t  •  * 


■ 


t£\. 


■  ■  ■■:::;v: 


»V^» 


CSV  ...♦:>,'' 


•  ■ 


H 


■ 


I  + 


V»  I  '  Y 


h 


m 


y.-/. 


■ 

I 


■ 


LIBRARY  OF 

WELLES  LEY  COLLEGE 


PURCHASED  FROM 
LIBRARY  FUNDS 


ACCULTURATION 


ACCULTURATION 


THE  STUDY  OF  CULTURE  CONTACT 


BY 


MELVILLE  J.  HERSKOVITS 

PROFESSOR  OF  ANTHROPOLOGY 
NORTHWESTERN  VNIVERS1TY 


JJliil 


J.  J.AUGUSTIN  PUBLISHER 

NEW  YORK  CITY 

1938 


intfio** 


lYo^zoj 


ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED 


GA/ 

//ss 


163a 
THIS  FIRST  EDITION  IS  COMPOSED  IN  GARAMOND  TYPE  CUT 
BY  THE  MONOTYPE  CORPORATION,  AND  PRINTED  IN  GERMANY 
BY  J.  J.  AUGUSTIN,  GLUCKSTADT,  HAMBURG  AND  NEW  YORK, 
IN  APRIL  1938  FOR  J.  J.  AUGUSTIN,  PUBLISHER,  NEW  YORK  CITY 


Preface 

The  primary  purpose  of  this  book  is  to  attempt  to  define  and  orient 
the  study  of  culture  contact  by  describing  some  of  the  work  that 
has  been  done  in  analyzing  the  results  of  contact  between  peoples,  and 
to  suggest  further  research  into  the  problems  that  arise  from  in- 
vestigations of  this  kind.  If  it  is  concerned  only  with  primitive  peoples 
this  is  not  because  it  is  held  that  the  forces  at  work  among  primitive 
folk  are  different  from  those  operative  in  contacts  between  literate 
peoples ;  but  merely  that  the  writer,  as  an  anthropologist,  has  felt  it 
to  be  the  part  of  wisdom  to  discuss  those  data  which  fall  in  the  field 
of  his  competence.  Hence  though  we  will  here  be  primarily  concerned 
with  problems  of  anthropological  research,  it  is  none  the  less  hoped 
that  what  is  said  will  be  of  use  to  workers  in  other  social  sciences, 
especially  to  historians,  sociologists  and  psychologists. 

I  am  grateful  to  the  Social  Science  Research  Council  for  having 
made  possible  a  period  of  reflection  and  reading  on  the  problems 
discussed  here  that  I  needed  to  point  the  concepts  that  had  been 
forming  in  my  mind  during  the  past  years  while  working  on  Negro 
research— essentially  an  acculturation  problem;  and  to  my  colleagues 
on  the  Council's  sub -Committee  on  Acculturation,  Dr.  Ralph  Linton 
and  Dr.  Robert  Redfield,  for  the  many  stimulating  discussions  that 
helped  further  to  clarify  these  problems ;  similarly,  it  is  a  pleasure  to 
express  my  gratitude  to  Dr.  Donald  Young,  who  participated  in 
many  of  these  discussions.  I  am  also  indebted  to  Dr.  George  Herzog 
for  bibliographic  suggestions  in  the  fields  of  music  and  linguistics. 

Melville  J.  Herskovits 
New  York, 
27  August  1937. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


Preface,  v 

I 

The  Problem,  i 

II 

Some  Acculturation  Studies  Reviewed,  33 

III 

Suggestions  for  Future  Research,  117 

APPENDIX 
An  Outline  for  the  Study  of  Acculturation,  ij1 

References,  137 
Index,  147 


I 

TWE  PROBLEM 


Intensive  study  of  contact  between  peoples  is  a  relatively  recent 
development  in  the  anthropological  repertory,  and  is  to  be  attributed 
to  a  constantly  increasing  interest  in  the  dynamics  of  human  life.  In 
research  having  to  do  with  human  physical  form,  for  example,  analyses 
of  racial  mixture  are  taking  their  place  at  the  side  of  those  more 
conventional  studies  in  classification  whose  aim  is  to  describe  and 
differentiate  racial  and  sub -racial  types.  In  an  analagous  manner, 
the  attempt  to  understand  the  nature  and  operation  of  human 
civilizations  through  the  study  of  "uncontaminated"  primitive 
societies  is  having  more  and  more  to  share  its  place  in  the  attention 
of  ethnologists  with  that  other  approach  which  frankly  assumes  that, 
since  culture  is  constantly  changing,  a  comprehensive  program  of 
research  must  recognize  the  value  inherent  in  the  study  of  peoples 
whose  traditions  have  been  or  are  today  being  influenced  by  the 
customs  of  other  folk  with  whom  they  are  in  contact. 

More  resemblances  than  just  this  are  to  be  seen  between  the  present 
status  of  research  in  physical  and  cultural  anthropology;  in  both  fields, 
new  modes  of  attack  on  old  problems  have  forced  students  to  a 
redistribution  of  methodological  emphasis,  while  in  both  there  also 
exists  a  certain  confusion  as  to  the  ends  to  be  sought,  inasmuch  as  the 


2  ACCULTURATION 

problems  of  race  crossing  and  culture  contact  are  of  such  immediate 
concern  that  the  demands  of  the  practical  situations  to  be  met  tend  to 
obscure  the  scientific  value  of  research  of  this  kind.  This  book, 
however,  will  only  deal  with  the  effects  of  contact  as  they  are  operative 
in  the  field  of  culture.  The  biological  aspects  therefore  may  be  passed 
by  without  further  comment,  except  in  such  cases  as  that  of  the 
Eurasians  of  the  Far  East,  or  in  certain  aspects  of  contact  between 
Negroes  and  Europeans  in  the  New  World,  where  the  fusion  of  culture 
is  intimately  associatedwiththe  crossing  of  the  physical  types  involved. 


Despite  recent  emphasis  on  research  among  peoples  whose  cultures 
are  in  a  state  of  flux,  or  where  it  can  be  historically  determined  that 
contact  has  produced  a  culture  of  multiple  origins,  recognition  of  the 
significance  of  this  kind  of  data  is  nothing  particularly  new.  The 
word  acculturation,  which  best  designates  studies  of  this  sort,  has  a 
respectable  history,  and  by  1928  it  had  attained  such  ethnological 
currency  that  Webster's  Unabridged  Dictionary  defined  it  as  "the 
approximation  of  one  human  race  or  tribe  to  another  in  culture  or 
arts  by  contact."  This  was  revised  in  the  most  recent  edition  (1934) 
to  read  "the  approximation  of  one  social  group  of  people  to  another 
in  culture  or  arts  by  contact;  the  transfer  of  cultural  elements  from 
one  social  group  of  people  to  another"  and,  in  addition  to  the  adjective 
accultural  listed  earlier,  the  verb  forms  acculturate  and  acculturize 
were  added — "to  cause  or  induce  a  people  to  adopt  the  culture  of 
another."  In  1936  the  New  Standard  Dictionary  defined  the  term  as 
"the  imparting  of  culture  by  one  people  to  another." 

The  word  is  still  peculiarly  American,  however  international  the 
interest  in  the  study  of  changing  cultures  may  be ;  though  it  has  been 
used  by  a  few  German  students,  the  British  have  consistently  preferred 
to  employ  the  compound  term  "culture -contact."1  This  is  recognized 
1  An  exception  to  this  statement  is  in  Schapera,  (1936). 


THE  PROBLEM  j 

by  the  editors  of  the  New  English  Dictionary  who,  in  their  supplement 
of  1933,  append  the  designation  "U.  S."  to  their  definition — "the 
adoption  and  assimilation  of  an  alien  culture." 

Some  of  the  uses  to  which  the  word  acculturation  has  been  put  may 
be  examined,  for  they  throw  light  on  its  meaning,  and  also  document 
the  statement  that  the  concept  is  not  a  development  of  recent  years. 
One  of  its  earliest  uses  was  by  Powell,  who  in  1880  wrote  "The  force 
of  acculturation  under  the  overwhelming  presence  of  millions  has 
wrought  great  changes."1  Six  years  later  W.  H.  Holmes,  in  discussing 
Spanish  Pueblo  art,  employed  the  word  as  a  matter  of  course : 


<a 


"The  artsWvpass  from  place  to  place  and  from  people  to  people  by 
a  process  of  acculturation  so  that  the  peoples  of  unlike  origin  practise 
like  arts,  while  those  of  like  origin  are  found  practising  unlike  arts."2 

Powell  later  employed  the  term  again  and  again,  writing  in  one  of 
his  annual  reports  that  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  had 
acquired  specimens  of  "the  arts  and  industries  of  the  partially  ac- 
culturized Papago  Indians"3;  and,  in  a  popular  article  dealing  with 
the  future  of  the  Indians,  placing  it  in  this  context : 

"...  For  such  reasons  the  early  methods  devised  for  civilizing  the 
Indian  tribes  largely  failed ....  Progress  was  made  to  the  extent  that 
the  Indians  came  in  contact  with  civilized  man  and  learned  his  ways 
and  industries,  but  it  was  acculturation,  not  education,  by  which  the 
advance  was  secured.  The  triumphs  of  civilization,  the  power  of 
prosperity,  the  wonders  of  industrial  art,  all  made  a  deep  impression 
on  the  Indian  and  from  them  he  learned  much,  but  from  the  school 
and  books  he  learned  little."4 

At  about  this  time  also,  Boas,  discussing  the  spread  of  folk-tales 
among  the  Indians  of  the  North  Pacific  Coast  wrote  the  following, 
in  which  the  word  is  used  in  its  current  sense : 

1  p.  46.  2  Holmes  (1886),  p.  266. 

3  Powell  (1896),  p.  44.  4  Powell  (1895),  p.  627. 


^  ACCULTURATION 

"The  arts  of  the  tribes  of  a  large  portion  of  the  territory  are  so 
uniform,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  discover  the  origin  of  even  the 
most  specialized  forms  of  their  productions  inside  of  a  wide  expanse 
of  territory.  Acculturation  of  the  various  tribes  has  had  the  effect 
that  the  plane  and  the  character  of  the  culture  of  most  of  them  is  the 
same ;  in  consequence  of  this  we  find  also  that  myths  travelled  from 
tribe  to  tribe  and  that  a  large  body  of  legends  belongs  to  many  in 
common."1 

How  rapidly  the  term  had  gained  currency  in  the  fifteen  years 
following  the  first  use  of  it  is  shown  by  its  matter-of-fact  inclusion 
in  the  columns  of  the  Popular  Science  Monthly  of  1895  by  an  anony- 
mous writer  reporting  on  scientific  publications  of  the  preceding 
month : 

"Similarities  in  Culture — Prof.  O.  T.  Mason  closes  a  somewhat 
critical  discussion  of  similarities  in  culture. .  .with  the  conclusion 
that  such  similarities  may  arise  through  a  common  humanity,  a 
common  stress,  and  common  attributes  of  Nature;  through  accultura- 
tion, or  contact,  commerce,  borrowing,  appropriating,  between 
peoples  in  all  degrees  of  kinship ;  and  through  common  kinship,  race, 
or  nationality."2 

Five  years  later,  however,  Powell  used  the  word  in  a  manner  that 
has  a  turn  of  meaning  somewhat  different  than  the  earlier  uses  of  it 
by  himself  and  others:  "The  process  of  culture  ...  is  by  invention 
and  acculturation.  The  invention  is  at  first  individual,  but  when  an 
invention  is  accepted  and  used  by  others  it  is  accultural  . . .  "3 — a 
meaning  that  is  the  more  interesting  since  the  passage  quoted  occurs 
in  a  context  of  comment  on  the  possible  results  of  extended  contact 
between  various  Indian  tribes  in  pre -European  times. 

Ehrenreich  (1905)  was  one  of  the  earliest  German  students  to  take  up 
the  term.  It  is  found  in  his  discussion  of  South  American  mythology, 

1  Boas  (1896),  p.  1;  see  also  pp.  9-1 1. 

2  Vol.  xlvii  (1895),  p.  714.  3  (1900),  p.  xxi. 


THE  PROBLEM  j 

where  he  speaks  of  the  "areas  of  acculturation"  (Akkutiurationsgebieten) 
and  "acculturational  relationships"  (Akkulturations verbatims)  to  be 
discerned  in  studying  the  myths  of  South  American  tribes.  A  more 
systematic  treatment  of  the  theme,  but  one  that  is  entirely  divorced 
from  other  than  cursory  supporting  data,  followed  three  years  later 
when  Vierkandt,  in  analyzing  the  processes  of  cultural  change,  devoted 
some  attention  to  the  phenomenon  and  its  significance  in  the  field  of 
cultural  dynamics.  The  discussion,  not  based  on  any  field  study  of 
cultures  where  change  was  taking  place  or  had  occurred  has,  however, 
perhaps  because  of  its  deductive  nature,  quite  failed  to  stimulate 
students  to  field  research.1 

In  the  United  States,  though  the  past  decade  or  two  have  seen  the 
word  acculturation  pass  into  the  ethnological  vocabulary,  it  has  only 
been  toward  the  latter  part  of  this  period  that  specific  field  studies 
of  the  results  of  cultural  contact  have  been  made.2  Except  for  the 
studies  recently  instituted  under  the  auspices  of  the  Office  of  Indian 
Affairs,  research  of  this  kind  has  in  this  country  been  consistently 
directed  toward  the  scientific  analysis  of  cultural  processes,  in 
contradistinction  to  European  investigation  of  cultural  contact,  which 
has  with  equal  consistency  been  pointed  toward  practical  concerns.3 
The  significance  of  this  for  a  clear  understanding  of  the  processes 
of  acculturation  that  are  occurring  over  the  world  is  of  the  first  order, 
and  will  be  pointed  out  later  when  the  difference  between  "practical 
anthropology"  and  the  scientific  study  of  acculturation  is  considered. 

1  The  only  German  student  who  has  made  such  a  study,  Wagner  (1932,  p.  60), 
speaks  of  Vierkandt's  work  as  "in  erster  Linie  theoretischer  Natur,"  and 
discussing  his  concept  of  "indigenous"  and  "foreign"  types  of  cultural  change, 
says  "An  jedem  realen  Kulturwandel  werden  mehr  oder  weniger  beide  Formen 
beteiligt  sein." 

2  Outstanding  examples  to  the  contrary  are,  of  course,  Mooney's  papers  on  the 
Ghost  Dance  (1896).  Radin  (1913,  1914)  also  published  two  short  papers  on 
culture -contact  among  the  Winnebago.  These  are  commented  on  in  the  next 
section  of  this  discussion. 

3  Cf.  Mead  (1932),  p.  5. 


6  ACCULTURATION 

3 

It  is  evident  that  the  students  of  cultural  change  who  have  employed 
the  term  acculturation  have  seldom  sought  to  define  it,  or  to  assess 
its  implications  before  using  it — indeed,  this  is  perhaps  the  primary 
reason  for  the  present  discussion.  For  some  the  word  seems  to  imply 
the  meaning  inherent  in  its  earliest  uses — the  result  of  somewhat 
close  contact  between  peoples  resulting  in  a  give-and-take  of  their 
cultures;  for  others  it  appears  to  hold  the  significance  implicit  in 
Powell's  usage  of  1900 — the  process  whereby  a  specific  trait  is 
ingested  by  a  recipient  culture;  while  still  others  apparently  accept 
it  as  the  means  whereby  an  individual  "becomes  acculturated"  to 
the  patterns  of  his  own  society,  a  usage  that  makes  the  term  "accul- 
turation" a  synonym  for  "education."  Since  all  of  these  are  but  phases 
of  cultural  change,  and  in  their  psychological  aspect  equally  involve 
the  learning  processes,  it  is  not  strange  that  in  the  minds  of  some 
students  all  these  meanings  seem  to  be  held  simultaneously,  with  the 
result  that  sometimes  this  concept  of  cultural  contact  appears  to  have 
one  meaning  for  them,  and  at  other  times  the  word  is  employed  in 
quite  a  different  sense.1 

It  is  of  some  importance,  therefore,  that  the  implications  of  the 
term  "acculturation"  be  clarified  at  the  outset  before  any  further 
discussion  of  its  meaning  is  attempted,  and  this  can  perhaps  best  be 
done  by  considering  some  definitions  of  the  word  which  have  recently 
been  offered.  "Acculturation,"  says  Lesser  in  his  discussion  of  the 
Pawnee  Hand  Game,  "...  is  a  useful  term  for  the  processes  by  which 
aspects  of  elements  of  two  cultures  mingle  and  merge."2  Feeling 
that  this  definition  is  too  broad,  however,  he  qualifies  it  with  the 
statement  that  acculturation  must  be  distinguished  from  assimilation 
"as  of  a  separate  character,"  and  then  explains  his  meaning  as 
follows : 

1  A  striking  instance  of  this  is  found  in  Bateson  (1935),  p.  179. 

2  Lesser  (1933),  p.  ix. 


THE  PROBLEM  j 

"Acculturation  may  be  taken  to  refer  to  the  ways  in  which  some 
cultural  aspect  is  taken  into  a  culture  and  adjusted  and  fitted  to  it. 
This  implies  some  relative  cultural  equality  between  the  giving  and 
receiving  cultures.  Assimilation,  however,  is  the  process  of  trans- 
forming aspects  of  a  conquered  or  engulfed  culture  into  a  status  of 
relative  adjustment  to  the  form  of  the  ruling  culture.  The  problem 
of  acculturation,  when  we  are  considering  the  American  Indians  in 
relation  to  their  adjustment  to  European  culture,  is  a  problem  of 
assimilation."1 

He  then  refines  the  distinction  drawn  in  the  preceding  passage  by 
another  qualification: 

"In  acculturation  the  cultural  groups  involved  are  in  an  essentially 
reciprocal  relationship.  Both  give  and  take.  As  a  result  it  is  a  valid 
problem  to  consider  what  is  adopted  and  what  not,  and  the  whys  and 
wherefores.  In  assimilation  the  tendency  is  for  the  ruling  cultural 
group  to  enforce  the  adoption  of  certain  externals,  in  terms  of  which 
superficial  adjustment  seems  to  be  attained.  The  adopting  culture  is 
not  in  a  position  to  choose." 

Before  analyzing  this  definition,  we  may  quote  from  Parsons' 
introduction  to  her  ethnographic  study  of  Mitla,  where  the  same  terms 
are  defined.  It  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to  point,  in  passing,  how  the 
quotation  which  follows,  when  compared  with  the  passages  just  cited 
from  Lesser,  demonstrates  the  terminological  confusion  found  among 
studies  of  this  kind : 

"In  this  book  my  task  is  to  convey  the  insight  which  I  got  among 
the  Zapoteca  into  the  ways  in  which  the  traits  of  an  old  culture  may 
perish  or  survive,  and  the  traits  of  a  new  culture  be  adopted  or 
rejected.  For  the  most  part,  the  analysis  is  concerned  with  accul- 
turation, with  what  the  Indian  took  from  the  Spaniard  rather  than 
with  assimilation,  which  is  a  reciprocal  process  and  would  include 

1  Lot.  cit. 


$  ACCULTURATION 

consideration  of  what  the  early  Spaniard  took  from  the  Indian  in  the 
development  of  both  Spaniard  and  Indian  into  modern  Mexican."1 

The  contradiction  here  is  patent,  for  Parsons'  implication  that  as- 
similation is  a  reciprocal  relationship  rules  it  out  as  applicable  to  just 
those  situations  where  Lesser  would  employ  the  word;  that  is,  where 
a  group  of  people,  in  making  their  adjustments  to  a  more  powerful 
culture,  take  it  over  without  in  any  appreciable  degree  themselves 
affecting  the  patterns  of  the  donor  culture. 

The  interchange  specified  in  Lesser's  statement  makes  it  difficult 
to  include  under  the  rubric  "acculturation"  many  of  those  situations 
found  in  the  world  at  the  present  time  as  the  result  of  the  impact 
of  European  culture  on  native  peoples.  For  Europe  may  influence 
very  considerably  the  culture  of  an  island  in  the  South  Seas,  let  us 
say,  which  can  in  no  conceivable  fashion  reciprocate  with  any  inter- 
change,2 yet  there  are  few  who  would  not  consider  these  folk  to  be 
undergoing  a  process  of  acculturation.  The  case  of  the  Indians 
discussed  in  Lesser's  work  is  somewhat  different,  for  there  has  been 
some  interchange  between  them  and  the  whites;  yet,  granting  the 
fact  that  these  Indians  "have  not  met  a  culture  of  the  same  order  of 
complexity  or  technical  advancement"  as  their  own,  and  that  "in  the 
methods  which  have  been  used  to  assimilate  the  Indian,  neither 
technically  nor  collectively  as  tribal  groups  were  the  natives  brought 
into  direct  contact  with  our  culture  as  such,"  does  this  preclude  us 
from  classifying  the  resulting  change  in  the  culture  of  the  Indians  as 
acculturation  ? 

The  methodological  principle  implied  by  Lesser  in  differentiating 
acculturation  from  assimilation  is  one  which,  at  best,  can  only  be  used 
with  the  greatest  caution.  For  just  when  are  a  people  free  or  not  free 
to  choose  one  or  another  aspect  of  a  culture  being  forced  on  them  by 

1  Parsons  (1936),  pp.  xii-xiii. 

2  A  recent  instance  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  Firth  (1937),  passim,  but  especially 
Ch.  II. 


THE  PROBLEM  p 

a  dominating  group  ?  Does  not  the  answer  to  this  rest  entirely  with 
the  judgment  of  the  student  who  concerns  himself  with  a  particular 
case  ?  In  Lesser's  own  monograph,  it  is  pointed  out  that  the  Pawnee, 
in  their  early  contacts  with  white  authority,  were  moved  to  a  reser- 
vation from  their  aboriginal  habitat  with  a  consent  on  their  part  that 
obviously  was  but  engendered  by  despair.  Here  they  were  taught 
agriculture,  and  they  seem  to  have  eagerly  accepted  the  opportunity 
to  become  farmers  and  thus  repair  their  damaged  fortunes.  That 
they  did  not  succeed  is  aside  from  the  point;  the  pertinent  question 
is  whether  or  not  the  invasion  of  their  hunting  patterns  by  this  new 
technique — which  was  introduced  by  the  whites,  but  which  they 
willingly  took  over  to  the  best  of  their  ability — is  acculturation  or 
assimilation.  Insofar  as  it  was  a  free  choice,  it  must  be  regarded  in 
terms  of  Lesser's  statement  as  the  former;  but  in  so  far  as  it  was 
imposed  by  a  dominant  power,  it  was  assimilation.1 

Thus  while  there  is  a  distinction  to  be  drawn  between  the  two 
concepts,  this  cannot  be  accomplished  under  the  terms  set  by  Lesser, 
and  by  the  same  token,  but  for  quite  different  reasons,  the  definitions 
advanced  by  Parsons  must  be  equally  subject  to  modification.  For 
though  the  subjective  element  inherent  in  Lesser's  approach  does 
not  enter  into  her  application  of  the  terms  to  Mexican  culture,  the 
differentiation  of  the  two  words  on  the  basis  of  whether  the  borrow- 
ing involved  in  contact  is  a  one-way  phenomenon  or  represents  an 
interchange  is  inadvisable . 

The  definition  presented  in  an  Outline  on  Acculturation  published 


1  A  further  difficulty  presented  by  Lesser's  modification  of  his  definition  of  ac- 
culturation is  seen  where  he  speaks  of  it  as  "the  ways  in  which  some  cultural 
aspect  is  taken  into  a  culture  and  adjusted  and  fitted  to  it,"  since  he  neglects  to 
distinguish  between  the  concepts  of  acculturation  and  diffusion.  This  point  will 
be  discussed  shortly,  but  the  question  must  here  be  asked  whether  diffusion  can 
be  thought  of  as  anything  but  a  process  by  means  of  which  some  aspect  of  a 
given  culture  is  taken  over  by  a  group  wRo  previously  did  not  have  it. 


I0  ACCULTURATION 

by  the  Sub-Committee  of  the  Social  Science  Research  Council1  may 
here  also  be  subjected  to  scrutiny: 

"Acculturation  comprehends  those  phenomena  which  result  when 
groups  of  individuals  having  different  cultures  come  into  continuous 
first-hand  contact,  with  subsequent  changes  in  the  original  cultural 
patterns  of  either  or  both  groups." 

To  this  definition  a  note  is  appended,  which  must  be  regarded  as  an 
integral  part  of  it : 

"Under  this  definition,  acculturation  is  to  be  distinguished  from 
culture -change,  of  which  it  is  but  one  aspect,  and  assimilation,  which 
is  at  times  a  phase  of  acculturation.  It  is  also  to  be  differentiated 
from  diffusion,  which,  while  occurring  in  all  instances  of  acculturation, 
is  not  only  a  phenomenon  which  frequently  takes  place  without  the 
occurrence  of  the  types  of  contact  between  peoples  specified  in  the 
definition. given  above,  but  also  constitutes  only  one  aspect  of  the 
process  of  acculturation." 

This  definition  is  seen  to  rule  out  several  interpretations  of  the 
word  that  have  from  time  to  time  been  made.  It  excludes  the  ap- 
plication of  the  term  to  the  manner  in  which  an  individual  acquires 
a  working  knowledge  of  the  skills  and  traditional  modes  of  thought 
of  his  own  culture,  which,  as  has  been  stated,  would  make  "accul- 
turation" synonymous  with  "education"  as  used  in  its  broadest  sense; 
it  indicates  that,  because  of  the  nature  of  the  contact  specified,  th,e 
cultures  concerned  are  taken  over  on  a  generous  scale,  and  thus,  by 
implication,  excludes  those  situations  where  only  a  single  aspect  of  a 
culture  is  transmitted;  while,  finally  and  most  importantly,  it  is 
entirely  colorless  concerning  the  relative  complexity  of  the  two 
cultures  involved,  and  whether  one  is  dominated  by  the  other  or 
contact  takes  place  on  a  plane  of  comparative  equality.  This  definition 

1  Redfield,  Linton,   and  Herskovits,   (1936).   This  outline  is  reproduced  as  an 
appendix  to  the  present  study. 


THE  PROBLEM  7/ 

is  likewise  noncommittal  as  to  whether  an  interchange  of  culture 
occurs  between  the  two  groups  party  to  the  contact,  or  whether  the 
process  is  a  matter  of  one  of  them  borrowing  from  the  other  without 
any  interchange  at  all  resulting — if,  indeed,  this  is  ever  possible. 
In  addition,  as  the  matter  has  been  put:  "It  plainly  does  not  dif- 
ferentiate contacts  between  historic  and  non-literate  folk  from  those 
between  two  primitive  peoples.  Nor  does  it  touch  upon  the  motiv- 
ations behind  studies  of  these  cultures  . .  ."* 

One  of  the  points  in  this  definition  to  which  objection  must  be 
raised  is  contained  in  the  phrase  "groups  of  individuals."  It  was 
because  of  this  that,  in  explaining  the  method  of  a  specific  acculturation 
study,  a  statement  of  the  approach  used  was  phrased  as  follows: 
"Studies  such  as  this,  concerned  with  a  people  whose  ascertainable 
past  history  shows  the  effect  of  first-hand,  continued  contact  between 
two  cultures,  have  in  recent  years  come  to  be  termed  acculturation 
studies."2 

The  problems  whether  culture  is  an  entity  in  its  own  right;  whether 
it  leads  an  objective  existence  of  its  own;  whether  it  can  be  studied 
apart  from  its  carriers ;  and  whether  it  pursues  its  own  way  despite 
attempts  to  control  it  on  the  part  of  those  who  live  under  it  are  of 
considerable  importance,  and  are,  in  fact,  not  altogether  aside  from 
the  present  discussion.  For  the  moment,  it  can  however  be  assumed 
that  culture  does  not  exist  apart  from  human  beings,  and  that  where 
contact  between  cultures  is  mentioned  a  certain  human  contact  must 
be  taken  for  granted  as  the  only  means  by  which  culture  can  spread 
from  people  to  people  or  from  generation  to  generation.  Yet,  while 
it  is  desirable  to  emphasize  that  culture  is  no  mystical  entity  that  can 

1  Herskovits  (1937a),  p.  259.  This  paper  gives  the  setting  of  studies  of  acculturation 
insofar  as  this  has  to  do  with  the  specific  approaches  of  the  various  schools  of 
anthropological  thought;  and  also  indicates  the  value  of  acculturation  studies  in 
the  general  approaches  to  the  understanding  of  culture. 

2  Herskovits  (1937b),  p.  323. 


j  2  ACCULTURATION 

travel  without  its  human  carriers,  it  is  also  true  that  it  is  not  a  simple 
matter  always  to  know  when  "groups  of  individuals"  are  in  contact, 
as  one  assesses  specific  situations  the  world  over  where  bodies  of 
tradition  have  been  or  are  continuously  impinging  on  one  another. 
This  is  seen  most  plainly  where  the  studies  of  secondary  effects 
of  contact,  such  as  contra -acculturative  movements,  are  made.  It  would 
be  difficult  to  designate  the  Ghost  Dance  of  the  Indians  of  North 
America,  for  instance,  as  anything  but  a  phenomenon  of  acculturation; 
yet,  especially  in  earlier  manifestations  of  this  as  analyzed  by 
Spier,  Gayton  and  others,  the  actual  presence  of  groups  of  whites 
among  the  Indians  is  difficult  to  discern;  while  in  Lesser's 
study  of  one  phase  of  the  Ghost  Dance  movement,  it  is  the  role  of 
the  Hand  Game  as  affording  the  Indians  a  new  interest  in  life  and  a 
point  toward  which  they  might  direct  this  interest  that  is  significant, 
rather  than  any  incorporation  of  phases  of  the  culture  of  the  whites 
with  whom  they  were,  indeed,  in  "continuous  first-hand  contact." 
Or,  the  condition  of  the  culture  of  the  natives  of  such  an  island  group 
as  Tikopia,  where  certain  elements  of  European  culture,  especially 
in  the  fields  of  material  culture  and  religion,  are  today  effecting  an 
invasion  of  aboriginal  patterns,  may  be  taken  as  a  case  in  point.  Is 
the  visit  of  the  mission  boat  once  or  twice  a  year,  and  the  work  of  a 
single  missionary  (a  native  of  another  island  and  not  himself  a  Eu- 
ropean!) to  be  regarded  as  an  acculturating  force?  Certainly  this 
person  is  not  a  "group  of  individuals,"  nor  can  it  well  be  maintained 
that  recurring  visits  of  those  on  the  mission  boat  constitute  "con- 
tinuous" contact. 

4 

The  problem  of  terminology  with  which  we  are  presented  may  be 
simplified  if  the  relationship  between  the  words  "acculturation," 
"diffusion"  and  "assimilation"  be  further  analyzed.  In  his  discussion 
of  diffusion,  Kroeber  defines  it  as  a  "process  ...  by  which  elements 


THE  PROBLEM  7  , 

or  systems  of  culture  are  spread,  by  which  an  invention  or  a  new 
institution  adopted  in  one  place  is  adopted  in  neighboring  areas  . . . 
in  some  cases  . . .  until  it  may  spread  over  the  whole  world."1  Dif- 
fusion, this  process  by  means  of  which  culture  spreads  in  space,  is 
contrasted  by  Kroeber  with  tradition,  which  represents  the  means 
by  which  a  given  culture  persists  in  time;  that  is,  the  means  by  which 
the  content  of  a  culture  is  handed  down  from  one  generation  to  another 
within  the  same  society.  And  though  both  of  these  "rest  largely  on 
the  same  psychological  basis :  imitation,"  yet  "as  a  technical  and  . . . 
semi -popular  term"  the  word  diffusion  has  "come  to  be  nearly 
restricted  to  its  intercultural  meaning"  so  that  one  almost  never 
speaks  of  the  diffusion  of  culture  from  one  generation  to  another, 
but  only  from  one  people  to  another. 

"Assimilation,"  on  the  other  hand,  is  defined  as  "...  the  name 
given  to  the  process  or  processes  by  which  peoples  of  diverse  racial 
origins  and  different  cultural  heritages,  occupying  a  common  ter- 
ritory, achieve  a  cultural  solidarity  sufficient  at  least  to  achieve  a 
national  unity."2  Its  significance,  we  are  told,  lies  deeper  than  the 
superficial  adoption  of  similar  traits  of  a  common  culture  by  a  number 
of  groups  of  different  origin;  fundamentally,  assimilation  is  not 
achieved  until  a  people  have  attained  a  unity  of  thought  that  underlies 
the  "veneer"  of  acceptance  of  traits  of  a  material  nature.  It  is  pointed 
out  that  there  are  "grades  and  grades"  of  assimilation,  and  that  the 
process  is  not  restricted  to  the  historic  cultures  alone,  but  that  in 
contacts  between  European  and  native  societies,  or  between  native 
cultures  with  one  another,  the  repercussions  of  contact  also  involve 
the  assimilation  of  the  culture  introduced  by  those  to  whom  it  has 
been  presented. 

That  these  three  words  do  not  have  identical  meanings,  then,  is 
obvious ;  it  is  equally  apparent,  however,  that  the  significance  of  each 

1  Kroeber,  (193 1). 

2  Park,  (1930). 


jj  ACCULTURATION 

tantalizingly  overlaps  the  intent  of  the  others.  Yet  the  difficulty  we 
have  in  distinguishing  between  these  concepts  is,  in  the  last  analysis, 
of  no  different  order  than  that  experienced  by  the  taxonomist  in 
distinguishing  different  units  in  the  biological  series.  In  the  social 
sciences  as  well,  differences  of  opinion  must  mark  all  attempts  to 
define  too  closely  terms  which  denote  processes  of  cultural  change 
as  similar  to  one  another  as  those  labelled  acculturation,  diffusion, 
and  assimilation.  It  would  therefore  be  wisest  to  draw  definitions 
that  are  more  rather  than  less  flexible,  and  not  attempt  to  delimit 
the  significance  of  each  term  too  rigidly.  The  important  fact  is  that 
these  terms  merely  represent  phases  of  a  single  process  by  means 
of  which  either  isolated  traditions  or  considerable  blocs  of  custom  are 
passed  on  by  one  human  group  to  another;  by  means  of  which  a 
people  adapt  themselves  to  what  has  been  newly  introduced  and 
to  the  consequent  reshuffling  of  their  traditions  as  these  were  aligned 
before  the  new  elements  were  presented.1 

If  this  approach  to  the  terminological  problem  be  taken,  then  in 
general,  diffusion  can  be  thought  of  as  that  aspect  of  cultural  change 
which  includes  the  transmission  of  techniques,  attitudes,  concepts 
and  points  of  view  from  one  people  to  another;  whether  it  be  through 
the  medium  of  a  single  individual  or  of  a  group,  or  whether  the  contact 
is  brief  or  sustained.  Now  it  is  evidently  useful  for  purposes  of  as- 
sorting different  types  of  data,  to  distinguish  in  this  general  field  those 
contacts  which  are  brief  and  involve  no  prolonged  association  between 
an  individual  and  folk  of  a  different  culture — as  where,  for  example, 
a  trait  of  Polynesian  culture  is  taken  over  by  a  Melanesian  group 
visited  once  by  some  voyagers  from  an  island  far  removed — from 
those  other  types  of  diffusion  that  take  place  when  a  people  are 
exposed  over  a  long  period  of  time  to  a  culture  different  from  their 
own.  On  the  basis  of  the  investigations  into  culture  contact  discussed 

1  Bartlett  (1923),  p.  136,  has  a  similar  point  in  mind  when  he  differentiates  between 
"transmission  by  contact"  and  "transmission  by  borrowing." 


THE  PROBLEM  zj 

in  the  next  section,  as  well  as  on  the  basis  of  research  not  reported 
on  there,  it  must  be  concluded  that  the  term  acculturation  is  best 
applied  to  studies  of  this  type;  while  the  word  assimilation  can  be 
used  to  designate  the  process  by  means  of  which  a  synthesis  of  culture 
is  achieved,  whatever  the  degree  of  contact  or  amount  of  borrowing. 

Some  further  discussion  of  the  difference  between  the  concepts 
of  acculturation  and  diffusion  may  be  profitable.  For  though  both 
represent  aspects  of  the  process  of  transmission  of  culture  from  one 
group  to  another — with  the  difference  that  diffusion  applies  to  all 
such  instances  of  transfer,  while  acculturation  has  to  do  with  continuous 
contact  and  hence  implies  a  more  comprehensive  interchange  between 
two  bodies  of  tradition — the  term  acculturation  has  further  come  to 
be  restricted  to  those  situations  of  contact  over  which  there  is  historic 
control.  And  from  the  point  of  view  of  method,  this  is  perhaps  the 
crux  of  the  matter,  for  while  conventional  studies  of  diffusion  have 
assumed  historic  contact  between  peoples  on  the  basis  of  the  existence 
of  similar  traits  in  their  cultures,  the  nature  of  a  given  contact  between 
two  folk,  details  of  the  manner  in  which  it  was  achieved,  and  the 
degree  of  its  intensity  are  all  beyond  the  power  of  the  student  to 
establish. 

Not  so  with  acculturation.  The  historic  contacts  of  the  peoples 
concerned  are  known  and  the  problem  is  one  of  adequately  applying 
the  historian's  technique,  of  employing  documentary  materials,  and  of 
gathering  information  in  the  field  concerning  the  contact  from  those 
who  took  part  or  are  taking  part  in  it.  In  this  way  the  student  insures 
the  accumulation  of  relevant  information  as  to  how  long  the  contact 
took  place,  or  the  circumstances  that  brought  it  about,  and,  in  some 
cases,  even  the  character  of  the  individuals  who  were  instrumental 
in  influencing  the  changes  that  resulted. 

This  use  of  real  history  thus  characterizes  studies  of  acculturation, 
rather  than  assumptions  of  historical  contact  based  on  reconstructions 
made  by  working  out  distributional  analyses.    The  advantages  in 


j6  acculturation 

this  use  of  historical  data  have  been  recognized  by  practically  all 
those  who  study  situations  involving  cultural  change  among  primitive 
peoples  whose  past  can  in  any  measure  be  reached.  This  is  the  case 
whether  these  students  are  concerned,  as  are  most  of  them,  with  an 
analysis  of  the  effects  of  contact  between  natives  and  whites,  or 
whether  they  are  concerned  with  the  contacts  of  native  tribes  with 
other  natives ;  it  is  true  whether  their  work  is  directed  toward  the 
ends  of  pure  science,  or  whether  they  are  primarily  concerned  with 
making  more  efficient  the  task  of  those  who  govern  native  peoples. 
Thus  Spier,  commenting  on  the  fact  that  "the  problems  of  culture 
growth  among  primitive  peoples  can  only  rarely  be  answered  at  the 
hand  of  dated  information,"  and  employing  the  "dated  information" 
available  to  him  to  analyze  the  Ghost  Dance  of  1870  among  the 
Klamath,  seems  to  regard  this  study  as  one  of  acculturation  rather  than 
of  diffusion.  "It  is  possible  to  discover  something  of  the  process 
of  acculturation  of  this  dance  complex  among  the  Klamath,"  he  says 
in  beginning  the  section  where  he  analyzes  his  data  as  they  bear  on 
the  problems  he  enunciates  in  his  sentence  quoted  above.1  Yet  what 
is  it  that  differentiates  this  work,  or  that  distinguishes  his  more 
inclusive  study  of  the  same  dance,2  from  his  summary  analysis  of  the 
Sun  Dance  which,  in  its  various  forms,  is  "diffused"  among  the 
Indians  of  the  Plains  ?3  Or,  to  take  other  examples  from  Africa,  what 
is  it  that  differentiates  Schapera's  consideration  of  the  effect  of  Eu- 
ropean contact  on  the  economic  aspects  of  Kaffir  life4  from  Torday's 
discussion  of  the  influence  of  the  ancient  Kingdom  of  Kongo  on  the 
peoples  of  the  interior  ?5  Can  it  be  said  that  the  processes  involved 
are  of  a  different  order  ?  Or  does  the  distinction  lie  in  the  fact  that 
the  contacts  involved  were  different  ?   The  difference  is  only  one  of 

1  Spier  (1927),  pp.  45,  53.  2  Spier,  (1935). 

3  Spier  (1921),  especially  the   section  pp.  jooff.,   entitled  "Diffusion  and  As- 
similation." 

4  Schapera,  (1928).  5  Torday,  (1928). 


THE  PROBLEM  jy 

the  degree  to  which  historicity  can  be  established;  in  the  first  case 
of  each  instance  cited,  the  history  of  the  movement  does  not  have 
to  be  reconstructed,  while  in  the  latter  it  must  be  conjectural. 

The  strategic  value  of  employing  known  history  in  studying 
contacts  between  cultures,  and  the  need  to  exploit  this  advantage  is 
even  admitted  by  those  who  commonly  are  most  reluctant  to  allow 
any  importance  to  an  understanding  of  historical  processes  for  students 
of  culture,  and  who,  in  all  cases,  set  their  faces  immovably  against 
any  type  of  historical  reconstruction.  Yet  the  exigencies  of  under- 
standing African  cultures,  for  example,  where  the  contact  between 
African  and  European  peoples  has  been  such  an  important  factor  in 
recent  years,  has  caused  those  who  take  such  an  anti -historical 
position  to  recognize  that  in  research  of  this  kind  the  utilization  of 
historical  data  is  a  sine  qua  non.  The  following  passage  may  be  quoted 
to  make  the  point : 

"Any  anthropologist  working  in  Africa  at  the  moment  is  really 
experimenting  with  a  new  technique.  Anthropological  theory  was 
evolved  very  largely  in  Oceania,  where  the  relative  isolation  of  small 
island  communities  provided  something  like  'typical'  primitive  social 
groups  .  .  .  The  anthropologist  who  embarks  for  Africa  has  obviously 
to  modify  and  adapt  the  guiding  principles  of  field  work  from  the 
start ...  He  has  to  exchange  his  remote  island  for  a  territory  where 
the  natives  are  in  constant  contact  with  other  tribes  and  races.  More 
important  still,  he  has  arrived  at  a  moment  of  dramatic  and  unprece- 
dented change  in  tribal  history.  Melanesian  societies,  it  is  true,  are 
having  to  adapt  themselves  slowly  to  contact  with  white  civilisation, 
but  most  of  the  tribes  of  Africa  are  facing  a  social  situation  which  is, 
in  effect,  a  revolution."1 

Such  recognition  of  the  flow  of  history  in  the  study  of  a  culture,  and 
of  the  dynamic  nature  of  the  phenomenon,  on  the  part  of  one  whose 
anti -historical  orientation  is  perhaps  best  shown  by  the  disregard 

1  Richards  (1935),  p.  20. 


j$  ACCULTURATION 

of  the  history  of  anthropology  found  in  the  statement  quoted,  is 
also  present  in  the  writings  of  others  who  hold  to  a  similar  point  of 
view.  Indeed,  the  entire  symposium  on  Methods  of  Study  of  Culture 
Contact1  from  which  the  quotation  just  cited  is  taken,  is  filled  with 
point  after  point  of  emphasis  on  the  need  for  recognizing  the  back- 
ground of  the  changing  societies  being  studied;  while  the  need  for 
reconstructing  these  cultures  as  they  existed  prior  to  the  contact  is 
not  only  admitted  but  stressed.2 

/ 

Since  the  difference  between  research  in  acculturation  and  other 
approaches  to  the  study  of  culture  is  one  of  degree  rather  than  of 
kind,  it  follows  that  the  field  methods  to  be  employed  in  acculturation 
studies  are  in  the  main  those  of  any  ethnographic  research.  There  is, 
however,  one  special  point  of  field  technique  that  must  be  considered. 
For  where  European  and  native  cultures  under  contact  are  being 
studied,  the  elements  from  the  student's  own  culture  tend  to  be 
taken  more  or  less  for  granted  by  him.  Hence  this  must  be  carefully 
guarded  against  lest  the  resulting  ethnographic  description  be  thrown 
badly  out  of  focus. 

The  proper  emphasis  on  this  point  has  been  well  laid  by  Schapera 
in  discussing  those  special  aspects  of  ethnological  method  that  apply 
to  studies  of  the  results  of  contact  between  Europeans  and  natives 
in  South  Africa.3  Since  "in  any  modern  fieldwork,"  the  task  is  "to 
obtain  as  full  an  account  as  possible  of  the  existing  tribal  culture," 
he  stresses  the  need  of  placing  all  parties  to  the  scene  in  their  proper 
perspective;  that  missionaries,  traders,  and  administrators  are  as 

important  as  chiefs,  sorcerers,  and  other  native  participants: 

1  Africa,  vols,  viii-x,  passim.  This  symposium,  in  the  main,  consists  of  con- 
tributions by  students  of  Malinowski,  an  analysis  of  whose  papers  on  the  subject  of 
culture-contact,  consisting  mainly  of  discussions  of  the  need  for  and  methods  to  be 
used  in  studying  the  problems  of  "practical  anthropology"  is  to  be  found  in 
Herskovits,  (1936). 

2  Mair  (1934a),  pp.  4i6ff.  3  Schapera,  (1935). 


THE  PROBLEM  jq 

"This  is  easy  enough  to  say.  In  practice  it  is  sometimes  difficult 
to  apply,  not  so  much  because  of  technical  obstacles  as  because  of  the 
outlook  engendered  by  the  training  that  most  anthropologists  receive 
before  going  into  the  field.  If  I  may  refer  to  my  own  experience, 
I  found  it  difficult,  when  actually  in  the  field,  not  to  feel  disappointed 
at  having  to  study  the  religion  of  the  Kxatla  by  sitting  through  an 
ordinary  Dutch  Reformed  Church  service,  instead  of  watching  a 
heathen  sacrifice  to  the  ancestral  spirits ;  and  I  remember  vividly  how 
eagerly  I  tried  to  find  traces  of  a  worship  that  was  in  fact  no  longer 
being  performed.  And  it  seems  so  silly  to  record  the  details  of  a 
Christian  wedding  or  confirmation  ceremony  with  the  same  fidelity, 
let  alone  enthusiasm,  with  which  one  would  note  down  the  'doctoring' 
of  a  garden  or  hut."1 

All  who  have  studied  peoples  undergoing  acculturation,  or  folk 
whose  customs  have  been  subjected  to  acculturational  processes  and 
represent  a  blend  of  native  and  European  or  American  customs,  will 
testify  to  having  experienced  the  same  feeling.  A  similar  method- 
ological caution,  taken  from  a  study  of  the  culture  of  Haiti,  may  also 
be  cited  to  show  how  the  same  point  of  view  was  developed  as  a  result 
of  field  experience  there : 

"In  attitudes  toward  the  gods,  then,  in  the  names  of  the  gods 
themselves,  in  the  manner  in  which  they  function  in  the  lives  of 
Haitians,  and  in  the  importance  of  the  ceremonial  connected  with 
them,  much  of  African  tradition  which  has  carried  over  into  Haitian 
religious  life  has  been  retained  in  pure  form.  Yet  the  intrusion  of 
Catholic  custom  into  these  African  patterns — often  noted,  though 
generally  in  passing — also  must  be  studied  if  the  significance  of 
the  forms  of  Haitian  folk-religion  is  to  be  grasped.  That  this  aspect 
of  vodun  has  received  the  scant  attention  it  has  had  is  probably  to 
be  ascribed  to  two  causes.  The  first  takes  the  Catholic  element  for 
granted,  so  that  even  where  a  particularly  dramatic  element  of 
Catholic  practice  is  seen  in  an  African  setting . . .  specific  mention  is 
1  Op.  cit.,  p.  317. 


20  ACCULTURATION 

made  of  this  without  attempting  to  dissect  its  historic  or  psycho- 
logical role.  The  second  reason  for  the  comparative  disregard  of 
Catholic  influence  is  that  for  Europeans  it  is  a  commonplace.  Spirit 
possession  and  sacrifices,  African  song  and  drum  rhythms  are  more 
'exciting'  than  prayers  and  hymns  of  the  Church . . . .  "* 

On  his  guard  against  thus  taking  the  familiar  for  granted,  the  com- 
petent field-worker  otherwise  prosecutes  his  study  of  acculturation 
along  lines  of  generally  recogni2ed  methods  of  field  procedure,  and 
attempts  to  obtain  as  rounded  a  picture  as  possible  of  the  culture  he 
is  studying  in  its  present  manifestations.  This  matter  of  the  "rounded 
presentation"  of  a  culture,  whether  under  acculturation  or  in  a  relative 
state  of  stability,  is,  however,  something  that  is  more  easily  urged 
than  achieved,  as  is  to  be  seen  from  the  field  reports  of  those  whose 
theoretical  position  is  most  insistent  on  the  need  for  complete  data 
on  a  culture  before  the  interrelations  of  its  various  aspects  can  be  dealt 
with  adequately.  For  the  task  of  describing  the  life  of  any  group,  when 
approached  from  the  point  of  view  of  workable  method,  almost 
demands  that  the  phenomena  be  classified  within  their  separate 
categories  both  when  field  data  are  gathered  and  when  they  are  published. 

If  such  a  procedure  of  breaking  down  a  culture  is  not  followed, 
especially  where  hybrid  cultures  or  societies  in  a  condition  of  flux  due 
to  pressure  from  an  outside  source  are  being  studied,  one  of  two 
things  happens.  In  one  approach,  a  single  phase  of  the  culture  is 
treated  so  exhaustively  in  the  attempt  to  pursue  to  the  last  point  of 
association  its  relationship  to  all  other  aspects  of  the  culture  that, 
seen  from  the  point  of  view  of  this  single  institution,  this  culture 
fails  to  yield  a  scientifically  useful  description  of  reality.  The  other, 
which  is  the  more  common,  is  that  the  student  does  not  see  the  forest 
for  the  trees,  so  that  a  discussion  of  mythology  tells  us  more  of  social 
organization  than  of  the  tales  themselves,  because  myths  are  the 
sanctions  underlying  clan  organization ! 
1  Herskovits  (1937  b),  pp.  270-271. 


THE  PROBLEM  2I 

No  one  would  deny  so  obvious  a  statement  that  all  aspects  of  a 
culture  are  interrelated;  students  from  the  early  days  of  anthropology 
have  not  failed  to  recognize  this  fact  as  presenting  one  of  the  most 
difficult  of  all  problems  in  the  preparation  of  data  for  the  use  of  fellow- 
workers.  The  point  that  must  especially  be  remembered,  where  work 
is  being  carried  out  in  the  confused  situations  with  which  the  anthro- 
pologist who  is  concerned  with  acculturated  folk  must  perforce  deal, 
is  that  certain  working  norms  regarding  the  presentation  of  data 
that  have  been,  and  probably  will  in  the  future  be  found  best  adapted 
to  the  task  of  the  ethnologist  in  reporting  on  the  cultures  he  studies, 
can  be  held  to  with  advantage  even  where  the  "rounded"  presentation 
of  the  life  of  a  people  is,  as  it  should  be,  the  aim  in  view.  Economics 
has  quite  naturally  its  ritualistic  and  magical  basis  in  many  primitive 
societies ;  nor  does  any  competent  student  overlook  the  fact  that  the 
lore  of  a  people,  to  be  living,  must  function  in  some  manner  that  makes 
it  valid  for  that  people. 

But  if  we  are  to  understand  the  life  of  any  folk,  it  is  essential  to 
organize  the  data  in  a  form  that  permits  us  to  know  the  patterning 
of  their  conduct,  or,  in  psychological  terms,  those  consenses  of 
individual  behavior  patterns  that  permit  the  student  of  culture  to 
differentiate  one  civilization  from  another.  And  granting  the  validity 
of  the  position  which  holds  that : 

". .  .culture  is  not  merely  a  system  of  formal  practices  and  beliefs. 
It  is  made  up  essentially  of  individual  reactions  to  and  variations 
from  a  traditionally  standardised  pattern ;  and,  indeed,  no  culture  can 
ever  be  understood  unless  special  attention  is  paid  to  this  range  of 
individual  manifestations . . .  'n 

yet,  as  the  author  of  this  passage  himself  has  clearly  demonstrated  in 
his  own  reports  of  fieldwork,  it  follows  that  to  be  able  to  cope  with 
a  degree  of  variation  about  a  norm  heightened  by  the  incident  of 

1  Schapera  (1935),  p.  319. 


22 


ACCULTURA  TION 


impact  between  two  cultures,  one  must  exercise  the  more  care  to 
present  the  norms  of  behavior  as  clearly  as  possible  so  that  the 
significance  of  the  variations  about  them  can  the  more  readily  be 
grasped. 

To  put  the  matter  somewhat  differently,  it  is  necessary  to  know  the 
"style"  of  a  culture — which  is  merely  another  way  of  saying  that 
we  must  know  its  patterning — in  precisely  the  same  way  that  the 
student  of  art  must  know  the  styles  that  characterize  the  various 
periods  of  art -history  in  order  to  cope  with  the  individual  variations 
that  are  examplified  in  the  works  of  artists  of  a  given  epoch.  It  is  on 
this  basis  alone  that  an  intensive  analysis  of  the  changing  modes 
of  painting  can  be  made,  and  it  is  in  precisely  this  way  that  the 
ethnologist  must  establish  a  basis  from  which  he,  or  others,  can  make 
further  studies  into  specific  aspects  of  a  culture.  The  rounded 
presentation,  which  holds  the  several  sub -divisions  of  culture  clearly 
in  mind,  must  precede  the  detailed  study  of  any  phase  of  a  specific 
culture.  But  it  must  be  rounded  in  the  sense  that  while  it  treats  all 
of  the  subordinate  patterns  within  the  several  large  divisions  of  culture 
so  as  to  give  a  sense  of  the  fullness  of  the  life  of  a  people,  it  must 
not  strain  too  much  to  integrate  all  aspects  with  each  other  lest 
confusion  also  result.  Because  some  emphasis  has  properly  been 
placed  on  the  interdependence  of  all  aspects  of  culture,  it  does  not 
follow  that  the  independence  of  its  principal  phases  should  be  forgot- 
ten. Religion  can  indeed  be  discussed  without  constant  reference  to 
social  organization;  economics  without  analyses  of  art. 

This  is  especially  to  be  kept  in  mind  when  gathering  and  presenting 
field  materials  from  cultures  in  a  state  of  flux.  For  here,  as  almost 
nowhere  else,  it  is  not  only  essential  that  a  full  portrayal  be  given  of 
the  situation  as  it  exists,  but  one  that  is  of  the  greatest  clarity,  for  on 
this  depends  the  measure  of  success  that  will  later  be  achieved  by  the 
all -important  succeeding  steps  of  analyzing  the  results  of  cultural 
contact.   And  while  a  full  presentation  demands  the  understanding 


THE  PROBLEM  2) 

of  all  aspects  of  culture,  a  clear  one  is  best  achieved  if  treatment  of 
the  several  subdivisions  of  culture,  the  recognition  of  the  existence 
of  which  empirically  developed  out  of  the  study  of  many  civilizations, 
be  not  handicapped  by  an  exclusive  emphasis  laid  where  those 
impinge  one  upon  another. 


Before  such  an  analysis  of  the  data  can  be  undertaken,  however, 
the  historic  control  must  be  set  up.    This  is  done  in  two  ways;  by 
field  study  tending  to  reconstruct  the  life  of  the  people  as  it  was  lived 
before  the  acculturative  process  set  in,  and  by  means  of  documentary 
evidence.  Neither  of  these  present  any  difficulties  in  method  that  are 
peculiar  enough  to  the  study  of  acculturation  to  merit  extended 
discussion   here.     That   quite  workable   reconstructions   of  tribal 
custom  that  no  longer  flourish  can  be  achieved  has  apparently  been 
difficult  to  comprehend  by  those  who  are  committed  to  the  method 
of  intensive  investigation  of  individual  primitive  societies  as  they 
operate  in  a  condition  of  relative  equilibrium.    And  it  is  perhaps 
understandable  that  those  who  hold  that  "uncontaminated"  societies 
offer  the  sole  valid  material  for  studying  culture  are  apprehensive 
of  reconstructions  of  traditions  which,  in  their  fullness,  exist  but  in 
the  memory  of  those  who  lived  in  earlier  times.  That  the  "difficulties 
of  studying  the  traditional  native  culture,  which  has  largely  become 
a  thing  of  the  past   . . .  "* — as  one  writer  on  culture -contact  puts 
it — should  therefore  be  stressed  by  them  is  not  only  understandable, 
but  has  a  certain  cautionary  value  that  should  not  be  underestimated. 
Yet  is  the  ethnological  documentation  of  the  "base-line"  from  which 
change  in  a  given  culture  took  its  departure  really  as  impossible  as  it 
would  seem  to  those  who  take  this  point  of  view  ?    Can  we  do  no 
better  in  this  important  phase  of  our  problem  than  the  following 
passage  would  seem  to  indicate  ? 
1  Wagner  (1936),  p.  317. 


2a  ACCULTURATION 

"It  is  obvious  that  such  a  reconstruction  can  never  have  the  same 
factual  value  as  the  results  of  direct  observation.  It  will  be  of  the  same 
abstract,  generalised  type  as  all  field-work  results  obtained  by  relying 
solely  on  the  statements  of  informants  and  not  checking  them  against 
data  taken  from  actual  practice.  It  will  be  lacking  in  the  everyday 
detail  which  is  an  essential  element  to  satisfactory  fieldwork,  and  it 
will  be  subject  not  only  to  the  inevitable  distortion  of  memory,  but  to 
that  of  prejudice,  sometimes  in  favour  of  the  old  order  and  sometimes 
against  it.  It  will  not  give  an  accurate,  a  complete,  or  a  dynamic 
picture  of  native  life,  and  if  such  a  reconstruction  was  presented  as 
the  sole  result  of  a  field  study,  it  would  have  little  value . . .  Never- 
theless it  seems  to  me  essential  for  this  type  of  inquiry 'n 

Happily,  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  obtaining  reconstructions 
are  in  fact  not  as  overwhelming  as  this  passage  would  make  them  out 
to  be.  May  it  not  be  that  this  groping  with  what,  for  them,  is  a  new 
problem  in  method,  arises  from  a  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  techniques 
of  American  students  who  have  worked  with  the  dislocated  cultures 
of  Indian  tribes,  and  have  obtained  highly  satisfactory  results,  even 
where  the  conditions  of  native  life  are  so  broken  as  to  test  severely 
the  ingenuity  of  the  ethnographer?  Whatever  the  case,  it  should 
be  recognized  that  by  means  of  a  judicious  employment  of  questions 
answered  by  a  number  of  informants,  and  by  balancing  such  material 
against  reports  of  those  who  had  contact  with  the  tribe  in  the  days 
of  its  cultural  vigor  and  the  findings  of  colleagues  who  have  worked 
with  related  tribes,  it  is  entirely  possible  to  obtain  workable  descriptions 
of  the  antecedent  patternings  of  cultures  that  today  are  only  fragmentary 
— accounts  which,  moreover,  can  even  attain  the  living  quality  of  a 
field  study  of  a  tribe  that  at  present  has  a  relatively  stable  existence.2 

1  Mair  (1934a),  pp.  416-417. 

2  This  is  exemplified  in  any  number  of  American  monographs,  of  which  Lowie's 
study  of  the  Crow  (1935)  may  be  taken  as  an  outstanding  instance;  the  method- 
ological discussion  in  the  introduction  (especially  pp.  xvii-xviii)  is  particularly 
germane  to  the  point  under  consideration.   Another  example  to  be  remarked, 


THE  PROBLEM 


*J 


The  reconstruction  thus  obtained  is  the  point  of  departure  for  a 
study  of  the  effects  of  the  impact  on  the  culture  under  analysis  of  a 
foreign  body  of  tradition  whose  results  are  at  hand  through  observation 
of  the  contemporary  mode  of  life. 

Though  the  discussion  of  the  necessity  for  obtaining  reconstructions 
of  the  earlier  life  of  a  people  has  here  followed  that  of  the  need  for 
the  description  of  their  life  as  it  is  lived  at  present,  there  are  cases 
where  the  wisest  practice  in  the  actual  study  of  acculturation  would 
seem  to  be  to  derive  the  base-line  from  which  the  changes  developed 
first,  and  then,  once  equipped  with  the  insight  into  past  conditions, 
to  obtain  relevant  data  concerning  the  contemporary  manner  of 
living.  Where  such  a  course  is  followed,  the  evaluation  of  changes 
that  have  ocurred  as  a  result  of  contact  will  be  surer,  and  an  under- 
standing of  the  effect  had  by  the  forces  operative  in  the  situation  of 
change  more  clear,  than  if  the  present-day  culture  is  first  studied 
without  reference  to  the  past.  This  has  been  emphatically  true  in 
studies  of  the  New  World  Negroes,  where,  because  of  a  disregard  of 
African  background,  the  real  significance  of  many  customs  has  been 
missed,  important  aspects  of  culture  not  readily  revealed  to  the  student 
have  been  overlooked,  and  erroneous  conclusions  drawn.  Without 
laboring  the  point,  it  must  be  emphasi2ed  that  the  study  of  cultural 
change — or,  for  that  matter,  the  study  of  culture  as  a  whole — can 
not  be  attempted  without  a  vivid  sense  of  the  historically  dynamic 
nature  of  the  phenomenon.  Hence,  the  more  background  that  is 
available,  the  better  the  treatment;  or,  conversely,  and  even  more 
importantly,  the  less  the  sense  of  history,  the  more  sterile  the  results. 

That  all  actual  historical  documents  bearing  on  a  given  situation 

where  a  specific  tribal  institution  of  the  past  is  presented  in  considerable  detail, 
is  found  in  McKern  (1922).  From  the  African  scene,  a  well-balanced  recognition 
of  the  possibilities  inherent  in  reconstructions,  as  well  as  of  the  drawbacks  of  this 
mode  of  approach,  is  to  be  had  in  Schapera's  paper  to  which  reference  has 
already  been  made  (1935,  pp.  321-322). 

3 


26  ACCULTURATION 

should  be  exhaustively  analyzed  goes  without  saying.  Especially  in 
the  case  of  contact  between  European  and  non-European  peoples 
will  material  of  this  sort  prove  important  in  indicating  the  manner 
and  intensity  of  the  contact,  and,  in  some  instances,  even  the  types 
of  persons  who  were  influential  in  it.  Information  of  this  character 
has  been  neglected  to  a  surprising  degree,  not  only  in  studies  of  ac- 
culturation— where  this  is  inexcusable — but  also  in  studies  of  the 
ethnology  of  relatively  undisturbed  folk.  Yet  the  light  such  materials 
shed  on  changing  custom,  the  strictly  ethnological  data  that  they 
supply — since  the  early  travellers  were  far  keener  observers  than 
ethnologists  generally  credit  them  with  having  been — and  the  sense 
of  sureness  in  time  depth  afforded,  are  of  the  greatest  value  in  the 
study  of  any  civilization,  acculturated  or  not. 

So  important  is  it  to  have  adequate  data  of  this  type  that  in  the 
case  of  the  contemporary  culture  of  Mexico,  where  there  is  known 
hybridity  of  background,  the  unsatisfactory  documentary  evidence 
concerning  the  precise  mode  of  contact  between  the  Indian  and 
Spanish  peoples,  and  the  lack  of  detail  concerning  the  cultures  which, 
several  hundred  years  ago,  were  merged  into  present-day  Mexican 
civilization,  have  made  it  seem  preferable  to  some  students  to  set  up 
a  series  of  categories  of  different  degrees  of  exposure  to  the  present- 
day  outer  world ;  and  on  this  basis  to  analyze  the  differences  between 
the  people  whose  modes  of  life  fit  into  such  categories,1  rather  then 
to  phrase  research  in  terms  of  the  integration  of  Spanish  and  Indian 
cultures  into  that  of  the  Mexican  today.  To  compare  communities 
of  the  order  of  city,  town,  and  village,  and  to  express  the  differences 
between  them  "in  terms  of  a  process  of  transition"  represents  an 
attack  on  the  problems  of  cultural  change  that  has  significance,  and 
should  both  yield  results  of  importance  and  stimulate  investigators 
to  new  modes  of  approach  elsewhere.  In  the  sense  of  being  research 
into  the  working  out  of  processes  of  acculturation  a  long  time  removed 
1  Redfield,  (1934). 


THE  PROBLEM  2J 

from  the  original  impulses,  indeed,  analyses  of  this  type  may  well 
be  regarded  as  a  profitable  form  for  other  acculturation  studies.  And 
though  the  difficulties  of  employing  historic  sources  in  the  Mexican 
scene  are  stressed  by  some  students  who  are  interested  in  analyzing 
the  historical  background  of  the  present  acculturated  Mexican 
societies  more  than  by  others,1  and  for  the  very  reason  that,  "wisdom 
in  ethnology,  as  in  life,  consists  in  having  more  than  one  method  of 
approach,"2  this  approach  well  merits  further  utilization  where  it 
can  be  applied. 

7 
With  information  concerning  the  historic  setting  of  the  contact 
in  hand,  the  cultures  involved  in  the  contact  understood,  and  the 
present  body  of  traditions  of  the  people  described,  the  analysis  of 
these  data  may  then  proceed  with  profit  along  the  lines  suggested 
in  the  Outline  of  the  Sub -Committee  on  Acculturation  of  the  Social 
Science  Research  Council  that  has  already  been  cited.  The  nature 
of  the  contact,  and  the  individuals  concerned  in  it;  the  role  these 
persons  played,  and,  if  possible,  the  reasons  why  they  exerted  their 
influence  as  they  did;  whether  the  contact  was  friendly  or  hostile, 
and  whether  or  not  the  two  groups  were  similar  or  dissimilar  in 
numbers  or  in  the  forcefulness  of  their  cultures :  all  these  should  be 
pointed  toward  an  understanding  of  both  field  data  and  the  relevant 
historical  literature.  Which  cultural  elements  were  accepted  or,  of 
equal  importance,  those  which  were  rejected,  together  with  any 
available  information  as  to  why  they  were  accepted  or  rejected,  should 
also  be  exhaustively  analyzed.  Finally,  viewing  the  culture  under 
investigation  as  a  going  concern,  an  inquiry  into  the  provenience 
of  the  elements  of  this  culture,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are 
integrated  into  the  totality  of  the  resulting  culture  will  round  out  the 

1  Beals,  (1936). 

2  Parsons  (1936),  p.  479. 

3* 


28  ACCULTURATION 

presentation  and,  in  making  available  an  additional  example  of  that 
type  of  cultural  change  that  is  called  acculturation,  will  permit  us  to 
further  our  understanding  of  the  processes  of  cultural  dynamics  in 
general. 

One  question  that  was  raised  as  a  result  of  the  publication  of  this 
Outline  on  Acculturation — but  one  that  is  by  no  means  only  pertinent 
to  acculturation  studies — derives  from  the  employment  of  the  word 
"traits."  Is  it  advisable,  it  is  asked,  in  analyzing  a  culture  that  has 
been  subjected  to  an  acculturative  process,  to  content  oneself  with 
what  has  been  described  as  a  "sorting -process  into  one  of  two  pigeon- 
holes ?"  Do  not  facts  treated  in  this  manner  "tend  to  remain  discrete 
and  non-comparable";  does  not  the  "scholarly  effort  come  to  rest 
when  the  assignment  to  one  heritage  or  the  other  has  been  made  P"1 
Moreover,  is  it  not  also  true  that  "assimilation  is  one  of  the  most 
subtle  and  elusive  of  social  processes,  which  does  not  reveal  itself 
by  plucked  threads,  by  isolated  facts  . . .  ?"2 

These  points  are  well  taken,  for  no  ethnographic  study  which  aims 
at  being  more  than  a  tabulation  of  cultural  items  can  rest  with  mere 
enumeration  which,  in  the  case  of  acculturation,  takes  the  form  of 
assigning  to  one  source  or  another  the  specific  elements  in  the  present 
culture  of  a  people  who  have  undergone  ascertainable  contact.  No 
type  of  ethnological  investigation  could  be  farther  removed  from 
that  which  employed  the  "classical"  comparative  method,  or  from 
the  so-called  "historical"  schools  of  ethnological  thought  as  exemplified 
in  the  generalizations  about  the  contact  of  peoples  made  by  the  British 
and  German  diffusionist  schools,  than  that  which  characterizes  the 
study  of  acculturation.    In  a  given  culture,  the  assignment  of  one 

1  Redfield  (1934),  pp.  58,  61. 

2  Parsons  (1936),  p.  xi.  It  may  be  remarked  that  Parsons'  use  of  the  word  as- 
similation, that  has  been  discussed  above,  does  not  for  the  present  purpose  lessen 
the  relevance  of  the  quotation,  since  its  significance  is  quite  that  of  acculturation 
in  the  present  discussion. 


THE  PROBLEM  2p 

element  or  another  to  a  specific  source  merely  clears  the  ground  so 
that  we  can  understand  the  kinds  of  things  that  were  taken  over  or 
rejected,  the  ways  in  which  they  were  integrated  into  the  culture, 
and,  from  this  and  the  study  of  many  acculturative  situations,  of  the 
possibility  of  working  out  general  principles  of  cultural  change. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  manner  of  treating  cultures  as  composed 
of  small  pieces  termed  "traits"  is  more  argued  against  than  actually 
manifested  in  acculturation  studies.  If  one  goes  through  the  literature, 
it  is  found  that  in  no  serious  attempt  to  analyze  such  a  situation  has 
the  student  who  has  broken  down  the  hybrid  body  of  traditions  with 
which  he  is  concerned  into  elements,  and  assigned  the  various  elements 
to  their  sources  of  origin,  been  content  with  this  assignment  of 
"traits."  This  is  true  whether  the  study  is  concerned  with  folk 
inhabiting  the  islands  of  Melanesia,  or  with  peoples  of  the  Philip- 
pines ;  whether  it  has  to  do  with  the  Negroes  of  South  Africa  or  the 
New  World;  whether  it  deals  with  broken  cultures  of  Indians  of  the 
United  States  or  the  living  cultures  of  Indians  of  Mexico.  It  is 
merely  a  step  in  method ;  and  an  essential  step,  be  it  said,  if  statements 
such  as  "in  cultural  contact,  traits  of  material  culture  give  way  more 
readily  than  non -material  ones"  or  "in  a  changing  culture,  women 
manifest  greater  conservatism  than  men,"  or  any  other  generalization 
of  this  kind  are  to  be  investigated.  But  this  is  only  another  way  of 
saying  that  the  procedure  is  but  a  means  to  the  end  of  understanding 
cultural  change,  which,  whether  among  people  where  the  historic 
contacts  are  ascertainable,  or  among  those. where  they  must  be 
inferred,  constitute  one  of  the  most  important  problems  of  the 
ethnologist. 

S 

In  reading  the  published  material  on  cultural  contact  and  accul- 
turation, one  cannot  but  be  impressed  with  the  proportion  of  these 
discussions  that  are  concerned  with  what  has  come  to  be  called 


20  ACCULTURATION 

"practical"  or  "applied"  anthropology.  It  is  not  the  purpose  of  this 
discussion  to  assess  the  degree  to  which  the  resources  of  anthrop- 
ology justify  the  application  of  anthropological  knowledge  to  current 
problems,  though  this  is  a  matter  of  some  importance  both  in  the 
realms  of  physical  and  cultural  anthropology.  Nor  is  it  proposed  here 
to  discuss  whether  or  not  the  scholar  can  exert  effective  influence  in 
the  face  of  those  social  and  economic  imponderables  that  are  operative 
in  most  situations  where  the  knowledge  of  anthropology  might 
conceivably  be  put  to  practical  use.1  Here  we  can  only  consider  the 
effects  of  these  practical  applications  of  ethnology  on  the  scientific 
study  of  the  processes  of  culture. 

It  is  in  no  sense  to  be  claimed  that  studies  of  scientific  value  have 
not  been  made  by  those  whose  primary  concern  is  with  the  practical 
applications  of  anthropology  to  the  problems  of  European-native 
contact.  Yet  it  is  none  the  less  true  that  when  practical  results  are  the 
end  of  such  studies,  a  sense  of  historical  perspective  is  ordinarily 
lacking.  Whether  this  is  a  result  of  the  essentially  ad  hoc  approach 
of  research  undertaken  with  practical  problems  in  mind  can  not  be 
said;  to  establish  the  fact,  however,  no  great  amount  of  reading  of 
available  publications  of  this  type  need  be  done,  nor  of  the  discussions 
of  general  problems  of  policy  regarding  the  directions  to  be  given 
the  changing  life  of  the  native.2 

The  concentration  on  the  practical  concerns  of  European-native 
contact  has  another  consequence  that  results  from  this  over-specializa- 
tion on  one  kind  of  contact.  That  from  the  point  of  view  of  culture- 
history,  contacts  of  the  sort  now  occurring  between  nationals  of 
colonizing  governments  and  native  peoples  are  of  no  different  order 

1  These  points  are  discussed  in  Herskovits,  (1936). 

2  See,  for  example,  the  numerous  papers  on  practical  anthropology,  its  methods 
and  aims,  that  are  found  in  most  recent  issues  of  the  journals  "Oceania"  and 
"Africa,"  as  well  as  such  works  as  those  of  Schrieke  (1929),  Elkin  (1937), 
Williams  (1933),  and  Westermann  (1934). 


THE  PROBLEM  *j 

than  those  that  have  certainly  occurred  since  recorded  history  began 
— and  perhaps  since  mankind  has  inhabited  the  earth — is  something 
that  seems  rarely  to  hold  a  place  in  the  underlying  approach  to  the 
subject  by  those  concerned  with  it.  An  illustration  of  this  may  be 
taken  from  one  of  the  most  comprehensive  studies  of  culture-contact 
that  has  been  carried  on  from  the  point  of  view  of  practical  anthrop- 
ology :  "At  no  time  in  the  history  of  mankind  has  a  clash  of  nations, 
peoples,  races,  and  their  cultures,  traditions,  prejudices,  interests  and 
abilities  taken  place  like  today."1  Yet  one  cannot  but  wonder  whether, 
in  the  light  of  our  historical  knowledge  of  the  expansion  of  the 
empires  of  the  Far  East  as  well  as  of  Europe  in  ancient  and  medieval 
times,  to  say  nothing  of  the  spread  of  peoples  over  the  non-literate 
world,  one  can  speak  of  a  qualitative  difference  between  the  contacts  of 
peoples  in  earlier  times  and  those  that  are  taking  place  at  present. 

There  is,  furthermore,  another  consideration  that  is  too  often 
overlooked  by  those  who  are  occupied  with  the  problems  of  applied 
anthropology.  A  basic  justification  of  ethnological  research  is  that 
it  gives  a  broad  background  against  which  to  judge  our  own  rules 
of  behavior,  and  a  more  inclusive  view  of  human  cultures  than  can 
be  attained  by  any  other  social  discipline.  This  is  because  it  alone 
offers  data  against  which  we  can  project  customs  peculiar  to  ourselves 
and,  in  the  manner  of  scientific  research,  test  generalizations  arising 
out  of  the  study  of  the  patterns  of  our  culture  by  seeing  whether  or 
not  these  generalizations  have  validity  when  applied  to  peoples  whose 
customs  have  no  historical  connection  with  our  own.  Are  not 
anthropologists  themselves,  in  devoting  themselves  to  the  study  of 
the  contact  between  their  own  culture  and  native  civilizations,  likewise 
in  danger  of  narrowing,  then,  the  point  of  view  they  have  attained  ? 
The  uncritical  tendency  to  see  native  cultures  everywhere  forced  out 
of  existence  by  the  overwhelming  drive  of  European  techniques ;  the 
feeling  that  these  "simpler"  folk  must  inevitably  accept  the  sanctions  of 
1  Thurnwald  (1935),  p.  1. 


f2  ACCULTURATION 

their  more  efficient  rulers  as  they  do  some  of  the  outward  modes 
of  life  of  those  under  whose  control  they  live;  all  these  reflect  a  type  of 
ethnocentrism  that  should  be  absent  from  the  scientific  studies 
of  an  anthropologist.  It  is  for  this  reason  that,  to  realize  to  the 
utmost  the  scientific  gain  to  be  had  from  studies  of  culture  contact, 
those  situations  where  nations  of  Europe  or  America  were  or  are 
today  in  no  way  involved  should  be  first  sought  out  for  study,  since 
here  the  student  who  comes  from  these  countries  can  in  no  wise 
identify  himself  with  the  processes  he  is  studying.  In  this  manner 
scientific  objectivity  will  be  enhanced;  otherwise  in  its  study  of 
cultures  in  contact,  anthropology  must  suffer,  without  check,  from 
the  same  handicaps  under  which  other  social  sciences  labor  in  neglect- 
ing to  look  beyond  the  horizon  of  our  own  culture. 


II 

SOME  ACCULTURATION  STUDIES  REVIEWED 


The  preceding  section  has  sought  to  indicate  the  earlier  uses  of 
the  term  "acculturation"  and  its  various  and  often  conflicting  meanings. 
A  definition  of  the  word  has  been  offered  so  that  studies  of  accul- 
turation may  be  oriented  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  ends  to  be 
sought  in  them;  and  to  make  for  results  of  the  greatest  usefulness 
in  future  research  into  those  problems  of  cultural  dynamics  that  can 
be  studied  through  an  analysis  of  the  principles  that  govern  human 
behavior  under  the  varying  circumstances  of  contact  between  peoples 
of  different  cultures. 

To  document  and  clarify  the  concepts  that  underlie  both  the  de- 
finition that  has  been  given  and  the  problems  in  the  field  of  culture 
contact  that  are  to  be  outlined  in  the  section  that  follows,  a  series 
of  brief  analyses  are  here  undertaken  of  some  of  the  studies  of  accul- 
turation that  have  been  made.  These  studies  by  no  means  compre- 
hend all  those  that  might  have  been  considered,  and  in  the  bibliography, 
which  itself  is  far  from  complete,  still  other  titles  will  be  found.  How- 
ever, most  of  the  full-length  portraits  of  individual  cultures  that  today 
exhibit  the  effects  of  prolonged  cultural  contact  are  discussed,  while 
certain  reports  that  deal  with  investigations  of  the  results  of  accul- 
turation in  the  field  of  religion  are  also  presented  to  indicate  the  manner 


24  ACCULTURATION 

in  which  effective  research  into  a  restricted  aspect  of  a  single  culture 
experiencing  contact,  or  even  into  the  adventures  of  a  single  institution 
in  such  a  culture  can  be  prosecuted. 

In  these  compressed  analyses,  the  data  are  presented  with  the 
primary  purpose  in  mind  of  making  available  to  the  student  the 
materials  at  hand,  so  that  he  may  be  the  better  guided  in  his  field 
studies.  So  different  are  the  situations  with  which  the  student  of 
culture  contact  is  called  upon  to  deal,  and  so  varied  are  the  method- 
ological problems  presented  in  what  is  the  essentially  pioneer  work 
that  must  be  done  at  the  present  time  in  studying  acculturation,  that 
it  has  been  felt  necessary  not  only  to  consider  the  history  of  accul- 
turation and  the  delimitation  of  the  field,  the  problems  that  can  be 
most  profitably  attacked  and  the  cautions  that  must  be  observed  in 
studying  them,  but  also  to  afford  those  concerned  with  research  of 
this  type  the  opportunity  to  follow  for  themselves  the  reports  upon 
which  the  conclusions  that  will  comprise  the  final  section  of  this 
work  are  in  large  measure  based. 

2 

At  the  outset,  research  that  presents  all  phases  of  the  life  of  ac- 
culturated  folk  may  be  reviewed.  Here,  although  the  nature  of  the 
data  in  each  will  be  sketched,  emphasis  will  be  placed  on  the  implica- 
tions of  these  studies  for  the  problems  of  cultural  dynamics  and 
the  role  of  the  individual  in  cultural  change,  and  on  the  evaluation 
of  the  hypotheses  that  have  been  advanced  on  the  basis  of  these 
investigations. 

a.  Parsons,  Elsie  Clews,  Mitla,  Town  of  the  Souls.1 

Two  reasons,  we  are  told,  actuated  this  study  of  the  Zapotecan 

town  of  Mitla  in  southern  Mexico.    Specifically,  it  was  undertaken 

to  obtain  comparative  data  to  throw  light  on  possible  Spanish  or 

Indian  derivations  of  certain  aspects  of  Pueblo  Indian  cultures.   But 
1  Excerpts  from  this  volume  are  given  with  the  kind  permission  of  the  publishers, 
the  University  of  Chicago  Press. 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  ,j 

from  a  broader  point  of  view  it  was  conceived  as  one  which,  when 
taken  together  with  analyses  of  other  Mexican  communities,  might 
lay  bare  "the  patterns  in  Indian- Spanish  assimilation  and  acculturation" 
and  thus  "add  to  the  understanding  of  these  fundamental  processes  of 
social  change  not  only  in  Latin  America  but  in  society  at  large."  (p.  xii) 

The  greater  part  of  the  book  is  given  over  to  a  well-rounded 
description  of  the  life  of  the  townspeople.  Two  departures  from 
customary  practice  mark  the  presentation,  however;  a  chapter  devoted 
to  the  neighboring  folk  relates  the  culture  of  Mitla  to  that  of  other 
communities  of  the  region,  while  another,  which  details  town  gossip, 
reveals  much  concerning  the  place  of  individuals  in  the  community 
of  which  they  form  a  part.  The  final  chapter,  which  breaks  down  the 
institutions  already  described  into  their  Indian  or  Spanish  sources 
of  provenience  and  considers  the  amalgamations  of  customs  which 
derive  from  both  sources,  bears  most  directly  on  the  study  of  ac- 
culturation. 

The  difficulties  in  answering  the  question  "Indian  or  Spanish?" 
are  amply  illustrated  by  the  great  number  of  cultural  elements  whose 
possible  or  known  provenience  must  be  sought.  These  range  from 
minutiae  of  custom  to  entire  institutions,  and  from  material  culture 
to  typical  states  of  mind.  One  point  that  is  made  has  special  signif- 
icance :  that  an  institution  from  one  culture,  in  being  taken  over  by 
another,  may  gain  a  new  validating  concept  drawn  from  aboriginal 
patterns.  This  is  to  be  seen  in  a  comment  on  the  phrasing  of  certain 
attitudes  held  by  the  natives:  "The  terms  are  Spanish,  but  the 
evaluation,  I  think,  is  characteristically  Indian.  It  is  based  on  a 
person's  conduct,  and  not  on  his  opinions  or  on  his  emotional  reactions 
except  as  expressed  in  conduct."   (p.  481) 

Some  traits  of  the  culture  stand  out  as  clearly  Indian,  as,  for  instance 
the  mode  of  carrying  burdens  on  the  back  by  means  of  a  tumpline, 
or  the  manner  of  greeting  visitors.  Other  traits  are  as  clearly  Spanish, 
though  here  the  usual  manifestation  of  the  introduced  trait  is  its 


2$  ACCULTURATION 

outer  form  rather  than  the  inner  response  to  that  form:  tiled  roofs, 
wedding  rites,  Catholic  elements  in  the  religious  ceremonialism.  But 
in  far  more  cases  than  would  come  under  either  of  the  preceding 
classifications,  traits  are  listed  as  partially  of  one  cultural  derivation 
and  partly  another;  and  still  more  often,  as  possibly  either  one  or  the 
other,  or  both.  "The  ethnologist  must  squint  backward  and  re- 
construct the  past  as  best  he  can,"  we  are  told,  and  these  results 
indicate  the  full  reward  vouchsafed  those  who  expend  the  effort 
needed  to  do  this. 

A  fundamental  problem  in  the  study  of  "cultural  assimilation"  is, 
to  employ  a  phrase  of  the  author,  the  analysis  of  the  use  of  "something 
new  in  accordance  with  something  old."  (p.  21)  This  particular 
quotation  has  to  do  with  the  adoption  of  European  words  into 
Zapotecan  speech,  but  it  might  equally  apply  to  almost  any  other 
problem  of  provenience  attacked  in  the  book.  It  recurs  again  and 
again :  thus  the  change  brought  about  in  the  life  of  women  by  an  electric 
mill  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  same  acculturizing  phenomenon,  "New 
goods,  but  handled,  as  far  as  the  division  of  labor  by  sex  is  concerned, 
in  the  old  way."  (p.  31)  And  the  same  holds  true  for  religion: 

"God,  the  saints,  and  the  spirits  of  the  dead. . .  form  the  pantheon 
of  present-day  Mitla,  as  of  the  Republic  at  large.  Included  among 
the  saints  are  the  Virgin  and  Christ,  for  there  are  many  Virgins  and 
many  Christs.  Even  a  saint  whose  name  does  not  change  but  is 
associated  with  different  sanctuaries  becomes  a  kind  of  split  personality 
or  possessed  of  quite  distinct  personalities,  like  brothers . . .  This 
concept  is  consistent  with  the  general  feeling  that  saints  are  local 
spirits ..."  (p.  204) 

"There  is  one  place  in  Mitla  where,  from  a  historical  point  of 
view,  the  devil  is  properly  allocated.  Over  the  door  of  the  jail. . .  are 

scratched  outlines  of  devils A  warning,  presumably,  to  the 

criminal !  A  warning,  but  of  what  ?  There  is  little  or  no  belief  in 
hell. . .  Even  when  you  want  to  injure  an  enemy,  you  do  not  pray  to 
the  Devil,  you  visit  the  three  crosses  of  Calvary,  at  noon  time.    It 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  ^ 

is  the  saints  who  do  your  bidding  for  evil  as  well  as  for  good,  in  this 
life.  The  saints,  the  souls,  and  God  are  associated,  like  the  Devil,  with 
this  life  rather  than  with  a  future  life;  they  all  bestow,  or  withhold, 
practical  benefits  and  goods  from  day  to  day,  just  as  did  the  ancient, 
pre-Conquest  gods."   (p.  210) 

Other  instances  of  this  kind  and  the  detailed  analyses  of  the  final 
chapter  bring  us  to  the  statement  of  a  problem  that  is  fundamental 
for  all  studies  of  acculturation :  "Why  have  these  traits  survived,  why 
have  other  traits  which  we  have  reason  to  suppose  were  once  a  part  of 
Zapotecan  culture  not  survived,  and  why  have  certain  features  or 
aspects  of  which  we  think  as  distinctively  Spanish  traits  not  been 
adopted  into  the  culture?"  (p.  511) 

This  leads  to  the  presentation  of  a  series  of  propositions  put  forward 
as  "partial  answers"  to  these  "basic  queries" : 

"Traits  may  be  preserved  merely  because  of  ignorance  of  anything 
different;  in  other  words,  certain  parts  of  two  contacting  cultures 
may  not  be  in  contact  at  all."  (pp.  5 1 1-5 12) 

"Intermarriage  is  a  more  obvious  factor  in  cultural  breakdown  or 
cultural  assimilation,  whichever  way  you  look  at  it,  particularly  when 
the  woman  belongs  to  the  dominant  culture."  (p.  512) 

"Ignorance  of  custom,  whatever  it  is  due  to,  is  a  great  protection 
to  custom."  (p.  515) 

"...  an  old  custom  . . .  [may  survive]  . . .  because  it  is  agreeable  to 
the  new  one."    (p.  515) 

"When  the  ceremonial  life  of  a  highly  ceremonialized  community  is 
suppressed,  far  more  of  its  general  culture  goes  by  the  board  than 
in  the  subjection  of  a  people  whose  culture  is  less  ritualized  and  less 
developed."  (p.  519) 

Illustrations  are  given  of  all  these  assumptions  from  the  past  history 
of  Mitla,  and  a  few  of  such  examples  can  be  cited  here.  Thus,  the 
first  hypothesis  is  illustrated  by  reference  to  practices  having  to 
do  with  the  life  of  women;  how  Mitla  Indian  women  have  practically 


j8  ACCULTURATION 

no  opportunity  of  knowing  about  the  "domestic  manners  and  morals" 
of  the  mestiza.    And  instances  from  elsewhere  are  also  proffered: 

"Up  to  recent  years  similar  conditions  held  for  the  Pueblo  Indians 
in  relation  to  the  Mexicans  and  'Americans'  surrounding  them,  and 
were  a  strong  factor  in  Pueblo  conservatism,  just  as  nowadays  the 
employment  of  Pueblo  girls  in  American  households  is  making  for  the 
breakdown  of  Pueblo  culture.  We  are  quite  familiar  with  the  effect  of 
house  service  among  American  Negroes  during  slavery — plantation 
Negroes  and  house  servants  were  very  distinct  groups — but  we 
have  not  applied  the  observation  to  other  cultural  contacts,  and  in 
applying  the  platitude  that  one  half  does  not  know  how  the  other  half 
lives  to  cultural  classes  within  the  same  group,  I  doubt  if  we  are 
fully  aware  of  its  significance."   (p.  512) 

Or,  referring  to  another  of  these  propositions,  it  is  pointed  out  that 
it  is  because  a  certain  region  is  ministered  to  only  by  a  visiting  priest 
— whose  knowledge  of  local  custom  is  slight — that  such  aboriginal 
rites  as  turkey -sacrifice  and  cave-visiting  have  survived. 

Other  mechanisms  that  have  been  operative  in  framing  present- 
day  Zapotecan  culture  are  then  considered,  with  particular  reference 
to  that  mode  of  accommodation  to  newly  introduced  cultural  elements 
termed  "change  by  substitution."  "We  have  been  wont  to  say," 
it  is  stated,  "that  new  traits  tend  to  be  welcomed  or  readily  borrowed 
if  they  do  not  clash  with  pre-existent  traits,  or  again  if  they  have 
something  in  common  with  pre-existent  traits  to  take  the  edge  off  their 
unfamiliarity."  (p.  521)  This  is  of  the  order  of  adaptation  which, 
in  the  study  of  religion  among  New  World  Negroes,  has  been  termed 
cultural  syncretism ;  and  a  striking  exemplification  of  the  process  in 
Mitla  is  given  in  the  following  passage : 

"Just  as  the  friars  and  priests  built  their  monastery  and  curacy  and 
their  new  churches  over  the  temples,  using  the  ancient  stones  in  new 
construction,  so  they  got  support,  when  they  could,  from  native 
culture  for  their  calendar,  their  ceremonies  and  ritual,  their  pantheon 
and  their  hagiology.    In  this  they  were  abetted,  of  course,  by  the 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  ^ 

people  themselves.  It  was  a  circle  of  assimilation  or  acculturation  in 
which  it  would  be  impossible  in  most  cases  to  pick  out  the  respective 
agents.  No  doubt  it  was  the  padres  who  had  crosses  raised  at  all 
places  known  or  suspected  to  be  associated  with  aboriginal  cults ;  or 
if  these  places  did  not  lend  themselves  to  this  technique  it  was  the 

padres  who  bedeviled  them On  the  other  hand,  no  doubt,  . . . 

calling  an  idolo  a.  santito  or  Lightning  the  messenger  of  Dios  or 
Solomon  the  mason  of  the  temples  or  thinking  of  the  saints  as  Mitle- 
yenos  who,  like  the  early  gods,  were  turned  into  stone  were  purely 
Indian  attempts  at  assimilation.  But  these  are  exceptionally  clear 
cases  of  agency  in  the  long  list  of  changes  by  substitution  that  we 
think  took  place  in  Zapotecan  post -Conquest  history,  substitutions 
which  for  the  most  part,  in  so  far  as  they  knew  about  them,  would 
have  been  favored,  if  not  suggested,  by  the  Catholics."  (pp.  5  20-5  21) 

Hence  this  trick  of  "giving  an  old  habit  of  mind  a  new  expression" 
brought  it  about  that  "the  new  religion  was  after  all  not  so  new," 
and,  by  implication,  that  the  new  culture  was  also  one  that  retained 
much  of  the  old. 

Those  traits  are  also  considered  which  have  been  rejected  "in  ac- 
cordance with  the  obverse  of  the  prime  principle  of  assimilation; 
i.  e.,  when  the  new  trait  is  too  unfamiliar,  offering  nothing  to  tie  up 
to,  or  is  quite  incompatable  with  the  old  trait,  not  yielding  to  any 
process  of  identification,  it  will  be  rejected."  (p.  528)  Here  come 
varied  aspects  of  Spanish  culture;  those  dependent  on  language, 
certain  aspects  of  sex  life,  habits  of  mind  and  attitudes  such  as 
partisanship  and  assertive  leadership,  and  many  of  the  emotions  as- 
sociated with  Catholicism,  as  well  as  many  of  the  doctrines  of  Catholic 
theology.  Failure  to  take  over  technological  traits  is  laid  to  poverty, 
not  to  lack  of  desire;  "when  the  new  economic  way  is  cheaper,  as, 
for  example,  a  woman's  cotton  dress  as  against  the  woolen,  it  is 
quickly  substituted."  (p.  532)  And  the  reason  held,  at  least  in  part, 
to  lie  behind  the  failure  to  adopt  such  customs  of  ceremony  as  a 
church  wedding,  which  is  costly,  is  also  this  economic  one. 


j0  ACCULTURATION 

The  methodological  emphasis  placed  at  the  end  of  this  book  on 
the  desirability  of  correlating  ethnological  findings  in  studies  of  this 
type  not  only  with  the  early  history  of  a  people  but  also  with  the 
available  archaeological  materials  that  bear  on  their  past  should  be 
kept  in  mind  for  use  elsewhere.  And  a  final  conclusion  in  like  manner 
is  worthy  of  being  remembered  when  research  in  other  cultures  of 
hybrid  origin  offers  further  opportunities  for  testing  such  an 
hypothesis  as  to  the  processes  of  acculturation  as  this : 

"It  would  appear  that  changes  in  social  organization  and  in  material 
culture  are  made  more  readily  than  changes  in  personal  habits  and 
in  emotional  attitudes,  and  that  a  foreign  complex  is  established  in  its 
entirety  only  when  it  can  be  fitted  into  an  old  form  of  behavior  and 
is  compatible  with  existing  emotional  attitudes."   (p.  536) 

b.  Redfield,  Robert,  Tepo^tlan,  a  Mexican  Village.1 

The  rounded  picture  of  life  in  the  central  Mexican  community 
described  in  this  book,  when  viewed  in  conjunction  with  the  materials 
in  the  volume  just  discussed,  gives  a  lively  sense  of  the  resemblances 
and  differences  between  two  related  cultures  which  have  both  been 
subjected  to  similar  historical  experiences.  Here,  however,  the 
similarity  between  the  two  volumes  ends,  for  while  one  is  an  analysis 
of  a  Mexican  culture  in  terms  of  its  Indian  and  Spanish  affiliations 
and  has  as  its  purpose  the  determination  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
two  cultural  heritages  became  merged  in  present-day  institutions 
and  beliefs,  the  other  with  which  we  are  concerned  here  employs 
a  different  method  to  deal  with  a  different  problem. 

This  method  is  developed  at  some  length  in  the  preface.  Its  es- 
sence is  found  in  a  passage  which,  in  the  book,  follows  a  discussion 
wherein  the  growing  interest  of  ethnologists  in  problems  of  cultural 
dynamics  is  contrasted  with  their  willingness  in  the  past  to  rest 

1  Excerpts  from  this  volume  are  given  with  the  kind  permission  of  the  publishers, 
the  University  of  Chicago  Press. 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  jT 

content  "with  the  mere  description  of  cultures  or  the  solution  of 
specific  historic  sequences,"    The  author  then  continues: 

"If  the  interest  of  the  student  lies  in  an  investigation  of  social 
processes  in  general  terms,  it  would  seem  a  more  direct  procedure 
to  study  such  processes  as  they  actually  occur,  rather  than  to  content 
one's  self  with  comparing  the  historical  sequences  so  laboriously 
determined  by  historical  methods  of  the  ethnologist,  who  works 
without  the  direct  sources  of  written  matter.  In  sequences  of  the 
latter  sort  only  a  small  part  of  all  the  facts  can  ever  be  recaptured.  If 
one  is  interested  in  studying  what  happens  rather  than  what  happened, 
one  moves  more  directly  if  one  studies  it  as  it  happens.  Now  that  the 
power  and  personnel  of  anthropology  has  grown,  it  can  undertake 
such  investigations  and  still  continue  its  work  of  preserving  the 
record  of  dying  cultures."  (p.  12) 

To  study  the  "more  isolated  groups  of  Mexico"  so  as  to  learn  of 
pre-Columbian  cultures  and  "the  changes  which  they  underwent 
when  they  came  in  contact  with  the  Spaniards"  is  possible  and,  by 
implication,  worthy  of  attention;  but  "such  a  study  would  be  . . . 
of  a  dead  culture  and  of  a  past  change"  and  hence  "such  was  not  the 
interest  that  took  the  writer  to  Mexico."  For  though  "to  learn  as 
much  as  can  be  learned  of  the  history  of  the  present  culture  of 
Tepoztlan  is  a  part  of  any  thorough  study  of  that  culture,"  and  hence 
must  be  an  essential  part  of  any  attempt  to  make  an  ethnographic 
analysis  of  it,  the  principal  emphasis  is  here  laid  on  current  changes 
rather  than  those  which  took  place  in  the  past. 

The  approach  that  is  used  is  based  on  the  concept  of  the  folk 
culture,  which  is  held  to  differ  significantly  from  the  culture  of 
sophisticated  societies.  The  difference  between  the  mode  of  studying 
cultural  change  when  approached  in  this  manner,  and  that  found 
in  the  volume  just  analyzed,  which  despite  the  fact  that  this  work 
preceded  the  other  by  seven  years  is  expressed  as  clearly  as  though  it 
had  been  written  with  the  later  work  in  mind,  is  set  forth  as  follows : 

4 


^2  ACCULTURATION 

"The  Mexican  folk  are  not  necessarily  Indian.  The  folk  culture  is 
a  fusion  of  Indian  and  Spanish  elements.  The  acculturation  which 
gave  rise  to  this  mixed  culture  took  place  three  hundred  years  ago, 
largely  within  the  first  few  generations  after  the  Conquest.  The 
analysis  of  the  Mexican  folk  culture  into  Spanish  and  Indian  elements 
is  one  problem — a  historical  problem.  The  description  of  changes 
occurring  in  that  folk  culture  due  to  spread  of  city  ways  is  another 
problem — a  study  of  contemporary  change.  The  disorganization 
and  perhaps  the  reorganization  of  the  culture  here  considered  under 
the  slowly  growing  influence  of  the  city  is  a  process — a  diffusion 
process — which  can  and  will  be  studied.  It  is,  the  writer  assumes, 
an  example,  within  convenient  limits,  of  the  general  type  of  change 
whereby  primitive  man  becomes  civilized  man,  the  rustic  becomes  the 
urbanite."  (pp.  13-14) 

As  is  shown  in  the  first  chapter,  where  the  location  of  the  village  in 
relation  to  its  surroundings  is  given,  the  study  essentially  resolves 
itself  into  an  analysis  of  cultural  change  in  another  of  those  possible 
situations  where  control  can  be  exerted  over  the  data.  This  is  ap- 
parent from  the  way  in  which  the  ethnic  composition  of  the  great 
plateau  of  central  Mexico,  wherein  Tepoztlan  is  situated,  is  sum- 
marized : 

"These  aboriginal  remnants  [that  inhabit  the  periphery]  and  the 
sophisticated  minority  in  the  capital  represent  the  two  extremes  of 
Mexican  culture :  the  one  urban  in  character  and  European  in  origin, 
the  other  Indian  and  tribal.  But  the  vast  middle  ground  is  occupied 
by  people  whose  culture  is  neither  tribal  nor  cosmopolitan.  Their 
simple  rural  way  of  life  is  the  product  of  ancient  fusion  between  In- 
dian and  Spanish  custom."    (p.  16) 

The  approach,  therefore,  centers  on  studying  the  present-day  life 
of  the  Tepoztecos  as  this  reflects  a  mingling  of  the  cultures  found 
at  the  center  and  at  the  periphery  of  the  area  in  which  it  occupies  a 
minute  portion.    And  as  the  question  inevitably  comes  to  mind, 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  ^ 

whether  this  is  not  really  the  problem  attacked  by  Parsons  translated 
into  distributional  terms  on  a  single  time  level,  the  answer,  a  partial, 
though  not  completely  affirmative  one,  is  afforded  us  in  the  des- 
criptions of  the  life  of  the  village  and  of  the  various  classes  of  its 
inhabitants. 

In  the  actual  presentation  of  data,  the  procedure  followed  is  like 
that  in  other  acculturation  studies,  and  there  is  ample  reference  of 
traits  to  their  sources.  The  opening  sentence  of  the  descriptive 
section  reads:  "The  material  culture  of  Tepoztlan,  in  contrast  to  the 
non-material  culture,  preserves  unmodified  a  large  number  of  pre- 
Columbian  traits"  (p.  31),  and  the  tabulation  at  the  end  of  the  first 
chapter  which  gives  the  Spanish,  Indian  or  mixed  sources  of  origin 
of  the  elements  in  material  culture  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  elaborate 
attempts  at  referring  traits  of  a  mixed  culture  to  specific  sources  of 
historical  origin  to  be  found  in  the  literature  of  culture  contact.  In 
treating  non-material  aspects  of  the  culture,  where  the  carry-over 
of  Indian  customs  is  least  apparent,  the  same  approach  is  present, 
as  is  to  be  seen  in  the  description  of  the  marriage  ceremony,  which 
is  prefaced  with  the  statement  that  the  ritual  "has,  in  general,  a 
simple  Catholic  form.  Most  of  the  features  of  the  old  Aztec  customs 
. . .  have  been  displaced  by  Christian-church  ritual.  But  certain 
elements  remain  . . . ."  (p.  140)  Similarly  in  discussing  magical  and 
medical  practices,  reference  is  made  to  points  of  derivation. 

In  the  concluding  chapters,  where  the  difference  between  the 
analysis  of  Tepoztlan  culture  and  other  studies  of  this  type  is  empha- 
sized, the  effect  of  contact  with  the  city,  and  the  consequences  of 
literacy  among  a  certain  section  of  the  population,  are  first  discussed. 
In  accordance  with  the  methodological  point  of  view  of  the  book,  the 
present  types  of  written  folk-literature  are  reproduced  rather  than  the 
earlier  oral  types : 

"If  the  purpose  of  the  present  study  had  been  to  rescue  disappearing 
elements  of  a  more  primitive  culture,  it  would  have  been  indicated 


44  ACCULTURATION 

to  collect  materials  of  this  sort.  But  these  older,  traditional  folk  tales 
do  not  constitute  the  songs  and  stories  of  meaning  and  significance 
to  the  Tepoztecos.  A  few  people  tell  these  stories,  usually  to  children. . . 
This  body  of  folk  lore  is  passing  through  the  nursery  to  oblivion.  It 
is  no  longer  vital;  it  does  not  enter  into  the  important  social  situations 
in  Tepoztlan."  (p.  173) 

Hence  the  figures  of  the  revolutionary  heroes  of  recent  Mexico 
rather  than  the  mythical  characters  of  an  earlier  mythology  move 
through  the  succeeding  pages ;  printed  ballads  rather  than  traditional 
songs  are  reproduced. 

The  final  chapter  points  the  data  of  the  preceding  pages  to  establish 
their  appropriateness  to  the  theoretical  assumptions.  Again,  we  are 
told  that  "the  culture  of  Tepoztlan  appears  to  represent  a  type 
intermediate  between  the  primitive  tribe  and  the  modern  city" ;  that 
"only  from  the  point  of  view  of  history  or  of  romantic  appreciation  is 
Tepoztlan  an  'Aztec  pueblo'."  (pp.  217-218)  And  the  advantages 
that  are  held  to  accrue  from  the  study  of  a  community  of  this  kind 
in  terms  of  the  gain  in  understanding  cultural  dynamics  is  again 
pointed  out,  though  this  time  from  a  somewhat  different  point  of 
view: 

" . .  .if  the  interest  is  not  in  depiction,  but  in  studying  social  change 
as  it  takes  place. . .  then  Tepoztlan  presents  an  excellent  opportunity. 
This  opportunity  is  for  the  study  of  the  change  whereby  a  folk 
community  is  slowly  becoming  more  like  the  city.  This  change  is  a 
case  of  diffusion,  occurring  in  an  easily  observed  situation,  so  slowly 
as  not  to  accomplish  the  disorganization  of  the  community,  and  under 
practical  circumstances  which  liberate  the  student  from  responsibility 
to  record  the  fragmentary  vestiges  of  a  disappearing  culture."  (p.  218) 

And  because  not  only  the  diffusion  of  "the  traits  usually  listed,  of 
technique  and  ritual"  can  be  studied  effectively  in  this  manner,  but 
also  "what  can  ...  be  called  'subjective'  traits:  mental  form  as  well 
as  mental  content,"  it  is  further  concluded  that  this  kind  of  situation 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  ^ 

is  one  in  which  research  into  the  inner  psychology,  as  well  as  outer 
forms,  of  the  "culture  process"  must  yield  rich  results. 

That  this  approach  represents  the  kind  of  control  sought  in  all 
acculturation  studies  is  evident,  and  to  the  degree  that  studies  of 
peoples  undergoing  acculturation  are  made  in  the  effort  to  under- 
stand the  workings  of  cultural  change,  there  is  practical  identity 
in  the  ends  that  are  sought.  The  situation  studied  in  Tepoztlan  may 
well  be  studied  elsewhere  than  in  Mexico,  but  such  investigations 
only  differ  from  studies  of  acculturation  in  the  matter  of  the  emphasis 
placed  on  the  time  element.  For  it  is  evident  that  the  culture  of  the 
"folk"  and  of  urban  sophisticates  must  be  of  an  order  of  difference 
that  is  quite  the  same  as  that  which  obtains  between  peoples  of 
different  historical  background  whose  contacts  have  resulted  in 
cultural  interchange.  That  this  is  recognized  to  be  the  case  is 
apparent  from  the  following  comment  which,  but  for  one  sentence, 
concludes  the  book : 

"They  are  changes  which  have  resulted. . .  out  of  the  conflict 
between  the  two  cultures  in  which,  mentally,  [the  Tepoztecan]  is 
living  at  the  same  time."  (p.  223) 

c.  Mead,  Margaret,  The  Changing  Culture  of  an  Indian  Tribe. 

With  this  study  of  the  contemporary  life  of  a  North  American  tribe, 
we  come  to  the  type  of  acculturative  situation  in  which  research 
is  most  currently  being  carried  on — where  contact  in  recent  historic 
times  has  occurred  between  whites  and  native  folk.  The  methodological 
problems  faced  by  the  author  here  offer  less  difficulties  than  those 
which  must  be  dealt  with  in  studying  Mexican  groups  where  the 
initial  impulses  of  contact  set  in  long  ago.  Here  the  contact  has  been 
so  recent  that  an  adjustment  of  the  kind  reached  by  the  people  des- 
cribed in  the  two  volumes  just  discussed  has  not  been  possible  to 
achieve,  and  the  disorganization  resulting  from  recent  or  continuing 
contact  is  a  prime  factor. 


ACCULTURA  TION 

The  mode  of  presentation  in  this  book  is  the  one  mandatory  in 
any  description  of  a  people  undergoing,  or  who  have  undergone, 
acculturation — the  cultural  base,  the  impinging  forces,  and  the 
resulting  change  in  the  receiving  group.  It  is  possible,  too,  here  to 
pay  some  attention  to  the  attitudes  of  the  donor  group,  and  use  is 
made  of  the  much  more  satisfactory  historical  data  that  are  to  be  had 
regarding  the  nature  of  the  contacts.  The  nexus  of  the  volume — 
the  data  concerning  the  life  of  the  people — is  laid  between  an  initial 
statement  of  approach,  and  a  final  consideration  of  the  place  of  women 
in  the  culture  as  it  exists  today,  especially  as  this  throws  light  on  the 
maladjustment  of  the  folk  at  the  present  time. 

"The  Antlers,"  as  the  anonymous  tribe  who  are  the  subject  of  the 
book  are  designated,  are  the  remnants  of  a  Plains  Indian  people  who 
led  a  semi-hunting,  semi-agricultural  existence.  With  their  social 
organization  based  on  a  gentile  system,  religion  marked  by  the  vision 
quest,  sacred  bundles,  and  secret  societies  for  war  and  healing  in 
which  women  played  a  minor  role,  they  lived  the  usual  well-adjusted 
life  of  any  undisturbed  tribe.  Three  periods  of  adjustment  followed 
their  initial  unimportant  contacts  with  whites.  The  first  was  during 
the  days  of  the  fur  trade,  when  with  the  introduction  of  guns  and 
steel  traps  the  dislocation  of  aboriginal  economic  life  commenced. 
The  second  is  marked  by  the  coming  of  white  settlers  to  the  region, 
the  establishment  of  an  Indian  agency  and  a  Presbyterian  mission, 
and  the  disappearance  of  the  buffalo.  In  the  third  period — "under 
double  pressure — from  government  and  missionary  on  the  one  hand, 
and  from  forward-looking  optimistic  leaders  on  the  other — the  people 
abandoned  earth  lodges,  tipis,  hunting,  trapping,  and  fishing,  and 
settled  down  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century  to  an 
existence  which  had  a  superficial  resemblance  to  a  rural  American 
community."  (p.  24) 

Thus,  at  the  turn  of  the  century,  "the  Antlers  might  be  said  to 
have  made  a  second  adjustment  to  white  culture  . . .    They  had  made 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  ^ 

for  themselves  a  sort  of  existence,  although  it  was  only  a  shadow  of 
the  rich  complexity  of  their  former  lives.  It  was,  however,  a  coherent 
standard,  which,  had  its  economic  basis  been  left  undisturbed,  might 
have  successfully  defied  further  modification  for  a  generation,  or 
perhaps  more."  (pp.  29-30)  But  this  was  not  to  be.  Because  after 
a  period  of  twenty -five  years  that  had  ill  equipped  the  Indian  to 
cope  with  the  new  situation  with  which  he  was  presented,  there  was 
an  "onrush  of  white  settlement,  coincident  with  the  'period  of  trust' 
when  by  act  of  Congress  the  Indians  were  to  receive  fee  patents  to 
their  lands."  (p.  30)  And  since  this  broke  down  the  last  protective 
barrier  which  might  have  been  reared  about  these  Indians,  they 
found  themselves  at  the  mercy  of  the  dominant  group  among  whom 
they  were  henceforth  to  live. 

The  closeness  of  the  whites  and  Indians  on  the  reservation  as  it 
was  constituted  in  1932,  the  time  of  the  writing  of  this  book,  is 
stressed;  though  it  must  be  noted  that  some  of  these  observations 
may  be  invalid  because  of  the  present  policy  of  the  Indian  Bureau, 
especially  with  regard  to  allotted  land.    "Everywhere  Indian  land 

abuts  on  white -owned  land (p-  34)    The  reservation  and  the 

reservation  towns  present  this  external  picture  of  a  mixed  population, 
using  the  same  roads,  driving  in  the  same  kind  of  vehicles,  trading 
at  the  same  stores  ..."  (p.  37)  and  in  many  other  ways  leading  the 
same  kind  of  life.  Yet  this  apparent  mingling  is  not  an  actual  one. 
'The  distribution  of  whites  and  Indians  over  the  same  territory  does 
not  make  for  much  contact  between  the  races"  (p.  3  6),  for  the  psychology 
of  both  groups  lays  emphasis  on  group  distinctions:  "This  continual 
contact  in  a  familiar  setting  only  seems  to  strengthen  the  popular  white 
belief  that  the  Indians  are  merely  bad  and  inefficient  editions  of  them- 
selves, and  encourages  them  to  set  down  the  deficiency  of  the  Indian 
to  his  race,  not  to  his  culture."  (p.  37) 

The  acculturative  forces  are  hence  those  of  governmental  pressure, 
and,  in  a  negative  sense,  the  refusal  of  the  whites  to  permit  the  Indians 


^8  ACCULTURATION 

to  enter  into  the  life  of  the  community,  except  where  advances  are 
made  to  an  individual  Indian  who  has  something  of  value  that  can 
be  acquired  to  advantage  by  a  white  neighbor,  or  where  political 
matters  are  involved,  since  the  Indians  of  this  particular  tribe  have  the 
vote.  Against  this  background  the  economic,  political,  social,  religous, 
and  educational  situations  of  the  Indians  are  projected,  to  be  con- 
sidered in  terms  of  the  deviations  from  aboriginal  custom  shown  by 
their  contemporary  form,  and  the  psychological  effect  of  the  resulting 
cultural  disequilibrium. 

In  all  these  aspects  of  culture,  save  only  the  religious,  much  the 
same  tale  of  cultural  chaos  is  told.  If  the  economic  life  be  taken  as 
an  example,  we  see  how,  on  the  basis  of  a  concept  of  wealth  as  a 
means  to  validate  position  by  the  accumulation  of  "merit  ratings 
through  the  public  distribution"  of  one's  belongings,  of  a  system  which 
admitted  no  inheritance  of  property,  of  land  as  something  that  ap- 
proached a  free  good  except  when  in  actual  use,  these  people  have 
been  projected  into  a  system  where  private  property,  both  in  goods 
and  land,  is  paramount,  and  where  to  give  wealth  away  means  to 
deprive  oneself  and  one's  family  of  the  very  necessities  of  life.  Yet 
the  economic  ideas  of  the  Indian's  past  "are  actually  the  economic 
ideas  which  be  retains  today.  For  the  situations  which  have  resulted 
from  white  contact  he  has  a  separate  ideology.  His  actual  personal 
property  is  sometimes  expended  according  to  one  set  of  ideas  and 
sometimes  to  the  other."  (p.  45)  The  old  patterns  of  the  "give  away" 
exist  in  attenuated  form,  while  the  "compulsion  to  provide  for  anyone 
who  enters  one's  house,"  something  regulated  in  aboriginal  times 
by  the  functioning  organization  of  the  society,  has  lost  its  checks  and 
balances  with  disastrous  results.  It  is  retained  only  in  small  matters, 
but  an  "extreme  selfishness"  rules  where  the  great  sums  that  un- 
comprehended  circumstances  sometimes  thrust  on  the  unprepared 
Indian  are  disposed  of  with  the  profligacy  that  is  encouraged  by  those 
whites  who  are  not  slow  to  grasp  the  opportunities  thus  afforded  them. 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED 


49 


The  course  of  "Antler"  religious  life  seems  to  have  been  one  of 
disintegration  and  then,  through  the  coming  of  the  Peyote  cult,  of 
subsequent  reintegration.  With  the  advent  of  Presbyterian  mis- 
sionaries the  aboriginal  beliefs  and  rites  all  but  disappeared,  so  that 
at  the  end  of  the  first  period  of  adjustment,  all  the  Indians  were  at 
least  nominal  Presbyterians.  Yet  the  desultory  Presbyterian  ritual 
gave  little  satisfaction,  so  that  when  the  Peyote  cult  was  introduced, 
its  incorporation  of  certain  tenets  of  Christianity  into  the  aboriginal 
patterns  of  ceremonialism  found  the  people  ripe  to  adopt  it.  Today 
the  Peyote  cult  continues  as  the  prevailing  religion,  and  though  its 
rites  no  longer  engross  the  people,  it  continues  to  hold  their  allegiance. 
Of  aboriginal  religion,  only  the  beliefs  and  attitudes  toward  the  dead, 
and  the  fear  of  the  supernatural  punishment  termed  nonka  that  follows 
on  disrespect  of  the  old  ceremonial  objects  that  have  not  been  sold  or 
lost,  continue. 

The  system  of  governmental  education  was  responsible  for  much 
of  the  breaking  down  of  earlier  mores.  As  described  in  this  book, 
since  it  presents  a  picture  of  conditions  under  an  Indian  policy  no 
longer  in  effect,  it  is  of  interest  to  the  student  concerned  with  ac- 
culturation principally  as  an  historical  statement.  This  is  especially 
true  of  the  account  of  the  "outing"  system  of  still  earlier  days, 
whereby  those  who  were  sent  east  to  school  spent  the  summers  working 
in  the  homes  of  Quaker  farmers,  where  they  were  treated  quite  as 
members  of  the  family.  Included  in  this  discussion  of  education, 
however,  is  a  highly  significant  passage  which  hints  at  acculturation 
in  linguistic  usage,  and  is  of  great  value  as  a  lead  for  further  research 
into  the  facts  concerning  the  results  of  acculturation  in  the  field  of 
speech. 

With  this  sketch  of  the  results  of  culture -contact  among  the 
"Antlers,"  the  place  of  this  report  among  acculturation  studies  may 
be  considered  in  other  respects  than  those  already  discussed.  Es- 
sentially a  study  in  social  demoralization,  the  presentation  is  under- 


j0  ACCULTURATION 

standably  marked  by  the  distress  of  a  sympathetic  observer  at  the 
unfortunate  conditions  under  which  these  Indians  have  come  to 
live.  The  question  for  the  student  of  cultural  contact  is,  however, 
whether  these  conditions  of  life  are  not  sufficiently  exceptional  so  as 
to  make  them  pathological  even  among  the  cases  of  brutal  contact 
between  natives  and  whites  known  to  us  from  other  parts  of  the  world. 
From  a  methodological  point  of  view,  the  situation  would  thus  seem 
to  be  so  extreme  that,  at  this  stage  of  the  study  of  culture  contact, 
the  aid  it  can  give  to  an  understanding  of  the  dynamics  of  cultural 
change  must  be  materially  less  than  that  afforded  by  research  among 
a  tribe  where  penalty  for  being  in  the  path  of  white  expansion  has  been 
less  drastic. 

The  great  emphasis  placed  in  this  study  on  the  impact  of  white 
culture  on  the  "Antlers,"  furthermore,  tends  to  obscure  the  effect 
on  the  same  people  of  a  highly  significant  process  of  inter-tribal 
acculturation  that  the  book  implies  is  going  on  among  the  Indians 
themselves.  It  would  undoubtedly  have  been  very  illuminating  if 
the  fact  that  the  "Antler"  takes  refuge  from  his  sense  of  a  loss  of 
tribal  dignity  through  identifying  himself  with  the  larger  group,  "the 
American  Indian,"  had  been  further  probed.  For  it  would  seem  that 
the  fact  that  he  is  today  thrown  into  much  closer  contact  than  ever 
before  with  other  "American  Indians"  who,  like  himself,  have  em- 
braced this  new  affiliation,  must  be  of  the  greatest  importance  in  ob- 
taining the  picture  both  of  his  outer  and  inner  life  that  is  the  aim  of 
this  study. 

The  theoretical  discussion  of  acculturation  differentiates  the  prac- 
tical from  the  scientific  study  of  cultures  in  contact  in  the  manner 
referred  to  in  the  preceding  section;1  it  states  the  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  studying  changing  cultures  as  against  the  problems  in  the 
description  of  life  in  "stable"  communities ;  and  indicates  the  con- 
tributions the  study  of  changing  societies  of  this  type  may  be  expected 
1  See  above,  p.  5. 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED 


JI 


to  make  to  our  knowledge  of  the  processes  of  cultural  change.  It 
is  the  author's  conviction  that,  to  the  historian,  research  into  the 
lives  of  peoples  undergoing  culture-contact  will  "show  sufficiently 
general  tendencies  so  that  any  detailed  study  of  one  group  at  one  time 
will  be  . .  .  data  upon  much  wider  historical  events"  (p.  8),  while  for 
those  concerned  with  cultural  dvnamics,  the  "studv  of  human  societies 
in  peculiar  conditions  of  disequilibrium  .  .  .  should  serve  to  illuminate 
the  social  process,  to  give  the  type  of  understanding  which  springs 
from  the  very  characteristic  which  makes  it  in  other  respects  so 
unsatisfactory — distortion."  (p.  15) 

The  effect  of  the  present  conditions  of  tribal  life  upon  the  "Antler" 
woman,  and  the  way  this  is  reflected  in  the  behavior  of  all  the  members 
of  the  tribe  constitutes  the  final  portion  of  this  work.  The  oft  repeated 
statement  concerning  the  conservatism  of  women  as  against  that  of 
men  is  in  this  discussion  formulated  as  a  general  principle.  Yet  the 
"Antler"  woman,  in  the  sphere  of  religion,  for  example,  or  in  the 
economic  aspects  of  her  life,  is  not  shown  to  have  changed  her  behavior 
to  a  strikingly  lesser  degree  than  have  the  men  of  her  tribe.  The 
statement  of  principle  regarding  differences  in  sex  receptivity  to  the 
new  thus  may  stand  as  one  to  be  further  tested,  for  though  among 
the  "Antlers"  the  verdict  is  "not  proven,"  the  contention  is  lodged 
deeply  enough  in  anthropological  assumption  to  merit  its  careful 
investigation. 

One  point  suggested  in  the  preceding  chapter  may  be  recalled  here 
as  especially  pertinent  to  a  discussion  of  the  approach  to  the  data 
inherent  in  this  work.  This  has  to  do  with  the  retention  of  historical 
perspective  by  the  student  who  deals  with  a  tribe  such  as  this,  where 
the  clinical  picture  dictates  a  diagnosis  of  extreme  demoralization. 
To  recognize  this  fact  does  not  necessarily  impel  one  either  to  draw 
the  conclusion  that  demoralization  is  inevitable  when  native  folk 
come  in  contact  with  European  cultures,  or  that  contact  of  this  kind 
must  lead  to  tribal  doom.  As  a  matter  of  recorded  fact,  it  is  known 


J2 


ACCULTURATION 


that  throughout  history,  though  stronger  peoples  have  imposed  their 
wills  on  weaker  ones,  these  have  made  their  adjustments,  completed 
their  acculturation,  and  survived  to  carry  on  their  lives  and  much 
of  their  earlier  tradition.  And  though  it  may  yet  be  demonstrated 
that  "the  process  of  cultural  disintegration  in  which  the  inevitable 
progress  of  the  more  complex  culture  gradually  breaks  down  the 
native  culture  is  as  meaningless,  as  random,  as  is  the  collapse  of  a 
house  before  a  wrecking  machine,"  yet  our  very  attempts  to  discern 
principles  of  cultural  dynamics  in  our  study  of  the  contacts  of  peoples 
would  seem  in  itself  to  constitute  a  denial  of  this  principle.  It  is 
likewise  to  be  questioned  whether  the  individual  who  is  "left  flounder- 
ing in  a  heterogeneous  welter  of  meaningless  uncoordinated  and 
disintegrating  institutions"  must  develop  the  "formless  uncoordinated 
character"  that  is  ascribed  to  him.  The  "Antlers,"  we  are  told,  were 
themselves  in  a  fairway  to  making  a  reasonably  satisfactory  adjust- 
ment to  their  new  conditions  of  life  at  the  end  of  the  past  century. 
The  Indians  of  Mexico  have  made  such  an  adjustment,  and  so  have 
the  Negroes  of  the  New  World,  though  they  were  subjected  to  far 
more  rigorous  treatment  and  to  an  all-embracing  detribalization  such 
as  the  "Antlers"  were  never  called  upon  to  face.  It  is  thus  not  too 
much  to  suggest,  as  we  attempt  to  rescue  our  sense  of  historic 
perspective  from  the  assaults  made  upon  it  by  our  emotions  when  we 
regard  the  actual  condition  of  a  primitive  group  such  as  this,  that 
the  "Antlers"  may  in  the  future  make  an  adjustment  to  their  present 
conditions  of  life  comparable  to  that  which  they  had  already  once 
made. 

The  mode  of  presentation  of  data  in  this  work  also  merits  consider- 
ation as  a  procedural  problem.  Students  of  cultural  contact,  especially 
those  who  study  native -white  contact,  are  often  confronted  with  a 
difficult  decision  when  preparing  their  field  materials  for  publication, 
since  this  must  often  be  done  so  as  to  obviate  any  possible  embar- 
rassment or,  in  some  cases,  actual  inconvenience  to  those  who  have 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  j$ 

given  them  information.  That  a  certain  measure  of  concealment 
is  absolutely  necessary — to  a  degree  unknown  when  "undis- 
turbed" primitive  cultures  are  described — must  be  recognized. 
But  the  extent  to  which  concealment  can  be  achieved  and  still  not 
vitiate  the  scientific  usefulness  of  the  resulting  work  is  a  matter  of 
the  utmost  importance.  This  study  represents  the  most  extreme 
degree  of  concealment ;  not  only  are  individuals  given  names  other 
than  their  own  and  the  tribal  name  itself  changed,  but  the  names  of 
neighboring  Indian  tribes  are  also  disguised,  the  reservation  is  not 
designated,  and  even  the  state  where  the  Indians  live  is  deleted.  Yet 
references  are  made  to  earlier  literature  concerning  this  people 
(pp.  91,  for  instance,  or  202-203)  which,  lacking  any  clues,  the 
reader  who  wishes  to  go  to  these  sources  is  at  the  mercy  of  casual 
word -of -mouth  information  concerning  the  tribal  name,  and  the 
common  procedure  of  checking  scientific  data  is  made  a  matter  of 
chance.  No  solution  of  this  practical  difficulty  can  be  suggested, 
unless  it  be  agreed  for  the  present  that,  since  the  field  is  so  wide, 
only  those  situations  should  be  studied  where  at  least  tribal  names 
and  the  locale  of  the  work  can  be  revealed.  For  it  is  evident  that  where 
such  elaborate  concealment  is  attempted  in  a  work  as  useful  as  this, 
much  of  its  value  to  students  concerned  with  the  same  problems  must 
inevitably  be  lost. 

d.  Radin,  Paul,  The  Influence  of  the  Whites  on  Winnebago  Culture. 

As  an  essential  preliminary  to  setting  forth  the  problems  consider- 
ed in  this  paper,  the  background  of  present-day  Winnebago  customs 
and  beliefs  is  first  presented  in  terms  of  their  early  history  and 
aboriginal  life.  The  author  then  proceeds  on  this  basis  to  outline 
the  results  of  the  contact  between  the  Winnebago  and  the  whites  in 
the  following  terms : 

"The  influence  of  European  cultures  has  taken  four  definite  lines; 
it  has  either  completely  obliterated  Winnebago  customs;  it  has  in- 


j  j  ACCULTURATION 

troduced  ideas,  customs,  and  utensils  of  European  origin;  it  has 
brought  into  contact  with  one  another  Indian  tribes  that  had  had 
little  or  no  intercourse  before;  or,  finally,  it  has  stimulated  contact 
already  existing  before  the  coming  of  the  white  man."  (p.  142) 

The  first  of  these  consequences,  it  is  pointed  out,  did  not  necessarily 
result  from  the  pursuit  of  a  definite  policy;  it  is  rather  that  the 
encroachment  of  the  whites  on  Indian  territory  and  the  movement 
of  the  frontier  "made  impossible  a  number  of  Indian  activities,  and 
brought  about  situations  new  to  Winnebago  history."  The  breakdown 
of  the  clan  system  is  thus  to  be  thought  of  as  having  resulted  from  the 
"ceaseless  shifting  of  position  from  one  place  to  another . . .  and  the 
intermarriage  with  whites  or  Indians  of  other  tribes,  [which]  played 
havoc  with  an  individual's  status."  Likewise,  the  manner  in  which 
the  individualities  of  small  village  groups  were  suppressed  by  being 
drawn  together  into  a  single  unit  is  held  to  be  the  result  of  the 
operation  of  the  same  impersonal  historic  circumstance.  "When  they 
were  all  forced  together,  there  was  an  intermingling  such  as  had  not 
been  known  before,  with  the  result  that  some  things  disappeared, 
while  others  were  unduly  emphasized."  (pp.  142-143)  Further 
examples  are  the  predominance  of  the  Thunder-Bird  and  Bear  clans, 
which,  owing  to  their  larger  membership,  were  enabled  to  assert 
greater  supremacy  when  the  Winnebago  were  concentrated  than 
would  have  been  possible  under  their  scattered  distribution  be- 
fore white  contact;  and  the  diffusion  of  the  Medicine  Dance 
which,  introduced  through  the  Sauk,  spread  much  more  rapidly 
among  the  Winnebago  than  could  have  been  possible  in  aboriginal 
times. 

Aside  from  material  objects,  only  three  concepts,  all  in  the  field  of 
religion,  can  be  traced  to  white  culture,  and  all  have  a  substantial 
basis  in  aboriginal  Winnebago  belief.  These  are  "the  concept  of 
Earth -maker;  the  concept  of  the  chief  of  the  bad  spirits;  and  the 
cross  symbol  associated  with  Earth-maker."    (p.  143) 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  jj 

"However,  what  approaches  to  the  Christian  concept  of  God  in 
Earth-maker  is  found  principally  in  the  origin  myths  of  the  various 
ceremonies,  and  can  be  adequately  explained  as  a  result  of  shamanistic 
systematization  of  beliefs.  The  concept  of  the  Great  Evil  Spirit  is, 
as  I  have  suggested,  merely  a  variation  of  the  popular  Evil  Spirit, 
although  it  must  be  admitted  that  there  was  a  number  of  Christian 
traits  in  the  characterization  of  this  figure  in  the  popular  Hero  cycle 
of  the  Twins.  The  cross  is  the  common  symbol  of  the  four  cardinal 
points  and  of  the  four  winds  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  Christian 
cross.  Its  association  with  Earth-maker  is  probably  accidental.  It 
might  still,  however,  be  contended  that  though  all  the  foregoing 
beliefs  are  of  unquestionable  Winnebago  origin,  the  elaborate  origin 
myth  in  the  Medicine  Dance  does  suggest  a  stimulation  on  the  part 
of  Christian  beliefs.  To  this  no  answer  can  be  given,  except  that  it  is 
possible."    (pp.  143-144) 

In  the  realm  of  material  culture,  however,  the  traits  introduced 
by  the  whites  were  legion;  while  "the  introduction  of  the  white  man's 
tools  . . .  produced  a  veritable  revolution  in  Winnebago  manufacture." 
They  were  taken  up  at  once,  and  so  effectively  that  the  memory  of 
pre -white  techniques  is  almost  lost.  As  might  be  expected,  this  was 
because  of  their  greater  efficiency,  which,  for  example,  permitted  the 
more  durable  dugout  to  replace  the  birch -bark  canoe: 

"The  introduction  of  European  utensils  possesses  a  peculiar  in- 
terest, for,  with  the  exception  of  ornamentation,  it  is  the  only  subject 
of  Indian  life  that  can  be  discussed  historically,  from  the  point  of 
view  of  the  Indian  mind  and  old  Indian  utensils  upon  borrowed 
elements.  No  such  studies  have  as  yet  been  made,  but  when  they 
shall  have  been  it  will,  I  am  certain,  become  patent  that  the  process 
of  borrowing  was  not  a  passive  one;  that  wherever  possible  the 
new  utensils  soon  became  assimilated  to  old  Indian  forms;  and 
that  even  with  regard  to  such  novel  articles  as  the  saddle  and  the 
whip,  Indian  methods  of  manufacture  exercised  a  due  amount  of 
influence."  (pp.  144-145) 


j  6  ACCULTURATION 

As  far  as  is  known,  this  study,  suggested  in  191 3,  is  still  to  be  made 
— either  among  the  Winnebago  or  any  other  Indian  tribe,  or,  indeed, 
elsewhere  in  the  world.  It  not  only  involves  a  detailed  analysis  of  the 
elements  of  European  and  native  culture  (granting  that  no  two  native 
cultures  in  contact  are  well  enough  known  to  permit  of  this  procedure) 
but  also  a  thorough  consideration  of  the  setting  of  these  material 
objects  in  the  new  cultural  amalgam.  In  the  field  of  religion  a  few 
studies  cast  along  these  lines  have  been  undertaken,  notably  of  the 
Ghost  Dance  and  the  Hand  Game  associated  with  it,  but  this  particular 
research,  suggested  two  decades  ago,  still  lies  in  the  future. 

The  final  two  points  concerning  the  results  of  contact  with  European 
culture,  which  present  the  greatest  methodological  difficulties,  are 
treated  as  a  series  of  stimulating  questions,  which  can  best  be  indicated 
in  the  words  of  their  author : 

"...  What  was  the  role  of  the  white  trader  in  bringing  into  closer 
contact  with  the  Winnebago,  both  their  Algonkin  neighbors  and  more 
distant  tribes  ?  This  question  is  of  transcendent  importance  because 
it  may  have  an  all -important  bearing  on  the  sameness  in  material 
culture,  religious  beliefs,  and,  to  a  large  extent,  mythology,  of  the 
culture  area  known  as  the  Woodland.  This  particular  factor  in  the 
development  of  uniformity  in  a  culture  area  has  never  been  inves- 
tigated. It  deserves,  however,  the  most  careful  attention,  for  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  through  the  influence  of  the  white  trader 
there  was  a  closer  drawing  together  of  Indian  tribes,  a  greater  percent- 
age of  intermarriage,  and  a  greater  and  more  systematic  interchange 
of  goods  and  ideas.  It  is  tantalizing  that  no  details  are  available  or 
likely  to  be  available.  For  this  reason  we  must  seize  upon  all  the  bits 
of  evidence  we  can  obtain;  if  the  Winnebago  tell  us  that  previous  to 
the  coming  of  the  whites  little  of  any  woodenware  was  used,  and  if, 
not  long  after,  we  find  in  common  use  among  the  Winnebago,  wooden- 
ware  indistinguishable  from  that  of  their  Algonkin  neighbors,  the  most 
plausible  inference  is  that  it  was  the  Algonkin  woodenware,  and  that  its 
rapid  dissemination  followed  in  the  trail  of  the  white  trader."  (p.  145) 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  jj 

This  point  must  be  underscored  as  one  that  has  been  almost 
completely  overlooked  in  studies  of  culture -contact,  and  will  be 
considered  in  the  next  section  of  this  discussion.  It  is  interesting 
that  this  opportunity  has  not  been  utilized  for,  once  set  forth,  it  is 
evident  that  persons  such  as  traders  who  circulate  freely  from  one 
tribe  to  another  must  be  important  agents  of  diffusion  and,  whether 
or  not  an  actual  factor  in  acculturation,  must  certainly  prepare  the 
way  for  acculturation  when  prolonged  contact  does  take  place.  That 
the  operation  of  this  particular  mechanism  in  the  exact  way  suggested 
can  no  longer  be  studied  among  the  Indians  of  the  United  States 
would  seem  to  be  the  case;  in  Africa,  however,  where  not  only  whites, 
but,  in  East  Africa  the  British  Indians  and  Arabs  constitute  an  ac- 
culturative  force  of  this  kind,  and,  in  West  Africa,  where  the  Hausa 
traders  take  objects  over  all  the  vast  stretch  of  the  Guinea  Coast  and 
inland  toward  the  western  Sudan,  it  should  be  susceptible  of  investi- 
gation. Similarly,  in  the  Far  East,  Chinese  traders  are  today  playing 
the  same  role  among  the  native  peoples  of  the  Philippines,  let  us  say, 
as  did  the  white  traders  among  the  Indians.  And  since*  the  aspects 
of  material  culture  carried  from  one  people  to  another  by  such  means 
are  the  most  easily  discernible  of  all  traits,  this  problem  is  one  which, 
not  only  because  of  its  promise,  but  because  of  its  methodological 
practicability,  deserves  attention  on  the  part  of  students. 

e.  Herskovits,  Melville  J.,  Life  in  a  Haitian  Valley. 

The  approach  to  acculturation  in  this  volume  is  essentially  that 
developed  in  the  preceding  section  of  this  discussion,  and  hence 
it  is  unnecessary  to  comment  on  those  parts  where  theoretical  problems 
are  discussed.  It  will  suffice  here  to  point  out  the  peculiarities  in  the 
situation  studied,  and  the  manner  in  which  these  affected  the  method- 
ological approach. 

In  a  way,  the  problems  of  procedure  presented  in  studying  the  life 
of  the  Haitian  peasant  exhibit  resemblances  both  to  those  that  confront 

5 


jS  ACCULTURATION 

students  who  consider  Mexican  culture  in  terms  of  its  past  contacts 
and  present  forms,  and  to  those  who  analyze  the  processes  of  ac- 
culturation elsewhere  among  peoples  such  as  the  American  Indians, 
or  South  or  East  Africans,  where  the  contact  of  native  peoples  with 
whites  is  going  on  at  the  present  time.  For,  like  the  Mexican,  the 
contact  with  European  culture  experienced  by  the  Africans  who 
were  brought  to  the  island  of  Haiti  as  slaves  ceased  many  years  ago, 
and  what  remains  is  the  result  of  acculturation  as  it  has  worked  itself 
out  after  a  considerable  period  of  time,  during  which  there  has  been 
a  minimum  of  disturbance  from  the  outside.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Haitian  situation  resembles  those  in  the  second  category  in  that, 
though  it  is  something  of  the  past  rather  than  the  present,  the  excel- 
lent historical  documents  make  it  possible  to  recover  the  circum- 
stances of  acculturation  to  a  degree  of  detail  not  much  less  than  in 
the  case  of  these  more  recent  contacts. 

Since  the  culture  of  Haiti  is  a  derivative  of  West  African  and  French 
patterns,  it  was  first  of  all  necessary  to  discover  the  tribes  from  which 
the  Negroes  had  been  drawn,  and  what  social  and  economic  strata 
in  the  African  population  these  represented;  it  was  equally  important 
to  determine  what  types  the  French  contributed  to  the  population 
of  the  island  during  the  period  that  Haiti  was  a  colony  of  France. 
And,  having  done  this,  it  was  possible  to  describe  the  outlines  of  the 
West  African  civilizations  from  which  the  preponderant  cultural 
importations  were  made,  and  the  mode  of  life  of  the  French 
masters,  which  in  turn  provided  an  understanding  of  the  background 
out  of  which  the  present-day  culture  has  grown.  This  background 
was  then  drawn  on  to  assess  the  provenience  of  specific  aspects  of 
culture,  and  of  attitudes  and  modes  of  behavior  of  the  people,  as  they 
exist  today. 

Actually,  the  method  to  be  followed  in  attacking  these  questions  of 
provenience  is  a  dual  one,  in  which  the  reciprocal  relationship  of 
history  to  ethnology  is  clearly  to  be  seen.  In  this  case,  for  example,  it 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  jp 

is  only  in  the  documents  that  the  necessary  accounts  of  the  customs, 
and  names  of  places,  persons  and  deities  of  West  Africa  that  are 
essential  if  we  are  to  establish  tribal  sources  of  origin  can  be  found. 
On  the  other  hand,  without  knowing  the  ethnology  of  West  Africa, 
many  promising  leads  in  these  same  documents  would  pass  unrecog- 
nized, since  even  such  important  hints  as  tribal  names  would  be, 
as  they  actually  have  been,  disregarded  by  one  lacking  knowledge  of 
the  tribal  distributions  of  West  Africa.  The  ethnologist  who  studies 
the  customs  of  the  Haitians  has  also  another  tool  to  use  in  determining 
cultural  origins.  Knowledge  of  the  names  of  gods  in  the  present- 
day  "voodoo"  cult,  or  a  grasp  on  those  other  aspects  of  Haitian  culture 
which  take  specific  West  African  form,  such  as  the  cooperative  societies, 
can  also  aid  in  determining  identifications  of  the  contributing  cultures. 
With  an  understanding  of  the  historical  background  from  which 
Haitian  culture  derived,  the  present-day  manifestations  of  this  culture 
as  found  in  a  single  valley  of  the  island  are  first  described,  and  then 
analyzed  in  terms  of  the  manner  in  which  they  have  developed  out 
of  their  acculturative  background.  As  always,  any  attempt  of  this 
kind  must  be  based  on  the  outer  patterns  of  the  culture — or,  if  a 
different  and  more  customary  phrasing  be  employed,  must  be 
concerned  with  tracing  the  traits  of  the  culture  to  their  sources.  As 
has  been  remarked  in  the  preceding  section,  however,  this  is  not 
enough,  and  therefore  not  only  "traits"  are  presented  in  their  objective 
manifestations,  but  attitudes,  points  of  view,  and  those  psychological 
mechanisms  which  underlie  these  outer  forms  are  considered  as  well. 
In  addition,  the  syncretism  of  the  contributing  cultures,  especially 
in  the  field  of  religion,  is  analyzed,  since  here,  as  in  all  other  cultures 
that  are  undergoing  or  have  undergone  continuous  contact  with 
civilizations  different  than  themselves,  not  only  have  aspects  of  the 
two  sets  of  traditions  diplaced  each  other  in  far  from  equal  degree, 
but  similar  phases  of  the  two  cultures  party  to  the  contact  have  tended 
to  form  customs  that  are  relatively  new. 

5* 


£0  ACCULTURATION 

This  study,  then,  seeks  to  establish  the  origin  of  as  many  elements 
of  the  culture  studied  as  possible,  but  in  its  descriptive  approach 
presents  the  culture  as  it  exists  here  and  now  as  a  living  entity.  The 
problem  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Negroes  of  different  tribes 
integrated  their  varied  civilizations  in  the  face  of  exposure  to  French 
culture  is  also  studied  when  such  matters  as  the  derivation  of  deities 
of  the  "voodoo"  cult  are  considered.  A  future  line  of  investigation 
into  the  manner  in  which  a  situation  of  cultural  mixture  such  as  is 
found  in  Haiti  reacts  on  the  personalities  of  its  carriers  is  also  indicated 
in  the  concept  of  "socialized  ambivalence,"  which  is  advanced  to 
explain  the  emotional  instability  of  the  Haitian  peasant  that  has 
arisen  out  of  the  stresses  resultant  on  the  conflicts  in  his  dual  cultural 
heritage. 

/.  Schapera,  I.,  The  Contributions  of  Western  Civilisation  to  Modern 

Kxatla  Culture. 

As  part  of  a  long-time  research  program  dealing  with  the  effect 
of  European  contact  on  this  South  African  tribe,  the  contribution 
to  be  considered  here  must  be  regarded  as  but  one  of  a  number  of 
related  papers  published  by  the  author.  Reference  has  been  made 
in  the  first  section  of  this  book1  to  another  of  these  papers  where 
field  techniques  employed  in  studying  the  BaKxatla  are  analyzed 
and  methodological  principles  are  indicated  which,  though  made  use 
of  in  this  particular  investigation,  can  also  be  used  in  studying  other 
peoples  who  live  under  conditions  of  culture  contact. 

Recapitulated,  these  methodological  steps  are  to  obtain  "as  full 
an  account  as  possible  of  the  existing  tribal  culture"  (which  involves, 
it  will  be  remembered,  as  full  an  account  of  the  European  modes  of 
behavior  that  are  present  as  of  the  more  exotic  aboriginal  traditions) ; 
to  reconstruct  tribal  culture  as  it  existed  prior  to  the  contact;  to 

1  See  above,  pp.  18-19. 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  fij 

recover  as  much  of  the  circumstances  of  the  contact  as  is  possible 
from  historical  documents  and  the  testimony  of  those,  both  native 
and  European,  who  can  draw  on  actual  experience;  and  finally,  to 
synthesize  this  material  and  point  it  toward  explaining  the  changes 
which  have  actually  occurred,  or  toward  accounting  for  resistance 
to  those  aspects  of  the  foreign  culture  which,  though  presented  to  the 
natives,  have  never  been  hospitably  received  by  the  tribe. 

This  method  is  well  illustrated  by  the  author's  treatment  of  his 
data  in  the  present  paper.  After  an  outline  of  the  aboriginal  culture 
of  the  tribe,  the  types  of  contact  which  it  has  undergone  are  reviewed. 
These  are  found  to  have  been  both  direct  and  indirect — these 
people,  on  Reserve,  have  since  their  first  experience  with  the  whites 
been  more  or  less  constantly  in  direct  touch  with  traders,  missionaries, 
and  government  officials;  but  an  equally  important  source  of  the 
transmission  of  European  culture  has  been  through  the  system  by 
which  men  go  from  the  Reserve  to  work  "in  the  urban  and  rural  areas 
of  the  Transvaal  and  other  European  settlements,"  where  they  "come 
into  contact  with  Western  civilization  in  its  most  developed  South 
African  form"  and  "also  encounter  representatives  of  many  other 
native  tribes." 

The  historical  approach  is  fully  utilized  in  the  author's  consideration 
of  the  manner  and  order  of  presentation  of  European  culture  to 
these  folk.  European  elements,  it  is  seen,  did  by  no  means  all  appear 
simultaneously,  just  as  the  aims  behind  their  presentation  were  not 
at  all  the  same  in  the  case  of  the  various  agencies  through  which  they 
reached  the  Kxatla: 

"The  aim  of  the  Mission ...  seeks  essentially  to  convert  the 
heathen  native  to  Christianity.  In  pursuit  of  this  policy  it  seeks  also 
to  introduce  a  new  system  of  morals  and  general  behaviour  con- 
forming to  Christian  ideals,  and. . .  further  undertakes  the  secondary 
task  of  promoting  the  general  social  and  material  advancement  of  the 
people.    The  Administfation  is  concerned  primarily  with  the  main- 


$2  ACCULTURATION 

tenance  of  law  and  order,  and  with  meeting  the  cost  of  the  necessary 
machinery.  Such  services  as  education  and  economic  development 
were  not  seriously  taken  in  hand  until  much  later.  The  trader,  in  so 
far  as  he  has  any  definable  aim  at  all,  is  there  to  exploit  the  natives  for 
his  own  economic  benefit,  and  accordingly  attempts  to  develop  as 
good  a  market  as  he  can  for  his  wares."  (p.  225) 

The  attitudes  toward  native  life  held  by  each  of  these  agencies,  and 
the  methods  they  employed  to  achieve  their  aims,  were  quite  different; 
and  this  difference  must  have  had  a  discernible  effect: 

"As  a  result  of  these  contacts,  certain  traits  of  culture  formerly 
possessed  by  the  BaKxatla  have  either  disappeared  completely  or 
appear  to  be  doing  so,  others  have  been  much  or  only  slightly  modified, 
and  still  others  appear  to  have  remained  largely  intact.  Other  traits, 
again,  have  been  taken  over  wholly  or  in  part  from  Western  civili- 
zation. Some  have  been  widely  accepted,  others  only  to  a  limited 
extent."   (p.  227) 

The  questions  "Why  have  some  of  these  changes  taken  place,  and  why 
have  they  varied  so  much  in  their  nature  and  effect  ?"  naturally  follow, 
and  the  answers,  in  accordance  with  their  significance  for  the  study 
of  cultural  change,  occupy  the  principal  portion  of  the  remainder  of 
the  paper. 

The  initial  acceptance  of  various  traits  of  European  culture  and  the 
secondary  developments  that  resulted  from  this  acceptance  are  illus- 
trated with  numerous  examples.  The  degree  to  which  acceptance 
was  optional  with  the  natives — as  in  the  case  of  the  wares  of  the 
traders — or  forced  upon  them — as  with  certain  administrative 
measures,  such  as  taxation — is  discussed,  and  here  the  influence  of 
individual  personalities  is  considered.  For  instance,  it  is  on  historic 
record  that  the  baptism  of  a  chief  (Lentswe,  who  ruled  from  1875 
to  1 921),  was  the  determining  factor  in  bringing  about  the  acceptance 
of  Christinaity  by  the  body  of  the  people,  while  this  same  tribal  head 
and  his  successor  were  primary  instruments  in  causing  the  adoption 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  $j 

of  many  other  phases  of  European  culture.  The  secondary  results 
of  the  introduction  of  these  new  elements  were  of  equal  if  not  greater 
importance : 

"The  acceptanceof  these  culture  traits  from  the  Europeans  led  in  time 
to  the  disappearance  or  modification  of  existing  institutions,  and  to  the 
introduction  or  development  of  other  new  forms  of  culture."  (p.  230) 

Some  of  these  were :  the  rise  of  new  occupations  at  home ;  the  extension 
of  the  activities  of  the  chief;  an  increase  in  tribal  legislation  to  cope 
with  new  conditions;  an  increasing  demand  for  trade  goods;  the 
establishment  of  Sunday  as  a  day  of  rest;  a  spreading  knowledge  of 
the  English  language. 

As  may  be  imagined,  the  acceptance  of  European  traits  has  not 
been  uniform : 

"Some  people  are  very  conservative,  while  others  have  discarded 
many  of  the  traditional  customs  and  beliefs  in  favour  of  European 
institutions.  The  distribution  of  European  traits  varies  from  an 
almost  universal  acceptance  of  clothing  and  certain  other  material 
objects  to  an  almost  negligible  adoption  of  European  standards  of 
life  and  conduct  in  general."  (p.  233) 

Some  of  the  internal  groupings  within  the  tribe  which  accepted  the 
proffered  traits  to  different  degrees  are  specified.  Those  who  have 
had  European  education  do  not  react  in  the  same  manner  as  those 
who  have  not  had  it.  Another  dividing  line  is  that  of  sex — "The 
men  have  on  the  whole  been  more  exposed  to  European  influences, 
mainly  as  a  result  of  labour  migration  .  .  .  But  in  one  respect  the 
women  have  taken  to  Western  civilization  far  more  extensively  than 
the  men.  The  great  majority  of  Church  members  are  women  ..." 
(p.  234)  Wealth  is  a  factor,  and  so  is  the  one  of  European  religious 
affiliation — and  differences  are  likewise  to  be  seen  between  Church 
members  and  "what  may  best  be  described  as  'nonconformists'." 
The  problem  of  resistance  to  European  patterns  and  traits  is  also 


6  j  ACCULTURATION 

considered.  Thus,  though  there  has  been  a  "wide-spread  and  rapid 
adoption  of  European  material  products,  relatively  slight  progress 
has  been  made  in  subsistence  activities."  The  explanation  for  this 
is  to  be  found  in  the  earlier  economy  of  the  Kxatla,  which  was  the 
typical  East  African  one  of  cattle -raising  and  the  production  of  crops 
for  subsistence.  "Slowness  in  change  ...  in  political  and  social 
organization"  is  also  to  be  discerned,  and  this  is  attributed  to  "the 
absence  of  much  direct  attack  upon  their  solidarity,"  though  a 
decreasing  incidence  of  polygyny  is  to  be  excepted  from  this  statement. 
Curious  contrasts  in  acceptance  and  rejection  are  found:  "The 
greatest  failure  of  the  Church,  and  of  Western  civilization  generally 
has  been  in  regard  to  magic  and  sorcery,"  but  "it  is  difficult  to  account 
for  the  persistence  of  these  beliefs  and  practices  in  contrast  with  the 
almost  complete  disappearance  of  ancestor-worship."  (pp.  239-240) 
Concerning  one  point  this  entire  study  has  particular  importance, 
for  it  furnishes  a  case  with  which  to  put  to  the  test  the  assertion 
encountered  all  too  frequently  that  the  contact  of  native  with  Eu- 
ropean culture  has  as  its  inevitable  result  the  destruction  of  the 
"weaker"  civilization.  As  we  have  seen,  this  is  based  partially  on  an 
absence  of  perspective  that  is  reinforced  by  arguments  drawn  from 
the  present  status  of  some  of  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  United  States, 
or  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Polynesian  and  certain  Melanesian  Islands 
where  there  is  not  only  cultural  degradation  but  actual  depopulation. 
It  is  too  easily  overlooked  that  some  peoples  are  made  of  sterner 
stuff,  but  Negroes  seem  to  be  of  this  type — whether  in  Africa,  it 
it  may  be  remarked,  or  in  the  New  World.  Thus  despite  the  impress- 
ive length  of  time  since  contact  has  been  effected  between  the 
BaKxatla  and  European  culture — a  contact  that  has  been  anything 
but  superficial  and  has  continued  now  for  almost  a  century — much 
of  aboriginal  culture  remains,  and  what  has  given  way  has  been 
replaced  by  foreign  traits  with  but  little  of  that  destructive  effect 
that  is  held  inescapably  to  follow.  Indeed,  the  BaKxatla  constitute 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  $j 

evidence  which  those  who  are  impressed  with  the  toughness  of  native 
cultures  in  the  face  of  the  vicissitudes  of  contact  with  Europeans  may 
well  offer  in  support  of  their  position.  The  proof  that  the  process 
among  the  Kxatla  has  been  one  of  adjustment  rather  than  disintegration 
is  best  seen  in  the  sections  dealing  with  the  modifications  that  both 
indigenous  and  introduced  traits  have  undergone.  The  introduction 
of  the  plough,  for  instance,  has  led  to  a  series  of  substitutions  for 
aboriginal  custom  that  have  had  no  perceptibly  harmful  effect  on  the 
native  economy,  and  this  result  is  paralleled  in  other  aspects  of 
present-day  tribal  life.  Borrowed  traits,  moreover,  have  been  changed 
in  accordance  with  Kxatla  patterns,  as,  for  example,  in  the  case  of  the 
Church  wedding,  which  "has  been  grafted  on  the  old  marriage 
ceremonies,  and  now  forms  the  first  stage,  followed  by  the  traditional 
festivities  at  the  homes  of  both  parties." 

The  BaKxatla,  it  is  concluded,  have  "on  the  whole  adapted 
themselves  with  considerable  success  to  the  impact  of  Western 
civilization ....  The  culture  at  the  present  time  is  not  the  traditional 
Bantu  culture  of  the  Tswana  tribes,  nor  is  it  the  civilization  of  the 
European  inhabitants  of  South  Africa.  It  includes  elements  of  both; 
but  they  have  been  combined  into  a  new  and  distinctive  pattern." 
(p.  250)  This  statement  is  perhaps  the  most  significant  conclusion 
of  the  entire  paper.  For  it  is  possible  that  we  have  here  in  actual 
operation  the  processes  that  brought  about  an  amalgam  of  culture 
such  as  can  be  seen  in  Mexico  and  Haiti  and  other  parts  of  the  world, 
where  peoples  who  were  once  in  continued  contact  with  foreign 
bodies  of  tradition  have  made  an  adjustment  in  terms  of  adaptation 
to  the  fashions  of  living  newly  introduced.  Perhaps  this,  to  a  far 
greater  extent  than  is  realized,  is  the  result  of  most  extended  contacts 
between  cultures,  rather  than  the  more  conventionally  accepted 
dictum  that  contact  eventuates  in  the  extinction  of  one  by  the  other. 


66  ACCULTURATION 

g.  Hunter,  Monica,  JLeaction  to  Conquest^  Effects  of  Contact  with 
Europeans  on  the  Pondo  of  South  Africa. 

Prefaced  with  brief  references  to  the  historical  background  of 
Pondo  contact  with  Europeans,  the  nature  of  this  contact,  and  the 
method  employed  in  studying  its  consequences,  this  work  then 
turns  to  the  ethnography  of  the  people  who  are  its  principal  subjects, 
indicating  those  points  at  which  aboriginal  traditions  have  been 
influenced,  changed,  or  replaced  by  what  has  been  imposed  upon 
the  people  by  Europeans  or  willingly  taken  over  from  them.  The 
Bantu  folk  of  South  Africa,  however,  as  has  been  seen  in  discussing 
the  work  just  considered,  are  not  only  influenced  by  whites  while  they 
are  on  the  Reserve,  but  also  when  they  go  away  from  home  to  work. 
Hence  the  concluding  portions  of  this  book  are  devoted  to  descriptions 
of  their  life  in  one  of  these  urban  communities,  and  on  European 
farms. 

The  approach  to  the  subject-matter  given  in  the  Introduction  is 
one  that  has  been  commented  on  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  present 
work: 

"This  book  deals  with  one  aspect  of  this  culture  contact — the 
effect  of  contact  with  Europeans  upon  a  Bantu  community. . .  To 
gauge  this  change  it  would  be  satisfactory  to  study  the  society  as  it 
was  before  it  came  under  these  influences,  to  study  the  nature  of  the 
influences,  and  then  to  observe  how  it  differs  from  the  old  culture. 
But  unfortunately  for  the  student  of  culture  contact,  the  science  of 
social  anthropology  has  been  developed  since  the  opening  up  of  Africa, 
and  in  the  areas  to  which  Europeans  came  there  are  no  adequate 
data  on  Bantu  life  as  it  was  before  contact  with  Europeans."  (p.  i) 

What  constitutes  "adequate  data"  is  not  something  on  which  all 
will  agree,  but  it  seems  strange  that  it  should  in  South  Africa  be 
necessary  to  complain  of  difficulties  in  recovering  enough  of  aboriginal 
modes  of  life  to  provide  a  satisfactory  base  against  which  to  assess 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  fy 

a  measure  of  cultural  change.  Happily,  neither  this  methodological 
intransigeance  nor  the  ethnocentrism  implied  in  the  statement  seem 
really  to  have  affected  the  field  work  as  it  was  done,  for  the  theoretical 
position  of  the  author  is  not  only  negated  by  the  actual  materials 
that  are  presented  in  that  part  of  the  book  where Pondo  life  is  described, 
but  explicit  statements  such  as  that  in  the  paragraph  succeeding 
the  one  containing  the  passage  quoted  show  that  the  approach 
to  the  problem  was  the  usual  one  employed  in  situations  of  this 
kind: 

"Among  the  Pondo,  in  the  reserve  community  studied,  those  still 
living  can  tell  a  great  deal  about  life  before  European  influence  was 
strong,  and  so,  besides  comparing  areas  subject  to  different  contact 
influences  we  observe  change  within  the  one  community  by  com- 
paring accounts  of  ancients  with  present  conditions,  conservative  with 
less  conservative  families." 

This  approach  is  made  still  more  explicit  in  a  later  passage : 

"My  object  is  firstly  to  describe  life  as  it  is  in  Pondoland  today; 
but  the  past  determines  the  present,  and  in  a  society  which  is  changing 
rapidly  it  is  impossible  to  explain  the  working  of  existing  institutions 
without  constant  reference  to  the  past.  Furthermore,  data  given  by 
ancients  on  past  conditions  indicates  lines  of  change  within  the  one 
community.  When  I  discussed  an  institution  with  old  people  they 
usually  described  it  as  it  had  worked  when  they  were  young.  Many 
institutions  I  saw  functioning  both  as  described  by  old  people  and  in 
modified  forms .  The  most  intelligible  way  of  presenting  very  complex 
material  seems  to  be  to  give  an  account  of  a  custom  or  institution  as 
I  have  seen  it  functioning  in  conservative  families,  or  as  it  has  been 
described  to  me  by  old  people,  and  then  to  discuss  how  it  is  now  being 
modified. . ."    (p.  13) 

The  reasons  for  including  descriptions  of  an  urban  native  community 
in  this  study  of  native  life  and  of  the  existence  of  the  natives  on 
European  farms,  are  also  given : 


68  ACCULTURATION 

"The  nature  and  degree  of  European  influence  has,  however, 
varied  in  different  areas,  and  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  study  the 
changes  taking  place  in  comparing  Bantu  communities  in'three  areas 
— reserves,  towns,  and  European-owned  farms — which  have  been 
subject  to  different  contact  influence.  These  communities  are  not 
an  evolutionary  series,  for  not  only  the  degree,  but  the  nature  of  the 
contact  in  each  area  differs,  yet  the  background  of  each  community 
is  the  same,  and  a  comparison  affords  some  indication  of  the  lines  of 
change  resulting  from  contact." 

A  certain  resemblance  is  to  be  discerned  between  this  approach  and 
that  of  Redfield  in  attacking  the  problem  of  cultural  change  in  Mexico. 
The  resemblance  is  not  a  close  one;  furthermore,  the  two  presen- 
tations cannot  be  compared  in  the  extent  to  which  the  philosophy 
underlying  the  methods  employed  by  the  two  students  has  been  given 
clarity  of  statement.  But  both  of  these  investigations  are  none  the 
less  marked  by  reluctance  to  utilize  historic  data  alone  when  attempting 
to  explain  the  changes  that  have  occurred  in  the  societies  they  study, 
and  hence  both  seek  a  method  whereby  the  dynamics  of  the  situation 
can  be  caught  at  first-hand  instead  of  in  retrospect. 

The  description  of  Pondo  life  as  lived  on  the  reserve  takes  the  form 
of  a  conventional  ethnographic  study,  giving  in  admirable  detail 
the  various  aspects  of  the  culture  under  consideration  and  only 
departing  from  the  traditional  mode  of  presentation  by  including 
under  each  heading  a  short  discussion  of  the  manner  in  which 
European  influences  are  to  be  discerned.  These  influences,  however, 
have  in  most  cases  almost  to  be  deduced  from  the  text,  for  despite 
the  introductory  statements  that  have  been  quoted,  the  evidences 
given  of  European  influences  on  the  aboriginal  tribal  life  are  so 
slight  that  one  comes  from  the  book  with  the  impression  that  this 
tribe  has  preserved  its  earlier  culture  to  a  much  greater  extent  than, 
for  instance,  have  the  BaKxatla.  An  objective  measure  of  the 
extent  to  which  culture  has  been  but  little  effected  by  contact  is 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED 


69 


found  in  the  statistics  of  plural  marriage  (p.  202),  a  native  institution 
that,  as  is  well  known,  is  invariably  the  subject  of  attack  by  Europeans : 


1911 

1921 

No.  of  wives  per 

No.  of  men 

No.  of  men 

man 

1 

187,864 

194,376 

2 

21,490 

20,321 

3 

2,857 

2,500 

4 

594 

390 

5 

168 

121 

from  6  to  20 

93 

67 

The  expressions  of  opinion  concerning  the  need  for  reconstructing 
aboriginal  life  and  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  doing  this  that  are 
found  in  the  Introduction  seem  therefore  to  be  in  the  nature  of 
superfluous  gestures  toward  a  methodology  the  applicability  of  which 
to  the  tribe  being  studied  is  far  from  clear.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the 
Pondo  on  their  reserve  live  a  life  that,  for  the  slightness  of  its  ac- 
culturation to  European  civilization,  does  not  seem  comparable  to 
that  of  a  tribe  of  American  Indians  such  as  the  Navajo,  the  aboriginal 
character  of  whose  culture  is  constantly  being  stressed. 

The  greater  part  of  the  book,  therefore,  comprises  an  excellent 
monograph  on  the  life  of  this  primitive  folk,  with  certain  remarks 
concerning  those  of  its  institutions  that  have  in  some  way  been 
affected  by  contact  with  Europeans.  Some  of  these  remarks  are  not 
without  value  for  the  study  of  acculturation,  especially  where,  as  in 
the  discussion  of  the  Christian  marriage  ceremonial,  a  series  of 
customs  are  presented  in  detail  which  "illustrate  the  fusion  of  Bantu 
and  Christian  ideas,  and  show  some  interesting  'emergent'  ceremonies 
which  exist  in  neither  of  the  parent  rituals,  but  which  have  grown 
out  of  the  fusion  of  the  two."  (p.  23)  But  even  here  this  must  be 
taken  for  granted,  or  this  result  must  be  inferred  from  reference  to  the 
prior  descriptions  of  aboriginal  rites,  for  the  ceremony  is  not  analyzed 


j0  ACCULTURATION 

so  as  to  show  which  parts  of  it  are  native,  which  are  European,  and 
which  are  "emergent." 

The  second  section  discusses  native  life  in  the  town  of  East  London, 
where  the  Bantu  population  is  composed  principally  of  Pondo,  Fingo, 
Xhosa  and  Thembu — tribes  among  whom,  we  are  told,  there  are 
"no  great  differences,"  since  all  these  people  live  not  far  from  one 
another  and  there  has  been  a  considerable  amount  of  intermarriage 
among  them.  "In  the  towns  visited  the  people  of  the  four  tribes 
live  mixed  up,  and  intermarry,  so  that  in  a  study  of  the  community 
it  was  impossible  to  separate  them."  (p.  43  8)  The  technique  employed 
here  was  naturally  quite  different  than  that  used  on  the  reserve.  It 
perhaps  closest  resembles  what  is  usually  termed  a  sociological 
community  study — the  word  "sociological"  being  here  used  in  its 
American,  and  not  its  British  sense.  Statistics  are  given  showing  the 
numbers  of  those  employed,  by  whom  and  in  what  capacities ;  the 
wages  they  earn;  the  number  of  rooms  in  which  they  live;  and  the 
manner  in  which  their  earnings  are  budgeted.  An  echo  of  life  on  the 
Reserve  ends  the  discussion  of  the  economic  customs  of  these  urban 
dwellers,  where  it  is  shown  how  in  such  matters  as  guarding  against 
unemployment,  or  seeing  to  it  that  rooms  available  for  rent  in  one's 
house  are  rented,  or  that  one's  shop  will  attract  trade,  the  people 
turn  to  aboriginal  magical  practices.  Against  this  economic  setting 
of  the  life  of  this  underprivileged  group  the  other  phases  of  their 
existence  are  projected,  the  whole  being  traced  against  the  background 
of  native  custom  described  in  detail  in  the  first  part  of  the  book.  The 
same  procedure  is  adopted  in  the  third  section,  which  treats  of  native 
life  on  European  farms. 

These  three  principal  parts  are  brought  together  in  a  final  section 
headed  "Tendencies,"  in  which  the  changes  that  are  occurring  on  the 
Reserve,  on  the  farms  and  in  the  towns  are  considered  together,  and 
an  attempt  is  made  to  assess  future  trends  in  the  light  of  present 
movements.  The  portion  of  this  section  which  is  probably  of  greatest 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  jj 

significance  for  an  understanding  of  cultural  change  under  the 
impact  of  foreign  traditions  is  that  in  which  is  described  how  the 
natives  in  closest  contact  with  the  Europeans,  who  are  thus  subject 
most  immediately  to  the  discrimination  practised  in  South  Africa 
against  those  of  non-European  stock,  tend  to  form  defensive  alliances 
and  set  up  other  contra-acculturative  devices  to  meet  the  situation. 
Because  of  the  prominence  given  such  movements  as  the  Ghost 
Dance  Religion  in  the  United  States,  and  the  various  prophet  move- 
ments in  New  Guinea,  and  elsewhere,  an  assumption  has  grown  that 
reaction  to  foreign  domination  must  take  the  form  of  escape  into 
other-worldliness.  That  this  is  only  one  alternative  is  made  clear 
for,  as  far  as  South  Africa  is  concerned,  though  there  have  been  sev- 
eral revivalistic  movements,  the  situation  is  for  the  most  part  being 
met  by  organizations  of  a  politico -economic  character  which  are  much 
more  concerned  with  meeting  the  realities  of  the  present  than  with 
fleeing  from  those  realities. 

The  approach  attempted  in  this  volume  to  the  study  of  the  proces- 
ses of  cultural  change  as  they  are  working  out  in  South  Africa  thus 
has  certain  potentialities  for  acculturation  research,  but  much  more 
work  must  be  done  before  these  potentialities  can  be  realized.  For 
not  only  does  the  final  section  quite  fail  to  tie  in  with  the  material 
of  the  preceding  parts  of  the  book  so  that  a  dynamic  portrayal  of 
cultural  changes  in  operation  is  afforded,  but  grave  methodological 
lapses  mar  the  conclusions.  Thus  it  is  superfluous  to  insist  on  a  full 
and  exact  knowledge  of  an  aboriginal  culture  as  antecedent  to.  an 
understanding  of  the  changes  resultant  upon  its  contact  with  a 
foreign  body  of  tradition  if,  in  arranging  a  series  of  comparisons 
between  these  folk  in  their  native  habitat  and  away  from  home,  people 
who  do  not  even  belong  to  the  same  tribe  are  used  to  establish  the 
desired  control.  Yet  it  is  just  such  a  shift  of  base  that  confronts  us 
in  this  book.  In  comparing  the  Reserve  and  urban  dwellers,  this 
fact  has  been  recognized  and,  as  has  been  quoted  above,  a  defense 


j  2  ACCULTURATION 

of  the  procedure  is  made  by  indicating  that  the  four  tribes  from  which 
the  urban  population  has  come  have  similar  cultures,  while  the  urban 
population  does,  moreover,  include  a  reasonable  proportion  of 
individuals  who  belong  to  the  tribe  studied  on  the  Reserve.  But  in 
the  case  of  the  farm-workers  what  we  find  is  that  "the  majority  are 
Xhosa,  but  there  are  also  Thembu,  Fingo,  and  a  few  Pondo  and  Suto 
living  on  the  same  farms."  (p.  505 ;  italics  inserted.)  Should  adequate 
controls  be  established  along  the  lines  suggested  here,  however,  the 
method  may  yield  findings  of  considerable  importance  for  those 
concerned  with  cultural  dynamics  as  operative  in  the  contact  of  peoples 
and  with  the  effect  of  contact  on  the  human  beings  who  undergo  these 
experiences  in  changing  cultures. 

The  studies  that  have  thus  far  been  discussed  do  not  by  any  means 
exhaust  the  list  of  works  that  would  merit  inclusion  in  a  complete 
survey;  enough  have  been  reviewed,  however,  to  demonstrate  the 
methods  of  studying  acculturation  that  have  been  devised,  and  therefore 
other  studies  that  have  been  made  in  East  Africa,  Australia,  Mela- 
nesia, Polynesia,  the  East  Indies,  the  Philippines,  and  the  Asiatic 
mainland  must  be  passed  by  with  briefer  notice.  Some  of  these — 
most  of  them,  as  a  matter  of  fact — are  of  less  scientific  usefulness 
to  the  student  of  cultural  processes  because  their  primary  concern 
is  with  remedial  programs  or  administrative  problems.  Yet  there 
are  some  methodological  suggestions  and  data  of  value  to  be  found 
in  them,  especially  as  concerns  those  aspects  of  culture,  such  as 
political  organization,  where  it  is  especially  important  to  the  adminis- 
trator to  have  the  most  detailed  information. 

Thus  Thurnwald's  study  of  culture  change  in  East  Africa1  includes 
historical  analyses  based  on  data  drawn  from  "district  books" — 
reports  of  officials  who  have  had  to  deal  with  the  tribes  of  the  area 
— that  represent  a  useful  example  of  how  unpromising  sources  can 

1  Thurnwald,  (1935). 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  j, 

be  employed  to  good  advantage;  the  exercises  written  by  native 
boys  in  European  schools  reveal  a  great  deal  concerning  the  attitudes 
of  these  young  people  that  stem  from  the  cultural  confusion  amid 
which  they  live.  The  use  of  questionnaires  by  Mrs.  Thurnwald1 
is  also  an  unusual  adaptation  of  a  device  which,  though  its  deficiencies 
can  be  granted,  has  proved  of  some  value  over  the  years  it  has  been 
employed  in  studies  made  of  our  own  culture.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  work  is  marked  by  an  attempt  to  do  too  much;  too  many  tribes 
are  considered,  and  too  many  different  kinds  of  situations  assessed; 
and  there  is  too  little  of  that  directed  attention  to  detail  that  is  the 
sure  path  in  scientific  development.  And  while  the  book  is  almost 
the  only  work  from  the  region  that  indicates  the  non-European 
acculturative  forces  operative  there,  and  which  pays  some  attention 
to  the  attitudes  of  Europeans  toward  natives;  yet  the  importance 
of  this  approach  is  likewise  vitiated  by  an  eagerness  not  to  offend 
those  in  power  in  describing  the  ends  sought  by  them,  and  a  tendency 
to  inject  evaluation  where  the  facts  might  best  speak  for  themselves. 

It  is  this  desire  to  make  out  a  case  for  an  administrative  program 
that  similarly  lessens  the  usefulness  of  Mair's  study  of  present-day 
life  of  the  Baganda.2  Again,  the  data  are  of  value,  but  one  must  go 
through  the  book,  noting  down  point  after  point  in  such  a  way  as 
to  reshuffle  the  materials  in  terms  of  the  acculturative  forces  that 
have  been  at  work,  before  the  syncretizations  that  have  resulted  be- 
come apparent.  No  such  analysis  is  made  by  the  person  best 
fitted  to  make  it — the  author — as,  for  example,  Schapera  has  done 
in  his  consideration  of  the  BaKxatla,  or  Parsons  for  the  Mitleyenos. 

Studies  of  culture  contact  in  the  islands  of  the  Pacific,  Australia, 
and  New  Guinea  have  been  concerned  with  entire  cultures  only 
in  a  few  instances,  and  in  these  the  presentation  has  been  too  brief 
to  allow  an  adequate  description  to  be  made  of  the  life  of  the  people 

1  Ibid.,  Ch.  IV  and  Appendix. 

2  Mair,  (1934  b). 


j  A  ACCULTURATION 

at  the  present  time,  let  alone  of  their  aboriginal  culture.  This  again 
does  not  mean  that  publications  useful  to  those  concerned  with 
scientific  problems  arising  out  of  the  study  of  cultural  contact  have 
not  resulted  from  research  in  that  region.  The  investigations  that 
have  been  made  into  the  contra-acculturative  revivalistic  movements 
of  New  Guinea  that  will  be  considered  below  are  of  the  first  rank; 
while  from  the  pen  of  the  same  government  anthropologist  has  come 
the  most  cogent  and  closely  reasoned  defense  of  the  role  of  the 
anthropologist  as  an  agent  in  directing  change  in  the  life  of  native 
peoples  that  has  as  yet  appeared.1  Here,  also,  work  is  being  done 
that  may  well  be  the  starting-point  for  studies  in  cultural  contact 
that  will  not  be  haunted  by  Rivers'  presupposition  of  the  doom 
foreordained  for  primitive  folk  in  contact  with  Europeans.2  For  as 
a  result  of  working  with  Australian  aborigines  who  have  been  most 
closely  associated  with  Europeans  over  a  long  period  of  time,  Elkin 
has  discovered  how  much  of  their  culture  has  survived.3  From  this 
experience  he  has  developed  his  hypothesis  of  the  three  stages  of 
adjustment  which  "from  the  point  of  view  of  the  native  race  . . .  can 
frequently  be  distinguished  in  this  history  of  its  contact  with  im- 
migrant white  people" — "bewilderment,  opposition,  resentment, 
and  a  sense  of  loss  . . . " ;  scorn  of  the  old  days  and  "a  feeling  of 
inferiority  with  regard  to  their  native  culture"  that  may  lead  to 
depopulation  unless  a  people  can  successfully  pass  through  it;  and 
finally  "a  return  to  the  old  faith,  though  somwhat  modified,  and  a 
sense  of  worth  regarding  native  arts,  crafts,  literature,  law  and 
custom  . . . .  "4 


1  Williams,  (1935). 

2  Rivers'  doctrine  has  recently  been  subjected  to  a  vigorous  attack  by  a  non- 
anthropological  writer  (Harrisson,  1937)  whose  book,  though  unconventional 
in  concept  and  presentation,  gives  much  information  of  value  on  native-white 
contacts  in  the  New  Hebrides. 

3  Elkin,  (1935).  4  Elkin  (1937),  pp.  537~54°. 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  jj 

All  these  studies  thus  enhance  our  knowledge  of  the  results  of 
contact  and,  as  such,  should  be  used  by  those  concerned  with  ac- 
culturation. Though  the  principles  that  are  adduced  from  such  data 
are  applicable  only  to  current  consequences  of  acculturation  of  native 
peoples  to  European  norms  of  behavior,  yet  it  must  at  least  be  re- 
cognized that  they  present  no  less  a  challenge  than  all  those  other 
speculative  dicta  that  have  issued  in  the  past  concerning  the  ways 
of  human  society  in  general.  With  such  as  these  all  anthropologists, 
whatever  their  particular  interests  or  theoretical  position,  are  familiar, 
and  in  testing  generalizations  concerning  acculturation  based  only 
on  native-European  contacts  ethnologists  will  be  but  once  more 
performing  the  routine  scientific  service  which  in  the  past  has 
characterized  their  work. 

3 

Studies  of  change  in  restricted  phases  of  given  cultures  may  be 
advantageously  considered  as  well  as  in  entire  cultures,  and  there  is 
much  to  be  said  in  favor  of  the  point  of  view  that  it  is  only  through  the 
detailed  study  of  a  single  institution  in  a  single  culture  that  the 
dynamics  of  cultural  change  can  be  discerned.  Granted  that  such 
studies  require  a  knowledge  of  the  range  of  patterns  of  the  entire 
culture  as  background,  this  approach  must  nevertheless  be  recognized 
as  having  the  inductive  character  that  causes  it  to  partake  of  the 
essence  of  scientific  method. 

It  so  happens  that  the  most  extensive  analyses  of  change  at- 
tendant on  cultural  contact  studied  in  single  institutions  have  had 
to  do  with  religion.  This  is  perhaps  due  in  part  to  the  striking 
nature  of  the  revivalistic  movements  that  have  arisen  among  primitive 
peoples  in  contact  with  whites,  which  has  caused  them  to  stand 
out  in  bold  relief  against  the  background  of  their  respective 
cultures,  and  has  thus  made  them  ready  subjects  for  research.  In 
the  United  States,  the  study  of  the  Ghost  Dance  by  Mooney,  when  it 

6* 


j£  ACCULTURATION 

was  still  vigorous,  made  it  natural  for  later  students  to  devote  further 
effort  to  this  striking  development,  while  the  Peyote  cult  among  the 
Indians,  and  the  revivalistic  movements  of  New  Guinea  and  elsewhere 
have  been  singled  out  for  treatment  because  their  genesis  and  course 
of  development  among  a  given  tribe  could  often  be  studied  on  the 
spot.  In  this  section,  then,  studies  of  the  various  forms  of  revivalism 
among  the  American  Indians  known  as  the  Prophet  or  Ghost  Dance 
(except  that  of  Mooney,  which,  though  forming  the  basis  of  all  later 
research,  holds  no  particular  significance  for  the  study  of  acculturation 
either  in  theoretical  statement  or  methodology),  and  investigations 
which  deal  with  similar  movements  that  developed  in  New  Guinea, 
will  be  considered  in  some  detail.  Research  in  other  special  phases  of 
single  cultures  will  subsequently  be  reviewed  more  briefly. 

a.  Spier,  Leslie,  The  Prophet  Dance  of  the  Northwest. 

The  supposition  that  the  nativistic  movements  which  since  1870 
have  appeared  among  the  Indians  of  various  parts  of  the  United 
States  constituted  cults  of  despair,  and  represented  reactions  against 
social  and  political  forces  with  which  these  natives  could  not  cope, 
is  sharply  challenged  in  this  paper.  By  means  of  elaborate  docu- 
mentation not  only  from  ethnographic  materials  but  from  historic 
sources,  what  has  been  thought  by  many  persons  to  have  been  a 
purely  contra-acculturative  phenomenon  is  shown  actually  to  have 
arisen  out  of  deep-seated  aboriginal  patterns  which,  even  before  the 
coming  of  the  whites,  had  through  intertribal  acculturation  come  to 
be  an  integral  part  of  the  culture  of  at  least  the  Indians  of  the  North- 
west, from  whence  the  cult  spread  in  its  better-known  revivalistic  form 
first  to  California  and  then  to  the  Plains. 

The  position  taken  can  best  be  stated  in  the  words  of  the  author : 

"It  has  been  generally  assumed  that  the  Ghost  Dance,  which  in 
1890  spread  throughout  the  Plains  from  a  source  in  western  Nevada, 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  yj 

was  a  wholly  new  development  engendered  by  the  need  for  a  messiah 
at  the  moment  and  without  historically  connected  antecedents.  Such 
was  the  stand  taken  by  Mooney  in  his  monumental  work  on  the  Ghost 
Dance  cult.  For  him  other  messianic  or  prophetic  movements  among 
the  Indians  were  merely  so  many  parallels  which,  with  similar  activi- 
ties among  Old  World  peoples,  provided  some  notion  of  the  psychic 
milieu  from  which  messianic  movements  sprang. 

"It  was  known  to  Mooney  that  some  twenty  years  earlier  another 
prophet  had  appeared  among  the  Paviotsos,  whose  doctrine  was 
identical  with  that  of  Wovoka,  the  accredited  Paviotso  originator  of 
the  1890  affair.  But  this  antecedent  development  did  not  appear  to 
Mooney  to  have  any  special  significance.  It  remained  for  Kroeber  to 
show  that  about  1870  a  doctrine  and  dance  having  its  source  in  this 
earlier  Paviotso  prophet  swept  westward  through  northern  and 
central  California  as  in  1890  the  Ghost  Dance  swept  eastward  through 
the  Plains 

"It  is  the  purpose  of  this  section  of  this  paper  to  show  that  the 
ultimate  origin  of  the  two  Ghost  Dance  movements  was  not  with  the 
Paviotso  but  in  the  Northwest  among  the  tribes  of  the  interior  Plateau 
area.  It  can  be  shown  that  among  these  peoples  there  was  an  old 
belief  in  the  impending  destruction  and  renewal  of  the  world,  when 
the  dead  would  return,  in  conjunction  with  which  there  was  a  dance 
based  on  supposed  imitation  of  the  dances  of  the  dead,  with  a  con- 
viction that  intense  preoccupation  with  the  dance  would  hasten  the 
happy  day ....  This  northwestern  cult  agrees  precisely  with  the  core 
of  the  Ghost  Dance  religion  among  the  Paviotso,  and  the  circumstances 
of  its  appearance  among  the  latter  parallel  those  of  earlier  date  in  the 
Northwest."    (p.  5) 

Because  of  the  numerous  forms  taken  by  this  revivalist  cult  in  the 
various  tribes  to  which  it  spread,  the  author  coins  the  name  "Prophet 
Dance"  as  a  generic  term  for  it. 

It  is  not  necessary  for  our  purpose  to  follow  the  argument  in 
detail.  What  may  be  emphasized  is  that  the  author  in  documenting 
his  thesis  has  made  an  important  contribution  to  the  study  of  accul- 


yS  ACCULTURATION 

turation,  both  as  a  corrective  for  the  too  facile  approach  that  assumes 
that  anything  which  bears  resemblance  to  European  custom  must, 
where  native  folk  have  been  in  contact  with  individuals  or  groups  of 
European  affiliation,  be  derived  from  this  source,  and  as  an  instance 
of  a  process  of  intertribal  acculturation  that  continued  as  a  result  of 
long  and  intimate  contact  between  tribes  which,  in  the  aggregate, 
covered  a  wide  area. 

Because  the  influence  of  Christianity  has  been  so  stressed  in  dis- 
cussions of  Prophet  Dance  sects,  it  is  important  to  note  that  most  of 
its  elements  can  be  derived  from  aboriginal  customs.  Thus  among 
the  Northern  Okanagon  of  Oregon  there  was  a  confession  dance  "held 
whenever  some  strange  natural  happening  was  felt  to  portend  the 
end  of  the  world,"  and  Murdock  is  quoted  to  the  effect  that  "public 
confession  was  also  incorporated  in  the  Smohalla  rites  of  the  Tenino" 
and  that  "the  informant  insisted  that  confession  was  aboriginal,  not 
borrowed  from  Christianity."  The  insistence  on  proselytizing  which 
marks  these  cults  has  also  been  referred  to  Christianity,  yet  "though 
this  is  a  most  unusual  characteristic  for  an  Indian  cult,"  there  is  valid 
reason  to  doubt  its  Christian  origin  since  "it  seems  to  be  involved  in 
the  very  nature  of  the  [Ghost  Dance]  doctrine"  and  since  there  is 
"specific  documentation  for  it  in  the  Northwest  as  a  pre-Christian 
practice."  (p.  12) 

Not  only  is  there  testimony  from  the  Northwest  that  the  elements 
of  the  Prophet  Dance  were  present  before  the  coming  of  the  whites, 
but  similar  evidence  is  found  in  the  Southern  Plateau  and  the  Great 
Basin  regions.  For  though  the  historical  material  is  fragmentary, 
what  does  exist  seems  to  indicate  that  its  Christian-like  aspects  were 
already  there  when  the  earliest  travellers  reached  the  region,  (p.  19) 
That  some  Christian  elements  were  introduced  between  the  time 
of  these  first  voyagers  and  their  successors  seems  apparent,  but 
they  were  merely  incorporated  into  pre-existing  forms  of  native 
custom : 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  ™ 

"The  travellers  of  the  eighteen-thirties  give  evidence  only  for  the 
externals  of  native  practice.  What  the  doctrinal  background  of  the 
rites  may  have  been,  whether  wholly  Christian  or  pagan,  or  a  blend, 
we  do  not  know.  They  assumed  that  the  rites  were  perverted  Christian 
forms — certainly  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath  and  calendric 
holidays,  and  the  posture  in  prayer  are  clearly  Christian — so  that 
we  must  take  their  word  for  it.  On  the  other  hand  fully  half  the 
ritual  elements  described  as  incorporated  in  the  compound  correspond 
to  known  native  forms."  (p.  20) 

Though  it  is  thus  apparent  that  the  Prophet  Dance  was  firmly 
established  in  the  patterns  of  native  culture  before  contact  with 
whites  took  place,  it  must  not  be  inferred  that  later  acculturation  with 
European  forms  of  religious  belief  did  not  occur.  What  is  demon- 
strated in  the  initial  sections  of  this  monograph  is  that  when  these 
European  traits  did  arrive,  concepts  and  rituals  that  might  afford  a 
hospitable  matrix  into  which  the  new  customs  and  beliefs  could 
efficiently  lodge  were  already  present.  It  is  with  this  in  mind  that  we 
pass  to  the  later  sections  of  this  work,  which  deal  with  the  early 
Christianized  versions  of  the  Prophet  Dance  (1 820-1 836),  and  the 
Smohalla  and  Shaker  cults. 

The  derivation  of  the  former  is  "sufficiently  romantic,"  resulting, 
as  it  did,  from  the  influence  exerted  by  a  "band  of  Iroquois,  twenty  - 
four  men,  who  about  1829  found  a  new  home  for  themselves  among 
the  Flathead  in  the  mountains  of  Montana."  These  Indians,  who 
perhaps  had  left  Quebec  "during  those  troublous  times  following 
the  defeat  of  the  Iroquois  as  partisans  of  the  British  in  the  war  of 
1 8 1 2- 14,"  introduced  their  new  neighbors  to  the  concepts  and  practices 
of  Catholicism.  And  since,  as  a  Catholic  historian  who  is  quoted  says, 
"the  ties  of  friendship  soon  ripened  into  stronger  ones  by  intermar- 
riage," an  unusual  form  of  secondary  acculturation  took  place  wherein 
inter -Indian  contact  was  the  medium  through  which  the  religion  of 
the  whites  was  brought  to  a  group  of  Indians  as  yet  unaffected  by  it. 


So  ACCULTURATION 

Yet  here  again  it  must  be  remembered  that  as  far  as  the  recipients 
were  concerned,  the  acculturation  that  occurred  was  a  process  that 
was  essentially  congenial  to  the  old  patterns.  As  the  matter  is  phrased : 

"The  fact  is  that  the  Christian  forms  which  the  travellers  of  the 
eighteen -thirties  encountered  west  of  the  Rockies  were  compounded 
with  the  native  Prophet  cult.  Further,  it  would  seem  that  it  was  the 
prior  existence  of  the  Prophet  Dance  which  explains  both  the  ready- 
acceptance  of  Christianity  at  its  point  of  introduction  and  its  rapid 
spread."  (p.  30) 

Once  introduced  among  the  Flathead,  this  Christianized  series  of 
rituals  spread  through  contact  between  the  tribes  of  the  region,  and 
numerous  quotations  from  contemporary  explorers  and  others  attest 
to  its  presence  at  dates  that  again  preclude  first-hand  white  influence: 

"We  have  direct  evidence  for  it  among  the  Flathead,  Nez  Perce, 
Cayuse,  and  Walla  Walla;  we  may  infer  it  for  their  immediate  Salish 
and  Sahaptin  neighbors ;  and  we  know  that  it  reached  as  far  south  as 
the  Shoshoni  in  southern  Idaho  and  west  to  the  Upper  Chinook 
or  Sahaptins  of  the  Dalles.  With  the  historians  we  have  every  reason 
to  believe  that  the  Christian  elements  were  introduced  by  the  Iroquois 
of  Montana."  (p.  35) 

The  reasons  why  Christian  belief  and  the  "prior  Prophet  cult"  should 
have  been  amalgamated  so  harmoniously,  and  with  enough  cohesion 
so  that  the  new  religion  could  spread  as  a  unit  from  its  place  of  origin, 
are  given  in  the  following  passage: 

"The  doctrines  are  parallel;  the  rites  are  not  in  conflict.  Both  tell 
of  an  apocalyptic  end  with  the  return  to  earth  of  its  pristine  happiness 
and  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the  way  prepared  by  a  righteous  life 
and  a  strict  adherence  to  devotions ;  in  both  prophets  bring  affirma- 
tion. That  they  actually  amalgamated  rites  rather  than  made  a 
substitution  is  attested  by  the  evidence.  So  far  as  the  natives  were 
concerned  then  the  new  religion  from  the  east  was  confirmation  and 
stimulus  to  existing  beliefs."   (p.  35) 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  Si 

Relatively  little  is  known  of  the  Smohalla  and  the  Shaker  religions, 
but  enough  information  is  available  to  show  that  both  are  "good 
Prophet  Dance"  despite  the  fact  that  in  them  Christian  elements  are 
prominent  to  a  far  greater  degree  than  is  the  case  with  the  other  forms 
that  have  been  considered.  The  Smohalla  cult,  which  "made  its 
appearance  among  the  Sahaptin  tribes  of  the  interior  perhaps  in  the 
eighteen-sixties  or  earlier,"  is  "most  certainly  a  direct  offshoot  of  the 
[Prophet]  cult  of  the  eighteen-thirties."  "The  Shaker  religion, 
avowedly  a  Christian  cult,  was  almost  certainly  affected  at  its  origin 
by  the  Smohalla  revival,  although  there  is  a  somewhat  remote  possibil- 
ity that  some  of  its  roots  lie  still  farther  back  in  the  original  form  of 
the  Prophet  Dance."  The  date  for  the  introduction  of  this  religion 
is  1882;  spreading  southward  from  southern  Puget  Sound,  it  has 
flourished  and  is  "one  of  the  principal  faiths  of  the  Indians  of  the 
coastal  district."   (p.  40) 

The  Smohalla  cult  takes  its  name  from  that  of  its  "prophet,"  and 
manifests  the  results  of  acculturation  to  Christianity  in  its  ritual,  rather 
than  in  its  doctrine,  which  is  quite  in  accord  with  the  tenets  of  the 
Prophet  faith  that  preceded  it.  Though  the  elements  of  this  can  be 
analyzed  to  reveal  their  provenience  from  Christian  as  well  as  from 
pagan  beliefs  and  rites,  it  is  held  that  instead  of  being  derived  from 
missionaries,  its  roots  rather  lie  in  "the  less  pagan  portions  of  the 
1830  rites."  Hence  despite  the  fact  that "...  there  can  be  little  question 
that  mission  experience  affected  Smohalla  or  whoever  was  responsible 
for  the  configuration  of  1860-70,  ..the  ultimate  source ...  appears 
to  be  the  brand  of  Christianity  brought  in  by  the  Iroquois  of  Mon- 
tana."  (p.  45) 

The  Shaker  religion,  which  is  "nominally  Christian,"  also  differs 
from  the  preceding  one  in  that  it  is  "an  extraordinary  blend  of  old 
shamanistic  performances  with  Catholic  ritual  and  Protestant  doc- 
trine." (p.  49)  Originating  in  1882  in  the  vision  experience  of  one 
John  Slocum,  who  "died"  and,  on  being  refused  admission  to  Heaven 


82  ACCULTURATION 

because  of  his  wickedness,  returned  to  preach  the  good  life,  its  cere- 
monialism centers  about  three  kinds  of  rites :  church  services,  curing 
the  sick,  and  grace  at  meals.  Perhaps  more  than  any  of  these  cults,  it 
is  at  once  the  agent  and  the  object  of  further  acculturative  processes, 
not  only  because  the  automobile  permits  much  visiting  between  cult- 
members  of  different  tribes,  but  also  because  "in  recent  years  they 
have  found  a  sympathetic  bond  with  various  sects  of  whites  (Holy 
Rollers,  Seven-Day  Adventists),  and  more  recently,  on  Klamath 
Reservation  and  in  northwestern  California  have  made  friendly 
contact  with  the  Four- Square  Gospel  hailing  from  southern  Cali- 
fornia." (p.  54) 

b.  Gayton,  A.  H.,  The  GhostDance  of  i8jo  in  South-Central 

California. 

This  description  of  the  spread  of  the  1870  Ghost  Dance  to  the 
Yokuts-Mono  peoples  of  central  California  may  be  regarded  as 
complementary  to  the  more  general  treatment  that  has  just  been 
discussed,  though  it  preceded  this  other  by  several  years.  The  method- 
ology of  the  two  studies  is  identical,  for  both  collate  information 
obtained  in  the  field  with  materials  from  historical  sources. 

Whether  or  not  this  particular  revivalistic  movement  resulted  from 
breakdown  in  native  culture  due  to  white  contact  is  not  clear.  Two 
comments  throw  some  light  on  the  point;  the  first  being  a  quotation 
from  Stephen  Powers'  "The  Tribes  of  California": 

"He  [Old  Sam,  who  probably  brought  the  Ghost  Dance  of  1870  to 
the  Miwok]  counseled  them  to  live  at  peace  with  the  whites,  to  treat 
them  kindly,  and  to  avoid  quarrels  whenever  possible,  as  it  was  worse 
than  useless  to  contend  against  their  conquerors."   (p.  65,  n.  1) 

The  second  is  a  comment  on  the  site  of  the  great  Eshom  Valley 
Dance  of  1872: 

"This  spot  was  selected  because  of  its  central  location  in  the  lower 
mountains  and  its  seclusion  from  the  white  settlers."  (p.  69) 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  $, 

The  absence  of  a  demonstrated  connection  between  the  situation  of 
the  Indians  in  the  face  of  an  advancing  frontier  and  the  revivalism 
under  discussion  may,  however,  be  due  to  the  specialized  focus  of 
this  paper.  A  paragraph  bearing  on  the  point  may  be  cited : 

"What  the  relations  were  between  the  Indians  of  the  San  Joachim 
Valley  and  the  white  population  of  1870  is  not  clear  from  native 
accounts.  The  statement  of  one  informant  that  'after  that  the  white 
man  came'  leads  one  to  believe  that  the  number  of  white  settlers 
before  that  time  was  negligible.  The  Indians  of  the  San  Joachim 
plains  were  the  first  to  suffer  the  loss  of  life,  lands,  and  hence  of 
economic  liberty;  those  living  in  the  foothills  where  the  Ghost 
Dance  was  first  introduced  were  as  yet  scarcely  disturbed  ....  Even 
so  the  natives  may  have  been  disconcerted  by  the  white  man's  con- 
tinued approach.  No  informant  will  admit  that  the  messianic  faith  had 
any  reference  to  the  presence  of  the  white  people,  much  less  that  hostile 
intentions  toward  the  whites  lurked  beneath  the  Ghost  Dance  activities. 
Whether  or  not  this  was  so  can  scarcely  be  proved  now."  (pp.  80-81) 

The  mechanism  which  made  for  the  spread  of  the  movement — the 
established  formula  that  persons  from  "adjacent  tribes"  might  attend 
and  take  part  in  any  dances — was  thus  one  of  acculturation,  whatever 
the  influence  of  contact  with  white  culture  may  have  been.  Moreover, 
"it  is  seen  that . . .  the  social  system  and  certain  ritual  elements  of  the 
Ghost  Dance. .  .were  entirely  in  consonance  with  established  proce- 
dure at  intertribal  celebrations"  (p.  77),  while  the  concepts  which  made 
up  the  ideological  foundation  of  the  movement  were  also  in  harmony 
with  earlier  patterns. 

Yet  if  this  were  entirely  the  case,  the  study  of  the  Ghost  Dance 
among  these  tribes  would  present  no  problem  for  us;  hence  it  is 
important  to  note  that  in  such  aspects  of  the  ritual  as  all-night  dancing, 
the  fact  that  the  taboo  against  eating  meat  during  a  ceremony  was  not 
observed  in  the  Ghost  Dance,  the  restoration  of  persons  having 
spells  to  consciousness  by  the  chiefs  rather  than  by  shamans,  and  the 


8  4  ACCULTURATION 

non-payment  of  the  singer  accompanists  (pp.  78-79),  there  were 
important  elements  of  the  ritual  that  "varied  from  the  San  Joachim 
norm." 

The  matter  is  thus  summarized : 

"The  process  of  acculturation  is  evident  from  our  detailed  account 
of  Ghost  Dances  at  Saganiu  and  Eshom  valley.  Analysis  of  the  social 
background  into  which  the  new  cult  was  thrust  indicates  that  the 
social  process  involved  in  holding  dances . . .  was  entirely  in  the  order 
of  the  established  system  for  intertribal  ceremonials.  Several  features 
of  the  Ghost  Dance  doctrine  were  interpreted  in  terms  of  extant 
cultural  forms. ..  .Analagous  acculturations  are  found  among  the 
Klamath  and  in  northwest  California.  The  doctrine  of  the  Ghost 
Dance  which  promised  the  return  of  dead  relatives,  absolution  from 
sickness  or  death,  a  continuous  life  of  peace  and  prosperity,  is  ubi- 
quitous in  its  human  appeal.  This,  together  with  the  fact  that  the 
cult  had  no  complex  features  of  belief  and  was  open  for  collective 
participation,  made  it  uniquely  suitable  for  a  rapid  diffusion  regardless 
of  the  type  of  culture  encountered  in  its  travels.  The  framework  and 
stimulus  of  the  revivalistic  cult  were  supplied,  the  details  were  filled 
in  according  to  the  individual  taste  of  varying  culture  patterns."  (p.  82) 

Finally,  in  this  connection,  the  manner  in  which  the  Dance  was 
accepted  by  these  people  is  clarified  by  considering  its  later  rejection 
in  the  light  of  the  dominant  patterns : 

"The  abandonment  of  the  Ghost  Dance  was  not  due  to  pressure 
exerted  by  the  white  population  but  rather  to  disillusionment.  The 
closing  words  of  Takac's  address  were  quite  in  keeping  with  the 
philosophical  outlook  of  the  Yokuts -Mono  mind.  Their  past  life  was 
a  singularly  placid  and  pleasant  one.  They  were  not  ridden  by  a 
mass  of  superstitious  fears  as  are  many  primitive  peoples.  There  were 
few  taboos ;  no  religious  office  or  supernatural  function  was  imposed 
on  anyone  who  did  not  want  it.  Individuals  went  about  their  daily 
lives  following  the  simple  rules  of  their  religious  and  social  order 
without  burdening  themselves  with  taboos  and  privations,  believing 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  gj 

that  if  the  supernatural  powers  wished  to  help  them  they  would.  The 
same  attitude  is  expressed  in  the  resolution  of  their  feelings  toward 
the  messianic  cult.  Exhaustive  efforts  to  bring  back  their  'father'  and 
their  dead  relatives  had  proved  to  be  futile,  hence,  give  it  up — 'if 
that  man  is  coming,  he'll  come  anyway'."   (p.  81) 

c.  Nash,  Philleo,  The  Place  of  Religious  Revivalism  in  the  Formation 
of  the  Intercultural  Community  of  Klamath  Reservation.1 

This  paper  supports  a  position  concerning  the  reasons  for  the  rise 
of  revivalistic  movements  among  native  folk  in  contact  with  whites 
which  opposes  that  advanced  concerning  the  same  phenomenon  in 
the  preceding  contributions.  Noting  that  such  revivals  are  "remark- 
ably uniform  in  doctrine  despite  the  dissimilarity  of  the  cultures  in 
which  they  appear,"  that  "they  are  not  mere  importations  of  Christian 
dogma,"  but  that  "on  the  contrary,  they  usually  rest  firmly  on 
aboriginal  religious  beliefs,  which  have  been  reworked  and  reinte- 
grated in  a  manner  which  gives  an  appearance  of  uniformity,"  an 
initial  hypothesis,  based  on  the  consideration  of  such  movements  in 
the  United  States,  New  Guinea  and  India,  was  nevertheless  formu- 
lated in  the  following  terms : 

"Nativistic  cults  arise  among  deprived  groups.  They  follow  a  shift 
in  the  value  pattern,  due  to  suppression  and  domination,  and  are 
movements  to  restore  the  original  value  pattern  which  they  do  by 
the  construction  of  a  fantasy  situation.  The  nature  of  this  fantasy, 
which  is  basic  to  the  cult,  is  a  function  of  (i)  the  original  value 
pattern  and  (2)  the  successive  changes  in  the  value  pattern  under 
white  domination."   (pp.  377-378) 

Thus  a  group  that  has  been  deprived  of  its  power  is  held  to  compensate 
for  its  impotence  by  setting  up  cults  which,  in  doctrine  and  ritual, 
offer  to  the  members  of  the  deprived  group  opportunities  to  identify 
themselves  with  some  power  that  is  sufficiently  great  to  cope  with  the 

1  The  exerpts  from  this  paper  are  reproduced  here  with  the  kind  permission  of  the 
University  of  Chicago  press,  publishers  of  the  volume  wherein  it  appeared. 


S6  ACCULTURATION 

situation,  and  sufficiently  friendly  to  support  their  cause.  In  its  early 
form,  this  envisages  a  return  to  the  "good  old  days" ;  as  time  goes  on, 
the  picture  of  these  "good  old  days"  in  the  minds  of  the  people 
becomes  warped  by  the  acculturation  to  which  they  are  subjected, 
and  hence  takes  on  a  somewhat  different  form,  incorporating  foreign 
values. 

The  hypothesis  was  tested  by  field-work  on  the  Klamath  Reser- 
vation, where  the  nativistic  revivalist  movement  of  187 1- 1878  was 
studied.  In  1864,  three  tribes  were  brought  together  on  this  reser- 
vation; the  Klamath,  whose  home  territory  it  had  been,  the  Modoc, 
who  gave  armed  resistance  to  attempts  to  transfer  them,  and  the 
Paviotso,  who  vacillated  between  their  aboriginal  habitat  and  the 
reservation  for  many  years  in  a  state  of  "passive  resistance"  until  they 
finally  settled  on  it.  The  first  two  of  these  tribes  were  relatively 
similar  in  culture  and  language,  but  the  Paviotso  differed  considerably 
in  both. 

"If  the  hypothesis  is  correct,  those  groups  which  participated  most 
fully  in  the  revival  should  be  those  which  suffered  most  deprivation 
in  their  contacts  with  whites.  Furthermore,  the  fantasy  situation 
integral  to  the  cult  should  be  appropriate  to  shifts  in  the  value  pattern 
which  had  taken  place  in  the  formation  of  the  intercultural  commu- 
nity."  (p.  378) 

The  question  in  point  is  "broken  down  into  two  problems" — that 
of  "deprivation"  and  that  of  "participation  in  the  religious  revival." 
(pp.  378-379)  Before  taking  up  these  matters,  however,  an  analysis 
is  made  of  the  historical  setting  of  the  movement  in  terms  of  "the 
formation  of  the  intercultural  community." 

Changes  in  the  life  of  the  three  tribes  when  they  were  "put  on  the 
reservation"  appear  to  have  been  essentially  internal  ones;  more  in 
the  nature  of  shifts  of  emphasis — at  least  as  far  as  the  Klamath  were 
concerned — in  the  social  position  of  chiefs,  shamans,  commoners  and 
slaves : 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  Sj 

"In  general,  the  formation  of  the  intercultural  community  on  the 
Upper  End  [of  the  reservation]  was  characterized  by  independence 
and  absence  of  restraint,  by  few  contacts  with  whites,  by  minimal 
cultural  changes,  and  by  the  formation  of  a  compact  community 
rather  than  the  scattered  type  of  the  Lower  End. 

"The  formation  of  the  intercultural  community  on  both  ends  of 
the  reservation  was  characterized  by  early  and  simple  beginnings  of 
cultural  change.  Acceptance  of  white  customs  and  techniques  was 
barely  under  way  in  this  first  ten  years  of  administrative  control.  Ten 
years  later  many  more  changes  had  taken  place,  but  in  the  period 
under  consideration  the  Indians  depended  on  the  collection  of  wild 
foods  in  their  original  habitat,  to  a  large  extent,  and  had  taken  over 
certain  superficial  characteristics  of  white  culture,  but  the  basic  change 
to  dependence  on  individual  enterprise  in  the  form  of  one -family 
subsistence  farms,  with  reliance  on  agriculture  and  grazing  techniques, 
was  common  only  in  the  last  half  of  the  period,  and  only  at  the  Lower 
End.  The  most  notable  feature  is  that  the  Indians  accepted  the  changes 
eagerly  and  industriously,  only  to  find  that  their  efforts  met  with 
failure,  through  no  fault  of  their  own."  (pp.  406-407) 

The  effects  of  the  exposure  to  white  domination  on  these  three  tribes 
is  thus  stated: 

"...with  respect  to  two  factors  in  change,  the  groups  on  the 
Klamath  Reservation  were  aligned  as  follows:  (1)  with  respect  to 
initial  deprivation  the  Modoc  suffered  most,  the  Klamath  suffered 
least,  and  the  Paviotso  were  intermediate ;  (2)  with  respect  to  changes 
introduced  through  administrative  policy  and  attendant  deprivation 
and  indulgence,  the  Klamath  changed  most,  the  Paviotso  least,  while 
the  Modoc  were  intermediate."    (p.  412) 

This  background  of  change  and  resistance  to  change  established, 
the  facts  concerning  the  revivalistic  movement  are  then  analyzed. 
Three  phases  of  its  development  are  distinguished,  the  Ghost  Dance, 
the  Earthlodge  cult,  and  the  Dream  Dance.  It  is  noted  that  of  the 
three  tribes  the  Modoc  who,  at  the  time  of  the  introduction  of  the  cult, 


SS  ACCULTURATION 

were  seething  with  revolt  against  the  plan  to  place  them  on  reservation 
— a  state  of  mind  that  later  resulted  in  the  "Modoc  war" — adopted 
the  first  phase  most  readily,  and  was  the  only  group  to  attach  to  it  an 
aspect  of  violence.  And  it  is  pointed  out  that  this  is  in  line  with  what 
might  have  been  expected  in  the  light  of  the  historic  role  of  the 
Modoc : 

"The  inclusion  of  the  collective  symbol  and  the  doctrinal  stress  on 
the  dead,  coupled  with  extremely  aggressive  elements  in  the  doctrine, 
are  consonant  with  the  damage  to  the  collective  symbol  suffered  by 
contact  with  whites."  (p.  418) 

In  contrast,  the  interest  of  the  Klamath  in  the  dance  was  limited  both 
in  time  and  degree;  among  the  Paviotso,  it  was  merely  a  "religious 
revival  in  a  strict  sense ;  an  increase  in  religious  activity  accompanied 
by  the  enhancement  of  well-established  symbols  and  practices." 
(p.  420) 

With  the  onset  of  the  Earthlodge  stage  greater  emphasis  was  placed  on 
the  individual,  while  the  earlier  elements  of  pugnacity  were  removed ; 
the  cult  offered  more  of  a  personal  escape  from  a  situation  that  was 
distasteful,  while  it  also  afforded  prestige  to  commoners  and  slaves 
who,  in  aboriginal  society,  could  not  have  hoped  to  attain  a  like 
position.  As  this  phase  passed  into  the  Dream  Dance,  worship 
became  still  more  highly  "personalized"  and,  though  associated  with 
the  dead,  no  longer  envisaged  their  return  to  earth.  Dreams  required 
interpretation,  and  for  this  the  members  of  the  cult  would  seek  out 
the  shamans,  so  that  as  this  phase  was  ended  by  the  oncoming  of 
Christianity  the  cycle  back  to  the  shaman  as  the  most  significant 
figure  in  the  manipulation  of  the  supernatural  had  been  completed. 
In  this  cycle  only  the  Indian  employees  of  the  agency,  whose  desire 
for  prestige  and  a  place  in  the  scheme  of  things  had  been  satisfied, 
took  no  part  but  even  attempted  at  one  time  to  suppress  the  move- 
ment. 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  fy 

In  essence,  these  data  tend  to  show  that  those  who  suffered  most 
under  the  initial  impact  of  white  contact  compensated  most  for  it. 
The  findings  of  field  research,  on  which  this  paper  is  based,  made  it 
desirable  to  revise  the  initial  hypothesis,  and  this  was  restated  in  the 
following  manner: 

"Nativistic  cults  arise  among  deprived  groups.  Deprivation  may 
occur  within  the  framework  of  either  acceptance  or  rejection  of 
values  and  skills  associated  with  white  culture.  Revivalism,  however, 
is  only  one  aspect  of  a  total  response  to  white  culture.  Revivalism  is 
that  portion  of  the  response  which  expresses  in  ritual  symbolism  the 
basic  attitudes  of  acceptance  or  rejection  of  white  culture,  feelings  of 
loss  or  damage,  aggressive  retaliation  in  response  to  deprivation 
suffered,  and  self -punishing  assertions  and  practices  in  proportion  to 
aggressive  retaliation."  (p.  442) 

A  number  of  points  may  be  raised  which  bear  on  this  treatment  as 
related  to  the  study  of  acculturation  in  general.  Granting  that  the 
shock  of  initial  conflict  incident  on  native -white  contacts  causes  com- 
pensatory movements,  it  is  unfortunate  that  one  fundamental  aspect 
of  this  phenomenon,  so  often  stressed  in  this  paper — the  formation 
of  what  is  called  the  "intercultural  community" — is  nowhere  treated 
as  its  importance  deserves.  What  confronts  us  again  and  again  is  the 
familiar  overemphasis  on  white  influence.  Thus,  on  page  404,  the 
isolation  of  the  "Upper  End"  community  from  whites  is  explicitly 
pointed  out.  Or,  on  page  410,  the  statement  "Jack's  group,  of  course, 
was  not  subject  to  the  acculturation  policy1  implies  that  the  term 
"acculturation"  is  appropriate  only  when  elements  of  white  culture 
are  taken  over  by  natives.  Another  passage  indicates  how  stress  on 
white  influence  tends  to  warp  the  description  of  the  situation : 

"The  reservation  Modoc  were  subject  to  the  same  initial  depri- 
vation as  the  Tule  Lake  Modoc.   They  suffered  additional  damage  to 

1  Italics  inserted. 
7 


y  0  ACCULTURA  TION 

the  group  symbol  at  the  hands  of  a  non-white  group— the  Klamath. . . . 
The  fact  that  no  anti -Klamath  doctrine  appears  fixes  the  character 
of  the  revival  as  an  anti -white  movement.  There  was  an  anti -Klamath 
reaction,  non-ritual  in  its  nature,  which,  aside  from  the  flight  to  the 
Lost  River,  took  the  form  of  gossip  and  hostile  anecdotes  which  are 
remembered  to  this  day." 

And  though  this  paper  is  concerned  primarily  with  revivalism,  yet 
it  must  be  regarded  as  regrettable  that  the  identification  of  the  word 
"acculturation"  with  "adaptation  to  white  modes  of  life"  has  appa- 
rently not  permitted  the  author  to  see  that  compensatory  mechanisms 
in  non-ritualized  form  are,  for  his  very  problem,  just  as  significant 
as  those  which  do  take  ritual  form. 

There  are  other  instances  where  lack  of  clarity  has  made  for  con- 
fusion, as  where  the  author  states :  " . .  .we  may  now  proceed  to  that 
aspect  of  cultural  change  which  seems  most  closely  connected  with 
deprivation — religious  revivalism."  (p.  412)  Quite  aside  from  the 
question  of  the  advisability  of  using  "cultural  change"  as  a  synonym 
for  "acculturation,"  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  available  materials  on 
culture  contact  would  support  the  implied  assumption.  It  has  been 
seen  how  among  the  South  African  Bantu  other  mechanisms  of 
adjustment  are  quite  as  prevalent  as  religious  ones;  while  among  the 
Bushmen  and  Hottentots,  who  have  suffered  far  more  "deprivations" 
than  the  Indians  treated  in  this  paper,  we  find  no  evidence  of  any 
kind  of  religious  revivalism. 

d.  Lesser,  Alexander,  The  Pawnee  Ghost  Dance  Hand  Game. 

This  volume  treats  the  development  of  one  special  phase  of  a 
local  variant  of  the  1890  Ghost  Dance.  The  work  is  not  only  signif- 
icant for  the  study  of  acculturation  because,  as  the  author  states,  the 
data  are  such  as  to  leave  "no  residue"  of  material  for  further  study, 
but  the  research  is  also  important  from  the  point  of  view  of  method, 
since  it  repersents  a  "typical  case  of  controlled  cultural  transform- 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  9l 

ation ..."  where  "the  method  of  exhaustive  analysis  supported  by- 
historical  background  has  demonstrated  with  exactitude  the  origins 
and  influences  of  change."   (p.  321) 

The  discussion  begins  with  a  thorough  account  of  the  vicissitudes  of 
the  Pawnee  in  their  original  habitat  in  Nebraska,  as  the  frontier 
moved  westward  and  took  with  it  any  chance  for  continued  stability 
of  aboriginal  life.  This  prompted  the  removal  of  the  tribe  on  their 
own  volition  to  Oklahoma,  where  a  friendly  related  folk,  the  Wichita, 
were  already  living  and  where  there  was  hope  of  better  days.  This 
hope,  however  was  not  to  be  realized,  so  that  by  1892,  when  the  Ghost 
Dance  spread  to  them,  they  "had  come  to  a  cultural  impasse,  with 
nothing  to  look  forward  to  and  nothing  to  live  by."  (p.  52) 

This  dance  came  to  the  Pawnee  through  the  instrumentality  of  one 
Frank  White,  "a  Pawnee  Indian  who  was  among  the  southern  Okla- 
homa tribes  who  were  Ghost  dancing;  he  participated  in  dances 
among  the  Comanche  and  Wichita,  learned  the  doctrine,  and  observed 
the  early  forms  in  which  the  dancing  was  at  that  time  organized ..." 
(p.  57)  Despite  the  conversions  he  made  to  the  new  doctrine,  his 
arbitrary  control  of  the  rites  and  his  use  of  the  Ghost  Dance  for  per- 
sonal gain  brought  on  discontent,  so  that  late  in  1 892  a  democratization 
of  the  ritual  occurred,  and  the  cult  was  reintroduced  in  the  form 
which  it  now  takes. 

It  may  be  well  at  this  point  to  summarize  in  the  author's  words  the 
hope  held  out  to  the  Indians  by  the  Ghost  Dance  doctrine  when,  as  a 
result  of  "the  United  States  government  program  of  assimilation" 
the  Pawnee  found  that  "their  old  life  was  gone,  and  nothing  adequate 
had  been  given  them  in  its  place."  The  new  ritual  "promised  the 
coming  of  a  new  and  restored  Indian  earth,  on  which  the  white  man 
would  be  no  more,  and  on  which  the  buffalo  would  roam  again";  it 
"prescribed  the  casting  aside  of  the  white  man's  ways  as  an  expression 
of  faith" ;  and,  in  its  third  tenet,  which  "concerned  the  visions  and 
the  seeking  of  them,"  it  offered  "moments  of  intercommunication 

7* 


y2  ACCULTURATION 

between  those  here  on  earth  and  their  deceased  kinsmen  in  the 
beyond,"  which  were  a  medium  through  which  one  could  "prove 
one's  strength  of  faith"  and  could  foresee  what  "the  new  earth  was  to 
be  like."  (p.  105)  It  was  thus  clearly  a  contra -acculturative  move- 
ment, and  it  is  not  difficult  to  understand  its  appeal  to  the  Indians; 
especially  when  it  is  realized  how  deeply  its  rites  lodged  in  aboriginal 
pattern : 

"The  revival  of  Pawnee  culture  which  began  to  materialize  in  the 
years  of  the  Ghost  Dance  went  back  for  its  material  primarily  to 
three  sources  in  the  old  culture:  the  bundles  and  bundle  rituals,  the 
societies,  and  the  games.  The  general  attempt  to  resuscitate  the 
aboriginal  forms,  supplemented  and  fortified  by  the  inspirations  and 
mandates  of  the  visions,  resulted  in  three  types  of  cultural  rebirth. 
The  activities  of  old  ceremony,  performance  and  play  were  fostered ; 
the  paraphernalia  were  put  in  order,  renewed,  and  recreated;  and 
concepts  from  the  old  context  were  enshrined  in  symbols  and  facsim- 
iles which  were  carried  in  the  dance  and  integrated  into  new  cultural 
forms."  (p.  106) 

The  setting  for  this  reintegration  was  provided  by  the  new  freedom 
which  governmental  policy  gave  the  Pawnee,  together  with  the  fact 
that  they  "found  themselves  side  by  side  with  white  men  for  the  first 
time  in  their  history"  as  a  result  of  the  allotment  system  which  broke 
up  the  reservation  and,  in  addition  to  contact  with  whites,  had  a 
counter  effect  of  enhancing  the  importance  of  opportunities  for 
communal  gatherings,   (pp.  11 9- 12 3) 

With  the  setting,  historical,  geographical,  and  cultural  thus  in 
hand,  the  author  devotes  the  second  portion  of  his  work  to  an  intensive 
consideration  of  the  hand  game  itself,  both  in  its  aboriginal  form  and 
as  concerns  its  present  role  as  a  part  of  the  Ghost  Dance  ceremonies. 
His  analysis  includes  a  description  of  the  paraphernalia  employed  in 
the  game  in  pre -white  days  and  at  present,  the  differences  in  the  social 
setting  of  the  game  in  earlier  times  and  now,  changes  in  the  behavior 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  p, 

of  the  participants,  as  well  as  the  obvious  matter  of  the  changes  as  the 
game  was  transformed  from  one  devoted  to  purposes  of  gambling 
to  one  that  is  part  of  a  religious  rite.  Its  inclusion  in  the  Ghost  Dance 
is  shown  to  have  come  subsequent  to  the  elimination  of  White  as 
the  sole  prophet,  when  the  validity  of  individual  vision  experiences 
was  affirmed;  a  development  which  so  flourished  "as  late  as  1930," 
that  the  author  tells  us  he  "was  able  to  list  twenty -two  individual  game 
developments  of  the  Pawnee."   (p.  155) 

In  the  detailed  analyses  of  the  various  forms  of  the  games  as  revealed 
in  visions,  relatively  little  of  European  practice  or  belief  is  to  be  seen. 
In  the  "church  games"  there  are  obvious  influences,  such  as  the  inter- 
vals between  bouts  of  guessing,  when  "Forty -Nine  or  Soldier  songs" 
are  sung,  or  where  a  Baptist  recites  a  prayer  before  the  play  instead 
of  giving  the  conventional  smoke -offering,  or  when  grace  is  said  before 
the  food  is  eaten  instead  of  the  aboriginal  food -offering,  but  there 
is  little  more  than  this.  In  the  vast  majority  of  forms  of  the  hand 
game  no  Christian  ritual  occurs,  and  European  influences  are  confined 
to  identifications  of  Christian  concepts  with  early  modes  of  thought 
and  practice. 

This  detailed  description  of  the  forms  taken  by  the  games  in 
accordance  with  the  revelations  had  by  their  "owners"  is  followed  by 
a  discussion  of  how  traits  of  the  older  form  have  been  retained  or  lost 
and  of  how  those  added  to  the  game  have  been  worked  into  the  com- 
plex as  it  now  exists.  Such  an  analysis  is  in  accordance  with  the 
methodology  of  the  author  in  utilizing  this  game  as  a  form  with  which 
to  document  "under  control"  a  specific  example  of  cultural  change : 

"The  persistence  of  traits  constitutes  that  body  of  cultural  elements 
without  which  no  identification  of  the  two  forms  would  be  possible. 
There  are  first  of  all  those  traits  which  persist  from  the  old  game  into 
the  new  form  identically;  these  form  the  base.  In  addition  there  are 
persistences  of  phases  of  the  pattern  or  form,  into  which  similar  but 
not  identical  cultural  material  has  been  filled."  (p.  309) 


pj  ACCULTURATION 

This  "base"  of  persisting  traits  is  seen  to  be  considerable — those 
"for  the  most  part. .  .associated  with  the  actual  play  of  the  game" 
(p.  309),  while  those  lost  derive  from  its  aspects  that  came  from  the 
identification  of  the  play  with  the  imagery  of  the  war  party.  Finally,  in 
analyzing  the  traits  added  to  the  original  complex,  we  are  permitted 
clearly  to  see  here,  as  elsewhere  in  the  book,  the  operation  of  that 
process  of  revamping  that  is  so  fundamental  to  cultural  change  in  any 
of  its  manifestations. 

e.  Chinnery,  E.  P.  W.  and  Haddon,  A.  C,  Five  New  Religious  Cults  in 

British  New  Guinea. 

This  paper  gives  a  sense  of  the  underlying  pattern  of  those  outbreaks 
of  religious  hysteria  in  New  Guinea  which,  because  of  their  wide- 
spread nature  and  frequent  occurrence,  must  be  taken  into  account 
in  discussing  the  rise  of  similar  more  recent  manifestations  in  this 
area.  At  the  same  time,  it  offers  some  of  the  few  available  instances 
of  intertribal  acculturation. 

The  first  two  cults,  which  are  briefly  described  by  Chinnery,  are 
each  founded  on  the  worship  of  a  "Food- Spirit."  Despite  govern- 
mental action  in  putting  down  their  overt  forms,  they  were  continuing 
underground  at  the  time  of  writing  and  were  threatening  to  "break 
out  in  strong  force  along  the  whole  northern  coast  from  the  Gira  to 
Buna  at  any  time."  (p.  451)  How  they  have  developed  from  their 
beginnings  cannot  be  stated,  since  no  further  reports  concerning 
them  have  been  published. 

Haddon's  contribution  to  this  joint  paper  gives  an  account  of  the 
origin  and  forms  of  three  more  cults  and,  in  addition,  makes  gen- 
eralizations on  the  basis  of  his  data.  In  the  light  of  his  own  later 
descriptions,  his  statement  that  the  cults  described  by  Chinnery 
"do  not  seem  to  be  related  to  the  somewhat  earlier  cult  to  which  I  call 
attention,  nor  is  there  any  evidence  of  the  slightest  connection  between 
these  and  the  abortive  message  of  the  Milne  Bay  'prophet' "  tends 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  pj 

to  underline  the  role  of  the  cultural  base  in  making  possible  these 
messianic  movements.  This  is  further  emphasized  by  the  notes  on 
the  cult  of  Mansoren  Koreri  among  the  tribes  of  Netherlands  New- 
Guinea  given  by  Moszkowski1  which,  as  Haddon  remarks,  is  not 
unlike  similar  cults  in  the  British  portion  of  the  island  in  that  it 
envisages  the  culture -hero  as  a  person  who,  disappointed  that  the 
tribe  failed  to  carry  out  his  injunctions,  vanished  and  is  believed 
destined  to  return  "and  then  everything  will  be  renewed." 

The  problem  of  the  relation  of  these  cults  to  white  encroachment  on 
native  custom  is  considered  by  Haddon  in  his  preliminary  remarks : 

"An  awakening  of  religious  activity  is  a  frequent  characteristic  of 
periods  of  social  unrest.  The  weakening  or  disruption  of  the  older 
social  order  may  stimulate  new  and  often  bizarre  ideals,  and  these  may 
give  rise  to  religious  movements  that  strive  to  sanction  social  or 
political  aspirations.  Communities  that  feel  themselves  oppressed 
anticipate  the  emergence  of  a  hero  who  will  restore  their  prosperity 
and  prestige.  And  when  the  people  are  imbued  with  religious  fervour 
the  expected  hero  will  be  regarded  as  a  Messiah.  Phenomena  of  this 
kind  are  well  known  in  history,  and  are  not  unknown  at  the  present 
day  among  peoples  in  all  stages  of  civilization."   (p.  45  5)2 

The  reference  made  to  the  Ghost  Dance  of  North  America  as  a  similar 
messianic  contra -acculturative  movement  would  come  to  mind  were 
it  not  mentioned  by  the  authors  in  this  connection. 

Nonetheless,  we  are  told  that  even  without  the  disruption  of  native 
custom  by  white  interference,  movements  of  a  similar  revivalistic 
nature  are  known  to  have  occurred — movements  which  are  of  im- 
portance for  the  ethnologist's  understanding  of  the  dynamics  of 
culture  from  an  entirely  different  point  of  view  than  that  being 
stressed  here,  but  are  of  no  less  significance  for  us  because  of  this  fact : 

1  Moszkowski  (191 1),  p.  327. 

2  In  much  of  this  Haddon  takes  a  position  which  was  to  be  assumed  by  Nash 
two  decades  later. 


p  6  ACCULTURA  TION 

"...  even  among  the  savages  of  New  Guinea  fresh  forms  of  religious 
activity  come  into  being  from  time  to  time  definitely  as  a  reaction 
against  the. encroachments  of  the  white  man.  But  the  mainspring  of 
others  is  at  present  obscure,  and  appears  to  be  more  distinctly  related 
to  purely  native  ideas.  These  cults  afford  a  valid  ground  of  argument 
against  the  very  prevalent  notion  of  the  permanence  of  all  native 

institutions They  illustrate . . .  the  methods  by  which  cults  have 

probably  spread  in  the  past,  and,  as  I  have  previously  suggested 
[referring  here  to  a  statement  in  the  Reports  of  the  Cambridge 
Anthropological  Expedition  to  Torres  Straits]  we  have  evidence 
elsewhere  of  a  definite  propaganda.  Indeed,  we  might. . .  admit  that 
savages  may  occasionally  have  a  missionary  zeal  which  impels  them 
to  impart  to  the  benighted  heathen  the  ceremonial  or  cult  that  yields 
to  themselves  so  much  satifsaction."  (pp.  45  5-45 6)1 

Of  the  three  religious  movements  described,  the  Baigona  cult 
consists  of  serpent  worship,  administered  by  initiates  deriving  their 
knowledge  from  one  Maine,  to  whom  the  original  vision  that  began 
the  cult  was  vouchsafed.  The  Prophet  of  Milne  Bay  was  named 
Tokerua,  and  he  foretold  an  early  destruction  of  the  world  as  it  now 
exists  and  a  return  to  the  golden  age.  A  number  of  natives  destroyed 
their  gardens  at  his  behest,  but  when  the  "prophet"  was  imprisoned 
and  the  millenium  failed  to  arrive,  the  cult  collapsed.  The  third 
movement,  that  of  the  German  Wislin  of  Saibai  (Torres  Straits)  was 
also  based  on  a  doctrine  of  the  return  of  the  dead,  and — in  this 
strikingly  like  the  Vailala  Madness  and  the  Kekesi  cult — they  were 
to  return  on  a  steamer,  when  they  would  fight  and  kill  the  white  man. 
Certain  Christian  elements  in  the  ritual  and  belief  are  seen  to  be 
"interwoven. .  .with  racial  animosity  and  a  recrudescence  of  the  vague 
ancestor  cult  of  heathen  times"  in  all  these  cults  (p.  463).  However,  it 
is  not  believed  that  borrowing  was  the  cause  of  resemblances  of  this 
kind — certainly  not  those  between  the  German  Wislin  of  Saibai  and 

1  Cf.  the  discussion  of  this  point  by  Williams  (1928),  pp.  5-6  and  77  ff. 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED 


97 


the  beliefs  of  the  prophet  of  Milne  Bay,  since  the  two  localities  are 
5  60  miles  apart.  "I  think  we  can  confidently  attribute  the  coincidences 
to  the  fact  that  the  two  fishing  populations  have  been  affected  in  an 
analagous  manner  by  the  social  unrest,  and  have  also  been  more  or 
less  imbued  with  the  Christian  religion. ..."  (pp.  462-463) 

/.  Williams,  F.  E.,  The  Vailala  Madness  and  the  Destruction  of  Native 

Ceremonies  in  the  Gulf  Division?- 

The  "Vailala  Madness"  represents  another  of  these  New  Guinea 
contra -acculturative  movements  which,  on  the  surface,  are  strangely 
like  the  Prophet  Dances  of  the  American  Indians.  In  both  cases, 
apparently,  the  new  cults  arose  as  reactions  to  the  hopelessness  of  the 
situation  in  which  natives  found  themselves  when  faced  with  white 
agression ;  in  both  they  were  based  on  doctrines  of  the  early  return 
of  the  dead,  and  involved  prophets,  possession,  and  dancing ;  in  both 
white  rituals  were  copied  to  some  extent;  while  finally,  both  move- 
ments seem  to  have  run  a  swift  course  to  an  early  and  almost  complete 
disappearance. 

Here,  however,  the  resemblance  ends.  In  many  parts  of  the  United 
States  the  Ghost  Dances  were  essentially  anti -white  and  predicted  the 
day  when  olden  times  would  return  and  the  invaders  would  be  wiped 
out,  a  doctrine  which  in  the  Plains  led  to  actual  warfare.  In  Papua, 
however,  though  the  doctrine  was  anti -white,  the  particular  form 
discussed  in  this  paper  brought  about  the  destruction  of  rituals  and 
sacred  objects  of  earlier  times,  and  for  these  this  new  cult  substituted 
a  considerable  number  of  Christian  and  secular  European  elements. 
In  this,  of  course,  it  contrasts  strikingly  with  the  Ghost  Dance,  where 
the  elements  derived  from  the  whites  were  few  when  compared  to 

1  Reference  should  also  be  made  to  Williams,  (1928).  The  titles  analyzed  here 
were  selected  because,  in  the  case  of  the  Vailala  Madness,  repeated  observations 
over  a  period  of  time  are  available. 


p$  ACCULTURATION 

the  number  that  consisted  essentially  of  elaborations  of  certain  aspects 
of  the  pattern  already  long  established  before  contact  with  the  whites. 

The  Vailala  Madness  is  named  after  a  town  on  the  southern  coast  of 
New  Guinea,  on  the  Gulf  of  Papua,  where  the  movement  began 
during  the  latter  months  of  191 9.  Its  commencement  can  be  acc- 
urately dated,  because  the  disturbance  it  caused  was  brought  to  the 
attention  of  a  political  officer  who  sent  in  careful  reports  concerning  it. 
It  was  a  dance  involving  "crazy,  uncontrolled  excitement"  and  "where 
it  touched  it  made  a  clean  sweep  of  ceremonies,  and . . .  destroyed 
almost  every  treasure  of  religion  and  art."  (pp.  1-2)  It  spread  up 
and  down  the  coast  and,  to  a  lesser  degree,  into  the  interior  up  the 
Vailala  River.  One  striking  characteristic  was  its  "spotty"  distribution, 
so  that  one  village,  unaffected  by  it,  might  have  a  neighbor  not  more 
than  a  mile  or  two  removed  described  as  a  "veritable  hot-bed"  of  the  cult. 

The  doctrine  of  the  Madness  centered  about  two  principal  tenets; 
the  immediate  return  of  the  dead,  and  the  belief  that  in  the  ancestral 
world  all  are  white.  The  deceased  relatives  were  expected  to  come  in 
a  large  steamer,  which  was  to  be  loaded  with  cases  of  gifts,  and,  in 
some  early  versions  of  the  cult,  was  also  to  have  on  board  cases  of 
rifles  to  be  used  in  driving  the  whites  from  the  land;  but  these 
beliefs  had  short  tenure.  As  to  the  ancestors  being  white,  it  is  pointed 
out  that  this  involved  two  concepts;  "that  the  white  men  are  the 
returned  ancestors  of  the  natives"  and  that  "the  natives  become  white 
in  after-life" — two  ideas  which  are  not  necessarily  related.  Beliefs 
of  this  type  were  not  without  their  aboriginal  sanction : 

"As  far  back  as  191 2  a  member  of  the  London  Missionary  Society 
found  the  natives  of  Moviavi  on  one  occasion  in  a  state  of  the  highest 
excitement  because  they  had  got  hold  of  the  idea  that  he  himself  was 
one  of  their  returned  ancestors ....  The  other  belief. . .  that  in  an 
after-life  the  black  men  will  be  white  men,  is  common  enough  in  the 
Gulf  Division,  and  might  easily  be  the  result  of  Missionary  influence, 
whether  taught  or  not."   (pp.  16-17) 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  ^ 

Many  Christian  elements  marked  the  doctrine.  Heaven  was  called 
Ihova  Kekere  or  "Jehova's  Land,"  and  Jesus,  God,  and  other  Christian 
designations  were  often  encountered.  "Some  of  the  most  prominent 
figures  have  declared  that  they  were  'Jesus  Christ  men'  "  and  implied 
that  they  would  no  longer  follow  heathen  ways.  "Certain  of  these 
men  had,  and  still  have,  visions  of  God  or  Christ,  from  whom  they 
receive  instructions  or  messages  for  their  fellows,  usually  of  an  ethical 
character."  Similarly,  the  belief  that  the  dead  ascend  into  Heaven 
— the  Christian  Heaven,  in  the  sky — was  fundamental,  while  the 
ethical  teachings  of  the  cult — "Thou  shalt  not  steal,  commit  adultery, 
nor  break  the  Sabbath  are  the  three  commandments  most  frequently 
heard" — also  argued  Christian  influence,  as  did  the  stress  laid  on 
the  fact  that  all  feasts  should  be  shared  equally  by  women  and  men, 
something  quite  out  of  line  with  earlier  custom,  (pp.  18-19,  24_26.) 

These  beliefs  seem  to  have  been  an  overlay,  however,  on  the  cult  of 
the  ancestors,  which  had  long  been  present  in  the  region : 

"The  really  fundamental  fact  in  the  whole  cult  is  the  tremendous  in- 
terest in  the  dead:  and  perhaps  the  most  important  regular  duty 
connected  with  it  is  the  making  of  mortuary  feasts ....  There  is 
nothing  new  in  the  fact  of  these  mortuary  feasts  in  the  Gulf  Division ; 
they  are  apparently  part  of  the  old  culture;  and  they  illustrate  this 
keenly -felt  interest  in,  and,  to  some  extent,  fear  of  the  dead  or  rather 
of  the  spiritual  entity  that  is  believed  to  survive  death.  It  would  be 
a  surprising  thing  if  a  new  cult  could  abolish  an  interest  so  deeply 
grounded.  Thus  it  would  appear  to  be  only  in  the  highly  pretentious 
style  of  arraying  the  feast  that  there  has  been  any  great  deviation  from 
former  custom."  (pp.  19-20) 

Moreover,  it  is  by  no  means  as  certain  as  would  seem  on  the  face  of 
it  that  the  Vailala  Madness  affected  other  aspects  of  native  culture 
than  the  religious  ones,  granting  it  "wiped  out"  the  earlier  rites  to 
the  degree  that  is  stressed.  Thus,  in  the  cult-houses  where  the  "Head- 
he -go-round  Men"  officiated,  there  were  separate  tables  allotted  to 


I00  ACCULTURATION 

the  different  clans  or  bark-cloth  strips  in  the  appropriate  places  with 
the  emblems  of  the  various  clans  to  which  they  belonged.  "Such 
facts,"  runs  the  comment,  "indicate  that  the  social  organization  has  to 
some  extent  survived  the  Vailala  Madness,  or  has  been  adapted  to  it " 

The  cult  of  the  dead,  the  heart  of  the  Madness,  consisted  of 
mortuary  feasts,  food  offerings  to  the  dead,  and  communication  with 
the  dead.  The  most  striking  adoptions  from  European  custom  were 
made  in  connection  with  this  aspect  of  the  movement.  Each  village 
had  its  ahea  uvi — "hot  house" — where  the  Automaniacs  became 
"hot"  or  possessed  on  entering,  and  where  the  rendezvous  between 
the  souls  of  the  dead  and  these  possessed  ones  took  place.  Before 
each  house  was  a  flag -pole  "which  seems  to  have  been  instituted  by 
the  London  Missionary  Society  a  good  many  years  ago"  from  which 
a  flag  was. especially  flown  on  Sundays  "when  [it  was]  partly  meant 
as  a  sign  that  the  day  should  be  kept."  At  the  time  of  writing, 
however,  it  functioned  "to  permit  certain  individuals  to  receive 
messages  from  the  dead  through  its  agency" — and  here  comes  perhaps 
the  most  up-to-date  instance  of  acculturation  that  has  been  recorded 
— since  the  derivation  of  this  use  of  the  flag -pole,  carefully  traced, 
is  shown  to  have  been  the  wireless  stations  observed  by  natives  at 
the  coast  and  on  shipboard!  (p.  24) 

Still  other  Europeanisms  seem  to  have  been  adopted  because  of  a 
desire  to  imitate  the  white  man.  The  dead,  for  example,  "are  not 
infrequently  depicted  as  clothed  in  European  garments.  One  in- 
formant..  .was  visited  by  God  himself ..  .wearing  coat,  shirt, 
trousers,  hat  and  'foot'  and  addressing  him  in  the  white  man's 
tongue."  Other  examples  given  of  this  are  the  tendency  to  crop  the 
hair  close,  the  "fall -in"  demanded  of  the  villagers  by  those  in  charge, 
the  regulation  of  dancing  by  whistle -blasts,  and  the  institutions  of  the 
old  nine  o'clock  curfew  in  Motu-Motu.   (p.  25) 

The  origin  of  the  Madness  is  said  to  have  been  the  result  of  a 
sermon  about  the  Resurrection  preached  by  a  white  missionary.   The 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  I0I 

originator  was  a  man  named  Evara,  who  had  apparently  been  given 
to  seizures  in  his  earlier  days,  before  the  cult  was  thought  of: 

"Whether  the  idea  of  the  steamer  and  the  returning  ancestors 
originated  here  is  not  certain.  But  there  was  much  talk  at  first  of  an 

aeroplane  that  was  dropping  messages  from  the  sky Informants 

from  Arihava  told  me  (from  hearsay)  that  Evara  had  in  his  possession 
a  number  of  'papers' — written  messages  that  had  come  fluttering 
down  from  the  sky  during  a  feast  in  the  village . . .  Being  questioned, 
however,  Evara  seemed  altogether  ignorant  of  the  portent.  He  had  no 
papers,  he  said,  but  there  was  a  book  in  his  box.  This  was  immedi- 
ately brought,  and  proved  to  be  a  modern  novel  of  244  pages — 'Love 
and  the  Aeroplane,'  with  a  very  vivid  portrayal  on  the  cover  of  this 
kind  of  a  machine,  with  a  man  and  woman  precariously  attached  to  it 
by  a  rope."   (p.  29) 

In  addition,  on  the  wall  of  the  ahea  uvi  of  Evara's  village  was  an 
advertisement  for  Lifebuoy  Soap,  "depicting  a  field-hospital,  a  motor 
ambulance,  and  a  number  of  figures  in  uniform."  All  the  figures 
were  identified,  one  as  Evara  himself,  and  the  others  either  as  living 
persons  or  his  deceased  relatives. 

The  spread  of  the  Madness  is  accounted  for  in  two  ways,  the  first  by 
the  "common  method  of.  ..going  to  see"  ceremonies  and  "then 
reproducing  an  imitation  at  home" ;  the  second,  by  proselytizing.  In 
this  the  Automaniacs  were  most  active  and  came  to  have  a  great  deal 
of  power,  so  that  "in  certain  villages,  at  any  rate... it  sometimes 
appears  that  they  have  superseded  the  chiefs."  (p.  32)  Their  power 
was  derived  from  an  ability  to  divine  and  to  heal;  in  the  latter  case, 
at  least,  they  seem  to  have  continued  the  older  forms  of  extracting  the 
object  that  "caused"  a  disease. 

It  is  evident  from  this  analysis  that  the  Madness  was  a  movement 
which,  though  of  short  duration,  must  have  come  with  a  tremendous 
surge  because  of  the  total  situation  of  the  natives  in  the  face  of  domina- 
tion by  the  whites.  That  it  did  not  destroy  as  completely  as  is  suggested 


I02  ACCULTURATION 

seems  to  be  clear;  it  is  fortunate  that  the  same  student  who  was  able 
to  observe  it  so  shortly  after  its  inception  was  able  in  later  years  to 
return  to  the  scene  of  his  studies,  and  to  make  available  a  report  of  the 
manner  in  which  the  initial  impulse  was  resolved. 

g.  Williams,  F.  E.,  The  Vailala  Madness  in  Retrospect. 

This  paper,  written  twelve  years  after  the  Madness  began,  shows 
how  after  the  initial  high  enthusiasm  which  greeted  it,  the  cult 
slowly  abated  until,  with  a  final  flare  in  193 1,  its  objectively  dis- 
cernible course  was  run.  In  retrospect,  the  author  retains  his  original 
conclusions  that  "on  the  whole . . .  not  a  few  of  the  doctrines  of  the 
movement  originated  in  visions  and  delusions;  and  it  cannot  be 
doubted  that  they  were  to  some  extent  born  of  the  mental  confusion 
that  followed  the  inrush  of  new  European  ideas."   (p.  372) 

Despite  the  failure  of  the  specific  events  which  were  predicted  to 
take  place,  the  young  people  today  show  no  tendency  to  regard  the 
movement  as  a  hoax,  but  hold  "a  widespread  belief  that  the  strange 
things  which  were  expected  to  happen  really  did  happen"  so  that 
"there  still  lives  a  popular  belief  that  those  first  years  of  the  Vailala 
Madness  constituted  a  brief  age  of  miracles."  Three  features  are 
believed  in  with  especial  firmness ;  the  coming  of  the  phantom  ship 
carrying  the  spirits  of  dead  friends  and  relatives,  the  resurrection 
of  the  "boss"  Ua  Halai,  and  the  matter  of  the  ghost  of  Maivake. 

As  to  the  reasons  for  the  appeal  of  the  cult,  we  are  told : 

". .  .they  are  to  be  found  in  certain  effects  of  contact  with  and 
subjugation  by  a  superior  people.  Such  contact  involves  (1)  the 
effort  to  assimilate  a  body  of  new  and  difficult  ideas,  and  a  resultant 
mental  confusion;  (2)  the  loss  of  customary  means  of  social  excitement; 
and  (3)  a  general  sense  of  inferiority."  (p.  377) 

With  regard  to  specific  elements  of  the  cult,  it  is  shown  how,  for 
example,  the  flagpole  as  a  carrier  of  messages  from  the  dead  developed 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  IOj 

from  a  knowledge  of  the  radio  station  of  the  Anglo -Persian  Oil  Co., 
and  in  the  case  of  each  trait  the  role  and  importance  of  the  leader  in 
fixing  the  concept  in  the  minds  of  his  followers  is  analyzed,  together 
with  the  manner  in  which  the  populace  reacted  to  the  "coming  and 
going  of  credulity . ' ' 

The  author's  conception  of  the  wider  significance  of  his  research 
for  students  concerned  with  the  processes  of  acculturation — a  some- 
what different  point  of  view  from  those  previously  encountered — is 
well  expressed  in  the  following  quotation: 

"If  the  present  paper  has  any  claim  to  interest  it  is  because  it  deals 
with  a  culture  on  the  move.  The  Vailala  Madness  came  as  a  violent 
shock  to  the  societies  of  the  Gulf  Division,  and  the  adjustment  and 
reactions  afford  material  for  the  study  of  culture  in  a  state  of  unusually 
rapid  metabolism ....  It  .may  be  idle  to  speculate  upon  origins  in  a 
static  culture ;  but  there  are  more  than  enough  native  societies  under- 
going change  at  the  present  day,  and  the  study  of  these  has,  I  believe, 
a  special  importance,  for  here  if  anywhere  we  shall  have  a  chance  of  dis- 
covering how  elements  of  culture  begin  and  how  they  grow."  (p.  379) 


4 

In  addition  to  the  studies  that  have  been  analyzed,  reference  can 
also  be  made  to  certain  other  publications  that  consider  the  problems 
with  which  we  are  concerned. 

A  further  important  body  of  materials  in  the  field  of  religion  deals 
with  the  effects  of  acculturation  among  the  American  Indians  as 
shown  in  the  Peyote  cult.  In  addition  to  the  early  studies  of  Radin, 
where  he  discussed  the  development  of  this  doctrine  among  the 
Winnebago  and  presented  sketches  of  the  personalities  concerned 
with  its  introduction  and  development  in  this  tribe,  there  has  been  a 
considerable  amount  of  subsequent  research  on  the  cult.  Outstanding 
among  these  studies  is  that  of  Wagner,  which  in  reviewing  all  the 


io4 


ACCULTURA  TION 


pertinent  literature,  not  only  treats  of  the  acculturative  development 
in  specific  tribes,  but  also  analyzes  the  data  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  several  impulses  to  be  discerned  in  its  movement  from  tribe 
to  tribe,  discussing  the  influence  of  each  impulse  in  making  for  the 
variations  in  doctrine  and  ceremonialism  that  appeared  as  the  cult 
spread.1  One  unusual  recent  paper  belonging  to  this  group  describes 
a  short-lived  version  of  the  cult  as  found  among  a  group  of  Negroes 
who  live  in  Oklahoma,  in  close  proximity  to  the  Indians  from  whom 
they  obtained  the  Peyote  religion.2 

The  considerable  number  of  studies  of  New  World  Negro 
religious  practices  have  largely  been  concerned  with  the  carry-over 
of  aboriginal  African  beliefs  and  rituals  found  among  folk  who  are  in 
the  main  professing  Christians.  To  the  historic  control  attainable  in 
other  acculturation  studies,  there  is  here  added  that  further  control 
which  derives  from  an  ability  to  assess  the  range  of  variation  in  a 
phenomenon  subject  to  differing  influences.  For  in  the  case  of  the 
New  World  Negroes,  these  groups,  aboriginally  endowed  with  a 
relatively  homogeneous  body  of  religious  concepts,  rituals  and 
magical  beliefs,  were  forced  to  undergo  a  series  of  contacts  that 
differed  not  only  as  to  severity  of  repression  of  African  modes  of 
worship,  but  also  as  to  the  forms  of  Christian  doctrine  and  cere- 
monialism which  were  sanctioned  by  the  whites  of  the  various  regions 
of  their  new  abode.  Hence  the  present-day  religious  life  of  Negroes 
can  be  compared  in  Catholic  as  against  Protestant  countries ;  while  the 
question  as  to  which  tribal  cultures  are  most  represented  in  the  survivals 
of  African  belief  found  in  each  region  at  the  present  time  offers  another 
salient  for  attack.3 

The  assimilation  of  new  religious  beliefs  to  old  under  acculturation 
has  also  received  the  attention  of  students  in  other  parts  of  the 

1  Reference  to  Wagner's  paper,  as  to  all  the  others  mentioned  in  these  paragraphs, 
will  be  found  in  the  list  of  works  cited  at  the  end  of  this  book. 

2  Smith,  M.  G.,  (1934).  3  Cf.  Herskovits,  M.  J.,  (1930,  1935). 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED 


IOJ 


world;  and  this  is  especially  the  case,  as  far  as  native -white  contacts 
are  concerned,  where  missionary  enterprise  has  been  pursued  with  any 
degree  of  vigor.  Except  for  studies  aimed  to  facilitate  the  work  of 
missionaries  among  folk  who  are  bearers  of  the  historic  cultures  of 
the  East,  however,  data  arising  from  this  source  tend  to  be  of  relatively 
smaller  degrees  of  usefulness  to  the  scientific  student,  since  such 
material  not  only  suffers  from  the  handicaps  which  have  been  indicated 
when  the  relation  of  practical  applications  of  anthropology  to  the 
scientific  study  of  culture  was  discussed,1  but  also  because  of  the 
fact  that  most  of  this  work  has  been  done  by  persons  not  trained  in 
scientific  anthropological  techniques.  And  while  the  student  of 
cultural  contact  can  winnow  much  of  use  to  him  from  these  docu- 
ments, for  the  most  part  materials  of  this  sort  must  be  employed 
with  caution,  since  they  are  unavoidably  conditioned  by  a  point  of 
view  that  has  been  restricted  by  the  mandate  under  which  students 
in  this  category  have  worked. 

Something  of  the  same  point  applies  to  acculturation  studies  in 
the  special  fields  of  political  and  economic  life,  for  here  most  of  the 
work  has  been  done  by  those  whose  primary  concern  has  been  with 
the  practical  implications  of  their  results  for  colonial  administrators. 
In  some  cases,  however,  such  as  in  the  ethnological  portions  of  the 
work  by  Brown  and  Hutt,  data  of  scientific  usefulness  can  be  ab- 
stracted by  students  concerned  with  questions  other  than  those  con- 
fronting officials  who  must  direct  the  course  of  native  life  during  a 
period  of  change. 

Though  the  same  comments  are  valid  for  many  studies  of  the 
effect  of  contact  on  social  organization,  there  are  some  contributions 
which  approach  the  phenomenon  from  the  point  of  view  of  pure 
science,  particularly  the  papers  of  Hallowell  and  Eggan.  Both  prove 
the  widely  held  theory  that  social  organization  is  less  prone  to  change 

1  See  above,  pp.  29-32. 
8 


I06  ACCULTURATION 

as  a  result  of  contact  than  any  other  aspect  of  culture  to  be  untenable ; 
moreover,  they  demonstrate  that  this  change  can  be  as  profound  as 
that  in  technology  or  any  other  phase  of  human  civilization.  And 
though  they  are  not  in  agreement  on  certain  other  theoretical  points, 
they  are  agreed  that  the  changes  which  they  have  been  able  to  control 
by  careful  recourse  to  historical  documentation  are  phenomena  of 
acculturation.  In  the  case  of  the  Abenaki  studied  by  Hallowell  these 
are  ascribed  to  "the  influence  exerted  upon  Abenaki  speakers  by  those 
of  related  Indian  languages  and  Europeans,"1  and  in  that  of  the 
Choctaw  reported  on  by  Eggan,  to  the  contacts  of  tribes  who  "had  a 
similar  culture,  resided  in  the  same  area,  were  removed  to  Indian 
Territory  under  similar  conditions,  and  were  subjected  to  similar 
influences  while  there."2  The  importance  of  the  latter  research 
is  enhanced  by  the  fact  that  it  is  one  of  the  very  few  acculturation 
studies  in  which  the  contact  of  natives  with  natives  is  the  sole 
concern. 

The  effects  of  acculturation  on  folklore  are  given  explicit  statement 
in  but  few  studies.  Painstaking  investigations  have  been  made  by 
scholars  working  in  historic  societies  into  the  manner  in  which 
themes  from  various  sources  have  been  combined  in  the  tales  of  Indo- 
European  peoples,  but  comparable  analyses  of  such  materials  from 
primitive  tribes  are  almost  entirely  lacking  except  as  they  have  been 
done  by  American  folklorists,  and  are  available  almost  solely  from 
American  Indians  and  Negroes  of  the  New  World.  Data  in  the  first 
category  usually  consist  of  stories  recorded  from  natives  in  which 
European  motifs,  and  occasionally  African  motifs,  can  be  discerned. 
Their  elements  are  ordinarily  not  broken  down  so  as  to  show  how 
incidents  of  foreign  derivation  were  worked  into  the  aboriginal  tales ; 
still  less  information  is  available  as  to  the  relationship  between  these 
stories  and  their  social  setting.   As  these  data,  however,  have  that 

1  Hallowell  (1928),  p.  145.  2  Eggan  (1937),  P-  39- 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  IOj 

objective  character  which  marks  all  folklore,  their  importance  for 
the  study  of  acculturation  is  of  the  first  order.1 

The  work  on  New  World  Negro  lore  is  characterized  by  more 
attention  to  provenience,  while  we  also  know  more  of  the  historical 
circumstances  that  brought  about  the  folkloristic  amalgam  represented 
in  the  tales.  In  the  main,  however,  the  method  used  in  presenting 
these  tales  is  the  conventional  one  of  folklorists,  wherein  references 
are  given  to  those  folk  from  whom  the  same  motifs  have  been  collected. 
Much  can  be  gleaned  from  this,  however,  concerning  the  manner  in 
which  these  literary  products  have  been  subject  to  the  process  of 
repatterning  and  recombination  that  is  so  especially  subject  to 
observation  in  this  field.  The  process  is  to  be  seen  in  the  various 
collections  from  the  United  States  and  the  Caribbean  published  by 
Parsons,  in  the  Jamaican  tales  recorded  by  Beckwith,  in  the  Bible 
stories  collected  from  the  Sea  Islands  of  the  Carolina  Coast  by  Stoney 
and  Shelby — though  here  the  combination  of  elements  needs  no 
scholarly  apparatus  to  make  it  apparent  to  the  reader — in  the  intensive 
analysis  of  certain  tales  from  Haiti  by  Comhaire-Sylvain,  and  in  the 
stories  reported  from  Dutch  Guiana  by  M.  and  F.  Herskovits. 

The  results  of  acculturation  in  the  field  of  language  have  also  received 
but  little  attention.  Mention  has  been  made  of  the  comments  in 
Mead's  work  on  the  "Antlers"  regarding  the  English  spoken  by  the 
Indians.  Parsons  also  includes  some  remarks  on  the  Spanish  elements 
found  in  Zapotecan,  referring  to  Radin's  analysis  of  Spanish  loan- 
words in  that  language.  The  problem,  however,  is  one  which  touches 
all  aspects  of  linguistic  expression,  and  has  to  do  particularly  with 
the  study  of  "pidgin"  dialects.  The  approach  to  this  problem  devel- 
oped by  M.  and  F.  Herskovits2  recognizes  the  independence  of  the 

1  Examples  of  tales  of  this  type  are  to  be  found  in  Thompson  (1929)  Ch.  VIII  and 
XI.  References  to  most  of  the  available  collections  of  such  stories  are  given  in 
his  Bibliography. 

2  (i937),  pp.  II7-I35. 

8* 


I0S  ACCULTURATION 

three  aspects  of  language — phonetics,  vocabulary,  and  grammar — 
and  holds  that  it  is  the  last  of  these,  and  particularly  that  mode  of 
expression  to  which  the  word  idiom  is  applied,  that  is  the  most 
resistant  to  contact,  while  vocabulary  is  most  easily  worked  into  the 
speech  habits  of  those  who  must  learn  a  new  tongue.  Analyzing  the 
various  forms  of  Negro -English,  it  is  thus  shown  how  the  turns  of 
phrase  peculiar  to  all  these  dialects  are  to  be  referred  to  the  fact  that 
in  contact  with  the  whites,  Negro  slaves  learned  the  words  of  the 
speech  of  their  masters,  and  poured  these  words,  which  they  pro- 
nounced as  well  as  they  could  in  accordance  with  their  aboriginal 
phonetic  patterns,  into  the  mold  of  African  grammatical  forms.  This 
assumption  is  also  valid  for  the  speech  of  other  New  World  Negroes,  as 
has  been  demonstrated  by  Sylvain's  study  of  Haitian  Negro-French. 
That  the  same  mechanism  has  operated  in  influencing  English  spoken 
by  natives  of  South  Africa  has  likewise  been  indicated  by  Lestrade. 
In  those  aspects  of  the  aesthetic  life  comprising  the  plastic  and 
graphic  arts  and  music,  only  a  few  studies  bear  on  the  processes  of 
acculturation.  More  suggestive  than  otherwise  is  the  work  of  Lips,  in 
which  he  indicates  the  reactions  of  primitive  people  to  whites  by 
reproducing  their  mode  of  portraying  them.  Most  data  having  to  do 
with  acculturation  in  the  arts,  however,  are  found  in  passing  references 
made  by  authors  who,  in  the  course  of  general  ethnographic  treatises, 
speak  of  the  manner  in  which  European  techniques  have  affected  the 
art  of  the  folk  whom  they  have  studied.  In  the  field  of  primitive 
music  Kolinski's  analysis  of  the  songs  of  the  Bush  and  Town  Negroes 
of  Dutch  Guiana  is  perhaps  the  most  extensive  that  has  been  made  of 
a  musical  idiom  that  is  of  known  multiple  derivation,  but  the  studies 
made  by  Herzog  of  the  songs  in  the  Ghost  Dance  rituals  also  indicate 
how  profitable  data  of  this  sort  may  prove  to  be  for  an  understanding 
of  acculturation  phenomena. 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED 


IOp 


5 

We  may  end  our  discussion  of  some  of  the  available  literature  on 
acculturation  on  a  non-scientific  note,  and  consider  what  writers  of 
fiction  may  give  to  scientists  who  seek  to  understand  the  results  of 
culture  contact,  especially  as  these  impinge  on  the  lives  of  individuals 
who  live  under  conditions  of  contact.  To  say  that  good  ethnology  is 
good  art,  and  that  to  depict  a  culture  so  that  it  emerges  from  the  pages 
in  which  it  is  described  as  the  living  entity  it  actually  is  needs  the 
craft  of  the  writer  as  well  as  the  discipline  of  science,  is  merely  to 
express  something  that  has  been  sensed  by  many  ethnologists,  and 
acknowledged  by  some.  The  literary  approach  is  particularly  appli- 
cable in  describing  outstanding  personalities  found  in  primitive 
societies,  as  can  be  seen,  for  instance,  in  the  biography  of  Chaka,  the 
great  military  leader  of  the  Zulu — a  document  that  affords  an  insight 
into  the  character  of  its  subject,  and  through  this  into  the  inner 
sanctions  of  the  culture  in  which  he  lived,  as  does  almost  no  scientific 
work  on  this  or  any  related  tribe. 

In  the  situations  of  acculturation,  where  the  stresses  and  strains 
on  human  personality  are  sharpened  as  a  result  of  the  confusion  of 
cultures  into  which  an  individual  is  born,  the  freedom  of  the  artist  to 
throw  the  relevant  material  into  sharpest  focus  should  give  the 
scientist  many  hints  of  value  to  him.  One  need  only  mention  a  few 
of  the  works  of  this  kind  that  have  appeared  in  past  years  to  make  the 
point;  Freuchen's  "Eskimo,"  for  instance,  with  its  portrayal  of  the 
results  of  the  impact  of  white  man's  technology  on  Eskimo  life,  or 
Millen's  "God's  Step -children"  and  the  light  it  throws  on  the  life  of 
the  mixed  Hottentot -Boer  Bastaards  of  South  Africa,  or  Williams  and 
May's  story  of  the  experiences  of  the  Kaffir,  Shambala,  in  Johannes- 
burg. 

To  give  point  to  the  remarks  that  have  just  been  made,  two  of 
the  more  recent  books  of  this  type  may  be  analyzed  in  the  manner 
in  which  scientific  works  have  been  reviewed.   In  doing  this,  some  of 


jl0  ACCULTURATION 

the  points  of  significance  in  these  books  to  be  looked  for  in  other 
fictional  material  of  like  calibre  may  be  made  patent  to  those  who  are 
concerned  with  that  approach  to  the  problems  of  acculturation  that 
is  termed  scientific. 

a.    Smith,  Bradford.    This    Solid  Flesh,  a  Novel  of  Intermarriage 

between (East  and  West? 

This  novel  tells  of  the  change  in  Japan  and  in  the  attitudes  of  her 
people  toward  the  western  world  and  its  ways  in  terms  of  the  lives 
of  four  people:  Yuki,  married  about  1870  to  a  warrior  of  the  Samurai 
class  who  is  killed  soon  after  her  marriage,  and  then  to  another  of  the 
type  who  was  not  unwilling  to  go  along  with  the  new  commercialism; 
Masao,  her  son  by  her  second  husband,  eager  for  the  new  knowledge, 
who  comes  to  America  and  there,  about  1905,  meets  and  marries  an 
American  girl;  Margaret,  his  wife,  who  bears  her  husband  a  daughter 
whose  Eurasian  status  makes  even  more  difficult  the  adjustments,  at 
best  anything  but  easy,  that  this  American  woman  must  make  to 
Japanese  life;  and  finally,  Ruth,  her  daughter,  who,  torn  between  the 
conflicting  claims  of  her  dual  heritage,  finally  breaks  with  the  Japanese 
traditions  and,  as  the  book  ends,  marries  an  American  and  points  her 
future  toward  life  in  her  mother's  homeland. 

The  tale  not  only  treats  with  what  appears  to  be  great  insight  the 
personal  problems  of  the  Eurasian,  thus  throwing  light  on  some  of  the 
aspects  of  their  situation  which  must  inevitably  invade  the  personali- 
ties of  such  individuals,  but  in  phrasing  the  reactions  of  the  characters 
to  the  situations  they  must  meet,  and  in  placing  them  in  their  setting, 
many  comments  of  value  are  given  for  those  interested  in  the  accul- 
turative  forces  that  have  been  playing  on  Japan  since  her  contact  with 
the  Western  World.   Thus  the  reaction  of  Masao  to  life  in  his  native 

1  Copyright,  1937,  by  the  publishers,  Bobbs-Merrill  Co.,  with  whose  kind  per- 
mission the  excerpts  quoted  here  are  used. 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  IIX 

country,  seen  after  five  years  of  study  and  work  in  the  United  States, 
is  phrased  as  follows : 

"Masao  himself  knew  that  a  change  was  taking  place.  During  the 
years  in  America  he  had  almost  forgotten  how  one  did  things  at  home. 
Yet  it  all  seemed  natural  once  he  had  returned.  The  leisurely,  round- 
about way,  the  avoidance  of  all  unpleasantness  by  courteous  circum- 
locution came  back  to  him  and  easily  became  part  of  his  own  practice 

"Business  methods  had  been  a  shock  to  him,  too.  So  many  men 
working,  such  a  leisurely  air  about  the  offices.  Yet  it  was  marvellous 
what  had  been  done  during  his  absence — the  growth  and  improvement 
in  the  work  of  his  company,  the  changing  pace  of  Tokyo,  the  air  of 
enterprise  and  confidence  and  progress.  When  he  left,  Japan  had  been 
a  little  country  striving  to  be  big;  now  it  had  become  a  nation  conscious 
of  its  power  and  determined  to  increase  it.  He  did  not  understand 
how  old  customs  and  new  progress  managed  to  exist  side  by  side.  Yet 

they  did,  and  he  had  to  fit  them  in  together  like  everyone  else " 

(pp.  152-153) 

There  is  much  in  this  book  of  suggestion  concerning  the  degree  to 
which  non-European  cultures  give  way  before  European  ones;  it 
would  seem  that  the  author  of  this  novel,  who  obviously  knows  Japan 
deeply  and  sympathetically,  realizes  that  beneath  the  surface  of 
Japanese  life  as  it  exists  today,  despite  all  its  westernisms,  the  full 
stream  of  earlier  tradition  flows  almost  unchecked.  This,  perhaps, 
is  the  reason  for  the  complete  failure  of  Margaret  to  accommodate 
herself  to  the  life  of  her  husband's  people  though  her  desire  might 
be  ever  so  sincere  and  ever  so  strong,  and  of  her  failure  to  be  accepted 
by  them.  In  one  place  in  the  book  she  muses  over  her  inability  to 
understand  Japanese  modes  of  life : 

"Often  she  asked  about  customs  and  events  that  interested  her. . . . 
The  answers  were  always  hesitant,  or  contradictory  if  she  asked  them 
in  several  quarters,  or  not  forthcoming  at  all.  When  sometimes  in 
despair  she  suggested  an  answer  the  reply  was  always,  'So  desho — 


JI2  ACCULTURATION 

Probably  it  is  so.'  Even  Masao  gave  vague  and  unsatisfactory- 
answers.  Did  it  mean  that  they  didn't  know?  Or  that  these  things 
were  secrets  forbidden  a  foreigner  ?  Often  to  her  sensitive  nature  the 
latter  seemed  the  case.  Yet  it  appeared  that  certainty,  logicality — call 
it  what  you  would — was  simply  not  important  to  a  race  which  traced 
its  social  origins  back  almost  a  millenium  before  Christ.  All  these 
things  were  so  because  they  were  so ;  one  knew  them  by  intuition  and 
destroyed  them  by  explaining.  Her  way  of  thought  and  theirs  simply  did 
not  match — hers  the  chain  whose  only  virtue  was  in  linking,  theirs  like  a 
galaxy  whose  stars  held  together  through  no  visible  influence."  (p.  156) 

And  again,  when  Masao  and  Margaret  move  into  the  European-style 
house  they  have  built : 

"Moving  out  of  a  Japanese  house  would,  she  felt,  be  a  confession  of 
her  inability  to  enter  its  life — at  least  it  would  mean  this  for  her.  She 
had  tried  to  enter  and  had  failed — partly  because  a  foreigner  could 
never  by  a  few  years'  residence,  acquire  the  mental  attitudes  which 
had  been  forming  through  a  hundred  generations,  and  partly,  she 
thought,  because  Yuki  had  not  wanted  her  to  enter  and  had  not 
helped.  Was  there  anywhere  in  the  world  another  nation  so  homo- 
geneous in  blood,  so  purely  of  one  stock  that  the  whole  population 
really  felt  themselves  to  be  of  a  family  ?  Of  course  they  did  not  want 
her."  (p.  201) 

These  excerpts  are  from  that  part  of  the  book  the  action  of  which  is 
laid  about  the  year  1920.  Ten  years  later,  Ruth,  Margaret's  daughter, 
returns  to  Japan  after  attending  college  in  the  United  States.  Though 
expected  to  marry  a  Japanese  who  can  be  adopted  by  her  father  and 
thus,  through  her  offspring,  perpetuate  the  family  in  approved 
Japanese  manner,  she  falls  in  love  with  Wayne,  an  American  engineer 
residing  in  Tokyo,  and  eventually  marries  him.  At  a  Japanese  "party" 
given  for  a  number  of  Americans  who  live  in  the  city,  he  meets  a 
geisha  whose  desire  is  to  reform  her  calling  and  make  of  it  the 
profession  of  entertainer.  His  train  of  thought  further  analyzes  the 
problem : 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED 


113 


"Here,  while  Ruth  was  up  against  the  dictates  of  tradition,  here  in 
the  heart  of  tradition  were  signs  of  change — a  curious  blending  of 
Western  morality  with  the  old  purposes  of  hospitality  and  entertain- 
ment, an  attempt  to  embrace  the  new  while  preserving  the  old  as 
Japan  always  did.  And  in  this  lay  her  strength.  China,  attempting 
the  new,  ended  in  chaos  and  revolution.  Japan,  through  some  secret 
chemistry,  could  blend  without  losing  either  flavor.  So  always 
behind  the  new  customs  and  pursuits  old  ways  of  thought  could  be 
seen  at  work,  and  even  in  areas  where  tradition  was  strongest  the  new 
was  welcomed,  wherever  it  could  improve.  There  was,  after  all, 
something  symbolic  in  woolen  underwear  beneath  a  kimono,  or  in  the 
neon  light  at  the  entrance  to  a  brothel."  (pp.  381-382) 

Yet  the  old  persists,  and  this  is  expressed  when,  near  the  end  of  the 
book,  Masao  reflects  on  the  development  of  Japan  since  he  went  to 
America  many  years  before  as  a  young  student: 

"...  He  had  hoped  for  a  fusion  of  East  and  West,  but  though  time 
had  shown  that  foreign  machines  might  run  with  equal  efficiency  this 
side  of  the  world,  tended  by  Oriental  hands,  foreign  ideals  had  either 
to  be  adopted  or  dropped;  there  was  no  fusing  them.  All  the  progress 
in  material  things  he  had  seen  since  his  return  more  than  twenty -five 
years  ago — the  unbelievable  development  of  industry,  the  auto- 
mobiles which,  arriving  shortly  after  his  return,  overran  the  city  now, 
the  inventions  like  his  own  which  had  brought  the  machine  age  to 
this  quiet  corner — this  only  made  the  difference  clearer.  One  had 
but  to  scratch  a  surface  anywhere  in  this  corner  of  the  world  to  find 
old  metal  underneath "  (p.  387) 

b.  McNickle,  D'Arcy,  The  Surrounded.1 

The  fortunes  of  a  half-breed  Flathead  Indian,  Archilde  Leon,  are 
recounted  in  this  story.   At  its  outset  he  is  found  returning  to  the 

1  Copyright,  1936.  The  excerpts  quoted  here  are  used  by  the  kind  permission  of 
the  publishers,  Dodd,  Mead  &  Co. 


Hj  ACCULTURATION 

reservation  to  visit  his  full-blood  Indian  mother  before  once  more 
seeking  the  cities  of  the  whites  to  find  further  employment.  Circum- 
stances hold  him  on  the  reservation,  however,  and  he  becomes  recon- 
ciled with  his  Spanish  father,  at  whose  death  he  takes  over  the  family 
property.  His  eventual  entanglement  in  a  situation  that  involves  his 
presence  at  the  murder  of  a  game  warden  by  his  renegade  brother 
and  his  complicity  in  hiding  the  crime,  and  his  eventual  attempt  to 
escape  punishment  and  the  killing  of  the  sheriff  by  the  girl  who 
accompanies  him,  are  the  major  points  of  action  which  are  woven  into 
descriptions  of  situations  and  people  which  vividly  portray  the  degra- 
dation of  these  Indians  and  the  difficulties  in  any  attempt  to  adjust 
their  lives  to  the  encroachments  of  white  culture. 

Two  passages  may  be  quoted ;  one  indicates  the  official  setting  out 
of  which  this  situation  has  developed,  and  the  other  the  Indian's 
characteristic  manner  of  meeting  the  outer  demands  of  his  new  social 
environment : 

"Mr.  Parker,  the  agent,  was  a  tall,  active  man  whose  hair  was  just 
beginning  to  grey.  He  liked  his  job  and  he  liked  his  Indian  wards. 
He  saw  their  helplessness  and  realised,  without  getting  excited  about 
it,  that  he  was  of  little  use  to  them.  He  did  what  he  could  but  at  every 
turn  he  was  hampered  by  a  system  which  penalized  initiative  and  by 
the  Indians'  own  poor  understanding  of  what  was  expected  of  them. 
Taking  over  an  Indian  Agency  was  always  like  moving  into  a  ready - 
furnished  house  in  which  the  pieces  not  only  did  not  match  but  were 
falling  apart  and  you  had  no  authority  to  throw  out  anything  or 
make  better  use  of  what  was  provided;  and  there  were  doors  that  led 
nowhere  and  some  that  would  let  you  tumble  into  a  dark  cellar;  the 
place  was  overrun  by  domestic  animals  which  had  to  be  fed  and  nursed, 
and  you  had  no  time  for  it  if  you  were  expected  to  keep  the  house  from 
falling  in  on  you;  not  a  few  of  the  pets  had  died  before  your  time  and 
others  threatened  to  die,  and  altogether  there  was  a  bad  odor  around; 
the  neighbors  were  always  spying  on  you  because,  you  at  last  realised, 
you  were  really  in  a  house  of  prostitution  and  they  were  expecting 


SOME  STUDIES  REVIEWED  ITj 

you  to  add  to  its  ill  fame — in  a  word  it  was  a  nightmare  which  no  one 
could  endure  without  cultivating  a  certain  amount  of  callousness. 
Above  all,  if  an  agent  wished  to  remain  in  the  Service,  he  had  to  keep 
his  record  clear.  If  in  doing  this  somebody  was  put  to  an  incon- 
venience or  made  to  suffer,  well — that  was  when  it  was  handy  to 
have  developed  a  callous  layer.  Of  course,  if  you  were  naturally  fair, 
you  tried  to  make  it  up  in  some  way,  off  the  record.  In  any  case, 
whether  you  made  amends  or  not,  you  had  to  be  in  the  right  position 
all  the  time.   It  was  the  only  way  to  survive."  (pp.  1 5 1-1 5  2) 

The  second  quotation  reads: 

"There  is  a  kind  of  chaos  about  an  Indian's  homestead  that, 
however  complete  and  hopeless,  is  nevertheless  not  inherent;  it  does 
not  belong  to  the  man.  In  the  teepee,  everything  is  in  place ;  but  when 
houses  are  built  and  farming  implements  acquired,  then  nothing  is 
surprising;  the  hayrack  stands  before  the  front  door  and  a  mowing 
machine,  with  many  parts  missing,  turns  to  rust;  a  wagon  not  far 
away  is  covered  with  an  assortment  of  harness  and  saddles  which  never 
find  their  way  to  the  barn ;  as  there  is  no  concentrated  rubbish  heap, 
tin  cans  are  scattered  to  the  yard  at  large;  here  are  the  ruins  of  some 
shade  trees,  sold  and  even  planted  by  an  energetic  travelling  nursery- 
man, but  broken  away  limb  by  limb  to  provide  whips  for  a  lazy  horse — 
they  never  had  been  watered  anyhow,  except  by  the  dogs  and  a  kind 
sky;  a  grindstone  that  has  long  ago  jumped  from  its  iron  trestle  lies 
fractured,  one  end  of  its  rusty  shaft  obtruding,  like  the  upraised  arm 
of  a  drowning  man;  and  these  are  only  the  few  evidences  of  a  foreign 
world."  (pp.  195-196) 

The  tone  of  the  book  is  consistently  pitched  toward  descriptions  of  the 
more  degrading  aspects  of  cultural  contact,  and  there  is  so  little  in- 
dication that  new  techniques  and  concepts  have  been  worked  into  In- 
dian life  that  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  is  that  experience  with  white 
culture  has  apparently  not  made  for  anything  but  disorientation. 
This  may  be  the  case ;  but  it  would  also  appear  from  the  account  of 
the  manner  in  which  the  hero's  mother,  a  life -long  Catholic  who 


jj6  acculturation 

before  her  death  renounces  the  faith  into  which  she  had  been  baptized 
as  a  little  girl  and  to  which  she  had  been  so  devoted  all  her  life,  that 
the  tribe  is  rather  living  a  life  of  passive  resistance  to  forces  more 
powerful  than  anything  it  can  possibly  cope  with,  until  some  ad- 
justment to  the  present-day  situation  becomes  possible. 


Ill 

SUGGESTIONS  FOR  FUTURE  RESEARCH 


A  brief  restatement  of  the  approaches  to  the  study  of  acculturation, 
and  their  importance  both  for  problems  of  cultural  dynamics  and 
questions  concerning  the  relation  between  an  individual  and  his 
culture  may  now  be  given,  together  with  some  general  methodological 
considerations. 

The  situations  to  be  classed  as  acculturative  fall  into  two  cate- 
gories. In  one  of  these  contact  between  peoples  is  a  recent  matter,  and 
institutions  are  to  be  observed  as  they  are  in  the  process  of  reacting  to 
the  forces  brought  to  play  upon  them.  In  the  other  the  contact  has 
taken  place  sufficiently  long  ago  so  that  conflicts  have  been  resolved 
and  the  present  culture  is  a  blend  or  a  mosaic,  depending  on  how  far 
a  harmonious  consolidation  of  custom  has  been  achieved. 

The  technique  of  utilizing  the  historical  materials  naturally  differs  in 
the  two  cases,  as  the  ethnological  approaches  must  differ.  Where  the 
contact  is  in  process  of  continuation,  its  history  is  more  readily  recover- 
able than  where  the  acculturative  process  was  active  many  years  ago,  and 
in  many  instances  this  will  make  it  possible  to  add  to  the  testimony 
of  documentary  data  information  from  those  who  were  present  at  the 
beginning  of  contact.  In  the  latter  case  the  historical  background 
will  be  more  sparse,  and  such  matters  as  information  bearing  on 


nS  ACCULTURATION 

personalities  who  were  active  in  the  contact  will  be  available  only  by 
a  stroke  of  good  fortune.  As  to  the  differences  in  method,  the  student 
who  works  in  a  society  long  acculturated  can  employ  those  devices 
conventionally  used  in  studying  "stable,"  "untouched"  communities, 
since  such  folk  will  in  all  likelihood  not  be  a  great  deal  more  variable  in 
individual  deviation  from  whatever  norms  have  been  set  up  after  the 
amalgam  was  achieved  than  in  "undisturbed"  cultures.  But  this 
variation  will  be  much  greater  where  the  accommodation  to  a  foreign 
culture  is  actively  proceeding,  and  hence  the  field  method  here  must 
be  flexible  enough  to  allow  for  this. 

Whether  the  work  deals  with  one  type  of  situation  or  the  other, 
historic  control  can  be  exerted  over  the  data,  which  means  that  in 
doing  a  study  of  acculturation  the  student  is  one  step  nearer  an 
approximation  of  laboratory  method  than  is  possible  where  a  culture 
is  only  studied  as  it  exists  on  a  single  time  plane,  without  any  historical 
resources  that  can  be  called  upon  to  document  an  otherwise  un- 
recoverable past.  This  is  to  say  that  the  study  of  acculturation  offers 
the  most  favorable  conditions  for  research  into  the  nature  and  pro- 
cesses of  culture  because  one  is  dealing  with  more  known  quantities 
than  in  any  other  type  of  investigation  into  the  problems  that  challenge 
the  student  of  human  civilization.  When  cultures  are  in  a  state  of 
flux,  we  can  see  happening,  before  our  very  eyes,  the  changes  whose 
occurrences  in  societies  that  have  reached  a  plane  of  cultural  stability 
we  can  only  postulate.  And  in  dealing  with  the  problems  having  to 
do  with  the  reaction  of  culture  on  human  personality,  the  situation 
of  the  individual  under  the  conditions  of  cultural  conflict  that  are  in 
process  of  resolution  tends  to  bring  to  the  surface  reactions  to  his 
cultural  milieu  that  are  so  deeply  submerged  in  less  culturally  turbulent 
times  as  not  to  be  observable. 

For  the  richest  gain  to  accrue  from  research  into  acculturation, 
certain  precautions  must  be  observed  by  the  student.  That  the  greatest 
degree  of  objectivity  must  be  constantly  sought  is  a  truism  that 


FUTURE  RESEARCH  np 

would  need  no  restating  had  not  the  failure  to  observe  it  been  so 
richly  documented  in  the  preceding  pages.  The  greatest  possible 
alertness  to  the  historic  background  of  the  folk  being  studied  must  be 
sought  with  equal  consistency  for,  as  may  also  be  concluded  from  the 
foregoing  pages,  the  degrees  to  which  the  historical  resources  dealing 
with  a  situation  are  exploited  will  be  a  measure  of  the  degree  to  which 
a  study  can  realize  its  potentialities.  Above  all,  the  student  must  be 
alive  to  all  the  factors ;  one  party  to  the  contact  must  not  be  approached 
with  an  a  priori  assumption  of  its  greater  significance  than  another;  no 
group  concerned  in  the  contact  may  be  neglected  merely  because  on 
the  surface  it  does  not  figure  as  largely  as  another;  while,  especially 
if  the  contact  is  between  white  and  native  peoples,  it  is  not  to  be  taken 
for  granted  that  native  civilizations  must  eventually  give  way  before 
European  or  American  culture.  Otherwise  the  mind  of  the  student 
will  be  closed  to  possible  sub -surface  developments  that  may  be  of  far 
greater  importance  for  a  knowledge  of  cultural  mechanisms — which 
is  to  say,  of  the  propensities  of  human  beings  toward  conservatism 
and  change  in  their  traditions — than  much  of  what  is  overt. 

An  inevitable  question  that  arises  is  whether  the  study  of  accul- 
turation must  lead  to  the  formulation  of  laws  of  cultural  processes. 
It  is  sometimes  said  that  those  who  are  interested  in  the  historical 
relations  between  cultures  and  who  insist  on  an  historical  approach 
to  any  study  of  cultural  phenomena  regard  this  as  an  end  in  itself,  and 
feel  that  once  the  antecedents  of  a  given  situation  have  been  analyzed, 
the  aim  of  their  research  will  have  been  achieved.  This,  however, 
merely  represents  a  misunderstanding  of  the  position  of  those  who 
feel  that  consideration  must  always  be  given  to  the  factor  of  time  in 
the  development  of  a  culture,  if  that  culture  is  fully  to  be  understood. 

History  is  essential;  it  is  not  enough.  A  scientific  frame  of  reference 
must  be  present  in  the  mind  of  anyone  who  makes  even  the  most 
detailed  research,  if  his  research  is  to  be  of  significance.  Every  scientist 
worthy  of  the  name  has  an  apperceptive  mass  of  theoretical  assumption, 


220  ACCULTURATION 

against  which  he  is  constantly  projecting  the  data  out  of  which  he 
hopes,  in  the  manner  of  any  worker  in  science,  to  discover  some 
principle  that  will  enable  him  and  his  fellow -workers  the  better  to 
understand  the  operations  of  the  human  mind  as  it  manifests  itself 
in  those  aspects  of  human  group  life  we  term  culture.  The  study 
of  acculturation  is  therefore  only  worth  while  insofar  as  it  leads  to 
a  greater  accumulation  of  fact,  so  that  a  resulting  larger  body  of  data 
will  be  available  from  which  to  draw  conclusions.  Because  of  its 
historic  controls,  it  is  a  valuable  additional  weapon  in  the  arsenal  of 
the  anthropologist ;  as  such  it  should  aid  us  in  our  search  for  an  ever 
surer  understanding  of  the  operations  of  human  civilization;  but  both 
the  historical  point  of  view  and  the  generalizing  frame  of  reference 
are  essential. 


It  is  apparent  from  the  analyses  of  work  in  the  field  of  culture 
contact  that  a  first  requirement  is  for  studies  to  be  made  among 
peoples  where  the  student  can  least  identify  himself  with  issues  at 
stake.  In  terms  of  acculturation  research,  this  means  that  the  prime 
necessity  is  for  investigation  to  be  carried  on  among  folk  whose 
contacts  involve  no  European  or  American  group.  A  number  of 
likely  localities  are  available  where  the  cultures  cannot  only  be  studied 
under  conditions  of  contact,  but  in  related  forms  prior  to  contact.1 

One  such  area  is  that  part  of  Africa  that  represents  the  southern- 
most extension  of  Mohammedan  influence.  In  the  region  about  Lake 
Chad,  for  example,  pockets  of  Mohammedans  are  encircled  by  folk 
who  have  retained  their  pagan  modes  of  life.  Between  these  enclaves 
and  their  surrounding  cultures  there  seems  to  be  a  constant  give -and  - 

1  An  example  of  this  kind  of  intertribal  acculturation  will  be  found  in  Herskovits 
(1938),  vol.  I,  pp.  246-247,  where  the  changes  in  form  of  the  Yoruban  Egungun 
secret  society  subsequent  to  its  introduction  into  Dahomey — changes  which 
bring  its  ceremonialism  into  consonance  with  Dahomean  patterns — are  set  forth. 


FUTURE  RESEARCH  I2I 

take  that  should  be  susceptible  of  revealing  research.  And  this  is 
equally  the  case  in  those  centers  of  this  region  where  Mohammedanism 
has  taken  firm  hold,  such  as  the  cities  of  Northern  Nigeria — Kano, 
Zaria,  and  the  like.  What  of  aboriginal  custom  persists  ?  What  of 
Mohammedan  practice  has  been  taken  over  ?  What  amalgams  of  culture 
have  resulted?  Furthermore,  this  area  offers  the  possibility  that  a 
series  of  groups  can  be  ranged  in  accordance  with  their  degree  of 
response  to  the  foreign  body  of  tradition  with  which  they  have  for 
varying  periods  been  in  contact,  so  that  they  can  be  studied  in  such  a 
way  as  to  employ  and  test  the  methods  already  employed  in  Mexico 
and  South  Africa.  Similar  studies  of  Mohammedan-native  contact 
in  process  can  also  be  made  in  East  Africa,  where  Nilotic  peoples  are 
being  constantly  influenced  by  the  Mohammedanized  tribes  to  the 
north. 

Another  region  where  native -native  contacts  of  this  kind  are 
available  for  study  is  Alaska,  where  Eskimo  and  Indian  groups  impinge 
on  one  another.  Here  a  process  of  mutual  borrowing  seems  to  be 
resulting  from  this  closeness  of  contact  that  is  reflected  in  outer 
manifestations  of  the  cultures  of  these  folk;  that  concomitant  change 
in  inner  values  is  also  taking  place  is  a  reasonable  presupposition  that 
might  be  analyzed  on  the  basis  of  the  knowledge  already  on  hand 
concerning  the  cultures  which  are  contributing  to  the  mixture. 
Central  America  offers  still  other  opportunities  for  study  of  the  results 
of  contact  between  non-European  peoples  of  different  aboriginal 
traditions,  in  research  that  can  be  done  among  the  Black  Caribs  of 
British  Honduras.  Unlike  the  preceding  folk,  these  people,  about 
whom  to  all  intents  and  purposes  no  information  at  all  is  available, 
experienced  their  acculturation  long  ago,  and  therefore  what  might  be 
studied  would  be  that  rarest  of  phenomena — the  stabilized  offspring 
of  two  known  cultures,  both  on  the  primitive  level.  The  entire 
problem  of  the  results  of  Indian -Negro  contact  in  the  New  World  is  as 
yet  almost  unprobed;  and  these  peoples  stand  as  an  opportunity  for 

9 


j22  ACCULTURATION 

any  program  of  research  that,  though  concerned  with  culture  contact, 
seeks  to  escape  from  what  on  the  surface  appears  to  be  situations 
inevitably  limited  to  contacts  between  Europeans  and  natives. 

In  these  regions — or  wherever  contacts  between  natives  alone  be 
the  object  of  research — it  is  important  that  rounded  studies  which 
describe  the  culture  as  a  whole  be  made,  since  work  of  this  type  will 
be  pioneer  work.  Analyses  of  particular  facets  of  culture  are,  of  course, 
possible;  the  effect  of  Mohammedan -native  contact  on  the  magical 
practices  of  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  the  West  African  area,  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  degree  to  which  Mohammedanism  as  practised 
by  these  new  converts  is  a  deviant  from  the  modes  of  worship  officially 
sanctioned  by  this  religion;  the  manner  in  which  the  technology  of 
the  Arctic  dwellers  of  Alaska,  both  Indians  and  Eskimos,  has  been 
mutually  affected  by  exposure  to  one  another  of  different  modes  of 
adaptation  to  an  exacting  natural  environment;  the  invasion  of  the 
linguistic  habits  of  the  Caribs  by  African  patterns  of  speech.  But 
though  such  special  studies  have  undoubted  value,  it  is  preferable  at 
present,  when  working  with  a  people  whose  culture  is  as  little  known  as 
are  those  that  have  been  suggested,  to  lay  the  foundation  for  these 
more  detailed  analyses  in  the  form  of  a  presentation  of  the  total  culture 
as  it  exists,  and  in  terms  of  its  historical  derivations,  rather  than  to 
concentrate  on  specific  aspects  which  cannot  be  satisfactorily  under- 
stood until  they  are  placed  in  their  cultural  matrix. 

Another  mode  of  escaping  these  ethnocentric  temptations  is  for 
research  to  be  done  among  peoples  where  the  acculturation  is  between 
aboriginal  folk  and  the  historic  cultures  of  the  Far  East.  In  the 
Philippines,  Malaysia,  Melanesia,  and  the  Pacific  Islands,  contacts 
between  Chinese,  Japanese  and  British  Indians,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
indigenous  folk  on  the  other,  are  constantly  making  for  the  spread 
of  these  eastern  civilizations  to  primitive  peoples.  The  influence 
being  exerted  by  the  Japanese  on  the  inhabitants  of  the  Micronesian 
Islands    at    present    mandated    to   Japan   (provided   that   political 


FUTURE  RESEARCH  I2f 

exigencies  permit  such  research  to  be  carried  on)  offers  a  promising 
method  for  checking  generalizations  as  to  the  results  of  native -white 
contacts.  Is  it  true,  for  instance,  that  under  Japanese  control  these 
natives,  who  are  of  the  same  stock  as  the  Polynesians  under  British 
rule,  show  the  same  tendency  to  "psychological  death"  postulated  by 
Rivers  as  a  result  of  his  study  of  the  effects  on  them  of  contact  with 
the  outside,  more  powerful  culture  of  Europe  ?  Do  they  go  through 
the  same  stages  of  accommodation  to  the  culture  of  a  "superior" 
people  as  Elkin  has  set  forth  on  the  basis  of  his  research  among  the 
Australian  aborigines?  Similar  investigation  might  also  be  made 
among  the  natives  of  Formosa,  where  Japanese  rule  has  gone  on  for  a 
longer  period  than  it  has  in  Micronesia;  in  any  case,  we  have  here 
a  healthy  means  of  recalling  that  native -white  contact  is  only  one  of  a 
number  of  comparable  movements  of  vast  geographical  scope  that 
are  taking  place  at  the  present  moment.1  And  in  a  similar  way,  analyses 
of  the  modes  of  life  of  other  peoples  who  inhabit  this  area,  where  there 
has  been  a  great  deal  of  Chinese  and  British  Indian  penetration,  would 
further  check  the  statements  of  those  who,  quite  outside  the  political 
sphere,  have  centered  their  attention  too  exclusively  on  contacts  of 
Europeans  and  Americans  with  natives. 

The  suggestion  made  more  than  two  decades  ago  by  Radin  con- 
cerning what  may  be  termed  the  secondary  results  of  acculturation 
which  take  the  form  of  accelerated  intertribal  borrowing  as  a  result 
of  the  imposition  of  a  uniform  outside  control  on  a  large  number  of 
aboriginal  peoples  should  be  followed  by  pertinent  research.  The 
compensations  for  loss  of  power  made  by  tribesmen  when  they 
identify  themselves  with  a  native  group  larger  than  the  older  tribal 

1  An  entire  series  of  problems  directed  toward  a  similar  end  is  available  for  study 
in  the  contacts  of  the  primitive  tribes  of  the  U.  S.  S.  R.  with  the  European  modes 
of  life  of  the  Russians.  An  example  of  how  fruitful  studies  in  this  general  area 
can  be  is  to  be  seen  in  the  analysis  of  Cossack-Tungus  contact  in  Manchuria 
made  by  Lindgren  (1938). 
9* 


224  ACCULTURATION 

unit,  as  suggested  in  Mead's  account  of  the  "Antlers,"  is  likewise 
worthy  of  study.  Research  of  this  kind  will  be  oriented  about  two 
principal  problems.  The  first  of  these  requires  the  student  to  seek  out 
and  assess  the  levelling  effect  exerted  by  power  brought  equally  to 
bear  on  a  number  of  tribes,  and  the  degree  to  which,  as  a  result,  the 
individual  qualities  of  the  separate  cultures  tend  to  be  submerged  in 
the  characteristics  which  mark  off  the  traditions  of  all  the  native 
groups  taken  as  a  whole,  from  the  dominant  culture.  The  second 
problem  concerns  the  manner  in  which  the  opportunities  for  contact 
afforded  under  such  conditions  have  resulted  in  intertribal  accul- 
turation— something  that  is  quite  different,  as  the  preceding  section 
has  indicated,  from  the  separate  acculturation  of  each  of  the  tribes 
in  a  region  to  the  culture  of  the  group  that  has  sovereignty  over  all 
these  tribes. 

Four  areas  stand  out  as  offering  the  most  likely  opportunities  for 
studies  of  this  nature — Melanesia,  South  Africa,  West  Africa,  and  the 
United  States.  In  Melanesia,  the  effect  of  the  recruitment  of  natives 
as  laborers  on  the  plantations  offers  a  situation  which  should  provide 
a  fruitful  field  for  studying  the  results  that  obtain  when  men  of 
different  tribes  are  thrown  together  over  considerable  periods  of  time. 
The  same  type  of  study — foreshadowed  by  the  research  of  Hunter 
and  more  especially  of  the  order  of  the  approach  employed  by  Hell- 
man — is  to  be  made  in  any  of  those  regions  of  South  Africa  where 
natives  are  concentrated  in  considerable  numbers.  The  Johannesburg 
mine  compounds  suggest  themselves  most  immediately,  but  there 
are  many  other  localities  where  a  study  of  this  sort  can  be  carried  on  to 
advantage.  In  the  seaports  of  British  West  Africa  such  as  Lagos, 
Accra,  and  Freetown,  native  communities  which  number  individuals 
belonging  to  all  the  tribes  of  the  coastal  area  are  found,  and  among 
these  profitable  research  can  be  done.  The  mutual  give-and-take  that 
results  when  American  Indians  of  many  different  tribes  come  together 
in  rodeos  and  exhibitions  of  various  sorts  is  well  worth  the  attention 


FUTURE  RESEARCH  I2j 

of  ethnologists.  Such  an  obvious  example  of  intertribal  acculturation 
as  the  spread  of  the  war -bonnet,  now  the  authenticating  label  of  a 
"true  Indian"  no  matter  what  his  tribe,  comes  to  mind  as  a  rough 
illustration  of  this  sort  of  borrowing;  but  one  can  only  speculate 
whether  the  obviously  foreign  elements  seen  in  the  performances  of 
the  various  tribes  of  Southwest  Indians  at  such  a  gathering  as  the 
Gallup  Festival,  assumed  for  purposes  of  show  in  the  presence  of  a 
white  audience,  are  carried  home  to  invade  tribal  rituals. 

No  suggestions  need  be  offered  as  to  localities  where  acculturation 
between  natives  and  peoples  of  European  or  American  origin  can  be 
made,  for  such  contacts  constitute  the  majority  of  those  now  being 
investigated  as  well  as  the  majority  of  those  that  have  been  studied. 
But  in  planning  research  among  peoples  who  have  experienced  this 
type  of  contact,  it  might  be  the  part  of  wisdom  to  seek  to  extend  the 
scope  of  the  bodies  of  data  that  have  already  been  accumulated, 
rather  than  at  the  moment  to  seek  out  new  regions  where  the  effects 
of  contact  between  whites  and  natives  have  not  been  studied.  Four 
groups  of  cultures  are  thus  indicated ;  in  two  of  them  contact  occurred 
long  ago,  while  in  the  other  two  contact  is  continuing.  The  valuable 
investigations  that  have  been  made  of  Mexican  cultures  should  be 
continued  by  detailed  research  on  more  Mexican  communities  to  show 
in  what  different  ways  the  impulses  begun  by  the  early  Spaniards 
have  worked  out.  Similarly,  further  work  on  New  World  Negroes, 
which  has  also  a  broad  basis  of  prior  research  among  the 
Negroes  of  the  United  States,  the  West  Indies,  and  South  America, 
can  throw  more  light  on  the  impact  of  differing  European  traditions 
on  the  cultural  heritage  of  the  Negroes  who  were  brought  to  the  New 
World.  In  South  and  East  Africa,  the  other  two  regions,  analyses  of 
the  dynamics  of  culture -contact  made  while  the  phenomenon  is 
occurring  can  also  build  on  much  prior  work  among  these  peoples ; 
another  advantage  which  would  accrue  to  non -practical  studies  made 
here  would  be  that  they  might  furnish  materials  against  which 


I26  ACCULTURATION 

the  scientific  value  of  the  results  of  studies  made  with  practical 
applications  in  mind  could  be  assessed. 

In  addition  to  these  four  regions,  studies  can  also  be  profitably 
made  among  peoples  whose  pre -contact  modes  of  life  are  known  from 
the  work  of  those  ethnographers  whose  interest  moved  along  the 
conventional  lines  of  anthropological  field-work  of  an  earlier  period 
of  anthropological  endeavor.  Here  the  vast  aggregate  of  data  from 
American  Indians  should  be  of  greatest  service  in  supplying  the 
student  with  background  materials  regarding  the  nature  of  the 
cultures  of  these  tribes  prior  to  contact;  and  a  similar  body  of  data 
is  at  hand  for  acculturation  research  in  Melanesia. 

3 

Research  concerning  the  effects  of  contact  on  specific  aspects  of 
culture  also  offers  many  opportunities  to  the  student  with  special 
interests.  Here,  however,  it  is  of  importance  again  to  emphasize  what 
may  appear  obvious ;  that  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  best  scientific 
strategy,  such  studies  should  be  made  where  they  can  be  based  on 
previous  rounded  presentations  of  the  entire  culture  of  a  people. 

A  few  of  these  acculturation  studies  in  restricted  aspects  of  culture 
that  can  be  based  on  materials  at  present  available  may  be  named.  As 
has  been  said,  studies  of  changes  in  political  life  and  social  organiza- 
tion under  contact  have  received  considerable  attention  from  those 
concerned  with  practical  applications  of  anthropology  to  the  direction 
of  native  life,  hence  a  principal  objective  of  research  done  in  these 
fields  with  no  other  than  scientific  ends  in  mind  should  be  to  check 
these  other  practical  studies  to  determine  their  value  as  documents 
to  be  employed  in  studying  the  problems  of  pure  science.  In  the  field 
of  the  economic  life  of  peoples  who  are  living  under  contact,  however, 
few  studies  have  been  published.1  That  the  repercussions  from  the 
introduction  of  money  into  a  non -pecuniary  economy  are  wide -spread 

1  Cf.  Firth,  (1929). 


FUTURE  RESEARCH  I2y 

is  recognized  by  all  who  have  dealt  with  situations  in  which  this  has 
occurred,  and  some  attempts  have  been  made  to  work  out  the  resulting 
cultural  realignments.  In  Africa  alone  such  studies  are  needed  from 
East  Africa,  where  money  was  not  used  in  pre -colonial  times,  and 
from  West  Africa  or  the  Congo,  where  cowrie  shells  or  iron,  the  ab- 
original media  of  exchange,  were  replaced  by  European  coinage. 
Studies  of  this  type  might  also  be  made  in  Melanesia,  where  money  - 
tokens  were  widely  employed;  in  all  such  research,  moreover,  the 
influence  exerted  on  other  aspects  of  the  culture  by  this  new  element 
in  the  economic  life  should  constitute  a  principal  end  in  view. 

The  fields  of  music  and  linguistics  present  many  important  prob- 
lems for  study.  The  manner  in  which  musical  idioms  are  influenced 
through  contact  is  practically  unknown,  since  the  few  available 
specialists  in  the  field  have  been  more  than  occupied  with  analyzing 
the  forms  of  primitive  music  in  the  relatively  few  undisturbed  versions 
that  have  been  collected.  However,  such  problems  as  the  manner  in 
which  African  musical  styles  have  carried  over  into  New  World  Negro 
music,  and  the  degree  to  which  these  have  manifested  varying 
changes  under  contact  with  the  differing  musical  traditions  of  Europe 
to  which  Negroes  were  exposed,  present  possibilities  for  research 
which  carry  a  wider  interest  as  they  bear  on  current  controversies  as 
to  the  derivations  of  American  Negro  music.  That  similar  problems 
are  susceptible  of  study  wherever  two  musical  idioms  have  come  to- 
gether is  evident;  New  World  Negro  music  has  been  mentioned 
merely  because  of  the  variety  of  European  musical  traditions  with 
which  the  African  styles  were  brought  into  association,  and  the 
number  of  African  and  New  World  Negro  songs  that  have  been 
recorded  and  are  thus  available  for  study. 

These  same  Negro  peoples  of  the  New  World  also  offer  great 
possibilities  for  the  study  of  the  influences  of  cultural  contact  on 
linguistic  expression.  Some  materials  are  on  hand,  and  what  is 
needed  at  the  present  time  are  more  data  not  only  from  the  speech 


I2S  ACCULTURATION 

of  the  New  World  Negro  peoples,  but  also  information  concerning 
the  relationship  between  pidgin  dialects  elsewhere  in  the  world,  and 
the  native  languages  on  which  they  are  based.  Research  is  thus 
desirable  into  Melanesian  and  Chinese  pidgin,  into  English  as  it  is 
spoken  in  such  a  locality  as  Hawaii,  into  the  Spanish  of  the  Maya 
Indians  and  the  French  of  Indo- China — at  the  very  least,  field  - 
workers  among  such  peoples,  even  though  not  linguists,  should  be 
encouraged  to  record  texts  in  these  pidgin  dialects  so  that  they  can 
later  be  analyzed  by  specialists.  It  is  also  important  that  the  English 
spoken  by  American  Indian  tribes  be -studied  with  the  same  point 
in  mind,  since  the  languages  of  many  of  these  tribes  have  been 
thoroughly  investigated,  and  texts  of  the  various  forms  of  Indian- 
English  can  be  studied  in  the  light  of  these  aboriginal  speech - 
patterns.  .  Such  research  would  be  of  great  aid  in  testing  the  hypo- 
thesis of  the  results  of  linguistic  contact  that  has  been  advanced  in 
the  preceding  pages,  to  say  nothing  of  testing  the  much  older  and 
more  widely  accepted  thesis  that  holds  such  dialects  to  be  merely 
expressions  of  the  intellectual  inferiority  of  non-European  peoples 
who  do  not  take  over  European  languages  in  their  pure  forms.  Re- 
search in  the  fields  of  folklore  and  religion  may  also  be  done  along 
these  lines,  but  it  is  not  necessary,  in  the  light  of  the  preceding 
discussion,  to  detail  either  regions  where  such  studies  may  be 
carried  on  or  the  problems  that  need  special  treatment,  since  these 
are  evident  both  from  the  analyses  of  studies  already  made  of  the 
phenomena  of  contact  as  they  affect  these  aspects  of  culture,  and  of 
the  manner  in  which  such  problems  may  be  attacked. 

It  remains,  however,  to  mention  one  piece  of  research  that,  though 
not  involving  fieldwork,  should  nevertheless  be  of  no  little  usefulness. 
Such  research  entails  carrying  much  further  the  analysis  of  accul- 
turation made  in  this  volume,  by  combing  the  literature  to  make 
available  to  students  the  enormous  store  of  materials  on  acculturation 
to  be  found  in  works  already  published — a  paragraph  here,  a  casual 


FUTURE  RESEARCH  I2p 

observation  there,  an  a  priori  conclusion  elsewhere — and  by  rework- 
ing this  material  so  as  to  clarify  the  various  statements  that  have 
been  made  concerning  culture  contact,  its  mechanists  and  results, 
which,  as  we  have  seen,  are*  in  anything  but  agreement.1  Research 
of  this  kind  would  give  a  prominent  place  to  the  information  concerning 
the  contacts  of  peoples  to  be  found  in  the  literature  of  travel  and 
exploration,  especially  that  which  deals  with  the  discoveries  of  earlier 
centuries.  As  a  result,  not  only  would  all  the  data  thus  uncovered  be 
on  hand  for  future  students  of  acculturation,  but  the  degree  to  which 
contact  has  been  a  recurring  and  ever-present  phenomenon  in  the  life 
of  man  would  be  made  to  stand  out  as  sharply  as  its  ubiquity  merits. 

4 
The  study  of  acculturation  is  equally  of  importance  for  those 
concerned  with  the  problems  of  the  development  of  human  personality 
and  of  the  interplay  between  personality  and  culture;2  and  if  studies 
of  this  type  have  received  scant  mention  here,  this  has  been  because 
to  all  intents  and  purposes  they  are  non-existent.  The  psychologists 
who  deal  with  social  phenomena  have  only  in  recent  years  come  to 
stress  the  force  of  culture  in  shaping  the  human  psyche,  while  psychi- 
atry has  likewise  tended  in  the  main  to  overlook  the  importance  of 
the  cultural  factor.  As  far  as  attempts  to  bring  these  problems  into 
primitive  societies  are  concerned,  such  studies  of  the  development  of 
personality  in  primitive  societies  as  have  been  attempted  have  been 
made  by  anthropologists  who,  unfortunately,  are  anthropologists  and 
not  specialists  in  the  difficult  field  of  the  study  of  human  personality; 
while  the  very  few  such  studies  that  have  been  attempted  by  those 
competent  to  investigate  the  development  of  personality  have  lacked 
the  necessary  anthropological  background. 

1  Examples  of  material  of  this  sort  are  to  be  found  in  such  standard  works  as 
Fletcher  and  La  Fleche,  Jochelson,  Junod,  etc. 

2  Cf.  May  and  Doob  (1937),  pp.  1-2. 


T  jO  ACCULTURATION 

It  has  become  so  apparent  that  work  along  these  lines  among  any 
of  the  primitive  groups  treated  by  anthropologists  needs  persons 
competent  in  the  two  fields  concerned,  that  programs  looking  toward 
the  training  of  personnel  in  both  disciplines  have  been  put  forward  and 
have  received   support  in  recent  years.     In  the  not   too    distant 
future,  therefore,  data  of  this  order  will  be  available  in  a  proper 
setting  and  with  interpretations  that  will  be  worthy  of  the  most  serious 
consideration  both  by  anthropologists  and  others  concerned  with  the 
development  of  personality,  and  the  role  played  in  this  by  culture.  But 
when  such  research  is  instituted,  those  who  command  the  necessary 
techniques  will  find  that  peoples  who  are  undergoing  acculturation, 
or  who  have  passed  through  the  stage  but  are  still  in  process  of 
resolving  the  cultural  conflicts  that  have  been  inherited  as  a  residue 
of  contact,  will  have  to  be  studied  quite  as  much  as  those  whose 
culture  is  more  stable.   For,  as  has  been  said,  the  influence  that  any 
culture  exerts  on  its  carriers  is  to  be  seen  in  sharper  outline  if  studied 
in  those  situations  where  stresses  are  so  accentuated  that  latent 
tendencies  which  might  never  come  to  the  surface  in  more  placid 
civilizations  are  revealed.  Work  in  this  dual  field  of  approach  among 
peoples  such  as  the  American  Indians  or  South  Africans,  where 
contacts  are  continuing  and  tensions  are  sharp,  will  undoubtedly 
produce  much  that  will  be  highly  suggestive  when  compared  with 
similar  phenomena  in  more  stable  societies  j1  while  in  such  countries 
as  Haiti,  where  conflicting  traditions  have  never  been  resolved,  but 
have  been  so  adjusted  to  one  another  that  a  mosaic  has  resulted  rather 
than  an  amalgam  such  as  is  found  in  Mexico,  materials  of  a  similar 
sort  should  likewise  yield  a  great  deal  of  insight  when  studied  in  the 
light  of  findings  from  homogenous  cultures. 

1  Since  this  was  written,  a  volume  giving  in  semi-fictional  form  the  results  of  the 
psychoanalysis  of  a  South  African  native  who  left  his  tribe  to  live  in  Johannes- 
burg has  appeared  (Sachs,  1937).  Its  revealing  quality  should  offer  fresh  stimulus 
to  work  of  this  type. 


APPENDIX 

Outline  for  the  Study  of  Acculturation 

by 

Robert  Redfield,  Ralph  Linton,  and  Melville  J.  Herskovits 

I.  Definition  (see  above,  pp.  2-18) 
II.  Approach  to  the  problem 

A.  Listing  of  materials  available  for  study. 

1.  Published  materials — of  prehistoric  contacts  (to  indicate 
how  acculturation  has  characterized  human  contacts  from 
early  times),  as  well  as  contacts  between  primitive  groups, 
between  primitive  and  literate  groups  (both  mechanized 
and  non-mechanized),  and  between  literate  groups  of  either 
or  both  categories. 

2.  Unpublished  materials  of  studies  in  acculturation  which 
are  completed  or  in  progress. 

B.  Classification  of  the  above  materials 

1 .  Do  these  studies  treat  of  entire  cultures  or  specific  phases 
of  culture  ? 

2.  If  the  studies  are  restricted  ones,  what  phases  of  the  culture 
are  treated  ? 

3.  What  are  the  motivations  of  the  studies  (insofar  as  this 
affects  the  type  of  material  treated);  e.g.,  are  they  scientific, 
or  are  they  designed  to  aid  in  the  formulation  of  administra- 
tive, educational,  or  missionary  policy  ? 


j 2  2  ACCULTURATION 

C.  Techniques  employed  in  the  studies  analyzed 
i.  Direct  observation  of  acculturation  in  process. 

2.  Recent  acculturation  studied  through  interviews  with 
members  of  acculturated  groups. 

3 .  Use  of  documentary  evidence  which  gives  historic  testimony 
concerning  early  contacts  that  have  resulted  in  accul- 
turation. 

4.  Deductions  from  historical  analyses  and  reconstructions. 

III.  Analysis  of  acculturation 

(NOTE:  The  significance  of  physical  type  in  determining 
attitudes  operative  in  acculturation,  as  well  as  the  import- 
ance of  the  concomitant  occurrence  of  race -mixture  or  its 
prohibition,  must  not  be  overlooked  as  a  factor  which  may 
pervade  any  situation,  process,  or  result  envisaged  in  this 
section.) 

A.  Types  of  contacts 

1 .  Where  contacts  are  between  entire  groups ;  or  are  between 
an  entire  population  and  selected  groups  from  another 
population,  e.g.,  missionaries,  traders,  administrators, 
special  craftsmen,  pioneers  and  their  families,  and  immi- 
grant males  (all  these  considered  with  special  reference  to 
the  elements  of  culture  likely  to  be  made  available  by  the 
members  of  such  special  groups  to  the  population  among 
whom  they  live). 

2.  Where  contacts  are  friendly,  or  are  hostile. 

3.  Where  contacts  are  between  groups  of  approximately 
equal  size,  or  between  groups  of  markedly  different  size. 

4.  Where  contacts  are  between  groups  marked  by  unequal 
degrees  of  complexity  in  material  or  non -material  aspects 
of  culture,  or  both,  or  in  some  phases  of  either. 

5.  Where  contacts  result  from  the  culture -carriers  coming 
into  the  habitat  of  the  receiving  group,  or  from  the  receiving 
group  being  brought  into  contact  with  the  new  culture  in 
a  new  region. 


APPENDIX  T jj 

B.  Situations  in  which  acculturation  may  occur 

i .  Where  elements  of  culture  are  forced  upon  a  people,  or  are 
received  voluntarily  by  them. 

2.  Where  there  is  no  social  or  political  inequality  between 
groups. 

3 .  Where  inequality  exists  between  groups,  in  which  case  any 
of  the  following  may  result : 

a)  political  dominance  by  one  group,  without  recognition 
of  its  social  dominance  by  the  subject  group; 

b)  political  and  social  dominance  by  one  group ; 

c)  recognition  of  social  superiority  of  one  group  by  the 
other  without  the  exercise  of  political  dominance  by  the 
former. 

C.  The  processes  of  acculturation 

i .  Selection  of  traits  under  acculturation : 

a)  the  order  in  which  traits  are  selected  (in  specific  cases) ; 

b)  the  possible  relationships  to  be  discerned  between  the 
selection  of  traits  under  the  various  types  of  contacts 
leading  to  acculturation,  and  the  situations  in  which 
acculturation  may  occur  (as  set  down  under  III  A  and  B 
above) ; 

c)  partial  presentation  of  traits  under  forced  acculturation; 
a')  types  of  traits  permitted  and  forbidden  to  the  receiving 

group; 
b')  techniques  employed  by  the  donor  group  for  imposing 

traits ; 
c')  types  of  traits  whose  acceptance  can  be  forced; 
d')  limitations  of  forced  acceptance; 

d)  resistance  of  receiving  group  to  traits  presented  to  them; 
a')  reasons  for  this  resistance; 

b')  significance  of  understanding  resistance  to  traits  as 
well  as  acceptance  of  them. 
2.  Determination  of  traits  presented  and  selected  in  accultura- 
tion situations : 
a)  traits  presented  by  the  donor  group  because  of 


j 24  ACCULTURATION 

a')  practical   advantages,    such   as   economic   profit  or 

political  dominance; 
b')  desirability  of  bringing  about  conformity  to  values  of 

the    donor    group,    such   as   humanitarian    ideals, 

modesty,  etc. ; 
c')  ethical  and  religious  considerations ; 

b)  traits  selected  by  the  receiving  group  because  of 
a')  economic  advantages; 

b')  social  advantages  (prestige) ; 

c')  congruity  of  existing  culture -patterns; 

d')  immediacy  and  extensiveness  of  changes  necessitated 

in  certain  aspects  of  the  culture  by  the  adoption  of 

functionally  related  traits; 

c)  traits  rejected  by  the  receiving  group. 

3.  Integration  of  traits  into  the  patterns   of  the  accepting 
culture : 

a)  the  factor  of  time  that  has  elapsed  since  the  acceptance  of 
a  trait; 

b)  the  element  of  conflict  produced  within  a  culture  by  the 
acceptance  of  new  traits  at  variance  with  pre-existing 
ones,  and  the  degree  of  conflict  which  ensues ; 

c)  the  process  of  adjustment  in  acculturation; 

a')  modification  and  reinterpretation  of  traits  taken  over; 
b')  modification  of  pre-existing  patterns  resulting  from 

the  taking  over  of  new  traits ; 
c')  displacement  of  older  traits  in  a  pattern  by  new  ones ; 
d')  "survivals"; 
e')  transfer  of  sanctions ; 
f ')  shifts  in  cultural  focus  caused  by  acculturation. 

IV.  Psychological  mechanisms  of  selection  and  integration  of  traits 
under  acculturation. 

A.  The  role  of  the  individual 

1 .  As  member  of  the  selecting  group ;  personality  of  the  first 
individuals  to  accept  foreign  traits  and  their  position  in 


APPENDIX  jjj 

society  as  influencing  selection  and  acceptance  of  new- 
traits. 

2;  As  member  of  the  donor  group ;  personality  of  the  in- 
dividuals who  are  in  contact  with  the  receiving  group,  their 
attitudes  and  points  of  view,  and  the  way  in  w^hich  the 
group  to  which  they  belong  is  regarded  by  members  of  the 
receiving  group,  as  making  for  favorable  and  unfavorable 
reception  of  traits. 

3 .  The  individual  as  member  of  a  special  group  in  his  society 
(priestly  class,  sib,  secret  society,  etc.)  and  his  position  in 
this  group,  as  accelerating  or  retarding  acceptance  of  new 
traits. 

B.  Possible  consistencies  in  personality  types  of  those  who 
accept  or  reject  new  traits. 

C.  Differential  selection  and  acceptance  of  traits  in  accordance 
with  sex  lines,  differing  social  strata,  differing  types  of  belief, 
and  occupation. 

D.  Initial  hostility  and  subsequent  reconciliation  of  individuals 
to  the  new  culture  as  a  factor  in  integrating  new  culture- 
traits,  and  caused  by 

1 .  intensity  of  contact ; 

2.  duration  of  contact  and  resulting  habituation  to  new  cultural 
elements ; 

3.  social,  economic  or  political  advantages  resultant  upon 
acceptance ; 

E.  Psychic  conflict  resulting  from  attempts  to  reconcile  differing 
traditions  of  social  behavior  and  different  sets  of  social  sanctions. 

V.  The  results  of  acculturation 

A.  Acceptance  :  where  the  process  of  acculturation  eventuates  in 
the  taking  over  of  the  greater  portion  of  another  culture  and 
the  loss  of  most  of  the  older  cultural  heritage ;  with  acquiescence 
on  the  part  of  the  members  of  the  accepting  group,  and,  as  a 
result,  assimilation  of  them  not  only  to  the  behavior  patterns 
but  to  the  inner  values  of  the  culture  with  which  they  have 
come  into  contact. 


jj6  ACCULTURATION 

B.  Adaptation :  where  both  original  and  foreign  traits  are  combined 
so  as  to  produce  a  smoothly  functioning  cultural  whole  which 
is  actually  an  historic  mosaic;  with  either  a  reworking  of  the 
patterns  of  the  two  cultures  into  a  harmonious  meaningful 
whole  to  the  individuals  concerned,  or  the  retention  of  a 
series  of  more  or  less  conflicting  attitudes  and  points  of  view 
which  are  reconciled  in  everyday  life  as  specific  occasions  arise. 

C.  Reaction :  where  because  of  oppression,  or  because  of  the 
unforeseen  results  of  the  acceptance  of  foreign  traits,  contra  - 
acculturative  movements  arise;  these  maintaining  their 
psychological  force  a)  as  compensations  for  an  imposed  or 
assumed  inferiority,  or  b)  through  the  prestige  which  a  return 
to  older  pre-acculturative  conditions  may  bring  to  those 
participating  in  such  a  movement. 


REFERENCES 


Adams,  Romanzo,  1937,  Interracial  Marriage  in  Hawaii.   New  York,  Macmillan. 
Anderson,  H.  D.,  and  Eells,  W.  C,  1935,  Alaska  Natives ',  a  Survey  of  their  So- 
ciological and  Educational  Status.    Stanford  U.,  Stanford  Univ.  Press. 

Bartlett,  F.  C,   1923,  Psychology  and  Primitive  Culture.    Cambridge  (England), 

Cambridge  U.  Press. 
Bateson,  Gregory,  1935,  "Culture  Contact  and  Schismogenesis."    Man,  xxxv, 

No.  199,  178-183. 
,   1936,  Naven.  Cambridge  (England),  Cambridge  U.  Press  (see  especially 

pp.    183-187). 
Beals,  Ralph,   1936,  "Problems  in  the  Study  of  Mixe  Marriage  Customs, "  in 

Essays  in  Anthropology  Presented  to  A.  L.  Kroeber.    Berkeley,  Univ.  Cal. 

Press. 

,  1937,  review  of  "Mitla"  by  E.  C.  Parsons.  Am.  Anth.,  xxxix,  681-682. 

Beckwith,  Martha,  1924,  "Jamaica  Anansi  Stories,"  Memoirs  Am.  F '.L.  Soc,  XVII. 
,  1929,  Black  Roadways,  a  Study  of  Jamaican  Folk  Life.   Chapel  Hill,  Univ. 

of  N.  Carolina  Press. 
Boas,  Franz,  1896.  "The  Growth  of  American  Mythologies,"  Jour.  Am.  F.  L., 

ix,  1-11. 
Brenner,  Anita,  1929,  Idols  Behind  Altars.   New  York,  Payson  &  Clarke. 
Broadwood,  Lucy  E.,  1907,  "English  Airs  and  Motifs  in  Jamaica,"  in  Jekyll,  W., 

Jamaican  Song  and  Story,  278-285.    Pub.  of  The  Folk-Lore  Society,  LV. 

London,  Nutt. 
Brown,  G.  G.,  and  Hutt,  A.  McD.  B.,  1935,  Anthropology  in  Action.    London, 

Oxford  U.  Press, 
van  Bulck,  G.,  1936,  "De  Invloed  van  de  Westersche  Cultuur  op  de  Gesproken 

Woordkunst  bij   de  Bakongo."    Kongo  Oversee,  ii,   285-293,  iii,   26-41. 

10 


j2S  ACCULTURATION 

Cator,  W.  J.,  1936,  The  "Economic  Position  of  the  Chinese  in  the  Netherland  Indies. 

Chicago,  Univ.  Chicago  Press. 
Chamberlain,  A.  T.,  1902,  "Earlier  and   Later  Kootenay  Onamatology."   Am. 

Anth.  (n.  s.),  iv,  229-236. 
Chinnery,  E.  W.  P.  and  Haddon,  A.  C,  191 7,  "Five  New  Religious  Cults  in 

British  New  Guinea."  The  Hibbert  Journal,  xv,  448-463. 
de  Cleene,  N.,  1935,   "Les  Chefs  Indigenes  au  Mayombe.   Hier,  Aujourd'hui, 

Demain."  Africa,  viii,  63-75. 
Comhaire-Sylvain,   Suzanne,   1937  (see  also  Sylvain),  Les  Contes  Haiti 'ens ;   ire 

partie,  Maman  dTEau:    2e  partie,  Conjoint  Animal  ou  Demon  Deguise. 

Brussels,  Weteren;  and  Port-au-Prince. 
Conzemius,  Eduard,  1928,  "Ethnographical  Notes  on  the  Black  Carib  (Garif)." 

Am.  Anth.,  xxx,  183-205. 
Culwick,  A.  T.,  and  G.  M.,  193 1,  "Culture- Contact  on  the  Fringe  of  Civilization.,, 

Africa,  viii,  163-170. 

Dorsainvil,  J.  C,  193 1,  Vodun  etNevrose.   Port-au-Prince,  Pierre  Noel. 
Dover,  Cedric,  1937,  Half  Caste.   London,  Seeker  and  Warburg. 

Ehrenreich,  P.,  1905,  "Die  Mythen  und  Legenden  der  Sudamerikanischen  Ur- 

volker."    Supplement  %ur  Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologie,  Berlin. 
Eggan,  Fred,  1937,  "Historical  Changes  in  the  Choctaw  Kinship  System."  Amer. 

Anth.,  xxxix,  34-52. 
Elkin,  A.  P.,   1935,  "Civilized  Aborigines  and  Native  Culture."    Oceania,  vi, 

1 17-146. 
,  1937,  "The  Reaction  of  Primitive  Races  to  the  White  Man's  Culture," 

The  Hibbert  Journal,  xxxv,  537-545. 

Firth,  Raymond,  1929,  Primitive  Economics  of  the  New  Zealand  Maori,  New  York, 

Dutton  (especially  Ch.  XIV). 

,  1937,  We,  the  Tikopia.  New  York,  American  Book  Co. 

Fletcher,  Alice  C.  and  La  Fleche,  Francis,  191 1,  "The  Omaha  Tribe"  in  2jth 

Ann.    Rep.    Bureau    of  Am.  Eth.,   Washington,   Gov't.   Printing    Office 

(especially  pp.  608-654;  Appendix:  "Recent  History  of  the  Omaha  Tribe"). 
Fortes,  M.,  1936,  "Culture  Contact  as  a  Dynamic  Process."  Africa,  ix,  24-55. 
Foster,  Laurence,  1935,  "Negro-Indian  Relationships  in  the  Southeast."   Ph.  D. 

Thesis,  Univ.  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia. 
Freyre,  Gilberto,  1934,  Casa-Grande  &  Sen^ala.  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Maia  &  Schmidt. 

Gamio,  Manuel,  1922,  Introduction,  Synthesis  and  Conclusions  . .  .  The  Population 
of  the  Valley  of  Teotihuacan.    Mexico,  Sec.  de  Agriculture  y  Fomento. 


REFERENCES 


139 


Gayton,  A.  H.,  1932,  "The  Ghost  Dances  of  1870  in  South-Central  California." 
17.  Calif.  Pub.  in  Am.  Archaeology  and  Ethnology,  xxviii,  57-82. 

GifTord,  E.  W.,  1924,  "Euro-American  Acculturation  in  Tonga."  /.  Polynesian 
Soc,  xxxiii,  281-292. 

Groves,  W.  C,  193 5-1936,  "Tabar  Today."    Oceania,  v,  224-240;  vi,  147-157. 

Haddon,  A.  C,  1935,  Report  of  the  Anthropological  Expedition  to  Torres  Straits,  I, 
General  Ethnography.  Cambridge  (England),  Cambridge  U.  Press. 

,  See  also  Gunnery  and  Haddon. 

Hallowell,  A.  I.,  1928,  "Recent  Changes  in  the  Kinship  Terminology  of  the 
St.  Francis  Abenaki."  In  Atti  de  XXII  Cong.  Int.  degliAmericanisti  (Rome), 

97-145. 
,  1936,  "Psychic  Stresses  and  Culture  Patterns."  Am.  J.  Psychiatry,  xcii, 

1291-1310. 
»  j937j  "Cross-Cousin  Marriage  in  the  Lake  Winnipeg  Area."    Twenty- 
fifth  Anniversary  Studies,  Philadelphia  Anthrop  Soc,  Philadelphia,   U.   Pa. 

Press. 
Harrisson,  Tom,  1937a,  Savage  Civilisation.  New  York,  Knopf. 
,  1937  b,"  The  New  Hebrides   People  and   Culture."     Geographical  J. , 

lxxxviii,  332-341. 
Hellman,  Ellen,  1935,  "Native  Life  in  a  Johannesburg  Slum  Yard."  Africa,  viii, 

34-62. 
,  1937,  "The  Native  in  the  Towns  in  the  Bantu- Speaking  Tribes  of  South 

Africa."    In  The  Bantu- Speaking  Tribes  of  S.Africa  (Schapera,  I.,  ed.). 
Herskovits,  M.  J.,  1927,  "Acculturation  and  the  American  Negro."   Southwestern 

Pol.  and  Soc.  Sci.  Quarterly,  viii,  211-225. 
,  1928,   The  American  Negro,  A  Study  in  Racial  Crossing.     New  York, 

Knopf. 
,  1930,  "The  Negro  in  the  New  World:  The  Statement  of  a  Problem." 

Am.  Anthrop.,  xxxii,  145-156. 
,  1934,  "Race  Mixture."  Encyc.  of  the  Soc.  Sci.,  XIII,  41-43.  New  York, 

Macmillan. 
,  1935,  "The  Social  History  of  the  Negro."    In  A  Handbook  of  Social 

Psychology  (C.  Murchison,  ed.).    Worcester,  Clark  Univ.  Press,  207-267. 
,    1936,    "Applied  Anthropology   and   the  American  Anthropologists." 

Science,  lxxxiii,  215-222. 
,  1937a,  "The  Significance  of  the  Study  of  Acculturation  for  Anthropo- 
logy." Am.Anth.,  xxxix,  259-264. 

,  1937b,  Life  in  a  Haitian  Valley.  New  York,  Knopf. 

,   1938,    Dahomey;    An  Ancient    West  African   Kingdom.     New   York, 

J.  J.  Augustin. 


11 


j  j0  ACCULTURATION 

Herskovits,  M.  J.  and  F.  S.,  1934,  Rebel  Destiny,  Among  the  Bush  Negroes  of  Dutch 

Guiana.  New  York,  Whittlesey  House. 
,  1936,  "Suriname  Folk  Lore."  Col.  V.  Contrib.  to  Anthrop.,  XXVII.  New 

York,  Columbia  U.  Press. 
Herzog,  George,  1935  a,  "Special  Song  Types  in  North  American  Indian  Music." 

Zeit.  fur  Vergleichende   Musikwissenschaft,   iii,    23-33    (Music,  pp.   1-6). 
,  1935  b,   "Plains   Ghost  Dance  and  Great  Basin   Music."    Am.  Anth. 

xxxvii  (1935),  403-419. 
Hogbin,  H.  Ian,  1934,  "Culture  Change  in  the  Solomon  Islands."    Oceania,  iv, 

233-267. 
Holmes,  W.  H.,  1896,  "Pottery  of  the  Ancient  Pueblos."  4  Ann.  Rep.,  Bureau 

of  Am.  Ethn.,  Washington,  265-358. 
Hornbostel,  E.  M.,  1926,  "Review  of  Books  on  American  Negro  Songs."  Int.  Rev. 

of  Missions,  xv,  748  ff. 
Hunter,  Monica,  1933,  "The  Effects  of  Contact  with  Europeans  on  the  Status  of 

Pondo  Women."  Africa,  vi,  259-276. 
,  1934a,  "Notes  on  Changes  in  Xosa  Resulting  from  Contact  With  Eu- 
ropeans." Africa,  vii,  100-104. 

,  1934b,  "Methods  of  Study  of  Culture  Contact."  Africa,  vii,  335-350. 

,  1936,  Reaction  to  Conquest,  Effects  of  Contact  with  Europeans  on  the  Pondo 

of  South  Africa.  London,  Oxford  U.  Press. 
,  1937,  "The  Bantu  on  European-Owned  Farms."  In  The  Bantu- Speaking 

Tribes  of  South  Africa  (I.  Schapera,  ed.)  389-404. 
Hurston,  Zora,  193 1,  "Hoodoo  in  America."  Jour.  Am.  F.  L.,  xliv,  317-347. 

Ichikawa,  Sanki,  1930,  "The  Pronounciation  of  English  Loan-Words  in  Japanese," 
In  A  Grammatical  Miscellany  Offered  to  Otto  Jespersen  on  his  Seventieth 
Birthday.  Copenhagen,  Levin  &  Munksgaard. 

Ignace,  Abbe  Etienne,  1908,  "Le  Fetichisme  des  Negres  du  Bresil."  Anthropos, 
iii,  881-904. 

Ishimoto,  Shidzue,  1935,  Facing  Two  Ways.  New  York,  Farrar  &  Rinehart. 

Jochelson,  W.,  1908,  "The  Koryak,"  vol.  vi,  pt.  ii,  Rep.  Jesup  N.  Pac.  Exped. 

(especially  Ch.  XIII  and  XIV). 
Johnson,  Guy  B.,  193 1,  "The  Negro   Spiritual:  A  Problem  in  Anthropology." 

Am.  A  nth.,  xxxiii,  157-171. 
Johnston,  Sir  H.  H.,  19 10,  The  Negro  in  the  New  World.  London,  Methuen. 

Keesing,  Felix,  1928,  The  Changing  Maori.  New  Plymouth,  N.  Z.,  Avery. 

,  1934,  Modern  Samoa,  Its  Government  and  Changing  Life.  Stanford  U. 

Press. 


REFERENCES  j^j 

Keesing,  Felix  M.  and  Keesing,  Marie,   1934,  Taming  Philippine  Headhunters. 

Stanford  U.  Press. 
Kolinski,  M.,   1937,  "Suriname  Music."    In  Suriname  Folklore,  by  M.    &  F. 

Herskovits,  491-758. 
Kroeber,  A.  L.,  193 1,  "DifFusionism."  Encyc.  of  the  Soc.  Sci.,V,  139-142.   New 

York,  Macmillan. 

Labouret,  Henri,  193 1,  A  la  Recherche  d'une  Politique  Indigene  dans  UOuest  Africa. 

Paris,  Editions  du  Comite*  de  L'Afrique  Frangaise. 
Landtman,  Gunnar,  1927,  The  Kiwai  Papuans  of  British  New  Guinea.  London, 

Macmillan  (especially  Ch.  XXXIII,  ''The  Pidgin-English  of  the  Kiwais"). 
La  Farge,  Oliver,  1929,  Laughing  Boy,  Boston  and  New  York,  Houghton  Mifflin. 
Lasswell,  Harold  D.,   1935,  "Collective  Autism  as  a  Consequence  of  Culture 

Contact:  Notes  on  Religious  Training  and  Peyote  Cult  at  Taos."   Zeit- 

schrift  fiir  So^ialforschung,  iv,  232-247. 
Layard,  John,    1936,    "Atchin  Twenty  Years  Ago."   Geographical  J. ,  lxxxviii, 

342-351. 
Lee,  D.  Demetracopoulou,  1936,  "Folklore  of  the  Greeks  in  America."  Folklore, 

xlvii,  294-310. 
Lesser,  Alexander,   1933,  "The  Pawnee  Ghost  Dance  Hand  Game,  A  Study  of 

Cultural   Change."    Columbia   U.  Contr.   to  Anthrop.  XVI,  New  York, 

C.  U.  Press. 
Lestrade,  G.  P.,  1934,  "European  Influences  upon  the  Development  of  Bantu 

Language  and  Literature."   In  Western  Civilisation  and  the  Natives  of  S. 

Africa  (I.  Schapera,  ed.),  105-127. 
Lindblom,  G.  K.,  1924,  Afrikanische  Relikte  und  Indianische  Entlehnungen  in  der 

Kultur  der  Buschneger  Surinams.    Goteborg,  Wettergreen  and  Kerber. 
Lindgren,  Ethel  John,  1938,  "An  Example  of  Culture  Contact  without  Conflict; 
The   Reindeer    Tungus   and   Russian   Cossacks  of  N.  W.   Manchuria, 
1929-193 2."  Forthcoming  in  /.  Roj.Anth.  Inst.,  lxviii. 
Linton,  Ralph,  1936,  The  Study  of  Man,  New  York,  Appleton- Century. 
Lips,  Julius,  1937,  The  Savage  Hits  Back.  New  Haven,  Yale  Univ.  Press. 
Lowie,  R.  H.,  1935,  The  Crow  Indians.  New  York,  Farrar  and  Rinehart. 

Mac  Crone,  I.  D.,  1937,  Race  Attitudes  in  South  Africa.    London,  Oxford  Univ. 

Press. 
MacLeod,  William  Christie,  1928,  The  American  Indian  Frontier.    New  York, 

Knopf. 
Mair,  L.  P.,  1934a,  "The  Study  of  Culture  Contact  as  a  Practical  Problem." 

Africa ,  vii,  415-422. 

,  1954b,  An  African  People  in  the  Twentieth  Century.    London,  Routledge. 

11* 


jj2  ACCULTURATION 

May,  Mark,  A.  and  Doob,  Leonard  W.,  1937,  Cooperation  and  Competition.  New 

York,  Social  Science  Res.  Council,  Bulletin  No.  25. 
McKern,  W.  C,  1922,  "Functional  Families  of  the  Patwin."   Univ.  California 

Publ.  inAm.Anth.  and  Arch.,  vol.  xiii,  235-258. 
McNickle,  Darcy,  1936,  The  Surrounded.   New  York,  Dodd  Mead. 
Mead,  Margaret,  1932,  "The  Changing  Culture  of  an  Indian  Tribe."  Columbia  U. 

Contr.  toAnthrop.,  XV.  New  York,  C.  U.  Press. 
Mekeel,  H.  Scudder,  1936,  "The  Economy  of  a  Modern  Teton  Dakota  Commun- 
ity,"  Yale  U.  Pub.  in  Anthrop.,  No.  6. 
Merick,  G.,  1908,  "Notes  on  Hausa  and  Pidgin  English."  J.African  Soc,  viii, 

303-307. 
Millin,  Sarah  Gertrude,  1925,  God's  Stepchildren,  New  York,  Boni  &  Liveright. 
Mooney,  James,  1896,  "The  Ghost-Dance  Religion  and  the  Sioux  Outbreak  of 

1890."    14th  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Am.  'Ethnology,  part  2.  Washington. 
Morinigo,  Marcos  A.,  193 1,    "Hispanismos   en  el  Guaranii."    Univ.   of  Buenos 

Aires,  Inst,  de  Filologia,  Coleccion  de  Estudios  Indigenistas,  I. 
Moszkowski,  Max,  191 1,  "Die  Volkerstamme  am  Memberamo  in  Hollandisch- 

Neuguinea  und  an   den  vorgelagerten  Inseln."    Zeitschr.  fur  Ethnologie, 

xliii,  3I5-343- 
Myers,   C.  S.,   1907,  "Traces  of  African  Melody  in  Jamaica."    In  Jekyll,  W., 

Jamaican  Song  and  Story,  278-285,  Pub.  of  The  Folk-Lore  Society,  IV. 

London,  Nutt. 

Nash,  Philleo,  1937,  "The  Place  of  Religious  Revivalism  in  the  Formation  of  the 
Intercultural  Community  on  Klamath  Reservation."  In  Social  Anthrop. 
of  N.  American  Tribes  (F.  Eggan,  ed.)  377-442.  Chicago,  U.  C.  Press. 

Nekes,  P.  Herm.,  1927,  "Zur  Entwicklung  der  Jaunde-Sprache  unter  demEinfluB 
der  Europaischen  Kultur."    In  Festschrift  Meinhof.  Hamburg,  301-314. 

Nina-Rodrigues,  Dr.,  1900,  L'Animisme  fetichiste  desNegres  de  Bahia.  Bahia,  Reis. 

Ortiz,  Ferdinand,  191 7,  Los  Negros  Brujos.   Madrid,  Editorial -America. 

Park,  Robert  E.,  1930,  "Assimilation,  Social."  Encyc.  of  the  Soc.  Sci.,  II,  281-283. 
New  York,  Macmillan. 

Parsons,  E.  C,  191 8,  "Folk-Lore  of  Andros  Islands,  Bahamas."  Mem.  Am. 
F.  L.  Soc,  XIII. 

,  1923,  "Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  South  Carolina."    Mem.  Am.  F.  L. 

Soc,  XVI. 

,  1928,  "Spanish  Elements  in  the  Cachina  Cults  of  the  Pueblos."  Pro- 
ceedings XXIII  Int.  Cong,  of  Americanists.    New  York,  582-603. 

,  1918  a,  "Pueblo-Indian  Folk-Tales,  Probably  of  Spanish  Provenience." 

Jour.  Am.  F.L.,  xxxi,  216-255. 


REFERENCES 


143 


Parsons,  E.  C,  1918  b,  "Nativity  Myth  at  Laguna  and  Zuni."    Jour.  Am.  F.  L., 

xxxi,  256-263. 
,  1933,  193  5,  "Folk-Lore  of  the  Antilles,  French  and  English."  Mem.  Am. 

F.  L.  Soc,  XXV,  parts  1  and  2. 
,  1936,  "Mitla,  Town  of  the  Souls."    U.  Chi.  Pub.  in  Anthrop.   Chicago, 

U.  C.  Press. 
Parsons,  Elsie  Clews  and  Boas,  Franz,  1920,  "Spanish  Tales   from   Laguna   and 

Zuni,  New  Mexico."  J.Am.  Folk-Lore,  xxxiii,  47-72. 
Peterkin,  J.  M.,  1927,  Black  April.   Indianapolis,  Bobbs- Merrill. 
Petrullo,  Vincenzo,  1934,  The  Diabolic  Roof,  a  Study  of  Peyotism,  the  New  Indian 

Religion,  among  the  Delawares.   Philadelphia,  Univ.  of  Pa.  Press. 
Piddington,  Ralph,  1933,  "Psychological  Aspects  of  Culture- Contact."   Oceania, 

iii,  312-324. 
Pitt -Rivers,  G.  H.  L.,  1927,  The  Clash  of  Culture  and  the  Contact  of  Races. 

London,  Routledge. 
Powell,  J.  W.,  1880,  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Indian  Languages.   Washington, 

Govt.  Printing  Office.  ) 
,  1894-1895,  "Proper  Training  and  the  Future  of  the  Indians."   The  Forum, 

xviii,  622-629. 
,  1896,  "Report  of  the  Director  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology 

for  the  year  ending  June  30,  1895."  In  Ann.  Rep.  Smithsonian  Institution 

....  to  July,  1 89 j.   Washington. 
1900,  "Report  of  the  Director."   19  th  Ann.  Rep.,  Bureau  of  Amer.  Eth. 

for  1 897-98.  Washington. 
Price,  Maurice  T.,  1924,  Christian  Missions  and  Oriental  Civilisation.    Shanghai, 

(privately  printed). 
Price-Mars,  Dr.,  1928,  Ainsi  Parla  VOncle...  Essais  d*  Ethnographie.   Port-au- 
Prince. 


Radin,  Paul,  191 3,  "The  Influence  of  the  Whites  on  Winnebago  Culture."  Proceed- 
ings of  the  State  Historical  Soc.  of  Wisconsin,  137-145. 

,  1 9 14,  "A  Sketch  of  the  Peyote  Cult  of  the  Winnebago:  A  Study  in  Bor- 
rowing." Jour.  ofRel.  Psych.,  xii,  1-22. 

,  1920,  "The  Autobiography  of  a  Winnebago  Indian."  Univ.  ofCal.  Publ. 

in  Am.  Archaelogy  and  Ethnology,  xvi,  381-473. 

,  1923,    "The  Winnebago  Tribe."  37  Ann.  Rep.   Bureau  of  Am.  Ethn., 

Washington. 

,  1930,  "A  Preliminary  Sketch  of  the  Zapotecan  Language."   Language, 

vi,  64-85. 

Ramos,  Arthur,  1934,  0  Negro  Brasileiro.   Rio  de  Janeiro,  Civilizacao  Brasileira. 

1935,  0  Folk-Lore  Negro  de  Brasil.   Rio  de  Janeiro,  Civilizacao  Brasileira. 


jjj  ACCULTURATION 

Redfield,   Robert,    1929,   "The   Material   Culture  of  Spanish-Indian   Mexico." 
Am.Anth.,  xxxi,  602-618. 

1930,   "Tepoztlan,  A  Mexican  Village."     U.  Chicago  Pub.  in  Anthrop. 

Chicago,  U.  C.  Press. 

I932,  "Maya  Archaeology  as  the  Mayas  See  It."   Sociologus,  viii,  299-309. 

1934,  "Culture  Changes  in  Yucatan."  Am.Anth.,  xxxvi,  57-69. 

Redfield,  R.,  Linton,  R.,  and  Herskovits,  M.  J.,  1935,  "A  Memorandum  for  the 

Study  of  Acculturation."  Am.  Anth.,  xxxviii,    149-152.    Also  in  Man, 

xxxv,  162,  145-148;  Africa,  ix,  114-118;  Oceania,  vi,  229-233. 
Redfield,  R.  and  Villa,  Alfonso,  1934,  Chan  Kom,A  Maya  Village.  Washington, 

Carnegie  Institution  of  Washington. 
Richards,  A.  I.,  1932,  "Anthropological  Problems  in  Northeastern  Rhodesia." 

Africa,  v,  1 21-144. 

193  5 ,  "The  Village  Census  in  the  Study  of  Culture  Contact."  Africa, 

viii,  20-33. 

Rivers,  W.  H.  R.  (ed),  1922,  TLssays  on  the  Depopulation  of  Melanesia.  Cambridge 

(England),  Cambridge  V.  Press. 
Roberts,  H,  H.,  1924,  "Some  Drums  and  Drum  Rhythms  in  Jamaica."  Natural 

History,  xxiv,  241-251. 

1926,  "Possible  Survivals  of  African  Song  in  Jamaica."    Mus.  Quarterly, 

xii,  340-358. 

Sachs,  Wulf,    1937,   Black  Hamlet,  The  Mind  of  an  African  Negro  revealed  by 

Psychonanalysis.  London,  Geoffrey  Bles. 
Sapir,  E.,  1934,  "The  Emergence  of  the  Concept  of  Personality  in  a  Study  of 

Culture."  /.  Soc.  Psych.,  v,  408-415. 
Schapera,  I.,  1928,  "Economic  Changes  in  South  African  Native  Life."  Africa, 

i,  170-188. 

1933,  "Premarital  Pregnancy  and  Native  Opinion,  A  Note  on  Social 

Change."  Africa,  vi,  59-89. 

(ed.),  1934,  Western  Civilisation  and  the  Natives  of  South  Africa,  Studies  in 

Culture  Contact.  London,  Routledge. 
193  5,  "Field  Methods  in  the  Study  of  Modern  Culture  Contacts."  Africa, 

viii,  315-328. 

1936,  "The  Contributions  of  Western  Civilization  to  Modern  Kxatla 

Culture."  Trans,  of  the  Roy.  Soc.  of  S.  Africa,  xxiv,  part  III,  221-252. 

(ed.),  1937,  The  Bantu  Speaking  Tribes  of  South  Africa,  an  Ethnographical 

Survey.  London,  Routledge. 
Schrieke,  B.,  (ed.),  1929,  The  Tiffed  of  Western  Influence  on  Native  Civilisations  of 

the  Malay  Archipelago.  Batavia  (Java),  KolfF. 
Schuchardt,  |Hugo,  1914,  "Die  Sprache  der  Saramakkaneger  in  Suriname."  Verb. 

der  K.Akad.  von  Wetenschappen,  Amsterdam,  Aft.  Letterkunde  (n.  s.),  XV. 


REFERENCES  z^j 

Schultze,  Ernst,  1933,  "Sklaven-  und  Dienersprachen  (sogen.  Handelssprachen)." 

Sociologus,  ix,  377-417. 
Seligman,  C.  G.,  1929,  "Temperament,  Conflict  and  Psychosis  in  a  Stone- Age 

Population."  Brit.  Jour.  Medical  Psych,  ix. 
Shonle,  Ruth,  1925,  "Peyote,  the  Giver  of  Visions."  Am.  Anth.,  xxvii,  53-95. 
Simpson,  Eyler,  N.  1937,  The  Ejido,  Mexico's  Way  Out.  Chapel  Hill,  Univ.  N. 

Carolina  Press. 
Skinner,  Alanson,    191 6,  "European  Tales  from  the  Plains  Ojibwa."    /.  Am. 

F.  L.,  xxix,  330-340. 
Smith,  Bradford,  1937,  This  Solid  Flesh  :  A  Novel  of  Intermarriage  Between  East 

and  West.  Indianapolis,  Bobbs- Merrill. 
Smith,  Mrs.  Maurice  G.,   1934,  "A  Negro  Peyote  Cult."  /.  of  the  Washington 

Acad.  Sci.  xxiv,  448-453. 
Speck,  F.  G.,  1923,  "Algonkian  Influence  upon  Iroquois  Social  Organization." 

Am.  Anth.,  xxv,  219-227. 
1913,    "European   Folk-Tales  among  the  Penobscot."    /.  Am.  F.  L.t 

xxvi,  81-84. 
Spier,  Leslie,  1921,  "The  Sun  Dance  of  the  Plains  Indians:  Its  Development  and 

Diffusion."  Anth.  Pap.  Am.  Mus.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  xvi,  451-527. 
,  1927,  "The  Ghost  Dance  of  1870  Among  the  Klamath  of  Oregon."  Univ. 

Wash.  Pub  I.  inAnthrop.,  ii,  39-56. 
,  1935,  "The  Prophet  Dance  of  the  Northwest  and  its  Derivatives:  The 

Source  of  the  Ghost  Dance."  Gen.  Series  inAnthrop.y  No.  1. 
Stoney,  S.  G.  and  Shelby,  G.  M.,  1930,  Black  Genesis.    New  York,  Macmillan. 
Sylvain,  Suzanne,  1936  (see  also  Comhaire-Sylvain),JL^  Creole  Haiti  en,  Morphologie 

et  Syntaxe.    Brussels,  Wetteren;  and  Port-au-Prince. 
Sutherland,  I.  L.  G.,  1935,  The  Maori  Situation.  Wellington,  N.  Z. 

Thompson,  Stith,  1929,  Tales  of  the  North  Am  eric  an  Indians.  Cambridge  (Mass.), 

Harvard  Univ.  Press. 
Thurnwald,  Richard,  1935,  Black  and  White  in  East  Africa.   London,  Routledge. 
Todd,  J.  A.,  1935,  "Native  Offences  and  European  Law."    Oceania,  v,  437-460. 
Torday,  E.,  1928,  "The  Influence  of  the  Kingdom  of  Kongo  on  Central  Africa." 

Africa,  i,  157-169. 

Vierkandt,  Alfred,  1908,  Die  Stetigkeit  im  Kulturwandel.    Leipzig,  Daneker   & 
Humblot. 

Wagner,   Giinter,    1932,   "Entwicklung   und  Verbreitung   des   Peyote -Kultes." 
BaesslerArchiv.,  xv,  59-144. 

,  1936,  "The  Study  of  Culture  Contact  and  the  Determination  of  Policy." 

Africa,  ix,  317-331. 


jqfi  ACCULTURATION 

Warner,  Lloyd,  1932,  "Malay  Influence  on  the  Aboriginal  Cultures  of  North 

Eastern  Arnhem  Land."  Oceania,  ii,  468  ff. 
Walker,  Abb6  A.,  1933,  "Les  Neologismes  dans  les  Idiomes  Gabonais."   /.  de 

la  Soc.  des  Africanistes  de  Paris,  iii,  300-314. 
Westermann,  Diedrich,  1934,  "The  African  To-day."    London,  Oxford. 
,   1937,  "Die  Zukunft  der  Naturvolker."    In  Lehrbuch  der  Volkerkunde 

(K.  Th.  PreuB,  ed.),  Stuttgart,  F.  Enke.   383-404. 
Williams,  F.  E.,  1923,  "The  Vailala  Madness  and  the  Destruction  of  Native 

Ceremonies  in  the  Gulf  Division."   Territory  of  Papua,  Anthrop.  Report 

No.  4.  Port  Moresby. 
,  1928,  Orokaiva  Magic.     London,  Oxford  (especially  pp.   3-101,  "The 

Taro  Cult,  a  Study  of  a  Primitive  Religious  Movement"). 
>  I933>  "Practical  Education:  The  Reform  of  Native  Horticulture."    Ter- 
ritory of  Papua,  Anthrop.  Report  No.  14.  Port  Moresby. 
,  1934,  "The  Vailala  Madness  in  Retrospect."  In  Essays  in  Honour  ofC.  G. 

Seligman.  London,  Kegan  Paul.  369-379. 
,  1935,  "The  Blending  of  Cultures:  An  Essay  on  the  Aims  of  Native 

Education."  Territory  of  P apua,  Anthrop.  ReportNo.  16,  Port  Moresby. 
Williams,  J.  Grenfell,  and  May,  Henry  John,  1936,  "I  am  Black,  the  Story  of 

Shambala."  London,  Cassell. 


INDEX 


Acceptance,   of   European    traits    by 
Kxatla,  62-63 
and  rejection,  of  Ghost  Dance  by 
Yokuts-Mono,  83-85 
Acculturation,  analyses  of  definitions 
of,  6 
categories  of,  117 

methods    of    studying    culture- 
change  in,  1 1 7-1 18 
defined,  by  Lesser,  6-7 
by  Parsons,  7-8 

by   Redfield,    Linton,   and  Hers- 
kovits,  10-11 
different  degrees  of,  within  Kxatla 

tribe,  63 
field  methods  in,  18-23 
history  of  use  of  term,  2-5 
hypothesis   of  rate  of,   in   various 

aspects  of  culture,  40 
intertribal,  50,  56,  89 

localities    for   research   in,    124- 
125 
Indian- Spanish,  in  Mexico,   35-40, 

40-45  , 

mechanisms     of,     among     Kxatla, 

61-62 

in  Ghost  Dance  of  1870  in  Central 

California,  83-84 


Negro-French,  in  Haiti,  57-60 
Outline  for  the  Study  of,  1 31-136 
practical  motivations  of  studies  of, 
in  Australia  and  New  Guinea, 

73-74 

processes  of,  133-134 

propositions  concerning,  by  E.  C. 
Parsons,  37 

relationship  of  term  to  concepts 
"diffusion"  and  "assimilation," 
12-17 

results  of,  classified,  135-136 

scientific  study  of,  contrasted  with 
study  of  "practical    anthrop- 
ology," 29-32 
in  United  States,  5 

secondary,  case  of,  79-80 

research  problems  in,  123-125 

significance  of  study  of,  in  New 
Guinea,  103 

traders  as  agents  of,  57 

use  of  term  restricted  to  effect  of 
white  contact  on  native  cul- 
tures, 89-90 

as  synonym  for  "culture-change," 
90 

value  of  fictional  works  dealing 
with,  109 

various  meanings  of,  6 


148 


ACCULTURA  TION 


Africa,    East,    research    problems    of 
native-Mohammedan     contact 
in,  121 
and  South,  as  locale  for  further 

acculturation  research,   125 
study  of  acculturation  in,  72-73 
South,    research    to    be    done    on 
intertribal  acculturation  in,  124 
West,  as  locale  for  study  of  inter- 
tribal  acculturation,    124 
research  problems  of  native-Mo- 
hammedan contact  in,  110-111 
Alaska,  research  problems  of  Eskimo- 
Indian  contact  in,    121 
Ambivalence,  social,  in  Haiti,  60 
Anonymity,    degree    of    desirable    in 
reporting    acculturation    data, 

52-5.3 
"Antlers,"  acculturation  of,  46-5 1 

"Applied  anthropology,"  contrasted 
with  scientific  study  of  ac- 
culturation, 29-32 

Art,  absence  of  acculturation  studies 
of,  108 

Assimilation,  as  related  to  terms 
"diffusion"  and  "accultura- 
tion," 12-15 

Attitudes,  toward  native  life,  of  whites 
in  contact  with  Kxatla,    61-62 

B 

Baganda,     study     of     acculturation 

among,  73 
"Base-line,"   of  culture   from  which 

change  can  be  measured,  25 
Bateson,  G.,  6 
Beals,  R.,  27 
Beckwith,  M.,   acculturation  seen  in 

collection  of  Negro  folklore  by, 

107      ' 
Boas,  F.,  early  useof  term  acculturation 

by,  4 


British  Honduras,  problems  of  Carib- 
Negro  acculturation  in,  121 


Caribs,  Black,  121 

Chaka,  109 

"Changing  Culture  of  an  Indian  Tribe" 

analyzed,  45-53 
Chinese,  contacts  of  natives  with,  as 

problem  for  study,   123 
Chinnery,    E.    P.    W.,    and   Haddon, 

A.   C,   paper   on   "Five   New 

Religious  Cults  in  British  New 

Guinea"    analyzed,    94-97 
Christian  elements,  in  New  Guinea  con- 

tra-acculturative     movements, 

96-103 
Christianity,  role  of,  in  Prophet  Dance 

sects  of  Northwest,  78-81 
Classes,   of  Europeans    and  Africans 

contributing  to  present  Haitian 

culture,  58 
Comhaire-Sylvain,   G.,    acculturation 

seen  in  Haitian  Negro  folklore 

studied  by,  107 
Compensation,    by    deprived   groups, 

85-86 
Confession,  patterns  of,  in  pre-contact 

native  Indian  cultures,  78 
Contact,  between  Indians  and  Negroes 

in    New    World,    as    research 

problem,  1 21-122 
between  physical     types,     present 

interest  in,  1-2 
hypothesis  of   demoralizing  effects 

on  natives  of  Europeans  tested, 

64-65 
intertribal,  50 
misplaced    emphasis    on    historical 

uniqueness  of  European-native, 

3i 
Winneb ago-white,  results  of,  54-55 


INDEX 


149 


Contacts,  types  of,  132 
Contra-acculturation,  among  Pawnee, 
90-94 
as  secondary  effect  of  culture  con- 
tact, 12 
Contra-acculturative    movements,    in 
New  Guinea,  94-103 
mechanisms  of  spread  of,  101 
in  South  Africa,  non-religious  nature 
of,  71 
"Contributions  of  Western  Civilization 
to    Modern    Kxatla    Culture" 
analyzed,  60-65 
Culture  and  personality,  study  of,  in 
acculturative   situations,    129- 
130 
interrelations  of  aspects  of,   20-22 
need  in  acculturation  for  "rounded 
presentation"    of    studies    in, 
20-22 
problem,  of  independence  of  aspects 
of,  20-22 
of  separate  existence  of,  11-12 
"style"  of,  22 
Culture  contact,   recent  interest  in,  1 
historical    technique    in    study    of, 

17-18 
scientific  and  "practical"  study  of, 

29-32 
secondary  results  of,  12 
significance  of  study  of,  5 1 
study    of,    for    practical    ends,    5, 

30-32 
Symposium  on  Methods  of  Study 
of,  18 

D 

Data,  on   Melanesian   and  American 
Indian  tribes,  for  acculturation 
research,  126 
documentary,    use  of   in   accultur- 
ation research,  25-26 


Deprivation,  role  of  in  inducing  con- 
tra-acculturative movements, 
86-88 

Dialects,  pidgin,  significance  of,  in 
study  of  acculturation,  108 

Diffusion,  definition  of,   12-13 

related  to  terms  "acculturation" 
and  "assimilation,"  12-17 

Disintegration,  cultural,  hypothesis 
concerning,  52 

Documents,  historical,  for  study  of 
acculturation  in  Haiti,  58 

E 

Economics,  inadequacy  of  accultur- 
ation studies  in,  105 

Eggan,  F.,  Choctaw  acculturation  in 
social  organization  studied  by, 
105 

Ehrenreich,  P.,  use  of  term  accultur- 
ation by,  5 

Elkin,  A.  P.,  30,  123 

hypothesis  of  stages  of  adjustment 
of  Australians  to  European 
culture  by,  74 

English  anthropologists,  use  of  term 
culture-contact  for  accultur- 
ation by,  2 

Ethnocentrism,     need     for     caution 
against,  119 
research  problems  which  avoid  pit- 
falls of,  1 20-1 2 1 

European  culture,  need  for  not  taking 
for  granted  in  studying  native 
contact  with,  18-20 

Evidence,  documentary,  use  of  in 
acculturation  research,  23-27 


Far  East,  opportunities  for  non- 
ethnocentric  acculturation  re- 
search in,  123 


JJO 


ACCULTURA  TION 


Fiction,  significance  for  scientist  of, 

109 
"Five  New  Religious  Cults  in  British 

New  Guinea"  analyzed,  94-97 
Firth,  R.,  8,  126 
Flathead  Indians,  demoralization  of, 

under    white    domination     as 

shown  in  novel,  11 3-1 16 
Fletcher,  A.  C,  and  La  Fleche,  F.,  129 
Folk  culture,  concept  of,  41 

method  of  studying,  42-44 
Folklore,  studies  of  acculturation  in, 

106-107 
Forces,    acculturative,    in    "Antler"- 

white  contact,  47-48 
Freuchen,  P.,  109 


Gayton,  A.  H.,  study  of  "Ghost  Dance 
of  1870  in  South  Central 
California',  by,    analyzed,  82- 

85 
German  anthropologists,  use  of  term 

acculturation  by,  2 
Ghost  Dance,  12,  76ff. 

resemblances  to  and  differences  from 

New    Guinea    contra-accultur- 

ative  movements,  95,  97-98 
"Ghost  Dance  of  1870  in  South  Central 

California"  analyzed,  82-85 

H 

Haddon,  A.  C,  and  Chinnery,  E.P.W., 
paper  on  "Five  New  Religious 
Cults  in  British  New  Guinea" 
analyzed,  94-97 

Haiti,  108,  130 

methods  of  study  of  acculturation 
in,  57-60 

Hallowell,  A.  I.,  study  of  Abenaki  ac- 
culturation in  social  organ- 
ization by,  105-106 


Harrisson,  T.,  74 
Hellman,  E.,  124 

Herskovits,  M.  J.,  12,  30,  104,  131 
caution  against  neglect  of  European 
custom  in  studying  European- 
native  contact  by,  19-20 
"Life  in  a  Haitain  Valley,"  work  by, 

analyzed,  57-60 
statement  of  method  in  accultur- 
ation studies  by,  11 
Herskovits,  M.   J.  and  F.   S.,   hypo- 
thesis  of   linguistic     accultur- 
ation   advanced    by,    107-108 
study   of   acculturation   in   Dutch 
Guiana  Negro  folklore  by,  107 
Herzog,   G.,    acculturation   in  Ghost 
Dance  songs   studied   by,    108 
Hindus  (British  Indians),  results  of  con- 
tacts of  natives  with,  as  problem 
for  study,  122-123 
Historic  control,  methods  of  achieving 
in    studying    culture    contact, 
23-27 
History,   known,  use  of  in   accultur- 
ation studies,    13-17 
need  of  in  acculturation  research, 

25-27 
place  of  in   acculturation   studies, 

1 1 7-1 18, 1 19-120 
use  of  in  studying  Tepoztlan  cul- 
ture, 43 
Holmes,  W.  H.,  early  use  of  term  ac- 
culturation by,  3 
Hunter,  M.,  124 

"Reaction  to  Conquest,"  book    by, 

analyzed,  66-72 
resemblance   of  method   used   by, 
to  that  of  Redfield,  68 
Hypothesis,  of  linguistic  acculturation, 
107-108 
of  stages  of  adjustment  of  Austral- 
ians  to  European   culture,   74 


INDEX 


IJI 


"Influence  of  Whites  on  Winnebago 

Culture"   analyzed,   53-57 
"Intercultural  community,"  85-89 
Intertribal      acculturation,      research 

problems  in,  123-125 
Iroquois  Indians,  role  of  in  bringing 

Christianity  to  Flathead  tribe, 

79-80 

J 

Japan,  acculturation  in,  as  shown  in 

novel,  110-113 
Japanese,  results  of  contacts  of  natives 

with,  as  research  problem,  123 
Jochelson,  W.,  129 
Junod,  H.,  129 

K 

Klamath  Indians,  reaction  of  to  white 

contact,  86-89 
Kolinski,  M.,  analysis  of  acculturation 

in  Dutch  Guiana  Negro  music 

by,  108 
Kroeber,  A.  L.,  definition  of  diffusion 

by,  13 
study  of  early  Prophet  movement 

among  California   Indians   by, 

77 
Kxatla,    study    of    acculturation    of, 

60-65 


Laws,  of  cultural  processes,  as  aim  of 
acculturation  research,  1 19-120 
Language,     changes    in,    under     ac- 
culturation, 49 
studies  of  acculturation  in,  107 
Leaders,  importance  of,  in  Kxatla  ac- 
culturation, 62-63 
in    spread   of  New   Guinea    cults, 
94-103 


Lesser,  A.,  definition  of  acculturation 

by,  6-7 
"Pawnee  Ghost  Hand  Game,"  study 

by,  analyzed,  90-94 
Les trade,  P.,  study  of  South  African 

native  English  speech  by,  108 
"Life  in  a  Haitian  Valley"  analyzed, 

57-60 
Lindgren,  E.  J.,  123 
Linton,  R.,  10,  131 
Lips,  J.,  108 
Lowie,  R.  H.,  24 

M 
Mair,  L.  P.,  18,  24 

study  of  Baganda  by,  73 
Malinowski,  B.,  18 
Material  culture,  problems  for  study 

of  acculturation  in,    5  5 
May,  M.  A.,  and  Doob,  L.  W.,  129 
McKern,  W.  C,  25 
McNickle,  D'Arcy,  novel  by,  analyzed, 

113-116 
Mead,  M.,  5,  124 

"Changing   Culture   of   an    Indian 
Tribe,"    work    by,     analyzed, 

45-53 
on      linguistic      acculturation      of 

"Antlers,"  49,  107 
Mechanisms,    psychological,    of    ac- 
culturation, 134-135 
Melanesia,   as   locale  for  research  in 
intertribal    acculturation,    124 
Method,  historical,  in  study  of  Ghost 
Dance  Hand  Game,  90-92 
of  analysis   of  acculturation  data, 

27-28 
of   comparing    life    of   natives    in 
reserves,  on  farm  and  in  towns 
of    South   Africa,    defects    in, 
71-72 
of  presenting  acculturation  data,  46 


7/2 


ACCULTURA  TION 


Method,    of   study    of   acculturation 
outlined,  1 31-136 
of  studying  culture-contact,  60-61 
of  studying   Pondo-White  contact, 

66-67 
of  synchronic  study  of  acculturation 
in  Mexico,  41-42,  44-45 
Mexico,  as  locale  for  further  accultur- 
ation research,    125 
technique  of  acculturation  studies  in, 
26-27 
Millen,  G.,  209 

Missionaries,  limitations  on  accultur- 
ation studies  by,  105 
"Mitla,"  analyzed,  34-40 
Modoc,  reaction  of  to  white  contact 

86-89 
Mooney,  J„  5,  75,  77 
Moszkowski,  M.,  95 


N 

Nash,  P.,  study  of  "Place  of  Religious 
Revivalism  in  ...  Klamath 
Reservation"  by,  analyzed, 
85-90 

Native  life,  urban,  compared  with  that 
of  reserves  in  South  Africa, 
70-71 

Nativistic  cults,  as  contra-accultur- 
ative  movements,  hypotheses 
concerning,  85,  89 

Negro,  New  World,  problems  for  ac- 
culturation research  among,  125 
studies  of  acculturation  in  religion 
of,  104 

Negroes,  study  of  Peyote  cult  among, 
104 

New  English  Dictionary,  definition  of 
acculturation  in,  3 

New  Standard  Dictionary,  definition 
of  acculturation  in,  2 


Park,  R.  E.,  definition  of  assimilation 

by,  13 
Parsons,  E.  C,  27 

acculturation  seen  in  Negro  folklore 

studies  by,  107 
definition    of     acculturation      by, 

7-8 
"Mitla,"  work  by,  analyzed,  34-40 
on  analysis  of  culture  into   traits, 
28 
Patterns,  of  Haitian  culture,  syncret- 
ism shown,  in  59 
cultural,  22-23 
economic,  of  "Antlers,"  change  in 

under  acculturation,  49 
native,  underlying  contra-accultur- 
ative  movements  of  the  North- 
west, 76-79 
underlying  nativistic  movements 
in  New  Guinea,  94-97 
Paviotso,  reaction  of  to  white  contact, 

86-89 
"Pawnee  Ghost  Dance  Hand  Game" 

analyzed,  90-94 
Pawnee,  history  of  contact  with  whites 
in  study  of  Ghost  Dance  hand 
game,  91 
Persistence,  of  traits  under  accultur- 
ation, 93 
Personality,  and  culture,  importance 
of   acculturation    research   for 
study  of,  129-130 
localities  for   prosecution   of  re- 
search in,  130 
problems  in  study  of,  in  Haiti,  60 
reaction  of  culture  on,  in  changing 
societies,  118 
Perspective,  historical,  absence  of  in 
studies  of  culture  contact,  30- 

3i,  52 
Peyote  cult,  103-104 


INDEX 


"Place  of  Religious  Revivalism  in  the 
Formation  of  the  Intercultural 
Community  of  Klamath  Re- 
servation"   analyzed,   85-90 

Political  life,  studies  of  limited  by 
"practical"    ends    sought,    105 

Polygyny,  incidence  of,  among  Pondo 
under   European    contact,  68- 

69 

Pondo,  effects  of  contact  on,  66-70 
"Popular  Science  Monthly,"  early  use 

of  term  acculturation  in,  4 
Powell,  W.  J.,  early  uses  of  term  ac- 
culturation by,  4 
"Practical  anthropology,"   5 

contrasted  to  scientific  study  of  ac- 
culturation, 29-32 
need  for  checking  results  in  studies 
of  by    non-practical   research, 
125 
Problems,  for  acculturation  research, 
as  bearing  on  relation  between 
personality    and  culture,    129- 
130 
in  economics,  126-127 
in  European-native  contact,  125- 

126 
in  folklore,  128 
in  linguistics,  127-128 
in  music,  127 
in  political  life,  126 
in  prior  literature  on  culture  con- 
tact, 128-129 
in  religion,  128 
in  social  organization,  126 
in  special  aspects  of  culture,  122 
involving  no   European  peoples, 

121-124 
under   intertribal   contact^   123- 
125 
methodological,   in  study  of  Haiti, 
57-5  9 


U3 

and  American   In- 


of  Mexicans 
dians,  45 
of  acculturation,  areas  for  study  of, 
i2off. 
"Prophet  Dances  of  the  Northwest" 
analyzed,  76-82 

R 

Race-crossing,     present     interest     in 

studies  of,  1-2 
Radin,  P.,  123 
early  acculturation  papers  by,  5 
"Influence  of  Whites  on  Winnebago 
Culture,"  paper  by,  analyzed, 

53-57 
study  of  Peyote  cult  among  Winn- 
ebago by,  1-3 
study  of  Zapotecan  linguistics  by, 
107 
"Reaction    to    Conquest,"    analyzed, 

66-72 
Reconstructionofpre-contact  cultures, 
difficulties  of,  23-24 
techniques  of,  24 
validity  of  objections  to,  24-25 
Redfield,  R.,  10,  131 
quoted  on  analysis  of  culture  into 

traits,  28 
"Tepoztlan,"   work    by,    analyzed, 
40-45 
Religion,  acculturation  in,  reasons  for 
numerous  studies  of,  75-76 
materials  for  study  of,  103-104 
Resistance,   to  European  culture  by 

Kxatla,  63-64 
Revivalism,     native,     as     contra-ac- 
culturative  phenomenon,  75-76 
Richards,  A.  I.,  18 
Rivers,  W.  H.  R.,  123 
doctrine  of  disappearance  of  native 
peoples      after     contact     with 
Europeans,  questioned,  74 


iJ4 


ACCULTURA  TION 


Sachs,  W.,  130 

Schapera,  I.,  16,  25 
quoted,    on    danger    of   neglecting 
European  elements  in  studying 
natives  under  contact,  19 
on  individual  variation  from  patt- 
erns of  a  culture,  21 
study    of    Kxatla    by,     analyzed, 

60-65 
use   of   term    acculturation    by,    2 

Schrieke,  B.,  30 

Shaker  religion,  81-82 

Situations,  in  which  acculturation  may 
occur,  133 

Smith,  Bradford,  novel  by,  analyzed, 
1 10-113 

Smith,  M.  G.,  104 

Smohalla  cult,  81 

Social  organization,  studies  of  ac- 
culturation in,   105-106 

Social  Science  Research  Council, 
definition  of  acculturation  by 
sub-Committee  on  Accultur- 
ation of,  9-1 1 

Spier,  L.,  16 
"Prophet  Dance  of  the  Northwest," 
study  by,  analyzed,  76-82 

Stoney,  S.  G.  and  Shelby,  G.  M.,  ac- 
culturation in  Negro  folklore 
shown  in  book  by,    107 

"Substitution,"  as  mechanism  in  ac- 
culturation, 38 

Sylvain,  S.,  study  of  Haitian  Negro- 
French  by,  108 

Syncretism,  cultural,  in  Haiti,  59 
in  Mexico,  38-39 


"Tepoztlan"  analyzed,  40-45 

"The  Surrounded"  analyzed,  11 3-1 16 

"This  Solid  Flesh"  analyzed,  110-113 


Thompson,  S.,  107 

Thurnwald,  H.,  use  of  questionnaires 
by  in  study  of  culture-change, 

73 
Thurnwald,  R.,  31 

methods  employed  by  in  East  Africa, 

72"73 
Torday,  E.,  16 

"Traits,"  advantages  and  disadvan- 
tages in  use  of  concept  of, 
28-29 

determination  of,  under  accultur- 
ation, 133-134 

integration  of,  into  patterns  of  ac- 
cepting cultures,  133-134 

selection  of,  under  acculturation, 
133 

U 

United  States,  Indian  tribes  of,  as 
offering  materials  for  research 
in  intertribal  acculturation, 
124-125 

U.  S.  S.  R.,  123 

V 

"Vailala  Madness  in  Retrospect" 
analyzed,  102-103 

"Vailala  Madness  and  the  Destruction 
of  Native  Ceremonies  in  the 
Gulf  Division"  analyzed,  97- 
102 

Variation,  of  individual  behavior 
around  cultural  norms,  under 
recent  and  distant  accultur- 
ation, 118 

W 

Wagner,  G.,  quoted,  on  Ehrenreich's 
analysis  of  acculturation,  5 
study  of  Peyote  cult  by,   103-104 


INDEX 


Webster's  Unabridged  Dictionary,  de- 
finition of  acculturation  in,  2 
Westermann,  D.,  30 
Williams,  F.  E.,  30 

papers  on  "The  Vailala  Madness" 

analyzed,  97-103 
studies  of  culture  contact  in  New 
Guinea  by,  73 


IJJ 


Williams,  J.  G.,  and  May,  H.  J.,  109 
Winnebago,    acculturation  of,    53-57 
Women,  effect  of  acculturation  on,  5 1 


Y 

Yokuts-Mono,     acculturation 
1870,  82-85 


of 


in 


Date  J) 


ue 


JW  23-40 


MW3  1  '5* 


r« 


^2. 


izkz 


— 


a 


JAN   t  5  '6!) 


.'6* 


ftPR  1  7   70 


UOry  Buriiu   Cat.  no,  1137 


! Herskovit 

s, 

Me 

lvill 

.e  J. 

1895 

-1963 

Accultura 

ti 

on : 

the 

study 

of 

culture 

contact 

J** 


■  * 


:    ..  "/%■  I  •  I  .*«'.- 

V'>«*'    •  I  I  I  I 

A<  MR    I 

RPffi        ■  I         "  v.*       ■  ■  I  -  ■ 

■    ■       ■  I  4 ' 

.  ■  I  .  - 

v.v  ■  •  ■ 

■ 

'  I  I  ■  v:  ■  I  I  .V,.*    *MV)  ># j 


*# 


HH 


BBS      v\K*<     H  *4** 

I i  -    f   '  .     ii   i 

■  ■    I   !:v;;«^ 


M       V-  at-  *f\u    %w 

UBS!       WrnBI   '  ',         '','.'..*■  ,  / 


