mm 


4  TH€AM€R1CAN  * 

Church  HistoryS€ri€s 


M 


'.^  ■"?-*■•. '.-■it..'. . ■• 


iM 


^ 
m^:: 


§m 


^mr 


?S^:>>"^';;;:i^ff? 


ISS^' 


Ki3a 


:i^^: 


iirrllVslVn   '5' 


It. 


mrnv^. 


xv,S_^4-_:i_ 


H 


\. 


Cpe  (^tnerican 
C^uxc^  J^istov^  ^tvm 

CONSISTING  OF   A   SERIES  OF 

DENOMINATIONAL  HISTORIES  PUBLISHED  UNDER  THE  AUSPICES  OF 

THE   AMERICAN   SOCIETY   OF  CHURCH   HISTORY 

(Beneraf  (Bbifore 

Rev.  Philip  Schaff,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.  Bishop  John  F.  Hurst,  D.  D.,  LL.  D. 

Rt.  Rev.  H.  C.  Potter,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.    Rev.  E.  J.  Wolf,  D.  D. 
Rev.  Geo.  P.  Fisher,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.         Henry  C.  Vedder,  M.  A. 
Rev.  Samuel  M.  Jackson,  D.  D.,  LL.  D. 

Volume  I 


(American  C^utc^  ^ieioxi^ 

THE   RELIGIOUS    FORCES 

OF  THE 

UNITED   STATES 


ENUMERATED,  CLASSIFIED,  AND  DESCRIBED  ON  THE  BASIS  OF  THE 
GOVERNMENT  CENSUS  OF  iSqo 


WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  ON  THE 
CONDITION  AND  CHARACTER  OF  AMERICAN  CHRISTIANITY 


BY 

H.  K.  CARROLL,  LL.  D. 

IN    CHARGE    OF    THt    DIVISION    OF    CHURCHES,   ELEVENTH    CtNSUS 

REVISED,  JANUARY   I,    I  896,  WITH  ADDITIONAL  TABLES  OF  STATIS- 
TICS FOR  THE  FIVE  YEARS  SINCE  THE  CENSUS  OF  I  89O 


€U  C^xi^tian  feiferature  Co. 


MDCCCXCIII 


Copyright,  1893, 
By  The  Christian  Literature  Company. 


5i^ 

i 


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

SECTION  PAGE 

I.  The  Sources  of  Information  and  the  Plan ix 

II.  The  Scope  and  Method  of  the  Census xi 

III.  Variety  in  Religion xiv 

IV.  Classification  of  the  Churches ". xvi 

V.  Denominational  Titles xix 

VI.  The  Causes  of  Division xxiv 

VII.  Analysis  of  Religious  Forces  of  the  United  States.  xxix 

VIII.  The  Religious  Population xxxiv 

IX.  The  Growth  of  the  Churches xxxvii 

X.  How  the  Religious  Forces  are  Distributed xl 

XI.  The  Evangelical  and  Non-Evangelical  Elements  ...  xlv 

XII.  The  General  Statistical  Summaries xlviri 

XIII.  The  Negro  in  his  Relations  to  the  Church liii 

XIV.  The  Characteristics  of  American  Christianity Iviii 

XV.  How  the  Church  Affects  Society Ixv 

Explanations  of  the  Terms  Used Ixviii 


VI  TABLE    OF   CONTENTS, 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

I.  The  Adventists i 

II.  The  Baptists i6 

III.  The  River  Brethren 55 

IV.  The  Plymouth  Brethren  59 

V.  The  Catholics 66 

VI.  The  Catholic  Apostolic  Church 84 

VII.  Chinese  Temples 86 

VIII.  The  Christadelphians 89 

IX.  The  Christians 91 

X.  The  Christian  Missionary  Association 95 

XI.  The  Christian  Scientists 96 

XII.  The  Christian  Union  Churches 99 

XIII.  The  Church  of  God 102 

XIV.  The  Church  Triumphant  (Schweinfurth) 105 

XV.  Church  of  the  New  Jerusalem 107 

XVI.  Communistic  Societies iii 

XVII.  The  Congregational  Churches 119 

XVIII.  The  Disciples  of  Christ 125 

XIX.  The  Dunkards 129 

XX.  The  Evangelical  Association 139 

XXI.  The  Friends 143 

XXII.  Friends  of  the  Temple 153 

XXIII.  The  German  Evangelical  Protestant  Church 155 

XXIV.  The  German  Evangelical  Synod 156 

XXV.  The  Jews 159 

XXVI.  The  Latter-Day  Saints 165 

XXVII.  The  Evangelical  Lutherans 175 

XXVIII.  The  Mennonites 206 

XXIX.  The  Methodists 221 

XXX.  The  Moravians 272 

XXXI.  The  Presbyterians 277 


TABLE   OF  CONTENTS.  Vll 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

XXXII.  Protestant  Episcopal  Bodies 317 

XXXIII.  The  Reformed  Bodies 329 

XXXIV.  The  Salvation  Army 340 

XXXV.  The  Schwenkfeldians 344 

XXXVI.  The  Social  Brethren  Church 346 

XXXVII.  The  Society  for  Ethical  Culture 348 

XXXVIII.  The  Spiritualists 350 

XXXIX.  The  Theosophical  Society 353 

XL.  The  United  Brethren  355 

XLI.  The  Unitarians 365 

XLII.  The  Universalists 369 

XLIII.  Independent  Congregations 376 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 

TABLE  PAGE 

I.  Summary  by  States  of  all  Denominations 378 

II.  Summary  of  Individual  Denominations 380 

III.  Summary  of  Denominational  Families  392 

IV.  Summary  of  Denominations  According  to  Number  of 

Communicants 394 

V.  Denominational    Families    According    to    Number    of 

Communicants 397 

VI.  Denominations  Classified  According  to  Polity 398 

VII.  Summary  of  Colored  Organizations 400 

VIII.  Churches  in  Cities 404 

IX.  Statistical  Summaries  for  1895 441 

INDEX 459 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  purpose  of  this  volume  is  to  describe  and  classify 
all  denominations,  so  as  to  give  a  clear  idea  of  the  charac- 
ter and  strength  of  the  religious  forces  of  the  United 
States. 


THE    SOURCES    OF    INFORMATION    AND    THE   PLAN. 

The  statistics  are  those  of  the  government  census  of 
1890,  revised  in  a  few  particulars,  and  arranged  to  present, 
with  necessary  fullness  and  without  unnecessary  detail, 
the  facts  that  everybody  ought  to  know,  but  which  have 
not  hitherto  been  accessible.  The  government  report  is 
very  voluminous.  It  makes  the  county  the  unit,  not  only 
in  its  tables  for  the  States,  but  also  in  those  for  ecclesias- 
tical organizations,  such  as  classes,  conferences,  dioceses, 
districts,  presbyteries,  synods,  and  the  like.  That  is,  the 
statistics  of  each  denomination  are  given  by  counties  under 
dioceses  and  presbyteries,  etc.,  as  well  as  under  the  several 
States  and  Territories.  It  was  deemed  unnecessary  to 
over-burden  these  pages  with  such  a  mass  of  statistical  de- 
tails. There  are  but  few  persons  who  would  ever  need  to 
make  use  of  them.  Therefore  the  State  has  been  made 
the  civil  unit,  and  each  denomination  is  presented  in  tables. 


X  IN  TROD  UC  TION. 

first  by  States,  and  secondly  by  ecclesiastical  organizations, 
where  such  organizations  exist.  The  descriptive  accounts 
are,  in  the  main,  those  prepared  for  the  government  census. 
Their  object  is  to  show  the  general  characteristics  of  de- 
nominational families,  or  groups ;  to  give  the  date,  place, 
and  circumstances  of  the  origin  of  each  denomination,  to- 
gether with  its  peculiarities  in  doctrine,  polity,  and  usage; 
to  state  the  cause  of  every  division,  and  to  indicate  the 
differences  which  separate  branches  bearing  the  same  fam- 
ily name. 

The  order  of  the  alphabet  is  followed  in  presenting  the 
denominations.  The  first  chapter  is  given  to  the  Advent- 
ists,  the  second  to  the  Baptists,  and  so  on  through  the  list. 
A  different  rule  is  observed,  however,  in  the  arrangement 
of  the  branches  of  denominational  families  or  groups.  The 
stem,  or  oldest  body,  is  given  the  first  place,  and  the  others 
appear  in  chronological  order,  according  to  the  date  of  their 
origin,  except  in  cases  where  there  has  been  one  or  more 
divisions  in  a  branch.  To  illustrate,  let  us  take  the  Ad- 
ventist  family.  The  Evangelical  branch  is  generally  con- 
ceded to  be  the  oldest.  The  Advent  Christians  are  second 
in  the  order  of  time,  and  the  Seventh-Day  body  third. 
The  Life  and  Advent  Union  would  be  fourth,  were  it  not 
that  the  Church  of  God,  which  is  more  recent,  is  a  division 
of  or  secession  from  the  Seventh-Day  branch.  The  Church 
of  God  therefore  occupies  the  fourth  place,  next  to  its 
parent  body.  The  same  rule  applies  to  the  arrangement 
of  Methodist  and  other  branches.  The  historical  order 
has  been  observed  because  it  is  the  more  logical  and  con- 
venient. The  alphabetical  order  would  inevitably  lead  to 
confusion,  and  frequent  and  unnecessary  repetition  in  the 
descriptive  accounts  ;  and  arrangement  according  to  numer- 
ical strength  would  be  open  to  the  same  objection.  The 
method  chosen  allows  the  reader  to  follow  the  historical 


INTRODUCriOX.  xi 

development  of  every  denominational  group,  and  study  the 
causes  of  each  successive  division  in  the  order  in  which  it 
occurred. 

11. 

THE    SCOPE    AND    METHOD    OF   THE    CENSUS. 

The  census  of  the  churches,  just  completed,  is  the  first 
successful  effort  of  the  government  in  this  direction.  In 
1850,  i860,  and  1870,  religious  statistics  were  gathered  by 
United  States  marshals  or  their  agents.  In  the  censuses  of 
1850  and  i860  three  items  only  were  given,  viz.,  churches, 
church  accommodations,  and  value  of  church  property.  In 
1870  a  distinction  was  made  between  churches  or  church 
societies  and  church  edifices,  thus  making  an  additional 
item.  In  1880  large  preparations  were  made  for  a  census 
which  should  not  only  be  thorough,  but  exhaustive  in  the 
number  of  its  inquiries.  A  vast  mass  of  detailed  informa- 
tion was  obtained ;  but  the  appropriations  were  exhausted 
before  it  was  tabulated,  and  the  results  were  wholly  lost. 
Having  been  appointed  in  1889  by  the  Hon.  Robert  P. 
Porter,  superintendent  of  the  eleventh  census,  to  the  charge 
of  this  division  of  the  census  office,  I  determined  to  make 
the  scope  of  the  inquiry  broad  enough  to  embrace  the 
necessary  items  of  information,  and  narrow  enough  to 
insure  success  in  collecting,  tabulating,  and  publishing 
them ;  and  to  devise  a  method  of  collecting  the  statistics 
which  would  serve  the  ends  of  accuracy,  completeness,  and 
promptness.  It  was  in  some  sense  to  be  a  pioneer  effort, 
and  the  plan  and  methods  adopted  were  designed  to  bring 
success  within  the  range  of  possibility  The  scope  of  the 
inquiry  of  1880  was  therefore  greatly  reduced.  Many 
questions  which,  if  fully  answered,  would 'yield  desirable 
information  were  omitted  from  the  census  of  1890,  which 


xii  INTRODUCTION. 

covers  these  points:  (i)  organizations  or  congregations; 
(2)  church  edifices;  (3)  seating  capacity;  (4)  other  places 
of  worship,  with  (5)  their  seating  capacity;  (6)  value  of 
church  property ;  (7)  communicants  or  members.  The 
number  of  ministers  Is  also  given  in  the  totals  for  denomi- 
nations. 

Great  diversity,  as  every  ecclesiastical  student  knows, 
exists  in  the  statistical  schemes  of  the  various  denomina- 
tions. Some  embrace  many,  others  few,  items ;  some  give 
congregations  or  societies,  but  not  edifices ;  others  edifices 
but  not  societies;  some  report  value  of  church  property, 
while  others  do  not ;  most  give  members  or  communicants, 
while  one,  the  chiefest  of  all,^  gives  only  population.  There 
are  also  as  many  varieties  of  the  statistical  year  as  there 
are  months.  Moreover,  quite  a  number  of  denominations 
have  never  made  any  returns  whatever.  These  considera- 
tions suggest  the  great  difficulty  of  securing  anything  like 
uniformity  in  the  returns ;  but  uniformity  was  kept  stead- 
ily in  view,  and  it  was  attained.  All  denominations  thus 
appear  in  the  census  of  1890  on  the  same  statistical  basis. 
For  the  first  time  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  Is  represented 
by  communicants,  and  not  by  population. 

The  method  of  gathering  the  statistics  was  to  make  the 
presbytery,  the  classls,  the  association,  the  synod,  the  dio- 
cese, the  conference,  etc.,  the  unit  In  the  division  of  the 
work,  and  to  ask  the  clerk  or  moderator  or  statistical  secre- 
tary of  each  to  obtain  the  desired  information  from  the 
churches  belonging  to  his  presbytery,  association,  or  dio- 
cese, as  the  case  might  be.  This  officer  received  full 
instructions  how  to  proceed,  and  sufficient  supplies  of  cir- 
culars, schedules,  etc.,  to  communicate  with  each  church. 
This  method  proved  to  be  quite  practicable,  and  very  sat- 

^  Roman  Catholic. 


INTRODUCTION.  xiii 

isfactory.  Several  thousand  agents  thus  gave  information 
which  they  were  best  quahfied  to  secure,  and  the  results 
were  found,  when  tests  were  applied,  to  be  full  and  accu- 
rate. I  may  mention  that,  having  a  large  force  of  clerks 
with  ample  supplies,  a  vast  correspondence  was  conducted. 
For  example,  desiring  to  obtain  a  complete  list  of  Lutheran 
congregations  unattached  to  synods,  a  letter  of  inquiry  was 
addressed  to  every  Lutheran  minister  asking  him  to  report 
any  such  congregations  iif  his  neighborhood.  In  this  way, 
much  information,  otherwise  unattainable,  was  received. 

It  should  be  understood  that  the  census  enumerators, 
who  take  the  population  by  domiciliary  visitation,  are  not 
allowed  to  ask  individuals  as  to  their  religious  connections. 
In  the  first  place,  they  have  but  a  brief  time  in  which  to 
complete  their  work ;  in  the  second  place,  their  schedules 
are  already  overburdened  with  inquiries ;  and  in  the  third 
place,  the  constitutional  provision  of  the  First  Amendment, 
restraining  Congress  from  making  any  "  law  respecting  an 
establishment  of  religion,  or  prohibiting  the  free  exercise 
thereof,"  is  interpreted  as  forbidding  it.  Many  persons 
would,  under  this  constitutional  guarantee,  refuse  to  an- 
swer questions  as  to  their  religious  faith,  and  it  is  doubtful 
whether  the  courts  would  not  uphold  them  in  their  refusal. 
The  census  authorities  believed  that  it  would  add  greatly 
to  the  difficulties  of  a  successful  enumeration  if  some  ques- 
tions were  mandatory  and  some  not.  This  is  the  reason 
we  cannot  have  in  this  country  what  the  census  reports  of 
Canada,  Australia,  and  certain  other  countries  include — 
statistics  of  religious  populations. 

While  the  census  of  1890  is  tabulated  by  counties  and 
States  as  well  as  by  associations,  conferences,  dioceses, 
presbyteries,  and  denominations,  the  materials  were  gath- 
ered in  such  a  way  as  to  permit  tabulation  by  cities  and 
other  civil  divisions.     The  manuscript  schedules  of  returns 


xiv  INTRODUCTION. 

from  which  the  printed  reports  are  compiled  show  the  loca- 
tion by  city  or  town,  county  and  State,  and  the  statistical 
facts,  of  every  congregation  of  every  denomination,  so  that 
it  is  possible  on  the  basis  of  these  returns  to  make  any 
desired  combination  in  tabulation. 

The  list  of  denominations  represented  is  believed  to  be 
exhaustive.  The  aim  was  to  make  it  so.  Returns  were 
sought  for  every  denomination,  regardless  of  the  character 
of  its  faith  or  the  fewness  of  its  members.  Thus  Chinese 
Buddhists,  Mormons,  Theosophists,  Ethical  Culturists,  Com- 
munistic Societies,  and  SpirituaHsts  appear  in  the  census  of 
1890,  as  well  as  Methodists,  Baptists,  and  Presbyterians; 
Jewish  congregations  as  well  as  Christian;  Catholic  as  well 
as  Protestant.  Nor  were  independent  or  unattached  con- 
gregations, undenominational  chapels,  missions,  and  similar 
unclassified  organizations  omitted. 

III. 

VARIETY   IN    RELIGION. 

The  first  impression  one  gets  in  studying  the  results  of 
the  census  is  that  there  is  an  infinite  variety  of  religions  in 
the  Uoited  States.  There  are  churches  small  and  churches 
great,  churches  white  and  churches  black,  churches  high 
and  low,  orthodox  and  heterodox,  Christian  and  pagan, 
Catholic  and  Protestant,  Liberal  and  Conservative,  Calvin- 
istic  and  Arminian,  native  and  foreign,  Trinitarian  and 
Unitarian.  All  phases  of  thought  are  represented  by  them, 
all  possible  theologies,  all  varieties  of  polity,  ritual,  usage, 
forms  of  worship.  In  our  economical  policy  as  a  nation  we 
have  emphasized  the  importance  of  variety  in  industry. 
We  like  the  idea  of  manufacturing  or  producing  just  as 
many  articles  of  merchandise  as  possible.     We  have  in- 


INTR  OD  UC  TIOiV.  XV 

vented  more  curious  and  useful  things  than  any  other  na- 
tion. In  matters  of  religion  we  have  not  been  less  liberal 
and  enterprising.  We  seem  to  have  about  every  variety 
known  to  other  countries,  with  not  a  few  peculiar  to  our- 
selves. Our  native  genius  for  invention  has  exerted  itself 
in  this  direction  also,  and  worked  out  some  curious  results. 
The  American  patent  covers  no  less  than  two  original  Bibles 
— the  Mormon  and  Oahspe — and  more  brands  of  religion, 
so  to  speak,  than  are  to  be  found,  I  believe,  in  any  other 
country.  This  we  speak  of  as  "  the  land  of  the  free."  No 
man  has  a  property  in  any  other  man,  or  a  right  to  dictate 
his  religious  principles  or  denominational  attachment.  No 
church  has  a  claim  on  tiie  State,  and  the  State  has  no 
claim  on  any  church.  We  scarcely  appreciate  our  advan- 
tages. Our  citizens  are  free  to  choose  a  residence  in  any 
one  of  fifty  States  and  Territories,  and  to  move  from  one 
to  another  as  often  as  they  have  a  mind  to.  There  is  even 
a  wider  range  for  choice  and  change  in  religion.  One  may 
be  a  pagan,  a  Jew,  or  a  Christian,  or  each  in  turn.  If  he 
is  a  pagan,  he  may  worship  in  one  of  the  numerous  temples 
devoted  to  Buddha ;  if  a  J  ew,  he  may  be  of  the  Orthodox 
or  Reformed  variety  ;  if  a  Christian,  he  may  select  any  one 
of  125  or  130  different  kinds,  or  join  every  one  of  them  in 
turn.  He  may  be  six  kinds  of  an  Adventist,  seven  kinds 
of  a  Catholic,  twelve  kinds  of  a  Mennonite  or  Presbyterian, 
thirteen  kinds  of  a  Baptist,  sixteen  kinds  of  a  Lutheran,  or 
seventeen  kinds  of  a  Methodist.  He  may  be  a  member  of 
any  one  of  143  denominations,  or  of  all  in  succession.  If 
none  of  these  suit  him,  he  still  has  a  choice  among  150 
separate  and  independent  congregations,  which  have  no 
denominational  name,  creed,  or  connection.  Any  resident 
of  the  United  States  is  perfectly  free  to  make  himself  at 
home  with  any  of  these  religious  companies,  and  to  stay 
with  each  as  long  or  as  short  a  time  as  he  will.     We  some- 


X  vi  IN  TROD  UC  TION. 

times  speak  as  though  there  were  not  sufficient  freedom  of 
thought.  Here  are  many  phases  of  thought,  and  any  man 
may  pass  without  hindrance  through  them  all. 

A  closer  scrutiny  of  the  list,  however,  shows  that  many 
of  these  143  denominations  differ  only  in  name.  Without 
a  single  change  in  doctrine  or  polity,  the  seventeen  Meth- 
odist bodies  could  be  reduced  to  three  or  four ;  the  twelve 
Presbyterian  to  three ;  the  twelve  Mennonite  to  two ;  and 
so  on.  The  differences  in  many  cases  are  only  sectional  or 
historical.  The  slavery  question  was  the  cause  of  not  a 
few  divisions,  and  matters  of  discipline  were  responsible  for 
a  large  number.  Arranging  the  denominations  in  groups 
or  families,  and  counting  as  one  family  each  the  twelve 
Mennonite,  the  seventeen  Methodist,  the  thirteen  Baptist 
bodies,  and  so  on,  we  have,  instead  of  143,  only  42  titles. 
In  other  words,  if  there  could  be  a  consolidation  of  each 
denominational  group,  the  reproach  of  our  division  would 
be  largely  taken  away. 

IV. 

CLASSIFICATION    OF   THE    CHURCHES. 

In  order  to  get  a  comprehensive  idea  of  the  numerous 
religious  bodies  it  is  necessary  to  classify  them.  This  is 
a  much  simpler  matter  than  might,  at  first  sight,  be  sup- 
posed. They  fall  naturally  into  three  grand  divisions, 
Christian,  Jewish,  and  miscellaneous.  The  Christian  divis- 
ion  we  divide  into  classes,  as  Catholic  and  Protestant,  and 
Evangelical  and  non-Evangelical.  Quite  independently 
of  this  classification  we  have  denominational  groups,  or 
families. 

Under  the  head  miscellaneous  I  would  include  Chinese 
Buddhists,  the  Theosophists,   the   Ethical   Culturists,   and 


INTRODUCTION.  xvii 

certain  communistic  societies.  This  is  a  very  small  and  in- 
significant division.  The  Jewish  division  embraces  simply 
the  Orthodox  and  Reformed  Jews.  The  Christian  division 
contains,  of  course,  the  great  majority  of  denominations 
and  believers — Catholics,  Protestants,  Latter- Day  Saints — 
all  bodies  not  Jewish  or  pagan. 

I  consider  as  a  denominational  family  all  Methodist 
bodies.  They  are  branches  with  a  common  stem,  a  com- 
mon name,  a  common  type  of  doctrine,  and  certain  com- 
mon features  and  usages.  I  consider  as  a  denominational 
family  all  Presbyterian  bodies.  They  all  go  back  to  the 
same  source  historically,  they  have  the  same  name,  the 
same  confession  of  faith,  with  two  or  three  exceptions,  and 
the  same  system  of  government.  I  also  class  the  various 
Lutheran  bodies  as  a  denominational  family,  the  numerous 
Baptist  bodies,  and  so  on.  A  denominational  family,  there- 
fore, is  a  number  of  branches  closely  affiliated  in  history 
and  in  common  characteristics.  Nowhere  have  denomina- 
tional families  developed  as  in  the  United  States.  In  no 
quarter  of  the  globe  have  the  Lutherans  or  the  Methodists, 
the  Presbyterians  or  the  Baptists,  the  Friends  or  the  Men- 
nonites,  separated  into  so  many  branches  as  here  in  this 
land  of  perfect  civil  and  religious  liberty. 

It  was  an  American  Presbyterian,  in  the  great  gathering 
of  Presbyterians  of  all  lands,  in  Belfast,  Ireland,  some 
years  ago,  who  exclaimed,  alluding  to  a  reference  to  the 
*'  U.  P's."  of  Scotland,  and  other  branches,  "We  are  httle 
better  than  a  lot  of  split  P's."  His  observation  might  be 
given  a  much  wider  range.  It  is  far  more  applicable  to 
Protestants  than  to  Presbyterians — we  are  "a  lot  of  spHt 
P's."  If  there  were  in  Milton's  day  **  subdichotomies  of 
petty  schisms,"  what  phrase  would  that  great  master  of 
vivid  expression  coin  to  fit  the  numberless  divisions  and 
subdivisions  into  which  Protestantism  has  fallen  since  ?    We 


xviii  INTRODUCTION. 

no  longer  classify  these  divisions  as  units,  but  as  families  of 
units.  The  Presbyterians  are  not  simply  one  of  these  divis- 
ions, but  a  whole  family.  The  Methodists,  who  were  a  sort 
of  ccclesiola  in  ecclesia  in  Wesley's  day  in  England,  are 
now  an  ecclesia  ecclesiarinn  the  world  over.  According 
to  the  scientists,  no  atom  is  so  small  that  it  may  not  be 
conceived  of  as  consisting  of  halves.  It  may  be  divided 
into  halves,  and  these  halves  may  in  turn  be  divided,  and 
so  on  ad  infijiitnin.  No  denomination  has  thus  far  proved 
to  be  too  small  for  division.  Denominations  appear  in  the 
list  given  in  this  volume  with  as  few  as  twenty- five  mem- 
bers. I  was  reluctantly  compelled  to  exclude  from  the 
census  one  with  twenty-one  members.  The  reason  was, 
that  while  they  insisted  that  they  were  a  separate  body 
and  did  not  worship  with  other  churches,  they  had  no 
organized  church  of  their  own.  Twelve  of  them  were  in 
Pennsylvania,  divided  between  Philadelphia  and  Pittsburg, 
six  in  Illinois,  and  three  in  Missouri.  They  were  so  widely 
scattered  they  could  not  maintain  public  worship. 

It  is  not  easy  to  define  clearly  and  to  apply  discriminat- 
ingly the  term  ''Evangelical."  It  comes,  of  course,  from 
the  Greek  word  '*  evangel,"  for  which  our  Anglo-Saxon 
**  gospel,"  or  good  news,  is  the  close  equivalent.  In  a 
general  way,  we  mean,  I  suppose,  when  we  say  certain 
denominations  are  Evangelical,  that  they  hold  earnestly  to 
the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  as  found  in  the  New 
Testament.  Evangelical  and  non- Evangelical  are  terms 
used  generally  to  designate  classes  of  churches  in  the 
Protestant  division.  The  Evangelical  churches  are  those 
which  hold  to  the  inspiration,  authority,  and  sufficiency  of 
the  Scriptures ;  the  Trinity,  the  deity  of  Christ,  justifica- 
tion by  faith  alone,  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the 
conversion  and  sanctification  of  the  sinner.  The  non-Evan- 
gelical churches  are  those  which  take  a  rationalistic  view  of 


INTRODUCTION.  xix 

the  deity  of  Christ  and  the  doctrines  of  grace,  of  which  the 
Unitarians  may  be  taken  as  an  example.  There  are  some 
denominations  which  have  the  word  *'  Evangelical "  in 
their  title,  and  yet  are  thoroughly  rationalistic  and  there- 
fore non- Evangelical.  Practically,  we  may  distinguish  as 
Evangelical  all  those  bodies  which  are  members  of  the 
general  organization  known  as  the  Evangelical  Alliance,  or 
in  harmony  with  its  articles  of  faith ;  and  as  non-Evangel- 
ical all  other  Protestant  bodies. 

V. 

DENOMINATIONAL   TITLES. 

The  numerous  divisions  make  modern  ecclesiastical  his- 
tory an  interesting  study.  It  is  interesting  because  it 
necessarily  deals  with  so  many  distinct  phases  of  religious 
thought,  so  many  diverse  denominational  movements,  and 
so  many  divergencies,  great  and  small,  in  usage,  discipline, 
and  polity.  But  it  is  a  peculiarly  difficult  study,  because 
of  the  multiplicity  of  denominational  divisions,  and  the 
labyrinth  of  details  which  must  be  mastered.  No  worse 
puzzle  was  ever  invented  than  that  which  the  names  of  the 
various  denominations  present. 

We  have,  for  example,  the  ''  Presbyterian  Church  in 
the  United  States  "  and  the  "  Presbyterian  Church  in  the 
United  States  of  America  "  ;  the  ''  Reformed  Church  in  the 
United  States"  and  the  "Reformed  Church  in  America." 
Which  is  which?  There  are  doubtless  many  members  of 
these  bodies  who  could  not  tell.  The  only  apparent  dis- 
tinction in  each  of  these  cases  is  geographical.  But  what 
is  the  difference  between  the  "  United  States  "  and  the 
''  United  States  of  America  "  ?  How  is  anybody  to  dis- 
tinguish between  the  '*  Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United 


XX  INTRODUCTION. 

States "    and    the   ''  Presbyterian   Church   in   the   United 
States  of  America  "  ? 

There  are,  no  doubt,  theological  distinctions  between  the 
*' Reformed  Church  in  the  United  States"  and  the  "Re- 
formed Church  in  America."     But  what  precisely  are  these 
distinctions  ?    They  cannot  be  of  fundamental  importance, 
because  both  churches  accept  the  same  symbol,  the  Heidel- 
berg Catechism.  We  should  expect  the  theologians  of  the  two 
churches  to  know;  but  what  about  the  body  of  ministers? 
Many  may  have  known  once,  but  might  find  it  difficult  to 
recall  the  exact  shades  of  difference.      As  to  the  laymen, 
few  of  them  have  probably  ever  heard  the  difference  de- 
scribed.    The  way  we  learn  to  distinguish  between  the  two 
churches  is  by  identifying  the  Reformed  Church  in  Amer- 
ica as  the  ''Dutch"  body,  and  the  Reformed  Church  in 
the  United  States  as  the  ''German"  body;   and  so  when 
we  want  to  use  these  titles  intelligently  we  bracket  the 
words  "  Dutch  "  and  "  German  "  in  connection  with  them. 
Amo'ng  the  Presbyterians  there  are  four  bodies  of  the 
Reformed  variety.      I  have  always  had  great  difficulty  in 
distinguishing  between  them.      One  is  called  the  Reformed 
Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United  States  of  America ;  an- 
other, the  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church  in  North  Amer- 
ica.    One  has  a  synod  and  the  other  a  general  synod.     But 
it  is  not  always  easy  to  remember  which  has  the  synod 
and   which   the    general    synod.       I    have   found   in    their 
monthly  organs  a  more  sure  method  of  distinction.      One 
of   these   organs   has  a  blue  cover  and  the  other  a  pink 
cover.     The  blue-cover  organ  represents  the  general  synod, 
and  the  general  synod  represents  the  Reformed  Presbyte- 
rian Church  in  North  America  ;  the  pink-cover  organ  repre- 
sents the  synod,  and  the  synod  represents  the  Reformed 
Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United  States  of  America. 
About  a  century  ago  a  number  of  ministers  and  churches 


INTRODUCTION.  xxi 

seceded  from  the  Kirk  in  Scotland  and  organized  the 
Secession  Church.  Soon  after,  half  of  this  Secession 
Church  seceded  from  the  other  half,  and  in  process  of  time 
the  halves  were  quartered.  Then,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
there  was  a  dispute  among  them  as  to  who  were  the  first 
seceders.  Those  who  thought  their  claim  best  prefixed 
the  word  **  Original "  to  their  title  and  became  Original 
Seceders.  Then  there  was  a  union  of  Seceders  and  Origi- 
nal Seceders,  and  the  result  was  the  United  Original  Seces- 
sion Church,  or,  more  properly,  the  Church  of  the  United 
Original  Seceders.  This  is  probably  the  only  instance 
in  which  the  ideas  of  division  and  union  are  both  incor- 
porated in  one  title.  This  title  being  neither  ecclesi- 
astical nor  doctrinal,  and  not  even  geographical,  we  may 
properly  term  it  mathematical,  and  think  of  the  church  as 
the  Original  and  Only  Addition-Division  Church  in  the 
Presbyterian  family. 

There  are  twelve  bodies  of  Presbyterians  to  be  distin- 
guished, and  seventeen  bodies  of  Methodists ;  and  Metho- 
dist titles  are  scarcely  more  helpful  than  Presbyterian. 
We  have  the  Methodist  Episcopal,  which  we  recognize  as 
the  parent  body,  and  which  we  sometimes  distinguish  as 
the  Northern  Church,  though  it  covers  the  South  as  well 
as  the  North.  We  have  the  Methodist  Episcopal,  South, 
which  resulted  from  the  division  in  1844.  We  have  the 
African  Methodist  Episcopal,  the  African  Methodist  Epis- 
copal Zion,  the  Colored  Methodist  Episcopal,  the  Union 
American  Methodist  Episcopal,  the  African  Union  Meth- 
odist Protestant,  the  Zion  Union  Apostolic,  and  the  Evan- 
gelist Missionary — all  colored  bodies.  We  have  also  three 
bodies  of  Congregational  Methodists,  none  of  which  are 
Congregational  in  fact,  with  Free,  Independent,  Protestant, 
Primitive,  and  other  varieties  of  Methodists,  the  why  of 
which  must  forever  remain  an  inscrutable  mystery  to  the 


xxii  INTRODUCTION. 

mass  of  mankind.  The  word  "  Protestant "  in  the  title  of 
the  Methodist  Protestant  Church  does  not,  at  least  histori- 
cally, mean  Evangelical  or  anti- Catholic,  but  really  anti- 
Episcopal.  The  Methodist  reformers  of  1830  protested 
against  the  episcopacy  of  the  parent  body  as  a  barrier  to 
the  reforms  they  advocated.  "  Methodist  Protestant  "  does 
not,  therefore,  indicate  that  there  is  a  Methodist  Catholic 
Church  from  which  this  is  distinguished,  but  that  there  is 
a  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  from  which  this  is  distin- 
guished as  a  Methodist  anti-Episcopal  Church.  In  the 
title  Free  Methodist  Church  the  word  **  Free  "  does  not 
mean  free  from  State  control  or  patronage,  as  it  means  in 
Presbyterian  parlance  in  Scotland,  but  free  from  the  pew 
system,  free  from  worldliness,  free  from  instrumental  and 
choir  music,  and  free  from  unsound  preaching.  This  we 
ascertain  from  the  history  of  the  body,  not  from  its  title. 
The  Primitive  Methodist  Church  does  not,  of  course,  claim 
to  belong  to  the  age  of  Primitive  Christianity,  nor  to  be 
the  original  Methodist  Church.  It  dates  from  18 10,  and 
sprang  from  a  revival  of  the  early  Methodist  practice  of 
field-preaching. 

Of  Baptist  bodies  we  count  thirteen,  including  the 
Regular,  North,  South,  and  Colored ;  the  Freewill  in  two 
varieties ;  the  General,  Separate,  United,  Six-Principle, 
Seventh-Day,  Primitive,  and  Old  Two-Seed-in-the-Spirit 
Predestinarian ;  also  the  Baptist  Church  of  Christ,  which 
claims  to  have  descended  direct  from  the  apostles.  Be- 
ginning with  the  three  principal  bodies,  called  **  Regular," 
we  might,  following  the  old  classification  of  verbs,  describe 
the  Baptists  as  *'  Regular,  Irregular,  Redundant,  and  De- 
fective." The  most  curious  of  all  Baptist  bodies  is  the 
Old  Two-Seed-in-the-Spirit  Predestinarian.  Here  we  have 
a  title  that  is  definitive.  It  describes  and  distinguishes. 
These   Baptists   are    Predestinarian.       They   believe    that 


INTRODUCTION.  xxlii 

every  action,  whether  good  or  bad,  of  every  person  and 
every  event  was  predestinated  from  the  beginning;  not 
only  the  initial  sin  of  Eve  and  the  amiable  compliance  of 
Adam  and  the  consequent  fall  of  man,  but  the  apostasy  of 
Satan.  They  are  thoroughly  Predestinarian  ;  and  not  only 
Predestinarian,  but  they  are  Old  Two-Seed-in-the-Spirit 
Predestinarians.  The  two  seeds  are  good  and  evil;  and 
one  or  the  other  of  them  will  spring  up  unto  eternal  life  or 
eternal  death,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  predestination 
decreed  in  each  particular  case. 

There  are  four  bodies  of  Brethren  who  object  to  any 
other  designation.  They  are  popularly  known  as  (Plym- 
outh) Brethren.  By  putting  the  word  Plymouth  in  paren- 
thesis we  can  distinguish  them  from  other  bodies  of  Breth- 
ren ;  but  how  shall  we  distinguish  each  of  these  four  bodies 
of  (Plymouth)  Brethren  from  the  other  three  ?  The  device 
I  was  led  to  adopt  for  the  census  was  that  of  Roman  numer- 
als, thus : 

(Plymouth)  Brethren  I., 

(Plymouth)  Brethren  II., 

(Plymouth)  Brethren  III., 

(Plymouth)  Brethren  IV., 
the  word  "  Plymouth  "  being  in  parenthesis  in  each  case. 

Much  confusion  often  arises  from  the  similarity  of  titles. 
There  are,  it  will  be  noticed,  several  bodies  called  the 
Church  of  God,  with  only  a  slight  variation  in  two  in- 
stances. There  are  the  Church  of  God  and  Churches  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus,  both  Adventist;  the  Church  of  God, 
otherwise  distinguished  as  the  denomination  founded  by 
Elder  Winebrenner,  and  the  Church  of  God  in  Christ.  The 
large  body,  which  appears  in  the  list  given  in  this  volume 
as  Disciples  of  Christ,  also  often  calls  itself  simply  "  The 
Christians."  There  is  another  denomination,  with  similar 
tenets  and  two  branches,  which  uses  the  same  designation, 


xxiv  INTRODUCTION. 

and  is  otherwise  known  as  the  Christian  Connection.  The 
authorities  of  the  census  in  1870  declared  that  in  the  re- 
sults it  was  impossible  to  draw  a  line  of  separation  between 
these  denominations.  A  few  years  ago  the  Disciples  were 
popularly  distinguished  as  the  body  to  which  President 
Garfield  belonged,  and  they  are  probably  better  known  as 
Campbellites,  a  term  which  is  offensive  to  them,  than  by 
either  of  their  accepted  titles. 

Since  we  have  divisions,  and  so  many  of  them,  we  need 
good  definitive  titles.  But  how  shall  we  get  them  ?  Lord 
Beaconsfield  waged  a  war  to  acquire  a  **  scientific  frontier  " 
in  India.  Almost  any  means  would  be  justifiable  that 
would  secure  for  us  a  scientific  nomenclature.  But  there 
is  this  great  difficulty :  a  definitive  title  cannot  be  given 
where  there  is  no  distinction  to  define.  Baptist,  Presby- 
terian, Congregational,  Episcopal,  are  definitive  titles ;  but 
between  many  of  the  Baptist  and  Presbyterian  branches 
there  is  no  difference  which  a  title  could  be  framed  to 
designate.  The  only  remedy  I  can  suggest  in  such  cases 
is  reunion ;  and  why  such  reunion  has  not  taken  place  in 
scores  of  instances  I  cannot  explain,  except  by  the  preva- 
lence of  the  doctrine  of  the  perseverance  of  the  saints.  It 
must  be  that  the  saints  of  the  sects  think  they  ought  to 
persevere  in  sectarian  division. 

VL 

THE   CAUSES    OF   DIVISION. 

What  is  it  that  has  caused  so  many  divisions  in  our 
Christianity?  The  question  is  one  of  profound  interest, 
whether  considered  as  a  matter  of  history,  as  indicating  the 
course  of  controversy,  or  as  affecting  the  influence,  spirit, 
and  power  of  organized  religion.     The  differences  in  some 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 

cases  between  branches  bearing  the  same  generic  name  are 
important ;  in  others  they  are  not.  How  shall  we  explain 
the  fact  that  there  are  six  kinds  of  Adventists,  thirteen 
kinds  of  Baptists,  seventeen  kinds  of  Methodists,  etc.  ?  The 
natural  presumption  is  that  the  six  branches  of  Adventists 
are  six  kinds  of  Adventists,  the  thirteen  branches  of  Bap- 
tists thirteen  kinds  of  Baptists,  and  so  on.  As  a  matter  of 
fact  this  is  not  so.  Different  titles  and  separate  existence, 
while  logically  implying  distinct  varieties,  are  in  some  cases 
simply  the  result  of  differences  which  have  long  ceased  to 
exist.  It  would  be  a  mistake,  therefore,  to  say  that  every 
one  of  the  143  distinct  titles  of  denominations  represents  a 
difference,  either  in  doctrine  or  polity  or  form  of  worship. 
One  of  the  most  numerous  of  the  denominational  fami- 
lies is  the  Methodist.  Methodism  has  had  a  marvelous 
growth  in  the  United  States,  and  yet  we  find  it  broken 
into  seventeen  divisions.  There  are  no  doctrinal  differences 
to  account  for  them.  They  are  all  Arminian  in  theology, 
agreeing  in  their  opposition  to  the  Calvinistic  decrees  ;  em- 
phasizing the  points  of  doctrine  which  Wesley  made  dis- 
tinctive ;  and  manifesting  substantial  oneness  in  the  minor 
matters  of  usage.  They  are  one  in  spirit,  and  each  has  the 
family  resemblance  in  many  characteristics.  They  differ, 
first,  in  church  government.  Some  are  episcopal ;  others 
presbyterian,  with  presidents  of  conferences  instead  of  bish- 
ops ;  and  one  is  independent.  The  oldest  of  the  existing 
divisions,  the  Methodist  Protestant,  became  separated  from 
the  parent  body  upward  of  sixty  years  ago  in  a  contro- 
versy over  the  admission  of  laymen  into  the  governing 
body  of  the  church.  Those  who  espoused  this  reform  be- 
lieved that  bishops  and  presiding  elders  were  autocratic, 
and  when  they  formed  ^  system  of  their  own,  they  brought 
the  laymen  to  the  front  and  sent  bishops  and  presiding 
elders  to  the  rear.     This  was  a  division  on  principles  of 


xxvi  IN  TROD  UC  TION, 

government.  Eight  of  the  branches  became  such  because 
of  color  or  race  difference.  All  of  these,  I  believe,  except 
one,  separated  from  a  white  body.  Two  other  divisions, 
the  American  Wesleyan  and  the  Methodist  Episcopal, 
South,  were  due  to  the  slavery  question,  which  has  been 
one  of  the  most  prolific  causes,  in  the  history  of  the  last 
fifty  years,  of  ecclesiastical  controversy  and  secessions. 
Another  body,  the  Free  Methodists,  was  the  result  of  too 
little  forbearance  and  too  harsh  exercise  of  discipline,  on  the 
one  side,  and  to  extravagances  of  preaching  and  behavior 
on  the  other.  In  other  words,  there  was  a  misunderstand- 
ing, a  quarrel,  and  a  separation.  The  three  Congregational 
Methodist  branches  are  not  really  congregational  in  form 
of  government.  Two  were  caused  by  disciplinary  troubles, 
and  the  third  is  a  race  church.  The  Primitive  branch 
comes  to  us,  not  by  division,  but  from  England  through 
Canada. 

To  summarize,  ten  of  the  seventeen  divisions  were  due 
to  the  race  or  the  slavery  question,  and  six  to  controversies 
over  practical  questions.  Of  course  differences  were  in- 
creased, in  some  instances,  by  the  natural  process  of  devel- 
opment. The  itinerancy,  for  example,  has  been  modified 
in  the  Methodist  Protestant  Church,  and  the  probationary 
system  abolished  in  the  Church,  South.  Leaving  out  the 
Independent  and  the  three  Congregational  branches,  which 
are  very  small,  I  doubt  whether  there  is  any  difference  be- 
tween the  various  episcopal  bodies  that  would  be  harder 
to  overcome  in  any  effort  to  unite  them  than  that  of  race 
and  section.  There  are  five  non-episcopal  bodies  which 
are  not  widely  separated  in  practice  or  spirit. 

Of  the  twelve  Presbyterian  bodies  all  are  consistently 
Calvinistic  but  two,  the  Cumberland  and  the  Cumberland 
Colored,  which  hold  to  a  modified  Calvinism.  All  use  the 
Presbyterian  system  of  government,  with  little  variation. 


INTRODUCTION.  .  xxvii 

What,  then,  is  it  that  divides  them?  Slavery  divided  the 
Northern  and  Southern,  the  race  question  the  two  Cumber- 
land bodies ;  one  branch  is  Welsh,  and  the  rest  are  kept 
apart  by  minute  variations.  They  have  close  points  of 
agreement,  but  they  differ  on  questions  that  seem  to  others 
utterly  insignificant. 

We  may  sum  up  the  causes  of  division  under  four  heads  : 
(i)  controversies  over  doctrine;  (2)  controversies  over 
administration  or  discipline ;  (3)  controversies  over  moral 
questions ;  (4)   controversies  of  a  personal  character. 

We  are  a  nation  made  up  of  diverse  race- elements.  All 
varieties  of  speech,  habits  of  thought,  mental,  moral,  and 
religious  training  are  represented  among  us  by  the  older 
and  the  newer,  the  European  and  the  Asiatic,  immigration. 
Here  there  is  the  utmost  freedom  for  all  forms  of  religion, 
with  no  exclusive  favors  to  any.  W'e  must  expect,  from 
such  a  commingling,  currents,  counter-currents,  and  eddies 
of  religious  thought.  Different  systems  of  doctrine,  differ- 
ent forms  of  worship,  and  different  principles  of  discipline 
are  brought  into  contact,  and  each  has  its  influence  upon 
the  others.  Calvinism  affects  Arminianism,  and  Arminian- 
ism  Calvinism.  The  Teutonic  element  modifies  the  EngHsh 
and  is  modified  by  it  in  turn.  Catholicism  has  been  most 
profoundly  affected  by  Protestantism,  and  some  elements 
of  Protestantism  by  Catholicism.  Thus  there  are  various 
forces  acting  upon  religion  in  the  United  States,  and  pro- 
ducing phenomena  in  our  religious  Hfe  which  the  future 
historian  will  study  with  great  interest. 

Without  attempting  to  consider  with  any  degree  of 
thoroughness  the  tendencies  manifested  in  the  history  of 
rehgion  in  the  United  States,  I  must  refer  to  that  toward 
liberal  views.  Most  denominations  have  become  much 
more  liberal  in  spirit  than  they  used  to  be.  It  was  the 
growth  of  this  liberal  spirit  which  caused  many  of  the  divi- 


xxviii  INTRODUCTION. 

sions  of  the  past  sixty  or  seventy  years.  Let  me  give  a 
single  illustration  of  the  tendency.  A  band  of  Dunkards 
came  across  the  sea  from  Germany  to  Pennsylvania  in  i  719. 
They  were  a  very  simple  people,  interpreting  the  Bible 
literally,  fashioning  their  outward  as  well  as  their  spiritual 
lives  by  it,  and  believing  they  were  called  by  God  to  be  a 
peculiar  and  exclusive  people.  More  unworldly  men  and 
women  never  inhabited  cloister.  They  were  in  the  world 
but  not  a  part  of  the  world.  They  thought  it  a  virtue  to 
resist  its  customs  and  ignore  its  fashions.  In  the  character 
and  cut  of  their  garments,  in  the  manner  of  wearing  their 
hair,  in  the  way  they  ordered  their  homes  and  their  daily 
life,  they  were  separate  and  peculiar.  They  adopted  strin- 
gent rules  of  discipline  to  prevent  the  trimming  of  the 
beard,  the  wearing  of  hats  instead  of  bonnets,  the  laying 
of  carpets,  the  use  of  pianos,  and  similar  acts,  in  order  to 
keep  themselves  pure  and  unspotted  from  the  world  and 
maintain  their  simplicity  of  life  and  faith.  For  many  years 
the  influences  of  the  world  seemed  to  have  no  effect  upon 
them ;  but  gradually  innovations  crept  into  their  habits, 
their  discipline  was  insensibly  relaxed,  and  the  questions 
sent  up  to  their  annual  meeting  grew  more  numerous  and 
perplexing,  and  differences  of  opinion  became  quite  com- 
mon. One  year  this  question  was  presented,  among  others  : 
'*  How  is  it  considered  for  Brethren  to  establish  or  patron- 
ize a  high-school?"  After  canvassing  the  Bible  carefully 
for  light,  the  following  answer  was  returned :  *'  Considered 
that  Brethren  should  mind  not  JiigJi  things,  but  condescend 
to  men  of  low  estate."  Nevertheless  the  high-school  was 
established,  and  has  since  developed  into  a  college.  The 
Dunkards  within  a  decade  have  spHt  into  three  bodies. 
Association  with  others  inevitably  changed  the  views  and 
habits  of  a  number  of  them,  and  led  to  innovations.  These 
innovations  were  resisted  by  the  more  conservative,  and 


INTRODUCTION.  xxix 

div^ision,  where  full  toleration  was  not  possible,  was  the  in- 
evitable result.  Consequently,  the  body  that  had  persisted 
for  a  century  and  a  half  as  an  unworldly,  harmonious,  and 
united  communion,  was  divided  into  three  branches,  a  Pro- 
gressive, a  Conservative,  and  an  Old  Order  branch. 

Conservative  and  liberal  tendencies  appear  in  all  organ- 
izations with  which  men  have  to  do.  They  are  manifested 
in  all  churches.  When  circumstances  accentuate  them, 
only  broad  toleration  and  strong  interests  in  common  can 
prevent  division. 


VII. 


ANALYSIS    OF    RELIGIOUS    FORCES    OF   THE    UNITED 
STATES. 

The  statistical  results  given  in  this  volume,  more  thor- 
oughly and  exhaustively  than  ever  before,  show  that  the 
religious  forces  of  the  United  States  are  almost  entirely 
Christian.  The  number  of  organizations  and  members  be- 
longing to  other  than  Christian  bodies  is  a  very  small  frac- 
tion of  the  whole,  over  one,  but  less  than  two,  per  cent. 
Among  the  non- Christian  denominations  we  count  the 
Orthodox  and  Reformed  Jews,  the  Society  for  Ethical 
Culture,  the  Chinese  Buddhists,  the  Theosophists,  the  New 
Icarians,  and  the  Altruists.  (The  pagan  Indians  are  not 
included  in  the  census,  and  no  account  is  made  of  them 
here.)  Those  bodies  are  all  insignificant,  except  the  Jews, 
and  are  hardly  sufficient  in  number  to  constitute  a  class. 
Including  the  Jews,  there  are  626  organizations  and  132,- 
301  members  who  are  non-Christian.  I  assume  that  the 
Latter-Day  Saints  and  the  Spiritualists,  whatever  may  be 
thought  of  certain  features  of  their  systems  of  religion,  are 
as  bodies  properly  classed  as  Christian.     The  Latter-Day 


XXX  INTRODUCTION. 

Saints  make  much  of  the  name  of  Christ,  at  least,  embrac- 
ing it  in  the  title  of  both  of  their  branches.  The  non- 
Christian  bodies  which,  excepting  the  Jewish,  are  not  grow- 
ing, but  rather  decreasing,  need  not  further  engage  our 
special  consideration. 

The  aggregates  by  which  the  forces  of  religion  are  rep- 
resented are  very  large.  There  are,  in  the  first  place,  1 1 1,- 
036  ministers.  This  number  represents  chiefly  those  who 
are  in  the  active  service  as  preachers,  pastors,  and  mission- 
aries. The  percentage  of  those  who,  though  retaining  their 
ecclesiastical  standing  as  ministers,  have  ceased  to  perform 
its  duties  cannot  be  large.  On  the  other  hand,  it  should  be 
observed  that  the  very  numerous  body  of  men  known  to 
Methodism  as  local  preachers,  some  of  whom  are  ordained, 
are  not  counted ;  nor  are  any  returns  given  for  those  who 
exercise  the  functions  of  the  ministry  in  bodies  like  the 
Plymouth  Brethren,  the  Christadelphians,  the  Shakers,  and 
similar  societies.  The  ministry  is  not  an  order  or  an  office 
among  the  Plymouth  Brethren  ;  but  any  believer  who  feels 
called  to  preach  is  given  the  opportunity  to  manifest  his 
gifts.  They  have,  therefore,  no  roll  of  ministers  to  be  re- 
ported. The  vast  majority  of  the  111,036  ministers  give 
their  whole  time  to  their  ministerial  work,  and  are  supported 
by  the  churches  they  serve. 

The  number  of  organizations,  or  church  societies,  or  con- 
gregations, is  165,297.  This  covers  not  only  all  self-support- 
ing churches,  charges,  or  parishes,  but  also  missions,  chapels, 
and  stations  where  public  worship  is  maintained  once  a 
month,  or  oftener.  Many  of  these  places  are  supported 
by  home  mission  societies  or  neighboring  churches.  It 
appears  that  upward  of  23,000  organizations  own  no  church 
edifices,  but  meet  in  halls,  schoolhouses,  or  private  houses. 

It  would  be  interesting  to  know  how  many  meetings  are 
held  by  all  denominations  in  the  course  of  a  year.      In  some 


INTRODUCTION.  Xxxi 

Catholic  parishes,  five  or  six  services  of  the  mass,  in  a  few 
cases  even  more,  are  provided  every  Sunday.  In  most 
Protestant  churches  there  are  two  services  on  Sunday,  be- 
sides the  week-night  prayer-meeting,  and  special  evangel- 
istic gatherings.  In  sparsely  settled  sections  of  the  South 
and  West,  bi-monthly  or  monthly  services  are  the  rule. 
Besides  the  rented  places,  there  are  more  than  142,000 
Christian  church  edifices  opened  periodically  to  the  gen- 
eral public.  If  monthly  meetings  only  were  held  in  these 
churches,  there  would  be  a  grand  total  of  1,711,200  every 
year.  But  as  -a  rule  three  services  are  held  weekly,  not 
including  the  Sunday-school.  Probably  the  actual  number 
of  Sunday  and  week-night  services,  to  say  nothing  about 
Sunday-school  sessions,  is  between  15,000,000  and  20,000,- 
000  a  year,  with  10,000,000  sermons.  Those  who  would 
get  some  idea  of  the  activity  of  the  churches  in  publishing 
the  good  tidings  and  propagating  the  principles  of  religion 
must  consider  the  tremendous  significance  of  this  conserv- 
ative estimate. 

The  accommodations  afforded  to  Christian  worshipers 
by  the  142,000  church  edifices  aggregate  43,000,000  and 
upward.  That  is,  more  than  43,000,000  people  could 
find  sittings  at  one  time  in  the  churches,  to  say  nothing  of 
other  places  where  divine  service  is  held.  The  question 
has  been  raised  whether,  if  everybody  wanted  to  go  to 
church  once  a  week,  the  churches  could  contain  them.  It 
is  to  be  said,  in  the  first  place,  that  not  all  the  inhabitants 
of  any  community  could  attend  service  at  any  particular 
hour  or  on  any  particular  day.  Infants,  the  infirm,  the  sick, 
and  those  who  wait  upon  them  must  remain  at  home,  and 
it  is  doubtful,  under  the  most  favorable  circumstances, 
whether  more  than  two  thirds  of  the  population  of  any 
community  of  a  thousand  or  more  could  be  free  to  attend 
any  one  service.     The  churches  alone,  it  appears,  furnish 


xxxii  INTRODUCTION. 

accommodations  for  over  two  thirds  of  the  population,  while 
the  halls,  schoolhouses,  and  other  places  where  sermons  are 
preached  have  room  for  nearly  two  and  a  quarter  millions 
more.  As  most  churches  have  at  least  two  services  every 
Sunday,  and  as  many  persons  attend  only  one,  it  seems  a 
very  reasonable  inference  that  if  the  entire  population  should 
so  desire,  and  sickness  and  other  controlling  conditions  did 
not  intervene,  they  could  attend  divine  worship  once  a 
week.  In  particular  communities  where  the  population  is 
very  sparse,  the  services  may  be  too  infrequent ;  in  crowded 
centers  the  church  accommodations  may  not  in  all  cases  be 
in  adequate  proportion  to  the  numbers ;  but  on  the  whole, 
taking  all  circumstances  into  consideration,  it  cannot  be  said 
that  the  spiritual  interests  of  the  millions  are  neglected,  so 
far  as  privileges  to  worship  are  concerned. 

It  is  an  enormous  aggregate  of  value  (nearly  $670,000,- 
000)  which  has  been  freely  invested  for  the  public  use  and 
the  public  good  in  church  property.  This  aggregate  rep- 
resents not  all  that  Christian  men  and  women  have  conse- 
crated to  religious  objects,  but  only  what  they  have  con- 
tributed to  buy  the  ground,  and  erect  and  furnish  the 
buildings  devoted  to  w^orship.  The  cost  has  in  some  cases 
run  up  into  the  hundred  thousands ;  in  many  others  it  is 
covered  by  hundreds ;  in  the  vast  majority  of  instances  it 
is  measured  by  thousands.  Every  community  has  one  or 
more  churches,  according  to  the  number,  character,  and 
needs  of  its  population.  In  crowded  cities,  where  real  es- 
tate is  quoted  at  high  rates,  and  where  churches  generally 
occupy  the  best  positions,  the  average  value  of  the  edifices 
rises  to  astonishing  figures.  This  is  especially  true  of  the 
older  cities,  Hke  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Baltimore,  Bos- 
ton, and  of  the  older  denominations,  such  as  the  Episcopal, 
the  Reformed  Dutch,  and  the  Friends.  The  average  value 
of  the  churches,  taking  the  whole  country  and  all  Christian 


INTRODUCTION.  xxxiii 

bodies  into  account,  is  $4707.  Of  course  in  some  denomi- 
nations the  average  is  much  greater,  in  others  much  smaller. 
For  example,  among  the  Original  Freewill  Baptists  of  the 
Caroiinas  it  is  only  $455  ;  while  in  the  Reformed  (Dutch) 
Church  it  reaches  $19,227;  in  the  Unitarian,  $24,725; 
and  in  the  Reformed  Jewish,  $38,839,  which  is  the  highest 
for  any  denomination.  The  high  average  among  the  Jews 
is  chiefly  due  to  the  fact  that  most  of  their  communicants 
(nearly  88  per  cent.)  are  to  be  found  in  the  cities.  Of 
Unitarian  and  Episcopal  communicants,  48  per  cent,  are  in 
cities  of  25,000  population  and  upward.  Denominations 
which,  like  the  Disciples  of  Christ,  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  South,  and  the  United  Brethren,  have  a  constitu- 
ency made  up  chiefly  of  rural  inhabitants,  report  a  lower 
average  of  value.  The  figures  for  the  Disciples  of  Christ  are 
$2292,  for  the  United  Brethren,  $1513,  and  for  the  Meth- 
odist Episcopal  Church,  South,  $1480.  It  is  to  be  noted 
that  the  average  is  much  smaller  in  the  Southern  than  in  the 
Northern  and  New  England  States.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  at 
least  twenty  per  cent,  of  the  entire  value  of  church  prop- 
erty is  returned  by  the  State  of  New  York  alone  ;  and  New 
York,  Pennsylvania,  Massachusetts,  Ohio,  and  Illinois  to- 
gether have  more  than  fifty  per  cent,  of  it.  No  account  is 
made  in  the  census  report  of  church  debts,  and  the  statis- 
tical plan  of  none  of  the  denominations,  with  one  or  two 
exceptions,  is  designed  to  collect  information  on  this  point. 
The  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  however,  provides  for  it 
in  its  systematic  yearly  inquiries.  In  that  body  it  appears 
that  the  debts  on  the  churches  constitute  about  eleven  per 
cent,  of  their  value.  Whether  this  proportion  holds  good 
in  other  denominations  it  is  impossible  to  say.  In  some, 
doubtless,  it  is  less ;  in  others,  more.  In  the  Protestant 
Episcopal  Church  no  edifice  can  be  canonically  consecrated 
until  it  is  fully  paid  for. 


XXxiv  INTRODUCTION. 

Among  the  mightiest  of  the  religious  forces  of  this  coun- 
try are  to  be  reckoned  the  members  or  communicants  of 
the  Christian  churches.  Allowing  for  those  members  who 
are  dark  beacons  and  either  help  not  at  all  or  help  to  lead 
astray,  we  have  still  an  army  of  millions  of  men  and  women 
who,  by  lives  devoted  to  the  service  of  God  and  their  own 
race,  manifest  the  power  of  the  gospel  to  reach  and  regen- 
erate the  human  heart  and  satisfy  its  highest  aspirations. 
These  are  active  forces,  constant  in  purpose,  with  an  influ- 
ence all-pervading  and  all-persuasive,  touching  the  hearts 
of  the  young  and  shaping  their  tender  thoughts  for  eter- 
nity, helping  the  older  to  make  choice  while  opportunity 
offers,  and  encouraging  the  weak  and  stumbling  believer 
to  persevere.  There  are  nearly  twenty  and  a  half  millions 
of  Christian  believers,  of  all  creeds  and  denominations.  A 
considerable  number  are  members  of  bodies  only  nominally 
Christian,  and  we  should  naturally  exclude  Spiritualists, 
Latter- Day  Saints,  and  certain  other  denominations.  With 
these  omissions  we  would  still  have  twenty  millions  of 
members,  Protestant  and  Catholic,  which  is  nearly  one 
third  of  the  entire  population  of  the  United  States.  When 
it  is  remembered  that  several  millions  of  our  population  are 
children  too  young  to  be  communicants,  the  showing  for 
the  churches  cannot  be  regarded  as  unfavorable,  by  any 
means.  Nearly  one  person  in  every  three  of  all  ages  is  a 
Christian  communicant. 

VIII. 

THE    RELIGIOUS    POPULATION. 

What  is  our  religious  population?  While  no  enumera- 
tion has  been  made  to  ascertain  the  religious  preferences  of 
the  people  of  the  United  States,  it  is  quite  possible  to  form 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 

an  estimate  upon  the  basis  of  the  communicants  reported, 
which  will  be  sufficiently  accurate  for  all  purposes.  The 
usual  way  of  computing  religious  population  is  by  multi- 
plying the  number  of  communicants  of  any  Protestant  de- 
nomination by  3^.  This  is  on  the  supposition  that  for 
every  communicant  there  are  2^  adherents,  including,  of 
course,  young  children.  A  careful  examination  has  satis- 
fied me  that  this  supposition  rests  on  good  grounds.  I  find 
support  for  it  in  a  comparison  between  the  census  returns 
of  the  religious  populations  of  various  communions  in  Can- 
ada with  those  which  the  denominations  give  themselves 
of  communicants.  It  will  be  convenient  to  arrange  the  re- 
turns for  population  and  communicants  in  tabular  form. 

Religious  Communi- 

DENOMINATIONS.  Population.  cants. 

Methodists 847,469  241,376 

Presbyterians 755.199  169,152 

Episcopalians 644, 106  i  i4j93  i 

Baptists 303749  78.-059 

This  table  indicates  that  there  are  2.5  Methodist,  3.5  Presby- 
terian, 4.6  Episcopalian,  and  2.9  Baptist  adherents  to  every 
communicant.  The  average  is  3.2.  This  is  higher  than  I  feel 
warranted  in  applying  to  all  denominations  in  the  United 
States.  The  proportion  varies  with  the  denominations,  and 
is  probably  much  lower  when  the  smaller  and  more  obscure 
denominations  are  brought  into  consideration.  Certainly, 
the  results  justify  us  in  assuming  that  there  are  at  least  2.5 
adherents  in  the  United  States  to  each  Protestant  commu- 
nicant, taking  all  the  denominations  together.  In  round 
numbers  we  may  take  14,180,000  as  representing  the  Prot- 
estant communicants.  This  leaves  out  not  only  the  Catho- 
lics, but  the  Jews,  the  Theosophists,  the  Ethical  Culturists, 
and  the  Spiritualists.    It  seems  best  to  omit  the  Latter-Day 


Xxxvi  INTRODUCTION. 

Saints  also.  Multiplying  this  number  by  3  i^,  we  have  49,- 
630,000,  which  represents  the  aggregate  of  Protestant  com- 
municants and  adherents,  or  Protestant  population.  To  this 
we  must  add  the  CathoHc  population,  in  order  to  get  the 
entire  Christian  population.  There  are  6,257,871  Catholic 
communicants  of  all  branches.  Catholic  communicants,  ac- 
cording to  Catholic  estimates,  constitute  85  per  cent,  of  the 
Catholic  population.  There  must,  therefore,  be  a  Catholic 
population  of  7,362,000  ;  adding  this  to  the  Protestant  pop- 
ulation, we  have  56,992,000.  This  stands  for  the  Christian 
population  of  the  United  States.  As  the  population,  ac- 
cording to  the  census,  is  62,622,250,  it  would  appear  that 
there  are  5,630,000  people  who  are  neither  Christian  com- 
municants nor  Christian  adherents.  Making  liberal  allow- 
ance for  the  Jews  and  other  religious  bodies  not  embraced 
in  the  Christian  population,  there  are  5,000,000  belonging 
to  the  non-religious  and  anti-religious  classes,  including  free- 
thinkers, secularists,  and  infidels.  We  have,  of  course,  no 
warrant  for  believing  that  the  majority  of  these  5,000,000 
who  are  outside  the  religious  populations  are  atheists,  or 
avowed  unbelievers.  There  are  but  few  real  atheists ;  few 
who  do  not  have  some  belief  concerning  a  supreme  being  and 
a  future.  But  most  of  the  5,000,000  are  probably  opposed 
to  the  churches  for  various  reasons.  And  we  must  not  for- 
get that  in  the  fifty-seven  millions  counted  as  the  Christian 
population  are  many  who  are  indifferent  to  the  claims  of 
religion,  and  seldom  or  never  go  into  a  house  of  worship. 
Adding  these,  and  the  large  number  of  members  on  whose 
lives  religion  exercises  practically  no  power,  to  the  5,000,- 
000,  we  have  a  problem  of  sufficient  magnitude  to  engage 
the  mind,  heart,  and  hand  of  the  church  for  a  generation. 
One  out  of  every  twelve  persons  is  either  an  active  or  pas- 
sive opponent  of  religion ;  two  out  of  every  three  are  not 
members  of  any  church. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXX  VU 

IX. 

THE    GROWTH    OF   THE    CHURCHES. 

The  normal  condition  of  the  Christian  church  is  a  grow- 
ing condition.  In  no  other  way  can  it  manifest  the  spirit 
and  power  of  the  gospel ;  on  no  other  consideration  can  it 
retain  that  spirit  and  power.  It  has  received  salvation  that 
it  might  press  it  upon  those  who  have  it  not ;  the  power  of 
the  Spirit,  that  it  might  speak  in  His  name ;  the  world  as 
its  parish,  that  it  might  convert  it.  It  must  be  aggressive 
or  cease  to  be  prosperous ;  it  must  diligently  propagate  or 
begin  to  decline.  In  the  very  nature  of  things  this  must 
be  so.  Death  decimates  yearly  the  list  of  communicants. 
The  losses  from  this  and  other  causes  must  be  made  good 
by  accessions  before  actual  growth  is  made  apparent.  There 
must  be  a  measure  of  increase  to  prevent  decline.  All  in- 
crease beyond  that  which  repairs  the  losses  we  count  as  net 
increase.  Otir  churches,  almost  without  exception,  mani- 
fest the  conditions  of  prosperity  and  growth.  Year  by  year 
they  add  to  their  numbers.  In  some  cases  the  percentage 
of  growth  is  large ;  in  others,  small ;  but  growth  is  the 
rule,  and  decline  the  rare  exception.  We  ascertain  this,  of 
course,  by  comparison  of  one  year's  returns  with  those  of 
another,  as  furnished  by  the  denominations  themselves,  or 
most  of  them.  It  should  be  said,  however,  that  denomi- 
national statistics  are  not  of  uniform  completeness  and  ex- 
cellence, and  it  is  difficult  in  many  instances  to  obtain  them 
at  all  for  a  series  of  years.  This  makes  it  hard  to  secure 
anything  Hke  a  fair  comparison.  The  returns  of  the  census 
of  1890  may  be  regarded  as  exhaustive  and  accurate  as 
possible ;  but  there  is  nothing  in  previous  censuses  with 
which  to  compare  them.  The  pubHshed  results  of  the 
seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth  censuses  do  not  include  commu- 


xxxviii  INTRODUCTION. 

ni cants  at  all,  and  we  cannot  be  sure  from  the  way  they 
were  conducted  that  they  were  sufficiently  accurate  and 
complete  for  purposes  of  comparison.  Results  obtained  in 
this  way  must  be  taken  simply  as  indications  of  increase, 
not  as  accurate  representations  of  it.  No  distinction  was 
made  in  1850  and  i860  between  church  organizations  and 
church  edifices.  Two  items  only  appeared  in  those  three 
censuses  in  such  form  as  to  admit  of  fair  comparison,  viz., 
church  accommodations  or  sittings,  and  value  of  church 
property.  It  appears  that  the  gain  in  sittings  in  the  ten 
years  ending  in  i860  was  34  per  cent.,  and  in  value  of 
church  property  over  lOO;  in  the  ten  years  ending  in  1870 
it  was  only  a  little  more  than  13  per  cent,  in  sittings,  but 
about  100  per  cent,  in  value.  Since  18 70  the  gain  in  sit- 
tings has  been  about  loi  per  cent.,  and  in  value  of  church 
property,  92.  These  figures  must  not,  however,  be  taken 
without  allowance  for  the  more  or  less  imperfect  returns  of 
1870.  A  more  satisfactory  comparison  may  be  made  for 
the  larger  denominations  between  the  censlis  returns  of 
1890  and  returns  of  1880  gathered  from  denominational 
year-books.     The  figures  represent  communicants. 

DENOMINATIONS.  1880.  1890.  Increase. 

Baptist,  Regular  (3  bodies).  .  .  .  2,296,327  3,429,080  1,132,753 

Baptist,  Freewill 78,012  87,898  9,886 

Congregational 3^4,332  5 12,771  128,439 

Disciples  of  Christ 350,000  641,051  291,051 

Dunkards 60,000  73i795  13-795 

Episcopal,  Protestant 343,158  532,054  188,896 

Episcopal,  Reformed 5,000  8,455  3>455 

Evangelical  Association 99^794  I33?3i3  33>5i9 

Friends 100,000  107,208  7,208 

Lutheran  (all  bodies) 693,418  1,231,072  537,654 

Methodist  Episcopal 1,707,413  2,240,354  532,941 

Methodist  Episcopal  (South)  .  .  830,000  1,209,976  379,976 

Methodist  (other) 987,278  1,138,954  151,676 

Moravian 9,212  11,781  2,569 

Presbyterian  (North) 573^599  788,224  214,625 

Presbyterian  (South) 121,915  179,721  57;8o6 


INTRODUCTION.  xxxix 


DENOMINATIONS.  1880.  i8qo.  Increase. 


Presbyterian,  Cumberland  ....  113,933 

Presbyterian  (other) 122,078 

Reformed  (Dutch) 79,269 

Reformed  (German)  151,761 

United  Brethren 156,735 


164,940 

51 

,007 

145,447 

23 

.369 

92,970 

13,701 

204,018 

52 

,257 

225,281 

68 

,546 

158,363  3 

,895 

,129 

Total 9,263,234 

The  increase  indicated  is  large,  amounting  to  over  42 
per  cent.  In  the  same  period,  ten  years,  the  population 
increased  at  the  rate  of  24.86.  These  churches,  which 
embrace  all  Protestant  communicants  except  about  a  mill- 
ion, grew  faster  than  the  population  by  17.19  per  cent. 
That  surely  is  encouraging.  It  is  a  large  net  gain,  and 
means  that  Protestant  Christianity,  notwithstanding  the 
large  Catholic  immigration  of  the  decade,  is  advancing  at 
a  rapid  pace. 

The  growth  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  for  the  same 
period  must  have  been  large.  It  was  fed  by  a  tremendous 
stream  of  immigrants  from  Catholic  Europe  and  the  Catho- 
lic section  of  Canada ;  and  the  natural  increase  of  a  popula- 
tion of  six  or  seven  millions  must  be  considerable.  How 
large  it  was,  however,  statistics  cannot  certainly  show.  The 
Catholic  year-books  do  not  give  exact  returns  of  Catholic 
population,  only  estimates,  based  upon  diocesan  reports  of 
births  and  deaths.  It  is  true  that  the  census  of  1890  makes 
returns  for  Catholic  communicants ;  but  what  is  there  with 
which  to  compare  them?  SadHer's  **  Directory  "  of  1881 
estimated  the  Catholic  population  of  1 880  at  6,367,330 ;  and 
in  1 89 1  at  8,277,039  for  1890 — an  increase  of  1,909,709,  or 
about  30  per  cent.  In  view  of  all  the  circumstances  this 
rate  of  growth  does  not  appear  to  be  too  high.  If  it  may 
be  taken  as  applying  to  the  increase  of  CathoHc  communi- 
cants in  the  decade  ending  in  1890,  it  would  appear  that 
the  Catholic  Church  must  suffer  very  heavy  losses,  for  its 


xl  INTRODUCTION. 

net  increase  is  far  below  that  of  the  Protestant  churches 
represented  in  the  above  table.  How  otherwise  can  its 
moderate  rate  of  increase  be  reconciled  with  the  enormous 
accessions  it  must  have  received  by  an  immigration  which 
helped  the  Lutherans  and  a  few  other  Protestant  bodies  to 
a  far  more  limited  degree  ? 

X. 

HOW   THE    RELIGIOUS    FORCES    ARE    DISTRIBUTED. 

While  the  religious  forces  are  established  in  every  State 
and  Territory  of  the  Union  and  bear  more  than  a  hundred 
and  forty  different  denominational  titles,  they  are  massed 
in  a  few  denominations  and  in  a  comparatively  few  States. 
The  five  largest  denominations  comprise  60  per  cent,  of 
the  entire  number  of  communicants ;  and  the  ten  largest, 
75  per  cent.  The  Roman  Catholic  Church  is  first,  with 
6,231,000;  the  Methodist  Episcopal  second,  with  2,240,- 
000;  the  Regular  Baptists,  Colored,  third,  with  1,349,000; 
the  Regular  Baptists,  South,  fourth,  with  1,280,000;  and 
the  Methodist  Episcopal,  South,  fifth,  with  1,210,000.  The 
Catholic  figures  are  truly  of  magnificent  proportions.  They 
exceed  by  more  than  150,000  the  sum  of  those  representing 
the  four  next  largest  denominations.  Every  tenth  person 
in  the  United  States  is  a  Catholic  communicant.  It  is  only 
fair,  however,  to  remind  those  interested  in  this  statement 
that  while  a  communicant  is  a  communicant  considered 
statistically,  whether  he  be  a  Catholic  or  a  Protestant,  there 
is  a  difference  between  the  Protestant  and  the  Catholic 
basis  of  membership  which  ought  to  be  kept  constantly  in 
view  when  comparison  is  undertaken.  The  Catholic  au- 
thorities count  as  communicants  all  who  have  been  con- 
firmed and  admitted  to  the  communion,  and  these  virtually 


INTRODUCTION.  xli 

constitute  the  Catholic  population,  less  all  baptized  persons 
below  the  age  of  nine  or  eleven.  The  Catholic  discipline 
does  not  contemplate  excommunication  for  violations  of  the 
moral  code,  only  for  lapses  from  the  faith  and  refusal  to 
obey  the  ecclesiastical  commandments.  There  are  many 
who  go  to  make  up  the  Protestant  population  who  have 
been  expelled  from  membership  for  offenses  which  the 
Catholic  Church  treats  by  a  very  different  method.  In 
other  words,  while  the  CathoHc  Church  reckons  that  85 
per  cent,  of  its  population  are  communicants,  among  Prot- 
estants the  proportion  is  estimated  to  be  under,  rather  than 
over,  30  per  cent.  The  Protestant  basis  of  membership  is 
belief  and  conduct ;  the  Catholic,  belief  and  obedience. 
In  any  given  thousand  of  Catholic  population  there  are  850 
communicants  and  150  adherents;  while  a  thousand  of 
Protestant  population  yields  only  about  300  communicants, 
the  rest,  700,  being  adherents.  Thus,  while  the  6,231,000 
Catholic  communicants  represent  a  Catholic  population  of 
about  7,330,000,  the  2,240,000  communicants  of  the  Meth- 
odist Episcopal  Church,  alone,  indicate  a  Methodist  popu- 
lation of  7,840,000. 

The  Roman  Catholic  Church  is  first  also  in  value  of 
church  property,  of  which  it  returns,  in  round  numbers, 
$118,000,000.  The  Methodist  Episcopal  is  second  ($97,- 
000,000);  the  Protestant  Episcopal  third  ($81,000,000); 
the  Northern  Presbyterian  fourth  ($74,000,000) ;  and  the 
Northern  Baptists  fifth  ($49,000,000).  Two  of  these  de- 
nominations, the  Episcopal  and  the  Presbyterian,  are  not 
among  the  five  which  return  the  largest  number  of  com- 
municants. They  stand  third  and  fourth  respectively  in 
the  table  of  church  property,  showing  that  they  are  much 
more  wealthy  in  proportion  to  communicants  than  any  of 
the  five  larger  denominations. 

In  number  of  organizations,  or  congregations,  the  Meth- 


xlii  INTRODUCTION. 

odist  Episcopal  Church  comes  first,  with  25,861,  and  the 
Roman  CathoHc  last,  with  10,231.  The  Southern  Baptists 
are  second,  with  16,238;  the  Southern  Methodists  third, 
with  15,017  ;  and  the  Colored  Baptists  fourth,  with  12,533. 
The  reason  the  Catholic  congregations  number  only  two 
fifths  as  many  as  the  Methodist  Episcopal  is  because  their 
parishes  are  so  much  larger  and  more  populous.  Some 
Catholic  parishes  embrace  from  12,000  to  16,000  commu- 
nicants, all  using  the  same  edifice.  It  is  a  common  thing  in 
the  cities  for  Catholic  churches  to  have  five  and  six  differ- 
ent congregations  every  Sunday. 

To  recapitulate :  The  Roman  CathoHc  Church  is  first 
in  the  number  of  communicants  and  value  of  church  prop- 
erty, and  fifth  in  number  of  organizations  and  houses  of 
worship ;  the  Methodist  Episcopal  is  first  in  the  number 
of  organizations  and  houses  of  worship,  and  second  in  the 
number  of  communicants  and  value  of  church  property. 

Let  us  now  see  how  the  five  leading  denominational 
families  or  groups  stand.  The  Catholics,  embracing  seven 
branches,  come  first  as  to  communicants,  with  6,258,000; 
the  Methodists,  embracing  seventeen  branches,  come  second, 
with  4,598,000;  the  Baptists,  thirteen  branches,  are  third, 
with  3,718,000;  the  Presbyterians,  twelve  branches,  are 
fourth,  with  1,278,000 ;  and  the  Lutherans,  sixteen  branches, 
are  fifth,  with  1,231,000.  It  will  be  observed  that  the 
combined  Methodist  branches  have  about  1,600,000  fewer 
communicants  than  the  combined  Catholic  branches. 

As  to  the  value  of  church  property,  the  Methodist  fam- 
ily is  first,  the  figures  being  $132,000,000.  The  Catholic 
family  is  second,  $118,000,000;  the  Presbyterian  third, 
$95,000,000;  Episcopalian  fourth,  $82,835,000;  the  Bap- 
tist fifth,  $82,390,000.  Thus,  among  denominational  fam- 
ilies the  Catholics  are  first  in  the  number  of  communi- 
cants, second  in  value  of  church  property,  and  fourth  in 


INTRODUCTION.  xliii 

the  number  of  organizations  and  houses  of  worship.  The 
Methodists  are  first  in  the  number  of  organizations  and 
houses  of  worship  and  value  of  church  property. 

Naturally  we  should  expect  to  find  the  greatest  number 
of  communicants  in  the  States  having  the  greatest  popula- 
tion. New  York  has  nearly  6,000,000  population,  and 
returns  2,171,822  communicants.  Pennsylvania,  second 
in  population,  is  also  second  in  communicants,  reporting 
1,726,640.  Illinois  is  third  in  population,  but  fourth  in 
communicants ;  Ohio,  fourth  in  population,  but  third  in 
communicants ;  Missouri,  fifth  in  population,  but  sixth 
in  communicants ;  Massachusetts,  sixth  in  population,  but 
fifth  in  communicants.  This  shows  that  the  percentage  of 
communicants  to  population  varies  even  in  the  older  States. 
In  New  York  it  is  36.21;  in  Pennsylvania,  32.84;  in 
Ohio,  33.13;  in  Illinois,  31.43;  and  in  Massachusetts, 
42.11.  The  highest  in  any  State  is  44.17,  in  South  Caro- 
lina; the  lowest,  12.84,  in  Nevada.  The  highest  percent- 
age is  not  found  in  any  State,  but  in  a  Territory.  New 
Mexico's  population  are  communicants  to  the  extent  of 
68.85  P^^"  cent.  ;  and,  strange  to  say,  Utah  is  second,  its 
percentage  being  61.62.  New  Mexico  is  predominantly 
Catholic.  This  explains  its  high  percentage  of  communi- 
cants. Utah  is  the  stronghold  of  the  Mormons,  and,  like 
the  Catholics,  they  report  a  large  membership  in  proportion 
to  their  population.  The  Catholics  are  numerically  the 
strongest  in  thirty-three  States  and  Territories,  including 
the  New  England,  the  Pacific,  the  newer  Northwestern,  and 
various  Western  and  Southern  States;  the  Methodists  in 
South  Carolina,  Tennessee,  West  Virginia,  Delaware,  Flor- 
ida, Indiana,  Indian  Territory,  Kansas,  and  Oklahoma; 
the  Baptists  in  Alabama,  Arkansas,  Georgia,  Kentucky, 
Mississippi,  North  Carolina,  Texas,  and  Virginia ;  and  the 
Latter- Day  Saints  in  Utah. 


xliv 


INTRODUCTION. 


It  Is  interesting  to  note  that  Pennsylvania  is  the  strong- 
hold of  the  Lutherans,  the  Presbyterians,  the  Moravians, 
the  Mennonites,  and  the  Reformed  (German) ;  North  Car- 
olina of  the  Methodists ;  New  York  of  the  Catholics,  the 
Jews,  the  Episcopalians,  the  Universalists,  and  the  Re- 
formed (Dutch) ;  Massachusetts  of  the  Congregationalists, 
Unitarians,  Swedenborgians,  Spiritualists ;  Georgia  of  the 
Baptists ;  Missouri  of  the  Disciples  of  Christ ;  Indiana  of 
the  Friends ;    Ohio  of  the  United  Brethren. 

While  New  York  is  first  among  the  States  in  number  of 
communicants  and  also  in  value  of  church  property,  it  does 
not  occupy  this  position  as  respects  number  of  organizations 
and  of  church  edifices.  Pennsylvania  leads  in  both  these 
particulars,  having  more  organizations  and  church  edifices 
than  any  other  State.  Ohio  occupies  the  second  place 
and  New  York  the  third  as  to  edifices  and  the  fifth  as  to 
organizations.  The  following  table  shows  how  the  posi- 
tions of  the  leading  States  vary  in  the  different  columns. 
In  each  list  the  States  are  arranged  in  the  order  of  numer- 
ical precedence. 


Communicants. 

1.  New  York. 

2,  Pennsylvania. 
Ohio. 
Illinois. 

Massachusetts. 
Missouri. 
Indiana. 

8.  North  Carohna. 

9.  Georgia. 
10.  Texas. 


Value  of  Church 
Property. 

1.  New  York. 

2.  Pennsylvania. 

3.  Massachusetts. 

4.  Ohio. 

5.  Illinois. 

6.  New  Jersey. 

7.  Missouri. 
8  Michigan. 
9.  Indiana. 

10.  Connecticut. 


Church  Edifices. 

1.  Pennsylvania. 

2.  Ohio. 

3.  New  York. 

4.  Illinois. 

5.  Georgia. 

6.  North  Carohna. 

7.  Missouri. 

8.  Alabama. 

9.  Indiana. 
10.  Tennessee. 


Organizations. 

1.  Pennsylvania. 

2.  Ohio. 

3.  Texas. 

4.  Illinois. 

5.  New  York. 

6.  Missouri. 

7.  Georgia. 

8.  North  Carohna. 

9.  Indiana. 
10.  Alabama. 


Only  six  States  appear  in  all  these  tables,  viz.,  New 
York,  Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  Illinois,  Missouri,  and  Indiana. 
Texas,  which  is  tenth  in  the  list  arranged  according  to 
number  of  communicants,  and  does  not  appear  at  all   in 


INTRODUCTION.  xlv 

those  for  value  of  church  property  and  number  of  church 
edifices,  stands  third  in  that  for  number  of  organizations. 
This  indicates  that  the  average  number  of  communicants 
to  each  organization  is  much  smaller  in  Texas  than  in  the 
other  States  mentioned.  Texas  has  a  smaller  percentage 
of  urban  population  than  the  other  States,  excepting  North 
Carolina,  Alabama,  and  Georgia ;  it  has  an  immense  area, 
and  it  is  therefore  natural  that  its  organizations  should  be 
small  and  numerous. 

XL 

THE  EVANGELICAL  AND  NON-EVANGELICAL  ELEMENTS. 

These  terms  are  commonly  applied  to  Protestants.  The 
sense  in  which  they  are  used  has  already  been  defined ; 
but  it  is  easier  to  define  the  terms  than  to  classify  denom- 
inations under  them.  In  which  class,  for  example,  should 
Universalists  be  put  ?  They  have  not  been  admitted  to  the 
Evangelical  Alliance,  chiefly  because  of  their  views  respect- 
ing the  nature  and  duration  of  future  punishment;  but  on 
the  main  points  of  New  Testament  Christianity  they  are 
generally  evangelical.  On  the  single  question  of  the  future 
of  the  wicked  dead  some  of  the  branches  of  the  Adventist 
family  and  other  bodies  w^ould  be  excluded  from  the  evan- 
gelical list ;  but,  on  the  whole,  would  it  be  quite  fair  to 
class  as  non-evangelical  those  who  believe  in  the  divinity 
of  Christ,  in  the  necessity  and  sufficiency  of  his  atonement, 
and  in  salvation  by  faith  alone?  By  some  the  Christians 
or  Christian  Connection  have  been  classified  with  the  Uni- 
tarians ;  but  they  have  become,  in  late  years,  quite  ortho- 
dox, and  are  undoubtedly  evangelical.  In  most  evangelical 
denominations  persons  are  to  be  found  who  are  non-evan- 
gelical ;   and  in  some  of  the  non-evangelical  denominations 


xlvi  ,  INTRODUCTION, 

there  are  some  who  are  thoroughly  evangelical.  Yet  we 
cannot  draw  the  line  through  denominations;  we  must 
draw  it  between  them.  The  classification  must  therefore 
be  more  or  less  arbitrary,  and  due  allowance  should  be 
made  for  this  fact. 

There  are  a  few  bodies  which  manifestly  ought  not  to 

be  classified  as  either  evangelical  or  liberal.  These  may 
properly  be  put  in  a  separate  list. 

Evangelical  Denominations. 

DENOMINATIONS.                                       O-"?^"^-  Communi- 

zations.  cants. 

Adventists i>757  60,491 

Baptists 43>029  3>7i7»969 

Brethren  (River) 1 1 1  3j427 

Brethren  (Plymouth) 314  6,661 

Christadelphians 63  i>277 

Christians 1,424  103,722 

Christian  Missionary  Association 13  754 

Christian  Union 294  18,214 

Church  of  God 479  22,5 1 1 

Congregationalists 4,868  512,771 

Disciples  of  Christ 7,246  641,051 

Dunkards 989  73,795 

Evangelical  Association 2,310  133,313 

Friends  (3  bodies) 855  85,216 

Friends  of  the  Temple 4  340 

German  Evangelical  Synod 870  187,432 

Lutherans 8,595  1,231,072 

Mennonites 550  41,541 

Methodists 5 1,489  4,589,284 

Moravians 94  11,781 

Presbyterians 13,476  1,278,332 

Protestant  Episcopal  (2  bodies) 5, 102  540,509 

Reformed 2,181  309,458 

Salvation  Army 329  8,742 

Schwenkfeldians 4  306 

Social  Brethren 20  913 

United  Brethren 4,526  225,281 

Universalists 956  49, 194 

Independent  Congregations 156  14,126 

Total 152,104  13,869,483 


INTRODUCTION,  xlvii 

Non-Evangelical. 

DENOMINATIONS.  Organi-  Communi- 

zations.  cants. 

Church  of  the  New  Jerusalem 154  7>095 

Friends  (Hicksite) 201  21,992 

German  Evangelical  Protestant 52  36,156 

Unitarians 421  67,749 

Total 828  132,992 

Catholic. 

Catholics 10,276  6,257,871 

Catholic  Apostolic 10  i)394 

Total 10,286  6,259,265 

'    Non-Orthodox. 

Christian  Scientists 221  8,724 

Church  Triumphant  (Schweinfurth) 12  384 

Communistic  Societies 32  4,049 

Latter-Day  Saints 856  166, 125 

Spiritualists  334  45,030 

Total Ij455  224,312 

Non-Christian. 

Chinese  Temples 47  

Ethical  Culturists 4  1,064 

Jews 533  130,496 

Theosophists 40  695 

Total 624  132,255 

Recapitulation. 

Evangelical 1 52, 104  13,869,483 

Non-Evangelical 828  132,992 

Catholic 10,286  6,259,265 

Non-Orthodox 1,455  224,312 

Non-Christian 624  132,255 

Total 165,297  20,618,307 


xlviii  INTRODUCTION. 

From  this  It  appears  that  the  non- evangelical  and  non- 
Christian  bodies  are  about  equal  in  communicants  or  mem- 
bers, and  that  together  the  non-evangelical,  non-orthodox, 
and  non- Christian  bodies  count  less  than  half  a  million, 
or  less  than  2.4  per  cent,  of  the  aggregate.  The  evangel- 
ical communicants  are  to  the  non- evangelical  as  103  to  i, 
and  constitute  more  than  67  per  cent,  of  all  communicants, 
Christian  and  non- Christian. 

It  further  appears  that  the  evangelical  organizations  out- 
number all  other  organizations  11  to  i,  and  form  no  less 
than  92  per  cent,  of  the  aggregate. 

XII. 

THE    GENERAL    STATISTICAL    SUMMARIES. 

The  extended  tables  given  at  the  end  of  this  book  are 
not,  perhaps,  very  attractive.  But  they  will  repay  careful 
study.  There  are  many  significant  facts  to  be  obtained 
from  an  examination  of  the  summaries  of  colored  organiza- 
tions, of  denominations  arranged  according  to  polity,  and 
of  churches  in  the  cities.  The  last  is  a  new  feature  in 
church  statistics. 

Of  the  classification  according  to  polity  a  word  of  ex- 
planation is  necessary.  It  is  difficult  in  some  cases  to 
know  how  to  classify.  It  is  clear  enough  that  Baptists, 
Congregationalists,  and  Disciples  of  Christ  are  congrega- 
tional ;  but  it  is  not  so  clear  where  the  vast  body  of  Lu- 
therans belongs.  They  are  not,  I  am  persuaded,  purely 
presbyterian,  nor  purely  congregational,  and  certainly  not 
purely  episcopal.  My  own  inclination  was  to  classify  them 
as  presbyterian,  and  I  wrote  to  representative  men  among 
them  for  their  opinion,  and  it  will  be  interesting  to  quote 
from  some  of  the  responses. 


INTRODUCTION.  xHx 

Professor  Henry  E.  Jacobs,  of  the  body  known  as  the 
General  Council,  says : 

I  am  not  surprised  at  your  perplexity  concerning  the  classification  of  Luther- 
ans with  respect  to  church  polity.  As  the  form  of  government  is  regarded 
as  unessential,  and  to  be  determined  according  to  circumstances,  there  is  a 
lack  of  uniformity.  The  Synodical  Conference  gives  to  synods  only  advisory 
power,  and  requires  the  ratification  of  all  synodical  resolutions,  and  even  the 
election  of  professors  of  theology,  by  the  congregations.  Nevertheless,  they 
agree  with  the  Presbyterians  in  maintaining  a  distinction  between  the  lay  and 
preaching  elders,  as  one  resting  upon  Scriptural  foundations.  Muhlenberg's 
scheme  of  church  government  clearly  belongs  to  a  generic  presbyterianism ; 
and  this  has  been  propagated  in  General  Council,  General  Synod,  United 
Synod  of  South,  and  most  of  the  independent  synods.  The  General  Council 
rejects,  however,  lay  elders,  as  not  warranted  in  Scripture ;  although  in  most 
of  its  older  congregations  the  constitutions  have  not  been  changed  and  a 
lay  eldership  is  retained  simply  as  a  useful  but  not  a  vScriptural  or  necessary 
church  institution. 

However  you  may  classify  us,  you  will,  therefore,  not  escape  criticism — 
and  that,  too,  with  some  basis  of  truth  ;  but  taking  everything  into  considera- 
tion, I  believe  that  you  are  right  in  classifying  us  as  presbyterian. 

The  Rev.  J.  Nicum,  of  the  same  branch,  says  the  Lu- 
theran Church  is  not  strictly  presbyterian,  though  usually 
so  classified,  nor  is  it  congregational. 

Everywhere  in  the  Lutheran  Church  there  are  conferences,  synods,  con- 
sistories, etc.,  to  whom  questions  of  ordination,  discipline,  appeals  from  de- 
cisions of  vestries  or  congregations  are  taken. 

IT  you  now  ask  me  for  a  positive  opinion  as  to  what  the  polity  of  the  Lu- 
theran Church  really  is,  I  say  it  is  episcopal,  or  at  least  more  nearly  so  than 
anything  else.  Our  presidents  of  conferences  and  of  synods  are  really 
bishops.  They  are  everywhere  charged  with  the  supervision  of  the  churches, 
their  visitation,  the  ordination  of  pastors,  and  the  recommendation  of  suitable 
men  to  vacant  parishes.  They  also  lay  the  cornerstones  to  new  church  build- 
ings, dedicate  them,  install  ministers,  or  appoint  suitable  persons  to  attend 
to  these  matters  for  them.  This  practice  is  universally  followed  in  the 
Synodical  Conference,  in  the  General  Council,  and  in  almost  all  the  independ- 
ent synods.  Jure  divino,  every  pastor  is  bishop  of  his  flock,  but  the  insti- 
tution of  diocesan  bishops  is  a  matter  of  human  expediency.  This  is  the  Lu- 
theran view. 

Professor  M.  Gunther,  of  the  Synodical  Conference, 
writes : 


1  INTRODUCTION. 

You  may  be  right  in  supposing  "  that  it  is,  rather,  presbyterian,"  if  you 
have  in  view  Eastern  bodies.  But  for  them  (General  Council  and  General 
Synod)  I  would  not  speak. 

As  to  the  Synodical  Conference,  its  polity  is  not  strictly  congregational, 
but  near  to  it — in  reference  to  the  main  principle  of  Congregationalism,  that 
every  congregation  is  independent  and  self-governing.  We  differ  in  regard 
to  the  mode  in  which  Congregational  churches  assist  each  other,  etc. 

Our  congregations  have  freely  entered  into  a  synodical  union  for  mutual 
assistance  and  oversight,  for  the  purpose  of  more  effectually  securing  unity 
and  purity  of  doctrine,  and  of  more  successfully  advancing  the  general  inter- 
ests of  the  church  (institutions,  missions,  etc.).  They  are  represented  by 
their  pastors  and  lay  delegates,  who  act  in  their  name,  in  some  cases  being 
instructed  by  them.  (Pastors  whose  congregations  have  not  as  yet  joined 
synod  have  no  vote.)  Synod  with  us  has  only  advisory  power,  no  legislative 
or  judicial  power. 

Our  synodical  organization  differs  quite  from  that  of  other  bodies,  even 
Lutheran.  In  our  body  congregations  govern  themselves — decide  matters 
in  congregational  meetings.  In  others,  congregations  are  governed  by 
church  councils.  Synods  are  regarded  as  legislative  and  judicial  bodies,  de- 
posing pastors,  etc.,  giving  pastors  whose  congregations  do  not  belong  to 
synod  a  vote,  etc. 

The  polity  of  the  Synodical  Conference  is,  therefore,  neither  strictly  con- 
gregational nor  presbyterian.  It  is  based  on  the  so-called  "  Collegial  Sys- 
tem "  (in  contradistinction  to  episcopalism  and  territorialism),  formed  accord- 
ing to  the  liberty  which  the  church  enjoys  in  this  free  country. 


Professor  George  H.  Schodde,  of  the  Independent  Synod 
of  Ohio,  says : 

In  theory,  and  in  practice  too,  among  the  most  thorough-going  representa- 
tives of  historic  Lutheranism,  the  congregational  principle  is  maintained  and 
lived  up  to ;  in  reality,  and  by  common  consent,  so  much  power  has  been 
delegated  to  the  synods  that  the  polity  almost  seems  presbyterian.  There  is 
no  disagreement  '\x\  principle  among  us  as  to  the  congregational  character  of 
our  polity ;  but  in  practice  synods  are  generally  a  good  deal  more  than  ad- 
visory bodies.  When,  however,  it  comes  to  a  clash,  I  have  never  heard  of  a 
synod  of  any  prominence  that  has  claimed  a  right  to  control  the  affairs  of  any 
congregation.  The  latter  is  the  highest  court  of  appeal.  "  Synod  is  merely 
an  advisory  body  "  is  in  theory  the  fundamental  basis  of  our  polity.  The 
struggle  between  the  Ohio  Synod  and  the  General  Council  some  fifteen  years 
ago  was  only  on  the  practical  application  of  this  principle,  not  on  the  prin- 
ciple itself.  I  think  our  leading  men  would  with  one  voice  say  that  our  pol- 
ity is  congregational,  and  the  church  to  be  classified  as  such. 


INTR  OD  UCTION.  \\ 

I  give  a  single  other  opinion,  from  a  letter  by  Professor 
E.  J.  Wolf,  of  the  General  Synod.     He  says : 

Theoretically,  our  polity  is  congregational.  Practically,  it  has  varied  ac- 
cording to  environment,  especially  so  because  Lutherans  have  never  claimed 
any  polity  to  be  of  divine  right.  The  Missourians  carry  out  strictly  the  con- 
gregational idea.  Their  churches  are  republics,  their  ministers  are  presidents, 
though  when  in  office  they  are  almost  absolute  monarchs.  In  the  other  divi- 
sions we  have  synods  corresponding  to  the  presbyteries  of  Calvinism,  and 
general  bodies  made  up  of  deputies  from  the  synods ;  but  when  it  comes  "  to 
the  powers  and  functions  of  the  synod,"  they  can  hardly  be  said  to  conflict 
seriously  "with  the  idea  of  pure  Congregationalism."  These  powers  are  al- 
most wholly  "advisory."  The  exceptions  to  this  rule  are  that  the  Augsburg 
Confession  is  the  ackonwledged  or  implied  basis  of  every  Lutheran  church, 
and  the  General  Synod  reserves  the  exclusive  right  of  publishing  hymn- 
books,  liturgies,  and  catechisms.  Should,  however,  any  congregation  de- 
cline to  use  such  manuals  as  the  General  Synod  provides,  it  cannot  be  dis- 
ciplined, although  cases  may  arise  where  the  synod  will  forbid  one  of  its 
members  to  officiate  in  a  recalcitrant  congregation.  The  congregation  itself 
cannot  be  dissolved,  and  if  it  sees  fit  to  withdraw  from  the  synod,  it  does  not 
lose  its  character  as  a  Lutheran  society,  though  the  synod  would  not  allow 
one  of  its  members  to  serve  such  a  congregation. 

In  other  words,  the  synod  has  control  over  the  ministers,  which  it  can  de- 
pose as  well  as  ordain,  although  again  theoretically,  in  both  cases,  only  at 
the  instance  of  a  congregation.  But  the  congregation  does  not  stand  or  fall 
through  any  action  of  synod.  And  just  here  is  the  pivotal  point  where  Con- 
gregationalism and  presbyterianism  both  come  into  our  polity.  A  minister 
once  a  member  of  a  synod  is  subject  to  its  requirements — he  must  submit  to 
the  body  he  has  joined.  A  congregation  can  defy  a  synod's  action ;  but  the 
only  prejudice  it  suffers  is  to  lose  its  connection  with  the  synod.  It  resumes 
an  independent  relation,  or  it  may  join  a  synod  connected  with  another  gen- 
eral body. 

Amid  such  conflicting  opinions,  I  have  deemed  it  proper 
to  make  a  sort  of  compromise,  and  classify  the  Synodical 
Conference  and  the  Ohio  Synod,  which  all  agree  are  less 
presbyterian  than  other  Lutheran  bodies,  as  congrega- 
tional, and  all  the  rest,  except  the  independent  congrega- 
tions who  also  go  into  the  congregational  list,  as  presby- 
terian. 

The  tables  devoted  to  the  statistics  of  the  churches  in 


lii  INTRODUCTION. 

the  cities  are  quite  exhaustive,  including  all  municipalities 
having  a  population  of  25,000  and  upward.  The  cities 
are  divided,  for  the  sake  of  convenience,  into  three  classes : 
first,  those  having  500,000  population  and  upward  ;  second, 
those  having  a  population  of  100,000  to  500,000;  and 
third,  those  having  a  population  of  25,000  to  100,000. 

The  results  are,  in  brief,  that  there  are  5,302,018  com- 
municants in  these  cities,  or  more  than  a  fourth  of  the 
aggregate  for  the  whole  country;  10,241  organizations, 
which  is  less  than  a  sixteenth  of  the  whole  number;  9722 
church  edifices,  which  is  a  little  larger  proportion;  and 
church  property  valued  at  $3 13,537,247,  or  more  than  forty- 
six  per  cent,  of  the  grand  total.  The  large  figures  repre- 
senting church  property  do  not  need  an  explanation.  The 
high  values  of  city  property  account  for  them.  The  cities 
have  an  aggregate  population  of  13,988,938.  Of  this 
population  it  appears  that  one  for  every  2.64  persons  is  a 
communicant.  This  is  a  higher  average  than  obtains  in 
the  country  generally,  where  it  takes  more  than  three  per- 
sons to  yield  one  communicant.  In  the  United  States 
there  are  337+  communicants  in  every  thousand  popula- 
tion; in  the  cities,  nearly  379  in  every  thousand.  Much 
of  this  difference  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the 
Roman  Catholic  strength  is  chiefly  in  the  cities,  and  it  has 
a  larger  proportion  of  communicants  to  its  religious  popu- 
lation than  any  other  denomination.  The  fact  that  the 
average  of  communicants  to  population  is  so  large  in  the 
cities  must  be  an  encouragement  to  those  who  fear  that 
the  church  is  losing  its  grip  on  the  masses  crowded  into 
our  cities. 

In  the  matter  of  church  edifices  a  little  calculation  will 
make  it  appear  that  the  cities  of  the  second  and  third  classes 
have  more  in  proportion  to  population  than  those  of  the 
first  class.     The  latter  have  one  to  2147  of  the  population ; 


INTRODUCTION.  \\\\ 

those  of  the  second  class,  one  to  1468;  and  those  of  the 
third  class,  one  to  1052. 

Of  the  denominations,  37  are  not  represented  in  any  of 
the  cities.  Only  three — the  Roman  Catholic,  Methodist 
Episcopal,  and  Protestant  Episcopal — are  represented  in 
all  of  them.  Of  the  Jews  (Orthodox),  nearly  92  per  cent. 
are  in  the  cities ;  of  the  Jews  (Reformed),  more  than  84 
per  cent. ;  of  the  Unitarians  and  Episcopalians,  upward  of 
48 ;  of  the  Roman  Catholics,  more  than  42  ;  of  the  Pres- 
byterians (North),  nearly  29  ;  of  the  Methodists  (Episcopal), 
nearly  1 5  ;  and  of  the  Southern  Baptists  and  Southern 
Methodists,  only  about  4. 

XIII. 

THE    NEGRO    IN    HIS  RELATIONS    TO  THE    CHURCH. 

The  negro  is  a  religious  being  wherever  you  find  him 
and  under  whatever  conditions.  In  his  own  continent, 
where  civilizing  influences  have  hardly  begun  to  lift  him 
above  the  state  of  savage  degradation  in  which  he  has  so 
long  remained,  his  religious  instincts  are  dominant.  They 
find  expression  often  in  superstitious,  idolatrous,  and  cruel 
rites  and  observances  ;  but  he  has,  nevertheless,  conceptions 
of  beings  of  exalted  power  who  affect  the  destiny  of  men. 

The  negro  of  the  United  States  has  no  religion  but  the 
Christian  religion.  He  is  not  a  heathen,  like  our  native 
Indian.  He  worships  but  one  God,  who  is  a  just  and  mer- 
ciful God,  desiring  that  all  men  should  be  free  from  sin, 
and  should  come  to  a  knowledge  of  the  way  of  life  through 
Jesus  Christ.  He  is  still  more  or  less  superstitious;  he 
still  has  some  faith  in  the  power  of  charms ;  there  is  still 
some  trace  of  heathenish  practices  in  him ;  but  our  own 
race  has  not  altogether  outgrown  childish  thoughts  about 


liv  INTRODUCTION. 

unlucky  days  and  the  way  to  avoid  the  evil  they  bring, 
and  how  mascots  procure  success.  We  cannot  condemn 
the  negro  for  his  superstition  without  taking  blame  upon 
ourselves  for  the  tenacity  with  which  we  cling  to  belief  in 
signs  and  times  and  things,  lucky  and  unlucky. 

The  negro  of  the  United  States  is  a  Christian,  not  an 
atheist  or  a  doubter.  He  gives  no  countenance  to  secu- 
larist or  free-thinking  organizations ;  nor  does  he  prefer 
abnormal  types  of  religion,  such  as  Mormonism  and  spirit- 
ualism. Moreover,  he  is  not  a  rationalist,  or  a  theoso- 
phist,  or  an  ethical  culturist.  He  does  not  turn  aside  to 
follow  the  erratic  turns  of  little  coteries  of  religionists. 
Neither  does  he  show  a  preference  for  the  Roman  form 
of  Christianity.  The  splendid  ceremonies  of  Catholic  wor- 
ship might  be  supposed  to  have  a  strong  attraction  for 
him,  but  it  is  not  so.  The  actual  membership  of  separate 
negro  Catholic  churches  does  not  exceed  fifteen  thousand, 
and  yet  the  Catholic  Church  is  not  weak  in  Louisiana  or 
Maryland  or  the  District  of  Columbia.  Thirty-one  represents 
the  total  of  separate  Catholic  negro  churches,  not  including, 
of  course,  the  negro  communicants  in  mixed  churches. 

The  negro  is  not  only  a  Christian,  he  is  an  evangelical 
Christian.  He  is  a  devout  Baptist  and  an  enthusiastic 
Methodist.  He  loves  these  denominations,  and  seems  to 
find  in  them  an  atmosphere  more  congenial  to  his  warm, 
sunny  nature,  and  fuller  scope  for  his  religious  activity, 
than  in  other  communions.  Perhaps  this  is  due  to  his 
long  association  with  them  and  his  training.  There  is  no 
reason  to  believe  that  he  might  not  have  been  as  intense 
a  Presbyterian  as  he  is  a  Baptist,  or  as  true  a  Congrega- 
tionalist  as  he  is  a  Methodist,  if  these  denominations  had 
been  able  to  come  as  near  to  him  in  the  days  of  his  slav- 
ery as  did  the  Baptist  and  Methodist  churches.  It  was 
fortunate  for  him  that,  while  he  was  the  slave  of  the  white 


INTRODUCTION.  Iv 

master,  that  master  was  a  Christian  and  instructed  him 
in  the  Christian  faith.  The  school  was  practically  closed 
to  him;  but  the  church  was  open,  and  thus  he  came  into 
personal  freedom  and  into  the  rights  of  citizenship  an  ilht- 
erate  man,  but  a  Christian,  with  that  measure  of  culture 
in  things  spiritual  and  moral  that  the  Christian  faith,  vol- 
untarily accepted,  necessarily  involves. 

According  to  the  census  of  1890,  there  are  7,470,000 
negroes  in  this  country.  This  includes  all  who  have  any 
computable  fraction  of  negro  blood  in  their  veins.  Of 
these  all  except  581,000  are  in  the  old  slave  territory, 
now  embraced  in  sixteen  States  and  the  District  of  Colum- 
bia. In  other  words,  notwithstanding  the  migration  of 
negroes  to  the  North  and  West,  ninety- one  percent,  of 
them  are  still  in  the  South,  on  the  soil  where  the  Eman- 
cipation Proclamation  of  1862  reached  them,  and  made 
them  forever  free  from  involuntary  bondage.  The  negro 
churches  of  the  South,  therefore,  form  a  large  and  im- 
portant factor  in  the  Christianity  of  that  section.  In  ten 
of  those  States  the  number  of  negro  communicants  ranges 
between  106,000  and  341,000,  and  in  four  of  them  it  ex- 
ceeds the  total  of  white  comimunicants.  Thus  in  Alabama, 
Georgia,  Mississippi,  and  South  Carolina  there  are  more 
colored  than  Avhite  communicants,  although  in  Mississippi 
and  South  Carolina  only  does  the  negro  population  ex- 
ceed the  white.  This  shows  that  in  point  of  church- mem- 
bership the  negro  is  quite  as  devoted  as  his  white  brother. 
Indeed,  the  proportion  of  colored  people  who  are  con- 
nected with  the  church  throughout  the  United  States  is 
larger  than  that  which  obtains  among  the  white  people. 
About  one  in  every  three  whites  is  a  church-member. 
On  this  basis  there  should  be  2,410,000  colored  members. 
The  actual  number  is  2,674,000,  or  an  excess  of  264,000 
beyond  the  proportion  that  obtains  among  the  whites. 


Ivi  INTRODUCTION. 

The  aggregate  of  colored  communicants  in  the  United 
States,  so  far  as  it  could  be  ascertained  by  the  careful 
methods  of  the  census,  is,  in  round  numbers,  2,674,000. 
This  includes  all  colored  denominations,  and  all  colored 
congregations  in  mixed  denominations,  so  far  as  they 
could  be  ascertained ;  but  it  does  not  take  account  of  col- 
ored communicants  in  mixed  congregations.  The  number 
omitted,  however,  cannot  be  very  large.  The  States  in 
which  the  negro  communicants  are  most  numerous  are  as 
follows : 

Georgia 341,433  Texas 186,038 

South  Carolina 317,020  Tennessee 131,015 

Alabama 297, 161  Louisiana 108,872 

North  Carohna . .  .* 290,755  Arkansas 106,445 

Virginia    238,617  Kentucky 92,768 

Mississippi 224,404  Florida   64,337 

In  these  twelve  States  are  found  2,398,865  communicants, 
leaving  about  275,000  to  the  rest  of  the  States  and  Terri- 
tories of  the  Union. 

As  to  denominational  connection,  the  negro  is  predomi- 
nantly Baptist.  More  than  half  of  all  negro  communicants 
are  of  this  faith,  the  exact  number  being  1,403,559.  Most 
of  these  are  Regular  Baptists,  there  being  less  than  20,000 
in  the  Freewill,  Primitive,  and  Two-Seed-in-the-Spirit 
branches.  It  is  significant  that  the  negro  prefers  the 
progressive  and  missionary  type  of  the  Baptist  faith,  and 
does  not  believe  in  the  Hard-shell,  Old  School,  or  anti-mis- 
sionary wing.  Not  less  Calvinistic  than  the  most  Calvin- 
istic  of  the  Regular  Baptists,  he  is  also  strict  in  his  practice 
and  thoroughly  denominational  in  his  spirit,  and  takes  no 
little  satisfaction  in  winning  negro  members  of  other  bodies 
to  the  Baptist  faith. 

The  number  of  negro  Methodists  is  1,190,638,  or  about 
213,000  less  than  the  aggregate  of  colored  Baptists.    The 


INTRODUCTION.  Ivii 

Methodists  are  divided  into  more  branches  than  the  Bap- 
tists, those  having  the  episcopal  system  embracing  the 
great  majority  of  church-members.  The  Presbyterians 
have  about  30,000,  the  Disciples  of  Christ  18,578,  and 
the  Protestant  Episcopal  and  Reformed  Episcopal  bodies 
somewhat  less  than  5000.  The  Baptists  are  organized 
into  associations,  and  have  State  conventions ;  the  Meth- 
odists and  Presbyterians  into  annual  conferences  and  pres- 
byteries. A  large  measure  of  superintendence  is  charac- 
teristic of  the  Methodist  bodies,  the  system  of  episcopal 
and  sub-episcopal  supervision  resulting  apparently  in  more 
intelligent  endeavor,  greater  concert  of  action,  and  better 
discipline. 

The  increase  in  the  number  of  colored  communicants 
since  emancipation  has  been  marvelous.  How  many  of 
the  slaves  were  church-members  is  not  and  cannot  be 
known  certainly.  Such  statistics  as  we  have  must  be  re- 
garded as  imperfect,  particularly  of  the  colored  Baptists. 
There  were  of  colored  Methodists  at  the  outbreak  of  the 
war  about  275,000,  as  nearly  as  I  can  ascertain.  Accord- 
ing to  this,  there  has  been  an  increase  in  thirty  years  of 
over  900,000  negro  Methodists.  This  is  truly  enormous. 
In  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  alone  are  more  colored 
communicants,  mainly  in  the  South,  than  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church,  South,  reported  in  1865,  and  the  two 
leading  African  branches  have  had  a  marvelous  growth. 
The  number  of  colored  Baptists  in  i860  did  not,  probably, 
exceed  250,000.  We  do  not  know,  of  course,  how  many 
colored  communicants  there  were  who  were  not  organized 
into  churches  and  reported  in  denominational  statistics. 
But  according  to  the  figures  we  have,  there  was  an  increase  in 
thirty  years  of  more  than  i ,  1 50,000  colored  communicants. 
I  knowof  no  parallel  to  this  development  in  the  history  of  the 
Christian  church,  when  all  the  circumstances  are  considered. 


Iviii  INTRODUCTION, 

The  negro,  considering  the  little  wealth  he  had  at  com- 
mand when  slavery  ceased,  has  achieved  wonders  in  the 
accumulation  of  church  property.  The  value  of  the 
churches  he  owns  is  $26,626,000,  the  number  of  edifices 
being  23,770.  Making  due  allowance  for  the  generous 
help  which  the  whites  have  given,  it  still  appears  that  the 
negro  has  not  been  unwilling  to  make  large  sacrifices  for 
the  sake  of  religion,  and  that  his  industry,  thrift,  and  busi- 
ness capacity  have  been  made  to  contribute  to  his  success- 
ful endeavors  to  provide  himself  with  suitable  accommo- 
dations for  public  worship. 


XIV. 

THE    CHARACTERISTICS    OF   AMERICAN    CHRISTIANITY. 

The  Christianity  which  prevails  in  the  United  States  is 
orthodox  and  evangelical.  These  terms  include  both  the 
Catholics  and  the  Evangelical  Protestants.  Together  they 
constitute  the  great  Christian  forces  which  possess  the 
country  and  determine  its  religious  character. 

The  Church  of  Rome  has  had  a  growth  in  this  free 
country  that  has  been  simply  phenomenal.  Though  it 
was  the  first  to  set  up  the  Christian  standard  on  this  soil, 
and  its  missionaries  were  pioneers  in  exploration  and  set- 
tlement in  the  great  West,  it  was  not  a  strong  church  at 
the  close  of  the  colonial  period.  There  were  in  1 784 
hardly  30,000  Catholics,  two  thirds  of  whom  were  in 
Maryland  and  Pennsylvania,  the  rest  being  widely  scat- 
tered. Immigration  from  Ireland  gave  the  church  the 
first  considerable  impulse  of  growth,  and  immigration — 
Irish,  German,  French,  Italian,  and  other — has  made  it 
the    largest    and    most    composite   church   in   the   United 


INTRODUCTION.  Hx 

States.  The  only  wonder  is  that  the  church  could  receive 
and  care  for  such  masses  of  diverse  nationalities.  Its 
energies  have  been  severely  taxed,  but  it  has  managed  to 
organize  and  equip  its  parishes  as  rapidly  as  necessity  re- 
quired, and  in  recent  years  to  give  some  attention  to  its 
educational  facilities,  which  have  been,  neither  excellent 
nor  adequate.  A  church  composed  so  largely  of  European 
elements,  with  an  episcopate  foreign  in  nativity  or  extrac- 
tion, education,  and  ideas,  under  the  immediate  control  of 
a  foreign  pope  and  his  councilors,  would  hardly  be  ex- 
pected to  fall  in  at  once  with  American  ideas,  particularly 
with  that  idea  which  distinguishes  our  system  of  popular 
education  from  that  of  all  other  countries.  Catholics  have 
been  openly  hostile  to  our  public  schools,  denouncing 
them  as  godless,  protesting  against  the  injustice  of  being 
taxed  for  the  support  of  institutions  they  could  not  patron- 
ize, and  insisting  that  they  be  relieved  of  school  rates  or 
that  the  school  moneys  be  divided  and  a  fair  share  given 
to  Catholic  schools.  The  determined  popular  resistance 
to  this  demand  increased  Catholic  hostility  and  made  the 
struggle  a  somewhat  bitter  one.  It  is  not  strange  that 
many  Protestants  should  regard  a  foreign  church,  with 
foreign  ideas  and  under  foreign  domination,  as  a  menace 
to  American  institutions ;  but  no  candid  observer  will 
hesitate  to  admit  that  a  change,  amounting  almost  to  a 
revolution,  has  taken  place  among  Catholics.  They  have 
become  as  American — at  least  the  body  of  them — as  the 
Lutherans.  No  impartial  and  intelligent  person  now  be- 
lieves that  they  want  to  subvert  our  liberties  or  destroy 
our  government  We  may  justly  accuse  them  of  meddling 
too  much  at  times  in  party  politics;  we  may  deprecate 
the  favor  they  sometimes  receive  in  municipal  councils ;  but 
in  all  those  fundamentals  which  make  our  government 
thoroughly  and  securely  Republican,  Catholics  are  at  one 


Ix  INTRODUCTION. 

with  Protestants.  Moreover,  their  sentiment  respecting  our 
public  schools  is  undergoing  a  gradual,  but  what  prom- 
ises to  be  a  complete,  change.  They  are  becoming  recon- 
ciled to  the  system,  and  are  adjusting  themselves  to  what 
they  have  come  to  recognize  as  a  permanent  and  beneficent 
institution.  They  have  come  to  see  that  secular  schools 
need  not  be  godless  or  infidel,  and  that  religious  instruction 
may  be  given  just  as  effectively  outside  as  inside  the 
public  schoolroom.  This  growing  favor  for  a  distinctive 
American  idea  is  only  one  of  several  signs  that  the  church 
is  taking  on  more  and  more  the  color  of  its  surroundings 
and  adjusting  its  thoughts  and  agencies  to  the  character- 
istics of  our  national  life.  It  was  not  an  obscure  priest  or 
an  adventurous  layman,  but  a  powerful  archbishop,  enjoy- 
ing the  confidence  of  the  pope  and  Monsignor  Satolli,  who, 
at  the  centenary,  a  few  years  ago,  of  the  first  Catholic 
bishop,  declared  with  emphasis  that  the  Catholic  Church 
in  the  United  States  must  be  definitely  and  thoroughly 
American.  The  ecclesiastical  garment  must  not  be  of  for- 
eign cut  or  have  a  foreign  lining,  even.  The  school  of 
thought  represented  by  Archbishop  Ireland  is  dominant  in 
the  church  to-day. 

The  Church  of  Rome  in  the  United  States,  it  is  bare 
truth  to  say,  is  far  more  in  harmony  with  Protestant  Amer- 
ica than  the  Church  in  Italy  or  Spain  or  Ireland  or  Mexico 
would  be.  It  has  less  of  the  superstitious  and  medieval 
character,  and  is  more  like  the  type  of  Catholicism  which 
prevails  in  England,  where  Catholic  prelates  are  possessed 
of  the  same  earnest  spirit  as  Protestant  prelates,  and  take 
an  active  part  in  all  social  and  moral  reforms.  In  the 
United  States  it  has  caught  something  of  the  evangelical 
spirit  of  Protestantism,  and  is  giving  its  millions  of  commu- 
nicants a  better  and  truer  gospel  than  in  those  countries 
where  it  does  not  come  into  contact  with  Protestantism.. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixi 

It  Is  a  curious  fact  that  while  Catholicism  is  numerically 
the  leading  denomination  in  considerably  more  than  half 
of  the  States,  actually  outnumbering  in  old  New  England 
the  Protestant  communicants  combined,  it  is  in  no  State 
in  the  ascendant  in  influence.  New  England  is  still  Protest- 
ant in  its  characteristics,  and  there  are  as  yet  no  signs  of  a 
revolution  in  its  distinctive  institutions.  The  reason  is  not 
far  to  seek.  The  Roman  Catholic  force  is  in  its  masses ; 
the  Protestant  power  lies  in  its  superior  intellectual  train- 
ing. Protestantism  furnishes  the  ideas  which  have  made 
New  England  what  it  is  and  which  maintain  it  essentially 
unchanged.  The  Protestant  leaven  is  more  powerful  and 
persistent  than  the  Catholic  leaven. 

Evangelical  Christianity  is  the  dominant  religious  force 
of  the  United  States.  In  its  various  denominational  forms 
it  shapes  the  religious  character  of  the  American  people. 
That  it  has  been  influenced  in  no  degree  by  the  non-evan- 
gelical or  rationahstic  churches,  I  would  not  venture  to  say. 
Doubtless  its  humanitarian  impulses  have  been  quickened 
and  strengthened  by  the  example  of  Unitarianism ;  but  I 
should  be  at  a  loss  to  name  the  particular  influence  which 
the  Church  of  Rome  has  exerted  upon  it.  There  has  been 
an  increase  of  what  some  call  churchliness,  and  confession- 
alism  has  developed  to  a  remarkable  degree  among  the 
Lutherans ;  but  these  are  limited  movements,  and  do  not 
give  character  to  the  Christianity  of  the  day.  The  Catho- 
lic revival  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  is  spending 
itself  within  the  denomination,  and  probably  repels  as  many 
as  It  attracts  to  that  communion. 

The  great  and  absorbing  purpose  of  evangelical  Chris-' 
tianity  seems  to  me  to  be  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  There 
are  those  living  who  can  remember  when  a  far  less  exalted 
idea  possessed  the  church,  when  It  seemed  to  think  its 
sphere  was  not  in  the  world,  and  its  main  duty  not  to  the 


Ixii  INTRODUCTION. 

world,  but  to  those  within  Its  own  pale.  Now  It  knows 
that  it  is  in  the  world  to  save  the  world ;  that  while  God 
loves  the  saint,  he  also  loves  the  sinner;  that  while  he  has 
*'  more  graces  for  the  good,"  he  has  messages  of  love  for 
the  bad.  It  considers  itself  as  commissioned  to  carry  these 
messages  to  every  heathen  land,  to  every  destitute  com- 
munity, to  every  godless  home,  and  to  every  unconverted 
person.  Evangelical  churches  are  like  bustling  camps  of 
spiritual  soldiers,  who  are  being  told  off  to  go  to  this  coun- 
try and  that,  to  this  destitute  section  and  that,  with  the 
gospel  of  peace,  to  conquer  the  whole  world  for  Christ. 
So  thoroughly  has  this  missionary  spirit  possessed  the  body 
of  evangelical  Christians,  that  the  smallest  and  most  ob- 
scure divisions  feel  constrained  not  only  to  evangelize 
home  communities,  but  to  have  their  representatives 
abroad. 

This  dominant  purpose  has  made  agencies  and  organiza- 
tions and  financial  methods  necessary.  The  business  of 
saving  the  world  requires  organization,  complete  and  ex- 
tensive ;  it  requires  administrators,  agents,  means,  machin- 
ery, enterprise.  All  these  the  church  has  provided,  and  a 
great  system  has  been  worked  out,  rivaling  in  its  universal 
operations  and  the  volume  of  Its  transactions  that  of  any 
commercial  project  of  which  we  have  knowledge.  Any 
kingdom,  country,  province,  island,  settlement,  with  hardly 
an  exception,  can  be  reached  directly  and  quickly  through 
the  numerous  channels  of  communication  estabHshed  by 
gospel  enterprise.  If  a  devoted  man  or  woman  wants  to 
enter  a  field  of  work  abroad,  the  widest  range  of  choice  is 
presented.  Any  country  between  Greenland  and  New 
Zealand,  in  the  western  or  eastern  circuit  of  the  globe, 
may  be  selected,  and  there  is  a  gospel  society  to  commis- 
sion him  and  send  and  support  him.  If  any  one  has  a  sum 
of  money  to  be  applied  to  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel, 


INTRODUCTION.  Ix 


111 


he  may  have  it  expended  in  any  presidency  in  India,  in 
any  division  in  Japan,  in  any  kingdom  in  Africa,  or  in  any 
island  of  the  sea.  The  machinery  exists  to  place  it  wher- 
ever he  wants  it  to  go. 

We  have  the  same  appliances  for  work  at  home.  Here 
are  Indians,  Chinese,  and  negroes ;  ignorant  and  vicious 
populations ;  groups  of  foreigners ;  the  frontiers  of  civiliza- 
tion and  the  centers  of  cities ;  the  prairies  and  the  slums ; 
the  jails,  asylums,  and  workhouses.  Here  is  book  and 
Bible  work^  evangelistic  work,  reformatory  work,  educa- 
tional work,  missionary  work,  and  many  other  forms  of  gos- 
pel benevolence,  with  abundance  of  machinery  for  all  the 
exigencies  of  service.  Places  are  ready  for  the  men  and 
women,  and  societies  exist  to  commission  and  direct  them, 
and  to  collect  and  administer  the  necessary  funds. 

Organization  is,  indeed,  one  of  the  characteristics  of  the 
church  of  to-day.  The  idea  of  organization  was  in  the 
first  church  ever  formed.  Where  two  or  more  believers 
are,  there  is  a  call  for  fellowship,  for  association,  and  for 
cooperation.  The  church  of  the  present  is  but  working  out 
more  fully  the  central  idea  of  Christian  fellowship.  This 
fellowship  is  now  understood  to  be  for  mutual  helpfulness 
and  for  service.  We  are  saved  to  serve,  and  we  can  serve 
best  if  we  serve  according  to  some  system.  Hence  we 
organize.  Every  church  has  come  to  have  its  committees 
for  regular  and  special  work.  The  women  are  organized 
for  those  parish  duties  which  they  can  best  perform ;  for 
missionary  work  for  which  they  have  special  aptitude. 
They  are  given  a  much  larger  share  of  the  Lord's  business 
than  our  forefathers  dreamed  of  allotting  to  them.  We 
have  organized  our  young  people.  This  is  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  movements  of  the  century  in  religious  work. 
The  mighty  development  has  come  almost  within  a  decade. 
The  young  people  of  both  sexes  have  been  banded  to- 


Ixiv  INTRODUCTION-.  ^ 

gether  into  Endeavor  Societies,  Epworth  Leagues,  Chris- 
tian Unions,  and  the  like,  and  their  members  are  numbered 
by  the  milHon.  By  organization  for  prayer,  praise,  and 
Christian  work,  and  particularly  training  in  public  service, 
a  great  body  of  young  believers  have  been  made  a  positive, 
aggressive  force  in  all  our  churches.  Who  can  measure  the 
influence  which  these  young  people  thus  organized  will 
exert  in  the  immediate  future?  Not  many  years  ago  the 
cry  was  raised :  **  We  are  losing  our  hold  on  the  young 
people.  They  are  not  coming  into  the  church.  They  are 
growing  up  indifferent  to  religion."  To-day  we  have  no 
more  devoted  and  enthusiastic  and  helpful  workers  in  the 
church  than  the  young  people. 

The  evangelical  Christianity  of  to-day  is  not  polemic.  It 
is  intensely  practical.  It  emphasizes  more  than  it  used 
to  the  importance  of  Christian  character  and  of  Christian 
work.  It  is  less  theological  in  its  preaching,  making  more, 
indeed,  of  biblical  exposition,  but  less  of  doctrinal  forms 
and  definitions.  And  yet  it  would  be  wrong  to  say  that 
it  makes  little  or  no  account  of  belief.  All  that  it  says,  all 
that  it  does,  is  based  upon  profound  and  unshakable  belief. 
It  is  the  gospel  it  declares  and  is  trying  to  work  out  in  a 
practical  way.  The  church  of  to-day  is  a  gospel  church. 
It  has  the  fullest  confidence  in  the  power  of  the  gospel, 
and  believes  it  was  given  for  all  men,  is  adapted  to  all  con- 
ditions, and  is  to  become  supreme  in  the  world.  Christ, 
the  center  of  this  gospel,  is  the  divine  Lord  and  Master  of 
the  church.  Belief  in  him  as  a  human  manifestation  of 
the  divine  love  and  a  divine  manifestation  of  a  perfect 
humanity  was  never  more  clear  and  strong.  It  is  upon 
him,  as  the  cornerstone,  his  atonement,  and  his  teachings 
that  the  evangelical  church  builds  its  system  of  religion ; 
and  while  this  is  the  age  of  the  higher  biblical  criticism, 
the  most  critical  and  careful  study  of  the  Bible  has  con- 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixv 

firmed  no  conclusions  which  shake  beHef  in  its  character 
as  the  Word  of  God,  or  in  its  mor^il  and  spiritual  teachings. 
On  the  contrary,  this  criticism  may  be  said  to  have  estab- 
lished the  genuineness  of  the  Gospel  of  John. 

I  do  not  wish  to  convey  the  impression  that  there  are 
no  dangerous  tendencies  in  the  church,  nothing  that  needs 
to  be  guarded  against.  There  are  enough  evidences  of 
weak  places  in  belief  and  practice  to  awaken  the  solicitude 
of  every  devoted  believer.  I  am  not  undertaking  an  ex- 
haustive description,  but  only  a  brief  characterization  of 
evangelical  Christianity  as  it  is  manifested  in  the  United 
States.     It  was  never  more  prosperous  and  powerful. 

XV. 

HOW   THE    CHURCH    AFFECTS    SOCIETY. 

It  is  to  be  remembered  that  all  the  houses  of  worship 
have  been  built  by  voluntary  contributions.  They  have 
been  provided  by  private  gifts,  but  are  offered  to  the  public 
for  free  use.  The  government  has  not  given  a  dollar  to 
provide  them,  nor  does  it  appropriate  a  dollar  for  their  sup- 
port. And  yet  the  church  is  the  mightiest,  most  pervasive, 
most  persistent,  and  most  beneficent  force  in  our  civilization. 
It  affects,  directly  or  indirectly,  all  human  activities  and  in- 
terests. 

It  is  a  large  property-holder,  and  influences  the  market 
for  real  estate. 

It  is  a  corporation,  and  administers  large  trusts. 

It  is  a  public  institution,  and  is  therefore  the  subject  of 
protective  legislation. 

It  is  a  capitalist,  and  gathers  and  distributes  large  wealth. 

It  rs  an  employer,  and  furnishes  means  of  support  to 
ministers,  organists,  singers,  janitors,  and  others. 


Ixvi  INTRODUCTION. 

It  is  a  relief  organization,  feeding  the  hungry,  clothing 
the  naked,  and  assisting  the  destitute. 

It  is  a  university,  training  children  and  instructing  old 
and  young,  by  public  lectures  on  religion,  morals,  industry, 
thrift,  and  the  duties  of  citizenship. 

It  is  a  reformatory  influence,  recovering  the  vicious,  im- 
moral, and  dangerous  elements  of  society  and  making  them 
exemplary  citizens. 

It  is  a  philanthropic  association,  sending  missionaries  to 
the  remotest  countries  to  Christianize  savage  and  degraded 
races. 

It  is  organized  beneficence,  founding  hospitals  for  the 
sick,  asylums  for  orphans,  refuges  for  the  homeless,  and 
schools,  colleges,  and  universities  for  the  ignorant. 

It  prepares  the  way  for  commerce,  and  creates  and 
stimulates  industries.  Architects,  carpenters,  painters,  and 
other  artisans  are  called  to  build  its  houses  of  worship; 
mines,  quarries,  and  forests  are  worked  to  provide  the  ma- 
terials, and  railroads  and  ships  are  employed  in  transporting 
them.  It  requires  tapestries  and  furnishings,  and  the  looms 
that  weave  them  are  busy  day  and  night.  It  buys  millions 
of  Bibles,  prayer-books,  hymn-books,  and  papers,  and  the 
presses  which  supply  them  never  stop. 

Who  that  considers  these  moral  and  material  aspects  of  the 
church  can  deny  that  it  is  beneficent  in  its  aims,  unselfish  in 
its  plans,  and  impartial  in  the  distribution  of  its  blessings  ?  It 
is  devoted  to  the  temporal  and  eternal  interests  of  mankind. 

Every  cornerstone  it  lays,  it  lays  for  humanity ;  every 
temple  it  opens,  it  opens  to  the  world ;  every  altar  it  estab- 
lishes, it  establishes  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  Its  spires  are 
fingers  pointing  heavenward ;  its  ministers  are  messengers 
of  good  tidings,  ambassadors  of  hope,  and  angels  of  mercy. 

What  is  there  among  men  to  compare  with  the  church 
in  its  power  to  educate,  elevate,  and  civilize  mankind? 


EXPLANATIONS   OF   THE   TERMS   USED. 


1.  By  "organizations  "  is  meant  church  societies,  or  congregations.  The 
returns  under  this  head  include  chapels,  missions,  stations,  etc.,  when  they 
are  separate  from  churches  and  have  separate  services. 

2.  Under  the  title  "  church  edifices  "  are  given  all  buildings  erected  for 
divine  worship.  Chapels  under  separate  rooms  are  counted  as  distinct  build- 
ings. The  fractions  which  appear  in  this  column  indicate  joint  ownership. 
A  large  number  of  church  edifices  are  owned  and  occupied  by  two  or  more 
denominations,  and  the  proportion  which  each  owns  is  expressed  by  the  frac- 
tions %,  yi,  %,  etc.  The  tables  do  not  show  how  many  churches  are  thus 
owned.  Many  fractions  have  disappeared  in  the  process  of  addition.  If 
there  were,  for  example,  twenty  churches  in  a  State  or  conference  or  diocese 
or  presbytery,  in  which  a  particular  denomination  had  a  fractional  interest  of 
%  each  in  eighteen,  j^  in  another,  and  %  in  another,  the  eighteen  halves 
would  be  converted  into  nine  integers  in  the  footing,  and  the  sum  of  j^  and 
X>  or  "1%,  would  be  the  only  fraction  that  would  appear. 

3.  "  Seating  capacity"  indicates  the  number  of  persons  a  church  edifice  is 
arranged  to  seat.  The  accommodations  of  halls  and  schoolhouses  are  given 
separately,  and  those  of  private  houses  are  not  counted  at  all. 

4.  "  Value  of  church  property  "  covers  only  the  estimated  value  of  church 
edifices  with  their  chapels,  the  ground  on  which  they  stand,  and  their  furnish- 
ings. It  does  not  embrace  parsonages,  cemeteries,  or  colleges,  or  convents, 
only  the  chapels  belonging  thereto.  No  deductions  are  made  for  church 
debts. 

5.  "  Communicants  "  embraces  all  who  have  the  privilege  of  partaking  of 
the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  of  members  in  denominations  like 
the  Friends,  Unitarians,  etc.  The  Jewish  returns  are  mostly  for  heads  of 
families  who  are  pewholders.  Those  for  Unitarians  are  larger,  in  proportion, 
than  those  for  the  Universalists,  because  the  terms  of  Unitarian  membership 
are  less  restrictive. 

6.  The  statistics  given  in  this  volume  are  for  the  United  States  only.  No 
returns  are  included  for  missions  or  churches  in  other  lands. 

Ixvii 


RELIGIOUS    FORCES    OF    THE 
UNITED    STATES. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE    ADVENTISTS. 

The  movement  out  of  which  the  various  Adventist 
bodies  have  come  began  about  the  year  1831  with  a  series 
of  lectures  on  the  personal  coming  of  Christ,  delivered  by 
William  Miller.  Mr.  Miller,  a  native  of  Massachusetts,  was 
converted  and  joined  the  Baptist  Church  at  Low  Hamp- 
ton, N.  Y.,  in  1 8 16.  He  had  been  a  Deist,  according  to 
his  own  statement.  A  diligent  study  of  the  Bible  inclined 
him  to  the  belief  in  1 8 1 8  that  the  millennium  was  to  begin 
not  before  but  after  the  end  of  the  world,  and  that  the 
second  advent  of  Christ  was  near  at  hand.  Further  ex- 
amination of  the  Scriptures  fully  convinced  him  of  the 
correctness  of  this  view,  and  in  August,  1831,  he  began  to 
lecture  on  the  subject.  His  study  of  the  Apocalypse  and 
the  Gospels  satisfied  him  that  the  **  only  millennium  "  to 
be  expected  '*  is  the  thousand  years  which  are  to  intervene 
between  the  first  resurrection  and  that  of  the  rest  of  the 
dead";  that  the  second  coming  of  Christ  is  to  be  a  per- 
sonal coming ;   that  the  millennium  "  must  necessarily  fol- 

I 


2  RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

low  the  personal  coming  of  Christ  and  the  regeneration  of 
the  earth  "  ;  that  the  prophecies  show  that  *'  only  four  uni- 
versal monarchies  are  to  precede  the  setting  up  of  God's 
everlasting  kingdom,"  of  which  three  had  passed  away — 
the  Babylonian,  the  Medo-Persian,  and  the  Grecian — and 
the  fourth,  that  of  Rome,  was  in  the  last  stage ;  that  the 
periods  spoken  of  in  the  Book  of  Daniel  of  "  2300  days," 
of  the  *'  seven  times  of  Gentile  supremacy,"  and  of  *'  1335 
days,"  were  prophetic  periods,  and,  applied  chronologic- 
ally, led  to  a  termination  in  1843,  when  Christ  would 
personally  descend  to  the  earth  and  reign  with  the  saints 
in  a  new  earth  a  thousand  years.  In  1833  he  published  a 
pamphlet  entitled  *'  Evidences  from  Scripture  and  History 
of  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ,  about  the  Year  1843,  and 
of  His  Personal  Reign  of  One  Thousand  Years." 

He  made  many  converts  to  his  views,  both  among  min- 
isters and  laymen  of  the  Baptist,  Christian,  Methodist,  and 
other  denominations,  and  the  new  doctrine  was  widely 
proclaimed.  In  1840  a  general  gathering  of  friends  of  the 
cause  was  held  in  Boston,  and  an  address  issued  which 
stated  that  while  those  who  participated  in  the  conference 
were  not  in  accord  in  fixing  the  year  of  the  second  advent, 
they  were  unanimously  of  the  opinion  that  it  was  "  spe- 
cially nigh  at  hand."  A  number  of  papers,  one  of  which 
was  a  daily,  appeared,  bearing  such  titles  as  The  Midnight 
Cry,  The  Sig7is  of  the  Times,  The  Trumpet  of  Alarm,  etc., 
and  helped  greatly  to  spread  Mr.  Miller's  views.  When 
the  year  in  which  the  advent  was  fully  expected  had 
passed,  Mr.  Miller  wrote  a  letter  confessing  his  **  error " 
and  acknowledging  his  "  disappointment,"  but  expressing 
his  belief  that  **  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near,  even  at  the 
door."       He    also    attended    a   conference    of   Adventists 


THE  ADVEXTISrS.  3 

held  in  Boston  late  in  May,  1844,  and  made  a  similar 
statement,  admitting  that  he  had  been  in  error  in  fixing  a 
definite  time.  Subsequently  he  became  convinced  that 
the  end  would  come  on  or  about  the  22d  of  October, 
1844,  and  said  if  Christ  did  not  then  appear  he  should 
"  feel  twice  the  disappointment  "  that  he  had  already  felt. 
Some  of  those  who  had  joined  the  movement  left  it  after 
the  time  for  the  end  of  the  world  had  passed  without  a 
fulfillment  of  their  expectations;  but  many  still  beheved 
that  the  great  event  was  near  at  hand,  and  urged  men  to 
live  in  a  constant  state  of  readiness  for  it. 

Various  views  were  developed  among  the  Adventists, 
after  the  second  date  had  passed  without  result,  respecting 
the  resurrection  of  the  body,  the  immortality  of  the  soul, 
and  the  state  of  the  dead,  and  these  differences  resulted  in 
course  of  time  in  different  organizations. 

At  a  general  conference  of  Adventists  held  in  Albany, 
N.  Y.,  April  29,  1845,  ^  report  was  adopted  holding  to  the 
visible,  personal  coming  of  Christ  at  an  early  but  indefinite 
time,  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  both  the  just  and  the 
unjust,  and  to  the  beginning  of  the  millennium  after  the 
resurrection  of  the  saints,  denying  that  there  is  any  prom- 
ise of  the  world's  conversion,  or  that  the  saints  enter  upon 
their  inheritance,  or  receive  their  crowns,  at  death. 

Small  companies  of  Adventists  at  various  times  after  the 
failures  of  1843  ^^d  1844  set  new  dates  for  the  second 
advent,  and  there  were  gatherings  in  expectation  of  the 
great  event;  but  the  "time  brethren,"  as  they  are  often 
called,  have  at  no  time  since  1844  formed  a  large  propor- 
tion of  the  Adventists. 

Ministers  are  ordained  to  the  office  of  elder  by  the  lay- 
ing on  of  hands,  upon  the  recommendation  of  the  churches 


4  RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF  THE   UNITED   STATES. 

of  which  they  are  members,  and  after  approval  by  a  com- 
mittee of  elders.  Baptism  is  administered  by  immersion. 
The  Adventists  are  Congregational  in  polity,  excepting 
the  Seventh- Day  branch,  which  has  a  government  of  a 
presbyterial  character.  Camp-meetings  form  prominent 
and  popular  annual  gatherings  among  the  Adventists.  On 
these  occasions  some  of  their  societies  hold  business  ses- 
sions. 

The  following  is  a  complete  list  of  Adventist  bodies, 
excepting  the  Adonai  Shomo,  which  is  a  small  commu- 
nistic body,  and  is  given  elsewhere  in  that  group : 

1.  Evangelical  Adventists,        4.   Church  of  God, 

2.  Advent  Christians,  5.   Life  and  Advent  Union, 

3.  Seventh-Day  Adventists,      6.   Churches  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 

I. — THE  EVANGELICAL  ADVENTISTS. 

Those  who  could  not  accept  the  views  of  the  Advent 
Christians  as  to  the  mortality  of  the  soul  began  in  1855 
to  hold  separate  meetings,  and  to  be  known  as  Evangelical 
Adventists.  They  believe  that  the  soul  is  immortal ;  that 
all  the  dead  will  be  raised,  the  saints  first  and  the  wicked 
last ;  that  the  former  will  enter  upon  the  millennial  reign 
with  Christ  and  after  the  judgment  receive  as  their  reward 
an  eternity  of  bliss ;  that  the  wicked,  who  will  rise  at  the 
end  of  the  millennial  reign,  will  be  sent  away  into  ever- 
lasting punishment.  They  also  hold,  contrary  to  the  belief 
of  the  Advent  Christians,  that  the  dead  do  not  always 
sleep,  but  are  in  a  conscious  state.  In  other  respects  their 
doctrinal  views  do  not  differ  from  those  of  the  second 
branch. 

They  have  two  annual  conferences,  besides  five  congre- 


THE  ADVENTISTS. 


5 


gations,  unattached,  and  are  found  in  Vermont,  Massachu- 
setts, Rhode  Island,  and  Pennsylvania.  Besides  the  church 
edifices  reported,  this  denomination  occupies  as  places  of 
worship  5  halls,  etc.,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  775. 


Summary  by  States. 

Organi-  Church  Seating  Value  of  «     Com- 

STATES.                              ,^f-„„c.  Tr^,-fi^»o  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  p^^j^  Property.         cants. 

Massachusetts 3            2  250  $4,500  150 

Pennsylvania 21           16  3,805  18,500  509 

Rhode  Island 2             2  1,100  33,000  325 

Vermont 4            3  700  5,400  163 

Total 30  23  5,855  61,400  1,147 

Summary  by  Conferences. 

CONFERENCES. 

Northern  Vermont  .           4            3  700  $5,400  163 

Pennsylvania 21     ■       16  3,805  18,500  509 

Unorganized 5            4  i,35o  37,5oo  475 

Total 30  23  5,855  61,400  1,147 


2. — THE   ADVENT   CHRISTIANS. 

A  difference  of  opinion  on  the  question  of  the  immor- 
tahty  of  the  soul  led  to  a  division  in  1855.  Those  who  be- 
lieve that  man,  both  body  and  soul,  is  wholly  mortal,  and 
that  eternal  life  is  to  be  had  only  through  personal  faith  in 
Christ  as  the  gift  of  God,  constitute  the  branch  known  as 
the  Advent  Christian  Church.  They  hold  to  the  proxi- 
mate personal  coming  of  Christ,  and  that  after  he  comes 
the  millennium  will  begin ;  they  deny  the  inherent  immor- 
tality of  the  soul,  insisting  that  those  only  shall  put  on 
immortality  at  Christ's  coming  who  are  his  true  disciples ; 
they  believe  that  all  the  dead  are  in  an  unconscious  state ; 


6  RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

that  all  shall  rise  therefrom — the  just  first,  to  receive  the 
gift  of  immortality  and  to  reign  with  Christ;  the  unjust 
last,  to  receive  sentence  of  banishment  and  to  be  punished 
by  annihilation. 

The  Advent  Christians  have  twenty  conferences,  with 
which  three  fifths  of  them  are  connected.  The  rest  are  in 
congregations  which  are  not  associated.  The  congrega- 
tions are  somewhat  loosely  organized,  there  being  no  gen- 
eral set  of  rules  or  particular  form  of  government  provided 
for  them.  They  occupy  as  places  of  worship  281  halls, 
schoolhouses,  and  private  houses,  with  an  aggregate  seat- 
ing capacity  of  34,705  for  the  two  former.  The  seating 
capacity  of  private  houses  is  not  given  in  any  of  the  tables 
in  this  volume. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  O''?^^"^- 

zations. 

Alabama 15 

Arkansas 22 

California 14 

Connecticut 26 

Florida 4 

Georgia.  . .- 15 

Illinois 21 

Indiana 10 

Iowa .  32 

Kansas 30 

Louisiana 2 

Maine 65 

Massachusetts 39 

Michigan 14 

Minnesota 14 

Mississippi i 

Missouri 7 

Nebraska 7 

New  Hampshire  ...  43 

New  York 17 

North  Carolina  ....  18 


Church 
edifices. 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

1.3;^ 

3,825 

$3,055 

688 

6 

1,750 

2,900 

671 

8 

1,525 

13,700 

5.58 

-7  T 

4,825 

54,300 

1,358 

I 

200 

100 

60 

5 

2,000 

2,850 

873 

14 

3,775 

32,800 

1,019 

7 

2,490 

9,400 

455 

14 

3,305 

17,300 

1,272 

3 

725 

3,200 

990 

I 

250 

500 

51 

28X 

7,520 

38,100 

2,317 

21 

5,605 

70,500 

2,611 

7 

2,025 

9,800 

591 

9 

2,375 

28,150 

710 
30 

X 

400 

300 

230 
98 

26 

6,500 

36,500 

1,978 

10 

2,500 

25,500 

1,048 

^5 

4,750 

8,075 

1.549 

7  HE   A  D  J  'EXTIS  TS. 


Summary  ey  States. — Continued. 

STATES.  O'P--  •rJ'.-H  "ca"^  It=ch' 

zalions.  Ldinces.  ^  t, 

pacity.  Property. 

Ohio 23  17  5,650  $20,500 

Oregon 8  i>^  450  1,000 

Pennsylvania 16  8j^  2,426  9,800 

Rhode  Island 12  10  2,650  27.450 

South  Carolina  ....  10  6/^  2,350  2,300 

South  Dakota 6  i  300  1,000 

Tennessee  7  3  1,100  1,900 

Texas 9  i  300  2,000 

Utah I  . .  

Vermont 28  14]^^  3,485  26,000 

Virginia 2  2  350  2,200 

Washington 7  i  200  700 

West  Virginia 15  6  2,100  2,200 

Wisconsin 20  12  2,580  11,525 

Total 580  294  80,286  $465,605 

Summary  by  Conferences. 

Alabama   15  13X  3.825  $3,055 

Arkansas   22  6  i,75o  2,900 

California 14  8  1,525  13,700 

Connecticut 26  21  4,825  54,300 

Dakota 6  i  300  1,000 

Georgia 15  5  2,000  2,850 

Illinois 21  14  3^775  32,800 

Indiana 10  7  2,490  9,400 

Iowa 32  14  3,305  17,300 

Kansas 30  3  725  3^200 

Maine 65  28^  7, 520  38,100 

Michigan 14  7  2,025  9,800 

Minnesota   14  9  2,375  28,150 

Missouri    7  )i  400  300 

Nebraska 7  .  . 

New  Hampshire  ...  43  26  6,500  36,560 

Ohio 23  17  5,650  20,500 

Oregon  and  Wash- 
ington      15  2;^  650  1,700 

Tennessee  7  3  1,100  1,900 

Texas 9  i  300  2,000 

Unorganized 185  107^^^  29,246  186,150 

Total 580  294  80,286  $465,605 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 


953 
132 
469 
950 
811 

163 
185 


1,079 
165 
129 
681 
613 

25,816 


688 
671 
558 

1,358 
163 
873 

1,019 

455 

1,272 

990 

2,317 

591 

710 

230 

98 

1,978 

953 

261 

185 

321 

10,125 

25,816 


8  RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES, 

3. — THE    SEVENTH-DAY    ADVENTISTS. 

These  form  a  branch  of  the  general  movement  of 
1840-44.  They  differ  from  other  Adventists  in  observing 
the  seventh  day  of  the  vi^eek  as  the  Sabbath,  in  interpreta- 
tion of  the  prophetic  periods,  and  in  form  of  organization. 
They  beheve  that  the  prophetic  period  of  2300  days  re- 
ferred to  in  the  Book  of  Daniel  closed  in  1844;  but  that 
the  coming  of  Christ  was  not  to  be  looked  for  then,  but  is 
to  occur  in  the  indefinite  future.  They  hold  that  Christ, 
in  1844,  at  the  termination  of  the  2300  days,  entered  as 
priest  upon  the  work  of  cleansing  the  heavenly  sanctuary, 
or  temple,  from  ''  the  presence  of  our  sins."  This  period, 
which  is  to  be  brief,  is  to  close  with  the  second  coming, 
the  time  of  which  cannot  be  forecast.  The  observance  of 
the  seventh  day  began  with  a  congregation  of  Adventists 
in  New  Hampshire  in  1844.  The  doctrine  respecting  the 
**  cleansing  of  the  sanctuary  "  has  helped  to  establish  and 
confirm  this  observance.  They  believe  that  the  second 
advent  is  to  precede,  not  follow,  the  millennium,  that  the 
state  of  the  dead  is  one  of  unconsciousness,  and  that  im- 
mersion is  the  proper  form  of  baptism.  They  practice  the 
ceremony  of  feet-washing  when  the  Lord's  Supper  is  ad- 
ministered. 

Their  congregations  are  organized  into  conferences,  of 
which  there  are  twenty-six,  besides  five  missions.  There 
is  also  a  general  conference,  which  meets  annually,  com- 
posed of  delegates  from  the  various  conferences.  Ordained 
ministers  are  not  pastors,  but  traveling  evangelists.  The 
local  churches  are  served  by  local  officers  who  need  not  be 
ordained  ministers.  Members  are  expected  to  contribute 
a  tenth  of  their  income  to  the  church. 


THE  ADVENTISTS.  9 

There  are  995  organizations  with  418  edifices,  valued  at 
$644,675,  and  28,891  communicants.  The  average  seat- 
ing capacity  of  the  edifices  is  225,  and  their  average  value 
$1542.  The  headquarters  of  the  Seventh-Day  Adventists 
are  at  Battle  Creek,  Michigan,  and  about  a  sixth  of  their 
communicants  are  in  that  State.  Their  congregations, 
however,  are  found  in  nearly  all  the  States  and  Territories. 
They  occupy  as  places  of  worship  555  halls,  etc.,  with  a 
seating  capacity  of  27,865. 


Summary  by  States  and  Territories. 


STATES.  Organi- 
zations. 

Arizona    i 

Arkansas 15 

California 34 

Colorado 13 

Connecticut 3 

Delaware 2 

District  of  Columbia  i 

Florida 6 

Georgia 4 

Idaho 5 

Illinois 24 

Indiana 55 

Iowa 85 

Kansas 67 

Kentucky 6 

Louisiana 5 

Maine 25 

Maryland i 

Massachusetts 15 

Michigan 134 

Minnesota 71 

Missouri 24 

Montana 2 

Nebraska 38 

Nevada 4 

New  Hampshire  ...  4 

New  Jersey 5 

New  York 42 

North  Carolina  ....  5 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ldifices. 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

12 

.3 

850 

$1,000 

363 

24 

8,328 

157,150 

2,226 

2 

650 

4,650 

414 

I 

150 

2,000 

91 

I 

150 

800 

26 

96 

119 

40 

81 

2 

400 

4,000 

148 

16 

3,550 

52,400 

871 

34,V 

7,900 

32,010 

1,193 

48 

11,249 

58,925 

2,197 

21 

4,165 

15.950 

1,990 

i^ 

400 

800 

80 

3 

650 

200 

116 

4% 

1.550 

7,400 

459 
23 

2 

600 

5,900 

490 

63 

15,875 

104,075 

4,715 

31 

5.215 

27,550 

2,313 

7 

1,500 

6,350 

815 

I 

200 

1,250 

49 

9 

1,025 

12,500 

829 

2 

300 

2,025 

56 

I 

200 

500 

112 

3 

425 

1,000 

85 

13 

3,000 

23,300 

1,17b 

3 

400 

500 

«3 

10       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States  and  Territories. — Continued. 

STATES  Organi-  Church  SeaUng  Value  of 

— •  zations.  Edifices.  ^^^^^  p^^^^-^ 

North  Dakota 4  

Ohio 55  i\%  5,575  $25,450 

Oregon 26  8  1,800  11, 300 

Pennsylvania 36  io>^  2,350  16.300 

Rhode  Island 6  4  500  1,025 

South  Dakota 30  9  2,350  7.400 

Tennessee  10  5X  1,350  2,425 

Texas 15  i  800  800 

Utah I  

Vermont 26  4  1,150  4,500 

Virginia 6  2  600  1,800 

Washington 21  10  1,925  20,050 

West  Virginia 5  3  450  2,500 

Wisconsin 58  43  7045  28,850 

Total 995  418  94,627  $644,675 

Summary  by  Conferences  and  Missions. 

Arkansas 15  3  850  $1,000 

Atlantic 10  4  575  1,800 

California 40  26  8,628  159,175 

Colorado 13  2  650  4.650 

Illinois 24  16  3,550  52,400 

Indiana 55  34/^  7,900  32,010 

Iowa 85  48  11,249  58,925 

Kansas 67  21  4,165  15,950 

Maine 25  42^  i,55o  7,400 

Michigan 134  63  15-875  I04,075 

Minnesota 75  31  5,215  27.550 

Missouri 24  7  1,500  6,350 

Nebraska 38  9  1,025  12,500 

New  England 28  8  1,450  9,425 

New  York 31  10  2,400  22,800 

North  Pacific 35  12  2,425  20,300 

Ohio 55  2i>^  5,575  25,450 

Pennsylvania 46  13^  2,950  16,800 

South  Dakota 30  9  2,350  7,400 

Tennessee  River ..  .  11  5^  1,550  2.425 

Texas 15  i  800  800 

Upper  Columbia.  . .  17  8  1,700  15,050 

Vermont 26  4  1,150  4,500 

Virginia 6  2  600  1,800 

West  Virginia 5  3  450  2,500 

Wisconsin 58  43  7,045  28,850 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

95 

1,189 

683 

884 

108 


452 
29 
526 
J 14 
560 
136 
1,892 

28,991 


363 
309 
2.323 
414 
871 

1. 193 

2,197 

1,990 

459 

4,715 

2,408 

815 

829 

801 

883 

879 

1,189 

1,098 


452 
512 
526 
114 
136 
1,892 


THE  ADVENTISTS.  II 

Summary  by  COxXferences  and  Missions, — Continued. 

,^,^,,  Organi.      Church        Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^^l^^^       Y.mz^^.  Ca-  Church  muni- 

pacily.  Troperty.  cants. 

MISSIONS. 

Cumberland 5  i             200  $800  71 

Louisiana 5  3             650  200  116 

Montana 2  i              200  I5250  49 

North  Carolina  ....  5  3             400  500  83 

South  Atlantic 10  40  200 

Total 995         418       94,627     $644,675      28,991 

4. — THE    CHURCH    OF   GOD. 

The  Church  of  God  is  a  branch  of  the  Seventh-Day 
Adventists.  A  division  occurred  among  the  latter  in  the 
years  1864-66.  This  division  resulted  in  the  organization 
of  the  Church  of  God.  The  chief  cause  of  the  division 
was,  it  is  stated,  the  claim  of  the  Seventh- Day  Adventists 
that  Mrs.  Ellen  G.  White  was  inspired  and  that  her  visions 
should  be  accepted  as  inspired.  There  are  differences 
between  the  two  bodies  on  the  subject  of  health- reform — 
which  is  made  prominent  by  the  parent  body — abstinence 
from  swine's  flesh,  tea,  and  coffee — which  the  latter  recom- 
mends— and  with  relation  to  prophecy. 

The  Church  of  God  has  three  annual  conferences,  also  a 
general  conference  representing  the  whole  denomination. 
The  number  of  members  is  647.  There  are  23  halls,  etc., 
with  a  seating  capacity  of  1445. 

Summary  by  States. 

Orfrani        Chnrrh         Seating  Vahie  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^ITZ:      VA^^^l  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.      Edifices.         ^^^^^^  Property.  cants. 

Indiana 2  . .  ....          20 

Kansas i  . .  ....          20 

Michigan 15  .  .  ....  $600  248 

Missouri 1 1  i  200  800  359 

Total 29  I  200         $1,400  647 


12        RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Conferences. 


Organi-       Church 
zations.       Edifices. 


Kansas  &  Nebraska         i 

Michigan 17 

Missouri 11 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

200 

$600 
800 

20 
268 

359 

Total 29  I  200         $1,400  647 

5. — THE    LIFE    AND    ADVENT    UNION. 

This  branch  differs  from  the  Evangelical  and  Advent 
Christian  bodies  respecting  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrec- 
tion, of  the  wicked  dead.  Both  the  latter  believe  that  the 
wicked  dead  will  rise  at  the  end  of  the  millennial  reign 
and  be  sentenced  to  everlasting  punishment  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  Evangelical  Adventists,  will  be  everlasting  suf- 
fering, and  according  to  the  Advent  Christians,  everlasting 
destruction.  The  Life  and  Advent  Union  holds  that  they 
will  not  rise  at  all ;  that  when  they  die  they  die  never  to 
wake,  but  are  doomed  to  sleep  eternal.  This  belief  had 
adherents  as  early  as  1844.  The  branch,  however,  dates 
from  1864.      It  was  organized  in  Wilbraham,  Mass. 

It  has  28  organizations,  fourteen  of  which  are  in  New 
England.  It  has  about  1000  members.  There  are  19 
halls,  etc.,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  1830. 

Summary  by  States. 

^         .        ^,        ,  Seating        Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  O''?^"'-     ^^^^""^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.      Edifices.  ^^^-^^  Property.  cants. 

Connecticut 6  i  100       $3,040  243 

Delaware i  . . 75 

Iowa I  . .          20 

Maine 7  3  1,200          1,250  188 

Massachusetts 5  2  500         2,000  177 

New  Jersey i  i  150            900  56 

.    New  York 2  i  300         9,500  140 

Rhode  Island i  100  75 

Virginia 4  . . 44 


Total 28  8  2,250     $16,790        1,018 


THE  ADVENllSrS.  I  3 

6. — THE    CHURCHES    OF    GOD    IN    CHRIST   JESUS. 

The  members  of  this  branch  are  popularly  known  as 
Age-to-Come  Adventists.  They  beheve  that  God  is 
pledged,  through  the  mouth  of  the  prophets,  to  the  final 
restitution  of  all  things,  and  expect  to  see  the  kingdom  of 
God  established  on  earth,  with  Christ  as  King  of  kings,  the 
saints  being  associated  with  him  in  the  government  of  the 
world.  They  believe  that  Israel  will  be  restored  to  rule  in 
Jerusalem;  that  the  dead  will  have  a  literal  resurrection, 
the  righteous  to  receive  the  blessings  of  immortality  and 
the  wicked  to  be  destroyed ;  and  that  eternal  life  comes 
only  through  Christ.  They  hold  that  acceptance  of  the 
gospel,  repentance,  immersion  in  the  name  of  Christ  for 
the  remission  of  sins,  are  conditions  of  forgiveness  of  sins, 
and  that  a  holy  life  is  essential  to  salvation. 

They  have  churches  in  twenty-three  States.  They  are 
associated  in  district  conferences,  and  there  is  also  a  gen- 
eral conference.  There  are  61  halls,  etc.,  with  a  seating 
capacity  of  4825. 

Summary  by  States. 

c\ •        ex.      u        Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  Orga"^-      ChfirS  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.      Edifices.        p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Arkansas 3             3  400  $500  59 

California 3 38 

Delaware i  . .          16 

Florida i  . .          10 

Illinois 10             4  700          2,700  541 

Indiana 19             9  3,050         9,900  621 

Iowa 4             I  200         2,000  121 

Kansas ,  . .  .  .  9             i  200  400  205 

Louisiana i  .  .          10 

Maryland 2             i  180  275  47 

Michigan 7             2  375          3,800  170 

Mississippi i               Yz  200  100  9 


Missouri 3  . .          49 

Nebraska 9  i  200            500  205 

New  Jersey 2  ..          31 

New  York i  . .          400  48 


180 

375 
200 

275 

3,800 

100 

200 

500 



400 

14       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. — Continued. 


STATES. 

Ohio 

Oregon  

Pennsylvania  . 
South  Dakota 
Washington.  . 
West  Virginia 
Wisconsin .... 

Total 


Organi- 
zations. 

5 
6 
I 

2 

3 


95 


Church 
Edifices. 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

1,175 
550 
300 


Value  of 
Church 
Propertj'. 

$21,500 

1,000 

3,000 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

89 
90 
29 

99 
30 
36 


30 


7,530     $46,075        2,872 


The    following    table    represents    the    six    branches    of 
Adventists : 

Summary  of  All  Adventists. 


Alabama 15 

Arizona i 

Arkansas   40 

California 51 

Colorado 13 

Connecticut 35 

Delaware 4 

District  of  Columbia  i 

Florida 11 

Georgia   19 

Idaho 5 

Illinois   55 

Indiana 86 

Iowa 122 

Kansas 107 

Kentucky 6 

Louisiana 8 

Maine 97 

Maryland 3 

Massachusetts 62 

Michigan 170 

Minnesota 85 

Mississippi 2 

Missouri 45 

Montana 2 

Nebraska 54 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

13 

3,825 

$3,055 

688 
12 

12 

3,000 

4,400 

1,093 

32 

9,853 

170,850 

2,822 

2 

650 

4,650 

414 

23 

5,075 

59,340 

1,692 

I 

150 

800 

117 
96 

I 

200 

100 

189 

5 

2,000 

2,890 

954 

2 

400 

4,000 

148 

34 

8,025 

87,900 

2,431 

51 

13,440 

51,310 

2,289 

63 

14,754 

78,425 

3,610 

25 

5,090 

19,550 

3,205 

I 

400 

80 

4 

900 

700 

177 

36 

10,270 

46,750 

2.964 

180 

275 

70 

27 

6,955 

82,900 

3,428 

72 

18,275 

118,275 

5,724 

40 

7,590 

55,700 

3,023 

/2 

200 

100 

39 

8 

2,100 

7,450 

1,453 

I 

200 

1,250 

49 

10 

1,225 

13,000 

1,132 

THE  ADVENTISTS. 


15 


Summary  of  All  Adventists. — Contimied. 


Nevada ...  4 

New  Hampshire  ...  47 

New  Jersey   8 

New  York 62 

North  CaroUna 23 

North  Dakota 4 

Ohio 83 

Oregon 40 

Pennsylvania 74 

Rhode  Island 21 

South  Carolina  ....  10 

South  Dakota 38 

Tennessee   17 

Texas 24 

Utah 2 

Vermont 58 

Virginia 12 

Washington 31 

West  Virginia 21 

Wisconsin 79 

Total 1,757 


^hurch 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

2 

300 

$2,025 

56 

27 

6,700 

37,000 

2,090 

4 

575 

1,900 

172 

24 

5,800 

58,700 

2,412 

18 

5.150 

8,575 

1,632 

95 

44 

12,400 

67,450 

2,461 

II 

2,800 

13,300 

904 

.36 

8,881 

47,800 

1,952 

16 

4,250 

61,575 

1,458 

7 

2,350 

2,300 

811 

10 

2,650 

8,400 

1,076 

8 

2,450 

4,325 

396 

2 

1,100 

2,800 

37 

22 

5,335 

35.900 

1,768 

4 

950 

4,000 

323 

II 

2,125 

20,750 

788 

9 

2,550 

4,700 

847 

55 

9,625 

40,375 

2,541 

774  190,748  $1,236,345  60,491 


CHAPTER  11. 

THE     BAPTISTS. 

There  are  numerous  bodies  of  Christians  who  are  called 
Baptists.  While  they  differ  on  other  points  they  all  agree 
on  these:  that  (i)  the  only  proper  subjects  of  Christian 
baptism  are  those  who  have  been  converted  and  profess 
personal  faith  in  Christ;  and  that  (2)  the  only  Scriptural 
baptism  is  immersion.  They  therefore  reject  infant  bap- 
tism as  invalid,  and  sprinkling  or  pouring  as  unscriptural. 
There  are  certain  denominations  which  accept  these  princi- 
ples in  whole  or  in  part — the  Disciples  of  Christ,  the  Chris- 
tians, the  Mennonites,  and  others — but  they  are  not  Bap- 
tists in  name,  and  are  not  counted  as  such  in  any  strict 
classification.  The  Disciples  of  Christ  accept  the  two 
principles  above  stated,  but  also  hold  that  it  is  only  through 
baptism  that  *'  divine  assurance  of  remission  of  sins  and 
acceptance  with  God  "  is  received.  The  Christians  gener- 
ally believe  in  immersion  for  believers,  but  do  not  refuse 
to  tolerate  pouring  or  sprinkling;  while  the  Mennonites 
baptize  usually  by  pouring. 

The  Baptists  appear  in  history  as  early  as  the  first  quar- 
ter of  the  sixteenth  century.  Beginning  in  Switzerland  in 
1523,  they  soon  took  root  in  Germany,  Holland,  and  other 
countries  on  the  Continent,  whence  they  found  their  way 
to  England,  driven  thence  by  the  persecution  which  their 
rejectioi;  of  infant  baptism  occasioned.  Persons  who  had 
been  baptized  in   infancy,   on   professing   conversion   and 

16 


THE  BAPTISTS. 


17 


applying  for  admission  to  Baptist  churches  were  baptized 
again.  Hence  the  persecuted  people  were  often  called 
Anabaptists.  The  first  Baptist  churches  in  England  were 
organized  before  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century. 
The  American  Baptists  did  not  spring  historically  from  the 
English  Baptists.  They  trace  their  origin  to  Roger  Will- 
iams, a  minister  of  the  Church  of  England,  who  came  over 
to  Massachusetts,  whence  he  was  driven  because  he  did 
not  conform  to  Congregationalism,  which  was  the  estab- 
lished religion  of  that  province.  He  became  the  founder 
of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  which,  by  the  charter 
secured  by  him  in  1644,  was  declared  free  to  all  forms  of 
religion.  Five  years  previously  Mr.  Williams  had  become 
a  convert  to  Baptist  principles,  and  had  been  immersed  by 
one  of  the  members  of  his  Church,  Ezekiel  Holliman, 
whom  he  in  turn  immersed,  with  ten  others.  Of  these 
he  'organized  a  Baptist  church  in  Providence.  Of  course 
there  were  Baptists  among  the  immigrants  who  came  across 
the  sea  in  the  seventeenth  century  and  later,  and  Baptist 
churches  became  numerous  in  New  England,  New  York, 
Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  Georgia,  and  other  States  before  the 
close  of  the  eighteenth  century. 

The  Baptists  are  variously  divided.  The  Regular  Bap- 
tists, who  constitute  the  great  majority  in  this  country, 
exist  in  three  bodies,  Northern,  Southern,  and  Colored. 
They  are  Calvinistic  in  doctrine.  The  Freewill  Baptists, 
existing  in  two  bodies,  together  with  the  General  Baptists 
and  others,  are  Arminian  in  doctrine.  The  Primitive  or 
Old- School  Baptists,  of  which  there  are  two  or  three 
branches,  are  strongly  Calvinistic.  They  also  oppose  Sun- 
day-schools, missionary  societies,  and  other  *'  human  insti- 
tutions." 


1 8       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

Baptist  churches  are  defined  as  ''  bodies  of  baptized 
believers,  with  pastors  and  deacons,  covenanted  together 
for  reHgious  worship  and  religious  work."  All  Baptist 
denominations  are  Congregational  in  polity,  with,  perhaps, 
the  exception  of  the  Original  Freewill  Baptists.  Each 
church  manages  its  own  affairs.  There  are  associations 
and  similar  organizations,  composed  of  ministers  and  repre- 
sentatives of  the  churches,  but  they  have  no  ecclesiastical 
power.  There  are  also  State  conventions,  variously  consti- 
tuted of  representatives  of  associations,  of  other  organiza- 
tions, and  of  churches.  Associations  and  conventions  are 
chiefly  concerned  with  the  general  interests  of  the  churches, 
such  as  missions,  Sunday-schools,  education,  etc.  Men 
are  ordained  to  the  pastorate  by  councils  consisting  of  min- 
isters and  representatives  of  neighboring  churches.  Coun- 
cils also  ''recognize"  new  churches,  and  advise  churches 
whenever  requested  so  to  do  in  cases  of  difficulty.  Dea- 
cons are  officers  of  the  church,  charged  with  the  care  of 
the  poor,  the  visitation  of  the  sick,  and  similar  duties. 

The  following  is  a  complete  list  of  the  various  Baptist 
bodies : 

1.  Regular  (North),  8.   General, 

2.  Regular  (South),  9.    Separate, 

3.  Regular  (Colored),  10.   United, 

4.  Six  Principle,  11.   Baptist  Church  of  Christ, 

5.  Seventh-Day,  12.   Primitive, 

6.  Freewill,  13.  Old    Two-Seed-in-the- Spirit 

7.  Original  Freewill,  Predestinarian. 

THE    REGULAR    BAPTISTS. 

There  are  three  bodies  of  Regular  Baptists,  the  North- 
ern, Southern,  and  Colored.  They  are  not  separate  by 
virtue  of  doctrinal  or  ecclesiastical  differences;   but  each, 


THE  BAPTISTS.  1 9 

nevertheless,  has  its  own  associations,  State  conventions, 
and  general  missionary  and  other  organizations. 

The  question  of  slavery  was  the  cause  of  the  separation 
between  the  Baptists  of  the  Northern  and  the  Baptists  of 
the  Southern  States.  In  1844  the  controversy,  which  had 
been  going  on  for  some  time,  entered  upon  the  decisive 
stage.  The  Alabama  State  convention,  representing  the 
Baptists  of  that  State,  adopted  in  that  year  a  series  of 
resolutions  demanding  "  from  the  proper  authorities  in  all 
these  bodies  to  whose  funds  we  have  contributed  .  .  . 
the  distinct,  explicit  avowal  that  slaveholders  are  eligible 
and  entitled  equally  with  non-slaveholders  to  all  the  priv- 
ileges and  immunities  of  their  several  unions,  and  espe- 
cially to  receive  any  agency  or  mission  or  other  appointment 
which  may  run  with  the  scope  of  their  operations  or  duties." 
The  Board  of  Foreign  Missions,  which  had  its  headquarters 
in  Boston,  and  received  contributions  from  the  whole 
denomination,  made  answer  to  the  demand  of  the  Alabama 
convention,  saying:  "  If  any  one  should  offer  himself  as  a 
missionary,  having  slaves  and  insisting  on  retaining  them 
as  his  property,  we  could  not  appoint  him.  One  thing  is 
certain,  we  can  never  be  a  party  to  any  arrangement  which 
would  imply  approbation  of  slavery."  The  board  of  the 
Home  Mission  Society  made  a  similar  declaration  of  jfolicy, 
and  division  took  place  in  1845. 

The  Regular  Baptists  accept  the  Bible  as  the  only  rule 
of  faith  and  practice.  To  its  authority  all  appeals  are 
made.  There  are,  however,  two  general  confessions  of 
faith,  which  have  weight  among  them  as  expressions  of 
their  belief.  The  older  one,  known  as  the  Philadelphia 
Confession,  first  appeared  in  London  in  the  seventeenth 
century ;  the  other,  called  the  New  Hampshire  Confession, 


20       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

was  adopted  by  the  New  Hampshire  State  convention  in 
1833.  The  Philadelphia  Confession  follows  closely  the 
Westminster  (Presbyterian)  Confession  of  Faith,  with  such 
changes  and  additions  as  were  required  to  set  forth  the 
Baptist  views  as  to  the  proper  subjects  and  mode  of  bap- 
tism and  related  questions,  and  as  to  church  government. 
The  New  Hampshire  Confession  was  formulated  to  express 
the  views  of  the  Calvinistic  Baptists  in  their  controversy 
with  the  Freewill  Baptists,  who  were  of  the  Arminian 
type  of  theology.  It  is  regarded  as  fairly  representing  the 
doctrinal  opinions  of  Northern  Baptists,  while  the  Philadel- 
phia Confession  is  more  acceptable,  perhaps,  to  Southern 
Baptists.  It  is  the  common  practice  of  Southern  associa- 
tions to  print  articles  of  faith  in  their  annual  minutes.  In 
a  few  instances  the  whole  New  Hampshire  Confession 
thus  appears ;  in  other  cases  it  is  shortened  by  the  omis- 
sion of  two  or  more  articles.  The  following  articles  taken 
from  it  express  the  views  of  all  Regular  Baptists : 

**  We  believe  that  a  visible  church  of  Christ  is  a  Congre- 
gation of  baptized  believers  associated  by  covenant  in  the 
faith  and  fellowship  of  the  gospel,  observing  the  ordinances 
of  Christ,  governed  by  his  laws,  and  exercising  the  gifts, 
rights,  and  privileges  invested  in  them  by  his  word ;  that 
its  on^  scriptural  officers  are  bishops  or  pastors  and  dea- 
cons, whose  qualifications,  claims,  and  duties  are  defined  in 
the  epistles  to  Timothy  and  Titus. 

"  We  believe  that  Christian  baptism  is  immersion  in 
water  of  a  believer,  into  the  name  of  the  Father  and  Son 
and  Holy  Ghost,  to  show  forth,  in  a  solemn  and  beautiful 
emblem,  our  faith  in  the  crucified,  buried,  and  risen  Sav- 
iour, with  its  e^ect  in  our  death  to  sin  and  resurrection  to 
a  new  Hfe;   that  it  is  prerequisite  to  the  privileges  of  a 


THE  BAPTISTS.  21 

church  relation  and  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  in  which  the 
members  of  the  church,  by  the  sacred  use  of  bread  and 
wine,  are  to  commemorate  together  the  dying  love  of 
Christ,  preceded  always  by  solemn  self-examination." 

The  Southern  associations  generally  set  forth  brief  arti- 
cles of  faith,  varying  somewhat  in  phraseology,  but  declar- 
ing the  same  doctrines.  One  of  these  compendiums  con- 
sists of  twelve  articles.  It  appears  more  often  than  any 
other  form  in  the  minutes  of  the  various  associations,  some- 
times with  two  or  more  articles  omitted,  sometimes  with  a 
distinct  one  added.  Articles  i  and  2  state  the  doctrine  of 
the  Trinity,  and  accept  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testament  as  the  word  of  God  and  only  ''  rule  of  faith  and 
practice  "  ;  Article  3  declares  that  "  God  chose  his  people 
in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  foundation  of  the  world"  and 
*'  predestinated  them  unto  the  adoption  of  children  "  ;  Arti- 
cle 4,  that  man  is  a  sinner  and  consequently  in  a  lost  con- 
dition ;  Article  5,  that  he  has  no  power  of  his  own  free  will 
and  ability  to  recover  himself  from  his  fallen  state ;  Article 
6,  that  sinners  are  *'  justified  in  the  sight  of  God  only  by 
the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  "  ;  Article  7,  that  the  elect 
are  ''  called,  regenerated,  and  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
through  the  Gospel  "  ;  Article  8,  that  nothing  can  separate 
true  behevers  from  the  love  of  God,  *'  and  that  they  shall 
be  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salva- 
tion "  ;  Article  9,  that  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  are 
ordinances  of  Christ,  and  that  behevers  are  the  only  sub- 
jects of  them,  and  immersion  is  the  only  baptism ;  Article 
10,  that  the  dead  shall  rise,  and  there  shall  be  a  final  judg- 
ment; Article  1 1,  that  the  "punishment  of  the  wicked  will 
be  everlasting  and  the  joys  of  the  righteous  eternal  "  ;  Arti- 
cle 12,  that  no  minister  has  the  right  to  administer  the 


22        RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

ordinances  unless  he  is  called  of  God,  has  ''  come  under  the 
imposition  of  hands  by  a  presbytery,"  and  is  *'  in  fellowship 
with  the  church  of  which  he  is  a  member."  This  summary 
fairly  represents  the  various  forms  of  confession  in  use. 
Some  of  the  colored  associations  insert  as  an  additional 
article  the  doctrine  that  *'  pedobaptism  by  immersion  is  not 
valid  even  when  the  administrator  himself  has  been  im- 
mersed." One  colored  association  in  Louisiana  has  an 
abstract  of  faith  which  declares  that  the  ''  blessings  of  sal- 
vation are  free  to  all  "  ;  that  election  by  God  is  consistent 
with  man's  free  agency ;  and  that  only  such  as  are  real 
believers  persevere  to  the  end.  These  are  modified  state- 
ments of  the  doctrines  of  election,  free  agency,  and  final 
perseverance  as  usually  held  by  Baptist  associations  in  the 
South.  A  few  associations  enjoin  the  washing  of  the 
saints'  feet  as  a  religious  rite. 

I. — THE    REGULAR    BAPTISTS    (NORTH). 

The  Baptist  churches  in  the  Northern  States,  after  the 
division  of  1845,  continued  to  support,  on  an  antislavery 
basis,  the  Home  Mission  Society  and  the  Baptist  Union, 
the  latter  taking  the  place  of  the  Board  of  Foreign  Mis- 
sions. In  1879  the  question  of  the  organic  union  of  North- 
ern and  Southern  Baptists  came  up,  but  nothing  was 
accomplished.  The  Southern  Baptist  convention  of  that 
year,  in  appointing  five  delegates  to  the  anniversaries  of 
the  Northern  Baptist  societies,  expressed  its  fraternal  re- 
gard ;  but  insisted  on  '*  the  wisdom  and  policy  of  pre- 
serving our  separate  organizations."  On  the  part  of  the 
Northern  Baptists  a  leading  denominational  journal  said 
they  were  generally  agreed  that  it  would  be  *'  wholly  unad- 


THE  BAPTISTS.  23 

visable  to  try  to  bring  about  organic  union  between  the 
Baptists  of  the  North  and  South." 

The  Northern  Baptists  have  churches  in  all  the  States 
north  of  the  Virginias,  Kentucky,  Missouri,  and  Texas,  in- 
cluding the  District  of  Columbia.  Some  churches  on  the 
border  divide  their  contributions  for  the  general  benevo- 
lences between  the  Northern  and  Southern  Baptist  bodies, 
and  one  educational  society  represents  both. 

There  are  414  associations  of  Northern  Baptists,  who  are 
strongest  in  the  States  of  New  York  (129,711),  Illinois 
(95*23 7),  and  Pennsylvania  (83,122).  In  three  other  States 
they  have  over  50,000  communicants  each:  Massachusetts, 
59,830;  Ohio,  57,685  ;  and  Indiana,  54,080.  There  are  in 
all  800,450  communicants,  belonging  to  7907  organiza- 
tions, with  7070  edifices,  valued  at  $49,530,504.  The 
average  value  of  the  edifices  is  $7006,  and  the  average 
seating  capacity  308;  1165  halls,  etc.,  with  a  seating 
capacity  of  109,350,  are  also  occupied. 

There  is  a  considerable  number  of  German  Baptist 
churches,  most  of  which  are  in  the  Northern  and  Western 
States.  The  earliest  of  them  were  organized  in  Pennsyl- 
vania in  1840  and  1841.  These  German  Baptists  are  not 
to  be  confounded  with  the  Dunkards,  who  are  often  called 
German  Baptists.  Their  churches  are  reported  in  con- 
nection with  the  various  associations  within  whose  bounds 
they  are  situated,  but  they  also  have  conferences  of  their 
own.  There  are  five  of  these  conferences,  the  Eastern, 
Central,  Southwestern,  Northwestern,  and  Texas,  and 
they  meet  annually.  There  is  also  a  general  conference 
in  which  they  are  all  represented.  This  conference  meets 
once  in  three  years.  There  are  in  all  upward  of  200 
German  churches   with   about   1 7,000    members.       There 


24       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

are  also  some  200  Swedish  churches  with  more  than 
12,000  members,  a  few  Danish  churches,  and  a  number 
of  Welsh  churches. 


Summary  by  States. 


pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Arizona 6  4  875  $11,200  197 

California 163  121  34,025  744,360  11,204 

Colorado 54  40  10,935  440,000  4,944 

Connecticut 135  138  47,280  1,650,050  22,372 

Delaware 13  16  4,782  165,300  1,823 

District  of  Columbia  2  2  1,900  65,000  3,000 

Idaho 20  10  2,180  26,100  656 

Illinois 996  911  282,463  3,495,010  95,237 

Indiana 552  515  164,055  1,313,422  54,080 

Iowa 417  340  89,231  1,162,640  30,901 

Kansas 545  339  87,015  893,233  32,172 

Maine 237  223  61,669  921,550  18,917 

Massachusetts 318  346  142,589  6,107,830  59,830 

Michigan 395  353  101,535  1,858,419  34,145 

Minnesota   194  161  40,575  1,107,839  14,698 

Montana 14  11  2,950  89,000  683 

Nebraska 230  164  36,590  514,710  11,917 

Nevada i  i  500  7,000  63 

New  Hampshire  .. .  85  97  28,310  585,050  8,768 

New  Jersey 224  252  94.575  2,957,628  38,757 

New  Mexico 15  4  1,250  22,000  355 

New  York 875  898  309,581  12,938,913  129,711 

North  Dakota 54  33  7,675  90,300  2,298 

Ohio 616  585  168,835  2,543,888  57,685 

Oregon 108  69  i7,74o  317,325  5,3o6 

Pennsylvania 634  642  219,589  5,984,322  83,122 

Rhode  Island 68  j'^  28,693  1,151,960  12,055 

South  Dakota Zt,  54  11,311  227,175  3,856 

Utah 4  3  700  65,000  327 

Vermont 100  103  28,124  584,500  8,933 

Washington 90  55  12,540  241,760  3,870 

West  Virginia 458  324  94,045  381,200  34,154 

Wisconsin 192  180  46,131  838,945  14,152 

Wyoming 9  3  525  27,875  262 

Total 7,907  7,070  2,180,773  $49,530,504  800,450 


THE  BAPTISTS. 


25 


2. — THE    REGULAR    BAPTISTS    (SOUTH). 


This  is  the  more  numerous  branch  of  white  Baptists. 
After  the  division  of  1845  the  Southern  churches  organized 
the  Southern  Baptist  convention,  which  meets  annually,  to 
consider,  promote,  and  direct  the  general  interests  of  the 
denomination,  such  as  home  and  foreign  missions  and 
Sunday-schools.  It  is  composed  of  delegates  from  asso- 
ciations and  other  organizations,  and  from  churches.  It 
has  no  ecclesiastical  authority  whatever.  It  represents 
churches  in  sixteen  States,  including  Kansas,  which  has 
a  few  churches  belonging  to  an  association  in  Missouri, 
the  District  of  Columbia,  the  Indian  Territory,  and  Okla- 
homa. 

The  oldest  Baptist  churches  and  associations  are  in  the 
North.  Of  the  seventy-seven  churches  reported  for  1770 
only  seven  were  in  the  South ;  these  were  in  Delaware,  fhe 
Carolinas,  and  Virginia.  In  the  next  decade  churches  rose 
in  Georgia,  Tennessee,  and  Kentucky.  There  were  none, 
however,  in  Missouri,  Mississippi,  and  Louisiana  until  after 
the  present  century  opened,  and  none  in  Arkansas  until  a 
considerably  later  date.  The  first  association  in  the  South 
was  that  of  South  Carolina,  organized  in  1 751;  those  of 
Sandy  Creek  and  Kehukee,  in  North  Carolina,  were  organ- 
ized in  1758  and  1765  respectively;  the  Ketocton,  in  Vir- 
ginia, in  1766;  and  the  Holston,  in  Tennessee,  in  1786. 
Virginia  was  in  1784  the  Baptist  stronghold,  having  more 
than  forty-two  per  cent,  of  all  the  members.  It  maintained 
the  lead  for  nearly  half  a  century,  then  lost  it,  and  regained 
it  from  New  York  in  1850,  and  held  it  until  Georgia  took 
it  some  fifteen  or  twenty  years  later. 

Kentucky,  North  Carolina,  Georgia,  Texas,  Missouri,  and 


26       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

Tennessee  are  the  great  Baptist  States  of  the  South.  They 
contain  nearly  two  thirds  of  the  total  of  members.  Ken- 
tucky has  153,668;  North  Carolina,  153,648;  Georgia,  137,- 
860;  Texas,  129,734;  Missouri,  121,985;  and  Tennessee, 
106,632 — making  a  total  of  803,527  in  these  six  States. 
Alabama  reports  98,185;  Virginia,  92,693;  Mississippi, 
82,315  ;  and  South  Carolina,  76,216.  In  all,  the  Southern 
Baptists  number  1,280,066.  These  members  are  divided 
among  16,238  organizations,  which  report  13,502  edifices, 
with  a  seating  capacity  of  4,349,407,  and  an  aggregate 
value  of  $18,196,637.  Besides  the  edifices,  2641  halls, 
etc.,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  326,000,  are  used  as  places 
of  worship. 

Southern  Baptists  seem  to  be  very  thoroughly  distrib- 
uted over  the  States  they  occupy.  They  have  organi- 
zations in  all  the  counties  in  the  State  of  Alabama  (66). 
In  the  State  of  Arkansas  they  have  organizations  in  74 
counties  out  of  75  ;  in  South  Carolina,  in  34  out  of  35  ; 
in  Florida,  in  44  out  of  45;  in  Georgia,  in  135  out  of 
137  ;  in  Kentucky,  in  1 1 1  out  of  1 19 ;  in  Louisiana,  in  38 
out  of  59;  in  Mississippi,  in  74  out  of  75  ;  in  Missouri,  in 
114  out  of  115;  in  North  Carolina,  in  95  out  of  96;  in 
Tennessee,  in  92  out  of  96;  in  Texas,  in  185  out  of  244; 
in  Virginia,  in  96  out  of  100. 

There  are  658  associations,  the  largest  of  which  is  the 
Dover,  of  Virginia,  having  11,711  members.  The  associ- 
ations are  given  alphabetically  under  each  State,  but  are 
not  footed  by  States,  because  many  of  them  cross  State 
lines. 

The  average  seating  capacity  of  edifices  is  322,  and  the 
average  value  $1348. 


THE  BAPTISTS.  2"] 


Summary  by  States. 

r\         •  /-^i       1  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                 O""?^"^-  S-fi  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.            ^^^-^^  Property.  cants. 

Alabama 1,495  1,373  407,119  $1,170,219  98,185 

Arkansas ^,^0?  732  220,390  408,885  58,364 

Dist.  of  Columbia        16  16  6,000  466,000  3,621 

Florida 403  334  73,435  208,933  18,747 

Georgia I5647  1,602  519,050  1,848,675  137,860 

Indian  Territory        181  no  18,485  35,765  9,i47 

Kansas 6  4  700  2,100  273 

Kentucky 1,441  1,277  426,720  2,364,238  153,668 

Louisiana 482  438  108,730  333,977  27,736 

Maryland 47  48  21,420  651,050  8,017 

Mississippi 1,125  1,071  319,370  689,451  82,315 

Missouri 1,636  1,265  390,775  2,386,898  121,985 

North  Carolina  .    1,480  1,472  603,938  1,662,405  153,648 

Oklahoma   8  216 

South  Carolina  .       759  748  234,080  894,724  76,216 

Tennessee   1,287  1,159  39^,715  1,802,015  106,632 

Texas 2,318  1,081  332,348  1,384,035  129,734 

Virginia 787  762  266,982  1,859,292  92,693 

West  Virginia  . .         13  10  3,150  27,975  1,009 

Total 16,238  13,502  4,349,407  $18,196,637  1,280,066 


3. — THE    REGULAR    BAPTISTS    (COLORED). 

The  Colored  Baptists  of  the  South  constitute  the  most 
numerous  body  of  Regular  Baptists.  Not  all  Colored  Bap- 
tists are  embraced  in  this  division ;  only  those  who  have 
separate  churches,  associations,  and  State  conventions. 
There  are  many  Colored  Baptists  in  Northern  States,  who 
are  mostly  counted  as  members  of  churches  belonging  to 
white  associations.  None  of  them  are  included  in  the  fol- 
lowing tables. 

The  first  State  convention  of  Colored  Baptists  was  organ- 
ized in  North  Carolina  in  1866;  the  second  in  Alabama 
and  the  third  in  Virginia  in  1867  ;   the  fourth  in  Arkansas 


28       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

in  1868;  and  the  fifth  in  Kentucky  in  1869.  There  are 
colored  conventions  in  fifteen  States. 

In  addition  to  these  organizations  the  Colored  Baptists 
of  the  United  States  have  others  more  general  in  character : 
the  American  National  Convention,  the  purpose  of  which 
is  **  to  consider  the  moral,  intellectual,  and  religious  growth 
of  the  denomination,"  to  deliberate  upon  questions  of  gen- 
eral concern,  and  to  devise  methods  to  bring  the  churches 
and  members  of  the  race  closer  together ;  the  Consolidated 
American  Missionary  Convention ;  the  General  Association 
of  the  Western  States  and  Territories  ;  the  Foreign  Mission 
Convention  of  the  United  States,  and  the  New  England 
Missionary  Convention.  All  except  the  first  are  missionary 
in  their  purpose. 

The  American  National  Convention,  in  its  annual  session 
in  1890,  adopted  a  resolution  recommending  that  the  prac- 
tice of  receiving  into  membership  persons  immersed  in 
Pedobaptist  churches  be  discontinued,  on  the  ground  that 
Pedobaptist  organizations  are  not  churches,  and  therefore 
have  no  power  to  administer  baptism.  The  exchange  of 
pulpits  with  Pedobaptists  was  also  condemned  as  *'  incon- 
sistent and  erroneous." 

It  was  extremely  difficult  to  obtain  returns  of  a  third  or 
more  of  the  Colored  Baptist  associations  in  the  South.  No 
response  was  made,  in  many  instances,  to  repeated  requests 
to  clerks  or  moderators  for  statistics.  Some  of  their  State 
missionaries,  professors,  and  others  were  induced  to  under- 
take the  work  of  gathering  the  returns  of  such  associations 
for  the  eleventh  census,  and  after  more  than  a  year  and  a 
half  of  earnest  endeavor,  all  possible  resources  being  ex- 
hausted in  the  effort,  full  reports  were  secured   from  all. 


THE  BAPTISTS.  29 

Several  correspondents  reported  to  the  Census  Office  that 
radical  changes  in  colored  associations  are  frequent.  A 
few  discontented  churches  often  withdraw  and  form  a  new 
association,  which  continues  for  a  year  or  two,  and  then  is 
absorbed  by  another  association.  The  boundaries  of  these 
bodies  change  frequently,  and  sometimes  they  are  also 
quite  irregular,  embracing  not  contiguous  territory,  but 
counties  or  portions  of  counties  widely  separated. 

The  Colored  Baptists  are  represented  in  fifteen  States, 
all  in  the  South,  or  on  the  border,  and  in  the  District  of 
Columbia.  In  Virginia  and  Georgia  they  are  very  nu- 
merous, having  in  the  latter  200,516,  and  in  the  former 
199,871  communicants.  In  Alabama  they  have  142,437; 
in  North  Carolina,  134,445;  in  Mississippi,  136,647;  in 
South  Carolina,  125,572;  and  in  Texas,  111,138  members. 
The  aggregate  is  1,348,989  members,  who  are  embraced  in 
12,533  organizations,  with  1 1,987  church  edifices,  valued  at 
$9,038,549.  There  are  416  associations,  of  which  66  are 
in  Alabama,  63  in  Georgia,  49  in  Mississippi,  40  in  North 
Carolina,  and  23  in  Virginia.  As  associations  generally 
conform  to  county  lines,  the  excess  of  associations  in 
Georgia  and  Alabama  over  Virginia  is  probably  chiefly  due 
to  the  greater  number  of  counties. 

The  average  seating  capacity  of  the  church  edifices  is 
287,  and  their  average  value  $754.  There  are  663  halls, 
etc.,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  45,520. 

While  some  of  the  Colored  Baptist  churches  are  very 
large,  particularly  in  the  cities,  there  are  many  weak  con- 
gregations in  the  rural  districts  which,  as  is  the  case  among 
the  smaller  white  churches,  do  not  have  regular  Sunday 
services  oftener  than  once  or  twice  a  month. 


30 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. 

^         •  r^i       u  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                 O''?^"'-  Church  ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Alabama 1,374  1,341  376,839  $795,384  142,437 

Arkansas   923  870  243,395  585,947  63,786 

Dist.  of  Columbia         43  -^^  18,600  383,150  12,717 

Florida 329  295  61,588  137,578  20,828 

Georgia 1,818  1,800  544,546  1,045,310  200,516 

Kentucky 378  359  109,030  406,949  50^245 

Louisiana 865  861  191,041  609,890  68,008 

Maryland 38  34  12,389  i5o,475  7.75° 

Mississippi 1,385  1,333  371,115  682,541  136,647 

Missouri 234  212  60,015  400,518  18,613 

North  Carolina  .     1,173  1,164  362,946  705,512  134,445 

South  Carolina  .        860  836  275,529  699,961  125,572 

Tennessee 569  534  159.140  519.923  52,183 

Texas 1,464  1,288  282,590  664,286  111,138 

Virginia 1,001  977  358,032  1,192,035  199,871 

West  Virginia  .  .          79  50  14,175  59,090  4,233 

Total 12,533  11,987  3,440,970  $9,038,549  1,348,989 


4. — CxENERAL    SIX-PRINCIPLE    BAPTISTS. 


This  small  body  of  less  than  1000  members  is  repre- 
sented only  in  three  States.  Its  first  church  was  organized 
in  1670  in  Rhode  Island.  The  creed  is  formed  from  the 
first  and  second  verses  of  Chapter  VI.  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  and  consists  of  six  principles:  i.  Repentance 
from  dead  works ;  2.  Faith  toward  God ;  3.  The  doctrine 
of  baptism ;  4.  The  laying  on  of  hands;  5.  Resurrection 
of  the  dead ;  6.  Eternal  judgment.  Hence  they  derive 
their  name. 

They  have  two  yearly  meetings :  one  in  Pennsylvania, 
and  one  in  Rhode  Island  and  Massachusetts.  There  are 
18  organizations,  12  of  which  are  in  Rhode  Island.  They 
occupy  4  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  400. 


THE  BAPTISTS.  3  I 


Summary  by  States. 


Seating         Value  of  Com- 


Organi-      Church  ^^-'^  ^^^^ 


zations.       Edifices. 


muni- 


pacity.  Property.  cants. 


Massachusetts i  . .  4 

Pennsylvania 5  3  1,300       $3,800  218 

Rhode  Island 12  11  2,300        15,700  715 


Total 18  14  3,600     $19,500  937 


5. — THE    SEVENTH-DAY    BAPTISTS. 

Baptists  who  observed  the  seventh  day  of  the  week  as 
the  Sabbath  appeared  in  England  as  early  as  the  latter  part 
of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  were  known  as  Sabbatarian 
Baptists,  until  the  general  conference  of  the  body  in  the 
United  States  changed  the  name  in  181 8.  The  first  Sev- 
enth-Day Baptist  church  in  this  country  was  organized  in 
Newport,  R.  I.,  in  1671,  by  Stephen  Mumford,  an  English 
Sabbatarian  Baptist.  From  this  Rhode  Island  church  the 
denomination  has  gradually  developed  in  the  United  States. 
As  early  as  1 700  Philadelphia  became  a  second  center  of  Sev- 
enth-Day Baptists,  and  soon  after  Piscataway,  N.  J.,  a  third. 

In  doctrine  the  Seventh-Day  Baptists  differ  from  other 
Baptist  bodies  only  concerning  the  observance  of  the  sev- 
enth day.  They  believe  that  the  seventh  day  is  the  Sab- 
bath of  the  Lord,  that  it  was  instituted  in  Eden,  promul- 
gated at  Sinai,  made  binding  upon  all  men  at  all  times,  and 
is  in  the  nature  of  its  relation  to  God  and  to  man  irrepeal- 
able.  They  hold  that  any  attempt  to  connect  the  Sabbath 
law  and  obligation  with  any  other  day  of  the  week  is  illog- 
ical and  tends  to  destroy  the  institution. 

The  Seventh-Day  Baptists  have  two  collegiate  institu- 


32 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


tions,  one  at  Milton,  Wis.,  the  other  at  Albert  Center,  N.  Y. 
Both  sexes  are  admitted  on  equal  terms  to  these  colleges. 
Albert  Center  is  also  the  headquarters  of  its  publishing 
interests. 

The  denomination  is  represented  in  twenty-four  States, 
having  io6  organizations,  78  church  edifices,  valued  at 
$265,260,  and  9143  communicants.  The  average  seating 
capacity  of  the  edifices  is  285  ;  average  value,  $3401. 
Eighteen  halls,  etc.,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  1125,  are 
also  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  Organi- 
zations. 

Alabama i 

Arkansas 2 

Connecticut 2 

Florida i 

Idaho     I 

Illinois  9 

Iowa 3 

Kansas 3 

Kentuck}' i 

Louisiana i 

Minnesota 5 

Mississippi i 

Missouri i 

Nebraska 4 

New  Jersey 4 

New  York   28 

North  Carolina  ....  i 

Ohio I 

Pennsylvania 5 

Rhode  Island 7 

South  Dakota 2 

Texas 4 

West  Virginia 9 

Wisconsin 10 

Total 106 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Church 
Property. 

muni- 
cants. 

II 

I 

240 

$900 

60 

2 

600 

4,500 

103 

I 

200 

1,500 

14 

I 

200 

400 

28 

6 

1,650 

8,825 

350 

2 

500 

4,300 

169 

300 

3,500 

229 

6 
3^ 

2 

500 

2,500 

246 
33 

I 

200 

500 

13 

2 

400 

3,900 

267 

5 

1,400 

55,285 

745 

24 

7,015 

71,025 

3,274 
10 

I 

350 

3,000 

131 

4 

1,300 

5,800 

224 

7 

2,162 

55.700 

1,271 

I 

225 

1,000 

28 
50 

8 

1,800 

15,900 

767 

9 

2,425 

26,725 

1,078 

78 

21,467    $265,260 

9,143 

THE  BAPTISTS.  33 

6. — THE    FREEWILL    BAPTISTS. 

The  first  church  of  this  denomination  was  organized  by 
Benjamin  Randall  in  New  Durham,  N.  H.,  in  1780.  He 
was  at  first  a  Gongregationalist.  Changing  his  views  on 
the  subject  of  baptism,  he  became  a  Baptist ;  but  he  did 
not  adhere  to  the  Calvinistic  doctrines  of  predestination, 
election,  limited  atonement,  and  final  perseverance  of  the 
saints,  as  generally  held  at  that  time  in  that  denomination. 
He  was  therefore  adjudged  unsound,  and  fellow^ship  was 
withdrawn  from  him  by  the  Baptists.  This  was  in  1779. 
In  1780  he  was  ordained  by  two  Baptist  ministers  who 
sympathized  with  his  doctrinal  views,  and  in  the  same  year 
the  first  Freewill  Baptist  church  was  organized,  as  already 
stated.  This  church  and  others  of  like  faith  which  sprung 
up  in  New  England  were  simply  called  Baptist  churches. 
At  the  close  of  the  century  the  distinctive  word  *'  Freewill  " 
was  adopted,  members  having  been  popularly  designated 
*'  Freewillers,"  in  allusion  to  the  doctrine  held  concerning 
the  freedom  of  the  will.  The  churches  multiplied.  At 
the  end  of  the  first  year  there  were  5,  at  the  close  of  the 
first  decade  18,  and  at  the  close  of  the  first  half-century 
450,  with  21,000  members.  The  denomination  was  grad- 
ually extended  beyond  the  bounds  of  New  England  into 
the  West.  Its  strong  antislavery  sentiment  prevented  its 
advance  into  the  South.  In  1835  the  general  conference, 
speaking  for  the  whole  body,  took  a  pronounced  position 
against  slavery.  In  1841  the  Free- Communion  Baptists 
of  New  York  united  with  the  Freewill  Baptists,  adding  55 
churches  and  2500  members.  The  body  lost  several  thou- 
sand members,  however,  by  the  Adventist  movement  and 
by  local  divisions.      It  had  60,000  in  1845,  but  in  1857  this 


34       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

number  had  been  reduced  to  less  than  49,000.  Its  num- 
bers also  declined  during  the  war,  many  of  its  ministers 
and  members  going  into  the  army.  By  1870  it  had  recov- 
ered from  all  its  losses,  reporting  60,000  members  as  re- 
turned in  1845.  A  fact  deserving  mention  is  that  women 
began  to  labor  as  preachers  among  the  churches  as  early  as 
I  79 1.      They  are  not  debarred  from  ordination. 

The  principles  of  doctrine  and  practice  held  by  the  Free- 
will Baptists  are  embodied  in  a  "  Treatise"  ordered  by  the 
general  conference  in  1832  and  published  in  1834  and  since 
revised.  The  doctrinal  chapters,  twenty- one  in  number, 
declare  (to  give  their  more  distinctive  statements)  that 
though  man  cannot  in  his  fallen  state  become  the  child  of 
God  by  natural  goodness  and  works  of  his  own,  redemp- 
tion and  regeneration  are  freely  provided  for  him.  The 
''  call  of  the  gospel  is  coextensive  with  the  atonement  to 
all  men,"  so  that  salvation  is  "  equally  possible  to  all." 
The  ''  truly  regenerate  "  are  *'  through  infirmity  and  mani- 
fold temptations"  in  **  danger  of  falling,"  and  ''ought 
therefore  to  watch  and  pray,  lest  they  make  shipwreck  of 
faith."  Christian  baptism  is  immersion,  and  participation 
in  the  Lord's  Supper  is  the  '*  privilege  and  duty  of  all  who 
have  spiritual  union  with  Christ,"  and  "  no  man  has  a  right 
to  forbid  these  tokens  to  the  least  of  his  disciples."  The 
denomination  has  always  advocated  open  communion,  as 
expressed  in  the  foregoing  sentence,  in  opposition  to  close 
communion,  which  is  the  rule  among  the  Regular  Baptists. 
In  the  brief  articles  of  faith  provided  for  churches  the 
"  human  will  "  is  declared  to  be  ''  free  and  self-determined, 
having  power  to  yield  to  gracious  influences  and  live,  or 
resist  them  and  perish,"  and  the  doctrine  of  election  is  de- 
scribed, not  as  an  "  unconditional  decree  "  fixing  the  future 


THE  BAPTISTS.  35 

state  of  man,  but  simply  as  God's  determination  '^  from  the 
beginning  to  save  all  who  should  comply  with  the  condi- 
tions of  salvation." 

The  Freewill  Baptists  have  quarterly  and  yearly  confer- 
ences, and  a  general  conference  meeting  once  in  two  years. 
The  quarterly  conference  consists  of  delegates  representing 
a  number  of  churches.  It  inquires  into  the  condition  of 
the  churches,  and  is  empowered  to  advise,  admonish,  or 
withdraw  fellowship  from  them.  It  may  not,  however, 
**  deprive  a  church  of  its  inpependent  form  of  government 
nor  its  right  to  discipline  its  members,  nor  labor  with  in- 
dividual members  of  churches  as  such";  it  may  only  deal 
with  the  churches  as  churches.  The  yearly  meeting  is 
composed  of  delegates  elected  by  quarterly  meetings.  It 
occupies  the  same  relation  to  quarterly  meetings  as  quar- 
terly meetings  do  to  the  churches.  The  general  confer- 
ence, which  is  charged  with  the  care  of  the  general  inter- 
ests of  the  denomination,  is  composed  of  delegates  from 
the  yearly  meetings.  It  may  discipline  yearly  meetings, 
but  not  quarterly  meetings  or  churches.  It  is  expressly 
forbidden  to  reverse  or  change  the  decisions  of  any  of  the 
subordinate  bodies.  Those  desiring  to  become  ministers 
are  licensed  for  a  year  by  the  quarterly  meeting  and  or- 
dained by  a  council  of  the  meeting.  Each  church,  besides 
its  pastor,  clerk,  and  treasurer,  has  a  board  of  deacons,  who 
assist  at  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  is  observed 
monthly,  have  the  care  of  the  poor,  and  conduct  religious 
meetings  in  the  absence  of  the  pastor. 

The  denomination  has  51  yearly  meetings  (some  are 
called  associations),  with  1586  organizations,  1225  edifices, 
valued  at  $3,115,642,  and  87,898  communicants.  It  also 
occupies  349  halls,  etc.,  having  a  seating  capacity  of  37,260. 


36       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UAFTED   STATES. 

It  is  represented  in  thirty-three  States,  chiefly  Northern 
and  Western.  It  is  strongest  in  New  England,  where  it 
originated.  In  Maine  there  are  16,294  members.  This  is 
the  banner  State  of  the  denomination. 

The  average  seating  capacity  of  the  churches  is  285,  and 
the  average  value  $2543. 


Summary  by  States. 


Organi-     Church 
zations.     Edifices. 


Alabama 15 

Arkansas i 

California 2 

Connecticut  ....  2 

Florida 3 

Illinois 115 

Indiana 31 

Iowa 45 

Kansas 36 

Kentucky 21 

Louisiana 40 

Maine 280 

Maryland 3 

Massachusetts  .  .  20 

Michigan 128 

Minnesota 30 

Mississippi 25 

Missouri 108 

Nebraska  ......  43 

New  Hampshire.  94 

New  York 134 

North  Carolina  .  i 

Ohio   128 

Oklahoma i 

Pennsylvania  ...  56 

Rhode  Island  ...  26 

South  Dakota ...  5 

Tennessee 53 

Texas 8 

Vermont 43 

Virginia 9 

West  Virginia  .  .  32 

Wisconsin 48 

Total 1,586 


13 
I 

2 

2 

83 
28 
36 
II 
17 
25 
232 

3 

17 

113 

24 
20 
56 
19 


103 

40 
26 

4 
35 

6 

34 

6 

10 

42 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

3,100 
500 
900 
400 

19,320 
8,075 
9,740 
4,900 
4,450 
4,830 

67,930 

525 
6,265 

29,145 
5,385 
7,880 

15,720 
4,990 

33,325 

36,727 
200 

30,645 

9,695 

7,845 

700 

10,895 

887 

9,110 

1-725 

3-350 

10,150 


Vakie  of 
Church 
Property. 

$1,245 

250 

19,500 

2,200 


71,500 

39,000 

65,800 

12,425 

7,980 

24,245 

584,750 

1,800 

188,200 

277.275 

94,550 

7,540 

59,825 

29,600 

379,000 

529,050 

100 

149,350 

76,300 

226,757 

11,500 

22,825 

3' 300 

94,375 

7,000 

34,000 

94,400 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

847 

40 

179 

125 

22 

6,096 

1,926 

2,029 

1,361 

1,641 

1,000 

16,294 

98 

3,122 

5.435 
1,497 
1,339 
4,752 
1,185 
8,004 
8,636 
II 
6,982 

100 
2,478 
3,252 

168 
2,864 

261 

2,325 

478 

1.668 

1,683 


1,225   349,309   $3,115,642   87,898 


THE  BAPTISTS. 


7. — THE    ORIGINAL    FREEWILL   BAPTISTS. 


37 


In  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  a  number  of 
General  Baptist  churches  w^re  organized  in  North  Carolina. 
These,  with  some  which  had  been  formed  in  Virginia  a 
little  earlier,  constituted  an  association  in  1729.  Thirty 
years  later  many  of  these  General  had  become  Calvinistic 
or  Regular  Baptist  churches.  Those  who  did  not  unite 
with  the  Calvinistic  associations  were  popularly  called 
*'  Freewillers,"  because  they  held  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
freedom  of  the  will.  Accepting  that  term,  they  became 
known  eventually  as  Original  Freewill  Baptists,  the  word 
**  original  "  probably  referring  to  their  early  history. 

Their  doctrines  are  set  forth  in  a  confession  of  faith  con- 
sisting of  eighteen  articles.  It  declares  that  Christ  **  freely 
gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,  tasting  death  for  every 
man";  that  God  wants  all  to  come  to  repentance;  that 
*'  all  men,  at  one  time  or  another,  are  found  in  such  capac- 
ity as  that  through  the  grace  of  God  they  may  be  eternally 
saved";  that  those  "ordained  to  condemnation"  are  the 
ungodly  who  refuse  to  repent  and  believe  the  gospel ; 
that  children  dying  in  infancy  are  not  subject  to  the 
second  death ;  that  God  has  not  "  decreed  any  person 
to  everlasting  death  or  everlasting  life  out  of  respect  or 
mere  choice,"  except  in  appointing  the  "godly  unto  Hfe 
and  the  ungodly  who  die  in  sin  unto  death  "  ;  that  only 
believers  should  be  baptized,  and  the  only  baptism  is  im- 
mersion. They  believe  in  washing  the  saints'  feet  and  in 
anointing  the  sick  with  oil. 

The  churches  hold  for  business  purposes  quarterly  con- 
ferences, in  which  all  members  may  participate ;  they  have 
a  clerk,  a  treasurer,  deacons  who  prepare  for  the  commun- 
ion service  and  care  for  the  poor,  and  ruling  elders  to  settle 


38       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

controversies  between  brethren.  Communion  and  feet- 
washing  are  as  a  rule  held  quarterly.  Members  of  churches 
are  forbidden  to  frequent  the  "  race-track,  the  card-table, 
shooting-matches,  or  any  other  place  of  disorder."  In 
church  trials  it  is  provided  that  "  no  person  of  color  within 
the  pale  of  the  church  shall  give  testimony  against  any 
person  "  except  one  "  of  color."  Only  male  members  shall 
occupy  the  offices  of  the  church.  Annual  conferences, 
composed  of  all  the  elders  (pastors),  ministers  (ordained), 
and  preachers  (licentiates)  in  good  standing,  and  of  dele- 
gates from  the  churches,  have  power  to  *'  silence  "  preach- 
ers, try  and  disown  or  discontinue  elders,  receive  new 
churches,  and  settle  difficulties  in  churches. 

There  are  three  conferences,  with  churches  in  the  two 
CaroHnas.  The  number  of  organizations  is  167,  with  125 
church  edifices,  valued  at  $57,005,  and  11,864  communi- 
cants. The  average  seating  capacity  of  the  edifices  is  331, 
and  their  average  value  $455.  Forty-three  halls,  etc.,  af- 
ford seating  capacity  for  4650  persons. 


Summary  by  States. 


North  Carolina  . 
South  CaroHna  . 

Total 


Organi- 
zations. 

34 


Church 
Edifices. 


99 
26 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

35.750 
5,650 


Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

$52,355 
4,650 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

10,224 
1,640 


167     125    41,400    $57,005    11,864 


8. — THE    GENERAL   BAPTISTS. 


The  General  Baptists  are  thus  distinguished  because 
originally  they  differed  from  the  Particular  or  Regular 
Baptists  in  holding  that  the  atonement  of  Christ  was  gen- 
eral,  not  particular;   that  is,  for  the  whole  race,  and  not 


THE  BAPTISTS.  39 

simply  for  those  effectually  called.  There  were  General 
Baptists  in  England  early  in  the  seventeenth  century. 
Indeed,  some  of  their  historians  claim  that  they  appeared 
both  in  England  and  America  before  the  Particular  or 
Regular  Baptists. 

General  Baptists  in  New  England  associated  themselves 
in  a  yearly  meeting  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth 
century.  Churches  of  the  same  faith  and  order  were  also 
organized  in  the  first  half  of  that  century  in  Maryland, 
Virginia,  and  the  Carolinas.  Most  of  these  early  churches, 
it  appears,  subsequently  became  Regular  or  Calvinistic 
churches. 

The  first  association  of  General  Baptists  in  the  West, 
where  the  denomination  now  has  its  entire  strength,  was 
the  Liberty,  of  Kentucky,  organized  in  1824.  In  1830  it 
adopted  the  practice  of  open  communion,  and  about  1845 
changed  one  of  its  articles  of  belief,  which  had  been  form- 
ulated at  its  organization,  so  as  to  embrace  "  infants  and 
idiots "  in  the  covenants  of  God's  grace,  and  another  so 
as  to  say  that  ''  he  that  shall  endure  to  the  end,  the  same 
shall  be  saved,"  instead  of  declaring  that  **  the  saints  will 
finally  persevere  through  grace  to  glory."  These  changes 
indicated  the  desire  to  eliminate  such  elements  of  Calvin- 
ism as  had  been  introduced  when  the  articles  were  adopted 
a  few  years  before. 

In  1870  the  General  Baptists  formed  a  general  associa- 
tion, in  which  all  General  Baptist  associations  are  repre- 
sented. The  purpose  of  the  general  association  was  to 
bring  ''  into  more  intimate  and  fraternal  relation  and  effect- 
ive cooperation  various  bodies  of  Hberal  Baptists."  The 
denomination  has  received  accessions  of  Freewill  churches, 
but  some  of  its  churches  have  in  turn  joined  Freewill  and 


40       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

other  Baptist  bodies.  It  has  increased  in  membership 
quite  rapidly.  In  1870  it  had  8000  members;  in  1880, 
12,367;  and  in  1890,  21,362.  It  is  represented  in  the 
States  of  Indiana,  Illinois,  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  Missouri, 
Arkansas,  and  Nebraska. 

The  confession  of  faith  adopted  by  the  general  associa- 
tion declares  that  the  Bible  is  the  only  rule  of  faith  and 
practice ;  that  there  is  one  God,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost;  that  man  is  ''fallen  and  depraved"  and 
has  no  ability  in  himself  to  salvation ;  that  he  that  endures 
to  the  end  shall  be  saved ;  that  rewards  and  punishment 
are  eternal ;  that  the  only  proper  mode  of  baptism  is  im- 
mersion; that  the  only  proper  subjects  of  baptism  are 
believers ;  that  none  save  infants  and  idiots  can  partake 
of  the  benefits  of  the  atonement,  which  was  made  for  all, 
except  by  repentance  and  faith.  They  are  in  substantial 
agreement  with  the  Freewill  Baptists. 

The  General  Baptists  have  22  associations,  399  organi- 
zations, 209  edifices,  valued  at  $201,140,  and  21,362  com- 
municants. The  average  seating  capacity  of  the  edifices 
is  344,  and  their  average  value  $964.  There  are  1 80  halls, 
etc.,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  28,201. 

Summary  by  States. 

f^         ■       r-\        \^     Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  <^^?^"'-     S-fi'  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.      Edifices.     ^^^^^^^  Property.  cants. 

Arkansas 33  4  2,000  $1,565  Ij2i7 

Illinois 41  30  8,400  12,125  2,605 

Indiana 64  59  22,800  135,425  5,35 1 

Kentucky 68  27  10, 125  20,950  4,455 

Missouri 166  70  21,025  22,675  6,654 

Nebraska 5  72 

Tennessee 22  19  7,500  8,400  1,008 

Total 399       209     71,850       $201,140       21,362 


THE  BAPTISTS.  4 1 

9. — THE    SEPARATE    BAPTISTS. 

The  Separate  Baptists  of  the  last  century  were  those 
who  favored  the  great  Whitefield  revival  movement. 
They  separated  from  those  Baptists  who,  for  various  rea- 
sons, opposed  the  revival.  They  had  considerable  acces- 
sions from  the  Congregational  churches,  and  became  nu- 
merous in  New  England,  Virginia,  and  elsewhere.  Most  of 
these  Separate  Baptists  formed  a  union  with  the  Regular 
Baptists  a  century  or  more  ago,  but  a  few  still  maintain 
separate  organizations.  Two  associations  which  retain  the 
word  **  Separate  "  in  their  title  are  counted  as  Regular 
Baptists. 

Separate  Baptists  are  generally  in  doctrinal  agreement 
with  the  Freewill  Baptists,  holding  to  a  general  atonement 
and  rejecting  the  doctrine  of  election  and  reprobation. 

There  is  one  association,  with  24  organizations,  19  church 
edifices,  valued  at  $9200,  and  1599  communicants.  The 
average  seating  capacity  of  the  edifices  is  297,  and  their 
average  value  $484.  There  are  5  halls,  etc.,  with  a  ses  t~ 
ing  capacity  of  525. 


Summary. 


Organi-    Church       ^^^""^  r<r    y: 

zations.    Edifices  ^^-  Church 


Seating         Value  of  Con  i- 

muhi- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 


Indiana.... 24         19         5,650      $9,200         1,599 


10. — THE    UNITED    BAPTISTS. 

There  being  In  Congregational  and  Baptist  churches  in 
New  England  some  opposition  to  the  great  revival  move- 
ment of  the  eighteenth  century  led  by  George  Whitefield, 
a  separation  occurred  in  many  Instances,  and  there  were 


42        RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

"Separates"  both  among  the  Congregationalists  and  Bap- 
tists. The  latter  were  called  Separate  Baptists,  and  those 
from  whom  they  separated  were  called,  by  way  of  distinc- 
tion, Regular  Baptists,  a  name  which  they  still  retain.  The 
Separate  Baptists  became  quite  numerous  in  New  England 
(where  many  of  those  who  separated  from  the  Congrega- 
tional churches  united  with  them)  and  elsewhere.  But  in 
the  last  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century  and  the  begin- 
ning of  the  present,  Separate  and  Regular  Baptists  came 
together  in  Virginia,  Kentucky,  and  elsewhere,  and  called 
themselves  United  Baptists.  The  great  body  of  these  are 
now  known  as  Regular  or  Missionary  Baptists. 

There  are  still  a  few  United  Baptists  who  retain  the  old 
title  and  an  independent  existence.  These  are  tabulated 
herewith  separately.  A  few  associations  in  full  fellowship 
with  the  Regular  Baptists  still  use  the  word  "  United." 
The  doctrinal  basis  on  which  the  union  of  Separate  and 
Regular  Baptists  was  accomplished  in  Kentucky  in  1801 
was  not  distinctly  Calvinistic.  While  it  did  declare  the 
final  perseverance  of  the  saints,  it  did  not  set  forth  election 
or  reprobation,  and  it  stipulated  that  the  holding  of  the 
doctrine  that  "  Christ  tasted  death  for  every  man  "  (gen- 
eral atonement)  should  be  "no  bar  to  communion."  The 
United  Baptists,  according  to  the  articles  of  faith  set  forth 
by  most  of  their  associations,  are  now  moderately  Calvin- 
istic. These  articles  declare  that  Christ  "  suffered  and  died 
to  make  atonement  for  sin,"  not  indicating  whether  this 
atonement  was  general  or  particular ;  that  though  the  gos- 
pel is  to  be  preached  to  all  nations,  and  sinners  are  to  be 
called  upon  to  repent,  such  is  their  opposition  to  the  gospel' 
that  they  freely  choose  a  state  of  sin ;  that  God  in  his 
**  mere  good  pleasure  "  elected  or  chose  in  Christ  a  great 


THE   BAPTISTS.  43 

multitude  among  all  nations ;  that  through  the  influences 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  he  ''  effectually  calls  them,"  and  they 
"freely  choose  Christ  for  their  Saviour"  ;  that  those  who 
are  united  to  God  by  a  living  faith  are  forgiven  and  justi- 
fied *'  solely  on  account  of  the  merits  of  Christ " ;  that 
those  who  are  justified  and  regenerated  will  persevere 
to  the  end ;  that  baptism  should  be  administered  only 
to  believers  and  by  immersion ;  that  the  Lord's  Supper 
should  be  '*  observed  by  those  who  have  been  regenerated, 
regularly  baptized,  and  become  members  of  a  gospel 
church  "  ;  that  feet-washing  ought  to  be  practiced  by  all 
baptized  believers. 

There  are  12  associations  of  United  Baptists,  with  204 
organizations,  179  church  edifices,  valued  at  $80,150,  and 
13,209  communicants.  The  average  seating  capacity  of 
the  churches  is  336,  and  their  average  value  $448.  Halls, 
etc.,  23,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  3650. 

Summary  by  States. 

<;tatf<;  Organi- 

^^^^^^-  zations. 

Alabama 15 

Arkansas   3 

Kentucky 81 

Missouri 45 

Tennessee  60 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

15 

4,900 

$5>9oo 

702 

3 

1,000 

925 

146 

78 

29,850 

39.750 

6,443 

32 

11,920 

15^975 

2,738 

51 

12,550 

17,600 

3,180 

Total.. ,       204         179       60,220     $80,150      13,209 


II. — THE    BAPTIST    CHURCH    OF    CHRIST. 

This  body  holds  a  separate  position  among  Baptists.  Its 
oldest  associations,  the  Elk  River  and  Duck  River,  were 
orsranized  in  1808  in  Tennessee,  where  more  than  half  of 


44 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


the  communicants  reported  are  to  be  found.  Its  articles 
of  faith  set  forth  a  mild  form  of  Calvinism,  with  a  general 
atonement.  They  declare  that  Christ  "  tasted  death  for 
every  man  "  and  made  it  possible  for  God  to  have  mercy 
upon  all  who  come  unto  him  on  gospel  terms ;  that  sinners 
are  justified  by  faith ;  that  the  saints  will  persevere ;  that 
true  behevers  are  the  only  proper  subjects  of  baptism; 
that  immersion  is  the  only  proper  baptism ;  and  that  bap- 
tism, the  Lord's  Supper,  and  feet-washing  are  ordinances 
of  the  gospel  to  be  continued  until  Christ's  second  coming. 
This  body  claims  to  be  the  oldest  body  of  Baptists,  and 
that  there  were  no  others  in  Tennessee  until  1825,  when 
the  Two-Seed  churches  came  into  existence  as  the  result 
of  what  is  known  as  the  Antinomian  Controversy. 

There  are  152  organizations,  135  church  edifices,  val- 
ued at  $56,755,  and  8254  communicants.  Of  the  latter, 
5065  are  in  Tennessee ;  the  rest  are  divided  between  Ala- 
bama, Arkansas,  Mississippi,  Missouri,  North  Carolina,  and 
Texas.  The  average  seating  capacity  of  the  edifices  is 
304,  and  their  average  value  $422.  Seventeen  halls,  etc., 
are  occupied  as  places  of  worship.  They  have  a  seating 
capacity  of  1275. 

Summary  by  States. 

„         .        ^,       ,  Seating         Value  of  Com- 

STATES  ^'■?^"'-       S'i  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.       Edifices.         p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Alabama 18  18  4,800  $5,200  782 

Arkansas 27  18  4,700  7,800  887 

Mississippi 8  8  2,400  4,950  368 

Missouri 4  2  435  900  185 

North  Carolina 16  16  4,600  5,400  659 

Tennessee 69  69  22,950  3^355  S^^^S 

Texas  10  3  1,000  1,150  308 


Total 152         135        40,885      $56,755        8,254 


THE  BAPTISTS. 


12. — THE    PRIMITIVE    BAPTISTS. 


45 


Those  who  are  variously  known  as  ''  Primitive,"  ''  Old 
School,"  ''Regular,"  and  ''Anti-Mission  "  Baptists  are  so 
called  because  of  their  opposition,  begun  more  than  fifty 
years  ago,  to  the  establishment  of  Sunday-schools,  mission, 
Bible,  and  other  societies,  which  they  regard  as  modern 
and  human  institutions  unwarranted  by  the  Scriptures  and 
unnecessary. 

Opposition  among  Baptists  to  the  missionary  and  other 
church  societies  was  manifested  some  years  before  the 
division  began.  In  1835  the  Chemung  Association,  hav- 
ing churches  in  New  York  and  Pennsylvania,  adopted  a 
resolution  declaring  that  as  a  number  of  associations  with 
which  it  had  been  in  correspondence  had  "  departed  from 
the  simplicity  of  the  doctrine  and  practice  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ,"  "  uniting  themselves  with  the  world  and  what  are 
falsely  called  benevolent  societies  founded  upon  a  monied 
basis,"  and  preaching  a  gospel  "  differing  from  the  gospel 
of  Christ,"  it  would  not  continue  in  fellowship  with  them. 
It  urged  all  Baptists  who  could  not  approve  the  new  ideas 
to  come  out  and  be  separate  from  those  holding  them. 
The  Baltimore  (Md.)  Association  made  a  similar  declara- 
tion in  1836,  and  a  gradual  separation  was  the  result.  The 
Warwick  Association  of  New  York  issued  a  circular  letter 
in  1 840,  which  shows  that  a  warm  controversy  was  then  in 
progress.  This  letter,  which  was  written  in  behalf  of  the 
"new  ideas,"  charged  the  Primitive  brethren  with  holding 
hyper- Calvinistic  doctrines,  and  insisted  that  their  predes- 
tinarianism  was  such  as  practically  to  deny  any  responsi- 
bility in  man  for  his  conduct  or  condition.  It  attributed 
to  them  statements  to  the  effect  that  God  carries  on  his 


46       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

work  *'  without  the  least  instrumentahty  whatever,"  and 
that  *'  all  the  preaching  from  John  the  Baptist  until  now, 
if  made  to  bear  on  one  unregenerated  sinner,"  could  not 
''quicken  his  poor  dead  soul."  The  Primitive  Baptists  do 
not  oppose  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  but  believe  that 
God  will  convert  the  world  in  his  own  way  and  own  good 
time  without  the  aid  of  missionary  societies. 

Primitive  Baptist  associations  generally  print  in  their  an- 
nual minutes  articles  of  faith,  a  form  of  constitution,  and  rules 
of  order.  The  articles  of  faith,  while  practically  the  same 
in  doctrinal  view,  vary  in  length  and  phraseology.  Some 
of  them  have  eleven  articles,  some  less,  some  more.  They 
declare  that  by  Adam's  fall  or  transgression  *'  all  his 
posterity  became  sinners  in  the  sight  of  God";  that  the 
"  corruption  of  human  nature  "  is  such  that  man  cannot  by 
his  own  free  will  and  ability  **  reinstate  himself  in  the  favor 
of  God  "  ;  that  "  God  elected,  or  chose,  his  people  in  Christ 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world  "  ;  that  sinners  are  jus- 
tified "  only  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  imputed  to 
them  "  ;  that  the  saints  will  finally  persevere  and  "  not  one 
of  them  will  ever  be  finally  lost "  ;  that  "  baptism,  the 
Lord's  Supper,  and  washing  the  saints'  feet  are  ordinances 
of  the  gospel  and  should  be  continued  until  Christ's  second 
coming";  that  *' the  institutions  of  the  day  [church  soci- 
eties] are  the  works  of  man  "  ;  that  it  is  therefore  *'  wrong 
to  join  them,"  and  that  no  fellowship  should  be  had  with 
them.  An  article  of  the  constitution  declines  **  fellowship 
with  any  church  or  churches  "  which  support  any  *'  mis- 
sionary, Bible,  tract,  or  Sunday-school  union  society  or 
advocates  State  conventions  or  theological  schools,"  or 
*'  any  other  society  "  formed  ''  under  the  pretense  of  cir- 


THE  BAPTISTS.  47 

culating  the  gospel  of  Christ."  The  Primitive  Baptists 
have  no  State  conventions  or  theological  seminaries.  They 
acknowledge  no  other  mode  of  baptism  than  immersion, 
and  insist  that  only  believers  are  proper  subjects  of  it,  that 
it  is  a  prerequisite  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  that  no  min- 
ister has  a  right  to  administer  the  ordinances  unless  he 
has  been  '''  called  of  God,"  *'  come  under  the  imposition  of 
hands  by  a  presbytery,"  and  is  *'  in  fellowship  with  the 
church  of  which  he  is  a  member." 

The  denomination  is  represented  in  twenty- eight  States 
and  the  District  of  Columbia.  Its  strongholds  are  :  Geor- 
gia, 18,535;  Alabama,  14,903;  Tennessee,  13,972;  North 
Carolina,  11,740;  and  Kentucky,  10,665.  It  has  little 
strength  in  any  Northern  State  except  Indiana  and  Illinois. 
The  total  of  members  is  121,347.  There  are  3222  organi- 
zations which  have  2849  edifices,  with  a  seating  capacity 
of  899,273.  and  a  value  of  $1,649,851.  The  average  seat- 
ing capacity  is  312  and  the  average  value  $580. 

According  to  the  Baptist  Almanac  of  1844,  there  were 
in  that  year  184  Primitive  Baptist  associations,  with  1622 
churches,  900  ordained  ministers,  and  61,162  members. 
If  these  returns  were  correct  they  have  gained  since  that 
date  1600  churches  and  about  60,000  mem.bers.  While 
their  associations  usually  print  annual  minutes,  which  give 
statistics  of  membership  and  number  of  churches,  no  gen- 
eral returns  for  the  denomination  are  published.  For  many 
years  its  membership  has  been  estimated  at  45,000  by 
statisticians  of  other  churches.  The  census  tables  show 
that  this  estimate  was  wide  of  the  mark.  There  are  279 
associations,  of  which  1 5  are  colored.  Colored  members 
are  not  numerous. 


48       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  Organi- 
zations. 

Alabama 360 

Arkansas 121 

Delaware 6 

District  of  Columbia  2 

Florida 67 

Georgia ,  483 

Illinois 160 

Indiana 144 

Iowa 34 

Kansas 19 

Kentucky 225 

Louisiana    43 

Maine 3 

Maryland 16 

Massachusetts i 

Mississippi 109 

Missouri 129 

Nebraska 2 

New  Jersey 4 

New  York 31 

North  Carolina  ....  311 

Ohio 139 

Pennsylvania 15 

South  Carolina  ....  23 

Tennessee 316 

Texas 156 

Virginia 234 

West  Virginia 65 

Wisconsin 4 

Total 3,222 


Church 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value  of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

■    pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

325 

105,076 

$125,364 

14,903 

93 

21,708 

29,032 

2,994 

7 

1.550 

19,000 

i«3 
34 

65 

15,820 

27,525 

1,997 

475 

168,935 

210,455 

18,535 

132 

40,  100 

93,100 

5,301 

128 

50,024 

123,550 

7,078 

15 

5,300 

9,950 

853 

7 

2,300 

10,100 

468 

208 

60,580 

151,425 

10,665 

42 

14,775 

18,955 

1,602 

3 

625 

3,300 

137 

15 

3.325 

27,950 

37'j 

I 

150 

5,500 

10 

104 

26,620 

38,600 

3,259 

93 

28,250 

^3,975 

3,763 

I 

300 

800 

40 

4 

1,400 

8,000 

2^8 

26 

8,700 

84,700 

1,019 

294 

89.800 

129,695 

11,740 

I3« 

40,28  s 

123,190 

4,262 

10 

3.420 

14,100 

314 

23 

5,750 

7,050 

531 

290 

97,165 

147,455 

13,972 

91 

27,220 

34,675 

4,201 

191 

62,195 

93,205 

9,950 

64 

16,700 

24,700 

2.777 

4 

1,200 

4,500 

128 

•,849   899,273  $1,649,851    121,347 


13. — THE    OLD    TWO-SEED-IN-THE-SITRIT    PREDESTI- 
NARIAN    BAPTISTS. 


These  are  very  conservative  Baptists,  who  are  not  in 
fellowship  with  the  Regular  or  Missionary,  nor  with  the 
Primitive  or  any  other  body  of  Baptists.  They  are  strongly 
Calvinistic,  holding  firmly  to  the  doctrine  of  predestination, 


THE  BAPlTSrS.  49 

as  their  name  indicates.  The  phrase  *'  Two  Seed  "  is  un- 
derstood to  indicate  their  beUef  that  there  are  two  seeds 
— one  of  evil  and  one  of  good.  This  doctrine  is  generally 
accredited  to  Elder  Daniel  Parker,  a  native  of  Virginia, 
who  was  ordained  in  Tennessee  in  1806,  and  labored  in 
that  State  till  181  7,  in  Illinois  till  1836,  and  then  in  Texas, 
where  he  died.  He  published  in  1826  a  pamphlet  which 
set  forth  the  two-seed  doctrine,  and  in  1829  another,  en- 
titled *'  Second  Do.se  of  the  Doctrine  of  Two  Seeds."  The 
following  explanation  of  the  doctrine  has  been  given  by  a 
writer  who  had  access  to  the  pamphlets  and  other  writings 
relating  to  it : 

*'  The  essence  of  good  is  God ;  the  e.ssence  of  evil  is  the 
devil.  Good  angels  are  emanations  from  or  particles  of 
God ;  evil  angels  are  particles  of  the  devil.  When  God 
created  Adam  and  Eve  they  were  endowed  with  an  ema- 
nation from  himself,  or  particles  of  God  were  included  in 
their  constitution.  They  were  wholly  good.  Satan,  how- 
ever, infused  into  them  particles  of  his  essence,  by  which 
they  were  corrupted.  In  the  beginning  God  had  appointed 
that  Eve  should  bring  forth  only  a  certain  number  of  off- 
spring ;  the  same  provision  applied  to  each  of  her  daughters. 
But  when  the  particles  of  evil  essence  had  been  infused 
by  Satan,  the  conception  of  Eve  and  of  her  daughters  was 
increased.  They  were  now  required  to  bear  the  original 
number,  who  were  styled  the  seed  of  God,  and  an  addi- 
tional number,  who  were  called  the  seed  of  the  serpent. 

"  The  seed  of  God  constituted  a  part  of  the  body  of 
Christ.  For  them  the  atonement  was  absolute ;  they 
would  all  be  saved.  The  seed  of  the  serpent  did  not  par- 
take of  the  benefits  of  the  atonement,  and  would  all  be  lost. 
All  the  manifestations  of  good  or  evil  in  men  are  but  dis- 


50       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

plays  of  the  essence  that  has  been  infused  into  them.     The 
Christian  warfare  is  a  conflict  between  these  essences." 

Not  all  the  associations  accept  the  peculiar  title  given 
above.  Some  call  themselves  simply  "  Regular,"  others, 
*'  Regular  Predestinarian,"  and  still  others,  *'  Regular  Two- 
Seed  Predestinarian  Primitive  Baptists."  Their  articles  of 
faith  also  vary  in  phraseology.  One  set  is  quite  brief, 
having  only  ten  articles ;  another  is  more  extended  and 
embraces  twelve  articles.  The  latter  declares  that  God 
is  the  Creator  of  all  things  and  governs  all  things  in 
righteousness ;  that  man  was  created  holy,  but  by  sin  fell 
into  a  depraved  state,  from  which  he  is  utterly  unable  to 
extricate  himself;  that  God's  elect  were  chosen  in  Christ 
before  the  world  began,  and  "  appointed  to  faith  and 
obedience  in  love  "  by  the  Spirit  of  God  because  of  the 
''righteousness,  life,  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension"  of 
Christ ;  that  God's  elect  will  in  due  time  be  effectually 
called  and  regenerated,  the  righteousness  of  God  being 
imputed  to  them ;  that  they  will  never  finally  fall  away ; 
that  good  works  are  the  fruits  of  faith  and  grace  in  the 
heart  and  follow  after  regeneration ;  that  ministers  should 
receive  ''legal  authority"  through  the  imposition  of  the 
hands  of  a  presbytery  acting  for  a  gospel  church,  and 
should  be  subject  to  the  discipline  of  the  church ;  that  the 
"  eternal  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  "  is  manifested  externally 
as  well  as  internally,  in  experimental  religion  and  the  call 
to  the  ministry,  and  the  true  church  should  distinguish 
itself  from  all  "false  sects,"  and  have  no  fellowship  with 
them ;  that  the  church  is  a  spiritual  kingdom  which  men 
in  a  state  of  nature  cannot  see,  and  it  should  therefore  re- 
ceive as  members  only  those  who  have  hope  in  Christ  and 


THE  BAPTISTS.  5  I 

an  experimental  knowledge  of  salvation;  that  the  ceremony 
of  feet- washing  ought  to  be  observed,  and  that  the  joys  of 
the  righteous  and  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  will  be 
endless. 

Two-Seed  Predestinarian  Baptists  differ  from  Primitive 
Baptists  concerning  the  doctrine  of  Predestination.  The 
former  hold,  according  to  the  statements  of  one  of  their 
prominent  elders,  that  God  predestined  all  his  children  to 
eternal  life,  and  the  devil  and  all  his  spiritual  children  to 
the  eternal  kingdom  of  darkness ;  that  he  foreordained  all 
events  whatever,  from  the  creation  to  the  consummation 
of  all  things,  not  suffering,  in  his  infinite  wisdom  and  per- 
fect knowledge,  anything  to  occur  to  change  his  plans. 
The  Primitive  Baptises  hold,  as  explained  by  the  same 
authority,  that  while  God  predestined  some  to  eternal  life, 
his  predestination  did  not  extend  absolutely  to  all  things, 
for  this  doctrine  would,  they  insist,  blasphemously  impute 
to  the  Almighty  the  existence  of  evil,  and  do  away  v/ith 
sin  and  human  accountability.  Some  of  the  Old  Two- 
Seed  Baptists  claim  Peter  Waldo,  John  Calvin,  Wyclif, 
Knox,  and  Bunyan  as  **  elders  "  who  held  the  true  faith  as 
to  the  two  seeds,  and  say  that  Arminius  was  the  great  cor- 
rupter of  sound  doctrine  on  this  subject. 

Many  of  the  Two-Seed  Baptists  are  strongly  opposed 
to  a  paid  ministry.  They  hold  that  the  calling  of  the  min- 
istry is  '*  to  comfort  Zion,  feed  the  flock,  and  contend 
earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints."  They 
are  antinomians,  and  do  not  believe  that  the  help  of  a  min- 
ister is  needed  by  the  Saviour  to  reach  and  save  sinners. 
He  is  a  full  and  complete  Saviour  and  carries  on  the  work 
of  salvation  without  the  help  of  men.       "  Modern    insti- 


52        RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

tutions,"  such  as  Sunday-schools,  theological  seminaries, 
Bible  and  missionary  societies,  are  regarded  with  marked 
disfavor,  as  among  the  Primitive  Baptists. 

There  are  50  associations,  with  473  organizations,  397 
church  edifices,  valued  at  $172,230,  and  12,851  commu- 
nicants. Though  the  communicants  are  scattered  over 
twenty-four  States,  they  are  most  numerous  in  Texas, 
Tennessee,  Kentucky,  Mississippi,  and  Arkansas.  The 
average  seating  capacity  of  the  edifices  is  339,  and  the 
average  value  $434.  There  are  75  halls,  etc.,  with  a  seat- 
ing capacity  of  5285. 

Summary  by  States. 

r^         ■        r^i        1  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  O^g^"^-      S"'^'^^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.      Edifices.  p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Alabama 24  24  4,900  $7,050  538 

Arkansas 62  58  24,880  30,800  1,230 

Florida 4  4  800  400  39 

Georgia 18  18  4,900  4,950  330 

Idaho 2  2  550  700  61 

Illinois   3  I  200  800  51 

Indiana 14  14  5,000  6,700  346 

Iowa I  . .           10 

Kansas 8  2  500  600  162 

Kentucky 58  58  21,700  29,450  2,401 

Louisiana 10  10  2,050  1,900  170 

Maine 3  3  1,000  1,400  115 

Mississippi 26  26  6,800  10,250  840 

Missouri 32  23  7,900  9,050  668 

New  York 3  3  1,300  1,900  96 

North  CaroUna 9  3  850  680  183 

Ohio I  I  300  400  33 

Oregon 15  2  1,400  1,800  194 

Pennsylvania 5  5  4,900  4,000  264 

Tennessee  37  36  13,900  16,800  1,270 

Texas loi  82  23,075  31,650  2,831 

Virginia 7  2  675  1,050  142 

Washington 5  i  150  400  71 

West  Virginia 25  19  7,000  9,500  806 

Total 473        397      134,73°      $172,230    12,851 


THE  BAPTISTS. 


53 


The  following  table  gives  a  summary  of  all  Baptist  bodies. 
The  returns  in  one  or  two  cases  are  somewhat  fuller  than 
those  of  the  census. 

Summary  by  States  of  All  Baptist  Bodies. 


STATES. 


Organi-     Church 
zations.    Edifices. 


Alabama 3>302  3,109 

Arizona 6  4 

Arkansas   2,279  1,780 

California 165  123 

Colorado 54  40 

Connecticut  ....  139  142 

Delaware 19  23 

District    of    Co- 
lumbia   63  51 

Florida 807  699 

Georgia 3,966  3,895 

Idaho 23  13 

Illinois i>324  1,163 

Indiana 829  763 

Indian  Territory  181  no 

Iowa 500  393 

Kansas 617  364 

Kentucky 2,273  2,024 

Louisiana ij44i  i>376 

Maine 523  461 

Maryland 104  100 

Massachusetts  .  .  340  364 

Michigan 523  466 

Minnesota 229  187 

Mississippi 2,679  2,562 

Missouri 2,355  ^'755 

Montana 14  1 1 

Nebraska 284  186 

Nevada 9  i 

New   Hampshire  179  186 

New  Jersey 232  261 

New  Mexico ....  15  4 

New  York 1,071  1,079 

North  Carolina  .  3,124  3,048 

North  Dakota  .  .  54  33 

Ohio 885  828. 

Oklahoma i  .  , ,  . 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

906,734 

$2,110,362 

258,405 

875 

11,200 

197 

518,813 

1,066,104 

128,724 

34,925 

763,860 

11,383 

10,935 

440,000 

4,944 

48,280 

1,656,750 

22,600 

6,332 

184,300 

2,006 

26,500 

914,150 

19,372 

15^843 

375,936 

41,647 

1,237.431 

3,109,390 

357,241 

2,930 

27,200 

745 

352,133 

3,681,360 

109,640 

255,604 

1,627,297 

70,380 

18,485 

35,765 

9,147 

104,771 

1,242,690 

33,962 

95,715 

921,958 

34,665 

662.455 

3,020,742 

229,524 

321,426 

988,967 

98,552 

131,224 

1,511,000 

35,463 

37,659 

831,275 

16,238 

149,004 

6,301,530 

62,966 

130,680 

2,135,694 

39,580 

46,460 

1,204,889 

16,441 

734.185 

1,433,332 

224,801 

536,240 

2,980,316 

159,371 

2,950 

89,000 

683 

42,280 

549,010 

13,481 

500 

7,000 

63 

61,635 

964,050 

16,772 

97,375 

3,020,913 

39,760 

1,250 

22,000 

355 

363,323 

13,625,588 

142,736 

1,098,084 

2,556,147 

310,920 

7,665 

90,300 

2,298 

240,415 

2,819,828 

69,093 
316 

54       KELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States  of  All  Baptist  Bodies. — Contmued. 

STATES  Organi-  Church          Seating 

^-^^^^^^  zations.  Edifices.          ^%^ 

Oregon 123  71         19,140 

Pennsylvania  .  .  .  720  704  240,204 

Rhode  Island.  .  .  113  117         41,000 

South  Carolina. .  1,676  1,633  521,009 

South  Dakota  ..  90  59         12,236 

Tennessee 2,413  2,193  720,815 

Texas 4,061  2,551  667,120 

Utah 4  3              700 

Vermont 143  137        37,234 

Virginia 2,038  1,938  689,609 

Washington....  95  56         12,690 

West  Virginia  .  .  681  485  140,220 

Wisconsin 254  235         59,906 

Wyoming 9  3              525 

Total 43,029  37,789  1 1,599,534  $82,392,423  3,717,969 


Value  of 

Church 

Property'. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

$319,125 
6,088,322 

5,500 
86,620 

1,450,117 
1,606,385 

239,675 
2,566,373 
2,119,096 

17,293 

203,959 

4,052 

186,174 

248,523 

65,000 
678,875 

327 
11,258 

3,152,582 

303,134 

242,160 

3,941 

552,365 
964,570 

27,875 

45,414 

17,041 

262 

CHAPTER    III. 

THE    RIVER    BRETHREN. 

Those  who  first  constituted  the  body  popularly  known 
as  River  Brethren  came  to  this  country  from  Switzerland 
in  1750  and  settled  near  the  Susquehanna  River  in  eastern 
Pennsylvania.  They  have  no  history  to  which  the  inquirer 
can  refer,  and  they  are  able  to  give  few  particulars  of  the 
early  life  of  the  denomination.  They  were,  it  is  supposed, 
Mennonites.  As  the  result  of  a  revival  movement,  begin- 
ning in  1770,  many  of  these  people  who  had  been  formal 
in  their  worship  became  zealous  believers,  and  organized 
separate  congregations.  The  first  members  were  baptized, 
it  is  believed,  in  the  Susquehanna  River,  and  the  denomi- 
nation thus  came  to  be  known  as  River  Brethren.  Jacob 
Engle  was  their  first  minister. 

In  their  belief  they  hold  to  trine  immersion,  the  washing 
of  feet,  nonresistance,  and  nonconformity  to  the  world. 
In  many  points  in  belief  and  practice  they  are  like  the 
Mennonites. 

1. — THE    BRETHREN    IN    CHRIST. 

This  is  by  far  the  largest  and  best  organized  branch  of 
the  River  Brethren.  Its  churches,  of  which  there  are  78, 
are  associated  in  district  conferences,  and  there  is  also  a 
general  conference,  representing  the  whole  body.  There 
are  twenty  of  the  district  conferences.     The  total  of  com- 

55 


56       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

municants  is  2688.  The  average  seating  capacity  of  the 
churches  is  422,  and  their  average  value  $1623.  There 
are  2"]  halls,  etc.,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  1080. 

Summary  by  States. 

STATES.  Organi-    Church 

zations.    li-dmces. 

Illinois 12  6 

Indiana 7  2 

Iowa 2 

Kansas     9  5 

Maryland i  i 

Michigan 7  2 

New  York i  i 

Ohio 13  9 

Pennsylvania 26  19 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Vahie  of 

Church 

Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

2,300 
700 

$13700 
1,800 

181 
130 

2,150 
600 

9,500 
3,000 

40 

588 

36 

250 
400 

1,800 

52 
32 

3;  900 
8,705 

14.100 
28,600 

410 
1,219 

Total 78         45       19,005      $73,050      2,688 

Summary  by  Districts. 


DISTRICTS. 


Ashland,  Ohio 3  2           500 

Center,  Pa 3        

Clarence  Center,  N.  Y. .  .  i  i           400 

Cumberland,  Pa 2  2            800 

Dayton,  Ohio  and  Ind. .  .  6  4         1,900 

Donegal,  Pa 2  2        1,200 

Indiana,  Ind 6  i  ^        700 

Iowa,  Iowa 2        

Lykins  Valley,  Pa 5  4         1,105 

Morrison's  Cove,  Pa.  ....  4  4         1,900 

New  Guilford,  Pa.  &  Md.  2  2         1,000 

North  Dickinson,  Kan. .  .  5  5         2,150 

North  Franklin,  Pa 6  3         1,700 

Pine  Creek,  111 2  i            500 

Port  Huron,  Mich 7  2            250 

Rapho,  Pa 3  3         1,600 

Shannon,  111 6  4         1,500 

South  Dickinson,  Kan. .  .  4        

Wayne,  Ohio 5  3^     1,500 

Whiteside,  111 4  i            300 

Total 78  45       19,005      $73,050      2,688 


$1,500 

56 

1,800 

23 
32 

3,000 

130 

8,400 

235 

4,5.00 
1,800 

222 
120 



40 

4,000 

2X6 

3,600 

137 

4.200 

72 

9,500 

4,600 

289 
234 

1,200 

43 

550 

52 

7,700 

221 

11,300 

91 

299 

4,200 

129 

1,200 

47 

THE   RIVER  BRETHREN.  57 


2. — THE  OLD  ORDER  OF  YORKER  BRETHREN. 

This  branch  is  generally  called  ''Yorker"  Brethren,  be- 
cause when  the  River  Brethren  were  divided  in  1862  the 
churches  in  York  County  were  not  affected  by  the  division. 
It  is  an  extremely  small  body,  holding  to  the  original  doc- 
trines and  practices  of  the  River  Brethren. 


Summary  by  States. 


Organ.-      Church         ^^_^     ^^^^^^^ 
zations.     Edinces. 


Seating    VaUie  of  Com- 

Ca-         Church  muni- 

pacity.    Property.  cants. 

Indiana i            ..                        ..  12 

Iowa I            .  .            .  .  15 

Ohio 2            38 

Pennsylvania 4           .  .           .  .          . .  149 


Total 8  214 


3. — THE    UNITED    ZION'S    CHILDREN. 

This  branch  is  the  result  of  a  division  which  occurred  in 
Dauphin  County,  Pa.,  in  1853.  It  has  the  same  confession 
of  faith  as  the  River  Brethren,  and  differs  from  them  only 
in  unimportant  particulars.  In  observing  the  ceremony  of 
feet-washing  one  person  both  washes  and  dries ;  among 
the  River  Brethren  one  person  does  the  washing  and  an- 
other the  drying.  Services  are  held  in  the  churches  alter- 
nately every  six  weeks.  Communion  is  celebrated  once 
or  twice  a  year. 

The  25  organizations  are  all  in  Pennsylvania.  They 
own  that  number  of  houses  of  worship,  valued  at  $8300. 
The  number  of  members  is  525. 


58       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary. 

-* 

Organi-      Church      Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATE.  .,o.?^„e       TT.iifi^^c.  ^^-  Church  muni- 

zauons.      Edifices,      p^^j^^^  Property.  cants. 

Pennsylvania 25  25         3,100  $8,300  525 


Summary  by  States  of  All  River  Brethren. 

Illinois 12  6         2,300  $13,700  181 

Indiana 8  2            700  1,800  142 

Iowa 3  55 

Kansas 9  5         2,150  9,500  588 

Maryland i  i            600  3,000  36 

Michigan 7  2            250  550  52 

New  York i  i            400  1,800  32 

Ohio 15  9         3,900  14,100  448 

Pennsylvania 55  44       11,805  36,900  1,893 


Total Ill  70       22,105         $81,350      3^427 


CHAPTER   IV, 

THE    PLYMOUTH    BRETHREN. 

This  body  of  Christians  originated  in  several  separate 
and  spontaneous  movements  in  1827-30.  The  first  pubHc 
meeting  held  by  them  was  in  Dublin,  Ireland.  A  large 
company  of  them  was  gathered  in  Plymouth,  England, 
whence  they  are  popularly  called  ''Plymouth"  Brethren, 
a  title  they  do  not  accept.  They  speak  of  themselves  as 
believers.  Christians,  saints,  or  Brethren.  Division  soon 
came  among  them,  and  they  now  exist  in  England  in  sev- 
eral branches.  From  England  they  came  to  Canada  and 
the  United  States. 

The  Brethren  accept  the  Scriptures  as  their  only  guide, 
acknowledging  no  creeds,  rituals,  or  anything  *'  which  sa- 
vors of  reason  or  mere  expediency."  They  do  not  allow 
that  ordination  is  necessary  to  the  ministry.  They  hold 
that  gift  is  sufficient  authorization  for  the  exercise  of  the 
privilege  of  the  priesthood  of  all  believers,  the  Holy  Spirit 
being  the  guide.  Hence  they  have  no  presiding  officers 
in  their  public  meetings.  Woman's  sphere  is  considered 
as  private. 

They  accept  the  evangelical  doctrines  of  the  Trinity,  of 
the  sinless  humanity  and  absolute  divinity  of  Christ,  and 
of  Christ's  atonement  by  his  sacrificial  death,  and  hold  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  present  in  the  believer  and  in  the  church, 
and  that  believers  are  eternally  secure.     They  look  for  the 

59 


6o       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

personal  premillennial  coming  of  Christ,  and  believe  that 
the  punishment  of  the  wicked  will  be  eternal. 

Their  view  of  the  church  is  that  it  is  one  and  indivisible. 
Christ  is  the  head  of  it,  the  Holy  Spirit  the  bond  of  union, 
and  every  believer  a  member.  It  was  begun  at  Pentecost 
and  will  be  completed  at  the  second  advent. 

They  regard  the  various  denominations  as  based  upon 
creeds,  an  ordained  ministry,  and  separate  organizations, 
and  do  not  therefore  fellowship  them.  They  meet  every 
Sunday  to  ''break  bread,"  which  is  the  term  they  use  to 
designate  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  Other 
meetings  are  held  for  Bible  study  and  prayer,  and,  when- 
ever occasion  offers,  for  the  unconverted.  They  own  no 
church  edifices,  but  meet  in  halls  and  private  houses. 

The  divisions  in  England  are  partly  reproduced  in  the 
United  States.^  The  last  division  in  this  country,  by  which 
the  third  and  fourth  branches  were  created  out  of  the  third, 
was  due  to  a  question  of  belief.  The  following  are  the 
branches,  the  Roman  numerals  being  introduced  for  the 
sake  of  distinction : 

Plymouth  Brethren  I. 

Plymouth  Brethren  11. 

Plymouth  Brethren  III. 

Plymouth  Brethren  IV. 

I. — THE    PLYMOUTH    BRETHREN    I. 

This  is  the  main  body  of  Brethren.  They  are  regarded 
as  more  conservative  than  the  second  branch,  but  less  so 
than  the  third  and  fourth  branches.  They  have  109 
assemblies  or  organizations,  with  2279  members,  who  are 
divided  among   twenty-seven  States  and  the  District  of 


THE  PLYMOUTH  BRETHREN. 


6i 


Columbia.  As  the  Plymouth  Brethren  have  no  houses 
of  worship,  and  consequently  no  church  property,  those 
columns  are  omitted,  and  the  table  is  arranged  to  show 
the  number  of  halls  occupied  and  their  seating  capacity. 


Summary  by  States. 


STATES,    ETC. 


California , 

Colorado 

Delaware 

District  of  Columbia 

Florida 

Georgia 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Kentucky 

Maine 

Maryland 

Massachusetts 

Michigan   

Minnesota 

Missouri 

Nebraska 

New  Hampshire  .  .  . 

New  Jersey 

New  York 

North  Carolina  .... 

Ohio 

Pennsylvania 

Texas 

Vermont 

Washington 

Wisconsin   

Total 


Organi- 

Halls, 

Seating 
Ca- 

Com- 
muni- 

zations. 

etc. 

pacity. 

cants. 

4 

4 

105 

49 

I 

I 

90 

14 

3 

3 

320 

44 

I 

I 

25 

8 

I 

I 

150 

75 

2 

2 

60 

17 

5 

5 

550 

158 

I 

I 

100 

14 

9 

9 

490 

163 

I 

16 

6 

I 

I 

25 

5 

I 

I 

20 

5 

I 

I 

30 

24 

7 

7 

316 

119 

9 

9 

637 

192 

II 

II 

850 

243 

2 

2 

350 

151 

I 

I 

25 

9 

I 

I 

80 

15 

9 

9 

770 

213 

19 

18 

1,600 

494 

I 

I 

25 

3 

2 

2 

Zl 

5 

II 

II 

572 

164 

I 

I 

20 

6 

I 

I 

20 

4 

2 

2 

40 

19 

^ 

I 

120 

70 

109 


[08 


7,423 


2,289 


2. — THE    PLYMOUTH    BRETHREN    II. 

Those    constituting    this    branch    are    often    called    the 
Open  Brethren,"  because  they  are  regarded  as  less  strict 


62       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


in  discipline  than  either  of  the  other  three  branches.  They 
also  hold  a  somewhat  different  view  of  the  ministry,  a  view 
approaching  that  common  am^ong  the  denominations  which 
have  regular  pastors.  The  column  headed  ''  church  prop- 
erty "  represents  furniture. 

They  have  88  organizations  and  2419  members,  and  are 
represented  in  twenty-three  States,  their  chief  strength 
being  in   Illinois. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES. 

Arkansas  . . . . 
California  .  .  .  . 

Colorado 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa   

Kansas 

Louisiana  . .  .  . 
Massachusetts 
Michigan  .  .  .  . 
Minnesota.  .  .  . 

Missouri 

Nebraska  .  .  .  . 
New  Jersey. .  . 

New  York 

North  Dakota 

Ohio 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania  . 
Rhode  Island 

Texas  

Virginia 

Washington  . . 

Total 


gani- 

Halls, 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

I 

I 

.... 

3 

4 

4 

515 

$90 

115 

I 

I 

100 

13 

13 

13 

1,350 

250 

410 

5 

5 

450 

150 

79 

-•> 

2 

250 

48 

6 

6 

800 

115 

I 

I 

100 

20 

6 

6 

750 

650 

274 

6 

6 

700 

170 

4 

4 

400 

25 

95 

2 

2 

200 

60 

4 

4 

47 

4 

4 

700 

«5 

8 

8 

975 

100 

353 

I 

I 

6 

3 

3 

175 

.... 

72 

I 

I 

10 

5 

5 

600 

.... 

214 

3 

3 

200 

... 

55 

4 

4 

300 

.... 

105 

3 

3 

260 

.... 

50 

I 

I 

100 

20 

1,925 


$1,265 


2,419 


3. — THE    PLYMOUTH    BRETHREN    III. 

These  are  the  strictest  division  of  the  Brethren.     Their 
separation  froin  the  Brethren  of  the  first  and  largest  divi- 


THE  PLYMOUTH  BRETHREN. 


63 


sion  some  years  ago  was  the  result  of  a  controversy  on  a 
point  of  doctrine  and  a  matter  of  discipline.  They  claim 
that  such  divine  power  is  vested  in  the  church,  that  all  the 
Brethren  are  under  moral  obligation  to  submit  to  a  decision 
rendered  by  the  church,  even  though  the  decision  were 
regarded  as  unjust. 

They  have  86  organizations  and  1235  members.     Most 
of  them  are  to  be  found  in  the  State  of  Illinois. 

Summary  by  States. 


California 

Colorado 

Connecticut 

Florida 

Georgia 

Illinois 

Iowa  

Kansas 

Louisiana 

Maryland 

Massachusetts  .  .  . 

Michigan 

Minnesota 

Missouri 

Nebraska 

New  Hampshire  . 

New  Jersey 

New  York 

North  Dakota  .  .  . 

Ohio 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania  .... 
Rhode  Island .... 

Tennessee   

Vermont 

Virginia 

Washington 

Wisconsin 

Total 86 


Organi- 

Halls, 
etc. 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cant?. 

4 

4 

100 

40 

I 

3 

I 
3 

200 



35 
16 

4 

4 

100 

.... 

33 

4 

4 

100 

.... 

32 

9 
6 

9 
6 

380 
800 

234 
166 

6 

6 

150 

79 

I 

I 

.... 

.... 

2 

I 

I 

.... 

.... 

12 

4 

4 

100 

59 

4 

I 

4 

I 

80 

$200 

47 
12 

2 

2 

.... 

18 

6 

6 

.... 

50 

I 

I 

.... 

4 

5 

5 

270 

.... 

83 

4 

4 

75 



76 

3 
3 

3 
3 

100 

.... 

29 
89 

I 

I 

.... 

12 

4 

4 

180 

.... 

57 

I 

I 

.... 

II 

I 

I 

.... 

8 

I 

I 

.... 

.... 

2 

2 

2 

.... 

.... 

13 

3 

1 

3 

I 

'"85 

12 

4 

86 


,720 


$200 


1,235 


64       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED  STATES, 


4. — THE    PLYMOUTH    BRETHREN    IV. 

This  branch  is  due  to  a  difference  arising  quite  recently 
among  those  formerly  constituting  the  third  division. 
Some  held  that  a  second  impartation  of  divine  power  must 
be  received  before  a  believer  could  be  said  to  be  in  full 
possession  of  eternal  life.  This  view  gave  rise  to  various 
complications  respecting  the  person  of  Christ  and  the  con- 
dition of  the  Old  Testament  saints.  Those  who  refused  to 
accept  this  teaching  formed  new  assemblies  or  congrega- 
tions, and  constitute  the  fourth  division. 

They  have  31  organizations,  with  718  members.  They 
are  found  in  fifteen  States,  principally  in  California,  Ohio, 
and  Massachusetts. 


Summary  by  States. 


California 

Colorado 

Georgia 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Kansas 

Maryland 

Massachusetts  . 

Michigan 

Minnesota  .  .  .  . 

Nebraska 

New  Jersey. .  . . 

Ohio 

Pennsylvania  . . 
South  Carolina 

Total 


Organi- 
zations. 

Halls, 
etc. 

Seating 
Ca- 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

cants. 

6 

6 

850 

137 

I 

I 

8 

I 

I 

6 

2 

2 

28 

I 

I 

150 

35 

I 

I 

12 

2 

2 

300 

67 

I 

I 

200 

100 

2 

2 

200 

57 

2 

2 

75 

Zl 

2 

2 

30 

5 

5 

120 

5« 

3 

3 

100 

no 

I 

I 

100 

25 

I 

I 

8 

31 


2,095 


718 


THE  PLYMOUTH  BRETHREN. 


65 


Summary  by  States  of  All  Plymouth  Brethren. 


STATES,    ETC. 

Arkansas  

California 

Colorado 

Connecticut 

Delaware 

District  of  Columbia 

Florida 

Georgia 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Kentucky 

Louisiana 

Maine 

Maryland 

Massachusetts 

Michigan 

Minnesota 

Missouri 

Nebraska 

New  Hampshire  .  .  . 

New  Jersey 

New  York 

North  Carolina  .... 

South  Dakota 

Ohio 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania 

Rhode  Island 

South  Carolina  .... 

Tennessee   

Texas 

Vermont 

Virginia 

Washington 

Wisconsin 


Organi- 
zations. 


i8 
4 
3 
3 

I 

5 

7 

29 

7 
17 
14 

I 
2 

I 

4 
18 
21 
18 

6 
13 

23 

31 

I 

4 
II 

2 
21 

4 

I 

5 
2 


Halls, 
etc. 

I 

18 

4 
3 
3 

5 

7 

29 

7 

17 
14 

I 

2 

I 

4 
18 
21 
18 

6 

13 
2 

23 
30 

I 

4 
II 

2 
21 

4 

I 
I 

5 

2 

5 
6 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 


1,570 
390 

320 

25 
250 
160 

2,280 
700 

1,540 
966 

25 

IOC 

20 

330 

1,366 

1,617 

1,325 

25 

80 

1,860 

2,650 

25 


Value  of  Com- 

Church  muni- 

Property,         cants. 


$90 


412 


1,452 
200 


320 
20 
260 
140 
205* 


250 
150 


650 

200 

25 


3 

341 

70 

16 

44 

8 

108 

55 
830 

128 

112. 

5 

22 

5 
103 

552 
466 

387 
229 

136 

19 

439 

923 

3 

35 

276 

22 

460 

66 

8' 

8 

III 

6 

^2> 

51 

74 


Total 


314   308   21,163   $1,465   6,661 


CHAPTER   V. 

THE    CATHOLICS. 

As  this  term  is  commonly  used,  it  applies  to  the  Church 
of  Rome,  to  the  Eastern  or  Orthodox  Churches,  and  to 
the  Old  and  Reformed  Catholic  bodies,  which  have  lately 
arisen.  As  the  result  of  a  controversy  beginning  in  the 
ninth  century  the  Christian  Church  was  divided  into  the 
Roman  and  Greek  Churches.  The  Church  of  Rome, 
which  is  the  more  numerous  division,  is  officially  called  the 
"  Holy,  Catholic,  Apostolic,  and  Roman  Church,"  and 
claims  to  be  the  only  church  founded  by  Christ.  It  has 
a  hierarchy,  including  a  pope,  who  is  supreme  pontiff,  a 
college  of  cardinals,  and  numerous  archbishops  and  bishops. 
Its  doctrine  is  expressed  in  the  oecumenical  creeds — the 
Apostles',  the  Nicene  (with  the  Filioque),  and  the  Athana- 
sian — and  in  the  decrees  of  twenty  oecumenical  councils, 
the  latest  of  which  was  that  of  the  Vatican,  in  1870.  The 
Greek  Church,  whose  full  title  is  ''  Holy,  Orthodox,  Cath- 
olic, Apostolic,  Oriental  Church,"  includes  the  Church  of 
Russia,  the  Church  of  Greece,  the  Armenians,  and  various 
other  divisions.  The  Orthodox  or  Eastern  Church  holds 
to  the  decrees  and  canons  of  the  first  seven  oecumenical 
councils,  accepting  the  Nicene  Creed  without  the  Latin 
Filioqiic.  This  creed  is  its  chief  doctrinal  expression.  Its 
highest  officials  are  patriarchs.  It  has  besides,  metropoli- 
tans or  archbishops,  and  bishops.  The  Uniates  are  Greek 
Christians  who  have  acknowledged  the  supremacy  of  the 

66 


THE   CATHOLICS.  6  J 

pope.  The  Old  and  Reformed  Catholics  are  bodies  origi- 
nating in  this  country  in  withdrawals  from  the  Roman 
Church. 


I. — THE  ROMAN  CATHOLIC  CHURCH. 

The  first  Christian  congregations  organized  in  the  terri- 
tory now  constituting  the  United  States  were  those  of  the 
Roman  Catholic  faith.  The  oldest  was  established  in  St. 
Augustine,  Fla.,  shortly  after  that  settlement  was  founded 
in  1565.  But  Catholic  services  were  held  on  Florida  soil 
long  before  that  date.  Missionaries  accompanied  the  Span- 
ish expeditions  of  discovery  and  settlement  in  the  first  half- 
century  after  Columbus  made  his  first  voyage  to  America, 
and  these  raised  the  cross  and  conducted  divine  worship. 
John  Juarez,  who  had  been  appointed  by  the  pope  Bishop 
of  Florida,  landed  with  the  expedition  of  Narvaez  in  1528, 
but  is  supposed  to  have  been  slain  or  to  have  perished  from 
hunger  the  same  year.  After  St.  Augustine  was  estab- 
lished many  companies  of  missionaries  went  out  into  Flor- 
ida, Alabama,  Georgia,  and  Carolina  to  labor  among  the 
Indians.  The  second  oldest  town,  Santa  Fe,  was  founded 
by  Spaniards  in  1582.  Missionaries  in  connection  with 
Coronado's  exploring  expedition  preached  among  the  Indi- 
ans of  New  Mexico  forty  years  earlier,  but  they  soon  per- 
ished. After  the  founding  of  Santa  Fe  missionary  work 
was  more  successful,  and  many  tribes  of  Indians  accepted 
the  Catholic  faith.  Franciscans  established  missions  in 
California  in  160 1,  and  French  priests  held  worship  on 
Neutral  Island,  on  the  coast  of  Maine,  in  1609,  and  three 
years  later  on  Mount  Desert  Island.  Jesuit  missions,  be- 
gun on  the  upper  Kennebec  in  1646,  were  more  successful 


68       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

and  permanent,  many  Indian  converts  being  among  their 
fruits.  In  1665  Catholics  sought  to  convert  the  Onondagas 
and  other  tribes  in  New  York.  Similar  attempts  among 
the  Great  Lakes  were  made  as  early  as  1641. 

The  history  of  the  Catholic  Church  among  the  English 
colonists  began  with  the  immigration  of  English  and  Irish 
Catholics  to  Maryland  in  1634.  They  founded  the  town 
of  St.  Mary's  the  first  year.  Ten  years  later,  as  the  result 
of  a  conflict  with  Protestant  colonists,  their  privileges  of 
worship  were  curtailed,  but  restored  in  1646.  A  toleration 
act  was  passed  by  the  legislature  of  Maryland  in  1649,  but 
it  was  repealed  in  1654.  The  Catholics  received  their 
rights  again  in  1660,  to  be  restricted  once  more  in  1704, 
and  these  restrictions  were  not  entirely  removed  until  the 
period  of  the  War  of  Independence.  In  Virginia,  the  Caro- 
linas,  Georgia,  and  New  England  severe  laws  were  enforced 
against  Catholics  for  many  years.  In  New  York,  which  is 
now  the  stronghold  of  Catholicism,  there  were,  it  is  said, 
no  more  than  seven  Catholic  families  in  1696,  and  the  few 
Catholics  found  on  Manhattan  Island  eighty  years  later 
had  to  go  to  Philadelphia  to  receive  the  sacraments. 

In  1 784,  at  the  close  of  the  Revolutionary  War,  the  pope 
appointed  the  Rev.  John  Carroll  prefect  apostolic.  Be- 
fore this  date  the  Catholics  in  this  country  had  been  under 
the  jurisdiction  of  the  vicar  apostolic  of  London,  England. 
Six  years  later  Dr.  Carroll  was  consecrated  bishop  in 
London,  and  Baltimore  became  the  first  Catholic  diocese. 
The  new  bishop  estimated  the  number  of  Catholics  in  the 
United  States  at  that  time  at  about  30,000,  of  whom  16,000 
were  in  Maryland,  and  7000  in  Pennsylvania.  The  rest 
were  scattered  over  a  broad  territory  stretching  into  the 
west  as  far  as  Michigan,  Indiana,  and  Illinois.     The  church 


THE   CATHOLICS.  69 

was  gradually  extended  to  Kentucky  (1787),  South  Caro- 
lina (1789),  Ohio,  and  other  parts  of  the  country.  It  grew 
rapidly  when  immigration  set  in  from  Ireland  and  Europe. 
This  has  been  the  chief  cause  of  the  rapid  increase  of  the 
church  in  the  last  half-century.  In  1807  there  were  about 
80  churches,  and  a  CathoHc  population  of  150,000.  In 
1820  this  population  had  doubled;  in  1830  it  had  doubled 
again.  In  the  next  decade  it  increased  from  500,000  to 
1,500,000;  in  1850  it  had  become  3,500,000;  in  i860, 
4,500,000;  and  in  1876,  6,500,000.  These  figures  were 
given  by  the  late  Prof.  A.  J.  Schem,  who  was  regarded  as 
good  authority  in  church  statistics. 

An  immense  territory  was  covered  until  1808  by  the 
single  diocese  of  Baltimore.  In  that  year  Baltimore  became 
a  metropolitan  see,  with  four  suffragan  bishoprics — New 
York,  Philadelphia,  Boston,  and  Bardstown.  The  purchase 
of  Louisiana  in  1803  had  added  the  diocese  of  New  Orleans, 
which  had  been  erected  in  1803.  In  1846  Oregon  City 
became  a  metropolitan  see;  in  1847  the  same  dignity  was 
conferred  on  St.  Louis,  and  in  1850  Cincinnati,  New  York, 
and  New  Orleans  were  erected  into  provinces.  There  are 
now  13  provinces,  the  metropolitan  sees  being  those  of 
Baltimore,  Oregon,  St.  Louis,  New  Orleans,  Cincinnati, 
New  York,  San  Francisco,  Santa  Fe,  Philadelphia,  Mil- 
waukee, Boston,  Chicago,  and  St.  Paul.  Connected  with 
these  provinces  are  66  dioceses,  5  vicariates  apostolic,  and 
I  prefecture  apostolic. 

The  doctrinal  system  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  is 
embodied  in  the  Apostles',  Nicene,  and  Athanasian  creeds, 
and  the  dogmatic  decisions  of  the  oecumenical  councils 
from  325  to  1870.  The  doctrine  of  the  church  is  that  it 
consists  of  all  who  hold  the  true  faith,  receive  the  true  sacra- 


70       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

ments,  and  acknowledge  the  rule  of  the  pope  of  Rome  as 
head  of  the  church.  While  the  Bible,  including  the  books 
commonly  called  apocryphal,  is  accepted  as  the  Word  of 
God,  the  authority  of  ecclesiastical  tradition  is  honored. 
The  church  is  held  to  be  infallible ;  the  Virgin  Mary,  the 
saints,  their  pictures  and  relics  are  venerated;  seven  sac- 
raments— baptism,  the  eucharist,  confirmation,  penance, 
extreme  unction,  ordination,  and  matrimony — are  admin- 
istered; justification  is  held  to  be  by  faith  and  works 
conjoined ;  transubstantiation  and  the  adoration  of  the 
elements,  baptismal  salvation,  priestly  absolution,  the  sacri- 
fice of  the  mass,  prayers  for  the  dead,  the  immaculate 
conception  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  a  temporary  place  between 
heaven  and  hell  for  departed  spirits,  are  also  features  of 
Catholic  belief.  The  worship  of  the  church  is  conducted 
in  the  Latin  language  according  to  an  established  ritual,  the 
mass  occupying  the  central  place  in  the  services. 

The  government  of  the  church  is  hierarchical.  At  its 
head  is  the  pope  with  a  college  of  cardinals.  Next  in  order 
are  archbishops,  who  are  set  over  provinces ;  bishops,  who 
preside  over  dioceses ;  and  various  other  ecclesiastical  dig- 
nitaries, besides  the  heads  of  orders,  monasteries,  etc.  In 
the  ministering  priesthood  there  are  two  orders — those  of 
priest  and  deacon.  The  governing  authority  of  each  dio- 
cese is  its  bishop,  who  receives  his  ecclesiastical  power  from 
the  pope.  The  government  of  the  church  in  the  United 
States  is  conducted  through  the  Propaganda  at  Rome,  the 
United  States  being  regarded  for  this  purpose  as  mission- 
ary territory. 

In  the  specially  difficult  task  of  gathering  the  statistics 
of  the  churches,  chapels,  missions,  and  stations  of  the  vari- 
ous dioceses  and  vicariates,  the  archbishops,  bishops,  and 


THE    CATHOLICS,  7 1 

other  ecclesiastical  officers  gave  cordial  cooperation.  At 
the  earnest  request  of  the  special  agent  of  the  Census  Office 
they  nominated  to  him  suitable  persons  to  do  the  work  at 
his  appointment  and  under  his  instruction,  urged  those  in 
charge  of  congregations  to  give  the  information  required, 
and  most  of  them  inspected  and  approved  the  final  returns 
before  they  were  certified  and  reported  to  the  Census  Office 
for  acceptance. 

As  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  always  gives  in  its  pub- 
lished annual  statistics  the  number  of  baptized  members  or 
population  instead  of  communicants,  the  census  appointee 
in  each  diocese  was  requested  to  comply  with  the  require- 
ments of  the  census  schedules  and  furnish  the  number  of 
communicants,  in  order  that  tlie  statistics  of  all  the  denom- 
inations might  be  uniform.  This  was  done  in  every  case. 
According  to  information  received  from  bishops,  it  is  the 
custom  of  the  church  for  baptized  persons  to  make  their 
first  communion  between  the  ages  of  nine  and  eleven  years. 
Baptized  persons  below  the  age  of  nine  years  are  not 
included,  therefore,  in  the  census  returns.  Some  ecclesi- 
astical authorities  estimate  that  members  of  this  class  con- 
stitute about  fifteen  per  cent,  of  the  population  of  the 
church,  which,  of  course,  embraces  both  baptized  members 
and  communicants. 

In  order  that  proper  significance  may  be  given  to  the 
figures  representing  the  seating  capacity  of  churches,  chap- 
els, etc.,  it  will  be  necessary  to  take  into  consideration  the 
fact  that  in  populous  places  from  three  to  four  and  some- 
times as  many  as  six  or  seven  services,  or  even  more,  are 
held  in  the  same  church  on  Sunday  In  most  Protestant 
churches  there  are  two  services  only,  and  in  some  but  one 
service.     Separate  services  of  the  mass  in  Catholic  churches 


^2       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

are  usually  attended  by  different  audiences.  It  may  help 
to  a  better  understanding  of  the  matter  to  quote  a  few 
sentences  from  letters  written  by  heads  of  dioceses. 

Archbishop  Elder,  of  Cincinnati,  says : 

*'  The  most  of  our  churches  have  at  least  two,  often  three, 
and  as  many  as  six  masses  every  Sunday,  and  each  is 
attended  by  a  different  body  of  worshipers." 

Archbishop  Janssens,  of  New  Orleans,  speaks  of  from 
*'  two,  three,  to  six  masses,"  and  refers  to  the  fact  that 
many  persons  stand  during  service.  In  the  archdiocese  of 
Baltimore,  according  to  the  secretary  of  Cardinal  Gibbons, 
there  are  usually  four  different  congregations  on  Sunday 
in  a  single  edifice.  In  the  archdiocese  of  Boston  there  are 
five  services  in  the  cathedral,  which  has  a  communicant 
membership  of  12,000,  and  reports  2600  seating  capacity. 
Archbishop  Corrigan,  of  New  York,  says  the  "  same  space 
is  used  over  and  over  again  by  different  worshipers  at  dif- 
ferent hours."  An  examination  of  the  returns  for  that 
see  shows  that  of  77  churches  in  the  city  of  New  York, 

I  has  one  service  of  the  mass,  6  have  two  services,  4  have 
three,  12  have  four,  17  have  five,  22  have  six,  10  have 
seven,  3  have  eight,  i  has  nine,  and  i  has  ten  every  Sun- 
day. Of  an  equal  number  of  churches  in  the  rural  part  of 
the  archdiocese,  26  have  one  mass,  24  have  two  masses, 

I I  have  three,  4  have  six,  and  i  has  five  every  Sunday ; 
4  have  mass  twice  a  month,  and  5  have  it  once  a  month. 
Bishop  McGovern,  of  Harrisburg,  says : 

*'  It  is  true  there  are  many  services  in  our  churches,  but 
each  service  is  not  always  attended  by  persons  who  were 
not  at  another  service.  Some  persons  attend  all  the  ser- 
vices. Then,  again,  in  some  of  the  churches  many  stand 
up  for  want  of  seats." 


THE    CATHOLICS.  73 

Bishop  Phelan,  of  Pittsburg,  writes : 

"  We  have  in  this  diocese  about  140  churches.  In  some 
there  is  one,  in  many  two,  in  some  three,  and  in  a  couple 
even  four  morning  services  (masses)  every  Sunday.  The 
afternoon  or  evening  services  should  not  count,  as  these 
worshipers  are,  or  ought  to  be,  the  same  who  were  present 
in  the  forenoon." 

The  use  made  of  the  accommodations  for  worshipers  is 
also  indicated  by  the  number  of  communicants  belonging 
to  a  parish.  In  many  cases  from  8000  to  15,000  commu- 
nicants are  reported  for  a  single  parish.  In  one  diocese 
there  is  a  parish,  consisting  entirely  of  Poles,  which  has 
1 7,490  communicants,  who  are  accommodated  in  a  single 
church  with  a  seating  capacity  of  1900.  Here  the  propor- 
tion of  communicants  to  seating  capacity  is  almost  as  nine 
to  one.  But  this  is  an  extreme  case.  In  Baltimore,  Bos- 
ton, and  Chicago  it  is  less  than  three  to  one ;  in  New 
York,  more  than  three  to  one ;  in  New  Orleans,  nearly 
four  to  one ;  in  Oregon,  Philadelphia,  St.  Paul,  and  San 
Francisco,  upward  of  two  to  one ;  in  Cincinnati  and  Mil- 
waukee, less  than  two ;  while  in  Santa  Fe  it  is  less  than 
one.  The  average  in  the  thirteen  metropolitan  sees  is 
about  two  and  a  quarter  to  one. 

The  total  number  of  communicants  is  6,231,417,  who  are 
attached  to  10,231  organizations  (churches,  chapels,  and 
stations),  making  an  average  of  609  communicants  to  each 
congregation.  Of  the  10,231  organizations,  1469,  or  about 
14.4  per  cent.,  worship  in  halls,  schoolhouses,  or  private 
houses,  which,  exclusive  of  private  houses,  represent  a 
seating  capacity  of  69,159,  while  the  8776  edifices  owned 
by  the  church  have  a  seating  capacity  of  3,365,754, 
making  a  total  of  3,435,913  for  the  whole  church,  which 


74       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

is  somewhat  more  than  half  the  number  of  communicants. 
Some  of  the  parishes  which  have  no  church  edifices,  but 
use  temporarily  such  accommodations  as  private  houses  can 
afford,  are  very  large.  One  of  these  parishes  reports  no 
fewer  than  14,000  communicants.  In  eleven  of  the  eighty- 
five  sees,  including  the  archdioceses  of  New  Orleans,  Phil- 
adelphia, and  San  Francisco,  every  organization  has  its 
own  church  edifice. 

The  total  value  of  church  property,  including  edifices, 
the  ground  on  which  they  stand,  furniture,  bells,  etc.,  is 
$1 18,069,746.  The  average  value  of  each  edifice  is  there- 
fore about  $13,454.  The  metropoHtan  see  of  New  York, 
with  its  472,806  communicants,  has  church  property  valued 
at  nearly  $9,000,000 ;  that  of  Chicago  comes  second,  with 
property  worth  $6,457,064;  and  that  of  Boston  third,  with 
a  total  of  $6,379,078.  The  diocese  of  Brooklyn  comes 
fourth,  with  a  valuation  of  $5,751,907,  and  Newark  fifth, 
with  $4,297,482.  These  five  sees  have  more  than  one 
fourth  of  the  entire  valuation  of  the  church. 

In  the  distribution  of  communicants,  the  archdiocese  of 
New  York  comes  first,  with  472,806;  Boston  second,  with 
419,660 ;  Chicago  third,  with  326,640  ;  Philadelphia  fourth, 
with  251,162;  Brooklyn  (diocese)  fifth,  with  228,785; 
St.  Paul  sixth,  with  203,484 ;  and  Baltimore  seventh,  with 
176,578.  There  are  twenty-two  sees  which  contain  up- 
ward of  100,000  communicants  each. 

In  the  tabulation  by  States  the  following  facts  appear: 
there  are  959  organizations,  with  1,153,130  communicants, 
in  the  State  of  New  York  (seven  dioceses),  and  the  value 
of  church  property  is  $25,769,478;  in  the  State  of  Massa- 
chusetts (two  dioceses)  there  are  614,627  communicants, 
belonging  to  381  organizations,  with  church  property  val- 
ued  at   $9,816,003;   in   the   State   of   Pennsylvania   (five 


THE   CATHOLICS.  75 

dioceses),  551,577  communicants,  654  organizations,  and 
$10,068,770  of  church  property;  in  the  State  of  IlHnois 
(four  dioceses),  473,324  communicants,  688  organizations, 
and  church  property  valued  at  $9,946,819;  in  the  State 
of  Ohio  (three  dioceses),  336,114  communicants,  586 
organizations,  and  $7,395,640  of  church  property.  In 
these  five  States  there  are  3,128,772  communicants,  or  a 
Httle  more  than  one  half  of  the  total  for  the  whole  church, 
and  there  is  church  property  of  the  value  of  $62,996,710, 
which  is  considerably  more  than  half  of  the  total  valua- 
tion. 

The  church  is  represented  in  every  State  and  Territory 
in  the  country,  including  Alaska  and  the  District  of  Co- 
lumbia. It  has  organizations  in  every  county  but  one  in 
the  six  New  England  States ;  also  in  every  county  in  New 
York,  New  Jersey,  Wisconsin,  and  other  States  and  Terri- 
tories. In  the  six  New  England  States  there  are  1,005,- 
120  Catholic  communicants.  This  exceeds  the  total  of 
Protestant  communicants  by  more  than  240,000.  Catholic 
communicants  exceed  Protestant  communicants  in  Massa- 
chusetts and  Rhode  Island,  Boston  and  Providence  being 
great  Catholic  centers ;  but  in  the  other  four  States  Prot- 
estant communicants  predominate. 

Embracing  immigrants  from  nearly  all  the  countries  of 
Europe,  the  Roman  Catholic  is  a  polyglot  church.  Con- 
fessions are  heard,  among  other  languages,  in  German, 
Polish,  Lithuanian,  Hungarian,  Bohemian,  French,  Span- 
ish, and  Italian.  In  the  diocese  of  Scranton  there  are 
seven  Polish,  seven  German,  four  Hungarian,  one  Lithua- 
nian, one  Polish  and  Lithuanian,  and  Italian,  besides  Eng- 
lish congregations. 

The  average  seating  capacity  of  the  church  edifices  is 
384,  and  the  average  value  $13,453. 


76       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED  STATES, 


Summary  by  States. 


zations.  Edifices. 

Alabama 70  42 

Alaska 6  5 

Arizona 52  22 

Arkansas 47  47 

California 249  243 

Colorado  no  94 

Connecticut 148  133 

Delaware 19  16 

District  of  Colum- 
bia   17  17 

Florida 44  33 

Georgia .  . , 64  44 

Idaho 52  22 

Illinois... 688  666 

Indiana 311  303 

Indian  Territory  .  17  8 

Iowa 445  455 

Kansas 367  271 

Kentucky 222  180 

Louisiana 206  184 

Maine 88  70 

Maryland 180  169 

Massachusetts  ...  381  324 

Michigan 406  360 

Minnesota 465  404 

Mississippi 67  60 

Missouri 442  402 

Montana 94  40 

Nebraska 213  179 

Nevada 20  12 

New  Hampshire  .  68  52 

New  Jersey 219  191 

New  Mexico 317  306 

New  York 959  877 

North  Carolina  .  .  60  24 

North  Dakota 115  60 

Ohio 586  515 

Oklahoma  ......  13  6 

Oregon 95  48 

Pennsylvania  ....  654  610 

Rhode  Island.  ...  51  52 

South  Carolina  . .  66  23 


Searing 

Value  of 

Com. 

Ca- 

Church 

mum- 

•   pacity. 

Property. 

can  ts. 

10,520 

$602,750 

13,230 

500 

9,700 

559 

6,490 

124,500 

19,000 

8,580 

219,100 

3,845 

83,740 

2,627,950 

156,846 

23,378 

843,637 

47,111 

79,444 

3,093,750 

152,945 

8,780 

201,500 

11,776 

12,800 

1,015,800 

37,593 

8,140 

225,100 

16,867 

10,746 

485,123 

11,228 

4,265 

70,050 

4,809 

235.784 

9,946,819 

473,324 

106,202 

3^534,691 

119,100 

1,680 

5,850 

1,240 

138,452 

3,872,400 

164,522 

55,730 

625,561 

67,562 

62,806 

1,800,550 

92,504 

57,885 

1,568,200 

211,763 

29,941 

597,550 

57,548 

60,860 

2,108,670 

141,410 

242,267 

9,816,003 

614,627 

131,641 

3,671,350 

222,261 

149,085 

3,514,325 

271,319 

13,448 

321.525 

11,348 

138,943 

4,070,370 

162,864 

8,668 

184,100 

25,149 

38,396 

1,179,160 

51,503 

3,500 

88,500 

3,955 

23,825 

205,600 

39,920 

99,290 

6,050,682 

222,274 

93,770 

296,755 

100,576 

480,974 

25,769,478  I 

,153,130 

4,935 

90,262 

2,640 

13,615 

171,550 

26,427 

197,813 

7,395,640 

336,114 

1,300 

4,300 

1,270 

11,462 

290,090 

30,231 

305,014 

10,068,770 

551,577 

40,625 

2,295,700 

96,755 

7,425 

384,500 

5,360 

THE   CATHOLICS. 


77 


Summary  by  States. — Continued. 


STATES.  O^^- 

zations. 

South  Dakota  ...  177 

Tennessee 60 

Texas 263 

Utah 28 

Vermont 79 

Virginia 69 

Washington 86 

West  Virginia  ...  67 

Wisconsin 646 

Wyoming .  67 

Total 10,231  < 


IThurch 
[Edifices. 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca-" 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

100 

19,218 

$246,030 

25,729 

.36 

11,105 

434,200 

17,950 

189 

55,925 

1,018,800 

99,691 

12 

2,210 

68,000 

5,958 

77 

31,101 

866,400 

42,810 

44 

14,811 

458,800 

12,356 

S8 

11,345 

156,050 

20,848 

62 

16,229 

340,155 

15,653 

620 

189,831 

4,859,950 

249,164 

.9 

1,260 

173,450 

7,185 

^776  3,365754  $118,069,746  6,231,417 


Summary  by  Dioceses. 


ARCHDIOCESES,  q            j, 

zaions. 

ARCHDIOCESES. 

Baltimore 174 

Boston 204 

Chicago   278 

Cincinnati 172 

Milwaukee 264 

New  Orleans  ....  148 

New  York 275 

Oregon 95 

Philadelphia 153 

Saint  Louis 297 

Saint  Paul 231 

San  Francisco  ...  124 

Santa  Fe 290 

DIOCESES. 

Albany 153 

Alton 141 

Belleville 95 

Brooklyn 109 

Buffalo 156 

Burlington 79 

Charleston 66 

Cheyenne 67 

Cleveland 297 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ldifices. 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

170 

69<995 

$3,078,020 

176,578 

166 

142,209 

6,379,078 

419,660 

271 

115,065 

6,457,064 

326,640 

164 

68,200 

3,269,970 

132,220 

262 

93,011 

3,-74,230 

119,271 

148 

50,415 

',535,900 

18I5964 

234 

::':-8,303 

8,99-, 525 

472,806 

48 

11,462 

290,090 

30,231 

157 

107,667 

3,388,000 

251,162 

267 

102,025 

2,778,545 

123,230 

201 

91,180 

.  2,474,435 

203,484 

123 

49,805 

2,021,260 

112,180 

289 

8r,37o 

272,055 

89,261 

124 

64,647 

3,164,700 

130,660 

138 

40,168 

1,216,480 

57,285 

93 

25,994 

916,400 

25,900 

113 

73,^^2,3 

5,751,907 

228,785 

150 

72,639 

3,403,900 

134,518 

77 

31,101 

866,400 

42,810 

23 

7,425 

384,500 

5,360 

9 

1,260 

173,450 

7,185 

250 

92,062 

2,805,200 

155,351 

yS       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Dioceses. — Continued. 

ARCHDIOCESES,  Orrani  Ch-irrh  Seating  Value  of  Com. 

^^;4-';  E^j|-2.  ^-  p^hur.ch  n3uni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

DIOCESES. 

Columbus 117  loi  37,551  $1,320,470  48,543 

Concordia 80        46  9,700  108,011  11,500 

Covington 98        62  18.606  380,200  25,793 

Davenport     138  136  3^.536  1,008,165  47,910 

Denver no        94  23,378  843,637  47,111 

Detroit 185  182  68,139  2,260,000  102,551 

Dubuque 303  319  99,916  2,864,235  116,612 

Duluth 63        41  9,086  119,375  131589 

Erie 120  103  36,988  873.300  51,017 

Fort  Wayne 148  135  42,311  1,376,000  45,229 

Galveston 106        81  21,325  601,000  36,013 

Grand  Rapids    ..  161  115  39,652  890,250  72,830 

Green  Bay 187  181  54,329  991,010  70,665 

Harrisburg 61         55  23,673  877,860  26,262 

Hartford 148  133  79-444  3.093,750  152,945 

Helena 94        40  8,668  184,100  25,149 

Jamestown 113        60  13,615  171,550  26,227 

Kansas  City 79        ^']  21,809  828,025  23,626 

La  Crosse 195  177  42,491  794,710  59,228 

Leavenworth  ....  208  176  38,945  392,800  48,906 

Lincoln 96        76  18,774  264,200  22,131 

Little  Rock 47        46)^  8,580  219,100  3,845 

Louisville 125  119  44,260  1,420,850  66,801 

Manchester 68        52  23,825  205,600  39,920 

Marquette 60        63  23,850  521,100  46,880 

Mobile 82        48  11,820  647,550  16,109 

Monterey  and  Los 

Angeles 'j'},        68  19,470  233,690  32,881 

Nashville 59        35  11,045  433^700  17,860 

Natchez '    68        61  13,598  322,525  11,427 

Natchitoches....  57        35  7,320  31,300  29,720 

Nesqually 86        58  ii,345  156,050  20,848 

Newark 116  108^  63,462  4,297,482  162,802 

Ogdensburg 86        Z-}^  34,694  836,246  60,579 

Omaha 117  103  19,622  914,960  29,372 

Peoria 174  164  54,557  1,356,875  63,499 

Pittsburg 198  185  78,986  3,307,025  134,976 

Portland 88        70  29,941  597, 55o  57,548 

Providence 86        87  61,265  3j374?5oo  156,850 

Richmond 58        46  15,475  477,500  13,261 

Rochester 91        91  45,775  1,907,300  65,670 

Sacramento 56        56  15,865  421,000  13,805 


THE   CATHOLICS.  79 


Summary  by  Dioceses. — Continued. 

ARCHDIOCESES,  r\^„^„\  r\.„^^^  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

DiocESES,  ETC.  P/?^"''  ^h^^^f  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  ^^^j^  Property.  cants. 

DIOCESES. 

Saint  Augustine. .  32  27  6,840  $180,300  13,988 

Saint  Cloud ']■},  70  19,408  402,765  19,998 

Saint  Joseph 66  58  15,109  463,800  16,008 

San  Antonio 116  68  26,700  326,500  30,870 

Savannah 64  44  10,746  485,123  11,228 

Scranton 122  no  57,700  1,622,585  88,160 

Sioux  Falls 179  100  19,218  246,030  25,920 

Springfield 142  123  79,418  2,358,125  134,872 

Syracuse 89  82  41,783  1,712,900  60,112 

Trenton  103  83  35,828  1,753.200  59,472 

Vancouver  Island  65  40  9,700  559 

Vincennes 163  168  80  2,158,691  73,871 

Wheeling T]  59  175  309»455  14,698 

Wichita 79  49  124,750  7,156 

Wilmington 43  33  125  259,950  14,251 

Winona 98  92  692  517,750  34,248 

VICARIATES  APOSTOLIC. 

Arizona 85  44  980  164,300  36,905 

Brownsville 35  35  76,200  26,218 

Idaho 52  22  980  70,050  4,809 

North  Carolina  .  .  60  24  225  90,262  2,640 

Utah 44  20  1,355  108,500  7,893 

PREFECTURE. 

Indian  Territory .  30  14  200  10,150  2,510 

Total 10,231  8,776  3,365,754  $118,069,746  6,231,417 


2. — THE    GREEK    CATHOLIC    CHURCH    (UNIATES). 

The  Greek  Catholic  Church,  commonly  called  Uniates, 
represents  a  body  quite  numerous  in  Austria,  Hungary, 
and  other  eastern  countries  in  Europe.  This  body  is  in 
communion  with  the  Church  of  Rome,  holding,  contrary  to 
the  other  Greek  churches  of  the  East,  to  the  procession  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  from  the  Son  as  well  as  from  the  Father, 


8o       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

in  accordance  with  the  belief  of  the  Latin  Church,  but 
maintaining  otherwise  its  ancient  discipHne,  allowing  the 
lower  clergy  to  marry,  administering  the  communion  in 
both  kinds  (bread  and  wine)  to  the  laity,  and  using  the 
Greek  language  in  its  ritual.  The  congregations,  whose 
statistics  are  given  herewith,  are  not  in  full  ecclesiastical 
connection  with  the  dioceses  of  the  Roman  Catholic 
Church,  and  are  therefore  given  separately. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES. 

Organi- 
zations. 

Church 

Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

Illinois 

I 

2,000 

Minnesota 

I 

I 

6cx) 

$3,000 

450 

New  Jersey 

2 

2 

740 

11,400 

1,000 

Pennsylvania 

lO 

10 

3,888 

48,900 

7,400 

Total 

14 

13 

5,228 

$63,300 

10,850 

3. — THE    RUSSIAN   ORTHODOX   CHURCH. 

The  full  title  of  this  body  is  the  ''  Holy,  Orthodox,  Cath- 
olic, Apostolic,  Oriental  Church."  It  arose  in  the  middle 
ages  from  the  Filioque  controversy,  there  being  a  difference 
of  doctrine  between  the  eastern  and  western  Christians  of 
Europe  concerning  the  procession  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
Western  Church  maintains  that  the  Holy  Spirit  proceeds 
from  the  Father  and  the  Son ;  the  Eastern  that  the  pro- 
cession is  from  the  Father  alone.  The  chief  governing 
body  of  the  Russian  branch  of  the  Greek  Church  is  the 
holy  synod  at  St.  Petersburg.  The  churches  of  this  faith 
in  California  and  Alaska  are  under  the  ecclesiastical  over- 
sight of  Bishop  Vladimir,  of  San  Francisco,  and  many  of 


THE   CATHOLICS.  8 1 

them  are  supported  financially  by  the  imperial  government 
of  Russia. 

Summary. 

STATE                          Organi-      Church         Seating         Value  of  Com- 

AND  TERRITORY.                 zations.     Edifices.            *-?■              Church  muni- 

pacity.          l-roperty.  cants. 

Alaska ii           22         2,900   $180,000  13,004 

California i             i             250       40,000  500 

Total 12           23         3,150  $220,000  13,504 


4. — THE  GREEK  ORTHODOX  CHURCH  (GREECE). 

This  is  the  national  church  of  the  kingdom  of  Greece. 
It  is  the  same  in  faith  as  the  Orthodox  Church  of  Russia. 
It  has  one  chapel  in  this  country,  in  connection  with  the 
consulate  of  Greece  in  New  Orleans.  This  chapel  is  under 
the  care  of  Archimandrite  Misael. 


Summary. 

Organi-     Church         Seatmg         V^lueof  Com- 

zations.    Edifices. 


Ca-  Church 


muni- 


pacity.         Property.  cants. 

Louisiana i  i  75  $5,000  100 


5. — THE    ARMENIAN    CHURCH. 

The  Armenian  Church  of  Turkey  is  separate  from  both 
the  Latin  and  Greek  Catholic  churches.  As  many  Arme- 
nians have  come  to  this  country,  congregations  of  them 
have  been  gathered  during  the  past  ten  years  in  New  York, 
Massachusetts,  and  Rhode  Island.  They  have  no  churches 
of  their  own,  but  meet  for  worship  in  chapels  owned  by 
the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church.  Their  services  are  held 
in  the  Armenian  language. 


STATES. 

Massachusetts „ . 

New  York 

Rhode  Island 

Organi- 
zations. 

....             3 

...                 2 

Total 

6 

^2       /RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 
Summary  by  States. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

195 
70 
70 

335 


6. — THE    OLD    CATHOLIC    CHURCH. 

The  Old  Catholic  churches  in  this  country  are  due  to 
the  Old  Catholic  movement  in  Europe,  with  which  they 
are  in  sympathy  in  doctrine  and  polity.  They  have  a 
bishop  or  archbishop — Vilatte — consecrated  May  i,  1892, 
by  a  prelate  of  the  Jacobite  Church  in  India.  Archbishop 
Vilatte  received  orders  in  Switzerland  as  deacon  and  priest 
in  1885  at  the  hands  of  the  Old  Catholic  bishop  of  Berne, 
in  that  citj^  The  Old  Catholics  hold  that  the  pope  is  a 
bishop  simply,  but  is  entitled  to  the  primacy  of  honor. 
They  agree  with  the  Greek  Church  in  rejecting  filioqtie 
in  the  Creed,  acknowledge  seven  sacraments,  revere  the 
monastic  life,  and  venerate  saints,  angels,  and  sacred  icons. 

Summary. 

n^rro.,;        ri,„.-oi.  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATE.  Organ        Sfi.2  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zalions.      Edifices.  p^^j^^^  Property.  cants. 

Wisconsin 4  3  700        $13,320  665 


7. — THE    REFORMED    CATHOLIC    CHURCH. 

This  body  is  Catholic  only  in  name  and  origin.  It  is  the 
result  of  a  movement  begun  in  New  York  City  ten  or 
twelve  years  ago.      Priests  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church 


THE   CATHOLICS.        *  83 

who  had  renounced  that  communion  adopted  Protestant 
doctrines,  and  entered  upon  an  evangelical  work,  chiefly 
among  Roman  CathoHcs.  There  are  congregations  in  con- 
nection with  the  movement  in  New  York,  Massachusetts, 
Pennsylvania,  and  Illinois.      It  has  no  church  edifices. 

Summary  by  States. 

e.....  Organi-         Halls,         Seating  Com- 

STATES.  „.t„    ,  ^^  '  Ca-  inuni- 


zations.  etc. 


pacity.  cants. 


Illinois I  I  400  1 50 

Massachusetts 2  2  i,  100  250 

New  York 4  4  1,500  450 

Pennsylvania i  i  600  150 

Total 8  8  3,600         1,000 

As  the  Roman  is  the  chief  Catholic  body,  the  other  six 
branches  having  in  all  only  45  organizations,  it  seems  un- 
necessary to  give  a  table  of  all  Catholic  bodies  by  States. 
The  totals  are  as  follows  :  organizations,  1 0,2  76  ;  church  edi- 
fices, 8816;  seating. capacity,  3,374,907;  value  of  church 
property,  $118,371,366;   communicants,  6,257,871. 


CHAPTER   VI. 

THE    CATHOLIC    APOSTOLIC    CHURCH. 

In  1830  and  1831  several  Presbyterians  in  Scotland 
and  London  prayed  for  a  restoration  of  the  *'  gifts  of  the 
Spirit."  Members  of  the  Episcopal  Church  were  at  the 
same  time  looking  for  such  manifestations.  In  response, 
gifts  of  '*  tongues  and  prophesyings  "  came,  it  is  said,  upon 
a  number  of  people,  some  of  whom  were  connected  with  a 
Presbyterian  church  in  London,  of  which  the  Rev.  Edward 
Irving  was  pastor.  Mr.  Irving  was  identified  with  the 
movement,  and  has  often  been  spoken  of  as  the  founder  of 
the  Catholic  Apostolic  Church.  But  its  representatives, 
while  cordially  recognizing  his  services,  do  not  so  regard 
him.  The  spiritual  manifestations  were  **  accompanied  by 
many  works  of  divine  power,  such  as  the  healing  of  the 
sick  "  ;  and  in  1832,  after  the  "  reahty  of  the  prophetic  gift 
had  been  fully  established  by  the  experience  of  almost 
three  years,"  the  office  of  apostle  was  revived,  a  layman  of 
the  Church  of  England  being  the  first  person  designated 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  fill  it.  Others  were  designated  from 
time  to  time  until  the  number  was  completed  and  there 
were  twelve.  Several  congregations  were  organized,  and 
in  time  the  movement  extended  to  other  countries. 

The  first  church  in  the  United  States  was  constituted  in 
Potsdam,  N.  Y.,  and  the  second  in  New  York  City  in  185  i. 

The  Catholic  Apostolic  Church  accepts  the  three  oecu- 
menical creeds — the  Apostles',  Nicene,  and  Athanasian — 


THE    CATHOLIC  APOSTOLIC   CHURCH.  85 

holds  to  the  plenary  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures,  and  also 
to  the  traditions  of  the  church  as  sources  whence  the  doc- 
trine of  Christ  is  to  be  derived.  It  regards  baptism  as  an 
ordinance  for  the  conveyance  of  the  new  or  resurrection 
life,  and  the  Lord's  Supper  as  a  sacrament  for  the  nourish- 
ing and  strengthening  of  that  life.  It  believes  that  the 
gift  of  the  Spirit  is  conveyed  by  the  laying  on  of  apostles' 
hands.  The  doctrine  of  predestination  is  accepted,  although 
it  is  denied  that  God's  mercies  are  limited  to  the  elect. 

In  its  system  of  worship  the  Eucharist  has  the  central 
place.  It  is  celebrated  every  Sunday.  There  is  also  a 
daily  service,  morning  and  evening.  A  full  ritual  is  used 
in  public  worship. 

Apostles,  prophets,  evangelists,  and  angels  or  chief  pas- 
tors are  recognized  as  constituting  a  fourfold  ministry. 
Angels  are  pastors  of  local  churches,  in  which  there  are 
also  elders,  deacons,  and  deaconesses.  Each  church  is  re- 
garded as  complete  in  itself. 

The  Catholic  ApostoHc^Church  has  10  organizations  and 
1394  members.  The  average  seating  capacity  of  its 
church  edifices  is  250,  and  their  average  value  $22,017. 
There  are  7  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  350. 

Summary  by  States. 

STATES  Organi-    Church 

STATES.  zations.     Edifices. 

California i 

Connecticut 3  i 

Illinois I 

Massachusetts i 

New  York 3  2 

Pennsylvania i 

Total 10  3  750     $66,050         1,394 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

$800 

88 

300 

3,250 

186 

6,500 

155 

500 

70 

450 

55,000 

822 

IZ 

CHAPTER   VII. 

CHINESE     TEMPLES. 

Every  Chinese  temple  is  a  house  of  prayer  or  worship, 
but  no  sermon  is  preached,  no  priest  installed,  no  religious 
instruction  given,  and  no  seating  accommodations  provided. 
There  is  always  at  least  one  shrine,  the  more  frequented 
temples  having  several,  so  that  a  number  of  persons  can 
perform  the  usual  ceremony,  each  for  himself,  without 
being  obliged  to  take  turns.  The  worshipers  do  not  meet 
in  a  body,  nor  is  any  particular  time  set  for  devotions. 
When  about  to  enter  upon  a  new  enterprise  or  to  take  a 
journey,  or  when  in  doubt  concerning  any  particular  course 
of  action,  the  Chinese  are  careful  to  consult  their  gods  and 
patron  saints.  Every  worshiper  provides  himself  with  in- 
cense sticks,  candles,  and  sacrificial  papers,  which  are 
generally  to  be  had  of  attendants  at  small  cost.  Offerings 
of  wine  and  meat  are  added  on  special  occasions.  The 
candles  and  incense  sticks  are  lighted  and  placed  in  their 
proper  receptacles.  If  wine  is  used,  it  is  put  in  minute 
cups  scarcely  larger  than  thimbles,  and  these  are  ranged  in 
a  row  before  the  shrine.  The  meat  offerings  may  be  roast 
chicken,  roast  pig,  or  any  other  table  luxury.  When 
everything  is  properly  placed  the  genuflexions  begin  and 
the  request  is  presented.  If  the  answer  required  is  a  sim- 
ple affirmative  or  negative,  the  worshiper  drops  a  pair  of 
lenticular  pieces  of  wood  on  the  floor  a  number  of  times  and 
calculates  the  answer  from  the  frequency  with  which  each 

86 


CHINESE    TEMPLES.  87 

face  turns  up.  Another  method  of  obtaining  responses, 
particularly  when  fuller  responses  are  desired,  is  by  shak- 
ing a  box  filled  with  numbered  slips  of  bamboo,  one  of 
which  will  fall  out,  and  then  consulting  a  book  containing 
numbered  answers  in  Chinese  verse. 

The  interior  of  Chinese  temples  is  often  highly  decorated. 
The  wails  and  ceilings  are  hung  with  tablets  having  inscrip- 
tions in  the  Chinese  character,  and  there  are  often  rows  of 
lanterns  and  embroidered  silk  umbrellas.  Fine  wood  carv- 
ing is  also  to  be  seen.  The  decorations  are  the  gifts  of 
worshipers. 

Most  Chinese  temples  are  free  to  all.  No  register  is 
kept  of  members.  Of  the  four  temples  in  New  York  City 
one,  Chung- wa-kung-saw,  claims  7000  worshipers ;  Chap- 
sing-tong,  700;  Hok-san-kung-saw,  1000;  Lung-kong- 
kung-saw,  1000.  Chung- wa-kung-saw  is  an  organization 
in  which  every  Chinaman  in  New  York  is  supposed  to  be 
interested.  Chap-sing-tong  admits  laundrymen  only,  and 
the  other  temples  are  supported  by  those  who  come  from 
Hok-san  and  Lung-kong  respectively.  A  laundryman 
from  the  district  of  Hok-san  may  therefore  be  a  member 
of  three  of  the  temples.  For  this  reason  no  statistics  of 
members  can  be  given. 

Chinese  temples  are  usually  well  supported.  The  rev- 
enues are  derived  largely  from  the  privilege,  sold  at  auc- 
tion to  the  highest  bidder,  of  selling  the  articles  of  worship, 
which  every  worshiper  must  have.  Thus  the  privilege  of 
selling  for  the  Lung-kong-kung-saw  of  San  Francisco 
brought  in  1890  $12,365.50,  and  .that  for  the  How-wang- 
mew  in  the  same  city  $3961.60. 

According  to  the  returns  of  population  there  are  107,475 
Chinese  in  the  United  States,  of  whom  ']2,\']2  are  in  Cali- 


88        RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

fornia,  9540  in  Oregon,  3260  in  Washington,  and  2935, 
the  next  largest  number,  in  New  York.  In  view  of  the 
fact  that  one  of  the  four  temples  in  New  York  City  claims 
7000  worshipers,  while  the  whole  State  has  a  Chinese  pop- 
ulation of  less  than  3000,  there  would  seem  to  be  a  large 
discrepancy.  If  that  one  temple  has  7000  worshipers,  the 
number  of  visitors  must  be  greater  than  the  resident 
Chinese  population.  Doubtless  7000  is  the  number  that 
worship  in  the  temple  in  the  course  of  a  year.  In  other 
words,  the  same  individual  is  counted  many  times.  A 
considerable  number  of  the  Chinese  are  members  of  Chris- 
tian churches. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES. 

Organi- 
zations. 

Tem- 
ples. 

Shrines. 

Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

California 

Idaho 

New  York 

Oregon  

40 

2 

4 
I 

41 

2 

3 
I 

178 

4 

$37,000 
25,000 

;:;: 

Total 

47 

47 

182 

$62,000 

.... 

CHAPTER    VIII. 

THE    CHRISTADELPHIANS. 

John  Thomas,  M.D.,  an  Englishman,  came  to  this 
country  in  1844,  and  identified  himself  with  the  Disciples 
of  Christ.  Soon  after,  his  views  changed  and  he  became 
convinced  by  a  study  of  the  Bible  that  the  cardinal  doc- 
trine of  the  existing  churches  correspond  with  those  of 
the  apostate  church  predicted  in  Scripture.  He  began  to 
pubHsh  his  views,  and  organized  a  number  of  societies  in 
this  country,  Canada,  and  Great  Britain.  No  name  was 
adopted  for  these  societies  until  the  Civil  War  broke  out. 
The  members  applied  to  the  government  to  be  relieved 
from  military  duty  in  consequence  of  conscientious  scru- 
ples, and  finding  it  necessary  to  have  a  distinctive  name, 
that  of  Christadelphians,  or  Brothers  of  Christ,  was  adopted. 

The  Christadelphians  do  not  accept  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity.  They  hold  that  Christ  was  Son  of  God  and  Son 
of  man,  manifesting  divine  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness 
in  working  out  man's  salvation  and  attaining  unto  power 
and  glory  by  his  resurrection.  He  is  the  only  medium  of 
salvation.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  an  effluence  of  divine  power. 
They  believe  in  the  natural  mortality  of  the  soul,  and  that 
eternal  life  is  only  given  by  God  to  the  righteous ;  that 
the  devil  is  the  evil  principle  of  human  nature ;  that  Christ 
will  shortly  come  personally  to  the  earth  and  set  up  the 
kingdom  of  God  in  place  of  human  governments ;  that  this 

89 


90       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

kingdom  will  be  established  In  Canaan,  where  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel  will  be  gathered ;  and  that  at  the  end  of  a 
thousand  years  judgment  will  be  pronounced  upon  all,  the 
just  receiving  eternal  life,  the  unjust  eternal  death. 

The  Christadelphians  practice  immersion.  They  have 
no  ordained  ministers.  Those  who  speak  and  conduct 
services  are  called  ''lecturing "  or  ''serving"  brethren. 
Their  meetings  are  all  held,  with  four  exceptions,  in  public 
halls  or  private  houses.  They  have  in  all  63  organizations, 
with  1277  members,  who  are  scattered  over  twenty  States. 
There  are  59  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  6085. 

Summary  by  states. 


r\         •      /^i        1  Seating  Value  of 

STATES.  Organ.-    Church              ^^  ^ 

zauons.   Edifices.  ^^^^^^  Property. 

Arkansas 5 

California 2 

Colorado 2 

Illinois 8           i              100           $500 

Iowa 5 

Kansas 4 

Kentucky 2           i             400             500 

Maryland i 

Massachusetts 9 

Michigan i 

Missouri 2 

New  Jersey i 

New  York 7 

Ohio I 

Oregon i 

Pennsylvania 3           i             200             700 

Texas 3 

Virginia 4           i             250          1,000 

West  Virginia l 

Wisconsin i 

Total (>2>          4            950       $2,700 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

74 
30 
16 
117 
67 

39 

89 
40 
245 
4 
20 
90 
92 
10 

25 

60 

100 

137 

7 

15 

1,277 


CHAPTER   IX. 

I. — THE    CHRISTIANS. 

This  body,  which  is  commonly  known  as  the  Chris- 
tian Connection,  but  owns  only  the  simple  designation 
"The  Christians,"  had  its  beginning  in  the  early  part  of 
the  present  century  in  the  union  of  three  distinct  move- 
ments :  one  in  which  Rev.  James  O'Kelley,  of  Virginia,  a 
Methodist,  was  prominent ;  another  in  which  Abner  Jones, 
M.D.,  of  Vermont,  a  Baptist,  was  first;  and  a  third  in 
which  Barton  W.  Stone,  and  other  Presbyterian  ministers 
in  Kentucky  and  Ohio,  cooperated.  These  three  move- 
ments, each  independent  and  unknown  to  the  leaders  of 
the  others  until  1806,  were  alike  in  taking  the  Bible  as  the 
only  rule  of  faith,  and  in  rejecting  Calvinism.  Mr.  Stone 
and  many  ministers  and  congregations  subsequently  united 
with  the  Disciples  of  Christ,  with  w^hich  this  denomination 
is  often  confounded.  They  are  much  alike  in  many  re- 
spects ;  they  have  no  creeds,  taking  the  Bible  simply  as 
their  rule  of  faith  and  practice ;  they  emphasize  the  impor- 
tance of  the  union  of  all  believers  in  Christ ;  they  believe 
that  immersion  is  the  only  true  form  of  baptism  (a  few 
ministers  among  the  Christians  also  believe  that  sprinkling 
is  baptism),  and  that  believers  only  are  its  proper  subjects, 
rejecting  infant  baptism. 

The  Christians  make  difference  of  theological  views  no 
bar  to  membership.     Holding  to  the  inspiration  and  divine 

91 


92       RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 

authority  of  the  Bible,  they  allow  every  one  to  interpret  it 
for  himself.  They  believe  in  the  divinity  of  Christ  and  in 
his  preexistence,  and  that  he  made  atonement  for  the  sins 
of  all  men.  They  admit  to  the  communion  table  believers 
of  other  denominations,  and  also  receive  into  membership 
persons  who  do  not  believe  in  immersion. 

In  church  government  the  Connection  is  Congregational. 
It  has,  however,  annual  conferences,  composed  of  ministers 
and  lay  delegates  from  the  churches.  These  conferences 
receive  and  ordain  pastors,  but  they  can  pass  no  regulations 
binding  on  the  churches.  There  is  a  general  convention 
which  meets  once  every  four  years,  called  the  American 
Christian  Convention,  which  cares  for  the  missionary, 
educational,  and  other  general  interests  of  the  Church. 

At  the  General  Convention  held  in  Cincinnati  in  1854,  in 
consequence  of  the  adoption  of  resolutions  declaring  against 
slavery,  representatives  of  the  Southern  churches  withdrew, 
the  result  of  which  was  the  organization  of  the  Christian 
Church,  South.  The  two  bodies  have  agreed  upon  a  form 
of  union,  by  which  each  retains  its  general  conference. 

There  are  75  annual  conferences,  covering,  in  whole  or 
in  part,  twenty-four  States.  The  strongholds  of  the  de- 
nomination are  Ohio,  where  it  has  nearly  26,000  members, 
and  Indiana,  where  it  has  somewhat  less  than  20,000.  In 
all  there  are  90,718  members,  divided  among  1281  organi- 
zations or  congregations.  These  organizations  have  963 
church  edifices,  which  are  worth  $1,637,202.  The  average 
value  is  $1700,  and  the  average  seating  capacity  313. 
Halls  to  the  number  of  218,  with  a  seating  capacity  of 
24,725,  are  occupied  as  places  of  worship. 


THE    CHRISTIANS. 


93 


Summary  by  States. 


Arkansas 

Connecticut  .  .  . 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Kentucky 

Maine 

Massachusetts  . 

Michigan 

Missouri 

Nebraska 

New  Hampshire 
New  Jersey. .  .  . 

New  York 

North  Carolina 

Ohio 

Pennsylvania  .  . 
Rhode  Island  .  . 

Texas 

Vermont 

Virginia ' 

"West  Virginia .  . 
Wisconsin 

Total.......    1,28 


Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

6 

2 

650 

$1,600 

181 

3 

3 

540 

2,800 

105 

104 

64 

20,239 

63,135 

5.745 

214 

186 

64,660 

230,925 

19,832 

54 

32 

9,460 

32,775 

2,555 

49 

8 

1,665 

8,250 

1,676 

41 

15 

5,650 

5,605 

2,146 

60 

28 

7,690 

76,380 

3,451 

28 

29 

8,325 

160,300 

2,722 

40 

29 

7,975 

62,200 

1,834 

35 

12 

4,000 

12,791 

1,627 

4 

2 

475 

1,000 

148 

23 

22 

6,178 

62,950 

1,522 

15 

15 

4,400 

66,700 

1,489 

120 

109 

28,710 

257,850 

7,520 

65 

57 

17,710 

23,055 

4,896 

273 

247 

83,105 

392,500 

25,952 

69 

54 

17,060 

98,500 

3,219 

8 

8 

2,525 

48,800 

972 

6 

118 

5 

3 

900 

9,800 

335 

23 

16 

4,550 

8,875 

1,390 

II 

8 

1,775 

4,456 

704 

25 

16 

3»45o 

5,955 

579 

963   301,692  $1,637,202  90,718 


-THE    CHRISTIAN    CHURCH,  SOUTH. 


In  consequence  of  the  adoption  by  the  General  Conven- 
tion of  Christians,  held  at  Cincinnati  in  1854,  of  resolutions 
opposed  to  slavery,  and  denouncing  it  as  an  evil,  the 
churches  of  the  South  withdrew  and  formed  a  separate 
organization.  The  Christian  Church,  South,  is  in  general 
agreement  in  doctrine  and  practice  with  the  Northern 
churches,  and  it  is  claimed  by  some  that  the  two  bodies 
are  now  practically  one. 


94       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

The  Southern  Church  is  strongest  in  North  CaroHna  and 
Virginia.  It  has  five  annual  conferences,  with  143  organi- 
zations, 135  church  edifices,  valued  at  $138,000  and 
13,004  communicants.  The  average  seating  capacity  of 
the  edifices  is  341,  and  the  average  value  $1022.  Eight 
halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  750,  are  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 

r\         •      r-u       T-       Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^'■?^"'-    ^}T  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.    Edifices,      p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Alabama 10  9  4, 100  $5,625  687 

Georgia 2  i  400  500  97 

North  Carolina 93  89  30,555  74,650  7^840 

Virginia 38  36  10,950  57.225  4,380 

Total 143       135      46,005     $138,000      13,004 

The  two  bodies  have  a  total  of  1424  organizations,  1098 
church  edifices,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  347,697  and 
a  value  of  $1,775,202,  and  103,722  communicants.  Both 
are  represented  in  only  two  States,  viz.,  North  Carolina 
and  Virginia. 


CHAPTER   X. 

THE    CHRISTIAN   MISSIONARY   ASSOCIATION. 

This  association  represents,  in  Christian  work  in  Ken- 
tucky, a  number  of  churches,  without  name,  without  creed, 
and  without  any  ecclesiastical  system.  Each  church  is 
entirely  independent.  The  churches  claim  to  be  unsecta- 
rian.  The  first  was  organized  in  Berea  by  Mr.  John  G. 
Fee.  The  doctrines  preached  are  those  common  to  evan- 
gelical Christianity.  Immersion  is  held  to  be  the  proper 
form  of  baptism,  but  is  not  insisted  upon.  One  hall,  with 
a  seating  capacity  of  lOO,  is  occupied. 


Summary. 


Organi-       Church         ^«,^""S  ^^       ° 

zations.      Edifices.  ^^-  Church 


Seating         Value  of  Com- 

muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 


Kentucky 13  11  3,300      $3,900  754 


95 


CHAPTER   XI. 

THE   CHRISTIAN    SCIENTISTS. 

Christian  Scientists  are  those  who  believe  that  all 
ills  of  body  and  all  evils  of  whatever  nature  are  subject  to 
the  healing  power  of  mind  or  spirit 

Mrs.  Mary  Baker  G.  Eddy,  of  Boston,  Mass.,  claims  to 
have  discovered  in  1866  and  introduced  in  1867  the  "  first 
purely  metaphysical  system  of  healing  since  the  apostolic 
days."  She  began  in  that  year  to  impart  information  as 
to  the  principles  of  the  system.  Out  of  this  beginning  was 
developed  the  Massachusetts  Metaphysical  College,  which 
was  chartered  in  1881.  Mrs.  Eddy,  with  six  of  her  stu- 
dents, constituted  the  first  Christian  Scientist  association  in 
1876.  Three  years  later  a  Christian  Scientist  Church  was 
organized  in  Boston  with  26  members.  Mrs.  Eddy  was 
called  to  be  its  pastor  the  same  year,  and  accepted  the 
position.  In  1881  she  was  ordained.  Other  churches  and 
associations  sprang  up  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  and 
in  1886  a  National  Christian  Scientist  Association  was 
formed,  the  first  meeting  being  held  in  New  York  City. 
There  are  regular  churches,  with  pastors,  in  thirty-three 
States,  and  Sunday  services  are  held  in  numerous  places 
where  churches  have  not  been  organized.  There  are 
also  thirty  or  more  Christian  Science  dispensaries.  The 
organ  of  the  denomination,  The  Christian  Science  Joimial 
(monthly),  publishes  many  columns  of  cards  of  practition- 
ers of  the  science  of  mind  healing. 

96 


THE    CHRISTIAN  SCIENTISTS.  97 

The  principles  of  Christian  Science  have  been  set  forth 
authoritatively  by  Mrs.  Eddy.  According  to  her  state- 
ments, all  consciousness  is  mind,  and  mind  is  God.  There 
is  but  one  mind,  and  that  is  the  divine  mind.  This  is  in- 
finite good,  which  supplies  all  mind  by  reflection  instead 
of  subdivision.  God  is  reflected,  not  divided.  Soul  is 
spirit,  and  spirit  is  God.  There  is  but  one  soul,  and  that 
is  God.  The  flesh  is  evil,  not  the  soul.  Soul  is  '*  sub- 
stance in  truth";  matter  is  "  substance  in  error."  Soul, 
spirit,  or  mind  is  not  evil,  nor  is  it  mortal.  Life  is  eternal. 
It  implies  God.  Whatever  errs  is  mortal,  and  is  a  depart- 
ure from  God.  Evil  is  simply  the  absence  of  good.  Evil 
is  unreal ;  good  only  is  real.  The  divine  mind  is  one  and 
indivisible,  and  therefore  never  out  of  harmony.  Man  is 
immortal,  being  coeternal  with  God.  The  divine  power  is 
able  to  bring  all  into  harmony  with  itself.  Hence  Christian 
Science  says  to  all  manner  of  disease :  ''  Know  that  God 
is  all-power  and  all-presence,  and  there  is  nothing  beside 
him,  and  the  sick  are  healed."  **  Sickness  is  a  beHef,  a 
latent  fear,  made  manifest  in  the  body  in  difi"erent  forms 
of  fear  or  disease.  This  fear  is  formed  unconsciously  in 
the  silent  thought."  It  is  to  be  dissipated  by  actual  con- 
sciousness of  the  '*  truth  of  science  "  that  man's  harmony 
is  no  more  to  be  invaded  than  the  rhythm  of  the  universe. 
Suffering  exists  only  in  the  "  mortal  mind  "  ;  "  matter  has 
no  sensation,  and  cannot  suffer."  '*  If  you  rule  out  every 
sense  of  disease  and  suffering  from  mortal  mind,  it  cannot 
be  found  in  the  body."  All  drugs  are  to  be  avoided. 
The  only  means  of  cure  proposed  by  Christian  Science  is 
spiritual.  Sin,  Hke  sickness  and  death,  is  unreal.  In  order 
to  cure  it  the  sinner's  belief  in  its  reality  must  be  over- 
thrown. 


98       RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

The  denomination  has  only  7  church  edifices.  Meet- 
ings are  held  in  213  halls,  which  have  a  seating  capacity 
of  19,690. 

Summary  by  States. 


California 

Colorado 

Connecticut 

Delaware 

District  of  Columbia 

Florida 

Georgia 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Maine 

Massachusetts 

Michigan    

Minnesota 

Missouri 

Nebraska 

New  Hampshire  .... 

New  Jersey 

New  York 

North  Dakota 

Ohio   

Oklahoma 

Oregon  

Pennsylvania 

Rhode  Island 

South  Dakota 

Tennessee 

Texas 

Utah 

Vermont 


Wisconsin 


Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

8 

814 

4 

147 

4 

75 

I 

3 

I 

15 

-7 

-^-h 

2 

40 

13 

300 

$2,126 

1,271 

5 

900 

134 

22 

300 

5,200 

640 

15 

300 

424 

60 

10 

15,000 

499 

6 

150 

125 

10 

200 

264 

9 

300 

374 

20 

100 

365 

650 

3 

54 

2 

100 

35 

28 

75 

14 

650 

14,000 

564 

16 

62 



155 

75 

33 



3 

112 

100 

2 

40 

2 

90 

16 

I 

150 

2,025 

474 

Total 221 


1,500       $40,666       8,724 


CHAPTER   XII. 

THE    CHRISTIAN    UNION    CHRUCHES. 

This  body,  which  is  now  called  the  Independent 
Churches  of  Christ  in  Christian  Union,  was  organized  in 
Ohio  during  the  first  years  of  the  Civil  War.  Elder  J.  V. 
B.  Flack  was  one  of  the  most  prominent  leaders  of  the 
movement,  which  was  outspoken  in  opposition  to  the  war. 
They  believed  that  it  had  been  **  produced  by  an  unwar- 
rantable meddling  both  North  and  South,  and  great  injus- 
tice and  insane  haste  on  the  part  of  extreme  leaders  in  both 
sections."  They  were  opposed  to  the  introduction  of  poli- 
tics into  the  pulpit,  and  withdrew  from  existing  denomina- 
tions because  they  could  not  tolerate  what  they  regarded 
as  political  preaching.  Elder  Flack  declared  that  he  was 
persecuted  by  the  ministers  and  members  of  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church,  in  which  he  was  a  pastor.  Writing  of 
the  matter  some  years  later,  he  said : 

**  We  refused  to  vote  in  the  conference  for  resolutions 
of  war.  We  refused  to  pray  for  the  success  of  war.  We 
refused  to  bring  politics  into  our  pulpit.  We  refused  to 
join  in  the  ranks  that  marched  on  the  streets  at  war  meet- 
ings. We  refused  to  make  certain  war  speeches.  We 
refused  to  prefer  charges  against  members  of  the  church 
whom  the  fanatics  accuse  of  being  disloyal.  We  refused 
to  preside  at  forced  trials  of  good  men  who  were  tried  for 
political  opinions." 

99 


lOO     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

He  claimed  that  on  account  of  taking  this  attitude  he 
was  severely  persecuted,  and  led  to  withdraw  from  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church  in  1863.  He  preached  to 
various  companies  of  men  and  women  after  his  withdrawal 
from  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church ;  but  the  first  church 
of  the  new  denomination  was  organized  by  the  Rev.  Ira 
Norris,  at  Lacon,  111.,  late  in  1863  or  early  in  1864.  At  a 
convention  held  in  Columbus,  O.,  in  February,  1864,  per- 
sons representing  five  different  denominations  being  pres- 
ent, the  foundation  of  the  new  denomination  was  laid. 
The  principles  of  the  Christian  Union  are  in  brief  as  fol- 
lows : 

1.  The  oneness  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 

2.  Christ  the  only  head. 

3.  The  Bible  the  rule  of  faith  and  practice. 

4.  Good  fruits  the  only  condition  of  membership. 

5.  Christian  union  without  controversy. 

6.  Each  local  church  self-governing. 

7.  Partisan  preaching  discountenanced. 

The  church  claims  to  be  non-partisan,  non-sectarian, 
and  non-denominational.  It  aims  to  furnish  a  basis  for  the 
union  of  all  true  believers  by  making  its  organization  as 
simple  as  possible  and  by  eliminating  from  its  system  con- 
troversial questions  in  doctrine  and  polity.  It  has  294 
congregations,  183  church  edifices  valued  at  $234,500,  and 
18,214  communicants;  105  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity 
of  14,705,  are  occupied  as  meeting- places.  For  many 
years  prior  to  the  census  of  1890  its  membership  was  esti- 
mated at  over  100,000  by  Elder  Flack  and  others. 


THE   CHRISTIAN  UNION  CHURCHES, 


lOI 


Summary  by  States. 


Arkansas 4 

Colorado 12 

Florida i 

Illinois 6 

Indiana 26 

Indian  Territory  ....  3 

Iowa 31 

Kansas 16 

Kentucky 5 

Maryland i 

Michigan  8 

Missouri 56 

New  Hampshire  ....  2 

Ohio 103 

Rhode  Island i 

Tennessee 8 

Texas 6 

Vermont 5 

Total 294 


,       , 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 
lOI 

50 

4 

1,450 

$3,850 

206 

21 

7,600 

25,700 

1.599 
130 

20 

6,850 

21,500 

i,25« 

4 

1,250 

4,600 

495 

I 

300 

1,000 

443 

I 

350 

1,000 

15 

3 

1,650 

12,000 

436 

31 

13.500 

39,050 

3,926 

I 

400 

4,000 

102 

94 

33,250 

114,350 

8,002 

I 

300 

3,500 

50 

2 

800 

1,400 

376 
190 

^ 

300 

2,500 

264 

184     68,000    $234,450     18,214 


CHAPTER    XIII. 

THE    CHURCH    OF    GOD. 

John  Winebrenner,  the  founder  of  this  denomina- 
tion, which  in  doctrine,  polity,  and  usage  resembles  both 
the  Baptist  and  Methodist  Churches,  became  a  member  of 
the  first  Reformed  German  Church,  Philadelphia,  in  1817, 
and  three  years  later  pastor  of  a  church  of  the  same 
denomination  in  Harrisburg.  There  were  four  congrega- 
tions under  his  care.  Under  his  plain  and  pungent  preach- 
ing a  revival  of  religion  began,  the  progress  of  which  was 
opposed.  The  opposition  continued  five  years  or  more, 
resulting  in  a  separation  from  the  church.  The  revival 
extended  intp  various  parts  of  Pennsylvania  and  even 
into  Maryland,  and  hundreds  of  persons  were  converted. 
These  persons  were  organized  into  separate  churches. 
Meanwhile,  Elder  Winebrenner,  after  a  careful  study  of 
the  Bible,  had  changed  his  views  respecting  points  of  doc- 
trine and  polity.  In  1830  he,  with  Andrew  Miller,  John, 
Eliot,  John  Walborn,  David  Maxwell,  and  James  Richards, 
who  were  recognized  as  teaching  elders,  met  in  conference 
and  agreed  upon  a  basis  of  church  organization.  The  fol- 
lowing are  the  leading  principles : 

I.  That  the  believers  in  any  given  locality  according  to 
the  divine  order  are  to  constitute  one  body.  The  division 
of  believers  into  sects  and  parties  under  human  names  and 
creeds   is  contrary  to   the   spirit  and   letter  of  the   New 


rilE    CHURCH  OF  GOD.  IO3 

Testament,  and  constitutes  the  most  powerful  barrier  to 
the  success  of  Christianity. 

2.  That  the  believers  of  any  community  organized  into 
one  body  constitute  God's  household  or  family,  and  should 
be  known  by  the  name  of  the  Church  of  God. 

3.  That  the  Scriptures  without  note  or  comment  consti- 
tute a  sufficient  rule  of  faith  and  practice.  Creeds  and 
confessions  tend  to  divisions  and  sects. 

4.  That  there  are  three  ordinances  binding  upon  all  be- 
lievers ;  namely,  immersion  in  water  in  the  name  of  the 
Trinity,  the  washing  of  the  saints'  feet,  and  the  partaking 
of  bread  and  wine  in  commemoration  of  the  sufferings  and 
death  of  Christ. 

Upon  the  basis  of  these  principles  the  denomination  was 
organized,  the  first  conference  being  held  in  1831. 

The  conferences  of  the  Church  of  God,  of  which  there 
are  several,  are  held  annually,  and  are  called  elderships. 
There  is  a  general  conference  or  general  eldership  which 
meets  triennially.  This  is  the  chief  legislative  and  judicial 
body.  The  presiding  officer  of  an  annual  eldership,  or  of 
the  general  eldership,  is  called  the  Speaker.  There  are 
itinerant  and  local  ministers  and  exhorters,  as  in  Method- 
ism, and  the  weaker  congregations  are  organized  into  cir- 
cuits. The  itinerant  ministers  are  appointed  to  pastorates 
by  stationing  committees  of  the  annual  elderships. 

The  Church  of  God  is  represented  in  fourteen  States 
and  the  Indian  Territory.  Its  chief  strength,  however, 
lies  in  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  where  it  originated. 
Fully  one  half  of  its  total  communicants  are  to  be  found  in 
Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  and  Indiana.  It  has  sixteen  annual 
elderships.  There  are  479  organizations  in  all,  with  338 
church  edifices,  having  an  average  seating  capacity  of  342 


104     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

and  an  average  value  of  $1902.     There  are  129  halls,  with 
a  seating  capacity  of  13,840. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  Organi- 
zations. 

Arkansas 19 

Illinois 36 

Indiana 44 

Indian  Territory  ....  16 

Iowa 18 

Kansas   26 

Maine 3 

Maryland 21 

Massachusetts i 

Michigan 16 

Missouri 7 

Nebraska 9 

Ohio 75 

Pennsylvania 162 

West  Virginia 26 

Total 479 


Church 
edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

I 

200 

$500 

577 

zz 

10,725 

41,850 

1,495 

32 

II 

10,915 
1,285 

53,500 
1,200 

2,575 
811 

10 
6 

3,275 
1,750 

13,400 
7,300 

683 
956 

20 

5,800 

25,700 

20 

10 

3,425 

8,300 

373 

4 

1,300 

4,100 

221 

2 

400 

1,900 

332 

66 
135 

24,575 
48,580 

99,550 
375,185 

3,352 
9,344 

8 

3,300 

10,700 

b8i 

338  115,530  $643,185  22,511 


CHAPTER   XIV. 

THE    CHURCH    TRIUMPHANT    (SCHWEINFURTH). 

The  founder  and  head  of  this  body  is  George  Jacob 
Schweinfurth,  who  was  born  in  Marion  County,  O.,  in 
1853.  He  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Epis- 
copal Church  in  Michigan,  but  soon  left  it  and  became  a 
disciple  of  Mrs.  Beekman,  who,  before  her  death,  which 
occurred  in  1883,  declared  herself  the  ''spiritual  mother  of 
Christ  in  the  second  coming,"  and  pronounced  Schwein- 
furth the  "  Messiah  of  the  New  Dispensation."  He  ac- 
cordingly became  the  acknowledged  head  of  her  follow- 
ers, and  removed  the  headquarters  of  the  sect  from  Byron, 
nine  miles  from  Rockford,  111.,  to  the  Weldon  farm,  six 
miles  from  Rockford,  changing  the  name  of  the  body  to 
the  Church  Triumphant.  A  large  frame  house,  called 
'*  Mount  Zion  "  or  ''  Heaven,"  is  occupied  by  Schweinfurth 
and  a  number  of  his  disciples.  There  are  also  other  com- 
panies, each  of  which  is  presided  over  by  an  "  apostle," 
who  reads  weekly  the  sermons  previously  delivered  by 
Schweinfurth  at  Mount  Zion.  There  are  no  rites,  cere- 
monies, or  forms  of  worship.  The  single  condition  of 
membership  is  recognition  of  Schweinfurth  as  the  **  Christ 
of  the  Second  Coming"  and  discipleship. 

The  Church  Triumphant  accepts  the  Bible  as  the  Word 
of  God,  but  denies  the  essential  divinity  of  Christ.  He 
was   a  mere  man,  but  passed  through  an   experience   in 

105 


I06     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

which  he  was  freed  from  the  power  and  curse  of  sin,  after 
which  he  received  the  Spirit  of  God  and  became  divine. 
Schweinfurth  does  not  claim  to  be  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  but 
to  have  received  the  same  Spirit  and  to  be  equal  to  him. 
He  claims  to  be  sinless,  to  perform  miracles,  and  to  be  able 
to  bestow  the  Spirit  on  whomsoever  he  chooses.  He  also 
declares  his  power  over  sin,  not  only  to  save  from  its  curse 
but  to  save  from  its  commission. 

There  are  in  all  12  organizations  and  384  members.  All 
the  services  are  held  in  private  houses  with  one  exception, 
Mount  Zion  being  returned  as  a  hall. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES  Organ!-  Halls 

STATES.  zations.  etc. 

Colorado i  i 

Illinois 5  5 

Kentucky i  i 

Michigan 2  2 

Minnesota 2  2 

Missouri i  i 

Total 12  12 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 


Value  of  Com- 
Church  muni- 
Property,  cants. 

12 

$15,000  190 
25 

37 

100 

20 

$15,000  384 


CHAPTER   XV. 

CHURCH    OF   THE    NEW   JERUSALEM. 

The  theological  writings  of  Emanuel  Swedenborg,  born 
in  Stockholm,  Sweden,  in  1688,  died  in  London,  England,  in 
1 772,  led  to  the  organization  of  the  New  Jerusalem  Church. 
Its  members  are  often  spoken  of  as  Swedenborgians.  He 
was  called,  according  to  his  own  words,  *'  to  a  holy  office 
by  the  Lord  himself,  who  most  mercifully  appeared  before 
me,  his  servant,  in  the  year  1743,  when  he  opened  my 
sight  into  the  spiritual  world,  and  enabled  me  to  converse 
with  spirits  and  angels."  From  that  time  he  began  to 
**  publish  the  various  arcana"  or  sacred  truths,  seen  by  or 
revealed  to  him,  *'  concerning  heaven  and  hell,  the  state  of 
man  after  death,  the  true  worship  of  God,  the  spiritual 
sense  of  the  Word,  and  many  other  important  matters  con- 
ducive to  salvation  and  wisdom."  His, voluminous  religious 
works  contain  the  body  of  doctrine  to  which  his  followers 
adhere.  The  greater  portion  of  them  consist  of  the  expo- 
sition of  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  Scriptures. 

The  first  meeting  for  organization  was  held  in  London 
in  1783,  eleven  years  after  his  death.  The  next  year  his 
teachings  were  set  forth  in  Boston  and  Philadelphia,  and  a 
congregation  was  established  in  Baltimore  in  1792.  This 
was  the  beginning  of  the  church  in  this  country.  It  was 
gradually  established  in  other  cities  and  towns,  and  is 
represented  now  in  twenty-nine  States,  besides  the  Dis- 

107 


I08     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF  THE   UNITED   STATES. 

trict  of  Columbia.  It  has  154  organizations,  and  7095 
members  or  communicants,  more  than  a  fourth  of  whom 
are  to  be  found  in  Massachusetts. 

The  doctrines  of  the  New  Jerusalem  Church  declare  that 
God  is  one  in  essence,  person,  and  nature,  manifesting 
himself  as  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit — the  Father  being 
the  infinite  divine  essence,  the  Son  the  human  organization 
with  which  the  Father  clothed  himself  to  accomplish  the 
redemption  of  mankind  when  immersed  in  sin,  and  the 
Spirit  being  the  divine  power  flowing  forth  into  act ;  that 
the  Lord  accomplished  this  redemption  by  fighting  against 
and  overcoming  the  infernal  hosts  which  had  long  enslaved 
mankind,  and  restoring  man  to  spiritual  freedom ;  that  life 
is  not  created,  only  the  forms  which  receive  it,  man's  mind 
and  body  being  organic  forms  for  the  reception  of  life, 
which  is  maintained  by  the  constant  conjunction  of  man 
and  God ;  that  man  has  a  spiritual  body  which  is  fitted  to 
receive  and  manifest  the  divine  forces,  and  the  mind  or 
spirit  constitutes  this  spiritual  body ;  that  the  material 
body  is  only  the  husk,  so  to  speak,  and  its  death  is  caused 
by  man's  resurrection  from  it ;  that  the  spiritual  world  is  a 
substantial  world,  the  realm  of  causes,  and  exists  in  three 
divisions — heaven,  the  world  of  spirits,  and  hell ;  that  the 
world  of  spirits,  which  all  enter  immediately  after  death, 
is  the  place  of  preparation  for  heaven  or  for  hell,  according 
to  the  character  brought  into  it ;  that  the  life  in  this  inter- 
mediate state  is  similar  to  the  one  in  this  world,  except 
that  it  is  not  a  life  of  probation,  but  a  life  devoted  to  bring- 
ing discordant  elements  in  man's  nature  into  harmony,  and 
to  receiving  instruction ;  that  gradually  the  scene  changes 
and  men  rise  to  heaven  or  sink  to  hell,  drawn  by  the  irre- 
sistible affinities  of  their  true  character ;   that  hell  is  not  a 


CHURCH  OF  THE  NEW  JERUSALEM.  109 

place  or  state  of  constant  punishment,  but  its  inhabitants 
have  all  the  enjoyments  of  which  their  perverted  nature  is 
capable,  living  under  restraint  of  penalties  which  follow 
every  violation  of  law;  that  heaven  is  a  place  of  useful 
activity,  in  which  each  finds  his  appropriate  sphere  of 
action  and  happiness,  and  becomes  subject  to  the  process 
of  perfectibility  which  goes  on  forever ;  that  in  the  Script- 
ures there  is  a  spiritual  principle  or  fact  corresponding  to 
every  natural  act  and  object  they  record,  a  spiritual  mean- 
ing distinct  from,  yet  harmonizing  with  and  based  upon, 
the  natural  meaning  of  every  word  and  sentence ;  that 
while  the  books  of  the  Bible  were  written  through  various 
authors,  each  in  his  own  natural  style,  it  is  nevertheless, 
by  virtue  of  the  infinite  store  of  truth  within  it,  a  divine 
book,  the  Lord  himself  being  its  author.  This  view  of  the 
Bible  is  one  of  the  chief  distinctions  of  Swedenborgian 
belief. 

The  organization  of  the  New  Jerusalem  Church  is  a 
modified  Episcopacy,  each  society  being,  however,  free  to 
manage  its  own  affairs.  There  are  associations  of  societies, 
generally  conforming  to  State  lines,  and  a  general  conven- 
tion composed  of  representatives  of  the  associations,  and 
also  of  a  number  of  societies  which  have  no  associational 
connection.  The  service  is  generally  liturgical.  A  variety 
of  liturgies  are  in  use  in  the  different  congregations  or 
societies;  the  greater  number,  however,  use  the  "Book  of 
Worship,"  published  by  the  General  Convention.  Three 
orders  are  recognized  in  the  ministry.  In  connection  with 
each  association  there  is  a  general  pastor,  who  bears  the 
same  relation  to  the  association  that  a  pastor  does  to  a 
society.  There  are  also  pastors  of  societies,  and  preachers 
not  yet  in  full  orders. 


no     RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

The  average  seating  capacity  of  the  church  edifices  is 
236,  and  their  average  value  $15,755;  7o  halls,  with  a 
seating  capacity  of  7165,  are  used  as  meeting-places. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  Organi-  Church     Seating 

zations.  ii^dinces. 

pacity. 

Arkansas i  i           400 

California 12  3           750 

Colorado ....  2  i             40 

Connecticut i  

Delaware  i  i           200 

District  of  Columbia.  i  

Florida 3         

Georgia 2  i            180 

Illinois 14  10        1,895 

Indiana 4  4           950 

Iowa 6  3           495 

Kansas 3  i             75 

Kentucky i  

Maine 4  3        1,125 

Maryland 9  4        1,215 

Massachusetts 22  18       5,025 

Michigan 5  4           975 

Minnesota 2  2           250 

Missouri 5  4           800 

New  Hampshire  ....  i  

New  Jersey 6  4           800 

New  York 11  5        1,350 

Ohio 13  8        1,625 

Oregon 2  i           100 

Pennsylvania 13  4        1,600 

Rhode  Island 3  3           610 

Tennessee 3  i             75 

Texas i  i           200 

Virginia i  i             75 

Wisconsin 2  . .        ..... 

Total 154  88     20,810 


Vahie  of 

Com- 

Church 

muni- 

Property. 

cants. 

$55 

3 

41,500 

347 

2,500 

41 

28 

12,000 

50 

93 

30 

9,000 

48 

163,700 

641 

16,500 

104 

6,200 

i.3« 

5,000 

62 

61 

33,000 

289 

44,600 

244 

368,500 

1,684 

34,600 

163 

29,000 

80 

24,600 

309 

42 

24,500 

323 

192,900 

560 

103,500 

657 

300 

45 

230,500 

774 

39,000 

130 

500 

64 

4,000 

40 

500 

2 

43 

$1,386,455    7,095 


CHAPTER   XVI. 

COMMUNISTIC    SOCIETIES. 

All  societies  observing  the  communal  life,  whether 
founded  on  a  religious  or  secular  basis,  are  embraced  in 
these  returns.  Two  of  the  societies  are  not  religious,  the 
Icarian  and  the  Altruist,  but  it  was  deemed  best  not  to 
omit  them,  on  the  technical  ground  that  they  are  not  or- 
ganized to  practice  a  faith,  but  to  apply  a  social  principle. 

There  are  nine  societies  which  properly  come  under  this 
head.  One  of  these,  the  Bruederhoef  Mennonite,  is  omitted 
in  this  chapter  because  it  is  given  in  that  on  the  Mennonites. 
The  other  societies  are  these : 

1.  Shakers,  5.  New  Icaria, 

2.  Amana,  6.  Altruists, 

3.  Harmony,  7.  Adonai  Shomo, 

4.  Separatists,  8.   Church  Triumphant 

(Koreshan  Ecclesia). 

I. — THE    SOCIETY    OF    SHAKERS. 

The  oldest  of  all  existing  communities  in  the  United 
States  is  that  of  the  Shakers,  or,  more  accurately,  ''  The 
Millennial  Church,  or  United  Society  of  Believers."  Their 
first  community  was  organized  at  Mount  Lebanon,  N.  Y., 
in  1792. 

They  count  themselves  as  followers  of  Ann  Lee,  an 
English  woman,  who  was  born  in  1736  in  Manchester  and 


112     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

died  in  1 784  in  this  country.  They  revere  "  Mother  Ann," 
as  she  was  called,  as  the  second  appearance  of  Christ  on 
earth.  She  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Quakers,  and 
in  a  persecution  which  arose  against  them  was  cast  into 
prison.  While  in  prison  she  saw  Christ  and  had  a  special 
divine  revelation,  which  showed  her  that  the  only  way 
mankind  could  be  restored  to  the  proper  relation  to  God 
was  by  leading  a  celibate  life.  She  came  to  this  country 
in  1774  and  settled  at  WatervHet,  N.  Y.,  in  1775,  and  died 
there.  The  popular  designation  "  Shakers  "  was  first  used 
in  England.  Those  Quakers  who  joined  "  Mother  Ann  " 
were  noted  for  "  unusual  and  violent  manifestations  of 
religious  fervor,"  and  were  therefore  spoken  of  as  *'  Shak- 
ing Quakers."      Hence  the  term  *'  Shakers." 

The  Shakers  are  strict  celibates,  have  a  uniform  style 
of  dress,  and  use  the  words  *'yea"  and  ''nay,"  but  not 
"thee"  or  "thou."  They  are  spiritualists,  holding  that 
there  is  a  "  most  intricate  connection  and  the  most  con- 
stant communion  between  themselves  and  the  inhabitants 
of  the  world  of  spirits."  They  believe,  as  already  stated, 
that  the  second  coming  of  Christ  is  past,  and  that  they 
constitute  the  true  Church,  and  that  "  revelation,  spiritual- 
ism, celibacy,  oral  confession,  community,  non-resistance, 
peace,  the  gift  of  healing,  miracles,  physical  health,  and 
separation  from  the  world  are  the  foundations  of  the  new 
heavens."  They  reject  the  trinitarian  conception  of  God, 
holding  that  he  is  a  dual  person,  male  and  female,  and  that 
the  distinction  of  sex  inheres  in  the  soul  and  is  eternal. 
Christ,  they  believe,  first  appeared  in  Jesus  as  a  male  and 
then  in  Ann  Lee  as  a  female.     They  worship  only  God. 

Both  sexes  are  represented  in  the  ministry.  Religious 
services,  held  on  Sunday,  consist  of  exhortation,  singing, 


COMMUNISTIC   SOCIETIES.  113 

and  marching  and  dancing  to  music.     There  is  Httle  audi- 
ble prayer. 

There  are  15  communities  of  Shakers — 3  each  in  Ohio 
and  Massachusetts,  2  each  in  Kentucky,  Maine,  New 
Hampshire,  and  New  York,  and  i  in  Connecticut.  They 
have  16  church  edifices,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  5650, 
or  an  average  of  353,  and  a  valuation  of  $36,800,  or  an 
average  of  $2300.  The  number  of  members  is  1728.  In 
1875,  according  to  Nordhoff's  "Communistic  Societies," 
they  had  18  communities  and  2415  members.  This  indi- 
cates that  they  are  decreasing. 

_  Summary  by  States. 


STATES. 

Connecticut  .  . .  . 

Kentucky  

Maine 

Massachusetts  .  . 
New  Hampshire 

New  York 

Ohio 

Total 


2. — THE    A.MANA   SOCIETY. 

This  society  calls  its  organizations,  of  which  there  are 
seven,  *' True  Inspiration  Congregations."  The  commu- 
nity is  confined  to  Iowa  County,  la.,  where  its  members 
exist  in  seven  towns.  They  came  from  Germany  in  1842 
and  settled  near  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  whence  they  removed  thir- 
teen years  later  to  their  present  location  in  Iowa.  They 
are  a  religious  rather  than  an  industrial  community,  and 


Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

I 

I 

400 

$5,000 

100 

2 

2 

700 

1,900 

371 

2 

2 

1,000 

5,000 

100 

3 

4 

1,000 

5,800 

129 

2 

2 

700 

1,500 

250 

2 

2 

1,100 

12,000 

575 

3 

3 
16 

750 
5,650 

5,600 

203 

15 

$36,800 

1,728 

114     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

are  devoted  Bible  readers,  believing  that  all  parts  of  the 
Book  are  inspired.  They  hold  to  the  Trinity,  to  justifi- 
cation by  faith,  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  but  not  to 
eternal  punishment.  The  wicked  are  to  be  purified  in  fire. 
They  do  not  observe  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  but  make 
much  of  that  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  which,  however,  is  cele- 
brated not  oftener  than  once  in  two  years.  They  believe 
that  an  era  of  inspiration  began  at  the  opening  of  the  eight- 
eenth century,  the  Holy  Ghost  revealing  the  secrets  of  the 
heart  and  conscience  to  messengers  or  new  prophets.  The 
elders  or  ministers  are  guided  by  the  spirit  of  inspiration, 
and  the  community  has  at  its  head  some  one  (at  one  time 
it  was  a  woman)  who  is  under  the  direct  inspiration  of  God. 
There  are  three  orders  of  members :  the  highest,  the  mid- 
dle, and  the  lowest  or  children's  order.  They  hold  relig- 
ious services  every  evening,  and  also  on  Sunday,  Wednes- 
day, and  Saturday  mornings.  The  general  meeting  is  held 
Saturday  morning;  the  other  meetings  are  mostly  for 
prayer. 

Summary. 

o^.^^  Organi-      Church 

^^A^^-  zations.       Edifices. 

Iowa 7  22  2,8oo        $15,000        1,600 


3. — THE    HARMONY    SOCIETY. 

The  founder  of  this  society  was  George  Rapp,  who  was 
born  in  Germany  in  1757  and  died  in  Economy,  Pa.,  in 
1847.  His  followers  are  celibates,  having  adopted  this 
rule  early  in  the  present  century,  and  follow  the  example 
of  patriarchal  rule  set  in  the  Old  Testament  and  hold  to  a 
community  of  property.     They  are  literalists  in  interpret- 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

COMMUNISTIC  SOCIETIES.  II5 

ing  the  Scriptures,  and  they  beHeve  that  the  millennium 
is  near  at  hand  and  that  all  mankind  will  ultimately  be 
saved,  those  who  marry  being  classified  with  the  number 
who  will  have  to  undergo  a  probation  of  purification.  They 
do  not  believe  in  spiritualism.  They  observe  as  holy  days 
Christmas,  Good  Friday,  Easter,  and  Pentecost.  They 
celebrate  the  Lord's  Supper  annually  in  October,  The 
town  of  Economy  is  described  by  Nordhoff  as  a  **  trim, 
well-kept  village."  The  society  has  one  organization,  one 
church  edifice,  valued  at  $10,000,  and  250  members. 


Summary. 


gam-  ^nurcn  Seating  V^l'-ie  of  Com- 

k:^„.  x^x.c^^^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 


Organi-  Church 

zations.         Edifices 


Pennsylvania i  i  500        $10,000        250 


4. — THE    SOCIETY    OF    SEPARATISTS. 

The  Separatists  originated  in  Germany.  They  settled 
at  Zoar,  O.,  in  181 7  and  adopted  communal  life  in  18 19. 
They  were  called  Separatists  in  Germany  because  they 
separated  from  the  State  church,  in  the  belief  that  they 
could  thus  enjoy  a  more  spiritual  faith.  They  reject  relig- 
ious ceremonies.  Marriages  are  allowed  but  not  favored. 
They  are  entered  upon  by  a  civil  compact,  there  being  no 
religious  celebration.  Their  Sunday  services  do  not  include 
public  prayer. 

Summary. 

g^^^P  Organi-         Church 

zations.        Edifices. 

Ohio I  I  500         $3,000         200 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

Il6     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


5. — THE    NEW    ICARIA    SOCIETY. 

The  New  Icaria  Society  was  organized  in  1879.  It  has 
no  creed  but  *'  rationalism  founded  on  observation,"  and 
opposes  all  *' anti-scientific  revelations."  Marriage  is  ap- 
proved. The  system  of  rule  is  democratic.  The  society 
has  disbanded  since  the  census. 

Summary. 


Organi-         Church  Seating  V^J^e  of        Coni- 

zations.        Edifices.  Ca-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.        cants. 


Iowa 


21 


-THE    SOCIETY    OF   ALTRUISTS. 


The  Altruists,  like  the  New  Icarians,  are  non-sectarian. 
The  principles  of  the  community  are  thus  expressed : 

'*  It  holds  the  property  of  all  its  members  in  common, 
and  all  work  according  to  their  ability  and  are  supplied 
according  to  their  wants,  and  live  together  in  a  common 
home  for  their  mutual  assistance  and  support  and  to  secure 
their  greatest  wealth,  comfort,  and  enjoyment.  It  allows 
equal  rights  and  privileges  to  all  its  members,  both  men 
and  women,  in  all  its  business  affairs,  which  are  conducted 
in  accordance  with  their  majority  vote  by  its  officers  who 
are  thereby  elected ;  and  it  makes  no  interference  with  the 
marriage  or  family  affairs  of  its  members,  nor  with  their 
religious,  poHtical,  or  other  opinions." 

Summary. 

r\         •  /^i       I.  Seating  Value  of         Com- 

STATE.  Organi-         Church  ^^_^  Church  muni- 

zations.         Edifices.         p^^j^^^  Property.        cants. 

Missouri i  . .  ....  25 


COMMUNISTIC  SOCIETIES.  1 17 


7. — THE    ADONAI    SHOMO. 


This  community  was  organized  and  legally  established 
as  a  corporation  in  1876  in  Petersham,  Mass.  At  its  organ- 
ization it  had  1 1  members.  It  came  out  of  the  Adventist 
movement.  Its  leading  principles  are  faith  in  Christ  as 
the  Son  of  God,  and  a  community  of  goods.  All  members, 
male  and  female,  have  an  equal  voice  in  matters  of  govern- 
ment and  property.  There  is  a  common  treasury,  whence 
individual  needs  are  supplied.  All  labor  for  the  common 
maintenance,  agriculture  being  the  chief  industry. 


Summary. 

STATE. 

Organi-        Church 
zations.       Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

husetts  .  .  . 

I 

$6,000 

20 

8. — THE  CHURCH   TRIUMPHANT   (KORESHAN   ECCLESIA). 

The  founder  of  this  body  is  Cyrus  Teed.  Cyrus  in 
Hebrew  is  Koresh';  hence  the  terms  Koreshan  Ecclesia, 
or  the  Koreshan  Church,  and  Koreshanity,  the  system  of 
Koresh.  The  foundation  principle  of  the  movement  is  the 
''  reestablishment  of  church  and  state  upon  a  basis  of  divine 
fellowship,"  the  law  of  which  is  love  to  neighbor.  It  has 
three  departments :  the  ecclesia,  or  church ;  the  college 
of  life,  or  educational  department ;  and  the  society  Arch- 
triumphant.  As  the  aims  of  Koreshanity  cannot  be  secured 
where  the  spirit  of  competition  operates,  the  life  of  the 
disciples  is  communal.  Celibacy  is  a  fundamental  doctrine. 
It  is  held  as  desirable  in  order  to  conserve  the  forces  of 
life,  and  necessary  to  the  attainment  of  that  purity  of  life 


Il8     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES, 

which  issues  in  immortality.  The  disciples  hope  to  pass 
out  of  the  world  as  did  Enoch,  Elijah,  and  Christ.  They 
have  no  churches,  but  occupy  6  private  houses.  The 
property  in  Chicago,  though  returned  as  private,  is  held 
for  denominational  purposes. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES. 

California 

Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

$36,000 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

160 
15 
15 

Illinois 

Massachusetts  .    . 
Oregon 

2 
I 

Total 


$36,000  205 


Summary  by  States  of  All  Communistic  Societies. 


California 

Connecticut    . . . 

Illinois 

Iowa 

Kentucky 

Maine 

Massachusetts  .  . 

Missouri 

New  Hampshire 

New  York 

Ohio 

Oregon  

Pennsylvania  . .  . 
South  Dakota . .  . 


Total 


37 


I 
I 

■; 

400 

$5,000 

15 

100 

2 

36,000 

160 

8 

22 

2,800 

15,000 

1,621 

2 

2 

700 

1,900 

371 

2 

2 

1,000 

5,000 

100 

5 

I 

4 

1,000 

11,800 

164 
25 

2 

2 

700 

1,500 

250 

2 

2 

1,100 

12,000 

575 

4 

4 

1,250 

8,600 

403 

I 

15 

I 

I 

500 

10,000 

250 

5 

5 

600 

4,500 

352 

45         10,050     $111,300       4,401 


South  Dakota  is  added  to  give  the  Bruederhoef  Men- 
nonite  communit}^. 


CHAPTER   XVII. 

THE  CONGREGATIONAL  CHURCHES. 

The  first  church  of  the  Congregational  faith  and  order 
in  the  United  States  came  over  the  sea  to  Plymouth, 
Mass.,  in  the  "Mayflower,"  in  1620.  Before  the  close  of 
the  first  half  of  that  century  there  were  in  New  England 
5  I  Congregational  churches,  besides  two  or  three  on  Long 
Island  and  one  in  Virginia. 

Congregationalism  developed  great  strength  in  New 
*. England,  spreading  but  slowly  over  other  sections  of  the 
country.  In  1801  a  plan  of  union  was  entered  into  with 
the  Presbyterian  Church  concerning  the  formation  of 
churches  in  new  settlements,  and  under  it  Congregation- 
alists  going  west  from  New  England  generally  entered 
Presbyterian  churches.  This  plan  continued  in  force  until 
1852,  when  it  was  formally  abrogated  by  a  convention  of 
Congregationalists  at  Albany,  on  the  ground  that  it  prac- 
tically excluded  Congregationalism  from  the  country  west 
of  New  England.  It  is  noticeable  that  in  the  older  States 
where  there  are  many  Congregationalists  there  are  compar- 
atively few  Presbyterians,  and  vice  versa.  Since  the  abro- 
gation of  the  plan  of  union  the  growth  of  Congregational 
churches  in  the  West,  particularly  in  Illinois  and  the  yet 
newer  States  of  the  Northwest,  has  been  quite  rapid.  Their 
antislavery  record  entirely  shut  them  out  of  the  States  of 
the  South  until  after  the  Civil  War.  Their  numbers  in  that 
section  are  still  limited  and  include  a  good  proportion  of 

119 


120     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

colored  members,  to  whose  education  they  have  been  much 
devoted. 

The  Pilgrims  and  Puritans,  who  constituted  the  early 
Congregational  churches,  were  not  averse  to  Presbyterian- 
ism  on  doctrinal  grounds.  Congregationalists  and  Presby- 
terians were  in  substantial  agreement,  the  Westminster 
Confession  serving  acceptably  as  the  doctrinal  symbol  of 
both  for  m.any  years.  It  was  adopted  by  the  Congre- 
gationalists at  a  general  synod  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in 
1646-48.  The  Savoy  Confession  of  Faith,  which  is  sim- 
ilar to  that  of  Westminster,  was  adopted  by  local  synods 
in  1680  and  in  1708,  and  a  national  council  held  in  1865, 
in  Boston,  Mass.,  expressed  its  adherence  to  the  faith 
''  substantially  embodied "  in  these  two  confessions,  and 
adopted  a  declaration,  known  as  the  *'  Burial  Hill  Declara-  "* 
tion,"  affirming  the  general  unity  of  the  church  of  Christ 
in  all  the  world,  and  setting  forth  the  ''  fundamental  truths 
in  which  all  Christians  should  agree,"  as  a  basis  of  gen- 
eral cooperation  and  fellowship.  In  187 1  a  National  Trien- 
nial Council  was  held  in  OberHn,  O.  The  following  was 
adopted  as  a  part  of  the  constitution  of  the  council : 

''They  [the  Congregational  churches]  agree  in  belief 
that  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  the  sufficient  and  only  infalli- 
ble rule  of  faith  and  practice ;  their  interpretation  thereof 
being  in  substantial  accordance  with  the  great  doctrines  of 
the  Christian  faith,  commonly  called  Evangelical,  held  in 
our  churches  from  the  early  times,  and  sufficiently  set  forth 
by  former  general  councils." 

Dr.  William  Ives  Budington,  the  moderator  of  the  coun- 
cil, afterward  gave  the  following  interpretation  of  this  para- 
graph : 

"Any  churches    recognizing   the   independency  of  the 


THE    CONGREGATIONAL    CHURCHES.  12 1 

local  church,  and  professing  the  historic  faith  of  Christ's 
church,  are  actually  and  intentionally  embraced  within 
the  fellowship  of  the  national  council.  The  distinctions  of 
Old  School  and  New  School  were  ignored,  and  just  as  much 
Arminianism  and  Calvinism." 

According  to  this,  Congregationalism  welcomes  Armini- 
ans  as  well  as  Calvinists  to  its  churches.  In.  1883  a  com- 
mission appointed  by  the  national  council  formulated  a 
confession,  consisting  of  twelve  articles.  It  is  of  a  general 
evangelical  character. 

The  polity  of  the  Congregational  churches  is  based  on 
the  principle  of  the  complete  autonomy  of  each  local  church. 
Connected  with  this  principle  is  that  of  the  fellowship  of 
the  churches.  The  Cambridge  platform,  adopted  in  the 
middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  declares  that  *'  although 
churches  be  distinct  and  therefore  may  not  be  confounded 
with  one  another,  and  equal  and  therefore  have  not  domin- 
ion one  over  another,  yet  all  churches  ought  to  preserve 
church  communion  one  with  another,  because  they  are  all 
united  unto  Christ,  not  only  as  a  mystical,  but  as  a  polit- 
ical, head,  whence  is  derived  a  communion  suitable  there- 
unto." The  fountain  of  ecclesiastical  power  is  in  the  local 
church,  and  not  in  any  association  or  council  of  churches. 
Each  church  manages  its  own  affairs.  When  differences 
arise  between  churches,  or  between  members  of  the  same 
church,  or  between  a  church  and  its  pastor,  they  may  be 
referred  to  a  council  specially  summoned,  composed  of 
pastors  and  representatives  of  neighboring  churches  of  the 
same  faith  and  order.  The  decisions  of  councils  are,  how- 
ever, not  mandatory,  but  simply  advisory.  Councils  have 
to  do  chiefly  with  questions  of  denominational  fellowship. 
They  examine,  ordain,   and  install  pastors,  and  recognize 


122     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

churches.  There  are  local  associations  purely  ministerial, 
meeting  for  fellowship,  and  which  in  some  sections  assume 
the  duty  of  examining  candidates  for  license  to  preach,  the 
license  being  in  the  nature  of  a  certification  to  the  churches 
of  the  fitness  of  the  licentiate.  There  are  also  local  and 
State  associations  or  conferences  of  churches  and  ministers 
which  hold  regular  meetings  for  consultation  concerning 
the  benevolent  and  missionary  work  of  the  churches  within 
their  bounds.  The  Triennial  National  Council  embraces 
representatives  of  all  the  local  associations  and  conferences ; 
but  equally  with  the  local  bodies  it  has  no  other  province 
than  that  of  giving  counsel  to  the  churches  and  benevolent 
societies. 

The  Congregational  idea  of  the  minister  is  that  he  is  a 
teacher  who  \s  prinms  inter  pares.  He  is  a  member  of  the 
church  which  he  serves,  and  is  subject  to  its  discipline  like 
any  other  member.  The  officers  of  a  church  consist  of  one 
or  more  pastors,  also  called  bishops  or  elders ;  and  of  dea- 
cons, who  are  laymen  charged  with  the  administration  of 
the  sacraments  and  of  the  charitable  interests.  Connected 
with  most  churches  is  a  religious  society  embracing  all 
members  and  supporters  of  the  church.  The  church  calls 
a  pastor,  and  the  society  approves  the  call  and  fixes  the 
salary. 

In  New  England  for  many  years  Congregationalism 
was  the  established  religion.  In  the  colonies  of  New 
Haven  and  Massachusetts  membership  in  a  Congrega- 
tional church  was  a  condition  of  the  exercise  of  the  polit- 
ical franchise,  and  the  churches  in  most  of  New  England 
were  supported  by  monies  raised  in  the  tax  levies.  In 
course  of  time  this  system  was  modified  so  as  to  allow 
persons  to  contribute  to  whatever  church  they  preferred. 


THE    CONGREGATIONAL    CHURCHES.  1 23 

It  was  formally  abolished  in  Connecticut  in  1816,  and  in 
Massachusetts  in  1833. 

There  are  Congregational  churches  in  all  the  States 
except  Delaware,  and  in  all  the  Territories  except  Alaska. 
The  total  of  members  in  this  country,  not  including  several 
thousand  converts  in  connection  with  missions  of  the  Amer- 
ican Board  in  foreign  lands,  is  more  than  half  a  million. 
Massachusetts,  where  Congregationalists  were  the  first 
colonists,  has  a  larger  proportion  of  the  total  than  any 
other  State,  101,890;  Connecticut  comes  second,  with 
59,154;  New  York  third,  with  45,686;  Illinois  fourth, 
with  35,830;  and  Ohio  fifth,  with  32,281.  Of  the  total 
valuation  of  church  property,  $43,335,437,  Massachusetts 
has  more  than  a  fourth,  or  $11,030,890;  Connecticut, 
$5,366,201  ;  New  York,  $5,175,262;  and  Illinois,  $2,975,- 
812.  There  are  only  15  places  in  Massachusetts  used  by 
Congregationalists  as  places  of  worship  which  they  do  not 
own.  There  are  62  such  places  in  South  Dakota,  50  in 
Iowa,  and  47  in  Michigan.  In  all,  456  halls,  with  a  seat- 
ing capacity  of  42,646,  are  used  by  congregations.  The 
4868  organizations  own  4736  edifices,  with  an  aggregate 
seating  capacity  of  1,553,080,  indicating  an  average  of  328 
to  each  house.     The  average  value  of  each  edifice  is  $9150. 

Summary  by  States. 

rv, •       /^i 1  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  P/?^"'-      Chfi  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.     iLdinces.  ■  -n  ._ 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Alabama 28  22  5>5o5  $9Ij755  15683 

Arizona    3  3  550  9,500  162 

Arkansas   7  5  1,600  26,000  669 

California 182  149  ;5^  Zl^m  1,014,975  11,907 

Colorado 49  38^^  11,010  377,090  3,217 

Connecticut 306  383  147,688  5,366,201  59,154 

District  of  Columbia  6  6  3, 370  339,000  1,399 

Florida 39  29  7,600  73,775  1,184 


124     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UArlTED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. — Contimied. 

,„._„_  Organi-  Church 

STATES.  zations.  Edifices. 

Georgia T^  58 

Idaho 5  3 

Illinois 302  296 

Indiana 55  42;^ 

Indian  Territory  ...  6  .... 

Iowa 285  243>^ 

Kansas 183  152 

Kentucky 8  6 

Louisiana    20  11 

Maine 240  272^ 

Maryland 3  3 

Massachusetts 559  671^ 

Michigan 331  299)^ 

Minnesota  175  152 

Mississippi 7  5 

Missouri 80  69 

Montana 7  5 

Nebraska 172  144 

Nevada i  i 

New  Hampshire  ...  188  226 

New  Jersey 33  36 

New  Mexico 4  4 

New  York 301  324 >^ 

North  Carolina  ....  20  16 

North  Dakota 65  38 

Ohio 247  252^^ 

Oklahoma 10  .... 

Oregon 35  27 

Pennsylvania 108  \oo% 

Rhode  Island 34  39 

South  Carolina  ....  3  3 

South  Dakota 138  80 

Tennessee 26  20 

Texas 15  12 

Utah 14  2 

Vermont 198  217 

Virginia 2  2 

Washington 104  62 

West  Virginia 2  2 

Wisconsin 182  196 

Wyoming 7  6 

Total 4,868  4,736      1,553,080  $43,335,437  512,771 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

15,500 

$75,350 

3,880 

420 

6,400 

105 

103,036 

2,975,812 

35,830 

12,200 

221,650 

3,081 
127 

23-733 

68,081 

1,231,886 

34,975 

485,975 

11,945 

1,750 

20,200 

449 

3,825 

23,800 

1,057 

85-591 

1,512,030 

21,523 

1,150 

71,500 

336 

298,910 

11,030,890 

101,890 

82,458 

1,533,055 

24,582 

37,403 

1,114,800 

13,624 

1,150 

6,975 

210 

29,550 

650,344 

7,617 

1,130 

38,800 

345 

32,019 

640,204 

10,045 

200 

1,000 

50 

73,346 

1,405,050 

19,712 

14,050 

655,300 

4,912 

625 

17,800 

175 

128,179 

5,175,262 

45,686 

3,705 

14,200 

1,002 

5,955 

81,800 

1,616 

83,029 

2,044,525 

32,281 
170 

7,500 

160,200 

2,037 

34,605 

672,588 

9,818 

19,080 

905,800 

7,192 

1,100 

31,350 

376 

14,967 

200,665 

5,164 

4,570 

106,000 

1,429 

3,250 

55,300 

846 

600 

76,000 

460 

65,112 

1,318,100 

20,465 

550 

7,500 

156 

13,698 

316,230 

3,154 

750 

18,500 

136 

52,615 

1,089,750 

15,841 

1,350 

44,550 

339 

CHAPTER   XVIII. 

THE    DISCIPLES   OF    CHRIST. 

This  body,  often  called  also  Christians,  was  one  of  the 
results  of  the  great  revival  movement  which  began  in  Ten- 
nessee and  Kentucky  in  the  early  part  of  the  present  cent- 
ury. Rev.  Barton  W.  Stone,  a  Presbyterian  minister  who 
was  prominent  in  the  revival  movement,  withdrew  from 
the  Presbyterian  Church,  and  in  1804  organized  a  church 
with  no  other  creed  than  the  Bible  and  with  no  name  but 
that  of  Christian.  One  of  his  objects  was  to  find  a  basis 
for  the  union  of  all  Christian  believers.  A  little  later 
Thomas  and  Alexander  Campbell,  father  and  son,  who 
came  from  Ireland,  where  the  former  had  been  a  Presby- 
terian minister,  organized  union  societies  in  Pennsylvania. 
Changing  their  views  as  to  baptism,  they  joined  the  Red- 
stone Association  of  Baptists.  Shortly  after,  when  Alex- 
ander Campbell  was  charged  with  not  being  in  harmony 
with  the  creed,  he  followed  the  Burch  Run  Church,  of 
which  he  was  pastor,  into  the  Mahoning  Baptist  Associa- 
tion, which,  leavened  with  his  teachings,  soon  ceased  to  be 
knov/n  as  a  Baptist  association.  In  1827,  after  some  cor- 
respondence with  Rev.  B.  W.  Stone  and  his  followers  of 
the  Christian  Connection,  there  was  a  union  with  a  large 
number  of  congregations  in  Ohio,  Kentucky,  and  Tennes- 
see, and  the  organization  variously  known  as  '*  Disciples  of 
Christ"  and  **  Christians"  is  the  result. 

125 


126     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

The  leading  principles  of  the  Disciples  of  Christ  are,  to 
quote  from  one  of  their  tracts:  (i)  ''To  restore  the  lost 
unity  of  behevers  and  so  of  the  Church  of  Christ  by  a 
return  in  doctrine,  ordinance,  and  life  to  the  religion 
definitely  outlined"  in  the  New  Testament ;  (2)  no  human 
creed,  but  the  Bible  only  as  the  rule  of  faith  and  practice ; 
(3)  baptism  by  immersion  of  believers  only,  in  which 
"  comes  a  divine  assurance  of  remission  of  sins  and  accept- 
ance with  God  "  ;  (4)  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper 
as  a  "feast  of  love"  every  Sunday.  The  central  doctrine 
of  their  teaching  is  that  "Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son 
of  God."  They  hold  that  "personal  trust  in  a  personal 
Redeemer"  is  the  faith  that  is  necessary  to  salvation. 

In  polity  they  are  congregational.  Their  ministers  are 
ordained,  but  are  not,  in  denominational  usage,  addressed 
with  the  title  "  Rev."  They  have  as  church  officers  elders, 
also  called  bishops,  pastors,  or  presbyters,  deacons,  and 
evangelists.  The  latter  are  itinerant  missionaries.  The 
churches  are  united  in  State  and  district  associations  for 
missionary  work,  and  there  is  also  a  national  convention 
for  home  and  another  organization  for  foreign  missions, 
and  a  Woman's  Board  of  Missions  for  both  home  and 
foreign  missions. 

The  Disciples  of  Christ  are  represented  in  all  the  States 
but  New  Hampshire  and  Nevada,  and  in  all  the  Territories 
except  Alaska.  In  number  of  members  Missouri  leads 
the  States,  with  97,773;  Indiana  is  second,  with  78,942; 
Kentucky  third,  with  JJ,64^']',  IlHnois  fourth,  with  60,867  ; 
and  Ohio  fifth,  with  54,425.  They  have  an  aggregate  of 
7246  organizations,  5324  church  edifices,  valued  at  $12,- 
206,038,  and  641,051  members  or  communicants.  The 
average  seating  capacity  of  the  churches  is  302,  and  the 


THE  DISCIPLES   OF  CHRIST. 


127 


average  value  $2292;    1141  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity 
of  139,325,  are  occupied. 

In  many  States  no  little  difficulty  was  encountered  in 
the  attempt  to  gather  full  statistics  for  the  census.  The 
most  competent  person  in  each  State  was  appointed  to  do 
the  work,  but  it  was  not  possible  to  get  returns  for  all  con- 
gregations known  or  believed  to  be  in  existence.  This 
was  particularly  true  of  Tennessee,  where  estimates  only, 
founded  on  various  sources  of  information,  were  possible 
for  several  counties.  A  small  percentage  of  members  in 
a  number  of  the  States  is  not,  therefore,  embraced  in  the 
following  tables,  which  are  believed,  however,  to  be  the 
most  complete  of  any  ever  before  published : 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  <^''?^"'- 

zations. 

Alabama 201 

Arizona 3 

Arkansas 265 

California 89 

Colorado 31 

Connecticut 2 

Delaware 4 

District  of  Columbia  2 

Florida 49 

Georgia 64 

Idaho 6 

Illinois 641 

Indiana 733 

Indian  Territory  ...  82 

Iowa 403 

Kansas 352 

Kentucky 632 

Louisiana 4 

Maine 9 

Maryland 14 

Massachusetts 4 

Michigan 73 


"^U.-^^V. 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

128 

30,818 

$78,185 

9,201 

I 

150 

3,000 

78 

123 

34,785 

106,360 

14,385 

62 

17,675 

291,250 

7,433 

18 

4,945 

151,625 

2,400 

I 

500 

16,000 

337 

3 

450 

4,800 

95 

2 

1,200 

80,000 

700 

22 

5,150 

14,850 

1,306 

60 

20,805 

197,925 

4,676 

I 

300 

2,000 

.  ?5° 

550 

155,505 

1,145,275 

60,867 

651 

219,320 

1,329,370 

78,942 

9 

2,805 

3,350 

1,977 

308 

83,450 

708,100 

30,988 

197 

55,045 

468,975 

25,200 

530 

169,635 

1,321,510 

77,647 

4 

1,000 

22,300 

202 

3 

700 

6,100 

293 

14 

5,200 

66,200 

I, -774 

3 

1,700 

67,200 

in 

49 

14,870 

160,650 

5,788 

128     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. — Continued. 


Minnesota  .... 
Mississippi  .... 

Missouri 

Montana 

Nebraska 

New  Jersey. . . . 
New  Mexico.  . . 
New  York  .... 
North  Carolina 
North  Dakota  . 

Ohio 

Oklahoma 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania  . . 
Rhode  Island. . 
South  Carolina 
South  Dakota., 
Tennessee  .  . . . 

Texas 

Utah 

Vermont 

Virginia 

Washington  . . . 
West  Virginia  . 

Wisconsin 

Wyoming 


irgani- 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

37 

29 

5,070 

$73,000 

1,917 

III 

69 

12,675 

55,422 

5,729 

,I20 

830 

263,280 

1,632,531 

9im2> 

13 

9 

1,789 

58,800 

785 

100 

«3 

22,660 

269,375 

7,715 

I 

105 

4 

6s 

41 

36 

11,810 

363,650 

4,316 

186 

136 

38,520 

71,157 

12,437 

I 



20 

475 

446 

138,778 

1,462,250 

54,425 

9 

2 

300 

500 

265 

74 

40 

10,950 

76,700 

4,067 

125 

lOI 

33,785 

533,147 

12,007 

I 

I 

150 

3,000 

35 

SO 

V 

8,060 

10,200 

2,880 

15 

6 

1,350 

10,800 

490 

322 

245 

80,510 

410,660 

41,125 

536 

267 

78,370 

467,900 

41,859 

2 

.... 

,  . 

270 

2 

2 

475 

5,000 

262 

161 

148 

45,228 

240,929 

14,100 

86 

29 

7,150 

93,400 

5,816 

«5 

51 

16,709 

92,292 

5,807 

24 

18 

5,825 

30,300 

1,317 

2 

.... 

48 

Total 7,246  5,324  1,609,452    $12,206,038  641,051 


CHAPTER   XIX. 

THE     DUNKARDS. 

The  Dunkards,  or  German  Baptists,  or  Brethren,  are  of 
German  origin,  and  trace  their  beginning  back  to  Alexan- 
der Mack,  of  Schwartzenau,  Germany.  Early  in  the  eight- 
eenth century  Mack  and  several  others  formed  a  habit  of 
meeting  together  for  the  study  of  the  New  Testament. 
They  were  convinced  that  its  doctrines  and  principles  of 
church  order  were  not  being  faithfully  followed,  either  by 
the  Lutheran  or  the  Reformed  Church.  They  therefore 
resolved  to  form  a  society  of  their  own.  Alexander  Mack 
was  chosen  as  their  pastor.  Persecution  soon  arose,  and 
they  were  scattered.  In  17 19  most  of  them  got  together 
and  came  to  the  United  States,  settling  in  Pennsylvania, 
where  their  first  church  was  organized  about  1723.  Like 
the  Mennonites,  they  chose  Germantown,  where  Christian 
Saur,  one  of  their  number,  edited  and  printed  the  first 
German  Bible  in  America,  the  unbound  sheets  of  which 
were  used  by  the  British  soldiers  to  litter  their  horses  after 
the  battle  of  Germantown,  in  the  Revolutionary  War. 
Later  a  number  of  these  sheets  were  gathered  up  and 
several  volumes  were  made  of  them,  some  of  which  are 
still  in  existence. 

The  Dunkards  were  an  earnest  and  devout  people,  en- 
deavoring to  shape  their  lives  according  to  the  teachings 
of  the  New  Testament,  and  they  increased  quite  rapidly, 

129 


130     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

drawing  their  converts,  of  course,  from  the  German  ele- 
ment. One  of  their  most  important  principles  is  noncon- 
formity to  the  world.  They  have  sought,  while  living  in 
the  midst  of  the  world,  to  preserve  a  simple,  unostenta- 
tious life,  ignoring  the  fashions  and  the  customs  of  society 
in  dress,  in  household  furnishing,  and  in  general  mode  of 
life.  Through  a  long  course  of  years  this  subject  occupied 
more  or  less  attention  at  every  Annual  Meeting.  Bishops 
and  heads  of  families  were  exhorted  to  be  careful  that  they 
and  their  households  set  a  good  example  in  rejecting  the 
"high  fashions"  of  the  times.  As  early  as  1822  it  was 
decided  that  with  those  who  should  continue  to  disregard 
the  rule  of  nonconformity  after  the  third  admonition  the 
Brethren  should  not  break  bread.  In  1840  complaint  was 
heard  at  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the  increase  of  the  **  evil  " 
of  conformity  to  the  world.  Some  Brethren,  it  was  said, 
conform  too  much  to  the  world  in  *'  building,  house-furni- 
ture, apparel,  etc.,  and  even  in  sleighing  have  bells  upon 
their  horses."  Five  years  later  a  solemn  warning  was 
given  against  "  fashionable  dressing,  building  and  orna- 
menting houses  in  the  style  of  those  high  in  the  world,'* 
as  an  "alarming  and  dangerous  evil."  In  1846  the  over- 
seers of  churches  were  instructed  to  see  that  members  did 
not  have  paintings,  carpets,  fine  furniture,  or  fine  houses. 
Much  attention  was  given  at  the  various  Annual  Meetings 
to  the  fashions  of  women.  In  1862  they  were  forbidden 
to  wear  "  hoops  "  and  bonnets,  and  enjoined  never  to  be 
without  the  cap,  or  prayer-covering,  in  church  worship. 
Among  the  queries  sent  up  in  later  years  was  one  asking 
whether  it  was  lawful  for  Brethren  to  establish  or  patronize 
high-schools.  The  reply  was  that  Brethren  should  not 
mind   JiigJi  things  but  condescend  to  men  of  low  estate. 


THE  DUNKARDS.  I3I 

The  Brethren,  however,  continued  to  maintain  a  high- 
school,  and  have  even  established  colleges.  Despite  their 
utmost  care,  innovations  crept  in  gradually  among  them ; 
carpets,  musical  instruments,  gold  watches,  and  other  for- 
bidden articles  found  their  way  gradually  into  use,  and  the 
cut  and  character  of  their  garments  were  changed.  Their 
discipHne  became  insensibly  relaxed,  and  the  differences 
between  them  and  their  neighbors  of  other  denominations 
were  less  striking.  The  result  was  that  the  more  conserv- 
ative, rallying  against  these  innovations  and  insisting  upon 
adherence  to  the  old  rules  of  discipline,  found  themselves 
strongly  opposed  by  the  more  progressive  element,  and  a 
division  occurred  about  ten  years  ago.  As  the  outcome 
of  this  division  there  are  three  branches,  known  as  the 
Conservative,  the  Progressive,  and  the  Old  Order  Brethren. 
There  is,  besides,  a  fourth  called  the  Seventh-Day  Baptist, 
German.  This  was  due  to  a  secession  from  the  Dunkards, 
led  by  Conrad  Beissel,  in  1728.  Beissel  and  his  disciples 
observed  the  seventh  day  of  the  week  as  the  Sabbath,  and 
adopted  a  communal  life. 

On  the  general  doctrines  of  the  evangelical  faith  the 
Brethren  are  in  harmony  with  other  Protestant  churches. 
They  interpret  the  Scriptures  literally,  and  hold  that  un- 
questioning obedience  should  be  given  to  both  letter  and 
spirit.  They  agree  with  the  Baptists  in  holding  that  im- 
mersion is  the  only  proper  form  of  baptism,  and  that  believ- 
ers are  the  only  proper  subjects  of  the  ordinance.  They 
do  not  practice  infant  baptism.  The  ordinance  is  adminis- 
tered to  candidates  in  a  kneeling  position.  They  are  dipped 
thrice,  once  at  the  mention  of  each  name  of  the  Trinity  in 
the  baptismal  formula.  They  are  dipped  forward  instead 
of  backward,  contrary  to  the  usual  custom  of  immersion. 


122     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


One  reason  given  for  dipping  forward  is  that  when  Christ 
died  upon  the  cross  his  head  fell  forward  on  his  breast. 
Immediately  after  the  third  immersion  the  administrator 
lays  his  hands  upon  the  candidate's  head  and  offers  prayer. 

Endeavoring  to  follow  all  the  customs  as  well  as  the 
commandments  of  the  New  Testament,  the  Dunkards  hold 
communion  in  the  evening.  It  is  preceded  by  the  feast 
of  love,  or  the  agapcE  of  the  Greeks.  After  partaking  of 
a  full  meal,  which  is  served  at  tables,  the  bread  and  wine 
of  the  sacrament  are  administered.  In  connection  with 
this  they  extend  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  to  one  another 
and  exchange  the  kiss  of  charity.  This  part  of  the  service 
is  observed  separately  by  the  sexes.  Before  the  supper  is 
eaten  the  ceremony  of  washing  one  another's  feet  is  per- 
formed, the  brethren  observing  it  among  themselves  and 
the  sisters  doing  likewise. 

The  ministry  consists  of  bishops  or  elders,  ministers,  and 
deacons,  all  of  whom  are  elected  by  the  congregations. 
Deacons  are  advanced  to  be  ministers,  ministers  are  ad- 
vanced to  the  second  degree,  and  bishops  or  elders  are 
elected  from  the  list  of  ministers  of  the  second  degree. 
Ministers  are  chosen  from  the  body  of  the  brethren.  In 
most  cases  they  receive  nothing  for  their  services. 

The  polity  of  the  Dunkards  is  partly  Congregational  and 
partly  Presbyterian.  Their  chief  ecclesiastical  body  is  the 
Annual  Meeting  or  Conference,  whose  decisions  are  con- 
sidered binding  upon  district  conferences  and  churches. 
Questions  in  doctrine  and  usage  are  sent  from  the  district 
conferences  to  the  Annual  Meeting,  which  returns  replies, 
generally  with  a  Scriptural  quotation  to  indicate  the  au- 
thority on  which  the  replies  are  based.  Each  district  con- 
ference sends  to  the  Annual  Meeting  one  bishop  and  one 


THE  DUNKARDS. 


133 


delegate.  The  bishops  compose  the  Standing  Committee 
of  the  conference.  This  Standing  Committee  provides  for 
the  organization  of  the  meeting  by  choosing  officers  and 
bringing  the  business  before  the  meeting  in  the  proper 
shape  for  action ;  and  also  appoints  committees  in  cases 
of  difficulty  in  local  churches.  After  the  division  changes 
were  made  in  the  manner  of  holding  the  Annual  Meeting 
in  each  branch  except  the  Old  Order. 

The  Brethren  hold  not  only  to  the  principle  of  noncon- 
formity but  also  to  that  of  nonresistance,  and  earnestly 
protest  against  secret  societies.  Their  ministers  are  not 
trained  men,  but  pursue  their  ordinary  business  avocations 
during  the  week,  preaching  on  Sundays  and  other  occa- 
sions, as  required.     There  are  four  branches,  as  follows : 

1.  Conservative. 

2.  Progressive. 

3.  Old  Order. 

4.  Seventh-Day,  German. 

I. — THE    CONSERVATIVE   BRETHREN. 

The  Conservatives  constitute  the  largest  branch  of  the 
Dunkards.  The  division  occurred,  as  already  stated,  as 
the  result  of  a  disagreement  concerning  the  enforcement 
of  discipline  in  matters  of  conformity.  The  Conservatives 
found  themselves  between  two  fires.  On  the  one  hand, 
there  were  quite  a  number  of  Brethren  who  demanded 
more  liberty  in  the  matter  of  the  wearing  of  dress,  and  in 
other  customs  which  had  hitherto  been  frowned  upon.  On 
the  other  hand,  there  was  a  body  of  Brethren  who  insisted 
upon  a  rigorous  enforcement  of  the  prohibitions  against 
the  adoption  of  modern  dress  and   modern  customs.     It 


134     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

was  the  policy  of  the  Conservatives  to  deal  leniently  with 
those  who  wanted  more  liberty,  and  to  conciliate,  if  pos- 
sible, those  who  wanted  a  more  rigorous  enforcement  of 
the  discipline.  The  Old  Order  Brethren,  however,  felt 
that  the  Progressive  Brethren  had  already  departed  from 
the  ancient  order  of  the  church.  The  principle  of  dress  as 
held  by  the  Conservatives  was  that  plainness,  modesty,  and 
economy  in  dress  is  a  gospel  principle,  and  that  to  retain 
the  form  of  plainness  was  to  insure  the  retention  of  the 
principle  of  plainness.  The  Progressive  Brethren  believed 
in  the  principle  of  plainness,  but  declared  that  there  was 
no  merit  in  adhering  to  a  particular  form  of  plainness. 
The  Progressives,  therefore,  became  a  distinct  branch. 

One  of  the  points  of  disagreement  between  the  Conserv- 
atives and  the  Old  Order  Brethren  was  that  of  the  in- 
troduction of  Sunday-schools.  The  Old  Order  Brethren 
stoutly  opposed  this  as  an  innovation,  while  the  Conserva- 
tives held  that  it  was  simply  an  application  of  the  principle 
of  the  fathers  that  the  children  should  be  religiously  edu- 
cated. The  Old  Order  Brethren  were  Hkewise  opposed 
to  educational  institutions.  The  Conservatives  say  on 
this  point  that  the  fathers  themselves,  if  they  were  now 
living,  would  be  favorable  to  Sunday-schools  and  high- 
schools,  and  also  to  missionary  work.  This,  then,  is  the  posi- 
tion of  the  Conservative  body.  They  are  in  favor  of  retain- 
ing the  principle  of  nonconformity  to  the  world,  but  of  not 
enforcing  it  so  rigorously  as  was  done  twenty-five  or  fifty 
years  ago.  They  believe  in  Sabbath-schools  and  mission- 
ary work,  and  also  in  educating  their  own  people.  They 
are  represented  in  twenty- eight  States  and  two  Territories, 
being  strongest  in  Pennsylvania,  Indiana,  and  Ohio,  where 
more  than  one  half  of  their  communicants  are  found.    There 


THE  DUXKAKDS. 


135 


are  180  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  15,048.  The 
average  value  of  the  houses  of  worship  is  $1313,  and  the 
average  seating  capacity  414. 

Summary  by  States. 


Arkansas 

California    

Colorado 

Florida  ....... 

Idaho    

Illinois 

Indiana 

Indian  Territory 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Kentucky 

Louisiana    

Maryland 

Michigan 

Minnesota  .  .    .  . 

Missouri 

Nebraska 

New  Jersey 

North  Carolina  . 

Ohio 

Oklahoma 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania  . . . 
South  Dakota. .  . 

Tennessee 

Texas 

Virginia 

Washington  .  .  .  . 
West  Virginia  . 
Wisconsin   


Total 


Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

4 

I 

400 

$300 

78 

3 

'> 

375 

2,200 

211 

I 

I 

300 

1.200 

IIO 

I 

I 

200 

600 

41 

I 

I 

200 

1,000 

40 

55 

59 

22,850 

96,860 

3,701 

107 

129 

58,565 

179,870 

10,224 

I 

27 

52  . 

yiH 

14,125 

49,505 

2,769 

62 

34 

i3>i5o 

53-425 

3,228 

I 

10 

I 

17 

29 

39-% 

15,825 

60.200 

2,446 

12 

II 

3,728 

11,425 

560 

2 

2 

600 

1,500 

104 

32 

26 

9,670 

23,025 

1,845 

28 

10 

3,650 

14,500 

998 

3 

3 

950 

5,000 

191 

9 

5 

1,625 

2,000 

510 

95 

I27>2 

50,620 

153,365 

8,490 

2 

46 

6 

4 

1.600 

4,400 

250 

lOI 

224-1^ 

94,738 

354,008 

14,194 

4 



102 

19 

16 

7,450 

11,700 

1,249 

.^ 

I 

150 

300 

95 

42 

87 

40,635 

73,523 

6,659 

.3 

26 

2>Z 

32 

12,180 

21,635 

2,710 

5 

170 

720  854  353,586  $1,121,541  61,101 


2. — THE  PROGRESSIVE  BRETHREN. 


The  reasons  for  the  division  which  resulted  in  the  for- 
mation of  this  branch  of  the  Dunkards  have  already  been 


136     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

given.  They  constitute  the  most  advanced  section  of 
the  body  of  Dunkards.  Their  rules  respecting  noncon- 
formity to  the  world  are  far  less  strict  than  those  of  the 
Conservatives.  They  call  themselves  simply  Brethren,  or 
The  Brethren,  and  do  not  wish  to  be  known  as  Dunkards. 
The  number  of  their  communicants  is  but  a  little  more 
than  one  eighth  of  that  of  the  Conservatives.  They 
occupy  37  halls,  which  have  a  seating  capacity  of  4455. 
The  average  value  of  their  edifices  is  $1521,  and  the  aver- 
age seating  capacity  342. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  O'-Sa"^- 

zations. 

California 2 

Colorado i 

Illinois 4 

Indiana 22 

Iowa 7 

Kansas 16 

Maryland i 

Michigan 6 

Missouri 3 

Nebraska 5 

Ohio 27 

Oregon i 

Pennsylvania 23 

Virginia 4 

West  Virginia 6 

Total 128 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

X. 

150 

$250 

72 
17 

M 

1,200 

7.500 

193 

I5X 

5,875 

22,620 

1,479 

4 

1,425 

6,850 

601 

3 

785 

5,400 

507 

5 

1,400 

2,600 

200 

5 

1,570 

5,850 

240 

I 

200 

90 

4% 

1,950 

8,900 

396 

17/3 

7,000 

30,700 

1,542 

I 

200 

200 

20 

28 

8,335 

50,400 

2,008 

3 

1,300 

2,450 

397 

4/2 

^,350 

2,050 

327 

96  32,740  $145,770  8,089 


3. — THE    OLD    ORDER    BRETHREN. 


This  is  the  smallest  of  the  three  branches  into  which  the 
Dunkards  were  divided  about  ten  years  ago.  The  Old 
Order  Brethren  aim  to  prohibit  conformity  to  the  fashions 
of  the  world  as  rigorously  as  did  the  fathers  fifty  years 


THE   DUNKARDS. 


137 


ago.  They  are  opposed  to  Sunday-schools,  missionary 
endeavor,  and  high-schools  or  colleges.  The  census  au- 
thorities had  much  difficulty  in  getting  returns  from  them. 
They  were  opposed  to  the  numbering  of  their  people  for 
Scriptural  reasons,  and  refused  in  many  cases  to  give  in- 
formation, which  was  otherwise  obtained.  There  are  62 
halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  2330,  occupied  as  places 
of  worship.  The  average  value  of  the  church  edifices  is 
$1279,  average  seating  capacity  408. 

Summary  by  States. 


Arkansas  

California 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Kentucky  

Maryland 

Michigan 

Missouri    

Nebraska  ..... 
North  Carolina 

Ohio 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania  . . 

Virginia 

West  Virginia  . 
Wisconsin  . .  . . 
Wyoming 


Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

I 

4 

I 

7 

12 

3 

725 

$970 

225 

21 

11^ 

5,050 

16,400 

647 

9 

^Yz 

800 

2,600 

100 

13 

3 

1,200 

2,800 

332 

I 

3 

6 

2 

1,200 

3,000 

328 

3 

I 

150 

200 

44 

9 

2 

200 

1,600 

155 

4 

I 

I 

350 

600 

47 
15 

31 

28 

10,825 

44,000 

1,766 

I 

10 

4 

5 

2,900 

5,000 

311 

4 

3 

1,400 

2,500 

188 

12 

2 

950 

1,100 

179 

I 



29 

I 



21 

Total, 


135 


63       25,750       $80,770       4,411 


4. — THE    SEVENTH-DAY    BAPTISTS,  GERMAN. 

This  is  the  oldest  secession  from  the  body  of  Dunkards. 
As  already  stated,  Conrad  Beissel  founded  it  in  1728. 
Only  a  very  few  members  are  now  reported.     These  ob- 


138     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

serve  the  seventh  day  as  the  Sabbath,  and  some  features 
of  the  communal  Hfe.  They  are  found  in  Bedford,  Frank- 
Hn,  Lancaster,  and  Somerset  counties,  Pa. 


Summary. 


Seating  Value  of  Com- 


Organi-     Church  ^^^^  ^^^^^^^ 


mum- 


zations.  Edifices.         p^'^.          ^— ;;,.  -— 

Pennsylvania 6  3         1,960      $i4>55o  ^94 

Summary  by  States  of  All  Dunkards. 

STATES. 

Arkansas   5  i             400            $300  82 

California 6  2             525            2.450  290 

Colorado 2  i             300           1,200  127 

Florida i  i             200               600  41 

Idaho   I  I             200            1,000  40 

Illinois 71  65        24,775        105,330  4,119 

Indiana 150  156       69,490        218,890  12,350 

Indian  Territory  ...  i          27 

Iowa '.  .    .  68  43        16,350         58,955  3.470 

Kansas 91  40        15,135          61,625  4,067 

Kentucky 2        13 

Louisiana i        17 

Maryland 36  47        18,425          65,800  2,974 

Michigan 21  17          5,448          17,475  844 

Minnesota 2  2             600           1,500  104 

Missouri 44  29        10,070         24,625  2,090 

Nebraska 37  16          5,950         24,000  1,441 

New  Jersey 3  3             950           5,000  191 

North  Carolina 10  5          1,625            2,000  525 

Ohio 153  173        68,445        228,065  11,798 

Oklahoma 2       46 

Oregon 8  5          1,800           4,600  280 

Pennsylvania 134  261      107,933       423j958  16,707 

South  Dakota 4       102 

Tennessee 19  16         7,450          11,700  1,249 

Texas 6  i             150              300  95 

Virginia 50  93       43,335          7^,473  7,244 

Washington 3        26 

West  Virginia 51  38        14,480         24,785  3,216 

Wisconsin 6 199 

Wyoming i        21 

Total 989  1,016     414,036  $1,362,631  73»795 


CHAPTER   XX. 

THE    EVANGELICAL    ASSOCL\TION. 

Jacob  Albright,  originally  a  Lutheran,  born  in  1759, 
was  the  founder  of  the  Evangelical  Association.  Near  the 
close  of  the  last  century  he  became  an  earnest  revival 
preacher.  He  labored  among  the  German-speaking  popu- 
lation, and  in  1800  formed  a  society  of  converts  in  Penn- 
sylvania for  "social  prayer  and  devotional  exercises"  every 
Sunday  and  every  Wednesday  night.  This  was  the  rise 
of  the  movement  which  resulted  in  the  Evangelical  Asso- 
ciation. The  first  conference  was  held  in  1807.  This 
conference  elected  Jacob  Albright  a  bishop.  Two  years 
later  a  church  discipline  very  similar  to  that  of  the  Metho- 
dist Episcopal  Church  was  published.  Some  years  after 
the  death  of  Bishop  Albright  (1808)  the  name  EvangeHcal 
Association  of  North  America  was  adopted.  Previously 
to  this  his  followers  had  been  known  as  *'  The  Albright 
People,"  or  ''  The  Albrights." 

In  doctrine  and  polity  the  Evangelical  Association  is 
Methodist.  It  has  annual  conferences,  a  quadrennial  gen- 
eral conference,  which  is  the  supreme  legislative  and  judi- 
cial body,  quarterly  conferences,  presiding  elders,  and  an 
itinerant  and  a  local  ministry,  exhorters,  class  leaders,  etc. 
It  also  has  bishops,  who,  however,  are  not  elected  for  life, 
but  for  a  term  of  four  years.  Its  Articles  of  Faith,  twenty- 
one  in  number,  are  the  same  in  substance  and  almost  the 
same  in  language  as  the  twenty-five  articles  of  the  Metho- 

139 


I40     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

dist  churches,  with  a  few  omissions.  F'ormerly  the  con- 
stituency of  the  church  was  almost  entirely  German ;  now 
it  is  largely  English. 

The  Evangelical  Association  has  twenty-six  annual  con- 
ferences. Four  of  the  conferences  are  in  other  lands :  one 
in  Canada,  one  in  Germany,  one  in  Switzerland,  and  one 
in  Japan. 

The  church  is  in  a  divided  state.  In  October,  1891, 
two  bodies,  each  claiming  to  be  the  legal  general  confer- 
ence, were  held,  one  in  Indianapolis,  the  other  in  Phila- 
delphia, and  each  elected  a  different  set  of  bishops  and 
general  church  officers.  The  differences  are  of  long  stand- 
ing. They  were  augmented  in  the  application  in  1890  and 
1 89 1  of  disciplinary  processes  to  the  three  bishops  of  the 
Association,  all  of  whom  were  tried  and  suspended.  The 
Philadelphia  General  Conference  took  order  restoring 
Bishop  Dubs  to  his  functions.  That  of  Indianapolis,  rep- 
resenting the  majority,  declared  the  proceedings  against 
Bishops  Esher  and  Bowman  void.  The  secular  courts  have 
been  appealed  to  in  various  cases,  and  have  decided  gen- 
erally in  favor  of  the  Indianapolis  Conference.  The  church 
was  divided  into  two  bodies  in  1894. 


THE   EVANGELICAL   ASSOCIATION. 


41 


Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  O'-?^"'- 

zations. 

California 13 

Colorado 3 

Florida 2 

Illinois   134 

Indiana 124 

Iowa 188 

Kansas 96 

Kentucky 3 

Maryland 14 

Michigan 134 

Minnesota 134 

Missouri 26 

Nebraska 81 

New  Jersey 10 

New  York 86 

North  Dakota 31 

Ohio 216 

Oregon 25 

Pennsylvania 662 

South  Dakota 74 

Texas 8 

Washington 7 

West  Virginia 15 

Wisconsin 224 

Total 2,310 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

10 

2,350 

$72,100 

472 

I 

150 

1,600 

87 

4 

450 

2,000 

69 

132 

35,000 

438,500 

10,934 

104% 

30^445 

214.390 

^,n'^ 

147 

30,910 

299,235 

9,761 

50 

10,060 

85,600 

4,459 

3 

850 

16,000 

213 

14 

5,800 

123,900 

1,743 

97 

22,775 

188,450 

6,677 

89 

17,165 

170,550 

6,181 

20 

6,750 

39,700 

1,102 

47 

8,935 

86,100 

3,458 

10 

2,675 

59.250 

669 

80  K 

18,870 

401,850 

6,222 

10 

2,035 

21,100 

784 

215K 

60,835 

491,975 

14-673 

24 

3-300 

63,900 

1,199 

627  >^ 

178,750 

1,590,605 

42,379 

15 

2,280 

20,450 

1,628 

7 

1,400 

22,950 

296 

6 

1,200 

14,900 

451 

13 

2,825 

5.475 

565 

172 

33,525 

355,^00 

12,553 

>899     479,335  $4,785,680    133,313 


Summary 

CONFERENCES. 

Atlantic '^^o 

California 13 

Cen'l  Pennsylvania.  259 

Dakota in 

Des  Moines 77 

East  Pennsylvania . .  218 

Erie 49 

Illinois 106 

Indiana 132 

Iowa 108 

Kansas 115 

Michigan 145 


BY  Conferences. 


30 

9,625 

$317,250 

2,903 

10 

2,350 

72,100 

472 

253>^ 

76,900 

487,315 

15,616 

25 

4,315 

41,550 

2,512 

61 

14,620 

117,500 

4,592 

218;^ 

59'790 

778,265 

17,899 

47 

12,775 

2 1 1 ,400 

3,996 

105 

30,200 

397,250 

9,570 

113^ 

33,470 

228,265 

7,140 

83 

15,740 

178,135 

5,069 

71 

16,860 

124,900 

5,533 

108 

25,275 

205,700 

7,386 

142     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 
Summary  by  Conferences. — Continued. 

CONFERENCES.  Organi- 

zations. 

Minnesota  128 

Nebraska 61 

New  York 71 

Ohio 138 

Oregon 32 

Pittsburg 208 

Platte  River 30 

South  Indiana 44 

Texas 8 

Wisconsin 227 

Total 2,310    1,899     479,335  $4,785,680    133,313 


-      Church 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Edifices. 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

89 

17,165 

$170,550 

6,081 

M 

5,450 

64,950 

2.126 

66 

15,370 

262,250 

5,295 

140 

38,835 

293,600 

8,999 

30 

4,500 

78,800 

1,650 

178 

48,735 

263,300 

9,738 

13 

3,S85 

23,150 

1,447 

44 

8,800 

89,300 

2,341 

7 

1,400  . 

22,950 

296 

173 

33,575 

357,200 

12,652 

CHAPTER    XXI. 

THE    FRIENDS. 

The  Friends,  or  Quakers,  as  they  are  often  called,  own 
as  their  founder  George  Fox,  an  EngUshman,  born  in  Dray- 
ton, Leicestershire,  in  1624.  He  began  to  preach  experi- 
mental holiness  of  heart  and  Hfe  in  1647.  He  had  large 
congregations,  and  in  1656  was  assisted  by  sixty  ministers. 
The  first  general  meeting  of  Friends  was  held  in  London 
in  1668,  the  second  in  1672.  The  Yearly  Meeting  was 
established  in  1678.  Encountering  much  opposition  and 
sevei:e  persecution  in  England,  many  Friends  emigrated  to 
this  country.  A  few  arrived  at  Boston  in  1656,  whence 
they  were  subsequently  scattered  by  persecution ;  many 
came  to  New  Jersey  and  Pennsylvania  after  1674. 

The  first  Yearly  Meeting  in  America  is  believed  to  have 
been  held  in  Rhode  Island  in  1661.  George  Fox  met 
with  it  in  1672,  and  in  1683  it  was  set  off  from  the  Lon- 
don Yearly  Meeting.  It  was  held  regularly  at  Newport 
until  1878.  Since  that  date  it  has  alternated  between 
Newport  and  Portland,  Me.  Yearly  Meetings  were  organ- 
ized in  Maryland  in  1672,  in  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey 
in  1 68 1,  in  North  Carolina  in  1708,  and  in  Ohio  in  181 2. 

The  Friends  have  no  creed,  no  liturgy,  and  no  sacra- 
ments. They  believe  in  a  spiritual  baptism  and  a  spiritual 
communion,  and  hold  that  the  outward  rites  are  unnec- 
essary.    They  accept  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  as  a 

143 


144     KELIGJOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

divine  revelation,  and  in  general  the  doctrine  of  the  atone- 
ment by  Christ  and  sanctification  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Belief  in  the  ''immediate  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit"  is 
pronounced  by  President  Chase,  of  Haverford  College,  the 
most  distinctive  feature  of  their  faith.  They  believe  in  the 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  worship  and  all  religious 
acts.  Periods  of  silence  occur  in  their  meetings,  when  no 
one  feels  called  upon  to  speak,  and  when  each  worshiper 
is  engaged  in  communion  with  God  and  inward  acts  of 
devotion.  The  Friends  believe  that  a  direct  call  to  the 
ministry  comes  to  persons  old  or  young  or  of  either  sex. 
Those  who,  after  a  sufficient  probation,  give  evidence  of 
a  divine  call  are  acknowledged  as  ministers,  and  allowed 
seats  at  the  head  of  the  meeting.  Besides  ministers,  there 
are  in  the  local  meetings  or  congregations,  elders  of  both 
sexes,  who  are  appointed  by  Monthly  Meetings,  and  who 
advise  the  ministers,  and,  if  necessary,  admonish  them. 

Their  societies  or  congregations  are  usually  called  meet- 
ings, and  their  houses  of  worship  meeting-houses.  There 
are  Monthly  Meetings,  embracing  a  number  of  local  meet- 
ings. They  deal  with  cases  of  discipline,  accept  or  dissolve 
local  meetings,  and  are  subordinate  to  Quarterly  Meetings, 
to  which  they  send  representatives.  Quarterly  Meetings 
hear  appeals  from  Monthly  Meetings,  record  certificates  of 
ministers,  and  institute  or  dissolve  Monthly  Meetings.  The 
highest  body  is  the  Yearly  Meeting.  No  Quarterly  Meet- 
ing can  be  set  up  without  its  consent.  It  receives  and 
determines  appeals  from  Quarterly  Meetings,  and  issues 
advice  or  extends  care  to  subordinate  meetings. 

The  Friends  are  divided  into  four  bodies,  popularly  dis- 
tinguished as  (i;  Orthodox,  (2)  Hicksite,  (3)  Wilburite, 
and  (4)  Primitive. 


THE  FRIENDS. 


45 


I. — THE   FRIENDS    (ORTHODOX). 


These  constitute  by  far  the  most  numerous  branch.  In 
1887,  at  a  General  Conference  held  in  Richmond,  Ind., 
they  adopted  a  "  Declaration  of  Christian  Doctrine,"  as  an 
expression  of  **  those  fundamental  doctrines  of  Christian 
truth  that  have  always  been  professed  by  our  branch  of 
the  Church  of  Christ."  This  declaration  sets  forth  the 
evangelical  view  of  the  Trinity,  the  Scriptures,  the  fall  of 
man,  justification  and  regeneration,  the  resurrection  and 
the  final  judgment,  the  issues  of  which  are  eternal.  In 
the  article  on  the  Holy  Spirit  these  sentences  appear : 

**  We  own  no  principle  of  spiritual  light,  life,  or  holiness, 
inherent  by  nature  in  the  mind  or  heart  of  man.  We 
believe  in  no  principle  of  spiritual  light,  life,  or  holiness, 
but  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  bestowed  on 
mankind,  in  various  measures  and  degrees,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord." 

The  article  on  public  worship  recognizes  **  the  value  of 
silence,  not  as  an  end,  but  as  a  means  toward  the  attain- 
ment of  the  end — a  silence  not  of  listlessness  or  of  vacant 
musing,  but  of  holy  expectation  before  the  Lord." 

The  discipline  of  the  Western  Yearly  Meeting  makes  as 
"  disownable  offenses,"  for  which  members  are  disowned 
or  excommunicated,  denial  of  the  divinity  of  Christ,  the 
revelation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  divine  authenticity  of 
the  Scriptures ;  engaging  in  the  liquor  traffic,  drunkenness, 
profanity,  joining  the  army  or  encouraging  war,  betting, 
participating  in  lotteries,  dishonesty,  taking  or  administer- 
ing oaths,  etc. 

Each  Yearly  Meeting  has  its  own  discipline,  but  fellow- 
ship is  maintained  between  them  by  epistolary  correspond- 


146     RELIGIOCS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 

ence.  There  is  also  a  general  agreement  between  them 
on  the  fundamentals  of  doctrine  and  discipline.  The  Phila- 
delphia Yearly  Meeting,  which  is  one  of  the  oldest,  has 
a  discipline  incorporating  various  decisions  and  advices 
adopted  since  its  organization  in  1681. 

There  are  10  Yearly  Meetings,  with  794  organizations, 
725  church  edifices,  valued  at  $2,795,784,  and  80,655 
members.  The  average  seating  capacity  of  their  edifices 
is  297,  and  their  average  value  $3718.  Halls  to  the  num- 
ber of  90,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  7085,  are  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 


Arkansas 

California 

Colorado 

Delaware 

Dist.  of  Columbia 

Florida 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Indian  Territory  . 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Louisiana 

Maine 

Maryland 

Massachusetts  .  .  . 

Michigan 

Minnesota 

Missouri 

Nebraska 

New  Hampshire  . 

New  Jersey 

New  York 

North  Carolina  .  . 

Ohio 

Oklahoma 

Oregon 


Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

5 

3 

500 

$1,950 

338 

II 

7 

1,785 

14,100 

1,009 

I 

I 

120 

300 

38 

I 

I 

260 

11,000 

122 

I 

19 

2 

2 

375 

1,200 

70 

21 

23 

6,155 

36,760 

2,015 

188 

172 

54,775 

325,577 

25,915 

10 

3 

250 

1,300 

468 

74 

73 

19-795 

102,632 

8,146 

65 

51 

14,304 

74,415 

7,762 

I 



66 

23 

2 1 

5,653 

35,975 

1,430 

6 

6 

2,025 

77,800 

525 

28 

28 

6,370 

117,700 

1,560 

17 

16 

4,550 

26,500 

1,433 

6 

3 

675 

35,100 

305 

5 

5 

950 

10,800 

615 

13 

8 

1,354 

4,800 

782 

10 

II 

2,860 

8,800 

413 

20 

21 

6,655 

84,200 

982 

50 

47 

10,270 

203,900 

3.644 

47 

43 

17,475 

36,850 

4,904 

9S 

94 

31,930 

202,250 

10,884 

2 

2 

180 

1,225 

108 

7 

6 

2,125 

10,550 

766 

TflE  FRIENDS.  1 47 

SUxMMARY  BY  STATES. — Continued. 

n^^o^;       r\.     ^v.        Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  O*^.?^"'-       Church  ^^_^  (.j^^^^j^  ^^^j_ 

zauons.     Edifices.       p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Pennsylvania 39  43  13,445  1,279,700  3,490 

Rhode  Island 11  11  3,720  58,800  617 

South  Dakota 4  2  475  1,000  266 

Tennessee   15  8  2,975  9j4oo  1,001 

Texas i  .  .  1 20 

Vermont 4  4  575  4,800  251 

Virginia 7  7  2,300  14,900  387 

West  Virginia i  i  150  400  50 

Wisconsin 3  2  400  1,100  154 

Total 794      725      215,431    $2,795,784     80,655 

Summary  by  Yearly  Meetings. 

YEARLY   MEETINGS. 

Baltimore 17  16  5,150  $101,500  1,012 

Indiana 177  160  51,725  350,437  22,105 

Iowa 117  100  26,429  168,532  11,391 

Kansas 89  64  16,084  88,940  9,347 

New  England 72  71  18,603  221,275  4,020 

New  York 54  51  10,845  208,700  3,895 

North  Carolina  ...  .  62  51  20,450  46,250  5,905 

Ohio 47  48  15,475  90.950  4,733 

Philadelphia  57  62  19,535  1,366,100  4,513 

Western 102  102  3IjI35  153,100  13,734 

Total 794      725      215,431    $2,795,784     80,655 

2. — THE    FRIENDS    (HICKSITE). 

This  body  of  Friends  is  so  named  from  Elias  Hicks,  a 
minister  who  was  foremost  in  preaching  doctrines  which 
became  a  cause  of  separation.  They  object  to  being  called 
Hicksites.  Elias  Hicks  was  born  in  1748,  and  died  in 
1830.  He  emphasized  the  principle  of  ''obedience  to  the 
light  within,"  and  so  stated  the  doctrines  of  the  preexist- 
ence,  deity,  incarnation,  and  vicarious  atonement  of  Christ, 
of   the  personality  of  Satan,  and  of  eternal  punishment, 


148     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE' UNITED   STATES. 

that  he  was  charged  with  being  more  or  less  in  sympathy 
with  Unitarianism. 

Those  identified  with  this  body  of  Friends  insist  that 
Mr.  Hicks's  views  were  ''exactly  those  of  Robert  Barclay," 
an  English  Friend  of  the  seventeenth  century,  whose 
''Apology  for  the  True  Christian  Divinity  "  is  still  regarded 
as  a  fair  exposition  of  the  doctrinal  views  of  Friends.  They 
decline  to  make  orthodox  theology  a  test  of  membership. 

The  separation  took  place  in  the  Philadelphia  Yearly 
Meeting  in  1827,  and  in  New  York,  Baltimore,  Ohio,  and 
Indiana  in  1828.  There  was  no  separation  in  New  England 
or  North  Carolina.  The  Genesee,  in  western  New  York,  and 
the  Illinois  Yearly  Meetings  were  formed  many  years  later. 

They  have  7  Yearly  Meetings,  with  201  organizations, 
213  church  edifices,  valued  at  $1,661,850,  and  21,992 
members.  The  average  seating  capacity  of  their  church 
edifices  is  341,  and  their  average  value  $7802.  They  oc- 
cupy 4  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  325. 

Summary  by  States. 

r.         •       r-u      u       Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^""P"'-    ^if"^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.     Edifices.      ^^^^^^,  Property.  cants. 

Delaware 6  6  1,440  $54>5oo  622 

District  of  Columbia  i  i  300  50,000  40 

Illinois 5  4  870  4,900  440 

Indiana 8  8  2,550  47, 100  1.376 

Iowa 4  4  1,300  3,800  440 

Maryland 17  18  5,410  133,050  1,547 

Michigan i  i  100  400  25 

Nebraska 3  i  200  1,400  198 

New  Jersey 23  26  9,980  183,500  2,279 

New  York 45  45  I3,575  561,850  3,331 

Ohio 16  18  4,485  61,350  1,187 

Pennsylvania 65  74  29,158  546,700  10,001 

Virginia 7  7  3,200  13,300  506 

Total 201       213       72,568    $1,661,850     21,992 


THE  FRIENDS.  1 49 


Summary  by  Yearly  Meetings. 

r\         •     f^\.      \.  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

YEARLY   MEETINGS.                 2'"?f"'-  ^}^^'f'^           Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.    Edifices.  p^^j^  Property.  cants. 

Baltimore 29         30  10,490  $211,300  2,797 

Genesee 13         13         3,900  i4>5oo  75 1 

Illinois 14         II          2,920  11,100  1,301 

Indiana 12         14         3,885  97,ioo  1,743 

New  York 36         37  10,950  567,250  2,803 

Ohio 9           9         2,500  8,850  568 

Philadelphia 88        99  37,923  75Ij75o  12,029 

Total 201       213  72,568  $1,661,850  21,992 


3.— THE    FRIENDS    (WILBURITE). 

The  Wilburite  Friends  are  thus  called  because  John 
Wilbur,  of  New  England,  was  their  principal  leader  in 
opposing  Joseph  J.  Gurney  and  his  teaching.  They  sep- 
arated from  the  Orthodox  body  in  the  New  England 
Yearly  Meeting  in  1845,  in  the  Ohio  in  1854,  and  in  the 
western  Iowa  and  Kansas  in  1877.  They  are  very  con- 
servative, and  were  unwilling  to  adopt  the  new  methods 
devised  as  the  church  became  aggressive  in  evangelistic 
and  missionary  work.  They  make  much  of  the  doctrine 
of  the  light  within,  holding  that  every  man,  by  reason  of 
the  atonement,  has  an  inward  seed,  or  light,  given  him, 
which,  as  it  is  heeded,  will  lead  him  to  salvation.  They 
deny  instantaneous  ccnversion  and  the  resurrection  of  the 
body.  The  controlling  portion  of  the  Philadelphia  Yearly 
Meeting  hold  to  the  views  of  Wilbur,  though  they  have 
not  separated  from  the  body  of  the  church  further  than  to 
decline  epistolary  correspondence  with  it.  They  are  counted 
with  the  Orthodox  branch. 

The  Wilburite  Friends  have  5  Yearly  Meetings,  with 
52  organizations,  52  church  edifices,  valued  at  $67,000,  and 


150     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

4329  members.  They  are  represented  in  the  States  of 
Indiana,  Iowa,  Kansas,  Massachusetts,  Ohio,  Pennsylvania, 
and  Rhode  Island.  The  average  seating  capacity  of  their 
church  edifices  is  253,  and  the  average  value  $1288. 
There  are  no  halls.      A  single  private  house  is  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 


Orjjam-     Church  ^     ^  r-u,,„u  

STATES.  ..•  cj-i:  Ca-  L-hurch  muni- 

^'^      ^  zations.    Edifices. 


Seating  Value  of  Com- 

Ca-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Indiana 9            9          1,810  $8,200  489 

Iowa 12           13           2,925  12,350  1,539 

Kansas 5            5          2,030  10,400  495 

Massachusetts 2            2             480  3>5oo  28 

Ohio 20          20          5,534  24,900  1,676 

Pennsylvania i             i              140  650  30 

Rhode  Island 3            2              250  7,000  72 

Total 52          52         13,169  $67,000  4,329 


Summary  by  Yearly  Meetings. 

YEARLY   MEETINGS, 

Iowa 7  7  1,500  $7,000  714 

Kansas 5  5  2,030  10,400  495 

New  England 5  4  IZ^  10,500  100 

Ohio 24  25  6,735  30,200  2,451 

Western 11  u  2,174  8,900  569 

Total 52  52  I3>i69  $67,000  4,329 


4. — THE    FRIENDS    (PRIMITIVE). 

The  Primitive  Friends  are  in  faith  and  practice  Wilburite. 
They  separated  from  the  Philadelphia  Yearly  Meeting  be- 
cause that  body  refused  to  correspond  with  the  New  Eng- 
land and  Ohio  (Wilbur)  Yearly  Meetings,  and  they  do  not 
affiliate  with  the  latter  because  they  recognize  the  Phila- 
delphia meeting  by  ministerial  visitations  and  by  exchang- 
ing certificates  of  membership. 


THE  FRIENDS.  151 

They  have  9  organizations,  5  church  edifices,  valued  at 
$16,700,  and  232  members.  They  are  found  only  in 
Massachusetts,  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  and  Rhode  Island. 
The  average  seating  capacity  of  their  church  edifices  is 
210,  and  the  average  value  $3340.  One  hall,  with  a  seat- 
ing capacity  of  50,  and  3  private  houses  are  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 


Massachusetts 
New  York.  . .  . 
Pennsylvania  . 
Rhode  Island. 


Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

2 

I 

200 

$1,000 

14 

2 

2 

400 

1,700 

1^3 

3 

2 

450 

14,000 

106 

2 

9 

Total 9  5        1,050        $16,700  232 


Summary  by  States  of  All  Friends. 

Arkansas 5  3  500  $1,950  338 

California 11  7  1,785  14, 100  1,009 

Colorado i  i  120  300  38 

Delaware 7  7  1,700  65,500  744 

District  of  Columbia.  2  i  300  50,000  59 

Florida 2  2  375  1,200  70 

Ilhnois 26  27  7,025  41,660  2,455 

Indiana    205  189  59,135  380,877  27,780 

Indian  Territory 10  3  250  1,300  468 

Iowa 90  90  24,020  118,782  10,125 

Kansas 70  56  16,334  84,815  8,257 

Louisiana i  66 

Maine 23  21  5,653  35^975  i>43o 

Maryland 23  24  7,435  210,850  2,072 

Massachusetts 32  31  7,050  122,200  1,602 

Michigan 18  17  4,650  26,900  1,458 

Minnesota 6  3  675  35,100  305 

Missouri 5  5  950  10,800  615 

Nebraska 16  9  i,554  6,200  980 

New  Hampshire 10  it  2,860  8,800  413 

New  Jersey 43  47  16,635  271,700  3,261 

New  York 97  94  24,245  767,450  7,078 

North  Carolina 47  43  17,475  36,850  4,904 


152 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States  of  All  Friends. — Continued. 

r\         ■     r-u       u      Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                            ^T""''   ^rfi'"            Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.    edifices.      p^^j^^^  Property.  cants. 

Ohio 131      132     4Ij949  $288,500  13,747 

Oklahoma 2         2           180  1,225  108 

Oregon 7         6       2,125  10,550  766 

Pennsylvania 108     120     43,193  1,841,050  13,627 

Rhode  Island 16       13       3,970  65,800  698 

South  Dakota 4         2           475  1,000  266 

Tennessee  15         8       2,975  9,400  1,001 

Texas i      120 

Vermont 4        4           575  4,8oo  251 

Virginia 14       14        5, 500  28,200  893 

West  Virginia i         i           150  400  50 

Wisconsin 3         2           400  1,100  154 

Total 1,056     995    302,218  $4,541,334    107,208 


CHAPTER    XXII. 

FRIENDS    OF    THE    TEMPLE. 

This  is  a  small  body  which  had  its  origin  in  Wiirtem- 
burg,  Germany,  upward  of  fifty  years  ago.  It  is  variously 
called  Temple  Society,  Friends  of  the  Temple,  **  Hoflfmann- 
ites."  The  Rev.  Christopher  Hoffmann,  president  of  the 
Temple  colonies  in  Palestine,  and  author  of  most  of  its 
standard  literature,  appears  to  be  its  chief  leader. 

The  Friends  of  the  Temple  have  for  their  great  object 
the  gathering  of  the  people  of  God  in  Palestine.  To  this 
end  they  constitute  Temples,  i.e.,  spiritual  communities,  in 
various  countries,  and  these  assist  in  the  construction  of 
the  Temple  in  the  Holy  Land,  which  is  to  become  a  center 
for  regenerated  humanity.  They  believe  in  the  power 
of  God  which  raised  Christ  from  the  dead,  to  build  up  a 
''  spiritual  house,  a  holy  priesthood,"  and  without  formu- 
lating their  doctrines  declare  their  full  acceptance  of  the 
Scriptures,  of  the  law  of  Moses  as  well  as  the  Gospel  of 
Christ.  They  believe  that  all  the  prophecies  will  be  fulfilled, 
and  that  as  Christ  came  to  work  out  the  fulfillment,  that 
should  also  be  the  mission  of  his  followers.  The  chief  task 
of  the  Temple  Society  is  to  secure  the  spiritual  develop- 
ment of  its  members,  who  are  under  the  oversight  of  presi- 
dents and  other  officers,  and  meet  for  worship  on  Sundays 
and  on  special  occasions.  No  regulations  have  been  adopted 
concerning  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  individual  con- 
victions being  allowed  full  play. 

153 


154     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

In  1874  the  Temple  Society  established  four  colonies  in 
Palestine — at  Joppa,  Sharon,  Haifa,  and  Jerusalem.  The 
cost  of  these  colonies  has  been  met  in  large  part  by  volun- 
tary contributions. 

Summary  by  States. 

,^,^,,  Organi-    Church  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

^^^^^^-  zatfons.    Edifices.  ^?-  p^^^'-'^;  "^""^ 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Kansas i         i  200  $800  55 

New  York 3         4  950  14,500        285 

Total 4        5  1,150       $15,300        340 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

THE    GERMAN    EVANGELICAL    PROTESTANT   CHURCH. 

This  is  a  body  of  scattered  congregations,  with  a  center 
in  Cincinnati.  Some  of  its  churches  are  a  century  old,  and 
some  are  quite  new.  The  German  language  is  almost 
exclusively  spoken.  In  theology  it  is  very  liberal,  ration- 
alistic views  generally  prevailing.  It  has  no  synodical 
organization,  but  there  are  non- ecclesiastical  associations, 
or  vereine,  of  ministers. 


Summary  by  States. 

n..„o.,;  r-v.-.r^i.  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                     Or?^"'-  CWh  ca-  Church  muni- 

zauons.  Edifices.  ^^^^^^.  Property.  cants. 

Illinois 2  2  800  $16,000  735 

Indiana 8  7  3,270  54,150  1,886 

Kentucky 3  2  2,100  51,000  1,250 

Louisiana i  i  1,000  40,000  3- 500 

Missouri 2  2  2,600  70,000  1,700 

Nebraska i  i  200  5,000  40 

Ohio  22  23  15,850  438,800  11,793 

Pennsylvania 9  10  6,655  439>ooo  12,287 

Texas  2  2  1,000  10,500  1,050 

West  Virginia 2  2  1,700  63,000  1,915 

Total 52  52  35,175      $1,187,450  36,156 


155 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 

THE   GERMAN   EVANGELICAL    SYNOD. 

The  German  Evangelical  Synod  of  North  America  rep- 
resents in  this  country  the  State  church  of  Prussia,  which 
is  a  union  of  Lutheran  and  Reformed  elements.  The 
first  ecclesiastical  organization  was  formed  October  15, 
1840,  at  a  meeting  held  at  Gravois  Settlement,  in  Missouri, 
by  six  evangelical  ministers.  Out  of  the  principles  then 
agreed  upon  the  constitution  of  the  Synod  has  been  grad- 
ually developed.  In  1850  the  Society  formed  in  Missouri 
and  the  German  Evangelical  Society  of  Ohio,  formed  in 
1850,  united.  To  this  union  there  was  a  further  addition 
in  i860,  when  the  United  Evangelical  Society  of  the  East 
was  consolidated  with  it.  In  1872  two  other  bodies — the 
Evangelical  Synod  of  the  Northwest  and  the  United 
Evangelical  Synod  of  the  East — entered  and  completed 
the  union.  All  were  kindred  bodies,  holding  the  same 
doctrines  and  governed  by  the  same  ecclesiastical  prin- 
ciples. 

The  Synod  accepts  the  Bible  as  the  only  rule  of  faith 
and  practice,  holding  to  the  Augsburg  Confession,  Luther's 
Catechism,  and  the  Heidelberg  Catechism,  in  so  far  as 
they  agree  with  one  another,  as  correct  interpretations  of 
it.  Concerning  those  points  on  which  these  symbols  do 
not  agree  the  Synod  stands  upon  the  Scripture  passages 
relating  to  them,  and  allows  liberty  of  conscience. 

156 


THE    GERMAN  EVANGELICAL   SYNOD.  157 

The  church  is  divided  into  districts,  of  which  there  are 
fifteen.  They  correspond  as  nearly  as  possible  to  synods 
in  the  Lutheran  Church.  A  General  Conference  repre- 
senting the  whole  church  meets  once  every  three  years. 
It  is  composed  of  the  presidents  of  the  districts,  and  of 
delegates,  clerical  and  lay,  in  the  proportion  of  one  for 
every  nine  ministers  and  one  for  every  nine  churches. 

Since  1872,  when  the  union  of  the  various  Evangelical 
Societies  was  completed,  the  church  has  grown  rapidly. 
It  had  then  219  organizations  and  8032  communicants. 
Now  it  has  870  organizations  and  187,432  communicants 
— the  organizations  having  been  multiplied  by  4  in  this 
period  of  eighteen  years,  and  the  communicants  by  23. 
It  is  represented  in  twenty-two  States,  being  strongest  in 
Illinois,  37,138;  Ohio,  31,617;  Missouri,  25,676;  and 
New  York,  17,409. 

The  average  seating  capacity  of  its  church  edifices  is 
313,  and  the  average  value  $5878.  It  also  holds  meet- 
ings in  83  halls,  which  have  a  seating  capacity  of  5970. 

Summary  by  States. 

STATES.  Organi-     Cl,urch      SeaUng 

zations.     Edifices.      ^^^;.„ 

pacity. 

California 4           4  618 

Colorado 2            i  250 

Illinois 164  155  47,081 

Indiana 75  75  22,635 

Iowa  59  43  11,413 

Kansas 28  19^  3^794 

Kentucky 11  10  5,525 

Louisiana 3           3  Ij55o 

Maryland 12  11  6,300 

Michigan 50  43  14,710 

Minnesota 53  40  9,072 

Missouri 124  115X31J922 

Nebraska 23  19  3,290 


Value  of 

Com- 

Church 

muni- 

Property. 

cants. 

$8,460 

315 

18,000 

135 

813,450 

37,138 

337,660 

15,274 

110,300 

6,902 

37,750 

2,053 

137,400 

4,912 

26,450 

1,250 

223,500 

4,405 

242,450 

10,926 

97,900 

5,567 

575,650 

25,676 

43,500 

2,142 

158     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. — Continued. 

^^^^^,                         Organi-  Church  Seating  Vahie  of  Com- 

STATES.                        ^^jf^^^  Edifices.  ^^-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

New  Jersey 3  2  1,190           39,000  1,890 

New  York 50  49  21,160  681,570  17,409 

North  Dakota 5  3  600             3,300  440 

Ohio 107  106  41,019  836,200  31,617 

Pennsylvania 12  12  5,670  132,150  5,293 

Texas 19  14  2,380           36.300  1,864 

Virginia i  i  700           30,000  700 

West  Virginia 2  i  216                 800  114 

Wisconsin 63  58  14,686  182,700  11,410 


Total 870        785     245,781    $4,614,490     187,432 

Summary  by  Districts. 


DISTRICTS. 


Atlantic  26  23  11,490  $380,650  9,825 

Indiana 80  79  31,890  724,600  25,444 

Iowa 65  49  12,973  127,625  7,885 

Kansas 32  22^4^  4,254  57,250  2,248 

Michigan 73  66  21,180  332,410  15,937 

Minnesota 59  44  9,842  101,700  6,127 

Missouri 93  Z'j'%.  25,030  424,650  ii,'^^^ 

Nebraska 21  17  3,080  42,000  2,082 

New  York 48  48  20,680  639,070  17,284 

North  Illinois .... .  83  79  26,340  511,675  22,814 

Ohio 95  93  33,645  582,000  23,875 

South  Illinois 81  76  21,671  318,900  15,216 

Texas 19  14  2,380  36,300  1,864 

West  Missouri 33  30  6,810  153,460  3,975 

Wisconsin 62  57  14,516  182,200  11,290 


Total 870        785     245,781    $4,614,490     187,432 


CHAPTER   XXV. 

THE   JEWS. 

The  first  company  of  Jews  in  this  country  came  from 
Brazil  in  1654.  The  first  synagogue  was  estabHshed  in 
Mill  Street,  New  York  City,  now  known  as  Broad  Street. 
It  was  called  the  Shearith  Israel  (Remnant  of  Israel),  and 
the  society  is  still  in  active  existence,  occupying  a  building 
on  West  Nineteenth  Street.  As  according  to  custom  ten 
males  above  the  age  of  thirteen  can  form  a  Jewish  congre- 
gation, it  is  quite  probable  that  there  was  Jewish  worship 
before  the  first  synagogue  was  opened,  although  it  was 
doubtless  conducted  with  some  secrecy,  as  a  petition  to  the 
authorities  of  New  Amsterdam  in  1685  for  the  privilege 
of  exercising  the  rites  of  the  Jewish  religion  was  denied. 
"  No  public  worship,"  so  ran  the  reply,  "  is  tolerated  by 
act  of  assembly  but  to  those  that  profess  faith  in  Christ." 
Later  some  of  the  Jews  in  New  York  removed  to  New- 
port, R.  I.,  and  there  held  regular  services,  securing  in 
1763  a  synagogue,  to  which  the  chief  contributors  were 
sons  of  the  minister  of  the  congregation,  the  Rev.  Isaac 
Touro.  One  of  these  sons,  Abr-aham  Touro,  gave  $10,000 
for  the  comipletion  of  the  Bunker  Hill  monument.  Jewish 
congregations  were  organized  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  in  1733; 
in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  in  1776;  in  Philadelphia  in  1780  and 
1782;  and  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1791.  Of  these  con- 
gregations those  in  the  South  and  one  of  those  in  Phila- 

159 


l60     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

delphia  used  the  ritual  of  the  Portuguese  Jews,  the  others 
that  of  the  German  Jews. 

The  Jews  of  America  have  no  rehgious  head.  Each 
congregation  is  autonomous,  and  responsible  to  its  mem- 
bers only.  It  is  said  that  an  effort  in  New  York  to  bring 
the  Orthodox  congregations  under  the  care  of  a  chief 
rabbi  is  not  wholly  satisfactory. 

The  statistics  of  Jewish  congregations  are  not  frequently 
or  periodically  gathered,  as  is  the  custom  of  most  religious 
denominations ;  but  twice  at  least  in  the  last  forty  years 
efforts  have  been  made  to  ascertain  the  number  of  Jewish 
congregations  in  the  United  States,  once  in  1854  and  again 
in  1880.  According  to  the  earlier  report  there  were  in 
1854  97  regularly  organized  congregations,  of  which  30 
were  in  the  State  of  New  York.  The  latter  count  was 
made  under  the  auspices  of  the  Board  of  Delegates  of 
American  Israelites  and  the  Union  of  Hebrew  Congrega- 
tions, and  it  required  several  years  to  complete  the  com- 
pilation. The  results,  which  have  been  regarded  as  quite 
accurate,  indicated  the  existence  of  270  congregations, 
with  12,546  members,  or  about  50,000  communicants. 
The  value  of  the  real  estate  held  by  the  congregations 
was  returned  at  $4,706,700,  with  other  property  aggre- 
gating $1,497,878,  or  a  total  of  $6,204,578,  exclusive  of 
burying- grounds. 

The  tables  presented  herewith  show  that  there  are  533 
congregations  of  Orthodox  and  Reformed  Jews,  with  130,- 
496  communicants.  It  should  be  noted  that  in  Jewish 
congregations  the  head  of  a  family  only  is  counted.  The 
members  of  the  family  are  represented  by  one  person. 
The  number  given  as  communicants,  therefore,  does  not 
indicate  the  number  of  members  of  a  synagogue.     Mem- 


THE  JEWS.  l6l 

bers  of  families  may,  on  attaining  their  majority,  rent  a 
pew  and  be  counted  as  a  member  of  a  synagogue  or  tem- 
ple, but  they  seldom  do  so  until  they  have  a  household  of 
their  own. 

I. — THE    ORTHODOX    JEWS. 

There  are  two  branches  or  schools  of  thought  in  the 
Jewish  religion,  commonly  designated  the  Orthodox  and 
the  Reformed.  The  attempt  is  here  made  to  tabulate  the 
statistics  in  accordance  with  this  classification.  It  is  diffi- 
cult, however,  in  some  cases  to  know  how  to  draw  the 
lines.  Under  the  above  heading  those  congregations  are 
embraced  which  adhere  to  the  ancient  rites  and  ceremo- 
nies, observing  the  Bible  as  expounded  and  expanded  by 
the  prophets  and  rabbis.  The  Orthodox  Jews  accept  the 
Schulchan  Aruch  as  authoritative  in  all  its  requirements. 
It  is  a  codification,  made  by  Rabbi  Joseph  Karo  in  the 
middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  of  the  laws  and  ceremo- 
nies expounded  by  the  rabbis  of  the  Talmud  and  handed 
down  from  generation  to  generation  by  tradition.  It  pro- 
vides for  the  minutest  details  of  Jewish  life,  and  those  who 
accept  it  consider  it  as  binding  as  the  law  of  Moses  itself. 
Halls  to  the  number  of  193,  with  a  seating  capacity  of 
24,847,  are  occupied  as  places  of  worship.  The  average 
seating  capacity  of  the  churches  is  384,  and  the  average 
value  $22,967. 

Summary  by  States. 


Organi-    Church 


Seating  Value  of  Com- 


^•^^■^^^-                       zatbns:  Edifices.            ^a-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Alabama i                    325 

California    7         5          2,225  $93»ooo  2,344 

Colorado 4         3             800  25,500  662 

Connecticut 6         i             500  12,000  926 


1 62     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. — Continued. 


c^.^.c  Organi-  Church      Seating  S'"\°^  ^°"?" 

STATES.  ,^f;„„,.  Tr^;fi^„c.            ^a-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.       p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

District  of  Columbia  i  i               75  $2,000  40 

Georgia 3  i             200  8,000  240 

Illinois 12  4         2,175  121,500  4,405 

Indiana 8  3             650  6,500  1,299 

Iowa I        50 

Kansas 4  i             260  12,000  403 

Kentucky 2  i             175  1,500  200 

Louisiana 8  2             575  20,000  629 

Maryland 3  3          1,200  43,000  775 

Massachusetts 7  4          i,775  110,500  1,201 

Michigan 6  5          2,150  36,000  2,150 

Minnesota  3  i             400  25,000  750 

Missouri 8  2          1,100  58,000  1,432 

Montana i        140 

Nebraska 4  i             100  S^Soo  550 

New  Jersey 19  10         2,575  44-3oo  2,521 

New  York 152  44       21,245  1,919,500  29,064 

North  Carolina  ....  i  i              180  6,500  'j'^ 

North  Dakota 1        30 

Ohio 17  6         2,790  67,000  2,313 

Oregon 2  i             350  16,000  475 

Pennsylvania 17  13          2,862  116,250  2,447 

Rhode  Island    3  i             200  20,000  685 

Tennessee  4  3          1,450  8,500  425 

Texas i       65 

Vermont i        44 

Virginia 4  3             675  17,000  493 

Washington i        150 

Wisconsin 42  150  7,000  291 


Total 316     122       46,837     $2,802,050     57,597 

2. — THE    REFORMED   JEWS. 

Under  this  classification  are  included  all  Jewish  congre- 
gations which  do  not  recognize  as  absolute  the  authority 
of  the  Schulchan  Aruch.  In  some  cases  the  departure 
from  orthodoxy  is  slight,  as  in  worshiping  with  the  hat  off, 
the  minghng  of  the  sexes  in  the  synagogue  or  temple,  and 
the  introduction  of   the  organ   and  female  choir.     There 


THE  JEWS. 


163 


are  38  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  6360,  occupied  as 
places  of  worship.  The  average  seating  capacity  of  the 
edifices  is  516,  and  their  average  value  $38,839,  which 
is  unequaled. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  O''?^"' 

zations 

Alabama   7 

Arkansas 5 

California 8 

Colorado i 

Connecticut 2 

District  of  Columbia  i 

Florida 2 

Georgia 6 

Illinois 12 

Indiana 15 

Iowa 5 

Kansas 2 

Kentucky 5 

Louisiana 5 

Maryland 9 

Massachusetts 2 

Michigan 4 

Minnesota 2 

Mississippi 6 

Missouri 9 

Nebraska 2 

New  Jersey 5 

New  Mexico i 

New  York 27 

North  Carolina  ....  3 

Ohio   17 

Oregon  i 

Pennsylvania 18 

Rhode  Island 2 

South  Carolina  ....  3 

Tennessee  5 

Texas 10 

Utah I 

Virginia 7 

West  Virginia 3 

Wisconsin 4 

Total 217 


^      Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

rHifirfx 

?         Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

'■    pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

5 

3.050 

$103,500 

2,843 

5 

1,450 

44,000 

744 

7 

3.150 

303,000 

3,835 

I 

600 

50,000 

400 

2 

850 

75,000 

695 

I 

900 

40,000 

936 

2 

318 

13.500 

147 

6 

2,900 

151,000 

1,846 

II 

6,645 

465,000 

5,766 

n 

4,050 

160,000 

2,318 

4 

1,160 

58,000 

487 
83 

4 

850 

16,000 

755 

4 

2,875 

255,000 

2,745 

6 

3.900 

223,500 

2,800 

2 

2,440 

135,000 

1,300 

4 

1,900 

118,000 

1,543 

-7 

724 

45,000 

674 

5 

1,750 

64,000 

1,370 

6 

3.033 

183,800 

3,018 

I 

500 

15,000 

512 

4 

2,420 

124,000 

1,755 
50 

25 

18,927 

2,395.700 

16,743 

I 

400 

30,000 

313 

13 

7,020 

636,225 

6,576 

I 

850 

80,000 

690 

15 

7,980 

552,500 

5,582 

I 

420 

25,000 

225 

3 

850 

78,000 

800 

4 

2,950 

106,000 

1,335 

8 

2,380 

182,000 

1,929 

I 

750 

40,000 

100 

6 

1,875 

70,500 

694 

2 

650 

9,000 

350 

4 

1,880 

105,000 

940 

179  92,397  $6,952,225  72,899 


164     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States  of  All  Jews. 


Organi-    Church      ^^g^]"^ 


zations.   Edifices. 


Alabama 

Arkansas 

California 

Colorado 

Connecticut 

District  of  Columbia 

Florida 

Georgia 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Kentucky 

Louisiana 

Maryland 

Massachusetts 

Michigan 

Minnesota 

Mississippi 

Missouri 

Montana 

Nebraska 

New  Jersey 

New  Mexico . 

New  York 

North  Carolina  .... 
North  Dakota  .    ... 

Ohio 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania 

Rhode  Island 

South  Carolina  .... 

Tennessee  

Texas 

Utah 

Vermont 

Virginia 

Washington 

West  Virginia    .... 
Wisconsin 


5 

15 
5 
8 
2 
2 

9 
24 

23 

6 

6 

7 

13 

12 

9 
10 

5 
6 

17 
I 
6 

24 

I 

179 

4 
I 

34 
3 

35 
5 
3 
9 

II 
I 
I 

II 
I 

3 
8 


5 

5 

12 

4 
3 
2 
2 
7 
15 
16 

4 
I 

5 
6 

9 
6 

9 
3 
5 
8 

2 
14 


19 
2 

28 
2 
3 
7 


pacity. 

3.050 
1,450 

5,375 
1,400 

1^350 
975 
318 
3,100 
8,820 
4,700 
1,160 
260 
1,025 
3.450 
5,100 
4,215 
4,050 
1,124 
1^750 
4,133 

600 
4,995 


69      40,172 
2  580 


9,810 

1,200 

10,842 

620 

850 

4.400 

2,380 

750 


550 


650 
2,030 


Vahie  of 

Church 

Property. 

$103,500 

44,000 

396,000 

75^500 

87,000 

42,000 

13,500 

159,000 

586,500 

166,500 

58,000 

12,000 

17,500 

275,000 

266,500 

245,500 

154,000 

70,000 

64,000 

241,800 

20,500 
168,300 

4,315,200 
36,500 

703,225 
96,000 

668,750 
45,000 
78,000 

114,500 

182,000 
40,000 

87,500 

9,000 
112,000 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

3,168 

744 
6,179 
1,062 
1,621 

976 

147 

2,086 

10,171 

3,617 

537 

486 

955 
3,374 
3,575 
2,501 

3,693 
1,424 

1,370 

4,450 

140 

1,062 

4,276 

50 

45,807 

386 

30 
8,889 
1,165 
8,029 
910 
800 
1,760 

1,994 
100 

44 

1,187 

150 

350 

1,231 


Total 533   301  139,234  $9,754,275   130,496 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

THE    LATTER-DAY    SAINTS. 

The  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-Day  Saints  is  of 
American  origin.  It  was  founded  in  1830  by  Joseph 
Smith,  its  first  Prophet.  He  was  born  in  Sharon,  Vt.,  in 
1805,  removing  to  Palmyra,  N.  Y.,  ten  years  later.  Be- 
tween the  ages  of  fourteen  and  fifteen  he  began  earnestly 
to  inquire  how  he  could  with  certainty  save  his  soul,  and 
how  he  might  ascertain  which  one  of  the  many  denomina- 
tions was  the  true  Church  of  Christ.  While  thus  seeking 
he  had  a  vision  of  a  great  light,  and  two  "  glorious  person- 
ages "  appeared  and  informed  him  that  his  sins  were  for- 
given, and  instructed  him  in  the  doctrine  of  the  one  true 
religion,  which  was  not,  he  was  told,  represented  by  any 
of  the  existing  churches.  Another  vision  was  granted  him 
in  1823,  when  an  **  angel  of  the  Lord"  appeared  and  told 
him  that  the  preparatory  work  for  the  second  coming  of 
Christ  was  soon  to  begin,  and  that  he  was  to  be  chosen  to 
bring  about  some  of  the  purposes  of  the  coming  dispensa- 
tion. The  vision  was  frequently  renewed.  By  the  direc- 
tions received  in  one  of  them  he  was  enabled  to  obtain  the 
sacred  records,  which  have  since  been  known  as  the ''  Book 
of  Mormon."  These  records  were  received,  it  is  stated, 
in  1827.  They  were  ''engraved  on  plates  which  had 
the  appearance  of  gold,"  and  these  plates  were  '*  filled  on 
both  sides"  with  words  in  reformed  Egyptian  characters. 

165 


1 66     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

Having  become  the  subject  of  persecution  on  account  of 
the  visions,  he  fled  to  Pennsylvania,  and  translated,  *'  by 
the  gift  and  power  of  God,"  the  records  which  had  been 
miraculously  delivered  to  him.  The  Book  of  Mormon 
claims  to  give  a  history  of  ancient  America,  from  a  settle- 
ment by  a  colony  who  came  from  the  Tower  of  Babel,  at 
the  confusion  of  tongues. 

An  angel  appeared  in  1829,  it  is  stated,  to  Joseph  Smith 
and  Oliver  Cowdery  and  ordained  them  as  priests  of  the 
order  of  Aaron  and  directed  them  to  baptize  each  other. 
In  1830  a  church  was  organized  at  Fayette,  Seneca  County, 
N.  Y.  The  new  gospel  was  preached,  miracles  were  an- 
nounced as  an  attestation  of  the  new  faith,  and  mission- 
aries were  sent  out,  among  whom  Brigham  Young,  Sidney 
Rigdon,  and  the  Pratt  brothers — Parley  P.  and  Orson — were 
prominent.  Churches  were  established  in  several  States. 
In  1 83 1  the  headquarters  of  the  denomination  were  re- 
moved west  to  Kirtland,  O.,  and  a  colony  was  formed  in 
Jackson  County,  Mo.  After  having  been  driven  out  of 
Missouri,  a  settlement  was  made  at  Nauvoo,  111.,  where  a 
large  temple  was  erected  and  where  the  headquarters  of 
the  church  were  fixed.  In  1843  Joseph  Smith  announced 
a  revelation  in  favor  of  the  celestial  order  of  marriage 
including  polygamy.  In  disturbances  which  subsequently 
arose  he  was  shot  and  killed  by  a  mob,  June  27,  1844,  at 
Carthage,  111.,  and  Brigham  Young  became  his  successor 
as  Prophet.  In  1846  and  1847  there  was  a  general  migra- 
tion from  Illinois  to  Salt  Lake,  the  present  headquarters  of 
the  church. 

There  are  two  divisions — the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-Day  Saints,  and  the  Reorganized  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-Day  Saints. 


THE   LATTER-DAY  SAINTS.  1 67 

I. — THE    CHURCH    OF   JESUS    CHRIST    OF    LATTER-DAY 

SAINTS. 

Those  who  migrated  to  Salt  Lake  devised  a  system  for 
active  propagation  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Book  of  Mormon 
and  subsequent  revelations,  and  their  numbers  increased 
steadily.  The  ''celestial  law  of  marriage"  was  openly 
practi(^ed  after  1852,  when  it  was  promulgated.  After  the 
death  of  Brigham  Young,  August,  1877,  John  Taylor  suc- 
ceeded as  president  of  the  church.  In  1890  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff, the  successor  of  John  Taylor  as  *'  seer,  revelator,  and 
first  president,"  announced  a  revelation  prohibiting  the 
contracting  of  further  polygamous  marriages. 

The  chief  points  of  the  doctrinal  belief  of  the  Latter- Day 
Saints,  as  stated  by  President  Wilford  Woodruff,  are  in 
substance :  God  exists  as  a  Trinity  of  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost ;  men  are  to  be  punished  for  actual  sins,  and 
not  for  the  transgression  of  Adam  ;  salvation  is  for  all  men, 
through  the  atonement  of  Christ,  by  obedience  to  the  laws 
and  ordinances  of  the  gospel ;  these  ordinances  are  faith, 
repentance,  baptism  by  immersion  for  the  remission  of  sins, 
and  the  laying  on  of  hands  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost; 
men  are  called  of  God  to  the  ministry  by  prophecy  and 
the  laying  on  of  hands  by  those  in  authority ;  there  is  the 
gift  of  tongues,  prophecy,  revelation,  visions,  healing,  and 
interpretation  of  tongues  ;  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God,  so 
far  as  it  is  translated  correctly,  also  the  Book  of  Mormon ; 
God  has  revealed  much  and  has  much  yet  to  reveal ;  there 
is  to  be  a  literal  gathering  of  Israel  and  the  restoration  of  the 
ten  tribes  ;  Zion  is  to  be  built  on  this  continent ;  Christ  will 
reign  personally  upon  the  earth,  which  is  to  be  renewed. 

The  organization  of  the  church  includes  features  of  both 


1 68     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   Sl'ATES. 

the  Jewish  and  Christian  systems.  There  are  two  orders 
of  the  priesthood,  the  Melchizedek  or  higher,  and  the 
Aaronic  or  lesser.  The  first  embraces  apostles,  patriarchs, 
high-priests,  seventies,  and  elders,  and  has  charge  over  all 
the  spiritual  interests  of  the  church,  preaching,  baptizing, 
laying  on  of  hands  for  confirmation  and  ordination,  healing, 
blessing,  administering  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  officiating 
in  all  the  ordinances.  The  Aaronic  priesthood,  ingluding 
bishops,  priests,  teachers,  and  deacons,  administers,  under 
the  direction  of  the  Melchizedek  priesthood,  the  outward 
ordinances  and  temporal  affairs.  In  organization  for  church 
government  the  place  of  the  ordinary  parish  is  taken  by 
the  ward.  Each  ward  has  its  meeting-house  and  bishop, 
and  two  counselors.  A  number  of  wards  constitute  a  stake 
of  Zion.  At  the  head  of  each  stake  or  district  is  a  presi- 
dent and  two  counselors,  who  are  high-priests,  and  a  coun- 
cil of  twelve  high-priests  who  sit  as  a  court  in  church 
matters.  There  is  a  general  conference  which  meets  in 
April  and  October  of  each  year  for  the  management  of 
the  general  affairs  of  the  church.  The  missionaries  and 
preachers  are  organized  into  seventies.  Each  seventy  has 
seven  presidents,  and  is  under  the  direction  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles.  The  highest  officers  are  those  of  the  First  Pres- 
idency, which  has  supreme  authority,  and  are  elected  by 
the  whole  church. 

The  chief  strength  of  the  church  is  in  Utah,  but  it  also 
has  organizations  in  twenty-two  States  and  Territories. 
There  are  in  all  425  organizations,  266  church  edifices, 
valued  at  $825,506,  and  144,352  communicants.  The 
average  seating  Capacity  of  the  edifices  is  346,  and  their 
average  value  $3103  ;  178  halls,  etc.,  with  a  seating  capac- 
ity of  28,310,  are  occupied. 


THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS. 


169 


Summary  by  States. 


Alabama 

Arizona 

Colorado 

Georgia 

Idaho  

Indiana 

Kansas 

Kentucky 

Maryland 

Mississippi  .... 

Nevada  

New  Mexico .  .  , 

New  York 

North  Carolina 
Pennsylvania  ,  . 
South  Carolina 

Tennessee 

Utah 

Virginia 

West  Virginia 
Wisconsin    .... 
Wyoming 


16 
3 

48 


19 


4,815 
1,380 

1,682 


Organi-      Church      ^^g^S 

zations.     Edifices.  •^' 

pacity. 


2 
27 

3 

I 

62 

I 
I 
I 

5 
5 

2 

4 

I 
2 

293 
I 

2 

I 


300 


72,375 


1.550 


Total 425       266       92, 102 


Value  of  Com. 
Church  muni- 
Property,  cants. 

166 

$26,400  6,500 

7,200  1,640 

175 

45,560  14,816 

14 

34 

199 

58 

123 

417 

1,430  453 

56 

108 

44 

203 

134 

733,216  117,640 

137 

81 

32 

11,700  1,322 

^825,506  144,352 


Summary  by  Stakes. 


Bannock  . . 
Bear  Lake 
Beaver. .  . . 
Box  Elder 
Cache  . . .  . 
Cassia  . .  .  . 

Davis 

Emery .  .  .  . 

Juab 

Knab 

Malad 

Maricopa  . 
Millard  .  .  . 
Morgan 


Oneida  .....  o 15 


20 

18 

4,420 

$9,720 

4,343 

25 

15 

3,660 

17,350 

4,986 

6 

5 

1,395 

25,100 

1,342 

14 

6 

1,750 

20,750 

3^993 

23 

21 

7,920 

87,000 

6,962 

6 

4 

622 

740 

1,377 

10 

9 

4,700 

36,500 

4,686 

9 

I 

125 

11,475 

1,968 

6 

5 

1,800 

19,661 

3,190 

8 

I 

300 

1,400 

2,161 

9 

9 

2,050 

7,850 

2,317 

4,800 

1,785 

8 

3 

1,325 

1 1,000 

2,815 

9 

3 

950 

3,200 

1,479 

15 

10 

2,940 

21,600 

4,445 

I/O     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Stakes. — Contimted. 


Organi- 

STAKES.  ^.f'^    ' 

zations. 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

8 

1,750 

$11,750 

1,786 

5 

1,950 

17,700 

2,251 

8 

1,650 

4,150 

3,086 

4 

625 

1,980 

1,413 

7 

2,540 

9,050 

2,067 

3« 

13,015 

222,694 

23,428 

5 

1,080 

6,000 

829 

2 

1,100 

5,700 

1,454 

I4>^ 

7,760 

56,980 

12,713 

'^% 

2,850 

19,665 

5,226 

6 

1,800 

11,000 

1,478 

lO 

5,200 

28,350 

2,611 

6 

1,575 

13,266 

1,974 

I 

500 

800 

1,588 

i8 

7,050 

69450 

19,240 

5 

2,900 

7,700 

3,379 

lO 

4,800 

61,125 

10,351 

352 

1,277 

266 

92,102 

$825,506 

144,352 

Panguitch 8 

Parowan 5 

Saint  George 24 

Saint  John's 7 

Saint  Joseph 9 

Salt  Lake    43 

San  Juan 7 

San  Luis 2 

Sanpete 16 

Sevier 19 

Snowflake 8 

Summit 15 

Tooele 7 

Uinta 6 

Utah 27 

Wasatch 6 

Weber 21 

MISSIONS. 

Northern  States. ...  10 

Southern  States.  .. .  12 

Total 425 


2. — THE    REORGANIZED    CHURCH    OF   JESUS    CHRIST 
OF    LATTER-DAY    SAINTS. 

Like  the  Mormons  of  Utah,  the  members  of  this  organ- 
ization, sometimes  called  Nonpolygamous  Mormons,  trace 
their  origin  back  to  the  movement  begun  by  Joseph  Smith 
in  1830.  They  claim  to  represent  this  movemicnt  and  to 
be  true  to  the  principles  and  doctrines  proclaimed  by  him, 
and  insist  that  those  who  followed  Brigham  Young  were 
led  away  from  the  truth  into  error.  They  deny  that  the 
revelation  concerning  polygamy  which  was  communicated 
to  the   church    in    Salt    Lake   City   in  1852    by  Brigham 


THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS.  171 

Young  was  genuine,  and  declare  that  the  true  successor 
to  Joseph  Smith  in  the  presidency  of  the  church  was  not 
Brigham  Young,  but  Joseph  Smith's  eldest  son,  Joseph. 
It  is  said  that  none  of  the  members  of  the  family  of  the 
first  Prophet  have  united  with  the  Utah  branch,  but  all 
have  become  members  of  the  Reorganized  Church. 

The  first  conference  was  held  in  1852,  and  it  was  then 
that  the  leadership  of  Brigham  Young,  James  J.  Strang, 
Sidney  Rigdon,  and  others  was  disowned  and  the  society 
organized.  Its  headquarters  are  at  Lamoni,  la.,  where  it 
has  a  large  publishing-house. 

The  Reorganized  Church  accepts  three  books  as  of 
divine  origin :  first,  the  Bible ;  second,  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon ;  third,  the  Book  of  Covenants.  The  latter  consists 
of  the  revelations  given  to  the  church  in  the  present  cent- 
ury as  a  guide  in  church  government.  The  Book  of 
Mormon  is  accepted  as  a  history  of  the  ancient  inhabitants 
of  America  and  the  revelation  given  them  by  God,  begin- 
ning at  a  period  two  thousand  years  before  Christ  and  con- 
tinuing until  four  hundred  years  after  Christ.  In  doctrine 
they  adhere  to  the  Trinity,  to  the  atonement  by  Jesus 
Christ,  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  to  the  second  com- 
ing of  Christ,  and  to  the  eternal  judgment,  believing  that 
each  individual  will  receive  reward  or  punishment  in  strict 
measure  according  to  the  good  or  evil  deeds  done  in  life. 
They  hold  that  men  are  to  be  saved  by  faith  in  God  and 
Christ,  by  forsaking  sin,  by  immersion  for  the  remission 
of  sin,  and  by  the  laying  on  of  hands.  They  believe  that 
revelations  of  God  are  still  given  by  the  Holy  Spirit  for 
the  guidance  of  the  church,  and  that  the  gifts,  blessings, 
and  powers  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  Bible  times  are  continual. 
Their  order  of  church  government   is  such  as   they  find 


172     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

authority  for  in  the  New  Testament  and  such  as  they 
understand  that  the  Apostolic  Church  observed.  It  in- 
cludes the  presidency,  consisting,  when  full,  of  three  per- 
sons, which  has  jurisdiction  over  the  whole  church  as  its 
chief  presiding  authority ;  twelve  apostles,  whose  special 
duty  is  to  take  charge  of  all  missionary  work  abroad ;  one 
or  more  quorums  of  seventy,  who  are  set  apart  from  the 
body  of  elders  and  assist  the  apostles ;  high-priests,  who 
have  charge  over  States  and  districts ;  priests  or  pastors, 
teachers  and  deacons,  and  bishops,  of  whom  three  are  set 
at  the  head  of  the  business  affairs  of  the  church.  Other 
bishops  and  agents  assist  in  collecting  the  tithes.  As  to 
marriage,  they  believe  that  it  is  ordained  of  God,  and  that 
there  should  be  but  one  companion  for  man  or  woman  in 
wedlock  until  the  contract  is  broken  by  death  or  transgres- 
sion. They  characterize  the  doctrine  of  polygamy  or  plural 
wives  as  an  abomination. 

The  Reorganized  Church  is  represented  in  thirty- six 
States  and  three  Territories,  including  that  of  Utah.  It 
returns  21,773  members,  of  whom  5303  are  in  Iowa.  The 
next  largest  number,  3189,  is  in  Missouri;  Illinois  has 
1909,  Michigan  1540,  and  California  1396.  Meetings  are 
held  in  254  halls,  etc.,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  15,370. 
The  value  of  the  church  property  is  $226,285,  which  in- 
dicates an  average  valuation  of  $1847.  The  average  seat- 
ing capacity  is  251.  The  church  is  not  fully  organized 
into  districts. 


THE   LATTER-DAY  SAINTS. 


^11 


Summary  by  States. 


Organi-     Church      Seating 
zations.    Edifices,      p^^-'y^ 


Alabama 12 

Arkansas i 

California 28 

Colorado   5 

Connecticut 

Florida 9 

Idaho 7 

Illinois 52 

Indiana 13 

Indian  Territory  ...  2 

Iowa 59 

Kansas 25 

Kentucky i 

Maine 14 

Maryland 

Massachusetts 8 

Michigan ...  33 


Minnesota  . .  . 
Mississippi  .  .  . 

Missouri 

Montana 

Nebraska  .... 

Nevada 

New  Jersey. .  . 
New  Mexico . . 
New  York. .  .  . 

Ohio  

Oregon  

Pennsylvania  , 
Rhode  Island. 
South  Dakota. 
Tennessee  .  . . 

Texas  

Utah 

Virginia 

Washington . . 
West  Virginia 
Wisconsin  .  .  . 
Wyoming  .  .  .  . 


4 

2 
42 

2 
20 

4 


3 
10 

3 

4 

3 

12 

14 
I 
I 

10 
6 


15 

2 

27 

4 
I 

2 


300 


1,700 
200 


3,500 
900 

6',785 
800 
200 

475 

2,050 
1,750 


1  100 
8  5,000 

2  400 
7  1,060 


3,050 

300 
150 

275 

1,025 

150 


300 
320 


Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

$350 


14,400 
2,000 


19,200 
1,800 

44,985 
3,300 
1,500 
1,800 

I  1 , 500 

4,325 

150 

58,650 

1,500 

7,500 


43,000 

1,000 
800 

325 
1,900 
3,700 


1,400 
1,200 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

426 
60 

1,396 

122 

8 

257 

156 

1,909 

366 

46 

5,303 
1,072 

50 

442 

17 

457 
1,540 

224 

74 
3,189 

122 
1,058 

108 
21 

3 

102 
678 

95 
373 
233 

88 

64 
437 
561 

34 

34 

325 

309 

14 


Total 431   122   30,790   $226,285    21,773 


174     RJ^LIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNFFED   STATES. 

The  two  branches  of  Latter-Day  Saints  aggregate  856 
organizations,  388  church  edifices,  with  a  seating  capacity 
of  122,892,  and  a  value  of  $1,051,791,  and  166,125  com- 
municants. Of  the  latter  118,201  are  in  Utah,  and  the 
next  largest  number,  14,972,  in  Idaho. 


CHAPTER    XXVII. 

THE  EVANGELICAL  LUTHERANS. 

The  earliest  Lutherans  in  America  came  from  Holland 
to  Manhattan  Island  in  1623  with  the  first  Dutch  colony. 
For  some  years  they  had  great  difficulty  in  estabhshing 
worship  of  their  own,  the  Dutch  authorities,  ecclesiastical 
and  civil,  having  received  instructions  "  to  encourage  no 
other  doctrine  in  the  New  Netherlands  than  the  true 
Reformed"  and  "to  allure  the  Lutherans  to  the  Dutch 
churches  and  matriculate  them  in  the  Public  Reformed 
religion."  A  Lutheran  pastor,  the  Rev.  John  Ernest  Goet- 
water,  was  sent  to  this  country  in  1657  by  the  Lutheran 
Consistory  of  Amsterdam  to  minister  to  two  Lutheran 
congregations,  one  at  New  York,  the  other  at  Albany. 
He  was  not  allowed,  however,  to  enter  upon  his  ministra- 
tions, but  was  sent  back  to  Holland  by  representatives  of 
the  Reformed  faith.  When  the  English  took  possession 
of  New  York  the  Lutherans  were  allowed  full  liberty  of 
worship. 

The  Lutheran  faith  was  also  established  on  the  banks  of 
the  Delaware  by  a  Swedish  colony,  who  erected  the  first 
Lutheran  church  in  America  near  Lewes  in  1638.  Swed- 
ish immigration  was  soon  checked,  and  the  large  Lutheran 
influx  from  Germany  did  not  begin  until  early  in  the  eight- 
eenth century,  the  first  German  congregation  of  Lutherans 
having  been  organized  at  about  that  time  in  Montgomery 

175 


176     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

County,  Pa.,  with  the  Rev.  Justus  Falckner,  who  was 
ordained  in  this  country  by  the  Swedes,  as  its  first  pastor. 
In  1 710  a  large  number  of  exiled  Palatines  settled  in  New 
York  and  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1734  a  colony  of  Salzburg- 
ers  planted  the  Lutheran  faith  in  Georgia. 

While  immigration  brought  many  Lutherans  to  this 
country,  they  were  in  a  scattered  and  unorganized  con- 
dition until  the  arrival  of  the  Rev.  Henry  M.  Muhlenburg, 
who  drew  them  closer  together,  formed  them  into  congre- 
gations, and  inspired  them  with  new  life.  In  1 748  he, 
with  six  other  ministers  and  lay  delegates  from  congrega- 
tions, organized  the  first  Lutheran  synod  in  this  countiy, 
the  Synod  or  Ministerium  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1786  the 
second  synod,  the  Ministerium  of  New  York,  was  formed. 

The  recent  extraordinary  growth  of  the  Lutheran  com- 
munion in  this  country  is  due  in  part  to  immigration  from 
Lutheran  countries.  A  large  proportion  of  Lutherans  are 
either  German  immigrants  or  the  offspring  of  German  im- 
migrants. There  are  also  large  bodies  of  Swedish,  Norwe- 
gian, and  Danish  Lutherans,  with  a  number  from  Finland 
and  other  European  countries. 

The  system  of  faith  held  by  all  Lutherans  is  set  forth  in 
the  Augsburg  Confession  and  in  a  number  of  other  sym- 
bols, known  as  Luther's  Catechisms,  the  Apology  of  the 
Augsburg  Confession,  the  Smalcald  Articles,  and  the 
Formula  of  Concord.  The  cardinal  doctrine  of  the  system 
is  that  of  justification  by  faith  alone.  The  ordinances  of 
baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  are  held  by  Lutherans  to 
be  not  mere  signs  or  memorials,  but  channels  of  grace. 
Their  view  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  peculiar.  They  be- 
lieve that  "  in  the  Holy  Supper  there  are  present  witli  the 
elements  and  are  received  sacramentally  and  supernatu- 


THE   EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  177 

rally  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  but  re- 
ject both  transubstantiation  as  held  by  the  Roman  Catho- 
lic Church,  and  consubstantiation  as  attributed  by  some 
writers  to  the  Lutheran  Church.  They  observe  the  vari- 
ous festivals  of  the  Christian  year,  and  have  a  liturgical 
form  of  worship. 

In  polit)'^,  while  the  sovereignty  of  the  individual  con- 
gregation, which  includes  the  office  of  preaching  the  gos- 
pel and  administering  the  sacraments,  is  recognized,  in  the 
synodical  system  as  it  prevails  a  measure  of  judicial  and 
executive  authority  is  conferred  upon  the  individual  synods 
by  the  individual  congregations.  General  bodies,  such  as 
the  General  Synod,  General  Council,  etc.,  are  formed  by 
the  union  of  a  number  of  synods  and  have  chiefly  advisory 
powers.  Synods  may  withdraw  from  the  General  Synod, 
General  Council,  and  other  general  bodies,  and  may  after- 
ward rejoin  the  body  they  withdrew  from  or  join  another 
body,  or  take  an  independent  position. 

Arranging  the  various  synods  as  nearly  as  possible  ac- 
cording to  speech,  we  find  that  seven  languages  are  repre- 
sented, if  the  Norwegian  be  considered  as  different  from 
the  Danish.  The  United  Synod  of  the  South  is  wholly, 
and  the  General  Synod  mostly,  English.  The  General 
Council,  the  Synodical  Conference,  and  the  independent 
synods  have  but  a  small  percentage  of  English  organiza- 
tions. The  following  is  a  summary,  omitting  the  independ- 
ent congregations,  which  cannot  well  be  classified  : 


Number  of 
organizations. 

Communican 

i,8i6 
2,691 

198,997 
460,706 

1,178 
688 

1,786 
181 

232,512 
88,700 

190,154 
13,674 

13 
II 

1,991 
1,385 

178     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 
Summary  by  Languages. 

LANGUAGES. 

English 

German 

German-English 

Swedish  

Norwegian 

Danish 

Icelandic 

Finnish 

Total 8,364  1,188,119 

I. — THE    GENERAL    SYNOD. 

This  is  the  oldest  general  body  of  Lutherans.  It  was 
organized  in  1820  by  representatives  of  the  Ministerium 
of  Pennsylvania,  the  oldest  synod  ;  the  Ministerium  of  New 
York,  the  next  oldest ;  the  Synod  of  North  Carolina,  the 
third  oldest ;  and  the  Synod  of  Maryland  and  Virginia.  The 
General  Synod  was  the  only  general  body  until  the  Civil 
War  cut  off  its  Southern  synods  and  led  to  the  organization 
of  the  General  Synod,  South,  now  known  as  the  United 
Synod  in  the  South.  It  never  had,  however,  the  adher- 
ence of  all  the  synods.  One  withdrew  and  afterward 
joined  again ;  some  held  aloof  from  it  for  many  years,  so 
that  from  the  first  there  has  scarcely  been  a  period  in 
which  there  have  not  been  synods  in  an  independent 
attitude. 

The  chief  cause  of  the  changes  which  synods  have  made 
in  their  attachments  to  the  general  bodies,  and  also  of  the 
organization  of  the  General  Council  and  Synodical  Confer- 
ence, has  been  differences  concerning  the  acceptance  and 
interpretation  of  the  doctrinal  symbols.     There  have  been 


THE  EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  I  79 

no  secessions  or  divisions  among  Lutherans  on  account  of 
questions  arising  in  church  government,  except  several 
instances  among  the  Germans,  when  charges  of  hierarch- 
ical tendencies  were  broached.  The  reception  in  1864  of 
the  Franckean  Synod  by  the  General  Synod  led  to  a 
division  on  confessional  grounds.  It  was  objected  by  many 
that  the  Franckean  Synod  had  not  announced  its  accept- 
ance of  the  Augsburg  Confession  and  it  was  thought  to  be 
doctrinally  unsound.  It  was  contended  in  behalf  of  those 
who  adhered  to  the  General  Synod  that  the  Franckean 
Synod  had  accepted  the  Augsburg  Confession  in  accepting 
the  constitution  of  the  General  Synod,  in  which  is  set  forth 
the  confessional  basis.  The  minority,  including  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Ministerium  of  Pennsylvania,  presented  a 
protest  against  the  admission  of  the  Franckean  Synod,  and 
the  representatives  of  the  Ministerium  withdrew.  Two 
years  later,  however,  at  the  next  meeting  of  the  General 
Synod,  delegates  from  the  Ministerium  were  in  attendance, 
but,  not  being  allowed  to  participate  in  the  election  of 
.officers,  on  the  ground  that  the  Ministerium  must  be  con- 
sidered as  "  in  a  state  of  practical  withdrawal  from  the 
governing  functions  of  the  General  Synod,"  they  retired, 
and  their  example  was  subsequently  followed  by  the  Pitts- 
burg, English  Ohio,  Minnesota,  and  Texas  synods,  and  the 
Ministerium  soon  after  led  in  a  movement  for  the  formation 
of  another  general  body. 

The  following  is  the  confessional  basis  of  the  General 
Synod : 

"  We  receive  and  hold  with  the  Evangelical  Lutheran 
Church  of  our  fathers  the  Word  of  God,  as  contained  in 
the  canonical  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments, 
as  the  only  infallible  rule  of  faith  and  practice,  and  the 


l8o     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   TIIE    UNITED   STATES. 

Augsburg  Confession  as  a  correct  exhibition  of  the  funda- 
mental doctrines  of  the  divine  Word  and  of  the  faith  of  our 
church  founded  upon  that  Word." 

The  General  Synod  Lutherans  affiliate  more  readily  with 
other  evangelical  denominations  than  the  Lutherans  at- 
tached to  the  General  Council,  the  Synodical  Conference, 
or  the  Ohio  Synod.  They  do  not  refuse  to  exchange  pul- 
pits with  ministers  of  evangelical  churches,  as  do  their 
stricter  brethren,  who  condemn  these  relations  under  the 
general  term  **  unionism." 

The  General  Synod  has  connected  with  it  23  synods,  the 
oldest  of  which,  that  of  Maryland,  was  organized  in  1820, 
and  the  new^est,  that  of  Middle  Tennessee,  in  1878.  It  is 
represented  in  twenty- five  States  and  in  the  District  of 
Columbia  and  Territory  of  New  Mexico.  Nearly  one  half 
of  its  communicants,  or  78,938,  are  to  be  found  in  the 
State  of  Pennsylvania.  Of  its  1424  organizations,  Penn- 
sylvania has  596.  There  are  1322  edifices,  valued  at 
$8,919,170.  This  indicates  an  average  value  for  each 
edifice  of  $6745,  which  is  extraordinary.  The  average 
seating  capacity  of  the  edifices  is  357.  Only  ']2  of  the 
1424  organizations  meet  in  other  than  church  buildings. 
The  72  halls  have  a  seating  capacity  of  10,730. 

The  boundaries  of  Lutheran  synods  are  very  irregular. 
Those  of  the  synods  belonging  to  the  General  Synod  are 
more  regular  than  those  of  any  of  the  other  Lutheran  gen- 
eral bodies,  but  only  5  of  the  23  do  not  cross  one  or  more 
State  lines. 


THE  EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  l8l 


Summary  by  States. 

STATES.  Organ!-  Church  Seating 

zations.  Edihces. 

pacity. 

Alabama i  i  300 

California 6  3  1,700 

Colorado 7  5  1,025 

Connecticut 2  i  400 

District  of  Columbia  6  6  3,000 

Illinois 93  83^  24,803 

Indiana 86  88  23,600 

Iowa  30  28  8,585 

Kansas 53  43  10,245 

Kentucky 11  11  3,700 

Maryland 96  97  43,430 

Massachusetts 2  2  275 

Michigan 9  9  2,450 

Minnesota i  i  300 

Missouri 14  13  4, 125 

Nebraska ']■},  55  12,185 

New  Jersey 16  16  5,i75 

New  Mexico 2  

New  York 95  looX  36,925 

Ohio 189  182  59,310 

Pennsylvania 596  S^S%  219,516 

South  Dakota 3  3  370 

Tennessee  11  11  4,600 

Virginia 3  3  1,050 

West  Virginia 5  5  1,800 

Wisconsin 11  8j^  2,600 

Wyoming 3  2  350 

Total 1,424    1,322      471,819  $8,919,170    164,640 

Summary  by  Synods. 

SYNODS. 

Allegheny 138  131  42,456 

Central  Illinois  ...  .  25  24^^  7,4^5 
Central    Pennsylva- 
nia      83  ']']]A  29,280 

East  Ohio 75  72  24,425 

East  Pennsylvania.  .  109  102 >^  47,560 

Franckean 29  28  8,225 

Hartwick 34  35  13,404 

Iowa 25  24  7,160 

Kansas 47  38  10,275 


Value  of 

Com- 

Church 

muni- 

Property. 

cants. 

$2,000 

175 

87,000 

743 

64,500 

220 

7,000 

190 

301,000 

1,038 

344,050 

7,438 

243,300 

6,090 

127,200 

2,043 

171,000 

2,835 

43,700 

1,627 

843,050 

17,288 

2,700 

103 

37,500 

679 

1,200 

26 

132,850 

1,576 

330,420 

3,731 

126,100 

2,415 

64 

1,224,700 

15,611 

1,039,950 

18,437 

3,672,650 

78,938 

7,700 

64 

8,900 

749 

7,000 

450 

69,000 

1,108 

17,600 

861 

6,100 

141 

$539,925 

12,806 

147,100 

2,187 

372,100 

8,680 

412,800 

6,360 

1,141,650 

17,994 

100,200 

2,147 

286,400 

4,578 

153,700 

1,727 

242,650 

2,924 

1 82     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Synods. — Continued. 

r»,^o„;  rv.,„-^v,  Seating  Value  ot  Com- 

SVNODS.                           ^'^.?^"^-  S^""^^^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  ^^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Maryland io8  109  48,905  $1,198,050  19,864 

Miami 45         42  13,310  295.000  4,604 

Middle  Tennessee . .        11         11  4,600  8,900  749 

Nebraska 102         77  16,175  4i5>87o  5,064 

New  York  and  New 

Jersey 50        54  20,096  955,900  1 1,234 

North  Illinois 46        41  12,900  198,050  3,147 

North  Indiana 6j         71  19,475  184,100  4,650 

Olive  Branch 37         35  9,675  135,100  3,577 

Pittsburg 81         75  24,850  330,125  7,740 

South  Illinois 19         15X  4j45o  20,250  1,234 

Susquehanna 59         58  26,540  483,850  10,643 

Wartburg.  .  . , 29         24  7,313  90,800  3,320 

West  Pennsylvania .      131  106  50,855  868,000  21,575 

Wittenberg 74        7i  22,475  338,650  7,836 

Total 1,424    1,322  471,819  $8,919,170  164,640 


2. — THE    UNITED    SYNOD    IN    THE    SOUTH. 

Soon  after  the  beginning"  of  the  Civil  War  the  four  synods 
of  North  and  South  Carolina  and  of  Virginia  and  south- 
west Virginia  withdrew  from  the  General  Synod  because 
of  the  adoption  by  that  body,  at  its  convention  in  1862,  of 
resolutions  concerning  the  war  which  gave  offense  to  the 
South.  These  synods  and  the  Synod  of  Texas  were  not 
represented  in  the  convention  of  1862  on  account  of  the 
outbreak  of  hostilities  and  the  condition  of  the  country. 
The  next  year  (1863)  the  four  synods  above  mentioned 
and  the  Synod  of  Georgia  constituted  the  General  Synod, 
South.  A  few  other  Southern  synods  afterward  became 
connected  with  it.  In  1886  a  new  organization,  known  as 
the  United   Synod  in  the  Soutli,  took  its  place,  consisting 


THE  EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  1 83 

of  six  synods  which  had  belonged  to  the  General  Synod, 
South,  and  the  independent  Tennessee  and  Holston  synods. 

The  type  of  Lutheranism  represented  by  the  United 
Synod  in  the  South  is  similar  to  that  of  the  General  Synod, 
though  perhaps  a  little  stricter.  Its  confessional  basis  is 
as  follows : 

''  The  Holy  Scriptures,  the  inspired  writings  of  the  Old 
and  New  Testaments,  the  only  standard  of  doctrine  and 
church  discipline. 

"  As  a  true  and  faithful  exhibition  of  the  doctrines  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures  in  regard  to  matters  of  faith  and  prac- 
tice, the  three  ancient  symbols,  the  Apostolic,  the  Nicene, 
and  the  Athanasian  Creeds,  and  the  Unaltered  Augsburg 
Confession  of  Faith ;  also,  the  other  symbolical  books  of 
the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church,  viz.,  the  Apology,  the 
Smalcald  Articles,  the  Smaller  and  Larger  Catechisms  of 
Luther,  and  the  Formula  of  Concord,  consisting  of  the 
Epitome  and  full  Declaration  as  they  are  set  forth,  defined, 
and  published  in  the  Christian  Book  of  Concord,  or  the 
Symbolical  Books  of  the  Lutheran  Church,  published  in 
the  year  1580,  as  true  and  Scriptural  developments  of  the 
doctrines  taught  in  the  Augsburg  Confession  and  in  perfect 
harmony  of  \sic\  one  and  the  same  pure  Scriptural  faith." 

The  United  Synod  in  the  South  is  represented  in  nine 
of  the  Southern  States,  including  Tennessee  and  West  Vir- 
ginia. It  has  414  organizations  and  379  church  edifices, 
of  an  average  value  of  $2938,  and  an  average  seating  capac- 
ity of  365  ;  29  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  4225,  are 
occupied. 


84     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. 

r\         •  /^u       1.  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  O/g^"^-  Church  ^^  ^^^^^^^  ^^^j_ 

zations.  Edifices.       p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Alabama 3           i  250  •$1,200  75 

Florida 2           2  460  5j45o  I43 

Georgia  16         15  4,825  99»i5o  i,477 

Mississippi ii          10  2,750  4^650  533 

North  Carolina 119  107  44,463  263,690  ii,759 

South  Carolina  ... .  74         78  27,525  339^250  8,757 

Tennessee 23         20  7,410  52,750  i,999 

Virginia 145  124  45,090  314,200  11,196 

West  Virginia 21         22  5,680  33,725  IjS^^ 

Total 414  379  138,453    $1,114,065  37,457 

Summary  by  Synods. 

SYNODS. 

Alpha      Synod      of 

Freedmen 5          3  550  $i,75o  94 

Georgia 17         16  4,885  92,600  1,535 

Holston 27         22  7,835  53,650  2,129 

Mississippi 11         10  2,750  4,650  533 

North  Carolina 56         53  21,050  188,800  6,163 

South  Carolina 61         66  21,975  337, 150  7,013 

Southwest  Virginia.  65         48  17,502  114,050  4,379 

Tennessee 107        9;  41,976  i43,790  10,086 

Virginia 65         64  19,930  177,625  5,525 


Total 414      379      13^,453    $1,114,065     37,457 

3. — THE    GENERAL   COUNCIL. 

This  was  the  third  general  body  to  be  organized  in  the 
order  of  time.  When  the  General  Synod  consented  in 
1864  to  the  admission  of  the  Franckean  Synod,  which  was 
regarded  by  the  minority  of  the  General  Synod  as  un- 
Lutheran  and  as  not  having  definitely  accepted  the  Augs- 
burg Confession,  the  delegates  of  the  Ministerium  of  Penn- 
sylvania protested  (a  number  of  others  joining  in  the 
protest)  and  withdrew.      At  the  next  session  of  the  Gen- 


THE  EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  185 

eral  Synod,  being  excluded  from  participation  in  its  organ- 
ization, they  retired  from  the  body.  The  Pittsburg,  the 
New  York,  the  English  Ohio,  the  Minnesota,  and  the 
Texas  synods  also  dissolved  their  connection  with  the 
General  Synod.  The  withdrawal  of  the  delegates  of  the 
Ministerium  of  Pennsylvania  was  approved  by  that  body 
at  its  next  session,  and  a  committee  was  appointed  to  issue 
a  '*  fraternal  address  to  all  Evangelical  Lutheran  synods, 
ministers,  and  congregations  in  the  United  States  and 
Canada  which  confess  the  Unaltered  Augsburg  Confession, 
inviting  them  to  unite  in  a  convention  for  the  purpose 
of  forming  a  union  of  Lutheran  synods."  The  proposed 
convention  was  held  in  December,  1866,  representatives 
of  the  synods  of  Pennsylvania,  New  York,  English  Ohio, 
Pittsburg,  Wisconsin,  English  district  of  Ohio,  Michigan, 
Minnesota,  Canada,  Illinois,  and  the  Joint  Synod  of  Ohio 
participating.  "  Principles  of  Faith  and  Church  Polity  " 
were  adopted,  and  the  next  year  the  first  convention  of 
the  new  body  was  held.  Thus  was  the  General  Council 
organized. 

In  the  first  year  of  its  history  the  Joint  Synod  of  Ohio 
withdrew  and  the  German  Synod  of  Iowa  assumed  a  semi- 
independent  position,  sending  delegates  and  participating 
in  the  debate  but  taking  no  part  in  the  voting.  This  body 
still  sustains  this  relation.  The  withdrawal  of  the  Joint 
Synod  of  Ohio,  and,  a  few  years  later,  of  the  synods  of 
Wisconsin,  Illinois,  and  Minnesota,  and  the  semi-independ- 
ent position  taken  by  the  German  Synod  of  Iowa,  were  on 
account  of  the  refusal  of  the  General  Council  to  give  a  sat- 
isfactory declaration  on  what  are  called  the  ''Four  Points." 
It  was  the  desire  of  these  bodies  that  some  expression 
should  be  given  concerning  chiliasm,  and  that  the  admis- 


1 86     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

sion  of  non-Lutherans  to  communion,  the  exchange  of 
*'  pulpits  with  sectarians,"  and  membership  in  secret  soci- 
eties should  be  unequivocally  condemned.  The  council 
would  not  commit  itself  fully  at  that  time  on  these  points, 
though  it  has  since  practically  done  so,  especially  on  the 
questions  of  pulpit  and  altar  fellowship. 

The  confessional  basis  of  the  General  Council  is  as  fol- 
lows : 

**  We  accept  and  acknowledge  the  doctrine  of  the 
Unaltered  Augsburg  Confession  in  its  original  sense  as 
throughout  in  conformity  with  the  pure  truth,  of  which 
God's  Word  is  the  only  rule.  We  accept  its  statements 
of  truth  as  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  canonical  Script- 
ures. We  reject  the  errors  it  condemns,  and  believe  that 
all  which  it  commits  to  the  liberty  of  the  church  of  right 
belongs  to  that  liberty. 

'*  In  thus  formally  accepting  and  acknowledging  the 
Unaltered  Augsburg  Confession  we  declare  our  conviction 
that  the  other  confessions  of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran 
Church,  inasmuch  as  they  set  forth  none  other  than  its 
system  of  doctrine  and  articles  of  faith,  are  of  necessity 
pure  and  Scriptural.  Preeminent  among  such  accordant, 
pure,  and  Scriptural  statements  of  doctrine,  by  their  in- 
trinsic excellence,  by  the  great  and  necessary  ends  for 
which  they  were  prepared,  by  their  historical  position,  and 
by  the  general  judgment  of  the  church,  are  these:  The 
Apology  of  the  Augsburg  Confession,  the  Smalcald  Arti- 
cles, the  Catechisms  of  Luther,  and  the  Formula  of  Con- 
cord, all  of  which  are,  with  the  Unaltered  Augsburg  Con- 
fession, in  perfect  harmony  of  one  and  the  same  Scriptural 
faith." 

One  of  the  most  perplexing  questions  Lutherans  have 


THE   EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  187 

had  to  deal  with  in  this  country  has  been  that  of  language. 
It  is  agreed  that  the  communion  sustained  very  heavy 
losses  down  almost  to  the  middle  of  this  century  by  insist- 
ing that  synodical  proceedings  and  church  services  gener- 
ally should  be  in  the  German  tongue.  The  children,  hav- 
ing learned  English,  desired  to  have  the  services  conducted 
in  that  language ;  failing  in  this,  they  joined  other  denom- 
inations. The  General  Council  proposed  from  the  begin- 
ning that  the  different  languages  and  nationalities  '*  should 
be  firmly  knit  together  in  this  New  World  in  the  unity  of 
one  and  the  same  pure  faith,"  and  declared  that  "  no  dis- 
tinction of  language"  must  be  allowed  '*  to  interfere  with 
the  great  work"  before  the  church  in  this  country.  It 
includes  American,  German,  and  Scandinavian  elements, 
but  English  is  the  official  language  of  the  General  Council, 
though  the  German  and  Scandinavian  tongues  are  also 
used.  It  has  many  large  English  churches  in  the  eastern 
cities,  but  a  majority  of  the  congregations  are  German 
and  Scandinavian  and  employ  those  languages.  But  few 
of  the  ministers  are  incapable  of  speaking  and  writing 
in  EngHsh.  All  the  correspondence  of  the  Census  Office 
with  Lutherans  of  whatever  synodical  connection  was  in 
English,  and  scarcely  a  score  out  of  the  thousands  of  let- 
ters received  were  in  any  other  tongue. 

There  are  nine  synods  connected  with  the  General 
Council,  including  one  in  Canada,  which,  of  course,  is  not 
given  in  these  tables.  While  the  General  Council,  the 
General  Synod,  and,  indeed,  most  other  denominations  of 
this  country,  have  churches  and  communicants  in  other 
countries,  these  churches  and  communicants  are  omitted  in 
the  census  reports.  Only  those  congregations  are  included 
which  are  within  the  territorial  limits  of  the  United  States. 


1 88     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

The  General  Council  has  2044  organizations,  with  1554 
edifices  and  324,846  communicants.  Of  the  latter,  107,- 
025  are  attached  to  the  Ministerium  of  Pennsylvania,  the 
oldest  Lutheran  synod  in  the  United  States.  Some  367 
organizations  hold  worship  in  halls,  etc.,  having  a  seating 
capacity  of  30,904.  The  total  value  of  church  property  is 
$11,119,286,  or  an  average  for  each  edifice  of  $7155, 
which  is  even  higher  than  the  extraordinary  average  of 
houses  of  worship  owned  by  the  General  Synod.  The 
average  seating  capacity  of  the  edifices  is  378. 

While  there  are  only  eight  synods,  there  are  congrega- 
tions in  thirty-two  States  and  one  Territory,  Pennsylvania, 
of  course,  maintaining  the  lead,  with  616,  or  nearly  one 
third  of  the  whole  number,  and  124,163  communicants. 
The  next  largest  number  of  communicants,  39,430,  is  found 
in  New  York,  Minnesota  coming  third,  with  27,906,  and 
Illinois  fourth,  with  26,860.  The  Synod  of  Texas  is  the 
only  synod  that  does  not  cross  State  lines.  The  Swedish 
Augustana  Synod,  though  second  in  numbers  to  the  Minis- 
terium of  Pennsylvania,  embraces  in  its  territory  no  fewer 
than  thirty  States,  being,  in  fact,  almost  as  widespread 
as  the  entire  General  Council.  Delaware  and  Kentucky 
are  the  only  two  States  covered  by  the  General  Council 
which  are  not  also  covered  by  the  Augustana  Synod. 
This  body  of  wide  boundaries  was  organized  in  i860 
with  only  about  5000  communicants,  and  is  composed  of 
Swedish  Lutherans.  The  synod  is  subdivided  into  seven 
conferences,  or  sub-synods,  which  meet  semi-annually. 
The  synod  itself  is  assembled  yearly.  The  German  Iowa 
Synod  has  five  districts,  and  covers  several  States. 


THE   EVANGELICAL   LUTHERAXS. 


189 


Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  Organi- 
zations. 

California 7 

Colorado 7 

Connecticut 24 

Delaware 2 

Dist.  of  Columbia  . .  i 

Florida i 

Idaho 3 

Illinois 143 

Indiana 38 

Iowa 174 

Kansas 62 

Kentucky 4 

Maine i 

Massachusetts 12 

Michigan 70 

Minnesota 223 

Missouri 18 

Nebraska 88 

New  Hampshire  ...  2 

New  Jersey 30 

New  York 113 

North  Dakota 38 

Ohio 118 

Oregon 4 

Pennsylvania 616 

Rhode  Island 3 

South  Dakota 100 

Texas 42 

Vermont 2 

Washington 7 

West  Virginia i 

Wisconsin   85 

Wyoming 5 

Total 2,044 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

S 

1,175 

$62,300 

603 

6 

1,436 

65,800 

519 

15 

5,820 

122  400 

3,767 

I 

335 

10,000 

296 

2 

1,400 

40,000 

600 

17 

139 

'> 

180 

2,450 

122 

42,335 

809,150 

26,860 

34 

10,335 

148,100 

3,887 

132 

34,771 

420,680 

20,009 

43 

11,294 

136,830 

6,269 

3 

570 

6,800 

299 

I 

300 

2,600 

179 

6 

2,110 

55,900 

1,743 

5« 

14,305 

153,350 

8,710 

175 

52,445 

624,120 

27,906 

16 

3,584 

101,800 

1,857 

55 

12,181 

206,001 

7,204 

2 

750 

13,500 

395 

20 

8,785 

339,500 

7,940 

109 

43,764 

1,915,510 

39,430 

7 

1. 210 

15,400 

1,582 

108 

35,510 

483,100 

15,915 

3 

675 

13,650 

305 

486 

268,885 

4,993,355 

124,163 

I 

300 

5,250 

420 

31 

5,070 

40,125 

4,770 

39 

9,810 

128,740 

7,140 
174 

5 

1,400 

33,950 

446 

I 

800 

10.000 

650 

66 

17,290 

158,925 

10,072 

580 

1,554     588,825  $11,119,286  324,846 


Summary  by  Synods. 

SYNODS. 

English     Synod     of 

Ohio   64         58        20,375 

Indiana 31         27  9,010 

Ministerium  of  New 

York 115        117        47,319 


$273,600 
169,000 


8,273 
3,058 


1,942,410     42,029 


I90     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. — Contin7ied. 

Ovrror,;      Pk.iv^T,  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

-•■"<'-•                ?aK:E'a'Ss.  Ca  Church  .nuni. 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Ministerium  of  Penn- 
sylvania      456       347  227,555  $4,319,355  107,025 

Pittsburg   167       149  47,825  961,800  20,755 

Scandinavian       Au- 

gustana 688       515  156,664  2,600,550  88,700 

Texas 39         35  8,485  1 12,740  6,643 

German     Synod    of 

Iowa 484      306  71,592  739,831  47,363 

Total    2,044    1,554  588,825  $11,119,286  324,846 


4. — THE    SYNODICAL    CONFERENCE. 

The  latest  and  largest  of  the  Lutheran  general  bodies 
is  the  Synodical  Conference,  organized  in  1872  by  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Missouri,  Ohio,  Wisconsin,  Minnesota, 
Illinois,  and  Norwegian  synods.  Four  of  these  synods,  the 
Ohio,  Wisconsin,  Minnesota,  and  Illinois,  had  taken  part 
in  the  organization  of  the  General  Council,  but  had  with- 
drawn. The  conference  was  intended  to  represent  a  type 
of  Lutheran  confessionalism  stricter  than  that  of  the  Gen- 
eral Council,  as  that  of  the  General  Council  was  stricter 
than  the  General  Synod.  The  following  is  its  confessional 
basis : 

''  The  Synodical  Conference  acknowledges  the  canonical 
Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  as  God's  Word, 
and  the  Confession  of  the  Evangehcal  Lutheran  Church  of 
1580,  called  the  Concordia,  as  its  own." 

The  central  body  of  the  Synodical  Conference,  and  the 
influence  which  constitutes  the  peculiar  type  of  Lutheran- 
ism  which  it  stands  for,  is  the  synod  of  Missouri,  Ohio,  and 
other  States,  which  was  organized  in  1847.     The  nucleus 


THE   EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  191 

of  this  synod  was  a  Saxon  colony  of  Lutherans  who  settled 
in  Missouri  in  1839.  When  the  synod  was  constituted  it 
embraced  12  congregations  and  22  ministers,  but,  proclaim- 
ing a  Lutheranism  of  the  most  positive  character,  it  at- 
tracted to  itself  hosts  of  German  immigrants  who  were  dis- 
satisfied with  the  result  of  the  union  of  the  Lutheran  and 
Reformed  religions  in  the  Fatherland,  and  were  pleased 
with  the  absolute  and  unreserved  acceptance  of  the  Augs- 
burg Confession  required  by  the  synod  and  with  its  stern 
antagonism  to  every  form  of  syncretism  (union  services, 
union  communions,  union  congregations),  and  its  insistence 
on  pure  Lutheran  literature,  pure  Lutheran  services,  and 
a  pure  and  positive  Lutheranism.  Some  questions  which 
most  other  Lutheran  bodies  might  consider  open  questions 
are  not  so  held  by  the  ''  Missourians,"  as  they  are  called. 
For  example,  they  maintain  that  Antichrist  is  the  Roman 
pontiff;  that  their  doctrine  as  to  the  ministry  and  the 
church  is  the  true  and  settled  Scriptural  doctrine,  and  that 
all  forms  of  chiliasm  or  millenarianism  are  to  be  condemned. 
They  allow  no  differences  on  these  and  some  other  extra- 
confessional  points ;  therefore  their  type  of  doctrine  and 
practice  has  become  known,  both  in  this  country  and  Ger- 
many, where  it  has  obtained  some  favor,  as  *'  Missourian." 
In  1 88 1  the  Joint  Synod  of  Ohio  withdrew  from  the 
Synodical  Conference  as  the  result  of  a  controversy  which 
arose  on  the  doctrine  of  predestination,  and  was  followed 
in  1882  by  the  Norwegian  Synod.  The  synod  of  Missouri 
maintained  that  predestination  to  salvation  is  not  due  to 
God's  foresight  of  faith  in  man,  but  faith  and  perseverance 
in  faith  are  included  in  the  decree.  The  adherents  of  the 
Ohio  party  opposed  this  as  Calvinistic,  and  a  division  was 
the  result. 


192     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

The  Missouri  is  by  far  the  largest  Lutheran  synod  in  the 
United  States,  and  embraces  in  its  territory  thirty-one 
States  and  the  District  of  Columbia.  It  is  divided  into  13 
districts,  or  sub-synods,  and  reports  1589  organizations, 
with  1261  church  edifices,  valued  at  $6,759,535,  and  293,- 
2 1 1  communicants. 

The  Synodical  Conference  has  1934  organizations,  1531 
church  edifices,  and  357,153  communicants.  The  average 
seating  capacity  of  its  edifices  is  289,  and  their  average 
value  $5098.  Only  6^  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of 
4362,  are  occupied.  The  constituency  of  the  Synodical 
Conference  is  almost  wholly  German.  Services  in  Eng- 
lish are,  however,  being  extensively  introduced,  and  ex- 
clusively English  congregations  have  been  founded. 

Summary  by  States. 

Oraan?      PlinrrV.         Seating  Valuc  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^lE^:    VA^lr..  Ca-  Church  muni. 

zations.     Edifices.        p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Alabama 5  5  1,300  $12,200  534 

Arkansas 17  13  2,165  39,345  1,311 

California 12  7  2,075  101,800  1,702 

Colorado 6  2  475  22,500  394 

Connecticut 8  4  1,900  33, 500  1,405 

District  of  Columbia  i  i  400  30,000  375 

Florida 3  2  270  4,400  209 

Idaho I  27 

Illinois 250  223  80,144  15456,630  69,033 

Indiana 102  96  32,299  632,260  24,666 

Iowa 139  82  18,452  194,715  13,252 

Kansas 71  47  8,974  95,030  5,906 

Kentucky 3  3  900  9,800  468 

Louisiana 11  11  3,375  59j40o  2,452 

Maryland 14  12  4,862  129,975  3,208 

Massachusetts 10  6  1,575  54,000  1,717 

Michigan 137  109  33,731  488,880  27,472 

Minnesota 217  159  36.346  443,700  30,398 

Missouri 118  112  32,820  613,940  22,121 

Montana 2  i  225  10,000  130 

Nebraska 135  93  16,788  168,570  12,339 

New  Jersey 5  5  1,320  32,000  699 


THE  EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  193 


Summary  by  States. — Continued. 

c\..^„„\       r-j, \.      Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                        ^rgarn-      Church         ^^^  ^^^^^^  ^^^._ 

zations.     Edifice..      ^^^.^^  Property.  cants. 

New  York 67         65        24,406  $1,055,455  22,642 

NorthDakota 18           5             650  6,050  1,136 

Ohio 54         55        18,330  409,975  15,440 

Oregon 5           3             340  6,300  •      274 

Pennsylvania 26         25         9,697  284,915  6,559 

South  Dakota 71         24         4,368  20,770  3,097 

Tennessee   2          2            550  30,110  227 

Texas 28         21          4,680  30,675  3,498 

Virginia 4           5          1,275  20,815  399 

West  Virginia 4           2             300  300  121 

Wisconsin 388       331        98,193  1,306,303  83,942 

Total 1,934    1,531      443,185  $7,804,313  357,153 

Summary  by  Synods. 

SYNODS. 

Minnesota   90         58        14,523  $218,990  12,655 

Missouri,  Ohio,  and 

other  States  ...  .    1,589    1,261;^  366,507  6,759,535  293,211 

Wisconsin 237       19834^    58,855  794,988  50,095 

English  Conference 

of  Missouri 18         12^      3,300  30,800  1,192 

Total 1,934    1,331      443,185  $7,804,313  357,153 


INDEPENDENT    LUTHERAN    SYNODS. 

There  are  twelve  Lutheran  synods  which  are  not  con- 
nected with  any  of  the  four  general  bodies,  and  are  there- 
fore called  independent  bodies.  They  occupy  this  attitude 
for  various  reasons.  In  at  least  two  cases,  those  of  the 
Suomai  Synod,  a  body  of  Finns,  and  the  Icelandic  Synod, 
the  reason  doubtless  is  peculiarity  of  language ;  in  other 
cases  it  is  differences  of  view  on  various  doctrinal  and 
practical  questions  and  in  national  peculiarities.  Some  of 
these  bodies  are  small,  three  of  them  having  less  than  5000 
communicants  each,  but  some  of  them  are  large  enough  to 


194    RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 

constitute  separate  denominations.  In  1892  the  Michigan 
Synod  united  with  the  Wisconsin  and  Minnesota  synods 
of  the  Synodical  Conference,  and  a  new  general  body  was 
thus  formed.  In  1893  the  Joint  Synod  of  Ohio  and  the 
German  Synod  of  Iowa  agreed  upon  terms  of  pulpit  and 
altar  fellowship,  without  becoming  organically  united. 


5. — THE  JOINT    SYNOD    OF    OHIO    AND    OTHER    STATES. 

This  body  was  organized  in  1 818.  It  occupied  an  in- 
dependent attitude  until  1867,  when  it  assisted  in  consti- 
tuting the  General  Council,  but  only  to  withdraw  in  the 
following  year,  because  it  was  not  fully  satisfied  with  the 
position  of  the  council  concerning  the  question  of  pulpit 
and  altar  fellowship  with  other  denominations.  It  has  ever 
been  conservative  and  strictly  confessional  in  character, 
and  it  was  for  nine  years  connected  with  the  Synodical 
Conference,  from  which  it  withdrew  in  1881  because  it 
could  not  ac@ept  the  views  of  the  majority  concerning  the 
doctrine  of  predestination.  Since  then  it  has  occupied  an 
independent  position.  Its  constituency  is  for  the  most 
part  German,  but  in  about  a  third  of  its  congregations  both 
German  and  English  are  used.  Like  other  large  Lutheran 
synods,  it  is  divided  into  a  number  of  districts. 

While  its  chief  strength  is  in  the  State  of  Ohio,  it  has 
many  communicants  in  Wisconsin,  Michigan,  Pennsylvania, 
and  Indiana.  It  embraces  twenty-three  States  and  the 
District  of  Columbia,  New  York  constituting  the  most 
easterly  and  northerly  portion  of  its  territory,  Texas  the 
most  southerly,  and  Oregon  the  most  westerly.  It  has 
421  organizations,  443  edifices,  valued  at  $1,639,087,  and 
69,505  communicants.  Only  ten  of  its  organizations  hold 
services  in  other  than  church  edifices.     The  average  value 


THE  EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  195 

of  its  edifices  is  $3700,  and  their  average  seating  capacity 

337.     Only  10  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  785,  are 
occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 

,^,^„,  Organi-     Church       ^^^^'"^  X^'"^^^  C°"^- 

STATES.  ^2or.^.     Edifices.         Cn-  Church  mum- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

District  of  Columbia  i           i              250  $13,000  150 

Idaho  1           I              300  1,000  80 

Illinois 16         16          6,950  60,000  2,695 

Indiana 34         32        11,825  160,950  5,095 

Iowa 5           8          1,850  10,500  650 

Kansas 5           5           1,500  2,750  472 

Louisiana i           i              700  5,000  500 

Maryland 12          12          3,620  38,900  i,545 

Michigan 21          20          7,672  125,700  6,217 

Minnesota 21         23          8,700  37,250  3,180 

Missouri i            i              200  600  30     . 

Nebraska 7           7           1,800  4,600  440 

New  York 2           2              330  2,700  198 

North  Carolina  ...  .  12          11           2,550  6,315  567 

North  Dakota i            i              300  750  70 

Ohio 191        197K     67,537  839,272  31,261 

Oregon i           i              200  600  50 

Pennsylvania 32         32         10.429  206,100  5,552 

South  Dakota 3           3           1,000  2,700  327 

Texas 4           7          2,850  20,000  1,730 

Virginia 5           4             750  2,900  175 

Washington 4           6          1,250  11,400  386 

West  Virginia 16         io><      2,025  5»5oo  779 

Wisconsin 25         41         14,750  80,600  7,356 

Total 421       443      149,338    $1,639,087  69,505 


6. — THE    BUFFALO    SYNOD. 

This  synod  was  organized  in  1845  by  the  Rev.  J.  A. 
A.  Grabau,  who  came  from  Germany,  where  he  had  suf- 
fered for  his  opposition  to  the  union  of  the  Reformed  and 
Lutheran  religions.  The  synod  has  announced  views  con- 
cerning the  ministerial  office  which  other  Lutherans  have 
considered  as  hierarchical.  It  insists  that  ordination,  unless 
by^  ordained  ministers,  is  not  valid ;    that  ministers  created 


196     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OE   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

by  congregations  have  no  divine  authority  to  pronounce 
absolution  or  to  consecrate  the  elements  of  bread  and 
wine;  that  congregations  may  not  pronounce  excommu- 
nication ;  that  obedience  is  due  to  ministers ;  and  that  the 
synod  is  the  supreme  tribunal  in  the  church. 

The  synod  has  congregations  in  six  States,  with  25 
church  edifices,  valued  at  $84,410,  and  4242  communi- 
cants. The  average  value  of  its  edifices  is  $3376,  and 
their  average  seating  capacity  232.  Two  halls,  with  a 
seating  capacity  of  275,  are  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 

STATES.  P/?^"* 

zations. 

California i 

Illinois I 

Michigan 4 

Minnesota 2 

New  York 12 

Wisconsin  7 

Total 27         25  5,793        $84,410        4,242 

7. — hauge's  synod. 

This  is  a  body  of  Norwegian  Lutherans  organized  in  the 
period  1846-50  by  immigrants  from  Norway.  It  took  its 
name  from  Hauge,  a  leader  of  a  strong  spiritual  movement 
in  that  country.  Its  followers  lay  much  stress  upon  con- 
version and  are  noted  for  their  earnestness.  The  laymen 
participate  in  prayer  and  exhortation  in  public  assemblies, 
contrary  to  the  practice  of  some  other  bodies  of  a  more 
churchly  character.  This  synod  has  always  occupied  an 
independent  attitude. 

It  has  175  organizations,  divided  among  eleven  States, 


Church 
Ldifices 

Sealing 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

I 

150 

$500 

26 

4 

300 
848 

2,500 
10,100 

i3(> 

2 
10 

7 

300 

2,715 
1,480 

3,700 
48,010 
19,600 

312 
2,268 
1,158 

THE   EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  197 

but  with  two  thirds  of  its  strength  in  Minnesota,  South 
Dakota,  and  Wisconsin,  and  100  church  edifices  having  an 
average  seating  capacity  of  306  and  an  average  vahie  of 
$2149;  75  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  4436,  are  oc- 
cupied. 

Summary  by  States. 

STATES.  Or?ani- 

zations. 

Illinois 10 

Indiana i 

Iowa 17 

Kansas i 

Michigan i 

Minnesota 55 

Nebraska 8 

North  Dakota 16 

South  Dakota 36 

Washington 2 

Wisconsin 28 

Total 175        100      30,500      $214,395      14,730 


8. — THE    NORWEGIAN    CHURCH    IN    AMERICA. 

This  body  was  organized  by  Norwegian  immigrants  a 
few  years  later  than  Hauge's  Synod.  Like  the  latter,  it 
has  always  maintained  an  independent  position,  except  for 
the  short  period  when  it  was  connected  with  the  Synod- 
ical  Conference.  A  few  years  ago  a  controversy  over  the 
doctrine  of  predestination  caused  a  division  in  its  ministry 
and  congregations,  resulting  in  the  formation  of  what  was 
known  as  the  Anti-Missouri  Brotherhood.  The  synod 
accepted  the  views  of  the  Missouri  Synod,  which  its  type 
of  Lutheranism  resembles,  while  the  brotherhood  rejected 
these  views  as  Calvinistic. 

The  synod  is  divided  into  three  districts.      Its  territory 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

8 

2,875 

$40,400 

863 

I 

250 

800 

29 

14 

3.450 

27,200 

1.593 
26 

I 

200 

4,000 

62 

41 

13,285 

99.345 

6,534 

4 

725 

4,950 

438 

5 

1,700 

4,850 

576 

II 

2,955 

11,700 

2,239 

I 

350 

1,000 

205 

14 

4,710 

20,150 

2,165 

198     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

embraces  twenty-two  States,  stretching  from  ocean  to  ocean 
and  from  the  Lakes  to  the  Gulf.  Two  thirds  of  its  commu- 
nicants, however,  are  in  the  States  of  Minnesota  and  Wis- 
consin. The  average  value  of  its  church  edifices  is  $2929, 
and  their  average  seating  capacity  is  287.  It  occupies  182 
halls,  which  have  a  seating  capacity  of  12,115. 

Summary  by  States. 

^         •       ^.        1  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  O-:?^"'-     %Yl  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.      Edifices.        p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

California 3  i  300  $14,000  189 

Colorado i  i  300  2,000  75 

Idaho I  I  150  1,000  45 

Illinois 14  6  3>i5o  95>5oo  1,688 

Indiana 2  i  300  6,000  182 

Iowa 49  26  9j275  97,800  7,059 

Kansas i  i  100  200  30 

Massachusetts 2  ...           375 

Michigan 14  7  1,125  9,900  758 

Minnesota 164  ii2>^  32,843  267,950  21,832 

Missouri 2  i  200  400  50 

Montana 3  i  250  1,200  165 

Nebraska 21  7  1,520  12,200  544 

New  Jersey i  i  225  4,000  180 

New  York 5  3  1,050  33,000  784 

North  Dakota 53  8  2,200  22,975  2,784 

Ohio 4  I  150  3,000  184 

Oregon 3  i  200  2,500  95 

South  Dakota 46  13  3,240  25,700  3,030 

Texas 4  5  950  6,700  350 

Washington i  ...           16 

Wisconsin  95  'J'jYz  21,460  200,800  15,037 

Total 489       275        78,988      $806,825       55,452 


9. — THE    MICHIGAN    SYNOD. 

This  is  a  German  body  organized  in  i860.  It  helped 
to  organize  the  General  Council,  and  was  connected  with 
it  until   1888,  when  it  withdrew  because  the   position  of 


THE  EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  199 

the  council  on  the  question  of  pulpit  and  altar  fellowship 
with  other  denominations  was  not  sufficiently  decided. 

The  synod  is  represented  in  the  States  of  Michigan  and 
Indiana/having  in  all  11,482  communicants.  Its  church 
edifices  have  an  average  value  of  $3109  and  an  average 
seating  capacity  of  276.  There  are  12  halls,  with  a  seat- 
ing capacity  of  550. 

Summary  by  States. 

r>..,^o„-       r\.-.,^r\.        Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^^^^^'-    T?,^"'^'^^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.     Edifices.         p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Indiana 3  3  1,150  $7,500  441 

Michigan 62         50        13,463        157,270       11,041 

Total 65         53        14,613      $164,770       11,482 


10. — THE    DANISH    CHURCH    IN    AMERICA. 

This  is  the  oldest  body  of  Danish  Lutherans  in  this 
country,  having  been  organized  in  1872.  It  is  connected 
with  the  Church  of  Denmark,  which  sent  missionaries  to 
this  country,  who  helped  to  organize  Danish  congregations 
and  a  little  later  to  form  them  into  a  synod. 

It  has  congregations  in  fourteen  States  and  in  the  Ter- 
ritory of  Utah.  Its  territory  stretches  from  Maine  to 
California,  forming  a  belt  across  the  northern  portion  of 
the  country.  It  has  131  organizations,  with  75  edifices, 
having  an  average  seating  capacity  of  198  and  an  average 
value  of  $1741.  The  total  number  of  communicants  is 
10,181,  more  than  half  of  whom  are  to  be  found  in  the 
States  of  Iowa,  Wisconsin,  Illinois,  and  Minnesota.  The 
synod  is  divided  into  9  districts.  There  are  42  halls,  with 
a  seating  capacity  of  2175,  used  as  places  of  worship. 


200     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. 


California 

Connecticut 

Illinois 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Maine 

Massachusetts  .  .  , 

Michigan 

Minnesota   

Nebraska 

New  Jersey 

New  York 

South  Dakota  .  .  . 

Utah 

Wisconsin 

Total 131 


Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

4 

I 

300 

$1,200 

125 

2 

2 

300 

2,000 

200 

9 

5 

1,330 

15,100 

1,314 

23 

14 

3,390 

24,800 

2,211 

I 

I 

125 

800 

120 

2 

2 

400 

200 

3 

119 

9 

8 

1,900 

13,700 

588 

17 

8 

1,230 

11,300 

1,032 

19 

II 

1,510 

20, 100 

888 

8 

5 

1,000 

6,000 

565 

5 

4 

475 

11,000 

410 

II 

I 

200 

1,500 

285 

2 

48 

16 

13 

2,600 

22,200 

2,076 

75       14,760      $129,700     10, 


II. — THE    GERMAN   AUGSBURG   SYNOD. 

This  body  was  formed  in  1875.  It  has  23  organizations, 
distributed  among  nine  States.  These  organizations  own 
23  church  edifices,  with  an  average  seating  capacity  of  329 
and  an  average  value  of  $4829. 


Summary  by  States. 


Organi-    Church 
zations.    Edifices. 


Arkansas   i 

Illinois 4 

Indiana 2 

Iowa I 

Michigan i 

Missouri 2 

New  York i 

Ohio I 

Wisconsin  10 

Total 23         23 


Seating 
Ca- 
pacity. 


Value  of  Com- 

Church  muni- 

Property,  cants. 


75 
631 

370 
70 

174 
1,199 

800 
1,700 
1,991 


7,560   $111,060   7,010 


4 

700 

$9,450 

2 

600 

5,000 

I 

100 

1,000 

I 

300 

5,000 

3 

1,360 

40,000 

I 

700 

3,500 

I 

1,000 

26,800 

;o 

2,800 

20,310 

THE  EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  20I 

12. — THE    DANISH    ASSOCIATION    IN    AMERICA. 

This  association  was  formed  in  1884,  chiefly  by  Danish 
ministers,  who  withdrew  from  what  was  then  called  the 
Norwegian-Danish  Conference,  not  because  of  doctrinal 
or  ecclesiastical  differences,  but  because  of  reasons  growing 
out  of  differences  of  nationality. 

It  embraces  50  organizations,  with  33  church  edifices, 
having  an  average  seating  capacity  of  173  and  an  average 
value  of  $1357.  There  are  15  halls,  with  a  seating  capac- 
ity of  480. 

Summary  by  States. 

Organi-      Church        Seating  Value  of  Com- 

»:„„.      T?,i.c„„„  Ca-  Church 


zations.     Edifices. 


muni- 
pacity.  Property.  cants. 


California 4  2  375  $3,000  144 

Illinois I                      4,000  50 

Iowa  6  2  350  3,800  413 

Minnesota 14  9  1,675  10,150  1,524 

Nebraska 16  14  2,200  14,625  754 

Oregon i                      20 

South  Dakota 2  2  250  2,200  153 

Washington 2  .  .          40 

Wisconsin 4  4  850  7,000  395 


Total 50        33         5,700         $44,775       3,493 


13. — THE    ICELANDIC    SYNOD. 

The  Synod  of  Icelanders  was  organized  in  1885.  By 
far  the  larger  part  of  this  synod  is  in  Manitoba. 

It  has  in  this  country  13  organizations,  4  church  edifices, 
with  an  average  seating  capacity  of  325  and  an  average 
value  of  $1800,  and  1991  communicants.  It  is  represented 
in  two  States  only,  Minnesota  and  North  Dakota.  There 
are  9  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  750. 


202     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. 


STATES. 

Minnesota.  . . . 
North  Dakota 

Total 


Organi-     Church      Seating 


zations.    Edifices, 


13 


Ca- 
pacity. 

1,300 
1,300 


Value  of 

Church 

Property. 


$7,200 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

221 

1,770 


$7,200  1,991 


14. — THE    IMMANUEL    SYNOD. 

This  Is  a  small  German  body  whose  organization  dates 
from  1886.  It  is  represented  in  seven  States  and  the 
District  of  Columbia,  having  21  organizations,  19  church 
edifices,  with  an  average  seating  capacity  of  279  and  an 
average  value  of  $4958,  and  5580  communicants. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  O':?^"^- 

zations. 

District  of  Columbia  i 

Illinois I 

Indiana i 

Michigan i 

New  Jersey.  ......  2 

New  York 5 

Ohio 6 

Pennsylvania 4 

Total 21 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

I 

300 

$15,000 

500 

I 

300 

10,000 

300 

I 

150 

1,200 

180 

I 

600 

15,000 

500 

2 

550 

7,000 

700 

3 

600 

6,000 

600 

6 

1,600 

25,500 

1,350 

4 

1,200 

14,500 

1,450 

5,300      $94,200     5,580 


15. — THE    SUOMAI    SYNOD. 

This  is  a  body  of  Finnish  Lutherans  constituted  in  1889. 
It  has  1 1  organizations,  8  church  edifices,  with  an  average 
seating  capacity  of  230  and  an  average  value  of  $1548, 
and  1385  communicants,  of  whom  1265  are  in  Michigan 
and  120  in  South  Dakota. 


THE  EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  203 


Summary  by  States. 

C....C                    Organi-     Church         Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                   ^^l^^^     Y.mc^s.             C^-  p^'^"'-'^^  "^""^- 

pacity.  rroperty.  cants. 

Michigan 10           7          1,715  $10,973  1,265 

South  Dakota i           i             200  1,925  120 


Total II  8  1,915  $12,898        1,385 

16. — THE    UNITED   NORWEGIAN    CHURCH. 

This  body  was  constituted  in  1 890  by  the  union  of  three 
synods,  viz.,  the  Norwegian  Augustana  Synod,  organized 
in  i860,  the  Conference  of  the  Norwegian-Danish  Church, 
organized  in  1870,  and  the  Norwegian  Anti-Missouri  Broth- 
erhood, organized  in  1887.  The  Brotherhood  separated 
from  the  Norwegian  Synod  because  they  could  not  accept 
the  latter's  views  respecting  the  doctrine  of  absolute  pre- 
destination. The  union  of  these  three  bodies  was  due  to  a 
movement  to  bring  together,  as  far  as  possible,  all  Norwe- 
gian Lutherans  in  one  body.  Hauge's  Synod  and  tlie  Nor- 
wegian Synod,  however,  still  maintain  a  separate  attitude. 

The  United  Synod  embraces  eighteen  States  in  its  terri- 
tory. It  has  1 122  organizations,  670  church  edifices,  and 
119,972  communicants,  of  whom  49,541  are  in  the  single 
State  of  Minnesota.  The  average  seating  capacity  of  the 
churches  is  277,  and  the  average  value  $2312.  There  are 
393  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  29,185. 


STATES. 


Idaho . . 
Illinois . 
Iowa  . . 
Kansas 


Summary  by 

States. 

Organi-     Church 
zations.   Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

I               I 

27            24 
113            85 

7          3 

300 

6,445 

25,335 
650 

$2,500 

68,400 

220,100 

5,300 

no 

3,298 
14,891 

314 

204     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF  THE   UNITED   STATES. 
Summary  by  States. — Continued. 

Seating  Value  of  C 


Organi-     Church         ^^ '^  -— 

zations.    Edifices. 


om- 

muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Maine 2           i             200  $2,000  225 

Maryland i          .  .            .... 42 

Michigan 27         23          5,973  69,450  3,011 

Minnesota 405       283        76,791  608,200  49,541 

Missouri i          .  .            ....            14 

Montana 2          .  .            . . 87 

Nebraska 13           i              100  250  285 

New  Hampshire  ..            i           i             250  2,500  125 

New  York i          . .            ....            84 

North  Dakota 162         44        10,380  77,55©  10,283 

Oregon 5           2             650  9,500  204 

South  Dakota 148         41          8,150  54,655  7,922 

Washington 19         10          2,575  29,600  819 

Wisconsin 187       151        47,443  394,45©  28,717 


Total 1,122       670      185,242    $1,544,455    119,972 

INDEPENDENT  CONGREGATIONS. 

Besides  the  independent  synods  there  are  a  number  of 
independent  Lutheran  congregations — that  is,  congrega- 
tions which  do  not  belong  to  any  synod.  In  most  cases 
the  reason  is  not  doctrinal,  but  simply  a  love  of  independ- 
ence. Not  infrequently  the  pastor  of  an  independent 
congregation  is  himself  a  member  of  some  synod.  They 
are  found  in  most  of  the  States  and  Territories.  They 
aggregate  231  organizations,  188  church  edifices,  with  a 
seating  capacity  of  62,334,  and  valued  at  $1,249,745,  and 
41,953  communicants. 

Summary  by  States  of  All  Lutherans. 


STATES. 


Organi- 


Alabama 10 

Arkansas 18 

California 39 

Colorado 21 


hurch 
lifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

7 
13 
21 

14 

1,850 
2,165 

6,575 
3,236 

$15,400 

364,800 
154,800 

1,386 

4,267 
1,208 

THE  EVANGELICAL   LUTHERANS.  205 

Summary  by  States  of  All  Lutherans — Continued. 

,^^^^,  Organi-     Church         Seating  Vf-^^e  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^^l^^^      £^^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Connecticut 37  23          8,820  $172,900  5,762 

Delaware 2  i              335  10,000  296 

Dist.  of  Columbia  11  13          6,100  414,000  2,997 

Florida 6  4             730  9,850  369 

Georgia 18  17          5,825  124,150  1,932 

Idaho 7  5             930  6,950  401 

Illinois 590  511       175,037  3,021,850  116,807 

Indiana 279  266        82,609  1,220,410  41,832 

Iowa 567  400      107,708  i!i5o,795  63,725 

Kansas 205  147        33,688  418,410  16,262 

Kentucky 18  17          5,170  60,300  2,394 

Louisiana 12  12          4,075  64,400  2,952 

Maine 6  5           1,300  8,600  904 

Maryland 131  129        55,602  1,081,925  24,648 

Massachusetts...  30  15          4,260  114,400  4, 137 

Michigan 380  307        86,132  1,109,058  62,897 

Minnesota 1,141  827      227,925  2,143,805  145,907 

Mississippi 11  10          2,750  4,650  533 

Missouri 160  148        42,689  890,090  27,099 

Montana 8  2             475  11,200  394 

Nebraska 387  253        49^949  774,8i6  27,297 

New  Hampshire .  .  3  3           1,000  16,000  520 

New  Jersey 68  53        18,080  526,750  12,878 

New  Mexico 2  64 

New  York 317  306      117,115  4,693,375  89,046 

North  Carolina  .  .  131  118        47,013  270,005  12,326 

North  Dakota  .  .  .  298  75         18,040  136,275  18,269 

Ohio 588  573      192,537  3,007,097  89,569 

Oregon 21  12          2,515  59,050  1,080 

Pennsylvania....  1,292  1,105      515,827  9,258,020  219,725 

Rhode  Island  ...  .  4  2             600  7,75o  590 

South  Carolina  . .  74  78        27,525  339,250  8,757 

South  Dakota  .. .  432  138        27,783  183,575  23,314 

Tennessee 36  33        12,560  91,760  2,975 

Texas 88  80        20,840  210,915  14,556 

Utah 4  84 

Vermont 2  1 74 

Virginia 157  136        48,165  344,915  12,220 

Washington 35  22          5,575  75, 95^  1,912 

West  Virginia  .. .  47  41         10,605  118,525  4,176 

Wisconsin 894  757      223,570  2,328,138  160,919 

Wyoming 8  2             350'  6,100  721 

Total 8,595  6,701  2,205,635  $35,060,354  1,231,072 


CHAPTER    XXVIII. 

THE     MENNONITES. 

The  Mennonites  take  their  name  from  Menno  Simons, 
born  in  Witmarsum,  Holland,  in  1492.  He  entered  the 
priesthood  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  and  in  1524 
was  appointed  chaplain  in  Pingium.  Two  years  later  he 
began  to  read  the  Scriptures,  which  he  had  hitherto  ignored. 
Becoming  a  close  student  of  them,  his  views  on  various 
doctrines  soon  changed,  and  he  was  known  as  an  evangel- 
ical preacher.  Upon  hearing  of  the  decapitation  of  a  de- 
vout Christian  because  he  had  renewed  his  baptism,  Menno 
Simons  began  to  examine  into  the  Scriptural  teaching  on 
that  subject,  and  was  convinced  that  there  was  no  Script- 
ural warrant  for  infant  baptism.  He  remained  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Church  of  Rome  for  several  years,  during 
which  he  wrote  a  book  against  the  Miinsterites.  He 
renounced  Cathohcism  early  in  1536,  and  was  baptized  at 
Leeuwarden.  In  the  course  of  the  following  year  he  was 
ordained  a  minister  in  what  was  then  known  as  the  Old 
Evangelical  or  Waldensian  Church.  From  this  time  on  to 
his  death,  in  1559,  he  was  active  in  the  cause  of  evangelical 
truth,  traveling  through  northern  Germany,  and  preach- 
ing everywhere.  The  churches  which  he  organized  as  a 
result  of  his  labors  rejected  infant  baptism  and  held  to  the 
principle  of  non-resistance.     A  severe  persecution  began 

206 


THE  AIENNONITES. 


207 


to  make  itself  felt  against  his  followers,  the  Mennonites; 
and,  having  heard  accounts  of  the  colony  established  in 
the  New  World  by  William  Penn,  they  began  to  emigrate 
to  Pennsylvania  near  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century, 
that  they  might  have  opportunity  to  worship  in  peace. 

The  first  Mennonite  church  in  this  country  was  estab- 
lished in  Germantown.  Upon  the  site  occupied  by  that 
church  a  plain  stone  meeting-house,  erected  in  1770,  now 
stands.  The  colony  of  Germantown,  which  had  secured  a 
tract  of  about  six  thousand  acres  of  land,  was  increased 
from  time  to  time  by  immigration  from  Europe.  In  1688 
the  Mennonite  meeting  at  Germantown  adopted  a  protest 
against  traffic  in  slaves,  said  to  have  been  the  first  ever 
made  on  this  continent.  In  this  protest  they  ^'say  that 
many  negroes  are  brought  hither  against  their  will,  and 
though  they  are  black  '*  we  cannot  conceive  there  is  more 
liberty  to  have  them  slaves  than  it  is  to  have  other  white 
ones."  The  protest,  which  was  sent  to  the  Friends,  as- 
serted that  *'  those  who  steal  or  rob  men  and  those  who 
buy  or  purchase  them  "  are  all  alike.  The  protest  was 
finally  sent  up  to  the  Yearly  Meeting  of  Friends,  where, 
after  some  consideration,  it  was  voted  not  to  be  proper  for 
the  meeting  to  give  a  positive  judgment  in  the  case.  The 
minute  of  the  Yearly  Meeting  refers  to  the  Mennonites  as 
**  German  Friends." 

Successive  immigrations  from  Holland,  Switzerland 
Germany,  and,  in  the  last  twenty- five  years,  from  southern 
Russia,  have  resulted  in  placing  the  great  majority  of 
Mennonites  in  the  world  on  American  soil,  in  the  United 
States  and  Canada.  According  to  the  census  reports  for 
1890,  the  number  of  members  in  this  country,  exclusive  of 
Canada,   Is  less  than  42,000.     This  is   the  first   complete 


208     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

statistical  statement  that  has  been  made  of  the  Mennonites, 
and  the  number  of  members  returned  is  much  smaller  than 
was  expected.  In  i860  there  was  a  general  meeting  of 
Mennonites  in  Iowa,  and  the  minutes  of  that  conference 
estimated  the  number  of  Mennonites  in  the  United  States 
at  128,000.  That  estimate  must  have  been  a  great  deal 
too  high,  or  the  denomination  has  suffered  extraordinary 
losses  since. 

The  doctrines  held  by  the  Mennonites  are  set  forth  in 
eighteen  articles  of  faith,  which  were  adopted  at  a  confer- 
ence held  in  Dordrecht,  Holland,  in  1632.  The  first  article 
treats  of  the  Trinity  and  of  God's  work  in  creation ;  the 
second  of  the  fall  of  man  through  the  disobedience  of 
Adam  and  Eve,  who  were  "  separated  and  estranged  from 
God,  that  neither  they  themselves,  nor  any  of  their  poster- 
ity, nor  angel,  nor  man,  nor  any  other  creature  in  heaven 
or  on  earth,  could  help  them,  redeem  them,  or  reconcile 
them  to  God."  They  would  have  been  eternally  lost  had 
not  God  interposed  in  their  behalf  with  love  and  mercy. 
The  third  article  shows  how  the  first  man  and  his  pos- 
terity are  restored  through  the  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God. 
The  next  ten  articles  set  forth  the  doctrines  of  salvation, 
the  ordinances,  and  treat  of  marriage  and  the  magistracy. 
The  fourteenth  article  declares  one  of  the  prominent  princi- 
ples of  the  Mennonites,  namely,  non-resistance.  It  enjoins 
believers  not  to  provoke  or  do  violence  to  any  man,  but 
to  promote  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  all ;  to  flee  when 
necessary  for  the  Lord's  sake  from  one  country  to  another, 
"  take  patiently  the  spoiling  of  our  goods,"  and  ''  when  we 
are  smitten  on  one  cheek  to  turn  the  other,  rather  than 
take  revenge  or  resent  evil."     Enemies  are  to  be  prayed 


THE   MENNONITES.  209 

for,  and,  when  hungry  and  thirsty,  to  be  fed  and  refreshed. 
The  fifteenth  article  interprets  Christ  as  forbidding  the  use 
of  all  oaths,  judicial  and  otherwise.  The  sixteenth  treats 
of  the  ban,  which  is  for  amendment  and  not  for  destruction. 
Those  who  have  been  received  into  the  company  of  saints, 
if  they  sin  voluntarily  or  presumptuously  against  God,  or 
unto  death,  must  as  offending  members  be  reproved  and 
excommunicated.  The  seventeenth  article  enjoins  the 
duty  of  avoiding  those  who  are  separated  from  God  and 
the  church,  not  only  in  eating  and  drinking,  but  in  all 
similar  temporal  matters  ;  although  if  an  offending  member 
is  hungry  or  thirsty  or  in  distress  of  any  kind,  it  is  lawful 
to  relieve  him.  The  eighteenth  article  pertains  to  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  and  the  last  judgment.  The 
righteous  are  to  reign  with  Christ  forever,  and  the  wicked 
are  to  be  thrust  down  into  the  everlasting  pains  of  hell. 

The  Mennonites  believe  in  baptism  on  profession  of 
faith,  but  they  do  not  baptize  by  immersion  except  in  one 
or  two  branches,  but  by  pouring.  Candidates  after  having 
been  under  suitable  instruction  are  catechized  as  to  their 
faith  in  God  and  their  desire  to  be  received  into  the  Church, 
and  then  receive  baptism  kneeling,  the  minister  taking 
water  with  both  hands  from  a  vessel  and  putting  it  upon 
their  heads  and  saying,  *'  Upon  the  confession  of  thy  faith 
which  thou  hast  made  before  God  and  these  witnesses,  I 
baptize  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Each  candidate  is  then  given  the  right 
hand  of  fellowship  and  the  kiss  of  peace,  the  wife  of  the 
minister  or  deacon  or  some  other  sister  giving  the  kiss  to 
the  female  converts.  Persons  received  from  other  denom- 
inations are  not  re-baptized  unless  they  earnestly  desire  it. 


2IO     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

In  some  cases  candidates  are  baptized  in  the  water,  kneel- 
ing therein,  the  minister  taking  up  water  in  both  hands  and 
pouring  it  upon  their  heads. 

The  Lord's  Supper  is  observed  twice  a  year,  usually  in 
the  spring  and  fall.  Church  examinations  are  held  before 
communion  in  order  to  inquire  into  the  standing  and 
condition  of  each  member.  Each  member  is  examined 
privately,  and  asked  whether  he  is  at  peace  with  God,  with 
the  church,  and  with  all  men,  and  desirous  to  partake  of 
the  Lord's  Supper.  If  there  are  any  difficulties  between 
members  an  effort  is  made  to  have  them  all  settled  before 
the  communion  takes  place.  As  the  bread  and  wine  are 
passed,  those  who  receive  them  rise  to  their  feet  one  after 
another.  Sometimes  the  communicant  goes  forward  to 
receive  the  bread  and  wine ;  in  other  cases  the  minister 
goes  from  seat  to  seat  and  from  person  to  person.  After 
the  Lord's  Supper  the  ceremony  of  feet-washing  is  per- 
formed. The  deacons  bring  in  vessels  of  water,  and  the 
members  proceed  to  wash  and  wipe  one  another's  feet  and 
to  give  the  kiss  of  peace,  the  sexes  separating  for  this 
purpose.     The  poHty  is  of  the  Presbyterian  type. 

Ministers  are  chosen  from  the  congregations  to  be  served. 
A  request  is  made  to  the  conference,  and  a  day  is  appointed 
for  the  purpose  of  making  the  choice.  The  bishop  preaches 
an  appropriate  sermon,  and  then  retires  to  the  council-room 
with  two  fellow-ministers.  All  the  members  who  desire 
to  do  so  visit  the  council-room,  one  by  one,  and  indicate 
the  person  of  their  choice.  If  only  one  brother  has  been 
chosen  in  this  way,  ordination  is  immediately  proceeded 
with.  When  more  than  one  is  nominated,  a  day  is  ap- 
pointed in  which  to  make  choice  by  lot  between  those 
nominated.     When  choice  by  lot  is  made,  the  deacons  take 


THE   AIENXONITES,  211 

as  many  hymn-books  as  there  are  candidates,  and,  retiring 
to  the  council-room,  place  in  one  of  these  books  a  slip  of 
paper  on  which  is  written  the  words :  *'  The  lot  is  cast  into 
the  lap,  but  the  whole  disposing  thereof  is  of  the  Lord;" 
or,  "  Herewith  God  has  called  thee  to  the  ministry  of  the 
Gospel."  The  books  are  then  taken  into  the  audience- 
room  and  placed  on  the  desk  or  table.  After  prayer  has 
been  made  each  of  the  brethren  nominated  takes  a  book, 
and  the  bishop  proceeds  to  look  for  the  lot.  The  one  in 
whose  book  it  is  found  is  considered  chosen,  and  the  bishop 
then  proceeds  to  ordain  him  with  laying  on  of  hands.  The 
ceremony  is  concluded  with  the  kiss  of  peace,  which  is 
given  by  the  bishop  and  the  other  ministers. 

Deacons  are  chosen  from  the  congregation  in  the  same 
manner  as  ministers.  Their  office  is  to  care  for  the  poor 
and  sick,  to  assist  in  administering  the  ordinances,  and  to 
take  charge  of  pubHc  meetings  in  the  absence  of  the  min- 
ister or  bishop.  Bishops  or  elders  are  ministers  having 
pastoral  charge  of  a  district,  in  which  there  may  be  one  or 
several  places  of  worship.  All  the  ministers  in  the  district 
are  under  the  direction  of  the  bishop  or  elder.  A  bishop 
is  selected  in  the  same  manner  as  a  minister  or  deacon,  and 
is  consecrated  in  the  same  way.  When  difficulties  arise 
between  brethren  they  are  settled  by  arbitration.  Those 
who  refuse  to  submit  to  arbitration  are  excommunicated, 
and  the  names  of  the  excommunicated  are  publicly  an- 
nounced. The  Mennonites  do  not  accept  public  offices 
except  in  connection  with  the  management  of  schools. 
They  are  a  sober,  industrious,  and  thrifty  people,  simple 
in  their  habits,  and  conscientious,  devout,  and  faithful 
Christians.  More  than  a  third  of  them  are  found  in  Penn- 
sylvania, the  great  German  State.     They  are  also  strong 


2  12     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

in  Ohio,  Kansas,  Illinois,  and  Indiana.  The  Russian  Men- 
nonites  have  formed  several  settlements  in  the  Northwest 
and  across  the  northern  border  in  Manitoba. 

There  are  twelve  branches  of  Mennonites,  as  follows : 


I. 

Mennonite, 

7- 

General  Conference, 

2. 

Bruederhoef, 

8. 

Church  of  God  in  Christ, 

3- 

Amish, 

9- 

Old  (Wisler), 

4- 

Old  Amish, 

lO. 

Brueder-Gemeinde, 

5- 

Apostolic, 

II. 

Defenseless, 

6. 

Reformed, 

12. 

Brethren  in  Christ. 

I. — THE    MENNONITE    CHURCH. 

This  may  be  regarded  as  the  parent  body.  It  has  nearly 
i8,ooo  communicants,  considerably  more  than  one  third  of 
the  total  of  Mennonites  in  this  country.  Many  of  its  con- 
gregations are  very  small,  the  average  number  of  com- 
municants to  each  congregation  in  Kansas  being  only 
about  25.  There  are  12  conferences,  besides  23  congre- 
gations which  sustain  no  conference  relations.  There  are 
29  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  1030. 


Summary  by  States. 


6 


STATES.  C>rpni-      Church 
zattons.     Edinces. 

Illinois 8 

Indiana 14 

Iowa 3 

Kansas 20 

Maryland 5 

Michigan 5 

Minnesota 6 

Missouri 6 

Nebraska 8 

North  Dakota i 

Ohio 27        22 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

3,175 


Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

$6,250 
11,940 


s 

1,033 

3,030 

5 

1,700 

6,600 

3 

875 

2,200 

4 

1,400 

3,700 

3/2 

900 

2,900 

5 

1,190 

7,250 

8,360 


35,450 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

273 
700 
28 
513 
336 

155 
725 
199 
751 
41 


THE  MENNONITES. 


213 


Summary  by  States. — Contimied. 

,^^^^,                      Organi-       Church         Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                      ^^l^^^       Edifices.           <^?-  T,^*""'^  '"""'■ 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Oregon 3             2           400  $1,100  115 

Pennsylvania 114         no      41,952  221,100  10,077 

South  Dakota  .7             6        1,000  2,500  655 

Tennessee  i             i            150  200  28 

Virginia  16           13        6,675  10,925  666 

West  Virginia 2            2           600  900  80 

Total 246         198      70,605  $317,045  17,078 


2. — THE    BRUEDERHOEF. 

Jacob  Huter,  of  Innspruck,  in  the  Tyrol,  is  considered 
the  founder  of  this  branch.  Huter  was  burned  at  the  stake 
in  1536.  He  instituted  the  communistic  idea,  which  is 
still  maintained,  the  members  *'  having  all  things  in  com- 
mon." His  followers  were  driven  from  Moravia  into  Hun- 
gary, thence  to  Roumania,  and  in  1 769  to  Russia.  The 
entire  community  came  to  the  United  States  from  Russia 
in  1874.  They  are  a  German-speaking  community,  and 
their  books,  which  are  in  manuscript,  are  written  in  that 
language.  They  are  all  settled  in  three  counties  in  South 
Dakota. 

Summary. 


South  Dakota 


Organi-    Church     ^g^"^ 
zations.    Edifices.     ^^^'^^ 


5 


5 


600 


Vakie  of 

Church 

Property. 

$4,500 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 


-THE    AMISH. 


The   Amish   constitute    the   second    largest    Mennonite 
branch.     They  take  their  name  from  Jacob  Ammen,  who 


2  14     KELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

separated  from  the  main  body  of  Mennonites  about  two 
centuries  ago,  on  account  of  differences  respecting  the  en- 
forcement of  church  discipHne.  He  and  his  followers 
insisted  that  the  ban  should  be  more  rigorously  observed. 
In  Pennsylvania  they  are  very  numerous.  They  used  to 
be  called  ''  Hookers,"  because  they  wore  hooks  instead 
of  buttons  on  their  coats.  They  are  represented  in  four- 
teen States,  being  most  numerous  in  Illinois,  Pennsylvania, 
and  Ohio.  There  are  33  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity 
of  960. 

Summary  by  States. 

STATFs  O'-g^ni-     Church      Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^^l  Ca-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Arkansas i  i  75  $300  65 

Colorado i  i  80  500  75 

Illinois 18  13  3,640  19,600  2,305 

Indiana 10  9  2,000  9,800  929 

Iowa 7  5  1,210  6,700  903 

Kansas 12  3  375  1,700  291 

Maryland 2  2  350  1,400  125 

Missouri 3  2  830  4,100  316 

Nebraska 5  2  470  1,200  504 

New  York 3  2  400  3,000  299 

Ohio 12  II  3,725  17,850  1,965 

Oregon 2  i  300  500  60 

Pennsylvania 20  9  1,975  9,800  2,234 

Tennessee  .......  i                     30 

Total 97        61        15,430        $76,450        10,101 


-THE    OLD    AMISH. 


This  branch  was  the  result  of  a  division  among  the 
Amish  about  twenty-five  years  ago  on  the  question  of 
enforcing  church  discipHne.  The  Old  Amish  are  very 
strict  in  adhering  to  the  ancient  forms  and  practices,  op- 
posing the  innovations  in  forms  of  worship  and  manner  of 


THE   MENNONITES. 


215 


conducting  church  work  introduced  during  the  present 
century.  There  are  only  about  2000  of  them,  and  they 
have  but  one  church  edifice 
in  private  houses,  except  in  one  case. 


Their  meetings  are  all  held 


Summary  by  States. 


Organi-         Church 

STATES.  zations.        Edifices. 

Illinois I               I 

Indiana 8 

Kansas 3 

Missouri i 

Ohio 5 

Oregon 3 

Pennsylvania i 

Total 22 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

200 


Value  of  Com- 
Church  muni- 
Property,  cants. 

$1,500  105 

145 

24 

694 

1?> 

144 

$1,500  2,038 


5. — THE    APOSTOLIC. 

This  is  properly  a  branch  of  the  Amish  Mennonites, 
differing  from  them  chiefly  in  being  less  strict  in  the  ob- 
servance of  the  rules  of  discipline  and  forms  of  worship. 
There  are  only  209  of  them,  belonging  to  two  congregations 

in  Ohio. 

Summary. 


Ohio 


Organi-        Church 
zations.       Edifices. 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

paciy. 

Property. 

cants. 

225         $1,200 


209 


-THE    REFORMED. 


In  1812  a  movement  was  begun  among  the  Mennonites 
for  "  the  restoration  of  purity  in  teaching  and  the  main- 
tenance of  discipHne  "  under  the  leadership  of  John  Herr. 


2l6     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

The  "  Herrites,"  as  they  are  sometimes  called,  are  very- 
strict  in  their  observances,  severe  in  the  use  of  the  ban, 
and  decline  fellowship  with  other  denominations.  They 
are  represented  in  seven  States,  more  than  half  of  their 
communicants,  however,  being  found  in  Pennsylvania. 
Services  are  held  in  4  private  houses  and  in  i  hall,  with  a 
seating  capacity  of  50. 

Summary  by  States. 

i-v         •       /-I-      t-       Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^':?^"'-    S^f"^         Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.     Edifices.       p^^j^^  Property.         cants. 

Illinois I  I  400  $2,500  60 

Indiana    2  i  100  700  38 

Maryland 2  2  400  1,800  64 

Michigan 3  52 

New  York 3  3  500  2,200  125 

Ohio 7  6  1,350  6,350  426 

Pennsylvania 16  16  4,655  39jIoo  890 

Total 34  29       7,465        $52,650      1,655 


7. — THE    GENERAL    CONFERENCE. 

The  beginning  of  this  body  is  traced  to  a  difficulty 
which  arose  in  Pennsylvania  in  1848,  in  a  matter  of  dis- 
cipline. John  Oberholzer  was  charged  with  attempting  to 
introduce  new  practices  and  new  doctrines.  As  the  result 
of  the  controversy  which  arose  over  the  matter  an  organiza- 
tion was  formed,  called  the  New  Mennonites.  This  body 
is  less  strict  than  most  other  branches  of  Mennonites,  and 
is  in  favor  of  an  educated  and  paid  ministry.  The  Gen- 
eral Conference  was  organized  in  i860  at  West  Point,  la. 
Afits  third  meeting,  in  1863,  a  plan  for  an  educational  in- 
stitute was  adopted,  and  a  theological  school  was  begun 
at  Wadsworth,  O.      It  flourished  for  a  number  of  years  and 


THE  MENNONITES. 


21J 


was  then  discontinued.  The  General  Conference  has  mis- 
sions among  the  Arapahoe  and  Cheyenne  Indians,  in  Indian 
Territory.  It  also  conducts  a  number  of  home  missions. 
There  are  three  district  conferences,  the  Central,  the 
Eastern,  and  the  Western.  The  General  Conference  meets 
once  every  three  years.  There  are  5670  communicants, 
scattered  over  ten  States.  The  average  seating  capacity 
of  the  edifices  is  323,  and  the  average  value  $2776.  One 
hall,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  50,  is  reported. 


Summary  by  States. 


Or^ani-      Church        Seating 
zations.     Edifices.       p^^j^^ 


Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Minnesota  .  .  . 

Missouri 

New  York .... 

Ohio 

Pennsylvania  . 
South  Dakota 


350 
800 

1,075 

5,630 

400 

200 

350 

4.325 

750 


Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

$1,000 
3.000 

5,950 

33,000 

1,500 

1,000 


2,000 

69  500 

2,400 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

169 

405 
509 

2,547 
70 

46 

139 

1,426 

226 


Total 45         43        13,880     $119,350        5,670 


8. — THE    CHURCH    OF    GOD    IN    CHRIST. 


This  branch  was  organized  by  John  Holdeman  in  1859. 
Holdeman  claimed  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy  **  to  under- 
stand the  foreknowledge  of  God,  to  know  mysteries,  to 
settle  difficulties,  to  keep  peace,  and  to  interpret  visions 
and  dreams."  This  branch  has  only  18  congregations, 
with  471  members.  It  is  represented  in  eight  States. 
There  are  2  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  150. 


2l8     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. 


^^.^^^  Oreani- 

STATES.  y 

zations. 

lUinois I 

Indiana i 

Kansas 6 

Michigan 3 

Missouri 2 

Nebraska i 

"Ohio 2 

West  Virginia 2 

Total 18 


Church 
Edifices. 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 


250 
150 


400 


Value  of  Corn- 

Church  muni- 

Property,  cants. 

3 

^ 3 

$1,400         274 

200  60 

58 

13 

38 

22 

•$  1,600         471 


9. — THE    OLD    (WISLER). 

This  branch,  which  has  only  610  communicants,  consists 
of  those  who  are  opposed  to  Sunday-schools  and  evening 
meetings  and  other  practices,  which  they  regard  as  inno- 
vations. They  are  represented  by  15  congregations,  in 
Indiana,  Michigan,  and  Ohio. 

Summary  by  States. 

r» ;       n\ 1,         Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^rgani-     Church  ^^^  ^^^^^^  j_ 

zations.      Edifices.         ^^^^^  Property.  cants. 

Indiana 3  3  900  $1,550  146 

Michigan 2  i  150  700  40 

Ohio 10  8  3,070  5,765  424 

Total 15         12  4,120  $8,015  610 

10. — DER    BRUEDER-GEMEINDE. 


This  body  originated  in  Russia  half  a  century  ago,  and 
emigrated  to  this  country  in  1873-76.  They  baptize  by 
immersion  and  emphasize  the  importance  of  evidence  of 
conversion.  They  are  very  active  and  zealous  in  the  per- 
formance of  their  rehgious  duties.     They  are  represented 


THE  MENNONITES. 


219 


in  Kansas,  Minnesota,  Nebraska,  and  South  Dakota  by  12 
congregations,  with  1388  communicants.  One  hall,  with  a 
seating  capacity  of  40,  is  reported. 


Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  Or^ani- 
zations. 

Kansas 5 

Minnesota 2 

Nebraska 3 

South  Dakota 2 

Total 12 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

5 

1,650 

$4,700 

685 

2 

700 

2,000 

172 

2 

1,120 

3,900 

3H1 

2 

250 

750 

150 

3,720     $11,350     1,388 


II. — THE    DEFENSELESS. 

The  Defenseless  Mennonites,  sometimes  called  Eglyites, 
are  really  a  branch  of  the  Amish.  They  lay  particular 
stress  upon  the  importance  of  conversion  and  regeneration. 
Henry  Egli  was  the  leader  of  this  movement.  It  is  repre- 
sented in  Illinois,  Indiana,  Kansas,  Missouri,  and  Ohio,  by 
9  congregations,  with  856  communicants. 

Summary  by  States. 

c\r-rr^r^-,        ri,,,..^!,       Scatiug  Valuc  of  Com- 

STATES.  ?f?^"l-      fj"'?^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.      Edifices.       p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Illinois 2  I  175  $1,000  99 

Indiana 3  3  1,025  4,875  467 

Kansas i  i  270  1,300  140 

Missouri i  i  150  565  18 

Ohio 2  2  450  2,800  132 

Total 9  8  2,070         $10,540  856 


12. — THE    MENNONITE    BRETHREN    IN    CHRIST. 


This  body,  which  originated  about  1878,  is  Methodistic 
in  its  form  of  organization,  in  its  usages,  and  its  discipline. 


220     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

Applicants  for  baptism  are  baptized  in  any  form  they  may 

prefer.     It  has  two  annual  conferences  in  the  United  States, 

and  there  are  also  a  number  of  churches  in  Canada.     There 

are  45   churches,  with   11 13   communicants.      Eight  halls, 

with  a  seating  capacity  of  660,  are  occupied  as  places  of 

worship. 

Summary  by  States. 


Organi- 
zations. 


Arkansas  i 

Indiana    9 

Iowa I 

Kansas i 

Michigan 2 

Nebraska i 

Ohio 8 

Pennsylvania 22 


Church 
edifices. 


8 

17K 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 


2,050 
300 

400 
3,300 

4,575 


Value  of 

Church 

Property. 


$3,500 
500 

2,400 

6,100 
27,100 


Total 45         34>^      10,625       $39,600 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

35 
191 

14 
25 
49 
15 
225 

559 
f,ii3 


Summary  b*^  States  of  All  Mennonites. 


Arkansas 2 

Colorado i 

Illinois   32 


51 
16 
62 


Indiana 
Iowa  .  . 
Kansas 

Maryland 9 

Michigan 15 

Minnesota 

Missouri 

Nebraska 

New  York 

North  Dakota  .  .  . 

Ohio 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania  .... 
South  Dakota  . . . 

Tennessee 

Virginia 

West  Virginia  .  . . 


9 
15 
18 

8 

I 

n 

8 
88 
16 

2 
16 

4 


I 

I 
23 
33 
II 

31 
9 
7 
7 
7 
9 
5 

60 

3 
168 

15 

I 

13 
2 


75 

80 

5,960 

10,050 

2,585 
9,208 
2,450 

1,575 
2,500 
2,080 
2,780 
960 


20,830 

700 

57,482 

2,600 

150 

6,675 

600 


$300 

500 

31,850 

35,365 

13,150 

45,130 

9,800 

5,500 

7,200 

8,565 

12,350 

5,200 

77,515 

1,600 

366,600 

11,150 

200 

10,925 

900 


100 

75 
3,014 
3,732 
1,454 
4,620 

525 

356 

967 

748 

1,664 

470 

41 

5,988 

248 

[5,330 

1,383 

58 

666 


Total 550      406        129,340    $643,800     41,541 


CHAPTER    XXIX. 

THE     iM  E  T  H  O  D  I  S  T  S  . 

Methodism,  which  counts  many  branches  in  Great 
Britain,  America,  and  elsewhere,  is  the  result  of  a  move- 
ment begun  at  Oxford  University,  ]'.ngland,  as  early  as 
1 729,  by  John  and  Charles  Wesley.  Their  own  account 
of  its  origin  is  given  in  these  words : 

"  In  1729  two  young  men  in  Eriglaiid,  reading  the  Bible, 
saw  they  could  not  be  saved  without  h  )liness,  followed  after 
it,  and  incited  others  so  to  do.  In  1737  they  saw  likewise 
that  men  are  justified  before  they  aie  sanctified,  but  still 
holiness  was  their  object.  God  then  thrust  them  out  to 
raise  a  holy  people." 

The  Wesleys,  with  two  others,  beg  an  to  meet  together 
at  Oxford  for  religious  exercises  in  i  7  29.  In  derision  they 
were  called  the  "  Holy  Club,"  ''  Bibl  Bigots,"  "  Method- 
ists," etc.  The  last  term  was  intenced  to  describe  their 
methodical  habits,  and  it  seems  to  ha  /e  been  accepted  by 
them  almost  immediately,  as  the  movement  they  led  was 
soon  widely  known  as  the  Methodist  movement. 

John  and  Charles  Wesley  and  Ge-  )rge  Whitefield  were 
ordained  ministers  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  it  was 
as  Church  of  England  clergymen  that  they  began  and 
carried  forward  their  stirring  evan;;elistic  work.  Being 
excluded,  as  preachers  of  *' new  dcctrines,"  from  many 
of  the  pulpits  of  the  Established  Chi  rch,  they  held  meet- 


222     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

ings  in  private  houses,  halls,  barns,  and  fields,  receiving 
many  converts,  who  were  organized  into  societies  for 
worship.  As  their  work  expanded  they  introduced  an 
order  of  lay  preachers  and  established  class-meetings  for 
the  religious  care  and  training  of  members.  In  1 744  the 
first  conference  was  held,  and  thereafter  Wesley  and  his 
helpers  met  together  annually.  Thus  was  organized  the 
annual  conference,  one  of  the  distinctive  institutions  of 
Methodism.  Wesley  grouped  together  several  appoint- 
ments and  put  them  in  charge  of  one  of  his  helpers.  This 
was  the  beginning  of  the  circuit  system.  He  then  con- 
ceived the  idea  of  increasing  the  efficiency  of  his  preachers 
by  frequent  changes  in  their  appointments.  This  is  how 
the  itinerancy  came  into  existence.  The  itinerancy  is 
maintained  in  nearly  all  the  branches  of  Methodism 
throughout  the  world,  though  it  has  been  greatly  modi- 
fied in  many  cases. 

Though  the  Wesleyan  movement  was  a  movement  within 
the  Church  of  England,  and  the  Wesleys  lived  and  died 
in  full  ministerial  relations  with  it,  serious  differences  arose 
between  the  Church  and  the  Methodists.  In  -i  745  John 
Wesley  wrote  that  he  was  willing  to  make  any  concession 
which  conscience  would  permit,  in  order  to  live  in  harmony 
with  the  clergy  of  the  Established  Church,  but  he  could  not, 
he  said,  give  up  the  doctrines  he  was  preaching,  dissolve 
the  societies,  suppress  lay  preaching,  or  cease  to  preach  in 
the  open  air.  For  many  years  he  refused  to  sanction  the 
administration  of  the  sacraments  by  any  except  those  who 
had  been  ordained  by  a  bishop  in  the  apostolic  succession, 
and  he  himself  hesitated  to  assume  authority  to  ordain ; 
but  the  Bishop  of  London  having  refused  to  ordain  min- 
isters for  the  Methodist  societies  in  America,  which  were 


THE  METHODISTS.  223 

left  by  the  Revolutionary  War  without  the  sacraments, 
Wesley,  in  1 784,  by  the  imposition  of  hands,  appointed 
or  ordained  men  and  gave  them  authority  to  ordain  others. 
He  ordained  Thomas  Coke,  LL.D.,  who  was  already  a 
presbyter  of  the  Church  of  England,  to  be  superintendent 
of  the  Methodist  societies  in  America,  and  set  apart  for 
a  similar  purpose  in  Great  Britain  Alexander  Mather,  who 
had  not  been  episcopally  ordained.  In  England,  Method- 
ism continued  to  be  a  non-ecclesiastical  religious  move- 
ment within  the  Church  of  England  till  after  John  Wesley's 
death,  March  2,  1791.  In  America  the  separation  took 
place  several  years  previous  to  that  event. 

The  peculiarities  of  Methodism  are:  (i)  The  probation- 
ary system,  by  which  converts  are  received  for  six  months 
or  more  on  trial ;  if  the  test  results  favorably,  they  are  then 
taken  into  "  full  connection,"  and  have  all  the  rights  and 
privileges  of  full  members.  (2)  The  class-meeting.  The 
members  and  probationers  of  each  church  are  divided  into 
companies  called  classes,  and  meet  under  the  care  of  a 
leader  for  prayer,  testimony,  and  spiritual  examination 
and  advice.  (3)  Exhorters.  Members  hcensed  to  hold 
meetings  for  prayer  and  exhortation.  (4)  Local  preachers. 
Laymen  adjudged  to  have  ''gifts,  graces,  and  usefulness" 
sufficient  to  justify  the  issuance  of  a  license,  subject  to 
annual  renewal,  to  preach  as  occasion  offers,  without  giv- 
ing up  their  secular  business ;  they  may  also  be  ordained 
as  deacons  and  elders.  (5)  The  itinerancy.  There  are 
rules  requiring  the  bishop  or  a  conference  committee  to 
station  the  regular  ministers  every  year,  and  hmiting  the 
pastoral  term  to  a  fixed  period.  In  the  English  Wesleyan 
Church  it  is  three  years;  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church  in  the  United  States  it  is  five  years,  having  been 


224     RELIGIOUS  lORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

successively  advanced  from  two  to  three  and  from  three 
to  fiye.  No  past(  r  can  serve  the  same  church  or  circuit 
in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  more  than  five  years 
successively,  nor  <:an  he  be  returned  to  it  until  after  the 
expiration  of  ano  her  period  of  five  years.  (6)  Presiding 
elders.  In  most  American  Methodist  branches,  each  an- 
nual conference  is  divided  into  districts,  two  or  more,  and 
a  presiding  elder  placed  over  each.  His  duty  is  to  travel 
over  his  district,  preside  at  quarterly  conferences  in  each 
charge,  report  t('  the  annual  conference,  and  assist  the 
presiding  bishop  in  making  out  the  list  of  appointments 
each  year.  His  term  of  office  is  hmited  in  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Churcl  to  six  years.  (7)  Bishops.  The  Epis- 
copal branches  \  ave  bishops,  elected  by  the  general  con- 
ference for  life.  They  ordain  ministers,  preside  over  the 
annual  conferences  and  at  the  general  conference,  and  sta- 
tion the  minister  >,  with  the  advice  of  the  presiding  elders ; 
they  are  itinerart  and  general,  not  diocesan,  officers. 

Methodism  also  has  a  system  of  conferences:  (i)  The 
quarterly  conference  is  held  four  tim_es  a  year  in  each 
church.  It  is  composed  of  the  pastor,  local  preachers, 
trustees,  stewar  is,  class  leaders,  and  other  church  officers. 
(2)  The  annual  conference  consists  of  all  the  itinerant 
preachers  (and  in  some  branches  of  representatives  of  the 
churches)  withia  its  bounds.  It  examines  the  characters 
of  the  ministe  s,  elects  candidates  to  deacon's  and  elder's 
orders,  and  tra  isacts  various  other  business.  (3)  The  gen- 
eral conference,  composed  of  representatives,  clerical  and 
lay,  from  the  various  annual  conferences,  meets  once  in 
four  years.  U  is  the  chief  legislative  and  judicial  court. 
It  elects   bishops  and   other  general   officers,  creates  new 


THE   METHODISTS.  22$ 

conferences,  changes  conference  boundaries,  and  controls 
the  administration  of  the  general  and  benevolent  interests 
of  the  church.  In  some  branches  a  district  conference  is 
also  provided  for.  It  is  composed  of  the  pastors  and  rep- 
resentatives of  the  churches  of  a  district,  the  presiding  elder 
being  the  chairman. 

In  theology,  Methodism,  excepting  the  Welsh  branch,  is 
Arminian.  Most  of  the  American  branches  have  adopted 
as  their  doctrinal  symbol  "Articles  of  Religion,"  twenty- 
five  in  number,  prepared  by  John  Wesley  from  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England.  In  common  with 
other  Arminian  bodies,  Methodists  emphasize  the  doctrine 
of  the  freedom  of  the  will  and  universal  atonement,  and 
deny  the  Calvinistic  ideas  of  predestination  and  reproba- 
tion. Their  more  distinctive  doctrines  are  those  which  Wes- 
ley revived,  restated,  and  specially  emphasized,  namely : 
(i)  present  personal  salvation  by  faith;  (2)  the  witness 
of  the  Spirit;  (3)  sanctification.  Upon  the  latter  point 
Wesley  taught  that  sanctification  is  obtainable  instantane- 
ously, between  justification  and  death,  and  that  it  is  not 
"sinless  perfection,"  but  perfection  in  love,  so  that  those 
who  possess  it  "  feel  no  sin,  nothing  but  love." 

There  are  seventeen  branches  of  Methodism,  as  follows : 

1.  Methodist  Episcopal,  9.  Methodist  Episcopal,  South, 

2.  Union  American  Meth.  Epis.)  10.   Congregational, 

3.  African  Meth.  Epis.,  11.   Congregational,  Colored, 

4.  African  Union  Meth.  Prot.,  12.   New  Congregational, 

5.  African  Meth.  Epis.  Zion,  13.   Colored  Meth.  Epis., 

6.  Zion  Union  Apostolic,  14.   Primitive, 

7.  Methodist  Protestant,  15.   Free, 

8.  Wesleyan  Methodist,  16.  Independent, 

17.   Evangelist  Missionary. 


226     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 
I. — THE    METHODIST    EPISCOPAL   CHURCH. 

Though  John  and  Charles  Wesley  crossed  the  ocean  in 
1735  and  labored  in  Georgia,  the  latter  about  one  year, 
the  former  two  years,  the  beginnings  of  Methodism  in  this 
country  are  dated  from  1 766,  in  New  York  and  Maryland. 
In  that  year  a  Wesleyan  local  preacher  from  Ireland,  Philip 
Embury,  gathered  a  few  Methodists  in  the  lower  part  of 
New  York  City  for  regular  worship.  Robert  Strawbridge, 
likewise  a  Wesleyan  local  preacher  and  Irish  immigrant, 
preached  to  a  small  number  of  people  in  Frederick  County, 
Md.,  at  about  the  same  time.  The  first  meetings  in  New 
York  were  held  in  Mr.  Embury's  house ;  then  they  were 
transferred  to  a  sail-loft,  and  in  1768  an  edifice  was  erected 
at  a  cost  of  $3000.  This  was  the  first  Methodist  church 
in  the  United  States.  Its  site  in  John  Street  is  still  occu- 
pied by  a  Methodist  edifice.  Captain  Thomas  Webb  of  the 
British  Army  was  an  efficient  colaborer  with  Mr.  Embury. 
Mr.  John  Wesley  sent  over  two  missionaries  in  1 769,  Rich- 
ard Boardman  and  Joseph  Pilmoor,  to  assist  in  the  work  of 
establishing  Methodism  in  this  country.  Seven  others  sub- 
sequently arrived.  Two  became  Presbyterians,  and  only 
one,  Francis  Asbury,  remained  through  the  Revolutionary 
War. 

The  first  annual  conference  was  held  in  Philadelphia  in 
1773,  Thomas  Rankin,  one  of  Wesley's  missionaries,  pre- 
siding. At  the  close  of  1784  a  general  conference  met  in 
Baltimore,  December  24th,  and  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church  v/as  formally  organized.  This  w^as  in  accordance 
with  the  plan  of  John  Wesley  himself.  The  societies  had 
increased,  and  the  number  of  members  had  swelled  from 
1 160  in  1773  to  14,988,  notwithstanding  the  adverse  influ- 


THE   METHODISTS,  22/ 

ences  of  the  Revolutionary  War;  and  these  societies  were 
without  an  ordained  ministry  and  consequently  without  the 
sacraments  during  the  period  of  the  war,  the  clergy  of  the 
Church  of  England,  from  whom  baptism  and  the  Lord's 
Supper  had  previously  been  received,  having  in  many  cases 
left  their  parishes.  Representations  being  made  to  Mr. 
Wesley  concerning  the  condition  of  the  Methodist  societies, 
he  set  apart  Dr.  Thomas  Coke,  a  presbyter  of  the  Church 
of  England,  to  be  superintendent  of  the  societies,  and  sent 
with  him  to  America  Francis  Asbury  and  two  others, 
directing  him  to  organize  the  societies  into  a  separate 
ecclesiastical  body,  and  to  have  Asbury  associated  with 
him  in  the  office  of  superintendent. 

When  the  conference  was  assembled  in  Baltimore  a 
letter  from  Mr.  W^esley  was  read,  stating  that  he  had 
"  appointed  Dr.  Coke  and  Mr.  Francis  Asbury  to  be  joint- 
superintendents  over  our  brethren  in  North  America,  as 
also  Richard  Whatcoat  and  Thomas  Vasey  to  act  as  elders 
among  them  by  baptizing  and  ministering  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per "  ;  that  he  had  prepared  a  Hturgy  to  be  used  by  the 
traveling  preachers ;  and  that  as  "  our  American  brethren 
are  now  totally  disentangled  both  from  the  State  and  from 
the  English  hierarchy,"  he  dared  not  '*  entangle  them  again, 
either  w^ith  the  one  or  with  the  other.  They  are  now,"  he 
added,  **  at  full  liberty  simply  to  follow  the  Scriptures  and 
the  Primitive  Church." 

The  conference  then  proceeded  to  '*  form  a  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church,"  electing  both  Coke  and  Asbury  as 
superintendents  or  bishops.  Asbury  was  successively 
ordained  deacon,  elder,  and  bishop.  The  order  of  wor- 
ship and  Articles  of  Religion  prepared  by  Mr.  Wesley 
were  adopted,   his  rules  and  discipline  were  revised   and 


228     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

accepted,  a  number  of  preachers  were  ordained,  and  the 
work  of  the  conference  was  completed.  The  constitution 
of  the  church  is  generaUy  held  to  consist  of  the  general 
rules  of  conduct  prepared  by  Mr.  Wesley,  the  Articles  of 
Religion,  and  six  Restrictive  Rules,  limiting  the  powers 
of  the  general  conference,  which  is  the  supreme  legislative 
body  and  the  final  court.  The  general  conference  elects 
bishops,  who  hold  office  for  life  or  during  good  behavior, 
and  who  preside  over  its  sessions,  but  have  no  vote  or  veto 
in  its  proceedings.  They  are  not  diocesan,  but  general 
and  itinerant,  visiting  and  presiding  over  the  annual  con- 
ferences successively,  and  appointing,  with  the  aid  and 
advice  of  the  presiding  elders,  the  preachers  to  the  pas- 
torates. 

The  progress  of  Methodism  in  the  new  and  growing 
nation  was  extremely  rapid.  Bishop  Asbury  (Dr.  Coke 
returned  after  a  few  years  to  England),  who  had  large 
organizing  and  administrative  power,  was  intensely  active 
in  extending  the  work  as  an  evangelistic  movement.  He 
changed  his  preachers  frequently,  appointed  them  to  large 
circuits  including  several  appointments,  and  raised  up  a 
body  of  class  leaders,  exhorters,  local  and  itinerant  preach- 
ers, by  whom  the  gospel  was  propagated  with  great  suc- 
cess. In  1800  Richard  Whatcoat  was  elected  to  the  bish- 
opric, and  in  1808  WilHam  McKendree  also,  the  latter 
being  the  first  native  American  to  occupy  that  office.  In 
the  conference  of  1 808  a  plan  was  adopted  providing  for  a 
general  conference  to  be  composed  of  delegates  elected  by 
the  annual  conferences,  and  to  meet  once  every  four  years. 
In  18 1 2,  when  the  first  delegated  general  conference  was 
held,  there  were  upward  of  195,000  communicants.  In 
1872  lay  delegates  appeared  for  the  first  time  in  the  gen- 


THE  METHODISTS. 


229 


eral  conference.  Though  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church 
has  suffered  heavy  losses  at  various  times  by  secessions 
and  divisions,  it  has  grown  very  rapidly,  and  is  by  far  the 
most  numerous  Methodist  body  in  the  world.  It  has  in 
this  country  102  annual  conferences,  besides  12  in  mission 
fields  in  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  Mexico,  with  missions 
in  South  America,  Korea,  and  other  countries. 

It  is  represented  in  all  the  States  and  Territories,  except- 
ing Alaska.  In  the  following  States  it  has  congregations  in 
every  county : 


No.  of 
counties. 

Connecticut 8 

Delaware 3 

Illinois  102 

Indiana 92 

Iowa 99 

Kansas 106 

Maine 16 

Maryland 24 

Massachusetts 14 


No.  of 
counties. 

Montana 16 

New  Hampshire 10 

New  Jersey   21 

New  York 60 

Ohio 88 

Pennsylvania    67 

Rhode  Island 5 

Vermont 14 


Of  the  2790  counties  in  the  various  States  and  Terri- 
tories, it  has  organizations  in  all  save  585.  This  number 
is  made  up  chiefly  of  counties  in  the  South  where  confer- 
ences of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  were  not  formed 
after  1844,  when  the  division  occurred  which  resulted  in 
the  organization  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  South, 
until  the  close  of  the  late  war.  In  the  States  of  Alabama, 
Arkansas,  Florida,  Georgia,  Kentucky,  Louisiana,  Missis- 
sippi, North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  Tennessee,  Texas, 
and  Virginia,  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  South,  is  in 
fuller  occupancy  than  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 

The  total  of  communicants,  including  both  members  and 


230    RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

probationers  (but  not  itinerant  ministers),  is  2,240,354. 
The  total  of  organizations  is  25,861,  and  there  are  22,844 
church  edifices,  with  an  aggregate  seating  capacity  of 
6,302,708,  and  a  total  valuation  of  $96,723,408.  In  ad- 
dition to  the  church  edifices,  there  are  2873  halls,  etc., 
with  a  seating  capacity  of  275,444,  used  as  places  of  wor- 
ship. The  average  seating  capacity  of  the  churches  is  2']6, 
and  the  average  value  $4234. 

An  examination  of  the  table  by  States  shows  that  the 
largest  number  of  communicants  in  any  one  State  is  to  be 
found  in  New  York,  242,492  ;  Ohio  comes  second,  with 
240,650;  Pennsylvania  third,  with  222,886  ;  Illinois  fourth, 
with  165,191;  and  Indiana  fifth,  with  162,989.  There 
are  six  States  in  which  there  are- more  than  100,000  mem- 
bers, and  six  other  States  in  which  the  number  is  more 
than  50,000.  In  the  number  of  organizations  and  church 
edifices  Ohio  leads  and  New  York  stands  second.  Of 
the  102  annual  conferences,  not  including  11  missions,  the 
largest  numerically  is  the  Philadelphia  conference,  which 
is  also  the  oldest.  The  Philadelphia  conference  reports 
61,645  communicants.  The  East  Ohio  comes  second,  with 
59,666;  the  Ohio  third,  with  58,089;  the  New  York  East 
fourth,  with  55,724;  and  the  New  York  fifth,  with  53,644. 
There  are  7  conferences  which  have  50,000  and  upward 
each,  and  30  which  have  between  25,000  and  50,000. 

The  lines  of  these  conferences  do  not  correspond  with 
those  of  the  States.  The  New  York  East  conference,  for 
example,  includes  parts  of  New  York;  Connecticut,  and 
New  Jersey;  the  Troy  conference  includes  appointments 
in  New  York,  Massachusetts,  and  Vermont ;  the  Wilming- 
ton conference,  in  Delaware,  Maryland,  and  Virginia ;  the 
Baltimore  conference,  in  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia, 


THE  METHODISTS.  23  I 

West  Virginia,  and  the  District  of  Columbia.  The  con- 
ferences are  not  arranged  on  a  plan  similar  to  that  of  dio- 
ceses in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  and  the  Roman  Catholic 
churches.  Each  diocese  occupies  its  own  territory  exclu- 
sively ;  but  the  same  territory  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church  is  often  covered  by  different  conferences.  For 
example,  there  are  white  conferences,  in  which  the  Eng- 
lish language  is  spoken,  and  there  are  German,  Swedish, 
and  other  conferences  having  foreign  constituencies,  which 
cover  parts  of  the  same  territory.  The  Northwest  Swed- 
ish conference  covers  portions  of  Illinois,  Indiana,  Iowa, 
Kansas,  Michigan,  Minnesota,  Missouri,  Nebraska,  New 
York,  Pennsylvania,  and  Wisconsin.  The  Norwegian  and 
Danish  conference  covers  portions  of  the  same  territory. 
So,  also,  do  the  St.  Louis  German,  the  West  German,  the 
Northwest  German,  the  Chicago  German,  and  the  follow- 
ing English-speaking  conferences :  Rock  River,  St.  Louis, 
Upper  Iowa,  West  Nebraska,  West  Wisconsin,  Wisconsin, 
Northwest  Indiana,  Northwest  Iowa,  Northwest  Kansas, 
Central  Illinois,  Central  Missouri,  Des  Moines,  Detroit, 
Illinois,  Iowa,  Kansas,  Minnesota,  and  Nebraska.  White 
English-speaking  conferences  are  also  overlapped  in  many 
States  by  conferences  composed  of  colored  members. 

In  the  German  conferences  and  missions  there  are  928 
organizations,  with  57,105  communicants;  in  the  Scan- 
dinavian, 308  organizations  and  17,820  communicants. 
There  are  also  25  Spanish  organizations,  with  1475  mem- 
bers, and  congregations  of  Bohemians,  Finns,  Portuguese, 
French,  Italians,  Welsh,  Chinese,  and  Japanese. 


2  32     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 
Summary  by  States. 


Organi- 
zations. 


Alabama 318 

Arizona 12 

Arkansas 226 

California -t^-^'j 

Colorado 90 

Connecticut 219 

Delaware 187 

Dist.  of  Columbia  30 

Florida 117 

Georgia 320 

Idaho 31 

Illinois i>903 

Indiana 1,618 

Indian  Territory  .  32 

Iowa Ij342 

Kansas 1,249 

Kentucky 435 

Louisiana 218 

Maine 355 

Maryland 925 

Massachusetts  .  .  .  394 

Michigan i>o85 

Minnesota 534 

Mississippi 398 

Missouri  . 905 

Montana 48 

Nebraska 649 

Nevada 12 

New  Hampshire  .  134 

New  Jersey 579 

New  Mexico 32 

New  York 2,123 

North  Carolina  .  .  287 

North  Dakota  ...  131 

Ohio 2,340 

Oklahonja 36 

Oregon 203 

Pennsylvania  ....  2,042 

Rhode  Island  ....  39 

South  Carolina  .  .  335 

South  Dakota  ...  254 

Tennessee 609 

Texas 407 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

289 

72,580 

$248,300 

18,517 

II 

3,550 

46,100 

320 

167 

38,243 

162,360 

10,076 

306X 

93,110 

2,053,371 

25,527 

77 

23,314 

931,900 

8,560 

217 

67,527 

2,123,380 

29,411 

188 

49,455 

956,300 

20,412 

29 

20,450 

772,500 

9,630 

105 

22,620 

219,000 

5,739 

302 

73,415 

255,940 

25,400 

26 

5,225 

69,200 

941 

1,779 

523,698 

7,046,785 

165,191 

1,585 

453,035 

4,243,180 

162,989 

15 

3,925 

9,750 

838 

1,215 

317,406 

3,344,245 

111,426 

734 

179,230 

1,912,015 

83,288 

34i>^ 

77,400 

762,090 

29,172 

191 

39,500 

303,302 

15,073 

290 

87,301 

1,152,875 

22,996 

887 

234,856 

3,771,717 

82,069 

.383 

153,722 

5,180,825 

58,477 

894 

250,747 

3,739,850 

86,958 

424 

92,400 

1,725,843 

30,837 

388 

81,038 

245,624 

31,142 

742 

199,044 

1,835,840 

58,285 

39 

8,535 

159,850 

1,901 

461 

112,603 

1,242,200 

41,086 

12 

2,700 

78,800 

418 

129 

40,505 

614,350 

12,354 

SS^'A 

185,485 

5,009,075 

82,955 

21 

4,625 

71,200 

1,750 

2,038 

614,501 

16,944,350 

242,492 

238 

64,487 

195,645 

16,433 

61 

11,100 

139,985 

4,804 

2,296 

685,319 

8,749,970 

240,650 

13 

3,100 

21,400 

1,224 

150 

34,430 

614,625 

9'!^^ 

1,931 

595,734 

12,642,104 

222,886 

37 

i^'^35 

495,000 

6,064 

2,37 

81,810 

292,235 

43,200 

140 

31,674 

375,260 

11,371 

549 

146,470 

665,460 

42,873 

346 

73,790 

592,835 

27,453 

THE  METHODISTS.  233 


Summary  by  States. — Continued. 

Organi-  Church  ^^^^'^^  Y?^"^  ^^  C^'": 

STATES.  of;^„=  T7^;fi^^o  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  ^^^^^^  Property.  cants. 

Utah 31  29  6,205  $223,650  1,048 

Vermont 228  195  55,851  758,800  17,268 

Virginia 316  271  42,925  329,144  16,764 

Washington 200  146  37,230  652,425  11,592 

West  Virginia  .. .  827  629X  146,900  902,153  48,925 

Wisconsin 706  623  134,913  1,791,900  41,360 

Wyoming 13  11  2,190  48,700  773 

Total 25,861  22,844     6,302,708  $96,723,408  2,240,354 

Summary  by  Conferences. 

CONFERENCES. 

Alabama 171  151K  32,845  $128,800  7,455 

Arkansas 134  95  26,200  114,220  6,295 

Austin 33  25  6,605  219,900  1,485 

Baltimore 411  403  137,966  3,221,060  41,195 

Blue  Ridge 172  130  42,930  77,850  7,492 

California 195  183  55, 45°  1,263,321  14,429 

CaliforniaGerman 

Mission 16  16  3, 610  121,400  829 

Central  Alabama.  153  143  41,135  130,360  11,317 
Central  German. .  177  i76>^  38,370  771,000  14,391 
Central  Illinois.  .  .  412  384^^  103,147  1,148,700  29,754 
Central  Missouri  .  158  136  35,305  177,580  8,559 
Central  New  York  313  308  95o75  1,662,650  35. 59^ 
Central  Ohio  ...  .  408  396><  118,235  1,260,250  38,893 
Central  Pennsyl- 
vania   581  530  152,200  2,319,495  50,773 

Central  Tennessee  136  120  28,725  97,435  5,584 

Chicago  German.  122  115  21,890  369,400  7,873 

Cincinnati   371  369  113,660  2,057,200  46,188 

Colorado 85  73  22,614  903,900  8,325 

Columbia  River.  .  132  84  19,845  254,250  5,792 

Dakota 201  119  27,794  325,200  9,774 

Delaware  236  228  50,534  3^5,970  16,877 

Des  Moines 392  355  96,010  965,900  36,927 

Detroit 495  402K  118,750  1,920,600  40,189 

East  German  ....  61  62  17,085  589,900  5,239 

East  Maine 190  Hi/^  42,105  471,150  10,444 

East  Ohio 539  535  160,510  2,385,700  59,666 

East  Tennessee .  .  T]  70  12,300  105,900  4,235 

Erie 414  410X  114,014  1,487,314  36,796 


234     KELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Conferences. — Contmtied. 


CONFERENCES. 


Organi- 
zations. 


Florida d'j 

Genesee 372 

Georgia 88 

Holston 308 

Idaho 31 

Illinois 597 

Indiana 424 

Indian  Mission ...  68 

Iowa 335 

Kansas 242 

Kentucky 333 

Lexington   151 

Little  Rock 92 

Louisiana 216 

Maine 171 

Michigan 540 

Minnesota 378 

Mississippi 195 

Missouri 328 

Montana 51 

Nebraska 195 

Newark  . 299 

New  England  .  .  .  246 
New   England, 

Southern 207 

New  Hampshire  .  139 

New  Jersey 303 

New  York 466 

New  York  East  .  .  325 

North  Carolina  .  .  115 

North  Dakota  ...  117 

Northern  German  11 1 
Northern       New 

York 312 

North  Indiana  .  .  .  463 

North  Nebraska .  .  117 

North  Ohio 323 

Northwest       Ger- 
man    94 

Northwestlndiana  343 

Northwest  Iowa  .  .  180 

Northwest  Kansas  329 


Church 

■pHifirpc 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

69 

14,790 

$86,365 

4,425 

356^^ 

98,095 

2,080,150 

34,946 

87 

15,000 

53,350 

3,547 

274 

83,275 

368,925 

24,419 

26 

5,000 

66,000 

1,173 

539 

156,813 

1,657,775 

52,934 

408 

122,425 

858,650 

41,424 

28 

7,025 

31,150 

2,062 

311 

85,665 

725,400 

25,059 

201 

54,810 

654,150 

21,534 

249  K 

56,015 

476,715 

20,653 

^■hl 

33,785 

286,125 

10,437 

72 

12,043 

48,140 

3,781 

189 

39,060 

296,102 

14,911 

153 

46,326 

697,225 

12,689 

445.^ 

122,327 

1,701,000 

43,898 

300 

70,570 

1,340,643 

23,768 

192 

48,023 

124,319 

14,869 

282 

74,860 

453,875 

19,799 

42 

9,260 

165,350 

1,991 

196 

59,493 

567,250 

19,220 

276^ 

89,045 

3,067,575 

42,198 

238 

102,891 

3,989,175 

40,884 

203 

67,288 

1,653,200 

24,371 

1.36 

44,765 

748,850 

14,335 

300 

101,870 

2,181,900 

44,488 

424K 

131,608 

4,731,900 

53,644 

327 

117,343 

5,609,380 

55,724 

108 

21,557 

117,795 

8,941 

59 

10,650 

136,185 

4,509 

85>^ 

12,800 

257,950 

4,643 

302 

85,205 

1,309,650 

27,540 

452 

131,315 

1,291,500 

47,144 

112 

25,205 

395,650 

9,481 

3i« 

98,979 

1,177,880 

30,435 

56>^ 

9,160 

130,850 

4,371 

339 

89,720 

977,030 

33,167 

166 

41,440 

469,800 

16,292 

112 

25,495 

228,790 

13,902 

THE  METHODISTS.  235 


CONFERENCES.  ,o..^„c 
zations. 

Northwest    Swed- 
ish    144 

Norwegian      and 

Danish 93 

Ohio 588 

Oregon 131 

Philadelphia 371 

Pittsburg 353 

Puget  Sound  ....  97 

Rock  River -^-^^ 

Saint  John  River.  43 

Saint  Louis 359 

Saint  Louis   Ger- 
man    161 

Savannah 232 

South  Carolina  .  .  335 
Southeast  Indiana  304 
Southern   Califor- 
nia    114 

Southern  Illinois.  405 

Southern  German  42 

South  Kansas  .  .  306 

Southwest  Kansas  289 

Tennessee 115 

Texas 238 

Troy 355 

Upper  Iowa 317 

Upper  Mississippi  202 

Vermont 177 

Virginia 202 

Washington 324 

West  German  ...  126 

West  Nebraska  .  .  274 

West  Texas 95 

West  Virginia  .  .  .  740 

West  Wisconsin  .  -^^t^^ 

Wilmington 376 

Wisconsin 234 

Wyoming 413 


Summary  by  Conferences. — Continued. 

Organi- 


""hiirrli 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

^nurcn 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

..dinces. 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

116 

27,675 

$397, 100 

9,236 

63 

14,320 

173,600 

4,782 

570 

167,985 

1,453,340 

58,089 

96 

24,915 

488,625 

7,051 

374 

156,921 

5,014,220 

61,645 

345 

101,639 

2,619,150 

45,485 

78 

19.875 

368,125 

6,615 

324K 

115,529 

2,946,400 

38,674 

30 

6,330 

121,125 

1,034 

260 

77,225 

945,185 

24,543 

154 

31,760 

491,490 

11,100 

215 

58,415 

202,590 

21,853 

ZV 

81,810 

292,235 

43,200 

2,03  Vz 

91.575 

884,450 

35,038 

9A)4 

31,700 

633,650 

9,836 

388 

112,110 

637,310 

30,322 

36^ 

6,800 

72,700 

2,470 

206M 

51,210 

429,375 

22,800 

160 

37,050 

490,700 

21,899 

112 

26,620 

129,850 

10,065 

197 

40,340 

202,005 

14,531 

339 

104,006 

2,417,525 

43,578 

289  J^ 

77,320 

970,455 

27,493 

195 

32,955 

120,505 

16,265 

148 

42,510 

496,600 

12,621 

158K 

24,725 

116,100 

8,718 

311 

66,930 

870,522 

32,976 

96X 

16,669 

265,650 

5,554 

104K 

19,425 

175,100 

9,743 

89 

20,245 

97,730 

8,932 

533K 

130,500 

702,375 

42,795 

268 

55,879 

655,550 

16,345 

372 

89,731 

1,510,837 

35,592 

234 

58,014 

886,200 

17,702 

360 

93,820 

1,657,150 

38,731 

236     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Missions. 

r> ;  nv.„,^\.  Searing  Value  of  Com- 

MISSIONS.                 Orsam-  Church  ^^_ «  ^j^      j^  ._ 

zations.  Edifices.  p^^.^y_  Property.  cants. 

Arizona 12  11  3?  55°  $46,100  320 

Black  Hills 23  17  3?55o            47,060  831 

Nevada 25  26  5,300  1 16,800  878 

New  Mexico  Eng- 
lish           10  8  1,900            42,000  540 

New  Mexico  Span- 
ish         25  15  3,225            38,700  1,475 

North  Pacific  Ger- 
man          18  17  2,850             5-, 750  635 

Northwest  Norwe- 
gian and  Danish        17  13  2,675             87,500  548 

Utah 34  32  6,730  228,150  1,066 

Wyoming 13  11  2,190             48,700  jj;^ 

Total 25,861   22,844    6,302,708   $96,723,4082,240,354 


2.— THE    UNION    AMERICAN    METHODIST   EPISCOPAL 
CHURCH. 

This  is  a  body  of  colored  Methodists  having  the  same 
general  doctrines  and  usages  as  other  branches  of  Method- 
ism. It  was  organized  in  181 3  in  Wilmington,  Del,  by  a 
number  of  colored  members  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  led  by  Rev.  Peter  Spencer,  a  colored  preacher. 

The  church  has  42  organizations,  with  35  church  edifices, 
valued  at  $187,600,  and  2279  communicants;  2  halls,  with 
a  seating  capacity  of  250,  are  occupied  as  places  of  wor- 
ship. There  are  three  annual  conferences,  with  two  general 
superintendents  or  bishops,  who  are  elected  for  life. 


THE  METHODISTS,  237 


Summary  by  States. 


^,       ,        Seating  Value  of  Com- 

Church  ^^  Q,hMxc\^  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 


=—■  ^St    EdMces.        <:-"  O-"  ">"-■ 


Connecticut i  i  350  $2,000  80 

Delaware  8  7  2,650  57, 500  507 

Maryland 4  4  1,000  6,400  124 

Mississippi i  i  200  2,000  80 

New  Jersey 6  6  1,725  14,700  385 

New  York 5  3  975  37, 400  288 

Pennsylvania 16  12  4,300  65,800  765 

Rhode  Island i  i  300  1,800  50 

Total 42  35  11,500  $187,600  2,279 

Summary  by  Conferences. 

CONFERENCES. 

Eastern  District.  ..  .  13  11  3, 350  $55,900  803 

Mississippi i  i  200  2,000  80 

Southern  District  ..  28  23  7, 950  129,700  1,396 

Total 42  35  11,500  $187,600  2,279 


3. — THE    AFRICAN    METHODIST    EPISCOPAL    CHURCH. 

This  branch  of  American  Methodism  was  organized  in 
Philadelphia  in  18 16  by  a  number  of  colored  members  of 
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  They  withdrew  from  the 
parent  body  in  order  that  they  might  have  larger  privi- 
leges and  more  freedom  of  action  among  themselves  than 
they  believed  they  could  secure  in  continued  association 
with  their  white  brethren.  The  Rev.  Richard  Allen  was 
elected  the  first  bishop  of  the  new  church  by  the  same 
convention  that  organized  it.  In  the  year  1787  Mr.  Allen 
had  been  made  the  leader  of  a  class  of  forty  persons  of  his 
own  color.  A  few  years  later  he  purchased  a  lot  at  the 
corner  of  Sixth  and  Lombard  Streets,  Philadelphia,  where 


238     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

the  first  church  erected  in  this  country  for  colored  Method- 
ists was  occupied  in  1 794.  This  site  is  now  covered  by 
an  edifice,  dedicated  in  1890,  valued  at  $50,000. 

In  doctrine,  government,  and  usage  the  church  does 
not  essentially  differ  from  the  body  from  which  it  sprang. 
It  has  an  itinerant  and  a  local  or  non-itinerant  ministry ; 
its  territory  is  divided  into  annual  conferences;  it  has  a 
general  conference,  meeting  once  every  four  years;  has 
bishops  or  itinerant  general  superintendents,  elected  for 
life,  who  visit  the  annual  conferences  in  the  episcopal  dis- 
tricts to  which  they  are  assigned ;  has  presiding  elders  who 
exercise  sub- episcopal  oversight  in  the  districts  into  which 
the  annual  conferences  are  divided ;  and  has  the  probation- 
ary system  for  new  members,  with  exhorters,  class  leaders, 
stewards,  stewardesses,  etc. 

The  church  in  its  first  half-century  grew  slowly,  chiefly 
in  the  Northern  States,  until  the  close  of  the  war.  At  the 
end  of  the  first  decade  of  its  existence  it  had  two  confer- 
ences and  about  8000  members.  In  1856  it  had  seven 
conferences  and  about  20,000  members;  in  1866,  ten  con- 
ferences and  75,000  members.  Bishop  B.  W.  Arnett,  the 
ardent  and  industrious  statistician  of  the  church,  in  noting 
a  decrease  of  343  members  in  the  decade  ending  in  1836, 
in  the  Baltimore  conference  explains  that  it  was  due  to 
the  numerous  sales  of  members  as  slaves.  According  to 
elaborate  figures  furnished  by  him,  the  increase  in  the  value 
of  church  property  owned  by  the  denomination  was  not 
less  than  $400,000  in  the  decade  closing  in  1866,  or  nearly 
50  per  cent.  In  the  succeeding  ten  years  the  increase  was 
from  $825,000  to  $3,064,000,  not  including  parsonages, 
which  seem  to  have  been  embraced  in  the  total  for  1866. 
According  to  the  returns   for   1890,   given   herewith,  the 


THE   METHODISTS.  239 

valuation  is  $6,468,280,  indicating  an  increase  of  $3,404,- 
280  in  the  last  fourteen  years,  or  1 1  i.i  i  per  cent. 

The  church  is  widely  distributed,  having  congregations 
in  forty- one  States  and  Territories.  The  States  in  which 
it  is  not  represented  are  the  two  Dakotas,  Idaho,  Maine, 
Nevada,  New  Hampshire,  and  Vermont.  Its  members  are 
most  numerous  in  South  Carolina,  where  there  are  88,172. 
Georgia  comes  second,  with  73,248;  Alabama  third,  with 
30,781;  Arkansas  fourth,  with  27,956;  Mississippi  fifth, 
with  25,439.  Tennessee  has  23,718,  Texas  23,392,  and 
Florida  22,463.  In  no  other  State  does  the  number  reach 
17,000.  The  eight  Southern  States  above  given  report 
315,169  members,  or  considerably  more  than  two  thirds 
of  the  entire  membership  of  the  church. 

It  will  be  observed  that  of  the  2481  organizations  only 
31,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  2200,  worship  in  halls,  school- 
houses,  etc.  All  the  rest,  2450,  own  the  edifices  in  which 
their  meetings  are  held.  These  edifices  number  4 124 — a 
remarkable  excess — and  have  a  total  seating  capacity  of 
1,160,838,  an  average  of  281  to  each  edifice.  The  average 
value  of  each  edifice  is  $1568. 

Summary  by  States. 

STATES  Organi-     Church  Seatmg 

^^^^^^-  zations.     Edifices.         p^-^ 

Alabama 145  274  77,600 

Arkansas 173  333  77,58$ 

California 13  15  2,929 

Colorado 8  6  2,300 

Connecticut 4  4  1,275 

Delaware 16  33  7,025 

Dist.  of  Columbia  6  7  5,500 

Florida 152  269  63,445 

Georgia 334  654  184,592 

Illinois 74  105  23,799 


Value  of 

Com- 

Church 

muni- 

Property. 

cants. 

$242,765 

30,781 

233,425 

27,956 

24,300 

772 

63,500 

788 

16,000 

IS8 

39,500 

2,603 

117,500 

1,479 

168,473 

22,463 

601,287 

73,248 

310,985 

6,383 

240     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. — Continued. 

^^,^^,  Organi-     Church  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^^^^^^^  Y.mc^^..  ^^:  Church  mum- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Indiana 36  51  16,450  $138,280  4,435 

Indian  Territory  .  14  22  1,680  2,618  489 

Iowa  29  29  7,115  87,365  1,820 

Kansas 48  58  14,309  i53j53o  4,678 

Kentucky 90  106  39,100  181,201  13,972 

Louisiana 81  115  36,150  193,115  13,631 

Maryland 58  93  29,881  266,370  12,359 

Massachusetts...  12  11  5,950  119,200  1,342 

Michigan 21  26  7, 155  72,185  1,836 

Minnesota 6  6  2,350  30,000  489 

Mississippi 122  255  59,833  226,242  25,439 

Missouri 87  126  27,870  281,289  9,589 

Montana 3  2  350  14,000  32 

Nebraska 4  4  1,350  62,000  399 

New  Jersey 54  68  19,510  159,850  5,851 

New  Mexico 3  3  550  3,300  62 

New  York 34  29  12,900  231,500  3,124 

North  Carohna  .  .  61  147  42,350  112,998  16,156 

Ohio  Ill  113  40,965  318,250  10,025 

Oregon i  16 

Pennsylvania....  87  112  39,900  605,000  11,613 

Rhode  Island  ....  4  3  2,050  95,000  595 

South  Carolina.  .  .  229  491  125,945  356,362  88,172 

Tennessee  144  236  61,800  461,305  23,718 

Texas 138  208  82,850  233,340  23,392 

Utah I  7 

Virginia 67  102  34,375  187,245  12,314 

Washington 2  i  400  4,000  66 

West  Virginia  ...  3  3  1,050  11,000  216 

Wisconsin 3  3  400  40,000  118 

Wyoming 3  i  200  4,000  139 

Total 2,481  4,124    1,160,838  $6,468,280  452,725 

Summary  by  Conferences. 

CONFERENCES. 

Alabama 81  175  50,500  $124,345  18,398 

Arkansas 62  100  25,590  77,490  9,i74 

Baltimore 64  100  35,381  383,870  13,838 

California  ... 16  16  3,329  28,300  854 


THE  METHODISTS.  24 1 


Summary  by  COxNferences. — Contimied. 


Organi-      Church 


Seating  Value  of  Com- 


CONFERENCES.  ^^^^^^J     £^j^^^^_  Ca-  Church 


muni- 


pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Central  Texas  ...  20  29  11,700  $50,300  3,526 

Columbia 133  271  65,065  197,415  42,840 

East  Florida 104  187  45,320  122,070  12,797 

Florida 48  82  18,125  46,403  9,666 

Georgia 124  260  67,882  127,412  26,963 

Illinois 45  ']']  17,209  107.250  3,796 

Indiana 36  51  16,550  138,280  4,435 

Indian  Territory  .  14  22  1,680  2,618  489 

Iowa 67  66  16,455  361,100  5,014 

Kansas 52  62  15,659  215,530  5,077 

Kentucky 47  58  19,850  81,551  7,434 

Louisiana 42  63  18,850  166,385  7,587 

Macon 107  226  68,060  287,662  25,568 

Michigan   21  26  7, 155  72,185  1,836 

Mississippi 42  80  23,275  57,300  10,270 

Missouri 44  56  13,700  216,575  4,917 

New  England.  ..  .  20  18  9,275  230,200  2,095 

New  Jersey. .... .  54  68  19,510  159,850  5,851 

New  York 34  29  12,900  231,500  3,124 

North  Alabama..  64  99  27,100  118,420  12,383 

North  Carolina  ..  61  147  42,350  112,998  16,156 

Northeast  Texas  .  42  56  19,000  56.575  6,076 

North  Georgia.  .  .  103  168  48,650  186, -213  20,717 

North  Louisiana  .  39  52  17,300  26,730  6,044 

North  Mississippi.  80  175  36,558  168,942  15,169 

North  Missouri   ..  43  70  14,170  64,714  4,672 

North  Ohio 66  63  22,940  229,825  4,446 

Ohio 45  50  18,025  88,425  5,579 

Philadelphia 61  96  30,975  390,550  10,247 

Pittsburg 45  52  17,000  264,950  4,185 

Rocky  Mountain  .  18  12  3,400  84,800  1,028 

South  Arkansas .  .  64  137  27,725  75j6i6  9,686 

South  Carolina  .  .  96  220  60,880  158,947  45,332 

Tennessee 83  130  36,275  338,219  13,423 

Texas 32  48  21,400  67,465  6,461 

Virginia 67  102  34,375  187,245  I2,3H 

West  Arkansas  ..  47  96  24,270  80,319  9,096 

West  Kentucky..  43  48  19,250  99,650  6,538 

Wesi  Tennessee .  .  61  106  25,525  123,086  10,295 

West  Texas 44  75  30,750  59,000  7,329 

Total 2,481  4,124  1,160,838  $6,468,280  452,725 


242     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

4. — THE    AFRICAN    UNION    METHODIST    PROTESTANT 
CHURCH. 

This  body,  which  has  a  few  congregations  divided  among 
eight  States,  came  into  existence  at  about  the  same  time 
the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  was  organized 
(1816),  differing  from  the  latter  chiefly  in  objection  to  the 
itinerancy,  to  a  paid  ministry,  and  to  the  episcopacy.  It 
has  2  annual  conferences,  with  40  organizations,  27  church 
edifices,  valued  at  $54,440,  and  3415  communicants;  13 
halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  1883,  are  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 

rs         •       ^-^^       \^       Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  O''?^"^-     S^>''"'=^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations,     Edifices,      p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Delaware 6  4        1,250  $9,600  368 

Maine i          45 

Maryland 8  7        2,255  5,600  1,546 

New  Jersey 8  6           836  5,940  281 

New  York 3          60 

Pennsylvania 8  8        2,140  32,100  852 

Rhode  Island i          49 

Virginia 5  2           680  1,200  214 


Total 40         27        7,161        $54,440         3.415 

Summary  by  Conferences. 


CONFERENCES. 


Baltimore 14  9        2,935  $6,800         1,805 

Northern 26         18        4,226  47,640         1,610 


Total 40         27        7,161         $54,440         3,415 

5. — THE    AFRICAN    METHODIST    EPISCOPAL    ZION 
CHURCH. 

A  congregation  of  colored  people,  organized  in  New 
York  City  in  1 796,  was  the  nucleus  of  the  African  Method- 
ist Episcopal  Zion  Church.     This  congregation  originated 


THE  METHODISTS.  243 

in  a  desire  of  colored  members  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church  to  hold  separate  meetings,  in  which  they  "  might 
have  an  opportunity  to  exercise  their  spiritual  gifts  among 
themselves,  and  thereby  be  more  useful  to  one  another." 
They  built  a  church,  which  was  dedicated  in  1800,  the 
full  name  of  the  denomination  subsequently  organized 
being  given  to  it.  The  church  entered  into  an  agreement 
in  1 80 1  by  which  it  was  to  receive  certain  pastoral  super- 
vision from  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  It  had 
preachers  of  its  own,  who  supplied  its  pulpit  in  part.  In 
1820  this  arrangement  was  terminated,  and  in  the  same 
year  a  union  of  colored  churches  in  New  York,  New 
Haven,  Long  Island,  and  Philadelphia  was  formed  and 
rules  of  government  adopted.  Thus  was  the  African 
Methodist  Episcopal  Zion  Church  formally  organized. 

The  first  annual  conference  was  held  in  182 1.  It  was 
attended  by  19  preachers,  representing  6  churches  and 
1426  members.  Next  year  James  Varick  was  chosen 
superintendent  of  the  denomination,  which  was  extended 
over  the  States  of  the  North  chiefly  until  the  close  of  the 
Civil  War,  when  it  entered  the  South  to  organize  many 
churches. 

In  its  polity  lay  representation  has  long  been  a  promi- 
nent feature.  Laymen  are  in  its  annual  conferences  as 
well  as  in  its  general  conference,  and  there  is  no  bar  to 
the  ordination  of  women.  Until  1880  its  superintendents, 
or  bishops,  were  elected  for  a  term  of  four  years.  In  that 
year  the  term  of  the  office  was  made  for  life  or  during 
good  behavior.  Its  system  Is  almost  identical  with  that  of 
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  except  the  presence  of 
laymen  in  the  annual  conference,  the  election  of  presiding 
elders  on  the  nomination  of  the  presiding  bishop,  instead 


244     J^J^LIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

of  their  appointment  by  the  bishop  alone,  and  similar  small 
divergences.  Its  general  conference  meets  quadrennially. 
Its  territory  is  divided  into  seven  episcopal  districts,  to 
each  of  which  a  bishop  is  assigned  by  the  general  confer- 
ence. There  are  in  all  twenty-eight  annual  conferences, 
one  of  which  is  partly  in  this  country  and  partly  in  Canada. 
There  is  also  a  missionary  district  in  Africa. 

The  church  is  represented  in  twenty-nine  States.  It  is 
strongest  in  North  Carolina,  where  it  has  111,949  commu- 
nicants; Alabama  comes  next,  with  79,231  communicants; 
South  Carolina  third,  with  45,880;  and  Florida  fourth, 
with  14,791.  There  are  in  all  1704  organizations,  1587 
church  edifices,  which  have  accommodations  for  565,577 
worshipers  and  are  valued  at  $2,714,128,  and  349,788 
communicants.  The  average  seating  capacity  of  the 
church  edifices  is  356  and  their  average  value  $1710;  also 
114  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  15,520,  are  occupied 
as  meeting-places. 

Summary  by  States. 

r\         •      r-u       I.        Seatinsr  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^'■S^"'-    ^^>r  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.    Edifices.        p^^;^^  Property.  cants. 

Alabama    336  315^4118,800  $305,350  79,231 

Arkansas 29  23  8,800  17,250  3,601 

California 13  6  2,600  37,200  2,627 

Connecticut 12  10  2,900  79j35o  1,012 

Delaware 2  i  115  500  158 

District  of  Columbia  6  6  3.400  298,800  2,495 

Florida 61  61  23,589  90,745  14,791 

Georgia 70  62  19,775  52,360  12,705 

Illinois 5  5  2,000  13,400  434 

Indiana 5  5  2,400  54,700  i,339 

Kentucky 55  52  13,075  86,830  7,217 

Louisiana 21  19  5,200  12,920  2,747 

Maryland 13  10  2,375  17.350  1,211 

Massachusetts 7  6  2,050  58,800  724 

Michigan 6  4  650  3,200  702 


THE  METHODISTS.  245 
Summary  by  States. — Continned. 

,^^^^,                      Organi-     Church       Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                     ^^^f^^^     Edifices.           ^X  ^^"''^^  "^""^- 

pacity.  Property.           cants. 

Mississippi 64         50       22,350  $22,975  8,519 

Missouri 6           6         3,900  6,000  2,037 

New  Jersey 25         24          7,400  107,700  2,954 

New  York 47         47        17,000  371,400  6,668 

North  Carolina 541       526^^171,430  485,711  111,949 

Ohio 8           5          1,160  13,000  194 

Oregon 2           2             300  20,000  275 

Pennsylvania 62         55        17,625  256,150  8,689 

Rhode  Island 3            i             400  2,000  401 

South  Carolina  ...  .      130       128       66,jjo  126,325  45,880 

Tennessee  55         52       21,093  78,813  12,434 

Texas 47         38        11,500  26,450  6,927 

Virginia 72         66        16,770  68,449  ii;765 

Wisconsin   i           i             150  400  102 

Total    1,704    1,587      565,577  $2,714,128  349,788 


6. — THE    ZIOX    UNION    APOSTOLIC    CHURCH. 

This  body  was  organized  at  a  meeting  held  at  Boydton, 
Va.,  in  1869.  It  is  said  that  most  of  those  concerned  in 
instituting  it  had  not  previously  belonged  to  any  regular 
body.  Its  discipline  is  very  similar  to  that  of  the  Method- 
ist Episcopal  Church,  except  that  it  is  much  briefer.  Its 
system  includes  bishops,  annual  conferences  and  a  general 
conference,  itinerant  ministers,  local  preachers,  class-meet- 
ings, etc. ;   I  hall,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  100,  is  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 

r>,„ ;         r-i u         Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ?;g^"j-  Ch^'^ch  ^^      «  ^^^^^^  ^^^;_ 

zations.       Edifices.        p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

North  Carolina  ....       3  3  900         $1,900  135 

Virginia 29  24  9,200  13,100       2,211 


Total 32  27  10,100       $15,000       2,346 


246     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES, 

7. — THE    METHODIST    PROTESTANT    CHURCH. 

This  branch  of  Methodism  was  organized  in  1830  by 
ministers  and  members  who  had  been  expelled,  or  had 
seceded  from  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  It  was 
the  outcome  of  a  movement  for  a  change  in  certain  features 
of  the  government  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  In 
1824  a  Union  Society  was  formed  in  Baltimore  having  this 
object  in  view,  and  a  periodical  called  TJie  Mutual  Rights 
was  established  to  advocate  it.  The  chief  reform  insisted 
upon  was  the  admission  of  the  laity  to  a  share  in  the  gov- 
ernment of  the  church.  The  annual  and  general  confer- 
ences were  composed  entirely  of  ministers,  and  the  laymen 
had  no  place  or  voice  in  either.  A  convention  held  in  1827 
resolved  to  present  a  petition  to  the  general  conference 
of  1828  asking  for  lay  representation.  The  conference 
returned  an  unfavorable  reply  to  the  petitioners.  This 
only  served  to  intensify  the  feeling.  The  Union  Society 
entered  into  a  campaign  for  ''  equal  rights,"  and  so  great 
an  agitation  resulted  that  the  leaders  of  the  movement 
came  to  be  regarded  as  disturbers  of  the  peace.  Some  of 
them  were  brought  to  trial  and  expelled  from  the  church. 
All  efforts  to  have  them  restored  having  failed,  many 
sympathizers  withdrew  from  the  church,  and  in  1828  a 
convention  of  the  disaffected  was  held  in  Baltimore,  and  a 
provisional  organization  formed.  Two  years  later  (Novem- 
ber 2,  1830)  another  convention  was  held  and  the  Meth- 
odist Protestant  Church  was  constituted.  It  began  its 
separate  existence  with  83  ministers,  and  about  5000  mem- 
bers. In  the  first  four  years  it  increased  its  membership 
enormously.  While  equal  rights  were  insisted  upon  in  the 
new  constitution,   as  between  ministers  and   laymen,  the 


THE  METHODISTS.  247 

right  of  suffrage  and  eligibility  to  office  was  restricted  to 
the  whites.  When  the  antislavery  agitation  began  in  the 
new  branch  some  years  later,  the  northern  and  western 
conferences  raised  an  objection  to  the  retention  of  the 
word  *'  white  "  in  the  constitution.  They  also  protested 
against  any  toleration  of  slavery  by  the  church.  Failing 
to  secure  such  changes  as  they  desired,  they  held  a  con- 
vention in  Springfield,  111.,  in  1858,  and  resolved  to  suspend 
all  relations  with  the  Methodist  Protestant  Church.  Later 
they  united  with  a  number  of  Wesleyan  Methodists  and 
formed  the  Methodist  Church.  After  the  close  of  the  war 
negotiations  for  a  reunion  were  begun,  and  in  1877  the 
two  branches — the  Methodist  and  the  Methodist  Protestant 
— were  made  one  under  the  old  title. 

The  Methodist  Protestant  Church  is  strongest  numeric- 
ally in  the  States  of  Ohio,  North  Carolina,  Maryland,  and 
West  Virginia.  It  is  represented  in  most  of  the  border 
and  Southern  States,  but  is  not  widely  diffused  among  the 
Northern  and  Western  States.  At  the  reunion  in  1877 
there  were  in  the  Methodist  branch  58,072  communicants; 
in  the  Methodist  Protestant  branch  58,470,  making  a  total 
of  116,542.  The  increase  since  then  has  amounted  to 
25,447,  the  membership  in  1890  aggregating  141,989. 
They  have  not,  however,  been  incorporated  in  the  disci- 
pline. The  average  seating  capacity  of  its  edifices  is  297, 
and  their  average  value  $1914.  There  are  575  halls,  with 
a  seating  capacity  of  80,025,  used  as  places  of  worship. 

In  doctrine,  the  Methodist  Protestant  does  not  differ 
from  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  except  that  it  has 
twenty-nine  instead  of  twenty-six  articles  of  religion.  The 
general  conference  of  1888  appointed  a  committee  to  revise 
the  doctrinal  symbol.     The  committee  made  the  revision 


248     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

in  1890,  adding  five  new  articles,  with  the  following  titles: 
**  Free  Grace,"  "Freedom  of  the  Will,"  ''Regeneration," 
"  Sanctification,"  and  "Witness  of  the  Spirit."  The  re- 
vised articles  were  submitted  to  the  annual  conferences  for 
amendment  and  approval,  but  have  not  been  adopted. 

Summary  by  States. 

STATES.  O^?^"^- 

zations. 

Alabama y'j 

Arkansas 118 

Connecticut 3 

Delaware 22 

District  of  Columbia  9 

Florida 11 

Georgia 80 

Illinois 135 

Indiana 132 

Indian  Territory  ...  16 

Iowa 61 

Kansas 32 

Kentucky 40 

Louisiana 26 

Maryland 174 

Michigan 120 

Minnesota 5 

Mississippi 75 

Missouri 90 

Nebraska 34 

New  Jersey 39 

New  York 90 

North  Carolina  ....  199 

Ohio 234 

Oregon  i 

Pennsylvania 172 

South  Carolina  ....  42 

Tennessee 40 

Texas 158 

Virginia 57 

Washington 6 

West  Virginia 230 

Wisconsin i 

Total 2,529    1,924     571,266   $3,683,337    141,989 


r"Kiiv^Vi 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Propert}'. 

cants. 

72H 

19,895 

$79,850 

'     4,432 

51 

14,650 

15,360 

3,946 

3 

530 

5,000 

154 

22 

5>oi5 

51,600 

1,551 

8 

3,225 

168,825 

831 

5 

1,300 

2,400 

350 

73 

21,050 

33,475 

4,390 

94 

25.840 

115,765 

5,502 

iioYz 

33,885 

142,875 

7,033 

I 

200 

300 

278 

55 

11,325 

84,900 

5,645 

19 

4,550 

33,770 

1,890 

18 

6,050 

8,500 

1,822 

23 

7,550 

6,850 

1,231 

iji'A 

44,993 

654,625 

13,283 

94 

23,035 

161,702 

4,512 

5 

1,000 

3,000 

137 

73 

17,095 

16,175 

3,147 

3« 

11,025 

29,900 

3-359 

9 

1,150 

8,450 

39 

12,625 

181,950 

3,459 

7« 

27,690 

293,000 

4,759 

189 

70,205 

126,800 

14,351 

226/3 

68,945 

441,000 

18,931 

I 

200 

1,200 

15 

129 

44,567 

641,575 

10,081 

42 

11.495 

21,095 

2,665 

.36^^ 

11,350 

25,950 

2,880 

31 

9,800 

16,700 

5,536 

57 

15,650 

94,000 

4,154 

6 

2,550 

62,800 

315 

I42;5^ 

42,676 

153,545 

10,652 

' 

150 

400 

12 

THE   METHODISTS. 


249 


Summary  by  Conferences. 


CONFERENCES.  -^.t,-... 

zations 

Alabama 73 

Alabama     Colored 

Mission 4 

Arkansas  81 

Baltimore    Colored 

Mission 7 

Central  Texas  ....  62 

Colorado-Texas.  . .  71 

Florida  Mission  ...  11 

Fort  Smith  Mission  51 

Genesee 18 

Georgia 50 

Georgia  Colored  . .  29 

Indiana 130 

Indiana  Mission.  . .  16 

Iowa 61 

Kansas 32 

Kentucky 36 

Louisiana 20 

Maryland 254 

Michigan 92 

Minnesota   5 

Mississippi 50 

Missouri 53 

Muskingum 109 

Nebraska 34 

New  Jersey 35 

New  York 27 

North  Carolina  .  .  .  193 

North  IIHnois 58 

North  Mississippi  .  27 

North  Missouri  ...  29 

Ohio 115 

Onondaga 54 

Oregon  7 

Pennsylvania 59 

Pittsburg 96 

South  Carolina  ...  37 
South   Carolina 

Colored 14 

South  Illinois 78 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com. 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

69 

18,895 

$78,850 

3,932 

4 

1,000 

1,000 

500 

50 

14,300 

14,825 

2,868 

5 

1,300 

16,125 

230 

6 

3,100 

6,000 

2,163 

5 

1,650 

1,900 

1,424 

5 

1,300 

2,400 

350 

7 

2,200 

2,335 

1,522 

i6>^ 

3,935 

43,900 

936 

45 

15,650 

22,100 

3,067 

27 

5,200 

11,325 

1,293 

107X 

33,135 

140,225 

6,981 

I 

200 

300 

278 

55 

11,325 

84,900 

5^645 

19 

4,550 

33,770 

1,890 

12 

4,800 

6,300 

1,585 

17 

5,700 

5,050 

917 

250/^ 

68,183 

1,031,025 

I9.-473 

68  K 

16,635 

121,777 

3,352 

5 

1,000 

3,000 

^37 

48 

9.495 

8,125 

1,910 

22 

5,825 

17,200 

2,155 

1051^ 

34,255 

216,800 

9,996 

9 

1,150 

8,450 

686 

35 

10,775 

125,450 

3,028 

27 

9,535 

172,475 

2,179 

183 

68,205 

124,100 

13,876 

45 

11,465 

76,450 

2,470 

26 

8,150 

8,400 

1,335 

16 

5,200 

12,700 

1,074 

112 

32,290 

195,100 

8,134 

\y/z 

16,850 

119.400 

2,304 

7 

2,750 

64,000 

330 

27 

8,450 

41,000 

1,346 

85 

31,257 

575,650 

7,817 

37 

10,550 

18,950 

2,132 

14 

4,045 

6,995 

1,160 

49>^ 

14,525 

39,715 

3,044 

250     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  ConferExNCes. — Continued. 

r^        •        r-\.      \.  Seating               Value  of  Com- 

CONPEKENCES.              Orfani-      Church  S                  ^^^^^  ^^^._ 

zations.      nainces.  pacuy.                Property.  cants. 

Tennessee 33          33  9j75o        $18,000  1,850 

Texas 25           19^^  5,050             8,800  1,949 

Virginia 34          3i  7, 500           18,450  2,943 

West  Michigan  .. .      32          29X  7j4oo           43^175  Ij3oi 

West  Virginia 227        143 >^  42,736         136,845  10,437 

Total 2,529     1,924  571,266   $3,683,337  141,989 


8. — THE   WESLEYAN    METHODIST    CONNECTION    OF 
AMERICA. 

In  this  title  "  Connection  "  is  used  in  a  sense  common 
to  Methodism,  especially  British  Methodism.  It  indicates 
congregations  bound  together  by  the  same  doctrinal  and 
ecclesiastical  ties.  This  body  was  organized  in  1843  by 
ministers  and  members  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church 
in  consequence  of  dissatisfaction  with  the  attitude  of  that 
body  toward  slavery  and  with  some  of  the  features  of  its 
governmental  system.  It  began  with  about  6000  members, 
most  of  whom  were  in  the  State  of  New  York.  In  doc- 
trine it  does  not  differ  from  other  branches  of  Methodism. 
It  refuses  to  receive  as  members  those  who  belong  to  secret 
societies,  and  as  long  as  the  institution  existed,  it  main- 
tained the  same  bar  against  those  connected  with  slavery. 
It  has  twenty-two  annual  conferences,  with  ministerial  and 
lay  members,  and  a  general  conference,  the  chief  legislative 
body  of  the  church,  which  meets  quadrennially.  There  is 
no  itinerancy,  as  in  most  other  Methodist  bodies,  but  pas- 
torates are  arranged  by  mutual  agreement  of  ministers  and 
congregations,  and  are  not  limited  to  a  term  of  years.  It 
has  565  organizations,  in  twenty- two  States,  with  16,492 


THE  METHODISTS.  25  I 

members,  of  whom  nearly  one  fourth,  or  3913,  are  in  New 
York;  Michigan  second,  with  2942 ;  and  Indiana  third,  with 

2199  members.  The  average  value  of  the  342  houses  of 
worship  is  $1151,  and  the  average  seating  capacity  is  252. 
There  are  213  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  oi  18,483. 

Summary  by  States. 

SSi"    E^d-r*       '"a."^  ctrcf  SrU 

zations.     Ldinces.             •,  t>          ^ 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

California 2           i             250  $75°  41 

Illinois   19         17         3,825  24,900  643 

Indiana 58         44        13,030  37,900  2,199 

Iowa 26         i6>^      4,015  16,500  840 

Kansas 22           8         2,325  14,350  566 

Massachusetts i                        ....  8 

Michigan 143         dy/^    14,120  58,475  2,942 

Minnesota 5           4             625  1,300  207 

Missouri 2         .  .            ....  50 

Nebraska 6         .  .            ....  78 

New  Jersey 3           2             500  2,650  65 

New  York 114        75        19,038  i35.95o  3»9i3 

North  CaroHna  ...  .         8           7          1,980  1,675  141 

Ohio  45         40        11,391  46,500  1,657 

Oregon 4           i             250  1,200  61 

Pennsylvania 41         30         7,205  25,300  1,195 

South  Dakota 23           5             900  5,200  458 

Tennessee  14           9         2,650  2,050  462 

Vermont 6          5          1,225  6,850  259 

Washington 3           i             200  600  35 

West  Virginia i           i             500  1,500  245 

Wisconsin 19         12          2,225  9,600  427 

Total 565       342       86,254  $393^250  16,492 

Summary  by  Conferences. 

CONFERENCES. 

Allegheny 34        30         7,530  $37, 100  1,207 

Central  Ohio 19         18          5,141  13,800  784 

Champlain 39        27         6,750  43, 950  i,444 

Dakota 23           5             900  5,200  458 

lUinois 19         17         3,825  24,900  643 

Indiana 58        44        13,030  37,900  2,199 

Iowa 26         i^Yz      4,015  16,500  840 


252     RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Conferences. — Continued. 

Ortrar.;  Chnrrh  Seating  Valuc  of  Com- 

CONKEHENCES.  "^SZ'.m^icl  ^a  Church  xnuni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Kansas i8  6  1,525  $10,150  464 

Lockport 30  21  5,350  27,750  896 

Miami 17  15  4,325  15,400  714 

Michigan 78  46  10,520  49,250  1,979 

Minnesota 5  4  625  i)30o  207 

Nebraska 6                      78 

New  York 12  4  jjS  5,250  239 

North  CaroHna  ....  8  7  1,980  1,675  141 

North  Michigan  ...  65  lyyi  3,600  9,225  963 

Pacific 9  3  700*  2,550  137 

Rochester 36  23  6,087  49,100  1,099 

South  Kansas 6  2  800  4,200  152 

Syracuse 24  15X  3,900  26,400  959 

Tennessee 14  9  2,650  2,050  462 

Wisconsin 19  \i]4  2,225  9,600  427 

Total 565  342  86,254  $393,250  16,492 


9. — THE    METHODIST    EPISCOPAL    CHURCH,  SOUTH. 

This  body  was  organized  at  a  convention  held  in  Louis- 
ville, Ky.,  in  1845,  by  annual  conferences  in  the  South, 
which  had  accepted  a  plan  of  separation  adopted  by  the 
general  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  at 
its  meeting  in  New  York  in  1844.  The  cause  of  separa- 
tion was  the  slavery  question. 

This  question,  which  gave  rise  to  much  discussion  and 
several  divisions  among  Methodists,  engaged  their  atten- 
tion as  early  as  1780,  four  years  before  American  Method- 
ism was  given  organized  form.  A  conference  held  in 
Baltimore  in  i  780  took  action  requiring  traveling  preachers 
who  held  slaves  to  set  them  free,  and  advising  lay  slave- 
holders to  do  likewise.  In  1789  the  following  appeared 
in  the  discipline  among  the  rules  prohibiting  certain  things : 


THE   METHODISTS.  253 

"  The  buying  or  selling  the  bodies  and  souls  of  men, 
women,  or  children,  with  an  intention  to  enslave  them." 

The  conference  of  1784,  which  organized  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church,  deemed  it  a  **  bounden  duty  "  to  take 
effective  measures  to  "  extirpate  this  abomination  from 
among  us."  It  accordingly  insisted  that  all  these  holding 
slaves  should  adopt  a  system  of  manumission,  failing  in 
which  they  should  be  excluded  from  the  church,  and  that 
in  future  no  slaveholder  should  be  admitted  to  the  church 
until  he  had  ceased  to  hold  slaves.  In  1800  the  disci- 
pline provided  that  any  minister  becoming  a  slaveholder 
must,  if  legally  possible  under  the  laws  of  the  State  in 
which  he  lived,  emancipate  his  slaves  or  '*  forfeit  his  min- 
isterial character."  In  18 16  the  general  conference  de- 
clared slaveholders  ineligible  to  any  official  station  in  the 
church,  except  in  States  where  the  laws  did  not  "  admit  of 
emancipation  and  permit  the  liberated  slave  to  enjoy  free- 
dom." These  provisions  could  not  be  observed  in  some 
of  the  States  in  the  South,  and  were  not  insisted  on  in  the 
Carolinas,  Georgia,  and  Tennessee.  In  1808  the  general 
conference  directed  that  a  number  of  disciplines,  **  with 
the  section  and  rule  on  slavery  left  out,"  be  printed  for  use 
in  South  Carolina. 

About  twenty-five  years  later  the  antislavery  agitation 
in  the  North  began  to  affect  Methodism.  The  general 
conference  of  1836  exhorted  the  members  of  the  church 
*'  to  abstain  from  all  abolition  movements  and  associations," 
and  censured  two  of  its  members  for  taking  part  in  an 
antislavery  meeting.  In  the  South  the  rule  concerning  the 
connection  of  ministers  with  slavery  had  not  been  enforced, 
except  in  six  of  the  border  conferences.  The  episcopacy, 
however,  had  been  kept  free  from  any  conflict  with  slave- 


254     KELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

holding.  While  the  Northern  conferences  would  not  have 
received  a  slaveholding  bishop,  the  Southern  conferences 
could  not  agree  that  slaveholders  ought  to  be  excluded 
from  the  episcopacy.  A  serious  conflict  arose,  therefore, 
when  Bishop  Andrew,  a  Southern  man  who  was  elected 
bishop  in  ^832,  became  by  marriage,  in  January,  1844,  a 
slaveholder.  At  the  general  conference  held  in  May  of 
that  year  in  New  York  City,  after  a  long  discussion,  it  was 
declared  by  a  vote  of  1 1 1  to  69  to  be  the  sense  of  the 
conference  that  Bishop  Andrew  ''  desist  from  the  exercise 
of  his  office  so  long  as  he  is  connected  with  slavery."  The 
Southern  delegates  protested  against  this  action,  and  in- 
sisted that  under  the  circumstances  the  *'  continuance  of 
the  jurisdiction  of  this  general  conference  "  over  the  con- 
ferences in  the  slaveholding  States  was  '*  inconsistent  with 
the  success  of  the  ministry  "  in  those  States.  The  outcome 
was  the  adoption  of  a  report  of  a  committee  of  nine  em- 
bodying a  plan  of  separation  to  become  operative,  if  the 
thirteen  annual  conferences  in  the  slaveholding  States 
should  "  find  it  necessary  to  unite  in  a  distinct  ecclesias- 
tical connection,  and  if  the  various  annual  conferences  by  a 
three-fourths  vote  should  so  change  the  constitution  as  to 
allow  of  a  division  of  the  property  of  the  Book  Concern." 

The  action  of  the  general  conference  was  followed,  in  the 
South,  by  a  convention  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  in  May,  1845, 
representing  the  thirteen  annual  conferences  which  had 
expressed  their  approval  of  the  plan  of  separation.  This 
convention  declared  the  conferences  represented  a  distinct 
body  under  the  title,  ''  The  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
South."  Two  bishops,  Andrew  and  Soule,  cast  their  lot 
with  the  Southern  church,  the  former  in  1845,  the  latter 
at  the  first  general  conference   in   1846.     The   Northern 


THE  METHODISTS.  255 

annual  conferences  disapproved  the  plan  of  separation,  and 
the  general  conference  of  1848  declared  it  null  and  void. 
A  suit  for  a  division  of  the  property  according  to  the 
plan  of  separation  was  prosecuted,  and  the  Supreme  Court 
of  the  United  States,  in  1854,  decided  it  in  favor  of  the 
Southern  church.  A  fraternal  messenger  sent  by  the  lat- 
ter to  the  Northern  general  conference  of  1848  was  not 
received  officially  by  that  body.  It  was  not  until  after  the 
Civil  War  (1876)  that  fraternity  was  established  between 
the  two  churches. 

The  Southern  church  lost  more  heavily  during  the  years 
of  the  war  than  the  Northern.  The  latter  had  in  1864 
about  68,000  fewer  members  than  in  i860,  the  decrease 
occurring  chiefly  in  the  border  conferences.  The  former 
lost  between  the  years  i860  and  1866  113,000  white 
members,  while  its  colored  membership,  aggregating  207,- 
"]66,  dwindled  to  78,742.  Most  of  the  colored  members 
went,  at  the  close  of  the  war,  into  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church  (which  extended  its  operations  into  the  South),  and 
into  the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  and  African  Method- 
ist Episcopal  Zion  churches.  In  1870  nearly  all  the  re- 
maining colored  members  were  organized  into  the  Colored 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  There  are  now  only  about 
500  colored  members  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
South,  and  these  are  scattered  among  27  annual  confer- 
ences. In  the  Indian  Mission  Conference  about  3500  of 
the  10,498  members  are  Indians.  The  Southern  church 
reorganized  its  shattered  forces  at  the  close  of  the  war,  and 
in  a  few  years  was  again  in  the  full  tide  of  prosperity.  Its 
growth  in  the  last  decade  has  been  rapid. 

The  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  South,  has  the  same 
articles  of  religion,  the  same  system  of  conferences,  annual 


256     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

and  general,  and  substantially  the  same  discipline  as  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  It  differs  from  the  latter  in 
admitting  lay  delegates  (four  from  each  district)  to  the 
annual  conferences;  in  making  lay  equal  to  ministerial 
representation  in  the  general  conference ;  in  giving  the 
bishops  a  modified  veto  over  legislation  which  they  may 
deem  unconstitutional ;  and  in  abolishing  the  probationary 
term  of  six  months  for  candidates  for  membership.  The 
changes  respecting  lay  delegation  and  the  probationary 
system  were  adopted  in  1866.  The  pastoral  term  was  in 
the  same  year  extended  from  two  to  four  years. 

There  are  45  annual  conferences,  covering  the  entire 
country  south  of  the  40th  parallel  of  latitude,  which  nearly 
corresponds  with  Mason  and  Dixon's  line,  and  also  parts 
of  Oregon,  Montana,  Idaho,  and  Washington;  but  the 
number  of  congregations  in  these  States  is  not  large.  Nor 
are  there  many  congregations  in  the  southern  portions  of 
Indiana  and  Illinois.  The  church  is  strongest  in  Texas, 
where  it  has  139,347  members;  in  Georgia,  where  it  has 
134,600;  and  in  Tennessee,  where  the  number  reaches 
121,398.  There  are  in  all  1,209,976  members,  with  15,017 
organizations,  and  12,688  edifices,  which  are  valued  at 
$18,775,362.  Of  the  congregations,  1634  meet  in  halls, 
etc.,  which  have  a  seating  capacity  of  190,777.  The  aver- 
age seating  capacity  of  the  church  edifices  is  265,  and  the 
average  value  $1480. 


THE  METHODISTS. 


257 


Summary  by  States. 


Alabama 1,101 

Arizona 11 

Arkansas ^i'^?)'}) 

California 175 

Colorado 26 

Dist.  of  Columbia  4 

Florida 389 

Georgia 1,286 

Idaho    II 

Illinois 154 

Indiana 10 

Indian  Territory .  .  275 

Iowa 8 

Kansas 83 

Kentucky 989 

Louisiana 316 

Maryland 142 

Mississippi 903 

Missouri i>230 

Montana 23 

Nebraska  8 

New  Mexico 25 

North  Carolina. .  .  1,288 

Oklahoma 15 

Oregon 70 

Pennsylvania  ....  14 

South  Carolina. .  .  686 

Tennessee i)367 

Texas i)7oi 

Virginia i>  172 

Washington 20 

West  Virginia  . .  .  482 

Total i5yOi7   I 


-     Church 
.     Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

1,050 

243,735 

$1,123,523 

87,912 

6 

1,150 

12,000 

336 

809 

203,069 

708,895 

71,565 

97;^ 

23,210 

446,010 

7,497 

16 

3,411 

100,300 

1,299 

3 

1,675 

61,400 

953 

347 

61,338 

333,824 

25,362 

I,272K 

322,856 

1,661,410 

134,600 

4 

700 

5,000 

221 

108 

26,450 

123,183 

7,109 

8 

1,850 

13,100 

945 

134 

24,455 

59,600 

9,693 

7 

1,800 

9,200 

730 

40  M 

10.300 

83,450 

3,346 

827 

239,410 

1,539,567 

82,430 

296;^ 

49,755 

483,470 

24,874 

135K 

30,470 

361,990 

10,604 

854 

207,760 

903,563 

74,785 

921 

264,788 

2,046,389 

86,466 

13 

2,920 

74,000 

492 

6 

1,275 

10,800 

206 

18 

2,850 

32,600 

548 

i,203>^  380,500 

1,471,135 

114,385 

7 

1,550 

16,150 

805 

40 

7,960 

50,850 

1,936 

12 

2,475 

11,400 

635 

678 

196,808 

796,840 

68,092 

1,258 

376,483 

1,994,382 

121,398 

1,076 

296,578 

1,647,866 

139,347 

1,107 

285,735 

2,183,565 

105,892 

II 

2,385 

27,650 

449 

321 

83,765 

382,250 

25,064 

,688  3,359,466  $18,775,362   1,209,976 


Summary  by  Conferences. 

CONFERENCES. 

Alabama 509         502      109,920        $567,360  39,574 

Arkansas 333         203        55,985           199,596  23,134 

Baltimore 561          482       120,550           977,965  41,070 

Columbia 44           29          5,260            32,650  1,280 


258     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 
Summary  by  Conferences. — Continued, 

CONFERENCES.  ^^l^; 

Denver 28 

East  Columbia. .  .  56 

East  Texas 219 

Florida 322 

German  Mission  .  22 

Holston 624 

Illinois 163 

Indian  Mission.  .  .  290 

Kentucky 332 

Little  Rock 456 

Los  Angeles 46 

Louisiana 250 

Louisville 488 

Memphis 491 

Mexican      Border 

Mission 22 

Mississippi 463 

Missouri 468 

Montana 24 

New  Mexico 27 

North  Alabama  . .  657 

North  Carolina  .  .  602 

North  Georgia  .  .  .  737 

North  Mississippi .  508 

North  Texas 458 

Northwest  Texas.  610 

Pacific 139 

Saint  Louis 339 

South  Carohna  . .  686 

South  Georgia  .  . .  546 

Southwest  Mis- 
souri    431 

Tennessee 608 

Texas   190 

Virginia 710 

Western 91 

Western       North 

Carolina 646 

Western  Virginia .  400 

West  Texas 177 

White  River 244 

Total 155O17    12,688  3,359,466  $18,775,362   1,209,976 


Church 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Edifices. 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

17 

3,561 

$101,100 

1,395 

24  K 

5,585 

48,850 

1,301 

210 

47,925 

214,825 

22,050 

280 

53,348 

309,024 

20,420 

21K 

4,600 

42,350 

1,325 

542 

165,370 

904,890 

43,014 

115 

28,050 

133,783 

7,854 

141 

26,005 

75,750 

10,498 

278;^ 

80,565 

692,900 

27,114 

391 

92,845 

326,217 

28,016 

31 

6,900 

157,735 

2,072 

242  K 

37,155 

445,845 

20,379 

419K 

119,100 

691,967 

40,427 

484 

135,728 

704,620 

49,436 

14 

2,125 

24,075 

1,041 

418 

100,207 

413,690 

38,173 

401 

107,520 

740,264 

36,965 

14 

3,120 

76,000 

517 

.'9 

2,950 

38,200 

535 

613 

141,255 

580,513 

53,210 

557 

169,715 

712,975 

52,643 

734 

198,176 

1,041,680 

82,921 

492 

120,703 

527,948 

41,177 

285 

83,800 

417,928 

42,013 

275 

86,730 

439,386 

45,208 

72 

17,310 

298,275 

5,722 

225 

72,965 

615,975 

20,684 

678 

196,808 

796,840 

68,992 

535>^ 

122,980 

617,230 

51,395 

ZoiYz 

86,103 

699,350 

29,547 

558 

166,460 

881,832 

59,999 

157 

43,860 

zzs.ni 

15,237 

702 

177,055 

1,474,580 

69,826 

46K 

11,575 

94,250 

3,552 

607 

199,635 

689,960 

57,594 

241 

68,285 

279,000 

20,722 

113 

27,438 

169,125 

12,429 

216 

54,239 

183,082 

20,415 

THE  METHODISTS.  259 

10. — THE    CONGREGATIONAL    METHODISTS. 

Dissatisfaction  with  certain  features  of  the  system  of 
polity  led  a  number  of  ministers  and  members  of  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  South,  to  withdraw  and 
organize  a  body  in  which  laymen  should  have  an  equal 
voice  in  church  government  and  local  preachers  should 
become  pastors.  The  new  church  was  organized  in 
Georgia  in  1852,  and  called  the  Congregational  Method- 
ist Church.  The  first  district  conference  was  formed  the 
same  year.  A  number  of  churches  in  harmony  with  the 
principles  of  the  movement  were  organized  in  Georgia, 
Mississippi,  and  other  States  of  the  South,  to  which  it  has 
been  confined.  In  1888  many  of  the  churches  and  minis- 
ters went  over  into  the  Congregational  denomination,  which 
appeared  in  the  South  after  the  war. 

The  system  of  the  Congregational  Methodists  is  not 
purely  congregational.  The  local  church  has  large  pow- 
ers, but  appeals  from  its  decisions  may  be  taken  to  the 
district  conference,  and  thence  to  the  State  conference, 
and  also  to  the  general  conference.  These  bodies  have 
likewise  the  power  of  censure  or  approval.  The  district 
conference  may  "  condemn  opinions  and  practices  contrary 
to  the  word  of  truth  and  holiness,"  and  may  cite  offending 
parties  for  trial,  and  admonish,  rebuke,  suspend,  or  expel 
from  the  conference.  Ministers  and  lay  members  have 
equal  rights  and  privileges  in  the  local  church  and  all  the 
conferences.  The  district  conference  is  composed  of  rep- 
resentatives from  the  churches,  the  State  conference  of 
representatives  of  the  district  conferences,  and  the  general 
conference  of  delegates  chosen  by  the  State  conferences. 
District  conferences  meet  semi-annually.  State  conferences 


26o     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

annually,  and  the  general  conference  quadrennially.  The 
ministers  are  elders  ordained  after  examination  and  ap- 
proved by  the  district  conference.  The  elder,  as  pastor 
of  a  church,  presides  at  its  monthly  conference.  The  other 
officers  of  a  church  are  class  leader,  deacon  or  steward, 
and  clerk.  The  itinerancy  is  not  in  force.  In  doctrine 
this  branch  does  not  differ  from  other  Methodist  bodies. 

This  body  has  in  all  214  organizations,  150  edifices, 
valued  at  $41,680,  and  8765  communicants.  Its  chief 
strength  lies  in  Alabama,  where  it  has  2596  communicants. 
The  average  seating  capacity  of  its  church  edifices  is  310, 
and  the  average  value  $278.  There  are  60  halls,  with  a 
seating  capacity  of  7825. 

Summary  by  States. 

r\         •       /^L      1.       Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  Organi-      Church  ^a-  Church  muni- 

zations.     Edifices.       p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Alabama 65  59  18,575  $i4:05o  2,596 

Arkansas 10  4  1,675  2,525  223 

Florida 7  i  550  250  179 

Georgia  29  28  8,000  8,050  1,655 

Illinois 4  . .          96 

Mississippi 28  22  5,600  5,400  1,341 

Missouri 38  13  4,4oo  3,000  1,450 

Tennessee 7  4  1,150  780  196 

Texas 26  19  6,450  7,625  1,029 

Total 214       150       46,400         $41,680       8,765 

Summary  by  Conferences. 

CONFERENCES. 

Arkansas 10  4  1,675  $2,525  223 

Georgia 26  25  7,200  7.300  1,517 

Illinois 4  96 

Mississippi 28  22  5,600  5>4oo  1,341 

Missouri 38  13  4,4oo  3»ooo  1,450 

North  Alabama 59  53  17,550  13,300  2,281 

Tennessee 7  4  1,150  780  196 

Texas 26  19  6,450  7,625  1,029 

West  Florida 16  10  2,375  1,750  632 

Total 214       150       46,400         $41,680       8,765 


THE  METHODISTS.  26 1 

II. — THE    CONGREGATIONAL   METHODISTS,  COLORED. 

This  body  consists  of  congregations  of  colored  members, 
organized  into  conferences  by  presidents  of  the  Congrega- 
tional Methodist  Church,  to  which  it  corresponds  in  all 
particulars  of  doctrine,  polity,  and  usage.  The  only  differ- 
ence between  the  churches  of  the  two  bodies  is  that  they 
are  composed  of  white  and  colored  persons  respectively. 
Four  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  450,  are  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES  Organi-  Church 

STATES.  zations.         Edifices. 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

Com- 

muni- 
cants. 

585 

$525 

215 
104 

585 

$525 

319 

Alabama 7 

Texas 2 

Total 9 


12. — THE    NEW    CONGREGATIONAL   METHODISTS. 

This  branch  originated  in  Ware  County,  Ga.,  in  1881. 
It  was  organized  by  members  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  South,  who  were  aggrieved  by  a  certain  action 
of  a  quarterly  conference  of  that  body,  which  action  they 
regarded  as  arbitrary.  It  has  the  same  doctrines  and  sub- 
stantially the  same  practical  system  as  the  Congregational 
Methodist  Church.  A  number  of  its  churches  united  with 
the  Congregational  denomination  in  1888. 

There  are  in  all  24  organizations,  17  edifices,  valued  at 
$3750,  and  1059  members,  found  chiefly  in  Georgia.  The 
average  seating  capacity  of  the  church  edifices  is  294  and 
the  average  value  $214.  There  are  6  halls,  with  a  seating 
capacity  of  450. 


262     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES, 


Summary  by  States. 

Organi-       Church        Seating  V^Jue  of  Com- 

s-^A^^^-                     zations.      Edifices.           ^a-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Florida 3             i            300  $150  113 

Georgia 21           16         4,850  3,600  946 

Total 24          17         5,150  $3,750  i»o59 


13. — THE    COLORED    METHODIST   EPISCOPAL   CHURCH. 

The  Colored  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  was  organized 
in  1870  of  colored  members  and  ministers  of  the  Meth- 
odist Episcopal  Church,  South.  Before  the  Civil  War  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  South,  did  a  large  evangel- 
istic work  among  the  negroes.  Bishop  H.  N.  McTyeire,  of 
that  body,  in  his  "History  of  Methodism,"  says:  "As  a 
general  rule  negro  slaves  received  the  gospel  by  Method- 
ism from  the  same  preachers  and  in  the  same  churches 
with  their  masters,  the  galleries  or  a  portion  of  the  body 
of  the  house  being  assigned  to  them.  If  a  separate  build- 
ing was  provided,  the  negro  congregation  was  an  append- 
age to  the  white,  the  pastor  usually  preaching  once  on 
Sunday  for  them,  holding  separate  official  meetings  with 
their  leaders,  exhorters,  and  preachers,  and  administering 
discipline  and  making  return  of  members  for  the  annual 
minutes."  For  the  negroes  on  plantations,  who  were  not 
privileged  to  attend  organized  churches,  special  missions 
were  begun  as  early  as  1829.  In  1845,  the  year  which 
marks  the  beginning  of  the  separate  existence  of  the  Meth- 
odist Episcopal  Church,  South,  there  were  in  the  Southern 
conferences  of  Methodism,  according  to  Bishop  McTyeire, 
124,000  members  of  the  slave  population,  and  in  i860 
about  207,000 


THE   METHODISTS.  263 

In  1866,  after  the  opening  of  the  South  to  Northern 
churches  had  given  the  negro  members  opportunity  to 
join  the  African  Methodist  Episcopal,  the  African  Meth- 
odist Episcopal  Zion,  and  other  Methodist  bodies,  it  was 
found  that  of  the  207,742  colored  members  which  the 
church,  South,  had  in  i860,  only  78,742  remained.  The 
o-eneral  conference  of  1866  authorized  these  colored  mem- 
bers,  with  their  preachers,  to  be  organized  into  separate 
congregations  and  annual  conferences,  and  the  general 
conference  of  1870  appointed  two  bishops  to  organize  the 
colored  conferences  into  a  separate  and  independent  church. 
This  was  done  in  December,  1870,  the  new  body  taking 
the  n^me  **  Colored  Methodist  Episcopal  Church."  Its 
rules  limited  the  privilege  of  membership  to  negroes. 

The  Colored  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  has  the  same 
articles  of  religion,  the  same  form  of  government,  and  the 
same  discipline  as  its  parent  body.  Its  bishops  are  elected 
for  life.  One  of  them,  Bishop  L.  H.  Holsey,  says  that  for 
some  years  the  body  encountered  strong  opposition  from 
colored  people  because  of  its  relation  to  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church,  South,  but  that  this  prejudice  has  now 
almost  entirely  disappeared.  He  says  a  separate  organi- 
zation was  made  necessary  by  the  change  in  the  relation 
between  master  and  slave.  **  The  former,  though  divested 
of  his  slaves,  carried  with  him  all  the  notions,  feelings,  and 
elements  in  his  religious  and  social  life  that  characterized 
his  former  years.  On  the  other  hand,  the  emancipated 
slave  had  but  little  in  common  with  the  former  master; 
in  fact,  he  had  nothing  but  his  religion,  poverty,  and  igno- 
rance. With  social  elements  so  distinct  and  dissimilar  the 
best  results  of  a  common  church  relation  could  not  be  ex- 
pected."     Bishop   Holsey  declares  that  the  great  aim  of 


264     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

the  church  is  (i)  to  evangeHze   the  negroes,   and  (2)  to 
educate  and  elevate  them. 

There  are  23  annual  conferences,  with  129,383  members. 
It  will  be  noticed  that  the  church  is  almost  entirely  con- 
fined to  the  South.  It  is  strongest  in  Georgia,  where  it 
has  22,840  members ;  Mississippi  comes  next,  with  20, 107  ; 
Tennessee  third,  with  18,968;  and  Alabama  fourth,  with 
18,940.  There  are  1759  organizations,  with  1653  church 
edifices,  valued  at  $1,713,366.  The  average  seating 
capacity  of  each  edifice  is  328,  and  the  average  value 
$1036.  There  are  64  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of 
6526. 

Summary  by  States. 


qTATF<?  Organi-    Church 

STATES.  zations.  Edifices. 


Alabama 222  220 

Arkansas   116  104 

Delaware 6  3 

District  of  Columbia         5  4 

Florida 36  26 

Georgia 266  256 

Illinois   2'  2 

Indian  Territory  ...  13  9 

Kansas 17  15 

Kentucky 91  63 

Louisiana 138  131 

Maryland 2  2 

Mississippi 293  292 

Missouri 35  31 

New  Jersey 5  3 

North  Carolina  ....  26  20 

Pennsylvania 6  2 

South  Carolina  ....  34  33 

Tennessee  206  205 

Texas 222  216 

Virginia 18  16 

Total 1,759  1.653 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

69,200 

$264,625 

18,940 

31,050 

60,277 

5,888 

430 

1,125 

187 

3,500 

123,800 

939 

7,000 

14,709 

1,461 

100,495 

167,145 

22,840 

800 

1,250 

56 

2,850 

2,975 

291 

3,625 

14,400 

713 

16,600 

140,330 

6,908 

43,220 

134,135 

8,075 

205 

475 

44 

72,150 

230,290 

20,107 

5.554 

22,140 

953 

625 

7,500 

266 

7,725 

23,120 

2,786 

310 

1,400 

247 

15,045 

65,325 

3,468 

67,900 

258,120 

18,968 

88,330 

147,075 

14,895 

4,850 

33,150 

1,351 

541,464 

$1,713,366 

129,383 

THE  METHODISTS.  265 

Summary  by  Conferences. 

^^^^P^^^^^,                  Organi-     Church  Seating  Y.^'^^  of  Com- 

CONFERENCES.                 ^J^^^^  Edifices.  ^^-  Church  mum- 

pacity.  Froperty.  cants. 

Alabama 180  178  53,800  $230,125  16,347 

Arkansas 44  44  10,575  23,650  2,152 

Central  Alabama  . .       31  31  11,900  27,900  2,061 

East  Texas 147  147  68,200  84,100  10,795 

Florida 36  26  7,000  14,709  1,461 

Georgia 104  96  43,050  71,300  8,047 

Indian  Mission  ....       11  7  2,600  2,675  239 

Kentucky 91  63  16,600  140,330  6,908 

Little  Rock 75  62  20.725  36,927  3,860 

Louisiana 138  131  43,220  I34,  I35  8,075 

Mississippi 108  no  23,100  94,000  7,446 

Missouri  and  Kansas       43  37  6,029  31,040  1,309 

New  Jersey 18  9  1,445  10.325  716 

North  Carolina  ...  .        26  20  7,725  23,120  2,786 

North  Mississippi  .  .      185  182  49,050  136,290  12,661 

South  Carolina  ....        34  33  15,045  65,325  3,468 
Southeast     Missouri 

and  IlHnois 12  12  4, 350  7, 100  430 

South  Georgia 162  160  57,445  95^845  i4,793 

Tennessee 98  96  30,550  87,270  8,621 

Texas 34  34  11,200  14,850  1,700 

Virginia 24  21  8,475  157,125  2,318 

West  Tennessee  ...      118  119  40,450  177,100  10,862 

West  Texas 40  35  8,930  48,125  2,328 

Total 1,759  1.653  541,464    $1,713,366  129,383 


14. — THE    PRIMITIVE    METHODIST    CHURCH. 

The  Primitive  Methodist  Church  is  not  a  branch  of 
American  Methodism,  but  it  came  from  England,  being 
introduced  first  into  Canada  in  1843  and  then  into  the 
United  States.  In  England  the  Primitive  Methodist 
Church  came  into  existence  in  1812.  It  was  organized  by 
ministers  and  members  of  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Church 
who  believed  in  camp-meetings  and  persisted  in  holding 
them.  The  Wesleyan  conference  declared  camp-meetings 
"  highly  Improper  and  likely  to  be  productive  of  consider- 


266     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

able  mischief."  Primitive  Methodism  differs  from  Wes- 
leyan  Methodism  chiefly  in  the  larger  use  it  makes  of  the 
lay  element. 

For  many  years  there  were  in  the  United  States  two 
annual  conferences,  the  Eastern  and  the  Western.  These 
were  separate  until  1889,  when  they  united  in  organizing 
a  general  conference.  There  are  now  three  annual  con- 
ferences, the  Eastern,  the  Pennsylvania,  and  the  Western. 
Each  conference  is  subdivided  into  districts,  as  is  the  cus- 
tom in  other  branches  of  Methodism.  They  also  have 
itinerant  and  local  ministers,  class  leaders,  etc. 

The  Primitive  Methodists  are  represented  only  in  eight 

States,  nearly  one  half  of  the  total  of  communicants,  4764, 

being  found  in  Pennsylvania.     They  have  84  organizations, 

with  ']'^  edifices,  valued  at  $291,993.     The  average  value 

of  each  edifice  is  $3743,  and  the  average  seating  capacity 

is  268.     There  are   1 1   halls,   with   a   seating   capacity  of 

1670. 

Summary  by  States. 

/-,         •       r^u       1-        Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  O'-?^"^-       Church  ^^_S  ^^^^^^  ^^^j_ 

zauons.    Edifices.       p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Illinois 8  7  1,710  $14,800  369 

Iowa 2  3  500  3, 150  29 

Massachusetts 7  6  1,750  40,000  575 

New  York 5  4  ii75o  47,650  496 

Ohio 3  3  660  2,400  69 

Pennsylvania 42  40  ii,435  146,025  2,267 

Rhode  Island 4  3  750  12,568  194 

Wisconsin  13  12  2,375  25,400  765 

Total 84        78       20,930       $291,993       4,764 

Summary  by  Conferences. 

CONFERENCES. 

Eastern 16         13         4,250       $100,218        1,265 

Pennsylvania 45         43        12,095  148,425        2,336 

Western 23         22         4,585  43»35o        ^163 

Total 84         78       20,930       $291,993       4,764 


THE  METHODISTS.  267 

15. — THE   FREE    METHODISTS. 

This  body  was  organized  in  i860  at  Pekin,  N.  Y.,  at  a 
convention  of  ministers  and  members  who  had  been  ex- 
pelled or  had  withdrawn  from  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church.  The  movement  arose  within  the  bounds  of  the 
Genesee  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church 
over  differences  concerning  membership  in  secret  societies, 
other  questions  of  discipline,  and  the  emphasis  to  be  placed 
in  preaching  on  certain  doctrines,  particularly  sanctification. 
In  the  course  of  the  controversy  several  ministers  were 
tried  and  expelled  from  the  church  on  charges  of  contu- 
macy.     A  number  of  laymen  were  also  excluded. 

The  new  organization  adopted  the  discipline  of  the 
mother  church  with  important  changes.  There  are  no 
bishops,  but  general  superintendents  are  elected  every  four 
years.  District  chairmen  take  the  place  of  presiding  elders. 
Persons  are  not  received  on  probation  simply  on  the  ex- 
pression of  *'  a  desire  to  flee  the  wrath  to  come,"  but  are 
required  to  give  evidence  of  conversion.  Members  are 
required  to  "  lay  aside  gold,  pearls,  and  costly  array  "  and 
dress  plainly,  and  are  forbidden  to  join  secret  societies  or 
to  indulge  in  the  use  of  intoxicants  and  tobacco.  At- 
tendance at  class-meeting  is  a  condition  of  membership. 
Church  choirs  and  the  pew  systenTare  not  approved.  Two 
new  numbers  were  added  to  the  Articles  of  Religion,  one 
setting  forth  the  doctrine  of  entire  sanctification,  which  is 
described  as  salvation  ''  from  all  inward  sin,  from  evil 
thoughts  and  evil  tempers,"  and  as  taking  place  instanta- 
neously subsequently  to  justification.  The  second  pertains 
to  future  rewards  and  punishments.  There  are  quarterly, 
district,  annual,  and  general  conferences.  Laymen  are 
admitted  to  all  on  equal   terms  with  ministers.     The  aver- 


268     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

age  seating  capacity  of  the  edifices  is  266,  and  their  aver- 
age value  $1298.  There  are  439  halls,  with  a  seating 
capacity  of  48,285. 

Summary  by  States. 

zation^.  Edifices.  ^^^^^^  Property.  cants. 

Arkansas 4  2  550  $750  61 

California 19  n  i,775  14,000  410 

Colorado 22  18  3,i75  10,000  203 

District  of  Columbia  i  ...          7 

Illinois  152  112  32,675  156,050  3,395 

Indiana 42  29  8,950  26,200  6^2, 

Indian  Territory  ...  i  ...           12 

Iowa Ill  62  13,829  57,500  2,117 

Kansas 78  19  5j5oo  18,750  1,300 

Louisiana 10  4  1,150  1,200  62 

Maryland i  i  200  700  31 

Massachusetts i  ...          12 

Michigan 197  115  33,350  107,815  4,592 

Minnesota 41  9  1,425  4,35o  529 

Mississippi i  ...          29 

Missouri 19  11  1,720  7,870  325 

Nebraska 37  10  2,925  13,025  486 

New  Jersey 8  4  1,125  11,275  ^^i 

New  York 142  114  29,495  243,950  3,751 

North  Dakota 9  85 

Ohio 54  29  10,300  28,900  897 

Oregon 13  6  1,800  5,400  188 

Pennsylvania 46  28  6,950  50,050  1,158 

South  Dakota 29  3  600  3,600  287 

Texas 15  6  1,030  5, 500  207 

Virginia i  i  150  1,000  28 

Washington 8  6  1,850  15,700  240 

Wisconsin 40  20  4,480  21,500  864 


Total 1,102       620      165,004       $805,085      22,110 

Summary  by  Conferences. 

CONFERENCES. 

California 

Central  Illinois  .  .  . 

Colorado 

Dakota 


19 

II 

1,775 

$14,000 

410 

!?> 

53 

13,900 

41,300 

1,800 

22 

18 

3,175 

10,000 

203 

31 

5 

900 

5,600 

308 

THE  METHODISTS,  269 


Summary  by  Conferences 


CON,BKEKCES.  '^^^  Chu«S. 

East  Michigan 80  38 

Genesee 69  61  ^ 

Illinois 58  46 

Iowa 46  30 

Kansas 37  10 

Louisiana 15  6 

Michigan 54  39 

Minnesota         and 

North  Iowa  ....  41  10 

Missouri 18  11 

Nebraska 11  2 

New  York 50  27 

North  Indiana  ....  20  12 

North  Michigan  .  .  63  38 

North  Minnesota.  .  27  6 

Ohio 54  29 

Oregon  and  Wash- 
ington    21  12 

Pittsburg 22  13 

Susquehanna 59  46  >^ 

Texas 16  6 

Wabash   43  30 

West  Iowa 52  29 

West  Kansas 61  11 

Wisconsin  40  20 


CES. — Continued. 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

11,825 

$41,050 

1,792 

16,990 

126,450 

1.943 

14,275 

103,200 

1,188 

8,200 

26,500 

1,003 

3,100 

12,250 

847 

1,700 

1,950 

152 

9.325 

33.850 

1,168 

2,164 

12,350 

609 

1,720 

7,870 

300 

275 

1,200 

171 

6,425 

73,875 

962 

3.350 

11,250 

317 

12,200 

32,915 

1,632 

800 

750 

351 

10,300 

28,900 

897 

3.650 

21,100 

428 

3.650 

24.350 

713 

10,855 

82,300 

1.530 

1,030 

5.500 

219 

10,100 

26,500 

763 

5,240 

28,450 

868 

3,600 

10,125 

672 

4,480 

21,500 

864 

Total 1,102      620       165,004     $805,085     22,110 


16. — THE    INDEPENDENT    METHODISTS. 

These  consist  of  congregations  in  Maryland,  Tennessee, 
and  the  District  of  Columbia,  which  are  not  connected 
with  any  annual  conference.  They  are  members  of  an 
association  which,  however,  has  no  ecclesiastical  authority 
whatever.  Each  congregation  is  entirely  independent. 
There  is  i  hall,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  100. 


2/0     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 
Summary  by  States. 


Organi-     Church 


Seating  Value  of  Com. 


STATES.                          znrinn/  pdifires  ^^-  Church  muni, 

zationb.  edihces.  ^^^^^^  Property.  cants. 

District  of  Columbia         i  i  175  $175  35 

Maryland 13  12  7,000  262,300  2,347 

Tennessee i  i  550  4,500  187 


Total 15         14         7,725        $266,975        2,569 


17. — THE    EVANGELIST    MISSIONARY    CHURCH. 

This  organization  of  Colored  Methodists  was  formed  in 
1886  by  ministers  and  members  in  Ohio  who  withdrew 
from  the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  Zion  Church  for 
various  reasons.  It  has  no  creed  but  the  Bible ;  but, 
according  to  its  bishop,  it  inclines  in  belief  to  the  doctrine 
that  there  is  but  one  divine  person,  Jesus  Christ,  '*  in  whom 
dwells  all  the  Godhead  bodily."  It  has  ii  organizations, 
in  the  States  of  Ohio,  Illinois,  Michigan,  and  Wisconsin. 
Nine  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  2650,  are  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 

^         •        /^-v,       t.  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  Orgam-      Church  ^^^  ^^^^^^  ^^^^j. 

zations.     Edifices.  ^^^^^  Property.  cants. 

Illinois I  . .  ...  ....  180 

Michigan 6  2  850  $1,200  409 

Ohio 3  I  200  800  314 

Wisconsin i  . .  ...  ....  48 

Total II  3  ijOSo  $2,000  951 

Summary  by  States  of  All  Methodists. 

Alabama 2,271  2,284  620,970  $2,278,988  242,624 

Alaska 

Arizona 23  17  4,700  58,100  656 

Arkansas 1,709  i,493  375)622  1,200,842  123,316 

California 559  438  123,874  2,575,631  36,874 

Colorado 146  117  32,200  1,105,700  10,850 

Connecticut 239  235  72,582  2,225,730  30,815 

Delaware 247  258  65,940  1,116,125  25,786 


THE  METHODISTS. 


271 


Summary  by  States  of  All  Methodists. — Continued. 

C....C  Organi-  Church  bearing  Value  of  Com- 

S^^^^^-  zations.  Edifices.  ^?-  Church  mum- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Dist.  of  Columbia  62  58  37^925  $1,543,000  16,369 

Florida 776  816  180,142  829,551  70,458 

Georgia 2,406  2,663  735j033  2,783,267  275,784 

Idaho 42  30  5,925  74,200  1,162 

Illinois 2,457  2,229  640,797  7,807,118  189,358 

Indiana 1,901  1,832  529,600  4,656,235  179,613 

Indian  Territory  .  351  181  33,110  75,243  11,601 

Iowa 1,579  1,387  355.990  3,602,860  122,607 

Kansas 1,529  894  219,839  2,230,265  95,781 

Kentucky 1,700  1,408  391,635  2,718,518  141,521 

Louisiana 810  780  182,525  1,134,992  65,693 

Maine 356  290  87,301  1,152,875  23,041 

Maryland 1,340  1,324  353,235  5^347,527  123,618 

.Massachusetts...  422  406  163,472  5,398,825  61,138 

Michigan 1,578  1,19^  329.9^7  4,144,427  101,951 

Minnesota 591  448  97,800  1,764,493  32,199 

Mississippi 1,885  1^935  466,026  1,652,269  164,589 

Missouri 2,412  1,888  518,301  4,232,428  162,514 

Montana 74  54  11,805  247,850  2,425 

Nebraska 738  490  119,303  1,336,475  42,94i 

Nevada 12  12  2,700  78,800  418 

New  Hampshire  .  134  129  40,505  614,350  12,354 

New  Jersey 727  707  229,831  5,500,640  96,377 

New  Mexico 60  42  8,025  107,100  2,360 

New  York 2,563  2,388  723,349  18,305,200  265,551 

North  Carolina  .  .  2,413  2,335  739^577  2,418,984  276,336 

North  Dakota ...  .  140  61  11,100  139,985  4,889 

Ohio 2,798  2,713  818,940  9,600,820  272,737 

Oklahoma 51  20  4,650  37, 55o  2,029 

Oregon 294  199  44,94o  693,275  11,927 

Pennsylvania  ....  2,536  2,359  732,641  14,476,904  260,388 

Rhode  Island  ...  .  52  45  20,335  606,368  7,353 

South  Carolina  .  .  1,456  1,709  497,873  1,658,182  251,477 

South  Dakota  ...  306  148  33,174  384,060  12,116 

Tennessee 2,443  2,351  689,446  3,491,360  223,116 

Texas 2,716  1,940  570,328  2,677,391  218,890 

Utah 32  29  6,205  223,650  1,055 

Vermont 234  200  57,076  765,650  17,527 

Virginia 1,737  1,646  4io,335  2,910,853  I54'693 

Washington 239  171  44,615  763,175  12,697 

West  Virginia  ..  .  1,543  1,097  274,891  1,450,448  85,102 

Wisconsin 784  672  144,693  1,889,200  43,696 

Wyoming 16  12  2,390  52,700  912 

Total 51,48946,138   12,863,178  $132,140,179  4,589,284 


CHAPTER   XXX. 

THE     MORAVIANS. 

This  is  the  name  by  which  the  members  of  the  Unitas 
Fratrum  are  generally  known.  The  Unitas  Fratriun,  or 
Unity  of  Brethren,  originated  in  Germany,  and  has  no 
connection  with  the  United  Brethren  in  Christ,  a  denomi- 
nation which  sprang  up  in  this  country  near  the  beginning 
of  the  present  century. 

The  Moravians  trace  their  rise  back  to  the  time  of  Huss. 
The  fruit  of  the  Huss  reformation  appeared  in  the  National 
Church  of  Bohemia.  The  Bohemian  Brethren  were  an 
organization  formed  within  the  Bohemian  Church,  pledged 
to  take  the  Bible  as  their  only  rule  of  faith  and  practice  and 
maintain  a  Scriptural  discipline.  The  Bohemian  Brethren 
were  persecuted  and  their  organization  was  overthrown  in 
Bohemia  and  Moravia,  but  it  was  resuscitated  in  1722-35, 
among  a  colony  of  refugees  from  Bohemia  and  Moravia, 
settled  on  the  estate  of  Count  Zinzendorf  in  Berthelsdorf, 
Saxony.  There  the  colony  built  the  town  of  Herrnhut, 
which  became  the  center  of  the  Renewed  Brethren. 

The  first  Moravians  who  came  to  the  United  States  set- 
tled in  Georgia  in  1735,  the  year  when  the  first  bishop  of 
the  Renewed  Church  was  consecrated.     The  colony  left 


THE  MORAVIANS.  ^73 

Georgia  five  years  later  and  founded  Bethlehem,  in  Penn- 
sylvania. At  Bethlehem,  and  also  at  Nazareth  and  Lititz, 
in  the  same  State,  Moravian  Church  settlements  were 
formed.  "The  lands  were  the  property  of  the  church, 
and  the  farms  and  the  various  departments  of  mechanical 
industry  were  stocked  by  it  and  worked  for  its  benefit. 
In  return  the  church  provided  the  inhabitants  with  all  the 
necessaries  of  life.  Whoever  had  private  means  retained 
them."  There  was,  however,  no  common  treasury,  and 
the  settlements  did  not  adopt  a  communal  life.  The 
economical  system  was  abolished  in  1 762,  having  lasted 
twenty  years.  The  Brethren,  however,  continued  to  main- 
tain the  church  system  of  communal  government  until 
1844-56,  when  it  disappeared.  This  system,  in  a  modi- 
fied form,  is  still  maintained  in  Germany. 

The  Unity  of  Brethren  consists  of  three  provinces,  the 
German,  B^ritish,  and  American.  All  are  under  a  central 
government,  the  seat  of  which  is  in  Herrnhut,  Germany. 
There  is  a  general  synod,  which  meets  once  in  ten  years. 
It  consists  of  delegates  from  each  of  the  provinces  and  also 
from  the  various  foreign  mission  fields,  and  is  empowered 
''  to  consult  and  legislate  upon  those  matters  which  are  of 
general  import."  It  decides  as  to  all  questions  of  doc- 
trine, all  essential  points  of  the  liturgy,  all  fundamental 
rules  of  discipline,  conditions  of  membership,  nomination 
and  appointment  of  bishops,  etc.  In  the  interim  between 
its  meetings  it  is  represented  by  the  Unity's  Elders'  Con- 
ference, which  is  a  sort  of  executive  committee.  Each 
province  has  a  synod  of  its  own,  which  legislates  for  and 
controls  provincial  affairs. 

Bishops,  presbyters,  and  deacons  are  recognized  in  the 
ministry  of  the  Brethren.      Bishops  are  general,  not  dio- 


2  74    KELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES.    ' 

cesan,  in  character.  They  are  appointed  by  the  general 
synod  or  under  its  authority.  The  American  Province  has 
the  right  to  nominate  those  for  this  country.  Bishops  are 
members  of  the  general  synod  and  also  of  provincial  synods. 
They  are  chosen  almost  invariably  to  sit  on  provincial 
boards  and  in  the  Unity's  Elders'  Conference.  They  have 
the  exclusive  right  to  ordain  to  the  ministry.  Deacons 
are  those  who  assist  in  preaching  the  gospel,  administer- 
ing the  sacraments,  and  other  church  services.  When 
deacons  are  appointed  to  preside  over  congregations  they 
are  ordained  as  presbyters. 

The  lot  is  not  now  used  in  the  selection  of  bishops  and 
appointments  to  office.  Formerly  it  was  used  in  the  ap- 
pointment of  ministers  and  in  connection  with  marriage. 
Marriage  by  lot  was  abolished  by  the  general  synod  in 
1818,  and  it  is  long  since  it  was  used  in  the  United  States 
in  the  appointment  of  ministers. 

In  public  worship  a  liturgy  is  used.  In  addition  to  pre- 
scribed forms  for  baptism,  the  Lord's  Supper,  confirmation, 
ordination,  etc.,  there  is  a  litany  to  be  used  every  Sunday 
morning;  also  special  liturgical  services  for  ecclesiastical 
festivals.  Love-feasts  are  held  preparatory  to  the  Lord's 
Supper. 

The  Moravians  accept  the  Scriptures  as  the  only  rule  of 
faith  and  practice.  They  hold  that  it  is  not  for  them  to 
"  define  what  Scripture  has  left  undefined,  or  to  contend 
about  mysteries,"  such  as  the  Holy  Trinity  and  the  sacra- 
ments, "which  are  impenetrable  to  human  understanding." 
They  emphasize  the  doctrine  of  the  "  total  depravity  of 
human  nature  "  ;  the  love  of  God  in  the  gift  of  his  Son  as 
the  Redeemer  of  the  world ;  the  real  Godhead  and  man- 
hood of  Christ;   the  atonement  and  satisfaction  made  by 


THE  MORAVIAXS.  275 

Christ  as  the  ground  for  forgiveness  of  sins ;  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  convicting  of  sin,  inspiring  faith  in 
Christ,  and  bearing  witness  of  adoption  as  children  of  God ; 
the  fruits  of  faith  as  show^n  in  willing  obedience  to  God's 
commandments.  Christ  is  the  center  of  Moravian  theol- 
ogy, and  his  death  is  proclaimed  as  *'  made  of  God  unto  us 
wisdom  and  righteousness  and  justification  and  redemp- 
tion." 

The  Moravians  have  94  organizations,  scattered  among 
seventeen  States  and  the  Indian  and  Alaska  Territories. 
The  total  of  members  is  11,781.  Of  these,  4308  are  in 
Pennsylvania,  1734  in  North  Carolina,  and  1477  in  Wis- 
consin. In  no  other  State  are  there  as  many  as  900.  Half 
of  the  total  valuation  of  church  property,  $681,250,  is 
reported  for  the  24  edifices  in  Pennsylvania.  The  average 
seating  capacity  of  the  114  edifices  returned  for  the  de- 
nomination is  277,  the  average  value  $5975  ;  4  halls,  with 
a  seating  capacity  of  715,  are  occupied. 

Summary  by  States 

STATES.  O"-?^"^- 

zations. 

Alaska 2 

California i 

Illinois I 

Indiana 2 

Indian  Territory  ...  i 

Iowa 3 

Kansas i 

Maryland 3 

Michigan 2 

Minnesota 9 

Missouri 3 

New  Jersey 4 

New  York   7 

North  Carolina  ....  13 

North  Dakota 2 


Dhurch 
edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Vahie  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

2 

100 

$5,000 

36 

I 
2 

3 

100 

600 

1,150 

700 

4,000 

17,600 

19 
336 
346 

I 

150 

400 

40 

3 

650 

4,500 

lOI 

2 
3 

325 
620 

2,500 
3,950 

19 
150 

2 
9 

375 
1,480 

4,500 
20,600 

168 
696 

3 

500 

5,500 

59 

4 

800 

13,500 

374 

10 

2,500 

127,200 

852 

20 

6,750 

58,900 

1,734 

-^ 

440 

6,500 

199 

2*]^    RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF  THE    UNITED  STATES. 


Summary  by  States. — Contimied, 

r\         ■  r^u       u  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                           ^'^?^"'-  ^}^'''^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  p^^j^y  Property.  cants. 

Ohio 6  6  2,2oo  $37,400  822 

Pennsylvania 14  24  9,77°  34Oj40o  4>3o8 

Virginia i  i  200  200  45 

Wisconsin 19  16  2,905  27,900  i,477 


DISTRICTS. 


Total 94      114      3i>6i5       $681,250       11,781 

Summary  by  Districts, 


Northern  79        92       24,515       $621,750        9,962 

Southern 15        22         7,100  59^500         1,819 

Total 94      114      3i>6i5       $681,250      11,781 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

THE     PRESBYTERIANS. 

The  Presbyterians  are  those  who  hold  to  a  system  of 
ecclesiastical  government  by  presbyters.  They  believe 
that  bishops  and  presbyters,  or  elders,  as  spoken  of  in  the 
New  Testament,  are  of  the  same  order,  being  different 
designations  for  the  same  office.  Bishops  were  presbyters 
in  charge  of  congregations.  Presbyters  both  taught  and 
governed.  They  were  both  in  and  over  the  congregations. 
The  Presbyterians  are  Calvinistic  in  doctrine.  The  Cum- 
berland Presbyterian  Church,  with  its  colored  branch,  holds 
to  a  modified  Calvinism,  rejecting  a  limited  atonement  and 
the  Westminster  statement  respecting  the  decrees ;  but  it 
is  considered  sufficiently  in  accord  with  what  is  called  the 
Reformed  system  to  be  admitted  to  membership  in  the 
council  of  the  Reformed  churches,  which  includes  the  Con- 
tinental Reformed  churches  and  their  branches,  as  well  as 
the  British,  American,  and  other  Presbyterian  bodies. 

The  Presbyterian  polity  provides  for  the  following  courts  : 
the  session,  the  presbytery,  the  synod,  and  (usually)  the 
general  assembly,  and  recognizes  as  officers,  bishops  or 
pastors,  ruling  elders  and  deacons.  Candidates  are  or- 
dained to  the  ministry  and  installed  as  pastors  by  the  pres- 
bytery. There  is  but  one  order  in  the  ministry,  that  of 
presbyter.      Ruling  elders  are  laymen  chosen  by  congre- 

277 


2^]^    RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

gations  to  exercise  government  and  discipline  therein,  to- 
gether with  the  pastor.  Deacons  are  also  laymen  chosen 
by  congregations  to  care  for  the  poor,  raise  and  distrib- 
ute alms,  and  manage  the  temporal  affairs  of  the  church. 
Elders  and  deacons  are  ordained  by  ministers.  The  ses- 
sion is  the  court  of  the  congregation.  It  is  composed  of 
the  pastor  or  pastors,  and  the  ruling  elders.  The  pastor  is 
ex  officio  moderator.  The  session  is  charged  with  the  care 
of  the  spiritual  interests  of  the  church.  It  receives  mem- 
bers, inquires  into  their  conduct,  has  power  to  admonish 
or  suspend  them  for  offenses,  and  elects  representatives  to 
the  presbytery.  The  presbytery  consists  of  all  the  min- 
isters and  one  ruling  elder  from  each  church  within  its 
bounds.  It  has  power  to  entertain  and  decide  appeals 
from  church  sessions;  examine  and  license  candidates  for 
the  ministry;  ordain,  install,  remove,  and  judge  ministers; 
decide  questions  of  discipline  and  doctrine  ;  unite  or  divide 
congregations,  or  receive  new  congregations ;  condemn  er- 
roneous opinions ;  and  in  general  to  care  for  the  welfare  of 
the  churches  within  its  limits.  The  synod  is  constituted  of 
delegates,  ministerial  and  lay,  elected  by  the  presbyteries 
belonging  to  it.  It  hears  and  decides  appeals  from  the 
presbyteries,  constitutes  new  presbyteries,  and  in  general 
exercises  supervision  over  presbyteries  and  sessions.  The 
general  assembly  is  the  supreme  legislative  and  judicial 
court  in  the  Presbyterian  system.  It  is  composed  of  com- 
missioners, ministerial  and  lay  (bishops  and  elders),  elected 
by  the  presbyteries.  It  receives  and  decides  appeals  from 
presbyteries  or  synods,  and  decides  all  questions  of  doc- 
trine and  discipline^      It  meets  yearly. 

There   are   twelve   Presbyterian   bodies  in  the   United 
States,  as  follows ; 


THE   PRESBYTERIANS.  279 

1.  Presbyterian  Church  in  U.  S.  of  America  (Northern), 

2.  Cumberland  Presbyterian,  3.  Cumberland  Colored, 
4.  Welsh  Calvinistic  Methodist,  5.  United  Presbyterian, 

6.  Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United  States  (Southern), 

7.  Associate  Church  of  North  America, 

8.  Associate  Reformed  Synod  of  the  South, 

9.  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United  States  (Synod), 

10.  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church  in  N.  America  (General  Synod), 

11.  Reformed  Presbyterian  (Covenanted), 

12.  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church  in  U.  S.  and  Canada. 

I. — THE    PRESBYTERIAN    CHURCH    IN    THE    UNITED 
STATES    OF    AMERICA. 

The  earliest  Presbyterian  churches  in  this  country  go 
back  to  the  first  half  of  the  seventeenth  century.  The 
elements  composing  them  were  chiefly  English  Puritans 
and  Scotch  and  Irish  immigrants.  On  Long  Island  a 
church  was  organized  as  early  as  1640  by  a  Puritan  min- 
ister named  John  Young.  Another  church  was  founded 
at  Hempstead  two  years  later.  Presbyterian  services  were 
held  on  Manhattan  Island  in  1643  by  Francis  Doughty^ 
and  a  Presbyterian  church  was  established  at  New- 
ark, N.  J.,  in  1667.  The  claim  has  recently  been  ad- 
vanced that  the  oldest  Presbyterian  church  is  the  First 
Church  of  Norfolk,  Va.,  which  was  established  as  a  con- 
gregation on  Elizabeth  River  in  the  first  quarter  of  the 
seventeenth  century^  Rev.  Francis  Makemie,  generally 
regarded  as  the  father  of  American  Presbyterianism,  came 
to  this  country  in  1683  fi'om  Ireland,  where  he  had  been 
a  member  of  the  Presbytery  of  Laggan.  He  organized  a 
Presbyterian  church  at  Snow  Hill,  Md.,  at  the  close  of  the 
century,  and  in  1 706,  with  John  Hampton,  an  Irishman,  and 
George  McNish,  a  Scotchman,  and  four  other  ministers — 
Jedediah  Andrews  (Philadelphia),  Nathaniel  Taylor  (Mary- 
land), and  Samuel  Davis  and  John  Wilson  (Delaware) — 


28o     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   SI'ATES. 

organized  the  first  presbytery  in  America,  the  Presbytery 
of  Philadelphia.  The  last  four  were  Puritan  ministers  who 
had  come  from  New  England  ;  Makemie  was  Scotch-Irish ; 
Hampton,  Irish ;  and  McNish,  Scotch.  The  same  year 
this  presbytery  ordained  John  Boyd  at  Freehold,  N.  J. 

In  1 716,  the  number  of  ministers  having  increased  to 
seventeen  and  covering  an  extensive  territory,  a  synod,  the 
Synod  of  Philadelphia,  was  formed,  and  the  presbytery 
was  divided  into  three  *'  subordinate  meetings,  or  pres- 
byteries." In  1 741  there  was  a  division  in  the  synod  in 
consequence  of  differences  respecting  subscription  to  the 
confession  of  faith  and  doctrines  and  practices,  which  an 
extensive  revival  movement  brought  into  prominence. 
Those  contending  for  a  strict  subscription  and  opposing 
what  they  regarded  as  errors  of  doctrine  in  the  revival 
movement  were  known  as  Old  Side,  and  the  other  party 
as  New  Side,  Presbyterians.  The  latter  organized  the 
Synod  of  New  York.  In  1758  the  two  bodies  were  re- 
united as  the  Synod  of  New  York  and  Philadelphia.  At 
the  opening  of  the  Revolutionary  War,  in  1775,  there  were 
in  connection  with  the  synod  1 7  presbyteries  and  1 70  min- 
isters. The  church  suffered  severely  in  the  war  for  inde- 
pendence, but  it  became  prosperous  after  peace  was  de- 
clared, and  in  1788  the  synod  decided  to  organize  a  gen- 
eral assembly  with  four  synods.  It  revised  and  adopted 
the  Westminster  Confession  and  Larger  Catechism,  form 
of  government,  book  of  discipline,  and  directory  of  worship. 
The  first  meeting  of  the  general  assembly  was  held  in 
Philadelphia  in  1789. 

Early  in  the  nineteenth  century  there  was  an  extensive 
revival  movement  in  the  Cumberland  Valley,  Tennessee. 
Differences  in  doctrine  and  practice  were  developed  by  this 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS.  28  I 

movement,  and  the  Cumberland  Presbyterian  Church  was 
organized. 

In  1837,  a  Httle  more  than  a  century  after  the  division 
in  the  Synod  of  Philadelphia  into  Old  Side  and  New  Side 
Presbyterians,  the  church  was  again  divided  into  Old 
School  and  New  School  Assemblies,  chiefly  as  the  result 
of  doctrinal  differences  concerning  the  atonement,  whether 
it  was  general  or  for  the  elect  only,  and  of  differences  con- 
cerning creed  subscription  and  polity  and  discipline.  In 
1840  the  Old  School  body  had  about  126,583  communi- 
cants, and  the  New  School  102,060.  In  1869  the  two 
assemblies  agreed  to  a  reunion,  which  was  consummated 
in  the  same  year. 

At  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil  War,  in  1 86 1,  the  churches 
in  the  South  separated  from  the  churches  in  the  North, 
adhering  to  the  Old  School  Assembly.  The  Southern 
churches  adhering  to  the  New  School  Assembly  had  also 
separated  from  the  Northern  churches  belonging  to  the 
New  School  Assembly  in  1858  on  the  question  of  slavery. 
The  two  bodies  created  in  the  South  by  this  division  united 
in  1 865  and  formed  what  is  popularly  known  as  the  South- 
ern Presbyterian  Church. 

The  church  in  the  North  has  grown  rapidly  since  the 
reunion  in  1869,  and  has  extended  into  the  South,  where 
it  has  organized  a  number  of  presbyteries,  chiefly  of  colored 
people.  It  is  represented  in  all  the  States  except  Missis- 
sippi, and  in  all  the  Territories,  including  the  District  of 
Columbia.  The  largest  number  of  communicants  reported 
for  a  single  State  is  161,386  in  Pennsylvania;  New  York 
comes  second,  with  154,083;  and  Ohio  is  third,  with 
82,444.  Though  there  are  more  communicants  in  Penn- 
sylvania by   7303   than   in   New  York,  the   value   of  the 


282     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

church  property  in  the  latter  State  is  much  greater  than 
the  value  of  the  church  property  in  the  former.  While  the 
1086  edifices  in  Pennsylvania  have  an  aggregate  valuation 
of  $15,491,680,  the  932  edifices  in  New  York  have  an 
aggregate  of  $21,293,992.  Only  26  buildings  other  than 
churches  are  occupied  in  these  two  States.  The  total 
valuation  for  the  whole  church  is  $74,455,200,  indicating 
an  average  value  for  each  edifice  of  $11,173.  The  average 
seating  capacity  is  334.  There  are  556  halls,  with  a  seat- 
ing capacity  of  57,805. 

The  general  assembly  of  1890  appointed  a  committee 
to  revise  the  Westminster  Confession,  so  as  to  soften,  with- 
out impairing  the  integrity  of  the  Calvinistic  system,  some 
of  its  expressions,  particularly  those  setting  forth  the  doc- 
trine of  pretention.  The  committee  reported  a  revised 
confession  to  the  general  assembly  of  1891,  and  the  draft 
was  sent  down  to  the  presbyteries  for  suggestions.  The 
revision  ultimately  failed. 

There  are  in  all  214  presbyteries,  of  which  18  are  in 
foreign  lands.  Of  the  196  in  this  country,  given  in  these 
tables,  that  of  New  York  reports  the  largest  number  of 
communicants,  23,873,  with  54  organizations  and  68  edi- 
fices, valued  at  $8,628,000.  The  second  presbytery  in 
numerical  order,  the  Central  Philadelphia,  has  38  organiza- 
tions and  46  edifices,  valued  at  $2,470,500,  and  17,600 
communicants.  The  Presbytery  of  Brooklyn  has  17,170 
communicants,  with  39  edifices,  worth  $1,536,927. 

There  are  thirty  synods,  of  which  two  are  foreign,  one 
being  in  India  and  one  in  China.  Synods  are  composed 
of  commissioners  chosen  by  the  presbyteries.  Within  a 
few  years  they  have  been  rearranged,  so  that  their  bound- 
aries correspond  with  those  of  the  various  States  as  far  as 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS. 


283 


possible.  There  are,  however,  notable  exceptions  to  this 
rule.  The  Synod  of  the  Atlantic  includes  South  Carolina, 
Georgia,  and  Florida ;  that  of  Catawba,  Virginia  and  North 
Carolina. 

Summary  by  States. 


Alabama 

Alaska 

Arizona 

Arkansas 

California 

Colorado 

Connecticut 

Delaware  

Dist.  of  Columbia 

Florida 

Georgia 

Idaho  

Illinois   

Indiana 

Indian  Territory  . 

Iowa  . 

Kansas 

Kentucky 

Louisiana 

Maine 

Maryland 

Massachusetts  .  . . 

Michigan 

Minnesota 

Missouri 

Montana -. 

Nebraska 

Nevada  

New  Hampshire  . 

New  Jersey 

New  Mexico    .... 

New  York 

North  Carolina  .  . 
North  Dakota  .  .  . 

Ohio 

Oklahoma 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania  .... 


r. 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

organi- 

,   Edifices. 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

zations. 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

5 

4 

1,050 

$17,300 

152 

5 

4 

1,100 

7,750 

481 

7 

3 

850 

13,900 

188 

15 

12 

2,660 

26,450 

494 

213 

172 

50,271 

1,696,725 

16,236 

74 

56 

14,595 

556,250 

5,902 

7 

9 

3,800 

433,500 

1,680 

32 

43 

14,970 

709,800 

4,622 

15 

19 

10,600 

900,000 

4,882 

34 

28 

6,050 

322,000 

1,042 

16 

9 

3,000 

13,850 

1,370 

19 

15 

o'^^5 

40,950 

815 

472 

475 

158,181 

4,045,350 

54,744 

308 

320M 

104,143 

2,338,900 

35,464 

70 

54 

8,018 

Z9^l'^-h 

1,803 

369 

347 

95,148 

1,503,400 

29,994 

370 

267^ 

69,929 

1,078,860 

24,050 

82 

l-h 

25,045 

748,375 

6,917 

I 

I 

300 

8,000 

70 

2 

3 

800 

8,000 

205 

11 

90 

33,020 

1,488,124 

10,593 

18 

18 

10,125 

365,500 

3,570 

236 

230 

76,050 

2.214,636 

25,088 

167 

154 

40,261 

1,292,670 

13,732 

207 

193 

54,815 

1,328,700 

17,272 

24 

18 

4,150 

88,000 

1,232 

228 

154K 

34,901 

576,210 

12,159 

8 

4 

865 

11,400 

275 

8 

9 

3,150 

34,800 

956 

300 

420 

169,357 

6,699,100 

58,759 

39 

17 

2,815 

45,675 

1,275 

784 

932 

378,411 

21,293.992 

154,083 

109 

103 

26,650 

89,180 

6,516 

.^2 

48 

9,500 

126,425 

3,036 

618 

636 

223,553 

5,754,350 

82,444 

17 

9 

1,850 

14,000 

450 

12> 

61 

H,397 

416.500 

3,935 

939 

i,o86K 

427,059 

15,491,680 

161,386 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

1,385 

$61,000 

608 

25,015 

173,900 

6,829 

13,966 

156,940 

4,413 

18,435 

216,520 

4,399 

9,525 

164,850 

2,812 

5,180 

212,975 

688 

300 

4,000 

230 

4,440 

43^925 

945 

14,785 

343,175 

3,770 

13,135 

308,200 

4,275 

34,204 

877,400 

11,019 

960 

52,250 

364 

284     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 

Summary  by  States. — Continued. 

STATES.  Organi-  Church 

zations.  Edifices. 

Rhode  Island  ....  4  4 

South  Carohna  . .  'j'j  Gj 

South  Dakota  ...  124  83 

Tennessee jj  71^ 

Texas 61  44 

Utah 20  31 

Vermont 2  i 

Virginia 19  19 

Washington 85  62 

West  Virginia.  ..  44  40 

Wisconsin   131  137X 

Wyoming 6  5 

Total 6,717  6,664     2,225,044  $74,455,200  788,224 

Summary  by  Presbyteries. 

PRESBYTERIES. 

Aberdeen 36  17            3,085           $34,575          883 

Alaska 5  4            1,100               7,75°          481 

Albany 51  63           28,135         1,133,670      10,016 

Allegheny 42  46          17,420           672,600       7,444 

Alton 41  43          11,480           182,500       3,776 

Arizona 7  3                850              13,900           188 

Athens 32  31            7, 010            105,250       2,460 

Atlantic 20  18            7,650              72,000        2,619 

Austin 27  18            4,700            113,850        1,360 

Baltimore  . 54  64          25,045         1,243,324       8,407 

Bellefontaine  .  .  .  .  25  23            6,925            104,900       3,197 

Benicia 40  27^        7, 610           136,850        1,970 

Binghamton 28  35           13,359           364,050       4,745 

Birmingham 5  4             1,050              17,300           152 

Bismarck  10  6            1,500             27,200           189 

Black  Hills 15  10            i,545              20,825           250 

Blairsville 36  36           13,925            283,800       6,169 

Bloomington  . .  .  .  55  56          16,010           233,900       5,704 

Boston 34  35           15,760           473,300       5,569 

Boulder 16  10            2,575             85,550        1,177 

Brooklyn 33  39          24,555         1,536,927      i7,i7o 

Buffalo 42  50          23,425         1,383,950       8,018 

Butler 36  34          1 1,675            135,800       4,487 

Cairo 52  48          12,235           ii7,35o       3,775 

Cape  Fear 30  26           6,605             27,450       1,585 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS. 


285 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. — Continued, 


PRESBYTERIES. 


Organi-    Church 
zations.    Edifices. 


Carlisle 52  68 

Catawba 35  35 

Cayuga 23  26 

Cedar  Rapids.  .. .  36  37 

Central  Dakota  .  .  33  20 

Champlain 20  25 

Chemung 22  23 

Cherokee  Nation.  28  16 

Chester 46  58 

Chicago 'J1  72 

Chickasaw 22  12 

Chillicothe 32  31 

Chippewa 18  20 

Choctaw 32  30 

Cincinnati 61  67 

Clarion 48  46 

Cleveland 26  34 

Columbia    19  24 

Columbus 29  34 

Council  Bluffs  ...  52  48 

Crawfordsville  ...  57  58 

Dakota 20  19 

Dayton 39  43 

Denver 21  14 

Des  Moines 54  52 

Detroit 43  47 

Dubuque  36  32 

Duluth 22  16 

East  Florida .  15  14 

East  Oregon  ....  17  13 

Ebenezer 26  25 

Elizabeth 32  47 

Emporia 83  58 

Erie 67  75 

Fairfield 40  '^6 

Fargo 38  18 

Flint 42  34 

Fort  Dodge T^  61 

Fort  Wayne 27  26 

Freeport 32  32 

Genesee 22  22J 

Geneva 23  29 

Grand  Rapids  ...  17  16 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

21,779 

8,350 

10,130 

11,175 

3,375 

7,102 

7,650 

2,867 

19,515 

37,935 

2,650 

10,225 

4,025 

3,286 

24,418 

14,985 

17,635 
7,060 
11,750 
11,903 
17,045 
2,475 
16,465 

4,255 
14,830 
22,320 

8,500 

3,195 
3,550 
3,000 
8,725 

21,734 
14,790 
25,925 
14,000 

3,415 
8,870 

14,685 
9,910 

10,644 

7-485 
12,430 

5,575 


Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

$775,700 

25,250 
386,000 
216,250 

41,950 
236,000 
225,300 

14,800 

544,700 

1,839,250 

20,000 
127,300 
102,975 

11,700 
1,186,500 
206,250 
871,250 
176,000 
282,700 
183,400 
322,900 

20,690 
600,300 
240,250 
225,325 
1,056,100 
138,100 

49,700 
296,500 

33,000 
232,900 
793,000 
207,650 
584,950 

86,750 

41,800 
116,075 
235,850 
308,300 
261,000 
200,150 
416,800 
115,800 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

7,751 
2,242 

4,453 
3,422 
1,242 
2,159 
2,331 

727 

7,207 

15,306 

558 
3,836 
1,346 

641 

9,394 
4,588 
6,721 
2,112 
3,623 
4,066 

5,757 
1,083 

7,596 
2,502 
4,265 
8,488 

2,979 
1,048 

589 
543 
2,624 
7,782 
6,353 
9,415 
3,359 
1,071 
2,286 
4,824 
3,750 
4,057 
3,184 
4,896 

1.936 


286     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 


PRBSBVT.R,BS.  fX™;    Chu-"^,  Ca- "  Church  ,„„„i- 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. — Continued. 

Seating  Value  of  Com- 

Ca-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Gunnison ii  12  2,545  $70,700  628 

Hastings 52  19  4,170  39j71o  Ij972 

Highland 25  21  6,530  111,225  2,261 

Holston 30  26  5,425  41,650  973 

Hudson 43  48  16,860  479,500  5,910 

Huntingdon 72  92  30,325  676,550  9,907 

Huron 20  22  7,625  214,100  2,598 

Indianapolis 35  38  14,205  482,100  6,198 

Iowa 41  41  13,700  224,225  4,212 

Iowa  City 41  41  11,388  157,050  3,617 

Jersey  City 31  40  17,880  978,700  6,179 

Kalamazoo 21  20  7,030  163,000  2,465 

Kansas  City 41  39  10,175  280,200  4,092 

Kearney 36  23  5,440  69,400  1,720 

Kingston 21  16  4,885  88,720  1,105 

Kittanning 50  52  18,170  278,080  7, 159 

Knox 16  9  3,000  13,850  1,370 

Lackawanna 93  98  33,112  1,111,800  10,936 

Lacrosse 10  11  2,250  63,000  776 

Lake  Superior  ..  .  20  21  4,5^5  128,750  1,441 

Lansing 21  20  5815  175,500  2,552 

Larned 58  37  9,660  181,600  2.494 

Lehigh 46  58  20,365  657,550  6,266 

Lima '^2>  3°  9^455  238,700  3,729 

Logansport 42  38  11,850  273,100  4,100 

Long  Island 26  ■^']  10,527  199,950  3,431 

Los  Angeles 69  57  14,766  448,900  5,203 

Louisville 29  26^  9,665  399,725  2,808 

Lyons 18  21  7,430  161,345  3,113 

McClelland 17  13  3,365  15,150  851 

Madison 40  43  9,775  190,800  3,113 

Mahoning 31  33  11,950  422,900  5,484 

Mankato 35  30  6,624  85.570  2,013 

Marion 28  28  7,995  99,000  2,678 

Mattoon 44  43>^  12,130  143^300  3,700 

Maumee 38  35  13,985  334,300  3,966 

Milwaukee 28  27)^  9,349  390,200  3,228 

Monmouth 47  61  20,530  39i,75o  5,877 

Monroe 19  22  8,325  195,911  2,371 

Montana 23  18  4,150  88,000  1,220 

Morris  and  Orange  41  59  22,615  1,103,600  8,826 

Muncie 24  23  6,640  140,500  2,609 

Muskogee 9  9  1,625  8,188  420 

Nassau 24  35  10,215  255,700  3,085 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS.  287 
Summary  by  Presbyteries. — Continued. 

Orsani-  Church  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

PRESBVTERIES.  Orjam  Church  ^a-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Nebraska  City ..  .  55  47  11,961  $205,600  3,993 

Neosho 64  53  14,215  149,750  4,724 

New  Albany 54  63  18,355  253,900  4,856 

Newark ,...  29  44  21,900  1,557,820  9,662 

New  Brunswick .  .  35  53  21,800  865,800  8,024 

Newcastle 50  63  21,470  936,100  6,550 

Newton 38  49  20,258  385,530  5,874 

New  York 54  68  48,350  8,628,000  23,873 

Niagara 20  21  7,825  224,700  2,984 

Niobrara 38  25>^  4,35°  37, 900  1,188 

North  River 28  35  13,040  535, 500  5,528 

North  Texas   ...  17  13  2,070  27,800  731 

Northumberland  .  46  52  17,278  588,500  5,927 

Olympia 32  21  5,700  154,400  1,407 

Omaha 47  40  8,980  223,600  3,286 

Oregon 45  40  9,297  358,800  2,960 

Osborne 43  23)^  3,844  45,600  981 

Otsego 26  29  9,420  231,600  2,992 

Ottawa 23  21  6,415  97,600  2,042 

Ozark 35  29  7,915  116,750  2,113 

Palmyra 33  30  7,745  85,700  2,094 

Pembina 46  20  4, 105  53,725  1,608 

Peoria 38  41  14,295  351,800  4,518 

Petoskey 19  15  3,415  44,7oo  746 

Philadelphia -^-i^  42  36,925  2,628.000  13,344 

Philadelphia  Cen- 
tral    38  46  35,280  2,470,500  17,600 

Philadelphia 

North   44  58  23,135  1,059,800  8,450 

Pittsburg 61  63  29,355  1,603,900  14,092 

Platte 53  51  13,455  141,500  3,132 

Portsmouth 34  31  12,050  182,900  3,437 

Pueblo 30  23  5,970  205,800  1,886 

Puget  Sound 34  23  5,225  122,325  1,510 

Red  River  22  17  2,950  32,200  816 

Redstone   34  48  16.475  293,850  4,447 

Rio  Grande 15  5  840  19,100  392 

Rochester 45  57  22,525  932,400  10,565 

Rock  River 36  36  11,220  221,000  3.481 

Sacramento 33  24^^  6,260  145,625  1,367 

Saginaw 31  32  9,385  204,300  2,611 

Saint  Clairsville .  .  44  45  15,185  229,600  6,219 

Saint  Lawrence . .  30  32  12,910  323,500  3,978 

Saint  Louis 49  48  16,525  724,550  6,011 


288     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. — Continued. 

nvn--.r,;  rv,„v^v,  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

PRESBYTERiES.  ^^^f"'"  C™  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  p^^j^^^  Property.  cants. 

Saint  Paul 64  69  23,419  $1,047,600  8,391 

San  Francisco  .. .  35  31  13,170  786,500  5,178 

San  Jose 24  21  5j430  110,250  1,902 

Santa  Fe 24  12  i)975  26,575  883 

Schuyler 42  44  12,172  227,000  3,922 

Shenango 26  29  10,915  179,750  5,270 

Solomon 48  32  7ji55  90,025  2,551 

Southern  Dakota .  28  23  4,151  43, 800  1,169 

Southern  Oregon .  13  10  2,525  28,700  538 

Southern  Virginia  12  11  2,690  15,075  522 

South  Florida  ...  19  14  2,500  25,500  453 

Spokane 15  11  2,110  50,650  639 

Springfield 36  38>^  13,645  370,650  4,463 

Steuben 26  26^^  8,710  247,400  3,242 

Steubenville 61  64  22,875  35i?25o  7,557 

Stockton 20  15  3,900  80,000  891 

Syracuse 42  43  16,985  766,400  6,399 

Topeka 49  43  13, 735  293,010  4,686 

Transylvania....  27  21  6,655  ii5,75o  1,485 

Trinity 18  14  3,055  31,200  791 

Troy 44  53  19,375  812, 100  7,980 

Union 32  35  9, 125  90,500  2,464 

Utah 21  32  5,330  218,975  753 

Utica 47  51  20,158  715,450  7,410 

Vincennes 32  34  10,913  300,900  3,483 

Walla  Walla  ....  12  13  2,550  24,850  773 

Washington 38  39  17, 355  428.400  7,406 

Washington  City.  27  33  13, 775  948,500  5,558 

Waterloo 35  -^^t  8,842  122,200  2,583 

Wellsboro 16  18  4.970  89,200  1059 

Westchester 36  49  16,750  1,173,100  6,852 

West  Jersey 47  67  22,640  622,900  6,535 

Westminster  ....  29  42  14,805  401,000  5,141 

West  Virginia  .. .  29  25  6,305  111,200  1,696 

White  River 7  4  1,100  5,525  231 

White  Water ...  .  '^']  40)^  15,225  257.200  4,711 

Winnebago 37  38  9,405  140,425  2,722 

Winona 25  23  4,273  82,100  1,490 

Wood  River 9  7  1,050  27,900  150 

Wooster 39  '^'^  ii,730  151,400  4,541 

Yadkin 38  2>1  10,745  30^980  2,551 

Zanesville 46  48  16,275  252,000  5,408 

Total 6,717    6,664     2,225,044   $74,455,200  788,224 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS.  289 

2. — THE   CUMBERLAND    PRESBYTERIAN    CHURCH. 

The  body  owes  its  existence  to  a  revival  which  began 
among  the  Presbyterian  churches  within  the  bounds  of  the 
Presbytery  of  Transylvania,  Ky.,  in  1800.  The  awakening 
was  first  manifested  in  the  congregation  of  the  Rev.  James 
McGready,  at  Gasper  River,  Logan  County,  and  soon  ex- 
tended throughout  the  Cumberland  Valley,  in  Kentucky 
and  Tennessee.  Existing  congregations  were  enlarged 
and  new  congregations  organized,  and  there  being  a  lack 
of  regular  ministers  to  supply  all  the  pulpits,  men  were 
received  from  the  laity  and  licensed  by  the  presbytery, 
without  the  full  literary  qualifications  required.  Some  of 
the  ministers  looked  upon  the  revival  with  disfavor,  and 
opposed  the  licensing  and  ordaining  of  laymen  to  preach, 
and  members  of  the  revival  party  were  cited  to  appear 
before  the  synod  to  answer  to  a  complaint  that  the  Cum- 
berland Presbytery,  which  had  been  formed  out  of  the 
Transylvania  Presbytery,  and  to  which  they  then  mostly 
belonged,  had  committed  irregularities.  The  synod  ulti- 
mately decided  to  dissolve  the  Cumberland  Presbytery, 
suspend  some  of  its  ministers,  and  attach  its  ministers  and 
members  to  the  Transylvania  Presbytery.  The  outcome 
of  the  matter  was  the  organization  of  an  independent  pres- 
bytery in  1 8 10,  which  was  called  the  Cumberland  Presby- 
tery. The  new  body  grew  rapidly,  and  was  divided  into 
three  presbyteries  in  181 3.  The  same  year  the  Cumber- 
land Synod  was  constituted.  The  synod  authorized  an 
expression  of  dissent  from  the  teaching  of  the  Westminster 
Confession  as  to  reprobation,  a  limited  atonement,  infant 
salvation,  and  the  calling  of  the  elect  only.  The  new 
church  was  rapidly  extended.      In  1822  it  had  46  ordained 


2gO     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

ministers;  in  1827,  114.  Two  years  later  a  general  as- 
sembly was  constituted. 

In  polity,  the  Cumberland  Church  is  distinctively  Pres- 
byterian, differing  little  from  other  Presbyterian  branches. 
Its  doctrines  are  embodied  in  a  confession  of  faith,  consist- 
ing of  twenty- eight  articles.  It  follows  the  Westminster 
Confession  except  as  to  the  doctrines  of  the  decrees.  It 
is  claimed  that  it  represents  the  medium  between  Calvinis- 
tic  and  Arminian  theology.  It  acknowledges  the  sover- 
eignty of  God,  and  declares  the  free  agency  of  man.  The 
atonement  of  Christ  was  made  for  all  mankind,  but  only 
those  who  yield  to  the  influences  of  the  Spirit,  which  are 
coextensive  with  the  atonement,  will  be  saved.  The  sal- 
vation of  those  who  thus  yield  is  certain,  because  both 
divine  and  human  agency  cooperate  to  that  end.  The 
elect  are  those  who  believe  on  the  Son,  and  the  date  of 
election  is  the  beginning  of  regeneration  and  adoption — 
that  is,  when  men  are  regenerated  they  are  elected  to 
eternal  life,  and  will  finally  persevere,  not  by  virtue  of 
God's  election  alone,  but  by  the  concurrent  choice  of  both 
God  and  the  believer.  No  truly  regenerated  man  will  ever 
finally  fall  away.  Grace  is  not  *'  irresistible."  It  may  be 
accepted  or  rejected.  If  accepted,  it  is  the  cause  of  elec- 
tion ;  if  rejected,  of  reprobation.  Elected  is  therefore  not 
unconditional,  either  to  honor  or  dishonor.  The  divine 
decrees  are  regarded  as  immutable,  but  not  as  universal. 

The  Cumberland  Church  is  not  represented  in  many  of 
the  Northern  States.  Its  chief  strength  lies  in  the  States 
of  the  border.  In  Tennessee  it  has  39,477  members;  in 
Missouri,  23,990;  in  Texas,  22,297;  and  in  Kentucky, 
15,458.  In  these  four  States  three  fifths  of  the  member- 
ship of  the  church  is  found.     The  whole  number  of  organ- 


THE   PRESBYTERIANS. 


291 


izations  is  2791;  church  edifices,  2024;  seating  capacity, 
669,507  ;  value  of  church  property,  $3,5  15,5  1 1  ;  members, 
164,940.  The  average  seating  capacity  of  church  edifices 
is  330  and  the  average  value  $1751.  There  are  536  halls, 
with  a  seating  capacity  of  84,588. 


Summary  by  States. 

n.-rxor,:  r-v,,„.oi.  Seating  Value  of 

STATES.  ?/?^"J-  ^^f±  Ca-  Church 

zations.  Edifices.  p^^j^^  Property. 

Alabama 158  137  41,931  $187,705 

Arkansas   300  178  57,735  158,250 

California 37  2^Vz  7,100  69,450 

Colorado 5  5  980  19,300 

Florida 6  i  200  200 

Georgia 15  12  3,300  8,550 

Illinois 198  183  58,960  313,985 

Indiana 42  53  18,075  160,700 

Indian  Territory  ..  .  53  30  8,550  11,645 

Iowa 24  23  5,650  34,550 

Kansas 68  25  6,350  55, 300 

Kentucky 213  185  65,350  254,600 

Louisiana 23  16  5,300  12,050 

Mississippi 135  1 16  36,409  108,650 

Missouri    393  271  98,096  571,363 

Nebraska 7  4  790  10,000 

Ohio 22  22  6,600  60,500 

Oregon 23  10  3,365  22,200 

Pennsylvania 52  48^  18,050  257,500 

Tennessee 529  464  149,471  745,605 

Texas   476  205^^  75,395  436,108 

Washington 11  4>^  i,55o  15,300 

West  Virginia i  i  300  2,000 

Total 2,791  2,024  669,507  $3,515,511 

Summary  by  Presbyteries. 

VKESBYTERIES. 

Alabama 27  24  6,925  $18,380 

Albion 16  17  5,075  19,785 

Allegheny 19  17  4,900  52,400 

Anderson 28  27  10,950  33,700 

Arkansas 39  21  7,200  30,500 

Atchison 7  2%.  750  3,200 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

7,390 

12,282 

1,496 

231 

88 
598 

14,177 
4,826 
1,229 
1,167 
2,386 

15,458 
868 

6,353 
23,990 

416 
2,602 

897 
6,210 

39,477 

22,297 

470 

32 

164,940 


1,081 
1,299 
1,576 
1,867 

2,139 
249 


292     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. — Continued. 


Org 


PRESBYTERIES.  v..6ani- 

zations. 


Athens ii 

Bacon 23 

Bartholomew  ....  28 

Bell 25 

Bonham 27 

Buffalo  Gap 15 

Burrow 31 

California 15 

Charlotte 34 

Chattanooga  ....  39 

Cherokee 15 

Chillicothe 28 

Choctaw 24 

Colesburg 6 

Colorado 19 

Corsicana 33 

Cumberland 31 

Dallas 23 

Davis 15 

Decatur 23 

East  Louisiana.  . .  10 

East  Tennessee  . .  27 

Eden 10 

Elk 53 

Ewing,  Ark 30 

Ewing,  111 27 

Florida 6 

Foster 24 

Georgia 21 

Greenville 23 

Gregory 30 

Guadalupe 27 

Guthrie 58 

Hopewell »  44 

Illinois 23 

Indiana 19 

Iowa II 

Kansas 23 

Kentucky 16 

King 43 

Kirksville 31 

Knoxville 33 

Lebanon 42 


PliiirrVi 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

edifices. 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

12 

3,600 

$22,400 

1,022 

II 

6,400 

32,800 

966 

20 

6,500 

6,750 

911 

17 

4,625 

14,100 

1,158 

II>^ 

3,675 

24,150 

1,485 

3 

1,000 

5,750 

788 

21 

7,350 

21,950 

1,032 

14/2 

3,150 

30,400 

485 

28 

8,600 

23,265 

1,354 

23/2 

7,000 

56,300 

2,139 

4 

1,300 

5,550 

466 

17/2 

5^175 

18,613 

1,443 

24 

6,850 

4,945 

446 

6 

1,200 

14,600 

385 

6X 

1,650 

10,900 

696 

16 

7,800 

31,500 

1,642 

22 

7,675 

15,800 

2,158 

i5/'4 

5,450 

46,400 

1,777 

H'A 

3-925 

28,050 

1,261 

20 

6, 100 

36,400 

1,770 

8 

2,300 

3,250 

319 

21 

7,850 

37,250 

2,033 

4 

800 

10,500 

331 

So'A 

17,685 

80,250 

5,713 

28 

12,000 

22,700 

1,814 

27>^ 

7,050 

26,900 

2,684 

^2 

200 

200 

88 

23 

7,675 

45,200 

2,015 

8 

4,850 

12,450 

908 

9 

2,900 

11,800 

746 

I 

800 

8,608 

998 

9 

850 

16,550 

952 

19 

6,100 

31,950 

2,250 

39 

12,000 

48,850 

3,450 

16 

6,700 

10,550 

1,141 

26;^ 

9,125 

118,500 

2,767 

12 

2,600 

13,150 

544 

12 

2,300 

24,300 

831 

12 

3,600 

29,900 

1,262 

12 

2,650 

18,450 

1,574 

23 

6,740 

31,850 

1,784 

28^ 

7,200 

45,050 

2,162 

42 

13,650 

144,800 

4.592 

THE  PRESBYTERIANS. 


293 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. — Continued. 


PRESBYTERIES. 


Organi- 
zations. 


Lexington 65 

Little  River 26 

Logan 41 

Louisiana 10 

McGee 30 

McGready 18 

McLin 16 

McMinnville.  . , . .  31 

Mackinaw 13 

Madison 40 

Marshall 23 

Mayfield 30 

Memphis 28 

Miami 7 

Mississippi 27 

Morgan 14 

Mound  Prairie.  . .  28 

Muskingum 4 

Nebraska 7 

Neosho 26 

New  Hope 48 

New  Lebanon  ...  32 

Nolin 27 

Obion 43 

Oregon 9 

Ouachita 15 

Owensboro 15 

Oxford 26 

Ozark 31 

Parsons 20 

Pennsylvania  ....  23 

Platte 50 

Princeton 16 

Red  Oak 33 

Red  River 23 

Republican  Valley  7 

Richland 59 

Robert  Donnell  .  .  43 

Rocky  Mountain  .  5 

Rushville 11 

Sacramento  ....  8 

Samt  Louis 2 

Salem 15 


u.,.,^v. 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

■51 

17,381 

$130,900 

4,220 

8/3 

3,850 

11,050 

1,002 

41 

11,100 

56,700 

2,809 

7 

2,600 

7,300 

438 

2.3 

7,550 

31,100 

2,196 

i^Yz 

5,656 

13,700 

1,078 

>3 

5.500 

14,250 

794 

31 

9,500 

48,100 

2,055 

13 

3>95o 

35,800 

1,243 

36 

7,250 

26,700 

2,453 

15 

4,825 

43,600 

978 

29 

1 1,400 

22,700 

2,100 

25 

8,460 

105,500 

1,744 

7 

2,000 

28,000 

1,271 

25 

5,350 

6,150 

929 

17 

6,450 

20,500 

1,242 

17 

4,450 

13,700 

1,178 

3 

1,000 

10,100 

309 

4 

790 

10,000 

416 

I4>^ 

7,150 

16,950 

1,188 

43 

17,956 

45,000 

2,540 

30 

15,600 

89,100 

2,735 

17 

6,300 

8,500 

1,477 

35 

16,800 

41,600 

3,317 

VA 

1,500 

6,400 

265 

10 

2,385 

2,425 

469 

14 

4,500 

36,700 

1,370 

22 

6,900 

36,550 

1,154 

21 

6,950 

28,800 

1,923 

4 

1,800 

5,900 

m 

21/2 

8,850 

I  19, 100 

2,755 

32 

11,400 

43,350 

2,283 

15 

7,550 

25,750 

1,568 

14 

5,500 

61,400 

2,048 

12 

3,475 

21,300 

1,610 
205 

5« 

13,511 

53,175 

4,158 

3« 

11,500 

49,575 

2,148 

5 

980 

19,300 

231 

9 

3,400 

14,700 

540 

7 

2,200 

19,300 

415 

2 

1,400 

80,000 

305 

1% 

2,750 

7,200 

655 

294    RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. — Continued. 


Organi.     Church      bearing 


Value  of  Com- 

PRESBYTERIES.  !^\?^"'"    t^ilcl'l!.'         Ca-  Church  muni- 


zations.    Edifices 


pacity.  Property.  cants. 


Salt  River 33  23  8,250  $55>55o  2,840 

Sangamon 26  26  6,710  50,400  1,575 

San  Jacinto 8  3  800  15, 55°  215 

San  Saba 18  6  1,850  I3j45o  594 

Searcy 30  16  5,000  21,900  1,207 

Sparta 44  34  16,765  27,665  3,583 

Springfield 19  13  2,575  29,200  1,095 

Springville 30  30  9,550  83,900  1,419 

Talladega 29  18  4,350  16,350  1,169 

Tehuacana 16  7^  2,920  9,400  818 

Texas  16  16  6,900  i5j55o  726 

Trinity 15  n  4,95°  11,850  809 

Tulare 14  8  1,750  i9»75o  596 

Union 11  n  4,600  88,000  1,911 

Vandalia 19  19  6,800  60,000  1,117 

Wabash 9  10  2,500  21,700  817 

Waco  15  10  2,800  9,600  791 

Walla  Walla 17  7  2,415  21,300  742 

Washington 23  6  1,300  7,600  905 

West  Iowa 7  5  1^850  6,800  238 

West  Plains 12  6  2,600  6,000  362 

West  Prairie 21  9  3,075  8,800  684 

White  River 35  27X  8,800  11,925  1,178 

Wichita 19  4/^  2,000  11,300  728 

Willamette 8  4  1,000  9,800  360 

Yazoo 20  19  5,534  12,650  1,067 

Total 2,791  2,024  669,507    $3,515,511  164,940 


3. — THE    CUMBERLAND    PRESBYTERIAN   CHURCH, 
COLORED. 

This  body  was  organized  in  May,  1869,  at  Murfreesboro, 
Tenn.,  under  the  direction  of  the  general  assembly  of  the 
Cumberland  Presbyterian  Church.  It  was  constituted  of 
colored  ministers  and  members  who  had  been  connected 
with  that  church.  Its  first  presbytery,  the  Huntsville,  was 
formed  in  1870,  its  first  synod,  the  Tennessee,  in  1871,  and 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS. 


295 


its  general  assembly  in  1874.  It  has  the  same  doctrinal 
symbol  as  the  parent  body,  and  the  same  system  of  gov- 
ernment and  discipline,  differing  only  in  race. 

It  has  2},  presbyteries,  and  is  represented  in  nine  States 
and  one  Territory.  Of  its  224  organizations,  34  only  wor- 
ship in  buildings  which  they  do  not  own.  There  are 
12,956  communicants,  and  the  total  value  of  the  church 
property  is  $195,826,  making  an  average  of  $1070  to  each 
edifice.  The  average  seating  capacity  is  285.  There  are 
34  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  3570. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES  Organi-  Church 

STATES.  zatlons.  Edifices. 

Alabama 44  38 

Arkansas 2 

Illinois 7  4 

Kansas 6  3 

Kentucky 36  31 

Mississippi 4  4 

Missouri 10  9 

Oklahoma 4 

Tennessee 81  72 

Texas 30  22 

Total 224  183 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

9>574 

$26,200 

3,104 
255 

1,300 

5,375 

195 

650 

15,000 

190 

I^IZ^ 

31,645 

1,421 

950 

1,825 

278 

3.425 

17,900 

471 
100 

24,125 

88,660 

5,202 

6,160 

9,221 

1,740 

52,139  $195,826  12,956 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. 

PRESBYTERIES. 

Alabama 7  5  1,850 

Angelina 7  5  1,750 

Arkansas   2  ..... 

Bowling  Green 5  4  950 

Brazos  River 9  7  2,170 

Cumberland 13  10  2,350 

East  Texas 14  10  2,240 

Elk  River 11  11  3,700 

Farmington 11  7  2,625 

Florence 14  14  3,099 

Green  River 8  7  1,680 


$4,150 

925 

2,350 

435 

255 

6,600 

.365 

2,896 

712 

7,010 

630 

3,975 

593 

10,100 

625 

8,960 

670 

10,350 

714 

810 

157 

296     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. — Continued. 

Organi-    Church 
zations.    Edifices. 


n^rro^;      r>.,,v^v,        Seating  Value  of  Com- 

PRESBYTERIES.  ^'-fany   ^^^i'^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 


Hartsville 5  4  450  $1,500  133 

Hiwassee 12  11  2,700  10,125  4°° 

Hopewell 10  9  3?35o  14,500  530 

Huntsville 18  15  2,925  8,500  1,160 

Mississippi 4  4  950  1,825  278 

New  Hope 12  13  4,700  19,500  610 

New  Middleton  .  .  . .  16  11  2,775  8,300  1,047 

Oklahoma 4                      100 

Pleasant  Hill 5  4  1,700  3,200  305 

Springfield 5  5  1,200  16,400  338 

Topeka 6  3  650  15,000  190 

Walter 26  24  8,325  39J75  1^784 

Total 224  183  52,139  $195,826  12,956 


4. — THE    WELSH    CALVINISTIC    METHODIST    CHURCH. 

Historically  this  body  is  a  part  of  the  general  Methodist 
movement  of  which  the  two  Wesleys  and  Whitefield  were 
the  leaders  in  Great  Britain.  Doctrinally  it  is  Calvinistic, 
its  confession  of  faith  being  similar  to  that  of  Westminster. 
Until  181 1  the  Calvinistic  Methodists  in  Wales  were  con- 
nected with  the  Church  of  England,  as  the  followers  of 
Wesley  in  England  had  been.  Since  that  date  they  have 
been  a  distinct  denomination. 

The  first  Welsh  Calvinistic  Methodist  Church  in  this 
country  was  organized  in  1826  in  Remsen,  N.  Y.  Four 
years  later  a  presbytery  was  constituted.  A  general  as- 
sembly, which  meets  once  in  three  years,  was  organized  in 
1869.  The  church  system  is  very  similar  to  that  of  the 
Presbyterian  churches,  with  which  it  affiliates.  There  are 
six  synods,  as  follows :  Synod  of  New  York  and  Vermont, 
Synod  of  Ohio,  Synod  of  Pennsylvania,  Synod  of  Wiscon- 
sin, Synod  of  Minnesota,  and  the  Western  Synod. 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS. 


297 


There  are  19  presbyteries.  The  number  of  organizations 
is  187,  with  12,722  communicants.  The  average  seating 
capacity  of  the  churches  is  235,  and  their  average  value 
$3303.  There  are  14  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of 
1266. 

The  Welsh  are,  of  course,  the  constituency  of  the  church, 
and  the  Welsh  language  is  used  in  its  services  and  in  the 
proceedings  of  its  ecclesiastical  judicatories. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  O';?^"^- 

zations. 

Colorado i 

Illinois I 

Iowa 8 

Kansas 5 

Minnesota  13 

Missouri 6 

Nebraska 7 

New  York 28 

Ohio , .  31 

Pennsylvania 34 

South  Dakota 6 

Vermont 6 

Wisconsin 41 

Total 187 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

V-r 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

I 

200 

$8,000 

156 

I 

700 

20,000 

425 

7 

1,220 

7,650 

348 

4 

850 

3,650 

115 

13 

3,705 

34,500 

1,166 

4 

555 

2,500 

154 

4 

780 

6,800 

267 

28 

6,370 

143,300 

1,789 

34 

8,050 

111,575 

2,463 

33 

10,000 

153,700 

2,461 

4 

730 

4,200 

306 

5 

1,175 

15,500 

431 

52 

10,110 

114,500 

2,641 

190       44,445       $625,875      12,722 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. 

PRESBYTERIES. 

Columbus 12  12  3,460 

Dodgeville 5  7  1,525 

Eastern    New   York 

and  Vermont 8  8  1,825 

First  Kansas 5  4  850 

First  Minnesota ...  .  10  10  2,555 

Jackson 11  14  2,770 

Lacrosse -3  3  550 

Lime  Spring 5  4  1,210 

Long  Creek 6  6  1,160 

Missouri 6  4  555 


$69,875 

1,242 

17,800 

271 

26,500 

701 

3,650 

115 

22,500 

766 

18,600 

855 

5,200 

166 

12,800 

465 

6,850 

283 

2,500 

154 

298     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. — Continued. 

Organi-  Church  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

PRESBYTERIES.                 ^^f^^.  TT^ifi^^t  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  p^^j^  Property.  cants. 

Nebraska 8  5  980  $14,800  423 

New  York  City i  i  550  70,000  350 

North  Pennsylvania.       23  21  7,iii  98,900  1,707 

Oneida 25  24  5,170  62,360  1,169 

Pittsburg 12  13  3,270  61,700  721 

South  Dakota 6  4  730  4,200  306 

Southern     Pennsyl- 
vania           7  7  Ij439  16,200  399 

Waukesha 13  15  3,495  66,900  1,309 

Welsh  Prairie 21  28  5,240  44,600  1,320 

Total 187  190  44j445  $625,875  12,722 


5. — THE    UNITED    PRESBYTERIANS. 

This  body  is  not  historically  connected  with  the  United 
Presbyterian  Church  of  Scotland,  though  it  was  formed  in 
a  similar  way  and  of  similar  elements.  The  Scottish  body 
was  organized  in  1847  of  Secession  or  Associate  Burgher, 
and  Relief  Presbyterians.  The  American  branch  was  con- 
stituted in  1858  of  Associate  and  Associate  Reformed 
Presbyterians.  The  Associate  Presbyterians  included  both 
Burghers  and  Secession  Presbyterians,  and  the  Associate 
Reformed,  Associate  and  Reformed  Presbyterians.  All 
these  divisions  were  brought  to  the  United  States  by 
Scotch  immigrants.  In  1858  most  of  the  Associate  and 
Associate  Reformed  Presbyterians  agreed  to  unite,  and 
the  United  Presbyterian  Church  in  North  America  was 
the  result.  A  number  of  each  of  the  bodies,  however,  re- 
fused to  enter  the  union,  and  hold  stiil  a  separate  existence. 

The  United  Presbyterian  Church  accepts  the  Westmin- 
ster Confession  of  Faith  and  catechisms   as  its  doctrinal 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS.  299 

Standards,  modifying  somewhat  the  chapters  on  the  power 
of  civil  magistrates.  Accompanying  these  standards  as 
a  part  of  the  basis  of  union  was  a  ''J^-^dicial  Testimony," 
declaring  the  sense  in  which  these  symbols  were  received. 
It  consisted  of  eighteen  declarations,  including  one  against 
human  slavery,  another  against  all  secret  oath-bound  soci- 
eties as  *'  inconsistent  with  the  genius  and  spirit  of  Chris- 
tianity"  and  forbidden  to  church  members,  another  opposed 
to  extending  the  "  communion  in  sealing  ordinances  "  to 
those  refusing  adherence  to  the  church's  profession,  sub- 
jection to  its  government  and  discipline,  or  abandonment 
of  fellowship  with  those  not  in  sympathy  with  the  church's 
position ;  also  another  that  it  is  the  '*  will  of  God  "  that 
the  songs  contained  in  the  Book  of  Psalms  be  sung,  and 
these  only,  "  to  the  exclusion  of  the  devotional  composi- 
tions of  uninspired  men,"  in  public  and  private  worship. 
In  government  and  discipline  the  church  is  similar  to  other 
Presbyterian  churches.  It  has  presbyteries,  synods,  and 
a  general  assembly. 

There  are  56  presbyteries,  not  including  three  in  foreign 
lands — one  each  in  Canada,  India,  and  Egypt.  The  num- 
ber of  organizations  is  866,  with  832  church  edifices,  val- 
ued at  $5,408,084,  and  94,402  communicants.  In  1859, 
the  year  after  the  church  was  organized,  it  had  55,547 
communicants.  It  has  gained,  therefore,  in  thirty-one 
years,  38,855  communicants,  or  about  seventy  per  cent. 
The  average  seating  capacity  of  its  church  edifices  is  318, 
and  their  average  value  $6500.  There  are  50  halls,  with 
a  seating  capacity  of  5930. 


300     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. 

STATES.  Or?ani-  Church  Se^^ng  Value  of 

zations.  Edifices.  -^  v.huh.u 

pacity.  Property. 

California 13  10  2,400  $129,500 

Colorado 5  5  1,450  55,500 

Connecticut i  i  500  10,000 

Illinois 62  61  18,363  231,300 

Indiana 29  29  7,885  92,850 

Iowa loi  98  25,960  274,200 

Kansas 58  48  11,605  127,350 

Maryland i  i  500  25,000 

Massachusetts 7  7  2,600  65,000 

Michigan 14  n  2,850  21,600 

Minnesota i  . .  ...            

Missouri 14  14  3,900  104,200 

Nebraska 35  25  5,160  95,429 

New  Jersey 6  6  2,175  98,500 

New  York 65  62  25,516  707,400 

North  Dakota i  i  100  1,600 

Ohio 136  136  43, 132  697,550 

Oregon 5  5  1,330  24,800 

Pennsylvania 281  283  102,404  2,552,450 

Rhode  Island i  i  400  15,000 

South  Dakota 4  2  ■  200  1,700 

Tennessee 7  6  1,300  6,000 

Vermont 3  3  900  8,000 

Washington 3  3  525  7,400 

West  Virginia 6  6  1,730  45,300 

Wisconsin 7  8  1,413  10,455 

Total 866  832  264,298   $5,408,084 

Summary  by  Presbyteries. 

PRESBYTERIES. 

Albany 8  8  3,050  $77,000 

Allegheny 31  30  13,205  443,200 

Argyle 12  12  6,250  108,000 

Arkansas  Valley  .. .  22  16  3,510  30,600 

Beaver  Valley 23  23  8,110  100,800 

Big  Spring 10  12  3,365  57, 800 

Boston 8  8  3,000  80,000 

Brookville 18  15  4,275  31,800 

Butler 32  32  10,330  161,400 

Caledonia 14  13  4,525  139,300 

Cedar  Rapids 11  10  2,685  45,000 

Chartiers 17  17  6,580  133,200 

Chicago 9  9  2,600  58,000 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

1,202 

537 

184 

6,529 

2,542 

7,769 

3,669 

171 

1,135 

646 

12 

1,068 

2,172 

685 

9719 

8 

14,710 

412 
39,204 

220 

59 
465 
219 
103 
530 
432 

94,402 


915 
5,856 
2,268 

977 
3,214 
1,201 

1,355 
1,174 
3,748 
2,273 

834 
2,745 

972 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS. 


301 


PRESBYTERIES. 


Organ  i 


Chillicothc 7 

Cleveland 11 

College  Springs.  ...  24 

Colorado 5 

Concordia 12 

Concmaugli 18 

Delaware 20 

Des  Moines 35 

Detroit 13 

First  Ohio 11 

Frankfort 17 

Garnett 17 

Illinois  Central.    ...  11 

Illinois  Southern  ...  21 

Indiana 11 

Indiana  Northern  .  .  11 

Iowa  Northwestern  .  6 

Kansas  City 11 

Keokuk 17 

Lake 26 

Le  Claire 10 

Los  Angeles 7 

Mansfield 15 

Mercer 13 

Monmouth 15 

Monongahela ^t?) 

Muskingum 27 

New  York 18 

Omaha 24 

Oregon  8 

Pawnee 17 

Philadelphia 15 

Princeton 9 

Rock  Island 11 

San  Francisco 6 

Sidney  17 

Steubenville 22 

Tennessee   7 

Vermont 3 

Westmoreland 31 

Wheeling 19 

Wisconsin 7 

Xenia 13 

Total 866 


SliYT 

ERIES. — Continued. 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

A'.C^ar 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

6 

2,250 

$10,000 

694 

9 

3,130 

65,300 

1,235 

23 

6,515 

56,900 

2,208 

S 

1,450 

55,500 

537 

9 

1,690 

15,800 

511 

19 

6,370 

92,600 

2,230 

19 

6,121 

55,100 

2,341 

33 

7,460 

89,500 

2,003 

10 

2,600 

19,300 

591 

13 

4,900 

130,000 

1,386 

17 

5,631, 

87,100 

2,117 

16 

4,240 

50,100 

1,510 

10 

2,500 

26.500 

646 

21 

7,105 

82,100 

2,284 

II 

2,850 

27,500 

845 

10 

2,185 

16,500 

735 

5 

1,165 

14.325 

239 

II 

3,240 

73,300 

1,061 

18 

5,800 

53,300. 

1,910 

27 

7,713 

95,750 

2,827 

10 

2,410 

17,225 

710 

S 

750 

25,000 

296 

IS 

4,255 

78,050 

1,424 

14 

4,«75 

80,300 

1,998 

15 

4,958 

82,200 

2,039 

31 

14,045 

646,250 

5,543 

29 

9,315 

65,600 

3,349 

17 

8,245 

436,500 

2,791 

18 

3,170 

64,079 

1,034 

8 

1,855 

32,200 

515 

1 1 

2,530 

37,000 

1,259 

16 

8,180 

475,500 

3,577 

10 

3,100 

40,450 

1,010 

1 1 

3,110 

38,250 

876 

5 

1,650 

104,500 

906 

16 

4,170 

65,400 

1,429 

22 

6,887 

109,300 

2,461 

6 

1,300 

6,000 

465 

3 

900 

8,000 

219 

33 

10,125 

160,550 

3,028 

19 

6,255 

128,700 

1,930 

8 

1,413 

10,455 

432 

13 

4,400 

114,000 

1,669 

832     264,298  $5,408,084    94,402 


302     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

6. — THE    PRESBYTERIAN    CHURCH    IN    THE    UNITED 
STATES    (southern). 

In  1858  the  Southern  churches  of  the  New  School  gen- 
eral assembly  separated  from  the  Northern  churches  be- 
cause of  differences  on  the  slavery  question.  There  were 
4  synods  with  15  presbyteries  in  the  South,  and  these 
organized  the  United  Synod,  South.  In  1861  there  was 
a  similar  division  in  the  Old  School  Presbyterian  Church, 
resulting  in  the  organization  of  the  Presbyterian  Church 
in  the  Confederate  States  of  America,  with  1 1  synods  and 
47  presbyteries.  In  1864  this  body  and  the  United  Synod, 
South,  were  united,  and  soon  after  the  name  Presbyterian 
Church  in  the  United  States  was  adopted.  On  account 
of  similarity  of  titles  this  church  is  commonly  called  the 
Southern  and  the  parent  body  the  Northern  Church. 

When  the  union  of  1864  took  place  the  Southern  Church 
had  87,000  communicants.  A  number  of  presbyteries 
which  had  been  connected  with  the  Northern  Church  joined 
it  after  the  close  of  the  Civil  War,  and  it  has  increased 
rapidly.  It  now  has  13  synods,  72  presbyteries,  and  179,- 
570  communicants.  In  1882  fraternity  was  formally  es- 
tablished between  the  Northern  and  Southern  bodies,  and 
in  1888  the  general  assemblies,  respectively,  held  a  joint 
meeting  in  Philadelphia  in  celebration  of  the  centenary  of 
the  adoption  of  the  constitution  of  the  church. 

The  Southern  Church  has  2391  organizations,  with  2288 
church  edifices,  valued  at  $8,812,152.  The  average  seat- 
ing capacity  is  302,  and  the  average  value  $3851.  There 
are  143  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  19,895. 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS, 


303 


Summary  by  States. 


STATES  0>-g^"i-  Church      Seating 

^'^^^^^-  zations.  Edifices.      p^a-^ 

Alabama 172  I4i>^  42,920 

Arkansas 92         75  21,830 

District  of  Columbia  i           i  1,000 

Florida 67  66  16,015 

Georgia 162  164  52,764 

Indiana 2           2  650 

Indian  Territory  ...  13         22  5^250 

Kentucky 171  i68>^  48,745 

Louisiana 64         55  18,435 

Maryland 14         17  4,785 

Mississippi 208  174  47,585 

Missouri 143  1 16  38,705 

North  Carolina 282  275  96,485 

South  Carolina 226  243^  68,185 

Tennessee  155  150  53,030 

Texas 242  171  45,977 

Virginia 290  345 K  ^ 00,977 

West  Virginia 87  loi  27,505 

Total 2,391    2,288     690,843 


Value  of 

Com- 

Church 

muni- 

Property. 

cants. 

$573,400 

10,560 

165,685 

4.478 

50,000 

246 

162,450 

3,444 

737,725 

12,096 

1,750 

79 

7,750 

629 

996,750 

16,915 

433,985 

4,926 

224,300 

1,654 

415,315 

11,055 

753,490 

10,363 

678,565 

27,477 

652,335 

16,561 

927,320 

15,954 

627,806 

10,774 

1,180,576 

26,515 

222,950 

5,995 

$8,812,152 

179,721 

Summary  by  Presbyteries. 

PRESBYTERIES. 

Abingdon 38  35  11,107  $ii7,35o 

Albemarle 26  27  7^850  80,400 

Arkansas 22  19  5, 530  68,800 

Athens 34  35  11,700  43,125 

Atlanta 39  40  1 1,875  203,750 

Augusta 19  20>^  7,950  189,600 

Bethel 46  53  17, 185  106,800 

Brazos 22  19^^  5,625  134.400 

Central  Alabama.  .  .  10  8  1,850  6,300 

Central  Mississippi.  60  52  12,450  104,150 

Central  Texas 49  27  6,882  112,600 

Charleston 28  '^2>  9,025  268,020 

Cherokee 28  28  9,767  63,400 

Chesapeake 17  20  7,925  110,900 

Chickasaw 25  25  8,250  17,500 

Columbia 26  27  9,255  78,700 

Concord 43  47  17,415  101,750 

Dallas 59  42  12,980  175,064 


2,634 
1,608 
1,130 

1,775 
4,100 

1,413 
4,796 
1,404 

357 
3,024 
2,450 

2,243 
2,127 
1,452 
1,266 
1,965 

4,511 
2,848 


304    RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF  THE    UNITED  STATES, 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. — Continued. 

r\         •  r-u      V,  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

PRESBYTERIES.                       ^.^'S^fire^               ^^-  ^^^Urch  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  p^^-^^^  Property.  cants. 

Eastern  Texas ... .  56  43  95965  $50,442  1,479 

Eastern  Hanover. .  53  67  21,195  402,700  5,-720 

Ebenezer 29  29  7,545  170,100  2,730 

Enoree 44  45  14,605  94,500  2,898 

Fayetteville 64  53  23,140  70,690  7j388 

Florida 20  21  5,425  47, 100  1,064 

Greenbrier 45  45  12,455  9^,^^o  3,023 

Harmony 32  35  8,890  55^465  i,932 

Holston 16  i^Yz  6,775  43,200  2,705 

Indian 13  22  5,250  7>75o  629 

Knoxville 24  19  6,225  133,100  2,012 

Lafayette 36  26  7,54°  72,700  2,194 

Lexington 59  -j^,  19.320  158,950  7.451 

Louisiana 21  19  5, 100  44,900  808 

Louisville 43  45  14,200  339.450  4,433 

Macon 21  18  5,775  144,850  1,261 

Maryland 13  16  4,385  209,300  1,607 

Mecklenburg 71  70  21,125  194,700  7,299 

Memphis 34  30  9,100  203,350  2,807 

Mississippi 24  22  6,865  115,000  i,957 

Missouri 28  24  7-250  79,75o  2,330 

Montgomery 48  61  16,990  230,011  4,202 

Muhlenberg 16  16  3,475  52,950  959 

Nashville -^-j  42  16,325  433, 920  5,013 

New  Orleans 29  24  10,565  362,700  3,635 

North  Alabama ..  .  55  35  Ii,i45  226,800  3,427 

North  Mississippi  .  35  24  6,680  76,590  1,721 

Orange 39  38  14,920  140,500  3,949 

Ouachita 22  19  5,400  41,100  1,198 

Paducah 16  17  5,400  107,600  1,750 

Palmyra 23  20>^  5,950  49-350  1,598 

Paris 21  15  4,170  33,000  920 

Peedee 24  24  6,975  47,200  1,489 

Pine  Bluff 18  17  5,300  23,950  1,131 

Potosi 17  13  4,400  37,800  961 

Red  River   30  26  6,835  65,085  1,202 

Roanoke 40  44  11,330  95,200  2,805 

Saint  John 25  25  5,650  40,700  1,103 

Saint  Louis 21  17  5,515  283,940  1,472 

Savannah 21  22  5,697  93,000  1,420 

South  Alabama ..  .  55  48  16,100  210,925  3,783 

South  Carohna  ..  .  52  53  11,505  80,350  3,203 

Suwanee 22  20  4.-940  74,650  1,277 


THE  PRESBVrERlANS. 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. — Contimied. 


305 


pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Tombeckbee 48  38  9,275  $63,375  2,368 

Transylvania 29  26  8,750  151,000  2,949 

Tuscaloosa 52  50  13,825  129,375  2,993 

Upper  Missouri.  . .  18  16  8,050  229,950  1,808 

Washburn.  • 27  18  5,050  30,585  922 

Western  District  .  .  23  20j^  6,500  41,800  1,664 

Western  Texas  .. .  35  24  6,355  122,300  1,673 

West  Hanover ...  .  36  41  j4  11,410  76,165  2,100 

West  Lexington  ..  40  -^'jYz  10.025  I77, 4oo  4,173 

Wilmington 39  40  12,035  90,525  2,722 

Winchester 41  59;^  i7,55o  173,200  3.301 

Total 2,391    2,288      690,843    $8,812,152  179,721 


7. — THE    ASSOCIATE    CHURCH    OF   NORTH    AMERICA. 

The  Associate  Presbyterians  began  with  a  secession  in 
1733  of  Ebenezer  Erskine  and  three  other  ministers  from 
the  Church  of  Scotland.  Twenty  years  later  the  first 
associate  presbytery  in  this  country,  that  of  Pennsylvania, 
was  organized.  In  i  782  most  of  these  Presbyterians,  who 
held  what  are  known  as  the  Marrow  doctrines,  united  with 
Reformed  Presbyterians,  whence  came,  in  course  of  time, 
various  bodies  of  Associate  Reformed  Presbyterians.  There 
were  Associate  Presbyterians,  however,  who  did  not  join 
this  union,  and  these  organized  in  1801  a  synod,  embracing 
several  presbyteries.  In  1858  there  was  a  union  of  Asso- 
ciate and  Associate  Reformed  Presbyterians,  resulting  in 
the  United  Presbyterian  Church.  Some  Associate  Presby- 
terians, however,  remained  separate  still.  These  are  known 
as  the  Associate  Church  of  North  America. 

The  Associate  Presbyterians  were  very  pronounced 
against  slavery.     As  early  as  1800  the  Associate  Presby- 


306     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES, 

tery  denounced  slavery  as  immoral  and  unjustifiable.  In 
i8il  it  repeated  this  declaration,  and  in  1831  it  resolved 
to  exclude  slaveholders  from  its  communion,  losing  thereby 
its  Southern  congregations. 

There  are  now  4  presbyteries,  with  3 1  organizations  and 
1053  communicants,  scattered  among  eight  States,  the 
majority  of  them  being  in  Pennsylvania  and  Iowa.  They 
have  23  edifices,  with  an  average  seating  capacity  of  211, 
and  an  average  value  of  $1270;  8  halls,  with  a  seating 
capacity  of  345,  are  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 

STATES.  O'-g-i-     Ch-ch        Seating 

zations.    Edifices.        ^„^- 

pacity. 

Illinois I  I  175 

Indiana 3  3  600 

Iowa 5  5  974 

Kansas 4  3  650 

New  Jersey i  i  200 

New  York i                         ...             14 

Ohio 4  3  625              6,800            ']'] 

Pennsylvania 12  7  1,625              7,800          420 


Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com. 
muni- 
cants. 

$1,000 
2,600 

17 
112 

5.300 
3.300 

233 
160 

2,400 

20 

Total 31         23         4,849         $29,200        1,053 

Summary  by  Presbyteries. 

PRESBYTERIES. 

Clarion 16  10  2,200 

Iowa 5  5  974 

Kansas 4  3  650 

Northern  Indiana  . .  6  5  1,025 

Total 31         23         4,849         $29,200       1,053 

8. — THE   ASSOCIATE   REFORMED  SYNOD  OF   THE   SOUTH. 

The  union  of  Associate  and  Reformed  Presbyterians  in 
1 782  resulted  in  a  body  called  Associate  Reformed  Pres- 


^12,000 

501 

5,300 

233 

3.300 

160 

8,600 

159 

THE  PRESBYTERIANS.  307 

byterians.  There  have  been  various  divisions  bearing  this 
name,  but  all  have  ceased  to  exist,  having  joined  with 
Associate  Presbyterians  to  form  the  United  Presbyterian 
Church,  or  been  absorbed  by  other  Presbyterian  bodies, 
except  the  Associate  Reformed  Synod  of  the  South.  In 
consequence  of  differences  in  the  general  synod  of  the 
Associate  Reformed  Church,  which  had  been  formed  in 
1804,  on  the  psalmody  and  communion  questions,  the 
Associate  Reformed  Synod  of  the  Carolinas  withdrew  in 
1 82 1  and  became  the  next  year  an  independent  body, 
under  the  title  of  The  Associate  Reformed  Synod  of  the 
South. 

The  synod  accepts  the  Westminster  Confession  of  Faith, 
with  those  sections  treating  of  the  power  of  civil  magis- 
trates in  ecclesiastical  matters  changed  so  as  to  eliminate 
their  *'  Erastian  doctrine."  In  1871  the  synod  also  adopted 
a  **  summary  of  doctrines,"  consisting  of  thirty- five  articles, 
together  with  a  brief  declaration  of  church  order  and  terms 
of  communion.  Its  distinctive  principles  are  contained  in 
the  sections  concerning  psalmody  and  the  communion. 
Psalms  only  and  not  uninspired  hymns  may  be  used  in 
worship,  and  persons  "  holding  to  error  or  corrupt  worship, 
or  notoriously  belonging  to  societies  which  so  hold,"  may 
not  be  admitted  to  the  Lord's  Table. 

Connected  with  the  synod  are  8  presbyteries,  with  116 
organizations,  the  same  number  of  edifices,  and  8501  com- 
municants. The  average  seating  capacity  of  the  edifices 
is  319;  their  average  value,  $1826.  The  main  body  of 
communicants  is  to  be  found  in  the  two  Carolinas  and 
Tennessee.  Five  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  540,  are 
occupied. 


308     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


wSUMMARY   BY  STATES. 

/-v         •  /^u      u  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                       ^'?^"'-  ^Yl""  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Alabama 5  5  1,700  $13,150  220 

Arkansas 10  9  1,900  7j300  513 

Georgia 8  8  2,500  i5j900  474 

Kentucky 5  6  1,150  14,500  169 

Mississippi 5  5  i>425  4,5oo  564 

Missouri i  i  35o  1,500  92 

North  Carolina 20  21  7,650  51,000  2,109 

South  Carolina 36  37  12,800  70,400  2,728 

Tennessee  14  H  3,975  18,100  1,058 

Texas 7  4  1,650  3,500  188 

Virginia 4  5  i,55o  10,000  286 

West  Virginia i  i  400  2,000  100 


PRESBYTERIES. 


Total 116        116      37,050        $211,850        8,501 

Summary  by  Presbyteries. 


Arkansas 10  9  1,900  $7,300  5^3 

First 38  39  14,125  84,900  3,686 

Kentucky 6  7  1,500  16,000  261 

Memphis 13  13  3,250  11,100  1,200 

Second 26  27  8,825  52,400  1,625 

Tennessee  and  Ala- 
bama   II  II  3,850  24,650  642 

Texas 7  4  1,650  3,500  188 

Virginia 5  6  1,950  12,000  386 

Total 116  116  37,050  $211,850  8,501 


THE    REFORMED    PRESBYTERIANS. 

The  Reformed  Presbyterians  of  the  United  States,  of 
whom  there  are  several  branches,  are  ecclesiastically  de- 
scended from  the  Cameronians,  or  Reformed  Presbyte- 
rians of  Scotland,  otherwise  called  Covenanters.  The  first 
presbytery  in  Scotland  was  organized  in  1743.  Eight 
years  later  the   first  Covenanter   minister   arrived  in  this 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS.  309 

country,  and  in  1774  the  first  presbytery  of  this  church  in 
America  was  constituted.  A  few  years  later  the  members 
of  this  presbytery,  joining  with  a  number  of  seceders,  as 
they  were  called,  also  a  Scottish  Presbyterian  division, 
organized  the  Associate  Reformed  Church.  A  division  in 
this  body  resulted  in  the  formation  of  the  Reformed  Dis- 
senting Presbytery,  and  the  original  Presbytery  being  re- 
suscitated, there  were  before  the  close  of  the  century  three 
branches  of  Reformed  Presbyterians. 

The  question  of  the  relation  of  the  Christian  Church  to 
civil  government  has  ever  been  a  prominent  one  among 
Reformed  Presbyterians.  All  accept  the  Westminster 
Confession  of  Faith  and  form  of  church  government,  and 
all  occupy  an  attitude  of  protest  against  civil  governments 
which  do  not  recognize  the  headship  of  Christ  and  the 
authority  of  God  and  his  law.  They  differ,  however, 
among  themselves  as  to  the  extent  to  which  this  protest 
should  be  carried.  Some  refuse,  because  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States  does  not  acknowledge  the  existence 
of  Almighty  God,  the  supremacy  of  Christ,  and  the  au- 
thority of  the  Scripture,  to  '*  incorporate  with  the  political 
body,"  and  hence  do  not  participate  in  elections  and  in 
certain  other  political  rights  and  duties.  Others  continue 
to  protest  against  **  a  godless  government,"  but  do  not  re- 
frain from  voting.  The  Reformed  Presbyterians  deem  the 
influence  of  secret  societies  pernicious,  and  forbid  commu- 
nicants all  connection  with  them.  They  do  not  use  modern 
hymns,  but  sing  psalms  only.  They  were  always  opposed 
to  slavery.  In  1800,  when  attention  was  called  to  the  fact 
that  some  of  the  members  owned  slaves,  the  presbytery 
enacted,  without  a  dissenting  voice,  that  "'  no  slaveholder 
should  be  allowed  the  communion  of  the  church." 


3IO    RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 

9. — THE   SYNOD    OF   THE    REFORMED    PRESBYTERIAN 
CHURCH. 

In  1809  a  synod  was  organized.  A  motion  brought 
before  this  body  in  1825  to  open  fraternal  correspondence 
with  the  general  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  Church 
being  defeated,  a  number  of  ministers  subsequently  with- 
drew and  joined  the  latter  body.  In  1833  a  division 
occurred,  resulting  in  two  organizations,  both  of  which 
retained  the  same  subordinate  standards  unchanged,  but 
differed  in  the  application  of  them.  The  one,  allowing  its 
members  to  vote  and  hold  office  under  the  government,  is 
known  as  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church  (New  Light) 
or  General  Synod ;  the  other,  still  adhering  to  the  old 
practice,  as  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church  (Old  Light) 
or  Synod. 

The  synod's  *' terms  of  ecclesiastical  communion"  em- 
brace an  acknowledgment  of  the  Scriptures  as  the  word  of 
God  and  only  rule  of  faith  and  manners ;  of  the  whole 
doctrine  of  the  Westminster  Confession  and  catechisms  as 
founded  upon  the  Scriptures ;  of  the  divine  right  of  one 
unalterable  form  of  church  government  as  set  forth  by  the 
Westminster  Assembly  ;  of  the  obligation  upon  the  church 
of  the  covenant  entered  into  in  1 871,  in  which  are  em- 
bodied the  engagement  of  the  national  covenant  and  of 
the  solemn  league  and  covenant,  so  far  as  applicable  in  this 
land.  The  covenant  of  1871  declares  that  those  accepting 
it  are  pledged  to  labor  for  *'  a  constitutional  recognition  of 
God  as  the  source  of  all  power,  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  ruler 
of  nations,  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  as  the  supreme  rule,  and 
of  the  true  Christian  religion,"  and  to  refuse  to  *'  incorpo- 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS. 


311 


rate  by  any  act  with  the  poHtical  body  until  this  blessed 
reformation  is  secured."  The  members  of  this  branch, 
therefore,  do  not  take  part  in  state  or  national  elections. 
They  neither  vote  nor  hold  office. 

The  synod  embraces  1 1  presbyteries,  with  1 1 5  organiza- 
tions and  edifices,  10,574  communicants,  and  church  prop- 
erty valued  at  $1,071,400.  The  average  value  of  its 
edifices  is  $9317,  and  the  average  seating  capacity  323. 
Though  it  is  represented  in  nineteen  States,  more  than  half 
of  its  communicants  are  in  Pennsylvania  and  New  York. 
Three  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  600,  are  occupied. 


Summary  by  States. 


STATES  Organi-  Church  SeaUng 

^-^^^^^^  zations.  Edifices.  p^a-^ 

Alabama i           i  300 

Colorado 3  2  650 

Illinois 5  5  1,575 

Indiana 3  3  850 

Iowa 9  9  2,760 

Kansas 9  7  1,750 

Maine i           i  300 

Maryland i           i  250 

Massachusetts 2  2  Ij35o 

Michigan 2  2  550 

Minnesota 4  3  1,000 

Missouri 2          i  350 

Nebraska i           i  350 

New  York 18  19  8,030 

Ohio 14  16  4,160 

Pennsylvania 33  35  11,180 

Vermont 5          5  1,240 

West  Virginia i           i  200 

Wisconsin   i           i  250 

Total 115  115  37,095 


Value  of 

Com- 

Church 

muni- 

Property. 

cants. 

$1,500 

76 

4,500 

142 

16,000 

5.36 

11,000 

246 

21,900 

984 

15,000 

75« 

4,000 

19 

15,000 

65 

100,000 

400 

6,000 

197 

2,800 

145 

10,000 

100 

3,500 

51 

459,500 

2,328 

55,600 

951 

324,500 

3,272 

17,900 

222 

700 

20 

2,000 

62 

$1,071,400     10,574 


312     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Presbyteries. 

c\^r.^^\  r-v-.-v^T,  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

PRESBYTERiES.              O/?^"'"  Sw=         ^a-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices,  p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Illinois 9  9  2,775  $35j000  776 

Iowa 12  II  3j3Io  I9)7oo  916 

Kansas 16  12  3,450  30,000  1,291 

Lakes 9  9  2,730  35, 000  768 

Maine i  i           300  4,000  19 

New  York 15  16  7,900  517,500  2,351 

Ohio 8  10  2,180  25,800  472 

Philadelphia 5  5  1,880  88,000  789 

Pittsburg 30  32  9,850  256,500  2,593 

Rochester 5  5  1,480  42,000  t^-ji 

Vermont 5  5  1,240  17,900  222 


Total 115       115      37,095     $1,071,400      10,574 

10. — THE    GENERAL    SYNOD    OF   THE    REFORMED 
PRESBYTERIAN    CHURCH. 

This  is  the  other  body  resulting  from  the  division  of  the 
Reformed  Presbyterian  Church  in  1833.  They  used  to  be 
popularly  distinguished  as  "  New  Lights."  The  general 
synod  holds  equally  with  the  synod  to  the  Westminster 
standards,  to  the  headship  of  Christ  over  nations,  to  the 
doctrine  of  '*  public  social  covenanting,"  to  the  exclusive 
use  of  the  psalms  in  singing,  to  restricted  communion  in 
the  use  of  the  sacraments,  and  to  the  principle  of  "  dissent 
from  all  immoral  civil  institutions,"  but  allows  its  members 
to  decide  for  themselves  whether  the  government  of  this 
country  should  be  regarded  as  an  immoral  institution,  and 
thus  determine  what  duties  of  citizenship  devolve  upon 
them.  They  may  therefore  exercise  the  franchise  and  hold 
office,  provided  they  do  not  in  these  civil  acts  violate  the 
principle  that  forbids  connection  with  immoral  institutions. 
Many  of  them  do  participate  in  elections.      Negotiations 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS. 


313 


for  the  union  of  the  general  synod  and  the  synod  failed  in 
1890,  because  the  latter  would  not  agree  to  a  basis  which 
interpreted  the  phrase  *'  incorporate  with  the  political 
body  "  as  meaning  '*  such  incorporation  as  involves  sinful 
compliance  with  the  religious  defects  of  the  written  consti- 
tution as  it  now  stands,  either  in  holding  such  offices  as 
require  an  oath  to  support  the  constitution  or  in  voting  for 
men  to  administer  such  offices." 

The  general  synod  embraces  5  presbyteries,  with  33 
organizations,  the  same  number  of  edifices,  valued  at 
$469,000,  and  4602  communicants.  The  average  seating 
capacity  of  its  edifices  is  375,  and  their  average  value 
$14,212,  which  is  an  extremely  high  figure.  One  hall, 
with  a  seating  capacity  of  100,  is  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 

n-rro.,;      r^-.-^v.       Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  2..fr="   S^fi'J  ^^-  Church  muni- 

zations.   Edifices.       p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Illinois 6  6  2,150  $16,400  590 

Indiana 2  2  450  2,400  82 

Iowa 2  I  180  1,000  33 

Kansas '. .  . .  .  11  150  800  65 

New  York 6  6  2,650  123,000  624 

Ohio 2  2  1,100  36,500  340 

Pennsylvania 11  12  4,900  283,500  2,685 

Tennessee i  i  200  400  18 

Vermont 2  2  600  5,000  165 

Total 33      33        12,380        $469,000        4,602 

Summary  by  Presbyteries. 

PRESBYTERIES. 

Northern  8  8  3,250  $128,000  789 

Ohio 3  3  1,300  38,000  400 

Philadelphia 6  6  3,250  185,500  2,103 

Pittsburg 5  6  1,650  98,000  582 

Western 11  10  2,930  19,500  728 

Total -^-^      33        12,380        $469,000        4,602 


314   religious  forces  of  the  united  states. 

ii. — the  reformed  presbyterian  church 
(covenanted). 

This  body  was  organized  in  1840  by  two  ministers  and 
three  elders  who  withdrew  from  the  synod,  or  the  branch 
known  as  the  **  Old  Lights,"  on  the  ground  that  the  latter 
maintained  sinful  ecclesiastical  relations  and  patronized  or 
indorsed  moral  reform  societies  with  which  persons  of  any 
religion  or  no  religion  were  connected.  Its  terms  of  com- 
munion are  somewhat  stricter  than  those  of  the  synod.  It 
is  a  small  body,  having  only  4  organizations,  with  37 
members,  divided  among  three  States. 

Summary  by  States. 


S:ScS.  Ca.-  Church  .nuni. 


Seating  Value  of  Com- 

Ca-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 


New  York i  ...  7 

Ohio I  I  200         20 

Pennsylvania 2  ...  10 


Total 4  I  200         37 


12. — THE    REFORMED    PRESBYTERIAN    CHURCH    IN    THE 
UNITED    STATES    AND    CANADA. 

This  body  was  organized  in  1883,  in  consequence  of 
dissatisfaction  with  the  treatment  of  a  question  of  discipline 
by  the  general  synod  of  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church 
(New  Lights).  In  the  matter  of  participation  in  elections 
it  holds  with  the  general  synod,  and  contrary  to  the 
synod,  that  Christians  may  vote  and  be  voted  for,  regard- 
ing the  republic  as  essentially  a  Christian  republic.      It  has 


THE  PRESBYTERIANS.  315 

but  600  members  in  the  United  States,  who  belong  to  one 
congregation  in  Allegheny  County,  Pennsylvania. 

Summary. 

n..rro«:      r»,.,..-.v.            Seating            Value  of  Com- 

PRESBYTERY.                 ?/£";-    Church                 (.^_«               ^^^^^^  ^^^j, 

zations.    Edifices.           p^^j^^             Property.  cants. 

Pittsburg I             I             800          $75,000  600 


Summary  by  States  of  All  Presbyterians. 

STATES. 

Alabama 385  327  97,475  $819,255  21,502 

Alaska 5  4  1,100  7j75o  481 

Arizona 7  3  850  13,900  188 

Arkansas  419  274  84,125  357,685  18,022 

California 263  211  59,771  1,895,675  18,934 

Colorado 88  69  17,875  643,550  6,968 

Connecticut 8  10  4,300  443,500  1,864 

Delaware 32  43  14,970  709,800  4,622 

Dist.  of  Columbia  16  20  11,600  950,000  5,128 

Florida 107  95  22,265  484,650  4,574 

Georgia 201  193  61,564  776,025  14,538 

Idaho 19  15  2,275  40,950  815 

Illinois 752  736  241,404  4,649,410  77,213 

Indiana 389  412  132,653  2,610,200  43,351 

Indian  Territory  .  136  106  21,818  59,158  3, 661 

Iowa 518  490  131,892  1,848,000  40,528 

Kansas     521  359  9^^934  1,299,260  3^,393 

Kentucky 507  464  148,020  2,045,870  40,880 

Louisiana 88  72  24,035  454,035  5,864 

Maine 3  4  1,100  12,000  224 

Maryland 93  109  38,555  1,752,424  12,483 

Massachusetts  ...  27  27  14,075  530,500  5,105 

Michigan 252  243  79,450  2,242,236  25,931 

Minnesota 185  170  44,966  1,329,910  15,055 

Mississippi 352  299  86,369  530,290  18,250 

Missouri 776  609  198,421  2,789,652  53, 510 

Montana 24  18  4,150  88,000  1,232 

Nebraska 278  189  41,981  691,939  15,065 

Nevada 8  4  865  1 1,400  275 

New  Hampshire  .  8  9  3,150  34,800  956 

New  Jersey 307  427  171,732  6,800,000  59,464 

New  Mexico 39  17  2,815  45,675  1,275 

New  York 903  1,047  420,977  22,727,192  168,564 


3l6     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 
Summary  by.  States  of  All  Presbyterians. — Contmited. 


Organi- 

STATES.  ^,?r„e 

zations. 


North  Carolina  . .  411 

North  Dakota  .  . .  100 

Ohio   828 

Oklahoma 21 

Oregon loi 

Pennsylvania  ....  1,365 

Rhode  Island  ....  5 

South  Carolina  . .  339 

South  Dakota 134 

Tennessee 864 

Texas 816 

Utah 20 

Vermont 1*8 

Virginia  313 

Washington 99 

West  Virginia  . .  .  140 

Wisconsin 180 

Wyoming 6 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

399 

130.785 

$818,745 

36,102 

49 

9,600 

128,025 

3,044 

849 

287,420 

6,722,875 

103,607 

9 

1,850 

14,000 

550 

76 

19,092 

463,500 

5,244 

1,506 

576,018 

19,146,130 

216,248 

5 

1,785 

76,000 

828 

347 

106,000 

896,635 

26,118 

89 

14,896 

162,840 

4,778 

779 

250,536 

2,002,605 

66,573 

446 

138,707 

1,241,485 

37,811 

31 

5,180 

212,975 

688 

16 

4,215 

50,400 

1,267 

369 

106,967 

1,234,501 

27,746 

70 

16,860 

365,875 

4,343 

150 

43,270 

581,150 

10,952 

199 

45,977 

1,004,355 

14,154 

5 

960 

52,250 

364 

Total 13,476   12,469  4,038,650  $94,869,097   1,278,332 


CHAPTER    XXXII. 

PROTESTANT    EPISCOPAL    BODIES. 

I. — THE    PROTESTANT    EPISCOPAL    CHURCH. 

The  beginnings  of  the  Church  of  England  in  this  coun- 
try reach  back  into  the  sixteenth  century,  although  the 
Protestant  Episcopal  Church  was  not  formally  organized 
as  an  independent  branch  until  1785.  Clergymen  of  the 
Church  of  England  accompanied  the  early  colonists  of 
North  Carolina  across  the  sea,  one  of  whom  baptized  an 
Indian  chief  in  1587  in  a  colony  unsuccessfully  begun  by 
Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  and  also,  about  the  same  time,  the 
first  white  Christian  born  in  that  colony.  It  is  probable 
that  the  Rev.  Francis  Fletcher,  who  accompanied,  as  chap- 
lain, the  expedition  of  Sir  Francis  Drake  to  the  Pacific 
Coast,  held  services  on  Cahfornia  soil  as  early  as  1579. 
He  officiated  for  six  weeks  in  the  neighborhood  of  Drake's 
Bay.  In  1607  worship  according  to  the  Anglican  ritual 
was  established  in  the  new  colonies  at  Jamestown,  Va., 
and  Kennebec,  Me.  It  was  soon  discontinued  in  Maine, 
but  in  Virginia  it  was  not  interrupted.  An  Episcopal 
congregation  was  gathered  in  New  Hampshire  in  1 631, 
and  parishes  were  formed  in  other  parts  of  New  England 
and  the  Middle  States  in  the  early  colonial  days,  Trinity 
parish.  New  York  City,  being  constituted  in  1693,  and 
Christ  Church  parish,  in  Philadelphia,  in  1695.  The 
church  became  the  established  church  in  New  York,  New 

317 


3l8     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF  THE   UNITED   STATES. 

Jersey,  Maryland,  Virginia,  South  Carolina,  and  Georgia. 
In  Virginia,  for  a  considerable  period,  no  other  form  of 
worship  was  tolerated.  In  Massachusetts,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  Anglican  service  was  not  allowed  until  liberty 
for  it  was  secured  by  royal  proclamation  in  1662.  The 
Episcopal  Church  received  considerable  assistance  from 
England,  particularly  from  the  Society  for  the  Propaga- 
tion of  the  Gospel,  organized  in  1701,  which  sent  over 
many  missionaries.  It  is  said  that  at  the  beginning  of 
the  Revolutionary  War  the  society  was  maintaining  about 
eighty  missionaries  in  the  colonies. 

At  the  close  of  the  struggle  resulting  in  American  inde- 
pendence many  of  the  parishes  were  without  ministerial 
oversight.  Some  of  the  clergymen  had  left  the  country 
during  the  war,  returning  to  England  or  going  north  to 
the  British  provinces.  In  Virginia,  where  at  the  outbreak 
of  the  war  there  had  been  164  churches  and  chapels  and 
91  clergymen,  it  was  found  in  1784  that  95  parishes  were 
either  extinct  or  forsaken,  and  only  28  clergymen  remained. 
At  a  conference  of  clergymen  and  laymen  from  New  York, 
New  Jersey,  and  Pennsylvania,  held  in  New  Brunswick, 
N.  J.,  in  May,  1784,  steps  were  taken  to  form  *' a  conti- 
nental representation  of  the  Episcopal  Church."  In  the 
following  October  a  convention,  representing  Delaware  and 
Maryland,  in  addition  to  the  three  States  above  named, 
assembled  in  New  York  City,  and  resolved  to  *'  recommend 
to  the  clergy  and  congregations  of  their  communion"  that 
"  there  be  a  general  convention  of  the  Episcopal  Church  "  ; 
that  the  first  meeting  of  the  convention  be  held  in  Phila- 
delphia in  September,  1785;  and  that  clerical  and  lay 
deputies  be  appointed  by  the  Episcopal  churches  in  the 
several  States,  "  duly  instructed  and  authorized  "  to  take 


PROTESTANT  EPISCOPAL  BODIES.  319 

part  in  its  deliberations.  At  the  convention  of  1785  a 
committee  was  appointed  to  draft  a  constitution,  to  pre- 
pare such  alterations  in  the  liturgy  as  were  necessary,  and 
to  report  a  plan  for  securing  the  consecration  of  bishops. 
All  of  these  matters  were  considered  by  the  committee, 
and  the  convention  acted  upon  the  several  reports  it  made. 
The  first  Episcopal  consecration  was  that  of  Bishop  Sea- 
bury,  of  Connecticut,  which  took  place  in  Aberdeen,  Scot- 
land, in  1784,  the  Scottish  bishops  officiating.  In  1787 
Drs.  William  White  and  Samuel  Provoost  were  consecrated 
bishops  in  London,  by  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.  The 
consecration  of  Bishop  Seabury  was  recognized  by  the 
general  convention  of  i  789,  and  the  church  was  thus  fully 
organized  and  fully  equipped,  with  bishops  of  the  Scottish 
and  English  succession,  a  constitution,  a  general  convention, 
and  a  prayer-book.  When  the  general  convention  of  1 792 
was  held,  it  was  estimated  that  there  were  in  this  country 
about  200  clergymen.  The  church  developed  quite  slowly 
until  after  the  first  quarter  of  the  present  century.  The 
clerical  list  reported  at  the  convention  of  1832  contained 
nearly  600  names;  three  years  later  it  had  swelled  to  763, 
and  in  1838  it  reached  951.  In  the  next  thirty  years  this 
number  was  considerably  more  than  doubled.  It  now  has 
52  dioceses  and  13  missionary  jurisdictions,  besides  5  mis- 
sionary jurisdictions  in  foreign  lands.  The  number  of  its 
bishops  is  75. 

The  doctrinal  symbols  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal 
Church  are  the  Apostles'  and  the  Nicene  creeds,  together 
with  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England 
slightly  altered. 

The  legislative  authority  of  the  church  is  vested  in  a 
general  convention,  which  meets  triennially.     The  conven- 


320     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

tion  consists  of  two  houses,  the  house  of  bishops  and  the 
house  of  clerical  and  lay  deputies.  The  deputies  are 
elected  by  diocesan  conventions.  Every  diocese,  regard- 
less of  the  number  of  clergymen  and  communicants  within 
its  bounds,  is  entitled  to  eight  deputies,  four  clerical  and 
four  lay.  The  concurrence  of  both  orders  in  the  house  of 
deputies  and  the  consent  of  both  houses  are  necessary  to 
the  enactment  of  legislation.  The  general  convention  has 
the  power  to  adopt,  alter,  or  repeal  canons  pertaining  to 
the  regulation  of  the  general  affairs  of  the  church,  to  ratify 
measures  for  the  erection  of  new  dioceses,  and  to  make 
alterations  in  the  constitution  and  Book  of  Common  Prayer 
under  certain  restrictions.  It  is  the  supreme  legislative, 
executive,  and  judicial  power.  The  legislation  of  the  gen- 
eral convention  is  in  the  form  of  canons,  which  are  arranged 
under  four  titles : 

**  I.   Of  the  orders  in  the  ministry  and  of  the  doctrine 
and  worship  of  the  church. 
*'  II.    Of  discipline. 

*'  III.   Of  the  organized  bodies  and  officers  of  the  church. 

"  IV.   Miscellaneous  provisions." 

There  is  in  each  diocese  a  convention  consisting  of  the 
clergy  and  representatives  of  the  laity.  The  bishop  of  the 
diocese  is  the  presiding  officer.  The  diocesan  convention 
has  power  to  provide  by  legislation  for  such  diocesan  mat- 
ters as  are  not  regulated  by  the  general  canons  of  the 
church.  The  unit  of  the  diocese  is  the  parish,  with  its 
rector,  churchwardens,  vestrymen,  and  congregation.  The 
vestrymen  are  the  trustees  and  hold  the  property  for  the 
corporation.  The  wardens,  of  whom  there  are  usually  two, 
represent  the  body  of  the  parish,  and  have  charge  of  the 
records,  collect  the  alms,  and  look  after  the  repairs  of  the 
church.    Vestry  meetings,  to  be  valid,  require  the  presence 


PROTESTANT  EPISCOPAL  BODIES.  32  I 

of  at  least  one  warden.  The  rector,  who  must  be  a  priest, 
presides,  and  has  exclusive  direction  of  the  spiritual  affairs 
of  the  church. 

Three  orders  are  recognized  in  the  ministry :  bishops, 
priests,  deacons.  A  bishop  is  elected  by  the  diocesan  con- 
vention and  consecrated  by  bishops  after  consent  has  been 
given  by  the  standing  committees  of  the  various  dioceses 
and  by  the  bishops.  He  licenses  lay  readers,  ordains  dea- 
cons and  priests,  administers  the  right  of  confirmation  to 
members,  institutes  rectors,  and  is  required  to  visit  every 
parish  in  his  diocese  at  least  once  in  three  years. 

The  number  of  organizations  is  5019;  of  church  edifices, 
5019,  which  have  an  aggregate  value  of  $81,220,317. 
Worship  is  also  held  in  312  halls,  etc.,  with  an  aggregate 
seating  capacity  of  28,007.  There  are  in  all  532,054  com- 
municants. Of  these  New  York  reports  the  largest  number 
(127,218)  among  the  States.  Pennsylvania  comes  second, 
with  54,720;  New  Jersey  third,  with  30,103;  Massachu- 
setts fourth,  with  26,855  ^  ^^"^d  Connecticut  fifth,  with 
26,652.  Maryland  has  more  than  Virginia,  and  the  Dis- 
trict of  Columbia  a  larger  number  than  Alabama,  Arkan- 
sas, Florida,  Georgia,  Kentucky,  Louisiana,  Mississippi,  or 
any  of  the  other  Southern  States,  excepting  only  North 
Carolina  and  Virginia.  The  church  is  represented  in  all 
the  States  and  Territories.  The  largest  diocese  is  that  of 
New  York,  with  53,593  communicants.  Pennsylvania  comes 
second,  with  33,459;  Maryland  third,  with  28,273;  and 
Massachusetts  fourth,  with  26,855.  There  are  51  dio- 
ceses, besides  a  number  of  missions  and  missionary  juris- 
dictions. The  multiplication  of  dioceses  has  been  quite 
rapid  in  the  last  quarter  of  a  century. 

The  average  seating  capacity  of  the  church  edifices  is 
266,  and  the  average  value  $16,182. 


322     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. 


Alabama 

Alaska 

Arizona 

Arkansas 

California 

Colorado .  . 

Connecticut 

Delaware 

Dist.  of  Columbia 

Florida 

Georgia 

Idaho 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Kentucky 

Louisiana 

Maine 

Maryland  ...... 

Massachusetts  . . . 

Michigan 

Minnesota 

Mississippi 

Missouri 

Montana 

Nebraska 

Nevada  

New  Hampshire  . 

New  Jersey 

New  Mexico 

New  York 

North  Carolina  .  . 

North  Dakota 

Ohio 

Oklahoma 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania  .... 
Rhode  Island.  .  .  . 
South  Carolina  .  . 
South  Dakota  . . . 
Tennessee 


Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices, 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

58 

59 

16,755 

$655,752 

6,085 

I 

I 

200 

1,200 

6 

9 

4 

800 

24,216 

179 

30 

28 

7,575 

196,122 

2,381 

103 

95 

19,700 

1,019,695 

9,221 

52 

44 

8,663 

700,065 

3,814 

161 

187 

64,275 

3,403,170 

26,652 

3« 

44 

11,215 

371,500 

2,719 

18 

28 

10,825 

790,500 

7,476 

100 

84 

13,569 

390,561 

4,225 

46 

50 

13,282 

492,300 

5,515 

13 



364 

186 

179 

47,523 

2,117,275 

19,099 

6.5 

61 

15,660 

537,600 

5,185 

105 

77 

17,385 

887,400 

6,481 

96 

48 

9,090 

316,225 

3,593 

47 

57 

34,935 

758,800 

7,161 

85 

65 

15,099 

387,950 

5,162 

38 

37 

10,342 

406,590 

3,291 

166 

244 

62,553 

2,381,406 

23,938 

166 

172 

57,613 

4,676,193 

26,855 

189 

175 

46,639 

1,645.551 

18,034 

171 

148 

27,070 

931,100 

11,142 

68 

61 

13,589 

322,960 

3,560 

III 

84 

23,035 

952,600 

8,828 

30 

22 

2,375 

165,450 

1,104 

no 

68 

11,665 

580,145 

4,036 

9 

9 

1,825 

19,500 

535 

44 

46 

10,550 

541,400 

2,911 

184 

234 

62,125 

3,815,850 

30,103 

16 

6 

1,140 

41,165 

373 

731 

827 

252,343 

30,862,213 

127,218 

178 

161 

34,721 

545,010 

8,186 

39 

892 

166 

184 

49,419 

2,069,787 

17,454 

4 

2 

325 

4,000 

105 

31 

25 

4,014 

361,930 

1,849 

369 

418 

134,967 

10,854,131 

54,720 

50 

61 

20,949 

1,189,700 

9,458 

94 

88 

21,041 

571,833 

5,742 

83 

69 

9,295 

234,532 

2,649 

69 

63 

16,275 

575,900 

5,671 

PROTESTANT  EPISCOPAL  BODIES.  323 


Summary  by  States. — Coittinued. 


Organi-     Church 
zations.    Edifices. 


Texas 139  no 

Utah 10  10 

Vermont 62,  56 

Virginia 245  330 

Washington 23  18 

West  Virginia  ....  61  63 

Wisconsin  133  117 

Wyoming 16 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

23,120 

$624,900 

7,097 

1,525 

71,250 

751 

13,087 

472,050 

4,335 

79,340 

1,697,375 

20,371 

3,731 

242,800 

1,698 

13,898 

276,687 

2,906 

21,830 

1,035,978 

10,457 
467 

Total 5,019  5,019  1,336,952  $81,220,317  532,054 

Summary  by  Dioceses  and  Missions. 

DIOCESES. 

Alabama 58  59  16,755  $655,752  6,085 

Albany 143  153  41,796  2,323,600  18,556 

Arkansas ^o  28  7,575  196,122  2,381 

California 76  70  15,375  9oo,353  8,107 

Central  New  York.  152  158^  40,362  1,873,500  16,159 

Cent'l  Pennsylvania  117  141  37,870  2,211,115  10,658 

Chicago 90  88  26,688  1,721,050  13,597 

Colorado 52  44  8,663  700,065  3,814 

Connecticut 161  187  64,275  3,403,170  26,652 

Delaware 38  44  11,215  37i, 500  2,719 

East  Carolina 51  49  13,125  243,910  3,351 

Easton 37  68  12,636  338,762  3,141 

Florida 100  84  13,569  390,561  4,225 

Fond  du  Lac 57  42  9,105  190,150  3,751 

Georgia 46  50  13,282  492,300  5,515 

Indiana 65  61  15,660  537,600  5,185 

Iowa 105  Jj  17,385  887,400  6,481 

Kansas 96  48  9,090  316,225  3,593 

Kentucky 47  57  34>935  758,800  7,161 

Long  Island no  147  43,642  4,868,500  23,690 

Louisiana ....  85  65  15,099  387,950  5,162 

Maine 38  37  10,342  406,590  3,291 

Maryland 147  204  60,742  2,833,144  28,273 

Massachusetts....  166  172  57,613  4,676,193  26,855 

Michigan 126  123  33,771  1,301,580  13, 559 

Milwaukee 76  75  12,725  845,828  6,706 

Minnesota 171  148  27,070  931,100  11,142 

Mississippi 68  61  13,589  322,960  3,560 


324     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 
Summary  by  Dioceses  and  Missions. — Continued. 

T.TnrRc:,.c  Organi- 


Missouri i  ii 

Nebraska 56 

Newark 78 

New  Hampshire.  . .  44 

New  Jersey 106 

New  York 210 

North  Carolina  ...  127 

Ohio , 99 

Oregon 31 

Pennsylvania 139 

Pittsburg 113 

Quincy 40 

Rhode  Island 50 

South  Carolina. ...  94 

Southern  Ohio ....  67 

Springfield 56 

Tennessee 69 

Texas 51 

Vermont 63 

Virginia 245 

Western  Michigan.  63 

Western  New  York  116 

West  Virginia  ....  61 

MISSIONS. 

Alaska i 

Montana 30 

Nevada  and  Utah .  .  19 

New    Mexico    and 

Arizona 25 

North  Dakota 39 

Northern  California  27 

Northern  Texas.  .  .  39 

Oklahoma  and  In- 
dian Territory  . .  4 

South  Dakota 86 

The  Platte 51 

Washington 23 

Western  Texas  ...  49 

Wyom'g  and  Idaho  29 

Total 5,019   5,019  1,336,952  $81,220,317    532,054 


""l,,,-,.T, 

Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

84 

23,035 

$952,600 

8,828 

50 

9,285 

492,725 

2,916 

98 

29,343 

2,370,300 

15,805 

46 

10,550 

541,400 

2,911 

136 

32,782 

1,445,550 

14,298 

251 

91,240 

19,662,450 

53,593 

112 

21,596 

301,100 

4,835 

109 

30,515 

1,101,100 

9,946 

25 

4,014 

361,930 

1,849 

165 

70,202 

6,868,971 

33,459 

112 

26,895 

1,774,045 

10,603 

39 

10,960 

172,500 

2,201 

61 

20,949 

1,189,700 

9,458 

88 

21,041 

571,833 

5,742 

75 

18,904 

968,687 

7,508 

52 

9,875 

223,725 

3,301 

63 

16,275 

575,900 

5,671 

47 

11,130 

305,200 

3,229 

S6 

13,087 

472,050 

4,335 

330 

79,340 

1,697,375 

20,371 

52 

12,868 

343,971 

4,475 

117 

35,303 

2,134,163 

15,220 

63 

13,898 

276,687 

2,906 

I 

200 

1,200 

6 

22 

2,375 

165,450 

1,104 

19 

3,350 

90,750 

1,286 

io>^ 

1,940 

65,381 

552 
892 

25 

4,325 

119,342 

1,114 

31 

6,060 

187,350 

2,037 

2 

325 

4,000 

105 

72 

9,625 

244,632 

2,937 

15 

2,050 

77,320 

832 

18 

3,731 

242,800 

1,698 

32 

5,930 

132,350 

1,831 
831 

PROTESTANT  EPISCOPAL  BODIES,  325 

2. — THE    REFORMED    EPISCOPAL   CHURCH. 

This  body  was  organized  in  1873.  Bishop  Cummins, 
of  Kentucky,  withdrew  from  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant 
Episcopal  Church  that  year,  in  consequence  of  certain  crit- 
icisms which  had  been  uttered  respecting  his  participation 
in  a  union  communion  service  in  connection  with  the  Sixth 
Conference  of  the  EvangeHcal  Alliance.  Bishop  Cummins 
met,  in  December,  1873,  with  seven  clergymen  and  twenty 
laymen  in  the  city  of  New  York,  and  it  was  resolved  to 
inaugurate  a  separate  movement.  Bishop  Cummins  was 
chosen  presiding  officer  of  the  new  church,  and  the  Rev. 
C.  E.  Cheney,  D.D.,  of  Chicago,  was  elected  bishop,  and 
subsequently  consecrated  by  Bishop  Cummins.  A  decla- 
ration of  principles  was  adopted  setting  forth  the  views 
of  the  new  body  respecting  doctrine,  polity,  worship,  and 
discipline.     These  principles  were  as  follows : 

"  I.  The  Reformed  Episcopal  Church,  holding  *  the  faith 
once  delivered  unto  the  saints,'  declares  its  belief  in  the 
Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  as  the 
Word  of  God  and  the  sole  rule  of  faith  and  practice ;  in 
the  creed  *  commonly  called  the  Apostles'  Creed  ' ;  in  the 
divine  institution  of  the  sacraments  of  baptism  and  the 
Lord's  Supper;  and  in  the  doctrines  of  grace  substantially 
as  they  are  set  forth  in  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  of  Religion. 

*'  II.  This  church  recognizes  and  adheres  to  Episcopacy, 
not  as  of  divine  right,  but  as  a  very  ancient  and  desirable 
form  of  church  polity. 

"  III.  This  church,  retaining  a  liturgy  which  shall  not 
be  imperative  or  repressive  of  freedom  in  prayer,  accepts 
the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  as  it  was  revised,  proposed, 
and  recommended  for  use  by  the  general  convention  of 


326     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church,  A. D.  1785,  reserving  full 
liberty  to  alter,  abridge,  enlarge,  and  amend  the  same, 
as  may  seem  most  conducive  to  the  edification  of  the 
people,  '  provided  that  the  substance  of  the  faith  be  kept 
entire.' 

"  IV.  This  Church  condemns  and  rejects  the  following 
erroneous  and  strange  doctrines  as  contrary  to  God's  Word  : 

"  First,  that  the  Church  of  Christ  exists  only  in  one  order 
or  form  of  ecclesiastical  polity ; 

*'  Second,  that  Christian  ministers  are  '  priests  '  in  another 
sense  than  that  in  which  all  believers  are  '  a  royal  priest- 
hood ' ; 

"  Third,  that  the  Lord's  Table  is  an  altar  on  which  the 
oblation  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  is  ofifered  anew  to 
the  Father; 

*'  Fourth,  that  the  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per is  a  presence  in  the  elements  of  bread  and  wine ; 

'*  Fifth,  that  regeneration  is  inseparably  connected  with 
baptism." 

At  a  general  council  of  the  Reformed  Episcopal  Church, 
held  at  Chicago,  111.,  in  May,  1874,  articles  of  religion  were 
adopted,  thirty-five  in  number.  They  follow  closely  the 
Anglican  articles  of  religion,  with  such  changes  as  are  in- 
dicated by  the  principles  adopted  in  1873.  -^t  the  same 
meeting  of  the  general  council  a  revised  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  was  also  adopted.  The  church  recognizes  but  two 
orders  in  the  ministry,  that  of  presbyter  and  that  of  deacon. 
It  holds  that  the  episcopate  is  not  an  order  but  an  office, 
the  bishop  being  simply  first  presbyter.  The  bishops  do 
not  constitute  a  separate  house  in  the  general  council  as  in 
the  general  convention  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church. 
They  preside  over  synods  or  jurisdictions,  which  correspond 


PROTESTANT  EPISCOPAL   BODIES.  327 

more  or  less  closely  to  dioceses  and   jurisdictions  of   the 
Protestant  Episcopal  Church. 

The  Reformed  Episcopal  Church  has  83  organizations, 
84  church  edifices,  valued  at  $1,615,101,  and  8455  com- 
municants. It  is  represented  in  twelve  States,  including 
Virginia  and  South  Carolina,  and  it  has  two  synods  and 
three  missionary  jurisdictions.  The  average  seating  capac- 
ity of  the  edifices  is  285,  and  their  average  value  $19,227. 
There  are  2  halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  300. 

Summary  by  States. 

r\         •      OL      1-        Seating             Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                       O""?^"'-    B""^^            Ca-                  Church  muni- 

zations.    Edifices.        p^^j^             Property.  cants. 

Delaware 2           2             650         $16,500  139 

Illinois 10         10         4,250         225,800  1,755 

Maryland 4           5          1,375            46,000  285 

Massachusetts 2           2             850           44,000  311 

Michigan  2           2             350             8,100  102 

Missouri 2           2             650            25,000  125 

New  Jersey 2           2             725           44)5oo  3^6 

New  York 4           4          1,775          280,400  743 

Ohio 3           2          1, 100           33,700  257 

Pennsylvania 13         15          5,800         870,000  2,640 

Virginia 2           2             425              2,700  49 

South  Carolina  (col- 
ored)        37         36         5>975           18,401  1,723 

Total Z2,        84       23,925    $1,615,101  8,455 

Summary  by  Synods. 

SYNODS, 

Chicago 13         12         4,850       $220,800  1,684 

New  York  and  Phila- 
delphia           23         25         9,800   »i, 255, 400  4jI59 

Missionary  Jurisdic- 
tion of  the  South .         6           7          1,800           48,700  334 

Missionary  Jurisdic- 
tion of  tire  West 

and  Northwest ..  .         4          4          1,500           71,800  555 

Special  Missionary 
Jurisdiction  of  the 

South  (colored)  .  .       37         36         5,975            18,401  1,723 

Total 83         84       23,925    $1,615,101  8,455 


328     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

The  totals  of  the  two  bodies  are:  Organizations,  5102; 
church  edifices,  5103;  seating  capacity,  1,360,877;  vakie 
of  church  property,  $82,835,418;  communicants,  540,509. 

The  Reformed  Episcopal  Church  adds  no  considerable 
number  to  the  communicants  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal 
Church,  except  in  Pennsylvania  (2640),  Illinois  (1755),  and 
South  Carolina  (1723).  It  contributes  to  the  total  valua^ 
tion  of  church  property  upward  of  $1,600,000. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

THE    REFORMED    BODIES. 

There  are  three  Reformed  churches  in  the  United 
States,  the  chief  of  which  are  the  Reformed  Church  in 
America  and  the  Reformed  Church  in  the  United  States. 
The  Reformed  churches  belong  to  the  Presbyterian  fam- 
ily in  poHty  and  doctrine,  though  their  standards  are  not 
those  of  Westminster  and  their  ecclesiastical  terms  differ 
somewhat  from  those  generally  used  by  the  Presbyte- 
rian churches.  They  have  consistories  instead  of  sessions, 
classes  instead  of.  presbyteries,  and  general  synods  instead 
of  general  assemblies.  The  origin  of  the  Reformed  Church 
in  America  is  traced  to  the  Reformed  Church  of  Holland ; 
that  of  the  Reformed  Church  in  the  United  States  to  the 
Reformed  Church  in  Germany.  For  the  sake  of  distinction 
the  former  is  popularly  called  the  Reformed  Dutch  and  the 
latter  the  Reformed  German  Church.  These  two  bodies, 
both  of  which  looked  for  aid  and  direction  to  the  classis  of 
Amsterdam  until  late  in  the  eighteenth  century,  agreed  in 
1 89 1,  through  their  general  synods,  upon  a  plan  of  federal 
union,  by  which,  if  it  should  be  ratified  by  the  classes, 
while  each  retained  its  autonomy,  a  community  of  interest 
would  be  established  respecting  missionary  and  educational 
matters,  and  a  federal  synod,  representing  both  churches 
and  having  advisory  powers,  would  be  held  annually.  The 
plan,  however,  failed,  the  classes  of  the  Reformed  Dutch 

329 


330     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

Church  declining  to  ratify  it,   and   the  general   synod  of 
that  body  regretfully  declaring  the  fact,  in  1893. 


I. — THE   REFORMED   CHURCH    IN   AMERICA. 

The  Rev.  Jonas  MichaeHus  organized  in  New  Amster- 
dam, in  1628,  the  first  church  of  this  order  in  this  country. 
It  embraced  fifty  communicants,  ''Walloons  and  Dutch." 
As  the  Dutch  immigrants  settled  along  the  Hudson,  on 
Long  Island,  and  in  New  Jersey,  congregations  of  their 
faith  were  gathered.  A  number  of  these  churches  are  still 
in  existence  upward  of  two  centuries  old.  The  first  organ- 
ization, termed  the  "  ccetus,"  was  formed  in  1747  by  per- 
mission of  the  classis  of  Amsterdam.  It  had  no  ecclesias- 
tical power,  but  was  merely  advisory,  the  classis  reserving 
all  power  to  itself.  In  1755  a  minority  of  the  "  coetus," 
dissatisfied  with  the  assumption  by  that  body  of  larger 
powers,  formed  a  **  conferentie."  This  was  the  beginning 
of  a  sharp  controversy,  which  was  ended  in  1770  in  the 
union  of  the  two  bodies  in  a  self-governing  organization. 
This  system  was  further  developed  in  1793,  and  finally 
perfected  in  the  present  ecclesiastical  government  of  the 
church. 

The  stream  of  Dutch  immigration  ceased  to  flow  in  the 
latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century.  This  fact,  with  cer- 
tain peculiar  difficulties  encountered  by  the  church,  accounts 
for  its  failure  to  attain  to  greater  numerical  strength.  The 
Dutch  language  having  ceased  to  be  the  language  of  its 
worship  many  years  ago,  the  word  ''  Dutch  "  was  eliminated 
from  its  title  in  1867.  In  consequence  of  a  considerable 
immigration  from  Holland  in  late  years,  which  has  settled 
in  Michigan   and   other  Western  States,  there  are  many 


THE  REFORMED  BODIES.  33  I 

congregations  in  that  section  in  which  the  Dutch  tongue  is 
now  used. 

The  Reformed  Church  accepts  the  Apostles',  the  Nicene, 
and  the  Athanasian  creeds,  the  Belgic  Confession,  the  can- 
ons of  the  Synod  of  Dort,  and  the  Heidelberg  Catechism 
as  its  doctrinal  symbols.  It  is  a  distinctively  Calvinistic 
body.  The  church  has  a  liturgy  for  use  in  public  worship, 
including  an  order  of  Scripture  lessons,  an  order  of  worship, 
and  forms  of  prayer.  These,  however,  are  not  obligatory, 
and  are  not  generally  used.  Forms  for  the  administration 
of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  for  the  ordination  of 
ministers,  etc.,  are  imperative. 

The  church  has  thirty-three  classes  in  this  country. 
There  are  also  four  particular  synods,  which  consist  of 
representatives  from  classes.  Above  the  particular  synods 
is  a  general  synod,  which  meets  annually.  The  particular 
synod  of  New  York  embraces  8  classes ;  that  of  Albany,  9  ; 
that  of  Chicago,  7  ;   and  that  of  New  Brunswick,  9. 

The  largest  classis  is  that  of  New  York,  which  has  8881 
communicants,  with  church  property  valued  at  $3,308,000. 
The  total  number  of  communicants  is  92,970.  These  be- 
long to  572  organiz^ttions,  and  own  670  edifices,  only  8 
halls,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  751,  being  rented  for 
public  worship.  These  church  edifices  have  a  total  value 
of  $10,340,159,  which  indicates  an  average  for  each  church 
of  $15,439.     The  average  seating  capacity  is  385. 

The  denomination  is  represented  only  in  fourteen  States. 
New  York  has  52,228  communicants,  and  New  Jersey 
24,057.  In  these  two  States,  therefore,  are  more  than 
four  fifths  of  the  entire  number  of  communicants,  with 
church  property  valued  at  $9,536,309,  or  within  $803,850 
of  the  entire  valuation  for  the  denomination. 


332     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. 

n,-„o«;  rv,„v^>.       Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                      O'^^?^"'-  ^^f^           Ca-  Church  muni- 

zauons.  Edifices.        p^^j^_  Property.  cants. 

Illinois 25  27         9,895  $169,800  2,820 

Indiana 3  3            700  9,000  172 

Iowa 26  28         8, 104  90,900  2,605 

Kansas 2  2            400  2,500  46 

Michigan 45  50        17,229  262,800  6,609 

Minnesota  3  3             750  10,000  145 

Nebraska 4  3             960  7, 500  344 

New  Jersey 124  155        65,445  2,091,029  24,057 

New  York 302  358      142,380  7,445,280  52,228 

North  Dakota 2  2             205  750  89 

Ohio 2  2             600  8, 100  1 56 

Pennsylvania 8  10         4,930  178,500  1,756 

South  Dakota 15  14         2,899  23,900  594 

Wisconsin  11  13         3,425  40,100  i,349 


CLASSES. 


Albany 17  18  8,250 

Bergen 19  22  9,200 

Bergen  (South  C las- 
sis)  12  14  6,100 

Dakota 18  17  3,604 

Grand  River 21  23  8,455 

Greene 7  8  3,150 

Holland 19  22  6,024 

Hudson 14  13^  5,235 

Illinois 17  19  4,985 

Iowa  23  25  6,944 

Kingston 19  17^^  7,150 

Long  Island  (North 

Classis)  . 22  35  15,090 

Long  Island  (South 

Classis) 20  28  13,345 

Michigan 9  10  4,050 

Monmouth 10  12  4,200 

Montgomery 31  33  1 1,025 

Newark 17  21  9,105 

New  Brunswick ...  .  12  16  8,805 

New  York 30  t,t,  19,179 


Total 572      670     257,922  $10,340,159     92,970 

Summary  by  Classes. 


$360,000 

3,340 

316,000 

2,764 

327,500 

3,094 

30,850 

749 

131,400 

3,327 

73,500 

1,603 

72,000 

2,530 

121,150 

2.087 

65,000 

984 

85,700 

2,395 

146,800 

2,766 

547,500 

4,062 

896,500 

4,443 

76,000 

1,013 

94,079 

1,417 

338,500 

3,513 

538,500 

4,175 

189,600 

2,708 

3,308,000 

8,881 

THE   REFORMED  BODIES,  333 


Summary  by  Classes. — Continued. 

r\, •  /-, 1  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

CLASSES.                     ?/?^"'-  p^h"-^^^  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  ^^^^^^  Property.  cants. 

Orange 26         28  10,790  $235,150  3,649 

Paramus 24         34  ii,355  358,800  3,966 

Passaic "       12         14  5,975  153,250  2,272 

Philadelphia 13         17  8,025  216,300  2,880 

Poughkeepsie 14         17  6,475  234,000  2,262 

Raritan 14         19  9,080  161,000  3,423 

Rensselaer 14         18  5,330  124,380  2,090 

Rochester 13         17  5,380  89,200  2,415 

Saratoga 13         13  4,775  144,800  1,973 

Schenectady 11         18  6,585  186,500  2,506 

Schoharie 17         17  5,286  60,150  1,138 

Ulster 18         20  6,740  187,250  2,593 

Westchester 15         20  7,125  306,400  2,021 

Wisconsin 31         31  11,105  164,400  3,931 

Total 572  670     257,922  $10^340,159  92,970 


2. — THE    REFORMED    CHURCH    IN    THE    UNITED    STATES. 

The  original  source  of  this  body  was  the  Reformed 
Church  established  in  the  Palatinate,  one  of  the  provinces 
of  Germany.  On  account  of  severe  persecutions  the  Pala- 
tine reformers  were  scattered,  many  finding  refuge  in  this 
country  in  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century.  There 
were  Germans  among  the  American  colonists,  however, 
before  this  period.  From  1700  to  1746  many  thousand 
settled  in  Pennsylvania  and  elsewhere,  and  a  number  of 
Reformed  congregations  having  been  gathered,  a  **  coetus  " 
(an  ecclesiastical  organization  having  advisory  powers)  was 
formed  in  1 747,  the  same  year  that  the  Reformed  Dutch 
organized  their  "  coetus  "  in  New  York. 

In  response  to  most  earnest  appeals  from  the  Rev. 
Michael  Schlatter,  who  was  a  sort  of  general   missionary 


334     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

and  organizer,  gathering  scattered  members  together  and 
ministering  to  pastorless  organizations,  the  Reformed 
Church  of  Holland  raised  nearly  $60,000,  the  interest  of 
which  was  devoted  to  the  erection  of  churches  and  school- 
houses  and  the  support  of  ministers.  Help  was  also  re- 
ceived for  the  education  of  youth  from  a  society  in  London. 

In  1 793  the  '*  coetus  "  became  a  synod  and  the  Reformed 
German  Church  an  entirely  independent  body.  There  are 
now  8  synods,  6  of  which  are  English  and  2  German.  The 
Eastern  Synod  embraces  1 1  classes ;  that  of  Ohio,  6 ;  that 
of  the  Northwest,  10;  that  of  Pittsburg,  5;  that  of  the 
Potomac,  9 ;  the  German  Synod  of  the  East,  5  ;  the  Cen- 
tral Synod,  4;   and  the  Synod  of  the  Interior,  5. 

Below  the  synods  are  classes,  corresponding  to  presby- 
teries in  the  Presbyterian  churches,  and  above  the  synods 
is  a  general  synod,  which  is  the  supreme  legislative  and 
judicial  body  of  the  church.  It  meets  once  every  three 
years,  and  was  organized  in  1863. 

Like  the  Reformed  (Dutch)  Church,  the  Reformed 
(German)  Church  is  Calvinistic  in  doctrine.  Its  symbol 
is  the  Heidelberg  Catechism,  which  is  also  accepted  by 
the  former  body.  In  substance  the  Heidelberg  Catechism 
is  Augustinian,  says  Prof.  T.  G.  Apple,  respecting  the  doc- 
trines of  natural  depravity  and  salvation  by  free  grace 
alone ;  but  it  does  not,  like  some  other  Calvinistic  symbols, 
teach  a  decree  of  reprobation  as  well  as  a  decree  of  election. 
The  Reformed  Church  has  a  liturgical  system  of  worship, 
but  its  use  is  optional  with  congregations. 

The  Reformed  (German)  Church  (it  dropped  the  word 
''  German  "  from  its  title  in  1869)  has  fifty-five  classes.  It 
is  represented  in  twenty- eight  States  and  in  the  District  of 
Columbia,  and  has  many  congregations  in  foreign  mission 


THE  REFORMED  BODIES, 


335 


fields.  Half  its  organizations  and  considerably  more  than 
half  its  communicants  are  in  the  State  of  Pennsylvania.  It 
is  also  particularly  strong  in  the  State  of  Ohio,  Maryland 
ranking  third.  The  total  value  of  its  church  property  is 
$7,975,583.  Its  1 5 10  organizations  own  1304  edifices, 
with  an  average  seating  capacity  of  410  and  an  average 
value  of  $6115.  There  are  61  halls,  with  accommodations 
for  6504. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  Organi- 
zations, 

California 3 

Colorado i 

Connecticut i 

Delaware i 

Dist.  of  Columbia.  2 

Illinois 30 

Indiana 60 

Iowa 34 

Kansas 25 

Kentucky 10 

Maryland 67 

Massachusetts  ....  i 

Michigan 17 

Minnesota 10 

Missouri 11 

Nebraska 14 

New  Jersey 5 

New  York 13 

North  Carolina  ...  39 

North  Dakota  ....  3 

Ohio 294 

Oregon 10 

Pennsylvania 754 

South  Dakota  ....  16 

Tennessee  3 

Virginia 20 

Washington 5 

West  Virginia  ....  6 

Wisconsin 55 

Total 1,510 


Church 

Seating 
Ca- 

Value of 
Church 

Com- 
muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

2 

300 

$11,000 

68 

I 

250 

20,000 

35 

I 

450 

18,000 

150 

I 

200 

2,000 

69 

2 

375 

31,000 

301 

2S/2 

7,500 

73,200 

1,783 

S6 

16,080 

231,775 

6,269 

31 

7,635 

66,350 

2,513 

14 

3,257 

49,900 

984 

6 

1,630 

37,500 

1,350 

63 

27,320 

484,225 

10,741 

I 

450 

56,000 

62 

12 

3,675 

47,900 

1,013 

8 

1,511 

17,820 

730 

7 

1,475 

18,800 

586 

10 

1,500 

14,100 

968 

5 

1,309 

23,800 

830 

13 

5,850 

204,200 

3,432 

36 

14,150 

49,000 

2,903 

I 

200 

600 

161 

283 

89,879 

1,128,275 

35,846 

6 

1,000 

29,300 

298 

618 

322,173 

5,121,328 

122,944 

13 

2,700 

11,750 

1,000 

3 

450 

2,500 

236 

22 

7,260 

44,800 

1,819 

4 

550 

11,410 

167 

5 

1,850 

25,300 

794 

54/2 

13,275 

143,750 

5,966 

1,304  534,254  $7,975^583  204,018 


336     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Classes. 


Allegheny 

Carlisle 

Chicago 

Cincinnati 

Clarion 

Eastern  Ohio 

East  Pennsylvania. 
East  Susquehanna. 

Erie 

German  Maryland. 
German  Philadelp'a 

Gettysburg 

Goshenhoppen. . . . 

Heidelberg 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Juniata 

Kansas 

Lancaster  (Ohio) .  . 
Lancaster  (Penn.) 

Lebanon  

Lehigh 

Lincoln 

Maryland 

Mercersburg 

Miami 

Milwaukee 

Minnesota  

Missouri 

Nebraska 

New  York 

North  Carolina. . .  . 

Philadelphia 

Portland  (Oregon). 

Saint  John's 

Saint  Joseph's  .... 

Saint  Paul's 

Schuylkill 

Sheboygan  

Somerset 

South  Dakota 

Tiffin 


Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

13 

13 

4,502 

$124,100 

1,767 

21 

I7X 

6,780 

82,900 

2,212 

7 

7 

2,050 

35,500 

645 

18 

18 

7,030 

216,100 

3,635 

29 

26>^ 

8,740 

74,600 

2,999 

28 

23  K 

8,950 

46,600 

3,389 

49 

31 

27,690 

393,450 

10,021 

45 

31/2 

18,600 

187,000 

4,751 

27 

27 

7,369 

136,500 

4,521 

8 

7 

3,625 

94,525 

2,463 

18 

18 

9,539 

376,800 

6,116 

24 

24 

11,500 

145,600 

4,987 

31 

23 

18,020 

285,500 

7,306 

27 

33 

8,735 

I  14,000 

4,642 

21 

16 

4,850 

31,700 

776 

31 

27 

6,550 

138,450 

3,530 

18 

15 

4,050 

25,500 

846 

50 

48 

15,110 

168,036 

5,400 

15 

9 

2,250 

31,700 

678 

29 

25 

8,300 

77,500 

2,656 

40 

32 

16,575 

257,100 

5,508 

54 

33 

30,650 

180,300 

11,456 

35 

37 

20,750 

408,100 

9,208 

4 

2 

400 

II,2GO 

169 

57 

55 

23,220 

412,500 

8,112 

25 

23X 

9,945 

134,667 

3,029 

55 

54 

17,539 

176,300 

5,678 

20 

20 

5,320 

57,650 

2,611 

21 

19 

3,536 

37,420 

1,450 

9 

6 

1,075 

6,800 

541 

14 

II 

1,750 

34,100 

973 

8 

8 

3,320 

215,200 

1,871 

39 

36 

14,150 

49,000 

2,903 

30 

28K 

12,225 

509,600 

5,454 

18 

12 

1,850 

51,710 

533 

24 

22y2 

7,475 

111,550 

4,440 

42 

33 

10,825 

100,600 

2,332 

20 

19K 

5,750 

84,000 

2,585 

45 

32 

21,490 

517,900 

11,282 

28 

28 

6,805 

74,600 

3,007 

36 

33 

8,926 

100,650 

3,169 

16 

14 

2,900 

12,350 

1,098 

34 

31 

9,186 

104,750 

2,396 

THE  REFORMED  BODIES.  337 


Summary  by  Classes. — Continued. 

Or^ani-    Church         Seating  Value  of  Com- 

^^^^^^^-                    Talon  .    Sees.           Ca-  Church  muni- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

Tohickon 39        24^    21,235  $257.35o  7,636 

Tuscarawas 45         42        13,650  144,500  4,665 

Ursinus 12         10          2,360  24,050  1,306 

Virginia 24         26         8,560  64,100  2,283 

Westmoreland ...  .         31         28        10,550  200,400  3,962 

West  New  York. . .           9           9         4,350  86,000  2,583 

West  Pennsylvania          6           6          1,925  23,300  905 

West  Susquehanna         50         39^^    14,840  182,000  4.236 

Wichita 12           6          1,407  30,200  351 

Wyoming 2>1         34        12,070  179,250  5,257 

Zion's  (Ind.) 28         28          7,205  90,600  3,435 

Zion's  (Penn.)  .  .  .  .         34         22        16,200  259,725  4,254 

Total 1,510    1,304     534,254  $7,975,583  204,018 


3. — THE    CHRISTIAN    REFORMED.   CHURCH. 

This  body  is  a  branch  of  an  organization  of  the  same 
name  in  Holland.  In  1835  there  was  a  secession  from  the 
Reformed  Church  of  Holland  of  ministers  and  others  who 
were  dissatisfied  with  the  prevailing  tone  of  the  doctrinal 
teaching  of  the  State  church  and  with  some  features  of  its 
government.  This  was  the  origin  of  the  Christian  Re- 
formed Church  of  Holland.  It  has  been  represented  in 
this  country  many  years.  In  1882  its  numbers  were  in- 
creased by  a  secession  of  ministers  and  members  of  the 
particular  synod  of  Chicago,  Reformed  (Dutch)  Church, 
because  of  the  refusal  of  the  general  synod  of  the  latter 
body  to  denounce  freemasonry  and  to  make  connection 
with  that  order  a  subject  of  church  discipline.  Finding 
the  position  of  the  Christian  Reformed  Church  more  to 
their  mind,  they  united  with  it.  In  1889  the  church  was 
still  further  increased  by  the  accession  of  a  number  of  con- 


338     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

gregations  belonging  to  the  True  Reformed  Church,  organ- 
ized in  1822  by  a  number  of  ministers  who  had  seceded 
from  the  Reformed  Dutch  Church. 

The  Christian  Reformed  Church  has  seven  classes  and 
one  synod.  Connected  with  the  classes  are  99  organiza- 
tions, with  106  edifices,  valued  at  $428,500,  and  12,470 
communicants.  More  than  half  of  the  latter  are  to  be  found 
in  the  State  of  Michigan.  The  average  value  of  the  church 
edifices  is  $4042,  and  the  average  seating  capacity  318. 
There  are  4  halls,  with  accommodations  for  200  persons. 

Summary  by  States. 

r\^r.^^\       ri,,,.-^!.       Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  O"^.?^"'-     Sfi  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.     Edifices.       p^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

Illinois 7  8  2,250  $29,000  782 

Indiana i  2  300  3,000  320 

Iowa.... 6  6  Ij95o  19,000  623 

Kansas 2  2  225  3,000  109 

Michigan 44  52  19,380  174,100  7,782 

Minnesota 4  i  100  800  93 

Nebraska 2  i  100  1,200  96 

New  Jersey 13  14  4,725  115,500  1,323 

New  York 8  8  1,995  48,800  313 

North  Dakota i  i  125  500  37 

Ohio 3  3  750  19.500  253 

South  Dakota 4  4  830  6,000  289 

Wisconsin 4  4  1,025  8,100  450 

Total 99       106       33»755       $428,500      12,470 

Summary  by  Classes. 

CLASSES. 

Grand  Rapids 16  18  8,630  $85,900  2,900 

Hackensack 13  14  4,245  127,500  531 

Holland 17  19  6,340  47,5oo  3,088 

Hudson 8  8  2,475  36,800  1,105 

Illinois 12  13  3,725  49,100  1,637 

Iowa. 20  17  3,530  33.500  1,292 

Muskegon 13  17  4,810  48,200  1,917 

Total 99       106       33,755       $428,500     12,470 


THE  REFORMED  BODIES. 


Summary  by  States  of  all  Reformed  Bodies. 


339 


^^,^^^  Organi.  Church        Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ^J^^^^_  Y.mc^^.          Ca-  Church  mum- 

pacity.  Property.  cants. 

California 3  2  300  $11,000  68 

Colorado i  i  250  20,000  35 

Connecticut i  i  450  18,000  150 

Delaware i  i  200  2,000  69 

Dist.  of  Columbia  .  2  2  375  31,000  301 

Illinois 62  61  19,645  272,000  5,385 

Indiana 64  61  17,080  243,775  6,761 

Iowa  66  65  17,689  176,250  5,741 

Kansas 29  18  3,882  55, 400  1,139 

Kentucky 10  6  1,630  37, 500  1,350 

Maryland 67  63  27,320  484,225  10,741 

Massachusetts  ....  i  i  450  56,000  62 

Michigan 106  114  40,284  484,800  15,404 

Minnesota 17  12  2,361  28,620  968 

Missouri 11  7  i,475  18,800  586 

Nebraska 20  14  2,560  22,800  1,408 

New  Jersey 142  174  71,749  2,230,329  26,210 

New  York 323  379  150,225  7,698,280  55,973 

North  Carolina  ...  39  36  14,150  49,000  2,903 

North  Dakota  ....  6  4  530  1,850  287 

Ohio 299  288  91,229  1,155,875  36,255 

Oregon 10  6  1,000  29,300  298 

Pennsylvania 762  628  327,103  5,299,828  124,700 

South  Dakota  ....  35  31  6,429  41,650  1,883 

Tennessee 3  3  450  2,500  236 

Virginia 20  22  7,260  44,800  1,819 

Washington 5  4  550  11,410  167 

West  Virginia  ...  .  6  5  1,850  25,300  794 

Wisconsin 70  71  17,725  191,950  7,765 

Total 2,181    2,080  825,931  $18,744,242  309,458 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

THE     SALVATION     ARMY. 

This  body  was  organized  in  London,  England,  in 
1876,  by  William  Booth.  He  had  been  engaged  for  sev- 
eral years  previously  in  evangelistic  work  in  the  east  of 
London,  chiefly  among  those  who  were  beyond  the  reach 
of  ordinary  religious  influences.  He  was  formerly  a  min- 
ister of  the  Methodist  New  Connection,  withdrawing  from 
the  regular  ministry  in  1861  for  independent  evangelistic 
work.  The  new  organi^tion  was  speedily  introduced  into 
various  countries  of  Europe,  into  the  United  States,  Aus- 
tralia, and  elsewhere. 

In  doctrine  the  Salvation  Army  is  thoroughly  evangeli- 
cal. Its  teachings  are  given  in  a  book  which  has  been  pre- 
pared by  the  "  general  "  of  the  Army,  Mr.  Booth.  This 
book  of  doctrine  and  discipline  sets  forth  the  ordinary  doc- 
trines respecting  God  and  Christ ;  the  sinfulness  of  man ; 
the  work  of  redemption  ;  the  atonement,  which  is  described 
as  general ;  election,  of  which  the  Arminian  view  is  taken ; 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  repentance  and  faith  as  conditions  of  sal- 
vation ;  the  forgiveness  of  sins ;  conversion ;  the  two  na- 
tures of  man ;  assurance,  setting  forth  the  Methodist  view ; 
sanctification,  which  is  emphasized  as  one  of  the  more  im- 
portant doctrines.  Entire  sanctification  is  described  as  a 
*'  complete  deliverance."  "  Sin  is  destroyed  out  of  the 
soul,  and  all  the  powers,  faculties,  possessions,  and  influ- 
ences of  the  soul  are  given  up  to  the  service  and  glory  of 

340 


THE   SALVATION  ARMY.  34 1 

God."  No  fewer  than  seven  sections  of  the  Book  of  Dis- 
cipline are  given  to  the  doctrine  of  sanctification ;  back- 
sliding also  forms  a  section,  and  so  also  do  final  persever- 
ance, **  death  and  after,"  hell,  the  Bible,  and  baptism.  The 
Army  recognizes  women's  right  to  preach,  and  full  direc- 
tions are  given  how  to  proceed  **  in  getting  men  saved." 

The  government  is  military  in  form,  and  military  titles 
are  used  in  designating  the  various  officers,  and  military 
terms  in  describing  the  various  departments  of  the  work. 
The  officers  are:  (i)  the  commander-in-chief,  who  has  the 
general  direction  of  the  entire  army ;  (2)  the  chief  of  staff, 
who  has  the  oversight  of  all  the  business  at  the  war  office, 
known  as  headquarters  ;  (3)  a  lieutenant-general,  who  trav- 
els under  the  direction  of  the  commander-in-chief  and  in- 
spects various  divisions ;  (4)  a  general,  who  has  command 
of  a  division;  (5)  a  captain,  who  commands  a  single  corps; 

(6)  a  lieutenant,  who  is  under  the  direction  of  the  captain ; 

(7)  a  color  sergeant,  who  has  charge  of  the  colors  and  car- 
ries them  in  procession ;  (8)  a  paymaster-sergeant,  or  treas- 
urer, who  cares  for  all  the  moneys  of  a  corps ;  (9)  a  pay- 
master-secretary. There  are  also  sergeants  who  lead  bands, 
and  there  are  various  other  officers.  The  sergeants  are 
appointed  by  the  captains.  The  treasurers  and  secretaries 
are  recommended  for  appointment  to  the  generals  of  divis- 
ions, and  the  commissions  are  issued  by  the  general-in-chief. 
The  term  of  office  is  indefinite. 

All  members  of  the  Salvation  Army  on  active  duty  wear 
a  uniform.  The  places  where  meetings  are  regularly  held 
are  usually  called  "barracks." 

The  Salvation  Army  in  the  United  States  is  represented 
in  thirty  States,  also  in  the  territory  of  Utah  and  the  Dis- 
trict of  Columbia.     It  has' 329  organizations,  with  2"]  church 


342 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


edifices,  or  barracks,  which  are  valued  at  $38,150.  Of 
halls,  etc.,  300,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  87,101,  are 
occupied.  There  are  in  all  8742  communicants  or  mem-_ 
bers.  It  is  not  the  chief  aim  of  the  army  to  make  converts 
for  membership  in  its  own  organization.  Many  of  those 
who  are  converted  through  its  labors  join  various  other 
denominations. 

Summary  by  States. 


California 

Colorado 

Connecticut 

Delaware  , 

District  of  Columbia 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Maine 

Maryland 

Massachusetts 

Michigan 

Minnesota 

Missouri 

Montana 

Nebraska 

New  Hampshire.  .  .  . 

New  Jersey 

New  York 

North  Carolina  .... 

Ohio 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania 

Rhode  Island 

South  Dakota 

Texas 

Utah 

Virginia 

Washington 

West  Virginia 

Wisconsin 

Total 


Organi-     Church        ^e^tlng 
zations.    Edifices.        ^^^^[^ 


29 
10 

6 

I 

I 

28 

4 
16 
12 

9 

7 

14 
28 

13 
12 

3 
I 
I 
4 

32 
2 

30 
3 

30 
2 
2 
4 

3 

5 

2 

14 

329 


1,500 
700 
600 


250 


2,025 
1,300 
1,720 
1,110 


1,250 


450 


Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

$9,188 
2,000 
2,235 


5.130 
1,000 

7,575 
800 


1,000    2,200 
150     875 


5,997 


1,150 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

340 
214 
203 
153 
23 
922 
104 

397 
307 
265 
213 
656 
1,099 
460 
340 
30 

19 

26 
156 
625 

59 
655 

44 
772 

31 

41 

35 

4 

54 

156 

7 

322 


27   12,055   $38,150   8,742 


DIVISIONS. 


THE  SALVATION  ARMY.  343 


Summary  by  Divisions. 


Organi-     Church 
zations.    Edifices. 


Seatiag 

Value  of 

Com- 

Ca- 

Church 

mum- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

700 

$2,000 

214 
538 

1,250 

5.997 

405 
438 

759 

Colorado  and  Wyo- 
ming    10 

Central 22 

East  Pennsylvania. .  16 

Iowa  and  Dakota.  .  .  18 

Illinois  and  Indiana.  22 

Kansas,       Missouri, 

and  Nebraska  ...  25          . .            ....                ....           666 

Massachusetts,  Con- 
necticu  t,   and 

Rhode  Island.  ...  22 

Maine      and      New 

Hampshire 10 

Michigan 28 

New  York  State.  ...  16 

Northwestern 2)1 

Ohio 32 

Pittsburg  and  West 

Pennsylvania  ....  12 

Pacific  Coast 41 

Southern. 14 

Texas 4 

Total 329        27        12,055         $38,150       8,742 


3 

1,900 

3,235 

890 
291 

5 

1,720 

7,575 

1,099 
284 

4 

1,360 

800 

1,049 

150 

875 

662 
326 

3 

1,500 

9,188 

574 

7 

3,475 

8,480 

502 
35 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

THE    SCHWENKFELDIANS. 

Kaspar  von  Schwenkfeld,  a  nobleman  of  Germany, 
born  in  the  fifteenth  century,  diflfered  from  other  Reformers 
of  the  period  on  a  number  of  points  concerning  the  Lord's 
Supper,  the  efficacy  of  the  external  Word,  and  Christ's  hu- 
man nature.  He  did  not  form  a  separate  sect,  but  his  fol- 
lowers did  so  after  his  death,  taking  his  name.  Early  in 
the  eighteenth  century  they  were  scattered  by  persecution. 
Some  fled  to  Denmark,  whence  they  came  to  this  country 
near  the  close  of  the  first  half  of  that  century.  They  set- 
tled in  Pennsylvania,  where  a  remnant  of  them  still  exist. 
They  celebrate  the  arrival  from  Denmark  annually,  making 
it  a  kind  of  festival. 

They  hold  in  general  to  the  doctrines  of  the  German 
Reformation,  with  a  few  peculiarities.  The  words  of 
Christ,  **  This  is  my  body,"  they  interpret  as  meaning, 
"  My  body  is  this,"  i.e.,  such  as  this  bread,  which  is  broken 
and  consumed,  and  affords  true  and  real  food  for  the  soul. 
The  external  Word,  as  they  believe,  has  no  power  to  renew ; 
only  the  internal  Word,  which  is  Christ  himself.  The  hu- 
man nature  of  Christ  was  not  a  created  substance.  Being 
associated  with  the  divine  essence,  it  had  a  majestic  dignity 
of  its  own. 

Among  the  customs  peculiar  to  the  Schwenkfeldians  is 
a  service  of  prayer  and  exhortation  over  newly  born  infants, 

344 


THE   SCHWENKFELDIANS.  345 

repeated  in  church  when  the  mother  and  child  appear.  The 
churches  are  Congregational  in  government,  each  electing 
its  minister  and  officers  annually.  The  former  is  chosen  by 
lot. 

Summary. 

r\        •      r-u      V        Searing  Value  of  Com- 

STATE.  ^'■?^"'-     S-fi"''  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.      Edifices.        p^^j^_  Property.  cants. 

Pennsylvania 4  6  1,925        $12,200         306 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

THE   SOCIAL   BRETHREN    CHURCH. 

This  is  a  small  body  of  about  twenty  congregations  in 
Arkansas  and  Illinois,  which  had  its  beginning  in  1867.  In 
that  year  a  number  of  members  of  various  bodies,  whose 
views  concerning  certain  passages  of  Scripture  and  certain 
points  of  discipline  were  not  in  harmony  with  the  churches 
to  which  they  belonged,  came  together  and  organized  a 
church  and  subsequently  an  association  of  churches.  In 
1887  a  discipline,  containing  a  statement  of  doctrine  and 
rules  for  the  government  of  the  churches  and  the  ordination 
of  ministers,  was  adopted.  The  Confession  of  Faith,  which 
consists  of  ten  articles,  sets  forth  the  commonly  received 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  the  Holy  Scriptures,  the  evangeli- 
cal doctrine  of  redemption,  regeneration,  and  sanctification, 
declaring  that  he  that  endures  unto  the  end  the  same  shall 
be  saved ;  holding  that  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper 
are  ordinances  made  binding  by  Christ,  and  none  but  true 
believers  are  the  proper  subjects.  Three  modes  of  admin- 
istering baptism  are  recognized,  and  candidates  are  allowed 
to  choose  between  them.  The  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth 
articles  declare  the  right  of  lay  members  to  free  suffrage 
and  free  speech,  that  candidates  shall  be  received  into  full 
membership  by  the  voice  of  the  church,  and  that  ministers 
are  called  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  not  to  preach  politics 
or  anything  else.     The  associations  correspond  in  general 

346 


THE  SOCIAL  BRETHREN  CHURCH.  347 

usage  to  Baptist  associations.  There  are  two  classes  in  the 
ministry,  ordained  and  licensed,  also  exhorters  and  stewards, 
as  in  the  Methodist  churches,  and  ordained  deacons,  as  in 
the  Baptist.  It  is  quite  evident  that  the  denomination  was 
originally  formed  of  Baptists  and  Methodists,  the  ideas  of 
both  these  denominations  and  some  of  their  usages  being 
incorporated  in  the  new  body. 

There  are  20  organizations,  with  1 1  edifices,  valued  at 
$8700,  and  913  members;  6  halls,  with  accommodations 
for  600,  are  occupied. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES. 

Organi- 
zations. 

Church       Seating 
Edifices.       pC^y 

Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

Arkansas 

Illinois 

4 
16 

I                 800 
10            7,900 

$1,000 
7,700 

830 

Total 

20 

II             8,700 

$8,700 

913 

Summary 

BY  Associations. 

ASSOCIATIONS. 

Northw'n  Arkansas. 
Southern  Illinois  . . . 
Wabash 

4 

10 

6 

1  800 
8        7,100 

2  800 

$1,000 

6,900 

800 

675 

Total 20         II  8,700  $8,700  913 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

THE    SOCIETY   FOR   ETHICAL   CULTURE. 

This  society  was  founded  in  New  York  in  1876  by  Prof. 
Felix  Adler.  It  was  announced  as  *'  the  new  religion  of 
morality,  whose  God  is  The  Good,  whose  church  is  the 
universe,  whose  heaven  is  here  on  earth,  and  not  in  the 
clouds."  Its  aims  have  been  thus  defined  by  Professor 
Adler: 

"  I.  To  teach  the  supremacy  of  the  moral  ends  above 
all  other  human  ends  and  interests. 

"  II.  To  teach  that  the  moral  law  has  an  immediate 
authority  not  contingent  on  the  truth  of  rehgious  beliefs 
or  of  philosophical  theories. 

**  III.  To  advance  the  science  and  art  of  right  living." 

Meetings  are  held  on  Sunday,  at  which  addresses  or 
lectures  are  delivered.  Societies  having  been  organized 
in  Chicago,  Philadelphia,  and  St.  Louis,  as  well  as  in  New 
York,  a  convention  was  held  in  1886,  and  *' The  Union  of 
the  Societies  for  Ethical  Culture  "  formed,  with  a  consti- 
tution calling  for  annual  meetings.  The  four  societies 
report  an  aggregate  of  1064  members.  The  New  York 
society  has  a  cash  fund  in  hand  of  $60,000.  The  5  halls 
occupied  have  a  seating  capacity  of  6260. 

In  connection  with  the  New  York  Society  considerable 
educational  and  philanthropic  work  is  carried  on,  both  by 

348 


THE  SOCIETY  FOR  ETHICAL   CULTURE, 


349 


men  and  women,  who  seek  the  necessitous  and  endeavor 
both  to  relieve  and  elevate  them,  and  also  to  prepare  them 
to  get  their  own  living. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  «■-?->-  Ch-r^  "Ca"^ 

zations.  Edifices.  ^^•. 
pacity. 

Illinois I  . .  .... 

Missouri i  . .  .... 

New  York i  . .  .... 

Pennsylvania i  . .  .... 

Total 4  


Value  of 

Church 

Property. 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

150 
600 


,064 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

THE    SPIRITUALISTS. 

What  is  known  as  modern  spiritualism  began  with 
"  demonstrations  "  in  the  Fox  family  in  Hydesville,  N.  Y., 
in  March,  1848.  The  same  phenomena  had  been  common 
in  Shaker  communities  before  that  date,  and,  indeed,  in 
almost  all  ages  and  among  many  different  peoples ;  but  it 
was  then  that  these  demonstrations,  generally  in  the  form 
of  rappings,  began  to  be  interpreted  as  communications 
from  the  disembodied  spirits  of  men  and  women  who  had, 
in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  passed  away,  but  whose 
spirits  were  still  in  a  living  and  active  state.  From  this 
time  individuals  began  to  investigate  these  spirit  manifesta- 
tions, circles  began  to  be  formed,  mediums  were  discovered, 
lecturers  recognized,  and  a  literature  established. 

Spiritualists  claim  that  the  miracles  of  Christ  are  ex- 
plained by  the  central  doctrine  of  their  belief,  and  they 
regard  the  demonstrations  of  spiritualism  as  establishing 
by  evidence  the  fact  of  a  future  life.  They  do  not  hold 
that  God  is  a  personal  being,  but  that  he  exists  in  all  things. 
Eternal  progression  is  the  law  of  the  spirit  world,  and  every 
individual  will  attain  supreme  wisdom  and  unalloyed  hap- 
piness. 

A  few  spirituaHst  societies  employ  permanent  speakers, 
but  usually  they  appoint  lecturers  for  limited  terms,  varying 
from  a  week  to  several  months.     A  large»proportion  of  the 

350 


THE   SPIRITUALISTS.  35  I 

lecturers  are  mediums,  who  are  believed  to  speak  under 
the  influence  or  direction  of  the  spirit  who  guides  or  con- 
trols them.  They  follow  the  Scriptural  injunction:  *'  Take 
no  thought  how  or  what  ye  shall  speak,  for  it  shall  be 
given  you  in  that  same  hour  what  ye  shall  speak."  When 
a  lecturer  appears  before  an  audience,  therefore,  he  asks 
that  a  subject  be  given  him,  and  when  he  receives  it  begins 
to  speak  upon  it  without  hesitation.  Summer  gatherings 
or  camp  meetings,  which  continue  from  one  to  ten  weeks, 
have  become  prominent  among  the  spiritualists.  In  189 1 
twenty-two  such  meetings  were  held. 

The  spiritualists  report  334  organizations,  with  30  regu- 
lar church  edifices,  not  including  halls,  pavilions,  and  other 
places  owned  or  occupied  by  them.  There  are  45,030 
members,  and  the  value  of  the  property  reported,  which 
includes  camp  grounds  as  well  as  church  edifices,  pavilions, 
etc.,  is  $573,650.  Not  many  of  the  halls  are  owned  by 
them.  There  are  members  in  thirty- six  States,  besides  the 
District  of  Columbia  and  the  Territories  of  Oklahoma  and 
Utah.  Among  the  States  Massachusetts  has  the  greatest 
number,  7345  ;  New  York  stands  second,  with  6351  ;  and 
Pennsylvania  third,  with  4569.  There  are  307  halls,  with 
accommodations  for  72,522. 

Summary  by  States. 

STATES.  0;?-i-    Sr'        '  Ca-"^ 

zations.    Edifices.       p^^j^^ 

Arkansas i  i  300 

California 20  i  250 

Colorado 2  .  .  .... 

Connecticut 19  4  1,650 

District  of  Columbia  3  . .  .... 

Florida  .  .  .: 2  . .  .... 

Georgia 2  . .           


Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

$1,000 

19.325 
600 

25 
1,869 

275 

20,810 

2,354 

750 

169 

352 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES, 


Summary  by  States. — Continued. 


Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Kansas 

Kentucky 

Louisiana 

Maine 

Maryland 

Massachusetts  .  . 

Michigan 

Minnesota 

Missouri 

Montana 

Nebraska 

New  Hampshire 

New  Jersey 

New  York 

Ohio  

Oklahoma 

Oregon 

Pennsylvania  . .  . 
Rhode  Island ,  .  . 
South  Carolina  . 

Tennessee 

Texas  

Utah 

Vermont 

Virginia 

Washington  , .  . 
West  Virginia  .  . 

Wisconsin 

Wyoming 


Organi- 
zations. 


7 
5 

13 
9 

3 

21 

6 
6i 

27 

3 
5 
I 


Church 
Edifices. 


34 
25 

I 
6 

12 

4 

I 
6 

I 

lo 

I 

4 
I 

3 

I 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

350 


250 

500 

500 


500 
000 


650 


500 


Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

$10,500 

4,850 

23,075 


400 
15,650 

269,710 
11,500 

13,100 


33.250 
3.350 

930 
58,600 


36,000 
23,250 


27,000 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

1,314 
715 

2,613 
627 
300 
120 

2,562 
665 

7.345 

2,565 

500 

853 
20 
290 
672 
100 

6,351 

2,174 

26 

751 

4,569 

150 

20 

1,075 

29 

80 

1,966 

12 

565 

65 

354 

50 


Total 


334        30       20,450      $573,650     45.030 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

THE   THEOSOPHICAL    SOCIETY. 

The  first  branch  of  this  society  in  the  United  States 
was  founded  in  New  York  in  November,  1875.  Its  de- 
clared objects  are : 

'*  First,  to  form  a  nucleus  of  a  Universal  Brotherhood  of 
Humanity,  without  distinction  of  race,  creed,  or  color. 

*'  Second,  to  promote  the  study  of  Aryan  and  other 
Eastern  literatures,  religions,  and  sciences,  and  demonstrate 
the  importance  of  that  study. 

**  Third,  to  investigate  unexplained  laws  of  nature  and 
the  psychical  powers  latent  in  man." 

A  circular,  issued  for  the  information  of  inquirers  by  the 
general  secretary  of  the  American  section,  states  that  the 
society  is  unsectarian  and  interferes  with  no  person's  re- 
ligious belief.  Another  circular,  entitled  "An  Epitome  of 
Theosophy,"  issued  by  the  secretary  of  the  executive  com- 
mittee of  the  Pacific  Coast,  states  that  some  of  the  funda- 
mental propositions  of  Theosophy,  or  "  Wisdom  Rehgion," 
are :  That  the  spirit  in  man  is  the  only  real  and  permanent 
portion  of  his  being ;  that  between  the  spirit  and  the  in- 
tellect is  a  *'  plane  of  consciousness  in  which  experiences 
are  noted,"  and  that  this  spiritual  nature  is  "  as  susceptible 
of  culture  as  the  body  or  intellect "  ;  that  spiritual  culture 
is  only  attainable  as  the  grosser  interests  and  passions  of 
the  flesh  are  subordinate ;  that  men,  systematically  trained, 

353  * 


354     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

may,  by  their  Interior  faculties,  ''  attain  to  clear  insight  into 
the  immaterial,  spiritual  world  "  ;  that,  as  a  result  of  this 
spiritual  training,  men  become  able  to  perform  works  usu- 
ally called  ''miraculous." 

The  Theosophical  Society  has  branches  In  seventeen 
States  and  the  District  of  Columbia.  Forty  organizations 
are  reported,  with  695  members.  Of  the  40  organizations 
14  are  in  California.  There  are  38  halls,  with  accommo- 
dations for  18 1 5. 

Summary  by  States. 


Organi-     Church 
zations.    Edifices. 


California 

Connecticut 

District  of  Columbia 

Illinois 

Indiana 

Iowa 

Louisiana 

Maryland 

Massachusetts 

Michigan 

Minnesota 

Missouri 

Nebraska 

New  York 

Ohio  

Pennsylvania 

Washington 

Wisconsin 


Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

200 


Value  of 
Church 
Property. 

$500 

75 


25 


Com- 


216 
13 

9 

68 

5 
48 
10 

5 
57 

8 
10 
13 
41 
97 
52 
25 

9 

9 


Total 40 


200 


$600    695 


CHAPTER  XL. 

THE    UNITED    BRETHREN. 

The  United  Brethren  in  Christ  are  sometimes  con- 
founded with  the  Unitas  Fratrwn  or  Moravian  Brethren. 
Though  some  of  the  historians  of  the  former  body  claim 
that  it  was  connected  in  some  way  with  the  Ancient  and 
Renewed  Brethren  of  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  the  United 
Brethren  in  Christ  and  the  Moravians  are  wholly  separate 
and  distinct,  and  have  no  actual  historical  relations.  The 
Moravians  were  represented  in  this  country  long  before  the 
United  Brethren  in  Christ  arose,  which  was  about  the  year 
1800. 

Philip  William  Otterbein,  a  native  of  Prussia  and  a  min- 
ister of  the  German  Reformed  Church,  and  Martin  Boehm, 
a  Mennonite  pastor  in  Pennsylvania,  of  Swiss  descent,  were 
the  chief  founders  of  the  church  of  the  United  Brethren 
in  Christ.  These  men,  preaching  with  great  earnestness 
and  fervency,  had  revivals  of  religion  in  Pennsylvania  and 
Maryland,  resulting  in  many  accessions  to  membership  of 
the  churches  they  served.  Others  of  like  mind  assisted 
them  in  the  ministry,  and  they  met  occasionally  in  con- 
ference concerning  their  work.  The  first  of  these  informal 
conferences  was  held  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1789.  The 
movement,  though  meeting  with  some  opposition,  gradu- 
ally developed  into  a  separate  denomination.  At  a  con- 
ference held  In  Frederick  County,  Md.,  in  1800,  attended 

355 


356     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

by  Otterbein,  Boehm,  Geeting,  Newcomer,  and  nine  others, 
an  organization  was  formed  under  the  title  "  United  Breth- 
ren in  Christ,"  and  Otterbein  and  Boehm  were  elected 
superintendents  or  bishops.  The  preachers  increased  and 
new  churches  arose,  and  it  soon  became  necessary  to  have 
two  annual  conferences,  the  second  one  being  formed  in 
the  State  of  Ohio.  In  1815  the  denomination  completed 
its  organization  by  the  adoption  at  a  general  conference  of 
a  discipline,  rules  of  order,  and  a  confession  of  faith.  For 
some  years  the  work  of  the  church  was  mainly  among  the 
German  element.  It  still  has  German  conferences,  but  the 
great  bulk  of  its  members  are  English-speaking  people. 

In  doctrine,  practice,  and  usage  the  United  Brethren  are 
Methodistic.  They  have  classes  and  class  leaders,  stew- 
ards, exhorters,  local  and  itinerant  preachers,  presiding 
elders,  circuits,  quarterly  and  annual  conferences,  and  other 
Methodist  features.  Their  founders  were  in  fraternal  in- 
tercourse with  the  fathers  of  American  Methodism,  and 
in  spirit  and  purpose  the  two  bodies  were  not  dissimilar. 
The  United  Brethren,  though  not  historically  a  Methodist 
branch,  affiliate  with  the  Methodist  churches,  sending  rep- 
resentatives to  the  oecumenical  Methodist  conferences. 

Their  annual  conferences  are  composed  of  itinerant  and 
local  preachers,  and  lay  delegates  representing  the  churches. 
The  bishops  preside  in  turn  over  these  conferences,  and 
in  conjunction  with  a  committee  of  presiding  elders  and 
preachers  fix  the  appointments  of  the  preachers  for  the 
ensuing  year.  The  pastoral  term  is  three  years,  but  in 
particular  cases  it  may  be  extended  wnth.  the  consent  of 
the  conference.  There  is  but  one  order  among  the  or- 
dained preachers,  that  of  elder.  Since  1889  it  has  been 
lawful  to  license  and  ordain  women.      Bishops  are  elected 


THE    UNITED   BRETHREN. 


357 


by  the  general  conference,  not  to  life  service,  but  for  a 
quadrennium.  They  are,  however,  eligible  to  reelection. 
The  general  conference,  which  is  composed  of  ministerial 
and  lay  delegates,  elected  by  the  annual  conferences,  meets 
once  in  every  four  years,  and  has  full  authority,  under  cer- 
tain constitutional  restrictions,  to  legislate  for  the  whole 
church,  to  hear  and  decide  appeals,  etc. 

Their  doctrines,  which  are  Arminian,  are  expressed  in 
a  confession  of  faith,  consisting  of  thirteen  brief  articles, 
which  set  forth  the  generally  accepted  view  of  the  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  the  Scriptures,  justification  and  re- 
generation, the  Christian  Sabbath,  and  the  future  state. 
Concerning  the  sacraments,  it  holds  that  baptism  and  the 
Lord's  Supper  should  be  observed  by  all  Christians,  but 
the  mode  of  baptism  and  the  manner  of  celebrating  the 
Lord's  Supper  should  be  left  to  the  judgment  of  individ- 
uals. The  baptism  of  children  is  also  left  to  the  choice  of 
parents.  Sanctification  is  described  as  the  '*  work  of  God's 
grace  through  the  word  and  the  Spirit,  by  which  those  who 
have  been  born  again  are  separated  in  their  acts,  words,  and 
thoughts  from  sin  and  are  enabled  to  live  unto  God." 

I. THE    UNITED    BRETHREN    IN    CHRIST. 

The  confession,  first  adopted  in  1815,  was  revised  in 
1889  and  slightly  enlarged.  The  constitution  was  also 
changed  in  the  same  year,  resulting  in  a  division,  those 
who  held  that  the  changes  were  not  effected  in  a  consti- 
tutional way  withdrawing  from  the  general  conference  of 
1889  and  holding  a  separate  session.  The  latter  hold  to 
the  unchanged  confession  and  constitution,  and  insist  that 
they  are  the  legal  body  known  as  the  United  Brethren  in 


358     RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF  THE    UNITED  STATES. 

Christ.  Many  cases  to  settle  the  validity  of  the  action  of 
the  general  conference  of  1889  have  been  before  the  courts, 
and  considerable  church  property  is  involved  in  the  final 
decision,  which  may  not  be  reached  for  some  years  to 
come.  As  both  bodies  claim  the  same  title,  it  has  been 
deemed  necessary  to  put  after  it,  in  parentheses,  in  one 
case,  for  the  sake  of  distinction,  the  words  ''  old  constitu- 
tion." This  designates  the  smaller  body,  which  refuses  to 
recognize  the  constitutionality  of  the  revision. 

The  general  conference  of  1885  created  a  commission  to 
revise  the  confession  of  faith  and  the  constitution,  express- 
ing at  the  same  time  its  opinion  that  two  clauses  in  the 
existing  constitution,  one  forbidding  the  changing  of  or 
doing  away  with  the  confession,  and  the  other  likewise  for- 
bidding any  change  in  the  constitution  except  upon  **  re- 
quest of  two  thirds  of  the  whole  society,"  were  '*  in  their 
language  and  apparent  meaning  so  far-reaching  as  to  ren- 
der them  extraordinary  and  impracticable  as  articles  of 
constitutional  law."  The  commission  submitted  a  revised 
confession  and  constitution  to  the  churches,  as  directed,  for 
their  approval.  A  number  of  members  of  the  general 
conference  of  1885  protested  against  the  act  creating  the 
commission  as  unconstitutional  and  revolutionary.  When 
the  work  of  the  commission  was  submitted  for  approval 
they  and  those  who  agreed  with  them  refused  to  vote  on 
it,  insisting  that  the  matter  was  not  legally  before  the 
church.  Of  those  who  voted,  more  than  two  thirds  ap- 
proved the  revised  documents,  and  they  were  accordingly 
formally  proclaimed  by  the  general  conference  of  1889  as 
the  **  fundamental  belief  and  organic  law  of  the  church." 
The  vote  of  the  conference  was  iii  to  21.  When  the 
chairman  announced   that  the  conference  would   proceed 


THE    UNITED  BRETHREN.  359 

under  the  amended  constitution,  Bishop  Milton  Wright  and 
eleven  delegates  withdrew  to  meet  elsewhere  for  legislation 
under  the  old  constitution.  The  majority  claim  that  the 
constitution  of  1841  was  never  submitted  to  the  members 
of  conferences  or  of  the  church,  but  was  adopted  by  the 
general  conference  only. 

Two  important  changes  were  made  in  the  constitution, 
one  admitting  laymen  to  the  general  conference,  and  one 
modifying  the  section  prohibiting  membership  in  secret 
societies.  The  old  constitution  had  this  section:  "There 
shall  be  no  connection  with  secret  combinations."  The 
new  constitution  modifies  this  by  providing  that  all  secret 
combinations  which  infringe  upon  the  rights  of  others 
and  whose  principles  are  injurious  to  the  Christian  char- 
acter of  their  members  are  contrary  to  the  Word  of  God, 
and  Christians  should  have  no  connection  with  them.  The 
new  section  also  empowers  the  general  conference  to  enact 
**  rules  of  discipline  concerning  such  combinations." 

There  are  in  this  country  45  annual  conferences;  also, 
one  in  Canada,  and  mission  districts  in  Africa  and  Ger- 
many. The  denomination  is  not  represented  in  any  of  the 
New  England  States,  nor  in  any  of  the  States  south  of 
Virginia,  Tennessee,  and  Missouri.  It  is  strongest  in  mem- 
bers in  the  three  States  of  Ohio  (47,678),  Indiana  (35,824), 
and  Pennsylvania  (33,951).  Its  total  membership  is  202,- 
474,  divided  among  3731  organizations,  with  2836  church 
edifices,  valued  at  $4,292,643.  The  average  seating  capac- 
ity of  the  edifices  is  288,  and  the  average  value  $1513. 
There  are  780  halls,  with  accommodations  for  93,035. 


360     RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. 

f\      „  nu  _„u         Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.  ?/?f"'-  Church            ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.       p^^j^y  Property.  cants. 

California 24  15         3,825  $28,400  588 

Colorado 18  8         1,800  32,800  585 

Idaho 2       100 

Illinois 320  245       67,495  260,075  15429 

Indiana 569  476     154,762  551,636  35,824 

Iowa 213  148       29,810  211,323  10,401 

Kansas 322  128^  33, 200  183,770  13,768 

Kentucky 13  11         2,400  4,700  567 

Maryland 57  55       14,300  113.789  4,736 

Michigan 138  93       27,405  133,250  5,201 

Minnesota 35  23         4,975  23,375  803 

Missouri  ....:.„.,  .  105  45^^    Hj^So  47,825  4,361 

Nebraska 147  75       16,775  84,950  5,673 

New  York. 35  23         5,975  34,650  953 

Ohio 745  692     205,755  1,198,870  47,678 

Oregon 13  8         2,100  11,100  493 

Pennsylvania 526  467     147,036  1,086,135  33,951 

South  Dakota 27  7         i,i75  4?  150  493 

Tennessee 27  18         5,600  13,985  1,141 

Virginia 71  66       11,500  65,940  5,306 

Washington 18  13         3,400  22,000  494 

West  Virginia 259  175       54,170  140,645  12,242 

Wisconsin 47  45         8,850  39,275  1,687 

Total 3,731  2,837     816,458   $4,292,643  202,474 

Summary  by  Conferences. 

CONFERENCES. 

Allegheny 153  135       41,375  $323,475  9709 

Arkansas  Valley  ...  74  28         7,090  48,500  4,100 

Auglaize 125  116^  39,150  145,150  6,187 

California 24  15         3,825  28,400  588 

Central  Illinois  ....  62  52^^   i5,59o  67,900  3,052 

Central  Ohio 68  66       20,845  9I5850  4,076 

Colorado. 18  8         1,800  32,800  585 

Des  Moines 99  6i}4.    15,000  82,070  4,521 

East  German 83  yj^.   25,925  208,700  5,715 

East  Nebraska 67  49 >^   11,075  66,2co  3,807 

East  Ohio 127  124      32,900  204,570  8,531 

East  Pennsylvania. .  76  73       23,661  227,700  7,030 

Elkhorn  and  Dakota  39  12         1,800  3,700  743 

Erie 117  83       21,025  100,435  3,552 


THE    UNITED   BRETHREN.  36 1 


Summary  by  Conferences. — Continued. 

r\ :  n^ i.      Seating  Value  of  Com- 

CONFERENCES.  O"^?^"^"  ^^^'f"          Ca-  Church  muni- 

zat.ons.  Edifices.     ^^^^^  Property.  cants. 

Illinois 69  61  20,500  $72,950  2,784 

Indiana 174  116  52,000  92,885  9,180 

Iowa 114  86  14,810  129,253  5,880 

Kansas 97  36^     9,835  47,7oo  3,051 

Kentucky 12         10         2,250  3;5oo  507 

Lower  Wabash  ... .  164  113  26,630  74,225  9,547 

Maryland 39  38         9,150  62,889  3,236 

Miami loi  94  30,700  303,950  10,957 

Michigan  39  30        9,155  45.900  I>213 

Minnesota 42  25         5,350  25,425  910 

Missouri 67  33)^  10,400  34,775  2.927 

Neosho 96  39X  10,675  45^700  3,763 

North  Michigan   ...  56  24         8,000  25,950  2,499 

North  Ohio 109  96^  28,385  142,550  4,206 

Northwest  Kansas. .  54  22^     5-300  40,270  2,794 

Ohio  German 46  43 >^     8,400  100,450  2,317 

Oregon 14           7         1,800  7,900  284 

Parkersburg 206  144  48,115  116,095  10,377 

Pennsylvania 148  137  45,625  311,375  10^234 

Rock  River 29         2^)4     3,100  40,450  1,104 

Saint  Joseph  144  130  41,947  206,315  10,112 

Sandusky 122  115  37-775  252,560  7,424 

Scioto 148  130^^  35.550  92,990  8,510 

South  Missouri  ....  38         12         3.750  13,050  i,434 

Tennessee   27         18         5,600  13,985  1,141 

Upper  Wabash  ... .  83         75  21,875  83,175  6,654 

Virginia 127         99  18,355  9^49°  7,346 

Walla  Walla 19         14         3,700  25,200  803 

West  Nebraska  ...  .  60         17}^     4,55o  16,150  1,476 

White  River 108         96  23,265  102,811  5,921 

Wisconsin 47         45         8,850  39,275  1,687 

Total 3,731    2,837     816,458    $4,292,643  202,474 


2. — THE    UNITED    BRETHREN    IN    CHRIST    (OLD    CON- 
STITUTION). 

This  body  consists  of  those  who  hold  that  the  act  of  the 
general  conference  of  1885,  creating  a  commission  to  revise 
the   confession  of  faith  and  constitution,  was  unconstitu- 


362     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

tional,  and  that  all  proceedings  under  it  were  null  and  void. 
Bishop  Milton  Wright  and  eleven  delegates  withdrew  from 
the  general  conference  of  1889  because  of  the  announce- 
ment that  its  proceedings  would  conform  to  the  revised 
constitution.  They  immediately  convened  in  conference 
and  proceeded  to  legislate  and  elect  bishops  and  general 
church  officers  under  the  old  constitution.  The  division, 
begun  in  this  way,  was  soon  widely  extended,  involving 
many  of  the  conferences  and  placing  the  ownership  and 
occupancy  of  much  church  property  in  dispute.  The 
*'  Liberals,"  as  the  majority  are  called,  continued  in  pos- 
session of  the  general  church  property  and  offices,  and  also 
of  most  of  the  churches  and  parsonages.  The  '*  Radi- 
cals," those  who  adhere  to  the  old  confession  and  consti- 
tution, have  churches,  ministers,  and  members  in  many  of 
the  conferences,  the  titles  of  which  they  have  preserved. 
There  are  therefore  two  sets  of  conferences  bearing  the 
same  names  and  covering  the  same  territory.  Many  suits 
have  been  entered  in  the  courts  to  test  the  control  of  the 
property  involved.  A  final  decision  has  not  yet  been 
reached.  Those  who  adhere  to  the  unamended  constitu- 
tion insist  that  the  general  conference  of  1885  had  no  con- 
stitutional power  to  provide  for  the  revision  of  the  consti- 
tution and  confession;  that  the  general  conference  of  1889 
had  no  right  to  act  under  the  revised  constitution,  and  that 
the  existing  constitution  was  and  still  is  the  organic  law  of 
the  church.  They  maintain  an  exclusive  attitude  toward 
all  secret  societies,  according  to  the  provision  of  the  old 
constitution  forbidding  connection  with  any  of  them. 

When  the  statistics  for  the  eleventh  census  were  ob- 
tained, the  line  of  division  had  not  in  all  cases  become  dis- 
tinct, and  it  was  difficult  to  get  returns  from  some  of  the 


THE    UNITED  BRETHREN,  363 

districts.  A  number  of  presiding  elders  reported  that 
much  of  the  church  property  in  their  respective  districts 
was  in  dispute,  being  claimed  by  both  parties.  In  tabu- 
lating from  the  schedules  returned  by  the  presiding  elders 
of  each  branch,  care  was  taken  not  to  count  the  same  edi- 
fices and  property  twice.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  in 
some  cases  duplication  has  not  been  prevented. 

The  total  number  of  members  is  22,807,  ^^^d  there  are 
795  organizations.  The  average  seating  capacity  of  the 
church  edifices  is  302,  and  their  average  value  $1116. 
There  are  209  halls,  with  accommodations  for  23,285. 

Summary  by  States. 

STATES.  Organi-     Church         Seating 

zations.     Edifices.        ^^^^^^^ 

California 9  6  i,595 

Illinois 39  33  7,895 

Indiana 160  143  51,420 

Iowa   23  20  6,900 

Kansas 33  11  3,450 

Michigan 164  90  25,325 

Nebraska 29  8  3j730 

Ohio 250  235  66,460 

Oregon , 49  20  5,505 

South  Dakota 6  4  800 

Washington 29  8  1,600 

Wisconsin 4  . .           

Total ,..     795       578       174,680     $644,940      22,807 

Summary  by  Conferences. 


Value  of 

Com- 

Church 

muni- 

Property. 

cants. 

$8,600 

118 

33  >  400 

1,193 

169,550 

6,873 

19,200 

272 

10,200 

588 

119,550 

5,602 

10,600 

358 

237,940 

5,822 

24,700 

1,203 

2,300 

109 

8,900 

606 

63 

CONFERENCES. 

Arkansas  Valley 

Auglaize 

California 

Central  Illinois  . 
East  Des  Moines 
East  Nebraska  .  . 


12          7  1,850  $6,400  232 

126  121  40,450  135,990  2,800 

9         5K  1,595  8,600  118 

19        16  3,905  17,700  369 

19        16  5,950  15,700  142 

7        . .           2,800  205 


364     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  Conferences. — Continued. 

o-^o^;  r'v.i.^^v,  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

CONFERENCES.  ^IfZ'  FHiW.  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  ^^^^^^  Property.  cants. 

Elkhorn  and  Dakota  15  6  930  $3,400  156 

Indiana 10  2  800  2,000  180 

Iowa 4  4  950  3,500  130 

Kansas 15  4^  1,600  3,800  303 

Michigan 58  35  9,900  56,200  2,192 

Minnesota 2  i  200  400  23 

North  Michigan  ...  82  34  ii,35o  40,250  2,388 

North  Ohio 84  8o>^  16,465  84,850  3,356 

Oregon 38  17^  5,105  21,600  1,029 

Rock  River 20  17  3, 990  15,700  824 

Sandusky 34  i6>^  3,760  15,200  565 

Scioto 81  87;^  23,775  73, TOO  1,685 

Walla  Walla 40  10  2,000  12,000  780 

West  Kansas 6  53 

West  Nebraska 11  5K  3,4oo  6,300  83 

White  River 99  91 X  36,705  119,450  5,131 

Wisconsin 4  .  .            63 


Total 795      578         174,680     $644,940     22,807 

The  totals  for  the  two  bodies  are  as  follows :  organiza- 
tions, 4526;  edifices,  3415;  seating  capacity,  991,138; 
value  of  church  property,  $4,937,583;  communicants, 
225,281. 


CHAPTER    XLL 

THE     UNITARIANS. 

Unitarianism,  as  its  name  indicates,  is  distinguished 
from  other  systems  of  Christian  belief  chiefly  by  its  rejec- 
tion of  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  and  the  deity  of  Jesus 
Christ.  It  denies  that  three  persons — the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit — are  united  in  one  God,  and  holds 
that  God  is  one,  that  he  is  iini-,  not  ^/'/-personal.  This 
view  is  not  modern.  Arius,  a  presbyter  of  Alexandria  in 
the  fourth  century,  held  that  Christ,  though  the  greatest  of 
created  beings,  was  not  equal  in  nature  and  dignity  to  God. 

Unitarian  organizations  were  formed  in  Poland  and  Hun- 
gary as  early  as  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  in 
the  United  States  and  England  in  the  first  quarter  of  the 
present  century.  King's  Chapel,  Boston,  a  Protestant  Epis- 
copal congregation,  adopted  in  1785  a  liturgy  so  revised 
as  to  exclude  all  recognition  of  the  Trinity,  and  ordained 
in  1787,  as  its  pastor,  on  the  refusal  of  the  bishop  of  the 
diocese  to  do  so,  James  Freeman,  who  was  Unitarian  in 
his  views.  Arian  ideas  began  to  influence  ministers  and 
laymen  in  the  Congregational  churches  in  New  England 
at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  In  1805  a  Uni- 
tarian, Dr.  Henry  Ware,  was  elected  to  the  divinity  chair 
in  Harvard  University,  and  in  18 19  a  separate  divinity 
school  was  organized  in  connection  with  the  university 
with  a  Unitarian  faculty. 

365 


366     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

Those  holding  Arian  views  became  generally  known  as 
Unitarians  in  1815,  which  is  usually  given  as  the  beginning 
of  the  Unitarian  denomination  in  America.  In  18 19  a 
Unitarian  congregation  was  formed  in  Baltimore.  William 
Ellery  Channing  preached  the  installation  sermon,  in  which 
he  clearly  defined  the  differences  between  Orthodox  and 
Unitarian  doctrines.  Many  Congregational  churches  in 
eastern  Massachusetts,  including  the  oldest,  that  of  Plym- 
outh, the  church  founded  by  the  Pilgrims  in  1620,  became 
Unitarian  without  changing  their  covenants  or  names.  In 
the  cours^  of  the  controversy,  1 20  Congregational  churches 
in  New  England,  founded  before  the  War  of  the  Revolu- 
tion, went  over  to  the  Unitarians.  In  1830  there  were,  in 
all,  193  churches  of  the  Unitarian  faith;  in  1865,  340. 
The  present  number  is  421. 

The  Unitarians  acknowledge  no  binding  creed.  They 
contend  for  the  fullest  liberty  in  belief,  and  exclude  no 
one  from  their  fellowship  for  difference  in  doctrinal  views. 
Unitarianism  is  declared  to  be  **  not  a  fixed  dogmatic 
statement,  but  a  movement  of  ever- enlarging  faith,"  wel- 
coming **  inquiry,  progress,  and  diversity  of  individual 
thought  in  the  unity  of  spiritual  thought."  In  the  de- 
nomination are  included  those  who  stand  upon  a  simple 
basis  of  Theism,  and  are  represented  in  the  Western  Uni- 
tarian Conference,  for  example,  and  those  who  accept  the 
Messiahship  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  general  terms  they  believe 
in  God  as  the  All-in- All,  "  in  eternal  life  as  the  great  hope, 
in  the  inspiration  of  all  truth,  in  man's  great  possibilities, 
and  in  the  divineness  of  sanctified  humanity." 

The  Unitarian  churches  are  Congregational  in  polity,  each 
congregation  being  independent  in  the  management  of  its 
own  affairs.     There  are  societies  for  the  conduct  of  mis- 


THE    UNITARIANS.  367 

sionary  work,  such  as  the  American  Unitarian  Association, 
organized  in  1825,  the  Western  Unitarian  Conference, 
which  attends  to  the  general  interests  of  the  societies  rep- 
resented in  it,  and  the  Western  Unitarian  Association,  whose 
object  is  to  *'  diffuse  the  knowledge  and  promote  the  inter- 
ests of  pure  Christianity."  There  are  also  conferences,  na- 
tional and  state  and  local.  The  national  conference,  which 
is  biennial,  declares  in  its  constitution  its  ''  allegiance  to  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  "  and  its  *'  desire  to  secure  the  largest 
unity  of  spirit  and  the  widest  practical  cooperation  "  in  the 
cause  of  Christian  faith  and  work.  It  confines  itself  to 
recommending  to  existing  Unitarian  organizations  ''  such 
undertaking  and  methods  as  it  judges  to  be  in  the  heart  of 
the  Unitarian  denomination."  It  is  composed  of  delegates 
from  the  churches  and  representatives  of  certain  Unitarian 
organizations.  The  conference  provides  for  a  committee 
of  fellowship,  for  the  consideration  of  applications  of  per- 
sons not  graduates  of  Unitarian  schools  to  enter  the  Uni- 
tarian ministry. 

The  421  organizations  report  424  edifices,  valued  at 
$10,335,100,  and  with  an  aggregate  seating  capacity  of 
165,090.  Of  the  67,749  communicants,  or,  more  properly, 
members,  as  the  Unitarian  custom  is  to  admit  any  one  to 
the  communion,  a  little  more  than  half  are  in  Massachusetts. 
New  York  has  the  second  largest  number,  4470;  California 
is  third,  with  3819  ;  and  New  Hampshire  fourth,  with  3252. 
The  denomination  has  organizations  in  thirty- two  States 
and  the  District  of  Columbia.  In  the  Southern  States  it 
has  scarcely  half  a  dozen  churches. 

The  average  value  of  its  church  edifices  is  very  high, 
reaching  $24,725  ;  their  average  seating  capacity,  389. 
There  are  55  halls,  with  accommodations  for  10,370. 


368     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  O'-P"* 

zations 

California i6 

Colorado 4 

Connecticut 2 

Delaware   i 

District  of  Columbia  i 

Georgia i 

Illinois 16 

Indiana 3 

Iowa 10 

Kansas 5 

Kentucky i 

Louisiana i 

Maine 22 

Maryland 2 

Massachusetts 189 

Michigan 12 

Minnesota 12 

Missouri 6 

Nebraska 3 

New  Hampshire  ...  26 

New  Jersey 5 

New  York 18 

North  Dakota i 

Ohio  5 

Oregon 5 

Pennsylvania 7 

Rhode  Island 6 

South  Carolina  ....  i 

South  Dakota 2 

Tennessee  i 

Vermont 9 

Washington 12 

Wisconsin 16 

Total 421 


Seating 

Value  of 

Com- 

7A'.e.^a^ 

Ca- 

Church 

muni- 

pacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

8 

5,100 

$366,040 

3,819 

2 

1,300 

157,500 

644 

2 

975 

38,000 

179 

I 

250 

14,000 

60 

I 

850 

80,000 

600 

I 

300 

10,000 

75 

15 

5,650 

406,000 

1,932 

3 

1,100 

8,500 

320 

9 

2,500 

83,100 

1,238 

2 

525 

20,500 

278 

I 

650 

70,000 

100 

I 

400 

40,000 

no 

25 

7,800 

216,700 

2,421 

3 

1,450 

107,000 

603 

217 

86,346 

5,278,370 

34,610 

13 

4.850 

168,500 

1,904 

9 

2,750 

126,600 

1,349 

8 

2,850 

230,800 

1,135 

3 

800 

44,000 

190 

25 

9,386 

357,200 

3,252 

2 

700 

23,500 

363 

22 

9-423 

1,117.500 

4,470 

0        90 

55 

3 

1,350 

80,000 

907 

4 

2,050 

139,500 

890 

8 

2,585 

276,200 

1,171 

6 

3,650 

393-500 

1,595 

I 

400 

30,000 

150 

I 

400 

10,000 

105 

2 

400 

16,000 

60 

8 

2,480 

112,500 

968 

4 

1,570 

75,000 

802 

14 

4,250 

238,500 

1,394 

424  165,090  $10,335,100  67,749 


CHAPTER   XLII. 

THE     UNIVERSALISTS. 

The  first  regular  preacher  in  America  of  the  distinctive 
doctrines  of  Universalism  was  Rev.  John  Murray,  a  dis- 
ciple of  James  Relly,  who  had  gathered  a  congregation  of 
Universalists  in  London.  The  names  of  a  number  of  min- 
isters of  different  denominations  are  included  in  the  list 
of  those  who  held  or  published  Universalist  views  before 
Murray  arrived  from  England  in  1770.  Among  these  was 
Dr.  George  de  Benneville,  of  Pennsylvania.  Mr.  Murray 
preached  at  various  places,  settling  at  Gloucester.  Mass., 
in  1774,  and  at  Boston  in  1793.  By  him  and  a  few  others 
a  number  of  Universalist  churches  were  established.  At 
the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century  there  were  about  a 
score  of  Universalist  ministers. 

The  Rev.  Hosea  Ballou,  whose  name  is  honored  as  the 
father  of  Universalism  in  its  present  form,  became  promi- 
nent in  the  movement  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  cent- 
ury. His  views  differed  radically  from  those  of  Mr.  Murray. 
In  a  **  Treatise  on  Atonement,"  published  in  1 795,  he  denied 
the  doctrine  of  the  vicarious  sacrifice,  and  insisted  that 
punishment  for  the  sins  of  mortality  is  confined  to  this  life. 
If  there  were  any  punishment  in  the  future  life  it  would 
be,  he  contended,  for  sins  committed  in  that  life.  Some 
years  later  he  expressed  the  belief  that  there  is  no  sin 
beyond  the  grave  and  consequently  no  punishment.      Mr. 

369 


370     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

Murray  had  held  that  Christ  himself  bore  the  punishment 
due  the  sins  of  mankind,  and  therefore  there  would  be  no 
further  punishment.  Of  the  early  Universalists,  Murray 
had  been  a  Methodist,  Winchester  and  Ballou  Baptists. 

There  being  quite  a  number  of  Universalists  who  held, 
contrary  to  the  views  of  Mr.  Ballou,  to  a  limited  future 
punishment,  a  division  occurred  in  1830,  and  an  association 
was  organized  in  the  interests  of  the  doctrine  of  restoration. 
This  association  existed  for  about  eleven  years  and  then 
became  extinct;  some  of  its  preachers  returning  to  the 
Universalist  denomination,  others  becoming  Unitarians. 
The  Restorationists  held  that  there  would  be  a  future 
retribution,  but  that  God  would,  in  his  own  time,  '*  restore 
the  whole  family  of  mankind  to  holiness  and  happiness." 

The  symbol  of  the  Universalist  faith  is  the  Winchester 
''Profession  of  Belief,"  which  was  adopted  in  1 803  by  the 
New  England  Convention,  held  in  Winchester,  N.  H.  It 
is  as  follows : 

"Article  i.  We  believe  that  the  Holy  Scriptures  of 
the  Old  and  New  Testaments  contain  a  revelation  of  the 
character  of  God,  and  of  the  duty,  interest,  and  final  desti- 
nation of  mankind. 

"Article  2.  We  believe  that  there  is  one  God,  whose 
nature  is  love,  revealed  in  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  one 
Holy  Spirit  of  Gcace,  who  will  finally  restore  the  whole 
family  of  mankind  to  holiness  and  happiness. 

"Article  3.  We  believe  that  holiness  and  true  happi- 
ness are  inseparably  connected,  and  that  believers  ought 
to  be  careful  to  maintain  order  and  practice  good  works ; 
for  these  things  are  good  and  profitable  unto  men." 

This  profession  of  belief  has  remained  unaltered  since 
it  was  formulated.     It  is  regarded  as  a  sufficient  general 


THE    UNIVERSALISTS.  37  I 

declaration  of  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  Universalists  for 
the  purpose  of  fellowship.  A  more  particular  knowledge 
of  their  general  belief  may  be  gathered  from  the  utterances 
of  leading  Universalist  writers. 

Universalists  believe  that  God  is  not  only  almighty,  all- 
wise,  and  omniscient,  but  that  he  is  perfectly  holy.  As  a 
holy  God  he  is  hostile  to  sin.  He  forbade  it  at  the  first, 
has  never  consented  to  it,  and  can  never  be  reconciled 
to  it.  His  power,  wisdom,  goodness,  and  holiness  are  all 
pledges  that  there  '*  shall  be  an  end  of  it  in  the  moral  uni- 
verse," and  that  **  universal  righteousness"  shall  be  estab- 
lished. Sin  is  to  be  ended  through  the  conversion  and 
salvation  of  all  sinners,  who  are  to  come  ultimately  into 
holiness  and  perfection.  This  is  to  be  done  by  Jesus  Christ, 
whose  function  it  is  to  bring  man  into  harmony  with  God. 
In  Christ  God  has  set  forth  in  a  single  human  life  his  great 
scheme  of  reconciliation.  There  was  perfect  harmony  be- 
tween this  life  and  God ;  and  Christ,  the  derived  from  the 
underived,  most  intimately  shared  the  nature  of  God  and 
represents  him  to  man  in  complete  fullness.  There  is 
no  shadow  of  variance  between  Christ  and  God.  Christ's 
work  in  the  world  is  to  bring  men  to  light  and  strengthen 
the  will  in  resolution  against  sin.  He  helps  to  overcome 
and  destroy  sin  in  the  individual  soul.  Salvation  is  not 
from  the  demands  of  justice,  nor  from  punishment,  endless 
or  otherwise.  The  demands  of  justice  must  be  met,  the 
consequences  of  sin  cannot  be  avoided.  It  is  the  bondage 
of  present  sin  from  which  salvation  is  necessary.  Salvation 
is  not  exemption  from  the  consequences  of  sin,  but  redemp- 
tion from  the  disposition  to  sin ;  also  from  imperfection. 
Beginning  with  repentance  and  receiving  God's  forgiveness 
for  past  sins,  the  soul  must  put  off  the  old  man  with  all 


372     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

his  sins  and  put  on  the  new  man  created  in  God's  likeness. 
Punishment  is  a  necessary  penalty  for  violated  law.  Divine 
punishment  is  "  not  the  manifestation  of  hatred  but  the 
sign  and  instrument  of  love."  The  punishment  of  sin  is  its 
inevitable  consequences — **  the  wounds,  the  damage,  the 
shame  which  sin  impresses"  upon  the  individual  conscious- 
ness. It  is  wholly  within  the  soul.  The  purpose  of  pun- 
ishment is  to  deter  from  sin  and  to  recover  from  sin.  It 
is  therefore  beneficent,  whence  it  follows  that  it  cannot 
be  endless,  for  endless  punishment  would  be  vindictive  and 
not  beneficent.  The  soul  is  immortal.  It  survives  death 
and  enters  upon  the  disembodied  state  in  the  same  con- 
dition in  which  it  quits  the  embodied.  If  it  has  been 
'*  dwarfed  "  in  the  present  life  ''  by  neglect,"  or  *'  weak- 
ened "  by  abuse,  or  "corrupted"  by  sin,  then  dwarfed, 
weakened,  corrupt,  it  must  enter  the  next  life.  Discipli- 
nary processes  will  be  continued  in  that  life,  and  the  soul 
that  goes  into  it  unrepentant  must  suffer  the  **  thraldom  or 
retribution"  until  the  **  will  consents  to  the  divine  order." 
Even  the  penitent  will  be  subject  to  "  such  discipline  and 
chastening  experiences  as  contribute  to  moral  progress." 

These  are  not  to  be  taken  as  authoritative  expressions 
of  denominational  belief.  The  Winchester  Profession  is 
the  only  acknowledged  symbol.  They  simply  represent 
the  current  teaching  of  the  Universalist  ministry.  Prob- 
ably some  Universalists  would  differ  from  them  in  some 
respects. 

The  Universalist  system  of  government  is  a  modified 
Presbyterianism.  The  parish  manages  its  own  financial 
and  general  interests,  and  calls  or  dismisses  a  pastor ;  but 
it  *'  acknowledges  allegiance  both  to  the  State  and  general 
conventions,  and  is  bound  to  observe  the  laws  they  enact." 


THE    UNIVERSALISTS.  373 

No  State  conventions  can  be  formed  '*  without  a  constitu- 
ency of  at  least  four  parishes."  Such  conventions  exercise 
authority  in  their  own  territory  under  rules  and  limitations 
prescribed  by  the  general  convention.  They  are  composed 
of  all  Universalist  ministers  in  fellowship,  and  of  lay  dele- 
gates from  the  parishes.     They  meet  every  year. 

The  general  convention,  which  is  held  in  October  bien- 
nially, consists  of  clerical  and  lay  delegates  from  each  State 
convention,  in  the  proportion  of  one  of  the  former  to  two 
of  the  latter.  Every  convention  is  entitled  to  send  at  least 
one  clerical  and  two  lay  delegates.  If  it  has  fifty  parishes 
and  clergymen  it  can  send  tnn'ce  as  many  delegates,  with 
an  additional  three  for  every  additional  twenty-five  parishes 
and  clergymen.  The  general  convention  "  exercises  eccle- 
siastical authority  throughout  the  United  States  and  Can- 
ada. It  is  the  court  of  final  appeal  in  cases  of  dispute 
between  State  conventions,  and  in  all  cases  of  discipline 
not  provided  for  and  settled  by  subordinate  bodies,"  and 
has  original  jurisdiction  in  States  and  Territories  where 
subordinate  conventions  have  not  been  organized.  The 
general  convention  is  an  incorporated  body  and  controls 
various  denominational  funds.  Ministers  are  ordained  by 
councils,  consisting  of  ten  ordained  ministers  and  lay  dele- 
gates from  ten  parishes,  called  by  the  parish  desiring  the 
ordination,  with  the  consent  of  the  convention  (State)  com- 
mittee on  fellowship,  ordination,  and  discipline.  There  are 
also  licentiates,  both  of  the  clerical  and  lay  order. 

Among  the  usages  of  the  church  is  the  observance  of 
the  second  Sunday  in  June  as  "  Children's  Sunday."  The 
churches  are  decorated  with  flowers  and  children  are  bap- 
tized. Christmas  and  Easter  are  generally  observed,  and 
a  Sunday  in  October  is  set  apart  for  services  in  memory  of 


374    RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 

members  who  have  died  during  the  year.  The  sacraments 
observed  are  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  mode 
of  baptism  is  left  to  the  choice  of  the  applicant. 

There  are  forty  State  conventions,  besides  those  of 
Canada  and  Scotland,  the  oldest  of  which,  that  of  New 
York,  was  organized  in  1825.  New  York  leads  in  the 
number  of  members,  reporting  8526;  Massachusetts  comes 
second,  with  7142;  Ohio  third,  with  4961;  and  Maine 
fourth,  with  3750.  The  total  of  members  is  4.9,194,  and 
the  aggregate  value  of  church  property  $8,054,333.  The 
average  value  of  the  church  edifices  is  $9750,  and  the 
average  seating  capacity  294. 

Summary  by  States. 

c-r.^.c  OrganI-    Church        S^^**"g 

STATES.  f  E^i^  Ca- 

pacity. 

Alabama 10  6  625 

Arkansas i  . .           

California 9  5  i>95o 

Colorado i  . .          

Connecticut 18  18  6,325 

District  of  Columbia  i  i  500 

Florida 3          i  150 

Georgia 15  12  2,250 

Idaho I           I  200 

Illinois 54  49K  13400 

Indiana 50  2>7  8,850 

Iowa 22  23  6,550 

Kansas 14  8  1,875 

Kentucky 23  12  3,200 

Maine 86  83  26,405 

Maryland i           i  700 

Massachusetts 121  119X  40j55o 

Michigan 27  26  6,600 

Minnesota 13  10  3j5oo 

Mississippi 3  2  200 

Missouri 16  4  1,600 

Nebraska 5          5  775 

New  Hampshire  ...  33  34  9,600 


Value  of 

Com- 

Church 

muni- 

Property. 

cants. 

$3,500 

.365 

16 

96,000 

1,382 

500 

15 

367,000 

2,129 

47,000 

128 

2,000 

45 

3^140 

533 

3,000 

25 

523,850 

3^424 

138,900 

1,950 

118,300 

829 

20,200 

571 

16,525 

434 

542,900 

3.750 

30,000 

3«2 

2,110,193 

7,142 

221,800 

1,549 

192,900 

1,093 

800 

120 

4,800 

711 

38,800 

161 

203,025 

1,204 

THE    UNIVERSALISTS. 


375 


Summary  by  States. — Continued. 

c\^rr^^\  r-j,,,../.!.  Seating  Value  of  Com- 

STATES.                 P/,?f"^-  Sfi^^=  Ca-  Church  muni- 

zauons.  Edifices.  ^^^j^^  Property.  cants. 

New  Jersey 6  6  1,720  $112,300  541 

New  York 168  147  44,600  1,798,250  8,526 

North  Carolina  ....       3  3  500  1,200  255 

Ohio  91  91  24,950  344,800  4,961 

Oregon 5  3  550  9,500  84 

Pennsylvania 42  36  9,850  417,500  2,209 

Rhode  Island 10  10  4,035  301,500  998 

South  Carolina 2  i  100  1,200  loi 

Tennessee i  i  100  750  20 

Texas  18  2  450  5,800  514 

Vermont 65  57  18,010  285,000  2,409 

Virginia i  i  300  5,000  18 

West  Virginia 2  i  100  1,200  56 

Wisconsin 15  15  3,545  85,200  544 

Total 956  832  244,615  $8,054,333  49jI94 


CHAPTER  XLIII. 

INDEPENDENT   CONGREGATIONS. 

These  are  congregations  having  no  connection  with  any 
of  the  denominations.  Some  are  akin  to  Presbyterian, 
others  to  Methodist  and  other  bodies.  Some  are  organ- 
ized on  a  union  basis  and  receive  part  of  their  support 
from  members  of  several  denominations.  There  are  54 
halls,  with  accommodations  for  10,445. 

Summary  by  States. 


STATES.  SS" 

zations. 

Alabama i 

Alaska i 

California 11 

Connecticut 4 

District  of  Columbia  5 

Georgia i 

Illinois 8 

Indiana 16 

Iowa I 

Kansas 9 

Maine 3 

Maryland 2 

Massachusetts 18 

Michigan 2 

Minnesota i 

Missouri 3 

New  Hampshire  ...  3 

New  Jersey 8 

New  York 26 

Ohio 5 

Pennsylvania 17 

Rhode  Island 6 

South  Carolina  ....  i 

Vermont 4 

Total 156 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 

Ca- 
pacity. 

Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

150 

766 

2 

550 

$70,575 

717 

3 

425 

3,600 

353 

3 

1,100 

17,100 

386 

I 

150 

25 

7 

3,970 

140,000 

1,640 

II 

3,200 

8,450 

918 

I 

200 

1,000 

75 

5 

1,090 

7,550 

271 

3 

850 

17,500 

170 

2 

2,200 

40,000 

500 

12 

3,105 

121,350 

684 

2 

375 

6,000 

170 

I 

100 

700 

'       31 

I 

200 

1,500 

156 

I 

200 

1,500 

150 

6 

2,150 

52,300 

552 

23 

10,255 

722,400 

4,232 

6 

2,025 

22,800 

298 

IS 

4,650 

140,900 

948 

4 

1,750 

89,200 

768 

I 

200 

8,000 

.... 

2 

600 

13,575 

166 

112 

39,345 

$1,486,000 

14,126 

376 

GENERAL    STATISTICAL    SUMMARIES. 

1.  Summary  by  States  of  all  denominations. 

2.  Summary  by  denominations. 

3.  Summary  by  denominational  families. 

4.  Summary  of  denominations  according  to  number  of 
communicants. 

5.  Summary    of    denominational    families    according    to 
number  of  communicants. 

6.  Summary    of   denominations    classified   according   to 
polity. 

7.  Summary  of  colored  organizations. 

8.  Summary  of  churches  in  cities. 


Ml 


378     RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 


TABLE  I.— Summary  by  States 


STATES.  Organizations.  Edifices. 

Alabama 6,383  6,013 

Alaska 26  34 

Arizona 131  70 

Arkansas 4,874  35791 

California 1,996  1,505 

Colorado 647  463 

Connecticut ij  i49  ij  I75 

Delaware 382  401 

District  of  Columbia 217  205 

Florida 1,971  i>793 

Georgia 6,899  7,008 

Idaho 247  143 

Illinois 8,296  7j352 

Indiana 6,480        ^     5j944 

Indian  Territory 806  429 

Iowa 5,539  4,539 

Kansas 4,927  2,859 

Kentucky 5,555  4,768 

Louisiana 2,701  2,520 

Maine 1,610  1,346 

Maryland 2,328  2,369 

Massachusetts 2,547  2,458 

Michigan 0 4,798  3,761 

Minnesota 3,429  2,619 

Mississippi 5,  I94  5,009 

Missouri 8,064  6, 121 

Montana 273  164 

Nebraska 2,797  1,822 

Nevada 64  41 

New  Hampshire 783  774 

New  Jersey 2,085  2,204 

New  Mexico 463  381 

New  York 8,237  7,942 

North  Carolina 6,824  6,512 

North  Dakota 868  335 

Ohio 9,384  8,896 

Oklahoma 123  41 

Oregon 969  592 

Pennsylvania 10, 175  9,624 

Rhode  Island 402  386 

South  Carolina 3,815  3,967 

South  Dakota 1,589  774 

Tennessee 6,35 1  5,794 

(a)  This  column  shows  the  percentage  of  population 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL  SUMMARIES. 


379 


OF  ALL  Denominations. 


Seating 

Value  of  Church 

Communi- 

Per cent,  of 

Capacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

Population  {a 

1,702,527 

$6,768,477 

559,171 

36.96 

4,800 

203,650 

14,852 

19,230 

270,816 

26,972 

45 

24 

1,041,040 

3.266,663 

296,208 

26 

26 

422,609 

11,961,914 

280,619 

23 

23 

120,862 

4.743,317 

86,837 

21 

07 

443.979 

16,985,036 

309,341 

41 

45 

111,172 

2,708,825 

48,679 

28 

89 

114,420 

6,313.625 

94,203 

40 

89 

391.132 

2,424,423 

141,734 

36 

21 

2,108,566 

8,228,060 

679,051 

36 

96 

29,527 

281,310 

24.036 

28 

48 

2,260,619 

39.715.245 

1,202,588 

31 

43 

1,890,300 

18,671,131 

693.860 

31 

65 

79.583 

182,266 

29.275 

1,203,185 

16,056,786 

556,817 

29 

12 

708,134 

7,452,269 

336,729 

23 

58 

1.504,736 

12,112,320 

606,397 

32 

63 

617,245 

5.032,194 

399,991 

35 

1^ 

408,767 

6,198,400 

160,271 

24 

24 

718,459 

15,445,946 

379.418 

36 

40 

1,102,772 

46,835,014 

942,751 

42 

II 

1,097,069 

18,682,971 

569,504 

27 

20 

691,631 

12,940,152 

532,590 

40 

91 

1.332,442 

4.392.473 

430,746 

Z7> 

40 

1.859,589 

19.663,737 

735,839 

27 

47 

33.942 

885,950 

32,478 

24 

57 

409,462 

6,443,689 

194,466 

18 

36 

9,890 

208,225 

5,877 

12 

84 

250,035 

4,457,225 

102,941 

27 

34 

803,017 

29,490,414 

508,351 

35 

18 

107,925 

531,925 

105,749 

68 

85 

2,868,490 

140,123,008 

2,171,822 

36 

21 

2,192,835 

7,077,440 

685,194 

42 

35 

69,590 

780,775 

59,496 

32 

56 

2,827,113 

42,159,762 

1,216,469 

33 

13 

8,605 

61,575 

4,901 

7 

58 

142,843 

2,829,150 

70,524 

22 

48 

3.592,019 

85,917,370 

1,726,640 

32 

84 

166,384 

7.583,110 

148,008 

42 

84 

1,199,908 

5.636,236 

508,485 

44 

17 

149.728 

1,761,277 

85,490 

26 

00 

1,812,942 

9,890,443 

552,658 

31 

26 

represented  by  the  number  of  communicants  in  each  State. 


380     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE   I. — Summary  by  States 


STATES. 

Texas 

Utah 

Vermont 

Virginia 

Washington 

West  Virginia 

Wisconsin , 

Wyoming , 

Total 


Organizations. 

Edifices. 

8,766 

5,638 

427 

280 

904 

802 

4,998 

4,894 

892 

532 

3.045 

2.216 

3,726 

3,290 

141 

43 

165,297       142,639 


TABLE  IL— Summary 


DENOMINATIONS.  Ministers.  Organizations. 

Adventists  : 

1.  Evangehcal 34  30 

2.  Advent  Christians 883  580 

3.  Seventh-Day 284  995 

4.  Church  of  God 19  29 

5.  Life  and  Advent  Union 50  28 

6.  Churches  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  .  94  95 

Total  Adventists 1,364  1,757 

Baptists  : 

1.  Regular  (North) 6,685  7,907 

2.  Regular  (South) 8,957  16,238 

3.  Regular  (Colored) 5,468  12,533 

4.  Six-Principle 14  18 

5.  Seventh-Day 115  106 

6.  Freewill 1,493  1,586 

7.  Original  Freewill 118  167 

8.  General 332  399 

9.  Separate 19  24 

10.  United 25  204 

11.  Baptist  Church  of  Christ 80  152 

12.  Primitive 2,040  3,222 

13.  Old  Two-Seed-in-the-SpiritPredes- 

tinarian 300  473 

Total  Baptists 25,646  43,029 

(a)  This  column  shows  the  percentage  of  population 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


381 


OF  ALL  Denominations. — Contmued. 


Seating 

Value  of  Church 

Capacity. 

Property. 

1,567,745 

$8,682,337 

89,695 

1,493,791 

237,000 

4,643,800 

1,490,675 

10,473,943 

126,109 

2,408,625 

601,238 

3,723,383 

846,408 

14,525,841 

8,385 

368,625 

^,596,378 

$679,694,439 

Communi- 
cants. 

Per  cent,  of 
Population  {a). 

677,151 
128,115 

30   30 
61.62 

106,315 

569,235 
58,798 

31-98 

34-37 
16.83 

192,477 

556,483 
11,705 

25.23 

32.98 
19.28 

20,618,307 


32.92 


BY  Denominations. 


Church 

Seating 

Edifices. 

Capacity. 

23 

5,855 

294 

80,286 

418 

94,627 

I 

200 

8 

2,250 

30 

7,530 

774 

190,748 

7,070 

2,180,773 

13,502 

4,349,407 

11,987 

3,440,970 

14 

3,600 

78 

21,467 

1,225 

349,309 

125 

41,400 

209 

71,850 

19 

5,650 

179 

60,220 

135 

40,885 

2,849 

899,273 

397 

134,730 

Value  of  Church 

Communi- 

Property, 

cants. 

$61,400 

1,147 

465,605 

25,816 

645,075 

28,991 

1,400 

647 

16,790 

1,018 

46,075 

2,872 

$1,236,345 

60,491 

$49,530,504 

800,450 

18,196,637 

1,280,066 

9,038,549 

1,348,989 

19,500 

937 

265,260 

9,143 

3,115,642 

87,898 

57,005 

11,864 

201,140 

21,362 

9,200 

1,599 

80,150 

13,209 

56,755 

8,254 

1,649,851 

121,347 

172,230 

12,851 

37,789  11,599,534  $82,392,423 

represented  by  the  number  of  communicants  in  each  State. 


3,717,969 


382     RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 


TABLE  II.— Summary  by 


Organi- 
zations. 


DENOMINATIONS.  Ministers. 

Brethren  (River): 

1.  Brethren  in  Christ 128  78 

2.  Old  Order  or  Yorker 7  8 

3.  United  Zion's  Children 20  25 

Total  River  Brethren 155  in 

Brethren  (Plymouth)  : 

Brethren  (I. )   109 

Brethren  (II.) 88 

Brethren  (III. ) 86 

Brethren  (IV. ) 31 

Total  Plymouth  Brethren 314 

Catholics  : 

1.  Roman  Catholic 9>i57  io>23i 

2.  Greek  Catholic  (Uniates) 9  14 

3.  Russian  Orthodox 13  12 

4.  Greek  Orthodox i  i 

5.  Armenian  7  6 

6.  Old  Catholic i  4 

7.  Reformed  Catholic 8  8 


Total 9,196     10,276 


Catholic  Apostolic 95  10 

Chinese  Temples 47 

Christad^lphians 63 

Christians  : 

1.  Christians  (Christian  Connection) Ij3So  1,281 

2.  Christian  Church  South 85  143 


Total  Christians i,435  Ij424 

Christian  Missionary  Association 10  13 

Christian  Scientists 26  221 

Christian  Union 183  294 

Church  of  God  (Winebrennerian) 522  479 

Church  Triumphant  (Schweinfurth) ...  12 

Church  of  the  New  Jerusalem 119  I54 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES,  383 


Denominations.- 

— Coniimced. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Capacity. 

Value  of  Church 
Property. 

Communi- 
cants. 

45 
25 

19,005 
3,100 

$73,050 
8,300 

2,688 
214 
525 

70 

22,105 

$81,350 

3,427 

•• 

$i;265 
200 

2,289 
2,419 

1,235 
718 

•• 



$1,465 

6,661 

8,776 
13 

23 

I 

3 

3.365,754 
5,228 

3,150 

75 
700 

$118,069,746 

63,300 

220,000 

5,000 

13,320 

6,231,417 
10,850 

13,504 
100 

1,000 

8,816 

3,374,907 

$118,371,366 

6,257,871 

3 

47 

4 

750 
950 

$66,050 
62,000 
2,700 

1,394 
1,277 

963 
135 

301,692 
46,005 

347,697 

$1,637,202 
138,000 

90,718 
13,004 

1,098 

$1,775,202 

103,722 

II 

7 
184 
338 

88 

3,300 

1,500 

68,000 

115,530 

20,810 

$3,900 
40,666 
234,450 
643,185 
15,000 

1,386,455 

754 

8,724 

18,214 

22,511 

384 

7,095 

384     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  II.— Summary  by 


DENOMINATIONS. 

Communistic  Societies  {a) : 

Shakers 

Amana 

Harmony 

Separatists , 

New  Icaria 

Altruists 

Adonai  Shomo 

Church  Triumphant  (Koreshan  Ecclesia) 


Ministers.         ^r?^"^- 
zations. 


Total  Communistic  Societies, 


32 


Congregationalists . 
Disciples  of  Christ. 


5,058 
3,773 


4,868 
7,246 


DUNKARDS: 

1.  Dunkards  or  German  Baptists  (Conserv. ). . 

2.  Dunkards  or  German  Baptists  (Old  Order) 

3.  Dunkards  or  German  Baptists  (Progressive) 

4.  Seventh-Day  Baptists  (German) 


Total  Dunkards. 


1,622 

237 
224 

5 
2,088 


720 

J35 

128 

6 

989 


Evangelical  Association 


1,235        2,310 


Friends  : 

1.  Friends  (Orthodox) 

2.  Friends  (Hicksite)  . 

3.  Friends  (Wilburite) 

4.  Friends  (Primitive) 


Total  Friends. 


Friends  of  the  Temple 

German  Evangelical  Protestant 
German  Evangelical  Synod.  .  .  . 


Jews 


Jewish  Congregations  (Orthodox) . 
Jewish  Congregations  (Reformed) 


1,113 

115 

38 

II 

794 
201 

52 
9 

1,277 

1,056 

4 

44 

680 

4 
870 

125 

75 

316 

217 

Total  Jews 200  533 

(a)  The  Bruederhoef  Mennonites  also  observe  a  communal  life.     They 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES.  385 

Denominations. — Continued. 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Capacity. 

Value  of  Church 
Property. 

Communi- 
cants. 

16 

22 

I 

I 

5,650 

2,800 

500 

500 

$36,800 

15,000 

10,000 

3,000 

6,000 
36,000 

$106,800 

1,728 

1,600 

250 

200 

21 

25 

20 

205 

40 

9,450 

4,049 

4,736 
5,324 

1,553,080 
1,609,452 

$43,335,437 
12,206,038 

512,771 
641,051 

854 

63 
96 

3 

353,586 

25,750 

32,740 

1,960 

414,036 

$1,121,541 

80,770 

145,770 

14,550 

61,101 

4,411 

8,089 

194 

1,016 

$1,362,631 

73,795 

1,899 

479,335 

$4,785,680 

133,313 

725 
213 

52 
5 

215,431 

72,568 

13,169 

1,050 

$2,795,784 

1,661,850 

67,000 

16,700 

80,655 
21,992 

4,329 

232 

995 

302,218 

$4,541,334 

107,208 

5 
52 

785 

1,150 

35,175 
245,781 

$15,300 
1,187,450 
4,614,490 

340 

36,156 

187,432 

122 

179 

46,837 
92,397 

$2,802,0^0 
6,952,225 

57,597 
72,899 

301  139.234  $9,754,275  130,496 

are  reported  in  connection  with  the  other  Mennonite  branches. 


386     RELIGIOUS  FORCES  C/    THE    UNITED  STATES. 


TABLE  II.— Summary  by 


DENOMINATIONS,  Ministers.        zatfons" 


Latter-Day  Saints  : 

1.  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-Day  Saints  543  425 

2.  Reorganized  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat- 

ter-Day Saints 1,500  431 

Total  Latter-Day  Saints 2,043  856 

Lutherans  : 

General  Bodies, 

1.  General  Synod 966  1,424 

2.  United  Synod  in  the  South 201  414 

3.  General  Council i? I53  2,044 

4.  Synodical  Conference 1,282  i,934 

hidependent  Synods. 

5.  Joint  Synod  of  Ohio,  etc 297  421 

6.  Buffalo 20  27 

7.  Hauge's 58  175 

8.  Norwegian  in  North  America 194  489 

9.  Michigan 37  65 

10.  Danish  in  America 108  131 

1 1.  German  Augsburg 49  23 

12.  Danish  Church  Association 40  5° 

13.  Icelandic  Synod i  13 

14.  Immanuel 21  21 

15.  Suomai  Synod 8  11 

16.  United  Norwegian  of  America 109  i,  122 

Independent  Congregations 47  231 

Total  Lutherans 4,59i  8,595 

Mennonites  : 

1.  Mennonite 336  246 

2.  Bruederhoef  {a) 9  5 

3.  Amish 228  97 

4.  Old  Amish 71  22 

5.  Apostohc 2  2 

6.  Reformed 43  34 

7.  General  Conference 95  45 

8.  Church  of  God  in  Christ 18  18 

9.  Old(Wisler) 17  15 

(rt)  The  Bruederhoef  Mennonites  observe  a  communal 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES.  387 

Denominations. — Continued. 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Capacity. 

Value  of  Church 
Property, 

Communi- 
cants. 

266 

92,102 

$825,506 

144,352 

122 

30,790 
122,892 

226,285 
$1,051,791 

21,773 

388 

166,125 

1,322 

471,819 

$8,919,170 

164,640 

379 

138,453 

1,114,065 

37,457 

1,554 

588,825 

11,119,286 

324,846 

1,531 

443.185 

7,804,313 

357,153 

443 

149,338 

$1,639,087 

69,505 

25 

5,793 

84,410 

4,242 

100 

30,500 

214,395 

14,730 

275 

78,988 

806.825 

55,452 

53 

14,613 

164,770 

11,482 

75 

14,760 

129,700 

10,181 

23 

7,560 

111,060 

7,010 

Ty-}, 

5,700 

44,775 

3,493 

4 

1,300 

7,200 

1,991 

19 

5,300 

94,200 

5,580 

8 

1,915 

12,898 

1,385 

669 

185.242 

1,544,455 

119,972 

188 

62,344 

1,249,745 

41,953 

6,701 

2,205,635 

$35,060,354 

1,231,072 

198 

70,605 

$317,045 

17,078 

5 

600 

4,500 

352 

61 

15,430 

76,450 

10,101 

I 

200 

1,500 

2,038 

I 

225 

1,200 

209 

29 

7,465 

52,650 

1,655 

43 

13,880 

119,350 

5,670 

3 

400 

1,600 

471 

12 

4,120 

8,015 

610 

life  and  constitute  properly  a  communistic  society. 


388     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE   IL— Summary  by 


DENOMINATIONS.  Ministers. 

Mennonites — Cofitifiued: 

10.  Bundes  Conference 37 

1 1.  Defenseless i8 

12.  Brethren  in  Christ 31 

Total  Mennonites 905 

Methodists  : 

1.  Methodist  Episcopal i5j423 

2.  Union  American  Methodist  Episcopal 32 

3.  African  Methodist  Episcopal 3j32I 

4.  African  Union  Methodist  Protestant 40 

5.  African  Methodist  Episcopal  Zion 1,565 

6.  Methodist  Protestant 1,441 

7.  Wesleyan  Methodist 600 

8.  Methodist  Episcopal,  South 4,801 

9.  Congregational  Methodist 150 

10.  Congregational  Methodist  (Colored) 5 

11.  New  Congregational  Methodist 20 

12.  Zion  Union  Apostolic 30 

13.  Colored  Methodist  Episcopal 1,800 

14.  Primitive  Methodist 60 

15.  Free  Methodist 657 

16.  Independent  Methodist 8 

17.  Evangelist  Missionary 47 

Total  Methodists 30,000 

Moravians 114 

Presbyterians  : 

1.  Presbyterian  in  the  United  States  of  Amer- 

ica (Northern) 5)934 

2.  Cumberland  Presbyterian 1,861 

3.  Cumberland  Presbyterian  (Colored) 393 

4.  Welsh  Calvinistic 100 

5.  United  Presbyterian  7Z^ 

6.  Presbyterian  in  the  United  States  (Southern)  1,129 

7.  Associate  Church  of  North  America 12 

8.  Associate  Reformed  Synod  of  the  South  ...  133 

9.  Reformed  Presbyterian  in  the  United  States 

(Synod) 124 


Organi- 
zations. 


12 
9 

45 
550 


25,861 

42 

2,481 

40 

1,704 

2,529 

565 

15,017 

214 

9 

24 

32 

1,759 

84 

1,102 

15 
II 

51,489 


94 


6,717 

2,791 

224 

187 

866 

2,391 

31 

116 

115 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SVMM ARIES.  389 


Denominations. — Continued. 

Church                        Seating  Value  of  Church  Communi- 

Edifices.                      Capacity.                               Property.  cants. 

II                            3,720                               $11,350  1^388 

8        2,070          10,540  856 

34       10,625          395600  1,113 


406       129,340        $643,800       41,541 


22,844 

6,302,708 

$96,723,408 

2,240,354 

35 

11,500 

187,600 

2,279 

4,124 

1,160,838 

6,468,280 

452,725 

27 

7,161 

54,440 

3,415 

1,587 

565,577 

2,714,128 

349,788 

1,924 

571,266 

3,683,337 

141,989 

342 

86,254 

393,250 

16,492 

12,688 

3,359.466 

18,775,362 

1,209,976 

150 

46,400 

41,680 

8,765 

5 

585 

525 

319 

17 

5,150 

3,750 

1,059 

27 

10,100 

15,000 

2,346 

1,653 

541,464 

1,713,366 

129,383 

78 

20,930 

291.993 

4,764 

620 

165,004 

805,085 

22,110 

14 

7,725 

266,975 

2,569 

3 

1,050 

2,000 

951 

46,138 

12,863,178 

$132,140,179 

4,589,284 

114       31,615        $681,250       11,781 


6,664 

2,225,044 

$74,455,200 

788,224 

2,024 

669,507 

3,515,510 

164,940 

183 

52,139 

195,826 

12,956 

189 

44,445 

625,875 

12,722 

832 

264,298 

5,408,084 

94,402 

2,288 

690,843 

8,812,152 

179,721 

23 

4,849 

29,200 

1,053 

116 

37,050 

211,850 

8,501 

"5 

37,095 

1,071,400 

10,574 

390 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  II.— Summary  by 


DENOMINATIONS.  ^^^jq^S. 


Ministers.         P/.ff^i" 


Presbyterians— C9;//z;zz/^^/ 

10.  Reformed  Presbyterian  in  North  America 

(General  Synod) 29  33 

11.  Reformed  Presbyterian  (Covenanted) i  4 

12.  Reformed  Presbyterian  in  the  United  States 

and  Canada i  i 

Total  Presbyterians  10,448      13,476 


Protestant  Episcopal: 

1.  Protestant  Episcopal 4>i46  5>o^9 

2.  Reformed  Episcopal 78  83 

Total  Episcopal 4^224  5, 102 


Reformed  : 

1.  Reformed  in  America 558  572 

2.  Reformed  in  United  States 880  1,510 

3.  Christian  Reformed 68  99 

Total  Reformed 1,506  2, 181 


Salvation  Army ...  329 

Schwenkfeldians 3  4 

Social  Brethren 17  20 

Society  for  Ethical  Culture ...  4 

Spiritualists ...  334 

Theosophical  Society ...  40 

United  Brethren: 

1.  United  Brethren  in  Christ 2,267  3,731 

2.  United  Brethren  (Old  Constitution) 531  795 

Total  United  Brethren 2,798  4,526 


Unitarians 5^5  42i 

Universalists 708  956 

Independent  Congregations  54  156 


Grand  Total 111,036    165,297 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES.  391 

Denominations. — Continued. 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Capacity. 

I 

12,380 
200 

I 

800 

12,469         4,038,650 


5,019  1,336,952 

84  23,925 


2,080 


27 

6 
II 


30 

I 


2,837 
578 

3,415 


424 
832 
112 


142,639 


Value  of  Church 
Property. 

Communi- 
cants. 

$469,000 

4,602 

2>1 

75,000 

600 

$94,869,097 

1.278,332 

$81,220,317 
1,615,101 

532,054 
8,455 

5,103  1,360,877  $82,835,418  540,509 


670 
1,304 

106 


257,922 
534,254 

33.755 

$10,340,159 

7.975,583 
428,500 

$18,744,242 

92,970 

204,018 

12,470 

825,931 

309.458 

12,055 
1,925 
8,700 

20,450 
200 

$38,150 

12,200 

8,700 

573,650 
600 

8,742 
306 

913 

1,064 

45.030 
695 

816,458 
174,680 

$4,292,643 
644,940 

202,474 
22,807 

991,138 

$4,937,583 

225,281 

165,090 

244-615 

39.345 

$10,335,100 

8,054,333 
1,486,000 

67.749 
49,194 
14,126 

.596,378 

$679,694,439 

20,618,307 

392     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES, 

TABLE  III.— Summary  by 


DENOMINATIONS.  Ministers.       ^atfons' 


Adventists  (6  bodies) 1,364  i,757 

Baptists  (13  bodies) 25,646  43,029 

Brethren  (River)  (3  bodies) 155  in 

Brethren  (Plymouth)  (4  bodies) 314 

Cathohcs  (7  bodies)  9?  196  10,276 

CathoHc  Apostolic 95  10 

Chinese  Temples ....  47 

Christadelphians ....  63 

Christians  (2  bodies)   1,435  i'424 

Christian  Missionary  Association 10  13 

Christian  Scientists 26  221 

Christian  Union 183  294 

Church  of  God  (Winebrennerian) 522  479 

Church  Triumphant  (Sclnveinfurth) ....  12 

Church  of  the  New  Jerusalem 1 19  154 

Communistic  Societies  (8  bodies) ....  32 

Congregationalists   5?o58  4,868 

Disciples  of  Christ 3^773  7,246 

Dunkards  (4  bodies) 2,088  989 

Evangelical  Association i>235  2,310 

Friends  (4  bodies) " 1,277  1,056 

Friends  of  the  Temple 4  4 

German  Evangelical  (Protestant) 44  52 

German  Evangelical  Synod 680  870 

Jewish  Congregations  (2  bodies) 200  533 

Latter-Day  Saints  (2  bodies) 2,043  ^56 

Lutherans  (16  bodies)  and  independent  con- 
gregations    4-59^  ^j595 

Mennonites  (12  bodies) 905  550 

Methodists  (17  bodies) 30,000  51,489 

Moravians 114  94 

Presbyterians  (12  bodies) 10,448  13,476 

Protestant  Episcopal  (2  bodies) 4,224  5,102 

Reformed  (3  bodies) 1,506  2, 181 

Salvation  Army ....  329 

Schwenkfeldians 3  4 

Social  Brethren 17  20 

Society  for  Ethical  Culture ....  4 

Spiritualists  .  .  •  •  334 

Theosophical  Society ....  40 

United  Brethren  (2  bodies) 2,798  4,526 

Unitarians 515  42 1 

Universalists 708  956 

Independent  Congregations 54  156 

Total II  1,036  165,297 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


393 


Denominational  Families. 


Church 

Seating 

Value  of  Church 

Communi- 

Edifices. 

Capacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

774 

190,748 

$1,236,345 

60,491 

37,789 

11,599,534 

82,392,423 

3,717,969 

70 

22,105 

81,350 

3,427 

1,465 

6,661 

8,816 

3,374,907 

118,371,366 

6,257,871 

3 

750 

66,050 

1,394 

47 

62,000 

4 

950 

2,700 

1,277 

1,098 

347,697 

1,775,202 

103,722 

II 

3,300 

3,900 

0^54 

7 

1,500 

40,666 

8,724 

184 

68,000 

234,450 

18,214 

338 

115,530 

643,185 

22,511 

15,000 

384 

"'88 

20,810 

1,386,455 

7,095 

40 

9,450 

106,800 

4,049 

4,736 

1,553,080 

43,335,437 

512,771 

5.324 

1,609,452 

12,206,038 

641,051 

1,016 

414,036 

1,362,631 

73,795 

1,899 

479,335 

4,785,680 

133,313 

995 

302,218 

4,541,334 

107,208 

5 

1,150 

15,300 

340 

52 

35,175 

1,187,450 

36,156 

785 

245,781 

4,614,490 

187,432 

301 

139,234 

9,754,275 

130,496 

388 

122,892 

1,051,791 

166,125 

6,701 

2,205,635 

35,060,354 

1,231,072 

406 

129,340 

643,800 

41,541 

46,138 

12,863,178 

132,140,179 

4,589,284 

114 

31,615 

681,250 

11,781 

12,469 

4,038,650 

94,869,097 

1,278,332 

5,103 

1,360,877 

82,835,418 

540,509 

2,080 

825,931 

18,744,242 

309,458 

27 

12,055 

38,150 

8,742 

6 

1,925 

12,200 

306 

II 

8,700 

8,700 

913 
1,064 

30 

20,450 

573,650 

45,030 

I 

200 

600 

695 

3,415 

991,138 

4,937,583 

225,281 

424 

165,090 

10,335,100 

67,749 

832 

244,615 

8,054,333 

49,194 

112 

39,345 

1,486,000 

14,126 

142,639 

43,596,378 

$679,694,439 

20,618,307 

394     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES, 


TABLE  IV.— Denominations  According  to  Number 
OF  Communicants. 

DENOMINATIONS.  Communicants. 

1.  Roman  Catholic 6,231,417 

2.  Methodist  Episcopal 2,240,354 

3.  Regular  Baptist  (Colored) 1,348,989 

4.  Regular  Baptist  (South) 1,280,066 

5.  Methodist  Episcopal  (South) 1,209,976 

6.  Regular  Baptist  (North)   800,450 

7.  Presbyterian  (North) 788,224 

8.  Disciples  of  Christ 641,051 

9.  Protestant  Episcopal 532,054 

10.  Congregational 512,771 

11.  African  Methodist  Episcopal 452,725 

12.  Lutheran  Synodical  Conference 3575  153 

13.  African  Methodist  Episcopal  Zion 349,788 

14.  Lutheran  General  Council   324,846 

15.  Reformed  in  the  United  States 204,018 

16.  United  Brethren  in  Christ 202,474 

17.  German  Evangelical  Synod 187,432 

18.  Presbyterian  (South)  179,721 

19.  Cumberland  Presbyterian 164,940 

20.  Lutheran  General  Synod 164,640 

21.  Latter-Day  Saints 144,352 

22.  Methodist  Protestant 141,989 

23.  Evangelical  Association 133)313 

24.  Colored  Methodist  Episcopal 129,383 

25.  Primitive  Baptist 121,347 

26.  United  Norwegian  Lutheran 119,972 

27.  United  Presbyterian 94)402 

28.  Reformed  in  America 92,970 

29.  Christian 90j7i8 

30.  Freewill  Baptist 87,808 

31.  Friends  (Orthodox) 80,655 

32.  Jewish  (Reformed) 72,899 

33.  Lutheran  Synod  of  Ohio 69,505 

34.  Unitarian   67,749 

35.  Dunkards  (Conservative) 61,101 

36.  Jewish  (Orthodox)   57)597 

yj.  Norwegian  Lutheran 55)452 

38.  Universalist 49)  i94 

39.  Spiritualist 45)030 

40.  Lutheran  United  Synod  in  the  South 37)457 

41.  German  Evangelical  Protestant 36,156 

42.  Seventh-Day  Adventist 28,991 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES.  395 


TABLE    IN  .—Continued. 

DENOMINATIONS.  Communicants. 

43.  Advent  Christian 25,816 

44.  United  Brethren  (Old  Constitution) 22,807 

45.  Church  of  God 22,5 1 1 

46.  Free  Methodist 22, 1 10 

47.  Friends  (Hicksite) 21,992 

48.  Latter-Day  Saints  (Reorganized) 21,773 

49.  General  Baptist 21,362 

50.  Christian  Union 18,214 

51.  Mennonite 17,078 

52.  Wesleyan  Methodist 16,492 

53.  Range's  Lutheran  Synod I4j730 

Independent  Congregations 14,126 

54.  Russian  Orthodox 13,504 

55.  United  Baptist 13,209 

56.  Christian  (South) 13,004 

57.  Cumberland  Presbyterian  (Colored) 12,956 

58.  Old  Two-Seed  Baptist 12,851 

59.  Welsh  Calvinistic  Methodist 12,722 

60.  Christian  Reformed 12,470 

61.  Original  Freewill  Baptist 1 1,864 

62.  Moravian 11,781 

63.  Michigan  Lutheran  Synod 11,482 

64.  Greek-  Catholic  (Uniates) 10,850 

65.  Reformed  Presbyterian  (Synod) 10,574 

66.  Danish  Lutheran  Church 10, 181 

67.  Amish  Mennonite 10,  loi 

68.  Seventh-Day  Baptist 9,  I43 

69.  Congregational  Methodist 8,765 

70.  Salvation  Army 8,742 

71.  Christian  Scientist 8,724 

72.  Associated  Reformed  Synod  (South) 8,501 

73.  Reformed  Episcopal 8,455 

74.  Baptist  Church  in  Christ 8,254 

75.  Dunkards  (Progressive) , 8,089 

']^.  New  Jerusalem 7,095 

']'].  Augsburg  Lutheran  Synod 7, 010 

78.  General  Conference  Mennonite 5,670 

79.  Immanuel  Lutheran  Synod 5,5^0 

80.  Primitive  Methodist 4,764 

81.  Reformed  Presbyterian  (General  Synod) 4,602 

82.  Dunkards  (Old  Order) 4,41 1 

83.  Friends  (Wilburite) 4,329 

84.  Buffalo  Lutheran  Synod 4,242 

85.  Danish  Lutheran  Association 3,493 


396     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE    \N .—Continued. 


DENOMINATIONS.  Communicants. 


86.  African  Union  Methodist  Protestant 3)4i5 

87.  Churches  of  God  (Adventist) 2,872 

88.  Brethren  in  Christ 2,688 

89.  Independent  Methodist 2,569 

90.  (Plymouth)  Brethren  II 2,419 

91.  Zion  Union  Apostohc ,  2,346 

92.  (Plymouth)  Brethren  1 2,289 

93.  Union  American  Methodist  Episcopal 2,279 

94.  Old  Amish  (Mennonite) 2,038 

95.  Icelandic  Lutheran  Synod Ij99I 

96.  Shakers  i>728 

97.  Reformed  Mennonite 1)655 

98.  Amana  Society , 1,600 

99.  Separate  Baptist i)599 

100.  Catholic  Apostolic Ij394 

loi.  Bundes  Conference  (Mennonite) i>388 

102.  Suomai  Lutheran  Synod i)385 

103.  Christadelphian i)277 

104.  (Plymouth)  Brethren  III 1,235 

105.  Evangelical  Adventist i)i47 

106.  Brethren  in  Christ  (Mennonite) ijii3 

107.  Ethical  Culture 1,064 

108.  New  Congregational  Methodist i)059 

109.  Associate  Church  of  North  America i)053 

1 10.  Life  and  Advent  Union 1,018 

111.  Reformed  Catholic i  ,060 

112.  Evangelist  Missionary 951 

1 13.  Six-Principle  Baptist 937 

1 14.  Social  Brethren 913 

115.  Defenseless  Mennonite 856 

1 16.  Christian  Missionary  Association 754 

117.  (Plymouth)  Brethren  IV 718 

118.  Theosophical  Society 695 

1 19.  Old  Catholic 665 

120.  Church  of  God  (Adventist) 647 

121.  Old  (Wisler)  Mennonite 610 

122.  Reformed  Presbyterian  in  the  United  States 

and  Canada 600 

123.  United  Zion's  Children 525 

124.  Church  of  God  in  Christ  (Mennonite) 471 

125.  Church  Triumphant  (Schweinfurth) 384 

126.  Bruederhoef  Mennonite 352 

127.  Friends  of  the  Temple 340 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES.  397 


TABLE    \N .—Continued. 


DENOMINATIONS.  Communicaiits. 


128.  Armenian  Catholic 335 

129.  Congregational  Methodist  (Colored) 319 

130.  Schwenkfeldian   306 

131.  Harmony  Society 250 

132.  Friends  (Primitive) 232 

133.  Old  Order,  or  Yorker  Brethren 214 

134.  Apostolic  Mennonite 209 

135.  Church  Triumphant  (Koreshan  Ecclesia) 205 

136.  Separatists 200 

137.  Seventh-Day  Baptist,  German 194 

138.  Greek  Orthodox 100 

139.  Reformed  Presbyterian  Covenanted 37 

140.  Altruists 25 

141.  New  Icarians 21 

142.  Adonai  Shomo 20 

143.  Chinese  Temples  (no  members  reported). 


TABLE  v.— Denominational  Families  According  to 
Number  of  Communicants. 

DENOMINATIONS.  Communicants. 

1.  Catholic 6,257,871 

2.  Methodist • 4,589,284 

3-  Baptist 3,717,969 

4.  Presbyterian 1,278,332 

5.  Lutheran  1,231,072 

6.  Episcopalian 540,509 

7.  Reformed 309,458 

8.  United  Brethren 225,281 

9.  Latter-Day  Saints 166,125 

10.  Jewish .  130,496 

11.  Friends 107,208 

12.  Christians 103,722 

13.  Dunkards 73,795 

14.  Adventist 60,491 

15.  Mennonite 4Ij54I 

16.  (Plymouth)  Brethren 6,661 

17.  Communistic  Societies 4j049 

18.  (River)  Brethren 3>427 


398     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE   VI. — Denominations 


DENOMINATIONS. 


Adventist  (4  bodies) 

Baptist  (12  iDodies) 

(River)  Brethren  (all) 

(Plymouth)  Brethren  (all) 

Catholic  (Reformed) 

Christians  (all) 

Christadelphian 

Christian  Missionary  Association , 

Christian  Scientist 

Christian  Union 

Chinese  Temples   

Congregational 

Disciples  of  Christ 

Friends  of  the  Temple 

German  Evangelical  Protestant . 

Jewish  Congregations  (all) 

Lutheran  (2  bodies)  {b) 

Methodist  Independent 

Schwenkfeldian 

Social  Brethren 

Society  for  Ethical  Culture 

Spiritualist , 

Theosophical  Society 

Unitarian 

Independent  Congregations 


CONGRE 

Ministers. 

Organi- 

zations. 

1,061 

733 

25,528 

42,862 

155 

III 

314 

8 

8 

1,435 

1,424 

63 

10 

13 

26 

221 

183 

294 

47 

5,058 

4,868 

Zm2> 

7,246 

4 

4 

44 

52 

200 

533 

1,626 

2,586 

8 

15 

3 

4 

20 

4 

334 

40 

515 

421 

54 

156 

Epis 


Catholic  (6  bodies) 

Catholic  Apostolic 

Evangelical  Association .  . 
Latter-Day  Saints  (all)  .  . 

Methodist  (8  bodies) 

Moravian 

Protestant  Episcopal  (all) 
United  Brethren  (all) 


(rt)  For  explanations,  see  page 


9,188 

10,268 

95 

10 

1,235 
2,043 
7,019 

2,310 

856 

46,907 

114 

94 

4,224 
2,798 

5,102 
4,526 

page 

of  Introduction. 

GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


399 


Classified  According  to  Polity  (a). 


GATIONAL. 


Church 
Edifices. 


355 

37,664 

70 


1,098 

4 
II 

7 
184 

47 

4,736 

5,324 

5 

52 

301 

2,162 

14 
6 


30 

I 
424 
112 


Seating 

Value  of  Church 

Communi- 

Capacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

95,921 

$589,870 

30,853 

11,558,134 

82,335,418 

3,706,105 

22,105 

81,350 

3,427 

1,465 

6,661 
1,000 

347,697 

1,775,202 

103,722 

950 

2,700 

1,277 

2>,Zoo 

3,900 

754 

1,500 

40,666 

8,724 

68,000 

234,450 
62,000 

18,214 

1,553,080 

43,335,437 

512,771 

1,609,452 

12,206,038 

641,051 

1,150 

15,300 

340 

35,175 

1,187,450 

36,156 

139,324 

9,754,275 

130,496 

654,867 

10,693,145 

468,611 

7,725 

266,975 

2,569 

1,925 

12,200 

306 

8,700 

8,700 

913 
1,064 

20,450 

573,650 

45,030 

200 

600 

695 

165,090 

10,335,100 

67,749 

39,345 

1,486,000 

14,126 

COPAL. 


8,816 

3 

1,899 

388 

42,961 

114 

5,103 

3,415 


3,374,907 

$118,371,366 

6,256,871 

750 

66,050 

1,394 

479,335 

4,785,680 

133,313 

122,892 

1,051,791 

166,125 

1,952,703 

126,599,144 

4,387,802 

31,615 

681,250 

11,781 

1,360,877 

82,835,418 

540,509 

991.138 

4,937,583 

225,281 

(/')  Inchiding  independent  congregations. 


400     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  VI. — Denominations  Classified 

Presby 

DENOMINATIONS.  Ministers.  Organi- 

zations. 

Adventist  (2  bodies) 303  1,024 

Baptist,  Original  Freewill 118  167 

Church  of  God  (Winebrennerian) 522  479 

Church  of  the  New  Jerusalem 119  154 

Dunkards  (all) 2,088  989 

Friends  (all.)   1,277  i?o56 

German  Evangelical  Synod 680  870 

Lutheran  {a)  (14  bodies) 2,965  6,009 

Mennonites  (all) 905  550 

Methodist  (8  bodies) 2,973  4^567 

Presbyterians  (all) 10,448  13,476 

Reformed  (all)   1,506  2,181 

Salvation  Army 329 

UniversaHst 708  956 

Recapit 

Congregational 39j7o8        62,373 

Episcopal 46,716        7^^^73 

Presbyterian 24,612        32,807 

Grand  Total 111,036       165,253 


TABLE   VII.— Summary  of 
Colored 

DENOMINATIONS.  Organizations. 

Regular  Baptist  (Colored) 12,533 

Union  American  Methodist  Episcopal 42 

African  Methodist  Episcopal 2,481 

African  Union  Methodist  Protestant 40 

{a)  For  explanations,  see 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL  SUMMARIES, 


401 


According  to  Polity. — Cotttitmed. 


TERIAN. 

Church 

Seating 

Value  of  Church 

Communi- 

Edifices. 

Capacity. 

Property. 

cants. 

419 

94,827 

$646,475 

29.638 

125 

41,400 

57.005 

11,864 

33^ 

115.530 

643,185 

22,511 

88 

20,810 

1.386,455 

7.095 

1,016 

414,036 

1,362,631 

73.795 

995 

302,218 

4.541.334 

107,208 

785 

245,781 

4,614,490 

187,432 

4,539 

1,550,768 

24,367,209 

762,461 

406 

129,340 

643.800 

41,541 

3,163 

902,750 

5,274,060 

198,913 

12,469 

4,038,650 

94,869,097 

1.278,332 

2,080 

825,931 

18,744,242 

309.458 

27 

12,055 

38,150 

8,742 

832 

244,615 

8,054,333 

49,194 

ULATION. 

52,618 

16,334,000 

$175,001,891 

5,802,614 

62,699 

18,314,217 

339,328,282 

11,723,076 

27,282 

8,938,711 
43,586,928 

165,242,466 
$679,572,639 

3.088,184 

142,599 

20,613,874 

Colored  Organizations. 


Denominations. 


page 


Church 
Edifices. 

Seating 
Capacity. 

Value  of  Church 
Property. 

Communi- 
cants. 

11,987 

35 
4,124 

27 

3,441,880 

11,500 

1,160,838 

7,161 

$9,038,549 

187,600 

6,468,280 

54,440 

1,349.189 

2,279 

452,725 

3.415 

of  Introduction. 

402 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


DENOM  IN  ATION  S. 


TABLE  VII.— Colored 


Organizations. 


African  Methodist  Episcopal  Zion i)704 

Congregational  Methodist  (Colored) 9 

Colored  Methodist  Episcopal ^y7S9 

Zion  Union  Apostolic 32 

Evangelist  Missionary 11 

Cumberland  Presbyterian  (Colored) 224 

Total 18,835 


Colored  Organizations 

Regular  Baptist  (North) 406 

Regular  Baptist  (South) 7 

Freewill  Baptist 5 

Primitive  Baptist 323 

Old  Tvvo-Seed-in-the-Spirit  Predestinarian  Baptist  .  15 

Roman  Catholic 31 

Christians  (Christian  Connection) 63 

Congregational 85 

Disciples  of  Christ 277 

Lutheran  (Synodical  Conference) 5 

Lutheran  (United  Synod  in  the  South) 5 

Methodist  Episcopal 2,984 

Methodist  Protestant  54 

Independent  Methodist 2 

Presbyterian  (Northern) 233 

Presbyterian  (Southern) 45 

Reformed  Presbyterian  (Synod) i 

Protestant  Episcopal 49 

Reformed  Episcopal yj 

Total 4,627 


Colored  Denominations 

Colored  Organizations  in  other  Denominations 
Total 


Recapit 
18,835 
4,627 


23,462 


GENERAL   STATISriCAL   SUMMARIES.  403 


Denominations. — Continued. 


Church 
Edifices. 


Seating 
Capacity. 

Value  of  Church 
Property. 

Communi- 
cants. 

565,577 

541,464 
10,100 

$2,714,128 

525 

1,713,366 

15,000 

349,788 

319 

129,383 

2,346 

1,050 
52,139 

2,000 
195,826 

12,956 

5,792,294 

$20,389,714 

2,303,351 

1,587 

5 

1,653 

27 

3 

183 

19,631 


IN  oTHEji  Denominations. 

324  92,660  $1,087,518  35,221 

5  1,900  3,875  651 

3  800  13,300  271 
291  96,699  135,427  18,162 

4  1,025  930  265 
27  8,370  237,400  14,517 
54  16.495  23,500  4,989 
69  19,360  246,125  6,908 

183  41,590  176,795  18,578 

5  1,050  13,400  211 
3  550  1,750  94 

2,800  635,252  3,630,093  246,249 

50  11,545  35,445  3,183 

2  725  4,675  222 

200  56,280  391,650  14,961 

29  6,190  22,200  1,568 

I  300  1,500  76 

53  11,885  192,750  2,977 

36  5,975  18,401  1,723 


4,139       1,008,651      $6,236,734      370,826 


ULATION. 

19,631 

5,792,294 

$20,389,714 

2,303,351 

4,139 

1,008,651 
6,800,945 

6,236,734 

370,826 

23,770 

$26,626,448 

2,674,177 

404 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  VIII.— Churches  in  Cities— First  Class  {a). 

ORGANIZATIONS. 

New     rui„„„„      Phila-  Brook- 

DENOMINATIONS.                             York          ni      '   delphia,  lyn,  Total. 

City.          '"•            Pa.  N.  Y. 

m 

Baptist  (4  bodies) 43         3^         94  34  207 

Roman  Catholic 123       123         57  57  360 

Congregational 8         47           3  20  '78 

Disciples  of  Christ 3           5           3  3  H 

Evangelical  Association 3         11           9  6  29 

Friends  (3  bodies) 3           2         10  3  18 

Lutheran  (11  bodies) 29         65         41  25  160 

Jewish  Congregations  (2  bodies)   135         17           9  8  169 

Methodist  Episcopal 63         97       108  56  324 

Other  Methodist  (9  bodies^  ...       8         14         24  12  58 

Presbyterian  (6  bodies) 67         39       112  31  249 

Protestant  Episcopal 80        36         87  42  245 

Reformed  (3  bodies) 32          9        21  18  80 

Unitarian 3           5           3  3  H 

Universalist 4           5           2  5  16 

Miscellaneous 40        62        27  37  166 

Total 644       573      610  360  2, 187 

{a)  Cities  having  500,000  population  and  upward. 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


405 


TABLE  VIII. — Churches  in  Cities — First  Class. — Continued. 


CHURCH    EDIFICES. 


New  pu-  „„„  Phila-  Brook- 

DENOMINATIONS.  York  "-"'cago,  jgiphia^  lyn, 

City.  ^"-  Pa.  N.  Y. 

Bgptist  (4  bodies) 41  40  95  42 

Roman  Catholic 108  119  61  62 

Congregational 10  48  4  27 

Disciples  of  Christ 2  4  2  2 

Evangelical  Association 3  11  9  6 

Friends  (3  bodies) 2  i  15  3 

Lutheran  (11  bodies) 24  58  40  25 

Jewish  Congregations  (2  bodies)  41  10  8  8 

Methodist  Episcopal 63  75  107  55 

Other  Methodist  (9  bodies)  ...  6  13  20  11 

Presbyterian  (6  bodies) 79  38  136  37 

Protestant  Episcopal 98  32  102  60 

Reformed  (3  bodies) 34  9  21  25 

Unitarian 4  4  4  5 

Universalist 4  4  2  5 

Miscellaneous 15  34  38  10 

Total 534  500  664  383 


Total. 

218 

89 
10 
29 
21 

300 
50 
290 
292 
89 
17 
15 
97 


406     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  VIII.— Churches  in 
Value  of 

DENOMINATIONS.  New  York  City. 

Baptist  (4  bodies) $3,878,800 

Roman  Catholic  8,124,750 

Congregational  1,015,500 

Disciples  of  Christ 113,000 

EvangeKcal  Association 80,000 

Friends  (3  bodies) 448,000 

Lutheran  (11  bodies) 1,621,800 

Jewish  Congregations  (2  bodies) 3,740,000 

Methodist  Episcopal 3,640,750 

Other  Methodist  (9  bodies) 331,000 

Presbyterian  (6  bodies) 9,354,000 

Protestant  Episcopal 16,393,000 

Reformed  (3  bodies) 3,448,000 

Unitarian 630,000 

Universalist 565,000 

Miscellaneous 1,287,000 

Total $54,670,600 


COMMUNI 

Population 1,515,301 

DENOMINATIONS. 

Baptist  (4  bodies) 1455 10 

Roman  Catholic  386,200 

Congregational 3j047 

Disciples  of  Christ 414 

Evangelical  Association 292 

Friends  (3  bodies) 835 

Lutheran  ( 1 1  bodies) 16, 1 25 

Jewish  Congregations  (2  bodies)  35>o85 

Methodist  Episcopal 14,998 

Other  Methodist  (9  bodies) 2,681 

Presbyterian  (6  bodies) 26,602 

Protestant  Episcopal 37)597 

Reformed  (3  bodies) 8,942 

Unitarian 940 

Universalist 863 

Miscellaneous 7,823 


Total 556,954 


GENERAL   STA  TISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


40; 


Cities — First  Class. — Contmtced. 


Church  Property. 


Chicago,  III. 

Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 

Total. 

$1,053,350 

$2,962,384 

$1,858,000   • 

$9,752,534 

4,837,657 

2,468,300 

4,984,637 

20,415,344 

1,272,310 

160,110 

1,753,000 

4,200,920 

65,000 

35.000 

50,800 

263,800 

137,000 

130,500 

49,500 

397,000 

12,000 

1,495,000 

146,000 

2,101,000 

1,080,250 

1,584,400 

852,100 

5.138,550 

536,500 

475,000 

227,000 

4,978,500 

2,023,100 

3,288,200 

2,116,500 

11,068,550 

195,600 

258,900 

166,650 

952,150 

1,646,800 

6,504,500 

1,582,000 

19,087,300 

1,223,100 

5.9I9.I7I 

3,369,500 

26,904.771 

35,8co 

860,000 

976,500 

5,320,300 

300,000 

250,000 

190,000 

1,370,000 

218,000 

245,500 

183,250 

1,211,750 

826,200 

1,386,400 

177,000 

3,676,600 

$15,462,667 

$28,023,365 

$18,682,437 

$116,839,069 

CANTS. 

1,099,850 

1,046,964 

806,343 

4,468,458 

12,634 

25.193 

13-971 

66,308 

262,047 

163,658 

201,063 

1,012,968 

9.704 

890 

II. 153 

24,794 

1,320 

472 

287 

2,493 

1,684 

1,256 

412 

3.644 

222 

5,014 

768 

6,839 

34,999 

11.653 

14.732 

77.509 

9.187 

4,216 

2,645 

51.133 

15.859 

32,925 

18,410 

82,192 

2,091 

5,281 

1,416 

11,469 

11,831 

41,199 

17,095 

96,727 

8.937 

28,319 

17,600 

92.453 

809 

7,566 

5.473 

22,790 

995 

675 

1,600 

4,210 

1,037 

514 

771 

3.185 

14,789 

6,358 

2,214 

31.184 

5.145 


335.189 


309,610 


1,589,898 


408    RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED  STATES, 


TABLE  VIIL— Churches  in 


Organi 


Baptist       Catholic     Congrega-      Jews         Lutheran 
(5  bodies).   (6  bodies).        tional.      (2  bodies).  (12  bodies). 


St.  Louis,  Mo 

Boston,  Mass 

Baltimore,  Md.  .  .  . 
San  Francisco,  Cal. 

Cincinnati,  O 

Cleveland,  O 

Buffalo,  N.  Y 

New  Orleans,  La. .  . 

Pittsburg,  Pa 

Washington,  D.  C. 

Detroit,  Mich 

Milwaukee,  Wis.  .  . 

Newark,  N.J 

Minneapolis,  Minn. 
Jersey  City,  N.  J. .  . 

Louisville,  Ky 

Omaha,  Neb 

Rochester,  N.  Y.  .  . 

St.  Paul,  Minn 

Kansas  City, Mo.  .  . 
Providence,  R.  I.  .  . 

Denver,  Col 

Indianapolis,  Ind.  . 
Allegheny,  Pa 

Total 

St.  Louis,  Mo 

Boston,  Mass 

Baltimore,  Md 

San  Francisco,  Cal. 

Cincinnati,  O 

Cleveland,  O 

Buffalo,  N.Y 

New  Orleans,  La. . . 


35 

86 

14 

9 

16 

29 

60 

30 

7 

7 

3« 

42 

2 

II 

25 

8 

33 

8 

6 

7 

IS 

41 

5 

6 

4 

16 

26 

16 

II 

12 

12 

29 

4 

4 

13 

27 

32 

4 

9 

10 

12 

43 

2 

2 

12 

ss 

15 

6 

2 

II 

II 

32 

6 

4 

16 

9 

29 

6 

5 

22 

12 

19 

2 

7 

4 

16 

18 

20 

2 

21 

8 

15 

3 

2 

7 

25 

22 

I 

4 

6 

8 

9 

10 

5 

II 

12 

16 

2 

3 

7 

II 

25 

9 

3 

20 

13 

22 

7 

3 

4 

19 

18 

13 

4 

I 

II 

12 

10 

4 

5 

10 

9 

5 

6 

4 

5 

13 

2 

I 

12 

417 

666 

187 

120 

257 
Church 

36 

80 

12 

5 

15 

29 

35 

32 

5 

6 

3« 

41 

2 

8 

24 

6 

33 

9 

5 

6 

12 

40 

5 

5 

3 

16 

28 

17 

5 

II 

15 

28 

5 

2 

13 

26 

32 

4 

4 

10 

(rt)  Cities  having  a  population 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


409 


Cities — Second  Class  (a). 


ZATIONS. 

Methodist 
Episcopal. 

Other 
Methodist 
(11  bodies) 

Presbyte- 
rian 
(11  bodies). 

Protestant 
Episcopal. 

Reformed 
(3  bodies). 

Miscel- 
laneous. 

Total. 

21 

21 

25 

20 

42 

289 

24 

2 

9 

27 

I 

74 

270 

87 

42 

27 

40 

10 

47 

371 

16 

4 

19 

42 

150 

33 

2 

21 

II 

5 

36 

179 

18 

4 

14 

16 

12 

45 

190 

20 

3 

13 

17 

8 

?>?> 

156 

22 

26 

13 

II 

II 

165 

27 

12 

^5 

13 

2 

24 

194 

^1 

30 

16 

17 

2 

18 

195 

16 

5 

15 

21 

2 

24 

152 

13 

3 

7 

2 

20 

121 

17 

4 

23 

II 

7 

9 

115 

24 

3 

II 

8 

31 

154 

14 

2 

10 

9 

II 

8 

89 

9 

17 

16 

12 

2 

15 

129 

10 

2 

15 

10 

15 

95 

10 

3 

13 

»I2 

4 

16 

98 

28 

2 

13 

12 

I 

15 

139 

19 

10 

12 

5 

I 

27 

123 

12 

7 

2 

13 

26 

115 

12 

5 

10 

8 

I 

20 

98 

18 

6 

16 

7 

3 

21 

105 

7 

5 

220 

25 

390 

2 
314 

74 

6 
625 

78 

500 

3,770 

Edifices. 

21 

18 

26 

17 

33 

263 

23 

2 

8 

35 

I 

59 

235 

86 

37 

35 

52 

10 

38 

371 

16 

3 

16 

9 

22 

125 

31 

2 

24 

II 

5 

30 

168 

20 

3 

21 

20 

12 

42 

195 

20 

3 

17 

19 

8 

24 

154 

20 

26 

13 

13 

6 

154 

of  100,000  to 

500,000. 

4IO     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  VIII.— Church 


Baptist       Catholic     Congrega-        Jews         Lutheran 
(5  bodies).  (6  bodies).       tional.       (2  bodies).  (12  bodies). 


Pittsburg,  Pa 

Washington,  D.  C. . . 

Detroit,  Mich 

Milwaukee,  Wis 

Newark,  N.J 

Minneapohs,  Minn. . . 

Jersey  City,  N.  J 

Louisville,  Ky 

Omaha,  Neb 

Rochester,  N.  Y 

St.  Paul,  Minn 

Kansas  City,  Mo 

Providence,  R.  I 

Denver,  Col 

Indianapohs,  Ind.  .  .  . 
Allegheny,  Pa 

Total 409 


10 

40 

2 

2 

13 

4S 

15 

6 

2 

13 

12 

32 

6 

4 

16 

9 

22 

6 

3 

22 

12 

19 

2 

5 

3 

16 

12 

16 

17 

8 

15 

2 

I 

5 

27 

22 

2 

6 

9 

9 

10 

2 

10 

14 

16 

2 

2 

8 

II 

18 

8 

2 

19 

12 

21 

5 

I 

4 

21 

17 

16 

I 

10 

12 

10 

3 

6 

10 

8 

4 

4 

6 

5 

13 

2 

10 

608 


183 


74        246 


Value  of  Church 


CITIES. 

St.  Louis,  Mo 

Boston,  Mass 

Baltimore,  Md 

San  Francisco,  Cal. . 

Cincinnati,  O 

Cleveland,  O 

Buffalo,  N.Y 

New  Orleans,  La. .  .  . 

Pittsburg,  Pa 

Washington,  D.  C. . 

Detroit,  Mich 

Milwaukee,  Wis.  .  .  . 

Newark,  N.  J 

Minneapolis,  Minn. . 
Jersey  City,  N.  J. .  .  . 

Louisville,  Ky 

Omaha,  Neb 

Rochester,  N.  Y 


Baptist 

Catholic 

(5  bodies). 

(6  bodies). 

$431,375 

$1,602,835 

1,537,000 

3,296,700 

804,150 

1,462,920 

199,250 

1,364,300 

348,500 

1,934,900 

363,500 

832,000 

412,000 

2,176,500 

137,850 

970,400 

252,200 

1,373,800 

1,026,000 

990,800 

344,200 

1,050,800 

200,800 

891,200 

547,000 

783,049 

513,863 

625,115 

207,000 

1,083,500 

686,650 

889,200 

124,300 

549,000 

424,607 

1,057,000 

GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


411 


Edifices. — Continued. 


[lodist 

Other 

Presbyte- 

Protestant 

Reformed 

Miscel- 

Total. 

copal. 

Methodist 
(11  bodies). 

rian 
(11  bodies). 

Episcopal. 

(3  bodies). 

laneous. 

26 

12 

46 

18 

2 

16 

187 

22 

27 

20 

27 

2 

7 

186 

17 

3 

17 

29 

2 

18 

156 

14 

2 

8 

8 

2 

II 

107 

18 

4 

35 

16 

12 

6 

132 

23 

2 

14 

8 

17 

126 

14 

2 

II 

12 

12 

7 

89 

9 

18 

20 

19 

2 

19 

144 

10 

2 

16 

10 

6 

84 

II 

2 

14 

16 

6 

II 

102 

30 

2 

13 

13 

I 

II 

128 

13 

9 

15 

5 

I 

15 

lOI 

II 

5 

2 

14 

14 

lOI 

12 

4 

7 

7 

I 

9 

81 

19 

6 

16 

7 

3 

13 

96 

7 

5 

26 

4 

5 

n 

493 


199 


440 


389 


82 


439 


3,562 


Property. 

Congrega- 

Jews 
(2  bodies). 

Lutheran 

IMethodist 

tional. 

(12  bodies). 

Episcopal. 

$333,000 

$178,000 

$422,400 

$274,450 

2,318,100 

243,000 

72,000 

1,085,000 

68,000 

263,000 

585,800 

2,055,300 

249,500 

300,000 

168,200 

446,500 

169,000 

484,000 

119,000 

691,000 

397,200 

108,000 

178,000 

517,000 

117,000 

50,000 

257,070 

404,900 

15,700 

235,000 

60,200 

119,412 

52,500 

65,000 

373,000 

796,900 

339,000 

42,000 

414,000 

758,800 

161,500 

107,000 

181,250 

366,600 

158,000 

93,000 

653,700 

183,000 

90,000 

117,800 

75,000 

679,500 

465,250 

20,000 

203,000 

474,200 

52,000 

10,000 

77,000 

345,300 

4,500 

40,800 

105,000 

220,600 

20,500 

258,075 

191,100 

120,000 

40,000 

127,000 

250,000 

412     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  VIII.— Value  of 

Baptist  Catholic 

^^^^^^-                                                 (5  bodies).  (6  bodies). 

St.  Paul,  Minn $250,400  $683,300 

Kansas  City,  Mo 356,000  569,950 

Providence,  R.  1 676,700  1,285,000 

Denver,  Col 254,600  5 13,042 

Indianapolis,  Ind 93, 600  243,700 

Allegheny,  Pa 37»4oo  337.5oo 

Total $10,228,945  $26,566,511 


Continuation  of  Value 


St.  Louis,  Mo 

Boston,  Mass 

Baltimore,  Md 

San  Francisco,  Cal 

CincinnatijO 

Cleveland,  O 

Buffalo,  N.  Y. .  . 

New  Orleans,  La 

Pittsburg,  Pa 

Washington,  D.  C 

Detroit,  Mich 

Milwaukee,  Wis 

Newark,  N.  J 

Minneapolis,  Minn 

Jersey  City,  N.  J 

Louisville,  Ky 

Omaha,  Neb 

Rochester,  N.  Y 

St.  Paul,  Minn 

Kansas  City,  Mo 

Providence,  R.  I 

Denver,  Col 

Indianapolis,  Ind 

Allegheny,  Pa 

Total $4,097,483 


Other  Methodist 

Presbyterian 

(11  bodies). 

(11  bodies). 

$474,900 

$980,700 

105,000 

350,000 

686,100 

1,191,324 

71,450 

666.100 

18,000 

963,700 

31,000 

840,000 

17,300 

1,051,600 

319,195 

337,000 

448,800 

2,042,450 

760,100 

950,000 

30,600 

875,000 

42,500 

302,500 

58,500 

1, 339^720 

11,000 

546,000 

16,600 

280,500 

268,500 

575,500 

53,000 

195,700 

16,000 

670,000 

18,000 

395.000 

250,070 

332,700 

80,368 

55,000 

110,000 

236,150 

87,500 

360,000 

123,000 

831,600 

$16,368,244 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


4T3 


Church  Property — Continued. 


Congrega- 

Jews 

Lutheran 

Methodist 

tional. 

(2  bodies). 

(12  bodies). 

Episcopal. 

$133,200 

$50,000 

$269,300 

$389,200 

164,500 

50,000 

95,000 

397,385 

585,500 

25,000 

250,300 

206,300 

63,500 

140,200 

652,000 

66,050 

24,500 

118,700 

351,000 

30,500 

201,400 

197,000 

$6,512,400        $2,593,800        $5,090^095        $11,980,847 


OF  Church  Property. 


Protestant 
Episcopal. 

Reformed 
(3  bodies). 

Miscellaneous. 

Total. 

$502,000 

$677,300 

$5,876,960 

2,144,175 

$56,000 

3,464,400 

14,671,375 

1,418,544 

185,500 

808,200 

9,528,838 

385,000 

390,800 

4,241,100 

314,000 

172,500 

929,450 

6,144,050 

367,700 

74,650 

524,850 

4,233,900 

797,000 

76,000 

609,750 

5,969,120 

231,500 

126,850 

2,553,107 

939,500 

70,000 

499,600 

6,913,750 

788,500 

31,000 

270,375 

6,370,575 

621,600 

13,000 

367,600    . 

4,119,150 

493,700 

24,500 

162,500 

3,205,400 

426,000 

426,500 

179,000 

4,722,069 

246,200 



342,200 

3,446,828 

325,000 

336,500 

65,000 

2,798,400 

376,300 

25,000 

361,300 

3,332,750 

276,550 

102,000 

1,990,825 

330,500 

46,000 

297,000 

3,378,107 

193,700 

8,000 

109,200 

2,499,300 

200,500 

12,000 

244,250 

2,672,355 

627,300 

673,600 

4,258,768 

418,000 

20,000 

270,350 

2,884,142 

153,000 

23,000 

130,600 

1,651,650 

76,000 

203,000 

2,037,400 

$12,652,269 

$1,600,150 

$11,809,175 

$109,499,919 

414 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  VIII— Churches  in 


Popula-  Baptist 

CITIES.  ^^^^  (5  bodies). 

St.  Louis,  Mo 451^770  5^654 

Boston,  Mass 448,477  n  ,885 

Baltimore,  Md 434?439  18,728 

San  Francisco,  Cal 298,997  1,228 

Cincinnati,  0 296,908  4^063 

Cleveland,© 261,353  3,449 

Buffalo,  N.  Y 255,664  3,958 

New  Orleans,  La 242,039  2,941 

Pittsburg,  Pa 238,617  2,288 

Washington,  D.  C 230,392  21,781 

Detroit,  Mich 205,876  3,078 

Milwaukee,  Wis 204,468  1,686 

Newark,  N.  J 181,830  4>ii9 

Minneapolis,  Minn 164,738  3,687 

Jersey  City,  N.  J 163,003  2,378 

Louisville,  Ky 161,129  13,753 

Omaha,  Neb 140,452  1,107 

Rochester,  N.  Y 133,896  3,345 

St.  Paul,   Minn 133,156  1,867 

Kansas  City,  Mo 132,716  4,490 

Providence,  R.  1 132, 146  5,382 

Denver,  Col 106,713  2,498 

Indianapohs,  Ind 105,436  1,714 

Allegheny,  Pa 105,287  1,005 

Total 5,229,432  126,184  I 


COMMUNI 

Catholic 

Con- 

Jews 

(6  bodies). 

grega-  ^ 
tional.  ^ 

bodies). 

75,908 

2,670 

3,022 

185,188 

10,076 

2,300 

77,047 

268 

3.500 

70,670 

2,121 

4,075 

72,368 

1,047 

3.725 

52,420 

z^zz-^ 

2,911 

73,010 

592 

1,025 

67,156 

431 

2,750 

56,916 

489 

1,250 

36,488 

1.399 

976 

45.795 

1,268 

2,700 

35.050 

1. 154 

981 

39.324 

744 

2,090 

37,855 

3.372 

474 

45,760 

633 

250 

33.740 

56 

515 

7,675 

1. 103 

1.035 

31,690 

460 

911 

51,215 

1.354 

950 

11,900 

1,076 

825 

44,065 

3.766 

875 

18,039 

1,362 

895 

8,390 

636 

1,627 

13.494 

356 

25 

[91^163  39,766  39,687 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES.  415 

Cities — Second  Class. — Continued. 


\^AiN  X  a. 

Lutheran 
(12  bodies). 

Methodist 
Episco- 
pal.       I 

Other 

Methodist 
[11  bodies). 

Presby- 
terian 
(11  bodies) 

Protestant 

Episco- 
.      pal. 

Reformed 
(3  bodies). 

Mis- 
cella- 
neous. 

Total. 

7,458 

3.871^ 

6,440 

5,727 

3,536 

16.900 

131,186 

1,959 

5,963 

737 

2,243 

8,167 

"62 

15,468 

244,048 

10,902 

22,258 

10,879 

6,505 

12,193 

3,695 

9,920 

175,995 

2,096 

3^115 

1,125 

3,421 

2,446 

2,575 

92,872 

1,252 

6,262 

587 

5,110 

2,253 

2,018 

17,092 

115,777 

7,162 

4,440 

543 

5,553 

3,257 

2,611 

8,706 

94,385 

13,460 

3,785 

210 

4,240 

3,387 

2,163 

9,330 

115,160 

^,777 

3,938 

4,679 

3,023 

2,910 

5,111 

95,716 

4,868 

6,701 

2,926 

12,066 

3.545 

630 

14,078 

105,757 

2,997 

9>i44 

6,526 

5,128 

7.315 

301 

2,517 

94,572 

8,609 

4,696 

875 

5,343 

5,693 

220 

5,120 

83,397 

18,892 

2,403 

119 

1,467 

1,952 

380 

4,165 

68,249 

1^387 

6,199 

568 

7,6c6 

3-076 

2.178 

2,697 

60,988 

5,906 

4,432 

189 

3,653 

2,465 

3,151 

65,184 

2,230 

3,805 

231 

2,000 

2.755 

3,033 

790 

63,865 

1,483 

1,613 

6,271 

3,981 

3-651 

600 

7,692 

73,355 

1,277 

1,859 

204 

2,150 

1,228 

1,020 

18,658 

4,847 

3,008 

360 

6,137 

3,263 

952 

4,064 

59,037 

5,608 

3,290 

190 

2,772 

2,140 

120 

1,607 

71,113 

838 

3,195 

1,960 

2,272 

1,143 

31 

3,870 

31,600 

75 

2,886 

859 

525 

4,251 

4,031 

66,715 

540 

2,858 

706 

2,319 

1,820 

35 

2,541 

33,613 

2,588 

5,829 

2,053 

3,806 

1,120 

560 

3,833 

32,156 

2,804 

2,538 

1,107 

6,985 

484 

3,868 

32,666 

112,015    118,088   50,344   104,032  84,050   19,589  150,146  2,035,064 


41 6     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE   VIII.— Churches 


Organi 


Baptist        Catholic         Congre-      Lutheran 
(5  bodies).    (4  bodies),  j^  gational.    (15  bodies). 


I. 

2. 

3- 
4. 
5- 
6. 

7. 
8. 

9- 
10. 
II. 
12. 

13- 

14. 

15- 
16. 

17- 
18. 
19. 
20. 


23- 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30- 
31- 
32. 
33- 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 


Albany,  N.  Y 7 

Columbus,  0 9 

Syracuse,  N.  Y 8 

Worcester,  Mass 10 

Toledo,  0 7 

Richmond,  Va 30 

New  Haven,  Conn 8 

Paterson,  N.  J 5 

Lowell,  Mass 7 

Nashville,  Tenn 20 

Scranton,  Pa 5 

Fall  River,  Mass 2 

Cambridge,  Mass 7 

Atlanta,  Ga 41 

Memphis,  Tenn 11 

Wilmington,  Del 9 

Dayton,  0 5 

Troy,  N.  Y 5 

Grand  Rapids,  Mich 6 

Reading,  Pa 2 

Camden,  N.  J 9 

Trenton,  N.  J 3 

Lynn,  Mass 5 

Lincoln,  Neb 4 

Charleston,  S.  C 10 

Hartford,  Conn 5 

Saint  Joseph,  Mo 5 

Evansville,  Ind 5 

Los  Angeles,  Cal 8 

Des  Moines,  la 5 

Bridgeport,  Conn 6 

Oakland,  Cal 8 

Portland,  Ore 3 

Saginaw,  Mich 4 

Salt  Lake,  Utah 2 

Lawrence,  Mass 4 

Springfield,  Mass 5 


14 

2 

6 

13 

7 

6 

8 

4 

5 

10 

12 

3 

12 

4 

12 

5 

. . 

3 

8 

17 

3 

8 

I 

I 

10 

9 

I 

4 

3 

I 

10 

5 

2 

10 

4 

5 

5 

2 

6 

5 

2 

•  I 

7 

2 

9 

I 

4 

9 

I 

7 

4 

4 

4 

6 

3 

2 

6 

3 

5 

4 

2 

4 

6 

9 

2 

5 

6 

10 

2 

9 

2 

2 

6 

3 

5 

7 

3 

3 

4 

7 

5 

7 

3 

7 

4 

4 

7 

6 

6 

6 

4 

4 

I 

7 

5 

5 

10 

I 

(rt)  Cities  having  a  population 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


AI7 


IN  Cities — Third  Class  {a). 


ZATIONS. 

Methodist 
Episcopal. 

Other  Meth- 
odist 
(12  bodies). 

Presbyterian 
(7  bodies). 

Protestant 
Episcopal. 

Miscellane- 
ous. 

Total. 

5 

I 

9 

6 

14 

64 

16 

2 

7 

3 

15 

78 

II 

6 

6 

8 

18 

74 

8 

2 

I 

4 

15 

65 

II 

3 

6 

7 

14 

76 

2 

7 

8 

II 

13 

79 

9 

3 

I 

9 

6 

64 

13 

3 

9 

3 

17 

60 

5 

2 

2 

3 

10 

49 

7 

34 

15 

8 

9 

lOI 

10 

3 

II 

3 

13 

62 

6 

2 

2 

4 

II 

41 

4 

2 

5 

13 

41 

9 

16 

9 

2 

7 

92 

3 

10 

8 

6 

5 

51 

21 

II 

7 

6 

II 

74 

7 

2 

6 

2 

23 

59 

8 

2 

II 

7 

10 

53 

8 

4 

4 

4 

33 

74 

3 

I 

3 

3 

25 

47 

II 

10 

4 

6 

7 

52 

9 

3 

8 

4 

7 

43 

9 

2 

2 

15 

42 

9 

2 

3 

3 

16 

49 

3 

14 

7 

10 

13 

7Z 

4 

I 

I 

8 

II 

48 

7 

9 

7 

4 

14 

59 

10 

3 

6 

3 

9 

45 

16 

6 

12 

5 

16 

78 

II 

4 

9 

2 

21 

66 

7 

2 

I 

6 

9 

43 

8 

3 

7 

4 

22 

66 

7 

3 

5 

4 

21 

60 

5 

7 

6 

4 

6 

44 

2 

I 

2 

3 

30 

49 

5 

2 

2 

8 

33 

5 

I 

•• 

I 

7 

35 

of  25,000  to  100,000, 

41 8     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UAFTFB   Sl'ATES. 


TABLE   VIIL— Organi 


Baptist         Catholic         Congre-       Lutheran 
(5  bodies).     (4  bodies).      gational.     (15  bodies). 


38. 

39- 
40. 
41. 

42. 

43. 
44. 

45- 
46. 

47- 
48. 

49. 
50. 

51. 
52. 

53- 
54. 
55- 
56. 

57. 
58. 

59- 
60. 
61. 
62. 

63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 

67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 

71. 

72. 

73. 
74- 
75. 
76. 

11- 
78. 

79- 
80. 


Manchester,  N.  H 4 

Utica,  N.  Y 4 

Hoboken,  N.  J 2 

Savannah,  Ga 37 

Seattle,  Wash 5 

Peoria,  111 4 

New  Bedford,  Mass 4 

Erie,  Pa i 

Somerville,  Mass 7 

Harrisburg,  Pa 4 

Kansas  City,  Kan 10 

Dallas,  Tex 15 

Sioux  City,  la 4 

Elizabeth,  N.  J 5 

Wilkesbarre,  Pa 3 

San  Antonio,  Tex 6 

Covington,  Ky 4 

Portland,  Me 3 

Tacoma,  Wash 3 

Holyoke,  Mass 2 

Fort  Wayne,  Ind i 

Binghamton,  N.  Y 2 

Norfolk,  Va 11 

Wheeling,  W.  Va 2 

Augusta,  Ga 32 

Youngstovvn,  0 4 

Duluth,  Minn 9 

Yonkers,  N.  Y 2 

Lancaster,  Pa 2 

Springfield,  0 5 

Quincy,  111 7 

Mobile,  Ala 14 

Topeka,  Kan 12 

Elmira,  N.  Y 3 

Salem,  Mass 2 

Long  Island  City,  N.  Y.  . .  i 

Altoona,  Pa 3 

Dubuque,  la i 

Terre  Haute,  Ind 4 

Chattanooga,  Tenn 14 

Galveston,  Tex 5 

Waterbury,  Conn i 

Chelsea,  Mass 3 


7 

3 

I 

8 

2 

5 

4 

I 

2 

9 

3 

I 

2 

6 

2 

5 

3 

3 

5 

3 

7 

4 

3 

5 

2 

8 

4 

4 

3 

2 

I 

4 

4 

8 

5 

I 

2 

4 

3 

3 

9 

I 

0 

3 

8 

2 

I 

5 

4 

S 

3 

2 

6 

5 

3 
J 

2 

3 

3 

6 

2 

3 

3 

4 

7 

2 

2 

3 

7 

3 

5 

9 

5 

I 

3 

3 

3 

4 

2 

4 

3 

5 

I 

3 

5 

[2 

3 

2 

5 

2 

I 

I 

9 

I 

4 

2 

2 

3 

GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


419 


ZATIONS. — -Continued. 


Methodist 

utner  i\ietn- 

odist 
(12  bodies). 

Presbyterian 

Protestant 

Miscellane- 

TrNt^l 

Episcopal. 

(7  bodies). 

Episcopal. 

ous. 

lotal 

4 

2 

2 

7 

30 

5 

I 

7 

6 

7 

45 

2 

I 

4 

4 

20 

2 

9 

3 

4 

5 

73 

? 

4 

4 

2 

II 

45 

6 

2 

5 

I 

12 

41 

4 

4 

I 

3 

17 

41 

4 

5 

3 

II 

36 

4 

I 

3 

6 

29 

7 

3 

6 

2 

20 

52 

8 

5 

4 

I 

6 

42 

3 

10 

9 

3 

9 

55 

7 

2 

2 

3 

8 

42 

4 

2 

8 

4 

3 

34 

7 

5 

7 

2 

8 

42 

4 

6 

5 

4 

5 

40 

5 

4 

2 

I 

2 

28 

6 

I 

I 

3 

15 

42 

9 

2 

3 

4 

9 

40 

2 

I 

I 

I 

17 

5 

I 

3 

J 

II 

34 

6 

3 

4 

3 

4 

27 

I 

13 

4 

5 

7 

42 

7 

I 

4 

2 

8 

30 

13 

3 

4 

4 

65 

3 

4 

6 

I 

5 

31 

7 

2 

3 

I 

5 

39 

3 

2 

3 

3 

4 

21 

4 

I 

2 

2 

21 

42 

-   5 

3 

3 

2 

13 

41 

4 

I 

I 

2 

12 

37 

3 

22 

3 

4 

I 

54 

10 

7 

10 

4 

20 

72 

3 

2 

3 

3 

4 

24 

2 

I 

2 

10 

24 

4 

I 

I 

13 

6 

2 

3 

I 

8 

31 

3 

I 

4 

I 

3 

30 

4 

I 

2 

2 

8 

29 

8 

8 

6 

3 

9 

51 

3 

5 

2 

3 

5 

33 

4 

I 

2 

4 

18 

2 

I 

I 

3 

15 

420 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE   VIIL— Organi 


8l. 
82. 

83- 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 


90. 
91. 
92. 

93- 
94. 

95. 
96. 


„g  Baptist  Catholic  Congre-  Lutheran 

(5  bodies),  (4  bodies),  gational.  (15  bodies). 

Bay  City,  Mich 3  4  i  3 

Pawtucket,  R.  1 4  4  2 

Akron,  O i  3  2  4 

Houston,  Tex 14  4 

Haverhill,  Mass 6  2  5 

Brockton,  Mass 5  i  4 

Williamsport,  Pa ,  5  2  ..  3 

Davenport,  la 3  4  2  4 

Sacramento,  Cal 3  i  i  2 

Canton,  O i  2  . .  2 

Birmingham,  Ala 16  2  i  i 

Little  Rock,  Ark 10  2  2  2 

Aubm-n,  N.  Y 3  3 

Taunton,  Mass. 2  4  4 

Allentovvn,  Pa i  2  7 

La  Crosse,  Wis 3  9  i  7 

Total 642  497  268  246 


Albany,  N.  Y 7 

Columbus,  0 9 

Syracuse,  N.  Y 8 

Worcester,  Mass 13 

Toledo,  0 12 

Richmond,  Va 29 

New  Haven,  Conn 7 

Paterson,  N.  J 6 

Lowell,  Mass 8 

Nashville,  Tenn 19 

Scranton,  Pa ...  7 

Fall  River,  Mass 7 

Cambridge,  Mass 11 

Atlanta,  Ga 39 

Memphis,  Tenn 11 

Wilmington,  Del 12 

Dayton,  0 8 

Troy,  N.  Y 5 

Grand  Rapids,  Mich 7 


Church 

13 

2 

7 

12 

9 

5 

9 

4 

5 

8 

15 

I 

13 

4 

II 

5 

S 

8 

20 

3 

7 

I 

I 

7 

9 

I 

4 

2 

I 

10 

4 

2 

II 

5 

4 

8 

2 

5 

5 

2 

I 

7 

I 

8 

I 

4 

9 

.. 

I 

7 

4 

2 

GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


421 


ZATIONS. — Continued. 


Methodist 
Episcopal. 

5 

2 

3 
10 
2 
4 
9 
3 
3 
2 

9 
5 
3 

4 

2 

5 


Other  Meth- 
odist 
(12  bodies). 


I 

12 


Presbyterian 
(7  bodies). 


Protestant 
Episcopal, 

3 
3 

I 

3 

2 
I 
4 
3 

I 
I 
2 

3 
2 
2 
2 

I 


Miscellane- 


5 
13 

4 


Total. 


28 
18 

27 
52 
32 
20 
40 
28 

30 
20 

55 
40 

24 
23 
29 
32 


56s 


Z^^ 


386 


318 


974 


4,284 


Edifices. 


5 

I 

12 

7 

II 

65 

16 

2 

10 

5 

II 

79 

II 

6 

6 

8 

10 

67 

7 

2 

5 

7 

58 

II 

2 

6 

8 

7 

74 

2 

6 

7 

22 

9 

83 

8 

3 

I 

II 

4 

65 

12 

3 

II 

4 

15 

60 

5 

2 

I 

3 

4 

40 

7 

39 

16 

9 

8 

105 

II 

2 

10 

2 

9 

57 

6 

2 

4 

4 

7 

46 

4 

2 

5 

7 

41 

6 

15 

9 

2 

3 

81 

3 

II 

7 

6 

5 

51 

19 

6 

II 

8 

7 

71 

7 

■-> 

6 

2 

26 

64 

9 

I 

15 

9 

7 

56 

8 

4 

4 

4 

21 

61 

422 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  VIII.— Church 


Reading,  Pa 

Camden,  N.  J 

Trenton,  N.  J 

Lynn,  Mass 

Lincoln,  Neb 

Charleston,  S.  C 

Hartford,  Conn 

Saint  Joseph,  Mo.  .  . . 

Evansville,  Ind 

Los  Angeles,  Cai 

Des  Moines,  la 

Bridgeport,  Conn.  . . . 

Oakland,  Cal 

Portland,  Ore 

Saginaw,  Mich 

Salt  Lake  City,  Utah 

Lawrence,  Mass 

Springfield,  Mass.  .  . . 
Manchester,  N.  H. .  .  . 

Utica,  N.  Y 

Hoboken,  N.  J 

Savannah,  Ga 

Seattle,  Wash 

Peoria,  111 

New  Bedford,  Mass.  . 

Erie,  Pa 

Somerville,  Mass.  .  .  . 

Harrisburg,  Pa 

Kansas  City,  Kan. . . . 

Dallas,  Tex 

Sioux  City,  la 

Elizabeth,  N.  J 

Wilkesbarre,  Pa 

San  Antonio,  Tex. . . . 

Covington,  Ky 

Portland,  Me 

Tacoma,  Wash 

Holyoke,  Mass 

Fort  Wayne,  Ind.  .  . . 
Bingham'ton,  N.  Y. .  . 

Norfolk,  Va 

Wheeling,  W.  Va. .  . . 


Baptist 

Catholic 

Congre- 

Lutheran 

(5  bodies). 

(4  bodies). 

gational. 

(15  bodies). 

2 

4 

8 

12 

3 

2 

6 

4 

3 

4 

3 

4 

4 

5 

4 

4 

i6 

9 

2 

9 

5 

4 

II 

2 

4 

9 

2 

2 

7 

6 

3 

7 

5 

8 

3 

4 

3 

4 

5 

5 

4 

8 

6 

3 

II 

2 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

6 

5 

2 

4 

3 

7 

5 

5 

5 

14 

4 

7 

3 

I 

5 

7 

2 

6 

2 

5 

I 

2 

37 

8 

3 

I 

6 

2 

6 

2 

3 

5 

3 

3 

4 

5 

5 

4 

7 

3 

6 

2 

5 

4 

2 

7 

7 

4 

4 

13 

3 

2 

3 

4 

4 

7 

4 

5 

I 

I 

3 

4 

3 

3 

8 

9 

I 

4 

10 

3 

3 

9 

I 

5 

I 

5 

4 

4 

4 

2 

I 

I 

6 

I 

5 

3 

3 

2 

II 

I 

I 

3 

.. 

3 

GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


423 


Edifices. — Contimced. 


Methodist 
Episcopal. 

3 
II 

9 
9 

7 
5 
4 
7 
10 

13 
II 


Other 

Presbyte- 

Methodist 

rian 

(12  bodies). 

(7  bodies), 

I 

4 

8 

8 

2 

12 

2 

I 

3 

15 

II 

I 

I 

9 

8 

3 

10 

4 

10 

5 

9 

2 

2 

2 

8 

2 

6 

6 

6 

10 

3 
I 

3 
I 

3 

4 
9 

I 


I 

3 

12 

I 


4 
7 
I 
6 
I 
8 
4 
7 
3 
II 

7 
4 
2 
I 
3 

3 
7 
5 
4 


Protestant 

Miscel- 

Episcopal. 

laneous. 

5 

21 

7 

5 

7 

4 

3 
3 

7 
6 

12 

II 

II 

4 

4 

10 

4 

8 

5 

7 

2 

17 

10 

3 

4 

8 

4 

II 

5 

4 

3 

19 

2 

3 

2 

4 

2 
9 

4 
6 

5 

4 

4 

2 

4 
6 

2 

8 

3 
5 

12 
8 

3 
3 

i 

I 

5 

2 

5 

i 

5 

I 

3 

5 

4 

4 

2 

2 

3 

8 

4 

5 

I 

I 

I 

10 

4 

2 

9 

4 

3 

5 

Total. 
48 

47 
32 

90 
43 
55 
51 
62 
60 
42 

46 
41 
32 
27 
37 
25 
50 
23 
71 
40 

38 
?>1 
38 
26 

51 
36 
45 
36 
36 
40 

39 
28 

34 
38 
17 
33 
30. 
43 
27 


424     RELIGI0U3  FORCES,    OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 


TABLE   VIII.— Church 


Augusta,  Ga 

Youngstown,   O 

Duluth,  Minn 

Yonkers,  N.  Y 

Lancaster,  Pa 

Springfield,  O 

Quincy,  111 

Mobile,  Ala 

Topeka,    Kan 

Elmira,  N.  Y 

Salem,  Mass 

Long  Island  City,  N.  Y 

Altoona,    Pa 

Dubuque,  la 

Terre  Haute,  Ind 

Chattanooga,  Tenn .... 

Galveston,  Tex 

Waterbury,    Conn 

Chelsea,  Mass 

Bay  City,  Mich 

Pawtucket,  R.  I 

Akron,  O 

Houston,  Tex 

Haverhill,  Mass 

Brockton,    Mass 

Williamsport,  Pa 

Davenport,  la 

Sacramento,  Cal 

Canton,  O 

Birmingham,    Ala 

Little  Rock,    Ark 

Auburn,  N.   Y 

Taunton,  Mass 

AUentown,    Pa 

La  Crosse,  Wis 

Total 


Baptist 
(5  bodies). 

Catholic 
(4  bodies). 

Congre- 
gational. 

Lutheran 
(15  bodies), 

31 

6 

2 

4 

3 

2 

3 

9 

4 

4 

3 

2 

I 

2 
6 
8 

3 
3 
9 

2 

7 
5 

12 

5 

I 

8 

2 

3 

3 

3 

2 

4 
3 
5 

2 

6 

•• 

3 

3 

5 

I 

12 

3 

2 

5 

5 

2 

13 
6 

I 
9 

I 
I 

2 

4 

2 

4 

I 

4 

4 
6 

4 
4 

2 

3 

I 

3 

2 

2 

II 

4 

7 

2 

5 

4 

I 

4 

5 

2 

3 

3 

4 

2 

4 

3 

I 

I 

I 

I 

2 

3 

15 

2 

I 

I 

10 

2 

2 

2 

4 

2 

I 

3 

4 
2 

6 

8 

6 

10 

3 

7 

676 

481 

291 

223 

GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES, 


425 


Edifices. — Continued. 


Methodist 
Episcopal. 

utner 

Methodist 
(12  bodies). 

iresoyte- 

rian 
(7  bodies). 

Protestant 
Episcopal. 

Miscel- 
laneous. 

Total. 

I 

15 

8 

4 

4 

71 

3 

3 

5 

3 

3 

29 

7 

2 

3 

I 

2 

33 

3 

I 

5 

4 

4 

23 

4 

I 

3 

3 

19 

42 

6 

3 

6 

4 

5 

40 

4 

I 

I 

4 

7 

35 

3 

22 

4 

5 

I 

54 

10 

6 

8 

4 

6 

50 

3 

2 

4 

3 

2 

23 

2 

2 

10 

25 

4 

I 

II 

5 

2 

3 

I 

6 

28 

3 

I 

4 

I 

3 

30 

5 

I 

2 

2 

8 

31 

8 

8 

6 

3 

5 

46 

4 

5 

2 

6 

5 

38 

3 

I 

4 

2 

18 

2 

I 

I 

2 

15 

5 

I 

I 

4 

4 

27 

2 

4 

3 

21 

3 

I 

I 

I 

9 

23 

II 

12 

3 

3 

5 

49 

2 

2 

6 

24 

4 

I 

3 

17 

10 

4 

4 

5 

II 

44 

3 

I 

4 

4 

3 

28 

2 

2 

2 

I 

9 

22 

2 

2 

2 

I 

9 

22 

7 

7 

6 

3 

3 

45 

5 

7 

4 

4 

3 

39 

3 

2 

6 

3 

4 

25 

4 

I 

3 

2 

22 

2 

I 

2 

10 

26 

6 

3 

I 

4 

40 

559 


359 


442 


401 


647 


4,079 


426     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES, 


TABLE  VIIL— Churches  in 
Value  of 


Baptist  Catholic 

^^'^^^^'  (5  bodies).  (4  bodies). 

Albany,  N.   Y $480,500  $913,000 

Columbus,  O      72,000  522,270 

Syracuse,  N.  Y 138,700  618,000 

Worcester,  Mass 247,350  402,000 

Toledo,  0 84,600  227,000 

Richmond,  Va 536,650  i57,ooo 

New  Haven,  Conn 239,000  323^500 

Paterson,  N.  J 180,400  505 > 000 

Lowell,  Mass 186,500  292,700 

Nashville,  Tenn 151.675  87,000 

Scranton,   Pa 133. 5oo  233,000 

Fall  River,  Mass 192,850  469,000 

Cambridge,  Mass 401,500  342,000 

Atlanta,  Ga 325. 45o  64, 500 

Memphis,  Tenn 182,800  170,000 

Wilmington,  Del 150,000  142,000 

Dayton,   0 148,000  324,000 

Troy,  N.  Y 160,000  504,200 

Grand  Rapids,  Mich 132,600  225,000 

Reading,  Pa 28, 500  92,000 

Camden,  N.  J 170, 100  140,000 

Trenton,   N.  J 77,000  456,000 

Lynn,  Mass 197,000  130,200 

Lincoln,  Neb 73.600  55»ooo 

Charleston,  S.  C 130,750  250,000 

Hartford,  Conn 280,000  382,600 

Saint  Joseph,  Mo 60,700  198,000 

Evansville,  Ind 30,800  284,500 

Los  Angeles,  Cal 101,500  87,000 

Des  Moines,  la 40,000  140,000 

Bridgeport,  Conn 88,000  250,000 

Oakland,   Cal 64,500  240,000 

Portland,  Ore 162,000  141,000 

Saginaw,  Mich 44,000  55'000 

Salt  Lake  City,  Utah 45, 000  33.ooo 

Lawrence,    Mass 82,000  279,000 

Springfield,    Mass 185,000  93,5oo 

Manchester,  N.  H 72,000  77,8oo 

Utica,  N.  Y    127,500  279,800 

Hoboken,  N.  J 48,000  370,000 

Savannah,  Ga 118,650  201,000 

Seattle,    Wash 48,500  15,000 

Peoria,  111 48,000  247,000 

New  Bedford,  Mass 44,600  222,000 


Congre-  Lutheran 

gational.  (15  bodies). 

$39,000  $198,800 

153,900  139.500 

105,000  122,000 

740,354  12,000 

51,000  133,200 

28,200 

676,000  56,500 

35,000  7,000 

280,000  6,000 

3,000  2,500 

47,028  27,500 

155.400     

300,000     

25,000     

15,500  25,000 

10,000 

6,500  166,500 

16,000 

161,000  54,000 

403,000 

84,500 

55.000 

122,000     

11,172  27,200 

31,000  232,000 

533,000  9,000 

13.500  58,575 

47,600 

81,600  38,800 

85,000  74,000 

180,000     

168,800  24,000 

75,200  48,500 

57.400 

50,000     

83.500     

404.300     

117,000  10,000 

41,600  90,600 

10,000  77,500 

5.300  75.000 

56,200  16,400 

108,500  34.300 

85,000     


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


427 


Cities — Third  Class. — Continued. 


Church  Property. 


Methodist 
Episcopal. 

$241,000 
399,700 
196,500 
193,900 
124,200 
2,000 
244,600 
156,000 
128,500 

55>2oo 

130,200 

99,100 

117,000 

57,000 

7,000 

526,250 

187,800 

275,500 

130,000 

68,000 

256,000 

244,000 

217,500 

89,200 

84,350 

110,000 

64,000 

90,600 

238,900 

128,800 

146,000 

149,216 

260,200 

114,500 

98,000 

58,900 

219,000 

41,000 

99,000 

98,000 

1,750 

146,000 

83,000 

63,000 


Other 
Methodist 
(12  bodies). 


^110,000 

36,000 

13,000 

20,800 

151,500 

25,000 

29,000 

15,400 

388,271 

8,900 

17,700 

15,000 

292,600 

181,300 

43,800 

10,000 

25,000 

8,800 

6,000 

43,290 

14,000 

7,500 

9,000 

126,925 

40,000 

90,800 

20,500 

56,200 

17,800 

13,000 

34,000 

20,000 

16,500 


,500 


Presbyterian 
(7  bodies). 

$500,500 
236,000 
457,000 

240,000 
146,800 

28,000 
421,500 

25,000 
356,650 
330,200 

28,000 

138,500 
248,500 
435,300 
256,000 
441,500 
64, 500 
99,500 
148,000 
429,000 

69,800 
245,000 

75,000 

91,500 
241,000 
170,000 
102,125 
150,000 
140,500 
286,000 

70,300 
117,000 

10,200 


10,000 

52,800 
65,000 
14,600 
16,600 


3,500 

235,000 

35,000 

50,000 

41,700 

222,500 

6,000 


Protestant 
Episcopal. 

$650,000 

100,725 

242,500 

148,000 

169,200 

308,000 

432,000 

105,000 

77,000 

137,000 

93,000 

98,657 

184,500 

115,000 

91,100 

191,250 

80,000 

377,500 

85,300 

96,000 

107,100 

99,500 

236,000 

62,500 

280,000 

394,000 

64,500 

69,000 

65,507 

52,150 

350,000 

55,875 

231,000 

104,500 

46,500 

33,500 

70,000 

25,000 

269,500 

361,000 

121,800 

63,500 

28,000 

66,900 


Miscel- 
laneous. 

$493,750 
179,500 
228,000 
229,400 

66,800 
146,000 

65,000 

.266,100 

150,900 

111,500 

57,400 

80, 700 
175,500 

55,000 
120,000 
101,500 
339,825 
195,500 
249, 500 
437,200 

34,500 

60,000 
242,500 

93,460 
122,567 
166,000 
161,600 
117,600 
112,000 
233,900 

83,000 
175,600 
255,650 

26,600 

212,594 
47,500 

245,000 
84,000 

129,500 
94,000 
79,000 
32,500 
90, 700 

164,650 


Total. 

$3,516,550 

1,814,595 
2,143,700 
1,986,004 
1,116,800 
1,476,150 
2,089,600 
1,705,000 
1,162,000 
1,292,796 
1,060,728 
1,141,407 
1,535,500 
1,073,050 
1,041,200 
1,600,100 
1,518,625 
1,995,200 
1,110,700 
1,230,200 

983,490 
1,434,500 
1,152,700 

490,932 
1,502,592 
1,989,600 

803,175 
901,600 

951,507 

873,775 

1,260,000 

1,052,491 

1,479,550 

488,800 

602,094 

594,600 

1,219,300 

430,300 

1,282,500 

1,093,500 

705,300 

484,800 

876,600 

668,750 


428     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  VIII.— Value  of 


Erie,  Pa 

Somerville,  Mass 

Harrisburg,    Pa 

Kansas  City,  Kan 

Dallas,    Tex 

Sioux  City,  la 

Elizabeth,  N.  J 

Wilkesbarre,    Pa 

San  Antonio,  Tex 

Covington,     Ky 

Portland,  Me 

Tacoma,  Wash 

Holyoke,    Mass 

Fort  Wayne,    Ind 

Binghamton,   N.  Y 

Norfolk,  Va 

Wheeling,  W.  Va 

Augusta,  Ga 

Youngstown,  O 

Duluth,    Minn 

Yonkers,  N.  Y 

Lancaster,  Pa 

Springfield,    O 

Quincy,  111 

Mobile,  Ala 

Topeka,  Kan 

Elmira,  N.  Y 

Salem,  Mass 

Long  Island  City,  N.  Y. 

Altoona,   Pa 

Dubuque,    la 

Terre  Haute,  Ind 

Chattanooga,  Tenn 

Galveston,   Tex 

Waterbury,    Conn 

Chelsea,   Mass 

Bay  City,  Mich 

Pawtucket,    R.  I , 

Akron,   O 

Houston,   Tex 

Haverhill,    Mass , 

Brockton,  Mass , 

Williamsport,  Pa 

Davenport,   la 

Sacramento,  Cal 

Canton,  O 


Baptist 

Catholic 

Congre- 

Lutheran 

(5  bodies). 

(4  bodies). 

gational. 

(15  bodies). 

$38,000 

$132,000 

$99,200 

113,855 

75,500 

$217,000 

56,500 

1 10,000 

199,600 

50,125 

18,500 

9,450 

122,675 

75,000 

22,000 

85,500 

97,000 

88,000 

83,700 

70,950 

138,500 

16,000 

7,000 

25,500 

225,300 

30,200 

37,000 

66,300 

108,300 

15,000 

60,600 

165,000 



95,000 

.  150,000 

221,000 

2,000 

60,000 

20,000 

65,700 

32,000 

104,000 

185,000 

117,976 

8,000 

50,000 

229,800 

3,000 

215,000 

103,000 

618,000 

105,000 

68,343 

100,000 

10,000  - 

112,000 

61,000 

117,075 

116,000 

22,000 

52,000 

41,000 

16,500 

16,300 

74,900 

35,500 

60,000 

42,000 

163,150 

71,000 

12,000 

6,000 

175,000 

188,100 

64,100 

77,000 

40,000 

164,000 

105,000 

220,525 

90,000 

79,069 

297,000 

3,500 

5,000 

72,000 

21,000 

24,500 

44,000 

87,500 

151,000 

141,500 

41,000 

100,900 

82,000 

30,000 

217,100 

42,000 

67,000 

131,300 

25,000 

371,500 

60,000 

31,000 

11,300 

94,500 

40,000 

5,025 

93,200 

100,000 

50,000 

5,110 

53,350 

151,000 

15,000 

61,500 

180,000 

130,000 

115,000 

20,000 

124,000 

68,300 

139,000 

12,000 

23,500 

89,500 

252,500 

75,000 

27,000 

47,000 

40,000 

90,000 

83,800 

53,000 

161,000 

79,000 

76,000 

45,500 

40,000 

130,000 

46,500 

128,000 

52,000 

45,500 

100,000 

36,800 

18,800 

31,000 

150,000 

20,000 

14,100 

60,000 

115,000 

89,000 

GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


429 


Church  Property. — Continued. 


Methodist 
Episcopal. 

Other 
Methodist 
(12  bodies). 

Presbyterian 
(7  bodies). 

Protestant 
Episcopal. 

Miscel- 
laneous. 

Total. 

$55,200 

$3,000 

$124,500 

$80,200 

$71,075 

$603,175 

113,000 

15,000 

38,000 

140,890 

713,245 

233,500 

15,500 

264,000 

55,000 

161,400 

1,095,500 

80,000 

32,750 

65,410 

25,000 

20,650 

301,885 

58,000 

95,200 

115,100 

35,750 

95,700 

619,425 

70, 500 

2,000 

48,000 

22,900 

51,000 

548,600 

107,000 

2,000 

305,500 

258,500 

6,000 

911,450 

161,000 

30,500 

320,000 

90,000 

42,000 

961,500 

44,000 

49,750 

79,500 

51,600 

46,400 

460,850 

163,000 

37,000 

80,000 

45,000 

24,000 

574,600 

122,500 

5,000 

159,000 

165,200 

919,700 

109,900 

5,000 

92,000 

79,500 

51,025 

515,125 

62,000 

30,000 

20,000 

20,000 

546,976 

57,800 

2,000 

164,000 

40,000 

87,300 

848,900 

185,000 

15,500 

150,000 

106,000 

9,000 

1,291,500 

4,000 

168,900 

69,500 

181,000 

31,700 

623,443 

149,000 

5,000 

137,000 

53,800 

94,400 

622,200 

3,000 

98,600 

155,600 

68,500 

131,000 

711,775 

98,200 

16,300 

175,000 

15,000 

57,500 

487,800 

35,800 

1,000 

17,100 

10,000 

19,500 

295,800 

131,600 

9,000 

140,000 

416,000 

61,000 

1,003,750 

87,000 

10,000 

73,000 

73,000 

137,700 

749,800 

117,200 

43,000 

103,000 

55,000 

50,000 

713,300 

89,600 

10,000 

75,000 

33,500 

146,600 

770,225 

10,000 

182,900 

105,000 

110,150 

13,500 

806,119 

106,600 

28,500 

109,500 

80,875 

32,750 

519,725 

42,700 

13,000 

105,000 

95,000 

19,000 

654,700 

58,000 

60,000 

231,000 

572,900 

29,500 

10,000 

286,600 

112,500 

6,500 

103,200 

50,000 

97,300 

609,800 

38,200 

6,000 

57,000 

92,000 

34,500 

715,200 

63,300 

6,200 

44,000 

25,000 

107,600 

396,925 

113,300 

106,700 

126,820 

79,200 

39,500 

713,830 

35,500 

89,600 

87,000 

125,000 

50,500 

606,950 

83,500 

3,000 

220,000 

30,000 

708,000 

60,000 

1,500 

16,400 

55,000 

391,900 

98,500 

1,500 

35,000 

78,300 

36,500 

492,600 

27,000 

50,500 

52,000 

546,500 

158,000 

2,000 

9,000 

45,000 

149,000 

567,000 

50,300 

80,600 

30,000 

42,900 

39,050 

379,650 

65,000 

15,000 

74,200 

470,200 

65,600 

2,500 

104,000 

387,600 

142,000 

19,000 

124,500 

160,000 

72,950 

744,950 

35,500 

3,500 

17,500 

208,300 

20,000 

485,900 

31,000 

16,000 

12,500 

25,000 

37,500 

337,100 

175,000 

3,500 

102,500 

11,000 

38,000 

594,000 

430 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  VIII.— Value  of 

Baptist  Catholic               Congre-         Lutheran 

^^'^'^^*                                  (5  bodies).  (4  bodies).            gational.       (15  bodies). 

Birmingham,  Ala $93,800  $105,000        $15,800          $3,000 

Little  Rock,  Ark 99,700  65,000            3,000          27,500 

Auburn,  N.  Y 140,500  160,000  

Taunton,  Mass 52,500  154,000  75, 700  

Allentown,  Pa 13,000  50,000  140, 500 

La  Crosse,  Wis 46,100  163,800          30,000          41,300 

Total $10,088,967  $18,108,795  $7,327,980  $4,408,110 


CITIES.  Population. 

Albany,  N.  Y 94,923 

Columbus,  O 88,150 

Syracuse,  N.  Y 88,143 

Worcester,  Mass.  ...  84,655 

Toledo,  O 81,434 

Richmond,  Va 81,388 

New  Haven,  Conn..  81,298 

Paterson,  N.  J 78,347 

Lowell,  Mass 775696 

Nashville,    Tenn....  76,168 

Scranton,   Pa 75>2i5 

Fall  River,  Mass.  .  .  .  74,398 

Cambridge,   Mass...  70,028 

Atlanta,  Ga 65,533 

Memphis,  Tenn 64,495 

Wilmington,  Del ...  .  61,431 

Dayton,  O 61,220 

Troy,  N.  Y 60,956 

Grand  Rapids,  Mich.  60,278 

Reading,  Pa 58,661 

Camden,  N.  J 58,313 

Trenton,   N.  J 57,458 

Lynn,    Mass 55,727 

Lincoln,  Neb 55,i54 

Charleston,  S.  C.  . . .  54,955 

Hartford,  Conn 53,230 

Saint  Joseph,  Mo.  .  .  .  52,324 


COMMUNI 

Baptist 

Catholic 

Congre- 

(5 bodies.) 

(4  bodies). 

gational. 

2,591 

27,150 

474 

1,589 

12,057 

1,850 

1,672 

14,925 

937 

2,183 

20,125 

4,152 

1,358 

17,935 

869 

24,003 

3,570 

2,138 

16,350 

5,916 

1,707 

16,764 

243 

2,494 

28,456 

2,724 

6,162 

6,000 

350 

1,577 

19,049 

1,242 

1,306 

32,560 

864 

2,367 

20,056 

2,510 

10,066 

2,050 

726 

2,018 

6,400 

289 

1,521 

8,601 

1,594 

10,601 

46 

2,012 

29,000 

1,352 

7,422 

1,107 

635 

7,500 

2,340 

5,172 

1,160 

13,050 

1,570 

9,365 

1,048 

781 

2,570 

674 

1,758 

3,756 

356 

1,672 

12,260 

4,007 

1,076 

5,896 

156 

GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


431 


Church  Property. — Contimced. 

Methodist  M?.?^-^;c^       Presbyterian 

Episcopal.         ,f/*°£;       <,boLs). 

$29,150  $179,400  $140,800 

54,800  81,100  45,000 

66,500  6,200  246,700 

47,800                       20,000 

18,500                       12,000 

42,500                       32,200 

$10,638,416     $3,458,786     $11,761,005      $ 


Protestant 

Miscel- 

Total. 

Episcopal. 

laneous. 

$54,375 

$43,200 

$664,525 

79,500 

42,000 

497,600 

128,000 

42,000 

789,900 

85,000 

90,000 

525,000 

18,000 

252,500 

504,500 

13,800 

36,000 

405,700 

,032,114  $10,374,086  $87,198,259 


CANTS. 

Lutheran 
(15  bodies). 

Methodist 
Episcopal. 

Other 
Methodist 
(12  bodies). 

Presbyte- 
rian 
(7  bodies). 

Protestant 
Episcopal. 

Miscel- 
laneous. 

Total. 

2,448 

1,685 

109 

3.484 

2,781 

3,875 

44,597 

2,115 

5,238 

586 

2,043 

834 

2,680 

28,992 

2,580 

3,043 

674 

2,064 

1,743 

3,977 

31,615 

230 

2,706 

177 

100 

969 

1,987 

32,629 

5,042 

1,948 

264 

1,652 

1,066 

2,244 

32,378 

457 

201 

2,171 

2,038 

3,045 

2,629 

38,114 

785 

2,960 

367 

115 

2,954 

1,099 

32,684 

334 

2,692 

337 

2,188 

1,018 

3,329 

28,612 

211 

1,688 

202 

335 

1,164 

940 

38,214 

217 

1,143 

9,061 

3,019 

953 

2,690 

30,195 

540 

2,402 

116 

2,903 

585 

1,708 

30,122 

1,708 

185 

410 

711 

1.394 

39.138 

1,310 

283 

1,062 

1,506 

29.094 

1,493 

9.323 

1,914 

863 

802 

27.237 

152 

575 

3,543 

1,743 

1,245 

1,368 

17.333 

296 

5,480 

1,072 

2,185 

1,146 

992 

21,293 

2,020 

3,169 

298 

1,661 

487 

7.214 

27,090 

562 

2,579 

125 

2,933 

2,023 

1,711 

40,945 

989 

1,787 

536 

782 

1,302 

6,090 

21,367 

5.380 

1,195 

120 

755 

455 

6,362 

22,402 

551 

4,368 

1,328 

1,081 

1,479 

390 

16,709 

1.575 

3,230 

404 

2,239 

1,301 

514 

23.473 

2,502 

198 

819 

1,881 

17,383 

531 

1,625 

216 

696 

301 

1,259 

8,653 

1,540 

3,301 

8,197 

1,673 

2,156 

1,380 

24,117 

270 

1,012 

215 

280 

2,197 

1,214 

23,127 

318 

948 

1,743 

981 

653 

2,817 

14,588 

432 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED  STATES. 


TABLE  VIII.— Com 


T,       1  ^-  Baptist  Catholic 

CITIES.  Population.  (^  todies.)  (4  bodies). 

Evansville,  Ind 50,756  865  5,650 

Los  Angeles,  Cal 50^395  1^282  6,154 

Des  Moines,  la 5O5O93  9°?  45377 

Bridgeport,   Conn...  48,866  879  11,565 

Oakland,  Cal 48,682  1,170  8,000 

Portland,  Ore 46,385  722  9,140 

Saginaw,  Mich 46,322  914  8,453 

Salt  Lake  City, Utah.  44,843  i7i  i,35o 

Lawrence,  Mass 44^654  i,494  21,500 

Springfield,   Mass...  44,i79  1.606  9,525 

Manchester,  N.  H.  .  .  44,126  1,162  13,600 

Utica,  N.  Y 44,007  808  8,600 

Hoboken,  N.  J 43,648  208  10,535 

Savannah,  Ga 43,189  8,226  3,585 

Seattle,   Wash 42,837  689  1,700 

Peoria,  111 41,024  735  5,100 

New  Bedford,  Mass .  .  40,733  708  13,000 

Erie,  Pa 40,634  557  12,030 

Some rville,  Mass.  ..  .  40,152  1,590  7,600 

Harrisburg,  Pa 39,385  41 1  Ij75o 

Kansas  City,  Kan.  .  .  38.316  981  2,525 

Dallas,  Tex 38,067  2,375  3,275 

Sioux   City,  la 37, 806  610  3,800 

Elizabeth,  N.  J 37,764  95o  8,900 

Wilkesbarre,    Pa....  37,718  398  8,620 

San  Antonio,  Tex.  .  .  37,673  1,075  6,283 

Covington,  Ky 37,371  943  10,102 

Portland,   Me 36,425  1,038  6,700 

Tacoma,   Wash 36,006  412  5,000 

Holyoke,  Mass 35,637  803  15,700 

Fort  Wayne,  Ind.  .  .  .  35,393  830  6,940 

Binghamton,  N.  Y .  .  35,005  1,023  5,5^5 

Norfolk,  Va 34,871  4,091  1,400 

Wheeling,  W.  Va.  .  .  34,522  224  6,276 

Augusta,  Ga 33, 300  6,228  2,725 

Youngstown,  0 33,220  763  5,280 

Duluth,  Minn 33, 115  835  2,675 

Yonkers,  N.  Y 32,033  731  9,35o 

Lancaster,  Pa 32,011  98  3,^97 

vSpringfield,    0 31,895  993  4,500 

Quincy,   111 31,494  1,555  8,386 

Mobile,    Ala 31,076  2,540  5,400 


Congre- 
gational. 


1,082 

663 

1,854 

1,571 

636 

273 
1,070 

3,434 

1,120 

480 

27 

280 

630 

767 
800 

1,294 

288 
328 
510 
152 
346 


2,230 
452 
930 
100 

775 


510 
306 


400 
365 


131 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


433 


MUNICANTS. — Contimied. 


Lutheran 
(15  bodies). 

Methodist 
Episcopal. 

Other 
Methodist 
(12  bodies). 

Presbyte- 
rian 
(7  bodies). 

Protestant 
Episcopal. 

Miscel- 
laneous. 

Total. 

943 

1,434 

710 

1,560 

445 

2,225            1 

3,832 

375 

3,002 

794 

1,956 

979 

2,605            ] 

8,229 

1,228 

2,454 

545 

1,204 

344 

4,420            ] 

6,142 

1,791 

143 

435 

1,734 

1,582 

9,983 

287 

1,469 

365 

1,665 

830 

3,133 

8,490 

347 

784 

291 

1,172 

676 

3,047 

6,815 

2,716 

1,330 

367 

829 

1,079 

324 

6,012 

24 

347 

7 

223 

465 

14,642 

[7,502 

990 

392 

553 

584           ^ 

^6,583 

30 

1,640 

55 

684 

1,233 

8,207 

270 

779 

187 

380 

1,103 

8,601 

2,144 

1,063 

95 

2,424 

2,002 

1,015 

8,631 

895 

730 

190 

1,417 

775 

4,777 

442 

265 

3,705 

368 

1,397 

637 

[8,905 

121 

1,323 

378 

639 

458 

901 

6,839 

1,08s 

i,-352 

208 

1,328 

210 

i,o8q 

[1,874 

1,152 

467 

113 

498 

2,156 

[8,894 

1,483 

898 

27 

1,382 

612 

1,331 

8,320 

1,369 

250 

432 

497 

3,032 

2,349 

2,628 

658 

1,714 

248 

2,471 

[2,229 

1,215 

339 

613 

100 

606 

6,667 

90 

445 

2,137 

973 

548 

1,540 

[1,711 

859 

1,010 

43 

530 

294 

551 

8,207 

480 

858 

65 

2,305 

2,536 

323 

[6,569 

885 

1,835 

558 

1,506 

431 

1,159 

f5,738 

500 

590 

1,063 

577 

525 

489 

[1, 102 

1,424 

751 

805 

550 

1,000 

[5,575 

300 

1,453 

45 

130 

1,075 

922 

[3,893 

505 

1,016 

64 

454 

470 

679 

9,052 

370 

370 

250 

305 

100 

8,828 

5,694 

1,248 

20 

938 

300 

2,274 

[8,344 

2,455 

441 

1,745 

818 

327 

[3,099 

40 

5,196 

809 

1,692 

383 

[3,611 

1,400 

2,094 

ZZ 

1,245 

361 

2,660 

[4,293 

310 

100 

4,975 

676 

729 

1,193 

[6,936 

815 

1,277 

262 

1,427 

216 

977 

[1,527 

772 

921 

115 

605 

275 

702 

7,206 

177 

813 

129 

1,301 

992 

590 

[4,083 

3,460 

1,011 

105 

655 

764 

2,829 

[2,119 

1,449 

2,332 

459 

1,121 

307 

2,710 

[4,271 

1,245 

330 

305 

369 

3,440 

[5,995 

222 

319 

10,379 

787 

1,576 

375        ' 

21,729 

434     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE  VIII.— Com 


CITIES.  Population. 

Topeka,   Kan 3I5O07 

Elmira,  N,  Y 30^893 

Salem,  Mass 30,801 

LongIslandCity,N  Y.  30,506 

Altoona,   Pa 30j337 

Dubuque,  la 30j3II 

Terre  Haute,  Ind.  ..  .  30,217 

Chattanooga,  Tenn .  .  29, 100 

Galveston,  Tex.  ....  29,084 

Waterbury,  Conn...  28,646 

Chelsea,  Mass 27,909 

Bay  City,  Mich 27,839 

Pawtucket,  R.  1 27,633 

Akron,   0 27,601 

Houston,  Tex 27,557 

Haverhill,  Mass 27,412 

Brockton,  Mass 27,294 

Williamsport,  Pa .  .  .  .  27,132 

Davenport,    la 26,872 

Sacramento,  Cal.  .  .  .  26,386 

Canton,  O 26, 189 

Birmingham,  Ala...  26,178 

Little  Rock,  Ark 25,874 

Auburn,  N.  Y 25,858 

Taunton,  Mass 25,448 

Allentown,   Pa 25,228 

La  Cross,  Wis 25,090 

Total 4,291,048 


Baptist 

Catholic 

Congre- 

(5 bodies.) 

(4  bodies). 

gational. 

1,426 

2,145 

809 

1,015 

6,900 

687 

517 

12,350 

808 

256 

8,102 

490 

2,770 

280 

10,442 

612 

956 

3.632 

300 

1,892 

1,700 

153 

734 

8,200 

549 

11,800 

1,220 

793 

6,000 

1,237 

448 

8,745 

151 

1,091 

10,850 

723 

275 

3,320 

990 

1,265 

3,350 

1,300 

7,500 

1,074 

703 

6,000 

1,383 

960 

2,900 

545 

3,910 

393 

370 

6,000 

287 

602 

4,330 

2,429 

2,500 

39 

1,680 

1,000 

224 

877 

4,850 

541 

7,150 

824 

194 

1,600 

462 

5,131 

293 

157,952  807,580  66,551 


Recapit 


Cities  of  the  First  Class  (4)  . . . 

Cities  of  the  Second  Class  (24) 

Cities  of  the  Third  Class  (96)  . 

Total  (124) 


Organi- 
zations. 

2,187 
3,770 
4,284 
[0,241 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES. 


435 


MUNICANTS. — Continued. 


Lutheran 
(15  bodies). 

Methodist 
Episcopal. 

Other 
Methodist 
(12  bodies).     ( 

Presbyte- 
rian 
7  bodies). 

Protestant 
Episcopal. 

Miscel- 
laneous. 

Total. 

526 

2,144 

1,004 

1,566 

612 

1,322 

11,554 

1,538 

404 

794 

612 

985 

12,935 

761 

30 

489 

1,393 

16,348 

50 

421 

130 

300 

9,259 

2,327 

2,160 

108 

1,456 

325 

1,591 

11,227 

716 

496 

15 

1,054 

205 

183 

14,003 

264 

1,278 

132 

495 

375 

1,457 

8,889 

75 

1,529 

1,649 

1,114 

900 

818 

9,830 

787 

841 

1,220 

485 

670 

811 

13,748 

850 

III 

1,135 

37(> 

16,041 

970 

64 

225 

375 

9,664 

I 

039 

1,142 

18 

321 

474 

944 

13,282 

436 

687 

197 

13,984 

I 

342 

1,142 

.5° 

130 

330 

2,825 

10,404 

935 

1,624 

410 

591 

537 

8,712 

802 

406 

1,457 

12,539 

911 

120 

481 

9,598 

I 

001 

2,514 

377 

1,062 

637 

2,033 

11,484 

'516 

608 

35 

363 

521 

600 

7,491 

148 

458 

332 

256 

330 

878 

9,059 

980 

1,205 

27 

525 

100 

1,862 

9,631 

50 

1,017 

3,118 

1,088 

698 

1,275 

12,214 

403 

579 

2,402 

562 

760 

688 

8,298 

1,127 

260 

2,043 

805 

658 

10,620 

926 

10 

106 

488 

506 

10,551 

2,662 

387 

26 

180 

172 

4,437 

9,658 

1,946 

630 
140,666 

91,190 

349 
92,021 

248 
79,033 

421 

9,480 

77,002 

165,061 

1,677,056 

ULATION. 

Church 

Value  of  Church 

Communi- 

T) 

i-i.; 

Edifices. 

Property. 

cants. 

i'upuictuuu. 

2,081 

$1 

16,839,069 

I 

,589,898 

4,468,458 

3,562 

I 

09,499,919 

2 

,035,064 

5,229,432 

( 

^,079 

87,198,259 

1,677,056 
5,302,018 

4, 
13, 

291,048 

?,722 

"fc 

13,537,247 

988,938 

436     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Denominations  in  Cities  of  25,000  and  Upward. 


DENOMINATIONS.  za^fons' 

Adventists  : 

1.  Evangelical 2 

2.  Advent  Christians 39 

3.  Seventh-Day   ...    62 

4.  Life  and  Advent  Union .  .  8 

5 .  Churches  of  God  in  Christ 

Jesus  9 

Baptists  : 

1.  Regular  (North) 716 

2.  Regular  (South) 153 

3.  Regular  (Colored) 309 

4.  Seventh-Day  2 

5.  Freewill 49 

6.  Primitive 17 


Church 
Edifices. 


23 

I 


Value  of 

Church 

Property. 


$127,175 

163.500 

9,600 

5,000 


Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

400 

3,414 

3,495 
451 

689 


792 

23,566,584 

200,525 

161 

4,200,100 

53,761 

288 

1,590,162 

88,195 

9,000 

61 

46 

642,900 

7,189 

16 

61,700 

713 

Brethren  (River): 
United  Zion's  Children 


[o        10 


2,400  215 


Brethren  (Plymouth): 

1.  Brethren  I 

2.  Brethren  II 

Catholics  : 

1.  Roman  Catholic 1,5 

2.  Greek  Catholic  (Uniates) 

3.  Russian  Orthodox 

4.  Greek  Orthodox 

5.  Armenian 

6.  Reformed  Catholic 

Catholic  Apostolic 

Chinese  Temples 

Christadelphians 

Christians: 

1.  Christians  (Christian  Con- 

nection)    

2.  Christian  Church  (South) 


41 
28 

650 

1,108 
1,093 

;i2  ] 

4 

I 
I 
4 
7 

[,434 
3 

I 
I 

65,034,350  3,007,176 

11,300    3,470 

40,000     500 

5,000     100 

285 

950 

8 

I 

57,800 

1,268 

23 
25 

22 

41,000 

549 

20 


197,700 

2,500 


2,728 
13 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES.  437 


Denominations  in  Cities  of  25,000  and  Upward. — Continued. 


Value  of  Com- 

DENOM*NATiONS.  TAITI"     -ir'J:^"-"!"  Church  muni- 

Property.  cants. 


Oreani-    Church  /^u      u 

zadons.    Edifices.  ^^^''^^^ 


Christian  Scientists 69  6  $34,850  4,921 

Christian  Union i  i  5,000  120 

Church  of  God  (Winebren- 

nerian)  ii  7  73^5oo  1,405 

Ch.   Triumphant   (Schwein- 

furth)    4  ...             112 

Ch.  of  the  New  Jerusalem .  .  74  44  1,105,200  4>993 

CongregationaHsts 533  563  18,041,300  131,111 

Disciples  of  Christ 164  166  2,887,810  42,734 

DUNKARDS : 

1.  Dunkards     or     German 

Baptists  (Conservative)  7  5  36,200  432 

2.  Dunkards     or     German 

Baptists  (Progressive) . .  2  i  137 

Evangelical  Association.  .. .         136      135         1,362,300        18,282 

Friends  : 

1.  Friends  (Orthodox) 38  36  1,635,300  5,892 

2.  Friends  (Hicksite) 19  19  1,025,000  5,435 

3.  Friends  (Wilburite)  ....  2  2                4,000  29 

4.  Friends  (Primitive)  ....  .  3  i               10,000  85 

Friends  of  the  Temple i  i  3, 500  35 

German  Evangel.  Protestant  28        28         1,010,400        28,192 

German  Evangelical  Synod.         120      118         2,548,100        72,283 

Jewish  Congregations: 

1 .  Jewish  Congregations 

(Orthodox) 266        98         2,667,550        52,822 

2.  Jewish  Congregations 

(Reformed)  132      118         6,356,725        61,650 

Latter-Day  Saints: 

1.  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 

Latter-Day  Saints 23         17  168,894         14,216 

2.  Reorganized    Church    of 

Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
Day  Saints , . . ,  29        14  43>5oo  2,498 


438     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Denominations  in  Cities  of  25,000  and  Upward. — Continued. 

n^.Tov,;  rv,„v^T,  Value  oi  Com- 

DENOMINATIONS.  urgam-  ^nurcti  Chi#ch  muni- 

zation..  Edifices.  Property.  cants. 

Lutherans  : 

General  Bodies. 

1.  General  Synod 108  103  $3,197,500  28,818 

2.  United     Synod     in     the 

South  9  13  335^200  2,317 

3.  General  Council 199  200  5,454,900  83,659 

4.  Synodical  Conference .. .  181  172  3,819,645  106,320 

Independent  Synods. 

1.  Joint  Synod  of  Ohio,  etc.  40  39  565,300  14,727 

2.  Buffalo  Synod 3  3  46,310  Ij390 

3.  Hauge's  Synod 6  6  69,000  914 

4.  Norwegian     Church     in 

America 27  19  204,800  5,029 

5.  Michigan  Synod i  i  11,000  800 

6.  Danish  Ch.  in  America.  .  21  9  38,100  2,178 

7.  German  Augsburg  Synod  2  3  30,000  1,098 

8.  Danish  Ch.  Association. .  8  2  5,400  283 

9.  Icelandic  Synod i  ...  20 

10.  United    Norwegian    Ch. 

of  America 27  21  237,100  5,176 

11.  Emmanuel  Synod 4  3  45,000  1,250 

Independent  Congregations  26  22  577j5oo  12,547 

Mennonites  : 

1.  Mennonite 2  2  5,000  64 

2.  Apostolic I  ...  50 

3.  General  Conference  ....  i  i  30,000  233 

4.  Brethren  in  Christ 3  2  6,000  iii 

Methodists  : 

1.  Methodist  Episcopal 1,3891,352  33,687,813  340^946 

2.  Union    American    Meth- 

odist Episcopal 9  6  93,800  762 

3.  African  Meth.  Episcopal.  171  172  2,446,100  51,430 

4.  African  Union  Methodist 

Protestant 19  9  24,690  i,  142 

5.  African  Methodist   Epis- 

copal Zion 109  92  1,113,170  33^350 


GENERAL   STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES.  439 


DENOMINATIONS. 


25,000 

AND    U 

PW  ARD. — Contin  iied. 

Organi- 
zations. 

Church 
Edifices. 

Value  of 

Church 

Property. 

Com- 
muni- 
cants. 

60 

55 

$1,015,175 

6,760 

6 

6 

33,500 

499 

165 

174 

3,013,521 

47,558 

2 

I 

300 

47 

3« 

28 

241,600 

5,186 

20 

19 

115,818 

1,469 

47 

31 

146,970 

1,702 

14 

13 

262,475 

2,382 

6 

2 

1,300 

716 

6.  Methodist  Protestant.  .  .  . 

7.  Wesleyan  Methodist.  .  .  . 

8.  Meth.  Episcopal  (South) 

9.  Zion  Union  Apostolic.  .  . 

10.  Colored  Meth.  Episcopal 

11.  Primitive  Methodist 

12.  Free  Methodist 

13.  Independent  Methodist. . 

14.  Evangelist  Missionary.  . . 


Moravians 7         11  274, 100  1,656 


Presbyterians  : 

1.  Presbyterian  in  the  U.  S. 

of  America  (North) .... 

2.  Cumberland  Presbyterian 

3.  Cumberland  Presbyterian 

(Colored) 

4.  Welsh  Calvinistic 

5.  United  Presbyterian  .... 

6.  Presbyterian  in  the  U.  S. 

(South) 

7.  Associate       Church       of 

North  America 

8.  Associate  Reformed  Syn- 

od of  the  South 

9.  Reformed      Presbyterian 

in  the  U.  S.  (Synod).  .  . 

10.  Reformed      Presbyterian 

in  North  America  (Gen- 
eral Synod) 10        10  415,500  2,665 

11.  Reformed      Presbyterian 

(Covenated) 3       ...  17 

12.  Reformed  Presbyterian  in 

the  U.  S.  and  Canada . .  i  i  75>ooo  600 


Protestant  Episcopal: 

1.  Protestant  Episcopal ...  .         877   1,082       50,589,154      255,536 

2.  Reformed  Episcopal  ....  43        46         1,565,717  6,560 


'45 
25 

889 
25 

39,696,049 
540,800 

235,317 
4,122 

8 
18 
96 

3 

20 

92 

13,500 

308,000 

2,498,050 

405 

3,591 
19,392 

94 

no 

2,891,250 

23,026 

I 

I 

2,400 

20 

I 

I 

8,000 

57 

23 

20 

768,000  ^ 

3,568 

440     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


Denominations  in  Cities  of  25,000  and  Upward. — Continued. 

r\ ;  n\ T,  Value  of  Com- 

DENOMINATIONS.                          P/?^"'"  ^^y^'f^  Church  muni- 

zations.  Edifices.  property.  cants. 

Reformed  : 

1.  Reformed  Ch.  in  Amer. .         104  124  $6,058,600  28,678 

2.  Reformed  Ch.  in  the  U.  S.         122  117  2,589,150  38,209 

3.  Christian  Reformed 17  18  172,600  3,355 

Salvation  Army 94  5  6,000  3,150 

Society  for  Ethical  Culture. .            4  ...             1.064 

Spiritualists 148  5  319,000  19,760 

Theosophical  Society 25  ...  600  524 

United  Brethren  : 

1.  United  Brethren  in  Christ          38  48  387,600  8,196 

2.  United  Brethren  in  Christ 

(Old  Constitution)  ....            2  6  30,500  116 

Unitarians 125  137  7,066,400  32,576 

Universalists 103  99  4,031,340  13,884 

Independent  Congregations          64  49  1,532,400  9,104 

Total 10,241  9,722  $3i3>537,247  5j302,oi8 


STATISTICAL  SUMMARIES  FOR  1895. 


441 


442      RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 

STATISTICAL    SUM 
TABLE  I. — Ministers,  Churches,  and  Communi 

DENOMINATIONS.  Ministers. 

1890.  1895. 

Adventists  : 

1.  Evangelical 34  34 

2.  Advent  Christians 883  912 

3.  Seventh-Day 284  253 

4.  Church  of  God 19  19 

5.  Life  and  Advent  Union 50  50 

6.  Churches  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ 94  94 

Total  Adventists 15364        1,362 

Baptists  : 

1.  Regular  (North)  {a) 6,685  8,536(/^) 

2.  Regular  (South)  {a) 8,957  I4,786(<^) 

3.  Regular  (Colored)  {a) 5,468  5,488(^) 

4.  Six-Principle 14  14 

5.  Seventh-Day 115  102 

6.  Freewill ij493  Ij346 

7.  Original  Freewill 118  120 

8.  General 332  355 

9.  Separate .^ 19  19 

10.  United .* 25  25 

11.  Baptist  Church  of  Christ .' 80  80 

12.  Primitive 2,040  2,120 

13.  Old  Two-Seed-in-the-Spirit  Predestinarian .  300  300 

Total  Baptists 25,646      33,291 

Brethren  (River): 

1.  Brethren  in  Christ 128  128 

2.  Old  Order  or  Yorker 7                7 

3.  United  Zion's  Children 20  20  • 

Total  River  Brethren 155  155 

Brethren  (Plymouth)  : 

1.  Brethren  (I.) 

2.  Brethren  \\l.\ 

{a)  The  returns  for  the  Regular  Baptists  for  1895  are  not  so  complete  as  those  obtained  by 
{b)  Estimated  for  1895. 


STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES  FOR  ISdo.  443 

MARIES   FOR   1895. 

CANTS    IN    1890   AND    1 895    IN   THE   UNITED    STATES   ONLY. 


Churches. 

Communicant; 

i. 

1890. 

1895. 

1890. 

1895. 

30 

30 

1,147 

1,147 

580 

610 

25,816 

26,500 

995 

1,201 

28,991 

41,128 

29 

20 

647 

647 

28 

28 

1,018 

1,018 

95 

95 
1,993 

2,872 
60,491 

2,872 

1,757 

73,312 

7.907 

9,328(/;) 

800,450 

985,752(^) 

16,238 

I7,867(^) 

1,280,066 

i,448,57o(^) 

12,533 

I3,I22(^) 

1,348,989 

1,343, 53o(/0 

18 

18 

937 

937 

106 

100 

9,143 

9,244 

1,304 

1,523 

87,898 

84,581 

167 

167 

11,864 

12,000 

399 

425 

21,362 

22,250 

24 

24 

1,599 

1.599 

204 

204 

13,209 

13,209 

152 

152 

8,254 

8,254 

3,222 

3,525 

121,347 

125,760 

473 

473 

12,851 
3,717969 

12,851 

43,029 

46,871 

4,068,539 

78 

78 

2,688 

2,688 

8 

8 

214 

214 

25 

25 

525 

525 

III 

III 

3,427 

3,427 

109 

109 

2,289 

2,289 

88 

88 

2,419 

2,419 

444 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE   I. — Ministers,  Churches,  and  Communicants  in 


DENOMINATIONS. 


Ministers. 


Brethren  (Plymouth)- 

3.  Brethren  (III.) 

4.  Brethren  (IV.) 


Continued  : 


1890. 


Total  Plymouth  Brethren 

Catholics  : 

Roman  Catholic 9>i57 

Greek  Catholic  (Uniates) 9 

Russian  Orthodox 13 

Greek  Orthodox i 

Armenian 7 

Old  Catholic i 

Reformed  Catholic 8 


Total  Catholics 9, 196 


Catholic  Apostolic 
Chinese  Temples  . 
Christadelphians  . . 


Christians: 

I.   Christians  (Christian  Connection). 


2.  Christian  Church,  South, 


95 


.350 

85 


Christian  Missionary  Association  .  . 

Christian  Scientists 

Christian  Union    

Church  of  God  (Winebrennerian)  .  . 
Church  Triumphant  (Schweinfurth). 
Church  of  the  New  Jerusalem   


10 
26 

183 

522 

119 


Communistic  Societies  {a) : 

I .   Shakers 

Amana 

Harmony 

Separatists 

New  Icaria 

Altruists 

Adonai  Shomo 

Church  Triumphant  (Koreshan  Ecclesia) 


Total  Communistic  Societies 


1895. 


10,339 
9 
13 
3 
7 
3 
8 

10,382 
95 


1,380 
105 


Total  Christians 1,435        1^485 


10 

26 

183 
450 

131 


{n)  Tlie  Bruederhoef  Mennonites  also  observe  a  communal  life.     They 


STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES  FOR  18'Jd. 


445 


1890    AND    1895    IN    THE    UNITED    STATES    ONLY.  —  ConUnued. 


90. 

Churches. 

1895. 

86 

86 

31 

31 

Communicants. 
1890.  1895. 


1,235 
718 


»235 
718 


314 


314 


6,661 


6,661 


10,231 

14,889 

6,231,417 

7,988,322 

14 

14 

10,850 

10,850 

12 

12 

13,504 

13-504 

I 

3 

100 

200 

6 

6 

335 

335 

4 

5 

665 

700 

8 

^ 

1,000 

1,000 

10,276 

14,931 

6,257,871 

8,014,911 

10 

10 

1,394 

1,394 

47 

47 

63 

63 

1,277 

1,277 

1,281 

1,320 

90,718 

95,250 

143 

160 

13,004 

15,000 

1,424 

1,480 

103,722 

110,250 

13 

13 

0^54 

o754 

221 

221 

8,724 

8,724 

294 

294 

18,214 

18,214 

479 

560 

22,511 

36,000 

12 

12 

384 

384 

154 

147 

7,095 

7,406 

15 

15 

1,728 

1,650 

7 

7 

1,600 

1,600 

I 

I 

250 

250 

I 

I 

200 

200 

I 

21 

I 

I 

25 

25 

I 

I 

20 

20 

5 

5 

205 

205 

32 

31 

4,049 

3,950 

are  reported  in  connection  with  the  other  Mennonite  branches. 


446      RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE   r. — Ministers,  Churches,  and  Communicants  in 

DENOMINATIONS.  Ministers. 

1890.  1895. 

Congregationalists  S^oS^  5j4oo 

Disciples  of  Christ 3j773  5,260 

DUNKARDS : 

1.  Dunkards  or  German  Baptists  (Conserv. ).  .  1,622  1,700 

2.  Dunkards  or  German  Baptists  (Old  Order).  237  180 

3.  Dunkards  or  German  Baptists(Progressive).  224  230 

4.  Seventh-Day  Baptists  (German) 5  5 

Total  Dunkards 2,088  2,115 

Evangelical  Bodies: 

1.  Evangelical  Association ij235  824 

2.  United  Evangelical  Church 410 

Total  Evangelical ij235  1,234 

Friends  : 

1.  Friends  (Orthodox) 1,113  i>i5o 

2.  Friends  ( Hicksite) 115  115 

3.  Friends  (Wilburite) 38  38 

4.  Friends  (Primitive) 11  11 

Total  Friends 1,277  1,314 

Friends  of  the  Temple   4  4 

German  Evangelical  Protestant 44  45 

German  Evangelical  Synod 680  838 

Jews: 

1.  Jewish  Congregations  (Orthodox) 125  130 

2.  Jewish  Congregations  (Reformed) 75  160 

Total  Jews 200  290 

Latter-Day  Saints: 

1.  Churchof  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-Day  Saints.  543  575 

2.  Reorganized  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat- 

ter-Day Saints 1,500  1,500 

Total  Latter-Day  Saints 2,043  2,075 


STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES  FOR   1895.  447 

1890  AND  1895  IX  THE  United  States  Only. — Continued. 


1890, 

Churches. 

1895. 

Communicants. 
1890. 

1895. 

4,868 
7,246 

5,500 
9;47l 

512,771 
641,051 

600,000 
923,663 

729 

135 

128 

6 

750 

120 

140 

6 

61,101 

4,411 

8,089 

194 

69,000 

4,000 

8,200 

194 

989  1,016  73,795  81,394 


2,310                  1,817                    ^li-h^l"^^  90,849 

1,000  55,055 


2,310  2,817  133,313  145,904 


794 
201 

52 

9 

824 
201 

53 
9 

80,655 
21,992 

4,329 
232 

88,158 
21,992 

4,329 
232 

1,056 

1,087 

107,208 

114,711 

4 
870 

4 

55 

1,075 

340 

36,156 

187,432 

340 

36,500 

185,203 

316 

217 

328 
220 

57,597 
72,899 

60,500 
79,000 

533  548  130,496  139,500 

425  580  144,352  212,000 

431  431  21,773  22,000 


856  I, on  166,125  234,000 


448      RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE   I. — Ministers,  Churches,  and  Communicants  in 

DENOMINATIONS.  Ministers. 

Lutherans  : 

General  Bodies.  1890.  1895. 

1 .  General  Synod 966  1,112 

2.  United  Synod  in  the  South 201  188 

3.  General  Council Iji53  I5O51 

4.  Synodical  Conference 1,282  1,698 

5.  United  Norwegian 109  342 

Independent  Synods. 

6.  Joint  Synod  of  Ohio 297  399 

7.  German  of  Iowa ...  328 

8.  Buffalo 20  23 

9.  Hauge's 58  72 

10.  Norwegian  in  North  America 194  237 

1 1 .  Michigan 37 

12.  Danish  in  America 108  17 

13.  German  Augsburg 49  20 

14.  Danish  Church  Association 40  40 

15.  Icelandic  Synod i  8 

16.  Immanuel 21  20 

17.  Suomai  Synod 8  10 

18.  Slavonian ...  8 

19.  Danish  Lutheran  Church  in  America ...  23 

20.  Texas ...  39 

Independent  Congregations 47  50 

Total  Lutherans 4,591  5,685 

Waldenstromians 140 

Mennonites  : 

1 .  Mennonite 336  356 

2.  Bruederhoef  {a) 9  9 

3.  Amish 228  235 

4.  Old  Amish 71  75 

5.  Apostolic 2  2 

6.  Reformed 43  43 

7.  General  Conference 95  100 

8.  Church  of  God  in  Christ 18  18 

9.  Old  (Wisler) 17  17 

10.  Bundes  Conference 37  ^7 

11.  Defenseless 18  18 

12.  Brethren  in  Christ 31  40 

Total  Mennonites ....  905  950 

(jt)  The  Bruederhoef  of  Mennonites  observe  a  communal 


STAriSTICAL   SUMMARIES  FOR  1895.  449 

1890  AND   1895  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OxLY. — Continued. 


CI 

lurches. 

Communicants. 

1890. 

1895. 

1890. 

189s. 

1,424 

1,479 

164,640 

180,794 

414 

361 

37,457 

35,910 

2,044 

1,697 

324,846 

312,033 

1,934 

2,365 

357,153 

479,221 

1,122 

1,083 

119,972 

104,851 

421 

560 

69,605 

78,000 

680 

55,925 

27 

31 

4,242 

3,850 

175 

215 

14,730 

28,655 

489 

607 

55,452 

57,300 

65 

11,482 

131 

43 

10,181 

3,500 

23 

22 

7,010 

4,750 

50 

60 

3,493 

4,550 

13 

25 

1,991 

5,227 

21 

22 

5,580 

6,500 

II 

38 

1,385 

4,000 

7 

500 

49 

.... 

4,000 

49 

6,209 

231 

100 

41,953 

15,000 

8,595 

9,493 

1,231,072 

1,390,775 

150 

20,000 

246 

266 

17,078 

18,378 

5 

5 

352 

352 

97 

no 

10,101 

10,700 

22 

25 

2,038 

2,438 

2 

2 

209 

209 

34 

34 

1,655 

1,655 

45 

50 

5,670 

6,000 

18 

18 

471 

471 

15 

15 

610 

610 

12 

12 

1,388 

2,000 

9 

9 

856 

856 

45 

54 

1,113 

4,000 

550  600  41^541  47,669 

Ife  and  constitute  properly  a  communistic  society. 


450      RELIGIOUS  fOKCES   OF  THE    UNITED   STATE'S. 


TABLE   I. — Ministers,  Churches,  and  Communicants  in 

DENOMINATIONS.  Ministers. 

1890.  1895. 

Methodists  : 

1.  Methodist  Episcopal 15^423  16,079 

2.  Union  American  Methodist  Episcopal 32  115 

3.  African  Methodist  Episcopal 3^32 1  4^365 

4.  African  Union  Methodist  Protestant 40  80 

5.  African  Methodist  Episcopal  Zion IjS^S  2,473 

6.  Methodist  Protestant ij44i  2,006 

7.  Wesleyan  Methodist 600  600 

8.  Methodist  Episcopal,  South 4,801  5j757(«) 

9.  Congregational  Methodist 150  204 

10.  Congregational  Methodist  (Colored) 5  5 

11.  New  Congregational  Methodist 20  20 

12.  Zion  Union  Apostolic 30  30 

13.  Colored  Methodist  Episcopal 1,800  1,297 

14.  Primitive  Methodist 60  70 

15.  Free  Methodist 657  855 

16.  Independent  Methodist 8  8 

17.  Evangelist  Missionary 47  87 

Total  Methodists 30,000  34,141 

Moravians 114  106 

Presbyterians  : 

1.  Presbyterian  in  the  United  States  of  Amer- 

ica (Northern) 5,934  6,498 

2.  Cumberland  Presbyterian    1,861  1,704 

3.  Cumberland  Presbyterian  (Colored) 393  400 

4.  Welsh  Calvinistic 100  107 

5.  United  Presbyterian 731  801 

6.  Presbyterian  in  the  United  States  (Southern)  1,129  ^^ZZl 

7.  Associate  Church  of  North  America 12  12 

8.  Associate  Reformed  Synod  of  the  South ..  .  133  93 

9.  Reformed  Presbyterian  in  the  United  States 

(Synod) 124  110 

10.  Reformed  Presbyterian  in  North  America 

(General  Synod) 20  33 

11.  Reformed  Presbyterian  (Covenanted) i  i 

12.  Reformed  Presbyterian  in  the  United  States 

and  Canada i  i 

Total  Presbyterians 10,448  1 1,097 

(rt)  The  returns 


STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES  FOR  1895.  45 

1890  AND   1895  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  Only. — Continued, 


Churches. 

Communicants. 

1890. 

1895. 

1890. 

1895. 

22,844 

24,605 

2,240,354 

2,629,985 

35 

115 

2,279 

7,031 

4,124 

4,575 

452,725 

594,776 

27 

70 

3,415 

7,000 

1,587 

1,612 

349,788 

409,441 

1,924 

2,356 

141,989 

178,681 

342 

565 

16,492 

18,344 

12,688 

i3,502(rt) 

1,209,976 

i,379,928(a) 

150 

238 

8,765 

12,500 

5 

5 

319 

319 

17 

35 

1,059 

1,200 

27 

32 

2,346 

2,346 

1,653 

4,004 

129,383 

170,718 

78 

100 

4,764 

6,340 

620 

708 

22,110 

26,876 

14 

15 

2,569 

2,569 

3 

13 

951 

4,600 

46,138  52,550  4,589,284  5,452,654 

94         104         11,781         12,923 
6,717       7,218        788,224        902,757 


2,791 

2,884 

164,940 

193,393 

224 

250 

12,956 

13,250 

187 

192 

12,722 

12,285 

866 

895 

94,402 

106,755 

2,391 

2,776 

179,721 

203,999 

31 

V 

1,053 

1,053 

116 

126 

8,501 

10,364 

115 

112 

10,574 

9,506 

33 

41 

4,602 

5,000 

4 

4 

?,1 

2>1 

I 

I 

600 

600 

13,476 

14,530 

1,278,332 

1,458,999 

for  1894. 

452      RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE   I. — Ministers,  Churches,  and  Communicants  in 

DENOMINATIONS.  Ministers. 

1890.  1895. 

Protestant  Episcopal: 

1.  Protestant  Episcopal 4, 146  AA^7 

2.  Reformed  Episcopal 78  93(^) 

Total  Episcopal 4,224  4,580 

Reformed: 

1.  Reformed  in  America 558  633 

2.  Reformed  in  the  United  States 880  953 

3.  Christian  Reformed   68  76 

Total  Reformed 1,506  1,662 

Salvation  Army ....  2,037 

Schwenkfeldians 3  3 

Social  Brethren 17  17 

Society  for  Ethical  Culture ....  .... 

Spirituahsts ....  .... 

Theosophical  Society ....  .... 

United  Brethren: 

1.  United  Brethren  in  Christ 2,267  2,057 

2.  United  Brethren  (Old  Constitution) 531  689 

Total  United  Brethren 2,798  2,746 

Unitarians 515  519 

Universalists 708  800 

Independent  Congregations 54  54 

Grand  Total 1 11,036  130,266 

(a)  The  returns  are  for  1894. 

(b)  It  is  not  likely  that  there  has  been  any  decrease  in  the  number  of  members  or  of  churches 


STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES   FOR   1895.  453 


I    AND    1895    IN    THE    UNITED  STATES    O^l^Y.  —  Coufimted. 

Churches.  Communicants. 

1890.  1895.  i8go.  1895. 

5,019  5,885  532,054  616,843 

83  94(^)  8,435  9.447(^] 


5,102  5)979  540009  626,290 


572 
1,510 

1,638 

92,970 
204,018 

101,352 
226,592 

99 

122 

12,470 

16,037 

2,181 

2.355 

309  .-45  8 

343,981 

329 
4 

682 
4 

8,742 
306 

33,500 
306 

20 
4 

20 

4 

913 
1,064 

1,064 

334 
40 

334 
95 

45,030 
695 

45,030 
2,500 

3,731 
795 

4,176 
850 

5,026 

202,474 
22,807 

225,199 

37,751 

4,526 

225,281 

262,950 

421 
956 
156 

455 
802 
156 

67,749 
49,194 
14,126 

68,500 

47,986(/^) 

14,126 

159,946  181,003  20,618,307  24,657,434 

ce  1890.     Doubtless  the  census  got  fuller  returns  than  the  "  Universalist  Register"  obtains. 


454     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 
TABLE  II.— Summary  for  1895. 


DENOMINATIONS.  Ministers.     Churches. 


Communi- 
cants. 


Adventists  (all  branches) 1,362  1,993  lZi?>^'^ 

Baptists  (all  branches) 33,291  46,871  4,068,539 

Brethren  (River)  (all  branches). ..  .  155  iii  3,427 

Brethren  (Plymouth)  (all  branches)           314  6,661 

Catholics  (all  branches) 10,382  14,931  8,014,911 

Catholic  Apostohc 95  10  1,394 

Chinese  Temples ...  47  •  •  ■  • 

Christadelphians ....  63  i  ,277 

Christians  (all  branches) 1,485  1,480  110,050 

Christian  Missionary  Association .. .  10  13  754 

Christian  Scientists 26  221  8,724 

Christian  Union 183  294  18,214 

Church  of  God 450  560  36,000 

Church  Triumphant  (Schweinfurth)  ....  12  384 

Church  of  the  New  Jerusalem 131  147  7, 406 

Communistic  Societies  (allbranches)  ..  31  3,95° 

Congregationalists 5,400  5, 500  600,000 

Disciples  of  Christ 5,260  9,471  923,663 

Dunkards  (all  branches) 2,115  \,o\6  81,394 

Evangelical  (all  branches) 1,234  2,817  145,904 

Friends  (all  branches) 1,314  1,087  ii4,7ii 

Friends  of  the  Temple 4  4  340 

German  Evangelical  Protestant.  ..  .  45  55  36,500 

German  Evangelical  Synod 838  1,075  185,203 

Jews  (all  branches) 290  548  139,500 

Latter-Day  Saints  (all  branches).  .  .  2,075  \,o\\  234,000 

Lutherans  (all  branches) 5,685  9,493  i,390,775 

Waldenstromians 140  150  20,000 

Mennonites  (all  branches) 950  600  47,669 

Methodists  (all  branches) 34,14^  52,550  5,452,654 

Moravians  '. 106  104  12,923 

Presbyterians  (all  branches) 11,097  I4,530  1,458,999 

Protestant  Episcopal  (all  branches)  4,580  5,979  626,290 

Reformed  (all  branches) 1,662  2,355  343,981 

Salvation  Army 2,037  682  33, 500 

Schwenkfeldians 3  4  306 

Social  Brethren 17  20  913 

Society  for  Ethical  Culture ....  4  1,064 

Spiritualists 334  45,030 

Theosophical  Society 95  2,5oo(rt) 

{a)   Returns  for  1894. 


STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES  FOR  1895. 
TABLE    IL  — Summary  for  1895. — Continued. 


455 


DENOMINATIONS. 


United  Brethren  (all  branches).  .  . 

Unitarians 

Universalists 

Independent  Congregations 

Total 130,266 


Ministers. 

Churches. 

Communi- 
cants. 

2,746 

5,026 

262,950 

800 

54 

455 
802 
156 

68.500 
47,986 
14,126 

;83,o2i     24,646,584 


TABLE  III.— Net  Gains  for  Five  Years. 


DENOMINATIONS. 


Adventists  (all  branches) *.  .  . 

Baptists  (all  branches)  {b) 

Brethren  (River)  (all  branches) .... 
Brethren  (Plymouth)  (all  branches) 

Catholics  (all  branches) 

Catholic  Apostolic 

Chinese  Temples '. 

Christadelphians . 

Christians  (all  branches) 

Christian  Missionary  Association .  . . 

Christian  Scientists 

Christian  Union 

Church  of  God 

Church  Triumphant  (Schweinfurth) 

Church  of  the  New  Jerusalem 

Communistic  Societies  (all branches) 

Congregationalists 

Disciples  of  Christ 

Dunkards 

Evangelical  (all  branches) 

Friends 

Friends  of  the  Temple 

German  Evangelical  Protestant.  . .  . 

German  Evangelical  Synod 

Jews  (all  branches) 


Ministers.     Churches. 

2{a)       236 


Communi- 
cants. 


7,645  3.842  350 

•        4,655       1,757 


12,821 
570 


50 


72(^) 


56 


81 


040 


528 


489 


12 

7{a) 

311 

i{a) 

99(^) 

342 

632 

87,229 

1,487 

2,225 

282,612 

27 

27 

7,599 

I(^) 

507 

12,591 

37 

31 

7,503 

I 

3 

344 

158 

205 

2,229(^) 

90 

15 

9,004 

(a)  Decrease. 

(b)  This  is  the  apparent  increase. 


The  real  increase  was  probably  much  larger. 


456     RELIGIOUS  FORCES   OF   THE    UNITED   STATES. 


TABLE    III. — Net  Gains  for  Five  Years. — Continued. 


DENOMINATIONS. 


Ministers.      Churches. 


32 
094 
140 

45 
141 

649 
356 
156 
o37(«) 


Latter-Day  Saints  (all  branches).  .  . 

Lutherans  (all  branches) i 

Waldenstromians  (a)    

Mennonites  (all  branches) 

Methodists  (all  branches) 4 

Moravians 

Presbyterians  (all  branches) 

Protestant  Episcopal  (all  branches) 

Reformed  (all  branches) 

Salvation  Army 2 

Schwenkfeldians   

Social  Brethren 

Society  for  Ethical  Culture 

Spiritualists 

Theosophical  Society 

United  Brethren  (all  branches) 

Unitarians 

Universalists  {c) 

Independent  Congregations 

Total  Gains  for  Five  Years  .  .  .        21,230 


155 
898 
150 

50 
6,412 

10 
1,054 

877 
174 
353 


Communi- 
cants. 

67,875 

159,703 

20.000 

6,128 

863,370 

1,142 

180,667 

85,781 

34,523 

24,758 


55  1.805 

52(^)       500  37,669 

4             34  751 

92            i54(<^)  i,2o8(^) 


23,075       4,028,277 


TABLE   IV.— The  Twelve  Largest  Denominations. 

DENOMINATIONS.  Commuoicants. 

1.  Roman  Catholic 7,988,322 

2.  Methodist  Episcopal 2,629,985 

3.  Southern  Baptist 1,448,570 

4.  Methodist  Episcopal,  South i,379,928(<:/) 

5.  Colored  Baptist 1,343,530 

6.  Northern  Baptist 985,752 

7.  Disciples  of  Christ    923,663 

8.  Presbyterian  (North) 902,757 

9.  Protestant  Episcopal 616,843 

10.  Congregational 600,000 

1 1.  African  Methodist  Episcopal 594,776 

12.  Lutheran  Sy nodical  Conference 479,221 

{a)  Not  reported  in  the  census  of  1890. 
{V)  Decrease. 

(<:)   The  decrease  in  churches  and  communicants  is  probably  apparent  rather  than  real.      I 
may  be  due  to  fuller  reports  for  the  census  than  for  the  "  Universalisl  Register." 
{d)  Returns  for  1894. 


STATISTICAL   SUMMARIES  FOR   1895.  457 


TABLE  V. — The  Twelve  Largest  Denominational 
Families. 

DENOMINATIONAL  FAMILIES.  Communicants 

1.  Catholic 8, 014, 911 

2.  Methodist 5,452,654 

3-   Baptist 4,068,539 

4.  Presbyterian 1,458,999 

5.  Lutheran Ij390>775 

6.  Episcopahan 626,290 

7.  Reformed 343j98i 

8.  United  Brethren 262,950 

9.  Latter-Day  Saints 234,000 

10.  EvangeHcal 145,904 

11.  Jewish 139,500 

12.  Friends 114,711 


INDEX. 


Adler,  Felix,  348. 

Adonai  Shomo,  iii,  117. 

Advent  Christians,  5. 

Adventists.      History  and  Polity,  1-4. 

Relation  to  Freewill  Baptists,  ^^. 

Relation  to  the  Adonai  Shomo,  117. 

Divisions,  4. 

Summary  Statistics,  14. 
Adventists,  Age-to-Come,  13. 
Adventists,  Evangelical,  4. 
Adventists,  Seventh-Day,  8. 
Adventists,  The  Church  of  God,  11. 
Adventists,  The  Churches  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  13. 
Advent  Union,  Life  and,  12, 
Albright,  John,  139. 

Albrights,  The.     The  Albright  People,  139. 
Allen,  Richard,  237. 
Altruists,  III,  116. 
Amana  Society,  iii,  113. 
American  Christian  Convention,  92. 
American  National  Convention,  28. 
Amish  (Mennonite),  213. 
Amish,  The  Old  (Mennonite),  214. 
Ammen,  Jacob,  213. 
Anabaptists,  17. 
Ann  Lee,  iii. 

Apostolic,  The  (Mennonite),  215. 
Armenian  Church,  81. 
Asbury,  Francis,  227. 

Associate  Church  of  North  America  (Presbyterian),  305. 
Associate  Reformed  Synod  of  the  South  (Presbyterian),  306. 
Ballou,  Hosea,  369. 
Baltimore  Association,  45. 
Baptist  Church  of  Christ,  43. 

Baptists.      History  and  General  Characteristics,  16-18. 
Relation  to  Other  Bodies,  16. 
Di\'isions,  18. 

459 


460  INDEX. 

Baptists.      Summary  Statistics,  53. 

Baptists,  Anti-Mission,  45. 

Baptists  (Colored),  Regular,  27-29. 

Baptists,  Free  Communion,  t^t^. 

Baptists,  Freewill,  33-36. 

Baptists,  General,  38-40. 

Baptists,  General  Six-Principle,  30. 

Baptists,  Missionary,  42. 

Baptists  (North),  Regular,  22-24. 

Baptists,  Old  School,  45. 

Baptists,  Old  Two-Seed-in-the-Spirit  Predestinarian,  48-54. 

Baptists,  Original  Freewill,  37. 

Baptists,  Primitive,  45-48. 

Baptists,  Regular,  17,  18. 

Baptists,  Regular,  General  Characteristics  and  Principles,  18-22. 

Baptists,  Regular  Predestinarian,  50. 

Baptists,  Regular  Two-Seed  Predestinarian  Primitive,  50. 

Baptists,  Sabbatarian,  31. 

Baptists,  Separate,  41. 

Baptists,  Seventh  Day,  31. 

Baptists  (South),  Regular,  25-27. 

Baptists,  United,  41. 

Bible  Bigots,  221. 

Bishop  Andrew,  254. 

Book  of  Covenants,  171. 

Book  of  Mormon,  165. 

Book  of  Worship,  109. 

Brethren  in  Christ,  55. 

Brethren,  Old  Order  of  Yorker,  57. 

Brethren  (Plymouth)  I.,  60. 

Brethren  (Plymouth)  11. ,  61. 

Brethren  (Plymouth)  III.,  62. 

Brethren  (Plymouth)  IV.,  64. 

Brethren,  The  River.      General  History,  55. 

Summary  Statistics,  58. 
Brethren,  Yorker,  57. 
Brigham  Young,  166. 
Brothers  of  Christ,  89. 
Brueder  Gemeinde  (Mennonite),  21S. 
Bruederhoef  (Mennonite),  213. 
Burial  Hill  Declaration,  120. 
Catholic  Apostolic  Church,  84. 
Catholic  Church,  The  (ireek,  79. 
Catholic  Church,  The  Old,  82. 
Catholic  Church,  The  Reformed,  82. 


INDEX.  46 1 

Catholic  Cliurch,  The  Roman,  Statistics  in  the  United  States,  76-79. 
Catholics,  General  Definition,  66. 
Channing,  William  Ellery^  366. 
Chemung  Association,  45. 
Chinese  Temples,  86. 
Christadelphians,  89. 
Christian  Church,  South,  93,  94. 
Christian  Connection,  The,  91, 
Christian  Missionary  Association,  95. 
Christian  Science  Journal,  The,  96. 
Christian  Scientists,  96. 

Christians,  The.     Origin  and  General  Characteristics,  91-93. 
Statistics,  93. 

Withdrawal  of  the  Christian  Church,  South,  93. 
Christian  Union  Churches,  99. 
Churches  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  (Adventist),  13. 
Church  of  God  (Adventist),  ii. 
Church  of  God  in  Christ  (Mennonite),  217. 
Church  of  God,  The  (Winebrenner),  102. 
Church  Triumphant  (Koreshan  Ecclesia),  iii,  117. 
Church  Triumphant,  The  (Schweinfurth),  105. 
Coke,  Thomas,  223,  227. 
Communistic  Societies.      Definitions  and  Divisions,  ill. 

Summary  Statistics,  118. 
Conference,  The  General  (Mennonite),  216. 
Conference,  The  Synodical  (Lutheran),  190. 

Congregational  Churches.      History,  Polity,  Relation  to  Presbyterians,  119- 
123. 
Summary  Statistics,  123,  124. 
Conservative  Brethren,  133. 

Consolidated  American  Missionary  Convention,  28. 
Council,  The  General  (Lutheran),  184. 
Cyrus  Teed,  117. 

Danish  Association  in  America,  The  (Lutheran),  201. 
Danish  Church  in  America,  The  (Lutheran),  199. 
Declaration  of  Christian  Doctrine,  145. 
Defenseless,  The  (Mennonite),  219. 
Disciples  of  Christ,  125-127. 

Relation  to  Other  Bodies,  91,  125. 
Principles,  126. 
Statistics,  127. 
Dunkards.      History  and  General  Characteristics,  130-133. 

Divisions,   133. 

Summary  Statistics,  138. 
Eddy,  Mrs.  INIary  Baker  G.,  96. 


462  INDEX. 

Embury,  Philip,  226. 
Engle,  Jacob,  55. 

Episcopal  Church,  The  Protestant.     History,  317-321. 

Doctrine,  319. 
Statistics,  322. 
Episcopal  Church,  The  Reformed,  Origin,  Principles,  and  Statistics,  325-327. 
Ethical  Culture,  The  Society  for,  348. 
Evangelical  Association,  139. 

Evangelist  Missionary  Church,  The,  (Methodist),  270. 
Evidence  from  Scripture  and  History  of  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ  about 

the  year  1843,  2. 
Falckner,  Justus,  176. 
Fee,  John  G.,  95. 
Flack,  Elder  J.  V.  B.,  99. 

Foreign  Mission  Convention  of  the  United  States,  28. 
Fox,  George,  143. 
Friends.      General  Description,  143,  144. 

Divisions,  144. 

Summary  Statistics,  152. 
Friends  (Hicksite),  147. 
Friends  of  the  Temple,  153. 
Friends  (Orthodox),  145. 
Friends  (Primitive),  150. 
Friends  (Wilburite),  149. 

General  Association  of  the  Western  States  and  Territories,  28. 
German  Baptists,  129. 

German  Evangelical  Protestant  Church,  155. 
German  Evangelical  Synod  of  North  America,  156. 
Goetwater,  John  Ernest,  175. 
Greek  Orthodox  Church,  81. 
Harmony  Society,  iii,  114. 
Hauge's  Synod  (Lutheran),  196. 
Herrnhut,  272,  273. 
Herr,  John,  215. 
Herrites,  216. 
Hicks,  Elias,  147. 
Hoffmann,  Christopher,  153. 
Hoffmannites,  153. 
Holdeman,  John,  217. 
Holliman,  Ezekiel,  17. 
Holy  Club,  221. 
Hookers,  214. 
Huter,  Jacob,  213. 

Independent  Churches  of  Christ  in  Christian  Union,  99. 
Irving,  Edward,  84. 


INDEX.  463 

Jews.     History  in  the  United  States,  1 59-161. 

Summary  Statistics,  164. 
Jones,  Abner,  91. 
Joseph  Smith,  165. 
Judicial  Testimony,  299. 
Koreshan  Ecclesia,  iii,  117. 
Latter-Day  Saints.     History,  165,  166. 
Divisions,  166. 
Summary  Statistics,  173. 
Latter-Day  Saints,  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of,  167. 
Latter-Day  Saints,  Reorganized  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of,  170. 
Lecturing  Brethren,  90. 
Lutheran  Congregations,  Independent,  204. 
Lutherans.      General  Survey,  175-177. 
Summary  Statistics,  205. 
Lutheran  Synods,  Independent,  193. 
Mack,  Alexander,  129. 
Makemie,  Francis,  279. 
Massachusetts  Metaphysical  College,  96. 
McKendree,  William,  228. 
Mennonite  Church,  212. 
Mennonites.      History,  206-212. 

Protest  against  Slavery,  207. 

Articles  of  Faith,  208. 

Pohty,  210. 
.  Divisions,  212. 

Summary  Statistics,  220. 
Menno  Simons,  206. 
Methodists.      History,  221-225. 

Peculiarities,  223. 
Conferences,  224. 
Articles  of  Religion,  225. 
Divisions,  225. 
Summary  Statistics,  271, 
Methodists,  Colored,  The  Congregational,  261. 
Methodist  Connection  of  America,  The  Wesleyan,  250. 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  226-236. 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  South,  252. 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  The  African,  237. 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  The  Colored,  262. 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  The  Union  American,  236. 
Methodist  Episcopal  Zion  Church,  The  African,  242. 
Methodist  Protestant  Church,  The,  246. 
Methodist  Protestant  Church,  The  African  Union,  242. 
Methodist  Church,  The  Primitive,  265. 


464  INDEX. 

Methodists,  The  Congregational,  259. 

Methodists,  The  Free,  267. 

Methodists,  The  Independent,  269. 

Methodists,  The  New  Congregational,  261. 

Midnight  Cry,  The,  2. 

Millennial  Church  or  United  Society  of  Believers,  ill. 

Miller,  William,  i. 

Missourians,  191. 

Moravians.      History,  272-275. 

Government,  273. 

Doctrine,  274. 

Statistics,  276. 
Mother  Lee,  112. 
Muhlenberg,  Henry  M.,  176. 
National  Christian  Scientist  Association,  96. 
New  England  Missionary  Convention,  28. 
New  Hampshire  Confession,  19,  20. 
New  Icaria  Society,  111-116. 
New  Jerusalem,  The  Church  of,  107. 
New  Lights,  312. 
.New  Mennonites,  216. 

Norwegian  Church  in  America  (Lutheran),  197. 
Norwegian  Church,  The  United  (Lutheran),  203. 
Oberholzer,  John,  216. 
O'Kelley,  James,  91. 
Old  Order  Brethren,  136. 
Old  (Wisler),  The  (Mennonite),  218. 
Open  Brethren,  61. 
Orthodox  Jews,  161. 
Parker,  Daniel,  49. 
Philadelphia  Confession,  19,  20, 
Plymouth  Brethren.       History  and  Doctrine,  59. 
Divisions,  60. 
Summary  Statistics,  65. 
Presbyterian  Church,  Colored,  The  Cumberland,  294. 
Presbyterian  Church  (Covenanted),  The  Reformed,  314. 
Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United  States  and  Canada,  The  Reformed,  314. 
Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United  States  of  America.     History,  279-283. 

Statistics,  283-288. 
Presbyterian  Cliurch  in  the  United  States  (Soutlicrn),  302. 
Presbyterian  Church,  The  Cumberland.      History  and  Doctrine,  289-291. 

Statistics,  291-294. 
Presbyterian  Church,  The  General  Synod  of  the  Reformed,  312. 
Presbyterian  Church,  The  Synod  of  the  Reformed,  310. 
Presbyterians,  Definition,  Polity,  Divisions,  277-279. 


IXDEX.  465 

Presbyterians,  The  Reformed,  History  and  Polity,  308. 

Presbyterians,  The  United,  298. 

Presbytery  of  Philadelphia,  280. 

Profession  of  Belief,  370. 

Progressive  Brethren,  135. 

Protestant  Episcopal  Bodies,  317. 

Quakers,  143. 

Randall,  Benjamin,  t^t^. 

Rapp,  George,  114. 

Reformed  Bodies,  General  Description,  329. 

Reformed  Church  in  America,  ZZ'^~ZZZ- 

Reformed  Church  of  the  United  States,  ZZZ~ZV1' 

Reformed  Church,  The  Christian,  337. 

Reformed  Jews,  The,  162. 

Reformed,  The  (Mennonite),  215. 

Russian  Orthodox  Church,  80. 

Salvation  Army,  Origin,  Character,  Government,  Statistics,  340-343. 

Schweinfurth,  George  Jacob,  105. 

Schwenkfeldians,  The,  344. 

Second  Dose  of  the  Doctrine  of  Two  Seeds,  49. 

Separatists,  111-115. 

Serving  Brethren,  90. 

Seventh-Day  Baptists,  German,  137. 

Shakers,  iii. 

Signs  of  the  Times,   The,  2. 

Social  Brethren  Church,  The,  346. 

Spiritualists,  The,  350. 

Statistical  Summaries  for  1895,  441. 

Stone,  Barton  W.,  91. 

Summary  Statistics  by  Denominational  Families,  392-393. 

Summary  Statistics  by  Denominations,  380-391. 

Summary  Statistics  by  States  of  all  Denominations,  378-381. 

Summary  Statistics  of  Churches  in  Cities,  404-440. 

Summary  Statistics  of  Colored  Organizations,  400-403. 

Summary  Statistics  of  Denominations  according  to  Number  of  Communi- 
cants, 394-397- 

Summary  Statistics  of  Denominations  according  to  Polity,  398-400. 

Summary  Statistics  of  Denominational  Families  according  to  Number  of 
Communicants,  397. 

Swedenborg,  Emmanuel,  107. 

Synod  of  Ohio  and  other  States,  The  Joint  (Lutheran),  194. 

Synod  in  the  South,  The  United  (Lutheran),  182. 

Synod,  The  BufTalo  (Lutheran),  195. 

Synod,  The  General  (Lutheran),  178. 

Synod,  The  German  Augsburg  (Lutheran),  200. 

Synod,  The  Icelandic  (Lutheran),  201. 


466  INDEX, 

Synod,  The  Michigan  (Lutheran),  198. 

Synod,  The  Suomai  (Lutheran),  202. 

Temple  Society,  153. 

Theosophical  Society,  353. 

Thomas,  John,  89. 

Time  Brethren,  3. 

Touro,  Abraham  and  Isaac,  159. 

True  Inspiration  Congregations,  113. 

Trumpet  of  Alarm,  The,  2. 

Uniates,  79. 

Unitarians,  365. 

Unitas  Fratrum,  272. 

United  Brethren  in  Christ,  357. 

United  Brethren  in  Christ  (Old  Constitution),  361. 

United  Brethren,  Origin  and  General  Description,  355-357. 

United  Zion's  Children,  57. 

Unity  of  Brethren  as  Distinguished  from  United  Brethren  in  Christ,  272. 

Universalists,  369. 

Warwick  Association,  45. 

Welsh  Calvinistic  Methodist  Church  (Presbyterian),  296. 

Westminster  Confession,  Revision  of,  282. 

White,  Mrs.  Ellen  G.,  ii. 

Wilbur,  John,  149. 

Wilford  Woodruff,  167. 

Williams,  Roger,  17. 

Winebrenner,  John,  102. 

Woman-preachers,  34. 

Zion  Union  Apostolic  Church  (Methodist),  245. 


Index  to  Introduction. 

I.  The  Sources  of  Information  and  the  Plan,  ix-xi. 
Relation  to  the  Census  of  1890. 

Alphabetical  Order  of  the  Denominations  and  Historical  Order  of 
the  Denomination  of  Families. 
II.  The  Scope  and  Method  of  the  Census,  xi-xiv. 

The  Census  of  1880  and  the  Census  of  1890, 
Exhaustive  List  of  Denominations. 

III.  Variety  in  Religion,  xiv-xvi. 

Wide  Range  of  Choice. 

The  Smaller  Bodies  ihe  more  Numerous. 

IV.  Classification  of  the  Churches,  xvi-xix. 

The  Principle  of  Classification. 
The  Difficulty  in  the  Nomenclature. 


INDEX.  467 

V.   Denominational  Titles,  xix-xxiv. 

Geographical,  Racial,  Historical,  etc. 
The  Blue  and  the  Pink  Cover. 
VI.   The  Causes  of  Division,  xxiv-xxix. 
Controversies  over  Doctrine. 

Controversies  over  Administration  and  Discipline. 
Controversies  over  Moral  Questions. 
Controversies  of  a  Personal  Character. 
VII.   Analysis  of  Religious  Forces  of  the  United  States,  xxix-xxxiv. 
Christians  and  Non-Christians. 
Ministers. 
Organizations. 
Services. 
Values. 

Communicants. 
VIII.    Religious  Population,  xxxiv-xxxvi. 
Methods  of  Computation. 
IX.   The  Growth  of  the  Churches,  xxxvii-xl. 
The  Normal  Condition. 
The  Net  Increase. 

Statistical  Proofs  of  the  Advance  of  Protestant  Christianity. 
X.    How  the  Religious  Forces  are  Distributed,  xl-xlv. 

With  respect  to  Number  of  Communicants,  Value  of  Property, 
Number  of  Organizations  or  Congregations. 
XL   The  Evangelical  and  Non-Evangelical  Elements,  xlv-xlviii. 
Classification  according  to  Definition. 
XII.   The  General  Statistical  Summaries,  xlviii-liii. 

Classification  according  to  Polity,  and  of  Churches  in  the  Cities, 

new  Features. 
Difficulties  with  respect  to  Lutherans. 
Opinions  of  Representative  Men. 

XIII.  The  Negro  in  his  Relations  to  the  Church,  liii.,  Iviii. 

XIV.  The  Characteristics  of  American  Christianity,  Iviii-lxv. 

The  Phenomenal  Growth  of  the  Church  of  Rome  and  its  Relation 

to  Protestant  America. 
Evangelical  Christianity  and  its  Principal  Purpose,  not  Polemical 
but  Practical. 
XV.   How  the  Church  affects  Society,  Ixv.-lxvi. 

As  a  Property-holder,  Corporation,  Public  Institution,  etc. 
Explanations  of  the  Terms  used,  Ixviii. 


APPENDIX. 


CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  CHURCH  MEMBERSHIP 
OF  THE   STATES    AND  TERRITORIES. 


THE  AREA  OF  THE    CIRCLE    REPRESENTS    IN    EACH    CASE 

THE  ENTIRE  CHURCH  MEMBERSHIP,  THE  VARIOUS 

SECTORS  REPRESENT,  PROPORTIONALLY,  THE 

STRENGTH  OF  EACH  DENOMINATION. 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF  THE   UNITED  STATES.      47 1 


MEMBERSHIP    OF    THE     LEADING     RELIGIOUS 
SECTS    IN    THE    UNITED    STATES. 


THE  AREA    OF    THE    CIRCLE    REPRESENTS  THE   CHURCH 

MEMBERSHIP    OF     THE    COUNTRY,    THE    SEVERAL 

SECTORS,     THE     PROPORTIONAL     STRENGTH 

OF  THE  SEVERAL  DENOMINATIONS. 


472      RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF  THE   UNITED  STATES. 
ALABAMA  ARIZONA  ARKANSAS 


DELAWARE  DISTRICT  OFCOLUMBIA  FLORIDA 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF  7 HE  UNITED  STATES.      473 
IN-DIANA  IOWA  KANSAS 


474      RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF  THE   UNITED  STATES. 
MONTANA  NEBRASKA  NEVADA 


I^EUGIOUS  FORCES  OF  THE   UXITED  STATES.      475 
RHOnr  ISLAND  SOUTH  CAROLINA  SOUTH  DAKOTA 


47^     RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF  THE   UNITED  STATES, 


NUMBER  OF  COMMUNICANTS  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  DENOMINATIONS, 


CATHOLfC 


METHODIST 


NEW  YORK 

MASSACHUSETTS 

PENNSYLVANIA 

ILLINOIS 

OHIO 

MINNESOTA 

WISCONSIN 

NEW  JERSEY 

MICHIGAN 

LOUISIANA 

IOWA 

MISSOURI 

CALIFORNIA 

CONNECTICUT 

MARYLAND 

INDIANA 

NEW  MEXICO 

TEXAS 

RHODE  ISLAND 

KENTUCKY 

KANSAS 

MAINE 

NEBRASKA 

COLORADO 

VERMONT 

NEW  HAMPSHIRE 

DISTOFCOLUMBIA 

OREGON 

NORTH   DAKOTA 

SOUTH  DAKOTA 

MONTANA 

WASHINGTON 

ARIZONA 

TENNESSEE 

FLORIDA 

WEST  VIRGINIA 

ALASKA 

ALABAMA 

VIRGINIA 

DELAWARE 

MISSISSIPPI, 

GEORGIA  7 


100,000      200,< 


>,000    400.000    800,000    600,000    700,000 


T 


LATTER  DAY  SAINTS 

O         100,000 

UTAH 
IDAHO 


CHRISTIANS 


OHIO  m 

INDIANA  ■ 

northcarolinaIi 


INDIANA 
OHIO 

PENNSYLVANIA 
IOWA 


r 


DUNKARDS 


PENNSYLVANIA 

INDIANA 

OHIO 


UNITED  BRETHREN 

OHIO 

INDIANA 

PENNSYLVANIA 

ILLINOIS 

KANSAS 

WEST  VIRGINIA     |i 

MICHIGAN 

IOWA 


NORTH  CAROLINA 

GEORGIA 
g        OHIO 
?        NEW  YORK 
%        PENNSYLVANIA 
»        SOUTH  CAROLINA 
p        ALABAMA 
I        TENNESSEE 
.-         TEXAS 
I         ILLINOIS 
g         INDIANA 
1         MISSISSIPPI 
"5         MISSOURI 
%         VIRGINIA 
§        KENTUCKY 

MARYLAND 

ARKANSAS 

IOWA 

MICHIGAN 

NEW  JERSEY 

KANSAS 

WEST  VIRGINIA 

FLORIDA 

LOUISIANA 

MASSACHUSETTS 

WISCONSIN 

NEBRASKA 

CALIFORNIA 

MINNESOTA 

CONNECTICUT 

DELAWARE 

MAINE 

VERMONT 

DIST  OF  COLUMBfA 

WASHINGTON 

NEW  HAMPSHIRE 

SOUTH  DAKOTA 

OREGON 

INDIAN  TERRITORY 

COLORADO 


9            100,000      200,000 

1             1 



1 

'"'*'' 

'^^"" 

'^"* 

^^^ 

^^^ 

^ 

^""^ 

'"^'" 

^ 

^^^" 

"^^^ 

'**'" 

^^*" 

^JU 

I^^ 

^^^_ 

^ 

ig^^^ 

^ 

= 

REFORMED 


PENNSYLVANIA 

NEW  YORK 

OHIO 

NEW  JERSEY 

MICHIGAN 

MARYLAND 


r 


RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF  THE   UNITED  STATES.      477 


IN  THOSE  STATES  IN  WHICH  THEY  HAVE  THE  GREATEST  STRENGTH. 


PRESBYTERIAN 

O  100,000      200,000 


100.000      200,000 


GEORGIA 

WORTH  CAROLINA 

VIRGINIA 

ALABAMA 

TEXAS 

KENTUCKY 


COUTH  CAROLINA 

TENNESSEE 

MISSOURI 

WEW  YORK 

/ARKANSAS 

ILLINOIS 

•LOUISIANA 

PENNSYLVANIA 

INDIANA 

OHIO 

MASSACHUSETTS 

WEST  VIRGINIA 
*  FLORIDA 

NEW  JERSEY 
,  MICHIGAN 

'i  Maine 

KANSAS 
IOWA 

CONNECTICUT 

DIST.OF  COLUMBIA 

RHODE  ISLAND 

WISCONSIN 

NEW  HAMPSHIRE 

MINNESOTA 

MARYLAND 

NEBRASKA 

CALIFORNIA 

VERMONT 


DISCIPLES  OF  CHRIST 


MISSOURI 

INDIANA 

KENTUCKY 

ILLINOIS 

OHIO 

TEXAS 

TENNESSEE 

IOWA 

KANSAS 

ARKANSAS 

VIRGINIA 

NORTH  CAROLINA^ 

PENNSYLVANIA 


PENNSYLVANIA 

NEW  YORK 

OHIO 

ILLINOIS 

TENNESSEE 

NEW  JERSEY 

MISSOURI 

INDIANA 

KENTUCKY 

IOWA 

TEXAS 

NORTH  CAROLINA 

KANSAS 

VIRGINIA 

SOUTH  CAROLINA 

MICHIGAN 

ALABAMA 

CALIFORNIA 

MISSISSIPPI 

ARKANSAS 

NEBRASKA 

MINNESOTA 

GEORGIA 

WISCONSIN 

MARYLAND 

WEST  VIRGINIA 


EPISCOPALIAN 


NEW  YORK 

PENNSYLVANIA 

NEW  JERSEY 

MASSACHUSETTS 

CONNECTICUT 

MARYLAND 

ILLINOIS 

VIRGINIA 

MICHIGAN 

OHIO 

MINNESOTA 

WISCONSIN 


GERMAN  EVANGELICAL  SYNOD 


ILLINOIS 

OHIO 

MISSOURI 

NEW  YORK 

INDIANA 

WISCONSIN 

MICHIGAN 


PENNSYLVANIA 

WISCONSIN 

MINNESOTA 

ILLINOIS 

OHIO 

NEW  YORK 

IOWA 

MICHIGAN 

INDIANA 

NEBRASKA 

MISSOURI 

MARYLAND 

SOUTH  DAKOTA 

NORTH  DAKOTA 

KANSAS 

TEXAS 

NEW  JERSEY 

NORTH  CAROLINA 

VIRGINIA 


CONGREGATIONALIST 


MASSACHUSETTS 

CONNECTICUT 

NEW  YORK 

ILLINOIS 

OHIO 

MICHIGAN 

IOWA 

MAINE 

VERMONT 

NEW  HAMPSHIRE 

WISCONSIN 

MINNESOTA 

KANSAS 

CALIFORNIA 

NEBRASKA 


EVANGELICAL  ASSOCIATION 


PENNSYLVANIA 
OHIO 

WISCONSIN 
ILLINOIS 


NEW  YORK 
ILUNOIS 


r 


478      RELIGIOUS  FORCES  OF  THE   UNITED  STATES. 


PROPORTION   OF  CHURCH    MEMBERS  TO  AGGREGATE   POPULATION. 

PER   CENT. 


NEW  MEXICO 

UTAH 

ARIZONA 

SOUTH  CAROLINA 

RHODE  ISLAND 

NORTH  CAROLINA 

MASSACHUSETTS 

CONNECTICUT 

MINNESOTA 

DISTOF  COLUMBIA 

ALABAMA 

GEORGIA 

MARYLAND 

NEW  YORK 

FLORIDA 

LOUISIANA 

NEW  JERSEY 

VIRGINIA 


OHIO 

WISCONSIN 

PENNSYLVANIA 

KENTUCKY 

NORTH   DAKOTA 

VERMONT 

INDIANA 

ILLINOIS 

TENNESSEE 

TEXAS 

Iowa 
oelhware 

IDAHO 

MISSOURI 
NEW  HAMPSHIRE 
MICHIGAN 
ARKANSAS 
SOUTH  DAKOTA 
WEST  VIRGINIA 
MONTANA 
'MAINE 
KANSAS 
CALIFORNIA 
OREGON 
COLORADO 
WYOMING 
NEBRASKA 
WASHINGTON 
NEVADA 
OKLAHOMA 


ITbe  Bmericau  Cburcb  IF^tstorp  Series. 


By  SuiiSCRH'TION,       . 


IN  Thirteen  Volumes,  at  $2.50  per  Volume 


Vol.  I. 

Vol.  11. 

Vol.  111. 

Vol.  IV. 

Vol.  V. 

Vol.  VI. 

Vol.  VII. 

Vol.  Vlll.- 


The  Religious  Forces  of  the  United  States,  H.  K.  Carroll,  LL.D., 
Editor  of  The  Independent,  Supt.  Church  Statistics,  U.  S.  Census,  etc. 


Baptists,     .... 

Congregationalists, 

Lutherans, 

Methodists, 

Presbyterians,   . 
Protestant  Episcopal,     . 
Reformed  Church,  Dutch 
Reformed  Church, 

Moravian,  . 


Vol,     IX.      Roman  Catholics, 


Vol.     X. 


Vol.    XI. 


Vol.   XII. 


Vol.  XIII. 


Unitarians, 

Universalists,    . 
M.  E.  Church,  So., 

Presbyterians,  So.,  . 

United  Presbyterians, 
Cumb.  Presbyterians, 

Disciples,    . 

Friends^  .      . 

United  Brethren,     . 
Ev.  Association, 


Bibliography, 

Mistory  of 

American 

Christianity, 


Rev.  a.  H.  Newman,  D.D.,  LL.D., 

Professor  of  Church  History,  McMaster 

University  of  Toronto,  Ont. 

Rev,  Williston  Walker,   Ph.D., 

Professor  of  Modern  Church  History, 
Theological  Seminary,  Hartford,  Conn, 

Rev.  H.  E.  Jacobs,  D.D.,  LL.D., 
Professor  of  Systematic  Theology  in  the 
Ev.  Lutheran  Seminary,  Phila.,  Pa. 

Rev,  J.  M.  Buckley,  D.D.,  LL.D.. 

Editor  of  the  New  York  Christian 
Advocate. 

Rev.  Robert  Ellis  Thompson^  D.D., 

Philadelphia,  Pa. 
Rev.  C.  C.  Tiffany,  D.D., 

New  York. 
Rev.  E.  T.  Corvvin,  D.D., 
Rector  Hertzog  Hall,  New  Brunswick,  N.J. 
German, Rev.  J.  H.  Dubbs,  D.D., 

Prof essor  of  History.  Franklyn  and 
Marshall  College,  Lancaster,  Pa. 

Rev,  J,  T.  Hamilton,  D.D., 
Professor  of  Church  History,  Theologica*. 
Seminary,  Bethlehem,  Pa. 

Rev,  T,  O'Gorman,  D.D., 

Professor  of  Church  History,  Catholic 
L^niversity,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Rev,  J.  H.  Allen,  D.D., 
Late  Lecturer  on  Ecclesiastical  History, 
Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Rev,  Richard  Eddy,  D.D., 

Providence,  R.  I, 
Rev,  Gross  Alexander,  D.D., 
Professor    Greek    and    N,   T.  Exegesis. 
Nashville,  Tenn. 

Rev.  Thomas  C.  Johnson,  D.D., 
Professor     Ecclesiastical     History     and 
Polity,  Hampden-Sidney,  Va. 

Rev.  James  B.  Scouller,  D.D,, 

Newville,  Pa. 
Rev,  R.  V.  Foster,  D.D., 
Professor  Biblical  Exegesis,  Cumberland 
University,  Lebanon,  Tenn. 

Rev.   R.   B,  Tyler,   D.D.,  New  York. 

Prof.  A.  C.    Thomas,  M.A,, 

Haverford  College,  Haverford,  Pa. 
R.    H.   Thomas,   M.D.,    Baltimore,  Md. 
Rev.    D,    Berger,  D,D.,  Dayton,  Ohio. 

Rev.  S.  p.  Spreng, 
Editor  Evangelical  Messenger,  Cleve- 
land, Ohio, 

Rev,  Samuel  Macauley  Jackson, 

New  York. 

Rev.  Leonard  Woolsey  Bacon,  D.D. 


mm 


Y^ 


