S.  6.  &  E.  L.  ELBERT 


'!.. 


mm$ 


iv?s 


isrv 


w 


Wmm 


lA  /Mi 


ELLA  SMITH  EI3ER5     f8B 

^n  ilWummir 

_za3hahihi  J.  omm 


&t'M> 


f 


•n 


AMERICAN    REBELLION. 


EEPOET  OF  THE  SPEECHES 


or  THE 


REV.  HENRY  WARD  BEECHER, 


DELIVERED 


AT     PUBLIC     MEETINGS 


IN 


MANCHESTER,       GLASGOW,       EDINBURGH, 
LIVERPOOL,     AND     LONDON; 


AND  AT  THE 


FAREWELL   BREAKFASTS 

IN  LONDON,    MANCHESTER,    AND    LIVERPOOL. 


UNION    AND     EMANCIPATION     SOCIETY, 

51,    PICCADILLY,    MANCHESTER. 

LONDON  :   SAMPSON  LOW  &  SON.       EDINBURGH  :    THOMAS   NELSON. 

GLASGOW :  THOS.  MURRAY  &  SONS.     DUBLIN  :  R.  D.  WEBB  &  SON. 

BELFAST:  JAMES  MAGILL.    LIVERPOOL:  HENRY  YOUNG. 

1864. 


NOTE. 


I  have  been  asked  to  revise  the  speeches  recently  delivered  by  me  in   Great 
Britain,  and  to  allow  them  to  be  published  together. 

In  compliance  with  that  request,  I  have  partially  revised  the  speeches 
delivered  in  the  Free  Trade  Hall,  Manchester,  in  the  City  Hall,  Glasgow,  and 
in  the  Free  Church  Assembly  Hall,  Edinburgh;  the  others  not  at  all. 

I  must  leave  them  with  all  the  imperfections  incidental  to  speeches  delivered 
under  circumstances,  in  several  cases,  not  favourable  to  literary  excellence  or 
reportorial  correctness. 

To  avoid  any  mistake  hereafter,  I  specify  those  speeches  which,  in  addition 
to  the  above,  I  permit  to  be  published ;  and  this  I  deem  necessary  on  account  of 
one  of  my  morning  addresses  being  so  inaccurately  reported,  unintentionally  I 
believe,  as  to  misrepresent  what  I  did  say,  and  attribute  to  me  that  which  I 
did  not  say. 

The  speech  in  the  Philharmonic  Hall,  Liverpool,  I  leave  as  a  curiosity.  It 
may  relieve  the  reading  of  the  others,  to  follow  the  course  of  a  speech  delivered 
under  difficulties. 

The  speeches  delivered  in  Exeter  Hall,  and  at  the  several  Breakfast  Meetings 
in  London,  Manchester,  and  Liverpool,  must  remain  as  they  are  published  in 
the  newspapers,  only  cautioning  the  reader  that  they  are  not  verbatim  reports. 

H.   W.  BEECHER. 

Liverpool,  30th  Oct.,  1863. 


MANCHESTEE  -OCTOBER  9,  1863. 


REPORT  OF  PROCEEDINGS  AT  THE  MEETING  HELD 
AT  THE  FREE  TRADE  HALL. 


On  Friday  evening,  October  9  th,  a  meeting  was  held  in  the  Free  Trade 
Hall,  according  to  announcement,  "to  welcome  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward 
Beecher  on  his  public  appearance  in  this  country."  The  hall  was 
extremely  crowded,  and  there  were  probably  6,000  persons  present.  It 
was  supposed,  from  the  paper  war  of  placards  for  the  previous  fortnight, 
that  the  meeting  might  be  disturbed  by  partisans  of  the  Confederate 
cause.  Arrangements  had,  therefore,  been  made  for  the  prompt  suppres- 
sion of  disorder ;  and  notices  to  that  effect  were  posted  about  the  room. 
The  chair  was  taken,  at  half-past  six,  by  Mr.  Francis  Taylor.  At  the 
same  time  the  entrance  of  Mr.  Beecher,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Bazley,  M.P., 
and  some  prominent  members  of  the  Union  and  Emancipation  Society, 
was  the  signal  for  enthusiastic  and  repeated  cheering.  The  following 
were  among  the  gentlemen  present : — Mr.  Thomas  Bazley,  M.P.  ;  Rev. 
Dr.  Parker,  Manchester;  Rev.  J.  B.  Paton,  Sheffield;  Mr.  Jacob  Bright; 
Mr.  W.  P.  Roberts,  Manchester ;  Mr.  Councillor  Williams,  Salford  ;  Rev. 
Richard  Jones,  Manchester ;  Rev.  J.  Bertram,  Manchester ;  Mr.  Samuel 
Bennett,  Manchester;  Mr.  W.  Hey  wood,  Manchester;  Mr.  James  Gallo- 
way, Manchester;  Mr.  Frederick  Cooper,  Manchester;  Mr.  Councillor 
Clegg,  Manchester;  Mr.  Joseph  Spence,  Manchester;  Rev.  P.  Prout,  Has- 
lingden ;  Mr.  A.  Ireland,  Mr.  Joseph  Leese,  Mr.  Charles  Bury,  Mr.  H. 
Dunckley ;  Rev.  G.  M'Gregor,  Farnworth;  Mr.  R.  Cooper,  Manchester; 
Mr.  J.  R.  Cooper,  Manchester ;  Rev.  J.  Dunckley,  Heywood ;  Rev.  W. 
Duckins,  Middlewich ;  Rev.  W.  Hanson,  Manchester  ;  Rev.  J.  Turner, 
Farnworth ;  Rev.  J.  M'Pherson,  Manchester ;  Rev.  R.  Cliff,  Bury  ;  Rev. 
W.  Sykes,  Rev.  W.  H.  Davidson,  Rev.  R.  Best,  Bolton  ;  Rev.  J.  S. 
Hill,  Pendleton ;  Rev.  J.  P.  Taylor,  Darlington  ;  Rev.  G.  Robinson, 
Over  Darwen  ;  Rev.  G.  Pywell,  Stockport ;  Mr.  D.  Mills,  Bowdon ; 
Mr.  S.  P.  Robinson,  Manchester;  Rev.  G.  Waldon,  Manchester;  Rev. 
J.  Morgan,  Rev.  W.  Shuttleworth,  Manchester  ;  Rev.  J.  Taylor,  Man- 
chester;  Rev.  O.  B.  Beadwell,  America;  Rev.  T.  G.  Lee,  Salford; 
Professor  Newth;  Mr.  Robert  Smith,  Manchester  ;  Mr.  W.  Boyd,  Glos- 
sop ;  Mr.  T.  Roberts,  Manchester ;  Mr.  J.  B.  Whitehead,  Rawtenstall ; 


2  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETUm 

Mr.  J.  C.  Edwards,  Manchester;  Mr.  T.  R.  Whitehead,  Rawtenstall; 
Mr.  E.  0.  Greening,  Manchester  ;  Mr.  S.  Watts,  jun.,  Manchester  ;  Mr. 
J.  C.  Dyer,  Burnage ;  Mr  Councillor  T.  Warburton,  Manchester ;  Mr. 
Councillor  Butter  worth,  Mr.  Councillor  Hampson,  Mr.  T.  H.  Barker, 
Manchester;  Mr.  J.  H.  Estcourt,  Manchester;  and  Mr.  P.  Sinclair, 
Manchester.  Padre  Gavazzi  was  in  one  of  the  reserved  seats  below  the 
platform.  The  first  row  was  occupied  by  forty  of  the  students  of  the 
Lancashire  Independent  College. 

One  of  the  hon.  secretaries  (Mr.  Greening)  stated  that  the  following 
*etter  had  been  addressed  to  his  colleague,  Mr.  Edwards,  and  himself, 
Dy  their  president,  from  Scotland  : — 

Pitnacre,  Dunkeld,  October  8,  1863. 

Gentlemen, — I  regret  that  I  shall  not  be  able  to  be  with  you  on  Friday  to 
join  in  your  welcome  to  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  as  I  am  suffering  from 
the  effects  of  severe  influenza.  I  have  firm  faith  that,  purified  from  the  plague 
spot  of  slavery,  the  republic  will  emerge  in  its  integrity  from  this  war  with  renewed 
life  and  vigour.  I  desire,  however,  most  earnestly  to  impress  upon  the  working 
men  of  Manchester  that  the  struggle  now  going  on  in  America  is  their  own  battle, 
for  in  the  maintenance  of  the  great  republic  in  the  West  depends  in  a  great  degree 
the  progress  of  popular  institutions  all  over  the  world.  This  the  enemies  of  freedom 
well  know,  and  therefore  imperial  influences  abroad,  as  well  as  selfish  and  oligarchical 
sympathies  at  home,  are  brought  to  bear  in  favour  of  the  slaveholding  conspirators. 
Mr.  Beecher  will  be  able  to  tell  his  fellow-countrymen  that,  whoever  else  be  against 
them,  the  hearts  of  the  working  men  of  England,  and  I  believe  throughout  Europe, 
beat  in  unison  with  those  who  are  fighting  the  battle  of  freedom  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Atlantic. — Yours,  &c,  (Signed)  Thos.  Bayley  Potter. 

The  Hon.  Secretaries  of  the  Union  and  Emancipation  Society. 

(Prolonged  applause.)  Letters  also  had  been  received  from  Mr.  W.  E. 
Forster,  MP.  for  Bradford  — (cheers), — and  Mr.  Bright,  M.P. — (pro- 
longed cheering), — regretting  their  inability  to  be  present.  Mr.  Bright 
said  :  "I  am  grieved  to  be  away  from  home  when  Mr.  Beecher  is  in  the 
neighbourhood."     (Loud  cheers.) 

Mr.  TAYLOR  having  taken  the  chair,  spoke  as  follows  :  Ladies  and 
gentlemen. — Your  committee  has  done  me  the  honour  to  place  me  in  the 
chair  this  evening,  and  by  your  kind  forbearance  I  shall  endeavour  to 
discharge  the  duties  which  devolve  upon  me  to  the  best  of  my  ability. 
One  thing  I  will  promise  you  :  the  preliminary  proceedings  shall 
be  short.  We  are  met  together  to-night  to  welcome  the  Rev.  Henry 
Ward  Beecher  on  his  first  public  appearance  in  England,  and  I 
am  glad  to  witness  so  large  an  audience  notwithstanding  the  efforts  which 
have  been  made,  both  in  public  and  private,  to  deter  persons  from  being 
present  on  this  occasion.  A  recent  number  of  the  Saturday  Review 
complains  that  the  friends  of  the  North  have  restricted  the  discussion  of 
the  American  question  to  the  simple  issue  of  slavery.  If  this  were  true, 
the  simple  issue  of  slavery  is  one  well  worthy  the  consideration  of 
Englishmen.  But  who  limited  the  question  to  the  simple  issue  of  slavery  1 
Did  not  the  Southern  states  in  all  their  Secession  ordinances  declare  that 
slavery,  and  slavery  alone,  was  the  question  at  issue  *?  ( Applause  )  Did 
not  the  Hon.  Alex.  Stephens,  the  vice-president  of  the  Confederacy,  boast 
thatthey  were  seeking  to  found  an  empire  on  the  "corner-stone  of  slavery  V 
The  fact  is,  the  South  has  declared,  over  and  over  again,  that  slavery 


MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING.  3 

is  the  top,  and  bottom,  and  middle  of  the  whole  question.  (Applause.) 
But  we  do  not  limit  the  discussion  of  the  question  to  the  simple  issue  of 
slavery,  and  we  are  here  to-night  to  declare  from  this  platform  to  the 
editor  of  the  Saturday  Review,  and  all  who  think  with  him,  that  im- 
portant as  that  issue  may  be,  there  are  others  which,  in  our  opinion, 
are  equally  important.  The  South  had  held  the  reins  of  government  in 
its  hands  for  a  long  series  of  years,  until  the  election  of  Mr.  Lincoln  on 
the  platform  of  the  limitation  of  the  area  of  slavery  turned  the  scale. 
That  election  was  the  free  and  unrestricted  voice  of  the  people,  and 
against  it  the  South  rebelled.  It  was  therefore  a  rebellion  against  con- 
stitutional government — an  armed  resistance  to  a  constitutional  ruler  ; 
and  the  issues  involved  in  the  struggle  are  the  safety  of  constitutional 
liberty  everywhere — the  progress  of  liberal  institutions  everywhere — 
and  the  development  of  Anglo-Saxon  civilisation  everywhere,  and 
therefore  it  is  that  we  seek  to  preserve  the  great  Republic  from  disruption. 
(Applause.)  But,  gentlemen,  we  live  in  strange  times,  and  in  the 
midst  of  strange  occurrences.  During  the  past  week  a  new  society 
has  sprung  up  amongst  us  called  the  "Southern  Independence  Asso- 
ciation," and  its  birth  has  been  heralded  by  an  earthquake.  (Laughter 
and  applause.)  Lord  Wharncliffe  is  the  president  of  this  association, 
and  he  is  supported  by  a  number  of  highly  respectable  gentlemen 
as  vice-chairmen.  Now,  I  have  not  a  word  to  say  respecting  these 
gentlemen  personally,  but  I  will  tell  you  what  a  facetious  friend  said 
to  me  after  comparing  the  two  lists  of  officers  which  appeared  in  the 
papers  the  day  after  the  formation  of  this  new  society.  He  said,  "Well, 
one  thing  is  clear,  the  North  has  all  the  'heads,'  and  the  South  has  all 
the  'tails."'  But  these  gentlemen,  highly  respectable  though  they  be, 
are  the  political  descendants  of  the  party  which  has  always  been 
opposed  to  progress.  (Hear,  hear.)  Lord  Wharncliffe  knows  perfectly 
well,  and  those  who  are  associated  with  him  know  perfectly  well,  that 
the  issues  I  have  referred  to  are  involved  in  this  struggle,  and  therefore 
they  support  the  South  in  its  attempt  to  destroy  the  Republic.  Some  of 
us  are  old  enough  to  remember  when  Lord  Grey's  ministry  was  defeated 
on  the  Reform  Bill,  and  proposed  to  appeal  to  the  country,  Lord 
Wharncliffe — the  grandfather  of  the  present  lord — rose  in  his  place  in 
the  House  of  Lords,  and  moved  an  address  to  the  King,  praying  His 
Majesty  not  to  dissolve  Parliament,  as  it  would  be  dangerous  to  the 
institutions  of  the  country.  This  was  done  in  order,  if  possible,  to 
scotch  the  Reform  Bill.  The  present  Lord  Wharncliffe — true  to  the 
instincts  of  his  house — proposes  to  recognise  the  South,  and  is  even 
prepared  for  war  with  the  North,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  scotch  the  new 
Reform  Bill  which  he  sees  looming  in  the  future.  (Applause.)  Let  the 
question  be  thus  plainly  put  before  the  country,  and  we  have  no  fear 
of  the  result.  At  any  rate,  having  thrown  down  the  gauntlet  and 
appealed  to  public  opinion,  we  are  prepared  to  abide  the  issue.  I  will  not 
detain  you  longer  with  any  remarks  of  mi»e,  further  than  to  ask  you  in 
case  any  disturbance  should  be  attempted  to  leave  the  management  of 
the  meeting  entirely  to  me,  but  call  upon  the  secretary  (Mr.  Greening) 
to  read  the  address  to  Mr.  Beecher,  which  has  been  prepared  by  the  society. 


4  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

Mr.  GREENING  read  the  following  address  :— 

Eev.  and  dear  Sir. — As  members  of  the  Union  and  Emancipation  Society,  we 
avail  ourselves  of  this,  your  first  public  appearance  in  England,  after  a  tour  under- 
taken for  the  purpose  of  relaxation,  to  welcome  you,  not  only  as  a  citizen  of  a  great 
and  free  country,  but  as  one  who,  for  a  long  series  of  years,  has  been  a  prominent 
and  successful  pioneer  in  the  cause  of  human  progress.  Though  separated  from  you 
by  the  broad  Atlantic,  we  have  been  earnest  spectators  of  your  fearless  and  per- 
sistent advocacy  of  the  personal  rights  of  the  coloured  race,  amidst  many  perils  and 
dangers,  unmoved  alike  by  the  blandishments  of  office,  or  the  threats  of  opponents  ; 
and  also  of  your  consistent  adherence  to  the  principles  of  political  and  religious 
liberty.  We  deeply  deplore  the  dreadful  calamity  which  has  come  upon  your  native 
country ;  but,  believing  as  we  do,  that  its  sole  cause  is  to  be  found  in  that  sum  of 
all  villanies — human  slavery — we  recognise  in  it  the  hand  of  retributive  justice  work- 
ing out  the  inevitable  punishment  of  wrong-doing,  and  overtaking  not  only  the  Southern 
slaveholder,  whose  hands  are  imbued  with  guilt,  but  our  own  country,  from  which 
you  inherited  this  hideous  institution,  and  the  free  States  of  America  which  have 
tolerated  its  existence.  Living  ourselves  under  a  constitutional  government,  and 
having  firm  faith  in  representative  institutions,  we  viewed  with  alarm  the  outbreak 
of  a  rebellion,  which  its  promoters  avowed  to  be  an  attempt  to  raise  an  empire  on 
the  "  Corner  stone  of  slavery,"  and  which  was  essentially  a  rebellion  against  free 
constitutional  government,  and  an  appeal  from  the  ballot-box  to  the  rifle.  The  suc- 
cess of  such  a  rebellion  would  place  constitutional  liberty  in  jeopardy  everywhere,  and 
we  congratulate  you  and  your  countrymen  on  the  determined  stand  you  have  made  to 
maintain  unimpaired  the  great  Republic,  which  has  been  handed  down  to  you  by 
your  forefathers,  and  thus  to  present  to  the  world  a  noble  spectacle  of  self-denying 
patriotism.  We  rejoice  that  your  statesmen,  whilst  maintaining  that  the  restoration 
of  the  Union  is  a  sacred  obligation,  have  been  led,\  step  by  step,  to  the  recognition 
of  the  rights  of  the  negro ;  thus  vindicating  the  consistency  of  those  who  have 
laboured  in  the  anti-slavery  cause  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,  in  the  midst  of  obloquy 
and  misrepresentation,  supported  only  by  their  firm  faith  in  the  eternal  principles  of 
right  and  justice  ;  and  establishing  for  them  a  claim  to  the  heartfelt  gratitude  of  the 
lovers  of  freedom  everywhere.  In  conclusion,  we  venture  to  hope  that  your  visit 
may  be  the  means  of  correcting  some  of  the  misrepresentations  as  to  the  position  of 
this  country  in  regard  to  the  American  struggle  which  have  been  assiduously  spread 
by  certain  portions  of  the  press,  and  of  cementing  the  bonds  of  amity,  which  ought, 
for  ever  to  bind  together  in  peace  the  two  great  representatives  of  the  Anglo-Saxon 
race — England  and  America.  The  cordial  alliance  of  these  two  powers  may  not  be 
consistent  with  the  designs  of  despotism,  or  be  approved  by  the  enemies  of  liberty 
here  or  elsewhere  ;  but,  being  one  in  race,  language,  religion,  and  love  of  freedom, 
they  may  thus  lead  the  van  of  civilisation,  and  bid  defiance  to  the  shocks  which 
jealousy  or  suspicion  might  bring  upon  them.  In  the  firm  hope  that  such  a  future 
may  be  in  store  for  your  country  and  ours,  we  bid  you  God  speed  in  the  enterprise 
in  which  you  have  been  so  long  engaged  and  borne  such  a  noble  part. — Signed,  on 
behalf  of  the  Union  and  Emancipation  Society,      Thos.  Bailey  Potter,  President. 

Mr.  BAZLEY,  M.P.,  on  rising  was  received  with  loud  cheers,  He 
said  that  not  ten  months  ago  the  people  of  Manchester  assembled  in 
that  spacious  hall  in  overwhelming  numbers,  as  on  the  present  occasion, 
to  express  their  deep  sympathy  with  constitutional  government,  with  the 
integrity  of  empire,  and  their  abhorrence  of  slavery.  (Cheers.)  Since 
then  the  horrors  of  civil  war  had  raged  in  a  country  that  had  previously  to 
the  breaking  out  of  the  present  conflict  been  only  known  as  extensively 
prosperous,  as  exceedingly  peaceful,  and  among  the  nations  of  the  earth 
pre-eminently  successful.  But  in  the  pride  of  the  South — [interruption, 
and  cries  of  "Turn  him  out."  The  Chairman :  Do  not  put  anyone  out, 
please.  If  our  friends  would  only  be  quiet  there  would  be  no  interrup- 
tion, as  the  disorder  is  all  caused  by  one  man] — but  in  the  pride  of  the 
South  an  attempt  had  been  made  to  build  up  a  nation  on  the  chief 


MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING.  5 

corner-stone  of  slavery,  and  such  an  attempt  had  been  alike  offensive 
to  the  great  people  of  the  States  of  America  and  to  the  intelligence 
of  the  people  of  Europe.      (Cheers.)     The  audacity  of  the  South  was 
only   equalled   by   its   unfortunate   hypocrisy.       (A   voice :      "  There 
has   been   hypocrisy   on   both  sides.")       The    South   now   complained 
that  she  could  not  be  let  alone  and  enjoy  her  assumed  independence. 
Keally  after  having  struck  the  first  blow,  after  having  initiated  the  re 
bellion  which  had  devastated  the  country,  it  was  more  than  temperate 
reason  could  sustain  to  suppose  that  such  a  demand,  could  either  be 
maintained  by  the  South  or  respected  by  those  to  whom  the  appeal  had 
been  made.     (Cheers.)     The  South  avowed  a  deep  interest  in  the  well- 
fare  of  the  negro-race.     It  proclaimed  to  the  world  that  the  negro  was 
better  cared  for  and  better  taught  than  if  left  to  his  own  management 
and  to  his  native  condition  in  Africa.     He  knew  not  that  the  South 
had.  an  abstract  right  to  determine  what  should  be  the  state  of  a  people 
or  nation  held  in  subjection.    (Cheers.)    If  the  latter  were  free,  then  we 
might  compare  facts  with  assumptions.  The  inconsistency  of  the  South  was 
clearly  shown  by  its  avowing  that  the  negro  had  equal  hope  of  a  future 
state  with  the  whites.     The  truths  of  our  common  faith  were  said  to  be 
orally  taught  to  the  negroes.    But  see  the  manifest  inconsistency  of  such 
doctrine,  when  the  common  rights  of  civilisation  and  of  education  were 
denied  to  a  people  whose  only  doom  was  incessant  labour.     (Cheers.) 
The  South  having  commenced  the  rebellion,  must  await  the  consequences 
of  reclamation  ;  the  North  would  contend  for  its  territorial  right,  for  the 
spread  of  civilisation,  of  just  government,  and  of  equal  rights  to  all ; 
and  therefore  the  time  might  be  coming,  he  hoped — and  soon,  too, — when 
the  South,  seeing  that  its  attempt  had  been  abortive,  would  be  glad  to 
see  itself  taken  back  into  the  Union.     (Applause.)     We  ought  never  to 
forget  that  in  the  commencement  of  the  struggle,  the  South  proclaimed 
cotton  to  be  King  and  endeavoured  to  coerce  Europe;  that  rebellion 
might  be  respected  and  the  nation,  built  upon  the  "corner  stone  of  slavery," 
might  be  called  into  the  midst  of  the  nations  of  the  earth.     That  had 
been  happily  prevented ;  nothing  could  be  more  honest  or  honourable 
than  the  conduct  of  the  labouring  classes  in  the  manufacturing  districts 
of  England ;  their  comforts  had  been  diminished,  very  important  in- 
terests had  been  interfered  with,  and  yet  in  their  suffering  they  had 
been  patient,   and  they  desired  not  to  be  fed  with  the  results  of  the 
labour  of  the  slave.    (Applause.)    They  wished  as  free  men  to  have  free 
coadjutors  in  every  part  of  the  globe.     On  that  occasion  he  hoped  he 
might  be  excused  if  he  referred  to  his  published  opinions,  of  twelve  years 
ago.     He  hoped  his  friends  and  constituents  would  not  think  he  was 
actuated  by  any  impulse  to  serve  the  passing  moment.     (Applause.) 
Twelve  years  ago  he  said, — "There  is  lamentably  a  dark  spot  upon  the 
cultivation  of  American  cotton,  which  the  friends  of  progress  and  of 
humanity  would  rejoice  to  see  obliterated,  not  by  violence — (applause) 
— but  by   rational  amelioration — (applause) — and   without  interfering 
with  the  institutions  of  any  country.     The  sires  of  the  Anglo-Saxon 
race  would  well  wish  their  trans -Atlantic  descendants  to  extend   the 
spirit  and  principles  of  freedom  to  the  persons,  homes,  and  labours  of 


6  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

every  colour  and  of  every  clime.     (Cheers.)     Can  there  be  safety  in  the 
coercion  of  labour,  and  is  the  cotton  planter  of  the  United  States  secure 
from   the    casualties   that  arbitrary   labours  engender  1       (Applause.) 
May  not  an  epidemic  of  disease  or  of  revolt  destroy  the  cultivation  of 
the   Southern  planters  of  America  1 "     (Hear.)     Whilst  we  recollected 
the  difficulties  and  troubles  of  America,  let  us  not  forget  that  our  own 
liberties  had  been  built  up  out  of  national  trials.     Who  would  have 
believed  in  the  restoration  of  our  monarchy,  when  Charles  I.  paid  the 
tribute  of  misgovernment,  and  a  Commonwealth  ruled  in  this  country, 
and  Cromwell  (loud  cheers)  rendered  the  name  of  England  alike  respected 
and  feared?     But  the  English  people  were  essentially  monarchical  in 
their  ideas  and  convictions;  and  if  so  great  an  alteration  had  taken  place 
with  us  within  a  few  years  at  that  time,  might  not  in  our  day  the 
American  mind  be  equally  restored,  so  that  before  long  we  should  see 
those  who  were  now  misled  seeking  again  the  fold  of  the  United  States' 
Government 3    (Cheers.)  No  policy,  more  beneficial,  could  be  pursued  by 
our  government  than  that  of  non-intervention.    Her  Majesty's  ministers, 
and  Earl  Russell  in  particular,  deserved  the  thanks  of  their  countrymen 
for  having  acted  upon  the  wise  principle  of  non-intervention.    (Cheers.) 
His  hearty  desire  was  that  this  country  might  be  j  ust  in  her  dealings,  not 
only  at  home,  but  abroad, — (hear,  hear) — that  in   our  relations  with 
America  we  might  cling  to  constitutional  government  and  the  rights  of 
freedom, — and  he  trusted  that  the  alliance  would  be  permanent  and 
solid,  with  the  cordial  affections  of  both  people  on  each  side  of  the 
Atlantic.     (Cheers.)     His  duty  on  the  present  occasion  was  to  move  that 
the  address  which  had  been  read  be  presented  to  the  distinguished  gentle- 
man who  was  present.     (Applause.)     He  need  not  recommend  it  for 
adoption,  for  he  felt  convinced  that  it  would  be  carried  by  overwhelming 
acclamation.     (Loud  cheers.)     The  rev.  gentleman  was  received  here  as 
the  messenger  of  peace  and  of  good  will  (loud  cheering  and  some  hissing) 
to  those  Anglo-Saxon  peoples  that  were  destined,  on  each  side  of  the 
Atlantic,  to  spread  civilisation  and  justice  throughout  the  world.     (Loud 
applause.) 

Mr.  ESTCOURT  seconded  the  motion.  He  said  he  was  very  anxious 
that  the  rev.  gentleman  should  occupy  as  much  time  as  possible  this 
evening,  and  his  observations  therefore  would  be  very  few.  This  great 
assemblage  was  convened  to  welcome  the  Reverend  Henry  Ward  Beecher, 
and  to  witness  the  presentation  to  him  by  the  members  of  the  Union 
and  Emancipation  Society,  of  the  address  which  had  been  read  by  the 
honorary  secretary,  and  the  adoption  of  which  had  been  so  ably  moved 
by  our  honourable  member,  Mr.  Bazley.  He  (Mr.  Estcourt)  was  re- 
minded by  the  peculiar  sounds  in  different  parts  of  the  hall,  that  other 
than  friends  were  in  attendance,  and  as  the  city  had  been  placarded 
with  bills  containing  an  invitation  to  the  citizens  to  attend  this  meeting 
in  large  numbers  and  give  our  esteemed  guest  a  "disgusting  reception," 
he  judged  that  the  discordant  noises  were  the  acknowledgment  of  these 
pujblicly  invited  persons  that  they  had  responded  to  the  call,  and  were 
prepared  to  shew  the  refinement  of  their  manners  by  giving  to  a  stranger 
to  thenij  but  a  friend  to  humanity,  the  polite  but  novel  reception, 


MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING.  V 

characterised  by  themselves  as  "disgusting;"  he  trusted,  however,  that 
those  gentlemen  would  see  that  it  would  be  better  to  avoid  giving  that 
sort  of  reception.      He  had  hopes   that   the    Southern   Independence 
Association,  having  now  got  some  respectable  names  upon  its  calendar, 
would  maintain  for  itself  that  respectability  and  gentlemanly  behaviour 
that  ought  to  mark  the  conducting  of  public  affairs.     (Laughter,  and 
cheers.)     As  a  member  of  the  Union  and  Emancipation  Society,  he,  for 
one,  from  the  commencement  of  the  rebellion  till  now,  had  sympathised 
with  the  Federal  party  in  America  for  this  reason,  that  slavery  up  to  that 
time  had  only  local  sanction;  but  then  it  claimed  to  be  national;  and 
rather  than  that  it  should  be  national  in  America,  they  said  "thus  far 
shalt  thou  go  and  no  further;"  and  because  the  South  could  get  no 
further,   the  first  .gun  at  Sumter  was  fired.     It  would  have  been  dis- 
creditable   alike  to   the  President  of  the  .Republic,  as  well  as  to  the 
people  of  that  Kepublic,  to  have  submitted  to  such  an  audacious  insult 
to  constitutional  government.     (Loud  applause.)     And  he  had  no  hesi- 
tation in  saying  that  those  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  who  were 
now   fighting    for    constitutional    government,    and   free   speech,    and 
personal,    civil,  social,  political,  and  religious  freedom,  ought  to  have 
the  moral  support,  and  he  believed  they  had,  of  every  intelligent  and 
well  informed  Englishman.     (Loud  applause.)     He  could  not  say  how 
long  it  would  take  to  convert  and  enlighten  the  unenlightened  and 
uninformed    portion    of    the    community,    who    in    establishing    the 
Southern    Slaveholding    Association,    had   publicly   acknowledged   one 
of  their  objects  to  be  to  obtain  "correct  information;"  but  inasmuch 
as  the  Union  and  Emancipation  Society  was  established  for  the  very 
purpose  of  supplying  such   information,  he  promised  to  all  applicants 
that  which    they   sought,    and  hoped    they  would   be   diligent   in   the 
acquisition  of  knowledge,  and  he  sincerely  trusted  that  before  the  year 
was  out  this  class  of  the  community  would  be  sailing  with  them   in 
one  boat,  in  an  intelligent  English  career,  in  favour  of  a  liberty  which 
was  the  undoubted  right  of  every  man.      (Loud  applause.)      He  had 
noticed  a  peculiarity  in  Manchester  lately  which  was  highly  suggestive, 
at  any  rate,  to  intelligent  men.     A  certain  party  had  said  that  Mr. 
Beecher  was  too  American,   because,  forsooth,  he  did  not  see  things 
exactly  as  they  saw  them.     But  whereas  in  1854  and  1857  that  great 
and  noble  man,  John  Bright — (loud  applause) — was  blamed  for  being  un- 
English  with  reference   to   the  Crimean  war,  now  the  selfsame  party 
blamed  Mr.  Beecher  for  being  too  American.     All  good  and  great  men 
have  been  misrepresented,  and  thus  it  was  such  men  were  misunderstood. 
There  were  few  men  in  the  world  who  had  the  moral  courage  to  act  out 
their  convictions,  and  to  dare  to  express  broad  principles,  independent 
of  sect  or  party ;  such  men  possessed  an  individuality  that  took  them 
out  of  the  groove  wherein  the  masses  of  the  people  are  placed.       If 
Mr.  Beecher,  who  had  been  consistent  and  persistent  in  his  advocacy  of 
fche  rights  of  freedom,  had  viewed  from  his  standpoint  in  America  certain 
things  in  England  that  to  him  did  not  appear  to  bear  that  friendship 
svhich  he  thought  ought  to  have  been  borne,  he  had  a  perfect  right  to 
express  his  opinion  in  a  frank  and  independent  manner.     (Applause.) 


8  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

The  meeting  was  not  asked  to  endorse  every  word  Mr.  Beecher  tad 
said,  but  to  manifest  by  its  welcome,  that  everything  he  had  done  in 
promoting  the  extension  of  the  broad  principles  of  liberty,  had  its 
hearty  approval.  (Applause.)  The  mode  of  doing  this  must  be  left  to 
Mr.  Beecher  himself,  and  he  (Mr.  Estcourt)  was  quite  sure  there  was 
not  an  Englishman  in  that  crowded  hall  who  did  not  sympathise  and 
wholly  approve  of  a  manly,  moral,  good  man,  wherever  he  was  found, 
whether  he  be  an  American,  an  Englishman,  or  the  citizen  of  any  other 
nation.  (Applause.)  He  therefore,  believing  Mr.  Beecher  to  be  such  a 
man,  with  the  greatest  pleasure  seconded  the  adoption  of  the  address. 

The  CHAIRMAN  then  put  the  resolution,  and  thousands  of  hands 
were  thrust  up  high  above  the  heads  of  the  dense  audience.  After  an 
interval  of  loud  cheers,  the  chairman  put  the  contrary,  and  amidst  peals 
of  derisive  laughter  and  cheers  a  few  hands  were  held  up. 

The  CH  A  IBM  AN  :  I  declare  the  resolution  carried  by  an  over- 
whelming majority.  (Enthusiastic  cheering.)  The  chairman,  in  handing 
the  address  to  Mr.  Beecher,  expressed  a  hope  that  the  rev.  gentleman 
would  long  live  in  health  and  strength  to  continue  his  career. 

The  Rev.  Mr.  BEECHER  then  turned  to  the  audience  to  speak,  but 
for  several  minutes  he  was  prevented  by  deafening  cheers,  followed  by 
a  few  hisses,  which  only  provoked  a  renewed  outburst  of  applause. 

Mr.  BEECHER  then  said :  Mr.   Chairman,  ladies,  and  gentlemen 

the  address  which  you  have  kindly  presented  to  me  contains  matters 

both  personal  and  national.     (Interruption.)     My  friends,  we  will  have 

a  whole  night  session  but  we  will  be  heard.     (Loud  cheers.)     I  have  not 

come  to  England  to  be  surprised  that  those  men  whose  cause  cannot 

bear  the  light  are  afraid  of  free  speech.     (Cheers  )     I  have  had  practice 

of  more  than  twenty-five  years  in  the  presence  of  tumultuous  assemblies 

opposing  those  very  men  whose  representatives  now  attempt  to  forestall 

free  speech.     (Hear.)     Little  by  little,  I  doubt  not,  I  shall  be  permitted 

to  speak  to-night.     (Hear.)     Little  by  little  I  have  been  permitted  in 

my  own  country  to  speak,  until  at  last  the  day  has  come  there,  when 

nothing  but  the  utterance  of  speech  for  freedom  is  popular.     (Cheers.) 

You  have  been  pleased  to  speak  of  me  as  one  connected  with  the  great 

cause  of  civil  and  religious  liberty.      I  covet  no  higher  honour  than 

to  have  my  name  joined  to  the  list  of  that  great   company  of  noble 

Englishmen  from  whom  we  derived  our  doctrines  of  liberty.     (Cheers.) 

For  although  there  is  some  opposition  to  what  are  here  called  American 

ideas,  what  are  these  American  ideas  ?       They  are  simply  English  ideas 

beaijng  fruit  in  America.     We  bring  back  American  sheaves,  but  the 

seed-corn  we  got  in  England — (hear)  ].  and  if,  on  a  larger  sphere,  and 

under  circumstances  of  unobstruction,  we  have  reared  mightier  harvests, 

every  sheaf  contains  the  grain  that  has  made  Old  England  rich  for  a 

hundred  years.     (Great  cheering.)     I  am  also  not  a  little  gratified  that 

my  first  appearance  to  speak  on  secular  topics  in  England  is  in  this 

goodly  town  of  Manchester,  for  I  had  rather  have  praise  from  men  who 

understand  the  quality  praised,  than  from  those  who  speak  at  hazard 

and  with  little  knowledge  of  the  thing  praised.     (Hear.)     And  where 

else,  more  than  in  these  great  central  portions  of  England,  and  in  what 


MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING.  9 

town  more  than  Manchester  have  the  doctrines  of  human  rights  been 
battled  for,  and  where  else  have  there  been  gained  for  them  nobler 
victories  than  here  %   (Cheers.)   It  is  not  indiscriminate  praise  therefore  : 
you   know  what   you   talk   about.      You   have  had  practice  in  these 
doctrines  yourselves,  and  to  be  praised  by  those  who  are  illustrious  is 
praise  indeed.     (Cheers.)     Allusion  has  been  made  by  one  of  the  gentle- 
men— a  cautionary  allusion,  a  kind  of  deference  evidently  paid  to  some 
supposed  feeling — an  allusion  has  been  made  to  words  or  deeds  of  mine 
that  might  be  supposed  to  be  offensive  to  Englishmen.       (Hear.)      I 
cannot  say  how  that  may  be.     I  am  sure  that  I  have  never  thought,  in 
the  midst  of  this  mighty  struggle  at  home,  which  has  taxed  every  power 
and  energy  of  our  people — ("Oh,"  and  cheers) — I  have  never  stopped 
to  measure  and  to  think  whether  my  words  spoken  in  truth  and  with 
fidelity  to  duty  would  be  liked  in  this  shape  or  in  that  shape  by  one  or 
another  person  either  in  England  or  America.     (Cheers.)     I  have  had 
one  simple,  honest  purpose,  which  I  have  pursued  ever  since  I  have 
been  in  public  life,  and  that  was  with  all  the  strength  that  God  has  given 
to  me  to  maintain  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  of  the  weak  in  my  own 
country.     (Cheers.)     And  if,  in  the  height  and  heat  of  conflict,  some 
words  have  been  over  sharp,  and  some  positions  have  been  taken  heed- 
lessly, are  you  the  men  to  call  one  to  account  1    (Hear.)    What  if  some 
exquisite  dancing  master,  standing  on  the  edge  of  a  battle,  where  Richard 
Cceur  de  Lion  swung  his  axe,  criticised  him  by  saying  that  "his  gestures 
and  postures  violated  the  proprieties  of  polite  life."    (Laughter.)    When 
dandies   fight   they  think  how  they  look,   but  when  men   fight  they 
think  only  of  deeds.     (Cheers.)     But  I  am  not  here  either  on  trial  or 
on  defence.     (Hear,  hear.)     It  matters  not  what  I  have  said  on  other 
occasions  and  under  different  circumstances.     Here  I  am  before  you, 
willing  to  tell  you  what  I  think  about  England,  or  any  person  in  it. 
(Cheers.)      Let  me  say  one  word,  however,  in  regard  to  this  meeting, 
and  the  peculiar  gratification  which  I  feel  in  it.   The  same  agencies  which 
have  been  at  work  to  misrepresent  good  men  in  our  country  to  you, 
have  been  at  -  work  to  misrepresent  to  us  good  men  here ;  and  when  I 
say  to  my  friends  in  America  that  I  have  attended  such  a  meeting  as 
this,  received  such  an  address,  and  beheld  such  enthusiasm,  it  will  be  a 
renewed  pledge  of  amity.    (Cheers.)    I  have  never  ceased  to  feel  that  war 
or  even  unkind  feelings  between  two  such  great  nations,  would  be  one 
of  the  most  unpardonable  and  atrocious  offences  that  the  world  ever 
beheld — (cheers) — and  I   have   regarded   everything   therefore,  which 
needlessly  led  to  those  feelings  out  of  which  war  comes,  as  being  in 
itself  wicked.     (Cheers.)     The  same  blood  is  in  us.     (Cheers.)     We  are 
your  children,  or  the  children  of  your  fathers  and  ancestors.     You  and 
we  hold  the  same  substantial   doctrines.     We  have  the  same  mission 
amongst  the  nations  of  the  earth.     Never  were  mother  and  daughter 
set  forth  to  do  so  queenly  a  thing  in  the  kingdom  of  God's  glory  as 
England  and  America.     (Cheers.)     Do  you  ask  why  we  are  so  sensitive, 
and  why  have  we  hewn  England  with  our  tongue  as  we  have  1     I  will 
tell  you  why.     There  is  no  man  who  can  offend  you  so  deeply  as  the 
one  you  love  most.    (Loud  cheers.)    Men  point  to  France  and  Napoleon, 


10  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

and  say  he  has  joined  England  in  all  that  she  has  done,  and  why  are 
the  press  of  America  silent  against  France,  and  why  do  they  speak  as 
they  do  against  England  1     It  is  because  we  love  England.     (Cheers.) 
I  well  remember  the  bitterness  left  by  the  war  of  our  Independence,  and 
the  outbreak  of  the  flame  of  L  8 1 2  from  its  embers.  To  hate  England  was 
in  my  boyhood  almost  the  first  lesson  of  patriotism  ;  but  that  result  of 
conflict  gradually  died  away  as  peace  brought  forth  its  proper  fruits : 
interests,  reciprocal  visits,  the  interchanges  of  Christian  sympathy,  and 
co-operative  labours  in  a  common  cause  lessened  and  finally  removed 
ill-feelings.    In  their  place  began  to  arise  affection  and  admiration.    For 
when  we  searched  our  principles,  they  all  ran  back  to  rights  wrought 
out  and  established  in  England ;  when  we  looked  at  those  institutions  of 
which  we  were  most  proud,  we  beheld  that  the  very  foundation  stones, 
were  taken  from  the  quarry  of  your  history ;  when  we  looked  for  those 
men  that  had  illustrated  our  own  tongue,  orators,  or  eloquent  ministers 
of  the  gospel,  they  were  English ;  we  borrowed  nothing  from  France,  but 
here  a  fashion  and  there  a  gesture  or  a  custom  :  while  what  we  had  to 
dignify  humanity — that  made  life  worth  having — were  all  brought  from 
Old  England.     (Cheers.)     And  do  you  suppose  that  under  such  circum- 
stances, with  this  growing  love,   with  this   growing   pride,  with   this 
gladness  to  feel  that  we  were  being  associated  in  the  historic  glory  of 
England,  it  was  with  feelings  of  indifference  that  we  beheld  in  our  midst 
the  heir-apparent  to  the  British  throne  ?  (Cheers.)  There  is  not  reigning 
on  the  globe  a  sovereign  who  commands  our  simple,  unpretentious,  and 
unaffected  respect,  as  does  your  own  beloved  Queen.     (Loud  cheers.)     I 
have   heard   multitudes  of  men  say  that  it  was  their  joy  and   their 
pleasure  to  pay  respect  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  even  if  he  had  not  won 
personal  sympathy,  that  his  mother  might  know  that  through  him  the 
compliment  was  meant  to  her.   (Loud  cheers. )  It  was  an  unarranged  and 
unexpected  spontaneous  and  universal  outbreak  of  popular  enthusiasm  ; 
it  began  in  the  colonies  of  Canada,  the  fire  rolled  across  the  border,  all 
through  New  England,  all  through  New  York  and  Ohio,  down  through 
Pennsylvania  and  the  adjacent  states  ;  nor  was  the  element  quenched 
until  it  came  to  Richmond.      I  said,  and  many  said — the  past  of  enmity 
and  prejudice  is  now  rolled  below  the  horizon  of  memory :  a  new  era 
is  come,  and  we  have  set  our  hand  and  voices  as  a  sacred  seal  to  our 
cordial   affection   and   co-operation   with  England.       (Cheers.)       Now 
(whether  we  interpreted  it  aright  or  not,  is  not   the  question)  when 
we  thought  England  was  seeking  opportunity  to  go  with  the   South 
against  us  of  the  North,  it  hurt  us  as  no  other  nation's  conduct  could 
hurt  us  on  the  face  of  the  globe ;  and  if  we  spoke  some  words  of  intem- 
.perate  heat,  we  spoke  them  in  the  mortification  of  disappointed  affection. 
(Cheers.)       It   has    been   supposed   that   I   have   aforetime   urged   or 
threatened  war  with  England.   Never.    This  I  have  said — and  this  I  re- 
peat now,  and  here — that  the  cause  of  constitutional  government  and  of 
universal  liberty  as  associated  with  it  in  our  country  was  so  dear,  so 
sacred,  that  rather  than  betray  it  we  would  give  the  last  child  we  had — 
that  we  would  not  relinquish  this  conflict  though  other  States  rose,  and 
entered  into  a  league  with  the  South — and  that,  if  it  were  necessary  we 


MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING.  11 

would  maintain  this  great  doctrine  of  representative  government  in 
America  against  the  armed  world — against  England  and  France.    (Great 
cheering,  followed  by  some  disturbance,  in  reference  to  which  the  chair- 
man rose  and  cautioned  an  individual  under  the  gallery  whom  he  had  ob- 
served persisting  in  interruption. )  Let  me  be  permitted  to  say  then,  that 
it  seems  to  me  the  darker  days  of  embroilment  between  this  country 
and  America  are  past.     (Cheers.)     The  speech  of  Earl  Russell  at  Blair- 
gowrie, the  stopping  of  those  armed  ships,  and  the  present  attitude  of  the 
British  government — (renewed  cheering) — will  go  far  towards  satisfying 
our  people.     Understand  me ;  we  do  not  accept  Earl  Russell's  doctrine 
of  belligerent  rights  nor  of  neutrality,  as  applied  to  the  action  of  the 
British  government  and  nation  at  the  beginning  of  our  civil  war,  as 
right  doctrine,  but  we  accept  it  as  an  accomplished  fact.     We  have 
drifted  so  far  away  from  the  time  when  it  was  profitable  to  discuss  the 
questions  of  neutrality  or  belligerency,  and  circumstances  with  you  and 
with  us  are  so  much  changed  by  the  progress  of  the  war,  that  we  now 
only  ask  of  the  government  strict  neutrality  and  of  the  liberty-loving 
people  of  England  moral  sympathy.     Nothing  more  !     We  ask  no  help, 
and  no  hindrance.    (Resumed  cheers.)    If  you  do  not  send  us  a  man,  we 
do  not  ask  for  a  man.     If  you  do  not  send  us  another  pound  of  powder, 
we  are  able  to  make  our  own  powder.  (Laughter.)  If  you  do  not  send  us 
another  musket  nor  another  cannon,  we  have  cannon  that  will  carry  five 
miles  already.  (Laughter.)  We  do  not  ask  for  material  help.  We  shall  be 
grateful  for  moral  sympathy — (cheers) — but  if  you  cannot  give  us  moral 
sympathy  we  shall  still  endeavour  to  do  without  it.     All  that  we  say  is, 
let  France  keep  away,  let  England  keep  hands  off;  if  we  cannot  manage 
this  rebellion  by  ourselves,  then  let  it  be  not  managed  at  all.     (Cheers.) 
We  do  not  allow  ourselves  to  doubt  the  issue  of  this  conflict.     It  is  only 
a  question  of  time.      For  such  inestimable  principles  as  are  at  stake,  — of 
self-government,  of  representative  government,  of  any  government  at  all, 
of  free  institutions  rejected  because  they  inevitably  will  bring  liberty  to 
slaves  unless  subverted; — of  national  honour,   and  fidelity  to  solemn 
national  trusts, — for  all  these  war  is  waged,  and  if  by  war  these  shall  be 
secured,  not  one  drop  of  blood  will  be  wasted,   not  one  life  squandered. 
The  suffering  will  have  purchased  a  glorious  future  of  inconceivable 
peace  and  happiness !      Nor  do  we  deem  the  result  doubtful.      The 
population  is  in  the  North  and  West.      The  wealth  is  there.      The 
popular  intelligence  of  the  country  is  there.     There  only  is  there  an 
educated  common  people.    (Cheers.)     The  right  doctrines  of  civil  govern- 
ment are  with  the  North.     (Cheers,  and  a  voice,  "Where's  the  justice  V) 
It  will  not  be  long,  before  one  thing  more  will  be  with  the  North — 
Victory.     (Loud  and  enthusiastic  rounds  of  cheers.)     Men  on  this  side 
.  are  impatient  at  the  long  delay ;    but  if  we  can  bear  it,  can't  you  ? 
(Laughter.)    You  are  quite  at  ease — ("not  yet");  we  are  not.     You  are 
not  materially  affected  in  any  such  degree  as  many  parts  of  our  own 
land  are.     (Cheers.)     But  if  the  day  shall  come  in  one  year,   in  two 
years,  or  in  ten  years  hence,  when  the  old  stars  and  stripes  shall  float 
over  every  state  of  America, — (loud  cheers,  and  some  disturbance  from 
one  or  two) — oh,  let  him  (the  chief  disturber)  have  a  chance.    (Laughter.) 


12  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

I  was  saying,  when  interrupted  by  that  sound  from  the  other  side  of 
the  hall,  that  if  the  day  shall  come,  in  one  or  five  or  ten  years,  in 
which  the  old  honoured  and  historic  banner  shall  float  again  over  every 
state  of  the  South ;  if  the  day  shall  come  when  that  which  was  the 
accursed  cause  of  this  dire  and  atrocious  war — slavery — shall  be  done 
away — (cheers) ;  if  the  day  shall  have  come,  when  through  all  the  Gulf 
States  there  shall  be  liberty  of  speech,  as  there  never  has  been — 
(cheers) — when  there  shall  be  liberty  of  the  press,  as  there  never 
has  been;  when  men  shall  have  common  schools  to  send  their 
children  to,  which  they  never  have  had  in  the  South ;  if  the  day 
shall  come  when  the  land  shall  not  be  parcelled  into  gigantic  planta- 
tions, in  the  hands  of  a  few  rich  oligarchs — (loud  cheers);  but  shall 
be  divided  to  honest  farmers,  every  .man  owning  his  little — (renewed 
cheers) ;  in  short,  if  the  day  shall  come  when  the  simple  ordin- 
ances, the  fruition  and  privileges,  of  civil  liberty,  shall  prevail  in 
every  part  of  the  United  States; — it  will  be  worth  all  the  dreadful 
blood,  and  tears,  and  woe.  (Loud  cheers.)  You  are  impatient; 
and  yet  God  dwelleth  in  eternity,  and  has  an  infinite  leisure  to  roll 
forward  the  affairs  of  men,  not  to  suit  the  hot  impatience  of  those  who 
are  but  children  of  a  day,  and  cannot  wait  or  linger  long,  but  according 
to  the  infinite  circle  on  which  He  measures  time  and  events  !  He 
expedites  or  retards  as  it  pleases  him  ;  and  yet  if  He  heard  our  cries  or 
prayers,  not  thrice  would  the  months  revolve  but  peace  would  come. 
But  the  strong  crying  and  prayers  of  millions  have  nob  brought  peace, 
but  only  thickening  war.  We  accept  the  Providence  ;  the  duty  is 
plain.  (Cheers  and  interruption.)  I  repeat,  the  duty  is  plain.  (Cheers.) 
So  rooted  is  this  English  people  in  the  faith  of  liberty,  that  it  were  an 
utterly  hopeless  task  for  any  minion  or  sympathiser  of  the  South  to 
sway  the  popular  sympathy  of  England,  if  this  English  people  believed 
that  this  was  none  other  than  a  conflict  between  liberty  and  slavery.  It 
is  just  that.  (Loud  cheers.)  The  conflict  may  be  masked  by  oar 
institutions.  Every  people  must  shape  public  action  through  their  laws 
and  institutions.  We  often  cannot  reach  an  evil  directly,  but  only 
circuitously,  through  the  channels  of  law  and  custom.  It  is  none  the 
less  a  contest  for  liberty  and  against  slavery,  because  it  is  primarily  a 
conflict  for  the  Union.  It  is  by  that  Union,  vivid  with  liberty,  that 
we  have  to  scourge  oppression  and  establish  liberty.  Union,  in  the 
future,  means  justice,  liberty,  popular  rights.  Only  slavery  has  hitherto 
prevented  Union  from  bearing  such  fruit.  Slavery  was  introduced  into 
our  country  at  a  time,  and  in  a  manner,  when  neither  England  nor 
America  knew  well  what  were  the  results  of  that  atrocious  system. 
It  was  ignorantly  received  and  propagated  on  our  side ;  little  by  little 
it  spread  through  all  the  thirteen  states  that  then  were  :  for  slavery  in 
the  beginning  was  in  New  England,  as  really  as  now  it  is  in  the 
Southern  States.  But  when  the  great  struggle  for  our  independence 
came  on,  the  study  of  the  doctrines  of  human  rights  had  made  such 
progress,  that  the  whole  public  mind  began  to  think  it  was  wrong  to 
wage  war  to  defend  our  rights,  while  we  were  holding  men  in  slavery, 
depriving  them  of  theirs.     It  is  an  historical  fact,  that  all  the  great 


MANCHESTER — PUBLIC   MEETING.  13 

and  renowned  men  that  flourished  at  the  period  of  our  revolution  were 
abolitionists.  Washington  was ;  so  was  Benjamin  Franklin  ;  so  was 
Thomas  Jefferson;  so  was  James  Munroe ;  so  were  the  principal  Virginian 
and  Southern  statesmen,  and  the  first  abolition  society  ever  founded  in 
America  was  founded  not  in  the  North,  but  in  the  middle  and  a  portion 
of  the  Southern  States.  Before  the  War  of  Independence,  slavery  was 
decaying  in  the  North,  from  moral  and  physical  causes  combined.  It 
ceased  in  New  England  with  the  adoption  of  our  constitution.  It  has 
been  unjustly  said  that  they  sold  their  slaves,  and  preached  a  cheap 
emancipation  to  the  South.  Slavery  ceased  in  Massachusetts  as  follows  : 
When  suit  was  brought  for  the  services  of  a  slave,  the  Chief  Justice 
laid  down  as  law,  that  our  Declaration  of  Independence,  which  pro- 
nounced all  men  "  equal,"  and  equally  entitled  to  "life,  liberty,  and  the 
pursuit  of  happiness,"  was  itself  a  bill  of  emancipation,  and  he  refused 
to  yield  up  that  slave  for  service.  At  a  later  period  New  York  passed 
an  Emancipation  Act.  It  has  been  said  that  she  sold  her  slaves.  No 
slander  was  ever  greater.  The  most  careful  provision  was  made  against 
sale.  No  man  travelling  out  of  the  State  of  New  York  after  the  passing 
of  the  Emancipation  Act  was  permitted  to  have  any  slave  with  him,  unless 
he  gave  bonds  for  his  re-appearance  with  him.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the 
slaves  were  emancipated  without  compensation  on  the  spot,  to  take  effect 
gradually  class  by  class.  But  after  a  trial  of  half  a  score  of  years  the 
people  found  this  gradual  emancipation  was  intolerable.  (Hear,  hear.) 
It  was  like  gradual  amputation.  They  therefore,  by  another  act  of 
legislation,  declared  immediate  emancipation — (hear) — and  that  took 
effect ;  and  so  slavery  perished  in  the  state  of  New  York.  (Cheers.) 
Substantially  so  it  was  in  New  Jersey,  and  in  Pennsylvania  ;  never  was 
there  an  example  of  States  that  emancipated  slaves  more  purely  from 
moral  conviction  of  the  wrong  of  slavery.  I  know  that  it  is  said  that 
Northern  capital  and  Northern  ships  were  employed  in  the  slave  trade. 
To  an  extent  it  was  so.  But  is  there  any  comm unity  that  lives,  in  which 
there  are  not  miscreants  who  violate  the  public  conscience  1  (Cheers.) 
Then  and  since,  the  man  who  dared  to  use  his  capital  and  his  ships  in 
this  infamous  traffic  hid  himself,  and  did  by  agents  what  he  was  ashamed 
to  be  known  to  have  done  himself.  (Hear.)  Any  man  in  the  North 
who  notoriously  had  part  or  lot  in  a  trade  so  detested,  would  have  been 
branded  with  the  mark  of  Cain.  (Cheers.)  It  is  true  that  the  port  of 
New  York  has  been  employed  in  this  infernal  traffic,  but  it  was  because 
it  was  under  the  influence  either  of  that  "democratic"  party  that  was 
then  unfortunately  in  alliance  with  the  Southern  slavery — (hear,  hear) — 
or  because  it  was  under  the  dark  political  control  of  the  South  itself. 
For  when  the  South  could  appoint  our  marshals, — could,  through  the 
national  administration,  control  the  appointment  of  every  Federal  officer, 
our  collectors,  and  every  customhouse  officer, — how  could  it  but  be  that 
slavery  flourished  in  our  harbours  1  For  years  together  New  York  has 
been  as  much  controlled  by  the  South  in  matters  relating  to  slavery,  as 
Mobile  or  New  Orleans  !  But,  even  so,  the  slave  trade  was  clandestine. 
It  abhorred  the  light :  it  crept  in  and  out  of  the  harbour  stealthily, 
despised  and  hated  by  the  whole  community.  Is  New  York  to  be  blamed 


14  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

for  demoniac  acts  done  by  her  limbs  while  yet  under  possession  of  the 
devil  ?  she  is  now  clothed,  and  in  her  right  mind.  (Cheers.)  There  was 
one  Judas ;  is  Christianity  therefore  a  hoax  1  (Hear.)  There  are  hissing 
men  in  this  audience — are  you  not  respectable  1  (Cheers  and  laughter.) 
The  folly  of  the  few  is  that  light  which  God  casts  to  irradiate  the 
wisdom  of  the  many.  (Hear.)  And  let  me  say  one  word  here  about 
the  constitution  of  America.  It  recognises  slavery  as  a,  fact;  but  it  does 
not  recognise  the  doctrine  of  slavery  in  any  way  whatever  ;  it  was  a  fact ; 
it  lay  before  the  ship  of  state,  as  a  rock  lies  in  the  channel  of  the  ship  as, 
she  goes  into  harbour  ;  and  because  a  ship  steers  round  a  rock,  does  it 
follow  that  that  rock  is  in  the  ship  1  (Hear,  hear.)  And  because  the 
constitution  of  the  United  States  made  some  circuits  to  steer  round  that 
great  fact,  does  it  follow  that  therefore  slavery  is  recognised  in  the  con- 
stitution as  a  right  or  a  system?  (No.)  See  how  carefully  that  immortal 
document  worded  itself.  In  the  slave  laws  the  slave  is  declared  to  be — 
what  ?  expressly,  and  by  the  most  repetitious  phraseology,  he  is  denuded 
of  all  the  attributes  and  characteristics  of  manhood,  and  is  pronounced 
a  "chattel."  (Shame.)  Now,  you  have  just  that  same  word  in  your 
farming  language  with  the  h  left  out,  "  cattle."  (Hear,  hear.)  And 
the  difference  between  cattle  and  chattel  is  the  difference  between 
quadruped  and  biped.  (Laughter.)  So  far  as  animate  property  is 
concerned,  and  so  far  as  inanimate  property  is  concerned,  it  is  just 
the  difference  between  locomotive  property  and  stationary  property. 
(Hear,  hear.)  The  laws  in  all  the  slave  states  stand  on  the  radical 
principle  that  a  slave  is  not  for  purposes  of  law  any  longer  to  be 
ranked  in  the  category  of  human  beings,  but  that  he  is  a  piece  of 
property,  and  is  to  be  treated  to  all  intents  and  purposes  as  a  piece  of 
property;  and  the  law  did  not  blush,  nor  do  the  judges  blush  now-a-days 
who  interpret  that  law.  (Hear.)  But  how  does  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States,  when  it  speaks  of  these  same  slaves,  name  them  ?  Does 
it  call  them  chattels  or  slaves  %  Nay,  it  refused  even  the  softer  words 
ser/*and  servitude.  Conscientiously  aware  of  the  dignity  of  man,  and 
that  service  is  not  opposed  to  the  grandeur  of  his  nature,  it  alludes  to 
the  slaves  barely  as,  persons  (not  chattels)  held  to  service  (not  servitude). 
(Hear  and  cheers.)  Go  to  South  Carolina,  and  ask  what  she  calls  slaves, 
and  her  laws  reply  "they  are  things:"  but  the  old  capitol  at  Washington 
sullenly  reverberates,  "No,  persons  /"  (Cheers.)  Go  to  Mississippi,  the 
State  of  Jefferson  Davis,  and  her  fundamental  law  pronounces  the  slave 
to  be  only  a  "  thing  ;"  and  again,  the  Federal  Constitution  sounds  back, 
"Persons."  Go  to  Louisiana  and  its  constitution,  and  still  that  doctrine  of 
devils  is  enunciated — it  is  "chattel,"  it  is  "thing."  Looking  upon  those 
for  whom  Christ  felt  mortal  anguish  in  Gethsemane,  and  stretched  him- 
self out  for  death  on  Calvary,  their  laws  call  them  "things"  and  "  chattels ;" 
and  still  in  tones  of  thunder  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  says 
"Persons."  The  slave  states,  by  a  definition,  annihilate  manhood  ;  the 
Constitution,  by  a  word,  brings  back  the  slave  to  the  human  family. 
(Cheers.)  What  was  it  then,  when  the  country  had  advanced  so  far 
towards  universal  emancipation  in  the  period  of  our  national  formation, 
that  stopped  this  onward  tide  ?     Two  things,  commercial  and  political. 


MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING.  15 

First,  the  wonderful  demand  for  cotton  throughout  the  world,  precisely 
when,  from  the  invention  of  the  cotton  gin,  it  became  easy  to  turn  it  to 
service.  Slaves  that  before  had  been  worth  from  300  to  400  dollars, 
began  to  be  worth  600  dollars.  That  knocked  away  one-third  of  adhe- 
rence to  the  moral  law.  Then  they  became  worth  700  dollars,  and  half 
the  law  went — (cheers  and  laughter);  then  800  or  900  dollars,  and  then 
there  was  no  such  thing  as  moral  law — (cheers  and  laughter);  then 
1,000  or  1,200  dollars,  and  slavery  became  one  of  the  beatitudes.  (Cheers 
and  laughter.)  The  other  cause,  which  checked  the  progress  of  eman- 
cipation that  had  already  so  auspiciously  begun,  was  political.  It  is 
very  singular,  that,  in  what  are  called  the  "compromises"  of  the  constitu- 
tion, the  North,  while  attempting  to  prevent  advantage  to  slavery, 
gave  to  the  slave  power  the  peculiar  advantage  which  it  has  had  ever  since. 
In  Congress  the  question  early  arose,  How  should  the  revenue  be  raised 
in  the  United  States  1  For  a  long  time  it  was  proposed,  and  there  was 
an  endeavour,  to  raise  it  by  a  tax  upon  all  the  cultivated  land  in  the 
different  states.  When  this  was  found  unjust  and  unequal,  the  next 
proposal  was,  to  raise  taxes  on  the  "polls,"  or  heads  of  the  voters,  in 
the  different  states.  That  was  to  be  the  basis  of  the  calculation  upon 
which  taxes  should  be  apportioned.  Now  when  that  question  came 
up,  ifc  was  said  that  it  was  not  right  to  levy  Federal  taxes  upon  the 
Indians  in  Georgia,  who  paid  no  taxes  to  the  Georgian  state  exchequer. 
So  the  North  consented  :  but  in  making  up  the  list  of  men  to  be  taxed, 
and  excluding  the  Indians,  it  insisted  that  the  slaves  should,  neverthe- 
less, be  included.  That  is  to  say,  if  Georgia  was  to  pay  to  the  Federal 
exchequer  in  proportion  to  her  population,  it  was  the  interest  of  the 
North  that  her  population  should  be  swelled  by  counting  all  her  slaves. 
There  was  a  long  debate  on  this  subject;  and  not  to  detain  you  with  all 
the  turns  on  this  matter,  the  two  things  were  coupled  together  at  last — 
representation  and  taxation.  (Hear.)  Their  eyes  being  fixed  solely 
upon  the  assessment  of  taxes,  it  was  agreed  that  five  slaves  should  count 
as  three  men,  and  that  it  was  supposed  would  give  some  advantage  to  the 
North  against  slavery.  But  in  a  very  few  years  the  government  ceased 
to  raise  taxation  by  "poll,"  and  raised  it  by  tariff.  Thenceforward,  as 
representatives  had  to  be  chosen  in  the  same  way,  and  as  five  slaves 
counted  as  three  white  men,  the  South  has  had  the  advantage ;  and  it 
has  come  to  this  point,  that  while  in  the  North  representatives  repre- 
sent men,  in  the  South  the  representatives  stand  for  men  and  property 
together.  I  want  to  drop  a  word  as  an  egg  for  you  to  brood  over.  It 
will  illustrate  the  policy  of  the  South.  The  proposition  to  make  a 
government  undeniably  National,  as  distinct  from  a  mere  Confederacy, 
came  from  Virginia  and  South  Carolina.  The  North,  having  more 
individuality,  was  jealous  of  yielding  up  the  rights  of  the  separate 
states ;  but  the  South,  with  the  love  of  power  characteristic  of  the 
Normans,  wanted  to  have  a  National  government  in  distinction  to  a 
Union  of  several  states.  In  result,  when  the  national  government  was 
established,  the  South  came  into  power ;  and  for  fifty  years  everything 
that  the  South  said  should  be  done  has  been  done,  and  whatever  she  said 
should  not  be  done,  has  not  been  done.     The  institutions  of  America 


16  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

were  shaped  by  the  North ;  but  the  policy  of  her  government,  for  half 
a  hundred  years,  by  the  South.  All  the  aggression  and  fillibustering, 
all  the  threats  to  England  and  tauntings  of  Europe,  all  the  bluster  of 
war  which  our  government  has  assumed,  have  been  under  the  in- 
spiration and  under  the  almost  monarchical  sway  of  the  Southern 
oligarchy.  (Loud  cheering.)  And  now,  since  Britain  has  been  snubbed 
by  the  Southerners,  and  threatened  by  the  Southerners,  and  domineered 
over  by  the  Southerners — ("No") — yet  now  Great  Britain  has  thrown 
her  arms  of  love  around  the  Southerners  and  turns  from  the  Northerners. 
("No.")  She  don't?  (Cheers.)  I  have  only  to  say  that  she  has  been 
caught  in  very  suspicious  circumstances.  (Laughter.)  I  so  speak,  per- 
haps as  much  as  anything  else,  for  this  very  sake — to  bring  out  from  you 
this  expression — to  let  you  know  what  we  know,  that  all  the  hostility 
felt  in  my  country  towards  Great  Britain  has  been  sudden,  and  from 
supposing  that  you  sided  with  the  South,  and  sought  the  breaking  up 
of  our  country;  and  I  want  you  to  say  to  me,  and  through  me  to 
my  countrymen,  that  those  irritations  against  the  North,  and  those 
likings  for  the  South,  that  have  been  expressed  in  your  papers,  are  not 
the  feelings  of  the  great  mass  of  your  nation.  (Great  cheering,  the 
audience  rising.)  Tho«e  cheers  already  sound  in  my  ears  as  the  coming 
acclamations  of  friendly  nations — those  waving  handkerchiefs  are  the 
white  banners  that  symbolize  peace  for  all  countries.  (Cheers.)  Join 
with  us  then,  Britons.  (Cheers.)  From  you  we  learnt  the  doctrine  of 
what  a  man  was  worth ;  from  you  we  learnt  to  detest  all  oppressions ; 
from  you  we  learnt  that  it  was  the  noblest  thing  a  man  could  do  to  die 
fob,  A  right  principle.  (Cheers.)  And  now,  when  we  are  set  in  that  very 
course,  and  are  giving  our  best  blood  for  the  most  sacred  principles,  let 
the  world  understand  that  the  common  people  of  Great  Britain  support 
us.  (Cheers.)  You  have  been  pleased  to  say  in  this  address  that  1  have 
been  one  of  the  "pioneers."  No.  I  am  only  one  of  their  eldest  sons.  The 
Birneys,  the  Baileys,  the  Bankins,  the  Dickeys,  the  Thorns  of  the  West, 
the  Garrisons,  the  Quincys,  the  Slades,  the  Welds,  the  Stewarts,  the 
Smiths,  the  Tappans,  the  Goodalls  of  the  East,  and  unnamed  hundreds 
more,  these  were  indeed  pioneers.  I  unloosed  the  shoe-latchets  of  the 
pioneers,  and  that  is  all :  I  was  but  little  more  than  a  boy  :  I  bear 
witness,  that  the  hardest  blows  and  the  most  cruel  sufferings  were 
endured  by  men,  before  I  was  thrust  far  enough  into  public  life  to 
take  any  particular  share;  and  I  do  not  consider  myself  entitled  to 
rank  amongst  the  pioneers.  They  were  better  men  than  I.  Those 
noble  men  did  resist  this  downward  tendency  of  the  North.  They 
were  rejected  by  society.  To  be  called  an  abolitionist  excluded  a  man 
from  respectable  society  in  those  days.  To  be  called  an  abolitionist 
blighted  any  man's  prospects  in  political  life.  To  be  called  an  abolitionist 
marked  a  man's  store, — his  very  customers  avoided  him  as  if  he  had  the 
plague.  To  be  called  an  abolitionist  in  those  days  shut  up  the  doors  of 
confidence  from  him  in  the  church ;  where  he  was  regarded  as  a  disturber 
of  the  peace.  Nevertheless,  the  witnesses  for  liberty  maintained  their 
testimony.  (Loud  cheers.)  Little  by  little,  they  reached  the  conscience, 
■ — they  gained  the  understanding.      And  as,  when  old  Luther  spoke, 


MANCHESTER— PUBLIC  MEETING.  1 


K 


thundering  in  the  ears  of  Europe  the  long  buried  treasures  of  the  Bible, 
there  were  hosts  against  him,  yet  the  elect  few  gathered  little  by  little,, 
and  became  no  longer  few ;  just  so  did  many  a  Luther  among  ourselves 
thunder  forth  a  long  buried  truth  from  God,  the  essential  right  of  human 
liberty ;  and  these  were  followed  for  half  a  score  of  years,  until  they 
began  to  be  numerous  enough  to  be  an  influential  party  in  the  state 
elections.    (Cheers.)    In  1848,  I  think  it  was,  that  the  Buffalo  platform 
was  laid.     It  was  the  first  endeavour  in  the  Northern  States  to  form  a 
platform  that  should  carry  rebuke  to  the  slave-holding  ideas  in  the  North. 
Before  this,  however,  I  can  say  that,  under  God,  the  South  itself  had 
unintentionally  done  more  than  we,  to  bring  on  this  work  of  emancipa- 
tion.    (Hear,  hear.)     First  they  began  to  declare,  after  the  days  of  Mr. 
Calhoun,  that  they  accepted  slavery  no  longer  as  a  misfortune,  but  as  a 
divine  blessing.     Mr.  Calhoun  advanced  the  doctrine,  which  is  now  the 
marrow  of  secession,  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  general  government  not 
merely  to  protect  the  local  States  from  interference-  but  to  make  slavery 
equally  national  with  liberty !     In  effect,  the  government  was  to  see  to 
it,  that  slavery  received  equivalents  for  every  loss  and  disadvantage, 
which,  by  the  laws  of  nature,  it  must  sustain  in  a  race  against  free 
institutions.      (Cheers.)     These   monstrous   doctrines   began  to  be  the 
development  of  future  ambitions.      The  South,  having  the  control  of 
government,  knew  from  the  inherent  weakness  of  their  system,  that,  if 
it  were  confined,  it  was  like  huge  herds  feeding  on  small  pastures,  that 
soon  gnaw  the  grass  to  the  roots,  and  must  have  other  pasture  or  die. 
(Cheers.)     Slavery  is  of  such  a  nature,  that,  if  you  do  not  give  it  con- 
tinual change  of  feeding  ground,  it  perishes.    (Renewed  cheering.)    And 
then  came  one  after  another  from  the  South  assertions  of  rights  never 
before  ureamed  of.     From  them  came  the  Mexican  war  for  territory ; 
from  them  came  the  annexation  of-  Texas  and  its  entrance  as  a  slave 
state  j  from  them  came  that  organised  rowdyism  in  Congress  that  brow- 
beat every  Northern  man  who  had  not  sworn  fealty  to  slavery;  that  filled 
all  the  courts  of  Europe  with  ministers  holding  slave  doctrines ;  that 
gave  the  majority  of  the  seats  on  the  bench  to  slave-owning  judges ;  and 
that  gave,  in  fact,  all  our  chief  offices  of  trust  either  to  slave-owners, 
or  to  men  who  licked  the  feet  of  slave-owners.     (Loud  cheers.)     Then 
came  that  ever-memorable  period  when,  for  the  very  purpose  of  humbling 
the  North,   and  making  it  drink  the  bitter  cup  of  humiliation,   and 
showing  to  its  people  that  the  South  was  their  natural  lord,  was  passed 
the  Fugitive  Slave  Bill.  (Loud  hisses.)  There  was  no  need  of  that.  There 
was  already  existing  just  as  good  an  instrument  for  so  infernal  a  purpose 
as  any  fiend  could  have  wished.     Against  that  infamy  my  soul  revolted, 
and  these  lips  protested,  and  I  defied  the  government  to  its  face  and 
told  them  "  I  will  execute  none  of  your  unrighteous  laws  ;  send  to  me  a 
fugitive  who  is  fleeing  from  his  master,  and  I  will  step  between  him  and 
his  pursuer."     (Loud  and  prolonged  cheers.)     Not  once,  nor  twice,  have 
my  doors  been  shut  between  oppression  and  the  oppressed ;   and  the 
church  itself  over  which  I  minister  has  been  the  unknown  refuge  of  many 
and  many  a  one.     (Cheers.)      But  whom  the  devil  entices  he  cheats. 
Our  promised  "peace"  with  the  South,  which  was  tfie  thirty  pieces  of 
B 


18  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

silver  paid  to  us,  turned  into  fire  and  burnt  the  hands  that  took  it.   For, 
how  long  was  it  after  this  promised  peace  that  the  Missouri  compromise 
was  abolished  in  an  infamous  disregard  of  solemn  compact  1      (Loud 
cheers.)     It  never  ought  to  have  been  made ;  but  having  been  made,  it 
ought  never  to  have  been  broken  by  the  South.    (Cheers.)    And  with  no 
other  pretence  than  the  robber's  pretence  that  might  makes  right,  they 
did  destroy  it,  that  they  might  carry  slavery  far  North.     That  sufficed. 
That  alone  was  needed  to  arouse  the  long  reluctant  patriotism  of  the 
North.     (Cheers.)     In  hope  that  time  would  curb  and  destroy  slavery, 
that  forbearance  would  lead  to  like  forbearance,  the  North  had  suffered 
insult,  wrong,  political  treachery,  and  risk  to  her  very  institutions  of 
liberty.      By  the  abolition  of  this  compromise  another  slave  state  was 
immediately  to  have  been  brought  into  the  Union  to  balance  the  ever 
growing  free  territories  of  the  North- West.  Then  arose  a  majesty  of  self- 
sacrifice  that   had  no  parallel  before.       Instead  of  merely  protesting, 
young  men  and  maidens,  labouring  men,  farmers,  mechanics,  sped  with 
a  sacred  desire  to  rescue  free  territory  from  the  toils  of  slavery;  and 
emigrated  in  thousands,  not  to  better  their  own  condition,  but  in  order 
that,  when  this  territory  should  vote,  it  should  vote  as  a  free  state. 
(Loud     cheers.)     Never  was  a  worse  system  of  cheating  practised  than 
the  perjury,  intimidation,  and  prostituted  use  of  the  United  States  army, 
by  which  the  South  sought  to  force  a  vile  institution  upon  the  men  who 
had  voted  almost  unanimously  for  liberty  and  against  slavery  in  Kansas. 
(Hear.)     But  at  last  the  day  of  utter  darkness  had  passed,  and  the  gray 
twilight  was  on  the  morning  horizon.     At  length  (for  the  first  time,  I 
believe,  in  the  whole  conflict  between  the  South  and  the  North),  the 
victory  went  to  the  North,  and  Kansas  became  a  free  state.     (Cheers.) 
Now  I  call  you  to  witness  that,   in  a  period  of  twenty-five  or  thirty 
years  of  constant  conflicts  with  the  South,  at  every  single  step  they 
gained  the  political  advantage,  with  the  single  exception  of  Kansas. 
What  was  the  conduct  of  the  North  1     Did  it  take  any  steps  for  seces- 
sion 1     Did  it  threaten  violence  1     So  sure  were  the  men  of  the  North 
of  the  ultimate  triumph  of  that  which  was  Bight,  provided  free  speech 
was  left  to  combat  error  and  Wrong,  that  they  patiently  bided  their 
time.     By  this  time  the  North  was  cured  alike  of  love  for  slavery  and 
of  indifference.     By  this   time  a  new  conscience  had  been  formed  in 
the  North,  and  a  vast  majority  of  all  the  Northern  men  at  length  stood 
fair  and  square  on  anti-slavery  doctrine.     (Cheers.)     We  next  had  to 
flounder  through  the  quicksands  of  four  infamous  years  under  President 
Buchanan,  in  which  senators,  sworn  to  the  constitution,  were  plotting 
to  destroy  that  constitution ; — in  which  the  members  of  the  cabinet,  who 
drew  their  pay  month  by  month,  used  their  official  position,  by  breach  of 
public  trust  and  oath  of  allegiance,  to  steal  arms,  to  prepare  fortifications, 
and  make  ready  disruption  and  war.     The  most  astounding  spectacle 
that  the  world  ever  saw  was  then  witnessed — a  great  people  paying 
men  to  sit  in  the  places  of  power  and  office  to  betray  them.     (Hear, 
hear.)     During  all  those  four  years  what  did  we?     We  protested  and 
waited,  and  said  :  "  God  shall  give  us  the  victory.     It  is  God's  truth 
that  we  wield,  and  in  his  own  good  time,  He  will  give  us  the  victory." 


MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING.  19 

(Great  cheering.)  In  all  this  time  we  never  made  an  inroad  on  the 
rights  of  the  South.  (Cheers.)  We  never  asked  for  retaliatory  law.  We 
never  taxed  their  commerce,  or  touched  it  with  our  little  finger.  We 
envied  them  none  of  their  manufactures  ;  but  sought  to  promote  them. 
We  did  not  attempt  to  abate,  by  one  ounce,  their  material  prosperity ; 
we  longed  for  their  prosperity.  (Cheers.)  Slavery  we  always  hated; 
the  Southern  men  never.  (Cheers.)  They  were  wrong.  And  in  our 
conflicts  with  them  we  have  felt  as  all  men  in  conflict  feel.  We  were 
jealous,  and  so  were  they.  We  were  in  the  right  cause ;  they  in  the 
wrong.  We  were  right,  or  liberty  is  a  delusion ;  they  were  wrong,  or 
slavery  is  a  blessing.  (Cheers.)  We  never  envied  them  their  territory ; 
and  it  was  the  faith  of  the  whole  North,  that,  in  seeking  for  the  abate  - 
ment  of  slavery,  and  its  final  abolition,  we  were  conferring  upon  the 
South  itself  the  greatest  boon  which  one  nation — or  part  of  a  nation — 
could  confer  upon  another.  That  she  was  to  pass  through  difficulties  in 
her  transition  to  free  labour,  I  had  no  doubt ;  but  it  was  not  in  our 
heart  to  humble  her,  but  rather  to  help  and  sympathise  with  her.  I 
defy  time  and  history  to  point  to  a  more  honourable  conduct  than  that 
of  the  free  North  towards  the  South  during  all  these  days.  In  1860,  Mr. 
Lincoln  was  elected.  (Cheerst)  I  ask  you  to  take  notice  of  the  conduct  of 
the  two  sides  at  this  point.  For  thirty  years  we  had  been  experiencing 
sectional  defeats  at  the  hands  of  the  Southerners.  For  thirty  years  and 
more  we  had  seen  our  sons  proscribed  because  loyal  to  liberty,  or  worse 
than  proscribed — suborned  and  made  subservient  to  slavery.  (Cheers.) 
We  had  seen  our  judges  corrupt,  our  ministers  apostate,  our  merchants 
running  headlong  after  gold  against  principle ;  but  we  maintained  fealty 
to  the  law  and  to  the  constitution,  and  had  faith  in  victory  by  legitimate 
means.  But  when,  by  the  means  pointed  out  in  the  constitution,  and 
sanctified  by  the  usage  of  three-quarters  of  a  century,  Mr.  Lincoln,  in 
fair  open  field,  was  elected  President  of  the  United  States,  did  the  South 
submit  %  (Cries  of  "No,"  and  cheers.)  No  offence  had  been  committed — 
none  threatened;  but  the  allegation  was,  that  the  election  of  a  man 
known  to  be  pledged  against  the  extension  of  slavery  was  not  compatible 
with  the  safety  of  slavery  as  it  existed.  On  that  ground  they  took  steps 
for  secession.  Every  honest  mode  to  prevent  it,  all  patience  on  the  part 
of  the  North,  all  pusillanimity  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Buchanan,  were 
anxiously  employed.  Before  his  successor  came  into  office,  he  left  nothing 
undone  to  make  matters  worse,  did  nothing  to  make  things  better.  The 
North  was  patient  then,  the  South  impatient.  Soon  came  the  issue.  The 
question  was  put  to  the  South,  and  with  the  exception  of  South  Carolina, 
every  State  in  the  South  gave  a  popular  vote  against  secession;  and  yet, 
such  was  the  jugglery  of  political  leaders,  that  before  a  few  months  had 
passed,  they  had  precipitated  every  state  into  secession.  That  never  could 
have  occurred  had  there  been  in  the  Southern  States  an  educated  common 
people.  But  the  slave  power  cheats  the  poor  whites  of  intelligence,  in  order 
to  rob  the  poor  blacks.  This  is  important  testimony  to  the  nature  and 
tendency  of  the  Union  and  Government  of  the  United  States ;  and 
reveals  clearly,  by  the  judgment  of  the  very  men  who  of  all  others  best 
know,  that  to  maintain  the  Union  is,  in  the  end,  to  destroy  slavery.    It 


20  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

justifies  the  North  against  the  slanders  of  those  who  declare  that  she  is 
not  fighting  for  liberty,  but  only  for  the  Union — as  if  that  were  not  the 
very  way  to  destroy  slavery  and  establish  freedom  !  The  government 
of  the  United  States  is  such  that,  if  it  be  administered  equitably,  in  the 
long  run  it  will  destroy  slavery ;  and  it  was  the  foresight  of  this  which 
led  the  South  to  its  precipitate  secession.  (Cheers.)  Against  all  these 
facts,  it  is  attempted  to  make  England  believe  that  slavery  has  had 
nothing  to  do  with  this  war.  You  might  as  well  have  attempted  to 
persuade  Noah  that  the  clouds  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  flood ;  it  is 
the  most  monstrous  absurdity  ever  born  in  the  womb  of  folly.  (Cheers.) 
Nothing  to  do  with  slavery1?  It  had  to  do  with  nothing  else.  (Cheers.) 
Against  this  withering  fact — against  this  damning  allegation — what  is 
their  escape  ?  They  reply — the  North  is  just  as  bad  as  the  South.  Now 
we  are  coming  to  the  marrow  of  it.  If  the  North  is  as  bad  as  the  South, 
why  did  not  the  South  find  it  out  before  you  did  1  If  the  North  had 
been  in  favour  of  oppressing  the  black  man,  and  just  as  much  in  favour 
of  slavery  as  the  South,  how  is  it  that  the  South  has  gone  to  war  against 
the  North  because  of  their  belief  to  the  contrary  1  Gentlemen,  I  hold  in 
my  hand  a  published  report  of  the  speech  of  the  amiable,  intelligent,  and 
credulous  President,  I  believe,  of  the  Society  /or  Southern  Independence. 
(Laughter.)  There  are  some  curiosities  in  it.  (Laughter.)  That  you  may 
know  that  Southerners  are  not  all  dead  yet,  I  will  read  a  paragraph : — 

The  South  had  laboured  hitherto  under  the  imputation,  and  it  had  constantly 
been  thrown  in  the  teeth  of  all  who  supported  that  struggling  nation,  that  they 
by  their  proceedings  were  tending  to  support  the  existence  of  slavery.  This  was  an 
impression  which  he  thought  they  ought  carefully  to  endeavour  to  remove — (cheers 
and  laughter) — because  it  was  one  which  was  injurious  to  their  cause — (cheers) — not 
only  among  those  who  had  the  feeling  of  all  Englishmen — of  a  horror  of  slavery — but, 
also,  because  strong  religious  bodies  in  this  country  made  a  point'of  it,  and  felt  it 
very  strongly  indeed. 

(Cheers.)  I  never  like  to  speak  behind  a  man's  back — I  like  to  speak 
to  men's  faces  what  I  have  to  say — and  I  could  wish  that  the  happiness 
had  been  accorded  to  me  to-night  to  have  Lord  WharnclifFe  present, 
that  I  might  address  to  him  a  few  simple  Christian  inquiries.  (Cheers.) 
For  there  can  be  no  question  that  there  is  a  strong  impression  that  the 
South  has  "  supported  the  existence  of  slavery."  (Cheers.)  Indeed,  on 
our  side  of  the  water  there  are  many  persons  that  affirm  it.  (Laughter 
and  cheers.)  And,  as  his  lordship  thinks  that  it  is  the  peculiar  duty  of 
the  new  association  to  do  away  with  that  sad  error,  I  beg  to  submit  to 
it,  that  in  the  first  place  it  ought  to  do  away  with  four  million  slaves 
in  the  South ;  for  there  are  uncharitable  men  living  who  think  that  a 
nation  that  has  four  million  slaves,  has  at  least  some  ''tendency"  to 
support  slavery.  (Cheers.)  And  when  his  lordship's  association  has 
done  that,  it  might  be  pertinent  to  suggest  to  him,  instantly  to  revise 
the  new  "  Montgomery"  constitution  of  the  South,  which  is  changed 
from  the  old  Federal  constitution  in  only  one  or  two  points.  The  most 
essential  point  is,  that  it  for  the  first  time  introduces  and  legalises  slavery 
as  a  national  institution,  and  makes  it  unconstitutional  ever  to  do  it 
away.  Now,  I  submit,  that  this  wants  polishing  a  little.  (Cheers.) 
Then  I  would  also  respectfully  lay  at  his  lordship's  feet — more  beautifully 


MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING.  21 

embossed,  if  I  could,  than  is  this  address  to  me — the  speech  of  Vice- 
President  Stephens — (hear,  hear) — in  which  he  declares  that  all  nations 
have  been  mistaken,  and  that  to  trample  on  the  manhood  of  an  inferior 
race  is  the  only  proper  way  to  maintain  the  liberty  of  a  superior ;  in 
which  he  lays  down  to  Calvary  a  new  lesson  ;  in  which  he  gives  the  lie 
to  the  Saviour  himself,  who  came  to  teach  us,  that  by  as  much  as  a 
man  is  stronger  than  another,  he  owes  himself  to  that  other.  (Loud 
cheers,)  Not  alone  are  Christ's  blood-drops  our  salvation,  but  those 
word-drops  of  sacred  truth,  which  cleanse  the  heart  and  conscience  by 
precious  principles,  these  also  are  to  us  salvation ;  and  if  there  be  in  the 
truths  of  Christ  one  more  eminent  than  another,  it  is,  "  He  that  would 
be  chief,  let  him  be  the  servant  of  all."  But  this  audacious  hierarch  of 
an  anti-Christian  gospel,  Mr.  Stephens, — in  the  face  of  God,  and  to  the 
ears  of  all  mankind,  in  this  day  of  all  but  universal  Christian  sentiment, 
pronounces  that,  for  a  nation  to  have  manhood,  it  must  crush  out  the 
liberty  of  an  inferior  and  weaker  race.  And  he  declares  ostentatiously 
and  boastingly  that  the  foundation  of  the  Southern  republic  is  ON  that 
cornerstone.  (Loud  cheers,  "No,  no,"  and  renewed  cheers.)  When 
next  Lord  Wharncliffe  speaks  for  the  edification  of  this  English  people — 
(laughter) — I  beg  leave  to  submit  that  this  speech  of  Mr.  Stephens's 
requires  more  than  a  little  polishing ;  in  fact,  a  little  scouring,  cleansing, 
and  flooding.  (Applause,)  And  if  all  the  other  crimson  evidences  that 
the  South  is  upholding  slavery  are  to  be  washed  pure  by  the  new  asso- 
ciation, not  Hercules  in  the  Augean  stable  had  such  a  task  before  him 
as  they  have  got.  (Loud  cheers.)  Lord  Wharncliffe  may  bid  farewell 
to  the  sweets  of  domestic  leisure  and  to  the  interests  of  state.  All  his 
amusement  hereafter  must  be  derived  from  the  endeavour  to  purge  the 
Southern  cause  of  the  universal  conviction  that,  "by  their  proceedings, 
they  are  tending  to  support  the  existence  of  slavery."  (Loud  cheers.) 
But  there  is  another  paragraph  that  I  will  read  : — 

He  believed  that  the  strongest  supporters  of  slavery  were  the  merchants  of  New 
York  and  Boston.  He  always  understood,  and  had  never  seen  the  statement  con- 
tradicted, that  the  whole  of  the  ships  fitted  out  for  the  transport  of  slaves  from 
Africa  to  Cuba  were  owned  by  Northerners. 

His  lordship,  if  he  will  do  me  the  honour  to  read  my  speech,  shall  hear 
it  contradicted  in  the  most  explicit  terms.  There  have  been  enough 
Northern  ships  engaged,  but  not  by  any  means  all,  nor  the  most. 
Baltimore  has  a  pre-eminence  in  that  matter;  Charleston,  and  New 
Orleans,  and  Mobile,  all  of  them.  And  those  ships  fitted  out  in  New 
York  were  just  as  much  despised,  and  loathed,  and  hissed  by  the  honour- 
able merchants  of  that  great  metropolis,  as  if  they  had  put  up  the  black 
flag  of  piracy.  (Loud  cheers.)  Does  it  conduce  to  good  feeling  between 
two  nations  to  utter  slanders  such  as  these  ?  His  lordship  goes  on  to 
say- 
That  in  the  Northern  States  the  slave  is  placed  in  even  a  worse  position  than  in 
the  South.    He  spoke  from  experience,  having  visited  the  country  twice. 

I  am  most  surprised,  and  yet  gratified,  to  learn  that  Lord  Wharncliffe 
speaks  of  the  suffering  of  the  slave  from  experience.  (Laughter  and 
cheers.)    I  never  was  aware  that  he  had  been  put  in  that  unhappy 


22  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

situation.  Has  he  toiled  on  the  sugar  plantation  1  Has  he  taken  the 
night  for  his  friend,  avoiding  the  day  ?  Has  he  sped  through  cane 
brakes,  hunted  by  hounds,  suffering  hunger,  and  heat,  and  cold  by  turns, 
until  he  has  made  his  way  to  the  far  Northern  States  1  (Cheers.)  Has 
he  had  this  experience  ?  It  is  the  word  experience  I  call  attention  to. 
If  his  lordship  says  that  it  is  his  observation,  I  will  accept  the  correction. 
I  continue : — 

In  railway  carriages  and  hotels,  the  negroes  were  treated  as  pariahs  and  outcasts 
and  never  looked  upon  as  men  and  brothers,  but  rather  as  dogs.     (Cheers.) 

In  all  railway  cars  where  Southerners  travel,  in  all  hotels  where 
Southerners'  money  was  the  chief  support,  this  is  true.  But  I  concede 
most  frankly,  that  there  has  been  occasion  for  such  a  statement :  there 
has  been  a  vicious  prejudice  in  the  North  against  the  negro.  It  has 
been  a  part  of  my  duty  for  the  last  sixteen  years  to  protest  against  it. 
No  decently  dressed  and  well-behaved  coloured  man  has  ever  had  moles- 
tation or  question  on  entering  my  church,  and  taking  any  seat  he  pleases ; 
not  because  I  had  influence  with  my  people  to  prevent  it,  but  because 
God  gave  me  a  people  whose  own  good  sense  and  conscience  led  them 
aright  without  me.  But  from  this  vantage  ground  it  has  been  my  duty 
to  mark  out  the  unrighteous  prejudice  from  which  the  coloured  people 
have  suffered  in  the  North ;  and  it  is  a  part  of  the  great  moral  revolution 
which  is  going  on,  that  the  prejudices  have  been  in  a  great  measure 
vanquished,  and  are  now  well  nigh  trodden  down.  In  the  city  of  New 
York  there  is  one  street  railroad  where  coloured  people  cannot  ride,  but 
in  the  others  they  may,  and  in  all  the  railroads  of  New  England  there  is 
not  one  in  which  a  coloured  man  would  be  questioned.  I  believe  that 
the  coloured  man  may  start  from  the  line  of  the  British  dominions  in 
the  North  and  traverse  all  New  England  and  New  York  till  he  touches 
the  waters  of  the  Western  lakes  and  never  be  molested  or  questioned, 
passing  on  as  any  decent  white  man  would  pass.  But  let  me  ask  you 
how  came  there  to  be  these  prejudices  1  They  did  not  exist  before  the 
War  of  Independence.  How  did  they  grow  up  %  As  one  of  the  accursed 
offshoots  of  slavery.  Where  you  make  a  race  contemptible  by  oppression, 
all  that  belong  to  that  race  will  participate  in  the  odium,  whether  they 
be  free  or  slave.  The  South  itself,  by  maintaining  the  oppressive  insti- 
tution, is  the  guilty  cause  of  whatever  insult  the  free  African  has  had  to 
endure  in  the  North.  How  next  did  that  prejudice  grow  strong  ?  It 
was  on  account  of  the  multitude  of  Irishmen  who  came  to  the  States. 
(Cheers  and  interruption.)  I  declare  my  admiration  for  the  Irish  people, 
who  have  illustrated  the  page  of  history  in  every  department  of  society. 
It  is  part  of  the  fruit  of  ignorance,  and,  as  they  allege,  of  the  oppression 
which  they  have  suffered — that  it  has  made  them  oppressors.  I  bear 
witness  that  there  is  no  class  of  people  in  America,  who  are  so  bitter 
against  the  coloured  people,  and  so  eager  for  slavery,  as  the  ignorant, 
the  poor,  uninstructed  Irishmen.  ("Oh,"  and  "hear,"  and  "Three 
cheers  for  old  Ireland.")  But  although  there  have  been  wrongs  done  to 
them  in  the  North,  the  condition  of  the  free  coloured  people  in  the 
North  is  unspeakably  better  than  in  the  South.  They  own  their  wives 
and  children.     (Hear,  hear.)     They  have  the  right  to  select  their  place 


MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING.  23 

and  their  kind  of  labour ;  their  rights  of  property  are  protected  just  as 
much  as  ours  are.  The  right  of  education  is  accorded  to  them.  There 
is  in  the  city  of  New  York  more  than  ten  million  dollars  of  property 
owned  by  free  coloured  people.  (Hear.)  They  have  their  own  schools ; 
they  have  their  own  churches ;  their  own  orators,  and  there  is  no  more 
gifted  man,  and  no  man  whose  superb  eloquence  more  deserves  to  be 
listened  to  than  Frederick  Douglass.  (Loud  cheers.)  Further  :  after  the 
breaking  out  of  this  war,  the  good  conduct  of  the  slaves  at  the  South 
and  of  the  free  coloured  people  at  the  North,  has  increased  the  kind 
feelings  of  the  whites  towards  them ;  and  since  they  have  begun  to  fight 
for  their  rights  of  manhood,  a  popular  enthusiasm  for  them  is  arising. 
(Loud  cheers.)  I  will  venture  to  say,  that  there  is  no  place  on  the  earth 
where  millions  of  coloured  people  stand  in  a  position  so  auspicious  for  the 
future,  as  the  free  coloured  men  of  the  North  and  the  freed  slaves  of  the 
South.  (Cheers.)  I  meant  to  have  said  a  good  deal  more  to  you  than 
I  have,  or  than  I  shall  have  time  to  say.  ("Go  on.")  I  have  endeavoured 
to  place  before  you  some  of  the  facts  which  show  that  slavery  was  the 
real  cause  of  this  war,  and  that  if  it  had  to  be  legally  decided  whether 
North  or  South  were  guilty  in  this  matter,  there  could  be  no  question 
before  any  honourable  tribunal,  any  jury,  any  deliberative  body,  that 
the  South,  from  beginning  to  end,  for  the  sake  of  slavery,  has  been 
aggressive,  and  the  North  patient.  Since  the  war  broke  out,  the  North 
has  been  more  and  more  coming  upon  the  high  ground  of  moral  prin- 
ciple, until  at  length  the  government  has  decreed  emancipation.  It  has 
been  said  very  often  in  my  hearing,  and  I  have  read  it  oftener  since  I 
have  been  in  England — the  last  reading  I  had  of  it  was  from  the  pen  of 
Lord  Brougham — that  the  North  is  fighting  for  the  Union,  and  not  for 
the  emancipation  of  the  African.  Why  are  we  fighting  for  the  Union, 
but  because  we  believe  that  the  Union  and  its  government,  administered 
now  by  Northern  men,  will  work  out  the  emancipation  of  every  living 
being  on  the  continent  of  America.  (Loud  cheering.)  If  it  be  meant 
that  the  North  went  into  this  war  with  the  immediate  object  of  the 
emancipation  of  the  slaves,  I  answer  that  it  never  professed  to  do  it; 
but  it  went  into  war  for  the  Union,  with  the  distinct  and  expressed 
conviction  on  both  sides,  that,  if  the  Union  were  maintained,  slavery 
could  not  live  long.  (Cheers.)  Do  you  suppose  that  it  is  wise  to 
separate  the  interest  of  the  slave  from  the  interest  of  the  other  people 
on  the  continent,  and  to  inaugurate  a  policy  which  takes  in  him  alone  ? 
He  must  stand  or  fall  with  all  of  us — (hear,  hear), — and  the  only  sound 
policy  for  the  North  is  that  which  shall  benefit  the  North,  the  South, 
the  blacks  and  the  whites.  (Cheers.)  "We  hold  that  the  maintenance 
of  the  Union  as  expounded  in  its  fundamental  principles  by  the  decla- 
ration of  independence  and  the  constitution,  is  the  very  best  way  to 
secure  to  the  African  ultimately  his  rights  and  his  best  estate.  The 
North  was  like  a  ship  carrying  passengers,  tempest  tossed,  and  while 
the  sailors  were  labouring,  and  the  captain  and  officers  directing,  some 
grumblers  came  up  from  amongst  the  passengers  and  said,  "  Yoti  «re  all 
the  time  working  to  save  the  ship,  but  you  don't  care  to  save  the  pas- 
sengers." I  should  like  to  know  how  you  would  save  the  passengers 
so  well  as  by  takinsr  care  of  the  ship. 


24  MANCHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

[At  this  point  the  Chairman  read  to  the  meeting  a  telegram  relative 
to  the  seizure  of  the  rams  at  Liverpool.  The  effect  was  startling.  The 
audience  rose  to  their  feet,  while  cheer  after  cheer  was  given.] 

Allow  me  to  say  this  of  the  coloured  people,  our  citizens  (for  in  New 
York  coloured  people  vote,  as  they  do  also  in  Massachusetts  and  in 
several  other  Northern  States ; — Lord  Wharncliffe  notwithstanding) : — 
it  is  a  subject  of  universal  remark,  that  no  men  on  either  side  have 
carried  themselves  more  gallantly,  more  bravely,  than  the  coloured  regi- 
ments that  have  been  fighting  for  their  government  and  their  liberty. 
My  own  youngest  brother  is  colonel  of  one  of  those  regiments,  and  from 
him  I  learn  many  most  interesting  facts  concerning  them.  The  son  of 
one  of  the  most  estimable  and  endeared  of  my  friends  in  my  congrega- 
tion was  the  colonel  of  the  regiment  which  scaled  the  rampart  of  Fort 
Wagner.  Colonel  Shaw  fell  at  the  head  of  his  men — hundreds  fell — 
and  when  inquest  was  made  for  his  body,  it  was  reported  by  the  Southern 
men  in  the  fort  that  he  had  been  "buried  with  his  niggers ;"  and  on  his 
gravestone  yet  it  shall  be  written,  "  The  man  that  dared  to  lead  the  poor 
and  the  oppressed  out  of  their  oppression,  died  with  them  and  for  them, 
and  was  buried  with  them."  (Cheers.)  On  the  Mississippi  the  conduct 
of  the  coloured  regiments  is  so  good,  that,  although  many  of  the  officers 
who  command  them  are  Southern  men,  and  until  recently  had  the 
strongest  Southern  prejudices,  those  prejudices  are  almost  entirely 
broken  down,  and  there  is  no  difficulty  whatever  in  finding  officers, 
Northern  or  Southern,  to  take  command  of  just  as  many  of  these 
regiments  as  can  be  raised.  It  is  an  honourable  testimony  to  the 
good  conduct  and  courage  of  these  long-abused  men,  whom  God  is  now 
bringing  by  the  Red  Sea  of  war  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  and  into 
the  land  of  promise.  (Cheers.)  I  have  said  that  it  would  give  me 
great  pleasure  to  answer  any  courteous  questions  that  might  be  proposed 
to  me.  If  I  cannot  answer  them  I  will  do  the  next  best  thing, — tell 
you  so.  (Hear.)  The  length  to  which  this  meeting  has  been  protracted, 
and  the  very  great  conviction  that  I  seem  to  have  wrought  by  my 
remarks  on  this  Pentecostal  occasion  in  yonder  Gentile  crowd — (loud 
laughter)  —  admonish  me  that  we  had  better  open  some  kind  of 
"meeting  of  inquiry."  (Renewed  laughter.)  It  will  give  me  great 
pleasure,  as  a  gentleman,  to  receive  questions  from  any  gentleman — 
(hear,  hear), — and  to  give  such  reply  as  is  in  my  power. 

The  rev.  gentleman  remained  standing  for  a  few  moments,  as  if  to 
give  the  opportunity  of  interrogation,  but  no  one  rising  to  question 
him,  he  sat  down  amidst  great  cheers.  The  speech  lasted  nearly  two- 
and-a-quarter  hours. 

The  CHAIRMAN"  then  declared  the  business  of  the  meeting  to  be 
at  an  end,  and  expressed  his  thanks  for  the  good  order  which  had  been 
maintained,  contrary  to  certain  illnatured  predictions.  (Cheers  and 
laughter.) 

The  chair  having  been  taken  by  Mr.  Bazley,  a  vote  of  thanks  to 
Mr.  Taylor  for  having  presided  was  moved  by  Mr.  BEECHER,  seconded 
by  Mr.  S.  WATTS,  jun.,  and  passed  by  acclamation. 

Mr.  TAYLOR,  in  returning  thanks,  said  that  it  was  a  subject  of 


MAN  CHESTER — PUBLIC  MEETING.  25 

congratulation  that  the  enemies  to  their  cause  would  now  be  prevented 
from  saying,  as  they  had  falsely  said  before,  that  the  meeting  had  broken 
up  in  confusion.     (Loud  cheers.) 

The  National  Anthem  was  then  played  on  the  organ,  and  the 
audience  dispersed,  several  hundreds  previously  pressing  round  Mr. 
Beecher,  to  shake  hands  with  him. 


GLASGOW  .-OCTOBER  13,   1863. 


REPORT  OF  PROCEEDINGS  AT  THE  MEETING  HELD 

AT  THE  CITY  HALL. 

The  public  meeting  "announced  to  be  held  in  the  City  Hall,  to  hear  an 
address  on  "  The  American  Crisis,"  by  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher, 
took  place  last  night.  The  hour  appointed  for  the  opening  of  proceedings 
was  seven  o'clock,  and  long  before  that  time  the  Hall  was  filled  to  excess 
by  a  crowd  that  waited  in  silence  till  the  entrance  of  the  speaker  of  the 
evening  on  the  platform,  accompanied  by  Bailie  Govan  and  a  number  of 
clergymen  and  city  councillors. 

Bailie  GOVAN,  on  taking  the  chair,  read  the  advertisement  calling 
the  meeting ;  after  which  he  said — It  is  not  my  intention,  ladies  and 
gentlemen,  to  detain  you  on  this  occasion  bv  any  observations  of  mine 
on  the  tremendous  conflict  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic.  With  the 
convictions  which  I  hold  in  reference  to  the  origin  and  nature  of  the 
struggle,  I  dare  not,  standing  here,  utter  one  word  in  favour  of  the 
South.  (Cheers,  hisses,  and  renewed  applause.)  And  I  am  quite  willing, 
on  this  occasion,  to  leave  the  advocacy  of  the  North  to  our  distinguished 
friend  who  is  this  evening  to  address  us.  (Cheers.)  I  have  no  doubt 
that  he  has  come  here  to-night  fully  prepared  to  plead  the  cause  of  his 
country  with  all  that  eloquence  of  which  he  is  the  master.  He  comes 
among  us  because  of  the  admiration,  and  respect,  and  love  that  he  feels 
for  the  British  nation.  (Hear,  and  applause.)  He  has  not  been  an 
abolitionist  only  since  South  Carolina  voted  secession ;  he  has  not  been 
an  emancipationist  only  because  he  felt  that  emancipation  was  necessary 
to  carry  to  success  the  objects  of  the  Union  ;  but  ever  since  he  entered 
into  public  life  his  voice  has  been  raised  and  his  energies  have  been 
devoted,  in  troublous  times  as  in  peaceful  times,  in  times  of  danger  to 
himself  as  well  as  in  times  of  security  and  safety,  in  behalf  of  the 
down-trodden  humanity  of  the  South.  (Cheers.)  I  have  no  doubt  that 
when  he  rises  to  address  you  he  will  speak  out  of  the  fulness  of  the 
love  that  flows  within  his  heart  towards  the  British  people,  and  he 
would  desire  to  have  from  you  such  a  reciprocation  of  that  feeling  as  will 
make  him  feel,  and  make  his  friends  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic 
feel,  that  peace  and  amity  between  Great  Britain  and  the  American 
Republic  must  be  eternal.  (Applause.)  I  will  not  longer  occupy  your 
time,  but  beg  to  introduce  to  the  meeting  the  Rev.  Dr.  Anderson. 


GLASGOW — PUBLIC   MEETING.  27 

Dr.  ANDERSON",  who  was  received  with  great  applause,  said — 
There  are  two  things  which  would  be  exceedingly  preposterous  were  I 
to  attempt  to  perpetrate  them.  The  first  is,  were  I  to  attempt  to  engage 
your  attention  for  more  than  five  minutes,  if  even  so  many.  The  second 
is,  if  I  were  to  execute  the  commission  which  friends  have,  I  think  very 
foolishly,  entrusted  to  me,  to  introduce  Mr.  Ward  Beecher.  Introduce 
him  to  you  !  I  intend  to  introduce  you  to  him.  (Laughter  and  applause.) 
You  are  all  already,  to  a  very  great  extent,  familiar  with  him.  All 
that  you  need,  friends,  to  make  you  more  familiar  with  him  is  that  you 
should  see  his  countenance  and  hear  his  living  voice.     (Hear,  hear.) 

The  Rev.  HENRY  WARD  BEECHER,  who,  after  the  applause 
with  which  he  was  greeted  when  he  rose  had  subsided,  said — Mr.  Chair- 
man, ladies,  and  gentlemen  :    No  one  who  has  been  born  and  reared  in 
Scotland  can  know  the  feeling  with  which,  for  the  first  time,  such  a  one 
as  I  have  visited  this  land,  classic  in  song  and  in  history.     I  have  been 
reared  in  a  country  whose  history  is  brief.     So  vast  is  it,  that  one  might 
travel  night  and  day  for  all  the  week,  and  yet  scarcely  touch  historic 
ground.     Its  history  is  yet  to  be  written ;  it  is  yet  to  be  acted.     But  I 
come  to  this  land,  which,  though  small,  is  as  full  of  memories  as  the 
heaven  is  of  stars,  and  almost  as  bright.     (Applause.)     There  is  not  the 
most  insignificant  piece  of  water  that  does  not  make  my  heart  thrill 
with  some  story  of  heroism,  or  some  remembered  poem ;   for  not  only 
has  Scotland  had  the  good  fortune  to  have  had  men  that  knew  how  to 
make  heroic  history,  but  she  has  reared  those  bards  who  have  known 
how  to  sing  her  histories.     (Applause.)      And  every  steep  and  every 
valley,  and  almost  every  single  league  on  which  my  feet  have  trod,  have 
made  me  feel  as  if  I  was  walking  in  a  dream.     I  never  expected  to  feel 
my  eyes  overflow  with  tears  of  gladness,  that  1  had  been  permitted  in 
the  prime  of  life  to  look  upon  dear  old  Scotland.      (Applause.)     For 
your   historians   have   taught  us   history,    your   poets  have   been   the 
charm  of  our  firesides,   your  theologians  have  enriched  our  libraries: 
from  your  philosophers — Reid,  Brown,  and  Stewart — we  have  derived 
the  elements  of  our  philosophy,  and  your  scientific  researches   have 
greatly  stimulated  the  study  of  science  in  our  land.   I  come  to  Scotland, 
almost  as  a  pilgrim  would  go  to  Jerusalem,  to  see  those  scenes  whose 
story  had  stirred  my  imagination  from  my  earliest  youth ;   and  I  can 
pay  no  higher  compliment  than  to  say  that  having  seen  some  part  of 
Scotland  I  am  satisfied,  and  permit  me  to  say  that  if,  when  you  know  me, 
you  are  a  thousandth  part  as  satisfied  with  me  as  I  am  with  you,  we 
shall  get  along  very  well  together.     (Applause.)     And  yet,  although  I 
am  not  of  a  yielding  mood — (a  laugh) — nor  easily  daunted,  I  have  some 
embarrassment  in  speaking  to  you  to-night.     I  know  very  well  that 
there  are  not  a  few  things  which  prevent  me  doing  a  good  work  among 
you.     I  differ  greatly  from  many  of  you.     I  respect,  although  I  will  not 
adopt,  your  opinions.     I  can  only  ask  as  much  from  you  for  myself.     I 
am  aware  that  a  personal  prejudice  has  been  diligently  excited  against 
me.     There  is  also  the  vastness  of  the  subject  on  which  I  am  about  to 
speak,  and  the  dissimilar  institutions  of  the  two  countries  which  stand 
in  my  way.     There  are  also  those  perplexities  which  arise  from  conflicting 


28  GLASGOW— PUBLIC  MEETING. 

statements  made  to  you.  There  is  also  a  supposed  antagonism  between 
British  and  American  interests.  Now  I  shall  not  consider  any  of  these 
points  to-night  except  the  first.  It  is  not  a  pleasant  avenue  to  a 
speech  for  a  man  to  walk  through  himself.  (Laughter.)  But  since 
every  pains  is  taken  to  misrepresent  me,  let  me  once  for  all  deal  with 
that  matter.  In  my  own  land  I  have  been  the  subject  of  misrepresenta- 
tion and  abuse  so  long,  that  when  I  did  not  receive  it,  I  felt  as  though 
something  was  wanting  in  the  atmosphere.  (Laughter  and  applause.) 
I  have  been  the  object  of  misrepresentation  at  home,  simply  and  only 
because  I  have  been  arrayed  ever  since  I  had  a  voice  to  speak  and  a 
heart  to  feel — body  and  soul,  I  have  been  arrayed,  without  regard  to 
consequences  and  to  my  own  reputation  or  my  own  ease,  against  that 
which  I  consider  the  damning  sin  of  my  country  and  the  shame  of  human 
nature — slavery.  (Great  applause.)  I  thought  I  had  a  right,  when  I 
came  to  Great  Britain,  to  expect  a  different  reception ;  but  I  found  that 
the  insidious  correspondence  of  men  in  America  had  poisoned  the  British 
mind,  and  that  representations  had  been  made  which  predisposed  men 
to  receive  me  with  dislike.  And,  principally,  the  representations  were 
that  I  had  indulged  in  the  most  offensive  language,  and  had  threatened 
all  sorts  of  things,  against  Great  Britain.  Now  allow  me  to  say  that, 
having  examined  that  interesting  literature,  so  far  as  I  have  seen  it  pub- 
lished in  British  newspapers.  I  here  declare  that  ninety-nine  out  of  one 
hundred  parts  of  those  things  that  I  am  charged  with  saying  I  never 
said  and  never  thought — they  are  falsehoods  wholly,  and  in  particular. 
(Great  applause.)  Allow  me  next  to  say  that  I  have  been  accustomed 
freely,  and  at  all  times,  at  home  to  speak  what  I  thought  to  be  sober 
truth  both  of  blame  and  of  praise  of  Great  Britain,  and  if  you  do  not  want 
to  hear  a  man  express  his  honest  sentiments  fearlessly,  then  I  do  not  want 
to  speak  to  you.  (Applause.)  If  I  never  spared  my  own  country — (hear, 
hear) — if  I  never  spared  the  American  church,  nor  the  government, 
nor  my  own  party,  nor  my  personal  friends,  did  you  expect  I  would 
treat  you  better  than  I  did  those  of  my  own  country  1  (Applause.)  For 
I  have  felt  from  the  first  that  I  hold  a  higher  allegiance  than  any  I  owe 
to  man — to  God,  and  to  that  truth  which  is  God's  ordinance  in  human 
affairs,  and  for  the  sake  of  that  higher  truth,  I  have  loved  my  country, 
but  I  have  loved  truth  more  than  my  country.  (Applause.)  I  have 
heard  the  voice  of  my  Master,  saying,  "  If  any  man  come  unto  me  and 
hate  not  father,  and  mother,  and  brother,  and  sister,  yea,  and  his  own 
life  also,  he  is  not  worthy  of  me."  When  therefore  the  cause  of  truth 
and  justice  is  put  in  the  scale  against  my  own  country,  I  would  disown 
country  for  the  sake  of  truth  ;  and  when  the  cause  of  truth  and  justice 
is  put  in  the  scale  against  Great  Britain,  I  would  disown  her  rather 
than  betray  what  I  understood  to  be  the  truth.  (Applause.)  We  are 
bound  to  establish  liberty,  regulated  Christian  liberty,  as  the  laiv  of  the 
American  Continent.  This  is  our  destiny,  this  is  that  towards  which 
the  education  of  the  rising  generation  has  been  more  and  more  assidu- 
ously directed  as  the  peculiar  glory  of  America — to  destroy  slavery,  and 
root  it  out  of  our  land,  and  to  establish  in  its  place  a  discreet,  intelligent, 
constitutional,  regulated,  Christian  liberty.      We  have  accepted  this 


GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING.  29 

destiny  and  this  task  :  and  if  in  accomplishing  this  a  part  of  our  own 
people  opposes  us,  we  shall  go  right  against  our  people  to  that  destiny. 
(Applause.)      If  France   undertakes   to   interfere,  and   to   say    "You 
shall  not,"  much  as  we  would  regret  to  be  at  war  with  any  nation 
on  the  globe,  or  with  France  in  particular,  who  befriended  us  in  our 
early  struggles  and  trials  \  still  the  cause  of  liberty  is  dearer  to  us  than 
any  foreign  alliance,  and  we  shall  certainly  say   "  Stand  off,  this  is  our 
work,  and  must  not  be  hindered."     If  they  bring  war  to  us,  they  shall 
have  war.     For  no  foreign  nation  shall  meddle  with  impunity  with  our 
domestic  struggle.      If  Great  Britain  herself,  tied  to  us  by  so  many 
interests,  endeared  by  so  many  historic  associations, — to  whom  we  can 
never  pay  the  debt  of  love  we  owe  her  for  those  men  who  wrought  out, 
in  fire  and  blood,  those  very  principles  of  civil  liberty  for  which  we  are 
now  contending, — yet,  if  even  Britain  shall  openly  or  secretly  seek  the 
establishment  on  our  national  territory  of  an  Independent  slaveholding 
empire,  we  will  denounce  her  word  and  deed ; — and,  terrible  and  cruel 
as  will  be  the  necessity,  we  will,  if  we  must,  oppose  arms  to  arms.     If 
Great  Britain  is  for  slavery,  I  am  against  Great  Britain.     (Cheers.)     If 
Great  Britain  is  true  to  her  instincts,  and  the  interests  of  her  illustrious 
history,  and  to  her  own  documents,  laws,  and  institutions;  if  she  is  yet 
in  favour  of  liberty,  as  she  has  always  been  here  and  everywhere  in  the 
world,  I  am  for  Great  Britain  \  and  shall  be  proud  of  my  blood  and 
boast  that  I  have  a  share  in  your  ancestral  glory.     My  prayer  shall  be 
that  Great  Britain  and  America,  joined  in  religion  and  in  liberty,  may 
march  shoulder  to  shoulder  in  the  grand  enterprise  of  bearing'  the  bless- 
ings of  religion  and  liberty  around  the  globe.      (Cheers.)     The  Slave 
States  may  be  divided  into  two  classes — the  Farming  States  and  the 
Plantation  States.  The  farming  States  are  Delaware,  Maryland,  Virginia, 
Kentucky,  Missouri,  and  parts  of  Tennessee  and  North  Carolina.     The 
lands  there  are  devoted  to  a  mixed  husbandry,  such  as  of  corn,  or  maize, 
wheat,  oats,  grass,  tobacco,  and  the  grazing  of  herds  of  cattle.  The  farms 
generally  are  not  large.     In  those  States  slave  labour  is  not  profitable, 
and   cannot   be   so.      Slave-breeding  is  profitable,  but  not  the   labour 
of  slaves.      The  plantation  States  are  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  Florida, 
Alabama,   Mississippi,  Louisiana,  Texas,  and  Arkansas — eight.     These 
States  do  not  pursue  a  mixed  husbandry.    They  raise  principally  cotton, 
sugar,  rice,  and  tobacco,  but  chiefly  the  two  great  staples — cotton  and 
sugar.     They  buy  the  principal  part  of  their  food,  and  almost  all  manu- 
factured products.     The  pails  they  carry  their  water  in  are  made  in 
New  England ;  their  broom  handles,  their  pins,  glass,  stone,  iron,  and 
tinware,  and  all  their  household  furniture,  are  the  manufacture  of  the 
North.       There  are  some   local  exceptions,    but  what  I  state  is  sub- 
stantially true  of  the  slave-States  of  the  extreme  South.     Now,  consider 
some  facts.     The  labour  of  slaves  in  the  farming  States  does  not  pay. 
Why  1     Because  mixed  farming  requires  much  more  skill  than  slaves 
have.     Slave  labour  must  always  be  applied  to  the  production  of  rude 
and  raw  material.      You  cannot  go  much  farther  than  that.       Slave 
labour  is  rarely  ever  skilled  labour  ;  that  would  require  too  much  brain, 
and  its  development  is  not  consistent  with  the  condition  of  the  slave. 


30  GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

Moreover,  slaves  are  too  costly.  In  the  farming  States  they  are  better 
off,  and  therefore  they  are  more  expensive;  for  a  man  is  expensive  jnst 
in  proportion  as  he  rises  in  the  scale  of  civilisation,  as  I  shall  show 
you  more  at  length  in  a  moment.  The  object  of  slavery  therefore 
in  the  Northern  slave  States  is  not  the  production  of  tobacco,  or  corn, 
or  maize,  or  wheat,  or  cattle,  or  dairy  products ; — the  whole  profit  of 
slavery  in  the  Northern  slave  States  is  in  breeding  slaves.  (Hear,  hear, 
and  sensation.)  Virginia  has  raised  as  much  as  $•24,000,000  a  year  for 
slaves  sold  South.  (Hear,  hear.)  I  will  read  you  the  testimony  of 
a  gentleman  from  the  slave  States.  The  editor  of  the  Virginia  Times, 
in  1836,  made  a  calculation  that  120,000  slaves  went  out  of  the  State 
during  the  year,  that  80,000  of  them  went  with  their  owners  who  re- 
moved, leaving  40,000  who  were  sold,  at  an  average  price  of  $600, 
amounting  to  $24,000,000.  You  can  not  understand  anything  about 
slavery  until  you  are  admitted  into  the  secrets  of  raising  slaves  as 
colts  and  calves  are  raised  for  market,  and  begin  to  see  the  inside  of 
this,  the  most  detestable  and  infernal  system  that  the  sun  ever  shone 
upon.  (Hear,  hear,  and  cheers.)  But  you  may  say  that  this  is  so  only 
in  Virginia.  I  ask  your  attention  to  the  words  of  Henry  Clay.  In 
1829  he  said  before  the  Colonization  Society,  "It  is  believed  that 
nowhere  in  the  farming  portions  of  the  United  States  would  slave 
labour  be  generally  employed  if  the  proprietors  were  not  tempted  to 
raise  slaves  by  the  high  prices  of  the  Southern  market."  That  is  Mr. 
Clay's  testimony,  a  Kentuckian,  a  slaveholder,  and  certainly  he  ought 
to  know.  Political  reasons  also  help  to  keep  up  slavery  in  these  States, 
and  some  personal  reasons  of  which  I  shall  not  speak.  These  Northern 
slave  States  would  emancipate  their  slaves  if  it  were  not  that  the  cotton 
States  give  them  a  market.  Gentlemen,  you  abhor  the  African  slave 
trade.  Let  me  tell  you  that  the  domestic  slave  trade  of  America  is 
unspeakably  worse.  Bred  amidst  churches,  refinements,  and  compara- 
tive civilization,  they  are  capable  of  a  thousand  pangs  more  of  suffering 
at  ruthless  separations  than  if  they  were  yet  but  savages.  I  call  your 
attention  to  a  few  propositions  then,  in  reference  to  slavery  as  it  exists 
in  the  extreme  Southern  States.  And  first,  the  system  of  slavery  re- 
quires ignorance  in  the  slave,  and  not  alone  intellectual  but  moral  and 
social  ignorance.  Anybody  who  is  a  slaveholder  will  find  that  there 
are  reasons  which  will  compel  him  to  keep  slaves  in  ignorance,  if  he  is 
going  to  keep  them  at  all.  Not  because  intelligence  is  more  difficult 
to  govern ;  for  with  an  intelligent  people  government  is  easier.  The 
more  you  develop  a  man's  intellect,  the  more  you  make  him  capable 
of  self-government ;  and  the  more  you  keep  him  in  ignorance,  the  more 
is  he  the  subject  of  arbitrary  government.  Virtue  and  intelligence 
compel  leniency  of  government ;  but  ignorance  and  vice  compel  tyranny 
in  government.  (Hear,  hear.)  These  things  follow  a  natural  law. 
The  slave  would  not  be  less  easily  governed,  if  he  were  educated. 
If  the  slaveholder  taught  him  to  read  and  write,  if  he  made  him  to 
know  what  he  ought  to  know  as  one  of  God's  dear  children,  the 
South  would  not  be  so  much  endangered  by  insurrection  as  she  is  now. 
There  is  nothing  so  terrible  as  explosive  ignorance.     Men  without  an 


GLASGOW— PUBLIC  MEETING.  31 

idea,  striking  blindly  and  passionately,  are  the  men  to  be  feared.  Even 
if  the  slaves  were  educated,  they  would  be  better  slaves.  What  is  the 
reason  then  that  slaves  must  be  kept  in  ignorance  1  The  real  reason  is 
one  of  expense.  In  order  to  make  slave  labour  profitable,  you  must 
reduce  the  cost  of  the  slave  ;  for  the  difference  between  the  profit  and 
the  loss  turns  upon  the  halfpenny  per  pound.  If  the  price  of  slaves 
goes  up,  and  cotton  goes  down  a  shade  in  price,  in  ordinary  times  the 
planters  lose.  The  rule  is  therefore,  to  reduce  the  cost  of  the  man ;  and 
the  slave  to  be  profitable  must  be  simply  a  working  creature.  What 
does  a  man  cost  that  is  a  slave  ]  Just  a  little  meal  and  a  little  pork,  a 
small  measure  of  the  coarsest  cloth  and  leather,  that  is  all  he  costs. 
Because  that  is  all  he  needs  —  the  lowest  fare  and  the  scantiest 
clothing.  He  is  a  man  with  two  hands  and  two  feet,  and  a  belly.  That 
is  all  there  is  of  a  profitable  slave.  But  every  new  development  within 
him  which  religion  shall  make — the  sense  of  fatherhood,  the  wish  for  a 
home,  the  desire  to  rear  his  children  well,  the  wish  to  honour  and  comfort 
his  wife,  every  taste,  every  sentiment,  every  aspiration,  will  demand 
some  external  thing  to  satisfy  it.  His  being  augments.  He  demands 
more  time.  He  strives  to  organize  that  little  kingdom  in  which  every 
human  being  has  a  right  to  be  king,  in  which  love  is  crowned, — the 
family  !  It  is  this  that  makes  an  educated  slave  too  expensive  for 
profit.  Profitable  slaveholding  requires  only  so  much  intelligence  as 
will  work  well,  and  only  so  much  religion  as  will  make  men  patient 
under  suffering  and  abuse.  More  than  that — more  conscience,  more 
ambition,  more  divine  ideas  of  human  nature,  of  men's  dignity,  of  house- 
hold virtue,  of  Christian  refinement,  only  make  the  slave  too  costly  in 
his  tastes.  Not  only  does  the  degradation  of  the  slave  pass  over  to  his 
work,  but  it  affects  all  labour,  even  when  performed  by  free  white  men. 
Throughout  the  South  there  is  the  most  marked  public  disesteem  of 
honest  homely  industry.  It  is  true  that  in  the  mountainous  portions 
of  the  South-west,  North  Carolina,  Northern  Georgian,  Eastern 
Tennessee,  and  Western  Virginia,  where  slaves  are  few,  and  where  a 
hardy  people  for  the  most  part  perform  their  own  agricultural  labours, 
there  is  less  discredit  attached  to  homely  toil  than  in  the  rich  alluvial 
districts  where  sugar  and  cotton  culture  demand  exclusive  slave  labour. 
But  even  in  the  most  favoured  portions  of  tiie  South,  manual  labour  is 
but  barely  redeemed  from  the  taint  of  being  a  slave's  business,  and  no- 
where is  it  honoured  as  it  is  in  the  great  and  free  North.  Whereas,  in 
the  richer  and  more  influential  portions  of  the  South,  labour  is  so 
degraded  that  men  are  ashamed  of  it.  It  is  a  badge  of  cTishonour.  The 
poor  and  shiftless  whites,  unable  to  own  slaves,  unwilling  to  work  them- 
selves, live  in  a  precarious  and  wretched  manner,  but  a  little  removed 
from  barbarism,  relying  upon  the  chase  for  much  of  their  subsistence, 
and  affording  a  melancholy  spectacle  of  the  condition  into  which  the 
reflex  influence  of  slavery  throws  the  neighbouring  poor  whites. 
Having  turned  their  own  industry  over  to  slaves,  and  established  the 
province  and  duties  of  a  gentleman  to  consist  in  indolence  and  politics, 
it  is  not  strange  that  they  hold  the  people  of  the  North  in  great  con- 
tempt.    The  North  is  a  vast  hive  of  universal  industry.     Idleness  there 


32  GLASGOW— PUBLIC  MEETING. 

is  as  disreputable  as  is  labour  in  the  South.  The  child's  earliest 
lesson  is  faithful  industry.  The  boy  works,  the  man  works.  Every- 
where through  all  the  North  men  earn  their  own  living  by  their  own 
industry  and  ingenuity.  They  scorn  to  be  dependent.  They  revolt  at  the 
dishonour  of  living  upon  the  unrequited  labour  of  others.  Honest  labour 
is  that  highway  along  which  the  whole  body  of  the  Northern  people 
travel  towards  wealth  and  usefulness.  From  Northern  looms  the  South 
is  clothed,  From  their  anvils  come  all  Southern  implements  of  labour. 
From  their  lathes  all  modern  ware.  From  their  lasts  Southern  shoes. 
The  North  is  growing  rich  by  its  own  industry.  The  small  class  of 
slaveholders  in  the  South  have  precarious  wealth,  but  at  the  expense  of 
the  vast  body  of  poor  whites,  who  live  from  hand  to  mouth  all  their 
days.  No  wonder  then,  that  Southerners  have  been  wont  to  deride 
the  free  workmen  of  the  North.  Governor  Hammond  only  gave  ex- 
pression to  the  universal  contempt  of  Southern  slaveholders  for  work 
and  workmen,  when  he  called  the  Northern  labourer  the  "mudsill  of 
society"  and  stigmatized  the  artizan,  as  the  "greasy  mechanic."  The 
North  and  the  South  alike  live  by  work;  the  North  by  their  own  work, 
the  South  by  that  of  their  slaves !  Which  is  the  more  honourable  ? 
I  have  a  right  to  demand  of  the  workmen  of  Glasgow  that  they  should 
refuse  their  sympathy  to  the  South,  and  should  give  their  hearty 
sympathy  to  those  who  are,  like  themselves,  seeking  to  make  work 
honourable,  and  to  give  to  the  workman  his  true  place  in  society. 
Disguise  it  as  they  will,  distract  your  attention  from  it  as  they  may,  it 
cannot  be  concealed,  that  the  American  question  is  the  working  mans 
question,  all  over  the  world  !  The  slave  master's  doctrine  is  that  capital 
should  own  labour — that  the  employers  should  own  the  employed.  This 
is  Southern  doctrine  and  Southern  practice.  Northern  doctrine  and 
Northern  practice  is  that  the  labourer  should  be  free,  intelligent,  clothed 
with  full  citizen's  rights,  with  a  share  of  the  political  duties  and  honours. 
The  North  has  from  the  beginning  crowned  labour  with  honour.  No 
where  else  on  earth  is  it  so  honourable.  The  free  States  of  the  North 
and  West,  in  America,  are  the  paradise  of  labourers.  One  of  the  pre- 
disposing causes  of  the  present  conflict,  was  the  extraordinary  contrast 
of  the  riches  of  the  North  and  the  unthriftiness  of  the  South,  resulting 
from  their  respective  doctrines  of  labour  and  the  labourer  !  It  would 
seem  as  if  Providence  had  demonstrated  the  wastefulness  and  mischiefs 
of  every  kind  of  despotism  in  church  and  in  state,  save  one — despotism 
of  work.  For  a  grand  and  final  contrast  between  the  sin  and  guilt  of 
labour- oppression,  and  the  peace  and  glory  of  free-labour,  he  set  apart 
the  Western  continent.  That  the  trial  might  be  above  all  suspicion,  to 
the  right  he  gave  the  meagre  soil,  the  austere  climate,  short  summers, 
long  and  rigorous  winters.  To  the  wrong  he  gave  fair  skies,  abundant 
soils,  vallej  s  of  the  tropics  teeming  with  almost  spontaneous  abundance. 
The  Christian  doctrine  of  work  has  made  New  England  a  garden,  while 
Virginia  is  a  wilderness.  The  free  North  is  abundantly  rich,  the  South 
bankrupt !  Every  element  of  prosperous  society  abounds  in  the  North, 
and  is  lacking  in  the  South.  There  is  more  real  wealth  in  the  simple 
little  State  of  Massachusetts  than  in  any  ten  Southern  States.     In  the 


GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING.  33 

free    States    everything    flourishes,    in   the    slave    States   everything 
languishes.     I  point  to  the   North  and  say,  behold  the  testimony  of 
Providence  for  free  labour  !     I  point  to  the  South,  and  say,  behold  the 
legitimate  results  of  slave  labour  !     Oppression  is  as  accursed  in  the 
field  as  it  is  upon  the  throne.     It  is  as  odious  before  God,  under  the 
slavedriver's  hat,   as  under  the  prince's  crown,  or  the  priest's  mitre. 
All  the  world  over,  slavery  is  detestable,  and  bears  the  curse  of  God 
everywhere  !     The  South  has  complained  bitterly  of  this  indisputable 
superiority  of  the  North  in  the  elements  of  national  wealth  and  general 
prosperity.     It  has  been  charged  to  class-legislation,  to  Yankee  shrewd- 
ness at  the  expense  of  honesty,  and  to  downright  advantage  taken  by 
Northern  commerce.     The  facts,  are,  however,  that  the  legislation  of 
the  country  has  been  controlled  for  fifty  years  by  Southern  influence. 
No  class-legislation  was  possible  except  in  her  own  favour.     The  North, 
so  far  from  cheating  the  South,  has  itself  been  obliged  largely  to  make 
up   the  wastes   and  squanderings   of  the   improvident   slave   system. 
Southern  bankruptcies  have  every  ten  years  carried  home  to  Northern 
creditors  the  penalty  of  complicity  with  slave  labour.      Besides  this,  the 
South  has  contributed  less,  and  received  more  from  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment, than  the  North.      The  peculiar  nature   of  society  under  such 
industry  and  institutions  made  the  functions  of  Government  oppressive 
and  expensive.     Ye%  with  every  partiality  and  favour  of  Government, 
and  with  the  North  for  fifty  years  almost  submissive  to  her  will  in  public 
matters,  the  statesmen  of  the  South  beheld  with  dismay  the  mighty  growth 
of  the  free  States  and  the  relative  weakness  of  the  slave  States.     To 
maintain  equipollence,  new  territory  must  be  acquired,  and  new  States 
brought  into  the  Union,  that  the  fatal  weakness  resulting  from  slavery 
in  the  older  States,  might  be  compensated  by  the  extent  of  the  South, 
and  by  the  number  of  votes  in  the  Congress, — controlling  legislation  in 
their  interest.      Out  of  this  radical  conflict  of  free  labour  and  slave 
labour,  have  sprung  naturally  the  elements  of  this  war.     In  the  race, 
slavery  has  crippled  itself.     It  therefore  seeks  to  escape  from  institu- 
tions and  influences  that  expose  its  folly,  that  reveal  its  degradation 
and  poverty,  and  would  inevitably,  in  due  time,  revolutionize  and  destroy 
it.     Not  only  is  it  true  that  the  working  men  of  England  have  an 
interest  in  this  conflict,  as  a  political  struggle ;  but,  as  a  conflict  between 
the  two  grand  systems — Slave  labour  and  Eree  labour — it  addresses  it- 
self to  every  labouring  man  on  the  globe.     If  the  North  succeed  and 
slavery  be  crushed,  labouring  men,  all  the  world  over,  will  be  benefited. 
The  American  conflict  is  but  one  form  of  that  contest  which  is  going  on 
in  all  nations.    Men  that  live  by  the  sweat  of  their  brow  are  aspiring  to 
more  education,  to  a  larger  sphere  of  influence,  to  some  share  of  political 
power,  to  some  joint  fruition  of  that  wealth  which  they  help  to  create. 
They  ought  to  know  their  fellows.     They  ought  to  recognize  in  every 
land  who  are  striving  for  them  and  who  against.     It  is  monstrous  that 
British  workmen  should  help  Southern  slaveholders  to  degrade  labour. 
Are  there  not  enough  already  to  crush  the  poor  a.nd  helpless  labourers 
of  the  world,  without  English  working  men,  too,  joining  the  rebel  gang 
of  oppressors  1      Every  word  for  the  South  is  a  blow  against  the  slave  ! 
c 


34  GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

Every  stroke  aimed  at  the  slave  rebounds  upon  the  European  labourer ! 
Join  the  slaveowner  in  making  labour  compulsory  and  dishonourable, 
and  the  slaveowner  will  unite  with  European  extortioners  in  grinding 
the  poor  operatives  here  !     The  North  is  truly  fighting  the  battle  of  the 
labourer  everywhere.      The  North  honours  work.     When  the  labourer 
is  educated,  all  doors  are  open  to  him,  and  it  depends  on  his  own  powers 
and  disposition  whether  he  shall  be  a  drudge  or  an  honoured  citizen.    It 
will  be  a  burning  shame  for  British  workmen  to  side  against  their  own 
friends  !   Consider  now,  for  a  moment,  what  were  our  respective  divisions 
when  this  war  broke  out  which  has  fused  all  parties  into  one  in  the  North 
and  one  in  the  South.  We  are  not  to  expect  parties  formed  methodically 
to  suit  any  philosophical  or  ethical  theory.     Such  arrangements  never 
happen  in  a  land  so  large,  so  diverse  in  population,  so  free  in  the  operation 
of  opinions,  and  swayed  by  so  many  motives.  Slavery  had  long  exerted  a 
grave  influence  upon  the  condition  of  the  country  before  it  was  recog- 
nized in  politics.     Indeed,  the  first  sign  of  the  entrance  of  this  vexed 
question  into  active  politics  was  seen  in  the  anxious  endeavours  of  all 
parties  to  exclude  it.   The  early  anti-slavery  men  found  themselves  shut 
out  from  all  parties,  from  ecclesiastical  bodies,  from  every  organization 
of  society.     They  gathered  adherents  outside  of  all  moral  and  civil  in- 
stitutions.    But  nothing  could  long  keep  out  a  toj^c  which  was  forced 
upon  the  North  by  the  unwise  and  arrogant  legislation  of  the  South. 
At  length  the  subject  took  complete  possession  of  politics,  and  divided 
the  whole  public  into  parties.       But  I  shall  consider  the  division  of 
opinions,  rather  than  of  parties,  which  are  seldom  homogeneous.     There 
were  three  degrees  of  opinion.     At  the  close  of  the  war  for  independence 
the  term  abolitionist  was  applied  to  such  men  as  Franklin,  John  Jay, 
&c,  who  united  in  societies   for   promoting   the  abolition  of  slavery. 
These  societies  died  out,  and  the  name  was  almost  forgotten,  till  revived 
about  1830,  and  applied,  then  and  since,  exclusively  to  Mr.  Garrison  and 
his  school.     They  regarded  slavery  as  so  established,  and  the  institu- 
tions of  the  country  as  so  controlled  by  its  advocates,  that  all  remedy 
was  hopeless,  and  they  urged  an  utter  separation  Jrom  the  South,  as  the 
only  way  of  freeing  the  North  from  the  guilt  and  contamination  of 
slavery.       There  was   no  political  difference   between   Mr.  Garrison's 
disunion   and   Mr.  Davis's   secession.     But   the   moral  difference  was 
world  wide.      The  disunionists  of  the  Garrison  and  Wendell  Phillips 
school  were  seeking  to  promote  liberty  and  to  weaken  slavery.     Mr. 
Davis  and  his  followers  are  seeking  to  strengthen  slavery  and  to  restrict 
liberty.     But  the  abolitionists,   though  a  heroic  band,  sought  a  right 
thing  by  a  wrong  method.       Their  party  was  never  large,  but  their 
direct  and  indirect  influence  was  great.     Another  section  was  repre- 
sented by  the  great  body  of  moral  and  intelligent  men  in  the  North  who 
held  that  slavery  should  be  limited  to  its  present  territory  :  that,  since 
it  existed  by  State  laws  and  not  by  national  laws,  it  should  be  restricted 
to  those  States  in  which  it  was  found  de  facto :  that  congress  should  leave 
it  where  it  was,  but  defend  the  territories  from  its  incursions  ;  that  the 
government  should  be  put  into  the  hands  of  men  who  loved  liberty  more 
than  slavery;  that  our  courts  should  be  purged  of  judges  appointed  to 


GLASGOW — PTJELIC  MEETING.  35 

serve  Southern  interests.  It  was  believed,  and  I  was  of  this  faith  my- 
self, that,  were  slavery  rigorously  confined  to  existing  bounds,  and  the 
institutions  of  the  nation  arrayed  on  the  side  of  liberty,  gradually 
natural  laws,  with  commercial  changes,  and  the  exigencies  of  political 
economy,  would  work  out  a  system  of  emancipation.  These  views  were 
held  by  the  North  both  in  a  latent  and  an  active  form,  by  men  who  were 
widely  different  in  politics,  and  who  sought  different  and  even  conflicting 
methods  of  enforcing  them.  The  third  section  was  represented  by  that 
class  of  men  which  exists  in  every  land  without  moral  convictions  in 
public  affairs,  who  regard  politics  as  a  game,  and  who  look  only  at  interest 
as  the  end  of  parties.  To  such  were  added  vast  numbers  of  ignorant 
emigrants.  With  a  partial  and  honourable  exception  in  favour  of  the 
Germans,  it  must  be  said  that  the  great  body  of  emigrants  flying  from 
foreign  hardships  and  oppression  joined  the  pro-slavery  party  in 
America,  and  arranged  themselves  against  the  negro.  This  has  been 
the  peculiar  and  chief  difficulty  of  the  North  in  political  efforts.  We 
owe  to  Europe,  but  chiefly  to  Great  Britain,  those  hindrances  that  so 
long  paralyzed  political  effort,  and  divided  the  action  of  the  North. 
It  will  be  seen  by  this  brief  view,  that  the  Northern  movement  pro- 
posed no  violence  nor  any  precipitate  action.  We  relied  on  the  inherent 
superiority  of  free-labour  to  develope  our  embryo  territories,  and  hoped 
that,  with  time  and  patience,  moral  influences,  following  the  operation 
of  great  natural  laws,  would  waste  away  slavery,  without  violence  or 
revolution,  and  with  benefit  to  both  the  bond  and  the  free.  The  key- 
note of  Northern  policy  was  No  more  Slave  States — No  more  legisla- 
tion in  favour  of  slavery.  Let  it  die  by  its  own  inherent  diseases  ! — 
Now  let  me  speak  of  the  South.  What  have  been  the  divisions  of 
the  South  ?  There  have  been  two  tendencies  there ;  a  more  moderate 
and  a  more  extreme  party.  The  former  attempted  to  maintain  the 
South  on  the  basis  of  slavery;  by  the  multiplication  of  new  States; 
by  the  acquisition  of  territories,  and  so  directing  the  Government  as 
to  fortify  slavery  till  it  should  stretch  across  the  continent  from  ocean 
to  ocean.  That  has  been  the  object  of  the  earlier  and  main  party  of 
the  South.  The  second  was  the  South  Carolina  party,  who  date  from 
Mr.  Calhoun's  time.  This  party  meant  to  break  off  from  the  Union 
as  soon  as  they  were  strong  enough.  Just  as  long  as  anything  was 
to  be  gained  by  staying,  so  long  they  meant  to  stay ;  but  as  soon  as 
nothing  more  was  to  be  gained,  they  meant  to  go.  They  included  the 
former  plan,  but  more  also.  They  designed,  first,  separate  national 
existence  as  the  ultimate  aim  of  the  Southern  States  ;  and  secondly,  the 
inclusion  of  the  tropics  of  America  in  a  gigantic  cotton-growing  slave 
empire.  They  meant,  ere  long,  to  seize  Mexico  and  central  America ; 
to  include  the  vast  central  American  tropical  oceanica,  and  spread 
slavery  over  all.  They  proudly  said — Cotton  is  king  !  and  if  we  have 
cotton  and  the  means  of  raising  it,  we  can  control  the  destiny  of  the 
globe  !  They  meant  also  to  re-open  the  African  slave  trade  for  the 
purpose  of  cheapening  negroes,  who  are  the  most  expensive  item  of 
labour.  In  South  Carolina  this  scheme  was  unblushingly  and  openly 
advocated ;  and  if  I  had  lived  in  the  South  and  been  a  slaveholder,  I 


36  GLASGOW— PUBLIC  MEETING. 

should  have  been  of  that  party.  What !  an  advocate  of  the  African  slave 
trade  1  Yes,  I  should  !  The  day  that  I  make  up  my  mind  to  keep 
slaves,  I  shall  have  to  keep  them  ignorant ;  and  if  I  live  in  the  cotton 
States,  I  am  not  likely  to  pay  Virginia,  under  a  home-tariff,  a  thousand 
dollars  for  a  slave  that  I  can  import  from  Africa  for  three  hundred 
dollars.  The  fact  is,  the  law  that  makes  the  foreign  slave  trade  piracy 
is  nothing  but  a  high  tariff  in  favour  of  the  slave  breeding  States :  and 
the  States  that  do  not  breed  slaves,  say, — That  tariff  must  be  taken 
off;  if  Africa  can  produce  the  material  cheaper  than  Virginia,  we 
must  have  the  advantage  of  it.  I  declare  too,  that  the  inter- State  slave 
trade  of  America  is  in  many  most  important  respects  more  cruel  than 
the  roughest  part  of  the  African  slave  trade.  To  bring  up  men 
under  the  gospel ;  to  bring  up  women  with  some  of  the  tender 
susceptibilities  of  womanhood,  and  more  than  half  their  blood  white 
blood, — to  rear  them  in  your  household,  and  then, — if  bankruptcy 
threatens,  or  exigencies  press,  to  call '  out  your  valuable  slaves  from 
a  Virginian  plantation  and  sell  them  to  the  slave  master,  to  manacle 
them, — to  drive  in  gangs  men  reared  under  the  sound  of  the  bell  of  the 
Christian  Church, — who  have  acquired  something  of  refinement  in 
their  masters'  families — to  carry  them  down  South  in  droves  of  fifties 
and  hundreds,  as  is  done  on  every  great  street  and  road  of  the  middle 
States, — is  I  say,  more  infernal,  more  wicked,  by  as  much  as  these 
northern-bred  slaves  are  more  tender,  susceptible  and  intelligent,  than 
the  poor  half-imbruted  African.  If  God  sends  one  bolt  at  the  ship 
that  brings  slaves  from  Africa,  double-shotted  thunders  are  aimed  at 
every  gang  master  that  drives  them  from  the  Northern  slave  States 
to  the  Southern.  (Applause.)  It  was  perfectly  natural  that  South 
Carolina  should  include  in  its  project  of  aggrandizement  the  opening 
of  the  African  slave  trade  ;  and  every  freeman  in  Great  Britain  that 
goes  for  the  South,  really  goes  for  the  opening  of  that  trade.  (Cheers 
and  hisses.)  When  you  put  a  drunken  engineer  to  drive  a  train,  you 
may  not  mean  to  come  to  any  harm,  but  when  you  are  in  that  train  you 
cannot  help  yourselves.  It  is  just  the  same  here.  You  do  not  mean  the 
slave  trade,  but  they  do  ;  and  all  that  they  ask  of  you  is — "to  be  blind." 
(Laughter  and  applause.)  This  Southern  plan  thus  includes  the 
opening  of  the  slave  trade  for  the  sake  of  cheapening  negroes,  and  the 
secession  threw  the  control  of  the  whole  South  into  the  hands  of  these 
extremists.  You  may  not  be  aware  that  when  Secession  was  proposed, 
after  the  election  of  Lincoln  every  State  by  its  popular  vote,  went 
against  secession,  except  South  Carolina.  Well,  that  might  have 
seemed  a  fatal  obstacle.  Not  at  all.  The  leaders  of  this  extreme 
party  immediately  began  to  work  upon  the  legislatures  either  to  call 
conventions  or  to  act  as  conventions,  and  pass  secession  acts.  The 
States  were  carried  out  of  the  Union  into  secession  notwithstanding 
the  vote  of  the  people  not  many  months  before.  How  was  it  that 
Tennessee  was  carried  out  ? — how  was  even  such  a  state  as  Georgia 
carried  out  ? — how  was  Alabama  carried  out  against  such  a  man 
as  Mr.  Stephens,  the  vice-president  of  the  Confederacy — a  man  who, 
though  on  the  wrong  side,    is  the  best  man,    I  think,   in  the  whole 


GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING.  37 

Southern   States  of  America — (applause) — and — if  it  were  not  for 
the  accursed  surrounding  of  slavery — is  as  true  and  far  sighted  a  states- 
man as  we  have  ever  had  in  America.     How  did  they  carry  out  'these 
States  by  their  legislatures  %     They  said  to  the  members  of  the  legisla- 
tures throughout  the  South,   "  the  North  never  stood  in  a  fair  stand-up 
fight.    It  was  always  anxious  about  its  mills  and  stores  and  its  money. 
They  will  rouse  up  at  first,    but  whenever  it  comes  to  the    last,  and 
we  threaten  fire  and  bloodshed,  they  always  knuckle  under."     Well,  I 
am  ashamed  to  say  there  was  too  much  truth  in  this.   Commercial  interest 
on  one  side,  and  a  desire   for   peace    and  love  of  the  Union  on   the 
other,  had  always  led  the  North  to  yield  to  Southern  threats.      But 
that  was  ended.     A  new  spirit  had  arisen.     The  North  now  for  the 
first  time  thoroughly  believed  that  the    South    aimed   to  nationalize 
slavery.     The  North  never  had  believed  that  it  was  worth  while  to 
agitate  the  controversy,  until  the  outrageous  conduct  of  the  South  in 
Kansas  brought  the  North  to  its  consciousness.      Since  then  it  has  been 
true  as  steel.  Well,  the  South  said,  "the  North  will  not  willingly  see  us 
go  out  of  the  Union — that  is  a  mere  ruse  on  our  part  :  we  will  go  out 
by    '  secession,'    and   say,    we    will    come  back   if  you    give   us  new 
guarantees.     Even  if  they  will  not  do  that,  there  will  be  no  war ;  for 
the  North  will  not  fight  us."     With  these  arguments  the  legislatures 
were  won,  and  the  secession  was  accomplished  in  the  greater  number  of 
the  slave  States.     The  upper  classes  thought,  that  secession  was  only 
a  political  trick,  through  which  they  were  to  go  back  into  a  reconstructed 
Union,  with  guarantees  inserted  for  the  nationalization  of  slavery  and 
for    its    extension    all  over   the   continent.      But  at  this   time    there 
happened  to  be  more  or  less  of  conference  between  friends  in  the  North 
and  friends  in  the  South,  and  it  seemed  as  if  the  consummation  would  be 
prevented.     Virginia   had   refused   persistently  to  pass   the   secession 
ordinance.     The  convention  that  was  by  the  popular,  vote  elected  in 
Virginia  was  known  to  be  immensely  in  favour  of  remaining  in  the 
Union.     It  was  necessary  that  something  should  be  done  to  prevent 
Virginia  standing  out  with  the  North,  and  it  was  done.      The  gang 
of  slave  drivers  in  Richmond  intimidated  the  members  of  the  convention. 
When  the  history  shall  be  written,  the  fact  will  appear,  that  numbers 
of  convention-men  were  made  afraid  for  their  lives.     They  were  told 
almost  in  so  many  words,     "You  shall  never  leave  Richmond  alive, 
if  you  fail  to  vote   secession."      It   was   voted,    but   secretly,  and  it 
was  not  known  in  Virginia  for  weeks.     I  was  myself  a  fellow  passenger 
with  one  man,  who  was  making  a  circuitous  journey  throughout  the 
North  to  get  home  alive  to  his  farm  in  the  Western  part  of  Virginia, 
because   he   had   been   true,   and    refused  to  vote  for  secession,    even 
secretly.     It  was  to  commit  the  South,  to  fire  the  wavering,  and  arouse 
the  seetional  blood,  that  orders  were  sent  by  telegraph  from  Washington 
by  the  Southern  conspirators  who  were   lurking  there — "  Open  your 
batteries    on    Fort  Sumter."       And  they  fired  at   that  glorious    old 
flag,  which  had  carried  the  honour  of  the  American  name  round  the 
globe,  in  order  that  they  might  take  Virginia  out  of  the  Union,  and 
compel  the  North  to  submit  either  to  a  degrading  compromise,  or  to 


38  GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

the  independence  of  the   South.      That  is  the  history  of  the  matter. 
(Applause.)    Now  let  me  speak  of  the  North.    Oh  how  I  wish  you  could 
have  seen  the  North  !     I  have  stood  on  the  summit  of  the  noblest  moun- 
tains in  Switzerland  :  I  have  seen  whatever  that  country  had  to  show  me 
of  mountain  peak,  of  more  than  royal  mountains  of  clouds  of  glaciers  : 
I  have  seen  the  beauties  of  Northern  Italy  :  I  have  seen  the  glories  of 
the  ocean  :  I  have  seen  whatever  Nature  has  to  show  of  her  sublimity 
on  land  and  on  sea  :  but  the  grandeur  of  the  uprising  of  the  Northern 
people,  when  the  thunder   of  the  first  cannon   rolled   through   their 
valleys  and  over  their  hills,  was  something  beyond  all  these  ;  nor  do  I 
expect,  till  the  judgment  day  fills  me  with  wondering  awe,  to  see  such 
a  sight  again.    There  had  been  a  secret  agreement  with  a  portion  of  the 
democratic   leaders  in  the  North,    that   they   were   to   side  with  the 
South,  and  paralyze  Northern  resistance.      But  with  stern  unanimity  the 
public  mutterings  denounced  complicity  with  the  South  as  a  treason 
worthy  of  death.     The  astounding  outburst  of  patriotic  feeling  terri- 
fied even  such  men  as  the  two  Woods,  and  they  made  haste  to  join 
the  rolling  tide.      No   rainbow  was   ever   so   decked   with   colour  as 
was  Broadway  with  flags.    Bunting  went  up  in  the  market.    (Laughter.) 
High  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  democratic  and  republican,    men   that 
had  been  for  the  South,  and  men  that  had  been  for  the  North,  found 
themselves  in  company.     It  is  said  that  misery  makes   one  acquainted 
with  strange  bedfellows,'  but   patriotism   makes   even  stranger   trans- 
formations. I  found  men  that  were  ready  to  mob  me  yesterday  for  my 
anti-slavery  agitations,  were  ready  to   denounce  me  to-day  because  I 
was  not  anti-slavery  enough.     Propelled  by  this  universal  feeling,  the 
Government  of  the  United  States  began — to   do  what  1     To   defend 
the  laws  and  the  constitution.     If  they  had  failed  to  do  this,  if  when  the 
Government  and  the  country  was  threatened  by  this  rebellion,  they 
had   faltered,   not  Judas,  not  the  meanest  traitor  that  has  ever  been 
execrated  through  all  time,  would  have  surpassed  them  in  ignominy. 
(Cheers.)      I   have    been    asked,    would  it   not  have   been   better   to 
negotiate  ?     What !   with  cannon  balls  firing  right   into   your   midst ! 
(Hear,  hear.)     The  other  side  was  using  powder  and  balls,  and  you 
propose  to  us  wad  and  paper !      The  day  for  talking  was  gone  by  for 
ever.     They  had  talked  too  much  already.     It  was  then  the  day  for 
action.   (Cheers.)     Men  in  England,  Scotland,  or  Ireland,  ask  me,  why 
did  you  not  consent  to  let  them  go,  since  the  whole  Southern  economy 
is  so  opposed  to  Northern  ?    Only  on  the  single  matter  of  slavery  is  there 
any  antagonism.     If  that  were  to  be  an  increasing  and  perpetual  evil, 
many  men  would  assent  to  separation  who  now  do  not.     But  we  believe 
it  to  be  a  removable  evil.     The  nature  of  our  institutions  is  against  it. 
The  laws  of  nature  are  against  it.     The  conscience  of  the  nation,  the 
public  sentiment  of  Christendom,  are  against  it.     The  real  and  general 
interest  of  the  South  itself  is  opposed  to  it.    Free  labour  in  place  .of  slave 
labour  would  be  the  greatest  boon  that  could  be  conferred  upon  the 
Southern  States.     Men  that  profit  by  slavery  are  but  a  handful ;  all  the 
rest  suffer  from  its  deadly,  wasting  nature.    If  then  a  limit  can  be  placed 
to  its  growth,  and  it  can  be  subjected  to  the  unobstructed  influences  of 


GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING.  39 

natural,  moral,  arid  civil  laws,  it  will  quickly  begin  to  decay  and  give 
place  to  a  healthier  system.  Already  the  tendency  had  in  many 
sections  been  established ;  and,  as  it  was  this  fervent  hope  of  a  peaceful 
ending  of  slavery  that  disinclined  thousands  of  conscientious  men  in  the 
North  to  meddle  with  it,  so  now  it  is  the  same  wish  to  see  slavery 
ended  that  leads  them  to  refuse  their  consent  to  a  separation,  which  not 
only  dismembers  the  nation,  but  gives  a  new  lease  of  life  to  slavery,  and 
opens  for  it  a  dark  empire  full  of  sorrow  and  tears  and  blood  within,  of 
quarrels  and  wars  without,  an  empire  of  belligerent  mischiefs  to  all. 
When  I  am  asked,  Why  not  let  the  South  go  1  1  return  for  an  answer  a 
question.  Be  pleased  to  tell  me  what  part  of  the  British  Islands  you 
are  willing  to  let  go  from  under  the  crown  when  its  inhabitants  secede 
and  set  up  for  independence  1  If  you  say  ten  or  fifteen  States,  with 
twelve  millions  of  inhabitants,  are  not  to  be  compared  to  the  county  of 
Kent.  I  say,  they  are  to  be  compared  to  Kent.  For  that  county 
bears  a  greater  proportion  to  the  square  miles  of  the  British  Islands 
than  the  rebellious  States  do  to  the  whole  territory  of  the  Union. 
But  the  right  or  wrong  of  such  rebellions  are  not  questions  in 
arithmetic.  Numbers  do  not  change  civil  obligations.  Secession  was 
an  appeal  from  the  ballot  to  the  bullet.  It  was  not  a  noble  minority 
defying  usurpation  or  despotism  in  the  assertion  of  fundamental  rights. 
It  was  a  despotism,  which,  when  put  to  shame  by  the  will  of  a  free  people, 
expressed  through  the  ballot-box,  rushed  into  rebellion  as  the  means  of 
perpetuating  slavery.  Northern  sentiment,  and  great  natural  laws, 
were  preparing  the  way  for  the  emancipation  of  four  million  of  slaves  : 
thereupon  eight  million  whites  broke  allegiance  and  withdrew  from  a 
free  government  in  order  to  maintain  this  slave  system;  and  that  is 
praised,  in  Great  Britain,  as  a  heroic  struggle  for  independence  ! 
Whose  independence,  the  white  man's  or  the  black  man's  ?  Unreflecting 
men  are  deceived  by  the  instances  of  colonies  in  the  past,  such  as  the 
American  colonies,  breaking  off  from  the  parent  Government,  and 
asserting  their  independence.  A  remote  colony,  an  outlying  and 
separate  territory,  whose  autonomy  is  already  practically  established, 
and  whose  connection  with  the  home  government  is  not  intimate,  territo- 
rial, adjacent,  but  only  political, — is  not  to  be  compared  with  home- 
territory,  geographically  touching  the  country  along  its  whole  line. 
This  is  not  cutting  off  a  foot,  or  a  hand.  It  is  cutting  across  the  body 
right  under  the  heart.  The  line  of  fracture  proposed  by  the  South,  is  not 
a  stone's  throw  from  the  national  capital.  France  might  consent  to  let 
Algiers  go,  but  would  she  let  a  north  and  south  line  be  run  touching  the 
city  of  Paris,  on  the  east,  and  separating  all  the  territory  east  from  her 
dominions  ?  Great  Britain  might  suffer  the  Canadas  to  secede  from 
the  crown ;  but  would  she  suffer  an  east  and  west  line  to  be  run  along 
the  edge  of  London,  and  all  the  territory  south  of  it,  to  pass  into 
hostile  hands  ?  Yet  this  is  the  very  case  of  America.  Secession 
accomplished  will  leave  Washington  toppling  on  the  edge  of  the 
Southern  abyss,  in  whose  lurid  future  loom  the  elements  of  quarrel, 
collision,  and  terrific  war.  In  asserting  the  integrity  of  our  territory 
under  the   national  Government,  we  shut   that  door,  through  which 


40  GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

threaten  to  come  just  such   storms  as  have  for  hundreds  of  years 
past  deluged  Europe  with  blood.     Better  a  single  gigantic  struggle  now 
than  a  hundred  years  of  intermittent  wars,  ending  in  treacherous  truces, 
and  breaking  out  again  at  every  decade  in  fierce  conflict.  I  shall  now  refer 
to  the  astonishing  pretence  that  this  war  has  nothing  to  do  with  slavery  ! 
Never  has  the  South  asserted  this.   The  interest  of  slavery  was  the  very 
ground  alleged  for  rebellion,  and  the  justification  put  in  for  it.     Slavery 
having   been   adopted   as   the   central  principle  of  Southern  political 
economy, — her   politics   having  for  thirty  years  avowedly   and   indis- 
putably moved  around  that  centre, — all  her  quarrels  with  the  North 
having  been  about  slavery,  directly  or  indirectly, — the  issues  of  the  last 
Presidential  election  having  been  issues  made  upon  this  very  question  of 
slavery, — all  her  principal  statesmen  having  made  interferences  with 
slavery  wrongs  at  the  hands  of  the  North — wrongs  in  the  past  or  feared 
in  the  future — the  very  reason  of  rebellion, — the  whole  interior  history 
of  America  for  seventy  years  having  been  wound  up  on  this  spool, — what 
amazing  impudence  do  they  manifest,  who,  calculating  on  the  ignorance 
of  the  British  public,  dare  to  affirm,  that  slavery  has  nothing  to  do  with 
this  war  !     Slavery  has  been  the  very  alphabet  of  the  war.     Every  letter 
of  its  history  has  been  taken  from  the  fount  of  slavery.     The  whole 
black  literature  of  the  war  has  been  drawn  from  slavery  !     To  be  sure 
there  is  a  division  of  opinion  in  America,  whether  the  five  States  of  the 
South,  or  the  Abolitionists  of  the  North,  are  most  to  blame  for  making 
slavery  the  occasion  of  the  war;   but  not  a  sane  man  on  our  whole 
continent  can  be  found  denying  that  slavery  is  the  root  of  it !    You  can- 
not point  to  a  war  either  in  ancient  or  modern  times,  that  has  turned 
so  much  upon  fundamental  principles  as  this  one  between  the  North  and 
the  South.     There  is  the  South  with  her  gigantic  system  of  slavery,  and 
there  is  the  North  with   her  freedom,  her  free  soil,  free  labour,  free 
speech,  and  her  free  press  ;  and  the  question  is,  which  oj  these  two  shall 
govern  the  American  continent?     (Applause.)     The  North  preferred  to 
settle  this  question  by  discussion,  by  moral  influence,  by  legal  and  con- 
stitutional means  ;  but  the  South  threw  down  the  gauntlet,  refused  a 
convention,  and  fired  on  the  old  flag ;  and  now  her  minions  are  whining 
and  crying  in  England  because  the  North  will  make  war  I     If  they  did 
not  like  blows,  why  did  they  strike  them  ?     I  will  admit  that  the  South 
is  as  gallant  a  people  as  ever  lived  ;  I  will  admit  that  when  they  shall 
come  back  to  the  Union,  as  they  will — (applause,  and  cries  of  "  never," 
and  waving  of  handkerchiefs) — they  will  come  back — (a  voice,  "never.") 
— Perhaps  you  will  not,  but — (laughter)—  they  will.  ("Never;"  a  voice, 
"  they  are  Anglo-Saxon  and  will  never  come  back.")   Why,  if  I  thought 
that  this  thing  was  to  be  fought  out  here,  I  would  say  it  over  and  over 
again  till  daylight  broke ;  but  not  your  breath  denying  or  mine  affirming 
will  alter  the  issue.  The  Grants, 'the  Bosecra,nzes,  the  Bankses  must  do 
that.     (Hisses.)    But  when  the  South  shall  come  back  into  the  Union — 
("never") — we  shall  honour  them  more  than  ever   we  did  for  their 
good  management  and  courage.     (Applause.)     There  are  some  things 
that  men  may  pay  too  much  to  find  out ;  but  if  the  South,  by  paying 
the  blood  of  thrice  ten  thousand  of  her  sons,  finds  out  that  liberty  is 


GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING.  41 

better  than  slavery,  she  will  not  have  paid  a  drop  too  much.  (Applause.) 
The  triumph  of  the  North  in  this  conflict  will  be  the  triumph  of  free 
institutions,  even  if  the  Northern  people  and  Government  could  be 
proved  to  have  been  delinquent,  in  every  individual  and  in  every  public 
officer.  Large  as  is  our  country,  independent  in  opinions,  and  hitherto 
divided  in  sentiment  about  slavery, — never  was  any  people  so  sincere,  so 
religiously  earnest,  as  is  now  the  North.  But,  what  if  its  people  were 
insincere,  its  president  a  trickster,  his  emancipation  proclamation  a 
hollow  pretence  %  What  if  the  North  were  as  cruel  to  coloured  people 
as  slavery  is  %  All  that  would  not  change  the  inevitable  fact,  that  the 
triumph  of  the  North  carries  with  it  her  free  institutions  all  over  the 
continent !  It  is  a  war  of  Principles  and  of  Institutions.  The  victory 
will  be  a  victory  of  Principles  and  of  Institutions.  This  is  avowed  by 
the  South  as  well  as  by  us.  If  the  North  prevails,  she  carries  over  the 
continent  her  pride  of  honest  work,  her  free  public  schools,  her  home- 
stead law,  which  gives  to  every  man  who  will  occupy  it  a  hundred  and 
sixty  acres  of  land ;  her  free  press,  her  love  and  habit  of  free  speech,  her 
untiring  industry,  her  thrift,  frugality,  and  morality,  and  above  all  her 
democratic  ideas  of  human  rights,  and  her  Old*  English  notions  of  a 
commonwealth,  transmitted  to  her  from  Sydney,  Hampden,  Vane, 
Milton  j  and  not  least,  her  free  churches  with  their  vast  train  of  charities 
and  beneficences  !  These  results  do  not  depend  upon  the  will  of  in- 
dividuals. They  go  with  the  society,  the  civilization,  the  ineradicable 
nature  of  those  Northern  democratic  institutions  which  are  in  conflict 
with  Southern  despotic  institutions.  If  then  any  one  says,  I  cannot  give 
my  sympathy  to  the  Northern  cause,  because  the  people  of  the  North  are 
just  as  bad  as  the  people  of  the  South,  I  first  utterly  deny  the  fact,  but 
next,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  I  for  a  moment  yield  it,  and  reply  that 
the  institutions  of  the  North  are  not  so  bad  as  the  institutions  of  the 
South,  even  if  the  people  are.  This  is  a  war  of  institutions,  not  simply 
of  races.  It  is  not  necessary  to  look  into  the  motives  of  her  individual 
citizens.  Look  into  the  spirit  and  structure  of  Northern  society.  Look 
at  her  history  and  see  in  the  vast  Western  States  what  is  the  result  of 
the  ascendancy  of  her  ideas.  Look  into  those  great  natural  laws  which 
have  generated  and  controlled  her  civilization  !  But  I  return  to  the 
shameless  and  impudent  assertion  that  the  North  is  not  sincere  in  this 
conflict.  True,  the  North  has  her  own  ways  of  managing  her  own  alairs. 
,  She  is  guided  by  the  genius  of  her  own  institutions,  and  not  by  the 
whims  of  unsympathizing  critics  three  thousand  miles  off,  ignorant  of 
her  ideas,  history,  institutions,  emergencies,  and  difficulties.  But  there 
has  never  before,  since  time  began,  been  a  spectacle  like  that  in  America. 
A  million  men  have  been  on  foot  in  the  army  and  navy,  every  man  a 
volunteer ',  the  best  blood  of  the  North,  her  workmen,  her  farmers  and 
artizans,  her  educated  sons,  lawyers,  doctors,  ministers  of  the  gospel, 
young  men  of  wealth  and  refinement,  side  by  side  with  the  modest  sons 
of  toil,  and  every  man  a  volunteer  I  They  have  come,  not  like  the  Goths 
and  Huns  from  a  wandering  life  or  inclement  skies,  to  seek  fairer  skies 
and  richer  soil;  but  from  homes  of  luxury,  from  cultivated  farms,  from 
busy  workshops,  from  literary  labours,  from  the  bar,  the  pulpit,  and  the 


42  GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

exchange,  thronging  around  the  old  national  flag  that  had  symbolized 
liberty  to  mankind,  all  moved  by  a  profound  love  of  country,  and  firmly, 
fiercely  determined  that  the  mother  land  shall  not  be  divided,  especially 
not  in  order  that  slavery  may  scoop  out  for  itself  a  den  of  refuge  from 
Northern  civilization,  and  an  empire  to  domineer  over  all  the  American 
tropics  !  It  is  this  sublime  patriotism  which,  on  every  side,  I  hear 
stigmatized  as  the  mad  rush  of  national  ambition  !  Has  then  the  love 
of  country  run  so  low  in  Great  Britain,  that  the  rising  of  a  nation  to 
defend  its  territory,  its  government,  its  flag,  and  all  the  institutions 
over  which  it  has  waved,  is  a  theme  for  cold  aversion  in  the  pulpit,  and 
sneers  in  the  pew  %  Is  generosity  dead  in  England,  that  she  will  not 
admire  in  her  children  those  very  qualities  which  have  made  the  children 
proud  of  the  memories  of  their  common  English  ancestors  ?  But,  it  is 
asked,  since  the  South  is  so  utterly  discordant  with  the  North, 
why  not  let  them  go,  and  have  peace  ?  Go  ?  It  is  to  stay  that 
they  are  fighting.  If  the  white  population  would  but  go  and  leave 
to  us  and  to  the  negroes  a  peaceful  territory,  we  might  be  willing. 
But  it  is  a  rebellious  population  asking  leave  to  organize  political  inde- 
pendence on  United  Spates  territory,  for  the  sake  of  threatening  the 
peace  of  the  whole  future  !  Our  trouble  is,  that  they  will  stay  if  we 
give  them  leave  to  go.  (Laughter.)  No  mountains  divide  the  North 
from  the  South — they  run  the  other  way.  No  cross  rivers  divide 
them — they  run  the  other  way.  No  latitudes  or  climates  divide  the  one 
from  the  other.  Don't  you  know  that  God  has  affianced  the  torrid  and 
the  temperate  zones  in  America  one  to  the  other,  and  that  they  are 
always  running  into  each  other's  arms  1  The  Gulf-streams  of  popula- 
tion are  constantly  interchanging  in  such  a  continent  as  oars.  There  is 
no  division-line  that  you  can  make,  except  a  merely  arbitrary  one. 
There  is  a  line  of  1,200  miles,  east  and  west,  which  you  propose  in  your 
division  to  make  the  fiery  line  of  a  slave  empire.  Do  you  ask  us  to  such 
a  bequest  of  peace  as  that  ?  A  Southern  boundary  of  1,200  miles  long, 
charged  with  the  flames  and  thunder  of  war,  ready  to  explode  on  any 
occasion  1  Well,  may  be — may  be — you  could  lie  down  on  a  powder 
magazine,  with  a  thousand  tons  of  powder  in  it,  and  a  fire  raging  within 
an  inch  of  it,  but  I  could  not  !  Will  so  much  as  one  cause  of  quarrel 
be  taken  out  of  the  way  1  Will  there  be  anything  that  will  stop  slaves 
running  across,  and  the  South  being  irritated  because  we  harbour  them'? 
Of  course  we  should  harbour  them,  as  you  do  in  Canada.  No  law  could 
stop  it  then.  (Cheers.)  The  only  thing  that  ever  gave  to  the  fugitive 
slave-law  a  shadow,  a  vestige  of  power,  was  that  for  the  sake  of  peace 
many  in  the  North  consented,  somehow  or  other,  to  get  rid  of  their 
consciences.  I  never  did.  (Applause.)  I  hated  the  law.  I  trod  it  under- 
foot ;  and  I  declared,  to  the  face  of  the  magistrates  and  the  government, 
that  I  would  break  it  in  every  way  I  could.  And  I  did.  (Cheers.) 
Now  say,  if  it  were  so,  when  there  were  motives  of  patriotism  to 
maintain  such  an  obnoxious  law,  what  would  it  be  when  the  sections 
were  rent  asunder?  If  separated,  would  the  contrast  of  free  labour  and 
slave  labour  be  less  exciting  1  Would  our  press  be  less  bold  in  its  procla- 
mation of  doctrines  of  liberty?    Would  not  parties  in  secret  league  with 


GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING.  43 

Southern  parties  torment  the  border  States  with  new  divisions,  and  make 
that  peace  impossible  by  which  we  are  to  be  bribed  to  cease  this  war  1 
Cruel  as  the  war  is,  yet  to  stop  it  until  slavery  has  its  death-wound, 
would  be  even  more  cruel !  When  the  surgeon  has  cut  half  the  cancer 
out,  is  that  man  the  friend  of  the  patient,  who,  seeing  the  blood  and 
hearing  the  groans,  should  persuade  him  to  leave  the  operation  half  per- 
formed, and  bind  up  the  cancered  limb  1  But,  you  ask,  How  long  shall 
we  carry  violence  into  the  South  1  I  will  ask  you  a  question  in  reply. 
If  in  the  purlieus  of  vice  in  old  Glasgow,  there  should  be  a  ward  of  which 
a  confederation  of  burglars  and  thieves  had  taken  possession,  how  long 
would  you  invade  it  with  your  police  1  (Laughter.)  Would  Glasgow 
give  up  to  them  or  would  they  have  to  give  up  to  Glasgow  1  We  may 
now  understand  what  Southern  rebellion  means.  There  seems  a  need 
of  information  on  this  point  in  high  places.  Earl  Russell,  in  replying 
to  Mr.  Sumner's  arguments  upon  rebellion,  reproached  him  with  incon- 
sistency in  such  a  horror  of  rebellion,  America  being  the  child  of  two 
rebellions  !  Were  they  rebellious  against  liberty  to  more  desrjotism  1  or 
against  oppression  to  more  freedom  1  The  English  rebellion  and  the 
American  rebellion  were  both  toward  greater  freedom  of  all  classes  of 
men.  This  rebellion  is  for  the  sake  of  holding  four  million  slaves 
with  greater  security,  and  less  annoyance  from  free  institutions  !  And 
now  observe !  The  South,  expressly  in  order  to  hold  fast  her  four 
million  slaves,  makes  war  against  what  the  Confederate  vice-president, 
Mr.  Stephens,  in  dissuading  secession,  pronounced  to  be  "  the  best, 
freest,  justest,  most  lenient  Government  that  the  sun  ever  shone  upon." 
He  declared  that  the  South  had  no  grievances ;  and  since  secession,  he 
has  glorified  the  new  Confederation,  as  established  with  "slavery  as  its 
corner-stone."  On  this  is  written  in  lurid  letters  of  infernal  light, 
"  The  only  foundation  of  our  liberty  is  to  own  the  labourer  and  to 
oppress  the  slave." — When  such  a  body  of  insurgents  comes  to  ask  you 
to  recognize  its  independence,  do  you  think  it  just  and  humane — is  it 
according  to  the  instinct — is  it  according  to  the  conscience  of  Great 
Britain  to  say  "  that  nation  ought  to  have  an  independence  1 "  And 
now  let  me  say  one  word  more ;  for  I  am  emboldened  by  your  courtesy. 
You  now  see  what  it  means  to  give  your  aid  and  succour  to  the  South. 
(Cheers.)  Why  were  you  in  favour  of  giving  the  Hungarians  their 
liberty  1  Because  they  said  the  yoke  of  Austria  is  heavier  than  we  can 
bear,  and  you  sympathized  with  them  because  it  was  a  step  towards 
larger  liberty.  When  Greece  complained,  why  did  the  nations 
interfere  1  It  was  to  give  her  more  liberty,  not  less.  When  Italy 
asked  help,  why  did  France — then  guided  by  her  better  genius — 
give  her  armies  to  beat  back  the  Austrians  and  give  Italy  her 
sway  in  the  Northern  part  of  that  beautiful  peninsula  1  It  was 
because  Italy  sighed  for  the  sweets  of  liberty — that  which  is  the 
right  of  every  people  on  the  globe.  Why  to-day  does  every  man 
wish  that  the  Czar  may  be  baffled,  that  he  may  be  sent  back  to  the 
frozen  fastnesses  of  the  North,  and  that  Poland  may  stand  erect  in  her 
nationality  %  (Cheers.)  Why  ?  It  is  because  Poland  is  under  a  des- 
potism and  is  struggling  for  independence   and  liberty.     (Applause.) 


44  GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

You  know  now  what  I  think  about  sending  clothes,  arms,  powder,  ships, 
and  all  the  muniments  of  war,  or  supplies  of  any  kind,  to  the  South.  I. 
do  not  stop  to  discuss  whether  it  is  legal  or  illegal.  I  do  not  discuss 
this  as  a  question  of  technical  law  at  all.  I  lift  it  up  and  put  it  on  the 
ground  of  moral  law.  Between  two  parties,  one  of  whom  is  labouring 
for  the  integrity  and  sanctity  of  labour,  and  the  other  is  for  robbery,  the 
degradation  of  labour,  and  the  integrity  of  slavery, — I  say  that  the 
man  that  gives  his  aid  to  the  Slave  Power  is  allied  to  it,  and  is  making 
his  money  by  building  up  tyranny.  (Hear,  and  cheers.)  Every 
man  that  strikes  a  blow  on  the  iron  that  is  put  into  those  ships  for  the 
South,  is  striking  a  blow  and  forging  a  manacle  for  the  hand  of  the 
slave.  (Applause  and  hisses.)  Every  free  labourer  in  old  Glasgow  that  is 
labouring  to  rear  up  iron  ships  for  the  South,  is  labouring  to  establish 
on  sea  and  on  land  the  doctrine  that  capital  has  a  right  to  own  "labour." 
(Cheers  and  hisses.)  You  are  false  to  your  own  principles,  to  your  own 
interests,  to  mankind,  and  to  the  great  working  classes.  You  have  no 
right,  for  the  sake  of  poor  pitiful  pelf,  to  go  against  the  great  toiling 
multitudes  of  Europe  that  are  lifting  up  their  hands  for  more  education 
and  more  liberty.  You  have  no  right  to  betray  that  cause  by  allying 
yourselves  with  despots  who,  in  holding  slaves,  establish  the  doctrine 
that  might  makes  right.  (Applause.)  It  is  not  in  anger  that  I 
speak,  it  is  not  in  pettishness  or  in  vehemence.  It  is  the  day-of-judg- 
ment  view  of  the  matter.  0  !  I  would  rather  than  all  the  crowns  and 
thrones  of  earth  to  have  the  sweet,  assuring  smile  of  Jesus  when  he  says, 
"  Come,  welcome,  inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  unto  the  least  of  these  ye  did- 
unto  me."  And  I  would  rather  face  the  thunderbolt  than  stand  before 
Him  when  he  says  on  that  terrible  day,  "  inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  unto 
the  least  of  these  my  little  ones,  ye  did  it  nob  unto  me."  Ye  strike 
God  in  the  face  when  you  work  for  slaveholders.  Your  money  so  got 
and  quickly  earned  will  be  badly  kept,  and  you  will  be  poor  before 
you  can  raise  your  children,  and  dying  you  will  leave  a  memory 
that  will  rise  against  you  at  the  day  of  judgment.  By  the  solemnity 
of  that  judgment — by  the  sanctity  of  conscience — by  the  love  you  bear 
to  humanity — by  your  old  hereditary  love  of  liberty ; — in  the  name 
of  God  and  of  mankind,  I  charge  you  to  come  out  from  among 
them,  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  unclean  and  filthy  lucre  made 
by  pandering  to  slavery.  One  word  more.  I  protest,  in  the  name 
of  all  that  there  is  in  kindred  blood,  against  Great  Britain  putting 
herself  in  such  a  position  that  she  cannot  be  in  cordial  and  ever-during 
alliance  with  the  free  republic  in  America.  (Applause.)  I  declare  to 
you  that  it  is  a  monstrous  severance  of  your  only  natural  alliance,  for 
Great  Britain  to  turn  aside  from  free  America  and  seek  close  relations 
with  despotism  !  You  owe  yourselves  to  us,  and  we  owe  ourselves  to 
you.  You  ought  to  live  at  peace  with  France — you  ought  to  study 
their  reciprocal  interest  and  they  yours.  But  after  all,  while  you 
should  be  in  Christian  peace  with  France,  I  tell  you  it  is  unnatural  for 
England  to  be  in  closer  alliance  with  France  than  America.  (Hear 
and  disapprobation.)  Nevertheless,  like  it  or  dislike  it,  so  it  is  !  On 
the  other  hand,  it  is  truly  unnatural  for  America,  when   she   would 


GLASGOW — PUBLIC  MEETING.  45 

go  into  a  foreign  alliance  to  seek  her  alliance  with  Russia.  (Hear 
and  applause.)  Oh,  why  don't  you  hiss  now?  (Laughter.)  I  declare 
that  America  should  study  the  prosperity  of  Russia,  as  of  every 
nation  of  the  globe ;  but  when  she  gives  her  heart  and  hand  in 
alliance,  she  owes  it  to  Greab  Britain.  (Applause.)  So  !  you  want 
to  hear  that.  And  when  Great  Britain  turns  to  find  one  that 
she  can  lean  on — can  go  to  with  all  her  heart — one  of  her  own — we 
are  her  eldest-boru,  strongest — to  us  she  must  come.  (Applause.)  A 
war  between  England  and  America  would  be  like  murder  in  the  family — 
unnatural — monstrous  beyond  words  to  depict.  Now,  then,  if  that  be 
so,  it  is  our  duty  to  avoid  all  cause  and  occasion  of  offence.  (Hear, 
hear.)  But  remember — remember — remember — -we  are  carrying  out 
our  dead.  Our  sons,  brothers'  sons,  our  sisters'  children — they  are 
in  this  great  war  of  liberty  and  of  principle.  We  are  taxing  all  our 
energies  :  you  are  at  peace,  and  if  in  the  flounderings  of  this  gigantic 
conflict  we  accidentally  tread  on  your  feet,  are  we  or  you  to  have  most 
patience  ?  When  the  widowed  mother  sits  watching  the  shortening 
breath  of  her  child,  hovering  between  life  and  death, — it  may  be  that 
the  rent  has  not  been  paid, — it  may  be  that  her  fuel  has  not  yet  been 
settled  for  ;  but  what  would  you  think  of  that  landlord  or  of  that  pro- 
vision dealei  that  would  send  a  warrant  of  distress  when  the  funeral 
was  going  out  of  the  door,  and  arrest  her  when  she  was  walking  to  the 
grave  with  her  firstborn  son.  Even  a  brute  would  say,  "Wait — wait  !" 
Yet  it  was  in  the  hour  of  our  mortal  anguish,  that  when,  by  an 
unauthorised  act,  one  of  the  captains  of  our  navy  seized  a  British  ship 
for  which  our  government  instantly  offered  all  reparation,  that  a 
British  army  was  hurried  to  Canada.  I  do  not  undertake  to  teach  the 
law  that  governs  the  question  :  but  this  I  do  undertake  to  say,  and  I 
will  carry  every  generous  man  in  this  audience  with  me,  when  I  affirm 
that  if  between  America,  bent  double  with  the  anguish  of  this  bloody 
war,  and  Great  Britain,  who  sits  at  peace,  there  is  to  be  forbearance 
on  either  side,  it  is  on  your  side.  (Applause.)  Here  then  I  rest 
my  cause  to-night,  asking  everyone  of  you  to  unite  with  me  in  praying, 
that  God,  the  arbiter  of  the  fates  of  nations,  would  so  guide  the  issue, 
that  those  who  struggle  for  liberty  shall  be  victorious ;  and  that  God, 
who  sways  the  hearts  of  nations,  may  so  sway  the  hearts  of  Great 
Britain  and  America,  that  not  to  the  remotest  period  of  time  shall 
there  be  dissension,  but  golden  concord  between  them  for  their  own 
sakes  and  for  the  good  of  the  whole  world.     (Great  cheering.) 

Several  questions  having  been  put  and  answered,  the  Rev.  Dr.  George 
Jeffrey  moved  and  Councillor  Alexander  seconded  a  resolution  expres- 
sive of  approbation  of  Mr.  Beecher's  able  and  uncompromising 
advocacy  of  the  rights  of  the  slave  to  freedom,  and  thanking  him  for 
the  very  admirable  and  eloquent  address  delivered  that  evening,  which 
was  carried  amid  great  and  prolonged  cheering. 


EDINBUKGH  .-OCTOBER  145  1863. 


GREAT    MEETING  IN   THE   FREE   CHURCH 
ASSEMBLY    HALL. 

Last  night,  one  of  the  most  crowded  meetings  that  ever  took  place  in 
this  city,  was  held  in  the  Free  Church  Assembly  Hall,  in  order  to  hear 
the  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beech er.  Long  before  the  hour  fixed  for  the 
meeting,  all  the  entrances  to  the  Hall  were  besieged  by  large  masses  of 
people ;  and  the  rush  for  places  was  so  great  that  a  few  minutes  after 
the  opening  of  the  doors  every  available  seat  was  taken  possession  of. 
Crowds  of  people  still  continued  to  pour  into  the  Hall,  and  the  passages 
became  crammed.  As  the  time  arrived  for  the  entrance  of  the  chairman 
and  Mr.  Beecher,  it  became  a  serious  question  how  they  were  to  gain 
admission  to  the  Hall.  All  doubt  was  set  at  rest  on  the  matter  by  loud 
cries  arising  from  the  east  doorway  that  Mr.  Beecher  could  not  obtain 
an  entrance.  A  great  effort  was  made  to  gain  a  passage  for  the  rev. 
gentleman,  who,  after  some  time,  managed  to  reach  the  chair,  and  was 
received  with  loud  and  prolonged  cheers.  Some  of  the  gentlemen  for 
whom  seats  had  been  reserved  on  the  plattorm  also  gained  admission — 
some  by  the  passage,  and  others  by  climbing  to  the  Moderator's  gallery 
and  walking  along  the  ledge — but  it  was  discovered  that  the  chairman, 
Mr.  Duncan  M'Laren,  was  still  amissing.  After  the  lapse  of  a  few 
minutes,  however,  Mr.  M'Laren  and  four  French  gentlemen,  including 
M.  Gamier  Pages,  also  got  in  ;  and  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  com- 
menced. Amongst  those  on  the  platform  and  that  could  be  noticed  in 
the  dense  crowd  in  the  Hall,  were  Professor  Rogers,  Glasgow  University ; 
Revs.  W.  Arnot,  Dr.  W.  L.  Alexander,  and  G.  D.  Cullen ;  Thos.  Nelson, 
Esq.,  Go  H.  Stott,  Esq.,  Thos.  Ireland,  Esq.,  Dr.  Grosvenor,  New  York; 
Revs.  Dr.  Andrew  Thomson,  Mr.  Ogilvie,  Mr.  Henderson,  Mr.  Graham, 
Newhaven,  Dr.  Liddell,  Lochmaben,  and  John  Hutchison,  Dunfermline; 
Hugh  Brown..  Esq.,  Stephen  Bourne,  Esq.,  David  M'Laren,  Esq.,  Pro- 
fessor Anderson,  United  States,  America ;  Mons.  Dasmarest,  Mons. 
Gamier  Pages,  Henry  Martin,  Esq.,  Wm.  Duncan,  Esq.,  Jas.  Gulland,  Esq., 
Dr.  H.  Stephenson,  D.  Williamson,  Esq.,  of  Beech  wood ;  J.  Carmen  t, 
S.S.C. ;  Professoi  Joseph  Henry  M'Chesney,  M.A.,  American  Consul  at 
Newcastle-on-Tyne ;  James  Robie,  Esq.,  Rev.  Dr.  Johnston,  Rev.  Dr. 
Goold,  Mi.  Adam,  Leith  :  Mr.  George  Laing,  Rev.  W.  Pulsford,  Win. 
Nelson,  Esq.,  R.  S.  Grieve,  Esq.,  James  Balfour,  Esq.,  W.S. ;  John 


EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING.  47 

M'Laren,  Esq.,  F.  W.  Brown,  Esq.,  Jas.  Robertson,  Esq.,  Wm.  Duncan, 
Esq.,  W.S.,  John  Pender,  Esq.,  M.P.,  Totness ;  J.  H.  Raper,  Esq.,  Robt. 
Heywood,  Esq.,  C.  B.  Darbyshire,  Esq.,  Thos.  Hare,  Esq.,  London;  John 
Smith,  Esq.,  Glasgow;  D.  Lewis,  Esq.,  Councillor  Mawson,  Newcastle; 
Jas.  Webb,  Esq.,  Dublin ;  Jas.  Haugbton,  Esq.,  Dublin ;  Max  Kyllman, 
Esq.,  Manchester;  L.  L.  Hyatt,  Esq.,  J.  Douglas,  Esq. 

The  CHAIRMAN  said — Ladies  and  Gentlemen, — May  I  entreat  as 
a  great  favour  that  the  utmost  quietness  be  preserved,  because  I  have 
often  observed  that  it  is  those  in  a  large  meeting  who,  with  the  best 
intentions  in  the  world,  cry  "  Peace,"  that  practically  make  all  the 
noise.  (Laughter.)  Since  I  have  been  made  Chairman,  every  one,  I 
have  no  doubt,  will  be  quite  disposed  to  give  up  a  little  of  his  personal 
liberty  to  •  my  dictation  to-night.  (Applause.)  You  know  what  the 
meeting  is  about.  The  advertisement  tells  you  honestly  what  the  object 
is  in  calling  you  together,  and  therefore  there  is  no  person  here  present 
who  has  any  right  to  take  offence  at  anything  that  is  said  within  the 
four  quarters  of  the  hall.  ("Oh,  oh,"  applause  and  hisses.)  The  objects 
of  the  meeting  are  twofold — the  first  is  to  hear  the  Rev.  Mr.  Henry 
Ward  Beecher.  (Loud  and  prolonged  applause.)  That  means  that  we 
are  to  hear  him  express  his  own  opinions — (cheers) — and  whether  or  no 
these  opinions  may  be  in  unison  with  your  opinions  or  with  mine,  that 
is  a  matter  of  which  the  meeting  has,  I  apprehend,  no  right  to  com- 
plain. ("  Oh,  oh/'  and  applause.)  We  are  greatly  indebted  to  him,  T 
think,  for  responding  to  the  call.  He  has  been  toiling  night  and  day, 
I  may  say,  in  Manchester,  Liverpool,  Glasgow,  and  other  towns  ;  and 
he  has  come  here  on  a  very  short  notice,  and  your  anxiety  to  hear  him 
has  been  such  that  you  almost  excluded  him.  The  Rev.  Dr.  Candlish 
has  sent  an  apology  for  not  being  here.  There  is  less  cause  for  regret, 
because  he  was  the  author  of  the  beautiful  answer  that  recently  appeared 
in  the  newspapers  from  the  ministers  of  Scotland  to  the  address  of  the 
ministers  of  the  United  States.  As  the  document  met  with  such 
universal  acceptance,  the  committee  who  had  charge  of  making  the 
arrangements  for  this  meeting  thought  that,  in  place  of  originating  any 
resolution  of  their  own,  they  would  just  extract  a  small  portion  from 
that  admirable  paper,  convert  it  into  a  resolution,  and  ask  you  to  con- 
demn slavery  in  the  terms  in  which  it  is  condemed  in  the  address 
prepared  by  Dr.  Candlish  and  other  distinguished  men.  That  will  be 
the  only  resolution  which  will  be  submitted  to  you,  except  the  usual 
formal  votes  which  take  place  at  all  meetings.  The  document  to  which 
I  have  referred  has  already  received  the  signatures  of  about  a  thousand 
ministers,  and  they  are  coming  in  by  scores  every  day,  expressing  the 
opinion  of  all  parts  of  Scotland.  So  much  for  the  origin  and  nature 
of  the  meeting.  I  feel  that  in  this  question,  which  has  been  so  keenly 
contested  in  this  country,  there  may  be  great  difference  of  opinion  on 
the  part  of  the  persons  who  are  here  present.  I  entreat  that  whatever 
difference  of  opinion  may  exist,  every  one  may  be  heard  fairly  and 
courteously — (loud  applause) — and  if  the  resolution  which  is  proposed 
to  the  meeting  be  disapproved  of,  and  any  gentleman  comes  forward  to 
the  platform  to  move  an  amendment.  I  will  do  as  much  to  give  him  a 


48  EDINBUEGH — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

hearing  for  his  speech,  if  within  the  scope  of  the  resolution,  as  I  would 
do  to  any  other  gentleman.     (Loud  cheers.)     I  am  most  anxious  that 
everything  should  be  done  in  such  a  straightforward  manner  as  will 
commend  itself  to  all  lovers  of  fair  play.     (Cheers.)     I  may  just  state, 
in  addition,  this  one  fact,  that  from  other  circumstances  we  have  been 
honoured  in  this  city  with  the  presence  of  many  distinguished  foreigners, 
and  among  these  three  or  four  gentlemen  who  were  to  have  gone  by  the 
six  o'clock  train  to-night  in  order  to  get  to  Paris  to-morrow  morning. 
They  kindly  agreed  to  testify  their  detestation  of  slavery  by  attending 
at  this  meeting,  in  order  to  say  a  few  words  in  unison  with  what  I  have 
no  doubt  will  be  said  by  Mr.  Beecher.     These  are  M.  Gamier  Pages — 
(loud  cheers) — M.  Desmarest,  and  M.  Henri  Martyn,  the  distinguished 
historian  of  France,      (Applause.)      I  have  now  concluded  all  that  ia 
proper  to  the  business  of  this  meeting.     I  will,  in  two  sentences,  make 
what  is  in  some  respects  a  personal   explanation,  but   which   applies* 
equally  to  other  members  here  present  of  the  Social  Science  Association. 
We  who  hold  anti-slavery  opinions  have  been  blamed  by  many,  because, 
at  the  meetings  which  were  held,  we  did  not  give  vent  to  our  opinions 
in  opposition  to  those  that  were  expressed  by  our  distinguished  Chair- 
man ;  and  a  paper  was  prepared  and  handed  about  privately  for  the 
purpose  of  entering  a  protest  against  the  terms  in  which  that  distin- 
guished man  spoke  about  the  North.     I  did  everything  in  my  power  to 
prevent  such  a  paper  being  signed,  and  told  the  parties  to  show  their 
opinion  by  coming  here  to-night.     I  have  no  doubt  that,  as  Chairman  of 
this  meeting,  I  have  said  things,  and  will  say  things,  which  are  distasteful 
to  many  here  present ;   but  in  that  respect  the  Chairman  is  a  privi- 
leged person — (laughter) — because  he  has  no  liberty  of  replying.     Mr. 
M'Laren  concluded  by  introducing  Mr.  Beecher  to  the  meeting. 

Mr.  BEECHER,,  on  coming  forward,  was  received  with  loud  and 
prolonged  cheers  and  some  hissing.  When  silence  had  been  restored,  he 
said : — I  should  regret  to  have  my  associations  of  this,  the  most 
picturesque  city  of  the  world,  disturbed  as  they  would  be,  if  I  thought 
that  you  needed  so  much  preparatory  pleading  to  persuade  you  to  hear 
me.  (Loud  applause  and  laughter.)  I  have  lived  in  a  very  stormy 
time  in  my  own  land,  where  men  who  did  not  believe  in  my  sentimeuts 
had  pecuniary  and  political  interests  in  disturbing  meetings,  but  neither 
in  East,  nor  West,  nor  in  all  the  Middle  States,  have  I  thought  it 
necessary  to  ask  an  audience  to  hear  me — not  even  in  America,  the 
country,  as  we  have  lately  been  informed,  of  mobs  !  (Loud  cheers  and 
laughter.)  I  am  not  to-night  a  partizan  seeking  for  proselytes.  I  have 
no  other  interests  to  serve  but  those  which  are  common  to  all  good 
men — the  interests  of  truth,  of  justice,  of  liberty,  and  of  good  morals. 
If  I  differ  with  you  in  the  way  in  which  they  are  to  be  promoted,  what 
then  1  Cannot  you  hear  opinions  that  you  do  not  believe  %  I  am  so 
firm  in  my  convictions  that  I  can  bear  to  hear  their  opposites.  (Cheers.) 
It  is  not  then  so  much  to  persuade  you  to  my  views,  though  I  should 
be  glad  to  do  that,  as  it  is  to  give  a  full  and  frank  expression  of  them, 
supposing  that  there  are  many  here  that  would  be  interested  in  a  state- 
ment of  affairs,  as  they  are  now  proceeding  on  the  continent  of  America, 


EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING.  49 

if,  for  no  other  reason — at  least  for  the  philosophic  interest  there  must 
be  in  this  passing  phenomena.  It  may  be  to  you  but  a  simple  question 
of  national  psychology ;  it  may  be  to  some  of  you  a  matter  of  sympathy  ; 
but  whether  it  be  philosophic  interest  or  whether  it  be  humanitarian 
and  moral  interest,  it  shall  be  my  business  to  speak,  for  the  most  part, 
of  what  I  know,  and  so  to  speak  that  }  ou  shall  be  in  no  doubt  what- 
ever of  my  convictions.  (Loud  cheers  and  laughter.)  America  has 
been  going  through  an  extraordinary  revolution  unconsciously  and 
interiorly,  which  began  when  her  present  national  form  was  assumed, 
which  is  now  developing  itself,  but  which  existed  and  was  in  progress 
just  as  much  before  as  now  that  it  is  seen.  The  earlier  problem  was 
how  to  establish  an  absolute  independence  in  States  from  all  external 
control  1  Next  (and  this  is  the  peculiar  interest  of  the  period  which 
formed  our  Constitution),  how,  out  of  independent  States  to  form  a  Nation, 
yet  without  destroying  local  sovereignty  ]  The  period  of  germination  and 
growth  of  the  Union  of  the  separate  colonies  is  threefold.  The  first 
colonies  that  planted  the  American  shores  were  separate,  and  jealous  of 
their  separateness.  Sent  from  the  mother  country  with  a  strong  hatred 
of  oppression,  they  went  with  an  intense  individualism,  and  sought  to 
set  up,  each  party,  its  little  colony,  where  they  would  be  free  to  follow 
their  convictions  and  the  dictates  of  conscience.  (Loud  applause.)  And 
nothing  is  more  characteristic  of  the  earlier  politics  of  the  colonists  than 
their  jealous  isolation,  for  fear  that  even  contact  would  contaminate. 
Two  or  three  efforts  were  made  within  the  first  twenty  or  twenty-five 
years  of  their  existence  to  bring  them  together  in  Union.  Delegates 
met  and  parted,  met  again  and  parted.  Indian  wars  drove  them 
together.  It  became  by  external  dangers  necessary  that  there  should 
be  a  Union  of  those  early  colonies,  but  there  was  a  fear  that  in  going 
into  Union  they  would  lose  something  of  the  sovereignty  that  belonged 
to  them  as  colonial  States.  The  first  real  Union  that  took  place  was 
that  of  1643,  between  the  colonists  of  what  is  now  New  England.  It 
is  a  little  remarkable,  I  may  say  in  passing,  that  the  fugitive  slave 
clause  of  our  Constitution  is  founded  almost  in  so  many  words  on  the 
first  Articles  of  Federation  that  were  made  in  1643  between  these  little 
New  England  colonies.  This  earliest  Union  was  the  type  and  model  of 
later  ones.  With  various  alternations  of  fortune  the  country  grew,  but 
maintained  a  kind  of  irregular  Union  as  exigencies  pressed  upon  it.  It 
was  not  until  1777,  a  year  and  a  half  after  the  Declaration  of  Indepen- 
dence, and  while  the  colonies  were  at  full  war  with  the  mother  country, 
that  what  is  called  the  Articles  of  Federation  were  adopted  ;  and  this  was 
the  second  period  of  Union,  when  the  Southern  States,  the  Middle  States, 
and  the  States  of  New  England  came  together  in  Federation,  which  was 
declared,  in  the  preamble,  to  be  perpetual.  (Cheers.)  But  about  ten 
years  after  these  articles  were  framed,  they  were  found  to  be  utterly 
inadequate  for  the  exigencies  of  the  times;  and  in  1787  the  present 
Constitution  of  the  United  States  was  adopted  by  convention,  and,  at 
different  dates  thereafter,  ratified  by  the  thirteen  States  that  first  con- 
stituted the  present  Union.  Now,  during  all  this  period  of  the  first 
Union  of   1643,  the  second  Union  of  1777,   and  the  third  or  final 

D 


50  EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

Union — the  present  one — of  1787,  there  is  one  thing  to  be  remarked, 
and  that  is,  the  jealousy  of  State  independence.  The  States  were 
feeling  their  way  towards  nationality;  and  the  rule  and  measure  of 
the  wisdom  of  every  step  was,  how  to  maintain  individuality  with 
nationality.  That  was  their  problem.  It  never  had  been  found  out 
for  them.  They  had  some  analogies,  but  these  were  only  analogies.  In 
that  wilderness,  for  the  first  time,  the  problem  was  about  to  be  solved — 
How  can  there'  be  absolute  independence  in  local  government  with 
j)erfect  nationality  1  Slavery  was  only  incidental  during  all  this  long 
period ;  but  in  reading  from  contemporaneous  documents  and  debates 
that  took  place  in  conventions  both  for  Confederation  and  for  final  Union, 
it  h  remarkable  that  the  difficulties  which  arose  were  difficulties  of  re- 
presentation, difficulties  of  taxation,  difficulties  of  tariff  and  revenue, 
and,  so  far  as  we  can  find,  neither  North  nor  South  anticipated  in  the 
future  any  of  those  dangers  which  have  overspread  the  continent  from 
the  black  cloud  of  slavery.  The  dangers  they  most  feared,  they  have 
suffered  least  from  :  the  dangers  they  have  suffered  most  from,  they  did 
not  at  all  anticipate,  or  but  little.  But  the  Union  was  formed.  The 
Constitution,  defining  the  national  power  conferred  by  the  States  on  the 
Federal  Government,  was  adopted.  Thenceforward,  for  fifty  years  and 
more,  the  nation  developed  itself  in  wealth  and  political  power,  until, 
from  a  condition  of  feeble  States  exhausted  by  war,  it  rose  to  the  dignity 
of  a  first-class  nation.  We  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  gradual  and 
unconscious  development  within  this  American  nation  of  two  systems 
of  policy,  antagonistic  and  irreconcilable.  Let  us  look  at  the  South 
first.  She  was  undergoing  unconscious  transmutation.  She  did  not 
know  it.  She  did  not  know  what  ailed  her.  She  felt  ill — (laughter) — - 
put  her  hand  on  her  heart  sometimes  ;  on  her  head  sometimes  ;  but  had 
no  doctor  to  tell  her  what  it  was,  until  too  late  ;  and  when  told  she 
would  not  believe.  (Laughter  and  cheers.)  For  it  is  a  fact,  that  when 
the  colonies  combined  in  their  final  Union,  slavery  was  waning  not  only 
in  the  Middle  and  Northern  States  but  also  in  the  South  itself.  When 
therefore  they  went  into  this  Union,  slavery  was  perishing,  partly  by 
climate  in  the  North,  and  still  more  by  the  convictions  of  the  people, 
and  by  the  unproductive  character  of  farm-slavery.  Slavery  is  profit- 
able only  by  breeding  and  on  plantations.  In  the  North  it  never  was 
very  profitable,  though  somewhat  convenient  as  a  household  matter ;  for 
if  you  can  get  a  good  chambermaid  and  a  good  cook,  it  is  worth  while 
to  keep  them.  (Laughter.)  There  was  for  the  most  part  in  New  England 
only  the  shadow  of  slavery — household  slavery.  The  first  period  of  the 
South  ivas  the  wane  and  weakness  of  slavery.  Nevertheless  it  existed. 
The  second  period  is  the  increase  of  slavery,  and  its  apologetic  defence  ; 
for,  with  the  invention  of  the  cotton  gin,  an  extraordinary  demand  for 
cotton  sprang  up.  Slave  labour  began  to  be  more  and  more  in  demand, 
and  the  price  of  slaves  rose;  but  still  there  was  a  number  of  years 
within  my  remembrance — and  I  am  not  a  patriarch — in  which  men 
said,  "  Slavery  is  among  us  ;.  we  don't  know  how  to  get  rid  of  it ;  we 
accept  it  as  an  evil ;  we  wish  we  had  a  better  system,  but  it  is  a  mis- 
fortune and  not  a  fault."     I  remember  the  apologetic  period.     Then 


EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING.  51 

came  the  next  period,  one  of  revolution  of  opinion  as  to  the  inferior 
races  of  the  South,  a  total  and  entire  change  in  the  doctrines  of  the 
South  on  the  question  of  human  rights  and  human  nature.  It  dates 
from  Mr.  Calhoun.  From  the  hour  that  Mr.  Calhoun  began  to  teach, 
there  commenced  a  silent  process  of  moral  deterioration.  I  call  it  a 
retrogression  in  morals — an  apostacy.  Men  no  longer  apologized  for 
slavery;  they  learned  to  defend  it ;  to  teach  that  it  was  the  normal  con- 
dition of  an  inferior  race  ;  that  the  seeds  and  history  of  it  were  in  the 
Word  of  God  ;  that  the  only  condition  in  which  a  Republic  can  be  pros- 
perous, is,  where  an  aristocracy  owns  the  labour  of  the  community.  That 
was  the  doctrine  of  the  South,  and  with  that  doctrine  there  began  to  be 
ambitious  designs,  not  only  for  the  maintenance  but  for  the  propagation 
of  slavery.  This  era  of  propagation  and  aggression  constitutes  the  fourth 
and  last  period  of  the  revolution  of  the  South.  They  had  passed  through 
a  whole  cycle  of  changes.  These  changes  followed,  certain  great  laws. 
No  sooner  was  the  new  philosophy  set  on  foot,  than  the  South  recognized 
its  legitimacy  and  accepted  it  with  all  its  inferences  and  inevitable 
tendencies.  They  gave  up  wavering  and  misgivings,  adopted  the  insti- 
tution— praised  it,  loved  it,  defended  it,  sought  to  maintain  it,  burned 
to  spread  it.  During  the  last  fifteen  years,  I  'believe  you  cannot  find  a 
voice,  printed  or  uttered,  in  the  cotton  states  of  the  South,  which 
deplored  slavery.  All  believed  in  and  praised  it,  and  found  authorhVy 
for  it  in  God's  Word.  Politicians  admired  it,  merchants  appreciated  it, 
the  whole  South  sang  paeans  to  the  new-found  truth,  that  man  was  born 
to  be  owned  by  man.  (Loud  cheers.)  This  change  of  doctrine  made  it 
certain,  that  the  South  would  be  annoyed  and  irritated  by  a  Constitution 
which,  wich  all  its  faults,  still  carried  the  God-given  principle  of  human 
rights,  which  were  not  to  be  taken  by  man  except  in  punishment  for 
crime.  That  Constitution,  and  the  policy  which  went  with  it  at  first, 
began  to  gnaw  at,  and  irritate,  and  fret  the  South,  when  they  had  adopted 
slavery  as  a  doctrine.  How  could  they  live  in  peace  under  a  Constitu- 
tion, that  all  the  time  declared  the  manhood  of  men  and  the  dignity  of 
freedom  1  It  became  necessary  that  they  should  do  one  of  two  things, 
either  give  up  slavery,  or  appropriate  the  government  to  themselves, 
and  in  some  way  or  other  drain  out  of  the  Constitution  this  venom  of 
liberty,  and  infuse  a  policy  more  in  harmony  with  Southern  ideas. 
They  took  the  latter  course.  They  contrived  to  possess  themselves  of 
the  government;  and  for  the  last  fifty  years  the  policy  of  the  country 
has  been  Southern.  Was  a  tariff  wanted  1  It  was  made  a  Southern 
tariff.  Was  a  tariff  oppressive  1  The  Southerners  overthrew  it.  Was 
a  tariff  wanted  again  1  The  Southern  policy  declared  it  to  be  neces- 
sary, and  it  was  passed.  Was  more  territory  wanted  1  The  South 
must  have  its  way.  Was  any  man  to  obtain  a  place  1  If  the 
South  opposed  it,  he  had  no  chance  whatever.  For  fifty  years  most 
of  the  men  who  became  judges,  who  sat  in  the  Presidential  chair 
and  in  the  Courts,  had  to  base  their  opinions  on  slavery  or  on 
Southern  views.  All  the  filibustering,  all  the  intimidations  of  foreign 
Powers,  all  the  so-called  snubbing  of  European  Powers,  happened  during 
the  period  in  which  the  policy  of  the  country  was  controlled  by  the 


52  EDINBURGH— PUBLIC  MEETING. 

South.  May  I  be  permitted  to  look  on  it  as  a  mark  of  victorious 
Christianity,  that  England  now  loves  her  worst  enemy,  and  is  sitting 
with  arms  of  sympathy  round  her  neck  1  (Loud  cheers.)  There  was 
at  the  same  time  a  revolution  going  on  in  the  North  unconsciously. 
The  first  period  of  revolution  begun  in  the  North  was,  what  might  be 
called  the  foundation-laying.  Material  wealth  began  to  be  amassed, 
manufacturing  and  farm  labour  flourished,  schools  were  multiplied, 
colleges  were  rising.  It  was  a  period  in  which  the  North  was  develop- 
ing and  consolidating  its  power.  Then,  for  many  years — and  it  is  a 
count  of  about  thirty  years  ago — the  North  began  to  be  assailed  by 
bold  prophets  of  the  truth,  and  a  crusade  was  commenced  against 
slavery.  (Cheers.)  I  was  then  a  boy,  but  old  enough  to  be  a  spectator 
and  a  sympathizer.  Those  men,  for  the  most  part,  have  gone  down  into 
their  graves — their  names  not  yet  honoured  as  they  will  be  ;  for  the 
day  is  coming,  when  round  their  names,  and  the  names  of  all  who  have 
been  faithful  to  the  sacred  cause  of  liberty,  there  will  be  hung 
garlands,  and  they  shall  be  clothed  with  honour;  but  around  the 
brows  of  those  who  have  betrayed  their  country  to  despotism 
shall  shine  lurid  light  in  flame  that  shall  consume.  (Cheers.) 
The  man  who  was  an  abolitionist  when  I  was  twenty-one  years  of  age 
might  bid  farewell  to  any  hopes  of  political  advancement ;  and  the 
merchant  who  held  these  opinions  was  soon  robbed  of  customers.  As 
far  as  I  remember,  there  was  nothing  in  the  world  that  so  ruined  a 
man — not  crime  itself  was  so  fatal  to  a  man's  standing  in  the  country — 
as  to  be  known  to  hold  abolition-sentiments.  The  churches  sought  to 
keep  the  question  of  slavery  out ;  so  did  the  schools  and  colleges  ;  so  did 
synods  and  conventions  ;  but  still  the  cause  of  abolition  progressed ;  and 
still,  as  is  always  the  case  with  everything  that  is  right,  though  the 
men  who  held  those  sentiments  were  scoffed  at,  though  such  men  as 
Garrison  were  dragged  through  the  streets  with  halters  round  their 
necks,  yet,  the  more  it  was  spoken  of  and  canvassed,  the  more  the  cause 
prospered,  because  it  was  true.  (Cheers.)  The  insanity  at  last  abated  ; 
for  the  command  came  from  on  High,  saying  to  the  evil  spirit  concerning 
the  North :  "I  command  thee  to  come  out  of  her."  Then  the  nation 
wallowed  on  the  ground,  and  foamed  at  the  mouth  ;  but  the  unclean 
spirit  passed  out,  and  she  became  clean.  The  more  some  people  wanted 
to  keep  down  this  subject  and  keep  out  the  air,  the  more  God  forced  the 
subject  on  their  minds.  If  you  let  a  steam-engine,  when  it  is  full  of 
steam,  only  hiss  at  the  rivets,  with  the  scape-valve  open,  it  cannot 
explode ;  but  if  the  steam  is  shut  up,  and  the  valve  closed,  it  will  be 
still  for  a  moment,  and  then,  like  thunder,  it  will  go  off !  So  it  was  in 
regard  to  this  subject.  Those  who  discussed  it,  became  convinced  of  its 
truth  j  but  those  who  would  not  permit  it  to  be  spoken  of,  and  shut  it 
up,  exploded.  (Laughter  and  cheers.)  About  this  time  the  South 
began  to  take  such  steps  as  »iore  and  more  brought  the  North  into  a 
rightful  frame  of  mind.  The  first  conflict  that  arose  between  the  South 
and  the  North  was  in  regard  to  the  admission  of  the  new  State  of 
Mssouri  in  1818.  (Hear.)  The  North  contended  that  there  should 
be  no  more   slave   States  —  the  doctrine  that   is   now   being  revived 


EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING.  53 

as  tlie  Republican  doctrine.       It  was  the  original  doctrine  and  con- 
viction, that  slavery  might   be  tolerated  where  it  was,   but   that  no 
more  States  should  be  admitted.     When  Missouri  knocked  at  the  door, 
there  were  those  who  opposed  its  admission  as  a  slave  State,  but  by 
Southern  management  and   intimidation    Henry  Clay  persuaded  the 
North  to  a  compromise.     Now,  when  there  is  no  difference  in  principle, 
but  only  conflicting  interests,  a  compromise  is  honourable  and  right,  but 
when  antagonistic  principles  are  in  question,  I  believe  compromises  to  be 
bargains  with  the  devil,  who  is  never  cheated.     (Loud   laughter  and 
cheers.)     The  North  gave  up  her  principles  and  admitted  the  Missouri 
State  with  slavery  as  an  excejrtion,  and  by  the  compromise  obtained  a 
line   of  latitude   that   should   limit   slavery.      Above  the  latitude  of 
36°  3 0'  all  States,  except  Missouri,  were  to  be  free ;  south  of  that  line 
there  might  be  slave  States.     By  this  concession  they  gave  up  the 
whole  principle,  as  such  compromises  always  must.      Then  came  the 
next  conflict.     The  policy  of  the  North  and  the  policy  of  the  South 
again  jarred  against  each  other.     The  North  was  striving,  according  to 
the  spirit  of  the  Constitution  and  the  convictions  of  the  fathers  of  the 
country,  the  founders  of  the  Union,  to  carry  out  the  doctrines  of  liberty. 
The  South  became  ambitious,  and  having  possession  of  the  Government, 
aimed  to  enforce  their  ideas    of  slavery   upon   the   whole    continent. 
Hence  admission  of  Texas  and  the  war  with  Mexico  for  the  sake  of 
territory.     Next  were  seized  the  regions  of  New  Mexico  and  California. 
These  were  added  to  the  Union  not  by  the  North,  but  by  the  South. 
Then  came  the  compromise  measures  of  1850,   and  the  Fugitive  Slave 
Bill,  which  the  North  accepted  finally,  as  children  take  medicine,  when 
the  silver  spoon  is  forced  into  their  teeth,  and  they  are  almost  choked  to 
make  them  take  it.  (Laughter.)  Then  came  the  only  abolition  that  I  ever 
heard   the    South   were   in   favour   of — the  abolition  of  the  Missouri 
compromise.     What  that  was,  I  have  just  been  telling  you.     But  now 
the  South  suddenly  found  out,  that  the  compromise  was  unconstitutional 
and  void.       They  claimed  to  abolish  the  compromise  and  have  slave 
States  north  of  the  line  36°  30'.     The  North,  incensed  and  indignant, 
yet  held  back,  from  love  for  the  Union  of  the  States,  and  gave  up  their 
own  convictions  and  their  proper  line  of  duty.     After  the  abolition  of 
the  Missouri    Compromise   it   was    declared   by  the    South,    that    the 
doctrine  of  Popular  sovereignty  should  be  established — a  doctrine  to  the 
effect  that  when  the  admission  of  a  State  was  determined  on,  it  should 
come  in  a  slave  State  or  a  free  State,  according  to  the  vote  of  the  population. 
The  South  carried  this  measure,  and  the  moment  they  carried  it  they 
attempted  to  get  Kansas  introduced  as  a  slave  state  ;  but  the  Northern 
men  were  too  quick  for  them — (laughter  and  applause) — for  they  sent 
such  a  superabundant  population  into  Kansas,  that  they  soon  lifted  the 
white  banner  without  a  black  star  upon  it.     (Cheers.)     The  instant  this 
was  done,  the  South  turned  round  and  said,   "Popular  sovereignty  is 
not  constitutional  or  expedient.     (Laughter  and  applause.)     The  States 
applying  for  admission  shall  not  have  the  liberty  of  saying  whether 
they  will  come  in  free  or  slave."     This  was  the  work  of  Mr.  Sliddell — 
(hisses) — now  minister  for  the  Southern  States  in  Paris.     (Hisses  and 


64  EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

slight  applause).     I  wish  he  were  in  this   hall   to  hear  you  hissing. 
(Cheers.)    By  this  time  the  North  was  thoroughly  roused  and  indignant. 
They  had  at  length  o]3ened  their  eyes,  and  reluctantly  began  to  see  that 
the   South  meant  nothing  short   of   forcing   slavery   over   the   whole 
continent.      The  North  thereupon  grew  firmer,  and  in  1856  nominated 
Fremont,  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  they  were  no  longer  to  be 
browbeaten  by  slavery.        He  failed  ;    but   failed  in  the  noblest  way, 
by  the  cheats  of  his  opponents.    The  State  that  gave  us  Buchanan  to  be 
a  burden  for  four  years,  was  the"  State  in  which  the  cheating  took  place. 
Then  came  the  last  act  of  this  revolution  of  feeling  in  the  North — the 
election  of  Mr.  Lincoln.    (Loud  and  protracted  cheering. )    The  principle 
that  was  laid  down  as  a  distinct  feature  of  the  platform  on  which  Mr. 
Lincoln  was  elected,  was,  that  there  should  be  no  more  slave  territories — 
in  other  words,  the  breathing  hole  was  stopped  up,  and  slavery  had  no 
air  ;  it  was  only  a  question  of  time  how  long  it  would  last  before  it 
would  be  suffocated.     (Laughter  and  cheers.)     The  North  respected  the 
doctrine  of  State  rights,  when  Georgia  said,  that  slavery  was  municipal 
and  local,  and  that  the  government  of  the  United  States  had  no  right 
to  touch  slavery  in  Georgia.     The  North  accepted  the  doctrine.     It  was 
true,  that  they  could  not  touch  slavery  in  the  States  ;  yet  the  North  had 
a  right,  in  connection  with  the  Middle   States,  to  say,   "  Although  in 
certain  States  slavery  exists  beyond  our  political  reach,  yet  the  territory 
that  is  free  and  is  not  beyond  our  jurisdiction  shall  not  be  touched  by 
the  foot  of  a  slave.     (Loud  cheers.)    That  was  the  spark  which  exploded, 
and  this  is  the  war  that  followed  ;  for  the  South  knew  perfectly  well, — 
and  there  is  no  place  where  logic  is  better  understood  than  in  the 
South, — that  if  limits  were  set  to  the  Slave  States,   if  the  territory 
could  be  no  further  extended,  the  prosperity  of  the  slaveholders  was  at 
an  end.     They  determined  that  that  doctrine  should  be  broken  up,  and 
and  they  went  into  the  Secession-war  for  that  very  purpose.     All  these 
were  conflicts  between  the  North  and  the  South,  about  the  growth  of 
slavery,  and  in  all  but  one  of  them  the  South  had  its  own  way.     (Hear.) 
The  States  had  been  charging  each  other  with  guilt,  and  with  infidelity  to 
obligations,  but  it  was  now  collision.     It  was  the  attraction  of  great 
underlying  influences  that  moved  both  South  and  North.    The  principle 
which  had  been  operating  in  the  North  for  many  years  was  the  principle 
of  free  labour,  while  the  principle  which  had  impregnated  all  Southern 
minds  was  the  principle  of  slave-labour.    The  result  is  this.     The  South 
is  exhausting  the  whole  life  of  the  States  in  defence  of  slavery.     This 
is   historical   now;      The   great  cause  of  the  conflict  —  the  centre  of 
necessity,  round  which  the  cannons  roar  and  the  bayonets  gleam, — 
is  the  preservation  of  slavery.     Beyond  slavery,  there  is  no  difference 
between  North   and   South.      Their  interests  are  identical,   with  the 
exception  of  woek.      The  North  is  for  free  work — the  South  is  for 
slave  work  ;  and  the  whole  war  in  the  South,  though  it  is  for  inde- 
pendence,   is,    nevertheless,    expressly  in  order  to   have  slavery  more 
firmly  established  by  that  independence.     (Hear,  hear,  cheers,  and  some 
hisses.)      On  the  other  hand,  the  whole  policy  of  the  North,  now  at 
last   regenerated,   and  made  consistent   with  their   documents,   their 


EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING.  55 

history,    and   real   belief — the  whole   policy   of  the   North,    as   well 
as    the   whole    work    of   the    North,    rejoicing    at    length   to   be    set 
free  from  antagonism,  bribes,  and  intimidations, — is  for  liberty  ;  liberty 
for  every  man  in  the  world.     (Cheers.)     I  wish  you  to  consider  for  a 
moment  what  is  the  result  of  this  state  of  things  in  the  North.     There 
never  was  so  united  a  purpose  as  there  is  to-day  to  crush  the  rebellion. 
We  have  had  nearly  three  years  of  turmoil  and  disturbance,  and  it  not 
only  has  not  taken  away  that  determination,  but  it  has  increased  it. 
In  the  beginning  of  this  conflict  we  were  peculiarly  English.     What  do 
I  mean  by  that  ?     Well,  if  I  have  observed  aright,  England  goes  into 
wars  to  make  blunders  at  first  always — (hisses  and  cheers) — but  you 
must  be  aware,  that  in  the  end  it  is  not  England  that  has  blundered. 
]  have  noticed,  in  the  course  of  my  study  of  the  Peninsular  war  under 
Wellington,  that  the  first  whole  year  was  a   series  of  blunders   and 
fraudulent  squandering — (cheers)  ; — but,  if  I  recollect  aright,  at  last 
the  same  Wellington  drove  his  foes  out  of  the  Peninsula.     (Cheers.)    And 
so  it  is  with  us.     We  have  so  much  English  blood  in  our  veins,  that  when 
we  began  this  war  we  blundered  and  blundered ;  but  we  are  doing  better 
and  better  every  step.     (Loud  cheering.)     There  has  been  time  enough 
for  mere   enthusiasm  to  have  cooled  in  the  North.     That  has  passed 
away.     Enthusiasm  is  like  the  vapour,  just  enough  condensed  to  let  the 
sun  striking  upon  it  fill  it  with  gorgeous  colours ;  but  when  still  farther 
it  condenses,  and  falls   in  drops  for  the  thirsty  man  to  drink,  or  carries 
the  river  to  the  cataract,   then  it  has  become  useful  and  substantial. 
Enthusiasm,  at  first,  is  that  airy  cloud  ;  but  when  it  has  become  a  prin- 
ciple in  the  hearts  of  the  people,  then  it  becomes  substantial ;  and  such 
is  the  case  in  the  North.     Enthusiasm  has  changed  its  form,  and  is  now 
based  on  substantial   moral  principle.     (Cheers.)     The  loss  of  our  sons 
in  battle  has  been  grievous ;  but  we  accept  it  as  God's  will,  and  we  are 
determined  that  every  martyred  son  shall  have  a  representative  in  one 
hundred  liberated   slaves.      (Loud  cheers.)     Never  was  such  a  unity  of 
Christian  men  in  the  North  as  there  is  to-day.     I  have  in  my  possession 
some   two  hundred  resolutions,   passed  by   different  Christian  churches 
and  denominations  in  America,  saving  Ihe  Poman  Catholics.     In  every 
form   of  language  they  express   themselves  alike  resolute  for  the  main- 
tenance of  the  government  and  the  crushing  of  the  rebellion.     I  may 
say  that  there  is  no  seam  in   the  garment  that  binds  us  together.     We 
are  one.     (Cheers.)     The  Peace- Democrats  have  tried  three  times  to  put 
a  stop  to  the  war,  and  every  time  they  tried  it,   it  became  evident  that 
the  only  platform  in  America,  on  which  this  subject  can  be  discussed,  is 
this — that  the  war  must  be  carried  on  till  the  Union  is  re-established. 
(Loud  cheers.)     The  Americans   are  a  practical  people.     They  know 
their  own  business.     (Hear,   hear.)     No  one  so  well  able  as  they  are,  to 
judge  what  they  want :  and  when  they  have  deliberately  arrived  at  a 
firm  resolve,  they  surely  are  to  be  regarded,  at  least  with  respect,  if  not 
with  sympathy.     (Cheers.)     This  much  we  expect,  that  when  a  people 
twenty  millions  strong,   intelligent,   moral,  and,  as  you  know,  thrifty — 
when  people  of  this  sort,  after  three  years  of  deliberation,  are  fixed  on 
one   purpose,   they  at  least  demand  courtesy,   if  not  respect.     (Loud 


56  EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

cheers.)  We  are  told  that  we  are  breaking  our  constitutional  obliga- 
tions by  the  measures  we  have  taken  ;  but  we  were  forced  to  adopt, 
those  measures,  and  the  reasons  are  abundant  and  plain.  How  % 
When  a  fire  first  breaks  out,  the  engineer  goes  down  and  plays  upon 
the  fire,  thinking  that  he  will  be  able  to  save  the  furniture  and 
the  neighbouring  houses  ;  but,  as  the  devouring  element  increases, 
and  threatens  destruction  to  all  around,  the  engineer  says  "  Bring 
me  powder,"  and  he  blows  up  the  neighbouring  house,  then  the 
next,  and  then  the  next,  until  a  sufficient  gap  is  made  to  prevent 
the  spread  of  the  conflagration  (Cheers.)  When  he  began,  he  did 
not  think  that  he  would  require  to  sacrifice  so  much  :  and  so  it  is 
with  us.  When  this  rebellion  commenced,  we  thought  to  put  it  down, 
and  to  maintain,  at  the  same  time,  the  rights  of  the  States  ;  but,  when 
the  war  assumed  such  proportions  as  seemed  to  threaten  the  destruction 
of  the  nation  and  its  constitutional  Government,  it  became  a  question 
whether  the  President  should  put  in  practice  the  powers  he  possessed 
of  saving  the  Union  at  all  hazards.  (Cheers.)  Long  he  paused,  I 
know  ;  for  I  assisted  in  bombarding  him.  (Laughter  and  cheers.)  For 
months,  and  months,  and  months,  I  both  pleaded  and  inveighed  against 
the  dilatory  policy  at  Washington,  and  at  last  the  President  issued  a 
proclamation,  declaring  that  the  rebellion  had  assumed  such  proportions,, 
that,  for  the  sake  of  saving  the  country,  he  intended  to  exercise  the 
power  he  possessed,  and  to  confiscate  the  total  "property"  of  the  South, 
the  whole  of  the  slaves  being  included,  for  the  sake  of  saving  the  Union 
and  the  Constitution.  (Cheers.)  But  some  men  speak  to  me,  and  say, 
"  Oh,  I  am  tired  of  waiting  ;  when  is  this  little  quarrel  of  yours  on  the 
other  side  to  be  settled  ?"  (Laughter.)  A  little  quarrel — (laughter) — 
with  1,200  miles  of  a  base  line — a  little  quarrel  that  commenced  only 
seventy-five  years  ago.  You  ask  how  ?  The  smouldering  fire  that  by 
some  means  or  other  has  caught  a  rafter  between  the  ceilings  is  not 
known  of  at  first ;  but  after  two  or  three  days  it  bursts  out,  and  the 
whole  building  is  consumed.  The  fire  did  not  begin  when  it  became 
visible  to  the  eyes  ;  it  began  some  time  before.  In  the  same  way  this 
war  did  not  begin  three  years  ago.  It  began  when  this  constitution 
was  adopted — a  constitution  for  liberty  with  a  policy  for  slavery — 
(cheers) — and  it  is  as  impossible  to  tell  when  it  will  come  to  a  termina- 
tion as  it  is  to  foretell  the  conclusion  of  any  great  matter  affecting  the 
welfare  of  thirty  millions  of  people,  contingent  partly  on  great  laws  and 
partly  on  interfering  politicians.  It  might  close  next  year  ;  it  might 
close  in  three  years ;  it  might  close  in  five.  We  have  lost  many  sons, 
we  have  spilled  much  blood.  This  is  the  operation  by  which  the 
cancer  is  to  be  severed  from  our  system ;  the  operation  is  now  far 
advanced,  and  woe  be  to  the  man  who  interferes  with  it  before  the  last 
bit  of  the  virus  is  removed.  (Cheers.)  But,  let  me  say,  even  a  servant 
who  will  bear  a  blow,  cannot  bear  to  be  beaten  and  preached  at 
both  together.  If  you  insist  on  groaning  over  the  tediousness 
of  the  war,  you  must  not  aid  to  prolong  it.  Either  do  not  ask 
us  when  it  will  end,  or  else  do  not  send  ships  and  guns  to  the 
rebels  in  the  South.      If  you   want  to   sympathize  with  us,  do  so  ; 


EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING.  57 

and  if  you  must  assist  the  rebels,  do  so  ;  but  do  not  attempt  both  tilings 
at  once.     ("  Hear,  hear,"  and  applause.)     I  thank  Earl  Russell  for  his 
speech  at  Blairgowrie.     It  is  a  speech  that  has  brought  comfort  and 
gladness  to  the  hearts 'of  our    American   friends.      (Hear,  hear.)     A 
friend  of  mine  in  New  York  has  written  to  me,  stating  that  the  whole 
feeling  there  has  been  changed  since  the  intelligence  of  Earl   Russell's 
speech.     We  do  not  want  to  quarrel ;  we  do  not  want  animosity  between 
Great  Britain  and  America.      No  man  has  spoken  of  Great  Britain 
words  of  praise  and  blame  with  more  honest  heart  than  I  have.   (Cheers 
and  some  hisses.)     That  man  is  not  your  friend  who  dares  not  speak  of 
your  faults  to  your  face.     The  man  that  is  your  friend  tells  you  when 
he  thinks  you  are  wrong  ;  and  whether  I  am  right  or  wrong,  I  assert, 
that  in  giving  moral  sympathy  largely  to  the  South,  and  above  all,  in 
allowing   the   infamous    traffic    of    your   ports   with   the    rebels,    thus 
strengthening  the  hands  of  the  slaveholders, — and  that,  without  public 
rebuke, — you  have  done  wrong.     I  have  said  this,  because,  dear  as  your 
country  is  to  to  us,  precious  as  were  the  legacies  given  to  us  of  learning 
and  religion,  and  proud  as  we  have  been  for  years  past  to  think  of  our 
ancestry  and  common  relationship  to  you — yet  so  much  dearer  to  us 
than   kindred  is  the  cause  of  God,  that,  if  Great  Britain  sets  herself 
against  us,  we  shall  not  hesitate  one  moment  on  her  account,  but  shall 
fulfil  our  mission  !     (Cheers.)     Earl  Russell  was,  however,  pleased  to 
say  that  this  was  a  conflict  for  territory  on  the  one   part,   and  for 
independence    on    the    other.      You   know  just  as   well    as    I,    that 
the  North  has  been  adverse  to  the  acquisition  of  territory.     It  was 
the    South    that    brought    in    Texas,    that    brought    in    the   whole 
of  the   Louisiana  tract  by   purchase  ;    it    was   the    South  that  went 
to  war   with   Mexico,    and    added   New  Mexico,    and   the    whole   of 
California ;  and  it  was  the  South  that  sent  Walker,  the  filibusterer, 
to  Cuba.     The  South  would  have  territory.     It  is  not  the  North  that 
has  been  avaricious  of  land,  but  the  South  that  needed  the  land  for  the 
extension  of  their  slave  system.     Now,  we  are  striving  for  the  territory 
that  belongs  to  the  Union.     (Hear,  hear.)     Let  ine  see  that  man  who 
dares  to  say  here  that  he  believes  in  the  kind  of  patriotism  that  would 
let  every  citizen  sit  still  while  their  territory  was  dismembered,   and 
never  raise  a  hand  or  lift  a  sword  ?     If  that  is  your  idea  of  patriotism, 
it  is  not  mine.       I   have   taught   my   people,    and  I   have   practised 
the  doctrine  myself  as  far  as  necessary,  that  it  was  the  duty  of  every 
Christian  to  defend  his  house,  and  if  any  robber  broke  into  his  house, 
that  he  was  bound  to  resist,  and  recover  any  goods  that  might  have 
been  carried  off.     Now,  that  which  is  true  of  the  householder,  I  declare 
to  be  true  of  the  nation.     The  love  of  country  means  this,  to  defend 
every  part  and  particle  of  the  country  from  unjust  alienation.     (Loud 
applause.)     It  amounts  then  to  just  this,  that  we  are  trying  to  get  back 
our  own  ;  though  Lord  John  Russell — I  beg  his  pardon,  Earl  Russell — 
(laughter) — says  that  we  were  ambitious  of  territory  !     Well,  here  come 
two  men  before  a  Justice  of  the  Peace,  the  one  with  the  other  by  the  coat. 
The  one  says  :  "I  found  this  man  in  my  house  carrying  off  my  wife's 
silks,  finery,  and  jewels."     Suppose  the  Justice  to  remonstrate  with  the 


58  EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

complainant,  and  reprimand  him  for  avarice,  and  blandly  let  the  thief 
go  without  a  word  !  !  What  would  become  of  a  community  in  which 
the  victim  of  robbery  was  scolded  and  the  robber  set  free  ?  (Applause.) 
Now,  the  territory  in  question  was  paid  for  by  the  money  of  the  Union, 
and  we  swore  by  as  solemn  an  oath  as  people  can  swear,  to  hold  it  for 
the  good  of  the  nation.  Because  we  are  striving  to  keep  our  oath,  I  do 
not  see  how  that  can  make  us  ambitious  of  territory.  (Hear,  hear, 
and  applause.)  On  the  other  side,  Earl  Kussell  says  the  South  are 
contending  for  independence.  Yes  they  are,  and  I  would  to  God  that 
so  much  gallantry  had  a  better  cause.  It  needs  but  that,  to  be  illus- 
trious to  the  end  of  time.  (Cheers.)  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am 
proud  to  say,  that  we  have  not  in  that  Western  Continent  degenerated 
from  your  British  blood.  There  is  high  spirit  yet  in  America  just  as 
much  as  there  is  here.  (Applause.)  Yet,  Southern  independence,  what 
is  it?  Wnen  they  seceded  and  went  to  Montgomery  to  frame  a 
Constitution,  what  did  they  do  1  They  made  one  or  two  little  altera- 
tions in  the  Constitution.  They  lengthened  the  term  of  the  Presidency, 
and  made  a  few  alterations  in  the  forms  of  procedures  in  the  Congress  ; 
but  substantially  they  took  the  same  Constitution  as  they  had  just 
escaped  from.  (Hear,  hear.)  The  only  material  clause  added  was  the 
one  that  made  slavery  peepetual,  and  declared  it  to  be  illegal  to 
undertake  to  abolish  it.  What  then  is  Southern  independence  1  It  is 
the  meteor  around  the  dark  body  of  slavery.  King  Bomba  of  Naples 
wanted  to  be  independent,  and  his  idea  of  independence  was,  that  he 
should  be  let  alone  whilst  he  was  oppressing  his  subjects.  This  very  idea 
of  independence  has  been  the  same,  since  the  days  when  Nimrod  hunted 
men.  (Laughter  and  cheers.)  This  is  the  only  independence  the  South 
is  fighting  for.  But  it  is  said,  that  the  North  is  just  as  bad  as  the  South 
in  its  hatred  for  the  negro.  At  one  time  I  admit  that  there  was  a  pre- 
judice against  the  black  man,  arising  out  of  the  political  condition  of 
things  :  but  I  can  bear  witness  that  this  prejudice  has  almost  entirely 
passed  away,  in  so  far  as  the  native  population  is  concerned.  (Cheers.) 
I  shall  not  say  who  are  the  bitterest  enemies  of  the  black  men,  because 
you  would  hiss  me  if  I  did  so.  (Loud  cries  of  "  Speak  out,"  and  a  voice, 
"The  Irishmen" — another  voice,  "  The  Irish  Roman  Catholics.")  There 
is  no  doubt  that  the  Irish  have  a  strong  prejudice  against  the  negroes, 
but  it  arises  simply  from  this,  that  they  have  been  led  to  believe  by  the 
enemies  of  the  North,  that,  were  the  slaves  freed,  they  would  dispute  the 
field  of  labour  with  them ;  whereas  everybody  who  knew  anything  of 
their  disposition  could  tell,  that,  were  they  freed,  the  Northern  negroes 
would  flock  to  the  South,  leaving  the  North  for  Northern  labourers. — The 
statement  has  been  made  that  the  Americans  are  seeking  to  destroy  the 
A  nglo-Saxons  for  the  sake  of  a  few  millions  of  negroes.  I  contend,  that, 
although  the  freedom  of  the  negroes  will  no  doubt  result  from  this  war, 
yet  we  are  fighting  for  the  good  of  all  mankind — black,  white,  and  yellow 
— (laughter) — for  men  of  all  nations — to  save  representative  government 
and  universal  liberty.  It  is  also  said,  that  the  proclamation  by  the  Pre- 
sident was  not  sincere — that  he  had  issued  it  merely  as  an  Official,  and 
that  it  did  not  express   his   personal   convictions.      All  I  need  to 


EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING.  59 

reply,  is,  that  the  President,  whatever  his  own  feelings,  is  bound  to 
act  as  an  Official  and  discharge  the  duties  of  his  Office.  He  is  bound  to 
administer  the  Constitution  of  the  country.  It  was  the  President  and 
not  the  man  who  spoke;  and  it  was  the  country,  and  not  the  President, 
that  was  responsible  for  the  proclamation.  At  the  same  time  I  affirm, 
that  the  manner  in  which  all  these  proclamations  have  been  carried  out 
is  a  sufficient  test  of  their  sincerity.  The  President  was  very  loth  to 
take  the  steps  he  did  ;  but,  though  slow,  Abraham  Lincoln  was  sure. 
A  thousand  men  could  not  make  him  plant  his  foot  before  he  was 
ready ;  ten  thousand  could  not  move  it  after  he  had  put  it  down. 
This  national  crisis  in  my  own  country  is  a  spectacle  worthy  of  the 
admiration  of  the  world,  and  I  can  only  hope  that  when  next  the  Social 
Science  Congress  assembles,  this  great  conflict  will  have  gone  so  far 
towards  an  issue,  thafc  it  may  be  found  consistent  with  duty  to  inaugurate 
its  meeting  without  sneering  at  a  neighbouring  nation.  (Great  cheering 
and  hisses.)  I  have  a  closing  word  to  speak.  It  is  our  duty  in  America, 
by  every  means  in  our  power,  to  avoid  all  cause  of  irritation  with  eyery 
foreign  nation,  and  with  the  English  nation  most  especially.  On  your 
side  it  is  your  duty  to  avoid  all  irritating  interference,  and  all  speech 
that  tends  to  irritate.  Brothers  should  be  brothers  all  the  world  over, 
and  you  are  of  our  blood,  and  we  are  of  your  lineage.  May  that  day 
be  far  distant  when  Great  Britain  and  America  shall  turn  their  backs 
on  each  other,  and  seek  an  alliance  with  other  nations,  (Loud  cries  of 
"Russia.")  The  day  is  coming  when  the  foundations  of  the  earth  will 
be  lifted  out  of  their  places  ;  and  there  are  two  nations  that  ought  to 
be  found  shoulder  to  shoulder  and  hand  in  hand  for  the  sake  of  Christi- 
anity and  universal  liberty,  and  these  nations  are  Great  Britain  and 
America.     (Loud  and  prolonged  cheering.) 

Dr.  ALEXANDER,  who  was  received  with  loud  applause,  said — 
ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  resolution  which  I  have  had  put  into  my  hands 
is  the  following  : — "  That  this  meeting  most  earnestly  and  emphatically 
protests  against  American  slavery  in  all  its  ramifications,  as  a  system 
which  treats  immortal  and  redeemed  human  beings  as  goods  and  chattels, 
which  denies  them  the  rights  of  marriage  and  of  home,  which  consigns 
them  to  ignorance  of  the  first  rudiments  of  education,  and  exposes  them  to 
the  outrages  of  lust  and  passion  ;  and  that  this  meeting  is  therefore  of 
opinion  that  it  should  be  totally  abolished,  and,  further,  that  this  meeting, 
rejoicing  in  the  progress  which  has  already  been  made  in  America  towards 
this  end,  desires  to  encourage,  with  their  cordial  sympathy,  the  earnest 
abolitionists  in  that  country  in  the  noble  efforts  they  are  making."  I  do 
not  think  that  it  is  necessary  that  I  should  offer  any  observations  in  support 
of  this  resolution.  After  the  magnificent  oration  to  which  we  have  just 
listened,  I  do  not  feel  myself  inclined  at  all  to  intrude  in  the  way  of 
speaking  upon  this  question,  and  I  presume  the  meeting  is  not  all  in- 
clined to  hear  anything  I  might  be  disposed  to  say.  I  do  not  think  the 
motion  which  has  been  put  into  my  hands  requires  very  much  to  be 
said  in  support  of  it.  I  think  it  is  exceedingly  moderate,  rather  more 
moderate  than  perhaps  I  should  have  expressed  it,  had  it  been  in  my 
own  words.     (Applause.)     I  think  it  pledges  us  to  nothing  but  what  we 


GO  EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

may  heartily  agree  to — (loud  applause) — from  our  abhorrence  of  slavery, 
oar  desire  to  see  that  feeling  acknowledged,  and  our  sympathy  with  those 
who  are  trying  to  abolish  it  in  America.  Some  may  perhaps  think  that 
in  the  resolution  we  might  directly  sympathise  with  the  Federals  in 
their  straggle,  but  that  might  probably  lead  to  a  division  in  the  meeting. 
I  would  venture  to  suggest  that  our  esteemed  friend  has  gone  very  far 
to  show  that  the  Northeners,  as  such,  are  abolitionists.  Those  who  think 
that  he  has  made  out  that  point  might  interpret  the  latter  part  of  this 
resolution  to  mean  the  whole  of  the  Federals  as  a  body ;  and  those  who 
do  not  think  that  might  restrict  it  in  their  own  minds  to  suit  their 
views.     (Laughter.) 

Dr.  GEOBGE  JOHNSTON  then  came  forward  amid  loud  cheers, 
and  said :  It  is  not  necessary  that  I  should  say  one  word  in  seconding  the 
motion.  I  am  quite  satisfied  that  this  meeting  is  perfectly  unanimous 
in  accepting  the  sentiments  expressed  in  the  motion,  and  why,  there- 
ore,  should  I  occupy  more  time.  (Applause.)  Just  let  me  say  this  one 
word,  that  I  apprehend  that  the  magnificent  speech  of  our  friend  Mr. 
Beecher  Stowe — (loud  laughter) — 1  mean  Mr.  Ward  Beecher — has 
removed  some  prejudices — (hear,  hear) — has  given  some  information 
which,  if  rightly  used,  will  guide  us  to  the  same  conclusion  to  which  I 
long  ago  came — viz.,  that  the  North  is  banded  together  to  maintain  the 
iberties  of  mankind.     (Loud  applause.) 

A  show  of  hands  was  then  taken,  when  only  three  were  held  up 
against  the  resolution,  which  were  carried  amidst  loud  and  prolonged 
heering. 

A  gentleman  named  Wright  came  forward  to  the  platform  to  speak, 
but  was  ruled  to  be  out  of  order. 

The  Kev.  DUNCAN  OGILYIE  said  :  The  motion  I  have  to  make 
is  one  which  will  recommend  itself  to  every  one,  in  consequence  of  what 
has  been  manifested  as  Mr.  Beecher  has  gone  on.  It  has  been  to  every  one 
an  immense  treat  to  hear  such  a  speech.  (Loud  applause.)  I  felt  myself 
warmed  exceedingly  by  it.  (Laughter.)  I  am  quite  sure  that  the 
sympathies  of  this  large  meeting  go  with  Mr.  Beecher  in  a  large  measure 
— (applause) — and  that  you  are  ready  to  say  Amen  to  every  word  almost, 
if  not  entirely.  (Loud  applause  and  hisses.)  I  am  ready  to  say  Amen 
to  what  Dr.  Johnston  stated,  and  I  think  the  meeting  is  ready  to  do  the 
same.  (Loud  applause  and  hisses.)  What  I  now  propose  is  that  we 
give  a  very  hearty  vote  of  thanks  to  Mr.  Beecher  for  coming,  at  very 
much  inconvenience,  as  I  know  he  has  done,  to  address  us  this  evening. 
(Loud  and  prolonged  applause.) 

Mr.  NELSON,  publisher,  rose  to  second  the  motion.  He  said :  I  have 
been  requested  to  second  this  motion  of  a  vote  of  thanks  to  Mr.  Beecher, 
and  I  rise  to  do  it  with  great  diffidence,  but  at  the  same  time  with  great 
pleasure.  It  is  unnecessary,  and  it  would  be  unbecoming  in  me,  to  pay 
any  personal  compliment  to  Henry  Ward  Beecher.  The  truth  is  that, 
in  listening  to  his  address  to-night,  I  forgot  Mr.  Beecher  altogether  in 
the  cause  of  which  he  is  the  representative ;  and  I  daresay  he  will  think 
that  the  best  compliment  I  can  pay  to  his  eloquence.  In  thanking  him, 
perhaps  you  will  allow  me,  in  a  single  sentence,  to  bear  my  humble  but 


EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING,  61 

willing  testimony  to  what  I  have  seen  of  the  growth  of  a  healthy  public 
opinion  in  America  on  the  subject  of  slavery.  Ten  years  ago  I  happened 
to  visit  the  United  States ;  and  everywhere,  from  New  York  to  Missouri, 
I  had,  like  others  from  the  old  country,  to  defend  myself  as  I  best  could 
against  the  defenders  of  slavery.  Conversation  on  general  topics  was 
sure  at  last  to  drift  into  this  one  great  subject;  but  all  is  changed  now. 
A  few  months  ago  I  paid  a  second  visit  to  the  United  States,  and,  except 
among  the  Copperheads,  I  can  bear  witness  that  the  old  hostility  to 
English  sentiment  against  slavery  is  gone.  In  the  city  of  New  York 
there  is  a  large  and  influential  association,  known  as  the  American  Tract 
Society.  This  society  has  for  many  years  been  one  of  the  battle-grounds 
on  which  the  cause  of  freedom  has  been  fought.  Its  mutilation  of  the 
works  of  English  authors,  and  its  rigid  exclusion  from  its  publications 
of  everything  against  slavery,  resulted  a  few  years  ago  in  the  formation 
of  a  new  society  pledged  to-  the  cause  of  freedom.  When  I  state  that 
proposals  have  been  made  for  a  re-union  of  the  two  societies,  because  all 
feel  free  now  to  speak  out  on  the  subject  of  slavery,  you  may  receive  it 
as  pretty  strong  evidence  that  a  vast  change  has  taken  place.  Yes,  Mr. 
Chairman,  the  tide  of  public  opinion  has  turned,  and  you  might  as  well 
attempt  to  chain  the  sea  as  arrest  its  progress.  In  this  country  we  are 
accustomed  to  talk  of  North  and  South,  as  if  in  these  two  words  we 
expressed  the  nature  of  this  terrible  civil  war ;  but,  Mr.  Chairman ,  I  beg 
leave  to  say  that  these  two  words  express  only  one -half  the  truth. 
There  are  two  Norths  and  two  Souths.  There  is  that  North  which  all 
along  has  yielded  to  the  South,  and  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  slave 
power.  There  is  that  other  North  who,  for  the  first  time,  have  the 
reins  of  power  in  their  hands,  and,  amidst  tremendous  difficulties,  are 
fighting  the  battle  of  freedom.  It  is  that  party,  represented  by  such  men 
as  Mr.  Beech er,  Charles  Sumner,  and  others,  who  have  a  right  to  appeal 
to  this  country  for  sympathy,  and  who,  I  think,  are  entitled  to  get  it. 
With  the  destruction  of  slavery  there  will  be  no  South.  A  distinguished 
nobleman  in  this  country  some  time  ago  set  afloat  the  neat  but  delusive 
phrase  that  this  is  a  war  on  one  side  for  empire,  on  the  other  for 
independence.  Yes,  Mr.  Chairman,  and  so  it  was.  The  Southern 
leaders,  at  the  beginning  of  the  struggle,  boasted  that  they  would  soon 
have  their  flag  floating  over  the  Capitol  at  Washington,  and  at  New 
York  and  Boston.  Was  not  that  a  struggle  for  empire  1  On  the  other 
side,  was  it  not  a  struggle  for  independence  when  for  the  first  time  we 
saw  the  North  rising  up  against  the  domination  of  the  South  1  Last 
December,  I  happened  to  land  in  New  York  soon  after  the  first  battle 
of  Fredericksburg,  the  darkest  hour  the  North  has  known  in  this  great 
war ;  but,  Mr  Chairman,  allow  me  to  say  that  though  the  terrible 
battle  of  Fredericksburg  was  a  defeat  to  the  North,  it  was  the  greatest 
victory  they  ever  gained.  It  broke  the  Democratic  party  into  two — 
peace  Democrats  and  war  Democrats.  The  Government  was  stronger 
after  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg  than  before  it ;  and  so  has  it  been 
with  all  the  other  defeats  of  the  North.  The  Press  in  this  country 
seemed  to  rejoice  over  these  defeats  and  disasters,  but  they  will,  I 
venture  to  think,  find  themselves  mistaken.     They  have  not  weakened 


62  EDINBURGH — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

the  North.  These  defeats  and  disasters  were  all  needed  to  bring  round 
the  North  to  the 'true  position  that  either  slavery  must  be  destroyed  or 
slavery  would  destroy  their  country.  Every  disaster  has  brought  large 
accessions  to  that  party  who  have  all  along  been  true  to  the  cause  of 
freedom.  There  is  one  other  point  that  1  would  like  for  a  moment  to 
refer  to.  In  this  country  we  attach  far  too  much  importance  to  the  news- 
papers of  America,  and  especially  to  the  vilest  of  them  ail — the  New 
York  Herald.  It  is  a  common  mistake  in  this  country  to  suppose  that 
that  paper  has  a- larger  circulation  than  any  other.  In  its  daily  issue 
among  the  rowdies  of  New  York  it  undoubtedly  has  ;  but  taking  its 
whole  issues  during  the  week,  it  is  far  outnumbered  in  circulation  by  the 
abolition  paper,  the  New  York  Tribune.  We  complain  against  the 
Americans  for  writing  bitter  articles  against  this  country;  but  allow  me 
to  say  that  the  worst  of  these  articles  are  generally  written  on  the 
arrival  of  the  English  mail,  and  I  confess,  from  the  tone  of  the  Press  of 
this  country,  I  don't  wonder  at  the  fierce  and  bitter  replies.  In  mixing 
with  Americans,  I  must  say  that  I  have  found  little  that  was  offensive, 
except  a  little  harmless  brag;  but  remember  that  this  is  natural  to  a 
young  country,  and  should  hardly  offend  us,  as  it  seems  to  do.  The 
most  offensive  things  I  have  read  or  heard  did  not  come  from  native- 
born  Americans,  but  from  our  own  countrymen,  and  especially  from 
those  who  were  natives  of  the  Green  Isle.  I  believe  that  among 
native  Americans  there  is  every  desire  to  cultivate  the  friendship  of 
this  country,  and  that  the  present  bitterness  of  feeling,  having  no  root 
in  itself,  will  soon  wither  away.  Mr.  Chairman,  we  must  not  forget 
that  there  are  also  two  Souths.  There  are  blacks  as  well  as  whites. 
Why  should  we  always  speak  as  if  the  whites  alone  formed  the 
South;  but  I  feel  that  I  have  already  detained  you  too  long1?  Before 
I  sit  down  I  beg  to  express  the  belief  that,  with  the  destruction  of 
slavery,  there  will  be  no  South.  It  is  slavery  alone  that  has  formed 
the  South.  The  din  and  smoke  of  battle  will,  ere  long,  clear  away.  I 
believe  that  the  present  bitter  feelings  between  North  and  South  will 
also  pass  away,  and  we  will  see  a  united  country,  with  the  fair  form  of 
liberty  wielding  the  sceptre  over  a  free  people. 

The  motion  was  carried  amid  loud  applause. 

The  Rev.  Mr.  CULLEN  moved  a  cordial  vote   of  thanks  to  the 
Chairman ;  and 

The  Rev.  Dr.  THOMSON  concluded  the  proceedings  with  prayer. 


LIVERPOOL  .-OCTOBER  16,  1868. 


GREAT    MEETING    IN    THE    PHILHARMONIC 

HALL. 

The  Hall  was  crowded  in  every  part  by  an  audience  drawn  together  by 
the  announcement  that  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  the  celebrated 
American  preacher  and  philanthropist,  brother  of  Mrs.  Beecher  Stowe, 
would  lecture  on  the  American  War  and  Emancipation.  Immediately 
the  doors  were  opened  the  hall  was  filled,  and  the  aspect  of  the  audience 
showed  that  the  proceedings  were  anticipated  with  no  little  eagerness, 
Mr.  Charles  Robertson  was  the  chairman  of  the  evening,  and  amongst 
those  present  on  the  platform  we  observed- 
Rev.  Robert  Knox,  Fareham;  Rev.  Josiah  Hankinson,  Leek;  Samuel 
Mosley,  Esq.,  London;  Rev.  Dr.  Nicholas;  Rev.  Bobert  Harley,  F.RS. ; 
Rev.  John  Jones,  Denis  Daley,  A.  Leighton,  Robert  Trimble;  Rev. 
Henry  Tarrant,  Derby;  William  Crossfield,  C  E.  Macqueen,  Kev.  Dr. 
Graham,  H.  G.  Cook,  Rev.  Thomas  Durant,  Charles  Wilson,  E.  K. 
Muspratt,  H.  C.  Long,  J.  H.  Estcourt,  E.  0.  Greening,  Peter  Sinclair, 
W.  Johnson,  J.  C.  Edwards,  R.  Goulden,  Manchester;  George  A.  Brown, 
John  Innes,  Charles  E.  Rawlins,  Rev.  C.  M.  Birrell,  Rev.  O.  B.  Bidwell, 
New  York;  William  Crossfield,  junior,  Isaac  B.  Cooke,  Rev.  Enoch 
Mellor,  M.A.,  President  of  the  Congregational  Union;  Rev.  Jones  Booth, 
Yorkshire;  Rev.  Robert  Shaw,  F.  James,  Rev.  R.  Balgarnie,  of  Scar- 
borough ;  Rev.  J.  Gawthorn,  Rev.  W.  Sanders,  Maurice  Williams, 
Dr.  Hitchcock,  Rev.  R.  J.  Milne,  the  Dean  of  Dromore;  C.  R.  Hall, 
John  Patterson,  Rev.  John  Lumb,  Malvern;  Rev.  John  Jones,  Kirkdale; 
Rev.  G.  Procter,  Isle  of  Wight;  Rev.  — Day,  Rev.  D.  G.  Smith,  Eglish; 
Rev.  OwenEvans,  Wrexham ;  Rev.  William  Roberts,  Rev.  James  Mahood, 
Rev.  Robert  Thomas,  Bangor;  Rev.  William  Rees,  Rev.  E.  Evans,  Mor- 
riston;  Rev.  William  Griffith,  Holyhead;  Rev.  E.  T.  Davis,  Abergele; 
Rev.  Noah  Stephens,  Rev.  John  Davis,  Cardiff;  Bev.  J.  Stephens,  Brecon ; 
Rev.  William  Edwards,  Cardigan;  Rev.  F.  Busby,  Southport;  Rev. 
W.  P.  Davis,  Ringmore;  Rev.  John  Thomas,  Rev.  J.  Jenkins,  Holywell; 
Rev.  A.  Francis,  Rhyl;  Rev.  J.  Roberts,  Conway;  Rev.  John  Wilde, 
Nottingham  ;  Rev.  Robert  Ashton,  Secretary  of  the  Congregational 
Union,  London. 

On  the  entrance  of  Mr.  Beecher,  preceded  by  the  chairman,  a  vast 
shout  of  mingled  welcome  and  disapprobation  was  immediately  raised. 


G4  LIVERPOOL— PUBLIC  MEETING. 

As  is  already  known,  to  our  readers,  placards  had  been  posted  through- 
out the  town  inciting  the  people  of  Liverpool  to  give  the  reverend 
lecturer  a  hostile  reception ;  and  it  soon  became  evident  that  a  small 
but  determined  minority  of  the  meeting  were  present  with  that  inten- 
tion. The  extent  to  which  their  exertions,  which  were  sedulously 
continued  throughout,  interfered  with  the  proceedings,  will  be  perceived 
by  the  report. 

CHARLES  ROBERTSON,  Esq.,  on  rising  to  introduce  the  lecturer, 
was  received  with  loud  cheers  and  hisses.  After  obtaining  silence  he 
said :  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  met  here  to-night  to  hear  an  address 
from  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher.  (Cheers1  and  hisses.)  I  hope, 
gentlemen,  this  is  an  assembly  of  Englishmen — (hear,  hear,) — and 
that  everybody  will  be  heard  with  calmness  and  impartiality.  (Hear, 
hear.)  Well,  gentlemen,  we  are  met  together  this  evening  to  receive 
such  information  from  Mr.  Beecher  as  he  has  it  in  his  power  to  com- 
municate to  us  respecting  the  present  state  of  the  contest  now  going 
on  in  the  United  States  of  America,  and  its  bearing  on  that  most  im- 
portant question  which  has  so  powerfully  stirred  the  hearts  of  English- 
men, the  question  of  the  emancipation  of  the  negro  race.  (Loud 
applause  and  hisses.)  I  need  not  say  to  you,  gentlemen,  it  is  that 
aspect  of  the  question  which  has  induced  many  of  us  to  take  a  part  in 
this  meeting.  It  is  because  we  believe  that  this  is  a  contest  which 
has  a  most  important  bearing  on  the  emancipation  of  the  negro  race, 
and  the  introduction,  to  a  larger  portion  of  the  population  of  the 
Southern  States,  of  those  rights  and  liberties  which,  as  men,  they 
ought  to  possess— that  we  have  taken  a  deep  interest  in  this  struggle, 
believing  that  the  success  of  the  Northern  States  will  lead  to  the 
emancipation  of  the  slave.  ("No,  no,"  hisses  and  cheers.)  The  question 
of  emancipation  possesses  such  an  immense  interest  and  importance, 
that  we  are  prepared  to  give  a  free  expression  of  our  sympathy 
and  support  to  this  movement.  We,  in  common  with  all  our 
fellow-countrymen,  deplore  and  deprecate  the  bloodshed  and  miseries 
which  this  war  has  occasioned.  I  think  there  is  no  man  among  us 
who  can  view  with  other  than  feelings  of  the  deepest  regret  the 
suffering  and  the  loss  which  it  has  occasioned  both  in  the  country 
where  the  war  is  being  waged  and  among  the  European  communities. 
But,  while  admitting  this  to  the  fullest  extent,  I  say,  that  to  establish 
the  great  principle  of  liberty,  the  sacrifice  of  all  else  we  hold  dear  pur- 
chases that  liberty  cheaply.  (Hear,  hear.)  Therefore,  while  we  do 
regret  the  misery  produced,  we  do  not  regret  the  great  issue  which  we 
believe  will  be  obtained  through  that  misery.  But,  gentlemen,  we  take 
this  side  not  only  in  sympathy  for  the  North,  but  in  sympathy  for  the 
South.  (Cheers.)  The  great  work- of  negro  emancipation  is  to  benefit 
the  inhabitants  of  these  Southern  States  more  than  even  it  will  benefit 
the  North.  With  the  North  it  is  a  question  of  humanity;  with  the  South 
it  is  a  question  of  progress,  liberty,  and  of  all  that  can  contribute  to 
elevate  and  promote  the  prosperity  of  a  state.  (Hear,  hear.)  It  is  with 
no  unfriendly  feelings  to  the  South  that  1  say  these  things.  They  are 
our  own  kinsmen  as  well  as  the  peoj)le  of  the  North.    We  have  admired 


LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING.  65 

their  courage  and  unflinching  devotedness  to  what  they  believe  a  right 
cause.  (Applause.)  But  we  are  equally  convinced  that  their  cause  is 
wrong.  (Loud  cries  of  "No,  no,"  and  "Hear,  hear.")  If  there  is  a 
righteous  God  in  Heaven,  we  believe  that  cause  cannot  prosper. 
(Renewed  interruption.)  The  chairman  concluded  by  asking  the 
respectful  attention  of  the  audience  to  Mr.  Beecher's  address,  adding 
that  that  gentleman  was  perfectly  prepared  to  answer  any  questions 
that  might  be  addressed  to  him  after  the  lecture,  provided  they  were 
put  in  writing,  with  the  name  of  the  writer  attached,  and  handed  up  to 
him  the  (chairman).     ("  Oh,  oh.") 

The  Rev.  HENRY  WARD  BEECHER  then  rose,  and,  advancing 
to  the  front  of  the  platform,  was  greeted  with  mingled  cheers,  hisses, 
and  groans.  A  considerable  proportion  of  the  audience  stood  up,  waving 
hats  and  handkerchiefs,  and  cheering.  A  man  in  the  gallery  called  for 
**  Three  cheers  for  the  Southern  States,"  which  created  much  laughter 
and  some  uproar.  Mr.  Beecher  proceeded  to  say — "  Ladies  and  gentle- 
men," when  the  uproar  again  commenced,  and  efforts  were  made  to  eject 
one  noisy  individual  from  the  body  of  the  hall. 

The  CHAIRMAN  said :  A  fair  opportunity  will  be  afforded  to 
express  approval  or  dissent  at  the  close  of  the  lecture,  but  if  any  one 
interrupts  the  meeting  by  disorderly  conduct,  I  shall  be  obliged  to  call 
in  the  aid  of  the  police.     (Cheers.) 

The  Rev.  Mr.  BEECHER  then  said :  For  more  than  twenty-five 
years  I  have  been  made  perfectly  familiar  with  popular  assemblies  in  all 
parts  of  my  country  except  the  extreme  South.  There  has  not  for  the 
whole  of  that  tkne  been  a  single  day  of  my  life  when  it  would  have  been 
sate  for  me  to  go  South  of  Mason's  and  Dixon's  line  in  my  own  country, 
and  all  for  one  reason ;  my  solemn,  earnest,  persistent  testimony  against 
that  which  I  consider  to  be  the  most  atrocious  t-hing  under  the  sun — 
the  system  of  American  slavery  in  a  great  free  republic.  (Cheers.)  I 
have  passed  through  that  early  period,  when  right  of  free  speech  was 
denied  to  me.  Again  and  again  I  have  attempted  to  address  audiences 
that,  for  no  other  crime  than  that  of  free  speech,  visited  me  with  all 
manner  of  contumelious  epithets;  and  now  since  I  have  been  in 
England,  although  I  have  met  with  greater  kindness  and  courtesy  on 
the  part  of  most  than  I  deserved,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  I  perceive 
that  the  Southern  influence  prevails  to  some  extent  in  England. 
(Applause  and  uproar.)  It  is  my  old  acquaintance  ;  I  understand  it 
perfectly — (laughter) — and  I  have  always  held  it  to  be  an  unfailing 
truth  that  where  a  man  had  a  cause  that  would  bear  examination  h6 
was  perfectly  willing  to  have  it  spoken  about.  (Applause.)  And  when 
in  Manchester  I  saw  those  huge  placards,  "Who  is  Henry  Ward 
Beecher  1" — (laughter,  cries  of  "Quite  right,"  and  applause) — and 
when  in  Liverpool  I  was  told  that  there  were  those  blood-red  placards, 
purporting  to  say  what  Henry  Ward  Beecher  had  said,  and  calling  upon 
Englishmen  to  suppress  free  speech — I  tell  you  what  I  thought.  I 
thought  simply  this — "  I  am  glad  of  it"  (Laughter.)  Why  3  Because 
if  they  had  felt  perfectly  secure,  that  you  are  the  minions  c#f  the 
South  and  the  slaves  of  slavery,  they  would  have  been  perfectly  still. 


66  LIVERPOOL — PUELIC  MEETING. 

(Applause  and  uproar.)  And,  therefore,  when  I  saw  so  much  nervous 
apprehension  that,  if  I  were  permitted  to  speak — (hisses  and  applause) — 
when  I  found  they  were  afraid  to  have  me  speak — (hisses,  laughter,  and 
"No,  no") — when  I  found  that  they  considered  my  speaking  damaging 
to  their  cause — (applause) — when  I  found  that  they  appealed  from  facts 
and  reasonings  to  mob  law — (applause  and  uproar) — I  said  :  no  man 
need  tell  me  what  the  heart  and  secret  counsel  of  these  men  are.  They 
tremble,  and  are  afraid.  (Applause,  laughter,  hisses,  "No,  no,"  and  a 
voice  :  "  New  York  mob.")  Now,  personally,  it  is  a  matter  of  very 
little  consequence  to  me  whether  I  speak  here  to-night  or  not. 
(Laughter  and  cheers.)  But,  one  thing  is  very  certain — if  you  do 
permit  rue  to  speak  here  to-night  you  will  hear  very  plain  talking. 
(Applause  and  hisses.)  You  will  not  find  a  man — (interruption)— you 
will  not  find  me  to  be  a  man  that  dared  to  speak  about  Great  Britain 
3,000  miles  off,  and  then  is  afraid  to  speak  to  Great  Britain  when  he 
stands  on  her  shores.  (Immense  applause  and  hisses.)  And  if  I  do  not 
mistake  the  tone  and  the  temper  of  Englishmen,  they  had  rather  have 
a  man  who  opposes  them  in  a  manly  way — (applause  from  all  parts  of 
the  hall) — than  a  sneak  that  agrees  with  them  in  an  unmanly  way. 
(Applause  and  "  Bravo.")  Now,  if  I  can  carry  you  with  me  by  sound 
convictions,  I  shall  be  immensely  glad — (applause) ;  but  if  I  cannot 
carry  you  with  me  by  facts  and  sound  arguments,  I  do  not  wish  you  to 
go  with  me  at  all ;  and  all  that  I  ask  is  simply  fair  play.  (Applause, 
and  a  voice :  "You  shall  have  it,  too.")  Those  of  you  who  are  kind  enough 
to  wish  to  favour  my  speaking — and  you  will  observe  that  my  voice  is 
slightly  husky,  from  having  spoken  almost  every  night  in  succession  for 
some  time  past — those  who  wish  to  hear  me  will  do  me  the  kindness 
simply  to  sit  still,  and  to  keep  still ;  and  I  and  my  friends  the 
Secessionists  will  make  all  the  noise.  (Laughter.)  There  are  two 
dominant  races  in  modern  history — the  Germanic  and  the  Romanic 
races.  The  Germanic  races  tend  to  personal  liberty,  to  a  sturdy 
individualism,  to  civil  and  to  political  liberty.  The  Romanic  race 
tends  to  absolutism  in  Government ;  it  is  clanish  ;  it  loves  chieftains, 
it  develops  a  people  that  crave  strong  and  showy  Governments  to 
support  and  plan  for  them.  The  Amglo-Saxon  race  belongs  to  the 
great  German  family,  and  is  a  fair  exponent  of  its  peculiarities.  The 
Anglo-Saxon  carries  self-government  and  self-development  with  him 
wherever  he  goes.  He  has  popular  government  and  popular  industry  ; 
for  the  effects  of  a  generous  civil  liberty  are  not  seen  a  whit  more  plain 
in  the  good  order,  in  the  intelligence,  and  in  the  virtue  of  a  self- 
governing  people,  than  in  their  amazing  enterprise  and  the  scope  and 
power  of  their  creative  industry.  The  power  to  create  riches  is  just  as 
much  a  part  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  virtues  as  the  power  to  create  good 
order  and  social  safety.  The  things  required  for  prosperous  labour, 
prosperous  manufactures,  and  prosperous  commerce  are  three.  First — 
liberty;  second,  liberty;  third,  liberty.  (Hear,  hear.)  Though  these 
are  not  merely  the  same  liberty  as  I  shall  show  you.  First,  there  must 
be  liberty  to  follow  those  laws  of  business,  which  experience  has 
developed,  without  imposts  or  restrictions,  or  governmental  intrusions. 


LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING.  07 

Business  simply  wants  to  be  let  alone.  (Hear,  hear.)  Then,  secondly, 
there  must  be  liberty  to  distribute  and  exchange  products  of  industry 
in  any  market  without  burdensome  tariffs,  without  imposts,  and  without 
vexatious  regulations.  There  must  be  these  two  liberties — liberty  to 
create  wealth,  as  the  makers  of  it  think  best  according  to  the  light  and 
experience  which  business  has  given  them ;  and  then  liberty  to 
distribute  what  they  have  created  without  unnecessary  vexatious 
burdens.  The  comprehensive  law  of  the  ideal  industrial  condition  of 
the  world  is  free  manufacture  and  free-trade.  (Hear,  hear:  a  Voice  : 
"  The  Morrill  tariff."  Another  voice  :  "  Monroe.")  I  have  said  there 
were  three  elements  of  liberty.  The  third  is  the  necessity  of  an 
intelligent  and  free  race  of  customers.  There  must  be  freedom  among 
producers  ;  there  must  be  freedom  among  the  distributors  ;  there  must 
be  freedom  among  the  customers.  It  may  not  have  occurred  to  you 
that  it  makes  any  difference  what  one's  customers  are,  but  it  does  in  all 
regular  and  prolonged  business.  The  condition  of  the  customer 
determines  how  much  he  will  buy,  determines  of  what  sort  he  will  buy. 
Poor  and  ignorant  people  buy  little  and  that  of  the  poorest  kind. 
The  richest  and  the  intelligent,  having  the  more  means  to  buy,  buy  the 
most,  and  always  buy  the  best.  Here  then  are  the  three  liberties — liberty 
of  the  producer  •  liberty  of  the  distributor  ;  and  liberty  of  the  consumer. 
The  first  two  need  no  discussion,  they  have  been  long  thoroughly  and 
brilliantly  illustrated  by  the  political  economists  of  Great  Britain,  and 
by  her  eminent  statesmen ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  enough  attention 
has  not  been  directed  to  the  third  :  and,  with  your  patience,  I  will 
dwell  on  that  for  a  moment,  before  proceeding  to  other  topics.  It  is  a 
necessity  of  every  manufacturing  and  commercial  people  that  their 
customers  should  be  very  wealthy  and  intelligent.  Let  us  put  the 
subject  before  you  in  the  familiar  light  of  your  own  local  experience. 
To  whom  do  the  tradesmen  of  Liverpool  sell  the  most  goods  at  the 
highest  profit  1  To  the  ignorant  and  poor,  or  to  the  educated  and 
prosperous  ?  (A  voice  :  "  To  the  Southerners."  Laughter.)  The 
poor  man  buys  simply  for  his  body ;  he  buys  food,  he  buys  clothing,  he 
buys  fuel,  he  buys  lodging.  His  rule  is  to  buy  the  least  and  the 
cheapest  that  he  can.  He  goes  to  the  store  as  seldom  as  he  can, — he 
brings  away  as  little  as  he  can, — and  he  buys  for  the  least  he  can. 
(Much  laughter.)  Poverty  is  not  a  misfortune  to  the  poor  only  who 
suffer  it,  but  it  is  more  or  less  a  misfortune  to  all  with  whom  he  deals. 
On  the  other  hand,  a  man  well  off, — how  is  it  with  him  ?  He  buys  in 
far  greater  quantity.  He  can  afford  to  do  it ;  he  has  the  money  to  pay 
for  it.  He  buys  in  far  greater  variety,  because  he  seeks  to  gratify  not 
merely  physical  wants,  but  also  mental  wants.  He  buys  for  the 
satisfaction  of  sentiment  and  taste,  as  well  as  of  sense.  He  buys  silk, 
wool,  flax,  cotton  ;  he  buys  all  metals — iron,  silver,  gold,  platinum ;  in 
short  he  buys  for  all  necessities  and  of  all  substances.  But  that  is 
not  all.  Pie  buys  a  better  quality  of  goods.  He  buys  richer  silks, 
finer  cottons,  higher  grained  wools.  Now,  a  rich  silk  means  so  much 
skill  and  care  of  somebody's  that  has  been  expended  upon  it  to  make  it 
finer  and  richer ;  and  so  of  cotton,  and  so  of  wooL     That  is,  the  price 


08  LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

of  the  finer  goods  runs  back  to  the  very  beginning,  and  remunerates 
the  workman  as  well  as  the  merchant.  Now,  the  whole  labouring 
community  is  as  much  interested  and  profited  as  the  mere  merchant,  in 
this  buying  and  selling  of  the  higher  grades  in  the  greater  varieties  and 
quantities.  The  law '  of  price  is  the  skill ;  and  the  amount  of  skill 
expended  in  the  work  is  as  much  for  the  market  as  are  the  goods.  A 
man  comes  to  market  and  says,  "  I  have  a  pair  of  hands,"  and  he 
obtains  the  lowest  wages.  Another  man  comes  and  says,  "I  have 
something  more  than  a  pair  of  hands  ;  I  have  truth  and  fidelity ; "  he 
gets  a  higher  price.  Another  man  comes  and  says,  "I  have  something 
more  ;  I  have  hands,  and  strength,  and  fidelity,  and  skill."  He  gets 
more  than  either  of  the  others.  The  next  man  comes  and  says,  "  I 
have  got  hands,  and  strength,  and  skill,  and  fidelity ;  but  my  hands 
work  more  than  that.  They  know  how  to  create  things  for  the  fancy, 
for  the  affections,  for  the  moral  sentiments  ;"  and  he  gets  more  than 
-either  of  the  others.  The  last  man  comes  and  says,  u  1  have  all  these 
qualities,,  and  have  them  so  highly  that  it  is  a  peculiar  genius ; "  and 
genius  carries  the  whole  market  and  gets  the  highest  price.  (Loud 
applause.)  So  that  both  the  workman  and  the  merchant  are  profited  by 
having  purchasers  that  demand  quality,  variety,  and  quantity.  Now,  if 
this  be  so  in  the  town  or  the  city,  it  can  only  be  so  because  it  is  a  law. 
This  is  the  specific  development  of  a  general  or  universal  law,  and  there- 
fore we  should  expect  to  find  it  as  true  of  a  nation  as  of  a  city  like 
Liverpool.  J  know  it  is  so,  and  you  know  that  it  is  true  of  all  the 
world  ;  and  it  is  just  as  important  to  have  customers  educated,  intelli- 
gent, moral,  and  rich  out  of  Liverpool  as  it  is  in  Liverpool.  (Applause.) 
They  are  able  to  buy  ;  they  want  variety,  they  want  the  very  best ;  and 
those  are  the  customers  you  want.  That  nation  is  the  best  customer 
that  is  freest,  because  freedom  works  prosperity,  industry,  and  wealth. 
Great  Britain  then,  aside  from  moral  considerations,  has  a  direct  com- 
mercial and  pecuniary  interest  in  the  liberty,  civilization,  and  wealth  of 
every  people  and  every  nation  on  the  globe.  (Loud  applause.)  You  have 
also  an  interest  in  this,  because  you  are  a  moral  and  a  religious  people. 
("  Oh,  oh,"  laughter,  and  applause.)  You  desire  it  from  the  highest 
motives  ;  and  godliness  is  profitable  in  all  things,  having  the  promise  of 
the  life  that  is,  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come  ;  but  if  there  were 
no  hereafter,  and  if  man  had  no  progress  in  this  life,  and  if  there  were 
no  question  of  civilization  at  all,  it  would  be  worth  your  while  to  protect 
civilization  and  liberty,  merely  as  a  commercial  speculation.  To  evan- 
gelize has  more  than  a  moral  and  religious  import — it  comes  back  to 
temporal  relations.  Wherever  a  nation  that  is  crushed,  cramped, 
■degraded  under  despotism  is  struggling  to  be  free,  you,  Leeds, 
Sheffield,  Manchester,  Paisley,  all  have  an  interest  that  that  nation 
should  be  free.  When  depressed  and  backward  people  demand  that 
they  may  have  a  chance  to  rise — Hungary,  Italy,  Poland — it  is  a  duty 
for  humanity's  sake,  it  is  a  duty  for  the  highest  moral  motives,  to 
sympathize  with  them;  but  beside  all  these  there  is  a  material  and 
an  interested  reason  why  you  should  sympathize  with  them.  Pounds 
and  pence  join  with  conscience  and  with  honour  in  this  design.     Now, 


LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING.  69 

Great  Britain's   chief  want  is — what  ?      They  have   said   that  your 
chief  want   is   cotton.       I  deny  it.       Your  chief  want  is  consumers, 
(Applause   and   hisses.)      You  have   got   skill,   you  have   got   capital, 
and   you  have   got   machinery  enough  to  manufacture   goods  for   the 
whole  population   of  the   globe.       You   could   turn   out   four-fold   as 
much  as  you  do,  if  you  only  had  the  market  to  sell  in.     It  is  not  so 
much  the  want  therefore  of  fabric,  though  there  may  be  a  temporary 
obstruction  of  it ;  but  the  principal  and  increasing  want — increasing 
from  year  to  year — is,  where  shall  we  find  men  to  buy,  what  we  can 
manufacture  so  fast  ?     (Interruption,  and  a  voice,   "  The  Morrill  taring" 
and  applause.)     Before  the  American  war  broke  out,  your  warehouses 
were  loaded  with  goods  that  you  could  not  sell.     (Applause  and  hisses.) 
You  had  over-manufactured;  what  is  the  meaning  of  over-manufacturing 
but  this,  that  you  had  skill,  capital,  machinery,  to  create  faster  than  you 
had  customers  to  take  goods  off  your  hands  1     And  you   know,  that, 
rich  as  Great  Britain  is,  vast  as  are  her  manufactures,  if  she  could  have 
four-fold  the  present  demand,  she  could  make  four-fold  riches  to-morrow  -r 
and  every  political  economist  will  tell  you  that  your  want  is  not  cotton 
primarily,   but  customers.     Therefore,  the  doctrine,  how  to  make  cus- 
tomers, is  a  great  deal  more  important  to  Great  Britain  than  the  doctrine 
how  to  raise  cotton.     It  is  to  that  doctrine  I  ask  from  you,  business 
men,  practical  men,  men  of  fact,  sagacious  Englishmen — to  that  point  I 
ask  a  moment's  attention.     (Shouts  of  "  Oh,  oh,"  hisses,  and  applause.) 
There  are  no  more  continents  to  be  discovered.     (Hear,  hear.)     The 
market  of  the  future  must  be  found — how  1     There  is  very  little  hope 
of  any  more  demand  being  created  by  new  fields.     If  you  are  to  have 
a  better  market  there  must  be  some  kind  of  process  invented  to  make 
the  old  fields'  better.     (A  voice,   "  Tell  us  something  new,"  shouts  of 
"  Order,"  and  interruption.)    Let  us  look  at  it,  then.    You  must  civilize 
the  world  in  order  to  make  a  better  class  of  purchasers.     (Interruption.) 
If  you  were  to  press  Italy  down  again  under  the  feet  of  despotism, 
Italy,  discouraged,  could  draw  but  very  few  supplies  from  you.     But 
give  her  liberty,  kindle  schools  throughout  her  valleys,  spur  her  industry, 
make  treaties  with  her  by  which  she  can  exchange  her  wine,  and  her 
oil,  and  her  silk  for  your  manufactured  goods  ;  and  for  every  effort  that 
you  make  in  that  direction  there  will  come  back  profit  to  you  by  increased 
traffic  with  her.     (Loud  applause.)    If  Hungary  asks  to  be  an  unshackled 
nation — if  by  freedom  she  will  rise  in  virtue  and  intelligence,  then  by 
freedom  she  will  acquire  a  more  multifarious  industry,  which  she  will 
be  willing  to  exchange  for  your  manufactures.     Her  liberty  is  to  be 
found — where  1     You  will  find  it  in  the  Word  of  God,  you  will  find  it 
in  the  code  of  history ;  but  you  will  also  find  it  in  the  Price  Current 
(hear,  hear) ;  and  every  free  nation,  every  civilized  people — every  people 
that  rises  from  barbarism  to  industry  and  intelligence,  becomes  a  better 
customer.     A  savage  is  a  man  of  one  story,  and  that  one  story  a  cellar. 
"When  the  man  begins  to  be  civilized,  he  raises  another  story.     When 
you  Christianize  and  civilize  the  man,  you  put  story  upon  story,  for  you 
develop  faculty  after  faculty  ;  and  you  have  to  supply  every  story  with 
your  productions.     The  savage  is  a  man  one  story  deep  ;  the  civilized 


70  LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

man  is  thirty  stories  deep.     (Applause.)     Now,  if  you  go  to  a  lodging- 
house,  where  there  are  three  or  four  men,  your  sales  to  fchem  may,  no 
doubt,  be  worth  something  ;  but  if  you  go  to  a  lodging-house  like  some 
of  those  which  I  saw  in  Edinburgh,   which  seemed  to  contain  about 
twenty  stories — ("oh,  oh,"  and  interruption)  —  every  story  of  which 
is  full,  and  all  who  occupy  buy  of  you — which  is  the  best  customer, — 
the  man  who  is  drawn  out,  or  the  man  who  is  pinched  up  %    ( Laughter.) 
Now,  there  is  in  this  a  great  and  sound  principle  of  political  economy. 
("  Yah  !  yah !"  from  the  passage  outside  the  hall,  and  loud  laughter.) 
If  the  South  should  be  rendered  independent — (at  this  juncture  mingled 
cheering  and  hisses  became  immense ;  half  the  audience  rose  to  their 
feet,  waving  hats  and  handkerchiefs,  and  in  every  part  of  the  hall  there 
was  the  greatest  commotion  and  uproar. )     You  have  had  your  turn 
now ;  now  let  me  have  mine  again      (Loud  applause  and  laughter.)     It 
is  a  little  inconvenient  to  talk  against  the  wind  ;  but,  after  all,  if  you 
will  just  keep  good-natured — I  am  not  going  to  lose  my  temper  ;  will 
you  watch  yours  1    (Applause.)    Besides  all  that, — it  rests  me,  and  gives 
me  a  chance,  you  know,  to  get  my  breath.    (Applause  and  hisses.)    And 
I  think  that  the  bark  of  those  men  is  worse  than  their  bite.     They  do 
not  mean  any  harm — they  don't  know  any  better.     (Loud  laughter, 
applause,   hisses,  and  continued   uproar.)      I  was  saying,  when  these 
responses  broke  in,  that  it  was  worth  our  while  to  consider  both  alter- 
natives.   What  will  be  the  result  if  this  present  struggle  shall  eventuate 
in  the  separation  of  America,  and  making  the  South — (loud  applause, 
hisses,  hooting,  and  cries  of  "  Bravo  !") — a  slave  territory  exclusively, — 
(cries  of  "No,  no,"  and  laughter) — and  the  North  a  free  territory,  what 
will  be  the  first  result  1  You  will  lay  the  foundation  for  carrying  the  slave 
population  clear  through  to  the  Pacific  Ocean.     That  is  the  first  step. 
There  is  not  a  man  that  has  been  a  leader  of  the  South  any  time  within 
these  twenty  years,  that  has  not  had  this  for  a  plan.     It  was  for  this 
that  Texas  was  invaded,  first  by  colonists,  next  by  marauders,  until  it 
was  wrested  from  Mexico.     It  was  for  this  that  they  engaged  in  the 
Mexican  war  itself,  by  which  the  vast  territory  reaching  to  the  Pacific 
was  added  to  the  Union.     Never  have  they  for  a  moment  given  up  the 
plan  of  spreading  the  American  institutions,  as  they  call  them,  straight 
through  towards  the  West,  until  the  slave,  who  has  washed  his  feet  in 
the  Atlantic,  shall  be  carried  to  wash  them  in  the  Pacific.       (Cries  of 
"  Question,"  and  uproar.)     There  !     I  have  got  that  statement  out,  and 
you  cannot  put  it  back.     (Laughter  and  applause.)     Now,  let  us  con- 
sider the  prospect.     If  the  South  become  a  slave  empire,  what  relation 
will  it  have  to  you  as  a  customer  ?     (A  Voice  :   "Or  any  other  man." 
Laughter.)     It  would  be  an  empire  of  12,000,000  of  people.     Now,  of 
these,  8,000,000  are  white  and  4,000,000  black.      (A  Voice:  "How 
many  have  you  got  ?" — applause  and  laughter.    Another  Voice  :  "  Free 
your  own  slaves.")      Consider   that   one-third   of  the   whole   are   the 
miserably  poor,  unbuying  blacks.     (Cries  of  "  No,  no,"  "  Yes,  yes,"  and 
interruption.)    You  do  not  manufacture  much  for  them.    (Hisses,  "Oh !" 
"No.")     You  have  not  got  machinery  coarse  enough.     (Laughter,  and 
"  JSTo.")     Your  labour  is  too  skilled  by  far  to  manufacture  bagging  and 


LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING.  71 

linsey-woolsey.     (A  Southerner  :  "  We  are  going  to  free  them  every 
one.")     Then  you  and  I  agree  exactly.     (Laughter.)     One  other  third 
consists   of   a   poor,    unskilled,    degraded  white  population  ;    and  the 
remaining  one-third,  which  is  a  large  allowance,  we  will  say,  intelligent 
and  rich.     Now  here  are  twelve  million  of  people,  and  only  one-third 
of  them  are  customers  that  can  afford  to  buy  the  kind  of  goods  that  you 
bring  to  market.      (Interruption   and   uproar.)      My   friends,    I    saw 
a  man  once,  who  was  a  little  late  at  a  railwa}r  station,  chase  an  express 
train.     He  did  not   catch  it.      (Laughter.)     If  you  are  going  to  stop 
this   meeting,    you    have   got    to    stop    it  before    I   speak;    for   after 
I  have  got  the  things  out,  you  may  chase  as  long  as  you  please — you 
would  not  catch  them.     (Laughter  and  interruption.)     But  there  is 
luck  in  leisure;  I'm  going  to  take  it  easy.     (Laughter.)     Two-thirds 
of  the  population  of  the   Southern  States  to-day   are  non-purchasers 
of  English  goods.       (A  Yoice:    "No,  they  are  not;"    "No,  no,"  and 
uproar.)     Now  you  must  recollect  another  fact — namely,  that  this  is 
going  on  clear  through  to  the  Pacific  Ocean;  and  if  by  sympathy  or 
help  you  establish  a  slave  empire,  you  sagacious  Britons — ("  Oh,  oh," 
and  hooting) — if  you  like  it  better,  then,  I    will  leave  the  adjective 
out — (laughter,  hear,  and  applause) — are  busy  in  favouring  the  estab- 
lishment of  an    empire  from  ocean  to  ocean  that  should  have  fewest 
customers  and  the  largest  non-buying  population.      (Applause,     "  No, 
no."      A  Yoice  :  "I   think  it  was  the  happy  people  that   populated 
fastest.")     Now,  for  instance,  just  look  at  this,  the  difference  between 
free  labour  and  slave  labour  to  produce  cultivated  land.     The  State  of 
Virginia  has  15,000  more  square  miles  of  land  than  the  State  of  New 
York  j  but  Yirginia  has  only  15,000  square  miles  improved,  while  New 
York  has  20,000  square  miles  improved.     Of  unimproved  land  Yirginia 
has  about  23,000  square  miles,  and  New  York  only  about  10,000  square 
miles.  Now,  these  facts  speak  volumes  as  to  the  capacity  of  the  territory  to 
bear  population.     The  smaller  is  the  quantity  of  soil  uncultivated,  the 
greater  is  the  density  of  the  population — (hear,  hear) ; — and  upon  that, 
their  value  as  customers  depends.     Let  us  take  the  States  of  Maryland 
and  Massachusetts.      Maryland  has  2,000  more  square  miles  of  land 
than   Massachusetts ;    but   Maryland    has    about    4,000   square  miles 
of  land    improved,    Massachusetts    has    3,200    square  miles.      Mary- 
land has  2,800  unimproved  square  miles  of  land,  while  Massachusetts 
has    but    1,800    square    miles    unimproved.      But     these     two    are 
little  States, — let  us  take  greater  States.     Pennsylvania  and  Georgia. 
The  State  of  Georgia  has    12,000  more   square   miles   of  land  than 
Pennsylvania.       Georgia   has   only  about   9,800   square   miles  of  im- 
proved  land,    Pennsylvania   has    13,400    square   miles   of    improved 
land,    or   about    2,300,000   acres   more   than    Georgia.      Georgia   has 
about  25,600  square  miles  of  unimproved  land,  and  Pennsylvania  has 
only  10,400  square  miles,  or  about  10,000,000  acres  less  of  unimproved 
land  than  Georgia.     The  one  is  a  Slave  State  and  the  other  is  a  Free 
State.     I  do  not  want  you  to  forget  such  statistics  as  those,  having  once 
heard  them.     (Laughter.)     Now,  what  can  England  make  for  the  poor 
white  population  of  such  a  future  empire,  and  for  her  slave  population  % 


72  LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

What  carpets,  what  linens,  what  cottons  can  you  sell  to  them  ?  What 
machines,  what  looking-glasses,  what  combs,  what  leather,  what  books, 
what  pictures,  what  engravings  1  (A  Voice :  "  We'll  sell  them  ships.") 
You  may  sell  ships  to  a  few,  but  what  ships  can  you  sell  to  two-thirds 
of  the  population  of  poor  whites  and  blacks  1  (Applause.)  A  little 
bagging  and  a  little  linsey-woolsey,  a  few  whips  and  manacles,  are  all 
that  you  can  sell  for  the  slave.  (Great  applause,  and  uproar.)  This 
very  day,  in  the  Slave  States  of  America  there  are  eight  millions  out 
of  twelve  millions  that  are  not,  and  cannot  be  your  customers  from 
the  very  laws  of  trade.  (A  Voice:  "Then  "how  are  they  clothed?" 
and  interruption.) 

The  CHAIRMAN :  If  gentlemen  will  only  sit  down,  those  who  are 
making  the  disturbance  will  be  tired  out. 

Mr.  BEECHER  resumed :  There  are  some  apparent  drawbacks  that 
may  suggest  themselves.  The  first  is  that  the  interests  of  England 
consist  in  drawing  from  any  country  its  raw  material.  (A  Voice :  "We 
have  got  over  that.")  There  is  an  interest,  but  it  is  not  the  interest  of 
England.  The  interest  of  England  is  not  merely  where  to  buy  her 
cotton,  her  ores,  her  wool,  her  linens,  and  her  flax.  When  she  has  put 
her  brains  into  the  cotton,  and  into  the  linen  and  flax,  and  it  becomes 
the  product  of  her  looms,  a  far  more  important  question  is,  "  What  can. 
be  done  with  it1?"  England  does  not  want  merely  to  pay  prices  for  that 
which  brute  labour  produces,  but  to  get  a  price  for  that  which  brain, 
labour  produces.  (Hear,  hear,  and  applause.)  Your  interest  lies  beyond 
all  perad venture;  therefore,  if  you  should  bring  ever  so  much  cotton 
from  the  slave  empire — ("Yah,  yah,") — you  cannot  sell  back  again  to  the 
slave  empire.  (A  Voice :  "Go  on  with  your  subject;  we  know  all  about 
England.")  Excuse  me,  sir,  I  am  the  speaker,  not  you;  and  it  is  for 
me  to  determine  what  to  say.  (Hear,  hear.)  Do  you  suppose  I  am 
going  to  speak  about  America  except  to  convince  Englishmen?  lam 
here  to  talk  to  you  for  the  sake  of  ultimately  carrying  you  with  me  in 
judgment  and  in  thinking — ("Oh !  oh!'') — and,  as  to  this  logic  of  cat-calls, 
it  is  slavery  logic, — I  am  used  to  it.  (Applause,  hisses,  and  cheers.) 
Now,  it  is  said  that  if  the  South  should  be  allowed  to  be  separate 
there  will  be  no  tariff,  and  England  can  trade  with  her ;  but  if 
the  South  remain  in  the  United  States,  it  will  be  bound  by  a  tariff, 
and  English  goods  will  be  excluded  from  it  (interruption).  Now, 
I  am  not  going  to  shirk  any  question  of  that  kind.  In  the  first 
place,  let  me  tell  you  that  the  first  tariff  ever  proposed  in  America 
was  not  only  supported  by  Southern  interests  and  votes,  but  was 
originated  by  the  peculiar  structure  of  Southern  society.  The  first 
and  chief  difficulty — after  the  Union  was  formed  under  our  present 
constitution — the  first  difficulty  that  met  our  fathers  was,  how  to  raise 
taxes  to  support  the  government ;  and  the  question  of  representation 
and  taxes  went  together ;  and  the  difficulty  was,  whether  we  should  tax 
the  North  and  South  alike,  man  for  man  per  caput,  counting  the  slaves 
with  whites.  The  North  having  fewer  slaves  in  comparison  with  the 
number  of  its  whites;  the  South,  which  had  a  larger  number  of  blacks, 
said,   "We  shall  be  over-taxed  if  this   system   be  adopted."       They 


LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING.  73 

therefore  proposed  that  taxes  and  representation  should  be  on  the  basis 
of  five  black  men  counting  as  three  white  men.    In  a  short  time  it  was 
found  impossible  to  raise  these  taxes  in  the  South,  and  then  they  cast 
about  for  a  better  way,  and  the  tariff  scheme  was  submitted.      The 
object  was  to  raise  the  revenue  from  the  ports  instead  of  from  the  people. 
The  tariff  therefore  had  its  origin  in  Southern  weaknesses  and  necessities, 
and  not  in  the  Northern  cities  (loud  applause).     Daniel  Webster's  first 
speech  was  against  it;  but  after  that  was  carried  by  Southern  votes, 
(which  for  more  than  fifty  years  determined  the  law  of  the  country,) 
New  England  accepted  it,  and  saying,  "It  is  the  law  of  the  land,"  con- 
formed her  industry  to  it ;  and  when  she  had  got  her  capital  embarked 
in  mills  and  machinery,  she  became  in  favour  of  it.     But  the  South, 
beginning  to  feel,  as  she  grew  stronger,  that  it  was  against  her  interest 
to  continue  the  system,  sought  to  have  the  tariff  modified,  and  brought 
it  down  ;  though  Henry  Clay,  a  Southern  man  himself,  was  the  immortal 
champion  of  the  tariff.     All  his  life  time  he  was  for  a  high  tariff,  till 
such  a  tariff  could  no  longer  stand  ;  and  then  he  was  for  moderating  the 
tariffs.     And  there  has  not  been  for  the  whole  of  the  fifty  years  a  single 
hour  when  any  tariff  could  be  passed  without  them.     The  opinion  of 
the  whole  of  America  was,   tariff,  high  tariff.       I  do  not  mean  that 
there  were  none  that  dissented  from  that  opinion,  but  it  was  the  popular 
and  prevalent  cry.     I  have  lived  to  see  the  time  when,  just  before  the 
war  broke  out,  it  might  be  said  that  the  thinking  men  of  America  were 
ready  for  free-trade.        There  has  been  a  steady  progress  throughout 
America  for  free-trade  ideas.     How  came  this   Morrill  tariff  %     The 
Democratic  administration,  inspired  by  Southern  counsels,  left  millions 
of  millions  of  unpaid  debt  to  cramp  the  incoming  of  Lincoln ;  and  the 
Government,  betrayed  to  the  Southern  States,  found  itself  unable  to 
pay  those  debts,  unable  to  build  a  single  ship,  unable  to  raise  an  army  : 
and  it. was  the  exigency,  the  necessity,  that  forced  them  to  adopt  the 
Morrill  tariff,  in  order  to  raise  the  money  which  they  required.     It  was 
the  South  that  obliged  the  North  to  put  the  tariff  on.     (Applause  and 
uproar.)     Just  as  soon  as  we  begin  to  have  peace  again,  and  can  get 
our  national  debt  into  a  proper  shape  as  you  have  got  yours — (laughter) — 
the  same  cause  that  worked  before  will  begin  to  work  again  ;  and  there 
is  nothing  more  certain  in  the  future  than  that  the  American  is  bound 
to  join  with  Great  Britain  in  the  world-wide  doctrine  of  free-trade. 
(Applause  and  interruption.)     Here  then,  so  far  as  this  argument  is 
concerned,    I  rest  my  case,   saying  that  it  seems  to  me   that  in  an 
argument  addressed  to  a  commercial  people  it  was  perfectly  fair  to 
represent  that  their  commercial   and   manufacturing  interests  tallied 
with  their  moral  sentiments ;  and  as  by  birth,  by  blood,  by  history, 
by  moral  feeling,  and  by  everything,  Great  Britain  is  connected  with 
the  liberty  of  the  world,   God  has  joined  interest  and  conscience,  head 
and  heart;  so  that  you  ought  to  be  in  favour  of  liberty  everywhere. 
(Great  applause.)     There  !     I  have  got  quite  a  speech  out  already,  if 
I  do  not  get  any  more.     (Hisses  aud  applause.)     Nov/  then,  leaving 
this  for  a  time,  let  me  turn  to  some  other  nearly  connected  topics.     It 
is  said  that  the  South  is  fighting  for  just  that  independence  of  which  I 


74*  LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

have  been  speaking.  (Hear,  hear.)  The  South  is  divided  on  that 
subject.  ("  No,  no.")  There  are  twelve  millions  in  the  South.  Four 
millions  of  them  are  asking  for  their  liberty.  ("  No,  no,"  hisses,  "Yes," 
applause,  and  interruption.)  Four  millions  are  asking  for  their  liberty. 
(Continued  interruption,  and  renewed  applause.)  Eight  millions  are 
banded  together  to  prevent  it.  ("  No,  no,:'  hisses,  and  applause.)  That 
is  what  they  asked  the  world  to  recognise  as  a  strike  for  independence. 
(Hear,  hear,  and  laughter.)  Eight  million  white  men  fighting  to  pre- 
vent the  liberty  of  four  million  black  men,  challenging  the  world. 
(Uproar,  hisses,  applause,  and  continued  interruption.)  You  cannot 
get  over  the  fact.  There  it  is  ;  like  iron,  you  cannot  stir  it.  (Uproar). 
They  went  out  of  the  Union  because  slave  property  was  not  recognised 
in  it.  There  were  two  ways  of  reaching  slave  property  in  the  Union  : 
the  one  by  exerting  the  direct  Federal  authority  :  but  they  could  not 
do  that,  for  they  conceived  it  to  be  forbidden.  The  second  was  by 
indirect  influence.  If  you  put  a  candle  under  a  bowl  it  will  burn  so 
long  as  the  fresh  air  lasts,  but  it  will  go  out  as  soon  as  the  oxygen  is 
exhausted  ;  and  so,  if  you  put  slavery  into  a  State  where  it  cannot  get 
more  States,  it  is  only  a  question  of  time  how  long  it  will  live.  By 
limiting  slave  territory  you  lay  the  foundation  for  the  final  extinction 
of  slavery.  (Applause.)  Gardeners  say  that  the  reason  why  crops  will 
not  grow  in  the  same  ground  for  a  long  time  together,  is  that  the  roots 
excrete  poisoned  matter  which  the  plants  cannot  use,  and  thus  poison 
the  grain.  Whether  this  is  true  of  crops  or  not,  it  is  certainly  true  of 
slavery,  for  slavery  poisons  the  land  on  which  it  grows.  Look  at  the 
old  slave  States,  Delaware,  Maryland,  Virginia,  Kentucky,  Tennessee, 
and  even  at  the  newer  State  of  Missouri.  What  is  the  condition  of 
slavery  in  those  States  1  It  is  not  worth  one  cent  except  to  breed.  It 
is  not  worth  one  cent  so  far  as  productive  energy  goes.  They  cannot 
make  money  by  their  slaves  in  those  States.  The  first  reason  with 
them  for  maintaining  slavery  is,  because  it  gives  political  power  ;  and 
the  second,  because  they  breed  for  the  Southern  market.  I  do  not 
stand  on  my  own  testimony  alone.  The  editor  of  the  Virginia  Times, 
in  the  year  183(3,  made  a  calculation  that  120,000  slaves  were  sent  out 
of  the  State  during  that  year  ;  80,000  of  which  went  with  their  owners, 
and  40,000  were  sold  at  the  average  price  of  600  dollars,  amounting  to 
24,000,000  dollars  in  one  year  out  of  the  State  of  Virginia.  Now, 
what  does  Henry  Clay,  himself  a  slaveowner,  say  about  Kentucky  % 
In  a  speech  before  the  Colonisation  Society,  he  said  :  "  It  is  believed 
.  that  nowhere  in  the  farming  portion  of  the  United  States  would  slave 
labour  be  generally  employed,  if  the  proprietary  were  not  compelled  to 
raise  slaves  by  the  high  price  of  the  Southern  market,"  and  the  only 
profit  of  slave  property  in  Northern  farming  slave  States  is  the  value 
they  bring.  (A  voice  :  "Then  if  the  Northerners  breed  to  supply  the 
South,  what's  the  difference  ?")  So  that  if  you  were  to  limit  slavery, 
and  to  say,  it  shall  go  so  far  and  no  further,  it  wrould  be  only  a  question 
of  time  when  it  should  die  of  its  own  intrinsic  weakness  and  disease. 
Now,  this  was  the  Northern  feeling.  The  North  was  true  to  the 
doctrine  of  constitutional  rights.     The  North  refused,  by  any  Federal 


LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC   MEETING.  75 

action  within  the  States,  to  violate  the  compacts  of  the  constitution, 
and  left  local  compacts  unimpaired  ;  but  the  North,  feeling  herself 
unbound  with  regard  to  what  we  call  the  territories, — free  land  which 
has  not  yet  State  rights. — said  there  should  be  no  more  territory  cursed 
with  slavery.  (Applause.)  Yv^ith  unerring  instinct  the  South  said, 
"The  Government  administered  by  Northern  men  on  the  principle  that 
there  shall  be  no  more  slave  territory,  is  a  Government  fatal  to  slavery," 
and  it  was  on  that  account  that  they  seceded — ("  No,  no,"  "  Yes,  yes," 
applause,  hisses,  and  uproar) — and  the  first  step  which  they  took  when 
they  assembled  at  Montgomery,  was,  to  adopt  a  constitution.  What 
constitution  did  they  adopt  ?  The  same  form  of  constitution  which  they 
had  just  abandoned.  What  changes  did  they  introduce  1  A  trifling 
change  about  the  Presidential  term,  making  it  two  years  longer  ;  a 
slight  change  about  some  doctrine  of  legislation,  involving  no  principle 
whatever,  but  merely  a  question  of  policy.  But  by  the  constitution  of 
Montgomery  they  legalized  slavery,  and  made  it  the  organic  law  of  the 
land.  The  very  constitution  which  they  said  they  could  not  live  under 
when  they  left  the  Union  they  took  again  immediately  afterwards,  only 
altering  it  in  one  point,  and  that  was,  making  the  fundamental  law  of 
the  land  to  be  slavery.  (Hear,  hear.)  Let  no  man  undertake  to  sajT  in 
the  face  of  intelligence — -let  no  man  undertake  to  delude  an  honest 
community,  by  saying  that  slavery  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Secession, 
Slavery  is  the  framework  of  the  South  ;  it  is  the  root  and  the  branch  of 
this  conflict  with  the  South.  Take  away  slavery  from  the  South,  and 
she  would  not  differ  from  us  in  any  respect.  There  is  not  a  single 
antagonistic  interest.  There  is  no  difference  of  race,  no  difference  of 
language,  no  difference  of  law,  no  difference  of  constitution ;  the  only 
difference  between  us  is,  that  free  labour  is  in  the  North,  and  slave 
labour  is  in  the  South.  (Loud  applause.)  But  I  know  that  you  say, 
you  cannot  help  sympathizing  with  a  gallant  people.  (Hear,  hear.) 
They  are  the  weaker  people,  the  minority  ;  and  you  cannot  help  going 
with  the  minority  who  are  struggling  for  their  rights  against  the 
majority.  Nothing  could  be  more  generous,  when  a  weak  party  stands 
for  its  own  legitimate  rights  against  imperious  pride  and  power,  than 
to  sympathize  with  the  weak.  But  who  ever  yet  sympathized  with  a 
weak  thief,  because  three  constables  had  got  hold  of  him  ?  (Hear,  hear.) 
And  yet  the  one  thief  in  three  policemen's  hands  is  the  weaker  party. 
I  suppose  you  would  sympathize  with  him.  (Hear,  hear,  laughter,  and 
applause.)  Why,  when  that  infamous  king  of  Naples — Bomba,  was 
driven  into  Gaeta  by  Garibaldi  with  his  immortal  band  of  patriots,  and 
Oavour  sent  against  him  the  army  of  Northern  Italy,  who  was  the 
weaker  party  then  1  The  tyrant  and  his  minions;  and  the  majority 
was  with  the  noble  Italian  patriots,  struggling  for  liberty.  I  never 
heard  that  Old  England  sent  deputations  to  King  Bomba,  and  yet  his 
troops  resisted  bravely  there.  (Laughter  and  interruption.)  To-day 
the  majority  of  the  people  of  Home  is  with  Italy.  Nothing  but  French 
bayonets  keeps  her  from  going  back  to  the  Kingdom  of  Italy,  to  which 
she  belongs.  l)o  you  sympathize  with  the  minority  in  Borne  or  the 
majority  in  Italy?     (A  voice:   "With  Italy.")     To-day  the  South  is 


76  LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

the  minority  in  America,  and  they  are  fighting  for  independence  !  For 
what?  (Uproar.  A  voice  :  "Three  cheers  for  independence,"  and* 
hisses.)  I  could  wish  so  much  bravery  had  had  a  better  cause,  and  that 
so  much  self-denial  had  been  less  deluded ;  that  that  poisonous  and 
venomous  doctrine  of  State  rights  might  have  been  kept  aloof ;  that  so 
many  gallant  spirits,  such  as  Jackson,  might  still  have  lived.  (Great 
applause  and  loud  cheers,  again  and  again  renewed.)  The  force  of  these 
facts,  historical  and  incontrovertible,  cannot  be  broken,  except  by 
diverting  attention  by  an  attack  upon  the  North.  It  is  said  that  the 
North  is  fighting  for  Union,  and  not  for  emancipation.  The  North  is 
fighting  for  Union,  for  that  ensures  emancipation.  (Loud  cheers,  "Oh, 
oh,"  '*No,  no,"  and  cheers.)  A  great  many  men  say  to  ministers  of 
the  Gospel — "  You  pretend  to  be  preaching  and  working  for  the  love 
of  the  people.  Why,  you  are  all  the  time  preaching  for  the  sake  of  the 
church."  What  does  the  minister  say  1  "  It  is  by  means  of  the  church 
that  we  help  the  people,"  and  when  men  say  that  we  are  fighting  for 
the  Union,  I  too  say  we  are  fighting  for  the  Union.  (Hear,  hear,  and 
a  voice  :  "  That's  right.")  But  the  motive  determines  the  value  ;  and 
why  are  we  fighting  for  the  Union  1  Because  we  never  shall  forget 
the  testimony  of  our  enemies.  They  have  gone  off  declaring  that  the 
Union  in  the  hands  of  the  North  was  fatal  to  slavery.  (Loud  applause.) 
There  is  testimony  in  court  for  you.  (A  voice  :  "  See  that,"  and 
laughter.)  We  are  fighting  for  the  Union,  because  we  believe  that 
j)reamble  which  explains  the  very  reason  for  which  the  Union  was 
constituted.  I  will  read  it.  "  We " — not  the  States — "  We,  the 
people  of  the  United  States,  in  order  to  form  a  more  perfect  nation — 
(uproar) — I  don't  wonder  you  don't  want  to  hear  it — (laughter)  —  "in 
order  to  form  a  more  perfect  nation,  establish  justice,  assure  domestic 
tranquillity — -(uproar) — provide  for  the  common  defence,  promote  the 
general  welfare,  and  secure  the  blessings  of  liberty — ("  oh,  oh") — to 
ourselves  and  our  posterity,  ordain  and  establish  this  constitution  of  the 
United  States  of  America."  (A  Voice  :  "  How  many  States  V)  It  is 
for  the  sake  of  that  justice,  that  common  welfare,  and  that  liberty  for 
which  the  National  Union  was  established,  that  we  fight  for  the  Union. 
(Interruption.)  Because  the  South  believed  that  the  Union  was  against 
slavery,  they  left  it.  (Renewed  interruption.)  Yes.  (Applause,  and 
"  No,  no.")  To-day,  however,  if  the  North  believed  that  the  Union  was 
against  liberty,  they  would  leave  it.  ("  Oh,  oh,"  and  great  disturbance.) 
Gentlemen,  1  have  travelled  im  the  West  ten  or  twelve  hours  at  a  time 
in  the  mud  knee-deep.  It  was  hard  toiling  my  way,  but  I  always  got 
through  my  journey.  I  feel  to-night  as  though  I  were  travelling  over  a 
very  muddy  road  ;  but  I  think  I  shall  get  through.  (Cheers.)  Well, 
next  it  is  said,  that  the  North  treats  the  negro  race  worse  than  the 
South.  (Applause,  cries  of  "Bravo!"  and  uproar.)  Now,  you  see  I 
don't  fear  any  of  these  disagreeable  arguments.  I  am  going  to  face 
everyone  of  them.  In  the  first  place  I  am  ashamed  to  confess  that  such 
was  the  thoughtlessness — (interruption) — such  was  the  stupor  of  the 
North — (renewed  interruption) — you  will  get  a  word  at  a  time ;  to- 
morrow will  let  folks  see  what  it  is  you  don't  want  to  hear — that  for  a 


LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING.  77 

period  of  twenty-five  years  she  went  to  sleep,  and  permitted  herself  to 
be  drugged  and  poisoned  with  the  Southern  prejudice  against  black 
men.  (Applause  and  uproar.)  The  evil  was  made  worse,  because,  when 
any  object  whatever  has  caused  anger  between  political  parties,  a  political 
animosity  arises  against  that  object,  no  matter  how  innocent  in  itself; 
no  matter  what  were  the  original  influences  which  excited  the  quarrel. 
Thus  the  coloured  man  has  been  the  football  between  the  two  parties  in 
the  North,  and  has  suffered  accordingly.  I  confess  it  to  my  shame. 
But  I  am  speaking  now  on  my  own  ground,  for  I  began  twenty-five 
years  ago,  with  a  small  party,  to  combat  the  unjust  dislike  of  the 
coloured  man.  (Loud  applause,  dissension,  and  uproar.  The  inter- 
ruption at  this  point  became  so  violent  that  the  friends  of  Mr.  Beecher 
throughout  the  hall  rose  to  their  feet,  waving  hats  and  handkerchiefs, 
and  renewing  their  shouts  of  applause.  The  interruption  lasted  some 
minutes.)  Well,  I  have  lived  to  see  a  total  revolution  in  the  Northern 
feeling — I  stand  here  to  bear  solemn  witness  of  that.  It  is  not  my 
opinion ;  it  is  my  knowledge.  (Great  uproar.)  Those  men  who  under- 
took to  stand  up  for  the  rights  of  all  men — black  as  well  as  white — have 
increased  in  number  ;  and  now  what  party  in  the  North  represents  those 
men  that  resist  the  evil  prejudices  of  past  years  1  The  Republicans  are 
that  party.  (Loud  applause.)  And  who  are  those  men  in  the  North 
that  have  oppressed  the  negro?  They  are  the  Peace  Democrats ;  and 
the  prejudice  for  which  in  England  you  are  attempting  to  punish  me, 
is  a  prejudice  raised  by  the  men  who  have  opposed  me  ail  my  life. 
These  pro-slavery  democrats  abused  the  negro.  I  defended  him, 
and  they  mobbed  me  for  doing  it.  Oh,  justice  !  (Loud  laughter, 
applause,  and  hisses.)  This  is  as  if  a  man  should  commit  an  assault, 
maim  and  wound  a  neighbour,  and  a  surgeon  being  called  in  should 
begin  to  dress  his  wounds,  and  by-and-by  a  policeman  should  come  and 
collar  the  surgeon  and  haul  him  off  to  prison  on  account  of  the  wounds 
which  he  was  healing.  Now,  I  told  you  I  would  not  flinch  from  any- 
thing. I  am  going  to  read  you  some  questions  that  were  sent  after  me 
from  Glasgow,  purporting  to  be  from  a  working  man.  (Great  interrup- 
tion.) Jf  those  pro-slavery  interrupters  think  they  will  tire  me  out,  they 
will  do  more  than  eight  millions  in  America  could.  (Applause  and 
renewed  interruption.)  I  was  reading  a  question  on  your  side,  too. 
"  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  in  most  of  the  Northern  States  laws  exist 
precluding  negroes  from  equal  civil  and  political  rights  with  the 
whites?  That  in  the  State  of  New  York  the  negro  has  to  be  the 
possessor  of  at  least  two  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  worth  of  property 
to  entitle  him  to  the  privileges  of  a  white  citizen  1  That  in  some  of 
the  Northern  States  the  coloured  man,  whether  bond  or  free,  is  by  law 
oxcluded  altogether,  and  not  suffered  to  enter  the  State  limits,  under 
severe  penalties  1  and  is  not  Mr.  Lincoln's  own  State  one  of  them  ;  and 
in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  $20,000,000  compensation  which  was  promised 
to  Missouri  in  aid  of  emancipation  was  defeated  in  the  last  Congress 
(the  strongest  Republican  Congress  that  ever  assembled),  what  has  the 
North  done  towards  emancipation  V  Now  then,  there's  a  dose  for  you. 
(A  Voice  :  "  Answer  it.")     And  I  will  address  myself  to  the  answering 


78  LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

of  it.  And  first,  the  bill  for  emancipation  in  Missouri,  to  winch  this 
money  was  denied,  was  a  bill  which  was  drawn  by  what  we  call  "log 
rollers,"  who  inserted  in  it  an  enormously  disproportioned  price  for  the 
slaves.  The  Kepublicans  offered  to  give  them  $10,000,000  for  the  slaves 
in  Missouri,  and  they  outvoted  it  because  they  could  not  get  $12,000,000. 
Already  half  the  slave  population  had  been  "run"  down  South,  and 
yet  they  came  up  to  Congress  to  get  $12,000,000  for  what  was  not  worth 
ten  millions,  nor  even  eight  millions.  Now  as  to  those  States  that  had 
passed  "black"  laws,  as  we  call  them;  they  are  filled  with  Southern 
emigrants.  The  Southern  parts  of  Ohio,  the  Southern  part  of  Indiana, 
where  I  myself  lived  for  years,  and  which  I  knew  like  a  book,  the 
Southern  part  of  Illinois  where  Mr.  Lincoln  lives — (great  uproar) — 
these  parts  are  largely  settled  by  emigrants  from  Kentucky,  Tennessee, 
Georgia,  Virginia,  and  North  Carolina,  and  it  was  their  vote,  or  the 
Northern  votes  pandering  for  political  reasons  to  theirs,  that  passed  in 
those  States  the  infamous  "  black  "  laws  ;  and  the  Republicans  in  these 
States  have  a  record,  clean  and  white,  as  having  opposed  these  laws  in 
every  instance  as  "  infamous."  Now  as  to  the  State  of  New  York,  it  is 
asked  whether  a  negro  is  not  obliged  to  have  a  certain  freehold  property, 
or  a  certain  amount  of  property,  before  he  can  vote.  It  is  so  still  in 
North  Carolina  and  Rhode  Island  for  white  folks — it  is  so  in  New  York 
State.  (Mr.  Beecher's  voice  slightly  failed  him  here,  and  he  was  inter- 
rupted by  a  person  who  tried  to  imitate  him,  cries  of  "Shame"  and 
"  Turn  him  out.")  I  am  not  undertaking  to  say  that  these  faults  of  the 
North,  which  were  brought  upon  them  by  the  bad  example  and  influence 
of  the  South,  are  all  cured ;  but  I  do  say  that  they  are  in  a  process  of 
cure  which  promises,  if  unimpeded  by  foreign  influence,  to  make  all 
such  odious  distinctions  vanish.  "Is  it  not  a  fact  that  in  most  of  the 
Northern  States  laws  exist  precluding  negroes  from  equal  civil  and 
political  rights  with  the  whites  ?"  I  will  tell  you.  Let  us  compare  the 
condition  of  the  negro  in  the  North  and  the  South,  and  that  will  tell 
the  story.  By  express  law  the  South  takes  away  from  the  slave  all 
attributes  of  manhood,  and  calls  him  "  chattel,"  which  is  another  word 
for  "  cattle."  (Hear,  hear,  and  hisses.)  No  law  in  any  Northern  State 
calls  him  anything  else  but  a  person.  (Applause.)  The  South  denies  the 
right  of  legal  permanent  marriage  to  the  slave.  There  is  not  a  State 
of  the  North  where  the  marriage  of  the  slave  is  not  as  sacred  as  that  of 
any  free  white  man.  (Immense  cheering.)  Throughout  the  South, 
since  the  slave  is  not  permitted  to  live  in  anything  but  in  concubinage, 
his  wife,  so  called,  is  taken  from  him  at  the  will  of  his  master,  and 
there  is  neither  public  sentiment  nor  law  that  can  hinder  most  dreadful 
and  cruel  separations  every  year  in  every  county  and  town.  There  is  not 
a  State,  county,  or  town,  or  school  district  in  the  North  where,  if  any  man 
dare  to  violate  the  family  of  the  poorest  blackman,  'there  would  not  be 
an  indignation  that  would  overwhelm  him.  (Loud  applause.  A  Voice  : 
"  How  about  the  riots  1 ")     Irishmen  made  that  entirely.    (Laughter.)* 

*  A  London  newspaper  disgracefully  attacked  Mr.  Beecher  as  impudently  false,  for 
making  this  statement;  and  the  paragraph  was  reprinted  in  other  papers  without  comment, 
although  Mr.  Beecher's  statement  is  notoriously  true.  Mr.  Berkeley,  of  Bristol,  dishonoured 
himself  lately,  by  adducing  the  New  York  riots  in  proof  that  the  coloured  man  is  treated  as 
ill  in  the  North  as  in  the  South,  ^yhen  the  riot  from  beginning  to  end  was  Southern. — Eds. 


LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING.  79 

la  the  South  by  statutory  law  it  is  a  penitentiary  offence  to  teach  a 
black  man  to  read  and  write.  In  the  North  not  only  are  hundreds  and 
thousands  of  dollars  expended  of  State  money  in  teaching  coloured 
people,  but  they  have  their  own  schools,  their  own  academies,  their  own 
churches,  their  own  ministers,  their  own  lawyers.  (Cheers  and  hisses.) 
In  the  South,  black  men  are  bred,  exactly  as  cattle  are  bred  in  the 
North,  for  the  market  and  for'  sale.  Such  dealing  is  considered  horrible 
beyond  expression  in  the  North.  In  the  South  the  slave  can  own 
nothing  by  law — (interruption) — but  in  the  single  city  of  New  York 
there  are  ten  million  dollars  of  money  belonging  to  free  coloured 
people.  (Loud  applause.)  In  the  South  no  coloured  man  can  determine — 
i uproar) — no  coloured  man  can  determine  in  the  South  where  he  will 
work,  nor  at  what  he  will  work  ;  but  in  the  North — except  in  the  great 
cities,  where  we  are  crowded  by  foreigners, — in  any  country  part  the 
black  man  may  choose  his  trade  and  work  at  it,  and  is  just  as  much 
protected  by  the  laws  as  any  white  man  in  the  land.  (Applause,)  I  speak 
with  authority  on  this  point.  (Cries  of  "No.")  When  I  was  twelve 
years  old,  my  father  hired  Charles  Smith,  a  man  as  black  as  lampblack, 
to  work  on  his  farm.  I  slept  with  him  in  the  same  room.  ("  Oh,  oh.') 
Ah,  that  don't  suit  you.  (Uproar.)  Now,  you  see,  the  South  comes 
out.  (Loud  laughter.)  I  ate  with  him  at  the  same  table  ;  I  sang  with 
him  out  of  the  same  hymn-book — ("Good"); — I  cried,  when  he  prayed 
over  me  at  night ;  and  if  I  had  serious  impressions  of  religion  early  in 
life,  they  were  due  to  the  fidelity  and  example  of  that  poor  humble 
farm -labourer,  black  Charles  Smith.  (Tremendous  uproar  and  cheers.) 
In  the  South,  no  matter  what  injury  a  coloured  man  may  receive,  he  is 
not  allowed  to  appear  in  court  nor  to  testify  against  a  white  man.  (A 
voice  :  "  That's  fact.")  In  every  single  court  of  the  North  a  respectable 
coloured  man  is  as  good  a  witness,  as  if  his  face  were  white  as  an  angel's 
robe.  (Applause  and  laughter.)  I  ask  any  truthful  and  considerate 
man  whether,  in  this  contrast,  it  does  not  appear  that,  though  faults 
may  yet  linger  in  the  North  uneradicated,  the  state  of  the  negro  in 
the  North  is  not  immeasurably  better  than  anywhere  in  the  South  1 
(Applause.)  And  now,  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  America — 
(great  interruption), — for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  United 
States  a  coloured  man  has  received  a  commission  under  the  broad  seal 
and  signature  of  the  President  of  the  United  States.  (Loud  applause.) 
This  day — (renewed  interruption) — this  day,  Frederick  Douglas,  of 
whom  you  all  have  heard  here,  is  an  officer  of  the  United  States — (loud 
applause) — a  commissioner  sent  down  to  organize  coloured  regiments  on 
Jefferson  Davis's  farm  in  Mississippi.  (Uproar  and  applause,  and  a 
Voice,  "  You  put  them  in  the  front  of  the  battle  too.")  There  is  another 
fact  that  I  wish  to  allude  to — not  for  the  sake  of  reproach  or  blame,  but 
by  way  of  claiming  your  more  lenient  consideration — and  that  is,  that 
slavery  was  entailed  upon  us  by  your  action.  (Hear,  hear.)  Against 
the  earnest  protests  of  the  colonists  the  then  Government  of  Great 
Britain — I  will  concede  not  knowing  what  were  the  mischiefs — 
ignorantlyj  but  in  point  of  fact,  t  forced  slave  traffic  on  the  unwilling 
colonists.  (Great  uproar,  in  the  midst  of  which  one  individual  was 
lifted  up  and  carried  out  of  the  room  amidst  cheers  and  hisses.) 


80  LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

The  CHAIRMAN:  If  you  would  only  sit  down  no  disturbance 
would  take  place. 

The  disturbance  having  subsided, 

Mr.  BEECHER  said  :  I  was  going  to  ask  you,  suppose  a  child  is 
born  with  hereditary  disease ;  suppose  this  disease  was  entailed  upon 
him  by  parents  who  had  contracted  it  by  their  own  misconduct,  would 
it  be  fair  that  those  parents,  that  had  brought  into  the  world  the  diseased 
child,  should  rail  at  that  child  because  it  was  diseased.     ("  No,  no.") 
Would  not  the  child  have  a  right  to  turn  round  and  say,  "Father,  it  was 
your  fault  that  I  had  it,  and  you  ought  to  be  pleased  to  be  patient  with 
my  deficiencies."     (Applause  and  hisses,   and  cries  of  "  order ; "  great 
interruption  and  great  disturbance  here  took  place  on  the  right  of  the 
platform ;  and  the  chairman  said  that  if  the  persons  around  the  unfortunate 
individual  who  had  caused  the  disturbance  would  allow  him  to  speak 
alone,  but  not  assist  him  in  making  the  disturbance,  it  might  soon  be  put 
an  end  to.      The  interruption  was  continued  until  another  person  was 
carried  out  of  the  hall.)     Mr.  Beecher  continued  :  I  do  not  ask  that 
yoii  should  justify  slavery  in  us,  because  it  was  wrong  in  you  two  hun- 
dred years  ago  ;  but  having  ignorantly  been  the  means  of  fixing  it  upon 
us,  now  that  we  are  struggling  with  mortal  struggles  to  free  ourselves 
from  it,  we  have  a  right  to  your  tolerance,  your  patience,  and  charitable 
construction.       I  am  every  day  asked  when  this  war  will  end.      (Inter- 
ruption.)    I  wish  I  could  tell  you  ;  but  remember  slavery  is  the  cause 
of  the  war.     ("Hear,  hear,"  applause,  "yes,"  "no.")     Slavery  has  been 
working  for  more  than  100  years,  and  a  chronic  evil  cannot  be  suddenly 
cured ;  and  as  war  is  the  remedy,  you  must  be  patient  to  have  the  con- 
flict long  enough  to  cure  the  inveterate  hereditary  sore.      (Hisses,  loud 
applause,  and  a  Voice  :  "We'll  stop  it.")      But  of  one  thing  I  think  I 
may  give  you  assurance — this  war  won't  end  until  the  cancer  of  slavery 
is  cut  out  by  the  roots.   (Loud  applause,  hisses,  and  tremendous  uproar.) 
I  will  read  you  a  word  from  President  Lincoln.     (Renewed  uproar.) 
ft  is  a  letter  from  Theodore  Tilton.      (Hisses,  and  cheers.)     Won't  you 
hear  what  President  Lincoln  thinks  1     ("No,  no.")     Well  you  can  hear 
it  or  not.     It  will  be  printed  whether  you  hear  it  or  hear  it  not.   (Hear, 
and  cries  of  "Read,  Read.")    Yes,  I  will  read.    "A  talk  with  President 
Lincoln  revealed  to  me  a  great  growth  of  wisdom.      For  instance,  he 
said  he  was  not  going  to  press  the  colonization  idea  any  longer,   nor 
the   gradual  scheme   of  emancipation,  expressing    himself  sorry   that 
the     Missourians     had     postponed     emancipation     for     seven     years. 
He    said,     '  Tell   your   anti-slavery    friends    that   I   am    coming    out 
all  right.'      He   is   desirous   that   the  Border   States   shall   form  free 
constitutions,   recognising  the  proclamation,   and  thinks  this  will  be 
made  feasible  by  calling  on  loyal  men."     (A  Voice  :  "  What  date  is  that 
letter  ?"  and  interruption.)     Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  finished  the 
exposition  of  this  troubled  subject.     (Renewed  and  continued  inter- 
ruption.)     No  man  can  unveil  the  future  ;    no  man   can   tell   what 
revolutions  are  about  to  break  upon  the  world  ;  no  man  can  tell  what 
destiny  belongs  to  France,  nor  to  any  of  the  European  powers ;  but  one 
thing   is   certain,  that   in   the   exigencies  of  the  future  there  will  be 


LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING.  81 

combinations  and  re-combinations,  and  that  those  nations  that  are  of  the 
same  faith,  the  same  blood,  and  the  same  substantial  interests,  ought 
not  to  be  alienated  from   each   other,   but   ought  to  stand  together. 
(Immense  cheering  and  hisses.)     I  do  not  say  that  you  ought  not  to  be 
in  the  most  friendly  alliance  with  France  or  with  Germany  ;  but  I  do 
say  that  your  own  children,  the  offspring  of  England,   ought  to  be 
nearer  to  you  than  any  people  of  strange  tongue.     (A  Voice  :  "De- 
generate sons,"  applause  and  hisses  ;  another  voice  :  "What  about  the 
Trent  ?  ")     If  there  had  been  any  feelings  of  bitterness  in  America,  let 
me  tell  you  they  had  been  excited,  rightly  or  wrongly,  under  the  im- 
pression that  Great  Britain  was  going  to  intervene  between  us  and  our 
own  lawful  struggle.      (A.  Voice  :   "  No,"    and  applause.)      With  the 
evidence  that  there  is  no  such  intention  all  bitter  feelings  will  pass 
away.     (Applause.)     We   do   not   agree   with   the   recent  doctrine  of 
neutrality  as  a  question  of  law.    But  it  is  past,  and  we  are  not  disposed 
to  raise  that  question.     We  accept  it  now  as  a  fact,  and  we  say  that  the 
utterance  of  Lord  Bussell  at  Blairgowrie — (Applause,  hisses,   and   a 
Voice  :  "What  about  Lord  Brougham?") — together  with  the  declara- 
tion of  the  government  in  stopping  war-steamers  here — (great  uproar, 
and  applause) — has  gone  far  towards  quieting  every  fear  and  removing, 
every  apprehension  from  [our  minds.     (Uproar  and  shouts  of  applause.} 
And  now  in  the  future  it  is  the  work  of  every  good  man  and  patriot  not 
to  create  divisions,    but  to  do  the  things  that  will  make  for  peace. 
("  Oh,  oh,"  and  laughter.)     On  our  part  it  shall  be  done.     (Applause 
and  hisses,  and  "  No,  no.")     On  your  part  it  ought  to  be  done ;  and 
when  in  any  of  the  convulsions  that  come  upon  the  world,  Great  Britain 
finds  herself  struggling  single-handed  against  the  gigantic  powers  that 
spread  oppression  and  darkness — (applause,  hisses,  and  uproar) — there 
ought  to  be  such  cordiality  that  she  can  turn  and  say  to  her  first-born 
and  most  illustrious  child,  "  Gome  !"    (Hear,  hear,  applause,  tremendous 
cheers,  and  uproar.)     I  will  not  say  that  England  cannot  again,   as 
hitherto,  single  handed  manage  any  power — (applause  and  uproar) — but 
I  will  say  that  England  and  America  together  for  religion  and  liberty — 
(A  Voice  :  "  Soap,  soap,"  uproar,  and  great  applause) — are  a  match  for 
the  world.     (Applause ;    a  Voice :  "  They  don't  want  any  more  soft 
soap.")     Now,  gentlemen  and  ladies — (A  Voice:    "Sam  Slick;"  and 
another  Voice  :  "  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  if  you  please.") — when  I  came 
1  was  asked  whether  1  would  answer  questions,  and  I  very  readily 
consented  to  do  so,  as  I  had  in  other  places ;  but  I  will  tell  you  it  was 
because  I  expected  to  have  the  opportunity  of  speaking  with  some  sort 
of  ease  and  quiet.     (A  Voice :  "  So  you  have.")     I  have  for  an  hour 
and  a  half  spoken  against  a  storm — (hear,  hear) — and  you  yourselves 
are  witnesses  that,  by  the  interruption,  I  have  been  obliged  to  strive 
with  my  voice,  so  that  I  no  longer  have  the  power  to  control  this 
assembly.    (Applause.)   And  although  I  am  in  spirit  perfectly  willing  to 
answer  any  question,  and  more  than  glad  of  the  chance,  yet  I  am  by  this 
very  unnecessary  opposition  to -night  incapacitated  physically  from  doing 
it.     (A  Voice  :    "  Why  did  Lincoln  delay  the  proclamation  of  slavery  so 
long. — Another  Voice  :     "  Habeas  Corpus."    A  piece  of  paper  was  here 

F 


82  LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

handed  up  to  Mr.  Beech er.)  I  am  asked  a  question.  I  will  answer  this 
one.  "At  the  auction  of  sittings  in  your  church,  can  the  negroes  bid 
on  equal  terms  with  the  whites  1"  (Cries  of  "No,  no.")  Perhaps  you 
know  better  than  I  do.  (Hear,  hear.)  But  I  declare  that  they  can. 
(Hear,  hear,  and  applause.)  I  declare  that,  at  no  time  for  ten  years 
past — without  any  rule  passed  by  the  trustees,  and  without  even  a 
request  from  me — no  decent  man  or  woman  has  ever  found  molestation 
or  trouble  in  walking  into  my  church  and  sitting  where  he  or  she 
pleased.  (Applause.)  "Are  any  of  the  office-bearers  in  your  church 
negroes'?"  No,  not  to  my  knowledge.  Such  has  been  the  practical 
doctrine  of  amalgamation  in  the  South  that  it  is  very  difficult  now-a- 
days  to  tell  who  is  a  negro.  (Hear,  hear,  and  "  No,  no.")  Whenever  a 
majority  of  my  people  want  a  negro  to  be  an  officer,  he  will  be  one  ;  and 
I  am  free  to  say  that  there  are  a  great  many  men  that  I  know,  who  are 
abundantly  capable  of  honouring  any  office  of  trust  in  the  gift  of  our 
church.  (Applause.)  But  while  there  are  none  in  my  church  there  is 
in  Columbia  county  a  little  church  where  a  negro  man,  being  the  ablest 
business  man,  and  the  wealthiest  man  in  that  town,  is  not  only  a  ruler 
and  elder  of  the  church,  but  also  contributes  about  two-thirds  of  all  the 
expenses  of  it.  (Hear,  hear,  and  a  Voice  :  "That  is  the  exception,  not 
the  rule.")  I  am  answering  these  questions,  you  see,  out  of  gratuitous 
mercy  :  I  am  not  bound  to  do  so.  It  is  asked  whether  Pennsylvania 
was  not  carried  ior  Mr.  Lincoln  on  account  of  his  advocacy  of  the 
Morrill  tariff,  and  whether  the  tariff  was  not  one  of  the  planks  of  the 
Chicago  platform,  on  which  Mr.  Lincoln  was  elected.  I  had  a  great 
deal  to  do  with  that  election  \  but  I  tell  you  that  whatever  local — (Here 
the  interruptions  became  so  noisy,  that  it  was  found  impossible  to 
proceed.  The  Chairman  asked  how  they  could  expect  Mr.  Beecher  to 
answer  questions  amid  such  a  disturbance.  When  order  had  been 
restored,  the  lecturer  proceeded  :) — I  am  not  afraid  to  leave  the  treat- 
ment I  have  received  at  this  meeting  to  the  impartial  judgment  of  every 
fair-playing  Englishman.  When  1  am  asked  questions,  gentlemanly 
courtesy  requires  that  I  should  be  permitted  to  answer  them.  (A  Voice 
from  the  farther  end  of  the  room  shouted  something  about  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Liverpool.)  I  know  that  it  was  in  the  placards  requested  to 
give  Mr.  Beecher  a  reception  that  should  make  him  understand  what 
the  opinion  of  Liverpool  was  about  him.  ("No,  no;"  and  "Yes,  yes.") 
There  are  two  sides  to  every  question,  and  Mr.  Beecher's  opinion  about 
the  treatment  of  Liverpool  citizens  is  just  as  much  as  your  opinion  about 
the  treatment  of  Mr.  Beecher.  Let  me  say,  that  if  you  wish  me  to 
answer  questions  you  must  be  still ;  for,  if  I  am  interrupted,  that  is  the 
end  of  the  matter.  (Hear,  hear,  and  "Bravo.")  I  have  this  to  say,  that  I 
have  no  doubt  the  Morrill  tariff,  or  that  which  is  now  called  so,  did 
exercise  a  great  deal  of  influence,  not  alone  in  Pennsylvania,  but  in  many 
other  parts  of  the  country ;  because  there  are  many  sections  of  our 
country — those  especially  where  the  manufacture  of  iron  or  wool  are 
the  predominating  industries — that  are  yet  very  much  in  favour  of 
protective  tariffs ;  but  the  thinking  men  and  the  influential  men  of  both 
parties  are  becoming  more  and  more  in  favour  of  free-trade.     "  Can  a 


LIVERPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING.  83 

negro  ride  in  a  public  vehicle  in  New  York  with  a  white  man?"  I 
reply  that  there  are  times  when  politicians  stir  up  the  passions  of  the 
lower  classes  of  men  and  the  foreigners,  and  there  are  times  just  on  the 
eve  of  an  election  when  the  prejudice  against  the  coloured  man  is  stirred 
up  and  excited,  in  which  they  will  be  disturbed  in  any  part  of  the  city ; 
but  taking  the  period  of  the  year  throughout,  one  year  after  another, 
there  are  but  one  or  two  of  the  city  horse-railroads  in  which  a  respectable 
coloured  man  will  be  molested  in  riding  through  the  city.  It  is  only  on 
one  railroad  that  this  happened,  and  it  is  one  which  I  have  in  the  pulpit 
and  the  press  always  held  up  to  severe  reproof.  At  the  Fulton  Ferry 
there  are  two  lines  of  omnibusses,  one  white  and  the  other  blue.  I  had 
been  accustomed  to  go  in  them  indifferently  ;  but  one  day  I  saw  a  little 
paper  stuck  upon  one  of  them,  saying  "  Coloured  people  not  allowed  to 
ride  in  this  omnibus."  I  instantly  got  out.  There  are  men  who  stand 
at  the  door  of  these  two  omnibus  lines,  urging  passengers  into  one  or  the 
other.  I  am  very  well  known  to  all  of. them,  and  the  next  day,  when  I 
came  to  the  place,  the  gentleman  serving  asked  "  Won't  you  ride,  sir "?" 
"No,"  I  said,  "I  am  too  much  of  a  negro  to  ride  in  that  omnibus." 
(Laughter.)  I  do  not  know  whether  this  had  any  influence,  but  I 
do  know,  that  after  a  fortnight's  time  I  had  occasion  to  look  in,  and  the 
placard  was  gone.  I  called  the  attention  of  everyone  I  met  to  that  fact, 
and  said  to  them,  "Don't  ride  in  that  omnibus,  which  violates  your 
principles,  and  my  principles,  and  common  decency  at  the  same  time." 
I  say  still  further,  that  in  all  New  England  there  is  not  a  railway  where 
a  coloured  man  cannot  ride  as  freely  as  a  white  man.  (Hear,  hear.) 
In  the  whole  city  of  New  York,  a  coloured  man  taking  a  stage  of  rail- 
way will  never  be  inconvenienced  or  suffer  any  discourtesy.  Ladies  and 
gentlemen,  I  bid  you  goocj^  evening. — Mr.  Beecher's  resuming  his  seat 
was  the  signal  for  another  outburst  of  loud  and  prolonged  cheers, 
hisses,  groans,  cat-calls,  and  every  conceivable  species  of  expression  of 
approbation  and  disapprobation.  Three  cheers  were  proposed  for  the 
lecturer  from  the  galleries,  and  enthusiastically  given. 

The  Rev.  C.  M.  BIRRELL  then  came  forward  and  said  it  would 
have  been  very  unlike  the  fairness  of  Englishmen  if  that  assembly 
had  not  given  to  a  distinguished  stranger — (hisses) — a  fair  and  impartial 
hearing;  and  it  would  have  been  as  unlike  a  free  American  to 
demand  of  Englishmen  that  they  should  accept  his  opinions  merely 
because  they  were  his.  But,  since  Mr.  Beecher  had  given  to 
them,  under  circumstances  of  great  difficulty,  and  with  marvellous 
courtesy  and  patience — (hear,  hear,) — an  elaborate,  temperate,  and  most 
eloquent  lecture,  he  called  upon  them  to  render  him  a  cordial  vote  of 
thanks.  (Hear,  hear,  and  renewed  hisses.)  He  expected  that  that  vote 
would  be  joined  in  by  all  the  representatives  of  the  American  slave- 
holders in  that  assembly,  considering  that  they  had  had  more  instruction 
that  night  than  they  had  apparently  received  during  all  the  previous 
part  of  their  lives.     ("Oh,  oh,"  cheers  and  laughter). 

Mr.  W.  CROSSFIELD,  in  seconding  the  resolution,  said,  as  an 
inhabitant  of  Liverpool,  he  had  been  ashamed  at  the  conduct  of  that 
meeting — an    assembly    of  gentlemen,    or  those  who  professed  to  be 


84  LIVEKPOOL — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

gentlemen.  For  himself  he  most  cordially  thanked  Mr.  Beecher  for 
the  very  interesting  lecture  they  had  had. 

The  vote  was  carried  with  loud  and  prolonged  cheering  and  the 
waving  of  hats. 

The  CHAIRMAN  said  he  was  sure  Mr.  Beecher  would  be  quite 
satisfied  with  that  unanimous  expression  of  feeling,  and  the  disturbance 
which  had  been  created  was  not  the  expression  of  the  feeling  of  the 
meeting,  but  the  work  of  a  few  persons  in  the  room  who  had  come  for 
the  purpose  of  opposition.  The  Chairman  then  put  the  negative  of 
the  proposition,  but  the  meeting  was  in  a  state  of  confusion.  Of  those 
who  understood  the  proceeding  there  were  none  to  be  seen  who  stood 
up  to  negative  the  vote. 


LONDON -OCTOBER   20,    1863. 


GREAT    DEMONSTRATION    AT    EXETER    HALL. 

Last  night,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Emancipation  Society  and  the 
London  Committee  of  Correspondence  on  American  Affairs,  a  meeting 
was  held  in  Exeter  Hall  to  hear  an  address  from  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward 
Beecher.     The  distinction  which  Mr.  Beech er  has  acquired  in  his  own 
country,  and  the  great  public  interest  which  was  felt  in  his  subject — 
"England  and  America" — left  no  room  for  doubt  that  his  audience  would 
only  be  limited  by  the  capacity  of  the  building.  In  the  first  instance  it  was 
proposed  that  only  a  portion  of  the  hall  should  be  set  apart  for  reserved 
seats,  and  that  the  remaining  space  should  be  occupied  with  free  seats ; 
but  the  demand  for  tickets  far  exceeded  any  possible  supply,  and  long 
before  the  day  of  meeting  it  became  evident  that  thousands  would  be  disap- 
pointed.   It  is  of  course  quite  unnecessary  to  say  that  long  before  the  hour 
of  meeting  the  great  hall  was  densely  packed  by  as  many  human  beings  as 
could  find  sitting  or  standing  room  in  any  part  of  the  edifice,  however 
inconvenient  or  perilous  the  position.      They  were  both  patient  and 
^good-humoured  while  waiting  for  the  appearance  of  Mr.  Beecher,  who 
found  great  difficulty  in  forcing  a  way  through  the  enormous  mass  of 
people,  which,  in  the  Strand  and  Exeter-street,  literally  beleaguered  the 
place  of  meeting.      On  presenting  himself  to  the  audience,  accompanied 
by  many  of  the  leading  supporters  of  the  Emancipation  movement,  he 
was  welcomed  by  long  and  reiterated  plaudits,  which  were  again  and 
again   repeated,    the   audience   rising    en    masse.       The   entire   scene 
brought  vividly  to  mind  the  great  meeting  held  in  the  same  building 
ten  months  ago,   although,  if  possible,  the  enthusiasm  and  unanimity 
were  still  greater  than  on  that  memorable  occasion.    The  friends  of  Seces- 
sion had  endeavoured  to  stir  up  some  personal  feeling  against  the  lecturer 
by  inflammatory  placards,  which  covered  every  wall  in  the  metropolis ; 
but  the  result  only  exhibited  their  own  weakness  and  the  total  absence 
of  any  popular  sympathy  with  their  cause.     There  was  a  small  group  of 
Southern  sympathizers  here  and  there,  but  so  small  as  to  be  utterly 
unable  to  do  more  than  give  vent  to  a  few  hisses,  which  were  always 
drowned  by  a  torrent  of  applause.       The  cheers  were  now  and  then 
relieved   by   stentorian  groans  for  the  Times,  Mr.   Mason,    and   other 
unpopular  organs  of  the  press  and  individual  Secessionists ;  and  we  may 
remark  that   this  species  of  honour  was  very  fairly  divided  between 
Printing-house-square  and  the  notorious  author  of  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law. 


86  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

The  name  of  President  Lincoln  was  received,  as  it  always  is  in  an  open  Eng- 
lish audience,  with  a  tempest  of  applause ;  and  when  Mr.  Beecher  alluded  to 
the  retention  of  the  rams,  and  said  that  when  he  returned  to  America  he 
should  have  "a  different  story"  to  tell  of  the  state  of  English  public 
opinion  from  that  which  had  previously  obtained  credence  there,  the 
assembly  testified  their  approbation  by  a  demonstration  which  has  never 
been  surpassed  and  rarely  equalled  in  the  palmiest  days  of  agitation. 
Dark  complexions  were  not  wanting  in  that  vast  multitude  of  upturned 
faces  ;  and  conspicuous  in  the  body  of  the  hall  was  a  venerable  negro, 
who  excited  some  amusement  by  the  vigour  with  which  he  acted  as 
fugleman  throughout  Mr.  Beecher's  speech.  The  courage  of.  the  mal- 
contents sensibly  diminished  as  the  proceedings  advanced,  and  ultimately 
only  three  hands  were  held  up  against  the  resolution  moved  by  Professor 
Newman.  Every  now  and  then  the  cheers  of  "  the  outsiders,"  who 
extemporised  a  meeting  of  their  own,  echoed  through  the  hall,  and 
helped  to  swell  the  plaudits  of  those  who  had  been  fortunate  enough 
to  obtain  admission.  Scarcely  anyone  left  before  the  meeting  was 
brought  to  a  close,  and  we  venture  to  say  that  not  one  of  the  assembled 
thousands  will  ever  forget  Mr.  Beecher's  last  public  address  in  England, 
or  the  popular  enthusiasm  which  it  evoked  in  his  honour  and  in  sym- 
pathy with  the  cause  which  he  represented. 

The  chair  was  taken  shortly  after  seven  o'clock,  by  Benjamin 
Scott,  Esq.,  Chamberlain  of  London,  and  the  following  were  among  the 
gentlemen  present  : — Sir  Charles  Fox,  Professor  Newman,  Professor 
Newth,  Dr.  Halley,  President  of  New  College  ;  the  Rev.  Dr.  Hugh 
Allen,  vicar  of  St.  George's,  Southwark  ;  the  Rev.  Dr.  Campbell,  the 
Eev.  Dr.  Jobson,  the  Revs.  W.  M.  Bunting,  W.  Dunkerley,  L.  H. 
Byrnes,  Dr.  Waddington,  Newman  Hall,  William  Brock,  W.  Cuthbert- 
son,  J.  B.  French,  Geo.  Wilkins,  H.  J.  Bevis,  E.  Da-vies,  Arthur  Hall, 
Sella  Martin,  A.  Hannay,  J.  C.  Galloway,  M.A.,  W.  O'Neill,  John 
Curwen,  John  Howard  Hinton,  M.A.,  T.  Jones,  James  Spong,  William 
Tyler,  E.  Mathews,  A.  Raleigh,  and  W.  Dorling ;  Dr.  Frederick 
Tomkins  ;  Messrs.  S.  Lucas,  George  Thompson,  John  Cunnington,  G. 
J.  Holyoake,  W.  R.  Spicer,  W.  WTillans,  Washington  Wilks,  John 
Gorrie,  Judge  Winter,  of  Georgia  ;  J.  M'Carthy,  L.  A.  Chamerovzow, 
Dr.  D'Aubigne,  Passmore  Edwards,  John  Stewart,  Edmoncl  Beales,  J. 
R.  Taylor,  Hugh  Williams  ;  M.  D.  Conway,  of  Virginia ;  J.  Jewitt, 
Boston;  William  Craft,  Georgia;  W.  J.  Haynes,  John  Noble,  jun., 
James  Beal,  J.  B.  Langley,  R.  Moore,  J.  Lyndall,  John  Cassell ;  T.  W. 
Chester,  Liberia ;  J.  Kenny ;  R.  Hill,  Bedford ;  John  Richardson, 
C.C.  ;  IT.  Thompson,  J.  A.  Horner,  W.  T.  Malleson,  treasurer,  and  F. 
W.  Chesson,  hon.  secretary  of  the  Emancipation  Society,  &c.  Mr.  G. 
Thompson,  who  was  one  of  the  first  to  appear  on  the  platform,  was 
received  with  three  cheers. 

Tho  CHAIRMAN  said  :  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow  me  to  inform 
you  that  the  crowd  outside  the  building  is  so  dense  that  Mr.  Beecher 
has  not  been  able  to  force  his  way  punctually.  It  has  been  with  the 
greatest  difficulty  that  I  and  some  other  members  of  the  committee 
have  found  our  way  here.     You  will,  therefore,  I  am  sure,  make  all 


LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING.  87 

allowance  for  Mr.  Beecher  if  he  should  yet  be  a  few  minutes  behind 
time.  (Cheers.)  I  will  proceed  to  address  a  few  words  pending  the 
arrival  of  Mr.  Beecher.  Appearing  before  you  to  preside  this  evening, 
I  regret  to  say  in  place  of  Mr.  Bright,  whom  we  had  hoped  to  be 
present  —  (cheers)  —  I  must  inform  you  that  it  is  not  our  object 
to  discuss  the  great  American  struggle.  There  will  be  and 
there  are  presented  to  us,  from  day  to  day,  abundant  opportunities 
of  discussing  that  momentous  question.  Our  object  to-night  is  to 
afford  an  opportunity  to  a  distinguished  stranger — (cheers) — to  address 
us  on  that  absorbing  topic — a  gentleman  who  is  entitled,  whatever 
opinions  we  may  hold,  to  our  profound  respect.  (Great  cheering.) 
Whether  we  regard  Henry  Ward  Beecher  as  the  son  of  the  celebrated 
Dr.  Beecher — (hear) — or  as  the  brother  of  Mrs.  Beecher  Stowe — 
(cheers) — or  a  stranger  visiting  our  shores — whether  we  regard  him  as  a 
gentleman  or  a  Christian  minister,  and  as  the  uncompromising  advocate  of 
human  rights — (loud  cheers) — he  is  entitled  to  our  respectful  and  courteous 
attention.  (Cheers.)  I  am  quite  sure  that  this  assembly  of  Englishmen  and 
English  women  will  support  me  in  securing  for  him  a  respectful  hearing. 
It  becomes  the  more  incumbent  upon  us  to  do  so  since  he  states  that  the 
rapid  and  fragmentary  reports  of  speeches  delivered  in  America  which  were 
flashed  across  the  Atlantic  by  the  telegraph  have  been  so  brief  and 
hurried  that  they  have  not  conveyed  to  us  his  full  meaning  and  sense. 
He  has  been  very  often  misunderstood,  and,  I  fear,  misrepresented ;  and, 
as  a  stranger  about  to  depart  from  our  shores  in  a  few  days,  he  asks  for 
this  opportunity  of  putting  himself  right  with  the  London  public  upon, 
this  question.  You  will  hear  him  and  judge  of  his  statements,  and  I 
am  sure  you  will  accord  him  a  fair  hearing.  I  shall  myself  abstain  ad- 
visedly from  entering  upon  the  subject  of  to-night's  address.  I  wish 
merely  to  take  this  opportunity  of  saying  how  much  I  esteem  the  man 
personally,  and  because  he  has  been  the  uncompromising  advocate,  for 
twenty-five  years,  in  times  of  peace  and  before  the  war,  of  the  emanci- 
pation of  the  enslaved  and  oppressed.  He  was  one  of  the  few  thinking 
men  who  were  the  noble  pioneers  of  freedom  on  the  American  continent. 
He  was  so  when  it  was  neither  fashionable  nor  profitable  to  be  so.  He 
took  his  stand,  not  on  the  shifting  sands  of  expediency,  but  on  the 
immovable  rock  of  principle.  (Cheers.)  He  had  put  his  hand  to  the 
plough,  and  would  never  turn  back.  Some  people  had  allowed  their 
ears  to  be  stuffed  with  cotton — (laughter  and  cheers) — some  were 
blinded  by  gold  dust,  and  some  had  allowed  the  gag  of  expediency  to  be 
put  in  their  mouths  to  quiet  them.  (Cheers.)  But  Henry  Ward 
Beecher  stood  before  the  world  of  America,  and  for  some  time  stood 
almost  alone,  and  called  things  by  their  right  names.  (Cheers.)  He 
had  no  mealy-mouthed  expressions  about  peculiar  institutions,  patriarchal 
institutions,  and  paternal  institutions — ("hear,  hear,"  and  laughter) — 
but  he  called  slavery  by  the  old  English  name  of  slavery.  (Loud 
cheers.)  And  he  charged  to  the  account  of  that  crime  cruelty,  lust, 
murder,  rapine,  piracy.  (Loud  cheers.)  He  minced  not  his  terms  or 
his  phrases.  He  looked  right  ahead  to  the  course  of  duty  which  he  had 
selected  ;    and,  regardless  of  the  threats  of  man  or  the  wrath  of  man, 


88  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

although  the  tar-pofc  was  ready  for  him  and  the  feathers  were  prepared — 
although  the  noose  and  the  halter  were  ready  and  almost  about  his 
neck — he  went  straight  onward  to  the  object;  and  now  he  has 
converted — as  every  man  who  stands  alone  for  the  truth  and  right  will 
eventually  convert — a  large  majority  of  those  who  were  originally 
opposed  to  him.  (Cheers.)  What  the  humble  draper's  assistant, 
Granville  Sharpe,  did  in  this  country,  Henry  Ward  Beecher  and  two 
or  three  like-minded  men  have  done  on  the  continent  of  America. 
When  he  heard  Christian  ministers — God  save  the  mark ! — standing  in 
their  pulpits  with  the  Book  of  Truth  before  them,  and  stating  that  the 
institution  of  slavery  was  Christian,  he  did  not  mince  the  matter — he 
affirmed  that  it  was  bred  in  the  bottomless  pit.  (Loud  cheers.)  I  honour 
and  respect  him  for  his  manliness.  He  is  every  inch  a  man.  He  is  a 
standard  Jby  which  humanity  may  well  measure  itself.  (Loud  cheers.) 
Would  to  God  we  had  a  hundred  such  men.  (Cheers.)  I  will  now  call 
upon  Mr.  Beecher — (great  cheering) — but  allow  me  to  say  that  we  shall 
only  prolong  our  meeting  in  this  heated  atmosphere  by  not  affording  the 
speakers  a  fair  opportunity  of  addressing  you.     (Loud  applause.) 

Rev.  HENRY  WARD  BEECHER  then  advanced  to  the  front  of 
the  platform  amidst  the  most  enthusiastic  demonstrations  of  applause. 
The  whole  audience  stood  up  :  hats  and  handkerchiefs  were  waved,  and 
for  some  minutes  the  most  exciting  manifestations  of  hearty  English 
good  feeling  were  extended  to  the  American  advocate  of  freedom.     As 
the  uproarious  greeting  subsided,  a  few  hisses  rose  up  from  the  middle 
of  the  room,  as  if  a  body  of  serpents  had  some  how  or  other  found  their 
way  into  the  assembly,  and  were  adding  their  prolonged  tribute  to  the 
general  display.     Mr.  Beecher  then  addressed  the  audience  as  follows, 
speaking  distinctly  and  deliberately  :   Ladies  and  gentlemen, — The  very 
kind  introduction  that  I  have  received  requires  but  a  single  word  from 
me.     I  should  be  guilty  if  I  could  take  all  the  credit  which  has  been 
generously  ascribed  to  me,  for  I  am  not  old  enough  to  have  been  a 
pioneer.     And  when  I  think  of  such  names  as  Weld,  Alvin  Stewart, 
Geritt   Smith,    Joshua   Levitt,    William   Goodell,    Arthur   and   Lewis 
Tappan,  William  Lloyd  Garrison — (loud applause) — and  that  most  accom- 
plished speaker  of  the  world,  Wendell  Phillips — (renewed  applause) — 
when  I  think  of  multitudes  of  that  peculiar  class  of  Christians  called 
Eriends — when  I  think  of  the  number  of  men,  obscure,  without  name  or 
fame,    who   laboured   in   the  earliest  days  at  the  foundation    of  this 
reformation — and  when  I  remember  that  I  came  in  afterwards  to  build 
on  their  foundation — I  cannot  permit  in  this  fair  country  the  honours 
to  be  put  upon  me  and  wrested  from  those  men  that  deserve  them  far 
more  than  I  do.     (Cheers.)    All  I  can  say  is  this,  that  when  I  began  my 
public  life  I  fell  into  the  ranks  under  the  appropriate   captains,   and 
fought  as  well  as  I  knew  how  in  the  ranks  or  in  command.      (Loud 
cheers.)     As  this  is  my  last  public  address  upon  the  American  question 
in  England,  I  may  be  permitted  to  glance  briefly  at  my  course  here. 
(Hear,-  hear.)     At  Manchester  I  attempted  to  give  a  history  of  the 
external  political  movement  for  fifty  years  past,  so  far  as  it  was  neces- 
.  sary  to  illustrate  the  fact  that  the  present  American  war  was  only  an 


LONDON — PUBLIC   MEETING.  89 

overt  and  warlike  form  of  a  contest  between  liberty  and  slavery  that 
had  been  going  on  politically  for  half  a  century.     (Hear;  hear.)     At 
Glasgow  I  undertook  to  show  the  condition  of  work  or  labour  neces- 
sitated by  any  profitable  system  of  slavery,  demonstrating  that  it  brought 
labour  into  contempt,  affixing  to  it  the  badge  of  degradation,  and  that  a 
struggle  to  extend  servile  labour  across  the  American  continent  interests 
every  free  working  man  on  the  globe.     (Cheers.)    For  my  sincere  belief 
is  that  the  Southern  cause  is  the  natural  enemy  of  free  labour  and  the 
free  labourer  all  the    world   over.      (Loud   cheers.)     In  Edinburgh  I 
endeavoured  to  sketch  how,  out  of  separate  colonies  and  States  intensely 
jealous  of  their  individual  sovereignty,   there  grew  up  and  was  finally 
established  a  nation,  and  how  in  that  Nation  of  United  States  two  dis- 
tinct and  antagonistic  systems  were  developed  and  strove  for  the  guidance 
of  the  national  policy,  which  struggle  at  length   passed  and  the  North, 
gained  the  control.  Thereupon  the  South  abandoned  the  Union  simply  and 
solely  because  the  Government  was  in  future  to  be  administered  by  men 
who  would  give  their  whole  influence  to  freedom.      (Loud  cheers.)      In 
Liverpool  I  laboured,  under  difficulties — (laughter  and  cheers) — to  show 
that  slavery  in  the  long  run  was  as  hostile  to  commerce  and  to  manu- 
factures all  the  world  over,  as  it  was  to  free  interests  in  human  society — 
(cheers) — that  a  slave  nation  must  be  a  poor  customer,  buying  the  fewest 
and  poorest  goods,  and  the  least  profitable  to  the  producers — (hear  hear) 
— that  it  was  the  interest  of  every  manufacturing  country  to  promote 
freedom,    intelligence,    and  wealth  amongst  all  nations — (cheers) — that 
this  attempt  to  cover  the  fairest  portion  of  the  earth  with  a  slave  popu- 
lation that  buys  nothing,  and  a  degraded  white  population  that  buys 
next  to  nothing,  should  array  against  it    every    true    political    econo- 
mist and  every  thoughtful  and   far-seeing    manufacturer,    as    tending 
to    strike    at    the    vital    want    of  commerce — -which   is    not   cotton, 
but  rich  customers.     (Cheers.)      I  have  endeavoured  to  enlist  against 
this  flagitious  wickedness,  and  the  great  civil  war  which  it  has  kindled, 
the  judgment,  conscience,  and  interests  of  the  British  people.     (Cheers.) 
I  am  aware  that  a  popular  address  before  an  excited  audience  more  or 
less  affected  by  party  sympathies  is  not  the  most  favourable  method  of 
doing  justice  to  these  momentous  topics ;    and  there  have  been  some 
other  circumstances  which  made  it  yet  more  difficult  to  present  a  careful 
or  evenly  balanced  statement ;  but  I  shall  do  the  best  I  can  to  leave  no 
vestige  of  doubt,  that  slavery  was  the  cause — the  only  cause — the  whole 
cause — of  this  gigantic  and  cruel  war.     (Cheers.)     I  have  tried  to  show 
that  sympathy  for  the  South,  however  covered  by  excuses  or  softened  by 
sophistry,  is  simply  sympathy  with  an  audacious  attempt  to  build  up  a 
slave  empire  pure  and  simple.     (Hear,  hear.)    I  have  tried  to  show  that  in 
this  contest  the  North  were  contending  for  the  preservation  of  their 
Government  and  their  own  territory,  and  those  popular  institutions  on 
which  the  well-being  of  the  nation  depended.  (Hear,  hear.)    So  far,  I  have 
spoken  to  the  English  from  an  English  point  of  view.    To-night  I  ask  you 
to  look  to  this  struggle  from  an  American  point  of  view,  and  in  its  moral 
aspects.     (Hear,  hear.)     That  is,  I  wish  you  to  take  our  stand-point  for 
a  little  while — (cheers) — and  to  look  at  our  actions  and  motives,  not 


90  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

from  what  the  enemy  says,  but  from  what  we  say.  (Cheers.)  When 
two  men  have  disagreed,  you  seldom  promote  peace  between  them  by 
attempting  to  prove  that  either  of  them  is  all  right  or  either  of  them  is 
all  wrong.  (Hear,  hear.)  Now  there  has  been  some  disagreement  of 
feeling  between  America  and  Great  Britain.  I  don't  want  to  argue 
the  question  to-night  which  is  right  and  which  is  wrong,  but  if  some 
kind  neighbour  will  persuade  two  people  that  are  at  disagreement 
to  consider  each  other's  position  and  circumstances,  it  may  not  lead 
either  to  adopting  the  other's  judgment,  but  it  may  lead  them  to  say  of 
each  other,  "I  think  he  is  honest  and  means  well,  even  if  he  be  mis- 
taken." (Loud  cheers.)  You  may  not  thus  get  a  settlement  of  the 
difficulty,  but  you  will  get  a  settlement  of  the  quarrel.  (Hear,  hear.) 
I  merely  ask  you  to  put  yourselves  in  our  track  for  one  hour,  and  look 
at  the  objects  as  we  look  at  them — (cheers) — after  that,  form  your 
judgment  as  you  please.  (Cheers.)  The  first  and  earliest  form  in  which 
the  conflict  took  place  between  North  and.  South  was  purely  moral.  It 
was  a  conflict  simply  of  opinion  and  of  truths  by  argument ;  and  hx 
appeal  to  the  moral  sense  it  was  sought  to  persuade  the  slaveholder  to 
adopt  some  plan  of  emancipation.  (Hear,  hear.)  When  this  seemed  to 
the  Southern  sensitiveness  unjust  and  insulting,  it  led  many  in  the  North 
to  silence,  especially  as  the  South  seemed  to  apologize  for  slavery  rather 
than  defend  it  against  argument.  It  was  said,  "  The  evil  is  upon  us  ; 
we  cannot  help  it.  We  are  sullied,  but  it  is  a  misfortune  rather  than  a 
fault.  (Cheers.)  It  is  not  right  for  the  North  to  meddle  with  that 
which  is  made  worse  by  being  meddled  with,  even  by  argument  or 
appeal."  That  was  the  earlier  portion  of  the  conflict.  A  great  many 
men  were  deceived  by  it.  I  never  myself  yielded  to  the  fallacy.  As  a 
minister  of  the  gospel  preaching  to  sinful  men,  I  thought  it  my  duty  not 
to  give  in  to  this  doctrine ;  their  sins  were  on  them,  and  I  thought  it 
my  duty  not  to  soothe  them,  but  rather  to  expose  them.  (Cheers. )  The 
next  stage  of  the  conflict  was  purely  political.  The  South  was  attempt- 
ing to  extend  their  slave  system  into  the  Territories,  and  to  prevent  free 
States  from  covering  the  continent,  by  bringing  into  the  Union  a 
slave  State  for  every  free  State.  It  was  also  the  design  and 
endeavour  of  the  South  not  simply  to  hold  and  employ  the  enormous 
power  and  influence  of  the  Central  Executive,  but  also  to  engraft  into  the 
whole  Federal  Government  a  slave  State  policy.  They  meant  to  fill  all 
offices  at  home  and  abroad  with  men  loyal  to  slavery — to  shut  up  the 
road  to  political  preferment  against  men  who  had  aspirations  for  free- 
dom, and  to  corrupt  the  young  and  ambitious  by  obliging  them  to  swear 
fealty  to  slavery  as  the  condition  of  success.  I  am  saying  what  I  know. 
I  have  seen  the  progressive  corruption  of  men  naturally  noble,  educated 
in  the  doctrine  of  liberty,  who,  being  bribed  by  political  offices,  at 
last  bowed  the  knee  to  Moloch.  The  South  pursued  a  uniform 
system  of  bribing  and  corrupting  ambitious  men  of  Northern  consciences. 
A  far  more  dangerous  part  of  its  policy  was  to  change  the  Constitution, 
not  overtly,  not  by  external  aggression — worse,  to  fill  the  courts  with 
Southern  judges — (shame)— until,  first  by  laws  of  Congress  passed 
through  Southern  influence,   and   secondly,    by  the   construction   and 


LONDON" — PUBLIC  MEETING.  91 

adjudication  of  the  courts,  the  Constitution  having  become  more  and 
more  tied  up  to  Southern  principles,  the  North  would  have  to  submit  to 
slavery,  or  else  to  oppose  it  by  violating  the  law  and  constitution  as 
construed  by  servile  judges.  (Hear,  hear.)  They  were,  in  short,  little 
by  little,  injecting  the  laws,  constitution,  and  policy  of  the  country 
with  the  poison  and  blood  of  slavery.  (Cheers.)  I  will  not  let  this 
stand  on  my  own  testimony.  I  am  going  to  read  the  unconscious 
corroboration  of  this  by  Mr.  Stephens,  the  Vice-President  of  the  present 
Confederacy — one,  to  his  credit  be  it  said,  who  at  one  time  was  a  most 
sincere  and  earnest  opponent  of  Secession.     It  is  as  follows  : — 

This  step  (of  Secession)  once  taken,  can  never  be  recalled;  and  all  the  baleful 
and  withering  consequences  that  must  follow  will  rest  on  the  convention  for  all 
coming  time.  When  we  and  our  posterity  shall  see  our  lovely  South  desolated  by 
the  demon  of  war,  which  this  act  of  yours  will  inevitably  invite  and  call  forth ;  when 
our  green  fields  of  waving  harvests  shall  be  trodden  down  by  the  murderous  soldiery 
and  fiery  car  of  war  sweeping  over  our  land ;  our  temples  of  justice  laid  in  ashes  ; 
all  the  horrors  and  desolation  of  war  upon  us  ;  who  but  this  convention  will  be  held 
responsible  for  it  ?  and  who  but  him  who  shall  have  given  his  vote  for  this  unwise 
and  ill-timed  measure,  as  I  honestly  think  and  believe,  shall  be  held  to  strict  account 
for  this  suicidal  act  by  the  present  generation,  and  probably  cursed  and  execrated 
by  posterity  for  all  coming  time,  for  the  wide  and  desolating  ruin  that  will  inevi- 
tably follow  this  act  you  now  propose  to  perpetrate  ?  Pause,  I  entreat  you,  and 
consider  for  a  moment  what  reasons  you  can  give  that  will  even  satisfy  yourselves 
in  calmer  moments — what  reasons  you  can  give  to  your  fellow-sufferers  in  the 
calamity  that  it  will  bring  upon  us.  What  reasons  can  you  give  to  the  nations  of 
the  earth  to  justify  it?  They  will  be  the  calm  and  deliberate  judges  in  the  case; 
and  what  cause  or  one  overt  act  can  you  name  or  point  on  which  to  rest  the  plea  of 
justification  ?  What  right  has  the  North  assailed'?  What  interest  of  the  South  has 
been  invaded  ?  What  justice  has  been  denied?  and  what  claim  founded  in  justice 
and  right  has  been  withheld  ?  Can  either  of  you  to-day  name  one  governmental  act 
of  wrong,  deliberately  and  purposely  done  by  the  Government  of  Washington,  of 
which  the  South  has  a  right  to  complain  ?  I  challenge  the  answer.  While,  on  the 
other  hand,  let  me  show  the  facts  (and  believe  me,  gentlemen,  I  am  not  here  the 
advocate  of  the  North  ;  but  I  am  here  the  friend,  the  firm  friend  and  lover  of  the 
South  and  her  institutions,  and  for  this  reason  I  speak  thus  plainly  and  faithfully, 
for  your's,  mine,  and  every  other  man's  interest,  the  words  of  truth  and  soberness), 
of  which  I  wish  you  to  judge,  and  I  will  only  state  facts  which  are  clear  and  unde- 
niable, and  which  now  stand  as  records  authentic  in  the  history  of  our  country. 
When  we  of  the  South  demanded  the  slave  trade,  or  the  importation  of  Africans  for 
the  cultivation  of  our  lands,  did  they  not  yield  the  right  for  twenty  years  ?  When 
we  asked  a  three-fifths  representation  in  Congress  for  our  slaves  was  it  not  granted? 
When  we  asked  and  demanded  the  return  of  any  fugitive  from  justice,  or  the 
recovery  of  those  persons  owing  labour  or  allegiance,  was  it  not  incorporated  in  the 
Constitution,  and  again  ratified  and  strengthened  in  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law  of  1850? 
But  do  you  reply  that  in  many  instances  they  have  violated  this  compact  and  have 
not  been  faithful  to  their  engagements  ?  As  individual  and  local  communities  they 
may  have  done  so ;  but  not  by  the  sanction  of  Government ;  for  that  has  always 
been  true  to  Southern  interests.  Again,  gentlemen,  look  at  another  fact,  when  we 
have  asked  that  more  territory  should  be  added,  that  we  might  spread  the  institution 
of  slavery,  have  they  not  yielded  to  our  demands  in  giving  us  Louisiana,  Florida, 
and  Texas,  out  of  which  four  States  have  been  carved,  and  ample  territory  for  four 
more  may  be  added  in  due  time  if  you  by  this  unwise  and  impolitic  act,  do  not 
destroy  this  hope,  and  perhaps,  by  it  lose  all,  and  have  your  last  slave  wrenched 
from  you  by  stern  military  rule,  as  South  America  and  Mexico  were,  or  by  the 
vindictive  decree  of  a  universal  emancipation,  which  may  reasonably  be  expected  to 
follow.  But,  again,  gentlemen,  what  have  we  to  gain  by  this  proposed  change  of 
our  relation  to  the  general  Government  ?  We  have  always  had  the  control  of  it, 
and  can  yet,  if  we  remain  in  it  and  are  as  united  as  we  have  been.     We  have  had  a 


92  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

majority  of  the  Presidents  chosen  from  the  South ;  as  well  as  the  control  and 
management  of  most  of  those  chosen  from  the  North.  We  have  had  sixty  years  of 
Southern  Presidents  to  their  twenty-four,  thus  controlling  the  executive  department. 
So  of  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court,  we  have  had  eighteen  from  the  South,  and 
but  eleven  from  the  North  ;  although  nearly  four-fifths  of  the  judicial  business  has 
arisen  in  the  Free  States,  yet  a  majority  of  the  court  has  always  been  from  the 
South.  This  we  have  required  so  as  to  guard  against  any  interpretation  of  the  Con- 
stitution unfavourable  to  us.  In  like  manner  we  have  been  equally  watchful  to 
guard  our  interest  in  the  legislative  branch  of  Government.  In  choosing  the 
presiding  Presidents  (pro  tern.)  of  the  Senate,  we  have  had  twenty-four  to  their 
eleven.  Speakers  of  the  house  we  have  had  twenty-three,  and  they  twelve. 
While  the  majority  of  the  representatives,  from  their  greater  population,  have 
always  been  from  the  North,  yet  we  have  so  generally  secured  the  speaker,  because 
he,  to  a  greater  extent,  shapes  and  controls  the  legislation  of  the  country.  Nor 
have  we  had  less  control  in  every  other  department  of  the  general  Government. 
Attorney-Generals  we  have  had  fourteen,  while  the  North  have  had  but  five. 
Foreign  ministers  we  have  had  eighty-six  and  they  but  fifty-four.  While  three- 
fourths  of  the  business  which  demands  diplomatic  agents  abroad  is  clearly  from  the 
Free  States,  from  their  greater  commercial  interests,  yet  we  have  had  the  principal 
embassies,  so  as  to  secure  the  world's  markets  .for  our  cotton,  tobacco,  and  sugar  on 
the  best  possible  terms.  We  have  had  a  vast  majority  of  the  higher  offices  of  both 
army  and  navy,  while  a  larger  proportion  of  the  soldiers  and  sailors  were  drawn  from 
the  North.  Equally  so  of  clerks,  auditors,  and  comptrollers  filling  the  executive 
department,  the  records  show  for  the  last  fifty  years  that  of  the  three  thousand  thus 
employed,  we  have  had  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  same,  while  we  have  but  one- 
third  of  the  white  population  of  the  Republic.  Again,  look  at  another  item,  and 
one,  be  assured,  in  which  we  have  a  great  and  vital  interest ;  it  is  that  of  revenue, 
or  means  of  supporting  Government.  From  official  documents  we  learn  that  a 
fraction  over  three-fourths  of  the  revenue  collected  for  the  support  of  Government 
has  uniformly  been  raised  from  the  North.  Pause  now,  while  you  can,  gentlemen, 
and  contemplate  carefully  and  candidly  these  important  items.  Leaving  out  of 
view,  for  the  present,  the  countless  millions  of  dollars  you  must  expend  in  a  war 
with  the  North  ;  with  tens  of  thousands  of  your  sons  and  brothers  slain  in  battle, 
and  offered  up  as  sacrifices  upon  the  altar  of  your  ambition — and  for  what?  we  ask 
again.  Is  it  for  the  overthrow  of  the  American  Government,  established  by  our 
common  ancestry,  cemented  and  built  up  by  their  sweat  and  blood,  and  founded  on 
the  broad  principles  of  right,  justice,  and  humanity  ?  And,  as  such,  I  must  declare 
here,  as  I  have  often  done  before,  and  which  has  been  repeated  by  the  greatest  and 
wisest  of  statesmen  and  patriots  in  this  and  other  lands,  that  it  is  the  best  and  freest 
Government — the  most  equal  in,  its  rights,  the  most  just  in  its  decisions,  the  most  lenient 
in  its  measures,  and  the  most  inspiring  in  its  principles  to  elevate  the  race  of  men,  that 
the  sun  of  heaven  ever  shone  upon.  Now,  for  you  to  attempt  to  overthrow  such  a 
Government  as  this,  under  which  we  have  lived  for  more  than  three-quarters  of  a 
century— in  which  we  have  gained  our  wealth,  our  standing  as  a  nation,  our 
domestic  safety  while  the  elements  of  peril  are  around  us,  with  peace  and  tranquil- 
lity accompanied  with  unbounded  prosperity  and  rights  unassailed — is  the  height  of 
madness,  folly,  and  wickedness,  to  which  I  can  neither  lend  my  sanction  nor  my 
vote. 

Was  there  ever  such  an  indictment  unconsciously  laid  against  any 
people  1  (Cheers.)  Here  Mr.  Stephens,  talking  to  people  in  Georgia, 
quite  unconscious  that  his  speech  would  be  reported,  that  it  would 
appear  in  the  Northern  press,  and  be  read  in  Exeter  Hall  to  an 
English  audience — tells  you  what  ha3  been  the  plan  and  what  have 
been  the  effects  of  Southern  domination  on  the  national  policy,  on 
the  Government,  and  on  the  courts  during  the  last  fifty  years.  The 
object  of  Southern  policy,  early  commenced  and  steadily  pursued,  was 
to  control  the  Government  and  to  establish  a  slave  influence  through- 
out North  America.     Now,  take  notice  first,  that  the  North,    hating 


LONDON — PUBLIC   MEETING.  93 

slavery,  having  rid  itself  of  it  at  its  own  cost,  and  longing  for  its 
extinction  throughout  America,  was  unable  until  this  war  to  touch 
slavery  directly.  The  North  could  only  contend  against  slave  policy — 
not  directly  against  slavery.  Why  1  Because  slavery  was  not  the 
creature  of  national  law,  and  therefore  not  subject  to  national  jurisdic- 
tion, but  of  State  law,  and  subject  only  to  State  jurisdiction.  A 
direct  act  on  the  part  of  the  North  to  abolish  slavery  would  have  been 
revolutionary.  (A  Voice  :  "We  do  not  understand  you.")  You  will 
understand  me  before  I  have  done  with  you  to-night.  (Cheers.)  Such  an 
attack  would  have  been  a  violation  of  a  fundamental  principle  of  State 
independence.  This  peculiar  structure  of  our  Government  is  not  so 
unintelligible  to  Englishmen  as  you  may  think.  It  is  only  taking  an 
English  idea  on  a  larger  scale.  We  have  borrowed  it  from  you.  A 
great  many  do  not  understand  how  it  is  that  there  should  be  State 
independence  under  a  national  Government.  Now  I  am  not  closely 
acquainted  with  your  affairs,  but  the  Chamberlain  can  tell  you  if  I  am 
wrong,  when  I  say,  that  there  belong  to  the  old  city  of  London  certain 
private  rights  that  Parliament  cannot  meddle  with.  Yet  there  are 
elements  in  which  Parliament — that  is,  the  will  of  the  nation — is  as 
supreme  over  London  as  over  any  town  or  city  of  the  realm.  Now,  if 
there  are  some  things  which  London  has  kept  for  her  own  judgment 
and  will,  and  yet  others  which  she  has  given  up  to  the  national  will, 
you  have  herein  the  principle  of  the  American  Government — (cheers) — 
by  which  certain  local  matters  belong  exclusively  to  the  local  jurisdic- 
tion, and  certain  general  matters  to  the  national  Government.  I  will 
give  you  another  illustration  that  will  bring  it  home  to  you.  There  is 
not  a  street  in  London,  but,  as  soon  as  a  man  is  inside  his  house,  he 
may  say,  his  house  is  his  castle.  There  is  no  law  in  the  realm  which 
can  lay  down  to  that  man  how  many  members  shall  compose  his 
family — how  he  shall  dress  his  children — when  they  shall  get  up  and 
when  they  shall  go  to  bed — how  many  meals  he  shall  have  a  day,  and 
of  what  those  meals  shall  be  constituted.  The  interior  economy  of  the 
house  belongs  to  the  members  of  the  house,  yet  there  are  many  respects 
in  which  every  householder  is  held  in  check  by  common  rights.  They 
have  their  own  interior  and  domestic  economy,  yet  they  share  in  other 
things  which  are  national  and  governmental.  It  may  be  very  wrong 
to  give  children  opium,  but  all  the  doctors  in  London  cannot  say  to  a 
man  that  he  shall  not  drug  his  child.  It  is  his  business,  and  if  it  is 
wrong  it  cannot  be  interfered  with.  I  will  give  you  another  illustration. 
Five  men  form  a  partnership  of  business.  Now,  that  partnership 
represents  the  national  Government  of  the  United  States  ;  but  it  has 
relation  only  to  certain  great  commercial  interests  common  to  them  all. 
But  each  of  these  five  men  has  another  sphere  —  his  family  —  and 
in  that  sphere  the  man  may  be  a  drunkard,  a  gambler,  a  lecherous  and 
indecent  man,  but  the  firm  cannot  meddle  with  his  morals.  It  cannot 
touch  anything  but  business  interests  that  belong  to  the  firm.  Now, 
our  States  came  together  on  this  doctrine — that  each  State,  in  respect 
to  those  rights  and  institutions  that  were  local  and  peculiar  to  it,  was 
to  have  undivided  sovereignty  over  its  own  affairs  ;  but  that  all  those 


94  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

powers,  such  as  taxes,  wars,  treaties  of  peace,  which  belong  to  one  State, 
and  which  are  conimen  to  all  States,  went  into  the  general  Government. 
The  general  Government  never  had  the  power — the  power  was  never 
delegated  to  it — to  meddle  with  the  interior  and  domestic  economy  of 
the  States,  and  it  never  could  be  done.     You  will  ask  what  are  we 
doing  it  for  now.     I  will  tell  you  in  due  time       Have  I  made  that 
point  plain  1     (Cheers.)    It  was  only  that  part  of  slavery  which  escaped 
from  the  State  jurisdiction,  and  which  entered  into  the  national  sphere, 
which  formed  the  subject  of  controversy.     We  could  not  justly  touch 
the  Constitution   of  the    States,  but  only  the  policy  of  the  national 
Government,  that  came  out  beyond  the  State  and  appeared  in  Congress 
and  in  the   territories.       (Cheers.)     We  are  bound   to    abide   by  our 
fundamental  law.     Honour,  fidelity,  integrity,   as  well  as  patriotism, 
required  us  to  abide  by  that  law.    The  great  conflict  between  the  South 
and  North,  until  this  war  began,  was,  which  should  control  the  Federal 
or  central  Government  and  what  we  call  the  Territories  ;  that  is,  lands 
which  are  the  property  of  the  Union,  and  have  not  yet  received  State 
rights.    (Cheers.)     That  was  the  conflict.     It  was  not  "  Emancipation  " 
or    "No    Emancipation;"    Government    had   no    business   with   that 
question.     Before  the  war,  the  only  thing  on  which  politically  the  free 
people  of  the  North  and  South  took  their  respective  sides  was,  "  Shall 
the  National  policy  be  free  or  slave  V1     And  I  call  you  to  witness  that 
forbearance,  though  not  a  showy  virtue — fidelity,  though  not  a  shining 
quality — are  fundamental  to  manly  integrity.      (Cheers.)      During  a 
period  of  eighty  years,   the  North,  whose  wrongs  I  have  just  read  out 
to  you,  not  from  her  own  lips,  but  from  the  lips  of  her  enemy,  has  stood 
faithfully  to  her  word.      With  scrupulous  honour    she   has    respecfced 
legal  rights,   even  when  they  were  merely  civil  and  not  moral  rights. 
The  fidelity  of  the  North  to  the  great  doctrine  of  State  rights,  which 
was  born  of  her — her  forbearance  under  wrong,  insult,  and  provocation — 
her  conscientious  and  honourable  refusal  to  meddle  with  the  evil  which  she 
hated,  and  which  she  saw  to  be  aiming  at  the  life  of  Government,  and 
at  her  own  life — her  determination  to  hold  fast  pact  and  constitution, 
and  to  gain  her  victories  by  giving  the  people  a  new  National  policy — 
will  yet  be  deemed  worthy  of  something  better  than  a  contemptuous 
sneer,  or  the  allegation  of  an    "  enormous  national  vanity."     (Cheers.) 
The  Northern  forbearance  is  one  of  those  themes  of  which  we  may  be 
justly  proud  —  ("Oh,"  and  cheers) — a  product  of  virtue,   a  fruit   of 
liberty,   an  inspiration  of   that  Christian    faith,  which  is  the  mother 
at  once  of  truth  and  of  liberty.     (Cheers.)     I  am  proud  to  think  that 
there  is  such  a  record  of  national  fidelity  as  that  which  the  North  has 
written  for  herself  by  the  pen  of  her  worst  enemies.     Now  that  is  the 
reason  why  the  North  did  not  at  first  go  to  war  to  enforce  emancipation. 
She  went  to  war  to  save  the  National  institutions  ; — (cheers) — to  save 
the  Territories ;  to  sustain  those  laws,  which  would  first  circumscribe, 
then  suffocate,  and  finally  destroy  slavery.    (Cheers.)    That  is  the  reason 
why  that  most  true,    honest,  just,    and  conscientious  magistrate,  Mr. 
Lincoln — (The  announcement  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  name  was  received  with 
loud  and  continued  cheering.     The  whole  audience  rose  and  cheered  for 


LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING.  95 

some  time,  and  it  was  a  few  minutes  before  Mr.  Beecher  could  proceed.) 
From  having  spoken  much  at  tumultuous  assemblies  I  had  at  times  a 
fear  that  when  I  came  here  this  evening  my  voice  would  fail  from  too 
much  speaking.  But  that  fear  is  now  changed  to  one  that  your  voices 
will  fail  from  too  much  cheering.  (Laughter.)  How  then  did  the 
North  pass  from  a  conflict  with  the  South  and  a  slave  policy,  to  a  direct 
attack  upon  the  institutions  of  slavery  itself  %  Because,  according  to 
the  foreshadowing  of  that  wisest  man  of  the  South,  Mr.  Stephens,  they 
beleaguered  the  national  Government  and  the  national  life  with  the 
institution  of  slavery — obliged  a  sworn  President,  who  was  put  under 
oath  not  to  invade  that  institution — to  take  his  choice  between  the  safety 
and  life  of  the  Government  itself,  or  the  slavery  by  which  it  was 
beleaguered.  (Cheers.)  If  any  man  lays  an  obstruction  on  the  street, 
and  blocks  up  the  street,  it  is  not  the  fault  of  the  people  if  they  walk 
over  it.  As  the  fundamental  right  of  individual  self-defence  cannot  be 
withdrawn  without  immorality — so  the  first  element  of  national  life  is 
to  defend  life.  As  no  man  attacked  on  the  highway  violates  law,  but 
obeys  the  law  of  self-defence — a  law  inside  of  the  laws — by  knocking 
down  his  assailant ;  so,  when  a  nation  is  assaulted,  it  is  a  right  and 
duty,  in  the  exercise  of  self-defence,  to  destroy  the  enemy,  by  which 
otherwise  it  will  be  destroyed.  (Hear.)  As  long  as  the  South 
allowed  it  to  be  a  moral  and  political  conflict  of  policy,  we  were  content 
to  meet  the  issue  as  one  of  policy.  But  when  they  threw  down  the 
gauntlet  of  war,  and  said  that  by  it  slavery  was  to  be  adjudicated, 
we  could  do  nothing  else  than  take  up  the  challenge.  (Loud  cheers.) 
The  police  have  no  right  to  enter  your  house  as  long  as  you  keep  within 
the  law,  but  when  you  defy  the  laws  and  endanger  the  peace  and  safety 
of  the  neighbourhood  they  have  a  right  to  enter.  So  in  constitutional 
Governments  ;  it  has  no  power  to  touch  slavery  while  slavery  remains  a 
State  institution.  But  when  it  lifts  itself  up  out  of  its  State  humility 
and  becomes  banded  to  attack  the  nation,  it  becomes  a  national  enemy, 
and  has  no  longer  exemption.  (Cheers.)  But  it  is  said,  "The  Presi- 
dent issued  his  proclamation  after  all  for  political  effect,  not  for  humanity. " 
(Cries  of  "  Hear,  hear.")  Of  course  the  right  of  issuing  a  proclamation 
of  emancipation  was  political,  but  the  disposition  to  do  it  was  personal. 
(Loud  cheers.)  Mr.  Lincoln  is  an  officer  of  the  State,  and  in  the  Presi- 
dential chair  has  no  more  right  than  your  judge  on  the  bench  to  follow 
his  private  feelings.  (Applause.)  He  is  bound  to  ask  "What  is  the 
law  % " — not  "  What  is  my  sympathy  1 "  (Hear,  hear.)  And  when  a 
judge  sees  that  a  rigid  execution  or  interpretation  of  the  law  goes  along 
with  primitive  justice,  with  humanity,  and  with  pity,  he  is  all  the  more 
glad  because  his  private  feelings  go  with  his  public  office.  (Cheers.) 
Perhaps  in  the  next  house  to  a  kind  and  benevolent  surgeon  is  a  boy 
who  fills  the  night  with  groans,  because  he  has  a  cancerous  and  diseased 
leg.  The  surgeon  would  fain  go  in  and  amputate  that  limb  and  save 
that  life  ;  but  he  'is  not  called  in,  and  therefore  he  has  no  business  to  go 
in,  though  he  ever  so  much  wish  it.  (Hear,  hear.)  But  at  last  the 
father  says  to  him,  "In  the  name  of  God,  come  in  and  save  my  child ;" 
and  he  goes  in  professionally  and  cuts  off  his  leg  and  saves  his  life,  to 


98  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

the  infinite  disgust  of  a  neighbour  over  the  way,  that  says,  "  Oh,  he 
would  not  go  in  from  neighbourly  feeling  and  cut  his  leg  off." 
(Loud  applause.)  I  should  like  to  know  how  any  man  has  a  right 
to  cut  your  leg  or  mine  off  except  professionally  —  (laughter  and 
cheers) — and  so  a  man  must  often  wait  for  official  leave  to  perform 
the  noblest  offices  of  justice  and  humanity.  Here  then  is  the  great 
stone  of  stumbling.  At  first  the  President  could  not  touch  slavery, 
because  in  time  of  peace  it  was  a  legal  institution.  How  then 
can  he  do  it  now  1  Because  in  time  of  war  it  has  stept  beyond 
its  former  sphere,  and  is  no  longer  a  local  institution,  but  a  national 
and  public  enemy.  (Applause.)  Now  I  promised  to  make  that 
clear;  have  I  done  it?  ("Hear,  hear,",  and  applause.)  It  is  said, 
"Why  not  let  the  South  go?"  ("Hear,  hear,"  and  cheers.)  "Since 
they  won't  be  at  peace  with  you,  why  do  you  not  let  them  separate 
from  you  ?"  Because  they  would  be  still  less  peaceable  when  separated. 
(Hear,  hear.)  Oh,  if  the  Southerners  only  would  go  !  (Laughter.) 
They  are  determined  to  stay — that  is  the  trouble.  (Hear,  hear.)  We 
would  furnish  free  passage  to  all  of  them  if  they  would  go.  (Laughter.) 
But  we  say,  "  The  land  is  ours."  (Cheers )  Let  them  go,  and  leave 
to  the  nation  its  land,  and  they  will  have  our  unanimous  consent. 
(Renewed  cheers.)  But  I  wish  to  discuss  this  more  carefully.  It  is 
the  very  marrow  of  the  matter.  I  ask  you  to  stand  in  our  place  for  a 
little  time,  and  see  this  question  as  we  see  it,  afterwards  make  up  your 
judgment.  (Hear,  hear.)  And  first,  this  war  began  by  the  act  of  the 
South — firing  at  the  old  flag  that  had  covered  both  sections  with  glory 
and  protection.  (Applause.)  The  attack  made  upon  us  was  under 
circumstances  which  inflicted  immediate  severe  humiliation  and  threat- 
ened us  with  final  subjugation.  The  Southerners  held  all  the  keys  of 
the  country.  They  had  robbed  our  arsenals.  They  had  made  our 
treasury  bankrupt.  They  had  possession  of  the  most  important  offices 
in  the  army  and  navy.  They  had  the  vantage  of  having  long  anticipated 
and  prepared  for  the  conflict.  (Hear,  hear.)  We  knew  not  whom  to  trust. 
One  man  failed,  and  another  man  failed.  Men,  pensioned  by  the  Govern- 
ment, lived  on  the  salary  of  the  Government  only  to  have  better  oppor- 
tunity to  stab  and  betray  it.  There  was  not  merely  one  Judas,  there 
were  a  thousand  in  our  country.  ("Hear,  hear,"  and  hisses.)  And  for  the 
North  to  have  lain  down  like  a  spaniel — to  have  given  up  the  land 
that  every  child  in  America  is  taught,  as  every  child  in  Britain  is  taught, 
to  regard  as  his  sacred  right  and  his  trust — to  have  given  up  the  mouths 
of  our  own  rivers  and  our  mountain  citadel  without  a  blow,  would  have 
marked  the  North  in  all  future  history  as  craven  and  mean.  (Loud 
cheers  and  some  hisses.)  Secoudly,  the  honour  and  safety  of  that  grand 
experiment,  self-government  by  free  institutions,  demanded  that  so  flagi- 
tious a  violation  of  the  first  principles  of  legality  should  not  carry  off 
impunity  and  reward,  thereafter  enabling  the  minority  in  every  party 
conflict  to  turn  and  say  to  the  majority,  "If  you  don't  give  us  our  way 
we  will  make  war."  Oh,  Englishmen,  would  you  let  a  minority  dictate 
in  such  a  way  to  you?  (Loud  cries  of  "No,  no,  never  !"  and  cheers.) 
Three  thousand  miles  off  don't  make  any  difference,  then  ?   ("No.  no.";, 


LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING.  97 

The  principle  thus  introduced  would  literally  have  no  end — would  carry 
the  nation  back  to  its  original  elements  of  isolated  States.  Nor  is  there 
any  reason  why  it  should  stop  with  States.  Jf  every  treaty  may  be 
overthrown  by  which  States  have  been  settled  into  a  Nation,  what  form 
of  political  union  may  not  on  like  grounds  be  severed  %  There  is  the 
came  force  in  the  doctrine  of  Secession  in  the  application  to  counties  as 
in  the  application  to  States,  and  if  it  be  right  for  a  State  or  a  county  to 
secede,  it  is  equally  right  for  a  town  and  a  city.  (Cheers.)  This  doctrine 
of  Secession  is  a  huge  revolving  millstone  that  grinds  the  national  life  to 
powder.  (Cheers.)  It  is  anarchy  in  velvet,  and  national  destruction 
clothed  in  soft  phrases  and  periphrastic  expressions.  (Cheers.)  But  we 
have  fought  with  that  devil  "Slavery,"  and  understand  him  better  than 
you  do.  (Loud  cheers.)  No  people  with  patriotism  and  honour  will 
give  up  territory"  without  a  struggle  for  it.  (Cheers.)  Would  you  give 
it  up  1  (Loud  cries  of  "  No.")  It  is  said  that  the  States  are  owners  of 
their  territory  !  It  is  theirs  to  use,  not  theirs  to  run  away  with.  We 
have  equal  right  with  them  to  enter  it.  Let  me  inform  you  when  those 
States  first  sat  in  convention  to  form  a  Union,  a  resolution  was  introduced 
by  the  delegates  from  South  Carolina  and  Virginia,  "  That  we  now  pro- 
ceed to  form  a  National  Government."  The  delegate  from  Connecticut 
objected.  The  New  Englanders  were  State-right  men,  and  the  South,  in 
the  first  instance,  seemed  altogether  for  a  National  Government.  Con- 
necticut objected,  and  a  debate  took  place  whether  it  should  be  a  Consti- 
tution for  a  mere  Confederacy  of  States,  or  for  a  nation  formed  out  of  those 
States.  (A  Voice  :  "  When  was  that?")  It  was  in  the  Convention  of 
1787.  He  wants  to  help  me.  (Laughter.)  I  like  such  interruptions. 
I  am  here  a  friend  amongst  friends.  (Cheers.)  Nothing  will  please  me 
better  than  any  question  asked  in  courtesy  and  in  earnest  to  elucidate 
this  subject.  I  am  not  afraid  of  being  interrupted  by  questions  which 
are  to  the  point.  (Cheers.)  At  this  convention  the  resolution  of  the 
New  England  delegates  that  they  should  form  a  Confederacy  instead  of 
&  Nation  was  voted  down,  and  never  came  up  again.  (Cheers.)  The 
first  draft  of  the  preamble  contained  these  words,  "  We,  the  people  of 
the  United  States,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  Nation  ; "  but  as  there 
was  a  good  deal  of  feeling  amongst  the  North  and  South  on  the  subject, 
when  the  draft  came  to  the  committee  for  revision,  and  they  had  simply 
to  put  in  the  proper  phraseology,  they  put  it  "for  the  purpose  of  forming 
a  Union."  But  when  the  question  whether  the  States  were  to  hold  their 
autocracy  came  up  in  South  Carolina — which  was  called  the  Carolina 
heresy — it  was  put  down,  and  never  lifted  its  head  up  again  until  this 
Secession,  when  it  was  galvanised  to  justify  that  which  has  no  other 
pretence  to  justice.  (Cheers.)  I  would  like  to  ask  those  English 
gentlemen  who  hold  that  it  is  right  for  a  State  to  secede  when  it  pleases, 
how  they  would  like  it,  if  the  county  of  Kent  would  try  the  experiment. 
(Hear,  hear.)  The  men  who  cry  out  for  Secession  of  the  Southern  States 
in  America  would  say,  "Kent  seceding?  Ah,  circumstances  alter  cases." 
(Cheers  and  laughter.)  The  Mississippi,  which  is  our  Southern  door  and 
hall  to  come  in  and  to  go  out,  runs  right  through  the  territory  which 
they  tried  to  rend  from  lis.     The  South  magnanimously  offered  to  let  us 


98  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

use  it ;  but  what  would  you  say  if,  on  going  home,  you  found  a  squad  of 
gipsies  seated  in  your  hall,  who  refused  to  be  ejected,  saying,  "  But  look 
here,  we  will  let  you  go  in  and  out  on  equitable  and  easy  terms." 
(Cheers  and  laughter.)  But  there  was  another  question  involved — the 
question  of  national  honour.  If  you  take  up  and  look  at  the  map  that 
delineates  the  mountainous  features  of  that  continent,  you  will  find  the 
peculiar  structure  of  the  Alleghany  ridge,  beginning  in  New  Hampshire, 
running  across  the  New  England  States,  through  Pennsylvania  and 
West  Virginia,  stopping  in  the  Northern  part  of  Georgia.  (Hear,  hear.) 
Now,  all  the  world  over,  men  that  live  in  mountainous  regions  have 
been  men  for  liberty — (cheers) — and  from  the  first  hour  to  this  hour  the 
majority  of  the  population  of  Western  Virginia,  which  is  in  this  moun- 
tainous region,  the  majority  of  the  population  of  Eastern  Tennessee,  of 
Western  Carolina,  and  of  North  Georgia,  have  been  true  to  the  Union, 
and  were  urgent  not  to  go  out.  They  called  to  the  National  Govern- 
ment, "  We  claim  that,  in  fulfilment  of  the  compact  of  the  constitution, 
you  defend  our  rights,  and  retain  us  in  the  Union."  (Cheers.)  We 
would  not  suffer  a  line  of  fire  to  be  established  one  thousand  five  hundrecl 
miles  along  our  Southern  border  out  of  which,  in  a  coming  hour,  there 
might  shoot  out  wars  and  disturbances,  with  such  a  people  as  the  South, 
that  never  kept  faith  in  the  Union,  and  would  never  keep  faith  out  of  it. 
They  have  disturbed  the  land  as  old  Ahab  of  accursed  memory  did — 
(cheers  and  hisses) — and  when  Elijah  found  this  Ahab  in  the  way,  Ahab 
said,  "  It  is  Elijah  that  has  disturbed  Israel."  (A  laugh.)  Now  we 
know  the  nature  of  this  people.  We  know  that  if  we  entered  into  a  truce 
with  them  they  would  renew  their  plots  and  violences,  and  take  possession 
of  the  continent  in  the  name  of  the  devil  and  slavery.  (Cheers.)  One 
more  reason  why  we  will  not  let  this  people  go  is  because  we  do  not 
want  to  become  a  military  people.  A  great  many  say  America  is 
becoming  too  strong ;  she  is  dangerous  to  the  peace  of  the  world.  But 
if  you  permit  or  favour  this  division,  the  South  becomes  a  military 
nation,  and  the  North  is  compelled  to  become  a  military  nation.  Along 
a  line  of  1,500  miles  she  must  have  forts  and  men  to  garrison  them. 
These  250,000  soldiers  will  constitute  the  national  standing  army  of  the 
North.  Now  any  nation  that  has  a  large  standing  army  is  in  great 
danger  of  losing  its  liberties.  ("  No,  no.")  Before  this  war  the  legal 
size  of  the  national  army  was  25,000.  That  was  all ;  the  actual  number 
was  18,000,  and  those  were  all  the  soldiers  we  wanted.  The  Tribune 
and  other  papers  repeatedly  said  that  these  men  were  useless  in  our 
nation.  But  if  the  country  were  divided,  then  we  should  have  two 
great  military  nations  taking  its  place,  and  instead  of  a  paltry  18,000 
soldiers,  there  would  be  250,000  on  one  side  and  100,000  or  200,000 
on  the  other.  And  if  America,  by  this  ill-advised  disruption,  is  forced 
to  have  a  standing  army,  like  a  boy  with  a  knife  she  will  always  want  to 
whittle  with  it.  (Laughter  and  cheers.)  It  is  the  interest,  then,  of  the 
world,  that  the  nation  should  be  united,  and  that  it  should  be  under  the 
control  of  that  part  of  America  that  has  always  been  for  peace — (cheers, 
and  cries  of  "No,  no") — that  it  should  be  wrested  from  the  control  and 
policy  of  that  part  of  the  nation  that  has  always  been  for  more  territory, 


LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING.  99 

for  filibustering,  for  insulting  foreign  nations.  (Cheers.)  But  that  is  not 
all.  The  religious-minded  among  our  people  feel  that  in  the  territory 
committed  to  us  there  is  a  high  and  solemn  trust — a  national  trust.  We 
are  taught  that  in  some  sense  the  world  itself  is  a  field,  and  every  Christian 
nation  acknowledges  a  certain  responsibility  for  the  moral  condition  of  the 
globe.  But  how  much  nearer  does  it  come  when  it  is  one's  own  country  ! 
And  the  Church  of  America  is  coming  to  feel  more  and  more  that  God 
gave  us  this  country,  not  merely  for  material  aggrandisement,  but  for  a 
glorious  triumph  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  (Cheers.)  Therefore  we 
undertook  to  rid  the  territory  of  slavery.  Since  slavery  has  divested 
itself  of  its  municipal  protection,  and  has  become  a  declared  public 
enemy,  it  is  our  duty  to  strike  down  the  slavery  which  would  blight  this 
far  Western  territory.  When  I  stand,  and  look  out  upon  that  immense 
territory  as  a  man,  as  a  citizen,  as  a  Christian  minister,  I  feel  myself 
asked,  "  Will  you  permit  that  vast  country  to  be  over-clouded  by  this 
curse  1  Will  you  permit  the  cries  of  bondmen  to  issue  from  that  fair 
territory,  and  do  nothing  for  their  liberty?"  What  are  we  doing1? 
Sending  our  ships  round  the  globe,  carrying  missionaries  to  the  Sand- 
wich Islands,  to  the  islands  of  the  Pacific,  to  Asia^  to  all  Africa.  And 
yet,  when  this  work  of  redeeming  our  continent  from  the  heathendom 
of  slavery  lies  before  us,  there  ap:e  men  who  counsel  us  to  give  it  up  to 
the  devil,  and  not  try  to  do  anything  with  it. — Ah!  independent  of 
pounds  and  pence,  independent  of  national  honour,  independent  of  all 
merely  material  considerations,  there  is  pressing  on  every  conscientious 
Northerner's  mind  this  highest  of  all  considerations — our  duty  to  God 
to  save  that  continent  from  the  blast  and  blight  of  slavery.  (Cheers.) 
Yet  how  many  are  there  who  up,  down,  and  over  all  England  are  saying, 
"Let  slavery  go — let  slavery  go1?"  It  is  recorded,  I  think,  in  the 
biography  of  one  of  the  most  noble  of  your  own  countrymen,  Sir  T. 
Fowell  Buxton — (cheers) — that  on  one  occasion  a  huge  favourite  dog  was 
seized  with  hydrophobia.  With  wonderful  courage  he  seized  the  creature 
by  the  neck  and  collar,  and  against  the  animal's  mightiest  efforts,  dash- 
ing hither  and  thither  against  wall  and  fence,  held  him  until  help  could 
be  got.  If  there  had  been  Englishmen  there  of  the  stripe  of  the  Times, 
they  would  have  said  to  Fowell  Buxton,  "Let  him  go;"  but  is  there 
one  here  who  does  not  feel  the  moral  nobleness  of  that  man,  who  rather 
than  let  the  mad  animal  go  down  the  street  biting  children  and  women 
and  men,  risked  his  life  and  prevented  the  dog  from  doing  evil  ?  Shall 
we  allow  that  hell  hound  of  slavery,  mad,  mad  as  it  is,  to  go  biting 
millions  in  the  future  ?  (Cheers.)  We  will  peril  life  and  limb  and  all 
we  have  first.  These  truths  are  not  exaggerated — they  are  diminished 
rather  than  magnified  in  my  statement ;  and  you  cannot  tell  how  power- 
fully they  are  influencing  us  unless  you  were  standing  in  our  midst  in 
America ;  you  cannot  understand  how  firm  that  national  feeling  is  which 
God  has  bred  in  the  North  on  this  subject.  It  is  deeper  than  the  sea  ; 
it  is  firmer  than  the  hills ;  it  is  serene  as  the  sky  over  our  head,  where 
God  dwells.  (Cheers.)  But  it  is  said,  "  What  a  ruthless  business  this 
war  of  extermination  is  ?"  I  have  heard  it  stated  that  a  fellow  from 
America,  purporting  to  be  a  minister  of  the  gospel  of  peace,  had  come 


100  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

over  to  England,  and  that  that  fellow  had  said  he  was  in  favour  of  a  war 
of  extermination.  Well,  if  he  said  so  he  will  stick  to  it ; — (cheers) — but 
not  in  the  way  in  which  enemies  put  these  words.  Listen  to  the  way 
in  which  I  put  them,  for  if  I  am  to  bear  the  responsibility  it 
is  only  fair  that  I  should  state  them  in  my  own  way.  We 
believe  that  the  war  is  a  test  of  our  institutions ;  that  it  is  a 
life-and-death  struggle  between  the  two  principles  of  liberty  and  slavery 
— cheers— that  it  is  the  cause  of  the  common  people  all  the  world  over. 
(Renewed  cheers.)  We  believe  that  every  struggling  nationality  on  the 
globe  will  be  stronger  if  we  conquer  this  odious  oligarchy  of  slavery,  and 
that  every  oppressed  people  in  the  world  will  be  weaker  if  we  fail. 
(Cheers.)  The  sober  American  regards  the  war  as  part  of  that  awful 
yet  glorious  struggle  which  has  been  going  on  for  hundreds  of  years  in 
every  nation  between  right  and  wrong,  between  virtue  and  vice,  between 
liberty  and  despotism,  between  freedom  and  bondage.  It  carries  with  it 
the  whole  future  condition  of  our  vast  continent — its  laws,  its  policy,  its 
fate.  And  standing  in  view  of  these  tremendous  realities  we  have  con- 
secrated all  that  we  have — our  children,  our  wealth,  our  national  strength 
— and  we  lay  them  all  on  the  altar  and  say  "  It  is  better  that  they  should 
all  perish  than  that  the  North  should  falter  and  betray  this  trust  of  God, 
this  hope  of  the  oppressed,  this  Western  civilisation.' '  (Cheers.)  If  we 
say  this  of  ourselves,  shall  we  say  less  of  the  slaveholders  1  If  we  are 
willing  to  do  these  things,  shall  we  say  "Stop  the  war  for  their  sakes ?" 
If  we  say  this  of  ourselves,  shall  we  have  more  pity  for  the  rebellious, 
for  slavery  seeking  to  blacken  a  continent  with  its  awful  evil,  desecrating 
the  social  phrase  "  National  Independence"  by  seeking  only  an  inde- 
pendence that  shall  enable  them  to  treat  four  millions  of  human  beings  as 
chattels  ?  (Cheers.)  Shall  we  be  tenderer  over  them  than  over  ourselves  1 
Standing  by  my  cradle,  standing  by  my  hearth,  standing  by  the  altar  of 
the  church,  standing  by  all  the  places  that  mark  the  name  and  memory 
of  heroic  men,  who  poured  out  their  blood  and  lives  for  principle,  I 
declare  that  in  ten  or  twenty  years  of  war  we  will  sacrifice  everything 
we  have  for  principle.  (Cheers.)  If  the  love  of  popular  liberty  is  dead 
in  Great  Britain  you  will  not  understand  us ;  but  if  the  love  of 
liberty  lives  as  it  once  lived,  and  has  worthy  successors  of  those  re- 
nowned men  that  were  our  ancestors  as  much  as  yours,  and  whose 
example  and  principles  we  inherit  as  so  much  seed  corn  in  a  new  and 
fertile  land — then  you  will  understand  our  firm,  invincible  determina- 
tion— to  fight  this  war  through  at  all  hazards  and  at  every  cost. 
(Immense  cheering,  accompanied  with  a  few  hisses.)  I  am  obliged  for 
this  little  diversion  ;  it  rests  me.  Against  this  statement  of  facts  and 
principles  no  public  man  and  no  party  could  stand  up  for  one  moment 
in  England  if  it  were  permitted  to  rest  upon  its  own  merits.  It  is 
therefore  sought  to  darken  the  light  of  these  truths  and  to  falsify  facts. 
I  will  not  mention  names,  but  I  will  say  this,  that  there  have  been 
important  organs  in  Great  Britain  that  have  deliberately  and  knowingly 
spoken  what  is  not  the  truth.  (Applause,  and  loud  cries  of  u  The 
Times!"  "Three  groans  for  the  Times/")  It  is  declared  that  the 
North  has  no  sincerity.     It  is  declared  that  the  North  treats  the  blacks 


LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING.  101 

worse  than  the  South  does.  (Hear,  hear.)  A  monstrous  lie  from 
beginning  to  end.  It  is  declared  that  emancipation  is  a  mere  political 
trick — not  a  moral  sentiment.  It  is  declared  that  this  is  the  cruel 
unphilanthropic  squabble  of  men  gone  mad  with  national  vanity. 
(Cheers  and  hisses.)  Oh,  what  a  pity  that  a  man  should  "fall  nine 
times  the  space  that  measures  day  and  night"  to  make  an  apostasy 
which  dishonours  his  closing  days,  and  to  wipe  out  the  testimony  for 
liberty  that  he  gave .  in  his  youth  !  But  even  if  all  this  monstrous  lie 
about  the  North — this  needless  slander — were  true,  still  it  would  not 
alter  the  fact  that  Northern  success  will  carry  liberty — Southern  success, 
slavery.  (Cheers.)  For  when  society  dashes  against  society,  the  results 
are  not  what  the  individual  motives  of  the  members  of  society  would 
make  them — the  results  are  what  the  institutions  of  society  make  them. 
When  your  army  stood  at  Waterloo,  they  did  not  know  what  were  the 
vast  moral  consequences  that  depended  on  that  battle.  It  was  not  what 
the  individual  soldiers  meant  nor  thought,  but  what  the  British  empire — 
the  national  life  behind,  and  the  genius  of  that  renowned  kingdom  which 
sent  that  army  to  victory — meant  and  thought.  (Hear,  hear.)  And 
even  if  the  President  were  false — if  every  Northern  man  were  a  juggling 
hypocrite — that  does  nob  change  the  Constitution ;  and  it  does  not 
change  the  fact  that  if  the  North  prevails,  she  carries  Northern  ideas 
and  Northern  institutions  with  her.  (Cheers.)  But  I  hear  a  loud 
protest  against  war.  (Hear,  hear.)  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  Mr.  Chair- 
man,— there  is  a  small  band  in  our  country  and  in  yours — I  wish  their 
number  were  quadrupled — who  have  borne  a  solemn  and  painful  testi- 
mony against  all  wars,  under  all  circumstances  ;  and  although  I  differ 
with  them  on  the  subject  of  defensive  warfare,  yet  when  men  that 
rebuked  their  own  land,  and  all  lands,  now  rebuke  us,  though  I  cannot 
accept  their  judgment,  I  bow  with  profound  respect  to  their  consistency. 
("Hear,  hear,"  and  cheers.)  But  excepting  them,  I  regard  this  British 
horror  of  the  American  war  as  something  wonderful.  (Benewed  cheers 
and  laughter,)  Why,  it  is  a  phenomenon  in  itself !  On  what  shore 
has  not  the  prow  of  your  ships  dashed  1  (Hear,  hear.)  What  land  is 
there  with  a  name  and  a  people,  where  your  banner  has  not  led  }^our 
soldiers?  (Hear,  hear.)  And  when  the  great  resurrection  r6veille  shall 
sound,  it  will  muster  British  soldiers  from  every  clime  and  people  under 
the  whole  heaven.  (Cheers. )  Ah  !  but  it  is  said  this  is  a  war  against 
your  own  blood.  (Hear,  hear.)  How  long  is  it  since  you  poured 
soldiers  into  Canada,  and  let  all  your  yards  work  night  and  cla}^  to 
avenge  the  taking  of  two  men  out  of  the  Trent  ?  (Loud  applause.)  Old 
England  shocked  at  a  war  of  principle  !  She  gained  her  glories  in  such 
wars.  (Cheers.)  Old  England  ashamed  of  a  war  of  principle !  Her 
national  ensign  symbolises  her  history — the  cross  in  a  field  of  blood. 
(Cheers.)  And  will  you  tell  us — who  inherit  your  blood,  your  ideas, 
and  your  high  spirits — (cheers) — that  we  must  not  fight  1  (Cheers.) 
The  child  must  heed  the  parents,  until  the  parents  get  old  and  tell 
the  child  not  to  do  the  thing  that  in  early  life  they  whipped  him 
for  not  doing.  And  then  the  child  says,  father  and  mother  are 
getting   too  old ;    they  had  better  be  taken  away  from  their  present 


102  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

home  and  corae  to  live  with  us,  (Cheers  and  hisses.)  Perhaps  you 
think  that  the  old  island  will  do  a  little  longer.  (Hisses.)  Perhaps 
yon  think  there  is  coal  enough.  Perhaps  you  think  the  stock  is  not 
quite  run  out  yet ;  but  whenever  England  comes  to  that  state  that  she 
does  not  go  to  war  for  principle,  she  had  better  emigrate  and  we  will 
give  her  room.  (Laughter.)  I  have  been  very  much  perplexed  what 
to  think  about  the  attitude  of  Great  Britain  in  respect  to  the  South.  I 
must,  I  suppose,  look  to  the  opinion  of  the  majority  of  the  English  people. 
I  don't  believe  in  the  Times.  (Groans  for  the  Times ;  groans  for  the 
Telegraph.)  You  cut  my  poor  sentence  in  two,  and  all  the  blood  runs 
out  of  it.  (Laughter.)  I  was  just  going  to  say  that  like  most  of  you  I 
don't  believe  in  the  Times,  but  I  always  read  it.  (Laughter.)  Every 
Englishman  tells  me  that  the  Times  is  no  exponent  of  English  opinion, 
and  yet  I  have  taken  notice  that  when  they  talk  of  men,  somehow  or 
other  their  last  argument  is  the  last  thing  that  was  in  the  Times. 
(Laughter.)  I  think  it  was  the  Times  or  Post  that  said,  that  America 
was  sore,  because  she  had  nob  the  moral  sympathy  of  Great  Britain,  and 
that  the  moral  sympathy  of  Great  Britain  had  gone  for  the  South.  ("No, 
no.")  Well,  let  me  tell  you,  that  those  who  are  represented  in  the  news- 
papers as  favourable  to  the  South  are  like  men  who  have  arrows  and 
bows  strong  enough  to  send  the  shafts  3,000  miles  ;  and  those  who  feel 
sympathy  for  the  North  are  like  men  who  have  shafts,  but  have  no  bows 
that  could  shoot  them  far  enough.  (Hear.)  The  English  sentiment 
that  has  made  itself  felt  on  our  shores  is  the  part  that  slandered  the 
North  and  took  part  with  the  South ;  and  if  you  think  we  are  unduly 
sensitive,  you  must  take  into  account  that  the  part  of  English  sentiment 
carried  over  is  the  part  that  gives  its  aid  to  slavery  and  against  liberty. 
(Hear,  hear.)  I  shall  have  a  different  story  to  tell  when  I  get  back. 
(The  assembly  rose,  and  for  a  few  moments  hats  and  handkerchiefs 
were  waved  enthusiastically  amidst  loud  cheering.  A  Voice  :  "  What 
about  the  Russians  1 "  Hear,  hear.)  A  gentleman  asks  me  to  say 
a  word  about  the  Russians  in  New  York  harbour.  As  this  is  a 
little  private  confidential  meeting — (laughter) — I  will  tell  you  the 
fact  about  them.  (Laughter.)  The  fact  is  this — it  is  a  little  piece 
of  coquetry.  (Laughter.)  Don't  you  know  that  when  a  woman 
thinks  her  suitor  is  not  quite  attentive  enough,  she  takes  another 
beau,  and  flirts  with  him  in  the  face  of  the  old  one  ?  (Laughter.)  New- 
York  is  flirting  with  Russia,  but  she  has  got  her  eye  on  England. 
(Cheers.)  Well  I  hear  men  say  this  is  a  piece  of  national  folly  that  is 
not  becoming  on  the  part  of  people  reputed  wise,  and  in  such  solemn 
and  important  circumstances.  It  is  said  that  when  Russia  is.  now 
engaged  in  suppressing  the  liberty  of  Poland  it  is  an  indecent  thing  for 
America  to  flirt  with  her.  I  think  so  too.  (Loud  cheers.)  Now  you 
know  what  we  felt  when  you  were  flirting  with  Mr.  Mason  at  your 
Lord  Mayor's  banquet,  (Cheers.)  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  did  not  do 
us  any  hurt  to  have  you  Englishmen  tell  us  our  faults  I  hope  it  don't 
do  you  Britishers  any  hurt  to  have  us  tell  you  some  of  yours.  (A  laugh.) 
Let  me  tell  you  my  honest  sentiments.  England,  because  she  is  a 
Christian   nation,    because   she  has    the   guardianship  of  the   dearest 


LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING.  103 

principles  of  civil  and'  religious  liberty,  ought  to  be  friendly  with  every 
nation  and  with  every  tongue.  But  when  England  looks  out  for  an 
ally  she  ought  to  seek  for  her  own  blood,  her  own  language,  her  own 
children.  (Cheers.)  And  I  stand  here  to  declare  that  America  is  the 
proper  and  natural  ally  of  Great  Britain.  (Cheers.)  I  declare  that 
all  sorts  of  alliances  with  Continental  nations  as  against  America 
monstrous,  and  that  all  flirtations  of  America  with  pandoured  and 
whiskered  foreigners  are  monstrous,  and  that  in  the  great  conflicts 
of  the  future,  when  civilization  is  to  be  extended,  when  commerce  is  to 
be  free  round  the  globe,  and  to  carry  with  it  religion  and  civilization, 
then  two  flags  should  be  flying  from  every  man-of-war  and  every 
ship,  and  they  should  be  the  flag  with  the  cross  of  St.  George  and  the 
flag  with  the  stars  of  promise  and  of  hope.  (Cheers.)  Now,  ladies  and 
gentlemen,  when  anybody  tells  you  that  Mr.  Beecher  is  in  favour  of 
war  you  may  ask,  "  In  what  way  is  he  in  favour  of  war  ?"  And  if  any 
man  says  he  seeks  to  sow  discord  between  father  and  son  and  mother 
and  daughter  you  will  be  able  to  say,  "  Show  us  how  he  is  sowing 
discord."  If  I  had  anything  grievous  to  say  of  England  I  would  sooner 
say  it  before  her  face  than  behind  her  back.  I  would  denounce  English- 
men, if  they  were  maintainers  of  the  monstrous  policy  of  the  South. 
However,  since  I  have  come  over  to  this  country  you  have  told 
me  the  truth,  and  I  shall  be  able  to  bear  back  an  assurance  to  our 
people  of  the  enthusiasm  you  feel  for  the  cause  of  the  North.  And 
then  there  is  the  very  significant  act  of  your  Government  —  the 
seizure  of  the  rams  in  Liverpool.  (Loud  cheers.)  Then  there  are  the 
weighty  words  spoken  by  Lord  Russell  at  Glasgow,  and  the  words 
spoken  by  the  Attorney- General.  (Cheers.)  These  acts  and  declara- 
tions of  policy,  coupled  with  all  that  I  have  seen,  and  the  feeling  of 
enthusiasm  of  this  English  people,  will  warm  the  heart  of  the  Americans 
in  the  North.  If  we  are  one  in  civilization,  one  in  religion,  one  sub- 
stantially in  faith,  let  us  be  one  in  national  policy,  one  in  every  enter- 
prize  for  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel  and  for  the  happiness  of  mankind. 
(Cheers.)  I  thank  you  for  your  long  patience  with  me.  ("Go  on  !") 
Ah  !  when  I  was  a  boy  they  used  to  tell  me  never  to  eat  enough,  but 
always  to  get  up  being  yet  a  little  hungry.  I  would  rather  you  go 
away  wishing  I  had  spoken  longer  than  go  away  saying,  "What  a 
tedious  fellow  he  was  !"  (A  laugh.)  And  therefore  if  you  will  not 
permit  me  to  close  and  go,  I  beg  you  to  recollect  that  this  is  the  fifth 
speech  of  more  than  two  hours'  length  that  I  have  spoken,  on  some 
occasions  under  difficulties,  within  seven  or  eight  days,  and  I  am  so 
exhausted  that  I  ask  you  to  permit  me  to  stop.     (Great  cheering.) 

Professor  NEWMAN  then  rose  and  moved  the  following  resolution  : 
"  Resolved, — That  this  meeting  presents  its  most  cordial  thanks  to  the 
Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher  for  the  admirable  address  which  he  has 
delivered  this  evening,  and  expresses  its  hearty  sympathy  with  his 
reprobation  of  the  slaveholders'  rebellion,  his  vindication  of  the  rights 
of  a  free  Government,  and  his  aspirations  for  peace  and  friendship 
between  the  English  people  and  their  American  brethren ;  and  as  this 
meeting  recognises  in  Mr.  Beecher  one  of  the  early  pioneers  of  negro 


104  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

emancipation,  as  well  as  one  of  the  most  eloquent  and  successful  of  the 
champions  of  that  great  cause,  it  rejoices  in  this  opportunity  of  con- 
gratulating him  on  the  triumph  with  which  the  labours  of  himself  and 
his  associates  have  been  crowned  in  the  anti-slavery  policy  of  President 
Lincoln  and  his  cabinet."  (Cheers.)  He  said  that  in  the  present  state 
of  this  controversy  it  was  necessary  that  the  English  people  should  see 
whether  their  sentiments  on  slavery  were  still  the  same.  The  people 
he  remembered  in  his  boyhood  were  in  great  majority  anti-slavery ;  and 
it  was  but  recently  that  half  a  million  JBritish  ladies  of  all  classes  sent 
addresses  to  the  women  of  America  deploring  this  terrible  curse. 
America  wanted  to  see  whether  they  were  changed  since  then.  It 
was  but  lately  that  Lord  Brougham  publicly  insulted  the  American 
ambassador,  Mr.  Dallas,  from  his  excessive  zeal  against  the  Southern 
domestic  institution  :  the  wonderful  contrast  of  that  noble  lord's  recent 
conduct  led  many  people,  and  pre-eminently  their  Northern  brethren, 
to  suppose  that  there  had  been  a  great  change  among  them.  The 
writings  of  such  men  as  Mr.  Carlyle,  the  articles  in  the  Times  and  of 
a  large  portion  of  the  metropolitan  press,  had  tended  to  induce  the  same 
feeling ;  but  it  was  for  them  to  show  that  they  still  adhered  to  their  old 
anti-slavery  views.  The  only  way  to  do  that  was  never  to  read  those 
papers ;  or  at  any  rate  never  to  pay  for  reading  them.     (Cheers.) 

Rev.  NEWMAN  HALL  seconded  the  resolution.  He  said  :  Last 
evening  I  was  visited  by  a  fugitive  slave.  Her  intelligent  countenance, 
her  modest  demeanour,  her  clear,  calm,  refined  voice  at  once  interested 
me.  I  soon  learnt  her  history.  Her  owner,  as  I  at  once  guessed,  was 
both  her  father  and  her  master.  (Shame.)  While  she  was  yet  a  child  she 
so  felt  the  cruelties  of  slavery  that  she  escaped.  She  was  pursued, 
tracked  by  bloodhounds,  brought  back,  and  subjected  to  the  fearful 
torments  which  are  generally  inflicted  upon  a  captured  slave.  She  was 
made  to  marry  early,  and  became  a  mother.  Then  she  was  employed  as 
wet  nurse  to  her  father's  children — that  is,  she  suckled  her  own  brothers 
and  sisters.  (Sensation.)  But  the  grief  that  she  felt  most  was  the 
selling  of  her  own  little  girl  at  the  age  of  ten  years.  Then,  as  child 
after  child  was  born,  she  wished  that  child  after  child  might  die  rather 
than  endure  the  cruelties  which  she  had  suffered.  With  all  the  tender 
instincts  of  a  mother  she  yet  rejoiced  to  see  her  babe  in  the  cradle  of 
death.  She  had  been  taught  to  believe  at  first  that  her  owner  was  her 
God,  and  for  a  time  she  did  believe  that  her  master  was  God  Almighty. 
But  when  she  afterwards  learned  that  there  was  a  God  in  heaven  she 
looked  to  Him  for  help,  and  resolved  at  any  risk  to  get  away.  She  fled 
to  the  woods,  and  was  soon  pursued,  and  her  master  was  so  near  her  at 
one  time  that  she  heard  him,  when  hiding  in  the  hollow  of  a  tree,  saying 
that  if  he  caught  her  she  would  never  put  a  step  on  the  ground  again. 
"Surely,"  I  said,  "  he  would  not  have  maimed  you  1 "  "  No,"  she  said, 
he  would  have  tarred,  feathered,  and  burnt  me  alive  " — a  fate  which 
many  a  captured  fugitive  has  undergone  as  an  example  to  others.  For 
ten  days  she  wandered  in  the  woods,  feeding,  or  rather  starving,  upon 
roots  and  leaves,  till  she  was  found  under  a  hedge,  exhausted,  by  a  good 
Samaritan,  a  minister  of  the  Gospel,  who   assisted  her,  and  got   hen 


LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING.  105 

shipped  in  a  vessel  that  was  going  to  New  York,  and  thence  to  Calcutta, 
from  whence  she  has  come  to  England.  On  her  right  ankle  there  is  the 
mark  of  the  red-hot  branding-iron  pnt  there  by  her  father,  and  on  her 
left  shoulder  is  the  mark  of  the  red-hot  branding-iron  put  there  also 
by  her  father  !  (Shame.)  On  her  wrists  you  will  see  the  scars  made 
by  the  links  of  the  chains  by  which  she  was  bound  by  her  father, 
and  where  the  iron  gnawed  into  her  flesh  !  (Sensation.)  She  bears 
the  mark  of  a  terrible  blow  struck  by  her  father  with  a  heavy  iron 
on  her  side,  which  has  made  her  crooked  and  incapacitated  her  for 
hard  work.  It  is  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  and  extending  the 
liberty  to  exercise  such  abominations  as  these  over  four  millions  of 
their  fellow-creatures  that  the  Southerners  are  in  arms.  (Cheers.)  It 
is  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  a  Government  and  the  carrying  out  of 
laws  which  will  put  a  stop  to  these  abominations — it  is  now  actually 
and  avowedly,  whatever  it  may  have  once  been,  for  the  purpose  of 
sweeping  the  American  continent  of  such  atrocities  as  these — that  the 
North  is  fighting.  (Cheers.)  Can  there  be  a  moment's  hesitation  on 
which  side — if  there  is  to  be  a  quarrel — the  sympathies  of  Christian  and 
free  England  shall  be  placed?  (Cries  of  "No.")  There  may  be  and 
there  are  differences  of  political  opinions  among  us,  but  there  is  no 
difference  worth  mentioning  with  reference  to  the  abomination  of  the 
slave  system.  There  are  many  of  our  countrymen — I  would  have  Mr. 
Beecher  take  note  of  it — and  there  may  be  some  in  this  meeting,  who 
think  that  it  would  have  been  as  well  that  the  South  should  have 
been  let  go  at  first,  or  that  the  war  having  commenced  and  gone  on  so 
long  it  should  now  cease.  I  give  them  credit  for  being  as  ardent  haters 
of  slavery  as  I  am.  (Hear,  hear.)  There  are  on  the  other  hand  those 
who  consider  that  if  the  war  were  now  to  be  brought  to  a  premature 
close  the  cause  of  emancipation  would  be  lost,  and  that  more  bloodshed 
and  war  would  ensue  than  if  now  the  battle  were  fought  out.  (Hear, 
hear.)  And  if  I  give  those  other  gentlemen  credit  for  being  haters  of 
slavery,  I  demand  that  on  our  part  we  shall  have  credit  for  being  haters 
of  war.  (Cheers.)  But  whatever  differences  of  political  opinion  there 
may  be  amongst  us,  there  is  no  difference  worthy  of  mentioning  with 
reference  to  our  abhorrence  of  the  system  of  slavery;  there  is  no 
difference  of  opinion  in  this  hall  as  to  the  honour  we  would  pay  to  one 
of  the  noblest  and  boldest  champions  of  freedom  in  the  world.  (Loud 
applause.)  And  though  we  are  not  bound  by  our  principles  to  agree 
with  every  word  and  sentiment  uttered  to-night,  we  do  all  agree  in 
heartily  thanking  the  lecturer  for  his  eloquent  oration  and  the  assistance 
he  has  thus  given  us  to  understand  this  great  question.  (Renewed 
applause.)  We  may  also  say  that  we  agree  in  wishing  him  hearty  fare- 
well as  a  true  friend  to  Great  Britain.  (Hear,  hear.)  We  may  have 
misunderstood  America — we  shall  henceforth  understand  her  better. 
Mr.  Beecher  may  have  misunderstood  us — he  will  understand  us  better. 
He  is  going  back  to  his  country  to  bear  this  testimony,  that  whatever 
difference  of  political  opinions  there  may  be  here,  the  heart  of  Old  England 
beats  true  to  freedom* — that  in  spite  of  caricatures  and  leading  articles, 
the  heart  of  Great  Britain  beats  true  to  America.     He  will  go  back  to 


10G  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

his  own  country  to  do  there  what  we  pledge  ourselves  to  do  here — every- 
thing that  will  promote  harmony  between  the  two  great  nations.  (Loud 
applause.)  He  will  go  home  to  do  what  we  pledge  ourselves  to  do — 
discourage  every  word  and  act  calculated  to  excite  international  irritation 
and  discord.  He  will  go  to  teach  his  countrymen,  as  we  teach  ours, 
that  the  true  alliances  for  the  free  to  make  are  with  free  peoples,  and  not 
with  despotic  emperors  or  czars.  (Renewed  cheering.)  We  will  both  of 
us — they  on  that  side  and  we  on  this — do  all  we  can  to  promote  true  and 
brotherly  love  between  these  two  great  peoples — do  all  we  can  to  discou- 
rage every  act  or  word  that  may  tend  to  beget  disunion  between  two  nations 
that  are,  as  we  have  heard,  one  in  blood,  one  in  speech,  one  in  literature, 
one  in  freedom,  one  in  faith — two  nations  over  whose  disunion  I  could 
fancy  hell  from  beneath  would  be  moved  with  exultation,  while  all  the 
tyrannies  on  the  earth  would  clap  their  hands — (loud  and  prolonged 
cheering) — two  nations  over  whose  indissoluble  alliance  the  heaven -born 
spirits  of  freedom,  civilisation,  and  religion  will  sing  rapturous  anthems 
of  praise  to  God,  beckoning  us  onwards,  as  sworn  brothers  in  the  van  of 
human  progress,  to  share  together  the  toil  and  to  reap  together  the  divine 
honour  of  the  final  victory  of  truth,  righteousness,  and  love.  (Immense 
aj>plause.) 

G.  THOMPSON,  Esq.  :  Mr.  Chairman,  ladies,  and  gentlemen, — I 
promise  you  that  my  words  shall  be  exceedingly  few.  Two  "new  men" 
have  set  you  and  me  the  example  of  brevity,  and  I  an  old  man,  will  not 
violate  the  example  they  have  furnished.  I  may,  however,  be  permitted 
to  say  that  it  is  with  more  than  ordinary  interest  I  attend  such  a  meet- 
ing as  this,  when  I  recollect  that  more  than  nine-and-twenty  years  ago 
T  was  labouring  with  a  handful  of  faithful  men  and  women  in  the  city  of 
Boston,  in  the  State  of  Massachusetts,  amid  much  obloquy  and  frequent 
danger,  in  disseminating  those  very  truths  which  are  now  convulsing  and 
converting  America — regenerating  and  establishing  America — and  which 
will  through  many  future  ages,  and  I  trust  centuries,  cement  together  the 
several  parts  of  America,  and  in  no  long  period  from  this  moment 
exhibit  to  the  world  a  continent  in  which  there  neither  domineers  a 
tyrant  nor  crawls  a  slave.  (Loud  cheers.)  I  can,  from  the  study  and 
observation  of  thirty  years,  during  which  I  have  paid  two  visits  to 
America,  and  held  familiar  intercourse  with  many  of  the  wisest — 
certainly  of  the  best — in  that  country,  and  have  enjoyed  uninterrupted 
intercourse  with  them  by  correspondence  and  the  reception  of  news- 
papers through  the  whole  time, — I  can  bear  my  humble  testimony  to 
the  truth  of  all  that,  in  substance  at  least,  Mr.  Beecher  has  said  to- 
night. (Hear,  hear.)  Let  Mr.  Beecher  know  that  the  heart  of  England 
would  have  beaten  in  all  its  pulses  but  for — whatever  may  have  been  the 
motives — the  perversities  of  the  truth  which  have  been  steadily  kept 
before  the  public.  Let  Mr.  Beecher  know  that  the  men  throughout 
this  country  who  have  manifested  a  decided  leaning  towards  the  South 
are  men  who  belong  to  two  classes,  and  two  classes  only — either  the 
unteachable,  and  therefore  the  ignorant,  or  the  informed,  and  therefore 
the  wilful.  (Cheers.)  I  have  heard  in  this  meeting  occasional  ories 
of  "  No."     Now  I  have  had  an  opportunity,  in  almost  every  part  of 


LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING,  107 

England,  of  taking  the  amount  of  information  possessed  by  those  who 
at  public  meetings  like  this  shout,  "  No,  no."     If  the  provincial  papers 
had  not  to  a  great  extent  followed  the  example  of  some  members  of  the 
London  press,  Mr.  Beecher  need  not  have  come  to  this  country  to  know 
what  the  opinions  of  the  honest  and  uncorrupted  millions  of  English- 
men on  this  subject  have  ever  been.     (Cheers.)     Had  the  North  been 
disposed  to  pay  the  price  which  the  South  has  paid,  the  venal  pens  that 
have  slandered  the  North  would  have  been  as  ready  to  magnify  and 
exalt  the  North.     (Hear,  hear.)     It  comes  within  my  knowledge  that 
in  the  city  of  Manchester,  where  there  is  a  feeble  imitator  of  a  great 
public   instructor    of   tins    metropolis — (A.   Voice  :    The    Manchester 
Guardian) — in  that  city  many  public  meetings  have  been  held,  in  all 
of  which,  by  immense  majorities,  and  frequently  with  perfect  unanimity, 
resolutions  have  been  passed  in  favour  of  the  North,  and  approving  and 
supporting  the  anti-slavery  policy  of  .President  Lincoln,  and  in  all  the 
great  surrounding  towns  similar  meetings  have  been  held  and  resolutions 
passed,  and  yet  that  newspaper  has  given  no  publicity  whatever  to  the 
occurrence  of   such  meetings — (shame) — while  it   has   blazoned   forth 
every  little  and  insignificant  meeting  held  by  little  knots  of  Secessionists, 
whose  names  until  recently  we  could  not  by  all  diligence  obtain.    (Hear, 
hear.)     Let  Mr.  Beecher  see  that  while  this  hall  has  been  crowded,  and 
while  thousands  have  been  gathered  in  the  hall  below,  and  in  the  Strand 
and  neighbouring  streets,  and  while  in  all  the  various  districts  of  London 
and  its  suburbs  there  have  Jbeen  multitudinous  meetings,  always  with 
the  same  results,  and  almost  unanimous  in  their  support  of  the  North, 
only  two  meetings  have  been  held  in  London — or,  at  least,  meetings 
only  in  two  places — in  support  of  the  South  :  one,  a  meeting  called  to 
hear  a  lecture  from  some  redoubtable  Colonel  Fuller,  who  volunteered 
to  tell  us  all  about  the  question,  and  the  other  a  meeting  held  up  a  pair 
of  stairs  in  Devonshire-street,  Portland-place.     (Laughter  and  cheers.) 
And  yet  the  Times  and  the  Manchester  Guardian  ignore  the  occurrence 
of  meetings  like  this  !     But  what  for  ?     It  serves  their  masters  for  the 
time  ;  it  pleases  their  patrons  for  the  time ;  and  it  manages  the  market 
for  the  time.     But  it  will  come  to  pass  on  this  question,  as  it  came  to 
pass  with  regard  to  other  questions  discussed  on  this  platform,  that  the 
"  brayings"  of  Exeter  Hall  will  become  the  utterance  of  the  feelings 
of  the  English  people.      (Cheers.)      You.  are  asked  to  commend  the 
address  of  Mr.  Beecher  because  in  it  he  has  rightly  reprobated  the  slave- 
holders' rebellion.     (Hear,  hear.)     There  are  a  few  Copperheads  in  this 
assembly.     (Laughter.)     I  don't  know  whether  you  all.  are  aware  what 
they  are,  and  Mr.  Beecher  could  tell  you  better  than  I  can.     South 
Carolina  is  called  the  Palmetto  State,  but  besides  having  the  palmetto 
for  its  ensign  it  has  also  the  rattlesnake.     (Hear,  hear,)     The  rattle- 
snake loses  its  skin  every  year  and  gets  a  new  one — and  I  hope  that 
South  Carolina,  will  also  lose  its  skin  and  get  a  new  one — but  while  the 
process  is  going  on  the  rattlesnake  becomes  blind,  and  the  copperhead 
snake  brings  it  the  food  it  requires.     Therefore  the  people  in  the  North 
who  sympathise  with  the  South  have  got  the   name  of  Copperheads. 
(Laughter.)     Now  if,  on  leaving  this  hall,  you  should  hear  any  gentleman 


108  LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING. 

finding  fault  with  Mr.  Beecher,  I  do  not  say  call  him  a  Copperhead 

(laughter) — but  you  may  at  any  rate  suspect  that  he  is  very  nearly  one. 
(Great  laughter.)  Mr.  Beecher  has  said  that  this  is  a  slaveholders' 
rebellion.  Slaveholders  conceived  it,  and  developed,  and  formed  all  that 
is  vital  and  influential  in  the  Southern  Confederacy.  Their  President 
is  a  slaveholder,  and  if  not  he  was  one  until  the  advance  of  the  Federal 
troops  set  his  slaves  at  liberty.  (Hear,  hear.)  The  simple  object  of  the 
South  is  to  raise  an  empire  by  the  subjugation  of  a  weaker  race.  But  I 
believe  that  the  South  will  not  succeed  in  her  criminal  designs,  and  that 
notwithstanding  temporary  checks  and  reverses,  the  Federals,  who  have 
been  compelled  to  draw  the  sword,  will  in  the  end  achieve  the  victory. 
(Cheers.)  And  I  earnestly  pray  that  when  the  smoke  of  battle  shall 
have  passed  way,  and  the  tears  have  been  wiped  from  the  eye  of  every 
mourner,  and  when  the  grass  has  begun  to  grow  upon  the  graves  of  those 
who  have  fallen,  universal  liberty  will  prevail,  and  the  whole  of  America 
be  made  hallowed  ground.     (Protracted  applause.) 

The  motion  was  then  carried  amidst  loud  cheers,  only  three  hands 
being  held  up  against  it. 

•The  Rev.  H.W.  BEECHER  briefly  acknowledged  the  vote  of  thanks. 

The  Rev.  W.  M.  BUNTING  moved,  and  Sir  CHARLES  FOX 
seconded,  a  vote  of  thanks  to  the  Chairman,  which  was  unanimously 
passed,  and  the  proceedings  then  terminated. 


OUTSIDE  THE  HALL. 

The  scene  outside  Exeter  Hall  last  evening  was  one  of  a  most  extra- 
ordinary description.  The  lecture  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Beecher  had  been 
advertised  to  commence  at  seven  o'clock,  and  it  was  announced  that  the 
hall  doors  would  be  opened  at  half-past  six.  The  crowd,  however,  began 
to  assemble  as  early  as  five  o'clock,  and  before  six  o'clock  it  became  so 
dense  and  numerous  as  completely  to  block  up,  not  only  the  footway, 
but  the  carriage  way  of  the  Strand ;  and  the  committee  of  management 
wisely  determined  at  once  to  throw  open  the  doors.  The  rush  that  took 
place  was  of  the  most  tremendous  character,  and  the  hall,  in  every 
available  part,  became  filled  to  overflowing  in  a  few  minutes.  No  per- 
ceptible diminution,  however,  was  made  in  the  crowd,  and  at  half-past 
six  there  were  literally  thousands  of  well-dressed  persons  struggling  to 
gain  admission,  despite  of  the  placards  exhibited  announcing  the  hall  to 
be  "quite  full."  The  policemen  and  hall-keepers  were  powerless  to 
contend  against  this  immense  crowd,  who  ultimately  filled  the  spacious 
corridors  and  staircases  leading  to  the  hall,  still  leaving  an  immense 
crowd  both  in  the  Strand  and  Burleigh-street.  At  ten  minutes 
before  seven  o'clock  Mr.  B.  Scott,  the  City  Chamberlain,  and  the 
chairman  of  the  meeting,  accompanied  by  a  large  body  of  the 
committee  of  the  Emancipation  Society,  arrived,  but  were  unable  to 
make  their  way  through  the  crowd,  and  a  messenger  was  despatched 
to  the  Bow-street  Police-station  for  an  extra  body  of  police.     About 


LONDON — PUBLIC  MEETING.  109 

thirty  of  the  reserve   men  were   immediately   sent,  and   those   aided 
by  the  men  already  on  duty  at  last   succeeded  in   forcing  a  passage 
for  the  chairman  and  his  friends.     Mr.  Beecher  at  this  time  arrived, 
but  was  himself  unable  to  gain  admittance  to  the  hall  until  a  quarter 
of  hour  after  the  time  appointed  for  the  commencement  of  his  address. 
The   rev.    gentlemen   bore   his  detention    in    the    crowd   with    great 
good  humour,  and  was  rewarded  with  a  perfect   ovation,   the   crowd 
pressing  forward  in  all  directions  to  shake  hands  with  him.     He  was  at 
last  fairly  carried  into  the  hall  on  the  shoulders  of  the  policemen,  and 
the  doors  of  the  hall  were  at  once  closed,  and  guarded  by  a  body  of 
police,  who  distinctly  announced  that  no  more  persons  would  be  admitted 
whether  holding  tickets  or  not.    This  had  the  effect  of  thinning  to  some 
extent  the  crowd  outside  ;  but  some  two  thousand  or  more  people  still 
remained  eager  to  seize  on  any  chance  of  admission  that  might  arise. 
At  a  quarter-past  seven  a  tremendous  burst  of  cheers  from  within  the 
building  announced  that  Mr.  Beecher  had  made  his  appearance  on  the 
platform.     The  cheering  was  taken  up  by  the  outsiders,  and  re-echoed 
again  gand   again.      The   bulk  of  the  crowd  had   now  congregated  in 
Burleieh-street,  which  was  completely  filled,  and  loud  cries  were  raised 
for  som  member  of  the  Emancipation  Committee  to  address  them.    The 
call   was   not,  however,    responded  to.      Several  impromptu   speakers, 
however,  mounted  upon  the  shoulders  of  some  working-men,  addressed 
the  people  in  favour  of  the  policy  of  the  North,  and  their  remarks  were 
received  with  loud  cheering  from  the  large  majority  ot  those  present. 
One  or  two  speakers  raised  their  voices  in  sympathy  with  the  South, 
but  these  were  speedily  dislodged  from  their  positions  by  the  crowd, 
whose  Northern  sympathies  were  thus  unmistakably  exhibited.     Every 
burst  of  cheers  that  resounded  from  within  the  hall  was  taken  up  and 
as  heartily  responded  to  by  those  outside.     Indeed,  they  could  not  have 
been  more  enthusiastic  had  they  been  listening  to  the  eloquent  lecturer 
himself.     This  scene  continued  without  intermission  until  the  close  of 
the  meeting.      When  Mr.    Beecher   and  his   friends   issued  from  the 
building  they  were  again  received  with  loud  eheers.     A  call  for  a  cheer 
for  Abraham  Lincoln  was  responded  to  in  a  manner  that  only  an  English 
crowd  can  exhibit.      A  strong  body  of  police  were  stationed  in  the 
Strand  and  Burleigh-street,  but  no  breach  of  the  peace  occurred  calling 
for  their  interference,     During  the  evening  a  large  number  of  placards 
denouncing  in  strong  language   the   President,    the   North,   and   its 
advocates  were  posted  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  hall. 


LONDON-OCTOBER   23,  1863. 


FAREWELL  TO  THE  REV.  H.  W.  BEECHER. 

Yesterday  morning,  at  Radley's  Hotel,  between  200  and  300 
gentlemen,  chiefly  ministers  of  various  denominations,  met  the  Rev. 
Henry  Ward  Beecher  at  breakfast,  upon  the  invitation  of  the  Committee 
of  Correspondence  on  American  Affairs,  for  the  purpose  of  wishing  him 
farewell  prior  to  his  departure  to  the  United  States.  The  chair  was 
occupied  by  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  B.  W.  Noel.  Among  the  gentlemen 
present  were: — Messrs.  B.  Scott,  Chamberlain,  S.  Lucas,  Joshua 
Wilson,  E.  Fisher,  W.  B.  Underhill,  George  Thompson,  L.  A.  Chame- 
rovzow,  John  Cassell,  S.  H.  Skeats,  James  Grant,  W.  Wilks,  H. 
Wharton,  F.  W.  Chesson,  D.  Pratt,  Thomas  Walker,  M.  D.  Conway, 
of  Virginia;  Edmond  Beales,  Victor  Schcelcher,  E.  Dicey,  F.  Evans, 
T.  C.  Turberville,  Capt.  T.  W.  Chester,  of  Massachusetts  Coloured 
Regiment ;  the  Revs.  Dr.  Waddington,  Dr.  Campbell,  Dr.  Davis,  Dr. 
Angus,  Dr.  Burns,  Dr.  Tomkins,  W.  M.  Bunting,  Newman  Hall, 
C.  Stovel,  J.  Curwen,  F.  Soden,  John  Graham,  J.  H.  Hinton,  F. 
Tucker,  C.  Gilbert,  Kilsby  Jones,  Thos.  Jones,  G.  Rogers,  W.  Ballan- 
tyne,  J.  Pillans,  E.  White,  J.  Miall,  J.  C.  Galloway,  J.  Corbin,  T.  W. 
Aveling,  W.  Tarbottom,  J.  Spong,  J.  V.  Mummery,  T.  Lessey, 
A.  Hannay,  W.  Dorling,  J.  Bevis,  H.  B.  Bowen,  F.  Neller,  R.  Fletcher, 
J.  H.  Hitchens,  John  Hall,  Ebenezer  Davies,  E.  Matthews,  J.  P.  Lyon. 
J.  W.  Pdchardson,  W.  M.  Statham,  H.  J.  Gamble,  R.  Ashton,  H.  B. 
Ingram,  W.  Owen,  A.  M.  Mackennell,  J.  Viney,  R.  W.  Betts,  R. 
Macbeth,  A.  M.  Henderson,  J.  Northrop,  J.  Bramall,  S.  March, 
G.  Wilkins,  W.  O'Neill,  J.  Russell,  Rev.  Sella  Martin,  of  Virginia ; 
Mr.  W.  Craft,  of  Georgia ;  Mr.  Gerard  Ralston,  Consul- General  of 
Liberia,  &c. 

The  CHAIRMAN  said  that  they  were  met  to  express  their  sympa- 
thy with  the  country  of  which  their  guest  was  a  citizen,  with  the 
Government  which  he  upheld,  and  with  the  great  movement  of  which 
he  was  an  ardent  supporter.  Mr.  Beecher  had  been  for  many  years  a 
brave  advocate  of  the  oppressed,  a  manly  patriot,  and  he  had  shown 
during  his  stay  in  England  a  boldness  not  easily  daunted,  and  a  good 
temper  that  no,  provocation  could  disturb.     (Applause.) 

Dr.  F.  TOMKINS,  the  secretary  of  the  Committee  of  Correspond- 
ence, read  several  letters  from  gentlemen  who  were  unable  to  be  present, 
but  who  wished  to  express  their  sympathy  with  the  objects  of  the 
meeting. 


LONDON — FAREWELL  MEETING.  Ill 

The  Kev.  Dr.  WADDINGTON  read  the  following  address  : 
To  the  Christian  Church  under  the  pastoral  care  of  the  Bev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher. 

Dear  Brethren, 

At  a  very  numerous  assembly  of  ministers  and  other  Christian  gentlemen,  held 
this  morning,  to  bid  your  beloved  pastor  an  affectionate  farewell,  it  was  desired  by 
an  unanimous  vote  of  the  meeting  that  we  should  forward  to  you  the  subjoined 
copy  of  an  address  given  on  the  occasion. 

We  willingly  comply  with  this  request,  and  in  doing  so  congratulate  you  most 
sincerely  on  the  honour  God  has  put  on  your  faithful  minister  in  his  absence  from 
you  by  strengthening  him  to  bear  the  testimony  which  we  are  well  assured  will 
produce  the  best  effect  in  this  country.  Your  prayers  have  been  answered  on  his 
behalf,  and  not  many  days  hence  we  trust  you  will  see  him  once  more  in  Plymouth 
Church,  and  hear  from  himself  how  many  mercies  have  been  multiplied  to  him 
during  his  temporary  sojourn  in  Europe:  Continue  your  prayers  for  him,  and  you 
will  yet  see  greater  things.    The  following  is  the  address  adopted  at  the  meeting: — 

"  Sir, — I  am  requested  by  the  Committee  of  Correspondence  on  American 
Affairs,  to  give  a  brief  but  full  expression  of  the  sentiments  of  fraternal  regard  we 
cherish  toward  our  distinguished  guest,  the  Eev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  and  to  the 
deep  sympathy  we  feel  for  his  countrymen,  now  suffering  the  innumerable  calamities 
of  civil  war. 

"  In  our  opinion,  it  would  have  been  a  matter  for  the  most  profound  and  lasting 
humiliation,  if  Mr.  Beecher  had  been  denied  a  fair  and  fitting  opportunity  to  state, 
from  observation  and  experience,  the  facts  so  important  for  all  to  understand  and  to 
weigh  at  this  momentous  crisis,  as  well  as  to  give  the  freest  utterance  of  his  own 
strong  convictions.  Partisans  in  any  sense  we  are  not — we  desire  for  all  parties  a 
candid  and  impartial  hearing ;  but  as  between  truth  and  error,  right  and  wrong, 
liberty  and  slavery,  Christ  and  Belial,  we  affect  no  neutrality,  the  very  thought  of 
it  is  to  our  minds  perfectly  abhorred. 

"  With  the  history  before  us  of  the  great  moral  conflict  which  has  continued 
ift  various  forms  from  the  days  of  the  Stuarts,  we  cannot  look  on  with  indifference 
at  the  American  conflict. 

"  We  have  welcomed  our  beloved  and  honoured  brother  to  our  shores — to  the 
land  of  Milton,  of  Hampden,  of  Sydney,  of  Cromwell,  and  of  Russell,  and  we  are 
glad  that  he  has  not  found  in  Old  England  a  mere  asylum  for  the  dumb. 

"  It  will  ever  be  a  source  of  satisfaction  to  us,  that  in  London  Mr.  Beecher  met 
an  audience  worthy  of  the  occasion,  and  of  the  speaker,  and  that  the  cordial  and 
unbought  sympathies  of  the  people  awakened  in  his  own  breast  sympathies  that  will 
thrill  the  hearts  of  millions  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  ;  there  can  be  no  doubt  but 
that  the  people  are  in  this  struggle  on  the  side  of  the  North. 

"  For  the  past  thirty  years  we  have  not  had  a  public  meeting  so  united  and  so 
earnest  in  the  manifestations  of  the  spirit  of  freedom. 

"  We  tender  to  Mr.  Beecher  our  warmest  acknowledgments  for  the  service  he 
has  rendered  to  the  cause  of  truth — of  right  and  of  liberty  by  his  manliness,  high 
moral  courage,  admirable  temper,  clear  intelligence,  sound  argument,  and,  above 
all,  by  the  kindliness  of  his  spirit. 

"  It  is  known  to  us  that  even  those  who  are  opposed  to  war  under  all  circum- 
stances, frankly  acknowledge  that  the  tendency  of  Mr.  Beecher's  public  speeches  in 
Manchester,  in  Glasgow,  in  Edinburgh,  in  Liverpool,  and  pre-eminently  in  London, 
has  been  to  produce  in  the  highest  degree  international  good  will. 

'.'  He  has  sought  not  to  irritate  but  to  convince.  He  has  administered  rebuke 
with  mingled  fidelity  and  affection.  He  has  been  courteous  without  servility.  He 
has  met  passion  with  patience,  prejudice  with  reason,  and  blind  hostility  with 
glowing  charity.  He  has  cast  the  seed  of  truth  amidst  the  howling  tempest  with 
a  clear  eye  and  a  steady  hand — the  effect  will,  we  doubt  not,  be  seen  after  many 
days. 

"  We  respond  most  sincerely  to  the  sentiment  so  eloquently  enforced  by  Mr. 


112  LONDON — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

Beecher,  that  every  human  being  on  the  face  of  the  globe  lias  an  interest  in  the 
speedy  abolition  of  slavery  in  America,  and  that  the  establishment  of  a  slave  empire 
would  send  its  withering  blight  through  all  nations. 

"  Our  sympathies  are  with  the  four  millions  of  American  sable  bondsmen,  but 
our  interest  in  this  momentous  struggle  arises,  to  a  great  extent,  from  the  desire  wc 
cherish  for  the  advancement  of  the  sacred  cause  of  freedom  in  England. 

"  The  precious  heritage  left  to  us  by  our  common  ancestry,  we  hold  in  trust  for 
all  mankind.  We  are  placed,  therefore,  under  the  most  solemn  obligation  to  stand 
firmly  by  all  right -hearted  men  who  contend  for  the  full  and  practical  recognition 
of  the  rights  of  humanity,  irrespective  of  colour,  clime,  or  social  condition. 

"  In  this  cause  we  recognise  in  Mr.  Beecher  a  faithful  witness  and  a  true  soldier. 
From  the  time  that  he  stood  up  as  a  youth  to  plead  in  Indianapolis  for  the  liberation 
of  those  who  are  in  worse  than  Egyptian  bondage,  until  he  confronted  his  opponents 
in  Liverpool,  he  has  evinced  the  sternest  fidelity,  the  most  unfaltering  courage,  with. 
the  most  consummate  skill.  Our  estimate  of  the  services  he  has  rendered,  is 
enhanced  by  the  remembrance  of  his  forbearance  and  moderation  at  many  a  critical 
juncture.  He  urged  the  claim  of  the  negro  years  ago  against  the  selfishness  of 
those  who  would  exclude  him  from  the  labour  market  in  New  York — and  no  man  has 
spoken  in  more  conciliatory  terms  of  the  misguided  men  of  the  South,  so  long  as 
the  attempt  at  reconciliation,  without  the  sacrifice  of  principle,  seemed  to  be  possible. 
If  the  energy  of  Mr.  Beecher  is  terrible  in  the  hour  of  conflict,  no  one  knows  better 
than  himself  that  "calmness  hath  great  advantage." 

"  In  the  openness  of  the  rebukes  uttered  by  Mr.  Beecher  in  this  country,  we 
have  the  guarantee  that  he  will  at  home  stand  to  his  testimony  as  to  what  is  sound 
in  the  heart  of  Old  England. 

"  We  part  with  our  friend  with  sincere  regret — for  we  find  on  better  mutual 
acquaintance,  we  cherish  for  him  deeper  and  stronger  affection.  But  we  are  willing 
that  he  should  now  go  speedily  to  tell  his  countrymen,  that  we  are  not  indifferent, 
as  some  have  supposed,  to  their  long  national  agony.  We  pray  that  by  the  inter- 
position of  the  unseen  arm  of  Omnipotence,  the  conflict  may  cease  with  the  removal 
of  the  only  cause  of  alienation  and  hostility.  We  trust  the  day  will  soon  come  when 
the  multitudinous  armies  of  the  North  and  South  can  be  safely  disbanded — and  the 
march  of  Christian  civilisation  will  be  continued  without  interruption  from  the 
Atlantic  to  the  Pacific.  % 

"  For  Mr.  Beecher  we  desire  every  personal,  domestic,  and  ministerial  blessing — 
a  safe  and  prosperous  voyage,  and  that  when  his  family  and  his  church  sing  "Home 
again  from  a  foreign  shore,"  he  will  not  think  dear  Old  England  quite  so  foreign  as 
some  other  lands.  We  know  that  when  the  telegraph  signals  his  arrival  in  American 
waters  thousands  will  go  out  to  bid  him  welcome,  and  in  their  joyful  salutations 
they  will  not  regard  our  testimony  as  impertinent  when  we  say,  that  no  man  could 
Lave  served  the  cause  we  love  better,  and  that  he  has  said  nothing  we  could  wish 
him  to  retract.  We  adopt  in  conclusion  his  own  words  on  the  memorable  20th  of 
October : — "  Let  there  be  one  alliance — if  not  in  form — yet  of  heart,  sympathy,  and 
love  between  parent  and  child — for  civil  liberty — for  Christian  civilisation — for  the 
welfare  of  the  world  which  yet  groans  and  travails  in  pain,  but  whose  redemption 
draweth  nigh." 

"With  sentiments  of  fraternal  sympathy  and  the  most  affectionate  Christian 
regard, 

"  We  are,  dear  Brethren,  faithfully  yours, 

'*  In  the  name  and  on  behalf  of  the  Meeting, 

«  BAPTIST  W.  NOEL,  M.A.,  Chairman. 

"BENJAMIN  SCOTT,  F.R.A.S.,  Chamberlain  of  London,  Treasurer. 

"FREDK.  TOMKINS,  M.A.,  D.C.L.*  Secretary. 

"JOHN  WADDINGTON,  D.D.,  Mover  of  the  Address 

"  Radley's  Hotel,  London. 
Oct.  23rd,  1863." 

The  address  was  carried  by  acslamation,  the  company  standing. 
The  Rev.  H.  WARD  BEECHER,  whose  rising  was  the  signal  for 
protracted  and  enthusiastic  cheering,  replied  to  the  address  as  follows : 


LONDON — FAREWELL   MEETING.  113 

Mr.  Chairman  and  gentlemen, — I  propose  this  morning  to  say  a  good 
many  things  on  a  good  many  subjects,  and  I  am  influenced  in  the  direc- 
tion in  which  I  shall  begin  by  the  request  of  the  esteemed  brother  who 
has  been  pleased  to  honour  me  this  morning,  and  to  confer  a  favour  upon 
me  which  I  shall  never  forget.     (Cheers.)     In  conversation  with  our 
chairman  I  made  some  statements  which  he  said  would  have  weight  with 
you,  and  I  therefore  consented  to  make  them  again.     That,  gentlemen, 
is  my  introduction.     (Cheers.)     Now  I  wish  it  to  be  understood  as  a 
matter  of  fact  that  this  Secession  is  rebellion,  even  judged  according  to 
the  principles  and  professions  of  the  South  hitherto.     Let  me  then  go 
back  and  state  generally  that  the  South  as  a  whole  never  has  believed 
in  Secession.     On  the  contrary,  it  has  been  condemned  again  and  again 
in  all  the  Southern  States  but  one,  and  has  been  only  held  by  a  small 
section  throughout  the  country.     Until  this  rebellion,  in  fact,  it  has 
never  been  held  that  the  Constitution  gives  the  right  to  a  State  to 
secede.     When  the  Convention  of  1787  came  together  to  amend  the 
Articles  of  the  Constitution,  the  first  thing  they  had  to  do  was  to  ascer- 
tain what  their  own  power  was,   and  what  was  the  province  of  their 
action,  and  the  question  arose  whether  they  could  proceed  to  institute  a 
national  Government.     That,   I  believe,  was  almost  the  first  question 
brought  before  them.     After  a  good  deal  of  debate  it  was  determined, 
almost   unanimously,    that   they   should   proceed  to   make  a  national 
Government  as  distinguished  from  a  perpetual    Confederation.      And 
what   is   remarkable   is  this,  that  the   proposition  for  a  National   as 
distinguished   from    a    Confederated    Government   was    made    by   the 
delegates  from  Virginia  and  South  Carolina,  and  it  was  opposed  by 
Connecticut  and  some  others — I  forget  which — of  the  Northern  States. 
It  was  debated  thoroughly,  and  the  Northern  proposition  that  we  should 
continue  a  mere  Confederation  in  perpetuity  was  voted  down  by  an 
immense  majority,  and  it  was  voted  in  express  terms — though  it  does 
not  appear  so  verbally  in  our  Constitution — that  they  should  proceed  to 
form  a  National  Government  in  distinction  to  a  Confederated  Govern- 
ment.    After  the  resolution  was  passed  it  was  put — like  all  the  other 
resolutions — into  the  hands  of  what  was  called  the  revising  committee, 
and  they,  as  a  kind   of   verbal  compromise,    introduced  the    present 
phraseology,  putting  the  words  "  Union"  and  "  United  States"  in  the 
place  of  *•  Nation."     The  change  was  unfortunate,  but  it  was  purely 
the  work  of  the  committee  of  revision,  whereas  the  Convention  them- 
selves had  voted  for  the  word   "Nation."     And  there  never  was  any 
change  in  that  until  Mr.   Calhoun's  day ;  but  Mr.   Calhoun's  doctrine 
was  repudiated  in  Virginia  and  Georgia,  and,  if  I  do  not  mistake,  in 
every  one  of  the  South- Western  States  it  was  in  a  minority.     It  was 
also  repudiated  by  our  courts,  and  by  the  national  Government  them- 
selves it  was  judged  that  nullification  was  itself  a  nullity.     (Cheers.) 
Therefore,  the  South  in  going  into  rebellion  has  not  been  following  out 
a  doctrine  held  by  it  from  the  first,  but  has  suddenly  reversed  its  own 
principles,  gone  against  the  records  of  its  own  parties,  and  dragged  in 
this  alleged  right  of  a  State  to  secede,  as  a  mere  excuse,  against  its  own 
records  and  creeds,  and  against  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
II 


114  LONDON — FAKEWELL   MEETING. 

United  States.  (Hear,  hear.)  I  have  a  right  therefore  to  say  to  you 
as  ministers  of  the  Gospel,  as  men  who  believe  in  the  powers  that  be, 
and  in  the  legitimacy  of  unoppressive  governments,  that  this  is  nothing 
more  or  less  than  a  rebellion.  So  much  for  that.  (Cheers.)  And  now, 
my  Christian  brethren,  I  feel  I  have  freedom  here.  (Renewed  cheers.) 
There  are  some  things,  you  know,  that  one  can  say  in  a  lecture-room 
that  one  cannot  say  in  the  pulpit,  and  there  are  things  which  a  man  can 
say  in  a  social  festival  meeting  of  this  kind  that  he  cannot  say  on  a  platform 
before  a  mingled  audience,  where  he  is  liable  to  have  a  sentiment  cut  in 
two  by  a  hoot  or  a  hiss.  (Laughter.)  Now,  I  want  to  introduce  some 
matters  here  that  would  not  well  suit  a  public  meeting.  I.wish  to  acknow- 
ledge the  many  kind  providences  which  have  attended  me  at  every  step 
since  I  have  been  in  England.  I  go  home,  not  for  the  first  time 
believing  in  a  special  Providence,  but  to  be  once  more  a  witness 
to  my  people  to  the  preciousness  and  truth  of  the  doctrine  "  God 
present  with  us."  In  ways  unexpected,  and  as  if  the  veiy  voice 
of  God  had  sounded  in  my  ears,  I  have  been  frequently  assisted 
during  my  sojourn  in  this  country.  When  I  returned  from  the 
continent  I  had  not  spoken  in  public  during  the  previous  twenty  weeks. 
I  began  my  course  by  addressing  about  6,000  people  in  Manchester.  I 
then  went  to  Glasgow,  Edinburgh,  and  Liverpool.  The  reception  I  met 
with  at  the  latter  town,  was  very  different  from  the  "  Welcomes"  of 
the  other  centres  of  commerce.  I  did  not  feel  the  slightest  animosity 
towards  the  people  of  Liverpool.  I  saw  that  those  who  opposed  me 
were  merely  partisans.  (Cheers.)  I  knew  that  the  people  of  Liverpool 
were  on  the  right  side.  I  remember  that  in  the  midst  of  the  wild  uproar 
at  the  Liverpool  meeting  I  felt  almost  as  if  a  door  had  been  thrown  open, 
and  a  wind  had  swept  by  me.  I  never  prayed  more  heartily  in  my  life 
than  I  prayed  for  my  opponents  in  the  midst  of  that  hurricane  of  inter- 
ruption. But  it  so  affected  my  voice  that  a  reaction  came  upon  me  on 
Saturday  and  Sunday,  and  I  was  almost  speechless  on  Monday.  I  felt 
all  day  on  Monday  that  I  was  coming  to  London  to  speak  to  a  public 
audience,  but  my  voice  was  gone  ;  and  I  felt  as  though  about  to  be  made 
a  derision  to  my  enemies — to  stand  up  before  a  multitude,  and  be  unable 
to  say  a  word.  It  would  have  been  a  mortification  to  anybody's  natural 
pride.  I  asked  God  to  restore  me  my  voice,  as  a  child  would  ask  its 
father  to  grant  it  a  favour.  But  I  hoped  that  God  would  grant  me  His 
grace,  to  enable  me,  if  it  were  necessary  for  the  cause,  that  I  should  be 
put  to  open  shame,  to  stand  up  as  a  fool  before  the  audience.  When  I 
got  up  on  Tuesday  morning,  I  spoke  to  myself  to  try  whether  I  could 
speak  and  my  voice  was  quite  clear.  (Cheers.)  Many  might  say  this  was 
because  I  slept  in  a  wet  jacket,  but  I  prefer  to  feel  that  I  had  a  direct 
interposition  in  my  favour.  (Cheers.)  Last  night  I  was  saying  to  myself, 
"I  am  going  among  Christian  ministers,  and  I  should  wish  to  represent  to 
them  the  state  of  things  in  New  York,"  when  my  servant  brought  to 
me  a  letter  from  America,  from  the  superintendent  of  my  Sabbath- 
school — my  dear  friend  Mr.  Bell,  of  Scotland,  by-the-by — (laughter) — 
but  he  is  a  good  man  notwithstanding.  (Laughter.)  He  said,  "  It  may 
be  that  you  will  haye  occasion  to  refer  to  the  report  of  the  committee 


LONDON — FAREWELL   MEETING.  115 

who  inquired  into  the  case  of  the  coloured  people  who  suffered  from  the 
riots,"  and  so  he  forwarded  their  report  to  me.  A  gentleman  who  has 
been  my  opponent  for  the  last  sixteen  years — a  gentleman  who,  because 
he  thought  I  was  opposed  to  the  best  interests  of  America,  hated  me 
with  Christian  fervour — (laughter) — was  appointed  on  the  committee. 
The  testimony  that  he  gave  to  the  committee  as  to  that  riot  was  that, 
with  the  exception  of  a  few  leaders,  it  was  the  work  of  Irishmen.  The 
papers,  for  prudential  reasons,  did  not  put  that  forward  in  New  York. 
It  was  no  more  an  American  riot  than  if  it  had  taken  place  in  Cork  or 
Dublin.  Therefore,  when  misinformed  persons  in  England  say  this 
riot  is  a  specimen  of  what  Americans  can  do,  I  say  it  is  a  specimen  of 
what  can  be  done  by  foreigners,  and  by -ignorance  and  misrepresenta- 
tion. Some  of  the  most  eminent  names  in  New  York  are  on  the 
committee — many  of  them  devoted  Democrats  strongly  opposed  to  the 
Eepublican  movement.  They  collected  upwards  of  $47,000  for  the 
immediate  relief  of  these  poor  blacks.  The  men,  women,  and  children 
who  were  relieved  amounted  to  some  12,000.  A  committee  was 
appointed  at  once  among  the  lawyers  of  New  York,  who  gratuitously 
offered  their  services  to  make  out  the  claims  of  all  property  of  the 
blacks  that  was  destroyed.  There  were  2,000  claimants  who  appeared, 
and  their  case  was  put  into  legal  train  without  any  expense  to  them- 
selves. (Cheers.)  The  aggregate  of  their  claims  in  the  city  of  New 
York  was  145,000  dollars.  The  committee's  report  contains  the 
following  account  of  the  martyrdom  of  a  poor  black  child  during  the 
riots : — 

Early  in  the  month  of  May  a  hoy  of  some  seven  summers  presented  himself  for 
admission  to  the  Sunday  School  of  the  Church  of  the  Mediator  in  this  city.  From 
the  first  Sunday  he  was  the  object  of  special  interest  on  the  part  of  both  his  pastor 
and  teacher.  Always  punctual  in  his  attendance,  tidy  in  appearance,  and  eager  to 
learn,  he  soon  won  the  affection  of  all  his  fellows  in  the  infant-class  to  which  he 
belonged.  But  though  comely,  he  was  black.  The  prejudice  which  his  colour  ex- 
cited amongst  those  of  meaner  mould  he  quickly  disarmed  by  his  quiet,  respectful, 
Christian  manner.  He  was  a  child-Christian.  What  more  lovely  is  there  on 
earth !  What  more  highly  esteemed  is  there  in  heaven  !  Little  did  those  who  thus 
casually  met  him  from  Sunday  to  Sunday  imagine  the  witness  of  suffering  God  had 
purposed  to  perfect  in  him  !  At  the  time  of  the  late  riot  he  was  living  with  an 
aged  grandmother  and  widowed  mother  at  No. — ,  East  28th-street.  On  Wednesday 
morning  of  that  fearful  week  a  crowd  of  ruffians  gathered  in  the  neighbourhood, 
determined  on  a  work  of  plunder  and  death.  They  stole  everything  they  could 
carry  with  them,  and,  after  threatening  and  affrighting  the  inmates,  set  fire  to  the 
house.  The  coloured  people,  who  had  the  sole  occupancy  of  the  building,  were 
forced  in  confusion  into  the  midst  of  the  gathering  crowd.  And  then  the  child  was 
separated  from  his  guardians.  He  was  alone  among  lions.  But  ordinary  humanity, 
common  decency,  had  exempted  a  child  so  young  anywhere  from  brutality.  But 
no.  No  sooner  did  they  see  his  unprotected,  defenceless  condition  than  a  compand- 
or fiendish  men  surrounded  him.  They  seized  him  in  their  fury,  and  beat  him  with 
sticks,  and  bruised  him  with  heavy  cobble-stones.  But  one,  ten-fold  more  the 
servant  of  Satan  than  the  rest,  rushed  at  the  child,  and  with  the  stock  of  a  pistol 
struck  him  on  the  temple  and  felled  him  to  the  ground,  A  noble  young  fireman — 
God  bless  the  firemen  for  their  manly  deeds — a  noble  young  fireman  by  the  name 
of  M' Govern  instantly  came  to  the  rescue,  and  single-handed  held  the  crowd  at  bay. 
Taking  the  wounded  and  unconscious  boy  in  his  arms,  he  went  to  the  house  of  an 
American  citizen  close  by  and  asked  to  have  him  received.  But  on  her  knees  the 
woman  begged  him  not  to  leave  the  dying  sufferer  with  her,  "  lest  the  mob  should 
tear  her  to  pieces."    It  was  a  suffering  Saviour  in  the  person  of  His  humblest  child. 


116  LONDON — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

Naked  and  wounded,  and  a  stranger,  they  took  him  not  in.  But  a  kind-hearted 
German  woman  made  him  a  sharer  of  her  poverty.  With  more  than  a  mother's  care 
did  she  nurse  the  forsaken  one.  A  physician  was  called,  and  both  night  and  day 
she  faithfully  watched  over  the  bed  of  him  outcast  from  his  brethren.  Our  hearts 
bless  her  for  her  goodness  to  our  child.  By  name  she  is  as  yet  unknown,  but  by 
her  deeds  well  known  and  well  beloved.  His  distracted  mother  found  her  cherished 
boy  in  these  kind  hands.  And  when  she  saw  him  in  the  earnest  simplicity  of  her 
spirit  she  kneeled  in  prayer  to  thank  God  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  promise.  "  God 
hath  taken  him  up."  The  lad  lingered  until  Thursday  evening,  when  the  Saviour 
released  him  from  his  sufferings ;  and  ' '  the  child  was  caught  up  to  God  and  the 
throne."  This  is  the  pastor's  memorial  to  little  Joseph  Reed,  a  martyr  by  the 
brutality  and  inhumanity  of  men  to  the  cause  of  law,  and  order,  and  right.  A  tablet 
to  his  memory  shall  be  placed  on  the  walls  of  the  Sunday-school  room  to  which  he 
loved  to  come.  Those  who  were  kind  to  him  we  count  as  benefactors  to  us.  May 
the  God  of  all  grace  richly  reward  them  with  the  blessings  of  His  love.  Buried  on 
earth  without  prayer,  but  with  praises  welcomed  in  Heaven,  the  chosen  loved  child 
of  the  family  "  Joseph  is  not." 

The  coloured  people  sent  in  their  thanks  to  the  committee.  There  are 
blacks  who  can  write  as  beautiful  English  as  the  white  people  of  America, 
and  amongst  the  blacks  there  are  men  as  high-minded  as  any  to  be  found 
among  white  men.  Some  people  have  said  that  blacks  are  the  connect- 
ing link  between  monkeys  and  white  men.  Well,  if  monkeys  have 
endowments  such  as  I  have  seen  in  black  men,  all  I  can  say  is,  that  it- 
is  time  to  begin  preaching  the  Gospel  to  monkeys.  (Laughter.)  Take 
as  an  example  of  their  intelligence  the  following  address  : — 

Gentlemen, — "We  have  learned  that  you  have  decided  this  day  to  bring  to  a 
close  the  general  distribution  of  the  funds  so  liberally  contributed  by  the  merchants 
of  N.ew  York  and  others  for  the  relief  of  the  coloured  sufferers  of  the  late  riots,  which 
have  recently  disgraced  our  city.     We  cannot  in  justice  to  our  feelings  permit  your 
benevolent  labours  to  terminate,  even  partially,  without  offering  some  expression  of 
our  sincere  gratitude  to  the  Universal  Father  for  inspiring  your  hearts  with  that 
spirit  of  kindness  of  which  we  have  been  the  recipients  during  the  severe  trials  and 
persecutions  through  which  we  have  passed.     When  in  the  pursuit  of  our  peaceful 
and  humble  occupations  we  had  fallen  among  thieves,  who  stripped  us  of  our  raiment 
and  had  wounded  us,  leaving  many  of  us  half  dead,  you  had  compassion  on  us.    You 
bound  up  our  wounds,  and  poured  in  the  oil  and  wine  of  Christian  kindness,  and  took 
care  of  us.     You  hastened  to  express  your  sympathy  for  those  whose  fathers,  hus- 
bands, sons,  and  brothers  had  been  tortured  and  murdered.    You  also  comforted  the 
aching  hearts  of  our  widowed  sisters,  and  soothed  the  sorrows  of  orphan  children. 
We  were  hungry  and  you  fed  us.     We  were  thirsty  and  you  gave  us  drink.     We 
were  made  as  strangers  in  our  own  homes  and  you  kindly  took  us  in.     We  were 
naked  and  you  clothed  us.     We  were  sick  and  you  visited  us.     We  were  in  prison 
and  you  came  unto  us.       Gentlemen, — this  generation  of  our  people  will  not, 
cannot  forget  the  dreadful  scenes  to  which  we  allude,  nor  will  they  forget  the 
noble  and  spontaneous  exhibition  of  charity  which  they  excited.      The  former 
will  be  referred  to  as  one  of  the  dark  chapters  of  our  history  in  the  Empire 
State,   and  the  latter  will  be  remembered  as  a  bright  and  glorious  page  in  the 
records  of  the  past.     In  the  light  of  public  opinion  we  feel  ourselves  to  be  among 
the  least  in  this  our  native  land,  and  we  therefore  earnestly  pray  that  in  the  last 
great  day  the  King  may  say  to  you  and  to  all  who  have  befriended  us,  "  Inasmuch 
as  you  have  done  it  to  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren  you  have  done  it  unto 
me;  come  ye,  blessed  of  my  father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world."     But  as  great  as  have  been  the  benefits  that  we  have 
received  from  your  friendly  and  unlooked  for  charity,  they  yet  form  but  the  smaller 
portion  of  the  ground  of  our  gratitude  and  pleasure.      We  have  learned  by  your 
treatment  of  us  in  these  days  of  our  mental  and  physical  affliction  that  you  cherished 
for  us  a  kindly  and  humane  feeling  of  which  we  had  no  knowledge.    You  did  not 
hesitate  to  come  forward  to  our  relief  amid  the  threatened  destruction  of  your  own 


LONDON — FAREWELL  MEETING.  117 

lives  and  property.    You  obeyed  the  noblest  dictates  of  the  human  heart,  and  by 
your  generous  moral  courage  you  rolled  back  the  tide  of  violence  that  had  well  nigh 
swept  us  away.     This  ever  memorable  and  magnanimous  exhibition  of  heroism  has 
had  the  effect  to  enlarge  in  our  bosoms  the  sentiment  of  undying  regard  and  esteem 
for  you  and  yours.     In  time  of  war  or  peace,  in  prosperity  or  in  adversity,  you  and 
our  great  State  and  our  beloved  conntry  may  count  us  among  your  faithful  friends, 
and  the  proffer  of  our  labours  and  our  lives  shall  be  our  pleasure  and  our  pride.     If 
in  your  temporary  labours  of  Christian  philanthropy,  you  have  been  induced  to  look 
forward  to  our  future  destiny  in  this  our  native  land,  and  to  ask  what  is  the  best 
thing  we  can  do  for  the  coloured  people — this  is  our  answer.     Protect  us  in  our 
endeavours  to  obtain  an  honest  living.      Suffer  no  one  to  hinder  us  in  any  depart- 
ment of  well-directed  industry,  give  us  a  fair  and  open  field,  and  let  us  work  out  our 
own  destiny,  and  we  ask  no  more.     We  cannot  conclude  without  expressing  our 
gratification  at  the  manner  in  which  the  arduous  and   perplexing  duties  of  your 
office  have  been  conducted ;    we  shall  never  forget  the  Christian  and  gentlemanly 
bearing  of  your  esteemed  secretary,   Mr.  Vincent  Colyer,  who  on  all  occasions  im- 
pressed even  the  humblest  with  the  belief  that  he  knew  and  felt  he  was  dealing  with 
a  crushed  and  heart-broken  people.     We  also  acknowledge  the  uniform  kindness 
and  courtesy  that  has  characterised  the  conduct  of  all  the  gentlemen  in  the  office  in 
the  discharge  of  their  duties.      We  desire  likewise  to  acknowledge  the  valuable 
services  contributed  by  the  gentlemen  of  the  legal  profession,  who  have  daily  been 
in  attendance  at  the  office  to  make  out  the  claims  of  the  sufferers  free  of  charge. 
In  the  name  of  the  people  we  return  thanks  to  all.     In  conclusion,  permit  us  to 
assure  you  that  we  will  never  cease  to  pray  to  God  for  your  prosperity,  and  that 
of  every  donor  to  the  Relief  Fund.     Also  for  the  permanent  peace  of  our  country, 
based  upon  liberty,  and  the  enjoyment  of  man's  inalienable  rights,  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  American  Union,  and  for  the  reign  of  that  righteousness  in  the  hearts  of 
the  people  that  saves  from  reproach  and  exalteth  the  nation. 

Let  this  document  be  an  answer  to  the  harsh  things  that  some  people 
have  said  of  the  coloured  people  in  New  York.     I  regard  my  reception 
of  this  document  last  night  as  Providential,  because  it  reached  me  just 
in  time  to  read  to  this  meeting.     (Cheers.)     I   should   have   wished, 
had  the  time  permitted,  to  make  a  statement  respecting  what  is  doing 
for  coloured  people  in  South  Carolina,  and  in  and  about  Norfolk.     I 
have  a  son  in  the  army,  who  has  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  something 
In  that  respect.     In  schools,  attended  by  thousands  of  coloured  people, 
adult  and  young,  education  is  given  without  fee  or  reward  by  highly 
educated  and  pious  men  and  women.     My  son  has  narrated  to  me  many 
beautiful  testimonies  of  the  piety  of  the  old  coloured  people  who  attend 
these  schools,  and  the  great  interest  they  take  in  the  education  of  the 
young  coloured  people.     One  old  coloured  saint  with  white  hair  made 
some  remarks  to  him  whch  struck  me  very  much.     He  said,  "We 
shall  never  get  any  good  by  this  education,  massa  ;  we  expect  to  suffer 
as  long  as  we  live  ;  but  our  children  will  get  the  benefit  of  this  educa- 
tion."    Now,  think  of  this  old  saint  having  passed  his  life  in  slavery, 
and   being   in   a   position  in   which,  had   his  master  lived,  he  would 
have    had    a   refuge   for   his   old   age.       Think   of  him  now   thrown 
out  in  his  old  age,  in  a  state  of  liberty,  it  is   true,  but  with  powers 
ill   qualified    to   use  it,    saying,    "We  have  been  praying  for  this  all 
ouv  lives,    and   now   our    children   are   going   to   get   it."      (Cheers.) 
I  cannot  go    into  details  respecting  the  state  of  the  freedmen  along 
the  valley  of  the  Mississippi;  but  I  may  say  this  comprehensively, 
that  the  churches  of  the  North  are  taking  up  their  burden  and  awaken- 
ing to  their  duty.     They  understand  what  is  required  of  them,  and  are 


118  LONDON — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

determined  not  to  let  the  men  come  out  of  slavery  and  feel  that  they 
are  worse  off  than  when  they  were  in  it.  I  don't  pretend  to  say  that 
our  people  have  not  made  mistakes  and  blunders ;  but,  judging  by  the 
ordinary  manner  in  which  persons  in  difficult  circumstances  conduct 
themselves,  I  do  say  that  the  Christian  churches  in  America  of  all 
denominations  are  stirred  up  by  the  spirit  of  their  Master  to  do  their 
duty  to  the  coloured  men  of  the  North  and  South.  (Cheers.)  I  now 
proceed  to  another  topic  that  is  very  pleasant  to  me.  I  want  you  to 
see  how  American  Christians  and  ministers  have  felt  during  the  whole 
of  this  war.  I  have  here  an  immense  amount  of  matter — (spreading 
out  a  number  of  printed  sheets  and  cuttings  from  newspapers  on  the 
table) — and  if  you  don't  believe  me,  I  will  read  it  all  to  you.  (Laughter.) 
I  shall  first  read  extracts  from  the  reports  of  various  ecclesiastical  bodies 
in  America  in  1861,  the  first  year  of  the  war.  I  have  not  packed  or 
garbled  them — indeed,  they  have  not  been  put  together  by  me,  but  by 
a  friend  in  Manchester.  I  may  read  perhaps  those  which  are  least  to 
the  point ;  but  I  want  you  to  see  what  has  been  the  feeling  of  our 
Christian  churches.  I  also  want  to  show  you  another  thing.  Many  of 
you  are  opposed  to  war.  (Hear,  hear.)  Now  I  must  say  that  for  any 
Englishmen  to  be  opposed  on  principle  to  war  is  a  greater  mark  of 
sincerity  and  frankness  than  anything  I  know  of.  (Laughter )  You 
Englishmen  are  always  fighting.  Why,  you  have  two  wars  on  hand 
now,  and  I  hardly  know  the  time  when  you  have  not  had  one.  The 
testimony  therefore  of  those  of  you  who  are  opposed  to  war  is  worthy  of 
double  attention.  ("  Hear,"  and  laughter.)  But  really  you  talk  to  us 
in  America  about  war  as  though  it  were  about  as  pleasant  to  us  as  a 
campaign  by  the  sea-side ;  as  though  it  were  nothing  to  us  to  have  our 
sons  killed,  or  brought  home  wounded  or  maimed,  or  to  have  a  widow 
coming  home  to  her  father's  house  with  her  helpless  children,  Some" 
people  seem  to  think  that  the  North  is  in  such  a  savage  fury,  that 
nothing  tickles  them  more  than  to  hear  of  the  slaughter  of  3,000  or 
4,000  men.  Oh,  gentlemen,  war  is  more  terrible  by  far  than  anything 
which  comes  home  to  you.  (Hear,  hear.)  You  who  send  your  armies 
to  China  to  fight,  or  to  the  Continent,  do  not  see  what  war  is.  Let  war 
ravage  your  own  island, — let  it  come  upon  London,  and  penetrate  into 
your  own  homes,  while  the  wounded  and  maimed  are  lying  around  you 
on  every  side,  or  brought  into  your  houses, — then  you  will  realize  what 
war  is.  Do  you  suppose,  brethren,  that  we  love  the  war  for  itself  ?  Do 
you  suppose  that  anything  but  the  very  strongest  principle  could  lead 
us  to  submit  to  it  1  (Hear,  hear.)  I  do  not  wish  you  to  accept  these 
statements  on  my  testimony,  but  will  read  to  you  a  few  extracts  which 
will  show  you  how  these  matters  were  talked  about  in  1861.  The 
following  is  from  the  report  adopted  by  Ripley  Presbytery  : — 

More  than  two  hundred  years  have  passed  away  since  the  buying  and  selling 
of  human  beings  as  property  commenced  in  this  country,  and  the  slave  trade  was 
allowed  to  be  continued  twenty  years  after  the  formation  of  the  National  Constitu- 
tion. What  a  system  of  murder  !  What  multitudes  have  been  murdered  in  procuring 
slaves  in  Africa  !  How  vast  the  number  that  died  in  the  passage  to  this  country  ! 
How  much  death  has  been  occasioned  by  change  of  climate,  by  excessive  labour, 
by  starvation,  and  by  direct  violence  and  cruel  scourging !     Have  not  millions  of 


LONDON — FAKE  WELL  MEETING.  119 

human  beings  suffered  death  in  the  most  horrible  forms,  under  the  operation  of  the 
system  of  slavery  in  this  country  during  the  last  200  years  ?  Does  not  the  blood  of 
millions  lie  upon  this  nation  ? 

The  report  goes  on  to  make  an  attack  on  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law, 

and  to  enunciate  the  obligation  of  the  Government  to  protect  the 

four  millions  or  more  of  coloured  people,  and  to  secure  their  rights  in 

accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution.     It  then  says  : — 

We  now  enter  our  solemn  protest  against  all  compromises  with  the  monstrous 
system  of  oppression  existing  in  the  slaveholding  States,  and  the  enforcement  of  the 
barbarous  Fugitive  Slave  Law,  and  the  giving  of  aid  in  any  form  to  the  system  of 
slavery. 

The  following   is  from  the  report  of  the  Maine  Conference  in  May, 

1861  (after  Mr.  Lincoln's  call  for  armed  support)  : — 

Eesolved — That  we  will  not  cease  to  pray  that  Divine  wisdom  may  guide  our 
rulers — that  the  Lord  God  of  Sabbaoth  may  give  success  to  our  arms  and  establish 
the  right — that  our  sons  and  brothers  who  have  so  nobly  responded  to  the  call  of 
their  country  in  this  hour  of  peril,  may  be  under  His  peculiar  care — that  we  will 
supplicate  God  to  interpose,  to  overrule,  that  these  trying  events  may  speedily  result 
in  permanent  peace — the  liberation  of  the  enslaved,  and  the  "  opening  of  the  prison 
to  them  that  are  bound." 

I  turn  now  to  the  session  of  the  General  Association  held  in  Indian - 

opolis,  my  old  home.     I  will  give  only  one  resolution  : — 

Resolved — That  as  Christian  men,  having  a  living  faith  in  the  superintending 
providence  of  Almighty  God,  we  recommend  the  churches  to  be  more  instant  in 
prayer  for  the  maintenance  of  the  Government,  the  integrity  of  the  Union,  the  per- 
petuity of  those  principles  of  liberty  upon  which  it  is  founded,  not  forgetting  those  in 
bonds  as  bound  with  them,  and  especially  for  the  preservation  and  spiritual  welfare 
of  those  who  have  volunteered  in  defence  of  their  country. 

Now  I  turn  to  the  General  Association  of  Congregational  churches  of 
Illinois  : — 

Resolved — That  as  the  war  is  but  the  ripe  and  bitter  fruit  of  slavery,  we  trust 
the  American  people  will  demand  that  it  shall  result  in  relieving  our  country  entirely 
and  for  ever  of  that  sin  and  curse,  that  the  future  of  our  nation  may  never  again  be 
darkened  by  a  similar  night  of  treason. 

Then  follows  a  resolution  urging  the  churches  to  attend  to  the  spiritual 

wants  of  the  army.    Here  is  a  resolution  from  the  Welsh  Congregational 

Churches  : — 

Resolved — That  we  hope  and  pray  that  God  in  His  wise  and  beneficent  provi- 
dence may  overrule  the  present  disturbances  in  our  country  to  hasten  the  overthrow 
of  slavery,  which  disgraces  our  land  and  threatens  the  existence  of  our  Government. 

One  from  Pennsylvania  : — 

Resolved — That  we  regard  the  war  in  which  our  country  is  now  engaged  as  a 
conflict  between  freedom  and  slavery,  and  the  advocates  of  slavery  have  tendered  the 
issue,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  the  friends  of  liberty  both  in  the  Church  and  in  the  State, 
to  accept  the  issue  directly,  and  give  it  the  prominence  before  God  and  the  world 
that  rightfully  belongs  to  it. 

These  resolutions,  you  will  mark,  were  all  passed  before  the  proclamation 

of  emancipation.      The  following  is  from  the  General  Association  of 

Congregation al  Churches  in  New  York  : — 

Whereas,  the  immediate  occasion  of  this  rebellion  and  its  fomenting  spirit  was  the 
determination  of  its  leaders  to  secure  and  perpetuate  the  system  of  slavery;  and, 
whereas,  there  can  be  no  guarantee  of  peace  and  prosperity  in  the  Union  while 
slavery  exists, — therefore,  Resolved,  That  we  rejoice  in  every  act  and  declaration 


120  LONDON — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

of  the  Government  that  brings  freedom  to  any  of  the  enslaved,  and  earnestly  hope 
for  some  definite  and  reliable  measure  for  the  abolition  of  slavery  as  the  conclusion 
of  this  great  conflict  for  the  support  of  the  Government  and  the  Union.  Whereas 
in  His  good  providence  God  has  opened  the  way  for  the  emancipation  of  the 
enslaved  in  this  land,  either  by  the  instructions  of  the  Government  to  military 
commanders  to  enfranchise  all  slaves  within  their  several  districts,  or  by  general 
proclamation  of  the  President,  or  by  Act  of  Congress  under  the  state  of  war — 
therefore, — Resolved,  That  it  is  our  duty  as  Christian  patriots  in  all  proper  ways  to 
urge  this  measure  upon  the  attention  of  the  Government,  and  to  pray  for  its 
consummation,  lest  the  condemnation  of  those  who  knew  their  duty  to  the  poor  and 
oppressed,  and  did  it  not,  should  be  visited  upon  the  nation. 

I  read  that  to  show  you  that  while,  on  the  one  hand,  they  were 
conscious  of  their  obligations  to  the  Government  and  nation,  they  had 
also  their  convictions  of  humanity  towards  the  oppressed.  (Hear,  hear.) 
In  1862  these  deliverances  became  stronger  and  clearer  throughout  the 
length  and  breadth  of  the  land.  Then  we  come  to  1863,  and  first  I 
will  refer  to  the  report  of  the  Dutch  reformed  Church — the  most 
immovable  church  in  the  world.  They  come  out,  however,  in  a  most 
unmistakeable  manner.  The  Methodist  Church  has  covered  itself  with 
perpetual  honour — thanks  be  to  God  for  their  fidelity.  Page  after  page 
of  their  reports  is  made  up  of  resolutions  on  the  subject  full  of  clear 
instructions  as  to  Christian  duty.  Here  is  the  testimony  of  the 
American  Baptist  Missionary  Union  : — 

Resolved — That  the  developments  of  the  year  since  elapsed,  in  connection  with 
this  attempt  to  destroy  the  best  government  on  earth,  have  tended  only  to  deepen 
our  conviction  of  the  truth  of  the  sentiments  which  we  then  expressed,  and  which 
we  now  and  here  solemnly  reiterate  and  re-affirm. 

Resolved — That  the  authors,  aiders,  and  abettors,  of  this  slaveholder's  rebellion, 
in  their  desperate  efforts  to  nationalise  the  institution  of  slavery,  and  to  extend  its 
despotic  sway  throughout  the  land,  have  themselves  inflicted  on  that  institution  a 
series  o*  most  terrible  and  fatal  and  suicidal  blows,  from  which,  we  believe,  it  can 
never  recover,  and  they  have  themselves  thus  fixed  its  destiny  and  hastened  its 
doom  ;  and  that,  for  thus  overruling  what  appeared  at  first  to  be  a  terrible  national 
calamity,  to  the  production  of  results  so  unexpected  and  glorious,  our  gratitude  and 
adoration  are  due  to  that  wonder-working  God,  who  still  "  maketh  the  wrath  of 
man  to  praise  him,  while  the  remainder  of  that  wrath  he  restrains." — Psalm  76 , 
verse  10. 

And  there  is  much  more  to  the  same  purpose.  Then  I  have  one  from 
Vermont,  and  one  from  Maine,  which  is  scarcely  cold  yet.  (Hear, 
hear.)  It  is  a  most  honourable  utterance,  drawn  up  I  think  by  Dr. 
Dwight,  of  Portland,  a  descendant  of  the  honoured  and  well-known 
Dr.  Dwight.  But  I  will  not  read  all  these  documents,  which  are, 
however,  quite  at  your  service,  if  you  wish  to  inspect  them.  I  have 
not  counted  them,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  there  are  two  hundred  of 
them,  and  if  you  read  them  all  you  would  say  there  were  a  thousand. 
(Laughter  and  cheers.)  I  seek  by  this  not.  so  much  to  make  an 
argument  as,  what  is  better  a  great  deal,  to  produce  in  you  the 
moral  conviction  that  the  American  churches,  under  great  difficulties, 
having  been  long  involved  in  a  trying  crisis,  have  come  to  the 
conclusion,  through  their  representatives,  that  this  rebellion  ought 
to  be  crushed,  and  that  slavery  should  be  destroyed  with  the  re- 
bellion. I  have  not  seen  Dr.  Massie,  but  I  know  that  now  he  has  been 
to  America,  and  seen  there  things  with  his  own  eyes,  he  is  prepared  to 


LONDON — FAREWELL   MEETING.  121 

come  to  the  same  conclusion.  I  know  that  he  is  an  honest  man,  and  I 
am  sure  that  an  honest  man  could  come  to  no  other.  (Hear.)  And  now 
it  is  not  a  question  with  us  whether  this  war  should  stop.  We  are  not 
going  to  stop  this  war  whatever  you  do.  You  have  not — let  me  say — 
stood  up  for  us  so  strongly  for  the  last  two  or  three  years  that  you  can 
influence  us  now  to  stop  the  war.  ("Hear,"  and  laughter.)  I  don't 
pretend  to  say  that,  considering  your  own  difficulties,  you  have  not  taken 
the  right  path.  (Hear,  hear.)  I  see  a  great  many  things  in  your  inter- 
nal affairs  here  in  England  that  I  was  not  aware  of  before.  We  thought 
that  you  were  all  well-informed  on  this  question,  and  that  you  sat  in 
your  ease  and  arrogance — allow  me  to  say  what  I  would  say  in  the  States 
— and  that  having  thus  settled  your  principles  you  refused  to  make  an 
application  of  them  to  the  States  which  needed  them  more  than  any 
other  country  in  the  world.  (Cheers.)  Now,  I  find  that  you  are  far 
from  well-informed,  and  it  is  a  great  comfort  to  me  to  know  that  your 
conduct  has  not  all  arisen  from  depravity.  I  shall  go  back  and  say,  "You 
must  not  think  that  England  simply  refused  to  bear  witness  to  her  own 
principles.  She  is  yet  in  the  battle  herself  about  this  question,  not  as 
to  slavery,  but  as  to  her  own  institutions,  and  if  she  had  borne  witness, 
as  some  of  her  people  would  have  done,  it  would  have  created  a  party 
movement."  I  shall  not  discuss  whether  there  was  not  higher  ground 
to  take  than  this,  and  whether  England  should  not  have  risen  in 
the  providence  of  God  and  occupied  it,  but  you  are  men,  and  we 
are  men,  and  we  are  glad  to  find  a  reason  for  not  being  angry 
with  you.  (Cheers.)  This  has  been  our  feeling  in  the  past,  and  it  has 
been  unlike  a  common  national  feeling.  Generally  speaking,  the  un- 
educated and  passionate  men  have  their  prejudices  and  bitternesses, 
while  the  intelligent  classes  have  their  better  opinions  and  judgments. 
But  it  has  been  the  reverse  with  us.  Those  that  have  felt  the  most 
grief  and  indignation  with  England  have  been  just  the  educated  and 
Christian  public,  who  have  felt,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  that  England 
has  been  selfishly  cold  and  cruel.  I  don't  intend  to  say  whether  that 
has  been  your  state  or  not.  I  am  not  here  to  make  a  case  against  you. 
I  am  a  Christian  amongst  Christians.  I  am  for  doing  what  will  unite 
us,  if  we  have  not  been  united  before — (cheers) — and  what  will  keep  our 
countries  together  in  Christian  fellowship.  (Renewed  cheers.)  But 
somebody  ought  to  tell  you  this — a  great  many  would  think  it,  and 
would  not  have  grace  to  say  it  plainly  to  you.  (Hear.)  But  God  has 
strengthened  me  to  speak  my  mind  to  you,  dear  Christian  brethren,  and 
to  tell  you,  that,  so  far  as  your  influence  has  gone  hitherto,  it  has  all 
been  against  liberty  and  for  slavery.  I  do  not  mean  that  that  is  what 
you  meant,  but  I  do  say  that  was  the  effect  of  your  conduct  in  America. 
From  one  cause  or  another,  unfortunately,  the  moral  influence  of 
Christians  in  England,  with  individual  exceptions  which  I  live  to 
remember,  has  been  on  the  side  of  slavery  and  against  those  who 
were  struggling  to  put  it  down.  Now  I  know  that  in  such  an 
hour  as  this,  and  in  the  presence  of  Christ,  who  is  in  our  midst,  you 
will  receive  such  a  statement  from  me  in  the  same  spirit  as  I  make  it. 
<{Cheers.)     I  know  that  you  will  give  this  subject  your  consideration, — 


122  LONDON — FAREWELL   MEETING. 

that  you  will  revise  your  opinions,  if  needs  be,  and  not  allow  yourselves 
to  be  influenced  by  a  commercial  bias,  nor  by  unscrupulous  papers. 
(Hear,  bear.)  I  wish  you  to  understand  how  much  harm  has  been  done 
on  our  side,  too,  by  "the  coppersmith."  (Hear,  hear.)  I  beg  of  you  to 
examine  this  question  of  duty  to  God's  people — of  duty  to  God.  Yea, 
I  will  humble  myself  for  Christ's  sake,  and  for  the  fellowship  of  the  body 
of  Christ,  and  beg  of  you  for  your  sakes  to  examine  this  fairly.  We 
wish  not  to  be  separated  from  the  English  people.  (Loud  cheers.)  We 
want  to  see  the  old  links  rubbed  brighter.  (Renewed  cheers.)  Let  me 
tell  you,  however,  we  cannot  stop  this  war — not  if  you  were  to  line  our 
shores  with  fleets,  which  I  know  you  will  not  do  ;  not  if  you  were  to  fill 
Canada  with  your  armies,  which  I  know  you  will  not;  not  if  you 
remain  still  indifferent  or  adverse.  That  would  make  no  difference  ; 
but  is  there  not  to  be  unity  between  the  Christians  of  England  and 
America?  (Cheers.)  You  say  that  we  have  retorted  upon  you,  and 
said  bitter  things.  Do  you  recollect  that  wonderful  passage  in  Scott's 
"  Antiquary,"  where  a  certain  hero  had  lost  his  son  and  was  next  morn- 
ing found  by  the  Antiquary  engaged  in  a  work  on  which,  having  met 
with  insuperable  difficulties,  he  vented  his  grief  and  rage,  although  it,  of 
course,  was  in  no  respect  to  blame?  ("Hear,"  and  laughter.)  How 
natural  a  thing  it  is  to  vent  our  impatience  and  grief  upon  our  own 
property  or  upon  our  own  friend.  And  when  we  had  seen  our  children 
slaughtered — oh !  what  noble  children  have  fallen  in  this  war — what  tears 
have  fallen  from  us  day  and  night, — and  when  we  found  treachery  in 
the  Government  and  on  every  side,  we  did  hope  to  have  received  some 
sympathy  ;  but  instead  of  .that,  the  wind  that  came  from  England  was 
as  cold  as  Greenland ;  and  if,  when  we  were  disappointed,  we  said 
bitter  things  of  England,  because  we  loved  her  and  expected  her  to 
support  freedom,  may  God  forgive  us.  (Cheers.)  You  will  ask  me  what 
can  be  done.  Well,  in  the  first  place,  let  me  say,  dear  Christian  brethren, 
that  I  thank  you  very  much  for  the  kind  things  you  have  said  and  done 
for  me.  But  I  certainly  would  feel  it  to  be  a  thousand  times  better,  if 
every  Christian  minister  and  Christian  brother  would  consent,  as  the 
result  of  my  importunity,  to  open  this  matter  on  his  knees  before  God. 
I  have  great  faith  in  the  guiding  spirit  of  God.  I  do  not  believe  he  will 
allow  his  dear  people  of  England  to  go  wrong  on  this  question.  Well, 
next  I  ask  you  to  remember  us  in  your  prayers.  I  do  not  mean  in  those 
circuitous  ubiquities  that  take  in  everybody  and  everything.  But  I  ask 
you  to  pray  for  the  North  as  for  those  that  you  believe  to  be  doing  a 
great  work  for  God.  Pray  for  the  North  as  you  would  have  prayed  for 
the  Covenanters,  for  the  old  Nonconformists,  for  the  old  Puritans,  for 
Christians  in  any  age  whose  duty  it  became  to  resist  unrighteousness, 
corruption,  and  wrong.  Pray  for  them  as  for  men  in  that  dark  trouble 
in  which  God  frequently  leaves  His  people  before  the  daylight  comes 
and  the  glory  of  victory  is  showered  down  upon  them.  (Cheers.)  But 
when  the  trumpet  sounds  for  peace,  and  what  are  left  of  us  are  gathered 
together,  and  there  are  to  be  congratulations,  and,  as  it  were,  divisions 
of  God's  spoils,  I  do  not  want  that  you  should  be  left  out.  I  desire  that 
whatever  may  have  been  the  misinformation  regarding  this  conflict  3,000 


LONDON — FAKEWELL   MEETING.  123 

miles  off,  for  the  future  there  may  be  no  possible  mistake — that  there  will 
be  eye  to  eye,  heart  to  heart,  and  hand  to  hand.  We  of  the  North  represent 
your  civilization.  In  the  South,  now  seeking  to  become  independent, 
there  is  not  a  point  of  sympathy  that  can  attach  her  to  England.  (Hear, 
hear.)  If  the  North  prevail  in  this  conflict,  and  the  Union  be  restored, 
there  is  not  one  single  point  of  religion  and  civilization  in  the  whole 
cyclopaedia  of  English  attainments  honourable,  noteworthy,  and  world- 
renowned  which  would  not  find  something  corresponding  thereto  among 
us.  This  train  of  remark  might  be  indefinitely  continued,  but  it  is  un- 
necessary. I  shall  go  home  certainly  with  a  much  lighter  heart  than  if 
I  had  not  spoken  in  England,  and  had  not  through  my  labour  here — 
too  brief  for  my  own  comfort — been  permitted  to  see  so  much  of  the 
interior  and  better  feeling  of  so  many  Christians  in  England.  Before  I 
sit  down  let  me  say  that  I  would  name  all  those  honourable  names — 
John  Stuart  Mill,  Professors  Cairnes,  Goldwin  Smith  and  Newman, 
Baptist  Noel,  Newman  Hall,  and  other  well-known  and  honoured 
names — I  would  name  them  all  but  that  there  are  so  many  whom  I 
would  wish  to  thank,  whose  names  I  either  do  not  know  or  have  for- 
gotten, that  if  I  were  to  try  and  enumerate  those  who  have  done  us  good 
and  Christian  service,  I  should  do  injustice  to  many.  And  for  the 
same  reason  I  will  not  mention  the  papers  and  magazines  that  have 
been  towers  of  strength  to  us.  Yet  we  will  remember  them  ;  and  the 
day  will  arrive,  I  trust,  when  those  who  have  laboured  for  us  in  ad- 
versity will  come  to  our  shores,  and  we  will  treat  them  so  well  that  you 
never  shall  see  them  back  again.     (L#ud  and  prolonged  applause.) 

The  Rev.  JOHN  CURWEN  said  that  he  wished  to  take  that 
opportunity  of  drawing  attention  to  the  London  auxiliary  of  the  Free- 
man's Aid  Society,  which  had  done  and  was  doing  excellent  service  in 
ministering  to  the  necessities  of  escaped  slaves,  and  which  was  worthy 
of  wider  support  than  it  received. 

'  Mr.  BEECHER  said  that  the  kind  of  work  done  by  the  society 
referred  to  was  one  in  which  Englishmen  of  all  political  creeds  could 
join.  If  a  man  could  not  go  with  the  Northern  States  he  could  at  any 
rate  agree  with  the  principle  of  helping  escaped  slaves.  He  knew  the 
men  engaged  in  the  work  in  America,  and  could  testify  to  their  zeal, 
prudence,  and  devotion  to  the  cause  of  freedom. 

The  Rev.  C.  STOVEL  said  he  felt  that  Mr.  Beecher  and  his  friends 
in  the  United  States  had  just  grounds  for  complaint  respecting  the  cold- 
ness of  the  sympathy  which  they  had  received  from  this  country.  He 
was  quite  certain,  however,  that  since  1833  there  had  been  a  very 
decided  feeling  in  England  in  reference  to  the  advancement  of  emanci- 
pation in  America.  There  was  ample  proof  that  the  moral  influence  of 
the  British  churches  upon  American  Christians,  in  consequence  of  their 
repeated  addresses  on  the  subject  of  slavery,  had  been  by  no  means 
small.  There  was  no  lesson  arising  out  of  this  struggle  so  important  as 
that  which  taught  the  moral  power  of  the  followers  of  Christ  over  the 
affairs  of  the  earth.  The  important  question  to  be  studied  was  how  the 
moral  power  of  England  and  America  could  be  best  united,  and  he 
would  suggest  to  Mr.  Beecher  the  possibility  of  from  time  to  time 


124  LONDON — FAREWELL   MEETING. 

communicating  to  church  organisations  in  England  the  best  mode  of 
making  their  words  and  actions  take  effect  in  the  United  States.  (Hear.) 
A  confiding  and  free  communication  between  the  churches  in  England 
of  all  classes  and  of  America  through  some  distinct  organisation  would, 
he  was  sure,  lead  to  results  of  great  importance.  If  the  Christian  Church 
would  but  act  with  all  its  energies  concentrated  on  one  point  it  would 
be  strong  enough  to  carry  any  great  moral  question.  He  thanked  Mr. 
Beecher  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart  for  his  labours  in  the  cause  of 
freedom.     (Cheers.) 

Mr.  BEECHER  said  that  a  question  in  writing  had  been  handed 
up  to  him  from  a  highly  esteemed  minister  to  this  effect — "  What  is  to 
be  the  end  of  this — is  it  to  be  a  war  of  extermination  ?"  Now  (said 
Mr.  Beecher),  I  am  glad  of  this  question.  So  long  as  there  is  a  fraction 
of  hope  on  the  part  of  the  South  that  the  core  cannot  be  reached,  it  will 
form  a  centre  of  cohesion  ;  but  as  soon  as  the  conviction  enters  their 
mind  that  slavery  must  come  to  an  end,  they  will  dissolve  in  that  very 
hour.  We  have  to  go  on  fighting,  until  this  conviction  is  produced. 
You  talk  of  extermination  !  Well,  the  South  has  lost  250,000  out  of  a 
population  of  5,000,000  of  white  men.  You  might  as  well  say  that  a 
father  is  killing  his  son  when  he  strikes  him  one  or  two  blows  as  a 
punishment.  The  North  is  not  trying  to  carry  moral  conviction  by 
force,  but  it  is  trying  to  uphold  the  Government  and  to  put  down  a  wild 
attempt  to  destroy  it.  We  are  trying  by  legitimate  warfare  to  produce 
an  impression  that  the  struggle  on  behalf  of  slavery  is  hopeless  ;  and 
let  me  say,  that  when  men  here  cry  "Stop  the  war,"  when  such  cry 
reaches  America,  it  means  "  Let  the  South  have  its  own  way."  (Hear, 
hear.)  Another  written  question,  the  purport  of  which  was  whether 
the  tariff  was  no  ground  of  Secession,  was  handed  to  Mr.  Beecher,  who 
replied — "Certainly  not ;  if  any  man  in  America  were  to  say  that  the 
tariff  had  anything  to  do  with  this  Secession  we  should  put  him  in  a 
lunatic  asylum."     (Cheers  and  laughter.) 

Mr.  WASHINGTON  WILKS  said  that  he  had  listened  with  great 
emotion  to  the  speech  they  had  heard  from  their  honoured  guest.  He 
wished  Mr.  Beecher  to  understand  how  deeply  those  who  were  present  felt 
the  rebuke  he  had  administered  to  this  country  for  her  coldness  in  the  hour 
ot  America's  trial,  and  how  bitterit  was  to  them  to  haveit  supposed  thatthey 
were  so  indifferent  as  they  had  been  represented.  He  had  had  opportunities 
of  hearing  and  reading  as  much  about  English  feeling  in  reference  to  the 
American  question  as  most  men,  and  he  declared  his  solemn  conviction 
that  with  all  England's  faults  and  shortcomings  it  was  not  true  that  as  a 
nation  she  had  been  indifferent.  (Cheers.)  He  knew  well  that  many 
men  had  been  misinformed  and  had  gone  wrong  on  the  subject.  He 
knew  well  that  many  churches,  even  churches  that  were  descended  from 
the  Puritans,  had  gone  wrong  from  the  same  cause,  and  that  many 
pastors,  who  would  have  been  faithful,  had  had  their  mouths  stopped 
by  rich  men.  (Hear,  hear.)  But  he  had  turned  for  consolation  from 
the  churches  to  the  people,  and  had  found  it.  (Loud  applause.)  He 
complained  also  that  the  American  newspapers  had  been  quick  at  taking 
hold  of  information  calculated  to  produce  bitter  feelings,  and  had  given 


LONDON — FAREWELL  MEETING.  125 

very  little  heed  to  those  who  were  the  just  exponents  of  English  senti- 
ment.    The  leaders  of  the  English  people — our  Cobdens,  Brights,  and 
all  the  chiefs  in  every  liberal  movement — were  all  on  the  side  of  the 
North  and  of  freedom.     He  could  not  recall  the  name  of  one  person 
with  any  pretensions  to  be  called  a  leader  of  the  people  who  was  on 
the  other  side.     (A  Voice:  "Brougham.")     Lord  Brougham  had  ceased 
for  twenty  years  to  be  a  public  leader.      (Loud  cheers.)     When  the 
negroes    in   the   West    Indies    were    emancipated    Brougham's    glory 
culminated ;  and  happy  would  it  have  been  for  him  if  he  had  known 
then  how  to  gather  his  garments   of  greatness   about    him,  and  sink 
down  into   dignified   repose.       Since   when,    in    1848,    he    raised   his 
voice   against   the   struggling  liberties    in    Europe,    he   had   been  no 
mouthpiece    of  liberal    principles,    but   simply  the    echo   of  his     old 
renown.     The  nation  had  spoken  out  strongly  in  public  meetings,  not 
simply  in  the  last  month  or  two,  but  through  the  whole  course  of  the 
struggle  ;  and  he  was  sorry  that  the  New  York  papers,  instead  of  giving 
prominence  to  such  meetings,   had  preferred  to  reprint   little   paltry 
expressions  of  opinion  against  America,  which  were  not 'entitled  to  a 
grain  of  weight.     (Hear,  hear.)     He  wished  Mr.  Beech er  to  understand 
that  the  feeling  expressed  towards  him  in  this  country  was  not  only 
genuine,  but  permanent.     (Hear,  hear.)     He  had  called  it  forth,  but 
not  created  it.     (Loud  cheers.)     He  would   have  found  it  if  he   had 
come  a  year  ago.     He  would  have  found  it  if  he  had  come  in  the  stormy 
days  of  the  Trent  business  ;  for  even  then  the  heart  of  Old  England  beat 
soundly  for  peace,  friendship,  and  freedom.     (Applause.)      He  would 
say  further,  that  had  the  question  of  slavery  nothing  to  do  with  this 
contest — if  it  had  been  possible  for  civil  war  to  have  broken  out  in 
America  on  any  other  issue,  the  English  people  would  have  been  found 
on  the  side  of  the  American  Union,  as  a  great  embodiment  of  free 
institutions,  and  a  great  instrument  of  human  progress.     (Hear,  hear.) 
Mr.  Beecher  would  go  back,  he  hoped,  to  America,  all  the  happier  for 
knowing  that  while  he  had  greatly  aided  them  in  their  great  work  of 
calling  forth  an  expression  of  public  opinion,  and  bringing  it  to  bear 
upon  the  Government  and  the  press,  he  had  also  good  reason  to  know 
that  England  had  always  been  right,  and  would  continue  to  be  right, 
on  the  great  question  at  issue  in  America.     (Hear,  hear.)     He  would 
only  add  that  he  rejoiced  at   the  opportunity  thus  afforded   to   Mr. 
Beecher  of  addressing  so  large  a  number  of  representatr|£  Christian 
men.     He  deplored  above  all  things  the  partial  defection%Df  Noncon- 
formist ministers  in  this  matter,  for  if  they  had  been  but  as  faithful  as  the 
poor  weavers  of  Lancashire — (hear,  hear) — no  statesman,  no  journalist 
■would   have  dared  to  slander  England  by  saying   that   she  was   not 
faithful  to  America  in  her  hour  of  conflict  and  agony.    (Loud  applause.) 
The  Rev.  WILLIAM  BLOOD,  rector  of  Temple  Grafton,  expressed 
his  warm  sympathy  with  Mr.  Beecher  as  a  brother  Christian  and  as  a 
patriot,  and  assured  him  that  it  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  suppose 
that  any  one  newspaper  represented  the  unanimous  feeling  of  England. 
If  the  different  organs  of  public  opinion  were  perused,   it  would  be 
found  that,  with  all  the  influence  brought  to  bear  upon  a  portion  of 


126  LONDON — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

the  press,  there  was  a  great  deal  of  healthy  feeling  in  the  ranks  of 
journalism.  The  course  taken  by  the  Morning  Star  and  the  Daily 
News  among  the  London  papers  was  honourable  to  the  conductors  of 
these  papers.     (Cheers.) 

Mr.  GEORGE  THOMPSON  moved  the  following  resolution  :— 
"That  this  meeting  of  Christian  ministers  and  Christian  laymen, 
assembled  to  testify  their  respect,  admiration,  and  esteem  for  the 
character  and  anti-slavery  labour  of  the  Eev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher, 
having  listened  with  the  deepest  interest  to  his  important  statements, 
and  wise  aiid  weighty  counsel,  desire  to  tender  to  him  their  warmest 
thanks  for  the  faithfulness,  affection,  and  fervour  with  which  he  has 
addressed  them.  They  would  testify  to  the  importance  and  timeliness 
of  his  recent  public  speeches,  and  while  regretting  that  he  cannot 
remain  to  render  additional  service  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  freedom 
in  this  country,  would  wish  him  God-speed  on  his  return  to  his  native 
land,  and  would  assure  him  that  they  in  future  will  cherish  an 
affectionate  remembrance  of  his  short  but  truly  friendly  and  most 
useful  visit.'*  He  felt  peculiar  pleasure  in  submitting  that  resolution. 
He  had  been  permitted  on  three  occasions  to  listen  to  their  guest,  and 
he  had  each  time  learned  something  with  regard  to  the  merits  of  the 
question  which  he  did  not  know  before.  He  was,  perhaps  more  than 
any  living  Englishman,  an  American  ;  and  though  he  had  had,  in  years 
past,  to  say  some  faithful  things  there,  and  had  suffered  personally  in 
consequence,  when  the  hour  of  her  trial  came  he  felt  towards  her  only 
as  a  faithful  friend.  He  regretted  that  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  lead 
public  opinion  in  this  country  did  not  in  all  respects  do  their  duty,  but 
he  could  confirm  the  statements  of  his  friend  Mr.  Wilks,  that  every 
Englishman  who  really  understood  America  had  given  a  sound  and 
true  utterance  upon  this  great  question.  The  only  exception  was  Lord 
Brougham,  who  had  indeed  blotted  his  fair  escutcheon  by  the  in- 
explicable course  which  he  had  taken  on  the  subject.  There  was  a 
goodly  array  of  public  men  who  had  spoken  out  on  the  side  of  the 
North,  and  if  some  to  whom  they  were  accustomed  to  look  as  leaders 
had  not  done  so  they  had  at  least  had  the  discretion  to  keep  silent. 
(Hear,  hear.)  He  had  attended  hundreds  of  public  meetings  on 
this  question,  and  had  invariably  carried  the  people  with  him. 
With  regard  to  once  slave-trading  Liverpool,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  it  had  strong  commercial  interests  which  tended  to  identify 
it  with  the  Southern  side,  but  he  still  believed  that  at  heart  the 
feeling  of  the  people  even  there  was  in  favour  of  the  North.  (Hear, 
hear.)  With  regard  to  America,  it  must  gladden  the  hearts  of  all  to 
notice  the  wonderful  change  that  had  come  over  the  country  on  the 
slavery  question  during  the  last  three  years.  For  one  thing  especially 
he  begged  to  thank  Mr.  Beecher, — that,  whether  in  his  own  pulpit  or 
on  an  English  platform,  he  had  always  generously,  nobly,  justly  laboured 
in  the  field  so  bravely  occupied  by  his  father  before  him,  bearing  his 
testimony  on  behalf  of  truth  and  liberty.     (Loud  applause.) 

The  Rev.  J.  GRAHAM  seconded  the  motion,  which  was  carried  by 
acclamation,  the  company  standing. 


LONDON — FAREWELL  MEETING.  127 

On  the  motion  of  Dr.  WADDINGTON,  a  vote  of  thanks  was  also 
passed  to  the  Chairman. 

The  CHAIRMAN,  in  responding,  said  that  he  could  not  altogether 
acquit  large  numbers  of  his  countrymen  from  the  charge  of  coldness. 
He  hoped,  however,  that  those  who  felt  differently,  whether  they  were 
a  majority  or  a  large  minority,  would  continue  to  refrain  from  anything 
that  might  be  construed  into  asperity.  Their  work  was  to  labour  to 
promote  a  sound  and  healthy  state  of  public  opinion.     (Cheers.) 

Mr.  BEECHER  begged  to  specially  acknowledge  the  address  to 
him  through  his  church  at  Brooklyn.  That  church  had  sent  him  abroad, 
and  had  generously  supplied  his  pulpit  in  his  absence  ;  and  he  had  no 
doubt  they  would  appreciate  that  mark  of  courtesy  and  kindly  feeling. 
(Cheers.) 

The  CHAIRMAN  then  offered  prayer,  and  the  proceedings  were 
brought  to  a  close. 


MANCHESTEE.-OCTOBEE  24,  1863. 


FAREWELL    TO    THE    REV.   H.    W.    BEECHER. 

The  Union  and  Emancipation  Society  entertained  the  Rev.  Henry 
"Ward  Beecher  at  a  public  breakfast,  on  Saturday  the  24th  October, 
1863,  and,  notwith standing  the  early  hour,  and  the  importance  of  the 
limited  time  for  business  on  that  day,  there  was  a  very  large  attendance. 
In  the  absence  of  the  President,  Mr.  George  L.  Ash  worth,  the  Mayor  of 
Rochdale,  occupied  the  chair.  The  company  included  Professor  Newman, 
London ;  Messrs.  Francis  Taylor,  Rev.  Dr.  Parker  ;  John  Patterson, 
Liverpool ;  Samuel  Watts,  jun.,  J.  C.  Dyer,  Jas.  Galloway,  J.  H. 
Estcourt ;  T.  B.  Whitehead,  Rawtenstall ;  Alderman  Kell,  Bradford  ; 
J.  F.  Wilkinson,  J.  C.  Edwards,  E.  O.  Greening ;  Robt.  Trimble,  A. 
Leighton,  and  J.  Whitty,  Liverpool ;  T.  C.  Ryley,  Wigan  ;  Alderman 
Harvey,  Salford  ;  Ernest  Jones,  Barrister-at-Law ;  Max.  Kyllman,  T. 
H.  Barker,  J.  J.  Raper,  J.  R.  Cooper,  Peter  Sinclair,  Jas.  Crossley,  Dr. 
Pankhurst,  T.  Johnson,  Joseph  Spencer,  J.  Hacking  ;  J.  Simpson, 
Sheffield  ;  Councillors  Butterworth,  Hampson,  Warburton,  Clegg, 
Manchester ;  and  Barber,  Stockport ;  and  a  great  number  of  gentlemen 
from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom. 

After  the  initiatory  services  had  been  fulfilled  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Parker, 
and  the  Rev.  T.  G.  Lee,  Mr.  Edwards,   one  of  the  hon.  secretaries, 
read  the  following  extracts  from  letters  of  apology  for  non-attendance  : — 
The  President,  T.  B.  Potter,  Esq. 

I  deeply  regret  my  inability  to  be  present  at  the  Breakfast.  Pray  present  my 
kind  regard  to  Mr.  Beecher,  and  tell  him  how  sorry  I  am  not  to  have  met  him 
again. 

John  Bright,  Esq.,  M.P.,  Birmingham. 

I  cannot  be  in  Manchester  on  Saturday  next,  and  therefore  cannot  have  the 
pleasure  of  meeting  Mr.  Beecher. 

I  am  sorry  for  this,  but  you  will  have  a  good  meeting,  I  do  not  doubt,  and 
Mr.  Beecher  will  warm  the  zeal  and  strengthen  the  faith  of  those  who  are  on  the 
right  side  in  this  great  American  conflict. 

W.  E.  Forster,  M.P.,  Bradford. 

I  am  sorry  that  I  am  so  engaged  on  Saturday  next  that  it  will  be  quite  impossible 
for  me  to  accept  your  invitation  to  meet  Mr.  Beecher  at  breakfast  that  morning. 

Will  you  be  good  enough  to  express  to  him  my  regret  that  I  am  unable  to  take 
leave  of  him,  and  to  wish  him  well  in  his  voyage  and  in  his  earnest  struggles  for 
his  country  and  for  liberty. 

P.  A.  Taylor,  Esq.,  M.P.,  Leicester. 

It  will  be  impossible  for  me  to  be  at  Manchester  on  Saturday,  but  I  need  not 
say  you  have  my  best  wishes  and  heartiest  sympathies. 


MANCHESTER — FAREWELL  MEETING.  129 

Thomas  Barnes,  Esq.,  M.P.,  Bolton. 

I  have  read  Mr.  Beecher's  addresses  with  much  interest  and  pleasure,  and  hope 
that  his  visit  will  conduce  to  a  better  mutual  understanding  between  our  own 
country  and  the  Northern  States.  We  have  been  like  offended  lovers,  between 
whom  there  has  been  some  shy  cold  looks,  that  has  led  both  parties  to  be  suspicious 
and  resentful,  until  something  like  a  breach  has  been  made. 

I  do  hope  Mr.  Beecher  may  be  the  healer  of  the  breach,  and  the  restorer  of  a 
good  understanding  between  us.  We  are  brethren,  and  nothing  should  divide  us 
but  the  waters  of  the  Atlantic. 

Samuel  Pope,  Esq.,  Barrister -at-Law. 

I  am  much  disappointed  that  I  am  unable  personally  to  express  my  apprecia- 
tion of  Mr.  Beecher's  life-long  efforts  in  favour  of  human  liberty. 

I  cannot  but  think  that  he  will  be  able  to  impart  to  his  friends  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Atlantic,  that  the  heart  of  the  British  people  responds  to  the  call  he  has 
made,  and  that  no  British  Government  will  venture  to  bring  our  country  into 
friendly  relations  with  a  slaveholder's  confederacy. 

Professor  Alfred  Newth,  Lancashire  Independent  College. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  invitation  to  the  breakfast  to  the  Rev.  H.  W. 
Beecher,  but  regret  that  my  engagements  will  not  allow  me  to  be  present.  I 
regret  this  the  more  as  I  was  away  when  he  unexpectedly  honoured  the  college 
with  a  visit. 

Professor  Henry  D.  Rogers,  Glasgow  University. 

It  stirs  my  heart  with  emotions  of  profound  joy  and  gratitude  to  see  the 
awakened  earnestness  of  the  more  enlightened  true  men  of  England  in  supporting 
the  North  in  its  struggle  to  maintain  the  Union  and  to  resist  all  recognition  of  the 
slaveholding  confederacy. 

Charles  Robertson,  Esq.,  Liverpool. 

I  hope  that  Mr.  Beecher's  visit  among  us,  as  well  as  his  frank  and  noble 
addresses,  will  form  an  additional  link  in  the  chain  that  ought  to  bind  Englishmen 
and  Americans,  and  that  the  manner  of  his  reception,  notwithstanding  the  hostile 
opposition  awakened  in  some  quarters  (and  I  refer  especially  to  this  town),  has 
satisfied  him  that  that  the  sympathies  and  good  wishes  of  a  large  and  I  trust  a 
growing  portion  of  the  English  people  are  enlisted  on  the  side  of  the  Federal 
Government,  identifying  it,  as  they  do  with  the  establishment  of  free  institutions, 
free  speech,  and  free  manhood. 

Duncan  McLaren,  Esq.,  Edinburgh. 

A  warm  friend  to  the  cause,  I  am  sorry  I  am  not  able  to  go  to  Manchester  at 
present. 

Letters  expressing  regret  at  their  inability  to  be  present  were 
received  from  W.  Coningham,  Esq.,  M.P.,  Brighton ;  E.  A.  Leatham, 
Esq.,  M.P. ;  The  Mayor  of  Oswestry;  Jacob  Bright,  Esq.,  Rochdale ; 
Joseph  Barratt,  Esq.,  Southport ;  Charles  Wilson,  Esq.,  Liverpool ; 
Robert  Ferguson,  Esq.,  Carlisle ;  Isaac  Ironside,  Esq.,  Sheffield ; 
William  Slater,  Esq.,  Carlisle;  C.  Wright,  Esq.,  Tydesley;  George 
Crossfield,  Esq.,  Warrington ;  J.  B.  Baines,  Esq.,  Leeds ;  Oliver 
Ormerod,  Esq.,  Rochdale ;  Edwin  Cox,  Esq.,  Preston ;  William  C. 
Levy,  Esq.,  Dundee  ;  Joseph  Sturge  Gilpin,  Esq.,  Nottingham ;  James 
Cropper,  Esq.,  Kendal ;  E.  Rawlins,  Junr.,  Liverpool ;  George  Wilson, 
Esq.,  Manchester,  and  others. 

The  CHAIRMAN  said  they  were  met  together  not  so  much  to 
make  speeches  as  to  show  by  their  presence  their  sympathy  for  the 
distinguished  gentleman  who  had  honoured  them  with  his  company. 
They  were  met  together  to  give  the  lie  to  that  which  had  for  some  time 
been  current  in  the  country,  namely,  that  the  people  of  England  had 
i 


ISO  MANCHESTER— FAREWELL  MEETING. 

no  sympathy  with  the  principles  and  cause  which  their  guest  had  so  long 
and  so  manfully  espoused,  and  which  they  were  now  met  to  show  they 
were  prepared  to  defend  and  maintain.  (Applause.)  He  deemed  it  as 
matter  of  the  deepest  humiliation  that  there  was  in  this  country  even 
a  small  section  of  our  countrymen  who  were  prepared  publicly  to  avow 
the  slightest  amount  of  sympathy  with  that  atrocious  and  wicked 
system  of  slavery ;  and  whatever  faults  we  might  have  to  find  with  the 
Government  of  this  country — and  I  am  one  who  thinks  it  is  far  from 
perfection — still  on  the  question  of  maintaining  a  strict  neutrality  with 
America,  on  the  whole  it  deserved  our  warmest  support  and  sympathy, 
(Cheers.)  It  would  have  been  impossible  for  Mr.  Beecher  to  have- 
selected  a  time  more  appropriate  and  opportune  for  visiting  this  country 
than  the  present  juncture,  in  order  to  render,  throughout  the  length  and 
breadth  of  the  land,  an  opportunity  to  Englishmen — at  least  a  vast 
majority  of  them — of  expressing  their  honest  sympathy  with  the  cause 
of  the  North.  The  speeches  which  Mr.  Beecher  had  delivered  in  the 
more  important  cities  of  this  great  country,  had  gone  a  long  way  towards 
enlightening  us  on  many  points  on  which  great  ignorance  prevailed. 
These  speeches  had  dispelled  much  that  had  deceived  and  misled  us,  and 
he  (the  mayor)  believed,  in  the  language  of  one  of  the  letters  just  read, 
that  there  would  be  a  rapidly  increasing  number  of  people  in  England 
who  would  rally  round  the  standard  of  liberty,  and  show  to  the  Northern 
portion  of  the  States  that  they  have  our  sympathies,  and  that  slavery 
to-day  was  with  us  just  what  it  had  been  in  times  past,  a  thing  we  viewed 
with  the  utmost  abhorrence.  (Loud  cheers.)  We  could  not  look  upon 
that  struggle  now  going  on  in  America  with  feelings  other  than  those  of 
the  strongest  sorrow.  We  could  not  contemplate  the  vast  sacrifices  of 
life  and  blood  without  feeling  the  deepest  commiseration.  But  if,  in  this 
mighty  and  gigantie  struggle  the  result  was  what  he  hoped  and  believed 
it  would  be — the  entire  and  permanent  abolition  of  slavery,  then  terrible 
and  vast  as  the  sacrifices  had  been,  that  result  would  compensate  for  all. 
(Cheers.)  Let  there  be  no  mistake  on  this  subject.  Let  us  render  all  the 
moral  support  we  can  to  the  Federal  Government,  and  show  them  by  our 
prayers,  sympathies,  and  kindly  expressions  of  affection  that  we  feel  for 
them  in  their  present  fearful  conflict,  and  let  us  uphold  the  hands  of  our 
Government  in  maintaining  a  strict  and  impartial  neutrality.  (Loud 
cheers.) 

Mr.  FRANCIS  TAYLOR  said  he  had  been  requested  to  move  a 
resolution  which  was  a  speech  in  itself,  and  which  would  render  it  quite 
Unnecessary  that  he  should  detain  them  with  any  lengthened  remarks. 
The  resolution  was  : — "  That  we  tender  our  thanks  to  the  Rev.  Henry 
Ward  Beecher,  for  the  able,  eloquent,  and  manly  addresses  he  has 
delivered  to  thousands  of  our  fellow-countrymen,  on  the  present 
national  crisis  in  the  United  States  of  America  ;  and  express  our  belief 
that  the  majority  of  the  intelligent  men  in  this  kingdom  unmistakeably 
sympathize  with  the  friends  of  freedom  in  America,  and  approve  of 
every  effort  made  to  maintain  free  and  constitutional  government.  We 
further  express  our  desire  that  he  may  be  spared  to  reach  his  native 
land  in  health  and  strength ;  and  we  assure  him  he  will  take  with  him 


MANCHESTER — FAREWELL   MEETING.  131 

the  friendship  of  many  on  this  side  the  Atlantic,  who  will  honour  his 
name  and  remember  him  with  affection."  (Cheers.)  This  resolution 
certainly  required  no  words  of  his  to  recommend  it  to  the  hearty 
approval  of  the  company,  and  he  was  equally  sure  that  Mr.  Beecher, 
the  gentleman  referred  to  in  the  resolution,  needed  no  compliment 
either  from  the  mover  of  the  resolution  or  from  any  other  person. 
Certainly  had  not  Mr.  Beecher  established  for  himself  a  reputation 
which  would  endure  for  all  time,  before  he  visited  our  shores,  the 
addresses  he  had  delivered  to  crowded  audiences  since  his  arrival  would 
have  secured  for  him  our  most  hearty  approval,  and  have  entitled  him 
to  every  expression  which  the  resolution  contained.  There  was  one 
point  in  the  resolution  to  which  for  a  moment  he  (Mr.  Taylor)  wished 
to  refer.  It  stated  that  "the  majority  of  the  intelligent  people  of  this 
country  unmistakably  sympathized  with  the  friends  ot'  freedom  in 
America,  and  approved  of  every  effort  made  to  maintain  free  and 
constitutional  government."  (Cheers.)  Since  Mr.  Beecher  addressed 
the  audience  in  our  Free-trade  Hall,  and  in  various  other  places  in  the 
kingdom,  comments  had  been  made  on  these  meetings  by  various  news- 
papers throughout  the  country.  It  was  asserted  by  the  Times,  and  by 
its  humble  follower  in  Manchester — (laughter) — that  notwithstanding 
all  the  enthusiasm  expressed  at  these  meetings,  they  really  meant 
nothing  at  all ;  that  Mr.  Beecher  would  make  a  great  mistake  if  he 
assumed  that  in  consequence  of  large  attendances  at  these  meetings, 
public  opinion  in  this  country  sympathized  with  his  friends  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Atlantic.  All  he  (Mr.  Taylor)  had  to  say  was  this  : — Let 
Mr.  James  Spence,  in  the  advocacy  of  the  Southern  cause  in  England, 
try  the  experiment ;  let  him  go  round  to  the  large  cities  in  this  country 
and  call  public  meetings,  at  which  all  who  chose  might  attend ;  and  let 
him  thus  test  public  opinion  and  see  whether  it  went  with  the  South. 
(Loud  cheers,  and  a  Voice :  "  Let  him  take  Liverpool  first.'1)  When  he 
(Mr.  Taylor*  presided  at  the  meeting  in  the  Free-trade  Hall,  he  stated 
before  Mr.  Beecher  addressed  the  assembly  that  if  any  person  wished 
to  ask  Mr.  Beecher  any  questions  after  the  proceedings  had  terminated 
that  person  would  be  at  perfect  liberty  to  do  so,  and  Mr.  Beecher  would 
be  ready  to  answer  the  questions  so  put  to  him.  Mr.  Beecher 
himself  made  a  similar  offer  in  the  course  of  his  speech  but  not  one 
person  presented  himself  to  ask  any  question.  (Cheers.)  It  appeared 
however  that  some  gentleman  calling  hflnself  "a  traveller" — whether 
he  was  at  the  meeting  or  not  was  not  known — if  he  were,  probably  he 
was  one  of  the  bellowing  bulls  that  disturbed  the  back  settlements  of 
the  hall.  (Loud  cheers.)  Well,  this  person  instead  of  availing  himself 
of  the  opportunity  of  putting  his  questions  in  person,  sneaked  off  to 
the  columns  of  a  sympathizing  newspaper  in  Manchester  and  said  "  it 
was  impossible  to  get  a  straightforward  answer  from  Mr.  Beecher  res- 
pecting the  treatment  of  coloured  people  in  the  North."  Now,  if  this 
gentleman  had  appeared  on  the  platform  at  the  Free-trade  Hall  to  put 
these  questions,  he  would  have  found  no  difficulty  in  getting  a  straight- 
forward answer,  and  no  doubt  Mr.  Beecher  would  so  far  notice  ihis 
question  as  to  give  during  the  remarks  he  was  about  to  make  an  answer 


132  MANCHESTER— FAREWELL  MEETING. 

that  would  satisfy  every  one.     (Loud  cheers.)     He  had  much  pleasure 
in  moving  the  resolution  he  had  read. 

Mr.  JOHN  PATTERSON,  of  Liverpool,  said  that  man  must  be 
very  ill  informed  indeed  upon  an  important  subject,  if  he  had  not  heard 
of  the  life  labours  as  well  as  "  Life  Thoughts "  of  Mr.  Henry  Ward 
Beecher.  (Applause.)  Among  the  glorious  chapters  which  adorned 
the  page  of  humanity  was  a  chapter  which  recorded  the  life  and  labours 
of  the  ''fanatical  abolitionists"  of  America.  He  for  one  gladly  embraced 
the  opportunity  now  afforded  to  him  in  this  assembly  of  "fanatical 
abolitionists" — (laughter) — to  tender  his  thanks  to  Mr.  Beecher  not 
only  for  what  that  gentleman  had  done  in  England,  but  for  what  he 
and  his  friends  had  done  in  America  during  the  past  twenty-five  years. 
During  the  few  weeks  of  the  past  summer  which  he  spent  in  America 
he  had  the  pleasure  of  being  introduced  to  Mr.  Beecher  at  his  own 
church,  and  of  telling  him  that  the  people  in  England  believed  that 
America  was  much  indebted  to  him  and  men  like  him  for  having  the 
courage  to  stand  up  before  the  world  and  rebuke  the  intentions  and 
presumptions  of  one  of  the  basest  and  foulest  Confederacies  that  ever 
disgraced  humanity.  (Loud  cheers.)  It  was  important  that  we  in 
England  should  speak  out  unmistakeably,  as  well  as  be  spoken  to  by 
the  eloquent  mouthpiece  of  American  abolitionists.  There  was  a  great 
mistake  existing  as  regarded  the  subject  of  anti-slavery  in  this 
country  which  sometimes  men  fell  into.  He  himself  was  but  a 
child  when  the  abolition  of  slavery  was  carried.  It  was  just  at  that 
stage  that  it  had  hardly  passed  enough  into  history  to  be  familiarized  as 
a  historical  question,  and  when  we  were  likely  to  lose  accurate  state- 
ments in  the  mist  of  tradition.  What  was  the  position  of  England 
with  regard  to  this  slavery  question1?  He  maintained  that  there  was  an 
excitement  and  contest  like  our  own  free-trade  agitation ;  like  that  which 
abolished  "  Tests  and  Corporation  Acts ;"  like  that  which  gave  to  our 
Roman  Catholic  countrymen  their  civil  privileges.  When  men  stood 
up  to  say  in  England,  "  We  are  all  anti-slavery,  and  always  were  ;"  it 
was  either  an  intentional  falsehood,  or  an  ignorant  mis-statement.  Eor 
England  was  never  entirely  anti-slavery.  When  he  met  men  on  the 
Liverpool  Exchange  who  said  to  him,  "  You  are  a  great  fool  to  talk 
about  slavery ;  we  are  as  much  opposed  to  slavery  as  you,  and  we  want 
to  put  an  end  to  it."  He  asked — Why?  And  the  answer  was, 
"  It  deprives  us  of  cotton."  He  had  the  misfortune  to  differ  from 
many  as  to  cotton  grown  by  slaves.  The  cheapest  way  in  which 
a  man  could  get  things  was  to  steal  them,  if  no  one  would  give 
them  to  Mm.  And  on  that  principle  the  cotton  grower  could  grow 
cotton  cheaper  with  the  stolen  labour  of  the  slave.  Men  in  this 
age  were  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of  light  as 
they  always  were,  and  hence  they  found  that  cotton  could  be  grown 
cheaper  by  slave  labour  than  by  free.  But  the  Ruler  of  this 
Universe  was  a  moral  governor,  who  ordained  that  terrible  retribution 
should  follow  evil-doing,  and  it  had  now  fallen  upon  the  United 
States  in  the  devastation  which  had  overtaken  them  and  which  would 
have  the  effect  of  bringing  up  the  price  of  slave-grown  to  free-grown 


MANCHESTER — FAREWELL   MEETING.  133 

cotton.  In  England  we  were  now  pretty  much  as  we  always  were — the 
minority  only  possessed  of  power  and  privilege.  But  education  was 
being  now  more  generally  diffused,  although  many  men  had  it  forced 
down  their  throaas.  Some  only  desired  that  the  people  should  be  so 
much  educated  as  to  make  them  subservient  to  selfish  purposes,  while 
the  men  who  represented  the  really  educated  intelligence  of  the  country 
desired  that  the  people  of  England  should  not  be  merely  what  Beresford 
Hope  wished,  a  "  well-fed,  well-clothed  church  peasantry" — (loud 
laughter) — but  rather  a  free,  intelligent,  industrious,  and  self-elevating 
people.  (Cheers.)  We  owed  great  thanks  and  obligations  to  the  men 
who  came  to  us  with  not  only  "40-parson"  but  500-parson  power 
across  the  Atlantic  and  who  spoke  words  of  truth,  soberness,  and  logical 
demonstration,  although  opposed  by  the  Times,  Telegraph,  and  Man- 
chester Guardian.  (Laughter  and  hisses.)  Many  persons  would  say 
that  the  opposition  given  to  Mr.  Ward  Beecher  demonstrated  the 
futility  of  his  endeavouring  to  speak  to  the  men  of  England.  It  showed 
rather  the  force  with  which  he  has  spoken  to  them,  and  he  (Mr.  Patter- 
son) stood  there,  a  Liverpool  man,  to  say  that  the  reception  Mr.  Beecher 
met  with  in  Liverpool,  exhibiting  as  it  did  all  the  vileness  that  still 
clung  around  them — all  the  miserable  tradition  of  an  intolerant  Toryism 
that  pervaded  a  portion  of  the  community ;  yet  it  showed  still  further 
how  high  the  intelligence  of  Liverpool  had  risen — how  amazingly  its 
middle  class  had  risen,  and  how,  if  Liverpool  men  were  true  to  them- 
selves, they  could  trample  under  foot  that  ancient  and  rotten  tradition. 
(Loud  cheers.)  That  meeting  in  Liverpool  was  open  as  the  day.  It  had 
been  stated  that  it  was  packed.  It  was  untrue.  Every  opportunity  was 
given  to  any  man  to  attend  ;  and  pains  were  taken  by  their  opponents 
to  enlist  men  to  come  there  for  the  purpose  of  opposition.  But  a  lament- 
able failure  the  opposition  was.  (Cheers.)  Not  one-seventh  of  that 
audience  held  up  their  hands  in  opposition  to  the  vote.  Whilst  he 
thoroughly  sympathised  with  Mr.  Beecher,  and  felt  annoyed  that  a  gentle- 
man in  his  position  and  from  such  a  distance  should  be  obliged  to  contend 
with  the  wild  beasts  at  Ephesus.  (Loud  laughter.)  Yet  he  rejoiced  for 
the  sake  of  liberty  that  the  meeting  was  held.  (Cheers.)  Many  meetings 
had  been  held,  but  the  people  of  Liverpool  had  pronounced  by  tremen- 
dous majorities  in  favour  of  the  North.  (Loud  cheers.)  There  was 
another  reason  why  he  desired  they  should  very  unmistakeably  pronounce 
their  thanks  to  Mr.  Beecher,  and  that  was  that  the  opposition  to  him 
had  not  only  come  from  our  hereditary  enemies,  but  also  from  some  of 
oUr  false  friends.  He  was  not  unmindful  of  past  services  rendered  to 
the  causes  of  liberty  by  one  illustrious  man  before  he  became  a  lord. 
He  had  read  with  great  enjoyment  words  which  that  man  had  spoken 
for  all  time,  and  which  would  never  die  ;  but  he  read  them  now  as  he  read 
the  words  of  Balaam.  And  deeply  did  he  regret  that  Henry  Brougham, 
once  the  man  who  claimed  to  be  the  very  prince  of  abolitionists,  should 
recently  have  stood  up  to  pronounce  words  of  unparalleled  baseness  on 
this  question.  (Loud  cheers.)  The  justification  Lord  Brougham  gave  of 
this  truculence  was  that  he  himself  was  the  great  leader  of  the  anti- 
slavery  party,  and  that  he  himself  did  more  in  this  question,  not  only 


134  MANCHESTER — FAREWELL   MEETING. 

than  any  other  man — for  to  say  that  might  be  excuse  to  him — but  that 
he  did  more  twice  over  than  all  the  other  advocates  of  emancipation  put 
together.  Was  Lord  Brougham  forgetful  of  all  the  Clarksons,  Wilber- 
forces,  Fowell  Buxtons,  Macaulays,  and  Jefferys — (cheers) — and  was  it 
not  enough  to  rob  the  sepulchres  of  the  dead,  but  he  must  endeavour  to 
deprive  the  living  of  the  glory  that  belong  to  them?  (Loud  applause.) 
Was  Lord  Derby  such  an  unconsidered  trifle  that  he  could  lay  claim 
to  no  part  in  negro  emancipation — (cheers) — and  Lord  Russell  such  a 
unit  that  he  could  be  appropriately  snuffed  out  by  Lord  Brougham  at 
an  Edinburgh  banquet?  (Cheers.)  It  was  a  shame  to  see  such  a 
hecatomb  offered  to  the  vanity  of  one  poor,  spoiled  old  man.  (Cheers.) 
He  cordially  seconded  the  resolution. 

The  resolution  was  supported  by  Mr.  W.  B.  Whitehead,  Mr.  Alder- 
man Kell  (Bradford),  Mr.  Alderman  Harvey  (Salford),  and  passed  with 
acclamation. 

The  Rev.  HENRY  WARD  BEECHER  rose  to  return  thanks,  and 
was  enthusiastically  cheered.  He  said:  Mr.  Chairman  and  gentlemen — 
I  wish  I  could  say  ladies  and  gentlemen.  But  I  begin  again — Mr. 
Chairman  and  gentlemen  [A  Voice :  The  ladies  are  represented  by 
the  gentlemen  ]  No  man  can  ever  represent  a  woman.  (Boisterous 
laughter  and  cheers.)  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  this  morning  to  avow 
myself  in  some  sense  a  convert.  While  I  have  seen  and  still  see  in 
England,  even  more  perhaps  than  you  will  admit,  of  prejudice  and 
misconception,  I  have  been  made  aware  of  some  prejudices  and  much 
misconception  in  myself,  and  in  other  honest  men  whom  I  may  fairly 
be  said  to  represent;  and  it  is  not  the  smallest  triumph  of  this  short 
course  of  two  weeks  during  which  I  have  been  permitted  to  remain  in 
England,  that  I  have  gained  the  victory  over  my  own  past  impressions 
and  am  prepared  to  admit  some  things  that  I  have  stoutly  denied  to 
Englishmen  of  my  own  congregation,  who  used  to  say  to  me,  grieved 
but  not  angered  at  the  things  I  said  about  England,  "  You  do  not 
know  Old  England."  I  used  as  sturdily  to  say,  "  I  do."  But  now  I 
shall  say  to  them,  very  humbly,  "I  did  not."  (Cheers.)  I  have  been 
called  to  speak  on  a  question  which  is  very  broad,  very  intricate,  and 
multitudinous  in  its  contents,  because  the  question  of  America  is 
simply  the  total  question  of  human  society.  It  begins  at  the  top  and 
goes  to  the  bottom,  and  back  again  from  the  bottom  to  the  top ;  from 
the  circumference  to  the  centre,  and  from  the  centre  to  the  circum- 
ference ;  for  there  is  nothing  in  political  economy,  philosophy,  human 
right,  or  whatever  can  spring  out  of  this  wonderful  being — man — in 
society,  that  is  not  involved  directly  or  indirectly  in  this  great  American 
struggle.  And  in  speaking  upon  a  question  so  broad,  it  was  quite 
impossible  to  speak  exhaustively:  the  only  thing  that  I  have  exhausted 
has  been  myself.  (Laughter.)  It  has  been  quite  impossible  under  the 
circumstances,  a  stranger  in  a  strange  community,  not  altogether  cogni- 
sant of  the  prejudice  or  the  wants  or  shades  of  thought  in  a  community, 
to  speak  upon  this  large  question  so  as  always  to  meet  the  requisitions 
of  my  audience.  I  shall  not  dwell  upon  the  interruption  which  I  have 
taken  very  kindly — which  even  in  its  worst  form  at  Liverpool,  I  do 


MANCHESTER — F  ABE  WELL   MEETING.  135 

them  the  justice  to  say,  was  rather  an  exhibition  of  party  feeling  than 
of  personal  malignity — (cheers)  ; — and  although  it  made  my  work  very 
hard,  God  is  my  witness  it  did  not  excite  in  my  mind  the  slightest 
animosity  towards  them,  still  less  towards  that  very  noble  community 
which  they  misrepresented  on  that  occasion.    There  is  another  matter 
I  wished  to  speak  of;  and  that  is,  that  the  reports  of  my  speeches  are 
not  authoritative,  nor  can  they  be  so,  until  they  have  passed  under  my 
revision.     And  I  wish  to  say  that  no  man  here  is  so  much  indebted 
to  a  class  of  men  much  abused  and  very  little  understood,  but  to 
whom  I  owe  lasting  obligations — I  mean  reporters  for  newspapers. 
They  are  young  men  who  are  generally  sent  out  into  meetings  of  all 
kinds,  where  men  are  divided,  and  where  questions  are  discussed 
with  warmth  and   excitement  at  untimely  hours ;   and  when  usually 
crammed  into  the  most  inconvenient  situations,  are  obliged  to  take  down 
either  the  whole  or  a  part  of  what  is  spoken  upon  arguments  upon 
which  they  have  not  been  thoroughly  read,  exercising  at  the  same 
time  an  immediate  judgment  as  to  what  should  be  omitted,  or  what 
the  wants  of  every  newspaper  oblige  them  to  produce.     Then  they 
are  hurried  back  in  the  midnight  hour  to  write  out  that  which  is  so 
lately  taken,  and  often  because  it  is  not  presented  next  morning  as 
some  would  wish,  men  blame  them,  and  impute  ill  motives.     (Loud 
laughter  and  cheers.)     Now,  I  am  a  newspaper  man  myself,  and  have 
been  made  familiar  with  the  life  and  difficulties  which   beset  the 
corps,  of  reporters.     I  have  followed  the  reports  of  my  speeches  in 
England,  but  have  never  in  a  single  speech  seen  that  which  led  me  to 
believe  that  any  reporter  had  intentionally  misrepresented  what  I  had 
said.     I  have,  however,  seen  the  editorial  column,  where  I  know  the 
editor,  thinking  he  was  supporting  a  certain  party,  misrepresented 
both  my  facts  and  principles.     (Cheers.)     And,  if  there  are  reporters 
present,  I  desire  to  express  through  them  my  sense  of  the  obligation 
under  which  I  lie  to  their  kindness  and  fidelity  in  this  visit    (Cheers.) 
Yet,  for  reasons  I  have  stated,  my  speeches  generally  occupying  more 
than   two   hours,    and    passing   generally   very   rapidly   over   many 
great  topics,  and  all  having  naturally  to  appear  next  morning,  when 
the  paper  could  not  afford  to  put  in  a  verbatim  report,  the  reports, 
while  presenting  the  general  tenor  of  my  speeches,  have  had  such 
inevitable   imperfections  as  to  make   them   not  exactly  the   things 
upon  which  to  base  an  attack  upon  me.    (Cheers.)    I  wish  now,  in  the 
opening  remarks  which  I  shall  make,  to  explain  to  you  precisely  the 
thing  whieh  I  have  attempted  to  do  in  England.    I  have  attempted — it 
is  the  keynote — the  inward  keynote  of  my  whole  progress  here — I 
have  attempted  to  use  my  information,  and  the  position  which  you  have 
been  kind  enough  to  secure  for  me,  to  promote  a  better  understanding 
and  a  lasting  peace  between  these  two  great  nations.     (Loud  cheers.) 
There  have  been  therefore  a  great  many  things  I  might  have  said,  and 
feelings  I  might  have  expressed,  which  I  have  not.     But  I  have  endea- 
voured to  bring  all  things  to  the  bar  of  a  manly  judgment,"  and  to  say 
those  things  which  would  draw  closer  the  bonds  of  amity.      (Cheers.) 
Even  in  the  cases  where  I  have  brought  up  matters  on  which  your 


136  MANCHESTER — FAREWELL   MEETING. 

judgment  and  mine  have  differed,  and  still  differ,  it  was  not  so  much 
to  go  back  and  argue  them  upon  the  merits  of  the  question  as  it  was 
to  put  you  in  possession  of  the  American  stand-point,  that  you  might 
see,  if  we  did  err,  what  was  the  reason  of  our  erring.  (Cheers.)  I 
wish,  for  instance,  to  illustrate  it  by  one  single  case,  and  that  was  the 
Trent  difficulty.  I  think  it  was  in  Manchester  I  mentioned  the  strong 
feeling  that  existed  in  America  upon  this  point.  And  the  London 
Daily  News — a  paper  to  which  I  should  be  glad  to  express  the  great 
obligations  of  American  citizens  —  (cheers) — if  I  were  not  afraid  it 
might  be  employed  against  it  to  diminish  its  influence  with  Britons — 
("No,  no") — I  say  that  paper  in  a  friendly  spirit  criticized  my  utter- 
ances, and  said  that  it  would  damage  my  testimony  with  English 
people  to  be  so  far  wrong  and  mistaken  in  facts  about  that  question  ; 
and  that  it  would  damage  my  testimony  amongst  English  people  on 
questions  with  which  I  was  better  informed.  They  did  not  specify 
however,  what  was  my  mistake.  Now,  I  want  just  to  specify  to  you 
how  we  Americans  looked  at  that  transaction,  not  for  the  purpose  of 
putting  ourselves  right  and  you  wrong,  but  to  ask  you  as  I  shall, 
when  I  have  made  my  statement,  if  you  had  been  in  our  situa- 
tion, and  things  looked  to  you  as  they  did  to  us,  would  you 
not  have  felt  as  we  did?  Is  not  that  fair?  (Cheers.)  You 
will  recollect,  then,  that  an  American  naval  vessel  by  accident — 
if  there  be  such  things  as  accidents — overhauled  an  English  mail 
steamer,  and  took  from  it  two  men  who  represented  themselves  as 
ambassadors  from  the  so-called  Confederate  Government  to  the  courts 
of  England  and  France  respectively.  I  remember  very  well,  when 
the  ship  came  from  Europe, — and  the  tidings  spread  across  America 
as  quick  as  lightning  could  flash, — that  for  a  day  or  two  the  universal 
feeling  was,  "Here's  a  stupendous  joke."  Everybody  laughed.  It 
struck  the  comical  feeling  of  the  nation  that  these  two  men  should  have 
started  off  to  represent  the  Confederates  at  St.  James's,  and  in  Paris, 
and  instead,  had  found  themselves  in  Fort  Lafayette.  (Laughter.)  And 
there  was  a  feeling  of  immense  good  nature,  and  even  jollity.  Then,  after 
two  or  three  days,  some  lawyer-men  began  to  inquire  in  the  papers, 
"  What  is  the  law  on  this  subject?  It  may  be  a  very  good  joke,  but 
what  says  the  law  1 "  We  began  to  draw  down  our  faces  and  say, 
"  Sure  enough  there  is  an  England,  and  she  will  have  a  word  to  say. 
What  then  is  the  law  ? M  Then  began  to  be  quoted  what  the 
English  doctrine  was  ;  our  papers  began  to  be  filled  with  English 
precedents  and  English  conduct,  and  there  was  a  universal  feeling 
that  we  had  acted  according  to  English  precedent.  (Cheers.)  That 
conviction  is  yet  unchanged,  and  never  will  be  changed,  because  it  was 
the  fact.  (Cheers.)  But  I  had  the  opportunity  of  knowing  from 
my  position,  both  as  preacher,  lecturer,  and  editor,  that  the  feeling  of 
the  people  was,  "  We  are  going  to  do  what  is  right  now,  whatever  it 
is.  If  we  are  in  the  wrong,  we  shall  concede  this  matter ;  but  if  we 
are  in  the  right,  we  will  not  budge  an  inch,  neither  by  bullying  nor 
intimidation."  And  the  moment  the  information  came  to  our  shores 
of  these  facts,  Mr.  Seward  addressed  a  confidential  communication  to 


MANCHESTER — FAREWELL  MEETING.  137 

Mr.  Adams,  instructing  him  to  read  the  same  to  Earl  Eussell,  the 
purport  of  which  was,  that  this  had  been  done  without  the  privity  or 
assent  of  the  American  Government,  who  were  prepared,  on  the  state- 
ment of  England's  wishes,  to  settle  this  matter  amicably.  Mr.  Adams 
read  that  to  Earl  Eussell,  and  it  lay  nine  or  ten  days  quiet.  The  letter 
being  confidential,  Mr.  Adams  scrupulously  avoided  speaking  of  it:  but 
it  leaked  out  nevertheless  that  there  had  been  a  communication 
from  the  American  Government  to  the  English,  and  everybody  was 
asking  what  was  its  nature.  This  communication  having  been  read, 
I  think,  on  the  19th  of  December,  it  would  be  about  the  29th  that  your 
Morning  Post — which  is  supposed  to  be  a  semi-official  organ — declared 
that  there  had  been  a  communication  from  the  American  Government, 
but  that  it  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Trent  affair.  And,  whereas  it 
was  a  communication  expressly  on  that  and  nothing  else,  to  this  hour 
that  paper  has  never  explained  nor  retracted  that  malicious  and  de- 
liberate falsehood.  From  that  point,  I  believe,  complication  began. 
But  there  was  something  before  that.  (Cheers.)  Even  before  that 
message  came  from  Washington,  and  before  the  British  Government 
had  heard  what  we  had  to  say,  orders  had  issued  that  British  troops 
should  repair  to  Canada,  and  the  navy  and  dockyards  were  put  on 
double  labour.  England  has  never  shown  want  of  promptness  and 
spirit ;  but  I  believe  you  can  find  no  other  case  in  English  histury  in 
which  a  misunderstanding  between  ships  of  two  nations  has  been 
treated  with  similar  precipitancy,  not  waiting  to  hear  explanations,  but 
preparing  war,  or  threatening  war,  before  you  could  possibly  have  the 
real  facts.  As  to  what  took  place  on  the  other  side,  I  am  alleged  to 
have  been  all  wrong  when  I  said  the  American  Government  showed 
instant  disposition  to  make  reparation ;  because,  on  the  other  hand  we 
heaped  honours  on  Captain  Wilkes  all  through  the  nation.  When  we 
thought  we  were  right,  we  did  ;  but  after  we  found  out  by  the  declara- 
tion of  our  own  Government  that  we  were  wrong,  point  me  to  one  in- 
stance, in  which  even  the  slightest  popular  assembly  undertook  to 
traverse  the  decision  of  our  Government,  by  showing  attention  to  Capt. 
Wilkes?  As  to  whether  we  did  not  use  all  possible  speed,  let  us  see 
what  were  the  facts.  Mr.  Seward  wrote  to  the  English  Government 
saying,  wre  were  prepared  to  settle  the  matter  satisfactorily  to  them, 
and  awaited  their  demands.  Many  say  :  we  ought  not  to  have  waited 
their  demands,  but  given  up  the  men  instantly.  But  there  were  conflict- 
ing doctrines  as  to  the  rights  of  Governments  over  contraband  of  war  in 
neutral  vessels.  There  was  the  British  doctrine  and  there  was  the 
American  doctrine.  From  1807  certainly  to  1813,  and  I  know  not  how 
much  longer,  the  British  doctrine  was  that  you  had  a  right  to  condemn  a 
neutral  vessel  without  bringing  her  into  a  prize  court.  That  was  the 
British  doctrine  and  practice  down  to  within  a  few  years.  I  think  the 
last  recognized  case — I  won't  undertake  to  say  it  is  the  last  case — is  that 
in  which  England  acted  upon  the  American  doctrine,  when  they  took 
a  Bremen  vessel  and  condemned  her  in  an  English  court  because  she 
was  bringing  the  crew  of  a  wrecked  Kussian  vessel  from  Japan  home. 
She  was  condemned  by  a  prize  court,  and  that  is  the  first  instance  I 


138  MANCHESTER — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

know  of  the  American  doctrine  being  acted  on  by  the  English  Govern- 
ment or  navy.     Now,  when  Mr.  Seward  wrote  to  Mr.  Adams  he  said 
thus  : — Here  is  the  old  British  doctrine,  which  they  have  never  given 
up  technically,  and  here  is  the  American.     Which  of  the  two  is  the 
British  Government  going  to  take  with  respect  to  Mr.  Mason  and  Mr. 
Slidell  ?     If  their  own,  we  have  committed  no  offence,  and  there  is 
nothing  more  to  be  said.     If  our  doctrine,  evidently  we  must  wait  for 
them  to  make  their  own  election  — I  ask  you  then,  was  that  not  a 
courteous  and  just  reason  for  waiting  till  the  overture  should  come 
from  the  English  Government  instead  of  from  ours,  as  to  what  should 
be  done  in  the  case  of  these  men  ?    (Cheers.)     Now,  all  these  facts 
are  perfectly  known  to  our  people,  and  I  ask  you  not  to  renew  this  old 
subject    It  is  past  for  good,  I  hope,  and  it  rests  in  peace.     But  then, 
I  want  you  so  far  to  review  these  facts  as  when  men  say  "  the  Ameri- 
cans have  shown  an  arrogant  and  intemperate  spirit  towards  Great 
Britain,  and  without  reason  in  that  Trent  affair," — I  want  you  then  to 
say,  "  Every  man,  and  I  for  one  if  I  had  been  an  American,  should 
have  felt  just  as  they  felt."    (Cheers.)      And  I  want  to  say  one  thing 
more,  and   it   is  this,  that  we  were  all  very  much  surprised  when 
Mr.  Seward  issued  his  decision.      But  so  it  was  and  so  it  stands.      I 
make  these  explanations  in  the  furtherance  of  a  better  understanding 
between  us,  so  that  there  may  be  no  unpleasant  memory,  and  no  coal 
that  has  not  gone  out  in  the  embers  and  ashes  of  this  old  question. 
(Loud  cheers.)    Also  I  wish  to  revert  to  a  certain  topic,  because  I 
am   informed   that  I  have  been  destroyed  by  several  papers,  body 
and  soul,  honour  and  reputation,  because  of  gross  and  intentional 
misstatements   made   in   Edinburgh.     I  cannot  tell  the  paper  that 
has  originated   it,  nor  would   I   if  I   could.     I   am   informed  that 
my  statements  made  respecting  the  circulation  of  money  were  totally 
at  variance   with   the   fact.     Now  all  I  can  say  is,  if  these  state- 
ments were  not  correct,  I  certainly  should  be  guilty  of  ignorance, 
though  not  intentionally.     Let  me  then  state  to  you,  availing  myself 
of  this  opportunity,  what  I  understand   about  the  condition  of  the 
North    fiscally,    and  •  of  material    prosperity  in    this   time   of   war. 
My  venerable  and  excellent  friend,  Dr.  Massie,  is  present — (cheers) — 
and  I  speak  as  before  one  who  knows  the  truth,  and  although  I  have 
never  till  this  morning  seen  him — may  I  see  him  a  thousand  times 
hereafter — though  I,  of  course,  know  nothing  of  his  opinions,  yet  I 
know  he  is  an  honest  man,  and  know  what  an  honest  man  must  say 
in  respect  of  certain  points  in  our  American  affairs.     I  say  he  will 
not  rebuke  me  for  saying  there  never  was  a  time  of  such  material  or 
moral  prosperity  as  in  the  North  at  this  time.     Burdened  as  we  are 
with  war,  there  never  was  a  time  when  husbandry  was  carried  on  with 
more  alacrity  or  success,  when  every  conceivable  form  of  productive 
industry,  and  of  manufacturing  through  its  whole  range,  was  more 
pressed  by  demand.    It  is  not  as  it  was  in  Manchester  just  before  this 
war,  when  you  had  manufactured  far  beyond  the  consumption  of  your 
customers.     It  is  not  speculative.      There  never  was  a  time  when 
monetary  affairs  were  so  easy,  and  I  think  so  healthy,  notwithstanding 


3LANCHESTER — FAREWELL  MEETING.  139 

the  contrary  opinion  of  the  editor  of  the  Times'  money  articles.     You 
say,  we  shall  come  to  a  crash.   It  may  be  we  shall,  though  we  are  going 
to  it  by  a  very  pleasant  way.     (Laughter.)     But  are  we  doing  this 
upon  an  inflated  paper  currency,  without  a  proper  basis  and  proper 
security  ?    Paper  must  represent  convertible  property.     Is  there  more 
paper  in  circulation  in  the  North  than  there  is  actual  and  available 
property  in  the  North  which  it  represents  ?     On  that  subject  I  declare 
it  makes  no  difference  whether  paper  is  issued  by  State  banks,  or 
individual  brokers,  or  the  National  Government;  if  there  is  nevermore 
paper  than  is  needed,  all  then  is  safe,  for  there  is  no  more  paper  than 
they  have  means  to  convert.    Again,  you  may  always  issue  more  paper 
than  you  can  convert  in  any  one  day.     Three  bills  to  one  pound  of 
bullion  is  a  safe  measure.    The  exact  state  of  affairs  in  the  North  was, 
that  this  uprising  so  deranged  business  that  it  compelled  a  universal 
settlement.     I  don't  know  how  it  is  in  England;  but  in  America  we 
need  a  financial  judgment  day  once  in  ten  years,   and  we  get  it. 
These  crashes,  although  in  one  way  of  looking  at  them  they  are 
unfavourable,   in   another   are   always    beneficial.      A   new   country 
must  have  credit.     As  countries  grow  old  and  rich,  they  can  contract 
it   more  and  more,   but  a  new  country,   that  has   its  resources  to 
develop,  requires  credit,  and  with  it  you  must  have  the  attendant 
evils  of  intense  stimulation  of  hopeful  and  sanguine  natures.     Once 
in  ten  years  you  work  out,  so  that  the  thing  comes  clear  round.    There 
is  a  kind  of  miscellaneous  crash,  in  which  every  man  picks  up  his  own. 
The  bubble  is  broken — the  paper  is  gone ;  and  the  property  remains. 
The  man  that  yesterday  said  :    this  is  my  house,   does  not   say    so 
to-morrow,  but  the  community  is  not  hurt;  the  property  is  there — 
the  difference  is  that  the  owners  have  shifted.    (Laughter.)    Now,  what 
of  these  commercial  reverses  ?     It  is  said  they  are  unhealthy,  but  it  is 
not  of  that  kind  of  unhealthiness  that  many  political  economists  have 
believed ;  and  these  periodical  settlements  are  always  salutary.     We 
had  a  settlement  in  1857,  and  there  was  the  less  at  the  beginning  of 
this  war  to  be  settled.     But  what  there  was,  we  swept  out  of  the  way. 
And  since  the  day  when  the  infant  colony  of  Plymouth  Bay  had  to 
pay  50  per  cent  for  money  loaned  to  her   in  England,   I  do   not 
believe  there  has  ever  been  so  sound  a  state  of  business  in  the  North 
as  to-day.     And  your  business  men  in  Manchester  will  see  that  these 
reasons  work  that  way.     One  thing  more  :  the  thing  does  not  stop 
there.     As  there  is  more  or  less  of  uncertainty  in  the  commercial 
world,  men  will  no  longer  go  on  the  credit  system  as  before.     They 
are  buying  for  cash;  then  going  home  and  selling  for  cash.     Some 
of  you  in  Manchester  can  say,  whether  it  is  not  the  case  here  to 
an  extent  never  before  known,  that  American  merchauts  are  buying 
for  cash.     The  business  is  taking  that  direction  ;   certainly  it  is  in 
America.     Not  that  there  may  not  be  facts  the  other  way,  but  this  is 
in  the  main  true.      Suppose  there  come  bye  and  bye  further  financial 
difficulties,  how  are  you  going  to  bankrupt  a  nation   which  has  no 
foreign  debts  ?     You  recollect  the  story  of  the  Frenchman  in  Boston. 
He  had  got  money  enough  and  goods  enough,  but  thought  a  man 


140  MANCHESTER — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

ought,  to  fail  when  he  could  not  collect  his  debts.     We  may  fail  so, 
but  I  don't  see  any  other  form   of  bankruptcy  awaiting   us.      Our 
Government  are  issuing  bonds  largely  that  are  becoming  the  basis 
of  the  whole  banking  system  in  the  North.     The  Government  bonds 
become  the  securities  of  our  State  banks.     They  issue  Government 
notes  as  their  circulation,  and  although  there  is  an  immense  amount 
of  Government  notes  in  circulation  they  are  taking  the  place  of  the 
individual  State  bank   notes   we   have  been   driving  in.     I    do  not 
profess  to  be  fully  informed,  but  my  impression  is,  there  is  no  more 
paper  money  in  circulation  now  than  there  has  been  at  many  periods 
in  American  history,  only,  it  is  not  a  circulation  of  individual  banks, 
nor  of  States  ;    it  is  a  circulation  of  the  total   United  States  ;  and 
whereas  before  these  bills  had  the  security  of  what  was  in  the  vault 
of  the  individual  bank  or  of  the  State,  now  the  guarantee  of  these 
bills  with  the  same  circulation   is   the   guarantee  of  the  credit  and 
total  property  of  the  United  States.     (Hear.)     Neither  can  I  state 
(as  I  should  have  done  if  I  had  supposed  I  was  to  be  called  on 
for  these  facts)  exactly  how  much  has  been  invested ;  but  probably  four 
or  five  hundred  millions  of  the  capital  of  the  North,  not  invested 
already  in  business,  has  been  invested  in  what  are  called  Government 
securities,  which  are  just  your  Consols  over  again.  Our  people  feel  two 
things — first,  that  our  Government  must  stand;  and,  secondly,  that  it 
will  stand,  and  it  is  safe  to  invest  in  it.    (Cheers.)    Our  savings  banks, 
insurance  companies,  trust-fund  commissioners,  and  men  who  have 
in  charge  the  money  of  widows  and  orphans — old  men  who  wish 
to  secure  themselves   against   contingencies  and  bankruptcies,  men 
who    have    sums   in   hand  and   are  looking   about   for   investment, 
are   showing   that   of  all   securities  none  seems  to  them  so  sound 
as    the  faith  and   credit  of  the  Government  of  the  United   States. 
(Loud  cheers.)      And  hundreds    of  millions   of  dollars   have   been 
invested   in   that  way;    so  that  I  may  say  the  Government  of  the 
United  States  has  a  lien  upon  all  the  inoperative  capital  of  the  North 
and  West,  and  it  has  become  the  interest  of  every  business  man  and 
every  monied  man  in  the  whole  Northern  States,  to  maintain  the  Govern- 
ment as  the  way  to  maintain  himself.    Now  then  if  it  be  said  that  I  have 
stated  that  the  Government  paper  had  been  issued  as  only  three  to  one 
of  bullion,  I  never  made  any  statement  on  that  question  at  all ;  but 
that  since  the  Central  Government  issued  this  paper — since  it  repre- 
sents not  only  what  has  been  paid  in  for  these  bonds  as  invested,  but 
represents  also  the  total  available  property  of  the  Federation  itself,  it 
is  a  better  circulation  than  that  of  Local  banks,  which  issue  three 
papers  to   one  pound  of  bullion — that  is  what  I  meant  to  say  at 
Edinburgh,  whether  I  said  it  or  not.     And  it  is  what  I  say  in  this 
great  capital  of  business  in  England.      I  cannot,    of  course,  speak 
authoritatively  in  this  matter.     I  am  not  a  financier,  I  am  not  a  banker, 
but  a  clergyman  and  a  patriot  only.     If  you  were  to  get  hold  of  a 
man  who  knew  a  great  deal  more,  he  would  state  the  matter  still 
more  strongly.     (Applause.)     If  there  is  anything  I  have  inadvertently 
omitted  to  notice  on  this  fiscal  question,  I  shall  be  ready  to  attend  to 


MANCHESTER — FAREWELL  MEETING.  141 

any  question  that  may  be  put  to  me  now.   (Mr.  Beecher  paused,  and 
then  resumed.)  I  may  presume,  then,  that  you  are  satisfied.  (Applause.) 
Now  there  is  some  art  in  speaking  so  as  to  relieve  one  subject  against 
another,  and,  having  given  you  a  few  words  upon  currency,  and  a 
sound  state  of  business  in  the  North,  I  will  turn  to  that  letter  in  one 
of  your  local  papers,  to  which  my  friend  Mr.  Taylor  referred,  contain- 
ing those  three  questions,  which  the  writer  says  have  never  received 
straight-forward    answers.      I   will   endeavour   to  show  you  what  a 
straight-forward  answer   is.      The  first   question    is,    "Do  coloured 
persons  ever  attend  your  church  in  Brooklyn?"    Yes,  by  scores  and 
hundreds.    (Cheers.)    Second,  "  If  so,  where  do  they  sit  ?  "    Wherever 
they  can  get  a  seat.     (Cheers  and  laughter )     Allow  me  to  say  our 
church  will  hold  but  3,000,  and  it  is  extremely  difficult  for  anyone  to 
get   a   seat.      I  have  said   humorously,    in   expostulating   with   our 
people,  that  they  are  sometimes  impatient  of  having  so  little  use  of 
their  own  pews,  for  which  they  pay  an  inordinate  rent,  "  Gentlemen, 
you  know  very  well  when  you  rent  pews  here  what  it  means  ;  you  pay 
300  dollars  for  a  pew  for  the  sake  of  sitting  in  the  aisle,  and  you  knew 
it  when  you  bought  your  pew."     It  is  expressly  stipulated  that  if  a 
man  is  not  in  his  pew  to  defend  it  within  a  certain  number  of  minutes 
after  the  service  begins,  he  forfeits  his  right  to  sit  there.     It  is  in  his 
article  of  sale.     We  have  from  16  to  25  active  and  enterprising  men 
whose   sole  business  is  to  seat  people  in  our  church ;    and   some- 
times, when  there  is  a  public  question  involving  great  interests,  the 
entrances  to  the  church  are   thronged  for  hours  before  the  doors  are 
open,      Well ;  when  our  own  pewholders  have  to  bustle  for  their  own 
seats,  because  strangers  may  come  an  hour  beforehand ;    when  this 
has  been  going  on  for  sixteen  continuous  years — if  you  ask  me  whether 
we  take  coloured  people  by  platoons,  and  walk  them   up  and  seat 
them   on   a   platform — why,   we   don't  treat  them   any  better  than 
white  folks.    (Loud  laughter,  and  cheers.)    We  treat  them  just  as  we  do 
white  folks.    (Cheers.)    Now,  let  me  say  this,  I  have  never  exerted  any 
direct  influence  on  this  subject ;  it  has  only  been  the  Christian  feeling 
and  good  sense  of  my  own  parishioners  that  have  led  them  to  deter- 
mine their  line  of  action  towards  coloured  people  within  the  body  of 
the  church.     And  what  does  it  mean  ?     I  have  never  yet  known  an 
instance  in  which  a  coloured  man  was  refused  a  seat,  if  he  were 
properly  dressed,  well  behaved,  and  modestly  asked  for  a  seat.     I 
have  myself  invited  Frederick  Douglass  and  other  men  to  sit  in  my 
own  pew.  Sometimes  a  man  says  to  me, — "I  would  come,  but  I  am 
afraid."    But  I  give  him  a  note  to  one  of  my  friends  and  then  he 
finds  no  trouble.     To  make  so  much  of  it,  would  seem  as  if  I  was 
boasting  of  the  liberality  of  our  people.     It  is  just  a  matter  of  course, 
of  Christian  common  sense.     If  my  answer  is  not  straightforward,  it 
is  because  I  had  to  go  round  to  get  all  this.     (Cheers  and  laughter.) 
Third,  "  Have  you  ever  seen  any  (that  is,  coloured  people)  amongst  your 
congregation ;   and  would  they  be  allowed  to  sit  in  any  pew  of  your 
church,  or  intermingle  with  your  white  hearers  ?"     If  my  people  were 
like  the  man  who  wrote  this  letter,  they  would  not  be  permitted  to  sit 


142  MANCHESTER — FAREWELL   MEETING. 

a  moment  there.     (Cheers.)      That  is  not  a  mere  jibe.      I  will  tell 
you  why  I  make  that  remark  in  a  moment.     But  I  have  seen  them, 
not  once  or  twice,  or  fifty,  but  hundreds  of  times.     I  tell  you  the  truth, 
gentlemen,  though  we  are  not  better  than  hundreds  of  other  churches. 
We  have  been  led  by  acquiescence  in  those  great  truths   preached 
in  Plymouth  church  ;    that  man  is  not  what  he  is  on  account  of  title, 
education,    or  wealth,  but  because  God  made  him  and  loves  him, 
and  God  will  redeem  him  to  immortality  and  glory.     (Cheers.)    And 
that  broad  ground  has  led  us  to  feel  insensibly,  more  and  more,  that 
a  man  in  the  house  of  God  is  to  be  treated  as  we  would  treat  that 
man  on  the  threshold  of  the  judgment  day.     And  now,  these  words 
will  go  back  to  America,  and  I  shall  have  them  set  down  to  me  there, 
and  shall  stand  to  every  word  I  have  said  on  America.     The  close  of 
the  letter,  containing  these  queries,  is  as  follows : — "  I  could  multiply 
instances  to  almost  any  extent  of  brutality  towards  the  coloured  people 
in  the  North,  and  of  kindness  and  indulgence  towards  them  in  the 
South,  which  I  witnessed  during  a  long  and  protracted  tour  through 
the    States.      Though   my  original   antipathy  to   slavery  was   never 
eradicated,  I  came  to  this  conclusion, — that  a  Slave  in  the  South  was 
a  far  gayer  and  happier   creature  than   a  free  black  in  the  North." 
There  you  have  it.     Ah!   there  never  was  a  serpent  yet  that  was 
taught  to  speak  in  human  language  that  first  or  last  the  sibilation 
did  not  come  out.     Whenever  I  find  a  man  undertake  to  tell  me,  that 
any  human  creature,  considered  in  the  totality  that  makes  up  a  man,  in 
his   body  and   soul — in   his   loves,   independence,  and   purities — in 
bis  relations  to  time  and  eternity — is  a  better  man  in  slavery  than  he 
is  out  of  it,  I  say,    "  Thou  son  of  the  devil,   get  thee  behind  me." 
(Loud  cheering.)     On  the  other  side,  let  me  say  pointedly,  that  the 
treatment   in   the   North   of  the   blacks  was  bad — that  we  imbibed 
prejudice  from  the  South — that  the  poison  of  slavery  in  every  fibre  of 
our  body,  wrought  out  bad  laws  and  usages ; — nevertheless,  the  party 
now  predominant  throughout  the  North,  though  once  a  small  minority, 
has  fought  up  against  that  prejudice  and  wrong,  until  at  last  it  is  in 
ascendancy :  and  Englishmen  are  asked  now  to  strike  us,  who  have  been 
martyrs  for  freedom,  because  of  the  prejudices  which  came  from  the  men 
who  are  now  in  rebellion.     (Great  cheering.)     And  I  avow,  there  is  a 
good  deal  of  work  yet  to  be  done.     We  do  not  appear  before  you  as 
a  saintlike  people ;  we  are,  just  like  you,  in  the  midst  of  struggles 
where  all  sorts  of  influences  are  in  combination.     We  have  fought  so 
far  with  complete  success — thanks  to  God ;  but  it  is  not  done  yet. 
There  are  many  things  we  need  to  change,  and  are  trying  to  change. 
All  we  ask  is,  that  when  our  faces  are  as  it  were  turned  towards  Jeru- 
salem, you  will  not  stop  us.     (Loud  cheers.)     And  I  say  still  further, 
that  in   respect   to   that  riot  which  took  place   in  New  York,  and 
so  much  used  adversely  to  us,  I  here,   and  accountable  for  what  I 
say,  declare  my  conviction  that  that  riot  was  nothing  in  the  world  but 
the  sore  made  by  a  foreign  blister  put  on  our  body.     The  rioters 
were   as   a   body  unquestionably    Irishmen.      (Cheers.)      Now,  you 
must  not  think  I  am  saying  this  in  any  ill-will  to  them.     These 


MANCHESTER — FAREWELL  MEETING.  143 

Irish  labourers  come  to  us  poor  and  uneducated  creatures,  easily 
led  by  more  intelligent  men,  men  who  work  through  their  passions. 
By  corrupt  Americans,  I  am  ashamed  to  say,  they  have  been  assid- 
uously taught  that  the  emancipation  of  the  slave  would  take  away 
from  them  the  market  of  labour,  and  that  emancipation  would  bring 
the  whole  South  Northward;  which  is  just  the  opposite  to  the  truth, 
that  it  is  likely  to  take  the  whole  coloured  North  Southward.  But 
they  have  been  stuffed  with  falsehood  in  the  most  offensive  forms, 
for  the  purpose  of  making  them  mischievous;  hence  with  the  sting 
of  the  draft  just  about  to  be  put  on  them,  there  was  a  wild  furious 
uprising  of  the  Irish  immigrants.  It  was  very  cruel  and  wicked, 
but  so  cruel  and  wicked  a  thing  was  never  done  with  so  much 
excuse  for  the  wicked  actors  as  this.  They  were  blind,  ignorant, 
misled  creatures,  who  thought  they  were  fighting  not  so  much  against 
the  blacks  as  for  themselves.  I  make  these  excuses  for  them  there- 
fore, and  I  say  this  riot  was  an  Irish  riot,  just  as  much  as  if  it  had 
occurred  in  Dublin  or  Cork,  instead  of  New  York.  (Hear,  hear.) 
When  Archbishop  Hughes  was  called  upon  to  address  them  and 
stop  it,  the  street  before  the  Archiepiscopal  residence  was  alive 
with  the  crowded  thousands ;  his  speech  was  reported,  and  he  never 
intimated  that  he  thought  anybody  else  was  engaged  but  Irishmen, 
He  took  it  for  granted  it  was  they  ;  he  never  excused  them  in  any  way 
by  the  oppression  that  they  had  suffered  in  Old  Ireland.  From 
beginning  to  end  it  is  taken  for  granted  it  was  the  work  of  Catholic 
Irish,  and  he  was  blaming  them  in  his  very  maternal  and  gentle  way 
for  doing  such  naughty  things.  (Laughter.)  But  what  was  the  con- 
duct of  the  city  of  New  York?  Between  40,000  and  50,000  dollars 
were  subscribed  to  relieve  the  wants  of  these  people  in  a  few  days.  A 
large  committee  was  appointed  from  the  most  respectable  merchants, 
men  of  the  highest  business  integrity,  and  of  the  utmost  honour  and 
purity  in  private  life.  I  marked  every  one  of  them  as  the  men  who 
have  been  my  opponents  from  the  beginning  of  this  agitation  for 
sixteen  years — men  who  are  intensely  conservative,  or  as  we  call  them, 
"  Old  Hunkerish."  (Laughter  and  cheers.)  But  these  men  had  their 
eyes  so  opened  by  this  riot,  that  they  followed  their  noble  and  gen- 
erous instincts,  so  as  not  only  to  give  their  money,  but  to  avow  as 
plainly  as  words  can  say: — "It  has  come  to  this.  If  the  coloured 
people  are  thus  violently  treated,  we  will  put  ourselves  between 
them  and  their  assailants,  and  they  shall,  as  long  as  we  live, 
have  the  right  to  labour  in  freedom.  (Loud  cheers.)  "A  body  of 
lawyers  volunteered  to  receive  and  put  into  legal  form  the  complaints 
of  every  coloured  man  who  had  lost  property : — according  to  our  law, 
the  municipality  is  responsible  for  every  cent  of  property  damaged  in 
the  riot ; — and  there  have  been  145,000  to  150,000  dollars  involved 
in  the  complaints  already  made,  or  making ;  and  legal  proceedings 
have  cost  the  coloured  people  not  a  cent.  (Cheers.)  The  letter  they 
wrote  of  thanks,  which  I  believe  will  appear  in  the  papers,  is  a 
composition  of  the  most  poetical  English,  and  consummate  Christian 
kindness,  showing  what  the  grace  of  God  can  make  appear  in  the 


144  MANCHESTER— FAREWELL  MEETING. 

hearts  of  outcast  men,  (Cheers )  Kead  that  letter  in  the  report 
of  the  Committee  which  has  just  reached  this  country,  and  the  reply  of 
Mr.  Mc.  Kenzie,  and  see  how  an  Old  Hunker  can  speak.  When  I  get 
back,  I  mean,  the  first  thing,  to  go  to  Mr.  Mc.Kenzie's  store  and  ask  him 
to  honour  me  by  shaking  hands.  Are  there  any  other  questions  about 
these  blacks  ?  [Mr.  Haughton,  of  Dublin :  "  Are  we  to  understand 
that  the  practice  in  your  own  church  is  the  universal  practice  in 
America ;  that  the  black  man  is  as  respected  in  other  churches  as  in 
yours  ?  "]  No,  sir.  Many  of  our  churches  are  filled  with  men  who 
are  the  first  merchants  of  New  York,  or  are  politicians.  The  position 
of  the  black  man  is  regulated  mainly  by  the  fact  that  he  is  the  football 
bandied  between  side  and  side;  to  treat  him  with  public  attention  has 
been  to  abandon  your  political  party,  and  seem  to  show  confidence 
in  the  other  side.  In  many  churches  of  New  York — I  cannot  speak 
positively,  but  my  impression  is — they  would  not  be  received  except 
in  a  particular  pew,  but  a  tendency  has  now  been  established,  and 
is  every  week  increasing,  to  receive  them  when  they  come  in  the 
churches.  It  is  a  process  begun.  Dr.  Massie  confirms  my  statement. 
I  do  not  want  to  make  out  our  case  any  better  than  it  is.  We  do 
not  move  in  perfection  as  the  saints  in  glory  do ;  all  we  can  ask  of 
men  is,  Are  they  in  the  right  direction  and  making  progress  ?  (Cheers.) 
I  want  now  to  add  a  word  or  two  with  respect  to  some  questions 
proposed  to  me  last  week.  A  Mr.  David  M'Crae,  I  think,  of  Glasgow, 
proposed  a  question  as  to  the  Constitution  which  I  did  not  then  quite 
understand.  The  gist  of  it,  as  far  as  I  remember,  is  this  : — Speaking 
of  the  fugitive  slave  clause  of  the  Constitution — his  question  was, 
Are  you  fighting  for  the  Constitution  with  that  clause  in  it?  If 
you  are,  how  do  you  pretend  that  you  are  fighting  for  liberty? 
Secondly,  if  you  are  fighting  for  Emancipation,  you  are  fighting  against 
that  Constitution,  and  how  do  you  condemn  the  seceded  states  ?" 
I  will  answer  by  a  statement  of  facts,  and  leave  you  to  settle  the  logic. 
In  the  first  place,  what  is  the  relation  of  our  Constitution  to  slavery: — 
First  it  contains  the  fugitive  slave  clause  ;  the  other  is  the  three- 
fifths  representation  clause.  I  will  take  the  last  first.  That  clause 
does  not  legalize  slavery.  It  merely  says,  (as  if  the  founders  of  the 
Constitution  recognised  it  as  a  fact,  but  not  a  doctrine  or  principle), 
"  five  men  other  than  free  whites  shall  count  for  three  votes."  Now 
what  is  the  origin  of  that?  When  we  first  formed  our  present 
Constitution,  having  had  ten  years  trial  of  what  was  called  Articles 
of  Confederation,  the  difficulty  that  struck  the  Government,  as  it 
strikes  every  Government,  first  was,  "  How  can  you  raise  funds  to 
carry  on  the  Government  ?"  First,  taxes  were  laid  on  the  lands  in 
all  the  country.  But  it  was  found  impossible  to  obtain  the  statistics 
which  were  requisite  for  levying  the  tax  justly,  and  therefore  they 
must  change  their  system.  It  was  then  proposed  they  should  tax 
the  people  per  capita.  Then  came  the  question  ;  as  the  vast  majority 
are  white  and  free  in  the  North,  and  as  an  immense  proportion 
in  the  South  are  slaves,  if  you  should  tax  according  to  the  free 
whites,  the  North  would  pay  nineteen-twentieths  of  the  taxes,  and  the 


MANCHESTER — FAREWELL   MEETING.  145 

South  only  one-twentieth  part,  having  the  monopoly  of  wealth. 
Therefore  the  North  said,  in  assessing  the  taxes  you  must  call 
every  able  bodied  black,  as  well  as  white  man,  one.  The  South 
said,  "  No,  we  are  willing  to  count  four  as  one."  That  is  the 
extreme  on  that  side,  and  you  see  just  how  it  was.  It  was 
on  a  question  of  raising  money,  whether  the  tax  should  be  raised 
on  the  whole  black  population  or  not,  or  whether  it  should  be 
raised  on  a  white  voting  population,  excluding  Indians  and  slaves. 
And  it  was  Mr.  Madison  who  proposed  a  middle  term  as  the  com- 
promise. He  said,  "  Five  shall  count  three  instead  of  one  counting 
one,  or  four  counting  one."  So  it  was  settled  that  in  laying  taxes  on 
the  South,  there  shall  be  three  men  taxed  where  there  are  five  black 
men  in  the  South.  But  in  settling  the  basis  for  taxation,  they  settled 
at  the  same  time  the  basis  for  representation.  A  few  years  afterwards 
we  ceased  to  raise  our  revenue  by  taxation  at  all,  and  the  very  thing 
on  which  this  compromise  had  been  made  ceased  to  exist.  Then 
came  in  the  unexpected  operation  of  this  clause  on  representation, 
which  was  a  shadowy  sequence  scarcely  understood  to  be  of  much 
importance,  but  had  become  of  prime  importance  when  the  North 
was  represented  in  Congress  by  a  representation  of  men  alone, 
while  the  South  was  represented  both  in  the  number  of  men  and 
the  amount  of  property.  The  South  is  represented  both  in  property 
and  in  men ;  the  North  simply  in  men,  and  not  in  property. 
This  clause  became,  by  an  unforeseen  accident,  of  strength  to  the 
South.  To-morrow,  if  slavery  totally  ceased,  that  Constitution  would 
not  have  to  be  changed  in  a  single  letter  in  that  regard.  There 
is  nothing  that  guarantees  or  perpetuates  it,  or  carries  the  conse- 
quence along  with  it  as  inevitable.  The  other  clause  in  the  Constitu- 
tion, concerning  rendition  of  fugitives,  appeared  in  our  history  first 
when  New  England,  which  was  just  as  much  slave-owning  as  the  South, 
formed  the  first  rudimental  Union.  So  jealous  were  the  States  of 
their  individual  sovereignty,  that  nothing  but  external  wars  and  diffi- 
culties drove  them  together,  and  they  passed  the  substance  of  this 
fugitive  slave  clause.  It  did  not  appear  in  the  Articles  of  Confedera- 
tion in  1777,  but  in  1787  the  present  Constitution  took  away  from  each 
State  the  right  to  pass  laws  in  contravention  of  laws  existing  in  other 
States ;  that  is  to  say,  no  man  held  to  service  in  one  State  shall  be 
discharged  therefrom  by  another  State  into  which  he  may  go.  It  is  a 
law  for  the  peace  of  the  whole  Union,  taking  away  the  power  of  one 
State  to  nullify  the  laws  of  another  State.  Congress  and  the  Federal 
Power  are  not  even  alluded  to  in  the  clause.  Then  it  went  on  to  provide 
that  such  persons  shall,  upon  proper  proof,  be  rendered  up  again  to 
their  claimants,  on  whom  the  proof  was  purposely  left.  But  that  is  the 
fugitive  slave  clause.  In  the  convention  where  it  was  adopted,  it  was 
attempted  to  include  this  clause  in  the  one  that  in  our  present  Consti- 
tution precedes  it,  namely,  in  Section  2  of  Article  4 : — "  A  person 
charged  in  any  State  with  treason,  felony,  or  other  crime,  who  shall 
flee  from  justice  and  be  found  in  another  State,  shall,  on  demand 
of  the  executive  authority  of   the  State  from  which  he  fled,   be 

K 


146  MANCHESTER— FAREWELL  MEETING, 

delivered  up  to  be  removed  to  the  State  having  jurisdiction  of  the 
crime."  The  executive  can  only  have  conference  with  the  execu- 
tive of  another  State,  so  where  there  were  crimes  and  felonies, 
the  Article  requires  that  the  executive  of  one  State  shall  demand  of 
the  executive  of  another  to  deliver  the  criminal  up.  And  it  was 
attempted  to  introduce  into  this  the  words,  "  and  persons  held  to 
servitude ;"  but  it  was  unanimously  voted  down,  on  the  ground  that 
there  was  no  more  reason  to  constrain  the  Government  to  retufn  any 
slave,  than  to  ask  them  to  return  any  ox  or  ass,  and  they  would  not 
push  the  States  to  that  indignity.  Then  the  next  clause  is  the 
following  : — "  No  person  held  to  service  or  labour  in  one  State  under 
the  laws  thereof,  escaping  into  another,  shall  in  consequence  of  any 
law  or  regulation  therein  be  discharged  from  such  service  or  labour, 
but  shall  be  delivered  up  on  claim  of  the  party  to  whom  such  service 
or  labour  may  be  due."  When  it  was  first  introduced,  the  terms  were 
"  any  person  held  to  servitude,  or  in  servitude."  The  first  attempt 
was  to  reject  that.  Why?  Because  it  was  declared  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States  should  not  recognize  slavery.  Mr.  Madison  has 
left  his  impartial  and  unquestionable  authority  on  the  subject,  that  the 
day  was  anticipated  when  slavery  should  cease  ;  and  the  builders  of 
the  Constitution  so  framed  it,  that  while  it  knev/  how  to  steer  round 
slavery  while  it  existed,  it  should  be  whole  and  perfect  when  slavery 
ceased.  (Cheers.)  The  Northern  view,  in  reference  to  the  operation  of 
this,  was,  that  if  a  slave  escaped  from  Maryland  into  Pennsylvania, 
and  the  master  found  his  slave  there,  and  brought  proof  before 
magistrate  and  jury  that  it  was  his  beast  of  burden,  he  should  take  it 
back  if  he  could.  Thus  it  left  the  man  to  manage  his  own  property 
without  being  hindered  or  obstructed.  What,then  is  the  objection  we 
take  to  the  fugitive  slave  law  of  1850  %  That  to  please  the  South  it 
was  laid  down  to  be  a  duty  of  the  whole  United  States  to  hunt  the  slave 
down  without  proof,  and  at  the  mere  summons  of  the  claimant, 
to  deliver  up  the  person  claimed  and  saddle  the  costs  on  the  popu- 
lation of  the  United  States.  I  answer  then,  in  respect  to  this  whole 
subject,  that  if  to-morrow  slavery  should  cease  by  the  force  of  arms,  the 
Constitution  is  not  touched,  nor  is  a  right  that  is  guaranteed  by  this 
Constitution  impaired ;  for  as  long  as  slavery  exists  there  is  an  Article 
which  gives  a  man  the  right  to  go  and  find  his  slave  and  take  him 
back  without  molestation,  and  that  is  bad  enough ;  but  if  to-morrow 
slavery  ceases  to  exist,  what  change  is  there  to  be  made  ?  For  our 
courts  have  construed  that  the  term  "  persons  held .  to  service," 
includes  all  apprentices  under  indenture,  and  that  a  slave  is  included  in 
that,  not  as  a  slave,  but  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  he  is  held  to  service. 
Are  we  then,  by  maintaining  the  Constitution,  maintaining  slavery? 
No,  not  at  all — slavery  does  not  exist  in  the  Constitution,  nor  by 
virtue  of  it.  It  has  been  settled  a  hundred  times  by  the  lawyers  of 
every  slave  State  that  slavery  is  a  local  institution,  and  can  exist  only 
by  special  local  statutes.  Nay,  the  very  conflict  between  the  South, 
under  Mr.  Douglas,  and  the  nascent  republican  party,  was  whether 
slavery  should  be  local  and  municipal,  or  national    They  tried  to  make 


MANCHESTER — FAREWELL  MEETING.  147 

it  national ;  that  is  the  last  form  of  the  political  conflict  between 
North  and  South — they  seeking  to  show  that  the  Constitution  did 
endorse  slavery,  and  we  saying  the  Constitution  never  did,  and  never 
shall.  I  don't  know  whether  Mr.  M'Crae  will  think  I  have  answered  his 
question,  but  I  am  sure  I  have  tried  to  give  you  grounds  and  facts  on 
which  every  man  can  answer  it  for  himself.  (Cheers.) — [Mr.  Haughton 
asked — "Is  it  not  the  case  that  William  Lloyd  Garrison  and  his  party 
have  invariably  maintained  that  the  Constitution  is  in  favour  of  slavery; 
have  not  the  judges  of  your  land  so  interpreted  the  Constitution,  and 
has  not  your  Supreme  Court  decided,  that  the  black  man  has  no 
rights  which  the  white  man  is  bound  to  respect.,'j — No  questions 
could  be  more  pertinent.  We  all  admit  that  slavery  existed  as  a  fact 
when  the  present  Constitution  was  adopted ;  that  two  clauses  were 
introduced  to  meet  certain  practical  difficulties  arising  out  of  local 
slavery  in  its  relation  to  general  government.  The  f miners  of  the 
Constitution  undertook  to  recognize  the  bare  political  fact  of  slave 
property  then  existing  in  some  States.  They  undertook  to  form  a 
Constitution  which  should  in  the  widest  scope  represent  liberty,  yet 
should  not  abruptly  destroy  slavery,  but  should  neither  encourage  nor 
help  it.  Now,  in  every  slave  State  that  has  given  a  definition  of 
slavery,  it  is  declared  to  be  the  condition  in  which  a  man  ceases  to  be 
a  man  and  becomes  a  chattel — a  thing,  not  a  being — a  person.  With 
this  definition  before  them,  when  the  Constitution  was  in  formation, 
they  after  debate  and  full  explanation  of  what  they  meant,  declared 
they  would  not  put  into  the  Constitution  a  description  or  allusion  to 
slavery  that  should  characterize  it  by  its  technical  term,  but  only  by 
terms  that  brought  it  out  of  "  chattelhood "  into  mere  "subordina- 
tion." Therefore  in  our  Constitution  slaves  are  called  "  persons," 
always.  This  was  no  accident — no  indiscriminate  use  of  words. 
(Cheers.)  It  was  done  by  men  who  said  among  themselves  "  Not 
many  years  can  pass  before  slavery  will  cease;  "  and  what  they  tried  to 
do  was  to  have  a  Constitution  that  could  hold  together  and  keep  us 
afloat  for  the  moment,  but  yet  should  not  give  countenance  to  slave  doc- 
trines. When  a  man  undertakes  to  steer  a  ship  he  does  not  necessarily 
include  in  his  ideas  of  successful  shipbuilding  all  the  shoals  and  sand- 
banks that  may  impede  its  voyage  ;  and  when  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States  was  formed,  the  formers  merely  made  two  provisions 
in  order  that  local  State  rights  might  be  divested  of  their  power  of 
mischief.  Now,  as  to  public  sentiment.  There  has  been  recently  a 
small  body  of  nien  who  held  that  our  Constitution  did  not  recognize 
slavery  as  doctrine  or  fact.  I  differ  with  them — it  does  recognize  it  as 
fact  but  not  as  doctrine.  Other  people  say,  "  No  matter  whether  the 
Constitution  does  or  does  not;  courts  that  bind  us  have  declared  that 
it  does  ;  therefore  let  us  break  the  Union  in  two  to  clear  ourselves." 
That  is  the  party  of  Mr.  Garrison,  and  Mr.  Wendell  Phillips.  The 
great  middle-class  have  said  this  : — "  Slavery  is  dying,  bound  to  die ; 
free  men  made  a  Constitution  for  liberty,  and  made  it  so  that  while 
slavery  was  dying,  the  Constitution  need  not  be  wrecked  by  running 
on  it"    As  to  the  decision  of  the  judges,  allow  me  to  say  that  our 


14S  MANCHESTER— FAREWELL  MEETING. 

Federal  courts  have  been  packed  by  Southerners ;  while  the  North 
has  had  either  to  accomplish  this  change  by  revolutionary  process,  or 
to  do  it  by  peaceable  methods,  such  as  are  organized  in  the  Constitu- 
tion itself.  "We  knew  perfectly  well  it  was  part  of  the  plan  of  the 
South,  by  packing  the  courts,  and  by  process  of  construction  to  trans- 
mute liberty  into  slavery  in  our  laws,  and  in  the  fundamental  law  of  the 
land.  That  was  what  we  believed  and  prophesied.  We  warned  the 
nation,  and  they  would  not  be  warned.  That  declaration  was  con- 
strued into  slander  of  the  courts  and  of  men  in  authority,  when  I  made 
it  up  and  down  through  the  land,  and  said,  "  The  South  are  taking 
away  your  Constitution  by  dry-rot — (cheers) — but  give  us  time,  and  we 
will  by  popular  discussions  reverse  this  policy,  and  fill  Congress  and 
the  courts  with  different  men,  and  then  we  will  reconstrue  it  back 
again,  and  we  will  find  yet  the  voice  of  liberty  that  shall  stand  by  the 
Constitution,  and  say  unto  the  bondsman,  "  Come  forth,  and  he  shall 
come  forth,  and  stand  among  living  men,  a  man  again."  (Cheers  ) 
This  was  my  doctrine  as  distinguished  from  that  of  Mr.  Phillips  and  Mr. 
Garrison.  I  have  said,  "Give  us  time,  there  are  in  our  Constitution  and 
in  our  nation  those  elements  which  will  bring  back  to  us  liberty  in  the 
Constitution  itself."  The  South  knew  it  just  as  well  as  the  North. 
(Cheers.)  But  they  lay  in  wait  and  watched,  and  the  moment  that 
discussion  had  produced  a  majority  for  us  and  Mr.  Lincoln  was  elected, 
they  rebelled.  Whatever  you  may  say  about  Southern  men,  it  must 
be  said  that  they  are  as  sagacious  as  children  of  darkness.  (Cheers.) 
And  we  said — so  long  as  our  courts  are  corrupted  and  construe  the 
Constitution  adverse  to  liberty,  we  cannot  help  ourselves.  Wherever 
they  do  wrong  to  us,  we  will  bear  the  wrong ;  but  when  they  command 
us  to  do  wrong  to  others,  we  will  not;  we  will  take  a  remedy;  it  is 
only  a  question  of  time  when  we  put  this  thing  right.  We  said, 
"  Wait — there  is  liberty  in  patience;"  they  said,  "  There  is  safety  only 
in  rebellion;"  so  they  rebelled.  (Applause) — [In  reply  to  another 
inquiry  addressed  to  Mr.  Beecher  as  to  the  Dred  Scott  decision.] — 
He  said,  the  friends  of  the  judge  have  thought  it  convenient  to  deny 
that  he  ever  used  the  words  imputed  to  him,  that  the  black  man 
has  no  rights  which  whites  are  bound  to  respect;  but  whether  he 
did  or  not,  it  is  universally  conceded  by  our  lawyers  that  it  was  not 
the  point  before  the  court,  but  an  extra-judicial  opinion.  He  was 
a  Maryland  slaveholding  judge :  the  very  instrument  by  which  the 
South  meant  to  transmute  our  institutions.  But  what  he  said  was 
his  own  opinion,  not  a  legal  decision. — [Another  questioner  asked 
if  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law  of  1850  was  still  part  of  the  Constitution.] — 
It  never  was  part  of  the  Constitution.  In  England  your  Constitution 
is  what  your  Parliament  determines  to  be  law ;  in  America  our 
Constitution  is  what  was  originally  written.  There  is  a  marked  dis- 
tinction between  law  founded  on  written  principles,  and  those  written 
principles  that  we  call  the  Constitution ;  so  that  if  your  Parliament 
had  passed  a  Fugitive  Slave  Law,  it  would  have  become  part  and 
parcel  of  the  British  Constitution,  but  with  us  the  State  Constitution 
and  the  National  Constitution  stand  unchanged  by  legislation.     If 


MANCHESTER — FAREWELL   MEETING.  149 

the  Constitution  is  contravened   by  laws  based   on    other   than   the 
principles  it  enunciates,  the  courts  set  them  aside.   The  Fugitive  Slave 
Law  is  simply  a  law,  not  a  part  of  the  Constitution,  which  we  hold  to 
be  an  outrage,  yet  inoperative,  as  having  no  power  beyond  the  year  in 
which  it  was  passed.      It  is  just  as  dead  now,  and  has  been  the  last 
eight  or  nine  years,  as  the  snake's  skin  that  was  sloughed  ten  years 
ago.     It  is  said  we  ought  to  have  abolished  it.    When  Congress  came 
together  they  passed  so  many  reformatory  laws  that  it   was  thought 
seriously  they  should  abolish  this  ;    but  they  said — we  are  charged 
with  coming  together  for  revolutionary  purposes,  and  to  destroy  the 
local  municipal  power  of  the  States,  and  we  must  not  do  anything  in 
our  national  legislation  that  shall  countenance  the  doctrine  that  we 
are  revolutionizing  State  sovereignty.     [A  gentleman  asked  how  the 
great  religious  associations  in  America  regarded  the  anti-slavery  ques- 
tion ?]     There  are  two  parties — one  is  very  small  and  able,   and  is 
called  Abolitionist ;  the  other  comprises  all  the  rest  of  the  North,  and 
is  called  Anti-slavery.     The  distinction  is  not  one  of  doctrine,  but  of 
method.     Mr.   Garrison  and  Mr.  Phillips  said  the  North  must  save 
itself  by  disunion  ;  the  great  body  of  those  who  hated  slavery  said,  we 
cannot  consent  to  that.    I  was  one  among  the  latter,  from  first  to  last, 
and  that  paragraph  in  the  newspapers  which  says  I  once  said  "  there 
could  be  no  getting  rid  of  slavery  under  the  Constitution"  is  a  total  and 
absolute  falsehood.     (Cheers.)     I  would  not  burn  a  barn  in  order  to 
get  rid  of  the  rats.     (Great  laughter.)    We  have  always  said,  the  thing 
is  bad  enough,  but  not  so  bad  but  we  can  cure  it  by  moral  means.     I 
have  avowed  over  and  over  again  to  Southern  slaveholders  : — "  You 
shall  not  go  off.     We  will  hold  you  in  the  bosom  of  liberty  until  your 
slavery  is   dead."      (Cheers.)     This  is  the  point  which  you  English 
are  liable  to  misunderstand.     A  great  many  good  men  seem  to  you 
to  have  paltered  and  connived,  but  you  should  recollect  it  belongs 
to  the  nature  of  free  discussion  and  moral  suasion  to  take  time  and 
patience.     You  cannot  convert  a  whole  nation  as  you  may  one  man, 
by  sitting  down  and  talking  to  him.     Prejudices  melt  slowly,  but  we 
have  always  had  such  faith  in  the  ultimate  victory  of  Liberty  over 
Slavery  that  we  have  said,  "With  God  on  our  side  we  can  fight  and 
shall  win."    (Cheers.)    Those  men  who  were  opposed  to  any  decisive 
and   summary  remedy   as   too   dangerous,   were  called   Anti-slavery 
men ;  those  who  were  in  favour  of  immediate  disruption,  as  the  sum- 
mary and  necessary  remedy,  were  called  Abolitionists,  that  was  the 
distinction.     But  now  there  is  no  distinction  at  all.     Mr.  Garrison 
and  Mr.  Phillips  are  both  of  them  my  personal  friends.    I  would  not 
for  all  the  world,  say  a  word  in  England  that  should  carry  back  pain 
to  their  hearts  :  and  although  I  have  differed  from  them  all  my  life, 
long,  I  have  never  failed  to  see  that  men  more  heroic  in  asserting  a 
great  principle,  never  existed  in  the  world.     Mr.  Garrison  has  said  at 
a  public  meeting,  that  when  he  declared  that  the  Constitution  involved 
slavery,  he  never  expected  to  see  the  Emancipation-proclamation  of 
the  President  of  the  United  States.     (Cheers.)     I  can  tell  you  there 
is  no  more  welcome  speaker  in  any  part  of  the  United  States,  than 


150  MANCHESTER — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

that  man  of  genuine  senatorial  nature,   of  polished   scholarship,  of 
exquisite  gentlemanly  manners,  of  most  truly  Christian  feelings  and 
sentiments,  even  if  sometimes  over  excited, — Mr.  Wendell  Phillips. 
But  we   are   all   one   to   day.      There  are  now  but  two   parties   in 
the   North.      An   overwhelming  majority   say  :    "  Since    they  have 
taken  the  sword,  let  slavery  perish  by  the  sword."    (Cheers.)     True  ! 
there  is   a   small  party  that  lives  in  crevices  and  cracks, — a   small 
malignant  party   called  "  Peace  Democrats,"  with  that  thrice-rotten 
Catiline  Wood  at  the  head   of  it,    whom   the    Times  newspaper   is 
accustomed  to  hold  up  as  the  exponent  of  American  peace  doctrine. 
Him  I  have  heard  praised  by  the  lips  of  Christian  men,  who,  if  they 
could  know  his  crimes,  vices,  and  Satanic  wickedness,  would  blow 
him  from  their  parlours,  as  you  do  Sepoys  from  the  moulhs  of  your 
cannon.   (Great  cheering.)   [Mr.  Kobertson  asked  Mr.  Beecher's  atten- 
tion to  two  clauses  in  the  Constitution,  frequently  quoted  to  demonstrate 
that  it  was  pro-slavery, — the  clause  where  Congress  legalized  the  slave 
trade  until  1808,  and  the  clause  requiring  the  executive  to  lend  assist- 
ance to  any  State  Government  in  case  of  domestic  insurrection.     A 
third  argument  was  the  New  England  States  repealing  the  Personal 
Liberty  Bill,  and  recognizing  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law.] — If  you  ask  me 
whether  I  think  what  was  then  done  was  ineffably  wicked,  I  say  yes, 
but  that  it  has  no  force  now,  everybody  admits.  When  this  Constitution 
was  made,  the  question  was,  how  much  each  separate  State  would  give 
up,  in  order  to  endue  the  central  Federal  Government  with  authority — 
how  much  the  Federal  Government  should  receive  of  sovereignty  from  the 
States  that  had  thus  far  held  the  whole  sovereignty.  They  proposed  to  give 
the  Government  in  Congress  the  power  to  abolish  the  slave  trade,  but 
they  would  not  let  them  have  that  power  till  1808.     It  was  then  not  a 
question  of  the  Constitution  at  all,  but  of  the  convention  of  these 
sovereign  States,  and  they  refused  to  put  into  the  hands  of  the  Federal 
Government    until    such   a    date    the   power  which    after    that    date 
the    Government   was  to   have       In   all    these    stages,   it   was   the 
opinion  of  every  man  who  founded  the  Constitution,  that  slavery  was 
dying,  and  they  did  not  feel  as  you  and  I  would  have  felt,  but  said  : 
"Ease  it  off  in  every  way,"     Slavery  was  like  some  brigand  brought 
into  an  Alpine  convent,  where  he  was  given  a  room  and  a  place  to 
prepare  to   die  in  decently.     On  the  contrary,  the  old  brigand  did 
not  die,  but  called   in    his  confederates,  and  domineered  over  the 
very  hospital  where  he  was  being  nursed  for  Christian   burial.     As 
to  the  prevention  of  rebellion  in  any  State,  the  National  Government 
is  of  course  bound  to  exert  its  whole  power  to  save  any  State  from 
the  intestine  mischiefs   of  insurrection.     If  this   covers   slavery   as 
much  as  liberty,  yet  because  it  is  a  principle  born  of  liberty,  slavery 
gets  the  benefit  of  it.     Every  nation  must  undertake  this  duty ;  the 
hand  to  which  you  give  the  national  sword,  must  defend  every  part 
of  the  nation  from  internal  disorder.     The  repealing  of  the  Liberty 
Bill   only  took  place  in   one   or   two  States.     I   wish   to   say  that 
I  feel   convinced,   when   Dr.  Massie  issues  his  report  of  his  visit, 
he  will  be  able  to  say  he  found  the    educated,  intelligent,  and 


MANCHESTER — FAREWELL  MEETING.  151 

religious-minded  people  of  the  North,  wherever  he  went,  settled 
down  to  the  conclusion  as  final  and  irremovable,  that  this  war 
must  be  supported  till  rebellion  shall  be  crushed,  and  that  rebellion 
can  not  be  crushed  till  slavery  has  been  destroyed.  I  do  not  mean 
merely  what  you  mean  here  by  the  "  intelligent  classes."  The  phrase 
with  us  includes  farmers,  mechanics,  the  very  bulk  of  our  people.  For 
it  is  the  legitimate  effect  of  democratic  instruction,  that  no  line  can  be 
drawn  between  the  college-educated  man  at  the  top,  and  the  common- 
school  educated  man  at  the  bottom.  A  thoroughly  educated  common 
people,  with  collegiate  men  to  be  their  leaders  and  mouthpieces,  in 
sympathy  with  them — all  moving  together — is  better  than  any  society 
where  the  bottom  is  ignorant,  and  the  top  is  educated.  (Cheers.) 
With  some  farther  remarks  Mr.  Beecher  concluded,  having  spoken 
nearly  two  hours. 

The  Rev.  Dr.  MASSIE  said  that  from  what  he  himself  had  heard 
while  in  America,  he  was  convinced  the  people  in  that  country  would 
place  the  greatest  confidence  and  faith-  in  the  honesty  of  Mr.  Beecher' s 
reports.  He  could  fully  confirm  that  gentleman's  reference  to  the 
opinion  of  the  intelligent  classes  of  America,  who  were  resolved  to 
maintain  the  Government  in  its  war  against  rebellion,  and  that  the 
rebellion,  with  its  twin  sister  slavery,  should  be  buried  in  one  tomb. 
(Loud  applause. ) 

Mr.  J.  C.  Dyer  having  taken  the  chair, 

Mr.  ESTCOURT  moved,  "That  the  thanks  of  the  meeting  be 
accorded  to  the  Mayor  of  Rochdale  for  presiding  in  so  able  and  courteous 
a,  manner ;"  and  expressed  a  hope  that  the  Queen  of  England  would 
ever  be  found  by  the  side  of  the  President  of  a  free  and  intelligent 
Republic,  and  never  have  her  pure  and  womanly  feelings  outraged  by 
the  residence  at  her  court  of  the  representative  of  any  empire  whose 
i(  corner  stone"  was  that  of  human  bondage. 

The  motion  was  seconded  by  Mr.  Greening,  aud  passed  unanimously. 

With  a  kind  and  complimentary  message  to  Mrs.  Beecher  Stowe, 
the  talented  sister  of  the  honoured  guest,  three  cheers  for  the  Queen, 
President  Lincoln,  and  Mr.  Beecher,  the  morning's  proceedings 
terminated. 


LIVERPOOL-OCTOBER    30,    1863. 


FAKEWELL  TO  THE  EEV.  HENRY  WARD  BEECHER. 

Yesterday  morning  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher  was  entertained 
by  the  members  of  the  Liverpool  Emancipation  Society  at  a  public 
breakfast  in  the  St.  James's  Hall,  Lime-street,  prior  to  his  return  to 
America  to-cky.  A  party  of  about  200  ladies  and  gentlemen  sat  down 
at  ten  o'clock  to  the  repast,  which  was  provided  with  much  taste  by  Mr. 
Lynn,  of  the  Waterloo  Hotel.  The  chair  was  occupied  by  Mr.  Charles 
Wilson ;  and  among  those  present  we  observed  the  Rev.  Dr.  Graham, 
Rev.  Professor  Griffiths,  Rev.  J.  S.  Jones,  Rev.  W.  Rees,  Rev.  W. 
Graham,  Rev.  Philip  Hains,  Rev.  J.  Jones,  Rev.  H.  W.  Thomas, 
Birkenhead ;  Rev.  Dr.  Sanders,  Birkenhead ;  Rev.  J.  Hughes,  Birken- 
head ;  Rev.  Noah  Stephens,  Rev.  S.  H.  Booth,  Rev.  H.  Rees,  Calvin  istic 
Methodist ;  Lieut.-Colonel  M'Corquodale,  Liverpool  Press  Guard ; 
Messrs.  Thomas  Bold,  jun.,  James  Alsop,  Charles  Robertson,  E.  K. 
Muspratt,  John  Patterson,  David  Stuart,  Peter  Stuart,  A.  Leighton, 
W.  Crosfield,  jun.,  J.  Turner,  Maurice  Williams,  W.  H.  Whittemore, 
J.  H.  Estcourt,  Manchester ;  Dr.  Scott,  F.  Thorpe  and  J.  Crook, 
Preston ;  C.  Macqueen,  J.  Bickles,  Bradford ;  T.  R.  Arnott,  R.  Trimble, 
J.  Innes,  S.  Pearce,  jun.,  Alex.  Eccles,  C.  E.  Rawlins,  jun.,  C.  R.  Hall, 
H.  J.  Cook,  Rev.  John  Thomas,  Rev.  W.  Roberts,  Rev.  F.  Skinner, 
Blackburn ;  W.  W.  Fennell,  E.  Bevan,  T.  S.  Bickersteth,  H.  Young, 
G.  Golding,  Dr.  Henry,  John  Mure. 

The  Rev.  J.  B.  Robberds  said  grace  before  breakfast.  After  the 
repast  the  Rev.  Dr.  Graham  offered  up  a  prayer. 

The  CHAIRMAN  (Mr.  C.  Wilson,  president  of  the  Liverpool 
Emancipation  Society)  said :  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  preside,  as 
I  have  no  doubt  it  also  gives  you  great  pleasure  to  be  present  on  this, 
which  may  be  the  last,  occasion  on  which  Mr.  Beecher  will  ever  address 
an  English  audience ;  and  I  feel  that  I  may  thank  him  in  your  name, 
in  my  own,  and  in  the  name  of  the  friends  of  Emancipation  and  of  Union 
generally,  for  the  ability,  the  power,  the  kindly  goodwill  with  which  he 
has  advocated  the  cause  of  liberty  during  his  stay  in  England.  (Hear, 
hear.)  He  has  stated  publicly  that  his  desire  is  to  draw  closer  the  bonds 
of  amity  and  good  fellowship  between  his  country  and  ours — (cheers)— 
and  if  I  have  one  wish  above  another  it  is  to  do  what  little  I  can  to 
promote  kind  and  generous  feeling  "between  the  two  great  nations 


LIVERPOOL — FAREWELL  MEETING.  153 

which  speak  the  English  language,  and  which  are  alike  entitled  to  the 
English  name."  (Cheers.)  1  have  lived  in  both  countries,  and  I  can 
never  forget  the  kindness  and  the  hospitality  which  I  and  my  family 
experienced  when  m  America ;  and  I  bear  this  testimony  that  there  is 
more  kindly  feeling  in  the  Americans  towards  England  and  the  English 
than  there  is  here  towards  America  and  the  Americans.  (Hear,  hear,, 
and  applause.)  It  is  not  unnatural  that  it  should  be  so.  They  have 
ties  and  affections  towards  the  land  of  their  forefathers  which  we  cannot 
have  towards  any  new  country.  This  island  contains  the  ashes  of  their 
ancestors.  She  is  the  place  from  whence  they  sprung.  To  them  she  is 
ever  their  mother  country — their  dear  Old  England.  They  claim  her  as 
well  as  we.  Every  American  who  comes  to  England  makes,  as  it  were, 
a  pilgrimage  to  the  old  home  of  his  family.  1  remember  a  connection 
of  my  own  who  visited  this  country  some  years  ago.  He  was  so  blind 
he  could  not  see  across  the  street ;  but  he  related  with  the  rapture  of  a 
school  boy  a  visit  he  had  paid  to  some  remote  part  of  Yorkshire  where 
his  family  once  lived  ;  how  he  had  met  with  an  old  lady  who  had  taken 
him  to  the  leaded  roof  of  her  house  to  show  him  the  country  round ;  the 
joy,  the  delight  with  which  he  stood  there,  looking  in  every  direction, 
and  in  imagination  seeing  the  same  fields,  breathing  the  same  Yorkshire 
air — in  fact,  living  again  the  life  so  familiar  to  generations  of  his  family. 
He  is  now  a  chaplain  in  the  Federal  army  ;  but  wherever  he  may  go, 
there  is  fastened  in  that  spot  a  cord,  invisible,  reaching  to  his  heart, 
which  neither  time  nor  space  shall  sever.  Some  months  ago  I  had  a 
letter  from  a  loved  relative  of  mine,  a  lady  residing  in  PhDadelphia, 
whose  husband  lies  buried  in  the  town  of  Warwick,  in  the  very  centre 
of  England.  Think  you  there  are  no  heartstrings  there  !  She  mourns 
in  plaintive  accents  the  more  than  want  of  sympathy  of  dear  Old  England, 
and  thinks  it  strange  that  in  their  hour  of  trial  a  mother  should  so 
forget  her  child.  But  she  concludes  with  this  line,  uttered  from  the  very 
depths  of  her  heart.  "England,  with  all  thy  faults,  I  love  thee  still." 
(Hear,  hear.)  Not  long  ago  I  met  with  Mr.  Whiting,  the  eminent 
lawyer,  who  has  lately  been  over  from  the  American  Government.  He 
also  spoke  with  pride  of  his  English  ancestry,  and  related  with  the  fresh- 
ness of  yesterday  a  former  visit  to  the  home  of  his  family  in  Lincolnshire 
— how  he  found  the  old  escutcheon  hanging  on  the  wall — how  he  had 
examined  the  family  registers,  in  the  old  Church,  and  the  tombstone 
beneath  which  his  people  lay  m  the  quiet  grave  yard,  No  spot  on  earth 
seemed  fraught  to  him  with  such  dear  recollections.  These  are  the 
heartstrings  which  bind  Americans  to  England.  As  Earl  Russell  said 
the  other  day,  they  have  our  language,  our  literature,  our  laws,  our 
early  history  is  also  theirs.  These  appeal  to  the  understanding  and  the 
intellect ;  but  those  quiet  spots,  the  homes  and  the  graves  of  their 
kindred,  bind  their  very  hearts  to  England.  O,  let  us  cherish,  and  seek 
to  return  the  love  that  ever  flows  towards  us  with  the  Atlantic  wave. 
Now,  let  me  congratulate  you,  Mr.  Beecher,  on  the  success  which  has 
attended  your  recent  efforts.  (Cheers.)  In  the  capital  of  Scotland  you 
had  the  opportunity  of  addressing  perhaps  the  most  learned,  the  most 
scientific,   the  most  critical— (hear,   hear) — and,   at  that    particular 


154  LIVERPOOL — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

juncture,  the  most  philanthropic  assembly  which  could  be  got  together 
in  this  kingdom.  I  understand  that  there  was  not  one  dissentient  voice. 
(Cheers.)  In  the  capital  of  England  no  room  could  be  found  large 
enough  to  contain  one-half  of  those  who  nocked  to  hear  and  support  you. 
(Hear,  hear.)  You  have  had  large  and  influential  meetings  in  other 
great  towns  and  cities ;  and,  sir,  you  have  fought  with  beasts  at 
Ephesus — (hear,  hear) — but,  even  here,  the  closing  scenes  must  have 
convinced  you  how  impotent  were  the  bello wings  and  howlings,  the 
occasional  bleatings  and  cacklings  of  the  Southern  hirelings  to  stifle  the 
voice  of  Liverpool  for  freedom.  (Applause.)  You  will  relate  these  things 
when  you  go  home.  You  may  also  tell  them  of  the  great  meetings  of  the 
Confederate  cause — how  they  are  held  in  caves  and  holes  of  the  earth 
— (hear,  hear) — "and  the  first  thing  publicly  known  of  them  is  from 
the  newspaper  report  next  morning,  when  you  learn  that  they  have 
had  the  same  thing  over  again — a  few  dozen  people  to  partake  of 
some  cock-a-doodle-doo  for  the  chief  dish,  and  the  correspondent 
"  S."  for  garnish.  (Laughter  and  cheers.)  You  may  also  tell  your 
people  that  it  is  not  from  any  want  of  employing  the  most  subtle 
and  devoted  agents,  and  conducting  their  cause  with  the  most  con- 
summate skill,  that  the  whole  British  nation  has  not  been  prosti- 
tuted to  the  Southern  cause.  Mr.  James  Spence  was  their  agent 
here.  He  is  an  elegant  writer,  a  fascinating  speaker,  a  man  so  skilled 
in  rhetoric  and  sophistry  that  he  can  hide  the  protruding  hoof,  and 
represent  the  devil  of  the  South  as  an  angel  of  light.  His  courage  is 
equal  to  his  accomplishments,  for  I  have  heard  him,  in  effect,  say,  before 
an  audience  of  Englishmen,  that  if  anyone  wanted  to  know  who  had  the 
"  courage  "  to  defend  slavery  from  the  Bible,  he  was  the  man.  I  never 
heard  a  man  so  hissed  in  the  whole  course  of  my  life.  They  have  had 
Mr.  Laird  for  their  shipbuilder — they  might  have  sought  England 
through  and  not  found  such  another  ;  not  only  has  he  built  them  ships 
which  cannot  be  surpassed,  but  he  has  sacrificed  for  them  his  Parlia- 
mentary reputation,  making  unverified  statements  which  have  been 
repudiated  with  scorn.  If  Mr.  Laird  had  any  hankerings  after  a 
Northern  contract,  he  certainly  did  not  seek  the  front  door.  The  next 
time  he  makes  a  pretended  statement  of  facts  in  Parliament  he  will  be 
reminded  of  these  anonymous  letters,  and  will  not  find  it  so  easy  to 
ride  off  on  a  piece  of  empty  clap-trap  about  Mr.  Bright  setting  class 
against  class.  (Cheers.)  These  shores  do  not  contain  a  nobler  or  purer 
patriot  than  John  Bright.  Mr.  Laird  may  say  that  he  would  rather  be 
known  as  the  builder  of  the  Alabama  than  as  he ;  but  I  venture  to 
predict  that  the  name  of  John  Bright  will  be  honoured,  and  cherished, 
and  lo^ed  by  the  English  nation  when  the  name  of  the  builder  of  the 
Alabama,  if  remembered  at  all,  will  be  as  that  of  a  man  who,  to  fill 
his  own  pockets  with  gold,  not  only  violated  the  proclamation  of  his 
Sovereign,  but  did  his  utmost  to  bring  two  kindred  nations  into  collision, 
to  cover  sea  and  land  with  fire  and  blood,  and  to  involve  the  whole 
British  race  in  all  the  horrors  and  calamities  of  war.  The  Chairman 
concluded  by  briefly  congratulating  Mr.  Beecher  on  the  success  which 
had  atttended  his  labours  in  this  country. 


LIVERPOOL — FAEEWELL  MEETING.  155 

Mr.  0.  E.  RAWLINS,  jun.,  said  :  Mr.  Chairman,  and  ladies  and 
gentlemen, — I  shall  content  myself  on  this  occasion,  by  simply  reading 
the  address  presented  to  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  and  ask  for 
your  approval  of  it.     He  then  read  the  following  address  : — 

To  the  Bev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  of  New  York,  U.S. 

After  a  brief  sojourn  in  Europe — a  short  respite  from  ceaseless  labours  of 
philanthropy — you  are  returning  to  your  country  to  resume  those  labours  with 
renewed  health  and  strength,  and  we  trust  a  yet  firmer  faith  in  their  ultimate 
success. 

Standing,  as  it  were,  on  the  very  shores  of  the  "old  country,"  and  in  a  town 
which  is  the  last — and,  perhaps,  through  its  commerce,  the  strongest — link  in  that 
chain  which  individually  unites  the  interests  of  England  and  the  United  States,  let 
us  regard  you  as  the  representative  of  your  countrymen,  and  take  counsel  together 
ere  we  bid  you  farewell. 

There  is  no  feeling  more  common  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  than  pride  in 
our  common  descent.  Hardly  a  century  has  elapsed  since  you  had  no  separate 
history  from  our  own.  Until  then  we  were  fellow-countrymen — united  under  the 
same  crown,  and  claiming  protection  from  the  same  Constitution.  The  same  page 
recorded  for  us  both  all  the  glorious  associations  of  the  past — the  same  battles  for 
national  independence,  and  the  same  national  struggles  for  civil  and  religious 
liberty.  To  this  day  we  are  sharing  the  inheritance  of  political  freedom  purchased 
by  the  blood  of  our  ancestors.  Better  than  all,  we  worship  at  the  same  altar,  and 
reverence  the  same  heroes  of  art,  literature,  and  science. 

With  such  recollections  crowding  upon  us,  let  us  this  day  pledge  each  other  not 
only  by  the  memories  of  the  past,  but  our  still  more  glorious  hopes  of  the  future, 
that,  so  far  as  in  us  lies,  there  shall  be  perpetual  peace  between  England  and  the 
United  States. 

Now,  there  are  common  principles  which  mark  the  genius — nay,  which  must  be 
essential  to  the  life  and  civilisation  of  both  nations  alike,  and  which  are  not 
materially  affected  by  our  differing  forms  of  Government.  The  latter  are,  in  fact, 
but  mere  accidents  of  our  national  existence.  On  the  one  side  we  have  an  heredi- 
tary monarchy  and  an  hereditary  House  of  Lords,  around  which  entwines  a  loyalty 
to  the  crown  of  centuries.  On  the  other  hand,  in  a  country  where  no  feudal 
aristocracy  had  ever  existed  and  no  King  ever  reigned,  you  were  obliged  to  make 
both  your  President  and  higher  chamber  elective.  All  our  other  political  and 
municipal  institutions  are  the  same. 

What,  then,  so  closely  assimilates  the  two  nations  in  the  hopes  and  fears,  the 
present  condition  and  future  prospects  of  their  civilisation  ?  What  but  the  love  of 
freedom — freedom  personal  and  national — which  has  always  distinguished  the 
Anglo-Saxon  race  above  all  others  ?  Subject  to  this  higher  law,  both  Englishmen 
and  Americans  hold  all  their  institutions. 

We  do  not  this  morning  trace  the  origin  and  progress  of  the  institution  which 
has  been  so  sad  an  exception  to  jthe  history  of  both  nations.  England  some  years 
ago  wiped  out  the  foul  blot  from  her  own  constitution,  and  it  is  now  her  proud 
boast  that  the  foot  of  a  slave  can  never  press  her  soil. 

The  peculiarites  which  distinguish  a  Federal  Union  of  States  previously 
independent  have  presented  the  same  course  with  you.  Slavery  was  found  to  be  a 
State,  not  a  national  institution.  All  action  thereon  by  the  Federal  power  was 
excluded.  But  when  the  slaveholding  States  claimed  to  extend  this  institution  not 
only  to  the  territories  but  throughout  the  Union,  the  free  spirit  of  the  North  was 
aroused,  and  in  the  Senate,  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  in  the  courts  of  justice, 
in  the  still  higher  courts  of  public  opinion,  but  everywhere  and  on  all  occasions  in 
a  constitutional  manner,  they  resisted  the  claim.  They  fought  the  battle  of  freedom 
against  slavery  in  Missouri,  in  Texas,  and  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United 
States,  and  at  length  they  succeeded  in  placing  in  the  Presidential  chair  a  man 
who  was  equally  pledged  to  the  constitutional  obligation  not  to  interfere  with 
slavery  within  the  States  themselves,  and  to  his  personal  obligation  to  prevent  its 
further  extension. 


156  LIVERPOOL — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

We  clearly  recognise  the  fact  that  the  Secession  of  the  Southern  slaveholding 
States  was  declared  by  themselves  to  be  because  they  had  lost  this  power  of 
extension ;  that  it  was  to  maintain  this  unconstitutional  Secession  that  the  national 
flag  was  violated  at  Fort  Sumter  ;  that  the  war  which  has  resulted  has  been  carried 
on  by  the  Federal  Government  for  the  suppression  of  a  rebellion  and  the  maintenance 
of  the  national  interests.  But  while  deeply  regretting  the  miseries  thus  occasioned, 
we  rejoice  with  you  that  treason  placed  within  the  power  of  that  Government  what 
peace  and  order  had  denied  to  it;  and  it  is  with  reverential  acknowledgment  of 
that  great  Providence  which  still  educes  good  from  evil  that  we  sympathise  with 
you  in  those  acts  of  the  Legislature  upon  which  is  founded  the  glorious  proclamation 
of  freedom  to  slaves  of  rebellious  States.  We  trust  you  may  not  fail  in  the  self- 
sacrifice  which  may  yet  be  needful  ere  that  proclamation  is  realised. 

There  is  yet  one  other  point  on  which  we  could  speak  with  a  candour  which  no 
one  can  appreciate  better  than  yourself. 

If  the  friendly  relations  of  the  two  countries  are  to  be  maintained  unbroken  in 
the  future,  it  must  be  on  the  basis  of  mutual  interests.  A  free  interchange  of  com- 
modities between  them  will  soon  annihilate  the  prejudices  which  still  unworthily 
linger  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  (Hear,  hear,  and  cheers.)  As  in  the  past 
we  have  noticed  that  the  gradual  relaxation  of  your  protective  tariff  was  breaking 
down  the  barriers  between  the  two  nations,  so  we  attribute  no  small  portion  of  the 
bitterness,  of  our  Southern  sympathisers  to  those  disturbances  in  our  commerce 
which  have  resulted  from  your  return  to  vicious  principles  of  taxation.  That  this 
is  a  violation  of  the  rights  of  the  consumer,  and  opposed  to  the  established  laws  of 
political  economy,  you  have  yourself  acknowledged. 

Freedom  of  commerce  with  other  nations  is  but  an  extension  of  freedom  of 
production  and  interchange  within  our  own.  To  prohibit  it  by  high  duties  for  the 
sake  of  protecting  particular  manufactures  by  high  prices  is  a  robbery  of  the  con- 
sumer. England  has  set  a  noble  example  of  universal  free-trade.  She  offers  no 
exclusive  privileges  ;  she  asks  no  previous  conditions.  You  have  but  to  follow  in 
her  footsteps.  You  have  not  shrunk  from  the  mighty  task  of  organising  the 
industry  of  4,000,000  coloured  labourers  and  5,000,000  of  whites.  With  equal 
courage,  attempt  the  far  easier  task  of  reorganising  your  system  of  taxation  on  the 
same  basis  of  freedom.  (Hear,  hear.J  Your  immediate  and  primary  duty  is  the 
suppression  of  a  foul  rebellion  and  the  emancipation  of  the  slave ;  but  we  are 
convinced  that  no  single  act  could  be  more  effective  in  securing  and  maintaining 
friendly  relations  between  our  two  nations  than  a  thorough  revision  of  your  fiscal 
policy.  Hundreds  of  thousands  of  our  surplus  population  are  every  year  emigrating 
to  the  United  States.  In  future  they  will  feel  that  every  State,  from  Maine  to 
Texas,  and  every  rood  of  soil  between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  Oceans,  may  be  a 
home  for  the  free.  When  the  electric  chain  shall  again,  as  once  it  did,  unite  us,  the 
first  message  that  sh^all  flash  with  lightning  speed  along  its  wires  will  be  "  Glory  to 
God  in  the  highest,  peace  and  freedom  to  man  on  earth,  without  distinction  of  creed, 
or  class,  or  colour,  to  the  end  of  time." 

(Immense  cheering.) 

The  Rev.  Mr.  JONES  seconded  the  adoption  of  the  address,  and  the 
motion  was  unanimously  adopted  with  a  display  of  enthusiastic  feeling. 

The  Rev.  H.  W.  BEECHER,  on  rising  to  respond  to  the  addresses, 
was  received  with  enthusiastic  cheers,  which  continued  for  some 
minutes.  He  said  : — Mr.  Chairman,  ladies  and  gentlemen — Although 
this  is  a  festive  scene,  it  is  rather  with  feelings  of  sadness  and  solemnity 
that  I  stand  in  your  midst ;  for  the  hours  are  numbered  that  I  am  to 
be  with  you,  and  the  ship  is  now  waiting  that  I  trust  will  bear  me 
safely  to  my  native  land.  If  already  I  have  to  the  full  those  senti- 
ments of  reverence  and  even  romantic  attachment  to  the  memories,  to 
the  names,  to  the  truths,  and  to  the  very  legends  of  Old  England  which 
have  been  so  beautifully  alluded  to  by  the  Chairman  on  this  occasion — if 
I  had  already  that  preparation,  how  much,  working  on  that  predisposition, 


LIVERPOOL— -FAREWELL  MEETING.  157 

do  you  suppose  has  been  the  kindness,  the  good  cheer,  the  helpfulness  which 
I  have  received  from  more  noble  English  hands  and  hearts  than  I  can 
name  or  even  now  remember.    I  have  to  thank  them  for  almost  everything, 
and  I  have  almost  nothing  to  regret  in  my  personal  intercourse  with 
the  English  people  ;  for  I  am  too  old  a  navigator  to  think  it  a  misfor- 
tune to  have  steered  my  bark  in  a  floe  or  even  a  storm,  and  what  few 
waves  have  dashed  over  the  bows  and  wetted  the  deck  did  not  send  me 
below  whining  and  crying.     (Hear,   hear,   and  laughter.)     It  was  a 
matter  of  course.     I  accepted  it  with  good  nature  at  the  time.     I  look 
back  on  it,  on  the  whole,  with  pleasure  now ;  for  storms,  when  they 
are  past  give  us  on  their  back  the  rainbow,  and  now  even  in  those 
discordant  notes  I  find  some  music.     (Applause.)     I  had  a  thousand 
times  rather  that  England  should  be  so  sensitive  as  to  quarrel  with  me 
than   that  she  should  have  been  so  torpid  and  dead  as  not  to  have 
responded  at  a  stroke.     (Cheers.)     I  go  back  to  my  native  land ;  but 
be   sure,   sir,   and   be   sure,   ladies   and   gentlemen   that   have   kindly 
presented  to  me  this  address,  that  though   I   needed  no  such  spur  I 
shall  accept  the  incitement  of  it  to  labour  there  for  a  better  understand- 
ing and  for  an  abiding  peace  between  these  two  great  nations.      (Hear, 
and  cheers.)     I  do  not  know  that  my  hardest  labour  is  accomplished  on 
this  side.   (Hear,  hear.)    I  know  not  what  is  before  me — what  criticisms 
may  be  made  upon  my  course.      I  think  it  likely  that  many  papers  that 
never  have  been  ardent  admirers  of  mjne  will  find  great  fault  with  my 
statements,  will  controvert  my  facts,  will  traverse  my  reasonings.     I  do 
not  know  but  that  men  will  say  that  I  have  conceded  too  much ;  and 
that,  melting  under  the  influence  of  England,  I  have  not  been  as  sturdy 
here  in  my  blows  as  I  was  in  my  own  land.     (Laughter.)     One  thing  is 
very  certain  that,  while,   before  I  came  here,  I  always  attempted  to 
speak  the  words  of  truth,  even  if  they  were  not  of  soberness — (laughter) — 
so  here  I  have  endeavoured  to  know  only  that  which  made  for  truth 
first — love  and  peace  next.     (Cheers.)    Of  course  I  have  not  said  every- 
thing that  I  knew.      So  to  do,  would  have  been  to  jabber  in  season  and 
out  of  season,  and  fail  to  promote  the  sublimest  ends  that  a  Christian 
man  or  a  patriot  can  contemplate — the  welfare  of  two  great  allied  nations. 
(Cheers.)     I  should  have  been  foolish  if  I  had  left  the  things  which 
made  for  peace  and  dug  up  the  things  that  would  have  made  offence. 
(Renewed  cheers.)      Yet,  that  course  was  not  inconsistent  with  frank- 
ness, with  fidelity,  and  with  a  due  statement  of  that  blame  which  we 
have  felt  attached  to  the  course  of  England  in  this  conflict.     (Hear, 
hear.)      I  shall  go  back  to  represent  to  my  own  countrymen  on  fitting 
occasions  what  I  have  discovered  of  the  reasons  for  the  recent  antagonism 
of  England  to  America.       And  I  shall  have  to  say  primarily  that  the 
mouth  and  the  tongue  of  England  have  been  to  a  very  great  extent  as 
were  the  mouth  and  the  tongue  of  old  of  those  poor  wretches  that  were 
possessed  of  the  devil, — not  in  their  own  control.  (Laughter  and  applause. ) 
The  institutions  of  England — for  England  is  pre-eminently  a  nation  of 
institutions — the  institutions  of  England  have  been  very  largely  con- 
trolled by  a  limited  class  of  men ;  and,  as  a  general  thing,  the  organs  of 
expression  have  gone  with  the  dominant  institutions  of  the  land.    Now, 


158  LIVERPOOL — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

it  takes  time  for  a  great  unorganised,  and  to  a  certain  extent  unvoting, 
public  opinion,  underneath  institutions,  to  create  that  grand  swell  that 
lifts  the  whole  ark  up — (hear,  hear,  and  cheers) ;  and  so  it  will  be  my 
province  to  interpret  to  them  that  there  may  have  been  abundant,  and 
various,  and  wide-spread  utterances  antagonistic  to  us,  and  yet  that  they 
might  not  have  been  the  voices  that  represented,  after  all,  the  great  heart 
of  England.  (Hear,  hear,  and  applause.)  But  there  is  more  than  that. 
Eising  higher  than  party  feeling,  endeavouring  to  stand  upon  some 
ground  where  men  may  be  both  Christians  and  philosophers,  and  looking 
upon  the  two  nations  from  this  higher  point  of  view,  one  may  see  that 
it  must  needs  have  been  as  it  has  been,  for  it  so  happens  that  England 
herself,  or  Great  Britain  I  should  say — I  mean  Great  Britain  when  I 
say  England  always — (loud  cheers) — Great  Britain  is.  herself  undergoing 
a  process  of  gradual  internal  change.  (Hear,  hear.)  All  living  nations  are 
undergoing  such  changes.  No  nation  abides  fixed  in  policy  and  fixed  in 
institutions  until  it  abides  in  death — (hear,  hear)  ;  for  death  only  is  im- 
movable in  this  life,  and  life  is  a  perpetual  process  of  supply.  Assimilation, 
excretion,  change,  and  sensitiveness  to  the  causes  of  change,  are  the  marks 
of  life.  (Applause.)  And  England  is  undergoing  a  change,  and  must  do 
so  so  long  as  she  is  vital ;  and  when  you  shall  have  put  that  round  about 
England  which  prevents  further  change,  you  will  have  put  her  shroud 
around  her.  (Hear,  hear,  and  cheering.)  Now,  changes  cannot  be 
brought  to  pass  amongst  a  free,  thinking  people,  as  you  can  bring  about 
changes  in  agriculture  or  in  mechanics,  or  upon  dead  matter  by  the 
operation  of  natural  laws.  Changes  that  are  wrought  by  the  will  of 
consenting  men  imply  hesitation,  doubt,  difference,  debate,  antagonisms ; 
and  change  is  the  final  stage  before  which  always  has  been  the  great 
conflict,  which  conflict  itself,  with  all  its  mischiefs,  is  also  a  great 
benefit,  since  it  is  a  quickener  and  a  life-giver ;  for  there  is  nothing  so 
hateful  in  life  as  death  ;  and  among  a  people  nothing  so  terrible  as 
dead  men  that  walk  about  and  do  not  know  they  are  dead.  (Laughter 
and  cheers.)  It  therefore  comes  to  pass  that  in  the  normal,  process  of  a 
change  such  as  is  taking  place  in  England,  there  will  be  parties,  there 
will  be  divided  circles,  and  cliques,  and  all  those  aspects  and  phenomena 
which  belong  to  healthy  national  progress  and  change  for  progress. 
Now,  it  so  came  to  pass  that  America  too  was  undergoing  a  change 
more  pronounced ;  and  since,  contrary  to  our  hope  and  expectation,  it 
was  a  change  that  went  on  under  the  form  of  revolution,  and  war  in 
its  latter  period,  it  at  first  addressed  England  only  by  her  senses  : 
for  when  the  rebellion  broke  out  and  the  tidings  rolled  across  the 
ocean,  everybody  has  said  "England  was  for  you"  at  first.  (Hear, 
hear.)  I  believe  so  :  because  before  men  had  time  to  weigh  in 
the  balances  the  causes  that  were  at  work  on  our  side ;  before  the 
patrician  had  had  time  to  study :  "  What  might  be  the  influence  of  this 
upon  my  class  ? " — and  the  churchman,  "What  will  be  the  influence  of 
these  principles  on  my  position?" — and  the  various  parties  in  Great 
Britain —  "  What  will  be  the  influence  of  these  American  ideas,  if  they 
pre  in  the  ascendancy,  on  my  side  and  on  my  position?" — before  men 
had  time  to  analyse  and  to  ponder;  —  they  were  for  the  North  and 


LIVERPOOL — FAREWELL  MEETING.  159 

against   the   South  ;    because,    although  your  anti-slavery  feeling    is 
hereditary  and  legendary,  there  was  enough  vitality  in  it,   however 
feeble,  to  bring  you  on  to  the  side  of  the  North  in  the  first  instance. 
Much  more   would    it   have   done,    had   it  been  a   really  living   and 
quickening  principle.     It  is  said  that  up  to  the  time  of  the  trouble  of 
the  Trent,  England  was  with  us,  but  from  that  time  she  went  rapidly 
over  the  other  way.     Now  that  was  merely  the  occasion,  but  not  the 
cause.    I  understand  it  to  have  been  this — that  there  were  a  great  many 
men  and  classes  of  men  in  England  that  feared  the  reactionary  influences 
of  American  ideas  upon  the  internal  conflicts  of  England  herself — (hear, 
hear) ; — and  a  great  deal  of  the  offence  has  arisen,  not  so  much  from  any 
direct  antagonism  between  Englishmen  and  Americans,  as  from  the 
feeling  of  Englishmen  that  the  way  to  defend  themselves  at  home  was 
to  fight  their  battle  in  America — (hear,  hear) — and  that  therefore  there 
has  been  this  strange,  this  anomalous  and  ordinarily  unexplained  cause  of 
the  offence  and  of  the  difficulties.     Let  us  look  a  little  at  it.     I  will  not 
omifc  to  state,  in  passing,  that  there  has  been  a  great  deal  of  ignorance  and 
a  greab  deal  of  misconception.  (Hear,  hear.)  But  that  was  to  be  expected. 
We  are  not  to  suppose — it  would  be  supreme  egotism  for  an  American 
to  suppose — that  the  great  mass  of  the  English  people  should  study 
American  institutions  and  American  policy  and  American  history  as  they 
do  their  own  ;  and  when  to  that  natural  unknowingness  by  one  nation 
of  the  affairs  of  another  are  added  the  unscrupulous  and  wonderfully 
active  exertions  of  Southern  emissaries  here,  who  found  men  ready  to 
be  inoculated,  and  who  compassed  sea  and  land  to  make  proselytes  and 
then  made  them  ten-fold  more  the  children  of  the  devil  than  themselves 
— (applause) — when   these   men  began    to   propagate   one-sided   facts, 
suppressing — and  suppression  has  been  as  vast  a  lie  in  England  as  falsi- 
fication—  (hear,   hear) — perpetually   presenting   every   rumour,    every 
telegram,  and  every  despatch  from  the  wrong  point  of  view,  and  forgetting 
to  correct  it  when  the  rest  came — (hear,   hear) — finding,   I    say,    these 
emissaries  and  these  easy  converts,  the  South  has  propagated  an  im- 
mense amount  of  false  information  throughout  England,  we  are  to  take 
this  into  account.     But,  next  consider  the  antagonisms  which  there  are 
supposed  to  be  between  the  commercial  interests  of  North  America  and 
of  England.     We  are  two  great  rivals.     Rivalry,  gentlemen,  is  simply 
in  the  nature  of  a  pair  of  scissors  or  shears ;  you  cannot  cut  with  one 
blade,  but  if  you  are  going  to  cut  well  you  must  have  one  rubbing 
against  the  other.     (Hear,  hear,  and  laughter.)     One  bookstore  cannot 
do  as  much  business  in  a  town  as  two,  because  the  rivalry  creates 
demand.       (Hear,    hear.)       Everywhere,    the   great   want  of  men    is 
people  to  buy,  and  the    end   of  all  commerce  should  be  to  raise   up 
people  enough  to  take  the  supplies  of  commerce.     (Hear,  hear.)     Now, 
where  in  any  street  you  collect  one,  five,  ten,  twenty  booksellers  or  dry 
goods  dealers,  you  attract  customers  to  that  point,  and  so  far  from  being 
adverse  to  each  other's  welfare,  men  clustering  together  in  rivalry,  in  the 
long  run  and  comprehensively  considered  they  are  beneficial  to  each  other. 
There  are  many  men  who  always  reason  from  their  lower  faculties,  and 
refuse  to  see  any  questions  except  selfishly,  enviously,  jealously.     It  is 


160  LIVERPOOL— FABEWELL  MEETING, 

so  on  both  sides  the  sea.  (Hear,  hear.)  Such  men  will  attempt  always 
to  foster  rivalry  and  make  it  rancorous.  They  need  to  be  rebuked  by 
the  honourable  men  of  the  commercial  world  On  both  sides  of  the  ocean, 
and  put  in  their  right  place — under  foot.  (Applause.)  Against  all 
mean  jealousies,  I  say,  there  is  to  be  a  commerce  yet  on  this  globe,  com- 
pared with  which  all  we  have  ever  had  will  be  but  as  the  size  of  the  hand 
compared  with  the  cloud  that  belts  the  hemisphere.  (Applause.)  There  is 
to  be  a  resurrection  of  nations ;  there  is  to  be  a  civilization  that  shall 
bring  up  even  that  vast  populous  continent  of  Asia  into  new  forms  of 
life,  with  new  demands.  There  is  to  be  a  time  when  liberty  shall  bless 
the  nations  of  the  earth  and  expand  their  minds  in  their  own  homes ; 
when  men  shall  want  more  and  shall  buy  more.  There  is  to  be  a  supply 
required,  that  may  tax  every  loom  and  every  spindle  and  every  ship 
that  England  has  or  shall  have  when  they  are  multiplied  fourfold. 
(Applause.)  Instead  therefore  of  wasting  energy,  peace,  and  manhood 
in  miserable  petty  jealousies,  trans- Atlantic  or  cis- Atlantic,  the  business 
of  England,  as  of  America,  should  be,  to  strike  those  keynotes  of  liberty, 
to  sound  those  deep  chords  of  human  rights,  that  shall  raise  the  nations 
of  the  earth  and  make  them  better  customers  because  they  are  broader 
men.  (Great  cheering.)  It  has  also  been  supposed  that  American  ideas 
reacting  will  have  a  powerful  tendency  to  dissatisfy  men  with  their  form 
of  government  in  Great  Britain.  This  is  the  sincere  conviction  of  many. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  England  is  not  perfect.  England  has  not  yet 
the  best  political  instruments  any  more  than  we  have ;  but  of  one  thing 
you  may  be  certain,  that  in  a  nation  which  is  so  conservative,  which 
does  not  trust  itself  to  the  natural  conservatism  of  self-governing  men, 
but  even  fortifies  itself  with  conservatism  by  the  most  potent  institutions, 
and  gives  those  institutions  mainly  into  the  hands  of  a  conservative  class, 
ordained  to  hold  back  the  impetuosity  of  the  people — do  you  think  that 
any  change  can  ever  take  place  in  England  until  it  has  gone  through 
such  a  controversy,  such  a  living  fight,  as  that  it  shall  have  proved  itself 
worthy  to  be  received  ?  And  will  any  man  tell  me,  that  when  a 
principle  or  a  truth  has  been  proved  worthy,  England  will  refuse  to 
receive  it,  to  give  it  house  room,  and  to  make  any  changes  that 
may  be  required  for  itl  (Hear,  hear.)  If  voting  vivd  voce  is  best, 
fifty  years  hence  you  will  be  found  voting  in  that  manner.  If 
voting  by  the  ballot  is  best,  fifty  years  hence  you  will  have  here  what 
we  have  in  America,  the  silent  fall  of  those  flakes  of  paper  which  come 
as  snow  comes,  soundless,  but  which  gather,  as  snow  gathers  on  the  tops 
of  the  mountains,  to  roll  with  the  thunder  of  the  avalanche,  and  crush 
all  beneath  it.  (Loud  applause.)  But  it  is  supposed  that  it  may  ex- 
tend still  further.  It  is  supposed  that  the  spectacle  of  a  great  nation 
that  governs  itself  so  cheaply  will  re-act  in  favour  of  those  men  in 
Europe,  who  demand  that  monarchical  government  shall  be  conducted 
cheaply.  (Hear,  hear.)  Eor  men  say,  look  at  the  civil  list — look  at 
the  millions  of  pounds  sterling  required  to  conduct  our  Government, 
and  see  30,000,000  of  men  governed  on  that  vast  Continent  at  not  one- 
tenth  part  of  the  expense.  (Hear,  hear.)  Well,  I  must  say,  that  if  this 
report  comes  across  the  sea,  and  is  true,  and  these  facts  do  excite  such 


LIVERPOOL — FAREWELL  MEETING.  161 

thoughts,    I  do  not  see  how  it   can  be  helped.       (Hear,    hear,    and 
laughter.)      I  do  not  say  that  our  American  example  will  re-act  to  the 
essential  re-construction  of  any  principles  in  your  edifice.      I  have  not 
in  my  own  mind  the  belief  that  it  will  do  more  than  re-adapt  your 
economy  to  a  greater  facility  and  to  more  beneficence  in  its  application; 
but  that  it  will  ever  take  the  crown  from  the  king's  head,  or  change 
the  organisation  of  your  aristocracy,  I  have  not  a  thought.     (Cheers.) 
It  is  no  matter  what  my  own  private  opinion  on  the  subject  is.     Did 
I  live  or  had  I  been  born  and  bred  in  England,  I  have  no  question 
that  I  should  feel  just  as  you  feel,   for  this  I  will  say  that  in   no 
other  land   that  I   know  of  under  the  sun   are  a  monarchy  and  an 
aristocracy  holding  power  under  it,  standing  around  as  the  bulwark  of 
the  throne — in  not  another  land  are  there  so  many  popular  benefits 
accruing  under  the  Government ;  and  if  you  must  have  an  aristocracy, 
where  in  any  other  land  can  you  point  to  so  many  men  noble  politically, 
but  more  noble  by  disposition,  by  culture,  by  manliness,  and  true  Chris- 
tian piety  "?     (Loud  and  reiterated  cheering.)     I  say  this  neither  as  the 
advocate  nor  as  the  adversary  of  this  particular  form  of  Government, 
but  I  say  it  simply  because  there  is  a  latent  feeling  that  American  ideas 
are  in  natural  antagonism  with  aristocracy.     They  are  not.     American 
ideas  are  merely  these — that  the  end  of  government  is  the  benefit  of 
the  governed.     (Hear,  hear,  and  cheers.)     If  that  idea  is  inconsistent 
Avith  your  form  of  Government,  how  can  that  form  expect  to  stand  ? 
And  if  it  only  requires  some  slight  re-adjustment  from  generation  to 
generation,  and  if  that  idea  is  consistent  with  monarchy  and  aristocracy, 
why  should  you  fear  any  change  ?     (Cheers.)     I  believe  that  monarchy 
and   aristocracy,  as   they   are   practically   developed   in  England,   are 
abundantly  consistent  with  the  great  doctrine,  that  Government  is  for 
the   benefit  of  the   governed.     (Hear,   hear.)     There  has  also  been  a 
feeling  that  the  free  church  of  America,  while  it  might  perhaps  do  in  a 
rough-and-tumble  enterprize  in  the  wilderness,  is  not  the  proper  form  of 
church  for  Great  Britain.     Well,  you  are  the  judges,  gentlemen,  about 
that,  not  we  ;  and  if  it  is  not  the  proper  form  for  Great  Britain,  you 
need  not  fear  that  Great  Britain  will  take  it.     If  it  is,  then  it  is  only  a 
question  of  time ;  you  will  have  to  take  it.     (Cheers.)     For  I  hold, 
sturdy  as  you  are,  strong  as  your  will  is,  persistent  as  you  may  be  for 
whatever  seems  to  you  to  be  truth,  you  will  have,  first  or  last,  to  submit 
to  God's  truth.     (Applause.)     When  I  look  into  the  interior  of  English 
thoughts,    and   feelings,  and  society,    and  see   how  in  the  first  stage 
of  our   conflict   with   your  old  anti-slavery  sympathies  you  went  for 
the   North  ;    how  there   came   a   second   stage,    when  you   began   to 
fear,  lest  this  American  struggle  should  re-act  upon  your  own  parties. 
I   think  I  see  my  way  to   the  third   stage,  in  which  you  will  say — 
"This  American   struggle   will  not   affect   our  interior  interests   and 
economy  more  than  we  choose  to  allow  ;  and  our  duty  is  to  follow  our 
own  real  original  opinions  and  manly  sentiments.     (Cheers.)     I  know 
of  but  one  or  two  things  that  are  necessary  to  expedite  this  final  judg- 
ment of  England,  and  that  is,  one  or  two  conclusive  Federal  victories. 
(Applause.)     If  I  am  not  greatly  mistaken,  the  convictions  and  opinions 

L 


162  LIVERPOOL — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

of  England  are  like  iron  wedges  ;  but  success  is  the  sledge  hammer 
which  drives  in  the  wedge  and  splits  the  log.     (Hear,  hear,  and  cheers.) 
Nowhere  in  the  world  are  people  so  apt  to  succeed  in  what  they  put 
their  hand  to  as  in  England,  and  therefore  nowhere  in  the  world  more 
than  in  England  is  success  honoured  :  and  the  crowning  thing  for  the 
North,  in  order  to  complete  that  returning  sympathy  and  cordial  good 
will  is  to  obtain  a  thorough  victory  over  the  South.    (Cheers.)    There  is 
nothing  in  the  way  of  that  but  the  thing  itself.     (Laughter  and  cheers.) 
Allow  me  to  say,  therefore,  just  at  this  point  and  in  that  regard,  that,  whilst 
looking  at  it  commercially,  and  whilst  looking  at  it  sentimentally,  the  pro- 
longation of  this  war  seems  mischievous,  it  is  more  in  seeming  than  reality, 
for  the  North  was  itself  being  educated  by  this  war.    This  North  was  like 
men  sent  to  sea  on  a  ship  that  was  but  half  built  as  yet ;  just  enough 
built  to  keep  the  water  out  of  the  hull :  but  they  had  both  to  sail  on 
their   voyage   and  to  build  up  their  ship   as  they  went.      We  were 
precipitated  at  a  civil  crisis  in  which  there  were  all  manner  of  compli- 
cations at  all  stages  of  progress  in  the  right  direction  of  this  war,  and 
the  process  of  education  has  had  to  go  on  in  battle-fields,  in  the  drill 
camps,  and  at  home  amongst  the  people,  while  they  were  discussing, 
and  taxing  their  energies  for  the  maintenance  of  the  war.     And  there 
never  was  so  good  a  schoolmaster  as  war  has  been  in  America.    Terrible 
was  the  light  of  his  eye,   fearful  the  stroke  of  his  hand ;  but  he  is 
turning  out  as  good  a  set  of  pupils  as  ever  came  from  any  school  in  this 
world.     Now,  every  single  month  from  this  time  forward  that  this 
struggle  is  delayed  unitises  the  North — brings  the  North  on  to  that 
ground  which  so  many  have  struggled  to  avoid  : — "  Union  and  peace 
require  the  utter  destruction  of  slavery."     (Loud  cheering.)     There  is 
an   old   proverb,    "There's  luck   in  leisure."     Let  me  transmute  the 
proverb,  and  say,   "There  is  emancipation  in  delay."    '(Loud  cheers.) 
And  every  humane  heart,  yea  every  commercial  man  that  takes  any 
comprehensive    and    long-sighted    instead   of  a   narrow   view  of  the 
question — will    say,    "  Let  the   war   thus   linger  until   it  has   burnt 
slavery  to  the   very   root."      (Kenewed    cheers.)     While   it   is,  how- 
ever, a  great   evil    and    a   terrible   one — I   will   not   disguise   it, — 
for  war  is  dreadful  to  every  Christian  heart, — yet,  blessed  be  God,  we 
are  not  called  to  an  unmixed  evil.     There  are  many  collateral  ad- 
vantages.    While  war  is  as  great,  or  even  a  greater  evil  than  many  of 
you  have  been  taught  to  think,  it  is  wrong  to  si^pose  that  it  is  evil 
only,  and  that  God  can  not,  even  by  such  servants  as  war,  work  out  a 
great  moral  result.     The  spirit  of  patriotism  diffused  throughout  the 
North  has  been  almost  like  the  resurrection  of  manhood.     (Cheers.) 
You  never  can  understand  what  emasculation  has  been  caused  by  the 
indirect  influence  of  slavery.     (Hear,  hear.)     I  have  mourned  all  my 
mature  life  to  see  men  growing  up  who  were  obliged  to  suppress  all  true 
conviction  and   sentiment,  because   it   was   necessary, to   compromise 
between  the  great  antagonisms  of  North  and  South.     There  were  the 
few  pronounced  anti-slavery  men  of  the  North,  and  the  few  pronounced 
slavery  men  of  the  South,  and  the  Union  lovers  (as  they  were  called 
during  the  latter  period)  attempting  to  hold  the  two  together,  not  by  a 


LIVEEPOOL — FAKEWELL  MEETING.  163 

mild  and  consistent  adherence  to  truth  plainly  spoken,   but  by  sup- 
pressing truth  and  conviction,  and  saying  "Everything  for  the  Union."  ' 
Now  during  this  period  I  took  this  ground,  that  if  "  Union"  meant 
nothing  but  this — a  resignation  of  the  national  power  to  be  made  a 
tool  for  the  maintenance  of  slavery — Union  was  a  lie  and  a  degradation. 
(Great  cheering.)     All  over  New  England,   and  all  over  the  State  of 
New  York,  and  through  Pennsylvania,  to  the  very  banks  of  the  Ohio, 
I,  in  the  presence  of  hisses  and  execrations,  held  this  doctrine  from 
1850  to  1860 — namely,   "Union  is  good  if  it  is  Union  for  justice  and 
liberty;  but  if  it  is  Union  for  slavery,  then  it  is  thrice  accursed."    (Loud 
cheering.)     For  they  were  attempting  to  lasso  anti-slavery  men  by  this 
word   "Union,"  and  to  draw  them  over  to  pro-slavery  sympathies  and 
the  party  of  the  South,  by  saying,   "Slavery  may  be  wrong  and  all 
that,  but  we  must  not  give  up  the  Union,"  and  it  became  necessary  for 
the  friends  of  liberty  to  say,    "Union  for   the   sake  of   liberty,    not 
Union  for  the  sake  of  slavery."     (Cheers.)     Now  we  have  passed  out 
of   that   period,  and    it   is    astonishing    to    see    how  men  have  come 
to  their  tongues  in  the  North — (hear,  hear,  and  laughter) — and  how 
men   of  the   hightest   accomplishments  now  say  they  do   not   believe 
in  slavery.     If  Mr.  Everett  could  have  pronounced  in  1850  the  oration 
which  he  pronounced  in  1860,  then  might  miracles  have  nourished  again. 
(Hear,  hear.)  Not  until  the  sirocco  came,  not  until  that  great  convulsion 
that  threw  men  as  with  a  backward  movement  of  the  arm  of  Omnipo- 
tence from  the  clutches  of  the  South  and  from  her  sorcerer's  breath — 
not  until  then  was  it,  that  with  their  hundreds  and  thousands  the  men 
of  the  North  stood  on  their  feet  and  were  men  again.    (Great  cheering.) 
More  than  warehouses,  more  than  ships,  more  than  all  harvests  and 
every  material  form  of  wealth  is  the  treasure  of  a  nation  in  the  manhood 
of  her  men.     (Great  applause.)     We  could  have  afforded  to  have  had 
our  stores  of  wheat  burnt — there  is  wheat  to  plant  again.     We  could 
have  afforded  to  have  had  our  farms  burnt — our  farms  can  spring  again 
from  beneath  the  ashes.     If  we  had  sunk  our  ships — there  is  timber  to 
build  new  ones.     Had  we  burnt  every  house — there  is  stone  and  brick 
left  for  skill  again  to  construct  them.     Perish  every  material  element 
of  wealth,  but  give  me  the  citizen  intact :  give  me  the  man  that  fears 
God  and  therefore  loves  men,  and  the  destruction  of  the  mere  outside 
fabric  is  nothing — nothing ; — (cheers) — but  give  me  apartments  of  gold, 
and  build  me  palaces  along  the  streets  as  thick  as  the  shops  of  London ; 
give  me  rich  harvests  and  ships  and  all  the  elements  of  wealth,  but 
corrupt  the  citizen,  and  I  am  poor.     (Immense  cheering,  during  which 
the  audience  rose  and  enthusiastically  reiterated  the  applause.)     I  will 
not  insist  upon  the  other  elements.     I  will  not  dwell  upon  the  moral 
power  stored  in  the  'names  of  those  young  heroes  that  have  fallen  in 
this  struggle.      [Here  the  speaker  manifested  considerable  emotion.] 
I  cannot  think  of  it,  but  my  eyes  run  over.     They  were  dear  to  me, 
many  of  them,  as  if  they  had  carried  in  their  veins  my  own  blood. 
How  many  families  do  I  know,  in  which  once  was  the  voice  of  gladness, 
in  which  now  father  and  mother  sit  childless !     How  many  heirs  of 
wealth,  how  many  noble  scions  of  old  families,  well  cultured,  the  heirs 


164  LIVERPOOL — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

to  every  apparent  prosperity  in  time  to  come,  flung  themselves  into  their 
country's  cause,  and  died  bravely  fighting  for  it.  (Cheers.)  And 
every  such  name  has  become  a  name  of  power,  and  whoever  hears  it 
hereafter  shall  feel  a  thrill  in  his  heart — self-devotion,  heroic  patriotism, 
love  of  his  kind,  love  of  liberty,  love  of  God.  (Renewed  applause.)  I 
cannot  stop  to  speak  of  these  things  ;  I  will  turn  myself  from  the  past 
of  England  and  of  America  to  the  future.  It  is  not  a  cunningly-devised 
trick  of  oratory,  that  has  led  me  to  pray  God  and  his  people  that  the 
future  of  England  and  America  shall  be  an  undivided  future,  and  a 
cordially  united  one.  (Hear,  and  cheers.)  I  know  my  friend  Punch 
thinks,.  I  have  been  serving  out  "soothing  syrup"  to  the  British  Lion. 
(Laughter.)  Yery  properly  the  picture  represents  me  as  putting  a 
spoon  into  the  lion's  ear  instead  of  his  mouth;  and  I  don't  wonder  that 
the  great  brute  turns  away  so  sternly  from  that  plan  of  feeding. 
(Laughter.)  If  it  be  an  offence  to  have  sought  to  enter  your  mind  by 
your  nobler  sentiments  and  nobler  faculties,  then  I  am  guilty.  (Hear, 
hear,  and  cheers.)  I  have  sought  to  appeal  to  your  reason  and  to  your 
moral  convictions.  I  have,  of  course,  sought  to  come  in  on  that  side  in 
which  you  were  most  good-natured.  I  knew  it,  and  so  did  you,  and  I 
knew  that  you  knew  it ;  and  I  think  that  any  man  with  common  sense 
would  have  attempted  the  same  thing.  I  have  sacrificed  nothing,  how- 
ever, for  the  sake  of  your  favour — (cheers) — and  if  you  have  permitted 
me  to  have  any  influence  with  you,  it  was  because  I  stood  apparently  a 
man  of  strong  convictions,  but  with  generous  impulses  as  well.  It  was 
because  you  believed  that  I  was  honest  in  my  belief,  and  because  I  was 
kind  in  my  feelings  towards  you.  (Applause.)  And  now  when  I  go 
back  home  I  shall  be  just  as  faithful  with  our  "young  folks"  as  I  have 
been  with  the  "  old  folks  "  in  England — (hear,  hear,  and  cheers)  — I  shall 
tell  them  the  same  things  that  I  have  said  to  their  ancestors  on  this  side. 
I  shall  plead  for  union,  for  confidence.  (Cheers.)  For  the  sake  of  civi- 
lization ;  for  the  sake  of  those  glories  of  the  Christian  Church  on  earth 
which  are  dearer  to  me  than  all  that  I  know  ;  for  the  sake  of  Him  whose 
blood  I  bear  about,  a  perpetual  cleansing,  a  perpetual  wine  of  strength 
and  stimulation ;  for  the  sake  of  time  and  for  the  glories  of  eternity,  I 
shall  plead  that  mother  and  daughter  —  England  and  America  —  be 
found  one  in  heart  and  one  in  purpose,  following  the  bright  banner 
of  salvation,  as  streaming  abroad  in  the  light  of  the  morning,  it  goes 
round  and  round  the  earth,  carrying  the  prophecy  and  the  fulfilment 
together,  that  "  The  earth  shall  be  the  Lord's,  and  that  his  glory  shall 
fill  it  as  the  waters  fill  the  sea  "  (Loud  and  prolonged  cheering.)  And  now 
my  hours  are  moments,  but  I  linger  because  it  is  pleasant.  You  have 
made  yourselves  so  kind  to  me  that  my  heart  clings  to  you,  I  leave 
not  strangers  any  longer — I  leave  friends  behind.  (Loud  cheers.)  I 
shall  probably  never  at  my  time  of  life — I  am  now  fifty  years  of  age, 
and  at  that  time  men  seldom  make  great  changes — I  shall  probably  see 
England  no  more ;  but  I  shall  never  cease  to  see  her.  I  shall  never 
speak  any  more  here,  but  I  shall  never  cease  to  be  heard  in  England  as 
long  as  I  live.  (Cheers.)  Three  thousand  miles  is  not  as  wide  now  as 
your  hand.     The  air  is  one  great  sounding  gallery.     What  you  whisper 


LIVERPOOL — FAREWELL  MEETING.  165 

in  your  closet,  is  heard  in  the  infinite  depths  of  heaven.  God  has  given 
to  the  moral  power  of  his  church  something  like  his  own  power.  What 
you  do  in  your  pulpits  in  England,  we  hear  in  America ;  and  what  we 
do  in  our  pulpits,  you  hear  and  feel  here  ;  and  so  it  shall  be  more  and 
more.  Across  the  sea,  that  is,  as  it  were,  but  a  rivulet,  we  shall  stretch 
out  hands  of  greeting  to  you,  and  speak  words  of  peace  and  fraternal 
love.  Let  us  not  fail  to  hear  "Amen,"  and  bhe  responsive  greeting, 
whenever  we  call  to  you  in  fraternal  love  for  liberty — for  religion — for 
the  Church  of  God.  Farewell ! — (The  rev.  gentleman  resumed  his  seat 
amidst  enthusiastic  applause.) 

The  Rev.  H.  BEES  rose  and  read  an  address  from  Welsh  ministers. 
The  original  is  in  Welsh,  and  is  accompanied  by  the  translation 
appended. 

To  the  Bev.  H.  Ward  Beecher. 
Reverend  Sib, 

We,  the  undersigned  ministers  of  the  Welsh  Congregational  Churches  in 
the  town  of  Liverpool  and  Birkenhead,  desire  to  embrace  the  opportunity  on  your 
departure  from  this  country  to  express  our  high  esteem  of  your  fame  and  character 
as  a  Christian  minister  and  an  enlightened  philanthropist. 

More  especially  would  we  express  our  profound  admiration  of  your  uncom- 
promising self-sacrificing  labours  on  behalf  of  the  oppressed  African  race,  and  your 
efforts  to  wipe  out  the  foul  blot  of  slavery  from  the  otherwise  fair  escutcheon  of 
your  great  and  noble  country :  efforts  which  in  common  with  those  of  others  of 
your  family  have  made  the  name  of  Beecher  dear  to  the  broken  hearts  of  down- 
trodden slaves,  and  illustrious  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  true  friends  of  justice,  freedom, 
and  humanity  throughout  the  world. 

We  beg  to  assure  you,  and  through  you  our  countrymen  in  America,  that  we 
deeply  sympathise  with  your  Executive  in  its  endeavours  to  put  down  the  rebellion 
in  the  Southern  States,  and  to  establish  the  Federal  Union  on  a  basis  of  equality  of 
rights  between  the  white  and  black  races. 

A  rebellion  whcse  declared  object  was  the  extension  and  perpetuation  of  negro 
slavery  must,  we  think,  be  regarded  by  every  enlightened  and  sober  mind  as  the 
grossest  insult,  alike  to  God  in  heaven  and  to  man  on  earth.  The  infamous  avowal 
of  a  determination  to  found  a  government  whose  "corner-stone"  was  to  be  the 
irredeemable  subjugation  of  the  black  man — the  assumption  that  such  a  theory  is  in 
accordance  with  the  will  of  God  as  revealed  in  nature  and  in  His  word,  we  believe 
to  be  the  climax  of  human  presumption  and  effrontery,  which  must  ever  remain 
a  black  scandal  in  the  annals  of  the  19th  century,  and  consign  the  memory  of  its 
abettors  to  the  just  execration  of  mankind  to  the  last  ages  of  the  world. 

We  rejoice  to  have  it  to  say  that  we  believe  there  is  not  a  solitary  minister  of 
our  denomination  in  the  Principality  who  would  not  have  gladly  subscribed  to  these 
sentiments  had  an  opportunity  of  doing  so  been  afforded ;  and  to  the  best  of  our 
knowledge  the  entire  body  of  Nonconformists  in  Wales,  of  every  denomination, 
entertain  similar  opinions  ;  indeed,  our  whole  nation,  with  comparatively  but  very 
few  exceptions,  are  wholly  of  the  same  mind. 

The  warm  and  hearty  demonstrations  of  welcome  with  which  you  have  been 
received  in  the  great  cities  and  towns  of  our  kingdom  will  have  sufficiently  proved 
to  you  that  after  all  the  heart  of  Old  England  is  in  its  right  place. 

Honoured  sir,  we  congratulate  you  on  the  results  of  your  visit.  You  will  leave 
our  shores  with  the  pleasing  conviction  that  your  labours  among  us  have  not  been 
in  vain.  Many  minds  have  been  interested  in  and  enlightened  on  the  issues  now 
pending  in  America — waverers  have  been  confirmed — misapprehensions  have  been 
corrected — personal  prejudices  against  yourself  have  been  removed — and  the  amount 
of  moral  sympathy  with  your  Government  has  been  greatly  augmented  through 
your  instrumentality.  The  scurrilous  attacks  upon  you  in  a  portion  of  the  daily 
and  weekly  press  are  the  highest  tribute  which  could  have  been  paid  to  the  influence 
ef  your  name  and  the  power  of  your  eloquence. 

I 


166  LIVEKPOOL — FAREWELL  MEETING. 

Dear  sir,  tens  of  thousands  of  the  best  men  in  England  will  long  cherish  fond 
recollections  of  your  visit ;  and  their  best  wishes  will  accompany  you  to  your  home. 
We  doubt  not  similar  recollections  will  be  cherished  on  your  own  part ;  and  when 
you  shall  have  proclaimed  to  your  countrymen  what  you  have  witnessed  and 
experienced  during  your  visit  to  this  country,  it  cannot  fail  to  prove  the  means  of 
strengthening  and  cementing  peace  and  love  between  our  two  powerful  nations. 
May  the  amiable  relations  between  England  and  America  be  never  interrupted. 
May  it  please  God  to  put  a  speedy  termination  to  the  lamentable  strife  now  raging 
in  your  beloved  country,  and  to  overrule  the  issues  of  the  struggle  to  the  relief  of 
the  oppressed,  and  the  hastening  on  of  that  Kingdom  in  which  there  is  no  difference 
between  Jew  or  Gentile,  bond  or  free.  And  if  it  pleases  Him,  may  it  terminate  in 
the  restoration  of  the  Federal  Union  and  the  speedy  liberation  of  the  slave. 

To  your  country  we  say  again— "Peace  be  within  thy  walls,  and  prosperity 
within  thy  palaces.  For  our  brethren  and  companions'  sakes,  we  will  now  say, 
peace  be  within  thee.  Because  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  our  God,  we  will  seek  thy 
good."  And  to  you,  sir,  we  say,  Go  in  peace.  May  the  good  hand  of  your  God  be 
upon  you  to  lead  you  back  safely  to  the  bosom  of  your  family  and  friends  ;  and  may 
your  valuable  life  be  yet  spared  many  years  to  M  serve  your  generation  according 
to  the  will  of  God." 

WILLIAM  EEES, 
JOHN  THOMAS, 
NOEL  STEPHENS, 
WILLIAM  ROBERTS, 
H.  C.  THOMAS. 

The  Rev.  Professor  GRIFFITH,  seconded  the  adoption  of  the 
address,  and  the  motion  was  cordially  carried. 

The  Rev.  H.  W.  BEECHER,  in  receiving  the  address,  remarked 
that  he  could  not  recognise  one  single  word  in  the  original  except  his 
own  name,  which  stood  in  English.  Although  this  was  the  case, 
he  was  more  than  pleased  to  say  that  he  owed  no  inconsiderable  part 
of  himself  to  the  Welsh  blood  which  he  had  in  his  veins.  Mary  Roberts 
was  his  great  great  grandmother,  and  she  was  as  fully  blooded  a  Welsh 
woman  as  ever  lived.     (Cheers.) 

Mr.  J.  H.  ESTCOURT,  Chairman  of  the  Executive  Committee  of 
the  Union  and  Emancipation  Society,  Manchester,  was  received  with 
cheering.  He  said  he  appeared  there  in  an  official  and  in  a  private 
capacity  :  in  the  latter  as  a  participator,  with  the  friends  present,  in  the 
last  larewell  to  their  friend,  the  Reverend  Henry  Ward  Beecher;  in 
the  former,  as  one  of  a  deputation  appointed  to  present  to  the  reverend 
gentleman  an  album,  duly  inscribed,  containing  about  200  carte  de 
visite  portraits  of  the  President,  Yice-Presidents,  Executive,  and  General 
Council  of  the  Union  and  Emancipation  Society,  of  Manchester  (each 
carte  de  visite  being  inscribed  with  the  autograph  of  the  person  repre- 
sented) as  a  token  of  the  esteem  and  affection  entertained  towards  Mr. 
Beecher  personally ;  and  also  of  their  admiration  of  his  manly  and 
eloquent  advocacy  of  the  claims  of  the  bondsmen  in  his  own  country,  to 
freedom  and  to  manhood.  (Applause.)  These  portraits  comprised  the 
leading  Liberal  members  of  the  House  of  Commons,  ministers  of  the 
Gospel,  eminent  men  in  literature  and  scholastic  position,  and  honest- 
hearted  intelligent  representative  men  of  the  nation.  Many  of  the 
best  citizens  of  the  kingdom  were  represented  in  that  album  — 
those  whose  sympathies  were  true  to  liberty  under  all  circumstances, 
and  whose  moral  support  was  ever  given  to  maintain  constitutional 
Government.     (Applause.)     He  trusted  that  to  Mr.  Beecher  might  be 


LIVERPOOL — FAREWELL  MEETING.  107 

vouchsafed  physical  and  mental  vigour,  so  that  his  future  may  be  as 
nobly  used  as  had  been  his  past.  He  believed  that  the  time  would 
come,  and  at  no  distant  day,  when  the  "sum  of  all  villanies"  would  no 
more  infest  the  earth  with  its  presence,  when  it  would  have  gone  into 
the  great  past;  and  the  oppressed  would  be  free.  When  from  the  Saxon 
language  would  be  banished  all  words  derivable  from  or  appertaining  to 
slavery,  and  our  noblest  song  should  be,  "  All  men  are  free."  (Cheers.) 
He  anticipated  that  time  with  much  joy  and  hope.  If  the  friends,  who 
now  are  gathered  around  their  guest,  a  man  honoured  with  success  and 
the  blessing  of  God  as  well  as  with  the  love  of  his  fellowmen  ;  if 
they  with  him  should  be  living  then,  and  see  the  grand  triumph  of 
freedom  over  bondage,  of  goodwill  over  hatred,  of  peace  and  right  over 
crimson  war  and  chronic  wrong, — what  a  jubilate  would  be  sung  by 
them  in  company  with  all  the  great  aud  good  men  of  all  the  nations  of 
the  earth.  May  we  all  do  our  duty  in  our  own  time,  earnestly  and 
with  courage,  and  the  fruits  would  certainly  be  seen,  though  perchance 
after  many  days  or  even  years.  (Applause.)  In  concluding  he  ex- 
pressed his  belief  that  the  memorial  he  had  the  honour  to  present  to 
Mr.  Beecher,  would  be  the  medium  of  "  sunny  memories,"  and  that 
some  of  the  pleasant  hours  which  he  had  spent  in  Old  England  with 
some  warm-hearted  and  loving  friends,  would  be  revived  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Atlantic,  across  which  he  prayed  for  the  reverend  gentleman 
a  safe  voyage.     (Applause.) 

The  Rev.  Mr  BEECHER,  in  acknowledgment  of  the  gift,  said  on 
his  voyage  home  he  should  feel  that  multitudes  accompanied  him,  and 
as  he  lay  alone  in  his  berth  he  should  feel  himself  to  be  a  noun  of  multi- 
tude. The  friends  of  Emancipation  should  remember  that  there  was 
room  enough  on  his  side  of  the  Atlantic  for  them.  As  this  country  had 
sent  hundreds  and  thousands  of  men  who  had  hindered  Emancipation — 
the  ignorant  emigrants,  suborned  to  the  pro-slavery  cause — so  he  thought 
it  only  right  and  fair  that  we  should  send  them  a  few  from  the  other 
extreme  to  help  the  great  cause  of  human  liberty  ;  and  if  so,  he  would 
accept  this  volume,  literally,  as  the  shadow  of  great  things  to  come. 

The  CHAIRMAN  announced  that  letters  regretting  inability  to 
attend  had  been  received  from  the  Mayor  of  Manchester,  the  Rev. 
Enoch  Mellor,  Mr.  W.  C.  Forster,  M.P.  for  Bradford,  and  one  by 
Mr.  Beecher  from  Mr.  John  Bright,  M.P.,  couched  in  the  most 
cordial  language,  and  regretting  exceedingly  that  an  engagement  which 
he  could  not  possibly  leave  in  Londen  prevented  him  coming  to 
meet  their  guest  here,  or  he  would  most  certainly  have  done  so.  The 
Chairman  having  announced  this  fact  to  the  meeting,  said  they  were 
now  called  upon  to  part. 

This  announcement  was  received  in  silence,  and  for  a  few  moments 
the  pause  was  not  broken,  many  of  the  audience  being  apparently 
disposed  to  take  a  silent  sorrowful  farewell  of  the  reverend  gentleman. 
At  length  it  was  proposed  by  a  gentleman  that  they  should  bid  Mr. 
Beecher  good-by  in  the  good  old  English  style,  with  three  cheers.  This 
suggestion  was  immediately  adopted,  and  three  ringing  hurrahs  were 
given.  Many  of  the  reverend  gentleman's  admirers  afterwards  flocked 
round  him  and  shook  him  by  the  hands, 


APPENDIX. 


THE   REY.  MR,   BEECHER  AT   LANCASHIRE 
INDEPENDENT    COLLEGE. 


On  Saturday  afternoon,  October  10th,  1863,  the  students  of  the 
Lancashire  Independent  College,  Withington,  seized  the  opportunity 
of  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher's  short  visit  to  this  neighbourhood 
to  invite  him  to  the  College,  to  receive  from  them  an  address.  The 
presentation  took  place  in  the  library.  Mr.  Beecher,  who  was  accom- 
panied by  Mr.  J.  H.  Estcourt,  met  with  an  enthusiastic  reception. 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  address,  which  was  read  and  pre- 
sented by  Mr.  Atkinson,  the  senior  student : — 

Reverend  and  Dear  Sir, 

We,  the  students  of  the  Lancashire  Independent  College,  heartily  welcome 
you  amongst  us  to-day.  We  rejoice  to  see  you  in  our  college.  Though  we  have 
not  had  the  opportunity  of  becoming  personally  acquainted  with  you  till  now,  we 
have  long  known  you  through  your  writings,  and  through  the  fame  you  have 
acquired  in  your  own  country  and  the  world  as  a  Christian  minister  and  a  philan- 
thropist. We  have  heard  much  of  your  public  career.  And  it  is  with  a  special 
admiration  that  we  call  to  mind  the  firm  and  persistent  opposition  which  you  pre- 
sented to  the  compromise  which  issued  in  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law — the  protection 
which,  in  defiance  of  that  law,  you  have  undauntedly  afforded  to  the  negro  runaway — 
the  manly  stand  you  have  taken  in  society  in  opposition  to  an  unworthy  and  un- 
christian prejudice  against  men  of  colour— and  the  efforts  you  have  made  against 
overwhelming  odds  to  obtain  liberty  and  free  speech  for  black  men  and  white  men 
alike.  But  while  we  hail  you  as  the  friend  of  the  negro  and  the  champion  of  the 
oppressed,  we,  as  students  for  the  Christian  ministry,  are  still  more  deeply  interested 
in  your  career  as  a  minister  of  the  gospel ;  and  we  take  this  opportunity  of  assuring 
you  that  the  noble  example  you  have  set  us,  in  earnest,  self-denying,  and  practical 
work  for  Christ,  has  inspired  us  with  the  warmest  sympathy  and  regard.  We 
wish  you,  reverend  and  dear  sir,  health  and  long  life ;  and  our  prayer  shall  be  that 
you  m.ay  be  enabled,  by  God's  blessing,  still  further  to  promote  the  interests  of  pure 
religion  in  your  country,  and  to  place  the  top-stone  on  that  edifice  of  social  and 
religious  freedom  which  you  have  so  nobly  laboured  to  raise. 

The  Lancashire  Independent  College,  10th  October,  1863. 

Mr.  BEECHER,  on  rising  to  reply,  was  loudly  applauded.  He 
said  :  Although  I  am  pressed  for  time,  I  could  not  deprive  myself  of  the 
pleasure  of  meeting  you,  for  I  feel  a  most  lively  interest  in  all  young 
men  who  are  preparing  themselves  for  that  which  I  esteem  to  be  the 
most  honourable  and  by  far  the  happiest  work  in  life — the  Christian 
ministry.  My  father,  you  know,  was  a  clergyman  before  me,  and  it 
pleased  God  to  give  him  eight  sons.  Every  one  of  them  is  a  minister  of 
the  gospel,  and  their  children  are — not  all,,  but  in  numbers,  also  be- 
coming clergymen.     I  can  say  that  I  am  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews. 


APPENDIX.  169 

(Laughter  and  applause.)  My  own  ministration  has  extended  over  a 
period  of  from  twenty-five  to  thirty  years.  Having  been  born  and 
educated  in  New  England,  I  was  called,  immediately  after  my  gradua- 
tion at  college,  to  leave  for  the  West,  where  I  laboured  for  fifteen  years 
as  a  settled  pastor  in  the  Presbyterian  Church.  In  our  country, 
Presbyterians  take  Congregational  Churches,  and  Congregationalists 
Presbyterian,  indifferently;  and  I  was  called  to  minister  in  the  Presby- 
terian Church  in  the  West,  studying  and  preaching  in  the  midst  of 
communities  where,  from  recent  settlement  and  spareness  of  popula- 
tion, there  was  much  missionary  work  to  be  done.  My  study  was 
my  saddle,  for  years  of  my  life.  After  that  I  was  removed  to  the  great 
metropolis  of  our  country — Brooklyn  being  really  part  of  the  city 
of  New  York,  'separated  only  by  a  river.  There  I  have  pursued  my 
ministry  from  that  day  to  this,  in  a  time  of  agitation  unparalleled  in  the 
history  of  our  country.  I  have  stated  these  facts  because  I  wish  to 
bear  witness  that  after  this  experience,  and  with  the  knowledge  that  I 
now  have,  if  any  office  of  state,  or  any  office  in  society  of  any  description 
whatever  were  proffered  me  as  an  honour,  or  as  a  place  of  joy  and  com- 
fort, I  should,  without  any  hesitation,  reject  them  each  and  all,  as  being 
less  than  the  gospel  ministry.  (Applause.)  To  a  young  man  who  looks 
out  with  some  proper  diffidence  of  his  own  powers ;  who  is  uncertain 
whether  he  shall  succeed  or  not ;  who  .has,  if  he  be  a  cautious  man  by 
nature,  some  provident  fears  as  to  support  and  as  to  relative  position  in 
society,  it  ought  to  be  something  encouraging  to  hear  one  as  old  as  I  am, 
and  after  so  many  years  of  ministration,  say  that  there  is  nowhere  else 
in  the  world  where  the  promise  of  the  Saviour  is  so  sure  to  be  fulfilled, 
"  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,  and  all  these 
things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  Young  gentlemen, — if  you  seek  a  settle- 
ment for  the  purpose  of  forestalling  God's  providence  and  making  your 
own  arrangements  ;  if  it  is  an  ambitious  settlement,  if  it  is  a  profitable 
settlement,  you  put  that  promise  away  from  you.  You  make  men 
your  almoners  and  treasurers,  not  God.  But  I  had  rather  settle  in 
poverty  with  God  for  my  treasurer  than  take  the  most  ambitious  posi- 
tion in  life  with  only  man  to  lean  upon.  He  never  betrays  his  promises, 
and  although  I  have  seen  days  of  poverty,  days  also  of  abundance,  under 
both  circumstances  I  have  the  most  simple,  unfeigned,  and  child-like 
faith  in  this,  that  if  a  man  will  without  reserve  give  himself  to  the  work 
of  God,  God  will  put  about  him  the  everlasting  arms  of  his  support,  and 
he  never,  not  for  an  hour,  not  for  a  moment,  whatever  the  seeming  may 
be,  will  be  betrayed  or  forsaken.  You  may  trust  God,  and  you  may 
give  yourselves,  without  a  thought  for  external  matters,  to  the  work  of 
the  ministration  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  this  leads  me  to  say 
that  for  this  work  you  must  love  Christ.  There  are  a  great  many 
religious  people  in  the  world,  but  I  am  afraid  not  many  Christians. 
There  are  many  whose  religion  is  duty ;  whose  religion  is  worship,  or 
submission,  or  holy  fear  and  reverence ;  which  are  all  indispensable 
auxiliaries.  But  no  man  is  a  Christian  who  does  not  love.  And  it  is 
love,  as  a  very  torrid  zone  in  the  heart,  and  love  to  Christ  as  distin- 
guished from  the  Father  or  the  Spirit  that  makes  a  man  a  Christian. 


170  APPENDIX 

And  where  one  has  that  heroic  inspiration ;  where  more  than  father, 
more  than  mother,  more  than  wife,  more  than  child,  more  than 
friends,  more  than  self,  he,  loving  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  has  the 
witness  of  it  day  by  day  in  his  own  soul,  so  that  all  these  other 
relationships  derive  their  odour,  their  flavour,  their  light,  and  their 
beauty  from  the  reflection  of  the  higher  love  in  him  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ;  where  it  is  his  life,  so  that  he  can  say  with  the  apostle,  "The 
life  which  I  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God" — then  it 
will  become  easy  to  do  it ;  otherwise  hard.  I  beseech  of  you  never  to 
neglect  a  duty ;  never  to  cease  to  cultivate  conscience ;  but  I  beseech  of 
you  do  not  go  into  the  ministry  to  be  merely  duty-performing  ministers. 
Let  me  say,  without  offensive  personality,  that  I  do  not  preach  because  it 
is  my  duty,  I  do  not  work  because  it  is  my  duty.  I  both  preach  and  I 
labour,  because  I  ddh't  know  anything  on  earth  that  is  so  pleasant  to 
me.  I  love  it.  Every  year  it  pleases  my  people  to  give  me  some  four 
Sabbaths  of  rest,  and  the  weeks  on  either  side  make  it  a  rest  of  about 
six  secular  weeks.  I  am  always  glad  to  go  away  and  rest,  for  I  am 
very  tired  when  the  hot  month  of  August  comes ;  but  I  can  bear  witness 
that  I  go  back  a  great  deal  more  glad  to  my  work  than  ever  I  went  away 
from  it.  (Applause  and  laughter.)  I  have  to  say  again  and  again,  "After 
all,  vacation  is  the  heaviest  month  in  the  year  to  me."  And  yet  that 
season  is  happy,  it  is  floral,  it  is  full  of  God  in  nature;  but  to  stand 
among  my  people, — to  look  among  those  faces  that  I  shall  see  yet 
glorified, — to  know  that  I  bear  my  Master's  heart  in  my  hand,  and 
that  I  am  labouring  for  Christ,  and  am  to  present  spotless  before 
the  throne  of  eternal  glory  those  whom  He  has  committed  to  my 
charge ;  to  see  the  evolutions  of  God's  grace  in  the  hearts  of  men  ;  to 
trace,  to  follow,  to  aid — I  know  of  nothing  under  the  sun  that  is  such 
fruition  and  such  joy,  and  such  continual  peace  as  that.  If  you  con- 
sulted but  selfish  joy,  if  that  were  a  possible  thing,  you  had  better  be  a 
minister  of  Christ's  gospel — not  a  fearing  minister,  not  an  anxious 
minister,  not  a  minister  that  is  always  talking  and  thinking  about  his 
"  awful  responsibilities."  (Laughter.)  That  is  the  way  a  slave  should 
talk,  but  that  is  not  the  way,  as  a  son  of  God,  you  should  talk.  You 
are  children  ! — not  servants — who  have  been  taken  into  the  bosom 
and  confidence  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  what  have  you  to 
talk  about  "  awful  responsibilities."  Love  and  trust  are  the  victorious 
mottoes  of  every  Christian  minister.  'No  evil  can  befal  you;  nothing 
can  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  Christ.  To  go  cheerfully,  and 
hoping,  and  loving,  and  courageous,  and  undaunted,  always  sure  that 
there  is  a  Providence  in  which  you  are  moving — this  is,  indeed,  to 
be  a  free  man.  And  there  is  nothing  that  takes  away  the  fear  of 
man  and  the  fear  of  human  society,  and  nothing  which  takes  away 
that  fear  which  is  the  most  troublesome  of  all,  the  fear  that  works 
through  conscience,  so  much  as  love.  "  Love  casts  out  fear,"  and  it  is 
not  perfected  till  it  does.  And  is  there  no  fear  in  Christian  experience  % 
Yes.  Just  like  the  sub-bass  in  the  organ ;  while  both  hands  are 
carrying  the  full  harmony  and  the  melodies  above,  there  is,  far  down, 
but  as  a  mere  lower  foundation,  the  rolling  sub-bass.     Down  there  let 


APPENDIX.  171 

conscience  and  fear  thunder,  but  high  above  let  all  the  harmonies  and 
melodies  of  heaven  sound  out  more  full,   clear,  and  more  cutting,  and 
lead  the  rest.     (Applause.)     I  do  not  know  how   it   is   with   you   in 
England — I  am  not  competent  to  speak  to  you  of  your  duties  in  parishes 
here — things  are  different.     I  shall  not  venture  a  single  word  in  that 
regard.     In  our  country  ministers  are  more  free.     I  take,  and  we  take, 
a  larger  scope  than  you   do   here.       Everything    of   that  kind   must 
depend  on  your  own  good  sense,  which  must  judge  of  the  institutions, 
manners,  customs,  and  opinions  that  are  round  about  you,  and  that  will 
take   on   a  different  form  in  different  periods  and  different  nations. 
With  us,  because  all  public  questions  are  settled  by  the  common  people's 
vote,  we   are   obliged,    wherever   that   public   question   carries   moral 
influence  with  it,  to  regard  the   moral   side  of  all   public  questions. 
And  that  gives  a  latitude   to   the  minister  of  the  gospel.      1   don't 
know  but  you  take  it  here  ;  but  I  have  an   impression  that  you  do 
not   to    any   such  extent   as   we   do.         Just   now,    the   ministry   of 
our  own  country  are  called,  in  a  signal  and  extraordinary  manner, 
into  public  affairs.     I  shall  not  trouble  you  with  any  general  remarks 
in  respect  to  the  struggle  in  America,  but  only  to  say  this,  that  never 
before  or  since  the  founding  of  the  colonies,  were  all  the  churches  of 
America  so  nearly  unified  as  they  are  to-day.     I  have  with  jne  else- 
where the  resolutions  of  Lutherans,  Baptists,  Methodists,  Presbyterians  ; 
of  every  shade  of  Congregationalists  ;  of  Episcopalians,  and  all  and  every 
denomination  save  the  Catholic,  running  through  three  years,   from 
North,  South,  Middle  States,  East  and  West — the  most  Conservative 
hitherto — all  of  them  with  one  testimony  and  one  feeling,  in  respect  to 
the  condition  of  things  in  our  country.     It  is  sometimes  said  that  the 
North  deserves  no  sympathy,  because  there  is  no  sincerity,  no  heartiness 
in  its  movements  in  this  subject.     The  man  that  says  that  in  England 
is  but  ignorant ;  the  man  that  says  that  in  America  is  a  knave.     No 
sincerity  !    There  is  nothing  else  in  the  Christian  community — ministers 
and  people — that  is  so  inwrought  into  the  very  feeling  and  fulness  of 
their  life  as  never  was  any  external  and  secular  aspect  of  affairs  before 
since  America  was  discovered.     (Hear.)     Why,  it  is  a  portion  of  their 
religion,  just  as  much  as  the  emancipation  of  the  Israelites  was  a  part 
of  Moses'  religion.    We  feel  called  in  the  matter  of  God  by  a  Providence 
which  speaks  as  loud  to  our  ears,  as  ever  the  top  of  Sinai  spoke  to 
Moses',  or  to  the  Hebrews'  ears.     And  it  is  the  business  of  the  Gospel  to 
produce  the  manhood  of  four  millions  of  the  human  race,  denuded  of 
manhood — we  feel  that  it  is  the  peculiar  work  of  the  Gospel  in  America 
in  this  age.     The  whole  air  is  full  of  sincerity  and  of  religious  con- 
viction, and  there  is  almost  no  division  of  opinion  on  that  subject. 
There  never  was  a  more  sublime  moral  spectacle  than  that  singular  and 
unsought  unison  which  it  has  pleased  God,  by  the  pressure  of  external 
circumstances,  to  bring  to  pass  in  the  American  Church  at  this  time. 
And  now  I  ask — not  that  you  should  commit  yourselves  one  way  or 
another,  but  you  are  men  of  prayer,  or  why  are  you  here  preparing  for 
sacred  avocations  1 — I  ask  that  you  will  not  forget  to  pray  for  America, 
And  I  ask  that  you  will  pray  such  prayers  that  angels  can  with  self- 


172  APPENDIX- 

respect  carry  them  up  to  God,  for  I  have  heard  prayers  that  I 
did  not  believe  an  angel  would  touch.  (Laughter.)  Not,  then, 
those  prayers  so  cautiously  circuitous  as  to  touch  everything  with- 
out touching  anything — (laughter) — not  prayers  that  shall  give  you 
an  appearance  of  doing  your  duty,  without  committing  yourself  one 
way  or  another ;  not  prayers,  so  far  South  as  not  to  commit  you 
with  the  North,  and  so  far  North  as  not  to  commit  you  with  the 
South.  (Applause.)  Pray  for  something,  and  mean  it.  (Hear.)  And 
if  you  believe  that  liberty  is  a  part  of  the  Gospel  work;  if  you  believe 
that  God  is  preparing  the  way  for  the  emancipation  of  four  million 
men  :  and  I  know  it,  I  feel  it  in  my  soul  as  if  it  were  an  inspiration 
and  a  revelation — then  pray  that  the  hand  of  those  men  in  the  North — 
the  whole  Christian  brotherhood — that  are  now  being  lifted  up  to  support 
the  hands  of  our  President  may  be  strengthened.  For  while  his  hands 
are  up  Israel  prevails,  and  when  they  fall,  Anialek  prevails.  Pray  that 
his  hands  may  be  held  up,  and  that  the  church  of  Christ  may  not  in 
America  backslide  from  her  witness,  and  her  fidelity  to  this  great  cause 
of  God  among  men.  Should  any  of  you  come  to  our  shores — it  is  not 
improbable — come  early.  After  men  are  forty  years  old  it  is  not  wise  to 
emigrate  as  a  rule ;  men  should  emigrate  while  yet  young,  if  they  are 
ever  to  do  it.  Then,  they  change  circumstances  easily.  Their  roots  are 
not  grown  into  the  soil;  they  are  adaptable  to  new  times,  new  circum- 
stances, new  relations.  I  suppose  you  are  wanted  in  England.  I  do  not 
know  how  much  ;  but  I  do  know  that  there  never  were  fairer  fields, 
nobler  opportunities  for  usefulness  for  men  that  in  the  ministry  sought 
not  themselves  but  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  than  in  the  ample  and  ever 
new  opening  states  of  our  Western  country.  I  have  laboured  there. 
I  know  the  privations ;  but  I  know  the  joys.  It  is  a  supreme 
gladness  to  labour  at  the  foundation.  Other  men  shall  come  and 
build  finer  structures,  but  the  tears  that  missionaries  shed,  the  prayers 
that  men  offer  under  the  trees  where  they  labour  in  the  woods ; 
the  sacrifices  men  make,  and  are  glad  that  they  make  them,  and  quite 
laugh  at  them ;  there  is  nothing  more  precious  in  human  experience, 
than  the  joys  of  Christ's  missionary,  with  hope  and  faith  very  far  sur- 
passing the  joys  from  secular  sources.  The  nearer  you  live  to  God,  the 
more  you  give  yourselves  up  to  him,  the  higher  and  happier  you  will  be, 
and  the  stronger.  And  while  I  would  not  ask  you  to  dismiss  the  gifts 
of  understanding,  or  to  seek  less  than  the  most  perfect  education  your 
time  and  means  allow,  for  you  will  have  need  of  all  of  it ;  yet  the 
foundation  of  all  education,  the  very  prime  motive  power  by  which  it 
should  be  all  directed,  is  love — love  to  God,  and  love  to  man.  (Applause.) 
May  that  God,  by  whom  we  both  live  and  hope,  bless  you  ;  and  may 
our  respective  spheres  of  labour  bring  us  to  meet  together  in  the 
unchanging  clime  of  Heaven.     (Applause.) 

On  the  proposition  of  Mr.  Handley,  seconded  by  Mr.  Robinson,  a 
vote  of  thanks  was  given  to  Mr.  Beecher  for  his  visit  and  address. 

Mr.  Beecher  was  then  conducted  over  the  college,  and  departed,  the 
students  cheering  him  from  the  steps  till  the  cab  in  which  he  rode  away 
was  out  of  sight. 


APPENDIX.  173 


MR.    BEECHER    AND    THE    NONCONFORMIST 
COLLEGE    STUDENTS. 


On  Thursday  evening,  October  32nd,  1863,  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher 
was  entertained  at  a  soiree,  and  presented  with  an  address  by  the 
students  of  five  of  the  Nonconformist  Colleges  in  and  about  London — 
namely,  the  Independent  Colleges  of  St.  John's  Wood  and  Hackney, 
the  Countess  of  Huntingdon's  College  at  Cheshunt,  the  Baptist  College, 
Regent's  Park,  and  the  Presbyterian  Theological  Hall,  Queen's  Square. 
The  place  of  meeting  was  the  Institution,  at  St.  John's  Wood,  and 
the  number  of  students  that  assembled  was  about  250.  When  tea  and 
coffee  had  been  served,  the  company  repaired  to  the  spacious  library, 
and  on  Mr.  Beecher's  entrance  accompanied  by  Dr.  Halley,  Dr.  Spence, 
Dr.  Tomkins,  Rev.  T.  Binney,  Rev.  A.  Raleigh,  Rev.  James  Stratten, 
Professors  Newth  and  Nenner,  the  Rev.  Kilsby  Jones,  and  some  other 
gentlemen,  he  was  greeted  with  loud  and  prolonged  applause. 

The  Rev.  ROBERT  HALLEY,  D.D.,  president  of  the  college,  took 
the  chair,  and  a  hymn  having  been  first  sung,  he  said  he  was  sure  he 
might  say  that  it  afforded  all  present  the  highest  gratification  and  de- 
light to  receive  in  their  midst  from  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  such  a 
man  as  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher — (loud  cheers) — not  only  as  the 
son  of  Dr.  Beecher,  whose  writings  were  well  known  in  this  countiy 
and  greatly  valued,  or  as  the  brother  of  Mrs.  Stowe,  the  talented  author 
of  that  remarkable  book,  "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,"  but  also,  and  chiefly  as 
a  man  who  was  himself  both  well  known  and  esteemed  in  Great  Britain 
as  a  writer,  a  preacher,  and  a  platform  orator,  and  one  who  had  ren- 
dered most  important  service  to  the  cause  of  human  freedom  in  America 
long  before  the  existing  war  broke  out.  (Cheers.)  They  could  not  have 
such  a  gentleman  among  them  without  feelings  of  pleasure,  and  would 
rejoice  to  receive  any  of  those  honoured  men  whose  names  Mr.  Beecher 
had  mentioned  on  Tuesday  evening,  who  had  done  and  suffered  so  much 
for  what  they  believed,  and  what  the  Christian  people  of  England 
believed,  to  be  the  cause  of  liberty,  of  truth,  and  of  Christianity  in 
America.  (Cheers.)  This  being  a  students'  meeting,  he  would  say  no 
more,  but  call  upon  Mr.  Jones,  the  senior  student  of  New  College,  to 
read  the  address. 

Mr.  JONES  accordingly  stood  forward  and  read  the  following 
document  : — 

Rev.  and  Dear  Sir, 

We,  the  students  of  the  Independent,  Baptist,  and  Presbyterian  Colleges  are 
glad  to  welcome  you  among  us  this  evening.  We  do  this  in  no  spirit  of  cold  for- 
mality, but  in  the  sincerity  of  our  hearts,  assured  that  you  are  a  man  called  of  God 
to  a  great  and  good  work.  We  esteem  it  an  honour,  knowing  that  your  time  is  so 
limited  and  so  fully  occupied,  to  receive  a  visit  from  so  distinguished  a  stranger  and 


174  APPENDIX 

so  eminent  a  minister.  We  recognise  in  you  one  who  has  devoted  his  best 
energies  and  the  rare  abilities  with  which  God  has  endowed  you  to  the  cause  of 
•civil  and  religious  freedom,  and  the  moral  and  social  elevation  of  the  degraded  and 
oppressed.  During  the  whole  course  of  your  public  life  you  have  ever  indignantly 
condemned  the  monstrous  sin  and  curse  of  slavery,  and  maintained  with  all  your 
eloquence  and  at  much  cost  the  common  rights  and  heritage  of  humanity.  And 
our  earnest  hope  is  that  you  may  soon  see  the  reward  of  your  labour  in  the  abolition 
of  the  social  distinctions  of  colour,  and  in  the  renewed  prosperity  of  the  American 
Republic.  Not  only  do  we  honour  you  as  a  social  reformer,  and  one  to  whom  the 
best  interests  of  your  country  are  dear,  but  we  especially  welcome  you  to  this 
college  as  a  Christian  minister.  While  thankful  that  in  the  past  God  has  so 
eminently  blessed  you  as  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel,  we  pray  that  He  will  graciously 
bestow  upon  you  health,  strength,  and  long  life,  that  you  may  be  still  more  useful 
in  your  important  labours  in  the  Christian  ministry,  and  that  you  may  be  in- 
creasingly able  by  your  advocacy  in  the  pulpit,  on  the  platform,  and  through  the 
press  to  hasten  the  time  when  God's  will  shall  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven." 
(Loud  cheers.) 

The  address  was  signed  representatively  by  the  senior  students  of 
each  college. 

Mr.  BEECHEB,  on  rising  to  respond  was  again  warmly  cheered. 
He  felt  deeply  grateful,  he  said,  for  the  kindly  greeting  that  had  been 
given  hirn.  It  was  much  pleasant er  to  his  mind  and  heart  than  the 
tumultuous  welcome  of  larger  and  more  promiscuous  assemblies ;  and 
he  was  particularly  pleased  with  that  part  of  the  address  in  which  he 
was  recognised  as  a  Christian  minister.  Love  towards  Christ  was  a 
bond  which  united  them  so  closely  as  to  make  them  blood  relations,  and 
caused  them  to  be  dear  to  each  other  on  earth,  and  filled  them  with  the 
hope  of  sweeter  friendship  and  nobler  joys.  He  disclaimed  the  idea  of 
having  suffered  losses  on  account  of  his  exertions  in  the  cause  of  human 
freedom,  because  he  had  never  looked  for  the  rewards  of  position  and 
public  favour  on  account  of  anything  he  had  done,  and  because  he  had 
always  felt  it  to  be  an  unspeakable  honour  and  reward  to  be  permitted 
to  engage  in  the  work  of  Christ,  and  to  do  anything  for  Him.  Even 
sufferings  for  the  Master's  sake  was  a  blessed  thing.  In  accepting  the 
invitation  to  meet  the  brethren  now  present  he  had  no  thought  of 
speaking  to  them  on  American  affairs,  and  would  confine  his  remarks 
to  matters  relating  to  Christian  work.  Accordingly,  he  proceeded  to 
advise  the  young  men  regarding  their  studies  while  at  college,  and 
touched  upon  various  points  appertaining  to  the  propagation  of  the 
Gospel  in  their  after  days.  He  set  out  by  strongly  urging  due  attention 
to  the  laws  of  bodily  health,  as  often  fundamental  to  success.  Morbid 
ideas  of  religion,  and  many  of  the  heresies  of  the  Church  had  sprung  from 
bad  digestions — (laughter  and  cheers) — for  depend  upon  it  a  very  close 
connection  subsisted  between  the  brain  and  the  stomach.  The  New  Testa- 
ment commanded  men  to  consecrate  their  bodies  as  much  as  their  souls 
to  God.  He  earnestly  exhorted  the  students  to  acquire  as  much  knowledge 
as  possible  before  the  time  came  for  them  to  enter  upon  the  active  duties 
of  their  profession,  assured  that  they  would  find  their  work  vastly  easier 
by  so  doing ;  and  cautioned  them  against  supposing  that  any  sort  of 
degree  of  mental  attainments  would  make  up  for  the  want  of  personal 
piety.  By  this,  he  said,  he  did  not  mean  merely  the  ecclesiastical  idea 
of  piety,  the  relation  of  the  soul  towards  God,  but  its  relations  also 


APPENDIX,  175 

towards  man — the  Divine  awakening  of  the  entire  faculties,  powers,  and 
affections,  and  their  employment  for  the  good  of  humanity  as  well  as 
for  the  glory  of  the  Most  High.  Religion  did  not  consist  only  in  prayer 
and  meditation,  but  in  genial  sympathy  and  brotherly  love,  showing 
itself  in  acts  of  benevolence.  As  ministers,  they  were  not  to  seek  then- 
own  ease,  or  for  high  social  position,  but  to  forget  themselves  in  their 
work,  endeavouring  only  to  be  useful,  and  then  a  blessed  reward  would 
never  fail  to  be  obtained.  Mr.  Beecher  discoursed  at  some  length,  and 
in  eloquent  words,  upon  the  necessity  of  fervency  of  feeling  in  order  to 
rouse  the  indifferent  and  to  be  generally  successful  in  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel.  Good  sense  was  also  an  indispensable  qualification,  and 
this  would  regulate  the  warmth  and  zeal  which  should  never  be  allowed 
to  run  wild  ;  let  them  be  disciplined,  but  never  lost.  (Cheers.)  The 
minister  of  the  Gospel,  moreover,  must  have  a  firm  faith  in  the  truths 
he  taught,  believe  in  them  as  undoubtingly  as  men  did  in  material 
things,  and  resolve  to  stand  by  his  convictions  at  all  costs,  ever  keeping 
before  the  mind  the  shortness  of  time  and  the  eternity  that  is  to  follow. 
Mr.  Beecher  concluded  by  offering  prayer. 

A  vote  of  thanks  for  the  address,  moved  and  seconded  by  the  senior 
students  of  Regent's  Park  and  Cheshunt  Colleges,  was  carried  unani- 
mously, and  with  the  utmost  enthusiasm. 

In  response  to  the  wish  of  the  meeting,  Mr.  Binney,  Dr.  Spence, 
Mr.  Raleigh,  and  Mr.  Stratten  each  made  a  few  remarks  expressive  of 
the  pleasure  they  had  derived  from  Mr.  Beecher s  address,  and  wishing 
for  him  all  manner  of  happiness  and  success. 

Dr.  H ALLEY  spoke  with  much  earnestness  and  feeling  upon  the 
essential  unity  subsisting  between  the  peoples  of  England  and  of  America, 
and  uttered  a  fervent  hope  that  before  a  great  while,  by  the  intervention 
of  Divine  Providence,  the  horrors  of  war  might  cease,  and  liberty  for  all 
ranks  and  races  prevail  over  the  broad  and  glorious  continent  of  America, 
and,  united  in  sympathy  and  in  effort  with  England,  set  an  example  to 
the  world,  and  diffuse  Christian  civilisation  over  every  region  of  the 
earth.     (Loud  cheers.) 

The  benediction  having  been  pronounced,  the  proceedings  termi- 
nated. 


AilEX.  Ireland  and  Co.,  Printers,  tall  Mall  Court,  Manchester 


