AN  ADDRLSS 

TO  THE 

AMERICAN  NEGRO 


BY  THE  NEGRO  DEVELOPMENT  AND 
EXPOSITION  COMPANY  OF  THE  U.S.A. 

528  LAST  BROAD  5TRLLT,    -     RICHMOND,  VA. 


ADDRESS  TO  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 


BY  THE 

NEGRO  DEVELOPMENT  AND  EXPOSITION  COMPANY  OF 
THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 

To  the  Ten  Million  Negroes  of  the  United  States — 
Greeting — 

Whereas  a  large  number  of  representative  men  and  women  of  the 
race  secured,  under  the  laws  of  Virginia,  a  charter  for  the  Negro  De- 
velopment and  Exposition  Company  of  the  United  States  of  America, 
on  the  13th  day  of  August,  1903,  which  company  was  organized  for 
the  purpose  of  holding  a  separate  exhibit  on  the  occasion  of  the  300th 
anniversary  of  the  landing  of  the  first  English  speaking  people  of  this 
country  at  Jamestown.  Va.,  but  before  the  incorporation  of  this  com- 
pany, there  was  organized  and  chartered  the  Jamestown  Exposition  Com- 
pany, under  the  laws  of  Virginia,  for  the  purpose  of  celebrating  the 
said  300th  anniversary,  by  holding  a  land  and  naval  exhibition  at  or 
near  Hampton  Roads,  Va.  This  last  company  is  officered,  owned  and 
operated  by  the  white  people    of  this  country. 

The  Negro  felt  that  in  as  much  as  there  was  to  be  a  celebration 
of  the  said  event  by  the  white  race,  it  would  be  a  fit  and  opportune  time 
for  the  Negro  to  come  upon  the  scenes  and  there  present  to  the  nations 
of  the  earth,  the  evidence  of  his  thrift  and  progress,  by  putting  upon  ex- 
hibition the  articles  and  things  made  and  invented,  created  and  pro- 
duced by  the  race  since  its  emancipation,  and  that  in  accordance  with 
the  uncertain  and  unsatisfactory  conditions  now  existing  as  to  the  Ne- 
gro in  this  country,  that  a  creditable  exhibit  of  his  industrial  capacities 
would  result  in  untold  good  to  the  entire  race,  that  the  Negro  question 
has  been  and  is  being  discussed  all  over  this  country,  some  taking  a 
favorable  view  of  the  situation,  others  taking  different  views,  leaving 
him  in  an  unsatisfactory  position  as  to  his  relation  to  the  government 
and  the  country  in  which  he  lives.  A  creditable  exhibit  would  have  a 
tendency  to,  show  just  what  the  Negro  can  do,  what  he  has  done,  and 
what  he  is  doing  in  the  solution  of  the  much  talked  of  question,  or 
problem.  That  in  this  particular  time,  such  an  exhibit  would  be  pro- 
ductive of  great  results  from  every  point  of  view.  The  fact  that  the 
nations  of  the  earth  have  been  invited  by  the  President  of  the  United 
States  to  participate  in  the  said  exposition,  is  another  evidence  that 
such  an  exhibit  would  be  of  untold  benefit  to  the  Negro.  It  would 
also  be  stimulating  to  the  Negro  to  see  for  himself  what  he  can  do,  as 


2 


such  an  exhibit  would  bring  together  the  entire  race  with  its  exhibits  to 
be  thus  viewed,  which  under  no  other  circumstances  it  could  haave  done. 

After  the  incorporation  of  the  said  Negro  Development  and  Ex- 
position Company,  its  executive  officers  conferred  with  the  Jamestown 
Company  and  secured  concessions  to  hold  a  separate  and  distinct  ex- 
hibit on  the  occasion  of  the  great  national  and  international  exposition 
to  enable  the  Negro  to  produce  the  results  above  referred  to.  The 
concessions  were  in  every  way  satisfactory  and  agreeable  to  both  the 
Negro  Development  and  Exposition  Company  and  the  Jamestown  Ex- 
position Company.  After  this  concession,  the  said  Negro  Development 
and  Exposition  Company  proceeded  to  present  its  claim  for  a  special 
exhibit  on  account  of  the  race  to  the  American  people  regardless  of  race 
or  color.  Its  first  effort  was  for  the  endorsement  of  the  National  Negro 
Business  League,  of  which  Dr.  Booker  T.  Washington  is  president.  Its 
second  effort  was  to  secure  the  endorsement  and  support  of  the  National 
Negro  Baptist  Convention  at  its  session  in  the  city  of  Chicago  on  the 
27th  day  of  October  1905,  which  endorsement  was  unanimously  received. 
It  received  the  endorsement  of  a  number  of  the  State  Bantist  Con- 
ventions, and  of  the  State  A.  M.  E.  Conferences  including  that  of 
Virginia.  It  received  the  endorsement  of  the  State  Baptist  Conventions 
of  North  Carolina,  South  Carolina  and  a  number  of  district  and  other 
conventions  of  the  race  in  the  various  States  of  the  Union.  Among 
them  were  the  Florida  State  Negro  Business  League,  and  the  Missis- 
sippi State  Negro  Business  League.  We  carried  the  cause  from  State  to 
State.  We  have  had  resolutions  adopted  endorsing  our  efforts  in  nearly 
every  State  of  the  Union,  where  the  race  population  justified  the  adop- 
tion of  such  resolutions.  We  have  spoken  and  received  the  endorse- 
ment in  mass  meetings  assembled  in  the  cities  of  New  York,  Phila- 
delphia, Pittsburg  and  other  large  cities  in  the  North  and  West. 

The  company's  authorized  capital  stock  was  fixed  at  $800,000  at 
the  par  value  of  $10.00  each.  We  saw  that  the  monev  could  not  be 
raised  in  time  to  have  the  desired  result  bv  the  sale  of  the  capital  stock 
among  the  members  of  our  own  Tace.  We,  therefore,  appealed  to  the 
governors  of  the  different  States,  where  the  colored  people  were  in  larg1"1 
numbers  or  the  colored  population  justified  it,  asking  that  thev  recom- 
mend to  their  legislatures  the  appropriation  of  an  amount  of  money, 
justified  bv  the  number  of  Negroes,  to  aid  and  assist  the  Negro  of  their 
respective  States  in  uniting  with  their  brethren  in  Virginia  in  making 
a  creditable  exhibit  of  their  achievements  from  their  said  States 
From  them  we  received  favorable  response.  A  large  number  of  the 
governors  recommended  snch  an  appropriation,  and  in  a  number  of 
States  appropriations  have  been  made  for  the  said  State's  participation 
in  the  Jamestown  Exposition.  We  have  appealed  to  the  State  com- 
missioners, appointed  by  their  respective  governors,  asking  that  a  pro 
portion  of  the  appropriation  thus  made,  be  set  apart  to  assist  the  Negro 


3 


of  that  State  in  the  part  he  desires  to  take  in  connection  with  the  Ne- 
gro exhibit  at  the  Jamestown  Exposition.  We  have  appeared  before 
the  committees  of  several  legislatures.  We  have  presented  the  cause  of 
the  Negroes  and  asked  the  legislatures  to  provide  for  them.  Then, 
for  i'ear  that  the  States  might  not  act  as  promptly  as  we  hoped  to  or  as 
satisfactorily  as  we  hoped  they  would,  we  appealed  to  the  president  of 
the  United  States,  and  asked  for  the  influence  of  his  good  oihee  in 
securing  an  appropriation  from  the  national  government.  The  mere 
calling  the  President's  attention  to  the  situation  secured  his  immediate 
endorsement  and  his  pledge  of  support  in  our  effort  to  get  governmental 
aid  in  this  laudable  enterprise.  rlo  emphasize  his  position  m  the  matter 
on  the  occasion  of  his  visit  in  the  South  in  passing  through  Richmond, 
Va.,  on  the  18th  day  of  October,  1905,  President  Koosevelt  stopped  the 
procession  that  was  escorting  him  through  the  city  of  Richmond  when 
it  reached  the  head-quarters  of  the  Negro  Development  and  Exposi- 
tion Company,  and  there  called  for  Giles  B.  Jackson,  the  Director 
General  of  the  said  company,  and  addressing  him,  said  in  part;  "Mr. 
Jackson,  1  congratulate  you  and  your  people  on  the  magnificient  show- 
ing you  have  made  in  your  development.  1  am  with  you.  1  assure  you 
and  your  people  that  you  have  my  hearty  support  in  the  efforts  you 
are  making  to  have  a  creditable  exhibit  of  the  achievements  of  your 
race  and  1  commend  you  in  the  effort  you  are  making  for  the  better- 
men  of  the  condition  of  your  race." 

Having  thus  received  the  public  commendation  of  the  President 
of  the  United  States,  we  proceeded  to  Washington  with  a  bill  in  hand 
prepared  with  pains  and  asking  for  the  appropriation  of  $250,000  by 
the  Congress  of  the  United  States  to  the  Negro  Development  and  Ex- 
position Company,  to  aid  him  in  his  exhibit.  This  bill  was  referred 
to  the  committee  on  Industrial  Arts  and  Expositions  and  after  several 
meetings  of  the  committee  once  in  the  city  of  Norfolk  and  on  other 
occasions  in  the  city  of  Washington,  it  was  agreed  to  recommend  the 
appropriation  of  $100,000  in  the  aid  of  the  Negro  Development  and 
Exposition  Company.  This  bill  was  likewise  reported  by  the  committee 
in  the  senate,  and  on  the  30th  day  of  June,  it  passed  both  houses  of 
congress  and  was  signed  by  the  president  and  there  upon  became  the  law 
of  the  land. 

It  is  needless  for  us  to  say  that  we  had  quite  a  difficult  task  in 
getting  this  appropriation.  We  had  to  fight  those  whom  we  had  ex- 
pected would  be  our  friends,  and  those  whom  we  had  expected  to  meet 
in  compact  in  opposition  to  this  appropriation,  were  those  who  came  to 
our  rescue.  We  mean  the  white  men.  We  mean  there  was  not  a  single 
white  man  in  congress  to  raise  his  voice  against  us.  It  passed  congress 
with  only  one  vote  against  us  and  that  was  so  faint  one  could  not 
discover  the  one  who  said  it.  He  did  not  mean  it.  If  he  had,  he 
would  have  made  himself  heard  and  his  identity  known,  therefore,  we 


4 


regard  it  that  the  bill,  appropriating  this  $100,000  to  aid  the  Negro, 
was  passed  without  a  single  voice  against  it.  But,  strange  as  it  may 
appear,  there  were  those  among  our  own  race,  who  wrote  letters  to 
congress  protesting  against  governmental  aid  of  the  Negro  Development 
and  Exposition  Company,  and  these  were  men  of  learning,  as  we  are 
told,  but  their  effort  was  so  preposterous  that  it  made  friends  for  us 
in  congress.  The  white  man  saw  that  any  Negro  who  opposed  such  an 
appropriation  was  an  enemy  to  himself  and  his  race,  hence,  the  op- 
position of  the  few,  simply  made  friends  for  us.  We  have  not  an  un- 
kind word  to  say  against  them  or  anybody  else.  The  fact  that  the 
government  has  put  its  seal  of  approval  upon  the  effort  of  the  Negro 
Development  and  Exposition  Company  and  its  officers  by  making  the 
appropriation  to  aid  it  in  its  work,  is  sufficient  to  commend  the  said 
company  to  the  entire  Negro  race  and  to  the  American  people.  It 
does  commend  it,  and  in  no  uncertain  tone,  for  when  the  government 
of  the  United  States  passes  an  act  appropriating  $1000,000,  it  puts  its 
commendation  upon  it.  When  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  passes 
an  act  appropriating  $1.00  to  any  cause,  it  carries  with  it  its  com- 
mendation to  the  world.  The  committee  on  Industrial  Arts  and  Ex- 
positions investigated  everything  pertaining  to  the  Negro  Development 
and  Exposition  Company.  They  had  meetings  after  meetings,  and 
Negro  after  Negro  appeared  before  them,  either  in  writing  or  other- 
wise, and  tried  to  throw  cold  water  upon  the  efforts  of  the  Negro  m 
Virginia,  but  every  step  they  made  redowned  to  the  benefit  of  the  Ne- 
gro Development  and  Exposition  Company.  The  harder  the  Negro 
fought  it  the  better  faith  the  white  man  had  in  it,  because  the  Negro 
could  not  make  the  argument  sufficiently  strong  against  the  appropria- 
tion to  convince  an  illiterate  man,  much  less  a  member  of  congress,  tnat 
the  Negro  exhibit  was  not  the  thing  to  be  had. 

The  fact  that  there  was  a  Negro  department  at  the  Atlanta  Exposi- 
tion, which  was  supported  by  governmental  aid,  and  the  fact  that  there 
was  a  Negro  department  at  the  Charleston  Exposition,  which  was  sup- 
ported by  governmental  aid,  and  the  fact  that  the  Negro  exhibit  was 
gathered  together  by  the  authorities  of  the  national  government  and 
carried  to  Paris,  and  there  put  upon  exhibition,  all  three  of  which  ex- 
hibitions were  declared  a  success,  have  caused  our  opposers  to  abandon 
all  opposition,  and  to  unite  with  the  Negro  Development  and  Exposition 
Company  to  make  the  desired  success  of  the  exposition.  They  were  the 
pride  of  the  Negro  race.  This  alone  was  argument  in  favor  of  the  Ne- 
gro exhibit  at  the  Jamestown  Exposition,  and  left  no  room  for  the  op- 
posers  to  make  a  stand. 

Now  that  all  of  this  has  happened  and  the  Negro  Development 
and  Exposition  Company  is  still  marching  to  the  front  with  the  aid 
of  the  government,  and  is  planning  to  have  a  gigantic  exhibit  at  the 
Jamestown  Exposition,  and  that  the  government  of  the  United  States,  by 


5 


its  act  has  removed  all  doubt  as  to  lue  success  of  the  exhibit  and  has 
declared  its  faith  in  the  management  of  the  .Negro  Development  and 
Exposition  Company,  the  thing  now  to  do  is  for  the  whole  race,  even 
those  who  differ  with  us,  to  unite  as  one  and  carry  forward  the  great 
work  of  creating  the  gigantic  exhibit  on  behalf  of  the  Negro  race  of 
this  country  at  the  Jamestown  Exposition. 

The  argument  that  the  Negro  exhibit  was  a  jim  crow  affair,  has 
been  knocked  out  by  the  act  of  the  government  and  by  the  act  of  the 
Negro  Development  and  Exposition  Company.  The  fact  that  the  com- 
pany is  owned,  and  officered  by  the  Negro  himself  and  was  made  and 
created  on  his  motion,  removed  any  taint  of  jim  crowism.  If  the  Ne- 
gro Development  and  Exposition  Company  is  a  jim  crow  affair,  then 
every  institution  of  learning,  owned  and  ohieered  by  Negroes,  is  likewise 
a  jim  crow  affair,  every  church,  in  which  Negroes  worship  and  over 
which  our  bishops  preside,  is  a  jim  crow  affair.  If  one  is  a  jim  crow 
affair,  then  the  other  is.  We  say  neither  is.  The  Negro  Development 
and  Exposition  Company,  and  the  church,  and  the  institution  of  learn 
ing,  owned  and  operated  by  Negroes,  each  is  a  separate  institution  lor 
the  benefit  of  the  Negro,  and  so  will  be  the  Negro  exhibit  at  the  James- 
town Exposition. 

Argument  has  been  produced  against  the  exhibit  because  of  the 
jim  crow  car  laws,  that  exist  in  the  Southern  States.  This  we  de- 
plore, and  our  position  is  known.  We  were  so  much  opposed  to  the 
law,  that  Giles  B.  Jackson,  the  Director  General  of  this  company,  ap- 
peared before  the  legislative  committee  on  roads  and  internal  navigation 
of  the  Virginia  legislature,  and  opposed  the  enactment  of  this  law,  with 
all  his  vim,  oratory,  force,  and  effect.  He  made  it  possible  for  a  com- 
mittee, that  was  headed  by  Dr.  Atkins,  of  Hampton,  Va.,  to  appear 
before  the  said  committee  and  enter  a  solemn  protest,  but  after  all  the 
bill  was  enacted.  It  was  only  in  keeping  with  all  the  Southern  States. 
It  is  now  the  law,  and  as  law-abiding  citizens,  we  are  compelled  to  bow 
in  humble  submission.  If  the  State  is  insufficient  to  compel  us  to  obey 
the  law,  the  United  States  government,  under  the  constitution,  would 
have  to  intervene  until  we  were  subjected  under  the  laws  of  the  State. 
Then,  too,  is  it  not  the  proper  thing  for  us  to  do  to  make  the  best 
terms  we  can  with  railroads  since  they  have  the  power  to  give  equal 
accommodation  to  both  races,  that  being  the  law  of  different  Southern 
States,  that  the  races  should  be  separated  that  no  distinction  should  be 
made  as  to  accommodation?  It  is  incumbent  upon  the  Negro  to  stop 
kicking  and  quarreling,  and  go  to  the  law  and  to  the  heads  of  the  au- 
thorities of  the  States  and  ask  that  the  railroads  be  required  to  give 
equal  accommodation  for  the  colored  passengers,  and  this  will  be  done. 
But  whether  the  citizens  of  the  different  States  do  it  or  not,  the  Ne- 
gro Development  and  Exposition  Company,  having  in  charge  the  Ne- 
gro exhibit  at  Jamestown,  will  see  to  it  that  equal  and  good  accom- 


e 


modations  will  be  afforded  to  the  Negro  travellers,  to  and  from  the  ex- 
position. The  Negro  Development  and  Exposition  Company  is  making 
itself  busy  in  looking  after  this  part  of  the  program.  It  will  take  up 
the  matter  with  the  heads  of  the  railroad  companies.  In  fact,  it  has 
already  done  so  with  some  of  the  companies  and  they  have  pledged  their 
word  and  honor  that  good,  clean  and  satisfactory  accommodations  will 
be  given  to  the  Negro  travelers  from  the  North,  South,  East  and  West. 
That  they  shall  have  no  reason  to  complain,  other  than  the  fact  that 
they  will  not  be  riding  with  the  white  folks.  They  will  be  riding  to- 
gether in  clean,  decent  and  respectable  cars  with  efficient  service.  Those 
travelling,  who  find  any  fault  with  the  management,  will  please  report 
the  same  to  Giles  B.  Jackson,  the  Director  General  and  the  general  coun- 
sel for  the  Negro  Development  and  Exposition  Company,  of  U.  S.  A., 
and  he  will  take  the  matter  up  immediately  with  the  railroad  companies 
and  see  to  it  that  there  shall  not*  be  any  other  occasion  for  complaint. 
CoL  Jackson  is  on  good  terms  with  the  railroad  companies,  but  if  they 
fail  to  do  their  duty,  the  aid  of  the  corporation  commission,  having 
charge  of  the  overseeing  of  all  the  railroads  of  Virginia,  will  adjust 
matters.  This  commission  was  made  and  created  under  the  constitution 
of  Virginia  for  the  purpose  of  enforcing  the  laws,  and  its  aid  will  be 
invoked  whenever  the  occasion  requires,  but  it  is  hoped  and  believed 
that  the  occasion  will  not  require  it.  The  railroad  and  steamboat  com- 
panies will  make  special  effort  to  avoid  any  complaint  from  any  travel- 
lers on  all  lines  and  roads. 

We  issue  this  address  that  the  members  of  our  race  may  thoroughly 
understand  the  true  condition  of  affairs  and  that  they  may  not  be  afraid 
to  come  to  the  exposition.  The  fact  that  there  will  be  crowds  of  people 
coming  from  all  over  the  country  to  the  exposition  will  make  it  conven- 
ient for  the  reunion  of  families,  that  have  been  separated  for  ten,  twenty, 
yes,  thirty  years.  The  opportunity  will  be  afforded  for  the  meeting  of 
our  friends,  whom  we  have  not  seen  since  the  war.  The  opportunity  will 
be  afforded  for  the  meeting  of  our  kin-folks  and  relatives,  whom  we 
have  not  seen  since  our  emancipation.  Every  car  coming  will  bring 
lots  of  our  race,  every  boat  will  be  loaded  down.  On  every  day  there 
will  be  those  who  have  not  seen  each  other  for  years. 

RESTAURANT  ACCOMMODATIONS.  Board  and  lodging  will 
be  the  same  as  it  is  now.  No  one  will  be  allowed  to  charge  more  than 
the  usual  price.  Board  and  lodging  can  be  secured  in  the  families  and 
hotels  in  Norfolk,  Hampton,  Phoebus,  Newport  News  and  the  surround- 
ing towns.  . . 

Ample  accommodations  will  be  made  by  which  persons  can  reach 
the  exposition  grounds  in  twenty-five  minutes.  Street  facilities  and 
bus  lines  will  be  in  abundance.  The  colored  people  in  the  city  of  Nor- 
folk are  now  organizing  a  tranportation  line  with  the  view  of  running 
carriages  of  all  kinds  and  busses  into  the  grounds. 


7 


The  Jamestown  Exposition  Company  will  issue  their  proclamation 
calling  upon  the  people  to  do  justice  between  man  and  man.  The  au- 
thorities of  Virginia  will  see  to  it  that  no  man  will  be  put  to  incon- 
venience or  prosecuted  unless  he  is  proven  guility  of  violating  the  laws 
of  the  land.  The  law  is  not  made  to  punish  the  just  and  law  abid- 
ing citizens  but  it  is  made  to  punish  the  offenders  of  the  law,  and  it  is 
made  to  protect  the  just  and  those  who  come  under  its  protection.  There 
are  those  among  both  races  whom  the  law  was  made  to  subdue.  It 
will  not  allow  them  to  predominate  or  to  obstruct  the  law  abiding  mem- 
bers of  any  race,  who  shall  come  upon  the  soil  of  Viirginia,  The  judges 
of  our  courts  are  conservative.  We  speak  from  our  own  knowledge 
of  praetice  before  the  bar  for  twenty  years.  No  man  will  be  unfairly 
dealt  with,  but  he  must  obey  the  law.  We  mean  the  rowdy  and  shiftless 
element  that  might  drift  among  us.  They  will  find  the  white  an-1 
blaek  men  united  to  suppress  them,  if  they  commence  to  evad" 
law  or  hinder  others  in  their  pursuit  of  happiness.  The  Negro  will 
have  no  complaint  to  make  when  he  conies  to  the  exposition.  We 
vouch  for  it  that  the  first  car  load  that  corner  here  will  go  back  with 
such  good  news  and  glad  tidings  that  manv  more  will  be  anxious  to 
come.  This  remains  to  be  seen,  that  we  understand  the  situation  and 
predict  this  as  the  result  of  careful  study  of  the  situation. 

Onr  head-quarters  will  be  found  at: 

528  E.  Broad  street,  Richmond,  Va. 

663  Church  street,  Norfolk,  Va. 

Corner  12th  and  IT  streets,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C,  at  Tru? 
Reformers'  Hall ;  no  one  can  miss  it. 

Anyone  desiring  information,  in  goinsr  to  either  one  of  these  cities, 
it  will  be  well  to  applv  to  the  head-quarters  and  <?et  sneh  information 
that  thev  desire,  or  write  to  Giles  B.  Jackson,  528  Broad  street.  Rich- 
mond, Va. 

Head-quarters  are  open  for  exhibits.  Please  write  for  particulars. 
On  some  of  the  exhibits  premiums  will  be  declared  bv  the  executive 
board  after  the  exposition. 

Respectfully  submitted, 
NEGRO  DEVELOPMENT  ANT)  EXPOSITION  CO. 
W.  TSAAC  JOHNSON,  President, 
REV.  A.  BTNOA.  JR..  Vice-President. 
ROBERT  "KELSER,  Secretarv. 
R,  T.  HTLL.  Treasurer. 
REV.  THOS.  SHORTS.  Sub-Treasurer. 
J.  R.  HAWKINS.  Auditor  &  Chief  of  Einauee. 
MRS.  A.  M.  OTTRTTS,  Organizer. 
GILES  B.  JACKSON,  Director  General. 


8 


AN  APPEAL  FOR  AID, 

The  fact  that  the  Negro  Development  and  Exposition  Com- 
pany was  chartered  under  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Virginia,  with 
an  authorized  capital  stock  of  $800,000,  divided  into  shares  of  $10 
each,  is  sufficient  in  itself  to  show  the  purpose  of  the  Company  to 
raise  the  money  from  the  individual  members  of  the  race  by  the 
sale  of  the  stock,  and  since  several  of  the  States,  through  their 
Legislatures,  have  appropriated  money  in  aid  of  the  Exposition, 
and  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  having,  on  the  30th  day  of 
June  1906,  appropriated  $100,000  in  aid  of  the  Negro  Development 
and  Exposition  Company  of  the  United  States  of  America,  it  is  in- 
cumbent upon  every  member  of  the  race  now  to  subscribe  to  at 
least  one  share  of  this  stock  for  $10,  or  two  shares  for  $20,  or  three 
shares  for  $30,  or  four  shares  for  $40,  or  five  shares  for  $50,  or  six 
shares  for  $60,  or  seven  shares  for  $70,  or  eight  shares  for  $80,  or 
nine  shares  for  $90,  ten  shares  for  $100.  The  Company  promises 
to  pay  a  dividend  upon  this  stock,  which  we  hope  will  not  be  less 
than  25  per  cent.,  together  with  interest  at  6  per  cent.  Then, 
from  a  business  standpoint,  it  is  encouraging  for  any  member  of 
the  race  to  invest  money  for  such  a  number  of  shares  as  he  may 
feel  disposed  to.    It  is  a  paying  investment. 

Then,  to  subscribe  to  this  stock  you  would  first  have  made  an 
investment  of  money  that  could  not  be  made  in  any  other  enter- 
prise. Second,  you  wonld  aid  the  Company -in  raising  money  ne- 
cessary to  have  a  creditable  exhibit  on  behalf  of  the  race  at  the 
Jamestown  Exposition,  as  a  failure  to  have  a  creditable  exhibit 
would  be  a  failure  of  the  race:  but  to  make  a  gigantic  exhibit  as 
we  propose,and  as  most  assuredly  will  be  made,  it  will  be  the  suc- 
cess of  the  race;  for  the  race  will  be  judged  according  to  the  ex- 
hibit it  makes  at  the  Jamestown  Exposition.  If  it  makes  a  poor 
exhibit  it  will  be  so  judged.  If  it  makes  a  good  and  substantial 
exhibit  it  will  put  the  race  in  a  substantial  position  before  the 
world. 

Let  every  man,  woman  and  child,  send  us  $10  for  one  share  of 
stock,  or  as  many  more  as  they  desire.  Write  for  particulars  to 
R.  T.  Hill,  Cashier  of  True  Reformers'  Bank,  604  N.  Second  St., 
Richmond,  Va.,  or  to  Giles  B.  Jackson,  528  E.  Broad  St.,  Rich- 
mond, Va. 


f 


