n 

M 


IST  ,    C^CI6  ux 


LIBRARY  OF 
WELLESLEY  COLLEGE 


PRESENTED  BY 


V\r   C  0V\..   \J   \<vev.\=^?.cV 


\'5'%CsSId 


THE    ALABASTER   SARCOPHAGUS 


OIMENEPTHAH  I.,  KING  OF  EGYPT, 


NOW    IN 


SIR    JOHN    SOANE'S    MUSEUM,    LINCOLN'S    INN    FIELDS. 


DEAWN   BY   JOSEPH   BONOMI, 
AND  DESCEIBED   BY  SAMUEL   SHAEPE. 


Heaven  bestomng  knowledge  on  a  man  and  liis  soul. 


LONDON: 
LONGMAN,   GEEEN,   LONGMAN,   EOBEETS,   AND   GEEEN. 

1864. 


LONDON  ; 
PRINTED   BY  WOODFALL   AND   KINDER, 

MILFORD   lANE,    STRAND,    W.C. 


S/torlly    wlIL    ue.   ^uv  ItsAecL 

oil.   'for  Jon  ft.  Joa.?7eJ  ylluscuin. 
ycj  TUies,  Size    2o  x  /2/z. 

^Jrccwn    Sy   ■Jose.^A  JBonomi 

Pnc^e.    Co    SuOscrc6e?-s     /oZ.     A/ter  c^ay  of  Pu&leca.tcon.    /St 
)  /3  Jcn.co/?>!s    J'/'^n  U^e^c^S 


I  U  M  E  N  T 


CONTENTS. 


The  Tomb  .... 

On  the  King's  Names    . 

the  Age  of  the  Sarcophagus  . 
the  Temple  of  Errebek 
the  Hall  of  Columns  at  Karuak 
„  the  Buildings  at  Abydos 

the  Flaminian  Obelisk  at  Rome 
the  Antiquities  in  the  British  Museum 
„  the  Alabaster  Sarcophagus    . 
Description  of  the  Plates  : 

Plate  1       .  .  . 

Plates  2  to  8 — The  outside 
Plates  2  and  3 — First  picture 
Plates  3  and  4 — Second  picture 
Plates  4  and  5 — Third  picture 
Plates  5,  6,  and  7 — Fourth  picture 
Plates  7  and  8 — Fifth  picture 
Plates  9  and  10 — Sixth  picture 
Plates  10  and  11 — Seventh  picture 
Plates  12  and  13— Eighth  picture  . 
Plates  13,  14,  and  15 — Ninth  picture 
Plate  1 5 — Tenth  picture     . 
Plates  1 6  and  1 7— The  Bottom  of  the  Chest 
Plate  18 — Broken  Pieces  of  the  Right  Side  of  the  Lid 
Plate  19 — Broken  Pieces  of  the  Left  Side  of  the  Lid,  and 
Appendix  :    Tabular  View  of  Kings'  Names 


the  King's  various  Names 


PAGE 

1 

4 
6 
8 
t) 

10 
11 
12 
14 

20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
31 
31 
34 
36 
38 
40 


LIST    OF    THE    WOODCUTS. 


Neith,  the  Goddess  of  Heaven,  in  the  sacred  tree,  pouring  the  water  of  life  and  knowledge 
into  the  mouths  of  a  man  and  of  his  soul  in  the  form  of  a  bird  with  human  head  and 
hands.     From  a  tablet  in  the  British  Museum  ..... 

Fig.   1.  Plan  and  Section  of  the  tomb,  from  Horeau's  Panorame  d'Egypte 

2.  The  king  embracing  the  god  Osiris 

3.  The  Abyssinian  Fenek,  and  the  hieroglyphic  copied  from  it 

4.  Plan  of  the  Temple  of  Errebek.     Lepsius 

5.  View  of  the  ruined  portico.     Horeau    .  .  . 
0.  Plan  of  the  Temple  of  Karnak.     Lepsius 

7.  View  in  the  Hall  of  Columns  at  Karnak.     Owen  Jones 

8.  Column,  with  a  full-blown  Papyrus  capital 

9.  „  „        Papyrus  bud  capital 

10.  Four  gods  of  the  dead  on  Canobic  jars 

1 1 .  The  sun  with  rays  in  the  daytime,  and  the  sun  held  up  by  the  ocean  in  the  night 

12.  The  sculptor's  canou  ;  or,  the  proportions  of  the  human  figure 
Chronological  series  of  kings'  names       ..... 


TITLE-PAGE 
PAGE 
2 

3 

5 

8 

9 

10 

11 

11 

11 

21 

33 

35 

44 


NOTICE     TO     THE     READER. 


Plate   1 .     Plan,  Sections,  and  Dimensions  of  Sarcophagus. 

Plates  15 — 9,  inclusively,  should  be  read  in  the  reverse  order,  i.e.,  from  left  to  right,  in  the 

European  way,  commencing  with  Plate  15. 
Plates  17  and  16  represent  the  figure  and  hieroglyphics  on  the  floor  of  the  Sarcophagus. 
Plates  18 — 8,  inclusively,  should  be  read  from  right  to  left,  in  the  Oriental  way,  commencing 

with  Plate  8 ;  in  each  case  going  with  the  boat  of  Ra, 


THE   SARCOPHAGUS  OF  OIMENEPTHAH  I. 


ON   THE   TOMB. 


TN  October,  1815,  the  enterprising  traveller  Belzoni  was  in  Thebes, 
with  a  party  of  labourers  in  his  service  exploring  the  ruins,  and  more 
particularly  searching  for  tombs  on  the  western  bank  of  the  Nile.  On 
the  16th  of  the  month,  he  directed  his  men  to  open  the  earth  at  the  foot 
of  one  of  the  hills  in  the  Biban  el  Molook,  or  Valley  of  Kings'  Tombs, 
in  the  very  bed  of  a  watercourse,  down  which,  when  the  rain  falls,  a 
torrent  of  water  rushes  towards  the  Nile.  Their  labours  were  soon 
rewarded  by  their  finding  in  this  unlikely  spot  that  the  ground  had  been 
before  opened.  They  continued  their  work  on  the  17th  and  18th;  and 
on  the  latter  day,  a  day  memorable  in  the  history  of  Egyptian  dis- 
coveries, they  came  upon  the  entrance  of  an  unusually  important  tomb 
eighteen  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  ground.  Having  made  an  open- 
ing throudi  the  rubbish,  and  descended  the  first  staircase,  our  dis- 
coverer  reached  the  first  corridor  or  passage,  thirty-six  feet  long. 

A  second  staircase  of  twenty-three  feet  and  a  second  sculptured 
corridor  of  thirty-seven  feet  led  into  a  small  room,  marked  a  in  our 
plan  and  section.  Fig.  1.  This  was  about  thirteen  feet  square.  It  was 
also  a  well  or  pit  thirty  feet  deep,  crossing  the  footpath  of  an  intruder 
into  the  tomb,  so  as  to  bar  his  further  progress,  and  also  formed  to  catch 
any  water  that  might  drain  into  the  tomb  from  the  surface  of  the  earth. 
On  the  opposite  side  of  this  pit  was  a  small  opening  of  less  than  a 
yard  square,  through  which  some  former  intruder  had  entered  ;  and  in 
the  pit  were  the  two  rope  ladders  by  the  help  of  which  he  had  passed 
it,  first  descending  to  the  bottom,  and  then  ascending  on  the  other  side. 

B 


a  THE   SARCOPHAGUS    OF   OlMENEPTHAH   I. 

This  small  opening  had  been  broken  through  the  wall  by  which  the 
entrance  to  the  rooms  beyond  had  been  carefully  closed  after  the  body 
had  been  placed  in  what  was  meant  for  its  last  resting-place. 


-iniiiui[°p 

Fig.  1.     Plan  and  Section  of  the  Tomb. 


On  passing  this  pit  or  well,  the  discoverer  entered  the  first  grand 
hall  marked  b  in  our  plan  and  section.  This  is  about  twenty-six 
feet  square,  and  its  roof  is  upheld  by  four  pillars.  Beyond  this  is  a 
second  hall,  of  about  the  same  size,  marked  c.  From  this  there  was 
no  outlet.  Returning,  therefore,  into  the  first  hall,  he  descended  a  third 
staircase  of  thirteen  feet,  and  passed  along  a  corridor  of  thirty-six  feet, 
and  a  fourth  staircase  of  seventeen  feet,  and  crossed  a  small  room  of 
twenty-four  feet  by  thirteen.  He  then  entered  the  third  and  principal 
hall,  of  which  the  first  half  is  upheld  by  six  columns,  and  the  second 
half  has  an  arched  roof.  This  hall,  including  its  two  parts,  is  fifty- 
eight  feet  long  by  twenty-seven  feet  wide.  In  the  second  half  of  this 
hall,  under  the  vaulted  roof,  marked  d  in  our  plan  and  section,  stood 
the  sarcophagus.  Whether  the  king  was  buried  in  this  is  unknown, 
because  it  had  already  been  violently  opened  and  its  cover  broken 
to  pieces,  and  no  remains  of  the  body  were  found  there  when  Belzoni 
reached  it. 

Out  of  this  hall  there  are  six  passages.  On  each  side  are  two 
smaller  rooms,  in  which  were  some  wooden  statues  four  feet  high,  with 
a  circular  hollow  inside  as  if  to  contain  a  roll  of  papyrus.  At  the  end 
is  a  room,  in  which  was  found  the  mummy  of  a  bull,  buried  there 
probably  at  the  same  time  with  the  king,  and  a  countless  number  of 
small  wooden  figures  of  mummies  six  or  eight  inches  long,  with  some 
few  made  of  baked  clay,  with  a  surface  of  glazed  blue.  One  of  these 
wooden  figures,  bearing  this  king's  name,  is  published    in    Egyptian 


THE  SARCOPHAGUS  OF  OIMENEPTHAH  I.  3 

Inscriptions,  Plate   71.      One  of  blue  porcelain,  which  may  also  have 
been  found  in  the  tomb,  is  in  the  British  Museum. 

The  total  length  of  the  passages,  from  the  surface  of  the  ground  to 
the  room  which  held  the  sarcophagus,  is  three  hundred  and  twenty  feet, 
and  their  perpendicular  depth  one  hundred  and  eighty  feet.  And  lastly, 
from  the  floor  beneath  the  sarcophagus  descended  another  staircase 
three  hundred  feet  in  length,  so  far  blocked  up  with  rubbish  that  it  has 
never  been  explored  to  the  end. 

Among  the  mythological  sculptures  on  the  walls  of  the  tomb,  we  will 
mention  one  class  as  important,  because  less  common  than  the  others. 
They  represent  the  king  affectionately  embracing 
the  gods ;  see  Fig.  2,  where  he  throws  his  arms 
round  the  god  Osiris.  Most  of  the  ancient 
Pagan  nations  boasted  that  they  were  beloved 
by  their  gods  ;  the  Egyptian  kings  styled  them- 
selves— some  "  Beloved  by  Amun,"  some  "  Be- 
loved by  Pthah,"  and  some  "  Beloved  by 
Neith  ; "  but  in  this  sculpture,  the  king,  in  a 
less  usual  way,  declares  that  he  loves  the  god  in 
return  for  the  blessings  granted  to  him.  His 
son  also,  the  great  Rameses  II.,  who  is  usually  pig.  2. 

styled    Amunmai,  or    Beloved   by  Amun,  is  in 

the  same  way  sometimes  styled  ]\Iiamun,  or  Lover  of  Amun.  This 
throws  much  credit  upon  the  religious  feelings  of  the  Egyptians.  We 
afterwards,  in  Alexandria,  meet  with  the  name  Philammon,  a  translation 
of  this  last  name ;  but  out  of  Egypt,  it  is  not  till  after  the  spread  of 
Christianity  that  we  meet  with  names  showing  that  their  bearers  felt 
any  love  for  their  gods. 

Other  sculptures  on  the  walls  are  nearly  the  same  as  those  which  we 
now  examine  at  our  leisure  on  the  sarcophagus. 

The  sarcophagus,  for  the  sake  of  which  this  beautiful  tomb  had 
been  tunnelled  into  the  limestone  rock,  and  the  broken  pieces  of  its 
cover,  Belzoni  removed  and  brought  to  England.  After  some  little 
time,  Sir  John  Soane  bought  it  of  him,  and  then  presented  it  to  the 
nation,  together  with  the  other  architectural  and  antiquarian  objects 
in  his  museum. 


4  THE  SARCOPHAGUS  OF  OIMENEPTHAH  I. 

Together  with  the  broken  pieces  of  the  lid,  Belzoni  brought  out  of 
the  tomb  a  piece  of  alabaster,  part  of  a  squai'e  box  or  chest,  ornamented 
with  a  female  figure,  standing  at  the  corner,  whose  arms  are  stretched 
out  backwards,  so  that  each  arm  lies  on  one  of  the  two  sides,  which 
join  and  make  the  corner  of  the  box.  This,  however,  can  have  formed 
no  part  of  the  sarcophagus. 


ON    THE    KING'S    NAMES. 

Both  of  the  names  of  this  king  are  variously  spelt  upon  the  sarco- 
phagus, and  yet  more  variously  upon  his  other  monuments.     In  Plate  19 
we  have  given  five  ways  of  spelling  his  first  name,  Nos.  77-81,  and 
nine   of  spelling  his   second  name,  Nos.  82-90.     The  second  name  is 
that  to  which  we  attempt  to  give  a  sound,  because  it  is   that  which  is 
used  by  the  Greek  writers.     On  our  sarcophagus  it  always  has  the 
sitting  figure  of  Osiris,  crowned  with  the  mitre ;  having  a  ball  upon  the 
top,  and  two  wings  or  side  pieces,  as  in  Nos.  82,  87,  88,  and  89.     But 
the  earlier  forms  of  the  name  have  the  sitting  figure  of  Anubis,  with  the 
head  of  a  square-eared  dog,  as  in  Nos.  84,  85,  and  86.     On  some  change 
of  religious  opinion  this  square-eared  dog  was  no  longer  popular,  and 
in  the  name,  No.  90,  from  the  Flaminian  obelisk  at  Rome,  we  see  how 
his  figure  was  cut  out,  and  covered  up  by  the  figure  of  a  hawk-headed 
god.     This  change  of  feeling  towards  the  square-eared  dog  took  place 
in  Thebes  in  the  middle  of  this  reign.     It  did  not  take  place  so  soon  in 
Ethiopia.     In  the  temples  of  Abousimbel  made  in  the  next  reign  the 
square- eared  dog  at  first  received  his  due  honour,  though  his  name  and 
figure  were  afterwards  cut  out  by  the  chisel,  probably  before  the  end  of 
that  reign.     The  change  of  this  character  in  Oimenepthah's  name  made 
httle  change  in  its   sound,  as  the  figure  of  Anubis  was  an  A,  and  the 
Osiris  an  O.     Manetho  calls  this  king  Amenophath,  which  agrees  very 
well  with  name  No.  84,  spelling  it  Pthah,  A,  I,  M,  N,  and  reading  it 
Aimenepthah.     It  will  be  observed  that  in  so  reading  it  we  remove  the 
word  "  Pthah  "  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  name.     For  this 
we  have  full  authority  in  the  other  kings'  names.     Those  of  Hophra, 


THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH   I.  5 

Nephra,  Menophra,  Mykera,  and  others,  all  have  the  syllable  "Ra" 
first  among  the  hieroglyphical  characters  within  the  ovals,  while  it  ends 
the  names  as  they  are  written  by  the  Greek  authors.  But  we  prefer 
calling  our  king  by  the  name  No.  82,  which  is  the  later  form, 
Oi-men-pthah  or  Oimenepthah.  This  would  seem  to  have  been  the 
name  read  to  Diodorus  Siculus,  except  that  his  interpreter  gave  to 
the  figure  of  Osiris  the  force  of  Os,  and  read  it  Osi-men-pthah,  which 
Diodorus  wrote  Osymandyas.  Eratosthenes  writes  this  same  name 
Cho-mae-phtha,  and  translates  it,  "  The  world  beloved  by  Hephsstus." 
This  is  to  be  explained,  first  from  the  Egyptian  use  of  a  guttural,  a 
doubtful  breathing,  between  Ch  and  Th,  which  led  the  interpreter 
to  pronounce  our  O  as  Cho,  and  which  also  led  him  to  translate 
it  as  Tho,  the  world.  And  again  it  needs,  as  the  further  explanation, 
that  we  take  into  account  their  slovenly  habit  of  not  pronouncing 
the  N  at  the  end  of  a  syllable.  This  is  seen  on  comparing  our  first 
names,  No.  79  and  No.  80,  one  of  which  has  an  N  in  the  syllable  MEN, 
and   the    other  has  not.     The   square-eared  dog  was   the  Abyssinian 


Fig.  3.     The  Fenek. 


Fenek  of  Fig.  3 ;  and  by  the  side  of  it  is  the  hieroglyphic  copied  from 
it  by  the  Egyptian  sculptor. 

The  name  No.  86  is  larger  than  the  rest,  and  is  Amunmai  Aimenep- 
thah.  The  name  No.  85  is  a  contraction  of  this;  and  without  the 
help  of  the  former,  the  latter  could  hardly  be  explained. 

In  the  first  name.  No.  79,  the  sitting  figure  is  the  goddess  Me,  or  Mo, 
Truth  ;  and  the  whole  may,  perhaps,  be  read  Memenra.  But  as  the 
Greek  authors  do  not  use  this  name,  its  force  is  of  less  importance. 
The  change  in  the   order   of  the  characters  in  the  names  No.  80  and 


6  THE   SARCOPHAGUS    OF    OIMENEPTHAH   I. 

No.  81  shows  great  irregularity  in  the  way  of  writing;  as  does  the 
separation  between  the  letters  M  and  N  in  some  of  the  second  names ; 
while  in  others  these  letters  come  together.  In  the  names  No.  77  and 
No.  78  we  have  some  additional  characters,  of  which  the  sound  is 
uncertain;  but  those  in  No.  77  may  be  translated.  "Approved  by  the 
ffod  Ra;  "  and  those  in  No.  78,  "  son  of  the  god  Ra." 

In  the  Appendix  will  be  seen  three  lists  of  the  names  of  the  great 
kino-s  of  Egypt,  ending  with  that  of  Rameses  II. ;  the  first  from 
Eratosthenes,  the  second  from  the  sculptured  monuments,  and  the  third 
from  Manetho.  By  a  comparison  of  all  the  names,  it  can  be  shown  that 
our  king  is  the  one  named  Amenophath  by  Manetho,  and  Chomaepthah 
by  Eratosthenes ;  and  hence  arises  the  support  to  our  reading  his  name 
Oimenepthah. 


ON   THE  AGE   OF  THE   SAECOPHAGUS. 

The  dates  in  the  earlier  part  of  Egyptian  history  are  very  uncertain. 
They  rest,  in  the  first  place,  on  a  recorded  Babylonian  eclipse  of  the 
moon,  which  happened  in  the  year  b.c.  721,  the  first  year  of  the  reign 
of  the  Babylonian  king,  Mardoc  Empadus,  or  Berodach  Baladan. 
While  this  king  was  reigning  in  Babylon,  Hezekiah  was  reigning  in 
Judea,  and  Tirhakah  in  Egypt,  as  we  learn  from  2  Kings  xix.,  xx. 

From  this  period  we  count  backwards  along  the  reigns  of  the  Jewish 
kino-s,  till  we  come  to  Rehoboam,  the  son  of  Solomon,  who  was 
reigning  at  the  same  time  with  Shishank  of  Bubastis,  king  of  Egypt. 
CSee  1  Kings  xiv.)  Shishank  was  the  first  king  of  Lower  Egypt  who 
made  himself  master  of  the  whole  kingdom  after  the  fall  of  the  great 
Theban  monarchy.     This  was  about  the  year  b.c.  975. 

Thus  far  we  have  travelled  backwards  along  the  stream  of  time  Avith 
tolerable  certainty ;  but  here  doubt  begins.  Before  the  time  of  Shishank, 
Egypt  had  been  governed  for  about  twenty  reigns,  or  .500  years,  by  the 
o-reat  Theban  kings,  who  made  the  statues  and  built  the  temples  for 
which  the  valley  of  the  Nile  is  so  remarkable.  One  of  these  was  our 
Oimenepthah   I.,  the  father  of  Rameses  II.     Of  those  less  important 


THE  SARCOPHAGUS  OF  OIMENEPTHAH  I.  , 

kings,  who  reigned  before  these  twenty,  we  have  not  now  to  speak  ;  our 
difficulty  lies  with  the  unimportant  kings  who  reigned  after  them, 
because  their  want  of  importance  leaves  us  unable  to  count  the  reigns 
between  our  Oinienepthah  and  Shishank  of  the  year  b.c.  975.  It  is 
probable  that  most  of  those  who  followed  Rameses  V.  were  not  kin^s 
of  Egypt,  though  they  used  the  title,  but  were  only  the  chief  priests  or 
magistrates  of  Thebes,  while  Shishank  and  his  successors  were  reigning 
over  the  kingdom.  If  this  be  granted,  then  Oiraenepthah  I.  and  seven 
or  eight  successors  may  have  filled  by  their  reigns  the  two  centuries 
before  Shishank ;  and  our  king  may  have  died  and  been  buried  in  our 
sarcophagus  not  necessarily  earlier  than  the  year  b.c.  1175. 

We  have  also  a  second  train  of  reasoning  by  which  we  can  support 
the  above,  and  which  helps  us  to  fix  upon  b.c.  1175  for  the  age  of  the 
sarcophagus.  The  Alexandrian  astronomers  and  writers  on  the  almanac, 
in  the  second  century  after  the  Christian  era,  tell  us  that  the  epoch  of 
four  times  365  years  before  the  year  a.d.  138,  or  the  year  e.g.  1322, 
was  called  the  era  of  Menophra.  If  we  now  look  through  the  list  of 
Theban  kings,  we  find  that  Thothmosis  III.  bore  that  name  in  his  first 
oval,  and  he  may  perhaps  be  the  king,  from  the  beginning  of  whose 
reign  these  years  were  counted.  Oinienepthah  I.  was  his  sixth  successor, 
and  again  allowing  twenty-five  years  to  a  reign,  seven  reigns  will 
bring  us  to  b.c.  1147  for  the  death  of  Oimenepthah  I.  In  the  present 
state  of  our  knowledge  greater  certainty  or  greater  exactness  cannot 
be  hoped  for. 

A  third  train  of  reasoning,  leading  to  the  same  opinion,  is  founded  on 
the  belief  that  Zerah  the  Cushite,  who  invaded  Judea  in  the  year 
B.C.  944  (see  2  Chron.  xiv.),  was  a  king  of  Upper  Egypt,  called  an  Ethio- 
pian or  Cushite,  to  distinguish  him  from  Shishank  and  his  son,  who 
were  of  Mitzraim  or  Lower  Egypt.  Ze-Ra,  or  Son  of  the  Sun,  is  the 
common  title  of  all  the  Egyptian  kings  ;  Rameses  VII.  is  the  only 
king  who  can  in  that  half-century  be  believed  to  have  had  rule  over 
both  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt ;  and  Rameses  VII.  was  the  ninth  in 
succession  after  Oimenepthah  I.  If,  therefore,  the  one  lived  in  the 
year  b.c.  944,  the  other  may  have  lived  about  b.c.  1175,  as  before 
conjectured. 


8  THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF    OIMENEPTHAH   I. 

The  Appendix,  with  the  hieroglyphical  names  of  the  great  Theban 
kings,  will  help  to  explain  this  king's  place  in  the  series  of  the  great 
builders  of  the  Egyptian  monuments. 


ON   THE   BUILDINGS    AND   MONUMENTS   OF   THIS   KING. 
THE    TEMPLE   OF   ERREBEK. 

Errebek,  or,  without  the  Arabic  article,  Re-bek,  the  City  of  the  Sun,  is 
the  name  of  a  village  and  ruined  temple  in  the  district  of  Gournou,  the 
most  northerly  part  of  Thebes,  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river.  The 
temple  was  begun  by  this  king,  Oiraenepthah  I.,  and  finished  by  his  son, 
Rameses  11.  Its  plan  will  explain  the  greater  number  of  the  Egyptian 
temples.     (See  Fig.  4.)     It  was  entered  through  a  doorway,  formed  of 

two  large  square-built  towers.  This  opened 
^f^V^^'l  into  a  courtyard,  which  was  crossed  through 
an  avenue  of  sphinxes,  nine  on  each  side. 
This  led  to  a  second  doorway  between  two 
other  large  towers,  and  this  into  a  second  court- 
yard of  the  same  size  as  the  last,  which  was 
crossed  through  a  second  avenue  of  eighteen 
sphinxes.  This  led  to  the  grand  portico  of  ten 
columns  in  a  row,  upholding  a  flat  roof.  (See 
Fia;.  5.^  Every  column  is  in  imitation  of  a  stick 
or  post,  formed  by  tying  together  several 
stalks  of  papyrus,  of  which  the  unopened  buds 
form  the  capital.  The  bands  which  tie  them  together  are  immediately 
below  the  capital.  At  the  bottom  are  seen  the  leaves  which  enclose  the 
stalk  of  the  natural  plant.  Each  column  stands  on  a  flat  round  base. 
The  chief  room  in  the  covered  part  of  the  temple  is  the  hall,  whose 
roof  is  supported  by  six  columns.  Out  of  this  various  smaller  rooms 
opened,  in  which  dwelt  the  priests,  and,  at  times,  perhaps  the  king.  It 
was  dedicated  to  Amun-Ra,  the  Sun,  the  king  of  the  gods,  and  to  his  son 
Chonso.  The  whole  of  the  walls  are  covered  with  painted  sculptures, 
representing  the  religious  ceremonies,  and  chiefly  the  king  making  his 
offerings  to  the  gods  on  behalf  of  the  nation. 


Fig.  4.     Plan  of  the  Temple  of 
Errebek. 


THE   SARCOPHAGUS    OF   OIMENEPTHAH   I.  9 

When  this  temple  was  built,  the  architectural  custom  had  not  yet 
been  introduced  of  placing  a  low  wall  between  each  pair  of  columns,  to 


Fig.  5.      Portico  of  Errebek. 


bar  the  gaze  of  the  people  on  the  outside.  This  change  of  style  in  the 
building  came  into  use  in  the  next  reign ;  and  it  shows  an  increased 
claim  of  power  by  the  priests,  who  thereby  made  the  separation 
between  themselves  and  the  laity  more  marked. 


THE  HALL  OF  COLUMNS  AT  KARNAK. 


The  old  temple  of  Karnak  was  the  work  of  many  reigns.  The  oldest 
part  is  that  built  by  Osirtesen  I.  Other  kings  added  largely  to  it,  and  orna- 
mented it  with  sculpture,  statues,  and  obelisks.  When  Amunothph  III. 
added  the  two  sohd  towers  which  are  now  in  the  middle  of  it,  and 
against  which  the  great  hall  was  afterwards  built,  he  may  be  supposed 
to  have  completed  it  with  these  as  its  entrance  toAvers.  But  Oimenep- 
thah  I.  conceived  the  bold  idea  of  doubling  its  size,  by  adding  a  new 
building  in  front,  leaving  the  older  to  be  the  inner  courts  and  halls.  He 
be<ran  the  great  Hall  of  Columns,  more  than  one  hundred  in  number  : 
and  though  he  did  not  live  to  complete  it,  but  left  that  task  to  his  son, 
Rameses  H.,  yet  we  may  be  sure  that  the  large  court  which  Rameses 

c 


JO 


THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH   I. 


design 


•••••••I 


and  his  successors  added  in  front  of  the  hall  was  part  of  Oinaenepthah's 
(See  Fig.  6.) 

On  each  side  of  the  walk,  down  the  middle 
of  the  hall,  is  a  row  of  five  columns,  of  the 
largest  size.  These  are  66  feet  in  height, 
and  12  feet  in  diameter.  On  each  side  of 
these,  in  each  half  of  the  hall,  stand  sixty-one 
smaller  columns.  These  are  42  feet  high, 
and  9  feet  in  diameter.  Fig.  7  is  a  view 
along  the  hall  between  two  rows  of  columns ; 
pSQi  BiHr  —  those   on  the   right   are    the   five     which  form 

one  of  the  middle  rows ;  and  those  on  the 
left  are  part  of  the  side  row  next  to  the 
middle.  Every  column  is  in  imitation  of  a 
plant  of  papyrus,  of  gigantic  thickness  ;  the 
larger  columns  have  the  capital  in  imitation 
of  the  flower  when  full  blown  (see  Fig.  8),  and 
the  smaller  columns  have  the  capital  copied 
from    the  unopened  bud   of  the   same  flower 

Fig.  6.     Temple  of  Karnak.  (ScC   Fig.    9.) 


:  :    T 


THE    BUILDINGS   IN   ABYDOS. 


At  the  city  of  This,  called  by  the  Greeks  Abydos,  this  king  began 
two  important  buildings,  both  of  which  he  left  unfinished,  and  they 
were  finished  by  his  son.  One  was  a  palace,  called  by  Pliny  (lib.  v.  11) 
the  Palace  of  Memnon,  meaning  of  Miamun,  or  Rameses  II.  ;  and  the 
other  was  a  temple  dedicated  to  the  god  Osiris.  Abydos,  or  This,  had 
been  the  capital  of  a  little  kingdom,  and  when  it  became  subject  to  the 
kings  of  Thebes,  it  was  a  second  capital.  It  was  here,  in  the  temple  of 
Osiris,  that  Rameses  II.  set  up  the  Historical  Tablet,  a  list  of  his  prede- 
cessors on  the  throne,  which  is  now  in  the  British  Museum.  It  is  from 
this  tablet  that  we  have  copied,  in  our  Appendix,  the  first  names  of  the 
last  seventeen  kings,  those  of  Rameses  II.  and  his  sixteen  predecessors. 


THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF    OIMENEPTHAH   I. 


11 


Fig.  7.     Hall  of  Columns,  Karnak. 


Fig.  9. 


THE   FLAMINIAN    OBELISK. 


This  obelisk,  which  stands  in  the  Piazza  del  Popolo  in  Rome,  was 
made  by  Oimenepthah  1.,  though,  Hke  the  temples  of  Errebek  and 
Abydos,  it  was  finished  by  his  son  Rameses  II.  It  is  87  feet  5  inches 
high.  On  each  side  are  three  lines  of  hieroglyphics.  Of  these  the 
middle  line  was  carved  in  honour  of  Oimenepthah,  and  the  two  outer 
lines  in  honour  of  Rameses ;  except  on  the  east  side,  where  all  the  three 
lines  are  in  honour  of  Rameses.  Thus  we  must  suppose  that,  at  the 
death  of  Oimenepthah,  it  was  still  lying  on  that  side  in  the  quarry ;  it 


12  THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH   I. 

had  received  the  sculpture  on  the  three  sides  which  could  be  got  at ; 
but  it  had  never  been  turned  over  to  be  sculptured  on  the  fourth  side. 
That  was  done  in  the  reign  of  Rameses  II.,  by  whom  also  the  two 
outer  lines  of  hieroglyphics  were  added  on  the  other  sides. 

On  this  obelisk  the  first  character  in  the  name  of  Oimenepthah  was 
the  sitting  figure  of  a  man,  with  the  head  of  a  dog  with  square  ears,  as 
described  in  page  5,  thus  spelling  the  name  Aimenepthah.  (See  No.  83, 
Plate  19.^  But  at  some  later  time  this  character  was  cut  out,  and  in 
its  place  was  cut,  on  the  lowered  surface,  the  figure  of  a  man  with  a 
head  of  a  hawk,  and  without  the  square  ears,  which  were  the  mark  of 
the  former.     (See  No.  90,  Plate  19.) 

In  Avhat  city  of  Egypt  this  obelisk  was  set  up  is  unknown.  The 
sculpture  upon  it  has  been  drawn  by  Mr.  Bonomi,  and  published  in  the 
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Literature. 


THE   ANTIQUITIES    IN  THE   BRITISH   MUSEUM. 

The  only  statue  which  we  possess  of  this  king  in  the  national  collec- 
tion is  one  of  wood,  which  was  found  in  his  tomb.  It  is  rather  larger 
than  life,  standing  and  stepping  forwards.  The  right  arm  hangs  down 
by  the  side,  and  once  held  a  club.  The  left  arm  is  raised,  as  if  it  once 
held  a  long  walking  stafl^,  the  staff  so  common  in  the  hands  of  figures 
on  the  funereal  tablets,  where  it  marks  the  deceased  man's  rank  as  a 
landowner.  In  the  Old  Testament  it  is  called  the  staff  of  inheritance. 
The  hair  was  once  tied  in  a  tail  behind.  The  feet  are  long  and  flat, 
with  a  low  instep,  as  is  usual  in  Egyptian  statues.  Unlike  the  stone 
statues,  the  back  is  free,  and  unsupported  by  a  pillar  or  slab  ;  moreover, 
in  the  stone  statues  we  never  find  the  arm  thus  free  and  separated  from 
the  side.  Every  Egyptian  statue,  from  the  earliest  to  the  latest,  from 
the  Colossus  to  the  smallest  bronze,  unless  swaddled  like  a  mummy, 
has,  like  this,  the  left  leg  foremost. 

On  the  landing-place  at  the  top  of  the  stairs,  which  lead  from  the 
Egyptian  Gallery  to  the  rooms  above,  are  three  plaster  casts  from  the 
Theban   sculptures  of  this  king.     One  is  from  the  walls  of  the  great 


THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH   I.  13 

temple  at  Karnak,  representing  Oimenepthah  conquering  his  enemies. 
He  is  standing  in  his  chariot.  With  his  left  hand  he  holds  a  bowstring 
round  the  neck  of  a  chief;  his  right  hand  holds  a  sword,  with  which 
he  is  going  to  strike.  The  enemy  are  flying  in  crowds  ;  some  are  dead, 
mostly  pierced  with  arrows.  They  are  probably  Arabs.  The  king  has 
no  beard,  perhaps  because  of  his  youth.  He  is  about  four  times  as 
tall  as  the  men  against  whom  he  is  fighting.  His  head  is  more  deeply 
cut  into  the  stone  than  the  rest  of  the  figure,  as  if  the  artist  had  altered 
it  from  the  first  design.  In  this  sculpture  the  king's  name  is  not  spelt 
with  the  figure  of  Osiris,  but  in  its  earlier  form,  with  the  figure  of 
Anubis,  a  sitting  man  wath  a  dog's  head  (see  Plate  19). 

A  second  cast  is  from  the  side  of  the  passage  into  the  king's  tomb, 
between  the  room  b  and  the  room  d,  in  our  plan,  Fig.  1,  page  2.  It 
represents  the  judge  Osix'is  seated  on  his  throne,  holding  his  two  sceptres. 
Behind  him  stands  the  goddess  of  Amenti,  the  place  of  the  dead. 
Before  him  is  the  king,  who  is  introduced  to  Osiris  by  the  hawk- 
headed  o-od  Horus.  The  flesh  of  Osiris  is  painted  blue,  the  colour  of 
heaven,  while  that  of  the  king  and  of  Horus  is  red,  the  colour  of 
the  Egyptian  men,  and  that  of  the  goddess  is  yellow^,  the  colour  of  the 
Egyptian  women.  The  king  has  his  beard  cut  square,  and  holds  the 
same  two  sceptres  as  the  god,  being  himself  after  death  and  judgment 
acquitted,  and  made  into  a  god.  These  figures  are  in  low  relief,  not 
in  sunk  relief.  In  cutting  a  passage  through  the  soft  rock,  it  was  as 
easy  to  make  the  sculptured  figures  in  one  form  as  in  the  other. 

A  third  cast,  from  the  same  passage  in  the  tomb,  is  of  two  priests  in 
the  same  unsunk  relief.  They  are  clothed  with  leopard  skins,  and  are 
said  to  be  beloved  by  Smotef,  one  of  the  four  lesser  gods  of  the  dead. 
This  god  was  a  suitable  patron  for  attendants  in  a  tomb. 

Among  the  funereal  tablets  in  the  British  Museum  is  one.  No.  146, 
which  speaks  of  this  king's  temple  or  palace.  It  is  of  limestone, 
37  inches  high.  The  sculpture  is  divided  into  three  parts  ;  at  the  top 
are  two  jackals,  each  representing  the  god  Anubis,  and  between  them 
a  crowned  post  for  the  god  Osiris.  In  the  second  part,  the  deceased 
man,  his  wife,  and  three  sons,  are  presenting  fire  and  water  to  the 
judge  Osiris,  seated,  with  Isis  and  Horus  standing  behind  him.     At  the 


14  THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH   I. 

bottom  the  deceased  man  and  his  wife  are  seated,  while  eight  of  his 
sons,  daughters,  and  relations  are  making  the  same  offerings  to  him, 
as  he  was  in  the  line  above  making  to  the  gods.  He  was  a  scribe 
belonging  to  the  army,  and  attached  to  the  palace  of  Oimenepthah  I. 

It  would  seem  that  no  king  of  Egypt  has  received  credit  for  any 
of  the  great  w^orks  Avhich  he  began,  unless  he  lived  to  put  his  own 
name  upon  them ;  and  Oimenepthah  may  have  begun  others  besides 
these  mentioned.  The  great  court-yard  at  Karnak,  and  its  towers  at 
the  entrance,  were  certainly  his  design,  though  not  bearing  his  name, 
because  his  Hall  of  Columns  would  have  been  incomplete  without  them. 
The  numerous  colossal  statues,  and  the  obelisks  of  his  son  Rameses  H., 
seem  too  many  to  be  the  work  of  one  reign ;  some  of  them  were 
most  likely  begun  by  the  father.  Had  the  temples  of  Abydos,  of 
Errebek,  the  Hall  of  Columns  at  Karnak,  and  the  Flaminian  obelisk, 
been  only  a  little  less  forward  at  the  time  of  his  death,  they  would  all 
have  been  thought  the  work  of  Rameses  H. 


THE   ALABASTER    SARCOPHAGUS    IN    SIR  JOHN    SOANE'S   MUSEUM. 

This  beautiful  stone  coffin  was  formed  of  two  parts,  the  chest  and 
the  lid,  each  hollowed  out  of  a  single  block.  The  stone  is  white  and 
translucent,  allowing  the  light  to  shine  through  it.  It  was  dug  from 
the  quarries  at  Alabastron,  a  town  on  the  east  side  of  the  Nile,  which 
has  given  its  name  to  the  stone.  Blocks  of  any  size  may  be  there 
obtained. 

The  lid,  or  cover,  has  been  broken  into  numerous  pieces,  of  which 
there  are  seventeen  in  the  Museum.  It  was  itself  a  hollowed  block, 
which,  when  placed  upon  the  chest,  added  15  inches  to  its  height. 

The  chest  is  slightly  shaped  to  the  body,  or  rather  to  the  inner  cases, 
which  were  so  shaped.  It  is  narrower  at  the  head  and  foot  than  in  the 
middle,  with  a  slight  increase  of  width  above  the  shoulders,  marking 
the  great  size  of  the  hanging  folds  of  the  shawl  which  covered  the 
king's  head.  The  bottom  of  the  chest  and  the  top  of  the  hd  are  also 
narrower  than  the  middle.     There  is  a  slight  swell  on  each  side  for  the 


THE   SARCOrHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH   I.  15 

calf;  and  a  small  swell  equally  well  marked  for  the  ankle.     The  out- 
side measures  of  the  chest  are — 

Length,  9  feet  4  inches. 
Greatest  breadth,  3  feet  8  inches. 
Breadth  at  foot,  23^  inches, 
v  Breadth  at  head,  22  inches. 

Height  without  the  cover,  32  inches  at  the  shoulders,  and 
27  at  the  feet. 
The  thickness  of  the  stone  is  from  two  and  a  half  to  four  inches.  Of 
this  thickness  the  inner  half  at  the  upper  edge  of  the  chest  is  sunk 
about  three-quarters  of  an  inch,  and  the  lid  has  the  outer  half  sunk  to 
match  ;  thus  making  the  chest  and  its  lid  fit  more  closely.  This  is  shown 
in  Plate  17.  At  the  foot  of  the  chest,  on  this  sunk  ledge,  has  been 
engraved 

DIS="    BY  G.  BELZONI. 

Both  the  chest  and  the  remains  of  the  lid  are  covered  inside  and  out 
with  small  figures,  and  hieroglyphical  writing  engraved  upon  the  flat 
polished  sui'face ;  and  at  the  bottom,  within  the  chest,  is  a  figure  of  the 
goddess  Neith,  the  heavens,  larger  than  life,  engraved  in  outline,  there 
lying  to  embrace  the  embalmed  mummy,  or  rather  the  wooden  mummy 
case,  which  was  to  be  placed  within  the  sarcophagus.  All  the 
engraved  lines  and  figures  were  at  one  time  filled  up  with  blue  paint, 
made  of  some  preparation  of  copper.  This  has  in  many  cases  fallen 
out ;  and  what  remains  has  mostly  been  made  black  by  the  London 
smoke,  which  has  at  the  same  time  discoloured  the  white  alabaster. 

Whether  the  lid  was  ever  fastened  on  does  not  now^  certainly  appear. 
The  fastening,  however,  if  any,  must  in  any  case  have  been  very  slight. 
But  it  would  seem  as  if  some  little  violence  had  been  used  to  separate 
the  lid  from  the  chest,  because  the  edge  of  the  chest  is  broken  in  several 
places,  particularly  near  the  left  shoulder  and  left  ankle  and  right  foot. 
It  would  seem  as  if  an  iron  tool  had  been  applied  to  the  left  shoulder  to 
wrench  off  the  lid,  and  that  the  weight  of  the  lid,  when  lifted  from  that 
spot  by  the  lever,  had  broken  the  edge  of  the  chest  on  the  opposite  side, 
near  the  right  elbow,  and  also  at  the  right  foot. 


16  THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF    OIMENEPTHAH   I. 

It  mio-lit  be  supposed  that  the  chest  and  the  hd  had  once  formed 
a  sino-le  block,  and  that  they  had  been  sawed  asunder  after  the  outside 
had  been  cut  into  shape.  But  from  the  veins  in  the  stone  this  seems 
not  to  have  been  the  case.  Indeed,  it  would  be  equally  easy  for  the 
sculptor  to  have  begun  by  placing  the  two  squared  and  solid  blocks 
one  upon  the  other,  and  thus  have  shaped  the  outside  of  both  at  the 
same  time.  When  so  shaped  outwardly,  the  two  blocks  must  of  course 
have  been  separated,  to  be  hollowed  out  and  to  have  the  small  figures 
cut  upon  them. 

There  is  a  slight  crack  in  the  chest  of  about  1 1  inches  in  length, 
near  the  right  elbow.  It  runs  downward  from  the  upper  edge, 
beginning  in  the  hieroglyphics  of  line  33,  Plate  4.  Whether  this  crack 
was  made  by  the  original  sculptor,  or  by  those  who  broke  the  lid  off 
afterwards,  is  uncertain. 

A  small  round  cavity  near  the  back  of  the  head  of  the  goddess 
Neith,  at  the  bottom  of  the  chest,  see  Plate  16,  betrays  the  manner  in 
which  the  mason  worked.  It  is  about  the  sixteenth  of  an  inch  deep, 
and  seven-eighths  of  an  inch  in  diameter.  It  was  made  by  a  drill,  but 
made  unfortunately  rather  deeper  than  it  should  have  been.  The  mason, 
having  cut  the  outside  of  the  block  to  its  proper  size  and  shape,  would 
seem  to  have  drilled  a  number  of  holes  downwards,  into  the  body  of  the 
stone,  to  a  given  depth,  and  thus  he  may  have  lessened  the  risk  of  spht- 
ting  the  alabaster  with  his  chisel.  Had  he  attempted  to  hollow  out  the 
sarcophagus  with  no  other  tool  than  chisel  and  mallet,  the  danger  of 
splitting  the  stone  would  have  been  very  great.  The  foot  or  end  of  the 
chest  is  perfectly  flat,  having  been  cut  by  a  saw  ;  and  at  the  lower  part 
of  the  end  there  are  the  traces  of  the  fracture,  the  rough  portions  left 
when  the  other  piece  of  stone  broke  away,  called  by  the  masons  "  the 
saw-break." 

On  the  outside  of  the  lid,  on  the  lappet  of  the  shawl  which 
covered  the  king's  head,  are  three  smaller  drill  holes,  each  a  quarter  of 
an  inch  in  diameter.  They  touch  one  another,  and  thus  make  one  larger 
hole,  No.  16  Q,  in  Plate  If).  They  were  probably  made  to  receive  some 
metal  ornament ;  but  as  no  other  portion  of  the  flat  top  of  the  lid 
remains,  it  is  useless  to  conjecture  their  purpose  more  exactly. 

The    stone    is    so  far  brittle  that  it   must   have  required   no   little 


THE  SARCOPHAGUS    OF    OIMENEPTHAH    I.  17 

skill  for  the  makers  to  place  the  heavy  lid  upon  the  chest  without  injury 
to  the  edges.  To  guard  against  such  an  accident  they  would  seem  to 
have  shielded  the  edges  of  both  chest  and  lid  with  a  thin  plate  of  copper. 
The  reason  for  so  thinking  will  be  understood  from  the   section  of  the 

edges  in  Plate  17. 

There  it  will  be  seen  that  four  thin  grooves  run  round  the  whole 
sarcophagus,  two  on  the  chest,  and  two  on  the  lid,  each  at  the  distance 
of  about  an  inch  from  the  edge.  In  these  grooves  there  still  remain 
small  pieces  of  the  metal.  Had  the  grooves  been  only  on  the  out- 
side of  the  sarcophagus,  we  might  have  supposed  that  the  metal  reached 
from  the  o-roove  on  the  lid  to  that  on  the  chest,  and  thus  formed  a  slight 
fastening.  But  in  this  way  we  cannot  explain  the  use  of  the  two 
grooves  on  the  inside.  The  metal  can  only  have  been  hammered  into 
them  before  the  chest  was  closed  by  the  lid.  Hence  no  other  supposition 
offers  itself  for  the  use  of  these  grooves,  but  that  they  received  the 
strips  of  metal  which  were  to  guard  the  edges  from  injury,  as  repre- 
sented in  one  of  the  sections  on  that  Plate. 

When  the  delicate  edges  were  thus  guarded,  the  lid  was  probably 
lifted  on  to  the  chest,  and  placed  in  position,  by  means  of  cords,  which 
passed,  not  round  it,  but  through  holes,  of  which  we  have  three 
remaining.  Of  these  one  is  seen  on  the  right  side  at  g,  the  second  is  in 
the  fracture  between  g  and  the  head  of  Thoth,  in  Plate  18;  and  the 
third  on  the  left  side,  at  b  c,  Plate  19.  The  portions  of  the  lid 
which  received  the  three  corresponding  holes  are  missing  Each  hole  is 
seven-eighths  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  being  made  by  the  same  drill  as 
that  already  spoken  of  as  making  the   slight  cavity  at  the  bottom  of 

the  chest. 

The   sculpture  on  the  outside  of   the  chest  is   divided  into  several 

portions. 

First  there  is  a  single  line  of  hieroglyphics  running  all  round  at  the 
upper  edge,  making  two  sentences,  each  beginning  on  the  right  side  of 
the  head,  and  ending  at  the  left  side  of  the  foot.  Below  this  line  of 
writing  is  a  band,  one  inch  wide,  which  also  runs  round  the  whole 
chest.''  It  is  covered  with  engraved  dots,  once  filled  with  the  same  blue 
copper  paint.      It  was  perhaps  meant  to  represent  the  firmament  of 


18  THE   SARCOPHAGUS    OF  OIMENEPTHAH   I. 

heaven ;  thouo-h  in  Plates  4  and  5  dots  of  the  same  size  are  clearly 
used  to  mean  the  earth  ;  and  in  this  respect  they  may  be  compared  with 
the  Hebrew  word  Shehak,  which  means  at  the  same  time  small  dust  and 
the  skies. 

The  sculpture  beneath  this  line  of  dots  is  divided  into  five  sets  of 
pictures,  of  three  in  a  set,  by  five  tall  doors,  each  turning  upon  two 
pivots  in  the  place  of  hinges,  and  each  guarded  by  a  serpent  Avhich  looks 
over  the  top. 

The  first  door  is  on  the  right  side  at  the  head. 

The  second  door  is  on  the  same  side  at  the  hip. 

The  third  door  is  on  the  same  side  at  the  foot. 

The  fourth  door  is  on  the  left  side  at  the  foot. 

The  fifth  door  is  on  the  left  side  at  the  elbow. 
Beneath  these  pictures  is  a  second  dotted  band  of  the  firmament,  one 
inch  wide,  speckled  with  blue  dots  like  that  above,  showing  that  the 
pictures  between  them  represent  events  which  are  to  take  place  not  on 
earth,  but  after  death.  The  doors  are  those  of  Amenti  or  Hell,  and 
they  are  spoken  of  in  the  book  of  Job  (xxxviii.  17),  where  the 
Almighty  asks,  "  Have  the  gates  of  death  been  opened  unto  thee  ?  or 
hast  thou  seen  the  doors  of  the  shadow  of  death  ?  " 

On  the  inside  of  the  chest  the  pictures  are  again  in  the  same  way  sur- 
rounded by  the  dotted  blue  bands  of  the  firmament,  and  divided  into 
sets  by  doors.  One  band  of  blue  dots  runs  all  round  the  upper  edge, 
and  a  second  below  divides  the  pictures  on  the  four  sides  from  the 
.picture  at  the  bottom.  These  two  bands  are  united  at  the  left  side  of 
the  head,  by  a  similar  band  running  from  top  to  bottom,  in  the  middle 
of  which  is  a  round  ball  to  represent  the  sun,  which  is  travelling  along 
this  its  path.  Beginning  at  the  right  side  of  the  head,  instead  of  one 
door  there  is  a  pair,  each  turning  on  a  pair  of  pivots,  and  shutting,  so  as 
together  to  close  a  doorway  doubly  wide. 

The  second  door  is  on  the  right  side  at  the  hip. 

The  third  door  is  at  the  end  against  the  right  foot. 

The  fourth  door  is  on  the  left  side  at  the  hip. 

The  fifth  door  is  on  the  same  side  at  the  cheek. 
These  five  doors,  or  six,  as  the  first  two  were  a  pair,  have  each  a  tall 


THE   SARCOrHAGUS   OF    OIMENEPTHAH   I.  19 

serpent  looking  over  the  top  as  a  guai-d,  but  they  do  not,  Uke  those  on 
the  outside,  put  out  the  cloven  tongue. 

On  the  bottom  is  a  large  figure  of  the  goddess  Neith,  engraved  in 
outline,  and  surrounded  by  lines  of  hieroglyphical  writing ;  some  over 
her  head,  even  between  the  large  letters  of  her  name,  others  by  her  side 
and  between  her  arms  and  her  body,  and  others  under  her  feet. 

To  judge  from  the  broken  pieces  of  the  lid  which  remain,  the  sculpture 
upon  it  was  of  the  same  character  as  that  on  the  chest.     On  the  outside 
a  single  line  of  hieroglyphics  ran  round  the  bottom  edge,  divided  into 
two  sentences,  each  beginning  at  the  right  side  of  the  head,  and  ending 
probably  at  the  left  foot.      On  the   sides  above  this  are  several  pictures 
with  small  figures,  and  hieroglyphical  writing  over  them.     At  the  top 
there  once  lay  a  figure  of  the  king  larger  than  life,  of  which  no  parts 
now  remain  except  the  right  flap  of  the  shawl  which  covered  his  head, 
and  the  ends  of  several  feathers  near,  which  show  that  two  winged  divi- 
nities lay  upon  his  body,   of  which   we  have  many   examples   on   the 
mummy  cases  in  the  British  Museum.     It  would  seem  as  if  the  aim  of 
the  person  who  broke  the  lid  into  pieces  was  to  carry  away  this  figure 
of  the  king,  after  breaking  off  the  side  pieces  which  we  now  possess,  as 
adding  unnecessarily  to  the  weight. 

On  the  sides  of  the  inside  of  the  lid  are  other  sculptured  pictures  ; 
but  whether  any  one  large  figure  was  on  the  inside  of  the  roof  is 
doubtful.  If  there  was  such  a  figure,  it  had  on  its  breast  a  scarabaeus, 
or  perhaps  a  vulture,  with  outstretched  wings,  of  which  we  have  a  part 
remaining,  on  the  piece  marked  e,  in  Plate  18,  which  on  the  outsid'e 
carries  the  end  of  the  king's  head-shawl. 

We  sometimes  see  in  a  sarcophagus  the  figure  of  Isis,  the  goddess  of 
earth,  lying  at  the  bottom  of  the  chest,  and  the  figure  of  Neith,  the 
goddess  of  the  heavens,  lying  opposite  to  her  on  the  inside  of  the  lid. 
But  as  here  Neith  lies  at  the  bottom,  and  as  the  top  would  have  been 
an  unsuitable  place  for  Isis,  it  is  not  probable  that  any  second  large 
figure  was  there  sculptured. 


ao  THE   SARCOPHAGUS    OF    OliMENEPTHAH   I. 


DESCRIPTION    OF    THE    PLATES.     (^Plate  1.) 

The  four  views  of  the  sarcophagus  in  the  upper  line  show  the  whole 
of  the  outside.  The  subjects  of  the  sculptures  begin  with  the  line  (u  v) 
on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  head,  and  thence  continue  round  the  chest, 
and  end  on  the  head. 

The  four  views  of  the  sarcophagus  in  the  second  line  are  sections 
showing  the  sculpture  on  the  inside.  These  begin  at  the  place  where 
the  others  began,  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the  head,  and  end  at  the 
same  place. 

The  subjects  on  the  outside  and  on  the  inside  of  the  chest  are  each 
fifteen  in  number,  contained  in  five  pictures  of  three  subjects  each. 
These  pictures  are  divided  by  tall  doors  guarded  by  serpents.  In  each 
picture,  in  the  centre  compartment  of  the  three,  we  find  one  view  of 
the  boat  of  the  god  Ra. 

The  three  views  in  the  bottom  line  of  this  Plate  show  the  goddess 
Neith  lying  at  the  bottom  of  the  chest,  and  also  two  restorations  of 
the  lid ;  one  of  the  outside  and  one"  of  the  inside.  The  views  of  the 
restored  lid  show  the  pieces  which  are  now  in  the  Museum.  To  every 
one  of  these  its  place  can  be  certainly  assigned  by  the  help  of  the 
sculptured  figures.  The  small  piece  marked  2  in  Plate  19,  containing 
the  lappet  of  the  king's  head-dress,  explains  to  us  that  the  head  was 
ornamented  like  the  usual  statues  of  the  kings.  The  pieces  of  the 
wings  in  Plates  18  and  19  tell  us  that  the  king  had  a  winged  sun  on  his 
head,  and  two  winged  animals,  probably  vultures,  on  the  breast  on  the 
outside,  and  one  winged  animal,  pi-obably  a  ram,  on  his  breast  on  the 
inside.  The  jackals'  tails  also  on  the  fragments  call  for  the  resto- 
ration of  the  whole  animals  on  the  inside  of  the  lid.  This  restoration 
is  shown  in  Mr.  Bonomi's  drawing. 


THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH    I. 


SI 


THE   SCULPTURES   ON   THE   OUTSIDE.     {Plates  2-8.) 

First,  we  have  a  single  line  of  hieroglyphics  running  round  the  upper 
edge,  divided  into  two  sentences,  each  beginning  at  the  right-hand  side 
of  °the  head,  and  ending  at  the  left-hand  side  of  the  foot.  In  these  the 
deceased  king  declares,  on  the  right-hand  side,  in  Plate  2,  that  he  is 
Amset,  the  son  of  Osiris  ;  that  he  is  Anubis,  whose  mother  is  Isis  ;  in 
Plate  3,  that  he  is  Sotef,  the  servant  of  Osiris. 

On  the  left-hand  side,  in  Plate  8,  he  declares  that  he  is  the  son  of  the 
goddess  Neith,  and  of  the  god  Mo,  or  Truth ;  and  that  he  is  Hepi ;  in 
Plate  7,  that  he  is  Anubis,  and  that  he  is  Snouf. 

Amset,  Sotef,  Hepi,  and  Snouf  are  the  four  lesser  gods  of  the 
dead,  whose  names  and  heads  are  upon  the  four  Canobic  jars,  in  which 
the  softer  parts  of  the  body  are  preserved  (see  Fig.  10).     These  gods 


Fig.  10.     Four  gods  of  fhe  dead. 


befriend  the  deceased  on  his  trial  before  the  judge  ;  they  sometimes 
present  offerings  to  the  judge,  as  mediators  on  his  behalf;  and  they  are 
sometimes  sacrificed  for  him,  and  he  places  them  on  the  altar  as  his 
atoning  sacrifice.  Anubis,  with  the  head  of  a  dog,  is  the  god  who 
has  charge  of  the  mummies.  Into  these  gods  the  king  now  declares 
himself  changed. 

Beneath  this    upper  line  of  writing  there  is  a  band  of  blue  dots, 

representing  the  sky,  and  below  the  sculptures  there  is  a  second  band 

of  dotted  sky,  telling  us  that  the  whole  of  the  pictures  between  them 

are  of  events  which  take  place  in  another  world. 

The  sculpture  is  divided  into  five  portions.     Each  begins  with  a  door 

which  turns   upon  two    pivots    for   hinges,   and  is    guarded  by  a  tall 


•22  THE    SARCOPHAGUS    OF   OIMENEPTHAH   I. 

serpent,  styled  the  appointed  door-keeper  and  guard.  Beyond  the  door, 
m  four  of  the  five  pictures,  is  the  garden  of  paradise,  surrounded  by 
two  rows  of  cypress  trees,  trees  which  do  not  grow  in  Egypt.  The  garden 
is  guarded  at  each  corner  by  a  sacred  asp  of  the  cobra  capella  kind, 
with  swollen  chest,  who  spits  fire  around  the  garden  wall.  This 
serpent  is  the  Urseus,  or  basilisk,  and  is  the  serpent  of  goodness. 
Within  the  garden  lie  the  mummies  of  good  men,  who  are  declared  to 
be  gods  and  goddesses. 

A  single  line  of  hieroglyphics  divides  this  garden  from  three  long 
pictures,  over  each  of  which  are  about  fifty  short  lines  of  hieroglyphics. 
In  these  vertical  lines  the  characters  are  placed  in  the  usual  order,  so 
that  the  reader  begins  with  the  face  of  the  animals ;  but  the  lines  them- 
selves are  placed  in  the  less  usual  order,  so  that  in  moving  from  line  to 
line  the  reader  follows  the  animals  instead  of  meeting  them. 


FIRST   PICTURE.   (Plates  i-S.) 

Within  the  garden,  or  after  passing  it,  the  picture  is  divided  into  three 
parts  or  rows.  At  the  top  we  meet  Avith  the  corn  growing  in  the  inundated 
land.  It  is  bearded  wheat,  and  with  it  are  twelve  granaries,  or  heaps 
of  corn,  each  crowned  with  the  head  of  a  god  :  these  are  the  gods  of 
the  grain.  Beyond  are  twelve  mansions,  or  monastic  cells,  with  two 
doors  each,  within  which  the  good  men  are  dwelling.  These  are 
guarded  by  a  fiery  serpent  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which  guards  the 
door  to  each  picture,  or  division  of  the  chambers  of  death.  Cultivation 
of  corn,  in  a  well-watered  field,  was  thought  to  be  one  of  the  employ^- 
ments  of  the  blessed  after  death. 

In  the  middle  of  the  picture  is  the  boat  of  Kneph-Ra  dragged  in 
sacred  procession.  The  god  has  a  ram's  head,  because  he  is  Kneph, 
the  spirit ;  and  he  has  the  sun  on  his  head,  because  he  is  also  Ra,  the  sun. 
He  is  two  persons,  making  only  one  god.  He  stands  in  the  boat  under 
a  canopy,  probably  a  gnat-gauze,  and  over  that  is  the  Eternal  Serpent, 
one  of  the  forms  under  which  the  heavens  are  represented.  Before 
him  is  a  guard,  and  behind  him  the  steersman  with  his  two  rudders. 


THE   SARCOPHAGUS    OF   OIMENEPTHAil    I.  23 

The  sacred  boat  is  pulled  by  a  rope  held  by  four  men,  which  is  fastened 
to  a  pole  carried  by  eight  bearers,  which  again  is  fastened  to  a  second 
rope  pulled  by  four  more  men.  The  pole  has  a  bull's  head  at  each  end, 
and  on  it  stand  small  statues  of  two  bulls  and  seven  sitting  men,  who 
are  called  the  Egyptian  gods.  Beyond  these  men,  who  are  all  pulling 
alono-  the  sacred  barge,  stand  four  more  men  bandaged  as  mummies. 

At  the  bottom  of  the  picture  we  see  the  giant  serpent,  named  Apoph, 
with  its  numerous  folds.  This  is  the  serpent  of  wickedness,  the  enemy 
of  the  human  race.  On  one  side  of  it  stand  nine  men,  called  the 
slayers  of  the  serpent  Apoph  ;  and  on  the  other  side  is  a  man  or  god 
leaning  on  his  staff,  the  mark  of  his  rank,  like  an  overseer  with  his  nine 
workmen.  Beyond  are  nine  other  men,  or  rather  gods,  each  holding 
in  one  hand  the  character  for  life,  and  in  the  other  an  Anubis  staff, 
or  rod,  with  an  animal's  head.  These  are  styled  other  conquerors, 
having  taken  part  in  the  battle  against  the  giant  serpent ;  and  before 
them  is  a  second  overseer,  or  master,  leaning  on  his  staff  of  rank,  or 
staff  of  inheritance,  as  it  is  named  in  Jeremiah  x.  16  andh.  19. 

We  are  reminded  of  this  wicked  serpent  in  the  book  of  Job,  where  we 
read  of  the  Almighty  in  chap.  xxvi.  13  : — 

"  By  His  Spirit  he  garnished  the  heavens  ; 
His  hand  wounded  the  crooked  (or  cowardly)  serpent." 


SECOND    PICTURE.     (Plates   3-4.) 

Here  we  have  the  tall  door,  as  before,  guarded  by  its  serpent,  the 
o-arden  with  its  rows  of  fir  trees,  and  asps  at  the  corners,  and  the  nine 
mummies  lying  within  the  garden. 

In  the  upper  part  of  the  picture  is  a  row  of  twenty-four  men. 

In  the  middle  of  the  picture  is  the  boat  of  Kneph-Ra,  drawn  by  four 
men,  and  met  by  two  men,  then  by  the  gods  Kneph  and  Horus,  and 
then  by  nine  others,  followed  by  the  overseer  with  his  staff. 

At  the  bottom  of  the  picture  is  a  row  of  twenty  wicked  men,  each 
with  his  arms  tied  behind  him,  awaiting  his  punishment.  Beyond  lie 
four  o-ood  men  enjoying   their   ease,    and    beyond   them    stands    the 


24  THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH    I. 

overseer  leaning  on  his  staff.  On  some  of  the  painted  papyri,  these  good 
men  are  each  lying  by  the  side  of  a  water  tank,  which  is  a  most 
desirable  luxury  in  a  warm  climate.  Here  their  tanks  are  not  drawn ; 
their  happiness  is  shown  only  by  their  lying  at  rest,  and  the  characters 
at  their  feet  tell  us  that  they  are  good. 


THIRD  PICTURE.     (Flates  4  and  5.) 

This  is  less  than  any  of  the  other  pictures,  and  is  limited  to  the  foot 
of  the  sarcophagus.  Here  the  tall  door,  guarded  by  the  serpent,  is  not, 
as  in  the  other  cases,  followed  by  the  two  rows  of  cypress  trees.  The 
picture  is  not  divided  into  three  parts.  It  contains  a  view  or  section  of 
the  world  in  the  form  of  a  flat  valley  between  two  hills.  But  this  valley 
is  cut  in  half,  and  one  half  is  turned  with  its  face  downwards  over  the 
other  half.  On  one  half  stands  a  pole  with  the  head  of  Kneph,  the 
ram,  and  on  the  other  a  pole  with  the  head  of  Anubis,  the  dog,  each 
between  a  pair  of  kneehng  men.  This  last  pole,  like  the  hill  on  the 
same  side  of  the  valley,  is  turned  downwards,  and  the  kneeling  men 
beside  it  have  their  heads  downwards.  By  the  side  of  each  pole  is 
written,  "  The  image  of  the  corn-land."  Over  the  upper  half  of  the 
valley  are  twelve  men,  named  the  gods  of  the  corn-lands  ;  and  under 
the  lower  half  are  twelve  other  men,  named  the  gods  of  the  corn-lands 
of  Amenti,  or  the  place  of  the  dead. 

In  the  middle,  between  the  upper  and  the  lower  land,  is  the  boat  of 
the  god  Ra,  in  which  the  god  is  represented  by  a  ring  or  ball  for  the  sun, 
on  which  is  its  name,  a  scarabeeus.  The  serpent,  instead  of  forming  a 
canopy  over  the  god,  is  here  made  to  encircle  it,  with  the  tail  in  its 
mouth.  As  in  the  other  pictures  of  this  boat,  there  is  a  guard  at  one 
end,  and  a  steersman  at  the  other. 

The  dots  sprinkled  over  the  tops  of  the  two  hills  may  be  compared 
with  "  the  highest  part  of  the  dust  of  the  world  "  in  Proverbs  viii.  26. 


THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF    OIMENEPTHAH   I.  85 


THE    FOURTH    PICTURE.     (Plates  5,  6,  and  7.) 

First  we  have  a  tall  door,  turning  upon  two  pivots.     A  long  serpent, 
the  guardian  of  this  door,  looks  over  the  top. 

On  passing  this  door,  we  enter  a  paradise  or  garden,  with  a  row  of  fir 
trees  on  the  top,  which  makes  it  probable  that  it  is  situated  in  a  country 
far  to  the  north  of  Egypt,  as  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  such  trees  are 
unknown.  Here  sits  the  judge,  Osiris,  wearing  the  double  crown  of 
Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  holding  in  his  right  hand  Life,  and  in  his  left 
the  crosier.  The  legs  of  his  throne  are  formed  like  lions'  legs,  a  form 
afterwards  imitated  by  the  Greeks  for  their  chairs.  Before  him  stands 
the  great  pair  of  scales  resting  upon  a  man's  shoulders.  In  this  the 
doings  of  all  mortals  are  to  be  weighed.  In  one  scale  it  is  usual  to  see 
the  heart  of  a  deceased  man,  and  in  the  other  scale  the  figure  of  Truth. 
But  here  we  have  the  soul  in  the  form  of  a  bird  instead  of  the  heart, 
and  the  artist  has  put  nothing  in  the  other  scale.  Above  is  the  dog- 
headed  god  Anubis,  whose  duty  is  to  bring  the  dead  into  the  presence  of 
the  Judge.  Below  are  nine  men,  the  representatives  of  the  human  race, 
mounting  the  steps  towards  the  judgment  seat.  In  front  of  the  Judge 
is  a  boat,  in  which  an  ape,  one  of  the  keepers  of  the  fiery  pit,  is  carrying 
away  a  wicked  man,  who  has  been  changed  into  the  form  of  a  pig. 
Other  wicked  men  are  on  their  knees  beneath  the  Judge's  throne, 
working  with  axes,  as  if  condemned  to  the  mines.  A  pig  is  the  unclean 
animal  into  which  the  souls  of  the  wicked  were  sometimes  said  to 
migrate ;  and  on  the  painted  papyri  we  see  that  the  souls  of  good  men 
are  sometimes  sent  into  the  body  of  a  ram,  the  animal  sacred  to  the  god 
Kneph,  the  spirit. 

Leaving  the  garden  of  the  Judge,  we  enter  the  garden  of  the  blessed, 
as  in  former  pictures.  This  is  fenced  with  two  rows  of  the  same  fir 
trees.  At  the  corner  of  each  is  a  serpent  of  goodness,  the  cob)-a 
capella,  known  from  the  serpent  of  evil  by  its  enlarged  chest.  Within 
this  garden  lie  the  mummies  of  good  men,  who  are  declared  to  be  now 
changed  into  gods  and  goddesses.     They  are  twelve  in  number. 

We   then  come   upon    the  three    rows  of  figures,  as  in  the  former 

E 


26  THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF    OIMENEPTHAH    I. 

picture,  and  thus  remark  that  the  garden  of  the  Judge,  with  the  inter- 
esting scene  of  mankind  coming  to  judgment,  is  placed  between  the 
tall  door  and  the  garden  of  the  blessed,  which  two  in  most  of  the 
other  pictures  touch  one  another. 

In  the  upper  part  of  the  picture  we  have  the  great  serpent  carried 
along  like  a  coil  of  rope  by  twelve  men  who  have  conquered  it,  and 
followed  by  twelve  other  men  in  the  act  of  bowing  to  it,  and  met  by 
four  gods,  each  carrying  an  Anubis  staff. 

In  the  middle  of  the  picture  we  have  a  god  before  whom  are  standing 
twelve  men ;  behind  these  are  nine  others,  the  conquerors  of  the  great 
serpent,  which  they  are  carrying  in  their  arms  ;  and  these  are  followed 
by  the  boat  of  Kneph-Ra,  drawn  along  by  four  men. 

At  the  bottom  of  this  picture  are,  first,  eight  men,  then  twelve  carry- 
ing the  serpent,  and  then  sixteen  others  with  the  hawk-headed  Horus 
leaning  on  his  staff,  as  the  overseer.  These  sixteen  are  in  four  groups, 
of  four  each ;  they  are  often  met  with  on  the  monuments,  and  often 
variously  coloured  and  dressed,  showing  that  they  are  meant  for  four 
races  of  men. 


FIFTH    PICTURE.     {Plates  7-8.) 

After  the  door  and  its  serpent,  and  the  mummies  lying  in  the  garden 
of  paradise,  we  have,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  picture,  a  river  with  two 
bridges,  described  as  the  Bridges  of  Life.  Twelve  dog-headed  gods  are 
named  the  keepers  of  the  Bridge  of  Life.  Before  them  are  ten  serpents 
with  swollen  chests,  the  Serpents  of  Life ;  and  behind  them  are 
twelve  figures   of  men,  declared  to  be  gods. 

In  the  middle  of  the  picture  is  the  great  serpent  of  evil,  with  its 
numerous  folds,  standing  in  the  river,  with  six  women  standing  on  each 
bank.  Beyond  is  a  temple  with  nine  cells,  in  each  of  which  lies  a 
mummy.  The  building  is  a  flat  roof  upheld  by  ten  columns.  Beyond, 
again,  is  the  boat  of  Kneph-Ra,  drawn  by  four  men. 

At  the  bottom  of  the  picture  are  four  doors,  the  entrances  of  tombs, 


THE    SARCOPHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH   I.  27 

beside  which  stand  the  door-keepers,  one  with  an  Anubis  staff,  and 
four  others  bowing  forward.  Then  are  twelve  gods  ;  then  the  god 
Osiris  standing  as  conqueror  upon  the  serpent  of  evil,  which  may  be 
considered  as  the  earliest  form  of  our  well-known  group  of  St.  George 
and  the  Dragon,  or  of  holiness  trampling  down  sin.  In  front  of  Osiris 
stands  a  serpent  of  goodness,  followed  by  twelve  gods,  the  last  of  whom 
is  Horus  leaning  upon  his  staff  as  the  overseer. 


THE  'SCULPTURE    ON    THE    INSIDE.     {Plates  9-15.) 

Here  we  have  not  got  the  single  line  of  hieroglyphics,  which  runs 
round  the  upper  edge.  In  other  respects  the  inside  is  much  the  same 
as  the  outside.  It  contains  five  pictures  divided  by  doors,  but  in  this 
case  there  are  six  doors  to  the  five  pictures,  as  the  first  and  the  last 
pictures  are  separated  by  a  pair  of  doors. 


SIXTH    PICTURE.     (Plates  9  and  10.) 

After  passing  through  the  door,  guarded  by  its  serpent,  we  come  to 
the  garden  with  its  two  rows  of  trees,  within  which,  in  place  of  the 
mummies  in  the  former  pictures,  we  have  two  poles ;  on  the  top  of  each 
is  a  human  head,  and  above  one  is  the  sun,  and  above  the  other  a 
scarabfeus.  After  this,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  picture,  we  have  a  god 
with  a  crocodile's  head,  followed  by  eight  goddesses,  each  sitting  on  an 
Uraeus,  then  by  twelve  gods,  each  carrying  an  Anubis  staff.  Of  these,  four 
have  hawks'  heads,  four  rams'  heads,  four  human  heads.  Then  follow 
four  more,  each  holding  up  a  star  in  the  right  hand  ;  and  then  four,  each 
holding  up  a  sun  in  the  right  hand. 

In  the  middle  of  the  picture  Ave  have  a  god  followed  by  a  goddess  of 
Low-er  Egypt  and  a  goddess  of  Upper  Egypt,  being  so  distinguished 
by  their  crowns.  Then  are  four  apes,  each  holding  up  a  large  human 
hand.  Then  the  great  serpent,  named  Apoph,  the  giant,  tied  to  the 
ground  by  several  chains.     In  front  of  it  stand  nine  gods  with  swords 


28  THE    SARCOPHAGUS   OF   GIMENEPTHAH    I. 

as  though  to  attack  it;  four  have  clogs'  heads,  and  five  have  human 
heads.  These  are  followed  by  four  men  drawing  the  boat  of  Kneph-Ka. 
At  the  bottom  of  the  picture  we  have  a  god  with  a  cat's  head  holding 
an  Anubis  staff,  followed  by  four  men  in  the  attitude  of  bowing,  four 
women  standing  uncrowned,  four  with  the  crown  of  Lower  Egypt,  four 
with  that  of  Upper  Egypt ;  four  men  uncrowned,  four  with  the  crown 
of  Lower  Egypt,  again  four  uncrowned,  and  lastly,  four  with  the  crown 
of  Upper  Egypt.  These  men  represent  the  four  well-known  ranks  in 
the  Egyptian  priesthood,  and  hence  the  women  may  represent  three 
ranks  of  priestesses. 


SEVENTH    PICTURE.     (Plates  10  and  11.) 

Here,  within  the  garden,  we  have  two  Anubis  staffs,  one  with  the  crown 
of  Upper  Egypt  over  it,  and  the  other  with  that  of  Lower  Egypt. 

Beyond  this,  in  the  upper  part  of  this  picture,  we  have  first  a  serpent 
with  a  chain  round  its  neck.  The  chain  is  held  by  four  men,  and  a 
fifth  man  seems  to  lie  upon  the  chain  ;  but  he  is  perhaps  only  so  placed 
because  the  artist,  from  not  understanding  perspective,  wished  in  this  way 
to  represent  him  as  on  the  other  side  of  the  serpent.  This  chained 
serpent  is  attacked  by  eight  men  with  swords.  Four  of  these  men 
have  human  heads,  and  four  have  each  a  fourfold  serpent's  head.  Five 
other  serpents  are  all  tied  to  one  chain,  which  is  held  at  one  end  by  a 
human  hand  rising  out  of  the  ground,  and  by  twelve  men,  or  gods  ;  and 
at  the  other  end  by  five  other  men,  or  rather  gods,  who,  by  a  false  aim  at 
perspective,  are  made  to  lie  upon  the  chain.  These  are  the  god  Seb  and 
the  four  mediating  gods  of  the  dead,  Amset,  Hepi,  Sotef,  and  Snouf. 
Behind  these  stands  Osiris,  Rho-t-amenti,  ki)i(/  of  hell,  whence  came  the 
Greek  name  Rhadamanthus. 

In  the  middle  part  of  the  picture,  we  have  the  boat  of  Kneph-Ra 
drawn  along  by  four  men.  Before  these  walks  a  man  holding  up  on 
high  a  star  in  his  right  hand.  Before  him  four  figures  are  seated  on 
the  ground ;  one  with  a  hawk's  head,  one  Avith  a  cat's  head,  and  two 
with  human  heads.  Of  these  two,  one  has  long  hair,  and  the  other  is 
baldheaded ;  they  both  have  beards,  though  all  the  four  figures  sit  upon 


THE    SARCOPHAGUS    OF    OIMENEPTHAH    I.  29 

their  heels,  with  both  knees  on  the  ground  in  the  attitude  more 
common  with  the  women.  Then  we  have  three  men,  each  holding  up 
a  star  with  one  hand,  and  with  the  other  holding  the  rope  of  a  boat, 
in  which  is  a  human  head,  and  an  Uraeus  serpent.  Next  is  a  serpent 
rising  from  the  ground  with  its  two  wings  outstretched,  as  in  the  act  of 
flying.  This  may  be  the  Seraph,  or  winged  serpent  of  the  Hebrew 
writers.  Next  is  a  man  holding  in  his  hand  what  seems  to  be  a  flame 
of  fire,  which  he  pours  upon  the  top  of  a  post,  having  a  ram's  head  and 
horns.  Next  is  an  Untus  standing  upright  on  its  tail,  having  three 
heads,  two  human,  and  one  that  of  a  serpent.  This  three-headed 
serpent  is  worshipped  by  four  women,  who  hold  up  both  their  hands 
toward  it  in  prayer.  Lastly  is  a  god,  a  union  of  Horus  and  Anubis, 
with  two  heads,  one  a  hawk's,  and  the  other  a  square-eared  dog's,  and 
Avith  two  pairs  -of  hands.  He  stands  upon  a  platform  made  with  two 
bows,  and  the  tails  of  six  Uraeus  serpents. 

In  the  bottom  part  of  the  picture  we  have  a  large  eye,  placed  upon  a 
bird-perch,  before  which  stands  a  god  with  an  Anubis  staff.  Behind 
this  is  an  ape  on  a  second  perch.  Before  him  stand  four  gods,  two 
with  human  heads,  and  a  star  on  each  head,  one  with  a  stag's  head,  and 
one  W'ith  a  crocodile's  head.  Each  holds  an  Anubis  staff,  and  the 
character  for  life.  Behind  them  stand  twelve  women  holding  to  one 
cord,  each  has  a  star  on  her  head.  These  are  the  twelve  hours.  Behind 
these  are  twelve  men,  each  holding  an  oar,  or  pole  enlarged  at  the  end. 


EIGHTH    PICTURE.     {Plaies  ]-i  and  ]5.) 

Here,  within  the  garden,  we  have  a  row  of  twelve  asjDS  or  serpents  of 
goodness.  Then  in  the  upper  part  is  a  hawk-headed  sphinx  wearing  the 
crown  of  Upper  Egypt.  From  the  tail  end  of  its  body  rises  a  man's 
head  with  the  same  crown.  On  its  back  stands  the  two-headed  god  of 
the  last  picture  (Plate  10),  at  once  Horus  and  Anubis.  On  each  side  of 
this  are  five  men  holding  a  rope ;  the  four  pull  against  the  one.  The  one 
has  a  bald  head ;  the  four  have  serpents'  heads,  and  are  crowned,  but 
the    crown   rests    not  on   the  serpent,    but    on  the   man's    shoulders. 


30  THE   SAECOPHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH   I. 

Between  the  one  man  and  the  four  on  each  side  of  the  sphinx  is  a 
sloping  pole,  with  a  crowned  head.  And  we  may  remark,  in  respect  to 
the  two  races  of  men  who  inhabited  Egypt,  that  the  head  with  the 
Theban  crown  has  a  short  beard,  and  the  head  with  the  Memphite 
crown  has  a  long  beard.  The  human  head  at  the  tail  of  the  sphinx, 
with  a  Theban  crown,  also  has  a  short  beard.  Beyond  this  a  man 
between  eight  serpents,  each  with  a  pair  of  human  legs  ;  four  walk  to 
the  right  and  four  to  the  left,  while  their  eight  tails  meet  together  in  his 
hands.  Beyond  this  is  another  man  in  the  same  way  holding  the  tails 
of  eight  serpents  with  human  legs,  four  walking  in  each  direction.  These 
eight  serpents  have  human  heads.  Two  other  crowned  serpents,  each 
turning  its  back  towards  the  eight  serpents  and  the  man,  have  their  tails 
meeting  at  his  feet.  A  group  of  two  men,  each  holding  an  open  sling 
or  rope  held  by  both  hands,  stand  apart  by  themselves.  • 

In  the  middle  part  of  the  picture  we  have  as  usual  the  boat  of  Kneph- 
Ra,  pulled  along  by  a  rope  held  by  four  men.  In  front  of  these  walk  six 
men  holding  slings.  In  front  of  them  are  four  apes  holding  slings.  In 
front  of  them  are  four  women  holding  slings.  In  front  of  them  are 
three  men  holding  spears,  and  each  holding  at  the  same  time  the  curling 
folds  of  a  cloth  which  covers  a  man  who  is  crouching  upon  his  hands 
and  knees  before  them.  This  man  hidden  under  the  cloth,  and  the 
figures  behind  him  armed  with  spears  and  slings,  are  advancing  to  attack 
two  great  monsters  ;  one  is  the  giant  serpent  Apoph,  and  the  other  is 
a  crocodile  whose  tail  ends  in  a  serpent's  head,  and  who  turns  this  tail 
against  his  assailants. 

On  the  lower  part  of  the  picture  we  have  a  crowned  hawk,  seated 
upon  the  folding  tails  of  four  serpents.  Of  these,  one  on  each  side  of 
the  hawk  is  a  serpent  of  evil  walking  on  human  legs,  and  the  other,  the 
Urteus,  the  serpent  of  goodness.  Under  this  group  passes  a  long  rope 
held  on  one  side  by  eight  men  and  on  the  other  by  sixteen  men ;  of  these 
last,  four  have  rams'  heads  representing  the  god  Kneph,  four  have 
hawks'  heads  for  the  god  llorus,  four  have  birds'  heads  for  the  god 
Thoth,  and  four  have  human  heads,  and  are  declared  to  be  souls  in 
Amenti. 


THE   SARCOPHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH    I.  31 


NINTH    PICTURE.     {Plates  13,  14,  and  15.) 

Within  the  garden  are  nine  mummies. 

In  the  upper  part  of  the  picture  we  have  a  god  standing,  who  is 
worshipped  by  nine  human  souls,  each  in  the  form  of  a  bird,  with  the 
head  and  hands  of  a  man.  On  our  title-page  we  have  a  man  and  his 
soul  under  the  same  form,  receiving  knowledge  from  the  goddess  of  the 
sacred  tree.     These  nine  souls  are  followed  by  twelve  men  standing. 

In  the  middle  line  we  have  a  river  or  piece  of  water,  in  which  are 
sixteen  figures  of  men  in  four  groups  of  four  each,  in  various  attitudes. 
These  are  spiritual  beings  or  ghosts.  They  are  named  Mout,  the  dead, 
Nouf,  the  spirits,  Achio,  the  magicians,  and  Erepo,  the  water-spirits.  This 
last  is  the  same  as  the  Hebrew  word  Rephaim,  and  reminds  us  of  the 
passage  in  Job  xxvi.  5,  "  Spiritual  beings  are  born  under  the  waters, 
and  are  the  inhabitants  thereof."  Beyond  the  piece  of  water  is  the  boat 
of  Ra  drawn  along  by  four  men  holding  the  rope. 

In  the  bottom  line  we  have  the  great  fiery  serpent  with  seven  gods, 
his  keepers,  standing  upon  his  folds,  while  twelve  wicked  men,  with 
their  arms  tied  together  at  their  elbows,  are  brought  up  by  a  keeper  to 
be  destroyed  by  the  blast  of  fire  which  this  great  serpent  breathes  out 
upon  them  from  his  mouth.  This  dreadful  animal  seems  to  be  meant 
by  Job  in  chapter  xxvi.  13,  when  he  says,  "  God  by  his  spirit  garnished 
the  heavens,  his  hand  formed  the  crooked  serpent." 


TENTH    PICTURE.     {Plate  15.) 

This  is  one  of  the  smallest  pictures,  being  of  the  same  size  as  that  at 
the  foot  of  the  sarcophagus  on  the  outside.  It  contains  only  one  subject. 
Here  the  dotted  band  of  the  sky  which  runs  round  on  the  top  of  the 
pictures  is  united  to  that  at  the  bottom  of  the  pictures  by  a  vertical  band 
of  the  same  width ;  and  that  it  is  the  sky  or  pathway  of  the  sun  is 
shown  by  the  figure  of  the  sun  which  is  here  met  with  upon  it. 

In  this  picture  we  have  a  representation  of  the  ocean,  in  which  float 


0-2  THE   SARCOPHAGUS    OF   OIMENEPTHAH    I. 

both  the  circular  world  and  the  boat  of  Ra,  the  sun.  But  the  attempt 
to  show  the  sun  at  the  same  time  in  its  two  positions,  as  held  up  by  the 
sky  in  the  daytime,  and  by  the  ocean  at  night,  is  a  little  confusing. 

In  the  boat,  the  sun,  with  the  scarabueus  as  its  name,  is  attended  by 
Isis,  Nepthis,  Seb,  and  seven  other  gods.  The  boat  is  upheld  by  the 
hands  of  the  god  of  the  ocean,  of  whom  we  only  see  the  bust  from  the 
breast  upwards.  The  air,  or  empty  space  above  the  boat  in  which  the 
fio-iu-es  stand,  is  joined  to  the  band  of  sky  which  runs  round  the  whole 
of  the  inside  of  the  sarcophagus. 

Thus  far  we  have  described  the  picture  as  it  stands  upright.  We 
now  turn  it  the  other  way,  and  we  see  the  circular  figure  of  the  earth 
surrounded  by  Osiris.  It  is  a  plane  floating  upon  the  waters,  as  de- 
scribed in  Proverbs  viii.  2  7  : 

"  When  God  prepared  the  heavens,  I,  Wisdom,  was  there  : 
When  he  drew  a  cu'cle  upon  the  face  of  the  deep." 

and  again  in  Job  xxvi.  10  : — 

"  He  drew  a  circle  upon  the  face  of  the  waters 
As  a  boundary  between  light  and  darkness." 

Upon  the  head  of  this  figure  of  Osiris  stands  the  goddess  Neith,  the 
supporter  of  the  sun,  which  she  upholds  with  her  outstretched  hand. 
The  artist  makes  one  figure  of  the  sun  answer  two  purposes,  as  it  is 
thus  held  up  on  one  side  by  the  goddess  Neith,  while  on  the  other  side 
it  is  in  its  boat  supported  by  the  figure  of  the  ocean. 

After  learning  from  this  picture  that  the  figure  of  a  man,  holding  over 
his  head  the  sun,  is  meant  for  the  god  of  the  ocean,  we  may  carry  our 
knowledge  to  explain  one  of  the  pictures  on  the  funereal  papyri.  These 
papyri  frequently  contain  a  group  of  four  pictures,  placed  one  over 
the  other  in  a  column.  In  the  first  the  deceased  person  is  in  the  boat 
of  the  god  Ra.  In  the  second  is  the  sun,  with  rays  of  light  streaming 
from  it.  It  is  between  two  worshippers ;  sometimes  they  are  both 
o-oddesses  of  Amenti,  but  at  other  times  they  ai'e  the  deceased  person 
and  his  wife.  In  the  third  we  have  this  figure  of  a  man,  or  more  often 
the  bust  of  a  man,  holding  the  sun  upon  his  head  by  help  of  his  two 
hands.     The  sun  sends  out  no  rays.     On  each  side  of  him  is  a  soul, 


THE    SARCOPHAGUS    OF   OIMENEPTHAH   I. 


3S 


ill  the  form  of  a  bird,  with  human  head  and  hands,  and  two,  or  per- 
haps four,  monkeys.  These  all  hold  up  their  arms  as  in  the  act  of  prayer. 
One  of  the  birds  has  a  beard,  showing  that  it  is  the  soul  of  a  man ;  the 
other  has  not,  being  the  soul  of  his  wife.  In  the  fourth  picture  we 
see  the  deceased  man  and  his  wife,  both  seated,  wath  a  table  of  offerings 
set  out  before  them,  and  a  priest  presenting  fire  and  water  to  them 
as  if  they  were  gods.  These  four  pictures,  with  some  slight  variations, 
may  be  seen  on  many  of  the  funereal  papyri. 

The  third  of  these  pictures  receives  its   explanation  from  this  sar- 
cophagus (see  Fig.  11).     Here  we  have  the  sun  supported  by  the  ocean  ; 


Fig.    11. 

it  is  therefore  after  sunset,  and  beneath  the  earth.  It  sheds  no  rays, 
and  it  may  be  contrasted  with  the  sun  in  the  second  picture,  which  sheds 
numerous  rays.  This,  which  we  may  suppose  is  in  the  heavens  over- 
head, is  worshipped  by  the  man  and  his  wife  in  bodily  form,  but  the 
former  sun  which  is  upheld  by  the  ocean,  we  must  suppose  to  be  in 
some  unknown  dark  place  beneath  the  earth,  where  it  gives  no  lio-ht, 
and  where  it  is  worshipped  by  the  souls  of  the  two  deceased  persons. 

Again,  these  pictures  on  the  papyri  explain  to  us  that  the  circular 
earth  on  the  sarcophagus  (Plate  15),  is  not  an  island  standing  up  out  of 
the  water,  but  is  like  a  raft  floating  upon  its  surface,  as  the  sun,  when 
in  the  ocean,  is  supposed  to  be  beneath  the  surface  of  the  earth.  And 
this  is  further  supported  by  passages  in  the  Hebrew  writino-s,  such  as 
Psalm  cxxxvi.  (>,  saying  that  God  stretched  out  the  earth  over  the 
waters  ;  and  the  ten  commandments,  which  speak  of  the  fish  in  the  waters 
beneath  the  earth ;  and  yet  more  exactly  does  Proverbs  viii.  27,  already 
quoted,  describe  this  circular  plate  of  the  earth  fioatino;  on  the  ocean. 


34  THE    SARCOPHAGUS   OF   OIMENEPTHAH    ], 

THE   BOTTOM   OF    THE   CHEST. 

[Plates  16  and  17.)     ' 

At  the  bottom  of  the  chest  hes  a  lar2:e  figure  of  the  goddess  Neith. 
She  is  standing  with  arms  straight,  and  hands  open  to  receive  the  body 
of  the  king.  The  face  and  lower  parts  of  the  body  below  the  waist 
are  in  profile,  but  with  a  front  chest,  front  shoulders,  and  a  front  eye. 
She  has  two  right  feet,  they  both  show  only  the  great  toe.  The  eye- 
brows and  eyelashes  are  painted.  As  the  drawing  is  little  more  than  an 
outline,  one  breast  only  is  shown  ;  the  artist  has  not  known  how  to 
represent  the  second.  From  the  Egyptian  figures  of  this  class,  it 
would  seem  as  if  the  Greeks  had  borrowed  the  notion  of  a  race  of 
Amazons,  or  women  with  one  breast.  The  goddess  has  long  hair 
falling  partly  in  front  and  partly  behind,  and  tied  back  from  her  eyes 
by  a  riband  or  diadem.  Her  dress  is  a  tight  robe  reaching  from  the 
ankles  to  the  breast,  and  held  up  by  two  shoulder-straps,  each 
fastened  with  a  buckle  on  the  shoulder.  This  robe  is  formed  of 
feathers,  and  over  it  are  closely  folded  a  pair  of  wings,  like  those  of  the 
cherubs  over  the  ark  in  the  Jewish  temple.  In  this  way  is  shown  the 
heavenly  character  of  the  lady.  She  wears  round  her  neck  a  collar 
formed  of  nine  broad  bands,  the  lowest  of  which  is  of  beads.  She  has 
broad  anklets  round  the  legs,  bracelets  round  the  wrists,  and  armlets 
round  the  upper  part  of  the  arms. 

In  order  to  explain  the  proportions  which  the  Egyptian  artist  gave 
to*tlie  human  figure,  her  height  has  been,  by  Mr.  Bonomi,  divided  into 
nineteen  parts,  by  lines  on  the  margin  of  the  Plate,  which  show  that 
the  artist  worked  according  to  the  usual  Egyptian  canon,  as  shown  on 
the  accompanying  woodcut  (Fig.  12).  Counting  downward  from  the 
head,  the  divisions  are  as  follow : — 


'3 


No.  1 .  At  the  bottom  of  the  forehead. 

,,  2.  At  the  bottom  of  the  nose. 

„  3.  At  the  top  of  the  shoulder. 

„  7.  At  the  narrowest  part  of  the  waist. 


THE   SARCOPHAGUS  OF  OIMENEPTHAH    I. 


35 


No.     9.  At  the  widest  part  of  the  body. 

10.  At  the  wrist  as  the  arms  hano;  down. 

12.  At  the  tips  of  the  outstretched  fingers. 

13.  At  the  top  of  the  knee. 

17.  At  the  bottom  of  the  dress. 

18.  At  the  top  of  the  instep. 

Above  the   head   of  the  goddess  is  her  name  written  by   means   of 
three  large    characters  N  T  for    Neith,  and  the  figure  of  the  heavens 


Fig.  12. 


covered  with  stars  to  help  out  and  explain  the  very  insufficient  spelling, 
which  without  that  sign  might  have  many  other  meanings.  The  N  is 
a  vase  partly  full  of  wine,  and  it  seems  to  prove  the  use  of  glass  at  that 
time,  as  it  is  transparent.  The  T  is  a  half-circle,  the  figure  of  a  hill,  and 
takes  its  force  from  the  word  TEI,  a  hill. 

The  writing  with  which  the  goddess  is  surrounded  is  wholly  in 
praise  of  the  king,  and  very  much  made  up  of  the  same  thoughts  and 
sentences  repeated  again  and  again.  Thus,  line  1  begins  with  "  Honours 
to  the  deified  King,  Lord  of  the  world  *  *  *  lately  deceased,  son 
of  the  Sun,  Oimenepthah  deceased,"  line  21  contains  the  same  words, 
ending  at  the  right  shoulder.  Lines  15  and  16*  both  begin  with  the 
same  words,  and,  with  variations,  the  same  is  found  in  lines  20,  29,  and 
30.     Other  sentences  begin  as  in  line  Q,  with  "  Honours  to  Seb ;"  in 


3(5  THE    SARCOPHAGUS    OF   OIMENEPTHAH    I. 

line  25,  "  Honours  to  Neith  the  great  goddess."  Others  as  m  hne  26, 
"  I  am  Neith ;"  in  lines  32  and  29,  "  I  am  the  son  of  Athor."  The 
king's  soul  is  mentioned  under  the  figure  of  a  bird  with  a  human  head, 
in  lines  17*,  25,  and  28,  and  in  19,  as  "the  illustrious  soul  of  the 
chanired  deified  king  deceased."  Much  of  this  is  clearly  written  to 
fill  up  the  space;  it  is  used  as  ornament,  as  we  see  the  larger 
hieroglyphics  used  on  the  architectural  parts  of  a  temple.  In  lines  4 
and  28,  the  king  has  the  title  of  Sethon,  written  by  means  of  a  twig, 
a  small  semicircle,  and  a  wavy  Une.  This  priestly  title,  Avhich  may  be 
translated  king,  is  used  by  Herodotus  as  the  name  of  the  general  who 
fou'>-ht  under  Tirhakah  against  Sennacherib.  It  is  also  the  word  Sethos, 
which  Manetho  gives  as  a  title  of  Barneses,  as  we  shall  see  in  the 
Appendix,  when  comparing  Manetho's  kings  with  the  monuments. 

In  Plate  17  we  have  sections^  of  the  edges  of  the  lid  and  chest, 
showing  how  they  are  made  to  fit ;  and  showing  also  the  four  grooves,  or 
notches,  which  run  all  round  the  sarcophagus,  and  the  copper  casing 
which  we  have  conjectured  was  once  there  as  a  guard  to  save  the  edges 
from  being  broken. 


BROKEN   PIECES    OF    THE    RIGHT    SIDE    OF    THE   LID.     [Plate  18.) 

The  pieces  on  this  side  all  join  together  and  form  part  of  one  continuous 
picture  for  the  outside,  and  of  a  second  continuous  picture  for  the 
inside.  Those  at  the  top  of  the  plate  show  us  the  outside.  Round  the 
bottom  runs  one  continuous  line  of  writing,  which,  like  the  line  on  the 
top  of  the  outside  of  the  chest,  is  in  praise  of  the  king.  The  writing 
is  to  be  read  in  two  directions,  beginning  at  the  dotted  line  u-v,  which 
marks  the  corner  of  the  sarcophagus,  and  the  division  betw^een  the  head 
and  side.  The  dotted  line  w-x,  divides  the  head  from  the  shoulder. 
Above  the  single  hne  of  hieroglyphics  is  a  band  of  blue  dots,  probably 
representing  the  firmament,  and  above  that  is  a  picture  divided  into 
three  parts,  but  broken  at  each  end. 

In  the  upper  part  we  have  six  men,  each  with  the  ostrich   feather  of 
truth  on  his  head ;    and  then  four  men,   with  what  may  be  a  flower 


THE    SARCOPHAGUS    OF   OIMENEPTHAH    I.  37 

on  the  head.  They  all  hold  up  their  hands  as  if  to  support  these 
objects. 

In  the  middle  part  we  have  six  posts,  each  having  a  dog's  head,  and 
to  each  of  which  are  tied  two  criminals.  Between  each  pair  of  posts 
stands  a  mummy-shaped  man,  except  between  one  pair,  where  there  are 
two  large  human  eyes.  Beyond  is  a  man  leaning  on  a  staff,  the  usual 
attitude  of  an  overseer  who  has  the  charge  of  these  criminals,  and 
behind  him  are  two  men  holding  a  rope,  probably  part  of  the  company 
pulling  along  the  boat  of  the  god  Ra. 

In  the  bottom  part  of  the  picture  is  a  man  carrying  a  ploughshare, 
and  behind  him  are  six  large  ears  of  corn  standing  out  of  the  ground, 
the  bearded  wheat,  or  Triticum  compositiim,  of  Egypt.  Towards  each 
of  these,  a  man  is  stooping  as  if  going  to  gather  the  harvest.  These 
are  evidently  good  men,  happily  employed  in  agriculture  after  death,  as 
those  in  the  former  row  were  wicked  men,  awaiting  the  punishment  that 
their  crimes  deserve. 

The  fragment  marked  e  is  the  only  piece  that  we  possess  from  the 
roof  of  the  lid.  Upon  it  are  the  sculptures  of  the  inside  surface.  The 
portion  of  wing  probably  belonged  to  a  vulture,  perhaps  having  the 
head  of  a  ram,  which  had  its  place  over  the  king's  breast.  The  broken 
lines  of  hieroglyphics  are  in  honour  of  the  king. 

Those  on  the  bottom  of  the  plate  show  us  the  sculptures  on  the  inside 
of  the  fragments  we  have  been  describing.  The  few  lines  of  hiero- 
glyphics which  remain  are  probably  all  in  praise  of  the  king,  and  not 
like  those  on  the  outside  of  the  same  fragments,  which  relate  to  the 
events  in  the  next  world  common  to  all  mankind.  Here  the  principal 
figure  is  the  god  Thoth,  having  the  head  of  an  ibis,  and  a  cow's  tail 
hanging  down  behind  from  his  waist,  a  common  ornament  with  Egyptian 
kings.  In  his  hand  he  holds  a  rope,  which  hangs  down  from  the  hiero- 
glyphical  character  for  the  heavens,  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  rope  is 
fastened  a  lamp.  In  this  way  the  stars  are  frequently  represented  as 
lamps  hanging  from  the  sky. 

Above  the  head  of  the  god  Thoth  is  the  tail  of  a  large  jackal,  whose 
body  was  on  the  roof  of  the  lid.  The  position  of  this  animal,  and  of 
the  great  wmgs  of  which  we  here  have  parts  only,  will  be  seen  in  Plate  1 , 


38  THE    SAECOPHAGUS   OF    OIMENEPTHAH    I, 

where  M.  Bonomi  has  attempted  a  restoration  of  these  sculptures. 
In  this  plate  we  see  two  of  the  large  round  holes,  by  the  help  of  which 
we  suppose  the  lid  was  lowered  on  to  its  place,  and  also  four  small 
holes  marked  l  m  n  o,  for  which  we  are  unable  to  conjecture  any 
purpose. 


BROKEN    PIECES    OF    THE   LEFT   SIDE   OF   THE   LID.     (Flute  19.) 

The  pieces  on  this  side  do  not  form  one  continuous  picture.  Like 
those  on  the  other  side,  we  have  the  bottom  line  of  hieroglyphics  in 
praise  of  the  king.  Above  it  a  dotted  band  representing  the  firmament, 
and  above  that  the  three  parts  of  a  picture  or  pictures.  And  here  we 
are  so  fortunate  as  to  have  one  of  the  doors  guarded  by  a  tall  serpent, 
and  the  two  rows  of  trees  the  boundaries  of  the  garden,  which  tell  us 
that  the  sculpture  on  the  sides  of  the  lid  on  the  outside,  was  divided  by 
these  doors  into  a  certain  number  of  pictures,  in  the  same  way  as  we 
have  seen  on  both  the  outside  and  the  inside  of  the  chest. 

In  the  upper  part  of  the  pictures  here,  we  have  a  row  of  men,  each 
holding  part  of  a  rope,  or,  possibly,  it  may  be  of  a  serpent. 

In  the  middle  part  we  have  a  row  of  figures,  of  which  two  are  stand- 
ing mummies,  and  seven  are  gods,  each  holding  an  Anubis  staff ;  behind 
these  is  the  boat  of  the  god  Kneph-Ra. 

In  the  lower  part,  we  have  a  row  of  six  men  lying  at  full  length  upon 
couches,  with  their  backs  upwards,  and  holding  up  their  heads  like  so 
many  sphinxes.  The  couches  have  lions'  legs,  but  have  not,  as  is  usual 
with  the  couches  for  mummies,  the  lion's  head  and  tail. 

The  fragment  Q  is  from  the  roof  of  the  lid.  The  sculpture  upon  it 
is  that  of  the  outside.  The  horizontal  bars  are  the  pattern  upon  the 
shawl  which  the  king  wore  upon  his  head.  This  portion  is  the  flap  or 
end  which  hung  upon  the  right  shoulder ;  but  this  will  be  better  under- 
stood in  Mr.  Bonomi's  restoration  of  the  figure  in  Plate  1.  Near  to  the 
Figure  16,  are  three  small  drill  holes.  For  what  purpose  they  were 
made  is  unknown.     They  have  broken  one  into  the  other. 

On  the  lower  part  of  the  plate,  we  have   the  sculptures   upon  the 


THE    SARCOPHAGUS   OF    OIMENEPTHAH    I.  89 

inside  of  the  same  fragments.  The  god  Thoth,  the  jackal's  tail,  and 
the  wing  behind  the  god  correspond  to  those  in  Plate  18.  The  broken 
lines  of  hieroglyphics  all  relate  to  the  king.  The  line  w-x  marks  the 
division  between  the  head  and  shoulder  of  the  sarcophagus.  The  line 
y-z  marks  the  elbow. 

On  the  fragment  P.  we  see  another  of  the  large  round  holes  by  which 
we  suppose  the  lid  was  lowered  on  to  its  place. 

In  this  plate,  fragments  M  and  N  are  wi'ongly  placed ;  they  ought  to 
be  changed  in  position,  as  in  Plate  1  ;  each  ought  to  stand  in  the  other's 
place. 


APPENDIX. 


In  the  accompanying  tabular  view  of  tlie  series  of  Egyptian  kings,  in  pages  44 
and  45,  the  row  of  hieroglyphical  names,  the  names  from  Eratosthenes,  and 
those  of  each  dynasty  of  Manetho,  form  each  an  independent  autliority.  They 
are  here  placed  side  by  side  in  columns  to  show  that,  in  respect  of  the  Kings  of 
Thebes,  Manetho,  Eratosthenes,  and  the  tablet  of  Abj^dos,  are  all  speakino-  of  the 
same  kings ;  and  to  prove  that  these  authorities  embrace,  within  the  limited  period 
of  twenty-two  reigns,  that  important  portion  of  Egyptian  history  which  reaches 
from  the  builders  of  the  great  pyramids  to  Rameses  II.  The  names,  it  is  true, 
are  often  unlike,  nor  is  the  order  of  names  in  each  quite  the  same.  But  the  dis- 
agreement in  a  few  cases  is  far  outweighed  by  the  satisfactory  agreement  in  the 
larger  number  of  cases.  In  order  to  show  that  these  several  lists  are  here  placed 
side  by  side  correctly,  and  that  they  lill  no  more  space  in  time  than  that  above 
assigned  to  them,  we  must  consider  a  few  of  the  names  more  carefully. 

1st.  As  to  the  kings  of  Manetho's  eighteenth  dynasty,  we  will  compare  the 
three  authorities  in  the  following  manner:  — 


Eratosthenes. 


■21.  Echeseosacara  . 

22.  Queen  Nitocris,  who  go- 

verned for  her  husband. 

23.  Myrtseus  Ammonodotus 


The  Monuments. 


Chebra  =  Ames     . 

Shogshegkara  =  Amunothph  I. 

Meshophrn  Thothmes  I  . 
Meshoph  Thothmes  II.    . 
Mesmeso  Thothmes  IIF. 
Amunothph  II.  Grandfather  to 

the    Maker    of    the    Vocal 

Statue. 


Manetho. 


1.  Ainosis. 

2.  Chebros. 

3.  Amenophthis. 

4.  Amersis. 

5.  Misaphris. 

6.  ]\Iisi)brrtgmuthosis. 

7.  Tulhmosis. 

8.  Amenophis    of     the    Vol'uI 

Statue. 


The  agreement  here  is  close  enough  to  prove  that  neither  list  should  be  moved 
higher  or  lower,  and  that  Manetho  has  made  a  mistake  in  giving  the  vocal  statue 
to  Amunothph  II.  Chebra  =  Ames  may  have  been  made  by  Manetho  into  two 
persons.  Ames  Athori,  the  wife  of  King  Amunothph  I.,  may  have  succeeded 
him  as  regent  and  have  been  counted  by  Manetho  as  a  sovereign  under  the  name 
of  Amersis. 

Eratosthenes  has  not  names  enough  in  his  list.  With  a  slight  variation  he  calls 


APPENDIX.  41 

Amunothph  I.  by  his  first  name  Shosliegkara,  giving  to  the  sword  in  his  first  oval 
the  force  of  Shogsheg,  which  is  one  of  its  Coptic  names.  He  rightly  says  that 
Queen  Nitocris  will  represent  her  husband  Thothmosis  II. ;  but  we  also  know  that 
she  governed  during  the  first  years  of  his  successor  Thothmosis  III.,  and  therefore 
we  need  not  be  surprised  that  that  king  also  is  omitted  from  the  list,  and  we 
must  consider  it  as  an  error  of  Eratosthenes  that  he  has  omitted  the  name  of 
Thothmosis  I. 

The  agreement  of  the  names  which  follow  is  not  so  satisfactory,  but  is  all  that 
we  could  wish  in  the  case  of  Semphrucrates  or  Anemneb,  of  Eameses  I.  and  of 
Oimenepthah  I.,  the  king  of  our  sarcophagus,  and  of  Eameses  II.,  the  first  king 
of  the  nineteenth  dynasty.  This  last  was  the  greatest  of  the  Egyptian  kincrs. 
He  is  called  Tyrannus  by  Eratosthenes,  and  Sethos,  the  kinfj,  by  Manetho. 

The  names  in  Manetho,  which  are  not  in  the  tablet,  may  be  all  accounted  for 
as  being  those  of  women.  On  the  death  of  Thothmosis  IV.,  Egypt  was  for  a  time 
governed  by  his  widow  Moutmes,  who  may  be  Manetho's  No.  10,  Acherres ;  and 
her  daughter  Amun-Eathos  may  be  his  No.  11,  Eathos.  So  also  we  may 
without  violence  suppose  that  his  No.  13,  Acherres,  is  another  queen,  who  may 
have  had  some  right  to  be  called  a  sovereign.  Tllfe  name  of  Acherres  may  be 
derived  from  that  of  the  goddess  Athor,  with  the  guttural  ch  changed  into  th. 
This  would  be  a   natural  title  for  a  queen. 

2nd.  As  to  Manetho's  eleventh  and  twelfth  dynasties,  we  remark  that  Labaris, 
after  whom  the  labyrinth  was  named,  was  probably  a  king  of  Heracleopolis,  and 
ought  to  be  removed  out  of  this  list.  There  then  remain  five  names  out  of  seven 
with  a  very  satisfactory  agreement,  quite  close  enough  to  prove  that  if  we  take 
the  tablet  of  Abydos  as  an  authority,  Manetho's  twelfth  dynasty  was  immediately 
succeeded  by  his  eighteenth,  and  that  the  intermediate  dynasties  were  reignino-,  if 
at  all,  contemporaneously  in  other  cities  of  Egypt. 

Eratosthenes,  although  he  by  no  means  agrees  throughout  with  the  other 
authorities,  yet  confirms  this  view.  His  Chnubus  Gneurus  is  clearly  Noubkora  or 
Amunmai-Thori  II.;  and  his  Moscheres  is  Meskora  =  Osirtesen  III.  He  thus 
agrees  with  the  tablet  of  Abydos  in  the  close  succession  of  all  these  kings,  and 
in  forbidding  the  introduction  of  any  space  of  time  between  Manetho's  twelfth 
and  eighteenth  dynasties. 

3rd.  As  to  the  place  given  to  Manetho's  kings  of  Memphis  and  their  reigning 
in  that  city  contemporaneously  \\dth  the  twelfth  and  earlier  half  of  the  eighteenth 
dynasty  in  Thebes,  it  depends  on  our  showing  that  Nitocris,  tlie  last  of  the 
Memphites,  is  the  same  person  as  the  Nitocris  of  Eratosthenes,  and  as  the  mfe  of 
Thothmosis  II.     In  support  of  this  we  remark : — 

Firstly,  that  Minerva  the  Victorious  is  simply  a  translation  of  the  Coptic 
Neith-chori,  which  we  recognise  as  the  name  of  the  wife  of  Thothmosis  II.  By 
her  numerous  buildings  we  see  that  she  well  deserved  the  title  given  to  her  by 
Erastosthcnes  of  governing  the  kingdom  for  her  husband.  Indeed  slie  did  the 
same  for  his  successor,  Thothmosis  III. 


42  APPENDIX. 

Secondly,  that  the  authority  of  Eratosthenes  quite  justifies  our  placing  the  builder 
of  the  third  pyramid,  as  Manetho  describes  her  to  be,  at  this  modern  date,  because 
he  places  Saophis  I.  and  II.,  the  builders  of  the  great  pyramids,  at  a  time  yet 
more  modern  than  our  view  of  Manetho  places  them. 

Thirdly,  that  Nitocris,  the  wife  of  Thothmosis  II.,  was  not  simply  a  queen- 
consort,  is  shown  by  the  monuments,  where  she  declares  herself  a  sovereign  in  her 
own  right  by  appearing  very  often,  though  not  always,  in  man's  clothes,  as  a  king. 
But  as  her  husband  was  king  of  Upper  Egypt  we  must  look  elsewhere  for  her 
k  ingdom  ;  and  we  see  that  Manetho  explains  this  by  saying  that  a  queen  of  that 
name  was  the  last  sovereign  of  Memj^his.  Her  marriage  seems  to  have  united 
the  two  kingdoms  into  one. 

We  further  see  that  this  arrangement  places  Manetho's  Phiops,  who  lived  one 
hundred  years,  at  the  same  point  of  the  series  as  Eratosthenes'  Apappus,  who 
was  said  to  have  lived  the  same  length  of  time.  Eratosthenes  asserts,  what  may- 
have  been  true,  that  four  of  Manetho's  Memphite  sovereigns  for  a  time  bore  sway 
over  Thebes  ;  namely,  Suphis  I.,  Suphis  II.,  Phiops  and  Nitocris. 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  subject  of  the  name  found  in  the  third  pyramid. 
This  is  Mikora,  or  Menkora.  Herodotus  says  that  this  pyramid  was  built  by 
Mykerinus  ;  but  then  he  adds  that  some  said  it  was  built  by  a  woman.  This  latter 
opinion  agrees  with  the  statement  of  Manetho.  But  further,  the  same  hieroglyphi- 
cal  name  was  found  in  the  fourth,  a  smaller  pyramid.  This  would  seem  to  agree 
with  our  opinion  that  two  sovereigns  at  the  same  time  had  equal  claim  to  a  regal 
tomb.  And  lastly,  if  we  compare  this  hieroglyphical  name  of  Mikora,  or 
Menkora,  we  shall  see  that  it  agrees  sufficiently  well  with  the  first  name  both  of 
Queen  Nitocris  and  that  of  Thothmosis  III.,  her  second  colleague  on  the  throne, 
to  remove  all  apparent  contradiction.  Her  first  name  is  Mikera,  and  his  first 
name,  which  at  Thebes  was  Menhophra,  or  Menhora,  may  easily  have  been  written 
at  Memphis  Menkora,  by  a  change  naturally  arising  from  the  use  of  the  guttural. 

If  it  should  be  thought  necessary  to  justify  the  harsh  change  from  th  to  ch, 
which  we  have  supposed  to  arise  from  the  use  of  the  guttural,  it  may  be  done  by 
showing  how  often  it  occurs.  Thus  Osiri-tesen  is  in  Manetho  Geson  goses  ;  Neit- 
thori  is  in  Eratosthenes  Nitocris ;  Chomajpthah  is  translated  as  if  it  were 
Thomajpthah ;  Menhora  on  the  Theban  monuments  becomes  Menkora  in  the  third 
and  fourth  pyramids  ;  and  Manetho's  name  for  the  queens,  Acherres,  is  of  course 
borrowed  from  Athor,  the  name  of  the  goddess.  So  the  crocodile  which,  in  the 
cast  of  the  Delta,  gave  its  name  to  the  Lake  Temsi,  was  called  by  the  priest  who 
talked  to  Herodotus  Champsi.  Cush  and  Ethiopia  are  both  derived  from  the  Coptic 
Etosh  or  Ethosh.  By  these  and  other  instances  of  words  written  with  h  and  th  at 
Thebes  and  in  the  east  of  the  Delta,  being  written  with  ch  at  Memjjhis,  and  by 
the  Greeks,  it  seems  probable  that  the  guttural  so  common  with  the  Hebrews  was 
also  in  use  in  Egypt. 

Having  said  thus  much  in  support  of  our  own  views,  it  may  be  as  well  to 
mention  those  of  other  Egyptian  students.     Those  who  are  in  favour  of  a  longer 


APPENDIX. 


4:1 


chronology,  place  all  Manetlio's  dynasties  in  one  continuous  series ;  and  refuse  to 
throw  aside,  as  we  have  done,  six  of  his  dynasties  as  filling  no  space  of  time, 
because  they  were  reigning  at  the  same  time  as  those  of  Thebes  and  Memphis'. 
They  thus  place  the  builders  of  the  two  great  jiyramids  about  forty  reigns  earlier 
than  we  do.  They  reject  the  testimony  of  Eratosthenes  altogether,  and  that  of 
the  tablet,  so  far  as  it  shows  that  there  is  no  interval  between  the  twelfth 
dynasty  and  the  eighteenth. 

Again,  those  who  give  to  our  king,  the  owner  of  the  sarcophagus,  the  name  of 
Sethos,  or  Seti-Menepthah,  do  so  because  they  attempt  to  reconcile  Manetho  and 
the  tablet  rather  differently.  They  disregard  all  the  ])oints  of  agreement  pointed 
out  in  page  40,  and,  preferring  the  one  agreement  which  we  have  felt  obhged  to 
reject  as  Manetho's  mistake,  they  place  the  owner  of  vocal  statue  in  each  list 
opposite  to  that  in  the  other.  This  brings  down  the  names  of  Rameses  or 
.Sethos,  the  first  of  the  nineteenth  dynasty,  to  a  second  king  of  the  name  of 
Oimenepthah.  And  thus,  without  any  authority  whatever,  they  give  to  the 
sitting  figure  in  our  king's  second  oval.  No.  84  in  Plate  19,  the  force  of  Set,  and 
call  the  kings  Seti-Menepthah  I.  and  II.  But  in  page  3G  we  have  shown  that 
this  word  Sethos  is  one  of  the  priestly  titles  given  to  other  Egyptians,  but  o-iven 
emphatically  to  the  great  Eameses  for  the  same  reason  that  Eratosthenes  calls 
him  Tyrannus. 

The  reader  has  here  the  whole  of  the  materials  before  him  to  judge  between 
these  two  views  of  Egyptian  history,  between  what  may  be  called  the  long  and 
the  short  chronologies. 


4-1 


•o3 
i  E 


fc 
p^ 


a 


d;     1-1     CI 


03 


a 


e 

3 


<y 


a     a  * 


X 


CO 


3    o 


iJ 


a 


(SI@l(iliiZI] 


So 
o  « 


2^ 

0) 


S  i 

o 

to 

a 

i 

?jN 

P. 
S 

.  2-1 

f 

i 

:^ 

S 

1      1 

^,„ 

& 

S 

o 

c 

"S    i- 

W     £    M  -5 

O       ri 

o 

•s 

A 

-fcj"     S 

§•^51 

=      J 

e 

11 

a 

o 

1  ^ 

atosth 
Thebes 
1  notes 
anetho 

E     1 

a;        1 — 1 
C 

O 

o 

1 

■  o 
«  IS 

11 

the   Gr 
years, 
hiops  c 

if 

jay 
o 

1 

00 

(2 

.  id 

C;  I 1 

J 

a 
a 
<2 

Apappus 
hundred 

t;*^.    £ 

_^ 

irj 

.-.• 

I^ 

r/3 

c-; 

M 

t^ 

■"' 

""■ 

■"* 

'"' 

" 

" 

— :^ 

45 


&Q 


•3     o  ^  a 

I  £11! 


5J     rR 


CO 


C^     ^ 


1 — .       clTlP 


B 
<! 


OS     — 
d  EH 


bo  S 
wO   o 


I 


to 


a 


00  J 

.    "   o   m    _, 


a 

o 

s  ^ 


K     DO 


O  "3 


•§.5 

§0 
a" 


X 


Oi    O  f-H 


2" 
o  a 


11 

S  2 


Amun 
Neithgori 


Mykera. 


W-H 


S 
<! 


<:<! 


s 

5 


^)IS)|®|(Mi)lSi|(SS^ 


^^m\^m. 


n 


ra^i§Dl0i)i^i^S)i<?^^ii  ^i^^i^^l 


rt 


■a  °J 


La 


o 


S^3 


■    F   ^^   hH 


5  iEIiE-i 
C 


i^ 


li;      -^ 


^       2 


^       A 


i.l 


2 
Pi 


§  o 
03 


E-I"H 

«    .§ 

g     S 

J3        0 

^  s 

^^ 

OjI 

§^ 

^B^ 

0 

0 

w 

WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHORS. 
THE  TRIPLE   MUMMY  CASE  OF  AROERI-AO,   AN    EGYPTIAN    PRIEST;    in  Dr.  Lee's 

Museum,  Hartwell. 

THE   CHRONOLOGY   .\ND    GEOGRAPHY    OF   ANCIENT    EGYPT. 


WORKS  BY  JOSEPH  BONOML 
THE   PROPORTIONS    OF    THE    HUMAN    FIGURE    ACCORDING    10   THE  ANCIENT 

GREEK   CANON  OF  VITRUVIUS.     Second  Edition. 

NINEVEH   AND    ITS    P.\LACES.     Third  Edition. 


WORKS  BY  SAMUEL  SHARPS. 

THE    NEW  TESTAMENT   TRANSLATED   FROM   GRIESBACH'S   TEXT.     Fifth  Edition. 

CRITICAL    NOTES    ON    THE    AUTHORIZED    ENGLISH    VERSION    OF    THE    NEW 

TESTAMENT. 
HISTORIC     NOTES    ON    THE    BOOKS     OF    THE    OLD    AND    NEW    TESTAMENTS. 

Second  Etlition. 

THE    HISTORY   OF    EGYPT    FROM   THE  EARLIEST  TIWES  TILL  THE  CONQUEST 

BY  THE  ARABS  in  a.d.  6^0.     Fourth  Edition. 

ALE.KANDRIAN   CHRONOLOGY. 

EGYPTIAN    INSCRIPTIONS  FROM  THE  BRITISH  MUSEUM  AND  OTHER  SOURCES. 

216  Plates  in  Folio. 
EGYPTIAN    HIEROGLYPHICS  :  being  an  .Attempt  to  Elxplain  their  Nature,  Origin,  and  Meaning. 
With  11  Vocabulary. 

EGYPTIAN   ANTIQUITIES    IN   THE   BRITISH   MUSEUM   DESCRIBED. 

EGYPTIAN    MYTHOLOGY  AND  EGYPTIAN    CHRISTIANITY:  with  their  Influence  on  the 

Opinions  of  Modern  Ghri-stcudom. 


Printed  by  WooUfsU  und  Kinder,  Mllford  Lane,  Strand,  London,  W.C. 


PLATE     / 


mMmmmMmmumum-i: 


HUM?(iimjg-LLUi-l:il! 


i^-p^^^'^^-'-ri,'-'' yi^ 


\^iinilu:^^-ttt-f^f.t'f;^ 


j?i;^:iui{;f.ii(U;jr^,>j,.l|,ll-|^ 


jAmitj).  iimiiiiiii'M'-^.^.iii 


PLATE        2 


i^<g^<3^pi<^f7jy^(ag^ii^(giijiiii'^^XJL;^p^si^>j^!ik>^  a 


"^•^t 


tl    1    t    t    1 
hi  t-ht' 


23) /ir  (>  i^ 


r  il  T  ii  i^  l>^  !k  t-' V^  n  T3  =>  <V -i  jp  ffi;  S  §  tij  "="  fr  vf  T -^  ^ '■ 


'.'■■  i:.-.:  ■■: 


•li'     1   li'V  t      ■  '■     II  I 


1 1  •  1 1 


6       jP        7        3?      3v?      32       75      35        !»      7?       Jj       i«~~«^       4?     2?       i«      ^J^-^?      ^J'        25       35       ^    37      3«        3?     aj       33        32      37       se      n 


y 


PLATE     3 


-itt^^rij-^- y:i  A;>^4i'3±  i;^ =(0: 


JMliiiiiiTiiiliiii 


1^  -^  f?r  »> 


^  ^  "^  '^  ^,^V 

1^  -^  ^  •>  S  n  S  n=^  it  ii^  ^  rr  ^  ^  ^  ^  :"3  r^  i1^  ^  fl 
:^  ,^  ~  ^ ^  y  \1  n  !^  ^  u/-  >  i;^  i;  -s^  I  ,  ^  ii>v  .13 

^s^  /»/!  i>^  p:::-  ly  ^  fj  T  ^  3v  ^  JL  i:^  >  ^  1  'J  I  ^=*^  ^  n? 


1 


I44.il4444'a 


•/.v.;.. 


!■•  1  I         ■  t    • 


I ~*^'" 


kfij 


/*—*■»"■  ^^^^4    •     -^^^^4  I  I       I 


iCV 


I    I 

I 


\ 


ir-m 


'J\ 


in 


I      I     I 


p 


n; 


~  m;  ua  ^  lit  -J,-;) 


r; 


.  • 


^ 


iM 


■  •!•  M-~~  "-~~«:  ^   ,  ,    V/  ^ 


■^jD^n^  ""^ —  ^^^  ^  IT  -5^ 


jj      Yi       Ti      j?      r«      5      li       Ti      To      «       ^?       It  _  '<       'J      ;«       ^3       ::5      «       ?«      ^      s~ 


<  .f  7 


15 73 Ti ZI 37 33" 


PLATE 


-y:^~T.mm^\£\  ]\m-rjr.:i:i']'KN\y^'Mm^i' 


<?! 


.^@i3ir^^>ieii:(2ii^,.  _  i  ...v^Bs 


■Ly' 


I  n  4-+  ■  ^  •  — -  ,/^Jn z;:^;;  ;„^  -^1  "LJ  CHT  '-Ju^''^^"-^  .  ■  ^—  rr,  '  J  ^^^ ^". '  '  zr: "^^  V  -^'^ '-J^  '  *  -^  ^  \Jj ^"^  ^ 


^  _  _  _ 

"  T  ^=   T-n.' 1--*  ^|i  I  p„n  ^-»  -^  J  r    -—  rSV  'J:^  i«. 


f5^Pi  =  <=iL:y(p 


i^i 


/MtA^^    l-ZTR    V'^M. 


'5  Hx -^  •r^'^:^>;'(J/^r"i^^'^^^' 

»»»«,  ,1         «^K   A»M*K    T„w^    "^^       ■"'  — "       A*WAWv     I  I    \.r^         II  II   I  <    ^      ■     J-        I  I  jl^^ 


1> 


I II  j^   "-"^  ^V 


5>i 


;i> 


wv^  ''^-^-  ^»^  irt)  ^  "^  ^^  -^      ' 


.•til 


3?         3rf         j7        jf^        33         J5         ^  Ji         Jf         J^  J^  ^7        Tr         i4        Ji        Ji         >/  Ji         ^y         7^  y  ^^tf  aF         ?4  7j        TE         ;^^  7a         ~ 


:  y     ji-     20  's*  •'«?        ^^ 


PLATE  S 


i^;j3Sfe-5g^l^llHIJZS/l=^yV~gr;^l2Tli;t^g^^S:r^s5L4:f:g=;^l=11l@M^ 


» ^;;;::;:;;^  Jn  Lju  <=>  '    i    '  \'Jf  <i>   ^T    '~~^  -^ — '  •""^  ''— —     \     -3*     _     1  f -  ^ 


^ 

-> 


I  I  I 


r^'-A  /%   i     J^  ^~*M/^  -^^^  |/^T  9  •* 

111-.    1,1*-*-^  ♦    I    •  z^*^  l'^  $  T 

A«~«'/*A    N|k        ^  I    '  '    '    I   '  •  A  ▼ 

*.     •  -i)      t^'A  J  I  i  I  L    J"^ — -  I  I    ' 


>%  1 


Mi 


I    >^ 


•-S^  ^^  <;^     •  r  .^^ggj^  ^      ^     ^   ,.„^  ^  ^IM    v*^     p^j 

■  l^<^        -^  ^L.  "^  -   -t^f  I,  /^^./.V-A^ 

-? 


T 


aii 


I 


.1 


-3 ; 


ra 


in 


T 


JFrt"  - 


♦ttttHtiittitim 


liiiiililiiU 


I 


>^^ ; 


/<r        <r       X* 


/•/         ^4? 


— r- 


<c  ^'     '■' 


"73     !?7      J?      T9      75     ^^^     IT"~3x     i«     2J        J«        ^  J 


Jj  J6  J7  *9  *^ 


PLATE     <J 


^l^^'B:j^-Z'A^';^^\fim'^^^l'aAiAKW^'^ui-B'^AA'^^^ 


'"O  JV  ^2 


/vviU  7:zt:z,  u^i  Jn  ■*■<->  7*-j '  I  I  A  ▼<===>  „^  I  I  I  iiiO  I  77* i  ^  n^.-^  <==>  1_^'  i 


Ik 


1    Iv I crrr^  nr- ^i^ ^^ ''^i^  JiL  — ^ •  •  •'*'^' 


_       m  <=>  '-^^  ■  •  •  -  M^  — ■ "  i 


•«  ■>5'  <•*  -5  *J J7 


"       *»    ~35     5?       57      Js      J?      jJ      ~i 35 r jj 


^y        J*         2/      ~"23        2?        2*       <;i     "    2i        21         m        /.«         /^         7f        77         75^"*    /«        /.r       ii         // ' 


PLATE     / 


^^mi^M^mmYm^m)J3^^w^smm^w'-i7^■^WW7^x\m^^ 


^i 


.u 


m  •  I 


^'■ 


-    J  '^^  ■ »       J  >w^  ^^  ;»; '  2  ^^^=^  m.      ■ 

jy^  ,. — .•    I  v-^  I  I  II  I  1(3.111^1111  I  iv    I 


5^' 


V^ 


-X.    n 

I    .1   _i    -y^       1^  I  >^  ,  -^  ■  TJ  1 1  -^ 

-■  I '  -2^  ,5 ,  M ,d^  "^  'tTt; rn  7---,  -i^ ■ — " 


1  ^  ^  •       V.\     ^ ^    I         I        I         —V       A  I  ^ 

D^^  \'j^'^-;"ili^^j|:K 

W.  III.       T  _^^.  _^Z.    I    -"    _   (%  1    I    I  A~~~A 


-^kT:i:> 


r^fi 


U 


^ 

n 


U 
It 


t    •  1 


•  ■ 

A 

1 . 

n- 

mat 


A 

.r 


m 

T 

"if 


r^      iiiiiiir 


trn..ui 


I  I  I 
I  I  I 

•      I 

en 

I  \ 


P:j 


n. 


^ 


■   111 


1: 

p 


IT      '^    •    JL     A~~~.  .^vo  I  -  A  J«JX^  '~-~^  U-l_  V  ^      »         ^  /«~~~  .     .     .  •  «>      ^L 

.^.  *  f^^  V'  en  IV.  i-^-^  — '  -    -.  rr^i . ^A*.,.^ /-~.A^ 


Z*-***^  ^ r    /*W-VA 


fHPn^V^^F^t)^^: 


<=F>  rr-  Ai  ^-  in  P  ^  Jl  1^  -^  y  i<-  tj  l1  n^ '  i  •  s 


:i?^'  ^^  ^  U;  ^  ;^.^  ^  -^.  J!L  £S  X  ^;7,  >; 


f**^^        /MWsr^       /^W^AA^ 


/»*^J^KS/\ 


uy 


I    I    '  <- — -. 


-^j — ■ — t- 


;•       rf       .r     "4       3        2        ?         50"       27         if  —sa 


57  5  5  J5  f-i  ''i  « 


T         ^y      ~7f        Ty      +7        ?7       7?        71        Ti  T-         40        7?         3T" 


PLATE  6* 


^=^3==^ 


■3A^£)mi'^mv\m'(^^^^€-j,^sMiim&i>i^m^'m^m^i 


■e3\^ 


y 


/'*^.^(•^A 


^ira  1  ::::::• '^^^  A I 


rm 


r7  •^  "^  -^ '•;■■' r^  i2^=^  1^  -^  ^  Sv  ^  — ^-'^  ^  :^^  ^  ^  (,T  /l  fi^  r^  1^  "^  >^^ 


?/IUIHIl>lIU^.  .^l1n>)rJ/iMiii'  /iiNii     in    ITIP  mu 


»^L! 


— '-*       ^k  -— *  "\     '.    .    .  ^^1     T**  I  I    /] 


\A 


•  w  nz]  i^ 


LJ 


3?  3«         35-        3-«  33         52        3'  30         P9  ZS  Tf         76  Zf       24        '23     '      22  2' 


5<?-         O  'iff  '7 


1s         7s         7i        73        72  7/  To         9 


PLATE 


9 


p— ,  zr:::;;  •  n  =='  IT]  yi  i  .  i  --^  =rr^  'I :    ""^  ^^^  —  ^^^^  '^^  *^^  <=>  I  — . .-  ^-aI   ^  ♦j' ,  ^-^  .  . .  ^c-  \  / 

will       I «.      ■!»<■      'T       ^^     A*'AWA       ^^--^     u— «*      ^ 


^^fr^ViLL'Lji-'^y.i    • -ill  ;;::5;::;  h-4  <=^ 


Vfr:ryiLL.'l--T-'/,i    • -=-j^  ;;;:5;::;  f-^  <=^  ,  ^  ^,  ^ 
^  ;^^  <  -X  --r-^  ;—  >^  1L»  <:^  •  |L^^  i^    ,  r  I  Tf]  =^ 


t>  ^^  V.I  ,„„„.,w.  -;■<:    9  1 1  ' -r  — ^  ""'^  '*~>~'  »"^9  — .  — :r  L_^  '-^     r 

"^  :*^  ^  i  *i  A  Sr  rr-.  =  1 1  t  l-^-i  =  A  y  / -it  "=~  "^  •  I 


.A 


>, 


^, 


I    4    1^        »» "*-*  rrzii  i_^9 

I    I    I  I      ri'"^^     ^     y^x   '"'  I  '^r    !a^  ^^    M     ^^^^ 

-  r L    i::::  ;:r::^  ^  ;z:::  V  i--^  ^  •n  ^ ?-5 


^A/.«^w^  I      1      I 


1 


■         III 


LI 


'V'J'     r  A>~«-«     r  -^^  ^r^  "^^  i^^"^ '  .^  ^'  ■=>  1  T 


.^V  I  I  I  "  ■    '  •-  I     1     I       _      1  _  I  I  <r^^LI^  ,-y  U.U1U.  »A>>MIJa     /M/AAMA       W..UA* 


.    ,,„,„„^   » ^   .        _   Ca^H  n—  f"^^"' »—      .^r  '        /*\  rt  .  .  •  f^^*^    /*w^      «  L  J   —    ^    I  LJ »       "^       Bill    — *♦—    . >  -4^- 

r^^  1  — •^—  ^^^  — ••—  yNiii         J    v.^      (www\  1^1  M      /\       _        m       ^       — M —    MiMAVA     ■   I  "  .        T^  I     ^  I 


^1    _<^   /i**"**M  — — ^"^  /#jli"  •—'"^^  ^MM      ^^ 
<-^  --^   4  I  I  I-  •■ — ;t>c~e. 


A^'^^A^    I         I         I 


III 


l        V  -        I         *        Zr*~    MNw^    ''~'~^       • 

I  yf. n-  o^  1 1  (  .^--r^.  — V '  '_ '  «- 


»«   - 

I  I  I 


r_- 


^  >r   '   '  '         ill  — - 


■"        ^*       ^?        2s       29       3o       37       3^       35      Jt^     SJ     aij   '  j/         55       ^Tf^     ^o       «/   '  '-«?         <j'  '    <«        .«'        ^iJ        Tf"      ;i#         «^      ?o     3v~ 


I  ^  rr,  ^  =v- --- '-^  ==^ ' ' '  in  ^^ 

,  ».     r  11    i  f I    //  --^  'ill  ^^  TTjT 


til' — ;   •    -^^^ ^  ^1      T    ^^- 


I . 


mimf 


.iju-^T 


n 


PLATE  /O 


•^ '  ■ ' '^\ ^  "^  ? i  1  iTI ^ -^ ""^ ^^ ^^^^ "rv ■  -^  J^  '"^ ^==^  ^  ? 


I— =N  -**-  l^~3  ^^  1    I    I  ^-^  -  ,— ^  ,/f_  £^  I      •  -«—  ^  — o  VC  '-^  UUM  '.vJLJ 


I  imi     J-    -<s^  s  c  <      ^  -^^^^  •  <  •  «=::2»  <=:>  n  i  j-         s        m  — « —    i    i  — " — 


I       I       I  ^    y«*w>A/y\ 


I    MVA^'A    <r~^'^   ^a^» 


•  ni£iiM«  ^  '-1^  V'^'Sl^i^^J^^  JL^0^.-^-3 

,',An!^^^S^^HV''^t.nn^Pri,^;fif1l!^,;=lAl 

.   ..L.rf^rf^|Tn<^fl^-^u^i.^.r^=-^i^^r^i^z:r: 

1  I  '  --^  vfl  1    ■ 


!•  J  ^   ^^^•*^A*^*\ 


**^     1         I        I    '        '        '  I 

/-»~~A     ^. 

I       '       1   "***"   ,_^ 


/^       4rf        4^        4S        4<)       SO        Sf         Si        S3 


"7        5         5         /o         //        >i        Aj        ^<       ^       'a       /?        /*        /^       *«       ?'       "       «       '* 


PLATE    // 


^i<.i<:'k'ki<-:k-k-ki<'k-k 


jstiir 


?        <? 


^  l\  /a        //        /F       /a        /4         'V-       /6         J}        /#       /5         i5        '2r"^22        23        24        ZS       26        27         28       2$'      30       3/ "  "jl       33       34        3S        Ji>'     3?        is'     3s''~'40  '  'iJ  '      ii     '  4J  ~     44' 


PLATE    12 


LI 


I"    I    I  1 1 1^ 


r.f 


'I  A I  •  •  *"    '    '      rr^  L  A 


tv-zvir  * 


TjTIl::. 


.  ^ 


» ^ 


.n 


s 


1 


I 


f 


I     I     I 


// 


Mr 


1 1 1 « 
\4 


'      t 


I      • 


•  a 


I* 


9  ■ 


i.r 


en 


AAAA^VW      ( 


Ul 

I  I 


30        37       35      JJ     \l4      35^      35    '  3/"  \3,y 


35        40      4/        42       ^       I44      4S       46       itf       46       4.9   '    So  '^^      SI       S~1      S4       'SS       S6 


PLATE    /3 


S  4  ^^**^ 


^f-S/^^^  ™  ^        J  ^;  ^ 


1 1 1 


".  I  iiM#^r-^'  ' 


-;"", '  i-2:-    ^  ^  _::l "-^ •'^ ;:zr^ "= ' — ^<=5    •    "^"^^^ — i   k 


JiS        ■!?■        cW        .«3  ^ 


"5         y         5         3     '^'o         ^7~"     ,i  ■  ■  ■  /J    ■    /4        />        /«        '>        '-J"        75"'      5o       ?7        22        23        24        ^7       Jtf       57        26       29 


PLATE    /4 


~^        '       '*       ^       "'       *'       ^^      ^       «       M     '^tf  "'jy"    "?J    "'29' ''ii)''i>/     Jl^ '''li^'' '.^»' '•:iir'''''3^ 


45       ,yo      .f/      s2      ss     Si       ss 


PLATE  fS 


'MMMiMMiB. 


L::: , , .  J  ^.  n^  ;^.  ^-rJ  ^it; '  vC 


A^****v  A^^*^^MK  <—->        ^,       ...         *  =-      1 

^*^  __!/ 1  I  •  — — '  -«-    1/   '~— ^    f  ,. 

'T^    ■"      ■    k^— <^ ^_«-'  '  ■   1/ 

y  111*  ^^,      9^1'     '^    *    L—-- 

-"^s>  VTL/^L '^  ;3:Jfc:->  I  1  il  *  T  ".    * 


*        5       ?5       *}       71      /3      A'     S*" 


^^•l()\'M;sa^'^()•p^D3:^.S5^^fil^fl,^r•|]|f^f^i!2^l:j?SJif^?o*lllii^Ti):•lF«4i^ 


PLATE  /6 


PLATE 


C3 

0"< 


^ 

e 


X 


i>         36        3f        3i        3J       31 


SO  «  >S  !r  21  2S- 1*    ii 


21      ■  f'  10 


y. 


W^.  \^  ^%^  y  '^  g  ,m  -^r:-  „> 


r^'^^**^    w*.^-^ 

fe 


IS         IS     "^ 


PLATE  is 


1^  J<f 


;'"«S/fS»:.*C5,^a'.- 


^^ 


^:i"^- 


:j  -.  A 


>>.    -  ,    >— .  v»  ^  rH  ^  » 


*       5       a       ? 


P!I^i[»ii^ls4 


^9       J«__iZ_     ^^    ^     3* 


'^m 


29 


PLATE    /^ 


30      ^^I 

^^2. ^  /!  .T-, ,^ ^ f  f  -n  j^ p r-r,  v\ 


N  '-i-^.  i.  ^  r{   ."T*,  iT",  :£!  I  E  - r-i  fC  r~"'  ''"^' 

,  ♦J5V   f'^  ^lo    . -l  "  i»LJ  ,    ,    I  ^tmt'  -C     — «  \ 


@E^@5l(j^ 


S^*"*^^)  V**w^ 


Date  Due 

1 

llbrifi  Buraau   Cat.  no.  1137 

e»^ 


3  5002  00127  2876 

The  alabaster  sarcophaqut  of  Otmeoepthah 


Art  DT  73  . B44  S5  1864 

Sharpe,  Samuel,  1799-1881. 

The  alabaster  sarcophagus 
of  Qimeneptah  I.,  King  of 


? 


t 


