Pitrcf^iase^  from 


\ 

\ 

I 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


i 


THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY 

NEW  YORK  •   BOSTON  •  CHICAGO 
ATLANTA  •   SAN  FRANCISCO 

MACMILLAN  &  CO.,  Limited 

LONDON  •   BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA,  Ltd. 

TORONTO 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


EUROPE,  ASIA 
AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


BY 

HENRY  FAIRFIELD  OSBORN 

LL.D.  (Trinity,  Princeton,  Columbia),  Hon.  D.Sc.  (Cambridge) 

VERTEBRATE  PALAEONTOLOGIST  OF  THE  UNITED  STATJiS  GEOLOGICAL 
SURVEY,   DACOSTA  PROFESSOR  OF  ZOOLOGY  IN  COLUMBIA 
UNIVERSITY,   CURATOR  OF  VERTEBRATE  PALEON- 
TOLOGY IN  THE  AMERICAN  MUSEUM  OF 
NATURAL  HISTORY 


ILLUSTRATED 


THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY 
1910  , 

All  rights  rfsertied 


Copyright,  1910, 
By  henry  FAIRFIELD  OSBORN. 

Set  up  and  electrotyped.    Published  October,  igio. 

■  08 


NortoooU  IPrrsa 
J.  8.  Cashing  Co.  —  BtrwR-k  &  Smith  Co. 
Norwood,  Mass.,  U.S.A. 


TO  MY  BRITISH  TEACHERS 


THOMAS  HENRY  HUXLEY 
AND 

FRANCIS  MAITLAND  BALFOUR 

THIS  COMPARATIVE  STUDY  OF  C^NOZOIC  MAMMALS 
IN  THE  OLD  AND  NEW  WORLDS 


IS  DEDICATED 


PREFACE 


To  the  memory  of  Huxley  as  my  chief  teacher  in  comparative  anatomy, 
as  well  as  to  that  of  Balfour,  niy  first  teacher  in  embryology,  I  have  dedicated 
this  work.  Huxley  set  forth  the  logic  of  Darwin  as  applied  to  pala3ontology ; 
Balfour's  genius  was  beyond  imitation,  but  his  pupils  may  follow  the  example 
of  his  ardent  enthusiasm  and  his  genial  way  of  living  the  life  of  science. 

Only  a  few  men  of  the  last  century  had  the  gift  of  speaking  in  clear 
language  both  to  the  learned  and  unlearned,  and  the  greatest  of  these  was 
Huxley.  To  write  both  for  the  man  of  one's  own  profession  and  for  the 
layman,  to  be  accurate  and  abreast  of  the  specialist  who  knows  as  much 
or  more  of  a  subject  than  you  do,  while  intelligible  to  the  non-specialist  — 
there  is  the  difficulty.  Many  times  have  I  thought  to  myself  in  the  course 
of  the  preparation  of  these  and  similar  lectures  how  simple  it  would  be 
to  address  either  audience  separately.  Yet  I  consider  it  fortunate  that  both 
are  with  us,  because  I  share  Huxley's  confidence  in  addressing  those  who 
are  willing  to  do  a  little  serious  thinking  in  order  to  enjoy  the  vast  vistas 
of  interesting  truth  which  come  as  the  reward  of  effort.  I  share  also  his 
conviction  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  man  of  science  to  devote  a  certain  part 
of  his  time,  however  absorbed  in  research  he  may  be,  to  an  honest  attempt 
to  scatter  scientific  truth.  Although  I  may  not  claim  that  any  parts  of  this 
volume  are  light  reading,  I  have  endeavored  both  to  hold  the  attention  of 
those  who  are  already  within  the  charmed  temples  of  palaeontology  and  to 
attract  new  votaries  to  its  shrines.  It  should,  however,  be  clearly  understood 
that  considerable  sections  of  this  work  are  purely  documentary  and  may 
be  passed  over  rapidly  by  the  general  reader. 

Time  and  place  are  the  main  theme  of  this  work  rather  than  descent, 
which  has  been  the  main  theme  of  all  previous  general  treatises  on  the 
Csenozoic  mammals ;  it  is  a  study  of  the  sources  or  birthplaces  of  the  several 
kinds  of  mammals,  of  their  competitions,  migrations,  and  extinctions,  and 
of  the  times  and  places  of  the  occurrence  of  these  great  events  in  the  world's 
history.  To  set  forth  this  history  in  all  its  grandeur,  it  is  interesting  to 
consider  the  question  of  past  environments,  such  as  the  past  geography 
(palseogeography)  of  the  earth,  the  changes  in  climate  and  in  the  earth's 
surface  which  conditioned  the  evolution  of  plant  life  (palaeobotany)  as  the 
primary  source  of  food  supply  for  the  mammals.  Thus  geology,  geography, 
botany,  and  climate  are  treated  as  leading  to  a  clear  understanding  of  each 
of  the  successive  groups  and  movements  of  mammalian  life. 

In  a  way  this  work  marks  the  completion  of  a  special  line  of  study 

vii 


viii 


PREFACE 


which  I  began  in  1898  and  have  been  pursuing  at  intervals  for  eleven  years, 
namely,  the  comparison  of  the  new  and  old  world  life. 

It  is  thus  an  exposition  and  explanation  of  two  presidential  addresses 
of  mine  delivered  before  the  New  York  Academy  of  Sciences  in  February, 
1899  and  1900,  entitled  "Correlation  between  Tertiary  Mammal  Horizons 
of  Europe  and  America,"  also  of  a  paper  published  recently  by  the  United 
States  Geological  Survey,  entitled  "  Cenozoic  Mammal  Horizons  of  Western 
North  America."  In  the  Introduction  I  have  drawn  freely  on  several  popu- 
lar addresses  of  mine,  "  The  Rise  of  the  Mammalia  in  North  America " 
(1893),  "  Ten  Years'  Progress  in  the  Mammalian  Palaeontology  of  North 
America"  (1905),  "The  Present  Problems  of  Palaeontology  "  (1905),  and, 
finally,  "Palaeontology,"  an  article  prepared  for  the  forthcoming  edition 
of  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica. 

The  stimuli]^  to  put  these  studies  into  the  present  collected  form  was 
given  by  the  generous  foundation  of  the  Harris  Lectureship  in  Northwestern 
University  by  Mr.  Norman  Waite  Harris  in  1906.  As  originally  delivered  ! 
in  December,  1908,  to  the  students  of  that  institution,  the  lectures  were  in 
general  popular  form.  It  has  required  a  year  to  verify  and  expand  them, 
so  that  the  volume  is  practically  of  date  December  31,  1909.  The  oral  style 
appropriate  to  the  lecture  has  given  way  necessarily  to  the  written  style ; 
there  is  a  greater  fullness  and  I  trust  a  greater  clearness. 

In  gathering  the  materials  for  the  preparation  of  these  addresses  and 
of  this  volume,  my  foremost  acknowledgments  are  due  to  the  profound  and 
accurate  researches  of  my  friend.  Professor  Charles  Deperet  of  the  University 
of  Lyons,  as  well  as  of  my  former  student  and  present  colleague  in  the 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  Dr.  William  Diller  Matthew.  The 
very  precise  data  which  they  have  brought  together,  coupled  with  my  own 
researches  and  observations  on  the  mammals  of  the  Old  and  New  Worlds, 
have  furnished  the  chief  material  for  the  broad  comparisons  and  generaliza- 
tions which  I  have  attempted  to  make.  I  have  also  reviewed  the  general 
literature  of  the  subject,  and  I  desire  to  acknowledge  the  aid  of  my  former 
student  and  present  research  assistant,  Mrs.  Johanna  Kroeber  Mosenthal, 
who  has  been  intrusted  with  a  large  part  of  the  reading,  translation,  and 
collation  of  facts  derived  from  the  foreign  and  American  sources. 

The  reader  will  observe  that  the  collections  in  the  American  Museum 
of  Natural  History  as  well  as  our  observations  in  the  field  are  very  largely 
drawn  upon.  These  have  been  gathered  and  planned  during  the  past  twenty 
years  under  my  direction,  and  the  fullest  acknowledgments  are  due  to  the 
able  and  energetic  explorers  who  have  helped  to  bring  these  rare  treasures 
of  the  past  together,  especially  to  Dr.  J.  L.  Wortman,  Dr.  W.  D.  Matthew, 
Mr.  J.  W.  Gidley,  Mr.  0.  A.  Peterson,  Mr.  Walter  Granger,  Mr.  Barnum 
Brown,  and  Mr.  Albert  Thomson.  The  necessity  for  great  precision  in  field 
records,  especially  for  recording  the  exact  levels  on  which  specimens  are 
found,  I  have  impressed  constantly  upon  the  minds  of  these  explorers.  Such 
precise  records  have  important  bearing  on  the  question  of  time  as  well  as 


PREFACE 


ix 


of  evolution;  they  were  omitted  in  the  pioneer  work  of  Leidy,  Marsh,  and 
Cope.  This  precision  in  America,  coupled  with  the  precision  especially  of 
Professor  Deperet's  records  and  observations  in  France,  has  rendered  possi- 
ble the  present  comparison  between  the  New  and  Old  Worlds.  Large 
collections  have  been  secured  also  by  the  museums  of  Princeton  University 
and  the  University  of  California,  by  the  Carnegie  Museum  of  Pittsburgh, 
the  Field  Museum  of  Natural  History  of  Chicago ;  and  some  few  additions 
have  been  made  in  recent  years  to  the  famous  collection  brought  together 
by  Professor  Marsh  in  Yale  University.  The  equally  famous  collection  of 
Cope  is  now  the  property  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 

The  space  and  time  distribution  of  the  mammal  life  of  Europe  as  set 
forth  in  Deperet's  articles  in  the  Comptes  renclus,  I  have  brought  together 
in  visual  form  in  a  new  series  of  maps. 

The  American  records,  sections,  and  maps  are  drawn  from  those  brought 
together  in  my  recent  bulletin,  "  Cenozoic  Mammal  Horizons  of  Western 
North  America,"  together  with  some  additions  from  my  observations  in 
Africa  and  from  the  very  latest  work  in  Wyoming.  I  am  here  indebted 
especially  to  the  cooperation  of  Mr.  Granger.  The  United  States  Geological 
Survey  has  given  permission  to  reproduce  many  of  the  illustrations  from 
my  bulletin. 

The  reader  who  finds  it  difficult  to  picture  the  rare  and  ancient  forms 
of  mammals  has  to  thank  that  gifted  artist  of  the  life  of  the  extinct  world, 
Mr.  Charles  R.  Knight,  for  the  series  of  restorations  drawn  under  my 
personal  direction,  which  are  brought  together  for  the  first  time  in  this 
volume.  It  is  always  to  be  understood  that  such  restorations  represent 
hypotheses  merely  or  approximations  to  the  truth.  We  know  little  or 
nothing  about  the  color  markings  of  these  extinct  forms,  and  even  the 
attempt  to  outline  the  proportions  of  the  limbs  and  body  is  somewhat  hazard- 
ous ;  yet  these  representations  serve,  in  connection  with  photographs  of  the 
skeletons,  to  give  us  a  sense  of  the  general  size  and  proportion,  and  to 
assemble  before  the  eye  such  inferences  as  to  the  homes  and  habits  of  the 
animals  as  can  be  deduced  from  their  skeletons,  especially  from  the  teeth 
and  feet,  and  from  the  kind  of  rock  in  which  their  remains  have  been 
discovered. 

Mrs.  L.  M.  Sterling  has  prepared  many  of  the  anatomical  and  geological 
illustrations  with  artistic  fidelity.  Mr.  Aleth  Biorn  and  Mrs.  Mosenthal 
have  prepared  the  Deperet  series  of  maps.  Mr.  Erwin  S.  Christman  has 
contributed  several  drawings.  The  field  photographs  are  chiefly  the  work 
of  Mr.  Albert  Thomson  and  other  members  of  our  field  parties.  The  photo- 
graphs of  skeletons  are  part  of  the  remarkable  series  executed  by  Mr.  A.  E. 
Anderson.  I  am  indebted  to  many  workers  in  other  institutions  for  generous 
assistance.  In  the  palaeobotanic  work  I  have  enjoyed  the  assistance  of  Miss 
Elsbeth  Kroeber,  also  of  Messrs.  F.  A.  Knowlton,  A.  A.  Hollick,  and  T.  D. 
A.  Cockerell. 


X 


PREFACE 


The  entire  text  has  been  studied  by  Dr.  W.  D.  Matthew  and  Dr.  W.  K. 
Gregory,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  many  valuable  criticisms  and  suggestions. 

A  liberal  appropriation  by  the  trustees  of  the  American  Museum  of 
Natural  History  has  facilitated  the  large  amount  of  special  study,  which  has 
been  devoted  to  the  preparation  and  illustration  of  this  work.  I  have  also 
recently  been  transferred  from  a  teaching  to  a  research  professorship  in 
Columbia  University. 

Finally,  the  especial  purpose  of  the  work  is  to  spread  the  knowledge  of 
palaeontology  in  the  United  States.  It  will  be  cause  for  regret  if  the 
extended  information  as  to  localities,  here  brought  together  for  the  first  time, 
should  lead  to  the  hasty  or  untrained  collection  of  fossils,  or  to  the  still 
more  harmful  ill-considered  description  of  new  species.  All  descriptions 
should  be  preceded  by  painstaking  examination  of  previous  types,  and  should 
be  accompanied  by  figures  and  short,  clear  diagnoses.  All  type  specimens 
should  find  their  way  into  large  central  and  accessible  museums  where  they 
can  be  readily  examined. 

HENRY  FAIRFIELD  OSBORN. 

American  Museum  of  Natural  History, 
December  31,  1909. 


CONTENTS 

PA6K 

Preface  v 

CHAPTER  I.  INTRODUCTION 

1.    Philosophy  of  the  Structure  of  Mammals  . 

Rise  of  Palseontology  

Law  of  Correlation  

Systematic  Palaeontology  

Darwin's  Influence  

Primitive  and  Progressive  Stages 
Precise  and  Philosophical  Research 
Influence  of  American  Discovery 


Primitive  and  Progressive  Forms  of  Teeth   10 

Primitive  and  Progressive  Foot  Structure   13 

Primitive  and  Progressive  Skull  Structure   17 

II.  Mammals  and  their  Environment   18 

Origin  and  Migration   19 

The  Law  of  Adaptive  Radiation   22 

The  Orders  of  Mammals   25 

Adaptive  Radiation  and  Geography   29 

The  Polyphyletic  Law   30 

Adaptations  to  Alternations  of  Habitat   31 

The  Law  of  Analogous  Evolution   32 

The  Law  of  Irreversibility  of  Evolution   34 

III.  Geographic  or  Space  Distribution  of  Mammals      .       .       .  .35 

Zoogeography   35 

Migration  Routes  and  Barriers   38 

IV.  Geologic  or  Time  Distribution  of  Mammals   39 

Time  Divisions   39 

Preliminary  Correlation   41 

Importance  of  Time  Correlation   42 

Time  Value  of  Fossils   44 

Geologic  Formations  and  Life  Zones   47 

Progressive  Con-elation   50 

Geologic  Formations  as  a  Record  of  Environments   53 

V.  Duration  of  the  Age  of  Mammals   58 

Mountain  Births   58 

Modes  of  Estimating  Csenozoic  Time   61 

Length  of  the  Caenozoic  Era   63 

VI.  Thk  World  Supply  of  Mammals   .   64 

Mammals  of  the  Northern  Hemisphere,  Holarctica   65 

Africa  as  a  Center  of  Mammalian  Evolution   68 

xi 


Xll 


CONTENTS 


PAGB 

Antarctica,  Australia,  aud  South  America  75 

Australasia  or  Notogfea  77 

South  America  or  Xeogaea  78 

General  Conclusions  79 

7.  Pal^ogeogkaphy  80 

CHAPTER  II.    THE  EOCENE 

Pal^:ogeography  of  Eocene  Europe   83 

palieogeography  of  north  america   84 

Atlantic  Border  Region   84 

Mountain  Region   85 

Mountain  Basin  Deposits   86 

Volcanic  Materials   90 

Pacific  Coast.    Close  of  the  Cretaceous   92 

Late  Cretaceous  and  Early  Eocene  Flora   93 

Alternate  Union  and  Disunion  of  European  and  North  American  Life  95 

Faunal  Phases   .95 

The  Archaic  Mammals   96 

I.  The  Basal  Eocene  Life  of  Europe  and  America       ....  97 

Close  of  the  Age  of  Reptiles  and  Beginning  of  the  Age  of  Mammals       .  97 

Seashore  Transition  Beds  in  Europe     .......  99 

Continental  Transition  Beds  in  America   100 

Animals  of  the  First  Faunal  Zone   102 

Basal  Eocene,  First  Faunal  Phase   102 

Basal  Eocene  of  Europe,  Thanetian  Formations   103 

Basal  Eocene  of  North  America   104 

Puerco  Life   106 

Torrejon  Life   107 

II.  The  Lower  Eocenk  Life  of  Europe  and  America     .       .      .  .111 

Lower  Eocene,  Second  Faunal  I'hasG   .112 

Lower  Eocene  Life  of  Europe       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .  .113 

Sparnacian  Life,  Coryphodon  Zone  114 

Lower  Ypresian  Formations  115 

Upper  Ypresian  Formations  .       .       .  117 

Lower  Eocene  Life  of  North  America.  Wasatch,  and  Wind  River  .       .       .  118 
Formations  of  the  Coryphodon  Zone     .       .       .       .       .       .  .119 

Wasatch  Life  124 

Wind  River  128 

Fishes  of  the  Green  River  Shales  135 

III.  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene  Life  of  Europe  and  North  America  .  137 

Third  Faunal  Phase  138 

Middle  and  Upper  Eocene  Life  of  Europe  140 

Geological  Succession  143 

Mammalian  Succession  146 

Collective  Fauna  of  the  Phosphorites  of  Quercy  151 

Middle  and  Upper  Eocene  Life  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  Region    .       .  .153 
Geology  of  the  Middle  Eocene   .157 


CONTENTS  Xlll 

PAGE 

Bridger  Fish  and  Reptile  Fauna   160 

Tlie  Succession  of  Middle  P^ocene  Mammals   161 

Upper  Eocene   166 

The  Atlantic  Coast  Region   170 

Causes  of  Extinction  of  the  Archaic  Orders  of  Eocene  Mammals     .       .  172 

CHAPTER  III.    THE  OLIGOCENE 

Fourth  Faunal  Phase   178 

Mammals  of  the  Lower  Oligocene   179 

Pal^ogeography   182 

Continental  Connections   182 

Geographic  Changes  in  Europe   183 

Flora  and  Climate   184 

Europe   184 

America   185 

Physiographic  Conditions   185 

Europe   185 

I.    Oligocene  Life  of  Europe   187 

Lower  Oligocene,  Saniioisian   187 

Middle  Oligocene,  Stampian   190 

Upper  Oligocene,  Aquitanian   193 

IL    Upper  Eocene  and  Oligocene  Life  of  North  Africa      .       .       .  199 

Geology  of  the  Fayum  Deposits                                                            .  200 

Fauna  of  the  Fayum  Deposits   201 

III.    Oligocene  Life  of  America   204 

Geologic  Conditions   204 

Prevailing  Mammal  Types   208 

Lower  Oligocene,  Titanotherium  Zone   210 

Middle  Oligocene,  Oreodon  Zone        .   219 

Upper  Oligocene,  Protoceras  Zone   225 

Upper  Oligocene,  Diceratherium  Zone   227 

Upper  Oligocene,  Promerycochoerus  Zone   231 

Causes  of  Extinction  of  Oligocene  Mammals   237 

CHAPTER  IV.    THE  MIOCENE 

Fifth  Faunal  Phase  ,  242 

Flora  and  Climate  of  Europe   242 

Continental  Connections   244 

Physiographic  Changes  in  Europe   246 

Miocene  Life  of  Europe  and  America  Compared   246 

I.    Miocene  Life  of  Europe   249 

The  Older  Fauna   249 

Lower  Miocene  or  Burdigalian   250 


xiv  CONTENTS 

PAGB 

Middle  Miocene  or  Vindobonian   255 

1.  Stage  of  Sansan   25'i 

2.  Stage  of  Simorre   260 

3.  Stage  of  St.  Gaudens   263 

Middle  Miocene  Primates   263 

Upper  Miocene  or  Pontian   264 

Physiographic  Conditions   265 

Pikernii   267 

Characteristic  Life   269 

Upper  Miocene  Primates   271 

The  Seven  Rhinoceros  Phyla  of  the  Miocene   272 

II.  Middle  Miocene  Life  of  Asia   273 

III.  Miocene  Life  of  North  America   276 

Transition,  Arikaree   277 

Ancient  Physiographic  Conditions   278 

Miocene  Flora  :       .  282 

Lower  Miocene,  Merycochoerus  Zone  .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .  285 

Middle  Miocene,  Ticholeptus  Zone   288 

Upper  Miocene,  Hipparion  and  Procamelus  Zone   297 

Miocene  History  of  American  Deer                                              .       .  302 

CHAPTER  V.    THE  PLIOCENE 

Sixth  Faunal  Phase   304 

I.  Pliocene  Life  of  Europe   304 

Modernization   304 

Palseogeography   304 

Flora  and  Climate   306 

Pliocene  Birds   307 

Pliocene  Primates   307 

Partial  List  of  Mammals   308 

Faunal  Break  with  the  Miocene   309 

Faunal  Divisions   309 

Lower  Pliocene  or  Plaisancian   311 

Middle  Pliocene  or  Astian   313 

Upper  Pliocene  or  Sicilian                                                                 .  317 

II.  Pliocene  Life  of  Asia   321 

Life  of  Southern  Asia   323 

Evolution  of  the  Proboscidea   330 

Conclusions  as  to  the  Age  of  the  Siwalik  Fauna   332 

Life  of  Eastern  Asia   332 

Pleistocene  Life  of  India   335 

III.  Pliocene  Life  of  North  America   336 

Relations  with  Eurasia   337 

American  Migration  of  Asiatic  Antelopes   337 

Reunion  with  South  America   339 

Evidence  of  Fish  Faunas   339 

Geologic  Succession   340 


CONTENTS  XV 

PAGE 

Climatic  and  Physiographic  Conditions   342 

Flora  of  the  Pliocene   343 

Flora  of  California   343 

Sirenians  on  the  Pacific  Coast   344 

Flora  of  the  Eastern  States  .       .       .   345 

1.  Late  Miocene  or  Early  Pliocene   345 

Alachua  Clays  or  '  Archer  Beds  '  of  Florida   346 

Kepublican  Kiver  of  Kansas,  Peraceras  Zone   348 

Characteristic  Lower  Pliocene  Mammals   350 

Horses,  Rhinoceroses,  1  apirs,  Even-toed  Mammals,  Mastodons,  Car- 
nivores   350 

2.  Lower  Pliocene,  Late  Phase   353 

Snake  River  Formation,  Neotragoceros  Zone   353 

Virgin  Valley  and  Thousand  Creek  of  Nevada   356 

Rattlesnake  Formation  of  the  John  Day  Valley,  Oregon   ....  357 

3.  Middle  Pliocene   360 

Blanco  Formation  of  Texas,  Glyptotherium  Zone     .....  360 

4.  Upper  Pliocene  or  Lower  Pleistocene   366 

Peace  Creek  Formation,  Florida   366 

'  Loup  River '  Formation  of  Nebraska,  Elephas  Imperator  Zone       .       .  368 

Conclusions  as  to  American  Pliocene                                                     .  369 

Causes  of  Pliocene  Extinction   369 

CHAPTER  VL    THE  PLEISTOCENE 

Seventh  Faunal  Phase   374 

Similar  Divisions  of  the  Seventh  Phase  in  the  New  and  Old  Worlds       .  374 

Time  Divisions  of  the  Quaternary                                                 .       .  375 

Glacial  Period  in  the  Alpine  Region  .       .   377 

Alternate  Migration  Theory                                                   .       .  378 

Faunal,  Glacial,  and  Culture  Stages      .       .       ...       .       ;  378 

The  Eolithic  Stage                                                                      .  382 

Duration  of  the  Pleistocene   385 

Geologic  Deposits   386 

[.    Pleistocene  Life  of  Europe   386 

Flora  and  Climate                                                                            •  386 

Four  Faunas,  Secular  Northward  and  Southw^d  Migrations  .       .       .  388 

Rhinoceroses   390 

1.  The  First  or  Early  Pleistocene  Fauna   391 

Geologic  Proofs  of  the  First  Glacial  Advance   392 

Flora  of  the  Norfolk  Interglacial   393 

Mammals  of  the  Norfolk  Interglacial   393 

Lower  Pleistocene  of  France   395 

Characteristic  Lower  Pleistocene  Mammals   397 

Elephants   397 

Rhinoceroses   399 

Human  Culture  Stages.    Eolithic  Flints   399 

2.  The  Second  or  Mid-Pleistocene  Fauna   399 

Flora  of  the  Interglacial  Periods   401 


xvi 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

First  Faunal  Sub-Zone   402 

Eolithic  Stage.    Heidelberg  Man   403 

PalaBolithic  Stage.    The  Chellean   404 

Second  Faunal  Sub-Zone   405 

Flora   407 

Characteristic  Mammals   407 

Horses  of  the  II  and  III  Faunal  Zones   408 

Life  of  the  Mediterranean  Islands   409 

Human  Culture  Stage.    Mousterian   410 

3.  The  Third  or  Upper  Pleistocene  Fauna   412 

Pleistocene  and  Recent  Habitat  Zones   414 

Tundra  Fauna  and  Flora   415 

Steppe  Fauna.    Elevation   415 

Forest  Fauna   417 

Migration   419 

Mammals  of  the  Third  Faunal  Zone   419 

Mammoths   419 

Rhinoceroses  .421 

Reindeer  or  Caribou   422 

Carnivores   422 

Herbivores   424 

Geographic  Distribution  of  the  Third  Fauna   425 

The  Schweizersbild  Cave   425 

Kesslerloch  Cave   425 

Voklinshofen   426 

Human  Culture  Stages   •   427 

Solutrian   427 

Magdalenian   427 

4.  The  Fourth,  Post-Pleistocene,  or  Modern  Fauna      ....  428 

II.  Pleistocene  Life  of  North  Africa   429 

Climate   430 

Sources  of  African  Life   430 

III.  Pleistocene  Life  of  North  America   434 

Introduction   434 

Geologic  Divisions  of  the  American  Quaternary   435 

Faunal  Divisions  of  the  American  Quaternary   438 

Succession  of  Elephants  or  Mammoths   440 

Physiographic  and  Climatic  Changes   442 

Elevation.    Subsidence.    Reelevation   412 

Glacial  and  Interglacial  Stages   444 

Climate  of  the  Great  Mountain  Basin   447 

^Migrations  of  the  Sangamon  Flora  in  Canada   448 

Migrations  of  Mammals   449 

Migrations  of  Birds   450 

Insects   450 

1.  Early  and  Mid-Pleistocene  Mammals  of  the  Plains  ....  452 

Relative  Age  of  the  Equus  and  Megalonyx  Faunas   453 

Early  Phases  of  the  Equus  Zone   454 


CONTENTS  Xvii 

PAGE 

Hay  Springs,  Nebraska   456 

Rock  Creek,  Texas   458 

Silver  Lake  of  the  Oregon  Desert   458 

Late  Phases  of  the  Equus  Zone   461 

Early  and  Late  Pleistocene  Life  of  Kansas   461 

2.  Mid-Pleistocene  Mammals  of  the  Forested  Regions  ....  464 

Characteristic  Mammals   466 

Aftonian  Interglacial  Stage                                           ....  467 

Upper  Lake  Lahontan  Beds   468 

Port  Kennedy  Cave,  Pennsylvania   468 

FrankstoM^n  Cave,  Pennsylvania   470 

Ashley  River,  South  Carolina                                                             .  471 

Rancho  La  Brea,  Southern  California   472 

Washtucna  Lake,  Washington   474 

Afton,  Indian  Territory   475 

Potter  Creek  Cave,  California   475 

Samwel  Cave,  California   477 

Big  Bone  Lick,  Kentucky   478 

Characteristic  Mid-Pleistocene  Mammals   480 

Mastodons   480 

Bison   482 

Mountain  Antelopes   483 

Tapirs   484 

Horses   484 

Lions   485 

3.  Fauna  of  the  Ovibos  Zone   486 

Conard  Fissure  of  Arkansas       .   487 

Canadian  Deposits   488 

The  Alaskan  Fauna   489 

Characteristic  Mammals  of  the  Third  or  Ovibos  Zone      ....  492 

Distribution  of  Musk  Oxen   492 

Sirenians  or  Sea-Cows   493 

Antiquity  of  Man  in  North  America   494 

Man  and  the  Mastodon   495 

Man  and  Megalonyx   496 

Human  Implements  and  Extinct  Mammals   497 

Human  Remains  in  Cave  Deposits                                                      .  498 

Skeletal  Remains  attributed  to  Early  Man   499 

Causes  of  Pleistocene  Extinction   500 


1 


THE  HARRIS  LECTURES 

DELIVERED  AT  NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY,  DECEMBER,  1908 


CHAPTER  I  —  INTRODUCTION 


HISTORY  OF  PALAEONTOLOGY  — ENVIRONMENT  — PAST  AND 
PRESENT  GEOGRAPHIC  DISTRIBUTION  OF  MAMMALS 

I.  Philosophy  of  the  Structure  of  Mammals 

Rise  of  PaloBontology 

Paleontology  is  the  zoology  of  the  past.  As  a  science  it  arose  dur- 
ing the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  century  in  various  parts  of  Europe 
with  the  first  comparisons  of  the  extinct  with  existing  forms  of  life.  Among 
the  mammals  such  comparisons  were  instituted  by  Buffon  and  others; 
Cuvier  subsequently  formulated  these  into  a  complete  system  of  study, 
and  was  thus  the  founder  of  vertebrate  palaeontology;  he  was  also  the 
pioneer  in  the  art  of  restoration  of  the  extinct  forms  of  mammalian  life 
and  the  conditions  under  which  they  lived. 

Cuvier  in  his  famous  Discours  ^  observed  that  naturalists  recoiled  from 
the  difficulties  which  faced  them  because  of  the  imperfections  of  fossils. 

"Even  if  we  should  meet  with  the  whole  skeleton/^  he  remarked,  "we  should 
have  great  difficulty  in  applying  to  it  characteristics  for  the  most  part  derived 
from  the  hair,  color,  and  other  marks  which  disappear  before  incrustation.  It  is 
uncommonly  rare  to  find  a  fossil  skeleton  at  all  perfect;  the  bones  are  isolated, 
confusedly  intermingled,  most  frequently  broken,  and  reduced  to  fragments ;  this 
is  all  which  our  geologic  layers  furnish  us,  and  is  the  sole  resource  of  the  natural- 
ist. .  .  .  Frightened  at  these  difficulties,  the  majority  of  observers  have  passed 
lightly  over  the  fossil  bones  of  quadrupeds,  classed  them  very  vaguely  after  super- 
ficial resemblances,  or  have  not  even  hazarded  the  giving  of  a  name  to  them,  so 
that  this  part  of  fossil  history,  the  most  important  and  instructive  of  all,  is  of  all 
others  the  least  cultivated. 

"I  do  not  pretend  by  this  remark,"  continues  Cuvier, to  detract  from  the  obser- 
vations of  Camper  or  of  Pallas,  of  Blumenbach,  Soemmering,  Merk,  Faujas,  Rosen- 
miiller,  Home,  and  others ;  but  their  assembled  labors  which  have  been  very  use- 
ful to  me  and  which  I  have  cited  elsewhere  are  only  partial."  [Footnote  to  French 
Edition,  p.  47.] 

Among  these  pioneers  of  mammalian  palaeontology  in  Europe  to  whom 
Cuvier  refers  were  the  vertebrate  zoologists  and  comparative  anatomists 

'  Baron  Georges  Leopold  Chretien  Frederic  Dagobert  Cuvier,  1769-1832,  Discours  sur 
les  Revolutions  de  la  Surface  du  Globe;  et  sur  les  changemens  qu'elles  ont  produits  dans  le 
regne  animal.    4to.    Paris,  1826. 

B  1 


2 


THE  4GE  OF  MAMMALS 


Peter  Simon  Pallas,  Pieter  Camper,  and  Johann  Friedrich  Blumenbach. 
Pallas  (1747-1811)  in  his  great  journey  (1768-1774)  through  Siberia  dis- 
covered the  vast  deposits  of  extinct  mammoths  and  rhinoceroses.  Cam- 
per (1722-1789)  contrasted  (1777)  the  Pleistocene  and  recent  species  of 
elephants;  Cuvier  (1799)  published  his  memoir  on  the  living  and  fossil 
elephants;  and  Blumenbach  (1752-1840)  separated  (1803)  the  mammoth 
from  the  existing  species  of  elephants  as  Elephas  primigenius.  In  1792 
Kerr  distinguished  the  American  mastodon  as  Elephas  americanus.  In 
1799  Thomas  Jefferson  (1743-1826)  described  the  giant  American  Pleis- 
tocene sloth  Megalonyx} 

The  ancient  life  of  the  Atlantic  border  of  North  America  was  also 
becoming  known  through  the  pioneer  work  of  Richard  Harlan  (1796- 
1843),  Jeffries  Wyman  (1814-1874),  and  Joseph  Leidy  (1823-1891).  The 
master  works  of  Joseph  Leidy  began  with  the  first  fruits  of  western  explora- 
tion in  1847,  and  extended  through  a  series  of  grand  memoirs,  culminating 
in  1874.  Leidy  adhered  strictly  to  Cuvier's  exact  descriptive  methods, 
and  while  he  was  at  heart  an  evolutionist  and  recognized  clearly  the  genetic 
relationships  of  the  horses  and  other  groups,  he  never  indulged  in  speculation. 

Cuvier's  Law  of  Correlation.  —  As  a  means  of  escaping  the  difficulties 
caused  by  the  imperfections  of  fossils,  Cuvier  formulated  and  announced  his 
famous  'law  of  correlation.'  He  reposed  in  this  law  a  buoyant  confidence 
which  subsequent  experience  has  shown  to  have  been  largely  misplaced. 
He  replied  to  the  critics  of  the  new  science  of  palaeontology,  who  deplored  the 
imperfect  nature  of  fossils,  that  the  comparative  anatomist  does  not  require 
the  entire  animal,  because  certain  laws  of  invariable  association  enable  him  to 
predict  from  a  single  part  the  structure  of  other  parts.  Thus,  he  observed, 
we  are  establishing  supposititious  laws  which  become  almost  as  certain  as  the 
laws  of  reasoning,  so  that  now  any  one  who  sees  the  track  of  a  cleft  foot 
may  conclude  that  the  animal  which  left  it  is  ruminant;  and  this  assertion 
is  as  sure  as  any  other  in  physics  or  morality.  This  footmark  alone  gives 
to  the  observer  both  the  formation  of  the  teeth,  the  shape  of  the  jaws, 
the  structure  of  the  vertebrae,  and  the  form  of  all  the  bones  of  the  legs, 
thighs,  shoulders,  and  even  the  frame  of  the  animal  which  has  passed. 
It  is  a  more  certain  mark  than  all  those  of  Zadig.- 

None  of  the  numerous  and  genuine  scientific  discoveries  of  the  great 
Frenchman  brought  him  such  immediate  prestige  as  did  this  famous  law. 
In  reference  to  it  Balzac  said  at  the  time  that  Cuvier  ''rebuilt  like  Cad- 
mus cities,  from  a  tooth";  yet,  although  in  part  defended  by  Huxley,^ 
there  is  more  error  than  truth  in  this  law  as  Cuvier  conceived  it,  for  there 

*  Jefferson,  Thomas,  A  Memoir  on  the  Discovery  of  Certain  Bones  of  a  Quadruped  of 
the  Clawed  Kind  in  the  Western  Parts  of  Virginia.  Trans.  Amer.  P/iilos.  Soc,  Vol.  IV,  1799, 
pp.  246-260. 

^  The  above  paragraph  is  a  literal  translation  from  Cuvier's  Discours.    See  full  title,  p.  1. 
^  Huxley,  On  the  Method  of  Palaeontology.  Ann.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XVIII,  1856.  Scien- 
tific Memoirs,  1898,  Vol.  I,  pp.  436-439. 


INTRODUCTION 


3 


never  is,  as  he  believed,  any  'invariable  association'  between  the  various 
parts  of  mammals.  This  is  because  each  part  is  adapted  to  the  particular 
service  which  it  has  to  perform  for  the  animal  as  a  whole,  service  which  may 
be  rendered  in  many  different  environments  and  on  many  different  kinds 
of  food.  While  the  feet  and  limbs  are  becoming  fitted  to  moving  in  the 
water,  or  on  land,  in  trees  or  in  flight  through  the  air,  the  teeth  at  the 
same  time  may  become  fitted  to  one  of  many  different  kinds  of  food,  to 
shrubs,  grasses,  bark,  insects,  or  to  other  animals.  Thus,  while  serving  the 
whole,  different  parts  of  animals  evolve  separately  and  independently, 
and  there  have  arisen  consequently  an  almost  unlimited  number  of  com- 
binations of  foot,  limb,  skull,  and  tooth  structure.^  The  simple  reason  why 
a  law  conceived  by  a  special  creationist  is  invalid  is  that  while  all  parts 
of  an  animal  conspire  to  make  the  animal  as  a  whole  adaptive,  there  is 
no  fixed  correlation  either  in  the  form  of  the  parts  or  in  the  speed  with 
which  they  evolve. 

It  is  consequently  impossible  for  the  palaeontologist  to  predict  the 
entire  structure  of  an  unknown  animal  from  one  of  its  parts  only,  unless 
the  part  happens  to  belong  to  a  type  already  very  familiar.  For  example, 
if  we  found  the  fossil  claw  bone  of  the  cat  we  would  know  that  it  belonged 
to  a  cat  and  would  be  able  to  restore  the  cat;  but  if  we  found  a  claw  bear- 
ing only  a  general  likeness  to  that  of  the  cat  it  would  be  very  unsafe  to 
restore  the  cat.  There  are  herbivorous  quadrupeds  (fam.  Chalicotheriidse) 
in  which  the  claws  remotely  resemble  those  of  the  giant  ground  sloths  and 
anteaters;  it  happened  that  one  of  these  very  claws  (of  the  genus  Macro- 
therium)  was  brought  to  Cuvier,  and  full  of  confidence  in  his  law,  but  en- 
tirely deceived  by  the  resemblance  of  the  claw  to  that  of  one  of  the  exist- 
ing scaly  anteaters  (the  pangolins  of  Africa  and  India),  he  termed  the 
animal  Pangolin  gigantesque.  Had  he  restored  the  animal  according  to 
his  own  '  law  of  correlation, '  he  would  have  pictured  a  giant  anteater  of  a 
structure  as  wide  as  the  poles  from  what  we  now  know  to  be  the  actual 
form  of  the  quadruped,  Macrotherium,  which  in  body,  limbs,  and  teeth  is 
a  true  herbivore  remotely  related  to  the  odd-toed  quadrupeds  known  as 
titanotheres. 

Again,  in  direct  opposition  to  Cuvier's  law  we  find  that  certain  Ameri- 
can Eocene  monkeys  (Notharctus),  in  which  the  limbs  are  fitted  to  tree- 
living,  or  arboreal,  habits,  exhibit  grinding  teeth  very  similar  to  those  of 
the  ground-living  Eocene  horses  (Orohippus),  in  which  the  limbs,  on  the 
contrary,  are  distinctly  of  the  running,  or  cursorial,  type.  Because  of  their 
teeth  these  monkeys  were  at  first  thought  to  be  hoofed  animals.  Thus 
teeth  do  not  give  us  certain  indications  of  the  form  of  the  hoofs,  nor  does 
the  form  of  the  hoof  give  certain  indications  of  the  form  of  the  teeth. 

Evolutionary  law  of  correlation.  —  Yet  despite  this  independent  evolu- 
tion of  parts,  every  part  does  conspire  to  make  the  animal  as  a  whole  adap- 

1  See  the  Law  of  Adaptive  Radiation,  p.  22. 

r 


4 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


tive,  so  that  there  is  always  a  true  adaptive  correlation,  although  not  of 
invariable  association  of  certain  kinds  of  organs,  as  Cuvier  conceived  it. 
The  law  of  correlation  of  tooth  and  foot  structure  may,  therefore,  be 
restated  as  follows :  — 

The  feet,  which  are  correlated  chiefly  with  the  limb  and  body 
structure,  and  the  teeth,  which  are  correlated  chiefly  with  the  skull 
and  neck  structure,  diverge  and  evolve  independently  in  adapta- 
tion to  securing  food  and  to  eating  food  under  different  condi- 
tions of  life  and  in  different  environments.  Each  part  evolves 
directly  to  perform  its  own  mechanical  functions  and  purposes,  yet 
in  such  a  manner  that  each  subserves  all  the  other  parts/ 

Systematic  Palceontology 

After  the  splendid  osteological  investigations  of  Cuvier  had  revealed 
a  new  mammalian  world  of  wonderful  richness,  his  successors  were  bent 
upon  multiplying  the  diversity  of  this  extinct  creation,  that  is,  adding 
new  species  and  genera,  rather  than  on  closely  studying  the  osteology  of 
the  fossil  forms  or  adding  new  working  principles  to  the  science.  In  France 
De  Blainville  was  the  one  great  generalizer  up  to  the  time  of  Gaudry. 
Thus  both  in  France  and  America  facts  accumulated  more  rapidly  than 
principles.  Cuvier's  chief  contributions  were  to  the  Upper  Eocene  mam- 
mals, to  a  few  Miocene  forms,  and  to  many  Pleistocene  forms.  His  suc- 
cessor, Henri  Marie  Ducrotay  de  Blainville  (1778-1850),  in  his  Osteo- 
graphie  des  Mammiferes^  (1839-1864)  added  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
Basal  and  Lower  Eocene  fauna  of  France.  Croizet  and  Jobert  ^  described 
(1828)  the  mammals  of  Perrier  and  Malbattu,  Upper  Pliocene.  In  the 
middle  of  the  century  Paul  Gervais  (1816-1879)  published  his  Zoologie 
et  Paleontologie  Frangaises}  In  1851  Edouard  Lartet  (1801-1870) 
published  his  Notice  sur  la  Colline  de  Sansan.^  Sansan  is  a  rich 
Middle  Miocene  deposit  discovered  by  Lartet  in  1834,  explored  for  many 
years,  and  finally  monographed  by  Henri  Filhol  (1843-1907)  in  1891.^ 

'  Cf.  pp.  192,  193,  of  Osborn,  The  Rise  of  the  Mammalia  in  North  America.  Amer.  Jour. 
Sci.,  Nov.  and  Dec,  1893. 

2  Ducrotay  de  Blainville,  Osteographie  ou  Description  Iconographique  Compar6e  du 
Squelette  et  du  Syst^me  Dentaire  des  Mammifferes  Recents  et  Fossiles  pour  Servir  de  Base 
k  la  Zoologie  et  k  la  Geologic.    Paris,  1839-1864. 

^  Croizet  et  Jobert,  Recherches  sur  les  Ossemens  fossiles  du  Departement  du  Puy-de- 
Dome.    Paris,  1828. 

*  Gervais,  Zoologie  et  Paleontologie  Fran^aises.  Nouvelles  Recherches  sur  les  Animaux 
Vertebres  dont  on  Trouve  les  Ossements  Enfouis  dans  le  Sol  de  la  France  et  sur  leur  Compa- 
raison  avec  Esp^ces  Propres  aux  Autres  Regions  du  Globe.    Paris,  1859. 

^  Lartet,  Notice  sur  la  Colline  de  Sansan,  suivie  d'une  Recapitulation  des  Diverses  Es- 
p^ces  d'Animaux  Vertebres  Fossiles  Trouves  soit  a  Sansan,  soit  dans  d'Autres  Gisements  du 
Terrain  Tertiaire  Miocene  dans  le  Bassin  Sous-Pyreneen.    Auch,  1851. 

^  Filhol,  Etude  sur  les  Mammif^res  Fossiles  de  Sansan.  Ann.  Sc.  GeoL,  XXI,  1,  Art.  1. 
Paris,  1891. 


INTRODUCTION 


5 


The  still  richer  Lower  Oligocene  and  Upper  Eocene  mammals  of  the  phos- 
phorites near  Quercy,  discovered  in  1865  and  noticed  by  various  authors, 
were  monographed  by  Filhol  in  1877.^ 

The  important  Lower  Oligocene  mammals  of  Ronzon,  discovered  by 
Auguste  Aymard,  first  reported  in  1856,  were  fully  and  ably  monographed 
by  Filhol  in  1881.  The  Upper  Oligocene  of  the  center  of  France  {VAllier, 
Puy-de-Dome,  Haute-Loire),  successively  described  by  Charles  Deperet, 
Antoine  Jacques  Louis  Jourdan  (1788-1848),  Gervais  (1851),  Nicolas 
Auguste  Pomel  (1853),  was  also  finally  monographed  by  Filhol  in  1880. 

It  remained  for  Victor  Lemoine  (1837-1897)  to  describe  the  Basal  Eocene 
mammalian  fauna  from  Cernay  near  Rheims,  discovered  in  1873,  and 
continuously  explored  up  to  the  present  time. 

In  the  meantime  in  Germany  the  works  of  Georg  August  Goldfuss 
(1782-1848),  Georg  Friedrich  von  Jager  (1785-1866),  and  Christoph  Gott- 
fried Giebel  (1820-1881,  Fauna  der  Vorwelt,  1846,  1847)  were  followed 
by  the  more  exhaustive  publications  of  Johann  Jakob  Kaup  (1803-1873), 
which  covered  the  Upper  Miocene  mammals  of  the  Mainz  Basin  (Eppels- 
heim  near  Worms).  The  gifted  Christian  Erich  Hermann  von  Meyer 
(1801-1869)  also  described  Hipparion  and  other  mammals  from  Eppels- 
heim  (1832).  To  Johann  Andreas  Wagner  (1797-1861)  we  owe  our  first 
knowledge  of  the  Upper  Miocene  fauna  (1848-1857)  of  Pikermi,  a  won- 
derfully rich  deposit  which  was  finally  monographed  (1862)  by  Albert 
Gaudry  (1827-1908).  The  Middle  Miocene  mammals  of  Wiirttemberg 
were  described  (1870-1885)  by  Friedrich  August  Quenstedt  (1809-1889) 
and  Oscar  Friedrich  van  Fraas  (1824-1897). 

The  work  of  William  Buckland  (1784-1856)  and  John  Phillipps  (1800- 
1874)  on  the  sparse  Tertiary  formations  of  Great  Britain  was  followed  by 
that  of  Richard  Owen  (1804-1892),  which  was  finally  summarized  in  his 
''A  History  of  British  Fossil  Mammals  and  Birds"  (1846),  and  Con- 
tributions to  the  History  of  British  Fossil  Mammals"  (1848),  treating 
especially  of  the  Upper  Eocene  of  the  Isle  of  Wight. 

Darvnn's  Influence 

A  review  of  the  two  classic  works  ^  of  Darwin  (Charles  Robert,  1809- 
1882),  of  1839  and  1859,  proves  that  he  was  the  founder  of  modern  palae- 
ontology. He  applied  to  the  living  world  the  earth-forming  principles 
of  Hutton  which  had  been  grandly  developed  and  expressed  by  Charles 
Lyell.  The  ideas  of  the  descent  of  mammals  and  other  applications  of 
this  law  of  similarity  between  the  past  and  present  history 

^  Filhol,  Recherches  sur  les  Phosphorites  du  Quercy.    Paris,  1877. 

^  Narrative  of  the  Surveying  Voyages  of  His  Majesty's  Ships  Adventure  and  Beagle 
between  the  years  1826  and  1836,  Describing  their  Examination  of  the  Southern  Shores  of 
South  America  and  the  Beagle's  Circumnavigation  of  the  Globe,  published  in  1839.  On 
the  Origin  of  Species  by  Means  of  Natural  Selection,  or  the  Preservation  of  Favoured  Races 
in  the  Struggle  for  Life,  published  in  1859. 


6 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


of  the  earth,  or  uniformit  aria  nism,  had  been  struggling  for  expres- 
sion in  the  writings  of  the  French  evolutionists  Lamarck  (Jean  Baptiste 
Pierre  Antoine  de  Monet  de,  1744-1829)  and  Etienne  Geoff roy  St.  Hilaire 
(1772-1844),  as  well  as  in  the  classifications  of  another  great  Frenchman, 
De  Blainville.  These  ideas  found  in  Darwin  their  first  true  interpreta- 
tion, because  the  geological  succession,  the  rise  of  mammals,  their  migra- 
tions, their  extinctions,  were  all  connected  with  the  great  central  idea  of 
divergent  evolution  from  primordial  forms.  The  impulse  which  Darwin 
gave  to  mammalian  palaeontology  was  immediate  and  unbounded,  finding 
expression  especially  in  the  writings  of  Thomas  Henry  Huxley  (1825-1895) 
in  England,  of  Jean  Albert  Gaudry  (1827-1908)  in  France,  of  Edward 
Drinker  Cope  (1840-1897)  and  Othniel  Charles  Marsh  (1831-1899)  in 
America. 

The  first  fine  exposition  of  the  new  spirit  of  the  period  as  applied  to 
extinct  Mammalia  is  Gaudry 's  Animaux  Fossiles  et  Geologie  de  VAttique 
(1862),  based  on  the  Upper  Miocene  fauna  of  Pikermi  near  Athens.  This 
work,  to  which  we  shall  make  many  references,  is  full  of  genius.  Espe- 
cially noteworthy  is  Gaudry's  discovery  that  mammals  in  their  descent 
or  phylogeny  follow  not  one  but  many  contemporaneous  and  parallel 
lines.  In  other  words,  Gaudry  first  enunciated  the  polyphyletic  law  as 
applied  to  mammals,  but  singularly  his  subsequent  writings  were  not  con- 
sistent with  this  law. 

The  remarkable  memoirs  of  Vladimir  Onufrievich  Kowalevsky  (1842- 
1883),  published  in  1873,  are  monuments  of  exact  observation  of  the  details 
of  evolutionary  change  in  the  skull,  teeth,  and  feet,  and  of  the  apprecia- 
tion of  Darwinism.  In  the  most  important  of  these  memoirs,  entitled 
Versuch  einer  Naturlichen  Classification  der  Fossilen  Hufthiere  (1873),  we 
find  a  model  union  of  detailed  inductive  study  with  theory  and  working 
hypothesis.  These  works  swept  aside  the  dry  traditional  fossil  lore  which 
had  been  accumulating  in  France  and  Germany.  They  breathed  the  new 
spirit  of  recognition  of  the  struggle  for  existence,  of  adaptation  and  de- 
scent. 

Huxley's  most  vital  contribution  was  his  development  of  the  method 
of  palceontology,  or  the  modes  of  examining  and  testing  facts,  of  synthesis 
and  analysis.  These  may  now  be  studied  in  his  collected  memoirs.^  His 
principles  of  analysis  are  complete  except  in  his  failure  to  realize  the 
wonderful  operation  of  the  law  of  analogy  in  the  repeated  creation  of 
similar  forms  from  dissimilar  ancestors. 

All  these  writers  attacked  the  problem  of  descent,  and  published  pre- 
liminary phylogenies  of  such  animals  as  the  horse,  rhinoceros,  and  ele- 
phant, which  time  has  proved  to  be  of  only  general  value  and  not  at  all 
comparable  to  the  exact  descent  series  which  were  being  established  dur- 
ing the  same  period  by  invertebrate  palaeontologists,  beginning  with  the 

^  Scientific  Memoirs  of  Thomas  Henry  Huxley,  4  vols,  London,  1898-1903. 


INTRODUCTION 


7 


memoirs  of  Wilhelm  Heinrich  Waagen  in  1869.  Phyletic  or  ancestral 
gaps  began  to  be  filled  in  a  general  way,  however,  especially  through  re- 
markable discoveries  in  North  America  by  Leidy,  Cope,  and  Marsh;  and 
the  ensuing  phylogenies,  or  Hrees,'  of  animal  descent  gave  enormous  pres- 
tige to  palaeontology,  as  affording  the  most  convincing  proofs  of  evolution. 

Primitive  and  progressive  stages.  —  It  was  early  (1870-1873)  observed 
by  Huxley,  Cope,  and  others  that  Cuvier's  broad  belief  in  a  universal  law 
of  perfection  was  erroneous,  and  they  began  to  perceive  the  difference 
between  persistent  primitive  t y p e s  (Huxley)  and  progressive  or 
advancing  types.  Darwin  himself  had  anticipated  that  primitive 
or  stem  forms  of  the  existing  modernized  or  specialized  kinds  of  animals 
would  be  discovered.  The  analytic  steps  by  which  from  existing  knowl- 
edge the  stem  form  might  be  reconstructed  before  its  discovery,  were  first 
fully  and  clearly  described  by  Huxley  in  1880,^  namely,  by  separating  all 
the  specialized,  or  modern,  characters  of  mammals  from  all  the  primitive, 
or  original  and  simple  characters,  and  by  putting  together  the  latter  to 
compose  an  ancestral  or  stem  form  of  mammal.  Thus,  more  or  less  inde- 
pendently, Huxley,  Kowalevsky,  and  Cope  had  ventured  to  picture  what 
the  ancestor  of  the  hoofed  mammals,  or  ungulates,  would  be  like  when 
discovered,  namely,  an  animal  whose  chief  characters  would  be  grinding 
teeth  with  simple,  rounded  cusps,  and  feet  with  five  separate  and  com- 
plete digits.  This  prophecy  and  restoration  at  first  seemed  to  have  been 
entirely  realized  and  fulfilled  in  the  discovery  in  northern  Wyoming,  in 
1873,  of  a  generalized  hoofed  mammal,  to  which  Cope  gave  the  name 
Phenacodus,  although  this  mammal  has  since  proved  not  to  be  directly 
ancestral  to  any  form,  but  rather  to  stand  for  a  type. 

The  reconstruction  of  primitive  ancestral  forms  was  so  much  more 
facile  and  enjoyable  than  the  arduous  labor  of  exploration  and  research 
that  it  naturally  went  to  extremes.  Here  we  are  reminded  of  a  critical 
saying  of  the  late  Professor  von  Gudden,  the  distinguished  neurologist 
of  Munich:  '^Ein  Steinchen  der  Wahrheit  hat  mehr  Werth  als  ein  grosser 
Schwindelbau.''  In  palaeontology  the  great  "  Schwindelhau/'  literally 
^'the  false  structure,"  is  the  phyletic  tree,  which  adorns  the  end  of  many 
good  as  well  as  many  superficial  papers.  Recently,  because  of  their  ex- 
tremely brief  existence,  these  phylogenies  have  fallen  somewhat  into  dis- 
favor, yet  the  present  reaction  against  these  trees  does  not  seem  to  be 
altogether  wise,  for  we  must  remember  that  they  are  among  the  working 
hypotheses  of  this  science,  which  serve  to  express  most  clearly  the 
author's  meaning. 

Precise  and  philosophical  research.  —  The  first  twenty  years  after  the 
publication  of  Darwin's    Origin will  always  remain  a  golden  era  in  the 

*  Huxley,  On  the  Application  of  the  Laws  of  Evolution  to  the  Arrangement  of  the  Ver- 
tebrata  and  more  Particularly  of  the  Mammalia.  Proc.  Zool.  Soc,  London,  1880,  pp.  649-662; 
Scientific  Memoirs,  Vol.  IV,  pp.  457-472. 


8 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


history  of  mammalian  palaeontology,  including  the  labors  of  those  men- 
tioned above  as  well  as  of  the  great  Swiss  palaeontologist,  Ludwig  Riiti- 
meyer  (1825-1895).  It  was  under  the  inspiration  of  the  ''Odontographie"  ^ 
of  Riitimeyer  that  Kowalevsky  completed  and  published  in  1873  his  four 
remarkable  memoirs  upon  the  hoofed  mammals.  He  wrote  these  four 
hundred  and  fifty  quarto  pages  in  three  languages  not  his  own,  in  French 
upon  Anchitherium  and  the  ancestors  of  the  horses,  in  English  on  the 
Hyopotamidse,  in  German  upon  other  types  of  even-toed  mammals,  namely, 
Gelocus,  Anthracotherium,  and  Entelodon,^  including  the  first  attempt  at 
an  arrangement  of  these  great  groups  of  mammals  on  the  basis  of  the 
descent  theory.  It  is  to  the  everlasting  renown  of  the  veteran  Riitimeyer 
and  of  Kowalevsky,  unfortunately  so  soon  deceased,  that  while  their  main 
inductions  as  to  the  descent  of  the  mammals  and  even  as  to  the  structure 
of  certain  pafts  of  mammals,  such  as  the  teeth,  have  suffered  by  the  fullness 
of  American  discoveries,  their  methods  of  thought  and  still  more  their 
thorough  methods  of  research  have  not  been  displaced.  Kowalevsky's 
theory  of  the  pedigree  of  the  horses,  like  that  of  Huxley,  was  not  the  right 
one ;  Riitimeyer  believed  that  the  grinding  teeth  of  hoofed  mammals  sprang 
from  lophodont  or  crested  forms,  which  also  has  been  disproved.  It  is, 
nevertheless,  the  right  system  of  thought  which  is  most  essential  to  prog- 
ress; and  better  in  the  end  wrong  results  which  have  been  reached  by 
right  methods  than  right  results  reached  haphazard  by  vicious  methods. 
If  a  student  to-day  asks,  how  shall  I  study  palaeontology,"  we  can  do  no 
better  than  to  direct  him  to  the  Versuch  einer  Natiirlichen  Classification 
der  Fossilen  Hufthiere  of  Kowalevsky,  out  of  date  in  some  of  its  facts, 
thoroughly  modern  in  its  method  of  approach  to  ancient  nature.  This 
work  is  a  model  union  of  the  detailed  study  of  form  and  function  with 
theory  and  the  working  hypothesis.  It  regards  the  fossil  not  as  a  petri- 
fied skeleton,  but  as  having  belonged  to  a  moving  and  feeding  animal; 
every  joint  and  facet  has  a  meaning,  each  cusp  a  certain  significance.  Ris- 
ing to  the  philosophy  of  the  matter,  it  brings  the  mechanical  perfection 
and  adaptiveness  of  different  types  into  relation  with  environment,  with 
changes  of  herbage,  with  the  introduction  of  grasses.  In  this  survey  of 
competition  it  speculates  upon  the  causes  of  the  rise,  spread,  and  extinc- 
tion of  each  animal  group.  In  other  words  the  fossil  quadrupeds  are 
treated  biologically  —  so  far  as  possible  in  the  obscurity  of  the  past.  From 
such  models  and  from  our  own  experience  we  learn  to  feel  free  to  abandon 
outworn  traditions  in  the  use  of  the  tools  of  science,  such  as  mere  methods 
of  description  and  classification,  and  to  conserve  a  reasonable  priority  in 
nomenclature  only. 

'  Riitimeyer,  L.,  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  der  fossilen  Pferde  und  zu  einer  vergleichenden 
Odontographie  der  Hufthiere  im  Allgemeinen.    Verh.  naturf.  Ges.  Basel,  Vol.  Ill,  no.  4,  1863. 

^  Readers  desiring  to  ascertain  the  zoological  relations  of  these  and  other  mammals 
mentioned  in  the  text  should  consult  the  index  and  appendix. 


INTRODUCTION 


9 


New  discoveries  continually  produce  new  conditions;  there  is  nothing 
more  obstructive  than  reverence  for  old  ideas  and  systems  which  have 
outlived  their  usefulness.  In  observation  the  old  motto  seems  to  have 
been  de  minimis  non  curat  lex,  to  the  effect  that  one  can  afford  to  pass 
over  the  minute;  at  the  present  time  we  cannot  be  too  exact  in  the  ob- 
servation of  the  minute.  The  vertebrate  palaeontologist  must  follow  the 
precise  methods  long  ago  introduced  by  Waagen  (1869)  among  the  in- 
vertebrates. Every  rudiment  of  a  cusp  on  a  tooth,  or  facet,  or  articulating 
surface  on  a  bone  has  its  value,  not  as  a  sign-post  on  which  to  hang  a  new 
species,  but  as  suggestive  of  the  dawn  of  some  new  character,  or  the  instru- 
ment of  some  function  or  relationship;  the  old  bird's-eye  methods  of 
comparison,  which  found  no  difference  between  the  grinding  teeth  of  a 
rhinoceros  and  of  a  lophiodon,  are  of  no  service  when  we  are  called  upon 
to  distinguish  between  many  lines  of  ancient  mammals  crowding  in  among 
the  ancestors  of  existing  mammals.  Such  methods  of  precise  observa- 
tion we  owe  largely  to  the  influence  of  Riitimeyer  and  Kowalevsky. 

Influence  of  American  Discovery 

The  first  mammalian  remains  from  the  Badlands  of  the  Great  Plains 
of  the  West,  east  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,  consisted  of  fragments  of  the 
lower  jaw  of  the  enormous  quadruped,  later  called  Titanotherium,  which 
was  described  by  Dr.  Hiram  A.  Prout  of  St.  Louis  in  the  American  Journal 
of  Science  in  1846.  We  now  know  that  this  specimen  was  of  Lower  Oli- 
gocene  Age.  Travelers  connected  with  the  American  Fur  Company 
brought  other  specimens  East  in  1846  and  1847.  In  1849  Dr.  David  Dale 
Owen  and  Dr.  John  Evans  explored  the  ^'Mauvaises  terres,"  and  brought 
back  collections  which  were  first  described  in  Owen's  Geological  Report 
of  1852.  This  attracted  a  great  deal  of  attention,  and  led  to  the  prolonged 
explorations  of  Ferdinand  Vandeveer  Hayden  (1829-1887)  and  Fielding 
Bradford  Meek  (1817-1876)  between  1853  and  1866  of  the  whole  region 
of  Nebraska  and  Dakota.  The  collections  of  mammalian  remains,  prac- 
tically all  of  which  were  new  to  science,  fell  into  the  able  hands  of  Dr. 
Joseph  Leidy  of  Philadelphia.  In  1852  he  published  his  first  volume, 
entitled  ''The  Ancient  Fauna  of  Nebraska,"  ^  and  in  1869  appeared  his 
great  work  ''The  Extinct  Mammalian  Fauna  of  Dakota  and  Nebraska,"  ^ 
which  closed  with  a  synopsis  of  all  fossil  mammalian  remains  of  North 
America  known  at  that  time.  This  monumental  work  laid  the  broad 
foundations  of  modern  study  and  must  still  be  considered  one  of  the  great- 
est single  contributions  to  the  mammalian  palaeontology  of  North  America. 

*  Leidy,  The  Ancient  Fauna  of  Nebraska,  or  a  Description  of  Remains  of  Extinct  Mam- 
malia and  Chelonia.    Smithson.  Contrib.  to  Knowl.,  Vol.  VI,  1852. 

2  Leidy,  J.,  The  Extinct  Mammalian  Fauna  of  Dakota  and  Nebraska,  including  an 
Account  of  some  Allied  Forms  from  other  Localities,  together  with  a  Synopsis  of  the  Mam- 
malian Remains  of  North  America.    Philadelphia,  1869. 


10 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Subsequent  research  has  shown  that,  considering  the  great  difficulties  under 
which  they  labored,  Hayden  and  Leidy  formed  a  surprisingly  accurate 
conception  of  the  geologic  or  time  succession  of  mammalian  forms  in  Oligo- 
cene,  Miocene,  and  Pliocene  times.  Hayden's  explorations  of  1869-1870 
in  the  interior  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  region  led  to  the  discovery  of  the 
Bridger  deposits  of  Middle  Eocene  Age,  the  rich  extinct  mammalian  life  of 
which  was  monographed  by  Leidy  in  1873. 

The  complete  geologic  succession  of  the  vast  ancient  life  of  the  Amer- 
ican continent  was  destined  to  demonstrate  the  evolution  law.  The  brief 
narrative  of  this  succession,  as  known  to-day,  forms  one  of  the  chief  sub- 
jects of  the  present  volume.  Between  1871  and  1873  Marsh  and  Cope 
took  up  the  labors  of  Leidy  in  the  exploration  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  ba- 
sins, rich  in  fossil  life.  The  first  ten  years  of  their  work  not  only  modified 
our  ideas  of  the  descent  of  the  mammals,  but  brought  together  data  for 
a  number  of  important  generalizations :  for  Marsh's  demonstration  ^  that 
the  size  of  the  brain  was  an  important  factor  in  survival,  that  most  small- 
and  smooth-brained  mammals  early  became  extinct;  for  Cope's  proof 
that  the  hoofed  animals  sprang  from  types  with  simple,  five-toed  feet,  rest- 
ing largely  upon  the  sole,  and  with  conic  cusps  on  the  grinding  teeth. 

Finally  between  1879  and  1883  came  Cope's  demonstration 
that  the  grinding  teeth  of  most  of  the  mammals  had 
passed  through  a  triangular  form  in  the  early  Eocene 
period,  in  which  three  tubercles,  or  a  tritubercular  struc- 
ture, is  apparent. 

Primitive  and  "progressive  forms  of  teeth.  —  This  dis- 
covery by  Cope  ^  of  primitive  and  widespread  trituberculy 
in  the  molar  or  grinding  teeth  was  a  great  step  forward. 
We  find  in  the  previous  descriptive  works  or  odontog- 
raphies of  Cuvier  and  of  Owen  not  even  a  suspicion  of 
the  existence  of  a  common  or  primitive  type  of  grinding 
tooth  from  which  the  highly  specialized  ''cheek  teeth"  of 
the  different  mammals  have  evolved.  At  the  present  time 
we  may  compare  the  molars  of  the  clawed  and  the  hoofed 
mammals  with  each  other  because  they  sprang  from  a 
common  tritubercular  type,  just  as  we  compare  the  hand 
or  foot  of  man,  of  the  horse,  the  cat,  because  we  know 
they  sprang  from  a  common  five-fingered  type.  Nearly  all  kinds  of 
mammals,  hoofed  quadrupeds,  monkeys,  carnivores,  insectivores,  rodents, 
marsupials,  are  found  building  up  their  grinding  teeth  on  the  basis  of  this 
primitive  tritubercular  ancestral  form.^    We  thus  have  a  key  to  the  com- 

^  Marsh,  O.  C,  Dinocerata.  A  Monograph  of  an  Extinct  Order  of  Gigantic  Mammals.  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.,  Vol.  X,  Washington,  1884,  p.  58  fol.;  see  also  Marsh,  74  and  '85  in  Bibliography. 

2  Cope,  E.  D.,  On  the  Trituberculate  Type  of  Molar  Tooth  in  the  Mammalia.  Pal.  Bull. 
no.  37,  Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XXI,  Dec.  7,  1883,  pp.  324-326. 

3  See  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Evolution  of  Mammalian  Molar  Teeth,  8vo.    New  York,  1907. 


pa.  me. 
*  / 


Fig.  1.  —  Primi- 
tive stage  in  tooth 
development.  Typ- 
ical tritubercular, 
upper  molar  of  the 
mesonychid  creo- 
dont,  Triisodon  of 
the  Basal  Eocene, 
Puerco  Formation. 
After  Osborn,  1907. 


INTRODUCTION 


11 


parison  of  the  molar  teeth  of  nearly  all  mammals,  and  similar  names  can  be 
given  to  the  cusps  in  the  upper  and  lower  molar  teeth  respectively. 

This  tritubercular  molar  owed  its  survival  to  three  features:  (1)  the 
original  advantage  of  its  triangular  form  as  expressed  in  the  term  'Hrigo- 
nodont"  proposed  by  Rtitimeyer;  (2)  the  possibility  of  free  addition  of 


Fig.  2.  —  Types  of  superior  molar  or  grinding  teeth.  A.  Bunodont,  all  conic,  Hyra- 
cotherium.  B.  Selenodont,  all  crescentic,  Protoceras.  C.  Lophodont,  all  crested,  Rhinoceros. 
D.  Buno-selenodont,  conic-crescentic,  Palceosyops.  E.  Lopho-bunodont,  crested-conic, 
Tapirus.    F.  Lopho-selenodont,  crested-crescentic,  Anchitherium. 

new  cusps  as  worked  out  in  detail  by  Cope,  Osborn,  Scott,  Wortman, 
Schlosser,  and  others;  and  (3)  the  wonderful  independent  modeling  of 
these  cusps  either  singly  or  in  pairs  into  different  forms,  some  remaining 
rounded,  or  bunoid,  others  becoming  elongate,  crested,  or  lophoid,  others 
becoming  crescentic  or  selenoid,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying  figures 
(Fig.  2). 

Taking  the  Greek  derivatives  (3ovv6^  (hillock),  \6cf>o^  (crest),  o-eXrjvYj 
(moon,  i.e.  crescent),  and  joining  them  with  the  word  oSovs  (tooth),  we 
have  very  simple  names  for  the  various  types  of  teeth  in  which  all  the 
tubercles  passed  through  the  same  form.  These  teeth  may  be  either  buno- 
dont, lophodont,  or  selenodont.  There  is  a 
marvelous,  independent,  adaptive  evolution 
of  each  cusp;  one  cusp  may  remain  rounded 
while  its  neighbors  become  crescentic,  and 
we  thus  find  compound  patterns,  which  may 
be  given  the  somewhat  cacophonous  terms 
''bunoselenodont,"  or  in  the  case  of  the 

conic-crested  form,  ''bunolophodont."  ^     „         ■,^  r        x  i.  • 

'  ^  Fig.  3.  —  Skull  of  the  rat,  showing 

Diprotodonty,  or  the  enlargement  of  a   extreme  diprotodonty  of  the  upper 

pair  of  cutting  teeth,  is  an  adaptation  which        lower  incisor  teeth.   After  Mat- 

.  ,       ,      .      .       thew,  1905. 

arises  frequently  and  independently  m  m- 

sectivores,  rodents,  monkeys,  tillodonts,  primitive  edentates,  and  other 
orders.  Sometimes  it  is  the  middle  pair  of  incisor  teeth,  sometimes  the 
second  pair  which  is  enlarged,  while  the  surrounding  teeth  are  reduced. 


12 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


The  enlarged  teeth  are  often  so  similar  as  to  be  very  misleading  in  regard 
to  relationship  or  affinity. 

As  regards  the  elongation  of  the  teeth  the  parallel  with  that  of  the  feet 
is  very  close  indeed,  for  we  distinguish  the  following  kinds  of  teeth: 

Brachyodont,  primitive  short-crowned  teeth,  with  simple  roots  and 
simple  cusps,  and  usually  with  simple  conic,  crescentic,  or  crested 
cusps,  as  of  the  pig,  deer,  and  mastodon. 

Hypsodont,  elongate  grinding  teeth,  as  of  the  ox,  horse,  and  elephant. 

Just  as  the  power  of  an  herbivorous  animal  to  move  long  distances  or 
to  take  wide  excursions  in  search  of  food  or  to  move  rapidly  in  escaping 
its  enemies  is  brought  about  through  changes  in  the  number  of  digits,  and 
in  the  form  and  proportions  of  the  feet,  so  the  power  of  an  animal  to  live  a 

long  period  of  time  and  to 
assimilate  the  harder  kinds  of 
food  is  increased  through 
changes  of  form  and  propor- 
tion in  the  teeth.  The  hypso- 
dont horse  attains  over  thirty 
years  of  age;  the  hypsodont 
elephant  lives  about  a  hundred 
years. 

Elongate  teeth  may  be  far 
more  highly  perfected  me- 
chanically and  have  more 
complicated  crowns,  consist- 
ing of  three  different  dental 
tissues  of  three  degrees  of 
density,  namely,  enamel,  den- 
tine, and  cement,  thus  afford- 
ing three  degrees  of  resistance, 
and  always  presenting  a  rough 
or  uneven  grinding  surface. 
The  passage  from  short- 
crowned  to  long-crowned  teeth  also  marks  the  passage  from  browsing 
forms,  living  on  softer  kinds  of  food,  to  the  grazing  forms,  living  on  the 
harder  kinds  of  food,  as  well  as  from  more  short-lived  animals  to  more 
long-lived  animals.  Here  again  we  see  that  the  elongation  of  the  teeth  like 
the  elongation  of  the  feet  is  eminently  adaptive.  For  example,  where 
physiographic  changes  reduce  the  softer  herbage  and  increase  the  harder 
grasses,  and  separate  the  favorable  feeding  grounds  as  well  as  the  drinking 
pools,  the  change  of  proportion  is  principally  in  the  direction  of  elongation 
of  the  feet,  the  teeth,  and  the  skull  respectively,  or  dolichopody  (feet), 
hypsodonty  (teeth),  and  dolichocephaly  (skull). 


D 


Fig.  4.  —  Tooth  proportions,  or  brachyodonty  and 
hypsodonty.  B.  Brachyodont,  short-toothed,  Masto- 
don americanus.  A.  Hypsodont,  long-toothed,  £'^ep/ias 
meridionalis.  D.  Brachyodont,  short-toothed,  Anchi- 
therium  aurelianense.  C.  Hypsodont,  long-toothed, 
Equus  caballus. 


INTRODUCTION 


13 


Primitive  and  progressive  foot  structure.  —  It  is  surprising  how  little 
attention  was  given  to  the  feet  of  mammals  between  the  time  of  Cuvier  and 
that  of  Gaudry,  Kowalevsky,  Huxley,  and  Cope.  Cuvier  himself  had 
assembled  a  lot  of  wholly  unrelated  animals  as  ^'Les  Pachydermes"  because 
of  the  common  possession  of  a  thick  skin;  this  was  virtually  a  new  desig- 
nation for  the  assemblage  termed  'Multungula'  by  Storr  (1780).  In  this 
unnatural  assemblage  consorted  the  thick-skinned  rhinoceroses,  hippo- 
potami, and  other  quadrupeds.  De  Blainville  (1816)  founded  the  modern 
classification  of  the  ungulates  by  observing  the  number  of  digits  in  the 
feet  and  separating  certain  of  the  Herbivora  into  two  classes,  '^a  doigts 
pairs"  and  '^a  doigts  impairs,"  or  with  an  even  and  an  odd  number  of  toes 
respectively.  This  suggested  to  Owen  (1847)  the  separation  of  the  Artio- 
dactyla  (a/orto?,  even  in  number,  SaKTvAo?,  finger)  from  the  Perissodactyla 
(irepta-aos,  odd  in  number,  SaKrvAos,  finger),  including  the  sharp  separation 
between  hippopotami  with  their  even  toes  and  rhinoceroses  with  their  odd 
number,  into  two  distinct  orders.  Thus  attention  was  concentrated  upon 
the  numerical  changes  in  the  evolution  of  the  feet,  and  Huxley,  Kowalevsky, 
and  Cope  more  or  less  independently  reasoned  »that  hoofed  animals  with 
one,  two,  three,  and  four  toes  must  have  sprung  from  more  primitive  forms 
with  five  toes.  The  number  of  digits,  therefore,  became  an  important 
means  of  distinguishing  the  adaptive  stages  of  evolution  in  many  differ- 
ent fines  of  mammals,  as  follows: 

Pentadactyl,  primitive  five-toed  mammals  such  as  Phenacodus. 
Tetradactyl,  mammals  with  four  digits  such  as  Hippopotamus  and  dog. 
Tridactyl,  mammals  with  three  digits  such  as  Rhinoceros  and  early  stages 

in  the  evolution  of  the  horse. 
DiDACTYL,  mammals  with  two  digits  such  as  the  deer  and  cattle. 
MoNODACTYL,  mammals  with  one  digit,  typified  by  the  horse. 

It  was  also  observed  that  the  simple  number  of  digits  does  not  tell  the 
whole  story  because  of  differences  of  proportion  related  to  the  amount  of 
service  which  each  digit  renders  to  the  animal.  Thus  in  an  early  stage  in 
the  evolution  of  the  horse  there  are  three  full-sized  digits  and  a  short  ad- 
ditional digit  in  process  of  degeneration.  The  former  rest  on  the  ground 
and  are  functional  or  in  active  service;  the  latter  is  suspended  at  the 
side  of  the  foot,  has  lost  contact  with  the  ground,  and  is  becoming  vestigial. 
This  gave  rise  to  a  distinction  between  functional  tridactylism,  in  which 
'all  three  toes  are  of  service,  and  numerical  tridactylism,  as  in  Hipparion, 
where  the  middle  toe  is  doing  all  the  work,  and  the  two  side  toes  are  dan- 
gling above  the  ground.  De  Blainville's  (1816)  and  Owen's  (1847)  sepa- 
ration of  the  even-  and  odd-toed  hoofed  animals  led  to  the  observation 
that  the  main  weight  of  the  animal  either  passes  through  the  central  digit, 
as  in  the  rhinoceros  and  horse  (Perissodactyla)  or  between  the  two  cen- 


14 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


tral  digits  ( Artiodactyla) .  This  difference  was  expressed  in  other  words 
by  Marsh  ^  by  the  terms  Mesaxonia  and  Paraxonia  respectively. 

The  pose  or  angle  of  the  foot  as  a  whole,  including  the  wrist  and  ankle 
joints  (carpals  and  tarsals),  the  intermediate  bones  (metacarpals  and 
metatarsals),  and  the  terminal  joints  (phalanges  and  ungues),  began  to 


Fig.  5.  —  Evolution  from  pentadactyl  to  monodactyl  condition  as  illustrated  in  the  foot  of 
the  horse  (above)  ;  comparison  with  the  human  hand  (below).  A.  Pentadactyl,  hypothetical 
ancestral  stage.  B.  Tetradactyl,  Protorohippus  stage.  C.  Tetradactyl-tridactyl,  Epihippus 
stage  (three  toes  resting  on  the  ground,  one  raised  slightly  above).  D.  Tridactyl,  Mesohippus 
stage.    E.  Monodactyl,  Equus  stage. 

attract  increasing  attention.  In  primitive  forms  it  was  seen  that  the  entire 
liand  and  foot  is  stretched  along  the  ground,  as  in  the  bear  and  in  the  foot 
of  man,  while  in  the  opposite  extreme  the  foot  rests  on  the  nail  or  on  the 
very  extremity  of  the  last  phalanx,  as  in  the  hoof  of  the  horse.  Thus  in  the 
gradus,  or  step,  a  series  of  important  intermediate  stages  are  observed,  as 
follows : 

Plantigradism,  where  the  entire  sole  of  the  hand  or  foot  rests  upon  the 

ground,  as  in  the  hind  foot  of  the  bear. 
Semi-plantigradism,  where  half  the  sole  rests  upon  the  ground,  as  in  the 

fore  foot  of  the  bear. 

'  Marsh,  O.  C,  Dinocerata.  A  Monograph  of  an  Extinct  Order  of  Gigantic  Mammals. 
U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Vol.  X,  Washington,  1884,  p.  186. 


INTRODUCTION 


15 


DiGiTiGRADiSM,  where  the  foot  rests  only  on  the  rows  of  phalanges,  as  in 
the  dog  and  cat. 

Unguligradism,  where  the  foot  rests  only  upon  the  end  phalanx,  as  in  the 

horse  and  the  deer. 
Rectigradism,  where  the  foot  is  immobile  and  the  entire  weight  rests 

on  a  large  pad,  as  in  the  elephant. 

Reduction  of  digits.  —  This  led  to  the  further  generalization  that  all 
primitive  types  of  mammals  were  pentadactyl  or  five-fingered  and  planti- 
grade, or  with  the  sole  of  the  hand  and  foot  resting  upon  the  ground.  From 
this  it  was  an  easy  step  to  perceive  that  the  raising  of  the  wrist  and  ankle 
joints  from  the  ground  in  the  passage  from  plantigradism  to  digitigradism 
also  tended  to  raise  the  shorter  digits,  namely,  the  thumb,  or  first  digit  in 
the  hand,  and  the  big  toe,  or  first  digit  in  the  foot,  from  the  ground,  to 
render  them  useless  in  progression  and  to  initiate  their  degeneration  or 
retrogression.  It  is,  in  fact,  in  this  stage,  where  the  inside  digits  of  both 
hand  and  foot  are  in  process  of  disappearance,  that  we  discover  most  hoofed 
mammals  of  the  early  geological  periods.  The  loss  of  one  digit  after  another 
occurs  under  what  is  known  as  the  law  of  digital  reduction.  Thus  the 
passage  from  five  to  four,  to  three,  to  two,  to  a  single  digit  is  a  gradual 
process,  not  the  work  of  a  century  or  centuries,  but  of  vast  periods  of  time. 

Perfection  of  joints  and  facets.  —  Another  and  more  intricate  law  in  the 
science  of  foot  evolution  concerns  the  changes  in  the  articulations,  or  facets, 
between  the  bones  of  the  wrist  and  ankle  and  the  bones  of  the  metapodium 
on  which  they  rest. 

Kowalevsky  first  directed  close  attention  to  the  fact  that  all  these  facets 
and  articulations  are  altered  while  the  wrist  or  ankle  is  in  process  of  be- 
coming raised  from  the  ground,  while  the  digits  are  being  reduced,  and 
while  the  weight  is  being  concentrated  more  and  more  on  the  central  digits 
and  taken  from  the  lateral  digits.  This  shifting  of  the  joints  or  facets  was 
found  by  Kowalevsky,^  Cope,^  Riitimeyer,^  and  Osborn  ^  to  produce  an 
interlocking  system,  so  that  the  bones  are  placed  above  each  other  like 
rows  of  bricks  with  '^struck"  or  alternating  joints,  and  this  alternation 
of  the  joints  with  the  closed  surfaces  is  brought  about  by  more  rapid  growth 
Ci  some  parts  of  the  foot  bones  than  of  other  parts,  producing  at  every 
stage  a  perfect  mechanism,  calculated  to  resist  the  enormous  strains  which 
come  upon  the  foot,  especially  in  the  rapid  movements  of  swift  running 

^  Kowalevsky,  Monographie  der  Gattung  Anthracotherium  Cuv.  und  Versuch  einer 
natiirlichen  Classification  der  fossilen  Hufthiere.    Paldontographica,  Vol.  XXII,  1873. 

^  Cope,  The  Vertebrata  of  the  Tertiary  Formations  of  the  West.  Rept.  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv. 
Terr.,  Vol.  Ill,  Washington,  1884;  also.  The  Perissodactyla,  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XXI,  1887. 

^  Riitimeyer,  L.,  Uber  einige  Beziehungen  zwischen  den  Saugethierstiimmen  Alter  und 
Neuer  Welt.   Abh.  Schweiz  paldont.  Ges.,  Vol.  XV,  pp.  1-151,  Zurich,  1888. 

*  Osborn,  The  Evolution  of  the  Ungulate  Foot,  Pt.  IV  of  The  Mammalia  of  the  Uinta 
Formation  by  Scott  and  Osborn.  Trans.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  n.s.  Vol.  XVI,  Aug.  20,  1889, 
pp.  531-569. 


16 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


types  of  hoofed  animals.  Another  device  of  nature  in  the  same  direction 
is  the  development  of  tongue-and-groove  joints  out  of  rounded  or  universal 
joints,  bringing  about  precision  of  movement  and  preventing  lateral  dislo- 
cation. All  these  steps  seem  to  have  a  distinct  survival  value,  that  is,  to 
affect  mammals  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  Thus  Kowalevsky  was  the 
first  to  point  out  that  certain  quadrupeds  with  less  perfected  foot  mechanisms 
were  gradually  replaced  by  others  with  more  perfected  foot  mechanisms. 

A  lowly  organized  or  primitive  hoofed  mammal  is  found  to  be  full  of 
mechanical  defects  when  its  feet  are  applied  to  the  severe  tests  of  rapid 
progression;  it  is  condylarthrous,  'ball  and  socket'  or  loose-jointed,  it  is 
plantigrade,  or  clumsy,  or  slow-gaited,  it  is  pentadactyl,  or  with  five  fingers 


Fig.  6.  —  Foot  proportions  among  rhinoceroses.  A.  Brachypody,  short-footed,  T'eZeoceras 
fossiger.  B.  Mesatipody,  medium-footed,  Aphelops  malacorhinus.  C.  Mesatipody,  medium- 
footed,  Rhinoceros  unicornis.    D.  Dolichopody,  long-footed,  Colodon  longipes. 

still  resting  on  the  ground,  it  is  often  taxeopod,  or  with  imperfectly  alter- 
nating joints  in  the  different  rows  of  bones  in  the  hands  and  feet.  As  a  rule 
also  it  is  short-footed,  or  brachypod. 

In  short,  all  the  ancestral  adaptations  to  ambulatory,  tree,  and  rock- 
climbing  purposes  must  be  abandoned  and  new  adaptations  acquired. 

Like  the  teeth,  the  feet  evolve  partly  through  changes  of  proportion 
as  well  as  through  reduction,  or  loss  of  useless  parts.  Thus  the  passage 
from  slow-walking,  or  ambulatory  types,  to  swift-moving,  or  cursorial  types, 
is  almost  invariably  marked  by  elongation  of  the  primitively  short  hand 
and  foot.    This  gives  us  another  series  of  stages,'  as  follows: 

Mesatipody,  mean,  or  intermediate  foot  forms,  as  of  the  tapir. 
Brachypody,  extremely  short  feet,  as  of  the  elephant. 
Dolichopody,  elongate  foot  forms,  as  of  the  horse. 

Altogether  the  changes  of  foot  structure  in  the  hoofed  animals  con- 
stitute a  fascinating  study  and  are  easily  comprehended.  Through  these 
changes  the  prehensile  and  locomotor  powers  of  the  limbs  of  animals  are 


INTRODUCTION 


17 


profoundly  affected  and  diversified,  and  numbers  of  types  are  evolved,  as, 
for  example : 

Ambulatory,  slow-moving,  mostly  primitive. 
Cursorial,  swift-moving,  secondary. 
Saltatorial,  swift-moving,  leaping,  secondary. 
FossoRiAL,  slow-moving,  digging,  and  burrowing. 
Natatorial,  amphibious,  aquatic,  swimming. 
Arboreal,  slow-moving,  tree-climbing. 
Glissant,  gliding,  as  in  the  'flying'  squirrel. 
Volant,  flying,  as  in  the  bat. 


Primitive  and  progressive  skull  structure.  —  Changes  in  tooth  proportion 
and  foot  proportion  may  or  may  not  be  accompanied  by  changes  of  propor- 


FiG.  7.  —  Skull  proportions  among  Titanotheres.  A.  Brachycephaly,  short-headed, 
Paloeosyops  major.  B.  Mesaticephaly,  medium-headed,  Manteoceras  manteoceras.  C.  Doli- 
chocephaly,  long-headed,  Dolichorhinus  cornutus. 


tion  in  the  skull.  Here  again  we  find  that  there  are  three  general  stages 
in  the  anatomy  of  the  skull  of  mammals,^  and  that  the  descriptive  terms  are 
the  same  as  those  which  were  introduced  long  ago  (1842)  in  the  anatomy 
of  the  human  skull  by  the  great  Swedish  anthropologist,  Anders  Adolf 
Retzius  (1796-1860),  namely: 

• 

Mesaticephaly,  an  intermediate  or  partly  elongated  condition,  charac- 
teristic of  many  intermediate  and  primitive  forms,  such  as  the  tapir. 

^  See  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Dolichocephaly  and  Brachycephaly  in  the  Lower  Mammals.  Bull. 
Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XVI,  Art.  VII,  Feb.  3,  1902,  pp.  77-89. 


18 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Brack YCEPHALY,  a  short,  broad-headed  condition  of  the  skull,  charac- 
teristic of  some  progressive  forms, 

DoLiCHOCEPHALY,  an  elongate  condition  of  the  skull,  especially  of  the 
anterior  or  facial  portion  in  front  of  the  eyes,  as  in  the  horse  (Equus) 
and  in  the  moose  (Alces). 

The  rationale  of  these  changes  of  proportion  is  very  different  in  dif- 
ferent skulls,  so  that  we  never  can  assume  that  long-headedness  is  due 
to  any  single  cause.  In  the  horse  long-headedness  is  a  very  ancient  char- 
acter; even  the  earliest  known  four-toed  horses  have  quite  elongate,  or 
at  least  mesaticephalic,  skulls.  The  progressive  elongation  of  the  skull 
in  horses  is  apparently  for  two  purposes:  first,  to  facilitate  reaching  the 
ground  with  the  row  of  incisor  or  cropping  teeth;  second,  and  no  less 
important,  to  allow  space  in  front  of  the  eye  sockets  for  the  great  rows  of 
elongate,  or  hypsodont,  grinding  teeth,  the  marvelous  dental  battery  of 
the  horse.  We  might .  assume  from  these  facts  that  long-headedness  is 
correlated  with  long  teeth,  but  the  giant  pigs  (elotheres)  have  still  longer 
and  narrower  skulls  than  the  horse,  yet  all  the  teeth  are  brachyodont,  or 
short-crowned.  Again,  the  elephant  has  extremely  elongate  or  hypsodont 
molar  teeth,  yet  it  possesses  also  the  shortest,  or  most  brachycephalic, 
skull  known  among  the  Mammalia. 

Thus  all  kinds  of  combinations  and  changes  of  proportion  occur  in  the 
evolution  of  mammals.  The  correlation  is  not  that  of  certain  fixed  types 
of  structure,  but  it  is  a  correlation  of  perfect  adaptations  to  different  de- 
mands brought  about  by  the  changes  in  habitat. 

II.  Mammals  and  their  Environment 

The  fitness  of  mammals  to  their  environment  takes  us  back  to  another 
line  of  thought  in  the  history  of  palaeontology,  in  which  we  ^ee  that  th(^ 
idea  of  the  evolution  of  the  environment,  as  revealed  by  the  study  of  fossils 
and  the  earth  itself,  grew  step  by  step  with  the  idea  of  the  evolution  of 
mammalian  life.  It  has  become  clear  that  there  are  two  ways  in  which 
mammals  experience  a  change  of  environment:  either  through  their  own 
migrations,  or  through  ''the  migration  of  the  environment  itself,"  as  Van 
den  Broeck  has  expressed  it,  in  the  successive  historic  changes  of  certain 
parts  of  the  earth  in  course  of  time.  Thus  if  we  imagine  a  family  of  mam- 
mals residing  continuously  in  the  region  now  known  as  South  Dakota,  the 
early  humid  environment  has  migrated  to  quite  a  different  part  of  the 
American  continent,  and  an  entirely  rtew,  arid  environment  has  come  in. 
Sometimes  mammals  and  their  environment  migrate  together.  This  was 
certainly  the  case  during  the  Glacial  Period,  when  physiographic  condi- 
tions, faunas,  and  floras  all  moved  southward  together  before  the  advance 
of  the  ice  sheet,  and  again  moved  northward  together  as  the  ice  retreated. 


INTRODUCTION 


19 


Origin  and  Migration 

The  crude  idea  of  centers  of  origin  and  dispersal,  or  migration  of  differ- 
ent kinds  of  animals,  is  a  very  ancient  one.  Even  Moses'  treatise  on  Noah's 
ark  and  the  spread  of  its  passengers  was  probably  not  the  first  attempt 
at  a  theory  of  geographic  origin  and  distribution  of  the  beasts  and  birds, 
because  this  theory  had  its  antecedents  in  the  traditions  of  Mesopotamia. 
There  is  no  question  that  these  myths  strongly  influenced  the  early  at- 
tempts at  scientific  explanation.  For  the  approaches  to  modern  views 
one  should  read  successively  the  writings  of  the  great  French  naturalists 
Buff  on  and  Cuvier.  We  find  in  Buff  on,  ^  who  wrote  in  the  middle  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  many  instances  of  anticipation  of  what  are  commonly 
regarded  as  modern  views. 

Buffon's  laws  of  animal  distribution  were  regarded  by  Cuvier  as  veri- 
table discoveries.  They  set  forth  some  of  the  fundaniental  principles  of 
geographic  distribution,  contrasting  successively  all  the  continents  (Eu- 
rope and  Asia,  or  Eurasia,  Africa,  North  America,  and  Australia),  and 
enumerating  especially  the  kinds  of  animals  which  each  possessed  and  in 
which  each  was  lacking.  In  comparing  the  new  and  old  worlds,  Buffon 
observed  that  the  quadrupeds  of  North  America  were  of  smaller  size  than 
those  of  Eurasia  and  Africa,  since  the  largest  North  American  animals 
were  inferior  to  the  elephants,  rhinoceroses,  and  hippopotami  of  Africa. 
His  second  remark  is  more  important:  it  is,  that  the  North  American 
animals  form  a  parallel  or  collateral  animal  kingdom  which  more  or  less 
duphcates  that  of  the  Old  World  with  some  important  exceptions,  and 
this  remark  may  be  construed  as  an  anticipation  of  the  law  of  evolution  of 
analogous  groups  on  large  continental  surfaces.  Every  animal,  he  re- 
marked further,  has  its  natural  country  or  habitat,  a  fact  which  links 
zoology  with  geography.  His  th'eory  of  evolution  —  and  he  certainly 
was  an  evolutionist  —  may  be  known  to-day  as  Buffon'' s  law  of  the  di- 
rect action  of  the  environment  upon  the  organism;  he  believed 
that  climate  or  environment  exerted  the  strongest  influence  in  the  modi- 
fication of  animal  forms.  Thus  he  attributed  the  shades  of  color  in  the 
skin  of  human  races  to  the  more  or  less  intense  action  of  the  sun. 

Palaeogeography,  or  the  study  of  the  past  relations  of  the  land  and  sea 
surfaces  of  the  globe,  also  had  its  beginnings  in  Buffon's  time.  In  com- 
menting on  the  giant  extinct  fauna,  the  mammoths  (Elephas  primigenius) 
and  woolly  rhinoceroses  {Rhinoceros  tichorhinus) ,  which  had  been  made 
known  in  northern  Asia  and  Siberia  through  the  explorations  of  Pallas,  and 
on  the  former  distribution  of  the  elephants  in  North  America,  Buffon 
significantly  pointed  out  that  parts  of  the  globe  now  submerged  beneath 

^  Georges  Louis  Leclerc,  Comte  de  Buffon,  1707-1788.  Edition  of  Buffon's  works  here 
referred  to  is  the  first,  Histoire  naturelle  generale  et  particuliere,  avec  la  description  du  cabi- 
net du  Roi,  1749-1789,  44  vols.,  illustrated,  including  Supplements.  Flourens's  Buffon, 
Histoire  de  Ses  Travaux  et  de  Ses  Idees,  12mo,  Paris,  1844,  is  based  on  this  edition. 


20 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  sea  were  formerly  elevated  and  furnished  land  bridges  or  connections 
between  the  continents;  he  thus  clearly  adumbrated  the  idea  of  the  migra- 
tions of  quadrupeds  and  of  the  subsequent  separation  of  faunas,  or  animal 
groups,  by  continental  depressions  and  the  submergence  of  old  migration 
routes. 

The  accompanying  map,  the  dotted  areas  on  which  represent  the  land 
bridges  which  would  emerge  through  the  elevation  of  the  continental 
borders  to  a  height  of  two  hundred  fathoms,  shows  the  reader  that  no 


Fig.  8.  —  Map  of  the  world  with  existing  outlines  and  200  fathom  lines  (dotted  areas) 
showing  former  land  connections  at  the  last  period  of  maximum  elevation. 


very  profound  or  cataclysmal  changes  are  required  to  connect  the  northern 
continents  with  each  other  and  with  the  outlying  masses.  With  the  south- 
ern continents,  South  America,  Africa,  and  Australia,  it  is  different;  an 
emergence  of  3040  meters,  or  1662  fathoms,  is  necessary  to  conniect  them 
as  shown  on  the  map  on  p.  77. 

Still  more  definitely  Buffon  placed  the  land  separation  between  the  old 
and  new  worlds  in  his  ''Sixth  Epoch,"  and  in  this  connection  clearly  brought 
out  a  theory  of  extinction  of  certain  species,  as  of  the  mammoths  of  Siberia 
and  of  North  America.  This  problem  of  the  interpretation  of  the  giant 
fossils  of  the  north  had  been  one  of  the  first  to  attract  the  attention  of 
naturalists;  Johann  Georg  Gmelin  (1709-1755)  left  it  as  a  legacy  to  Buf- 
fon, Buffon  handed  it  down  to  Blumenbach,  the  pioneer  of  vertebrate 
palaeontology  in  Germany.  Buffon  attributed  (Tome  V,  p.  172)  the  dis- 
appearance of  the  great  animals  from  the  north  partly  to  the  refrigeration 
of  the  temperature,  and  partly  to  migration  to  the  south.    Nous  ne  pouvons 


INTRODUCTION 


21 


douter  qu'apres  avoir  occupe  les  parties  septentrionales  de  la  Russie  et  de  la 
Siberie  .  .  .  ou  Von  a  trouve  leurs  depouilles  en  grande  quantite,  ils  n'aient 
ensuite  gagne  les  terres  moins  septentrionales  .  .  .  en  sorte  qu'd  mesure  que 
les  terres  du  Nord  se  refroidissoient,  ces  animaux  cherchoient  des  terres  plus 
chaudes.  .  .  .  (Tome  V,  p.  172,  Supplement.)  This  sagacious  naturalist 
also  pointed  out  that  these  monuments  of  the  extinct  life  of  the  earlier 
ages  of  the  world  were  understandable  by  comparison  of  their  structure 
with  that  of  living  animals  of  related  type;  such  comparison,  he  observed, 
demonstrates  the  existence  in  times  past  of  species  different  from  those 
actually  existing  but  closely  related  (Tome  V,  p.  154,  Mineraux). 

Cuvier  observes  that  fossils,  which  have  given  birth  to  the  theory  of  the 
earth,  have  also  furnished  it  with  its  principal  lights,  the  only  ones  which 
have  been  generally  recognized  down  to  the  present  period.  He  extends 
Buffon's  ideas,  and  gives  new  and  beautiful  theoretical  illustrations  of  the 
possible  effects  of  continental  elevation  and  depression,  which  we  may 
paraphrase  with  slight  modifications  of  his  own  language. 

Let  us  suppose,  Cuvier  remarks  in  his  Discours  (Paris,  1826,  pp.  64-65), 
that  a  great  invasion  of  the  sea  covers  with  a  mass  of  sand  or  other  deposit 
the  continent  of  Australia;  it  would  bury  the  carcasses  of  the  kangaroos, 
wombats,  dasyures,  bandicoots,  flying  phalangers,  as  well  as  of  the  duck- 
bills [Ornithorhynchus]  and  spiny  anteaters  [Echidna].  It  would  entirely 
destroy  these  species  of  animals  because  none  of  them  exist  in  any  other 
country.  Suppose,  further,  that  the  same  convulsion  of  nature  were  to 
leave  dry  the  numerous  small  straits  which  separate  Australia  from  the 
continent  of  Asia;  it  would  open  the  way  for  the  entrance  into  Australia 
of  the  elephant,  rhinoceros,  buffalo,  horse,  camel,  tiger,  and  all  other  Asiatic 
quadrupeds,  which  would  come  to  people  this  continent  in  which  they 
were  before  unknown.  If,  however,  a  naturahst  studying  these  living  ani- 
mals were  to  lay  open  the  soil  on  which  they  moved  he  would  find  the  re- 
mains of  the  buried  ancient  fauna  of  marsupials,  etc.  What  Australia 
would  become  were  such  a  hypothetical  invasion  realized,  Europe,  Siberia, 
and  a  great  portion  of  America  are  to-day,  and  it  may  some  day  be  dis- 
covered in  the  examination  of  these  countries,  and  even  of  Australia  itself, 
that  they  have  all  experienced  similar  revolutions.  To  carry  the  above 
hypothesis  still  further,  Cuvier  concludes,  after  the  Asiatic  animals  have 
migrated  into  Australia  let  us  imagine  that  a  second  revolution  destroyed 
Asia,  the  original  home  of  these  animals:  the  naturalist  who  discovered 
their  second  country  would  be  as  much  embarrassed  to  find  whence  they 
came  as  we  can  now  be  to  discover  the  origin  of  those  animals  which  are 
found  in  our  own  countries. 

Despite  these  sagacious  views,  Cuvier  was  an  exponent  of  the  cata- 
clysmal  rather  than  the  uniformitarian  school  of  transformation,  that  is, 
he  believed  in  violent  changes  in  past  times  rather  than  in  the  slow  changes 
such  as  we  observe  to-day.    Experience  has  proved  that  he  was  somewhat 


22 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


extreme  in  his  idea  of  the  total  depopulation  of  the  continents  through 
great  physical  revolutions;  we  have  no  evidence  that  such  sweeping  changes 
have  ever  occurred,  yet  he  was  not  far  from  the  truth,  and  it  is  certain  that 
in  these  specific  illustrations,  cited  above,  he  clearly  thought  out  and 
furnished  some  of  the  chief  ideas  underlying  our  modern  work,  namely, 
of  the  invasions  of  great  groups  of  mammals  through  the  forma- 
tion of  new  routes  for  migration  and  of  wide  resulting  con- 
trasts between  the  existing  and  the  extinct  forms  of  life,  or 
faunas  in  all  continental  areas. 

As  regards  mammalian  origin  and  descent  it  is  well  known  that  Cuvier 
was  not  an  evolutionist,  but  on  the  contrary  a  convinced  believer  in  special 
creation.  This  belief  kept  him  from  fully  anticipating  the  ground  work 
of  modern  palaeontology.  He  did  not  consider  the  Age  of  Mammals  as 
furnishing  the  source  of  any  animals  now  existing.  He  recorded  his  dis- 
covery of  the  mammals  of  the  Gypse  de  Montmartre  as  a  revelation  of  a 
phase  of  mammal  life  which  he  believed  to  belong  early  in  the  Age  of  Mam- 
mals (it  is  nov/  known  to  be  Upper  Eocene),  but  he  did  not  seek  among 
these  mammals  ancestors  of  existing  forms.  Although  he  believed  that 
ail  these  older  forms  had  become  extinct,  he  did  not  appeal  to  new  crea- 
tions to  produce  the  species  now  existing,  but  maintained  that  such  species 
were  existing  elsewhere,  that  is,  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  This  in- 
genious and  interesting  feature  of  Cuvier's  theories  as  to  the  replacement 
of  faunas  has  not  been  understood  sufficiently  because,  as  recently  pointed 
out  by  Deperet,^  he  has  been  credited  generally  with  a  theory  which  really 
arose  in  the  imagination  of  some  of  his  followers  rather  than  his  own, 
namely,  of  a  succession  of  extinctions  followed  by  a  succession  of  creations. 
Cuvier  rather  believed  that  an  extinction  on  one  continent  or  in  one  region 
was  followed  by  repopulation  through  migration  from  another  region,  and 
he  illustrated  his  meaning  very  clearly  in  the  hypothetical  cases  cited 
above  of  the  possible  invasion  of  the  sea  over  the  continent  of  Australia 
and  subsequent  repopulation  from  Asia. 

The  Law  of  Adaptive  Radiation 

The  law  of  evolution  even  as  crudely  perceived  by  Buffon  added  another 
element  of  fascination  to  the  ideas  of  centers  of  origin  and  of  migration, 
namely,  that  of  modification  of  mammals  under  new  and  strange  con- 
ditions of  environment.  Such  general  modification  was  about  as  far  as 
Buffon's  thoughts  went.  Those  of  Lamarck  went  farther,  namely,  to 
adaptation  to  new  conditions  of  life,  and  with  this  idea  is  coupled  his  con- 
ception of  the  principle  of  divergence  or  radiation  in  the  formation  of  differ- 
ent habits  and  the  search  for  different  kinds  of  food. 

'  Deperet,  L'evolution  des  Mammif^res  tertiaires;  rimportance  des  migrations  (Eocene). 
C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.,  Paris,  Vol.  CXLI,  Nov.  6,  1905,  p.  702. 


INTRODUCTION 


23 


Darwin  independently  and  at  a  somewhat  late  day  discovered  this 
essential  principle  as  told  in  his  Autobiography :  ^ 

"  But  at  that  time  I  overlooked  one  problem  of  great  importance;  and  it  is 
astonishing  to  me,  except  on  the  principle  of  Columbus  and  his  egg,  how  I  could  have 
overlooked  it  and  its  solution.  This  problem  is  the  tendency  in  organic  beings 
descended  from  the  same  stock  to  diverge  in  character  as  they  become  modified. 
That  they  have  diverged  greatly  is  obvious  from  the  manner  in  which  species  of 
all  kinds  can  be  classed  under  genera,  genera  under  families,  families  under  sub- 
orders and  so  forth;  and  I  can  remember  the  very  spot  in  the  road,  whilst  in  my 
carriage,  when  to  my  joy  the  solution  occurred  to  me;  and  this  was  long  after  I 
had  come  to  Down.  The  solution,  as  I  believe,  is  that  the  modified  offspring  of 
all  dominant  and  increasing  forms  tend  to  become  adapted  to  many  and  highly 
diversified  places  in  the  economy  of  nature." 

The  writer  has  termed  this  principle  of  embranchement  of  Lamarck, 
or  of  divergence  of  Darwin,  the  law  of  adaptive  radiation.'^  According  to 
this  law  each  isolated  region,  if  large  and  sufficiently  varied  in  its  topog- 
raphy, soil  climate,  and  vegetation,  will  give  rise  to  a  diversified  mam- 
malian fauna.  From  primitive  central  types  branches  will  spring  off  in 
all  directions  with  teeth  and  prehensile  organs  modified  to  take  advan- 
tage of  every  possible  opportunity  of  securing  food  and  in  adaptation  of 
the  body,  limbs,  and  feet  to  habitats  of  every  kind,  as  shown  in  the 
diagrams  on  page  24.  The  larger  the  region  and  the  more  diverse  the 
conditions,  the  greater  the  variety  of  mammals  which  will  result. 

The  most  primitive  kinds  of  mammals  were  probably  small  insec- 
tivorous or  omnivorous  forms,  therefore  with  simple,  short-crowned  teeth, 
of  slow-moving,  ambulatory,  terrestrial,  or  arboreal  habit,  and  with  short 
feet  provided  with  claws. 

In  seeking  food  and  avoiding  enemies  in  different  habitats  the  limbs 
and  feet  radiate  in  four  diverse  directions;  they  either  become  fossorial 
or  adapted  to  digging  habits,  natatorial  or  adapted  to  amphibious  and 
finally  to  aquatic  habits,  cursorial  or  adapted  to  swift-moving,  terrestrial 
progression,  arboreal  or  adapted  to  tree  life.  Tree  life  leads  as  its  final 
stage  into  the  parachute  types  of  the  flying  squirrels  and  phalangers,  or  into 
the  true  flying  types  of  the  bats.  We  have  not  thus  far  found  a  single 
instance  in  which,  a  mammal  is  known  to  have  been  transformed  from  an 
•^^^quatic  into  a  land  type;  it  is  always  the  reverse.  Nor  have  we  found  an 
instance  where  the  extreme  fossorial  or  cursorial  types  have  retrogressed 
into  slow-moving,  ambulatory,  or  terrestrial  types.  There  is  some  evi- 
dence, however,  of  arboreal  types  secondarily  taking  up  terrestrial  habits, 
as  in  the  case  of  many  of  the  terrestrial  and  cursorial  marsupial  mammals 
of  Australia,  which  are  believed  to  have  evolved  from  specialized  arboreal 

^  The  Life  and  Letters  of  Charles  Darwin,  including  an  Autobiographical  Chapter. 
Edited  by  his  son  Francis  Darwin.    London,  1888,  Vol.  I,  pp.  68-69. 

■  Osborn,  The  Law  of  Adaptive  Radiation.   Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXXIV,  1902,  pp.  353- 

363. 


24 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


LIMBS  AND  FEET 


VOLANT 


FOSSORIAL 


ARBOREAL 


Short-limb?d,  plantigrad  ^  ]  AMBULATORY 
peiitadactyl,  unguicu-  !-  or 
late  Stem  J  TERRESTRL\L 


NATATORIAL 
Amphibious 


CURSORIAL 
Digit  igrade 


Aquatic 


Unguligrade 


f  Fish 

CARNIVOROUS  |  Fl  sh 
I  Carrion 


TEETH 

OMNIVOROUS 

HERBIVOROUS 


Grass 

Herb 

Shrub 

Fruit 

Root 


MYRMECOPHAGOUS 
Dentition  reduced 


Stem  INSECTIVOROUS 


forms.  Similarly,  Matthew  ^  has  suggested  that  most  placental  mammals 
bear  evidence  of  descent  from  primitive  arboreal  ancestors. 

Similarly,  in  the  case  of  the  teeth,  insectivorous  and  omnivorous  types 
appear  to  be  more  central  and  ancient  than  either  the  exclusively  carnivo- 
rous or  herbivorous  types.  Thus  the  extremes  of  carnivorous  adaptation, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  cats,  of  omnivorous  adaptation,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
bears,  of  herbivorous  adaptation,  as  in  the  case  of  the  horses,  or  myrme- 
cophagous  adaptation,  as  in  the  case  of  the  anteaters,  are  all  secondary. 


^  Matthew,  W.  D.,  The  Arboreal  Ancestry  of  the  Mammalia.  Amer.  Natural.^ 
Vol.  XXXVIII,  nos.  445-446,  Nov.-Dec,  1904. 


INTRODUCTION 


25 


It  is  obvious  that  a  mammal  may  hunt  for  its  herbivorous  diet  in  sev- 
eral different  habitats,  in  the  water,  on  land,  on  trees,  beneath  the  surface 
of  the  earth,  and  since  the  limbs  are  the  means  of  locomotion  in  these 
habitats  a  mammal  may  be  herbivorous  and  natatorial,  like  the  manatee 
(Manatus)  and  dugong  (Halicore),  herbivorous  and  arboreal,  like  the  tree 
sloths  (Bradypodidae),  herbivorous  and  cursorial,  like  the  horses.  This 
makes  it  perfectly  clear  why  there  is  no  fixed  correlation  between  the 
structure  of  the  teeth  and  that  of  the  limbs,  and  is  another  proof  of  our 
inability  to  predict  the  form  of  one  part  of  an  animal  from  our  knowledge 
of  another  part. 

The  prolonged  operation  of  the  adaptive  radiation  of  mammals  from 
primitive  and  generalized  forms  into  specialized  and  adaptive  forms  has  in 
the  vast  periods  of  geologic  time  (see  p.  63)  evolved  or  created  the  existing 
Orders  of  Mammals. 

The  Orders  of  Mammals^ 

A  brief  review  of  the  chief  kinds  of  mammals  living  and  extinct  is 
needed  before  we  can  take  a  survey  of  their  history;  otherwise  the  reader 
will  be  lost  in  details  without  being  able  to  comprehend  general  kinds  and 
relations.  A  full  conspectus  of  the  classification  of  the  principal  types 
of  mammals  living  and  extinct  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix  of  this  volume, 
to  which  the  student  or  reader  may  make  rapid  reference  through  the 
index. 

With  reference  to  adaptive  radiation,  each  order  of  mammals  should 
be  thought  of  as  having  a  typical  mode  of  life  from  which  its  various  mem- 
bers diverge  in  various  degrees,  sometimes  so  far  as  to  take  up  an  entirely 
different  mode  of  life.  The  typical  life  is  usually  the  original,  ancestral  or 
primitive, life  which  characterized  the  order  when  it  first  diverged  from 
other  orders;  as  a  rule  it  is  the  typical  mode  of  life  which  gives  or  has 
given  the  dominant  or  profound  anatomical  characters  to  the  teeth  and 
skeleton.  For  example,  the  rodents  were  originally  herbivorous,  gnawing 
animals,  and  this  is  still  typical  of  most  rodents,  but  certain  rodents  have 
departed  so  far  from  their  ancestral  habits  as  to  become  not  only  aquatic 
but  fish-eating.  Thus  there  is  a  clear  distinction  between  the  primary, 
typical,  original,  fundamental  adaptation  of  an  order,  and  the  secondary 
or  acquired  adaptations  which  many  of  its  members  may  enter  upon  and 
thus  imitate  the  typical  adaptation  of  another  order. 

The  grand  divisions  and  subdivisions  of  the  Class  Mammalia  of  Linnaeus 
are  as  follows: 

^  For  a  review  of  the  evolutionary  relationships  of  the  principal  groups  of  mammals,  see 
Gregory,  W.  K.,  The  Orders  of  Mammals.    Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVII,  1909. 


26 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


A.    EGCx-LAYING  MAMMALS.    Very  Primitive,  Reptile-like,  or 
Transitional,  Reproducing  their  Young  from  Deposited  Eggs. 

1.  PROTOTHERIA. 

1.  Protodonta.     Very  small  and  primitive,  North  American  mam- 

mals (?)  of  the  early  Age  of  Reptiles. 

2.  MONOTREMAT A.    Of  Australia,  New  Guinea,  and  Tasmania,  highly 

specialized  Prototheria.  Xo  Pre-Pleistocene  forms  certainly  known. 
Duckbill  Platypus  (^Ornithorhynchus)  and  Spiny  Anteater  (^Echidna). 


B.    VIVIPAROUS  MAMMALS.    Of  Higher  Grade,  Bringing  Forth 
their  Young  Alive. 

II.  MARvSUPIALIA,  DIDELPHIA,  or  METATHERIA.  Pouched  Mammals, 
or  ]\Iarsupials,  typically  carrying  the  young  in  a  pouch.  Placental 
structure  rudimentary  or  primitive.  Extinct  and  living  families  of 
Australia,  South  America,  and  (opossums,  etc.)  llolarctica. 

1.  Triconodonta.    Polyprotodont  carnivorous  marsupials  (?)  of  the 

Age  of  Reptiles. 

2.  MaRSUPIALIA  PROPER. 

a.    Multituherculata.    Diprotodont,  herbivorous  marsupials  of  the  Age  of 
Reptiles  and  early  Age  of  Mammals. 

h.    Pohjprotodontia.    Polyprotodont,  carnivorous,  and  omnivorous  Mar- 
supials of  the  Age  of  Mammals.    Opossums,  dasyures,  etc. 

c.    Diprotodontia.    Diprotodont,  herbivorous  marsupials  of  the  Age  of 
Mammals.    Phalangers,  kangaroos,  etc. 


m.  PLACENTALIA,  MONODELPHIA,  or  EUTHERIA.  Mammals  nour- 
ished  before  birth  by  a  typical  placenta.  Young  never  carried  in  a 
pouch. 

A.  UNGUICULATA.  Clawed  Mammals,  adapted  to  terrestrial,  fossorial, 
arboreal,  aquatic,  cursorial,  and  volant  life.  Including  all  the  actual 
and  theoretical  primitive  forms  of  mammals,  as  well  as  many  modern- 
ized or  highly  specialized  forms. 

1.  Pantotheria  (TRITUBERCULATA) .    Small  primitive  insectivores  of 

the  Age  of  Reptiles  (Jurassic),  generally  with  numerous  cheek  teeth. 

2.  Insectivora.    Modern  insectivores,  such  as  moles,  shrews,  hedge- 

hogs, and  tenrecs. 

3.  TiLLODONTlA.    Lower  to  Middle  Eocene,  tillotheres  or  tillodonts, 

herbivorous  or  phytophagous  mammals,  in  some  respects  similar  to 
rodents. 

4.  Dermoptera.     Represented  only  by  the  "flying  lemur,"  Galeo- 

pithecus,  of  the  Oriental  region. 

5.  Chiroptera.    The  bats,  including  the  fruit  bats,  vampires,  insect- 

eating  bats,  etc. 


INTRODUCTION 


27 


6.  Carnivora. 

a.  Creodonta,  or  Primitive  Carnivora  (Eocene).    Surviving  to  the  Lower 

Oligocene. 

b.  Fissipedia,  of  Middle  Eocene  to  recent  times,  including  the  civets, 

hyaenas,  dogs,  raccoons,  bears. 

c.  Pinnipedia.    Seals,  walruses.    Known  from  Miocene  to  recent  times. 

7.  RODENTIA.    Squirrels,  beavers,  mice,  porcupines,  etc.    Lower  Eocene 

to  recent  times. 

8.  T;eniodonta,  orGANODONTA.   Probably  ancestral  or  related  to  the 

edentates.  Primitive,  with  enamel  on  the  teeth.  Basal  to  Middle 
Eocene,  North  America  only. 

9.  Edentata,  or  Xenarthr A.   True  South  American  edentates  (also 

North  America,  Eocene  and  Recent),  without  enamel  on  the  teeth, 
Eocene  to  Recent.  Sloths,  armadillos,  glyptodonts,  ground  sloths, 
ant-bears,  etc. 

10.  Ph  OLID  OTA.    Scaly  Anteaters,  or  Pangolins  (Mants),  of  India  and 

Africa.    Oligocene  to  recent  times. 

11.  Tub  ULIDEN  T  AT  A.    Aardvarks  (Onjcteropus).   Oligocene  to  recent 

times.    Africa  (recent  species),  and  Europe  (extinct  species  only). 

B.  PRIMA  TES,  primarily  adapted  to  arboreal  and  ambulatory  life,  fingers 

terminating  in  "  nails,"  rarely  in  claws.  Frugivorous,  phytophagous, 
and  omnivorous.  The  primitive  forms  are  distantly  allied  to  the 
Unguiculata-Insectivora. 

12.  Primates,  including 

a.  Lemuroidea,  lemurs,  galagos,  "  aye-aye,"  tarsier,  etc.,  and  extinct 

lejmuroids.    Eocene  to  recent  times. 

b.  Anthropoidea,  monkeys  and  apes,  including  South  American  mar- 

mosets, Old  World  monkeys,  baboons,  apes,  and  anthropoid  apes, 
also  man.    Miocene  to  recent  times. 

C.  UNGULATA,  or  Hoofed  Mammals,  herbivorous,  primarily  ambula- 

tory and  cursorial,  secondarily  aquatic  and  rarely  arboreal.  Originally 
derived  from  members  of  the  Unguiculata. 

1.    ARCTOG^AN  HOOFED  MAMMALS 
i.e.  of  North  America,  Asia,  Europe,  and  Africa. 
A.  Probably  of  Holarctic  Origin. 

13.  Condylarthra.    Arch aic,  primitive,  light-limbed,  hoofed  mammals, 

surviving  to  the  Lower  Eocene. 

14.  Am  ELY  POD  A.    Archaic,  heavy-limbed  quadrupeds,  surviving  to  the 

Upper  Eocene. 

15.  Artiodactyla.     Even-toed,    hoofed    mammals,  including  pigs, 

hippopotami,  camels,  tragulines,  deer,  giraffes,  antelopes,  sheep,  oxen, 
and  many  extinct  forms.    Lower  Eocene  to  recent  times. 


28 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


16.  Perissodactyla.    Odd-toed,  hoofed  mammals,  Lower  Eocene  to 

recent  times,  including  tapirs,  horses,  rhinoceroses,  and  the  extinct 
pal.neotheres,  titanotheres,  lophiodonts,  etc. 

17.  A  N  c  Y L  0  P  0  D  A.  Closely  related  to  the  Perissodactyla.    Middle  Eocene 

to  Upper  Miocene  times,  with  hoofs  secondarily  modified  into  claws, 
partly  for  digging. 

B.    Probably  of  A frican  Origin. 

18.  Proboscidea.    Mastodons  and  elephants.    Upper  Eocene  to  recent 

times. 

19.  Barytheria.   Including  only  one  (discovered)  large,  peculiar  herbi- 

vore, of  the  Lower  Oligocene  of  J^'orth  Africa. 

20.  SiRENiA.    Sea-cows  or  manatees,  and  dugongs.    A  highly  modified 

aquatic  offshoot  of  the  hoofed  mammals.  Upper  Eocene  to  recent 
times. 

21.  Hyracoidea.    The  dassies  and  conies  of  Africa  and  Syria,  small 

rock  and  tree-living  hoofed  animals.    Upper  Eocene  to  recent  times. 

22.  Embrit  HOPODA.    Including  the  "  Arsinoitheres  "  of  the  Upper  Eo- 

cene and  Oligocene  of  northern  Africa  only. 

2.    NEOG^AN  HOOFED  MAMMALS  OR  NOTOUNGULATA 
i.e.  of  South  America. 

23.  HOMALODOTHERIA.   Including //owa/o^/o^^m'um  and  others.  Penta- 

dactyl,  secondarily  clawed  mammals.  Teeth  in  continuous  series. 
Eocene  to  Miocene,  South  America. 

24.  TOXODONTIA.    Including  the  protypotheres,  typotheres,  nesodonts, 

and  toxodonts.  Eocene  to  Pleistocene,  South  America.  Molars  with 
flattened  outer  wall,  more  or  less  rhinocerotoid.  Incisors  often 
enlarged. 

25.  ASTRAPOTHERI A.     Including    the   rhinoceros-like  astrapotheres. 

Chiefly  Miocene,  South  America.  Upper  canines  forming  elongate 
tusks.    Limbs  pillar-like. 

26.  LiTOPTERNA.    Including  light-limbed,  three-toed,  and  virtually  one- 

toed  forms,  some  resembling  three-toed- horses.  Eocene  to  Pleistocene, 
South  America. 

27.  Pyrotheria.    Including  ' diprotodont'  forms  with  crested  masto- 

don-like molar  teeth.    Eocene,  South  America.    Limbs  pillar-like. 

D.    CETACEA,  or  whales,  aquatic  mammals  probably  derived  from  the 
Unguiculate  Division. 

28.  Zeuglodontia.    Primitive  Eocene  whales,  transitional  in  certain 

characters  to  primitive  carnivores. 

29.  Odontoceti.   Toothed  whales,  including  the  extinct  squalodonts,  the 

river  and  marine  dolphins,  the  belugas  and  narwhals,  the  beaked 
whales,  and  the  sperm  whales. 

30.  Mystacoceti.    Whalebone  whales,  includhig  the  right  whales,  the 

humpbacked  whales,  and  the  fin -backed  whales. 


INTRODUCTION 


29 


This  classification  is  followed  in  the  same  order  in  the  Appendix  of 
this  volume,  where  the  families  and  principal  genera  are  also  introduced. 

Adaptive  Radiation  and  Geography 

We  may  now  consider  the  relation  between  the  adaptive  radiation  of 
the  different  kinds  of  mammals  and  the  geography  of  past  and  present 
times. 

Adaptive  radiation,  continental}  —  The  law  of  adaptive  radiation  natu- 
rally operates  on  a  grand  scale  on  great  continents  like  Africa,  or  a  great 
insular  continent  like  Australia.  Through  its  geographic  distribution 
and  isolation  there  originate  from  common  primitive  forms  new  species, 
genera,  families,  and  even  orders  of  mammals.  It  is  most  important  to 
grasp  in  imagination  the  ideas  of  adaptive  radiation  as  applying  wherever 
there  is  a  large  theater  for  the  operation  of  this  law  and  of  a  succession  of 
radiations  in  the  course  of  the  Age  of  Mammals.  Thus  we  shall  study  the 
proofs  of  primeval  or  archaic  radiation  of  mammals  which  began  during 
the  Age  of  Reptiles  and  extended  in  all  directions  into  forms  resembling 

I  modern  insectivores,  rodents,  bears,  dogs,  cats,  monkeys,  sloths,  buno- 
dont,  and  selenodont  hoofed  mammals  and  lophodont  hoofed  mammals. 
Through  the  extinction  of  many  of  these  mammalian  branches  or  radii, 
through  the  survival  of  other  branches,  or  through  the  invasion  or 
entrance  of  branches  from  some  distant  radiation,  the  process  begins 

1  over  again. 

For  these  grand  continental  radiations  there  seems  to  be  some  ratio 
i  between  the  degree  or  extent  of  divergence  and  the  physiographic  diversity 
i  and  extent  of  the  geographic  area  in  which  the  radiation  occurs.  As 

shown  below  (p.  38)  this  connects  adaptive  radiation  with  the  science 

of  zoogeography  or  geographic  distribution. 

!      Thus  the  highly  diversified  land  area  of  Arctogaea,  comprising  Africa, 
I  Eurasia,  and  North  America,  constituted  a  vast  center  in  which  twenty- 
one  primitive  and  specialized  orders  of  mammals  radiated  from  each  other. 
In  the  more  restricted  continent  of  South  America  four  to  five  orders  of 
mammals  enjoyed  their  chief  radiation. 

Adaptive  radiation,  local?  —  Quite  as  important  although  not  on  so  grand 
a  scale  is  the  local  adaptive  radiation  in  the  same  or  neighboring  geographic 
regions  wherever  there  is  found  a  diversity  of  habitat  and  of  food  supply. 
Good  living  illustrations  of  this  local  adaptive  radiation  are  seen  in  the  geo- 
graphic distribution  in  Africa,  previous  to  the  extinction  by  man,  of  the 
"white"  or  square-lipped  rhinoceros  {Rhinoceros  simus),  which  lives  upon 
grasses  and  has  long-crowned  or  hypsodont  teeth,  and  the  "black"  or 

^  See  Osborn,  Correlation  between  Tertiary  Mammal  Horizons  of  Europe  and  North 
America:  An  Introduction  to  the  More  Exact  Investigation  of  Tertiary  Zoogeography.  Ann. 
N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.,  Vol.  XIII,  no.  1,  July  21,  1900,  pp.  49  ff. 

2  Osborn,  1902,  op.  cit. 


30 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


pointed-lipped  rhinoceros  (R.  bicornis),  with  short-crowned  or  brachyodont 
teeth,  which  browses  mainly  upon  shrubs.  The  feeding  ranges  of  these 
animals  are  not  very  far  apart.  They  do  not  subsist  upon  exactly  the 
same  food,  thus  they  do  not  compete.  The  grazing  "white  rhinoceros"  is 
long-headed,  or  dolichocephalic,  the  browsing  "black  rhinoceros"  is  rela- 
tively short-headed,  or  mesaticephalic.  The  local  adaptive  radiation  of 
the  antelopes  of  Africa  furnishes  still  more  remarkable  illustrations  of  the 
same  kind. 

Among  living  forms  we  find  long-headed  and  short-headed,  long-footed 
and  short-footed,  long-toothed  and  short-toothed  types,  living  near  each 
other,  resorting  to  the  same  water  courses  for  drink,  and  thus  liable  to  be 
killed  in  the  same  spot.  We  thus  find  a  clue  in  the  present  to  the  inter- 
pretation of  what  frequently  occurs  among  fossilized  types,  namely:  in 
the  same  geological  deposits  are  often  mingled  short-footed,  or  ambulatory, 
with  long-footed,  or  cursorial,  quadrupeds.  The  cursorial  types  subsisted 
upon  grasses  and  ranged  out  on  the  plains,  the  ambulatory  types,  chiefly 
browsers,  frequented  the  river  borders,  the  thickets,  and  the  hillsides. 
Among  the  best  illustrations  of  this  kind  is  the  difference  between  the  forest- 
living  horse  Hypohippus  and  the  plains-living  horse  Hipparion  of  the  Upper 
Miocene.    (See  pp.  243,  295.) 

Thus  local  adaptive  radiation  causes  the  splitting  up  of  mammals, 
dwelling  in  the  same  geographic  regions  into  side  branches  or  series  which 
we  call  phyla.  We  may  find  preserved  in  the  same  geologic  deposits  two, 
three,  four,  or  even  as  many  as  five  phyla  of  mammals  belonging  to  direct 
and  collateral  lines.  Local  adaptive  radiation  is,  therefore,  one  explana-^ 
tion  of  the  next  very  general  principle  of  divergence,  which  may  be  known 
as  the  polyphyletic  law. 

The  polyphyletic  law.  —  In  these  locally  separated  phyla,  sometimes 
minute,  sometimes  conspicuous  differences  are  developed.  One  of  the 
most  frequent  distinctions  is  in  adaptations  to  speed,  i.e.,  in  ambulatory 
and  cursorial  types;  another  is  in  the  proportions  of  the  skull,  whether 
brachycephalic  or  dolichocephalic;  a  third  is  in  the  proportions  of  the 
horns,  if  such  are  developed.  This  law  is  so  general  in  Oligocene  and  Mio- 
cene times  that  if  we  discover  light-limbed  types  we  may  anticipate  the 
discovery  of  their  more  slow-moving  counterparts.  Horses,  camels,, 
rhinoceroses,  the  related  titanotheres,  have  one  after  another  proved  to 
break  up  under  this  polyphyletic  law  into  grazing  and  browsing  types,, 
slender  and  heavy  types,  in  the  same  or  neighboring  geographic  regions. 

It  is  seen  at  once  that  this  polyphyly  renders  the  study  of  phylogeny,  or 
the  tracing  of  successive  lines  of  descent  among  the  mammals,  far  more 
interesting  and  at  the  same  time  far  more  difficult,  because  the  fossil  re- 
mains of  members  of  these  different  series  or  phyla  are  often  intermingled 
and  it  is  difficult  to  separate  them.  In  other  cases  the  nature  of  the  geo 
logic  deposition  affords  a  ready  key  to  the  separation  of  these  phyla.  Fo 


INTRODUCTION 


31 


example,  sediments  which  we  find  deposited  in  rivers  are  found  to  contain 
chiefly  the  forest-Uving  and  slow-moving,  browsing  types,  while  deposits 
which  were  made  on  flood  plains  contain  the  grazing,  swift-moving  types. 
Another  fact  of  great  interest  is  that  this  separation  of  the  quadrupeds 
or  Herbivora  naturally  brought  about  a  separation  of  their  carnivorous 
enemies  into  powerful,  short-limbed  types  with  massive  jaws,  and  swifter, 
light-limbed  types,  with  more  slender  parts. 

Adaptation  to  alternations  of  habitat.  —  In  the  long  vicissitudes  of  time 
and  processions  of  continental  changes,  animals  have  been  subjected  to 
alternations  of  habitat  either  through  their  own  migrations  or  through  the 
migrations  of  the  environment  itself ;  that  is,  a  habitat  to  which  an  animal 
has  become  adapted  may  be  abandoned  for  a  long  period  of  time  and 
adaptations  are  acquired  for  a  second  habitat.  Following  this  again,  life 
in  the  first  habitat  may  be  resumed.  Dr.  Louis  DoUo  has  contributed  most 
brilliant  discussions  ^  to  this  alternation  of  habitat  theory  as  applied  to 
the  interpretation  of  the  anatomy  of  the  marsupial  mammals  of  Australia 
and  of  several  of  the  orders  of  reptiles  and  fishes.  Although  often  obscure, 
the  anatomical  proofs  of  adaptations  corresponding  to  alternations  of 
habitat  are  recorded  both  in  the  skeleton  and  in  the  soft  parts  of  animals. 

In  his  brilliant  essay  of  1880  Huxley  ^  suggested  that  the  primitive  forms 
of  marsupials  were  all  arboreal,  or  tree-living,  an  hypothesis  which  has 
been  abundantly  confirmed  by  the  careful  studies  of  Dollo^  and  Bensley,^ 
according  to  which  we  may  imagine  that  the  marsupials  passed  through: 
(1)  a  very  primitive  land-living,  or  terrestrial  phase,  in  which  the  limbs 
would  be  normally  developed;  (2)  an  arboreal,  or  tree-living  phase,  in 
which  some  modifications  of  the  limbs  for  grasping  of  the  boughs  would 
be  acquired,  as  illustrated  in  the  tree  phalangers  of  Australia;  (3)  a  sec- 
ondary land-living,  or  terrestrial  phase,  in  which  the  arboreal  adaptation 
of  the  limbs  is  checked  and  a  new  adaptation  to  swift-moving,  or  cursorial 
habits  is  acquired,  as  in  the  kangaroos,  in  which  the  hind  limbs  especially 
are  modified  for  leaping  and  rapid  progression;  (4)  a  return  to  arboreal 
life,  with  further  adaptations  for  tree-living  habits  in  limbs  which  have 
already  been  extremely  modified  in  course  of  the  earlier  phases,  as  in  the 
tree-kangaroos. 

Improbable  as  such  a  theory  of  alternation  of  habitats  appears  at  first 
to  be,  it  is  none  the  less  supported  by  the  strongest  anatomical  evidence 
in  the  study  of  the  feet  of  the  marsupials,  in  which  the  record  of  one  adap- 

^  Dollo,  Louis,  Les  ancetres ,  des  Marsupiaux  etaient-ils  arboricoles?  Trav.  Stat.  zool. 
Wimereux,  Tome  VII,  1899,  pp.  188-600,  pi.  XII. 

-  Huxley,  T.  H.,  On  the  Application  of  the  Laws  of  Evolution  to  the  Arrangement  of 
the  Vertebrata  and  more  Particularly  of  the  Mammalia.  Proc.  Zool.  Soc,  1880,  pp.  649-662; 
Sci.  Mem.,  Vol.  IV,  pp.  457-472. 

^  Bensley,  B.  Arthur,  On  the  Evolution  of  the  Australian  Marsupialia;  with  remarks  on 
the  Relationships  of  the  Marsupials  in  General.  Trans.  Linn.  Sac,  London  (2)  Vol.  IX,  Pt.  3, 
1903,  pp.  83-214. 


32 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


tation  on  another  is  plainly  written.  Similar,  but  less  extreme  examples 
are  known  among  the  higher  placental  mammals  of  the  northern  hemisphere, 
in  which  the  theoretical  life  phases  are  as  follows: 

1.  A  primitive  ambulatory  phase  of  a  small,  slow-moving  animal,  of 
insectivorous  or  omnivorous  type,  provided  with  claws. 

2.  The  transformation  into  an  herbivorous,  ambulatory  type  pro- 
vided with  more  or  less  well-formed  hoofs,  adapted  to  terrestrial  gait  and 
relatively  swift  movements. 

3.  Partial  adaptation  of  a  slower  gait,  accompanied  by  the  conversion 
of  the  hoofs  into  clumsy  claws,  adapted  to  digging  or  tearing  down  the 
smaller  branches  of  trees,  as  in  the  larger  sloths.  This  return  of  an  ungu- 
late or  hoofed  type  back  to  an  imitation  clawed  type,  like  that  of  the 
large  ground-living  sloths,  occurs  several  times  independently  among  the 
typically  hoofed  mammals,  the  most  extreme  case  being  that  of  the  chali- 
cotheres  (Macrotherium),  which  were  mistaken  for  giant  sloths  by  Cuvier, 
but  which  really  show  a  regression  to  an  older  habit.    (See  Fig.  130.) 

The  Law  of  Analogous  Evolution 

All  the  modes  of  change  described  above  are  divergent,  or  tending  to 
separate  animals  from  each  other.  If  the  surface  of  the  earth  were  infi- 
nitely varied,  and  if  animals  had  an  infinite  variety  of  means  of  adaptation 
to  certain  conditions,  undoubtedly  all  families  and  genera  of  mammals 
would  be  entirely  dissimilar  from  each  other,  but  in  comparing  the  habi- 
tats of  mammals  in  different  parts  of  the  earth,  among  the  diversities  of 
condition  we  find  similarities  or  repetitions  of  similar  environments:  each 
continent  has  its  mountains,  its  hillsides,  its  plains,  its  pampas,  river  borders, 
swamps,  deserts,  grazing  grounds,  forests,  its  open  country.  Again, 
the  modes  of  adaptation  of  the  epidermis,  of  the  teeth,  feet,  and  limbs  of 
mammals  are  also  limited.  The  ingenuity  of  Nature  in  adapting  animals 
to  similar  conditions  is  not  infinite;  the  same  devices  are  repeatedly  em- 
ployed by  her  to  accomplish  the  same  adaptive  ends. 

This  repetition  or  duplication  of  habitat  in  difTerent  parts  of  the  earth 
underlies  the  law  of  analogous  evolution,  because  mammals  in  their  adapta- 
tions to  similar  conditions  of  habitat  or  environment  in  different  parts 
of  the  earth  have  repeatedly  converged  or  come  together  in  their  external 
and  more  or  less  in  their  internal  form,  as  well  as  in  separate  structures. 
As  regards  the  similar  molding  of  single  organs  in  many  independent 
groups  of  mammals,  one  of  the  first  to  trace  this  law  in  detail  was  W.  B. 
Scott  in  his  masterly  paper  of  1891.^  This  process  of  the  analogous  fash- 
ioning of  animals  which  may  be  only  remotely  related  or  not  at  all  related 
to  each  other  is  known  as  homoplasy,  parallelism,  and  convergence.  Thus 

'  Scott,  W.  B.,  On  the  Mode  of  Evolution  in  the  Mammalia  and  on  some  of  the  Factors 
in  the  Evolution  of  the  Mammalia.  Jour.  MorphoL,  Vol.  V,  1891,  no.  3,  pp.  361-378,  378-402. 


INTRODUCTION 


33 


homoplasy  affects  not  only  separate  organs  but  entire  types  of  animals, 
groups  of  families  and  entire  groups  of  orders,  in  a  manner  often  extremely 
confusing  to  the  seeker  of  real  ancestral  relationships.  Analogy,  or  like- 
ness of  function,  through  its  power  to  transform  unlike  and  unrelated 
mammals  or  unlike  and  unrelated  parts  of  mammals  into  likeness,  has  per- 
formed such  miracles  that  the  inference  of  kinship  or  descent  is  often  irre- 
sistible; yet  it  is  now  well  understood  that  a  deeper  ancestral  resemblance 
may  closely  relate  animals  which  are  externally  dissimilar,  while  it  may 
just  as  widely  separate  animals  which  are  externally  similar.  Similar  desert 
or  steppe  environments  have  fashioned  the  African  jumping  hare  (Pedetes) 
of  the  Cape,  the  true  jerboas  (Dipus,  Alactaga)  of  the  steppes  of  Asia,  and 
the  American  jumping  mice  (Zapus)  into  similar  saltatorial  forms,  yet 
these  are  partly  independent  transformations.  These  jumping  mice  (Di- 
podidae)  are  paralleled  by  many  forms:  among  other  rodents  by  the 
Heteromyidae  (pocket  mice),  among  the  insectivores  by  the  elephant 
shrews  (macroscelids),  among  marsupials  by  the  rat-kangaroos  (Bettongia) , 
etc. 

Thus  analogous  adaptation  is  the  counterforce  to  divergence,  and 
strongly  tends  to  bring  mammals  together.  Nevertheless  two  very  im- 
portant exceptions  are  to  be  noted.  First,  we  rarely  find  exactly  and 
precisely  the  same  means  adopted  in  several  groups  of  organs  twice  over; 
and  second,  all  the  externally  similar  forms  may  be  found  on  close  exam- 
ination to  bear  record  of  real  internal  and  ancestral  differences.  Thus  the 
marsupial  mole  Notorydes  closely  parallels  the  placental  mole  Talpa  in 
external  appearance,  but  in  its  internal  structure  and  dentition,  in  its  mode 
of  reproduction,  and  in  its  skeleton  it  is  fundamentally  different.  Thus 
similarity  of  adaptation  can  never  be  mistaken  by  the  close  and  logical 
student  of  anatomy  for  similarity  of  descent  or  of  ancestry.  Of  these 
two  kinds  of  adaptation  and  genetic  resemblance,  analogy  is  the  woof, 
composed  of  the  horizontal  strands  which  tie  animals  together  by  their 
superficial  resemblances,  while  homogeny  (homology  as  applied  to  organs) 
is  the  warp,  composed  of  the  vertical,  hereditary  strands  which  connect 
animals  with  their  ancestors  and  their  successors. 

The  grander  applications  of  analogy  to  the  groups  of  mammals  were 
first  observed  by  Buffon  in  similar  adaptations  of  animals  evolving  on 
different  continents.  In  earlier  studies  of  the  marsupials  of  Australia 
Geoff roy  St.  Hilaire,  De  Blainville,  and  Richard  Owen  observed  the  re- 
markable analogies  between  the  ''families"  into  which  these  mammals 
are  divided  and  the  ''orders"  of  the  northern  continents.  Cope  ^  also  ob- 
served this  grand  mimicry  of  marsupial  and  placental  orders. 

More  recently  it  has  been  discovered  that  the  collective  mammals  of 
ancient  South  America,  although  of  partly  independent  stock,  in  many 
ways  mimic  the  collective  mammals  of  North  America  in  Caenozoic  times. 

^  Cope,  E.  D.,  Origin  of  the  Fittest.    Essays  on  Evolution.    8vo,  New  York,  1887. 


34 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMxMALS 


Again,  the  archaic,  or  Cretaceous  placentals  of  North  America  and 
Europe,  although  ahke  marked  by  extremely  low  organization  in  certain 
characters,  in  other  characters  more  or  less  closely  imitate  the  radiations  oi 
higher  groups  and  give  us  bear-like,  cat-like,  dog-like,  and  hyaena-like 
forms. 

Connecting  this  principle  with  the  laws  of  adaptive  radiation,  conti- 
nental and  local,  we  find  that  the  radiations  in  different  areas  are  more  or 
less  analogous  with  each  other;  that  is,  we  discover  many  analogous  radii 
or  lines  of  adaptation,  among  other  radii  which  are  entirely  dissimilar. 
When  we  come  to  compare  the  early  evolution  of  the  mammals  in  Africa, 
for  example,  we  shall  find  that  adaptation  pursued  entirely  different  lines 
from  those  pursued  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  North  America;  so  that  when 
the  African  mammals  finally  entered  Europe,  after  having  undergone  a 
long  independent  evolution  of  their  o^vn,  they  were  entirely  dissimilar  and 
foreign  in  appearance  to  any  with  which  they  competed  in  Europe. 

One  of  the  most  important  advances  of  the  past  twenty  years  has  been 
the  clear  recognition  of  this  law  of  analogy  and  of  the  pitfalls  which  it  con- 
stantly spread  for  the  earlier  students  of  mammals.  It  may  be  described 
as  the  very  'Svill  o'  the  wisp"  of  evolution,  always  tending  to  lead  the 
student  of  descent  astray. 

The  Law  of  Irreversibility  of  Evolution 

A  very  frequent  feature  of  divergent  adaptation  is  the  loss  of  parts  as 
explained  on  p.  15,  or  the  very  profound  modification  of  parts,  as  in  the 
''tree  phase,"  of  the  early  life  of  the  marsupials,  in  which  two  of  the  toes 
become  syndactylous,  or  closely  appHed  to  each  other.  These  lost  parts 
are  never  reacquired,  nor  can  such  profound  modifications  of  form  and 
proportion  be  overcome;  a  specialized  organ  can  never  again  become 
generalized,  lost  parts  are  irretrievable.  It  follows  that  while  the  condi- 
tions of  life  may  be  recurrent  or  reversible,  the  conditions  of  adaptive 
structure  are  not  reversible.  Hence  the  dictum  of  Dollo  ^  that  evolution, 
while  frequently  reversible  in  conditions  of  environment  and  adaptation, 
is  irreversible  in  animal  structure.  Each  part  that  is  lost,  like  a  tooth 
or  a  digit,  narrows  dowTi  the  possibility  of  future  plastic  adaptation  to 
new  conditions.  Nature  often  resorts  to  other  remedies  to  repair  her 
losses,  namely,  to  substitution  of  parts,  or  to  change  of  function. 

Thus  extreme  specialization  accompanied  by  the  great  enlargement 
of  certain  parts  and  the  great  reduction  of  other  parts  often  places  a 
mammal  in  a  cul  de  sac  of  structure,  where  it  is  incapable  of  further 
modification  to  meet  a  new  environment.  This  may  become  a  cause  of 
extinction. 

^  Dollo,  Les  Lois  de  I'Evolution.  Bull.  Soc.  Beige  Geol,  Paleont,  Hydrol,  Vol.  VII,  1893, 
pp.  164-166. 


INTRODUCTION 


35 


III.  Geographic  or  Space  Distribution  of  Mammals 


Zoogeography.  — We  have  seen  above  that  we  owe  to  Buffon  (p.  19ff.) 
and  Cuvier  (p.  22  ff.)  the  beginnings  of  the  fascinating  study  of  geographic 
distribution  in  past  and  present  times.  Cuvier  clearly  saw  that  the  mam- 
mals which  we  find  at  any  point  on  the  earth  to-day  may  not  have  origi- 
nated there  but  have  had  their  homes  or  centers  of  origin  at  far  distant 
points.  It  has  since  become  more  and  more  evident  that  only  through 
palaeontology  can  we  connect  the  present  distribution  of  mammals  with 
their  distribution  in  the  past,  and  set  forth  a  science  of  geographic  dis- 
tribution, or  zoogeography,  which  will  be  in  harmony  with  both  sets  of  facts. 
The  importance  of  this  more  thorough  study  of  present  and  past  geo- 
graphic distribution  was  recognized  by  Alexander  von  Humboldt.  The 
first  exact  attempt  to  compare  the  animals  and  plants  of  the  present  and 
past  in  a  single  region  was  that  of  Edward  Forbes  in  his  remarkable  paper 
on  the  geological  relations  of  the  fauna  and  flora  of  the  British  Isles.^  In 
this  paper  he  attempts  to  distinguish  those  animals  and  plants  which  are 
native  to  the  British  Isles  from  the  immigrants,  and  among  the  latter  he 
attempts  to  trace  the  sources,  or  geographic  centers  from  which  they  came. 

Many  of  the  principles  of  zoogeographic  distribution  were  clearly  un- 
derstood by  Darwin  and  set  forth  in  ''The  Origin  of  Species"  in  the  year 
1859,  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  in  the  same  year  Philip  Lutley  Sclater  ^ 
divided  the  world  into  six  zoogeographic  regions,  as  follows: 


Neog^ea 


Pal^ogjea 


Nearctic, 

Neotropical 

Palsearctic 

Indian 

Ethiopian 

Australian 


Boreal  Zone 
Tropical  Zone 
Boreal  Zone 
Tropical  Zone 
Tropical  Zone 
Austral  Zone 


North  America 
South  America 
Europe  and  Asia 
Southern  Asia 
Africa 
Australia 


We  observe  that  Sclater's  was  an  east  and  west  division,  or  a  new  and 
old  world  division,  based  on  the  lines  of  longitude  rather  than  of  latitude. 
Murray's  ''Geographical  Distribution  of  Mammals,"  published  in  1866, 
served  to  arouse  further  investigation  of  this  subject.^ 

The  six  great  regions  of  Sclater  were  subsequently  adopted  in  their  en- 
tirety by  Alfred  Russel  Wallace  in  his  great  work  of  1876,  "Geographical 
Distribution  of  Animals  .  .  . "     the  first  comprehensive  attempt  at  this 

^  Forbes,  E.,  On  the  Connection  between  the  Distribution  of  the  Existing  Fauna  and 
Flora  of  the  British  Isles  with  the  Geological  Changes  which  have  affected  their  Area.  Mem. 
Geol.  Surv.,  Vol.  I,  1846. 

^  Sclater,  P.  L.,  On  the  General  Geographical  Distribution  of  the  Members  of  the  Class 
Aves.    Jour.  Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  (ZooL),  Vol.  II,  p.  130  (1857),  1859. 

^  Murray,  A.,  The  Geographical  Distribution  of  Mammals,  London,  1866. 

4  Wallace,  A.  R.,  Geographical  Distribution  of  Animals,  with  a  Study  of  the  Relations 
of  Living  and  Extinct  Faunas  as  Elucidating  the  Past  Changes  of  the  Earth's  Surface,  2  vols. 
London,  1876. 


36 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


study.  The  fundamental  suggestion  of  Sclater  to  divide  the  world  into 
eastern  (Palaeogsea)  and  western  (Neogaea)  divisions  proved,  however,  to  be 
entirely  inconsistent  with  the  facts  of  past  and  present  distribution.  Hux- 
ley as  early  as  1868  had  proposed  a  northerly  (Arctogsea)  and  southerly 
(Notogaea)  division,  and  it  became  gradually  apparent  ^  that  the  six  great 
regions  should  be  grouped  into  larger  northern  and  southern  Realms. 
Sclater  (1874),  J.  A.  Allen  (1878),  W.  T.  Blanford  (1890),  and  Alfred 
Newton  (1893),  along  various  lines  contributed  to  the  conclusion  that 
there  are  three  such  great  primary  realms  based  on  a  north  and  south  divi- 
sion, namely:  Arctogcea,  Notogcea,  and  Neogcea.  The  regions  as  embraced 
in  these  realms  are  clearly  set  forth  in  the  accompanying  table. 


Realms 

Arctog^a 


Regions 

Holardic  Region 
Nearctic  Region 
Palcearctic  Region 

Ethiopia?!  Region 
Oriental  Region 


Geographic  Boundaries 

Europe,  Asia,  and  North  America. 

North  America  north  of  Mexico. 

Asia,  north  of  the  Himalayas,  Europe,  and 
Africa  north  of  the  Desert  of  Sahara. 

Africa,  south  of  the  Sahara  Desert. 

Asia  south  of  the  Himalayas,  including  Su- 
matra, Java,  Borneo,  and  the  PhiUppines. 


II.  NOTOG^A 


III.  Neog.ea 


Australian  Region  Australia. 
Neotropical  Region   South  America. 


This  division  into  grand  zoogeographic  Realms  and  Regions  broadly^ 
or  in  a  general  way  only,  conforms  to  the  facts  of  distribution  of  mammals 
in  past  and  present  times,  and  these  divisions  correspond  with  the  main 
events  during  the  Age  of  Mammals,  but  are  not  to  be  understood  as  being 
separated  either  by  sharp  or  continuous  barriers.  For  example,  while  Neo- 
gaea, embracing  the  single  Neotropical  Region  of  South  America,  was 
during  the  greater  part  of  the  Age  of  Mammals  separate  from  the  other 
Realms,  it  shows  at  the  beginning  unmistakable  proof  of  connection  both 
with  Notogaea  (Australia)  and  with  Arctogaea  (the  northern  hemisphere), 
and  toward  the  close  of  this  Age  it  shows  the  most  positive  evidence  of 
renewed  union  with  Arctogaea  through  a  commingling  of  the  North  and 
South  American  faunas. 

Realms.  —  Thus  it  appears  that  while  these  grand  Realms  were  the 
main  centers  of  the  adaptive  radiation  of  the  orders  of  mammals,  the  orders 
were  not  confined  to  these  realms,  but  during  periods  of  land  connection 
certain  members  strayed  into  adjacent  realms;  that  each  realm,  there- 
fore, contains  a  mingling  of  its  original,  or  autochthonous  types  and  its 

^  The  history  of  opinion  on  this  subject  is  fully  set  forth  in  Lydekker's  invaluable  work, 
A  Geographical  History  of  Mammals,  1896,  chap.  i.  Additional  interesting  details  are  found 
in  R.  F.  Scharff  s  History  of  the  European  Fauna  (1899). 


INTRODUCTION 


37 


migrant,  or  derived  types.  Thus  Arctogcea,  containing  the  broadest  and 
most  highly  diversified  land  areas  of  North  America,  Asia,  Europe,  and 
Africa,  appears  as  the  center  in  which  twenty-one  primitive  and  special- 
ized orders  of  mammals  radiated  from  each  other.  In  the  southern  Realm 
of  Neogcea,  more  restricted  geographically,  four  or  five  orders  of  mammals 
enjoyed  their  chief  radiation.  During  the  larger  part  of  the  Age  of  Mam- 
mals Notogsea  (Australia,  New  Zealand,  and  Tasmania),  shut  off  by  the 
sea  from  Arctogsea,  witnessed  the  highly  diversified  radiation  of  the  Mar- 
supials and  of  the  declining  group  of  Monotremes. 

Regions  in  the  zoogeographical  sense  may  be  thought  of  as  more 
restricted  areas  of  adaptive  radiation  of  mammals  which  have  been  isolated 


Fig.  9.  —  Chief  zoogeographic  Realms  and  Regions  of  the  world  on  the  Sclater- 

Huxley  system. 


from  each  other  for  shorter  periods  either  by  climatic  barriers,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  arctic  conditions  of  the  north,  or  by  great  physical  barriers, 
such  as  masses  of  water  or  desert  sands.  Whereas  the  Realms  are  the 
centers  in  which  orders  originate.  Regions  in  general  are  chiefly  distin- 
guished by  the  adaptive  radiation  of  families  of  mammals.  This,  while 
broadly  true,  is  not  universally  true,  for  the  Ethiopian  Region  (Africa 
south  of  the  Sahara)  appears  to  have  given  birth  during  early  Tertiary 
times  to  several  orders  of  mammals,  namely:  Barytheria,  Embrithopoda, 
Hyracoidea,  Proboscidea,  and  perhaps  the  Sirenia  and  Cetacea.  The  two 
marine  orders  of  mammals,  last  named,  are  also  attributed  to  the  hypothet- 
ical 'Atlantis,'  or  atlantic  archipelago  connecting  Africa  and  South  America 
(see  J.  W.  Gregory,  Eigenmann,  and  others). 

It  must  be  very  clearly  understood,  therefore,  that  all  the  modern 
zoogeographic  divisions,  Realms,  Regions,  sub-Regions,  etc.,  are  chiefly 


38 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


used  for  purposes  of  convenience,  that  they  express  the  truths  of  geographic 
distribution  in  their  grander  outHnes  but  not  in  their  details. 

In  the  shifting  geographic  and  physiographic  scenes  of  the  enormously 
protracted  Age  of  Mammals  the  lines  of  division  are  now  sharpened  by 
continental  depression  and  separation,  by  isolation  and  insulation,  and 
again  blended  by  continental  elevation  or  by  the  formation  or  renewal 
of  migration  routes,  and  by  the  opportunities,  of  which  the  mammals  are 
prone  to  take  immediate  advantage,  to  extend  their  geographic  range  by 
migration. 

Thus  we  shall  see  in  past  times  the  Nearctic  and  Palaearctic  now  blend 
into  the  Holarctic,  and  again  separate  more  widely  than  at  present.  Again, 
we  shall  see  the  Ethiopian,  Holarctic,  and  Neotropical  blending  far  more 
closely  than  "they  do  at  present.  In  truth,  there  can  he  no  uniform  system 
of  past  and  present  distribution,  as  the  present  writer  once  fondly  hoped. 
Every  geologic  Era,  every  Epoch,  and  even  every  Period  has  its  own  laws 
of  distribution. 

Migration  Routes  and  Barriers 

Checking  the  tendencies  of  mammals  to  migrate  are  inconspicuous 
barriers  of  many  kinds  in  the  living  world  and  in  animals  themselves,  as 
well  as  the  more  obvious  and  conspicuous  physiographic  and  climatic 
barriers.  Mountain  chains,  broad  rivers,  stretches  of  sea,  of  desert,  or  of 
forest,  which  freely  facilitate  the  migration  of  some  kinds  of  mammals  and 
form  absolute  checks  to  the  migration  of  other  kinds,  present  barriers  no 
more  formidable  than  those  indirectly  brought  about  by  certain  degrees 
of  moisture  and  of  heat  or  cold.  Thus  "temperature  zones"  form  barriers 
wherever  they  control  the  periods  of  reproduction.^  Moisture  may  infest 
a  country  Avith  insect  pests,  such  as  flies,  ticks,  and  mosquitoes,  which  form 
as  absolute  a  boundary  to  migration  as  a  broad  mass  of  water.  Animals 
which  are  so  specialized  as  to  be  restricted  or  confined  to  certain  habitats 
may  be  said  to  impose  their  own  barriers  upon  themselves. 

Most  barriers  are  ultimately  traceable  to  changes  in  the  greater  and 
lesser  land  masses  and  their  connections,  caused  by  the  elevation  or  sub- 
sidence of  various  parts  of  the  earth.  These  changes  both  make  and 
destroy  land  routes,  and  cause  a  series  of  changes  in  all  physical  conditions 
of  climate,  moisture  or  desiccation,  of  temperature,  or  heat  and  cold.  The 
succession  of  faunas  during  the  IMiocene  and  Pliocene  periods  in  Europe  is 
positive  proof  of  a  succession  of  environments. 

In  this  connection  it  is  highly  interesting  to  compare  the  stable  con- 
tinents of  North  America  and  Africa,  which  show  relatively  slight  fluctua- 
tions of  land  and  sea  level  during  the  Age  of  Mammals,  with  the  highly 
unstable  continent  of  Europe.    During  a  considerable  part  of  the  Age  of 

^  Merriam,  C.  H.,  The  Geographical  Distribution  of  Life  in  North  America  with  Special 
Reference  to  the  Mammalia.    Proc.  Biol.  Soc.  Washington,  Vol.  VII,  April  13,  1892. 


INTRODUCTION 


39 


Mammals  Europe  is  like  a  peninsula  budding  off  from  the  western  side  of 
Asia  or  at  times  almost  like  an  archipelago,  so  largely  does  the  sea  trans- 
gress its  northern  and  southern  borders.  Its  varying  coastlines,  its  insular 
conditions,  its  archipelagic  surfaces  are  to  be  followed  in  imagination  in 
connection  with  the  evolution  of  its  mammalian  fauna.  Nevertheless  the 
main  trend  of  evolution  and  extinction  in  unstable  Europe  coincides  with 
that  in  relatively  stable  North  America. 

IV.  Geologic  or  Time  Distribution  of  Mammals 

Time  divisions.  —  A  host  of  questions  turn  upon  the  geologic,  or  time 
distribution  of  mammals,  which  is  to  be  studied  hand  in  hand  with  their 
geographic,  or  space  distribution,  as  above  described.  The  precise  solu- 
tion of  all  problems  of  origin  and  dispersal,  or  travel  and  migration  of  the 
different  kinds  of  mammals,  concluding  finally  with  the  most  absorbing 
question  of  the  center  of  origin  and  dispersal  of  the  human  race,  turns  upon 
the  question  of  geologic  time. 

At  present,  from  astronomical  reckoning,  we  may  all  ascertain  the  time 
and  readily  fit  all  that  is  occurring  in  different  parts  of  the  world  into  the 
days,  weeks,  and  months.  In  the  past,  however,  in  the  geologic  time 
divisions  ^  which  are  known  as  Stages  (Etages),  Periods,  and  Epochs, 
we  directly  invert  our  present  order  of  procedure,  because  we  must  first 
discover  what  is  occurring  in  the  different  parts  of  the  world,  and  from 
these  occurrences  we  must  deduce,  estimate,  and  establish  geologic  time. 

If  the  question  is  asked  when  did  the  Age  of  Reptiles  close  and  the  Age 
of  Mammals  begin,  in  France,  in  the  Rocky  Mountains,  or  in  South  Amer- 
ica, the  answer  is  sought  not  through  the  rocks,  but  through  the  fossils 
which  they  contain,  or  through  a  process  of  observation  and  reasoning 
which  is  known  technically  as  palceontological  correlation.  When  we  com- 
pare all  the  fossil  mammals  which  are  known  in  the  dawn  of  the  Eocene  in 
Europe,  in  North  America,  and  South  America,  we  are  able  to  establish  a 
homotaxis  or  general  similitude  in  the  life  of  these  widely  separated  regions, 
and  a  synchronism,  or  general  similitude  in  the  time  of  these  different  re- 
gions. An  exact  synchronism  is  practically  impossible  of  attainment,  but 
approximate  synchronism,  or  time  correlation,  is  by  no  means  beyond  our 
reach,  although  often  a  vastly  long  and  difficult  undertaking. 

The  very  title  of  this  volume,  ^^The  Age  of  Mammals,"  implies  the 

^  Comptes  Rendus  de  la  VIII^  Session,  en  France,  Congr^s  Geologique  International, 
Paris,  1900  (1901).    This  International  Geological  Congress  ruled  the  following  use  of  terms: 

1.  ^/ras  =  Palaeozoic,  Mesozoic,  Csenozoic. 

(Csenozoic  =  Tertiary  +  Quaternary.) 
p.  Periods  as  Cambrian,  Silurian,  Cretaceous,  etc. 

3.  Epochs  =  Eo  .  .  .,  Meso  .  .  .,  Neo  .  .  .,  as  Eodevonian,  Mesodevonian,  Neode- 
vonian,  etc. 

4.  Ages  =  Etages  =  (Ages  or  Stages),  as  Astian,  Bartonian,  etc. 

5.  Phases=Life  Zones,  such  as  "zone  a  Cardiola,"  etc. 


40 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


question  of  time,  and  it  is  one  of  our  chief  objects  in  this  review  of  the  his- 
tory of  tlie  fossil  mammals  of  the  Old  and  New  Worlds  to  use  this  history 
as  a  means  of  closely  establishing  similar  divisions  of  past  time  in  these 
two  widely  separated  geographic  regions. 

Employing  the  suggestive  terms  of  Louis  Agassiz,  the  whole  life  history 
of  the  earth  may  be  divided  into  Ages  of  Invertebrates,  of  Fishes,  of  Rep- 
tiles, of  Mammals;  the  latter  Age  comes  as  the  last  episode  before  the 
final  Age  of  Man.  The  Age  of  Mammals  is  technically  known  as  the 
Ccenozoic  Era  (Age  of  Recent  Life),  a  term  which  is  partly  equivalent  to 
but  has  generally  replaced  the  older  term  Tertiary,  which  signifies  the 
third  period  in  the  history  of  life.  The  Caenozoic  is  subdivided  into  two 
Periods  and  six  Epochs,  as  follows: 

Epochs 

HoLOCENE,  (from  oAc?,  entire,  Katvo?,  recent),  or  recent  time,  characterized 
by  the  world-wide  destruction  and  eUmination  of  mammals  through 
the  agency  of  man. 
Pleistocene  (from  TrAeio-ros,  most,  Katvos,  recent),  a  life  period  in  which 
the  majority  of  the  recent  forms  of  mammals  appear  and  in  which 
there  occurs  the  last  glacial  period  and  a  great  natural  extinction  of 
earlier  forms  in  all  parts  of  the  world. 

Pliocene  (from  ttXclwv,  more,  Katvds,  recent),  a  vast  modernization  of 
the  mammals  in  which  all  the  existing  orders  and  families  are  known, 
as  well  as  many  of  the  existing  genera,  but  few  or  no  existing  species. 
Miocene  (from  /xetW,  less,  Kaivos,  recent),  an  earlier  stage  of  moderniza- 
tion, in  which  lived  many  mammals  closely  similar  to  existing  forms. 
Oligocene  (from  oAtyo?,  little,  /catvo's,  recent),  characterized  by  the  ap- 
pearance of  many  existing  types  of  mammals  and  the  gradual  dis- 
appearance of  many  of  the  older  types. 
Eocene  (from  17^9,  dawn,  Katvos,  recent),  characterized  by  the  first  ap- 
pearance of  many  of  the  ancestors  of  the  modernized  mammals  and 
the  gradual  disappearance  of  many  of  the  archaic  types  characteristic 
of  the  Age  of  Reptiles. 

These  grand  time  divisions  of  the  Caenozoic  are  the  work  of  the  nine- 
teenth century,  and  the  incessant  trend  of  discovery  is  to  multiply  time 
divisions  and  make  them  more  minute.  The  work  of  the  twentieth  cen- 
tury is  precise  correlation.  The  ardent  studies  of  the  great  French  natural- 
ists Lamarck,  Alexandre  Brongniart  (1770-1847),  Cuvier,  and  Deshayes 
in  the  early  part  of  the  nineteenth  century,  the  golden  age  of  palaeontol- 
ogy in  France,  were  accompanied  by  a  growing  realization  of  the  vast 
stretches  of  geologic  time  as  witnessed  in  the  vast  changes  which  have 
taken  place  in  the  animal  life  of  the  globe  and  in  the  enormous  thickness  of 
some  of  the  sedimentary  rocks  which  had  been  deposited  even  during  this 
later  or  Tertiary  Period.  It  became  absolutely  necessary  to  make  divi- 
sions of  the  Tertiary;  the  threefold  division  was  in  the  first  instance  due 


.2 

O 

Ph 


O 

N 

o 

«  O 

Ph 


INTRODUCTION 


41 


to  the  monumental  researches  of  Gerard  Paul  Deshayes  (1795-1875)  on 
the  succession  of  the  shells  in  the  Paris  Basin;  he  perceived  that  as  we 
pass  from  the  older  and  lower  to  the  higher  and  more  recent  geological 
levels  there  is  an  increasing  percentage  of  living  types  or  species.  To  the 
threefold  division  discovered  by  Deshayes,  Charles  Lyell  in  1833  applied 
the  names  Eocene,  Miocene,  and  Pliocene.  In  1854  Heinrich  Ernst  Beyrich 
(1815-1896)  perceived  that  in  many  parts  of  Europe  a  fourth  grand  divi- 
sion existed  between  Eocene  and  Miocene  times,  for  which  he  proposed 
the  term  Oligocene.  Another  step  in  this  naming  of  the  periods  or  sys- 
temes  was  in  1839  when  LyelP  proposed  the  term  ''Pleistocene"  for  the 
period  succeeding  the  Pliocene  and  preceding  the  Recent  or  Holocene. 

Students  of  fossil  shells  also  took  the  leadership  in  further  dividing 
the  Age  of  Mammals  into  time  periods  by  demonstrating  that  the  epochs 
can  be  subdivided  into  stages,  or  etages.  Thus  the  French  invertebrate 
palaeontologist,  Alcide  Dessahnes  d'Orbigny  (1802-1857),  divided  the  Eocene 
of  France  into  a  lower  stage,  or  Suessonian,  named  from  the  deposits  chiefly 
north  of  Paris,  and  an  upper  stage,  or  Parisian,  named  from  the  deposits 
around  Paris.  Successive  proposals  of  D'Orbigny,  Dumeril,  Mayer-Eymar, 
Suess,  Deperet  have  finally  led  (1889)  to  the  subdivision  of  all  the  Cseno- 
zoic  periods  into  a  large  number  of  Stages  which  receive  their  names  from 
the  geographical  localities  in  which  they  are  most  typically  represented  in 
various  parts  of  France,  Belgium,  Italy,  and  Sicily.  It  is  now  recognized 
that  each  of  these  stages  represents  a  long  period  of  time.  These  stages  and 
their  approximate  parallels  in  North  America  are  exhibited  in  the  accom- 
panying table. 

Preliminary  Correlation 


Europe 

Asia 

North  America 

Upper 

Sicilian 

Siwaliks 

'Loup  River' 

Pliocene  ^ 

Middle 

ASTIAN 

Siwaliks 

Blanco 

Lower 

Plaisancian 

Siwaliks 

Thousand  Creek 
Rattlesnake  and 
Republican  River 

■'Loup  Fork' 

Upper 

PONTIAN 

Manchhar  - 

Madison  Valley 

Clarendon 
Deep  River 

Miocene  < 

Middle 

ViNDOBONIAN 

Manchhar  < 

Pawnee  Buttes 
,  Mascall 
Arikaree 

Lower 

Burdigaliap^ 

* 

'Upper  Harrison' 

.  Upper  Rosebud 

1  Charles  Lyell,  Antiquity  of  Man,  1839,  p.  6. 


42 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Africa 


Oligocene 


Eocene 


Upper 


Middle 


Lower 


Upper 


Middle 


Lower 


Basal 

Cretaceous  Uppermost 


FayAm 


FayAm 


Aquitanian 

Stampian 

Sannoisian 

LUDIAN 

Bartonian 
Lutetian 

Upper  Ypresian 

Lower  Ypresian 


Sparnacian 

(Upper  Landenian  of  Bel- 
gium) 

Upper  Thanetian   ( =  Cer- 
naysian) 
(Lower  Landenian  of  Bel- 
gium) 

Lower  Thanetian 

Danian  =  Maestrichtian 
(Terrestrial)  (Marine) 


'Harrison  (Lower) 
John  Day 
White  River 

(Upper) 
White  River 

(Middle)  Brule 

Clays 

White  River(Base) 
Cypress  Hills 
Pipestone  Creek 
Chadron 

{Uinta  (Upper  and 
Middle) 
Washakie  (Upper) 

{Uinta  (Lower) 
Washakie  (Lower) 
Bridger  (Upper) 

(Bridger  (Lower) 
Huerfano  (Upper) 

{Bridger  (Lower) 
Huerfano  (Upper) 
Green  River 

{Huerfano  (Lower) 
Wind  River 
Wasatch  (Upper) 
Wasatch  (Lower) 


I  Torrejon 
1  Fort  Union 


f  Puerco 

I  Fort  Union 

Hell  Creek 


Importance  of  Time  Correlation 

If  we  are  eager  to  solve  the  great  number  and  variety  of  most  inter- 
esting questions  still  unsolved  as  to  the  source,  origin,  affiliation,  migra- 
tion, and  extinction  of  the  noble  races  of  animals  which  passed  across  the 
stage  of  the  northern  hemisphere,  or  ancient  Holardic  Region,  during  the 
Csenozoic  Period,  we  must  endeavor  to  use  very  exact  methods  of  com- 


INTRODUCTION 


43 


parison,  to  establish  so  far  as  possible  the  homotaxis  or  the  synchronism 
of  the  geological  subdivisions  of  the  Csenozoic  in  the  New  and  Old  Worlds, 
and  to  agree  upon  the  limits  which  shall  be  assigned  to  the  Eocene,  Oligo- 
cene,  Miocene,  Pliocene,  and  Pleistocene  Epochs  and  their  stages. 

It  will  certainly  prove  best  that  the  grandly  successive  series  of  Ter- 
tiary horizons  in  France  should  be  adopted  as  the  chief  bases  of  time  divi- 
sion, partly  because  of  their  priority  of  description  and  definition,  but 
chiefly  because  in  France,  owing  to  the  instability  of  the  continent  above 
referred  to,  there  is  a  remarkable  alternation  of  fresh-water  deposits  con- 
taining remains  of  mammals  and  of  marine  deposits  containing  fossilized 
shells,  the  shells  serving  as  time-keepers  of  the  evolution  going  on  in  other 
parts  of  the  world.  Thus  in  France  the  evolution  of  mammals,  or  the- 
vertebrate  time  scale,  is  checked  off  by  the  invertebrate  time  scale.  As 
we  shall  see,  the  Lower  Csenozoic  of  America  from  the  base  of  the  Eocene 
to  the  summit  of  the  Oligocene  offers  us  a  much  more  complete  life  story 
than  that  of  France;  in  fact,  it  is  an  unbroken  historic  chapter.  The  same 
is  true  of  our  Oligocene  and  to  a  somewhat  less  extent  of  our  Miocene. 
But  the  mammal-bearing  series  is  entirely  fresh-water.  Only  during  the 
late  Miocene  and  Pliocene  of  Florida  and  in  the  little  known  Oligocene  of 
New  Jersey,  do  we  discover  an  alternation  of  marine  and  fresh-water  con- 
ditions such  as  occurs  throughout  the  entire  Ca?nozoic  in  France.  In  the 
Pliocene  our  country  affords  only  a  series  of  vistas  of  what  was  happening, 
while  Europe  offers  a  more  commanding  view. 

If,  therefore,  France,  Germany,  Switzerland,  and  Italy  furnish  the  ini- 
tial basis  for  time  standards,  comparison  with  America  will  serve  to  check 
and  amplify.  Thus  the  final  basis  for  time  divisions  of  the  Csenozoic  will 
be  international.  There  is  every  reason  for  the  international  usage  of  similar 
terms,  both  as  to  life  forms  and  as  to  time  stages.  In  these  matters 
patriotism  and  provinciahsm  naturally  should  have  no  weight;  palaeon- 
tology knows  nothing  of  the  divisions  formed  by  the  English  Channel,  the 
Rhine,  nor  the  Atlantic;  it  does  not  recognize  the  superiority  of  an  Eng- 
hsh  system,  a  French,  a  German,  or  an  American  system,  but  like  all  its 
sister  branches  of  science,  in  these  times  of  absolute  scientific  good  will, 
demands  an  international  system.  If  approximate  synchronism  in  the 
Epochs  and  Stages  can  be  established,  and  the  present  volume  is  designed 
to  bring  together  all  the  facts  that  can  be  assembled  toward  such  syn- 
chronism, it  will  be  very  desirable  to  adopt  uniform  descriptive  terms  for 
the  European  and  American  geologic  divisions. 

Our  first  object  is  to  show  how  far  the  Epochs  or  Systemes  of  America 
and  Europe  can  be  synchronized  and  similar  permanent  limits  be  placed 
between  them;  our  second  object  is  to  establish  Stages  as  convenient 
divisions  of  each,  in  addition  to  the  descriptive  terms  Upper,  Middle, 
Lower,  and  Basal,  which  are  respectively  marked  off  in  the  natural  geo- 
logic boundaries  of  the  two  continents.  Of  course  the  synchronizing  of 
the  stages  and  substages  throughout  will  present  greater  difficulties  and 


44 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


may  in  some  instances  prove  impossible,  owing  to  the  absolute  independ- 
ence of  the  movements  of  the  earth  and  of  the  other  physical  phenomena 
which  caused  these  stages  in  the  Old  and  New  Worlds.  It  is  obvious  that 
the  overlapping  in  time  of  these  minor  periods  of  deposition  would  be  the 
rule  and  that  exact  synchronism  would  be  largely  coincidence  and  there- 
fore highly  improbable;  all  that  we  can  reasonably  hope  to  establish  in 
the  near  future  is  approximate  synchronism  of  the  stages.  Ultimately  the 
lines  of  time  overlap  may  be  determined. 

Time  Value  of  Fossils 

During  the  Age  of  Mammals  we  should  endeavor  to  establish  absolute 
time  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  like  Greenwich  standard  time  of  to-day, 
not  through  measuring  the  thickness  of  the  rocks  but  through  using  as 
our  chronometers  all  the  known  forms  that  lived,  plants,  and  vertebrate 
and  invertebrate  animals.  The  thickness  of  the  rocks  varies  enormously, 
and  is  correspondingly  deceptive.  The  fresh- water  Oligocene  rocks  of  the 
western  plains,  for  example,  are  only  400  to  800  feet  in  thickness,  while 
on  the  Pacific  coast  and  in  Italy  marine  rocks  of  the  same  age  are  10  to 
12,000  feet  in  thickness.  The  thickness  of  rocks  is  one  of  the  means  of 
estimating  the  total  duration  of  the  Age  of  Mammals,  while  the  stages  of 
evolution  in  animals  and  plants  give  us  the  punctuation  points,  as  it  were, 
or  the  means  of  keeping  geologic  time.  It  is  true  that  during  the  Caeno- 
zoic  Era  the  plants  are  comparatively  stationary,  and  so  are  the  amphibians- 
fishes,  and  reptiles,  but  the  mammals  are  in  a  state  of  continuous  and  in- 
cessant change,  and  what  gives  them  especial  chronometric  value  is  that 
the  rate  of  change  or  of  evolution  is  the  same  in  many  parts  of  the  world 
at  the  same  time.  Even  during  the  Age  of  Reptiles  we  may  take  advan- 
tage of  the  remarkably  constant  evolution  of  the  herbivorous  multituber- 
culate  gnawing  mammals  known  as  Plagiaulacidse,  surviving  members  of 
which  are  found  in  the  Basal  Eocene  (Fig.  28).  The  grooves  on  the  sides 
of  the  large  cutting  teeth  of  Plagiaulax  and  the  cusps,  or  tubercles,  on  the 
grinding  teeth  are  successively  added  with  the  precision  of  clock-work, 
while  the  number  of  premolars  is  diminishing.  If  we  suppose  the  rate 
of  evolution  has  been  about  the  same,  we  can  approximately  calculate  the 
intervals  of  deposition.^ 


Age 

OF  Reptiles 

Age  of 

Mammals 

Stonesfield  Purbeck  Laramie 

Puerco 

Cernaysian 

Diminishing  number  of  pre- 

molars   

? 

4-3  2 

2-1 

1 

Increasing  grooves  on  pre- 

molars   

? 

7-9  11-14 

12-15 

14 

Increasing  number  of  molar 

tubercles:  outer;  inner  . 

? 

4:2  6:4 

6:4 

9:6 

^  See  Osborn,  H.  F.,  The  Rise  of  the  Mammalia  in  North  America.  Proc.  Amer.  Ass.  Ad. 
Sci.,  1894,  pp.  188-227;  and  Amer.  Jour.  Set.,  Nov.  and  Dec,  1893. 


INTRODUCTION 


45 


Similarly  the  slow  stages  in  the  attainment  of  perfection  in  the  grind- 
ing teeth  of  the  Eocene  horses  are  of  great  value  as  time-keepers;  for 
example,  in  the  molars  of  Eohippus  and  Orohippus  we  observe  that  in  the 
lower  levels  a  certain  cusp  is  adumbrated  in  shadowy  form;  on  a  slightly 
higher  level  it  is  distinctly  visible;  on  a  still  higher  level  it  is  fully  grown. 
We  do  not  observe  any  sudden  breaks,  but  a  series  of  minute  gradations, 
always  in  the  direction  of  adaptation,  because  it  appears  that  these  changes 
in  the  teeth,  which  Osborn  has  called  "rectigradations, "  may  be  of  the 
same  kind  as  those  to  which  Waagen  applied  the  term  mutations"  in 
observing  shells  of  successive  geological  levels.  Whenever  a  new  character 
is  thus  gradually  brought  to  perfection,  the  animal  is  assigned  a  new  spe- 
cific name;  Eohippus  validus  becomes  Eohippus  venticolus,  or  Orohippus 
hallardi  passes  into  Orohippus  progressus.  When  a  number  of  these  new 
characters  thus  gradually  assemble  in  different  parts  of  the  tooth  series,  or 
in  the  feet,  we  assign  a  new  generic  name:  Eohippus  becomes  Orohippus, 
or  Orohippus  becomes  Epihippus.  The  specific  and  generic  names  which 
were  applied  both  in  Europe  and  America  to  the  Eocene  horses  by  Owen, 
Cope,  and  Marsh  were  in  every  case  defined  by  the  presence  of  such  slowly 
evolving  new  characters  or  groups  of  characters. 

Now  the  time-keeping  value  of  mammals  lies  in  the  fact  that  in  Great 
Britain,  in  France,  in  Switzerland,  in  the  Rocky  Mountains,  in  short, 
wherever  these  inconspicuous  but  important  ^  rectigradations '  are  appear- 
ing, they  arise  at  approximately  the  same  rate  and  approximately  in  the 
same  order  even  among  animals  which  are  widely  separated  geographically. 

Close  geologic  synchronism,  moreover,  requires  a  comparison  of  the 
entire  fauna  and  entire  flora.  The  survival  of  a  few  primitive  or  arrested 
types  may  mislead,  as  in  Australia,  for  example.  Huxley  ^  was  somewhat 
doubtful  of  the  time-keeping  value  of  fossils;  at  least  he  thought  the  ap- 
plication might  be  overdone.  He  went  so  far  as  to  say,  ''It  is  possible  that 
similar,  or  even  identical,  faunae  and  florae  in  two  different  localities  may 
be  of  extremely  different  ages,  if  the  term  '  age '  is  used  in  its  proper  chron- 
ological sense."  Such  a  possibility  as  Huxley  imagined  has  never  been 
more  than  partly  realized.  Among  the  mammals  as  well  as  among  the 
plants  there  is  a  constant  progression  which  is,  on  the  whole,  a  guide  or 
index  to  synchroneity.  This  does  not  preclude  such  broad  statements  as 
the  following:  that  the  general  aspect  of  modern  Africa  resembles  that  of 
Pliocene  Europe. 

Various  Evidences  of  Synchronism  and  Homotaxis 

When  we  attempt  to  compare  what  is  going  on  in  the  Old  and  New 
Worlds  during  the  enormously  long  time  which  is  called  the  Age  of  Mam- 

^  Huxley,  The  Anniversary  Address  of  the  President.  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  London, 
Vol.  XXVI,  1870,  pp.  29-64;  Scientific  Memoirs,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  526. 


46 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


mals  we  should  not  limit  ourselves  to  mammals,  but  should  appeal  to  as 
many  classes  of  facts  as  possible,  facts  of  climate,  of  geology,  of  physiog- 
raphy, of  migration  and  colonization,  and  the  rise,  dominance,  and  decline 
of  certain  kinds  of  animals  and  plants. 

In  comparing  the  mammals  of  the  two  regions  we  look  for  the  following 
tests : 

1.  Presence  of  similar  species. — Those  classic  or  time-honored  bases 
of  comparison  in  establishing  percentages  through  the  presence  or  absence 
of  similar  genera  and  species  lead  us  to  most  interesting  results,  because 
they  prove  that  the  mammals  of  the  Old  and  New  Worlds  were  alter- 
nately brought  together  and  separated.  In  other  words,  there  was  an 
alternating  convergence  and  divergence  of  the  faunas.  The  resemblances 
will  first  be  very  numerous  and  close,  then  there  will  come  an  estrangement 
when  they  will  be  very  few,  then  the  resemblances  will  suddenly  increase 
again.  It  is  obvious  that  only  during  the  periods  of  faunal  resemblance 
are  we  able  to  use  the  following  or  second  method  of  comparison. 

2.  Similar  stages  of  evolution.  —  This  second  method  of  comparison  is 
based  upon  the  similarity  in  the  stages  of  development  of  like  phyla  of  the 
mammals  on  the  two  continents,  as  expressed  in  the  detailed  changes  in 
the  grinding  teeth  (molars  and  premolars),  in  the  numerical  reduction  of 
the  digits,  etc.  For  example,  the  different  transformations  of  the  pre- 
molars, or  anterior  grinding  teeth  in  the  horses,  rhinoceroses,  and  tapirs 
during  the  Eocene  and  Oligocene  Epochs  afford  very  exact  data  for  corre- 
lation purposes. 

3.  Simultaneous  appearance  or  introduction  of  new  mammals.  —  The 
sudden  appearance  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Worlds  of  mammals  which 
have  no  known  ancestors  in  lower  horizons  and  have  apparently  originated 
elsewhere  is  of  great  value  in  correlation.  These  coincident  immigrations 
from  unknown  northern  regions  (Eurasia)  or  from  southern  regions  (Africa) 
in  several  cases  give  us  very  exact  datum  points;  for  example,  certain 
kinds  of  modernized  mammals  simultaneously  appear  in  Europe  and  in 
North  America  in  Lower  Eocene  and  again  in  Oligocene  times. 

4.  Intermigration  periods.  —  These  periods  are  those  in  which  con- 
spicuous interchanges  of  mammals  took  place,  as  between  North  and 
South  America  in  the  Pliocene.  The  horse  (Equus)  being  unquestionably 
derived  from  North  America,  its  earliest  appearance  in  North  America 
must  antedate  its  first  appearance  in  South  America. 

5.  Predominance  of  certain  kinds  of  mammals.  —  Many  related  families 
of  mammals  seem  to  go  through  a  C3^cle  of  gradual  ascent  until  they 
attain  a  stage  of  world-wide  predominance  at  al)out  the  same  periods. 
For  example,  the  climax  of  the  odd-toed  ungulates  (Perissodactyla)  is 
in  the  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene  of  Europe  and  North  America,  while 
the  climax  of  the  even-toed  ungulates  (Artiodactyla)  comes  at  a  later 
period. 


INTRODUCTION 


47 


6.  Extinction  periods  of  certain  mammals.  —  World-wide  predominance 
has  its  counterpart  in  the  world-wide  disappearance  or  extinction  of  cer- 
tain forms,  correlated  with  grand  geologic  and  physiographic  changes. 
An  example  of  this  kind  is  the  very  general  extinction  of  browsing  types  of. 
Herbivora  during  the  Oligocene.  Among  rodents,  the  beaver-like  Steneo- 
fiber  disappears  at  the  same  time  both  in  Europe  and  North  America,  or  is 
replaced  by  modified  forms. 

This  general  comparison  of  the  evolution  stages  of  the  Old  World  and  the 
New  World  will  naturally  become  precise  and  final  only  after  the  time  in 
the  Old- World  stages  and  in  the  New  has  been  separately  established  and 
defined.    Thus  there  are  correlation  problems,  as  follows: 

European  or  Eurasiatic  Correlation. 
American  Correlation. 
American  and  Eurasiatic  Correlation. 
North  and  South  American  Correlation. 

When  these  four  broad  problems  of  American-Asiatic-European-African 
correlation  and  of  the  broader  New  and  Old  World  correlation  are  worked 
out  we  shall  be  able  to  establish  a  complete  and  very  accurate  geologic 
time  scale  for  the  entire  Age  of  Mammals,  and  to  speak  with  precision  re- 
garding the  time  of  successive  migrations,  appearances,  and  extinctions. 
It  is  even  possible  that  we  shall  be  able  in  the  New  and  Old  World  to  em- 
ploy the  same  stages  or  subdivisions  of  the  Epochs  of  time. 

Geologic  Formations  and  Life  Zones 

The  earth's  crust  is  made  up  of  a  vast  series  of  separate  deposits  which 
are  technically  known  as  ^formations.'  The  formation  is  the  geologic  unit. 
It  may  vary  in  thickness  or  in  extent  of  geographic  distribution;  it  may 
be  laid  down  in  many  ways,  such  as  by  the  transporting  power  of  water  or  of 
wind  or  through  falls  of  volcanic  ash,  but  it  is  of  the  essence  of  a  'forma- 
tion' that  the  conditions  of  deposition  remain  more  or  less  uniform;  when 
the  conditions  change,  as  from  fresh-water  to  marine,  for  example,  we  pass 
into  a  new  formation. 

If  animal  remains  are  varied  in  the  formation,  we  may  select  among  the 
number  a  very  conspicuous  or  abundant  or  unique  mammal  as  especially 
distinctive  of  the  whole  formation  or  of  a  certain  level  in  the  formation  as 
marking  off  a  life  zone.  The  word  'beds'  previously  used  in  a  similar 
sense  is  liable  to  cause  confusion  because  it  has  also  been  applied  to  geologic 
formations.  It  is  clear  that  while  the  geologic  formation  may  be  limited 
in  extent,  the  life  zone,  owing  to  the  wider  geographic  range  of  the  mam- 
mal from  which  it  takes  its  name,  is  not  limited,  but  may  be  found  else- 
where. 

For  example,  in  southwestern  Wyoming  there  is  a  very  thick,  more  or 
less  uniform  deposit  of  volcanic  ash,  or  tuff,  which  has  been  named  the 


48 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Bridger  Formation,  from  its  proximity  to  the  famous  old  Fort  Bridger/ 
The  entire  formation  is  1800  feet  in  thickness.  The  upper  half  of  it 
is  distinguished  by  the  sudden  appearance  of  a  very  large  and  distinc- 
tive quadruped,  Uintatherium,  named  after  the  adjoining  range  of 
Uintah  Mountains,  which  are  on  the  boundary  between  Wyoming  and 
Utah.  This  animal  is  so  very  distinctive  that  we  may  speak  of  the  Upper 
half  of  the  Bridger  formation  as  the  Uintatherium  Zone.  One  hundred 
miles  east  of  the  Bridger  is  a  deposit  known  as  the  Washakie,  and  in  the 
lower  half  of  this  we  find  the  same  quadruped,  Uintatherium,  very  abun- 
dant and  characteristic.  Thus  the  Lower  Washakie  is  also  in  the  Uinta- 
therium Zone.  From  the  presence  not  only  of  Uintatherium  but  many 
other  animals  in  common  we  are  able  to  correlate  these  two  formations,  as 
follows: 

Formations  Zones 


Upper 
Washakie 


Eobasileus  zone 


Uintatherium  zone 
Orohippus  zone 

This  single  example  illustrates  how  all  fossil-bearing  formations  may 
be  correlated  with  each  other  where  they  contain  similar  life  zones.  This 
furnishes  a  simple  key  to  the  elaborate  correlations  which  the  reader  will 
find  in  the  later  pages  of  this  work.  The  above  is  a  striking  example  of  an 
overlapping  in  time;  that  is,  while  the  upper  half  of  the  Bridger  Forma- 
tion was  being  deposited,  the  deposition  of  its  more  or  less  distant  neigh- 
bor, the  Washakie  Formation,  began.  In  this  case  the  two  formations 
happened  to  be  somewhat  similar  in  their  rock  composition,  both  being 
composed  of  volcanic  ash;  but  another  Uintatherium  life  zone  might  be 
found  in  a  formation  of  river  sand  or  clay.  Thus  the  life  zone  enables  us 
to  synchronize  geological  formations  of  many  different  kinds  which  may 
be  widely  distributed  geographically,  and  may  vary  greatly  in  thickness. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  correlation  of  innumerable  fossil-bearing  formations 
of  the  Old  and  New  World  respectively  can  be  made  much  closer  and  more 
exact  than  the  correlation  of  the  Old  and  New  World  combined;  yet  the 
method  of  investigation  is  in  each  case  the  same.    It  should  be  based  on: 

1.  Comparisons  of  animals  of  similar  mutative,  specific,  and  generic  stages. 

2.  Evidences  of  similar  local  evolution. 

3.  Dominance  or  scarcity  of  similar  animals  in  the  fauna  as  a  whole. 

4.  Diminution,  disappearance,  or  apparent  extinction  of  similar  forms. 

5.  First  appearance  of  similar  forms,  apparently  by  migration  or  invasion 
from  some  other  region. 

^  See  Osborn,  H.  F.,  pp.  50  ff.,  Cenozoic  Mammal  Horizons  of  Western  North  America. 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Bull.  361,  1909. 


Upper  I 
Bridger  j 
Lower  1 
Bridger  } 


Lower 
Washakie 


ROCKY  MOUNTAIN  BASIN 
DEPOSITS 


GREAT  PLAINS 
DEPOSITS 


Glyptotherium. 


CorypTbodoTv 

and, 
J^ohippus 


/oRT^umoN  INTRODUCTION  OF  ANCESTORS  ^g§DERN  MAMMALS 


2^  Faunal  Period 


-15,  ARCHAIC  MAMMALS 
ONLY 


\l  Period 


Pantolarnhdq. 
PolyTrvastodon 


CRETACEOUS 


CLOSE  OF  THE  AGE  OF  REPTILES 


EXTINCTION  OF  DINOSAURS 


By  permission  of  the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey. 

Fig.  10.  —  Successive  and  overlapping  Formations  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  Region  in 
Eocene  and  Oligocene  times.  Key  to  the  series  of  scale  sections  in  the  subsequent  pages  ;  all 
the  sections  are  drawn  to  same  scale.  The  horizontal  dotted  lines  indicate  the  boundaries  of 
similar  Life  Zones. 


E 


50 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Sources  of  error  in  correlation.  —  Evidence  of  these  five  kinds  as  the 
basis  of  the  correlation  of  formations  contains  several  sources  of  error. 
First,  we  should  always  be  on  our  guard  against  imperfections  in  records 
and  should  keep  in  mind  the  possible  presence,  while  a  given  formation 
was  being  deposited,  of  mammals  which  perhaps  escaped  fossihzation  or 
whose  fossil  remains  have  not  yet  been  discovered.  We  must  not  too 
hurriedly  assume  the  absence  of  a  mammal  from  an  entire  continent  or 
even  from  the  geographic  region  of  a  certain  formation  simply  because  it 
has  not  yet  been  discovered  in  that  formation.  Many  mammals  long  con- 
sidered absent  from  the  entire  American  Eocene,  for  example,  the  peculiar 
armadillo-like  forms  of  South  America,  have  recently  been  discovered  in 
the  Bridger  Formation  above  mentioned.  Again,  some  mammals  living 
near  the  larger  streams  or  along  the  shore  lines  are  much  more  apt  to  be 
caught  and  entombed  in  certain  formations  than  others  living  at  a  dis- 
tance, in  the  forests  or  out  on  the  uplands,  for  example. 

Most  formations  are  limited  in  geographic  extent,  and  we  must  always 
keep  in  our  imagination  the  life  of  the  vast  outside  areas  which  were  also 
thickly  populated,  with  their  differences  of  habitat,  of  longitude,  or  eastern 
and  western  distribution,  of  latitude,  or  northern  and  southern  distribu- 
tion, of  altitude,  or  vertical  distribution,  such  as  on  mountain  ranges  and 
in  the  valleys;  in  short,  there  were  always  in  past  times  such  differences 
of  distribution  as  exist  among  mammals  to-day,  which  render  it  improb- 
able that  the  restricted  area  of  a  given  'formation'  will  give  us  an  ade- 
quate picture  of  the  entire  contemporary  hfe  of  a  continent. 

Progressive  Correlation 

European  Correlations.  —  The  foundation  for  the  correlation  of  Euro- 
pean formations  with  each  other  naturally  began  with  the  early  work  of 
Cuvier  and  advanced  with  the  progress  of  mammalian  pala3ontology  on 
the  continent.  In  France,  Gervais  ('59,  '69),  Gaudry  ('62,  '73,  '78,  '86, 
'88,  etc.),  Filhol  ('77,  '79,  '81,  '88,  '91),  Lemoine  ('78,  '80,  '82,  '85,  '87,  '88), 
Boule  ('83,  '88,  '93,  '96,  etc.),  and  especially  Deperet  ('87,  '90,  '92,  '93,  '00, 
'05,  '06)  have  successively  described  typical  horizons  or  formations  and 
the  mammals  characteristic  of  them.  Parallels  between  the  formations 
of  England  and  France  were  early  set  forth  by  Owen  ('60),  followed  by 
Sir  Joseph  Prestwdch  ('88),  and  Wilham  Boyd  Dawkins  ('80,  '94).  Par- 
allels with  Germany  have  been  especially  treated  by  Von  Zittel,  Schlosser 
('88,  '83-'97,  '90,  '95,  '02),  and  Deperet  ('85,  '87,  '90,  '92,  '93,  '05,  '06,  etc.).^ 

The  first  step  in  correlation  through  faunal  parallelism,  or  similar  life 
zones,  is  naturally  to  assemble  as  full  a  list  as  possible  of  the  character- 
istic species  and  genera  of  mammals.  Valuable  tables  of  such  European 
faunal  parallels  are  those  given  by  Von  Zittel  in  his  great  Handbuch  der 

^  Principal  titles  are  given  in  the  Bibliography. 


INTRODUCTION 


51 


Palceontologie  (1876-1893).  Full  and  more  precise  lists  of  the  European 
mammals  characteristic  of  different  formations  or  horizons  are  those  as- 
sembled by  Schlosser  (1887-1890).  The  Literaturbericht  (1883-1897) 
of  the  same  author,  a  complete  review  of  the  literature  of  mammalian 
palaeontology  for  the  fourteen  years  indicated,  is  a  mine  of  wealth  for  an 
investigation  of  this  kind.  Up  to  1896,  however,  there  still  existed  no 
satisfactory  correlation  of  all  the  Old  World  horizons  with  each  other,  and 
it  was  obvious  that  a  unified  Old  World  system  was  absolutely  necessary 
as  a  starting-point  for  exact  comparison  with  the  formations  of  the  New 
World.  Realizing  that  an  acceptable  working  basis  could  only  be  secured 
by  cooperation,  Osborn  drew  up  in  1897  a  Trial  Sheet  of  the  Typical  and 
Homotaxial  Tertiary  Horizons  of  Europe  and  circulated  it  for  criticism  and 
suggestion.  Invaluable  corrections  were  received,  especially  from  the 
author's  friends  Gaudry,  Von  Zittel,  Schlosser,  Pavlow,  Boule,  Lydekker, 
and  Deperet.  The  corrections  were  embodied  in  a  Second  Trial  Sheet 
(April  15,  1898),  which  was  used  for  further  personal  investigation  and  dis- 
cussion with  the  above-named  palaeontologists,  also  with  Lepsius  of  Darm- 
stadt and  Forsyth  Major  of  the  British  Museum.  A  Third  Trial  Sheet, 
issued  in  1900,  was  more  accurate  than  its  predecessors,  but  still  lacked 
the  desired  exactness  and  fullness.  The  general  state  of  knowledge  in  1900 
was  brought  together  in  the  author's  paper,  ''Correlation  between  Tertiary 
Mammal  Horizons  of  Europe  and  America."  ^  In  June,  1905,  there  began 
in  the  Comptes  Rendus  de  V Academic  des  Sciences  the  epochal  series  of 
papers  by  Deperet  entitled  U evolution  des  Mammiferes  tertiaires ;  im- 
portance des  migrations.  These  papers  covered  with  the  desired  fullness 
and  precision  the  subject  of  the  correlation  of  all  the  mammal-bearing 
formations  of  Europe,  and  moreover  treated  briefly  and  with  great  preci- 
sion the  succession  of  mammalian  life  in  Europe,  and  the  supposed  migra- 
tions between  the  continents  of  the  main  land  masses  of  Europe,  Asia, 
Africa,  and  North  America.  Deperet's  life  zones  and  faunistic  subdivisions 
of  the  Old  World  are  adopted  throughout  the  present  volume  as  the  stand- 
ard for  comparison  with  the  New  World.  His  correlation  of  formations 
is  graphically  expressed  in  a  full  series  of  maps.    (See  Figs.  26,  50,  etc.) 

American  Correlation.  —  The  chronological  correlation  of  American 
mammal-bearing  formations  with  each  other  opened  in  a  very  promising 
way  through  the  exact  methods  which  characterized  even  the  early  ob- 
servations of  the  geologist  Hayden  and  the  palaeontologist  Leidy  on  the 
geologic  formations  of  our  Great  Plains.  Naturally  errors  crept  into  such 
a  rich  and  new  field,  where  many  formations  were  so  similar  to  each  other 
in  external  appearance,  and  in  a  period  of  geologic  thought  which  preceded 

^  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Correlation  between  Tertiary  Mammal  Horizons  of  Europe  and  Amer- 
ica; An  Introduction  to  the  more  Exact  Investigation  of  Tertiary  Zoogeography;  Prelimi- 
nary Study  with  Third  Trial  Sheet.  Ann.  New  York  Acad.  Sci.,  Vol.  XIII,  no.  1,  July  21, 
1900,  pp.  1-64;  and,  Correlation  des  horizons  de  mammiferes  tertiaires  en  Europe  et  ea 
Amerique.    C.  R.  8^  Cong.  geol.  intern.,  1900,  pp.  357-363. 


52 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


a  clear  separation  of  the  Oligocene,  Miocene,  and  Pliocene  faunas,  but  we 
cannot  repress  our  admiration  for  the  admirable  attempts  at  precision  on 
the  part  of  Hayden  and  Leidy  whereby  Oligocene  and  Miocene  mamma- 
lian faunas  were  separated  off  into  six  successive  faunistic  stages  indicated 
by  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  and  F. 

Unfortunately  this  standard  was  not  followed,  and  slow  progress  was 
made  for  many  years,  owing  to  very  loose  methods  of  collecting  fossils  for 
purely  anatomical  and  descriptive  purposes  without  closely  recording  geo- 
logic levels  and  life  zones.  Nevertheless  considerable  advance  was  made 
in  the  successive  writings  '  of  Cope  (1879,  1884),  Marsh  (1877),  Scott  (1887, 
1893),  W.  B.  Clark  (1891,  1896),  Dall,  (1896,  1897),  Wortman  (1893),  Os- 
born  (1897,  1898,  1900). 

In  the  survey  (1898)  of  the  Middle  Eocene  Washakie  Basin,  Osborn  and 
McMaster  prepared  the  first  geologic  section  which  recorded  the  'levels' 
on  which  different  species  of  mammals  were  found.-'  The  starting-point 
of  the  admirable  precision  of  recent  Avork  was  Hatcher's  survey  between 
1886  and  1888  of  the  Lower  Oligocene  of  the  Great  Plains,  summed  up  in 
his  paper,  ''The  Titanotherium  Beds,"  ^  in  which  he  exactly  described  the 
stratigraphy,  the  geographic  distribution,  and  the  division  of  the  Titano- 
therium Zone  into  Lower,  Middle,  and  Upper  levels.  This  was  followed  in 
1893  by  Wortman's  paper  "On  the  Divisions  of  the  White  River  or  Lower 
Miocene  of  Dakota,"  which  treated  precisely  the  succession  of  mammals 
in  the  entire  White  River  formation,  now  considered  of  Oligocene  Age. 
In  1899  all  the  formations  both  of  the  mountain  region  and  of  the  Great 
Plains  of  the  West  were  for  the  first  time  accurately  reviewed  and  compared 
by  Matthew  in  his  important  paper,  "A  Provisional  Classification  of  the 
Fresh-Water  Tertiary  of  the  West."  ^  This  paper  was  accompanied  by  a 
discussion  of  all  the  preceding  work  of  correlation,  by  a  review  of  all  the 
principal  formations  then  known,  and  by  a  complete  faunal  list  of  the  spe- 
cies of  mammals  hitherto  described,  the  first  which  had  appeared  subsequent 
to  Leidy's  great  list  published  in  1869,  thirty  years  previously. 

The  next  review  of  the  American  life  succession  during  the  Age  of 
Mammals  is  that  of  Osborn  ('09),  entitled  "Cenozoic  Mammal  Horizons 
of  Western  North  America."  *  This  comprehensive  paper,  accompanied 
by  "Faunal  Lists  of  the  Tertiary  Mammalia  of  the  West,"  by  W.  D. 
Matthew,  forms  the  American  basis  of  the  present  volume. 

American  and  European  Correlation.  —  This  broader  study  has  also 
advanced  step  by  step,  beginning  with  the  comparisons  made  by  Leidy, 

*  Principal  titles  are  given  in  the  Bibliography. 

-  McMaster,  J.  B.,  Stratigraphical  Report  upon  the  Bridger  Beds  in  the  Washakie  Basin, 
Wyoming  Territory,  accompanied  hy  profiles  of  three  sections.    In  Osborn,  H.  F.,  A  Memoir 
upon  Loxolophodon  and  Uintatherium,  two  Genera  of  the  Suborder  Dinocerata.  Contrib. 
M.  Mus.  Geol.  Arch.,  College  of  New  Jersey  [Princeton],  Vol.  I,  1881,  pp.  1-54. 

3  Hatcher,  J.  B.,  Tlie  Titanotherium  Beds.    Amer.  Natural,  March  1,  1893.  pp.  204-221. 

*  For  reference  see  Bibliography. 


INTRODUCTION 


53 


and  has  aroused  the  interest  of  all  mammalian  palaeontologists  in  turn, 
including  especially^  Cope  (1879,  1884),  Filhol  (1885),  Marsh  (1891), 
Scott  (1888,  1889,  1894),  and  Osborn  (1900,  1909).  Especially  interesting 
historically  are  Cope's  first  comprehensive  papers,  ''The  Relations  of  the 
Horizons  of  Extinct  Vertebrata  of  Europe  and  North  America"  (1879),^ 
''The  Horizontal  Relations  of  the  North  American  Tertiaries  with  those 
of  Europe''  (1883),^  compared  with  Filhol's  Critique  of  these  papers  (1885). 
The  most  comprehensive  recent  paper  is  W.  H.  Ball's  "A  Table  of  the 
North  American  Tertiary  Horizons  correlated  with  one  another  and  with 
those  of  Western  Europe;  with  Annotations"  (1898).^  Ball's  attention 
is  especially  directed  to  the  southeastern  portions  of  the  United  States, 
particularly  Florida,  where  an  alternation  of  marine  and  fresh-water  forma- 
tions with  vertebrate  and  invertebrate  life  zones  affords  a  very  direct 
method  of  correlation  with  the  European  geological  stages,  which  are  nota- 
bly distinguished  by  the  alternation  of  marine  and  fresh-water  conditions.'^ 

Geological  Formations  as  a  Record  of  Environments 

Our  knowledge  of  what  may  be  called  the  procession  of  environments 
in  different  parts  of  the  world  during  the  Age  of  Mammals  is  derived  from 
three  sources.  First  and  foremost,  from  the  structure  of  the  animals 
themselves,  which  fairly  mirrors  the  habitat  in  which  they  lived;  second, 
from  the  impressions  of  plants  which  the  rocks  may  contain;  third,  from 
the  nature  of  the  rocks  in  which  the  fossil  remains  are  found  entombed. 
These  three  kinds  of  evidence  give  us  as  complete  a  picture  of  the  environ- 
ment as  we  can  ever  hope  to  obtain,  and  they  must  be  studied  together. 
They  give  us  a  vista  of  the  succession  of  the  meteorologic  or  climatic  phases 
of  the  period,  of  the  general  passage  from  warmer  to  cooler  temperatures, 
from  moister  to  drier  conditions.  We  are  enabled  to  restore  physiographic 
conditions  by  separating  the  animals  which  naturally  inhabit  well-watered 
forests,  lowlands,  and  rivers  from  those  naturally  frequenting  plains  and 
uplands,  by  separating  those  adapted  to  softer  ground  from  those  adapted 
to  dry,  partially  arid  plains,  and  by  adding  to  this  information  that  de- 
rived from  evidences  of  successive  fluviatile,  flood  plain,  and  aerial  or  seolian 
deposits.  Therefore  the  examination  of  the  rocks  in  which  mammals  are 
contained  is  little  less  important  and  interesting  than  the  examination  of 
the  fossils  themselves;  the  two  studies  should  go  hand  in  hand. 

Beside  the  examination  of  the  rocks  another  feature  of  geologic  study 
which  dovetails  with  the  palseontologic  is  the  exact  and  precise  record- 

^  Principal  titles  are  given  in  Bibliography. 

2  U.S.  Geol.  and  Geog.  Surv.  Terr.  Bull.,  Vol.  V,  no.  1,  1879. 

^  Cope,  E.  D.,  Section  2  of  The  Vertebrata  of  the  Tertiary  Formations  of  the  West, 
Book  I,  .1883,  pp.  21-45. 

*  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  18th  Ann.  Repf.,  1896-1897. 

5  See  Dall,  Geological  Results  of  the  Study  of  the  Tertiary  Fauna  of  Florida,  1886-1903. 
Trans.  Wagner  Free  Inst.  Sci.  Phila.,  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  6,  1903,  pp.  1541-1620. 


54 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


ing  of  levels.  In  strata  like  those  of  our  American  Oligocene,  where  depo- 
sition has  been  extremely  slow,  every  foot  of  level  may  mark  a  long  period 
of  time;  fifteen  or  twenty  feet,  or  even  less,  may  mark  a  time  during  which 
one  species  passed  by  mutation  into  another. 


Fig.  11.  —  Chief  areas  of  deposition  in  the  Cienozoic  of  North  America:  black  =  Httoral 
depositions  of  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  coasts  ;  dotted  =  '  continental '  formations  of  the 
Great  Plains  and  of  the  Mountain  Regions.    After  W.  B.  Scott. 


INTRODUCTION 


55 


This  naturally  introduces  us  to  a  closer  examination  of  geologic  forma- 
tions of  various  kinds. 

As  shown  above,  while  the  geologic  unit  is  the  ''formation/'  ''life  zones" 
may  occur  in  formations  totally  differing  in  thickness,  in  the  kind  of  rock, 
in  geographic  extent,  in  mode  of  deposition.  These  largely  geologic  data 
are,  however,  of  constant  service  to  the  palaeontologist  as  part  of  the  record 
of  the  past  conditions  under  which  the  animals  lived. 

The  map  of  North  America  on  page  54  illustrates  clearly  the  two 
great  divisions  in  the  kinds  of  formations,  namely,  the  border  areas  of 
marine,  estuarine,  and  fiuvio-marine  deposition  of  formations  (indicated  in 
black)  and  the  central  areas  of  continental  deposition  (indicated  in  dots). 
Connected  with  this  distribution  is  naturally  the  power  which  transported 
the  sediments,  whether  of  the  sea  or  in  inlets  of  the  sea,  whether  of  streams 
or  rivers,  or  even  of  the  wind.  Sorted  as  to  the  transporting  power,  the 
various  kinds  of  formations  in  which  fossil  remains  of  mammals  occur  are 
as  follows: 

1.  Marine,  Beneath  the  ocean  or  along  its  margins.  Such  formations  occa- 
sionally contain  the  remains  of  land  and  freshwater  mammals,  mingled  with  those 
of  marine  mammals  and  shells.  2.  Estuarine.  Brackish  water  deposits  along  the 
inlets  of  seas  and  at  river  mouths;  also  indicated  by  the  remains  of  animals.  3.  Flu- 
viatile.  Freshwater  sediments  deposited  in  river  channels  or  bays,  at  the  mouths 
of  streams,  or  in  torrent  fans.  4.  Lacustrine.  Freshwater  deposits  borne  into 
lakes  by  rivers  or  streams,  which  beyond  the  coarser  entrance  areas  may  be  of  the 
finest  grain  and  become  evenly  stratified  through  periodic  sedimentation.  5.  Flood 
plain  or  overflow  deposits.  Through  periodic  overflow,  as  of  the  Mississippi  or  the 
Nile.  Vast  stretches  of  country  flooded  with  muddy  water,  which  subsiding  may 
also  leave  a  stratified  sedimentation.  Very  characteristic  of  the  Middle  Tertiary 
of  North  America.  6.  Lagoon  deposits.  In  abandoned  river  channels  and  shallow 
lakes  which  through  evaporation  may  collect  gypsum  and  other  salts.'  Very  fre- 
quent in  the  Csenozoic  of  France.  7.  Molian  or  aerial  deposits.  Transported  by 
the  wind  on  dryland  surfaces,  usually  fine  non-stratified  sands  and  dust,  always 
lacking  the  regular  horizontal  lines  which  may  characterize  lacustrine  and  flood- 
plain  deposits.  Frequent  in  the  later  Csenozoic  of  North  America.  8.  Cave 
deposits.  Bones  of  animals  living  in  caves,  fallen  or  dragged  into  them,  inclosed 
with  other  fine  sediments.  Where  over-abundant  they  may  consolidate  into  a 
"phosphorite "  or  phosphate  deposit.  Frequent  in  the  Pleistocene  of  North  America 
and  Europe.  9.  Fissure  deposits.  Bones  accumulated  in  the  same  manner  as  in 
caves,  or  by  wind  or  water  action,  in  fissures  of  the  rock,  more  or  less  consolidated, 
also  sometimes  forming  "phosphorites."  Frequent  in  the  Csenozoic  of  Europe,  as 
the  famous  fissure  deposits,  of  Egerkingen,  of  Lissieu,  of  Quercy. 

The  remains  of  fossil  mammals  may  be  deposited  under  any  of  the 
above  conditions  and  thus  occur  in  formations  of  many  kinds.  The  least 
perfectly  preserved  are  those  washed  along  with  coarse  pebbles  and  gravels, 
while  the  most  perfect  as  a  rule  are  those  found  in  the  fine  sediments  of 
still  water,  of  seolian  dust,  of  asphaltum,  or  of  volcanic  ash. 


56 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Fig.  12.  —  The  imbedding  of  skeletons  in  aeolian,  or  wind-drift  deposits.  Above  :  Recent 
times.  Partially  imbedded  skeleton  of  an  ox  on  the  plains  of  South  Dakota.  Below  :  Miocene 
times.  Partially  exhumed  skeleton  of  the  fossil  forest  horse,  Hypohippics,  on  the  plains  of 
Colorado. 


The  chief  kinds  of  mammal-bearing  rocks,  that  is,  sorted  as  to  mineral 
composition,  are  as  follows: 

1.  Conglomerates  {"  Conglomerats,''  " Konglomerate'').  Composed  of  weather- 
worn pebbles,  gravels,  and  sands.  They  are  evidence  either  of  advancing  or  re- 
treating shore  lines  of  the  sea  or  of  river  channels,  or  mountain  streams  where  they 
spread  upon  the  plains.  'Mud-ball'  conglomerates  are  rather  common  in  the 
western  tertiaries.    On  the  old  sea  borders  of  Eocene  France  we  find  the  Gravier 


INTRODUCTION 


57 


marin  de  Cernay,  de  Meudon.  In  the  great  Oligocene  Bad  Lands  of  South  Dakota 
it  is  most  interesting  to  find  the  coarser  sediments  of  a  'river  channel'  traversing 
a  fine  'overflow'  deposit,  each  containing  its  characteristic  forms  of  mammahan 
life.  Both  in  the  deposits  of  the  mountain  regions  and  plains  regions  of  the  western 
United  States  great  and  small  areas  of  these  sediments  occur  containing  either 
weatherworn  or  often  battered  fossils.  2.  Sandstones  {"GreSy^'  " Sandsteine'^). 
Composed  chiefly  of  quartz  sand  or  sometimes  of  feldspar  grains  (arkose  sand- 
stones), associated  with  deposits  of  volcanic  origin,  as  in  the  Bridger  Formation. 
Sandstones,  due  to  sea  and  river  action,  naturally  cover  wider  areas  than  the  coarser 
conglomerates,  which  they  often  adjoin,  because  they  display  the  transporting 
power  of  slower  water  action  or  higher  wind  action,  as  in  deserts.  Characteristic 
of  late  Pleistocene  and  Glacial  times.  3.  Shales  {"Argile  schisteuse/'  "Schiefer- 
thon'').  Chiefly  fine  mud  sediments,  deposited  in  still  or  comparatively  still  water 
and  exhibiting  more  or  less  perfect  horizontal  or  oblique  cleavage  or  lamination. 
Often  contain  beautifully  preserved  leaves  and  remains  of  fossil  fishes,  as  the  Green 
River  Shales.  Rarely  contain  remains  of  mammals.  4.  Clays  {"  Argile/'  ''limon,^' 
"Thon'').  Due  to  river,  flood  plain,  or  deep  water  action,  these  are  uniformly  fine 
sediments,  typically  of  continental  origin,  in  large  part  a  consolidated  loess.  The 
true  "plastic  clay"  or  argile  plastique  is  mostly  of  marine  origin  and  results  from 
the  final  decomposition  of  feldspar.  The  famous  London  Clay,  containing  Hyraco- 
therium,  is  an  estuarine  formation.  5.  Loess  {"Loess"  in  French  and  German). 
Characteristic  of  late  Pleistocene  and  Glacial  times.  An  unconsohdated,  fine,  porous, 
silicious  silt,  deposited  on  river  flood  plains,  in  back  waters,  and  by  the  agency  of 
the  wind  on  dryland  surfaces  and  (according  to  some  authors)  as  glacial  mud. 
Water-borne  and  wind-borne  loess  are  hard  to  distinguish;  some  loess  is  of  joint 
origin.  In  some  regions  loess  is  composed  of  volcanic  ash  more  or  less  altered  by 
weather  and  river  erosion.  Where  of  flood  plain  origin  it  may  show  horizontal 
color  banding,  due  to  seasonal  floods,  or  in  seolian  loess  to  the  direction  of  preva- 
lent winds.  A  partially  consolidated  loess  would  be  commonly  called  a  clay; 
when  further  consolidated,  a  shale.  The  most  famous  loess  deposit  is  the  Pampean 
formation  of  Argentina,  rich  in  mammals.  6.  Volcanic  ash  and  tuff  {"Tufs," 
"Tuff").  The  great  constituent  of  the  Mountain  Basin  formations  of  North 
America.  Composed  of  volcanic  ejecta,  containing  many  feldspathic  particles. 
Where  wind-borne,  the  ash  resembles  loess;  where  water-borne,  volcanic  ash  forms 
tuffs.  Examples  are  large  parts  of  the  Bridger,  Wind  River,  and  other  mountain 
basin  formations  of  North  America.  7.  Lignites  {"Lignites"  " Braunkohle") . 
Rare  as  a  Csenozoic  formation  in  America,  common  in  the  Eocene  of  Europe,  as 
the  Lignites  du  Soissonais,  de  la  Debruge,  de  Cadibona.  8.  Gypsum  {"Gtjpse," 
"Gyps").  Formed  by  evaporation  of  lagoons.  Afford  an  invaluable  indication  of 
climatic  conditions.  The  most  famous  deposit  of  the  kind  is  the  Upper  Eocene 
Gypsede  Montmartre,  near  Paris.  9.  Limestones  {"Calcaire,  "  "Kalk").  Limestones, 
as  the  Calcaire  grossier  of  the  Upper  Eocene  of  France,  are  chiefly  calcareous  (car- 
bonate of  lime),  sometimes  of  organic  origin,  or  formed  by  the  accumulation  of 
shells ;  sometimes  by  deposition  from  water  holding  lime  in  solution.  Traver- 
tines are  calcareous  deposits  formed  from  hot  springs.  10.  Marls  {"Marnes," 
Mergel").  Loose  or  unconsohdated  deposits  of  earth,  of  lime,  of  shells,  etc.,  rich 
in  organic  matter.  Phosphate  Beds  are  marls  or  other  formations  rich  in  phos- 
phate of  hme,  such  as  those  of  South  Carolina;  they  are  httoral  and  estuarine  in 


58 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


origin  and  may  contain  the  intermingled  remains  of  land  and  sea  animals.  1 1 .  Phos- 
phorites (phosphate  of  lime)  {''Phosphorites,''  " Phosphorit").  Also  of  organic 
origin,  directly  or  indirectly  derived  from  the  hard  parts  of  animals,  or  from  the 
excrements  of  aninaals.  12.  Asphalt  or  asphaltum  Asphalte,''  "Asphalt.'')  The 
residuum  of  pitch  lakes  left  by  the  evaporation  of  petroleum  springs.  A  remark- 
able asphaltum  deposit  (Rancho  La  Brea,  see  Fig.  205)  has  recently  been  found  in 
the  Pleistocene  of  southern  California,  containing  a  rich  variety  of  mammals  in 
remarkable  preservation.  13.  Breccias  {"Breche,"  "Breccia").  Formed  by  the 
filling  in  of  bones  and  gravels  cemented  together  by  calcareous  waters. 

V,  Duration  of  the  Age  of  Mammals 

How  long  was  the  Age  of  Mammals?  How  many  years  ago  did  it 
begin?  How  may  we  find  out?  If  we  remark,  for  example,  that  Eohippus, 
the  first  stage  in  the  development  of  the  horse,  was  an  animal  which  lived 
about  three  millions  of  years  ago,  our  hearer  looks  incredulous  and  has  a 
perfect  right  to  ask,  What  are  your  grounds  for  assigning  such  an  enormously 
long  period  of  time?  There  are  a  great  many  ways  of  estimating  geologic 
time,  all  of  which  either  depend  on  the  comparison  of  past  processes  with 
present  processes  of  earth  formation,  or  make  an  appeal  to  astronomic 
data,  such  as  the  procession  of  the  eclipses,  the  eccentricity  of  the  earth's 
orbit,  or  the  consolidation  of  the  earth's  crust  and  the  period  necessary  for 
cooling  sufficiently  to  admit  of  life. 

A  vast  period.  —  Whatever  method  of  calculation  we  adopt,  a  glance 
at  the  accompanying  diagram  shows  that  the  Age  of  Mammals,  while 
vastly  long  in  itself,  was  relatively  short  as  compared  with  all  the  life  periods 
which  preceded  it;  it  was  estimated  by  Dana  in  1874  as  occupying  only 
one-sixteenth  of  the  whole  life  period,  by  Wallace  in  1895  as  occupying  one- 
twentieth  of  the  whole  life  period.  Each  of  these  Ages  represents  a  vast 
interval,  as  attested  both  by  the  great  geographic  changes  which  occurred  in 
them,  by  the  great  mountain  chains  which  were  thrown  up  and  then  com- 
pletely reduced  to  the  general  level,  by  the  enormous  thickness  of  the  sedi- 
mentary deposits  which  were  laid  down  on  land  and  sea,  recently  estimated 
at  a  total  of  265,000  feet  or  upwards  of  50  miles  (Sollas,  1900),  or  335,800 
feet  (Sollas,  1909),  and  still  more  perhaps  by  the  great  changes  in  the  ani- 
mal and  plant  life  which  are  recorded  in  the  fossils.^ 

Mountain  births.  —  Biologists  from  Darwin  to  the  present  time  have 
demanded  long  periods  for  these  evolutionary  changes  and  for  the  Age  of 
Mammals  itself.  As  a  measure  of  the  lapse  of  time  the  comparison  of  the 
great  advance  in  size  and  structure  between  the  Eocene  Eohippus  and  the 
existing  horse  (Equus)  (Fig.  14)  is  perhaps  less  impressive  than  a  reviev/ 
of  the  great  mountain  births  which  occurred  during  the  Age  of  Mammals. 

The  Rocky  Mountains,  it  is  true,  began  their  elevation  during  the  close 

^  See  Poulton,  1896,  A  Contribution  to  the  Discussion  of  the  Age  of  the  Earth,  Essays  on 
Evolution,  1908,  p.  15. 


PERI ODS 


HIMALAYAS 

SWISS  ALPS 
PYRENEES 


EASTERN  ALPS 
(Partly) 


HE  HERCYNIAN  BELT  OF 


CENTRAL  EUROPE? 


^  CAj?BpNIEERppS- 
K^'^  /  /  <^  /  /  /  ^ 
/////  /.  /  /  <  / 


/ 


/////  ////^, 
'///D^V^^NIAN-// 


/ 


SCOTTISH  HIGHLANDS. 


SILURIAN 


FINLAND 

E.SCANDINAVIA 

S.BOHEMIA 


15000 


ORDOVICIAN 

17000 


CAMBRIAN 


16000 


ALGONKIAN 


SIERRA  NEVADA 


APPALACHIAN 


/CARBON  I  FEf^Cl/S/' 


qE/VjO'Nf/  ^ 

/.  C// /////. 
/  ////////'/', 
.  //////// ////^^ 


SILURIAN 


ACADIAN 


TACONIC 


?  PRE-CAMBRIAM 


?  ARCHAEAN 


Fig.  13.  —  A  diagram  showing  what  the  total  thickness  of  the  earth's  crust  would  be  if  all 
the  surface  deposits  since  the  time  of  the  first  appearance  of  life  had  accumulated  on  top  of 
each  other.  Age  of  Mammals  =  dots.  Age  of  Reptiles  =  vertical  lines.  Age  of  Amphibians 
and  Fishes  -  oblique  lines.  The  births  of  American  and  Eurasiatic  mountain  systems  are 
mdicated  by  incisions  of  the  right  and  left  hand  columns  respectively. 


CO 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


of  the  Age  of  Reptiles;  they  had  only  attained  a  height  of  four  or  five 
thousand  feet  when  the  Age  of  Mammals  commenced;  they  continued  to 
rise  during  the  entire  period.  But  consider  the  map  of  Europe  and  Asia 
at  the  beginning  of  Eocene  time  and  realize  that  the  great  mountain 
systems  of  the  Pyrenees,  the  Alps,  and  the  Himalayas  were  still  unborn, 
level  surfaces  in  fact,  partly  washed  by  the  sea.  As  shown  in  the  dia- 
gram, the  birth  of  the  Pyrenees  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  Oligocene.  At 
this  time  Switzerland  was  still  a  comparatively  level  plain,  and  not  until 


Fig.  14.  —  Duration  of  the  Age  of  Mammals  as  measured  by  the  evolution  of  the  horse. 
Skeleton  of  the  Eocene  four-toed  horse,  Eohippus,  and  of  the  Texas  Lower  Pleistocene  horse, 
Equus  scotti.    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


the  close  of  the  Oligocene  did  the  mighty  system  of  the  Swiss  Alps  begin 
to  rise.  Central  Asia  was  even  yet  a  plain  and  upland,  and  only  during 
the  Miocene  did  the  Himalayas,  the  noblest  existing  mountain  chain,  begin 
to  rise  to  their  present  fellowship  \vith  the  sky.  In  North  America  again, 
since  the  close  of  the  Eocene  the  region  of  the  present  Grand  Canon  of 
the  Colorado  has  been  elevated  11,000  feet  and  the  river  has  carved  its 
mighty  cafion  through  the  rock  to  its  present  maximum  depth  of  6500  feet. 

Those  who  have  been  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  antiquity  of  these 
wonders  of  the  world  and  will  imagine  the  vast  changes  in  the  history  of 
continental  geography  and  continental  life  which  were  involved,  will  be 
ready  to  concede  that  the  Age  of  Mammals  alone  represents  an  almost 
inconceivable  period  of  time. 


INTRODUCTION 


61 


Modes  of  Estimating  Ccenozoic  Time 

From  the  rocks  themselves  there  are  several  modes  of  calculation: 
1.  Total  thickness  of  the  formations  composing  the  so-called  sedimentary 
rocks,  compared  with  the  average  rate  of  accumulation,  deposition,  and 
sedimentation  observable  to-day.  2.  Denudation  and  erosion,  the  counter 
processes,  or  the  wearing  away  of  elevated  surfaces  by  the  action  of  water 
and  wind,  snow,  ice,  and  frost.  Estimates  of  former 
heights  of  mountains,  etc.,  and  of  the  length  of  time 
during  which  these  erosive  agencies  have  been  at  work. 
3.  Chemical  content  of  the  sea,  based  on  the  assump- 
tion that  all  the  salts  and  mineral  elements  of  the  sea 
are  derived  by  solution  from  the  soil.  4.  Procession 
and  recession  of  the  glaciers  as  a  means  of  estimating 
Pleistocene  or  Quaternary  time  by  comparison  of  past 
with  present  advances  and  retreats  of  glacial  masses. 

Obstacles  confront  every  mode  of  making  these 
comparisons  of  past  and  present  processes.  In  estimat- 
ing past  rates  of  accumulation  by  those  observed  in  the 
deltas  or  mouths  of  existing  rivers,  the  disturbing  and 
unnatural  influence  of  man  must  be  considered.  The 
modern  delta  accumulations  of  the  Mississippi,  the  Po, 
the  Danube,  the  Tigris,  the  Euphrates,  and  the  Ganges 
are  probably  unnaturally  rapid  because  the  soil  of  the 
drainage  basins  from  which  these  deltas  are  formed  has 
been  disturbed  by  the  unnatural  erosion  hastened  by 
human  cultivation.    In  the  case  of  the  Tigris  and     _  ^ 

1.         r  r  r  n  r         -a         <•  —  Duration 

Euphrates,  the  makmg  oi  from  forty  to  liity  miles  of  of  the  Age  of  Mam- 
new  land  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  so  that  ancient  seaports  "^^^^  as  measured  by 

•   1      1    the   evolution  of  the 

01  tour  or  live  thousand  years  ago  are  now  far  mland,  teeth  of  the  horse.  Su- 
is  very  largely  due  indirectly  to  human  agency,  namely,     "2,^ ,  grinding  teeth 

c    .      r  1  .11  of  Eohippus    (below) , 

to  the  destruction  of  the  forests,  the  unrestricted  brows-  and  of  Equus  (above), 
ing  of  sheep  and  goats,  and  the  consequent  rapid  de-  d^awn  to  scale  and 

showing  the  great  in- 

nudation  of  the  soil. 


crease  in  complexity  as 
fVip  well  as  in  length  (A) 
and  width  (B). 


The  Mississippi, 


Deposition  or  accumulation.  —  An  outline  of 
methods  employed  to  calculate  rates  of  deposition  may 
be  found  in  WiUiams's  ''Geological  Biology"  (1895). 
according  to  the  calculations  of  Humphreys  and  Abbot,  brings  down  every 
year  sediment  equivalent  in  amount  to  a  mass  268  feet  deep  and  one 
square  mile  in  extent.  Assuming  the  area  of  distribution  to  be  50,000 
square  miles,  the  deposit  would  reach  a  depth  of  50  feet  in  about  10,000 
years,  or  one  foot  in  200  years.  Forshay  estimated  the  Mississippi  ac- 
cumulation as  four  times  as  rapid,  or  at  the  rate  of  one  foot  in  50  years. 
The  most  precisely  measured  flood  plain  in  the  world  is  that  on  either 


62  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

side  of  the  River  Nile.  It  is  found  that  by  the  annual  overflow  the 
sediments  accumulate  at  the  rate  of  two  feet  and  ten  inches  in  100  years.^ 
Again,  illustrating  the  difficulty  of  forming  estimates  from  present  rates  of 
accumulation  or  deposition,  the  estimates  given  by  Geikie  in  1892  may  be 
cited,  which  show  that  the  sedimentary  deposits  at  the  mouth  of  the  Po 
are  much  more  rapid  than  those  at  the  mouth  of  the  Danube. 

Denudation  or  erosion.  —  Estimates  based  on  denudation  confront 
similar  difficulties.  Haughton  ^  in  1878  found  the  mean  rate  of  denuda- 
tion of  the  surface  in  the  several  great  river  basins  of  the  world  to  be  one 
foot  in  3090  years.  A  most  ingenious  method  of  measuring  the  rate  of 
erosion  is  the  '  cedar-root  chronology, '  which  appears  to  have  been  invented 
by  James  Hall  ^  in  1871.  He  made  an  elaborate  study  of  the  rate  of  ero- 
sion along  the  valley  of  the  Mohawk  River  in  New  York,  based  upon  the 
estimated  age  of  nineteen  cedar  trees,  the  length  of  the  exposed  root,  and 
the  recession  of  the  cliff  per  century.  From  this  he  calculated  that  35,000 
years  was  the  minimum  of  time  since  the  Cohoes  Falls  were  opposite  the 
pothole  in  which  the  famous  'Cohoes  mastodon'  skeleton  was  deposited. 
The  same  method  was  used  by  Knight  ^  in  1899,  of  especial  interest  be- 
cause the  observations  were  made  in  a  well-known  fossiliferous  area,  at 
Bates-Hole,  Wyoming,  where  there  is  a  vast  depression  produced  by  the 
erosion  of  the  Tertiary  beds  of  Oligocene  Age.  On  its  slopes  grow  pine  trees 
(Pinus  murrayana  Eng.)  that  have  recorded  the  rate  of  erosion  here  for 
about  300  years.  As  the  material  was  worn  away  their  roots  became 
more  and  more  exposed.  The  oldest  of  the  trees  stand  on  slopes,  their 
trunks  elevated  three  or  four  feet  above  the  slopes.  On  the  average  it  was 
found  that  the  trees  300  years  old  had  about  three  feet  of  rock  removed 
from  their  roots.  According  to  this  100  years  are  required  to  remove  one 
foot  of  surface.  Three  miles  have  been  eroded  on  either  side,  and  at  the 
rate  of  one  foot  per  century,  1,584,000  years  must  have  elapsed  since  the 
process  began.  The  process  began  not  earlier  than  the  close  of  the  Miocene, 
when  the  highest  beds  of  Bates-Hole  were  deposited.  Thus  the  erosion 
must  have  occurred  during  the  subsequent  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  periods, 
which  estimated  in  this  way  represent  a  duration  of  1,584,000  years.  On 
this  basis  it  would  not  be  out  of  the  way  to  estimate  the  Age  of  Mammals 
at  4,000,000. 

Helium  content.  —  The  most  recent  method  is  that  of  Strutt,  based 
upon  the  amount  of  helium  found  in  different  rocks.  Helium,  like  the 
radioactive  elements,  accumulates  in  minerals,  and  hence  if  we  measure 

1  Lyons,  H.  G.,  The  Physiography  of  the  River  Nile  and  its  Basin.  Surv.  Dep't.  Egypt, 
Cairo,  1906. 

2  Haughton,  Physical  Geology.    Nature,  Vol.  18,  1878,  pp.  266-268. 

^  Hall,  J.,  Notes  and  Observations  on  the  Cohoes  Mastodon.  Rept.  N.  Y.  State  Cab.  Nat. 
Hist.,  Vol.  21,  1871,  pp.  99-148. 

^  Knight,  W.  C,  Some  New  Data  for  Converting  Geological  Time  into  Years.  Science^ 
U.S.  Vol.  X,  1899,  pp.  607-608. 


INTRODUCTION 


63 


the  amount  of  helium  in  a  sample  rock  and  the  amount  produced  in  the 
sample  in  one  year,  we  can  reckon  the  length  of  time  the  helium  has  been 
accumulating,  and  hence  the  age  of  the  rock.  This  method  may  lead  to 
determinations  not  merely  of  the  average  age  of  the  crust  of  the  rock,  but 
of  the  ages  of  particular  rocks  and  the  date  at  which  the  various  strata  were 
deposited.^ 

A  very  rough  estimate  of  the  accumulation  or  thickness  of  the  Eocene 
and  Oligocene  sediments  in  the  Rocky  Mountain  basins  is  seven  thousand 
feet.  This  is  an  approximate  figure  which  will  in  time  be  made  exact. 
These  sediments,  however,  consist  largely  of  tuffs  or  partly  worked  over 
volcanic  materials  deposited  in  water.  We  certainly  have  no  means  of 
comparison  with  similar  processes  going  on  to-day  which  will  enable  us  to 
estimate  the  time  occupied  in  the  accumulation  of  these  rocks. 

Thus  difficulties  confront  us  on  every  side,  and  the  most  careful  of  our 
computations  are  mere  approximations.  Since,  however,  it  is  desirable 
to  give  some  idea  of  the  scientific  opinion  on  the  duration  of  the  Age  of 
Mammals,  the  following  table  is  of  interest. 


Length  of  C^nozoic  Era  or  Age  of  Mammals 


Estimated  by  Comparison  with  Present  Rates  of  Deposition  and  Denudation 


Dana        1874         3,000,000  years 


Wallace     1881         4,200,000  years 

(Tertiary  = 
4,000,000 

Quaternary  = 
200,000+) 


Walcott     1893         2,900,000  years 


Based  on  the  estimated  thickness  of  the 
total  series  of  stratified  rocks  and  the 
estimated  rate  of  accumulation  of  de- 
posits along  the  shores  of  continents 
at  the  present  time. 
Based  on  the  rate  of  denudation  with  the 
estimated  thickness  of  sedimentary 
rocks  (which  is  probably  less  than 
177,200  feet,  as  given  by  Haughton 
78);   and  further  on  the  dates  of 
phases  of  high  eccentricity  of  the 
earth's  orbit. 
Based  on  the  total  thickness  of  sedi- 
mentary rocks  of  North  America 
(100,000  feet),  compared  with  present 
rates  of  accumulation. 
Upham      1893         3,100,000  years      Based  on  estimates  of  the  length  of  the 
(mean)  glacial  stages. 

(Tertiary  = 
2  -  4,000,000 

Quaternary  = 
100,000) 

^  Thomson,  J.  J.,  Address  of  the  President  of  the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement 
of  Science  [Winnipeg,  1909j.    Science,  n.s.  Vol.  XXX,  no.  765,  Aug.  27,  1909,  pp.  257-279. 


64 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Based  on  the  rate  of  denudation  or  erosion 
as  measured  b}^  the  amount  of  ex- 
posure of  roots  of  pine  trees  of  known 
age  (1  foot  in  100  years). 

Based  on  the  rate  of  accumulation  esti- 
mated at  1  foot  in  100  years.  The 
estimated  thickness  of  sedimentary 
rocks  (Eocene  to  Recent)  is  42,000 
feet. 

The  thickness  of  sedimentary  rocks 
(Eocene  to  Recent)  estimated  at 
63,800  feet. 

Penck        1908     Quaternary  =  500,000     Based  on  the  average  rate  of  rfeww6^a^ioM 
to  1,000,000  years         of  the  present  land  surface  (^^^^  foot 
in  1  year). 


VI.  The  World  Supply  of  Mammals 

The  source  of  the  world's  supply  of  mammals,  the  great  homes,  centers, 
or  continents  from  which  the  orders  evolved  and  took  on  their  distinctive 


LATE  CRETACEOUS 


Fig.  16.  —  Late  Cretaceous  and  Basal  Eocene.  Period  of  extinction  of  the  great  Reptilia. 
A  time  of  elevation,  favoring  an  interchange  of  archaic  life  between  South  and  North  America, 
also  between  North  America  an  I  Europe.  South  America  probably  united  with  Australia  via 
Antarctica,  allowing  an  interchange  of  carnivorous  and  herbivorous  marsupials.  A  partial 
conmiunity  of  fauna  between  North  America  and  Eurasia  with  Africa.  Rearranged  from 
W.  D.  Matthew,  1908. 


Knight  1899 


Sollas  1900 


1909 


4,000,000  years 

(Eocene-Miocene  = 
2,500,000  app. 

Plio. -Pleistocene  = 
1,584,000) 

4,200,000  years 

(Tertiary  = 
3,800,000 

Quaternary  = 
400,000) 

6,380,000  years 


INTRODUCTION 


65 


form,  still  remains  as  one  of  the  great  problems  of  the  Age  of  Mammals 
which  has  not  been  thoroughly  worked  out.  The  solution  turns  upon 
palseogeography,  or  the  past  relations  of  the  continents  and  islands  to  each 
other,  but  many  palseogeographic  problems  in  turn  appeal  to  the  past  and 
present  distribution  of  animals  and  plants.  The  existence  of  a  great 
southern  continent,  Antarctica,  for  example,  is  just  beginning  to  be  de- 
monstrated through  geography  and  geology ;  ^  it  was  first  indicated  through 
the  facts  of  palaeontology,  zoology,  and  botany. 

Thus  we  may  first  briefly  consider  the  distribution  of  mammalian  or- 
ders in  the  past,  and  then  the  palceogeography,  or  former  distribution  of 
land  surfaces,  migrating  tracts,  etc. 

World-wide  distribution  during  the  Age  of  Reptiles.  —  Our  comparison 
begins  with  Eocene  times,  or  the  first  period  of  the  Age  of  Mammals.  We 
find  proofs  from  the  very  outset  not  only  that  all  the  great  continents  were 
richly  supplied  with  mammalian  life,  but  that  during  the  preceding  Age 
of  Reptiles  important  migrations  and  interchanges  of  mammalian  life  had 
taken  place,  establishing  a  sort  of  cosmopolitan  distribution  of  the  more 
primitive  forms,  especially  of  the  Insectivora.  These  generalized  stem 
forms  of  mammals  were  widely  distributed.  We  discover  (compare  p.  64) 
during  the  latter  part  of  the  Age  of  Reptiles  and  very  early  in  the  Age  of 
Mammals  evidences  of  connections  between  the  following  areas: 

Australia,  deriving  its  marsupials  either  from  the  north  through  Asia 
and  the  northern  continents,  or  from  the  south  through  Antarctica  and 
South  America. 

South  America,  sharing  a  community  of  marsupial  life  with  Australia 
either  through  Antarctica  on  the  south  or  through  North  America,  Europe, 
and  Asia  on  the  north,  and  of  placental  life  with  (?)  North  America. 

North  America,  sharing  a  community  of  life  in  the  orders  Marsupialia, 
Edentata,  and  probably  Condylarthra  and  (?)  Amblypoda  on  the  south  with 
South  America,  and  on  the  north  with  Europe  and  probably  Asia. 

Africa,  showing  evidence  of  a  community  of  mammalian  life  with 
Europe  on  the  north  and  Asia  on  the  northeast,  but  as  yet  no  evidence  of 
connection  either  with  the  mammalian  life  of  Australia  or  the  early  mam- 
malian life  of  South  America. 

Mammals  of  the  Northern  Hemisphere.    Holardica  the  Grand  Center  of  Evo- 
lution 

As  regards  the  grand  centers  of  origin,  Riitimeyer  in  his  classic  paper  of 
1867  set  forth  what  is  now  known  as  the  Bi-polar  theory.^  Other  authors 
have  advocated  the  North  Polar  theory;  others  again  the  South  Polar 
theory  (Ameghino). 

^  The  recent  British  Antarctic  expeditions  confirm  the  pioneer  geographic  work  of  Wilkes, 
and  report  the  discovery  of  sedimentary  deposits  and  of  fossiUzed  wood. 

2  Riitimeyer,  Ueber  die  Herkunft  unserer  Thierwelt.  Basel  und  Genf,  1867. 


66 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


The  North  Polar  Theory.  —  Since  the  greater  land  masses  of  the  globe 
are  in  the  north,  we  should  expect  to  find  a  greater  number  of  orders  of 
mammals  in  the  northern  hemisphere  than  in  the  southern  (see  p.  68). 
In  1886  Haacke  advanced  the  extreme  theory  that  all  land  mammals 
originated  at  the  North  Pole  and  thence  spread  southward.'  To  support 
this  theory  it  was  only  necessary  to  assume  land  connections  between  the 
north  polar  region  and  the  northern  parts  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  North 
America,  connections  between  North  and  South  America,  between  Europe 
and  Africa,  between  Africa  and  Madagascar,  between  Asia  and  Australia, 
and  between  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  The  climate  of  the  North  Pole, 
according  to  this  theory,  was  subtropical.  In  migrating  to  the  south  new 
forms  pressed  the  old  ones  until  the  older  were  forced  down  to  the  southern 
extremities.  This  would  account  for  the  ancient  orders  of  Monotremata 
and  Marsupialia  in  Australia  and  for  the  Marsupialia  in  southern  portions 
of  North  America  and  in  South  America.  The  fact  that  the  present  conti- 
nents have  as  a  whole  had  the  same  geographic  boundaries  for  long  periods 
of  time  supports  Haacke's  theory,  which  does  not  presuppose  any  essential 
changes  in  the  masses  of  water  and  land  and  renders  unnecessary  the  hy- 
pothesis of  a  southern  creative  center,  such  as  Antarctica.  We  shall  see, 
however,  that  there  are  many  facts  which  can  be  explained  only  through  the 
existence  of  such  a  great  southern  land  mass. 

Similarly  in  1903  Wortman,^  calling  attention  to  the  proofs  of  a  mild 
and  equable  climate  growing  very  gradually  cooler  as  characteristic  of  the 
north  polar  region  throughout  the  early  part  of  the  Age  of  Mammals, 
assumed  the  existence  of  a  grand  northern  common  center  of  evolution  and 
dispersal,  both  for  plants  and  animals.  Such  a  general  southward  re- 
treat of  the  higher  plants  and  mammals  throughout  much  of  the  Age  of 
Reptiles  and  the  whole  of  the  Age  of  Mammals  appears  to  be  demonstrated 
by  a  succession  of  waves  of  migration,  utterly  unheralded,  certainly  not 
coming  from  the  south  (that  is,  from  either  South  America  or  Africa)  and 
thus  as  certainly  coming  from  the  north,  i.e.,  from  a  northerly  formative 
evolution  area.  These  southward  waves  are  partly  to  be  ascribed  to  the 
lowering  of  temperature  which  was  inaugurated  at  the  Pole  and  gradually 
extended  southward. 

Scharff  ^  also  has  favored  this  theory  of  a  northern  creative  center  of 
mammalian  life.  He  believes  in  North  Atlantic  land  connections  which 
must  have  existed  up  to  very  recent  geological  times  between  northern 
Scandinavia  and  Arctic  North  America  by  way  of  Spitzbergen  and  Green- 
land; in  fact,  in  early  Pliocene  times  or  perhaps  during  the  Miocene  Period 

^  Wilh.  Haacke,  Der  Nordpol  als  Schopfungscentrum  der  Landfauna.  Biolog.  Centralblatt, 
Vol.  6,  1886-1887,  pp.  363-370. 

^  Wortman,  Studies  of  Eocene  Mammalia  in  the  Marsh  Collection,  Peabody  Museum, 
Pt.  II,  Primates.    Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  June,  1903,  Vol.  15,  pp.  419-436. 

^  Scharff,  R.,  European  Animals:  Their  Geological  History  and  Geographical  Dis- 
tribution, New  York,  1907. 


INTRODUCTION 


67 


an  extensive  continent  united  northern  Europe  and  Arctic  North  America. 
The  southern  shores  of  this  continent  extended  from  the  British  Isles  to 
Newfoundland  in  a  great  curve.  He  points  out  that  the  fossil  flora  proves 
that  the  subsidences  of  the  northern  Atlantic  which  separated  Europe  and 
America  were  geologically  recent,  that  is,  of  late  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene 
times.  So  few  remains  of  fossil  mammals  have  been  found  on  the  eastern 
€oast  of  North  America  that  the  hypothesis  of  Scharff  of  a  broad  North 


Fig.  17.  —  Chief  centers  of  the  adaptive  radiation  of  the  orders  of  mammals  so  far  as 
known  at  the  present  time. 


Atlantic  land  connection  during  a  considerable  part  of  the  Age  of  Mammals 
is  neither  supported  nor  disproved  by  such  negative  evidence. 

Other  authors  ^  believe  that  the  connections  and  migration  routes  be- 
tween Europe  and  North  America  were  chiefly  North  Pacific  or  via  Asia  and 
the  region  of  Behring  Straits. 

Even  if  the  north  polar  center  theory  of  Haacke  be  extreme  and  the 
evidence  for  a  north  Atlantic  land  mass  is  less  strong  than  that  for  North 
Pacific  land  connection  between  the  New  and  Old  worlds,  the  fact  remains 
undisputed  somewhat  in  the  form  stated  by  Wortman,  that  the  northern 
portions  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  North  America  formed  the  greatest  creative 
center,  probably  during  the  Age  of  Reptiles  and  certainly  during  the  Age 
of  Mammals.  Striking  evidence  for  this  is  found  in  the  great  number  and 
variety  of  the  orders  of  mammals  which  have  been  discovered  early  in  Eocene 
and  Lower  Oligocene  times  in  Europe  and  North  America,  which  with  Asia 
constitute  the  region  Holarctica. 

These  orders  of  mammals  (compare p.  73)  are  as  follows: 

^  See  Matthew,  W.  D.,  Hypothetical  Outlines  of  the  Continents  in  Tertiary  Times. 
Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  HisL,  Vol.  XXII,  Art.  XXI,  Oct.  25,  1906. 


68 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Marsupialia 

Insectivora 

Chiroptera 

Carnivora-Creodonta 

Carvornia-Fissipedia 

Rodentia 

Tillodontia 

Ta^niodonta  or  Ganodonta 
Edentata-Xenarthra 


Pholidota 

Tubulidcntata 

Lemuroidea 

Condylarthra 

Amblypoda 

Artiodactyla 

Perissodactyla 

Ancylopoda 

Zeuglodontia 


This  imposing  array  may,  it  is  true,  be  partially  swollen  by  inclusion  of 
orders  of  mammals  which  were  probably  indigenous  to  South  America 
(Edentata)  and  possibly  to  Africa  (Pholidota,  Tubulidentata,  Zeuglodontia), 
but  even  taking  out  these  possibly  or  probably  foreign  members  of  northern 
society,  a  large  residuum  of  mammals  which  probably  originated  in  the  north- 
ern hemisphere  still  remains  and  firmly  establishes  this  as  the  dominant 
hemisphere  in  the  evolution  of  the  Mammalia. 

Africa,  Ethiopian  Region,  also  an  Important  Center  of  Mammalian  Evolution 

Regarding  Africa  as  a  theater  of  mammalian  evolution  there  have  been 
two  views.  First,  the  older  view  that  Africa  derived  its  original  primitive 
stock  of  mammals  from  the  north  and  then  remained  passive  until  it  received 
a  new  wave  of  highly  specialized  mammals.  Second,  the  newer  view  that 
Africa  was  throughout  the  Age  of  Mammals  a  great  center  of  mammalian 
evolution  and  contributed  its  full  quota  to  the  world  stock  of  modernized 
mammals.  In  general  it  may  be  said  that  prior  to  1900  the  African  conti- 
nent as  a  great  theater  of  adaptive  radiation  of  the  Mammalia  had  not  been 
sufficiently  considered.  This  was  chiefly  because  it  had  practically  no  dis- 
covered fossil  mammal  history.  It  was  the  fashion  with  most  writers  on  geo- 
graphic distribution  to  speak  mainly  and  exclusively  of  the  invasion  of  Africa 
by  European  types  rather  than  of  the  possible  invasion  of  Europe  by  African 
types. 

Hypothesis  of  northern  invasion  of  Africa.  — In  1867  Rlitimeyer  ^  expressed 
the  opinion  that  at  a  very  early  period  Europe  sent  into  Africa  its  wealth 
of  tropical  forms.  The  ancient  population  of  this  continent  was  first  fully 
discussed  by  Alfred  Russel  Wallace,^  who  also  set  forth  the  hypothesis  of 
northern  invasion,  namely :  that  before  Pliocene  times  Africa  was  occupied 
only  by  a  small  primitive  fauna,  lemurs,  insectivores,  edentates,  and  rodents, 
and  that  early  in  Pliocene  times  the  large  mammalian  fauna  of  Europe  and 
southern  Asia  (Pikermi  and  Siwalik  Hills)  were  "poured  into  Africa  and, 
finding  there  a  new  and  favorable  country  almost  wholly  unoccupied  by  large 
mammalia,  increased  to  an  enormous  extent,  developed  into  new  forms, 
and  finally  overran  the  whole  continent." 


^  Riitimeyer,  Uber  die  Herkunft  unserer  Thierwelt,  1867,  pp.  42-43. 
2  Wallace,  The  Geographical  Distribution  of  Animals,  1876,  p.  288. 


INTRODUCTION  69 

In  his  notable  paper  of  1876  Blanford  ^  clearly  implied  the  existence  of  an 
African  element  in  the  fauna  of  India,  but  he  referred  to  mammals  rather  of 
recent  than  of  early  evolution  in  Africa.  He  believed  ^  that  an  Indo-African 
land  connection  (the  Lemuria  of  other  authors)  across  the  Indian  Ocean,  per- 
sisted through  the  Age  of  Reptiles  and  probably  lasted  into  early  Csenozoic 
times,  vestiges  of  this  connection  being  indicated  by  Madagascar,  the  Sey- 
chelles, and  other  islands  and  coral  reefs.  Madagascar  continued  to  form 
a  part  of  the  African  mainland  throughout  the  first  half  of  the  Age  of  Mam- 
mals, but  was  severed  from  it  before  Africa  was  invaded  from  the  north, 
in  older  Pliocene  and  glacial  times.  Madagascar  possesses  among  its  fauna 
(Insectivora,  Lemuroidea)  the  older  mammals  of  the  African  continent  which 
have  become  little  modified  since.  Blanford  also  believed  -  (1890,  p.  73) 
in  a  connection  between  Africa  and  South  America,  in  order  to  explain 
certain  supposed  alliances  between  some  South  American  and  African  and 
even  Madagascan  types. 

Similarly  Lydekker  ^  (1896)  believed  that  the  ancestral  types  of  the 
existing  mammals  of  Madagascar  entered  the  African  continent  some  time 
during  the  Oligocene  period  and  soon  after  ranged  over  the  whole  of  the  Ethio- 
pian and  Malagasy  (Madagascar,  Mascarene  Islands)  regions,  which  were 
then  broadly  united  and  possessed  a  common  mammalian  fauna.  In  Lydek- 
ker's  opinion,  Africa  was  peopled  only  with  these  primitive  forms  and  not 
until  the  Pliocene  Age,  when  Madagascar  became  isolated  as  an  island,  did 
there  occur  the  great  invasion  from  the  north  of  the  higher  and  larger  mam- 
mals such  as  apes,  monkeys,  and  the  great  quadrupeds  which  were  then 
flourishing  all  along  southern  Europe  and  Asia.  This  migration  took  place 
(p.  256)  along  the  eastern  side  of  the  continent  and  the  existence  of  certain 
species  of  mammals  which  are  still  common  to  India  and  Africa,  or  were 
so  during  the  Pleistocene  epoch,  lends  support  to  this  view. 

Similar  theories  were  expressed  in  1888  by  Schlosser,^  namely,  that  the 
mammals  of  Africa  seem  to  be  partly  (1)  a  continuation  of  the  primitive  ani- 
mal life  found  in  the  North  American  Eocene,  and  partly  (2)  a  continuation 
of  the  European  and  Asiatic  life  of  the  Upper  Eocene.  Thus  the  present 
mammalian  fauna  of  Africa  seems  to  point  to  two  migrations:  (1)  the  first 
occurred  very  early,  including  the  primitive  Insectivora,  closely  related  to 
forms  found  early  in  the  Age  of  Mammals  in  North  America;  (2)  the  second 
migration  into  Africa  occurred  in  the  Pliocene,  bringing  in  the  apes,  cats, 
hyaenas,  civet  cats,  rhinoceroses,  horses,  elephants,  pigs,  hippopotami,  ante- 
lopes, etc.    Up  to  this  time  these  mammals  had  lived  in  Europe  or  in  Asia. 

^  Blanford,  W.  T.,  The  African  Element  in  the  Fauna  of  India.  Ann.  Mag.  Nat.  Hist., 
Ser.  4,  Vol.  XVIII,  1876,  pp.  277-294. 

^  Id.,  Address  Delivered  at  the  Anniversary  Meeting  of  the  Geological  Society  of  London, 
Feb.  21,  1890,  p.  68  (Proc.  GeoL  Soc,  1890,  pp.  43-110). 

^  Lydekker,  A  Geographical  History  of  Mammals,  Cambridge,  1896,  p.  255. 

^  Schlosser,  M.,  tJber  die  Beziehungen  der  ausgestorbenen  Saugethierfaunen  und  ihr 
Verhaltniss  zur  Saugethierfauna  der  Gegenwart.  Biol.  Centralbl.,  1888,  Vol.  VIII,  pp.  582-650. 


70 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Hypothesis  of  Africa  as  an  evolution  center.  —  The  opposing  view  of  the 
,  invasion  of  Europe  from  Africa  was  independently  thought  out  and  set  forth 
by  three  authors  in  1899-1900,  namely,  by  Tullberg  in  his  monograph  on  the 
rodents,'  by  Stehlin  in  his  monograph  on  the  teeth  of  the  pig  family,^  and  by 
Osborn.^ 

Tullberg,  as  directly  opposed  to  Haacke,  is  a  strong  believer  in  a  great 
southerly  center  of  distribution,  and  stands,  like  Riitimeyer,  as  an  advocate 
of  the  bipolar  theory.    Thus  he  remarks  (pp.  490-491) : 

''In  the  Miocene  the  great  African  region  sent  its  heterogeneous  fauna  into 
Asia  by  way  of  Syria  or  Arabia.  In  this  way  Eurasia  received  together  with  typical 
(southwest)  African  types,  others  of  Asiatic  origin  that  had  become  differentiated 
from  their  ancestral  forms,  in  the  Madagascar-East-African  region.  Among  the 
latter  may  be  counted  the  Cavicornia,  which,  though  a  product  of  Africa,  were 
most  likely  originally  derived  from  northern  Artiodactyla.  The  Simiae,  Proboscidea, 
and  the  rodent  Hystricognathi  are  probably  purely  African  types  whose  first  ap- 
pearance in  Eurasia  followed  the  Miocene  migration."  When  the  Placentalia  first 
appear  they  have  already  undergone  a  considerable  differentiation,  and  since  they 
sprang  neither  from  the  Marsupialia  nor  from  the  Monotremata,  we  must  assume 
that  they  went  through  the  early  undiscovered  stages  of  their  evolution  in  some 
great  geographic  region  (other  than  Australia) ;  this  region  is  presumably  the  great 
southerly  continent  embracing  South  America  and  Africa  and  reaching  over  to 
India  by  way  of  Madagascar  with  a  broad  tongue  of  land  (the  Lemuria  and  Gond- 
wana  Land  of  other  authors) .  Three  great  mammalian  groups  had  already  evolved : 
(1)  the  ancestors  of  the  Lemuroidea  and  Anthropoidea;  (2)  the  ancestors  of  the 
Ungulata;  (3)  the  ancestors  of  the  Rodentia-Simplicidentata.  These  stocks  segre- 
gated off  into  two  great  divisions:  one,  East-Africa-Madagascar-Europe-Asia-North- 
America,  the  other  Southwest-Africa-South-America.  In  the  beginning  of  the  Age 
of  Mammals,  Africa  became  separated  from  South  America;  in  the  Lower  Oligo- 
cene  (p.  488)  Madagascar  separated  both  from  Asia  (India)  and  from  Africa.  At 
the  same  time,  however,  the  east  African  region  joined  with  the  southwest  African 
region  and  an  interchange  of  mammals  took  place. 

Stehlin's  views  (p.  478)  are  still  more  closely  parallel  to  those  independ- 
ently developed  by  Osborn,  as  the  following  citation  from  his  monograph  ^ 
shows : 

"Africa's  part  in  the  evolution  of  the  animal  life  of  the  globe  (p.  478)  has 
generally  been  represented  as  very  passive,  but  the  mere  fact  that  Africa  was  a 
large  continental  landmass  during  the  entire  Tertiary  makes  this  view  seem  unten- 
able. Among  the  living  mammals  of  Africa  there  are  a  number  of  types  such  as 
the  coney  (Hyrax),  the  aardvark  (Oryderopus) ,  and  the  pangolin  (Manis),  which 
differ  so  widely  from  any  Tertiary  Asiatic  or  European  forms,  that  the  conclusion 

1  Tullberg,  T.,  tjber  das  System  der  Nagethiere,  1899,  pp.  485-495. 

2  Stehlin,  H.  G.,  tlber  die  Geschiehte  des  Suiden-Gebisses,  1899-1900,  pp.  478-488. 

^  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Faunal  Relations  of  Europe  and  America  during  the  Tertiary  Period 
and  Theory  of  the  Successive  Invasions  of  an  African  Fauna  into  Europe,  1900,  pp.  56-59. 


INTRODUCTION 


71 


seems  not  far  to  seek  that  they  represent  the  last  remnants  of  an  ancient  African 
fauna.  This  hypothetical  (p.  479)  primitive  fauna  was  clearly  analogous  to  that 
of  South  America,  and  it  seems  probable  that  there  existed  a  means  of  communica- 
tion between  the  two  continents  either  by  way  of  Antarctica  or  a  trans-Atlantic 
landmass.  It  is  possible  that  both  had  received  their  fauna  from  the  north  in  pre- 
tertiary  times.  Certain  it  is,  however,  that  both  were  later  connected  with  the 
northern  continents,  communication  in  the  eastern  hemisphere  being  established 
much  earlier  than  in  the  western,  probably  before  the  Miocene.  Africa  is  now 
inhabited  by  mammalian  types  of  various  orders,  which  have  become  differentiated 
into  genera  and  even  families,  and  which  are  practically  unknown  among  the  fossil 
as  well  as  the  living  fauna  of  Europe  and  Asia.  When  we  consider  how  large  a 
space  of  time  is  required  for  the  development  of  even  slight  modifications,  the  con- 
clusion seems  forced  upon  us  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  present  faunal  types  of 
Africa  existed  there  throughoid  the  Tertiary.  The  antelopes  (p.  480),  then  as  now, 
seem  to  have  had  their  chief  centre  of  evolution  in  Africa,  and  perhaps  the  giraffes 
likewise.  Whether  the  horses,  rhinoceroses  and  even  the  enigmatical  proboscideans 
were  native  to  the  same  continent  in  early  Tertiary  times,  must  remain  an  open 
question.  It  is  very  probable  (p.  488)  that  the  Pikermi  fauna  [a  rich  Upper  Miocene 
fauna  of  Greece,  see  map,  p.  267],  save  for  the  forms  that  can  be  referred  back 
to  the  European  middle  Miocene,  is  derived  from  Africa.  The  way  into  Asia  seems 
to  have  been  less  open  at  this  time,  no  African  forms  having  been  found  east  of 
Maragha  (Persia).  In  the  Pliocene,  on  the  other  hand,  communication  with  Asia 
seems  to  have  been  more  intimate  than  with  Europe.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact 
(p.  488)  that  Chceropsis  (the  pigmy  hippopotamus),  and  Phacochcerus  (the  wart- 
hog)  at  no  time  migrated  out  of  Africa.  Perhaps  Ethiopia  was  better  able  to 
maintain  its  inhabitants  uninterruptedly  than  any  part  of  Asia  or  Europe  because 
it  remained  for  the  most  part  unaffected  by  the  great  marine  and  orogenic  move- 
ments, and  by  the  great  lowering  of  temperature  at  the  close  of  the  Tertiary." 

In  1899-1900  Osborn  developed  and  published  his  "Theory  of  Successive 
Invasions  of  an  African  Fauna  into  Europe."    He  observes  (p.  56) : 

"Let  us  therefore  clearly  set  forth  the  hypothesis  of  the  Ethiopian  region  or 
South  Africa  as  a  great  center  of  independent  evolution  and  as  the  source  of  succes- 
sive northward  migrations  of  animals,  some  of  which  ultimately  reached  even  the 
extremity  of  South  America  —  I  refer  to  the  Mastodons.  .  .  . 

"The  first  of  these  migrations  we  may  suppose  brought  in  certain  highly  special- 
ized ruminants  of  the  Upper  Eocene,  the  anomalures  or  peculiar  flying  rodents  of 
Africa;  with  this  invasion  may  have  come  the  pangolins  [Pholidota]  and  aardvarks 
[TubuHdentata],  and  possibly  certain  armadillos,  Dasypodidce,  if  M.  Filhol's  iden- 
tification of  Necrodasypus  is  correct.  A  second  invasion  of  great  distinctness  may 
be  that  which  marks  the  beginning  of  the  Miocene  when  the  mastodons  and  dino- 
theres  first  appear  in  Europe,  also  the  earhest  of  the  antelopes.  A  third  invasion 
may  be  represented  in  the  base  of  the  Pliocene  by  the  increasing  number  of  antelopes, 
the  great  giraffes  of  the  vEgean  plateau,  and  in  the  upper  Phocene  by  the  hippo- 
potami. With  these  forms  came  the  rhinoceroses  with  no  incisor  or  cutting  teeth, 
similar  to  the  smaller  African  rhinoceros,  D.  bicornis.  Another  recently  discovered 
African  immigrant  upon  the  Island  of  Samos  in  the  ^Egean  plateau  is  Pliohyrax 


72 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


or  Leptodon,  a  very  large  member  of  the  Hyracoidea,  probably  aquatic  in  its  habits, 
indicating  that  this  order  enjoyed  an  extensive  adaptive  radiation  in  Tertiary 
times." 

"It  thus  appears  that  the  Proboscidia,  Hyracoidea,  certain  Edentata,  the 
antelopes,  the  giraffes,  the  hippopotami,  the  most  specialized  ruminants,  and 
among  the  rodents,  the  anomalures,  dormice,  and  jerboas,  among  monkeys  the 
baboons,  may  all  have  enjoyed  their  original  adaptive  radiation  in  Africa;  that 
they  survived  after  the  glacial  period,  only  in  the  Oriental  or  Indo-Malayan  region, 
and  that  this  accounts  for  the  marked  community  of  fauna  between  this  region 
and  the  Ethiopian  as  observed  by  Blanford  and  Allen." 

Osborn  contended  that  against  the  prevalent  theory  of  Asiatic  origin  of 
these  mammals  were  two  important  facts :  first,  that  the  known  Oligocene 
and  Lower  Miocene  mammals  of  the  Bugti  beds  of  Sind  are  markedly  Euro- 
pean in  type,  and  contain  no  African  elements;  second,  that  if  these  animals 
had  originated  in  Asia  some  of  them  would  have  found  their  way  into  North 
America  as  early  as  or  earlier  than  into  Europe ;  third,  there  is  the  important 
fact  that  all  these  animals  appear  suddenly  in  Europe  without  any  known 
ancestors  in  the  older  geologic  formations. 

This  hypothesis  of  Osborn  up  to  the  present  time,  however,  appears  to 
be  confirmed  only  so  far  as  the  Proboscidea  and  Hyracoidea  are  concerned. 

Autochthonous  orders  of  Africa.  —  These  hypotheses  of  Tullberg,  Stehlin, 
and  Osborn,  that  Africa  has  been  an  important  center  of  adaptive  radiation, 
enjoyed  a  partial  but  most  welcome  verification  in  1901  when  Mr.  Hugh  J.  L. 
Beadnell  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Egypt  and  Dr.  C.  W.  Andrews  of  the 
British  Museum  of  London  announced  the  discovery  of  numerous  fossil  land 
mammals  in  Upper  Eocene  and  Lower  Oligocene  strata  exposed  in  the  Faytim 
about  eighty  miles  southwest  of  Cairo.  Between  1901  and  1905  the  explora- 
tion and  collection  of  these  beds  were  actively  continued.^  One  unexpected  dis- 
covery succeeded  another:  Africa,  far  from  being  a  continent  parasitic  upon 
Europe  and  Asia,  was  proved  through  these  discoveries  to  be  a  partly  depend- 
ent but  chiefly  independent  center  of  a  highly  varied  life,  a  great  breeding 
place  not  only  of  animals  which  subsequently  wandered  into  Europe,  but  of 

'  Andrews,  A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Tertiary  Vertebrata  of  the  Faydni,  Egypt. 
London,  1906. 

Osborn,  H.  F.,  Milk  Dentition  of  the  Hyracoid  Saghatherium  from  the  Upper  Eocene  of 
Egypt.    Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXII,  Art.  xiii,  July  25,  1906,  pp.  263-266. 

Osborn,  H.  F.,  The  American  Museum  Expedition  to  the  Fayura  Desert.  The  Nation,  Vol.  84, 
no.  2177,  Mar.  21,  1907,  pp.  271-272. 

Osborn,  H.  F.,  The  Fayum  Expedition  of  the  American  Museum.  Science,  n.s.  Vol.  XXV, 
no.  639,  Mar.  29,  1907,  pp.  513-516. 

Osborn,  H.  F.,  Hunting  the  Ancestral  Elephant  in  the  Fayilm  Desert.  Discoveries  of  the  Re- 
cent African  Expedition  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.  The  Century 
Magazine,  Vol.  LXXIV,  Oct.,  1907,  no.  6.  pp.  815-835. 

Osborn,  H.  F.,  New  Fossil  Mammals  from  the  Fay(im  Oligocene,  Egypt.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus. 
Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIV,  Art.  xvi.  Mar.  25,  1908,  pp.  265-272. 

Osborn,  H.  F.,  New  Carnivorous  Mammals  from  the  Fayum  Oligocene,  Egypt.  Bull.  Amer. 
Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVI,  Art.  xxviii,  Sept.,  1909,  pp.  415-424. 


INTRODUCTION 


73 


animals  belonging  to  types  hitherto  unknown  and  undreamed  of.  The  an- 
cestors of  the  two  great  groups  which  Osborn  had  hypothetically  placed  on  the 
map  of  Africa,  namely,  the  Proboscidea  and  the  Hyracoidea,  were  successively 
found  here  as  well  as  the  remarkable  unknown  group  of  Embrithopoda,  in- 
cluding ArsinoUherium.  The  Sirenia  or  seacows,  which  had  been  discovered 
many  years  earlier  near  Cairo,  were  traced  back  to  primitive  forms,  and  then 
the  ancestors  of  the  archaic  whales,  or  Zeuglodontia,  a  group  also  previously 
discovered  here,  were  traced  back  to  their  early  stages  of  evolution.  These 
discoveries  proved  to  be  epoch-making,  marking  a  turning  point  in  our  knowl- 
edge of  the  origin  and  distribution  of  the  Mammalia,  and  arousing  such 
widespread  interest  that  for  the  time  being  North  Africa  becomes  the  storm 
center  of  mammalian  palaeontology.    (See  p.  199.) 

From  our  present  knowledge  it  appears  that  Africa  may  have  been, 
therefore,  the  source  or  original  home  of  the  following  orders  of  mammals: 


Proboscidea,        Mastodons  and  elephants, 
Sirenia,  Seacows  or  manatees  and  dugongs. 

Zeuglodontia,       Primitive  or  ancestral  whales,  showing  evidence  of  descent  from 

land-living,  carnivorous  forms. ^ 
Hyracoidea,         Large  ancestral  forms  of  the  modern  diminutive  'dassies'  and 

conies. 

Embrithopoda,  Represented  by  the  giant  Arsinoitherium,  a  large  herbivorous 
quadruped  with  a  pair  of  great  horns  on  the  front  part  of  the 
skull. 


Autochthonous  and  migrant  orders  of  Africa.  —  It  is  well  to  place  in  im- 
mediate contrast  with  the  list  of  Holarctic  Orders  on  p.  68  all  those  orders  of 
mammals  which  have  thus  far  been  found  in  the  Eocene  and  Oligocene  of 
northern  Africa  in  the  Fayum  region,  keeping  in  mind  most  emphatically 
that  this  probably  represents  only  a  part  of  the  whole  mammalian  fauna  of 
Africa  in  these  early  geological  times,  and  that  great  discoveries  are  still  to  be 
made,  especially  among  the  order  Insectivora.  These  mingled  orders  present 
or  discovered  in  Africa  are  as  follows : 


Carnivora-Creodonta  Sirenia 

Rodentia-Theridomyidse  Embrithopoda 

Artiodactyla  Hyracoidea 

Proboscidea  Zeuglodontia 
Primates 


Certain  orders  of  mammals  are  conspicuous  by  their  absence  from  this 
ancient  Ethiopian  list,  although  one  or  more  of  them  may  well  be  found  when 
we  know  more  of  the  palaeontology  of  the  "dark  continent."  Among  these 
absent  or  undiscovered  forms  are: 

1  Zeuglodonts  are  also  observed  in  the  Upper  Eocene  of  the  eastern  United  States. 


74 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Tillodontia 
Tseniodonta 


Amblypoda 
Perissodactyla 


Edentata 
Pholidota 


(an  especially  notable  absence) 
Ancylopoda 
Carnivora-Fissipedia 


Tubulidcntata 
Condylarthra 


(also  an  especially  notable  absence) 


In  other  words,  this  early  African  assemblage  is  conspicuously  lacking  in 
the  perissodactyl  or  odd-toed  ungulates  (horses,  tapirs,  and  rhinoceroses)^ 
so  abundantly  represented  at  the  same  time  in  the  north,  also  in  the  charac- 
teristic pangolins  (Pholidota)  and  aardvarks  (Tubulidcntata)  which  are  now 
widely  spread  in  Africa.  The  raptorial  animals  of  early  African  times  are 
solely  of  the  archaic  type  of  Carnivora  known  as  Creodonta,  and  do  not  in- 
clude representatives  of  the  dog,  cat,  hyaena,  or  civet  families.  Even  antici- 
pating the  modification  and  enlargement  of  this  limited  assemblage  by  future 
discovery,  the  conclusion  is  certainly  supported  by  fact  as  at  present  known 
that  Africa  formed  a  very  important  independent  center  of  adaptive  radia- 
tion during  the  Eocene  and  early  Oligocene  period. 

Early  migration  between  Europe  and  Madagascar.  —  Still  more  recently 
(1905)  Grandidier  ^  has  discussed  the  former  zoogeographic  relations  be- 
tween Europe  and  Madagascar,  as  shown  in  the  following  citations :  ^ 

The  lemurs,  as  well  as  many  others  of  the  existing  and  extinct  mammals  of 
Madagascar,  show  a  close  affinity  to  Eocene  types  of  France.  Cryptoprocta  ferox, 
the  curious  plantigrade  cat  known  as  the  'Fossa,'  is  allied  to  Proailurus  and 
Pseudcelurus.  The  viverrines  are  allied  to  Cynodidis.  The  Madagascan  hippo- 
potamus is  perhaps  allied  to  Acotherulum.  Of  birds,  ^pyornis,  so  abundant  among 
the  extinct  animals  of  Madagascar,  is  comparable  to  Dasyornis  londinensis  of  the 
Eocene  of  the  Isle  of  Sheppey,  England.  It  seems  thus  that  the  last  representa- 
tives of  the  Eocene  fauna  of  the  north  took  refuge  in  Madagascar.  This  faunal 
community  is  explicable  only  on  the  assumption  of  intermigrations  between  Eu- 
rope and  Madagascar,  perhaps  by  way  of  Africa,  in  the  early  Tertiaries.  If  'Le- 
muria,'  the  great  Indo-Madagascan  continent,  of  which  Madagascar  is  supposed 
to  be  the  sole  remnant,  ever  existed,  it  must  have  been  reduced  to  a  long  Indian 
peninsula  or  archipelago  in  Mesozoic  times.  It  is  much  more  logical  to  suppose 
that  during  the  Tertiary  the  northwest  coast  of  Madagascar  for  a  short  time 
became  united  with  the  mainland  of  Africa  by  an  isthmus,  of  which  Mayotte, 
the  Comores,  etc.,  are  remnants.  By  means  of  this  land  bridge  Madagascar  was 
peopled  not  only  with  African  animals  such  as  Hippopotamus  and  Potamochoerus, 
but  also  with  the  Eocene  and  Oligocene  types  so  widely  distributed  in  the  northern 
hemisphere,  and  remains  of  which  appear  also  in  Egypt,  India,  etc.  Communica- 
tion with  Africa  was  finally  interrupted  and  Madagascar  continued  its  independent 
existence,  its  inhabitants  evolving  without  admixture  of  strange  elements  and  main- 
taining their  primitive  characteristics.  Meanwhile  Africa  received  ruminants,  large 
Carnivora,  etc.,  by  immigration,  forms  which  are  totally  lacking  in  Madagascar." 

^  Grandidier,  G.,  Recherches  sur  les  Lemuriens  Disparus  et  en  particulier  sur  ceux  qui 
vivaient  a  Madagascar.  Extr.  Nouv.  Arch.  Mus.,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  VII,  Paris,  1905.  (See  especially 
pp.  138-140.) 


INTRODUCTION 


75 


Antarctica,  Australia  and  South  America 

One  of  the  greatest  triumphs  of  recent  biological  investigation  is  the  hypo- 
thetical reconstruction  of  a  great  southern  continent,  to  which  the  name 
Antarctica  has  been  given,  through  the  concurrence  of  evidence  derived  from 
botany,  zoology,  and  palaeontology.  This  tends  to  support  the  bipolar 
theory. 

In  1847  the  British  botanist  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  first  advocated  the  view 
that  there  had  been  a  larger  and  more  continuous  tract  of  land  than  now 
exists  in  the  Antarctic  Ocean,  to  explain  the  distribution  of  flowering  plants, 
which  show  the  same  resemblances  as  the  animals,  many  plants  of  Chih, 
Patagonia,  Tasmania,  and  New  Zealand  being  allied.  He  did  not  assign  any 
geological  date  whatever  to  his  Antarctic  land.  In  1867  the  Swiss  palaeontol- 
ogist Riitimeyer  published  his  remarkable  zoogeographical  sketch  entitled 
Uber  die  Herkunft  unserer  Thierwelt} 

He  says  (pp.  13-15) : 

"From  the  study  of  modern  distribution  and  particularly  of  island  life,  we 
arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  all  parts  of  the  earth,  no  matter  how  isolated,  have 
received  their  animal  inhabitants  from  a  few  faunal  centers.  Aside  from  the  large 
connected  land  masses  north  of  the  equator,  we  need  to  assume  only  three  such 
centers  for  the  warm-blooded  animals  of  both  hemispheres:  Australia  for  the  mar- 
supials, Madagascar  for  the  makis,  and  the  islands  of  the  Indian  Ocean  from  New 
Zealand  to  Madagascar  for  the  wingless  birds.  In  reality  these  three  centers  are 
one,  since  their  fauna  represents  the  remnants  of  the  animal  life  of  a  large  Antarctic 
continent,  since  covered  by  the  sea  and  by  an  impenetrable  ice-sheet.  The  presence 
of  marsupials  and  of  ostriches  in  America  and  of  penguins  on  both  sides  of  the  great 
body  of  water  that  divides  the  continents  from  the  South  Polar  regions,  are  evidence 
in  favor  of  such  an  assumption."  Besides  this  Antarctic  faunal  center  Riitimeyer 
also  believed  in  an  Arctic  or  northern  faunal  center  (p.  65). 

In  1870  Huxley,^  in  his  anniversary  address  before  the  Geological  Society 
of  London,  said  that  the  simplest  and  most  rational  way  of  accounting  for  the 
various  differences  and  similitudes  of  the  life  of  southern  lands  is  on  the  sup- 
position that  a  South  Pacific  continent  existed  during  the  Age  of  Reptiles 
which  connected  Australia,  New  Zealand,  and  South  America,  and  then 
gradually  subsided,  Australia  being  the  first  land  to  be  cut  off  from  the  con- 
nection and  thus  receiving  only  the  lower  types  of  mammals,  or  marsupials. 
This  took  the  form  of  a  supposed  South  Atlantic  rather  than  South  Pacific 
land  bridge.  In  1893  H.  O.  Forbes^  revived  Hooker's  theory  of  a  southern 
or  Antarctic  continent,  and  considered  that  it  existed  until  very  late  times 
geologically,  that  is,  until  the  Pliocene.    He  even  proposed  to  connect  this 

^  For  full  reference  see  Bibliography. 

^  Huxley,  Anniversary  Address  of  the  President,  1870.  Collected  Memoirs,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  548. 

^  Forbes,  H.  O.,  The  Chatham  Islands;  their  Relation  to  a  Former  Southern  Continent. 
Roy.  Geog.  Soc,  Suppl.,  Vol.  Ill,  1893;  and,  Antarctica,  a  Supposed  Former  Southern  Conti- 
nent.   Nat.  Sci.,  Vol.  Ill,  1893. 


76  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

continent  with  Madagascar  and  with  some  of  the  Polynesian  Islands  of  the 
South  Pacific.  In  1895  Charles  Hedley/  an  Australian  naturaUst,  proposed 
the  more  reasonable  view  of  the  extension  of  the  Antarctic  continent,  sup- 
posing that  in  mid-Tertiary  time,  during  the  period  of  milder  climate,  a 
continent  somewhat  larger  than  that  now  existing  at  the  Antarctic  Pole 
connected  South  America  with  Tasmania  and  with  New  Zealand.  From  this 
continent  he  supposed  that  the  marsupials,  reptiles,  amphibians,  and  snails, 
which  are  common  to  South  America,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand,  may  have 
migrated. 

The  history  of  this  fascinating  Antarctica  theory  is  fully  narrated  by  that 
expert  palaeogeographer  Arnold  Edward  Ortmann.^  It  was  discussed  by  Gill 
(1875)  in  its  relation  to  the  distribution  of  the  fishes.  Evidence  in  its  favor 
has  been  drawn  by  Beddard  from  a  study  of  worms  and  other  invertebrates: 
by  Moore  from  a  study  of  the  flora  of  South  Africa;  by  Spencer  from  a  study 
of  the  Australian  fauna;  by  Ameghino,  Hatcher,  and  Ortmann  from  observa- 
tions on  the  invertebrate  and  vertebrate  fossils  of  Patagonia;  by  Moreno 
from  the  discovery  in  South  America  of  Miolania,  an  Australian  fossil 
turtle. 

In  1900  Osborn  ^  reconstructed  this  old  continent  by  elevation  to  the  3040 
meter  sounding  line,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying  figure,  thus  presenting 
a  view  intermediate  between  the  extreme  of  Forbes  and  the  more  conserva- 
tive view  of  Hedley,  who  had  united  South  America  with  Tasmania  through 
a  narrow  strip  of  land.  Ortmann,  in  1901,  after  reviewing  the  whole  subject,^ 
accepted  the  first  theory  of  Rlitimeyer  with  the  restrictions  put  upon  it  by 
Hedley,  expressing  the  opinion  that  the  fossil  shells  and  mammals  of  Pata- 
gonia resemble  certain  forms  of  New  Zealand  and  Australia  so  closely  as 
to  be  regarded  as  an  additional  proof  of  the  former  connection  of  South  Amer- 
ica with  Australia  and  New  Zealand,  but  not  with  Africa.  This  author  also 
reconstructed  Antarctica. 

Later  opinions  on  the  subject  are  those  of  W.  J.  Sinclair  (1905)  based  on 
his  exhaustive  studies  of  the  marsupials  of  Australia  and  Patagonia,*^  from 
which  he  concludes:  ®  ''The  Patagonian  marsupials  of  the  Santa  Cruz 
epoch  are  of  peculiar  interest  from  the  relationship  which  they  bear  to 
certain  Australian  and  Tasmanian  forms.  This  relationship  establishes  the 
reality  of  former  land  connection  between  the  Australian  region  and  South 

'  Hedley,  C,  Considerations  on  the  Surviving  Refugees  in  Austral  Lands  of  Ancient 
Antarctic  Life.  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  .V..S.  Wales,  1S95;  and,  A  Zoogeographic  Scheme  for  the  Mid- 
Pacific.    Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  N.S.  Wales,  1899. 

^  Ortmann,  Reports  of  the  Princeton  Expedition  to  Patagonia,  Vol.  IV,  Palaeontology  I, 
Pt.  1,  Marine  Cretaceous  Invertebrates,  1901,  p.  310. 

^  Osborn,  Faunal  Relations  of  Europe  and  America,  1900,  p.  52. 

*  Ortmann,  The  Theories  of  the  Origin  of  the  Antarctic  Faunas  and  Floras.  Amer.  Nat- 
ural, Vol.  XXXV,  no.  410.  Feb.,  1901,  pp.  139-142. 

^  Published  in  the  Princeton  Patagonian  Reports,  Vol.  IV,  Pt.  3,  1906,  pp.  330-460. 

^  Sinclair,  The  Marsupial  Fauna  of  the  Santa  Cruz  Beds.  Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol. 
XLIX,  no.  179,  1905,  pp.  73  £f. 


INTRODUCTION 


77 


America,  so  plainly  indicated  by  the  distribution  of  the  Tertiary  marine 
moUusks,  fishes,  land  shells,  decapod  Crustacea,  and  plants." 

Equally  emphatic  is  the  conclusion  of  Dollo  based  on  the  fishes  collected 
by  the  Belgian  Antarctic  expedition.^    After  citing  (pp.  220-222)  the  whole 


Fig.  18.  —  South  polar  view  of  the  world,  elevated  to  the  3040  meter  line,  showing  the 
actual  (horizontal  lines)  and  the  hypothetical  (vertical  lines)  outlines  of  the  continent  Ant- 
arctica, including  its  supposed  relations  with  New  Zealand  and  Australia.   After  Osborn. 


history  of  the  discussion  of  the  existence  of  a  South  Polar  continent,  he  con- 
siders the  distribution  of  five  families  and  four  genera  of  freshwater  fishes, 
and  concludes  (p.  224)  that  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  it  is  the 
Tertiary  Antarctica  of  Osborn  or  an  analogous  Antarctica,  indispensable  for 
the  marsupials  and  the  turtle,  Miolania,  which  best  explains  the  biogeog- 
raphy  of  the  Antarctic  and  sub-Antarctic  fishes. 

Australasia  or  Notogcea 

The  highly  specialized  mammals,  monotremes  and  marsupials,  of  Austral- 
asia are  so  remote  geographically  and  zoologically  from  the  history  of  the 
northern  hemisphere  that  it  is  only  necessary  to  state  two  principal  facts. 

1  Dollo,  Resultats  du  Voyage  du  S.  Y.  Belgica  en  1897-1898-1899,  Zoologie,  Poissons. 
4to.    Anvers,  1904. 


78 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


First,  the  anatomy  of  these  mammals  points  back  to  the  introduction  into 
Austraha  of  some  small  arboreal  opossum  or  Didelphys-\ike  forms  as 
the  source  of  the  wonderful  adaptive  radiation  of  the  marsupials  of  this 
continent.  Whence  this  Didelphys-like  form  came,  whether  from  Asia 
or  from  Antarctica,  is  unknown,  and  why  the  placental  insectivorous  forms 
did  not  enter  the  continent  at  the  same  time  is  also  a  mystery.  The  present 
imperfect  palaeontological  evidence  favors  the  entry  of  marsupials  into  Aus- 
tralia by  way  of  South  America  and  Antarctica,  but  it  must  be  remembered 
that  this  turns  upon  the  fact  that  our  knowledge  of  pre-Oligocene  mammal 
life  of  Asia  is  entirely  a  blank.  The  affinities  of  the  Australian  mammalian 
life  with  that  of  South  America  consist  in  the  common  presence  of  both 
the  polyprotodont  or  carnivorous  forms,  allied  to  the  existing  ''Tasmanian 
wolf"  (Thyladnus) ,  and  of  the  small  diprotodont  herbivorous  forms  (epanor- 
thids,  Coenolestes),  very  remotely  allied  to  the  kangaroos. 

South  America  or  Neogoea,  A  Theater  of  Evolution  Equal  to  that  of  Africa 

South  America  appears  to  have  had  late  Cretaceous  or  early  Eocene 
connections  through  Antarctica  with  Australia  on  the  south,  and  with  the 
great  northern  radiation  of  mammals  of  the  northern  hemisphere  through 
North  America.  This  constituted  its  original  supply  of  mammalian  life, 
from  which  sprang  a  grand  and  peculiar  adaptive  radiation  after  the  connec- 
tions both  with  Australia  and  with  North  America  were  cut  off  through  either 
geographic  or  climatic  barriers.  There  is  no  satisfactory  evidence  of  connec- 
tion at  any  time  with  the  mammalian  life  of  Africa  except  in  very  late  Plio- 
cene times  through  migration  by  way  of  North  America.  The  twelve  orders 
of  mammals  which  evolved  in  South  America  from  these  original  sources  of 
supply  include  three  (primates,  rodents,  and  odontocetes)  which  appar- 
ently arrived  later  than  the  remainder. 


Mammalian  Orders  of  Pre-Pliocene  Times,  South  America 

Condylarthra 


(identification  doubtful) 
Toxodontia 
Astrapotheria 
Litopterna 
Pyrotheria 
Cetacea  (Odontoceti) 


Marsupialia 
Insectivora 
(rare) 

Rodentia  of  the  suborder  Hystricomorpha 

only 
Edentata 

Anthropoidea  ^  (Platyrhini) 

Conspicuous  by  their  absence  from  the  pre-Pliocene  formations  of  South 
America  are  the  following  orders : 

Chiroptera  Artiodactyla 
Tillodontia  Perissodactyla 

'  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  South  American  monkeys  are  widely  distinct  from  the 
Old  World  or  catarrhine  monkeys  and  apes. 


INTRODUCTION 


79 


Taeniodonta 
Pholidota 
Tubulidentata 
Lemuroidea 

Amblypoda  (possibly  represented) 


Ancylopoda 
Sirenia 


Embrithopoda 


Hyracoidea 

Zeuglodontia 

Proboscidea 


We  can  most  readily  understand  the  absence  of  the  four  peculiarly  African 
orders,  the  Proboscidea,  Sirenia,  Hyracoidea,  Embrithopoda.  The  peripty- 
chid  family  of  Amblypoda  is  possibly  represented  by  some  animals  described 
by  Ameghino.  The  absence  of  many  orders  highly  characteristic  of  the 
Eocene  of  the  northern  hemisphere  is  more  striking,  namely,  Artiodactyla, 
Perissodactyla,  Ancylopoda,  Chiroptera,  Carnivora-Fissipedia.  The  mam- 
malian history  of  South  America  during  the  Age  of  Mammals  is  further 
remarkable  because  of  the  extinction  of  the  Insectivora  which  are  appar- 
ently represented  in  the  small  Lower  Miocene  genus  Necrolestes,  which  is 
analogous  to  the  Chrysochloris  or  Cape  golden  mole  of  South  Africa. 

An  interesting  parallel  with  Africa  in  Eocene  and  Oligocene  times  is  in 
the  entire  absence  of  true  Carnivora  of  the  dog  or  cat  families,  whose  func- 
tion of  preying  upon  the  Herbivora  and  other  mammals  was  exclusively 
performed  in  Africa  by  the  archaic  Creodonta,  and  in  South  America  by  the 
archaic  carnivorous  Marsupialia.  This  freedom  from  attacks  of  the  higher 
specialized  carnivores  constituted  a  condition  especially  favorable  to  the 
wonderful  adaptive  radiation  in  South  America  of  the  opossums  (Didel- 
phyidse),  hystricomorph  rodents  (cavies,  tree  porcupines,  viscachas),  as  well 
as  edentates  (sloths,  armadillos,  glyptodonts,  anteaters),  and  of  four  very 
specialized  and  peculiar  orders  of  ungulate  type. 


This  review  of  the  sources  of  the  world's  supply  of  mammals  shows  that 
there  were  various  degrees  of  kinship  or  community  of  life  between  the  conti- 
nents, as  follows:  (1)  close  kinship  of  the  Holarctic  Region,  namely.  North 
America,  Asia,  and  Europe,  having  the  majority  of  the  pre-Miocene  orders  of 
mammals  in  common,  and  separated  chiefly  by  the  apparently  early  con- 
tributions of  Africa  to  Europe  and  of  South  America  to  North  America; 
(2)  separation  of  the  Africa- Ethiopian  Region  as  a  center  of  evolution  of  four 
or  five  orders  of  mammals  not  found  elsewhere,  although  united  with  Europe 
by  the  presence  in  common  of  two  orders  of  mammals  and  probably  others 
to  be  discovered;  (3)  South  America,  with  the  closest  early  kinship  with 
North  America,  more  ancient  kinship  with  Australia,  remote  kinship  with 
Europe,  and  still  more  remote  kinship  with  Africa.  These  degrees  of  relation- 
ship are  just  what  we  should  expect  from  a  bird's-eye  view  of  the  geography 
of  the  northern  and  southern  hemispheres  respectively. 


General  Conclusions 


80 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


VII.  Pal^ogeography 

The  present  and  past  geographic  distribution  of  the  mammals,  their  migra- 
tions, their  sudden  invasions,  afford  most  valuable  data  for  the  science  of 
palceogeography.  Through  this  science  we  attempt  to  restore  the  former  out- 
lines of  the  continents  and  seas.  While,  as  shown  by  Wallace,  small  mam- 
mals may  be  carried  over  sea  considerable  distances  on  driftwood,  and  while 
many  of  the  larger  mammals  are  capable  of  swimming  great  distances,  it  is 
certain  that  the  distribution  and  colonization  of  the  large  terrestrial  mammals 
have  only  taken  place  through  land  connections  between  the  various  conti- 
nents and  islands.  We  are,  in  fact,  forced  again  and  again  to  assumxC  the 
existence  of  such  land  connections,  but  this  fact  does  not  enable  us  to  plot  the 
former  geographic  outlines.  To  do  this  we  require  evidence  furnished  by 
geology,  which  with  the  aid  of  that  furnished  by  fossil  shells  makes  it  possible 
to  trace  the  former  invasions  of  the  sea  over  what  is  now  land,  and  even  to 
establish  closely  certain  ancient  shorelines.  The  conclusions  drawn  from 
existing  and  fossil  mammals  must  also  be  compared  with  those  drawn  from 
the  distribution  of  birds,  reptiles,  fresh  and  sea  water  fishes,  insects,  and  other 
invertebrates,  and  in  a  very  important  degree  of  plants. 

Palseogeography  is  still  an  embryonic  or  nascent  science  with  great  possi- 
bilities of  future  growth  and  usefulness.  The  hypothetical  outlines  of  the 
continents  during  the  Age  of  Mammals  as  presented  in  this  volume  are  repro- 
ductions with  slight  modifications  of  those  published  by  Matthew.^  These 
outlines  represent  a  synthesis  of  the  work  of  De  Lapparent,  Dall,  Hill, 
Hatcher,  and  others. 

They  are  to  be  interpreted,  as  originally  stated  by  their  author,  as 
both  hypothetical  and  temporary.  The  author  himself  has  now  (1910) 
abandoned  as  a  matter  of  imperfect  record  the  theory  of  an  Antarctic  land 
connection  between  South  America  and  Australia,  as  represented  in  his 
map  of  the  world  in  post-Cretaceous  time,  on  p.  64'  of  this  volume.  He  now 
believes  that  the  greater  part  of  the  animals  and  plants  of  the  southern  con- 
tinents are  of  northern  origin,  and  that  the  evidence  advanced  for  Antarctic 
connections  is  probably  explainable  through  distribution  from  the  north. 

A  static- American  land  bridge. — The  theory  of  a  North  Pacific  land 
bridge  over  what  is  now  Behring  Straits  still  depends  largely  on  the  evidence 
afforded  by  the  distribution  of  the  mammals,  because  the  Csenozoic  geology 
of  Alaska  and  of  northeast  Siberia  is  so  imperfectly  known.  The  most  inter- 
esting fact  concerning  this  land  bridge  is  that  both  from  zoological  and  palae- 
ontological  data  it  appears  to  have  been  intermittent,  to  have  emerged  from 
the  sea  and  then  to  have  become  submerged.  American  geologists  have  con- 
cluded that  the  northwestern  coasts  of  Alaska  and  British  Columbia  were 
above  water  during  the  Eocene  to  an  extent  as  great  or  greater  than  at  present. 

'  Hypothetical  Outlines  of  the  Continents  in  Tertiary  Times.  Bull.  Amer.  Mils.  Nat.  Hist., 
Vol.  XXn,  Art.  xxi,  1906. 


INTRODUCTION 


81 


Submergence  of  the  coast  during  Oligocene  and  Lower  Miocene  times  was 
succeeded  by  a  reemergence,  known  as  the  post-Kenai  revolution,  in  late 
Miocene  or  Early  Pliocene  times.  The  mammalian  life  of  Europe  and 
North  America  similarly  shows  intermittent  intervals  of  close  correspondence 
and  similarity  and  of  separation  or  divergence.  The  very  close  similarity 
between  the  mammals  living  at  the  present  time  on  either  side  of  the  Beh- 
ring  Straits  is  strong  evidence  that  up  to  late  Pleistocene  times  there  was  free 
migration  between  the  two  continents. 

The  Great  Antilles,  West  Indies,  and  South  America.  —  This  region  was 
another  area  of  emergence  and  submergence,  which  is  of  deep  interest  because 
of  the  apparent  faunal  connection  between  North  and  South  America  late 
in  the  Age  of  Reptiles  and  early  in  the  Age  of  Mammals,  followed  by  a  pro- 
longed and  absolute  separation  or  divergence  of  the  mammalian  life  of  the 
two  countries,  which  was  again  succeeded  by  a  sudden  renewal  of  relations 
in  the  Middle  Pliocene.  The  results  obtained  by  Hill  (1899)^  as  to  the 
movements  of  the  Antilles  are  summarized  by  Matthew  as  follows:  "The 
Eocene  strata  of  the  Antilles  bear  evidence  of  the  preexistence  of  extensive 
areas  of  land  during  the  latter  part  of  the  Age  of  Reptiles  (Cretaceous) .  Late 
in  Eocene  time  there  was  a  profound  submergence  including  all  but  the 
highest  tips  of  the  Antilles,  which  lasted  into  early  Oligocene  times.  In  Oligo- 
cene or  Miocene  times  there  was  a  great  upward  movement  whereby  many 
of  the  islands  were  connected  with  each  other  and  possibly  with  the  insular 
southern  portion  of  Florida,  but  land  connections  between  the  North  and 
South  American  continents  were  not  established  at  this  time.  During 
Miocene  and  Pliocene  times  the  islands  were  again  separated  by  partial 
submergence  into  their  present  outlines,  which  have  been  since  retained 
with  only  slight  modifications.  In  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  times  there  have 
been  intermittent  periods  of  elevation,  but  none  so  great  as  those  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  Oligocene." 

These  conclusions  on  the  whole  leave  the  question  of  the  period  of  connec- 
tion between  North  and  South  America  entirely  an  open  one ;  yet  this  period 
seems  to  be  pretty  firmly  established  as  of  Pliocene  Age  through  the  over- 
whelming testimony  of  the  interchange  of  large  terrestrial  mammals  between 
North  and  South  America  at  this  time. 

^  Hill,  R.  T.,  Geological  Reconnoissance  of  Jamaica.  Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  ZooL,  Vol. 
XXXIV,  1899,  pp.  1-226. 


CHAPTER  II 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 

The  Eocene  was  originally  defined  as  the  dawn  of  the  recent  species  of 
marine  molluscs.  It  subsequently  came  to  be  regarded  also  as  the  dawn  of 
mammalian  life.  We  now  realize  that  it  was  more  truly  the  sudden  expan- 
sion and  evolution  of  the  mammals  after  what  appears  to  have  been  a  long 


Fig.  19.  —  Chief  areas  in  which  mammal  deposits  of  the  Age  of  Reptiles  have  been  dis- 
covered. 1-  North  America,  Laramie  (Cretaceous),  Judith  River  (Cretaceous),  Morrison 
(Jurassic);  2.  North  Carolina  (Upper  Triassic)  ;  3.  Germany  (Upper  Triassic)  ;  4.  England, 
Purbeck  (Upper  Jurassic),  Stonesfield  slate  (Middle  Jurassic)  ;  5-  South  Africa,  Stormberg 
Beds  (Upper  Triassic) .    6.  Patagonia  (Age  doubtful) . 


period  of  very  slow  development  during  the  Age  of  Reptiles.  The  true  dawn 
of  the  mammals  had  occurred  some  15,000,000  years  earlier,  even  before  the 
opening  of  the  Age  of  Reptiles.  This  is  truly  a  blank  historic  period,  some- 
what in  the  sense  in  which  the  term  is  applied  to  human  history,  because 
during  the  Age  of  Reptiles  our  documents  are  very  rare  and  widely  scattered. 
The  few  black  dots  on  the  accompanying  map  of  the  world  are  placed  on  all 
the  geographic  points  on  the  entire  globe  where  the  remains  of  mammals  of 
the  Reptilian  Age  have  thus  far  been  recorded. 

82 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


83 


Even  these  dots  may  give  an  exaggerated  idea  of  our  knowledge,  because 
the  remains  which  have  been  discovered  consist  largely  of  teeth  and  im- 
perfect jaws.  The  conditions  which  so  favored  the  preservation  of  the 
records  of  reptilian  life  were  singularly  unfavorable  to  the  recording  of  mam- 
malian life.  Exactly  the  reverse  conditions,  namely,  of  extensive  terrestrial 
and  freshwater  formations,  prevailed  during  the  Age  of  Mammals,  so  that  the 
mammalian  records  are  far  more  complete  than  those  of  the  reptiles,  amphib- 
ians, or  fishes. 


Palceogeography  of  Eocene  Europe 

During  a  considerable  part  of  the  Eocene  epoch  Europe  was  a  small, 
isolated  land  area,  peninsular  and  sometimes  insular.  Seas  are  known  to 
have  extended  over  the  region  of  the  Pyrenees,  over  Switzerland,  southward 
over  a  large  part  of  Africa,  and  eastward  to  China.  In  these  seas  the  shells 
of  Foraminifera,  called  nummulites,  accumulated  as  '  nummulitic '  limestones 
to  the  extent  of  10,000  feet,  especially  in  the  areas  which  now  represent  the 
summits  of  the  Alps  and  Apennines. 

Despite  the  broad  areas  of  depression  which  correspond  with  the  present 
mountain  ranges  of  the  Pyrenees  and  Alps,  the  continent  of  Europe  was 
beginning  to  assume  its  present  outlines  and  conformation.  To  the  north 
France  was  broadly  united  with  Great  Britain.  The  interior  of  France  was 
mostly  above  water.  Throughout  the  Eocene  period  there  were  two  areas  of 
continental  depression  and  elevation.  The  first,  along  the  northeast  coast 
bordering  Belgium;  the  second,  along  the  southwest  coast  bordering  the  Gulf 
of  Gascogne,  in  the  region  of  the  Pyrenees.  It  is  chiefly  in  these  areas  that 
the  great  life  zones  were  preserved.  The  succession  of  stages  which  succes- 
sively record  the  geographic  and  life  changes  in  the  country  now  known  as 
France  are  as  follows: 

IiVfciie  Basal  Eocene,  or  Thanetian,  France  was 
Upper  Eocene  (6)  Ludian  indented  b}^  great  northern  and  southern  gulfs. 

Middle  Eocene(5)  Bartonian^         ^^^"g       ^^^"^^^  ^^^^       mammaliferous  de- 
posits of  Cernay  and  La  Fere.    In  the  Lower 
(4)  Lutetian  Eocene,  or  Sparnacian,  there  was  a  great  northern 

Lower  Eocene  (3)  Ypresian  gulf  bordered  by  lagoons.    In  the  Ypresian 

CI  •  France  was  separated  from  Spain.    In  the 

(2)  bparnacian        ,  ^. ,  „  -r^         ^      .  -r^ 

Middle  Eocene  or  Lutetian,  i^  ranee  and  western 

Basal  Eocene  (1)  Thanetian  Europe  formed  a  great  island  separated  by  a 

broad  channel  from  Eurasia  and  Asia. 

These  disturbed  conditions  of  the  shorelines  and  of  the  regions  which 
now  constitute  the  great  river  basins  of  France  explain  the  great  variety  of 
deposits  in  which  the  remains  of  fossil  mammals  are  found,  namely,  the  suc- 
cession of  marine,  fluvio-marine,  littoral,  estuarine,  lagoon,  and  swamp 
deposits  throughout  the  entire  Eocene  period  in  France  and  England.  Con- 


84 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


ditions  of  deposition  in  western  North  America  were  entirely  different;  here 
we  find  continuous  depositions  of  uniform  character.  In  France  there  is  a 
lack  of  stability,  due  to  weak  or  unstable  coast  outlines,  to  the  alternation 
of  land  and  sea  deposits.  Moreover,  the  relations  of  these  land  masses  to 
each  other  and  to  the  Asiatic  continent  were  continually  changing.  The 
proximity  of  the  sea  favored  a  warm,  moist,  and  uniform  climate. 

Palceogeography  of  North  America 

The  most  important  thing  to  note,  as  pointed  out  by  Suess,  is  that  North 
America  has  been  a  relatively  stable  continent  since  the  close  of  the  Creta- 
ceous; its  great  land  surfaces  are  older,  more  prominent,  and  more  extensive 
than  those  of  Europe.  The  land  surfaces  of  Africa,  however,  are  far  older 
than  either. 

It  is  the  West  which  best  repays  interest,  and  the  most  central  fact  estab- 
lished is  that  there  were  during  the  Csenozoic  Period  two  grand  natural  divi- 
sions of  geologic  deposition  and  of  animal  and  plant  habitat,  similar  to  the  two 
natural  divisions  which  exist  to-day,  namely,  the  Mountain  and  the  Plains 
regions.  The  Atlantic  Border  region  becomes  of  importance  only  in  late 
Csenozoic  times.  The  Pacific  Coast  region  becomes  of  importance  in  Pliocene 
and  Pleistocene  times. 

For  the  purposes  of  our  study,  the  palaeogeography  of  the  United  States 
previous  to  the  Pleistocene  may  therefore  be  divided  into  the  following  great 
regions  : 

1.  The  Atlantic  Border  Region. 

2.  The  Plains  Region. 

3.  The  Mountain  Region. 

4.  The  Pacific  Coast  Region. 

1.  Atlantic  border  region.  —  More  unstable  conditions,  somewhat  similar 
to  those  of  western  Europe,  may  have  prevailed  along  the  eastern  and  Atlan- 
tic seaboard  in  Eocene  times;  that  is,  the  north  and  south  Atlantic  borders 
were  rising  and  falling.  Only  toward  the  end  of  the  Eocene  were  portions 
of  Florida  raised  out  of  the  sea.  The  continental  shoreline  appears  to  have 
bordered  the  Atlantic  in  a  general  northeast  to  southwest  direction  from  the 
region  of  southern  New  York  to  northern  Florida.  There  was  a  well-marked 
indentation  in  southeast  Georgia:  from  the  vicinity  of  the  Chattahoochee 
River  the  shorelines  rounded  to  the  west,  northwest,  and  north,  forming  the 
eastern  coast  of  a  greater  Gulf  of  Mexico  which  extended  to  the  meeting  of  the 
Ohio  and  Mississippi  Rivers.  From  this  the  Gulf  extended  in  a  southwesterly 
direction.  At  the  culmination  of  the  Eocene  a  movement  of  elevation  took 
place.  During  the  entire  Eocene  epoch  the  country  stretching  to  the  Missis- 
sippi and  eastward  to  the  Appalachians  and  Atlantic  coast  is,  with  a  few 
exceptions,  a  terra  incognita  so' far  as  its  terrestrial  mammalian  life  is  con- 
cerned.   Glimpses  only  of  its  marine  or  seashore  mammalian  life  are  afforded 


KEY  TO  MAP 

PT.  Puerco,  Torrejon,  and  Wasatch  of  San 

Juan  basin,  New  Mexico  Basal  and  lower  Eocene. 

BH.  Wasatch  of  Bighorn  Basin,  Wyoming .  Lower  Eocene. 
W.  Wasatch    (typical),    Evanston,  Wy- 
oming  Lower  Eocene. 

WR.  Wind  River,  Wyoming  Lower  Eocene. 

H.  Huerfano,  Colorado  Lower  and  middle  Eocene. 

B.  Bridger,  Wyoming   Middle  Eocene. 

WK.  "Washalcic,"  Wyoming  Middle  and  upper  Eocene. 

U.  Uinta,  Utah  Middle  and  upper  Eocene. 

12.  White   River  deposits  along  Swift 

Current  Creek,  Assiniboia,  Canada  .  Lower  Oligocene. 

10.  White  River  deposits  along  Pipestone 

Creek,  Montana  Lower  Oligocene. 

2.  Typical  White  River  and  Rosebud, 

South  Dakota  Oligocene  and  Miocene. 

1.  White  River,    Monroe   Creek,  and 

Harrison,  Nebraska  Ob'gocene  and  Miocene. 

4.  Pawnee   Buttes   section    ("  Pawnee 

Creek,"  "Martin  Canyon,"  "Cedar 
Creek,"  "Horsetail  Creek,")  Colo- 
rado  Oligocene  to  middle  Miocene. 

7.  John  Day,  Mascall,  and  Rattlesnake, 

Oregon  Oligocene,  Miocene,  and  Plici- 

cene. 

8.  "  Fort  Logan  "  and  Deep  River,  Mon- 

tana  Lower  and  middle  Miocene. 

11.  "Flint  Creek,"  Montana  Middle  Miocene. 

6.  "Panhandle,"  "  Clarendon,"  Blanco, 

and  "  Rock  Creek,"  Texas  Miocene  to  Pleistocene. 

17.  "  Nebraska,"  and  underlying  beds, 

Nebraska  Miocene. 

5.  "  Santa  Fe  marls,"  New  Mexico  Upper  Miocene. 

9.  "  Madison  Valley,"  Montana  Upper  Miocene. 

3.  "RepubHcan  River,"  Kansas  Lower  Pliocene. 

13.  "Archer,"  Florida  Lower  PUocene. 

14.  "Loup  River,"  Nebraska  Upper  Pliocene. 

18.  Silver  Lake,  Oregon  Lower  Pleistocene. 

15.  Ashley  River,  South  Carolina  Pleistocene. 

16.  Port  Kennedy,  Pennsylvania  Middle  Pleistocene. 

19.  Potter  Creek  cave,  California  Middle  Pleistocene. 

20.  Conard  fissure,  Arkansas  Upper  Pleistocene. 


liy  permlsslun  ol  tbc  U.  a.  Ueologic 


FiQ.  20.  —  Map  of  the  United  States,  shovring  the  general  Mountain  and  Great  Plains  Regions  ;  also  the  typical  localities  of  the  principal  formations,  sections,  and  deposits. 


I 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


85 


in  the  Upper  Eocene  Zeuglodon  Zone  ^  (see  p.  170)  of  Alabama  and  Florida, 
and  in  other  littoral  marine  deposits. 

While  this  vast  eastern  region  contains  no  Eocene  mammal-bearing  de- 
posits, it  may  well  have  been  the  scene  of  a  very  active  continental  mamma- 
lian life  from  the  time  of  the  emergence  of  the  central  area  toward  the  close 
of  the  Cretaceous,  or  during  and  after  Laramie  time.  Yet  absolutely  the 
only  land  mammals  we  know  from  this  great  region  up  to  the  Pleistocene 
are  those  reported  by  Marsh  from  the  supposed  Oligocene  of  New  Jersey, 
namely,  four  species,  the  giant  pig  Entelodon,  a  tapiroid,  Protapirus  {Tapira- 
vus)  validus,  a  rhinoceros.  Rhinoceros  matutinus,  and  a  supposed  tillodont, 
Anchippodus.  The  animal  last  named  is  a  Rocky  Mountain  Middle  Eo- 
cene type,  not  known  to  have  survived  into  Oligocene  times. 

2.  The  plains  region.  —  The  description  of  this  region  will  be  deferred 
until  the  introduction  of  the  Oligocene  (p.  204),  with  which  epoch  our  records 
of  plains  life  open. 

3.  Mountain  region.  —  The  mountain  region  contains  the  entire  known 
record  of  Eocene  continental  life.  The  mountain  and  high  plateau  region  as 
a  whole  stretched  nearly  through  British  Columbia  to  a  broad  land  connec- 
tion with  Asia,  which  was  apparently  interrupted  and  renewed  more  than 
once  during  the  Csenozoic.  On  the  south  it  terminated  in  the  mountains 
which  form  the  northern  boundary  of  the  southern  Mexican  State  Oaxaca. 
Of  the  great  western  mountain  systems  of  the  present  time  the  Sierra  Nevada 
range  was  formed  at  the  close  of  the  Jurassic  Period,  as  announced  by  Whit- 
ney in  1864  and  confirmed  by  Hyatt.  Only  toward  the  close  of  the  Creta- 
ceous (Laramie)  did  the  present  Rocky  Mountain  region  begin  to  be  defined 
by  an  uplift,  commencing  in  Colorado  and  extending  northward  into  Mon- 
tana, accompanied  by  great  volcanic  outbursts,  the  Denver  stage  of  Colorado, 
the  Livingston  stage  of  Montana,  7,000  feet  in  thickness  on  top  of  the  Lara- 
mie. This  mountain  birth,  extending  from  Mexico  on  the  south  to  British 
America  on  the  far  north,  and  including  a  number  of  lesser  ranges,  gave  rise 
to  two  great  geographic  features,  namely:  the  mountain  basins  within  the 
mountain  region,  and  the  great  plains  east  of  the  mountain  region,  bordered 
on  the  south  by  the  gigantic  Gulf  of  Mexico. 

In  picturing  in  the  mind's  eye  the  mountain  region  in  Eocene  times  it  is 
very  important  to  note  that  the  Rocky  Mountain  ranges  were  far  from  having 
attained  their  present  height;  the  highest  emerged  peaks  in  Eocene  times 
were  believed  by  Dana  to  have  been  perhaps  4,000  to  5,000  feet  above  sea 
level,  while  the  Sierra  Nevada  ranges  at  the  same  time  were  between  3,000  and 
4,000  feet  above  sea  level.  The  Great  Basin  lying  between  the  Rockies  and 
Sierras  was  probably  at  a  height  of  1,000  feet  above  the  sea. 

During  the  subsequent  Csenozoic  the  average  elevation  of  the  Rocky 
Mountain  region  was  tripled,  the  mountain  peaks  in  general  rising  from 

'  Zeuglodon  is  an  aberrant  whale-like  form  which  probably  originated  in  the  early  Eocene 
of  northern  Africa. 


86 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


13,000  to  14,000  feet,  with  corresponding  elevation  of  the  intermediate 
basins  and  with  a  continuous  erosion  of  their  summits.  The  mountain 
ranges  which  were  involved  in  this  grand  movement  and  defined  the  basin 
areas  which  are  of  such  extraordinary  interest  to  the  palaeontologist,  are  as 
follows:  The  Wasatch  Range,  which  now  extends  north  and  south  for 
over  100  miles  on  the  east  side  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake  Basin.  East  of  the 
south  half  of  the  Wasatch  Range,  stretching  away  for  150  miles,  are  the  Uinta 
Mountains  (now  over  13,000  feet  in  height);  at  the  angle  of  a  junction  be- 
tween these  ranges  is  a  great  outflow  of  igneous  rock  (trachyte).  Eastward 
of  Utah,  the  Elk  Mountains,  the  San  Juan,  and  the  Front  Range  of  Colorado, 
including  the  famous  Spanish  Peaks,  were  uplifted.  To  the  west  the  Pacific 
coast  ranges,  in  time  of  elevation,  lagged  far  behind  the  Sierra  Nevada  and 
even  behind  the  Rocky  Mountain  ranges,  remaining  at  sea  level  long  after 
the  Rocky  Mountain  system  was  born. 

Mountain  basin  deposits.  — The  oldest  basin  is  the  San  Juan  (Fig.  21, 
PT)  in  northwestern  New  Mexico,  which  includes  the  Basal  Eocene,  Puerco 
and  ToRREJON,  and  Lower  Eocene  depositions,  all  lying  on  top  of  the  Laramie 
or  Upper  Cretaceous.  As  displayed  in  the  accompanying  map  (Fig.  21)  the 
grandest  basin  area  (W)  is  the  Wasatch,  lying  east  of  the  Wasatch  Range  and 
north  of  the  Uinta  Range,  with  an  original  width  of  300  miles  and  north 
and  south  extent  of  500  miles.  This  deposition  concludes  with  the  Lower 
Eocene  Wasatch  deposits,  scattered  over  an  area  450  miles  north  and  south 
and  250  miles  east  and  west  to  a  thickness  of  1,500  to  2,500  feet.  Superposed 
on  these  deposits  are  the  Green  River  shales,  also  Lower  Eocene,  and 
above  these  the  Bridger  (B)  formation. 

Mode  of  origin.  —  The  underlying  Wasatch  is  of  fiuviatile  and  flood 
plain  origin,  while  the  Green  River  shales  cover  an  area  of  more  than 
5,000  square  miles,  and  represent  a  vast  shallow  lake.  The  Bridger  is 
regarded  as  fiuviatile  and  flood  plain,  as  is  also  the  succeeding  Washakie 
(WK).  In  northern  Wyoming,  west  of  the  Big  Horn  Mountains,  is  another 
basin  (BH)  filled  with  a  flood  plain  deposition  of  Wasatch  age,  and  in  west 
central  Wyoming  is  the  Wind  River  Basin  (WR)  of  Lower  and  Middle 
Eocene  age.  East  of  the  Front  Range  in  southern  Colorado,  close  to  the 
Spanish  Peaks,  is  the  Huerfano  Basin  (H)  of  Lower  and  Middle  Eocene 
age;  and  directly  south  of  the  Uinta  Mountains  is  the  great  Uinta 
Basin  (U),  extending  east  and  west  over  140  miles  and  containing  deposi- 
tions of  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene  age.  To  the  northwest,  in  Oregon,  are 
the  John  Day  Basin  (7)  of  Oligocene  age  and  the  Deep  River  (8)  of 
Middle  Miocene  age. 

The  successive  periods  of  deposition  in  these  mountain  basins  is  deter- 
mined through  the  abundant  remains  of  fossil  mammals  and  other  verte- 
brates which  they  contain,  and  it  is  a  remarkable  fact,  brought  out  through 
palaeontology,  that  these  depositions  were  partly  contemporaneous,  partly 
successive,  so  that  they  give  us  a  wonderful  panorama  of  the  entire  succession 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


87 


of  life  from  the  beginning  of  the  Eocene  to  the  end  of  Oligocene  times,  as 
shown  in  the  diagram  (Fig.  10)  on  page  49. 


Fig.  21.  —  Chief  Fossil  Mammal  Deposits  of  Western  North  America.  PT.  Puerco  and 
Torrejon,  N.  Mex.  BH.  Big  Horn  Basin,  Wyo.  W.  Typical  Wasatch,  Evanston,  Wyo.,  and 
Utah.  WR.  Wind  River,  Wyo.  H.  Huerfano,  Col.  B.  Bridger,  Wyo.  WK.  Washakie, 
Wyo.  U.  Uinta,  Utah  and  Col.  12.  Swift  Current  Creek,  Assiniboia.  10.  Pipestone 
Creek,  Mont.  2.  Typical  White  River  and  Rosebud,  S.  Dak.  1.  White  River,  Monroe 
Creek  and  Harrison,  Nebr.  4.  Horsetail  Creek,  Cedar  Creek,  Pawnee  Creek  and  Martin 
Canyon,  Col.  7.  John  Day,  Mascall  and  Rattlesnake,  Greg.  8.  Fort  Logan  and  Deep  River, 
Mont.  11.  FHnt  Creek,  Mont.  6.  Panhandle,  Clarendon,  Blanco  and  Rock  Creek,  Tex. 
17.  "Nebraska"  and  underlying  beds,  Nebr.  5.  Santa  Fe  marls,  N.  Mex.  9.  Madison 
Valley,  Mont.    3.  Republican  River,  Kan.    14.  Snake  Creek,  Nebr.    18.  Silver  Lake,  Oreg. 

It  was  believed  formerly  that  each  of  these  great  mountain  basins  con- 
tained a  lake  and  that  the  deposits  consequently  were  lacustrine,  but  the 
/lake  theory'  has  gradually  given  way  to  the  theory  that  these  were  princi- 


88 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


pally  flood  plain  depositions,  delta,  overflow,  and  swamp  deposits  with 
relatively  limited  areas  of  shallow  lakes.  According  to  this  theory  the  prin- 
cipal true  lakes  of  Eocene  and  Miocene  times  are  the  Green  River  and  the 
Florissant.  The  famous  Green  River  formation  consists  of  impure  lime- 
stones and  thin  fissile  calcareous  shales  often  as  finely  laminated  as  paper, 
between  the  leaves  of  which  we  discover  in  beautiful  preservation  the  re- 
mains of  plants,  insects,  and  fishes,  but  none  of  mammals  except  in  the  form 
of  footprints.  Occasional  layers  of  gypsum  indicate  periods  of  evaporation 
and  salinity.    In  the  Bridger  beds  the  frequent  occurrence  of  large  selenite 


General  Comparison  of  some  of  the  Mountain  and  Plains  Formations  ' 


Middle  Pliocene 
Lower  Pliocene  . 

Upper  Miocene  . 

Middle  Miocene 

Lower  Miocene 
and  Upper  Oli- 
gocene 

Upper  Oligocene 

Lower  Oligocene 


Upper  Eocene 
Middle  Eocene 
Lower  Eocene 
Basal  Eocene 


MOUNTAIN   BASIN  DEPOSITS 

Geologic.  —  Partly  of  erosion 
materials;  largely  of  vol- 
canic materials,  partly 
eolian,  partly  deposited 
in  water. 

Faunistic.  —  Extinct  mam- 
mals, chiefly  inhabiting  a 
mountainous,  hilly,  for- 
ested, lake-  and  river- 
border, well-watered  coun- 
try. 


Rattlesnake,  Oreg. 


Deep  River,  Mont.;  Mas- 
call,  Oreg. 

"Fort  Logan,"  Mont.  .  . 

John  Day  (upper  part), 
Oreg. 

John  Day  (middle  and 
lower  parts),  Oreg. 

Deposits  on  Pipestone 
Creek,  Mont. 


Uinta,  northern  Utah  , 
[  "Washakie,"  Wyo.  .  . 

\  Bridger,  Wyo  

I  Wind  River,  Wyo.   .  . 

Wasatch,  N.  Mex.  and  W 
f  Torrejon,  N.  Mex.    .  . 
\  Puerco,  N.  Mex.  .    .  . 
I  Fort  Union,  Mont.  .  . 


GREAT   PLAINS  DEPOSITS 

Geologic.  —  Largely  of  wa- 
ter-erosion and  wind-ero- 
sion materials;  partly  of 
volcanic  materials. 

Faunistic.  —  Extinct  mam- 
mals, chiefly  of  an  open- 
plains  country, traversed 
by  broad,  slow-moving 
rivers,  savannah,  partly 
forested,  with  shallow 
lakes  and  decreasing  rain 
supply. 


Blanco,  Tex. 

Ogalalla,  in  part  ("Repub- 
lican River"),  Nebr. 

Ogalalla  ("Nebraska"), 
Nebr. 

"Pawnee  Creek,"  Colo. 

Arikaree  (Gering,  Rose- 
bud), Nebr.,  S.  Dak. 

White  River,  S.  Dak.  (up- 
per part). 

White  River  (lower  part), 
of  the  western  plains  of 
South  Dakota,  Nebraska, 
etc. 


Second  deposition  (or 
Neocene)  period  of 
very  widespread  flu- 
viatile,  flood-plain, 
and  eolian  deposits, 
chiefly  erosion  and 
volcanic  materials, 
on  the  Great  Plains  of 
Dakota,  Nebraska, 
Colorado,  and  west- 
ern Kansas.  Limited 
and  scattered  depos- 
its in  the  Rocky 
Mountain  region. 

First  deposition  (or 
Eocene)  period  of 
lacustrine,  river,  and 
flood-plain  deposits, 
largely  of  volcanic 
materials  in  the 
Rocky  Mountain  ba- 
sins, chiefly  in  the 
ancient  drainage  ba- 
sin of  Colorado  Riv- 
er. Plains  deposits 
of  this  period  eroded 
away,  buried,  or  un- 
known. 


crystals  proves  that  the  water  was  occasionally  unduly  saline  through  evapo- 
ration.   The  existence  of  swamps  in  the  Bridger  is  indicated  by  stretches  of 

^  From  p.  22  of  Osborn,  Cenozoic  Mammal  Horizons  of  Western  North  America. 
Geol.  Surv.  Bull.,  361.    Washington,  1909. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


89 


(NEB.) 


ZONES 

Cervus 


MAMMALS 


Ovibos 
Megalonyx 
Equiis 


Bison 

Cas  t  oroides 

i^astodon 

Piatygonus 


Elephas 


Glyptotherium 


Peraceras 


Piiauchenia 
Felis 

Neotragocerus 

Epigdulus 


Procamelus 


Ticholeptiis 

250    I  iMerycochoerus 
iDiccrdtherium  - 


Teleoceras 
Aelurodon 
Neohipparion 
Protohippus 

A4erycodus 
Trilophodon 
Aphelops 
i^erychippus 

h/lerychyus 
Oxydactylus 
Moropus 
Parahippus 


250'  Prom  erycoch  oerus 

Leptauchenia 


Eporeodon 
Steneofiber 
Entelodon 
Protoceras 


OreodoTi 


Poebrotherium 
i\/litamyn  odon 
Hyaenodon 
Pgr  a  cod  on 


Leptomeryx 

TitanotheriuTTi  ^otyiopus 

IVlesohippus 
Trigonias 


Diplacodon  i^'f^'^^^'u- 
^  Dolicnorhinus 

Amynodon 

Eohasileizs  Achaenodon 


Uintatherium, 
OrohippTzs 

(NEW MEXICO)  Eotitanops 


Palaeosyops 
Notharctus 
Patriofelis 
i^etacheirom ys 


Systemodon 
^  7  ^x.      •  Pachyaena 
Lambdotherium  Phenacodus 


CorypJiodon 

Pantolambda 
Pdlymastodon 


Eohippus 


E upro  tog  on /a 
Chr/acus 
Periptychus 
Dissacus 


Fig.  22.  —  Composite  of  the  more  important  sections,  not  drawn  to  scale,  showing  the 
principal  Life  Zones  of  the  entire  Caenozoic  period  in  western  North  America.  Mountain 
Basin  deposits  =  horizontal  ruling.    Great  Plains  deposits  =  dotted  areas. 


90 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


lignite;  the  proofs  of  prolonged  overflow  or  lagoon  conditions  are  found  in  the 
great  horizontal  bands  known  as  the  ''white  layers."  As  will  be  more  fully 
described  below,  the  vast  building  materials  of  these  deposits  were  partly 
derived  by  erosion  from  the  surrounding  mountain  ranges,  but  chiefly  by 
sediments  of  volcanic  dust  which  have  consolidated  into  what  are  known 
as  tuffs. 

These  great  facts  of  western  physiography  may  be  summed  up  as  follows: 
(1)  the  axes  of  the  mountain  ranges  were  the  same  as  at  present;  the  ranges 
themselves,  though  not  actually  as  high,  were  probably  higher  in  relation  to 
the  surrounding  country  than  at  present  because  we  must  allow  for  a  long 
period  of  erosion.  (2)  The  Eocene  drainage  systems  were  also  broadly  the 
same  as  the  modern,  namely,  the  systems  of  the  Colorado  River,  the  Arkan- 
sas River,  the  Big  Horn  branch  of  the  Missouri  River,  and  the  Columbia 
River.  In  details,  however,  the  drainage  systems  have  certainly  been  modi- 
fied by  uplift  and  erosion.  (3)  The  deposits  all  lie  in  the  same  great  mountain 
basins  or  mountain  valleys  in  which  they  were  originally  collected.  Owing 
to  the  proximity  of  volcanic  peaks,  ash  and  other  fine  eruptive  materials 
contributed  very  largely  and  in  some  basins  almost  exclusively  to  these 
Eocene  and  Oligocene  deposits  of  the  Mountain  region.  (4)  Except  close 
to  the  mountain  foothills,  as,  for  example,  in  the  Wasatch  of  the  Big  Horn 
basin  (BH),  there  has  been  comparatively  little  post-Eocene  disturbance, 
because  these  deposits  are  still  horizontal  or  at  gentle  angles  with  their 
original  horizontal  position.  (5)  Surrounding  mountain  ranges  were  inter- 
spersed with  active  volcanic  peaks ;  the  upper  Colorado  River  basin  especially 
was  surrounded  by  a  circle  of  volcanoes  which  poured  out  their  lava  and  widely 
distributed  ashes.  (6)  The  mammalian  life  of  the  mountain  region  is  largely 
that  of  plateaux,  uplands,  and  elevated  basins,  of  streams  and  lake  borders, 
of  hillsides,  and  more  or  less  of  forests.  There  are  also  evidences  of  arid  peri- 
ods in  which  great  stretches  of  the  sandy  flood  plains  were  desiccated  during 
the  dry  season  of  the  year,  and  afforded  a  favorable  basis  for  the  evolution  of 
mammals  with  slender  or  cursorial  types  of  limbs  and  feet,  as  of  the  smaller 
horses. 

Volcanic  materials.  —  A  very  large  part  of  the  basin  deposits  of  the 
Rocky  Mountain  Region  which  for  years  were  described  as  consisting  of 
gravels,  sandstones,  and  clays,  are  now  found  to  consist  largely  and  in  some 
places  exclusively  of  volcanic  ash  materials.  As  early  as  1876  Clarence 
King  ^  recognized  volcanic  ash  strata  in  the  lower  Eocene  Wasatch  of  west- 
ern Wyoming  underlying  the  true  Coryphodon  Zone.  Merrill  and  Peale  in 
1885-1886  determined  the  volcanic  ash  origin  of  the  Bozeman  Lake  deposit, 
Gallatin  County,  Montana.  Peale  ^  prophetically  observed:  ''Again,  do 
not  these  volcanic  materials  which  must  have  fallen  in  showers  over  a  large 
extent  of  country  —  accumulating  in  some  cases  in  beds  40  to  90  feet  thick  — 

'  King,  C,  Amer.  Jour.  Set.,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  XI.  1876,  pp.  478-480. 
2  Peale,  A.  C,  Science,  Vol.  VIII,  Aug.  20,  1886,  p.  163. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


91 


account  for  the  perfect  preservation  of  the  vertebrate  remains  which  charac- 
terize the  formations  in  so  many  parts  of  the  West:  and  is  there  not  also 
suggested  one  possible  cause  for  the  extinction  of  some  of  the  many  groups 
of  animals  which  have  at  present  no  descendants  in  this  region  and  whose 
only  remains  are  the  bony  fragments  found  in  these  lacustrine  deposits?" 
Following  Merriam's  ^  determination  (1901)  of  the  volcanic  ash  nature  of  the 


115  UO^  105* 


110'  "io? 


EOCENE  DEPOSITS  THE  5AME  REGION 

Fig.  23.  —  [To  left]  Chief  Eocene  fossil-mammal-bearing  Formations  (largely  volcanic 
tuffs)  in  the  Mountain  Region  of  North  America,  and  [to  right]  areas  of  volcanic  rock  (lavas) 
in  the  same  geographic  region.  1.  Puerco  and  Torrejon,  N.  Mex.  2.  Wasatch,  Utah  and 
Wyo.  3.  Big  Horn  (Wasatch),  Wyo.  4.  Wind  River,  Wyo.  5.  Huerfano,  Col.  6.  Bridger, 
Wyo.    7.  Washakie,  Wyo.    8.  Uinta,  Utah  and  Col.    9.  (?)  Fort  Union,  Mont. 

Oligocene  deposits  of  the  John  Day  Basin,  the  next  important  step  was  the 
recognition  by  Sinclair  ^  (1906)  that  the  deposits  of  the  Bridger  Basin  (Middle 
Eocene)  were  also  chiefly  of  volcanic  nature,  or  tuffs.  The  same  author  ^ 
in  1907  proved  that  the  successive  Washakie  Basin  deposits  were  likewise  of 
ash.  This  led  to  a  thorough  examination  by  the  United  States  Geological 
Survey  through  Albert  Johannsen  of  samples  of  rock  from  the  entire  Eocene 
Series,  with  the  most  interesting  and  conclusive  results.* 

The  manner  of  deposition  of  the  volcanic  ash  in  these  various  basins, 

1  Merriam,  J.  C,  A  Contribution  to  the  Geology  of  the  John  Day  Basin.  Univ.  CaL, 
Bull.  Dept.  Geol.,  Vol.  II,  1901,  p.  269. 

^  Sinclair,  W.  J.,  Volcanic  Ash  in  the  Bridger  Beds  of  Wyoming.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat. 
Hist.,  Vol.  XXII,  Art.  xv,  1906,  pp.  273-280. 

'  Sinclair,  W.  J.,  Science,  n.s.  Vol.  XXVII,  no.  685,  Feb.  14,  1908,  p.  254. 

*  Johannsen,  Albert,  in  litteris,  1909. 


92 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


whether  washed  down  from  the  mountain  sides,  blown  about  on  dry  sur- 
faces, distributed  in  flood  plains  or  in  extensive  or  shallow  lakes,  has  not  been 
fully  determined.  Merriam  ^  rejects  the  theory  of  the  lacustrine  origin  of  the 
John  Day  Formation  and  speaks  of  "showers  of  ash  with  tuff  deposits  on  a 
plain  occupied  in  part  by  shallow  lakes."  Undoubtedly  the  wind  or  atmos- 
pheric currents  were  a  great  agent  of  distribution.  As  observed  by  Russell  ^ 
one  wind-distributed  deposit  in  Alaska  occupies  52,280  square  miles,  and  is 
100  feet  thick  in  places.    Other  deposits  cover  great  areas  not  only  in  the 


Fig.  24.  —  Mt.  Pelee  and  volcanic  cloud  distributing  volcanic  ash.    After  a  painting  by 
Charles  R.  Knight  under  the  direction  of  E.  O.  Hovey. 


mountain  but  in  the  plains  region.  As  shown  in  the  accompanying  picture 
of  Mt.  Pelee,  the  dust  is  carried  high  up  into  the  air  by  the  explosive  dis- 
charges of  steam  and  gas,  and  may  be  distributed  over  vast  areas  by  the 
wind.  It  is  white  unless  adulterated  with  other  substances,  and  resembles 
powdered  pumice.  It  consists  of  angular  flakes  of  glass,  generally  too  small 
to  be  distinguished  by  the  unaided  eye.    Its  chief  component  is  silica. 

The  total  or  combined  thickness  of  these  Eocene  depositions  is  enormous, 
but  since  the  deposits  were  partly  contemporaneous  and  partly  successive,  as 
shown  by  a  careful  study  of  the  life  zones  which  they  contain  (diagram  on 
p.  49),  the  net  total  Eocene  deposition,  deducting  the  thickness  of  over- 
lapping deposits,  was  about  7,200  feet. 

4.  Pacific  coast,  close  of  the  Cretaceous.  —  The  subsidence  and  erosion  of 
the  western  part  of  the  western  continent  had  almost  established  a  connec- 
tion between  the  Pacific  gulf  in  California  and  Oregon  and  the  old  Mississip- 
pian  Sea  of  the  Mississippi  valley.^    The  intervening  isthmus  not  covered 

»  Merriam,  J.  C,  op.  ext.,  1901. 

2  Russell,  I.  C,  Volcanoes  of  North  America,  New  York,  1897,  p.  286  fol. 
'  Smith,  J.  P.,  Salient  Events  in  the  Geologic  History  of  California.   Science,  n.s.,  Vol. 
XXX,  no.  767,  1909,  pp.  346-351. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


93 


by  salt  water  was  worn  down  to  base  level,  and  widening  expanses  of  flats 
were  covered  with  marshes  which  eventually  formed  coal,  preserving  a  similar 
flora  from  the  outlyers  of  the  Mississippi  valley  almost  to  the  Pacific  coast. 
These  coal-forming  conditions  reached  far  up  into  Alaska,  where  almost  under 
the  arctic  circle  types  of  plants  flourished  that  to-day  could  not  live  in  the 
open,  north  of  Mexico. 

In  Eocene  times  the  climatic  and  geographic  conditions  remained  the 
same,  but  the  sea  had  encroached  still  farther  on  the  land,  and  the  base  level- 
ing of  the  backbone  of  the  continent  was  more  complete.  Tropical  conditions 
still  prevailed  up  as  far  as  Alaska,  and  coal  was  still  formed  abundantly 
where  vegetation  is  now  scanty.  This  is  truly  an  ''Eocene  carboniferous," 
for  most  of  the  coal  on  the  west  coast  belongs  to  this  epoch.  At  this  time 
also  a  temporary  connection  was  established  between  the  Pacific  and  Atlantic 
oceans,  for  the  peculiarly  Atlantic  type  of  mollusc,  Venericardia  planicosta, 
is  found  along  with  Pacific  types  in  California  and  Oregon. 

In  his  recent  discussion  of  this  region,  Scharff,^  after  a  complete  review 
of  the  existing  knowledge  of  the  present  and  former  distribution  of  animal 
and  plant  fife  in  the  two  continents,  comes  to  the  following  somewhat  extreme 
conclusion,  namely :  that  there  was  a  great  lobe  of  land  connecting  western 
North  America  with  the  southern  portion  of  the  South  American  continent 
during  the  beginning  of  Caenozoic  times,  while  Central  America  and  the 
northern  portion  of  the  South  American  continent  were  still  largely  submerged. 

Late  Cretaceous  and  Early  Eocene  Flora 

The  plant  life  is  naturally  one  of  the  keys  to  the  evolution  of  the  herbiv- 
orous mammals.  We  have  to  consider  the  food  afforded  by  bark,  leaves, 
twigs,  and  buds,  by  shrubs,  and  by  the  plants  of  softer  tissue,  such  as  mam- 
mals browse  upon  to-day,  as  well  as  by  the  grasses,  plants  of  harder  tissue, 
upon  which  they  graze.  The  diminution  of  browsing  mammals  and  increase 
of  grazing  mammals  is  one  of  the  great  features  of  Caenozoic  evolution. 

Grasses.  —  If  we  observe  the  conditions  of  the  preservation  of  plant 
remains  along  existing  ponds,  river  borders,  or  swamps  we  see  at  once  that  they 
are  as  favorable  for  the  preservation  of  deciduous  leaves  as  they  are  unfavor- 
able for  the  preservation  of  grasses.  Grasses  are  firmly  attached  to  their 
roots  and  are  not  swept  away  either  by  water  or  wind.  Leaf  deposits,  there- 
fore, abound  everywhere  and  give  us  sure  indications  of  the  forest  flora, 
while  we  know  but  little  of  the  field  and  meadow  flora,  which  is  of  great  im- 
portance in  connection  with  the  evolution  of  the  grazing  herbivorous  Ungu- 
lates especially.  In  fact,  the  evidence  as  to  grasses  is  very  limited  throughout 
the  entire  Age  of  Mammals.  The  number  of  kinds  of  grasses  (Graminese) 
found  in  the  whole  Caenozoic  of  Europe  is  comparatively  small,  and  it  is  diffi- 

1  Scharff,  R.  F.,  On  an  Early  Tertiary  Land-Connection  between  North  and  South  Amer- 
ica.  Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XLIII,  Sept.,  1909,  pp.  513-531. 


94 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


cult  to  draw  conclusions  from  fossil  plant  remains  alone  as  to  their  relative 
or  absolute  importance.  At  what  period  grasses  began  to  assume  anything 
like  their  present  dominance  it  is  impossible  to  determine.  The  absence  of 
native  grasses  in  Australia  is  indirect  evidence  of  their  late  geological  devel- 
opment. According  to  Schimper  and  Schenck  ^  the  first  record  of  grasses 
is  in  the  Cretaceous  Age,  the  cane  (Arundo),  and  the  reed  (Phragmites) 
being  found  in  North  America.  According  to  Gardner  -  the  determination 
of  the  meadow  grass  (Poacites)  from  the  Kome  beds  of  Greenland  is  very 
doubtful.  There  can  be  little  doubt,  according  to  Hollick,  that  grasses  arose 
at  an  early  period  in  the  Caenozoic,  perhaps  even  in  the  lowest  Eocene. 
While  Gardner  (1886,  p.  454)  considers  that  they  attained  prominence  in  both 
hemispheres  only  toward  the  close  of  the  Eocene,  he  believes  it  to  be  not  im- 
probable that  the}^  were  established  in  the  north  (Spitzbergen)  at  an  early 
period.  The  indirect  evidence  derived  from  the  adaptations  of  the  teeth  of 
mammals  disposes  us  to  adopt  the  opinion  of  Gardner  (1886,  p.  441)  that 
grasses  attained  wide  distribution  in  both  hemispheres  only  toward  the  close 
of  the  Eocene.  Their  evolution  on  favorable  forestless  regions  was  certainly 
a  very  prolonged  one,  beginning  in  Mesozoic  times. 

A  southern  flora.  —  The  Tertiary  flora  in  general  ^  represents  not  only 
every  one  of  the  great  types  of  vegetation  but  also  a  large  nimiber  of  the 
orders  and  genera  of  the  present  plant  world.  Passing  over  from  the  Creta- 
ceous into  the  early  Tertiary,  the  horsetails  (Equisetaceae)  are  represented  by 
reduced  forms.  Among  the  gymnosperms,  the  cycads  were  waning  while  the 
Coniferae,  or  true  gymnosperms,  were  represented  by  forms  closely  allied  to 
the  sequoias,  widely  distributed  and  in  great  abundance.  The  true  conifers 
or  pines  were  of  more  modern  origin.  The  palms  were  a  dominant  type 
which  flourished  in  great  luxuriance  during  the  Eocene  and  Miocene.  The 
dicotyledonous  angiosperms  which  had  appeared  suddenly  in  the  Upper  Cre- 
taceous began  to  gain  complete  ascendancy,  and  in  this  group  were  several 
types  which  seem  to  be  waning  at  the  present  time :  for  example,  the  sassa- 
fras (Sassafras),  tulip  tree  (Liriodendron) ,  and  the  sweet  gum  (Liguidamhar) . 
In  the  Eocene  a  luxuriant  vegetation  covered  the  northern  hemisphere  as  far 
north  as  Grinnell  Land  (81°  45'')  >  the  Arctic  flora  alone  comprising  400 
species  of  arborescent  type.  In  North  America  the  deciduous  flora  of  the 
older  Caenozoic  was  very  similar  to  the  modern  flora. 

The  processes  of  modification  and  evolution  of  plants  were  far  slower 
than  the  evolution  of  mammals.  In  connection  with  what  has  been  said 
above  regarding  grasses,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  deciduous  plants 
which  we  know  are  mainly  those  which  grow  in  the  lowlands.  In  Caenozoic 
times,  as  now,  there  was  a  great  difference  in  the  vegetation  of  different 

'  Schimper  und  Schenk,  Handbuch  der  Paliiontologie  (Zittfl),  II  Abth.,  Palaophytologie, 
1890,  p.  385. 

2  Gardner,  J.  S.,  Fossil  Grasses.  Proc.  Geol.  Assoc.,  Vol.  IX,  1886,  p.  441. 

3  Ward,  L.,  Plants,  Fossil,  in  Johnson's  Universal  Encyclopaedia,  1895,  p.  329. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  95 

levels.  Temperature  and  humidity  are  the  most  important  factors  govern- 
ing plant  distribution,  but  we  must  also  take  into  consideration  the  nature 
of  the  soil  and  other  conditions  of  environment.  Since  there  are  so  many 
factors  governing  plant  distribution,  it  is  difficult  to  use  plants  as  thermom- 
eters of  the  past  except  in  a  general  way,  and  this  difficulty  is  increased  by 
the  fact  that  Csenozoic  species  are  only  related  to  and  not  identical  with 
present  species;  also  that  many  nearly  related  species  can  live  under  very 
different  conditions. 

The  most  memorable  fact  about  the  flora  is  one  recently  insisted  upon 
by  Knowlton  (1909),^  namely,  that  as  we  pass  from  the  Cretaceous  into  the 
Eocene  there  is  no  appreciable  change  in  the  flora.  From  this  it  would  ap- 
pear that  there  was  no  secular  change  of  climate;  that  the  temperature  re- 
mained the  same.  So  impressed  is  this  palffiobotanist  with  these  facts  that 
he  places  within  the  Cretaceous  the  Fort  Union  Beds,  which  are  here  re- 
garded as  Basal  Eocene. 


ALTERNATE  UNION  AND  DISUNION  OF  EUROPEAN  AND  NORTH  AMERICAN 

LIFE 

Europe  and  North  America  to-day  are  on  the  whole  closely  united  in  their 
mammalian  life,  and  were  it  not  for  the  profound  changes  and  extinctions 
which  have  been  caused  by  man,  these  widely  separated  countries  would  at 
once  be  recognized  as  constituting  one  great  zoological  region,  occupied  by 
similar  forms  of  mammalian  life.  The  beaver,  bear,  wolf,  stag,  moose,  rein- 
deer, bison,  are  some  of  the  many  connecting  forms  which,  as  Allen  pointed 
out,  constitute  this  a  single  zoological  region,  Holarctica. 

It  is  a  striking  fact  that  at  the  beginning  of  Eocene  times  we  find  a  similar- 
ity which  is  nearly  if  not  quite  as  close  as  that  which  prevails  to-day.  This 
similarity  of  Basal  Eocene  times  is  intensified  in  Lower  Eocene  times.  Then, 
however,  follows  a  long  period  of  disunion  in  the  forms  and  evolution  of  mam- 
mahan  life,  extending  through  the  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene,  in  course  of 
which  the  mammals  become  so  different  on  the  two  continents  that  a  zoologist 
would  certainly  mark  them  off  into  two  entirely  distinct  zoological  regions, 
namely,  the  Old  World  or  Pal^arctica,  and  the  New  World  or  Nearctica. 

But  just  when  the  divergence  seems  most  extreme,  there  comes  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Oligocene  a  fresh  faunal  reunion,  perhaps  even  more  close 
than  the  first.  These  periods  of  union  and  separation  again  recur.  We  thus 
have  good  ground  for  dividing  the  whole  Csenozoic  Period  into  a  series  of 
grand  Faunal  Phases. 

a.  Faunal  phases.  —  Another  means  of  distinguishing  these  faunal 
phases,  in  addition  to  the  continental  separation  and  reunion  of  the  mammals, 

^Knowlton,  F.  H.,  The  Stratigraphic  Relations  and  Palaeontology  of  the  "Hell  Creek 
Beds,"  "Ceratops  Beds"  and  Equivalents,  and  their  Reference  to  the  Fort  Union  Forma- 
tion.   Proc.  Wash.  Acad.  Sci.,  Vol.  XI,  no.  3,  1909,  pp.  179-238. 


96 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


is  in  the  struggle  or  competition  which  we  observe  between  two  great  divisions 
of  mammals,  which  are  so  distinct  in  their  affinities  and  evolutionary  stages 
that  they  may  almost  be  set  apart  as  two  groups.    These  are: 

I.  Archaic  primitive  mammals,  partly  descended  from  ancestors  of  great 
antiquity  in  the  Age  of  Reptiles;  mostly  without  modern  descendants. 

II.  Mammals  with  modern  descendants  and  relationships,  chiefly  compris- 
ing ancestors  of  existing  families. 

The  gradual  dying  out,  or  extinction,  of  the  archaic  in  competition  with 
the  modern  types  thus  affords  a  second  important  means  of  dividing  the 
Cajnozoic  into  faunal  phases.  A  third  means  of  distinguishing  the  faunal 
phases,  and  one  which  lends  variety  to  the  subject,  is  that,  especially  during 
periods  of  separation,  several  families  independently  evolve  in  Europe  and 
North  America  respectively,  without  interchange  by  migration. 

Through  these  three  means  we  may  clearly  divide  the  Caenozoic  into 
seven  great  faunal  phases,  as  follows: 

I.  First  Faunal  Phase,  Basal  Eocene,  archaic  mammals  only  are  known, 
(p.  102). 

II.  Second  Faunal  Phase,  Lower  Eocene,  archaic  and  modern  mammals 
intermingled  (p.  112). 

III.  Third  Faunal  Phase,  Lower  to  Upper  Eocene.    Europe  and  North 
America  separated  (p.  138). 

IV.  Fourth  Faunal  Phase,  Oligocene.   Archaic  mammals  extinct.  Europe 
and  North  America  reunited  (p.  178). 

V.  Fifth  Faunal  Phase,  Miocene.    African  mammals  reach  Europe  and 

North  America.    Europe  invaded  from  Asia  (p.  242). 
VI.  Sixth  Faunal  Phase,  Middle  PHocene.    North  and  South  America 
reunited  (p.  304). 

VII.  Seventh  Faunal  Phase,  Pleistocene.    Widespread  extinction.  Fresh 
invasion  of  America  by  European  mammals  (p.  374). 

h.  The  archaic  mammals.  —  Nature  deals  in  transitions  rather  than  in 
sharp  lines.  We  cannot  circumscribe  the  archaic  mammals  sharply,  nor 
be  sure  as  yet  that  some  of  them  did  not  give  direct  descent  to  certain  of  the 
modernized  mammals.  Yet  the  mammals  of  the  Basal  Eocene  of  both  Eu- 
rope and  North  America  are  altogether  of  very  ancient  type ;  they  exhibit 
many  primitive  characters,  such  as  extremely  small  brains,  simple,  triangular 
teeth,  five  digits  on  the  hands  and  feet,  prevailing  plantigradism.  They 
are  to  be  collectively  regarded  as  the  first  grand  attempts  of  nature  to  estab- 
lish insectivorous,  carnivorous,  and  herbivorous  groups,  or  unguiculates 
and  ungulates.  The  ancestors  or  centers  of  these  adaptive  radiations 
date  far  back  in  the  Age  of  Reptiles.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Eocene  we 
find  the  lines  all  separated  from  each  other  but  not  as  yet  very  highly  special- 
ized.   The  specialization  and  divergence  of  these  archaic  mammals  con- 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


97 


tinue  through  the  Eocene  Period  and  reach  a  chmax  near  the  top,  although 
many  branches  of  this  archaic  stock  become  extinct  in  the  Lower  Eocene. 
The  orders  which  may  be  provisionally  placed  in  this  archaic  group  are  the 
following : 

Marsupialia. 

Multituberculata,  Plagiaulacidse. 
Placentalia. 

Insectivora.    Insectivores  not  as  yet  positively  identified  in  the  Basal  Eocene. 
Tseniodonta.    Edentates  with  enamel  teeth. 
Creodonta.    Archaic  families  of  carnivores. 
Condylarthra.    Primitive  light-limbed  cursorial  ungulates. 
Amblypoda.    Archaic,  typically  heavy-limbed,  slow-moving  ungulates. 

This  group  is  full  of  analogies,  but  is  without  ancestral  affinities  to  the 
higher  placentals  and  marsupials.  There  are  forms  imitating  in  one  or  more 
features  the  modern  Tasmanian  '  wolf  '  (Thylacinus) ,  the  bears,  cats,  hyaenas, 
civets,  and  rodents  of  to-day,  but  no  true  members  of  the  orders  Primates, 
Rodentia,  Carnivora,  Perissodactyla,  Artiodactyla  have  been  discovered. 

A  remarkably  interesting  palseogeographic  fact  is  the  presence  of  many 
similar  if  not  actually  related  mammals  in  South  America  in  the  Upper 
Cretaceous  or  Basal  Eocene  Notostylops  Zone  of  Patagonia.  Since  other 
members  of  this  archaic  fauna  of  North  America  are  positively  and  widely 
represented  in  the  Basal  Eocene  of  Europe,  we  have  abundant  proof  of  that 
striking  faunal  community  or  widespread  distribution  of  similar  forms 
of  mammalian  life  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Age  of  Reptiles  which  has  already 
been  referred  to  (p.  95). 

I.    THE  BASAL  EOCENE  LIFE  OF  EUROPE  AND  AMERICA 

There  is  little  doubt  that  the  extinction  of  the  large  terrestrial  and 
aquatic  reptiles,  which  survived  to  the  very  close  of  the  Cretaceous,  pre- 
pared the  way  for  the  evolution  of  the  mammals.  Nature  began  afresh 
with  the  small,  unspecialized  members  of  the  warm-blooded  quadrupedal 
Class  to  slowly  build  up  out  of  the  mammal  stock  the  great  animals  which 
were  again  to  dominate  land  and  sea.  One  of  the  most  dramatic  moments 
in  the  life  history  of  the  world  is  the  extinction  of  the  reptilian  dynasties, 
which  occurred  with  apparent  suddenness  at  the  close  of  the  Cretaceous, 
the  very  last  chapter  in  the  ''Age  of  Reptiles." 

Close  of  the  Age  of  Reptiles  and  Beginning  of  the  Age  of  Mammals 

We  are  fortunate  witnesses  of  these  great  events  as  they  followed  each 
other  at  two  widely  distant  points,  namely  on  the  northern  coast  of  France 
and  Belgium,  and  in  the  heart  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  region  in  Wyoming 
and  northern  Montana. 


98 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Toward  the  close  of  the  Age  of  Reptiles,  in  late  Cretaceous  times,  sea 
and  land  still  possessed  a  large  reptilian  fauna;  the  great  marine  ich- 
thyosaurs  and  plesiosaurs  had  previously  become  extinct,  but  the  giant  sea 
lizards,  or  mosasaurs,  still  survived. 

In  Belgium,  the  very  summit  of  the  Cretaceous,  the  Danian  or  Mae- 
strichtian  Stage,^  a  name  given  to  the  exposures  around  Maestricht,  records 
the.  existence  in  the  seas  of  several  mosasaurs,  namely,  the  huge  Mosa- 
saurus  giganteus  and  the  lesser  Platecarpus,  as  well  as  of  great  marine  turtles. 
On  land  there  wandered  the  tall  herbivorous  dinosaurs  known  as  Iguano- 
dontia  {Orthomerus  dolloi  Seeley)  and  their  enemies,  the  carnivorous 
dinosaurs  (Megalosaurus  hredai  Seeley). 

At  the  same  time  in  the  Rocky  Mountain  region,  where  the  land  ani- 
mals only  are  known,  there  existed  several  kinds  of  dinosaurs.  Chief 
among  the  herbivorous  forms  were  the  giant  Iguanodontia  {Trachodon) 
or  duckbill"  dinosaurs,  the  great  paired-horned  Ceratopsia  (Triceratops) ^ 
and  the  armored  ankylosaurs  (Ankylosaurus) .  All  these  herbivorous  forms 
were  subject  to  attack  by  the  giant  carnivorous  megalosaurs  of  the  genus 
Tyrannosaurus.  There  were  also  smaller  dinosaurs  (Ornithomimus) ,  cur- 
sorial, or  of  swift-running  habit.  These  reptiles  were  in  the  climax  of 
specialization  and  grandeur;  they  moved  amidst  a  stately  flora  of  palms 
and  sequoias  interspersed  with  bananas  and  fig  trees,  and  a  very  rich  de- 
ciduous tree  flora  of  modern  south  temperate  type. 

A  great  many  species  of  small  mammals  are  known  in  these  Upper 
Cretaceous  dinosaur  beds  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  region. .  They  are  with- 
out exception  of  small  size,  and  as  compared  with  the  reptiles,  they  are 
humble  and  inconspicuous  forms. 

We  have  no  conception  as  to  what  worldwide  cause  occurred,  whether 
there  was  a  sudden  or  a  gradual  change  of  conditions  at  the  close  of  the 
Cretaceous;  we  can  only  observe  that  the  worldwide  effect  was  the  same: 
the  giant  reptiles  both  of  sea  and  land  disappeared.  Reptiles  are  so  sen- 
sitive to  temperature  that  it  is  natural  to  attribute  this  extinction  to  a 
general  lowering  of  temperature,  or  refrigeration,  but  the  flora  shows  no 
evidence  of  this  either  in  Europe  or  America;  nor  is  there  evidence  of  any 
great  geographic  cataclysm  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  for  the  plant  life 
transition  from  one  Age  to  the  other  in  the  Rocky  Mountain  region  is  alto- 
gether gradual  and  gentle. 

Among  the  successive  stages  and  formations  in  which  this  momentous 
change  from  Age  to  Age  is  recorded  are  the  following: 

*  According  to  De  Lapparent,  Danian  and  Maestrichtian  are  not  synonymous;  the  Mae- 
strichtian,  forming  a  part  of  the  Aturian  (or  Upper  Senonian),  is  earlier  than  the  Danian. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


99 


Age  of  Mammals 


Rocky  Mountains  Belgium  France 

3.  Lower  Eocene,  =  3.  Upper  Landenian  =  3.  Sparnacian 
Wasatch 

2.  Basal  Eocene,  =  2.  Lower  Landenian  =  2.  Upper  Thanetian 

ToRREJON  (Cernaysian) 

I.  Basal  Eocene,  =  1.  Lower  Thanetian 
Fort  Union, 

PUERCO 

Age  of  Reptiles     1.  Upper  Creta-  =  Danian,  Msestrich- 
ceous,  Laramie  tian 

First,  it  will  be  observed  that  the  Upper  Cretaceous  Laramie  of  America 
is  broadly  regarded  as  of  age  equivalent  with  the  Danian  or  M^strichtian 
of  Europe,  also  that  both  are  characterized  by  a  rich  reptilian  fauna,  mark- 
ing the  close  of  the  Age  of  Reptiles. 

Lying  at  the  base  of  the  Eocene  or  dawm  of  the  Age  of  Mammals  in 
America  are  the  Fort  Union  or  great  lignitic  formation  of  Wyoming  and 
Montana,  and  the  Puerco  of  New  Mexico;  the  latter  is  partly  a  tuff  for- 
mation. 

These  are  both  continental  deposits  which  are  regarded  as  of  the  same  age 
as  those  sea  border,  or  fluvio-marine  deposits  in  northern  Europe,  which 
are  placed  in  the  Lower  Thanetian  stage. 

We  thus  enjoy  a  contemporaneous  picture  of  mammalian  life  as  it 
existed  along  the  northern  coasts  of  France  and  Belgium  and  in  the  river 
valleys,  flood  plains,  and  lake  borders  of  the  newly  born  Rocky  Moun- 
tain region  of  New  Mexico  and  Montana.  For  it  must  be  remembered 
(p.  93)  that  this  region  too  had  not  long  previously  been  on  the  borders 
of  an  inland  sea. 

Seashore  transition  beds  in  Europe.  —  The  very  ancient  Basal  Eocene 
formations  of  Europe  are  along  the  sea  borders  and  are  thus  not  favor- 
able to  the  preservation  of  mammalian  life;  yet  the  rocks  are  full  of  interest 
as  serving  to  illustrate  how  an  ancient  encroaching  seashore  may  record 
both  its  own  life  and  that  of  the  land  near  by. 

An  especially  clear  sequence  of  these  transition  deposits  is  that  recently  de- 
scribed by  Deperet  ^  in  northern  France  near  Rheims.  (1)  Immediately  overlying 
the  Cretaceous  are  the  Sables  blancs  siliceux  de  Rilly,  white  seashore  sands  of  variable 
thickness  containing  many  marine  molluscs  which  are  similar  to  those  in  the  Sables 
de  Bracheux,  another  Basal  Eocene  formation.  (2)  The  overlying  Gravier  marin 
de  Cernay,  or  seashore  gravels  of  Cernay  (erroneously  called  'Conglomerate  de 
Cernay  by  Lemoine),  containing  species  of  typical  marine  molluscs  characteristic 
of  the  Upper  Thanetian  (Pectunculus,  Ostrea,  Lucina),  is  also  a  marine  or  shore 
formation,  rich  in  the  teeth  of  sharks.  The  remains  of  mammals  represent  those 
carried  into  the  borders  of  a  shallow  sea  through  river  currents;  they  are  iden- 

^  Deperet,  Relations  stratigraphiques  des  Faunes  des  Cernay  et  de  Meudon  au  Mont  de 
Berru.   Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  VI,  1906,  pp.  442-443. 


100 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


tical  in  age  with  the  mammals  of  the  celebrated /awna  of  Cernmj,  which  contains  the 
marsupial  multituberculate,  Xeoplagiaulax.  As  the  coast  was  rising,  this  deposit 
was  overlaid  by  (3)  a  bed  of  coarse  sands,  claj^s,  and  lignites,  which  represents  the 
beginning  of  the  Sparnacian,  of  a  thickness  of  17  m.;  near  this  level  were  found 
the  bones  of  the  giant  bird  Gastornis,  described  by  Lemoine.  The  coast  was  still 
rising,  so  that  superposed  (4)  is  a  lagoon  or  lacustrine  formation  of  marls  and  lime- 
stones without  fossils.  Superposed  again  are  the  (5)  Sables  et  argiles  lignileuses  with 
a  brackish  water  molluscan  fauna  of  Sparnacian  age;  in  these  sands  and  clay- 
lignites  (21  m.  above  the  Gravier  marin  de  Cernay),  have  been  found  limb  bones  of 
Corijphodon  identical  in  size  with  the  typical  specimen  found  at  Meudon  {Manxes 
de  Meudon). 

These  records  of  a  sinking  and  rising  Basal  Eocene  shore  line  near  Rheims 
are  paralleled  by  the  Lower  Landenian,  a  Basal  Eocene  marine  phase  of  Belgium, 
probably  of  the  same  age  as  the  Cernaysian  of  Rheims.  (1)  This  marine  littoral 
formation  contains  no  mammals,  but  a  number  of  very  characteristic  reptiles,  as 
follows:  the  large  lizard  Champsosaurus  lemoinei,  of  the  same  species  as  that  found 
near  Rheims  in  the  typical  Cernaysian,  abundantly  represented  and  beautifully 
preserved;  Lytoloma,  a  marine,  shore-living  turtle  with  a  very  powerful  mandib- 
ular symphysis,  evidently  adapted  to  crushing  the  littoral  molluscs;  the  giant 
bird  Gastornis  has  also  been  found  here.  (2)  Surely  resting  on  the  Lower  Landenian 
is  a  fluviatile  formation  attributed  to  the  Upper  Landenian  stage,  and  represented 
at  Orsmael  and  Erquelinnes,  localities  in  Belgium  widely  separated  geographically 
but  containing  the  same  fauna,  the  genera  being  provisionally  identified  as  follows: 
Coryphodon,  Phenacodus,  Dissacus,  Hycenodidis,  Decticadapis,  Plesiadapis,  also  a 
most  important  member  of  the  Perissodactyla-Equidae,  provisionally  identified  as 
Pachynolophus  maldani.  It  appears  from  this  evidence  that  the  Upper  Landenian 
of  Orsmael  and  Erquelinnes,  containing  Coryphodon  and  a  true  perissodactyl,  is  of 
more  recent  age  than  the  Upper  Thanetian  or  Cernaysian,  and  should  be  correlated 
with  the  lower  Sparnacian  of  France,  or  the  Wasatch  of  North  America. 

Continental  transition  beds  in  America.  —  The  gentle  transition  from 
the  reptilian  to  the  mammalian  Age  is  far  more  simply  shown  in  the  suc- 
cession of  continental  depositions  in  northern  Montana.  The  passage 
from  the  Laramie  (Hell  Creek  beds)  to  the  Fort  Union,  or  Lignitic  beds, 
is  apparently  continuous.  The  indications  are  that  the  late  Cretaceous 
Laramie  was  a  period  of  open  country  traversed  by  sand-bearing  rivers. 
In  the  succeeding  Basal  Eocene,  or  Fort  Union,  there  is  evidence  that 
large  parts  of  Montana,  Wyoming,  Colorado,  and  the  Dakotas  were  covered 
with  dense  coal-  or  lignite-forming  forests.  Vast  stretches  of  subtropical 
and  more  hardy  trees  were  interspersed  with  swamps  where  the  vegeta- 
tion was  rank  and  accumulated  rapidly  enough  to  form  great  beds  of 
lignite.  Here  were  bogs  in  which  bog  iron  was  formed.  Amid  the  glades 
of  these  forests  there  wandered  swamp  turtles,  alligators,  and  large  lizards 
of  the  characteristic  genus  Champsosaurus.  Plant  remains  in  the  Laramie 
Hell  Creek  beds  have  also  been  found  in  the  Fort  Union  at  various  locali- 
ties; types  common  to  the  Upper  Cretaceous  and  Basal  Eocene  formations 
are  the  fig  {Ficus),  banana  {Musophyllum),  palms  similar  to  the  sabal  of 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


101 


Florida  {Flabellaria  sahalites),  horse-tail  rushes  (Equisetum),  the  soapberry 
(Sapindus),  the  hardy  sequoias  (Sequoia)  and  gingkos  (Gingko),  also  the 
oak  (Quercus),  and  sycamore  (Platanus).  The  existence  of  this  continuous 
similar  flora,  as  determined  by  Knowlton/  through  the  transition  from  the 


fort  Union  molluscs, plants 
Fort  Union  plants 


Mammal  Quarry 


Fort  Union  plants 
'Ceratops  Beds'" molluscs 


Fort  Union  plants 
-  Fort  Union  plants 


1^-  Ceratops  Beds'mollusc 
<- 


~  — ~  — —  ■ — — .  ■— —  _—  -i^— "\< —  Livingston  plants 


Marine  and  brackish 
invertebrates 


Ft.  Pier  re 
invertebrate 
fauna 


MAMMALS 

Pdntolambda 
Claenodon 


Pti/odus 


Claenodon 
Mioc/aenus 


DINOSA  URS 

Tr/ceratops 
Trachodon 


Fig.  25.  —  Age  of  Mammals  succeeding  the  Age  of  Reptiles.  Columnar  section  to  the 
northeast  of  the  Crazy  Mountains,  Montana,  showing  the  Fort  Union  mammal  beds  (Basal 
Eocene) ,  overlying  the  "  Ceratops  Beds  "  (Upper  Cretaceous) ,  Data  of  Stone  and  Stanton,  1910. 


Age  of  Reptiles  into  the  Age  of  Mammals,  is  strong  evidence  that  the 
cause  of  the  extinction  of  the  Reptilia  is  not  to  be  sought  in  a  change  of  flora 
or  in  a  lowering  of  temperature.  A  typical  Basal  Eocene  mammalian  fauna 
containing  the  marsupial  Plagiaulacidse  is  found  as  described  below  (p.  111). 

^  Knowlton,  F.  H.,  Notes  on  a  Few  Fossil  Plants  from  the  Fort  Union  Group  of  Mon- 
tana, with  Description  of  One  New  Species.  Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  Vol.  XVI,  1893,  pp.  33-36; 
also,  The  Tertiary  Floras  of  the  Yellowstone  National  Park.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  II,  1896, 
pp.  51-58.  Knowlton  and  Stanton,  Stratigraphy  and  Palaeontology  of  the  Laramie  and 
Related  Formations  in  Wyoming.    Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer.,  Vol.  VIII,  1897,  pp.  127-156. 


102 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


7.  BASAL  EOCENE,  FIRST  FAUNAE  PHASE  — MAMMALS  SOLELY 
OF  THE  ARCHAIC  TYPE  COMMON  TO  THE  NEW  AND  OLD 
WORLDS 


Animals  of  the  First  Faunal  Zone.  —  The  Basal  Eocene  life  zones  in 
both  countries  are  sharply  characterized  by  the  extinction  or  absence  of 
the  giant  reptiles,  by  the  survival  from  the  Cretaceous  of  the  large  swamp 


Fig.  26.  —  Basal  and  Lower  Eocene.  Thanetian,  Cernaysian,  Lower  Landenian. 
FRANCE.  —  Glauconie  de  1  la  Fere  (Aisne),  fluvio-marine  deposits  (6  meters).  Gravier 
marin  de  2  Cernay,  near  Reims  (.5-7  meters).  Sables  et  calcaires  de  3  Rilly,  near  Reims, 
lacustrine.  Sables  de  4  Chdlons-sur-Marne  (Marne).  Sparnacian,  Upper  Landenian. 
BELGIUM.  —  5  Erquelinnes,  near  French  boundary.  FRANCE.  —  Argile  plastique  et 
lignites  de  6  Soissons  (Aisne),  7  Guny,  8  Muirancourt,  near  Paris.  9  Saron,  near  Ste.  Maxence. 
10  Laon  (Aisne).  11  Upper  Cernay,  near  Reims.  Conglomerat  de  12  Meudon,  near  Paris. 
Lignites  de  13  Vaugirard,  near  Paris.  Travertin  de  14  Sezanne  (Marne),  a  calcareous  tuff 
rich  in  plants.  ENGLAND.  —  Woolwich  and  Reading  Beds,  "plastic  clay,"  of  15  Dulwich, 
16  Croyden,  near  London,  marine  and  estuariiie  (4-28  meters)  sands  and  clays.  Lower 
Ypresian.  ENGLAND.  —  17  London  clay  of  18  Heme  Bay  (Kent),  19  Kyson,  north  of  Har- 
wich, 20  Harwich  (Essex),  21  Isle  of  Sheppey,  mouth  of  the  Thames,  marine  and  estuarine 
deposit  (over  500  feet  maximum).  FRANCE.  —  Marine  deposits  of  22  Pourcy,  near  Reims. 
Upper  Ypresian.  FRANCE.  —  In  Marne,  near  Epernay  :  22  Chavot,  sables  a  teredines  d'A?/, 
marine  (3-4  meters) ,  marnes  de  Cuts.    Correlation  of  Deperet. 

or  fluviatile  lizard  Champsosaurus  (of  the  order  Choristodera  or  long- 
snouted  Rhynchocephalia).  In  the  Rocky  Mountain  region  this  animal 
is  also  found  in  the  underlying  Laramie  formation.  Its  survival  both 
in  the  Rocky  Mountain  region,  in  Belgium,  and  in  France  is  one  of  the 
most  distinctive  features  of  the  Basal  Eocene,  because  it  is  apparently  on 
the  verge  of  extinction  and  does  not  reappear  in  higher  levels. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


103 


This  Basal  Eocene  stage  is  further  distinguished  by  the  presence  of 
numerous  diprotodont  marsupial  multituberculates  of  the  family  Plagiaula- 
cidse,  and  by  many  other  very  primitive  mammals. 

It  is  also  distinguished  by  the  absence  of  any  mammals  belonging  to 
modernized  families.  These  first  make  their  appearance  on  both  con- 
.tinents  in  the  Lower  Eocene  (Wasatch)  in  what  is  known  as  the  Coryphodon 
Zone,  probably  equivalent  to  the  Upper  Landenian  of  Belgium  or  the 
Sparnacian  of  France. 

The  chief  distinction  of  this  mammal  fauna  is  that  it  represents  a 
survival  of  the  mammalian  life  of  the  Age  of  Reptiles,  and  so  far  as  we 
know  it  now  this  life  is  all  of  the  archaic  type.  We  are,  in  fact,  witnessing 
the  close  of  a  faunal  phase  which  opened  well  back  in  Cretaceous  times. 


Basal  Eocene  of  Europe 

Thanetian  Formation.  —  The  Basal  Eocene  of  Europe  is  known  as  the 
Thanetian  Stage;  it  is  named  after  the  Isle,  or  promontory,  of  Thanet,  at 
the  .mouth  of  the  Thames.  As  above  described  on  p.  99,  it  is  divided  into 
inferior  and  superior  levels.  In  France  it  is  typified  by  the  fluvio-marine  glau- 
conie  de  la  Fere,  from  which  the  single  famous  bear-like  creodont  Arctocyon 
primcevus  was  described  in  1841.  With  the  superior  level  (Upper  Thane- 
tian) is  paralleled  the  fluvio-marine  gravel  deposit  of  Cernay,  near  Rheims, 
from  which  the  famous  ''fauna  of  Cernay"  was  described  by  Lemoine.^ 


This  very  rich  Cernaysian  or  Upper  Thanetian 
fauna  is  nearly  of  the  same  age  as  the  Torrejon  fauna 
of  northern  New  Mexico;  that  is,  its  age  is  a  little 
more  recent  than  the  underlying  true  Puerco  fauna  of 
New  Mexico.  It  contains  small  insectivores,  lemur- 
like mammals,  a  few  hoofed  mammals,  and  many  car- 
nivores. It  is  especially  interesting  to  compare  the 
teeth  of  Neoplagiaulax  (Cernaysian)  with  those  of 
Ptilodus  (Torrejon)  as  in  a  similar  stage  of  evolution; 
these  are  small,  gnawing,  diprotodont  marsupials, 
which  may  be  descended  from  Plagiaulax  of  the 
The  Insectivora  are  represented  by  members  of  the 
family  Adapisoricidae,  somewhat  analogous  to  the  tree  shrews  (Tupaia). 
Primitive  monkeys,  possibly  lemuroids,  are  represented  by  small  animals 
referred  to  the  Plesiadapidae.  More  doubtful  is  the  identification  of  the 
teeth  of  the  herbivorous  tuberculate  pattern  with  that  of  one  of  the 
primitive  cursorial  ungulates  (Euprotogonia)  of  the  hoofed  order  Con- 
dylarthra  of  the  Torrejon.  Pleuraspidotherium  somewhat  resembles 
Meniscotherium,  the  primitive  ungulate  or  condylarth  of  more  recent 

*  See  Lemoine,  various  papers  listed  in  Bibliography. 


Characteristic 

Mammals 
Plagiaulacids 
Adapisoricids 
Lemuroids  (?) 
Insectivores,  (?) 
or  Condylarths  (?) 
Arctocyonids 
Oxyclsenids 
Triisodonts 

Upper  Jurassic. 


104 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


geological  age  in  the  Rocky  Mountains;  it  may  as  well  be  an  insectivore. 
The  comparison  of  the  primitive  carnivores  or  Creodonta  in  the  two 
countries  is  closer,  namely,  of  the  Thanetian  species  of  Arctocyon,  with  its 
omnivorous,  bear-  or  raccoon-like  teeth,  with  those  of  Cloenodon  of  northern 
New  Mexico.  Similarly  the  Thanetian  Procynictis  parallels  Chriacus  of 
the  American  family  Oxyclsenidse,  and  Hycenodidis  is  similar  to  the 
American  Dissacus  of  the  Mesonychidae.  Contrary  to  the  recent  opinion 
of  Deperet,  it  does  not  appear  probable  that  the  presence  is  demonstrated 
of  any  of  the  modernized  animals,  e.g.  artiodactyl  or  perissodactyl  un- 
gulates, in  this  imperfectly  known  fauna.  Similarly  we  note  the  absence 
of,  or  have  thus  far  failed  to  discover  in  this  fauna  any  relatives  of  the 
Edentata  (Taeniodonta)  or  Amblypoda,^  both  characteristic  of  the  Torrejon. 
Of  course  the  Cernaysian  river  deposit  presents  a  very  incomplete  picture 
of  the  mammalian  life  of  France  during  this  period,  for  as  observed  by 
Lemoine  and  Deperet  these  mammal  remains  were  only  those  which  were 
washed  into  streams  and  carried  to  the  sea  near  by. 

The  associated  freshwater  fishes  of  northern  France  and  Belgium  are 
related  to  the  garpikes  (Lepidosteus)  and  bow-fins  (Amia),  now  met  with 
only  in  the  great  rivers  of  North  America.  There  are  many  turtles,  all 
marsh  and  river  varieties,  Crocodilia,  both  of  the  crocodile,  or  Nile  type, 
and  the  long-snouted,  gavial  type,  of  the  Ganges.  Extremely  adapted  to 
aquatic  life  is  the  rhynchocephalian  lizard  Simcedosaurus,  related  to  the 
Champsosaurus  of  the  Basal  Eocene  of  North  America.  The  flightless 
bird  Gastornis,  belonging  to  the  order  of  Chenomorphae,  according  to  von 
Zittel,^  is  remarkable  for  its  huge  proportions  and  its  powerful  legs  in  con- 
trast with  its  feeble  wings. 

The  flora  of  this  Basal  Eocene  period  indicates  a  moderately  warm  and 
temperate  climate  free  from  great  extremes,  including  palms  (Flabellaria) , 
laurels  (Laurus),  cinnamons  {Cinnamomum) ,  and  a  doubtfully  referred 
grass  (Poacites).^  In  the  extreme  north  the  Basal  Eocene  flora ^  of 
Greenland,  Iceland,  and  Spitzbergen  included  lindens,  alders,  magnolias, 
poplars,  and  birches,  indicating  a  temperature  similar  to  that  of  south 
temperate  France  or  California  at  the  present  time. 

Basal  Eocene  of  North  America 

Puerco  and  Torrejon  Formations.  —  In  northwestern  New  Mexico,  at 
the  head  of  the  Puerco  River  on  the  divide  between  the  Rio  Grande  and 
San  Juan  rivers,  are  the  Basal  Eocene,  post-Cretaceous  beds  which  Pro- 

^  As  above  noted  (p.  100),  the  inclusion  in  this  stage  of  mammals  found  in  the  Upper 
Landenian  of  Orsmael  and  Erquclinnes,  namolj',  Amblypoda  (Coryphodon)  and  Perisso- 
dactyla  (primitive  Equidae)  is  extremely  doubtful. 

-  Von  Zittel,  Text-Book  of  Palaeontology-,  transl.  by  Eastman,  Vol.  II,  1902. 

3  De  Lapparent,  Traite  de  Geologic,  1906,  p.  1492. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  1504,  citation  from  Heer's  Flora  fossilis  arctica. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


105 


fessor  Cope  described  as  'Tuerco  marls"  in  1875/  and  from  which  he 
listed  the  first  mammalian  fauna  in  1881.^  The  formation  overlies  the 
Upper  Cretaceous  (Laramie)  and  underlies  the  Wasatch  (Sparnacian, 
Ypresian). 

In  1895  Wortman  observed  a  natural  subdivision  of  the  formation  into 
Lower  or  Puerco  proper,  and  Upper  or  Torrejon,  estimating  the  combined 
thickness  at  800  to  1,000  feet/^    In  1897  Matthew^  separated  the  fauna  of 


r 


PROBABLY 
WASATCH 


TORREJON 
BEDS 


I  Fig.  27.  —  Badlands  of  northern  New  Mexico,  head  of  Torrejon  River.    Basal  Eocene, 

Torrejon-Pantolambda  Zone  below.  Lower  Eocene,  Wasatch-Coryphodon  Zone  above.  From 
photograph  by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  1896. 

the  two  levels,  adopting  Wortman's  proposed  designation  Torrejon  for 
I        the  upper  beds,  which  are  nearly  of  Upper  Thanetian  or  Cernaysian  age. 
As  distinguished  by  its  mammalian  life  this  division  is  as  follows: 

.  |[     Upper:  Torrejon  Formation  (300  feet),  zone  of  Pantolambda,  the  earliest 
known  member  of  the  Ungulata-Amblypoda,  with  crescentic  teeth, 
ancestral  to  Coryphodon. 
j     Lower:  Puerco  Formation  (500  feet),  zone  of  Polymastodon. 

In  1901  Douglass  discovered  in  the  Fort  Union  or  great  lignite  forma- 
tion of  the  upper  Missouri  River  in  northern  Montana,  a  bed  of  shale  con- 

^  Cope,  E.  D.,  Report  on  the  Geology  of  Northwestern  New  Mexico,  Examined  During 
1874,  Append.  LL,  Ann.  Rept.  Chief  Eng.,  Washington,  1875. 
I  ^  Cope,  E.  D.,  On  Some  Mammalia  of  the  Lowest  Eocene  Beds  of  New  Mexico.  Proc. 

f  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XIX,  1881,  pp.  484-495. 

f  ^  Osborn,  H.  F.,  and  Earle,  Chas.,  Fossil  Mammals  of  the  Puerco  Beds.    Collection  of 

1892.    Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist,  Vol.  VII,  Art.  i,  Feb.,  1895. 

*  Matthew,  W.  D.,  A  Revision  of  the  Puerco  Fauna.    Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  IX, 
1897,  pp.  259-323. 


106 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


taining  a  mammalian  fauna  of  Torrejon  age,  including  especially  the  con- 
dylarth  Euprotogonia  and  the  amblypod  Pantolamhda} 

Reptilian  fauna.  —  Abundant  remains  of  three  different  species  of 
Champsosaurus,  the  large,  aquatic  lizard  with  a  gavial-like  snout,  have 
been  found  in  the  Puerco.  This  animal  (p.  100)  occurs  also  in  the  Lower 
Eocene  of  France  (vicinity  of  Rheims)  and  of  Belgium.  From  the  Puerco 
has  been  obtained  also  the  earliest  known  North  American  serpent  (Hela- 

gris  prisciformis),  un- 
specialized  in  character 
and  of  about  the  size 
of  the  common  black 
snake  {Bascanium  con- 
strictor). 

Puerco  Life  of  the 
New  Mexico  Region 

Neoplagiaulax  or 
Polymastodon  Zone. — 
This  is  the  earliest 
known  of  the  Eocene 
mammal  groups,  im- 
mediately succeeding 
the  Cretaceous,  and 
preceding  in  age  the 
Torrejon  and  Cernay- 
sian.  In  New  Mexico 
and  Montana  are  found 
these  small  archaic 
mammals  evolving 
from  ancestors  of  the 
Age  of  Reptiles.  Two 
of  the  genera  date,  in 
family  ancestry  (Plagi- 
aulacidae),  as  far  back 

Fig.  28.  — SkuU  of  the  Basal  Eocene  plagiaulaoid  Ptilodus  aS  the  Upper  Triassic 
(X  f).     In  the  U.S.  National  Museum,  Washington.     After    qj.  J^hsetic  namely:  of 

the  diminutive  multi- 

tuberculates,  (1)  Neoplagiaulax,  which  represents  a  decided  advance  upon 
Ptilodus  of  the  Upper  Cretaceous  (Laramie),  and  (2)  Polymastodon,  which 
similarly  is  much  more  modern  than  Meniscoessus  of  the  Laramie.  The 
latter  animal  is  as  large  as  a  beaver  (Castor).  In  general  these  mammals 
were  the  marsupial  rodents  of  the  Mesozoic  period. 

*  Douglass,  E.,  The  Discovery  of  Torrejon  Mammals  in  Montana.  Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XV, 
1902,  pp.  272-273. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


107 


Two  orders  of  archaic  hoofed  mammals,  or  ungulates,  are  known  here, 
namely:  (1)  the  Arablypoda,  or  short-footed  forms,  represented  b}^  the 
bunodont  Periptychidte,  which  receive  their  name  from  the  sculptured 
sides  of  the  grinding  teeth  of  the  type  genus  Periptychus.  This  family 
embraces  a  number  of  large  and  small  herbivorous  mammals,  all  with  a 
peculiar  triangular  asymmetry  in  their  superior  molar  teeth,  of  consider- 
able range  in  size,  probably  in  part  arboreal  in  habit.  (2)  The  light-limbed 
ungulates,  or  Condylarthra,  are  doubtfully  represented  by  one  genus 
(Protogonodon)  of  the  family  Phenacodontid?e.  The  gnawing  or  leaf-eating 
Herbivora  of  the  order  Tseniodonta  are  represented  by  two  families,  Sty- 
linodontidae  and  ConoryCtidae.  This  order  is  also  known  as  Ganodonta 
(yavos,  enamel,  6Bov^,  tooth),  a  name  assigned  by  Wortman  when  he 
demonstrated  that  certain  descendants  of  these  mammals  present  many 
resemblances  to  the  gravigrade  South  American  edentates,  although  dis- 
tinguished by  the  persistence  of  dental  enamel,  which  has  disappeared  in 
all  the  true  Edentata.  Of  doubtful  affinity  to  the  Insectivora  are  the  two 
genera  Mioclcenus  and  Oxyacodon.  The  primitive  carnivores,  or  Creodonta, 
of  this  phase  have  been  discovered  only  in  part.  They  include  two  families 
(TriisodontidjB,  Oxyclainidae),  represented  by  five  genera.  By  Wortman 
the  Oxyclaenidae  were  regarded  as  Insectivora. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  not  a  single  representative  ancestor  of  any  exist- 
ing order  of  mammals  is  certainly  recognized  in  this  assemblage.  The 
possible  exceptions  are  the  supposed  representatives  of  the  Edentata  and 
Insectivora,  both  "^ery  ancient  orders.  The  opinion  of  Cope  that  the  an- 
cestry of  modernized  mammals  was  to  be  sought  in  these  Puerco  forms 
therefore  lacks  direct  confirmation.  The  opposite  opinion  that  the  Puerco- 
Torreion  mammals' are  not  ancestral  to  the  modern  mammals  was  developed 
by  Osborn  (1893-1904),^  when  he  applied  to  them  the  name  Meseutheria, 
indicative  of  their  archaic  or  Mesozoic  character. 

Negatively,  therefore,  the  Puerco  is  distinguished  by  the  absence  of 
recognizable  primates,  rodents,  carnivores,  and  of  any  modern  families  of 
inscctivores,  artiodactyls,  and  perissodactyls. .  A  summary  of  the  Puerco 
mammalian  fauna  is  as  follows: 

Genera  Species 

Archaic  mammals  of  Triassic  ancestry,  Marsupialia  Dipro- 

todontia  4  5 

Archaic  mammals  of  Cretaceous  ancestry  15  24 

Mammals  of  modern  affinity  0  0 

Torrejon  Life  of  the  New  Mexico  and  Montana  Regions 

Pantolamhda  Zone.  —  All  the  Mammalia  of  the  Torrejon  phase,  or  Pan- 
tolambda  zone  were  found  about  three  hundred  feet  above  those  of  the 

^  Osborn,  Rise  of  the  Mammalia  in  North  America,  1893;  and  Ten  Years'  Progress  in 
Mammahan  Palaeontology,  1904.    See  Bibliography. 


108  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

Puerco  phase,  and  thus  represent  a  very  long  interval  of  geologic  time. 
They  are  of  somewhat  larger  size,  considerably  more  varied,  and  in  the 
presence  of  one  new  family  (Miacidie,  genus  Didymictis)  more  modern. 
The  diprotodont  multituberculates,  including  the  diminutive  Neoplagiaulax 
and  Ptilodus,  and  the  much  larger  Polymastodon,  still  occur  in  this  zone. 
Gidley  ^  has  recently  made  the  most  important  discovery  that  the  anirnal 
called  Chirox  by  Cope  -  is  actually  the  same  as  Ptilodus  or  Neoplagiaulax; 
that  is,  it  represents  the  superior  dentition;  a  beautifully  preserved  skull 


Fig.  29.  —  Archaic  hoofed  mammals  of  the  Pantolambda  Zone.  Outline  restorations  to 
same  scale  (X  j^).  A.  Meniscotherium,  a  condylarth.  (See  also  Fig.  39.)  B.  Pantolmnbda, 
an  amblypod,  short-footed,  semi-plantigrade.  C.  Euprotogonia,  a  condylarth,  long-  and 
slender-limbed. 


and  part  of  the  skeleton  of  Ptilodus  found  in  the  Fort  Union  of  Montana 
demonstrates  beyond  question  that  this  animal,  and  consequently  all  the 
multituberculates,  are  true  marsupials,  aberrant  diprotodonts,  as  was 
originally  surmised  by  Owen  ^  in  describing  Plagiaulax  from  the  Upper 
Jurassic.  The  chief  peculiarity^  is  that  (Fig.  28)  the  upper  and  lower 
teeth  are  fundamentally  different  in  numbers  and  in  arrangement  and  do 
not  oppose  each  other.  Gidley  is  inclined  to  consider  these  animals  as 
frugivorous,  the  incisors  being  well  fitted  for  picking  small  fruits  or  berries. 
The  previous  view  has  been  that  they  were  gnawing  types  analogous  to  the 
rodents.  It  is  important  to  note  that  these  are  the  very  last  survivors  of 
this  very  ancient  family  of  plagiaulacids  (Plagiaulacidse) . 

As  compared  with  the  Puerco,  the  faunal  summary  is  as  follows: 

Genera  Species 

Archaic  multituberculates,  Marsupialia  Diprotodontia                  4  4 

Archaic  or  primitive  mammals  of  Cretaceous  ancestry                 20  37 

Modern,  or  possibly  related  to  the  modern  Carnivora                    1  1 

^  Gidley,  J.  W.    Notes  on  the  Fossil  Mammalian  Genus  Ptilodus,  with  Descriptions  of 
New  Species.    Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  Vol.  XXXVI,  June  19,  1909,  pp.  611-626,  PI.  70. 
-  Cope,  E.  D.,  Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XXI,  1883,  p.  321. 

^  Owen,  R.,  Monograph  of  the  Fossil  Mammalia  of  the  Mesozoic  Formations.  Mon.  Pal. 
Soc,  1871. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


109 


Thus  the  archaic  forms  predominate  in  the  ratio  of  forty-oiie  species  of 
archaic  to  one  species  of  modern  affinities.  This  rich  fauna  is  beheved  to 
be  of  the  same  age  as  that  of  a  portion  of  the  Fort  Union  of  Montana,  as 
described  by  Douglass  ^  (1902)  and  Farr.  Its  approximate  parallels  in 
Europe  (Upper  Thanetian  or  Cernaysian)  are  indicated  by  the  common 
presence  in  France  and  North  America  of  somewhat  similar  stages  of  evolu- 
tion among  the  representatives  of  three  or  four  families,  namely:  (1)  Pla- 
giaulacidae,  (2)  Arctocyonidse,  (3)  Mesonychidse-Triisodontinse,  (4)  Oxy- 
cla3nidse.  As  noted  above,  other  identifications  of  the  Torrejon  and 
Cernaysian  faunas  are  somewhat  uncertain. 

As  in  the  Puerco,  these  Torrejon  mammals  belong  almost  exclusively  to 
an  older  radiation,  destined  to  become  extinct  during  the  Eocene.  This 
elimination,  in  fact,  begins  at  once,  because  five  out  of  the  fourteen  families 
of  mammals  discovered  in  the  Torrejon  make  their  last  appearance  at  this 
stage.  The  remark  applied  by  Dr.  Lemoine  to  the  Cernaysian  fauna, 
"Comme  c^est  drole,  ce  rn.onde  Id,^^  certainly  applies  with  equal  force  to  the 
Torrejon  world;  it  was  certainly  strange  and  bizarre,  none  the  less  ex- 
tremely interesting  and  fortunately  much  more  completely  known  than 
the  Puerco  assemblage,  because  the  limbs  and  feet  of  several  of  its  mem- 
bers have  been  discovered. 

It  was  the  happy  finding  of  the  fore  foot  of  Psittacotheriwn  which  led 
Wortman  ^  to  the  demonstration  that  this  member  of  the  family  Stylinodon- 
tidse,  as  well  as  the  animal  known  as  Conoryctes  of  the  order  Tseniodonta 
(Ganodonta),  are  strongly  analogous  if  not  actually  related  to  the  South 
American  gravigrade  Edentata,  such  as  Megalonyx,  and  the  armadillos, 
respectively. 

These  browsing  or  leaf-eating  tseniodonts  now  attain  a  considerable  size, 
and  present  a  direct  passage  between  the  Wortmania  (" Hemiganus'^)  of 
the  Puerco  and  the  Calamodon  of  the  Wasatch  or  Sparnacian.  There  are 
still  no  true  rodents.  Beside  the  Mioclaenidae  (Mioclcenus)  and  Panto- 
lestidse  (Pentacodon)  there  are  the  Mixodectidae,  making  their  first 
appearance  with  a  pair  of  greatly  enlarged  incisor  teeth,  which  suggested 
to  Cope  their  affinity  with  the  Chiromys,  or  Aye-Aye,  of  Madagascar,  and 
to  Osborn  their  possible  relationship  to  the  Rodentia  (Order  Proglires). 
These  small  insectivore,  rodent,  or  lemur-like  forms  are  destined  to  survive 
to  the  summit  of  the  Eocene. 

It  is  noteworthy  how  frequently  diprotodonty,  or  the  enlargement  of  a  front 
pair  of  incisor  teeth,  appears  not  only  in  the  marsupial  suborder  '  Diproto- 
dontia,'  but  as  a  parallel  or  analogous  adaptation  in  these  Basal  Eocene  mam- 
mals of  Europe  and  America,  and  in  the  several  families  of  other  orders. 

^  Douglass,  E.,  A  Cretaceous  and  Lower  Tertiary  Section  in  South-Central  Montana. 
Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  LXI,  1902,  pp.  207-224. 

^Wortman,  J.  L.,  The  Ganodonta  and  their  Relationship  to  the  Edentata.  Bull.  Amer. 
Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  IX,  1897,  pp.  59-110. 


110 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Of  the  archaic  ungulates,  the  light-limbed  Condylarthra  are  now  cer- 
tainly represented  by  two  genera  of  Phenacodontidse  (Tetraclcenodon,  Eu- 
protogonia) ,  the  former  reported  both  from  New  Mexico  and  Montana. 
Of  the  slow-moving  Amblypoda  the  bunodont  Periptychidae  are  still  repre- 
sented by  four  genera,  and  the  selenodont  Pantolambdidse,  which  are  con- 
sidered more  nearly  ancestral  to  the  coryphodonts  of  the  Wasatch,  make 
their  first  appearance.    The  genus  Pantolamhda,  including  animals  rang- 


FiG.  30.  —  Basal  and  Lower  Eocene  stages  in  the  evolution  of  the  heavy-limbed  Ambly- 
poda. Above  :  Skeletons  of  the  small  Pantolamhda  and  its  large  successor  Coryphodon. 
Below  :  Restorations  of  the  same  by  Charles  R.  Knight.  Both  in  the  American  Museum  of 
Natural  History. 


ing  in  size  from  that  of  a  large  beaver  to  that  of  a  sheep,  receives  its  name 
from  the  lambda  shape  of  the  cusps  of  its  superior  grinding  teeth;  out 
of  these  simple  cusps  were  destined  to  arise  the  extraordinary  yoke- 
shaped  teeth  of  Coryphodon  and  the  still  stranger  crested  teeth  of  Uinta- 
therium.  The  primitive  skull,  short  limbs  with  everted  elbows,  the  short, 
spreading  feet  and  long  tail  of  this  animal,  all  point  toward  ancestry  from 
an  unguiculate  or  clawed  animal  of  the  primitive  carnivore-creodont  build. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


111 


It  should  be  noted  that  there  are  no  lemurs  or  other  primates  certainly 
recognized  in  this  fauna.  Several  of  the  animals  which  were  regarded  as 
lemuroid  by  Cope  are  now  placed  near  the  insect ivores  (Matthew,  1909). 

Prevailing  The  ancient  Carnivora  (Creodonta)  are  either  richer 

Mammals  ^or  more  fully  known  in  this  phase  than  in  the  Puerco, 

Plagiaulacids  since  they  are  represented  by  four  families,  Arcto- 

Periptychids  cyonidse  {Clcenodon) ,  Mesonychidae  (Dissacus),  Triiso- 

Pantolambdids  dontidse  (Sarcothraustes) ,  Oxyclaenidae  {Chriacus,  Tri- 

Phenacodonts  centes,  Deltatherium) .     These  creodonts  are  partly 

Tseniodonts  provided  with  tubercular   teeth,  partly  with  sub- 

Mixodectids  trenchant  or  cutting  teeth.   It  is  important  to  observe 

Insectivores  (?)  that  no  well-developed  sectorial  teeth  have  as  yet 
Pro-Carnivores  evolved  in  this  phase;  in  other  words,  the  Creodonta 
(or  Creodonts)  are  not  yet  perfected  as  flesh  eaters. 

Triisodonts  The  first  rudiments  of  modernism  are  seen  in  the 

Oxyclsenids  genus  Didymidis,  a  member  of  the  family  Miacidse, 

Arctocyonids  which  may  be  considered  one  of  the  true  pro-Carnivora 

because  in  the  disposition  of  its  carnassial  or  sectorial 
teeth  it  agrees  with  dog-like  and  civet-like  forms  of  the  higher  Wasatch 
and  Bridger  Formations. 


II.    THE  LOWER  EOCENE  LIFE  OF  EUROPE  AND  AMERICA 

We  now  enter  the  life  or  faunal  zone  of  Coryphodon,  the  bulky  succes- 
sor of  Pantolamhda,  an  animal  known  both  in  Europe  and  North  America; 
also  of  Hyracotherium  and  Eohippus,  the  first  representatives  of  the  horses 
(Equidse).  Deperet  (see  p.  100)  was  of  the  opinion  (1905)  that  Cory- 
phodon and  Hyracotherium  appear  earlier  in  Europe  than  in  America, 
namely,  in  the  Lower  Landenian  of  Belgium,  which  he  synchronizes  with 
the  Cernaysian^  or  Thanetian;  the  evidence  for  this  correlation  does  not 
appear  conclusive.  It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that  both  Coryphodon 
and  the  primitive  horses  may  be  found  at  an  earlier  geological  phase  in  the 
Old  than  in  the  New  World.  In  whichever  continent  the  coryphodons 
and  horses  did  originate,  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  occurrence  of  a  sudden 
modernization,  through  the  appearance  both  in  Europe  and  North  America 
of  an  assemblage  of  mammals,  unheralded  by  ancestral  forms,  which  in- 
cludes ancestors  of  four  or  five  modern  orders  and  embraces  eleven  new 
families,  two  of  which  persist  to  the  present  time  and  none  of  which  have 
been  observed  in  the  Torrejon  or  Puerco  phases.  We  are  thus  in  another 
of  the  great  successive  faunal  phases,  namely,  the  Second,  as  follows: 

^  Deperet,  C,  L'evolution  des  Mammif^res  tertiaires;  importance  des  migrations  (Eocene). 
C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Vol.  CXLI,  sea.  Nov.  6,  1905,  p.  702. 


112 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


//.  LOWER  EOCENE,  SECOND  FAUNAE  PHASE  — FIRST  MODERNI- 
ZATION IN  EUROPE  AND  AMERICA,  OR  INVASION  OF  ANCESTORS 
OF  MODERN  MAMMALS  WHICH  MINGLE  AND  COMPETE  WITH 
ARCHAIC.  CLOSE  FAUNAE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  WESTERN 
EUROPE  AND  WESTERN  NORTH  AMERICA.  APPARENT  BREAK 
BETWEEN  NORTH  AND  SOUTH  AMERICA.  INITIAL  ELIMINATION 
OF  ARCHAIC  IN  COMPETITION  WITH  MODERN  MAMMALS. 

European  palaeontologists  have  usually  attributed  the  source  of  the 
modern  families  of  the  Second  Faunal  Phase  to  North  America;  while 
this  theory  is  without  evidence,  it  is  certain  that  this  fauna  originated  neither 
in  South  America  nor  in  Africa.    There  remain  four  possible  centers  of 


Fig.  31.  —  Coryphodonts,  typical,  large  mammals  of  the  Lower  Eocene.  To  the  left  a 
coryphodon  bull  with  large  tusks  ;  to  the  right  a  cow,  with  small  tusks.  After  the  original  by 
Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


origin,  namely:  (1)  the  Great  Plains  and  Atlantic  Border  region  of  North 
America;  (2)  the  more  northerly  American  Mountain  Region,  that  is, 
British  Columbia;  (3)  the  northerly  American-Asiatic  land  mass  or  northern 
Holarctica;  (4)  the  northerly  Eurasiatic  region  or  northern  Palaearctica. 
Each  of  these  regions  was  sufficiently  large  and  varied  to  give  origin  to  a 
diversified  modern  fauna,  but  in  the  writer's  judgment  the  nearly  simul- 
taneous appearance  in  western  Europe  (latitude  50°),  and  in  North  America 
(latitude  40°),  favors  the  fourth  hypothesis,  namely,  that  these  mammals 
had  been  previously  developing  in  the  northerly  portion  of  Holarctica,  or 
in  the  North-American-Asiatic  land  mass.    There  was  certainly  such  a 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


113 


great  land  mass  to  the  north,  of  warm  to  temperate  cHmate  favorable  to 
the  evolution  of  these  higher  forms  of  mammalian  life;  in  fact,  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that  this  northerly  region  was  throughout  the 
whole  pre-Pleistocene  Csenozoic  period  highly  favorable  to  the  evolution 
and  migration  of  the  higher  forms  of  the  Mammalia.  This,  as  seen  in  a 
north-polar  view  of  the  earth,  was  the  area  of  the  great  migrating  routes 
and  must  have  enjoyed  a  favorable  climate,  otherwise  the  faunal  con- 
tinuity between  Europe  and  western  America  could  not  have  been  so  fre- 
quently renewed  or  sustained  by  intermigration.  As  detailed  on  p.  66, 
this  hypothesis  of  a  northerly  or  circumpolar  center  has  been  advocated 
by  Wortman  and  others.  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  the 
actual  center  from  which  these  modernized  mammals  suddenly  spread  into 
Europe  and  North  America  is  still  hypothetical  and  will  not  be  determined 
until  the  Basal  Eocene  fossil  mammal  beds  in  the  unknown  portions  of 
America  and  Asia  shall  have  been  discovered. 

Placing  in  contrast  the  archaic  and  modern  orders  in  North  America 
during  the  Second  Faunal  Phase,  they  appear  somewhat  as  follows: 


Archaic  Orders 
Creodonta,  creodorits 
Insectivora,  insectivores 
Tillodontia,  tillodonts 
Tseniodonta,  ganodonts 
Condylarthra,  phenacodonts 
Amblypoda,  coryphodonts 


Modern  Orders 
Carnivora,  fissipede  carnivores 
Rodentia,  rodents 
Perissodactyla,  odd-toed  ungulates 
Artiodactyla,  even-toed  ungulates 
Primates,  lemuroids  or  monkeys 


As  noted  above,  the  division  is  very  arbitrary;  the  archaic  or  modern 
columns  will  be  swollen  or  diminished  by  the  respective  transfer  of  the 
primitive  Insectivora  to  the  modern  column,  or  of  the  primitive  Lemuroidea 
to  the  archaic  column. 


Lower  Eocene  Life  of  Europe 

» 

As  compared  with  that  of  America  the  Lower  Eocene  of  Europe  is 
more  precisely  subdivided  at  the  present  time  by  Deperet  ^  and  others 
through  the  alternation  of  marine  and  terrestrial  formations,  upon  which 
the  European  palaeontologist  relies,  while  his  American  confreres  are  de- 
pendent entirely  upon  the  freshwater  phases  of  the  Rocky  Mountain 
basins.  After  it  has  been  possible  to  make  very  close  comparisons  between 
the  evolution  stages  of  a  large  number  of  related  mammals  on  the  two 
continents,  closer  correlations  may  be  made  than  are  at  present  prac- 
ticable. It  is  therefore  best  to  treat  Europe  and  America  separately,  first 
noting  the  broad  parallelism  of  stages,  as  follows: 

1  Deperet,  L'evolution  des  Mammif^res  tertiaires,  e.tc.  (Eocene),  1905. 


114 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Europe 
Upper  Ypresian 

Lower  Ypresian 


Sparnacian 


North  America 
Lower  Bridger 
Huerfano  (Upper) 

Wind  River,  Coryphodon  Zone 
Upper  Wasatch     "  " 
Huerfano  (Lower)  "  " 

Lower  Wasatch,  Coryphodon  Zone 


Sparnacian  Life,  Coryphodon  Zone 

Sparnacian  formations.  —  The  Sparnacian  Stage  is  broadly  parallel  with 
the  Lower  Wasatch  of  America;  it  receives  its  name  from  Epernay  (Latin, 

Sparnacum).  As  shown  in 
localities  6-16  of  the  accom- 
panying map  (Fig.  26),  the 
chief  formations  representing 
this  stage  are  along  the  old 
Suessonian  coastline  of  northern 
France  and  southeastern  Eng- 
land, formerly  near  the  shore- 
line of  the  ancient  North  Sea, 
which  is  known  geologically  as 
the  Suessonian  Sea.  The  open 
Thanetian  sea  of  the  preceding 
phase  is  now  succeeded  by 
lagoons  and  estuaries,  favor- 
able to  the  formation  of  plastic 
clays  and  lignites.  The  typical 
deposits,  argiles  plastiques  et 
lignites  de  Soissons  ^  of  lacus- 
trine origin  (6),  are  paralleled 
by  the  fluviatile  Conglomerat  de  Meudon  (12),  near  Paris,  by  l^e  Sables 
et  argiles  ligniteuses,  near  Cernay  (described  above  on  p.  100),  and  by  the 
Travertin  de  Sezanne  (14)  and  the  W^oolwich  and  Reading  Beds.  The  last 
two  (15)  apparently  both  yield  a  rich  representation  of  the  flora  of  the 
period.  De  Lapparent  describes  the  Sparnacian  as  a  period  of  fluvio- 
marine  deposition,  the  region  of  Paris  being  occupied  by  a  lagoon,  while 
farther  south  were  lakes. 

The  lacustrine  Travertin  de  Sezanne  (a  calcareous  tuff),  near  the  present 
site  of  Paris,  includes  the  sassafras  and  other  large  trees  of  the  laurel  family, 
lindens  and  magnolias.^    Similarly  in  the  Woolwich  Beds  of  southeastern 

*  The  town,  Soissons,  is  in  Dept.  Aisne,  northeast  of  Paris. 
2  De  Lapparent,  Traite  de  Geologie,  1906,  p.  1495. 


Fig.  32.  —  France  in  Lower  Eocene,  or  Ypresian 
times.  After  de  Lapparent,  1906.  White  =  land. 
Ruled  lines  =  sea.  The  modern  river  courses,  as 
indicated,  differ  totally  from  those  of  Eocene  times. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


115 


England  are  found  locusts  {Robinia),  figs  (Ficus),  tulip  trees  (Liriodendron) , 
and  Grevillea,  a  proteaceous  plant  now  confined  to  Australia/  The  marine 
and  estuarine  plastic  clays  of  this  formation  also  contain  remains  of  Cro- 
codilus  and  of  the  giant  bird  Gastornis. 

Prevailing  The  remains  of  mammals  are  very  scarce.    In  the 

Mammals  Soissons  deposits  (6)  are  found  three  very  important  and 
Coryphodonts  distinctive  forms,  namely,  the  two  heavy-bodied  ungulate 
Hyracotheres  coryphodons  C.  eocenus,  C.  oweni,  the  former  described  in 
(Horses)  1846  by  Owen,  the  latter  by  Hebert  ten  years  later.  An 
Lophiodonts  equally  significant  form  from  the  Lignites  de  Soissons  is 
Palseonictids  the  odd-toed  or  perissodactyl  ungulate  Lophiodon  larteti, 
which  Filhol  regarded  as  the  ancestor  of  the  true  heavy- 
bodied  lophiodonts.^  Among  the  carnivorous  mammals  is  the  creodont 
PaloBonictis  gigantea  (from  Muirancourt,  Oise,  8),  a  mernber  of  the  Palae- 
onictidse,  a  family  of  cat-like,  short-faced  creodonts,  which  also  appear  for 
the  first  time  in  the  Wasatch  of  the  Rt)cky  Mountains  {Palceonictis  occiden- 
talis).  In  the  Soissonais  of  Europe  has  also  been  found  a  large  mesonychid 
creodont,  Pachycena  boulei.  Both  at  Meudon  and  in  the  upper  deposits 
near  Cernay  are  found  the  bones  of  Coryphodon  oweni.  This  sparsely 
known  mammalian  fauna  of  Europe  has  its  complete  counterpart  in  the 
Rocky  Mountain  region. 

From  the  Upper  Cernay  deposits  near  Rheims  (seep.  100)  (sables  et  argiles 
ligniteuses)  is  also  recorded  a  femur  (length  .390)  of  Coryphodon  oweni 
Hebert  identical  in  size  with  the  typical  specimen  found  at  Meudon. 

Ypresian  Life 

Lower  Ypresian  formations.  —  The  Ypresian  stage  is  named  from  Ypres, 
Flanders.  It  is  typified  by  the  famous  estuarine  formation  of  the  London 
Clay  (166  m.),  which  is  also  the  type  of  the  Etage  Londinien  of  Mayer- 
Eymar,  a  formation  containing  several  important  primitive  mammals  and 
marine  molluscs,  which  prove  that  this  is  on  a  higher  level  than  the  Sparna- 
cian.  Exposures  are  at  Herne  Bay,  Kent  (18),  Kyson  (19),  Harwich,  Essex 
(20).  Of  the  same  age  are  the  plant  deposits  of  the  Isle  of  Sheppey  (21), 
near  the  mouth  of  the  Thames,  and  the  marine  deposits  of  Pourcy  (22)  near 
Rheims.    (See  map,  p.  102). 

The  mammals  of  the  London  Clay  include  the  amblypod  Coryphodon 
eocenus,  also  a  small  mammal  Platychoerops  {  =  Miolophus),  an  animal  often 
compared  with  but  certainly  not  related  to  the  tillodont  Esthonyx  of  the 
Rocky  Mountain  region;  it  is  of  the  size  of  the  marten  (Mustela)  and  of 

^  Gardner,  British  Eocene  Flora,  Palceont.  Soc,  p.  29,  quoted  by  A.  Geikie  in  A  Text- 
Book  of  Geology,  London,  1893. 

^  Deperet,  C.,  Les  Transformations  du  Monde  animal  (Paris,  1907),  traces  the  evolu- 
tion of  the  four  phyla  of  lophiodonts  from  the  Upper  Ypresian  stage  (pp.  206-208). 


116 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


uncertain  relationships.  The  carnivore  Argillotherium  (Davies,  1884)  is 
also  indeterminate. 

Horses.  —  Fortunately  the  primitive  four-toed  horses  (Equidse)  are 
represented  by  several  highly  characteristic  specimens  of  the  genus  Hyra- 
cotherium  ( =  Pliolophus) .    The  great  English  anatomist  Owen  ^  described 

these  specimens  (H. 
leporinum  and  H.  cuni- 
culus),  but  quite  natu- 
rally failed  to  recognize 
their  ancestral  relation- 
ships to  the  horses. 
The  type  {H.  leporinum) 
exhil)its  simple  grinding 
teeth  (Fig.  2)  which 
are  similar  to  those  of 
Eohippus  borealis  of  the 
Wasatch  and  Wind 
River  Formations  of  the 
Rocky  Mountains,  but 

the  second  superior  premolar  tooth  is  a  very  simple,  two-rooted,  single- 
cusped  tooth,  whereas  in  all  the  American  equines  the  same  tooth  is 
more  complex,  namely,  invariably  three-rooted  and  three-cusped,  or  with 
two  external  cusps  and  an  internal  ledge.    This  London  Clay  type  of 


Fig.  33.  —  Skull  of  the  primitive  Eocene  horse  Hyracothe- 
rium  {Pliolophus)  vulpiceps  of  the  London  Clay  (X  2)-  After 
Owen. 


Fig.  34.  —  Models  of  the  Lower  Eocene,  primitive  horse  of  North  America,  Eohippus.  After 
originals  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


Hyracotherium,  therefore,  is  the  most  primitive  horse  certainly  known, 
and  bespeaks  the  very  early  entrance  of  the  horses  into  Europe.  H.  vul- 
piceps, or  the  'fox-headed'  hyracothere,  also  from  the  London  Clay  (see 

1  Owen,  R.,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc,  Vol.  VI,  1839  (1841),  p.  203,  and  Ann.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  VIII 
(1841),  1842,  p.  1. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


117 


Fig.  33),  is  a  somewhat  more  progressive  horse,  and  is  similar  in  its 
stage  of  evolution  to  the  Eohippus  validus  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  region, 
which  has  the  simplest  fourth  superior  premolar  of  any  of  the  American 
hyracotheres.  We  note  especially  the  swelling  brain  case  of  these  httle 
horses  (Fig.  33),  indicative  of  a  comparatively  well-developed  cerebrum. 
This  London  Clay  phase  is  evidently  of  the  Coryphodon  Zone,  broadly 
corresponding  with  the  Wasatch,  but  possibly  a  shade  older. 

Fortunately  our  knowledge  of  the  contemporary  fish,  reptile,  and  bird 
life  is  quite  extensive.  The  fishes  of  the  London  Clay  include  rays  {Mylio- 
hatis),  sharks  (Odontaspis,  Lamna),  sun-fishes  (Tetrapterus),  and  saw- 
fishes (Pristis).  Among  the  reptiles  are  marine  and  freshwater  turtles 
and  tortoises  (Chelone,  Trionyx,  Platemys),  two  species  of  crocodile,  and  a 
sea-snake  (Palceophis)  of  large  size.  Among  the  birds  are  Steganopodes, 
allies  of  the  pelicans  and  cormorants;  Dasyornis,  also,  a  giant  bird  pos- 
sibly allied  to  Gastornis,  has  been  discovered.^ 

Of  still  greater  interest  is  the  rich  land  flora  preserved  in  the  Isle  of 
Sheppey  deposits  near  the  mouth  of  the  Thames.-  This  gives  by  far  the 
I  best  picture  we  have  both  of  the  environment  and  temperature  of  the. 
most  remote  period  of  the  horse.  We  find  palms  (Nipa,  Sabal,  Chamoe- 
rops),  conifers  {Sequoia,  Pinus,  Callitris,  now  of  Africa),  the  plantain 
(Musa),  now  confined  to  eastern  Asia,  the  eucalyptus  (Eucalyptus),  now 
characteristic  of  Australia,  the  tupelo  (Nyssa)  now  exclusively  North 
American.  There  are  also  oaks,  laurels,  sweet  gums  (Liquidambar) ,  mag- 
nolias, almonds  (Amygdalus) ,  and  soapberries  (Sapindus),  altogether  a 
flora  south  temperate  rather  than  subtropical. 


Characteristic 
Mammals 


Upper  Ypresian  Formations.  —  While  the  Lower 
Ypresian  is  in  the  Coryphodon  Zone  and  corresponds 
in  age  with  the  American  Wasatch  and  Lower  Wind 
River  depositions  or  close  of  the  Lower  Eocene,  the 
Upper  Ypresian  lacks  Coryphodon  and  contains  a  more 
recent  fauna  which,  as  Deperet  observes,  approximates 
it  more  closely  to  the  Middle  Eocene.  It  thus  perhaps 
corresponds  to  the  Upper  Huerfano  and  base  of  the 
Bridger  Formations  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  region.  The 
typical  stage  is  locally  known  as  the  Sables  a  Teredina 
personata,  especially  exposed  in  northern  France  near 
Epernay,  at  Chavot  (22),  a  marine  formation,  at  Ay 
(22),  and  at  Cuis.    These  are  the  Sables  ageiens  of  Lemoine. 

These  Teredo  sands  contain  the  faune  ageienne  of  Lemoine,  which  partly 

'  Geikie,  A.,  Text-Book  of  Geology,  1893,  p.  973;  and  Boyd  Dawkins,  Early  Man  in 
Britain,  1880,  p.  19. 

2  J.  S.  Gardner's  British  Eocene  Flora  (Paleont.  Soc,  p.  12),  as  quoted  by  A.  Geikie,  1893, 
p.  973. 


Dichobunids 
(Artiodactyls) 

Hyracotheres 
(Horses) 

Lophiodonts 

Insectivores 

(?)  Lemurs 

(?)  Mesonychids 


118 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


includes  a  continuation  of  the  old  mammals  of  the  Upper  Thanetian  (Cer- 
naysian),  and  partly  a  number  of  mammals  now  recorded  or  observed  for 
the  first  time.  Among  the  former  is  the  insectivore  Adapisoriculus,  pos- 
sibly related  to  Adapisorex  of  the  Cernaysian,  Plesiadapis,  which  resembles 
Mixodedes  of  the  American  Torrejon  in  its  diprotodont  dentition.  The 
skull  and  skeletal  characters  do  not  agree  well  with  those  of  modern  insec- 
tivores,  nor  are  they  distinctively  primate  (Matthew).  Protoadapis  also 
appears,  and  like  Plesiadapis  is  of  doubtful  primate  reference;  it  has  been 
classed  with  the  Rodentia,  or  may  be  placed  with  Mixodedes  among  the 
Proglires.  Creodonts  are  represented  by  Hycenodidis,  allied  to  the  mesony- 
chids  in  tooth  structure;  the  rodents  by  Dedicadapis  and  Plesiardomys. 
The  odd-toed  Ungulata  are  represented  by  two  out  of  four  great  branches 
or  phyla  of  the  Lophiodontidae  which  are  destined  to  play  a  great  part  in 
the  Eocene  mammal  life,  namely,  by  the  more  robust  form  *Lophiodon 
remense  (of  about  the  size  of  a  tapir  and  ancestral  to  the  great  L.  lautricense 
of  the  Upper  Eocene)  and  by  Chasmotherium,  a  small  lophiodont  lacking 
the  third  lobe  of  the  last  lower  molar  (ancestral  to  the  C.  cartieri  of  the 
Upper  Eocene) .  These  chasmotheres  are  of  small  size,  the  premolar  teeth 
rapidly  complicating;  they  tend  to  be  short-headed,  or  brachycephahc, 
the  teeth  finally  forming  a  closed  series.  The  other  phylum  parallels  the 
more  robust  lophiodons  and  survives  until  the  close  of  the  Middle  Eocene. 
Deperet  considers  the  '  Propachynolophus '  gaudryi  (Lemoine)  of  these  beds 
as  a  member  of  the  Equidse,  but  in  the  present  writer's  opinion  the  ad- 
vanced condition  of  its  grinding  teeth,  its  considerable  size,  the  presence 
of  a  mesostyle  in  the  grinding  teeth  above  and  of  a  metastylid  below  ap- 
pear to  liken  it  rather  to  a  primitive  palaeothere  {?Plagiolophus).  The 
smaller  Propachynolophus  maldani  (the  type  of  this  species  and  genus), 
however,  may  be  truly  a  hyracothere,  or  primitive  horse.  The  Artio- 
dactyla  are  now  for  the  first  time  represented  by  the  small  pro-ruminant 
form  Protodichohune. 

Altogether  the  affinities  of  these  animals  await  solution  by  much  further 
study  and  comparison. 

In  deposits  alleged  to  be  of  Upper  Ypresian  age  in  southeastern  Europe 
(Transylvania)  are  found  "the  remains  of  a  large  quadruped  (Brachydias- 
tematherium)  related  to  the  American  family  of  titanotheres  (see  p.  556). 
This  animal  is  in  an  Upper  Eocene  stage  of  evolution  comparable  to  that 
of  the  American  Protitanotherimn  (p.  169).  It  thus  appears  probable  that 
these  deposits  are  much  more  recent  than  Lower  Eocene. 

Lower  Eocene,  Wasatch  and  Wind  River  Life  of  North  America 

The  Lower  Eocene  of  North  America  is  the  great  Coryphodon  Zone  ; 
it  is  represented  by  a  grand  fauna  known  from  thirty-eight  years  of 
exploration  in  formations  which  are  broadly  known  as  "Wasatch,"  this 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


119. 


being  the  name  first  applied  by  Hayden  ^  to  a  group  of  beds  of  this  age 
near  Evanston,  western  Wyoming.  This  Evanston  'Wasatch'  represents 
the  earUest  phase  (corresponding  with  the  Sparnacian  and  Lower  Ypresian  of 
Europe),  a  more  recent  phase  of  the  same  fauna  being  contained  in  the 
Wind  River  Formation  of  central  Wyoming.  The  animals  which  tie 
these  vastly  extended  deposits  together  are  Coryphodon,  Eohippus  (the 
earliest  type  of  American  horse),  Phenacodus,  and  Palceonidis.  In  the 
Wind  River  (corresponding  with  the  Upper  Ypresian  of  Europe),  Bathyopsis, 
a  new  member  of  the  Order  Amblypoda  appears. 

The  contrast  which  the  life  of  the  Coryphodon  Zone  of  the  Wasatch 
and  Wind  River  exhibits  to  the  very  archaic  and  chiefly  Mesozoic  fauna  of 
the  underlying  and  earliest  Torre j on  and  Puerco  formations  (p.  Ill)  ren- 
ders this  one  of  the  most  striking  of  modernizations  in  the  whole  American 
Csenozoic. 

The  archaic  and  modern  mammals  are  in  these  North  American  Spar- 
nacian and  Lower  Ypresian  beds  thoroughly  mingled;  the  former  still  pre- 
dominate in  the  number  of  genera  and  species;  they  also  predominate  in 
size,  Coryphodon  and  Phenacodus  and  the  carnivorous  creodonts  being  the 
largest  mammals  of  the  period. 

The  mammals  belonging  to  the  modernized  orders  are  inferior  in  size 
and  in  number  of  species,  but  prove  to  be  mechanically  superior  both  in 
their  foot  and  tooth  structure,  and  of  higher  intelligence. 

The  summary  of  this  mingled  fauna  is  as  follows: 

Summary  of  Wasatch  Genera  and  Species 

Genera 

Multituberculate  marsupials  (Plagiaulacidse)  0 
Placental  mammals  of  archaic  type  18 
Placental  mammals  with  modern  affinities  11 

In  this  calculation  the  Insectivora  are  included  among  the  archaic 
forms,  the  Primates,  or  Lemuroidea,  among  the  modern.  Naturally  a 
sharp  hne  cannot  be  drawn  between  orders,  and  the  above  table  only  repre- 
sents the  momentous  change  in  a  broad  way.  As  compared  with  the 
summaries  on  pp.  107-8,  the  contrast  is  sufficiently  striking. 

Formations  of  the  Coryphodon  Zone.  —  Phase  I.  As  shown  in  the  accom- 
panying map,  the  chief  exposures  in  the  central  Rocky  Mountain  region 
are  as  follows:  (1)  the  typical  'Wasatch'  group  of  Hayden,  or  more  re- 
strictedly  the  'Knight  Formation' of  Veatch,  1,750  feet;  (2)  the  Wasatch 
of  the  Black  Buttes  (=  Bitter  Creek  of  Powell,  =  Vermillion  Creek  of 
King,  1878),  in  the  Washakie  Basin,  Wyoming;  (3)  the  'Wasatch'  of  the 

1  Hayden,  F.  V.,  Geological  Report  of  the  Exploration  of  the  Yellowstone  and  Missouri 
Rivers,  by  F.  V.  Hayden,  assistant  to  Col.  William  F.  Raynolds,  U.  S.  Engineers,  Washing- 
ton, 1869. 


Species 
0 
48 
33 


120 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


By  permission  of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey. 


Fig.  35.  —  Heart  of  the  ancient  Eocene  flood  plain  and  lake  region  of  Wyoming,  showing 
the  areas  of  Eocene  deposition  which  have  resisted  erosion.  Lower  Eocene  :  Wasatch  (oblique 
lines) ;  Wind  River  (horizontal  Unes) ;  Green  River  (vertical  lines) .  Middle  Eocene  :  Bridger 
and  Washakie  (horizontal  lines).    Upper  Eocene  :  Uinta  (horizontal  lines). 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


121 


Types  of  Eohippus  Index 
f    "       "  yassaci'ensJs 
"    "  Phenacodus  primaevus 
"    >'  Coryphodon  radians 
"    "         "  semicinctus 
"    »        /'  /at/ceps 


Volcanic  ash  or 
white  beds 


P/ants  characteristic 
of  Dernier  formation 


Plants  and 
invertebrates 
of  Montana 
age 


By  permission  of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey. 


Fig.  36.  —  Scale  section  of  the  Lower  and  Middle  Eocene  of  southwestern  Wyoming,  showing 
the  relations  of  the  "typical  Wasatch  group"  of  Hayden  (A);    Modified  from  Veatch,  1907. 


122 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


San  Juan  Basin  of  northern  New  Mexico,  1,500  feet,  overlying  the  Torrejon 
and  Puerco  series;  (4)  the  'Wasatch' of  the  Big  Horn  of  Wyoming,  2,391 
feet  (Loomis).  Phase  II.  (1)  The  lower  portion  of  the  Huerfano 
Formation  near  Spanish  Peaks,  Colorado.  The  Wind  River  Formation 
(Hayden)  of  northern  Wyoming,  500  feet. 

These  formations  all  contain  Coryphodon  and  Eohippus,  and  may  be  col- 
lectively known  as  Lower  Eocene.    Below  them  were  either  mammalif- 


FiG.  37.  —  In  the  heart  of  the  Lower  Eocene  badlands  on  Gray  Bull  River,  Big  Horn 
Basin,  Wyo.  Wasatch  Formation.  Zone  of  Coryphodon,  primitive  horses,  tapirs,  etc.  Photo- 
graph by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  1896. 


erous  beds  of  undoubted  Basal  Eocene  age  (Puerco  and  Torrejon)  or  de- 
posits of  equivalent  age  (e.g.  Fowkes,  Almy,  Fig.  36,  p.  119)  resting  on  the 
Upper  Cretaceous.  The  fact  of  paramount  interest  is  the  great  thickness 
of  these  Lower  Eocene  depositions,  amounting  in  western  Wyoming  to 
4,000  or  5,000  feet.  For  the  beds  which  intervene  between  this  Coryph- 
odon Zone  and  the  summit  of  the  Cretaceous,  the  thickness  indicates 
an  enormous  period  of  time,  ample  even  for  the  transformation  of  the 
diminutive  ancestors  of  Pantolambda  into  the  bulky  Coryphodon  (Figs.  30 
and  31). 

The  materials  of  which  these  various  deposits  of  the  Coryphodon  Zone 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


123 


were  composed  are  partly  indicated  in  the  petrographic  analysis  of  Johann- 
sen/ 


E3^NONFOSSILIFER0US 


L  am  l)dot?writLTn 


Paramys 

Coryphodon  (rare)  ^ 
LambdotherJum  primae^um 
Phenacodus 
Eohlppus  cn'status 
Heptodon 


Caryphodort  zoTze 
Pelycodus 
Oxyaena 
Anacodon 

Eohlppus  (very  abundant) 
■Systemodon 

Coryphodon  (very abundant) 
S'inopa 
Tri'gono/estes 
Hyopsodus 
Sarco/emur 

Esthonyx  \ 
Palaeictops 
Paramys 


Fig.  38.  —  Composite  columnar  section  of  the  Wasatch  and  Wind  River  formations  of  Big 
Horn  basin,  compiled  from  sections  by  F.  B.  Loomis.  See  section  A,  Fig.  35.  Total  thickness 
2,391  feet. 


Wyoming  in  Wasatch  times.  —  A  glance  at  Fig.  35  enables  us  to  restore 
two  of  these  great  basins,  the  Wasatch  lying  south  of  parallel  42° 


*  Johannsen,  Albert,  Petrographic  Report  on  Rocks  Collected  by  Professor  H.  F.  Osborn, 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.    In  Ms. 


124 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


and  the  Big  Horn  traversed  by  parallel  44°,  east  of  the  Wasatch  and  west 
of  the  Big  Horn  ranges  respectively,  both  vast  flood  plain  and  lacustrine 
basins  surrounded  by  low  mountain  ranges.  It  is  significant  that  at  Evan- 
ston  in  the  Big  Horn  (Fig.  36)  and  in  the  Wind  River  (Fig.  38)  the  mammals 
are  found  chiefly  in  or  near  the  so-called  "Red  Beds."  These  beds  may  be 
an  indication  of  the  prolonged  exposure  of  these  sediments  to  the  air,  or 
of  erosion  from  the  reddish  rocks  of  the  Trias.  The  basins  were  formerly 
considered  great  lake  basins,  but  the  river,  flood  plain,  and  lagoon  theory 
now  prevails.  Loomis  (1907)  ^  carefully  analyzed  the  entire  mammalian 
fauna  of  the  Coryphodon  Zone  with  reference  to  its  bearing  on  the  physio- 
graphic conditions  in  these  old  mountain  ranges.  He  shows  that,  judging 
by  the  apparent  adaptations  to  various  modes  of  life,  the  total  known  species 
of  the  vertebrate  fauna  are  divided  as  follows:  aerial  3  per  cent,  cursorial, 
terrestrial,  and  arboreal  75  per  cent,  amphibious  12  per  cent,  aquatic  10  per 
cent.  We  may  imagine  that  this  small  percentage  of  species  of  truly 
aquatic  animals,  such  as  crocodiles,  fishes,  and  turtles,  mingled  their  remains 
with  those  of  the  prevailing  land  animals  by  becoming  stranded  or  inclosed 
in  lagoons  far  from  the  rivers.  The  bones  of  terrestrial  animals  may  have 
been  exposed  on  the  sunny  flats.  The  light-limbed  horse  Eohippus, 
probably  typical  of  a  plains  or  partly  open  country,  alone  makes  up  32  per 
cent  of  the  total  collections.  All  the  other  perissodactyl  or  odd-toed 
ungulates  were  light-limbed,  including  the  lophiodonts  (Heptodon),  primi- 
tive titanotheres  (Lambdotherium) ,  the  surviving  archaic  condylarths  {Phe- 
nacodus).  The  feet  of  all  these  animals  indicate  dry  rather  than  swampy 
ground  conditions,  because  they  are  more  slender  than  those  of  the  modern 
tapir.  On  the  other  hand,  the  coryphodons  were  certainly  marshy-land 
dwellers,  and  perhaps  partly  amphibious,  or  stream  dwellers,  although  this 
is  far  from  demonstrated.  The  presence  of  rivers  of  considerable  size  is 
indicated  by  the  large  lepidostean  fishes,  or  garpikes  (Clastes),  and  by  the 
river-living  turtles  (Trionyx). 

Wasatch  Life  of  the  Wyoming  and  New  Mexico  Region 

Surviving  archaic  mammals.  —  Taken  altogether,  the  prevailing  resem- 
blances of  this  older  fauna  of  the  Coryphodon  Zone  are  with  the  mammals 
found  in  the  Sparnacian  and  Lower  Ypresian  of  Europe,  but  far  closer  com- 
parisons are  necessary  than  any  which  have  been  made  hitherto. 

Of  the  smaller  Herbivora,  no  signs  of  the  Plagiaulacidae  or  any  other 
marsupials  have  been  discovered;  opossums  (Didelphyidae)  were  probably 
living  in  the  forests  of  this  region,  however.  Of  the  condylarth  ungulates, 
Phenacodus  is  the  most  famous.    The  discovery  by  Wortman  ^  .of  the 

1  Loomis,  Origin  of  the  Wasatch  Deposits.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  May,  1907,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  XXIII, 
pp.  356-364. 

2  See  Cope,  E.  D.,  The  Vertebrata  of  the  Tertiary  Formations  of  the  West.  Rept.  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.  Terr.,  Vol.  Ill,  1883  (1884),  PI.  LVII  and  text. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


125 


Fig.  39.  — Skeleton  of  the  Lower  Eocene  condylarth  Meni- 
scotherium  terroeruhroe.  In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History.     {N.B.  The  scapula  is  only  partially  restored.) 


complete  skeleton  of  P.  primcevus  with  its  five  digits  on  the  fore  and  hind 
feet  and  its  primitive  bunodont  teeth  was  welcomed  as  realizing  the  proto- 
type or  atavus  of  the  Ungulata;  but  more  profound  study  has  revealed  that 
this  extremely  small-brained  (Fig.  40),  long-tailed  animal,  replete  with 

archaic  unguiculate   

characters,  is  not  the 
ancestor  of  a  new  and 
vigorous  stock,  but  the 
survivor  of  a  dying-out 
stock.  Like  its  am- 
blypod  contemporaries, 
the  Wind  River  species, 
P.  wortmani  was  less 
abundant  and  of  dimin- 
ished size.  A  contem- 
porary condvlarth  of 
the  proportions  of  a 
modern  hyrax  is  M enis- 
cotherium  (Fig.  39),  with  its  very  complex  bunolopho-selenodont  grinding 
teeth  and  reduced  cropping  teeth. 

The  heavy-limbed  Amblypoda  of  the  period  include  several  species  of 
Coryphodon,  attaining  the  proportions  of  small  rhinoceroses,  with  crested 
grinding  teeth  and  defensive  canine  tusks.  These  animals  were  termed 
Pantodonta  by  Cope,  in  reference  to  the  complete  series  of  upper  and  lower 
mcisors.  They  have  a  rather  feebly  developed  chest  and  musculature  of 
the  lumbar  region,  abbreviated  tail,  short,  clumsy  feet,  and  may  have  been 
partly  amphibious  in  habit.  The  skull  marks  a  great  advance  upon  that 
of  the  ancestral  Pantolambda,  and  rudiments  of  the  posterior  pair  of  osseous 
horns,  characteristic  of  the  succeeding  genus  Uintatherium,  are  observed. 

Anew  order  (Tillodontia)  of  gnawing diprotodont phytophagous  placentals 
IS  heralded  in  species  of  Esthonyx,  in  which  one  pair  of  the  incisor  teeth  is 
eginning  to  enlarge  at  the  expense  of  the  others,  prophetic  of  the  fully  di- 
rotodont  Tillotherium  of  the  Middle  Eocene.  The  supposed  aberrant 
entata  of  the  order  Taeniodonta,  or  Ganodonta,  succeeding  the  Torrejon 
tylinodontidse,  are  now  represented  by  the  still  more  progressive  Cala- 
odon,  with  a  deep-set  pair  of  anterior  teeth  and  still  more  reduced  enamel 
n  the  grinding  teeth.  The  tendency  of  these  herbivorous  forms  to  become 
iprotodont,  or  enlarge  a  pair  of  front  teeth,  is  thus  manifested  independently 
n  two  orders.  The  Insect ivora  are  now  represented  by  three  and  perhaps 
our  families,  namely,  the  pantolestids  {Palceosinopa) ,  believed  to  be  long- 
ailed  aquatic  forms  analogous  to  the  potamogalids  of  modern  Africa; 
he  leptictids  (Palceictops) ,  probably  terrestrial  forms  of  the  size  of  the 
ledgehog  (Erinaceus) ;  the  hyopsodontids  (Hyopsodus),  with  teeth  like 
hose  of  Eohippus  on  a  miniature  scale,  animals  which  were  long  regarded 


126 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


as  Lemuroidea,  but  are  now  transferred  to  the  Insectivora  on  skeletal  char- 
acters. There  are  other  small  forms  {Diacodon,  Didelphodus)  which  are 
of  uncertain  affinity.  Preying  upon  these  insectivorous  and  herbivorous 
forms  are  members  of  five  families  of  the  carnivorous  Creodonta,  including 


Fig.  40.  —  Lower  Eocene  liKlit-limhed  condylarths,  or  phenacodonts,  showing  arched  bi 
and  long  tail.    Above  :  The  skeleton  of  Phenacodus  primoevus  (Cope's  famous  type).  Below:' 
Restoration  by  Charles  R.  Knight.    Both  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


specialized  Arctocyonidae  with  flattened  tubercular  teeth  (Anacodon),  whic 
make  their  last  appearance.    The  giant  carnivores  or  omnivores  of  the  peric  * 
are  the  mesonychids  of  the  genus  Pachyosna,  descended  from  the  TorrejoBf 
Dissacus,  with  blunt,  rounded  cusps  adapted  to  devouring  decaying  flesh 
In  wide  contrast  are  the  palaeonictids  (or  oxyaenids)  represented  by  PalcBj 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  127 


onictis,  of  the  size  of  a  puma  {Felis  concolor),  with  sectorial  teeth,  short  face 
and  jaws.  Another  branch  of  oxysenids  includes  animals  of  smaller  size 
(Oxycena)  with  sharp  and  effective  sectorials.  Of  the 
size  of  the  modern  civets  {Viverra)  are  several  species 
of  Sinopa,  adapted  to  the  quest  of  birds  and  small 
mammals.  Of  great  zoogeographic  interest  is  the  sim- 
ultaneous distribution  of  three  of  these  families  (Palae- 
onictidse,  Mesonychidse,  Hysenodontidse)  in  the  Lower 
Eocene  of  France. 

Progressive  or  modernized  mammals.  —  Contrasting  with 
these  archaic,  small,  aberrant  carnivores,  are  the  mem- 
bers of  the  family  Miacidae,  including  Didymictis,  sur- 
viving from  the  Torrejon,  besides  a  great  variety  of  small 
related  carnivores  {Viverravus,  Miacis,  Uintacyon,  Vul- 
pavus),  all  distinguished  by  the  fact  that  the  carnassial 
teeth  are  the  same  as  those  in  the  modern  Carnivora, 
namely,  the  fourth  upper  premolar  and  first  lower  molar. 
Evidently  these  small  true  pro-carnivores  were  begin- 
ning to  sharply  compete  for  their  prey  with  the  small 
(Artiodactyls)  creodonts,  although  the  larger  creodonts  (Palceonidis, 
Lophiodonts  Pachycena)  were  alone  capable  of  attacking  animals  of 

Hyracotheres  the  size  of  Coryphodon  and  Phenacodus.  The  primates 
are  now  certainly  recognized  for  *the  first  time.  Sur- 
prisingly modern  is  the  Tarsius-like  Anaptomorphus,  a  short-faced,  large- 
eyed,  aberrant  form,  with  teeth  analogous  to  those  in  the  existing  tarsier 
(Tarsius)  of  Madagascar,  that  is,  not  distinctly  lemuroid.  An  insectivore 
of  the  diprotodont  type  or  with  an  enlarged  pair  of  lower  front  teeth 
is  Cynodontomys,  ancestral  to  the  Microsyopidae  of  the  Bridger,  and  with 
some  analogies  to  the  Mixodectidae  of  the  Torrejon  and  the  Plesiadapidae 
of  the  Cernaysian.  Among  the  herbivorous  ungulates  the  greatest  interest 
centers  in  the  appearance  of  two  families  of  even-toed  or  artiodactyl 
forms,  the  Trigonolestidae,  diminutive  forms  (Trigonolestes)  with  a  typical 
artiodactyl  astragalus,  perhaps  related  to  the  Dichobunidae  (Protodicho- 
hune)  of  the  Upper  Ypresian.  Of  more  doubtful  affinity  are  the  sup- 
posedly pig-like  achsenodonts,  represented  by  Parahyus,  quite  an  un- 
certain reference.  Of  equal  moment  is  the  sudden  appearance  of  three 
families  of  Ungulata-Perissodactyla,  namely,  the  horses  (Equidae),  tapirs 
(Tapiridse) ,  lophiodonts  (Lophiodontidae) .  The  lophiodonts  are  represented 
by  the  excessively  slender-limbed  and  narrow-footed  Heptodon,  analogous 
in  size  only  to  the  Chasmotherium  of  the  Ypresian  of  France,  but  distin- 
guished by  dofichocephaly.  Known  in  America  only,  at  this  stage,  are  the 
tapirs  (Systemodon) ,  animals  somewhat  exceeding  the  modern  foxes  (Vulpes) 
in  size.  Still  more  numerous  and  characteristic,  as  well  as  diversified,  are 
the  horses,  including  eleven  species  which  have  been  discovered  in  the 


Mammals 

Coryphodonts 

Phenacodonts 

Meniscotheres 

Tillodonts 

Taeniodonts 

Insectivores 

Arctocyonids 

Mesonychids 

Palaeonictids 

Oxyaenids 

Hyaenodontids 

Lemuroids 

Rodents 

Dichobunoids 


128 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


different  exposures  of  the  Wasatch,  all  animals  of  the  size  of  small  foxes, 
graceful,  light-Umbed,  and  like  their  European  contemporaries  {Hyraco- 
therium),  large-brained.  Close  comparison  (cf.  p.  116)  of  these  hyracotheres 
with  those  of  the  Lower  Ypresian  (London  Clay)  of  the  northern  coast 
of  Europe  shows  that  the  grinding  teeth  are  in  a  very  similar  stage 
of  evolution.  The  species  Eohippus  validus,  on  the  whole  the  most  ancient 
in  type  of  the  American  hyracotheres,  is  in  exactly  the  same  state  of  evolu- 
tion as  the  H.  vulpiceps  of  the  London  Clay;  but  nothing  in  America  is  known 
quite  so  ancient  as  the  H.  leporinum  of  the  London  Clay  in  respect  to  the 
simplicity  of  the  anterior  premolar  teeth, 

A  modern  aspect  is  also  given  to  this  fauna  by  the  appearance  of  the 
Rodentia  {Paramys,  Sciuravus)  of  the  family  Ischyromyidse,  embracing  a 

number  of  species  sug- 
gesting in  their  tooth 
structure  the  sciuro- 
morphs,  or  squirrel  \ 
group  of  rodents.  It  ; 
appears  probable  that  j 
some  of  these  ischy-  ^ 
romyids  were  destined 
to  give  rise  to  the  true 
sciurids  or  squirrels. 

Wind  River  Life  of 
Wyoming  and  Colorado 

Geological  conditions 
and  distribution.  —  In 
their  grand  sequence 
the  Wind  River  sedi- 
ments and  their  geologic 
parallels  in  Wyoming 
and  Colorado  take  up 
the  life  story  of  the 
Wasatch  and  continue 
it  into  the  beginning  of 
the  Bridger  deposition, 
which  we  regard  as 
true  Middle  Eocene. 

The  typical  forma- 
tion lies  at  the  head 

waters  of  the  Big  Horn  River  (Fig.  41),  northeast  of  the  Wind  River 
Mountains,  4*00  to  500  feet  in  thickness,  irregularly  disposed  with  an  east 
and  west  extent  of  100  miles  and  north  and  south  extent  of  forty  miles. 


liy  permission  of  the  U.S.  Geolo^Mcal  Survey. 


Fig.  41.  —  Map  showing  location  of  the  Wasatch  (obHque 
lines)  and  Wind  River  (horizontal  lines)  of  the  Big  Horn  region 
of  Wyoming. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  129 

It  is  readily  distinguished  geologically  (Fig.  43)  by  horizontal  alternating 
bands  of  gray  and  bright  red  fossil-bearing  rocks.  These  red  bands  contain 
most  of  the  fossils,  and  some  are  of  considerable  horizontal  extent.  The 
basin  has  been  explored  successively  by  Hayden  (1859,  1869),  by  Wortman 
for  Cope  (1880)  and  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History  (1891,  1896), 
by  Loomis  for  Amherst  College  (1904),  and  by  Granger  (1905,  1909)  for  the 
American  Museum.  To  the  latter  we  are  indebted  for  the  first  accurate 
survey  of  the  geology  and  of  the  life  succession  in  this  basin  as  here  set 
forth.^  All  previous  accounts  are  incorrect,  first,  in  attributing  too  great 
thickness  to  the  Wind  River  deposits,  second,  in  failure  to  connect  them 
properly  with  the  underlying  Wasatch. 

The  sequence  of  the  Wind  River  life  zone  to  that  of  the  Wasatch  is  clearly 
indicated  in  the  Tatman  Mountain  section  (Fig.  38)  at  the  summit  of  the 
Big  Horn  Wasatch  deposition  (Fig.  41)  to  the  north;  here  we  clearly  pass 
from  the  Wasatch  into  Wind  River  times. 

While  these  formations  were  being  deposited  in  Wyoming  there  was  accu- 
mulating in  southeastern  Colorado  the  base  of  the  Huerfano  Formation, 
discovered  by  Hills  ^  in  1888  and  explored  by  Osborn^  and  Wortman  in  1896. 
The  basin  lies  immediately  north  of  the  famous  twin  volcanoes  known 
as  Spanish  Peaks,  and  the  Huerfano  deposits  are  rnost  probably  tuffs,  or  of 
volcanic  dust  origin.  The  fossils  apparently  occur  in  a  single  stratum  not 
exceeding  ten  or  fifteen  feet  in  thickness  and  not  more  than  thirty  or  forty 
feet  from  the  base  of  the  formation.  They  include  the  remains  of  ten  genera 
and  of  several  species  characteristic  of  the  Wind  River  deposits.  While 
the  lower  Huerfano  levels  are  of  Wind  River  age,  the  upper  levels  are  dis- 
tinctively of  Middle  Eocene,  or  Bridger  age. 

The  W^ind  River  life  has  thus  been  found  in  three  chief  localities: 
Wind  River  of  Wyoming,  500  feet. 

Tatman  Mountain,  upper  levels  of  'Big  Horn  Wasatch'  of  Wyo- 
ming, 300  feet. 

Huerfano  of  southeastern  Colorado,  800  feet,  including  'Bridger' 
levels. 

Geographic  conditions.  —  Loomis  (1907)  has  rightly  regarded  the  Wind 
River  Formation  as  of  fluviatile  and  flood  plain  origin.  The  wide  horizontal 
extent  of  the  red  bands  is  attributable  to  prolonged  or  repeated  periods 
of  flooding;  the  red  color  is  less  probably  due  to  aridity  or  other  atmos- 
pheric causes  than  to  erosion  from  the  Triassic  rocks.  Besides  a  great 
variety  of  mammals,  the  'red  beds'  contain  turtles  (Trionyx),  crocodiles 
(Crocodilus) ,  and  hzards  of  the  family  of  Anguidse  (Glyptosaurus) .  The 

1  See  also  forthcoming  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  by  Walter  Granger. 

2  Hills,  R.  C,  Recently  Discovered  Tertiary  Beds  of  the  Huerfano  Basin,  Denver,  1888. 

'  Osborn,  The  Huerfano  Lake  Basin,  Southern  Colorado,  and  its  Wind  River  and  Bridger 
Fauna.    Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  IX,  1897,  pp.  247-258. 

K 


130 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


intermediate  gra3dsh  'shales/  as  well  as  the  coarse  conglomerate  beds 
formed  by  rapid  stream  action  of  river  invasions,  are  barren. 

Even  in  the  'red  beds'  fossils  are  scarce  except  in  one  or  two  very  limited 
areas,  and  as  a  rule  fragmentary  and  imperfectly  preserved.  The  only 
complete  skeleton  recorded  is  the  type  of  the  famous  Eohippus  venticolus, 


Fig.  42.  —  The  Lower  Eocene  banded  layers  of  the  Wind  River  Badlands,  basin  of  the 
Wind  River,  Wyo.  Zone  of  Lamhdotherium  and  of  the  last  stages  of  Coryphodon.  Photo- 
graph by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  1896. 

found  by  Wortman  in  1880.  It  has  required  years  of  the  most  arduous 
search,  concluding  with  the  '  microscoping '  of  the  beds  by  the  American 
Museum  party  of  1909,  to  round  out  materials  for  our  knowledge  of  this, 
including  the  discovery  of  the  skulls  of  two  of  the  most  characteristic  forms. 

Faunal  life. — With  the  Wind  River  we  enter  a 
new  life  zone,  signalized  by  the  earliest  record  of  a 
new  and  very  important  family  of  perissodactyls,  the 
titanotheres,  which  is  represented  by  the  genus  Lamh- 
dotherium from  which  the  zone  takes  its  name. 
Accompanying  this  small,  light-limbed  and  very 
abundant  titanothere  is  the  larger  titanothere  known 
as  Eotitanops,  sl  form  truly  ancestral  to  the  great 
titanotheres  of  Eocene  and  Oligocene  times.  There 
are  many  other  newly  arriving  mammals,  including 
twelve  new  genera  and  fifty-five  species,  which  have 
not  been  found  in  the  Wasatch.  Nine  of  these  new 
genera  of  mammals  are  also  found  in  the  Bridger. 
Wind  River  life  is  thus  transitional  and  prophetic  of 
Bridger  life.    The  Wind  River,  however,  represents 


Newly 
Arriving 
Mammals 

Titanotheres 

Lamhdotherium 

Eotitanops 
HjTacodonts 

Hyrachyus 
Uintatheres 

Bathyopsis 
Primates 

Notharctus 

Washakius 

Microsyops 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


131 


Carnivores 

Oddectes 
Patriofelis 
Limnocyon 
Tritemnodon 
Edentates 
Stylinodon 


truly  the  closing  chapter  of  the  Lower  Eocene,  because 
there  is  remarkably  little  extinction,  there  being 
rather  a  numerical  diminution  of  the  mammals  so 
highly  characteristic  of  the  Lower  Eocene.  In  all, 
the  Wind  River  possesses  twenty-five  genera  in  com- 
mon with  the  Wasatch.  It  possesses  eleven  Wasatch 
species.  It  is  doubtful  whether  a  single  family  of 
mammals  becomes  extinct. 


132 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


With  the  arrival  of  the  new  and  retention  of  the  old  life,  the  Wind  River 
stands  directly  intermediate  in  position;  in  fact  the  archaic  and  modernized 
mammals  are  nearly  evenly  balanced,  as  shown  in  the  following  summary: 

Wind  River  Genera  and  Species 

"  Genera  Species 
Archaic  mammals  21  30 

Modernized  mammals  22  36 

In  this  estimate,  as  before,  the  Insectivora  are  somewhat  arbitrarily 
placed  with  the  archaic,  the  Lemuroidea  with  the  modernized  forms.  How- 
ever reckoned,  this  balance  between  representatives  of  families  destined  to 
become  extinct  and  those  destined  to  populate  the  earth  is  extremely 
interesting.  Two  families  of  creodonts  (Arctocyonidse,  Palseonictidae) 
are  sparingly  represented,  and  have  possibly  disappeared.  No  other  fami- 
lies or  genera  are  known  to  have  become  extinct. 

Archaic  mammals.  —  The  chief  surviving  archaic  mammals  are  the  co- 
ryphodonts,  the  condylarths,  including  Phenacodus,  Ectocion,  and  Menis- 
cotherium,  three  families  of  creodonts  (Oxysenidae,  Hysenodontidse,  Meson- 
ychidse),  the  insectivores,  the  tillodonts,  and  the  edentate  tseniodonts. 
Among  the  archaic  Ungulata  it  is  noteworthy  that  both  Coryphodon  and 
Phenacodus  are  apparently  diminished  in  number.  It  was  supposed  until 
recently  that  they  were  also  dwindling  in  size,  but  this  proves  to  be  an 
error,  because  large  forms  of  both  animals  were  discovered  by  the  American 
Museum  party  of  1909,  including  a  phenacodont  as  large  as  the  P.  primcevus 
of  the  Wasatch.  Undoubtedly  the  competition  between  the  condylarths 
and  the  smaller  but  better  endowed  horses,  tapirs,  titanotheres,  and  lophio- 
donts  was  becoming  very  severe.  It  is  extraordinarily  interesting  to  find 
the  little  Meniscotherium  of  the  Wasatch  again  appearing  in  the  Wind  River. 
There  are  three  or  four  species  of  Coryphodon,  including  chiefly  animals  of 
much  smaller  size  than  prevail  in  the  Wasatch,  and  also  one  form  of  robust 
size. 

Simultaneous  with  the  decline  of  the  coryphodonts,  it  is  most  interesting 
to  record  the  appearance  of  the  first  member  (Bathyopsis)  of  the  related 
family  (Uintatheriida?)  of  giant  Amblypoda  which  are  destined  to  become 
the  great  quadrupeds  of  the  Middle  Eocene.  For  years  only  the  jaw  of 
the  type  species  {B.  fissidens)  was  known,  but  a  skull  discovered  by  Olsen 
of  the  American  Museum  party  of  1909  shows  that  the  animal  possessed 
a  pair  of  nasal  frontal  horns  above  the  orbits,  although  there  are  no  horns 
on  the  back  of  the  skull,  as  in  the  Bridger  successor,  Uintatherium. 

Of  the  diprotodont,  gnawing,  or  leaf-eating  mammals,  the  small  Wasatch 
type  (Esthonyx)  persists,  representing  the  order  Tillodontia,  which  is  also 
destined  to  survive  into  Bridger  times.  Among  the  tseniodonts,  or  supposed 
primitive  Edentata,  the  large  Wasatch  type  Calamodon  survives  and  a 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


133 


smaller,  very  progressive  Bridger  form  Stylinodon  first  appears;  this  animal 
is  distinguished  by  the  long-crowned  grinding  teeth,  beginning  to  grow 
from  persistent  pulps. 

Little  change  appears  among  the  Insectivora,  since  all  the  Wasatch 
families  and  genera  survive  or  pass  into  more  advanced  mutations  or  stages. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  members  of  the  supposed  insectivore  genus  Hyopsodus 
attain  a  large  size  at  this  time  and  are  the  most  abundant  of  Wind  River 
mammals. 

The  opossums,  or  Marsupialia-Didelphyidse,  are  possibly  represented 
at  this  time  in  the  species  Peratherium  comstockii  recorded  by  Loomis,  or 
in  the  problematic  form  Didelphodus. 

Of  the  ancient  Carnivora  the  Creodonta  are  now  represented  by  three 
families:   (1)  the  Mesonychidse,  including  the  giant  Pachycena;   (2)  the 


Fig.  44.  —  The  Lower  Eocene  creodont  Oxycena  preying  upon  the  carcass  of  Eohippus. 
After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


Hysenodontidse,  which  are  still  limited  to  two  animals  about  the  size  of  the 
fox,  namely,  Sinopa,  the  creodont  most  widespread  geographically  of  any 
geologic  period,  and  Tritemnodon,  both  animals  possessing  slender  bodies 
and  long  and  slender  heads;  (3)  among  the  Oxysenidae  is  one  species  of 
Oxycena  of  intermediate  size,  and  there  first  appear  in  this  family  at  this 
time  the  primitive  Limnocyon  and  the  specialized  short-faced  Patriofelis. 
The  latter  animal  is  cat-like,  large-limbed,  nearly  as  large  as  the  South 
American  jaguar  (Felis  undo),  and  becomes  especially  characteristic  of 
Middle  Eocene,  or  Bridger  times.  The  bear-creodonts,  or  arctocyonids,  are 
doubtfully  represented  in  the  Wind  River  and  Huerfano  depositions. 

Progressive  mammals.  —  The  report  by  Cope  of  the  existence  of  bat^, 
or  Cheiroptera,  is  an  error;  there  are  no  certainly  known  bats  in  the  entire 
American  Tertiary.  The  supposed  Middle  Eocene  (Bridger)  bats  reported 
by  Marsh  are  talpoid  insectivores.^ 

1  Matthew,  W.  D.,  The  Carnivora  and  Insectivora  of  the  Bridger  Basin,  Middle  Eocene. 
Mem.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  IX,  Pt.  6,  1909. 


134 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


The  Rodentia  are  represented  by  the  bunodont  squirrel-like  Paramys, 
surviving  from  the  Wasatch,  and  the  somewhat  more  rare  Sciuravus  of  the 
primitive  family  Ischyromyidse. 

To  be  ranged  among  the  ancient  Creodonta  or  among  the  more  modern 
pro-Carnivora  is  the  family  Miacidae,  which  is  now  becoming  highly  diver- 
sified. It  includes  a  variety  of  species  which  belong  to  the  surviving  Wa- 
satch genera  Didymidis,  Miads,  and  Vulpavus,  as  well  as  to  the  higher 
genera  Viverravus  and  Oodedes.  These  animals  are  analogous  in  dental 
structure,  in  size,  and  in  proportions  to  the  civets  and  to  the  South  American 
procyonids  (Bassariscus,  Cercoleptes)  rather  than  to  the  dogs.  The  reten- 
tion of  the  last  lower  molar  is  the  only  especial  cynoid  feature. 

Similarly  the  Primates  begin  to  take  on  a  slightly  more  modernized  form. 
There  are  the  highly  specialized  Tarsius-like  anaptomorphids,  including 
two  species,  Anaptomorphus  spierianus  Cope,  A.  ahboti  Loomis,  as  well  as  a 
third  representative  of  a  new  anaptomorphid  genus.  Related  to  the  same 
family  are  diminutive  monkeys  allied  to  the  Omomys  and  Washakius  of  the 
Bridger.  We  discover  also  the  lemuroid  or  insectivoroid  microsyopsids, 
including  the  Wasatch  genus  Cynodontomys,  as  well  as  the  Bridger  genus 
Microsyops.  Similarly  monkeys  or  lemurs  of  larger  size  represent  the  fam- 
ily Notharctidae,  which  now  includes  not  only  the  smaller  Wasatch  Pelycodus, 
but  the  more  progressive  Nothardus,  a  primate  appearing  here  for  the  first 
time  which  becomes  especially  characteristic  of  the  Bridger. 

Of  the  cursorial  Herbivora  the  odd-toed  ungulates  (Perissodactyla) 
are  now  enriched  by  the  newly  appearing  family  of  Titanotheriidae,  both 
by  the  light-limbed  Lambdotherium  and  the  larger  and  more  central  Eoti- 
tanops.  Lambdotherium  is  especially  abundant,  and  characteristic  of  rocks 
of  Wind  River  age  wherever  found.  The  prevailing  species,  L.  popoagicum 
(named  after  a  local  stream,  the  Popoagie  River),  is  an  animal  of  the  size 
of  a  coyote  {Canis  latrans),  with  a  slender,  elongate  muzzle,  and  laterally 
compressed  digits  which  suggest  those  of  the  contemporary  equines;  it 
was  evidently  a  cursorial,  or  slender-footed  form  adapted  to  the  open  basins 
of  the  mountain  region.  The  larger  Wind  River  titanothere  (Eotitanops 
horealis)  is  now  about  the  size  of  a  two-thirds  grown  tapir,  and  appears 
to  possess  all  the  characters  which  justify  our  regarding  it  as  ancestral  to 
certain  of  the  Bridger  and  Upper  Eocene  titanotheres ;  whereas  Lambdo- 
therium belongs  to  a  dying-out  phylum.  It  is  noteworthy  that  these  mem- 
bers of  the  titanothere  family,  which  is  destined  to  become  the  dominant 
perissodactyl  family  of  the  remainder  of  the  Eocene,  are  already  dominant 
in  size  among  the  modernized  herbivores  of  Wind  River  times,  although  in- 
ferior to  the  coryphodonts  and  uintatheres. 

The  horses  are  represented  by  the  persisting  Wasatch  genus  Eohippus, 
in  which  the  hind  feet  retain  the  vestigial  fifth  digit,  and  there  is  little  ad- 
vance in  the  complication  of  the  grinding  teeth.  The  famous  skeleton  of 
Eohippus  venticolus,  discovered  by  Wortman  and  fully  described  and  figured 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


135 


by  Cope  (1884),  is  distinguished  by  its  relatively  elongate  head,  very  slender 
limbs  and  digits,  and  the  marked  simplicity  of  its  grinding  teeth.  The 
horse  of  the  Huerfano  country  appears  (Cockerell)  to  correspond  with  this 


Fig.  45.  — The  Wind  River  Eocene  four-toed  horse,  or  Eohippus.  As  a  forest-living  form 
the  animal  is  represented  as  spotted.  The  indication  of  a  short  mane  is  entirely  conjectural. 
After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


species  both  in  its  measurements  and  in  the  simple  character  of  the  crowns 
of  its  grinding  teeth. 

The  lophiodonts  are  still  represented  by  the  Wasatch  Heptodon,  a  slender- 
limbed  animal. 

Tapirs  have  not  yet  been  discovered,  but  they  undoubtedly  existed  at 
this  time. 

The  family  of  hyracodonts  makes  its  first  appearance  here,  its  presence 
being  indicated  by  a  single  specimen  of  the  genus  Hyrachyus. 

Fishes  of  the  Green  River  Shales  and  Other  Eocene  Formations^ 

While  the  terrestrial  life  of  the  close  of  the  Lower  Eocene  is  so  well  por- 
trayed in  the  Wind  River  Formation,  the  fluviatile,  lacustrine,  and  plant  life 
is  equally  well  known  through  the  shale  deposits  in  the  Green  River  Lake 
to  the  south  (Fig.  35). 

1  Cope,  E.  D.,  The  Vertebrata  of  the  Tertiary  Formations  of  the  West.  RepL  U.S.  Geol. 
Surv.  Terr.,  Vol.  Ill,  1883  (1884). 


136 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


General.  —  The  Eocene  fishes  of  the  Rocky  ^lountain  region  are  partly 
known  in  the  Wasatch  (Lower)  and  Bridger  (Middle),  and  far  more  fully 
in  the  intermediate  Green  River  Shales,  which,  since  they  are  found  to  lie 
intermediate  between  the  Wasatch  and  Upper  Bridger,  are  considered  of  the 
same  age  as  the  Wind  River  and  the  Lower  Bridger  formations.  The  fact 
of  most  general  interest  is  that  the  fishes  are  partly  those  of  the  existing 
fresh  waters  of  the  interior  of  the  United  States,  and  partly  those  now  char- 
acteristic of  South  America,  Australia,  and  Africa.  Thus  in  the  Bridger 
we  find  the  Lepidosteidse  represented  by  the  garpike  (L.  anax),  as  large 
as  the  largest  alligator  gars  of  the  Mississippi.  In  this  formation,  as  well  as 
in  the  Bridger  and  Washakie,^the  other  American  ganoid  family  of  bowfins 
(Amiidae)  is  abundantly  represented.  The  siluroid,  or  catfish,  order  Nema- 
tognathi,  represented  in  the  Bridger  and  Washakie  Rhineastes,  is  now  widely 
distributed  in  South  America.  This  South  American  distribution  is  more 
clearly  represented  in  the  remarkable  deposits  of  the  Green  River. 

The  Green  River  Lake  Formation.  —  From  the  evidence  afforded  by  the 
fishes,  the  Green  River  Shales  are  best  explainable  as  either  an  estuarine  or 
a  land-locked  bay  deposit.  On  such  a  supposition  only  can  we  account  for 
the  preponderance  of  river  forms  with  a  small  admixture  of  marine  or  coast 
forms,  such  as  Notogoneus,  belonging  to  a  family  (Gonorhynchidse),  the 
living  members  of  which  are  all  strictly  marine  (Cope,  Smith  Woodward), 
or  the  sting  ray,  Dasyatis,  a  member  of  the  order  of  sharks,  allied  to  existing 
forms  which  frequent  the  streams  and  estuaries  of  Florida  as  well  as  the 
adjacent  coasts  (Boulenger).  Altogether  the  fishes  represent  three  major 
groups:  elasmobranchs  (sting  rays),  ganoids  (Lepidosteus,  Amia),  and 
teleosts.  A  large  part  of  the  teleosts  are  related  to  fishes  at  present  confined 
to  the  southern  hemisphere.  Thus  the  diplomystids  ('rough-backed 
herrings')  survive  only  in  certain  rivers  and  along  portions  of  the  coasts 
of  Chili  and  eastern  Australia;  Dapedoglossus  or  Phareodus  and  Priscacara 
belong  to  families  now  chiefly  distributed  in  South  America,  Africa,  and 
Australia. 

These  Neotropical  and  possibly  Antarctic  affinities  coincide  with  those 
displayed  in  the  turtles  and  tortoises  described  below  (see  Bridger  Basin). 

The  fishes  thus  indicate,  first,  that  the  Green  River  Lake  still  preserved 
or  had  only  recently  lost  connection  with  the  sea,  and  second,  that  western 
North  America  had  enjoyed  long-continued  continental  connection  with 
western  South  America.  They  may  also  be  interpreted  as  favoring  the 
highly  improbable  'Atlantis'  hypothesis. 

The  flora  ^  also  presents  some  indications  of  South  American  affinity  in 
Manicaria,  a  palm  now  confined  to  Guiana,  and  in  Zizyphus,  a  tropical  plant. 
Here  also  we  find  the  palms  Sahal  and  Flahellaria,  horsetails  (Equisetum), 
and  among  the  ferns  the  genus  Acrostichum,  which  is  now  confined  to  the 

1  Newberry,  J.  S.,  and  HoUick,  A.,  The  Later  Extinct  Floras  of  North  America  (edit,  by 
HoUick).    U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Vol.  XXXV,  1898. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


137 


West  Indies  and  New  South  Wales.  The  sequoias  are  represented  by 
Nordenskioldia.  Among  the  northern  trees  are  willows,  oaks,  and  planer 
trees  {Planer a). 

III.  MIDDLE  AND  UPPER  EOCENE  LIFE  OF  EUROPE  AND 

AMERICA 

Near  the  close  of  the  Lower  Eocene  the  interchanges  of  mammalian  life 
between  the  New  and  Old  Worlds  apparently  ceased,  and  the  mammals 
of  the  two  great  holarctic  colonies  entered  upon  a  long  period  of  independent 
and  partly  divergent  evolution  which  lasted  until  the  summit  of  the  Eocene, 


MIDDLE  EIOCEINE: 


T^^'  —  ^^^^^^  Eocene.  A  period  of  continental  depression,  or  geographic  isolation  of 
the  New  and  Old  World  mammals,  resulting  in  prolonged  independent  evolution  and  adaptive 
radiation  on  the  great  continents.  Australia  probably  separated.  The  archaic  and  modern 
mammals  giving  rise  to  independent  groups  of  mammals  in  (1)  North  America,  (2)  Eurasia 
(3)  North  Afnca,  (4)  South  America.    Rearranged  after  W.  D.  Matthew,  1908. 

as  first  pointed  out  by  the  writer  in  1899  ^  and  subsequently  emphasized  by 
Stehlin  ^  and  Matthew.^  Whereas  in  the  Lower  Eocene,  owing  to  a  contin- 
uance of  the  Basal  Eocene  community  of  life  and  to  the  invasion  of  similar 
modernized  families,  the  two  continents,  that  is,  western  Europe  and  the 
Rocky  Mountain  region,  were  united  by  the  presence  of  nine  families  and 

^  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Tertiary  Mammal  Horizons  of  Europe  and  America,  1899-1900,  p.  7  fol- 
2  Stehlin,  H.  G.,  Sur  les  Mammif^res  des  Sables  Bartoniens  du  Castrais.    Bull.  Soc.  Geol. 

France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  IV,  May,  1904,  p.  473. 

Matthew,  W.  D.,  Hypothetical  Outlines  of  the  Continents  in  Tertiary  Times  (p.  361). 

Bull.  Amer.  Mua.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXII,  Art.  xxi,  Oct.,  1906. 


138 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


many  genera  of  mammals,  a  faunal  community  which  will  probably  be 
enriched  rather  than  diminished  by  future  discoveries  in  France,  we  now 
enter  a  long  period  of  disunion.  This  disunion  culminates  in  there  being  at 
the  close  of  the  Eocene  only  five  families  of  mammals  common  to  western 
Europe  and  the  Rocky  Mountains,  namely,  Lophiodontidae,  Dichobunidae, 
Homacodontidse,  Equidse,  Hysenodontidae,  while  at  the  same  time  eleven 
families  of  mammals  are  known  in  Europe  which  have  not  been  discovered 
in  America,  and  thirteen  families  are  known  in  America  which  have  not 
been  discovered  in  Europe.  We  can  thus  hardly  avoid  the  conclusion  that 
there  was  a  prolonged  period  of  geographic  or  climatic  isolation  between 
the  two  regions,  constituting  a  very  distinct  faunal  phase,  as  follows : 

///.  THIRD  FAUNAL  PHASE —  GRADUAL  DIVERGENCE  BETWEEN 
MAMMALS  OF  NORTH  AMERICA  AND  THOSE  OF  WESTERN 
EUROPE,  AND  LITTLE  EVIDENCE  OF  FAUNAL  INTERCHANGE, 
NO  EVIDENCE  OF  FURTHER  NORTHERN  OR  EURASIATIC  MIGRA- 
TION IN  NORTH  AMERICA.  DESCENDANTS  OF  THE  ARCHAIC  AND 
MODERNIZED  MAMMALS  SLOWLY  EVOLVING  AND  COMPETING 
WITH  ONE  ANOTHER  DURING  THE  LOWER  AND  MIDDLE  EOCENE. 
GRADUAL  ELIMINATION  OF  THE  ARCHAIC  MAMMALS.  CON- 
TINUATION IN  NORTH  AMERICA  OF  SIMILAR  CONDITIONS  OF 
ENVIRONMENT. 

As  to  life  in  the  mountain  region,  attention  may  be  especially  directed 
to  the  evidence  of  uniform  and  favorable  environmental  conditions  and  per- 
sistent evolution  throughout  the  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene  periods.  The 
changes  are  those  of  progressive  modification  and  adaptation  rather  than  of 
breaks  in  the  balance  of  nature  by  migration  or  extinction.  Both  the  archaic 
and  the  modernized  mammals  increase  in  size  and  in  variety.  The  changes 
are,  moreover,  specific  rather  than  generic.  At  the  close  of  the  Lower 
Eocene,  or  Corj^Dhodon  Zone,  just  considered,  we  have  observed  the  elimi- 
nation of  the  phenacodonts,  corjq^hodonts,  palseonictids,  arctocyonids; 
no  further  very  striking  elimination  occurs.  The  surviving  archaic  mammals 
appear  to  flourish  and  increase,  especially  in  size  and  muscular  power. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  in  this  long  period,  and  even  up  to  the  summit  of 
the  American  Eocene,  only  three  new  or  previously  unknown  families  of 
mammals  make  their  appearance.  These  are  the  ancestral  camels  (Camel- 
idae),  the  oreodonts  (Oreodontidae),  and  the  primitive  armadillos  (Edentata 
Dasypoda).  In  western  Europe  there  is  by  contrast  the  repeated  appear- 
ance of  new  families  from  some  easterly  and  northerly  sources. 

Correlation.  —  Both  in  Europe  and  in  North  America  a  rich  mam- 
malian fauna  opens  the  Middle  Eocene  and  pursues  a  quite  independent 
evolution  in  the  Old  and  New  Worlds  during  the  entire  Middle  and  Upper 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


139 


Eocene  which  renders  time  correlation  very  difficult.  There  are  some 
interesting  contrasts  similar  to  those  which  generally  distinguish  a  penin- 
sular from  a  continental  fauna.  The  archaic  herbivores  (Amblypoda), 
which  form  the  most  striking  feature  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  fauna,  are 


Fig.  47.  —  Divergence  of  Europe  and  America.  Upper  Eocene  titanotheres,  found  only  in 
North  America.  To  the  left  the  broad-skulled  Manteoceras  ;  to  the  right  the  long-skulled  Do- 
lichorhinus.   After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


entirely  unrepresented  and  probably  extinct  in  Europe.  The  archaic 
carnivores,  which  are  represented  by  three  powerful  family  types  in  the 
Rocky  Mountains  (Mesonyx,  Patriofelis,  Sinopa) ,  emhrsice  only  a  single  family 
(Hyjenodontidae)  in  Europe.  Altogether  the  North  American  fauna  is 
much  more  diversified  and  more  continental  and  cosmopolitan  than  the 
European.  The  European  stages  and  their  American  parallels  may  be 
approximately  correlated  as  follows: 


American 

Formations 
Upper  Uinta 
Middle  Uinta 
Upper  Washakie 

Lower  Uinta 
Lower  Washakie 
Upper  Bridger 

Lower  Bridger 
Upper  Huerfano 


American 
Life  Zones 


Approximate  Euro- 
pean Stage 


Upper  Eocene 


Diplacodon  Zone 
I^obasileus  Zone 
Eobasileus  Zone 

Uintatherium  Zone 
Uintatherium  Zone 
Uintatherium  Zone 

Orohippus  Zone 
Orohippus  Zone 


LUDIAN 
LUDIAN 
LUDIAN 


Middle  Eocene 


Bartonian 
Bartonian 
Bartonian 

Lutetian 


Lutetian 


140 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Middle  and  Upper  Eocene  Life  of  Europe 

Palceogeographij}  —  Early  in  the  Lutetian  the  sea  advanced  southward 
around  Paris  and  then  proceeded  id  form  the  calcaire  grossier  superieur, 
a  fluviatile  formation  Avhich  gathered  in  remains  of  many  ungulates.  At 
the  same  time  there  were  lake  deposits  at  Argenton  (1),  a  fissure  deposit 
also  rich  in  mammals,  and  at  Lissieu  (2)  near  Lyons.  When  the  upheaval 
of  the  Pyrenees  began,  the  climate  became  warmer.    In  France  we  have 


Fig.  48.  —  Europe  in  Middle  Eocene,  or  Lutetian  times.    White  =  land.    Ruled  =  sea. 

After  de  Lapparent,  1906^ 


evidence  of  a  flora  bearing  an  African  aspect  and  including  oleanders  (Ne- 
rium).  Palms  flourished  in  southern  England,  and  there  were  water  gavials 
(Gavialis),  crocodiles,  and  giant  sea-snakes  (Palceophis) .  The  flora  of 
Bournemouth  suggests  a  comparison  of  climate  with  that  of  the  Malay 
Archipelago  and  tropical  America. 

Our  knowledge  of  the  geographical  distribution  of  the  mammals  rapidly 
widens,  chiefly  through  the  discovery  of  freshwater  and  fissure  formations 
all  over  France  and  in  southern  England. 

In  the  succeeding  Bartonian  stage  there  was  a  fresh  marine  invasion  in 
the  Paris  Basin.  In  the  southwest  the  sea  receded  as  the  upheaval  of  the 
Pyrenees  continued,  and  in  the  Paris  Basin  lagoons  began  to  form.  The 
flora  indicates  that  the  climate  remained  warm  as  in  the  Lutetian  stage; 
it  includes  palms  (Sahalites,  Flabellaria) ,  laurels  (Laurus),  and  Podocarpus, 
a  conifer  now  confined  to  eastern  Asia. 

The  Upper  Eocene  or  Ludian  stage  marks  the  elevation  of  northern 

1  Cf.  de  Lapparent,  A.,  Traite  de  Geologie,  1906,  p.  1513  fol. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


141 


France  and  the  consequent  recession  of  the  old  Northern,  or  Suessonian 
Gulf,  replaced  in  the  Basin  of  Paris  by  a  period  of  great  lagoons,  the  evapo- 
ration of  which  caused  thick  deposits  of  gypsum.  At  the  same  time  numer- 
ous small  freshwater  lake,  river,  and  swamp  deposits  (lignites)  collected 
mammal  remains  over  a  very  wide  area,  reaching  northern  Spain,  southern 
England,  and  Bavaria  (Heidenheim)  in  the  east,  and  giving  us  probably 
a  very  true  picture  of  the  entire  fauna  of  western  Europe.  The  lagoons 
were  fed  by  freshwater  streams,  which  brought  with  them  remains  of  animals 
from  neighboring  districts.  Those  of  the  Paris  gypse  probably  communi- 
cated with  the  sea  by  river  channels  to  the  north.  The  bed  of  the  ancient 
lake  of  Velay  contains  a  flora  of  African  type,  including  the  sabal  (Sabalites) 
and  the  date  palms  (Phcenicites) . 

The  Mammalian  group  as  compared  with  that  of  America.  —  We  first  note 
in  the  Old  World  the  entire  absence  of  tapirs  (Tapiridse),  of  titanotheres 
(Titanotheriidte),  and  rarity  of  pro-Carnivora  (Miacidae),  as  well  as  of 
many  other  archaic  and  modern  forms  of  mammals  which  have  been  dis- 
covered in  the  American  Eocene.  The  number  of  European  Middle  and 
Upper  Eocene  families  surviving,  or  having  descendants  at  the  present 
day,  is,  in  fact,  very  small,  including  only  the  horses  (Equidae),  moles  (Tal- 
pidae),  hedgehogs  (Erinaceidae),  and  possibly  the  aye-ayes  (Cheiromyidae). 
Possibly  certain  of  the  Old  World  dichobunes  (Dichobunidae)  are  ancestral 
to  the  modem  ruminants.  With  these  exceptions  this  is  truly  an  ancient 
fauna,  and  so  it  impressed  all  the  early  French  writers.  It  is  not,  however, 
an  archaic  fauna  in  the  sense  of  being  a  survival  from  the  Age  of  Reptiles, 
because  the  only  archaic  mammals  are  the  hyaenodonts  and  insectivores. 
This  group  represents,  therefore,  the  first  adaptive  radiation  of  the  higher 
kinds  of  placental  Herbivora,  radiating  mostly  into  browsing  types,  which 
exhibit  a  great  range  of  size  and  speed,  and  indicate  a  general  prevalence 
of  forested  conditions  and  soft  herbage.  Without  exception  the  grinding 
teeth  are  short-crowned  or  brachyodont.  No  distinctively  grazing  or 
hypsodont  animals  are  loiown  in  all  this  assemblage.  Stehlin  ^  (1904,  p.  473) 
observes:  ''Thus  the  aspect  of  the  European  fauna  during  the  second  half 
of  the  Eocene  tends  to  become  ever  more  homogeneous  as  our  knowledge 
of  it  increases.  It  is  a  period  of  comparative  calm,  during  which  a  num- 
ber of  types  (lophiodonts)  dominant  at  first,  become  extinct,  while  others 
(palaeotheres)  gradually  gain  in  importance." 

Like  the  mammals  which  appeared  in  North  America  late  in  Wind  River 
and  early  Bridger  times,  this  faunal  group  was  destined  to  monopoHze  the 
European  world  during  the  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene.  The  first  extinc- 
tions occurred  in  the  Bartonian.  The  first  invasion  of  any  considerable 
number  of  new  mammals  appeared  at  the  very  close  of  the  Eocene  or 
Ludian  (see  p.  145). 

I*  stehlin,  H.  G.,  Sur  les  Mammifferes  des  Sables  Bartoniens  du  Castrais.  Bull.  Soc.  Geol. 
France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  IV,  May,  1904,  pp.  445-475. 


142 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Fig.  49.  —  Heads  of  American  Upper 
Eocene  mammals  not  thus  far  known  in 
western  Europe.  *  Outline  restorations 
by  Charles  R.  Knight.  A.  Eobasileus, 
an  amblypod.  B.  Protitanotherium,  a 
titanothere.  C.  Dolichorhinus ,  a  titano- 
there.  D.  Manteoceras,  a  titanothere. 
E.  Harpagolestes,  a  creodont.  Chiefly  of 
Upper  Washakie  Age,  Eobasileus  Zone. 

*  It  is  possible  that  the  family  of  titanotheres 
may  have  existed  in  eastern  Europe  at  this  time. 


Increasing  separation  from  America. 
— Riitimeyer^  attempted  to  draw  many 
parallels  between  the  Middle  Eocene 
mammals  of  Switzerland  (Egerkingen) 
and  those  of  the  Rocky  Mountain 
region,  but  all  recent  research  (Osborn, 
Matthew,  Stehlin)  ^  has  tended  to 
separate  these  animals  more  and  more 
widely.  To  begin  with,  the  odd-toed 
ungulates  (perissodactyls)  of  the  two 
countries  are  quite  different.  The 
horses,  which  evolved  in  great  abun- 
dance and  variety  in  France,  can  only 
be  broadly  compared  with  those  of  the 
Rocky  Mountains.  The  palaeotheres 
of  France,  three-toed  animals  near  of 
kin  to  the  horses,  never  reached  Amer- 
ica at  all.  The  lophiodonts,  it  is  true,  ;| 
are  represented  in  both  countries,  but 
by  dissimilar  forms.  Of  even-toed 
mammals,  the  European  dichobunesjj 
may  have  some  relationship  with  thei 
American  homacodonts.  Of  all  the 
remaining  even-toed  or  artiodactyll 
mammals,  which  appear  in  such  pro-' 
fusion  in  France,  no  counterparts  what-| 
ever  are  found  in  America.  This  isj| 
true  as  well  of  the  carnivores  and  otherf 
unguiculates;  the  so-called  Calamodon,\ 

1  Riitimeyer,  Die  Eocane  Saugethier-Wdt 
von  Egerkingen.  Abhandl.  schweiz.  paldont.jl^ 
GeselL,  Vol.  XVIII,  Zurich,  1861. 

2  See  Bibliography. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  143 


supposed  by  Riitimeyer  to  be  related  to  the  tseniodont  edentates  of 
America,  is  now  regarded  by  Stehlin  as  related  to  the  aye-aye  (Cheiromys) 
of  Madagascar.  The  rodents  also  (Plesiarctomys)  are  remotely  related/  as 
well  as  the  primates,  or  lemuroids.  The  most  American  type  of  animal  in 
the  European  Middle  Eocene  is  perhaps  the  little  carnivorous  creodont 
Sinopa  of  Egerkingen,  a  representative  of  the  family  Hyaenodontidse,  and, 
so  far  as  known,  somewhat  like  its  Bridger  contemporary.  Sinopa,  how- 
ever, is  a  survivor  of  an  old  phylum;  it  is  an  alert  and  widespread  animal 
distributed  from  the  Rocky  Mountain  region  to  northern  Africa. 

The  affinity,  therefore,  between  America  and  Europe  is  only  that  of 
descent  from  similar  ancestors;  for  the  time  Europe  constitutes  part  of  an 
entirely  different  zoological  region,  or  Palcearctica. 

Geological  Succession 

1.  Lutetian  Stage.  —  This  initial  stage  (which  takes  its  name  from 
Lutetia,  Paris),  according  to  Deperet  ^  exhibits  (I)  an  older  fauna  of  Argenton 
and  Bracklesham,  and  (II)  a  newer  fauna  of  the  calcaire  grassier  of  Paris. 
In  the  latter  begins  the  Palceotherium  Zone. 

The  older  fauna  marks  the  beginning  of  the  fissure  deposits  of  Lissieu  (2) 
near  Lyons  and  of  Egerkingen  (10),  Canton  Vaud,  in  Switzerland.  The 
last,  rich  in  the  teeth  of  mammals,  has  been  made  famous  through  the 
researches  of  Riitimeyer,^  who  assigned  them  great  geological  antiquity. 
His  successor,  Stehlin,  has  properly  placed  them  in  the  lower  portion  of  the 
Middle  Eocene.^ 

To  the  newer  stage  belong  the  rich  deposits  of  La  Leviniere  (Herault) 
(7)  recently  explored  by  Deperet,  yielding  perfectly  preserved  skulls  of 
lophiodonts  and  horses. 

2.  The  succeeding  Bartonian  Stage  receives  its  name  from  the  Barton 
clays  of  Hampshire,  England.  It  is  sharply  defined  zoologically  as  the  close 
of  the  Lophiodon  Zone,  including  the  large  final  stage  of  lophiodont  evolu- 
tion (L.  lautricense) ,  in  which  the  premolar  teeth  are  complicated,  whereas 
in  the  L.  rhinocerodes  of  Egerkingen  they  are  simple.  With  the  disappear- 
ance of  these  dominant  mammals  Europe  was  left  during  the  remainder  of 
the  Eocene  without  any  quadrupeds  larger  than  tapirs.  The  lophiodon 
Chasmotherium  also  disappears.  The  supposed  chalicothere  Pernatheriurn, 
a  very  aberrant  perissodactyl,  is  first  known  at  this  stage.  The  mammals 
are  otherwise  a  continuation  of  those  of  the  Lutetian.    Of  the  same  age  are 

^  Plesiarctomys  is  probably  but  not  certainly  closely  related  to  or  identical  with 
Paramys.    W.  D.  M. 

^Deperet,  C,  L'evolution  des  Mammif^res  tertiaires  (Eocene).  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris, 
Vol.  CXLI,  1905. 

^  Riitimeyer,  L.,  Die  Eocane  Saugethier-Welt  von  Egerkingen.  Abhandl.  schweiz.  paldont. 
Ges.,  Vol.  XVIII,  Zurich,  1891. 

*  Stehlin,  H.  G.,  Die  Saugetiere  des  schweizerischen  Eocans,  Critischer  Catalog  der  Mate- 
rialien,  III  Teil.    Abhandl.  schweiz.  palaontol.  Ges.,  Vol.  XXXII,  Zurich,  1906,  pp.  593-595. 


144 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  lacustrine  deposits  of  St.  Ouen  (12)  near  Paris.  Fissure  deposits  or 
'terrains  siderolithiques,'  analogous  to  those  of  Egerkingen  and  Lissieu, 
are  represented  in  Heidenheim  (Bavaria)  (20)  and  Mormon  t  near  Lyons. 
Deperet  considers  the  beginning  of  the  famous  fissures  of  Quercy  (19)  as 


Fig.  50.  —  Middle  Eocene.     Lutetian.     FRANCE.  —  Marnes  d'  1  Argenton  (Indre),  1 
lacustrine.    Siderolithique  de  2  Lissieu,  near  Lyons,  fissure  deposits.    Calcaire  grossier  de  3 
Paris,  Vaugirard,  4  Nanterre,  5  Gentilly,  near  Paris,  lower  strata  marine,  upper  freshwater  or 
brackish.    6  Coucy,  Dampleix  (Aisne).    7  Les  Matelles,  La  Leviniere,  conglomerats  et  grbs  de 
St.  Gely  du  Tesc  (Herault).    Ores  d'  8  Issel,  Cesseras,  in  the  Mts.  Corbi^res.  ENGLAND.— 
Series  of  clays,  marls,  sands,  and  lignites  of  9  Bracklesham  (Sussex),  marine  (100  ft.). 
SWITZERLAND.  —  Mergeln  von  10  Egerkingen,  in  the  Jura  Mts.,  terrain  siderolithique.  ; 
GERMANY.  —  Siisswasserkalk  von  11  Buchsweiler  (.AJsace).     Bartonian.     FRANCE.—  j 
Calcaire  de  12  St.  Ouen,  in  Paris  basin,  lacustrine  or  brackish  (10-20  meters).    Calcaire  de  13 
Sergy  (Aisne).    Gres  et  moUasse  de  14  Castrais,  Mazou,  Montespien,  near  Narbonne.  15 
Lautrec  (Tarn).    16  Viviers,  in  the  Rhone  valley.    Marnes  de  17  Robiac  (Gard).  Sideroli- 
thique de  18  Mormont  (in  part)  near  Lyons.    Phosphorites  de  19  Quercy  (a  small  part),  in 
south  central  France.    GERMANY.  —  Bohnerz  von  20  Heidenheim  (Bavaria).  Deperet. 

of  this  age.  Of  greatest  import  for  our  knowledge  of  the  mammals  are  the 
marl  beds  of  Robiac  (Gard)  (17)  in  south  central  France,  which  through  the 
explorations  of  Deperet^  have  yielded  to  the  Lyons  Museum  a  splendid 
series  of  remains  of  lophiodonts,  horses,  and  other  mammals;  here  was  found 
a  veritable  boae  bed,  crowded  with  well-preserved  types. 

3.  Ludian  Stage.  —  This  stage  is  named  after  the  marnes  de  Ludes 
in  the  Paris  Basin,  but  is  typified  by  the  gypse  de  Montmartre  (4),  made 

^  Deperet  and  Carrie^re,  Sur  un  nouveau  gisement  de  Mammif^res  de  I'Eoc^ne  moyen  k 
Robiac  pr6s  Saint-Mamert  (Gard).  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  sea.  Oct.  21,  1901,  Vol.  CXXXIII, 
no.  17,  pp.  616-618. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


145 


famous  by  the  classic  researches  of  Cuvier.  This  stage  is  equivalent  in  part 
to  the  'Ligurian'  of  Mayer;  the  fauna  is  readily  distinguished  from  that 
of  the  Bartonian  by  the  absence  of  lophiodonts.  The  mammals  described 
by  Cuvier  are  from  near  the  summit  of  the  gypse.  Of  the  same  age  are  the 
rich  lignites  de  la  Debruge  (Vaucluse).  The  best  known  mammalian  life 
of  this  period,  however,  is  that  of  the  south  of  France,  as  shown  in  the 
phosphorites  of  Quercy  (3),  the  lignites  of  Gargas  (5),  and  at  Euzet  (8)- 
In  England  we  have  the  famous  deposits  on  the  Isle  of  Wight  (9),  of  Hord- 
well,  Bembridge,  and  Headon.  This  Ludian  fauna  is  also  divided  by 
Deperet  ^  into  an  older  phase  and  a  newer  phase.    We  note  the  presence 


Fig.  51.  —  Upper  Eocene.  Ludian  Stage.  FRANCE. —  1  St  Hippolyte  de  Caton  (Card). 
Gypse  de  2  Pan's  (lower  strata).  Phosphorites  de  S  Qiiercy  (in  part),  south  central  France. 
Gypse  de  4  Montmartre,  near  Paris,  dried  up  lagoons  (55  meters).  Lignites,  gypse  de  5  Gar- 
gas,  southeastern  France.  Lignites  da  6  Mormoiron  (Vaucluse).  7  Villeneuve  la  Comptal, 
near  Narbonne.  %  Euzet-les-Bains  (Gard).  ENGLAND.  —  "Barton  sand,"  fluvio-marine, 
and  clays,  marls,  loams,  limestone,  sandstone,  etc.,  of  9  Headon  (140-200  ft.);  marls  and  lime- 
stones, "fluvio-marine"  of  9  Bembridge  (120  ft.);  "Barton  clay"  of  9  Hordwell  (300  ft.), 
Isle  of  Wight.     Correlation  of  Deperet. 

of  the  larger  archaic  carnivores,  true  members  of  the  family  Hyseaodontidse 
(Hycenodon,  Quercytherium) ,  also  of  the  type  specimen  of  Lophiotherium, 
a  diminutive  horse  in  the  same  stage  of  evolution  as  the  American  Epihippus 
of  the  Uinta;  that  is,  with  the  premolar  teeth  compHcated. 

The  Upper  Ludian,  typified  by  the  gypse  de  Montmartre  (4)  is  still  more 
readily  distinguished  by  the  first  appearance,  or  at  least  by  our  first  knowl- 

*  Deperet,  C,  L'evolution  des  Mammif^res  "tertiaires  (Eocene).  1905. 


146 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


edge,  of  several  families,  including  the  artiodactyl  anoplotheres  (Anoplothe- 
rium)  and  csenotheres,  of  the  true  dogs  or  Canidae  (Cynodidis),  and  of  two 
previously  unknown  families  of  rodents,  Theriodomyidae  ^  and  Myoxidse 
(dormice).  More  distinctive  is  the  appearance  here  of  diminutive  opossums 
(Didelphyidae,  Peratherium),  either  by  migration  from  North  America,  or 
as  residents  which  have  not  been  discovered  in  older  formations. 

Mammalian  Succession 

Cuvier's  views  restated.  —  It  is  interesting  to  describe  the  adaptive  radia- 
tion of  the  gypse  fauna  so  far  as  possible  in  the  language  of  Cuvier.^  The 
chief  animals  which  he  discovered  were  the  palseotheres,  which  reached  their 
climax  at  this  time,  the  aberrant  artiodactyl  anoplotheres,  the  anthraco- 
theres,  Choeropotami,  and  the  lemuvoid  Adapts.  The  palseotheres  were  brows- 
ers, forest-living  animals,  resembling  tapirs  (P.  medium)  in  the  general 
form  of  the  body  and  head,  particularly  in  the  shortness  of  the  bones  of 
the  nose,  which  indicate  that,  like  the  tapir,  they  had  a  short,  prehensile 
proboscis,  or  upper  lip;  their  grinding  teeth  are  crested  like  those  of  the 
forest-living  horses  of  the  Miocene  of  North  America  (Hypohippus)  or  of 
the  short-crowned  lophoselenodont  type.  Their  resemblance  to  the  forest- 
living  horses  is  also  shown  in  the  presence  of  three  digits  on  both  fore  and 
hind  feet.  "Our  gypsum  quarries,"  observed  Cuvier,  "are  crowded  with 
these  animals."  The  adaptive  radiations  of  the  palseotheres  are  observed 
first  in  their  size,  and  second  in  the  variations  of  the  structure  of  their  feet. 
The  largest  palseothere  (P.  magnum)  was  of  the  size  of  a  horse;  another 
species  (P.  medium)  resembles  the  boar  in  size  and  is  distinguished  by  long, 
narrow  feet;  a  third  species  (P.  crassum)  is  distinguished  by  its  broader 
feet,  and  a  fourth  (P.  latum)  by  feet  still  larger  but  with  shorter 
digits;  a  fifth  species  (P.  curtum)  only  attained  the  size  of  a  sheep,  but  its 
feet  are  still  larger  and  shorter  in  proportion.  The  sixth  species  (P.  minus), 
which  was  attributed  to  Paloeotherium  by  Cuvier,  has  longer  legs  and  is  of  a 
lighter  build  than  the  others;  it  is  distinguished  by  very  slender  feet,  the 
lateral  toes  of  which  are  shorter  than  the  median,  and  is  now  known  under 
another  name  {Plagiolophus  minus).  It  is  famous  as  having  been  selected 
by  Huxley  as  one  of  the  early  ancestors  of  the  horse;  we  now  perceive 
that  it  was  parallel  ^vith,  rather  than  ancestral  to,  the  early  horses.  Cuvier 
described  the  anoplothere  as  of  the  height  of  the  wild  boar,  with  much- 
spreading  feet  and  a  very  long  and  thick  tail,  so  that  as  a  whole  it  had  nearly 
the  proportions  of  an  otter  but  with  longer  legs;  it  is  probable,  he  said, 
that  it  swam  well  and  frequented  the  lagoons.  In  widest  contrast  to  these 
forest  and  swamp-living  forms  were  the  xiphodonts,  which,  as  restored  by 

^  Schlosser  regards  the  theriodomyids  as  primitive  hystricomorph  or  porcupine-like 
rodents. 

2  Cuvier,  G.,  Discours  sur  les  Revolutions  de  la  Surface  du  Globe,  et  sur  les  Changemens 
qu'elles  ont  Produits  dans  le  R^gne  Animal.    Paris  and  Amsterdam,  1826. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  147 

Cuvier,  are  slender  and  slightly  formed,  like  the  most  beautiful  gazelles. 
For  the  environment  of  these  animals  Cuvier  pictured  a  small  number  of 
tolerably  fertile  plains  wherein  they  could  multiply,  perhaps  separated  by 
considerable  stretches  of  lofty  hills.  The  researches  of  Adolphe  Brongniart  ^ 
revealed  the  flora  of  the  period  as  consisting  of  palm  trees  and  many  other 
beautiful  plants,  while  in  the  waters  were  found  crocodiles  and  soft-shelled 
turtles  (Trionychia) . 

The  following  is  a  newer  picture  of  the  Upper  Eocene  life  of  southern 
France,  England,  and  Bavaria. 

Herbivorous  mammals.  —  The  odd-toed  ungulates,  or  perissodactyls, 
become  increasingly  important.  All  are  polyphyletic,  or  broken  up  into  a 
number  of  independent  phyla.  (1)  The  lophiodonts,  the  dominant  family, 
embrace  two  main  generic  phyla  (Lophiodon  and  Chasmotherium) ,  both 
descended  from  Ypresian  ancestors,  and  both  becoming  extinct  in  the 
Bartonian;  of  these  the  genus  Lophiodon  splits  up  into  three  sub-phyla, 
according  to  Deperet.  (2)  The  palaeotheres,  first  known  in  the  Upper 
Lutetian,  also  diphyletic  and  including  the  cursorial  Plagiolophus  and  the 
less  swift  but  bulkier  Palceotherium,  were  of  medium  size;  they  become 
extinct  in  the  Ludian.  (3)  The  hyracotheres,  or  primitive  horses,  also 
subdivided  into  three  and  perhaps  four  phyla  {Pachynolophus,  Anchilophus, 
Lophiotherium) ,  were  of  the  smallest  size  and  greatest  speed.  They  ap- 
parently disappeared  from  western  Europe  at  the  close  of  the  Ludian. 

The  even-toed  ungulates,  artiodactyls,  though  inferior  in  size  to  the 
largest  of  the  perissodactyls,  were  highly  varied  and  numerous,  yet  appar- 
ently not  ancestral  to  any  of  the  modern  artiodactyls.  They  include: 
(1)  The  dichobunes,  sub-selenodont  artiodactyls  of  very  small  size,  similar 
to  the  homacodonts  of  North  America.  This  is  a  prominent  Eocene  phylum 
which  extends  into  the  Ohgocene  (Stampian),  but  according  to  the  best 
authority  (Stehlin)  does  not  give  rise  to  the  higher  artiodactyls  or  rumi- 
nants.^ (2)  Anthracotheres  of  somewhat  larger  size,  but  swift-moving 
cursorial  forms,  first  appear  in  the  Lutetian  (Catodontherium) ,  and  des- 
tined to  survive  into  the  Oligocene  (Brachyodus) ,  to  become  dominant  in 
size  and  variety  and  to  send  off  branches  which  migrated  to  North  America. 

(3)  Xiphodonts,  excessively  light-limbed,  fleet,  or  cursorial  forms  first 
known  in  the  Lutetian,  surviving  to  the  close  of  the  Eocene  (Ludian). 

(4)  Dichodonts  and  dachrytheres,  first  appearing  in  the  Upper  Lutetian 
and  surviving  to  the  close  of  the  Eocene.  (5)  Anoplotheres,  browsers, 
forest  and  swamp  dwellers,  of  larger  size,  slow-moving,  with  clumsy  feet, 
first  appearing  in  the  summit  of  the  Eocene  (Ludian).    (6)  Aberrant 

^  Cuvier,  G.,  and  Brongniart,  A.,  Description  Geologique  des  Environs  de  Paris.  Paris, 
1821. 

^  See  Stehlin,  Die  Saugetiere  des  schweizerischen  Eocans.  Critischer  Catalog  der  Materia- 
lien.  Abhandl.  schweiz.  palaont.  Ges.,  Vol.  XXXIII,  Zurich,  1906,  Pt.  4,  p.  670  (table  of  the 
phylogeny  of  the  dichobunids) . 


148 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


suilline,  or  pig-like,  forms  (Suidse)  embracing  the  larger  form  Choeromorus, 
and  Acotherulum,  of  diminutive  size. 

The  most  striking  fact  regarding  this  as- 
semblage of  mammals  is  that  so  few  of  them 
are  ancestral  to  the  Oligocene  mammals  of 
the  same  geographic,  region.  This  is  seen  in 
the  special  study  of  several  of  the  groups. 

Three  phyla  of  Eocene  suillines.  —  We  are 
indebted  to  Stehlin  for  a  masterly  review  ^  of 
the  descent  of  the  Eocene  suillines  of  Europe. 
The  key  to  the  interpretation  of  these  mam- 
mals, which  have  been  in  confusion  since  the 
time  of  Cuvier,  is  found  in  the  discrimina- 
tion of  three  grand  phyla  and  several  sub- 
phyla,  readily  distinguished  by  four  characters, 
namely,  through  their  respective  dolicho- 
cephaly  or  brachycephaly,  the  shape  of  the 
posterior  part  of  the  mandible,  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  anterior,  or  cutting  teeth,  and 
the  presence  or  absence  of  a  mesostyle  on  the 
superior  grinders.  Thus  Choeropotamus  (doHchocephahc),  Choeromorus  (mesa- 
ticephalic),  Cebochoerus  (brachycephalic)  represent  three  distinct  lines,  widely 
spread  geographically  and  of  great  geologic  range,  from  the  Upper  Lutetian 
to  Lower  Sannoisian.  No  suoids  are  known  from  the  Lower  Lutetian,  and 
Choeropotamus  alone  survives  into  the  Lower  Sannois  an.  Only  Leptaco- 
theruluni  of  Quercy  and  Choeromorus  of  Mormont  remain  as  a  possible 
source  of  Oligocene  evolution.  Through  the  aberrant  evolution  of  their  cut- 
ting teeth  neither  Choeropotamus  nor  Cebochoerus  can  include  ancestors  of 
the  post-Eocene  suillines.  Stehlin  suggests  that  they  may  be  ancestral 
to  the  hippopotami,  which  first  appear  in  the  Lower  Pliocene  of  Europe. 

Five  phyla  of  Eocene  anthracotheres.  —  These  animals,  large  and  small,  are 
readily  distinguished  from  the  pigs  by  their  selenodonty,  i.e.  all  the  outer 
and  often  the  inner  crests  of  the  superior  grinding  teeth  are  crescentic.  In 
this  connection  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  pigs  also  originally  pos- 
sessed crescentic  cusps,  that  their  rounded  cusps  are  secondary,  or  neo- 
bunodont.^  Among  the  smaller  anthracotheres  (Haplobunodon,  Rhaga- 
therium)  of  Egerkingen,  Mormont,  Hordwell,  Bembridge,  and  Quercy  (of 
Lutetian  to  Ludian  age),  as  well  as  Lophiobunodon  of  Lissieu  and  La  Levi- 
niere,  we  discover  five  phyla  which  suddenly  make  their  appearance  in  Upper 

'  Stehlin,  H.  G.,  Die  Siiugetiere  dcs  schweizerischen  Eocaens.  Critischer  Catalog  der 
Materialien.  Fiinfter  Teil:  Chopropotamus,  Cebochopnis,  Chcpromorus,  Haplobunodon, 
Rhagatherium,  Mixtotherium.  Abhandl.  schweiz.  paldont.  Ges.,  Vol.  XXXV,  1908,  pp.  691- 
837. 

^  Stehlin,  H.  G.,  Uber  die  Geschichte  des  Suiden-Gebisses.  Abh.  schweiz.  paldont.  Ges., 
Vols.  XXVI-XXVII,  1899,  1900,  Pt.  1,  p.  125. 


Chief  Mammals 

Lophiodonts 
Palffiotheres 
Hyracotheres 

(primitive  horses) 
Dichobunids 
Anthracotheres 
Ancodonts  or  hyopotamids 
Xiphodonts 
Dichodonts  - 
Anoplotheres 
Suillines 
Lemuroids 
Sciuroids 

Moles  and  hedgehogs 
Hysenodonts 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


149 


Lutetian  times,  because  no  anthracotheres  are  known  below  this  period, 
and  no  similar  forms  are  found  in  the  Eocene  of  North  America.  None 
of  these  European  forms  appear  to  include  the  ancestors  of  the  true  Oli- 
gocene  anthracotheres  {Anthracotherium)  of  Europe,  a  case  of  discontinuity 
which  is  parallel  to  that  of  the  Eocene  and  Oligocene  pigs.  Stehlin  con- 
cludes that  the  anthracotheres  occurring  in  the  Lower  Oligocene  of  Europe 
are  not  autochthonous,  but  migrants,  or  ''in-wanderers."  Since  almost 
simultaneously  similar  ''in-wanderers"  appear  in  North  America,  we  should 
probably  regard  Asia  as  the  common  northern  center  of  the  true  anthra- 
cotheres ;  still,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  diminutive  (Rhagatherium  cegyp- 
tiacum)  form  of  the  Fayum  of  northern  Africa  is  one  of  the  most  primitive 
anthracothere  types  which  we  know. 

Ancodonts. — Parallel  with  and  related  to  the  anthracotheres  is  the  second 
group  of  semi-selendont  artiodactyls  which,  in  a  comprehensive  sense, 
can  be  embraced  in  the  term  Eocene  ancodonts,  or  hyopotamids,  distin- 
guished by  the  structure  of  the  molar  teeth,  the  open  mesostyles,  and  the 
generally  sharpened  crests.  These  Eocene  ancodonts  are  astonishingly 
numerous,  including  Mixtotherium  (brachycephalic)  from  Quercy,  and  Da- 
crytherium  (dolichocephalic),  and  ranging  through  the  Lutetian,  Bartonian, 
and  Ludian  stages  in  several  phyla,  including  beside,  the  above  Catodon- 
therium  and  Hyracodontherium.  While  these  animals  {Mixtotherium)  dis- 
appear at  the  close  of  the  Eocene  of  Europe,  Stehlin  discusses  the  very 
interesting  question,  already  suggested  by  Scott  (1890)  and  Earle,  of  their 
possible  ancestry  to  the  group  of  oreodonts  which  suddenly  appear  (Eomeryx, 
Protoreodon,  Protagriochoerus,  etc.)  in  the  Uinta  Formation,  Upper  Eocene, 
of  northern  Utah,  Rocky  Mountains.  StehHn,  however,  dismisses  this 
theory,  showing  that,  despite  many  resemblances,  the  mixtotheres  of  Europe 
are  too  specialized  to  have  given  rise  to  the  oreodonts.  He  admits  the  pos- 
sibihty  of  a  north  Asiatic  center  from  which  common  ancestors  of  the 
European  mixtotheres  and  the  American  oreodonts  may  have  wandered, 
to  give  rise  to  the  respective  Old  and  New  World  forms. 

Arboreal  mammals.  —  The  Primates  include  the  lemur-hke  Adapis, 
appearing  in  the  Lutetian,  surviving  through  the  Ludian,  and  reappearing 
/in  the  giant  Megaladapis  of  Madagascar.  There  is  also  the  Tamils-like 
Necrolemur,  which  appears  in  the  Lutetian  and  survives  through  the  Ludian. 

Of  arboreal  type  are  also  probably  the  sciuromorph,  or  squirrel-hke 
rodents  {Plesiarctomys) ,  analogous  to  similar  forms  in  North  America  ;  it  is 
noteworthy  that  most  Eocene  rodents  seem  to  be  arboreal  or  forest-living 
forms  ;  the  plains-living  forms  are  not  known  until  the  Oligocene.  Of  the 
remaining  small  fauna  it  is  important  to  note  that  among  Insectivora  both 
the  moles  (Talpidse)  and  hedgehogs  (Erinaceidse)  first  appear  in  the  Lutetian. 

Considering  this  powerful  herbivorous  and  small  fauna  it  is  surprising 
that  we  know  so  little  of  the  carnivores,  since  these  are  confined  to  the  small 
viverroid,  or  Sinopa-\\\iQ  forms  of  the  Lutetian,  which  are  succeeded  by  the 


150 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


true  Hyoenodon  of  the  Bartonian  and  Ludian.  Northern  Asia  or  Eocene 
Europe  appears  to  have  been  the  home  of  the  genus  Hycenodon,  because 
these  animals  do  not  appear  in  northern  Africa  and  in  North  America 


Fig.  52.  —  The  New  and  Old  World  family  of  mcsonychid  creodonts,  known  in  the  Lower 
Eocene  of  Europe  and  in  the  Low(t  to  Upper  Eocene  of  North  America.  Above  :  Skeleton 
of  the  Middle  Eocene  (Bridger)  Dromocyon  vornx,  in  the  Yale  Museum.  Below  :  Restoration 
of  a  similar  form.  After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight,  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History. 


until  the  Lower  Oligocene.  They  are  typically  cursorial  or  running  creo- 
donts or  primitive  carnivores,  capable  of  traveling  great  distances,  and 
thus  finally  enjo^'ing  a  very  wide  geographic  range,  before  extinction. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  151 


The  Collective  Fauna  of  the  Phosphorites  of  Quercy 

The  beginning  of  these  fissure  deposits  occurred  during  Bartonian  times; 
they  richly  display  the  life  of  the  Upper  Eocene  or  Ludian  stage,  and  extend 
into  the  totally  different  mammaHan  fauna  of  Middle  Oligocene  or  Stampian 
times,  thus  representing  a  very  long  period  of  time.  They  are  the  most 
extensive  and  famous  mammal-bearing  fissure  deposits  which  have  ever 
been  discovered.  They  are  found  in  Jurassic  calcareous  fissures,  3  to  6 
meters  in  width  and  35  meters  in  length;  the  matrix  is  a  phosphate  of  lime, 
probably  of  mineral  spring  origin.  The  mammahan  fauna  is  of  extraordi- 
nary richness,  beauty,  and  completeness.  Gaillard  ^  considers  that  the 
phosphorites  were  formed  as  a  result  of  alternation  of  wet  and  dry  seasons, 
such  as  we  see  in  the  tropics  to-day;  tricklings  of  rain  water  filled  crevasses 
in  the  rocks  and  became  saturated  with  the  dissolving  limestone;  this 
process  was  followed  by  the  advent  of  the  dry  season,  a  period  of  evapora- 
i  tion,  during  which  the  phosphorites  were  precipitated.  The  mammals  often 
occur  entire,  as  in  caverns  to-day.  Filhol,^  in  his  monograph,  suggested 
that  death  was  caused  by  asphyxiation  due  to  poisonous  vapors  rising  from 
the  hot  springs. 

The  birds  of  Quercy.  —  The  recent  studies  by  Gaillard  ^  on  the  bird  life 
preserved  in  these  fissures  throws  a  very  important  side  light  both  on  the 
climatic  condition  of  the  period  and  the  zoogeographic  relations  of  France 
at  this  time,  that  is,  between  the  Middle  Eocene  and  Middle  Oligocene. 
The  birds,  like  the  mammals,  of  the  phosphorites  show  so  little  resemblance 
to  those  of  the  present  day  that  very  few  can  be  referred  to  living  genera. 
They  are  all  types  fitted  to  inhabit  great  warm  plains,  scattered  with  groves. 
They  can  be  referred  to  the  following  groups:  diurnal  and  nocturnal  birds 
of  prey  (Raptores) ;  the  American  vultures  (Cathartidse) ;  the  serpenteaters 
(Serpentariidse),  of  which  the  existing  African  'secretary  bird'  is  the  only 
I  [  existing  form;  the  storks  (Ciconiidse) ;  the  sandpipers  (Totaninae);  the 
[  rails  (Rallidse);  the  Old- World  quails  (Perdicinse) ;  the  Asiatic  and  African 
sand  grouse  (Pteroclidae) ;  and  the  rollers  (Coraciidae),  cuckoos  (Cuculidse), 
goat-suckers  (Caprimulgidse),  and  swifts  (Cypselidse)  of  the  large  group 
Pico-passeriformes.  Entirely  lacking  are  several  families  of  aquatic  birds 
'  1  and  probably  the  true  sparrows.  It  is  an  essentially  tropical  assemblage. 
The  descendants  of  the  Quercy  birds,  or  at  least  such  forms  as  approach  them 
most  closely,  are  now  for  the  most  part  inhabitants  of  the  equatorial  regions 
of  Africa  and  South  America.  Thus  the  serpenteaters,  the  gangas,  or  sand 
grouse,  the  gallinaceous  birds  of  the  genus  Palceocryptonyx,  the  rollers 
(Geranopterus) ,  and  the  touracos  (Dynamopterus)  lend  to  the  Quercy  fauna 
an  African  or  Indo-Malayan  aspect.    On  the  other  hand,  there  are  forms 

*  Gaillard,  C,  Les  Oiseaux  des  Phosphorites  du  Quercy.     Ann.  Univ.  Lyon,  n.s.,  I,  Sci. 
Med.,  no.  23,  1908. 

^  Filhol,  H.,  Recherches  sur  les  Phosphorites  du  Quercy,  Paris  1877,  p.  127. 


152 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


with  distinctly  American  affinities.  Plesiocathartes  is  related  to  the  tropical 
American  king  vulture  (Sarcorhamphus) ;  Orthocnemus  approaches  the  Bra- 
zilian chaha  {Chauna  chavaria);  Elaphrocnemus  approaches  the  'quadruped 
bird/  or  hoatzin,  of  Central  America,  and  Filholornis,  the  penelopes  (Pe- 
nelopinse),  likewise  of  Central  and  South  America.  The  striking  relationship 
that  exists  between  certain  birds  of  the  phosphorites  and  living  American 
forms  justifies  the  assumption  that  there  were  intermigrations  of  New 
World  types  during  the  Eocene  or  Oligocene. 

Eocene  birds  of  North  America  arul  Europe.  —  It  is  interesting  at  this 
point  to  refer  to  the  little  that  is  known  of  Eocene  birds  of  North  America.^ 
Of  the  Lower  Eocene  the  Diatryma  gigantea  of  the  Wasatch  of  New  Mexico 


Bv  ix'iriii.s.sioii  of  [lie  L.ts.  (ieologioal  .^survc'v 


Fig.  53.  —  Chief  Middle  Eocene  Formations  (horizontal  Hncs).    Bridger,  C  C,  of  south- 
western Wyoming.    Washakie,  D,  of  south  central  Wyoming. 

is  a  large  flightless  bird,  possibly  related  to  the  genus  of  the  same  name  in 
England  and  France.  The  various  species  of  Aletornis  described  by  Marsh 
are  })elieved  to  be  allied  to  the  cranes.  They  vary  from  the  size  of  the 
killdeer  plover  to  that  of  a  flammgo.  The  owls  (Bubo)  and  woodpeckers 
(Uintornis)  are  also  provisionally  identified.  The  few  records  we  possess 
of  the  birds  of  undoubted  Eocene  age  in  England  and  France  point  in  the 
same  manner  to  early  differentiation  of  bird  life.  In  the  Lower  Eocene,  or 
Sparnacian  of  northern  France,  Belgium,  and  England,  the  giant  Gastornis 
is  abundant,  an  animal  as  large  as  an  ostrich,  not  a  true  struthious  type, 
however,  but  presenting  rather  affinities  to  the  wading  and  aquatic  birds. 
In  the  Lower  Eocene,  or  Ypresian,  of  the  Isle  of  Sheppey,  small  vultures 
(Lithornis),  kingfishers  (Halcyornis),  sea  gulls,  and  herons  have  been  found. 

From  the  Upper  Eocene  of  Montmartre  Cuvier  recognized  eleven  distinct 
species.  Altogether  there  were  representatives  of  the  Accipitres,  or  birds  of 
prey,  of  the  Passeres,  or  tree  perchers,  of  the  Picariae,  including  the  wood- 

1  American  Ornithologists'  Union  (J.  A.  Allen,  Editor),  Check-List  of  North  American 
Birds,  3d  and  revised  ed.    New  York,  1910. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


153 


peckers,  cuckoos,  rollers,  etc.,  the  Gallinse, 
or  gallinaceous  birds,  the  Gralla?,  or  shore- 
frequenting  birds,  and  finally  of  the  Stega- 
nopodes,  which  include  the  cormorants.^ 


Middle  and  Upper  Eocene  of  the 
Rocky  Mountain  Region 

The  whole  vertebrate  fauna,  reptilian  as 
well  as  mammalian,  of  this  period  is  better 
known  than  that  of  any  other  of  the  Eocene 
phases.  As  shown  in  the  correlation  table 
(Fig.  10,  p.  49)  the  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene 
is  represented  by  a  grandly  successive  series 
of  formations,  partly  overlapping  in  time, 
and  apparently  leaving  no  interval  unfilled 
with  records  of  mammalian  life.  Reading 
from  the  base  upward,  these  formations  suc- 
ceed and  overlap  each  other  as  follows: 

Uinta,  of  northern  Utah,  including  three 
levels 

Washakie,  of  south  central  Wyoming, 
including  two  levels 

Bridger,  of  southwestern  Wyoming,  in- 
cluding two  main  levels 

Huerfano,  of  southeastern  Colorado, 
including  two  levels. 

Mammalian  life.  —  Like  the  Middle  and 
Upper  Eocene  of  Europe,  the  mammalian 
life  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  region  of  North 
America  is  a  unit.  Of  the  twenty-six  families 
of  mammals  of  every  kind,  seven  cease  to  be 
known  at  the  end  of  the  Middle  Eocene  or 
Upper  Bridger  phase.  Only  two  new  families 
are  suddenly  introduced  at  the  summit  of 
the  Eocene  or  Upper  Uinta  phase.  There 
was  thus  in  the  Rocky  Mountain  region  a 
long  period  of  uniform  evolution  and  com- 
petition among  the  members  of  the  existing 
fauna,  a  few  families  becoming  extinct  and 
the  majority  surviving  with  no  sudden  in- 
troductions of  dangerous  competitors.  On 

'  Owen,  Palaeontology  (1860),  pp.  291-292. 


154 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  whole,  it  is  a  very  imposing,  diversified, 
an  equal  distribution  of  arboreal,  cursorial, 
and  herbivorous  types. 


and  well-balanced  fauna,  with 
aquatic,  fossorial,  carnivorous, 


185' 


calcareous 


?   Oreodon.  zone 


Oreodon 
Cylindrodon 
Caenopus 
Ischyromys 
Poebro  the  Hum 


TitanotheriviTrt  zone 

DipLacodon  zotw 
Amynodon 
Protoreodon 
Cdmelid 


lB  uff  an  5  ^ra  y_- 
Ssanciy  sTiaTes^ 
l¥7T?i^an'cl7~-7~^ 


?  Lambdothjeriunv  zone 


Coryphodon,  PhenacoduSj  Eohlppus 
?  Coryphodon  zorve 


By  permission  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 

Fig.  55.  —  Lower  Eocene  to  Oligocene.    A  composite,  continuous  section  in  the  Wind  River 
Basin,  Wyoming.    After  Granger,  1910.    Compare  Fig.  38. 

As  above  noted,  the  chief  distinction  from  Europe  is  in  the  large  pro-  ; 
portion  of  surviving  archaic  Mammalia.    Very  noteworthy  is  the  presence 
of  an  opossum  {Peratherium)  as  indicating  the  continued  residence  of 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


155 


polyprotodont  marsupials  in  this  country.  Among  the  Carnivora-Creo- 
donta,  we  find  three  famihes,  the  oxysenids,  hyaenodontids,  and  mesonychids, 
the  last  developing  into  animals  of  formidable  size. 

The  Insectivora  are  highly  varied,  including  six  families,  four  of  which 
are  now  extinct,  while  two  are  doubtfully  compared  with  the  modern 
moles  (Talpidse)  and  tenrecs  (Centetidse)  as  well  as  with  the  tupaiids  or 


Fig.  56.  —  Skeleton  of  Uintatherium  (mirabile) ,  the  amblypod  successor  of  Pantolamhda 
and  Coryphodon.  Uintatherium  Zone,  Upper  Bridger.  (See  Fig.  58.)  In  the  American 
Museum  of  Natural  History.    After  Osborn. 


tree  shrews.  The  peculiar  herbivorous  Tillodontia  apparently  become  ex- 
tinct in  Tillotherium  of  the  Bridger.  The  archaic  edentates  with  enameled 
teeth  (Tseniodonta)  survive  into  the  Lower  Bridger  only  (Stylinodon) . 
Of  the  archaic  Ungulata  the  phenacodonts  have  all  disappeared,  but  the 
amblypod  stock  is  apparently  flourishing  and  reappears  in  the  imposing 
Uintatherium  of  the  Middle  Bridger.  In  the  Middle  Eocene  the  ratio  of 
archaic  and  modernized  genera  and  species  of  mammals  is  as  follows: 

Genera  Species 
Archaic  mammals  15  35 

Modernized  mammals  ^  146 

72  .  181 

Thus  there  is  for  the  first  time  a  decided  predominance  of  the  modern- 
ized over  the  archaic  forms.  Among  what  we  have  been  regarding  as  the 
more  modern  types,  the  arboreal  primates  now  include  two  families  (Anap- 


156 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


tomorphidae,  Notharctidse),  both  surviving  from  the  Lower  Eocene.  The 
pro-Carnivora  (Miacidse)  also  survive  from  the  Lower  Eocene,  and  be- 
come more  diversified  than  in  the  Wind  River,  although 
Characteristic    most  of  the  genera  are  modified  Lower  Eocene  forms. 

The  Rodentia  still  are  limited  to  the  rather  generalized 
Ischyromyidae,  also  surviving  from  the  Lower  Eocene 
and  becoming  diversified  into  six  genera,  which  may 
prove  to  represent  more  than  one  family.  At  the  very 
summit  of  the  Eocene  the  American  rodents  known  as 
jumping  mice,  or  Dipodidse,  are  doubtfully  represented 
in  the  genus  Protoptychus.  Among  the  modern  ungu- 
lates, as  in  Europe,  this  is  the  grand  epoch  of  the  Peris- 
sodactyla.  Of  these,  two  families  only  (Equidae  and 
Lophiodontidse)  have  relatives  in  Europe.  Of  the  re- 
maining families,  the  tapirs  (Tapiridae),  titanotheres 
(Titanotheriidae),  two  families  of  rhinoceroses  (Hyraco- 
dontidae,  Amynodontidae),  cursorial,  aquatic,  or  amphib- 
ious respectively,  appear  to  be  peculiar  to  North 
America. 

The  even-toed  ungulates,  or  Artiodactyla,  are  far  less 
diversified  than  in  Europe.    They  include  the  bunodont 
and  omnivorous  Achaenodontinae  (Achoenodon) ,  related  to  the  entelodonts 


Fig.  57.  —  In  tho  hoart  of  the  Middle  Eocene,  Bridger  Badlands  of  Wyoming,  in  the  famous 
locality  known  as  Grizzly  Buttes.  Zone  of  Orohippus  and  Palceosyops.  Photograph  by 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  1903. 


Mammals 

Uintatheres 

Horses 

Tapirs 

Rhinoceroses 

Titanotheres 

Lophiodonts 

Entelodonts 

Homacodonts 

Oreodonts 

Camelids 

Taeniodonts 

Tillodonts 

Insectivores 

Lemuroids 

Armadillos 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


157 


(see  p.  217)  or  'giant  pigs/  which  are  destined  to  play  a  very  imposing 
part  in  the  OUgocene  of  North  America  and  Europe.  The  diminutive 
selenodonts  (Homacodon),  provisionally  referred  to  the  European  family  of 
Dichobunidse,  may  represent  an  independent  family  (Homacodontidse). 
The  most  novel  American  forms,  also  destined  to  be  conspicuous  in  the 


By  permission  of  tlie  U.S.  Geologicai  Survey. 
Fig.  58.  — Typical  Middle  Eocene  of  western  Wyoming.    Scale  section  of  the  Lower  and 
Upper  Bridger  Formation.    Prepared  by  Matthew  and  Granger,  1903. 

future  history  of  the  continent,  are  the  oreodonts  (Oreodontidse)  and  the 
[pro-camels  (Camelidse  or  Hypertragulidse) . 

Geology  of  the  Middle  Eocene  Bridger,  Lower  Washakie,  and  Lower  Uinta 

Bridger.  —  These  noble  exposures  in  southwest  Wyoming,  discovered 
in  1869,  are  the  classic  hunting  grounds  of  Leidy,  Marsh,  and  Cope,  famous 


158 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


for  a  rich  fauna,  and  of  late  most  accurately  surveyed  by  the  American 
Museum  parties. 

Clarence  King  ^  believed  that  the  Bridger  and  Washakie  deposits  (Fig. 
35,  p.  118)  were  formed  in  a  great  single  or  partly  divided  'Washakie 
Lake.'  This  long  accepted  lacustrine  theory  has  gradually  given  way 
before  the  arguments  of  Matthew  ^  and  Davis  ^  for  the  flood  plain  and 
fluviatile  theory.  It  is  definitely  shown  (Osborn,  Granger)  that  the  Washa- 
kie Formation  began  during  the  Upper  Bridger,  but  continued  on  after  the 
Bridger  ceased.    In  both  formations,  as  shown  by  the  studies  of  Sinclair  ^ 


Fig.  59.  —  Middle  Eocene  of  the  Washakie  Basin,  Wyo.,  Haystack  Mountain  or  '  Mam- 
moth Buttes.'  Lower  :  top  of  Middle  Eocene  or  Uintatherium  Zone.  Upper  :  base  of  Upper 
Eocene  or  Eobasileus  Zone.    Photograph  by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  1906. 


and  the  analyses  of  Johannsen,  volcanic  ash,  ejecta,  and  erosion  materials 
are  important  ingredients,  so  that  we  may  imagine  that  in  Bridger  times 
this  basin  was  surrounded  by  active  volcanoes,  as  represented  in  Fig.  23, 
which  lent  grandeur  to  the  landscape.  From  his  observations  while  col- 
lecting fossil  turtles  in  the  Bridger  in  1903,  Hay  ^  concluded  that  the  Bridger 
deposits  were  almost  solely  the  result  of  fluviatile  and  flood  plain  action, 
that  this  basin  was  a  nearly  level  country,  probably  covered  with  vegeta- 
tion and  well  forested.  The  occurrence  of  fossil  remains  in  all  portions  of 
the  Bridger  beds  indicates  that  there  existed  no  permanent  sheet  of 

1  Clarence  King,  Systematic  Geology,  Washington,  1878,  p.  458. 

2  Matthew,  W.  D.,  Is  the  White  River  Tertiary  an  Eolian  Formation?  Amer.  Natural, 
Vol.  XXXni,  1899,  pp.  403-408. 

3  Davis,  W.  M.,  The  Fresh-water  Tertiary  Formations  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  Region. 
Amer.  Acad.  Arts  and  Sci.,  Proc,  Vol.  XXXV,  1900,  pp.  346-373. 

*  Sinclair,  W.  J.,  Volcanic  Ash  in  the  Bridger  Beds  of  Wyoming.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat. 
Hist.,  no.  22,  1906,  pp.  273-280. 

«  Hay,  O.  P.,  The  Fossil  Turtles  of  the  Bridger  Basin.  Amer.  Geol,  Vol.  XXXV,  June, 
1905,  pp.  327-329. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


159 


water.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  most  of  the  animals  lived  near 
the  places  where  they  were  buried.  They  are  such  forms  as  would 
be  found  in  a  well-wooded  region.     In  the  channel  beds,  composed  of 


E0BASILEU5  ZONE 

EohasUeus 

Achaenodorv 

Amynodoa 

Dolictiorhiniis 

Metarhinus 


NO 


SUMMIT  OF 
HAYSTACK  MT 


Eobasileus  cornulm 
(Type  skull) 


Dolichorhinas  hyognatnus 

(Skull  An Mu3.  coll.  I$06) 


Metarhinus  earlei 

(Type  skull) 
LEVEL  OF  ADOBE  TOWN 


Nanteocems  tvashakiensis  "-^ 

(Type  skull)  \ 

?  U(Loxolophodon)  speirianum 
(Tifpe  skull) 


LJ 

z 
u 
o 
o 
llJ 

or 

UJ 
Q- 
Q. 
D 


UlNTATHERIUM  ZONE 

Ultitatherliinv 
Maateoceras 
Mesatirhinus 
Notfiarctus 
Hyrtvckyus 
SinopO/ 


LOWER  BROWN  SANDSTONE 


liJ 

z 

UJ 

o 
o 

LiJ 

UJ 
_l 
Q 
Q 


Fig  60.  — Section  (not  in  scale  series)  of  Lower  and  Upper  Washakie  of  central  Wyoming 
showing  distribution  of  the  principal  types  of  mammals.    Prepared  by  Granger,  1907. 

coarse  materials,  there  is  proof  of  streams  with  rapid  currents  traversing 
the  basin,  bordered  by  swamps  in  which  were  formed  beds  of  li'gnite,  or 
by  freshwater  bays  in  which  the  Unionidse,  or  freshwater  mussels,  accu- 
mulated.   While  the  coarse  deposits  indicate  streams,  finer  deposits  indi- 


160 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


cate  mud  beds,  or  shallow  water  conditions,  in  which  the  remains  of  uinta- 
theres  and  rhinoceroses  are  occasionally  found  as  if  they  had  been  mired 
in  a  standing  position  {Hyrachyus  has  been  found  in  this  way).  Occasion- 
ally, however,  the  entire  region  must  have  been  flooded  for  long  periods, 
because  the  careful  researches  of  Granger  and  Matthew  reveal  the  existence 
of  successive  'white  layers'  (Fig.  58)  of  great  horizontal  extent,  largely 
calcareous,  or  composed  of  shallow  limestone  containing  shells  {Goniobasis, 
Planorbis),  as  well  as  weatherworn  jaws  of  small  mammals.  In  their 
harder  constituency  these  layers  form  the  caps  of  the  great  benches  or 
steppes  which  subdivide  the  grand  Bridger  Formation  into  successive 
layers,  A  —  F.  These  hard  layers  also  serve  to  mark  off  the  Bridger  into 
faunal  levels.  In  general  on  the  lower  levels  we  find  smaller  mammals 
in  lower  stages  of  evolution,  while  on  the  higher  levels  we  find  larger  mammals 
in  a  more  advanced  stage.  There  is  thus  a  general  progression  and  ad- 
vance of  mammalian  life  from  below  upward,  and  secondly  a  gradual 
change  in  the  character  of  the  fauna,  partly  due  to  extinction  and  partly 
to  invasion  of  the  Bridger  from  the  surrounding  country. 

Washakie.  —  The  Washakie  lies  fifty  miles  east  of  the  Bridger,  a  for- 
mation occupying  an  area  of  over  300  square  miles,  chiefly  composed  of 
volcanic  material  and  subdivided  into  the  Lower  Washakie  (Brown  Beds, 
Uintatherium  Zone,  260  feet  in  thickness)  and  Upper  Washakie  (Green 
and  Gray  Beds,  Eobasileus  Zone,  380  feet  in  thickness).  First  men- 
tioned by  Hayden  in  1869,^  it  is  famous  through  the  successive  explora- 
tions of  Cope,  Marsh,  Scott,  Osborn,  and  finally  of  Granger,^  who  has 
solved  its  geologic  and  faunal  characters. 


•  Fish  and  Reptile  Fauna 

In  the  stream  channels  of  the  Bridger  have  been  found  remains  of 
several  species  of  bowfins  (Amiidae)  and  garpikes  (Lepidosteidae)  as  well| 
as  of  catfishes  or  siluroids  {Rhineastes) .  From  the  Lower  Bridger  are] 
also  described  three  species  of  snakes.  The  crocodiles  were  numerous  and  I 
diversified,  including  Crocodilus  as  well  as  the  diminutive  Limnosaurus\ 
with  laterally  compressed  teeth.  Several  species  of  Lacertilia  {GlyptO'\ 
saurus)  have  been  described.  All  these  partially  known  reptiles  give  us 
hints  as  to  the  Floridian  or  south  temperate  conditions  of  climate,  and  the 
great  abundance  of  aquatic  life.  We  may  picture  partly  open,  partly  forested] 
country,  somewhat  similar  to  the  bayou  region  of  the  Mississippi  Delta. 

More  direct  information  is  afforded  from  Dr.  Hay's  monographic! 
studies  on  the  Testudinata.^    We  might  expect  to  find  here  representa-| 

^  Hayden,  op.  cit.,  1869. 

^Granger,  W.,  Faunal  Horizons  of  the  Washakie  Formation  of  Southern  Wyoming. HNji 
Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVI,  no.  3,  Jan.  19,  1909,  pp.  13-23.  M^] 

3  Hay,  O.  P.,  The  Fossil  Turtles  of  North  America.    Publ.  Carnegie  Inst.,  Washington,! 
no.  75,  4to.  1908. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  161 

tives  of  the  characteristically  South  American  order  of  side-necked  or 
pleurodiran  turtles,  but  such  have  not  been  found.  The  soft-shelled  river 
turtles  (Trionychoidea)  were  represented  by  at  least  two  species,  whereas 
there  are  at  present  in  the  whole  world  only  twenty-six;  the  Bridger  rivers 
and  brooks  fairly  swarmed  with  these  creatures,  some  of  them  equal  in 
size  to  the  largest  existing  Asiatic  species.  They  are  indicative  of  flowing 
waters.  Swampy  conditions  are  indicated  by  the  presence  of  fourteen 
species  of  the  family  Emydidse  (order  Cryptodira),  as  compared  with  the 
twelve  species  hving  in  the  Mississippi  valley  to-day.  The  genus  Baptemys 
of  the  same  order  has  its  nearest  relatives  at  present  in  Central  America, 
while  a  third  genus  (Anosteira)  is  reported  by  Lydekker  in  the  Upper 
Eocene  of  England.  The  presence  of  extensive  stretches  of  land  is  indi- 
cated by  the  true  land  tortoises  (Testudinidse)  of  the  genus  Hadrianus, 
including  giant  tortoises  nearly  three  feet  in  length,  which  probably  lived 
on  dry  lands  bordering  the  Bridger  Basin.  The  ancient.  Lower  Cretaceous 
order  Amphichelydia  is  also  represented  here  by  four  species  belonging  to 
two  genera. 

The  Succession  of  Middle  Eocene  Mammals 

Lower  Bridger  or  Orohippns  Zone.  —  The  Lower  Bridger  includes  levels 
A,  B,  C,  of  the  section  Fig.  58.  It  is  characterized  by  the  absence  of  the 
Amblypoda.  It  may  be  distinguished  as  the  Orohippus  Zone  from  the 
presence  of  these  characteristic  little  'mountain  horses.' 

Many  older  Wasatch  and  Wind  River  species  are  found  on  this  level 
which  do  not  survive  into  the  Upper  Bridger.  All  the  creodonts  and  pro- 
Carnivora  are  of  older  type.  The  Insectivora,  Primates,  and  smaller  Car- 
nivora  are  richly  represented  in  the  locality  known  as  Grizzly  Buttes. 
Here  have  been  found  among  the  monkeys,  or  lemurs,  the  Tarsius-like 
anaptomorphids,  the  notharctids,  resembling  some  of  the  South  Ameri- 
can monkeys,  as  well  as  remains  of  Microsyops  with  its  rodent-like  incisors, 
analogous  to  those  of  the  aye-aye  of  Madagascar.  There  is  also  the  long- 
tailed  and  probably  aquatic  insectivore  Pantolestes,  and  numerous  minute, 
shrew-like  insectivores.  Opossums  (Peratherium)  also  occur.  The  primi- 
tive hysenodonts  Sinopa  and  Tritemnodon  abound  in  these  lower  beds. 
Mesonyx  is  a  Lower  Bridger  animal. 

Among  the  hoofed  mammals  or  ungulates  the  delicate  lophiodont 
Helaletes  is  most  common,  analogous  to  the  Chasmotherium  of  France. 
Among  the  horses  five  species  of  Orohippus  occur,  all  animals  of  small 
size  and  still  possessing  four  digits  on  the  fore  feet.  Among  titanotheres 
principally  the  broad-headed  Palceosyops  and  Limnohyops  occur  in  rela- 
tively early  stages  of  evolution.  It  is  noteworthy  that  no  traces  of  horns 
are  found  upon  the  heads  of  the  titanotheres  on  this  level.  The  pro- 
rhinoceroses,  or  hyracodonts,  are  represented  only  by  the  light-limbed 

M 


162 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Hyrachyus.  The  tapirs  have  not  as  yet  been  discovered  in  the  Lower 
Bridger.    The  mammal  of  most  exceptional  interest  is  the  armadillo 


Fig.  61.  —  Outline  restorations  to  same  scale  (X^V)  of  contemporary  Middle  Eocene 
mammals.  By  Charles  R.  Knight.  A.  Notharctus,  a  primate,  arboreal.  B.  Orohippus,  a 
primitive  horse,  cursorial.  C.  Hyrachyus,  a  primitive  rhinoceros.  D.  Tillotherium,  a  tillo- 
dont.  E.  Dromocyon,  a  creodont,  cursorial.  F.  Palceosyops,  a  titanothere.  G.  Metachei' 
rornys,  an  armadillo,  ambulatory.    H.  Patriofelis,  a  creodont. 


Metacheiromys,  similar  in  many  respects  to  the  smaller  existing  armadillos, 
but  apparently  possessing  a  leathery  instead  of  a  bony  shield,  the  jaws 
lacking  the  columnar  enamelless  teeth  of  the  existing  Dasypus,  but  defended 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


163 


in  front  by  a  pair  of  sharp  caniniform  teeth  coated  with  enamel.  The  ar- 
chaic edentate  Stylinodon  is  doubtfully  represented  in  this  level.  The 
tillodont  stage  is  Trogosus. 


Fio.  62.  —  A  destroyer  of  Middle  Eocene  smaller  mammals  and  birds.  Skeleton  of  the 
slender-limbed  creodont  Tritemnodon  agilis.    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


Upper  Bridger  Levels  C  and  D,  Lower  Washakie  and  Lower  Uinta.  —  The 
geographic  distribution  of  these  contemporaneous  depositions  is  displayed 
on  the  map  on  p.  120. 


Fig.  63.  —  Skebton  of  the  Middle  Eocene  tapir-like  titanothere  Paloeosyops  leidyi.  One  of 
the  large  mammals  of  the  Orohippus  zone.    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


(1)  Upper  Bridger:  Uintaiherium  Zone.  —  This  level  is  marked  by  the 
introduction  of  a  number  of  new  forms,  including  especially  the  great 
amblypod  Dinocerata,  which  are  represented  by  species  of  Uintaiherium 
in  various  stages  of  evolution.    These  animals  differ  from  Coryphodon  in 


164 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  absence  of  upper  cropping  teeth,  and  in  the  presence  of  spear-hke 
tusks  and  two  pairs  of  prominent  osseous  horns.  The  body  is  intermediate 
in  proportion  between  those  of  the  elephant  and  rhinoceros.  The  feet  are 
extremely  short  and  broad.  The  brain  (Fig.  71)  is  no  larger  than  that 
of  a  dog,  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  body,  and  essentially  of  the  archaic 
type.  These  animals  are  very  abundant  both  in  the  Upper  Bridger  and 
Lower  Washakie,  and  serve  to  tie  these  formations  into  a  single  life-zone. 

Of  the  creodont  Carnivora  the  small  hysenodont  Sinopa  is  becoming 
somewhat  more  rare.  The  large,  powerful  creodont  Patriofelis  of  the 
family  Oxysenidse,  analogous  in  its  proportions  on  a  powerful  scale  to  the 
modern  wolverine  (Gulo),  and  in  its  dentition  to  Hyoena  and  Synoplotherium, 
was  capable  of  attacking  the  largest  contemporary  mammals.  Here  also 
the  skulking  and  swift-footed  Mesonyx  (or  Dromocyon,  Mesonychidse)  is 


Fig.  61.  —  The  armadillo  in  North  America.    Skeleton  of  the  Middle  'Eocene  Metacheiromys 
tatusia  of  the  Bridger  formation.    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 

ungulates  the  tapirs  (Isectolophus)  occur,  but  are  rare.  The  horses  (Oro- 
hippus)  as  well  as  the  primates  (Notharctidse)  are  in  a  somewhat  more 
advanced  stage  of  dental  evolution  than  in  the  Lower  Bridger  levels.  The 
titanotheres  now  become  polyphyletic  through  the  appearance  of  three 
additional  phyla  (Telmatheriuni,  Manteoceras  and  Mesatirhinus)  in  ad- 
dition to  the  extremely  broad-headed  Palceosyops  Thus  indications  of  at 
least  five  phyla  of  titanotheres  now  occur,  including  long-headed  forms 
with  more  hypsodont  teeth,  and  short-headed  forms  with  more  brachyo- 
dont  teeth.  Of  great  interest  is  the  development  of  rudimentary  horns 
on  the  forehead  above  the  orbits,  which  appear  as  'rectigradations,'  in  all 
of  these  phyla. 

(2)  Loiver  Washakie :  Uintatherium  Zone.  —  The  Lower  Bro\vn  Beds  of 
the  Washakie  contain  a  fauna  identical  with  that  of  the  Upper  Bridger 
C  and  D,  namely,  Uintatherium,  Palceosyops,  Manteoceras,  Mesatirhinus, 
Notharctus,  Hyrachyus,  and  Sinopa,  in  fact,  the  genera  of  the  Lower  Washa- 
kie are  almost  without  exception  found  in  the  Bridger  and  are  represented 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


165 


by  species  closely  allied  to  those  of  the  Upper  Bridger  and  in  some  cases 
identical  with  them.  None  of  these  genera,  however,  excepting  the  insec- 
tivore  Hyopsodus  and  the  rodent  Paramys  survive  into  the  Upper  Uinta. 
A  similar  fauna  is  contained  in  the  little-known  Lower  Uinta  beds,  south 
of  the  Uinta  Mountains.  These  three  levels  (Upper  Bridger,  Lower  Washa- 
kie, Lower  Uinta)  may  all  be  regarded  as  marking  the  closeof  the 


Fig.  65.  —  Patriofelis,  a  powerful,  jaguar-like  creodont  of  the  Middle  Eocene.  Above: 
Skeleton  of  Patriofelix  vorax  from  the  Bridger.  Below  :  Restoration  of  the  same  by  Charles 
R.  Knight.    Both  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 

Middle  Eocene,  although  the  distinction  between  Middle  and  Upper  is 
naturally  a  somewhat  artificial  one  and  employed  for  purposes  of  con- 
venience. 

(3)  Lower  Uinta:  Uintatherium  Zone. — While  the  Upper  Bridger  and 
Lower  Washakie  deposits  were  accumulating  north  of  the  Uinta  Mountains, 
the  base  of  the  Uinta  series  began  to  form  south  of  this  range,  in  north- 
eastern Utah.    The  lowermost  beds  (Uinta  A)  are  composed  largely  of 


166 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


coarse,  fluviatile  materials  and  contain  but  few  fossils,  including  Dino- 
cerata,  the  rhinoceroses  {Amynodon),  and  Triplopus  (an  excessively  light- 
limbed  hyracodont),  the  aberrant  titanotheres  Sphenocoelus  and  Metarhinus. 
The  latter  titanothere  appears  to  be  a  dwarf  and  possibly  aquatic  or  river- 
frequenting  form,  hence  the  specific  name,  M.  fluviatilis. 

Upper  Eocene,  as  Represented  in  the  Upper  Washakie  and  Middle  and 
Upper  Uinta.    The  Ludian  Stage 

Upper  Washakie  :  Eobasileus  Zone.  —  In  these  famous  beds,  constitut- 
ing the  Haystack  Mountain,  or  Mammoth  Buttes  (Fig.  59)  of  Cope's 


Fig.  66.  —  The  Upper  Koccui'  L'oIhi.siU  u.s,  the  four-horned  amblypod,  last  representative  of 
its  race.  To  the  left  a  female,  with  small  horns  and  tusks  ;  to  the  right  a  male  with  large 
horns  and  tusks.  After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History. 


descriptions,  the  archaic  fauna  is  distinguished  by  the  final  evolution  of 
the  Amblypoda  into  giant  specialized  Dinocerata,  including  the  extremely 
long-headed  form,  Eobasileus  (  =  '  Loxolophodon^)  of  Cope.^  Eobasileus 
(Fig.  66)  represents  a  distinct  phylum  of  amblypods,  as  shown  by  the  more 
posterior  position  of  the  front  pair  of  horns  and  the  consequent  great  elon- 
gation of  the  snout;  in  Tinoceras  the  front  horns  are  more  anterior  in 
position,  and  the  snout  is  thus  relatively  shorter,  the  proportions  of  the 

^  The  type  of  the  genus  Tinoceras,  namely,  the  species  T.  anceps  is  from  the  Upper  Bridger, 
Sage  Creek,  Horizon  C.  The  type  of  the  species  T.  ingens  is  probably  from  the  Lower  Washakie. 
(W.  D.  M.  1909). 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


167 


whole  being  less  dolichocephalic.  Another  feature  of  the  archaic  fauna  is 
the  giant  size  attained  by  members  of  the  creodont  mesonychids,  the  skulls 
of  which  equal  those  of  the  large  modern  brown  bears  of  Alaska.  The 
oxysenids  are  represented  by  much  larger  and  more  specialized  forms  of 
Limnocyon  than  those  from  the  Upper  Bridger. 

In  regard  to  the  modernized  fauna  the  most  conspicuous  fact  is  the  first 
appearance  .  among  the  Perissodactyla  of  a  new  family  of  rhinoceroses, 
destined  to  become  amphibious  (Amynodontidse).  Among  titanotheres 
the  extremely  brachycephahc  Palceosyops,  belonging  to  a  phylum  already 
dwarfed  (P.  copei)  in  the  lower  stage,  is  now  apparently  extinct.  The 


Fig.  67.  —  Heart  of  the  Washakie  Badlands  in  the  Eobasileus  Zone,  "Adobe  Town,"  five 
miles  east  of  Kinney  Ranch,  Wyoming.  Photograph  by  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History,  1895. 


most  signal  advance  in  this  titan  othere  family  is  the  appearance  of  the 
extremely  long-headed  Dolichorhinus  (Fig.  49)  with  incipient  horns,  an 
extreme  type  also  destined  to  become  extinct,  while  the  less  extreme  prophet- 
horned  titahothere  Manteoceras  (Fig.  49)  apparently  survives  and  gives 
rise  to  certain  of  the  giant  quadrupeds  of  the  Lower  Oligocene.  Among 
Artiodactyla  of  the  entelodont  family  the  robust  'giant  pig'  or  omnivore 
AchcBnodon  is  also  distinctive  of  this  level.  The  other  mammals  represent 
a  continuation  of  the  Bridger  fauna.  All  the  small  mammals  are  com- 
paratively rare,  probably  because  the  coarse  conditions  of  deposition  were 
unfavorable  for  their  preservation.  Thus  the  Equidse  and  the  Artiodactyla 
of  this  stage  are  still  unknown.    The  mammals  characteristic  of  this  deposit 


168 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


{Dolichorhinus,  Amynodon,  and  fEobasileus)  are  also  found  in  the  Middle 
Uinta,  south  of  the  Uinta  Mountains;  several  other  genera  are  common 
to  these  two  formations. 

Middle  Uinta:  fEobasileus  Zone.  —  This  level  is  believed  to  be  of  the 
same  age  as  the  Upper  Washakie  because  of  the  presence  o^  a  great  abun- 
dance of  the  long-skulled  titanothere  Dolichorhinus  of  the  species  D.  hijogna- 
thus.  Other  titanotheres  abundant  here  are  of  the  supposed  fluviatile  or 
Metarhinus  type.    Among  rhinoceroses,  two  phyla,  namely,  the  light-limbed 


Fig.  68.  —  Upper  Eocene  Uinta  Formation,  near  the  mouth  of  White  River,  Utah.  Base 
of  Uinta,  Horizon  C.  The  true  Diplacodon  Zone.  Wortman  and  Peterson  prospecting. 
Photograph  by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  1895. 


hyracodonts  (Triplopus)  and  the  amynodonts  (Fig.  75)  occur.  These 
amynodont  rhinoceroses  are  distinguished  by  powerfully  developed  upper 
and  lower  canine  teeth;  they  now  considerably  exceed  the  existing  tapirs 
in  size.  This  geological  level  is  also  distinguished  as  containing  limb  bones 
of  the  last  known  survivors  of  the  great  Amblypoda,  but  these  animals 
have  not  as  yet  been  specifically  determined.  Another  distinguishing 
feature  is  that  the  Artiodactyla  are  more  numerous  and  varied  because  it 
is  at  this  stage  that  we  first  know  of  the  existence  in  America  of  the  very 
important  family  of  Hypertragulidse  {Leptotragulus,  Leptoreodon) ,  small 
selenodont  ruminants  which  were  at  one  time  believed  to  be  ancestral  to 
the  camels  and  oreodonts,  but  are  now  considered  (Matthew)  distinct. 
The  entelodonts  are  represented  by  Protelotherium,  a  successor  of  Achmno- 
don.  Among  the  unguiculates,  two  families  of  rodents  are  recorded:  (1)  Is- 
chyromyida?  (Paramys),  and  (2)  Heteromyidie  (Protoptychus) .  Of  the 
archaic  Camivora  the  oxyaenids  and  mesonychids  still  survive,  the  latter 
family  being  represented  by  the  giant  form  Harpagolestes,  which  is  also 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


169 


recorded  in  the  Upper  Washakie.  Among  the  modernized  or  progressive 
Carnivora  the  first  true  dogs  (Canidae)  are  reported  here  (Procynodidis) . 
Altogether  these  beds  closely  agree  with  the  Upper  Washakie,  and  together 
may  be  considered  as  constituting  the  base  of  the  Upper  Eocene. 

Upper  Uinta:  Diplacodon  Zone.  —  These  upper  or  true  Uinta  beds 
were  named  by  Marsh  ^  in  1877  as  the  site  of  an  important  stage  in  the 


Diplacodon 
zone 


<-  Diplacodon 

-<-  Artlodactyla  and  chief  collection 
of  Uinta  mammals(small) 
Diplacodon  

<    Dolichorhinus  cornutus, 
chief  fossiliferous  lewel 
Amynodon 
EohasiZeTLs 

zone  Metarhinus 


Chief  fossiliferous  level 
Metarfy/nus 


By  permission  of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey. 


Fig.  69. 


Scale  section  of  the  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene  of  the  Uinta  Basin. 
After  Peterson. 


evolution  of  the  titanotheres,  the  genus  Diplacodon.  Here  too  is  found  a 
robust  titanothere  known  as  Protitanotherium,  which  is  intermediate  be- 
tween Manteoceras  and  the  horned  titanotheres  of  the  Lower  Oligocene; 
in  this  animal  the  horns  are  prominent,  oval,  osseous  projections  at  the  junc- 
tion of  the  frontal  and  nasal  bones.  Altogether  three  or  four  phyla  of 
titanotheres  occur  here,  including  animals  equal  in  size  to  the  largest  exist- 
ing rhinoceroses.  Thus  it  would  appear  that  after  the  extinction  of  the 
Dinocerata  the  titanotheres  at  once  became  the  dominant  quadrupeds  of 

'  Marsh,  Introduction  and  Succession  of  Vertebrate  Life  in  America.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.^ 
ser.  3,  Vol.  IX,  1877,  pp.  337-378. 


170 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


western  America.  The  Equidae  are  represented  by  Epihippus,  the  very 
diminutive  horse  in  a  stage  of  evolution  which  is  not  quite  so  advanced  ; 
as  that  of  Lophiotherium  cervulum  of  the  gypse,  or  Ludian,  stage  of  France. 
The  tapirs  (I sedolophus)  and  rhinoceroses  {Amynodon)  occur,  but  in  general 
we  observe  that  forest  and  fluviatile,  or  river-frequenting,  forms  are  rare 
in  this  formation.  This  explains  perhaps  why  the  bunodont  or  omnivorous 
entelodonts,  or  elotheres,  have  not  been  found.  The  conclusion  is  that 
the  conditions  of  deposition  and  fossilization  at  this  time  were  less  favor- 
able to  the  collection  of  river  and  swamp  dwellers,  and  more  favorable  [ 
to  the  preservation  of  the  upland  and  meadow  or  field  Herbivora.  i 

For  the  first  time  in  North  American  history  the  Artiodactyla  of  the  | 
ruminant  division,  or  Pecora,  begin  to  abound,  herbivores  of  diminutive  and 
intermediate  size,  with  short-cro^vned  molar  teeth  of  the  crescentic  or  i 
selenodont  pattern.    The  Dichobunidae,  or  Homacodontidae,  are  represented 
by  Bunomeryx.    Most  interesting  is  the  rise  of  the  camel  family.    Thus  I 
the  Camelidae,  or  Hypertragulidse,  are  represented  by  four  genera,  Lepto-  \ 
tragulus,  Protylopus,  Camelomeryx,  Oromeryx.    Of  these,  the  diminutive 
Protylopus  has  been  selected  as  the  possible  ancestor  of  the  grand  phylum  .1 
of  American  camels.    The  polyphyletic  tendency  in  this  family  is  already 
displayed,  and  undoubtedly  more  than  one  line  is  represented  here.  The 
Oreodontidae  are  similarly  abundant,  embracing  ancestors  both  of  the  i 
typical  oreodonts  (Protoreodon)  and  of  the  aberrant  agriochoerids  (Pro-  I 
tagriocJiGerus) .  | 

Among  the  carnivorous  enemies  of  these  Herbivora  were  the  smaller  j 
creodont  oxyaenids  and  the  giant  Mesonyx,  as  well  as  the  smaller  fox-like  ; 
canids  or  pro-Carnivora,  Miads  and  Procynodictis.    This  is  the  last  ap- 
pearance in  North  America  of  these  two  creodont  families  (Oxyaenidae  and  i 
Meson ychidse),  and  there  is  some  reason  for  thinking  that  the  American  j 
Hysenodontidae  (Sinopa)  had  already  become  extinct  and  that  the  hyaeno- 
donts  which  we  shall  find  appearing  in  the  Lower  Oligocene  were  invading 
forms  from  the  Old  World  or  from  the  north.    If  this  proves  to  be  the 
case,  it  may  be  said  that  the  Upper  Eocene  of  America  is  marked  b  y  t  h  e 
final  disappearance  of  all  the  archaic  herbivorous  and 
carnivorous  mammals  of  American  residence  as  well  as  by 
the  incipient  extension  of  the  great  order  Artiodactyla. 

! 

The  Atlantic  Coast  Region  | 

The  Zeuglodon  Zone.  —  The  Zeuglodon  Beds  of  the  southeastern  states 
are  referred  to  the  Jackson  ^  Formation,  which  is  regarded  as  the  middle 

^  Lyell,  1847,  was  the  first  to  assign  the  Zeuglodon  beds  to  the  Jackson  Formation  below  the 
Vicksburg;  this  was  recognized  by  Hale,  and  strongly  insisted  on  by  Hilgard  (1867).    The  Jack- 
son was  regarded  by  Dana  (1895)  as  Middle  Eocene,  approximately  equivalent  to  the  Bridger  i 
Formation  in  the  Rocky  Mountain  region. 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


171 


or  the  summit  of  the  Eocene.  As  described  by  Schuchert  and  Lucas/ 
the  beds  vary  in  thickness  from  five  to  ten  feet,  but  are  of  great  geographic 
extent,  since  bones  are  recorded  from  Florida  to  Arkansas.  In  Choctaw 
County,  Alabama,  the  strata  are  buff  or  whitish  marl  with  some  green 
glauconitic  sand.  They  thus  belong  to  an  old  soft  seabottom,  in  which 
the  bones  are  either  isolated,  or  more  or  less  of  a  skeleton  may  be  found 
in  position  and  undisturbed. 

The  great  marine  mammal  known  as  Zeuglodon  undoubtedly  lived  in 
large  numbers  in  the  ancient  Gulf  of  Mexico,  as  well  as  in  the  seas  of  south- 
ern Europe  and  northern  Africa.    Its  proportions  were  not  like  those  of 


Fig.  70. — The  primitive  whale  Zeuglodon  cetoides  from  the  Eocene  of  Alabama.  Drawn 
I  by  Charles  R.  Knight  under  the  direction  of  F.  A.  Lucas.    Original  in  the  American  Museum 
of  Natural  History. 

I    the  existing  whales,  because  the  diameter  was  not  more  than  six  or  eight 
I    feet  through  the  thickest  part  of  the  body,  while  the  length  reached  fifty 
I    or  even  seventy  feet,  about  forty  feet  of  which  constituted  the  long  and 
j    freely  movable  tail.    This  tail,  in  the  opinion  of  Lucas,^  ended  in  a  fluke, 
1    which  would  indicate  that  the  mammal  was  a  constant  diver.    The  head 
was  relatively  small,  but  the  jaws  were  provided  with  great  grasping  and 
cutting  teeth.    There  was  a  pair  of  short  fore  paddles  just  behind  the 
head,  but  the  hind  limbs  were  vestigial  and  retained  within  the  skin.  The 
shoulder  blades  were  like  those  of  a  whale,  but  the  extremely  elongate 

^  Lucas,  F.  A.,  The  Pelvic  Girdle  of  Zeuglodon,  Basilosaurus  Cetoides  (Owen),  with  Notes 
on  Other  Portions  of  the  Skeleton.    Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  Vol.  XXIII,  pp.  327-331,  1900. 
2  Lucas,  Animals  of  the  Past.    New  York,  1901. 


172 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


vertebrae  differ  from  those  of  any  other  known  animal.  The  ancestral 
zeuglodonts  are  knowTi  in  the  Eocene  of  Africa.  It  appears  possible  that 
these  great  American  forms  are  migrants  from  the  Mediterranean  seas  of 
the  Old  World  (  see  p.  73). 

Causes  of  Extinction  of  the  Archaic  Orders  of  Eocene  Mammalia* 

Extinction  is  not  on  the  same  scale  nor  due  to  the  same  causes  through- 
out the  successive  geologic  epochs.  The  great  law  of  mammalian  improve- 
ment through  the  elimination  of  the  least  fitted  becomes  less  sweeping  in 
its  effects  as  time  goes  on  and  the  Mammalia  become  perfected.  Eocene 
extinction  is  chiefly  that  of  whole  orders  of  archaic  mammals.  Late  Eocene 
and  Oligocene  extinction  is  preeminently  that  of  inadaptive  families. 
Miocene  times  complete  the  elimination  of  families  and  are  characterized 
by  the  extinction  of  inadaptive  genera.  This  is  also  true  of  Pliocene  times. 
The  especial  feature  of  Pleistocene  times  is  the  ruthless  and  world-wide 
extinction  of  highly  adaptive  kinds  of  mammals  in  certain  parts  of  the 
world,  both  of  genera  and  of  species. 

Competition  of  lower  and  higher  types.  —  It  is  a  very  striking  fact  that 
not  only  the  archaic  but  a  very  large  proportion  of  what  we  may  term 
the  prophetic,  modernized,  Eocene  mammals  became  extinct  at  or  before 
the  close  of  this  period.  The  causes  of  extinction  were  probably  not  the 
same  in  the  two  groups.  The  archaic  mammals  are  very  generally  dis- 
tinguished by  extremely  small  brains.  This  is  certainly  true  of  many  of 
the  creodonts,  of  Phenacodus,  Coryphodon,  and  the  Dinocerata.  This 
limited  brain  power  placed  these  quadrupeds  at  a  disadvantage  in  com- 
petition with  the  higher  placentals.  Under  contemporary  or  prevailing 
conditions  of  life,  intelligence  and  instinct  are  matters  of  first  importance 
in  relation  to  quickness,  alertness,  adaptability  to  new  conditions.  Modern 
quadrupeds  differ  widely  in  this  regard;  on  the  western  plains  of  North 
America,  for  example,  the  horses  by  their  resourcefulness  save  their  lives 
where  cattle  perish.  The  cursorial  Phenacodontidse  measured  their  psychic 
powers  with  the  cursorial  Equidse;  the  tooth  structure  in  the  two  families 
was  substantially  the  same,  but  the  phenacodonts  were  handicapped  by  a 
lower  brain  organization  and  by  an  inferior  foot  mechanism.  The  long 
survival  and  steady  increase  in  size  of  the  clumsy  Amblypoda  is  one  of  the 
most  astonishing  phenomena  of  Eocene  mammal  life.  The  extinction  of 
these  mammals  may  be  attributed  to  two  causes:  the  low  brain  power, 
which  may  have  inhibited  the  proper  defense  and  care  of  the  young,  and 
the  arrested  evolution  of  the  grinding  teeth,  which  are  actually  no  larger 
and  little  more  effective  for  the  comminution  of  food  in  the  giant  Uinta- 
therium  than  in  the  smaller  Coryphodon.    It  is  noteworthy  that  where  the 

1  Osborn,  H.  F.,  The  Causes  of  Extinction  of  Mammalia.  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XL, 
no.  479,  Nov.  1906,  no.  480,  Dec.  1906.    iSee  especially  pp.  856-857,  850-854,  842. 


THE  EOCENE  OP  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


Cer. 


17 


Phenacodus    B      ^r(Domestic)  Coryvhodon        C  Rhmoceros 

K   omestic)  Umtathenum     D  Hippopotamus. 


174 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


evolution  of  an  animal  runs  to  the  development  of  tusks  and  horns,  prob- 
ably favored  by  sexual  selection,  the  grinding  teeth  are  apparently  neg- 
lected and  are  apt  to  show  arrested  development.  The  widespread  belief 
that  bulky  animals  tend  to  disappear  first  is  inconsistent  with  the  fact  that 
the  small  phenacodonts  became  extinct  long  before  the  large  Amblypoda. 

Among  the  modernized  Eocene  Herbivora  of  Europe,  several  of  the 
small  Artiodactyla  became  extinct  very  soon  after  the  period  which  marked 
the  extinction  of  the  bulky  lophiodonts.    Thus  bulk  is  chiefly  fatal  where 


WinubtmiUlBnar>upidis  itiKciuortsCrewlonts  Carmvore      Rodents    Tilioiionts  tenioilonls  Edentale!  Pnmaiei    Conilyuna;    Ambiypods   Ariioijactyls     Ptrissodaciyls     fntnuc lims 


Fig.  72.  —  Evolution  of  mammals  in  North  America.  (In  solid  black)  Archaic  mammals 
which  became  extinct  in  the  Eocene  and  (creodonts)  Oligocene  Epochs,  namely  :  multituber- 
culates,  creodonts,  tillodonts,  taeniodonts,  condylarths,  and  amblypods.  (In  hollow  lines)  Ap- 
pearance and  extinction  of  archaic  and  modernized  mammals  which  survive  to  Pleistocene  or 
recent  time,  namely  :  marsupials,  insectivores,  carnivores,  rodents,  edentates,  primates,  peris- 
sodactyls,  proboscideans. 

correlated  with  inadequate  feeding  mechanism,  with  brain  power  not 
adequate  to  enabling  the  females  to  defend  and  care  for  the  young  as 
well  as  to  meet  new  conditions  of  life,  and  with  inadequate  defensive 
organs. 

The  competition  of  the  archaic  Creodonta  with  the  diminutive  pro- 
Carnivora  in  Eocene  times  may  be  only  remotely  compared  to  the  extinc- 
tion of  the  Tasmanian  wolf  (Thylacinus)  and  Tasmanian  devil  (Sar- 
cophilus)  through  the  introduction  of  the  true  dog  {Canis  dingo)  on  the 
Austrahan  main  land. 

The  steady  increase  in  size  of  the  creodonts  as  displayed  in  Patriofelis 
and  in  the  enormously  powerful  Harpagolestes  is  a  fact  which  may  be 
placed  parallel  with  the  increasing  size  of  the  Amblypoda. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  only  archaic  Carnivora  which  persisted  into 
the  Lower  Oligocene  are  the  hyaenodonts,  in  which  the  brain  actually  in- 


THE  EOCENE  OF  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 


175 


creased  in  size.  Marsh's  laws  ^  of  the  relations  of  brain  growth  to  survival 
are  apparently  borne  out  by  these  comparisons,  namely,  that  the  brains 
of  surviving  races  are  upon  the  average  larger  than  those  of  declining 
races.  On  the  other  hand  in  following  the  many  causes  of  extinction 
through  the  entire  Caenozoic  we  shall  find  that  even  large  cerebral  develop- 
ment, as  in  certain  rhinoceroses  (Teleoceras)  and  elephants  (Mastodon), 
may  fail  to  preserve  a  race. 

Diminished  or  contracted  land  areas.  —  In  Europe  especially  the  vary- 
ing coast  hues,  the  insular  conditions,  the  archipelagic  surfaces,  are  to  be 
seriously  studied  in  connection  with  the  extinction  which  overtook  so  many 
characteristic  Eocene  mammals  before  the  opening  of  the  Oligocene,  so 
that  the  general  aspect  of  the  fauna  is  altogether  different  when  the  Oligo- 
cene fairly  opens.  Changes  of  land  caused  by  elevation  or  subsidence 
operate  indirectly  through  causing  changes  in  all  the  physical  conditions 
of  climate,  moisture,  desiccation,  temperature,  and  so  forth;  also  more 
directly  in  facilitating  the  cutting  off  of  migrations  and  introducing  new 
competitions.  North  America. and  Africa  were  the  stable  continents  of 
Tertiary  times,  which  underwent  slight  fluctuations  of  land  area  as  com- 
pared with  the  highly  unstable  continents  of  Europe  and  the  southern 
half  of  South  America.  It  must  be  stated,  however,  that  the  main  phe- 
nomena of  extinction  in  unstable  Europe  coincide  with  those  in  stable 
America.  We  have  seen  in  group  after  group  that  the  Upper  Eocene  mam- 
mals of  peninsular  Europe  are  not  those  which  in  the  main  give  rise  to 
the  Oligocene  fauna. 

A  glance  at  western  North  America  in  Tertiary  times  as  studied  by 
J.  Perrin  Smith  ^  displays  the  important  influence  which  must  have  been 
exerted  by  the  relations  of  the  Arctic,  Pacific,  and  Atlantic  oceans  as 
affected  by  continental  elevation  and  depression.  During  part  of  the 
Cretaceous,  Smith  believes  that  Asia  and  the  Alaskan  peninsula  were  con- 
nected across  Behring  Straits.  Whenever  the  cold  currents  of  the  Arctic 
Ocean  were  cut  off,  the  western  coast  of  America  enjoyed  a  warm, 
probably  a  subtropical  climate  (see  p.  93).  The  same  author  believes 
that  during  early  Tertiary  times  a  connection  existed  between  the  Eocene 
seas  of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  to  the  south  of  California.  By  Miocene 
times  this  passage  appears  to  have  been  closed.  The  opinion  of  this  author 
is  based  upon  the  marine  fauna.  That  based  upon  the  land  fauna  is  cited 
elsewhere  (p.  81).  In  the  north  the  land  appears  to  have  risen  again 
toward  the  end  of  the  Miocene,  cutting  off  the  Arctic  Ocean,  and  giving  a 
temperate  though  not  tropical  climate  to  the  entire  North  Pacific. 

Insular  conditions.  —  The  substitution  of  insular  for  continental  condi- 

^  Marsh,  Small  Size  of  the  Brain  in  Tertiary  Mammals.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  VIII, 
1874,  pp.  66-67;  also.  On  the  Size  of  the  Brain  in  Extinct  Animals,  Abstr.  Nature,  Vol. 
XXXII,  London,  1885,  p.  562. 

^  Smith,  J.  P.,  Periodic  Migrations  between  the  Asiatic  and  the  American  Coasts  of  the 
Pacific  Ocean.    Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  XVII,  Mar.  1904,  pp.  217-233. 


176 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


tions  by  subsidence  has  undoubtedly  been  a  potent  cause  both  of  exter- 
mination in  certain  localities  and  of  the  survival  of  very  primitive  forms. 
It  may  be  said  at  once  that  most  of  the  causes  both  of  survival  and  of 
extinction  which  prevail  upon  continents  are  intensified  on  islands.^  Wal- 
lace attributed  the  widespread  extinction  which  occurred  in  Australia  in 
early  Pleistocene  times  partly  to  the  increased  competition  and  struggle 
for  existence  caused  by  the  progressively  contracted  land  area  due  to  sub- 
sidence.^ Wallace  also  rightly  attributed  the  survival  of  certain  primitive 
mammals  among  the  monotremes  and  marsupials  to  the  practically  in- 
sular condition  of  the  Australian  region.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is 
reason  to  believe  that  the  introduction  of  new  forms  of  life  on  islands 
causes  more  rapid  and  profound  modifications  in  the  fauna  than  similar 
introductions  on  continents. 

^  Osborn,  H.  F.,  The  Causes  of  Extinction  of  Mammalia,  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XL, 
no.  479,  Nov.,  1906,  pp.  769-795;  no.  480,  Dec,  1906,  pp.  829-859.  (See  especially  pp. 
773-774.) 

2  Wallace,  A.  R.,  The  Geographical  Distribution  of  Animals  (1876).  Vol.  I,  pp.  158-159. 


4 


CHAPTER  III 

THE  OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND 
NORTH  AMERICA 

This  period  is  sharply  defined  by  great  geographic  revolutions  as  well 
as  great  transformations  in  its  animal  and  plant  life.  In  Europe  it  opens 
with  the  main  elevation  of  the  Pyrenees  and  is  marked  toward  the  close  by 
the  initial  elevation  of  the  Alps  (Fig.  13,  p.  59).  We  are  able  to  study  the 
Mammalia  over  a  still  wider  geographic  range.    In  America  the  principal 


Fig.  73.  —  Summit  of  the  Oligocene  or  transition  to  the  Miocene.  Lower:  Brule  Clays, 
or  Leptauchenia  Zone.  Upper:  Lower  Rosebud,  or  Promerycochcerus  Zone.  Exposures  on 
the  south  side  of  the  White  River,  near  Porcupine  Creek.  Photograph  by  American  Museum 
of  Natural  History,  1906. 


interest  centers  around  our  first  knowledge  of  the  life  of  the  Great  Plains 
region,  a  vista  we  have  not  enjoyed  previously  because  all  our  former 
studies  have  been  confined  to  the  mammals  of  the  mountain  region.  In 
Europe  the  plains  fauna  still  remains  unknown. 

The  most  remarkable  fact  is  the  remingling  by  intermigration  and  by 
fresh  invasions  of  similar  types  from  the  north  of  the  mammals  of  the  New 
and  Old  Worlds,  so  that  Europe  and  western  America  again  constitute  a 
single  zodlogical  region,  or  Holarctica.  We  thus  enter  the  Fourth  Faunal 
Phase. 

N  177 


178 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


IV,  LOWER  OLIGOCENE,  FOURTH  FAUNAE  PHASE  — THE  SECOND 
MODERNIZATION.  SUDDEN  APPEARANCE  IN  EUROPE  AND 
NORTH  AMERICA  OF  NUMEROUS  XI STING  FAMILIES  OF 
MAMMALS.  REUNION  OF  THE  NEW  AND  OLD  WORLD  INTO 
A  SINGLE  ZOOLOGICAL  REGION,  FOLLOWED  BY  ANOTHER 
LONG  PERIOD  OF  INDEPENDENT  EVOLUTION  AND  PARTIAL 
EXTINCTION. 

The  first  impression  of  this  phase  is  our  sudden  introduction  to  a  large 
number  of  modernized  types  which  had  been  slowly  evolving  elsewhere, 
probably  in  the  plains  of  America  and  Eurasia.  In  North  America  this 
second  modernization  is  shown  to  be  still  more  remarkable  than  the  first 


Fig.  74.  —  Lower  (Jligocme  horizons  resting  upon  the  Upper,  Middle,  and  Lower  Eocene. 
Titanotherium  Zone  =  Lower  Ohgocene.  "Bridger"  and  "Uinta"  =  Middle  and  Upper 
Eocene.  Lambdotherium  Zone  =  Lower  Eocene.  Escarpment  of  the  Beaver  Divide,  near 
Hailey,  Wyoming.  Photograph  by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  expedition  of  1909. 
Compare  Fig.  95. 

or  Wasatch  modernization,  which  was  one  of  appearance  of  existing  orders, 
because  this  is  one  of  existing  families,  not  as  yet  recognized  in  the  mountain 
basins.  The  Oligocene  fauna  thus  is  far  more  familiar  in  aspect  than  the 
known  Eocene.  This  new  list  in  America  includes  six  existing  families  of 
rodents,  four  existing  families  of  carnivores,  one  existing  family  of  peris- 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  179 


sodactyls.  A  very  similar  modernization  occurs  in  western  Europe,  many 
familiar  modern  families  appearing  for  the  first  time. 

Several  of  these  new  families  appear  simultaneously  in  Europe  and 
North  America.  Thus  the  two  countries  which  were  separated  most  widely 
at  the  close  of  the  Eocene  are  again  brought  together  in  the  Lower  Oligocene, 
as  shown  in  the  accompanying  table. 


Mammals  of  the  Lower  Oligocene 


Peculiar  to 
Europe 

Palseotheres 

Anoplotheres 

Caenotheres 

Gelocids 

Amphicyonids 

Viverrids 

Cricetines  (ham- 
sters) 

Theridomyids 

Sirenians  (Hali- 
therium) 


Common  to  Europe  and 
North  America 
Titanotheres 
Chalicotheres 
Rhinoceroses  (aceratheres 

and  diceratheres) 
Amynodonts 
Anthracotheres 
Suillines 
Entelodonts 
Opossums 
Hysenodonts 
Canids  (dogs) 
Mustelids  (martens) 
Machaerodonts  (saber-tooth  cats) 


Peculiar  to  North 
America 

Horses 

Hyracodonts  (rhinoceroses) 

Oreodonts 

Camelids 

Hypertragulids 

Leptictids 

Chrysochlorids  ?  (insecti- 

vores) 
Ischyromids  ^  (rodents) 
Leporids  or  hares 


The  closest  correspondence  of  the  Old  and  New  Worlds  is  seen  to  be 
among  the  perissodactyl  ungulates  and  the  carnivores;  the  least  community 
is  among  the  artiodactyl  ungulates,  which  exhibit  fewer  families  in  common. 
It  is  a  very  striking  fact  that  there  was  little  interchange  of  the  artio- 
dactyls  of  the  New  and  Old  Worlds  until  the  Pleistocene. 

We  note  that  forest  and  browsing  quadrupeds  prevail  in  both  countries. 
A  contrast  is  the  apparent  disappearance  of  the  horses  in  western  Europe, 
and  the  rapid  evolution  of  these  animals  in  western  North  America.  The 
continental  influence  of  North  America  is  still  displayed  in  the  presence  of 
giant  quadrupeds,  especially  the  titanotheres  and  entelodonts,  which  greatly 
surpass  in  proportions  the  largest  of  European  mammals  of  the  time,  which 
are  of  intermediate  and  smaller  size;  there  is  also,  on  the  whole,  a  greater 
diversity  in  the  American  life.  In  the  two  countries  six  of  the  great  families 
of  perissodactyls  and  artiodactyls  of  Eocene  origin  die  out.  The  last  of  the 
archaic  carnivores  (hysenodonts)  survive  only  to  the  Middle  Oligocene. 

^  The  Ischyromyidse,  the  American  Eocene  Rodentia  par  excellence,  are  regarded  by 
Matthew  as  a  primitive  Eocene  and  Early  Oligocene  (Ischyromys,  Prosciurus,  Cylindrodon) 
group  of  squirrel-like  or  sciuromorph  rodents.  The  great  masseter  muscle  of  the  jaw  lies 
entirely  behind  the  infraorbital  foramen,  as  it  does  in  the  existing  sewellels  (Haplodontidse), 
also  peculiarly  American  rodents,  first  observed  in  the  Upper  Oligocene,  or  John  Day,  and  in 
the  specialized  Mylagaulids,  a  peculiar  family  of  horned  rodents  ot  the  Upper  Miocene,  both 
Sciuromorpha. 


180 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Fig.  75.  —  Amynodonts,  axjuatic  rhinoceroses  of  Europe  and  America.  The  Lower  Oligo- 
cene  Metamynodon  of  South  Dakota.  After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American 
Museum  of  Natural  History. 


The  especially  characteristic  hoofed  mammals,  common  to  this  great 
holarctic  region  and  dominating  in  the  two  countries,  which  attain  their 
maximum  evolution  and  then  disappear,  are  the  following: 

Types  Supposed  Origin 

Diceratheres,  pair-homed  rhinoceroses.  North  America 

Amynodonts,  amphibious  rhinoceroses  with  canine  tusks  "  " 

Entelodonts,  giant  pigs  with  elongate  skulls  and  stilted  limbs  Eurasia 
Anthracotheres,  buno-selenodont  artiodactyls,  varied  and  attain- 
ing  giant  size  in  Europe  only. 

These  animals  are  all  descendants  of  Upper  Eocene  ancestors.  Among 
artiodactyl  ungulates  we  discover  partly  descendants  of  Eocene  families, 
partly  new  invading  forms,  the  latter  especially  seen  in  Europe.  The  pre- 
vailing artiodactyls  common  to  both  countries  exhibit  five-cusped,  brachy- 
odont,  buno-selenodont  molar  teeth  (anthracotheres);  bunodont  teeth  are 
more  rare  (suillines  and  entelodonts).  True  four-cusped  selenodont  molars 
of  modern  type  are  observed  in  the  oreodonts  and  hypertragulids  and,  in 
more  specialized  form,  in  the  smaller  pro-ruminants,  or  gelocids,  newly 
arriving;  also  in  the  true  ruminants,  or  cervulines,  arriving  in  Europe  in  the 
Middle  Oligocene,  both  probably  of  south  Asiatic  origin.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  all  these  primitive  Oligocene  ruminants  of  Europe,  like  their  selenodont 
contemporaries,  the  hypertragulids  in  America,  are  hornless  but  usually 
provided  with  defensive  tusks. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  181 

The  csenotheres  are  especially  characteristic  of  the  European  Oligocene, 
although  a  few  traces  of  the  family  appear  as  early  as  the  Ludian  (Upper 
Eocene).  The  csenotheres  and  surviving  dichobunes  of  Europe,  in  spite  of 
certain  resemblances  in  their  tooth  structure,  are  very  remote  from  one 
another;  in  fact,  the  csenotheres  form  a  somewhat  isolated  group  (see  p.  548). 
These  peculiarly  European  forms  reached  their  culmination  in  the  Middle 
Oligocene,  declined  before  the  Oligocene  ended,  and  seem  to  have  become 
entirely  extinct  soon  after  the  appearance  of  the  invaders  of  the  Miocene.^ 


Fig.  76.  —  Entelodonts,  giant  pi^s  of  Europe  and  America.  A  Middle  Oligocene  stage. 
(The  position  of  the  ears  in  this  restoration  is  erroneous  ;  they  are  placed  too  high.  See 
Fig.  83.)    After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


In  America  the  majority  of  the  Oligocene  mammals  have  been  discovered 
in  the  single  geographic  region  of  Dakota  and  in  a  continuous  series  of  dep- 
ositions not  exceeding  600  feet  in  thickness,  which  are  known  as  the  White 
River  Group.  Similar  forms  have  been  found  in  Wyoming,  Montana, 
Colorado,  and  British  Columbia.  In  Europe  we  find  an  analogous  fauna 
in  beds  of  very  different  geologic  origin,  and  interspersed  with  rich  records  of 
plant  life  which  are  practically  wanting  in  America. 

This  is  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  instances  of  the  advantages  of 
correlation.  Were  it  not  for  the  convincing  evidence  to  the  contrary  af- 
forded by  the  Old  World,  we  should  be  inclined  to  regard  the  American 
OUgocene  as  a  period  marked  by  few  geographic  changes,  but  by  certain 

^  Stehlin,  H.  G.,  Die  Saugetiere  des  schweizerischen  Eocaens,  1903-1906,  pp.  675,  687,  690. 


182 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


grand  evolutionary  changes  in  mammalian  life;  in  other  words,  it  is  chiefly 
the  vast  evolutionary  changes  in  the  American  mammals  (horses,  titano- 
theres,  and  rhinoceroses)  which  enable  us  to  realize  the  enormous  duration 
and  grandeur  of  Oligocene  times  in  America. 

As  the  Oligocene  advances,  the  countries  again  diverge  and  become  dis- 
similar in  their  faunal  aspect.  The  correlation  of  the  great  time  divisions 
and  depositions  in  which  these  changes  occur  are  as  follows: 


Life  Zones 
Diceratherium  Zone 


Metamynodon  (  =  Cadurcotherium) 
Zone 

Ancodus  {Titanotherium)  Zone 


European  Stages     American  Formations 


Aquitanian 

Stampian 
Sannoisian 


Harrison 

John  Day  Formations 
White  River  (Upper) 
White  River  (Middle) 

White  River  (Base) 


PaloBogeography 

Continental  connections.  —  With  the  Oligocene  began  an  emergence  of 
the  continents  from  their  prolonged  Eocene  submergence.    The  land  masses 
of  Europe,  Asia,  and  North  America  became  connected.^    This  is  the  theoret- 
ical explanation  of  the  intermigrations  which  followed  and  of  the  invasion 
of  a  new  fauna  into  North  America  and  Europe,  coming  presumably  from 
the  circumpolar  region.    Whether  the  connection  between  the  Old  and 
New  W^orlds  was  by  way  of  Alaska  or  across  the  whole  breadth  of  the  great 
polar  continent  is  uncertain.    In  the  accompanying  map  by  Matthew  the 
connection  is  indicated  by  way  of  Alaska  and  eastern  Asia.    In  general 
the  southern  continental  masses  (South  America  and  Australia)  appear  to 
have  been  disconnected.    Of  the  great  Lower  Oligocene  fauna  now  known  ; 
in  northern  Africa,  the  larger  part  is  exclusively  African  in  type,  but  a  smaller  i 
part  includes  a  few  mammals,  such  as  the  hysenodonts,  anthracotheres,  j 
certain  suillines,  and  smaller  rodents,  which  are  also  known  in  the  Upper ' 
Eocene  and  Lower  Oligocene  of  France.  ; 

The  fluviatile  and  estuarine  sea-cows,  or  sirenians,  were  probably  common  : 
to  all  the  Mediterranean  borders,  African,  Asiatic,  European,  and  even  the 
western  Atlantic  in  Oligocene  times.  The  Eocene  Egyptian  types  (Eo- 
therium,  Eosiren,  Protosiren)  are  more  primitive  in  the  possession  of  hind  limbs. 
The  earliest  of  the  European  forms  is  Halitherium  {H.  veronense)  from  Middle 
Eocene  Hmestones  of  northern  Italy  (Monte  Zuello).  The  most  primitive 
form  in  skull  and  tooth  structure  is  Prorastomus  from  the  (?)  Eocene  of  the  j 
island  of  Jamaica,  West  Indies.  The  Oligocene  stage  is  Halitherium  schinzi 
from  marine  sands  near  Basel,  Paris,  Bordeaux,  and  Belgium.^    The  fact 

'  De  Lapparent,  A.,  Traits  de  G6ologie,  1906,  p.  1547. 

^  Abel,  O.,  Die  Sirenen  der  mediterranen  Tertiilrhildungen  Osterreichs.    Abh.  K.  K.  Geol. 
ReichsansL,  Vol.  XIX,  no.  2,  Vienna,  1904.    See  especially  pp.  214-223. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  183 

f  j  that  the  Middle  Eocene  sirenians  of  Europe  are  more  speciahzed  than  the 

M  Upper  Eocene  sirenians  of  Africa  might  be  cited  as  evidence  that  the  sire- 

a  nian  center  of  diffusion  was  hkewise  to  the  northward, 

j  Geographic  changes  in  Europe.  —  The  early  earth  movements  of  the 

I"  Oligocene  caused  an  invasion  of  the  sea  in  the  north  of  France,  and  in  Ger- 

s|  many  as  far  south  as  Leipzig.    This  vast  northern  ocean  of  Tongrian  and 
Stampian  age  is  beUeved  to  have  made  the  northern  climate  of  Europe  more 


OLIGOCENE 


Fig.  77.  —  Oligocene.    A  period  of  continental  elevation  and  reunion  followed  by  the 

;  reestablishment  of  connections  between  the  life  of  the  New  and  Old  Worlds.    Central  Europe 

\  submerged  or  partly  archipelagic.    African  mammals  and  birds  partly  similar  to  those  of 

j|  '  Europe.    Madagascar  united  with  Africa.    South  America  entirely  separated,  its  mammals 

I  developing  independently.     Australia  entirely  separated.     Closing  the  Oligocene,  another 

I  long   interval    of    separation  between  North  America  and   Europe.     Rearranged  after 

.  j  W.  D.  Matthew,  1908. 

temperate.  The  lignitic  flora  of  south  central  Germany  now  includes 
sequoias,  birches  (Betula),  and  palms  (Palmacites) }  Southern  Europe 
through  the  rise  of  the  Pyrenees  and  Swiss  Alps  was  elevated,  and  conditions 
were  favorable  for  continental  depositions  rich  in  mammalian  life  both  in 
southern  France  and  in  the  south  of  Germany,  as  shown  in  Fig.  79. 

In  the  Aquitanian,  or  Upper  Oligocene  stage  almost  all  of  Europe  had 
again  emerged  from  the  sea;  great  shallow  lakes  were  scattered  over  France, 
^    Switzerland,  Germany,  Austria,  Italy,  and  Greece.    In  southwestern  France 
or  Aquitania,  from  which  the  stage  derives  its  name,  there  is  a  renewed 
'  advance  of  the  sea  over  the  land.    The  freshwater  lakes  are  varied  by 

^  De  Lapparent,  A.,  Traite  de  Geologic,  1906,  pp.  1547-1549. 


184 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


lagoons  and  swamps,  with  lignitic  deposits.  The  flora  indicates  an  increasing 
humidity,  with  moderate  and  equable  warmth.  The  bird  life  of  central 
France  (Allier)  is  similar  to  that  bordering  certain  lakes  of  the  interior  of 
Africa  to-day.^    According  to  De  Lapparent,^  the  Oligocene  terminated 


Fig.  78.  —  Europe  in  Lower  Oligocene  or  Sannoisian  times.    White  =  land.    Ruled  =  sea. 
Dotted  areas  =  lagoons.    After  de  Lapparent,  1906. 


by  the  drying  up  of  the  lakes,  deepening  of  the  valleys,  and  beginning  of  the 
river  or  fluviatile  regime  of  the  Lower  Miocene.  Thus  the  Oligocene  of 
Europe  is  physiographically  subdivided  as  follows: 


O 


3.  Upper  Oligocene. 

2.  Middle  Oligocene. 
1.  Lower  Oligocene. 


Aquitanian. 


Stampian. 
Sannoisian. 


Extensive  freshwater  lakes  and 
lagoons.    Recession  of  sea. 

Advance  of  sea  in  Paris  Basin. 
Marine    and    brackish  deposits 
lacustrine  and  marine  marls. 


Flora  and  Climate 

Europe.  —  A  new  character  is  given  to  the  OHgocene  flora  by  the  disap- 
pearance of  many  tropical  forms,  and  the  appearance  of  a  great  many 
non-tropical  forms;  with  few  exceptions  this  flora  has  its  modern  repre- 
sentatives north  of  the  Equator."'    The  temperature  fell  somewhat,  and 

^  Milne  Edwards,  A.,  Recherches  Anatomiques  et  Paleontologiques  pour  servir  a  I'Histoire 
des  Oiseaux  Fossiles  de  la  France.    Paris,  1869-1871,  p.  570. 

2  De  Lapparent,  A.,  Traite  de  Geologie,  1906,  p.  1598. 

3  Schimper  und  Schenk,  Handbuch  der  Palajontologie,  ed.  by  von  Zittel,  Pt.  II,  1,  Pal- 
seophytologie,  1890,  p.  802. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  185 

there  was  a  lessening  of  humidity.  The  occurrence  of  palms  {Sabal,  Cha- 
mcerops)  in  the  Baltic  region  indicates  a  mean  annual  temperature  of  at 
least  18°  C.  or  64°  F.,  the  existing  isotherm  of  southern  Spain  and  Italy. 
The  prevailing  forest  flora  includes  palms,  sequoias,  and  numerous  other 
conifers,  figs,  cinnamons,  magnohas,  and  trees  of  south  temperate  forest 
type.    African,  Indian,  and  Australian  types  become  more  rare.^ 

Cooler  Lower  Oligocene  conditions  of  the  northern  coast  of  Europe  are 
indicated  in  the  rich  flora  of  the  amber  beds  of  Konigsberg  (55°  north), 
which  include  pines,  spruces,  sequoias,  cypresses,  oaks,  chestnuts,  beeches, 
maples,  and  also  the  cinnamon;  in  the  main  a  north  temperate  flora. ^  The 
period  in  general  is  marked  by  the  increase  of  conifers  and  the  spread  of  decid- 
uous trees.  Along  certain  lake  borders  (Aix,  Gargas)  of  southern  France 
the  heat  and  drought  during  the  latter  part  of  the  summer  were  extreme 
(de  Saporta).  The  climate  of  the  Oligocene  was  thus  less  uniform;  the  dif- 
ference in  seasons  became  more  marked.  We  know  nothing  of  the  grasses. 
The  structure  of  the  teeth  of  the  mammals  indicates  the  continued  preva- 
lence of  browsing  types,  and  a  very  small  percentage  of  grazing  and  grass- 
eating  types.  Forest  and  swamp-living  types  are  still  very  numerous. 
In  the  Middle  Oligocene  of  central  France  (Aix)  are  found  conifers,  palms 
(Flahellaria) ,  and  cinnamons.^ 

North  America.  — Unfortunately  there  are  no  leaf-bearing  beds  of  cer- 
tain Oligocene  age;  in  fact,  we  know  nothing  of  the  flora  of  the  region  of  the 
great  plains  in  Oligocene  times.  A  hint  as  to  the  temperature  of  Dakota 
is  afforded  by  the  discovery  by  Loomis  *  of  crocodiles  in  the  old  river  deposits 
of  the  Lower  White  River  group,  sure  indication  of  south  temperate  or 
Floridian  conditions  of  climate.  The  Kenai  beds  of  Alaska,  formerly  con- 
sidered Oligocene,  are  now  referred  to  the  Eocene  ^  and  possibly  Upper 
Cretaceous.®  Thus  we  must  depend  upon  Europe  for  our  knowledge  of 
the  North  American  climate,  and  the  presence  in  the  two  countries  of  so 
many  similar  forms  of  mammals  indicates  a  uniformity  of  temperature. 

Physiographic  Conditions 

Europe.  —  The  abundant  localities  where  Oligocene  mammals  are  found 
in  Europe  indicate  an  undulating  country,  thickly  forested  in  places,  with 
still-water  predominating  over  fluviatile  depositions.  In  contrast  with 
the  Eocene,  fiuvio-marine  deposits  are  rare.  Most  localities  are  'continen- 
tal,' or  in  the  interior.    Exceptions  are  the  fiuvio-marine  sands  of  the  Fayum 

^  Geikie,  A.,  Textbook  of  Geology.    London,  1893,  p.  991. 

2  Goeppert,  Flora  des  Bernsteins,  Vol.  I,  1883,  Vol.  II  (Goeppert,  Menge,  Conwentz) , 
1886. 

3  Geikie,  A.,  Textbook  of  Geology,  1893,  p.  990. 

*  Loomis,  F.  B.,  Two  New  River  Reptiles  from  the  Titanothere  Beds.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci., 
Dec,  1904,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  XVIII,  pp.  427-432. 

^  Knowlton,  F.  H.,  Fossil  Flora  of  Alaska.    Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer.,  Vol.  V,  1893,  p.  587. 
«  Note  by  Dr.  Hollick,  March,  1909. 


186 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


(Fig.  79,  28),  on  the  northern  shore  of  the  African  continent,  and  of  Hemp- 
stead (24).  The  Upper  Ohgocene  sands  of  Pyrimont  in  Savoy  (Fig.  84,  4) 
are  of  fluviatile  origin.  The  Ohgocene  opens  with  the  still-water  marls  and 
limestones  of  Ronzon  (Fig.  79,  13)  in  southern  France,  and  closes  with  the 
extensive  lacustrine  or  freshwater  limestones  of  St.  Gerand-le-Puy  (Fig.  84, 
2)  in  the  Bourbonnais.  Lignites  or  deposits  of  thick  swamp  vegetation  are 
abundant,  as  at  Calaf  (Fig.  79,  25)  and  Tarrega  (26),  Spain,  at  Celas  (3) 
(Gard)  in  France,  and  Cadibona  (Liguria)  (Fig.  82,  46)  in  Italy.  Of  this 
period  are  the  fissure  deposits  or  Bohnerze  of  the  Jura  (Swabia),  Frohn- 
stetten  (Fig.  79,  17),  and  other  localities.  The  most  famous  fissure  deposits 
are  those  of  Quercy  (Fig.  79, 12)  which,  we  may  recall  (p.  151),  begin  in  the 
Upper  Eocene  and  continue  into  Middle  Ohgocene  times. 


5  10  15  20  ,  25 


0  5  10  It  20  25  "~ar 


Fig,  79.  —  Lower  Oligocene.  Sannoisian,  or  Lower  Tongrian.  FRANCE.  —  Lagfton 
deposits  near  Paris  :  marnes  blanches  de  1  Pantin,  2  Romainvilie.  Lignites  de  3  Celas,  4  Ave- 
jan,  6  Vermeil  (Gard).  6  Fronsac  (Gironde).  Calcaire  grossier  de  7  La  Grave  (Gironde)  dis- 
tinct from  that  of  Paris.  Gypse  die  %  Sainle-Sabine  (Dordogne).  Argiles  de^Duras  (Dor- 
dogne).  Calcaire  d'  10 /sstffeac  (Dordogne).  11  /Sam^-Cernm  (Dordogne).  Phosphorites  du 
\2,Quercy,  south  central  France,  in  part.  Marnes  et  calcaires  (100  meters)  de  13  Ronzon, 
near  Lyons.  Calcaire  de  14  Brie,  north  of  Paris.  GERMANY.  —  Fluviatile,  Melanienkalke 
von  15  Brunnstatt,  16  Rixheim  (Alsatia).  Bohnerz  von  17  Frohnstetten  (Suabia)  ;  Asphaltkalk 
von  18  Lohsann  (Alsatia)  ;  Bohnerz  von  19  V ehringerdorf ,  20  Vehringen,  21  Eselsberg,  near 
Ulm,  22  Hochherg  in  Suabian  Jura  ;  Bohnerz  von  23  Oerlingerthal,  near  Ulm.  ENGLAND.  — 
Fluvio-marine  clay  and  marl  (140  ft.)  of  24  Hempstead  on  Isle  of  Wight.  SPAIN.  —  Lignites 
of  25  Calaf,  26  Tarrega  near  Barcelona.  AUSTRIA-HUNGARY.  —  Flysch,  freshwater  and 
marine  of  27  Monte-Promina  (Dalmatia).  EGYPT.  —  Sand  and  clay,  fluvio-marine,  of  28 
the  FayHm.    Correlation  of  Deperet. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  187 


I.  OLIGOCENE  LIFE  OF  EUROPE 

Lower  Oligocene,  Sannoisian,  or  Lower  Tongrian 

This  stage  takes  its  name  from  the  marnes  de  Sannois  in  France  and  from 
Tongres  in  Belgium.  According  to  Deperet  ^  the  early  fauna  of  the  lignites 
de  Celas,  Avejan,  Vermeil  (Fig.  79,  3-5),  as  well  as  several  deposits  in  the  south 
of  France  (6-11),  part  of  Quercy  (12),  and  Frohnstetten  in  Swabia  (17) 
are  of  this  age.    The  mammals  of  these  deposits  do  not  present  any  Oligo- 


FiG.  80.  —  Entelodonts  of  the  New  and  Old  Worlds.    Skeleton  of  the  giant  Upper  Oligocene 
entelodont  Dinohyus  hollandi.    In  the  Carnegie  Museum,  Pittsburg.    After  Peterson. 


cene  characters;  they  are  simply  a  continuation  of  the  palseotheres,  anop- 
lotheres,  and  last  of  the  xiphodonts  of  the  Upper  Eocene  or  Ludian. 

The  first  real  Oligocene  fauna  is  that  of  the  marls  of  Ronzon  (13)  in  the 
Rhone  valley  near  Lyons,  which  succeeds  the  fauna  of  the  gyyse  or  Ludian, 
and  contains  the  new  Oligocene  mammals.  Of  the  same  age  are  the  mam- 
mals of  Hempstead  (24)  (Isle  of  Wight),  of  Lobsann  (18)  (Alsace),  Calaf 
and  Tarrega  (25,  26)  (Spain)  numerous  deposits  in  Swabia  (19-23),  and 
possibly  of  Monte.  Promina  in  Dalmatia  (27). 

The  mammals  of  this  stage  are  of  three  kinds:  (1)  those  descended  from 
the  Upper  Eocene  fauna  of  Europe;  (2)  those  of  fresh  north  or  south 
Asiatic  origin  or  previously  undiscovered;    (3)  those  apparently  from 

^  Deperet,  L'evolution  des  Mammif^res  tertiaires;  I'importance  des  migrations  (Oligo- 
cene).   C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Vol.  CXLII,  sea.  March  12,  1906,  pp.  618  seq. 


188 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


North  America  or  first  known  in  the  Upper  Eocene  of  that  region.  The 
conspectus  of  this  fauna  is  as  follows: 

Among  the  odd-toed  ungulates  of  this  as- 
LowER  Oligocene       semblage  the  horses  (Equidae)  are  conspicu- 
Group  ous  by  their  absence.    The  palseotheres  {Pa- 

a.  {Continued  from  Eocene)  loeotherium,  Plagiolophus)  are  entering  on  their 

Palseotheres  decline.    The    rhinoceroses    are  represented 

Anthracotheres  by  a  small   form    (Ronzotherium)  with  sub- 

Anoplotheres  hypsodont  molar  teeth  which  appears  to  be 

Caenotheres  of   the    river-frequenting,    amynodont  type 

Canids  (dogs)  rather  than  a  true  rhinoceros.    Tapirs  have 

Erinaceids  not  appeared  in  Europe  at  this  stage. 

Opossums  The  last  of  the  anoplotheres  occur  at  this 

Hyaenodonts  level.    Among  the   even-toed   ungulates  the 

b.  {New  Arrivals)  entelodonts,  supposed  migrants  from  America, 

Rhinoceroses  still  rare.    The  anthracotheres  are  begin- 

Entelodonts  ^i^g  their  dominant  reign.    These  animals  are 

Gelocids  purely  European  in  origin,   hardy  travelers 

Mustelids  versatile  feeders;  they  are  very  widely  dis- 

Amphicvonids  tributed  geographically  and  form  valuable  means 

Cricetines  for  ^i^^  correlation.  They  are  polyphyletic  and 

(hamsters)  include  hypsodont  and  brachyodont  branches 

as  follows:  (1)  The  typical  Ancodus  {Hyo- 
potamus)  velaunus  of  Ronzon,  with  its  long-crowned  molar  teeth,  is  of  the 
same  evolution  stage  as  the  animals  {A.  bovinus)  found  at  Hempstead  on 
the  Isle  of  Wight;  it  is  a  bit  more  hypsodont  or  modern  than  our  Ancodus 
{A.  americanus,  A.  brachyrhynchus,  A.  rostratus)  of  the  great  plains  of 
ancient  Dakota.  (2)  The  short-crowned  anthracothere  Brachyodus  also 
occurs  in  the  Fayum  of  northern  Egypt  {B.  goringii),  in  Dakota  {B. 
brachyrhynchus),  and  at  Hempstead.  It  is  descended  from  the  Catadon- 
therium  of  the  Lutetian.  (3)  Anthracotherium  also  occurs,  an  ancestor  of 
the  giant  Middle  Ohgocene  forms.  The  anthracotheres^  also  exhibit  a 
divergence  into  dolichocephalic  and  brachycephalic  forms.  There  is  a  wide 
geographic  distribution  of  the  ancodons  in  Europe,  Africa,  Asia,  and 
North  America.  No  ancestral  forms  have  been  discovered  in  the  Amer- 
ican Eocene,  and  their  abundance  in  the  Upper  Eocene  of  Europe  and 
Africa  points  to  migration  from  the  Old  World;  it  would  appear  that  from 
a  north  Asiatic  center  these  animals  may  have  migrated  independently  to 
Europe,  southern  Asia,  and  to  North  America.  The  American  species  occur 
in  four  successive  levels,  and  parallel  those  of  Europe  in  their  evolution. 
Whereas  in  Europe  they  disappeared  at  the  close  of  the  Middle  Oligocene, 
in  North  America  they  survived  to  the  Lower  Miocene,  represented  by  an 

'  Matthew,  W.  D.,  Observations  upon  the  Genus  Ancodon,  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat. 
Hist.,  Vol.  XXVI,  Art.  i,  Jan.  5,  1909,  pp.  1-7. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE^  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  189 

animal  {Arretotherium)  more  or  less  similar  to  the  last  survivor  {Merycopot- 
amus)  in  the  Miocene  of  India. 

Most  interesting  among  artiodactyls  is  the  newly  arriving,  small,  and 
primitive  ruminant  Gelocus,  which  appears  in  the  midst  of  this  varied 
browsing  fauna,  a  representative  of  the  family  Gelocidse,  analogous  to  the 
existing  chevrotains,  and  a  harbinger  rather  than  ancestor  of  the  varied 
artiodactyl  groups  of  later  periods. 

The  remainder  of  the  mammal  faima  of  Ronzon  may  be  partly  described 
in  the  language  of  Filhol  (1881)  as  revealing  to  us  an  aquatic  and  riparian 


Fig.  81.  —  Hysenodonts,  common  to  Europe,  Africa,  and  America.  Skeleton  of  the  Middle 
Oligocene  creodont  Hyoenodon  horridus  of  South  Dakota.  In  the  American  Museum  of  Natu- 
ral History. 


fauna  with  a  few  truly  terrestrial  animals,  including  also  remains  of  birds, 
reptiles,  fish,  insects,  crustaceans,  and  molluscs.  The  insectivores  are  repre- 
sented by  primitive  hedgehogs,  the  rodents  by  chinchilla-like  Therido- 
myidse,  and  the  hamsters  (Cricetodon) .  The  opossums  (Didelphyidse)  were 
very  small,  and  for  the  most  part  belonged  to  the  Peratherium  group, 
which  persists  with  little  change  from  the  Upper  Eocene.  The  carnivores 
are  all  small  forms,  excepting  the  creodont  Hycenodon.  No  machserodont 
cats,  or  felids,  have  been  discovered  at  this  stage.  The  canid  family  is 
varied,  including  Cynodon,  Cynodidis,  and  Amphicynodon;  the  former,  in 
its  rather  spreading  feet,  long  tail,  and  shape  of  the  head,  suggesting  the 
otter.  We  wonder  at  the  absence  of  larger  carnivores,  for  the  ungulates 
are  worthy  of  stronger  hunters  than  those  which  are  known.  The  Mus- 
telidse,  or  marten  family,  is  represented  by  Proplesictis;  the  otter  has  not 
been  observed. 


190 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Milne  Edwards  *  has  described  the  birds  of  Ronzon  as  including  the 
Accipitres  (Teracus),  Grallae,  allied  to  the  plovers,  also  phoenicopfcerids, 
including  birds  allied  to  the  flamingoes  but  of  more  slender  build  and  with 
shorter  feet.    The  gannets  are  also  represented. 

Middle  Oligocene,  Stampian 
Upper  Tongrian 

Our  knowledge  of  the  European  mammals  of  this  stage  extends  still 
more  widely,  especially  to  the  east  of  the  Adriatic,  including  a  marl  deposit 
as  far  east  as  Styria  (Austria)  (Fig.  82,  48).  The  rich  final  deposits  of  the 
phosphorites  de  Quercy  are  of  this  age.  In  this  age,  too,  are  the  lignites  of 
Cadibona  (Liguria)  (46),  the  deposits  of  Moissac  (35)  in  southwestern  France, 
containing  the  first  undoubted  paired-horned  rhinoceros  {D.  minutum),^  also 
of  Cereste  (22)  and  Manosque  (23)  in  southeastern  France;  to  the  north 
are  the  lacustrine  sands  of  Ferte  Alais  (Seine-et-Oise)  '(1).  In  the  summit 
of  the  Stampian  are  the  lacustrine  deposits  of  Gannat  (16)  in  central  France 
(Allier),  which  have  yielded  the  large  hornless  tetradactyl  rhinoceros  (A. 
gannatense).  Altogether  Deperet  has  listed  fifty  localities,  as  shown  in 
Fig.  82. 

At  this  time  the  tree  flora  was  one  of  sequoias  and  cinnamons.  In 
northern  Italy  flourished  palms  that  require  an  even  temperature  of  25°  C. 
(77°  F.)  similar  to  that  of  Brazil. 

Characteristic  mammalian  life.  —  The  affinity  to  America  is  strength- 
ened by  the  arrival  of  fresh  perissodactyls,  including  the  first  appearance 
in  Europe  of  the  tapirs  (Protapirus,  Paratapirus) ,  of  the  true  hornless 
rhinoceroses  (aceratheres),  remarkably  similar  to  those  of  the  Middle  Beds 
of  the  White  River  group,  Dakota,  also  of  undoubted  diceratheres,  or 
pair-horned  rhinoceroses.  The  amphibious  rhinoceroses,  or  amynodonts, 
are  represented  by  Cadurcotherium  with  hypsodont  teeth,  in  a  state  of 
evolution  closely  similar  to  that  of  Metamynodon  of  our  western  plains. 
An  entire  lower  jaw  of  Cadurcotherium  ^  was  found  at  Bournoncle  St. 
Pierre;  there  is  little  doubt  that  this  highly  specialized  amynodont  belongs 
to  the  age  of  Moissac  in  France.  These  similarities  tend  to  establish  a 
parallel  with  the  Oreodon  and  Metamynodon  Zones  (Fig.  101)  of  the  White 
River  group  of  South  Dakota,  which  are  accordingly  regarded  as  of  Middle 
Oligocene  age. 

The  artiodactyl  ruminants  increase.  —  Fresh  Asiatic  elements  make 
their  first  appearance;  e.g.  the  cervuline  deer  (Dremotherium)  which,  although 
hornless,  is  compared  with  the  existing  muntjacs  (Cervulus)  of  the  southern 

'  Milno  Edwards,  A.,  Oiseaux  Fossiles  de  la  France,  1869-1871,  p.  552. 

^  This  dicerathere  of  Moissac  is  more  progressive  in  its  horn  development  than  any  of 
the  ancestral  diceratheres  of  the  Oreodon  Zones. 

=»Boule,  M.,  Le  Cadurcotherium.  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  1896,  Vol.  CXXII,  pp.  1150-1152. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  191 


and  eastern  parts  of  Asia,  animals  which  are  fond  of  hilly  ground  covered 
with  forests,  and  related  to  the  true  deer,  or  Cervinse.  At  the  same  time 
the  gelocids  (Gelocus)  make  their  last  appearance  in  western  Europe. 
Arrivals  from  the  northerly  regions  are  the  beavers,  or  castorids  {Steneo- 


Fig.  82.  —  Middle  Oligocene.  Stampian  or  Upper  Tongrian.  FRANCE.  —  Sables  de  1 
la  Ferte-Alais,  in  Paris  basin,  lacustrine.  In  the  basin  of  the  AUier  and  the  upper  Loire : 
2  Bournoncle-Saint-Pierre,  3  Bons,  4  Perrier,  Autrac,  Solignat,  Orsonnette,  Malhat,  Les  Pra- 
deaux,  Les  Chauffours,  Bansat,  Chibrac,  Jussat,  Romagnat,  Perignat,  Lemdes,  Cournon, 
5  Montaigut-le-Blanc,  6  Champeix,  7  Saint-Germain-Lembron,  Boudes,  8  Antoingt,  9  Vodable, 
10  Lamontgie,  11  Nonette,  12  La  Sauvetat,  13  Gergovia,  14  Marcoin,  15  Chaptuzat;  lacustrine 
deposits  of  16  Gannat;  17  Saint-Menoux,  18  Vaumas,  19  Saint-Pourgain-sur-Bebre,  20  Bri- 
ennon,  21  Digoin.  Schistes  de  22  Cereste,  near  Aix.  Gypse  et  marnes,  lignites  de  23  Ma- 
nosque,  near  Aix  (600  meters).  Argiles  de  24  Saint-Henri,  near  Marseilles.  Calcaires 
gypsif^res  de  25  les  Milles,  near  Aix.  26  Auzon  (Gard).  27  Perne  (Vaucluse).  In  the 
Garonne  basin  :  28  Cestayrol,  29  Saint-Sulpice,  30  Rabastens,  hill  of  Saint-Martin,  I'lsle 
d'Albi,  31  Montans;  moUasse  de  32  Salvagnac,  33  Villebramar ;  Pont-Sainte-Marie,  Ca~ 
pettier,  Les  Peries,  la  Milloque,  Comberatiere,  Itier,  Bourg  de  Visa,  34  Tournon;  moUasse 
de  35  Moissac;  36  Beauville,  37  Montsegur ;  phosphorites  de  38  Quercy  (greater  part), 
GERMANY.  —  Meeressande  von  39  Ufhofen,  in  central  Germany.  Septarienthon  von  40 
Flonheim,  near  Mayence.  Cyrenen-Mergel  von  41  Miesbach  (Bavaria).  Braunkohlenla- 
gerung  von  42  Schliichtern,  42a  Gusternhain,  43  Westerwald,  in  southwestern  Prussia. 
SWITZERLAND.  —  44  Blauen,  near  Basel.  45  La  Conversion,  near  Lausanne.  ITALY. — 
Lignitic  deposits  of  46  Cadibona  (Liguria),  47  Monteviale,  Zovencedo  (Vicenza).  AUSTRIA.  — 
48  Trifail  (Styria).  49  marls  in  Dalmatia.  ISLAND  OF  MAJORCA.  —  Lignites  of 
50  Inca.     Correlation  of  Deperet. 

fiber).  Among  insectivores  appear  the  water  voles,  desmans  or  myogalids, 
also  the  shrews  or  soricids  (Amphisorex) .  Among  rodents  there  also  ap- 
pear the  lagomorph  picas  or  tailless  hares  (Lagomyidae,  Titanomys),  animals 
which  are  at  present  distributed  in  the  mountainous  parts  of  Asia, 
eastern  Europe  (one  species),  and  North  America  (one  species). 


192 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Among  animals  of  prey,  representatives  of  the  true  cats  (Felidae,  Pseu- 
doelurus)  first  appear,  and  in  the  streams  for  the  first  time  the  otters  {Pota- 
viotherium)  occur.  Probably  also  from  northern  Eurasia  or  from  America 
arrived  the  first  of  the  saber-tooth  cats  (Felidae-Machaerodontinie) ;  it  is 
noteworthy  that  machaerodonts  {Dinictis)  are  also  first  known  in  the  Lower 
Oligocene  of  our  western  plains. 

Still  greater  variety  is  lent  to  the  mammalian  fauna  by  the  entrance 
either  from  southern  Asia  or  from  Africa  of  representatives  of  two  of  the 


Fig.  83.  —  Entelodonts  of  the  New  and  Old  Worlds.  Model  of  the  giant  Upper  Oligo- 
cene entelodont  Dinohyus  hollandi  of  western  Nebraska.  From  original  by  Theodore  A.  Mills, 
executed  under  the  direction  of  O.  A.  Peterson,  in  the  Carnegie  Museum,  Pittsburg. 


edentate  orders,  the  aardvarks  (Tubulidentata) ,  which  are  represented  by 
the  archaic  Archceoryderopus,  and  the  pangolins,  or  scaly  anteaters,  repre- 
sented by  Leptomams.  Since  these  animals  have  not  as  yet  been  found 
in  the  Lower  Oligocene  of  Africa,  it  is  uncertain  whether  they  are  of  African 
or  of  Asiatic  origin;  on  the  whole,  the  evidence  favors  their  northerly  or 
Asiatic  origin;  the  pangolins  are  widely  distributed  in  the  later  Ca^nozoic 
of  Asia. 

Altogether  this  assemblage,  as  listed  by  Deperet,  is  a  most  imposing 
one.  As  shown  in  the  accompanying  conspectus,  mingled  with  these  new 
migrant  or  foreign  forms  we  find  the  continuation  of  the  greater  part  of 
the  Lower  Oligocene  mammals  as  listed  on  p.  188. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  193 


The  members  of  this  fauna  that  are  dying  out  are  the  hyaenodonts, 
palaeotheres,  and  entelodonts.     The  apparent  extinction  of  these  giant 

pigs  (entelodonts)  in  Europe  is  note- 
Characteristic  Mammals        worthy,  because  in  America  they  sur- 
Amynodonts  vive  to  the  summit  of  the  Ohgocene 

(Cadurcotherium)  or  Lower  Miocene  and  attain  an  enor- 

Palseotheres,  last  appearance  mous  size.    They  also  are  recorded 

Chalicotheres  (Tetraconodon)  in  Miocene  or  Pliocene 

Entelodonts,  last  appearance  deposits  of  India. 

Hysenodonts,  last  appearance  The  Oligocene  faunal  approxima- 

Anthracotheres  of  large  size  tion  to  America  is  the  closest  at  this 

Rodents  of  many  existing  families  stage.  The  continued  absence  of 
Insectivores  of  many  existing  families  horses  is  very  remarkable;  it  is  doubt- 
Amphicyonids  less  due  to  the  prevalence  of  forests 

Machserodonts  and  the  absence  of  open  plains.  The 

Lutrines,  or  otters  anthracotheres   attain  a  large  size. 

Viverrids  The  aceratheres,  hornless  rhinoceroses, 

Pangolins,  scaly  anteaters  are  very  similar  in  their  dental  evolu- 

Aardvarks,  orycteropids  tion  to  those  of  Dakota.    The  pair- 

horned  rhinoceroses  (Diceratherium 
minutum)  are  more  advanced  in  the  development  of  their  horns  than 
those  of  the  White  River  Group  of  Dakota.  The  chalicotheres  are  repre- 
sented by  Schizotherium,  a  more  advanced  stage  than  the  Pernatherium 
of  the  Upper  Eocene  of  France.  On  the  whole,  the  fauna  is  still  that  of 
river  and  lake  borders,  of  forests,  streams,  and  small  meadows  and  glades. 


Upper  Oligocene,  Aquitanian 

This  is  the  age  typified  by  the  mammals  of  the  famous  lacustrine  beds 
of  St.  Gerand-le-Puy  (AUier)  (Fig.  84,  2)  in  the  heart  of  France.  Of  nearly 
identical  age  in  America  are  the  Middle  and  Upper  beds  of  the  John  Day 
Formation  in  Oregon,  as  indicated  by  similar  stages  in  the  evolution  of 
the  mammals.  In  the  Old  World,  while  the  localities  as  listed  by  Deperet  ^ 
are  only  eighteen  in  number,  they  may  be  traced  as  far  east  as  Hungary. 
In  Germany  are  the  rich  deposits  of  Eggingen  (11)  near  Ulm.  In  Savoy, 
on  the  borders  of  Switzerland,  Deperet  has  unearthed  at  Pyrimont  (4)  a 
fauna  which  promises  to  be  richer  and  more  complete  even  than  that  of 
St.  Gerand-le-Puy. 

As  noted  on  p.  183,  Europe  has  now  taken  on  its  modern  outlines. 
This  is  a  period  of  great  bodies  of  freshwater,  partly  bordered  with  decidu- 
ous trees  of  modern  type.  The  deposits  of  St.  Gerand-le-Puy,  of  Pyrimont 
(Savoy),  of  Weisenau  near  Mayence,  and  of  Ulm  in  the  basin  of  the  Upper 

^  Deperet,  L'evolution  des  Mammif^res  tertiaires;  I'importance  des  migrations  (Oligo- 
cene).   C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Vol.  CXLII,  sea.  March  12,  1906,  p.  618. 
O 


194 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Danube  mark  a  long  band  across  western  and  central  Europe  over  which 
rangexi  a  very  typical  and  very  homogeneous  mammalian  fauna. 

Declining  groups.  —  There  are  marked  extinctions  or  emigrations.  The 
absentees  among  the  recorded  mammals  of  this  Aquitanian  stage  are  the 
palaeotheres,  amynodonts  or  cadurcotheres,  the  entelodonts  or  giant  pigs, 
the  gelocids  (Gelocus),  as  well  as  their  enemies  the  carnivorous  hyaenodonts. 
With  these  exceptions  the  Middle  Oligocene  or  Stampian  mammals  (p.  193) 
probably  all  continue  at  this  time.    Yet  it  is  certain  that  we  have  here 


Fig.  84.  —  Upper  Oligocene.  Aquitanian.  FRANCE.  —  Calcaire  de  1  Celles-sur-Cher, 
2  Saint-Gerand-lc-P uij ,  in  the  Bourbonnais,  lacustrine  formation.  3  Chaveroche,  in  the  Bour- 
bonnais.  Conglomorat  et  sables  do  4  Pyrimont,  marnes  de  Challonges,  in  Savoy.  5  Varages, 
in  Provence.  Grfes  mollassique  de  6  Boujac,  near  Alais  (70-80  meters).  MoUasse  d'  7  Avignon, 
in  Rhone  valley.  GERMANY.  —  Kalke  von  8  Weisenau,  9  Momhach,  near  Mainz.  10  Has- 
lach,  in  southwestern  Germany.  Kalk  und  Mergelbiinke  von  11  Eggingen,  near  Ulm. 
SWITZERLAND.  —  MoUasse  grise  de  12  Lausanne,  on  Lake  Geneva,  fresh  water  with  a 
marine  band  (300  meters).  13  Othmarsingen,  near  Zurich.  MoUasse  ^  Hgnites  de  14  Hohe 
Rhonen,  near  Basel.  SPAIN.  —  Marls  and  limestones  of  15  Rubi,  near  Barcelona.  AUSTRI A- 
HUNGARY.  —  IG  Tuchorschitz  (Bohemia).  17  Keutchach  (Karinthia).  IS  Waitzen  (Hun- 
gary).    Correlation  of  Deperet, 

only  a  partial  picture  of  the  Old  World  life  of  the  times,  because  the  only 
mammals  known  are  those  adapted  to  lowlands  and  lake  and  river  borders. 
Highly  distinctive  are  the  giant  anthracotheres  (A.  magnum),  the  last  of 
this  large  phylum,  although  the  smaller,  short-crowned  anthracotheres 
(Brachyodus)  survive  into  the  Miocene.  Among  diminutive  forms  the 
opossums  or  didolphids  make  their  last  recorded  appearance  (Amphipera- 
therium)  in  the  Old  World. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  195 


Mammals  and  birds.  —  The  mammalian  group  was  picturesquely  de- 
scribed by  Filhol  ^  in  1880  in  his  memoir  on  St.  Gerand-le-Puy,  and  other 
scenes  in  central  France  at  this  Middle  Oligocene  time  may  be  imagined 
from  Milne  Edwards'  description  ^  of  the  birds  of  St.  Gerand-le-Puy  and 
other  localities  in  the  Allier  basin.  The  lakes  were  small  and  shallow,  sur- 
rounded by  broad  belts  of  marsh  with  characteristic  vegetation.  Turtles 
of  various  kinds  lived  in  the  waters,  and  crocodiles  almost  as  large  as 
the  living  Nile  types  were  a 
constant  menace  to  the  aquatic 
birds.  The  varied  bird  popula- 
tion finds  its  parallel  to-day  on 
certain  lakes  in  the  interior  of 
Africa.  Unlike  the  avifauna  of 
the  Upper  Eocene,  it  begins  to 
include  a  number  of  existing 
genera.  The  pelican,  ibis, 
marabou,  flamingo,  sand- 
grouse,  and  above  all  the  cour- 
oucou  (trogon),  the  parrots, 
and  secretary  birds  lent  to  this 
fauna  an  unmistakable  African 
aspect.  Ducks  were  common, 
cormorants  (Graculus)  and 
grebes  (Colymhoides)  were  less 
abundant  than  the  gulls (Larits) , 
which  are  to  be  seen  every- 
where. Considering  this  abundant  community  of  bird  life  with  that 
of  modern  Africa,  it  is  very  noteworthy  that  no  African  mammals 
whatever  have  been  found  in  any  deposits  of  this  period.  The  birds 
are  forms  which  could  more  readily  migrate.  Probably  the  modern 
African  avifauna  is  largely  derived  from  that  of  Oligocene  Europe  and 
Asia.. 

As  noted  above,  the  mammal  fauna  preserved  probably  presents  a  very 
incomplete  picture  of  the  manifold  animal  life  of  France  at  this  time.  Thus 
it  seems  likely  that  monkeys  and  lemurs  inhabited  the  forests,  and  that 
bats  were  much  more  numerous  than  the  one  genus  found  would  indicate. 
Horses  may  have  existed  on  the  northeastern  plains;  but  no  proofs  have 
been  found  that  they  existed  in  Europe.  Rodents  were  common,  repre- 
sented by  six  families,  namely,  the  now  extinct  theridomyids  (Theridomys) 
and  eomyids  (Rhodanomys),  also  the  squirrels  (Sciurus),  beavers  (Steneo- 
fiber),  the  tailless  hares  or  picas  (Titanomys).    We  especially  note  the 

*  Filhol,  H.,  Etude  des  Mammif^res  fossiles  de  Saint-Gerand  le  Puy  (Allier).  Bibl.  Ecole 
Hautes  Etudes,  Sect.  Sci.  Nat.,  Vol.  XIX,  Art.  1.,  1880. 

2  Milne  Edwards,  A.,  Oiseaux  fossiles  de  la  France,  1869-1871,  pp.  562-570. 


Fig.  85.  —  France  in  Upper  Oligocene  or  Aquita- 
nian  times.  Dotted  areas  =  lagoons.  White  =  land. 
Ruled  =  sea.    After  de  Lapparent,  1906. 


196 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Fig.  86.  —  Diocratheres,  common  to  the  New  and  Old  Worlds.  Above:  Skeleton  of  the 
Oligocene  rhinoceros  Coenopus  occidenlalis  of  South  Dakota.  Below  :  Restoration  of  the  same 
by  Charles  R.  Knight.    Both  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


OLTGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  197 


Prevailing  Mammals 

Suillines 

Csenotheres 

Cervuline  Deer  (hornless) 

Giant  Anthracotheres 

Aceratheres 

Diceratheres 

Tapirs 

Chalicotheres 
Opossums 
Amphicyonids 
Civets 

Castorids  (Steneofiher) 


absence  of  the  true  rabbits  and  hares  (Leporidae),  which  at  this  time 
were  abundant  in  America. 

The  carnivores  have  undergone  great 
changes  since  the  Lower  OUgocene.  The 
civet-hke  dog  Cynodictis  has  disappeared. 
The  canids  are  now  represented  by  two  more 
modern  genera  (Amphicynodon,  Cephalogale). 
The  largest  dog-like  forms  are  the  amphicyons, 
now  equaling  the  wolf  or  hunting  dog  in  size, 
but  not  in  speed;  the  typical  members  of  this 
race  were  heavier  and  more  thickset  than  the 
dogs,  but  more  slender  than  the  bears,  with 
clumsy  legs  and  a  long  tail.  Of  the  smaller 
Carnivora,  the  mustelid  family  is  represented 
by  Plesidis,  a  small,  long-bodied  carnivore  of 
the  size  of  a  marten,  as  well  as  by  the  otters. 
The  mustelines  are  also  represented  by  Pro- 
celurus.  Still  more  striking  is  the  presence  of  the  fierce  viverrid  carnivores 
{Amphidis,  Herpestes)  of  the  modern  civet  and  mongoose  types.  Ungu- 
lates were  numerous, 
including  the  tapirs  as 
well  as  rhinoceroses  and 
chalicotheres.  The 
horses  are  still  absent. 
The  rhinoceroses  now 
embrace  the  dicera- 
theres and  the  larger 
aceratheres  {A.  leman- 
ense).  The  chalico- 
theres have  now  at- 
tained a  larger  size 
{Macrotherium) .  Also 
frequenting  the  vast 
swamps  surrounding 
the  lake  were  the  horn- 
less cervuline  deer  {Dremotherium  and  Amphitragulus) ;  it  is  noteworthy 
that  this  is  the  last  record  of  this  hornless  race  in  Europe.  The  little 
caenotheres,  the  last  survivors  of  the  anoplothere  family,  lived  in  large 
herds  around  the  lake,  and  are 'found  in  great  abundance.  The  suillines 
are  represented  by  the  aberrant  pigs  (Palceochoerus) . 

At  Pyrimont  ^  we  obtain  an  imperfect  picture  of  the  animal  life  of  the 
swampy  Rhone  valley  of  Savoy  toward  the  close  of  the  Oligocene  period. 

1  Deperet  and  Douxami,  Les  Vertebres  Oligocenes  de  Pyrimont-Challonges  (Savoie). 
Mem.  Soc.  Paleont.  Suisse,  Geneva,  Vol.  XXIX,  1902,  pp.  84-87. 


Fig.  87.  —  Ancestral  saber-tooth  tigers  common  to  the 
New  and  Old  Worlds.  Skeleton  of  the  Middle  Oligocene 
csLTiiivore  Hoplophoneus  primcevus  of  South  Dakota,  a  fore- 
runner of  the  great  saber-tooth  tiger  of  the  Pleistocene.  In 
the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


198 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


The  insectivores  are  represented  by  large  numbers  of  a  small  aquatic 
animal  (Echinogale)  allied  to  the  desmans.  The  beavers  are  also  abundant 
here  {Steneofiber  eseri),  animals  about  one-third  smaller  than  the  existing 
beavers.  The  Herbivora  are  the  preponderating  element  of  the  fauna. 
Both  the  two-horned  (Diceratherium)  and  the  small  hornless  (Aceratherium) 
rhinoceroses  occur.  The  tapirs  (Paratapirus)  were  somewhat  larger  ani- 
mals than  the  Middle  Oligocene  Protapirus.  Of  the  suoids  Palceo- 
chcerus  is  the  precursor  of  the  Miocene  Hyotherium;  the  very  primitive, 
long-headed  pig  Doliochoerus  also  occurs.    The  small  and  graceful  mem- 


FiG.  88.  —  Lower  Oligocene  fluvicj-inannc  tuimution,  north  of  Lake  Q<jrun,  Fayiim,  Egypt. 
Lower  and  upper  horizons  of  the  Arsinoitherium  zone.  Photograph  by  American  Museum  of 
Natural  History,  expedition  of  1907. 


bers  of  the  genus  Ccenotherium  lived  in  large  troops  in  the  region  of 
Pyrimont. 

Oligocene  suillines.  —  Stehlin  inclines  to  the  belief  ^  that  both  kinds  of 
true  pigs  {Propalceochoerus,  Doliochoerus)  which  appear  at  the  beginning 
of  Oligocene  times  in  Europe  are  new  immigrants  and  not  descendants 
of  Choerornorus  or  of  any  other  Eocene  suillines  of  Europe  (see  p.  148).  Of 
these  Oligocene  pigs  Propalceochoerus  is  regarded  as  the  starting  point  of 
the  Old  World  main  group  of  true  pigs  with  all  its  branches,  while  Dolio- 
choerus exhibits  such  striking  resemblances  to  the  peccaries  (Dicotylidse) 
of  North  America  that  Stehlin  considers  it  very  near  the  stem  form  if  not 
the  actual  stem  form  of  our  Oligocene  group  of  primitive  peccaries.  The 

*  Stehlin,  H.  G.,  Die  Saugetiere  des  schweizerischen  Eocaens,  1903-1906,  p.  749. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  199 

Old  World  Miocene  pigs  (Listriodon,  Choerotherium,  see  p.  253)  are  at  best 
regarded  as  aberrant  branches  of  the  main  Old  World  {i.e.  Propalceochoerus) 
stem. 


II.    UPPER  EOCENE  AND  OLIGOCENE  LIFE  OF  AFRICA 

The  epoch-making  discoveries  of  recent  years  in  Egypt  have  already 
been  briefly  referred  to  (p.  72),  and  now  deserve  a  fuller  treatment.  On 


Fig.  89.— Section  through  the  Eocene  and  Oligocene  formations  north  of  Lake  Qurun, 
Faydm,  Egypt.  Arrows  indicate  levels  richest  in  remains  of  mammals.  After  Beadnell, 
Andrews,  Granger,  Osborn. 


the  southern  borders  of  the  Libyan  Desert,  sixty  miles  southwest  of  Cairo, 
lies  a  series  of  bluffs  of  Upper  Eocene  and  Oligocene  age,  overlying  the 
fertile  basin  of  the  Fayum.  As  early  as  1879,  Schweinfurth  discovered 
some  bones  of  the  great  Eocene  whales  among  the  lower  westerly  bluffs  of 
what  may  be  known  as  the  Zeuglodon  Zone  (Fig.  89).    In  1898  came  the 


200 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


first  evidence  of  the  existence  of  extinct  land  animals  in  this  region,  and 
in  1901-1905  explorations  under  Beadnell  and  Andrews  of  the  Egyptian 
Survey  and  British  Museum  resulted  in  a  series  of  remarkable  discoveries, 
which  were  ably  set  forth  in  Andrews'  fine  memoir  of  1906/ 

Supplementary  explorations  by  the  author,  and  Mr.  Granger  of  the 
American  Museum,^  in  1907,  and  by  other  institutions,  promise  to  round 
out  our  knowledge  of  this  newly  found  world  of  African  life  in  early 
Tertiary  times. 

As  shown  in  the  accompanying  section,  the  bluffs  are  sixteen  hundred 
feet  in  thickness.  The  lower  level,  or  'Zeuglodon  Zone'  (200  feet)  is  a 
purely  marine  formation  rich  in  remains  of  the  primitive  Eocene  Cetacea 
(Zeuglodon  and  Prozeuglodon) .  Above  these  (500  feet)  are  marine  and 
estuarine  beds  in  which  remains  of  Zeuglodon  are  mingled  with  those  of 
fluviatile  and  shore-living  mammals,  including  sea-cows  (Eosiren),  am- 
phibious animals  {Moeritherium)  related  to  the  proboscidean  stock,  and 
still  larger  quadrupeds  {Barytherium)  of  unknown  affinity;  this  may  be 
termed  the  'Barytherium  Zone'  and  is  believed  to  be  of  Upper  Eocene  age 
from  evidence  afforded  partly  by  the  animals,  partly  by  richly  fossiliferous 
shell  layers.  Above  this  are  fluvio-marine  beds  (900  feet),  designated  as 
the  * Arsinoitherium  Zone,'  which  yield  a  splendid  representation  of  the 
land  fauna  of  northern  Africa  in  Lower  Oligocene  times.  Beside  the  mammals 
we  here  discover  giant  land  tortoises  {Testudo  amnion)  resembling  those  of 
modern  Madagascar,  giant  pythons  (Gigantophis) ,  ostrich-like  birds  (Ere- 
mopezus),  broad-snouted  crocodiles  {Crocodilus  megarhinus)  similar  to 
those  now  found  in  African  rivers,  as  well  as  the  slender-snouted  gavial- 
like  forms  {Tomistoma)  similar  to  those  now  found  in  Borneo.  In  the 
rivers  beside  the  numerous  sirenians  and  zeuglodont-whales  there  swam 
river  turtles  (Podocnemis)  related  to  those  found  to-day  only  in  South 
America;  there  were  also  large  sea  snakes  (Pterosphenus) ,  and  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean Sea  near  by  were  found  great  floating  leather-back  turtles  {Thalas- 
sochelys)  closely  similar  to  modern  forms. 

So  far  as  the  mammals  mirror  their  surroundings,  Eocene  Libya  was  a 
savannah  country,  partly  open,  partly  thicketed  or  jungled,  partly  forested, 
of  about  the  same  temperature  as  to-day,  fairly  well  watered,  and  subject 
to  occasional  freshets  and  floodings  from  sand-bearing  rivers  to  the  south. 
These  old  river  beds  of  loosely  compacted  sand  have  yielded  the  greater 
part  of  the  thousands  of  isolated  specimens  which  have  been  taken  from 
this  region,  including  forty-five  species  of  mammals,  twenty-one  of  reptiles, 
and  twenty-three  species  of  fishes. 

The  fauna  as  a  whole  shows  affinities  to  that  of  the  modern  life  of 

*  Andrews,  C.  W.,  A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Tertiary  Vertebrata  of  the  Faydm, 
Egypt.    4to,  London,  1906. 

2  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Hunting  the  Ancestral  Elephant  in  the  Faytim  Desert.  Century  Maga- 
zine, Vol.  LXXIV,  no.  6,  October,  1907,  pp.  815-835. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  201 


Africa,  Asia,  and  South  America,  also  to  the  Hfe  of  Eocene-OUgocene 
Europe.    This  assemblage,  however,  presents  more  contrasts  than  resem- 
blances to  the  mammalian  life  which  existed  in  Lower  Oligocene  times 
on  the  north  shores  of 
the  Mediterranean,  as 
displayed  in  the  phos- 
phorites of  Quercy. 

The  resemblances 
consist  in  the  presence 
of  small  myomorph 
rodents  (Phiomys, 
Metaphiomys),^  and  a 
great  variety  of  car- 
nivorous creodonts  be- 
longing exclusively  to 
the  family  Hysenodon- 
tidse,  including  the 
three  principal  genera 
Hycenodon,  Pterodon, 
Apterodon,  also  found 
in  France.  Among  the 
even-toed  ungulates, 
or  artiodactyls,  we  find 
in  northern  Africa,  as 
in  Europe,  several 
ancodonts  or  hyopo- 
tamids  (Ancodus, 
Brachyodus) ;  the  aber- 
rant Rhagatherium  of 
North  Africa  is  also 
found  in  Switzerland; 
there  are  large  mam- 
mals (Geniohyus)  re- 
sembling the  European 
suillines  in  their  denti- 
tion, and  very  diminutive  forms  (Apidium)  resembling  remotely  Acotherulum 
and  Cehochoerus  of  France. 

The  very  striking  point  of  contrast  with  the  neighboring  peninsula 
of  Europe  is  the  absence  of  perissodactyls,  of  tapirs,  horses,  and  rhinoce- 
roses of  all  kinds.  Neither  are  there  any  higher  types  of  selenodont 
artiodactyls  such  as  we  might  consider  as  ancestral  forms  of  the  great 
ruminant  fauna  of  modern  Africa.    This  would  appear  to  strengthen  the 

^  Osborn,  H.  F.,  New  Fossil  Mammals  from  the  Fayiim  Oligocene,  Egypt.  Bull.  Amer. 
Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIV,  Art.  xvi,  Mar.  25,  1908,  pp.  265-272. 


Fig.  90.  —  The  aberrant  rhinoceros-like  ungulate  Arsinoi- 
therium  attacked  by  the  carnivorous  creodont  Pterodon. 
(Oligocene  of  the  Fayftm,  Egypt.)  After  original  by  Charles 
R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


202 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMIMALS 


hypothesis  that  both  the  Perissodactyla  and  Artiodactyla  are  natives  of 
Holarctica,  or  the  northern  hemisphere. 

The  great  arsinoitheres  played  the  part 
in  OHgocene  Africa  which  is  now  performed 
by  the  rhinoceroses  in  the  dark  continent: 
they  were  the  giant  mammals  of  the  period. 
The  dominant  feature  of  the  head  is  a  pair 
of  enormous  forwardly-projecting  bony 
horn-cores  over  the  snout,  which  in  life 
were  sheathed  with  horn,  sharply  pointed 
in  the  old  bulls,  and  blunted  or  rounded  in 
the  calves.  A  smaller  pair  of  horns  are 
also  seen  to  rise  above  the  eyes.  As  re- 
stored by  Andrews,  a  moderate-sized  bull 
(Arsinoitherium  zitteli)  stands  five  feet  nine 
inches  at  the  withers.  The  neck  is  short, 
the  limbs  long,  the  feet  short  and  spread- 
ing, terminating  in  five  short  toes  adapted, 
like  the  crested  grinders,  to  grazing.  These 
remarkable  manamals,  the  affinities  of  which 
are  entirely  unknown,  were  apparently  con- 
fined to  Africa. 

Remains  of  hyracoids  are  very  numerous,  indicating  that  they  ran  in 
herds  composed  either  of  large  varieties  (Megalohyrax)  equaling  the  smaller 


By  permission  of  the  Century  Company. 


Fig.  91.  —  The  extinct  giant  coney  Megalohyrax  of  the  Lower  OHgo- 
cene of  North  Africa,  together  with  its  small  successor,  Hyrax,  of  recent 
times.    After  a  drawing  by  Charles  R.  Knight. 

tapirs  in  size,  or  of  the  smaller  but  still  more  abundant  Saghatherium.  All 
these  animals  have  an  enlarged  pair  of  fighting  tusks,  and  the  denti- 
tion throughout  is  remarkably  similar  to  that  of  the  existing  hyraces,  or 


Characteristic  Mammals 

Creodont-carnivores 

5  genera 
Ptolemaiids 

Relationships  unknown 
Myomorph  rodents 
Anthrocotheroid  artiodactyls 

2  genera 
Suoid  artiodactyls 

2  genera 
Hyracoids,  or  hyraces 
Primitive  proboscideans 

sub-aquatic  and  terrestrial 
Barytheres 
Arsinoitheres 
Sirenians 
Zeuglodonts 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  203 


Fig.  92.  —  Restoration  of  the  head  of  the  prim- 
itive proboscidean  Moeritherium  of  the  Upper 
Eocene  of  the  Fayum,  Egypt.  (The  eyes  are  rela- 
tively too  conspicuous.)  After  original,  modeled 
under  the  author's  direction,  by  Erwin  S.  Christman 
in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


coneys  of  the  Sinaitic  Peninsula  and  of  Africa.    The  Hving  hyraces  are 
relatively  of  diminutive  size.    It  would  appear  from  the  varied  nature 
and  abundance  of  these  ani- 
mals that  Africa  was  the  chief 
center  of  their  adaptive  radia- 
tion. 

Still  more  important  are 
the  two  primitive  members  of 
the  order  Proboscidea,  Moeri- 
therium and  Palceomastodon. 
The  former  is  a  sub-aquatic 
mammal  which  presents  its 
chief  resemblances  to  the  Pro- 
boscidea in  the  enlargement  of 
the  same  pair  of  front  teeth  as 
those  which  constitute  the  tusks 
of  elephants;  also  in  the  struc- 
ture of  the  grinding  teeth, 
which  are  essentially  ancestral 
to   those    of  Palceomastodon. 

Other  parts  of  the  animal  exhibit  analogies  to  the  primitive  sea-cows  or 
sirenians. 

The  other  type,  Palceomastodon,  appears  to  be  directly  ancestral  to  the 
Lower  Miocene  mastodons  of  Europe;  in  contrast  with  Moeritherium,  it 
probably  possessed  a  long  prehensile  upper  lip,  a  pair  of  spoon-shaped 

lower  incisor  teeth 
which  opposed  this  lip, 
a  pair  of  upper  incisor 
tusks  well  developed 
as  fighting  weapons, 
with  an  enamel  band 
on  the  outer  sides. 
The  grinding  teeth  are 
more  complex  than 
those  of  Moeritherium 
and  directly  ancestral 
in  form  to  those  of 
Trilophodon  angusti- 
dens  of  the  Lower 
Miocene  of  Europe. 
17    no         ^    ^-      r  ^^   u  J   r         •  Thc  accompauyiug 

liG.  93.  —  Restoration  of  the  head  of  the  primitive  pro-  r     /     r  j 

boscidean  PaZtEomas^odo/i  of  the  Lower  Oligocene  of  the  Fayum,  models    of   the  heads 

Egypt.    After  original,  modeled  under  the  author's  direction,  (FigS    92    93)  exhibit 

by  Erwin  S.  Christman  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  ^     °  * 

History.  the    profound  dmer- 


204 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


ences  between  these  two  proboscideans,  and  indicate  that  we  may  look 
for  other  radiations  of  the  proboscidean  stock  in  Africa;  possibly  the 
river-living  sirenians  may  prove  to  be  one  of  these  radiations.  Certain 
of  the  palaeomastodons  attained  an  imposing  size,  but  none  of  them  rivaled 
the  arsinoitheres. 


III.    OLIGOCENE  LIFE  OF  AMERICA 

Geologic  conditions.  —  Widely  contrasting  with  the  limited  and  scattered 
deposits  of  Europe  are  the  vast  Badlands,  or  Mauvaises  Terres,  of  the 


OLIGOCENE  DEPOSITS 


Fig.  94.  —  Chief  Oligocene  deposits  of  fossil  mammals  in  the  Mountain  Region  of  North 
America.  1.  John  Day,  Oreg.  2.  White  River,  S.  Dak.,  Neb.,  Wyo.  3.  Horsetail  Creek 
and  Cedar  Creek,  Col.  4.  Pipestone  Creek  and  Threeforks,  Mont.  5.  White  Buttes, 
N.  Dak.    6.  Swift  Current  Creek,  Assiniboia.    7.  Bate's  Hole,  Wyo. 

western  plains  region  which,  as  we  now  believe,  represent  the  vestiges  of 
extensive  flood  plains  similar  to  those  of  many  existing  rivers  in  India  and 
South  America.  Scattered  over  the  surface  at  different  points  from  British 
Colum])ia  on  the  north  to  the  Mexican  plateau  on  the  south  are  areas  from 
two  to  three  hundred  miles  east  of  the  Rocky  Mountains.  For  the  most 
part  they  overlie  not  the  Eocene,  but  the  worn  upper  surfaces  of  the  Cre- 
taceous (Fort  Pierre),  proving  that  while  the  Rocky  Mountain  basin  de- 
posits were  forming,  the  region  of  the  Great  Plains  was  an  open,  slightly 
undulating  country,  traversed  by  rivers  and  streams. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  205 


The  earlier  theory  as  to  the  origin  of  these  vast  deposits  was  that  they 
were  due  to  great  lakes  whose  borders  were  frequented  by  rich  mammalian 
life.  As  early  as  1869  Leidy  ^  raised  a  doubt  as  to  this  lacustrine  theory 
in  the  following  words:  ''While  the  geological  formation  makes  it  appear 
that  the  fossils  were  deposited  in  ancient  lakes,  or  in  estuaries  or  streams 
connected  with  the  latter,  it  is  strange  that  they  exhibit  no  traces  of  fishes 
or  of  aquatic  molluscs  intermingled  with  the  multitude  of  relics  of  terres- 
trial animals.  The  single  mollusc  known  is  terrestrial,  and  the  turtles  are 
mostly  land  forms.  Even  mammals  of  decided  aquatic  habitat  are  absent. 
With  the  exception  of  the  shore-living  rhinoceros  and  the  beaver,  no  am- 
phibious mammals  have  been  discovered.  While  the  fossil  bones  are  in 
perfect  preservation,  their  original  sharpness  of  outline  without  the  slightest 
trace  of  erosion  indicates  quiet  water  with  a  soft  muddy  bottom.  .  .  . 
The  few  turtles  appear  to  be  related  to  the  swamp-living  emydians.  It 
is  remarkable  that  there  are  no  crocodile  remains.^  Where  were  these 
creatures  when  the  shores  of  the  ancient  waters  of  Nebraska  and  Dakota 
teemed  with  such  an  abundant  profusion  of  ruminating  hogs  and  oreodons?" 

Despite  this  sagacious  suggestion  by  Leidy  that  the  mode  of  preserva- 
tion of  the  animal  remains  did  not  support  the  lake  theory,  this  theory 
was  generally  maintained  by  all  geologists  and  palaeontologists  up  to  a 
comparatively  recent  time.  Finally  a  number  of  geologists,  Gilbert^ 
(1896),  Haworth^  (1897),  Davis  ^  (1900),  Johnson^  (1902)  began  to  throw 
more  and  more  serious  doubts  on  this  theory.  Thus  Davis  observed 
(1900,  p.  372):  ''Geologists  have  been  too  ready  to  explain  the  freshwater 
Tertiary  formations  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  region  as  lacustrine  in  origin. 
The  large  share  of  these  deposits  are  probably  due  to  fluviatile  or  other 
sub-aerial  agencies."  The  same  author  drew  comparisons  with  the  pied- 
mont, or  flood  plains  of  the  Ganges,  the  Po,  and  the  Hwangho.  The  coup 
de  grace  to  the  lake  theory  was,  however,  given  by  the  palaeontologists, 
Matthew '  (1899,  1901),  Fraas  '  (1901)  and  Hatcher  ^  (1902),  who  set  forth 
convincing  reasons  for  the  theory  of  fluviatile  or  river  channel  and  flood 

1  Leidy,  J.,  The  Extinct  Mammalian  Fauna  of  Dakota  and  Nebraska,  Philadelphia,  1869. 

2  Crocodile  remains  have  since  been  discovered;  see  p.  185,  Loomis,  1904. 

3  Gilbert,  G.  K.,  The  Underground  Waters  of  the  Arkansas  Valley  in  Eastern  Colorado. 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  17th  Ann.  Rept.,  Pt.  2,  1896,  p.  576. 

*  Haworth,  E.,  Physical  Properties  of  the  Tertiary  (of  Kansas).  Univ.  Geol.  Surv.  Kansas, 
Vol.  II,  1896,  p.  281. 

^  Davis,  W.  M.,  The  Freshwater  Tertiary  Formations  of  the  Rocky  IV^ountain  Region. 
Proc.  Amer.  Acad.  Arts  Set.,  Vol.  XXXV,  no.  17,  March,  1900,  p.  372. 

^  Johnson,  W.  D.,  The  High  Plains  and  their  Utilization.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  22d  Ann. 
Rept.,  Pt.  4,  1902,  p.  638. 

^  Matthew,  Is  the  White  River  Tertiary  an  Eolian  Formation?  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol. 
XXXIII,  1899,  pp.  403-408;  and.  Fossil  Mammals  of  the  Tertiary  of  Northeastern  Colorado. 
Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Mem.  1,  Pt.  7,  Nov.,  1901. 

^  Fraas  (ed.  by  Osborn)  on  the  aqueous  vs.  eolian  deposition  of  the  White  River  Oligo- 
cene  of  South  Dakota.    Science,  n.s..  Vol.  XIV,  1901,  pp.  210-212. 

^  Hatcher,  J.  B.,  Origin  of  the  Oligocene  and  Miocene  Deposits  of  the  Great  Plains.  Proc. 
Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XLI,  1902,  pp.  113-131. 


206 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


plain  origin,  with  periods  of  backwater,  lagoon,  and  shallow  lake  conditions, 
and  even  of  aeolian  conditions.  Matthew  and  Hatcher  pointed  out  that 
the  great  Badlands  are  composed  partly  of  coarse  sandstones  and  con- 
glomerates, indicating  river  formations,  and  partly  of  so-called  clays,  indi- 
cating still  water  or  aeolian  conditions  in  which  horizontal  banded  deposits 
were  laid  down.  Especially  interesting  is  the  demonstration  by  Matthew 
that  the  river  channel  sandstones  contain  chiefly  the  remains  of  forest-  and 


Fig.  95.  —  Lower  Oligocene  overlying  Upper  Eocene  horizons  on  the  Beaver  Divide  at 
Wagon-bed  Spring,  near  Hailey,  Wyo.  Diplacodon  Zone  (Eocene)  below ;  Titanotherium 
Zone  (Oligocene)  above.  Photograph  by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  expedition 
of  1909. 


river-living  animals,  while  the  fine  clays  contain  the  remains  of  plains- 
living  or  cursorial  animals. 

The  accompanying  panorama  prepared  b}^  Osborn  after  a  personal 
survey  of  this  wonderful  region  in  1907  is  designed  to  indicate  how  the 
fluviatile  'Titanotherium,'  'Metamynodon,'  and  'Protoceras'  sandstones 
traverse  the  outlying  fine  deposits  or  clays  and  prove  the  existence  of 
great  river  channels  from  seven  hundred  feet  to  a  mile  in  width.  These 
rivers  flowed  eastward,  and  bore  down  from  the  mountains  coarse  ma- 
terials; they  occasionally  overflowed  in  broad  shallow  sheets  of  water,  too 
transitory  to  support  any  of  the  aquatic  animals.  They  caused  such  dep- 
ositions as  are  left  by  the  annual  overflows  of  the  Nile. 

A  picture  of  the  plains  region  in  Oligocene  times  is  that  of  broad,  gentle 
eastward  slopes  from  the  Rocky  Mountains,  plane  or  gently  undulating 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  207 


100 


200 


300 


400  FEET' 


By  permission  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 

Fig.  96.  —  Panoramic  view  of  the  Oligocene  and  Miocene  exposures  on  the  south  side  of  the 
White  River,  South  Dakota.    After  Osborn. 


208 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


and  not  mountainous,  bearing  broad  streams  with  varying  channels,  some- 
times spreading  into  shallow  lakes,  but  never  into  vast  freshwater  sheets. 
Savannahs  were  interspersed  with  grass-covered  pampas  traversed  by  broad, 
meandering  rivers.  This  land  was  dry  in  dry  seasons,  but  was  flooded  in  very 
high  water  periods.  The  materials  were  partly  erosion  products  of  the  Rocky 
Mountains  and  Black  Hills,  such  as  true  sandstones  and  conglomerates,  but 
they  included  also  fine  layers  of  volcanic  dust,  wind-borne  from  distant 
craters  in  the  mountains,  far  out  on  the  plains  of  Nebraska  and  Kansas. 

Scattered  through  these  Titanotherium  and  Oreodon  beds^  are  numer- 
ous thin  layers  of  limestone,  always  of  limited  areal  extent,  rich  in  remains 
of  freshwater  plants  (Chara)  and  molluscs  {Limncea,  Physa,  Planorbis),  of 
species  inhabiting  swamps  and  small  ponds.  Remains  of  forests  are  found 
at  different  horizons  throughout  these  beds,  including  silicified  trunks  of 
trees  and  seeds  belonging  especially  to  forest  types  (Hickoria,  Celtis). 
Nothing  like  complete  trunks  are  observed,  and  the  impression  was  that 
of  burial  on  stream  margins  where  only  the  less  destructible  parts  of  trees 
would  endure  sufficiently  long  to  be  covered  up  and  preserved.  (Hatcher.) 

Prevailing  mammal  types.  —  It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  above  de- 
scribed Oligocene  mammals  of  western  and  central  Europe,  there  are  no 
plains-  or  upland-living  types;  horses  are  absent,  the  hornless  deer-like 
forms  are  the  gelocids  and  cervulines,  analogous  to  those  now  frequenting 
swampy  or  forested  regions.  The  dry  ground  or  upland  fauna,  if  it  existed, 
has  not  been  discovered. 

In  America,  on  the  other  hand  (see  p.  220),  both  the  low  ground  and 
the  high  ground  mammals  of  the  Oligocene  are  known,  the  former  broadly 
agreeing  in  foot  and  tooth  structure  with  those  of  Europe;  the  latter,  in- 
cluding the  horses  and  camels,  are  fleet,  cursorial  types.  Thus  the  physiog- 
raphy of  the  plains  country  was  varied. 

As  this  is  the  first  glimpse  of  the  life  of  the  great  plains  of  America, 
it  is  probable  that  many  of  the  mammals  which  are  found  here  were  not 
new  to  North  America,  but  had  been  resident  on  the  Great  Plains  for  a 
considerable  period. 

Oligocene  lizards.^  —  Indications  of  dry  land  conditions  in  the  Titano- 
therium and  Oreodon  zones  of  Montana  are  found  in  the  presence  of  numer- 
ous lizards  of  a  type  (Glyptosaurus)  which  has  the  skull  covered  with  tuber- 
culated  bony  plates.  These  animals  are  referred  to  the  burrowing,  nearly 
limbless  family  of  Anguidse,  and  are  related  to  forms  also  found  in  the 
Eocene  of  the  Bridger  Formation  of  Wyoming.  In  the  Oligocene  of  Ne- 
braska the  worm-like,  amphisbsenian  lizards  {Rhineura,  Hyporhina)  occur, 
animals  now  inha})iting  the  tropical  regions  of  America  and  Africa. 

In  adflition  to  the  evidence  drawn  from  geology  and  the  mammals,  the 

'  Hatcher.  J.  B.,  Origin  of  the  OHgocene  and  Miocene  Deposits  of  the  Great  Plains. 
Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XLI,  1902,  pp.  113-131. 

-  Douglass,  E.,  Some  Oligocene  Lizards.  Ann.  Cameg.  Mus.,  Vol.  IV,  nos.  3  and  4,  1908, 
pp.  278-285. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  209 


Fig.  97.  —  Type  of  the  Titanotherium  Zone,  Lower  Oligocene.  Above  :  Herd  of  titano- 
theres  of  the  genus  Brontotherium  on  an  ancient  flood  plain  in  the  South  Dakota  region. 
After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight.  Below  :  Skeleton  of  the  giant  titanothere  Brontotherium 
gigas  (female) .    Both  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


P 


210  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

tortoises  (Testudinata),  as  analyzed  by  Hay/  furnish  important  proof  of 
prevailing  dry  land  conditions  on  the  great  plains.  How  long  previously 
such  conditions  had  set  in  it  is  impossible  to  say.  In  the  entire  Oligocene 
and  Miocene  beds  of  the  great  plains  only  six  species  of  water-living  turtles 
have  thus  far  (1907)  been  recorded,  and  these  are  probably  from  river 
channel  sandstones,  as  contrasted  with  a  very  much  larger  number  of 
land-living  tortoises,  chiefly  from  fine  clay  deposits.  The  upland  testudi- 
nates  include  in  the  White  River  group  (Lower  to  Upper  Oligocene)  eight 
species  of  land  tortoises  (Stylemys,  Testudo).  Remains  of  crocodiles  have 
been  recorded  (Loomis)  ^  in  river  channel  beds  of  Lower  Ohgocene  age. 

Physiographic  conditions.  —  The  general  conditions  of  Oligocene  life  in 
the  plains  region  have  already  been  pictured  in  the  early  part  of  this  chap- 
ter (p.  179),  and  we  may  now  review  the  characters  of  each  subdivision  of 
the  Oligocene  more  in  detail. 

Lower  Oligocene,  Lower  White  River,  or  Chadron  Formation, 

titanotherium  zone 

This  takes  us  at  once  into  one  of  the  grandest  and  most  famous  of 
mammal-bearing  horizons,  the  'Titanotherium  Beds'^of  Leidy  and  Hayden, 


Fk;.  98.  —  In  the  '  Big  Badlands  '  of  South  Dakota  ;  Lower  and  Middle  Oligocene.  Lower  : 
Titanotherium  Zone  including  channel  beds,  a  river  formation.  Upper  :  Oreodon  Zone,  a 
flood-plain.    Photograph  by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  1907. 


1  Hay,  O.  P.,  The  Fossil  Turtles  of  North  America.  PM  Cameg.  Inst.,  Washington, 
no.  75.     4to,  1908. 

^  Loomis,  1904,  op.  cit 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  211 


By  permission  of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey. 


Fig.  99.  —  Oligocene,  Lower  Miocene  and  Pleistocene  exposures  of  South  Dakota,  Nebraska,  and 
eastern  Wyoming.  After  Darton  and  Thomson.  ObHque  lines  =  Titanotherium  Zone,  Cha'dron 
Formation.  Dots  =  Oreodon  and  Leptauchenia  Zones,  Brule  Formation.  Horizontal  hnes  =  Prome- 
rycochoerus  and  Merycochoerus  Zones,  Arikaree  Formation.  Vertical  lines  =  Pleistocene.  Exten- 
sive Upper  Miocene  and  Phocene  exposures  omitted. 


212 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


at  the  very  base  of  the  Ohgocene,  which  rest  directly  upon  the  irregularly 
eroded  surfaces  of  the  Upper  Cretaceous.  As  shown  in  the  accompanying 
map,  this  Chadron  Formation  (black  lines)  was  widely  distributed  in 
South  Dakota,  Nebraska,  and  Wyoming,  and  extends  up  into  British 
Columbia  to  the  Swift  Current  Creek  Formation.  Again  in  Montana  we 
find  the  Pipestone  Creek,  first  explored  by  Douglass,'  which  yields  the 
mammals  of  smaller  size,  or  microfauna.^  Since  the  Titanotherium  beds 
of  the  Big  Badlands  are  mostly  coarse  and  largely  fluviatile,  our  knowledge 
of  the  American  mammals  of  this  stage  is  still  rather  limited  except  as 
regards  the  titanotheres,  which  are  magnificently  represented  and  undergo 
their  entire  final  evolution  and  extinction  in  this  short  period  of  two  hun- 
dred feet  of  deposition. 

The  first  to  thoroughly  explore  this  zone  was  Hatcher,^  while  searching 
for  titanothere  skulls  and  skeletons.    In  1893  he  divided  the  zone  into 


Fig.  100.  —  Heads  of  Lower  Oligocene  titanotheres.  Representing  four  contemporaneous 
phyla,  or  lines  of  descent  of  (.4)  Megacerops,  (B)  Titanotherium,  (C)  Symhorodon,  (D)  Bron- 
totherium.  After  originals  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History. 

three  levels:  a  lower,  characterized  by  titanotheres  of  very  small  size, 
with  small  horns;  a  middle,  by  titanotheres  with  horns  of  intermediate 
size;  and  an  upper,  by  giant  titanotheres,  some  of  which  exhibit  magnificent 
horns.  Osbom  ^  subsequently  showed  that  these  dominant  mammals  rep- 
resent four  phyla  or  grand  divisions,  namely: 

Titanotherium,  long-headed,  slender-limbed,  lacking  incisor  teeth. 
Megacerops,  short-headed,  stout-limbed,  with  incisor  teeth. 


Short-horned 


Long-horned 


f  Symhorodon,  smaller,  lacking  incisor  teeth. 
1  Brontotherium,  larger,  with  incisor  teeth. 


This  polyphyletic  character,  or  adaptive  radiation  of  the  titanotheres, 
affords  us  a  hint  as  to  varied  local  conditions  which  are  also  reflected  in 

1  Douglass,  Fossil  Mammalia  of  the  White  River  beds  of  Montana.  Trans.  Amer.  Philos. 
Soc,  U.S.,  Vol.  CC,  1901,  pp.  1-42. 

2  Ibid.,  New  Vertebrates  from  the  Montana  Tertiary.  Ann.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Pittsburg, 
Vol.  II,  no.  2,  1903,  pp.  145-200. 

3  Hatcher,  J.  B.,  The  Titanotherium  Beds.  Amer.  Natural,  March  1,  1893,  pp.  204-221. 
*  Osborn,  H.  F.,  The  Four  Phyla  of  Oligocene  Titanotheres.    Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat. 

Hist.,  Vol.  XVI,  Art  vii,  Feb.  18,  1902,  pp.  91-109. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  213 


Leptauchenia 

ma  zone  Protoceras 
sandstones" 

"Oreodon  clays''' 
Metamynodon 


7dsi 


the  varied  structure  of  the  horses.  Titanotherium,  for  example,  being  a 
slender-Umbed,  and  swift-moving  animal,  may  have  cultivated  a  grazing 
habit,  while  Brontotherium  (Fig.  97)  was  a  heavy-limbed,  slow-moving 
quadruped  armed  with  gigantic  horns 
and  teeth  of  a  relatively  short- 
crowned,  browsing  type.  The  titano- 
theres  now  reach  the  climax  of  their 
evolution  and  become  extinct  with 
apparent  suddenness. 

Two  members  of  this  family  have 
been  discovered  in  Europe.  They 
are  (1)  Brachydiastematherium  trans- 

Sylvanicum  from  the  vicinity  of  Andra-    By  permission  of  the  U.S.  Geological  survey. 
Shaza  Klausenburg,  Transsylvania,  in        Fig.  lOl.  —  Scale  section  of  the  Oligocene 

Hungary,  comparable  to  our  Proti-  SSll^'^SterToVtoll''^''''"'^ '  °' 

tanotherium;  (2)  'Titanotherium^  ru- 

melicum  Toula,  from  Bulgaria.  Probably  a  member  of  the  sub-family 
Titanotheriinae  (fMegacerops). 

The  faunal  group  as  a  whole  is  exhibited  in  the  following  conspectus: 


sandstones^ 


Titanotherium 

   ^   clays  and 

-Tiidcno€herivLm\zorLe  sandstones 


Characteristic 
Mammals 

Opossums 

Leptictids 

Hyaenodonts 

True  canids 

Mustelids 

Machserodont  cats 

Surviving  Eocene  rodents 

(ischyromyids) 
Heteromyids 
Leporids  (hares) 
Hyracodonts 
Amynodonts 
Aceratheres 
Diceratheres 
Lophiodonts 
Horses 

Chalicotheres 

Titanotheres 

Entelodonts 

Dicotylids 

Leptochoerids 

Anthracotheres 

Camels 

Hypertragulids  (hornless) 


This  group  seems  to  be  much  richer  in  peris- 
sodactyls  than  that  of  the  Lower  Oligocene  of 
western  Europe,  especially  in  the  presence  of  the 
cursorial  rhinoceroses  or  hyracodonts,  of  the 
horses,  of  surviving  slender-limbed  lophiodonts 
(Colodon),  as  well  as  of  the  great  titanotheres. 
Beside  the  hyracodont  and  amynodont  rhinoc- 
eroses the  true  rhinoceroses  appear,  probably 
both  the  acerathere  and  dicerathere  ancestors, 
distinguished  (Trigonias)  by  the  presence  of 
small  upper  canine  teeth.  Coenopus  is  a  still 
more  common  form.  We  note  that  the  artio- 
dactyls  are  freshly  allied  to  those  of  Europe 
through  the  widespread  anthracotheres  (Ancodus  f 
Anthracotherium) ,  probably  recent  arrivals  from 
the  Old  World.  The  primitive  peccaries  (Dico- 
tylidse),  the  primitive  ruminants  (Hypertra- 
gulidae),  and  the  small  camels  (Camelidse)  are 
peculiarly  American.  Primitive  insect ivores  (lep- 
tictids and  chrysochlorids)  occur.  The  opos- 
sums (Peratherium)  survive.  The  Carnivora- 
Creodonta  now  include  a  variety  of  hysenodonts, 
among  which  are  forms  of  really  gigantic  size. 
The  true  Carnivora  include  varied  canids 
{Daphcenus  and  Cynodictis),  the  latter  similar 


214 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


to  the  Old  World  form.  The  light-limbed  machserodont,  or  saber-tooth 
cats  {Dinictis)  are  characteristic,  as  well  as  the  first  mustelids  (Buncelurus) 
known  in  this  country. 

Every  division  of  the  mammals  seems  to  have  differentiated  into  its 
plains-living  and  open  country  types  and  forest-  and  river-living  types. 


Fig.  102.  —  The  Lower  Oligocene  cursorial  rhinoceros  ^^mcodon.    After  original  by  Charles 
R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


Of  the  former,  we  observe,  among  the  rodents,  the  leporids  or  hares; 
among  rhinoceroses,  the  light-limbed  hyracodonts;  among  the  lophiodonts, 
Colodon.  The  horses  of  the  period  are  still  polyphyletic,  —  small,  exces- 
sively light-limbed,  s\vift  animals,  models  of  grace  and  beauty.  Among 
carnivores,  both  the  canids  and  machserodont  cats  are  partly  cursorial. 
The  scarcely  known  camels  were  also  plains-living  types,  although  still 
brachyodont.    The  peccaries  (Dicotylidae)  first  appear  here. 

Of  the  contrasting  forest  and  lowland  fauna,  among  perissodactyls 
may  be  cited  the  titanotheres,  found  in  the  Swift  Current  Creek  deposits 
of  British  Columbia.  The  forest-living  tapirs  are  not  known.  Among 
artiodactyls,  Agriochoerus,  a  genus  of  oreodont,  also  the  anthracothere 
Ancodus  are  probably  river-border  or  forest  animals.  The  amynodont 
rhinoceroses  now  take  on  a  distinctly  fluviatile,  or  river-living  type;  their 
remains  are  found  only  in  the  river-channel  sandstones.  Most  of  the 
titanotheres  were  browsers  and  frequented  river  borders  in  the  lower  plains. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  215 


It  is  striking  that  no  trace  of  monkeys  has  been  found;  in  fact,  there 
is  every  evidence  that  these  animals  disappeared  from  America  at  or  before 
the  close  of  the  Eocene.  The 
small,  triangular  teeth  of  Lepto- 
choerus,  formerly  referred  to 
the  primates  by  Marsh  and 
Cope,  now  prove  to  belong  to 
a  primitive  surviving  artio- 
dactyl  family  (Leptochoeridse) . 
Beside  the  leptochoerids  the 
artiodactyls  include  the  giant 
pigs  or  entelodonts,  and  pec- 
caries or  dicotylids,  the  foreign 
anthracotheres,  and  the  much 
more  numerous  and  varied 
native  oreodonts. 

Most  important  of  all,  the 
hypertragulids  appear,  typified 

by  the  diminutive  Hypertragulus  and  Leptomeryx.  The  former  (Hypertra- 
gulus)  bears  some  resemblance  to  the  chevrotains  (Tragulus)  of  southern  Asia. 
Matthew's  recent  restudy  ^  of  Leptomeryx,  a  member  of  this  family,  brings 


Fig.  103.  —  Skull  of  the  Lower  Oligocene  titano- 
there  Brontotherium  gigas  (male) .  In  the  American 
Museum  of  Natural  History.    After  Osborn. 


Fig.  104.  —  Contemporary  Lower  Oligocene  mammals  of  South  Dakota  to  same  scale 
(XtV)-  By  Charles  R.  Knight.  A.  Leptomeryx,  smcestral  hornless  deer.  B.  Oreodon,  a 
primitive  browser  or  grazer.    C.  Hyoenodon,  the  last  of  the  creodonts. 

out  the  very  important  fact  that  it  has  numerous  indications  of  remote 
relationship  to  the  true  ruminants  and  especially  to  the  American  deer 

^  Matthew,  W.  D.,  Osteology  of  Blastomeryx  and  Phylogeny  of  the  American  Cervidae. 
Bull  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIV,  Art.  xxvii,  1908,  p.  552. 


216 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


(Cervidae)  rather  than  to  the  Old  World  chevrotains  (Tragulus)  or  New 
World  camels  (Camelidae)  as  had  formerly  been  supposed.  Thus  in  America, 
as  in  Europe,  there  appear  in  the  Lower  Oligocene  for  the  first  time  mammals 
with  a  kinship  to  the  cervine  or  deer  division  of  the  ruminants. 

In  the  Pipestone  Creek  beds  of  Montana  our  faunal  knowledge  has 
been  especially  enriched  by  the  discovery  and  description  of  the  hitherto 
unknowTi  microfauna  of  the  Titanotherium  beds/  which  includes  archaic, 
tenrec-like  forms,  as  well  as  erinaceids  among  Insectivora.  These  beds 
belong  near  the  base  of  the  Oligocene  (Matthew,  p.  201).  They  contain 
very  primitive  insectivores  (Apternodus)  with  teeth  of  ancient  type;  also 
a  diminutive  opossum  {Peratherium  titanelix).  All  the  rodents  belong 
to  the  ischyromyid  and  hare  divisions.  None  of  the  mice  or  squirrel 
groups  are  found  here. 

Cypress  Hills,  Saskatcheivan.  —  In  1883  McConnell  of  the  Canadian 
Survey  discovered  Tertiary  beds  in  the  Cypress  Hills,  the  northernmost 
mammal-bearing  horizons  of  Tertiary  times.  As  described  by  Cope^ 
(1891)  and  more  fully  by  Lambe  ^  (1908),  the  fauna  is  of  Lower  Oligocene 
age,  corresponding  chiefly  to  that  of  the  Lower  Titanotherium  beds  of 
Montana,  although  the  upper  members  may  be  synchronous  with  the  Oreo- 
don  Zone.  The  formation  is  fluviatile,  or  fluvio-lacustrine,  and  is  widely 
scattered  from  the  Cypress  Hills  to  the  Swift  Current  Creek  region.  Its 
fluviatile  origin  is  attested  by  the  presence  of  abundant  remains  of  fishes, 
including  the  bowfins  {Amia),  garpikes  (Lepidosteus) ,  siluroids  (Rhineastes) . 
There  are  also  numerous  aquatic  {Anosteira,  Trionyx)  as  well  as  terrestrial 
{Stylemys,  Testudo)  chelonians,  lizards,  snakes,  and  crocodiles.  The 
mammalian  fauna  includes  opossums  (Didelphys)  and  several  species  of 
hyjenodonts,  including  one  animal  of  gigantic  size  (Hemipsalodon  grandis), 
also  the  true  canids  and  machserodonts  (Dinictis)  characteristic  of  the 
Lower  Oligocene.  The  mammalian  fauna  in  general  is  similar  to  that  of 
the  Titanotherium  Zone  of  Nebraska,  South  Dakota,  and  Montana.  All 
the  titanotheres  and  several  of  the  equines  as  well  as  rhinoceroses  belong 
to  very  primitive  species.  Of  somewhat  doubtful  inclusion  within  this 
fauna  is  the  supposed  ancylopod  {Chalicotherium  hilohatum)  which  rests 
upon  very  uncertain  evidence. 

White  River  beds  of  Montana  and  North  Dakota.'^ — The  tertiaries  of 

^  Douglass,  E.,  New  Vertebrates  from  the  Montana  Tertiary.  Ann.  Carneg.  Mus., 
Vol.  II,  no.  2,  190.3,  pp.  14.5-200. 

^  Matthew,  W.  D.,  The  Fauna  of  the  Titanotherium  Beds  at  Pipestone  Springs,  Mont. 
Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX,  1903,  pp.  197-226. 

^  Cope,  E.  D.,  On  Vertebrata  from  the  Tertiary  and  Cretaceous  Rocks  of  the  North  West 
Territory.    Gcol.  Surv.  Canada,  Contrib.  to  Canad.  Palceont.,  Vol.  Ill,  Montreal,  1891,  pp.  1-25. 

2  Lambe,  L.  M.,  The  Vertebrata  of  the  Oligocene  of  the  Cypress  Hills,  Saskatchewan. 
Canada  Dept.  Mines,  Contrib.  to  Canad.  Palceont.,  Vol.  Ill,  Ottawa,  1908,  pp.  1-65. 

*  Douglass,  E.,  A  Geological  Reconnaissance  in  North  Dakota,  Montana,  and  Idaho;  with 
Notes  on  Mesozoic  and  Cenozoic  Geology.  Ann.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  V,  nos.  2  and  3,  1909, 
pp.  211-288. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  217 

Montana  will  be  more  fully  described  in  the  Miocene  section  (p.  279). 
The  Lower  Oligocene  beds  of.  White  River  age  overlie  the  Basal  Eocene 
or  Fort  Union.  They  were  apparently  deposited  in  streams,  lakes,  and 
marshes  in  ancient  river  valleys,  cut  into  the  Fort  Union.  Douglass  deter- 
mines beds  of  both  Titanotherium  and  Oreodon  Zones.  The  Pipestone 
Creek  beds,  discovered  in  1899,  belong  in  the  Titanotherium  level,  and 
have  yielded  a  rich  fauna  of  small  mammals. 

Similarly,  in  North  Dakota  there  are  restricted  areas  of  Lower  Oligo- 
cene overlying  the  Fort  Union,  especially  at  White  Butte,  throughout  a 


^^^^^u<>/««n/£r  Zone  (Chann!^/ 

Fig.  105.  —  '  Big  Badlands,'  head  of  Corral  Draw,  South  Dakota.  Lower  Oreodon  Zone, 
and  river  channel  beds  of  Metamynodon  sandstones  in  the  foreground,  overlaid  by  the  Upper 
Oreodon  Zone  and  capped  by  the  Leptauchenia  Zone  and  river  channel  beds  of  the  Protoceras 
sandstones.    Photograph  by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  1906. 

section  two  hundred  and  ten  feet  in  thickness,  apparently  including  the 
Titanotherium  Zone  below  and  Oreodon  Zone  above.  Another  section 
affords  a  thickness  of  three  hundred  and  twenty  feet,  which,  however, 
includes  the  Oreodon  and  overlying  Protoceras  and  Leptauchenia  Zones. 
These  AVhite  River  formations  in  North  Dakota  are  believed  to  represent 
deposits  made  in  the  old  river  valley  traversed  by  streams  originating  in 
the  Black  Hills. 

The  giant  pigs,  or  entelodonts.  —  The  family  tree  of  the  giant  pigs 
has  recently  been  studied  by  Peterson,^  who  traces  these  animals  from 
lower  Oligocene  ancestors  {Entelodon  in  Europe,  Archceotherium  in  North- 
America),  which  may  have  sprung  alike  from  an  unknown  northern  or 
Holarctic  form.  Related,  are  the  Eocene  giant  pigs  (Achcenodon)  of  the 
Washakie  and  Uinta  (Upper  Eocene  of  the  Rocky  Mountains),  too  special- 

^  Peterson,  O.  A.,  A  Revision  of  the  Entelodontidse.  Mem.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  IV, 
no.  3,  May,  1909,  pp.  41-158,  Pis.  liv-lxii. 


218 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


ized  in  their  teeth  to  be  regarded  as  directly  ancestral.  The  European 
Entelodon  of  Eymar  (1847)  or  Elotherium  of  Pomel  (1847,  indet.)  is  re- 
garded as  generically  different  from  the  American  forms.  Of  the  latter, 
Archceotherium  of  the  Lower  Oligocene,  Titanotherium  Zone,  is  believed  to 
be  distinguished  from  Entelodon  by  its  elongate  snout;  in  brief,  its  greater 
dolichocephaly;  the  earliest  phase  {A.  mortoni)  gives  rise  to  a  series  of 
species,  and  already  in  the  Upper  Titanotherium  Zone  attains  an  impos- 
ing size  {A.  ingens).  The  tuberosities  of  the  lower  jaw  are  strongly  de- 
veloped in  Pdonax  bathrodon  of  the  Protoceras  Zone,  Upper  Oligocene. 
In  the  Upper  Oligocene  of  the  John  Day,  a  massive  form,  Bodchoerus  hu- 
merosus,  appears,  distinguished  by  a  long  humerus  and  short  feet,  a  slow- 
moving  type,  while  the  gigantic  Dinohyus  hollandi  of  the  Harrison  beds  of 


Fig.  106.  —  Type  of  the  Oreodoii  Zone.    Skeleton  of  the  Middle  Oligocene  oreodont  Merycoi- 
dodon  {"  Oreodon  ")  culbertsoni.    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


Nebraska  is  more  cursorial.  The  close  of  the  Oligocene,  or  beginning  of 
the  Miocene  witnessed  the  evolution  of  four  great  phyla  of  entelodonts 
(Pelonax,  Dinohyus,  Dceodon,  Bodchoerus).  The  distinctions  of  these  phyla 
require  further  discrimination. 

The  geographic  range  was  as  far  east  as  New  Jersey  {Ammodon  Marsh), 
while  the  geologic  range  is  to  the  summit  of  the  Arikaree  beds,  which  are 
here  regarded  as  Lower  Miocene.  It  has  been  suggested  by  Schlosser  and 
Winge  that  these  animals  were  omnivorous  or  even  carnivorous,  which  is 
highly  improbable.  The  extraordinary  appearance,  as  sketched  some 
years  ago  under  the  direction  of  the  present  author  (Fig.  76),  is  probably 
less  accurate  than  the  more  recent  restoration  by  Mills  under  the  direction 
of  Peterson  (Fig.  83),  in  which  the  ears  are  placed  lower  down  and  are 
more  drooping,  in  keeping  with  the  inferior  position  of  the  external  audi- 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  219 


tory  meatus,  which  is  placed  much  lower  on  the  sides  of  the  head  than  in 
the  pigs  or  peccaries.  In  Mills'  restoration  the  tuberosities  on  the  lower 
surface  of  the  jaw  represent  a  mechanism  for  muscular  attachment. 

Middle  Oligocene,  Oreodon  Zone  or  Brule  Clays, 
Stampian  Stage 

Geology.  —  Immediately  overlying  the  Titanotherium  Zone  in  the  White 
River  Group  of  the  Great  Badlands  is  the  Oreodon  Zone,  or  Brule  Clays, 
about  270  feet  in  thickness,  and  broadly  distinguished  as  of  Middle  Oligo- 
cene age.  While  the  Titano- 
therium beds  are  of  colder, 
grayish  tint,  these  Oreodon 
layers  are  warmer  buffs  and 
pinks,  and,  as  shown  in  Fig.  98, 
are  generally  distinguished  by 
long,  horizontal  lines  or  bands 
of  similar  color,  which  indicate 
the  frequent  recurrence  of  over- 
flow or  Stillwater  conditions. 
These  horizontal  bands  are  an 
indication  of  aqueous  rather 
than  seolian  deposition.  Such 
bands  are  seldom  seen  in  the 
Titanotherium  Zone  of  South 
Dakota,  although  observed  in 
Titanotherium  beds  elsewhere. 
The  Oreodon  beds  are  divided 
by  the  so-called  '  nodular 
layers'  (Fig.  96)  into  'Lower/ 
'Middle,'  and  'Upper,'  each 
with  a  more  or  less  specific 
fauna,  and  affording  a  series  of 
transitions,  including  arrivals 
and  departures  of  animals  of  different  kinds,  similar  to  those  which  are 
recorded  in  the  Eocene  levels  of  the  Bridger.  Thus  the  Oreodon  Zone 
alone  represents  a  vast  interval  of  geologic  time. 

The  lower  Oreodon  Zone  is  abruptly  traversed  by  the  'Metamynodon 
Sandstones'  (Fig.  105),  coarse  river  channel  deposits,  cross-bedded  sand- 
stones of  greenish  and  brownish  color,  full  of  pebbles,  containing  especially 
the  amphibious  rhinoceroses  (Metamynodon)  and  other  lowland  forms. 
In  general,  as  first  observed  by  Matthew,  there  is  a  sharp  distinction  be- 
tween the  fluviatile  and  river-border  fauna  contained  in  these  sandstones 


Fig.  107.  —  Metamynodon  sandstones,  river 
channel  beds  in  the  Upper  Oreodon  layers  of  South 
Dakota.  Photograph  by  American  Museum  of 
Natural  History,  1894. 


220  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

and  the  plains  fauna  contained  in  the  clays  of  the  Oreodon  Zone.^  The 
only  explanation  is  that  the  clay  and  sandstone  fossils  represent  two  co- 
existent faunas  of  different  local  habitat.- 


FiG.  108.  —  Skeleton  of  the  Oligocene  aquatic  rhinoceros  Metamynodon  planifrons.    (See  Res- 
toration, page  180).    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.    After  Osborn. 


Contrasting  Plains  and  River-Border  Mammals 


Chiefly  Plains 


Perissodactyla 


Mesohippus 
phus,  etc. 
Hyracodon 
Colodon 


Leptauchenia 

Oreodon 

Eporeodon 

Poebrotherium 

Leptomeryx 

Hypertragulus 

Hypisodus 


hairdi,  meteulo- 


Artiodactyla 


Chiefly  Riverside 

Mesohippus  intermedins  and  Mio- 

hippus 
Metamynodon 
Ccenopus 
Protapirus 
Titanotherium 

Agriochoerus 

Perchoerus 

Entelodon 

Ancodus 

A  nthracotherium 

Protoceras 


'  Matthew,  A  Provisional  Classification  of  the  Fresh- Water  Tertiary  of  the  West.  Bull. 
Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XII,  1899,  pp.  19-75. 

2  Matthew,  Fossil  Mammals  of  the  Tertiary  of  Northeastern  Colorado.  Mem.  Amer. 
Mils.  Nat.  Hist.,  no.  1,  Pt.  7,  Nov.,  1901. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  221 


Chiefly  Plains 


Carnivora 


Hycenodon 

DinicHs 

Cynodidis 

Hoplophoneus 

Daphcenus 

Ischyromys 
Palceolagus 
Eumys 

Gymnophjchus 
Leptictidae 


Rodentia 


Insectivora 


Chiefly  Riverside 


Hoplophoneus 
DaphoBnus 


Steneofiber 


Of  the  same  age  are  the  'Cedar  Creek'  beds  of  northeastern  Colorado 
and  widespread  similar  exposures  in  southeastern  Wyoming,  South  Dakota, 
northwestern  Nebraska,  and  far  north  in  western  Montana.  These  ex- 
posures are  renewed  proofs  of  the  existence  of  vast  fertile  and  nearly  level 
flood  plains,  east  of  the  Rockies,  gently  sloping  eastward  and  traversed 
by  stream  channels  or  rivers  which  are  narrower  than  those  of  Titano- 
therium  times.  The  plain  is  chiefly  forested  along  the  river  borders;  but 
the  flora  is  entirely  unknown. 

Approximate  homotaxis  with  the  Stampian  or  Middle  Oligocene  of 
Europe  is  indicated  by  similar  stages  in  the  evolution  of  the  anthracotheres 
{Ancodus),  of  the  amynodont  rhinoceroses  (Metamynodon,  Cadurcotherium) , 
of  the  true  rhinoceroses,  or  aceratheres  and  diceratheres.  In  both  countries 
the  Middle  Oligocene  is  the  disappearing  point  both  of  the  amynodonts 
and  of  the  archaic  carnivores  (hysenodonts) . 

The  Oreodon  beds  are  the  favorite  fossil  hunting  grounds  of  the  West, 
because  the  fossils  are  or  were  extremely  abundant.  The  mammalian 
fauna  is  also  very  rich,  more  than  150  species  of  mammals  having  been  found 
in  the  Big  Badlands  of  South  Dakota  alone.  Since  this  level  is  much  more 
favorable  for  the  smaller  forms  of  life  than  the  Titanotherium  Zone,  the 
considerable  number  of  new  forms  is  partly  attributable  to  this  fact.  Large 
herds  of  the  small  browsing  oreodonts  took  the  place  of  the  csenotheres  in 
Europe,  and  other  ruminants  abound  in  this  level. 

The  observer  readily  distinguishes  the  Oreodon  stage  not  only  by  its 
geologic  differences,  but  by  the  abundance  of  oreodonts  and  the  absence  of 
all  traces  of  titanotheres.  The  Rodentia  include  the  tree-living  squirrels 
(Prosciurus) ,  the  ground-squirrel  or  semi-cursorial  type  (Eutypomys),  and 
the  hares,  or  leporids  (Palceolagus) ;  the  mice,  or  Muridse,  now  make  their 
first  appearance  (Eumys),  while  the  peculiarly  Eocene  ischyromyids  make 
their  last  appearance.  Among  Insectivora  the  erinaceids  appear  for  the 
first  time  (Proterix),  and  the  talpids  or  moles  (Domnina),  are  represented. 
The  opossums  appear  in  numerous  species  (Peratherium). 


222 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Among  carnivores  the  archaic  hyaenodonts  also  appear  for  the  last 
time,  and  are  represented  by  rather  highly  varied  forms,  animals  dis- 
similar in  size,  speed,  and  in  the  proportions  of  the  skull,  ranging  from 
the  diminutive  H.  mustelinus  to  the  powerful  H.  horridus  (Fig.  81), 
and  including  also  species  {H.  leptocephalus)  which  exhibit  in  the  closure 
of  the  posterior  palate  a  backward  extension  of  the  respiratory  tract 
which  has  been  regarded  (Scott)  as  evidence  of  aquatic  adaptation,*  but 
may  be  correlated  with  the  extreme  posterior  position  of  the  cutting  or 
sectorial  molars.  At  the  same  time  the  machserodont  cats  specialized  into 
the  fleet  and  slender-limbed,  swift-moving  Dinidis  and  the  heavy-limbed 
Hoplophoneus  (Fig.  87),  which  is  transitional  to  the  Eusmilus  of  the  Upper 


Fig.  109.  —  Skeleton  of  the  Oligocene  wolf,  Daphcenus.    In  the  Carnegie  Museum,  Pittsburg. 

After  Peterson. 


Oligocene.  The  canids  ^  also  vary  widely  from  the  small  civet-like  Cyno- 
didis  to  powerful  forms  such  as  Daphcenus  nehrascensis,  which  equaled 
the  wolf  {Canis  lupus)  in  size. 

The  Herbivora  which  formed  the  prey  of  these  carnivores  are  included 
in  six  families  of  artiodactyls  and  six  families  of  perissodactyls,  these  two 
orders  at  the  time  being  nearly  balanced  both  in  numbers  and  differentia- 
tion. Of  the  artiodactyls  the  camelids  (Poehrotherium) ,  which  are  now  of 
slender  form,  begin  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  the  Plains  fauna.  The 
hypertragulids,  or  primitive  ruminants  and  deer,  are  still  diminutive  and 
hornless  forms.  The  oreodonts  are  of  intermediate  size  and  now  more 
sharply  differentiated  into  three  phyla,  (1)  the  small  brachycephalic  Lep- 
tauchenia  being  added  to  (2)  the  typical  cropping  or  grazing  oreodonts  and 
to  (3)  the  forest-living  Agriochoerus.  Diminutive  also  are  the  leptochcerids. 
Of  intermediate  size  are  the  anthracotheres,  which  include  both  the  An- 

'  Scott,  W.  B.,  and  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Preliminary  Account  of  the  Fossil  Mammals  from  the 
White  River  Formation,  contained  in  the  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.  Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  ZooL,  Harvard 
Coll.,  Vol.  XIII,  1887,  pp.  152  fol. 

-  Hatcher,  J.  B.,  Oligocene  Canidai.  Mem.  Carnegie  Mus.,  Vol.  I,  Sept.,  1902. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  223 

codus  and  Anthracotherium  of  European  origin;  the  anthracotheres  exhibit 
no  tendency  to  attain  the  great  proportions  displayed  in  the  European  and 
Asiatic  forms.  Of  the  pig-hke  forms  the  peccaries  (Perchoerus)  are  less 
numerous  than  the  entelodonts;  the  latter  now  begin  to  attain  giant  size 
(E.  ingens),  thus  assuming  a  rank  similar  to  that  of  the  anthracotheres  in 
Europe. 

The  perissodactyls  are  similarly  differentiated  into  the  massive  river- 
frequenting  amynodonts  (Metamynodon)  with  hypsodont  molars  and  power- 


FiG.  110.  —  The  Lower  Oligocene  three-toed  horse  Mesohippus,  a  swift,  light-limbed  animal. 
To  the  right  Dinictis,  the  Ught-limbed  saber-tooth  cat.  After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight 
in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


ful  canine  tusks,  and  the  extremely  long-limbed,  long-footed,  but  still  tri- 
dactyl  lophiodonts  (Colodon);  these  lophiodonts  are  of  considerably  larger 
size  than  the  contemporary  horses.  From  the  Oreodon  Zone  comes  the 
typical  Mesohippus  bairdi  of  Leidy,  an  extremely  light-limbed  equine,  and 
there  now  is  becoming  more  apparent  the  incipient  adaptive  radiation  of 
the  horses  into  forest-living  and  browsing  types  (Mesohippus  eulophus, 
remotely  related  to  the  forest-living  horse,  Hypohippus,  of  the  Miocene), 
and  plains  or  grazing  types  (M.  ohliquidens) .  Some  of  these  horses  are 
chiefly  found  in  the  ^Clays'  (M.  eulophus,  M.  hairdi,  M.  ohliquidens),  others 
chiefly  occur  in  the  'sandstones'  of  this  and  higher  levels  {M.  intermedins, 
M.  validus,  M.  gidleyi).  The  tapirs  (Protapirus)  are  rare.  The  fleet-footed 
cursorial  rhinoceroses,  or  hyracodonts,  are  numerous  and  characteristic 
of  this  horizon.  As  in  Europe  the  true"  rhinoceroses  are  clearly  divided 
into  the  dicerathere,  or  two-horned,  and  the  acerathere,  or  hornless,  series. 


224 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Upper  Oligocene  of  the  Western  Plains  and  of  the  Mountain 

Region  of  Oregon 

The  Upper  Oligocene  of  America  broadly  corresponds  to  the  close  of 
the  Stampian  and  the  Aquitanian  stages  of  Europe.  In  both  countries  it 
is  characterized  negatively  by  the  absence  of  the  hya^nodonts,  the  last  of 
the  archaic  Mammalia,  as  well  as  of  the  amynodonts  or  amphibious  rhi- 
noceroses. Especially  characteristic  are  various  evolution  stages  of  the  pair- 
horned  rhinoceroses  (Diceratherium) ,  which  are  now  armed  with  a  trans- 
versely placed  pair  of  horns  on  the  ends  of  the  nasal  bones.  Another 
common  form  which  makes  its  first  appearance  in  both  the  New  and  Old 
Worlds  at  this  time  is  the  primitive  beaver  or  castorid  {Steneo fiber) . 

It  is  difficult,  however,  to  draw  close  time  parallels  between  Europe 
and  America  because  of  new  and  plainly  evident  faunal  divergence.  Of 
the  six  families  of  American  artiodactyls  only  the  anthracotheres  are  rep- 
resented in  Europe,  and  that  by  very  different  forms  from  those  in  America. 
Of  the  four  families  of  American  perissodactyls  both  the  hyracodonts  and 
the  horses  are  absent  in  Europe,  although  the  rhinoceroses  and  tapirs  are 
represented  by  somewhat  similar  evolution  stages.  Of  the  ancylopods,  or 
chalicotheres,  the  Moropus  of  Oregon  still  awaits  close  comparison  with 
the  Maa'otherium  of  France;  the  wrist,  or  carpus,  of  Moropus  is  the  m^ore 
primitive. 

The  Upper  Oligocene  of  western  America  is  clearly  divided  into  Early, 
Middle,  and  Later,  or  first,  second,  and  third  faunal  phases,  the  former  being 
seen  in  the  upper  levels  of  the  White  River  group  of  Dakota,  which  contain 
a  continuation  of  the  Plains  fauna,  while  the  second,  as  displayed  in  the 
John  Day  Valley  of  Oregon,  gives  us  a  renewed  glimpse  of  the  mountain 
fauna  and  corresponds  most  closely  with  the  true  Aquitanian  of  France. 
The  third  is  again  observed  on  the  Great  Plains  of  Dakota,  is  slightly  sub- 
sequent to  St.  Gerand-le-Puy  in  age,  and  is  by  many  regarded  as  the  base 
of  the  Miocene. 


Third  Phase.  —  Upper  John  Day  of 
Oregon.  Lower  Harrison,  Rosebud,  and 
Arikaree  of  the  Great  Plains  of  Dakota. 

Second  Phase.  —  ^liddle  levels  (Di- 
ceratherium Zone)  of  the  John  Day  For- 
mation of  Oregon. 

First  Phase.  —  Upper  part  of  White 
River  Group  of  South  Dakota,  Leptau- 
chcnia  and  Protoceras  Zones. 


Diceratheres  very  numerous.  Promery- 
cochoerus  appearing. 

Diceratheres  with  well-developed  horns. 
Chalicotheres  in  the  Moropus  stage. 

Diceratheres  with  very  rudimentary 
horns.  Cynodictis  and  Hyracodon 
still  surviving.  Leptauchenia. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  225 


First  Phase  of  the  Upper  OUgocene,  Leptauchenia-Protoceras  Zone 

Geologic  conditions.  —  The  upper  part  of  the  Brule  Clays  of  the  White 
River  Group  in  the  Great  Badlands  immediately  and  conformably  overlie 
the  Oreodon  Zone.  Correlated  with  these  are  widespread  deposits  in 
northeastern  Colorado  and  in  North  Dakota,  indicating  a  continuation  of 


Fig.  111.  —  The  Upper  Oligocene  four-horned  ruminant  type  of  the  Protoceras  Zone. 
Above  :  Protoceras  chased  by  the  Ught-Umbed  saber-tooth  Dinictis.  After  original  by  Charles 
R.  Knight.  Below  :  Skeleton  of  Protoceras  celer.  Both  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History. 

Q  , 


226 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  wide  flood  plain  conditions.  A  similar  fauna  (Leptauchenia)  was  ap- 
parently partly  contained  in  the  lower  part  of  the  John  Day  Formation 
of  Oregon,  in  which,  however,  fossils  are  so  scarce  that  reference  to  the 
Leptauchenia  Zone  is  provisional.  In  contrast  with  the  underlying  Oreodon 
beds  the  'clays'  are  relatively  barren.  The  sparsely  preserved  plains 
mammals  of  the  period  are  contained  in  the  upper  part  of  the  Brule  Clays 
or  so-called  Leptauchenia  Zone,  while  the  forest  and  fluviatile  mammals 
are  found  in  relative  abundance  in  the  Protoceras  sandstones,  old  river 


Fig.  112.  —  Panorama  from  the  summit  of  Sheep  Mountain,  South  Dakota,  an  eroded  area 
of  the  Upper  OUgocene.  Leptauchenia  Zone  in  the  foreground,  the  underlying  Oreodon  and 
Titanotherium  Zones  appearing  in  the  distance.  Photograph  by  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History,  1904. 


channels  of  brilliant  greenish  tint  which  traverse  different  levels  of  the 
finer  buff  and  pinkish  deposits  of  the  Clays.  Vertical  or  'organ  pipe' 
erosion  of  these /clays'  is  very  characteristic.  Whitish  layers  of  volcanic 
ash  occur,  and  very  few  fossils  are  found. 

Remains  of  mammals  are  altogether  far  more  scarce  than  in  the  under- 
lying Oreodon  Zone,  being  confined  to  21  species.  Of  these  the  chief  new 
member  is  the  castorid  (Steneofiber)  which  makes  its  first  appearance  here 
in  the  form  of  a  very  primitive  species,  S.  nebrascensis.  This  animal  be- 
comes of  decided  chronologic  value  in  its  subsequent  evolution  because  of 
its  wide  geographic  distribution. 

Highly  characteristic  of  and  giving  the  name  to  the  sandstones  is  the 
remarkable  artiodactyl  Protoceras,  an  animal  of  the  height  of  the  sheep, 
remotely  related  to  the  American  deer  and  to  the  hypertragulids,  but  not 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  227 

descended  from  any  known  American  ancestor,  therefore  probably  a  new- 
comer; it  exhibits  two  pairs  of  short,  plated  or  rounded,  bony  horns,  or 
bosses,  and  canine  tusks  like  those  of  the  muntjacs.  In  these  sandstones 
was  discovered  also  the  finely  preserved  dicerathere  Ccenopus  tridactylus, 
a  descendant  of  the  Ccenopus  occidentalis  of  the  Oreodon  Zone,  in  which 
paired  rugosities  on  the  nasal  bones  of  old  male  specimens  are  prophetic 
of  the  prominent  horns  of  the  later  Dicer atherium.  In  the  same  sandstones 
are  found  tapirs  (Protapirus  validus)  of  larger  proportions,  and  small- 
headed  horses  (Mesohippus  intermedius)  of  considerably  larger  size,  which 
more  nearly  approach  the  Anchitherium  type  of  the  Lower  Miocene  of 
Europe;  in  fact,  the  six  species  of  horses  found  on  this  level  represent  a 
great  advance  upon  those  of  the  Oreodon  Zone,  Three  of  these  species 
pass  into  the  higher  Miohippus  stage  of  the  Upper  Oligocene,  or  John  Day. 
Among  Carnivora  it  is  noteworthy  that  Cynodictis  survives  and  that  the 
machserodonts  now  include  Eusmilus. 

The  adaptive  radiation  into  plains  and  lowland  mammals  beginning  in 
the  Titanotherium  and  Oreodon  Zones  is  thus  still  more  strongly  marked, 
but  the  plains  types  are  relatively  little  known.  Among  artiodactyls,  the 
entelodonts,  peccaries,  anthracotheres,  oreodonts,  hypertragulids,  and 
camelids  are  all  represented,  the  latter  passing  into  the  somewhat  more 
advanced  side  branch  of  camel  development  known  as  Pseudolahis. 

Second  Phase  of  the  Upper  Oligocene,  Diceratherium  Zone 

John  Day  Formation  of  Oregon.  —  This  grand  formation  carries  us  for 
the  first  time  into  the  mammal  life  of  the  extreme  northwestern  states, 
which  has  become  known  through  the  successive  explorations  and  re- 
searches of  Condon,  Sternberg,  Wortman,  Cope,  Merriam,  and  Sinclair.^ 
We  owe  the  discovery  of  these  beds  to  the  veteran  geologist  of  Oregon, 
Professor  Condon.  It  is  a  sharply  defined  volcanic  deposition  of  a  total 
thickness  of  1,650  feet,  composed  of  tuffs,  divided  into  lower,  middle, 
and  upper  levels  by  two  rhyolitic  flows,  and  sharply  bounded  at  the 
summit  by  a  gigantic  basaltic  outflow  two  thousand  feet  in  thickness, 
known  as  the  Columbia  River  Lava,  which  is  regarded  as  of  Lower 
Miocene  age.  As  described  by  Merriam,^  the  volcanic  materials  of  the 
John  Day  deposits  were  chiefly  wind-blown,  or  seolian.  There  is  little 
evidence  of  fluviatile  conditions.  The  greater  portion  of  the  series  is 
presumably  made  up  of  slow  accumulations  of  ash  which  fell  mainly  on 
open  plains,  upon  which  shifting,  shallow  lakes  may  have  existed  from  time 
to  time.    The  John  Day  beds  show  a  remarkable  evenness  in  their  strati- 

^  Principal  titles  given  in  Bibliography. 

2  Merriam,  J.  C,  A  Contribution  to  the  Geology  of  the  John  Day  Basin.  Univ.  Cal., 
Bull.  Dept.  GeoL,  Vol.  II,  1901,  p.  269  fol.;  and,  Carnivora  from  the  Tertiary  Formations  of 
the  John  Day  Region.    Univ.  Cal.,  Bull.  Dept.  GeoL,  Vol.  V,  1906,  pp.  1-64. 


228 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


fication.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  period  the  topography  appears  to  have 
been  more  diversified  and  the  action  of  streams  to  have  become  more 
pronounced  (p.  3).  The  Mollusca  are  terrestrial,  or  air  breathing  types, 
with  the  exception  of  those  of  one  locality,  which  are  fluviatile.  The 
Testudinata  (genus  Stylemys)  are  of  the  Testudo  or  terrestrial  type,  no 
river-living  turtles  having  been  recorded  ;  neither  is  there  any  evidence 
of  crocodiles.  Even  the  so-called  beavers  (Castoridie)  are  of  the  genus 
Steneofiher,  not  a  true  river-living  form.    This  time-keeping  rodent  (see 


Fig.  113.  —  View  of  S-ott  s  liluif,  a  famous  landnuiik  in  western  Nebraska.  Upper  Oligo- 
cene  of  the  Oreodon  and  supposed  Leptauchenia  Zones,  overlaid  by  Miocene.  Photograph  by 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  1908. 


p.  197),  it  may  be  observed  parenthetically,  is  in  the  same  stage  of  evo- 
lution as  its  relatives  in  St.  Gerand-le-Puy  of  France.  The  remains  of 
forests  are  found  in  the  middle  of  the  tuff  deposits,  and  the  great  forest 
at  the  summit  was  overtaken  and  submerged  by  the  lava  flow,  the  trunks 
of  the  trees  still  standing. 

The  known  mammalian  fauna  of  the  John  Day  Formation  is  chiefly 
of  the  open-forest,  river-border,  and  savannah-living  type.  Brachyodont 
or  browsing  types  of  molar  teeth  still  prevail.  The  beginning  of  this  great 
deposition  in  the  John  Day  valley  of  Oregon  appears  to  correspond  very 
nearly  with  that  of  the  closing  deposition  of  the  White  River  group,  Brule 
Clays,  or  Leptauchenia  Zone  of  the  Dakota  region  just  described;  but 
the  mammals  of  these  beds  are  so  sparse  and  little  known  that  few  deduc- 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  229 


tions  can  be  made  from  them  except  that  they  are  closely  related  to  those 
of  the  overlying  'Middle  John  Day.' 

Our  full  knowledge  of  the  mammalian  life  of  this  great  basin,  there- 
fore, begins  with  the  richly  fossiliferous  levels  of  the  Middle  John  Day, 
or  Diceratherium  Zone,  which  contains  a  varied  mammalian  fauna  con- 
siderably more  advanced  than  that  of  the  Leptauchenia-Protoceras  Zones, 
above  described,  and,  as  pointed  out  by  Scott,  on  the  whole  closely  similar 
in  its  evolution  to  the  St.  Gerand-le-Puy  fauna  of  France.  One  hundred 
species  of  mammals  have  been  described  from  this  level,  and  while  this 


Fig.  114. 


Middle  John  Day  Formation,  Oregon  ;  Diceratherium  Zone. 
University  of  California,  1900. 


Photograph  by 


list  may  be  reduced  by  closer  comparison,  it  also  will  be  expanded  by 
further  exploration.  As  in  the  Upper  Oligocene  of  France  we  note  the 
entire  disappearance  of  the  archaic  hysenodonts;  among  rhinoceroses  the 
cursorial  hyracodonts  are  absent;  among  Artiodactyla  no  traces  have 
been  found  of  the  primitive  family  of  leptochoerids,  nor  of  the  anthraco- 
theres;  among  smaller  mammals  it  is  noteworthy  that  there  are  no  traces 
of  the  opossums  (didelphyids) . 

Among  rodents  we  note  the  reappearance  of  the  castorid  Steneofiher, 
first  observed  in  the  somewhat  older  Protoceras  Zone,  and  also  highly 
characteristic  of  the  European  Upper  Oligocene.  Still  more  striking  is  the 
first  appearance  of  the  peculiarly  American  haplodontids  or  sewellels, 
which  even  at  the  present  time  are  confined  to  the  Rocky  Mountain  region. 
These  animals  (see  p.  534)  are  sciuromorphs,  remotely  related  to  the  Eocene 


230 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


and  Lower  Oligocene  ischyromyids  of  North  America.  Noteworthy  also 
is  the  first  appearance  of  the  geomyids,  or  pocket  gophers,  another  rodent 
family  which  is  peculiar  to  North  America.  Besides  these  castorids,  gophers, 
sewellels,  and  sciurids,  there  are  murids  and  leporids,  the  last  family  includ- 
ing a  species  actually  referred  to  the  existing  genus  Lepus. 

The  perissodactyl  ungulates  are  now  reduced  from  seven  families  to 
the  three  existing  families  of  Equidae,  Tapirid®,  and  Rhinocerotidae,  and  the 
extinct  aberrant  family  of  Chalicotheriidae.  Among  the  rhinoceroses  the  dic- 
eratheres  are  in  a  much  more  advanced  stage  of  evolution  than  in  the 
Protoceras  or  Leptauchenia  Zone,  as  they  exhibit  a  pair  of  well-developed 
horn  cores  upon  the  nasals  (as  in  the  D.  minutum  of  Moissac,  France), 
and  include  animals  of  a  considerable  range  in  size.  These  pair-horned 
rhinoceroses  are  especially  numerous  and  characteristic.  Aceratheres  have 
not  been  recognized  in  the  Oregon  region,  although  they  were  undoubtedly 
present.  Among  the  tapirs,  Protapirus  is  similar  to  that  found  in  the 
Protoceras  sandstones  of  the  White  River  group,  a  single  species,  P.  rohus- 
tus.  The  horses  are  numerous;  they  present  a  slight  advance  upon  those 
of  the  Protoceras  sandstones,  and  are  now  chiefly  referred  to  the  stage 
Miohippus,  while  one  species  {A.  prcestans)  from  the  Upper  John  Day  is 
very  similar  to  the  Lower  Miocene  Anchitherium  of  Europe.  The  chali- 
cotheres  are  represented  by  three  species  in  the  Moropus  stage  of  evolution. 

The  Carnivora  ^  are  confined  to  the  three  families,  canids,  mustelids, 
and  felids.  Of  these  the  dogs  still  include  Cynodictis  (Merriam)  beside  a 
great  variety  of  more  modern  genera  (Nothocyon,  Mesocyon,  Temnocyon,  a 
descendant  of  Daphoenus,  Paradaphcenus,  Enhydrocyon,  Philotrox).  This 
is  the  most  remarkable  assemblage  of  canids  known  in  any  formation 
in  America.  Beside  the  long-faced  dogs  {Temnocyon)  there  were  short- 
faced  forms  {Enhydrocyon,  Philotrox),  analogous  to  the  Simocyon  type  of 
Europe.  Oligobunis  was  formerly  considered  a  dog;  it  is  now  regarded  as 
a  mustelid.  The  felids  also  indicate  that  during  the  deposition  of  the 
Middle  John  Day  the  region  included  a  country  of  open  savannahs  favor- 
ing the  running  types.  The  mid-Oligocene  separation  observed  by  Matthew  ^ 
between  (1)  the  Dinictis  phylum,  which  is  more  truly  feline,  and  (2)  the 
Hoplophoneus  phylum,  which  is  more  truly  machserodont,  is  now  indicated 
by  the  light-limbed  Nimravus,  and  the  machserodont  Hoplophoneus,  which 
still  survives. 

Of  the  Artiodactyla,  five  families  are  kno\\Ti,  namely:  entelodonts, 
dicotylids,  oreodonts,  hypertragulids,  and  camelids.  The  entelodonts 
begin  to  approximate  the  climax  of  their  evolution,  including  animals  of 
massive  size  and  robust  limbs  {E.  imperator),  and  a  considerable  variety 

'  Merriam,  J.  C,  Carnivora  from  the  Tertiary  of  the  John  Day  Region.  Univ.  Cal. 
Publ.,  Bull.  Dept.  GeoL,  Vol.  V,  no.  1,  1906,  pp.  1-64. 

^  Matthew,  W.  D.,  Fossil  Mammals  of  the  Tertiary  of  Northeastern  Colorado,  1901,  pp. 
387-394. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  231 

of  specific  forms.  Similarly  the  suillines,  or  dicotylids,  are  found  in  great 
numbers  (Perchoerus)  and  in  a  variety  of  specific  forms.  Of  the  oreodonts 
the  Agriochoerus  phylum  reaches  a  climax  preceding  its  extinction.  The 
typical  cursorial  oreodonts  pass  into  the  Eporeodon  stage.  The  hyper- 
tragulids  are  represented  only  by  Hypertragulus. 

Third  and  Final  Phase,  Promerycochcerus  Zone 

Upper  John  Day  of  Oregon.  —  Especially  noteworthy  in  the  Upper 
John  Day  is  the  sudden  appearance  of  Pr ornery cochoerus,  an  unheralded 
oreodont,  which  is  highly  characteristic  of  the  close  of  the  Oligocene  and 
opening  of  tht  Miocene  of  North  America.  This  Upper  John  Day  level 
also  contains  members 
of  the  camel  series 
(Paratylopus) ,  animals 
of  larger  size,  and 
similar  to  those  in  the 
Middle  Oligocene.  It 
is  noteworthy  that  the 
only  camels  from  the 
John  Day  obtained 
by  the  University  of 
California  expeditions 
come  from  this  upper 
level. 

Great  Plains  of 
Dakota,  the  'Harrison' 
and '  Rosebud. ' — While 
the  John  Day  Forma- 
tion was  gathering  in 
Oregon,  either  a  con- 
tinuous but  non-fossil-bearing  deposition  or  a  brief  erosion  interval  followed 
on  the  Great  Plains  of  Dakota,  and  the  great  formations  variously  known  as 
^Arikaree,'  'Gering,'  'Monroe  Creek,'  'Harrison,'  and  'Rosebud'  began  to  be 
deposited  conformably  or  unconformably  on  the  summit  of  the  White  River 
group,  or  Leptauchenia  Zone  (Fig.  96).  This  great  formation  was  recog- 
nized as  Horizon  D  by  Hayden  as  early  as  the  year  1869.  It  is  indicated 
by  the  horizontal  lines  in  the  map  on  p.  211,  and  is  extensively  exposed 
along  the  White,  Niobrara,  and  North  Platte  rivers.  It  opens  with  partly 
flood  plain  or  fine  deposit  conditions,  interspersed  with  partly  fluviatile  or 
channel  conditions,  which  are  indicated  by  broad  beds  of  conglomerates 
and  river  sandstones  (Gering  and  Monroe  Creek  formations).  The  latter 
are  non-continuous;  they  reach  a  maximum  thickness  of  200  feet,  and 
are  generally  unfavorable  for  the  preservation  of  mammalian  life.  The 


Fig.  115.  — Type  of  the  Promerycochcerus  Zone.  Skull  of 
the  Upper  Oligocene  oreodont  Promerycochoerus  macrostegus. 
In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.    After  Matthew. 


232 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


conditions  of  deposition  are  more  fully  discussed  under  the  Miocene, 
p.  278. 

As  soon  as  fossils  become  abundant  it  is  evident  that  we  are  in  the 
Promerycochoerus  Zone,  because,  while  the  entire  assemblage  of  mammals 
is,  on  the  whole,  similar  generically  to  that  of  the  Upper  John  Day,  the 
specific  stages  are  regarded  as  type  for  type  more  recent  than  those  either 
of  the  Middle  or  even  of  the  Upper  John  Day,  or  of  the  Aquitanian  or  St. 
Gerand-le-Puy  of  France.  The  peccaries  afford  similar  testimony.  Thi- 
nohyus  siouxensis  is  more  modified  than  any  of  the  species  of  the  John 
Day.^    It  is  interesting  to  note  that  these  peccaries,  like  those  of  the  John 


Fig.  IIG.  —  Upper  John  Day  Formation,  Oregon;  Promerycochoerus  Zone.    Photograph  by 
the  University  of  California  expedition  of  1900. 


Day,  fall  into  two  phyla,  a  dolichocephalic  and  a  brachycephalic.  This  more 
recent  character  and  the  presence  in  these  lower  Arikaree  deposits  of  the 
plains  of  several  new  genera  of  mammals  may  justify  the  placing  of  these 
formations  in  the  Lower  Miocene  (Peterson,  Matthew).  We  are  certainly 
in  the  presence  of  a  transition. 

As  compared  with  the  Old  World,  however,  it  would  appear  that  this 
mammalian  assemblage  of  the  Upper  John  Day,  Lower  Arikaree,  Lower 
Harrison,  and  Lower  Rosebud  is  still  characteristically  Oligocene  rather 
than  Miocene,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying  list. 

1  Peterson,  O.  A.,  New  Suilline  Remains  from  the  Miocene  of  Nebraska.  Mem.  Carnegie. 
Mus.,  Pittsburg,  Vol.  II,  no.  8,  1906,  pp.  305-320. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  233 


Columbia  River  lava 
(basalt  flow,  2000  feet) 


Forest  on  top  of  ashes 
.  Camelidae 


JProTTierycochoeT'us  zone 
( (attest  lei^el) 


o 
o 
o 

a 

Q. 
Q. 


500- 
lOOO' 


250- 
300' 


Anchitherium 

Moropus 

Entelodon 

Paratylopus 

Eporeodon 

rfyperiragu/uS 


Miohippus 
Protapirus 
Moropus 
DiceratJierixtTn  Eporeodon 

zone  Agriochoerus 
(fossils,  numerous)  Nothocyon 
Temnocyon 


^  Remains  of 
'    forest  in  the 
tuff  deposits 


Lepus 
Steneof/ber 
Meniscomys 


f  /  ^^^r)'  '<:'')  >'Rhypljtic  ^^\ow 

Diceratheriinae, 
Elotherium, 
?  Oreodon 
(fossils,  scarce) 


By  permission  of  the  U.S.  Geologifal  Survey. 


Fig.  117.  —  Section  of  the  Upper  Oligocene  of  the  John  Day,  Oregon.    After  Merriam  and 

Sinclair. 


Characteristic  Mammals 

Anchitheres  {Miohippus,  Parahippus] 
Diceratheres  (varied) 
Tapirs 

Chalicotheres  (Moropus) 
Entelodonts  (last  appearance) 
Hypertragulids 

(Hypertragulus,  Syndyoceras) 
Castorids  (Steneofiber) 
Camelids  (varied) 
Oreodonts 

(Promerycochoerus) 
Dicotylids  (varied) 
Leporids 
Sciurids 
Haplodontids 


The  older  or  surviving  forms  in  this 
final  Oligocene  phase  include  advanced 
species  of  the  oreodont  Leptauchenia. 
Steneofiber  is  very  abundant  and  char- 
acteristic; this  is  its  last  appearance. 
The  final  stages  of  Aceratherium  and 
Entelodon  (Dinohyus)  are  also  observed 
here.  Among  the  forms  which  are  new 
or  not  previously  observed  are  the  an- 
chithere  Parahippus,  a  brachyodont, 
tridactyl  horse  which  becomes  very 
characteristic  of  the  Miocene.  Certain 
new  and  specialized  oreodonts  (Mesoreo- 
don,  Phenacocoelus)  are  found,  besides  the 
highly  characteristic  Pr ornery cochoerus 
and  the  surviving  Leptauchenia.    It  is 


234 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


noteworthy  that  Agriochoerus  is  ap- 
parently extinct. 

As  we  are  now  again  observing  the 
fauna  of  the  Great  Plains,  it  is  not 
surprising  to  discover  the  excessively 
delicate  and  graceful  cursorial  camelid 
Stenomylus  gracilis. 
On  the  whole,  however,  browsing,  slow-moving,  river  and  forest-border 
and  actual  forest-living  types  prevail  over  open-plains  and  cursorial  types, 


Characteristic  Mammals 

(continued) 

Geomyids 
Pro-Felids 
Pro-Machaerodonts 
Canids  (varied) 
Mustelids 


Fig.  118.  —  Summit  of  tlic  ()liti;ocen('  Lcnvcr  Aliuceuc,  Lower  Harrison  beds,  Sioux 
County,  Nebraska.  A  view  of  the  Stenomylus  quarry  in  the  Promerycochoerus  Zone.  Photo- 
graph by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  1908. 


SO  far  as  we  know  the  fauna  of  this  region  at  this  time.  Undoubtedly  an 
upland  or  plains  and  cursorial  fauna  existed  in  this  western  region,  but  it 
has  not  become  fully  known. 

Physiographic  conditions.  —  The  geologic  conditions  of  the  Lower 
Arikaree,  Lower  Rosebud,  and  Lower  Harrison  are  peculiarly  interesting. 
Near  the  summit  of  the  Lower  Harrison  occur  the  Daemonelix  beds  of 
Barbour,  named  from  the  giant  spirals  or  corkscrews  of  harder  rock,  which 
resist  erosion,  held  together  by  fibrous  material,  and  at  many  points  stand 
out  prominently  against  the  sloping  bluffs  of  the  Upper  Niobrara  River. 
These  were  interpreted  originally  as  representing  the  spiral  roots  of  some 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  235 


gigantic  plant  (Barbour,  1897  ^) ;  then  as  the  burrows  of  the  castorid  rodent 
Steneofiber,  remains  of  which  were  found  to  occur  inside  (Peterson,  1905)  ^; 
more  recently  Riggs  ^  has  reported  skeletons  of  other  animals  drawn  to- 
gether within  these  spirals,  a  fact  which  tends  to  throw  doubt  upon  the 
rodent  'burrow  theory.' 

Near  the  summit  of  the  Lower  Harrison  stream  bed  formation  is  the 
extraordinarily  rich  deposit  known  as  the  Agate  Spring  Quarry,  thoroughly 


Fig.  119.  —  View  of  the  Dsemonelix  beds  near  Harrison,  Sioux  County,  Nebraska,  showing 
the  problematical  Dcemonelix,  or  "devil's  corkscrews."  From  the  Morrill  Collection  of  Geo- 
logical Photographs,  University  of  Nebraska,  hy  permission  of  E.  H.  Barbour. 


explored  by  Barbour  of  the  University  of  Nebraska  and  by  Peterson  for  the 
Carnegie  Museum,  and  yielding  a  nearly  if  not  complete  picture  of  the 
larger  mammals  of  this  region  and  period.  Here  has  been  found  especially 
a  complete  skeleton  of  the  giant  chalicothere  Moropus  and  of  the  giant 
entelodont  Dinohyus,  and  smaller  forms  of  Diceratherium  in  great  abundance. 
This  quarry  was  first  reported  by  James  H.  Cook  about  1890  in  the  center 
of  a  region  rich  in  fossils. 

The  mammals  of  this  period  have  been  chiefly  described  by  Barbour, 
Peterson  (1906),  and  Matthew.^    The  last  author,  in  describing  (1907)  the 

1  Barbour,  E.  H.,  On  a  New  Order  of  Gigantic  Fossils.  Nebr.  Univ.  Stud.,  Vol.  I,  no.  4, 
July,  1892;  and  Nature,  Structure  and  Phylogeny  of  Dcemonelix.  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer.,  Vol. 
VIII,  April,  1897,  pp.  305-314. 

2  Peterson,  O.  A.,  Description  of  New  Rodents  and  Discussion  of  the  Origin  of  Dcemonelix. 
Carnegie  Mus.  Mem.,  Vol.  II,  1905,  pp.  139-191. 

3  Riggs,  Remarks  on  Dcemonelix,  Amer.  Soc.  Vertebr.  Pal.,  7th.  Ann.  Meet.,  Baltimore, 
Dec,  1908. 

*  Principal  titles  are  given  in  Bibliography. 


236 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Lower  Rosebud  beds,  which  lie  farther  east  along  the  Pine  Ridge  of  the 
White  River,  speaks  of  the  entire  fauna  as  an  outgrowth  of  the  Oligocene 
(White  River  and  John  Day  faunas)  containing  no  new  or  migrant  elements.^ 
Among  the  most  peculiar  forms  are  Syndyoceras  (a  collateral  successor  of 
Protoceras  of  the  Leptauchenia  Zone) ,  a  hypertragulid  with  an  extraordinary 
development  of  the  paired  horns  on  top  of  the  skull  (Fig.  121),  and  Steno- 

mylus,  a  small  and  delicately 
limbed  cameloid  abundantly 
found  in  one  locality  (Fig.  118). 
Oxydadylus  (Fig.  1 44)  is  a  long- 
necked,  or  giraffoid  camel,  the 
first  of  a  very  important  Mio- 
cene and  Pliocene  series. 

The  hares,  or  leporids,  are 
represented  by  species  which 
cannot  be  separated  from  the 
modem  genus  Lepus,  although 
the  tooth  pattern  is  primitive. 
The  Equidae  are  represented 
only  by  species  with  lateral 
toes,  typically  reaching  the 
ground,  with  no  vestige  left  of 
the  pollex.  The  oreodonts  are 
almost  as  abundant  as  in  the 
Oreodon  beds  of  the  White 
River  group.  Especially  re- 
markable is  the  group  contain- 
ing three  specimens  of  Pro- 
which 


IS  now 


Fig.  120.  —  Contemporary  Upper   Oligocene  or  merycochoerus 

Lower  Miocene  mammals  to  same  scale.    By  Charles  j.  j  •     j-u                  •  t\t 

R.  Knight.    A.  Syndyoceras,  successor  to  Protoceras.  mOUUtcd  m  the  CameglC  Mu- 

B.  Phenacocoelus,  successor  to  Oreodon.    A  browser  seum;  the  animals  were  huddled 

clcZZ'  together  as  if  overtaken  by  a 

sandstorm  or  sudden  fall  of 
volcanic  ash.  The  canids  range  from  the  size  of  foxes  (Nothocyon)  up 
to  the  larger  and  more  predaceous  dogs  (Cynodesmus),  but  include  also 
the  short-faced  dogs  (Enhydrocyon) .  A  giant  dog  from  the  Lower  Harri- 
son was  first  defined  as  an  amphicj^on,  but  is  now  distinguished  as  Da- 
phcenodon  (Peterson).  The  peccaries,  or  dicotylids  (Desmathyus) ,  are  still 
closely  related  to  the  Perchoerus  type  of  the  John  Day.  They  are  extremely 
abundant  and  characteristic  in  this  zone. 

In  conclusion  emphasis  may  be  laid  upon  the  fact  that  these  plains 
formations  are  difficult  to  correlate  in  point  of  time,  that  they  may  be 

^  Matthew,  W.  D.,  A  Lower  Miocene  Fauna  from  South  Dakota.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus. 
Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIII,  1907. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  237 


By  permission  of  E.  H.  Barbour. 

Fig.  121.  —  Skull  of  the  four-pronged  ruminant  Syndyoceras,  found  in  the  Dsemonelix  beds  of 
Sioux  County,  Nebraska.    Univ.  Nebr.  Coll. 


either:  (1)  Upper  Oligocene,  or  (2)  transitional  from  Oligocene  to  Miocene, 
or  (3)  of  pure  Lower  Miocene  age  (see  p.  277). 

Causes  of  Extinction  of  Oligocene  Mammals* 

In  considering  Eocene  extinction  we  have  found  (p.  172)  the  note- 
worthy feature  in  America  to  be  the  competition,  or  struggle  for  existence, 
between  lower  and  higher  types  of  mammals,  or  the  archaic  and  modern- 
ized, as  a  result  of  which  the  former  entirely  disappeared. 

In  Europe  this  feature  is  less  conspicuous  than  the  apparent  influence 
of  the  altered  land  areas  of  a  peninsular  region  with  the  large  number  of 
consequent  changes  (p.  83).  This  is  the  more  apparent  in  Europe  because 
the  archaic  mammals  do  not  appear  ever  to  have  had  such  a  strong  foot- 
hold in  Eocene  times  as  in  continental  America.  We  note  the  disappear- 
ance of  a  very  large  number  of  prophetic  forms  of  modernized  mammals 

^  Osborn,  H.  F.,  The  Causes  of  Extinction  of  Mammalia.  Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XL, 
no.  479,  Nov.,  1906,  pp.  769-795,  no.  480,  Nov.,  1906,  pp.  829-859. 


238 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


such  as  palseotheres,  lophioclonts,  anoplotheres,  xiphodonts,  in  part  highly 
speciahzed  and  yet  destined  to  extinction. 

Doubtless  the  defective  brain,  the  defective  tooth,  the  defective  foot 
contributed  to  the  downfall  of  the  prophetic  modern  types,  and  throughout 
Oligocene  times  we  are  able  to  concentrate  our  attention  on  certain  specific 
organs,  or  parts  of  animals,  as  causes  of  extinction. 

In  general  those  mammals  appear  to  survive  which  present  the  highest 
adaptive  combination  of  favorable  characters  in  fully  formed  organs  as  well 
as  the  highest  adaptabilitij  or  capacity  to  further  favorable  change  of  habit  or 
structure.  Conversely,  inadaptive  combinations  of  characters,  such  as  of  the 
brain,  the  limbs,  the  teeth,  appear  to  have  been  the  causes  of  extinction, 
partly  in  connection  with  changes  of  environment,  partly  because  inherently 
or  relatively  inadaptive. 

Thus  in  Oligocene  still  more  clearly  than  in  Eocene  times  we  observe 
that  extreme  bulk,  extreme  specialization,  and  the  development  of  certain 
dominant  characters  lead  to  extinction.  Certain  types  of  teeth  or  certain 
types  of  limb  and  foot  structure  simultaneously  over  large  parts  of  the 
world  have  been  found  wanting  and  thus  proved  fatal  to  their  possessors. 
These  are  the  general  lines  of  thought  which  have  been  followed  by  many 
authors  since  Darwin  first  directed  our  attention  to  this  subject.  It  is 
desirable  to  look  into  some  of  these  causes  more  critically. 

Inadaptive  foot  structure.  —  As  already  remarked  (p.  15),  Kowalevsky 
observed  in  his  great  monograph  (1873,  p.  152),  the  extinction  in  Oligocene 
and  Miocene  times  of  all  artiodactyls  with  inadaptive  foot  structure  and 
inadaptive  grinding  teeth,  as  follows:  Upper  Eocene,  Xiphodon,  Anoplo- 
therium,  Diplopus;  Oligocene,  Ancodus,  Anthracotherium,  Entelodon.  He 
pointed  out  that  the  inadaptation  of  the  feet  consisted  in  a  mechanical 
defect  in  the  small  bones  of  the  hand,  or  manus,  while  the  inadaptation  in 
the  grinding  teeth  consisted  in  the  persistent  short,  or  brachyodont  crowns 
composed  of  partially  rounded  cones  and  imperfectly  formed  crescents. 
By  his  theory  the  mechanically  defective  feet  were  incapable  of  acquiring 
the  elongation  into  the  cursorial  type  which  saved  the  lives  of  the  artio- 
dactyls with  adaptively  formed  front  feet.  The  short-crowned  teeth  could 
not  survive  the  change  of  vegetation  from  the  softer  herbage  of  Eocene 
times  to  the  harder  grasses  of  late  Oligocene  and  Miocene  times. 

The  accompanying  diagram  (Fig.  122)  bears  out  Kowalevsky 's  general- 
ization so  far  as  the  teeth  are  concerned.  It  exhibits  the  reduction  in 
number  of  the  mammals  with  short-crowned  bunodont  teeth  toward  the 
close  of  the  Oligocene,  and  the  reduction  and  extinction  of  mammals  with 
bunoselenodont  grinding  teeth  of  two  divisions,  that  is,  both  among  the 
artiodactyl  anthracotheres  and  anoplotheres  and  among  the  perissodactyl 
titanotheres  and  chalicotheres.  The  purely  crested  or  lophodont  types 
also  appear  to  have  suffered  a  reduction.  The  most  highly  successful 
dental  types  appear  to  have  been  the  selenodont,  characterizing  all 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  239 


the  modem  ruminants,  and  the  lophoselenodont,  characterizing  the 
horses. 

Titanothere  grinding  teeth.  —  We  have  seen  the  magnificent  titanotheres 
suddenly  cut  off  at  the  close  of  Lower  Oligocene  times,  and  this  extinction 
may  be  attributed  partly  to  the  cone-and-crescent,  or  bunoselenodont 


RECENT 

:ne 

UPPER 

CD 
1— 

oo 

MIDDLE 

LjU 

— f 
Q_ 

LOWER 

U_l 
LU 

UPPE  R 

PLIOC 

LOWE  R 

UJ 

z 

UPPE  R 

OCE 

MIDDLE 

T 

LO WE  R 

 J 

ENE 

UPPER 

GOC 

MIDDLE 

o 

LOWER 

NE  1 

UPPER 

ICEI 

MIDDLE 

UJ 

LOWER 

Hippopotami  Anthracotheres  Oreodonts  Hyracodonts  Horses  Titanotheres 
Pi$s,  Peccaries  Anoplotheres  Hypertra^ulids  Rhinoceroses  Hyracotheres  Chalicotheres 
Achaenodonts  Csnotheres,  Lophiodonts 

Elotheres  Xiphodonts  Camels 

True  Ruminants  ^ 


Artio  dactyla 


Pe  rissodactyla 


EVOLUTION  OF   UNGULATES  IN  NORTH  AMERICA 

Fig.  122.  —  The  survival  or  extinction  of  mammals  possessing  certain  types  of  molar  teeth. 


pattern  of  their  grinding  teeth,  which  were  adapted  to  browsing  on  the 
coarse  and  soft  rather  than  grazing  upon  the  fine  and  hard  kinds  of  food. 
Among  these  animals,  nature  was  apparently  making  an  effort  to  convert 
a  brachyodont  into  a  hypsodont  crown  by  the  elongation  of  the  outer  side 
of  the  superior  grinding  teeth;  but  this  effort  was  futile  because  of  the 
absence  of  a  cross-crest  and  the  persistent  brachyodonty  of  the  inner 


240 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


side  of  the  crown.  Such  a  half-hypsodont,  half-brachyodont  tooth  was 
not  adaptive. 

Some  other  cause,  however,  must  be  sought  for  the  extinction  of  the 
titanotheres,  because  the  entelodonts,  with  teeth  still  less  effective  me- 
chanically, and  the  chalicotheres,  with  teeth  very  similar  in  pattern  to 
those  of  the  titanotheres,  both  survived  through  the  Oligocene  or  even  into 
Pliocene  times  in  certain  parts  of  the  world.  The  obvious  conclusion  is 
that  tlie  entelodonts  and  chalicotheres  either  enjoyed  some  compensating 
adjustment  or  discovered  a  level  habitat  suitable  to  their  needs. 

Useless  dominant  organs.^  — Another  explanation  which  may  be  offered 
of  the  extinction  of  the  titanotheres  is  that  in  two  phyla  the  horns  were 
over-developed,  attaining  gigantic  size  and  causing  an  incidence  of  natural 
selection  on  characters  which  were  useful  in  combat  only.  Characters 
which  have  reached  an  extreme  stage  so  as  to  demand  a  larger  share  of  the 
sum  total  of  bodily  nutrition  than  their  general  utility  justifies  may  be 
known  as  useless  dominant  organs;  they  appear  to  violate  the  law  of 
economy  of  growth,  or  the  most  favorable  combination  of  characters  by 
the  subservience  of  each  part  to  the  whole. 

But  the  force  of  this  theory  as  applied  to  the  extinction  of  the  titano- 
theres is  completely  negatived  by  the  fact  that  two  of  the  phyla  {Titano- 
^herium,  Megacerops)  in  which  the  horns  were  relatively  small  became  extinct 
at  exactly  the  same  time  as  the  large-horned  genera  {Brontotherium,  Sym- 
borodon).  We  are  thus  compelled  to  believe  that  the  titanotheres  became 
extinct  partly  through  the  inadaptation  of  their  grinding  tooth  structure  to 
sustain  their  great  bulk  in  a  period  of  incipient  desiccation  and  of  changed 
conditions  of  climate  and  vegetation. 

Diminution  of  browsing  animals.  —  The  Oligocene  certainly  witnessed 
a  world-wide  diminution  of  the  larger  types  of  browsing  animals  with  brachyo- 
dont  teeth  and  with  feet  incapable  of  rapid  or  cursorial  locomotion.  There 
is,  on  the  contrary,  an  increase  in  the  number  of  grazing  animals,  accom- 
panied by  an  incipient  transformation  of  brachyodont  into  hypsodont 
grinding  teeth  wherever  the  tooth  pattern  admits  of  such  a  change,  and  a 
general  elongation  of  the  feet  from  mesatipodal  into  dolichopodal  types. 

Multiplication  of  smaller  browsing  and  grazing  animals.  —  The  multi- 
plication of  the  small  browsing  and  grazing  animals,  such  as  the  oreodonts, 
in  Oligocene  times  is  also  to  be  taken  into  consideration  as  a  possible  cause 
of  extinction  of  the  larger  types  like  the  titanotheres.  The  oreodonts  cer- 
tainly existed  in  enormous  numbers,  and  must  have  consumed  great  quan- 
tities of  food.  The  horses  also  swarmed  in  herds  during  the  Oligocene 
periods  in  the  region  of  South  Dakota  and  Nebraska.  It  is  possible  that 
these  animals  may  have  cut  off  part  of  the  food  supply  of  the  titanotheres. 
Their  influence  may  be  compared  to  that  of  the  introduction  of  large  num- 
bers of  sheep  and  goats  into  a  cattle  country.    The  abundance  of  new 

'  Cope,  E.  D.,  Primary  Factors  of  Organic  Evolution,  1896,  p.  173. 


OLIGOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  241 

forms  of  dissimilar  feeders  may  disturb  completely  the  balance  of  nature 
and  alter  the  character  and  amount  of  food  supply  or  even  of  the  water 
supply  in  any  given  region. 

The  general  conclusion  as  to  Oligocene  extinction  is  that  climatic  con- 
ditions, increasing  aridity,  development  of  grasses,  incipient  reduction  of 
water  courses,  spread  of  meadow  and  savannah  country,  favored  the  evolu- 
tion of  Herbivora  with  long-crowned  teeth  and  with  elongate  feet. 

This  period  accordingly  witnesses  the  first  striking  development  of  a 
tendency  which  becomes  the  dominant  feature  of  Miocene  and  Pliocene 
evolution,  namely,  substitution  of  grazing  cursorial  types  for  browsing 
and  ambulatory  types,  the  latter  being  driven  to  the  forests  and  water 
courses. 


CHAPTER  IV 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 

With  the  beginning  of  the  Miocene  we  enter  upon  a  new  faunal  phase 
in  Europe.  We  also  enjoy  our  first  knowledge  of  the  life  of  Asia.  The 
hitherto  pent-up  mastodons  of  Africa  enter  Europe  and  later  reach 
North  America;  Asia  toward  the  close  of  the  Miocene  sends  great  contri- 
butions of  its  mammalian  life  into  Europe  and  to  a  far  less  degree  into 
North  America.  In  all  probability  at  this  time  Africa  receives  certain 
large  contributions  both  from  Europe  and  Asia,  but  of  the  exact  period 
when  this  Eurasiatic  contribution  to  Africa  occurred  we  have  no  direct 
geologic  record.  The  grand  result  of  these  intermigrations  between  the 
great  continents  is  that  by  the  close  of  the  Miocene,  Africa,  Europe,  and 
Asia  probably  constituted  one  zoological  realm,  arctog^a,  with  North 
America  as  an  outlyer,  distant  but  yet  related. 

This  condition,  which  we  shall  speak  of  as  the  Fifth  Faunal  Phase, 
continues  until  the  Lower  or  Middle  Pliocene,  when  South  America  unites 
with  North  America  and  enters  into  this  world-wide  distribution  of  a 
somewhat  similar  fauna,  namely,  of  proboscideans,  horses,  tapirs,  true 
felids,  and  machaerodonts,  canids,  mustelids,  and  many  families  of  rodents. 

V.  FIFTH  FAUNAL  PHASE —  MIOCENE  TO  LOWER  PLIOCENE. 
APPEARANCE  IN  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  OF  AFRICAN 
PROBOSCIDEA  AND  OF  ASIATIC  SHORT-LIMBED  RHINOCEROSES. 
CLOSE  UNION  OF  THE  MAMMAL  FAUNA  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND 
AFRICA .  NORTH  AMERICA  MORE  REMOTE.  AND  SOUTH  AMERICA 
STILL  ENTIRELY  INDEPENDENT.  PROGRESSIVE  EXTINCTION 
OF  BROWSING  AND  INCREASE  OF  GRAZING  TYPES.  A  LOWERING 
OF  TEMPERATURE.  INCREASING  SUMMER  DRY  PERIODS  AND 
SEMI-ARID  AREAS. 

Palceogeography  and  Climate 

Flora  and  climate  of  Europe.  — There  is  evidence  of  a  gradual  lowering 
of  temperature.  AVhile  the  vegetation  of  the  Miocene  has  much  in  com- 
mon with  the  Ohgocene  and  is  characterized  by  an  increase  of  species, 
many  forms  now  confined  to  warmer  zones  disappear  from  central  and 

24? 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  243 


Fig.  123.  —  Type  of  the  Upper  Miocene  '  Hipparion  Fauna '  of  the  New  and  Old  Worlds. 
Neohipparion,  the  light-limbed  desert-living  horse  of  the  Upper  Miocene  of  North  America. 
Above  :  Skeleton  of  Neohipparion  whitneyi.  Below  :  Restoration  of  the  same  by  Charles  R. 
Knight.    Both  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


244 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


northern  Europe.  After  the  Ix)wer  Burdigalian,  which  is  close  to  the 
OHgocene  in  character,  palms  cease  north  of  the  Alps,  and  toward  the 
end  of  the  Miocene  there  was  a  further  fall  in  temperature,  especially  in 
the  Arctic  regions.'  The  absence  of  palms  north  of  the  Alps  ^  is  paralleled 
by  their  absence  in  the  entire  Rocky  Mountain  region  of  America  from 
Colorado  northwest.  In  consulting  the  earlier  treatises  of  Saporta  (1867)  ^ 
and  Heer  (1865)  ^  it  is  important  for  the  student  to  note  that  at  the  time 
these  works  were  written,  the  entire  warmer  Oligocene  Period  was  em- 
braced within  the  Miocene.  We  have  few  records  of  the  development  of 
grasses,  but  there  is  no  question  that  Kowalevsky's  generalization  (1873), 
based  upon  the  structure  of  the  feet  and  teeth  of  mammals,  that  the  Miocene 
was  characterized  by  an  increase  of  grassy  plains,  was  correct;  yet  it  is 
remarkable  that  only  at  the  close  of  the  Miocene  of  Europe  do  mammals 
with  hypsodont,  grazing  teeth  and  stilted  or  cursorial  limbs  suddenly  ap- 
pear in  large  numbers;  they  are  Oriental  or  exotic  forms,  which,  however, 
were  tempted  to  enter  Europe  by  climatic  and  floral  conditions  to  which 
they  had  become  perfectly  adapted  in  Asia  and  North  America.  If  the 
palaeontologist,  observes  Kowalevsky,'*  will  imagine  himself  in  the  close  of 
the  Miocene,  he  will  see  great  changes  going  on.  Omnivorous  forms  are 
becoming  graminivorous,  the  method  of  chewing  is  changing  from  a  vertical, 
biting  movement,  to  a  horizontal,  grinding  one;  and  to  meet  these  new 
conditions  of  feeding  it  is  necessary  that  more  durable  teeth  should  be 
developed.  The  low  teeth  are  replaced  by  columnar  ones.  It  is  in  these 
anatomical  changes  that  we  find  the  surest  proof  of  the  existence  of  the 
great  grassy  plains  and  of  the  development  of  silicious  plants.  ''How- 
ever," observes  Gaudry,^  "grasses  did  not  form  a  very  large  element  of 
the  vegetation  even  at  this  time."  This  was  the  beginning  of  the  period 
of  dry,  grassy  plains,  similar  to  those  of  recent  Africa,  and  extending  through 
the  greater  part  of  the  Pliocene. 

Continental  connections.  —  The  emergence  of  the  continents  progressed 
in  the  Miocene.  The  great  Mediterranean  Sea  of  Europe  and  southern 
Asia  was  consequently  reduced,  and  Africa,  to  the  east  at  least,  was  united 
with  Europe,  permitting  the  northward  migration  of  the  mastodons  and 
dinotheres.  America  was  broadly  united  with  eastern  Asia,  and  the 
shutting  off  of  the  warmer  southern  currents  from  the  polar  region  prob- 
ably marked  the  commencement  of  a  cooler  northern  climate.  South 
America  still  remained  separate;  at  least,  there  is  no  evidence  of  a  faunal 

1  Schimper  und  Schenk,  Palteophytologie,  1890,  p.  820. 

*  Palms  and  camphor  trees  are  recorded  in  the  Middle  Miocene  beds  of  CEningen,  47"^ 
N.  lat. 

'  See  Bibliography. 

*  Kowalevsky,  V.,  Monographic  der  Gattung  Anthracotherium  Cuv.  und  Versuch  einer 
naturlichen  Classification  der  fossilen  Hufthiere.  Paloeontographica,  n.s.,  2,  3,  (XXII),  1873, 
p.  270  fol. 

"  Gaudry,  A.,  Animaux  Fossiles  du  Mont  Leberon  (Vaucluse).  Etude  sur  les  Vert^br^s, 
p.  79.    4to,  Paris,  1873. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  245 


interchange  with  North  America.  Austraha  also  was  separate.  During 
this  epoch  or  in  the  Phocene  may  have  occurred  the  union  of  the  East 
Indies,  Borneo,  Sumatra,  Java,  with  the  Asiatic  mainland,  enabhng  the 
animals  of  Asia  to  populate  these  islands. 

The  coastal  changes  of  southeastern  North  America  resulted  in  the 
establishment  of  the  main  present  outlines  of  the  East  Indies  and  Florida. 
Jamaica  emerged  after  the  close  of  the  Oligocene;  Cuba  emerged  after  the 


MIOCENE 


Fig.  124.  —  Middle  and  Upper  Miocene,  a  period  of  continental  elevation  and  emergence, 
consequently  of  renewed  land  connections  and  migrations.  Africa  broadly  united  with  Europe 
across  the  Arabic  peninsula,  and  a  typical  Asiatic  fauna  roaming  westward  into  Europe  and 
Africa.  Asia  connected  with  the  East  Indies  and  the  Philippine  Islands.  Florida  elevated  at 
the  close  of  the  Miocene.  South  America  divided  into  northern  and  southern  halves  by  a  broad 
gulf,  the  northern  half  perhaps  connected  with  North  America.  Australia  entirely  separated 
from  Asia.    Rearranged  after  W.  D.  Matthew,  1908. 

beginning  of  the  Miocene;  at  the  termination  of  the  Miocene,  Florida 
became  a  part  of  the  continent;  this  continental  connection  of  Florida  is 
consistent  with  the  appearance  on  this  peninsula  of  an  important  part  of 
the  Upper  Miocene  fauna  of  North  America  in  Lower  Pliocene  times.^ 
Both  Dall  ^  and  Hill  ^  concur  in  believing  that  North  and  South  America 
have  been  united  from  the  Miocene  to  the  present  time. 

^  De  Lapparent,  A.,  Traite  de  Geologic,  p.  1606. 

^  Dall,  W.  H.,  Geological  Results  of  the  Study  of  the  Tertiary  Fauna  of  Florida.  Trans. 
Wagner  Inst.,  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  6,  1903,  pp.  1549-1550. 

'  Hill,  R.  T.,  Geological  History  of  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  and  Portions  of  Costa  Rica. 
Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  Zodl.,  Vol.  XXVIII,  June,  1898,  p.  270. 


246  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

Physiographic  changes  in  Europe.  —  The  Miocene  witnessed  the  begin- 
ning of  the  phenomena  which  resulted  in  the  formation  of  the  great  chain 
of  Swiss  Alps  (Fig.  13,  p.  59).  At  the  very  beginning  of  the  period  the 
lake  basins  of  the  Oligocene  were  gradually  drained  off  and  replaced  by 
great  river  and  flood  plain  deposits.  Thus  the  initial  or  Burdigalian  stage 
was  just  opening  when  the  vast  Lake  of  Beauce  was  drying  up,  leaving 
the  calcaires  de  Beauce  and  calcaires  de  Montabuzard,  the  latter  containing 
the  earliest  Miocene  life.^  Over  this  were  poured  the  earliest  sandy  de- 
posits (sables  de  Chitenay)  of  the  great  Miocene  river  which  traversed  the 
northern  portion  of  France  and  emptied  into  the  English  Channel.  These 
deposits  of  the  sables  de  VOrleanais  are  composed  of  formations  of  different 
stages,  which  together  contain  the  typical  Lower  Miocene  mammalian  fauna. 
Thus  the  earl}^  Miocene  life  is  recorded  in  V.ontinental  formations.' 

During  the  Middle  Miocene,  or  Vindobonian  stage,  there  was  a  re- 
newed depression  of  the  southern  coast  of  Europe,  while  at  the  same  time 
the  lacustrine  deposits  of  Sansan,  Simorre,  and  St.  Gaudens  were  laid  down 
in  southwestern  France,  giving  us  a  complete  record  of  Middle  Miocene 
life.  The  coastal  depression  in  the  south  was  followed  in  the  Upper  Mio- 
cene, or  Pontian  Stage,  by  a  renewed  elevation  and  the  fresh  and  wide- 
spread 'continental  formations,'  which  give  us  a  most  wonderful  picture 
of  the  life  from  the  Isle  of  Samos  in  the  east  to  that  of  western  Spain,  as 
well  as  of  northern  Germany.  Thus  at  the  close  of  the  Miocene  the  south 
of  Europe  probably  covered  a  tremendous  land  area  favorable  to  and  con- 
temporaneous with  the  remarkable  development  of  cursorial,  herbivorous 
mammals,  plains-living  types,  the  climatic  conditions  being  similar  to 
those  prevailing  in  East  Africa  at  the  present  time.^  Even  at  this  time 
southern  Europe  was  rather  sharply  distinguished  from  northern  Europe 
in  flora  and  fauna,  probably  on  account  of  increasing  desiccation.  While 
at  Pikermi  (Greece)  there  were  giraffes  and  antelopes,  deer  (forest  types) 
were  common  north  of  the  Alps.^ 

The  enormous  thickness  of  certain  of  the  Miocene  marine  deposits 
(2,700  m.),  and  of  the  more  massive  freshwater  deposits,  together  with 
these  vast  periods  of  elevation  and  depression,  and  the  great  changes  in 
the  mammalian  life,  combine  to  give  us  a  realization  of  the  great  duration 
of  Miocene  time. 

Miocene  Life  of  Europe  and  America  Compared 

The  Lower  Miocene  of  Europe  is  very  clearly  defined  by  the  sudden 
appearance  of  the  proboscideans,  including  both  mastodons  and  dinotheres. 

'  Mayet,  L.,  Etude  des  Mammif^res  Miocenes  des  Sables  de  I'Orleanais  et  des  Faluns  de  la 
Touraine.    Ann.  Univ.  Lyon,  n.s.,  I.  Sci.  Med.,  fasc.  24,  1908. 

^  Dep6ret,  C,  Recherches  sur  la  Succession  des  Faunesde  Vertebres  Miocenes  de  la  Vallee 
du  Rhone.    Extr.  Arch.  Mus.  Hist.  Nat.  Lyon,  1,  IV,  Lyons,  1887,  p.  249. 

3  Palacky,  J.,  Die  Verbreitung  der  Ungulaten.  Zodl.  Jahrb.,  Abt.  Syst.  Geog.  Biol., 
J.  W.  Spengel  in  Giessen,  Vol.  XVIII,  No.  2,  1903,  p.  339. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  247 


In  the  coastal  rivers  there  swarmed  at  this  time  sirenians  (Metaxytherium), 
also  originally  from  Africa.  From  Asia  there  appeared  the  first  of  the 
antelopes  (Protragocerus) .  From  Asia  or  from  eastern  Europe  there  ap- 
peared two  entirely  new  phyla  of  rhinoceroses  hitherto  unrepresented  in 
western  Europe  and  unknown,  namely,  the  excessively  bulky  and  short- 
limbed  teleocerine  and  the  slender-limbed  dicerorhine  forms,  the  former 
destined  to  flourish  and  die  out  in  Europe  during  the  Miocene  period,  the 
latter  destined  to  survive  in  the  existing  and  rather  primitive  two-horned 
rhinoceros  (Dicerorhinus)  of  Sumatra.  In  this  phylum,  to  which  we  shall 
make  frequent  reference,  the  grinders  are  short,  the  horns  are  small  and 
placed  in  tandem  on  the  frontals  and  nasals.  Probably  from  Asia  also,, 
there  entered  Europe  the  first  of  the  higher  primates,  or  anthropoid  apes 
(Pliopithecus) .  From  Asia  also  entered  the  first  horned  cervuline  deer,  or 
muntjacs.  Of  this  Lower  Miocene  invading  fauna  the  mastodons  and 
teleocerine  rhinoceroses  alone  reached  North  America.  Distinctive  also  is 
the  reappearance  in  Europe  of  horses  in  the  Anchitherium  stage  either  of 
north  Asiatic  or  of  North  American  origin. 

The  most  characteristic  of  the  larger  forms  of  hoofed  mammals  which 
by  the  Middle  Miocene  become  common  to  the  New  and  Old  Worlds  are 
the  following: 

Primitive  mastodons  with  four  large  tusks  (new). 
Chalicotheres,  forest-living. 

Teleocerine,  or  short-footed  rhinoceroses,  single-homed  (new). 
Aceratheres,  large,  hornless,  tetradactyl  rhinoceroses. 
Tapirs. 
Anchitheres. 

Mingled  with  the  new  and  strange  invaders,  some  of  the  descendants 
of  the  great  groups  of  Oligocene  mammals  continue  their  evolution  both 
in  Europe  and  North  America,  but  certain 
of  the  most  characteristic  Oligocene  types 
have  passed  their  flourishing  period  and 
are  in  their  last  stages.  These  passing 
forms  are  the  diceratheres,  the  anthra- 
cotheres,  the  enteledonts,  which  die  out 
either  at  the  close  of  the  Oligocene  or 
very  early  in  the  Miocene.  Of  all  the 
mammals  with  bunoselenodont  grinding 

teeth    (see    Fig.    122)    the    chalicotheres        Fig.  ip.  -  Restoration  of  the  head 
^  ^  of  Dmotherium,    Miocene   oi  iiiurope 

alone  survive  and  are  among  the  most  (X3V).  After  Gregory, 
highly  distinctive  forms  of  the  Miocene. 

During  the  Lower  and  Middle  Miocene  the  greater  diversity  of  the 
American  life  as  observed  in  the  Oligocene  continues.  This  is  because  we 
know  the  fauna  of  the  drier  regions  in  North  America  at  this  period,  while 


248 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


in  western  Europe  we  know  only  the  mammals  adapted  to  moister  and 
better  forested  conditions. 

In  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Europe  this  contrast  no  longer  obtains,  for 
there  is  suddenly  revealed  a  great  fauna  of  dry  plains  and  uplands;  this 
fauna  is  similar  to  that  of  the  drier  parts  of  Africa  and  Asia  of  the 
present  day,  and  to  that  of  North  America  in  Upper  Miocene  times. 

Comparison  between  the  Old  and  New  Worlds  in  the  Lower  and  Middle 
Miocene,  or  before  this  great  upland  element  in  Europe  appears,  is  as 
follows : 

Mammals  of  the  Lower  and  Middle  Miocene 


Peculiar  to  Europe 

Dinotheres 

Anthracotheres 

Tragulids 

(water  chevrotains) 
Horned  cervuline  deer 
True  horned  antelopes 
Cricetines,  or  hamsters 
Picas,  or  tailless  hares 
Leptictids  or  erinaceids 
Dicerorhine  rhinoceroses 
Bears 
Viverrids 
True  suillines 
Siren  ians 

{Halitherium, 

Metaxytherium) 


Common  to  Europe  and 

North  America 
Mastodons 

(trilophodont) 
Anchitheres 
Tapirs 

Rhinoceroses 

(aceratherine  and  tele- 

ocerine) 
Chalicotheres 
Primitive  hornless  deer 
Mustelids 
True  felids 
Machaerodonts 
Typical  canids 
Canids 

(short  faced) 
Amphicyonids 
Castorids,  beavers 
Talpids,  moles 
Murids,  mice 


Peculiar  to  North  America 
Camelids 

Protohippine  horses 
Antilocaprids,  primitive 
Oreodonts 

Dicotylids,  peccaries 
Haplodontids,  sewellels 
Geomyids,  gophers 
Heteromyids 
Leporids,  hares 
?Cricetines 
Mylagaulids 
Procyonids 


A  very  marked  difference  is  seen  in  the  prevalence  of  Amphicyon  and 
the  early  appearance  of  the  bears  in  Europe,  and  rarity  of  true  canids  of 
the  wolf  and  fox  type;  while  in  America  the  canids  abound  and  are  widely 
varied,  the  bears  are  altogether  absent  and  the  amphicyons  appear  gradually. 

America  still  has  many  of  its  own  rodents,  such  as  the  sewellels  (hap- 
lodontids), gophers  (geomyids),  and  especially  hares  (leporids).  The 
greatest  diversity  between  Europe  and  America,  however,  is  among  the 
Artiodactyla;  America  is  seen  to  be  developing  its  own  pigs  or  dicotylids, 
its  highly  diversified  oreodonts  and  camels,  its  peculiar  hypertragulids,  in- 
cluding the  ancestors  of  the  American  deer,  and  its  own  antelopes  (antilo- 
caprids), which  are  widely  different  from  the  true  or  bovine  antelopes  of 
Europe.  The  evolution  of  a  distinctive  plains  fauna  of  North  America  is 
witnessed  especially  in  the  long-limbed  and  long-toothed  varieties  of  the 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  249 


horses,  which  rapidly  evolve,  as  well  as  of  the  plains-living  hares.  Other 
contrasts  will  be  brought  out  in  detail  as  we  follow  the  history  of  Europe 
and  America  independently. 

The  foregoing  tables  and  contrasts  show  rather  a  unity  of  ancestral 
stocks  than  a  genuine  faunal  reunion  in  the  Lower  and  Middle  Miocene 
of  the  New  and  Old  Worlds,  because  the  invasion  of  North  America  by 
the  nomadic  mastodons  and  teleocerine  rhinoceroses  cannot  be  cited  as 
evidence  of  a  widespread  interchange  of  life.  Thus  we  cannot  draw  close 
parallels  between  the  Miocene  divisions  of  the  New  and  Old  Worlds.  They 
may  be  broadly  divided  as  follows : 


Stage 
Upper,  Pontian 

Middle,  Vindo- 

bonian 
Lower,  Burdiga- 

lian 


Fauna 
Newer  Miocene 

Fauna 
Older  Miocene 

Fauna 
Older  Miocene 

Fauna 


Europe 
of  Pikermi  and  Ep- 

pelsheim 
of  St.  Gaudens,  Si- 

morre,  and  Sansan 
Sables  de  I'Orlean- 

ais,  Briittelen,  and 

Eggenburg 


North  America 
'Loup  Fork,'  Hip- 

parion  Zone 
Deep  River,  Ticho- 

leptus  Zone 
Arikaree,  Mery- 

cochoerus  Zone 


1.    MIOCENE  LIFE  OF  EUROPE 

As  indicated  in  our  earlier  discussion  of  this  wonderful  fauna  (p.  246), 
the  Miocene  life  of  Europe  may  be  divided  into  two  grand  phases,  as  follows : 


The  Newer  Fauna  of  the  Upper 
Miocene. 

The  Older  Fauna  of  the  Lower  and 
Middle  Miocene. 


Second  or  Asiatic  invasion,  introduction  of 
numerous  plains-living,  grazing,  hypso- 
dont  types. 

First  or  African  invasion.  Continuation 
and  partial  extinction  of  the  Oligocene 
mammals.  Continued  prevalence  of 
browsing,  brachyodont,  and  river-bordej; 
types. 


The  Older  Fauna 

Prevalence  of  browsing  types.  —  In  the  older  fauna  we  observe  the  dying 
out  of  all  the  large  Oligocene  mammals  except  the  chalicotheres.  Of  the 
large  mammals  the  imposing  element  is  found  in  the  newly  arriving  mas- 
todons and  dinotheres,  which  gradually  evolve  throughout  the  Oligocene. 
Attention  should  be  called  to  the  fact  that  these  huge  animals,  as  well  as 
the  flat-horned  antelopes  (Protragocerus) ,  the  tapirs,  the  anchitheres,  the 
teleocerine  rhinoceroses,  the  chalicotheres  among  the  Herbivora,  are  all 
rather  clumsy  or  slow-moving  forms.  The  prevailing  Carnivora  (Am- 
phicyons  and  Dinocyons),  highly  characteristic  of  the  period,  are  also  clumsy 
and  slow-moving.  The  relatively  small  and  light-limbed  tragulids  (Dor- 
catherium)  and  cervulines  {Dicrocerus)  are  related  to  the  forest-  and  swamp- 


250 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


living  types  of  to-day.  In  short,  this  older  Miocene  fauna  is  devoid  of 
any  plains-living  elements  or  any  distinctive  upland  types,  and  this  is  in 
widest  contrast  with  the  grazing  and  cursorial  mammals  of  the  newer  or 
Upper  Miocene  fauna. 

The  newer  fauna  is  not  a  development  of  the  older;  it  is  a  distinct  and 
very  important  invasion  both  from  Asia  and  Africa. 

Lower  Miocene  or  Burdigalian 

The  Miocene  is  said  to  be  introduced  ^  in  the  calcaire  de  Montahuzardf 
which  records  the  return  of  the  horses  (Anchitherium) .  The  overlying 
sables  de  VOrleanais  are  fluviatile  sands,  laid  down  in  successive  stages 


Fig.  126.  —  Lower  Miocene.  Burdigalian.  FRANCE.  —  Sables  de  1  Neuville-aux-Bois 
(Loiret),  fluviatUe,  sables  de  Rcbrechicn,  2  Marigny,  3  Fay-aux-Loges,  4  Beaugency,  5  Tavers, 
6  Les  Barres,  Artenay,  marnes  du  Blesois,  calcaire  de  Montabuzard  (Loiret),  lacustrine.  Sables 
de  7  Chilleurs,  Chevilly  (Loiret),  8  Neuvilly,  near  Belgian  frontier,  fluviatile.  Sables  de  9  Ruan, 
north  central  France.  Calcaires  et  marnes  de  10  Suevres  (Loire-et-Cher).  Faluns  et  calcaires 
de  11  Pontlevoy,  faluns  et  sables  de  Thenay,  in  la  Touraine.  Sables  de  12  Chitenay  (Loire-et- 
Cher),  fluviatile.  Faluns  de  13  Manthelan,  in  la  Touraine,  marine.  14  Saint-Nazaire-en- 
Royans  (Drome) .  Mollasse  blanche  de  15  ^n(7/es  (Gard).  LOWER-AUSTRIA.  —  Mollasse 
of  16  Eggenburg,  marine.  Marine  deposits  of  17  Linz.  SWITZERLAND.  —  Muschelsand- 
stein  von  18  Briittelen,  19  Macconens,  La  Moliere,  20  Bucheggherg,  western  Switzerland, 
marine.  PORTUGAL.  —  Mollasse  of  21  Horta  de  Tripas,  near  Lisbon.  GERMANY. — 
Spalte  der  Schieferbriiche  von  22  Solcnhofen  (Bavaria).    Correlation  of  Deperet. 

which  contain  the  entire  rich  Lower  Miocene  fauna,  parallel  with  which 
are  widely  scattered  deposits  in  France,  Germany,  Austria,  S^vitzerland, 

^  Mayet,  Mammifferes  Miocenes  des  Sables  de  I'Orleanais,  1908,  p.  314. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  251 


and  far  to  the  southwest  in  Portugal  near  Lisbon.  In  this  Lower  Bur- 
digalian  stage  the  flora  of  Auvergne  {Myrica,  Cinnamomum,  Liquidamhar) 
indicates  a  warm  and  dry  cUmate.^  In  the  strata  of  the  basin  of  Mayence 
the  OUgocene  flora,  Sabal,  Sequoia,  Laurus,  Cinnamomum,  also  persists.^ 
The  marine  cetacean  of  the  period  is  Squalodon  hariensis. 

The  Lower  Miocene  mammals  are  very  widely  distributed  from  India 
(Sind)  on  the  east  to  Portugal  on  the  west,  and  singularly  uniform  in  species. 
Of  the  surviving  Oligocene  forms  the  robust  anthracothere  Brachyodus  is 
especially  widespread  and  characteristic  of  the  Lower  Miocene;  it  is 
the  last  survivor  of  this  great  Oligocene  stock.  Among  perissodactyls,  it 
is  interesting  to  note  the  survival  of  the  pair-horned  rhinoceroses  (Dicer a- 
therium),  a  line  also  about  to  disappear.  Arising  from  Oligocene  ancestors 
and  highly  characteristic  of  the  entire  Miocene  period  are  the  descendants 
of  three  other  lines  of  perissodactyls,  namely:  the  tapirs  (Paratapirus) , 
the  aceratheres  (Aceratherium)  and  the  aberrant  chalicotheres  (Macro- 
therium) . 

The  views  of  Stehlin  are  somewhat  different  from  those  of  Mayet. 
He  regards  (1907)  ^  the  fauna  of  the  sables  de  VOrleanais  as  preceding  that 
of  Montabuzard  and  as  composed  of  two  elements  of  very  different  origin. 
One  is  indigenous  to  Europe  and  has  survived  from  the  Oligocene,  the 
other  is  foreign,  recently  immigrated  from  an  unknown  center,  probably 
from  central  Asia.  Although  we  now  know  that  the  mastodons  originated 
in  Africa,  the  forms  that  accompanied  them  when  they  first  appeared  in 
Europe  may  lead  one  to  suppose  that  they  reached  Europe  by  way  of 
southern  Asia.  The  forms  that  have  developed  directly  out  of  the  Eu- 
ropean Oligocene  fauna  include:  Amphicyon,  Steneofiber,  Palceochoerus, 
Hyotherium,  Brachyodus.  Among  the  immigrants  are :  Mastodon,  Dinothe- 
rium,  Anchitherium,  Rhinoceros  [Teleoceras]  of  the  T.  aurelianensis  brachypus 
type,  Listriodon,  Choerotherium,  Hycemoschusf ,  Palceomeryx  cf.  Kaupi.  The 
different  deposits  of  the  sables  de  VOrleanais  are  not,  as  was  formerly 
supposed,  identical  in  age.  To  the  differences  in  age  as  well  as  to  the 
differences  in  location  may  be  ascribed  the  fact  that  the  various  faunas  are 
not  exactly  equivalent.  The  faunas  of  the  successive  stages  of  the  sables 
are  increasingly  similar  to  that  of  Montabuzard,  although  none  of  them 
seem  to  be  quite  as  modern;  in  other  words,  the  calcaire  de  Montabuzard  is 
held  to  be  more  recent  than  the  sables. 

The  Lower  Miocene  horse  Anchitherium  aurelianense,  described  by 
Cuvier  himself  from  the  sables  de  VOrleanais,  is  a  small,  relatively  primitive, 
three-toed  horse  with  brachyodont  molars,  in  which  the  cones  and  conules 
are  very  distinct,  teeth  quite  similar,  in  fact,  to  those  of  certain  of  the 

1  Boulay,  1899,  and  Giraud,  C.  R.,  Vol.  CXXXI,  p.  916. 

2  De  Lapparent,  A.,  Traite  de  Geologic,  1906,  p.  1604. 

^  Stehlin,  H.  G.,  Notices  Paleomammalogiques  sur  quelques  Depots  Miocenes  des  Bassins 
de  la  Loire  et  de  I'Allier.  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  VII,  1907,  pp.  525-550,  536,  543. 


252 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


North  American  Upper  Oligocene  anchitheres.  Most  surprising  is  the  new, 
broad-headed  rhinoceros  {T.  aurelianensis) ,  named  Teleoceras  by  Hatcher  * 
from  the  presence  of  a  horn  at  the  very  tip  of  its  nasals,  with  a  rudiment 
of  a  second  horn  in  the  center  of  the  frontals,  as  observed  by  Gaudry.  This 
animal  is  in  all  probability  from  northern  Asia,  and  is  destined  to  become 


Fig.  127.  —  Skulls  of  the  French  and  American  teleocerine  rhinoceroses.  (A)  Teleoceras 
aurelianensis  (cast),  (fi)  Teleoceras  medicornutus  (original).  In  the  American  Museum  of 
Natural  History. 


one  of  the  most  distinctive  and  widespread  of  Miocene  rhinoceroses;  al- 
though short-footed,  or  brachypodal,  and  short-limbed,  it  was  a  great 
traveler;  its  range  extended  to  Florida.  The  small  narrow  horn  at  the 
tip  of  the  snout  was  probably  an  effective  defensive  weapon.  The  acera- 
theres,  or  hornless  companions  of  Teleoceras,  are  distinguished  by  relatively 
slender  limbs  and  tetradactyl  fore  feet;  the  nasals  are  narrow,  pointed, 
and  typically  smooth,  but  they  occasionally  show  the  rudiments  of  a  small 
horn.  These  animals  are  decidedly  dolichocephalic.  As  above  noted,  in 
the  Burdigalian  beds  of  Portugal  there  occurs  a  third  phylum  of  rhinoc- 
eroses, a  diminutive  form  {Dicerorhinus  tagicus)  ^  distinguished  by  horns 
on  both  the  nasals  and  frontals,  and  remotely  ancestral  to  the  existing 
rhinoceros  of  Sumatra.^  We  shall  speak  of  these  animals  as  Sumatran 
rhinoceroses  or  dicerorhines.  A  diminutive  ancestor  of  the  dicerorhine 
phylum  has  also  been  recently  discovered  in  the  sables  de  VOrleanais,  and 
Roman  *  believes  that  there  existed  in  Europe  two  phyla  of  these  dicero- 
rhine rhinoceroses,  one  of  more  diminutive  size,  one  of  larger  size,  terminat- 
ing respectively  in  the  small  and  the  large  Upper  Miocene  races  of  D. 
schleiermacheri.. 

1  Hatcher,  J.  B.,  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XXVIII,  March,  1894,  p.  241. 

2  Roman  and  Fliche,  Le  Neog^ne  Continental  dans  la  Basse  Vallee  du  Tage  (Rive  Droite), 
l^re  Pt.,  Paloontologie.    Commis.  Serv.  Geol.  Portugal,  Lisbon,  1907,  p.  44. 

3  Thomas  points  out  that  the  name  Ceratorhinus  Gray  is  preoccupied  by  Dicerorhinus. 
*  Roman,  F.,  Sur  un  crane  de  Rhinoceros.    Soc.  Linn,  de  Lyon,  Mar.  8,  1909. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  253 


Characteristic 
Lower  Miocene 
Mammals 
Anthropoid  apes 

(gibbons) 
Mastodons 
Dinotheres 
Anchitheres 
Tapirs 

Rhinoceroses 

Teleocerine 

Dicerorhine 

Aceratherine 

?Diceratherine 
ChaUcotheres 
Suilhnes 

Horned  cervuUnes 
Traguhds,  or  chevrotains 
Antelopes 

(first  Cavicornia) 
Anthracotheres 

{Brachyodus  only) 
Amphicyons 
Dinocyons 
Sirenians 


Of  the  artiodactyls,  beside  the  surviving 
anthracothere  Brachyodus,  we  observe  the 
pigs,  recently  monographed  by  Stehlin.^  In 
the  early  Miocene  he  notes  (p.  481)  that  the 
descendants  of  the  Upper  Oligocene  Palceo- 
choerus  are  becoming  more  sharply  differen- 
tiated, the  larger  ones  being  gradually  trans- 
formed into  Hyotherium  sommeringi  of  the 
Miocene.  There  also  appear  two  new  invading 
forms  (Listriodon  and  C hoer other ium) ,  of  remote 
relationship  to  the  local  suillines.  Thus,  like 
the  rest  of  the  mammals,  the  Suidse  are  en- 
riched by  the  arrival  of  new  types  at  this  time. 
"The  faunal  change,"  continues  this  writer 
(p.  482),  ''is  perhaps  the  grandest  that  oc- 
curred in  Europe  during  the  entire  Tertiary; 
no  doubt  it  followed  some  far-reaching  geo- 
logical change ;  presumably  communication 
was  reestablished  with  some  great  evolutionary 
center  of  the  Old  World." 

The  true  selenodont  artiodactyls  are  also 
reenforced  by  two  fresh  arrivals.  Among  the 
traguhds,  a  type  closely  related  to  the  water 
chevrotains  of  western  Africa  (HycemoscMis) 
now  appears  for  the   first  time.    The  true 


modern  tragulids  (Tragulidae)  are  a  very 
primitive  group  of  small  ungulates,  embracing  two  living  genera,  the  Indian 
and  Himalayan  mouse-deer,  or  chevrotains  (Traguhis),  and  the  West  Afri- 
can water-chevrotains  (Hycemoschus) ;  Tragulus  scarcely  exceeds  a  rabbit 
in  size;  it  suggests  an  agouti  with  unusually  long  legs,  while  th(?  larger 
members  of  the  family  show  some  analogy  to  the  musk  deer. 

Similarly  the  pro-Cervidse  are  enriched  by  the  appearance  of  horned 
cervulines  (Dicrocerus) ,  notable  as  the  first  horned  artiodactyls  to  enter 
Europe,  and  closely  similar  to  the  existing  muntjacs.  A  new  cervuline, 
Micromeryx,  also  arrives,  probably  from  Asia. 

Marking  a  still  wider  break  from  the  Oligocene  selenodonts  is  the  re- 
ported occurrence  (Stehlin)  of  the  first  representative  of  the  great  family  of 
Cavicornia,  or  hollow-horned  ruminants,  in  the  antilopine  genus  Proiragoc- 
erus,  a  small  animal  with  horns  laterally  flattened,  as  in  the  existing  goats. 

The  giant  invader  of  the  period  is  the  narrow-toothed  mastodon  (Tri- 
lophodon  angustidens)    named  specifically  from  its  long,  narrow  upper 

^  stehlin,  H.  G.,  Uber  die  Geschichte  des  Suiden-Gebisses.  Abh.  Schweiz.  paldont.  Ges., 
Yols.  XXVI,  XXVII,  Zurich,  1899-1900,  pp.  1-527. 

2  The  type  specimen  of  T.  angustidens  is  from  the  Middle  Miocene. 


254 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


and  lower  molar  teeth,  which  are  quite  similar  in  proportion  to  those  of 
the  Oligocene  Palceomastodon  of  North  Africa.  This  animal  was  termed 
Trilophodon  by  Falconer  because  there  are  three  transverse  rows  of  cusps 
on  the  intermediate  '  grinding  teeth,  while  the  last  grinder  has  four  trans- 
verse rows.  It  is  further  distinguished  by  a  long,  projecting  snout  armed 
with  four  straight  and  forwaidly  projecting  tusks.  While  this  is  the  most 
widely  prevailing  Lower  Miocene  species,  another  mastodon  with  broader 
teeth  also  occurs.  These  animals  are  related  to  the  intermediate  forms  of 
primitive  mastodons  (T.  pygmoeus)  found  in  the  Burdigalian  or  Lower 
Miocene  of  Algeria  (Deperet). 

The  dinotheres  are  characterized  by  the  absence  of  upper  tusks  and 
by  a  pair  of  lower  tusks  projecting  downward  in  the  lower  jaw. 

Of  the  predaceous  or  carnivorous  fauna,  the  giant  amphicyonids  {Am- 
phicyon)  are  the  dominant  forms.  The  canids  are  less  numerous  and 
varied  than  in  America;  the  last  of  the  Oligocene  genus  Cephalogale  appear. 
The  Mustelidae,  or  marten  and  weasel  family,  is  represented  by  several 
land-living  genera  {Stenogale,  Palceogale,  Stenoplesictis)  as  well  as  by  the 
river  otters  {Lutridis,  Lutra),  the  first  species  of  the  modern  genus  of 
otters.  The  felids  are  represented  by  numerous  machaerodonts,  or  saber- 
tooth  cats,  and  by  the  aberrant  Pseudoelurus,  regarded  by  von  Zittel  ^  as 
related  to  the  Madagascan  fossa  (Cryptoproda) ,  but  of  the  size  of  a  small 
panther. 

Of  the  microfauna  we  first  observe  among  the  castorids  that  the  genus 
Chalicomys  replaces  the  Steneofiber  of  the  Oligocene.  There  are  also  ham- 
sters (Cricetodon),  picas  or  tailless  hares  (Myolagus),  talpids  {Talpa),  and 
Galerix,  referred  to  the  tupaiids  or  tree  shrews  by  Deperet,  to  the  erina- 
ceids  or  to  the  leptictids  by  Leche. 

Not  the  least  noteworthy  is  the  first  alleged  appearance^  in  Europe 
of  Pliopithecus,  a  representative  of  the  anthropoid  apes,  related  to  the 
existing  gibbons  of  Asia,  and  undoubtedly  Asiatic  in  origin.  Stehlin^ 
regards  the  anthropoids  as  absent  from  this  sables  fauna.  Summing  up 
the  new  contributions  to  the  life  of  western  Europe,  they  appear  to  be  as 
follows : 

From  Africa  From  Asia  From  North  America 

Mastodons  Tragulids,  or  chevrotains  Anchitheres 

Dinotheres  Horned  cervulines 

Teleocerine  rhinoceroses 

Sumatran  rhinoceroses 

Anthropoid  apes 

Antilopines  (doubtful) 

*  That  is,  the  fourth  premolar  and  first  and  second  molars. 

2  Von  Zittel,  K.,  Handbuch  der  Palaontologie,  1,  IV,  1891-1893,  p.  667. 

3  Mayet,  Mammif^res  Miocenes  des  Sables  de  I'Orleanais,  etc..  1908,  p.  317. 

*  Stehlin,  Notices  Paleomammalogiques  sur  quelques  Depots  Miocfenes.  1907. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  255 

As  regards  the  liome  of  the  first  hollow-horned  ruminants,  or  Antilo- 
pinse,  there  is  no  evidence  in  the  known  Oligocene  of  Africa  indicating  the 
existence  of  the  ancestors  of  the  true  ruminants  or  selenodont  artiodactyls 
of  this  type.  The  Lower  Oligocene  artiodactyls  of  Africa  appear  to  be 
overflow  or  outlying  forms  of  the  suillines  and  anthracotheres.  Nor  do 
hollow-horned  ruminants  appear  in  North  America  until  a  late  geologic  period, 
the  Lower  Pliocene;  it  is  consequently  probable  that  the  antelopes,  together 
with  the  entire  stock  of  Cavicornia,  including  the  Bovine,  or  cattle,  origi- 
nated in  Asia. 

It  is  interesting  to  cast  a  glance  at  conditions  in  the  Iberian  peninsula, 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Tagus.^  There  was  an  encroachment  of  the  Atlantic 
Ocean  on  Portugal  during  and  before  the  Early  Miocene,  due  to  sinking 
of  the  Tagus  basin,  accompanied  by  the  formation  of  sea  border  deposits 
near  Lisbon  (Horta  de  Tripas)  containing  mammalian  remains.  Here  is 
found  the  smallest  Sumatran  rhinoceros  known  {Dicerorhinus  tagicus),  a 
dwarf  ancestor  of  the  D.  sansaniensis  of  the  Middle  Miocene.  Teleoceras, 
Brachyodus  and  Palceochcerus  also  occur  here :  the  latter  {P.  aurelianensis)  is  a 
small  pig,  known  to  have  inhabited  central  France  at  this  time  and  to  have 
survived  into  the  later  Miocene  of  Switzerland.  The  felid  Pseudcelurus 
transitorius  is  a  medium-sized  form  transitional  between  the  larger  Oligocene 
ancestors  and  its  later  and  still  smaller  Middle  Miocene  descendants. 

On  the  seashores  of  upper  and  lower  Austria  we  again  discover  remains 
of  sirenians  (Halitherium  christoli)?  Another  marine  deposit  is  that  of 
the  molasse  of  Briittelen,^  Switzerland,  representing  a  coastal  formation 
occupied  by  an  arm  of  the  sea,  in  which  were  deposited  the  remains  of 
terrestrial  and  freshwater  animals  mingled  with  marine  forms.  Here  also 
are  found  tapirs,  diceratherine  and  aceratherine  rhinoceroses,  suilhnes,  cer- 
vuline  deer,  and  of  especial  interest  are  the  remains  of  an  antelope,  prob- 
ably allied  to  Protragocerus,  a  small,  thickset  animal  with  short,  conical 
bony  horns,  which  inhabited  the  Rhone  valley  in  the  Lower  Miocene 
period.  Here  again  occur  remains  of  the  primitive  narrow-toothed 
mastodon  (T.  angustidens)  and  of  the  felid  Pseudcelurus. 

Middle  Miocene  or  Vindobonian 

The  Middle  Miocene,  or  Vindobonian,  is  distinguished  by  a  few  new 
arrivals,  chiefly  from  Asia  and  partly  from  Africa.    These  are  as  follows: 

Ancestral  bears,  or  Ursidse,  several  branches  from  Eurasia. 
Old  World  or  catarrhine  monekys  (Oreopithecus) ,  related  to  the 
baboons,  from  Eurasia. 

^  Roman  and  Fliche,  Le  Neog^ne  Continental  dans  la  Basse  Vallee  du  Tage,  1907,  pp.  44-76. 

2  Abel,  O.,  Die  Sirenen  der  Mediterranen  Tertiarbildungen  Osterreichs.  Abh.  K.K. 
Geol.  Reichsanst.,  Vol.  XIX,  no.  2,  Vienna,  1904  (p.  215). 

^  Studer,  T.,  Die  Saugetierreste  aus  den  marinen  Molasseablagerungen  von  Briittelen. 
Abh.  schweiz.  paldont.  Ges.,  Vol.  XXII,  Zurich,  1896,  pp.  3-34. 


256 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Anthropoid   apes   (Dryopithecus) ,    related   to   the  chimpanzees, 
from  Eurasia. 

Hystricomorph  rodents  (Hijstrix),  related  to  the  porcupines,  from 
Africa. 


The  mammals  of  the  Vindobonian  stage,  as  listed  in  Deperet's  epoch- 
making  work,^  show  a  grand  geographic  extension  from  western  Portugal 
to  the  northern  shores  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  recorded  in  no  less  than  sixtv- 


FiG.  128.  — Europe  in  Middle  Miocene  or  Vindobonian  times.    Dotted  areas  lagO( 
White  =  land.    Ruled  =  sea.    After  de  Lapparent,  1906. 


eight  fossil-bearing  localities.  The  sirenian  of  the  Middle  Miocene  is 
Metaxytherium .  ^ 

Physiography.  —  The  Vindobonian,  according  to  de  Lapparent,^  marks 
the  beginning  of  the  formation  of  the  Alps  and  of  the  Himalayas;  the  Med- 
iterranean Sea  shrinks,  and  in  its  eastern  part,  which  extended  to  the 
heart  of  Persia,  is  converted  into  land.  The  grand  subdivisions  of  the 
Middle  Miocene  are  those  indicated  by  the  coastal  changes  of  southern 
Europe  accompanied  by  successive  and  sharply  defined  deposition  stages, 
Avith  which  the  continental  deposits  of  France,  Austria,  Switzerland,  and 
Bavaria  are  broadly  paralleled  by  Deperet  as  follows: 

1  Deperet,  C,  L'evolution  des  Mamraif^res  tcrtiaires  (Miocene).  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris, 
Vol.  CXLIII,  sea.  Dec.  24,  1906,  pp.  1121-1122. 

2  Abel,  O.,  Die  Sirenen  der  mediterranen  Tertiarbildungen  Osterreichs,  1904,  p.  215. 
»  De  Lapparent,  Traite  de  Geologic,  1906,  p.  1606. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  257 


Marine  Stages  Continental  Depositions 

Sarmatian  St.  Gaudens,  CEningen,  Elgg,  Kapffnach,  Giinsburg, 

Monte  Bamboli,  San  Isidro. 
Tortonian  Simorre,  Steinheim,  Grive-Saint-Alban,  Mosskirch 

Helvetian  Sansan,  Eibiswald,  Goriach,  Georgensgmiind 


The  deposits  are  of  the  greatest  variety,  including  the  rich  typical 
lacustrine  deposits  of  Sansan  and  Simorre  of  southwestern  France,  formed 
in  a  large  freshwater  lake,  as  well  as  the  lignites  or  swamp  deposits  of 
Styria  {Steiermark  Braunkohle),  at  Eibiswald,  Wies,  Goriach,  and  Voitsberg. 
These  preserve  Austria's  contribution  to  the  mammahan  fauna.  In  Ger- 
many are  the  calcareous  freshwater  deposits  of  Georgensgmiind  and  Engels- 
wies.  Of  the  middle  stage  are  the  famous  freshwater  deposits  of  Steinheim 
and  the  fissure  deposits  of  Mosskirch,  which  are  parallel  in  age  with  the 
great  fissure  deposits  of  La  Grive-Saint-Alban  in  France.  Italy  contributes 
to  the  upper  stage  the  mammals  of  the  lignites  of  Monte  Bamboli.  As 
observed  by  Osborn,  and  especially  clearly  defined  by  Deperet,  there  are 
three  successive  stages,  typified  by  Sansan,  Simorre,  and  St.  Gaudens. 


Stage  of  Sansan 

The  mammals  of  this  oldest  stage,  discovered  in  1834,  described  by 
Lartet  ^  (1858)  and  more  fully  by  Filhol  ^  (1891),  are  contemporaneous 
with  a  rich  bird  fauna  described  by  Milne  Edwards'  (1869-1871).  The 
latter  author  observes  that  the  bird  fauna  as  a  whole  has  no  species  in 
common  with  that  of  the  Upper  Oligocene  of  AUier;  it  is  less  abundant 
and  less  varied,  and  though  it  includes  many  water-loving  birds,  we  find 
more  non-aquatic  forms  mingled  with  them.  It  is  certain  that  the  African 
and  Asiatic  types  are  less  numerous  and  that  the  temperate  types  are  more 
numerous  than  during  the  Oligocene  (p.  195).  There  are  four  birds  of  prey, 
namely:  an  eagle  {Aquila  minuta),  of  the  size  of  the  hen-harrier  {Circus 
cyaneus);  sl  sea  eagle  {Halioetus  piscator),  an  undetermined  species  of  eagle 
of  large  size,  and  an  owl  (Strix).  Among  passerines  we  know  of  a  large, 
long- winged  crow  (Corvus),  the  remains  of  which  are  the  most  common 
avian  bones  found  at  Sansan;  an  aberrant  passerine  (Homalopus),  present- 
ing certain  analogies  to  the  hornbills,  and  thirteen  small  Fringillidae,  mem- 
bers of  the  family  that  includes  the  modern  sparrows,  finches,  etc.  There 
were  two  pheasants  (Phasianus),  one  of  which  was  larger  than  any  recent 
pheasant,  and  three  kinds  of  partridges  (Palceoperdix) ,  all  extinct.  About 
the  waters  of  Sansan  lived  a  heron  (Ardea),  slightly  smaller  than  the  com- 

1  Lartet,  E.,  Notice  sur  la  Colline  de  Sansan.    C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Vol.  46.  1858. 

2  Filhol,  H.,  Etude  sur  les  Mammif^res  fossiles  de  Sansan.  Ann.  Sc.  Geol,  Vol.  XXI,  1, 
Arti.    Paris,  1891. 

3  Milne  Edwards,  A.,  L'Histoire  des  Oiseaux  Fossiles  de  la  France,  1869-1871,  Vol.  II, 
pp.  579-582. 


258 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


mon  European  heron,  a  small  curlew  {Numenius),  and  three  ducks  (Anas), 
one  of  which  was  very  small  and  slender,  one  much  like  the  recent  duck 


Fig.  129.  —  Middle  Miocene.  Vindobonian.  Horizon  of  Sansan.  FRANCE.  —  Calcaire 
de  1  Sansan  (Gers),  lacustrine.  2  Jegun  (Gers).  Faluns  de  3  Pontlevoy,  4  Sainte-Maure, 
5  Manthelan,  in  the  basin  of  the  Loire,  marine.  MoUasse  de  6  pbnt  de  VHerhasse,  7  Bren, 
8  Clerieux,  near  Romans,  marine.  GERMANY.  —  Meeresmolasse  (in  Swabia)  von  9  Baltrin- 
gen,  Rammingen,  Heggbach,  Ursendorf,  Hochgeland,  10  Hansen,  11  Niederstozingen,  12  Siissen. 
Siisswasserkalk  von  13  Georgensgmund,  14  Engelswies  (Bavaria).  AUSTRIA-HUNGARY. — 
Braunkohle  (in  Styria)  von  15  Eihiswald,  Wies,  16  Goriach,  Gamlitz,  17  Voitsherg,  Parschlug, 
Ncufel,  Leoben,  Leiding,  Feislernitz.  Marine  sands  of  Gmnd  at  17a  Guntersdorf  (Lower 
Austria).  Horizon  of  Simorre.  FRANCE.  — 2  Bonnefond,  St.  Cristan  (Gers).  2a  Villefranche 
d'Astarac,  calcaire  de  Simorre  (Gers),  lacustrine.  CineritesdelS  Tournon,  in  south  central 
France.  19  V Isle-en-Dodon  (Gers).  20  Saverdun  (Ari^ge).  Mollasse  de  21  Mirabeau  (Vau- 
cluse),  marine.  Marine  deposits  of  22  Sorgues  (Vaucluse).  Marine  deposits  of  23  Romans 
(Drome).  Siderolithiques  de  24  La  Grivc-Saint-Albarj  (in  large  part)  (Is&re),  25  Mont  Ceindrc 
(Rhone),  26  Pretty  near  Tournus  (Saone-et-Loirc) ,  27  Gray  (Haute-Saone).  GERMANY.— 
In  Swabia,  Bohnerz  von  28  Willmardingen,  Jungnau  (in  large  part),  Siisswasserkalk  von 
Steinheim,  Ries,  Urlau,  29  Nordlingen,  30  Althausen.  Bohnerz  von  31  Mosskirch,  32  Genkin- 
gen,  33  Heuberg,  34  Melchingen.  Gips  von  35  Hohenhoven  (Baden)  (10  meters).  AUSTRIA- 
HUNGARY. —  In  the  intra-Alpine  basin  of  Vienna,  36  Dornbach,  Vordersdorf,  Loretto,  Marga- 
rethen,  37  Funfkirchen  (Hungary'),  calcaire  de  ZS  Bruck-a.-Leitha ;  39  Breitenbrunn,  Abstdorf- 
Franzensbad,  40  Mannersdorf,  41  Neudorf.  42  Trauenzinen  (Silesia).  43  Krivadia  (Transyl- 
vania). 44  Gyulu-Mendru  (Transylvania).  45  Pesth  (Hungary).  46  Ssoskut  (Hungary). 
RUSSIA.  — 47  Wosskressensk.  Horizon  of  Saint-Gaudens.  FRANCE.— 48  Valentine,  Saint- 
Gawf/ens  (Haute-Garonne).  Montrejau  (Haute-Garonne).  SWITZERLAND.  — Sands  of 
50  Delsberg,  near  Basel.  51  Le  Lode,  in  the  northwest.  52  La  Chaux-de  Fonds,  in  the  north- 
west. 53  Vermes,  near  Basel.  Mergelkalke  von  54  CEningen,  near  Ziirich,  fresh  water.  Lig- 
nites of  55  Etgg,  56  Kdpffnach,  ubslt  Zurich.  57,  Fr/^/jcim,  near  Ziirich,  GERMANY. — In 
Bavaria  :  11  Gunsburg,  Reisensburg ;  Sande  von  58  Hdder,  Dinkelscherben,  Reichenau,  59  Dies- 
sen,  60  Basing,  Praising,  Tutzing,  Stdtzling,  Reichertshofen,  61  Frontenhau^en,  Flinz  of  Munich. 
62  Sankt  Georgen  (Baden).  AUSTRIA.  —  36  Heiligenstadt,  Tegel  von  Hernals,  in  Vienna 
basin.  ITALY. -Lignites  of  63  Mt.  Bamholi  (Tuscany).  SPAIN.  — 64  San  Isidro,  near 
Madrid.  PORTUGAL.  — 65  Aveiras  de  Baixo,  near  Oporto.  RUSSIA.  — 66  Kriwoi-Rog 
(Kherson).  67  .Vjco/ai>#.  at  the  mouth  of  the  Dnieper.  6h  Sebastopol  {Crimea.) .  69  Tiraspol, 
near  the  mouth  of  the  Dniester,    Correlation  of  Deperet. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  259 


(Anas)  in  its  proportions,  and  the  third  a  very  large,  stoutly  built  form. 
There  were  also  three  different  rails  (Rallus),  smaller  than  the  Oligocene 
species  found  in  the  basin  of  the  AUier,  and  including  a  land-rail  and  two 
marsh-loving  forms  or  water-rails. 

Around  the  lake  borders  ^  browsed  the  innumerable  smaller  ruminants, 
tragulines,  and  cervulines,  the  latter  with  forked  horns  (Dicrocerus)  and 
present  in  great  specific  variety.  Frequenting  the  marshes  were  three 
forms  of  pigs  (Hyotherium,  Choerotherium),  and  the  typical  Listriodon  with 
crested  teeth  like  those  of  a  tapir.  Several  species  of  flat-horned  antelopes  ^ 
are  listed  from  this  horizon.  Of  the  perissodactyls  the  diceratheres  have 
now  disappeared;  the  anchitheres,  tapirs,  and  rhinoceroses  all  present 
more  advanced  stages.  Especi- 
ally characteristic  among  the 
latter  is  the  species  Dicerorhinus 
sansaniensis,  a  delicate  form 
which  supports  but  two  horns, 
a  successor  to  the  Lower  Mio- 
cene D.  tagicus.  The  chalico- 
theres  are  in  the  Macrotherium 

stage,  a  complete  skeleton  hav-        Fig.  130.  — Clawed  fourth  digit  of  the  foot  (Xl) 

ing  been  described  from  this       MidX^Mf^clrotrat:^  " 
level  by  Filhol,  which  enabled 

him  for  the  first  time  to  prove  that  the  chalicotheres  were  not  edentates, 
but  of  composite  structure,  with  the  teeth  of  perissodactyls  and  claws  of 
digging  type. 

The  type  of  the  great  Miocene  mastodon  (T.  angustidens)  was  dis- 
covered in  this  famous  deposit.  Bats,  or  Cheiroptera  (Vespertilio,  Rhino- 
lophusYsire  numerous.  Insectivores  also  abound,  including  several  modern 
genera,  hedgehogs  (Erinaceus),  shrews  {Sorex,  Crocidura),  and  desmans 
(Myogale);  the  latter  are  very  similar  to  those  now  found  in  the  Pyrenees 
and  a  few  localities  in  Russia.  Another  insectivore,  Galerix  (syn.  Lan- 
tanotherium)  is,  according  to  Leche,  related  to  the  Oriental  erinaceid  {Gym- 
nura)  now  found  in  southeastern  Asia  and  the  East  Indies.  The  rodents 
include  squirrels  (Sciurus),  flying  squirrels  (Sciuropterus) ,  dormice  (Myoxus), 
picas  (Myolagus),  hamsters  (Cricetodon) ,  castorids  (Chalicomys),  and  the 
peculiar  family  of  theridomyids,  soon  to  become  extinct. 

Preying  upon  this  herbivorous  fauna  are  the  giant  dogs  Amphicyon  and 
Hemicyon.  Neither  the  true  dog  type  (Canis)  nor  the  cat  type  (Felis) 
has  yet  appeared.  The  leopard-like  Pseudcelurus  represents  the  cats,  while 
Machcerodus  represents  the  saber-tooth  tigers.  The  mustelids  were  becom- 
ing more  numerous,  including  martens,  otters,  weasels,  while  the  Asiatic 
civets  or  viverrids  (Viverra)  are  becoming  somewhat  more  rare. 

^  Filhol,  1891,  and  Milne  Edwards,  1869-1871,  op.  cit. 
^  Protragocerus  sansaniensis,  P.  martiniana,  P.  clavata. 


260 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


In  the  trees  was  found  the  gibhon-hke  ape  PUopithecus. 

The  chief  mamniaHan  faunas  parallel  with  Sansan  (Fig.  129,  1)  are 
those  of  the  freshwater  calcareous  deposits  of  Georgensgmiind  (13)  in  Ba- 
varia, and  of  the  lignites  of  Eibiswald,  Wies  (15),  Goriach  (16),  and  Voits- 
berg  (17)  in  Styria.  Of  the  conditions  in  Styria,  Hilber  ^  states  that  in 
the  early  Miocene  the  sea  advanced  over  parts  of  central  and  southern 
Styria,  bringing  in  great  southern  molluscs  with  shells  of  wonderful  hue. 
In  the  forests  monkeys  picked  tropical  fruits  from  the  trees,  and  great 
powerful  herbivores  found  abundant  sustenance  in  the  valleys,  which  were 
always  free  from  snow.  The  carnivores  hunted  herds  of  muntjacs,  such 
as  are  found  in  the  East  Indies  to-day.  These  conditions  are  comparable 
with  those  now  existing  along  the  Bay  of  Tunis,  but  the  temperature  of 
the  water  of  Tunis  is  not  high  enough  to  permit  the  growth  of  coral  reefs 
such  as  flourished  in  the  Miocene  seas  bordering  Styria. 

Stehlin  -  states  that  the  known  distribution  of  the  Suidse  in  the  Middle 
Miocene  is  somewhat  more  extensive  than  in  the  Ohgocene,  Hyotherium 
and  Choerotherium  extending  into  Austria,  while  remains  of  Listriodon  have 
been  found  even  in  Asia  Minor.  During  the  transition  from  the  Middle  to 
the  Upper  Miocene  (Stehlin,  p.  483)  the  Suidae  become  impoverished  once 
more;  the  aberrant  migrants  {Listriodon,  Choerotherium)  disappear,  and  only 
the  central  form  Hyotherium,  a  survivor  from  the  Oligocene  ancestors,  con- 
tinues and  undergoes  further  differentiation  into  the  true  pigs  (>Sws),  which 
first  appear  in  the  upper  stage.  The  same  author  (p.  475)  believes  that 
America  received  its  Suidae  either  from  Asia  or  Europe  in  the  Lower 
Oligocene  or  even  earlier,  the  Eocene  Choeromoridae  of  France  showing 
more  points  of  affinity  with  the  American  Dicotylidae  (peccaries)  than 
with  any  other  forms. 

Stage  of  Simorre  and  La  Grive-Saint-Alban 

This  stage  is  characterized  by  an  advance  and  by  the  introduction  of  a 
few  new  forms. 

The  lacustrine  calcaires  de  Simorre  (Fig.  129,  2a)  directly  overlie  those 
of  Sansan  and  are  distinguished  by  mammals  of  more  advanced  specific 
stage.  For  example,  the  little  two-horned  Sumatran  rhinoceros  (Dicero- 
rhinus  simmorrensis)  is  more  progressive  than  its  ancestor  D.  sansaniensis.^ 
Again,  the  PUopithecus  of  La  Grive,  as  described  by  Deperet,  is  a  little 
nearer  the  gibbon  (Hylohates)  than  that  of  Sansan.  The  best  known 
mammals  of  this  stage  are  those  found  in  the  fissure  deposits,  or  sidero- 
lithiques,  of  La  Grive-Saint-Alban  (24)  (Isere),  explored  by  Jourdan  be- 

'  Hilber,  V.,  Die  sarmatischen  Schichten  vom  Waldhof  bei  Wetzelsdorf,  Graz  SW.  MitL 
Naturwiss.  Ver.  Steiermark,  Jahr.,  1896.  No.  33,  Graz,  1837,  pp.  183-18t. 

-  Stehlin,  H.  G..  Uber  die  Geschichte  des  Suidea-Gebisses,  1899-1900,  p.  482. 

'  Osborn.  H.  F.,  Phylogeny  of  the  Rhinoceroses  of  Europe.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.y 
Vol.  Xni.  Art.  xix.  Dec.  11,  1900,  pp.  258-259. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  261 

tween  1845  and  1861,  and  monographed  by  Deperet  ^  (1887,  1892)  and 
Gaillard  ^  (1899).  The  latter  author  has  increased  the  faunal  hst  of  La 
Grive  to  sixty-three  species,  and  the  new  types  he  records  all  tend  to  em- 
phasize the  more  recent  age  than  Sansan  of  this  remarkably  rich  fauna. 
The  most  famous  parallel  of  La  Grive  is  that  of  Steinheim  (28),  Wiirttem- 
berg,  in  which  upward  of  thirty  species  have  been  recorded  by  Peters, 
Fraas,^  and  others,  twenty  of  which  are  common  with  those  of  La  Grive. 

Of  the  physiography  of  this  famous  deposit  of  La  Grive,  Gaillard  ^ 
remarks  (1899,  p.  77) :  "The  fauna  was  so  varied  that  from  it  we  can  deduce 
some  ideas  in  regard  to  the  region  it  inhabited.  The  presence  of  flying 
squirrels  (Sciuropterus)  and  of  certain  tree-living  forms  of  the  insectivorous 
and  carnivorous  orders  proves  that  the  country  was  wooded  ;  gentle  streams 
flowed  along  the  bases  of  the  hills  to  collect  in  a  lake  or  marsh  at  the  bottom 
of  the  valley.  The  edges  of  this  body  of  water  were  the  haunt  of  rhinoc- 
eroses, otters,  and  of  various  birds.  The  numerous  insectivores  show  that 
insects  were  abundant,  and  indicate  a  warm  and  humid  climate.  We  are 
fully  justified  in  assuming  that  the  Dauphine  in  the  Miocene  period  had 
very  much  the  general  aspect  of  certain  wooded  regions  in  the  tropics 
to-day."  Deperet  says  (1887,  p.  252)  of  this  locality  in  the  southeastern 
part  of  France  that  there  was  easy  means  of  communication  both  with 
the  Garonne  valley  and  with  Germany  and  Switzerland. 

The  chief  and  most  interesting  newcomer  is  the  ancestral  bear  {Ursavus 
primoBvus),  of  which  Schlosser  ^  observes:  ''This  is  a  small  animal,  showing 
certain  resemblances  to  the  short-snouted  Malayan  sun-bear  (Helarctos), 
though  not  directly  ancestral  to  it.  It  is  in  the  main  line  of  descent  of 
the  brown  bear,  being  ancestral  to  the  upper  Miocene  Ursus  hockhi." 

Gaillard  sums  up  the  fauna  of  La  Grive  (1899,  pp.  75-78)  as  including 
one  primate  (Pliopithecus) ,  seven  bats,  nine  insectivores,  sixteen  genera, 
and  many  more  species  of  carnivores,  including  the  saber-tooth  tiger 
Machcerodus  jourdani,  a  true  feline  (Felis  zitteli)  a  little  smaller  than  the 
domestic  cat,  three  species  of  the  feline  Pseudcelurus,  the  primitive  bear 
(Ursavus),  the  large,  extinct,  bear-like  dogs  Dinocyon  and  Amphicyon,  the 
otter  (Lutra),  three  small  mustelines  of  the  genus  Mustela,  a  number  of 
civets  (Viverra  and  Herpestes),  and  a  genet  (Progenetta) .  There  are  numerous 
rodents,  among  them  squirrels,  dormice,  hamsters,  picas.    The  probos- 

^  Deperet,  C,  Recherches  sur  la  Succession  des  Faunes  Vertebres  Miocenes  de  la  Vallee 
du  Rhone.  Extr.  Arch.  Mus.  Hist.  Nat.  Lyon,  1,  IV,  Lyons,  1887.  Also,  La  Faune  de 
Mammiferes  Miocenes  de  la  Grive-Saint-Alban  (Is^re).  Arch.  Mus.  Hist.  Nat.  Lyon,  Vol.  V, 
1892,  pp.  1-93. 

2  Gaillard,  C,  Mammiferes  Miocenes  Nouveaux  ou  Peu  Connus  de  la  Grive-Saint-Alban 
(Is^re).    Arch.  Mus.  Hist.  Nat.  Lyon,  Vol.  VII,  Lyons,  1899. 

^  Fraas,  O.,  Die  Fauna  von  Steinheim.  Jahreshefte  Ver.  vaterl.  Naturkunde  Wurttem., 
Vol.  XXVI,  Stuttgart,  1870.  Also,  Beitrage  zur  Fauna  von  Steinheim,  Jahreshefte  Ver. 
Vaterl.  Naturkunde  Wurttem. ,  Vol.  XLI,  Stuttgart,  1885. 

4  Schlosser,  M.,  Uber  die  Baren  und  Barenahnlichen  Formen  des  Europaischen  Tertiars. 
Palceontographica,  Vol.  XL VI,  Stuttgart,  1899,  p.  102. 


262 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


cideans  were  represented  by  Dinotherium  and  Trilophodon  angustidens;  the 
perissodactyls  by  Anchitherium  and  two  rhinoceroses,  D.  simmorrensis 
and  Teleoceras  hrachypus,  a  successor  of  T.  aurelianensis  of  the  Lower 
Miocene.  There  was  one  ancylopod  (M acr other ium),  three  pig-hke  forms 
{Listriodon,  Sus,  Choeromorus) ,  among  ruminants  an  antelope  (Protra- 
gocerus),  a  chevrotain  (Dorcatherium) ,  and  several  cervulines,  or  deer-like 
forms  (Micromeryx,  and  Dicrocerus). 

A  closely  similar  fauna  existed  on  the  plateaux  of  Bavaria  and  Swabia 
as  described  by  Otto  Roger.^  He  refers  the  bear  of  this' region  to  Pseu- 
darctos,  one  of  the  forms  intermediate  between  the  dog  and  bear  families 

common  in  the  Miocene.  The  remaining  carni- 
vores, insectivores,  and  rodents  are  closely 
similar  to  those  of  La  Grive.  Among  the 
rodents  are  the  flying-squirrels  (Sciuropterus) , 
now  distributed  in  southern  Asia  and  Holarctica. 
The  proboscideans,  perissodactyls,  and  suillines 
were  also  the  same,  the  latter  including  the 
three  Middle  Miocene  genera  {Choerotherium, 
Hyotherium,  and  Listriodon).  The  ruminants 
are  abundant,  varied,  and  exhibit  great  range 
in  size.  One  of  the  larger  animals  is  the  brachy- 
odont  or  browsing  Palceomeryx,  an  Asiatic  animal  which  also  finds  its  way 
to  America.  It  is  of  doubtful  affinity.  Of  the  three  species  of  Palceomeryx 
recorded  probably  all  were  hornless,  although  attaining  the  size  of  existing 
deer  or  reindeer;  they  are  to  be  regarded  as  precursors  rather  than  ancestors 
of  the  deer.  Schlosser  has  suggested  their  possible  affinity  to  the  family 
of  giraffes.  Dicrocerus  is  a  cervuline  of  the  size  of  the  existing  fallow  deer, 
bearing  forked  antlers  very  much  like  those  of  the  muntjac.  These  animals 
inhabited  the  woods  of  Bavaria  in  great  herds.  Lagomeryx  is  a  tiny  cervu- 
line deer  smaller  than  any  living  species.  Micromeryx  is  a  small,  slender, 
long-legged  ruminant,  in  Roger's  opinion  probably  closer  to  the  antelopes 
than  to  the  deer.  The  flat-horned  antelopes  (Protragocerus)  are  repre- 
sented by  two  species,  and  the  water  chevrotains  by  Dorcatherium,  closely 
related  to  the  recent  hornless  water  chevrotain  (Hyoemoschus)  of  Africa. 


Fig.  131.  —  Middle  Miocene 
Dicrocerus  of  Steinheim  (X  ^^5). 
After  Fraas. 


^  Roger,  O.,  Wirbelthierreste  aus  dcm  Dinotheriensande  der  bayerisch-schwabischen 
Hochebene;  and,  Wirbelthierreste  aus  dem  Obermiocan  der  bayerisch-schwabischen  Hochebene. 
Ber.  Naturwiss.  Ver.  Schwaben  u.  Neuburg  in  Augsburg,  nos.  33,  35,  36;  1898,  1902,  1904. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  263 


Stage  of  St.  Gaudens,  (Eningen,  Gunshurg,  and  Monte  Bamholi 


Middle  Miocene 

Mammals 
Gibbons 
Baboons 
Bear 
Civets 
Amphicyons 
Canids 
Porcupines 
Flying  squirrels 
Tree  shrews 

(very  doubtful) 
Mastodons 

(trilophodont) 
Dinotheres 
Tapirs 
Anchitheres 
Rhinoceroses 
.    (three  phyla) 
Chalicotheres 
Antelopes 
Cervulines 

(horned) 
Chevrotains 

(hornless) 
Palseomerycids 

(hornless) 
Suillines 

(three  phyla) 


This  concluding  phase  of  the  Middle  Miocene  is, 
according  to  Deperet/  typified  by  the  fauna  of  St. 
Gaudens  (Fig.  129,  48)  on  the  head  waters  of  the 
Garonne,  which  are  paralleled  (48-69)  by  the  fresh- 
water deposits  of  (Eningen  (54),  near  Zurich,  the 
lignites  of  Elgg  (55)  and  Kapffnach  (56) ;  in  the  same 
region,  the  mammals  of  Giinsburg  (11)  and  Statz- 
ling  (60)  in  Bavaria,  the  lignitic  fauna  of  Monte 
Bamboli  (63)  in  Tuscany,  and  the  deposits  of  San 
Isidro  (64),  near  Madrid. 

In  the  (Eningen  beds  (which  lie  immediately  above 
the  strata  of  the  Aquitanian  Molasse  in  Switzerland, 
and  are  placed  in  the  horizon  of  St.  Gaudens,  Middle 
Miocene,  upper  division,  by  Deperet)  are  many  plant 
and  animal  remains.  The  fiora,^  consisting  of  nearly 
five  hundred  forms,  is  of  a  sub-tropical  to  temperate 
character,  with,  however,  some  tropical  species.  Palms 
are  present,  but  very  scarce.  American  types  of  trees 
are  most  frequent.  Comparison  should  be  made  with 
the  nearly  contemporary  forests  of  Oregon  (Mascall) 
and  of  Colorado  (Florissant),  see  p.  283.  European 
trees  stand  next  in  number,  followed  in  order  of 
abundance  by  Asiatic,  African,  and  Australian  forms. 
Judging  from  the  proportions  of  species  found  there, 
the  total  insect  fauna  may  be  presumed  to  have  been 
richer  in  some  respects  than  it  now  is  in  any  part  of 
Europe.  The  wood  beetles  were  especially  numerous 
and  large.  The  waters  were  tenanted  by  numerous 
fishes,  nearly  all  referable  to  living  genera;  also  by 
crocodiles  and  chelonians.^ 
Middle  Miocene  primates.  —  It  is  remarkable  that  representatives  of 
the  Old  World,  or  catarrhine  monkeys,  and  of  the  anthropoid  apes  appear 
simultaneously  in  the  Miocene  of  Europe,  and  are  both  represented  by 
relatively  large  forms.  Of  these  the  cynomorph  Oreopithecus  bamboli,  from 
the  lignites  of  Monte  Bamboli,  Tuscany,  is  regarded  by  Gervais  and  Forsyth 
Major  as  standing  nearer  the  anthropoids.  It  is  true  that  the  upper  molars 
do  resemble  those  of  the  anthropoid  apes,  while  the  lower  molars  resemble 
those  of  the  baboons.    The  Dryopithecus  fontani  is  unquestionably  a  true 

^  Deperet,  L'evolution  des  Mammif^res  tertiaires  (Miocene).  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris, 
Vol.  CXLIII,  Dec.  24,  1906,  p.  1122. 

^  Heer,  O.,  Flora  tertiaria  Helvetiae,  Winterthur,  1853-1859;  also,  Die  Urwelt  der 
Schweiz,  2d  ed.,  Zurich,  1873. 

3  Geikie,  A.,  Textbook  of  Geology,  London,  1893  (p.  1001). 


264 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


anthropoid;  it  is  represented  by  three  lower  jaws  and  a  humerus  found 
in  the  Middle  Miocene  of  St.  Gaudens  in  southern  France.  From  recent 
examination  of  all  the  discussions  regarding  this  famous  fossil,  which  has 
by  some  been  placed  near  the  line  of  human  ancestry,  Schwalbe  ^  con- 
cludes that  while  the  molars  resemble  those  of  man,  this  ape  cannot  be 
brought  nearer,  perhaps  not  so  near,  the  line  of  human  ancestry  as  the 
other  anthropoids.  How  far  Dryopithecus  may  be  regarded  as  a  stem 
form  from  which  on  the  one  side  the  line  led  to  the  human  race  and  from 
the  other  to  the  living  anthropoids,  namely,  the  chimpanzee,  orang,  gibbon, 
and  gorilla,  cannot  as  yet  be  certainly  determined.  In  one  feature,  the 
relative  shortness  of  the  humerus,  this  animal  approaches  the  chimpanzee 
more  closely  than  it  does  the  other  anthropoids. 

Upper  Miocene,  Pontian 

With  this  stage  we  enter  the  newer  Miocene  fauna,  sometimes  known 
as  the  Hipparion  fauna,  the  most  famous,  the  most  widely  distributed, 
and  the  best  known  of  all  the  mammalian  faunas  of  the  Old  World.  It  is 
highly  distinctive  and  sharply  demarcated  from  the  older  mammals  by  the 
new  Asiatic,  or  Oriental,  American,  and  possibly  African  mammals  which 
it  contains,  especially  by  the  great  abundance  of  grazing  and  cursorial 
types  which  make  their  first  appearance  in  southern  Europe.  These  new 
forms  are  as  follows: 

Hipparions,  fleet,  grazing  horses  from  Asia  and  North  America. 
Hares,  or  true  leporids  from  Asia  and  North  America. 
Rhinoceroses,  dicerine  (genus  Diceros),  or  atelodine  {i.e.  without 

cutting  teeth),  similar  to  those  of  modern  Africa. 
Giraffes,  hornless,  in  great  number  and  variety. 
Antelopes  related  to  the  existing  gazelles   (Gazella),  oryx  (Oryx), 

elands  (Oreas),  harnessed  antelopes  (Tragelaphus) ,  water  bucks 

(Cobus),  etc. 
True  deer,  the  roe  deer  (Capreolus). 
Ancestral  sheep  {Criotherium). 
Ancestral  hyienas  {J ctitherium) . 

Hyracoids  or  coneys  (Pliohyrax),  probably  from  Africa. 
Aardvarks  (Orycteropus)  from  Africa  or  Asia. 

This  new  fauna,  on  the  whole,  is  very  distinctly  similar  to  that  of  modem 
equatorial,  east,  or  plateau  Africa  with  the  exception  of  the  true  Cervidae, 
which  never  found  their  way  into  central  Africa.  However,  it  is  rather 
Asiatic  than  African  in  origin  and  evolution;  in  short,  many  of  these 
mammals  appear  to  be  on  their  way  to  Africa  from  Asia.    Still  another 

'  Schwalbe,  G.,  IJber  fossile  Primaten  und  ihre  Bedeutung  fiir  die  Vorgeschichte  des 
Mcnschen.  Mitteil.  Philomath.  Ges.  Elsass-Lothringen,  Vol.  IV,  no.  1,  Decade  16  (1908), 
Strassburg,  1909,  pp.  45-61. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  265 

view  is  that  this  fauna  is  an  outher  of  that  which  prevailed  both  in  Asia 
and  in  Africa  in  Upper  Miocene  times.  The  various  opinions  on  the  im- 
portant point  of  the  origin  of  this  Pontian  fauna  will  be  cited  later. 

With  the  advent  of  this  new  plains  fauna,  but  especially  with  the  ad- 
vent of  these  new  conditions  of  hfe  in  southern  Europe,  it  is  not  surprising 
to  find  a  temporary  retreat  of  the  forest  fauna.    The  old  Miocene  browsing 


Fig.  132.  —  Distribution  of  the  '  Hipparion  Fauna '  in  the  eastern  hemisphere. 


fauna  is  partly  dying  out,  partly  retreating  to  the  north,  partly  returning 
to  the  forests,  hillsides,  and  swamps  of  Asia  and  Africa. 

Physiographic  conditions.  —  De  Lapparent  ^  gives  a  clear  account  of 
the  physiographic  changes.  In  the  Upper  Miocene,  or  Pontian,  the  general 
recession  of  the  sea,  begun  in  the  Middle  Miocene  or  Vindobonian,  con- 
tinues until  the  Mediterranean  Sea  has  almost  wholly  dried  up,  or  become 
reduced  to  a  number  of  brackish  lakes.  As  a  result  Europe  is  broadly^con- 
nected  with  Asia  and  Africa;  the  waters  of  the  great  basins  of  eastern 
Europe  grow  gradually  less  saline,  and  are  replaced  by  the  Caspian  Sea 

^  De  Lapparent,  A.,  Traite  de  Geologie,  1906,  p.  1622. 


266 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


and  other  large  sheets  of  increasingly  fresh  water,  while  brackish  lagoons 
are  formed  between  Sicily  and  the  Rhone  valley. 

In  the  Congeria  gravels  of  Austria,  Callitris  and  the  camphor  trees 
(Camphora)  as  well  as  the  acacias  {Acacia)  have  vanished,  but  the  sequoias 
(Sequoia)  and  the  bamboos  (Bambusa)  continue.  Beeches  (Fagus)  are 
much  more  abundant  than  in  the  preceding  stages.^  Greece  at  this  period 
is  covered  with  rich  pastures  inhabited  by  enormous  herds  of  ruminants 


Fig.  133.  —  Europe  in  Upper  Miocene  or  Sarmatian  (Vindobonian-Pontian)  times.    White  — 
land.    Ruled  =  sea.    Dotted  areas  =  flood  plains  and  lagoons.    After  de  Lapparent,  1906. 

and  odd-toed  ungulates.  In  no  less  than  forty  localities,  extending  from 
central  Persia  (Maragha)  to  western  Portugal  (Archino),  the  life  of  this 
great  Upper  Miocene  stage  has  become  kno\Mi. 

Typical  deposits  are  those  of  the  lake-bound  ^gean  region  of  Pikermi 
(Fig.  134,  1)  giving  us  the  typical  southern  fauna  of  the  period,  closely 
similar  to  that  of  the  Isle  of  Samos  (2)  in  the  ^gean  Sea,  and  Maragha. 
In- Austria-Hungary  are  the  beds  of  Baltavar  (9).  In  Germany  we  get  a 
glimpse  of  the  more  northerly  mammals  in  the  river  gravels  of  Eppelsheim 
(40)  near  Darmstadt.  The  fauna  of  southwestern  Europe  is  revealed  in 
the  deposits  of  Mont  Leberon  in  Vaucluse  (14),  in  the  volcanic  ash  beds 
of  Puy  Courny  (17)  (Cantal),  while  further  southwest  are  the  deposits  of 
Concud  (31)  in  eastern  Spain  and  Archino  (32)  in  western  Portugal. 

It  should  be  said  that  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  geologic 
epoch  in  which  this  fauna  belongs,  that  the  German  geologist  Lepsius^ 

'  De  Saporta,  G.,  Le  Monde  des  Plantes  avant  I'Apparition  de  rHomrae,  Paris,  1879, 
p.  375. 

^  Lepsius,  R.,  Geologic  von  Deutschland  und  den  angrenzenden  Gebieten,  Pt.  I,  Stutt- 
gart, 1887-1892,  p.  637. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  267 


holds  to  the  unquestionable  Lower  Pliocene  age  of  Eppelsheim  and  conse- 
quently of  Pikermi,  of  which  Eppelsheim  presents  the  northern  facies, 
where  the  antelopes  are  replaced  by  deer.    Deperet  ^  and  other  writers  of 


Fig.  134.  —  Upper  Miocene.  Pontian.  GREECE.  —  Red  limonite  of  1  Pikermi.  ASIA 
MINOR.  —  2  Isle  of  Sarnos.  PERSIA.  —  3  Maragha  (omitted  on  map) .  RUSSIA.  —  4  Tcher- 
nigow,  in  south  central  Russia.  5  Sands  of  Balta,  in  Podolia,  southwestern  Russia.  Limestone 
of  6  Odessa,  7  Groussolowo  (Kherson) .  ROUMANIA.  —  8  Manzati.  HUNGARY.  —  9  Balta- 
var.  Lignites  of  10  Baroth-Kopecz.  AUSTRIA.  — 11  Siebenhirten,  near  Vienna.  Congeria 
gravels  of  12  Vienna  basin.  13  Eggenburg,  near  Vienna.  FRANCE.  —  Limons  rouges  de 
14  Mont  Luberon  (Vaucluse).  15  Visan  (Vaucluse).  16  Aubignas  (Ard^che).  Cinerites  de 
17  Puy-Courny  (Cantal).  Lignites  de  18  Saint-Jean-de-Bournay,  19  La  Tour-du-Pin  (Is^re). 
Marnes  de  20  La  Trappe  de  Chambaran  (Is^re).  21  Mont  Mirail  (Drome).  Lignites  de 
22  Tersanne  (Vaucluse).  Mollasse  de  23  La  Croix-Rousse  (Ain),  freshwater.  24  Sainte-Foy- 
a  L^/on,  near  Lyons.  Mollasse  d' 25  Amfoenew  (Ain) ,  fresh  water.  2Q  Soblay  {Am) .  262i  Saint- 
Jean-le-Vieux  (Ain).  27  Rocher  du  Dragon,  near  Aix  (Bouches-du-Rhone).  Marnes  de 
28  Montredon  (Herault).  Lacustrine  deposits  of  29  Estavar  (Cerdagne).  30  Orignac  (Haute- 
Garonne)  SPAIN.  —  Lacustrine  deposits  of  31  Concud  (Arragon).  PORTUGAL.  — 32  Ar- 
chino,  on  the  Tagus.  SICILY.  —  33  Grasitelli,  near  Messina.  GERMANY.  —  34  Salmen- 
dingen  (Bavaria).  Bohnerz  von  35  Melchingen,  36  Trochtelfingen,  Zt  Ebingen,  in  Swabia. 
38  Undingen  (Baden).  39  Heuberg,  in  Swabia.  Kies  von  40  Eppelsheim,  near  Worms  (7-10 
meters).    Correlation  of  Deperet. 

the  French  school  are  equally  positive  that  this  entire  fauna  should  be 
regarded  as  Upper  Miocene. 

Pikermi.  —  Gaudry  after  his  explorations  between  1855  and  1860  gave 
a  brilliant  picture  of  the  life  of  Greece  in  his  great  memoir  of  1862. ^  He 
observed  (p.  326  seq.)  that  vast  plains  probably  extended  eastward,  con- 
necting Greece  with  Asia,  and  beyond  the  arid  Pentelicus  and  Hymettus 

^  Deperet,  C,  L'evolution  des  Mammif^res  tertiaires  (Mioc&ne),  C.  R.,  1906,  p.  1123. 
^  Gaudry,  A.,  Animaux  Fossiles  et  Geologic  de  I'Attique,  d'apres  les  Recherches  faites  en 
1855-1856  et  en  1860  sous  les  auspices  de  I'Academie  des  Sciences,  Paris,  1862. 


268 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


there  stretched  verdant  lowlands  in  which  grassy  plains  alternated  with 
magnificent  forests.  These  regions  harbored  a  varied  mammalian  life: 
here  wore  two-horned  rhinoceroses,  huge  bears,  monkeys  romping  among 
the  rocks,  and  carnivores,  of  the  civet,  marten,  and  cat  families,  lying  in 
wait  for  their  prey;  grottos  of  Pentelican  marble  served  hyaenas  as  habi- 
tations, while  immense  troops  of  hipparions,  like  those  of  the  quaggas  and 
zebras  in  Africa  to-day,  occupied  the  plains.  No  less  swift,  and  even  more 
beautiful,  were  the  antelopes,  assembled  in  large  herds  according  to  their 
various  species,  and  distinguished  by  the  form  of  their  horns.  Palceoreas 
had  spiral  horns,  Antidorcas  lyre-shaped;  in  Palworyx  they  were  long  and 
arched,  in  some  species  they  resembled  those  of  the  gazelles,  while  Tra- 
gocerus  had  horns  that  approached  those  of  the  goats;  Palceotragus  was  a 
slender,  narrow-headed  form  with  horns  placed  directly  above  the  eyes. 
Helladotherium  and  a  giraffe  even  more  closely  related  to  the  recent  ones 
were  predominant  in  size  among  the  ruminants.  Ancylotherium  was  re- 
garded (1862)  as  an  edentate  with  hooked  claws  of  huge  proportions,  but 
is  now  recognized  as  the  last  stage  in  the  evolution  of  the  perissodactyl 
chalicotheres.  The  most  majestic  animal  of  all  was  Dinotherium,  which 
together  with  two  kinds  of  mastodon  represented  the  proboscideans.  There 
was  heard  the  roar  of  the  terrible  machaerodonts,  called  saber-tooth  tigers 
on  account  of  their  dagger-like  upper  canines.  .  .  .  There  is  a  conspicuous 
absence  of  small  animals  (p.  333) :  beside  some  turtles,  a  lizard  and  some 
birds,  there  are  only  a  rather  large  porcupine  (Hystrix),  a  skunk-like  form 
{Promephitis) ,  and  a  marten  (Mustela)  slightly  larger  than  the  European 
marten  of  to-day.  No  trace  of  the  bat  nor  of  an  insectivore  has  been  dis- 
covered. The  absence  of  small  forms  can  be  accounted  for  by  the  peculiar 
conditions  of  deposition  of  the  Pikermi  beds.  The  strong  currents  neces- 
sary to  bring  together  the  vast  number  of  gigantic  bones  must  have  been 
sufficiently  powerful  to  sweep  all  smaller  ones  away.^  A.  Smith  Wood- 
ward believes  that  the  Pikermi  bone  beds  are  due  to  some  catastrophe  by 
which  the  animals  were  suddenly  destroyed  at  several  distant  points; 
the  bodies  were  hurried  by  torrential  floods  through  thickets  or  tree-ob- 
structed water-courses  before  reaching  the  shallow  basins  in  which  they 
finally  rested.  This  phenomenon  appears  to  have  been  repeated.  The 
hipparions,  together  with  the  numerous  gazelles  and  probably  Hellado- 
therium, lived  on  the  grass  of  the  great  prairies;  certain  giraffes  were  browsers, 
and  Palceotragus,  probably  a  long-necked  form,  but  smaller  than  the  giraffe, 
fed  on  the  leaves  of  the  lower  branches  of  trees.  The  affinities  of  the 
Pikermi  fauna,  concluded  Gaudry,  are  not  with  that  of  modern  Europe,  but 
of  Africa,  and  this  resemblance  becomes  more  and  more  striking  as  we  pro- 
ceed to  a  closer  examination  of  the  faunas.  We  are  thus  led  to  the  conclusion 
that  at  this  time  a  land  connection  existed  between  Europe  and  Africa. 

'  Woodward,  A.  S.,  The  Bone-Beds  of  Pikermi,  Attica,  and  Similar  Deposits  in  Euboea. 
Geol.  Mag.,  n.s.,  Dec.  IV,  Vol.  VIII,  Nov.,  1901,  p.  485. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  269 


Characteristic  life.  —  The  mammals  of  southwestern  France,  of  Mont 
Leberon,  and  Croix  Rousse,  were  also  described  by  Gaudry  (1873)/  and 
more  recently  by  Deperet.^  The  smaller  and  more  delicate  build  of  the 
Rhone  valley  mammals  as  compared  with  those  of  Pikermi  may  be  due, 
says  Deperet  (1887,  p.  254),  to  the  dry  climate  and  scarcer  nourishment 
which  they  met  with,  this  being  the  northern  limit  of  their  distribution. 
Of  artiodactyls,  the  suillines  are  represented  by  a  giant  species  of  true  pig 
{Sus  major),  related  to  the  living  boars  through  the  Pliocene  forms.  Of 
the  surviving  older  ruminant  fauna,  Palceomeryx  was  a  large  and  Micro- 
meryx  a  small  hornless  deer,  while  the  muntjac  Dicrocerus,  with  its  small 
bifurcated  antlers,  also  was  present.  It  is  important  to  note  that  this  is 
the  last  appearance  of  the  horned  cervuline  deer  in  Europe.  The  roe  deer 
(Capreolus  matheronis)  occurs  here,  although  absent  in  the  Pikermi  fauna 
(Gaudry,  1873,  p.  77).  Side  by  side  with  the  troops  of  gazelles  {Gazella 
deperdita)  with  lyre-shaped  horns,  there  existed  Tragocerus  with  antilopine 
affinities  but  flattened  horns  that  gave  it  a  general  goat-like  appearance. 
The  giant  giraffe  (Helladotherium),  the  most  majestic  of  the  ruminants  of 
Europe,  also  occurs  here.  The  rhinoceroses  are  of  greater  size,  the  Su- 
matran  type  Dicerorhinus  schleiermacheri  being  provided  with  large  horns; 
the  hornless  aceratheres  also  occur  here  {A.  incisivum).  Most  striking  is 
the  fact  that  the  brachyodont  anchitheres  have  entirely  disappeared,  and 
that  both  the  horses  (hipparions)  and  antelopes  are  provided  with  long- 
crowned  or  hypsodont  teeth.  Among  the  carnivores,  small  and  large,  we 
still  observe  the  plantigrade  Amphicyon  and  the  gigantic  Dinocyon,  also 
the  primitive  bear-like  Hycenarctos,  indicating  an  omnivorous  radiation  of 
this  division  of  the  Garni vora.  Schlosser  ^  (1899)  observes  that  while 
Hycenarctos  in  a  measure  paralleled  the  bears  in  its  evolution,  it  was  not 
in  the  line  of  descent  of  Ursus ;  it  possibly  gave  rise  to  the  parti-colored 
bear  {Mluropus)  of  Thibet.  Notable  among  the  rodents  are  two  members 
of  the  true  leporid  family  or  hares  {Lagodus  and  Titanomys),  one  of  which 
is  ancestral  to  the  Corsican  pica. 

A  very  similar  fauna  has  been  more  recently  described  ^  (Deperet, 
1895)  from  Montredon  (134)  (Herault),  including  evidence  of  troops  of 
hipparions,  antelopes,  and  gazelles.  Especially  notable  here,  as  in  Pikermi 
and  Eppelsheim,  is  the  absence  of  wolf  or  fox-like  canids;  this  great  family 
is  represented  only  by  the  curious  short-faced  Simocyon. 

To  the  north  in  Eppelsheim  (Fig.  134,  40)  the  chief  feature  is  the 

1  Gaudry,  A.,  Animaux  Fossiles  du  Mont  Leberon  (Vaucluse).  Etude  sur  les  Vertebres. 
Paris,  1873. 

^  Deperet,  C,  Recherches  sur  la  Succession  des  Faunes  de  Vertebres  Miocenes  de  la  Vallee 
du  Rhone.    Exfr.  Arch.  Mus.  Hist.  Nat.  Lyon,  1,  IV,  Lyons,  1887. 

3  Schlosser,  M.,  Uber  die  Baren  und  Barenahnlichen  Formen  des  Europaischen  Tertiars. 
PalcBontographica,  Vol.  XLVI,  Stuttgart,  1899,  p.  142. 

4  Deperet,  C,  Resultats  des  fouilles  paleontologiques  dans  le  Miocene  sup^rieur  de  la 
coUine  de  Montredon.    C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Sept.  9,  1895. 


270 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


greater  abundance  of  deer,  which  replaced  the  antelopes  of  the  south.  The 
three  older  forms  of  rhinoceroses  occur,  successors  of  the  Middle  Miocene 
forms,  such  as  D.  sansanensis.  The  typical  giant  dinothere  of  Kaup  (Z). 
giganteum)  occurs  here. 

To  the  east  the  mammals  of  Samos  ^  and  Maragha  -  are  naturally  close  to 
those  of  Pikermi.    In  Samos  occurs  the  hornless  girafiine  form  Samotherium, 


Fig.  135.  —  The  Okapi  (Ocapia),  a  primitive  giraffe  from  the  forests  of  the  Congo. 

After  Lankester. 

very  close  to  the  existing  Ocapia  discovered  in  1899  in  the  African  forests. 
The  aardvark  {Oryderopus  gaudryi)  is  found  in  both  localities.^  The  range 
of  all  the  characteristic  antelopes  of  Pikermi  to  the  far  east  in  Persia  is  an 
evidence  of  their  wide  distribution  in  Asia.  The  Maragha  fauna  also  includes 
a  sivathere  ( U rmiatherium)  which  resembles  that  of  the  Siwaliks  of  India.  In 
general  the  fauna  of  Maragha  (seep.  332)  closely  approaches  that  of  the  Pliocene 
of  southern  Asia  (Siwaliks)  and  of  China  (p.  332).  To  the  far  west  a  similar 
fauna  (of  Concud,  Spain)  has  recently  been  described  by  A.  Smith  Woodward.* 

^  Forsyth  Major,  C.  J.,  Sur  un  gisement  d'ossements  fossiles  dans  I'ile  de  Samos,  contem- 
porains  de  I'age  de  Pikermi.  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  1887,  p.  4;  also  Considerations  nouvelles 
sur  la  faune  des  Vertebres  du  Miocene  superieur  dans  I'ile  de  Samos.  C.  R.  Acad.  Scv.  Paris, 
Nov.  2,  1891. 

^  Schlosser,  M.,  Die  Fossilen  Cavicornia  von  Samos.  Beitr.  Pal.  Geol.  Osterreich-Ungarns 
u.  Orients,  Vol.  XVII,  Vienna  and  Leipzig,  1904. 

^  Kittl,  E.,  Beitrilge  zur  Kenntniss  der  fossilen  Saugethiere  von  Maragha  in  Persien. 
I,  Carnivoren.    Ann.  K.  K.  Naturhist.  Hofmus.,  Vol.  II,  Vienna,  1887. 

^  Rodler,  A.  und  Weithofer,  K.  A.,  Die  Wiederkiiuer  der  Fauna  von  Maragha.  Kais. 
Akad.  Wiss.,  Math.-Naturwiss.  CI.,  Vol.  LVII,  Vienna,  1890. 

'  Andrews,  C.  W.,  On  a  Skull  of  Oryderopus  Gaudryi  Forsyth  Major  from  Samos.  Proc. 
Zool.  Soc.  London,  1896,  pp.  290-299. 

*  Woodward,  A.  S.,  The  Lower  Pliocene  Bone-bed  of  Concud,  Spain.  Geol.  Mag.,  n.s. 
Dec.  IV.  Vol.  X,  May,  1903. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  271 


In  all  these  localities  the  mastodons,  as  well  as  the  dinotheres,  now 
reached  a  higher  phase  of  development.  The  mastodons  are  still  '  longi- 
rostral/  or  long-jawed,  with  large  lower  tusks.  It  is  noteworthy  also  that 
while  some  of  these  mastodons  {T.  pentelici)  are  still  in  the  trilophodont 
stage,  i.e.  with  three  ridges  on  the  intermediate  molars,  the  mastodon  of 
Eppelsheim  is  a  Tetralophodon  (T.  longirostris  Kaup)  with  four  ridges  on 
the  intermediate  molars.  Through  the  Pliocene  of  Europe  and  North 
America  both  kinds  are  found.  The  Pleistocene  American  mastodon  is  a 
descendant  of  a  trilophodont  phylum. 

This  fauna  may  be  summarized  as  follows: 

The   animals    in   the  opposite 
Mastodons  column  which  make  their  last  ap- 

(trilophodont  and  tetralophodont,  pearance  in  Europe  at  this  time  are 


longirostral) 
*Chalicotheres 
(Ancylotherium) 
Rhinoceroses 
*Aceratheres 

Sumatran  types 
*African  types 
*Teleocerines 
Hipparions 
Tapirs 
Suillines 

*Tragulids,  or  chevrotains 
*Cervulines 

True  cervids  or  roe  deer^ 
First  sheep,  or  ovids 
Antelopes 
*Giraffes 

*Anthropoid  apes 

Catarrhine  monkeys 

Leporids  (Lepus) 

Castorids  (Castor) 
*Amphicyons 

Felids 

Hyraces,  or  coneys 


indicated  by  a  star  (*).  For  several 
of  these  forms,  such  as  the  water 
chevrotains  and  the  cervuline  deer, 
this  is  not  an  extinction,  but  a 
migration.  For  other  forms,  such 
as  the  aceratherine  and  teleocerine 
rhinoceroses,  this  is  apparently  a 
period  of  extinction,  although  it  is 
possible  that  Aceratherium  survived 
in  the  north  and  gave  rise  to  the 
giant  Elasmotherium  of  the  Pleisto- 
cene of  northern  Asia.^ 

Especially  interesting  is  the  ar- 
rival in  Greece  and  Samos  of  the 
large  hyracoid  (Pliohyrax),  un- 
doubtedly of  African  origin.  The 
hyraces,  or  dassies,  are  abundant  and 
widely  varied  in  the  Lower  Oligocene 
of  Africa. 

Upper  Miocene  primates.  — 
Schwalbe  -  regards  the  Eppelsheim 
femur  attributed  to  Dryopithecus  as 
belonging  rather  to  a  true  gibbon  and 
thus  deserving  the  designation  PUo- 


hylobates  eppelsheimensis  which  has 
been  given  to  it  by  Dubois.  In  the  Upper  Miocene  appear  two  new  and 
interesting  forms,  the  first  of  which,  Pliopithecm  antiquus,  is  of  a  typical 
anthropomorphous  type,  spreading  over  all  Europe,  France,  Switzerland, 

^  Osborn,  H.  F. :   Frontal  Horn  on  Aceratherium  incisivum.    Relation  of  the  type  to 
Elasmotherium.    Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  IX,  no.  214,  Feb.  1899,  pp.  161-162. 
2  Schwalbe,  op.  cit.,  1909,  p.  55. 


272 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Styria,  and  Germany;  it  stands  remarkably  near  the  living  gibbon,  and  is 
a  smaller  animal  than  either  Oreopithecus  or  Dryopithecus.  The  other  form 
from  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Pikermi,  Mesopithecus,  is  related  in  the  abbre- 
viation of  its  extremities,  not  to  the  tree-living,  but  to  the  true  quadru- 
pedal cynomorphs,  or  macaques;  it  is  one  of  the  earliest  and  most  impor- 
tant representatives  of  this  branch. 

The  Seven  Rhinoceros  Phyla  of  the  Miocene 

The  polyphyletic  law  is  in  no  group  more  brilliantly  illustrated  than 
among  the  rhinoceroses.  The  Miocene  of  Europe  and  North  America  opens 
with  the  discovery  of  two  phyla,  both  descended  from  Oligocene  ancestors, 
namely:  (1)  the  pairhorned  Dicer atheriince,  or  diceratheres,  (2)  the  hornless 
Aceratheriince,  or  aceratheres.  To  these  are  added  in  Miocene  and  Pliocene 
times  four  more  great  phyla,  namely:  (3)  the  Teleocerince,  or  teleocerine 
rhinoceroses,  ^vith  a  horn  at  the  very  tip  of  the  nasal  bones,  with  extremely 
short  feet  and  limbs,  hence  also  known  as  brachypodine.  There  also  ap- 
pear in  the  Lower  Miocene  the  first  of  (4)  the  Dicerorhince,  also  known  as 
the  ceratorhine  or  Sumatran  rhinoceroses,  distinguished  by  two  horns  and 
large  cutting  teeth,  and  destined  to  play  a  very  important  part  in  Europe 
and  survive  in  the  existing  Sumatran  rhinoceroses;  from  these  there  branch 
off  in  late  Tertiary  and  early  Quaternary  times  the  Etruscan  and  broad- 
nosed  rhinoceroses,  without  cutting  teeth.  To  these,  at  the  summit  of  the 
Miocene  and  again  in  the  Pleistocene,  are  added  (5)  the  Dicerince  or  atelo- 
dine  rhinoceroses,  distinguished  by  two  horns  and  the  absence  of  cutting 
teeth  (hence  atelodine),  surviving  in  the  existing  African  rhinoceros. 
Then  there  appears,  in  the  Phocene  of  Asia  only,  the  sixth  great  phylum 
of  (6)  Rhinocerotince,  the  typical  or  Asiatic  rhinoceroses,  with  large,  single, 
anterior  horns  and  jaws  armed  with  anterior  cutting  teeth;  these  survive 
in  the  existing  Indian  and  Javan  rhinoceros.  A  seventh  phylum  which 
may  have  branched  off  from  the  aceratherine  branch  is  that  of  the  (7) 
Elastnotheriince,  giant  hypsodont  forms  distinguished  by  a  single  posterior 
or  median  horn  and  known  only  in  the  Pleistocene  of  Europe  and  Asia. 
These  phyla  in  several  instances  divide  into  sub-phyla;  for  example,  the 
dicerorhine  or  Sumatran  phylum,  as  noted  above.  The  aceratherine  phy- 
lum sends  off  branches  in  some  of  which  the  skulls  acquire  minute  horns 
near  the  tips  of  the  nasals.  The  dicerine,  or  African  phylum,  divides  into 
long-headed  forms,  now  typified  by  the  'white  rhinoceros,'  D.  simus,  and 
mesaticephalic  forms,  typified  by  the  'black  rhinoceros,'  D.  hicornis. 

1.  Diceratheriinae,  the  diceratheres. 

2.  Aceratheriinae,  the  aceratheres. 

3.  Teleocerinae,  the  teleocerines  or  short-footed  rhinoceroses. 

4.  Dicerorhinae,  the  dicerorhine  or  Sumatran  two-horned  rhinoceroses. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  273 


5.  Dicerinae,  the  atelodine  or  African  rhinoceroses,  two-horned. 

6.  Rhinocerotinae,  the  typical  or  Indian  rhinoceroses,  single-horned. 

7.  Elasmotheriinai,  the  elasmotheres  (a  possible  side  branch  of  II). 

II.    MIDDLE  MIOCENE  LIFE  OF  ASIA 

The  wonderful  mammalian  fauna  of  Asia  still  awaits  stratigraphic 
arrangement;  that  is,  the  geologic  or  time  succession  of  the  mammals  is 
still  to  be  worked  out.  On  this  and  on  further  exploration,  especially  of 
the  smaller  forms  of  life,  depends  the  question  of  the  origin  and  history  of 
some  of  the  most  important  Old  World  types.  The  earliest  known  mammals 
at  present  discovered  in  Asia  are  of  Miocene  age,  and  partly  of  Oligocene 
character  compared  with  those  of  Europe,  while  the  more  recent  are  of 
Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  age. 

In  India  the  main  geologic  distribution  of  the  mammal  beds,  according 
to  Oldham,^  Blanford,^  and  Geikie,^  is  as  follows: 

II.  Siwalik  Group,  newer,  or  chiefly  Pliocene. 
I.  Manchhar  Group,  Sind,  older,  or  chiefly  Miocene. 

The  most  striking  feature  of  the  Lower  Manchhar  mammals  is  their 
correspondence  with  those  of  the  'older  Miocene'  of  western  Europe,  and 
the  most  mysterious  feature  is  the  absence  in  this  fauna  of  ancestors  either 
of  the  Upper  Miocene  life  of  Europe  or  of  the  Upper  Miocene  and  Pliocene 
life  of  Asia;  that  is,  western  India  at  this  time  does  not  furnish  us,  as  we 
should  have  anticipated,  with  the  ancestry  of  the  wonderful  Upper  Mio- 
cene and  Pliocene  fauna,  but  only  with  a  very  limited  portion  of  this  ances- 
try. This  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  this  is  chiefly  a  forest  or 
browsing  fauna. 

Manchhar  group.  —  In  Sind  (Fig.  136),  resting  on  the  marine  Gaj  of 
undoubted  Lower  Miocene  age,  on  the  flanks  of  the  Kirthar  Range,  is  the 
Manchhar  series,  10,000  feet  in  thickness,  composed  of  fluviatile,  or  flood- 
plain  clays,  sandstones,  and  conglomerates.  Of  these  the  Lower  Manchhar 
beds  are  composed  of  ossiferous  conglomerates,  including  bones  and  single 
teeth,  the  specific  determination  of  which  is  often  unsatisfactory.  The 
Upper  Manchhars  are  unfossiliferous.  Since  the  Gaj  beds  are  Lower  Mio- 
cene, the  Lower  Manchhars  cannot  be  older  than  Middle  Miocene.  This 
intermediate  position  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  they  do  not  contain  any 
typical  Upper  Miocene  mammals,  with  the  possible  exception  of  two  species. 
The  Bugti  beds  in  the  southern  portion  of  the  Suleiman  Range,  consisting 
also  of  clays  and  sandstones  iriterstratified  with  conglomerates  5,000  feet 
in  thickness,  have  yielded  near  Dera  Bugti  a  similar  fauna. 

1  Oldham,  R.  D.,  A  Manual  of  the  Geology  of  India.    8vo,  Calcutta,  1893. 
^  Blanford,  W.  T.,  Homotaxis,  as  Illustrated  from  Indian  Formations.    Rec.  GeoL  Surv. 
India,  Vol.  XVIII,  Pt.  1,  1885,  p.  37. 

3  Geikie,  A.,  Text-book  of  Geology,  1893,  pp.  1021,  1022. 


274 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


It  is  apparent,  first,  that  there  is  every  reason  why  the  term  'Siwahk' 
should  not  be  apphed  to  the  Manchhar  Zone;  second,  it  is  of  interest  to 
note  that  these  Manchhar  and  Bugti  deposits  are  apparently  of  river  and 


Fig.  136.  —  Map  of  India  showing  Tertiary  formations  containing  fossil  mammals  (oblique 
lines).  1.  Manchhar  Bods  ;  2.  Bugti  Hills;  3.  Perim  Island  ;  4.  Punjab  Si waliks  ;  5.  Sub- 
himalayan  Siwaliks  ;  6.  Beds  of  the  Lower  Irawadi.    Modified  from  Oldham. 


flood-plain  origin,  like  the  great  American  deposits  which  we  have  been 
considering. 

Middle  Miocene  Life  of  India 

These  older  mammals  of  western  India  (Manchhar  and  Bugti)  are  spoken 
of  by  Schlosser  *  as  the  '  Anthracotherium  fauna'  because  of  the  presence 
of  very  large  numbers  of  anthracotheres,  large  and  small,  including,  beside 
Brachyodus,  an  animal  we  have  seen  to  be  very  typical  of  the  Lower  Mio- 
cene of  Europe,  other  species  referred  to  Hyopotamus  and  Anthracotherium, 
and  other  mammals  regarded  as  related  to  the  anthracotheres,  namely, 
Hemimeryx  and  Sivameryx.    From  the  Bugti  Hills,  Pilgrim  described  in 

*  Schlosser,  M.,  Die  fossilen  Saugethiere  Chinas  nebst  einer  Odontographie  der  recenten 
AntUopen.    Abh.  k.  bayer.  Akad.  Wiss.,  CI.  II,  Vol.  XXII,  Pt.  1,  Munich,  1903. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  275 

1907  the  giant  anthracothere,  A.  hugtiense,  and  from  the  same  horizon  the 
tetraconodont  anthracothere  to  which  he  gave  the  name  Telmatodon} 
The  A.  hugtiense  is  a  brachyodont  form  closely  resembling  Brachyodus. 

This  fauna  is  sharply  distinguished  from  the  'newer  Miocene'  fauna 
of  Europe,  as  well  as  from  the  true  Siwalik  fauna  of  India,  by  the  absence 
of  Hipparion,  as  well  as  of  all  the  other  characteristic  Upper  Miocene 
types  of  Europe  and  Pliocene  types  of  Asia.  We  should  expect  to  find 
here  large  numbers  of  the  ruminants,  ancestors  of  the  antelopes  and  of  the 
cattle,  but  such  is  not  the  case.  We  do  find,  however,  certain  other  Upper 
Miocene  mammals  in  this  fauna,  indicating  that  it  partly  extended  into 
Upper  Miocene  times. 
•  The  pigs  are  represented  by  animals  referred  to  Hyotherium,  a  typical 
Miocene  genus,  and  to  Sus  (S.  hysudricus),  a  genus  which,  it  will  be  re- 
called, first  appears  in  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Europe.  In  this  connection 
it  may  be  noted  that  the  specific  and  generic  determinations  of  these  ani- 
mals probably  require  revision,  since  the  determinations  are  old  and  many 
of  them  are  based  on  imperfect  types. 

Beside  the  largely  prevailing  anthracotheres,  the  artiodactyls  are  rep- 
resented by  the  water  chevrotains  {Dorcatherium) ,  but  not  by  any  of  the 
cavicorn  or  hollow-horned  ruminants. 

Especially  interesting  among  the  perissodactyls  is  the  presence  of  a 
true  single-horned  Asiatic  rhinoceros  {R  sivalensis),  an  animal  not  repre- 
sented in  Europe,  but  believed  (Lydekker)  to  be  an  ancestor  of  the  existing 
brachyodont  or  browsing  type,  the  Javan  ^  rhinoceros  (R.  sondaicus). 
Another  species  (?  T.  perimensis)  is  regarded  by  some  writers  (Lydekker) 
as  a  teleocerine  rhinoceros,  or  as  belonging  to  the  genus  Teleoceras.  The 
hornless  rhinoceroses,  or  aceratheres,  are  also  numerous,  being  represented 
by  the  widely  distributed  Miocene  species  A.  b  anfordi. 

That  this  is  a  browsing  rather  than  a  grazing  fauna  is  still  further  em- 
phasized by  the  absence  both  of  horses  and  hipparions  as  v/ell  as  of  grazing 
types  of  cattle  and  antelopes.  Among  the  five  primitive  species  of  mas- 
todons there  is  recorded  an  animal  which  resembles  and  is  referred  to  the 
typical  Trilophodon  angustidens  of  the  Lower  and  Middle  Miocene  of  Eu- 
rope. There  is  also  the  trilophodont  mastodon  (T.  pandionis)  and  the 
more  progressive  tetralophodont  species  {T.  perimensis)',  it  will  be  recalled 
that  this  animal  is  in  a  stage  of  mastodon  development  which  occurs  only 
in  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Europe.  Two  forms  of  Dinotherium  are  recorded 
in  the  Lower  Manchhar  Beds.  Among  the  more  rare  animals  mentioned 
by  Blanford^  on  somewhat  doubtful  evidence  are  the  scaly  anteaters,  or 

^  Pilgrim,  G.  E.,  Description  of  Some  New  Suidse  from  the  Bugti  Hills,  Baluchistan. 
Rec.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  Vol.  XXXVI,  Pt.  1,  Nov.  1907,  pp.  45-56. 

^  The  "Javan  Rhinoceros"  (R.  sondaicus)  now  occurs  in  northern  India,  Burmah,  the 
Malay  Peninsula,  Java,  Sumatra,  and  probably  Borneo. 

3  Blanford,  W.  T.,  1885,  op.  ciL,  p.  37. 


276 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


pangolins  (Manis),  relatives  of  which,  it  will  be  recalled,  first  occur  in  the 
Oligocene  of  Europe. 

The  interpretation  of  this  Lower  Manchhar  and  Bugti  fauna  as  a 
whole  is  that  it  was  collected  from  a  forested  region  not  inhabited  by 
grazing  types,  that  it  contains  some  survivals  of  European  browsing  types 
of  Oligocene  and  Lower  Miocene  age,  and  that  it  is  chiefly  of  Middle  and 
partly  of  Upper  Miocene  age. 

IIL    MIOCENE  LIFE  OF  NORTH  AMERICA 


The  greatest  progress  in  recent  years  in  American  palaeontology  is  in 
the  revelation  of  the  different  phases  of  the  Middle  and  Lower  Miocene 


Fig.  137.  —  Chief  Miocene  and  Lower  Pliocene  fossil  mammal  deposits  of  western  North 
America.  1.  Typical  Arikaree  Formation,  S.  Dak.,  Nebr.,  Col.  2.  Laramie  Peak,  Wyo. 
3.  Pawnee  Creek  Beds,  Col.  4.  Panhandle  Beds,  Tex.  5.  Deep  River  Beds,  Mont.  6.  Mad- 
ison Valley  Beds,  Mont.  7.  Mascall  Formation,  Oreg.  8.  Republican  River,  Kan.,  Nebr. 
9.  Santa  Fe  Marls,  N.  Mex.  10.  Clarendon  Beds,  Tex.  11.  Elephas  imperator  Beds,  Tex. 
(See  text  for  horizons.) 

and  their  relation  to  the  Oligocene.  We  owe  this  chiefly  to  the  explora- 
tions and  studies  of  Scott,  Matthew,  Hatcher,  and  Peterson. 

No  sudden  geologic  or  life  break  occurs  in  America  to  separate  Ohgo- 
cene  from  Miocene  times,  such  as  that  which  so  sharply  demarcates  these 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  277 


periods  in  Europe;  nor,  again,  can  we  at  present  sharply  define  either  the 
beginning  or  the  close  of  the  American  Miocene  by  comparison  with  Eu- 
rope, because  the  similar  animal  forms  are  but  few.  Nor  is  there  a  divi- 
sion of  the  American  Miocene  into  an  older  and  a  newer  fauna  such  as 
occurs  in  Europe  (p.  249),  yet  we  can  make  a  broad  faunistic  correlation 
between  the  two  countries,  as  follows: 

The  older  Miocene  in  both  countries  marks  the  disappearance  or  absence  of 
some  of  the  most  characteristic  Oligocene  ungulates,  such  as  the  entelodonts, 
or  giant  pigs,  and  the  dicerathere  rhinoceroses.  It  marks  the  continued 
prevalence  of  browsing  herbivorous  quadrupeds  with  short-crowned  teeth. 

The  newer  Miocene  marks  the  world-wide  prevalence  of  the  first  grazing 
horses  and  other  quadrupeds  with  long-crowned  grinding  teeth;  also  of 
mastodons  with  trilophodont  or  three-crested  intermediate  molars,  as  well 
as  of  mastodons  with  tetralophodont  or  four-crested  intermediate  molars. 

Periods  Formations  Horse  Zones 

Upper  Miocene      Ogallala,  "Loup  Fork,"  Clarendon,  Madison  Hipparion 

Valley  Protohippus 
Middle  Miocene     Deep  River,  Pawnee  Buttes  *  Merychippus 
Lower  Miocene      Arikaree  (=' Upper  Harrison'  and  'Upper  Rose-  Parahippus 

bud') 

Thus  the  transition  in  North  America  from  Oligocene  to  Miocene  times 
is  still  undetermined,  and  the  line  of  demarcation  adopted  in  this  volume 
is  provisional.  The  rate  of  evolution  does  not  help  us,  because  some  groups 
of  American  mammals  evolve  more  rapidly  than  corresponding  Old  World 
forms;  for  example,  the  canids,  mustelids,  leporids,  and  the  equines.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  American  geologic  stage  we  have  here  selected  as  Lower 
Miocene  does  not  surely  contain  either  the  mastodons,  the  teleocerine 
rhinoceroses,  or  the  earliest  horned  deer  so  distinctive  of  the  Lower  Miocene 
of  Europe;  our  interpretation  is  that  these  animals  during  Lower  Miocene 
times  were  slowly  migrating  and  spreading  from  Europe  and  Asia  into 
North  America,  so  that  they  first  surely  appear  in  what  we  call  the  Middle 
Miocene.  The  line  of  transition  between  the  American  Oligocene  and 
Lower  Miocene  is  that  indicated  as  follows: 

Transition  to  the  Lower  Miocene  in  the  Arikaree  {  =  '  Upper  Harrison/  '  Upper  Rose- 
bud ')  Formations 

Mammals  characteristic  of  the  Upper  Oli-       New  mammals  characteristic  of  the 
gocene,  absent  or  undiscovered  here  Lower  Miocene 

Entelodonts  Mastodon,  evidence  doubtful 

Hypertragulus  Blastomeryx,  a  cervid 

Syndyoceras  Merycochoerus,  a  Miocene  oreodont 

Steneofiber  Merychyus,  a  Miocene  oreodont 

(last  appearance)  Phlaocyon,  the  first  procyonid 

Diceratherium 


278 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Thus,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying  sections  of  the  Pine  Ridge  (Fig. 
138),  of  Sioux  County,  Nebraska  (Fig.  99),  the  Arikaree,  'Upper 
Harrison,'  and  'Upper  Rosebud'  beds,  while  geologically  continuous  with 
the  Harrison,  and  showing  no  unconformity  or  other  evidence  of  a  break 
in  time,  yet  do  lack  some  of  the  mammals  found  in  the  Harrison  and  do 


By  permission  of  the  U.S.  Geoiogical  Survey. 

Fig.  138.  —  Diagrammatic  section  of  the  Lower  Miocene.    Taken  near  Harrison,  Nebraska. 

After  Peterson. 


contain  some  new  mammals  not  found  below.  There  are  proofs  of  a  long 
interval  of  time,  of  several  extinctions,  and  of  some  quite  profound  changes 
of  environment  and  of  evolution.  Further  exploration  may  modify  this 
artificial  line,  and  either  lessen  or  intensify  it. 

Ancient  Physiographic  Conditions 

The  Plains  Region 

Geologic  conditions.  —  The  conditions  of  deposition  of  these  upper  beds 
east  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  indicate  the  continuance  of  the  same  physio- 
graphic features,  namely,  of  great  flood  •  plains  with  a  gentle  slope  in  an 
easterly  direction,  traversed  here  and  there  by  river  channels  containing 
coarser  deposits.  The  typical  Arikaree  Formation  of  Darton,^  as  observed 
at  Pine  Ridge  in  northern  Nebraska  in  1899,  is  in  the  same  region  as  the 
'Rosebud'  of  Matthew.  He  observes  (p.  176)  that  a  large  portion  of  the 
high  lands  of  western  Nebraska  and  southeastern  Wyoming  extending 
from  Pine  Ridge  is  occupied  by  the  sands  and  soft  sandstones  of  the 
Arikaree  Formation.  It  attains  a  thickness  of  over  800  feet  in  southeastern 
Wyoming,  and  formerly  extended  far  up  the  slopes  of  the  mountains  to 
the  north  and  west.  As  thus  defined,  the  Upper  Harrison  of  Hatcher,  and 
Upper  Rosebud  correspond  to  the  upper  part  of  the  Arikaree  Formation  of 
Dart  on. 

'  Darton,  N.  H.,  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Geology  and  Underground  Water  Resources 
of  the  Central  Great  Plains.    U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Prof.  Paper,  no.  32,  1905,  p.  174. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  279 

Hatcher  ^  compares  the  conditions  which  led  to  the  formation  of  these 
great  deposits  with  those  at  present  prevaihng  along  the  Parana  and  Para- 
guay rivers  in  South  America.  Citing  from  Mr.  H.  H.  Smith,  he  says: 
''The  flood  plain  of  the  Paraguay  has  a  width  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles, 
which  broadens  as  we  ascend  the  river,  so  that  the  flood  plains  of  the  Upper 
Paraguay,  Amazon,  and  Orinoco  rivers  are  confluent,  and  that  a  vast 
region  about  the  headwaters  of  these  streams  presents  similar  physical 
conditions.  Here,"  observes  Hatcher,  ''we  have  a  region  of  equal  or 
greater  area  than  that  occupied  by  Miocene  deposits  of  our  western  plains, 
with  all  the  conditions  necessary  for  the  deposition  and  present  distribution 
of  the  sandstones,  clays,  and  conglomerates,  together  with  the  preservation 
of  remains  of  the  faunas  characteristic  of  each." 

The  geology  of  the  Lower,  Middle,  and  Upper  Miocene  formations  in 
Nebraska,  South  Dakota,  Wyoming,  Colorado,  Montana,  Oregon,  and 
Texas  still  requires  further  working  out.  The  section  taken  by  Gidley  ^ 
on  the  Llano  Estacado  or  Staked  Plains  of  Texas  (Fig.  167)  illustrates 
how,  through  the  shifting  of  streams,  old  formations  begin  to  be  worked 
over  into  new.  Thus  the  Upper  Oligocene  Brule  Clays  are  invaded  by 
Lower  Miocene  streams  of  the  Arikaree;  Middle  Miocene  formations  break 
down  to  form  materials  for  Upper  Miocene  (Fig.  167),  and  in  turn  all 
these  older  formations  may  contribute  to  the  subsequent  Pliocene  and 
Pleistocene.  In  general  the  Miocene  overlaps  the  Oligocene  eastward  and 
extends  south  into  Texas  and  north  into  Montana.  To  the  north  it  is 
much  cut  up  by  erosion,  to  the  south  and  east  much  buried  by  later  sedi- 
ment. It  is  largely  composed  of  altered  or  eroded  volcanic  ash  materials; 
in  some  places  pure  volcanic  ash  beds  are  found.  The  general  direction 
of  the  streams  was  from  west  to  east,  or  from  the  mountains  out  upon  the 
plains.  Thus  the  Miocene  becomes  finer  and  thinner  as  we  proceed  east- 
ward, while  the  coarse  materials  and  sedimentary  sands  and  clays  are 
found  closer  to  the  mountains.  To  a  certain  extent  the  evidence  points  to 
the  same  east  and  west  stream  channels  as  exist  to-day.^ 

The  Mountain  Region 

Oligocene  and  Miocene  of  Montana}  —  In  Montana  the  Rocky  Mountain 
chain  extends  far  to  the  west,  and  with  it  the  outlying  Tertiaries.  The 
ancient  flood  plain  and  lacustrine  deposits  occupy  the  large  valleys  of  the 

*  Hatcher,  J.  B.,  Origin  of  the  OUgocene  and  Miocene  Deposits  of  the  Great  Plains. 
Amer.  Philos.  Soc.  Proc,  Vol.  XLI,  1902,  pp.  113-131. 

^  Modified  (1908)  from  section  in:  Gidley,  The  Fresh-water  Tertiary  of  Northwestern 
Texas,  American  Museum  Expedition,  1899-1901.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX, 
1903,  pp.  617-635. 

3  From  notes  by  W.  D.  Matthew. 

*  Douglass,  The  Neocene  Lake  Beds  of  Western  Montana  and  Descriptions  of  Some  New 
Vertebrates  from  the  Loup  Fork.    Univ.  Montana,  thesis,  June,  1899. 


280 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


MerycochosTms 
zone 


Parah/'ppus 
Mo  r  op  us 

Merycochoerus 
(abundant  and 

characteristic) 
?  Merychyus 
Blastomeryx 
Oxydacty/us 
Testudo 

Amphlcyon 
(primitive  sta$e) 


LEVEL  OF  AGATE  SPRING 

D/'cera  ther/um 
Moropus 
D/nohyus 


FOSSIL  QUARRY 


200 


Deemonelix 

heds"        ?  Merychyus 

(prJmitii^e  stage) 

Promerycochosrus 
vantasselensls 


Parahippus 


Pro  merycochoerus 
Carriheri 


Mesoreodon 
Protomeryx 


■9' •'.'?' I'j 


.q.,o;.>i°:£?.u9-.-.c3 


.o-P^o.  o'.Oo  o.-: 


mmmmm 


Dicera  ther/um 


Leptauchenia 
?  Mesoreodon 


:^brule-e:^^ 


L  eptaiLcTijeTua-. 


Leptauchenia 


By  permission  of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey. 


Fig.  139.  —  Scale  section  corresponding  wnth  section  A  near  Harrison  in  Fig.  99. 

After  Peterson. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  281 

upper  Missouri  east  of  the  Rockies  above  the  region  of  Helena,  especially 
the  Gallatin,  Madison,  Jefferson,  Beaverhead,  Ruby,  Big  Hole,  Hell 
Gate;  they  extend  also  along  the  Bitter  Root  rivers  and  their  tributaries. 
Hay  den  and  Peale  in  1871  and  1872  gave  the  first  good  general  description 
of  these  deposits  in  the  Annual  Reports  of  the  United  States  Geological 
Survey  of  the  Territories. 

The  geologic  history  of  these  successive  formations  differs  in  one  im- 
portant respect  from  that  of  the  great  plains  of  Nebraska  and  South  Dakota, 
because  the  older  Oligocene  beds  were  uplifted  in  places  to  a  considerable 
angle  (35°)  before  the  Middle  Miocene  deposits  were  laid  down.  Exten- 
sive layers  of  volcanic  ash  overlie  the  lower  Oligocene  beds  of  the  Titano- 
therium  Zone,  and  the  Upper  Miocene  Madison  Valley  Formation  is  partly 
composed  of  layers  of  volcanic  ash  as  well  as  the  'channel  beds'  of  sand 
and  gravel. 

Pipestone  Creek.  —  The  oldest  mammals  of  these  deposits  are  those 
found  in  the  lower  beds  near  the  three  forks  of  the  Missouri  River,  on 
Pipestone  Creek  near  Whitehall  and  on  the  Big  Hole  north  of  Dillon. 
These  beds  consist  of  gray  and  yellow  clays  and  sandstones  and  conglomer- 
ates, 200  feet  in  thickness,  containing  a  lower  ' Titanotherium  Zone'  fauna, 
namely,  of  Lower  Oligocene  age. 

Deep  River.  —  Near  White  Sulphur  Springs,  also,  in  the  valley  of  Deep 
River,  there  is  a  comparatively  small  lacustrine  or  flood  plain  deposit,  in- 
cluding the  'Lower'  and  'Upper'  Deep  River  beds.  The  'Lower  Deep 
River  beds'  contain  a  fauna  of  Upper  Oligocene  age.  The  prevailing 
fauna  of  the  overlying,  or  'Upper  Deep  River  beds,'  which  has  been  de- 
scribed by  Cope  (1879)  and  Scott  (1893,  1895)  is  of  Middle  Miocene  age; 
this  is  the  typical  'Ticholeptus  Zone'  of  Cope.  Here  we  find  remains  of 
brachyodont  and  subhypsodont  horses,  and  of  the  oreodonts  (Merychyus 
and  Ticholeptus).  According  to  Cope,  the  Trilophodon.  among  the  earliest 
Proboscidea  occurring  in  America,  is  found  here;  Douglass  thinks  it  possible 
that  this  type  belongs  to  a  more  recent  formation. 

Flint  Creek.  —  Subsequent  in  age  to  these  three  faunas  are  the  mammals 
of  Middle  Miocene  age  contained  on  Flint  Creek  and  in  the  lower  portion 
of  the  valley  of  the  Madison  River  which  united  with  the  Jefferson  and 
Gallatin  to  form  the  Missouri. 

Madison  Valley.  —  This  formation,  of  true  Upper  Miocene  age,  two 
hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  thickness,  is  composed  of  sands,  gravels,  clays, 
and  volcanic  ash  that  are  often  grassed  over,  covered  with  drift,  or  entirely 
washed  away;  yet  near  the  Madison  River  there  is  one  exposure  fifteen  to 
twenty  miles  in  extent.  It  contains  hypsodont  horses  (Protohippus  and 
Neohipparion),  the  camel  Procamelus,  the  primitive  deer  Blastomeryx,  also 
trilophodont  mastodons.  Especially  important  is  the  ruminant  obtained 
here,  originally  described  by  Douglass  as  Palceomeryx,  but  now  referred  to 
Dromomeryx. 


282  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS  11 

The  Pacific  Coast  Region  ■ 

Before  the  Miocene  epoch  connection  between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  H 
oceans  of  Eocene  times  had  wholly  ceased,  and  the  coast  faunas  of  the  I 
later  Tertiary  were  wholly  of  the  Pacific  type.    The  Lower  Miocene  was  1 
still  a  warm  oceanic  period;  for  we  find  in  its  fauna  a  nautilus  still  persist- 
ing, and  other  genera  now  found  only  in  southern  waters.    The  accumula- 
tion of  organic  remains  along  the  Coast  Range  furnishes  the  series  from  i 
which  the  petroleum  of  California  was  afterwards  distilled.    In  the  northern 
interior  vast  outpourings  of  the  Columbian  lava  flow  (see  p.  359)  which 
covered  an  area  of  more  than  200,000  square  miles,  including  the  north- 
eastern part  of  California,  occurred  about  the  middle  of  the  Miocene.  In 
the  Upper  Miocene  the  climate  of  California  was  no  longer  sub-tropical, 
but  warm-temperate,  and  most  like  that  of  the  states  bordering  the  present    1  ' 
Gulf  of  Mexico.    Marine  animals  like  those  of  our  time  abounded  in  the 
waters,  and  along  with  them  were  some  southern  forms.    On  the  land,  elms,  I 
walnuts,  hickories,  and  laurels  flourished,  indicating  a  temperate,  rainy  cli- 
mate, more  moist,  if  not  more  mild,  than  that  of  to-day  in  the  same  region,  i 
In  the  Sierra  Nevada  Mountains  of  this  epoch  there  were  large  rivers 
winding  slowly  down  low  grades,  overloaded  with  sediments,  the  auriferous 
gravels,  which  spread  out  on  low  plains  not  far  above  sea  level;  through 
subsequent  elevation  these  flood-plain  deposits  are  now  found  higher  up  on 
the  Sierra  Nevadas,  with  their  channels  buried  under  later  lava  flows.* 


Miocene  Flora 

Our  knowledge  of  the  Miocene  flora  of  North  America  is  confined  to 
that  of  the  ancient  forests  of  the  great  mountain  region,  as  described  chiefly 
by  Knowlton  -  and  Cockerell,^  extending  from  Colorado  northward  through 
Montana,  Nevada,  Idaho,  Oregon,  and  Washington.  The  famous  'Mas- 
call'  flora  of  Oregon  is  of  Middle  Miocene  age;  the  similar  but  by  no  means 
identical  flora  of  Florissant,  Colorado,  is  of  somewhat  more  recent,  per- 
haps Upper  Miocene,  age. 

In  the  rich  plant  beds  of  the  ancient  lake  deposits  of  all  this  region, 
there  is  no  record  of  the  existence  of  any  palms,  although  there  are  occa- 
sional tropical  plants  and  many  warm  temperate  forms;  yet  the  proportion 
of  tropical  types  is  much  smaller  than  in  the  Eocene.  Sequoias  are  less 
frequent.  The  horsetails  (Equisetum)  begin  to  be  reduced  both  in  num- 
bers and  size.  The  ginkgo  still  occurs,  although  it  is  less  numerous.  The 
figs  (Ficus)  still  flourish  in  Montana,  Nevada,  Idaho,  and  Oregon.  This 
gives  us  a  hint  as  to  temperature,  for  the  fig  now  grows  in  northern  Florida, 

'  Smith,  J.  P.,  Salient  Events  in  the  Geologic  History  of  California.  Science,  n.s.. 
Vol.  XXX,  no.  767,  1909,  pp.  346-35L 

2  See  Knowlton,  H.  F.,  1893,  1896,  1898,  1900,  1902,  in  Bibliography. 
>  CockereU,  T.  D.  A.,  1906,  1908,  in  Bibliography. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  283 


latitude  30°,  and  in  Europe  as  far  north  as  the  Black  Sea,  latitude  40°,  in 
a  January  isotherm  of  40°  Fahr.  to  50°  Fahr.  (4°  C.  to  10°  C).  In  Oregon 
is  recorded  Artocarpus,  the  breadfruit,  now  confined  to  the  Pacific  Islands. 
Magnolias  abound  through  all  this  region.  We  infer  that  in  this  moun- 
tainous, volcanic,  and  well-forested  region  the  climate  was  more  equable, 
and  south  temperate  rather  than  tropical,  with  abundant  moisture,  but 
not  continuously  humid. 

Predominant  in  the  Miocene  flora  (Mascall)  of  the  mountain  region 
were  the  following  genera: 

Less   abundant   were    the   myrtles  (Myrica), 
Willows,  Salix  birches  (Betula),  alders  (Alnus),  laurels  (Laurus), 

Poplars,  Populus  staff  trees  (Celastrus),  maples  (Acer),  persimmons 

Sumach,  Rhus  (Diospyros),  aralias  (Aralia);  ferns  (Filices)  and 

Walnuts,  Juglans         horsetails  (Equisetum) . 

Oaks,  Quercus  On  the  great  plains  and  along  the  borders  of 

Elms,  Ulmus  the  great  rivers  which  traversed  them,  the  flora 

Plane  trees,  Platanus  probably  included  types  adapted  to  a  warmer 
Magnolias,  Magnolia  temperature.  Of  these  we  have  no  direct  knowl- 
Figs,  Ficus  edge,  as  no  plant  beds  are  preserved.  Certainly 

there  is  no  proof  of  tropical   conditions  north 

of  the  fortieth  parallel. 

As  for  the  field  flora  of  the  plains  an  appeal  must  again  be  made  to 
the  dental  anatomy  of  the  mammals,  which  demonstrates  that  grasses  were 
constantly  increasing  and  formed  the  chief  food  of  the  prevailing  types  of 
horses  and  ruminants  in  Upper  Miocene  times. 

Florissant  Lake.  —  The  deposits  of  the  ancient  lake  basin  of  Florissant, 
Colorado,  now  in  the  heart  of  the  arid  region  of  the  Rocky  Mountains, 
elevated  to  a  height  of  eight  thousand  feet,  were  especially  monographed 
by  Samuel  Hubbard  Scudder,^  and  more  recently  studied  by  T.  D.  A. 
Cockerell,^  so  that  we  now  know  the  plants  of  its  shores,  the  insects  which 
hovered  about  them,  and  other  characteristics  which  are  most  significant 
as  to  conditions  in  the  border  mountain  region  in  Miocene  times.  The 
lake  lay  in  a  long,  narrow  valley  between  granitic  mountains,  surrounded 
by  volcanoes,  so  that  the  very  shales  in  which  the  remains  of  plants  and 
insects  are  entombed  are  wholly  composed  of  volcanic  sand  and  ash  from 
a  source  probably  close  at  hand  (Scudder,  1890,  pp.  18-34).  From  con- 
sideration of  all  the  evidence,  Cockerell  ^  regards  the  age  of  these  beds  as 

^  Scudder,  S.  H.,  The  Tertiary  Insects  of  North  America.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Terr.,  Rept., 
Vol.  XIII,  1890. 

^  Cockerell,  The  Fossil  Fauna  and  Flora  of  the  Florissant  (Colorado)  Shales.  Univ.  Col. 
Studies,  Vol.  Ill,  no.  3,  Boulder,  Col.,  June,  1906;  also.  The  Fossil  Flora  of  Florissant,  Col- 
orado. Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIV,  no.  4,  1908,  pp.  71-110;  and,  The  Miocene 
Trees  of  the  Rocky  Mountains.  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XLIV,  no.  57,  January,  1910,  pp. 
31-47. 

'  Cockerell,  letter  to  the  author,  March,  1908. 


284 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


probably  Upper  rather  than  Lower  Miocene.  Both  the  plants  and  insects 
show  a  very  close  general  correspondence  with  those  of  (Eningen  as  de- 
scribed by  Heer/  and  (Eningen  is  now  considered  (p.  263)  Middle  Miocene. 
The  plants  of  Florissant  are  in  general  similar  to  those  of  the  Colorado 
uplands  and  of  our  southern  states;  they  are  in  no  sense  tropical,  and 
there  are  no  palms  whatever.  Of  the  more  than  hundred  genera  described, 
many  still  exist  in  Colorado,  such  as  pines  (Pinus),  'cedars'  {Sahina), 
alders  {Alnus),  oaks  (Quercus),  rose  (Rosa),  ash  (Fraxinus),  grape  (Vitis), 
maple  (Acer),  sumac  (Rhus),  thorn  {Crataegus),  thistle  (Carduus),  aster 
(Aster),  Virginia  creeper  (Parthenocissus) .  It  would  be  easy  by  selection 
of  a  large  series  of  such  plants  and  also  insects,  so  similar  to  those  of  modern 
Colorado,  to  conclude  that  since  the  Miocene  there  had  been  no  climatic 
changes  of  any  moment.  Thus  the  narrow-leafed  cottonwood  (Populus) 
is  almost  exactly  like  the  common  tree  of  the  Colorado  foothills;  and 
many  other  examples  might  be  cited. 

On  the  other  hand,  mixed  with  this  familiar  flora  is  a  very  different 
one,  indicative  of  a  warmer,  moister  climate.  The  most  prominent  element 
of  this  other  flora  is  the  southern  one,  such  as  is  found  in  the  eastern  United 
States  to-day,  including  several  species  of  the  soapberry  (Sapindus),  sweet 
fern  (Comptonia),  sweet  gum  (Liquidambar) ,  two  kinds  of  chestnut  {Cas- 
tania),  basswood  (Tilia),  several  species  of  holly  {Ilex),  smoke  tree  {Cotinus), 
persimmon  {Diospyros),  and  even  one  or  two  of  the  figs  {Ficus).  This 
flora,  however,  is  not  one  of  the  extreme  south. 

Other  elements  in  the  flora  are  of  minor  importance,  but  include  the 
giant  redwood  {Sequoia)  now  of  California.  With  it  grew  an  incense  cedar 
{Heyderia),  now  found  in  America  only  on  the  Pacific  coast;  it  also  sur- 
vives (a  single  species)  in  Asia.  The  sequoia  and  incense  cedar  are  both 
very  closely  related  to  their  living  Californian  allies.  Several  species  of 
Wernmannia  represent  a  shrub  still  extant  in  the  mountains  of  the  West 
Indies.  The  Old  World  genera  of  Florissant,  not  found  in  America  at  all 
to-day,  are  few  and  mostly  of  doubtful  identification;  perhaps  the  best 
case  is  that  of  Parana  of  the  order  Convolvulace^e,  now  living  in  the  East 
Indies  and  fossil  also  in  the  European  Miocene.  "So  far  as  I  am  able  to 
judge,"  continues  Dr.  Cockerell,^  "the  insects  tell  the  same  tale  as  the 
plants,  except  that  the  Old  World  element  is  much  more  definite  and  in- 
disputable, though  small."  The  most  striking  members  of  this  Old  World 
group  are  two  species  of  the  tse-tse  fly  {Glossina),  to-day  exclusively  African; 
this  is  of  especial  interest  in  connection  with  the  introduction  of  African 
mammals  {Mastodon)  into  the  Miocene  of  North  America.  One  of  the 
orthopterous  insects,  a  sort  of  large  grasshopper,  shows  resemblances  to  a 
living  African  genus.     Certain  neuropterous  insects,  resembling  the  'ant- 

1  Heer,  O.,  Flora  tertiaria  Helvetiae,  Winterthur,  1853-1859;  also,  Die  Urwelt  der  Schweiz, 
2d.  ed.,  Zurich,  1873. 

-  Letter  to  the  author,  March,  1908. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  285 

lions,'  belong  to  a  family  now  extinct  in  North  America,  but  represented 
in  Chili,  in  Persia,  and  abundantly  in  Africa.  Two  species  of  the  horse  fly 
(Tabanus)  are  also  found  here,  quite  close  to  living  forms.  It  is  interesting 
to  note  that  while  the  Equidse  have  undergone  generic  changes  since  Miocene 
times,  their  tormentors  have  remained  not  only  generically  the  same,  but 
have  changed  little  specifically.^  The  now  extinct  element  in  the  insect 
fauna  includes  certain  plant  lice,  dragon  flies,  and  cicadas.  The  Neo- 
tropical or  South  American  element,  if  there  be  any,  must  be  slight. 

'^From  consideration  of  all  the  evidence,"  continues  the  same  writer, 
conclude  that  fche  chmate  of  Florissant  at  the  time  the  shales  were  de- 
posited was  warm  and  moist,  but  in  no  sense  tropical,  the  flora  including  a 
hilly  and  lake  border  element.  The  altitude  was  not  much  less  than  it  is 
to-day  (8,000  feet),  but  under  the  prevailing  climatic  conditions  there  were 
no  heavy  winter  snows.  There  is  apparently  no  reason  why  these  moist 
mountain  side  conditions  of  the  Florissant  Lake  should  not  have  been 
contemporaneous  with  the  presence  of  arid  conditions  in  Texas,  Kansas, 
and  the  great  plains  generally."  ^ 

The  horse  flies  of  Florissant  are  especially  interesting  in  connection 
with  the  epidemic  theory  of  extinction  of  some  of  the  American  mammals, 
suggested  by  Osborn  ^  and  others.  The  deadly  nature  of  the  tse-tse  fly 
(Glossina)  in  Africa  is  well  known.  In  Algeria  the  tabanids  also  transport 
a  trypanosome  disease  of  the  dromedary.  It  seems  possible,  therefore,  that 
both  these  flies  may  have  been  instrumental  in  carrying  diseases  to  the 
Mammalia.^ 

Lower  Miocene 
Merycochoerus  Zone 

Geologic  distribution.  —  As  described  above  on  p.  279,  the  geographic 
area  in  which  these  mammals  are  known  is  identical  with  that  of  the  close 
of  the  Oligocene  because  it  is  revealed  in  a  continuation  of  the  upper  por- 
tions of  the  Upper  Oligocene,  Arikaree,  Harrison,  and  Rosebud  Formations 
of  western  Nebraska  and  South  Dakota,  also  farther  west  around  the 
base  of  Laramie  Peak,  and  to  the  south  in  the  uppermost  Martin  Canon 
of  Colorado.  Our  knowledge  is  again  due  chiefly  to  the  comparatively 
recent  explorations  and  studies  of  Peterson,  Matthew,  Cook,  and  Thomson. 

There  is  no  foreign  invasion.  The  mammal  fauna  is  entirely  American, 
that  is,  derived  from  American  Oligocene  ancestors.  A  possible  exception 
is  indicated  by  a  portion  of  two  teeth  which  remotely  resemble  those  of 
one  of  the  primitive  mastodons;  we  await  further  evidence  on  this  point.* 

^  Cockerell,  Letter  to  the  author,  March,  1908. 

^  Osborn,  H.  F.,  The  Causes  of  Extinction  of  MammaUa.    Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XL, 
no.  479,  1906,  pp.  769-795,  no.  480,  pp.  829-859. 
2  Cockerell,  Letter  to  the  author,  Jan.  9,  1909. 

*  Cook,  Harold  J.,  A  New  Proboscidean  [Gomphotherium  conodon]  from  the  Lower  Miocene 
of  Nebraska.    Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  XXVIII,  Aug.,  1909,  pp.  183-184. 


286 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Fig.  140.  —  Skull  of  the  t^-pical  Lower  Miocene  oreodont 
' Merycochtrrus  proprius.  In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History.    After  Matthew. 


The  fossils  are,  how- 
ever, less  abundant 
than  in  the  lower  ho- 
rizon, and  further  ex- 
ploration is  awaited 
with  interest.  As  ob- 
served on  p.  277,  in 
defining  these  beds  as 
Lower  ^iocene  the 
following  characteristic 
Oligocene  forms  are 
now  believed  to  be 
absent:  Entelodon 
(Dinohyus),  Hyper- 
tragulus,  and  Steneo- 
hy  the  Lower  Miocene 
Upper  Miocene 


fiber.    The  latter  genus  is  replaced  in  Europe 
Chalicomys;  its  successors  in  America  are  perhaps  the 
and  Pliocene  Hystricops  and  Eucastor. 

Especially  noteworthy  among  the  new  Lower 
Miocene  mammals  is  Blastomeryx,  a  descendant  of  the 
Oligocene  Leptomeryx,  and  broadly  ancestral  to  the 
American  deer  (Mazama  and  Odocoileus).  This  animal 
is  hornless  but  provided  ^vith  sharp  canine  tusks,  and 
is  in  the  same  stage  of  evolution  as  Dremotherium  of 
the  Upper  Oligocene  of  Europe.  Other  new  artio- 
dactyls  are  the  oreodontsM erycochcerus  andMerychyus. 
The  former  is  a  brachycephalic,  or  short-faced  successor 
of  Promerycochoerus,  while  Merychyus  is  a  smaller  ani- 
mal which  becomes  extremely  abundant  and  is  es- 
pecially characteristic  of  the  Middle  Miocene.  Both 
these  oreodonts  persist  through  the  Miocene.  Among 
the  tylopods  or  camelids  the  long-limbed  and  long- 
necked  Oxydadylus  ^  again  appears,  a  tree-browsing 
camel  ^vith  brachyodont  molar  teeth  broadly  ancestral 
to  the  '  giraffe  camels '  of  the  Middle  and  Upper  Mio- 
cene. The  other  camelid,  Protomeryx,  was  a  small, 
rather  short-limbed  animal  with  hypsodont  molars;  it 
probably  gave  rise  to  the  line  of  camels  that  ended  in 
the  Pleistocene  with,  very  large  and  long-limbed  forms. 
The  peccaries  are  again  represented  in  Desmathyus. 

The  perissodactyl  Herbivora  include  the  chali- 
cotheres  (Moropus)  and  the  last  survivors  of  the 

'  Peterson,  O.  A.,  Osteology  of  Oxydactylus.    Ann.'  Cameg.  Mies.,  Vol.  II,  no.  3,  Feb.; 

1904. 


Lower  Miocene 

?Mastodons 
Camelids 

Protomeryx 

Oxydactylus 
Oreodonts 

M  erycochcerus 

Merychyus 
Pro-Cervids 

Blastomenjx 

(hornless) 
Horses 

Parahippus 

fAltippus 
Rhinoceroses 

Aceratherium 

Diceratherium 
Procyonids 

Phlaocyon 
Mustelids 

Megalictis 
Rodents 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  287 


diceratheres.  The  horses  are  becoming  more  varied,  including  Parahippus 
(P.  nebrascensis)  as  well  as  an  extremely  light-limbed  form,  possibly  similar 
to  the  Altippus  described  by  Douglass^  from  the  Lower  Miocene  Fort 
Logan  Formation  of  Montana;  this  is  an  equine  which  combines  brach- 
yodont  molar  teeth  with  long  and  very  slender  limbs  and  feet.    There  are 


Porcupine  Butte 
Volcanic  ash  layer 


Merycochceras 
zone 


Blastomeryx 
Parahippus 
Cynodesmus 
Phlaocyon 
bun  is 
Mega/ictis 
Oxydactylus 
Desmat/iyus 
Protomeryx 
Merycochceras 
Merych/us  (abundant) 
Aelurocyon 
Arctoryctis 
Enioptychus 
Lepus 


Promerycochcerus 
(v^ery  abundant 
and  characteristic) 
Diceratherium 
Elothen'um 
Steneo  fiber 
Hypertragu/us 
Parahippus  (small sp) 
Leptauchenia 
(near  base) 

Nimravus 
Moropus 
D/'nohyus 
Mesoreodon 


BRULE  -^^^^^-^-^^^^^-^^^^LeptmzcTierda  zone 


By  permission  of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey. 
Fig.  141.  —  Scale  section  of  the  Rosebud  Formation. 


After  Thomson  and  Matthew. 


also  more  diminutive  horses,  scarcely  exceeding  in  size  the  Oligocene 
Mesohippus.    All  these  horses  have  short-crowned  molar  teeth. 

Of  the  rodents  all  the  Oligocene  families  continue,  and  Matthew  finds 
evidence  of  the  occurrence  of  the  heteromyids,  the  leaping  rodents  related 
to  the  existing  Heteromys,  which  is  in  the  same  family  with  the  'American 
kangaroo  rat'  or  Dipodomys.  Especially  interesting  is  the  occurrence  of 
a  new  insectivore,  Arctorydes,  doubtfully  related  to  the  South  African 
chrysochlorids,  or  Cape  Golden  moles. 

Of  the  Carnivora  the  felids  of  this  stage  still  await  discovery.  The 

*  Douglass,  E.,  Fossil  Horses  from  North  Dakota  and  Montana.  Ann.  Carneg.  Mus., 
Vol.  IV,  nos.  3  and  4,  1908. 


288 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


canids,  represented  by  Cynodesmus,  are  abundant  and  varied.  This  is 
the  first  geological  appearance  of  the  characteristically  American  family 
of  raccoons,  or  procyonids,  here  represented  by  Phlaocyon.  The  Mustelidse 
are  represented  by  the  Oligocene  Oligobunis  and  two  new  forms  of  superior 
size  {^lurocyon  and  Megalictis);  the  latter  {M.  ferox)  is  a  very  powerful 
mustelid,  intermediate  in  character  between  the  ratel  (Mellivora)  of  Africa 
and  India  and  the  wolverine  (Gulo),  an  animal  which  subsequently  becomes 
Holarctic  in  distribution. 

It  is  striking  that  every  representative  of  the  Testudinata  found  in  the 
Arikaree,  or  'Upper  Harrison'  beds  is  an  upland  form,  and  so  far  as  known 
all  remains  belong  to  the  genus  Testudo,  which  embraces  the  land  tortoises, 
represented  by  five  species.  This  is  suggestive  of  the  seolian  deposition  of 
these  beds.^ 

Middle  Miocene 
Ticholeptus  Zone 

Deep  River  and  Flint  Creek,  Montana;  Mascall,  Oregon;  Pawnee  Creek, 
Colorado.  —  In  the  above-named  formations  of  Montana,  Oregon,  and  Colo- 
rado, which  are  broadly 
united  as  the  Middle 
Miocene  or  Ticholeptus 
Zone,  we  meet  another 
very  profound  change 
in  the  mammalian  life 
of  North  America,  which 
corresponds  to  that  oc- 
curring in  the  Lower 
Miocene  of  Europe, 
namely,  the  first  appear- 
ance both  of  the  African 
mastodons  and  of  the 
short-limbed  rhinoce- 
roses, or  TeleocerinjB. 
It  is  supposed  that  these 

Fig.  142.  —  Skull  of  the  typical  Middle  Miocene  oreodont  Lower  Miocene  invaderS 
Ticholeptus  breviceps  Douglass  (Type),  about  |-.    After  Doug- 

lass.  of  Europe  reached 

America  in  the  Middle 

Miocene,  but  it  is  quite  possible  that  future  discovery  may  give  a  greater 
age  to  these  formations.  Another  resemblance  to  the  Lower  Miocene  of 
Europe  is  the  occurrence  at  this  level  of  the  earliest  horned  or  antlered 
ruminants.    These,  however,  have  no  known  European  affinities,  since  they 

^  Loomis,  F.  B.,  Turtles  from  the  Upper  Harrison  Beds.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  XXVIII, 
no.  163,  July,  1909,  pp.  17-26. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  289 

belong  to  the  peculiarly  American  family  of  Miocene  and  Pliocene  mery- 
codonts,  allied  in  skeletal  but  not  in  horn  structure  to  the  modern  prong- 
horned  antelopes  or  antilocaprids. 

The  appearance  of  these  modernized  selenodont  artiodactyls  or  Pecora 
must  have  effected  a  change  in  the  external  aspect  of  the  fauna  only  less 
marked  than  that  caused  by  mastodons  and  bulky  rhinoceroses.  Other 
new  elements  of  Eurasiatic  origin  appear.  Among  the  artiodactyls  appears 
a  bovine  or  antelopine  form  somewhat  similar  to  the  characteristic  Protra- 
gocerus  of  the  Middle  Miocene  of  Europe,  an  animal  (Dromomeryx)  whose 
zoologic  position  is  still  uncertain;  it  presents  certain  resemblances  to  the 
Antilocapridse.  There  are  also  carnivores  resembling  the  amphicyons,  and 
among  the  Mustelidse  the  otters  appear  {Potamotherium) ,  animals  which 
are  first  recorded  in  the  Upper  Oligocene  or  Aquitanian  of  Europe.  A 
felid  similar  to  the  characteristic  Lower  Miocene  Pseudcelurus  also  occurs. 

Probably  of  native  or  North  American  origin,  because  related  to  the 
haplodontids  or  sewellels,  is  a  very  peculiar  family  of  mylagaulid  rodents 
with  short,  deep  skulls,  but  which  depart  from  all  other  rodents  in  develop- 
ing horns. 

Most  surprising  is  the  evidence  of  the  existence  of  true  edentates  of 
Megalonyx  type  in  the  Mascall  beds  of  Oregon.^  The  extinction  of  several 
mammals  characteristic  of  the  Lower  Miocene  or  Promerycochoerus  Zone, 
and  the  occurrence  of  more  advanced  stages  in  the  evolution  of  the  horses 
and  camels,  especially  mark  this  stage  as  intermediate  or  halfway  between 
Lower  and  Upper  Miocene. 

Formations.  —  The  Deep  River,  or  Ticholeptus  Zone  of  Oregon  was  dis- 
covered by  Grinnell  and  Dana  in  1875,  and  divided  into  two  levels  by  Cope 
in  1879,  namely,  the  Ticholeptus  and  Procamelus  beds  (Upper  Miocene) 
which  he  rightly  recognized  as  quite  distinct  in  age.  In  1893  Scott  first  fully 
characterized  the  mammals  of  these  beds,  and  concluded  that  the  nearest 
European  equivalent  is  the  fauna  of  Sansan  and  Simorre,^  which  we  now 
determine  as  Middle  Miocene. 

The  Pawnee  Creek  horizon  of  Colorado  was  first  explored  by  Cope  in 
1873.  The  American  Museum  parties  entered  these  beds  in  1898,  and  re- 
turned in  1901,  under  Matthew,  who  first  distinguished  the  horizon  from 
the  'Loup  Fork/  or  Upper  Miocene,  to  which  all  previous  writers  had 
referred  it.^  In  1903  Douglass  ^  made  known  the  mammals  of  the  Flint 
Creek  Formation  in  Montana,  which  proved  to  be  of  similar  age,  or  transi- 

^  Sinclair,  W.  J.,  Some  Edentate-like  Remains  from  the  Mascall  Beds  of  Oregon.  Univ. 
Cal,  Bull.  Dept.  Geol,  Vol.  V,  no.  2,  1906,  pp.  65-66. 

^  Scott,  W.  B.,  The  Mammalia  of  the  Deep  River  Beds.  Trans.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  n.s., 
Vol.  XVIII,  1895,  no.  2,  p.  182. 

3  Matthew,  W.  D.,  Fossil  Mammals  of  the  Tertiary  of  Northeastern  Colorado.  Amer. 
Mus.  Nat.  Hist,  Mem.  I,  Pt.  7,  Nov.,  1901,  pp.  358-374. 

*  Douglass,  E.,  The  Neocene  Lake  Beds  of  Western  Montana,  and  Descriptions  of  Some 
Vertebrates  from  the  Loup  Fork.    Univ.  Montana,  thesis,  June,  1899. 


290 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


tional  to  the  Upper  Miocene.  Finally  the  studies  of  Merriam  ^  and  Sin- 
clair 2  have  confirmed  Cope's  opinion  that  the  Mascall  of  Oregon,  immedi- 
ately overlying  the  Columbia  River  lava  which  caps  the  Upper  OHgocene 
of  the  John  Day  Formation,  is  also  of  this  age.  The  Virgin  Valley  of 
Nevada  (p.  356)  has  recently  yielded  a  fauna  of  similar  age.  We  are  thus 
enabled  to  again  survey  the  mammalian  life  of  North  America  over  a  wide 
geographic  area  extending  from  the  plains  to  the  mountain  region,  and  on 
the  whole  very  uniform  in  character.    As  bearing  upon  the  climate  of 


Fig.  143.  —  Middle  Miocene  of  Colorado.  A  view  of  West  Pawnee  Butte,  taken  from  the 
summit  of  East  Pawnee  Butte.  Photograph  by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History  expe- 
dition of  1901. 


these  times  it  is  interesting  to  observe  the  testimony  of  the  Mascall  flora, 
as  described  by  Knowlton.^ 

Flora  of  the  northwest  mountain  region.  —  In  the  northwest  mountain 
region  no  palms  are  recorded  (cf.  pp.  282^).  The  vegetation  still  bore 
a  southern  character.  The  Mascall  flora  of  the  John  Day  Basin  (lat.  45°  N.), 
which  is  regarded  as  Middle  Miocene,  is  relatively  rich.  It  was  distinctly 
a  hard  wood  flora,  in  general  appearance  like  that  of  the  area  east  of  the 
Mississippi  at  the  present  time."  There  were  large  numbers  of  horsetails 
(Equisetum),  but  the  ferns  were  scarce.    Both  of  the  grasses  (Gramineae) 

^  Merriam,  J.  C,  A  Contribution  to  the  Geology  of  the  John  Day  Basin.  Univ.  Cah, 
Bull.  Dept.  GeoL,  Vol.  II,  1901. 

-  Sinclair,  W.  J.,  Some  Edentate-like  Remains  from  the  Mascall  Beds  of  Oregon.  Univ. 
Cal.,  Bull.  Dept.  GeoL,  Vol.  V.,  no.  2.  1906,  pp.  65-66. 

'  Knowlton,  F.  H.,  Fossil  Flora  of  the  John  Day  Basin,  Oregon.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Bull., 
204,  1902. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  93. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  291 


and  the  sedges  (Cyperaceae)  only  a  single  doubtful  form  has  been  found. 
The  conifers,  although  represented  by  several  genera,  must  also  have  played 
an  inconspicuous  role.  Of  the  deciduous  types,  the  birches  (Betulacese) 
were  most  abundant;  next  in  importance  were  the  beeches  (Fagacese),  and 
then  the  maples  (Aceracese),  which  attained  a  great  size  in  the  Mascall 


Fig.  144.  —  Contemporary  Middle  Miocene  mammals  of  the  western  plains  region  to  same 
scale  (X  2?)-  By  Charles  R.  Knight.  A.  Oxydactylus ,  primitive  giraffe  camel.  B.  Meryco- 
dus,  ancestral  horned  ruminant.  C.  Pronomotherium,  aquatic  oreodont  with  proboscis. 
D.  Thinohyus,  ancestral  peccary.    E.  Epigaulus,  horned  burrowing  rodent. 

beds.  We  observe  also  walnuts,  plane  trees,  willows,  and  sweet  gums,  the 
latter  (Liquidambar)  forming  a  conspicuous  element.  Dr.  Arthur  HoUick* 
observes  of  this  flora  of  central  Oregon  in  Middle  Miocene  times  that  it 
points  to  a  temperate  climate,  the  breadfruit  (Artocarpus)  alone  indicating 
warmer  conditions,  although  both  this  form  and  the  alleged  cinnamon 
(Cinnamomum)  are  not  certainly  identified.  The  climate  was  probably 
south  temperate. 

^  Notes  by  Dr.  Hollick,  March,  1909. 


292 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Fauna.  —  The  conspectus  of  the  fauna  exhibits  at  once  its  wide 
departure  from  the  Upper  OUgocene  and  its  successive  Lower  Miocene 
stages  as  above  described. 

The  reported  occurrence  of  edentates  of  the 
gravigrade  type  is  especially  interesting  because 
these  animals  were  supposed  to  have  first  in- 
vaded North  America  in  Middle  Pliocene  times. 
It  must  be  remembered  that  the  occurrence  of 
armadillo-like  forms  intheBridger  (p.  164)  points 
to  the  possibility  that  the  edentates  were  resident 
in  certain  parts  of  North  America  from  early 
times. 

The  occurrence  of  gravigrade  sloths  in  the 
Miocene  of  the  northwest  seems  consistent  with 
Scharff's  theory  that  North  and  South  America 
were  at  times  connected  through  Lower  Cali- 
fornia and  western  South  America.^  But  this 
theory  is  inconsistent  with  the  fact  that  other 
animals  did  not  pass  south  or  north. 

The  Proboscidea  are  relatively  little  known, 
being  represented  by  two  species  {T.  proavus,  T. 
hrevidens) ,  neither  of  which  has  the  long,  narrow 
grinding  teeth  characteristic  of  T.  angustidens  of 
the  Lower  Miocene  of  Europe.  Of  the  rhinoce- 
roses the  species  Teleoceras  medicornutus,  dis- 
covered in  the  Pawnee  Creek  region  of  Colorado, 
is  a  remarkably  close  successor  of  the  T.  aurelia- 
nense  of  the  Lower  Miocene  of  France,  because 
both  possess  beside  the  terminal  nasal  horn  a  ru- 
dimentary frontal  horn.  This  is  one  of  the  most 
brilliant  illustrations  of  the  migration  theory 
between  the  New  and  Old  Worlds.  Of  the 
aceratherine  rhinoceroses,  which  are  best  known 
in  the  plains  region  of  Colorado,  the  type  of 
Cope's  genus  Aphelops  (A.  megalodus)  occurs  at  this  level. 

Of  the  browsing,  or  leaf-eating  fauna,  we  find  three  important  examples 
among  the  horses,  namely,  Hypohippus  of  Oregon  and  Colorado,  a  supposed 
forest-living  horse  with  short-crested  teeth  and  persistent  tridactyl  feet, 
Archceohippus  of  the  Mascall,  Oregon,  a  small  animal  with  teeth  resembling 
those  of  the  OUgocene  Mesohippus,  but  distinguished  by  two  very  large 
preorbital  pits;  and  the  short-crowned  Parahippus  (= Desmathippus  Scott) y 
in  which,  although  the  molars  are  brachyodont,  a  fine  deposit  of  cement 

^  Scharff,  R.  F.,  On  an  Early  Tertiary  Land-connection  between  North  and  South  Amer- 
ica.   Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XLIII,  Sept.  1909,  pp.  513-531. 


Proboscideans 

Trilophodon 
Rhinoceroses 

Teleocerine 

Aceratherine 
Horses 

Merychippus  stage 

Hypohippus  stage 
Tapirs 

Chalicotheres 

Peccaries 

Oreodonts 

Ticholeptus  stage 
Camelids 

Protolabis  stage 

AUicamelus  stage 
Palseomerycines 

Dromomeryx 
Merycodontids 

Merycodus 
Edentates 

Megalonychids 
Canids 

Amphicyonids 
Mustelids 

Otters 
Felids 

Pseudailurus 
Mylagaulids 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  293 


appears  in  the  valleys.  Of  these  several  phyla  of  horses  the  Hypohippus 
is  closest  to  the  Middle  Miocene  Anchitherium  of  Europe;  in  fact,  it  was 
believed  by  Scott  ^  to  belong  to  this  genus.  Widely  distinguished  by  its 
elongate  or  sub-hypsodont  molar  teeth  is  the  plains-living,  probably  grass- 
eating  horse  Mery- 
chippus  of  Colorado, 
certain  species  of 
which  lead  into  the 
true  equines  or  Hip- 
potheriinae. 

The  tapirs  are  still 
sparingly  represented 
in  the  remains  of  ad- 
vanced types. 

Dominant  mem- 
bers of  the  artiodactyl 
fauna  are  the  oreo- 
donts  and  camelids, 
both  of  which  show  a 
high  degree  of  adap- 
tive radiation.  Among 
the  oreodonts  Mery- 
cochoerus  and  Mery- 
chyus  persist.  Pro- 
merycochoerus  is  again 
abundant  in  the  Deep 
River  beds  of  Mon- 
tana. The  very  char- 
acteristic and  wide- 
spread genus  Ticho- 
leptus  is  probably  a 
direct  and  slightly 
modified  descendant  of  Eporeodon  of  the  summit  of  the  Oligocene,  while  the 
small  and  extremely  broad-ski^led  Cyclopidius  suggests  Leptauchenia  of  the 
Upper  Oligocene. 

The  camels  are  now  still  more  clearly  divided  into  the  browsing  types 
with  short-crowned  teeth,  and  the  grazing  types  with  long-crowned  teeth. 
Among  the  former  the  remarkable  'giraffe  camel'  Alticamelus  replaces 
Oxydactylus  of  the  Lower  Miocene.  The  recognition  by  Matthew  ^  of 
this  parallel  with  the  Old  World  giraffes  was  a  most  interesting  con- 
tribution to  the  Miocene  zoology  of  America.  The  existence  of  long- 
limbed,  long-necked,  brachyodont  types  of  camels  browsing  from  the 

1  Scott,  W.  B.,  Mammalia  of  the  Deep  River  Beds,  1895,  p.  181. 

2  Matthew,  W.  D.,  Fossil  Mammals  of  the  Tertiary  of  Northeastern  Colorado,  1901. 


Fig.  145.  — Skull,  neck,  and  limbs  of  the  large  Middle  Mio- 
cene "giraffe  camel,"  Alticamelus  alius,  of  Colorado.  In  the 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History.    After  Matthew. 


294 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


tops  of  trees  is  conclusive  evidence  of  increasing  arid  conditions  and 
lengthening  summer  droughts  which  would  render  an  adaptation  of  this 
kind  of  great  survival  value.  Of  the  more  conservative  or  typical 
grazing  camels  with  relatively  short  limbs  and  sub-hypsodont  grinders 
the  characteristic  forms  are  Miolabis,  which  succeeds  the  Lower  Mio- 


FiG.  146.  —  Skeleton  of  the  deer-antelope  Merycodxis  oshorni.    In  the  American  Museum  of 
Natural  History.    After  Matthew. 


cene  Protomeryx,  and  Protolabis,  which  includes  certain  long-headed 
forms,  readily  distinguished  from  its  successor  Procamelus  by  the  pres- 
ence of  a  full  set  of  upper  incisor  teeth  and  by  its  separate  or  'split' 
metapodials. 

The  presence  of  numerous  small-homed  and  hornless,  grazing  and  brows- 
ing ruminants  lends  an  entirely  new  aspect  to  the  plains  and  forest-border 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  295 


fauna.  These  animals  are  of  three  different  kinds.  The  first,  Merycodus,^ 
presented  externally  the  appearance  of  a  diminutive  American  deer,  twenty 
inches  high  at  the  withers,  with  three-tined  antlers  nine  inches  in  length.  It  is 
the  leader  of  the  newly  appearing  family  of  merycodonts,  distinguished  by 
the  possession  of  the  deciduous  branching  antlers  of  the  American  deer 
type  combined  with  the  skeletal  characters  of  the  American  prong-homed 
antelopes  (Antilocapridae),  and  provided  with  elongate  or  hypsodont  grinding 


Fig.  147.  —  Skeletons  of  the  Eocene  four-toed  horse  Eohippus  venticolus,  and  of  the  Miocene 
forest  or  browsing  horse  Hypohippus  osborni.    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


teeth,  thus  a  plains-living  or  grazing  form.  The  second  cervid  type  is  a  horn- 
less animal  of  smaller  proportions,  known  as  Blastomeryx,  sl  successor  of  Lepto- 
meryx,  and  apparently  a  member  of  the  American  branch  of  the  true  Cer- 
vidae.  This  is  a  browsing  animal  with  short-crowned  teeth;  in  its  propor- 
tions it  is  similar  to  the  cervuline  or  musk  deer  of  Europe;  it  stands  twelve 
to  eighteen  inches  high  at  the  shoulders,  and  is  hornless.^  The  third  rumi- 
nant of  this  stage  is  Dromomeryx,  also  a  brachyodont  or  browsing  form,  of 
larger  size,  closely  similar  in  its  tooth  structure  to  the  hornless  Palceomeryx 

^  See  Matthew,  W.  D.,  A  Complete  Skeleton  of  Merycodus.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist., 
Vol.  XX,  1904,  p.  128. 

In  the  Antilocapridae  the  bony  horn  core  is  permanent  like  that  of  the  Bovinae,  but  the 
horn  sheath  is  annually  shed,  a  very  peculiar  combination  of  characters. 

^  The  beginnings  of  antlers  appear  only  in  the  Upper  Miocene  representatives  of  this 
phylum  (Scott). 


296 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


of  Europe,  but  actually  related  to  the  cavicorn  antelopine  or  bovid  division 
of  the  Ruminantia.  Species  of  Dromomeryx  from  Colorado  (D.  horealis) 
belong  to  an  animal  of  the  size  of  the  existing  Virginia  deer.  The  horn 
pedicles  are  without  'burr/  apparently  not  deciduous  and  probably  en- 
closed in  a  horny  sheath  as  in  the  true  antelopes  and  cattle. 

There  is  a  great  variety  of  canids  both  of  the  long-  and  short-faced  types. 
The  abundance  of  these  animals  in  the  Miocene  of  North  America,  contrasted 


Fig.  148.  —  The  Upper  Miocene  forest-li\'ine:  or  browsing  horse  Hypohippiis.    After  original 
by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


with  their  subordinate  position  in  Europe,  renders  it  very  probable  that 
this  continent  was  the  chief  center  of  their  adaptive  radiation.  As  studied 
by  Scott,  Matthew,  and  Merriam,  they  are  in  a  high  degree  polyphyletic, 
including  five  or  six  distinct  lines,  as  follows :  The  typical  dogs,  descendants 
of  Cynodictis  of  the  Oligocene,  are  represented  by  Tephrocyon  and  lead  in 
the  direction  of  Canis.  The  cyons  or  dhole-like  dogs  are  successors  to  the 
Temnocyon  and  Daphcenus  of  the  Oligocene  with  trenchant-heeled  grinding 
teeth,  and  are  represented  by  Cyan  and  Idicyon.  The  giant  or  bear-like 
dogs  are  represented  by  Amphicyon.  The  mustelid  family  is  represented 
by  a  species  of  marten,  by  a  primitive  otter,  as  above  noted,  while  the 
felids  of  Colorado  are  represented  only  by  specimens  doubtfully  referred  to 
the  European  Pseudcelurus.  It  is  noteworthy  that  none  of  the  machae- 
rodonts  have  been  discovered  at  this  stage,  although  they  are  abundant  both 
in  older  and  in  more  recent  formations. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  297 

Most  remarkable  of  all  the  rodents  are  the  short-headed  mylagaulids, 
which  may  be  regarded,  together  with  the  sewellels  or  haplodontids  and 
Eocene  and  Oligocene  ischyromyids,  as  a  primitive  division  of  the  sciuro- 
morph  rodents.  Beside  the  typical  genus  Mylagaulus,  there  has  been  dis- 
covered the  extraordinary  Ceratogaulus  rhinocerus,  which  has  a  special  horn- 
bearing  bone  on  the  nasals,  which  was  undoubtedly  capped  with  a  prominent 
pointed  dermal  horn. 

Upper  Miocene 

Hipparion  and  Procamelus  Zone 

The  appearance  in  great  numbers  of  herbivores  with  long-crowned  or 
grazing  teeth  such  as  the  horses  (Protohippus  and  Hipparion)  and  the  camels 
(Procamelus)  establishes  at  once  a  broad  evolution  parallel  with  the  Upper 
Miocene  of  Pikermi,  of  Eppelsheim,  and  of  Mont  Leberon.  The  teeth  and 
feet  of  these  animals  demonstrate  beyond  question  the  spread  in  America 
as  in  Europe  at  the  close  of  the  Miocene  of  great,  dry,  grassy  plains,  of 
droughts  or  arid  seasons,  of  long  distances  between  the  water  pools  at  cer- 
tain seasons  of  the  year;  in  short,  of  East  African  and  plateau  conditions 
of  Hfe. 

While  no  new  mammals  especially  distinctive  of  western  Europe  appear 
in  America  at  this  time,  it  is  evident  that  in  Protohippus  and  Hipparion 
there  was  an  invasion  of  progressive  types  from  the  north,  either  from 
British  Columbia  or  from  northern  Asia.  It  is  a  striking  fact  that  while 
Protohippus  and  Hipparion  may  have  been  descended  from  certain  stages 
of  the  highly  characteristic  Middle  Miocene  Merychippus,  horses  of  the 
genus  Merychippus  as  well  as  of  the  primitive  Parahippus  and  of  the  forest 
horse  Hypohippus  still  persist  in  the  Upper  Miocene  side  by  side  with  the 
highly  specialized  and  hypsodont  Protohippus  and  Hipparion.  This  is  in 
wide  contrast  with  the  Old  World,  in  which  only  the  Hipparion  type  is 
known.    Browsing  horses  (Hypohippus)  occur  with  the  hipparions  in  China. 

This  Upper  Miocene  fauna  was  very  widespread  geographically,  very 
rich  in  specific  forms,  highly  varied  in  character,  and  represented  by  num- 
bers of  complete  skeletons.  In  other  words,  the  American,  like  the  European 
Miocene,  closes  with  a  great  and  famous  mammalian  fauna. 

Geologic  formations.  Plains  region.  —  This  is  the  typical  '  Loup  Fork ' 
of  all  the  early  literature  of  Hayden,  Leidy,  Marsh,  Cope,  also  of  Scott  and 
Osborn  in  part.  But  the  deposits  to  which  the  names  'Loup  Fork'  and 
'Loup  River'  were  originally  applied  lie  in  eastern  Nebraska  and  are  of 
Upper  Pliocene  or  Lower  Pleistocene  age;  the  term  Loup  Fork  was  also 
stretched  to  cover  Middle  Miocene  formations,  and  gradually  lost  all  definite 
meaning.  Typical  Upper  Miocene  deposits  of  western  Nebraska  were 
named  the  'Nebraska  Formation'  by  Scott  in  1894;  ^  officially,  however, 

1  Scott,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer.,  Vol.  V,  1894,  p.  595. 


298 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


'Nebraska'  is  preoccupied,  and  by  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey  this  forma- 
tion is  known  as  the  '  Ogallala '  of  Darton.  It  consists  of  widely  scattered 
river  channel  and  flood  plain  deposits  in  South  Dakota  and  Nebraska.  To 
the  south  in  New  Mexico  are  the  Santa  Fe  Marls,  determined  as  of  this  age 
by  Cope  in  1884.  In  northwestern  Texas  are  the  Clarendon  beds  of 
Gidley,  a  river  channel  deposit  overlying  the  Panhandle,  Middle  Miocene, 
at  the  edge  of  the  Llano  Estacado  (Fig.  167).  On  the  northern  plains 
of  Montana  are  the  Madison  Valley  beds  of  Douglass,  1,200  feet  in 
thickness. 

From  Montana  on  the  northwest  to  Texas  on  the  southwest,  to  Nebraska 
and  Kansas  in  the  central  west,  we  find  a  very  similar  list  of  mammals,  so 
that  the  homotaxis  of  the  American  horizons  'Nebraska,'  'Ogallala,' 
'Clarendon,'  'Santa  Fe,'  'Madison  Valley,'  and  numerous  others  un- 
named is  singularly  well  established.  They  may  be  said  to  belong  to  the 
Hipparion  Zone,  a  term  equivalent  to  the  Procamelus  Zone  of  Cope, 
the  Cosoryx  Zone  of  Scott  (1894),  the  Protohippus  Zone  of  Osborn 
(1907). 

The  climatic  conditions  and  flora  of  the  high  mountain  region  at  about 
this  time  are  well  pictured  in  the  description  of  the  Florissant  Lake  of  Colorado 
given  on  p.  283.  There  is  evidence  of  occasional  dust  burials  by  a  wind 
or  sand  storm  in  the  discovery  of  remains  of  six  hipparions  on  Little  White 
River  near  the  Rosebud  Agency  in  South  Dakota.^  This  discovery  in- 
cluded the  perfect  skeleton  of  a  female,  the  type  of  Neohipparion  whit- 
neyi,  found  closely  crowded  against  those  of  several  younger  horses  of 
the  same  species,  the  group  having  perished  together  either  in  a  sand  storm 
or  by  a  stroke  of  lightning;  the  association  of  the  younger  horses  with  the 
mare  is  a  natural  one,  indicating  that  this  group  had  not  been  brought 
together  by  stream  action.  In  the  original  description  of  the  superb  type 
specimen  (Fig.  123)  of  this  group  Gidley  pointed  out  that  its  limbs  had  the 
delicate  proportions  of  those  of  the  Virginia  deer.  With  its  strongly 
hypsodont  and  long-crowned  teeth  it  represents  a  typical  horse  of  the  arid 
country. 

The  conspectus  of  this  Upper  Miocene  fauna  shows  it  as  of  prevailing 
American  type. 

As  set  forth  in  this  summary  there  is  a  balance 
Prevailing  Mammals  between  the  grazing  and  browsing  types  of  Her- 
Proboscidea  bivora.    Each  great  order  of  herbivores  exhibits  an 

Trilophodon  increasingly  sharp  division  between  the  more  con- 

Rhinoceroses  servative  browsing  iynpes  with  short-crowTied  teeth, 

Teleoceras,  Aphelops  and  the  more  progressive  grazing  types  with  long- 
Tapirs  crowned  teeth.    Among  the  horses,  the  browsers 

Tapiravus  (Hypohippus  and  Parahippus)  are  beginning  to 

*  J.  W.  Gidley,  A  New  Three-toed  Horse.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX, 
July  24,  1903.  p.  465. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  299 


Prevailing  Mammals  decline.    The  river-border  and  forest-living  oreo- 

donts  are  among  the  declining  types  soon  to  be- 
come extinct.  The  browsing  tapirs  are  represented 
only  by  a  single  recorded  specimen  of  Tapiravus. 
The  true  browsing  or  ^giraffe  camels'  (Altica- 
melus)  so  highly  characteristic  of  the  Lower  and 
Middle  Miocene  have  not  thus  far  been  discovered 
at  all  in  the  Upper  Miocene,  although  we  are  certain 
that  these  animals  were  not  yet  extinct,  because 
remains  of  them  are  again  found  in  the  Lower  Plio- 
cene Rattlesnake  Formation  of  Oregon.  Grazing 
camels  with  hypsodont  teeth  (Procamelus  and 
Pliauchenia)  are  very  abundant  and  specifically 
varied.  The  more  primitive  hypsodont  camel 
known  as  Protolabis  still  survived  in  Montana. 
The  wide  geographic  range  of  these  camels  in 
North  America  is  most  remarkable.  They  were 
certainly  present  in  great  herds,  and  lent  the  most 
characteristic  aspect  to  the  landscape.  Soon  after 
this  period  they  are  first  recorded  in  Asia  in  the 
Siwaliks  of  the  sub-Himalayas.  Among  the  ru- 
minants, the  brachyodont  browsing  Dromomeryx 
and  Blastomeryx  still  survive  and  are  highly  char- 
acteristic. At  this  time  Blastomeryx  first  appears 
with  horns.  Certain  of  the  rhinoceroses  are  also 
of  the  browsing  type,  and  all  the  new  mastodons 
must  be  placed  in  this  category.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  browsing  chali- 
cotheres,  represented  by  the  giant  Ancylotherium  of  the  Upper  Miocene 
of  Europe,  have  not 
yet  been  discovered  in 
North  America.  The 
grazing  animals  are  on 
the  whole  more  numer- 
ous, more  varied,  and 
more  characteristic. 

A  very  typical  pro- 
boscidean is  the  Trilo- 
phodon  productus,  a 
doubtful  specimen  of 
which  was  discovered 
by  Gidley  in  the  Clar- 
endon Formation  of 

Texas      The  skull    of  — ^^^^^  primitive  four-tusked  mastodon, 

Trilophodon  productus,  of  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Texas.    In  the 
this  mastodon  is  broad     American  Museum  of  Natural  History, 


Horses 

Hypohippus 

Parahippus 

Merychippus 

Protohippus 

Neohipparion 

Peccaries 
Prosthennops 

Oreodonts 

Pronomotherium 
Merycochoerus 

Camels 
Procamelus 
Pliauchenia 

Deer 

Blastomeryx 

(horned) 

Merycodonts 

Cavicornia 
Dromomeryx 

Canids 

Procyonids 

Felids 

Machserodonts 


300 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


and  flat;  the  upper  tusks  are  directed  downward  and  outward,  and  orna- 
mented with  a  ribbon-like  band  of  enamel;  the  lower  tusks  still  retain 
the  horizontally  flattened  form  characteristic  of  PaloBomastodon,  and  the 
degree  of  attrition  indicates  that  they  were  in  constant  use  in  feeding.  The 
lower  jaws  are  still  elongate.  From  the  parts  of  a  skeleton  attributed  to 
one  of  these  animals,  we  may  estimate  the  height  as  5  ft.  10  in.  at  the 
withers.  The  trilophodont  molars  indicate  that  this  animal  may  have 
been  in  the  same  line  of  descent  as  the  great  Mastodon  americanus  of  the 
Pleistocene. 

The  teleocerine  rhinoceroses  at  this  stage  are  represented  by  the  species 
T.  crassus,  which  is  somewhat  less  hypsodont  than  the  T.  fossiger  of  the  next 
stage.  Similarly  the  aceratheres  {Aphelops  brachyodus)  have  not  yet  at- 
tained the  final  stage  of  evolution.  Two  of  these  animals  from  the  Flint 
Creek  beds  of  Montana^  {A.  montanus,  A.  ceratorhinus)  exhibit  dolicho- 
cephalic skulls,  long  and  slender  nasals,  sometimes  with  small  terminal 
horn  rugosities  {A.  ceratorhinus),  brachyodont  teeth,  limbs  relatively  long 
and  slender.  These  proportions  are  in  wide  contrast  with  those  of  the 
broad-skulled,  short-footed  contemporary  Teleoceras  of  Montana,  which 
exhibits  short  nasals  with  a  small  laterally  compressed  terminal  horn  (fT. 
crassus) . 

The  tapirs  were  very  rare. 

The  horses  present  a  very  high  degree  of  adaptive  radiation,  fitted  to 
the  diversified  feeding  grounds  of  the  plains  region  and  to  the  forests  and 
thickets  bordering  the  streams.  All  of  these  horses  exhibit  pits  or  depres- 
sions on  the  side  of  the  face  in  front  of  the  eyes,  a  character  which  points 
away  from  rather  than  toward  the  ancestors  of  Equus. 

The  oreodonts  include  the  persistent  Miocene  genera  Merychyus  and 
Merycochoerus,  and  in  the  Madison  Valley  beds  of  Montana  there  appears 
the  remarkable  Pronomotherium,  an  extremely  specialized  brachycephalic 
oreodont,  with  receding  nasals,  indicating  in  the  plainest  manner  the  pos- 
session of  a  large  proboscis.^  Even  in  Merycochoerus  the  face  is  greatly 
shortened  and  probably  supplied  with  a  flexible  upper  lip  and  much  shorter 
jaw  than  the  Upper  Oligocene  Promerycochoerus.  The  abbreviation  of  the 
skull  and  adoption  of  fluviatile  habits  appear  to  ha.ve  been  features  of  the 
closing  chapter  of  the  oreodont  evolution. 

Among  the  camels  Procamelus  is  readily  distinguished  from  the  Middle 
Miocene  Protolahis  by  the  loss  of  two  upper  incisor  teeth,  a  marked  approach 
to  Camelus.  The  contemporary  Pliauchenia  is  distinguished  by  the  loss  of 
some  of  its  premolar  teeth,  thus  approaching  the  llamas,  or  South  American 
camels  (Auchenia),  in  which  the  premolars  are  more  reduced  than  in  the 

'  Douglass,  E.,  New  Vertebrates  from  the  Montana  Tertiary.  Ann.  Carneg.  Mus., 
Pittsburg,  Vol.  II,  no.  2,  1903,  pp.  145-200. 

-  Douglass,  E.,  Promerycochoerus  and  a  New  Genus  of  Merycoidodonts  with  Some  Notes 
on  Other  Agriochocridse.    Ann.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Pittsburg,  Vol.  IV,  No,  2,  1907. 


THE  MIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  301 


true  camels.  Procamelus  is  a  highly  varied  form,  including  massive  as  well 
as  more  slender  and  graceful  types,  but  the  limbs  are  of  moderate  length, 
or  proportioned  as  in  the  recent  camels;  it  is  regarded  as  a  generalized 
form  which  may  have  given  rise  to  both  the  New  and  Old  World  camels. 

The  ancient  camels  of  Montana  have  been  investigated  recently  by 
Douglass^  and  are  shown  to  include  two  species  {Procamelus  elrodi,  P. 
madisonius) .  The  former  contrasts  widely  in  the  proportions  of  its  head  and 
neck  with  the  Alticamelus  alius  of  Matthew,  because  the  head  is  nearly  as 
large,  while  the  neck  is  very  much  shorter,  the  total  length  of  the  neck 
being  1,036  mm.,  while  that  of  A.  alius  is  1,560  mm.,  or  half  as  long  again. 

The  American  deer  family  is  still  represented  by  the  genus  Blasiomeryx 
{B.  wellsi).  Scott  has  reported  a  horned  member  of  this  phylum.  At  this 
stage  we  first  come  to  know,  through  the  explorations  of  Douglass  in  Mon- 
tana,^ the  true  characters  of  the  form  which  has  long  figured  in  palseonto- 
logical  literature  as  Blasiomeryx  and  Palceomeryx,  but  was  really  an  entirely 
distinct  animal,  to  which  Douglass  has  given  the  name  Dromomeryx.  There 
are  some  reasons  for  considering  it  not  one  of  the  Cervicornia,  but  one  of 
the  Cavicornia,  resembling  in  certain  characters  the  American  prong-horned 
antelope,  or  Aniilocapra,  in  others  some  of  the  Old  World  antelopes,  although 
the  teeth  are  still  of  the  brachyodont  or  browsing  type.  Matthew,  on  the 
other  hand,  doubts  whether  it  is  distinct  from  the  original  deer-like  Paloeo- 
meryx.  Contemporary  with  these  forms  were  several  species  of  Merycodus, 
with  its  cervid  antlers  of  the  deciduous  type.  The  peccaries  are  repre- 
sented by  Prosthennops. 

Among  the  raptorial  types  the  macharodonts  reappear,  animals  of 
large  size,  accompanied  by  a  form  resembling  the  Miocene  Pseudcelurus  of 
Europe,  of  the  species  P.  inirepidus.  Among  the  mustelids  we  find  the 
marten  (Mustela),  weasel  (Putorius),  primitive  otter  (Potamotherium) ,  and 
the  first  recorded  appearance  in  America  of  the  true  otter  (Luira).  These 
animals  are  fairly  abundant  in  the  river  channel  formations  of  this  period. 
Similarly  the  raccoon  or  procyonid  family  is  represented  by  a  form  (Lepiarc- 
tus)  more  modern  in  type  than  the  Middle  Miocene  Phlaocyon ;  Wortman  ^ 
observed  (p.  239),  ''This  animal  offers  a  number  of  transitional  characters 
between  the  more  tjrpical  Procyonidae  and  the  aberrant  CercolepiesJ^ 

The  canids  include  several  species  of  ^lurodon,  sl  typical  dog  derived 
from  the  Tephrocyon  type  of  the  Middle  Miocene.  Another  canid  (Ischyro- 
cyon)  is  intermediate  between  the  Cyon  or  dhole  and  the  Amphicyon  group, 
with  large  grinding  teeth  as  in  the  latter.    It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the 

'  Douglass,  E.,  A  Description  of  a  New  Species  of  Procamelus  from  the  Upper  Miocene  of 
Montana  with  Notes  upon  Procamelus  madisonius  Douglass.  Ann.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  V, 
nos.  2  and  3,  1909,  pp.  159-165. 

^  Douglass,  E.,  Dromomeryx,  a  New  Genus  of  American  Ruminants.  Ann.  Carneg.  Mus. 
Vol.  V,  no.  11,  1908-1909,  pp.  457-479. 

^  See  Wortman,  J.  L.,  On  the  Affinities  of  Leptarctus  primus.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat. 
Hist.,  Vol.  VI,  1894. 


302 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


first  amphicyon-like  animal  recognized  in  America  is  the  species  A.  amer- 
icanus,  described  by  Wortman  ^  in  1901,  one  of  a  number  of  somewhat 
atypical  forms  to  which  Cope  gave  the  name  Borophagus,  animals  differing 
from  the  typical  amphicyons  of  Europe.  As  in  the  Old  World,  these  are 
truly  the  giant  carnivores  of  the  period,  some  of  them  rivaling  the  largest 
existing  bears  in  size.  Thus  the  D.  gidleyi  of  the  Clarendon  beds  of  Texas 
has  a  head  as  large  as  that  of  the  great  brown  or  Kadiak  bear  of  Alaska. 
The  rodents  of  this  period  include  squirrels,  marmots,  and  mylagaulids, 
gophers,  murids,  leporids,  and  castorids.  Among  the  last  is  the  species 
Eucastor  {Dipoides  tortus),  which  presents  a  resemblance  to  the  giant  Cas- 
toro'ides  of  the  Pleistocene.^ 

Miocene  History  of  American  Deer 

All  the  New  World  or  American  deer  (Odocoileus,  Mazama,  etc.)  are 
known  to  stand  well  apart  from  the  Old  World  deer  (Cervus)  in  two  impor- 
tant characters,  namely,  the  absence  of  the  brow  tine  of  the  antler  and  in 
the  preservation  of  the  distal  portion  of  the  lateral  metacarpals.  They  are 
thus  termed  telemetacarpal,  while  Cervus  is  termed  plesiometacarpal  because 
the  proximal  portion  of  the  metacarpals  is  preserved.  It  appears  certain 
that  the  Odocoileus  and  Cervus  phyla  have  been  separated  since  very  ancient 
times.  According  to  the  observations  of  Matthew  ^  the  diminutive  Lepto- 
meryx  of  the  American  Lower  Oligocene  is  an  extremely  unspecialized 
ruminant  related  to  the  primitive  American  cervids.  It  is  possible  that 
through  the  Miocene  Blastomeryx  it  may  be  a  direct  ancestor  of  the  deer; 
Blastomeryx  is  analogous  to  the  Miocene  deer  of  the  Old  World,  being 
armed  with  powerful  canine  tusks  in  the  Lower  Miocene  stage  {B.  primus) , 
and  not  acquiring  horns,  'antlers,'  until  Upper  Miocene  times  (B.antilo- 
pinus  Scott,  B.  borealis  Cope).  The  Dromomeryx  of  Douglass  is  also  to  be 
considered  in  this  connection.  The  Pliocene  stage  of  the  browsing  Ameri- 
can deer  with  simple  antlers  has  not  yet  been  discovered;  it  should  be 
somewhat  more  primitive  than  the  North  American  Odocoileus  and  resem- 
ble rather  the  South  American  deer  (Mazama)  which  occurs  in  Pleistocene 
and  recent  times  in  that  country. 

1  Wortman,  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  1901. 

2  Matthew,  W.  D.,  A  Horned  Rodent  from  the  Colorado  Miocene.  With  a  Revision  of 
the  Mylagauli,  Beavers,  and  Hares  of  the  American  Tertiary.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.f 
Vol.  XVI,  Art.  xxii,  1902,  p.  304. 

3  Matthew,  W.  D.,  Osteology  of  Blastomeryx  and  Phylogeny  of  the  American  Cervidae. 
Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  HiM.,  Vol.  XXIV,  Art.  xxvii,  June  30,  1908,  pp.  535-562.  Speaking 
more  fully.  Dr.  Matthew's  theory  is  that  there  was  a  common  North  Asiatic  center  of  evolution 
which  contributed  to  Europe  and  North  America,  respectively,  various  stages  in  the  evolution 
of  the  deer. 


CHAPTER  V 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA 

The  Pliocene  life  of  Europe  and  Asia  is  relatively  well  known,  while 
that  of  North  America  is  imperfectly  known;  therefore  only  the  broadest 
time  parallels  can  be  drawn.  The  extension  of  our  knowledge  to  the  mam- 
mals of  India,  China,  and  North  Africa  is  full  of  interest  and  importance. 


PLIOCENE 


Fig.  150.  —  Middle  and  Upper  Pliocene.  A  period  of  continued  continental  elevation, 
especially  in  Europe  and  Eastern  North  America.  Seasons  of  aridity  or  summer  drought, 
increased  aridity  of  the  Great  Plains  of  North  America.  South  America  connected  with  North 
America  by  migration  routes  which  allowed  free  interchange  of  mammals.  Australia  still 
united  with  New  Guinea  and  Tasmania.    Rearranged  after  W.  D.  Matthew,  1908. 

In  course  of  the  Pliocene  we  enter  upon  the  sixth  grand  faunal  phase 
(p.  304),  which  can  only  be  understood  through  a  preliminary  survey  of 
the  general  changes  and  prevailing  mammalian  life  in  each  of  the  northern 
continents. 

The  geographic  conditions  in  Africa,  Europe,  Asia,  and  North  America 
favored  the  wide  dispersal  of  similar  forms  of  mammals,  which  reached  a 

303 


304 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


climax  in  the  temporary  unification  into  one  grand  zoo- 
logical region  of  all  the  great  continents,  excepting  Australia.  This 
somewhat  extreme  statement  may  be  made  for  the  sake  of  emphasis,  but 
it  is  well  within  the  bounds  of  truth  to  say  that  never  before  or  since  in 
geologic  time  has  the  mammalian  life  of  the  globe  enjoyed  such  a  wide- 
spread and  uniform  distribution  as  during  closing  Miocene  and  PUocene 
times. 

VI .  SIXTH  FAUNAL  PHASE.  — PLIOCENE  TO  MIDDLE  PLEISTO- 
CENE MODERNIZATION.  INTERCHANGE  AND  WIDE  DISTRI- 
BUTION OF  CERTAIN  MIGRATING  MAMMALS  IN  AFRICA, 
EURASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA.  SECOND  ENTRANCE  INTO 
NORTH  AMERICA  OF  SOUTH  AMERICAN  MAMMALS.  INVA- 
SION OF  SOUTH  AMERICA  BY  MAMMALS  OF  NORTH  AMERI- 
CAN, ASIATIC,  EUROPEAN,  AND  AFRICAN  ORIGIN.  CONTINUED 
INDEPENDENT  EVOLUTION  OF  NON-MIGRATING  MAMMALS 
IN  THE  NEW  AND  OLD  WORLDS.  GRADUAL  ADVANCE  OF 
MORE  TEMPERATE  CLIMATIC  CONDITIONS  IN  THE  NORTH- 
ERN HEMISPHERE  AND  INVASION  OF  NEW  FOREST  OR  BROWS- 
ING TYPES  FROM  THE  NORTH. 

I.   PLIOCENE  LIFE  OF  EUROPE 

Modernization. — The  final  modernization  of  the  mammalian  life  of 
southern  Europe  may  be  said  to  have  commenced  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Pliocene,  to  have  continued  in  the  gradual  withdrawal  of  plateau  and  desert 
types  and  in  the  appearance  from  the  north  of  new  browsing  forest  and 
aquatic  t>T)es,  and  to  have  been  completed  during  the  glacial  stage  of  the 
Pleistocene.  Contemporaneously  with  these  life  changes,  the  physiography, 
climate,  and  flora  also  gradually  assumed  their  present  or  modern  condi- 
tion, but  only  after  the  great  fluctuations  of  the  Pleistocene,  or  Ice  Age. 

While  the  mammals  of  the  early  Pliocene  are  little  known,  the  very 
opening  of  the  epoch  is  defined  by  many  disappearances  caused  both  by 
emigration  and  extinction,  whereby  Europe  lost  much  of  its  prevailing  south- 
Asiatic  and  Ethiopian  aspect.  The  chief  animals  which  had  left  the 
country  are  the  giraffes,  most  of  the  Asiatic  or  African  antelopes,  the  two- 
homed  African  rhinoceroses,  the  aardvarks,  and  the  anthropoid  apes  allied 
to  the  gibbon  and  chimpanzee.  There  remained  only  two  types  of  antelopes 
allied  to  Oryx  and  to  the  gazelle,  and  the  hipparions,  which  may  have  re- 
sembled the  zebras  in  external  appearance. 

PaloBogeography.  —  The  Pliocene  epoch  opened  with  a  reversal  of  the 
conditions  of  the  Upper  Miocene,  namely,  a  contraction  of  the  vast  land 
areas  or  grazing  plateaux  of  southern  Europe,  which  had  been  so  favorable 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE^  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  305 


to  the  Asiatic- African  period  of  the  mammalian  Hfe  of  Pikermi  and  Mt. 
Leberon.  The  entire  geographic  history  of  the  epoch  extends  from  the 
time  of  the  completion  of  the  Swiss  Alps  to  the  establishment  of  the  main 
coast  lines  of  Europe,  the  last  touches  being  given  to  these  lines  in  the  late 
Pleistocene  and  contributing  their  modern  aspects.  The  Pliocene  was 
marked  throughout  by  continuous  volcanic  disturbances.  The  extinctions 
and  disappearances  of  mammals  are  in  themselves  proof  of  very  profound 
physiographic  changes  between  the  close  of  the  Miocene  and  the  first 
mammaliferous  records  of  the  Lower  Pliocene,  namely,  of  depression  as 
contrasted  with  the  extreme  elevation  at  the  close  of  the  Miocene. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  epoch,  or  Plaisancian  stage,  the  Straits  of 
Gibraltar  w^re  formed,  and  communication  between  the  Atlantic  and 
Mediterranean  was  reestablished.  A  bay  extended  into  the  valley  of  the 
Rhone;  Italy  was  submerged  except  for  the  Apennines  and  a  part  of  Sicily.^ 

The  Middle  Pliocene,  or  Astian,  named  from  the  region  of  Asti  in 
Piedmont,  is  also  a  stage  of  marine  depression  which  surrounds  almost  the 
entire  Mediterranean  basin,  representing  in  importance  as  well  as  in  dura- 
tion the  greater  part  of  the  Pliocene.  The  fauna  denotes  a  rather  warm 
sea.  Toward  the  close  of  the  Middle  Pliocene  the  reelevation  of  the  land 
and  retreat  of  the  sea  left  Italy  with  practically  its  present  contours. 

Consequently  the  Upper  Pliocene  of  Italy  is  represented  solely  by  fresh- 
water deposits.  It  is  the  contemporaneous  marine  formations  of  Sicily, 
however,  which  give  the  name  '  Sicilian '  to  this  final  Pliocene  stage.  The 
peninsula  which  connected  the  Balearic  Islands,  Corsica,  and  Sardinia  with 
the  mainland  opened  the  Mediterranean  more  largely  toward  the  east. 
Beyond  the  ^gean  Sea  there  stretched  the  great  open  marine  area  of  the 
Caspian  and  Baltic  seas. 

Stages  Formations  Characteristic  Faunas 

3.  Sicilian  A  marine  phase  in  Sicily.    Fresh-  Fauna  of  the  upper  Val 

Elevation  and  water  fluvio-lacustrine  deposits       d'Arno  and  of  Olivola 

modern  coast  of  northern  Italy  and  Central       in  Tuscany;  of  Perrier 

lines.  France.  and  Coupet  in  central 


France. 


2.  Astian 


Marine  deposits  in  northern  Italy 
(Asti).  Freshwater  deposits  of 
southern  France. 


Fauna  of  southern 
France,  Roussillon,  of 
Montpellier  (He- 
rault);  flora  of  Mexi- 
mieux  (Saone  valley). 


Closing  with 
elevation. 


1.  Plaisancian 
Maximum 
depression. 


Depression  and  marine  deposition 
in  northern  Italy  (Plaisantin), 
deep  depression  of  the  Po  and 
Rhone  valleys  of  southern 
France. 


Lignites  of  Casino  (Tus- 
cany) ;  Autrey  in 
Saone  valley. 


*  De  Lapparent,  A.,  Traits  de  Geologie,  1908,  p.  1633. 


306 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Flora  and  climate.  —  Owing  to  the  expansion  of  the  warm  Mediterranean 
Sea,  the  cHmate  of  the  Lower  PUocene  is  mild.  The  very  gradual  cooling 
or  lowering  of  temperature  continues.  The  entire  Pliocene  epoch  was 
marked  by  the  slow  southward  advance  of  the  northern  forest  types  of 
trees  and  by  the  corresponding  recession  to  the  south  of  the  more  delicate 
types,  the  palms,  for  example,  being  driven  10°  farther  south. ^  The 
European  flora  gradually  loses  its  large  palms  and  camphor  trees;  the 
sabal  (Sabal)  flourishes  for  a  while  in  Languedoc,  and  the  dwarf  fan  palm 
(Chatnwrops)  maintains  its  existence  near  Marseilles  up  to  the  end  of  the 
Pliocene  period.  After  having  retained  for  so  long  a  time  the  sequoias 
(Sequoia)  and  bamboos  (Bambusa),  Europe  becomes  populated  with  species 
very  similar  to  those  of  its  present  tree  flora. 

A  marked  and  most  interesting  peculiarity  is  that  several  very  characteris- 
tic Pliocene  species  of  Europe  are  now  found  only  in  the  great  forests  of  North 
America.^  Thus  in  the  Pliocene  of  Europe  there  occur  such  trees  as  the 
locust  {Robinia),  the  honey  locust  (Gleditschia) ,  the  sumac  (Rhus),  the  bald 
cypress  (Taxodium),  the  tulip  tree  (Liriodendron) ,  the  sweet  gum  {Liquid- 
ambar),  the  sour  gum  (Nissa),  which  do  not  now  occur  in  Europe,  but  are 
at  present  very  characteristic  forms  of  the  flora  of  temperate  North  Amer- 
ica.'' The  oak  (Quercus),  beech  (Fagus),  maple  (Acer),  poplar  (Populus), 
walnut  {Juglans),  and  the  larch  (Larix)  predominate  in  central  France,  and 
include  forms  which  show  affinities  to  existing  types  of  North  Africa  (Al- 
geria), southern  Europe  (Portugal),  and  even  Japan.  Toward  the  very 
end  of  the  Pliocene  there  is  a  marked  lowering  of  temperature,  and  in  the 
higher  mountainous  areas  there  was  perhaps  a  beginning  of  glacial  stages. 

Other  authorities  *  believe  that  in  the  Pliocene  there  occurred  a  still 
greater  fall  of  temperature,  that  while  we  cannot  speak  of  a  uniform  climate 
over  all  Europe  during  the  Miocene,  this  is  even  less  the  case  during  the 
Pliocene.  The  flora  undergoes  a  corresponding  change,  and  there  appear 
many  forms  which  seem  to  be  identical  with  modern  types,  or  at  least  are 
varieties  of  recent  species. 

Against  the  gradual  cooling  theory,  however,  may  be  cited  the  opinion 
expressed  by  Deperet  in  1893  that  the  Pliocene  flora  shows  great  uniformity 
throughout,  even  in  deposits  of  quite  different  ages;  that  from  beginning 
to  end,  the  Pliocene  flora  of  southern  France  and  Italy  shows  none  but  the 
slightest  changes.  This  opinion  is  based  upon  the  fact  that  the  deposits 
of  the  Val  d'Amo,  northern  Italy,  represent  the  entire  range  of  the  Pliocene, 

*  Deperet,  C,  Note  sur  la  Succession  stratigraphique  des  Faunes  de  Mamraif^res  Pliocfene3 
de  I'Europe  et  du  Plateau  Central  en  particulier.  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  XXI, 
1893,  p.  529. 

2  De  Lapparent,  A.,  Traite  de  G6ologie,  1906,  p.  1635. 

^  Nicholson,  H.  A.,  A  Manual  of  Palaeontology,  Edinburgh  and  London,  1879,  Vol.  II, 
p.  476. 

*  Schimpcr  und  Schenk,  Palaeophytologie,  1890,  p.  821. 

'  Dep^'ret,  C,  Note  sur  la  Succession  stratigraphique  dea  Faunes  de  Mammif^res  Plioc^neg 
de  I'Europe,  1893,  p.  528. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  307 

and  yet  the  flora  from  the  lower  strata  is  indistinguishable  from  that  of  the 
upper.^  In  the  Val  d'Arno  we  find  the  sassafras,  bay,  laurel,  magnolia, 
sweet  gum,  etc. ;  thus  the  regions  which  harbored  the  rich  forest  and  meadow 
fauna  of  northern  Italy  in  Upper  Pliocene  times  abounded  in  trees  familiar 
to-day  in  the  Carolinas  of  the  southern  United  States.  Similarly  the 
famous  flora  of  Meximieux  is  regarded  by  Deperet  as  representing  all 
the  levels  of  the  Pliocene.  At  Meximieux  the  bamboo  (Bambusa)  is 
characteristic. 

Pliocene  birds.  —  The  fossils  preserved  in  the  numerous  marine  and 
littoral  formations  of  the  Pliocene  give  us  a  picture  of  the  substantially 
modern  character  of  the  shore  bird  life  of  Europe,  which  may  be  compared 
with  that  of  North  America,  p.  459.  In  the  Lower  Pliocene  of  England  we 
discover  in  the  Red  Crag  of  Suffolk  remains  of  Diomedea,  an  albatross 
slightly  smaller  than  the  existing '  frigate  birds'  (Fregata) .  In  northern  Italy 
are  found  the  coot  (Fulica),  guillemots  (Uria)  of  the  size  of  the  recent 
spectacled  guillemot,  and  the  falcons  {Falco).  In  the  Middle  Pliocene  of 
Montpellier  and  Roussillon  we  find  representatives  of  the  existing  Grallse 
(including  herons,  etc.)  and  of  the  family  of  Anatidae  (which  comprises 
the  ducks  and  swans),  as  well  as  gallinaceous  forms  (Gallus)  related  to  Indo- 
Malayan  types.  There  were  also  crows  (Corvus)  and  thrushes  (Turdus) 
similar  to  existing  European  forms.^ 

Pliocene  primates.^  —  In  the  Pliocene  appear  three  of  the  catarrhine 
monkeys  closely  related  to  the  still  living  langur  (Semnopithecus) ,  to  the 
macaque  (Macacus),  and  to  the  baboon  (Cynocephalus).  The  Dolichopi- 
thecus  of  France  (Perpignan)  is  distinguished  from  the  existing  langur  of 
southern  Asia  through  its  elongate  face  and  its  relatively  short  and  stout 
limbs. 

The  anthropoid  apes  do  not  survive  in  Europe;  Dryopithecus  appears 
to  have  become  extinct,  as  well  as  the  gibbon  line,  which  we  have  seen 
represented  in  the  Pliohylobates  of  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Eppelsheim. 

The  chimpanzee  from  the  Pliocene  of  the  Siwalik  Hills,  commonly 
designated  as  Palceopithecus  sivalensis,  is  fully  identified  by  Schlosser  with 
the  existing  chimpanzee  (Anthropopithecus) .  According  to  Schlosser,  also, 
there  is  positive  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  orang  (Simia)  in  the 
Siwaliks,  but  fossil  remains  of  the  gorilla  (Gorilla)  have  not  yet  been 
discovered. 

To  be  reckoned  with  the  primates  also  are  the  undiscovered  makers  of 
the  eoliths,  or  primitive  flints  found  in  various  parts  of  Europe. 

^  Ristori,  Contrib.  alia  flora  foss.  d.  Val  d'Arno  sup.  Atti  Soc.  Toscana  Sc.,  Vol.  VII, 
1886;  also  Consid.  geol.  s.  Val  d'Arno,  id.  p.  256  seq. 

^  Deperet,  C,  Les  Animaux  Pliocenes  du  Roussillon.  Mem.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Paleont., 
no.  3,  Paris,  1890,  pp.  127-138. 

3  Schwalbe,  G.,  tjber  fossile  Primaten  und  ihre  Bedeutung  fiir  die  Vorgeschichte  des 
Menschen.  Mitteil.  Philomat.  Ges.  Elsass-Lothringen,  Vol.  IV,  no.  1,  Decade  16  (1908),  Strass- 
burg,  1909,  pp.  45-61. 


308 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


PARTIAL  LIST  OF  PLIOCENE  MAMMALS  OF  THE  NEW  AND  OLD 

WORLDS 


Common  to  Europe,  Asia,    Peculiar  to  North  America 
and  North  America 


Peculiar  to  Europe  and  Asia 

I.  Lower  and  Middle 
Pliocene 
Roe  deer  (Capreolus) 
True  antelopes  and  ga- 
zelles 

Sumatran  rhinoceroses 

(Dicerorhinu^) 
True  rhinoceroses 

{Rhinoceros,  Asia 

only) 

African  and  Asiatic 

monkeys 
True  boars  (Su^) 
Porcupines  (Hystrix) 
Tailless  hares  {Lagomys) 
Hyaenas  {Hycena) 
Dog-bears  (Hycenarctos) 
Civets  (Viverra) 
Bears  {Ursus) 
Pandas  (Ailurus) 
Wild  Cat  (Felis  catus) 
Lynxes  (Felis  lynx) 
Foxes  (Vulpes) 


I.  Lower  and  Middle 
Pliocene 
Mastodons 

(tetralophodont  and 

trilophodont) 
Last  hornless  and  tele- 

ocerine  rhinoceroses 

(not  in  Europe) 
Hipparions 
Bovid  antelopes 
Tapirs  ' 
Mustelids 
Canids 

Machserodonts 
Felids  (Felis) 
Murids '  (Mus) 
Hares  '  (Lepus) 
Otters  •  (Lutra) 


I.  Lower  and  Middle 
Pliocene 

Last  oreodonts 

Camels  and  llamas 

Ancestral  horses 

Ancestral  American 
deer 

Merycodonts 

Dicotj'lids   or  pec- 
caries 

Haplodonts,  sewellels. 

Geomyids,  gophers 

Procyonids 

Amphicyonids,  or 
giant  dogs 

Gravigrade  eden- 
tates 

(Megalonychids) 


Upper  Pliocene  11.  Upper  Pliocene 


Polycladine  and  axis 

deer 
Bovines  (Bos) 
Hippopotami 
Macaques  (Macacu^) 
\o\es  (Arvicola) 
African  murids 

(Lophiomys,  Ru^- 

cinomys) 
Hamsters  (Cricetus) 
Moles  (Talpa) 
Shrews  (Sorex,  Cro- 

cidura) 


Elephants  (Elephas) 
True  horses  (Equus) 
Camels 

(N.  America,  Asia) 


11.  Middle  Pliocene 
of  South  American 
Origin 
Glyptodont  eden- 
tates 
Gravigrade  eden- 
tates 


'  Thcso  mammals  undoubtedly  existed  in  the  American  Pliocene,  although  they  have 
not  yet  boon  recorded. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  309 


Faunal  break  with  the  Miocene.  —  The  profound  influences  of  the  great 
earth  movements  of  southern  Europe  on  all  the  conditions  of  life  are  re- 
flected in  the  faunal  break  between  the  Upper  Miocene  (Pikermi  stage)  and 
the  Lower  Pliocene  (Plaisancian  stage).  As  noted  on  p.  271,  the  advent 
of  a  new  period  is  first  negatively  indicated  by  the  absence  in  Europe  of 
many  carnivores,  especially  of  the  giant  dogs  (Dinocyon),  of  the  short-faced 
dogs  (Simocyon),  of  Promephitis,  of  the  hyaena-like  Ictitherium  and  Hyce- 
nictis,  and  of  the  anthropoid  apes  (gibbons).  Among  the  herbivorous 
mammals  no  successors  in  Europe  are  found  to  the  dinotheres  (Dinotherium) , 
chalicotheres  (Ancylotherium) ,  hornless  rhinoceroses  (Aceratherium) ,  teleoc- 
erine  rhinoceroses  (Teleoceras) ,  or  African  rhinoceroses  {Dicer os).  The 
rhinoceroses  evidently  found  conditions  unfavorable,  for  beside  the  expulsion 
of  the  hornless  and  teleocerine  types,  the  African  two-horned  types  {Diceros 
or  Atelodus),  which  were  so  abundant  in  the  Upper  Miocene,  apparently 
migrated  out  of  Europe,  though  destined  to  reappear  again  in  the  late 
Pleistocene.  Thus  the  only  rhinoceroses  which  have  been  discovered  in 
Europe  during  the  Pliocene  belong  to  the  two-horned,  long-headed,  cera- 
torhine,  or  Sumatran  type  (Dicerorhinus) ,  and  these  are  distinguished  from 
the  African  two-horned  types  by  the  presence  of  anterior  cutting  teeth. 


As  we  have  seen  (p.  305),  the  natural  divisions  of  the  Pliocene  are  based 
upon  three  great  marine  stages,  while  the  mammalian  life  is  divided  into  two 
grand  phases,  as  follows: 


Faunal  Divisions 


Stages 
Upper:  Sicilian 


Fauna 
The  Newer 

Pliocene  Fauna 


Europe  North  America 


New  North  and  Loup  River  For- 

South  Asiatic  mation,  Elephas 

types.  First  imperator  Zone 
Elephas  and 


Equus  Zone 


o  ^  Middle:  Astian 


The  Older 

Pliocene  Fauna 


Surviving  Mio-  Blanco  Formation, 
cene,  African,  Hipparion  and 
and     Asiatic  Glyptotherium 


types  Zone 


Lower:  Plaisan- 


cian 


The  Older 

Pliocene  Fauna 


Surviving  Mio-  Republican  River 
cene,  African,  and  Rattlesnake 
and     Asiatic  Formations, 


types  Hipparion  and 


Pliohippus  Zone 


Thus,  like  the  Miocene,  the  Pliocene  of  Europe  has  a  grand  and  two- 
fold division:  it  embraces  an  'older  fauna'  of  surviving  resident  t5^es, 
and  a  'newer  fauna'  of  arriving  types.    Briefly,  the  older  fauna  is  a  con- 


310 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


tinuation  of  part  of  the  Upper  Miocene  fauna  of  Pontian  age,  followed  by 
a  gradual  disappearance  of  many  of  these  survivors. 

The  older  Pliocene  fauna}  —  The  older  Pliocene  fauna  corresponds  to 
the  Lower  (Plaisancian)  and  Middle  (Astian)  Pliocene  stages.  It  is  character- 
ized by  the  persistence  of  the  smaller  number  of  Upper  Miocene  mammals; 


Fig.  151.  —  Pliocene.  Plaisancian.  ENGLAND.  —  1  Coralline  Crag  of  Suffolk. 
FRANCE.  —  Minorai  dc  fer  d'  2  Autrey  in  the  Saone  Valley  (region  de  la  Bresse),  lacustrine. 
ITALY.  —  Lignites  of  3  Casino  (Tuscany).  Astian.  ENGLAND.  —  4 Crag  of  Suffolk, 
marine  (large  part).  FRANCE.  — Sables  marins  de  5  Montpellier  (Herault).  Sables  siliceux 
gris  de  6  Perpignan  in  Roussillon,  flu\do-lacustrine.  Sables  de  7  Trevoux,  cailloutis  de  8  Mont- 
luel,  tufs  de  9  Meximieux,  in  the  Saone  Valley  (region  de  la  Bresse).  Sicilian.  ENGLAND.  — 
\0  Norwich  Crag  of  Norfolk,  flu\'io-marine.  FRANCE.  —  Sables  et  graviers  de  11  Chagny  in 
the  Saone  Valley.  Graviers  de  12  Perrier,  fluviatile,  Arde  (Puy-de-D6me).  13  Vialette, 
Coupet,  volcanic  deposits,  sables  a  mastodontes  du  Puy,  Sainzelles,  la  Malouteyre  (Haute- 
Loire).  ITALY.  —  Marls  and  sands  of  14  Pareto  in  northern  Italy,  fluvio-lacustrine.  15  San 
Paolo  (Piedmont),  16  Villafranca,  17  Ferrara,  18  Fossano  (Piedmont),  in  the  Po  Valley'. 
19  Corniano,  20  Montopoli  near  San  Miniato,  21  Empoli,  22  Siena,  in  Tuscany.  P'erruginous 
gravels  ot  the  23  Val  dWrno  ("  Sansino  beds,"  60  meters),  flu\'io-lacustrine.  24  Papigno, 
lignites  of  25  Spoleto,  26  Assist,  in  Umbria.  Lacustrine  formations  of  27  Campagnano,  in 
Roma,  28  Ca^telnuovo  in  the  Valley  of  the  Serchio,  29  Olivola,  in  Province  Massa  Carrara 
(Tuscany).     Correlation  of  Deperet. 


the  larger  number  of  Upper  Miocene  mammals,  as  noted  upon  p.  271,  have 
emigrated  or  become  extinct.  The  persistent  forms  include  the  hipparions, 
a  few  large  antelopes  of  African  aspect  (Palceoryx  cordieri,  P.  hoodon),  large 
monkeys  with  Asiatic  affinities,  such  as  Semnopithecus  and  Dolichopithecus, 
allied  to  the  langurs  and  macaques,  rare  anthropoid  apes.    Deer  are  in- 

'  Dep6ret,  Succession  stratigraphique  des  Faunes  de  Mammifdres  Pliocenes  de  I'Europe, 
1893,  p.  538. 


THE  PLIOCENfi  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  311 


frequent,  and  when  present,  include  only  those  with  simple  antlers  like  the 
roe  deer  (Capreolus).  Among  the  rodents  are  two  forms  {Trilophomys  and 
Ruscinomys)  allied  to  the  African  crested  rats.  A  flying  squirrel  {Sciurop- 
terus)  and  a  primitive  beaver  (Chalicomys)  persist  from  the  Miocene. 
Further  details  regarding  this  older  fauna  are  given  below  in  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  mammals  of  Roussillon.  At  Casino  are  recorded  the  newly 
arriving  hippopotami  (p.  313). 

The  newer  Pliocene  fauna^  witnesses  the  disappearance  of  the  last  of 
the  characteristic  Miocene  genera,  among  which  only  the  mastodon  sur- 
vives until  the  close.  The  horse  {Equus  stenonis)  replaces  Hipparion;  the 
Bovinse  appear  in  Europe  for  the  first  time  (Leptobos  elatus) ;  monkeys  con- 
tinue in  Italy,  but  are  now  represented  by  forms  (Macacus  florentinus)  allied 
to  the  Barbary  macaque  of  Gibraltar;  the  southern  elephant  (Elephas 
meridionalis)  makes  its  appearance  and  coexists  almost  everywhere  with 
Mastodon  arvernensis  and  M.  horsoni.  This  fauna  has  been  found  in  vari- 
ous parts  of  Italy,  France,  and  England.  Not  the  least  characteristic 
feature  of  this  newer  fauna  is  the  abundance  of  large  deer  with  elaborate 
antlers  of  the  '  polycladine'  tjrpe,  as  well  as  ancestors  of  the  true  Cervus  or 
'  elaphine '  type.  The  newer  fauna  of  the  Upper  Pliocene  is  thus  sharply 
defined  by  the  expulsion  or  emigration  of  many  of  the  resident  Asiatic  or 
African  forms,  and  by  the  sudden  introduction  or  appearance  of  several 
modern  types  which  had  probably  evolved  in  North  America,  Asia,  and 
possibly  Africa,  chief  among  which  are  the  following  animals: 

Equus  {E.  stenonis)  the  true  horses    North  America 

Leptobos  (L.  elatus)  the  first  true  cattle   Southern  Asia 

Cervus  {C.  dicranius),  etc.,  polycladine  deer   Northern  Asia 

Elephas  {E.  meridionalis)  the  true  elephants   Asia  or  Africa 

Summary.  —  Comparing  this  with  the  corresponding  general  history  of 
Miocene  life,  p.  249,  we  observe  that  the  Pliocene  migrations  and  extinctions 
exactly  reverse  those  of  the  Miocene. 

The  explanation  of  this  interesting  contrast  is  to  be  found  in  the  reversed 
order  of  the  physiographic  changes  in  Europe,  and  of  the  changes  in  plant 
hfe,  p.  244.  In  other  words,  while  the  Miocene  closed  with  a  period  of 
warm,  dry,  open  plains  in  southern  Europe  favorable  to  grazing  or  steppe 
types,  the  Pliocene  closed  with  a  moister  period  and  the  spread  of  forest  and 
fluviatile  conditions  interspersed  with  meadows  favorable  to  a  great  vari- 
ety of  browsing  deer,  as  well  as  to  the  grazing  elephants,  horses,  and  cattle. 

Lower  Pliocene  or  Plaisancian 

As  this  is  chiefly  a  marine  phase,  the  terrestrial  mammalian  fauna  is 
imperfectly  known.    The  typical  deposits  are  those  of  the  lignites  of 

^  Deperet,  Succession  stratigraphique  des  Faunes  de  Mammif^res  Pliocenes  de  I'Europe. 
1893,  p.  539. 


312 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Casino  (Tuscany)  (Fig.  151,  3)  which  are  correlated  by  Dep^ret^  with  the 
lacustrine  deposits  of  Autrey  (2)  in  the  valley  of  the  Saone,  France.  On 
the  east  coast  of  England  is  a  marine  formation,  the  Coralline  Crag  of  Suf- 
folk (1),  containing  mastodon  and  a  rhinoceros  {Dicerorhinus) .    This  may 


Fig.  152.  —  Europe  in  Lower  Pliocene  or  Plaisancian  times.    White  =  land.    Ruled  =  sea. 
Dotted  areas  =  lagoons.    After  de  Lapparent,  1906. 


not,  however,  represent  the  very  base  of  the  Pliocene.  At  this  time  south- 
eastern England  was  connected  with  France  and  Belgium  by  an  isthmus, 
which  accounts  for  the  migrations  of  such  continental  forms  as  are  recorded 
in  late  Pliocene  or  early  Pleistocene  stages  in  Great  Britain.^ 

Transition  zone.  —  The  lignites  of  Casino  are  intercalated  in  marine 
(Congeria)  beds,  which  form  the  extreme  base  of  the  Pliocene  below  the 
'Marnes  Bleues'  of  the  Plaisancian,  so  that  some  Italian  geologists  regard 
them  as  part  of  the  Upper  Miocene  (Pontian).  The  mammals  of  Casino, 
while  mixed,  show  on  the  whole  a  closer  affinity  to  the  Lower  Pliocene  than 
to  the  Upper  Miocene.  Among  the  surviving  Upper  Miocene  forms  is  the 
tapir,  Tapirus  priscus,  kno^\Tl  also  from  Eppelsheim.  We  find  Sus  eryman- 
thius,  a  boar  which  occurs  likewise  at  Pikermi;  also  Ictitherium,  the  hysena 
stage  of  Pikermi.  Some  of  these  mammals  when  more  closely  studied  may, 
however,  reveal  a  closer  kinship  to  the  characteristic  Lower  Pliocene  species 
such  as  Tapirus  arvernensis,  Sus  provincialis,  and  Hipparion  crassum.  The 
true  Pliocene  forms  of  Casino  are  the  monkey  (Semnopithecus  monspessu- 
lanus),  an  oryx  (Palceoryx  cordieri),  a  roe  deer  (Capreolus  australis),  and 

»  Dep^ret.  Succession  stratigraphique  des  Faunes  de  Mammif^res  Pliocenes  de  I'Europe, 
1893.  p.  539. 

2  De  Lapparent,  Traits  de  Geologic,  1906,  p.  1637. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  313 


a  hippopotamus  {H.  hipponensis) }  It  is  noteworthy  that  this  species  of 
hippopotamus  is  recorded  (Gaudry,  1876)  also  in  the  PHocene  or  early 
Pleistocene  of  Algeria  and  in  the  Siwalik  Hills  of  India. 

Outside  of  Casino,  Italy  has  thus  far  proved  barren  of  remains  of  the 
'ancient  Pliocene  fauna,'  with  the  exception  of  a  few  scattered  fossils  be- 
longing to  the  following  characteristic  Pliocene  species : 

(1)  Mastodon  arvernensis,  the  mastodon  of  the  Val  d'Arno. 

(2)  Dicerorhinus  leptorhinus,  a  rhinoceros  of  Sumatran  type,  successor 
to  the  Upper  Miocene  types. 

(3)  Sus  strozzii,  a  wild  boar. 

(4)  Tapirus  arvernensis,  a  tapir  which  persists  through  the  Pliocene. 

Hippopotami.  —  The  sudden  appearance  of  hippopotami  in  Europe  is 
one  of  the  most  striking  features  of  Lower  Pliocene  times;  it  is  comparable 
to  that  of  the  sudden  appearance  of  mastodons  in  Lower  Miocene  Europe. 
The  presence  of  these  animals  in  Casino  is  attested  by  Deperet  (1890)  and 
by  Schlosser  (1887),  the  species  being  described  as  H.  hipponensis;  an  allied 
form  is  found  in  Algeria.  These  animals  are  abundant  in  the  Phocene  of 
the  Siwahks  of  Asia  at  this  time  (p.  329). 

The  origin  of  the  hippopotami  is  still  unknown.  Stehlin^  (1908)  has 
suggested  that  possibly  the  Eocene  Choeromorus  survived  beyond  the  con- 
fines of  Europe  and  gave  rise  to  the  hippopotami.  The  affinity  of  the 
Siwalik  Merycopotamus,  an  animal  first  described  as  Hippopotamus  by  Fal- 
coner and  Cautley,  but  now  placed  near  the  anthracotheres,  would  appear 
to  suggest  an  anthracotheroid  origin  for  the  hippopotami. 

They  certainly  enjoyed  a  wide  range  in  Pliocene  times  from  southern 
Asia  to  southern  Europe  and  northern  Africa.  The  prevailing  Pleistocene 
species  is  the  giant  form  known  as  H.  major,  found  in  the  Upper  Pliocene 
and  Pleistocene  of  Algeria,  in  southern  and  central  Europe,  and  in  England. 
The  existing  African  species  {H.  amphihius)  is  also  recorded  by  some  authors 
in  the  Pleistocene.  The  difference  is  probably  only  a  matter  of  terms.  There 
are  also  the  dwarf  species  H.  pentlandi,  H.  minutus,  occurring  in  the  isolated 
islands  of  the  Mediterranean.^ 

Middle  Pliocene  or  Astian 

This  stage  contains  the  continuation  of  the  'faune  pliocene  ancienne'  of 
Deperet.  Geologically  the  period  is  characterized  by  a  gradual  recession 
of  the  sea  and  increasing  and  more  widespread  fluviatile  and  freshwater 
depositions.    Fortunately  these  depositions  are  rich  in  mammalian  life,  so 

'  Deperet,  Les  Animaux  Pliocenes  du  Roussillon,  1890,  p.  189. 

^  Stehlin,  H.  G.,  Die  Siiugetiere  des  schweizerischen  Eocaens.  Critischer  Catalog  der 
Materialien.  FiinfterTeil:  Choeropotamus,  Cebochoerus,  Choeromorus,  Haplobunodon,  Rhagath- 
erium,  Mixtotherium.    Abhandl.  schweiz.  palaont.  Gesell.,  Vol.  XXXV,  1908,  pp.  691-837. 

3  Von  Zittel,  K.,  Handbuch  der  Palaontologie,  1,  IV,  Mammalia,  Munich,  1891-1893. 


314 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


that,  thanks  to  the  earlier  writings  of  Gervais,  Falconer,  Forsyth  Major, 
NeA\i;on,  and  Boyd  Dawkins,  and  the  more  recent  researches  of  Deperet, 
we  get  a  magnificent  picture  of  the  Middle  Pliocene  life  of  Europe  marking 
the  close  of  the  extension  of  the  older  Pliocene  fauna.  The  chief  localities 
are  the  following: 

Roussillon  (Fig.  151,  6),  a  basin  surrounding  the  village  of  Perpignan,  north 

of  the  eastern  Pyrenees,  fluvio-lacustrine  deposits. 
Meximieux  (9),  lacustrine  tuffs  or  volcanic  ash  deposits,  famous  for  flora, 

in  the  Saone  Valley. 
Red  Crag  of  Suffolk  (4),  fluvio-marme  deposits  partly  of  Upper  Pliocene  age. 

The  flora  of  Meximieux,  already  alluded  to  on  p.  307,  shows  an  abun- 
dance of  plants  with  affinities  to  the  genera  of  the  Canary  Islands,  mingled 
with  those  of  the  Caucasus  and  of  China. ^  Here  flourish  the  bamboo, 
the  sassafras,  the  magnolia,  and  the  laurel.  This  indicates  a  mean  annual 
temperature  of  17°- 18°  C.  (62°-64°  Fahr.). 

The  mammalian  life  of  southern  France  just  north  of  the  eastern  Pyr- 
enees is  preserved  in  the  basin  of  Roussillon,  the  site  of  a  Pliocene  gulf ;  in 
the  center  of  this  basin  is  situated  the  village  of  Perpignan.  The  mammals 
described  below  (p.  315)  include  also  those  of  Montpellier  (Herault),  a 
deposit  of  marine  sands  containing  a  very  similar  fauna. 

We  owe  to  Deperet  ^  (1890)  a  fine  analysis  of  this  'ancient  Pliocene 
fauna.'  It  is  an  assemblage  which  gives  us  a  fair  idea  of  the  animal  life  of 
the  sub-tropical  swampy  plains  of  this  region  toward  the  middle  of  the 
Pliocene  period.    There  are  four  grand  components  of  the  fauna. 

(1)  The  first  is  that  of  the  surviving  Miocene  forms  (Machcerodus, 

Mastodon,  Hipparion,  Hyoenarctos)  which  have  left  no  modern 
successors. 

The  other  three  components  are  the  essentially  modern  genera  or 
ancestors  of  genera  which  still  survive  and  are  now  distributed 
in  three  great  zoological  regions,  as  follows: 

(2)  Europe  and  central  Asia,  the  Palaearctic  Region. 

(3)  The  Indo-Malayan  province  of  the  Oriental  Region. 

(4)  The  Ethiopian  or  African  Region. 

The  saber-tooth  tiger  {M achcerodus)  of  the  period  is  of  a  smaller  type 
than  the  great  Upper  Miocene  forms.  Hyoenarctos,  the  dog-bear  {H.  in- 
signis),  is  intermediate  in  structure  between  the  Miocene  dinocyons  and 
the  true  bears,  although  it  is  not,  as  formerly  supposed,  ancestral  to  the 
bears. 

The  mastodons  ^  have  now  attained  a  gigantic  size  and  are  armed  with 

^  De  Saporta  quoted  by  De  Lapparent,  Traite  de  Geologie,  1906,  p.  1645. 
'  Dep^rot,  Animaux  Pliocenes  du  Roussillon,  1890. 

'  Capcllini,  G.,  Mastodonti  del  Museo  Geologico  di  Bologna.  Mem.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Inst. 
Bologna,  Ser.  6,  Vol.  IV,  Bologna,  1907. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  315 


enormously  long  straight  tusks.  The  especially  significant  change  is  that 
the  lower  tusks  are  smaller  and  that  the  lower  jaws  are  short  or  'breviros- 
tral.'  As  in  North  America  these  mastodons  include  two  series  provided 
respectively  with  three-  and  four-crested  intermediate  molars;  of  the  for- 
mer Hrilophodont'  type  is  the  M.  horsoni,  of  the  latter  '  tetralophodont ' 
tyipe  is  the  M.  arvernensis.    It  is  noteworthy  that  these  two  species  persist 


Fig.  153.  —  Outline  restoration  of  Mastodon  arvernensis,  the  great  Pliocene  short-jawed 
mastodon  of  Europe  (X  72) • 

throughout  the  Pliocene  and  that  M.  horsoni  is  the  more  closely  related  to 
the  American  Pleistocene  mastodon  (M.  americanus) ,  which  is  also  tri- 
lophodont. 

The  tridactyl  horse  of  the  period  (Hipparion  crassum)  is,  like  its  prede- 
cessors, a  typical  grazing  form.  There  is  some  recent  evidence  that  this 
animal  persists  throughout  the  Pliocene.^ 

The  Oriental  and  Indo-Malayan  element  of  the  fauna  of  Roussillon  and 
Montpellier  includes  the  two  kinds  of  monkeys,  namely,  Dolichopithecus 
and  Semnopithecus,  which  are  related  respectively  to  the  macaques  ^  and 
the  langurs,  both  of  Asia.  We  also  find  that  the  bear  of  the  period  {Ursus 
minutus)  is  a  small  member  of  the  Helardos  group,  ancestral  to  the  arboreal 
Malayan  sun-bear.  Similarly  the  tapir  {T.  arvernensis)  is  almost  identical 
with  the  recent  Malayan  tapir  {T.  indicus)  now  distributed  in  Sumatra  and 
Borneo.  The  two-horned  rhinoceros  {Dicer orhinus  leptorhinus)  receives  its 
specific  name  from  the  slender  character  of  its  nasal  bones,  which  are  without 
the  supporting  septum  characteristic  of  the  Upper  Pliocene  species;  it  also 
belongs  in  the  same  sub-family  (see  p.  272)  with  the  existing  rhinoceros  of 
Sumatra.  The  civet  (Viverra)  may  be  classed  with  the  Indo-Malayan 
group.  Altogether  Deperet  finds  ten  species  of  animals  in  this  fauna  which 
are  of  existing  Indo-Malayan  affinity. 

The  existing  African  and  west  Asiatic  element  is  represented  by  the 
hyaenas  {H.  arvernensis),  ancestral  to  the  striped  hyaena  of  north  Africa  and 
southern  Asia,  by  the  caracals  (Lynx  brevirostris)  allied  to  the  southern  or 

^  Stehlin,  Une  Faune  a  Hipparion  k  Perrier.  Bull.  Sac.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  IV,  1904, 
p.  443. 

^  The  Barbary  ape  (Macacus  inuus)  of  Northern  Africa  and  Gibraltar  is  an  isolated  sur- 
vivor of  these  widespread  Pliocene  macaques. 


316 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Persian  lynx,  by  the  servals  {Felis  christoli)  allied  to  the  recent  African 
forms,  by  the  gazelles  {G.  deperdita)  of  north  African  type,  slightly 
smaller  than  the  Dorcas  gazelle.  The  oryx  (Palceoryx  cordieri)  is  one  of 
the  antelopes  of  a  tj^pe  now  abundantly  represented  in  Africa,  perhaps 
ancestral  to  the  existing  oryx.  The  wild  cat  (Felis  catus  aff.  maniculata)  is 
regarded  by  Depcret  as  similar  to  or  identical  with  the  caffre  cat  of  northern 
Africa,  Two  of  the  rodent  types  {Trilophomys,  Ruscinoinys)  are  allied  to 
the  existing  crested  rats  and  to  the  gundis  of  northern  Africa. 

The  presence  of  gallinaceous  birds  (Gallus)  of  a  form  (PalcBocryptonyx) 
allied  to  the  wood  quail  of  Malaysia,  of  giant  land  tortoises  (Testudo), 
of  great  river  turtles  (Trionyx),  and  finally  of  fish  belonging  to  the  Africo- 
Asiatic  group  of  silurids  further  accentuates  the  southern  or  Ethiopian  and 
Oriental  element. 

In  addition  to  this  essentially  southern  element  there  is  in  the  ancient 
Pliocene  fauna  a  large  temperate  and  north  temperate  element  which  allies 
it  with  the  recent  animal  life  of  Europe  and  of  central  Asia.  The  repre- 
sentatives of  this  element^  are,  among  mammals,  the  fox  (Vulpes),  the 
wild  cat  (F.  catus),  the  mole  (Talpa),  the  shrew  (Croddura),  the  flying 
squirrel  (Sciuropterus) ,  the  beaver  (Castor),  and  the  rat  (Mus).  There 
are  hamsters  (Cricetus),  picas  (Lagomys),  boars  (Sus),  roe  deer  (Capreolus), 
hares  (Lepus),  porcupines  (Hystrix),  otters  (Lutra);  among  birds,  the 
goose  (Anser),  the  crow  (Corvus),  and  the  thrush  (Turdus).  It  is  note- 
worthy that  the  fox,  mentioned  above,  is  with  the  exception  of  the  canids, 
recorded  in  the  Middle  Miocene  of  Q^ningen,  the  first  true  member  of  the 
canids  to  be  recorded  in  Europe,  but  the  wolf  also  soon  appears.  At 
Montpellier  (5)  in  southern  France  (Herault)  we  find,  in  addition  to  many 
of  the  animals  listed  above,  certain  mammals  (e.g.  Hycenarctos,  Semnopi- 
tkecus,  Felis  christoli,  Lutra  a  finis)  especially  recorded.  The  monkey  which 
occurs  here  (Semnopithecus  monspessulanus)  is,  as  above  noted,  scarcely 
distinguishable  from  the  langurs  of  southern  Asia.  These  animals  have  a 
shorter  muzzle  than  the  macaques,  which  are  represented  in  the  Lower 
Pliocene  by  the  genus  Dolichopithecus  of  Roussillon. 

The  deer  of  the  period  are  small  forms  resembling  the  existing  roe  deer, 
or  Capreolus,  an  animal  usually  provided  with  only  three  tines  on  its 
antlers;  the  species  C.  australis  persists  throughout  the  Pliocene.  Thus 
the  Montpellier  mammals  in  general  include  a  number  of  survivors  (e.g., 
Semnopithecus,  Palceoryx)  of  Lower  Pliocene  forms  of  Casino,  and  a  some- 
what larger  number  of  species  which  persist  into  the  Upper  Pliocene  of  the 
Val  d'Arno. 

Underlj'ing  the  typical  Upper  Pliocene  fauna  of  Perrier  has  recently  been 
described  the  'hipparion  fauna'  of  Roccaneyra.^  Here  occur  especially  an 
hipparion  of  very  large  size,  with  slender  limbs,  a  gazelle  (G.  julieni)  iden- 

'  Somo  of  those  animals  are  found  at  Montpellier,  but  are  not  recorded  at  Roussillon. 
2  Stchlin.  Une  Faune  a  Hipparion  k  Perrier.    Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  IV,  1904. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  317 

tical  in  dentition  with  Speke's  gazelle  of  East  Africa,  also  a  very  large  ante- 
lope (A.  aff.  torticornis) ,  large  saber-tooth  tigers,  hysenas,  and  wolves  (Canis 
megamastoides) ,  the  first  wolf  recorded  in  Europe.  This  fauna  of  Roccaneyra 
is  an  open  steppe  or  prairie  fauna  since  it  lacks  all  the  characteristic  forest- 
living  forms.  The  geological  evidence  points  to  this  deposit  as  of  possible 
Upper  Pliocene  age,  but  with  this  exception  there  is  no  support  for  the  idea 
that  hipparions  persisted  into  the  Upper  Pliocene  in  Europe. 

The  date  of  the  introduction  of  the  hippopotamus  into  Europe,  as  well 
as  its  source,  whether  Asiatic  or  African,  are  very  interesting  questions.  It 

is  recorded  at  Casino  associated  with  remains 
of  hipparion. 

In  the  Red  Crag  (4)  of  Suffolk,  the  prevail- 
ing animals  belong  to  the  ancient  Pliocene 
fauna;  this  sand  deposit  of  mixed  origin  con- 
tains also  some  vertebrates  (Equus,  Elephas) 
probably  belonging  to  higher  levels  (seep.  321). 
These  remains  are  chiefly  interesting  as  demon- 
strating the  range  westward  into  Great  Britain 
of  this  older  Pliocene  fauna  of  hipparions, 
tapirs,  mastodons,  hippopotami,  and  roe  deer. 

The  marine  mammals  of  this  period  found  at 
Montpellier  include  the  sirenians  (Halitherium), 
the  seals  (Pristiphoca) ,  three  cetaceans  (Delphi- 
nus,  Rorqualis,  Hoplocetus). 

Surveying  this  older  Pliocene  fauna  as  a 
whole  we  are  struck  by  the  great  predominance 
of  animals  closely  related  to  existing  forms.  If 
the  living  zoologist  should  imagine  himself  in 
France  at  this  period,  he  would  see  only  four 
animals  which  would  appear  entirely  novel  and 
unknown,  namely,  the  saber-tooth  tiger,  the 
mastodon,  the  hipparion,  and  the  hysenarctos; 
all  the  rest  of  the  fauna  would  seem  to  be  a  very 
strange  commingling,  or  congress,  of  African, 
European,  and  Asiatic  mammals  of  the  present 
day.  Not  a  single  North  American  element 
would  be  observed  in  this  assemblage,  unless  we 
except  those  elements  of  more  remote  migration,  such  as  the  hares,  the 
tapirs,  and  possibly  the  hipparions  and  the  foxes. 

Upper  Pliocene  or  Sicilian 

With  this  stage  enters  the  'newer  Pliocene  fauna'  of  English  authors, 
the  faune  Pliocene  recente  of  French  authors,  a  fauna  ^  including  for  the 

^  Deperet,  Animaux  Pliocenes  du  Roussillon,  1890,  pp.  190-191. 


Middle  Pliocene 
Partial  List 

Monkeys 

Langurs 

Macaques 
Mastodons 
Hipparions 
Tapirs 

Sumatran  rhinoceroses 

Boars  (Sus) 

Hippopotami 

Roe  deer  (Capreolus) 

Antelopes  (Palceoryx) 

of  large  size 
■Gazelles  (Gazella) 
Hyaenas 

Canids  (foxes,  wolves) 
Hysenarctids 
(dog-bears) 
Machserodonts 
Pandas  (Ailurus) 
Bears 

Wild  cats,  lynxes 
Caracals,  servals 
Flying  squirrels 
(Sciuropterus) 


318 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


first  time  the  majestic  southern  elephants  (E.  meridionalis)  which  herded 
with  the  last  of  the  European  mastodons  and  roamed  all  over  Europe  from 
Italy  to  Great  Britain.  The  tridactyl  hipparion  disappears,  being  replaced 
by  the  true  monodactyl  horse  (Equus  stenonis).  The  larger  Etruscan  rhi~ 
noceros  {Dicerorhinus  etruscus)  succeeds  the  D.  leptorhinus  of  the  Lower 
Pliocene.  The  macaques  {M acacus  florentinus)  reappear,  closely  related  to 
the  living  apes  of  Gibraltar.  The  hippopotami  are  now  widely  spread 
over  southern  Europe. 

Equally  striking  is  the  first  appearance  in  Europe  of  the  true  bovines,. 
ancestors  of  the  existing  wild  and  domestic  cattle.  The  deer  also  multiply 
and  increase  in  size,  and  are  especially  distinguished  by  their  large  and 
splendidly  developed  branching  horns.  Mingled  with  these  new  forms 
are  some  of  the  practically  unchanged  survivors  of  the  ancient  Pliocene 
fauna,  such  as  the  saber-tooth  tiger  {Machcerodus  cultridens),  the  bears 
{Ursus  arvernensis) ,  the  tapirs  {T.  arvernensis) ,  the  short-jawed  mastodons 
{M.  arvernensis,  M.  horsoni). 

This  period  is,  however,  sharply  defined  by  the  disappearance  of  several 
members  of  the  earlier  fauna,  namely,  of  the  Asiatic  langur  (Semnopithecus) , 
the  civet  (Viverra),  the  panda  (Ailurus),  and  the  flying  squirrels  (Sciu- 
ropterus). 

Physiography.  —  Great  Britain  is  still  broadly  connected  with  the  con- 
tinent,^ so  that  in  the  fluvio-marine  deposits  of  the  Norwich  Crag  of  Nor- 
folk (p.  321)  we  find  many  of  the  mammals  characteristic  of  northern  Italy 
and  central  France.  The  remains  of  mammals  are  chiefly  preserved  in 
river  and  lake  deposits.  There  is  evidence  that  the  climate  is  gradually 
becoming  cooler.  Among  the  typical  marine  formations  of  Sicily,  which 
give  the  name  to  this  stage,  there  is  a  sudden  appearance  of  shells  of  northern 
type,  an  invasion  due  to  the  opening  of  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar  and  inflow 
of  Atlantic  waters.  In  the  Norwich  Crag  of  England  there  are  also  a  great 
many  shells  of  boreal  type  which  increase  in  number  during  the  latter  part 
of  the  Sicilian  stage.  With  the  cooling  of  the  sea  and  introduction  of 
northern  currents  naturally  came  a  lowering  of  temperature  and  a  retreat 
of  palms  and  other  tropical  plants  to  the  south.  The  dwarf  fan  palm 
(Chamoerops)  occurs  for  the  last  time  on  the  Lipari  Islands,  north  of  Sicily.^ 
The  advent  of  the  northern  types  of  shells  in  the  sea  is  prophetic  of  the 
Glacial  Period. 

In  the  accompanying  map  (p.  310)  is  displayed  the  wide  distribution 
of  formations  in  which  the  remains  of  this  splendid  fauna  are  preserved 
(Nos.  10-29).  We  owe  to  Forsyth  Major  (1884,  1890)  and  to  Deperet 
(1885,  1890,  1893)2  especially  the  study  of  the  mammals  of  the  Val  d'Arno 
near  Florence,  of  Olivola  in  northern  Tuscany,  and  of  Perrier  (Puy-de  Dome). 

The  mammals  of  Perrier  have  been  found  in  gravels  at. the  base  of  the 

»  De  Lapparent,  A.,  Trait6  de  Geologic,  1906,  pp.  1648-1652. 
^  For  principal  titles  see  Bibliography. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  319 


volcanic  Mont  de  Perrier  (12),  near  Issoire/  The  genera  now  extinct  are 
here  reduced  to  two,  namely,  Mastodon  and  Machcerodus.  All  the  other 
mammals  of  central  France  of  this  period,  with  the  exception  of  the  tapirs 
and  antelopes,  continued  to  live  on  in  the  same  region  during  the  Pleisto- 
cene. Monkeys  are  no  longer  found  in  France,  a  significant  evidence  of 
lowering  of  temperature,  but  the  macaques  still  occur  in  northern  Italy. 
While  the  essentially  southern  and  plains-living  antelopes  have  diminished 
in  number  and  size,  being  represented  by  only  two  species,  the  lesser.  Anti- 
lope  ardea,  the  greater,  A.  tragelaphus  torticornis,  and  there  is  but  a  single 
species  of  gazelle  (G.  horhonica),  the  essentially  northern  and  forest-living 
deer  have  not  only  multiplied,  but  have  greatly  increased  in  variety  and 
the  complication  of  their  antlers.  The  smaller  roe  deer  (Capreolus  australis), 
with  its  erect  three-branched  antlers,  descended  from  the  C.  matheronis 
of  the  Miocene,  persists.  There  also  appears  the  axis  type  of  deer  (Axis 
pardinensis) ,  with  three-  to  four-branched  antlers,  now  characteristic  of 
southeastern  Asia.  Among  the  new  arrivals  is  the  stag,  or  red  deer  type 
(C.  elaphus  perrieri),  with  long  branched  antlers,  less  complicated,  however, 
than  in  the  Pleistocen'e  and  recent  true  Cervus.  The  fourth  deer  is  of  a 
type  {Polycladus)  now  extinct,  with  elaborately  branched  antlers,  typified  by 
the  C.  dicranius  (Nesti).  Thus  the  Capreolus,  Elaphus,  Axis,  and  Polycladus 
types  are  all  represented,  but  the  fallow  deer,  or  Dama  type,  which  plays  a 
large  part  in  the  Pleistocene,  has  not  yet  appeared  in  Europe.  The  abun- 
dance of  these  browsing  forest-  and  glade-living  animals  bespeaks  a  wide 
extension  of  the  forests  at  this  period.  The  contemporary  Leptobos  etruscus 
(  =  L.  elatus)  is  the  earliest  ox  of  Europe,  a  generalized  type  with  long, 
rounded  horn  cores,  widely  separated  at  their  base  and  placed  low  down  on 
the  forehead;  the  females  originally  described  as  Leptobos  were  hornless;  the 
limbs  were  unusually  slender. 

It  is  not  surprising  to  find  among  the  enemies 

Upper  Pliocene       of  these  northern  and  southern  types  of  ruminants 
Partial  List         an  abundance  of  both  the  northern  and  south- 
Monkeys  ern  types  of  Carnivora.     Pursuing  the  deer, 

Macaques  appears  one  of  the  earliest  of  the  distinctly 

Mastodons  wolf-like  or  thooid   canids  (C  megamastoides) . 

Elephants  (Elephas)  The  felids  become  more  varied,  including  types 
Horses  (Equus)  resembling  the  lynx,  the  panther,  and  the  lion. 

Tapirs  Among  these  modern  carnivores  there  still  sur- 

Sumatran  rhinoceroses  vives  the  saber-tooth  tiger  (Machcerodus  cul- 
Hippopotami  tridens),  a  species  persisting  throughout  Pliocene 

Cattle  {Leptobos)  times.    The  bear  of  Auvergne  (Ursus  arvernensis) 

Antelopes  and  gazelles    is  a  small  animal.    The  hysenas  now  include  types 

(diminutive)  allied  to  both  the  spotted  and  the  striped  hysenas 

^  Deperet,  C,  Considerations  generales  sur  les  Vertebres  Pliocenes  de  I'Europe.  Ann. 
Sci.  GeoL,  Vol.  XVII,  Paris,  1885,  pp.  252-253. 


320 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Upper  Pliocene      of  Africa.    The  fluviatile  otters  (Lutra)  and  bea- 
Partial  List         vers  (Castor)  are  closely  allied  to  existing  forms. 
Roe  deer  The  small  fauna  includes  voles,  picas,  hares,  por- 

Axis  deer  cupines,  also  species  approaching  recent  types. 

Red  deer  (Cermis)  Among  the  perissodactyls,  the  tapirs  (T.  arver- 

Polycladine  deer  nejisis)  appear  in  Europe  for  the  last  time;  the 

Machserodonts  Pliocene  tapirs  resemble  the  existing  Indian  tapirs 

(T.  indicus)  very  closely.^  The  'Etruscan  rhinoc- 
eros '  is  a  long-limbed,  long-headed  animal,  distinguished  from  its  Lower 
Pliocene  ancestor  (D.  leptorhinus)  by  a  well-developed  bony  septum 
which  furnishes  support  for  the  great  nasal  horn  ;  it  is  structurally 
related  to  the  D.  platyrhinus  of  the  Siwaliks  of  India,  as  well  as  to  the 
smaller  and  much  more  primitive  Hving  species  D.  sumatrensis  of 
Sumatra.  This  animal  survives  in  the  Lower  Pleistocene  Forest 
Bed,  together  with  several  other  members  of  this  fauna.  The  Asiatic 
and  African  element  is  now  less  conspicuous  than  in  the  older  Pliocene 
fauna. 

In  his  comments  on  the  mammalian  fauna  of  the  Val  d'Amo,  Forsyth 
Major  -  speaks  of  the  spreading  of  this  fauna  eastward  into  India.  Of  the 
types  now  resident  in  southeastern  Asia  the  tapir,  the  axis  deer,  and  the 
rhinoceros  may  be  mentioned. 

The  rich  fauna  of  the  Val  d'Arno  is  even  more  varied  and  typical  than 
that  of  Perrier.  It  is  splendidly  represented  in  the  Museum  of  Florence. 
The  macaque  which  occurs  here  (M.  florentinus)  is  the  last  of  the  European 
macaques.  The  disappearance  of  the  monkeys  from  Europe  at  the  close  of 
the  Pliocene  is  a  very  significant  fact;  it  may  be  remembered  that  in  the 
Upper  Miocene  they  ranged  as  far  north  as  Eppelsheim;  in  the  Lower  Plio- 
cene they  were  restricted  to  the  forests  of  the  south  of  France;  in  the  Upper 
Pliocene  to  those  of  Italy;  their  gradual  southern  retreat  is  probably  due 
to  a  slowly  progressive  lowering  of  temperature.^ 

The  elephant  of  this  period,  the  typical  E.  meridionalis  of  Nesti,  popu- 
larly known  as  the  'southern  elephant,'  is  a  magnificent  animal  with  mod- 
erately long-cro\vned  or  hypsodont  molar  teeth  composed  of  as  many  as 
fourteen  rows  of  closely  compressed  transverse  enamel  plates.  It  is  either 
of  Asiatic  or  African  origin.  The  molars  are  broad,  the  enamel  thick 
and  smooth.    The  tusks  are  of  gigantic  proportions. 

A  remarkable  feature  of  the  contemporary  mastodon  (M.  arvernensis) 
is  the  extraordinarily  long  and  very  slightly  outcurved  tusks.'*    The  wild 

'  Kittl,  E.,  Fossile  Tapirroste  von  Biedermannsdorf.  Annul,  k.k.  naturhist.  Hofmua., 
Vienna,  1896,  Notizcn,  pp.  57-58. 

-  Forsyth  Major,  C.  J.,  On  the  Mammalian  Fauna  of  the  Val  d'Arno.  Quart.  Jour.  Geol. 
Soc.  London,  Vol.  XLI,  June  25,  1884,  p.  3. 

'  Boyd  Dawkins,  W.,  The  Classification  of  the  Tertiary  by  Means  of  the  Mammalia. 
Quart.  Jour.  Gcol.  Soc,  Vol.  XXXVI,  London,  1880,  p.  .394. 

*  Capellini,  Mastodonti  del  Museo  Geologico  di  Bologna,  1907. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  321 


boar  of  the  period  {S.  strozzii)  exhibits  tusks  more  Hke  those  of  the  Asiatic 
boar  {S.  celebensis)  than  those  of  the  European  boar. 

The  horse  (Equus  stenonis)  which  frequented  northern  Italy  in  Upper 
Phocene  times  reached  a  height  of  nearly  15  hands  (1.524  m.) ;  it  is  distin- 
guished by  the  narrow  anterior  pillar  (protocone)  of  the  upper  molar  teeth 
and  is  regarded  by  Ewart  ^  as  one  of  the  possible  ancestors  of  existing  horses, 
on  his  theory  that  these  breeds  may  be  traced  back  to  several  wild  ancestral 
stocks.  Contemporaneous  with  E.  stenonis  in  the  Upper  Pliocene  of  Europe 
was  the  E.  sivalensis  of  the  Upper  Pliocene  of  southern  Asia,  which  may 
also  have  had  a  share  in  the  making  of  modern  domestic  breeds. 

The  L.  duhia  is  distinct  from  the  common 
otter  (L.  vulgaris) .  The  L.  reedii  is  of  a  very 
brachyodont  type,  resembling  the  L.  sivalensis 
of  India.  The  seal  Phocanella  agrees  with 
that  found  in  the  Belgium  Pliocene  by  Van 
Beneden.  The  beaver  Trogontherium  minus 
is  represented  by  teeth  much  smaller  than 
those  of  its  successor  in  the  Pleistocene,  T. 
cuvieri;  its  incisor  has  the  front  rounded,  with 
rugose  enamel,  thus  differing  from  Castor. 
The  supposed  panda,  Ailurus  anglicus  Daw- 
kins,  from  the  Red  Crag  of  Suffolk  is  repre- 
sented by  a  perfect  upper  molar  tooth,  which  strikingly  resembles  the  cor- 
responding teeth  of  Ailurus  fulgens  of  Asia,  but  is  one-third  larger  in  size. 

II.    PLIOCENE  LIFE  OF  ASIA 

Our  first  glimpse  into  the  life  of  the  forested  regions  of  southern  Asia 
during  Miocene  times  (p.  273)  is  followed  in  the  Pliocene  by  a  fuller  knowl- 
edge of  what  is  altogether  the  grandest  assemblage  of  mammals  the  world 
has  ever  seen,  distributed  through  southern  and  eastern  Asia,  and  prob- 
ably, if  our  vision  could  be  extended,  ranging  westward  toward  Persia  and 
Arabia  into  northern  Africa. 

It  is  the  most  truly  cosmopolitan  aggregation  because  in  its  Upper 
Pliocene  stage  it  represents  a  congress  of  mammals  from  four  great  con- 
tinents, namely:  (1)  native,  or  autochthonous  mammals  of  southern  Asia, 
(2)  survivals  of  the  fauna  known  at  earlier  periods  in  Europe,  presumably 
common  to  northern  Europe  and  Asia,  (3)  mammals  of  African  origin, 
(4)  mammals  of  North  American  origin. 

By  the  close  of  the  Pliocene  the  contributions  of  these  four  continents 

^  Ewart,  J.  Cossar,  The  Possible  Ancestors  of  the  Horse  Living  under  Domestication. 
Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XXX,  no.  763,  Aug.  13,  1909,  pp.  219-223. 

2  Newton,  E.  T.,  On  Some  New  Mammals  from  the  Red  and  Norwich  Crags.  QuarL 
Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  Vol.  XL VI,  Aug.,  1890,  pp.  444-453. 


Mammals  from  the  Red 
AND  Norwich  Crags.^ 

Lutra  duhia 
Lutra  reedii 
Phoca  moorei 
Phocanella  minor 
Trogontherium  minus 
Mesoplodon  floris 
Mesoplodon  scaphoides 
Ailurus  anglicus  Dawkins 


322 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


are  thoroughly  intermingled.  The  only  continents  which  do  not  contribute 
in  the  least  to  this  assemblage  are  South  America  and  Australia. 


// ijpothdiml  Original  Sources  of  the  Pliocene  Life  of  Southern  Asia 


3.  Natives  of 
North  America 

Rhinoceroses 

Horses 

Tapirs 

Camels 

Canids 

?Wolves  and  foxes 


Natives 
Africa 

Mastodons 
Dinotheres 
?Elephants 


1.  Natives  OF  South-     2.  Natives  of     3.  Natives    of     4.  JNatives  op 

erx  Asia  Eurasia 
Anthropoid  apes  Bears 
Catarrhine  monkeys  Porcupines 
Cavicornia  Mustelines 

Cattle  (Bovidip)  Fclids 
Antelopes  (Antilopinae)  Dinocyons 

of  Asiatic  and  Afri-  Elotheres 

can  types  Anthracotheres 
Goats  (Caprina^)  Chalicotheres 
Tragulids,  or  true  chev-     True  deer 

retains  - 
Cervuline  deer 
Axis  deer 
Musk  deer 
Viverrids  or  civets 
Hyaenas 
Cheetahs 

(Cyncdurm) 
Panpjolins  ? 

(Manis) 

Nor  does  the  above  list  by  any  means  include  all  the  mammals  of  the 
south  Asiatic  Pliocene,  because  all  the  small  fauna  still  awaits  discovery, 
the  following  mammals  being  conspicuous  by  their  absence  in  the  Pliocene 
although  some  of  them  appear  in  the  Pleistocene. 

Nor,  again,  are  we  in  a  position  to  list  the 
original  homes  of  the  above  animals  with  any 
degree  of  finality,  the  above  lists  being  put  for- 
ward as  tentative. 

There  are  two  great  areas  in  which  this  Asiatic 
life  is  known,  namely:  (1)  southern  Asia,  south 
of  the  Himalayas,  (2)  eastern  Asia,  China,  and 
Japan. 

Eastern  Asia,  as  we  shall  see,  adds  consider- 
ably to  this  assemblage,  because  it  includes  north- 
erly forms.  The  continental  elevation  of  the  eastern  Asiatic  coast  rendered 
Japan  practically  a  part  of  the  continent,  so  that  its  Pliocene  and  Lower 
Pleistocene  deposits  yield  a  rich  Stegodon  and  Elephas  fauna.    Even  Java  ^ 


Mammals  Absent  or 
Undiscovered 

Insectivores 

Lemurs 

Marsupials 

Hares 

Aardvarks 

Northern  types  of  deer 


'  >Lirtin,  K.,  Uoborroste  vorweltlicher  Proboscidier  von  Java  und  Banka. 
des  gcologischen  Reicks-M useums  in  Leydcn,  Vol.  IV,  no.  1,  1884,  pp.  1-24. 


Sammlunjen 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  323 


in  two  localities  yields  Stegodon  teeth  very  similar  to  S.  ganesa  and  S. 
insignis;  we  find  here  also  Elephas,  Hippopotamus,  Sus,  and  Bos.  Even 
more  important  is  the  Pithecanthropus  eredus  discovered  by  Dubois  in 
1894,  with  its  decided  affinities  to  the  Une  of  human  ancestry. 

1.  Life  of  Southern  Asia 

This  life  is  revealed  in  the  wonderfully  rich  deposits  broadly  known 
as  the  'Siwaliks,'  vast  ancient  flood  plain  areas  stretching  for  a  distance 
of  fifteen  hundred  miles  along  the  foothills  of  the  Himalayas.    To  assist 


Fig.  154.  —  Chief  Miocene  and  Pliocene  fossil  mammal  deposits  of  Asia,  1 .  Maragha, 
Persia.  2.  Perim  Island.  3.  Manchhar  Beds  of  Sind.  4.  Siwaliks  of  the  Punjab.  5.  Sub- 
himalayan  Siwaliks  (River  Brahmaputra  to  River  Jhelum).  6.  Valley  of  the  Lower  Irawadi, 
Burma.  7.  Miocene  and  Pliocene  deposits  of  China  (Provinces  of  Shan-si,  Shen-si,  Sze-chuan, 
Kwang-Tung,  Ho-nan,  Hu-nan,  Hu-peh).    8.  Miocene  and  Pliocene  deposits  of  Japan. 


our  mental  picture  of  the  environment  it  is  important  to  remember  that 
while  the  elevation  of  the  Himalayas  commenced  with  the  Tertiary  epoch, 
the  range  only  attained  an  elevation  comparable  to  that  which  it  now 
possesses  toward  the  commencement  of  the  Pliocene  period  (Oldham  and 
Blanf  ord) . 

Our  knowledge  of  the  Siwahk  mammals  is  due  chiefly  to  the  masterly 
researches  of  Falconer  and  the  recent  revisions  of  Lydekker.  The  geologic 
or  time  succession  of  the  various  deposits  which  have  been  treated  collec- 
tively as  of  this  age  is  of  the  utmost  importance  but  still  awaits  careful 


324 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


analysis.  So  far  as  can  be  judged  from  the  most  valuable  geologic  notes 
and  discussions  of  Oldham/  Blanford,'  Lydekker/*  and  recently  of 
Schlosser/  the  general  arrangement  of  these  beds  in  ascending  geologic  order 
is  somewhat  as  follows: 


Irawadi  \'alley,  Burmah  (Pliocene) 

'  Upper  Siwaliks '  (Upper  Pliocene) 


Sub-Himalayas 


'Lower  Siwaliks'  (Middle  and  Lower 

Pliocene,  Upper  Miocene) 
Punjab  'Siwaliks'  (Middle  and  Lower 

Pliocene,  Upper  Miocene) 
Island  of  Perim,  west  coast  of  India 

(Miocene  and  Pliocene) 
Bugti  Hills  of  Baluchistan  (Middle  and 

Upper  Miocene) 
Manchhar  Beds  of  Sind  (Middle  and 

Upper  Miocene) 


Fauna  II 

Stegodons 
Horses  (Equus) 
Camels 

Buffaloes  {Bvbalus) 


Fauna  I 
Anthracotheres 
Mastodons 


Geologic  or  Stratigraphic  Succession  of  the  Mammals 

The  mammals  of  the  'Lower  Manchhar'  beds  of  Sind  have  already 
(p.  273)  been  shown  to  be  of  Middle  and  Upper  Miocene  age;  those  of 
the  Bugti  Hills  of  Baluchistan  appear  to  partake  of  the  same  character, 
namely,  what  may  be  called  the  Anthracothere  Zone  fauna.  The  mammals 
of  the  Island  of  Perim,  on  the  west  coast  of  India,  appear  to  be  transitional, 
that  is,  to  contain  both  this  older  Anthracothere  and  a  newer  Hipparion 
Zone  fauna.  As  we  ascend  through  the  Punjab  Siwaliks,  through  the 
'  Lower  Siwaliks '  and  the  '  Upper  Siwaliks '  of  the  sub-Himalayas,  into  the 
Siwaliks  of  the  Irawadi  Valley,  Burmah,  the  anthracothere  fauna  gradually  dis- 
appears, and  is  gradually  replaced  by  the  newer,  or  true  Pliocene  fauna.  Only 
in  the  'Upper  Siwaliks'  of  the  sub-Himalayas  and  in  the  Irawadi  Valley^ 
Burmah,  do  we  find  the  pure  Upper  Pliocene  fauna  of  Stegodon,  ElephaSy 
Equus,  Camelus,  and  Buhalus.  These  beds  are  partly  succes- 
sive; they  partly  overlap  in  time. 

Perim  Island,  a  small  reef  overlaid  by  ossiferous  conglomerates  (fluvia- 
tile),  contains  fragmentary  remains  of  mammals  discovered  by  von  Hiigel 
in  1836.  It  lacks  the  Upper  Pliocene  forms  entirely  and  appears  to  be 
intermediate  between  the  Lower  Alanchhar  Zone  of  Sind,  and  to  corre- 
spond only  with  the  lower,  true  Siwaliks;  it  contains  none  of  the  Upper 
Siwalik  mammals. 

'  Oldham,  R.  D.,  A  Manual  of  the  Geology  of  India.    Calcutta,  1893. 

2  Blanford,  W.  T.,  Homotaxis  as  Illustrated  from  Indian  Formations.  Rec.  Geol.  Surv. 
India.  Vol.  XVIII,  Pt.  1,  1885. 

'  Lydokkor.  R.,  A  Geographical  History  of  Mammals.    Cambridge,  1896. 

*  Schlo.sser,  M.,  Die  fossilen  Siiugethiere  Chinas  nebst  einer  Odontographie  der  recenten 
Antilopen.    Abh.  k.  bayer.  Akad.  Wiss.,  CI.  II,  Vol.  XXII,  Pt.  1,  Munich,  1903. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  325 

In  northwest  India  fossils  occur  low  down  in  the  Punjab  Siwaliks  which 
attain  a  total  thickness  of  14,000  feet.  It  is  by  no  means  certain,  ob- 
serves Oldham,  that  some  of  the  specimens  from  the  northwestern  Punjab, 
especially  those  with  mid-Tertiary  affinities,  are  not  confined  to  the  lower 
levels.  The  precise  horizon  of  all  the  forms  collected  is  not  known;  a 
very  large  proportion  of  Siwalik  remains  were  obtained  by  native  collectors,- 


Fig.  155.  —  Map  of  India  showing  Tertiary  formations  containing  fossil  mammals  (oblique 
lines).  I.  Manchhar  Beds  ;  2.  Bugti  Hills;  3.  Perim  Island;  4.  Punjab  Siwaliks  ;  5.  Sub- 
himalayan  Siwaliks  ;  6.  Beds  of  the  Lower  Irawadi.    After  Oldham. 


and  the  localities  are  of  course  doubtful.  While  these  Punjab  beds  are 
distinguished  from  the  Miocene  fauna  of  the  Lower  Manchhar  by  the 
rarity  of  anthracotheres  and  the  absence  of  Hyotherium,  they  appear  to 
contain  a  somewhat  older  fauna  than  the  true  Siwaliks  of  the  sub-Hima- 
layas. Thus,  of  the  surviving  Miocene  forms  several  are  recorded  in  the 
Punjab  only,  namely:  Dinotherium,  Machcerodus,  Dorcatherium,  anthraco- 
theres.   More  primitive  mastodons  are  also  chiefly  from  the  Punjab. 

The  Siwalik  Group,  or  Siwaliks  proper,  are  exposed  in  the  sub-Himalayas, 
a  long  range  of  hills  which  for  a  distance  of  1,500  miles  advance  along 


326 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  main  chain  to  the  south.  The  group  reaches  the  enormous  aggregate 
thickness  of  15,0(X)  feet.  The  clays,  sandstones,  and  conglomerates  of 
which  it  is  composed  were  probably  deposited  by  the  flood  plains  of  great 
rivers  which  flowed  from  the  Himalayan  chain  by  the  same  outlets  as  their 
modern  representatives ;  ^  thus  there  is  a  close  resemblance  between  these 
beds  and  the  recent  deposits  of  the  flood  plain  of  the  Ganges.^ 

Here  again  in  the  'Lower  Siwaliks'  are  recorded  certain  surviving  Mio- 
cene forms  such  as  the  giant  dogs  {Amphicyo7i) ,  the  clawed  perissodactyls 
(Ancylotherium) ,  supposed  entelodonts  (Tetraconodon) ,  and  the  bear  dogs 
(Hyctnardos).  In  the  'Upper  Siwaliks,'  or  higher  Siwalik  strata  only 
(Oldham),  occurs  the  Upper  Pliocene  fauna  including  the  true  horse  {Equus), 
the  first  camels  (C.  sivalensis),  the  stegodont  elephants  (*S.  insignis,  S. 
ganesa),  and  the  giant  tortoises  (Colossochelys).  Especially  modern  in 
these  highest  strata  is  the  buffalo  (Bubalus  palceindicus) ,  closely  similar  to 
the  buffalo  of  the  Ganges  and  central  provinces  of  India  at  the  present 
time. 

The  Irawadi  Valley  of  Burma  apparently  contains  only  the  Upper 
Siwalik  fauna  and  an  intermingling  even  of  Lower  Pleistocene  types. 

It  thus  appears  probable  that  the  'survival  theory'  of  the  intermingling 
of  Oligocene,  Miocene,  Lower  and  Upper  Pliocene  types  in  India  contains 
some  elements  of  truth,  but  has  been  overstated  because  of  erroneous  or 
incomplete  field  records.  As  well  observed  by  Oldham,  some  of  the  anom- 
alies would  probably  disappear  if  we  knew  the  horizons.  At  the  same 
time,  the  balance  of  evidence  is  all  in  favor  of  regarding  the  Siwaliks 
proper  as  of  Upper  Miocene  and  Lower,  Middle,  and 
Upper  Pliocene  age.  While  it  is  not  certain  that  there  were  Oligocene 
survivals  in  the  Pliocene  of  Asia,  it  is  certain  that  animals  which  became 
extinct  at  the  close  of  the  Miocene  in  Europe,  such  as  the  amphicyons,  chali- 
cotheres,  dinotheres,  the  aceratheres,  the  teleocerine  rhinoceroses,  the  entelo- 
donts or  elotheres,  survived  in  Asia.  Otherwise  the  general  law  of  genetic 
succession  or  replacement  of  more  ancient  by  more  modern  types  prevailed 
in  Asia  as  in  Europe. 

It  is  premature  to  attempt  to  work  out  the  genetic  or  stratigraphic 
succession  of  these  mammals,  which  will  furnish  one  of  the  most  fascinat- 
ing problems  for  the  British  palaeontologist.  The  fauna  is  of  such  deep 
import  in  connection  with  the  life  of  Europe,  Africa,  and  North  America, 
that  it  is  desirable  to  examine  it  in  some  detail. 

General  Characters  of  the  South  Asiatic  Mammals 

A  broad  survey  proves  that,  as  indicated  on  p.  322,  southern  Asia 
was  a  center  of  the  evolution  of  the  anthropoid  apes  of  the  Old  World  and 

^  Geikie,  A..  Text-Book  of  Geology,  p.  1021,  London,  1893. 

»  Oldham,  R.  D.,  A  Manual  of  the  Geology  of  India.    Calcutta,  1893. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  327 

catarrhine  monkeys,  of  the  grand  divisions  of  the  hollow-horned  ruminants 
or  Cavicornia,  and,  if  not  the  chief  center,  it  was  at  least  an  extremely 
important  center  of  the  evolution  of  the  Proboscidea,  because  here  we 
find  these  animals  in  all  stages  of  transition  between  the  mastodon  and 
the  elephant  type.  It  remains  to  be  discovered  whether  a  similar  fauna 
and  similar  evolution  characterized  Africa  at  this  time. 

Among  the  primates  we  find  the  orang  (Simia),  an  ape  now  confined 
to  Borneo  and  Sumatra,  also  the  chimpanzee  (Anthropopithecus) ,  another 
ape  now  confined  to  Africa,  the  Siwalik  species  displaying  a  more  human 
type  of  dentition  than  that  of  the  existing  African  form.  Among  the  monkeys 
are  the  macaques  (Macacus)  and  langurs  (Semnopithecus) ,  which  we  have 
also  seen  in  the  '  ancient  Pliocene '  fauna  of  Montpellier.  There  are  also 
true  baboons  (Cynocephalus) . 

The  assemblage  of  Carnivora  is  the  most  extraordinary  the  world  has 
ever  seen.  There  are  first  the  ancient  bear-like  canids  Amphicyon  and 
Hycenardos,  related  to  Miocene  types  of  Europe.  The  felids  include 
machaerodonts  {Machcerodus,  Mlurogale,  Mluropsis),  beside  varieties  of 
true  cats  (Felis)  analogous  to  the  leopard  and  lynx,  and  including  species 
equaling  the  tigers  in  size.  There  are  five  species  of  hysenas,  including 
primitive  forms  resembling  the  Upper  Miocene  Ictitherium  of  Pikermi, 
while  others  of  more  modern  aspect  are  similar  to  the  spotted  hyaena  (H. 
crocuta),  and  still  others  to  the  striped  hyaena  (H.  striata).  Among  the 
smaller  carnivores  are  civets  (Viverra),  otters  (Lutra),  ratels  (Melivora), 
bears  related  to  the  Indian  sloth  bear  (Melursus),  foxes  (Vulpes),  and 
wolves  (Canis). 

Among  the  few  rodents  known  are  representatives  of  the  bamboo  rats 
(Rhizomys),  porcupines  (Hystrix),  and  the  hares  (Caprolagus). 

The  variety  of  odd-toed  ungulates  is  no  less  remarkable.  Among 
these  perissodactyls  are  first  to  be  noted  the  aberrant  chalicotheres  (fAncy- 
lotherium) ,  which  also  survive  in  the  Pliocene  and  possibly  into  the  early 
Pleistocene  of  China.  The  tapirs  (Tapirus)  are  rare,  being  recorded  only 
in  the  Upper  Siwaliks  of  the  Irawadi  Valley.  Of  the  rhinoceroses,  the  acera- 
theres  include  a  widely  distributed  species  {A.  hlanfordi),  also  found  in 
the  Upper  Miocene  of  Maragha  in  Persia,  as  well  as  a  possible  (Lydekker) 
teleocerine  rhinoceros  (T.  perimense).  Related  to  the  dicerorhine  or 
Sumatran  phylum  of  rhinoceroses,  which  we  have  observed  from  the  early 
Miocene  onward  in  Europe,  is  the  majestic  D.  platyrhinus;  while  we  find 
also  representatives  of  the  true  Asiatic  rhinoceroses  (R.  palceindicus) ,  re- 
lated to  the  existing  one-horned  types  of  India  and  Java  and  not  represented 
in  Europe  at  all. 

Two  species  of  Hipparion  are  known,  and  it  appears  certain  that  this 
animal,  which  does  not  certainly  extend  beyond  the  Middle  Pliocene  of 
Europe,  survived  into  Upper  Pliocene  times  in  Asia;  in  Africa  it  is  said 
to  have  survived  into  the  Lower  Pleistocene.    One  species  (H.  antilopinum) 


328 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


is  said  to  have  lost  its  lateral  digits.  Here  also  in  the  Upper  Pliocene  of 
the  sub-Himalayan  Siwaliks  occurs  a  species  of  true  horse.  This  ancient 
Siwalik  horse  (E.  sivalensis)  measured  about  15  hands  (1.524  m.);  it  had 
long,  very  slender  limbs,  a  long,  tapering  face,  deflected  to  form  an  angle 
of  nearly  twenty  degrees  with  the  base  of  the  cranium;  it  seems  also  to 
have  had  a  long  neck,  high  withers,  and  a  high-set  tail,  thus  resembling 
the  so-called  Aral)ian,  or  desert  type  of  horse.  Like  the  E.  stenonis  of  the 
Pliocene  of  northern  Italy  it  may  have  contributed  to  modern  breeds,^  such 
as  the  unimproved  Kirghiz  races  of  central  Asia.  It  is  distinguished  from 
E.  stenonis,  however,  by  a  broad  protocone,  or  anterior  pillar,  on  its  upper 
molars  (see  p.  321). 

Among  the  artiodactyls  in  the  period  of  the  'Upper  Siwaliks'  the  most 
significant  new  arrival  from  America  is  the  camel  (C.  sivalensis),  said  to 
retain  affinities  with  the  South  American  llamas  (Auchenia).  There  are 
also  true  giraffes  {Camelopardalis) ,  and  a  great  variety  of  the  extinct  horned 
giraffes  kno™  as  sivatheres,  bramatheres,  and  vishnutheres,  allied  to  but 
much  more  specialized  than  those  of  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Pikermi;  it  is 
noteworthy  that  these  aberrant  giraffes  are  the  only  ruminants  which  give 
an  archaic  character  to  the  artiodactyl  fauna  of  the  Siwaliks,  all  the  re- 
maining Artiodactyla  being  decidedly  modern  in  aspect.  Among  the 
actually  modern  forms  are  the  true  chevrotains  (Tragulus)  and  musk  deer 
(Moschus).  There  are  also  more  ancient  forms  said  to  be  allied  to  the 
Miocene  PaloBomeryx  of  Europe.  The  distribution  of  water  chevrotains 
(Dorcatherium)  in  this  fauna  of  European  affinity  is  probably  confined  to 
the  older  or  lower  beds.  The  higher  deer  are  all  of  existing  Asiatic  type, 
namely,  representatives  of  the  rusa  (C.  sivalensis)  and  axis  group.  It  is 
noteworthy  that  there  are  no  deer  of  the  northern  (Cervus)  type. 

The  Cavicornia,  or  hollow-horned  ruminants,  are  represented  by  an 
enormous  variety  of  forms  closely  related  to  those  now  confined  to  Asia 
or  to  East  and  South  Africa,  but  also  found  in  North  Africa  in  Pleistocene 
times.  Among  the  animals  related  to  the  existing  Asiatic  antelopes  are  the 
nilgai  (Boselaphus) ,  the  four-horned  antelope  (Tetracerus),  the  gazelle 
{Gazella).  Among  animals  of  modern  African  affinity  are  the  elands 
(Oreas),  the  kudus  (Strepsiceros) ,  the  roan  and  sable  antelopes  (Hippo- 
tragus),  forms  related  to  the  hartebeests  (Bubalis)  and  water  bucks  (Cobus), 
also  the  gazelles  (Gazella).  It  is  these  African  types  only 
which  have  allies  in  the  European  'newer  Miocene'  fauna 
of  Pikermi  and  Maragha,  —  a  significant  fact.  Especially  novel  is 
the  appearance  of  the  goats  (Capra)  in  forms  closely  related  to  existing 
species  of  Asia,  also  including  a  large  hornless  goat  (Bucapra)  with  bovine 
affinities. 

All  these  facts  point  to  northern  India  as  a  great  center  of  adaptive 

^  Ewart,  J.  C,  The  Possible  Ancestors  of  the  Horses  Living  under  Domestication.  Science, 
U.S.,  Vol.  XXX,  no.  763,  Aug.  13,  1909,  pp.  219-223. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  329 

radiation  of  the  Cavicornia.  This  is  rendered  still  more  probable  through 
the  appearance  here  of  a  great  variety  of  bo  vines.  The  ancestor  of  the 
Indian  buffalo  (Bubalus)  is  here  found  in  a  flat-horned  species  (B.  platy- 
ceros)  recorded  both  in  the  Punjab  and  in  the  southern  Himalayas;  the 
remaining  bovines  are  of  remarkably  modern  type  and  appear  first  in  the 
sub-Himalayas  only.  They  include  a  short-headed  bison  {Bison  sivalensis) , 
the  earliest  known  member  of  this  phylum,  the  small  cattle  (Hemihos) 
related  to  the  existing  anoa  of  the  Celebes,  also  some  long-skulled  forms 
such  as  the  ancestral  ox  (Leptobos),  said  to  be  similar  to  the  species  (L. 
etruscus)  which  first  makes  its  appearance  in  the  Val  d'Arno  in  the  '  recent 
Pliocene  fauna'  of  Europe.  Here  too  are  found  three  species  of  true 
oxen  {Bos),  the  earliest  known  ancestors  of  the  domestic  cattle.  As  re- 
gards migration,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  bison  {Bison)  and  the  true 
oxen  {Bos)  appear  in  Europe  only  after  the  opening  of  Pleistocene  times 
(Forest  Bed),  namely,  during  the  second  faunal  stage. 

The  pig  family,  which  we  have  seen  represented  in  the  Miocene  Man- 
chhar  beds  of  Sind  by  Hyotherium,  here  branches  out  into  a  great  variety 
of  forms  including  many  species  of  true  pigs  {Sus),  of  the  Miorse-pig,'  or 
Hippohyus,  with  extremely  elongate  or  hypsodont  molars,  and  of  the 
peculiar  sanithere  {Sanitherium) .  Among  the  surviving  forms  in  the 
Punjab  Siwaliks  are,  as  identified,  both  the  listriodonts  {Listriodon) ,  long- 
snouted  pigs  confined  to  the  Miocene  of  Europe,  and  an  aberrant  branch 
of  the  entelodonts  or  elotheres  {Tetraconodon) ,  giant  pigs  confined  to  the 
Ohgocene  of  Europe  and  North  America.  Both  of  these  identifications  if 
correct  are  of  the  greatest  interest.  An  ancient  character  is  also  given  to 
the  entire  Siwalik  series  by  the  specialized  anthracothere  Merycopotamus, 
long-snouted,  flat-skulled  animals  which  are  confined  to  the  Siwaliks  or 
true  Pliocene,  whereas  the  anthracotheres  proper,  Anthracotherium  and 
Hyopotamus,  are  only  recorded  in  the  Manchhar  beds  and  Bugti  Hills  of 
Sind.  Merycopotamus  is  considered  a  representative  of  an  early  branch 
of  the  anthracotheres,  from  which  the  hippopotami  may  have  taken 
origin. 

Among  the  river-living  forms  is  the  primitive  hippopotamus  with  six 
teeth  in  the  front  part  of  the  jaw  {Hexaprotodon),  said  to  be  allied  to  ani- 
mals which  are  found  in  the  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  of  Algeria  {H.  hip- 
ponensis);  there  is  also  the  true  hippopotamus  {H.  iravadicus),  found  in 
the  'Upper  Siwaliks'  of  the  Irawadi  Valley  of  Burma. 

The  Proboscidea  include  first  the  dinotheres  found  in  the  lower  levels 
{Dinotherium  pentapotamice,  D.  indicum),  descendants  of  animals  known  in 
the  Manchhar  beds  of  Sind  and  on  the  Island  of  Perim,  surviving  into 
the  older  Punjab  Siwaliks,  and  closely  related  to  D.  giganteum  of  the  Upper 
Miocene  of  Europe.  Second,  there  are  the  mastodons,  third  the  stegodons, 
and  fourth  the  true  elephants. 


330 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Evolution  of  the  Probosci(}fa 

The  true  Proboscidea  exhibit  a  great  range  of  evolution,  from  the  con- 
servative phylum  of  trilophodont  mastodons  (related  to  the  Mastodon  ameri- 
canus  of  the  American  Pleistocene)  through  intermediate  stages  in  which 
the  number  of  transverse  crests  on  the  grinders  steadily  increases,  until 
we  reach  the  Stegodon  stage,  in  which  there  are  from  six  to  twelve  low 
transverse  crests  on  the  grinding  teeth;  finally  into  elephants  which  em- 
brace both  (1)  the  African,  or  Loxodonta  type  {E.  planifrons)  with  narrow 
grinding  teeth  having  comparatively  short  cro\vns  and  few  transverse 
crests,  and  (2)  the  Indian  elephant,  or  Elephas  type  {E.  hysudricus),  which 
is  said  to  be  closely  related  to  the  southern  mammoth  {E.  meridionalis)  of 
the  Upper  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  of  Europe. 

The  evolution  of  these  remarkable  mammals  is  evidently  polyphyletic 
and  involves  a  great  number  of  contemporaneous  changes  in  the  skull, 
tusks,  and  grinders,  among  which  the  following  are  the  most  important: 
(1)  abbreviation  or  increasing  brachycephaly  of  the  skull;  (2)  abbreviation 
of  the  lower  jaws  and  loss  of  the  lower  tusks;  (3)  loss  of  the  enamel  of  the 
upper  and  lower  tusks;  (4)  addition  of  transverse  crests  on  the  inter- 
mediate and  posterior  grinding  teeth  in  both  jaws;  (5)  transition  from  a 
short-crowned,  brachyodont  browsing  adaptation  of  the  grinding  teeth  of 
the  true  mastodon  type  into  the  long-crowned  hypsodont  grazing  adapta- 
tion of  the  elephant  type;  (6)  addition  of  a  'cement'  coating  to  the  grinders. 

Arranged  in  ascending  order  of  complexity,^  as  observed  in  the  older^ 
intermediate,  and  newer  Miocene  and  Pliocene  formations  of  Asia,  these 
animals  may  be  listed  as  follows: 

Euelephas  hysudricus,  sl  primitive  hypsodont  elephant  of  the  Indian 

type,  related  to  E.  meridionalis  of  Europe. 
E.  (Loxodonta)  planifrons,  sl  hypsodont  elephant  of  the  African  type, 

related  to  E.  antiquus  of  the  Pleistocene  of  Europe. 
Stegodon  insignis  {  =  S.  ganesa),  sub-hypsodont,  with  as  many  as 

thirteen  transverse  crests,  found  also  in  China,  Japan,  and  Java, 

Upper  Pliocene  and  Lower  Pleistocene. 
Stegodon  bombifrons,  brachyodont,  with  as  many  as  nine  transverse 

crests,  found  also  in  China. 
Stegodon  cliftii,  brachyodont,  closest  to  Mastodon,  found  also  in  China 

and  Japan. 

Mastodon  (Tetralophodon)  sivalensis,  molars  with  four  to  five  trans- 
verse crests  and  cement. 

Mastodon  (Tetralophodon)  perimensis,  molars  with  four  transverse 
crests  and  some  cement. 

Mastodon  (Tetralophodon)  punjahiensis,  molars  with  four  transverse 
crests. 

*  In  each  case  the  word  '  molars  '  refers  to  the  '  intermediate  molars.' 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  331 

Mastodon  (Tetralophodon)  latidens,  molars  with  four  transverse  crests. 
Mastodon  (Trilophodon)  falconeri,  molars  with  three  transverse  crests. 
Mastodon  (Trilophodon)  pandionis,  molars  with  three  transverse  crests. 
Mastodon  {Trilophodon)  palceindicus,  molars  with  three  transverse 

crests,  a  variety  of  Trilophodon  angustidens. 
Mastodon  (Trilophodon)  angustidens. 

A  diphyletic  subdivision  of  the  mastodons  is:  (1)  into  those  forms  in 
which  the  transverse  crests  are  composed  of  conic  nipples,  or  tubercles, 
with  accessory  cones,  forming  trefoils,  namely  :  M.  (Tetralophodon)  longiro- 
stris,  M.  pentelici,  M.  (Tetralophodon)  sivalensis;  and  (2)  those  in  which  we 
find  simple,  sharply  defined  transverse  crests  without  accessory  cones,  M. 
(Trilophodon)  turicensis,  M.  (Trilophodon)  horsoni. 

The  trilophodont  species  belong  in  the  same  group  with  the  M.  (Trilo- 
phodon) horsoni  and  the  M.  (Trilophodon)  turicensis,  characteristic  of  the 
Upper  Miocene  of  Europe,  while  the  tetralophodont  mastodons  are  related 
to  the  M.  (Tetralophodon)  longirostris  of  Europe.  It  will  be  recalled  (p.  254) 
that  the  trilophodont  T.  angustidens  has  large  lower  incisors,  while  the 
trilophodont  T.  turicensis  has  small  lower  incisors.  In  all  the  tetralopho- 
donts  of  Europe  and  Asia,  including  India  and  China,  the  upper  incisors 
are  without  enamel,  while  the  lower  incisors  are  small  or  wanting,  and  the 
lower  jaw  is  correspondingly  abbreviated;  this  abbreviation  of  the  lower 
jaw  is  a  characteristic  feature  of  the  Pliocene  mastodons. 

A  progressive  character  not  mentioned  above  is  the  addition  of  cement 
to  the  grinding  teeth,  as  in  horses  and  other  grazers;  this  we  first  discover 
in  certain  of  the  tetralophodonts  (T.  perimensis),  and  it  increases  in  the 
stegodonts  (S.  cliftii,  S.  homhifrons). 

It  is  a  remarkable  feature  of  the  proboscideans  that  from  the  geologically 
lowest  to  the  highest  or  most  recent  forms  they  all  use  their  six  grinding 
or  premolar-molar  teeth  on  each  side  at  some  period  of  life;  while  the  lower 
forms  employ  four  and  even  five  grinders  at  once,  it  is  a  distinctive,  pro- 
gressive character  of  the  highest  forms  to  employ  their  upper  and  lower 
grinders  successively,  two  pairs  at  a  time,  and  finally  one  pair  at  a  time, 
the  anterior  grinders  being  used  in  youth  and  the  posterior  in  old  age. 

The  stage  E.  (Loxodonta)  planifrons  is  the  final  transition  between  the 
mastodontoid,  or  crested,  and  the  elephantoid,  or  plated  type;  the  grinders 
consist  of  high,  thin  transverse  crests  with  intermediate  valleys  completely 
filled  with  cement.  This  animal  is  much  more  primitive  than  the  E.  anti- 
quus,  or  straight-tusked  elephant  of  the  Lower  Pleistocene  of  Europe,  the 
closest  counterpart  of  E.  antiquus  being  found  in  the  E.  namadicus,  which 
is  recorded  in  the  Lower  Pleistocene  of  India. 

It  is  obvious  from  this  review  that  part  of  the  mastodons  of  India 
resemble  the  Middle  and  Upper  Miocene  mastodons  of  Europe,  and  it 
would  appear  that  the  Upper  Pliocene  of  India  (?  and  of  Africa)  witnessed 


332 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  first  occurrence  of  the  true  elephant  (E.  hysudricus),  just  as  the  Upper 
PHocene  of  Europe  witnessed  the  first  occurrence  of  the  southern  mammoth, 
or  true  elephant  (E.  meridionalis) . 

Conclusions  as  to  the  age  of  the  Siwalik  Fauna.  —  Against  the  actual 
Upper  Miocene  age  of  any  of  the  true  Siwalik  fauna  is  the  fact,  to  which 
attention  was  called  by  Forsyth  Major,^  that  there  is  not  a  single  species 
in  common  with  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Pikermi.  Yet  it  would  appear  that 
the  true  Siwalik  fauna  begins  with  mastodons,  hipparions,  chalicotheres, 
rhinoceroses,  dinotheres,  antelopes,  amphicyons,  closely  comparable  to 
Upper  Miocene  forms  of  Europe.  The  Upper  Siwaliks  close  with  true 
elephants  {Elephas),  camels,  buffaloes,  and  cattle,  also  true  horses  (Equus), 
which  are  of  Upper  and  Lower  Pliocene  but  not  of  Lower  Pleistocene  age. 
The  successive  evolution  stages  of  these  mammals  will  undoubtedly  be 
discovered  when  the  horizontal  or  geographic  and  vertical  or  stratigraphic 
distribution  is  carefully  worked  out.  This  is  one  of  the  most  fascinating 
problems  awaiting  British  palaeontologists. 

It  is  important  to  note,  as  an  indication  of  the  tropical  conditions  of 
climate  of  northern  India  in  Pliocene  times,  the  presence  of  a  large  num- 
ber of  mammals  which  have  now  been  driven  farther  south  into  the  Indian 
archipelago  and  into  Africa,  especially  the  anthropoid  apes  and  certain 
of  the  antelopes.  It  is  equally  important  to  note  the  absence  of  northern 
forms  of  deer  and  other  ruminants.  The  single  species  of  bear  known  in 
the  Upper  Siwaliks  of  the  Irawadi  is  of  southern  type,  similar  to  the  existing 
Indian  sloth  bear  (Melursus).  Traces  of  this  northern  forest  fauna  are 
to  be  found  in  China. 

Outlyers  of  this  south  Asiatic  fauna  are  to  be  found  on  the  north  in 
China,  and  on  the  west,  in  beds  of  Maragha,  Persia,  and  even  in  Africa. 

As  noted  by  Schlosser  ^  we  find  at  Maragha,  near  the  southern  shore  of 
the  Caspian  Sea,  pure  Asiatic  types,  such  as  the  sivathere  {Urmiatherium) , 
the  hornless  giraffe  (Alcicephalus) ,  the  true  giraffe  (Camelopardalis) ,  three 
species  of  antelope,  the  Asiatic  hipparion  {H.  richthofeni)  and  the  acerathere 
{A.  blanfordi).  On  the  other  hand,  out  of  thirty-two  Maragha  species, 
thirteen  of  the  most  typical  occur  at  Pikermi.  Thus  the  fauna  of  Maragha 
may  be  saifl  to  form  a  transition  between  the  Asiatic  and  Chinese  assem- 
blages and  those  of  Pikermi  and  Samos.  While  it  shows  distinct  affinities 
with  Asia,  it  contains  at  the  same  time  some  northern  (i.e.  north  Asiatic) 
elements. 

2.  Life  of  Eastern  Asia 

The  earliest  mention  of  fossils  in  China  dates  back  to  1853,  when  David- 
son published  a  short  notice  on  a  number  of  teeth  sent  to  England  from 

'  Forsyth  Major,  Comptes  rendus,  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Nov.  16,  1891. 

^  Schlosser.  M.,  Die  fossilen  Siiugethiere  Chinas  nebst  einer  Odontographie  der  recenten 
Antilopen.    Abh.  k.  bayer.  Akad.  Wiss.,  CI.  II,  Vol.  XXII,  Pt.  1,  Munich,  1903. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  333 


Shanghai.  Thus  the  extinct  Hfe  of  China  and  of  western  North  America 
was  brought  to  the  notice  of  scientists  at  about  the  same  time,  ljut  the 
hterature  on  the  former  still  consists  of  a  small  number  of  mostly  incom- 
plete studies.  Owen  pubhshed  a  small  work  in  1870;  Gaudry  in  1871; 
there  is  a  monograph  by  Koken  (1885) ;  Lydekker  has  contributed  various 
notes,  and  finally  Schlosser  ^  in  his  Die  fossilen  Sdugethiere  Chinas 
(Munich,  1903)  has  made  a  more  exhaustive  study  of  all  the  material 
available  to  him,  comparing  the  Chinese  faunas  with  the  contemporary 
animal  life  of  Europe  and  southern  Asia  (Schlosser,  op.  cit.,  pp.  7,  8).  In 
this  illuminating  review  of  the  fossil  mammals  thus  far  recorded  in  China  ^ 
we  obtain  our  first  picture  of  the  life  of  northeastern  Asia  in  Upper  Mio- 
cene and  Pliocene  times.  It  is  important  to  note  that  there  are  practically 
no  geologic  records.^ 

It  is  a  world  of  life  which  has  close  relationships  with  that  of  Persia 
(Maragha)  and  diminishing  resemblances  as  we  pass  westward  to  the  faunas 
of  Samos,  of  Pikermi,  Greece,  and  of  Mont  Leberon,  France.  It  naturally 
has  its  closest  relationships  with  the  life  of  southern  Asia,  as  seen  in  the 
Siwalik  fauna.  The  Siwalik  fauna,  as  we  have  seen,  however,  belongs  to 
more  southern  latitudes  and  contains  anthropoid  apes  which  have  been 
referred  both  to  the  chimpanzees  and  orangs,  beside  other  mammals  dis- 
tinctive of  southerly  latitudes  and  represented  at  the  present  time  by 
descendants  which  inhabit  southern  Asia  and  Africa.  Not  only  is  the 
more  northerly  life  of  China  of  somewhat  hardier  type,  but  its  closer 
proximity  to  North  America  is  evidenced  by  the  presence  of  forest  horses 
(Hypohippus) ,  of  supposed  camels  (Paracamelus) ,  and  of  supposed  teleoc- 
■erine  rhinoceroses  {Teleoceras)}  Conspicuous  by  their  absence  are  certain 
■characteristic  Miocene,  European,  and  Siwalik  forms,  such  as  Amphicyon. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  no  cattle  are  found  in  this  fauna,  no  animals  related 
to  the  genera  Bos,  Bison,  or  Buhalus. 

The  age  of  these  scattered  deposits  is  late  Miocene  or  early  Pliocene. 
They  are  broadly  characterized  by  abundant  remains  of  the  north  Asiatic 
Lipparion  {H.  richthofeni),  of  hornless  rhinoceroses,  or  aceratheres,  of  very 
large  browsing  horses,  or  anchitheres,  which  possibly  are  identical  with 

'  Schlosser,  M.,  Die  fossilen  Saugethiere  Chinas  nebst  einer  Odontographie  der  recenten 
Antilopen.    Abh.  k.  hayer.  Akad.  Wiss.,  CI.  II,  Vol.  XXII,  Pt.  1,  Munich,  1903. 

2  In  all  the  larger  cities  of  China,  fossil  remains  are  sold  as  '  dragon  bones '  and  '  dragon 
teeth,'  and  used  in  medicine.  To  bring  out  their  supposed  medicinal  properties  they  are 
fried,  boiled  in  wine,  or  even  eaten  in  their  natural  state  as  a  cure  for  diseases  of  the  heart, 
Mdneys,  liver,  and  intestines,  and  are  further  regarded  as  very  beneficial  in  nervous  affections. 
Nearly  all  collections  of  Chinese  fossils  have  been  bought  up  from  the  druggists,  who  fortu- 
nately keep  accurate  records  as  to  the  provinces  and  even  localities  from  which  the  materials 
Lave  been  brought  (Schlosser,  1903,  pp.  3-6). 

3  Some  of  the  other  animals  from  China,  figured  by  Schlosser,  singularly  resemble  allied 
American  types,  e.g.  Hipparion  richthofeni,  Equus  sivalensis  (=  Pliohippus),  Sus  microdon 
{=  Prosthennops) .  The  rhinoceroses  generally  are  very  similar  to  American  forms.  (Note 
by  W.  D.  Matthew.) 


334 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  Hypohippus  of  the  Miocene  of  America,  of  trilophodont  and  tetraloph- 
odont  mastodons,  besides  a  varied  group  of  ruminants,  including  giraffes, 
gazelles,  antelopes,  and  kudus  similar  to  those  known  in  the  Upper  Mio- 
cene of  Maragha,  Persia.  There  are  also  certain  types  which  characterize 
the  older  Pliocene  fauna  of  Europe,  such  as  the  fox  (Vulpes)  and  the  hyaena. 

These  mammals  are  divided  by  Schlosser  into:  (1)  an  open  plains  or 
steppe  fauna,  found  in  the  red  clays  of  the  provinces  of  Shan-Si  (northern 
China)  and  Sze-Chuan  (western  China),  perhaps  also  in  Kwang-Tung  and 
other  eastern  provinces ;  and  (2)  a  forest  fauna,  chiefly  preserved  in  the  red 
sandstones  and  greenish  limestones  of  the  provinces  of  Ho-Nan  and  Hu- 
Peh  (central  China),  and  probably  also  in  the  neighborhood  of  Tientsin 
(northeast). 

Schlosser  believes  that  the  remains  of  the  open  plains  fauna  were  prob- 
ably washed  into  pools  without  being  transported  far  from  the  places 
where  the  animals  died.  The  larger  number  of  hipparion  remains  have 
been  found  with  the  open  plains  mammals,  although  this  widely  distributed 
tridactyl  horse  also  occurs  associated  with  the  forest  animals;  a  dwarf 
race  and  also  a  larger  one  are  known.  Of  the  rhinoceroses,  the  species 
R.  habereri  is  regarded  as  possibly  related  to  the  short-legged  Teleoceras 
type  of  America  and  western  Europe.  The  aceratheres  belong  to  a  species 
{Aceratherium  hlanfordi)  found  both  in  the  Manchhar  beds  of  Sind,  in  the 
Siwaliks  of  India,  and  in  Maragha,  Persia.  In  the  forest  fauna  are  re- 
corded two  other  kinds  of  rhinoceroses,  one  of  which  is  referred  to  the 
two-horned  Sumatran,  or  Dicerorhinus  type,  and  the  other  {R.  hrancoi) 
to  the  one-horned  Indian  or  true  rhinoceros  type  which  is  recorded  also  in 
the  Manchhar  beds  of  Sind  (p.  275)  and  in  the  Siwaliks. 

Of  the  giraffes  the  gigantic  Camelopardalis  {=Giraffa)  is  similar  to  that 
from  the  Pliocene  Siwaliks,  while  the  hornless  giraffe,  Aldcephalus,  and  the 
sivathere,  Urmiatherium,  are  identified  with  the  Upper  Miocene  giraffes  of 
Maragha.  The  gazelles  are  both  steppe-living  types,  with  resemblances 
to  the  small  Middle  Pliocene  gazelle  (G.  deperdita)  of  Roussillon,  France, 
and  to  the  existing  Grant's  gazelle  of  Africa.  Two  distinctively  Upper 
Miocene  antelopes  of  Pikermi  type,  namely,  Palceoreas  (eland)  and  Trago- 
cerus  (flat-horned  antelope)  are  also  recognized  here.  Antelopes  resem- 
bling the  addax  (Plesiaddax)  and  kudu  (Strepsiceros)  are  also  reported,  as 
well  as  antelopes  suggesting  the  nilgai  (Boselaphus)  of  modem  India.  In 
association  with  these  plains  types  have  been  found  a  number  of  remains 
of  Pliocene  hysenas,  including  three  closely  allied  species,  one  of  gigantic 
size,  also  an  extinct  hyaena  (Palhycena)  intermediate  in  structure  between 
the  Pikermi  form  (Iditherium)  and  the  true  hyaenas. 

The  Proboscidea  are  exclusively  mastodons,  being  referred  to  the 
trilophodont  {M.  pandionis)  and  tetralophodont  {M.  latidens)  types  similar 
to  those  which  are  found  in  the  Manchhar  beds  of  Sind  as  well  as  in  the 
Punjab  or  Lower  Siwaliks. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  335 

Especially  interesting  in  the  forest  fauna  are  ancestral  true  deer  of 
medium  and  small  size,  and  belonging  to  several  species.  To  the  forest 
fauna  too  is  referred  the  fox  (Vulpes)  which,  we  shall  find  (p.  308),  is  first 
recorded  in  the  older  Pliocene  of  Europe,  the  otter  (Lutra),  badger  (Meles), 
and  the  characteristic  Miocene  and  Pliocene  saber-tooth  tigers  (Machcero- 
dus),  similar  to  forms  discovered  at  Pikermi  and  Eppelsheim,  are  also  found 
here.  To  the  forest  fauna  Schlosser  likewise  attributes  the  mastodon, 
two  kinds  of  two-horned  rhinoceroses  (Dicerorhinus) ,  a  forest-living  gazelle 
(Gazella) ,  and  several  species  of  Sus. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  a  true  horse  of  south  Asiatic  type  {Equus  sivalensis), 
as  well  as  the  gigantic  camel  Paracamelus,  are  also  included  in  this  older 
fauna.  We  have  seen  that  Equus  ^  is  a  distinctive  feature  of  the  Upper 
Pliocene  both  of  Europe  and  Asia.  It  would  appear  possible  that  the 
association  of  these  animals  of  more  advanced  evolution  with  the  older 
Pliocene  or  Upper  Miocene  types  may  be  due  to  an  error  in  the  geologic 
records. 

Other  very  characteristic  forms  inhabiting  China,  of  which  the  geologic 
age  reference  in  the  present  writer's  opinion  is  somewhat  doubtful,  are  the 
chalicotheres  {Ancylotherium  sinense),  the  tapirs  (T.  sinensis),  and  the 
hippopotami.  Schlosser  considers  both  the  tapir  {op.  cit,  p.  73)  and 
the  chalicothere  (op.  cit.,  p.  75)  as  Pleistocene.  The  survival  of  the  latter 
animal  into  Pleistocene  times  is  a  record  of  exceptional  interest;  it  rests 
upon  somewhat  slender  evidence. 

3.    Pleistocene  of  India 

The  Karnul  Caves  in  the  district  of  Madras,  southeast  India,  as  studied 
by  Lydekker,2  give  us  a  picture  of  south  Asiatic  life  in  Pleistocene  times. 
The  fauna  as  a  whole  has  lost  the  greater  part  of  its  cosmopolitan  Plio- 
cene aspect,  and  closely  resembles  the  typical  Oriental  fauna  of  modern 
India;  however,  it  still  retains  a  certain  affinity  with  the  African  fauna, 
particularly  in  the  presence  of  a  baboon  (Cynocephalus) ,  of  the  spotted 
hyjena  {Hycena  crocuta),  of  a  small  equine  very  similar  to  the  Abyssinian 
ass  (Equus  asinus),  and  a  pangolin  indistinguishable  from  the  recent  giant 
pangolin  {Manis  gigantea)  of  west  Africa.  Most  of  the  Asiatic  species 
represented  in  these  caves  are  now  extinct,  but  they  have  a  less  primitive 
aspect  than  the  forms  of  the  Upper  Pliocene  of  the  Narbada  Valley.  The 
Asiatic  elements  include  monkeys,  tigers  and  leopards,  jungle  cats,  viver- 
rines,  sloth  bears,  porcupines,  and  mice.  Among  the  larger  Herbivora, 
beside  the  wild  ass  of  African  type  there  is  an  ass  similar  to  the  existing 
south  Asiatic  onager  (E.  onager).    The  rhinoceros  presents  affinities  to  the 

^  Many  of  the  specimens  referred  to  Equus  probably  belong  to  the  older  evolutionary 
stage. 

^  Lydekker,  R.,  The  Fauna  of  the  Karnul  Caves.  Indian  Tertiary  and  Post-tertiary 
Vertebrata.    Pal.  Ind.,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  Ser.  10,  Vol.  IV,  Pt.  2,  1886. 


336 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Upper  Pliocene  Etruscan  type  of  Europe.  The  ruminants  include  buffaloes, 
nilgais,  gazelles,  black  bucks,  antelopes  resembling  the  oryx,  four-horned 
antelopes,  sambar  and  axis  deer,  muntjacs,  chevrotains,  the  wild  boar, 
and  wild  pigs.  With  the  upper  layers  of  animal  remains  traces  of  man  are 
found,  and  even  at  the  lower  levels  are  found  primitive  implements. 

III.    PLIOCENE  LIFE  OF  NORTH  AMERICA 

The  close  of  the  Miocene  and  opening  of  the  Pliocene  cannot  be  dated 
in  the  western  plains  region  of  North  America  as  in  Europe,  because  while 
in  Europe  there  is  a  marked  interruption  in  the  conditions  of  life  at  the 
close  of  the  Miocene,  in  the  western  plains  and  mountain  regions  of  North 


Fig.  156.  —  Upper  Miocene  and  Pliocene  distribution  of  the  Strepsicerine  and  Hippotragine 
Antelopes.    Known  distribution  in  black,  hypothetical  migration  area  in  oblique  lines. 


America  both  the  conditions  of  life  and  the  mammalian  fauna  continue 
without  a  l)reak.  This,  like  the  American  passage  from  the  Oligocene  to 
the  Miocene  and  that  from  the  Miocene  to  the  Pliocene,  is  an  artificial  one, 
made  for  purposes  of  convenience  and  of  correlation  with  the  Old  World 
time  scale. 

As  regards  the  time  scale,  a  new  feature  of  paramount  importance  and 
interest  arises  in  connection  with  the  sudden  and  welcome  extension  of  our 
knowledge  of  the  mammals  of  North  America  to  the  far  southeast,  along  the 
ancient  seacoast  of  Florida.  Here  appear  for  the  first  time  in  North  America 
means  of  correlation  such  as  characterize  European  formations  through- 
out, namely,  the  alternation  of  marine  shell-bearing  forma- 
tions with  freshwater  mammal-bearing  formations.  The 
former  contain  invertebrates  which  may  be  closely  compared  with  those  of 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  337 


Europe;  the  latter  contain  mammals  which  may  be  closely  compared  with 
those  of  the  Western  plains.  This  coincidence  is  observed  in  the  opening 
of  the  Pliocene  in  the  formation  known  as  the  'Alachua  Clays,'  and  again 
in  the  close  of  the  Pliocene  in  the  '  Peace  Creek '  beds,  both  of  which  mammal- 
bearing  formations  have  been  described  in  relation  to  their  surrounding 
shell-bearing  formations  by  the  expert  invertebrate  palaeontologist,  Dr. 
W.  H.  Dall.  The  fauna  and  relations  of  these  formations  will  be  described 
below. 

Relations  with  Eurasia.  —  The  mammals  of  the  American  Pliocene  are 
the  least  known  of  all  the  American  epochs.  Early  in  the  Pliocene  the 
typical  Cavicornia,  or  hollow-horned  ruminants  of  Eurasia,  first  make  their 
appearance  in  North  America  in  forms  somewhat  similar  in  appearance  to 
the  Protragocerus  of  the  Miocene  of  Europe.  In  the  Upper  Pliocene  we 
have  seen  that  the  camels  of  North  America  first  make  their  appearance 
in  India  and  China.  With  these  exceptions  we  know  of  no  very  grand  or 
marked  interchanges  of  life  between  the  New  and  Old  Worlds  in  this  period 
until  the  very  close,  when  the  Old  World  elephants  appear. 

American  migration  of  Asiatic  antelopes.  —  The  appearance  of  true 
Asiatic  antelopes  related  to  two  of  the  great  sections,  the  tragelaphine 
and  hippotragine,  is  one  of  the 
most  recently  discovered  and 
profoundly  impressive  features 
of  Phocene  times.  The  first 
certain  evidence  of  this  kind  is 
the  supposed  hippotragine 
antelope  Neotragocerus  dis- 
covered by  Matthew  and  Cook 
in  western  Nebraska  in  1908  ^ : 
this  animal  is  believed  to  be 
related  to  the  same  group  as 
the  Tragocerus  of  the  Upper 
Miocene  of  Pikermi,  a  group 
now  represented  by  some  of 
the  largest  and  finest  African 
antelopes  in  the  region  south 
of  the  Sahara,  including  the 
roan  antelope  {Hippotragus 
equinus),  the  sable  antelope 
(//.  niger),  the  oryx,  and  the  addax. 
a  round -oval  cross  section. 

This  evidence  of  American  invasion  by  true  Asiatic  antelopes  was 
brilliantly  and  amply  confirmed  during  the  summer  of  1909  by  Merriam's 


By  permission  of  the  New  York  Zoological  Society. 

Fig.  157.  —  A  recent  hippotragine  type  of  Africa,  the 
sable  antelope  (Hippotragus  niger). 


The  horn  is  short  and  straight,  with 


1  Matthew,  W.  D.,  and  Cook,  H.  J.,  A  Pliocene  Fauna  from  Western  Nebraska. 
Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVI,  no.  27,  1909. 


Bull. 


338 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


discovery  ^  in  the  Virgin  Valley,  Nevada,  of  antelopes  (Ilingoceros)  with 
spirally  twisted  horn  cores,  related  to  the  kudus  (Strepsiceros)  of  the  tra- 
gelaphine  section,  the  section  represented  to-day  by  the  nilgai  of  India, 
as  well  as  bush  bucks  and  harnessed  antelopes,  the  sitatungas,  kudus,  and 
elands  of  Africa.  There  are  a  number  of  species  of  these  twisted-horn 
types  as  well  as  an  oval-horned  genus  (Sphenophalos) .    The  type  specimen 

of  Ilingoceros  resembles  the 
Protragelaphus  of  the  Pliocene 
of  Europe  and  Asia.  Thus 
we  have  definite  proof  of  the 
existence  in  the  Western  plains 
and  mountain  region  in  Plio- 
cene times  of  considerable  if 
not  of  great  herds  of  antelopes 
of  Asiatic  and  African  type. 
The  bearing  of  this  discovery 
on  the  zoogeographic  relations 
of  the  New  and  Old  Worlds 
in  the  Pliocene  is  very  signif- 
icant. 

Extinction  and  chronology. 
—  The  attempt  to  form  New 
and  Old  World  parallels  brings 
up  the  question  of  the  value 
of  extinction  in  determining 
geologic  time.  Was  there  a 
world-wide  extinction  of  the  teleocerine  rhinoceroses  at  the  close  of  the 
Miocene,  or  did  these  animals  survive  into  Pliocene  times  in  America 
as  well  as  in  Asia?  The  answer  is  that  there  is  considerable  but  not 
as  yet  conclusive  evidence  that  the  teleocerine  rhinoceroses  reached 
their  highest  development  and  extension  in  the  Lower  Pliocene  of  America 
and  Asia.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  giant  dogs,  or  amphicyons, 
which  disappear  in  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Europe,  but  are  found  in  the 
supposed  Middle  Pliocene  or  Blanco  beds  of  Texas,  and  are  also  recorded 
in  the  Pliocene  of  Asia.  The  clawed  perissodactyls,  the  chalicotheres, 
disappear  in  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Europe  and  North  America,  but 
survive  in  Asia  even  into  the  Pleistocene,  according  to  Schlosser.^  A  great 
number  of  mammals  of  various  kinds  survive  in  southern  Asia  after  they 
disappear  in  Europe  and  North  America.  The  conclusion  is  that  extinc- 
tion per  se  is  of  little  value  in  geologic  synchronism. 


Fig.  15S.  —  A  recent  strepsicerine  antelope  of  Africa, 
the  kudu  {Strepsiceros  kudu) .    After  Gambier  Bolton. 


'  Merriam,  J.  C,  The  Occurrence  of  Strepsicerine  Antelopes  in  the  Tertiary  of  North- 
western Nevada.     Univ.  Cal.  PubL,  Bull.  Dept.  GeoL,  Vol.  V,  no.  22,  Dec,  1909,  pp.  319-330. 

'  Schlosser,  M.,  Die  fossilcn  Saugothiere  Chinas  nebst  einer  Odontographie  der  recenten 
Antilopen.    Ahh.  k.  hayer.  Akad.  Wiss.,  01.  II,  Vol.  XXII,  Pt.  1,  Munich,  1903. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASTA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  339 


Reunion  with  South  America.  —  As  the  Pliocene  was  an  epoch  of  eleva- 
tion of  all  the  continents,  it  affected  eastern  North  America  after  some 
oscillations,  but  before  the  termination  of  the  marine  Pliocene  the  per- 
manent connection  of  the  peninsula  of  Florida  with  the  North  American 
continent  was  accomplished/ 

After  an  interval  of  separation  which,  so  far  as  the  mammal  record 
goes,  extended  back  to  the  Upper  Cretaceous  or  Basal  Eocene,  South 
America  became  again  united  with  North  America,  and  an  interchange  of 
mammals  took  place;  some  physical,  climatic,  or  biotic  barriers  were  un- 
doubtedly removed.  The  previous  separation  need  not  have  been  at 
Panama,  as  is  generally  assumed  - ;  Hill  ^  believes  that  from  the  close  of 
the  Oligocene  onward  the  waters  of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  have  been 
separated  at  this  point;  in  other  words,  that  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  is  as 
old  as  the  Oligocene.  Ortmann  ^  has  suggested  the  adoption  of  von  Iher- 
ing's  hypothesis  ^  that  the  water  barrier*  existed  for  a  long  period  across 
the  parallel  of  the  present  Amazon  River. 

The  supposed  discovery  of  the  remains  of  large  sloth-like  or  gravigrade 
edentates  in  the  Middle  Miocene  (Mascall)  of  Oregon  and  in  the  Lower 
Pliocene  (Alachua  Clays)  of  Florida  makes  it  appear  possible  that  these 
mammals  were  resident  in  North  America  throughout  the  Age  of  Mammals, 
but  this  does  not  remove  the  significance  of  the  great  invasion  of  these 
animals  from  South  America  in  Lower  and  Middle  Pliocene  times.  In 
this  connection  Scharff's  hypothesis^  should  be  considered.  (Compare 
p.  93.) 

Evidence  of  fish  faunas.  —  As  regards  the  theory  of  a  long  prevailing 
separation  of  North  and  South  America  in  C«nozoic  times,  the  freshwater 
fishes,  on  the  whole,  supplement  the  evidence  afforded  by  the  mammals. 
Eigenmann  ^  (1906)  makes  the  statement  that  North  America  has  not 
contributed  a  single  element  to  the  freshwater  fish  fauna  of  South  America. 
This,  however,  should  be  compared  with  the  statement  on  p.  136.  The 
beginnings  of  intercommunication  are  shown  by  the  fact  that  two  promi- 
nent South  American  families,  the  Characinidse  and  Cichlidae,  have  at  the 
present  time  representatives  as  far  north  as  the  Rio  Grande  River,  while 

1  Dall,  W.  H.,  Geological  Results  of  the  Study  of  the  Tertiary  Fauna  of  Florida.  Trans. 
Wagner  Inst.,  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  6,  1903,  p.  1550. 

^  Matthew,  W.  D.,  Hypothetical  Outlines  of  the  Continents  in  Tertiary  Times.  Bull. 
Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist,  Vol.  XXII,  Art.  xxi,  1906,  p.  365. 

^  Hill,  R.  T.,  Geological  History  of  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  and  Portions  of  Costa  Rica. 
Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  ZooL,  Vol.  XXVIII,  1908,  p.  270. 

*  Ortmann,  A.  E.,  Von  Ihering's  Archiplata-Archelemis  Theory.  Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XII, 
no.  311,  Dec.  14,  1900,  p.  929. 

^  Von  Ihering,  H.,  The  History  of  the  Neotropical  Region.  Science,  n.s..  Vol.  XII, 
no.  310,  Dec.  7,  1900,  pp.  857-864. 

^  Scharff,  R.  F.,  On  an  Early  Tertiary  Land-Connection  between  North  and  South  America. 
Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XLIII,  Sept.,  1909,  pp.  513-531. 

^  Eigenmann,  C.  H.,  The  Fresh-water  Fishes  of  South  and  Middle  America.  Pop.  Sci. 
Month.,  June,  1906,  pp.  515-530. 


340 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


several  members  of  the  North  American  fauna  have  representatives  as  far 
south  as  the  Isthmus  of  Tehuantepec. 

It  is  true  that  the  existing  North  American  fish  fauna  is  almost  en- 
tirely distinct  from  the  tropical  American  fauna;  the  latter  has  its  affinities 
with  the  fishes  of  tropical  Africa,  and  in  Eigenmann's  opinion  necessitates 
a  former  land  connection  between  Africa  and  South  America.  Such  a 
mid-Atlantic  land  connection  would  be  known  as  'Atlantis/  and  while 
of  a  highly  hypothetical  character,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  fresh  evi- 
(hnice  in  its  favor  has  recently  been  brought  forward  by  J.  W.  Gregory.^ 
This  writer  maintains  that  the  striking  similarity  of  the  West  Indian  corals 
to  those  of  the  Miocene  deposits  of  the  Mediterranean  basin  and  to  the 
living  genera  of  the  Red  Sea  can  only  be  explained  on  the  assumption 
that  there  was  a  shallow  water  connection  across  the  Central  Atlantic  at 
a  period  no  later  than  the  Miocene.  Moreover,  this  fauna  could  not  have 
come  by  way  of  the  North  because  it  is  absent  from  the  northern  Miocene 
of  Europe  and  America. 

The  geographic  distribution  of  land  mammals  does  not  favor  such  an 
hypothesis,  although  it  is  a  convenient  one  for  certain  facts  of  distribution, 
such  as  the  occurrence  of  the  water  snake  Pterosphenus  in  the  Fayum  and 
in  Eocene  beds  of  Alabama,  the  distribution  of  the  characines,  cichlids, 
siluroids,  and  probably  of  the  octodont  rodents.  Likewise  an  archipelago 
between  western  Africa  and  eastern  America  might  have  facilitated  the 
migration  from  Africa  to  America  of  the  sirenians  and  the  zeuglodonts  in 
Eocene  times;  but  such  migrations  may  equally  well  have  occurred  by 
way  of  the  Pacific  coast  line  and  through  the  gulf  between  the  continents. 
A  south-Atlantic  connection  with  Africa  is  quite  another  matter,  which 
has  been  discussed  above  under  Antarctica  (p.  75). 

Geologic  Succession 

Our  knowledge  of  the  mammals  of  the  Pliocene  epoch  in  America  is 
very  incomplete  and  still  awaits  the  more  active  exploration  and  exact 
research  which  have  so  nearly  solved  the  mammalian  succession  of  tlie 
Miocene  and  earlier  periods.  The  historic  or  geologic  succession  also  re- 
quires more  exhaustive  study. 

The  formations  w^hich  yield  us  vistas  of  Pliocene  life  in  North  America 
are  widely  scattered,  limited  in  extent,  and  less  rich  in  complete  fossil 
remains  than  those  of  the  Miocene.  Despite  the  evidence  afforded  by  the 
inverte])rate  paleontology  of  Florida,  there  is  some  doubt  as  to  whether 
certain  of  these  older  formations,  here  provisionally  referred  to  the  Plio- 
cene, do  not  more  properly  belong  in  the  Upper  ^Miocene,  where  they  have 
been  previously  placed. 

Somewhat  the  same  feeling  prevails  as  to  the  age  of  the  beds  assigned 

'  Gregory,  J.  W.,  Contributions  to  the  PaljEontology  and  Physical  Geology  of  the  West 
Indies.    Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  Vol.  LI,  no.  22,  1895,  pp.  255-312. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  341 


to  the  close  of  the  PUocene  in  the  following  table;  they  may  prove  subse- 
quently to  belong  rather  to  the  early  part  of  the  Pleistocene. 


Fig.  159.  —  Chief  Pliocene  and  Upper  Miocene  fossil  mammal  deposits  of  western  North 
America.  1.  Rattlesnake,  Oreg.  2.  Blanco,  Tex.  3.  Ogallala,  Kan.,  Nebr.  4.  Snake  Creek, 
Nebr.    5.  Virgin  Valley,  Nev.    6.  Loup  River,  Nebr,    (See  text  for  horizons.) 

With  these  doubts  in  mind  as  stimulating  to  further  research,  the  follow- 
ing ascending  arrangement  of  the  best  known  formations  is  set  forth 
provisionally : 

'Peace   Creek   Formation  of   Elephasf  columbi  and  Equus 
southern  Florida, 


Upper  Pliocene,  or 
Lower  Pleistocene 


Zone 

Loup  River,  of  eastern  Ne-   Elephas  imperator  and  Equus 


braska 


Zone 


Middle  Pliocene 


Lower  Pliocene 


Blanco    Formation,    Staked  Glyptotherium  Zone,  Rhinoceros 

Plains,  or  Llano  Estacado,  extinct  or  undiscovered 
of  Texas 

Virgin  Valley  and  Thousand  Ilingoceros    Zone,  Rhinoceros 


Creek  of  Nevada 


survivmg 


Snake  Creek  beds,  western    Neotragocerus  Zone,  Rhinoceros 


Nebraska 


survivmg 


Rattlesnake  Formation,  John   Alticamelus  Zone,  Rhinoceros 


Day  Valley,  Oregon 
Alachua  Clays,  northern  Flor- 
ida. 


survivmg 
Peraceras  Zone,  Rhinoceros  very 
abundant 


{Republican  River  Formation,    Peraceras  Zone 
northern  Kansas  and  Ne- 
braska. 


342 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


It  is  important  to  note  that  Matthew  and  Merriam  have  compared  the 
*  Snake .  Creek'  and  '  Virgin  Valley'  faunas  with  that  of  Pikermi,  or  the 
Upper  Miocene  of  Greece  (p.  267).  It  is  obviously  premature  to  attempt 
to  correlate  these  subdivisions  with  the  Pliocene  stages  of  Europe,  yet  there 
seems  to  be  a  broad  correspondence  in  America  with  the  divisions  of  the 
'Older  Pliocene  Fauna'  and  'Newer  Phocene  Fauna'  of  the  Old  World. 

As  in  all  other  epochs,  subdivisions  will  be  finally  made  with  clearness 
and  exactness  through  the  successive  extinctions  of  older  forms  and  the 
successive  arrivals  of  newer  forms.  Pending  this  more  exact  research  of  the 
future,  the  following  provisional  subdivision  may  be  offered: 

Provisional  Subdivision  of  American  Pliocene  Life 


Lower  Pliocene 
Rhinoceroses 

aceratherine,  tcleocerine 
'Giraffe'  or  browsing  camels 
True  or  grazing  camels 
Earliest  Cavicornia 
Browsing  horses 
Grazing  horses 
Long-jawed  mastodons 
Tapirs 


Middle  Pliocene 
Rhinoceroses  extinct 
Browsing  horses  extinct 
Grazing  horses  of  Proto- 

hippus,  Pliohippus,  and 

Hipparion  type 
Gigantic  browsing  camels 
Grazing  camels 
Short-jawed  mastodons 


Upper  Pliocene 

Elephants 
(Elephas) 

Grazing  and  monodactyl 
horses  (Equus) 

Browsing  camels  extinct 

True  grazing  camels  and 
llamas  only 

Mastodons  disappear  in 
the  western  plains  re- 
gion 

Tapirs  disappear  in  the 
western  plains  region 


Climatic  and  Physiographic  Conditions 

Great  Plains.  —  There  is  evidence,  both  in  the  sandy  nature  of  the 
deposits  in  the  Great  Plains  region,  in  the  extinction  of  browsing  types  of 
horses  and  camels,  and  in  the  survival  of  grazing  types  in  the  same  fam- 
ilies, of  increasing  aridity  in  the  Western  plains  and  mountain  region.  This 
was  probably  accompanied  by  more  widely  prevailing  summer  droughts 
and  by  the  contraction  of  the  streams  during  the  dry  season.  It  is  cer- 
tainly significant  that  the  rhinoceroses,  brachyodont  or  browsing  horses,  and 
giraffe  or  browsing  camels  successively  disappear.  In  the  early  Pliocene  or 
in  the  close  of  the  Miocene  we  find  proofs  (Sternberg  ^  of  the  existence  of 
groat  herds  of  large  land  tortoises  moving  slowly  across  the  plains.  Their 
presence  in  such  large  numbers  is  in  itself  proof  of  arid  conditions,  and  it  is 
an  interesting  ])it  of  collateral  testimony  from  paleobotany  that  seeds, 
found  ^v^thin  a  fossil  skull  of  one  of  these  animals,  belong  to  a  species  of 
plant  {Tithynialus  willistoni)  which,  according  to  Cockerell,^  indicates  an 
open,  relatively  arid,  although  not  strictly  desert  country. 

»  Sternberg,  C,  Letter.  2  Cockerell,  T.  D.  A.,  Letter  to  the  author,  April,  1909. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  343 

California.  —  In  the  Pliocene  of  the  Pacific  coast  ^  a  change  to  colder 
conditions  is  indicated  both  by  the  disappearance  of  warm-temperate  types 
of  plants  and  by  the  colder  character  of  the  salt  water  fauna,  as  well  as  of 
that  found  in  the  freshwater  Pliocene  lake  beds.  The  whole  west  coast 
of  North  America  was  rising  and  the  shore  receding  westward;  the  waters  of 
the  Pacific  no  longer  reached  the  foot  of  the  Sierra  Nevadas,  nor  even  the 
great  central  valley  between  the  Sierra  Nevadas  and  the  Coast  Range; 
but  elevation  was  not  uniform,  for  valleys  of  the  coast  ranges  that  had  been 
eroded  during  the  Miocene  were  filled  with  sediments  during  the  Pliocene; 
the  enormous  deposits  to  a  depth  of  3,000  feet  of  the  Great  Valley  be- 
tween the  Sierras  and  the  Coast  Range  belong  partly  to  the  Pliocene  and 
partly  to  the  Quaternary,  an  area  wholly  of  fluviatile  origin.  Thus  during 
the  Pliocene  the  Sierra  Nevadas  were  elevated,  and  California  at  that 
time  was  very  much  like  the  California  of  to-day;  with  the  great  moun- 
tain ranges  of  the  Sierras  on  the  east,  the  long,  broad  valley  —  in  many 
cases  covered  by  freshwater  lakes  —  in  the  center,  and  on  the  west  the 
long,  low  Coast  Range. 

The  Pliocene  Flora 

The  eastward  trend  of  the  deciduous  tree  flora  of  Europe  is  a  most 
significant  fact.  It  has  been  pointed  out  above  that  the  Miocene  and 
Pliocene  forest  trees  of  Europe  become  the  modern  forest  trees  of  our  Cen- 
tral and  South  Atlantic  states.  With  the  flora  in  late  Tertiary  times  there 
came  certain  faunal  waves.  Unfortunately  nothing  is  known  of  the  flora 
of  the  Great  Plains  region  nor  of  the  central  mountain  region,  and  we 
must  rely  upon  observations  made  in  California,  from  which  only  indirect 
conclusions  can  be  drawn. 

Flora  of  California.  —  Here  we  must  rely  upon  the  earlier  notes  of 
Lesquereux  (1859-1888)  and  of  Turner  (1891). 

Plants  of  the  auriferous  gravels  of  the  Sierra  Nevada^  collected  in  Nevada 
County,  California,  on  the  thirty-ninth  parallel  indicate  a  temperature  a 
few  degrees  higher  on  the  average  than  that  of  middle  California  of  the 
present  day;  in  other  words,  they  represent  a  latitude  a  few  degrees  farther 
south.  Thus  in  Nevada  County  on  the  thirty-ninth  parallel  in  Pliocene 
times  there  lived  palms  similar  to  those  which  now  flourish  in  California  on 
the  thirty-fourth  parallel.  Pliocene  palms  are,  however,  very  rare,  only  a 
single  specimen  of  a  sabal  being  found  in  the  whole  collection  from  Nevada 
County.  The  prevalence  of  a  warmer  climate  than  the  present  in  Pliocene 
times  seems  to  be  indicated  by  oaks  of  Mexican  type  and  by  species  of  figs 
(Ficus),  but  this  is  counterbalanced  by  the  presence  of  the  birch  (Betula), 

^  Smith,  J.  P.,  Salient  Events  in  the  Geologic  History  of  California.  Science,  n.s.,  Vol. 
XXX,  no.  767,  1909,  pp.  346-351. 

^  Lesquereux,  L.,  Report  on  the  Fossil  Plants  of  the  Auriferous  Gravel  Deposits  of  the 
Sierra  Nevada.    Mem.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.  Cambridge,  Mass.,  Vol.  II,  1882. 


344 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  beech  (Fagus),  the  elm  (Ulmus),  which  are  all  characteristic  northerly 
types.  We  conclude  that  the  Pliocene  climate  in  this  region  was  like  that 
of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  or  zone  of  the  live  oak,  at  the  present  time.  It  is 
likely  that  the  region  of  Chalk  Bluffs,  Nevada  County,  in  Pliocene  times 
was  sheltered  by  western  ranges  of  mountains  against  the  influence  of 
Pacific  fogs;  at  all  events,  the  absence  of  conifers  seems  to  indicate  a 
drier  climate.  A  very  striking  feature  of  this  flora  is  that  which  it 
possesses  in  common  with  the  Pliocene  flora  of  central  Europe,  namely, 
that  it  contains  a  large  number  of  trees  which  no  longer 
grow  on  the  Pacific  slope  of  North  America  but  are 
now  confined  to  the  Atlantic  slope.  Among  these  are 
species  of  the  sweet  gum  {Liquidambar) ,  of  the  magnolia,  of  the  prickly 
ash  (Zanthoxylum),  and  of  the  holly  (Ilex). 

Some  indication  of  the  general  age  of  this  flora  is  found  in  the  fact  that 
out  of  forty-two  species,  twelve  are  closely  allied  to  Miocene  types,  while 
thirty  are  more  closely  related  to  the  present  flora,  especially  of  the  Eastern 
or  Atlantic  States.  The  conifers,  including  the  sequoias,  which  are  now  the 
most  conspicuous  element  of  the  Sierras,  did  not  exist,  or  at  best  were  very 
rare,  in  Pliocene  times  in  California  (Lesquereux,  1882). 

The  most  recent  contribution  to  the  Pliocene  flora  of  California  is  that 
of  Turner,^  who  records  the  following  plants  of  Kirker  Pass,  California, 
latitude  38°,  as  of  Pliocene  age:  the  date  plum  (Diospyros),  the  magnolia 
(Magnolia),  the  laurel  (Laurus),  and  the  viburnum  (Viburnum).  The  same 
author  notes  that  the  flora  from  Corral  Hollow,  California  (latitude  38°), 
referred  by  Lesquereux  to  the  Miocene,  is,  however,  probably  of  Pliocene 
age,  as  it  is  found  associated  with  Pliocene  shells.  This  flora  includes  horse- 
tails (Equisetum),  sequoias  (Sequoia),  yews  (Taxites),  alders,  chestnuts, 
willows,  poplars,  planes,  laurels,  cinnamons  (Cinnamomum) ,  myrtles  (Myr- 
tus),  red  bays  (Per sea),  and  sumac  (Rhus). 

Sirenians  on  the  Pacific  coast. ^  —  Other  indications  of  mild  climatic 
conditions  are  found  in  the  presence  of  mammals  remotely  allied  to  the 
manatees  and  dugongs  of  the  present  equatorial  belt.  The  remarkable 
littoral  or  marine  mammal  known  as  Desmostylus  derives  its  name  from  the 
clusters  of  rounded  and  heavily  enameled  columns  which  constitute  its 
grinding  teeth.  The  muzzle  is  slender  and  tapering,  and  armed  with  one 
pair  of  incisors  in  the  upper  jaw  and  two  pair  in  the  lower.  It  is  a  large 
animal,  the  skull  being  eighteen  inches  to  two  feet  in  length.  According  to 
Merriam  it  is  found  only  in  marine  formations  of  Pliocene  age.  It  cer- 
tainly inhabited  both  the  eastern  and  western  shores  of  the  Pacific  coast; 
remains  have  been  found  in  California,  Oregon,  and  Japan. 

'  Turner,  H.  W.,  1891.  Geology  of  Mount  Diablo.  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer.,  Vol.  II, 
1891,  pp.  .396-397. 

^  Marsh,  O.  C.,  Notice  of  a  New  Fossil  Sirenian,  from  California.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci., 
Vol.  XXXV,  1888,  pp.  94-96. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  345 

Flora  of  the  Eastern  states.  —  Lesquereux  ^  also  described  a  flora  from 
Graves  County,  Kentucky  (latitude  37°),  which  he  believed  to  be  of  PHocene 
age,  including  the  fig  (Ficus),  laurel  (Laurus),  soapberry  (Sapindus),  and  the 
oak  (Quercus).  In  the  Pliocene  of  Bridgetown,  New  Jersey,  the  following 
plants  have  been  found:  the  sweet  gum  (Liquidambar) ,  laurel,  and  poplar. 
One  of  the  earliest  of  the  numerous  contributions  of  the  same  author  is 
that  on  the  supposed  Pliocene  flora  collected  near  Somerville,  Tennessee.^ 
This  flora  finds  its  relatives  at  the  present  time  on  the  southern  shores  of 
Florida  and  islands  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico;  there  are  only  four  plants  refer- 
able  to  existing  species.  It  includes  the  laurel,  the  wild  orange  tree  {Pru- 
nus)  now  found  in  the  Bahamas  and  near  the  coast  of  the  Carolinas,  the 
oak  of  a  species  now  found  along  the  coast  of  Florida,  the  beech,  a  species 
of  more  northern  range,  and  the  willow. 

Late  Miocene  or  Early  Pliocene 

In  every  branch  of  life  the  fauna  from  northwestern  Kansas  to  Florida  is 
a  continuation  and  evolution  of  the  typical  Miocene  fauna  of  North  Amer- 
ica. Perhaps  it  is  Miocene,  for  there  are  no  new  elements.  The  clawed 
perissodactyls  or  chalicotheres  are  absent  or  undiscovered,  while  the  oreo- 
donts  (Merycochoerus,  Merychyus)  are  becoming  rare;  conditions  were  either 
becoming  unfavorable  for  these  forms  in  this  region  or  the  entire  phylum 
was  dying  out.  The  rarity  of  the  browsing  horses  is  an  indication  of  con- 
ditions unfavorable  to  the  older  brachyodont  browsing  types;  a  few  remains 
of  these  animals  are,  however,  still  found.  It  is  important  to  grasp  clearly 
the  fact  that  the  grazing  horses  are  now  in  a  highly  polyphyletic  condition. 

The  chief  formations  in  which  these  late  Miocene  or  early  Pliocene 
early  types  of  mammals  occur  are  the  following: 

4.  Rattlesnake  Formation  of  John  Day  Valley,  Oregon. 

3.  Republican  River  Formation  of  northwestern  Kansas. 

2.  Alachua  Clays  or  Archer  Formation  of  northern  Florida. 

1.  Ogallala  Formation  (typical)  Darton,  of  southwestern  Nebraska. 

Late  Miocene  or  early  Pliocene  times  in  North  America  were  character- 
ized by  the  survival  of  the  last  members  of  the  great  family  of  oreodonts, 
which  are  thus  far  represented  only  by  fragmentary  specimens  of  the  char- 
acteristic Miocene  genera  Merycochoerus  and  Merychyus.  Among  the  peris- 
sodactyls the  browsing  or  forest  horses  (Hypohippus)  still  survive  but  are 
also  becoming  rare;  they  are  represented  by  forms  with  somewhat  longer 
"teeth  than  those  of  the  Middle  Miocene.    Of  the  grazing  horses  the  char- 

^  Lesquereux,  L.,  Recent  Determinations  of  Fossil  Plants  from  Kentucky,  Louisiana, 
Oregon,  California,  Alaska,  Greenland,  etc.,  with  Descriptions  of  New  Species.  Compiled  and 
prepared  for  publication  by  F.  H.  Knowlton.    Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  1888,  pp..  11-38. 

^  Lesquereux,  L.,  On  Some  Fossil  Plants  of  Recent  Formations.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.  and 
Arts.,  2d  Ser.,  Vol.  XXVII,  May,  1859,  pp.  359-366. 


346 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


acteristic  horses  of  the  Miocene  Merychippits  stage,  with  grinding  teeth  of 
intermediate  length,  still  survive  in  almost  equal  numbers  with  the  more 
progressive  grazing  horses,  Protohippus,  Pliohippus,  and  N eohipparion. 
The  rhinoceroses  are  represented  by  the  teleocerine  and  aceratherine  phyla, 
both  of  which  reach  a  high  degree  of  specialization.  Of  these  the  aceratheres 
or  hornless  rhinoceroses  are  represented  by  species  of  Aphelops  comparable 
in  evolution  to  the  Aceratherium  hlanfordi  of  the  Pliocene  of  Asia  as  well  as 
by  the  short-headed  Peraceras.  The  teleocerine  rhinoceroses,  which  are 
also  believed  to  survive  in  the  Pliocene  of  Asia,  although  extinct  in  Europe, 
attain  their  maximum  evolution  and  size,  and  are  present  in  great  number 
and  variety.  The  aberrant  perissodactyl  chalicotheres  have  apparently 
disappeared  in  North  America,  though  it  is  possible  that  some  of  these 
animals  will  be  unearthed  by  future  exploration,  since  they  are  believed  to 
have  survived  in  Asia  in  Pliocene  times. 

Indicative  of  the  Upper  Miocene  rather  than  of  the  Lower  Pliocene  age 
of  this  fauna  is  the  fact  that  the  trilophodont  and  tetralophodont  mastodons 
still  retain  the  long  lower  jaws  or  longirostral  character  of  the  Miocene 
mastodons  of  Europe  and  America,  whereas  the  Lower  Pliocene  mastodons 
of  Europe  are  referred  to  the  short-jawed  species  M.  arvernensis;  this 
specific  reference,  however,  may  not  be  correct,  so  that  too  much  stress 
should  not  be  laid  upon  this  single  feature. 

Among  the  camels  Pliauchenia  is  now  the  characteristic  genus;  this  is 
a  typical  grazing  camel  with  affinities  to  the  llamas  of  South  America,  as  the 
name  indicates.  We  also  find  surviving  the  short-limbed  or  grazing  camel 
Procamelus.    The  browsing  or  giraffe  camel  (Alticamelus)  still  occurs. 

In  the  earliest  of  these  supposed  Pliocene  formations,  namely,  the  'Re- 
publican River '  of  Kansas  and  '  Alachua  Clays '  of  Florida,  we  have  dis- 
covered no  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  Cavicornia  or  hollow-horned 
ruminants  of  the  Old  World  type.  The  older  formations,  therefore,  contain 
rhinoceroses,  but  do  not  contain,  apparently,  the  antelopes  or  Bovidae. 

The  Alachua  Clays  or  'Archer  Beds^  of  Florida 

These  clays  were  so  named  by  Dall  in  1885.*  They  had  been  referred 
by  some  authorities  to  Upper  Miocene,  by  others  they  had  been  regarded 
as  late  as  Pliocene  or  even  Pleistocene.  They  appear  on  the  western  anti- 
cline of  the  higher  portions  of  Alachua  County  (Fig.  160),  along  the  banks 
of  many  rivers  and  streams,  occurring  in  sinks,  gullies,  and  other  depres- 
sions, in  rocks  of  successive  age.  The  clays  are  of  a  bluish  or  grayish  color, 
and  extremely  tenacious.  The  deposits  were  believed  by  Dr.  J.  C.  Neal 
(1883)  to  have  occurred  along  the  margins  of  an  ancient  lake,  which  he 
named  Lake  De  Soto.    The  existence  of  such  a  Pliocene  lake  or  series  of 

^  Dall,  W.  H.,  and  Harris,  G.  D.,  The  Neocene  of  North  America.  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv., 
no.  84,  1892. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  347 


lakes  is  indicated  by  such  scanty  evidence  as  is  here  afforded.  Whether 
such  a  lake  existed  or  not  is  less  important  than  the  conclusion  reached  by 
Dall  in  his  report  of  1892 ^  that  the  beds  underlying  the 
Alachua  Clays  at  certain  points  are  not  of  Miocene  but 
of  early  Pliocene  age.  The  same  author  (op.  cit.,  p.  130)  con- 
cludes.   While  the  determination  of  the  precise  epoch  of  the  deposition  of 


-^^^ 

3"  ijZ^^^^ 

:  _79 

111 

 3i 

A 

■><< 

CLAYS 

28" 

97 

peace: 

CREltK^) 

;  '  ■. -^'^:■.■'^■V■5 

J  26 

1/ 

 2S 

1  11 

8S 

85 

8 

i'  e 

o 

3* 

.-^•^ 
2* 

81- 

80' 

79" 

Fig.  160.  —  Geological  map  of  Florida  showing  the  area  of  distribution  of  the  principal 
Csenozoic  exposures  and  the  location  of  the  Alachua  Clays  (Lower  Pliocene)  and  Peace  Creek 
beds  (Upper  Pliocene  or  Pleistocene).  Solid  black  =  Eocene  ;  ruled  =  Miocene  ;  dotted  == 
PHocene  ;  white  =  Pleistocene.    After  Dall,  1890. 

these  remains  in  the  clays  may  be  regarded  as  still  a  desideratum,  we  may 
be  permitted  to  conclude  with  some  confidence  that  at  least  they  are  not 
Miocene." 

Among  the  first  to  notice  the  mammalian  remains  in  these  clays  was 
Dr.  Neal.  They  were  first  thoroughly  examined  by  Dr.  Joseph  Leidy, 
who  concluded  that  there  were  no  species  identical  with  those  of  the  so-called 
'Loup  Fork'  horizon  of  the  West.  But  the  more  exact  studies  published 
in  the  names  of  Leidy  and  Lucas  in  1896  ^  led  to  the  contrary  opinion  that 
these  animals  are  in  part  specifically  identical  with  those  of  the  Republican 
River  Formation  of  western  Kansas.   While  this  conclusion  is  based  upon 

1  Op.  cit.  pp.  93,  133. 

^  Leidy,  J.  (Lucas,  F.  A.  ed.),  Fossil  Vertebrates  from  the  Alachua  Clays  of  Florida. 
Trans.  Wagner  Free  Inst.  Sci.  Phila.,  Vol.  IV,  Jan.,  1896. 


348 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


rather  imperfect  specimens,  very  little  doubt  remains  of  the  substantial 
similarity  in  the  age  of  these  faunas.  We  discover  here  especially  the  short- 
footed  or  teleocerine  rhinoceroses  of  the  species  T.  fossiger.  There  are  also 
remains  of  a  long-limbed,  hornless  rhinoceros  {Aphelops  malacorhinus) . 
Mingled  with  these  are  found  hipparions  {H.  ingenuum) .  The  proboscideans, 
or  mastodons,  are  represented  by  M.  (fTrilophodon)  floridanus,  a  species 
with  long,  narrow  grinding  teeth,  somewhat  akin  in  their  proportions  to 
those  of  M.  angustidens  of  Europe.  There  are  also  remains  of  a  number 
of  camels,  including  a  giant  form  provisionally  referred  to  Procamelus,  but 
possibly  representing  the  giraffe  camel  Alticamelus.  The  deer  family  is  rep- 
resented by  teeth  provisionally  referred  to  the  Virginia  deer  Odocoileus, 
but  probably  representing  an  ancestral  stage  of  this  animal.  The  remains 
of  a  tapir  and  of  a  Megatherium  are  also  attributed  to  this  same  zone 
(op.  cit.  p.  x),  but  are  probably  of  more  recent  age. 

The  above  list  of  mammals  is  that  recorded  from  a  point  ten  miles  east 
of  Archer,  hence  these  are  also  known  as  the  'Archer  Beds.'  The  appear- 
ance of  the  bones  suggests  that  the  animals  were  mired  and  then  scattered 
by  predatory  Carnivora.  Ashes  and  burnt  clay  were  found  beneath  some 
of  the  bones,  but  there  is  no  sufficient  evidence  of  human  agency  in  this; 
the  fire  may  have  been  due  to  lightning,  a  frequent  occurrence  in  Florida  at 
the  present  time.  The  longitudinal  splitting  of  the  long  bones,  sometimes 
observed,  may  be  due  to  the  penetration  and  growth  of  roots  in  the  hollows 
of  the  bones  rather  than  to  the  agency  of  man. 

These  details  have  been  dwelt  upon  at  some  length  because  it  seems  that 
here  we  have  a  source  of  positive  evidence  as  to  the  survival  of  the  teleocerine 
rhinoceros  fauna  in  the  southern  United  States  into  Pliocene  times. 

A  much  newer  or  Upper  Pliocene  fauna  is  that  mistakenly  attributed  to 
the  Alachua  Clays  from  Ocala,  Marion  County,  Florida,  a  fauna  containing 
Elephas  (E.  fcoluwM),  horses  {E.  fraternus),  llamas  {Auchenia),  and  saber- 
tooth  tigers  (MachoBTodus).  This  'Ocala'  fauna  corresponds  rather  with 
that  of  the  Upper  Pliocene  or  Lower  Pleistocene  Peace  Creek  Formation  of 
south  central  Florida.  It  may  prove  that  this  Florida  fauna  is  'homo- 
taxial'  rather  than  'synchronous'  with  the  Republican  River  and  succes- 
sive faunas  of  the  Western  plains  region,  which  we  shall  now  examine. 

The  'Republican  River  ^  of  Kansas.    Peraceras  Zone 

Here  we  discover  a  very  rich  mammalian  fauna  resembling  that  of  the 
Alachua  Clays  in  the  presence  of  the  rhinoceroses  Teleoceras  fossiger  and 
Aphelops  malacorhinus,  and  also  containing  the  very  characteristic  rhi- 
noceros Peraceras,  which  is  believed  to  be  an  acerathere,  or  hornless. 

The  typical  deposits  are  100  feet  in  thickness  and  extend  along  the 
Republican  River  of  northwestern  Kansas;  they  are  part  of  the  'Loup 
Fork '  as  described  by  Cope  and  other  authors. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  349 

The  famous  '  Long  Island  Quarry '  of  Phillips  County,  Kansas,  belongs 
in  the  Republican  River  phase,  and  is  said  to  be  a  river  channel  formation 
cut  through  the  mass  of  the  flood  plain  Republican  River  deposits.    It  was 


Fig.  161.  —  Old  and  New  World  short-limbed  or  teleocerine  rhinoceroses  of  the  Upper 
Miocene  or  Lower  Pliocene.  Above  :  Restoration  of  Teleoceras,  represented  in  a  Florida  envi- 
ronment, from  the  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight.  Below  :  Skeleton  of  Teleoceras  fossiger  from 
the  '  Long  Island  Quarry,'  Kansas.    Both  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


discovered  by  Charles  H.  Sternberg  as  long  ago  as  1882,  and  has  yielded 
remains  of  hundreds  of  teleocerine  rhinoceroses  of  the  species  Teleoceras 
fossiger.  It  also  contains  species  of  Mlurodon,  of  Pliohippus  (large),  Pli- 
auchenia  vera  (a  small  animal),  of  Merycodus,  all  animals  characteristic  of 


350 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  main  mass  of  the  'RepubHcan  River'  Formation.  Several  museums 
have  secured  materials  of  Teleoceras  from  this  quarry  sufficient  to  assemble 
the  scattered  bones  into  complete  skeletons.  The  skeleton  mounted  in  the^ 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History  is  shown  in  Fig.  161.  The  rhinoceros 
bones  lie  on  the  bottom  layer  of  the  'Quarry,'  mingled  with  sand  about  two 
feet  in  thickness;  the  heavy  short  bones  of  the  feet  and  limbs  lie  at  the 
very  bottom;  the  skulls,  arch  bones,  and  vertebrae  lie  higher  up.  For  this 
reason  Sternberg  is  convinced  that  this  was  a  quicksand  deposit. 

Some  miles  to  the  east  is  another  locality  in  which  remains  of  rhinoceroses 
and  mastodons  were  found  associated  with  those  of  large  land  tortoises  (p. 
342).  As  described  by  the  last-named  explorer,  these  tortoises  were  em- 
bedded together  in  a  space  150  feet  in  length  and  some  four  feet  in  thick- 
ness; they  were  all  found  in  normal  position  with  plastron  down,  the  heads- 
and  limbs  attached.  There  is  thus  considerable  evidence  that  this  was 
part  of  a  great  assemblage  of  tortoises  which  had  been  overwhelmed  by  a 
sandstorm  and  died  where  they  were  entombed.^  Another  interpretation, 
by  Hay,  is  that  these  reptiles  had  burrowed  into  the  sand  to  hibernate; 
but  this  would  hardly  account  for  their  facing  in  the  same  direction. 

Characteristic  Lower  Pliocene  Mammals 

Multiple  phyla  of  horses.  —  The  Great  Plains  at  this  time  were  covered 
with  great  herds  of  horses  of  many  different  kinds.  The  browsing  section 
is  represented  by  Hypohippus,  the  last  representative  of  the  ancient  anchi- 
therine  phylum  of  horses,  with  three  toes  and  short-crowned  teeth  adapted 
to  browsing.  It  is  distinguished  by  nearly  perfect  transverse  crests  on  the 
grinders,  somewhat  like  those  of  early  palseotheres. 

The  protohippine  section  as  distinguished  by  Gidley  ^  includes  horses 
with  three  toes  and  long-crowned  teeth,  adapted  to  grazing;  it  subdivides 
into  more  primitive  forms  with  subhypsodont  teeth,  such  as  Merychippus, 
and  more  progressive  forms  with  long-crowned,  well-cemented  teeth,  such 
as  Protohippus  and  Pliohippus.  The  two  latter  animals  are  distinguished 
by  the  diverse  characters  of  the  preorbital  fossae  on  the  sides  of  the  face. 
In  Protohippus  these  two  fossae  are  shallow,  without  sharply  defined  bor- 
ders, while  in  Pliohippus  there  are  two  large  and  partly  confluent  fossae,  or 
depressions  in  front  of  the  orbits,  with  sharply  defined  posterior  borders. 
It  is  generally  believed  that  the  true  horse  (Equus)  has  descended  from  some 
more  conservative  or  central  forms,  like  Protohippus,  but  the  species  bridg- 
ing the  transition  between  Protohippus  and  Equus  still  await  discovery. 

A  fourth  and  distinct  line  of  Pliocene  horses  is  that  which  contains  the 
hipparions  (Neohipparion),  in  which  the  antero-internal  pillar  of  the  pre- 
molars (protocone)  is  completely  separated  from  the  transverse  crests. 

'  Sternberg,  C.  H.,  Letter. 

^  Gidley,  J.  W.,  Revision  of  the  Miocene  and  Pliocene  Equidae  of  North  America.  Bull. 
Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIII,  Art.  xxxv,  Nov.  26,  1907,  pp.  865-934. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  351 


These  hipparions,  in  America  at  least,  include  the  extreme  desert-living 
types. 

The  American  group  of  hipparions,  or  NeoMpparion,  differ  from  the 
hipparions  of  Europe  and  Asia  in  several  characters:  (1)  the  anterior  pillar 
of  the  upper  grinders  is  relatively  larger  and  elliptical  in  cross  section;  ^ 
(2)  the  enamel  foldings  are  comparatively  simple;  (3)  the  limbs  and  feet, 
so  far  as  known,  indicate  a  more  slender  construction  of  the  long  bones  and 
especially  longer  proportions  of  the  metapodials.  The  skeleton  of  N.  whit- 
neyi  (Fig.  123)  was  discovered  by  Mr.  H.  F.  Wells  of  the  American  Museum 
expedition  of  1902  in  the  Upper  Miocene  or  Lower  Pliocene  deposits  on 
Little  White  River  near  Rosebud  Agency,  South  Dakota;  the  little  cluster 
of  animals  was  huddled  together  as  if  they  had  perished  in  a  desert  storm. 
It  consisted  of  the  superbly  complete  skeleton  of  an  adult  mare  associated 
with  incomplete  skeletons  of  five  other  younger  individuals  undoubtedly 
of  the  same  species.  The  age  of  this  type  {N.  whitneyi)  is  quite  probably 
Lower  Pliocene.^ 

The  increasingly  arid  conditions  of  climate  were  probably  accompanied 
by  an  extension  of  the  areas  of  the  dry  grassy  plains  and  uplands  over 
which  these  quadrupeds  roamed,  the  hard  conditions  of  the  soil  hastening 
the  transformation  from  the  tridactyl  into  the  monodactyl  condition. 

Multiple  phyla  of  rhinoceroses.  —  We  have  evidence  also  of  the  existence 
of  four  and  possibly  of  five  contemporary  phyla  of  rhinoceroses.^  As  among 
the  horses,  surprisingly  primitive  persistent  forms  mingled  with  the  most 
highly  specialized.  The  polyphyletic  character  is  also  attributable  to  the 
intermingling  of  American  and  Eurasiatic  strains.  (1)  The  first  phylum 
found  among  the  aceratheres  began  with  Ccenopus  persistens  in  the  Middle 
Miocene  and  is  continued  into  the  C.  brachyodus  of  the  Upper  Mio- 
cene; the  former  species  is  slender,  long-headed,  with  short-crowned  teeth 
and  primitive  feet;  the  skull  proportions  are  little  changed  from  the  Oligo- 
cene  type;  all  these  animals  are  small.  (2)  A  second  phylum  includes  a 
number  of  large,  long-headed,  long-limbed  aceratheres  with  brachyodont 
teeth;  these  animals  are  closest  to  the  Miocene  aceratheres  of  Europe;  they  . 
include  the  A.  ceratorhinus  and  A.  montanus  found  by  Douglass  in  the 
Upper  Miocene  of  Montana;  the  nasals  are  long  and  tapering  and  exhibit 
in  the  males  a  diminutive  terminal  ho^n.  (3)  A  third  phylum  apparently, 
introduced  by  the  Aphelops  megalodus  of  the  Middle  Miocene,  is  mesati- 
cephalic,  with  smooth  nasals,  with  a  high  occiput  inclined  forward;  it  per- 
haps runs  into  the  long-Hmbed  A.  malacorhinus  of  the  Lower  Pliocene.  (4) 
Then  comes  a  phylum  of  extremely  broad-headed  aceratheres,  perhaps 

^  Gidley,  J.  W.,  A  New  Three-toed  Horse.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX. 
Art.  xiii,  July  24,  1903,  pp.  465-476. 

^  Osborn,  H.  F.,  New  Miocene  Rhinoceroses  with  Revision  of  Known  Species.  Bull. 
Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XX,  Art.  xxvii,  Sept.  24,  1904,  pp.  307-326;  also, 

Douglass,  E.,  Rhinoceroses  from  the  Oligocene  and  Miocene  Deposits  of  North  Dakota, 
and  Montana.    Ann.  Carnegie  Mus.,  Vol.  IV,  nos.  2  and  3,  1908,  pp.  256-266. 


352 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


introduced  by  A.  plamceps  of  the  Middle  Miocene,  and  extending  into  the 
brachycephahc  Peraceras  superdliosus  of  the  Lower  Phocene;  in  the  latter 
animal  the  premaxillaries  are  weak  and  there  are  no  superior  canines;  the 
hornless  and  pointed  nasals  resemble  those  of  the  aceratheres  of  Europe. 
(5)  The  most  distinctively  Old  World  form  constitutes  a  fifth  phylum; 
this  is  composed  of  the  short-footed  ' Teleocerine '  (Teleoceras)  rhinoceroses 
which  now  attain  very  large  dimensions;  the  males  are  armed  with  horns 
placed  at  the  very  tip  of  the  nasals;  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  further 
evolution  of  the  second  or  median  frontal  horn,  which  is  observed  in  the 
Middle  Miocene  ancestor,  T.  medicornutus;  although  distributed  over  the 
entire  northern  hemisphere,  these  animals  were  clumsy,  slow-moving,  and 
resemljled  the  hippopotamus  in  their  proportions;  it  is  not  improbable  that 
they  largely  frequented  the  sluggish  rivers  of  the  period. 

Tapirs.  —  Tapirs  still  survive,  but  are  very  little  known,  being  repre- 
sented by  the  single  species  Tapiravus  varus. 

Even-toed  mammals.  —  The  artiodactyls  of  the  period  include  the  sur- 
viving oreodonts,  the  browsing  and  grazing  camels,  the  ancestral  American 
cervids,  the  merycodonts,  and  the  peccaries. 

Among  the  camels,  Pliauchenia,  an  animal  characterized  by  the  presence 
of  only  three  premolars  in  the  lower  jaw,  but  in  other  respects  showing  much 
resem})lance  to  Procamelus,  is  the  most  typical  form.  The  Upper  Miocene 
Procamelus  is  still  present  and  abundant,  and  there  are  evidences  in  this 
formation  of  the  existence  of  the  giraffe  or  browsing  camels  (Alticamelus) . 
The  merycodonts  are  still  represented  by  Merycodus,  which,  it  will  be  re- 
called, is  a  delicately  formed  grazing  type,  with  a  skeleton  analogous  to  that 
of  the  pronghorn  antelopes,  but  with  deciduous  antlers  of  the  American 
deer  type. 

The  true  American  procervids  are  represented  by  Blastomeryx,  an  animal 
little  kno™  at  this  stage,  but  probably  provided  with  simple,  branched 
antlers.    The  peccaries  are  represented  by  Prosthennops. 

Rodents.  —  Among  the  rodent  fauna  it  is  interesting  to  note  the  presence 
of  Eucastor,  closely  related  to  if  not  identical  with  Dipoides,  sl  rodent  also  ob- 
served in  the  Pliocene  of  Asia;  it  is  possibly  ancestral  to  the  Castoro'ides  of 
our  Pleistocene,  and  it  should  be  compared  with,  the  Sigmogomphius  of  the 
Pliocene  of  California.  The  peculiarly  American  family  of  Mylagaulidse  is 
now  represented  by  Mylagaulus,  sl  remarkable  horned  gopher  (as  discovered 
by  Matthew),  and  by  the  still  more  specialized  Epigaulus.  These  animals 
as  a  whole  ^  seem  to  have  been  especially  adapted  to  digging,  for  which 
habit  they  were  far  better  equipped  than  any  of  the  existing  gophers.  The 
highly  modified  feet  and  unusually  small  orbits  suggest  that  they  may  have 
lived  almost  exclusively  underground.  Of  what  use  could  the  horns  have 
been  to  a  burrowing  rodent?    They  may  prove  to  be  sexual  characters. 

^  Gidley,  J.  \V.,  A  New  Horned  Rodent  from  the  Miocene  of  Kansas.  Proc.  U.S.  Nat. 
Afus..  Vol.  XXXII,  June  29,  1907,  pp.  627-636. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  353 


If  not,  it  seems  not  improbable  that  they  served  as  accessories  to  the  great 
claws  to  assist  in  rapid  digging. 

The  duplicidentate  rodents  are  represented  by  the  true  hare  (Lepus). 

Lower  Pliocene  mastodons.  —  The  giant  forms  of  the  period  are  the  long- 
jawed,  tetralophodont  mastodons  of  the  species  Tetralophodon  campester 
and  T.  euhypodon,  both  described  by  Cope.  In  the  second  species,  T. 
euhypodon,^  the  symphysis  of  the  jaw  is  abbreviated  when  we  consider  it  in 
relation  to  the  large  size  of  the  inferior  tusks,  yet  it  cannot  properly  be 
called  'brevirostral';  the  superior  tusks  are  compressed  distally;  the  in- 
ferior tusks  are  large,  cylindrical,  and  retain  the  enamel  band.  The  other 
species,  T.  campester,  embraces  animals  of  larger  size,  with  a  very  long 
symphysis  in  the  lower  jaw,  i.e.  of  more  primitive  ' longirostral'  propor- 
tions; the  intermediate  molars  are  tetralophodont,  and  the  sixth  molar  has 
six  cross  rows  of  tubercles,  and  a  heel. 

Attention  has  been  called  above  to  the  fact  that  the  Lower  Pliocene 
mastodons  of  Europe  embrace  both  the  trilophodont  and  tetralophodont 
types,  and  are  believed  to  be  short-jawed,  or  brevirostral,  although  this  is 
not  to  the  present  writer's  knowledge  certainly  known. 

Carnivores.  —  The  carnivorous  enemies  of  this  large  herbivorous  fauna 
are  still  very  imperfectly  known.  Among  the  canids  there  are  two  species  of 
Mlurodon.  The  Mlurodon  was  as  large  as  the  modern  wolf,  but  had  a 
short,  heavy,  mastiff -hke  head,  and  was  distinguished  from  any  living  canids 
by  the  cat-like  construction  of  the  carnassial  teeth.  There  is  some, 
although  not  conclusive,  evidence  of  the  existence  of  an  animal  related  to 
the  bear-dog  (Dinocyon)  and  known  as  Borophagus.  The  survival  of  these 
animals  throughout  the  Pliocene  of  America  as  well  as  of  Asia  is  rendered 
probable  by  the  occurrence  of  Dinocyon  limb  fragments  in  the  Middle 
Pliocene  deposits  (Blanco)  of  Texas.  There  is  also  some  evidence  of  the 
existence  of  true  dogs  of  the  genus  Canis  from  rare  and  fragmentary 
material. 

Lower  Pliocene,  Late  Phase 

Snake  Creek  Formation  (Ogallala)  of  Western  Nehraska^ 
Neotragocerus  Zone 

A  more  recent  phase  of  the  Lower  Pliocene  mammalian  life  of  the  region 
of  western  Nebraska  has  recently  been  revealed  in  the  discovery  by  an 
American  Museum  party  under  Matthew  and  Cook  ^  of  the  remains  of  a 
large  and  varied  fauna,  including  no  less  than  fifty  species  of  mammals  which 
are  in  many  respects  intermediate  in  evolution  between  those  of  the 

1  Cope,  E.  D.,  The  Proboscidia.  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  'XXIII,  no.  268,  April,  1889, 
pp.  191-211. 

^  Matthew,  W.  D.,  and  Cook,  H.  J.,  Pliocene  Fauna  of  Western  Nebraska.    Bull.  Amer. 
Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVI,  no.  27,  Sept.,  1909,  pp.  361-414. 
2  a 


354 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


'Republican  River'  stage  above  described  and  of  the  Middle  Pliocene, 
'Blanco'  stage,  of  Texas. 

The  exposures  in  which  this  rich  fauna  occurs  lie  along  a  sand  hill  region, 
or  crest  of  the  divide  between  the  Niobrara  and  Platte  rivers  in  Nebraska, 
near  the  headwaters  of  Snake  Creek,  which  gives  the  name  to  this  formation. 
It  is  an  out  Iyer  of  the  'Ogallala'  of  Darton,  a  formation  which  is  typically 
composed  of  clean  sand  with  a  considerable  amount  of  gravel;  the  Snake 
Creek  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  local  facies  of  the  Ogallala.    The  bones  occur 


Fig.  162.  —  On  the  plains  of  western  Nebraska.  Miocene  (Sheep  Creek  beds)  overlaid  by 
a  Pliocene  (Snake  Creek)  formation.  Photograph  by  American  Museima  of  Natural  History 
expedition  of  1908. 


apparently  in  an  old  river  channel,  in  such  vast  numbers  as  in  places  to 
form  a  veritable  bone  bed  several  feet  thick,  in  which,  owing  to  the  scatter- 
ing influence  of  river  action,  complete  skulls  and  skeletons  are  very  rare. 

All  the  species  and  mutations  are  more  advanced  than  those  of  the  Re- 
publican River,  or  Peraceras  Zone.  Among  the  hoofed  Herbivora  all  the 
Lower  Pliocene  types  of  rhinoceroses,  however,  still  occur,  including  remains 
which  are  attributed  to  Teleoceras,  Aphelops,  and  to  a  still  simpler  brachyo- 
dont  rhinoceros  probably  belonging  to  the  persistent  brachyodont  phylum 
mentioned  under  the  Republican  River  (p.  348). 

Among  the  dying-out  members  of  the  fauna 
Prevailing  Mammals  ^^^^  examples  of  the  Miocene  oreodont 

Mastodons,  longirostral  Merychyus. 

Tetralophodon  The  most  important  and  unexpected  fea- 

fTrilophodon  (Florida)  ture  of  this  assemblage  is  the  evidence  of  the 
Horses,  several  phyla         presence  of  the  bovid  division  of  the  Cavicornia. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  355 


Khinoceroses,  3-4  phyla 
Teleocerine 
Aceratherine 
Peraceras 
Aphelops 
Aceratherium 
Tapirs 

Tapiravus 
Oravigrade  edentates 

?  Megalony  chids 
Last  oreodonts,  2  phyla 
Merycochoerus 
Merychyus 
Camels,  llamas 
Browsing  camels 

Alticamelus 
Grazing  camels 
Procamelus 
Pliauchenia 
Cavicornia 

Neotragocerus 
Merycodonts 
Merycodus 
Pro-Cervids 

Blastomeryx 
Peccaries 

Prosthennops 
Carnivores 
Rodents 
Mylagaulids 

(Horned  gophers) 
Primitive  beavers 
(Eucastor,  Dipoidesf) 


For  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  North 
American  continent  true  antelopes  are  positively 
recognized,  which  appear  to  be  related  to  the 
tragocerine,  or  flat-horned  group, ^  characteris- 
tic of  the  European  Miocene  and  Pliocene; 
hence  the  animal  is  named  Neotragocerus  and 
the  zone  in  which  it  occurs  the  Neotragocerus 
Zone.  The  horn  cores  are  perfectly  straight, 
and  of  a  round-oval  section;  they  approach 
those  of  the  existing  mountain  sheep  {Oream- 
nos)  but  lack  the  curvature.  The  teeth  and 
jaw  of  species  of  Bison  also  occur  in  this  forma- 
tion, but  there  is  some  doubt  as  to  whether  they 
are  properly  associated  with  this  geological 
level,  because  the  specimens  may  be  intruders 
from  a  more  recent  formation. 

Another  possible  newcomer  is  indicated  by 
the  presence  of  gravigrade  edentates  represented 
by  an  undetermined  member  of  the  Megalonyx 
family.  It  will  be  recalled,  however,  that  the 
claw  of  a  gravigrade  edentate  has  been  found 
in  the  Middle  Miocene  (Mascall)  of  Oregon, 
and  there  is  a  possibility  that  these  giant  sloths 
may  have  been  resident  in  the  forests  of  North 
America  throughout  the  Csenozoic  period,  while 
not  finding  their  way  into  the  river  and  flood 
plain  areas. 

By  far  the  most  astonishing  feature  of  the 
fauna  is  the  extraordinary  richness  and  variety 
of  the  horses;  these  are  the  most  abundant 
animals  in  this  formation.  The  four  or  five 
main  phyla  are  the  same  as  those  in  the  Upper 
Miocene  (p.  297),  that  is,  we  find  remains  of 


the  conservative  and  presumably  tridactyl 
iDrowsing  or  forest  horses  (Hypohippus  and  Parahippus)  intermingled  with 
those  of  the  intermediate  stage  in  the  evolution  of  the  true  horses  (Mery- 
chippus).  There  are  also  several  species  belonging  to  the  Protohippus  and 
Pliohippus  phyla,  as  well  as  several  species  of  the  desert-living  horses 
{Neohipparion).  This  assemblage  of  conservative  and  progressive  types 
of  horses  was  certainly  one  of  the  most  distinctive  features  of  Lower  Plio- 


^  In  the  tragocerine  group  the  horn  cores  are  laterally  compressed,  as  in  the  goats  (caprine 
section),  but  the  grinders  are  short-crowned,  resembling  those  in  the  brachyodont  antelopes. 
(Flower  and  Lydekker,  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Mammals  Living  and  Extinct,  Lon- 
don, 1891,  p.  349.) 


356 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


cene  times  in  North  America.  These  animals  must  have  swarmed, in  great 
herds  over  the  prairies,  the  conservative  or  browsing  types  dwelhng  in  the 
woodlands  and  copses.  A  marked  approximation  to  the  dental  type  of 
^quus  is  seen  in  certain  varieties  of  Neohipparion  found  in  this  deposit, 
while  certain  varieties  of  Pliohippus  approximate  the  South  American 
Pleistocene  horse  Hippidion.  There  is  no  conclusive  evidence  that  any 
of  these  horses  were  monodactyl,  nor  among  the  thousands  of  teeth  pre- 
served can  a  single  one  be  referred  to  the  genus  Equus. 

Among  the  camels  the  typical  camel  of  the  Upper  Miocene  (Procamelus) 
is  well  represented,  as  well  as  the  giraffe  camel  (Alticamelus) .  Mingled  with 
them  are  remains  of  gigantic  pliauchenias,  equaling  in  size  and  robustness 
those  of  the  Middle  Pliocene  (Blanco  Formation).  The  peccaries  belong 
to  the  Upper  Miocene  genus  Prosthennops,  although  the  teeth  begin  to 
approach  those  of  the  Lower  Pleistocene  Platygonus.  The  remains  of  the 
American  Cervicornia  and  of  the  merycodonts  also  present  a  mixture  of 
Upper  Miocene  and  of  more  recent  character. 

The  rodents  are  again  represented  by  the  mylagaulids,  or  horned  go- 
phers, by  the  pocket  gophers  and  primitive  beavers.  Among  the  latter  we 
find  Dipoides,  an  animal  also  observed  in  the  Pliocene  of  China  (Schlosser) 
and  regarded  by  Matthew  as  possibly  related  to  the  Castor oides  of  the 
Pleistocene. 

Among  the  carnivores  are  lions  and  saber-tooth  tigers,  amphicyons  and 
cyons,  aelurodons  and  true  wolves  (Tephrocyon),  cacomistles  {Bassariscus) ^ 
and  mustelids  of  several  genera.    (W.  D.  Matthew.) 


Reference  has  been  made  above  (p.  338)  to  the  astonishing  discovery  of 
strepsicerine  antelopes  or  kudus  in  northwestern  Nevada.^  The  sequence 
of  the  Tertiary  formations  in  this  region  is  as  follows  : 


The  Virgin  Valley  Formation  proper  as  explored  by  Merriam  probably 
exceeds  1,500  feet  in  thickness;  it  is  composed  chiefly  of  volcanic  ash  and 
tuffs,  the  included  gravels,  sands,  clays,  lignitic  and  diatomaceous  deposits 
being  of  much  smaller  volume  than  those  of  purely  volcanic  origin. 

'  Merriam,  J.  C,  The  Occurrence  of  Strepsicerine  Antelopes  in  the  Tertiary  of  North- 
western Nevada.     Univ.  Cal.  Publ.,  Bull.  Dept.  Geol.,  Vol.  V,  no.  22,  pp.  319-330. 


Virgin  Valley  and  Thousand  Creek  of  Nevada 


Terrace  formations 

Epoch  of  canon-cutting  (and  of  extensive  faulting) 

Deposition  of  Mesa  Dolorite 

Thousand  Creek  section 

Virgin  Valley  Formation 

Epoch  of  erosion  and  faulting 

Puebla  Range  series  ( =  ?Columbia  Lava) 


Quaternary,  late 
Quaternary,  early 
Quaternary  to  Pliocene 
Pliocene  to  late  Miocene 
Pliocene  to  early  Miocene 
Miocene 

Miocene  to  Oligocene 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  357 

The  mammal-bearing  beds  of  the  'Thousand  Creek'  section  seem  to 
correspond  mainly  with  the  upper  levels  of  the  Virgin  Valley.  The  frag- 
mentary fossils  found  here  are  of  extraordinary  interest.  The  two  large 
antelopes  (Ilingoceros,  Sphenophalos)  exhibit  close  affinities  to  those  of  the 
tragelaphines  of  the  Siwaliks  of  Asia,  including  the  recent  nilgai  (Bosela- 
phus),  which  in  turn  are  related  to  the  recent  kudu  (Strepsicefos) ,  eland 
(Oreas),  etc.,  of  Africa.  The  kudu  (Strepsiceros)  and  eland  (Oreas)  occur 
in  the  Siwaliks  of  southern  Asia,  as  well  as  the  nilgai. 

Sphenophalos  presents  a  near  resemblance  to  the  Neotragocerus  discovered 
in  the  Snake  Creek  beds,  Nebraska  (p.  355),  except  in  the  comparative  smooth- 
ness and  denseness  of  the  surface  of  the  horn  core,  which  suggests  affinity 
to  the  recent  prong-horn  antelope  (Antilocapra)  of  the  Western  plains. 
If  this  animal  (Sphenophalos)  proves  to  be  intermediate  between  the  bovine 
antelopes  of  Asia  and  our  prong-horn  antelopes,  or  antilocaprids,  it  will  go 
to  confirm  the  theory  advocated  by  Matthew  ^  that  the  American  prong- 
horns  are,  after  all,  aberrant  antelopes,  that  is,  with  affinities  to  the 
Bovidse. 

The  true  antelopes  are  represented  by  Neotragocerus,  as  well  as  by 
three  species  of  the  two  Asiatic  genera  above  mentioned. 

A  rich  fauna  of  t3^ical  American  mammals  was  contemporaneous  with 
these  antelopes  in  Nevada,  and  points  to  their  Lower  Pliocene  age,  espe- 
cially in  the  survival  of  several  species  of  rhinoceroses  and  the  stage  of  horse 
evolution  known  as  Merychippus  and  Parahippus.  The  forest-living  horse 
(Hypohippus)  and  the  desert-living  type  (Neohipparion)  are  somewhat 
doubtfully  recorded.  Among  the  aberrant  Perissodactyla  is  a  form  at- 
tributed to  Chalicotherium.  The  peccaries  are  represented  by  Prosthennops; 
the  cameloids  by  Procamelus  and  Alticamelus.  There  is  a  species  of  Palceo- 
meryx  near  P.  horealis,  as  well  as  the  deer-like  antelope  Merycodus. 

The  small  fauna  includes  the  sewellels  (Haplodontia),  marmots,  hares, 
mylagaulids,  castoroids  (Dipoides),  and  gophers  (Geomys);  beside  several 
kinds  of  canids  there  is  a  felid  of  gigantic  size. 

The  Edentata  are  represented  by  remains  of  very  large  claws  resembling 
those  of  the  megalonychids  except  for  a  narrow  median  fissure. 


Rattlesnake  Formation  of  the  John  Day  Valley,  Oregon 

As  shown  in  the  diagram  (Fig.  164),  this  is  the  uppermost  of  the  series 
of  Csenozoic  formations  in  the  John  Day  region,  overlying  the  Middle 
Miocene  Mascall  Formation  and  the  Upper  Oligocene  John  Day.^    The  type 

^  Matthew,  W.  D.,  A  Complete  Skeleton  of  Merycodus.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist., 
Vol.  XX,  1904,  pp.  101-129. 

^  Merriam,  J.  C,  and  Sinclair,  W.  J.,  Tertiary  Faunas  of  the  John  Day  Region.  Univ. 
Col.  Publ.,  Bull.  Dept.  GeoL,  Vol.  V,  no.  11,  Oct.,  1907,  pp.  171-205. 


358 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


specimens  of  the  following  species  of  Pliocene  mammals  are  supposed  to 
have  been  derived  from  the  Rattlesnake  beds : 

Neohipparion  occidenialis  Leidy. 

Neohipparion  sinclairi  Wortman. 

fPlatygonus  rex  Marsh. 

To  these  should  be  added,  from  specimens  in  the  University  of  California 
collection,  a  horse  referred  to  Pliohippus  supremus  Leidy,  also  some  remains 
of  rhinoceroses  which  are  specifically  indeterminate,  a  large  suilline  form, 


Fig.  163.  —  Miocene  exposures  near  mouth  of  Rattlesnake  Creek,  John  Day  Basin,  Oregon. 
Mascall  formation  (Middle  Miocene)  below.  Rattlesnake  formation  (Lower  Pliocene)  above, 
separated  by  an  unconformity.    Photograph  by  J.  C.  Merriam. 


fragmentary  remains  of  a  camel  smaller  than  Alticamelus,  and  portions  of 
a  carapace  and  plastron  of  a  land  tortoise  (Clemmys  hesperia,  Hay). 

The  Rattlesnake  beds  are  composed  of  loose  gravels,  probably  repre- 
senting a  fluviatile  or  flood  plain  deposition.  These  gravels,  associated  with 
tuffs  and  rhyolitic  lavas,  lie  upon  the  up-tilted  and  eroded  edges  of  the 
JMiddle  Miocene  Mascall  Formation  (see  p.  288).  The  mammal  remains 
have  been  obtained  both  from  the  tuffs  and  the  gravels.  The  scattered  and 
broken  condition  of  the  bones  of  one  of  the  horses  found  in  these  beds  also 
seems  to  indicate  a  long  exposure  of  the  remains  on  a  land  surface  which  was 
being  rapidly  worked  over.  The  close  of  the  Rattlesnake  deposition  marks  the 
beginning  of  a  long  interval  of  erosion  which  may  be  regarded  as  the  open- 
ing event  of  the  Quaternary.    (Merriam  and  Sinclair,  op.  dt.,  p.  175.) 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  359 


-400' 


Character 

Tuffs,    gravels  and 

lava  (rhyolite) 
Average  150  feet 

Unconformity 

Tuffs,  tuff-shales, 
conglomerates 


Basalt  with  small 
amount  of  inter- 
stratified  tuff 


Remarks 


Few  Fossils 


— .  tn 

'i  3 


Pliohippus  supremus  (Leidy) 

Rhinoceros 

Hog-like  form 

Small  and  large  camel 

Clemmys  hesperia  Hay 


?  Neohipparion,  Platygonus  rex 


Mammalian  fossils  moderately  abun- 
dant 


Separated  from  Upper  John  Day  by 
surface  of  erosion  on  which  trees 
grew.  Trees  were  killed  and  buried 
by  the  lava.  Heat  of  lava  has 
baked  Upper  John  Day  to  a  brick 
red,  but  for  a  few  inches  only  below 
the  contact  plane 


Brick  red  zone  baked  by  heat  of  basalt 


Drab  tuffs,  becoming 
gravelly  at  top. 


Camels  in  upper  part  of  this  division. 
Charred  and  sUicified  trees  at  con- 
tact with  lava.  These  grew  on  an 
old  surface  eroded  before  extrusion 
of  lava  , 


500' 
-1000' 


Greenish  and  drab 
tuffs,  with  many 
nodules 

Local  rhyolite  flows 
toward  the  top 
and  bottom  of  this 
division 


Abundant  mammals 
Silicified  tree  trunks, 
locally  present 


standing  erect, 


250' 
-3  00' 


Red,  green, 
white  tuffs 
tuff-shales 


and 
and 


Elotherium  (large  species) 
Rhinoceros  (gen.  ?  sp.  ?) 
Merycoidodont 


Lavas,  tuffs,  tuff-shales  and  agglomerates 
Plant  fossils  exclusively 


Fig.  164.  —  Columnar  section  of  the  John  Day  Formation  of  Oregon,  and  superposed  strata, 
Eocene  to  Pliocene.    After  Sinclair,  1909. 


360 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Middle  Pliocene 

Blanco  Forjnation  of  Texas,  Glyptotherium  Zone 

The  Blanco  Formation  of  Texas  is  decidedly  distinct  and  more  recent 
in  its  mammalian  life  than  that  of  the  Republican  River,  of  the  Rattlesnake, 
or  of  the  Snake  Creek  beds,  just  described.  It  is  provisionally  regarded  as 
of  Middle  Pliocene  age.    Its  most  distinctive  characters  are  the  appearance 

of  short-jawed  masto- 
dons with  few  grinding 
teeth  approaching  the 
Stegodon  type,  and  of 
South  American 

\/,  y  '     armored  edentates,  or 

glyptodons. 

Ccenozoic  beds  of 
Texas.  —  Before  de- 
scribing  the  fauna  of 
this  very  important 
formation,  it  is  desir- 
able to  outline  the 
characters  of  the 
Csenozoic  deposits  of 
northwestern  Texas  as 
successively  studied 

by  Cunmiins  (1891)  and  Gidley  (1899,  1900,  1901).  As  in  Nebraska, 
South  Dakota,  Montana,  and  Oregon,  we  obtain  vistas  of  the  Caenozoic 
depositions  in  this  southwestern  portion  of  the  United  States  which  afford 
vivid  pictures  of  the  life  succession.  The  credit  for  prior  exploration 
belongs  to  Mr.  W.  F.  Cummins  of  the  Texas  Geological  Survey,  whose  early 
collections  were  submitted  to  Cope  for  determination.  Credit  for  the  more 
mature  determination  of  the  age  of  these  beds  and  the  fauna  which  they 
contain  belongs  to  the  American  Museum  expeditions  conducted  by  Mr. 
Gidley.  The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  conclusions  reached  by  the 
latter  author.^ 

Since  the  close  of  the  Triassic  there  has  been  no  great  disturbance  or 
change  of  level  in  the  region  of  the  Staked  Plains  (see  map),  hence  the  strata 
of  the  Triassic  which  underly  this  hilly  region  are  for  the  most  part  nearly 
horizontal,  and  the  country  at  the  beginning  of  the  Miocene  epoch  was 
(•omjiaratively  level.  After  a  long  period  of  erosion  in  which  the  Cretaceous 
deposits  were  removed  during  Lower  or  Middle  Miocene  times,  flood  plain 
and  lacustrine  conditions  prevailed  and  the  'Panhandle  Formation'  (Fig. 
167)  was  \\idely  spread  over  the  vast  area  now  occupied  by  the  Staked 

'  Oidloy,  J.  W.,  The  Freshwater  Tertiary  of  Northwestern  Texas.  American  Museum 
Expeditions,  1899-1901.    Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.  Vol.  XIX,  Nov.  21,  1903,  pp.  617-635. 


Fig.  165.  —  Upper  view  of  the  shield  and  armored  tail  of 
Glyptotherium  as  exposed  in  the  Blanco  horizon  of  Texas. 
Photograph  by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  1900. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  361 


Plains,  extending  westward  to  the  Rocky  Mountains  of  New  Mexico,  and 
spreading  eastward  over  a  much  greater  territory  than  they  now  occupy. 
All  the  formations  succeeding  the  '  Panhandle '  or  of  more  recent  date  are 


Fig.  166.  —  Map  of  a  section  of  northern  Texas  showing  location  of  important  fossil  mammal 
finds  and  geologic  horizons.    After  Gidley,  Amer.  Mus.  Exped.,  1902. 


represented  by  comparatively  small  areas  of  fluviatile,  flood  plain  or  seolian 
origin. 

The  earliest  of  these  more  restricted  formations  are  known  as  the  '  Claren- 
don,' and  are  of  Upper  Miocene  or  Lower  Pliocene  age,  containing  such 
characteristic  forms  as  Procamelus,  Protohippus,  Pliohippus,  Hipparion, 
and  Trilophodon.  The  main  body  of  the  Clarendon  beds  consists  for  the 
most  part  of  cross-bedded  sands  and  sandstones,  intermixing  more  or  less 


362 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


and  cross-bedding  with  the  clays;  these  indicate  the  existence  of  old  river 
channels  taking  a  nearly  east  and  west  direction,  or  approximately  the 
same  as  that  of  the  streams  draining  the  country  at  the  present  time. 
Some  of  them  are  traceable  for  long  distances.  It  is  in  these  peculiar  beds 
of  sandy  clays  that  all  the  fossils  of  this  region  occur. 

Still  more  recent  than  these  are  new  and  fresh  river  channel  forma- 
tions (Fig.  167)  which  also  cut  their  way  into  the  Middle  and  Lower  Mio- 
cene and  constitute  the  famous  '  Blanco  Formation '  of  Cummins  and  Cope. 
These  beds  occupy  a  comparatively  narrow  valley  or  basin  formed  for 
their  deposition  by  ancient  erosion  of  the  older  Lower  Miocene  (Panhandle 
beds);  they  are  traceable  southeastward  for  fifteen  or  twenty  miles  to 
the  edge  of  the  plains;  there  is  total  absence  of  any  proof  for  the  theory 

Blanco  *iROCK  creek^  ''clarendon' 

{ middle  Pliocene)   (Equuszone,  lofver Pleistocene)  (tipper  Miocene) 

'panhandle"  ""^TllljW^ 
(middle  Miocene)  ^^^^i;;;:?^ 


■Jurassic  sandstone 
^Triassic  shales- 


liy  permission  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History 

Fig.  167.  —  Diagrammatic  section  of  the  Llano  Estacado  region  of  Texas,  showing  the 
intrusion  of  Miocene,  Pliocene,  and  Pleistocene  river  channels  in  an  older  Middle  Miocene 
Formation.    After  J.  W.  Gidley. 

of  lake  origin  of  these  beds,  and  many  evidences  of  river  or  stream  deposi- 
tion. Occasional  deposits  of  Fuller's  or  diatomaceous  earth  are  accounted 
for  by  the  supposition  that  there  were  in  this  ancient  valley  occasional  pools 
filled  with  clear  water  partially  isolated  from  the  main  stream.  The  ani- 
mals which  were  preserved  here  include  the  armored  and  gravigrade  eden- 
tates, the  short-jawed  mastodons,  and  advanced  types  of  horses  and  camels. 

A  third  period  of  river  or  flood-plain  formation  traversing  the  same 
Lower  Miocene  substratum  occurred  during  the  Pleistocene  epoch,  laying 
down  the  broad  bands  of  the  'Rock  Creek  Formation,'  also  of  fluviatile, 
alluvial,  and  a?olian  origin,  composed  of  cross-bedded  sands,  gravels,  and 
clays.  The  wind,  carrying  large  quantities  of  fine  dust  and  sand  on  the 
surrounding  plains,  may  have  played  an  important  part  in  forming  these 
deposits.  The  mammals  represented  consist  wholly  of  land  forms,  and 
some  of  the  bones  show  weather-checking;  they  contain  the  characteristic 
Lower  Pleistocene  forms,  Eqmis,  Elephas  imperator,  and  Platygonus. 

This  geologic  succession  in  Texas  may  be  summarized  as  follows: 

Lower  Pleistocene,  Rock  Creek  Formation  Equus  and  Elephas  imperator  Zone 

Middle  Pliocene,  Blanco  Formation  Glyptotherium  Zone 

Upper  ]Miocene  or  Lower  Pliocene,  Clarendon  Procamelus  Zone 
Formation 

Middle  and  Lower  Miocene,  Panhandle  For-  Menjcochoerus  Zone 
77iation 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  363 


Mammals  of  the  Blanco  Formation.  —  The  'Blanco'  of  Texas  takes  its 
name  from  the  Httle  mountain  of  white  sand  near  the  edge  of  the  Llano 
Estacado  on  Catfish  Creek,  which  as  a  prominent  landmark  has  been  digni- 
fied by  the  name  of  Mt.  Blanco.    (Fig.  168). 

The  life  phase  of  the  Blanco  is  distinguished:  (1)  negatively  by  the 
undoubted  extinction  of  the  Oreodontidae,  a  phylum  which  we  have  ob- 
served in  its  last  stages 
in  the  Lower  Pliocene; 
(2)  by  the  apparent 
extinction  of  the  rhi- 
noceroses; in  all  the  ex- 
plorations which  have 
been  carried  on  in 
these  beds  no  traces 
of  these  animals  have 
been  found;  (3)  by 
the  apparent  but  not 
yet  fully  demonstrated 
absence  of  the  forest 
or  browsing  horses  of 
the  Hypohippus  type. 
No  traces  have  been 
found  either   of  the 

grazing  horses  with  short-crowned  teeth,  or  of  the  Merychippus  type.  An- 
other browsing  mammal  which  has  not  yet  been  found  in  this  zone  is  the 
giraffe  camel,  or  Alticamelus. 

Although  the  fauna  is  still  imperfectly  known, 
Mastodons,  brevirostral  every  branch  of  the  mammals  shows  disappear- 


FiG.  168.  —  American  Museum  camp  below  Mt.  Blanco, 
Crosby  County,  Texas.  '  Mt.  Blanco '  is  the  white  hill  in  the 
distance.  Glyptotherium  Zone.  Photograph  by  American 
Museum  of  Natural  History  expedition  of  1900. 


?Tetralophodont 

?Trilophodont 
Stegodons 

S.  mirificus 
Grazing  horses,  3  phyla 

Protohippus 

Pliohippus 

Neohipparion 
Edentates 

Gravigrades 
Megalonychids  ? 

Glyptotherium 
Peccaries 

Platygonus 
Felidae 

Felis 


ances  as  well  as  certain  new  arrivals  which  are 
decidedly  indicative  of  a  new  faunistic  stage. 

Of  marked  zoogeographic  interest  is  the  first 
appearance  here  of  the  giant  glyptodonts,  or 
armored  edentates  of  South  American  type;  it  is 
of  course  impossible  to  determine  whether  these 
animals  entered  the  country  about  this  time  or 
whether  they  had  found  their  way  there  in  the 
Lower  Pliocene,  because  at  no  period  do  the  glyp- 
todonts extend  very  far  north.  Accompanying 
these  armored  edentates  were  the  great  hairy 
gravigrade  sloths  related  to  the  genera  Megalonyx 
and  Mylodon,  evidences  of  the  existence  of  which 
we  have  already  found  in  the  Lower  Pliocene  and 
possibly  in  the  Middle  Miocene  of  North  America. 

In  Texas  and  Nebraska,  and  probably  in  some 


364 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Mustelidae  outlyers  of  the  'Ogallala  Formation/  we  find  the 

Caniinartes  first  proofs  of  the  existence  in  America  of  short- 

Canidae  jawed  or  brevirostral  Proboscidea.    These  masto- 

Canis  dons  as  a  rule  have  lower  incisor  teeth,  and  were 

Amphicyonids  hence  termed  Dibelodon  by  Cope;   they  possess 

many-crested  molar  teeth,  in  some  respects  resem- 
bling those  of  the  Stegodon  type. 

Among  the  camels  occur  pliauchenias  of  very  large  size.  The  peccaries 
or  dicotylids  now  pass  from  the  Miocene  Prosthennops  stage  into  the  Upper 


Fig.  169.  —  Middle  Pliocene  mammals  of  Texas  (X  ^V)-    Outline  restorations  by  Charles  R. 
Knight.    A.  The  glyptodon  Glyptotherium  texanum.    B.  The  giraffe-camel  Alticamelm. 

Pliocene  and  Lower  Pleistocene  Platygonus  stage.  This  animal  is  a  large, 
fleet-footed,  or  cursorial  peccary,  including  two  species,^  the  more  primitive 

1  Gidley,  J.  W.,  On  Two  Species  of  Platygonus  from  the  Pliocene  of  Texas.  Bull.  Amer. 
Mus.  lYat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX,  July  24,  1903,  pp.  477-481. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  365 

of  which  (P.  texanus),  it  is  interesting  to  note,  presents  a  close  relationship 
to  the  P.  rex  from  the  Rattlesnake  Formation  of  Oregon. 

The  horses  are  imperfectly  known,  but  it  is  certain  that  they  still  be- 
longed to  the  three  great  grazing  phyla  Pliohippus,  Protohippus,  and  Neo- 
hipparion,  the  browsing  Hypohippus  phylum  having  apparently  disap- 
peared, as  well  as  the  intermediate  Merychippus  phylum.  One  of  the 
species  of  Protohippus  (P.  cumminsii)  was  so  progressive  in  character  as 
to  have  been  referred  by  Cope  to  the  genus  Equus,  but  according  to  Gidley 


Fig.  170.  —  Carapace  and  tail  of  the  Pliocene  glyptodont  Glyptotherium  and  skeleton  of  the 
recent  armadillo  Xenurits.    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


it  shows  a  much  closer  relationship  to  the  three-toed  horse  of  the  Miocene, 
though  it  is  more  advanced  than  any  true  Miocene  species  of  this  genus. 
The  Pliohippus  of  this  stage  was  also  mistakenly  referred  by  Cope  to 
Equus,  but  its  principal  characters  point  to  a  more  primitive  phase  than 
any  true  species  of  this  genus. 

Glyptodonts.  —  Among  the  edentates,  Glyptotherium  is  the  only  one 
fully  known.  The  existence  of  glyptodonts  in  Texas  (1888)  and  Florida 
(1889)  was  first  made  known  by  Cope  and  Leidy.  A  fuller  knowledge  of 
these  remarkable  animals  as  they  appear  in  the  southern  portion  of  the 
United  States  was  revealed  in  1900  by  the  discovery  by  the  American 
Museum  party  under  Gidley  of  a  nearly  complete  carapace  with  tail  arma- 
ture of  an  animal  found  to  be  distinct  from  the  South  American  glypto- 
donts and  thus  described  as  Glyptotherium  texanum  by  Osborn.^  This 
animal  was  very  primitive  and  simple  in  its  tail  structure,  which  strongly 
suggests  that  of  several  of  the  PUocene  Santa  Cruz  types  of  Patagonia. 

1  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Glyptotherium  texanum.  A  New  Glyptodont,  from  the  Lower  Pleistocene 
of  Texas.    Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX,  Art.  xvii,  pp.  491-494,  Aug.  17,  1903. 


366 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


The  general  shape  of  the  carapace  is  rather  hke  that  of  the  Sclerocalyptus 
than  of  Glyptodon.  As  in  the  Pampean  Panodhus,  the  seventh  to  the 
fifteenth  rows  of  lateral  plates  of  the  carapace  are  movable,  or  imbricating. 
Taken  altogether  this  animal  combines  characters  of  several  of  the  South 
American  forms  of  the  Miocene  and  Pleistocene  periods. 

The  most  important  member  of  the  Proboscidea  is  the  Mastodon  {Stego- 
don)  7nirificus,  represented  by  a  complete  skull  with  the  upper  tusks  pre- 
served. This  animal  has  been  found  in  Nebraska,  Idaho,  and  Texas. 
The  upper  tusks  are  round,  without  enamel,  upturned,  and  divergent; 
the  lower  jaw  is  short  and  tuskless.  In  old  age  only  four  grinding  teeth, 
the  last  upper  and  lower  teeth  on  each  side,  are  in  use  at  one  time.  These 
third  molars  have  five  to  six  low  cross  crests,  and  are  thus  in  a  stegodon 
stage  of  evolution,  but  the  crests  are  partly  interrupted  by  supplementary 
median  tubercles,  so  that  it  does  not  appear  that  this  animal  is  closely 
related  to  any  kno^vn  species  of  the  Asiatic  Stegodon.  A  number  of  other 
species  of  mastodons  were  named  by  Cope  from  this  formation  from  single 
molar  teeth.  It  is  thus  uncertain  whether  they  belonged  to  trilophodont 
or  tetralophodont,  long-  or  short-jawed  series.  The  provisional  references 
are  T.  shepardi,  T.  tropicus,  T.  precursor,  T.  humholdti. 

Among  the  Carnivora  a  problematic  feature  is  the  earliest  record  of 
the  genus  Felis  in  the  species  F.  hillimus,  which  may,  however,  be  wrongly 
referred.  The  only  musteline  known  is  Canimartes  cumminsii,  an  animal 
very  remotely  related  to  the  marten,  weasel,  etc.  The  giant  Carnivora 
of  the  period  include  the  amphicy on-like  Borophagus,  also  possibly  a  true 
species  of  Amphicy  on. 

Upper  Pliocene  or  Lower  Pleistocene  , 

Equus  and  Elephas  Zone 

Considerable  uncertainty  again  exists  whether  the  formations  here 
recorded  should  be  arranged  under  the  Upper  Pliocene  or  under  the  Lower 
or  initial  stage  of  the  Pleistocene. 

The  evidence  afforded  in  Florida  by  the  Peace  Creek  Formation  is 
again  singularly  welcome,  because  we  here  find  an  Equus  and  Elephas 
fauna  which  is  said  to  underlie  marine  beds  of  Upper  Pliocene  age.  These 
geologic  facts  are  so  important  in  the  chronology  of  American  mammalian 
life  that  they  may  be  described  first. 

Peace  Creek  Formation,  Florida 
There  extends  for  miles  along  Peace  Creek  in  INIanatee  County,  south- 
western Florida,  a  series  of  beds  which  Dall '  has  termed  the  Peace  Creek 

»  Dall.  W.  H.,  and  Harris,  G.  D.,  The  Neocene  of  North  America.    BuU.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv., 
no.  84.  1892. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  367 


Formation.  This  author  visited  the  Peace  Creek  region  in  January,  1891, 
hoping  for  an  opportunity  to  observe  an  inter-stratification  of  marine  beds 
with  those  containing  mammahan  re- 
mains. This  anticipation  proved  to 
be  well  founded,  because  it  produced 
the  following  results:  the  bone  beds 
which  are  rich  in  the  remains  of 
mammalian  life  lie  between  an  older 
marine  Pliocene  rock  below  and  a 
newer  marine  Pliocene  bed  above, 
thus,  in  the  opinion  of  this  observer, 
determining  its  Pliocene  character 
beyond  question  {op.  cit.  p.  133). 

The  mammals  of  these  Peace 
Creek  bone  beds  are  much  more 
recent  than  those  of  the  Alachua 
Clays  of  Florida,  although  they  do 
contain  one  type  in  common,  namely, 
an  hipparion  {H.  ingenuum).  It  will 
be  recalled  that  Hipparion  survives 
in  the  Upper  PHocene  of  Asia,  also 
possibly  in  the  Upper  Pliocene  of 
Europe,^  and  in  the  Lower  Pleisto- 
cene of  North  Africa.^  No  teleocerine 
or  other  rhinoceroses  appear  in  these 
Peace  Creek  bone  beds.  We  notice 
also  the  absence  of  camels,  which 
may  be  due,  however,  to  local  causes, 
because  camels  were  probably  flour- 
ishing at  the  same  time  on  the  West- 
ern plains  and  in  Cahfornia. 

The  mammalian  assemblage,  if 
found  without  association  with  Plio- 
cene marine  invertebrates,  would  cer- 
tainly have  been  regarded  as  of  early 
Pleistocene  age  rather  than  late  Plio- 
cene. We  owe  the  description  and 
identification  of  these  remains  to 
Leidy  ^  in  1899,  and  they  undoubtedly 
require  revision  to-day.    It  is  possible 

1  Stehlin,  H.  G.,  Une  Faune  a  Hipparion  h  Perrier.  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  4,  Vol. 
IV,  1904. 

2  Pomel,  A.,  Les  Equides.    Carte  Geol  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1897. 

3  Leidy,  J.,  Description  of  Vertebrate  Remains  from  Peace  Creek,  Florida.  Trans.  Wagner 
Free  Inst.  Sci.  Phila.,  Vol.  II,  Dec,  1889,  pp.  19-32. 


Fig.  171.  —  Chief  fossU  mammal  deposits 
of  eastern  North  America.  13.  Alachua  Clays, 
Fla.  14.  Peace  Creek,  Fla.  15.  Charleston 
(Ashley  River),  S.  C.   16.  Port  Kennedy,  Pa. 


368 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


that  older  and  newer  mammals  are  intermingled  in  these  collections.  The 
greatest  anachronism  is  the  reported  occurrence  of  Bison.  He  states  that 
the  following  fossils  were  collected  in  Peace  Creek  at  Arcadia,  Florida, 
from  a  sand  bar  which  is  exposed  when  the  water  is  low :  Tapirus,  a  tapir 
resembling  the  T.  americanus  of  South  America;  a  true  horse,  Equus;  teeth 
and  bones  which  may  belong  to  some  extinct  species  of  Hipparion,  a 
small  three-toed  equine;  Bison,  of  the  size  of  the  recent  American  bison; 
a  deer  similar  to  the  recent  Odocoileus;  a  mammoth  provisionally  referred 
to  E.  columbi;  among  edentates,  a  glyptodont  probably  similar  to  Glypto- 
therium,  also  Megalonyx.  The  Sirenia  appear  in  the  manatee  (Manatus). 
Among  the  reptiles  there  is  a  gigantic  species  of  land  tortoise  (Testudo 
cras^scutata)  as  well  as  trionychids  and  emyids.  Among  the  Proboscidea 
is  recorded  the  true  mastodon,  M.  americanus. 

It  seems  hardly  possible  that  this  assemblage  is  all  of  the  same  age, 
and  careful  stratigraphic  work  and  more  accurate  systematic  determination 
of  the  species  of  mammals  are  necessary  before  the  Upper  Pliocene  age  of 
these  forms  can  be  considered  as  proved.  The  conclusion,  however,  seems 
well  founded  that  we  have  here  an  Equus,  Elephas,  Glyptotherium  fauna 
either  of  very  late  Pliocene  or  of  early  Pleistocene  age. 

^  Loup  River/  Nebraska,  Formation, 
Elephas  Imperator  Zone 

The  same  uncertainty  applies  as  to  the  Upper  Pliocene  age  of  the  original 
'Loup  River'  formation  described  by  Meek  and  Hayden  in  1861-1862 
in  Nebraska,  and  to  certain  formations  as  yet  unnamed  in  Texas  and 
Mexico,  which  also  contain  remains  of  Equus  and  of  Elephas  imperator. 

The  typical  'Loup  River'  beds  were  first  characterized  by  Meek  and 
Hayden*  as  follows:  "Fine  loose  sand  with  some  layers  of  limestone  — 
contains  bones  of  Canis,  Felis,  Castor,  Equus,  Mas  odon,  Testudo,  etc., 
some  of  which  are  scarcely  distinguishable  from  hving  species."  These 
sands  lie  on  the  Loup  River  or  Loup  Fork  of  the  Platte  River.  Of  the 
bones  collected  in  this  locality  Leidy  observed  in  1869:  "Other  remains 
of  elephants,  as  Dr.  Hayden  supposed  them  to  be,  he  observed  in  association 
with  those  of  Mastodon  mirificus,  Equus  excelsus,  and  Hipparion  at  the 
head  of  the  Loup  Fork  branch  of  the  Platte  River;  also  between  this  point 
and  Niobrara  River  and  on  the  latter."  These  species  were  determined  by 
Leidy  as  follows:  Elephas  imperator,  Mastodon  mirificus,  Equus  excelsus. 

The  term  Loup  River,  which  was  thus  very  loosely  defined  and  cir- 
cumscribed at  the  outset,  together  with  the  animals  which  it  contained, 
although  employed  by  Hayden  in  1862  and  1869,-  in  1871  and  1873,  was, 

'  Proc.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phila.,  Vol.  XIII,  1861  (1862),  p.  433.    Also  Leidy,  J.,  Extinct 
Mammalian  Fauna  of  Dakota  and  Nebraska,  1869,  p.  255. 
*  See  Leidy,  op.  cit.,  1869,  Introduction. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  369 


with  the  animals  which  it  contains,  subsequently  confused  by  both  Hay  den 
and  Leidy  themselves^  with  the  very  much  older  horizon  of  true  Upper 
Miocene  age  as  part  of  their  Horizon  F.  'Loup  River'  thus  became  iden- 
tical in  its  loose  significance  with  'Loup  Fork,'  and  the  error  spread  into 
all  subsequent  literature. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  '  Loup  River '  was  the  original  name  applied 
to  a  fluviatile  formation  containing  mammals  solely  of  Upper  Pliocene  or 
Lower  Pleistocene  age,  namely,  Equus  and  Elephas. 

Conclusions  as  to  American  Pliocene.  —  Few  generalizations  can  be 
made  from  this  scanty  fauna  and  unsettled  stratigraphy  of  the  Pliocene. 
We  are  confronted  with  more  gaps  in  our  knowledge  and  with  more  un- 
solved problems  than  in  any  other  epoch.  Among  the  unsolved  problems 
is  the  direct  ancestry  of  the  South  American  cameloids  (Auchenia),  the 
llamas,  and  guanacos,  as  well  as  of  the  true  Old  World  camels  {Camelus). 
We  should  discover  here  deer  leading  to  the  American  type  of  deer  {Odo- 
coileus);  we  should  also  discover  horses  intermediate  between  the  most 
progressive  stages  with  tridactyl  feet  {Protohippus,  Pliohippus)  and  the 
monodactyl  Equus.  It  appears  finally  that  while  the  Pliocene  plains 
fauna  is  sparsely  known,  the  Pliocene  forest  fauna  is  wholly  unknown. 

Causes  of  Pliocene  Extinction 

The  disappearance  of  the  browsing  Herbivora  and  evolution  of  the  graz- 
ing Herbivora,  in  the  Great  Plains  region,  we  have  observed  as  cumulative 
processes,  beginning  in  Oligocene  times  (p.  240)  and  reaching  a  climax  in 
the  Pliocene. 

Increasing  aridity  and  prevailing  summer  droughts  were  characteristic 
of  late  Miocene  and  early  Pliocene  times  in  Europe,  and  evidence  is  accu- 
mulating that  the  same  conditions  prevailed  in  western  North  America. 

Secular  desiccation  has  been  the  fate  of  portions  of  three  great  con- 
tinents in  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  times,  in  each  of  which  we  observe  a 
gradual  modification  and  extinction  of  certain  kinds  of  quadrupeds.  These 
regions  of  increasing  aridity  are:  (1)  the  Western  plains  region  of  North 
America,  including  the  arid  plateau  and  mountain  region,  beginning  in 
Miocene  times;  (2)  South  America,  Patagonia,  and  the  Pampean  region, 
beginning  in  late  Pliocene  times;  (3)  north  central  Africa,  beginning  in 
late  Pleistocene  times;  (4)  central  Australia,  beginning  in  Pleistocene 
times.- 

Combining  the  facts  brought  together  by  many  observers.  Cope,  Ko- 
walevsky,  Scott,  Matthew,  Hatcher,  Stirling,  we  observe  that  the  diminu- 
tion of  the  softer  kinds  of  vegetable  food  and  increase  of  the  harder  kinds, 

^  See  Leidy,  op.  cit.,  1869,  pp.  15-21. 

2  Osborn,  H.  F.,  The  Causes  of  Extinction  of  Mammalia.  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XL, 
nos.  479  and  480,  Nov.  and  Dec,  1906,  pp.  769-795,  829-859.    (See  especially,  pp.  783-787). 


370  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

/ 

such  as  grasses,  are  accompanied  by  the  extinction  of  a  large  number  of 
the  browsing  Herbivora  and  by  the  rapid  evolution  of  the  grazing  Her- 
bivora,  as  was  first  thoroughly  worked  out  in  Kowalevsky's  epoch-making 
memoir  of  1873. 

The  influences  of  decreasing  moisture  are  fivefold:  (1)  the  character 
of  tlie  food  supply  changes  with  diminution  of  the  softer  and  more  succu- 
lent vegetation  and  increase  of  the  harder  and  more  resistant  vegetation. 
(2)  There  is  an  increase  in  the  length  and  severity  of  the  dry  seasons  of 
the  year.  (3)  Forest  barriers  are  diminished  or  removed,  and  new  com- 
petitors enter  the  country.  (4)  There  is  a  reduction  of  the  water  supply 
and  consequent  elimination  of  the  animals  incapable  of  traveling  long 
distances  for  food  and  water.  (5)  The  evolution  of  grazing  quadrupeds  is 
favored,  while  that  of  browsing  and  forest-living  quadrupeds  is^  hindered. 
In  brief,  prevailing  or  increasing  droughts  entirely  disturb  the  balance  of 
nature;  they  compel  migration;  they  expose  quadrupeds  to  attack  by  car- 
nivores by  drawing  them  to  restricted  water  pools;  they  favor  quadrupeds 
able  to  dispense  with  a  daily  supply  of  water. 

Facts  of  this  kind  enable  us  to  understand  the  disappearance  of  the 
browsing  horses,  of  the  browsing  chalicotheres,  of  the  browsing  and  grazing 
rhinoceroses,  incapable  of  traveling  great  distances,  and  of  the  browsing 
camels,  and  the  evolution  at  the  same  time  of  the  wide-ranging  long-limbed 
types  of  grazing  horses  and  grazing  camels,  which  even  in  Pliocene  times 
were  probably  acquiring  the  power  of  dispensing  with  daily  draughts  of 
water. 

Influence  of  droughts.  —  Darwin  describes  ^  the  devastating  effects  of  the 
great  drought  in  the  pampas  of  South  America  between  1827  and  1830, 
during  which  great  numbers  of  birds,  wild  animals,  cattle,  and  horses 
perished  from  want  of  food  and  water.  Cattle  perished  by  thousands  on  the 
muddy  banks  of  the  Parana  River.  Similarly  Azara  describes  horses  perish- 
ing in  large  numbers  in  marshes,  where  driven  in  by  thirst.  In  central 
Africa  to-day  the  influence  of  gradual  decrease  of  moisture  is  clearly  illus- 
trated in  the  conditions  observed  by  such  writers  as  Gregory. ^  The  drinking 
places,  or  water  pools,  during  long  periods  of  drought  become  fewer  in 
number  and  more  Avidely  separated,  and  large  animals  driven  to  them  by 
thirst  are  more  readily  attacked  and  killed  by  Carnivora.  Thirst,  like 
hunger,  drives  quadrupeds  to  take  extreme  risks,  which  they  would  abso- 
lutely avoid  during  natural  conditions  of  w^ater  supply.  The  pools  become 
separated  by  distances  of  thirty  to  forty  miles,  thus  necessitating  long 
excursions  to  and  from  the  various  feeding  places,  during  which  quad- 
rupeds are  again  exposed  to  attack.  Finally,  some  of  the  pools  dry  up 
entirely,  and,  as  observed  by  Gregory  (op.  cit.,  p.  268):  ''Here  and  there 

'  Dans-in,  C,  Journal.  .  .  .  Voyage  of  H.  M.  S.  Beagle  around  the  World,  1845.  New 
ed.,  1900.  pp.  128-1.30. 

2  Gregory,  J.  W.,  The  Great  Rift  Valley.    8vo,  London,  1896. 


THE  PLIOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  371 

around  a  water  hole  we  found  acres  of  ground  white  with  the  bones  of 
rhinoceroses  and  zebra,  gazelle  and  antelope,  jackal  and  hyena  ...  all 
the  bones  were  there  fresh  and  ungnawed.  .  .  .  These  animals  had  crowded 
around  the  dwindling  pools  and  fought  for  the  last  drops  of  water." 

Such  perishing  of  animals  in  great  numbers  from  thirst  would  be  one 
of  many  causes  bringing  about  the  condition  of  diminished  herds,  which 
may  indirectly  become  a  final  cause  of  actual  extinction  through  the  in- 
ability of  the  enfeebled  herd  to  protect  its  young. 

Another  effect  of  increasing  desiccation  is  the  increased  number  of 
alkali  lakes,  licks,  and  springs,  and  other  areas  of  salt  deposits.  Alkali  is 
sought  by  certain  wild  animals  as  a  substitute  for  salt;  the  effects  are  not 
beneficial,  and,  as  observed  by  Chestnut,^  may  predispose  animals  to  the 
eating  of  noxious  narcotic  weeds. 

We  have,  therefore,  good  grounds  for  believing  that  secular  desiccation 
was  one  of  the  world-wide  influences  which  caused  the  impoverishment  of 
the  magnificent  fauna  of  early  Phocene  times  and  the  actual  extinction  of 
certain  types  of  mammals. 

^  Chestnut,  V.  K.,  and  Wilcox,  E.  V.,  The  Stock-poisoning  Plants  of  Montana:  A  Pre- 
liminary Report.    U.S.  Dept.  Agric,  Div.  of  Botany,  Bull.  26,  1901. 


CHAPTER  VI 


THE  PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH 

AMERICA 

We  have  seen  that  the  Upper  Tertiary  or  Pliocene  closes  with  a  world 
rich  with  life,  a  world  replete  with  Asiatic  and  African  influence.  The 
Tertiary  is  followed  by  the  Quaternary: 

C.NOZOIC={?™-- 

The  grand  divisions  of  the  Quaternary  in  the  New  and  Old  Worlds  are 
the  same;  namely,  beginning  with  the  Pleistocene  and  closing  with  the 
Holocene, 

II.  HoLOCENE,  or  Recent.    Mammals  of  prehistoric  times.  Do- 
jx,  mestication. 
^     I.  Pleistocene,  or  Glacial. 

3.  Post-Glacial.    Mammals  of  existing  species.    Migrations  and 
^  extinctions. 

^         2.  Glacial.    Period  of  successive  glacial  advances  and  retreats. 
2  Mammals  of  extinct  and  existing  species  commingled. 

^         1.  Preglacial.     Period  of  the  incipient  lowering  of  temperature 
and  modification  of  animal  and  plant  life. 

In  the  Pleistocene  period  the  fullness  and  precision  of  European  in- 
vestigation are  in  the  strongest  contrast  to  the  preliminary^  results  of  Ameri- 
can work,  and  in  no  other  period  may  we  anticipate  more  weighty  induc- 
tions from  correlation  between  the  history  of  the  Old  and  New  Worlds. 
It  is  true  that  the  Pleistocene  history  of  Europe  is  still  in  a  formative 
stage,  but  it  is  absolutely  clear  that  a  final  and  positive  time  scale  and 
subdivision  of  the  early  Age  of  Man  are  not  far  cUstant,  and  that  the  vast 
labors  of  European  geologists,  botanists,  zoologists,  palaeontologists,  and 
anthropologists  w^W  finally  be  rewarded  wdth  a  harmonious  theory  of  all 
the  phenomena  of  the  Quaternary  epoch. 

Combined  attack  by  geological  and  biological  methods  has  nowhere 
produced  more  brilliant  results.  The  unaided  testimony  of  the  rocks  and 
soils  fails  to  tell  us  of  the  successive  advances  and  retreats  of  the  ice;  but 
where,  owing  to  the  obliteration  of  surface  deposits,  geology  is  in  confusion, 
the  traces  of  plant  and  animal  life  serve  both  biology  and  meteorology 
like  vast  thermometers  of  the  past,  actually  recording  within  a  few  degrees 

372 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  373 


the  repeated  rise  and  fall  of  temperature.  Man,  first  with  his  crude  im- 
plements and  then  with  his  skeletal  remains,  enters  amidst  these  extinct 
floras  and  faunas,  and  affords  a  new  and  very  precise  means  of  marking 
off  the  stages  of  geologic  time. 

Geographic  changes.  —  Elevation,  subsidence,  reelevation,  is  the  se- 
quence of  Pleistocene  geographic  change.  The  beginning  of  the  Pleisto- 
cene is  remarkable  for  its  broad  land  connections,  and  represents  the  last 
stage  of  that  community  of  fauna  which  during  Pliocene  times  distin- 


PLEISTOCENE 


Fig.  172.  —  Pleistocene,  or  Ice  Age.  A  period  of  maximum  total  elevation  facilitating  free 
migrations  and  invasions  of  life,  culminating  in  the  Glacial  epoch,  and  followed  by  a  prolonged 
depression.  Portions  of  northern  Europe  and  the  coasts  of  North  America  greatly  depressed. 
Then  a  period  of  reelevation.    Rearranged  after  W.  D.  Matthew,  1908. 

guished  the  entire  region  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa.  The  central  geo- 
graphic feature  of  the  Ice  Age  was  the  continental  elevation,  which  increased 
the  land  areas  and  connections  and  shut  off  the  warm  ocean  currents, 
serving  to  lower  the  temperature.  During  the  second  Interglacial  Period 
there  occurred  extensive  volcanic  disturbances  in  central  Europe,  giving 
rise  to  the  hot  spring  formations  of  Thuringia  (Taubach,  Weimar). 

The  general  and  local  subsidence  which  was  the  chief  feature  of  closing 
Pleistocene  times  served  to  cut  off  all  the  old  continental  connections  which 
had  been  characteristic  of  the  Tertiary.  As  to  the  sequence  of  this  de- 
pression, Ireland  first  lost  its  land  connection  with  Wales  and  then  with 
Scotland,  and  Great  Britain  became  faunally  isolated.  In  the  Mediter- 
ranean in  mid-Pleistocene  times  (Pohlig)  the  land  bridge  across  Gibraltar 


374 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


to  Africa,  also  that  between  Italy,  Sicily,  and  Africa,  was  broken;  Malta 
and  the  other  Mediterranean  islands  became  isolated.  To  the  eastward 
the  ^lediterranean  Sea  extended  into  the  ^gean  region  and  cut  off  the  old 
land  connection  between  Greece  and  Asia  Minor.  During  a  period  of 
depression  the  Black  Sea,  the  Caspian,  and  the  Sea  of  Aral  formed  the 
large  single  sheet  of  water  known  as  the  Hyrcanian  Sea.  In  Asia  similar 
depression  and  separation  phenomena  were  in  progress.  The  islands  oi" 
the  East  Indies,  Sumatra,  and  Java  were  cut  off  from  the  Malayan  Penin- 
sula. The  separation  of  the  Japanese  and  Philippine  archipelagos  prob- 
ably occurred  in  post-Glacial  times.  Similarly  New  Guinea  and  Tasmania, 
originally  part  of  the  Australian  continent,  became  isolated. 

It  is  premature  to  attempt  to  correlate  these  depression  phenomena 
with  the  life  zones.  Late  in  Pleistocene  times  to  the  far  northeast  the 
Boliring  Straits  were  reopened,  and  only  after  a  long  period  of  community 
and  free  intermigration  of  Holarctic  life,  the  Nearctic  region  of  North 
America  was  completely  isolated  from  the  Palsearctic  region  of  Eurasia. 

VII.  SEVENTH  FAUNAL  PHASE  —  QUATERNARY.  IN  THE  NORTH- 
ERN HEMISPHERE  THE  GLACIAL  PERIOD.  VERY  GRADUAL 
EXTINCTION  OR  EXPULSION  OF  SOUTHERN  TYPES  OF  AFRICAN, 
SOUTH  ASIATIC,  AND  SOUTH  AMERICAN  ORIGIN.  FIRST 
APPEARANCE  IN  CENTRAL  EUROPE  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  OF 
THE  CIRCUMPOLAR  TUNDRA  FAUNA.  IN  NORTH  AMERICA 
EXTINCTION  OF  THE  REMAINING  LARGE  ENDEMIC  QUAD- 
RUPEDS. THIRD  AND  FINAL  MODERNIZATION  BY  A  EURA- 
SIATIC  OR  NORTHERN  INVASION  OF  NEW  HARDY,  FOREST, 
MEADOW,  AND  MOUNTAIN,  RUMINANTS  AND  CARNIVORES. 

The  Quaternary  is  a  time  of  transition,  of  vast  extinction  through 
natural  causes,  as  well  as  geographic  redistribution  of  life.  During  this 
epoch  man  becomes  the  destroying  angel,  who  nearly  completes  the  havoc 
which  nature  has  begun. 

We  thus  enter  a  new  Faunal  Phase,  the  Seventh.  When  its  tran- 
sitions are  complete,  the  world  wears  an  entirely  new  and  somewhat  im- 
poverished aspect.  The  north  has  banished  all  the  chief  southerly  forms 
and  established  the  five  modern  zoological  regions  of  the  Old  and  New 
Worlds,  namely:  Paliearctic,  Nearctic,  Oriental,  Ethiopian,  Neotropical. 

Similar  divisions  of  the  Seventh  Phase  in  the  New  and  Old  Worlds.  —  It 
is  natural  in  the  present  review  to  compare  on  a  grand  scale  the  mammalian 
succession  in  the  Quaternary  epoch  with  those  in  the  various  Tertiary 
epochs.  It  will  be  remembered  that  both  in  the  Miocene  (p.  249)  and 
Pliocene  (p.  309)  of  Europe  we  have  evidence  of  two  faunal  periods.  Tested 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  375 


by  the  same  standards  there  is  considerable,  but  not  as  yet  conclusive, 
evidence  that  both  in  Europe  and  North  America  the  Quaternary  exhibits 
three  faunal  periods  (I,  II,  III),  the  first  of  these  subdividing  into  two,  as 
follows : 

Faunal  Period  I 

First  fauna.    Temperate  fauna  of  Second  fauna.       Rich  temperate 

late  pre-glacial  and  early  interglacial  fauna  of  interglacial  times.  Intermin- 
times.  Several  surviving  Pliocene  types.  ghng  of  extinct  and  recent  species.  Large 
Species  mostly  now  extinct.  southern  element. 

Faunal  Period  II 

Third  fauna.  Entrance  of  an  arctic  or  circumpolar  fauna  in  the  last  glacial 
stages.  Arrival  of  new  northern  elements.  Southern  element  greatly  reduced. 
Many  existing  species. 

Faunal  Period  III 

Fourth  fauna.  The  prehistoric  mammals.  All  existing  species.  A  north 
temperate  fauna  of  modern  forest  and  plains  types. 

The  secular  climatic  conditions  in  America  were  broadly  contemporaneous 
with  those  in  Europe ;  it  is  thus  natural  to  expect  to  discover  a  broad  similarity 
in  the  faunal  succession,  and  it  may  be  said  that  this  expectation  is  realized. 
Close  similarity  should  not  be  anticipated,  first  because  the  animals  at 
the  close  of  the  Pliocene  in  the  two  countries  contain  many  different  ele- 
ments (Europe  including  south-Asiatic  and  African,  and  America  including 
South  American  forms) ;  second,  because  physiographic  conditions  in  Amer- 
ica were  different.  Below  the  southernmost  ice  limit  of  the  United  States 
was  a  vast  land  area,  whereas  in  Europe  the  Mediterranean  closely  bordered 
the  ice-clad  regions  on  the  south. 

There  is"  little  doubt  that  in  both  countries  these  four  faunas  broadly 
correspond  with  the  advance  of  Pleistocene  or  glacial  time  as  follows : 

Fourth  fauna,  post-glacial  and  modern  conditions. 

Third  fauna,  maximum  glacial,  arctic  conditions. 

Second  fauna,  mid-Pleistocene  interglacial  temperate  conditions. 

First  fauna,  early  Pleistocene  temperate  conditions. 

Time  Divisions  of  the  Quaternary 

The  fluctuations  of  climate  and  of  the  animal  and  plant  life  of  the 
Pleistocene  are  so  numerous,  so  widespread,  and  so  profound  that  it  seems 
best  to  introduce  the  subject  by  a  review  of  the  great  time  divisions,  together 
with  some  discussion  as  to  the  period  when  we  should  consider  that  the 
Quaternary  proper  begins.  The  reader  will  observe  at  once  that  these 
time  divisions  are  based  on  evidence  of  four  kinds : 


376 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


1.  Geological:  glacial  deposits  and  erosions. 

2.  Botanical :  plant  deposits,  alternation  of  northern,  arctic,  and  tem- 
perate floras. 

3.  PaliEOzoological :  evolution,  migration,  and  extinction  of  animal  life. 

4.  Archaeological :  human  implements,  stages  of  human  culture,  skeletal 
remains  of  man. 

Geologists  are  agreed  that  there  were  several  glacial  advances,  differing 
in  duration  and  severity,  alternating  ^\^th  intergladal  warm  periods  during 
which  the  ice  retreated  and  conditions  of  climate  prevailed  which  in  some 


Fig.  173,  —  Europe  in  glacial  times.    I.  Maximum  glaciation.    After  de  Lapparent,  1906. 


instances  were  even  milder  than  those  of  the  same  latitudes  to-day.  While 
in  a  sense  rhythmic,  both  the  glacial  and  interglacial  periods  differed  in 
duration;  they  also  differed  in  intensity  in  different  parts  of  the  northern 
hemisphere  and  as  affected  by  the  proximity  of  great  mountain  ranges  or 
highlands  on  which  the  ice  masses  could  accumulate.  Thus  near  the  Swiss 
Alps,  Pcnck  (1909)  observes  evidence  of  four  great  glacial  advances  and  three 
interglacial  epochs,  while  in  northern  Germany  only  three  great  glacial 
advances  are  recorded,  because  one  of  the  series  was  not  sufficiently  extensive 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  377 

to  leave  its  records  in  regions  so  remote  from  the  Alps.  Similarly,  Ameri- 
can geologists  have  discovered  evidence  in  certain  parts  of  the  United 
States  of  five  great  glacial  advances,  two  of  which  are  more  or  less  confluent. 
It  is  obvious  that  in  different  parts  of  the  northern  hemisphere  it  will  be 
easier  to  correlate  the  first  and  the  last  of  these  successive  advances  than  to 
correlate  the  intermediate  ones.  The  correlations  which  are  suggested  in 
the  accompanying  tables  in  square  brackets  [  ]  are  to  be  regarded,  there- 
fore, as  in  a  large  measure  hypothetical. 

Germany.  —  In  studjdng  the  four  faunal  periods,  we  may  first  consider 
the  divisions  of  the  Pleistocene  of  northern  Europe  as  discussed  by  Pohlig.^ 
Pohlig  introduces  the  Pleistocene  with  what  he  calls  the  Norfolk  Interglacial 
Stage;  this  implies  a  previous  glacial  stage,  in  Great  Britain  at  least  (see  p. 
393).  In  strata  of  this  age  we  discover  what  is  generally  regarded  as  the 
First  Pleistocene  Fauna  and  will  be  described  as  such  in  the  present  work. 
The  mammals  of  the  First  and  Second  Pleistocene  faunas  are  principally 
recorded  in  the  warmer  deposits  of  interglacial  times,  namely,  the  Norfolk, 
Skanian,  and  Helvetian.  The  times  of  the  first,  of  the  second,  and  perhaps 
of  the  third  glacial  advances  have  left  no  trace  of  mammalian  remains  in 
Germany;  in  the  short  arctic  summers  the  districts  left  free  by  the  ice 
were  flooded  by  the  melting  of  the  glacial  edges,  and  there  was  thus  no 
chance  for  either  plants  or  animals  to  exist.  This  does  not  appear  to  be 
true,  however,  of  the  final  or  fourth  glacial  time,  namely,  the  Berolinian, 
which  corresponds  broadly  with  the  last  glaciations  elsewhere,  namely, 
with  the  Wiirm  Glaciation  of  the  Alps  region  or  with  the  Wisconsin  of 
North  America.  Here  it  is  believed  that  we  have  records  of  animal  life,  or 
of  the  Third  Fauna  which  existed  during  the  period  of  advance,  of  maximum 
glaciation,  and  of  retreat.  The  divisions  of  Pohlig  appear  to  agree  with 
those  of  Penck  on  this  point,  and  would  serve  to  explain  the  fact  that  pre- 
ceding and  during  the  last  glaciation  we  have  our  first  positive  records  of  the 
Arctic  tundra  and  steppe  types  of  mammals  in  Europe,  constituting  the 
Third  Pleistocene  Fauna. 

Switzerland.  —  The  most  recent  results  in  Switzerland  are  those  presented 
by  Penck,  which  are  shown,  with  some  modifications,  in  the  accompanying 
table.2 

The  Glacial  Period  in  the  Alpine  Region 

This  table,  which  was  prepared  under  Professor  Penck's  direction 
(March,  1909),  brings  out  the  two  distinctive  features  of  his  theory,  namely: 
(1)  of  the  alternation  of  the  Second  and  Third  faunas;  (2)  of  the  correlation 
of  the  human  culture  stages  with  the  interglacial  periods.  Both  are  im- 
portant if  sustained  by  sufficient  evidence. 

1  Pohlig,  H.,  Eiszeit  und  Urgeschichte  des  Menschen.  Leipzig,  1907.  These  terms  are 
used  in  a  different  order  by  James  Geikie  (1894).    See  also  Jour,  of  GeoL,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  241-269. 

2  Penck,  A.,  Das  Alter  des  Menschengeschlechtes.  Zeitschr.  EthnoL,  no.  3,  1908,  pp.  390- 

407. 


378 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Alternate  migration  theory. — The  alternation  is  held  by  Penck  to  be 
demonstrated  in  Switzerland,  where  during  the  Riss  Glaciation  the  Third 
Fauna,  embracing  the  woolly  manmioth  {E.  primigenius)  and  woolly  rhi- 
noceros (D.  tichorhinus),  first  appears  in  Europe,  only  to  be  succeeded, 
however,  in  the  short  Riss-Wurm  interglacial  period,  by  the  rearrival  of  the 
Second  Fauna,  including  the  straight-tusked  elephant  {E.  antiquus)  and  the 
broad-nosed  rhinoceros  (Z).  merckii).  This  Second  Fauna  is  again  driven 
out  during  the  final  Wurm  Glaciation  by  the  woolly  elephant  and  woolly 
rhinoceros  of  the  Third  Fauna. 

Faunal,  glacial,  and  culture  stages.  — The  six  culture  subdivisions  of  the 
Palaeolithic  are  those  introduced  by  French  archaeologists,  for  in  France 
these  successive  stages  were  first  clearly  distinguished,  especially  by  the 
elder  de  Mortillet;  several  of  them  are  now  recognized  in  Belgium.  It 
will  be  noted,  secondly,  that  Penck  traces  the  earliest  palaeolithic  culture 
stage,  namely,  the  Chellean,  back  into  the  heart  of  the  Pleistocene  as 
contemporaneous  with  the  second  fauna  of  the  very  long  and  warm  inter- 
glacial period,  known  as  the  Helvetian,  or  Mindel-Riss;  whereas  Boule 
would  place  the  Chellean  in  the  final,  short  interglacial  period,  or  Riss- 
Wiirm. 

The  mammals  and  culture  stages,  therefore,  are  correlated  by  Penck  ^ 
with  the  great  fluctuations  of  the  northern  waves  of  mammalian  life  as 
follows.  The  Second  Fauna  of  the  long,  warm  Helvetian,  or  Mindel-Riss 
interglacial  stage  is  considered  contemporaneous  with  the  Chellean  phase 
of  human  culture  typified  at  Chelles,  France  (Fig.  176,  15).  This  second 
fauna  was  forced  to  migrate  southward  during  the  Riss  Glaciation,  which 
was  of  long  duration  and  accompanied  by  a  severe  climate,  favorable  to 
the  northern  forms  of  woolly  elephant  and  woolly  rhinoceros,  constituting 
the  Third  Fauna.  As  the  Riss  glacier  receded  there  followed  the  relatively 
short  Riss-Wiirm  interglacial  epoch,  in  which  we  discover  the  return  of  our 
Second  Fauna,  and  the  evolution  of  a  higher  stage  of  human  culture,  namely > 
the  Mousterian,  to  which  belong  the  men  of  Neandertal,  Spy,  Krapina, 
and  the  animal  remains  of  Moustier,  which  gives  the  name  to  this  stage. 
This  ]\Iousterian  culture  period  was  contemporary  ^vith  the  Riss  Glaciation 
as  well  as  with  the  succeeding  Riss-Wiirm  interglacial  stage.  As  this  stage 
is  followed  by  the  final,  or  Wiirm  Glaciation,  the  arcto-alpine  mammals  of 
the  Third  Fauna  again  appear  in  Europe.  In  the  meantime  the  Mousterian 
culture  stage  gives  way  successively  to  the  Aurignacian,  the  Solutrian,  and 
the  Magdalenian,  the  latter  representing  the  height  of  the  Reindeer  Period, 
when  the  Third  or  arctic  fauna  spread  over  Europe.  After  the  Magdalenian 
culture  stage,  which  closes  the  Palaeohthic  series,  there  is  an  interval  which 
marks  the  retreat  of  the  last  glaciation  before  the  introduction  of  the  Neo- 
lithic culture  and  the  appearance  of  the  Fourth  Fauna. 

»  Penck,  A.,  Das  Alter  de3  Menschengeschlechtes.  Zeitschr.  EthnoL,  no.  3,  1908,  pp.  390- 
407. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  379 
THE  GLACIAL  PERIOD  IN  THE  ALPINE  REGION 


Modified  after  mss.  of  Penck,  1909 
[Interpellations  by  the  present  writer  in  square  [  ]  brackets] 


Geologic 

Time 
Divisions 

Characteristic 
Geological 
Deposits 

Glacial  and  Inter- 
glacial  Epochs 

Fauna 

Human  Culture 

Stages 
(as  correlated  by 

Penck) 

Human 
Skeletal 
Remains 

HOLO- 
CENE 

[Fourth  Fauna] 

NEO- 
LITHIC 

MID-PLEISTOCENE-GLACIAL 

Schweizersbild 
near  Schaff- 
hausen 

Kesslerloch 
Cave 

Wildkirchli 
Cave  of  Mt. 
Santis 

Diirnten 

Wetzikon 

Leffe  in  Val 
Gandino 

[IV]  GLACIA-  f 
TION-      <  ^ 
WURM  [ 

[a  . 

Short  3d  Interglacial 
Epoch 

Iliss-Wurm 

[III]  GLACIATION-  ( 
RISS  ^ 

2d  Interglacial  Epoch, 
very  long  and  warm 
Mindel-Riss 

[II]  GLACIATION- 
MINDEL 

[Third  Fauna] 

Elephas  primi- 

genius 
Rhinoceros  ti- 

chorhinus 

[Second  Fauna] 

Elephas  antiquus 
Rhinoceros  mer- 

ckii 
Ursus  spelaeus 

[Third  Fauna] 

Elephas  primi- 

genius 
Rhinoceros  ti- 

chorhinus 

[Second  Fauna] 

Elephas  antiquus 
Elephas  meridio- 
nalis  (last  ap- 
pearance) 
Hippopotamus, 
etc. 

Magdalenian  " 
Solutrian  O 

t— 1 

w 

Aurignacian 

Eh 

iMousterian  O 

AcheuUan 
Chellean 

1  Reindeer 
1  Man 

Mentone 

Spy,  Kra- 
pina,  Le 
J  Moustier 

Neander- 
L    tal  Man 

Heidelberg 
Man 

Strong  uncon- 
formity 

1st  Interglacial  Epoch 

[1]  GLACIATION- 
GIJNZ 

Pre-Glacial  Epoch 
Elevation  500  meters 

[First  Fauna] 

Machgerodus 
Rhin.  etruscus 
E.  meridionalis 
Hippopotamus 

Typical  Pleisto- 
cene inverte- 
brates : 
Pupa  musco- 
rum,  Succinea 
oblonga,  Helix 
hispida 

0     L     I   T     H     I     C  ] 

PLIOCENE 
(Summit  of) 

W 

I Prof .  Penck  is  disposed  to  correlate  the  European  Glacial 
epochs  with  the  American,  as  follows  : 
of  Glaciation  Wiirm  =  Wisconsin 

Riss  =  lUinoian 
Mindel  =  Kansan 


580 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


It  was  formerly  supposed  that  the  transition  from  the  PalseoHthic  to 
the  NeoHthic  was  abrupt,  but  some  recent  authorities  (Rutot,  MacCurdy) 
are  incUned  to  favor  a  more  gradual  development  theory;  thus  the  Tarde- 
noisian  industry,  representing  the  beginning  of  the  Neolithic,  may  be  consid- 
ered as  a  transformation  of  the  Magdalenian;  furthermore,  the  art  of 
polishing  stone  implements  did  not  appear  until  the  fourth  epoch  (Roben- 
hausian)  of  the  Neolithic.  From  the  Neolithic  period  to  the  present  time  there 
has  been  no  great  deviation  in  climate  or  in  fauna.  Thus  Neolithic  man,  who 
belonged  to  a  different  race  with  polished  stone  implements,  first  appeared 
in  post-glacial  times,  or  at  the  beginning  of  the  Holocene  or  Recent  Period. 

Theory  of  Boule.  —  The  French  palaeontologist  and  archaeologist  Mar- 
cellin  Boule^  believes  that  Penck  errs  both  in  his  correlation  of  the  glacial 
periods  with  human  culture  stages  and  in  his  view  of  the  alternate  migra- 
tions of  the  arctic  or  third  fauna  of  mammals.  He  maintains  that  of  the 
three  great  glacial  advances,  one  falls  in  the  Pliocene  and  two  in  the  Pleis- 
tocene. He  observes  that  if  one  holds  with  Penck  that  all  the  glacial  epochs 
are  Pleistocene,  the  conclusion  naturally  follows  that  the  Pleistocene  opened 
with  a  time  of  great  glaciation;  but  there  is  more  ground  for  believing  that 
the  first  glacial  epoch  at  least  was  of  late  PUocene  age,  and  since  the  Nor- 
folk Forest  Bed  deposits  are  probably  transitional  between  the  Pliocene 
and  Pleistocene,  even  the  second  glacial  epoch  would  be  placed  at  the  close 
of  the  Pliocene  period.  The  nomenclature  is  largely  a  matter  of  terms, 
but  the  questions  of  alternate  migrations  and  geologic  age  of  the  human 
culture  stages  are  both  very  important  and  far-reaching.  The  accompany- 
ing table  exhibits  the  wide  difference  of  opinion  between  these  distinguished 
authorities  as  to  the  geologic  age  of  the  culture  phases. 


Geological  Divisions 
OF  Penck 


Post-Glaeial 


Wiirm  Glaciation  .... 

Third  interglaeial  epoch 
Riss  Glaciation  .... 

Scoond  interglaeial  epoch 
Mindel  Glaciation    .    .  . 

First  interglaeial  epoch 
Giinz  Glaciation  .... 


Paleolithic  Arch.eological  Divisions  of 


Penck  2 


Magdalenien 


!  Solutreen  ^  . 
Moustierien  - 
Chelleen    .  . 


Boule 


Magdalenien 
Solutreen 
Moustierien 


K  Chelleen 

o 
c 

H 


•  Boule,  M.,  Observations  sur  un  Silex  Tailld  du  Jura  et  sur  la  Chronologie  de  M.  Penck. 
AnthropoL,  Vol.  XIX.  1008. 

'  Cf.,  however,  Penck's  later  views,  as  expressed  in  the  table  (p.  379). 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  381 


Human  culture  stages.  —  Our  review  of  the  time  divisions  of  the  Quater- 
nary naturally  closes  with  that  of  the  human  culture  periods,  which  are 
most  clearly  presented  in  the  accompanying  table  by  de  Mortillet,^  and 
below  will  be  found  brief  outlines  of  the  history  of  Palaeolithic  man  and 
the  appearance  of  man  in  North  America  (p.  494). 


G.  DE  MORTILLET'S  CLASSIFICATION  OF  1898-1908,  BASED  ON  THE  EVOLU- 
TION OF  HUMAN  IMPLEMENTS  2 


Geological 
Periods 

Historic 
Divisions 

Materials 
Imp] 

AND  Types  of 

.EMENTS 

Culture  Stages 

o 

Merovingian 

XV 

^'V  al^cman 

STOR] 

Roman 

XIV 

HOLO- 

Iron 

XIII 

—  Lugdunian 

CENE 
OR 

O 

Gallic 

XII 

—  Marnian 

RECENT 

ISTOB 

XI 

—  Hallstattian 

OTOH 

Bronze 

Tziganian 

X 

—  Larnaudian 

« 

Ph 

IX 

—  Morgian 

Neolithic 

VIII 

—  Robenhausian 

'ERNARY  : 
OR 

STOCENE  ] 

VII 

—  Magdalenian 

o 

Palseolithic 

VI 

—  Solutriau 

STOR] 

Stone 

V 

—  Moustcrian 

QUA! 
PLEI 

'rehi 

IV 

—  Acheulian 

III 

—  Chellean 

TER- 

Eolithic 

II 

—  Puycournian 

TIARY 

I 

—  Thenaysian 

The  Eolithic  Stage. ^  —  The  rude  flints  known  as  eoliths,  which  precede 
the  earliest  palseoliths  of  the  Chellean  Stage,  have  been  the  subject  of  much 

1  De  Mortillet,  A.,  La  Classification  Palethnologique.    Paris,  1908. 

2  Yrom.  *A.  de  Mortillet's  La  Classification  Palethnologique,  Paris,  1898-190S.  This 
classification  is  that  of  the  elder  de  Mortillet,  and  it  is  considerably  modified  by  more  recent 
discoveries. 

3  MacCurdy,  G.  G.,  The  Eolithic  Problem,  Evidences  of  a  Rude  Industry  Antedating 
the  Paleolithic.    Amer.  Anthrop.,  Vol.  VII,  no.  3,  July-Sept.,  1905,  pp.  425-479. 


382 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


controversy.^  Flints  thought  by  some  to  be  the  work  of  man  were  discovered 
by  TAbbe  Bourgeois  in  1867  in  the  Miocene  of  Thenay,  Loire-et-Cher,  and 
in  1877  Rames  l^rought  to  notice  flints  from  the  Upper  Miocene  volcanic  ash 
beds  of  Puy-Courny,  Cantal,  in  central  France,  a  formation  of  the  same 
age  as  the  Pikermi  fauna.  In  1892  Brown  proposed  the  term  *  eoliths,'  to  dis- 
tinguish these  supposed  very  primitive  artifacts  from  the  '  palaeoliths '  and 
'neoliths'  of  Lubbock  (Fig.  174). 

These  flints  are  very  rough,  but  rude  as  they  are,  they  generally  show 
one  part  shaped  as  if  to  hold  in  the  hand,  while  the  other  part  appears  to  be 


Fig.  174.  —  A.  Eolith,  Mafflean  Epoch,  Belgium.  B.  Palaeolith,  Chellean  Epoch,  Milton 
Street,  Kent,  England.  C.  Neolith,  Upper  Robenhausian  Epoch,  Gille  Leie,  Denmark. 
Photograph  by  MacCurdy,  1909. 


edged  or  pointed  for  cutting.^  It  is  a  puzzling  fact  that  the  earliest  eoliths 
resemble  the  later  ones,  there  being,  therefore,  little  development  or  im- 
provement in  form  for  hundreds  of  thousands  of  years. 

Eoliths  have  been  discovered  not  only  in  Upper  Miocene  deposits  of 
central  France,  but  in  early  Pleistocene  gravels  of  France  (St.  Prest)  and 
Belgium,  in  southern  England  (possibly  Kent),  and  in  Upper  Oligocene 
betls  of  Belgium.  The  Belgian  geologist  Rutot  has  devoted  his  life  to  the 
Eolithic  period  and  proved  that,  like  the  Palaeolithic,  it  is  capable  of  sub^ 
division  into  a  number  of  stages  or  industries,  which  are  geologically  demon- 
strable (see  Table  by  MacCurdy).    Perhaps  the  most  convincing  discovery 

1  Wilson,  J.  H.,  Recent  Journeys  among  Localities  noted  for  the  Discovery  of  Remains 
of  Prehistoric  Man.  Ann.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.,  Vol.  XVI,  no.  2,  Mar.  17,  1905  (read  Jan.  18, 
1904),  pp.  65-74. 

2  Penck.  A.,  The  Antiquity  of  Man.  Lecture  before  Washington  Acad.  Sci.,  Feb.  1,  1909. 
Abstr.  Science,  n.a.,  Vol.  XXIX,  no.  739,  Feb.  26,  1909,  pp.  359-360. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  383 

RELATIVE  CHRONOLOGY  OF  THE  EOLITHIC  AND  PALEOLITHIC  OF  THE 
STONE  AGE  (after  MacCurdy) 


Geological 
Periods 


Flan- 
drian 


Braban- 
tian 


Hes- 
bayan 


Glacial  and 
Interglacial 
Epochs 


Daun  Stage 
Gschnitz  Stage 
Blihl  Stage 
(Wisconsin) 


Wiirm  Glacial 


Riss-Wiirm 
Interglacial 


Cam- 
pinian 


Riss  Glacial 
(lUinolsan) 


Mindel-Riss 
Interglacial 


Mosean 


Upper 


Middle 


Lower 


Uppe 


Middle 


Lower 


Upper 


Middle 


Lower 


Mindel  Glacis 
(Kansan) 


Giinz-Mindel 
Interglacial 

Giinz  Glacial 
(Pre-Kansan) 


Fauna 


Reindeer 


Bison 


Equus  ca- 
ballus 


Ursus  spe- 
Iceus 


Elephas 

primige- 

nius 
Rhinoceros 

tichorhi- 

nus 

Rhinoceros 
merckii 

Elephas 
antiquus 


Elephas 
meridio- 
nalis 


Hipparion 
Dinothe- 
rium 


Human 
Remains 


Cultural- 
Epochs 


Cro-Magnon, 
Grimaldi 


Grimaldi 
(Negroid), 
Combe-Ca- 
pelle 

La  Chapelle- 
aux-Saints, 
H.  Mouste- 
riensis,  Spy, 
Krapina, 
Neandertal 


Magdale- 
nian 


Solutrean 


Type  Stations 


La  Madeleine 
(Dordogne) 


Aurigna- 


Mouste- 
rian 


Homo  hei- 
delbergen- 


Acheulian 


Solutre 
(Saone-et- 
Loire) 


Auiignac 
(Haute-Ga- 
ronne) 


Le  Moustier 
(Dordogne) 


Chellean 


Saint-Acheul 
(Somme) 


Strepyan 


Mesvinian 


Mafflean 


Reutelian 


Chelles  (Seine- 
et-Marne) 


Strepy  (Bel- 
gium) 


Mesvin  (Bel- 
gium) 


Maffle  (Bel- 
gium) 


Reutel  (Bel- 
gium) 


Saint- 
Prestian 


Kentian 


Cantalian 


Fagnian 


Saint-Prest 
(Eure-et- 
Loire) 


Kent  (Eng- 
land) 


Puy-Courny 
(Cantal) 


Hautes- 
Fagnes  Bon- 
celles  (Bel- 
gium) 


384 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


FLANDRIAN  <  ^^f^ftRON LOESS 


of  all  is  that  recently  reported  of  the  presence  of  eohths  in  the  same  depos- 
its  with  a  jaw  of  very  low  type  (Homo  fteideibergensts). 

I  they  are  to  be  regarded  as  human  artifacts,  the  antiqmty  of  man  or 
Ota  pre-human  type  given  lo  shaping  .ton.  imp!eme«i«  is  greatly  mereased: 
three  or  four  times  for  the  Pliocene,  and  six  or  eight  times  for  those  found 
n  the  Lower  Miocene  (Cantal).    If,  as  claimed  by  Rutot  eo  i  hs  occur 
midcr  sT^ata  of  Upper  Oligocene  age,  the  length  of  time  is  still  further 

Flinty  layer  (cailloutis)  with 
Neolithic  industry. 


WURM. 


Flinty  layer  without  industry. 
RISS-WURM  INTERGLA- 
CIAL 

I  RISS-WURM,  RISS. 
Flinty  layer  with  Acheulian 

industry.  RISS. 
Flinty   layer  with  Chellean 
industry.  MINDEL-RISS 
INTERGLACIAL. 
Flinty  layer  with  transition 
from  Eolithic  to  Paleolithic 
rStrepyan  industry).  MIN- 
DEL-RISS INTERGLA- 
CIAL .  . 
Flinty  layer  with  Mesvinian 
industry.  MINDEL-RISS 
INTERGLACIAL. 

Flinty  layer  with  Mafflean 
industry.  MINDEL-RISS 
INTERGLACIAL. 


HESBAYAN— 


CAMPINIAN" 


MOSEAN 


F.G.  l75.-Section  of  the  Exploitation  Holin,  near  Spiennes  B^^^^^^^  super- 
position  of  the  Quaternary  deposits;  lower  terrace  of  the  vaUcy  oi  tHe  irouu 
MacCurdy,  adapted  from  Rutot. 

multiplied.  The  presence  in  the  Miocene  of  France  of  extinct  phyla  of 
anthropomorphous  primates  offers  one  possible  explanation  of  the  origin  ot 
eoliths;  it  seems  very  unlikely,  in  view  of  their  great  antiquity,  that  any 
being  at  all  closely  resembling  man  (genus  Homo)  could  have  remained 
through  such  long  ages  while  all  other  genera  of  mammals  became  trans- 
formed. The  only  known  Miocene  and  Pliocene  primate  which  might  be 
considered  as  an  'eolith'  maker  is  Dryopithecus;  all  others  belong  to  existing 
phyla  of  monkeys,  baboons,  and  apes.    (Penck,  1909.) 

The  intermediate  anthropoid,  Pithecanthropus,  attributed  to  the  Pliocene 
by  its  discoverer  Dubois  in  1893,  is  now  by  Volz  referred  to  the  Pleistocene. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  385 


It  is  regarded  by  Schwalbe  ^  either  as  a  direct  or  indirect  ancestor  of  the 
human  phylum,  standing  intermediate  between  the  apes  and  man  in  respect 
to  its  high  brain  capacity  and  the  structure  of  its  femur.  It  thus 
probably  belongs  in  the  family  Hominidse,  and  if  so  it  had  a  grasping  thumb. 


The  Pleistocene  was  estimated  by  Dana  (1874)  to  be  equal  to  one- 
fourth  of  the  entire  Caenozoic  Era;  by  Ward  (1885)  and  Williams  (1895) 
it  has  been  estimated  at  one-third  of  the  entire  Caenozoic  Era.  The  tend- 
ency of  more  recent  thought  has  been  altogether  in  the  direction  of  length- 
ening the  duration  of  Pleistocene  time.  If  with  Wallace  we  accept  CrolFs 
theory  and  estimate,  the  last  glacial  advance  would  date  back  to  the  last 
period  of  great  eccentricity,  namely  200,000  years.  The  other  figures  show 
the  variations  of  opinion  on  this  subject  and  the  increasing  tendency  to 
prolong  the  estimates  of  time. 


The  more  recent  estimates,  although  made  by  very  high  and  usually 
conservative  authorities,  appear  excessive  unless  we  are  to  extend  our 
estimates  of  Tertiary  time  (see  p.  63)  to  twenty  miUion  years,  and  of  pre- 
Tertiary  time  into  hundreds  of  milhons. 

Penck  has  recently^  (1908)  pointed  out  the  vast  interest  which  attaches  to 
this  duration  problem  in  connection  with  the  antiquity  of  man.  He  beheves 
that  the  whole  Ice  Age  lasted  somewhere  between  500,000  and  1,000,000 
years.  The  second,  very  long  and  warm  interglacial  epoch,  known  as  the 
Helvetian  or  Mindel-Riss,  is  alone  reckoned  by  him  at  several  hundred 
thousand  years,  and  the  final  short,  or  Riss-Wiirm,  Interglacial  Stage  is 
reckoned  at  nearly  100,000  years.  Since  the  climax  of  the  final,  or  Wiirm, 
Glaciation  he  believes  that  from  30,000  to  50,000  years  have  elapsed.  As 
regards  the  duration  of  palaeolithic  culture  periods,  the  older  palaeolithic,  or 
Chellean  and  Mousterian  culture  periods  are  of  much  longer  duration  than  the 
newer  palaeolithic,  or  Solutrian  and  Magdalenian.  Since  the  beginning  of 
the  latter,  or  Magdalenian,  perhaps  24,000  years  have  elapsed;  since  its 
end  perhaps  16,000.  Compared  with  the  Palaeolithic  divisions,  the  Neo- 
lithic stone  and  metal  periods  have  occupied  an  almost  unappreciable  length 
of  time;  if  the  beginning  of  the  age  of  metals  dates  back  3,000  to  3,500  years, 
that  of  the  Neolithic  lake  dwellings  began  about  5,000  to  7,000  years  ago. 

1  Schwalbe,  G.,  Ueber  fossile  Primaten  und  ihre  Bedeutung  fiir  die  Vorgeschichte  des 
Menschen.  Mitteil.  Philomat.  Ges.  Elsass-Lothringen,  Vol.  IV,  no.  1,  Decade  16  (1908), 
Strassburg,  1909. 

^  Penck,  A.,  Das  Alter  des  Menschengeschlechtes.    Zeitschr.  Ethnol.,  no.  3,  1908,  pp.  390- 

407. 


Duration  of  the  Pleistocene 


Upham 

SoUas 

Penck 


1893 
1900 
1908 


100,000  years 
400,000  years 
500,000  to  1,000,000  years 


2c 


386 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Geologic  deposits.  —  The  chief  geologic  formations  or  deposits  of  glacial 
times  are  the  following: 

Glacial  boulders,  boulder  clays,  and  drift. 

Lignitic  and  swamp  deposits. 

Fluviatile  gravels,  till,  and  river  terraces. 

Lacustrine  and  marine  terraces. 

Loess,  fine,  calcareous,  fluviatile  and  seolian  loam. 

Volcanic  travertines  and  tufas. 

Phosphorites  and  other  fissure  deposits. 

Cave  deposits. 

Loess,  found  in  the  Pleistocene  of  Europe,  northern  Asia,  North  America, 
and  in  the  pampean  regions  of  South  America,  is  the  mo.st  distinctive  of  all 
glacial  deposits,  next  to  the  boulder  clay  and  drift.  It  consists  of  a  fine, 
porous,  silicious  and  calcareous  silt,  usually  of  a  light  brown  color,  charac- 
terized by  a  peculiar  competency  to  stand  in  vertical  walls  during  erosion. 
Its  distribution  is  quite  independent  of  altitude,  occurring  in  Europe  from 
sea  level  to  a  height  of  1,500  meters.  Its  origin  is  partly  fluviatile,  partly 
aeolian.  Thus  it  is  believed  that  the  fine  mud  carried  by  rivers  becomes 
desiccated  and  is  retransported  by  the  wind.  Penck  (1904)  describes  loess 
as  formed  in  districts  traversed  periodically  by  great  streams,  leaving 
dry  mud  which  is  redistributed  by  the  wind.  In  Europe  it  is  one  of  the 
most  characteristic  formations  of  the  interglacial  epochs;  some  loess  de- 
posits belong  to  the  Riss-Wiirm  Interglacial,  others  are  known  from  the 
older  Mindel-Riss  Epoch,  and  some  very  rare  deposits  probably  date  back 
to  the  Giinz-Mindel  Interglacial  epoch. ^  Another  theory  of  formation  is 
that  the  snow  driven  by  the  wind  carried  earthy  material  with  it.  Thus 
the  loess  remained  as  a  residue  after  the  melting  of  the  snow.^ 

The  plateau  between  Uzes  and  Avignon'*  contains  numerous  fissures 
filled  with  phosphorites  which  can  scarcely  be  distinguished  from  those  of 
Quercy  but  contain  the  remains  of  mammals  of  mid-Pleistocene  age. 

I.    PLEISTOCENE  LIFE  OF  EUROPE 

Flora  and  Climate 

It  is  clear  from  the  great  fluctuations  of  temperature  and  moisture  which 
occurred  during  Pleistocene  times  that  the  flora  cannot  be  treated  as  a 
unit  nor  as  progressing  in  a  single  direction  like  the  flora  of  the  preceding 

^  Penck,  A.,  Die  alpinen  Eiszeitbildungen  und  der  prahistorische  Mensch.  Arch.  Anthro- 
pol,  U.S.,  Vol.  I,  no.  8,  1904. 

2  Davidson,  Charles,  On  Deposits  from  Snow  Drifts  with  Especial  Reference  to  the 
Origin  of  the  Loess  and  the  Preservation  of  Mammoth  Remains.  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  London, 
1894,  p.  472. 

^  Dep^ret,  Sur  les  phosphorites  quaternaires  de  la  region  de  Uz^s.  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris, 
Tome  120,  1895. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  387 


epochs.  It  presents  alternations  of  arctic,  boreal,  and  temperate  species, 
which  migrated  southward  and  northward  following  the  advances  or  re- 
treats of  the  glacial  cap.    The  broad  divisions  of  the  climate  are  as  follows : 

1.  First  cold  phase,  connected  with  the  first  glacial  period. 

2.  The  fairly  warm  climates  of  the  interglacial  periods. 

3.  The  damp  and  cold  climates  of  the  last  glacial  advances. 

4.  The  dry  and  cold  climate  of  the  period  of  the  last  glacial  retreat 

in  the  age  of  the  reindeer. 

There  is  evidence  both  in  Europe  and  North  America  that  especially  in 
certain  of  the  long,  warm  interglacial  intervals  the  climate  in  the  northern 
hemisphere  was  somewhat  more  equable  and  milder  than  at  present,  with  a 
higher  mean  temperature  and  at  certain  intervals  a  greater  precipitation  of 
moisture}  There  was  perhaps  more  sunshine  than  now.  As  a  result  of 
such  favorable  conditions  arboreal  vegetation  flourished  to  the  far  north. 
The  present  tundras  of  Siberia  and  British  America  then  supported  forests 
which  have  long  since  been  extirpated,  the  northern  limit  of  similar  living 
trees  now  lying  far  to  the  south. ^ 

A  picture  of  the  flora  of  the  very  long  and  warm  Mindel-Riss  interval 
of  the  Second  Interglacial  epoch,  the  Chellean  Stage  of  human  culture 
according  to  Penck,  in  which  the  hippopotamus  appears  for  the  last  time  in 
northern  Europe,  is  preserved  in  the  tuf  de  la  Celle,  which  contains  remains 
of  the  sycamore  maple  {Acer  pseudoplatanus) ,  willows  (Salix),  the  Austrian 
pine  (Pinus  laricia).  Higher  up  in  the  same  deposits  we  find  the  box  tree 
(Buxus),  not  uncommonly  the  fig  (Ficus);  the  sweet  bay  (Laurus  nohilis) 
appears  less  frequently.  In  the  upper  part  of  the  tuf  de  la  Celle  where  Chel- 
lean palseoliths  have  been  found,  the  fig  and  sweet  bay  are  absent.^  The  cli- 
mate was  more  damp  and  certainly  milder  than  that  of  the  present  time  in 
this  region,  the  mean  annual  temperature  being  eight  to  nine  degrees  higher. 
In  I^orraine  below  the  level  of  the  third  Pleistocene  fauna  there  occurs  a 
flora  in  which  the  most  northerly  varieties  of  the  larch  (Larix)  and  the 
mountain  pine  {Pinus  lambertiana)  predominate.  In  still  higher  plant  beds, 
the  tufs  de  Pont-d-Mousson  in  eastern  France,  there  are  remains  of  forests 
composed  of  deciduous  trees  some  of  which  have  since  migrated  farther 
south.  These  are  a  few  of  the  many  instances  showing  the  southward  and 
northward  migration  of  the  flora  in  Pleistocene  times,  similar  to  those 
to  be  mentioned  as  occurring  in  the  Toronto  Formation  of  Canada 
(p.  448).  There  is  strong  ground  for  the  behef '  that  there  were  cycles  of 
•climatic  change  beginning  in  earlier  interglacial  and  succeeding  glacial 

1  Croll,  J.,  On  Arctic  Interglacial  Periods.   Philos.  Mag.,  Ser.  5,  Vol.  XIX,  1885,  p.  36. 
2Nathorst.  Engler's  Bot.  Jahrb.,  1881,  p.  431;  also  Schroter,  C,  Die  Flora  der  Eiszeit. 
Zurich,  1883. 

^  De  Lapparent,  A.,  Traite  de  Geologic.    Paris,  1906,  p.  1703. 

*  Penck,  A.,  Die  alpinen  Eiszeitbildungen  und  der  prahistorische  Mensch.  Archiv.  An- 
thropoL,  n.s.,  Vol.  I,  no.  8,  1904. 


388 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


epochs.  Since  the  mammalian  life  of  the  third  and  fourth  glaciations  (Riss, 
Wiirm),  according  to  Penck,  is  identical  in  Switzerland  at  least,  we  may 
ascribe  tundra,  or  barren  ground  conditions,  both  to  the  fauna  and  flora  of  these 
fmal  glacial  epochs.  From  the  beginning  of  the  last  interglacial  interval  to 
the  present  time  the  vegetation  of  the  region  near  the  Alps  has  apparently 
gone  through  a  cycle  of  changes  such  as  the  following: 

Vegetation  Climate  Period 

4th.  Forest  West-European,  oceanic  Modern 

3d.  Steppe  Southeast-European,  continental  Post  glacial 

2d.  Tundra  Northeast-European,  sub-Arctic  Glacial 

1st  Forest  West-European,  oceanic  Interglacial 

The  steppe  and  tundra  biotic  period,  according  to  all  authorities,  was  the 
great  feature  of  the  last  glacial  phases. 

Neumayr  estimated  that  the  general  lowering  of  temperature  of  Europe 
had  not  amounted  to  more  than  6°  C,  and  believes  that  even  during  the  Ice 
Age  a  comparatively  mild  climate  prevailed  in  Great  Britain.  Martins  esti- 
mated that  a  lowering  to  the  extent  of  4°  C.  would  bring  the  glaciers  of 
Chamounix  down  to  the  level  of  the  plain  of  Geneva.  Penck  estimates  that, 
all  other  atmospheric  conditions  remaining  the  same  as  now,  a  fall  of  tem- 
perature to  the  extent  of  4  to  5°  C.  would  be  sufficient  to  give  us  back  the 
Glacial  Period. 


Secular  Northward  and  Southward  Migrations  of  Faunas 

The  passing  from  the  Pliocene  to  the  Pleistocene  is  clearly  outhned  on 
the  east  coast  of  England  in  Norfolk.  After  the  first  great  cold  wave  the 
fife  of  Great  Britain  is  considerably  altered;  it  constitutes  the  first  fauna, 
as  briefly  defined  above.  This  is  followed  in  Europe  by  the  second,  by 
the  third,  and  by  the  fourth  faunas,  as  more  clearly  distinguished  in  the 
accompanying  table,  and  explained  above,  p.  375. 

The  principal  contributors  to  the  theory  of  northward  and  southward 
migrations  and  to  the  succession  of  faunas  are  Nehring,  Woldrich  (1882), 
and  more  recently  Penck.  In  considering  the  distribution  and  migration 
of  the  mammals  throughout  the  Glacial  Period,  we  must  constantly  keep 
in  mind  the  differences  of  latitude.  Italy  had  a  more  moderate  climate 
than  central  Europe;  the  reindeer  seems  never  to  have  found  its  way  there, 
yet  a  lowering  of  temperature  in  Italy  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  the 
alpine  mammals,  such  as  the  marmot  (Marmota),  chamois  (Rupicapra),  and 
steinbok  (Ibex)  came  down  to  the  plains.^  The  hippopotamus  undoubtedly 
remained  in  Italy  longer  than  it  did  in  northern  Europe,  so  it  is  not  surpris- 
ing to  find  its  remains  associated  with  those  of  the  big-nosed  rhinoceros  (D. 
7nerckii)  in  a  cave  near  Mentone  in  the  French  Riviera,  which  belongs  in 

» Issel.  A.,  Liguria  geologic  e  preistorica.  Ref.  by  Boule  in  L'AnthropoL,  1893,  pp.  602-604. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  389 


the  period  of  Aurignacian  culture,  corresponding  with  the  last  glacial  ad- 
vance, according  to  Penck  (see  page  379) .  The  same  writer  considers  that 
at  the  time  central  Europe  was  tundra-like  and  Italy  was  a  forested  country. 


I.  Fauna.  Mammals  op 
THE  First,  or  Nor- 
folk Interglacial 
Period 


Climate  temperate 


The  faunal  zone  of  the 
last  saber-tooths  {Ma- 
chcETodus) 


First  appearance  of  the 
giant  deer  {M egaceros) , 
of  the  musk  ox,  and  of 
the  bison 

South  of  the  Alps  the 
straight  -  tusked  ele- 
phant and  the  hippo- 
potamus 


Eolithic  implements 


II.  Fauna.  Mammals 
OF  THE  Second  and 
Third  Intergla- 
cial Periods 

Climate  temperate  to 
warm-temperate 

Hardy  northern  forms 
of  African  and  south 
Asiatic  mammals 


North  of  the  Alps  the 
straight  -  tusked  ele- 
phant and  the  hippo- 
potamus, the  ances- 
tor of  the  mammoth 
{E.  trogontherii) ,  and 
the  broad-nosed  rhi- 
noceros (Z).  merckii) 
are  abundant.  The 
musk  ox  does  not  ap- 
pear. Reindeer,  if 
present,  are  rare. 

Eolithic  and  early  Palae- 
olithic man 


III.  Fauna.  Mammals 
OF  THE  Last  Inter- 
glacial, Glacial, 
AND  Glacial  Re- 
treat 

Climate  cold  and  dry 


First  invasion  of  the  arc- 
tic, tundra  and  steppe 
types,  including  nu- 
merous reindeer  and 
musk  oxen 

The  true  mammoth,  the 
woolly  rhinoceros  and 
the  reindeer  wide- 
spread in  Europe 


IV.  Fauna.  Mammals, 
OF  THE  Prehistoric 
Forest,  Meadow, 
AND  River  Fauna 
of  Europe 

Climate  similar  to  recent 


Absence  of  rhinoceros 
and  elephant,  and  ex- 
tinction of  the  ' cave ' 
animals 

Rarity  of  reindeer 


The  cave  and  loess  pe- 
riods of  human  culture 
Late  Palaeolithic  man 


Neolithic  man 


Penck  ^  also  observes  that  we  cannot  hope  to  trace  a  continuous  evolu- 
tion of  forms  during  Pleistocene  times,  because  we  are  not  dealing  with  a 
development  of  one  successive  series  in  one  locahty,  but  with  the  cyclical 
alternation  of  a  number  of  different  faunas  compelled  to  migrate  through 
the  alternations  in  the  temperature  and  in  the  floras,  the  mammals  disap- 
pearing and  returning  at  intervals  too  brief  to  allow  of  any  marked  evolu- 
tionary changes.  Herein  lies  our  difficulty  when  we  attempt  to  distinguish 
between  the  tundra  faunas  of  the  late  glaciations  and  the  forest  faunas  of 
the  late  interglacial  epochs,  because  the  faunas  return  not  only  with  the 
same  generic  but  the  same  specific  types,  as  especially  illustrated  in  the 
case  of  the  mammoth  {E.  primigenius)  and  the  giant  deer  (Cervtis  megaceros). 

Implements  of  human  manufacture,  however,  mark  the  progress  of 
time  because  in  the  evolution  of  human  culture  the  glacial  epochs  are 
separated  by  the  successive  advances  in  the  fashioning  of  stone  implements 
and  in  the  primitive  arts. 

This  '  alternate  migration '  theory  is  presented  in  the  following  table :  ^ 

1  See  Penck,  A.,  Die  alpinen  Eiszeitbildungen  und  der  prahistorische  Mensch.  Arch. 
AnthropoL,  n.s..  Vol.  I,  no.  8,  1904,  p.  89,  '04  in  Bibliography. 

2  After  Penck,  1904.  The  reader  will  observe  some  discrepancies  between  this  table 
and  that  on  p.  397. 


390 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Present  Cervus  elaphus 

[  Elephas  primigenius 

4th,  Wiirm,  Glacial  Epoch    j  Rhinoceros  tichorhinus 
[  Rangifer  tarandus 


Epoch 


Fauna 


Vegetation 
Forest 


(Nehring) 
Forest 


(G.  de  Mortillet) 
Neolithic 


Tundra 


Pal.eolithic 
IMagdalenian  Culture 


[  Elephas  primigenius 
RiM-Wiirm  Interglacial     \  Rhinoceros  tichorhinus 
[  Equus  caballus 


Grassy  steppes  Steppe 


Solutrian  Culture 


Forest 


Sd,  Riss,  Glacial  Epoch     [  Elephas  primigenius 
Maximum  j  Rhinoceros  tichorhinus 

Glaoiation  [  Rangifer  tarandus 


Tundra 


Tundra 


Mousterian  Culture 


Rhinoceroses.  —  The  three  great  rhinoceroses  characteristic  of  the  Eu- 
ropean Pleistocene,  which  probably  belonged  to  two  separate  phyla,  Asiatic, 
or  Sumatran,  and  African,  are  of  distinct  geologic  value.  Of  the  former 
phylum,  D..etruscus  of  the  Val  d'Arno^  is  a  small  animal  of  Pliocene  and 
early  Pleistocene  times,  distinguished  by  brachyodont  or  short-crowned 
grinding  teeth,  and  long,  slender  limbs,  two  horns,  the  larger  of  which  is 
posterior,  and  the  absence  of  cutting,  or  front  teeth;  it  is  remotely  related 
to  the  Dicer orhinus,  or  Sumatran  phylum,  but  differs  in  the  absence  of  cutting 
teeth.  It  belongs  with  the  First  Fauna,  and  does  not  survive  into  mid- 
Pleistocene  times. 

Succeeding  this  animal  in  early  Pleistocene  times  both  in  Great  Britain, 
France,  and  Italy,  also  surviving  with  the  Second  Fauna  of  the  mid-Pleis- 
tocene of  all  Europe,  is  the  broad-nosed  rhinoceros,  kno^vn  as  D.  megarhinus, 
or  D.  merekii.  It  is  distinguished  from  D.  etruscus  by  long-cro^vned,  or 
hypsodont  grinding  teeth;  it  resembles  it  in  the  smaller  anterior  and  larger 
posterior  horn,  and  in  the  elongation  of  its  limbs  and  feet.  In  mid-Pleisto- 
cene times  it  became  covered  with  hair,  attained  a  great  size,  and  was  very 
abundant  and  characteristic. 

The  third  species,  the  woolly  rhinoceros  {D.  antiquitatis,  D.  tichorhinus), 
is,  however,  the  distinctively  cold  weather,  steppe,  and  tundra  form,  and 
belongs  with  the  Third  Fauna.  Like  the  foregoing  species,  it  has  no  front 
teeth,  hence  has  been  improperly  considered  as  related  to  them,  but  it 
really  belongs  to  the  modern  African  group  of  Atelodus  (Diceros),  distin- 
guished by  a  very  large  front  horn  and  small  posterior  horn  as  in  the  exist- 
ing "white  rhinoceros"  (R.  simus). 

The  names  of  these  three  rhinoceroses  are  almost  hopelessly  confused 
in  the  early  literature,  though  the  characters  were  very  clearly  defined  hy 
Dawkins.-  Both  in  the  megarhine  and  tichorhine  rhinoceroses  and  in  old 
individuals  of  the  Etruscan,  the  septum  supporting  the  nasal  bones  becomes 
more  or  less  fully  ossified,  to  support  the  stout  anterior  horns. 

'  Dawkins,  W.  Boyd,  On  the  Dentition  of  Rhinoceros  etruscus  Falc.  Quart.  Journ.  Geol. 
Sac.,  Vol.  XXIV.  1868,  pp.  207-218. 

2  Dawkiii-s,  W.  Boyd,  The  British  Pleistocene  Mammalia,  Pt.  I,  Introduction,  1866. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  391 


1.  The  First,  or  Early  Pleistocene  Fauna 

As  a  whole  the  fauna  of  Europe  is  now  distinguished  from  that  of  the 
Upper  Phocene  by  the  absence  of  primates,  mastodons,  antelopes  and  ga- 
zelles, and  tapirs. 

This  is  the  fauna  of  the  first  interglacial  period,  known  as  the  Norfolk- 
Interglacial.    It  is  typified  in  the  Forest  Bed  of  Cromer,  Norfolk  (Fig.  176, 


Fig.  176.  — Pleistocene.  EUROPE.  — 1  Forest  Bed  of  Cromer  (Norfolk).  Sables  de  2 
<S<.  Presi  near  Chartres  (Eure-et-Loire).  3  Malhattu  (Puy-de-D6me).  4t  Peyrolles  (Bouches- 
du-Rhone).  5  Solhilac  near  Puy.  Clay  deposits  of  6  Durfort  (Gard).  7  Cajarc  (Lot-et-Ga- 
ronne).  8  Val  d'Arno  (Tuscany).  9  Leffe  near  Bergamo  (Lombardy).  10  Rixdorf  near  Pots- 
dam (Brandenburg).  Gravels  of  11  Sussenborn  near  Weimar.  Sands  of  12  Mosbach  in 
northern  Baden.  Freshwater  deposits  of  13  Clacton  (Essex).  Sands  of  Mauer  near  14  Hei- 
delberg (western  Germany).  15  Chelles  on  the  Marne,  near  Paris.  16  *S^.  Acheul  (Somme). 
17  Ilford  and  Grays  Thurrock  (Essex).  Lignites  of  18  Durnten  and  of  Utznach,  near  Zurich. 
19  Taubach  near  Weimar.  20  Wildkirchli  cave  on  Mont  Sdntis  (eastern  Switzerland).  Tuffs 
of  21  the  Tiber  Valley,  near  Rome.  Caves  of  22  Neandertal,  near  Dusseldorf  (western  Ger- 
many), 23  *Sp^,  near  Amur  (Belgium),  23a  iiCrapma  (Croatia),  24  Chapelle-auz- Saints  (Cor- 
r6ze).  Caves  and  alluvial  deposits  of  25  Ternifine  (or  Palikao)  near  Oran  (Algeria),  26  Pointe 
Pescade,  near  Algiers  (Algeria).  27  Prince's  Cave  (Monaco).  Sandy  clays  of  28  Vdklinshofen 
(Alsace).  29  Saalfeld  (Saxe-Meiningen) .  Travertines,  etc.,  of  30  Gera,  Jena  (Saxe- Weimar) . 
31  Leipzig  (Saxony).  32  Solutre,  north  of  Lyons.  Loess  of  33  Wurzburg  (Bavaria).  34  Thiede 
near  Braunschweig  (Prussia).  Cave  of  35  Montmaurin  (Haute-Garonne) .  36  Chdteauneuf- 
sur-Charente  (Charente).  Caves  of  37  Schweizersbild  near  Schaffhausen,  and  Kesslerloch  near 
Thayngen  (northern  Switzerland).  Remains  of  lake  dwelHngs  at  38  Wauwyl  (Lucerne),  39  Ro~ 
benhausen,  south  of  Lake  Pfaffikon,  40  Concise  on  Lake  Neuchatel  (Switzerland).  Peatbogs  of 
41  Hassleben,  near  Weimar.  Travertines  of  42  Langensalza  (Erfurt)  in  central  Germany. 
Caves  of  the  43  Island  of  Malta,  44  Island  of  Crete,  45  Island  of  Cyprus. 


1),  in  which  certain  mammals,  such  as  the  musk  ox  (Ovihos),  are  said  (Daw- 
kins)  to  occur,  which  are  not  found  in  more  southerly  localities.  This 


392 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


fauna  has  been  treated  as  of  Upper  Pliocene  age  by  some  writers  (Boule  0 ; 
but  since  in  the  remarkably  rich  deposits  of  the  Forest  Bed  of  Norfolk, 
England,  it  succeeds  a  molluscan  fauna  of  arctic  affinity,  there  is  little  doubt 
that  we  are  witnessing  the  mammalian  life  of  the  first  temperate  interglacial 
period.    The  chief  localities  in  which  this  fauna  occurs  are  the  following: 

Forest  Bed  of  Cromer,  Norfolk,  England  (Fig.  176,  1),  typical  of 
the  northern  life 

Sables  de  St.  Prest  (Eure-et-Loir),  France,  (2)  typical  of  the  cen- 
tral life 

Malbattu  (Puy-de-D6me),  France,  (3)  typical  of  the  central  life 
Peyrolles  (Bouches-du-Rhone),  France,  (4)  typical  of  the  central  life 
SoLHiLAC,  near  Puy,  southern  France,  (5)  typical  of  the  central  life 
Durfort  (Card),  southern  France,  (6)  typical  of  the  central  life 
Val  d'Arno  (upper  deposits),  northern  Italy,  (8)  typical  of  the 
southern  hfe 

While  many  Pliocene  animals  have  disappeared,  the  fauna  still  includes 
a  number  of  forms  surviving  from  the  Pliocene,  such  as  the  saber-tooth  cats 
(Machcerodus),  the  roe  deer  (Capreolus),  the  polycladine  deer  (C.  sedgwicki), 
the  more  primitive  dicerorhine  rhinoceroses  {D.  etruscus),  the  horses  (Equus)^ 
and  especially  the  southern  mammoths  {E.  meridionalis) ,  and  hippopotami. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  the  saber-tooth  cats  and  the  polycladine  deer  do  not 
reappear  in  the  later  Pleistocene  formations  of  Europe,  although  the  saber- 
tooths  survive  to  a  much  later  period  both  in  Asia  and  in  North  America. 
No  traces  of  the  larger  true,  or  leonine,  cats  {Felis  leo  spelcea)  are  recorded 
at  this  stage. 

Among  the  new  arrivals  are  the  earliest  and  very  numerous  members  of 
the  giant  fallow  deer  race,  which  terminate  in  the  Upper  Pleistocene  in  the 
giant  deer  Megaceros.  The  bison  (Bison)  certainly  makes  its  first  appear- 
ance in  Europe,  and  according  to  some  authors  the  true  cattle  (Bos)  also 
appear  at  this  stage.  It  is  also  important  to  note  here  the  presence  of  a  form 
(Caprovis)  intermediate  between  the  goat  and  the  sheep,  as  the  name  indi- 
cates, most  nearly  resembling  the  mouflon  of  Sardinia.  Among  the  rodents 
the  large  beaver  (Trogontherium)  succeeds  the  smaller  species,  first  observed 
in  the  Pliocene  of  the  Red  Crag.  South  of  the  Alps  the  earliest  of  the 
straight-tusked  elephants  (E.  antiquus)  occurs.  A  giant  hippopotamus  (H, 
major)  is  certainly  recorded,  both  south  of  the  Alps  and  to  the  north  in  Great 
Britain.  The  greatest  stranger  among  the  new  arrivals  is  the  musk-ox 
(Ovibos),  attributed  by  Dawkins-  to  the  Forest  Bed  deposits. 

Geologic  proofs  of  the  first  glacial  advance. — James  Geikie^  (p.  335) 

1  Cf.,  however,  Boule,  1890,  p.  945. 

'  Dawkins,  W.  Boyd,  On  the  Alleged  Existence  of  Ovihos  moschatiis  in  the  Forest-bed,  and 
on  its  RauKo  in  Space  and  Time.    Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  London,  1883,  pp.  576-579. 

^  Geikie,  J.,  The  Great  Ice  Age  and  Its  Relation  to  the  Antiquity  of  Man,  3d  ed.,  Lon- 
don, 1894. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  393 


favors  the  theory  that  the  Forest  Bed  deposits  were  accumulated  during 
an  epoch  of  genial  conditions  which  succeeded  a  colder  glacial  period  in 
which  the  Chillesford  and  Weybourn  Crags  were  deposited;  these  'crags' 
mark  the  culmination  of  the  cold  conditions  which  began  to  manifest  them- 
selves as  early  as  the  Red  Crag  (p.  317)  of  Upper  Pliocene  times;  at  this 
culminating  time  the  sea  abounded  in  arctic  molluscs.  Even  in  the  Red 
Crag,  northern  forms  of  molluscs  begin  to  appear,  and  when  we  reach  the 
Chillesford  and  Weybourn  crags  the  marine  molluscs  present  a  decidedly 
arctic  aspect.  Immediately  above  the  Weybourn  Crag  there  is  evidence  of 
a  climatic  reaction,  because  the  estuarine  and  fluviatile  deposits  of  the 
Forest  Bed  contain  a  flora  and  a  mammalian  fauna  of  temperate  type 
which  contrast  strongly  with  the  assemblage  of  northern  and  arctic  shells 
in  the  subjacent  crag  deposits. 

Flora  of  the  Norfolk  Interglacial.  —  All  the  plants  composing  the  Norfolk 
Interglacial  flora  belong  to  living  species,  and  with  a  few  exceptions  are 
still  indigenous  to  Norfolk,  including  such  forms  as  the  maple,  hawthorn, 
elm,  birch,  alder,  hornbeam,  beech,  pine,  and  spruce.  The  arrival  of  the 
spruce  {Abies)  is  especially  noteworthy  because,  although  known  in  Miocene 
times  in  the  arctic  region  of  Grinnell  Land,  this  is  its  first  appearance  in 
central  Europe ;  it  is  also  found  in  the  interglacial  lignites  of  Switzerland. 
It  has  since  constituted  an  important  member  of  the  European  forests. 
From  this  tree  flora  Reid  concludes  ^  that  the  climate  was  nearly  the  same  as 
the  climate  of  present  times,  but  slightly  warmer.    This  is  in  latitude  52°  40'. ^ 

Contemporaneous  with  this  temperate  flora  there  flourished  the  remark- 
ably rich  mammalian  fauna  of  the  Forest  Bed;  the  mammals  also  indicate 
conditions  of  climate  somewhat  warmer  than  those  prevailing  in  the  south 
of  England  to-day. 


For  our  knowledge  of  the  mammalian  life  of  the  Forest  Bed  and  contem- 
poraneous fauna  in  France  we  are  principally  indebted  to  Dawkins  (1880, 
1883),  to  Newton  (1880),  to  Gaudry  (1893),  to  Boule  (1902),  and  Pohlig 
(1907).  Dawkins  many  years  ago  (1883,  p.  579)  gave  the  ratio  of  living, 
extinct,  resident,  and  newly  arriving  mammals  as  follows : 


The  specific  determinations  of  many  of  these  animals,  especially  of  the 
horses  and  the  deer,  await  revision,  and  upon  this  closer  study  depend  many 

^  Reid,  C,  and  Reid,  E.  M.,  The  Pre-Glacial  Flora  of  Britain.  Jour.  Linn.  Soc,  Botany, 
Vol.  XXXVIII,  Jan.,  1908,  pp.  206-227. 

^  A  list  of  these  plants  is  given  in  Dawson's  The  Geological  History  of  Plants,  1896, 
pp.  218-271. 


Mammals  of  the  Norfolk  Interglacial  Epoch 


Survivals  from  the  Pliocene 
Newcomers,  extinct  forms  . 
Hving 


6 
21 


11  species 


394 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


interesting  questions.  The  true  red  deer,  or  stag  of  Europe  (C.  elaphus), 
for  example,  was  listed  in  this  fauna  by  Dawkins,  but  Newton  regarded  it 
as  very  uncertain,  and  other  authors  consider  that  it  first  appears  only  in 
later  Pleistocene  times.    The  chief  members  of  this  mammalian  assemblage 

Forest  Bed  Fauna.  —  The  authen- 
tic occurrence  in  the  Forest  Bed  de- 


are  as  follows: 

Eohthic  Man 

(indicated  by  implements  only) 
Southern  mammoths 

E.  meridioymlis,  (?)  E.  trogontherii 
Straight-tusked  mammoths 

(in  Italy  only) 

E.  antiquus 
Dicerorhine  rhinoceroses 

D.  etruscus 
Primitive  horses 

E.  caballus  fossilis 
E.  stenonis 

Hippopotami 

H.  major 
Polycladine  deer 

C.  sedgmcki 
Roe  deer 

C.  capreolus 
Axis  deer  (in  Italy  or 

southern  Europe  only) 
Giant  fallow  deer 

C.  dawkinsi,  C.  verticornis 
(?)  Musk  oxen,  or  musk  sheep 

(in  Great  Britain) 

(?)  Ombos  moschatus 
Bison 

Bison  honasus 
(?)  Primitive  true  cattle 

(?)  Bos  primigenius 
Large  beavers 

Trogontherium 
Saber-tooth  cats 

Machcerodus  (?)  cultridens 
Wolverines,  or  gluttons 

(in  Great  Britain) 

Gulo  luscus 


posits  of  a  number  of  mammals  which 
are  commonly  attributed  to  this 
fauna  was  questioned  by  Newton^ 
after  very  careful  study  of  all  the 
records  and  materials.  It  is  cer- 
tainly very  important,  now  that  we 
recognize  a  series  of  glacial  and 
interglacial  epochs,  that  mammals 
belonging  to  late  Pleistocene  times 
should  not  be  attributed  to  the  For- 
est Bed  Interglacial  Epoch  without 
very  conclusive  testimony.  Among 
the  records  which  Newton  considered 
doubtful  are  the  hyaena,  the  broad- 
nosed  rhinoceros  (D.  megarhinus) , 
the  true  cattle  (Bos  primigenius),  the 
red  deer  (Cervus  elaphus),  the  moose 
(Aloes  latifrons),  and  the  giant  deer 
(Megaceros).  The  reference  of  the 
musk  ox  (0.  moschatus)  by  Dawkins 
must  also  be  considered  somewhat 
doubtful. 

Deer.  —  The  presence  of  deer  in 
great  numbers  and  representing  many 
different  phyla  is  one  of  the  most 
distinctive  features  of  the  times;  it 
is  certain  that  during  the  Norfolk 
Interglacial  period  there  existed  nu- 
merous and  varied  forms  of  deer  life 
both  in  Great  Britain  and  southern 
and  western  Europe.  They  belong 
to  several,  probably  to  as  many  as 
five,  distinct  phyla.  The  first  of 
these,  the  polycladine,  or  'many- 
branched  '  deer,  so  distinctive  of  the 


1  New-ton.  E.  T.,  Notes  on  the  Vertebrata  of  the  Pre-Glacial  Forest  Bed  Series  of  the 
East  of  England.  Geol.  Mag.,  Vol.  VII,  PI.  XV,  1880,  Pt.  I,  Carnivora,  pp.  152-155,  Pt.  II, 
Camivora,  pp.  424-427,  Pt.  Ill,  Ungulata,  pp.  447-452. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  395 


Bear  of  the  '  brown '  Upper  Pliocene  of  the  Val  d' Arno, 

and  of  the  '  cave '  type     now  make  their  last  appearance  in 

Ursus  ferox,  U.  spelceus  Europe  as  Sedgwick's  deer  (C.  sedg- 

Otters  and  martens  wicki)  of  the  Forest  Bed,  with  won- 

Wolves  and  foxes  derfully  complex  antlers,  and  closely 

Walrus  (in  Great  Britain)  related  to  the  C.  dicranios  of  the  Val 

Trichecodon  huxleyi  d'Arno.    A  second  old  European 

phylum  is  that  of  the  roe  deer  (C. 
capreolus).  A  third  phylum,  numerous  and  highly  diversified,  is  that  of 
the  giant  fallow  deer  represented  by  a  variety  of  species  (C.  verticornis, 
C.  fitchii,  C.  dawkinsi).  There  is  some  doubt  whether  the  true  deer  of 
the  Carnutes  (C.  carnutorum)  occurs  here.  The  true  fallow  deer  (C.  dama) 
and  the  reindeer  (Rangifer  tarandus)  certainly  do  not  occur  here.  There  is 
also  some  doubt  as  to  the  existence  of  the  moose  {Alces  latifrons).  As 
above  noted,  Newton  is  very  uncertain  as  to  whether  the  stag  (C.  elaphus) 
or  red  deer  has  ever  been  recorded  in  the  Forest  Bed.  This  animal  cer- 
tainly appears  in  the  mid-Pleistocene  in  Europe  and  only  at  a  very  late 
stage  in  North  America. 

Surveying  this  Forest  Bed  fauna  as  a  whole,  we  see  that  browsing,  forest- 
living,  and  fluviatile  types  predominate.  Among  the  carnivores  are  the 
wolverine,  otter,  two  kinds  of  bear,  wolf,  fox,  marten,  a  true  feline  (Felis) 
of  doubtful  reference  beside  the  last  representatives  of  the  saber-tooth 
tigers.  Among  the  forest-living  browsers  are  the  richly  varied  deer,  a  very 
large  boar  related  to  Sus  scrofa,  the  browsing  rhinoceros  {D.  etruscus)  with 
short-crowned  teeth;  while  in  the  rivers  disported  giant  hippopotami 
(H.  major). 

Among  the  grazing  and  meadow-living  forms  either  Bison  or  Bos  is 
represented,  more  probably  the  former  genus.  There  should  also  be  in- 
cluded two  species  of  horses,  a  heavier  and  a  lighter  form,  the  latter  resem- 
bhng  the  E.  stenonis  cocchi  of  the  Val  d'Arno.  Estuarine  conditions  are 
represented  by  the  presence  of  the  walrus,  the  seal  (Phoca),  and  of  the 
cormorant  (Phalacrocorax) . 

Lower  Pleistocene  of  France.  —  The  Lower  Pleistocene  deposits  of  France 
of  approximately  the  same  age  as  the  Forest  Bed  are  those  of  St.  Brest  ^ 
(near  Chartres),  of  Durfort  (Gard),  of  Solilhac  (near  Puy),  and  the  recently 
discovered  phosphorite  deposits  of  Cajarc  (Lot-et-Garonne)  (Fig.  176,  7). 
These  beds  are  placed  in  the  Upper  Pliocene  by  Boule,  in  the  transition 
between  the  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  by  Harle  and  Stehlin,  as  well  as  by 
Deperet.  Slightly  more  recent  beds,  the  Lower  Pleistocene  age  of  which  is 
not  questioned,  are  those  of  Montsaune  and  Montmaurin  (35)  in  the 
Pyrenees.  Attributed  to  this  age  also  are  the  plant  beds  of  the  forest  of 
Moret  ^  in  the  Seine  valley  near  Fontainebleau. 

^  Dawkins,  W.  B.,  Early  Man  in  Britain  and  his  Place  in  the  Tertiary  Period.  London, 
1880. 


396 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


We  are  disposed  to  consider  all  these  deposits  as  of  the  same  age  as  the 
Forest  Bed  and  thus  belonging  to  the  first  faunal  zone  or  Lower  Pleistocene. 
The  mammals  embrace  substantially  the  same  species,  namely,  the  southern 
elephant  {E.  meridionalis) ,  the  Etruscan  rhinoceros  (D.  etruscus),  prim- 
itive species  of  horse,  the  giant  hippopotamus  (H.  major),  the  large  beaver 
{Trogontherium) ,  and  the  bison  {B.  bonasus).  ' 

From  Durfort  was  obtained  the  magnificent  skeleton  of  a  southern  mam- 
moth {E.  meridionalis)  described  by  Gaudry^  (p.  397).  The  giant  fallow 
deer  are  represented  at  St.  Prest  by  the  species  C.  carnutorum  Hhe  deer  of 
the  Carnutes.'  St.  Prest  is  famous  because  in  1863  Desnoyer  first  dis- 
covered here  the  incised  bones  which  are  now  considered  as  the  work  of 
Eolithic  man. 

The  most  recently  discovered  fauna  of  this  age  is  that  of  Cajarc^  in  the  ^ 
northern  part  of  the  Rhone  basin.  Harle  and  Stehlin  consider  it  transi- 
tional between  the  St.  Prest  and  Durfort  and  the  Montmaurin  deposits. 
The  elephant  {E.  meridionalis)  is  of  a  type  more  recent  than  that  typical  of 
the  Upper  Pliocene.  The  Bos  or  Bison  is  of  very  large  size.  Especially 
interesting  is  the  fact  that  these  authors  positively  determine  here  relatives 
of  the  red  deer  (Cervus  elaphus),  leaving  the  specific  reference  doubtful. 
There  is  a  large  badger  {Meles  taxus)  characteristic  of  the  Early  Pleistocene, 
a  small  wolf  (Canis)  no  larger  than  a  jackal.  There  is  also  a  small  species  of 
saber-tooth  tiger  (Machcerodus). 

In  the  cavern  at  Montmaurin  in  the  Pyrenees  ^  we  have  remains  of  an 
early  Pleistocene  fauna  as  different  from  that  of  the  Upper  Pliocene  as  it 
is  from  the  Pleistocene  cold  fauna  that  followed  it.  According  to  Boule,  it 
includes  the  broad-nosed  rhinoceros  {D.  merckii),  the  red  deer,  or  stag  (C. 
elaphus),  the  roe  deer  (C  capreolus),  as  well  as  the  saber-tooth  tiger  (M. 
latidens).  The  saber-tooth  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  characteristic 
mammals  of  this  Lower  Pleistocene  stage.  In  southern  France,  accom- 
panying the  southern  mammoth  appear  the  primitive  Etruscan  rhinoceros 
(D.  etruscus)  and  the  bison  {B.  bonasus).  Flora. — Associated  with  the 
remains  of  these  animals  at  Durfort^  were  those  of  numerous  plants 
(Planera,  Parrotia,  Quercus,  Fagus),  of  species  now  represented  in  the 
Caucasus,  in  Persia,  in  southern  Italy,  Portugal,  and  Japan.  Again,  in 
the  interglacial  forest  of  Moret  (Seine  valley)  we  find  the  fig  (Ficus)  and 
the  Judas  tree  (Cercis),  indicating  a  mild  temperature.  The  tree  flora,  like 
that  of  Norfolk,  thus  indicates  somewhat  warmer  conditions  of  temperature 
than  prevail  at  the  present  time,  the  temperature  of  4°  to  the  south. 
Reid  observes  that  the  climate  of  this  age  was  slightly  warmer,  but  almost 

»  Gaudry,  A.,  L'Elephant  de  Durfort.    Paris,  1893. 

2  Harle,  E.,  and  Stehlin,  H.  G.,  Une  Nouvelle  Faune  de  Mammif^res  des  Phosphorites  du 
Querry.    Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  IX,  1909,  pp.  39-52. 

'  Boule,  M.,  La  Caverne  h  Ossements  de  Montmaurin  (Haute-Garonne).  L'Anthropol., 
Vol.  XIII,  1902. 

*  Gaudry,  A.,  L'E16phant  de  Durfort.    Paris,  1893. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  397 


identical  with  the  present.^  The  spruce  forests  (Abies)  for  the  first  time 
appear  in  Great  Britain,  in  the  Forest  Bed.  The  most  striking  fact  in 
examining  the  flora  of  the  Norfolk  and  Suffolk  coasts  of  England  is  its 
correspondence  with  the  modern  flora,  in  spite  of  the  immense  period  of 
time  that  has  elapsed  and  the  great  changes  in  climate  during  which  all 
these  plants  were  driven  out  and  then  permitted  to  return.  ''However," 
continues  Reid,  ''though  very  similar,  we  find  in  the  fossil  flora  several 
exotic  species  which  give  it  a  slightly  different  character,  and  we  notice  also 
the  absence  of  several  modern  forms." 

Characteristic  Lower  Pleistocene  Mammals 
This  fauna  as  a  whole  is  an  outlier  of  the  African,  Asiatic  group,  with  a 
strong  northerly,  or  Eurasiatic,  forest  element  intermingled.  The  reindeer 
is  not  present  and  the  musk  ox  (Ovihos),  if  its  presence  be  confirmed,  is 
the  only  ruminant  which  can  be  said  to  give  the  Forest  Bed  a  distinctively 
arctic  character. 

Elephants.  —  The  southern  elephant  (E.  meridionalis)  of  the  times  be- 
longs to  a  somewhat  more  advanced  type  than  that  of  the  Upper  Pliocene 
of  the  Val  d'Arno.  The  Forest  Bed  specimens  are,  in  fact,  attributed  by 
Pohlig^  to  the  mid-Pleistocene  species  E.  trogontherii.  The  southern  elephant 
is  best  known  from  the  magnificent  specimen  found  at  Durfort,  France,  and 
mounted  under  the  direction  of  Gaudry  in  the  Paris  Museum;  the  height 
at  the  shoulders  is  3.83  m.,  or  12  ft.,  9^  in.  The  following  compar- 
ison of  the  relative  heights  of  the  great  Pleistocene  and  recent  elephants  is 
based,  so  far  as  the  extinct  forms  are  concerned,  on  a  series  of  approximations, 
because  it  is  very  difficult  to  measure  the  height  of  these  animals  from  the 
skeleton. 

Estimated  height  at  shoulder  ^ 
Feet    Inches  Meters 
E.  imperator,  the  imperial  mammoth  of  North       13         6  4.05 
America 

The  straight-tusked  elephant,  E.  antiquus  of  Europe  ^ 
The  southern  elephant  of  Europe,  E.  meridionalis  12  9  3.83 
The  largest  hving  African  elephants,  E.  africanus  11  6  3.45 
The  Columbian  mammoth  of  North  America,  E. 

coliimbi  11  3.30 

The  Indian  elephant  of  Asia,  E.  indicus  10         6  3.15 

The  true  or  northern  mammoth,  E.  primigenius  9         6  2.85 

The  living  pigmy  elephant  of  the  Congo,  E.  cydotis 

pumilio  7  2.10 

The  dwarfed  elephant  of  Crete  {E.  creticus),  Malta 

{E.  melitensis),  and  Cyprus  5  1.50 

The  American  mastodon.  Mastodon  americanus  9         6  •  2.85 

^  Reid,  C,  and  Reid,  E.  M.,  The  Pre-Glacial  Flora  of  Britain.  Jour.  Linn.  Soc,  Botany, 
Vol.  XXXVIII,  Jan.,  1908,  pp.  206-227. 

^  Pohlig,  Uber  Elephas  trogontherii  in  England.  Monatsber.  Deutsch.  Geol.  Ges.,  Vol.  61, 
1909,  no.  5.  pp.  242-249. 

'  These  figures  are  taken  from  Osborn,  from  Andrews'  memoir,  from  estimates  by  F.  A. 
Lucas,  Nature,  Sept.  10,  1908,  from  Pohlig  (1907),  and  from  Rowland  Ward's  Records  of  Big 
'Game  (8vo,  London,  1907).  •»  See  below. 


398 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


The  southern  elephant  ^  is  Falconer's  '  Preglacial  variety  of  the 
mammoth ' ;  it  belongs  to  the  same  group  as  the  true  mammoth  {E. 
trogontherii,  E.  primigenius)  and  the  Columbian  mammoth  (E.  columhi) 
of  America.  It  is  distinguished  both  from  the  African  (Loxodonta)  and 
from  the  Indian  (Euelephas)  types  of  elephants  by  its  peculiarly  flattened 
forehead  and  peaked  cranium.  It  was  taller  than  the  true  mammoth  (E.  ' 
primigenius)  which  only  appears  in  late  Pleistocene  times.  The  tusks  were 
shorter  and  less  bent.  We  may  infer  from  its  original  sub-tropical  habitat  S 
that  it  was  hairless.  In  tooth  and  skull  structure  it  resembled  E.  hysu- 
dricus  of  the  Siwaliks  of  India. 

Two  distinct  stages  of  southern  elephant  are  known,  the  more  primitive  i 
of  which  has  very  low,  broad  teeth,  with  thick  enamel.    The  other  more  ' 
progressive  stage  has  dental  plates  of  thinner  enamel;  this  type  occurs  in 
the  Forest  Bed,  at  Durfort,  and  in  the  upper  deposits  of  the  Val  d'Arno; 
it  is  said  to  be  the  original  type  of  Nesti,  who  founded  the  species.  There 
were  thus  two  grand  phyla  of  elephants  evolving  in  northern  and  southern 
Europe  at  this  time,  the  one  (E.  meridionalis,  E.  trogontherii)  with  remote 
resemblances  to  the  Indian,  the  other  {E.  antiquus)  with  resemblances  ta  ■ 
the  African  elephants  of  recent  times. 

The  straight-tusked  elephant  {E.  antiquus)  does  not  occur  in  the  north 
at  this  time,  but  is  found  in  the  Arno  valley  of  Italy,  where  it  is  associated 
with  a  fauna  of  almost  tropical  character,  including  the  southern  mammoth 
and  the  hippopotamus.    The  typical  E.  antiquus  is  recognized  by  its  nar- 
row, elongated  grinding  teeth  with  comparatively  few  plates,^  which,  com- 
bined with  its  skull  characters,  suggest  its  affinity  to  the  modern  African 
{Loxodonta)  rather  than  to  the  Indian  elephant  {Euelephas)  group.  While 
in  the  first,  or  Norfolk,  interglacial  period  it  is  confined  to  Italy,  in  subsequent 
interglacial  times  it  wandered  into  northern  Europe  as  one  of  the  grandest  ^ 
and  most  distinctive  forms,  attaining  a  very  wide  distribution.    Pohlig  cer- 
tainly overestimates  its  size  ^  in  assigning  to  it  a  height  of  5  m.  at  the  back 
(16  ft.  8  in.),  or  1  m.  more  than  the  mammoth,  and  with  tusks  also  5  m.  in 
length.    In  consequence  of  the  size  and  weight  of  the  tusks,  the  head,  i  i 
shoulders,  and  fore  legs  were  enormously  developed.    The  same  writer  fit 
believes  that  the  habitat  of  this  mammoth  retreated  and  advanced  with  the-  k 
successive  ice  waves  and  warm  interglacial  times.  t 

The  diminutive  elephants  of  the  Mediterranean  islands  were  the  dwarfed  ] 
descendants  of  these  straight-tusked  elephants.  The  researches  of  Miss  tlio 
Bate  ^  confirm  the  relationship  to  E.  antiquus  of  these  pigmy  forms,  which  \]\ 

*  3fP 

*  Pohlig,  H.,  Eiszeit  und  Urgeschichte  des  Menschen.  Leipzig,  1907,  p.  120. 

'  Pohlig,  H.,  Dentition  und  Kranologie  des  Elephas  antiquus  Falc.  mit  Beitragen  iiber  ^Pp 
Elephas  primigenius  Blum,  and  Elephas  meridionalis  Nesti.  Nov.  Act.  Ksl.  Leop-Carol.  Deutsch,  ^ 
Akad.  Naturforscher,  Vol.  LIII,  no.  1.    Halle,  1888. 

^  Pohlig,  H.,  Eiszeit  und  Urgeschichte  des  Menschen.    Leipzig,  1907. 

*  Bate,  D.  M.  A.,  On  Elephant  Remains  from  Crete,  with  Description  of  Elephas  creticm 

sp.  n.    Proc.  Zool.  Sac.  London,  Aug.  1,  1907,  pp.  238-250.  U 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  399 

attained  a  height  of  only  5  ft.  She  remarks  that  the  adaptabiUty  to  which 
E.  antiquus  owed  its  wide  geographic  distribution  and  its  continued  exist- 
ence through  a  long  period  of  time  may  explain  its  rapid  diminution  in  size 
under  adverse  circumstances. 

Rhinoceroses.  — These  animals  belong  to  the  dicerorhine  phylum;  that 
is,  they  are  related  remotely  to  the  Sumatran,  or  Asiatic,  and  not  to  the 
African  rhinoceroses,  although  like  the  latter  they  lack  the  front  or  cutting 
teeth.  The  stage  typical  of  the  period  is  the  Etruscan  rhinoceros  (D. 
etruscus),  a  browsing  form  with  short-crowned  teeth,  first  recorded  in  the 
Val  d'Arno.  It  appears  probable  that  the  related  broad-nosed  rhinoceros 
I  {D.  megarhinus  or  D.  merckii),  a  grazing  animal  with  long-crowned  teeth, 
is  not  certainly  recognized  in  the  Forest  Bed  level,  but  first  occurs  in  a  later 
interglacial  stage;  this  point  requires  investigation. 

Human  Culture  Stages 

j        Eolithic  flints.  —  As  above  noted,  the  earliest  traces  of  man  in  beds  of 
this  age  were  the  incised  bones  discovered  by  Desnoyers  at  St.  Prest  near 
Chartres  in  1863.    Doubt  as  to  the  artificial  character  of  these  incisions 
I  has  been  removed  by  the  recent  explorations  of  Laville  and  Rutot  which 
I  resulted  in  the  discovery  of  eolithic  flints,  fully  confirming  the  discoveries 
of  the  Abbe  Bourgeois  in  these  deposits  in  1867.    The  associated  fauna 
includes  the  elephant  {E.  meridionalis) ,  the  rhinoceros  (D.  etruscus),  the 
hippopotamus  (H.  major),  the  beaver  (Trogontherium) ,  three  species  of  bear 
I  and  one  of  the  bison.    Further  confirmation  is  lent  by  the  discovery  of 
^    Abbott  of  several  worked  flints,  two  in  situ,  in  the  Cromer  Forest  Bed. 

!       It  is  possible  (Schotensack  ^)  that  the  Mauer  sands,  containing  some 
'  I  species  of  the  First  Fauna,  as  well  as  an  elephant  attributed  to  E.  antiquus > 
\  are  of  this  early  date.    (See  pp.  401,  403). 

\  • 

2.    The  Second,  or  Mid-Pleistocene  Fauna 

IE  I 

!  Comparing  the  mammals  of  Europe  now  present  with  those  demarcating 
the  stages  in  the  Pliocene,  Miocene,  and  earlier  ages,  we  perceive  that  we  are 
truly  entering  a  new  life  zone,  which  may  be  divided  into  two  faunal  sub- 
zones,  an  earher  and  a  more  recent.    (See  pp.  375,  389.) 

The  mammals  of  this  grand  life  zone  have  lost  many  resemblances  to 
[j,  those  of  the  Upper  Pliocene  and  are  regarded  by  most  authorities  (pp.  377, 
^jii  378)  as  belonging  chiefly  to  the  second  and  third  interglacial  epochs.  They 
are  distinguished  from  those  typical  of  the  Norfolk  Forest  Bed  by  the  dis- 
appearance of  certain  surviving  Pliocene  forms  and  by  the  first  appearance 
in  northern  Europe  of  certain  southern  types,  such  as  the  hippopotamus  and 
the  straight-tusked  elephant. 

^  Schotensack,  O.,  Der  Unterkiefer  des  Homo  heidelbergensis  aus  den  Sanden  von  Mauer 
bei  Heidelberg:  Ein  Beitrag  ziir  Palaontologie  des  Menschen.    Leipzig,  1908. 


400 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


The  saber-tooth  tigers  (M achcerodus)  now  disappear  in  Europe  and  their 
place  in  the  balance  of  nature  is  taken  by  giant  true  leonid  felines  {Felis 
spelcea);  the  southern  mammoth  {E.  meridionalis)  is  replaced  by  a  more 
progressive  stage  {E.  trogontherii) ,  which  is  regarded  by  Pohlig  as  its  direct 
successor;  the  polycladine  deer  of  Upper  Pliocene  and  Norfolk  Forest  Bed 
times  have  vanished,  neither  are  there  traces  of  the  axis  deer.  True  cattle 
{Bos  primigenius)  now  certainly  appear  as  well  as  the  Bison.  The  moose 
(Alces  latifrons),  the  giant  fallow  deer  (Megaceros  belgrandi),  and  the  roe 


Fig.  177.  —  The  giant  fallow  deer,  Mcgaceros,  of  the  British  Pleistocene,  from  a  skeleton 
found  in  the  Irish  peat  bogs.  After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum 
of  Natural  History. 

deer  (Capreolus)  are  all  present.  The  true  stag  {Cervus  elaphus)  is  again 
recorded,  but  somewhat  doubtfully.  Another  animal  of  somewhat  doubtful 
record  but  of  very  great  interest  is  the  reindeer  {Rangifer  tarandus);  this 
animal,  if  present,  is  rare,  because  this  is  distinctively  the  pre-reindeer 
period.  Among  other  arctic  forms  the  musk  ox  (0.  moschatus)  is  conspicu- 
ous by  its  absence.  As  evidence  of  milder  temperatures,  the  hippopotamus 
again  appears  in  central  Europe  and  in  Great  Britain.  Rhinoceroses  are 
very  abundant,  but  still  represent  exclusively  the  broad-nosed  types,  the 
dicerorhine,  or  Sumatran  phylum  (D.  merckii,  or  D.  megarhinus).  The 
])rachyodont  Etruscan  rhinoceros  (D.  etruscus)  is  doubtfully  recorded. 

The  carnivores  of  the  period  include,  beside  the  cave  lion  (Felis  spelcea), 
the  lynx  {Felis  lynx),  the  broAvn  bear  {Ursus  ardos),  and  the  badger  (Meles), 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  401 

Among  the  rodents,  Trogontherium  reappears  accompanied  by  beavers 
(Castor  fiber)  and  marmots  (Marmota) . 

It  is  especially  noteworthy  and  characteristic  of  this  fauna  that  it  con- 
tains no  types  either  of  the  cold  northern  steppes  or  of  the  tundras,  that, 
beside  the  absence  of  the  musk  ox  and  the  rarity  of  the  reindeer,  no 
arctic  rodents  are  recorded. 

The  appearance  of  the  earliest  skeletal  remains  of  man  is  the  fact  of 
most  tremendous  interest  in  this  great  life  zone.  Such  remains  are  cer- 
tainly intermingled  with  those  of  the  mammoths  and  other  mammals. 
The  earliest  (Eolithic)  human  stage  {Homo  heidelbergensis)  belongs  to  the 
earher  phase  of  Mosbach,  while  the  remains  of  the  palaeolithic  (Homo  nean- 
dertalensis)  belong  in  the  later  phase  of  the  period  of  Taubach  and  Krapina. 
Of  these  we  shall  speak  more  fully  on  a  later  page.  It  is  important,  how- 
ever, to  call  attention  again  to  the  differences  of  opinion  between  Penck  and 
Boule  (p.  380)  as  to  the  correlation  of  the  mammahan  fauna  of  the  geo- 
logic glacial  and  interglacial  phases  and  the  human  culture  stages. 

A  unit  fauna.  —  A  grandly  distinctive  fact  is  that  in  all  the  localities 
Hsted  below  we  have  a  substantially  similar  mammalian  fauna,  that  is,  a 
fauna  composed  of  similar  or  closely  related  species,  which  may  have  re- 
treated with  the  advance  of  the  ice  but  reappeared  in  interglacial  times. 

We  note  that  it  is  the  stage  prior  to  the  appearance  of  the  true  mammoth 
(E.  primigenius) ,  as  well  as  prior  to  that  of  the  atelodine  or  dicerine  rhinocer- 
oses (D.  antiquitatis) ;  we  note  the  absence  of  the  steppe  and  tundra  types 
of  mammals,  which  only  arrive  in  a  later  stage,  and  that  the  fauna  taken 
together  is  that  of  forests,  river  borders,  and  of  an  open  meadow  country,  con- 
taining a  mingling  of  hardy  forms  of  the  north,  like  the  deer  and  the  moose, 
with  probably  the  more  sensitive  forms  of  the  south. 

The  horse  was  distributed  over  all  the  northern  hemisphere  in  the  older 
Pleistocene,  both  in  glacial  and  interglacial  epochs.  The  specific  references 
to  E.  cahallus  fossilis  are  very  indefinite  and  doubtful.  The  horses  of  the  long, 
warm,  interglacial  stage  were  remarkable  for  their  great  size,  which  exceeded 
that  of  the  largest  living  breeds.  According  to  Pohlig  ^  they  were  at  all 
times  accompanied  by  wild  asses  (f  E.  hemionus).  This,  we  are  inclined, 
however,  to  beheve  was  a  feature  of  the  Asiatic  steppe  period,  in  which  we 
should  expect  to  find  asses  similar  to  the  dzegettai  of  Asia. 

Flora  of  the  interglacial  periods.  —  As  in  the  first  or  Norfolk  interglacial, 
the  climate  was  perceptibly  warmer,  or  at  least  more  equable  and  humid 
than  at  the  present  time.  In  fact,  during  the  second  long,  warm  interglacial 
and  the  shorter,  or  third  interglacial  period,  there  was  a  recurrence  of  con- 
ditions milder  than  the  present.  A  vision  of  the  flora  is  afforded  in  the 
Quaternary  tuffs  of  Provence  ^  which  are  associated  with  the  remains  of 

1  Pohlig,  H.,  Eiszeit  und  Urgeschichte  des  Menschen.    Leipzig,  1907. 
^  De  Saporta,  G.,  La  Flore  des  Tufs  Quaternaires  en  Provence.  C.  R.  Sess.  Congr.  Sci, 
France.    Aix,  1867. 
2d 


402 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  E.  antiquus  stage.  ''The  flora  of  the  Quaternary  tuffs,"  observes 
Saporta,  ''is  composed  almost  entirely  of  woody  forms  living  in  valleys  and 
by  the  sides  of  streams."  It  is  for  the  most  part  analogous  with  the  present 
flora  of  Provence.  Of  the  thirty-seven  species,  twenty-nine  still  occur  in 
this  region.  Among  the  forms  which  have  since  retreated  to  the  south  are 
the  sweet  bay  {Laurus  nobilis)  and  another  species  of  laurel  (L.  canariensis) 
which  is  now  confined  to  the  Canaries.  The  greater  humidity  of  the  time 
is  indicated  by  the  presence  of  species  of  pines  which  require  more  moisture. 
As  in  the  Norfolk  Interglacial  the  figs  (Ficus)  and  the  Judas  trees  (Cercis) 
flourished.  The  ash  (Fraxinus)  is  of  a  species  now  found  in  Corsica  and 
Italy.  On  the  whole  the  forest  trees  and  forest  ground  flora  are  surprisingly 
modern,  including  oaks,  elms,  poplars,  willows,  lindens,  maples,  sumacs, 
dogwood,  hawthorn.  Among  the  climbing  plants  are  the  vine  (Vitis)  and 
clematis  (Clematis). 

First  Faunal  Sub-zone 

The  life  of  this  zone  is  typified  by  the  fauna  of  Mosbach,  of  Rixdorf, 
and  of  Slissenborn.    It  is  the  Elephas  trogontherii  stage  of  Pohlig. 

This  stage  opens  with  the  more  temperate  climate  of  the  long,  warm, 
interglacial  period  known  as  the  Mindel-Riss  of  Penck.  This  period  was 
first  observed  by  Lyell  and  Evans  in  England,  and  subsequently  recognized 
in  Germany  and  France.  Geologically  the  deposits  are  of  fluviatile  origin, 
consisting  chiefly  of  river  sands  and  gravels,  in  which  the  rerhains  of  hippo- 
potamus, of  Dicerorhinus  merckii,  and  of  Elephas  trogontherii  occur.  These 
animals  were  formerly  cited  as  evidence  of  south  temperate  climate,  but 
the  evidence  of  the  equally  numerous  northern  types  and  the  temperate 
flora  tends  to  modify  extreme  views  as  to  temperature. 

The  geographic  connections  of  Europe  with  the  south  through  the  land 
bridges  of  Lower  Pleistocene  times  still  persisted,  because  the  depression 
of  the  southern  portions  of  the  continent  of  Europe  had  not  yet  begun. 

Among  the  chief  locaHties  are  the  following: 

Mosbach,  near  the  Neckar  in  northern  Baden  (Fig.  176,  12). 

SussENBORN,  near  Weimar,  Germany  (11). 

Rixdorf,  near  Potsdam,  Germany  (10). 

St.  Roch,  France. 

Clacton,  Essex,  England  (13). 

Mauer  Sands,  near  Heidelberg  (14). 

The  most  typical  fauna  is  that  of  Mosbach}  Here  are  found  all  the 
characteristic  types  of  the  period,  the  hippopotamus  (H.  major),  the  urus 
(Bos  primigenius),  the  bison  {B.  prisons),  the  rhinoceros  (D.  merckii),  two 
species  of  mammoth  {E.  antiquus,  E.  trogontherii),  horses  {E.  f  caballus). 

1  Lepsius,  R.,  Geologie  von  Deutschland  und  den  Angrenzenden  Gebieten.  Erster  Teil: 
Das  Westliche  und  Siidliche  Deutschland.    Stuttgart,  1892. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  403 


Among  the  river-living  forms  are  the  beavers;  the  giant  beaver  {Trogon- 
therium)  makes  its  last  appearance  in  Europe  in  this  sub-stage.  The  mar- 
mot (Marmota),  now  found  in  the  Alps,  Car- 
pathians, and  Pyrenees,  is  a  mountain-living 
type  whose  remains  may  have  been  borne 
down  by  the  streams.  The  carnivores  include 
the  lions  {F.  spelcea),  lynx  (F.  lynx),  the  bear 
{Ursus  ardos),  and  the  badger  (Meles).  The 
deer  family  is  represented  by  the  moose,  the 
giant  deer,  the  roe  deer,  and  the  stag  (C  ela- 
phus).  The  former  identification  of  the  rein- 
deer {R.  tarandus)  is  now  disputed.  Accord- 
ing to  Lepsius  the  molluscan  fauna  points  to 
a  colder  climate  than  the  present.^ 

The  gravels  of  Siissenhorn^  are  of  the  same 
age  as  the  Mosbach  sands.  They  belong  to 
the  Elephas  trogontherii  stage  of  Pohlig,  and 
this  species  is  more  abundant  here  than  any 
other.  The  fauna  again  is  very  similar,  includ- 
ing the  broad-nosed  rhinoceros  {D.  merckii),  a 
species  of  horse  more  primitive  than  E.  cahal- 
lus,  the  bison  (B.  priscus),  the  red  deer  (C 
elaphus),  and  the  roe  deer.  Weiss  also  iden- 
tifies here  somewhat  doubtfully  a  reindeer 
(R.  tarandus). 

Eolithic  stage,  Heidelberg  Man.  —  To  the 
faunal  stage  of  Elephas  antiquus,  of  the  Etrus- 
can rhinoceros  {D.  etruscus),  and  of  primitive 
species  of  horse  {E.  stenonis  [?])  is  to  be  added 
the  recently  discovered  Heidelberg  man  {Homo 
heidelbergensis)  determined  from  a  lower  jaw 
found  (1907)  ^  in  the  Mauer  sands  at  a  depth 
of  24.10  meters.    These  sands  are  capped  by 
deposits  of  loess.    Schotensack  likens  the 
mammals  of  the  Mauer  sands  to  those  of  the 
Forest  Bed  of  Norfolk ;  the  presence  of  E.  antiquus  indicates  a  somewhat 
more  recent  date;  while  the  species  of  horse  and  rhinoceros  would  agree 
with  the  earher  Forest  Bed  date.    This  discovery  is  one  of  the  most  im- 

1  Lepsius,  R.,  Geologie  von  Deutschland  und  den  Angrenzenden  Gebieten.  Erster 
Tail:   Das  Westliche  und  Slidliche  Deutschland.    Stuttgart,  1892. 

2  Weiss,  A.,  Die  Conchylienfauna  der  Kiese  von  Siissenborn  bei  Weimar.  Zeitschr.  Deutsch. 
Geol.  GeselL,  Vol.  51,  1899,  pp.  156-167. 

'  Schotensack,  O.,  Der  Unterkiefer  des  Homo  heidelbergensis  aus  den  Sanden  von  Mauer 
bei  Heidelberg:  Ein  Beitrag  zur  Palaontologie  des  Menschen.  Leipzig.  Verlag  von  Wilhelm 
Engelmann,  1908. 


First  Faunal  Sub-Zone 
Man 

Homo  heidelbergensis 
Straight-tusked  elephant 

E.  antiquus 
Mammoth 

E.  trogontherii 
Broad-nosed  rhinoceros 

D.  merckii 
Wild  horse 

Equus  (?)  sp. 
Urus 

Bos  primigenius 
Bison 

Bison  priscus 
Red  deer 

Cervus  elaphus 
(?)  Reindeer 

Rangifer  tarandus 
Giant  fallow  deer 

Cervus  subgen.  Megaceros 
Moose 

Alces 
Hippopotamus 

H.  major 
Giant  beaver 

Trogontherium 
Lion 

Felis  spelcea 
Marmot 

Marmota 


404 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


portant  in  the  whole  history  of  anthropology,  especially  as  it  is  said  to  have 
been  followed  by  the  finding  of  eoliths  in  the  same  layer.  The  lower  jaw 
is  exceptionally  massive,  without  chin  projection,  with  an  essentially  human 


Fig.  178.  —  The  human  lower  jaw  (about  X  |)  found  near  Heidelberg,  on  which  is  based  the 
species  Homo  heidelbergensis.    After  Schotensack  and  MacCurdy. 

set  of  teeth;  in  other  words,  it  is  a  jaw  similar  to  that  of  an  anthropoid  ape, 
with  the  dentition  of  a  man.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  belongs  to 
one  of  the  makers  of  the  eoliths.^ 

Eolithic  flints  have  also  been  found  in  Rixdorf  as  well  as  in  Britz  and 
Rudesdorf,  near  Berlin.  Stations  have  been  discovered  in  England  and 
France  of  the  same  Eolithic  age. 

PaloBolithic  Stage.  The  Chellean.  —  The  typical  Chellean  also  belongs 
with  the  first  life  zone  of  the  second,  or  mid-Pleistocene  fauna.  This 
is  proven  in  the  gravel  beds  of  Chclles  (Fig.  176,  15),  situated  only  a  few 
meters  above  the  present  level  of  the  Marne,  which  show  a  succession  of 
three  distinct  deposits.  The  earliest  deposit,  or  the  typical  Chellean,  at  the 
base,  resting  unconformably  upon  the  Tertiary,  is  a  gravel  containing  the 
remains  of  straight-tusked  elephants  (E .  antiquus) ,  the  broad-nosed  rhinoc- 
eros (D.  merckii),  the  giant  beaver  {Trogontherium  cuvieri),  together  with 
palieolithic  flint  implements  of  human  manufacture  of  the  most  primitive 
t3'pe.  Thus  the  Chellean  is  regarded  by  Penck  (table,  p.  379)  as  belonging 
in  the  long,  warm,  Mindel-Riss  interglacial  epoch.  Boule,  however,  assigns 
it  (p.  380)  a  more  recent  age,  or  just  preceding  the  last  glaciation.  No 
traces  of  the  true  mammoth  (E.  primigenius)  nor  of  the  woolly  rhinoceros 
(R.  antiquitaiis)  are  found  in  the  lower  Chellean  Zone;  but  both  are  found 

'  MacCurdy,  G.  G.,  Eolithic  and  Paleolithic  Man.  Amer.  AnthropoL,  Vol.  II,  no.  1, 
Jan.-Mar.,  1909,  pp.  92-100. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  405 

on  higher  levels  of  the  same  deposits,  associated  with  flints  of  the  Mousterian 
type,  fixing  the  age  of  the  higher  levels  as  Mousterian. 


Fig.  179.  —  Sand-pit  at  Mauer  near  Heidelberg.    The  lower  jaw  (Homo  heidelbergensis)  was 
found  at  the  spot  marked  with  a  cross.    After  Schotensack  and  MacCurdy. 


Second  Faunal  Sub-zone 

This  is  the  Elephas  antiquus  stage  of  Pohlig.  According  to  Penck  it 
corresponds  with  the  short,  final  interglacial  epoch  and  with  the  Mousterian 
stage  of  palaeolithic  culture.  It  is  typified  by  the  fauna  of  Taubach  (near 
Weimar)  (Fig.  176,  19),  the  travertines  of  Laviste  and  Aygelades  near 
Marseilles,  the  tuffs  of  the  Tiber  valley  near  Rome  (21),  the  lignites  of 
Utznach  and  Diirnten  (18)  near  Zurich,  of  Grays-Thurrock  and  Ilford  (17), 
Essex,  England. 

The  straight-tusked  elephant  (E.  antiquus)  was  very  abundant,  but  thi ; 
is  its  last  appearance  north  of  Italy.  The  most  important  new  arrival  is 
the  true  mammoth  {Elephas  primigenius),  which,  according  to  Pohlig,  is  a 
direct  descendant  of  E.  trogontherii,  which  in  its  turn  is  derived  from  E. 
meridionalis} 

The  broad-nosed  rhinoceros  (D.  merckii)  is  also  abundant,  but  it  now 
appears  for  the  last  time.  The  hippopotamus  is  not  recorded  at  Mosbach, 
but  is  recorded  in  Essex,  England  (Ilford,  Grays-Thurrock). 

1  Pohlig,  H.,  Tiber  Elephas  trogontherii  in  England.  Monatsber.  Deutsch.  Geolog.  Ges.,  Vol. 
LXI,  1909,  no.  5. 


406 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


By  far  the  most  important  animal  is  man,  known  as  Homo  neandertal- 
ensis. 

Depression.  —  According  to  Pohlig/  this  stage  is  characterized  geo- 
graphically by  tlie  wid(^spread  depression  of  the  continental  borders  of 

southern  Europe.  Great 
Britain  was  cut  off  from  the 
continent,  Spain  from  Morocco ; 
Italy,  Sardinia,  and  Tunis  were 
separated,  and  Greece  lost  its 
connection  with  Asia  Minor. 
A  somewhat  cooler  interglacial 
climate  is  represented  in  the 
fauna  of  the  Thuringian  tufas, 
in  which  Pohlig  records  sixty- 
one  species  of  mammals.  Geo- 
logically the  stage  was  char- 
acterized by  extensive  vol- 
canic disturbances  in  central 
Europe,  and  by  the  deposi- 
tion of  gypsum  and  tufas, 
these  earth  movements  being 

¥ui.  IbO.  —  Recon-struction  of  the  head  of  Homo     Connected    through    the  widc- 

X'^r^rfhtTutho^^  spread  depression  of  the 

continental  borders  and  isola- 
tion of  the  islands  of  the  Mediterranean  above  noted. 

The  chief  localities  in  which  this  fauna  is  recorded  are  the  following: 

Grays-Thurrock  and  Ilford,  Essex,  England  (Fig.  176,  17). 

DuRNTEN,  near  Zurich,  Switzerland  (18). 

Utznach,  lignites,  near  Zurich  (18). 

Taubach,  near  Weimar,  Germany  (19). 

Laviste,  travertines,  near  Marseilles. 

Krapina  (cave  of),  Croatia  (23  a). 

It  is  interesting  to  summarize  this  fauna  as  found  at  Taubach,^  near 
Weimar,  also  at  Ilford,  and  Grays-Thurrock,  Essex,"^  in  order  to  bring  out 
more  clearly  its  contrast  with  that  which  follows: 

This  fauna  is  that  of  Taubach 
Summary  of  Second  Fauna  and  of  Ilford,  Essex.    It  will  be 

Man,  Homo  neandertalensis  seen  to  present  a  wide  contrast  to 

Straight-tusked  elephant,  E.  antiquus    the  mammalian  assemblage  which 

'  Pohlip:,  H.,  Vorljiufige  Mittheilungen  iiber  das  Plistocaen,  insbesondere  Thiiringens. 
Sitzungshcr.  Niederrhein  Ges.  Bonn,  Mar.  3,  1884,  pp.  2-15. 

2  Pohlig,  H.,  Vorliiufige  Mittheilungen  iiber  das  Plistocaen,  etc.,  1884,  p.  4. 

'  Dawkins,  W.  B.,  Classifioation  of  the  Tertiary  Period  by  Means  of  the  Mammalia. 
Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  Aug.,  1880,  pp.  379-405. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  407 


Early  mammoth,  E.  trogontherii 
Broad-nosed  rhinoceros,  D.  merckii 
Wild  horse,  E.  (f )  caballus 

Probably  the  'forest'  variety 
Wild  boar,  Sus  (scrofa)  antiquus 

Extinct  variety 
Bison,  B.  prisons 

Extinct  variety 
Urus,  or  'Ur-ochs,'  Wild  cattle 

Bos  primigenius 
(?)  Red  deer,  C.  elaphus 
Roe  deer,  C.  capreolus 
Giant  deer,  C .' megaceros 
(?)  Reindeer,  R.  tarandus 
Lion,  Felis  (leo)  spelcea 
Hycena  (crocuta)  spelcea 
Brown  bear,  Ursus  arctos 
Small  cave  bear,  Ursus  spelceus 
Wolf  and  fox,  Canis  lupus,  C.  vulpes 
Badger,  Meles  taxus 
Marten,  Mustela  martes 
Otter,  Lutra 
Beaver,  Castor  fiber 

Extinct  variety 
Water  and  field  vole,  Arvicola 
Hamster,  Cricetus 
Suslik,  Spermophilus 
Marmot,  Marmota 


follows  in  the  Third  Great  Life 
Zone.  At  Grays-Thurrock,  Essex, 
the  hippopotamus  also  is  recorded 
by  Dawkins.  It  is  noteworthy  that 
the  reindeer  {R.  tarandus)  is  not  re- 
corded in  Essex.  The  mammoth  of 
Essex  was  referred  by  Pohlig  ^  to  E. 
trogontherii.  The  horse  of  Essex, 
according  to  Ewart,^  is  of  the  'for- 
est '  type.  This  fauna  is  a  prevail- 
ing forest-meadow  and  river  fauna. 
It  appears  probable  that  the  lions, 
hyaenas,  and  bears  which  occur  here 
are  not  true  cave  types,  but  ances- 
tors of  the  cave  types  which  appear 
in  the  next  geologic  stage.  They 
certainly  were  not  cave-dwellers  at 
this  time,  so  the  specific  names  are 
misleading. 

Flora.  —  The  lignites  of  Diirn- 
ten  and  Utznach  reveal  forests  of 
mid-Pleistocene  age,  similar  to  those 
which  still  continue  to  flourish  in 
the  same  region  of  Zurich  and  St. 
Gall,  consisting  of  spruce,  firs  {Fi- 
nns ahies),  mountain  pines,  larches, 
birches,  yews,  and  sycamores,  with 
an  undergrowth  of  hazel.  With 


this  hardy  flora  is  associated  the 
straight- tusked  elephant,  the  broad-nosed  rhinoceros,  the  urus,  and  the 
stag.  These  lignitic  deposits  rest  on  the  remains  of  a  retreating  glacier, 
and  are  in  turn  covered  with  those  of  another  glacier,  and  are  therefore 
interglacial.^ 

Mammals  of  the  Second  Fannal  Zone.  —  In  considering  the  life  it  is 
necessary  to  keep  in  mind  the  '  alternate  migration  theory, '  of  the  second 
and  third  faunas. 

The  broad-nosed  rhinoceros  and  the  straight-tusked  elephant  were  among 
the  most  characteristic  mammals  of  this  epoch.    The  former  animal  {D 

^  Pohlig,  H.,  Dentition  und  Kranologie  des  Elephas  antiquus  Falc.  mit  Beitragen  iiber 
Elephas  primigenius  Blum,  und  Elephas  meridionalis  Nesti.  Nov.  Act.  Ksl.  Leop.-Carol.  Deutsch. 
Akad.  Naturforsch.,  Vol.  LIII,  no.  1,  Halle,  1888,  p.  326. 

2  Ewart,  J.  C,  The  Multiple  Origin  of  Horses  and  Ponies.  Repr.  Trans.  Highl.  Agric.  Soc. 
Scotland,  1904,  p.  581. 

*  Dawkins,  W.  B.,  Early  Man  in  Britain  and  his  Place  in  the  Tertiary  Period.  London, 
1880,  p.  145. 


408 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


merckii)  is  a  relative  of  the  smaller  form  (D.  etruscus)  of  the  Norfolk  inter- 
glacial,  or  first  interglacial  period,  but  is  readily  distinguished  by  its  h3rpso- 
dont  or  long-crowned  grinding  teeth.  It  is  distinguished  from  all  other 
rhinoceroses  by  its  greater  size  and  relatively  longer  legs;  ^  the  horn  was  very 
long,  and  inclined  forward,  the  second  horn  seeming  to  have  been  almost 
equally  large.  The  skin,  so  far  as  we  know,  was  not  clothed  with  hair.  It 
left  no  descendants  on  the  Mediterranean  islands,  nor  have  remains  been 
found  in  Spain. 

The  true  mammoth  {E.  trogontherii) ,  which  first  occurs  at  this  stage, 
is  the  most  specialized  form  of  elephant  which  has  ever  existed,  especially 
in  the  numerous  thin  and  closely  compressed  laminae  in  the  enamel  of  its 
teeth.  Probably  its  most  typical  form  is  that  of  the  northern  or  arctic 
phase  of  evolution  {E.  primigenius) ,  which  belongs  to  the  third  great  faunal 
zone  of  the  Pleistocene. 

The  bison  {B.  priscus)  rivaled  the  mammoth  as  a  wanderer,  able  to 
adapt  itself  to  wide  diversities  of  climate.  In  the  long,  warm,  interglacial 
period  there  existed  a  race,  B.  priscus  (antiqui),  which  enjoyed  a  wide  dis- 
tribution, while  on  the  Mediterranean  islands  there  lived  pigmy  varieties. 
The  bison  is  a  brachycephalic  or  short-headed  ox,  while  its  contemporary, 
the  gigantic  urus  {Bos  primigenius)  is  long-headed  or  dolichocephalic,  also 
less  slender  and  less  agile  than  the  bison.  At  Durnten,  remains  of  the  urus 
are  found  associated  with  those  of  E.  antiquus  and  D.  merckii.^  The  popular 
Teutonic  designation  of  these  animals  is  rather  confusing  to  English  ears. 
It  is: 

"Auerochs,"  "Wisent"  =  Bison  priscus. 

"Ur-ochs"  ''Urus  "  (i.e.  primitive  oxen)  =  Bos  primigenius. 

The  urus  of  Caesar,  or  Ur-ochs,  is  mentioned  as  surviving  in  Germany  in 
its  wild  state  as  late  as  the  twelfth  century  a.d.  The  bison  or  Wisent  has 
survived  to  the  present  time,  and  is  now  represented  in  the  Bos  bison  or 
Bison  honasus  of  Lithuania,  where  it  is  carefully  preserved.^  The  relations 
of  these  animals  to  domestication  will  be  considered  on  a  later  page. 

Horses  of  the  Second  and  Third  Faunal  Zones.  —  There  is  bright  promise 
of  clearing  up  the  relations  of  the  Pleistocene  horses  of  Europe  to  the  |. 
modern  vald  and  domesticated  races  through  new  lines  of  study  instituted 
by  Ewart-'  since  1904.  The  different  wild  breeds  of  horses  have  evolved 
in  three  great  kinds  of  environment:  thus  we  discover  horses  adapted  to: 
(1)  forests  and  upland  valleys,  (2)  to  high,  dry  steppes,  (3)  to  deserts  or 
plateaux.    In  these  three  chief  habitats  the  horses  may  be  respectively 

'  Pohlip,  Eiszeit  und  Urgeschichte  des  Menschen,  1907,  pp.  124-125. 

*  Pohlig.  H.,  Eiszeit  und  Urgoschichte  des  Mcnscben.  Leipzig,  1907,  p.  131;  and  Riiti- 
meyer,  L.,  Die  Fauna  der  Pfahlbauten  der  Schweiz.  Neue  Denkschr.  schweiz.  Ges.  gesam. 
Naluruuis.,  Vol.  XIX.  Ziirirh.  1862,  pp.  68-112. 

»  Ewart,  J.  C,  '04,  '07,  '09.    For  titles  see  Bibliography. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  409 

known  as  the  'forest  horse/  the  'steppe  horse/  and  the  'plateau  horse.' 
Each  has  its  distinctive  coloring,  tooth  structure,  and  proportions  of  skull, 
body,  and  limbs. 

In  the  forest  horse  we  see  a  relatively  large,  clumsy  animal;  the 
face  is  broad,  short,  and  not  bent  down  on  the  cranium,  in  which  respect 
it  resembles  other  browsing  and  forest-living  types  of  Herbivora.  The 
limbs  are  short,  the  front  cannon  bone  (Mtc.  Ill)  being  short  and  stout, 
the  length  only  53^  times  the  width.  The  tail  is  set  on  low.  This  type  of 
horse  {E.  rohustus)  is  found  at  Solutre  and  in  the  Neolithic  deposits  of 
Ilford  (Essex)  and  in  Kent. 

The  desert  or  plateau  horse,  widely  differing  in  proportions,  is  the 
Pleistocene  animal  identified  by  Owen  as  an  ass  {E.  asinus  fossilis)  but 
considered  a  horse  by  Ewart,  and  named  by  him  E.  gracilis.  This  is  a  small 
animal,  not  over  12.2  hands  in  height,  slender-limbed,  with  long,  slender 
front  cannon  bones  (Mtc.  Ill),  the  length  being  73^  times  the  width.  The 
head  is  small,  the  face  fine  and  narrow,  with  a  straight  profile  only  slightly 
deflected  upon  the  cranium.  The  internal  cusp  (protocone)  of  the  upper 
molars  is  short.  Remains  of  an  animal  of  this  type  are  found  in  the  Pliocene 
of  Italy  (small,  slender-limbed  varieties  of  E.  stenonis)  and  France,  and  in 
the  Pleistocene  of  France  and  northern  Africa.  It  agrees,  so  far  as  known, 
with  the  existing  Celtic  pony  type  (E.  cahallus  celticus),  a  variety  of  horse 
distinguished  by  small,  fine  head,  large  eyes,  slender  limbs,  five  lumbar 
vertebrae,  now  found  in  more  or  less  pure  form  in  the  outlying  islands  and 
on  the  coast  of  western  Europe.  This  animal  is  believed  to  be  a  northern, 
hardy,  thick-coated  relative  of  the  pure  desert  type,  better  known  as  the 
Arabian,  which  gave  rise  to  the  modern  thoroughbred. 

The  steppe  or  third  kind  of  horse  is  typified  by  the  existing  wild  species 
of  the  Gobi  Desert  of  central  Asia  {E.  przewalskii) .  It  is  characterized  by 
short  neck,  large  head,  with  a  convex  profile,  short  back,  like  the  Celtic 
pony,  and  only  five  lumbar  vertebrae  and  heavy  limbs.  This  type  of  horse 
is  depicted  in  the  palaeolithic  Magdalenian  drawings  of  France. 

Another  possible  contributor  to  the  breeds  of  domesticated  horses  is  an 
animal  of  the  E.  sivalensis  type  in  the  Upper  Pliocene  of  the  Siwaliks  of 
India.  This  animal  is  tall,  with  long,  fairly  slender  limbs,  long  neck,  well 
set  on  tail,  long  face,  strongly  deflected  on  the  cranium,  with  a  convex  pro- 
file and  broad  brow,  and  short  protocone. 

Life  of  the  Mediterranean  Isla7ids.  —  Riitimeyer  (1869)  believed  that 
Morocco,  Algeria,  and  Tunis  were  stocked  with  animals  by  way  of  Gibral- 
tar, and  perhaps  also  by  Sicily  and  Malta  from  Europe.  In  the  islands  of 
Cyprus,  Malta,  and  Crete,  as  recently  explored  by  Miss  Bate,^  we  have 
proof  first  of  a  period  of  connection  with  the  neighboring  continents  through 
elevation,  second  of  the  isolation  of  the  islands  through  depression,  followed 

^  Bate,  Dorothea,  M.  A.,  Pleistocene  Mammalia  m  Crete.  Geol.  Mag.,  n.s.,  Decade  5, 
Vol.  II,  May,  1905,  pp.  193-202. 


410 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


by  the  dwarfing  of  several  types  of  large  mammals  confined  there  or  made 
captive  by  the  sea.  The  occurrence  of  closely  related  but  specifically  dif- 
ferent pigmy  elephants  and  hippopotami  in  \\idely  separated  islands  is  aa 
instance  of  independent  evolution,  with  some  divergence,  from  common 
ancestors.  It  appears  probal^le  that  Cyprus  became  an  island  first.  The 
extinct  Elephas  Cypriotes  and  Hippopotamus  minutus  are  both  more  prim- 
itive than  the  Maltese-Sicilian  species.  The  affinity  of  Malta  to  Sicily  is 
hulicatcd  by  the  common  occurrence  in  cavern  deposits  on  both  islands  of 
two  species,  Elephas  mnaidriensis  and  Hippopotamus  pentlandi.  E.  meli- 
tensis,  a  dwarf  race  characteristic  of  Malta,  has  been  found  also  near  Rome,^ 
which  would  appear  to  indicate  that  the  land  connection  with  the  Italian 
mainland  existed  probably  at  two  different  times.  Pohlig  believes  ^  that 
toward  the  end  of  the  first  glacial  period  the  large  mammals  migrated  to 
Sicily,  which  at  that  time  was  connected  both  with  Europe  and  Africa;  the 
land  bridges  then  became  submerged,  and  the  large  mammals  became  dwarf 
races.  The  dwarf  elephants  (E.  melitensis,  E.  mnaidriensis),  however,  are 
both  believed  to  be  derived  from  the  European  straight-tusked  elephant 
(E.  antiquus),  of  Asiatic  origin.  The  African  elephant  (Loxodonta)  never 
crossed  the  Mediterranean.  The  reduced  existing  fauna  of  Cyprus  con- 
tains a  mingling  of  European  and  North  African  forms,  and  shows  the  effects 
of  deforestation  in  historic  times. 

Human  Culture  Stage 

Mousterian. — The  Mousterian  was  in  part  interglacial  and  in  part 
glacial,  corresponding,  according  to  Penck,  "with  the  Riss,  or  third  glacial 
advance,  the  most  extensive  kno^^^l.  We  are  still  in  the  second  life  zone, 
or  period  of  the  straight-tusked  elephant  (E.  antiquus)  and  of  the  broad- 
nosed  rhinoceros  (D.  merckii),  which  may  alternate,  by  migration,  Tvith 
mammals  of  the  third  life  zone.  Together  vnth  these  mammals  in  the 
Prince's  Cave  in  Monaco  are  found  the  remains  of  hippopotamus,  but  this 
animal  does  not  occur  to  the  north  of  the  Alps  at  this  time. 

To  this  period  belongs  the  fauna  of  the  Wildkirchli  Cave  on  Mont 
Sentis  in  Switzerland  (Fig.  176,  20)  and,  still  more  important  for  the  re- 
mains of  man  which  they  contain,  the  caves  of  Neandertal  (22),  in  western 
Germany,  of  Spy  (23)  in  Belgium,  and  of  Krapina  (23  a)  in  Croatia.  ^Vhile 
Penck  regards  this  ^lousterian  as  belonging  to  the  third  glaciation,  Boule 
maintains  that  it  belongs  to  the  Wiirm,  or  fourth  glaciation.^ 

This  period  is  that  of  the  Neandertal  race  of  men  (Homo  neandertalen- 

'  Pohlig  H..  Die  Cerviden  des  thiiringischen  Dilu\aaltravert  nes  mit  Beitragen  iiber  andere 
diluviale  una  iiber  recente  Hirschformen.  Palaontographica.  Vol.  XXXIX,  1892,  pp.  215-262. 

*  Pohlig.  H.,  Eine  Elephantenhohle  Siciliens  und  der  erste  Nachweis  des  Cranialdoraes 
von  Elenhas  antiquus.   Ahhand.  kdnigl.  hayer.  Akad.  Wissensch.,  Miinchen,  1893,  pp.  37  seq. 

'  BouIp.  M..  Observations  sur  un  Silex  Taille  du  Jura  et  sur  la  Chronologie  de  M.  Penck. 
L'AnthropoL,  Vol.  XIX,  1908. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  411 


sis),^  the  typical  Palaeolithic  men  of  Europe,  who  were  far  more  primitive 
both  in  skull  and  Umb  structure  than  the  Neolithic  men  (see  Fig.  180).  The 
skull  of  Neandertal  man  was  characterized  by  an  extremely  receding  forehead, 
by  the  great  prominence  of  the  supraorbital  ridges,  and  by  a  rather  slender 


Fig.  181.  —  Skull  of  a  '  Neandertal  man  '  from  the  cavern  of  La  Chapelle-aux-Saints 
(Correze),  France.    After  Boule. 


jaw.  The  occipital  projection  for  the  attachment  of  the  superior  muscles  of 
the  neck  was  large,  indicating  that  these  muscles  at  the  back  of  the  neck 
were  strongly  developed,  a  character  necessary  to  meat-eaters  before  the 

^  The  mid-Pleistocene  man  was  definitely  named  Homo  neanderthalensis  by  Cope  in  1893 
at  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  the  skeletons  of  Spy;  it  seems,  however,  that  King  had  pre- 
viously (1864)  used  the  same  term.  Schwalbe  (1901)  remarks,  .  .  .  "the  species  of  man  which 
I,  together  with  King  (1864)  and  Cope  (1893),  designated  as  Homo  neanderthalensis."  In  the 
following  year  (1902)  the  same  author  introduces  the  term  Homo  primigenius,  which  is  that 
generally  adopted  in  Germany.  Among  French  authors  the  same  man  is  known  to-day  as 
Homo  mousteriensis.  This  polynomial  usage  serves  at  least  to  emphasize  the  unanimous 
opinion  as  to  the  distinct  specific  character  of  mid-Pleistocene  man. 


412 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


invention  of  knives  and  forks.  This  primitive  type  of  man  was  shorter 
than  the  average  European  (that  is,  5  feet  8}^  inches) ;  he  is  estimated  of  as 
low  stature  as  5  feet  33^  inches.  His  lower  limbs  were  especially  powerful, 
but  his  gait  seems  not  to  have  been  fully  erect,  for  the  knees  are  bent 
slightly  forward.  The  human  character  of  the  classic  type  of  Neandertal, 
discovered  in  1857,  has  been  confirmed  by  successive  discoveries  at  La 
Naulette,  Spy,  Krapina,  and  Malarnaud. 

The  most  remarkable  skull  of  Mousterian  age  is  that  (Fig.  181)  found 
by  the  Abbes  J.  and  A.  Bouyssonie  and  L.  Bardon  in  the  cavern  of  La 
Chapelle-aux-Saints  (Correze)  in  1908,  associated  with  stone  implements 
and  remains  of  the  reindeer,  urus,  ibex,  and  woolly  rhinoceros.  The  cranium 
is  dolichocephalic,  with  prominent  supraorbital  processes  and  relatively 
short  and  broad  nose,  weak  lower  jaw,  lacking  the  prominent  chin  pro- 
cess. These  characters,  as  well  as  the  posterior  position  of  the  foramen 
magnum  and  the  form  of  the  palate,  are  distinctly  simian  or  pro-human. ^ 

3.  The  Third  or  Upper  Pleistocene  Fauna 

This  grand  faunal  stage  is  in  many  ways  clearly  defined  from  those 
which  precede  it;  it  belongs  to  a  period  of  time  sharply  distinguished. 
To  the  anthropologist  this  is  the  close  of  the  long  Palieolithic  period,  in- 
cluding successively,  or  in  ascending  order,  the  Aurignacian,  Solutrian,  and 
Magdalenian  cultures ;  to  the  student  of  past  climates  as  represented  in  glacial 
conditions  this  represents  the  period  of  the  last  great  glaciations  in  the  Old 
and  New  Worlds,  including  the  advance,  the  maximum,  and  the  recession 
periods ;  to  the  geologist  this  is  the  chief  time  of  the  formation  of  the  loess 
as  well  as  of  the  final  river  gravels  and  sands,  and  glacial  moraines  and 
boulders;  to  the  palaeontologist  this  is  the  period  of  the  reindeer  {R.  taran- 
dus),  of  the  giant  woolly  rhinoceros  {Diceros  antiquitatis)  which  belongs  to  an 
entirely  different  race  from  the  dicerorhine  type  (D.merckii)  which  it  replaces, 
and  of  the  arctic  type  of  hairy,  or  woolly  mammoth  (E.  primigenius) .  The 
straight-tusked  elephant  {E.  antiquus)  no  longer  appears.  The  'steppe 
horse'  arrives  in  Europe;  there  is  evidence  of  steppe  blood  in  the  palaeo- 
lithic horse  drawings  of  the  Madeleine  Cave,  and  m  the  deposits  of  the 
Rhine  Valley.- 

Still  more  distinctive  perhaps  to  the  zoologist  is  the  first  certain  appear- 
ance or  re-occurrence  in  Europe  of  numerous  small  as  well  as  large  forms 
of  the  circumpolar  arctic  fauna,  namely,  of  the  tundra  fauna,  and  then  of 
the  steppe  fauna.  Thus  the  musk  ox  (0.  moschatus)  returns,  accompanied 
by  large  herds  of  reindeer,  driven  southward  by  the  renewed  advance  of 

»  Boule,  M.,  L'Homme  Fossile  de  la  Chapelle-aux-Saints.  UAnthropol,  Vol.  XIX,  1909, 
pp.  519-525. 

2  Ewart,  J.  C,  On  Skulls  of  Horses  from  the  Roman  Fort  at  Newstead,  near  Melrose, 
with  Observations  on  the  Origin  of  Domestic  Horses.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Edinburgh,  Vol.  XLV, 
Pt.  3,  no.  20,  1907,  pp.  555-587. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  413 


the  great  inland  ice  sheet  over  northern  and  central  Europe.  The  reindeer 
penetrated  even  into  Spain  and  perhaps  Asia  Minor.^  Similar  proofs  of 
this  great  and  possibly  repeated  southerly  migration  of  circumpolar  forms 
are  found  in  North  America.  It  is  well  for  the  reader  to  contrast  this  fauna 
at  once  with  that  of  the  mid-Pleistocene  above  described  (p.  399). 

This  hst  of  animals  includes  a 


True  mammoth,  Elephas  primigenius 
Woolly  rhinoceros,  D.  antiquitatis 
Musk  ox,  Ovibos  moschatus 
Reindeer,  Rangifer  tarandus 
Saiga  antelope.  Saiga  tartarica 
Asiatic  wild  ass,  Equus  hemionus 
Arctic  hare,  Lepus  variabilis 
Arctic  fox,  Canis  lagopus 
■Jerboa,  Aladaga  saliens 
Ibex,  Capra  ibex 
Chamois,  Rupicapra 
Wolverine,  Gulo  borealis 
Cave  bear,  Ursus  spelceus 


large  number  of  new  arrivals,  mostly 
from  northern  Europe  and  Asia, 
which  partly  mingled  with  and  partly 
drove  before  them  the  mammals  sur- 
viving from  the  previous  period. 
The  chief  disappearances  or  ab- 
sentees from  the  early  fauna  are  the 
broad-nosed  rhinoceros  (D.  merckii) 
and  the  straight-tusked  elephant 
{E.  antiquus). 

The  dominant  and  most  distinc- 
tive feature  of  this  period  is,  there- 
fore, the   wave,  or  succession  of 


waves,  of  life  from  the  extreme 
north;  a  north  no  longer  mild  and  temperate,  like  that  of  Eocene,  Ohgo- 
cene,  and  Miocene  times,  but  partly  covered  with  snow  and  ice  and  in- 
habited by  arctic,  tundra,  and  steppe  types,  as  it  is  to-day. 

The  chief  localities  where  this  grand  third  fauna  has  been  discovered 
are  the  following: 


Localities 

Xesslerloch  Cave,  near  Thayngen  (Fig.  176,  37) 
ScHWEizERSBiLD  CavG,  near  Schaffhausen  (37) 
Scattered  deposits  in  Thuringia,  in  northern  Germany, 

Saalfeld,  Gera,  Jena,  Leipzig  (29,  30,  31) 
WuRZBURG,  Bavaria,  Loess  deposits  (33) 
SwABiA  and  Franconia,  cave  deposits 
VoKLiNSHOFEN,  Alsace  (28) 

MoNTMAURiN  Cave  (Haute-Garonne),  Upper  levels 
(35) 

Chateauneuf-sur-Charente  (Charente)  (36) 


Culture  Zones 

Magdalenian  Stage 
Magdalenian  Stage 
Aurignacian  and  Solu- 
trian  Stages 

Solutrian 

Aurignacian  and  Solu- 
trian Stages 
Magdalenian  Stage 


To  understand  the  mammals  of  the  third  and  fourth  periods  of  Pleisto- 
cene life  in  Europe  it  is,  first  of  all,  necessary  to  group  them  into  four  great 
series  which  broadly  correspond  with  the  great  geographical  life  zones  of 


^  Pohlig,  H.,  Dentition  und  Kranologie  des  Elephas  antiquus  Falc. 
Leop.-Carol  Deutsch.  Akad.  Naturforsch.,  Vol.  LIU,  no.  1,  Halle,  1888. 


Nov.  Act.  Ksl. 


414 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  northern  hemisphere  at  the  present  time.  Here  we  may  refer  to  the 
masterly  researches  of  Nehring  ^  and  Woldrich.^ 


Pleistocene  and  Recent  Habitat  Zones 


I.  Tundra,  or  Snow-loving  Fauna  III. 


Forest  Fauna,  Chiefly  Forest- 
loving  Forms 


Musk  ox,  Ovihos  moschaius 
Reindeer,  R.  tarandus 
Arctic  hare,  Lepus  variabilis 
Baiuled  lemming,  Myodes  torquaius 
Wolverine,  Gulo  borealis 
Marmot,  Ardomys  bobac 
Vole,  Arvicola  nivalis 
Ermine,  Foetoriiis  erminea 
Arctic  fox,  Canis  lagopm 

Ptarmigan,  Lagopus  alpinus 

II.  Steppe  Fauna,  on  High,  Grassy 
Steppes,  and  Pastures 

Saiga  antelope,  Antilope  saiga 
Reindeer,  R.  tarandus 

(Barren  ground  variety) 
Wild  ass,  Equus  hemionus 
Wild  horse,  Equus  przewalskii 

(Steppe  type) 
Wild  cattle.  Bos  primigenim 
Jerboa,  Alactaga  jaculus 
Suslik,  Spermophilus 
Hamster,  Cricetus 

Woolly  rhinoceros,  Diceros  tichorhinus 
Elasmothere,  frontal-horned  rhinoceros, 

Elasmotherium 
Marmot,  Marmota 
Dwarf  pica,  Lagomys  pmillus 
Vole,  Arvicola 
Wolf,  Canis  lupus 
Rabbit,  Lepus  timidu^ 
Mole,  Talpa  europoea 


Reindeer,  R.  tarandus 
(Woodland  variety) 
Moose,  Alces  palmatus 
Red  deer,  Cervus  elaphus 
Roe  deer,  Cervus  capreolus 
Wild  cattle.  Bos  primigenius 
Wild  boar,  Sus  scrofa 
Beaver,  Castor  fiber 
Vole,  Arvicola  glareolus 
Dormouse,  Myoxv^ 
Forest  mouse,  Mus  sylvaticv^ 
Wolf,  Canis  lupus 

Forest  horse,  E.  caballu^  (Forest  type) 
Fox,  Canis  vulpes 
Brown  bear,  Ursus  arctos 
Wolverine,  Gido  luscus 
Pine  marten,  Mustela  martcs 
Badger,  Meles  taxus 
Wild  cat,  Felis  catus 

Forest  grouse,  Tetrao  europalis 

IV.  Forest  and  Field  Types 

Wild  cattle.  Bos  primigenius 
Bison,  Bison  priscus 
Reindeer,  Rangifer  tarandus 
Giant  deer,  Cervus  megaceros 
Wild  horse,  Equus  caballus 
Woolly  rhinoceros,  D.  antiquitatis 
Woolly  elephant,  Elephas  primigenius 


'  Nehring,  A.,  (jber  Tundren  und  Steppen  der  Jetzt-  und  Vorzeit,  mit  besonderer  Be- 
rucksichtigung  ihrer  Fauna.    Borlin.  1890. 

*  Woldrich.  J.  N.,  Die  diluvialen  Faunen  Mitteleuropas  und  eine  heutige  Sareptaner 
Steppenfauna  in  Niederosterreich.  Mitth.  Anthrop.  Ges.  Wien,  Vol.  XI,  n.s.,  Vol.  I,  Vienna, 
1882. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  415 

As  indicated  in  the  repetition  in  the  above  columns,  the  mammals  are 
not  all  closely  confined  to  these  life  zones;  but  certain  of  them,  especially 
the  elephants,  bison,  reindeer,  the  rhinoceroses,  and  probably  the  primitive 
cattle  and  arctic  hare,  wandered  freely  and  had  a  wide  range.  Other  forms, 
like  the  musk  ox,  jerboa,  the  saiga  antelope,  the  moose,  are  each  respec- 
tively distinctive  of  the  tundra,  steppe,  or  forest  environment. 

Tundra  fauna  and  flora.  — Animals  like  the  lemming  ^  {My odes  torquaius), 
adapted  to  extreme  conditions,  generally  cling  to  these  very  obstinately,  and 
perish  rather  than  conform  to  altered  environment.  This  animal  dwells 
immediately  to  the  north  of  the  region  of  coniferous  forests,  among  scattered 
shrubs  of  the  common  juniper  (Juniperus  communis)  and  the  dwarf  birch 
(Betula  nana).  Thus  we  may  be  perfectly  certain  that  the  lemmings  dis- 
covered in  England,  France,  Belgium,  and  a  large  part  of  Germany  in  Pleis- 
tocene times  are  proofs  of  conditions  which  prevailed,  similar  to  those  of 
the  present  circumpolar  region.  The  lemmings  probably  advanced  south 
with  the  characteristic  tundra  fauna,  and  we  must  conclude  that  there  were 
tundras  in  central  and  western  Europe  for  a  time  during  the  Pleistocene. 
At  Thiede  near  Braunschweig,  the  classical  locality  for  lemming,  the  re- 
mains are  associated  solely  with  those  of  the  arctic  fox,  arctic  hare,  reindeer, 
musk  ox,  and  mammoth;  thus  a  comparison  of  northern  Eurasia  and  the 
'barren  grounds'  of  northern  Asia  and  North  America  is  quite  justifiable. 
Characteristic  plants  of  the  period  are  the  dwarf  birch  (Betula  nana),  polar 
willow  (Salix  polaris),  mountain  dryas  (Dryas  octopetala).  The  lemmings 
probably  dwelt  in  the  immediate  neighborhood  of  the  glaciers.  As  the 
climate  grew  warmer  they  retreated  with  the  tundra  fauna  to  the  north,  the 
high  grassy  slopes  of  the  mountain  sides  being  the  last  to  be  deserted.  The 
arctic  hare  (Lepus  variabilis)  in  the  British  Isles  is  now  confined  to  Ireland 
and  the  mountains  of  Scotland. 

As  the  lemming  is  typical  of  the  tundras,  the  jerboa  (Alactaga)  is  typical 
of  steppe  conditions;  thus  the  succession  of  three  rodents  indicates  approxi- 
mately the  succession  of  tundra,  steppe,  and  forest  conditions,  as  follows: 

Tundra,  the  lemming  (Myodes  torquatus) 
Steppe,  the  jerboa  (Alactaga  jaculus) 
Forest,  the  squirrel  (Sciurus  vulgaris) 

Steppe  fauna.  —  This  fauna  in  deposits  at  several  different  points  is 
definitely  proved  to  have  followed  the  tundra  fauna.  Both  Nehring  ^  and 
Woldrich  ^  hold  that  the  steppes  of  central  Europe  were  post-glacial.  Accord- 
ing to  Woldrich  (1896)  the  tundra  and  steppe  types  of  Europe  represent  the 

^  Nehring,  A.,  Uber  Tundren  und  Steppen  der  Jetzt-  und  Vorzeit,  mit  besonderer  Be- 
nicksichtigung  ihrer  Fauna.    Berlin,  1890,  pp.  81-166. 
2  Nehring,  op.  ciL,  1890,  p.  222. 

'  Woldrich,  J.  N.,  Ueber  die  Gliederung  der  anthropologischen  Formationsgruppe  Mit- 
teleuropas.  Sitzber.  kgl.  bohm.  Ges.,  math,  naturwiss.  Classe,  1896.  Ref.  Matiegka  in  Central- 
blatt  Anthrop.,  1896,  pp.  142-143. 


4: 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


last  great  glacial  advance,  after  which  came  the  meadow  or  field  (Weide- 
faima),  and  then  the  forest  fauna  (Wald-fauna). 

Steppe  conditions  of  climate  were  rendered  possible  in  Europe  by  the 
elevation  and  extension  of  the  land  much  farther  to  the  north  and  north- 


FiG,  182.  —  Map  of  northwostom  Europe  in  the  late  Pleistocene.  Former  coast  repre- 
sented at  present  100  fathom  line  by  double  lines.  Dots  indicate  areas  where  remains  of  late 
Pleistocene,  terrestrial  mammals  have  been  found.    Alter  Boyd  Dawkins. 

west  than  at  present;  Great  Britain  was  united  with  the  continent,  Scan- 
dinavia with  Spitzbergen,  and  thus  all  tempering  influences  of  the  Atlantic 
ocean  were  cut  off  from  northern  Europe.  Prevailing  east  ^vinds  probably 
helped  to  give  central  Europe  a  cold,  dry  continental  climate  favorable  to 
dust  storms.    This  was  a  chief  period  of  loess  formation,  which,  according  to 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  4i7 


the  theory  of  Richthofen,  owes  its  origin  to  wind-borne  dust  and  sand  acting 
under  the  influence  of  a  dry,  steppe  climate  both  in  summer  and  winter. 
However,  Kobelt^  and  Scharff  ^  (1899,  p.  212)  agree  in  thinking  that  the 
presence  of  steppe  mammals  affords  no  proof  of  the  steppe  character  of  the 
country. 

The  steppe  regions  of  northern  Asia  still  maintain  this  fauna.  Such 
animals  as  the  jerboa,  which  are  unable  to  swim,  presumably  crossed  the 
rivers  while  these  were  frozen  over.  The  absence  of  fossil  plants  in  the 
deposits  of  the  steppe  period  is  due  to  the  unfavorable  conditions  for  the  pres- 
ervation of  plant  remains.  Small  stretches  of  woodland  were  probably 
confined  to  the  banks  of  rivers,  to  favorable  mountain  slopes,  etc.  The 
flora  was  probably  like  that  of  eastern  Eurasia  or  southwestern  Siberia 
to-day. 

The  fauna  included,  beside  the  jerboa,  the  rufous  sizel,  or  suslik  (Sper- 
mophilus  rufescens),  the  bobac  marmot  {Marmota  hobac),  the  dwarf  pica, 
the  hamsters,  the  northern  voles,  the  corsac  fox  {Canis  corsac),  the  manul, 
or  Pallas's  cat  {Felis  manul).  Covering  the  plains  were  the  larger  grazing 
animals  such  as  the  saiga  antelope,  the  wild  asses  (dzeggetai),  and  the  wild 
horses,  probably  similar  to  the  still  surviving  Equus  przewalskii.  Ewart  con- 
siders it  probable  that  the  Celtic  pony  {E.  cahallus  celticus)  also  came  with 
the  steppe  fauna,  while  the  yellow  dun,  Norse"  horse,  or  forest  typo, 
belongs  to  the  succeeding  forest  fauna.  There  is  evidence  of  ^  steppe  blood ' 
in  the  horses  of  the  Pleistocene  deposits  of  the  Rhine  valley  and  in  the 
horses  of  the  Palaeolithic  drawings  of  the  Magdalenian  caves,  while  there 
is  evidence  of  '  Celtic  blood '  in  the  horses  of  the  mammoth  beds  of  Britain. 

The  saiga  antelope  has  now  retreated  to  the  steppes  of  eastern  Europe 
and  western  Siberia.  The  jerboa  (Alactaga  jaculus)  is  now  confined  to 
Eurasia  and  western  Siberia.  The  bobac  marmot  {Marmota  bobac)  has  a 
similar  range. 

The  characteristic  fauna  of  the  modern  Alps  is  mainly  of  central  Asiatic 
rather  than  of  Siberian  origin.^ 

Forest  fauna.  —  Following  the  retreat  of  the  glacial  cap  and  the  grad- 
ual depression  of  northern  Europe  came  a  more  humid  climate,  favorable 
for  reforestation.  Besides  the  common  squirrel  (Sciurus  vulgaris),  the 
herald  of  forest  conditions  all  over  the  northern  hemisphere,  there  appeared 
the  red  deer,  the  roe  deer,  the  moose,  the  wild  boar,  the  red  fox,  the  badger, 
the  wolverine,  the  pine  marten,  the  pole  cat  {Foetorius  putorius),  the  ermine, 
and  the  common  weasel  {Mustela  vulgaris).'^ 

With  these  stiU  living  species  were  mingled  the  great  extinct  mammals 
of  the  times,  and  occasionally  these  three  great  faunas  are  found  pure,  or 

1  Kobelt,  W.,  Die  Verbreitung  der  Tierwelt.    Gemassigte  Zone.    Leipzig,  1902. 
2Scharff,  R.  F.,  The  History  of  the  European  Fauna.    London,  1899. 
3Scharff,  R.,  The  History  of  the  European  Fauna.    London,  1899  (p.  340). 
^  Kobelt,  W.,  Die  Verbreitung  der  Tierwelt.    Gemassigte  Zone.     Leipzig,  1902. 
2  E 


418 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


entirely  distinct  and  separate,  as  in  the  lower  deposits  of  Thiede  near 
Braunschweig,  above  cited.  More  often  they  are  successive,  or  superposed 
upon  each  other,  even  in  the  same  localities;  thus  in  the  loess  near  Wiirz- 
burg,  Bavaria,  Nehring  ^  has  recorded  both  a  tundra  and  a  steppe  fauna, 
including,  beside  the  still  living  types,  the  woolly  rhinoceros,  the  mammoth, 
the  urus,  and  the  bison.  In  other  localities  Nehring  has  observed  and  most 
accurately  recorded  a  vertical  succession  of  tundra,  steppe,  and  forest  mam- 
mals. 

Our  realization  of  the  long  periods  of  time  in  which  these  successive 
deposits  with  successive  faunas  accumulated  is  intensified  by  their  associa- 
tion with  successive  stages  in  the  evolution  of  human  culture.  The  most 
famous  instance  of  this  kind  is  that  recorded  by  Nehring  ^  in  the  remarkable 
grotto  at  Schweizersbild  near  Schaffhausen,  in  which  the  following  layers 
appear : 

Neolitliic  .      5.  Gray  culture  layer,  forest  fauna 
Palaeolithic     4.  Upper  Breccia,  or  '  upper  rodent '  layer,  steppe  fauna 
Palaeolithic      3.  Yellow  culture  layer,  palaeolithic  'reindeer  age,'  steppe  fauna 
Palaeolithic     2.  Lower  Breccia,  or  'lower  rodent'  layer,  animal  remains  and  traces 

of  man,  tundra  fauna 
Palaeolithic      1.  Diluvial  layer.    No  fossils 

Of  these  the  '  lower  rodent '  layer  (2)  contains  a  pure  arctic  fauna,  such 
as  the  vole,  hare,  fox,  the  reindeer,  the  ptarmigan.  In  the  layer  above 
these  the  early  steppe  animals  begin  to  appear,  the  hamsters  and  picas. 
Then  in  the  'yellow  culture'  layer  there  is  an  assemblage  of  pure  steppe 
forms,  susliks,  dwarf  picas,  and  wild  horses,  all  pointing  to  the  absence  of 
forests ;  but  at  the  top  of  this  layer  the  first  squirrel  appears  as  the  harbin- 
ger of  forests.  In  the  upper  rodent  (4)  layer  the  steppe  fauna  begins  to  be 
intermingled  with  an  increasing  number  of  forest  types,  such  as  squirrels,  dor- 
mice, and  the  pine  marten.  Finally  we  reach  the  (5)  'gray  culture'  layer, 
composed  of  the  modem  forest  dwellers,  such  as  the  squirrel,  the  beaver,  the 
pine  marten,  the  stag,  the  roe,  the  wild  boar,  the  brown  bear.  A  similar 
succession  of  tundra,  steppe,  and  forest  faunas  has  been  observed  in  many 
parts  of  central  Europe.^ 

Elaphine  or  red  deer} —  Sir  Victor  Brooke  held  that  the  Cervidae  origi- 
nated in  Asia  and  from  there  spread  east  and  west.  The  Asiatic  origin  of 
the  red  deer  has  since  been  ably  maintained  by  Koppen.  A  very  large 
antlered  race  has  been  discovered  and  identified  by  Nehring  as  C.  canadensis. 

1  Nehring,  A.,  Ubersicht  iiber  vierundzwanzig  mitteleuropaische  Quartar-Faunen.  Zeit- 
8chr.  DcHtsch.  Geol.  Ges.,  1880,  pp.  468-509. 

'  Nehring,  A.,  Die  kleineren  Wirbeltiere  vom  Schweizersbild  bei  Schaffhausen.  Neue 
Denkschr.  allg.  schweiz.  Ges.  gesam.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XXV,  1896,  pp.  40-77. 

»  Nehring,  A.,  Die  kleineren  Wirbeltiere  vom  Schweizersbild  bei  Schaffhausen.  Neue 
Denkschr.  nllq.  .sc/?im2.  Gcsell.  gesam.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XXXV,  1896,  pp.  40-77. 

«  Scharflf,  R.  F.,  The  History  of  the  European  Fauna.    London,  1899,  pp.  246-251. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  419 


The  giant  fallow  deer  is  found  in  Ireland,  England,  Scotland,  the  Isle 
of  Man,  France,  Denmark,  Germany,  Austria,  northern  Italy,  and  Eurasia, 
even  in  Siberia. 

Migration.  —  The  crowding  out  of  the  tundra  fauna  occurred  in  the  follow- 
ing manner.  1  The  great  alpine  glaciers  still  extended  far  out  over  the  land 
during  the  formation  of  the  lower  rodent  layer.  As  these  retreated  they 
left  desolate  stretches  behind  them  and  the  valleys  and  plateaux  now  free 
from  ice  became  tundras,  where  swamps  alternated  with  patches  of  polar 
willows  and  stunted  fir  trees  and  places  covered  merely  with  low  scrubby 
birches  or  reindeer  moss  and  lichens.  As  this  vegetation  retreated  north 
and  south  before  the  advance  of  the  steppe  climate,  the  tundra  fauna  fol- 
lowed, the  forms  that  moved  south  being  confined  to  ever  smaller  areas  and 
higher  altitudes.  Enormous  intervals  of  time  elapsed  between  the  deposi- 
tion of  the  (3)  yellow  culture  layer  of  the  reindeer  age  and  the  (5)  gray 
culture  layer  of  Neolithic  times  and  the  forest  fauna.  It  was  a  slow  change 
that  drove  the  steppe  mammals  gradually  toward  the  dry  regions  of  the 
east  to  make  room  for  the  forests  and  their  faunas.  It  is  clear  that  the 
north  and  the  east  were  the  only  directions  open  to  them  in  their  retreat 
before  the  increasingly  damp  climate  and  the  spread  of  woodlands.  The 
typical  central  European  forest  forms,  the  wild  cat,  marten,  bear,  hare, 
roe,  stag,  and  urus,  which  constituted  the  principal  fauna  of  the  succeeding 
stage  and  of  all  later,  prehistoric,  and  early  historic  time,  was  probably  in 
existence  long  before,  but  confined  to  small  and  scattered  bits  of  forests  on 
mountain  slopes  and  in  gullies.  The  interval  between  these  yellow  and  gray 
culture  layers  in  human  history  means  the  change  from  the  Palaeolithic 
reindeer  stage  to  the  Neolithic  stage,  because  in  the  ^gray  culture'  layer 
we  find  weapons  and  implements  of  polished  stone  which  represent  a  stage 
of  culture  similar  to  that  of  the  Swiss  lake  dwellings. 

Mammals  of  the  Third  Faunal  Zone 

Mammoths.  —  The  mammoth  {E.  priinigenius)  now  reaches  the  height 
of  its  evolution  and  specialization.  As  preserved  in  the  frozen  tundras  of 
northern  Siberia  it  is  the  most  completely  known  of  all  fossil  Mammalia, 
with  its  undercoat  of  wool  and  overcoat  of  long  hair.  As  recently  de- 
scribed by  Salensky  ^  from  the  wonderfully  complete  specimen  discovered 
in  1901  on  the  banks  of  the  Beresowka  River  in  northeastern  Siberia,  this 
animal  developed  characters  which  absolutely  exclude  the  possibility  of 
its  ancestry  to  the  existing  Indian  elephants.  The  hind  foot  is  four- 
toed,  or  tetradactyl,  and  not  five-toed  as  in  the  living  forms.    The  head 

^  Studer,  T.,  Die  Tierreste  aus  den  pleistocsenen  Ablagerungen  des  Schweizersbildes  bei 
Schaffhausen.  Neue  Denkschr.  allg.  schweiz.  Ges.  gesam.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XXXV,  1896,  pp.  1-38. 

2  Salensky,  W.,  Uber  die  Hauptresultate  der  Erforschung  des  im  Jahre  1901  am  Ufer  der 
Beresowka  entdeckten  mannlichen  Mammutcadavers.  C.R.  Sea.  Six.  Congr.  Internal.  Zool. 
Berne,  1904,  pp.  67-86. 


420 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


was  larger  as  compared  with  the  length  of  the  body  than  in  recent  ele- 
phants, a  character  which  stands  in  close  connection  with  the  enormous 
development  of  the  tusks;  these  were  distinguished  by  their  spiral  form, 
the  points  directed  inward.  The  ears  were  very  small  and  covered  with 
hair.  The  tail  was  relatively  shorter  than  in  the  existing  elephants  and  was 
provided  with  a  tassel  of  long,  bristly  hair  at  the  end.  The  color  of  the 
hair  is  a  yellowish  browTi,  varying  from  light  brown  to  pure  brown,  and 
a  coat  of  woolly  hair,  2  to  2\  cm.  in  length,  covered  the  whole  body. 


Fig.  183.  —  The  hairy  mammoth  (Elephas  primig emits)  and  Palaeolithic  man  (Homo  neanderta- 
lensis).    After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


Interspersed  with  these  were  a  large  number  of  longer  and  thicker  hairs 
which  formed  mane-like  patches  on  the  cheeks,  on  the  chin,  on  the  shoulders, 
flanks,  abdomen,  etc.  A  broad  fringe  of  this  long  hair  extended  along  the  sides 
of  the  body  as  depicted  in  the  palaeolithic  sketches  from  the  Combarelles 
Cave  discovered  by  Capitan  and  Breuil  in  1901.  Especially  interesting  is 
the  food  found  in  the  stomach  and  mouth,  which  consists  of  a  meadow  flora 
such  as  characterizes  this  region  of  Siberia  at  the  present  day,  thus  appear- 
ing to  disprove  the  theory  that  the  climate  was  milder  than  that  now  pre- 
vailing. Nor  does  it  appear  that  it  was  more  frigid,  because  there  are  few 
representatives  of  tundra  vegetation.  Grasses  (Graminece)  and  sedges 
(Cyperacece)  predominate.  There  were  also  wild  thyme  {Thymus),  beans 
of  the  wild  oxytropis  {Oxytropis  campestris),  seeds  of  the  alpine  poppy 
(Papavcr),  and  the  boreal  variety  of  the  upright  crowfoot  {Ranunculus  acer)y 
all  still  found  in  this  region. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  421 


Rhinoceroses.  —  It  is  important  to  recall  the  fact  (p.  412)  that  the  com- 
panion of  the  mammoth,  the  tichorhine  or  woolly  rhinoceros  (Z).  antiqui- 
tatis)  is  not  a  successor  of  the  dicerorhine  series  (Z).  etruscus,  D.  merckii)^ 
but  a  relative  of  the  African  type  of  rhinoceros,^  which  had  no  representatives 
in  Europe  after  Miocene  times.  It  will  be  recalled  that  in  the  Upper  Miocene 
(p.  264)  we  found  in  the  D.  pachygnathus  of  Pikermi  a  relative  of  the  existing 
white  and  black  rhinoceroses  (D.  simus,  D.  hicornis)  of  Africa.  A  remark- 
ably preserved  specimen  of  D.  antiquitatis  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Museum 


Fig.  184.  —  The  woolly  rhinoceros  {R.  antiquitatis) .  The  skull  in  this  drawing  is  probably 
represented  somewhat  too  short  and  the  anterior  horn  less  long  and  slender  than  it  should  be. 
The  body  and  limbs  are  also  too  slender.  After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American 
Museum  of  Natural  History. 


shows  the  side  of  the  face  still  covered  with  golden  brown  wool ;  other  parts 
of  the  body  were  provided  with  a  thick  hairy  covering.  These  animals 
were  extremely  long-skulled,  like  the  white  rhinoceros  {D.  simus)  of  Africa. 
They  exceeded  in  size  the  existing  African  species,  and  like  them  bore  ex- 
tremely slender  anterior  horns,  over  a  yard  in  length.^  All  the  horns  of  this 
variety  that  have  been  found  are  more  or  less  worn  on  the  outer  side  of  the 
bend;  there  was  a  second  very  short  horn  behind  the  large  one.  The  woolly 
rhinoceros  was  more  closely  confined  to  the  edge  of  the  great  ice  sheet  than 
the  mammoth;  that  is,  it  did  not  migrate  so  far  to  the  south,  stopping  at 
the  Alps,  while  the  mammoth  wandered  into  Italy  as  far  south  as  Rome. 
The  elasmothere  {Elasmotherium)  was  another  companion  of  the  mam- 

^  I.e.  the  white  rhinoceros,  Diceros  simus. 

2Pohlig,  H.,  Eiszeit  und  Urgeschichte  des  Menschen.    Leipzig,  1907,  p.  122. 


422 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


moth,  distributed  in  eastern  Europe,  Germany,  and  southern  Siberia. 
Whether  it  reached  northern  Siberia  with  the  mammoth,  woolly  rhinoceros, 
musk  ox,  and  reindeer  remains  an  open  question.  To  the  south,  teeth  have 
been  attributed  to  this  animal  from  Sicily.^  It  is  a  gigantic  animal  distin- 
guished from  all  the  European  Pleistocene  forms  by  the  absence  of  the 
anterior  horn  and  possession  of  an  enormous  horn  situated  on  the  forehead 
between  the  eyes,  and  by  the  elaborate  foldings  in  the  enamel  of  its  teeth. 
It  is  possibly  descended  ^  from  the  typical  Aceratherium  of  the  Upper 
Miocene  of  Eppelsheim  (p.  272),  which  shows  the  rudiment  of  a  horn  be- 
tween the  eyes.  The  skull  attains  a  meter  in  length ;  the  dermal  horn  on 
the  forehead  was  enormous.  The  limb  bones  exceeded  in  size  those  of  the 
largest  species  of  rhinoceros  by  one-third  in  length.  Its  hypsodont  and 
folded  teeth  were  especially  adapted  to  a  grassy  diet,  and  Gaudry  connects 
its  appearance  in  Europe  with  the  extensive  deforestation  accompanying 
the  steppe  and  tundra  periods  of  mammalian  life;  it  apparently  wan- 
dered into  Europe  from  central  Asia  and  never  became  very  numerous. 

Reindeer  or  caribou.  —  The  reindeer  of  Eurasia  and  America  embrace 
two  groups  of  species,  the  'barren  ground'  and  the  Svoodland,'  readily 
distinguished  by  the  size  and  the  proportions  of  the  antlers.^  The  barren 
ground  reindeer  is  said  to  have  entered  Europe  with  the  second  fauna 
and  perhaps  came  by  a  different  route  {i.e.  via  Greenland).^  The  wood- 
land first  appears  in  Europe  with  the  third  fauna,  and  persisted  until  com- 
paratively recent  times,  but  has  noAV  become  extinct.  In  the  barren 
ground,  typified  by  the  Old  World  reindeer  {R.  tarandus,  R.  spitzbergensis) , 
and  by  the  American  arctic  forms  (R.  arcticus,  R.  groenlandicus,  R.  granti, 
R.  pearyi),  the  antlers  are  round,  slender,  and  long,  in  proportion  to  the 
relatively  small  size  of  the  animal,  while  the  beam  and  the  tines,  including 
the  brow  tine,  are,  as  a  rule,  but  little  palmated;  in  some  forms  the  '  brow 
tine '  is  palmate.  The  antlers  of  the  woodland  group,  now  extinct  in 
Europe,  but  typified  by  several  American  species  (R.  caribou,  R.  montanus, 
R.  osborni),  are  heavier,  flatter,  thicker,  and  more  heavily  palmated,  both 
on  the  beam  and  tines,  especially  the  brow  antler,  while  the  tine  above 
the  'brow,'  corresponding  to  the  'bez-tine'  of  the  stag  (Cervus)  is  elaborately 
developed  and  palmated,  contrasting  sharply  with  the  same  tine  in  the 
barren  ground  group. 

Carnivores.  —  Probably  the  chief  enemies  of  the  Herbivora  were  the 

1  Brandt,  J.  F.,  Mittheilungen  iiber  die  Gattung  Elasmotherium,  besonders  den  Schadel- 
bau  dersclben.  iMem.  Acad.  Imper.  Sci.  Petcrshourg,  Ser.  VII,  Vol.  XXVI,  no.  6,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1878;  and  Gaudry  and  Boule,  Materiaux  pour  I'Histoire  des  Temps  Quaternaires. 
3i6me  Fasc.    L'Elasmotherium.    Paris,  1888. 

2  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Frontal  Horn  on  Aceratherium  incisivum.  Relation  of  the  Type  to  Elas" 
motherium.    Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  IX,  no.  214,  Feb.,  1899,  pp.  161-162. 

^  Grant,  Madison,  The  Caribou.  Ann.  Rept.  N.Y.  Zodl.  Soc,  no.  7,  New  York,  1892, 
pp.  175-196. 

*  Scharff,  R.  F.,  The  History  of  the  European  Fauna,  London,  1899,  p.  154. 

t 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  423 

Upper  Pleistocene  lions  {Felis  spetea) ,  descended  from  the  great  cats  of  the 
Pliocene  of  France  and  Italy  {Felis  arvernensis) .  The  fact  that  the  remains 
of  this  animal  are  so  often  found  together  with  those  of  the  cold  fauna  makes 
Nehring's  suggestion  ^  seem  plausible  that  the  cave  lion  was  a  northern 
race  of  the  recent  African  and  West  Asiatic  lion,  adapted  to  a  colder  climate 
and  with  heavy  fur.  These  lions  are  known  from  deposits  in  England, 
Belgium,  Austria,  southern  Russia,  France,  Spain,  and  Italy,  Sicily,  Greece, 
and  Algeria.^  After  examination  of  available  specimens  from  central  and 
northern  Europe,  Boule  ^  reaches  the  conclusion  that  they  are  not  remains  of 
tigers  as  was  formerly  supposed  by  de  Blainville  and  Lartet.  While  rich  in 
individual  variations,  F.  spelcea  is  nearer  the  lion  than  the  tiger  in  some  of 
its  characters;  it  should,  in  fact,  be  considered  a  veritable  race  of  the  recent 
lion  with  the  name  Felis  leo  spelcea.  It  sometimes  equals  and  often  surpasses 
the  existing  lions  and  tigers  in  size.  It  differs  from  both  in  the  more  gentle 
and  uniform  slope  of  its  profile,  and  in  its  large,  flat  forehead,  but  its  limb 
bones  are  longer  and  proportionately  thicker. 

The  bears  {Ursus  spelceus)  were  far  more  numerous  than  the  lions,  in- 
cluding a  gigantic  and  a  smaller  variety  {Ursus  suh-spelceus) .  The  former 
nearly  equaled  the  largest  recent  bears  in  size,  and  all  of  the  cave  bears 
were  more  thickset  than  any  of  the  recent  species.  The  front  paws 
were  of  tremendous  size.  When  one  considers  that  the  claw-bearing  pha- 
langes are  feebly  developed,  that  the  anterior  premolars  are  practically 
lost,  and  that  the  cusps  of  the  teeth  are  blunted  in  a  way  which  is  indicative 
of  an  omnivorous  diet,  it  becomes  plain  that  the  large  Herbivora  and  even 
primitive  man  found  no  very  formidable  enemy  in  the  cave  bear.  While  the 
large  and  small  races  of  U.  spelcea  were  contemporary,  there  are  certain 
indications  that  the  smaller  was  the  older,  being  found  at  Mosbach  during 
early  interglacial  deposits.  Both  races  became  extinct  in  the  Pleistocene 
without  leaving  descendants.  The  ancestor  of  the  brown  bear  {Ursus 
arctos  prisons),  believed  to  be  a  descendant  of  the  Etruscan  bear  of  the 
Norfolk  interglacial,  is  also  found  in  Pleistocene  caves;  it  is  not  so  large 
as  the  cave  bear,  but  while  it  has  been  mistakenly  identified  with  the 
grizzly  {Ursus  horribilis),  in  reality  it  has  closer  affinities  to  the  European 
brown  bear  {Ursus  arctos). 

The  cave  hyaena  {Hycena  cr acuta  spelcea)  and  the  cave  wolf  {Canis  lupus) 
of  the  same  period  also  attained  dimensions  greater  than  their  living  allies.^ 
The  cave  hysena  is  merely  a  variety  of  the  living  spotted  hyaena  {Hycena 
crocuta)  of  east  Africa.  It  has  the  larger  proportions,  the  heavier  build, 
the  broad  skull,  the  long,  powerful  carnassial  teeth  that  distinguish  the 

1  Nehring,  A.,  Uber  Tundren  und  Steppen  der  Jetzt-  und  Vorzeit,  mit  besonderer  Be- 
riicksichtigung  ihrer  Fauna.    Berlin,  1890. 

2  Boule,  M.,  Les  Grands  Chats  des  Cavernes.  Ann.  Paleont.,  Vol.  I,  Paris,  Jan.,  1906, 
pp.  20-27. 

^  Gaudry,  A.,  and  Boule,  M.,  Materiaux  pour  I'Histoire  des  Temps  Quaternaires.  4i6me 
Fasc.    Les  Oubliettes  de  Gargas.    Paris,  1892,  pp.  108-112. 


424 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


spotted  hysena  from  the  striped  hysena  (H.  striata)  of  the  present  day. 
Although  proportionately  heavier,  the  hind  limbs  may  have  been  shorter 
than  in  the  spotted  hyjena,  perhaps  an  adaptation  to  cave  life  which  the 
inclement  climate  made  necessary.  Thus  the  Pleistocene  species  of  Euro- 
pean hyaenas  underwent  an  evolution  of  their  own,  and  as  a  result  the  living 
African  forms  differ  more  from  the  Pleistocene  hyaenas  than  they  do  from 
those  of  the  Pliocene.  In  the  caves  of  southern  France  a  variety  {Hycena 
prisca)  of  the  striped  hyaena  {HycB7ia  striata)  also  occurs,  where  are  discovered 
further  remains  {H.  intermedia)  resembling  the  cave  hyaena.  The  cave 
hyiena  was  a  very  common  animal,  and  is  responsible  for  the  destruction  of 
vast  numbers  of  the  bones  of  its  contemporaries  in  a  manner  not  pleasing 
to  the  palaeontologist.  According  to  the  same  authorities  ^  (p.  117  seq.) 
no  constant  osteological  differences  can  be  determined  between  the  Pleisto- 
cene cave  wolf  and  the  wolf  of  western  Europe,  although  the  former  is  of 
considerably  larger  size. 

The  badger  {Meles  taxus)  probably  originated  in  west  central  Asia; 
the  only  three  other  species  known  are  confined  to  Asia.  The  two  extinct 
Lower  Pliocene  species  are  found  in  Persia,  Maragha  (ilf .  polaki,  M.  mara- 
ghanus)} 

Herbivores.  —  The  large  ruminant  Herbivora  of  this  period,  the  bison, 
the  urus,  and  reindeer,  were  widely  distributed  but  not  contemporaneous, 
since  they  are  chiefly  characteristic  of  different  life  zones.  The  most  typical 
ruminant  of  the  tundras,  the  musk  ox  (0.  moschatus) ,  sometimes  occurs, 
but  is  by  no  means  common. 

Especially  interesting  is  the  appearance  of  the  alpine  ruminants,  the 
chamois  (Rupicapra  tragus),  and  the  ibex  {Capra  ibex). 

Woldrich  ^  has  pointed  out  that  the  large  herbivores  were  more  closely 
bound  to  their  special  conditions  of  environment,  and  thus  more  closely 
reflect  the  changes  of  environment,  than  the  carnivores,  which  continue 
from  one  fauna  into  the  next.  Thus  the  bear,  the  lion,  and  the  hyaena 
continue  from  one  period  into  the  next.  The  horse  showed  itself  adaptive 
because  it  continued  through  steppe  times  into  the  meadow  and  into  the 
forest  period;  it  is  probable  that  this  was  not  a  case  of  transformation 
but  of  migration  of  types  especially  fitted  to  these  habitats,  namely,  of 
'steppe'  and  'forest'  horses.  No  'tundra'  horse  is  known,  although  re- 
mains of  horses  occur  in  frozen  tundras  even  bordering  the  Arctic  Ocean 
(see  Alaska,  p.  470).  The  reindeer  also  continued  in  the  forests  of  Germany 
after  the  time  of  Caesar,  and  in  the  forests  of  Scotland  probably  as  late  as 
the  twelfth  century. 

*  Gaudry,  A.,  and  Boule,  M.,  Mat6riaux   pour  I'Histoire  des  Temps  Quatemaires. 
4.  i^^me  Fasc.    Lcs  Oubliettes  de  Gargas.    Paris,  1892,  pp.  108-112. 
2  Scharff,  op.  cit.,  1899,  p.  44. 

^  Woldrich,  J.  N.,  Die  diluvialen  Faunen  Mitteleuropas  und  eine  heutige  Sareptaner 
Steppenfauna  in  Niederosterreich.  Mitth.  anthrop.  Ges.  Wien,  Vol.  XI,  n.s.,  Vol.  I.  Vienna, 
1882. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  425 


Geographic  Distribution  of  the  Third  Fauna 

The  Schweizersbild  Cave  (Fig.  176,  37)  belongs  to  the  Magdalenian 
Stage  of  human  culture,  and  according  to  Penck  the  indications  are  that  it 
dates  from  the  maxi- 
mum period  in  the 
last  glacial  advance.^ 
The  deposits  in  the 
Schweizersbild  Cave, 
as  described  above 
(p.  418),  began  with 
the  tundra  fauna,  on 
which  accumulated 

(1)  the  steppe  fauna 
of  the  reindeer  age, 

(2)  the  steppe  fauna 
of  the  upper  rodent 
layer,  both  Palaeo- 
lithic, and  immedi- 
ately succeeded  (3)  by 
the  Neolithic  '  forest 
fauna '  of  the  '  gray 
culture '  layer.  It 
thus  bridges  over  an 
enormously  long 
period  of  time. 

Much  time  must 
have  elapsed  between 
the  first  halt  in  the  glacial  retreat  and  the  appearance  of  Magdalenian  man 
in  this  cave.  Boule  and  Penck  agree  in  saying  that  the  Magdalenian 
or  reindeer  man  arrived  in  the  Schaffhausen  regionlong 
after  thelast  Quaternary  glaciers  had  vanished  thence, 
that  is,  after  the  disappearance  of  the  tundra  fauna.^ 

Kesslerloch  Cave.  —  Similar  conclusions  result  from  the  study  of  the 
geologic  conditions  surrounding  the  Kesslerloch  Cave  of  Thayngen  in  Swit- 
zerland (Fig.  176,  37).  This  famous  cave  hes  on  the  edge  of  a  moderately 
wide  valley,  traversed  by  a  brook.^  In  this  sheltered,  well-watered,  hilly 
region,  woods  flourished  and  harbored  the  forest  animals,  at  the  same  time 
that  the  glaciers  retreating  southward  left  damp  and  stony  areas,  closely 
followed  by  a  tundra  fauna.    The  woolly  rhinoceros  and  the  mammoth 

^  Penck,  A.,  Die  Glacial bildungen  um  Schaffhausen  und  ihre  Beziehungen  zu  den  prae- 
liistorischen  Stationen  des  Schweizersbildes  und  von  Thayngen.  Neue  Denkschr.  allg.  schweiz. 
Oes.  gesam.  Naturwiss.    Vol.  XXXV,  1896,  pp.  155-179. 

^  Niiesch,  J.,  Das  Kesslerloch,  eine  Hohle  aus  palaolithischer  Zeit.  Neue  Grabungen  und 
Punde.    Neue  Denkschr.  allg.  schweiz.  Ges.  gesam.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XXXIX,  Pt.  2,  pp.  1-72. 


Fig.  185.  —  Skulls  of  the  Pleistocene  "woolly  rhinoceros" 
D.  antiquitatis  of  Eurasia  (above),  and  of  the  recent  African 
"  white  rhinoceros  "  D.  simiis  (below) .  In  the  American  Museum 
of  Natural  History. 


426 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


persisted  longer  here  than  in  other  parts  of  Europe.  As  analyzed  by  Nuesch, 
we  discover  here  mammals  distinctive  of  the  tundras,  of  the  steppes,  of  the 
modern  Alps  (marmot,  chamois,  ibex),  of  the  meadow-forests  (bison,  urus), 
and  finally  of  the  modern  forest  type  (lion,  wolf,  brown  bear,  pine  marten, 
squirrel,  wild  boar,  and  stag) .  These  mammal  zones  undoubtedly  correspond 
with  the  passing  or  evolution  of  several  human  culture  stages  (perhaps 
the  Aurignacian,  Solutrian,  and  Magdalenian) .  While  the  tundra  fauna 
was  pushing  southward  into  the  heart  of  Switzerland,  it  had  already  van- 
ished from  central  Germany,  Belgium,  and  France,  where  it  had  been  super- 
seded by  a  steppe,  or  even  a  meadow-forest  fauna.  The  human  artifacts 
show  that  these  deposits  parallel  those  of  Schweizersbild,  both  belonging  to 
the  IVIagdalenian.  A  hearth  with  ashes  and  coals,  and  many  charred  bones 
of  old  and  young  mammals,  including  the  woolly  rhinoceros,  have  been 
found  here.  The  human  remains  show  that  a  race  of  pigmies  dwelt  here 
smaller  even  than  the  small  men  of  Schweizersbild,  their  height  being 
estimated  at  120  cm.  (4  feet).^  The  horse  of  Kesslerloch  shows  many  re- 
semblances to  the  Przewalsky  horse  of  the  high  steppes  of  Central  Asia.^ 

The  fauna  of  Vdklinshofen  ^  includes  a  similar  intermingling  of  tundra, 
steppe,  mountain,  and  meadow-forest  types. 

The  same  is  true  of  the  scattered  deposits  *  in  Thuringia  near  Saalfeld, 
Gera,  Jena,  Leipzig,  etc.  The  loess  fauna  near  WiXrzhurg,  Bavaria,^  also 
includes  twenty  species  of  mammals  divided  into  typically  modem  tundra 
forms  of  northern  Asia,  typical  modern  steppe  forms  of  central  Asia  and 
Siberia,  together  with  the  four  characteristic  great  mammals  of  the  period, 
the  mammoth,  the  woolly  rhinoceros,  urus,  and  bison. 

The  arctic  character  of  the  fauna  of  Chdteauneuf-sur-Charente  ®  in  cen- 
tral France  is  very  conspicuous,  most  of  the  species  belonging  either  to 
the  tundras  or  the  steppes  of  modern  Europe.  The  bones  of  many 
young  animals  occur  in  this  deposit,  which  may  be  explained  perhaps 
on  the  supposition  that  the  animals  fell  into  the  fissure  while  the  open- 
ing was  lightly  covered  with  snow,  the  young  being  the  most  frequently 
entrapped. 

Summary.  —  This  grand  fauna  is  singularly  uniform;  everywhere^  it  in- 
cludes the  woolly  rhinoceros,  the  mammoth,  and  the  reindeer.  Highly 
characteristic  forms,  intermingled  with  these  at  favorable  points,  are  the 

^  Niiesch,  op  cU.,  p.  21. 

^Studer,  T.,  Die  Knochenreste  aus  der  Hohle  zum  Kesslerloch  bei  Thayngen.  Neue 
Denkschr.  allg.  schweiz.  Ges.  gesam.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XXXIX,  Pt.  2,  1904,  pp.  73-112. 

'  Lepsius,  R.,  Geologie  von  Deutschland  und  den  Angrenzeuden  Gebieten.  Erster  Teil, 
Das  Westliche  und  Sudliche  Deutschland.    Stuttgart,  1892. 

*  Pohlig,  H.,  Vorliiufige  Mittheilungen  iiber  das  Plistocaen,  insbesondere  Thiiringens. 
SUzungsber.  Niederrhein.  Ges.  Bonn,  Mar.  3,  1884,  pp.  2-15. 

^  Nehring,  A.,  Ubersicht  iiber  vierundzwanzig  mitteleuropaische  Quartar-Faunen.  Zeit- 
8chr.  deulsch.  geolog.  Ges.,  Jahrg.  1880,  pp.  468-509. 

'  Boule,  M.,  and  Chauvet,  G.,  Sur  I'existence  d'une  faune  d'aniraaux  arctiques  dans  la 
Charente  k  l'6poque  quaternaire.   C.R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Vol.  XXVIII,  1899,  pp.  1188-1190. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  427 


bison  and  the  urus.  The  five  grand  geographic  components  of  the  fauna 
are  the  following :  the  tundra,  steppe,  alpine,  the  meadow-forest,  the  mod- 
ern forest.  All  are  contemporaneous  with  Palaeolithic  man  except  the 
modern  forest  mammals,  which  belong  to  the  Neolithic  age. 

Human  Culture  Stages 

Solutrian.  —  The  Solutrian  Stage  succeeds  the  Mousterian.  According 
to  Penck  ^  it  represents  the  maximum  of  the  last  glacial  advance,  the  tundra 
and  steppe  period  of  mammahan  life.  In  the  opinion  of  all  French  archae- 
ologists the  Solutrian  represents  the  beginning  of  the  Reindeer  Period,  and 
is  closely  joined  with  the  Magdalenian,  which  represents  the  close  of  the 
Reindeer  Period,  both  being  entirely  post-glacial.  According  to  Pohlig  ^ 
the  Solutrian  is  not  represented  in  the  deposits  of  England,  Germany, 
Austria,  Belgium,  or  Switzerland.  It  is  typified  at  Solutre  (Fig.  176,  32),  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  river  Saone,  midway  between  Chalon  and  Lyon,  the  site  of 
.an  open-air  palaeolithic  camp.  Toussaint  enumerates  fragments  of  at  least 
100,000  horses,  which,  mingled  with  other  bones  of  the  chase,  formed  a  sort 
of  rampart  around  the  camp  of  Solutre.  The  majority  of  these  horses 
belonged  to  the  stout-headed,  short -limbed  'Norse'  or  'forest'  type  of 
Ewart,  measuring  about  fifty-four  inches  (13.2  hands)  at  the  withers,  the 
size  of  an  existing  pony.  The  large  joints  and  hoofs  are  especially  adapted 
to  the  low-lying  marshy  ground  in  the  vicinity  of  forests  and  for  feeding 
during  part  of  the  year  on  coarse  grasses,  roots,  and  other  hard  substances, 
for  which  its  long  teeth  and  powerful  jaws  were  well  adapted.^  There  is 
no  evidence  that  men  of  the  Solutrian  age  either  bred  or  reared  these  ani- 
mals; had  they  been  bred  for  food,  young  animals  would  appear  more 
abundant.  The  majority  of  the  remains  are  of  horses  from  five  to  seven 
years  of  age. 

Magdalenian.  —  The  Magdalenian  Stage  belongs  to  the  faunal  zone  of 
the  last  stages  of  the  mammoth,  the  woolly  rhinoceros,  and  the  reindeer. 
It  represents  the  close  of  the  '  Reindeer  Period '  of  the  older  classifications. 
Boule  places  the  Magdalenian  well  along  in  the  post-glacial  period.  The 
mammoth  existed  in  Italy  up  to  Mousterian  times,  while  in  France  it  per- 
sisted up  to  the  Magdalenian.  Boule  and  Penck  agree  that  it  corresponds 
with  the  end  of  the  last  glacial  epoch,  or  with  the  last  glacial  retreat.^  It 
is  typified  by  the  upper  levels  of  the  rich  deposits  of  Schweizersbild  near 
Schaffhausen,  and  of  the  Kesslerloch  Cave. 

1  See  Penck's  Table,  p.  379. 

2  Pohlig,  H.,  Eiszeit  und  Urgeschichte  des  Menschen.    Leipzig,  1907. 

^  Ewart,  J.  C,  The  Multiple  Origin  of  Horses  and  Ponies.  Trans.  Highland  Agric.  Soc.  of 
Scotland,  1904,  pp.  1-39. 

*  Boule,  M.,  Observations  sur  un  Silex  Taille  du  Jura  et  sur  la  Chronologie  de  M.  Penck. 
L'AnthropoL,  Vol.  XIX,  1908;  Penck,  A.,  Lect.  before  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.,  Jan.  25,  1909. 


428 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


4.  The  Fourth,  Post-Pleistocene,  or  Modern  Fauna 

We  now  enter  the  recent,  Holocene,  or  Neolithic  age.  The  mammals 
of  this  epoch  differ  from  the  three  preceding  Pleistocene  Faunas  in  the 
extinction  of  the  mammoth  and  the  woolly  rhinoceros,  as  well  as  of  the 
cave  bear,  lion,  hyiena,  species  which  left  no  descendants;  and  finally  in 
the  retreat  to  the  north  and  northeast  of  the  highly  speciahzed  tundra 
and  steppe  t>T)es. 

There  remained  in  the  plains  and  mountains  of  Europe  the  forest- 
meadow,  the  pure  forest,  and  the  alpine  types,  all  direct  descendants  of  the 
mammals  of  preceding  stages.  It  is  remarkable  that  no  new  mammals 
appear  except  those  introduced  by  Neolithic  man.  The  fauna  of  early 
Neolithic  times  is  directly  sequent  upon  that  of  late  Palaeolithic  times. 
This  fauna  has  been  discovered  in  the  Swiss  lake  dwellings  ^  (Fig.  176,  38- 
40)  at  Moosseedorf,  Wauwyl,  Robenhausen,  Concise,  etc.  In  the  peat  bogs 
of  Hassleben  (41),  etc.,  in  the  travertines  of  Jena,  Langensalza  (42),  etc. ,2 
have  been  found  the  following  mammals : 

Bison  bonasus,  the  European  bison,  still  surviving  in  Lithuania. 
Bos  primigenius,  collateral  ancestor  of  the  long-horned  larger  existing 

cattle  of  western  Europe.    The  'urus/  of  Caesar's  text,  surviving 

in  Germany  until  the  twelfth  century. 
Bos  longifrons,  the  'Celtic  short-horn,'  the  probable  ancestor  of  the 

small  breeds  of  British  short-horned  and  hornless  cattle. 
Cervus  elaphus,  the  red  deer  or  stag . 
Cervus  capreolus,  the  roe  deer. 
Alces  machlis,  the  elk  or  moose. 

Rangifer  tarandus,  the  reindeer,  surviving  in  central  Europe  until  the 

twelfth  century. 
Cervus  dama,  the  fallow  deer,  replacing  the  giant  deer. 
Capra  ibex,  the  ibex  of  the  mountain  or  alpine  fauna. 
Rupicapra  tragus,  the  chamois  of  the  mountain  fauna. 
aSws  scrofa  ferus,  the  wild  boar. 
Sus  scrofa  palustris,  the  turf  pig. 

Equus  caballus  celticus,  the  Celtic   pony,  representative  of  the 

'  plateau '  type. 
Equus  caballus  Ujpicus,  the  Norse,  or  'forest'  horse. 
Castor  fiber,  the  beaver. 
Sciurus  vulgaris,  the  common  squirrel. 
Lepus  timidus,  the  European  hare. 

Lepus  variabilis,  the  arctic  hare,  in  Ireland  and  the  north. 

*  Riitimeyer,  L.,  Die  Fauna  der  Pfahlbauten  der  Schweiz.  Neue  Denkschr.  allg.  schweiz. 
{resell,  gesam.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XIX.    Zurich,  1862. 

*  Pohlig,  H.,  Vorlaufige  Mittheiluns;en  iiber  das  Plistoc£En,  insbesondere  Thiiringens. 
Sitzungsber.  Niederrhein.  Ges.  Bonn,  Mar.  3,  1884,  pp.  2-15. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  429 


Mus  sylvaticus,  the  field  mouse. 

Marmota  marmotta,  the  marmot  of  the  alpine  fauna. 

Ursus  arctos,  the  brown  bear. 

Meles  taxus,  the  badger. 

Mustela  martes,  the  pine  marten,  also  the  weasel,  pole  cat,  the 

ermine,  etc. 
Lutra  vulgaris,  the  otter. 
GmIo  luscus,  the  wolverine. 
Canis  lupus,  the  wolf. 
Cams  vulpes,  the  fox. 
Felis  catus,  the  wild  cat. 

There  is  evidence  of  the  'plateau^  or  'Celtic^  horse  in  the  Neolithic 
deposits  of  Essex  and  of  Switzerland  (La  Tene) ;  it  was  widely  distributed 
in  Europe  and  Asia  in  prehistoric  times.  ^ 

It  is  beyond  the  purpose  of  this  volume  to  trace  the  history  of  domes- 
tication. The  Neolithic  immigrants,  or  men  of  the  New  Stone  Age,  pos- 
sessed or  brought  with  them  cattle,  sheep,  goats,  pigs,  horses,  and  dogs. 
Appreciating  the  value  of  domestication,  they  certainly  captured  and  domes- 
ticated three  indigenous  European  species,  namely,  the  Celtic  short-horn 
cattle,  the  forest  horse  (E.  caballus  typicus)  and  the  Celtic  horse  {E.  cabal- 
lus  celticus).  The  wild  ox  {Bos  primigenius)  was  hunted  but  not  domes- 
ticated. The  domestic  ox  {Bos  taurus)  shows  many  points  of  resemblance 
to  the  Urus,  but  is  not  directly  descended  from  it,  but  rather  from  the  Bos 
trochoceros  type  of  the  Pleistocene  of  Italy.  Riitimeyer  has  made  an  exhaus- 
tive study  of  this  subject,^  tracing  the  origin  of  the  various  types  of  domes- 
ticated cattle. 

II.    PLEISTOCENE  LIFE  OF  NORTH  AFRICA 

In  no  region  of  the  world  have  more  profound  changes  occurred  during 
and  since  Pleistocene  times  than  in  Africa  north  of  the  Sahara.  In  its 
mammal  life  this  region  is  now  part  of  Europe,  or  Palceardic;  in  Quaternary 
times  it  was  still  more  distinctively  a  part  of  Africa,  or  Ethiopian.  One 
cannot  fail  to  be  struck,  observes  Boule,^  with  the  essentially  African  char- 
acter of  the  Quaternary  mammals  of  Algeria.  With  the  exception  of  the 
bear  {Ursus)  every  genus  still  inhabits  the  dark  continent,  and  several  are 
peculiar  to  it  {Phacochoerus,  Hippopotamus,  the  giraffe,  and  various  ante- 
lopes). The  small  number  of  species  common  to  the  Quaternary  fauna  of 
Europe  and  North  Africa  is  noteworthy;  the  affinity  is  so  slight  that  it 
appears  that  by  the  middle  of  the  Quaternary,  at  the  latest,  communication 

lEwart,  J.  C,  op.  ext.,  1907. 

2  Riitimeyer,  L.,  Die  Fauna  der  Pfahlbauten  der  Schweiz,  Neue  Denkschr.  allg.  schweiz. 
Gesell.  gesam.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XIX.    Zurich,  1862. 

^  Boule,  M.,  Les  Mammif^res  quaternaires  de  1' Algeria  d'apr^s  les  travaux  de  Pomel. 
L'Anthropol,  Vol.  VII,  1896,  pp.  563-571. 


430 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


between  the  two  continents  was  interrupted.  It  is  natural  to  suppose  that 
the  hon,  hyaena,  hippopotamus,  now  so  characteristic  of  Africa,  entered 
Europe  from  this  North  African  region,  but  it  appears  quite  as  probable 
that  these  animals,  all  of  which  occur  in  the  Upper  Pliocene  of  Asia  (p.  321), 
are  of  Asiatic  rather  than  of  African  origin.  If  we  adopt  this  Asiatic  theory, 
we  must  suppose  that  during  Pliocene  times  Africa  and  southern  Asia  had 
a  great  mammalian  fauna  in  common. 

The  theory  of  the  relative  isolation  of  Africa  from  Europe  in  Quaternary 
times  originated  with  Pomel  ^  as  a  result  of  his  exhaustive  review  of  the 
entire  fauna  of  North  Africa.  He  concludes  that  since  the  resemblances 
between  the  European  and  North  African  Quaternary  faunas  are  rare  and 
often  doubtful,  the  two  continents  were  separated  by  the  Mediterranean 
Sea  and  Straits  of  Gibraltar  then  as  now. 

Climate.  —  While  in  Europe  the  alternating  glacial  and  inter-glacial 
epochs  caused  extensive  migrations  and  changes  of  fauna,  Africa  was  out 
of  the  reach  of  these  vicissitudes.  It  seems  well  established  ^  that  after 
Upper  Pliocene  times  Algeria  enjoyed  a  sub-tropical  climate,  characterized 
by  abruptly  alternating  dry  and  rainy  seasons.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
Quaternary  Period  ^  North  Africa  was  probably  characterized  by  excessive 
rainfall  which  led  to  the  formation  of  great  alluvial  or  river  and  flood  plain 
depositions  in  the  Barbary  and  Sahara  regions. 

At  this  time  the  mammalian  fauna  of  North  Africa,  with  the  exception 
of  some  peculiarly  Eurasiatic  forms  (such  as  the  bear,  deer,  wild  boar,  and 
wild  sheep)  and  certain  American  types  (such  as  the  camels),  was  closely 
similar  to  the  grand  plateau  life  of  equatorial  Africa  at  the  present  time, 
including  elephants,  rhinoceroses,  zebras,  wild  asses,  giraffes,  wild  cattle, 
buffalo,  antelopes,  gazelles,  gnus,  elands,  hippopotami,  wart  hogs,  lions, 
and  hyaenas.  The  presence  of  these  animals  is  consistent  with  the  climatic 
theory  of  sub-tropical  temperature  and  alternating  dry  and  rainy  seasons. 

Various  indications  point  to  increasingly  long  periods  of  drought  and 
progressive  secular  desiccation  of  this  great  region  as  the  Pleistocene  ad- 
vanced, resulting  in  the  partial  extinction  and  partial  migration  of  the  great 
equatorial  life  to  central  and  southern  Africa.  The  bear,  as  a  characteristic 
forest  dweller,  also  became  extinct,  while  the  deer,  wild  sheep,  wild  boar, 
and  smaller  mammals  of  European  type  survived  to  establish  for  this  region 
its  present  affinity  with  Europe. 

Sources  of  African  life.  —  It  is  premature  to  attempt  to  establish  the 
sources  of  all  the  various  members  of  this  imposing  assemblage  of  mammals; 
there  remains  always  a  great  element  of  doubt  which  can  be  eliminated  only 

'  Pomel,  A.,  Les  Elephants  Quaternaires.  Carte  Geol.  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers- 
1895. 

2  Lamothe,  Le  Climat  de  I'Afrique  du  Nord  pendant  le  Pliocene  superieur  et  le  Pleisto, 
c^ne.    C.  R.  Congr.  Geol.  Internal.,  Sess.  X,  Mexico,  1906,  Vol.  I,  1907,  pp.  341-347. 

'  Pomel,  A.,  Les  Elephants  Quaternaires.  Carte  Geol.  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  ; 
1895,  p.  39. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  431 


by  discovery  of  the  complete  Csenozoic  history  of  Asia  and  Africa.  It 
would  appear  probable  from  our  previous  studies  that  several  continents 
contributed  to  the  remote  or  original  ancestry  of  this  fauna,  somewhat  as 
follows : 

Africa,  elephants  and  mastodons. 

Northern  Eurasia,  deer  and  bear. 

Southern  Eurasia,  wild  cattle  and  buffalo. 

North  America,  rhinoceroses,  various  Equidse,  the  camel. 


The  total  assemblage  may  be  summarized  as  follows  from  Pomel : 

Six  species  of  elephants  are  known, 
including  the  mastodon  as  well  as  a 
southern  mammoth  (E.  meridio- 
nalis)  found  in  the  early  Pleistocene 
deposits.  In  later  deposits  elephants 
similar  to  the  E.  antiquus  type  of 
Europe  and  its  dwarf  representative 
in  Malta  are  found,  but  the  most 
characteristic  and  widespread  form 
{E.  atlanticus)  belongs  to  the  African 
sub-genus  Loxodonta,  while  differing 
from  the  recent  African  elephant  in 
several  points.  The  latter  species 
{E.  africanus)  only  occurs  in  still 
more  recent  deposits  of  the  latest 
prehistoric  period. 

Similarly  the  two  species  of  rhi- 
noceroses (D.  mauritanicus,  D.  suhi- 
nermis)  resemble  the  modern  African 
types,  but  there  is  nothing  to  indi- 
cate the  existence  either  of  the  mod- 
ern African  'black'  or  'white' 
species.  The  Pleistocene  horses  are 
peculiarly  interesting  in  the  alleged 
survival  of  several  species  of  hip- 
parions  side  by  side  on  the  plains  of  Numidia  with  the  early  North 
African  horses  or  zebras.  One  of  the  latter  {E.  numidicus)  is  closely  similar 
to  the  Upper  Pliocene  E.  stenonis  of  Europe  (Boule,  1899).^  The  other  {E. 
mauritanicus)  shows  tooth  characters  of  the  recent  zebra.  Thus  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that  in  Pleistocene  times  direct  ancestors  of  the 
zebra,  now  confined  to  equatorial  Africa,  occupied  the  extreme  north  of 
the  continent.    To  the  same  period  belongs  the  wild  ass,  very  similar  to 

^  Boule,  M.,  Observations  sur  quelques  Equides  Fossiles.  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  3, 
Vol.  XXVII,  1899,  pp.  531-542. 


Man 

Mastodon  (Early  Pleistocene) 
Elephants  (several  species  of  African 

and  of  E.  meridionalis  type) 
Rhinoceroses  (2  species  of 

African  type) 
Hipparions,  zebras,  and  asses 
Camels 

Giraffes  {Lihytherium,  Giraffa) 
Deer  (of  the  Cervus  type) 
Wild  cattle  (Bos)  (3  species) 
Buffalo 

Dwarf  antelopes,  gazelles, 

gnus,  oryx,  nagor,  elands 
Wild  sheep 

Hippopotami  (four  species) 

Wild  boar  (Sus) 

Wart  hogs  (Phacochoerus) 

Cave  lions  (2  species) 

Hyaenas  (spotted  and  striped) 

Bear  (of  Helarctos  group) 

Jackals 

Macaques 


432 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  typical  African  ass  {E.  asinus),  which  survived  in  this  region  until 
exterminated  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  is  now  confined  to  the  deserts 
of  Abyssinia. 

Among  the  Artiodactyla  the  presence  of  camels  (C.  thomasii)  in  Palaeo- 
lithic Pleistocene  times  and  even  in  deposits  of  Neolithic  age  (C.  dromedarius) 
is  extraordinarily  interesting.  There  is  no  evidence  as  to  domestication. 
The  earlier  of  these  two  camels  of  ancient  Libya  had  longer  le^s  and  was  of 
heavier  build  than  the  dromedary.  The  rare  remains  of  the  later  form, 
probably  identical  with  the  recent  dromedary,  may  be  those  of  a  race  which 
was  already  emigrating  or  becoming  extinct.^  The  presence  of  the  camel 
is  one  of  the  most  convincing  proofs  of  connection  of  this  fauna  with  that 
of  the  Upper  Siwaliks  of  southern  Asia,  and  thus  of  North  America. 

Giraffes  very  similar  to  the  recent  African  giraffe  (C.  giraffa)  have  been 
found  in  mid-Pleistocene  deposits  associated  with  Palaeolithic  stone  imple- 
ments of  the  Chellean  type.^  They  are  also  depicted  in  rock  drawings  of 
Neolithic  age  in  Algeria. 

In  Neolithic  times  there  existed  at  least  one  species  of  deer,  whereas  at 
present  there  are  two  kinds  of  deer,  the  red  and  the  fallow,^  in  North  Africa,^ 
both  undoubted  Eurasiatic  migrants. 

Especially  significant  of  Asiatic  and  Siwalik  affinity  are  the  Pleistocene 
cattle  and  buffaloes  of  North  Africa,  including  contemporary  species  of 
Bos,  all  belonging  to  late  Quaternary  or  to  the  NeoUthic  age,  partly  do- 
mesticated, and  with  remote  resemblances  to  the  Pleistocene  cattle  of  France 
and  Spain.  Similar  Asiatic  affinity  is  found  in  the  remains  of  buffalo  {Bu- 
balus  antiquus)  allied  to  the  existing  Indian  form.  This  was  a  powerful 
beast  which  presumably  lived  in  herds,  frequenting  grassy  plains  and 
swampy  districts,  and  in  its  presence  here  we  seem  to  find  confirmation  of 
what  geology  teaches  us  in  regard  to  the  dampness  of  the  Quaternary  climate. 
The  disappearance  of  the  buffalo  from  North  Africa  at  the  commencement 
of  the  Recent  Period  was  no  doubt  due  to  the  increasingly  dry  conditions, 
and  partly  to  destruction  by  man. 

The  great  number  and  variety  of  antelopes  is  most  astonishing  in  this 
region,  which  now  is  inhabited  only  by  the  gazelles  (Gazella),  hartebeest 
(Bubalis),  and  addax  antelope  (Addax).  It  includes  gnus  (Connochoetes), 
several  species  of  Bubalis  still  represented  in  the  Barbary  States,  an  aber- 
rant form  {Oreonagor) ,  related  to  the  nilgai  of  India,  nine  species  of  gazelles 
(Gazella),  the  oryx  (Oryx),  the  nagor  {Cervicapra  redunca),  several  large 
elands  (Oreas),  such  as  now  inhabit  South  Africa,  as  well  as  dwarf  ante- 
lopes (Cephalophus).    Beside  these  plains  and  desert  types  of  ruminants, 

^  Pomel,  A.,  Cameliens  et  Cervides.  Carte  Geol.  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1893. 

2  Pallary,  P.,  Note  sur  la  Girafe  et  le  Chameau  du  Quaternaire  Algerien.  Bull.  Soc.  Geol. 
France,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  XXVIII.  1900,  pp.  908-909. 

'  See  Lydekker,  Deer  of  all  Lands.  The  North  African  red  deer  (Cervus  elaphus  bar- 
barus)  is  smaller  than  the  European  race.  Evidence  on  the  range  of  the  common  fallow  deer 
{Ccrviis  dama)  in  northwestern  Africa  is  not  very  full. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  433 


the  hills  were  covered  with  wild  sheep  {Ovis  paloeotragus)  very  similar  to  the 
existing  Barbary  sheep,  as  well  as  goats  {Ovis  promaza) . 

In  the  rivers  there  lived  in  early  and  later  Pleistocene  times  a  series  of 
species  of  hippopotami  (H.  hipponensis,  H,  sirensis,  H.  icosiensis)  leading  to 
a  form  {H.  annectens)  related  to  the  existing  Nile  hippopotamus.  There 


Fig.  186. V —  Skeleton  of  the  Pleistocene  pigmy  hippopotamus  of  Madagascar,  Hippopotamus 
madagascariensis,  together  with  a  skull  of  the  recent  hippopotamus  H.  amphibius.  In  the 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


are  also  two  types  of  wild  boar  (Sus),  and  more  abundant  than  these  were 
the  wart  hogs  (Phacochoerus)  found  in  the  caves  and  alluvial  deposits  of 
Barbary. 

Preying  upon  these  Herbivora  were  lions,  leopards,  and  hysenas,  com- 
pared by  Pomel  with  Pleistocene  cave  forms  of  Europe.  The  bear  (Ursus 
libycus)  found  fossil  in  Algeria  seems  to  belong  to  the  Helarctos  group,  now 
represented  by  the  Malayan  sun  bear,  and  possibly  derived  from  the  small 
U.  etruscus  of  the  European  Pliocene.  There  are  also  jackals,  wolves,  the 
ichneumon,  and  possibly  a  polecat. 

The  primates  are  represented  by  a  macaque  (Macacus)  not  very  different 
from  the  existing  forms  which  frequent  the  regions  of  the  Straits  of  Gibral- 
tar. The  prehistoric  men  of  the  Barbary  States  apparently  obtained  and 
domesticated  the  horse,  species  of  sheep,  and  several  dogs,  and  left  many 
sketches  of  animals  on  the  rocks  of  the  region. ^ 

1  See  Pomel,  '93,  '94,  '95,  '96,  '97,  '98  in  Bibliography. 


2f 


434 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


III.    PLEISTOCENE  LIFE  OF  NORTH  AMERICA 

The  early  and  mid-Pleistocene  life  of  North  America  is  the  grandest  and 
most  varied  assemblage  of  the  entire  Caenozoic  Period  on  our  continent. 
It  lacks  the  rhinoceroses  of  Europe,  but  possesses  the  mastodons,  in  addition 
to  an  array  of  elephants  more  varied  and  quite  as  majestic  as  those  of  the 
Old  World.  Great  herds  of  large  llamas  and  camels  are  interspersed  with 
enormous  troops  of  horses.  Tapirs  roam  through  the  forests.  True  cattle 
(Bos)  are  not  present,  but  imposing  and  varied  species  of  bison  are  widely 
distributed.  An  element  entirely  lacking  in  Europe  is  that  of  the  varied 
types  of  giant  sloths,  which  were  scattered  all  over  the  country,  as  well  as  the 
great  armored  glyptodonts  in  the  South.  Preying  upon  these  animals  are 
not  only  saber-tooth  cats,  but  true  cats,  rivaling  the  modern  lion  and  tiger 
in  size. 

A  fact  of  great  importance  is  that  we  now  witness  for  the  first  time 
the  life  of  the  entire  United  States,  of  the  Plains  and  Mountain  regions  of 
the  West,  of  the  Pacific  slope,  of  the  vast  and  hitherto  unknown  forested 
stretches  of  the  East,  of  the  sandy  savannahs  of  the  South,  as  well  as  of 
portions  of  British  Columbia  and  Alaska.  This  more  extended  range  of 
knowledge  enhances  both  the  interest  of  the  subject  and  its  difficulties. 
When  we  attempt  to  correlate  the  age  of  faunas  east  and  west  of  the  Sierras 
and  Rocky  Mountains,  we  must  consider  the  influences  of  these  great 
barriers  and  of  the  Pacific  Ocean.    (See  Fig.  194.) 

It  is  true  that  most  of  the  testimony  is  of  a  fragmentary  character,  but 
its  geographic  range  and  zoologic  diversity  are  compensating  features.  The 
fossil  mammals  of  the  East  were  the  first  to  draw  the  attention  and  excite 
the  wonder  of  the  pioneers  of  American  palaeontology,  of  De  Kay,  Jefferson, 
Harlan,  Couper,  and  Holmes.  It  was  natural  that  the  discoveries  in  the 
Tertiary  of  the  West  from  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  onward 
should  have  diverted  attention  from  the  less  showy  but  no  less  important 
Quaternary  fauna.  Leidy,  Marsh,  and  Cope  gave  it  little  attention.  Quite 
recently,  however,  interest  has  begun  to  revive,  and  the  studies  of  Mercer, 
J.  C.  Merriam,  Sinclair,  Furlong,  Lucas,  Brown,  and  others  are  bringing 
the  Quaternary  again  into  its  deserved  prominence.  A  thorough-going  re- 
vision of  these  mammals  and  of  their  environment  is  still  required;  for  it 
must  be  acknowledged  that  the  present  review  is  based  upon  very  incom- 
plete zoologic  and  geologic  data. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  435 


GEOLOGIC  DIVISIONS  OF  THE  AMERICAN  QUATERNARY 


II.    HOLOCENE  OR  ReCENT 


I.  Pleistocene,  or  Glacial 
3.  Post-Glacial 


2.  Glacial 


1.  Pre-Glacial 


A  moderate  elevation  of 
the  land  where  de- 
pressed in  the  preced- 
ing period.  Mam- 
mals of  existing  spe- 
cies. 

Depression  of  lands 
that  were  glaciated  in 
the  Glacial  Period; 
amelioration  of  cli- 
mate; final  disappear- 
ance of  the  ice;  great 
river  floods  and  lakes, 
and  fluviatile  and 
lacustrine  deposits. 
Forests  and  mammals 
of  the  temperate  zone 
spread  over  parts  of 
the  previously  glaci- 
ated regions. 

Increased  elevation  of 
the  land  over  wide  re- 
gions in  higher  lati- 
tudes; climate  in 
these  latitudes  of  low 
temperature,  abund- 
ant precipitation,  and 
consequent  produc- 
tion of  glaciers.  Suc- 
cessive widespread 
glaciation  of  the  frigid 
lands,  with  the  ex- 
clusion of  all  life  ex- 
cept that  of  boreal 
and  arctic  regions.  A 
subsidence  beginning 
toward  the  close. 
Mammals  in  the  gla- 
ciated areas  preserved 
in  interglacial  peat  de- 
posits, bogs  in  glacial 
moraines,  and  drift 
deposits.  South  of 
the  glaciated  areas  in 
caves  and  in  river 
sands,  loess,  wind 
drift  and  clay  depos- 
its. 


7.  Champlain  Sub-Stage  (Marine) 


Glacio-Lacustrine  Sub-Stage 


5a.  Wisconsin  Glacial,  Later 

5th  Interglacial 
5.    Wisconsin  Glacial,  Earlier 

4th  Interglacial 
4.     Iowan  Glacial 
3d  Interglacial 
3.    Illinoian  Glacial 
2d  Interglacial 
Kansan  Glacial 
1st  Interglacial 
Sub-Aftonian  Glacial 


'Ozarkian  Stage'  of  the  Eastern 
States  =  '  Sierran  Stage '  of  the 
Pacific  coast. 


2. 


436 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


By  permission  of  the  N.Y.  Zoological  Society  and  H:irr>  i    w  1,111  y  <  i  ii  im  ,1  mu  k  ox). 

Fig.  187.  —  Eurasiatic  invaders  of  North  America  in  the  Pleistocene.     The  musk  ox  (Ovibos), 
caribou  (Rangifer),  and  moose  (Alces). 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  437 


By  permission  of  the  N.Y.  Zoological  Society. 

Fig.  188.  —  Eurasiatic  invaders  of  North  America  in  the  Pleistocene.    The  wapiti  (Cervus 
canadensis) ,  Rocky  mountain  goat  (Oreamnos) ,  black  bear  ( U rsus  americanm) . 


438 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Faunal  Divisions  of  the  Quaternary 

The  study  of  the  mammals  of  the  Quaternary  has  by  no  means  progressed 
so  far  in  America  as  in  Europe;  it  will  be  many  years  before  the  faunistic 
succession  can  be  worked  out  with  such  chronologic  accuracy  and  precision 
as  has  at  last  been  attained  by  European  geologists  and  palaeontologists. 
The  principal  difficulty  which  confronts  us  in  the  study  of  the  life  of  Pleis- 
tocene times  in  America  is  that  the  richest  deposits  of  fossil  mammals  he 
to  the  south  of  the  great  terminal  moraine,  or  farthest  advance  of  the  glacial 
cap.  In  two  localities  only,  the  Afton  of  Iowa  and  the  Toronto  Formation 
of  the  Don  Valley,  has  it  been  possible  to  locate  a  mammalian  fauna  between 
two  great  series  of  glacial  deposits.  Other  such  localities  will  doubtless  be 
discovered.  Neither  are  the  stages  of  human  culture  available,  as  in  the 
Old  World,  to  supplement  and  check  the  time  stages  of  evolution  of  the 
mammals.  In  the  meantime,  the  student  must  depend  upon  the  following 
four  lines  of  evidence  to  mark  the  progress  of  Pleistocene  time : 

First,  the  survival  of  characteristic  Pliocene  types,  such  as  the  saber- 
tooths,  or  machaerodonts. 

Second,  the  gradual  extinction  or  emigration  of  these  older  types,  in- 
cluding the  greater  part  of  the  indigenous  large  fauna  of  North  America. 
Thus  the  saber-tooths,  the  tapirs,  the  camels,  the  horses  one  by  one  dis- 
appear. Among  animals  of  South  American  origin  the  giant  sloths  and 
the  glyptodonts  also  gradually  vanish.  Among  forms  of  Old  World  origin, 
the  elephants  and  mastodons  gradually  disappear.  These  extinctions,  when 
understood  (p.  500),  will  give  us  a  series  of  dates. 

Third,  the  gradual  arrival  of  types  new  to  America  but  long  resident  in 
the  Old  World  (p.  436-7).  Thus  we  notice  the  successive  arrivals  or  first 
records  of  such  Eurasiatic  mammals  as  the  moose  (Alces),  the  bison  (Bison), 
the  mountain  goat  (Oreamnos),  the  musk  ox  (Ovihos  moschatus),  the  true 
red  deer  {Cervus),  the  bear  (Ursus),  the  reindeer  (Rangifer),  the  latter  three 
forms  appearing  late  in  Pleistocene  times.  These  arrivals  will  in  time  also 
furnish  a  series  of  time  divisions. 

Fourth,  the  comparison  of  the  climatic  adaptations  of  New  World  groups 
with  those  which  prevailed  during  the  four  grand  zones  of  mammalian  life 
in  Europe  which  we  have  described  above.  Such  comparison  enables  us 
to  give  a  preliminary  outline  in  somewhat  hypothetical  form  of  four  great 
faunistic  periods  or  life  zones,  broadly  analogous  to  those  in  Europe,  as 
sho\vn  in  the  following  table. 

These  zones  are  not  sharply  distinguishable  chronologically  at  present ; 
they  partly  overlap  and  are  partly  successive. 

Hypothetical  Division  into  Four  Zones  or  Faunas,  I -IV 
The  lines  of  separation  between  these  zones  are  by  no  means  clearly  de- 
fined at  present,  and  will  depend  in  the  future  upon  the  more  accurate 
definition  of  species. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  439 

I.  First  or  Equus-Mylodon  Zone  of  the  Plains  regions  (see  p.  452). 
Mammals  of  this  period  include  among  surviving  forms,  machserodonts, 
camels  (llamas),  mylodont  sloths,  prong-horn  antelopes,  white-tailed  deer, 
and  numerous  horses.  The  glyptodonts  survive  in  the  south.  The  mas- 
todons no  longer  appear  in  the  Great  Plains  region.    The  giant  dogs,  or 


Fig.  189.  —  Distribution  of  the  Proboscidea  in  North  America.  (After  Lucas).  A.  Ele- 
phas  imperator,  the  imperial  mammoth.  B.  Elephas  columhi,  the  Columbian  mammoth. 
C.  Elephas  primigenius,  the  northern  mammoth.  D.  Mastodon  americanus,  the  American 
mastodon. 


dinocyons,  appear  to  survive.  The  peccaries  are  represented  by  Platy- 
gonus.  Among  the  newly  appearing  forms  are  the  giant  beavers  (Casto- 
roides)  and  the  badgers  (Taxidea).  In  this  assemblage  there  are  no  true 
European  deer  (Cervus),  no  bison,  no  bear,  and  no  mountain  goats 
(Oreamnos)  nor  mountain  sheep  (Ovis),  and  since  it  is  largely  a  temperate 
fauna,  there  are  no  reindeer  nor  musk  oxen. 

II.  Second  or  Megalonyx  Zone  (see  p.  464).  The  mammals  of  this 
stage,  which  are  believed  to  belong  to  the  temperate  and  favorable  inter- 
glacial  zones  of  mid-Pleistocene  times  and  to  the  south  beyond  glacial  in- 


440 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


fluences,  still  include  no  arctic,  tundra,  or  steppe  types.  Among  the  still 
surviving  forms,  which,  however,  disappear  during  this  period,  are  the 
machffirodonts  and  the  tapirs.  The  camels,  which  no  longer  occur  in  the 
east  nor  in  the  forested  regions,  appear  to  survive  in  California  and  in 
the  plateau  regions  of  the  southwest.  The  peccaries  are  represented  by 
Mylohyus.  The  mylodont  sloths  seem  to  have  given  way  gradually  to 
the  giant  sloths  (Megalomjx).  Giant  bisons  {B.  latifrons)  abound  in  the 
east.    Among  the  rodents  the  porcupines  (Erethizon)  and  the  marmots 

(Marmota)  appear.  Precursors 
of  the  musk  ox  appear  {Eucera- 
therium).  The  moose  {Alces) 
is  frequently  recorded,  and  the 
true  deer  (Cervus)  perhaps 
arrives  very  late.  There  is  still 
no  trace  of  the  reindeer  (Ran- 
gifer)  nor  of  the  musk  ox. 

III.  Third  or  Ovibos-Rangifer 
Zone  of  the  plains  and  forests 
(see  p.  486).  The  third  mam- 
malian fauna  is  apparently  that 
of  the  final  glacial  advance  and 
perhaps  of  a  cold,  dry  loess 
period.  It  includes  the  musk 
ox  {Ovihos),  which  advances 
into  the  Middle  States  (Fig. 
214).  The  mastodon  is  the 
dominant  form  in  the  forests 
of  the  East.  The  true  northern 
mammoth  (Elephas  primigenius) 
appears  and  spreads  as  far  south 
as  the  city  of  Washington  (see 
Fig.  189,  C).  The  reindeer 
(R.  caribou)  is  widely  distrib- 
With  the  remains  of  the  mammoth  are 
The  saber-tooth  tigers  have 


Fig.  190.  —  Moiar.s  of  (-4)  the  northern  mam- 
moth, Elephas  primigetiius,  (B)  the  Columbian  mam- 
moth, Elephas  columbi,  (C)  the  Imperial  mammoth, 
Elephas  imperator.  In  the  American  Museum  of 
Natural  History. 


uted  in  the  Middle  States, 
associated  those  of  several  species  of  bison, 
disappeared. 

l\.  Fourth  or  Cervus  Zone.  The  fourth  fauna  is  the  prehistoric 
fauna  of  the  forests  of  the  East  and  West,  of  the  prairies,  and  of  the  great 
plains  and  arid  region.  It  is  characterized  by  the  very  wide  distribution 
of  the  wapiti  (C  canadensis),  or  Old  World  deer.  It  includes  all  the  mam- 
mals which  the  early  settlers  found  on  this  continent.  All  the  horses,  tapirs, 
proboscideans,  and  other  exotic  mid-Pleistocene  forms  have  disappeared. 

Succession  of  elephants  or  mammoths.  —  The  three  great  elephants  of 
Upper  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  times  in  North  America,  although  partly 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  441 

overlapping  in  time  and  in  range,  will  probably  be  found  to  be  characteristic 
of  distinct  epochs  and  habitats,  as  follows : 

3.  The  northern  mammoth  {Elephas  primigenius) ,  ranging  from  Alaska 
south  to  the  latitude  of  Washington.    Late  Pleistocene,  or  Zone  III. 

2.  The  Columbian  mammoth  {Elephas  columhi),  ranging  from  the 
southerly  range  of  E.  primigenius  to  the  City  of  Mexico.  Mid-Pleistocene, 
or  Zone  II. 

1.  The  imperial  mammoth  {Elephas  imperator),  ranging  from  Nebraska 
to  the  City  of  Mexico.    Early  Pleistocene,  or  Zone  I  and  (?)  II. 


Fig.  191.  —  Middle  Miocene  mastodon  (Trilophodon  productus)  beside  Upper  Pliocene  or 
Lower  Pleistocene  elephant  {E.  imperator).  Models  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American 
Museum  of  Natural  History. 

li 

The  imperial  elephant  is  an  early  arrival.  It  is  by  far  the  largest  of 
these  animals,  attaining  a  height  of  over  thirteen  feet,  and  more  definitely 
distinguished  by  the  enormous  size  of  its  molar  teeth,  in  which  the  enamel 
plates  are  relatively  few  (seventeen),  widely  separated,  and  surrounded  by  a 
heavy  mass  of  cement. 

The  Columbian  elephant  is  an  animal  of  lesser  size,  attaining  a  height 
of  eleven  feet,  with  twenty-one  to  twenty-two  cross  ridges  in  its  upper 
grinders. 


442 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


As  in  Eurasia,  the  latest  arrival  in  the  latitude  of  the  Middle  States  is 
the  northern,  or  hairy  mammoth  {E.  primigenius) .  It  is  distinguished  by 
its  smaller  size,  its  height  not  exceeding  nine  feet,  by  the  very  numerous 
(18-27  +  )  and  thin  plates  in  its  grinding  teeth,  by  its  very  thick  covering 
of  hair  and  wool. 

While  the  characteristic  geographic  range  of  these  three  elephants,  as 
defined  above  after  the  studies  of  Lucas  ^  (Fig.  189),  is  distinct,  there  are 
points  where  they  overlap  geographically.  Moreover,  the  teeth  of  the 
northern  and  Columbian  mammoths  sometimes  intergrade,  so  that  it  is 
difficult  to  distinguish  the  species.  The  Columbian  and  imperial  mammoths 
were  for  a  time  at  least  contemporaneous  with  the  mastodon,  because  re- 
mains of  all  three  species,  namely,  E.  columbi,  E.  imperator,  and  M.  america- 
nus,  have  been  reported^  at  Afton,  Iowa.  E.  columbi  and  M.  americanus  were 
contemporaneous  through  the  Central  States,  Missouri,  Indiana,  and  Ohio. 
The  identification  of  E.  imperator  in  these  deposits  is  somewhat  doubtful. 

Physiographic  and  Climxitic  Changes  connected  with  Continental  Elevation 

and  Depression 

To  understand  this  life  and  to  sharply  demarcate  these  zones  we  must 
survey  the  series  of  geographic  changes  which  marked  the  progress  of  Qua- 
ternary times. 

As  in  Europe,  the  grand  cHmatic  changes  of  North  America  were  ushered 
in  and  perhaps  partly  caused  by  great  changes  of  level  which  altered  the 
proportions  of  land  and  sea,  and  left  a  whole  chain  of  biotic  results  in  their 
train.    Briefly  they  were  as  follows: 

Elevation,  beginning  in  the  Pliocene  (see  p.  339)  and  reaching  a  maxi- 
mum in  late  Glacial  times. 
Depression,  in  post-Glacial  times. 
Reelevation,  to  present  levels. 

1.  Elevation. — The  seat  of  the  North  American  glaciers  was  in 
British  Columbia  from  three  great  sources,  namely:  from  eastern  (Labra- 
dorian),  central  (Keewatin),  and  western  (Cordilleran)  centers.  Parts  of 
this  region  were  elevated  from  3,000  feet  to  5,000  feet  (Upham,  1871) 
above  the  present  level. 

Eastern  States.  —  The  coast  of  Maine  rose  to  a  height  of  1,000  feet,  that 
of  southern  New  England  and  as  far  south  as  Long  Island,  New  York,  to  150 
feet.  Great  river  channels  and  fiords  were  formed  along  this  magnificent 
coast  line,  in  glacial  regions  only.^    See  Fig.  214,  p.  485. 

California.  —  In  early  Quaternary  times  the  California  coast  stood  from 

*  Lucas,  F.  A.,  North  American  Elephantids.  Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XV,  no.  379,  April  4, 
1902,  pp.  554-555. 

2  Cah-in,  Samuel,  Present  Phase  of  the  Pleistocene  Problem  in  Iowa.  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer., 
Vol.  XX,  Mar.  IS,  1909,  pp.  133-152. 

.   3  Dana,  Manual  of  Geology,  4th  ed.,  New  York,  1894,  pp.  946-949. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  443 


2,000  to  3,000  feet  higher  than  now;  deep  canons  were  eroded  in  the  Sierra 
Nevada  and  Coast  ranges;  this  is  the  Sierran  Epoch,  which  corresponds  to 
the  pre-Glacial  or  Ozarkian  Epoch  of  the  East.  In  the  succeeding  Glacial 
times  the  Sierras  were  covered  by  a  great  ice  sheet  which  poured  its  glaciers 
down  canons  6,000  or  7,000  feet  above  sea  level.  This  indicates  that  in 
the  Glacial  Epoch  the  chmate  of  California  was  very  similar  to  that  which 


Fig.  192.  —  North  polar  view  of  the  world  showing'  existing  outlines,  and  (dotted  areas)  eleva- 
tion to  the  200  fathom  line,  indicating  the  northern  areas  of  migration  in  Pleistocene  time. 

now  prevails  in  the  Olympic  Peninsula  of  Washington,  where  glaciers  de- 
scend to  a  point  6,000  feet  above  sea  level.  The  present  climate  of  this 
peninsula  is  cool  and  rainy,  and  the  forests  consist  almost  entirely  of  conifers. 
During  this  period  of  elevation  the  Channel  Islands  (Santa  Rosa)  off  the 
coast  of  southern  California  were  connected  with  the  main  land,  allowing 
the  mammoths  to  make  their  way  across  on  dry  land.^ 

^  Smith,  Jas.  Perrin,  Salient  Events  in  the  Geologic  History  of  California,  Science,  n.s., 
Vol.  XXX,  no.  767,  1909,  pp.  346-351. 


444 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Alaska.  —  The  coast  of  Alaska  was  elevated,  a  broad  land  bridge  with 
Asia  existed,  and  the  continental  shore  line  extended  far  north  into  the 
present  Arctic  Ocean,  but  the  northern  portions  of  the  peninsula  itself  were 
never  covered  with  ice. 

2.  Subsidence.  —  Continental  depression  was  the  grand  feature  of 
post-Glacial  times  on  both  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  coasts.  The  San 
Pedro  Stage  of  California  corresponds  with  the  Champlain  Stage  of  the  East. 
In  Champlain  times  a  long  arm  of  the  sea  probably  extended  up  the  Hudson 
River  to  Lake  Champlain,  converting  it  into  a  small  mediterranean  sea 
which  attracted  seals  and  even  white  whales  {Delphinapterus  leucas).  The 
subsidence  carried  both  the  North  Atlantic  and  North  Pacific  shores  several 
hundred  feet  below  their  present  level.  This  was  a  warm  and  moist  climatic 
period. 

3.  Reelevation.  —  This  depression  was  followed  by  a  renewed  eleva- 
tion, both  of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  coasts,  which  apparently  coincided 
in  time  with  the  Terrace  Epoch  of  the  New  England  river  valleys. 

These  elevations  and  subsidences  naturally  exerted  a  profound  influence 
(a)  on  temperature,  (6)  on  moisture  and  precipitation,  (c)  on  the  migrations 
and  extinctions  of  animal  and  plant  fife. 


Glacial  and  Interglacial  Stages 


Glacial  Stages 


Wisconsin 


Interglacial  Stages 
Fifth  interglacial 
Fourth  interglacial,  PEORIAN 


Drift  from  the  Keewatin  centers. 
Excessively  calcareous.  Drift  of  light 
yellow  color.  A  moraine-forming  ice- 
sheet  covering  Iowa.  Divided  into 
earlier  and  later  phases. 


Interval  very  short  as  compared 
with  the  Yarmouth  or  Sangamon. 
Yellow  layers  containing  terrestrial 
molluscs  {Coccinia  pupa)  in  the  Missis- 
sippi valley,  in  Illinois,  in  Iowa. 


lowan 


Drift  from  the  northwest  Keewatin 
center  barely  reaching  Iowa.  Light  yel- 
low in  color.    Large  granitic  boulders. 


Clearly  represented  in  Illinois. 
Buried  forests,  peat  beds,  and  pond 
silts.  Forests  of  tamarack  (Larix). 
Long  interval,  though  shorter  than  the 
Yarmouth. 


Third  interglacial,  SANGAMON 


minoian 


Yellow  drift  covering  small  part  of 
Iowa.  Ice  chiefly  from  the  northeast 
Labradorian  center. 


Second  interglacial;  YARMOUTH 


Kansan 


Forests  and  terrestrial  faunas  typi- 
fied at  Yarmouth.  Apparently  the 
longest  of  the  interglacial  intervals, 
"  perhaps  longer  than  all  post-IUinoian 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  445 


Kansan 

Light  blue  or  gray  drift  from  the 
northwest,  Keewatin  center,  covering 
large  areas  in  Iowa.  Till,  sand,  and 
gravel  boulders. 


Sub-Aftonian 

(=pre-Kansan,  Jerseyan,  Albertan) 

Dark  blue  or  black  drift  from  the 
northwest,  Keewatin  center,  covering 
large  areas  in  Iowa.  Typical  at  Afton 
Junction. 


time."  Modern  mammals:  Lepus  syl- 
vaticus,  Mephitis  mephitica. 

First  interglacial,  AFTONIAN 

Flats,  terraces,  Aftonian  gravels 
containing  fluviatile  and  terrestrial  mol- 
luscs. Mammals:  Elephas  columbi,  (?) 
E.  imperator,  Mastodon  americanus, 
Equus  complicatus,  E.  occidentalis,  (?) 
Cervus,  (?)  a  cavicorn  ruminant.  Lux- 
uriant forests  of  tamarack  (Larix),  peat 
beds,  etc. 


This  table  is  partly  compiled  from  the  publications  of  Chamberlin,^  and 
will  be  made  more  clear  by  a  review  of  the  latest  contributions  to  this 
subject  by  Calvin,^  who  observes  that  within  the  limits  of  Iowa  the  drift- 
ing sheets  of  five  distinct  glacial  advances  may  be  clearly  differentiated. 

(1)  The  first  is  the  pre-Kansan  or  sub-Aftonian  Glaciation,  which  we  may 
compare  with  the  first  or  Giinz  Glaciation  of  the  Swiss  Alps.  This  was 
followed  by  a  long  interglacial  interval,  known  as  the  Aftonian  Interglacial 
Stage,  in  which  the  ice  disappeared  and  great  floods  poured  along  the  drain- 
age courses;  especially  important  is  the  fact  that  the  Aftonian  gravels  of 
Iowa  have  yielded  remains  of  a  rich  mammalian  fauna  (elephants,  mastodons, 
horses,  and  perhaps  moose),  which  will  be  described  below  (p.  467);  addi- 
tional evidence  to  the  same  effect  is  found  in  the  buried  forests  which  extend 
over  practically  the  whole  state  of  Iowa,  in  fact,  the  Aftonian  more  than 
any  other  of  the  interglacial  intervals  was  a  time  of  luxuriant  forest  growth ; 
one  peat  deposit  is  three  feet  in  thickness.  (2)  The  second  or  Kansan 
Glaciation  may  be  compared  with  the  Mindel  and  Saxonian  of  Europe; 
the  deposits  record  what  appears  to  have  been  the  maximum  phase  of  the 
Pleistocene  glaciation  in  Iowa.  This  was  followed  by  the  Yarmouth  Inter- 
glacial Period,  which  seems  to  have  been  the  longest  of  all  the  interglacial 
intervals  in  Iowa ;  it  also  was  a  true  interglacial  period  and  had  its  forests  and 
its  terrestrial  faunas;  the  mammals,  which  are  sparsely  known,  appear  to 
have  been  partly  of  modern  type.  (3)  The  third  or  Illinoian  Glaciation 
affected  directly  only  a  small  part  of  the  state  of  Iowa.  This  is  followed  by 
the  third  interglacial  interval,  known  as  the  Sangamon,  which  is  indicated  by 
buried  forests,  pond  silts,  peat  beds  containing  great  quantities  of  tamarack 
{Larix)  roots,  etc.    Though  shorter  than  the  Yarmouth,  the  Sangamon 

1  Chamberlin,  T.  C,  and  Salisbury,  R.  D.,  Geology.    8vo,  New  York,  1905-1906. 

2  Calvin,  S.,  Present  Phase  of  the  Pleistocene  Problem  in  Iowa.  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer., 
Vol.  XX,  Mar.,  1909,  pp.  133-152. 


446 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


interval  seems  to  have  been  a  very  long  one.  (4)  This  interval  was  fol- 
lowed by  the  fourth  or  lowan  Glaciation,  of  lesser  extent,  the  glaciers 
stopping  a  long  way  short  of  their  predecessors,  the  Kansan  and  pre- 
Kansan,  the  main  body  failing  to  reach  the  state  of  Iowa.  This  was  fol- 
lowed by  the  short  Peorian  Interglacial  Stage.  (5)  The  fifth  or  Wisconsin 
Glaciation  (at  some  points  divided  into  two,  or  into  early  and  later  Wis- 


FiG.  193.  —  Cox  gravel  pit  near  Missouri  Valley,  Iowa.    Showing  (A)  Aftonian  gravels 
overlaid  by  (K)  Kansan  drift.    Photograph  by  Cahdn. 

consin  stages)  sent  one  ice  sheet  into  Iowa;  in  general,  while  not  the 
most  extreme,  it  is  the  most  conspicuous  in  its  results,  since  it  was  this 
last  glacial  advance  which  sent  the  'great  terminal  moraine'  across  the 
continent. 

There  is  no  escape  from  the  conclusion,  continues  the  same  author,  that 
the  Pleistocene  was  a  long  period,  compared  with  which  the  recent  period, 
or  post-Glacial  time,  would  have  to  be  represented  by  a  very  small  fraction. 
Even  the  interglacial  intervals,  the  Yarmouth  or  Sangamon,  exceed  the 
time  which  has  elapsed  since  the  last,  or  Wisconsin  Glaciation,  to  the  present 
day.  According  to  this  view,  we  may  now  be  living  in  an  interglacial 
period. 

Similar  views  have  recently  been  expressed  by  the  Canadian  geologist, 
A.  P.  Coleman.^  This  writer  observes  that  the  study  of  the  Canadian 
interglacial  deposits  supports  the  theory  that  the  Ice  Age  is  not  a  unit,  but 
that  in  the  East  it  included  several  glacial  periods  completely  separated  by 
warm  periods  free  from  glacial  ice.  These  imply  a  great  complexity  and  a 
very  long  duration  for  the  Pleistocene.    The  whole  epoch  must  have  re- 

1  Coleman,  A.  P.,  Interglacial  Periods  in  Canada.  Intern.  Geol.  Congress.    Mexico,  1906. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  447 


quired  several  hundred  thousand  years,  and  the  recent  times  in  which  we 
are  hving  may  represent  only  the  first  third  of  another  interglacial  interval. 
He  discusses  the  two  opposing  theories  in  regard  to  interglacial  conditions, 
namely  (1)  that  the  central  ice  sheet  diminished  and  expanded  according 
to  climatic  changes,  but  never  disappeared  completely  until  the  end  of  the 
Wisconsin  (or  fifth  period),  (2)  that  the  melting  was  complete  so  that  the 
successive  sheets  represent  the  work  of  separate  glaciations.  The  writer 
adopts  the  latter  view.  This  is  rendered  probable  by  the  fact  that  the  rich 
forest  flora  and  the  temperate  insect  fauna  found  in  beds  of  the  Toronto 
Formation,  corresponding  perhaps  to  the  Sangamon  or  third  interglacial 
interval,  indicate  that  at  this  interglacial  period,  at  least,  eastern  North 
America  was  entirely  free  from  glaciers  and  enjoyed  climatic  conditions 
similar  to  the  present.  This  interglacial  period  alone  appears  to  have  lasted 
from  20,000  to  100,000  years. 

Loess.  —  It  is  a  striking  fact  that  the  vast  deposits  of  loess  in  North 
America,  as  in  Europe,  belong  to  glacial  times,  although  the  loess  extends 
far  south  of  the  glacial  drift  and  to  the  west  of  the  Mississippi  River.  The 
aquatic  theory  of  origin  has  been  replaced  by  the  seolian,  according  to  which, 
while  the  river  floods  poured  down  the  materials  of  the  loess  these  were 
whipped  up  by  the  winds  and  redeposited  on  the  adjacent  uplands,  being 
held  after  deposition  by  vegetation.  Thus  the  loess  is  found  along  the 
sides  of  streams.    The  deposits  seem  to  be  related  to  periods  of  aridity. 

The  thin  glacial  drift  of  Nebraska,  rarely  more  than  a  foot  or  two  in 
thickness,  belongs  to  the  Kansan  epoch. ^  The  loess  bluff  deposit,  or  '  yel- 
low clay '  of  Nebraska,  belonging  probably  to  a  later  epoch  than  the  '  Kan- 
san, '  covers  the  eastern  part  of  the  state,  averaging  in  thickness  100  feet, 
distributed  evenly  over  hills  and  hollows  alike,  and  is  thus  of  aerial 
rather  than  aquatic  origin.  It  contains  remains  of  the  mammoth  E.  co- 
lumhi  and  numerous  species  of  terrestrial  molluscs. 

The  geologic  conditions  in  Kansas  will  be  considered  in  connection  with 
the  fauna  (p.  461). 

Climate  of  the  Great  Mountain  Basin. — The  periodic  changes  of  climate  in 
the  mountain  region  are  best  recorded  in  the  Great  Basin  (Fig.  214)  between 
the  Wasatch  and  Sierra  Nevada  ranges  which  witnessed  the  rise  and  fall 
of  Lake  Bonneville  ^  the  '  greater  Salt  Lake '  of  Pleistocene  times,  and  of 
Lake  Lahontan,^  which  lay  on  the  eastern  slopes  of  the  Sierras.  These 
fluctuations  are  of  great  importance  because  connected  at  one  point  with 
the  Equus  Zone  fauna  of  Silver  Lake  in  the  old  Lahontan  Lake  terraces. 
The  climatic  succession  is  as  follows : 

1  Barbour,  E.  H.,  Nebraska  Geological  Survey,  Vol.  I,  1903.  Report  of  the  State  Ge- 
ologist. 

2  Gilbert,  G.  K.,  Lake  Bonneville.    U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Monogr.,  Vol.  I,  1890. 
'  King,  C.,  Systematic  Geology.  U.S.  Geol.  Explor.  40th  parallel,  Clarence  King  geologist 

in  charge,  1878. 


448 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Epochs 


Climate 


Mammals 


6.  Present  time 
Holocene 


5.  Post-Lahontan 
(?)post-Glacial 


4.  Second  rise  of  Lake  La- 
hontan 

(?)  Period  of  final  gla- 
ciation. 
3.  Inter-Lahontan  Period 
Interglacial 


2.  First  rise  of  Lake  Lahon- 
tan 

(?)  First  glacial  advances 


L  Pre-Lahontan 
(?)Pre-Glacial 


Infrequent  rain,  evaporation 
rapid,  dry  climate,  lacus- 
trine bodies  small  and 
varying,  no  glaciers. 

Arid  period.  Great  dryness, 
average  temperature  higher 
than  now.  Lakes  dried 
up,  glaciers  melted. 

More  rain  than  in  period  2. 
Slight  evaporation,  low 
temperature,  large  lakes, 
and  powerful  glaciers. 

Less  moisture,  more  evapora- 
tion, higher  temperature. 
Lakes  smaller  than  at 
present.  Disappearance 
of  glaciers. 

Low  temperature,  abundant 
moisture,  little  evapora- 
tion, glaciers  on  the  moun- 
tains large,  lakes  in  the 
valleys. 

Dry  period,  little  rain,  much 
evaporation,  lakes  small, 
often  dried  up,  mountains 
without  glaciers. 


Obsidian  spearhead. 
Elephas  columbi, 
Equus,  Bison, 
{f)Eschatius. 


These  periods  of  moisture  are  attributed  to  the  southward  and  north- 
ward movements  of  the  rain-belt,  along  the  advancing  and  retreating  front 
of  the  ice-belt. 

At  its  maximum,  Lake  Bonneville  covered  an  area  of  19,000  square 
miles,  and  was  1,000  feet  deep,  whereas  its  diminutive  descendant,  the  Great 
Salt  Lake,  is  less  than  fifty  feet  deep.  Lake  Lahontan  covered  an  area  of 
nearly  9,000  square  miles.  All  lines  of  physical  or  erosive  evidence  point 
to  the  shortness  of  time  since  the  last  rise  of  Lakes  Bonneville  and  Lahontan. 

In  both  basins,  during  the  period  of  the  second  rise,  we  have  glimpses  both 
of  the  mammalian  life  (p.  468)  and  of  the  bird  life  (p.  460),  so  that  it  is  of 
the  utmost  importance  and  interest  to  correlate  this  'second  rise'  in  time 
with  one  of  the  five  epochs  of  great  glacial  advance  in  the  central  states  of 
Iowa  and  Illinois.  This  can  only  be  done  through  a  closer  comparison  of 
the  specific  forms  of  Pleistocene  mammals  than  has  been  attained  at  present. 

Migrations  of  Sangamon  flora  in  Canada.  —  Deposits  on  the  northern 
shores  of  Lake  Ontario  afford  significant  evidence  of  alternate  warmer  and! 
colder  periods  respectively  in  the  Don  and  overlying  Scarborough  forma- 
tions.   As  in  Europe,  there  are  proofs  that  certain  interglacial  epochs  were 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  449 

warmer  than  the  present  time  and  that  the  flora  followed  the  fluctuations 
of  temperature.  The  plants  of  the  Don  Formation  on  the  Don  River,  near 
Toronto,  Ontario,^  belong  to  interglacial  times  between  the  Illinoian  and 
the  lowan,  or  even  an  earlier  stage.  The  sands  and  clays  of  this  formation 
yield  a  flora  of  a  climate  practically  similar  to  that  of  Virginia,  or  appre- 
ciably warmer  than  that  of  Toronto  or  the  northern  shores  of  Lake  Ontario 
at  the  present  time;  in  fact,  it  indicates  that  a  temperature  as  high  as  that 
of  our  Middle  and  Southern  states  to-day  prevailed  as  far  north  as  Ontario. 
It  comprises  the  maple  (Acer),  the  judas  tree  {Cercis),  the  honey-locust 
{Gleditschia) ,  osage  orange  (Madura),  spruce  (Picea),  the  hop-hornbeam 
(Ostrya);  also  plane  trees,  poplars,  plums,  oaks,  lindens,  and  elms,  forests 
such  as  prevail  five  degrees  farther  northward. 

In  these  forests  of  the  Toronto  Formation,  probably  belonging  between 
the  Illinoian  and  lowan  ice  ages,  we  also  find  evidence  ^  of  the  presence  of 
mammoths,  mastodons,  bison,  deer-moose  (Cervalces),  and  the  reindeer 
(R.  caribou). 

As  proof  of  migration  we  discover  the  cold  climate  fossil  flora  of  the  over- 
lying Scarborough  Beds,  which  indicates  a  return  of  temperature  similar  to 
that  of  northern  Lake  Superior  or  of  southern  Labrador. 

The  Leda  Clays  flora  at  Green's  Creek  on  the  Ottawa  (central  Canada 
lat.  46°  N.)  is  boreal  rather  than  arctic.^  The  summer  temperature  of  this 
period  must  have  been  somewhat  cooler  than  at  present,  probably  similar 
to  that  of  the  south  coast  of  Labrador  (lat.  51°  N.)  to-day.  The  plants  from 
the  Leda  Clays  are  still  found  in  some  parts  of  Canada.  None  of  them  are 
arctic.  . 

The  most  striking  proof  of  southward  migration  of  a  northern  plant  is 
that  of  the  larch,  or  tamarack  (Larix),  discovered  in  Georgia  (lat.  34°  30'  N.), 
or  about  480  miles  south  of  its  present  limit.^ 

Migrations  of  mammals.  —  The  extreme  northward  and  southward 
movements  of  several  types  of  mammals  in  Pleistocene  times  along  the 
Atlantic  seaboard  are  also  very  significant.  Our  records  are  chiefly  con- 
fined to  the  older  observations  of  Leidy,  Weigenmann,  J.  L.  Smith,  Cooper, 
Richardson,  Emmons,  and  Wyman.  As  an  example  of  the  southerly  move- 
ment of  a  northerly  type,  the  walrus  (Odobcenus)  migrated  as  far  south  as 
the  coast  of  Georgia.  As  an  example  of  the  northerly  movement  of  a 
southern  type,  the  manatee  (Manatus)  migrated  as  far  north  as  the  coast 
of  New  Jersey.  The  caribou  (Rangifer)  ranged  south  into  Pennsylvania 
and  Ohio,  and  we  may  anticipate  the  discovery  of  more  southerly  records. 
The  moose  (Alces)  is  found  south  of  the  Ohio  and  Missouri  rivers;  the  wapiti 

^  Dawson,  W.,  and  Penhallow,  D.  P.,  On  the  Pleistocene  Flora  of  Canada.  Bull.  Geol.  Soc. 
America,  Vol.  I,  April,  1890,  pp.  311-334;  also  Penhallow,  D.  P.,  Contributions  to  the  Pleisto- 
cene Flora  of  Canada.   Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XLI,  no.  487,  June,  1907,  pp.  443-452. 

2  Coleman,  A.  P.,  Letter  to  the  author  dated  Dec.  18,  1908. 

^  Dawson,  J.  W.,  The  Geological  History  of  Plants,  1896,  pp.  218-271. 

*  Chamberlin,  T.  C,  and  Salisbury,  R.  D.,  Geology,  Vol.  III.    New  York,  1906. 
2g 


450 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


(Cervus  canadensis)  is  recorded  (F.  W.  Putnam)  as  far  south  as  Florida. 
According  to  Thompson-Seton  ^  the  range  of  the  wapiti  in  prehistoric  times 
did  not  extend  south  of  the  thirty-third  parallel  {i.e.  to  northern  Georgia, 
Alabama,  and  Texas). 

Migrations  of  birds  in  Pleistocene  times. — Allen  ^  believes  that  ''the 
Glacial  Period  left  its  impress  upon  the  majority  of  northern  birds,  through 
the  development  in  them  of  the  habit  of  migration,  for  it  is  now  generally 
conceded  that  this  habit  must  have  originated  in  consequence  of  a  great 
reduction  of  temperature  at  the  close  of  the  Tertiary.  Prior  to  this  period, 
owing  to  the  comparatively  uniform  climatic  conditions  then  obtaining 
almost  everywhere,  there  could  have  been  no  necessity  for  extended  pe- 
riodic movements.  During  the  waning  of  the  ice  period  the  areas  offering 
a  congenial  summer  home  to  a  great  multitude  of  birds  became  greatly 
extended,  from  which,  however,  they  were  driven  by  semi-arctic  winters  to 
seek  favorable  winter  haunts  farther  southward.  In  this  way  it  is  believed 
the  habit  of  migration  has  become  established  as  an  irresistible  hereditary 
impulse  as  mandatory  as  the  'instinct'  of  reproduction.'* 

The  same  author  speaks  elsewhere  (op.  cit.,  p.  101)  of  the  ''over-crowded 
tropics."  "On  account  of  the  flight  of  all  animal  hfe  before  the  successive 
advances  of  the  great  ice  sheet  there  was  a  crowding  together  of  exiles 
from  the  north  into  the  more  favored  regions  to  the  southward,  leading  to 
an  intense  struggle  for  existence  and  a  weeding  out  on  a  grand  scale  of  forms 
least  fitted  for  the  contest.  This  period  must  have  been  one  of  great 
activity  in  the  evolution  of  new  types.  Opportunity  was  given  for  the 
gradual  adaptation  of  many  forms  to  lower  temperatures  than  those  to 
which  they  had  been  accustomed,  and  to  an  enforced  change  of  food.  The 
recession  of  the  ice  field  at  the  close  of  the  Glacial  Epoch  was  accompanied 
by  the  gradual  extension  northward  of  habitable  land.  A  broader  area 
became  available  in  summer  than  in  winter,  and  an  annual  migration  for  a 
great  or  less  distance  on  the  part  of  pioneer  life  became  a  necessity." 

Insect  life.  —  To  throw  some  light  on  the  effect  of  the  Glacial  Period 
on  the  insect  life  of  North  America,  Scudder  ^  instituted  a  careful  comparison 
of  the  number  of  endemic  species  in  the  northern  part  of  the  eastern  states 
(i.e.  the  area  once  covered  by  the  ice  sheet)  and  of  the  Pacific  coast  (where 
it  is  claimed  no  ice  sheet  covered  the  face  of  the  country),  and  also  to  deter- 
mine how  many  species  were  common  to  north  and  south,  in  the  East  and 
in  the  West.  If  there  were  found  no  signs  of  poverty  in  the  fauna  of  the 
regions  of  former  glaciation,  we  may  say  that  the  East  has  fully  recovered 
from  the  shock  of  the  Glacial  Period.    The  beetles  (Coleoptera)  were  chosen 

'  Thompson-Seton,  E.,  The  Wapiti  and  his  Antlers.  Scribner's  Magazine,  Vol.  XXXIX, 
no.  1,  Jan.,  1906. 

-  Allen,  J.  A.,  The  Geographical  Origin  and  Distribution  of  North  American  Birds, 
Con.sidered  in  Relation  to  Faimal  Areas  of  North  America.   The  Auk,  Vol.  X,  no.  2,  April,  1893. 

3  Scudder,  S.  H.,  The  Effect  of  Glaciation  and  of  the  Glacial  Period  on  the  Present  Fauna 
of  North  America.    Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  XL VIII,  Sept.,  1894,  pp.  179-187. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  451 


as  subjects  of  illustration,  since  they  are  at  least  as  sensitive  tests  of  the 
economic  or  faunal  changes  as  any  other  group  of  animals.^  Scudder's 
results  show  'Hhat  on  the  whole  the  fauna  of  the  East  has  nearly  or  quite 
recovered  from  its  enforced  removal  from  the  northern  states  and  Canada 
at  the  time  of  the  Glacial  Period,  and  that  whatever  influence  the  past 
existence  of  a  Glacial  Period  may  now  exert  upon  the  distribution  of  animal 
life  in  North  America  should  be  sought  only  in  minor  features,  such  as  the 
remnants  of  boreal  faunas  lingering  in  favorable  spots  amid  temperate  sur- 
roundings and  the  similar  features  introduced  by  the  latitudinal  trend  of  our 
great  mountain  chains." 


Fig.  194.  —  Chief  Pleistocene  fossil  mammal  localities  of  North  America.  CANADA.  — 
1  Don  Valley,  near  Toronto,  2  Iroquois  Beach,  Ontario.  UNITED  STATES.  — 3  Franks- 
town  Cave  (Blair  County),  4  Port  Kennedy  Cave  near  the  Schuylkill  River,  Pa.  6  Erie  Clays, 
on  Lake  Erie  near  Cleveland,  surface  muck  near  6  Ashley,  Ohio.  Surface  muck  and  gravel 
near  7  Jonesboro,  Merion,  and  Fairmouni,  Indiana.  8  Big  Bone  Lick  (Boone  County),  Ky. 
9  Wythe  County,  Va.  10  Big  Bone  Cabin  (Van  Buren  County),  Tenn.  11  Ashley  River,  near 
Charleston,  S.  C.  12  Skidaway  Island,  Ga.  13  Peace  Creek  (Manatee  County),  Fla. 
14  Natchez,  Miss.  15  Hardin  County,  16  Rock  Creek  (Parker  County),  Tex.  17  Conard  Fis- 
sure, near  Harrison,  Ark.  Sulphur  spring  near  18  Afton,  Ind.  Ter.  19  McPherson  County, 
20  Twelve  Mile  Creek,  Sternberg's  Elephant  Bed  (Logan  County),  21  Solomon  Valley,  Kan. 
Caves  in  zinc  mines  near  22  Carthage,  Mo.  Gravels  near  23  Afton,  la.  24  Hay  Springs,  Neb. 
25  Glenwood  Springs,  Col.  26  Anita  Mine,  near  the  Grand  Canon,  27  Ream's  Canon,  near 
Holbrook,  Ariz.  Asphaltum  of  28  Rancho  La  Brea,  near  Los  Angeles,  29  Mercer's  Cave, 
(Calaveras  County),  30  Potter  Creek  Cave  and  Samwel  Cave  (Shasta  County),  Cal.  31  Fossil 
Lake,  near  Silver  Lake,  Oreg.  32  Washtucna  Lake  (Franklin  County),  Wash.  Alluvial  sand, 
etc.  of  33  San  Pablo  Bay,  Cal. 

^  Incidental  reference  may  be  made  at  this  point  to  the  fact  that  in  the  Scarborough 
Beds  of  the  Toronto  interglacial  deposits,  Ontario,  among  seventy-eight  species  of  animals 
seventy-two  are  beetles. 


452 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


1.    Early  and  Mid-Pleistocene  Mammals  of  the  Plains  Regions. 
The  First  or  Equus  Zone  Fauna 

This  is  chiefly  a  plains,  desert,  and  river-border  fauna,  including  some 
very  large  mammals,  but  less  varied  in  type  than  that  of  the  Megalonyx 
Zone.  It  begins  in  early  and  extends  into  mid-  and  perhaps  late  Pleistocene 
times. 

The  life  of  the  plains  and  mountain  regions,  or  of  what  may  be  called 
the  Equus-Camelus-Mylodon  Zone,  is  known  in  numerous  and  widely  scat- 
tered deposits  in  the  Great  Plains,  in  the  mountain  region,  and  along  the 


Fig.  195.  —  The  Upper  Pliocene  or  Lower  Pleistocene  imperial  mammoth  (Elephas  imperator). 
Model  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


coast  of  Florida.  Some  of  these  local  river  or  wind-drift  deposits  have 
received  distinct  formation  names,  such  as  the  'Sheridan'  of  Scott,  the 
'Rock  Creek'  of  Gidley. 

As  we  should  expect  in  deposits  bordering  on  great  grassy  plains  and 
uplands,  one  of  the  most  abundant  mammals  is  the  horse;  consequently 
these  formations  have  come  to  be  known  collectively  as  'Equus  Beds' 
(Marsh)  or  the  '  Equus  Zone.'  It  is  not  shown  that  they  are  all  of  the  same 
age;  on  the  contrary,  they  probably  represent  a  very  long  period  of  time. 
Some  may  have  been  deposited  near  the  beginning  of  the  Pleistocene; 
others  may  be  mid-Pleistocene.  We  may,  therefore,  distinguish  the  'early' 
and  the  'late'  Equus  Zone;  distinct  zonal  names  will  in  time  be  applied. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  453 


Thus  it  must  be  stated  at  once  that  portions  of  the  Equus  Zone  fauna  of 
the  Great  Plains  region  are  probably  synchronous  with  the  Megalonyx  Zone 
fauna  of  the  forest  and  mountain  region. 

Some  of  the  chief  localities  where  the  early  and  mid-Pleistocene  mammals 
of  these  two  epochs  have  been  found  together  in  large  numbers  are  the 
following,  placed  in  ascending  order: 

6.  Kansas  Pleistocene,  several  localities,  early  and  late  (Fig. 
194,  19,  20,  21). 

5.  Lake  Lahontan  (Nevada),  Lake  Bonneville  (Utah)  'upper 
terraces'  (Fig.  214,  L,  B). 

4.  Silver  Lake,  Lake  County,  Oregon,  a  more  recent  phase  con- 
taining plains  and  river,  or  fluviatile  types  (Fig.  194,  31). 

3.  Rock  Creek,  Tule  Canon,  Llano  Estacado,  Texas,  a  fluviatile 
formation  containing  Equus  scotti  (Fig.  194,  16). 

2.  Hay  Springs,  western  Nebraska,  chiefly  an  open  plains  and 
river  border  fauna  (Fig.  194,  24). 

1.  Peace  Creek,  southern  Florida  (see  p.  367),  a  forest  and  plains 
fauna  of  late  Pliocene  or  early  Pleistocene  times,  partly  inter- 
mingled with  a  more  recent  fauna  (Fig.  194,  13). 

Relative  age  of  the  Equus  and  Megalonyx  faunas.  —  The  late  Pleistocene 
age  of  the  Silver  Lake  fauna  of  the  Equus  Zone  is  supported  by  the  geologic 
and  physiographic  studies  of  Gilbert  in  the  region  of  the  great  Pleistocene 
lakes  of  Bonneville  and  Lahontan.  Cope  ^  believed  (1895)  that  the  fauna 
of  the  Equus  Zone,  covering  areas  in  Oregon,  Nevada,  California,  Nebraska, 
the  Staked  Plains,  in  southern  Texas,  Chihuahua,  and  the  valley  of  Mexico, 
was  throughout  contemporary  with  the  Megalonyx  fauna  of  the  East,  dif- 
fering from  it  only  in  details.  He  regarded  the  Megalonyx  fauna  as  pre- 
Champlain. 

This  conclusion  was  accepted  by  Williston  in  1897,^  who  was,  moreover, 
disposed  to  relegate  the  Equus  fauna  to  very  late  Pleistocene  times.  "  Every 
fact  furnished  from  Kansas  seems  to  substantiate  Cope's  conclusions  that 
the  Megalonyx  fauna  of  the  East  and  the  Equus  fauna  of  the  West  were 
contemporaneous,  and  that  both  occurred  during  the  period  of  depression, 
that  is,  during  late  Pleistocene  time."  It  is  certain  that  during  the  Cham- 
plain  period  there  was  a  depression  in  Kansas,  though  probably  not  a  very 
profound  one.  The  Champlain  is  a  period  of  fluviatile  conditions  and 
ameliorated  climate,  of  luxuriant  forest  growth,  and  more  or  less  submer- 
gence.   From  the  presence  everjrwhere,  the  same  author  continues,  in  the 

^  Cope,  E.  D.,  The  Antiquity  of  Man  in  North  America.  Amer.' Natural.,  Vol.  XXIX, 
no.  342,  June,  1895,  pp.  593-599. 

2  Williston,  S.  W.,  The  Pleistocene  of  Kansas.  Univ.  Geol.  Surv.  Kansas,  Vol.  II,  1897, 
pp.  299-308. 


454 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Quaternary  deposits  of  Kansas  of  Elephas  [columhi]  primigenius  remains, 
the  characteristic  species  of  the  Equus  Zone,  the  conclusion  is  that  the 
prevaiHng  superficial  deposits  belong  to  this  formation.  The  author  con- 
cludes by  regarding  the  Pleistocene  mammals  of  Kansas  as  probably  con- 
temporaneous. 

There  are  many  reasons,  however,  why  we  should  consider  certain  de- 
posits of  the  Equus  fauna  as  earlier  than  the  Megalonyx  fauna.  When  we 
compare  the  mammals  found  at  Hay  Springs,  northwestern  Nebraska, 
Rock  Creek,  Texas,  Silver  Lake,  Oregon,  and  Peace  Creek,  Florida,  we  find 
many  points  of  similarity,  such  as  the  association  of  many  mammals  which  I 
do  not  appear  together  in  later  formations,  and  the  absence  of  others  which  1 
have  apparently  not  yet  reached  America.  j 

The  solution  undoubtedly  is  that  the  so-called  'Equus  Zone'  faunas  in  i 
different  localities  are  not  synchronous,  but  represent  an  enormously  long 
period  of  time,  some  of  early  and  some  of  mid-Pleistocene  age,  some  pre- 
ceding and  some  contemporaneous  with  the  '  Megalonyx  Zone '  faunas. 
The  'Equus  Zone'  is  accordingly  divided  here  into  (1)  early  phases,  p. 
454,  and  (2)  late  phases,  p.  461. 

(1.)    Early  Phases  of  the  Equus  Zone  ' 

These  early  phases  are  apparently  distinguished  by  the  presence  of  true  ■ 

camels  and  by  the  absence  of  bison  (Bison).    Contradictory  to  this  state-  ; 

ment  is  the  fact  that  Bison  is  recorded  at  Peace  Creek.  \ 

The  western  and  southwestern  plains  life  of  the  early  phase  may  be  \ 

summarized  as  follows:  , 

I 

Horses,  very  abundant  and  characteristic.  |i 
True  camels,  as  well  as  llamas,  abundant  in  the  west  and  southeast.  |j 
Columbian  mammoths,  abundant.  "': 
Imperial  mammoths,  not  certainly  determined  in  the  north,  probably  l.i 

present  in  the  south.  | 
The  earliest  prong-horn  antelopes  (Antilocapra) ,  abundant  on  the 

Great  Plains. 
The  last  of  the  merycodonts  (Capromeryx). 
Peccaries  of  the  genus  Platygonus,  not  Dicotyles. 

Mylodont  sloths  {Paramylodon),  abundant  in  the  west  and  south-  j 
east. 

GljT^todonts,  or  armored  edentates,  in  the  south. 

The  giant  beaver,  Castoro'ides,  making  its  first  appearance. 

The  badger,  Taxidea,  first  appearing. 

Machaerodonts,  or  saber-tooths,  very  numerous. 

No  other  large  felines. 

Dinocyons,  or  amphicyonine  dogs,  doubtfully  present. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  455 


Mammals  absent  or  undiscovered  in  this  Fauna: 

Mastodon,  probably  abundant  in  the  forests  of  the  east. 
Giant  sloths  (Megatherium,  Megalonyx),  not  recorded. 
Bison,  or  buffalo,  recorded  only  at  Peace  Creek,  Florida. 
Bear,  not  recorded  at  any  point. 
Mountain  sheep,  not  recorded,  a  mountain  type. 
Mountain  goat,  not  recorded,  a  mountain  type. 

Of  these  animals,  the  most  characteristic  are  the  Columbian  mammoths, 
camels,  horses,  mylodonts,  peccaries  of  the  genus  Platygonus,  the  giant 
beavers  (Castor aides).    The  imperial  mammoth  (E.  imperator)  is  not  found 


Fig.  196.  —  Skeleton  of  the  Columbian  mammoth  Elephas  columbi,  from  the  Pleistocene  of 
Indiana.    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.    After  Osborn. 


at  Hay  Springs,  Silver  Lake,  Rock  Creek,  but  is  doubtfully  reported  at 
Afton,  Indian  Territory,,  in  association  with  the  Columbian  mammoth. 
Its  chief  distribution  is  in  the  southwest. 

The  tapir  is  not  found  in  these  western  deposits,  because  they  chiefly 
include  the  plains  fauna,  but  it  was  undoubtedly  widely  distributed  in 
forested  regions.    Matthew  ^  has  pointed  out  the  prevalence  of  plains- 

^  Matthew,  W.  D.,  List  of  the  Pleistocene  Fauna  from  Hay  Springs,  Nebraska.  Bull. 
Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist,  Vol.  XVI,  1902,  pp.  317-322. 


456 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


living  types  at  Hay  Springs,  at  Silver  Lake,  and  in  the  Oregon 
desert,  while  the  more  recent  fauna  of  Washtucna  Lake,  Washington, 

shows  a  large  proportion 
of  forest  and  mountain 
types  and  no  aquatic  mam- 
mals. 

Hay  Springs,  Nebraska. 
—  The  Hay  Springs  (Fig. 
194,  24)  fauna,  as  explored 
by  the  American  Museum 
expeditions  of  1893  and 
1897,  is  a  very  rich  one 
and  may  be  taken  as  typical 
of  the  early  phase  of  the 
Equus  Zone.  It  includes 
the  llama-like  cameloids 
(Camelops)  and  a  true  camel 
(C.  americanus) .  The  true 
prong-horn  antelopes  {An- 
tilocapra)  make  their  first 
appearance  here,  and  with 
them  are  associated  the 
smaller  Capromeryx  (C. 
furdfer),  an  animal  inter- 
mediate between  the  mery- 
codonts  (see  pp.  294-5, 
357)  and  the  true  American 
prong-horns.  The  most 
abundant  species  of  horse 
is  E.  complicatus,  while 
E.  fraternus,  sl  smaller  ani- 
mal, is  also  found.  The 
sloth  which  appears  here 
is  distinct  from  the  mid- 
Pleistocene  Mylodon  harlani 
of  the  East,  and  according 
to  the  determination  of 
Brown  belongs  to  a  dis- 
tinct genus,  Paramylodon} 


1  Matthew,  W.  D.,  List  of  the 
Pleistocene  Fauna  from  Hay 
Springs,  Nebraska.  Bull  Amer. 
Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XVI,  1902, 
pp.  317-322. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  457 


Paramylodon  is  described  ^  as  in  some  features  more,  in  others  less 
specialized  than  Mylodon  and  retaining  features  of  the  older,  more  prim- 
itive sloths.  It  differs  from  Mylodon  in  having  but  four  upper  teeth,  the 
hindermost  of  which  is  tri-lobed  instead  of  bi-lobed.  The  limbs  are  more 
slender  and  the  ankles  more  flexible  than  in  Mylodon.  A  second  specimen 
has  recently  been  found  ^  near  Walsenburg,  Colorado,  which  contains  five 
upper  teeth,  and  while  exhibiting  the  elongate  skull  and  inflated  muzzle  of 
the  type  of  Paramylodon,  it  indicates  that  the  generic  distinction  between 
these  two  forms  may  be  insecurely  founded.    A  fine  specimen  of  a  Mylodon, 


Fig.  198.  —  Quarry  in  which  six  skeletons  of  the  Lower  Pleistocene  horse  Equus  scotti  were 
found.  Head  of  Rock  Creek,  Texas.  Lower  Pleistocene  or  Equus  Zone.  Photograph  by 
American  Museum,  1900. 


not  distinguishable  from  the  Walsenburg  specimen,  comprising  most  of  the 
skeleton,  was  found  in  1880  by  Mr.  S.  Garman  of  a  Harvard  University 
expedition  at  Hay  Springs.  A  description  of  this  specimen,  now  preserved 
in  the  Museum  of  Comparative  Zoology,  has  not  been  published. 

Prairie  wolves  (C  latrans)  have  been  found,  but  few  if  any  true  felids. 
The  peccaries  (Platygonus)  are  much  more  swift-footed  and  advanced  in 
dentition  than  the  modern  peccary,  and  may  be  supposed  to  have  lived 
more  in  the  open.  The  prairie  dogs  (Cynomys),  gophers  (Thomomys),  and 
field  mice  (Microtus)  are  even  now  characteristic  of  the  plains  of  this  same 
Nebraska  region,  while  muskrats  (Fiber  zihethicus)  occurred  then  as  now 
along  the  streams;  Remains  of  a  small  species  of  Castoro'ides  are  occasional. 
This  fauna  is,  on  the  whole,  similar  to  that  of  Silver  Lake,  which  differs 

^  Brown,  Barnum,  A  New  Genus  of  Ground  Sloth  from  the  Pleistocene  of  Nebraska. 
Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX,  Art.  xxii,  Oct.  28,  1903,  pp.  569-583. 

^  Cockerell,  T.  D.  A.,  A  Fossil  Ground-Sloth  in  Colorado.  Univ.  Col.  Studies,  Vol.  VI,  no. 
4,  Boulder,  Col.,  June,  1909,  pp.  309-312. 


458  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

from  it  in  the  presence  of  the  beaver  {Castor)  and  the  otter  {Lutra),  which 
are  not  found  at  Hay  Springs. 

Rock  Creek,  Texas.  —  (Fig.  194,  16.)  These  beds  are  extensively  ex- 
posed in  the  Staked  Plains  of  Texas  (Fig.  166)  along  the  south  side  of 
Tule  Canon.  As  described  above  (p.  362),  they  represent  a  Lower  Pleis- 
tocene river  channel  cutting  its  way  into  an  older  Miocene  horizon.  They 
are  especially  famous  for  the  magnificent  series  of  six  skeletons  of  horses 
discovered  by  Gidley  ^  in  1900  and  referred  to  Equus  scotti.  (See  Figs.  197 
and  198.)    In  these  beds  are  also  found  a  peccary  (Platygonus)  and  the 


Fig.  199.  —  The  Lower  Pleistocene  true  horse  of  Texas,  Equus  scotti.    After  original  by 
Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


imperial  mammoth  (E.  imperator).  Cope  ^  had  previously  reported  from 
Rock  Creek  a  sloth  {Mylodon  sodalis),  several  species  of  horses,  and  two 
cameloids  {Holomeniscus  sulcatus,  H.  macrocephalus) ,  as  well  as  two  large 
land  tortoises. 

Silver  Lake  of  the  Oregon  Desert.  —  (Fig.  194,  31.)  One  hundred  and 
fifty  miles  northwest  of  the  old  Lahontan  shore  lines  in  the  heart  of  the 
Oregon  desert  of  the  Great  Basin,  and  twenty  miles  northeast  of  Silver 
Lake  there  is  a  slight  depression  in  the  desert  perhaps  twenty  acres  in  extent 
marked  Christmas  Lake  on  the  maps,  to  which  Cope  gave  the  name  "Fos- 
sil Lake."    This  'Silver,'  'Christmas,'  or  'Fossil'  lake  region  was  succes- 

>  Gidley,  J.  W.,  A  New  Species  of  Pleistocene  Horse  from  the  Staked  Plains  of  Texas. 
Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIII,  no.  13,  pp.  114-116;  also  Tooth  Characters  and 
Revision  of  the  North  American  Species  of  the  Genus  Equus.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist., 
Vol.  XIV,  Art.  ix,  1901,  pp.  1.34-1.37. 

2  Cope,  E.  D.,  Report  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Texas,  1892,  1893,  p.  87. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  459 


sively  explored  by  Condon,  Cope,  Sternberg  (who  made  the  chief  collec- 
tions), and  Russel  (1882).  It  now  presents  a  perfectly  dry  surface  con- 
sisting of  a  light-colored  mixture  of  sand  and  clay  or  dried  mud  of 
volcanic  origin;  all  the  fossils  he  in  this  last  friable  deposit  of  volcanic 
dust.  Though  actually  twenty  miles  distant  from  Silver  Lake,  the  rich 
fauna  of  mammals  and  birds  found  has  been  described  by  Cope^  and 
Shufeldt,  and  referred  to  by  Gilbert,  as  the  fauna  of  the  Silver  Lake  Equus 
beds.  It  is  obvious  that  we  have  no  means  of  correlating  it  in  time  with 
the  lacustral  move- 
ments either  of  Lake 
Bonneville  or  of  Lake 
Lahontan,  and  that 
at  present  the  correla- 
tion of  this  fauna  with 
either  of  the  phases 
of  the  Glacial  Epoch 
will  be  impossible  un- 
less shore  lines  of  the 
Silver  or  Christmas 
Lake  region  admit  of 
investigation  similar 
to  that  which  has 
been  so  successful  in 
the  great  ancient  lakes 
to  the  south. 

The  Silver  Lake  mammal  fauna  appears  to  be  slightly  younger  or  more 
recent  than  that  of  the  Hay  Springs  Equus  beds  above  described;  both 
the  camels  and  horses  are  somewhat  more  progressive  in  type.  It  is  note- 
worthy that  the  bison  does  not  occur  in  this  rich  fauna. 

We  owe  to  Cope  ^  (1889)  and  Shufeldt  ^  (1892)  pecuHarly  pictur- 
esque descriptions  of  this  region  as  it  may  have  been  in  Pleistocene 
times. 

Proof  that  the  country  was  partly  fluviatile  and  partly  wooded  is 
afforded  by  the  presence  of  the  muskrat  (Fiber),  the  otter  (Lutra),  the 
beaver  (Castor  fiber),  and  the  giant  beaver  (Castoro'ides).  The  supposed 
great  mylodont  sloth  (Mylodon  sodalis),  an  animal  as  large  as  the  existing 
grizzly  bear,  also  affords  evidence  of  forested  conditions  and  probably  of 
abundant  moisture ;  it  is  possible  that  this  animal  may  prove  to  be  a  Mega- 
lonyx.  The  mammoth  (f  E.  columbi)  frequented  the  forests  of  the  river 
or  lake  borders.    There  were  several  varieties  of  horses,  including  especially 

^  Cope,  E.  D.,  The  Silver  Lake  of  Oregon  and  its  Region.  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XXIII, 
1889,  pp.  970-982. 

2  Shufeldt,  R.  W.,  A  Study  of  the  Fossil  Avifauna  of  the  Equus  beds  of  the  Oregon  desert. 
Jour.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phila.,  Vol.  IX,  1892,  pp.  389-425. 


Fig.  200.  —  The  famous  Hay  Springs  Quarry  of  western 
Nebraska  in  the  Equus  Zone,  Lower  Pleistocene.  Photograph 
by  American  Museum  of  Natural  History  expedition  of  1897. 


460 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  types  E.  pacificus  and  E.  occidentalis.  The  most  numerous  forms  next 
to  the  horses  were  the  cameloids,  animals  identical  neither  with  the  existing 
camel  nor  llama,  referred  by  Cope  to  the  genera  Eschatius  and  Camelops,  and 
distinguished  from  recent  llamas  {Auchenia)  by  the  greater  reduction  of  the 
premolar  teeth,  a  feature  which  is  especially  marked  in  the  genus  Eschatius, 
This  animal  is  also  found  in  the  valley  of  Mexico.  Among  the  burrowing 
forms  were  the  pocket  gophers  {Thomomys  huLhivorus,  T.  clusius).  Geomys 
also  occurs.  Hares  {Lepus  campestris)  are  very  abundant.  The  peccaries 
are  represented  by  two  species  of  Platygonus.  There  are  also  prong-horn 
antelopes  (Antilocapra) .  The  only  carnivore  recorded  by  Cope  is  the 
prairie  wolf,  or  coyote  (C.  latrans),  but  Matthew  has  added  the  gray  wolf 
(C  cf.  occidentalis)  ^  an  animal  of  the  size  of  the  timber  wolf.  The  record 
of  a  bear  (Ursus)  by  Cope  is  not  confirmed.  The  arrowheads  and  flints 
found  on  the  surface  of  these  deposits  are  probably  of  recent  age. 

Silver  Lake  avifauna  and  climate.  —  It  is  a  very  fortunate  circumstance 
that  the  contemporaneous  bird  life  of  Silver  Lake  is  fully  known  through 
the  rich  deposits  investigated  by  Shufeldt^  (1892).  The  bird  life  was  very 
abundant  and  not  very  dissimilar  from  what  we  might  observe  at  any  of 
the  alkaline  lakes  of  the  West,  resorted  to  at  the  present  day  by  the  wild 
fowl  during  their  migrations.  Great  flocks  of  swans  (Cygnus  paloregonus) , 
geese  (Anser  condoni),  and  ducks  were  there;  a  cormorant  (Phalacrocorax) 
was  among  the  rarities;  among  the  species  of  grebe  is  one  {Podiceps  occi- 
dentalis) still  frequenting  this  region.  There  were  also  coots  (Fulica  minor) 
and  herons  (Ardea  paloccidentalis) .  Other  forms  of  birds  include  two 
species  of  grouse,  crows,  and  eagles.  The  strangest  figure  upon  the  scene 
among  the  birds  was  a  true  flamingo  (Phoenicopterus  copei).  The  north- 
ernmost distribution  of  the  flamingoes  at  present  is  southern  Florida  and 
the  Bahama  Islands  (lat.  27°  N.).  Shufeldt  concludes  that  the  climate 
might  well  be  compared  with  that  of  Florida  or  the  lower  part  of  Louisiana, 
that  the  vegetation  was  fully  as  luxuriant  as  it  now  is  in  those  parts,  and 
that  the  palms  were  abundantly  represented.  This  conclusion  as  to  a 
Floridian  climate  and  the  existence  of  palms  is,  however,  very  questionable. 
Brown  ^  observes  that  the  South  American  flamingoes  {Phoenicopterus  chilen- 
sis)  migrate  as  far  south  as  the  lakes  in  central  eastern  Tierra  del  Fuego, 
lat.  53°  S.,  where  they  are  said  to  breed,  and  certainly  spend  a  part  of 
the  season.  This  region  corresponds  in  temperature  to  the  climate  of 
central  Alberta,  Canada,  400  miles  north  of  Silver  Lake.  Thus  it  appears 
that  the  presence  of  Phoenicopterus  copei  at  Silver  Lake  has  little  weight  in 
the  determination  of  climate.  It  is  more  probable  that  the  northern  lakes 
of  that  period  contained  molluscs  on  which  the  flamingoes  fed. 

1  Matthew,  W.  D.,  List  of  the  Pleistocene  Fauna  from  Hay  Springs.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus. 
Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XVI,  Sept.  25,  1902,  pp.  317-322. 

^  Shufeldt,  R.  W.,  A  Study  of  the  Fossil  Avifauna  of  the  Equusbeds  of  the  Oregon  Desert. 
Jour.  Acad.  Xat.  Sci.  Phila.,  Vol.  IX,  1892,  pp.  389-425. 

'  Mr.  Barnum  Brown  in  a  note  to  the  author. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  461 


Gilbert's  ^  review  (pp.  303-305)  of  the  total  fauna  of  the  Bonneville  and 
Lahontan  basins  led  him  to  the  conclusion  that  the  life  throws  little  light 
on  the  question  of  climate;  in  other  words,  it  is  inconclusive.  He  pointed 
out  that  the  testimony  of  the  freshwater  molluscs,  which  are  similar  in  the 
Bonneville,  Lahontan,  and  Christmas  Lake  basins,  so  far  as  it  goes,  points 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  lacustral  epochs  were  epochs  of  relative  cold, 
and  favors  the  correlation  of  the  high-water  periods  with  the  periods  of 
largest  glaciers. 

(^.)  Late  Phases  of  the  Equus  Zone 

These  late  phases  of  the  Equus  Zone  are  apparently  distinguished  by  the 
absence  of  true  camels  and  the  presence  of  bison.  At  several  points  there 
is  evidence  of  the  existence  of  man  in  the  presence  of  palaeolithic  spear  or 
arrowheads. 

The  fauna  is  imperfectly  known,  and  the  above  distinction  between 
*  early '  and  '  late '  is  rather  arbitrary  at  present. 

Early  and  late  Pleistocene  life  of  Kansas.  —  The  geologic  age  of  the 
widely  scattered  Pleistocene  deposits  of  Kansas  still  awaits  determination 
through  the  careful  examination  and  comparison  of  the  species.  Williston, 
Haworth,  Hay,  and  Darton  agree  in  a  broad  way  on  the  following  geologic 
succession  : 

Plains  marl  =  loess  =  Pleistocene. 

Mortar  beds  =  Ogallala  P'ormation  =  Pliocene  +  Upper  Miocene. 

The  uppermost  Miocene  and  Pliocene  is  dominantly  sandy,  gravelly, 
and  clayey,  the  consolidation  into  the  so-called  'mortar  beds'  being  due 
to  the  penetration  of  water  and  presenting  no  test  of  geologic  age.  The 
plains  loess,  or  'marl'  (Hay)  is  a  very  irregular  mantle;  in  places  it  is  still 
in  process  of  formation  as  an  seolian  accumulation  over  sodded  surfaces. 
Near  the  base  Matthew  has  collected  well-petrified  bones  of  Equus;  near 
the  top  one  finds  unfossilized  bones  of  the  recent  bison.  Some  of  the 
principal  localities  are  as  follows : 

Twelve-mile  Creek  near  Russell  Springs,  Logan  County,  Kansas 
(Fig.  194,  20). 

'Sternberg's  Elephant  Bed,'  Logan  County,  Kansas  (Fig.  194,  20). 
GooDLAND,  Sherman  County,  Kansas  (Fig.  194,  20,  approximately). 
Harper  Township,  McPherson  County,  Kansas  (Fig.  194,  19). 

McPherson  County,  Kansas.^ — The  watershed  between  the  Kansas  and 
Arkansas  river  systems  crosses  at  right  angles  a  shallow  trough  about  ten 
miles  wide  in  McPherson  County.  This  trough  contains  sediments  con- 
sisting of : 

I       '  Gilbert,  G.  K.,  Lake  Bonneville.    Monogr.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Vol.  I.    Washington,  1890. 

2  Lindahl,  J.,  Description  of  a  Skull  of  Megalonyx  leidyi,  n.  sp.  Trans.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc, 
Q.S.,  Vol.  XVII,  Jan.  2,  1891,  pp.  1-10. 


462 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


4.  Fine  dull-orange  colored  loam,  upward  of  seventy-five  feet  in  thickness, 

occasionally  resembling  loess. 
3.  Stratum  of  volcanic  dust  several  feet  in  thickness,  also  seen  at  other 

localities,  extending  twelve  miles  across  the  trough. 
2.  Stratum  of  clay,  not  of  great  horizontal  extent. 

1.  Gravel  and  sand  containing  boulders,  clay,  fragments  of  Cretaceous 
shales.   Remains  of  M egalonyx,  Equus. 

In  the  bottom  of  these  fluviatile  gravels  a  skull  of  Megalonyx  leidyi  was 
discovered  by  Lindahl,  as  well  as  remains  of  Equus.    If  Megalonyx  was  a 


Fig.  201.  —  Skeleton  of  the  Lower  Pleistocene  peccary  Platygonus  leptorhinus.     In  the 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


forest-dweller,  this  discovery  affords  some  evidence  that  it  followed  the 
river-border  forest  lines  into  Kansas  in  early  Pleistocene  times,  also  that  it 
was  capable  of  withstanding  considerable  cold.  The  study  of  the  region 
and  the  deposits  shows  that  the  making  of  the  gravel  and  sand  was  coin- 
cident with  a  period  of  increasing  humidity ;  also  that  ice-flooding  may  have 
been  present  as  an  effective  transporting  agency. 

Goodland,  Sherman  County ,  Kansas.  —  In  1894  a  most  interesting  discov- 
ery was  recorded  by  Williston  at  Goodland,  north  of  Fort  Wallace,  in  the 
extreme  western  part  of  the  state. ^    Nine  specimens  of  the  large  peccary 

1  Williston,  S.  W.,  Restoration  of  Platygonus.  Kansas  Univ.  Quart.,  Vol.  Ill,  1894,  pp.. 
23-39. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  463 

Platygonus  (compressus)  leptorhinus  were  found  lying  close  together  as  though 
a  herd  of  the  animals  had  been  overcome  by  some  sudden  catastrophe. 
They  lay  about  nine  feet  below  the  surface,  with  heads  directed  toward 
the  southwest,  the  heads  of  the  hinder  lying  upon  the  posterior  parts  of  the 
more  anterior  ones,  and  the  bones  all  or  nearly  all  in  the  position  they  had 
been  at  the  time  of  the  animals'  death.  This  crowding  together  would  in- 
dicate that  the  animals  were  overtaken  either  by  a  dust  storm,  a  snowstorm, 
or  a  bhzzard,  just  as  herds  of  sheep  are  found  at  the  present  time. 

'Sternberg's  elephant  bed/  also  in  Logan  County,  Kansas,  contains 
numerous  remains  of  the  Columbian  mammoth  {E.  columbi),  a  large  species 


Fig.  202.  —  The  Lower  Pleistocene  peccaries  of  North  America  of  the  genus  Platygonus. 
After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


Twelve-mile  Creek,  Kansas  (Fig.  194,  20).  —  On  this  tributary  of  the 
t  Smoky  Hill  River  has  been  discovered  the  richest  deposit  of  the  Pleistocene 
ai  of  Kansas.  In  the  blue-gray  layers  directly  underlying  the  recent  plains 
f  layers  are  recorded  remains  of  several  species  of  mammals,  including  Elephas 
0  columbi,  Platygonus  compressus.  Bison  occidentalis.  The  stratum  contain- 
lii^  ing  the  bison  was  about  two  feet  in  thickness  and  composed  of  fine  silty 
material  of  bluish-gray  color.  The  bone  bed  when  cleared  off  was  about 
ten  feet  square,  and  contained  the  skeletons  of  five  or  six  adult  bison,  of 
ill]  two  or  three  younger  ones,  together  with  a  foetal  skeleton  within  the  pelvis 
^     of  one  of  the  adults.^    The  animals  evidently  all  perished  together.  In 

:  ^  Williston,  S.  W.,  On  the  Occurrence  of  an  Arrow-Head  with  Bones  of  an  Extinct 

Bison.    Trans.  Internal.  Congr.  Americanists,  1902,  pp.  335-337. 


464 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


removing  the  bones  of  the  largest  of  these  skeletons  an  arrowhead  was 
discovered  underneath  the  right  scapula,  imbedded  in  the  matrix,  but 
touching  the  bone  itself.  Williston  is  entirely  satisfied  of  the  authenticity 
of  this  discovery.  The  evidence  that  man  was  contemporaneous  with  the 
extinct  species  of  bison  (see  p.  497)  is  of  the  greatest  importance. 

The  fauna  of  the  Kansas  Pleistocene  as  summed  up  by  Williston  (1897)  ^ 
was  in  part  as  follows: 

Mastodon  americanus  Platygonus  compressus 

Elephas  columbi  Camelops  kansanus 

Elephas  (?)  imperator  Megalonyx  leidyi 

Bison  occidentalis  Mylodon 

Bison  alleni  Canis  lupus 

Bison  bison  Canis  (?)  latrans 

Alces  (?)  sp.  Geomys  bursarius 
Equus,  several  species 

The  simultaneous  death  of  small  herds  of  peccaries  as  well  as  of  bison 
points  to  the  existence  of  these  animals  during  severe  conditions  of  climate 
subject  either  to  violent  winter  storms,  or  to  the  prevalence  of  great  dust 
clouds.  A  high,  cold  wind  storm,  at  very  low  temperatures,  carrying  with 
it  great  volumes  of  dust  (loess),  would -account  for  the  death  and  rapid 
burial  of  small  herds  of  animals  seeking  shelter  in  some  gully. 


2.    Mid-Pleistocene  Mammals  of  the  Forested  Regions.  The 

Second  Fauna 

This  is  a  temperate  and  south  temperate,  chiefly  forest  and  meadow 
fauna,  indicating  very  favorable  conditions  of  life.  Herbivorous  and  car- 
nivorous mammals.    This  fauna  is  chiefly  known  in  mid-Pleistocene  times. 

The  second  great  faunal  group  of  North  America  is  the  Megalonyx 
Fauna,  named  by  Cope  after  the  great  sloth  which  predominated  and  was 
widely  distributed  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific.  The  most  important 
question  is  that  discussed  above  (pp.  453,  454) ,  whether  this  is  a  forest  fauna 
contemporaneous  with  the  distinctive  plains  fauna  of  the  Equus  Zone.  The 
forest  types  and  plains  types  of  North  America  are  very  different  to-day  and 
were  undoubtedly  very  different  in  Pleistocene  times.  Our  present  con- 
clusion is  that  there  are  indications  that  the  Megalonyx  fauna  is  partly 
contemporaneous  with,  partly  successive  to,  the  plains  fauna  of  the  Equus 
Zone  in  the  localities  above  described. 

This  is  a  rich  and  magnificent  fauna,  by  no  means  dwarfed  or  impov- 
erished. It  is  everjrvvhere  distinguished  by  the  presence  of  Megalonyx,  by 
the  absence  of  arctic,  tundra,  and  steppe  tjq^es.    It  is  distinctively  the 

1  Williston,  S.  W.,  The  Pleistocene  of  Kansas.  Univ.  Geol.  Surv.  Kansas,  Vol.  II,  1897, 
pp.  299-308. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  465 


fauna  of  a  temperate  climate,  becoming  north-temperate.  Associated  with 
Megalonyx,  at  least  in  the  earlier  periods  of  this  great  life  zone,  we  find  the 
true,  or  typical  Mylodon  of  the  East.  According  to  the  locality,  whether 
forest,  meadow,  or  plain,  we  find  also  the  American  mastodons,  the  Colum- 
bian mammoth,  tapirs,  horses,  camels,  peccaries,  bison,  and  moose.  The 
enemies  of  this  herbivorous  fauna  are  North  and  South  American  types  of 


By  permission  of  C.  S.  Prosser. 


Fig.  203.  —  The  giant  ground  sloth,  megalonyx,  an  immigrant  from  South  America.  Skele- 
ton of  the  North  American  Pleistocene  Megalonyx  jeffersoni.  In  the  Ohio  State  University 
Museum,  Columbus,  Ohio. 

bear,  very  widely  distributed,  saber-tooth  tigers,  as  well  as  large  lion-like 
cats,  and  all  the  modern  types  of  American  canids  and  felids. 

The  American  deer  (Odocoileus)  was  very  abundant  in  the  forests,  but 
it  is  noteworthy  that  the  large  European  deer  or  American  wapiti  (Cervus) 
is  nowhere  recorded.  We  note  everjrwhere  the  absence  of  the  true  musk 
ox  (Ovihos),  although  certain  of  its  relatives  or  precursors  are  recorded  in 
late  phases  of  this  zone,  and  are  actually  found  in  certain  of  the  same  de- 
posits, such  as  the  Big  Bone  Lick,  Kentucky.  It  is  probable,  however,  that 
such  mingled  deposits  are  successive  rather  than  contemporaneous. 

Geological  conditions.  —  Few  sections  are  available  to  show  the  geologic 
conditions  under  which  this  fauna  occurred.  Such  sections  should  now  be 
taken  and  published  from  many  different  points. 

2h 


466 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Characteristic  mammals.  —  In  the  various  grand  deposits  of  the  forested 
regions  of  the  East  and  far  West  in  which  the  mammaUan  Hfe  is  recorded, 
successive  phases  of  this  great  period  of  time,  which  will  undoubtedly  be 
divided  into  sub-zones,  are  indicated  in  the  very  gradual  extinction  of  the 
older  forms  and  the  appearance  of  newer  forms,  including  modern  species. 
In  a  broad  way  this  fauna  seems  to  correspond  with  the  second  faunal  zone 
of  Europe,  i.e.  it  contains  the  animal  life  of  a  temperate  climate;  in  other 
words,  it  does  not  embrace  any  mammals  of  the  northern  tundras  or  steppes ; 
neither  the  typical  musk  ox  (Ovibos),  the  reindeer  (Rangifer),  nor  the  true 
northern  mammoth  {E.  primigenius)  are  within  it. 

In  addition  to  what  is  noted  above,  the  prevailing  mammals  of  this 
fauna  appear  to  be  as  follows : 

Columbian  mammoth  {E.  columbi),  in  the  west  and  southeast. 
Mastodon  {M.  americanus),  very  abundant  in  the  east,  rare  in  the 
west. 

Horses,  fairly  abundant  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States. 

Tapirs,  fairly  abundant  in  the  forested  regions  of  the  east  and 

southeast,  not  recorded  in  the  west. 
Llamas,  no  longer  found  in  the  east  and  southeast,  but  surviving 

in  the  west,  perhaps  in  Oregon,  and  certainly  in  California  until 

near  the  close  of  this  life  zone. 
Mylodon,  sometimes  associated  in  earlier  deposits  with  Megalonyx, 

disappearing  in  the  more  recent  deposits. 
Megalonyx,  surviving  throughout,  abundant  in  the  east  and  on  the 

Pacific  slope. 

Megatherium,  recorded  in  association  with  this  fauna  at  Skidaway 

Island  in  Georgia  and  in  South  Carolina. 
Bison  {B.  latifrons,  B.  antiquus),  widely  distributed  in  the  east  and 

west. 

Moose  {Alces),  appearing  in  the  west,  doubtfully  recorded  in  the  east. 
Virginia  deer  (Odocoileus) ,  abundant. 

The  peccary  (Mylohyus)  replaces  Platygonus,  or  represents  it  in  the 
forest  fauna. 

Relatives  of  the  great  musk  sheep,  or  musk  ox  {Euceratherium, 
Preptoceras) ,  appearing  in  late  deposits  in  the  west. 

Mountain  goat  (Oreamnos)  of  the  rupicaprine  family,  appearing  in 
late  deposits  in  the  west. 

The  marmot  (Marmota),  appearing  in  late  deposits  in  the  west. 

Tree  porcupines  (Erethizon),  widely  distributed  throughout  the 
United  States. 

Castor  aides,  a  giant  beaver-like  rodent,  widely  distributed  in  the 
eastern  and  middle  states,  but  apparently  not  extending  to  the 
south. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  467 


Saber-tooth  tigers  (Smilodon),  surviving  throughout. 
Large  Hons  (Felis  atrox),  in  the  southwest  and  west. 
Bear,  of  the  North  American  black  bear  type  {U.  americanus),  also 
a  giant  bear  allied  to  the  South  American  cave  bear  (Arcto- 
therium),^  widely  distributed  throughout  the  United  States. 
Old  World  deer  (Cervus),  not  recorded. 

Some  of  the  great  deposits  in  which  the  more  or  less  successive  phases 
of  this  fauna  have  been  discovered  are  placed  in  the  accompanying  column 
in  ascending  chronologic  order  so  far  as  their  relative  age  can  be  determined 
at  present : 

More  recent  9.  Big  Bone  Lick,  Boone  County,  Kentucky  (Fig.  194,  8). 
Intermediates.  Samwel  Cave,  Shasta  County,  California  (Fig.  194,  30). 
"         7.  Potter  Creek  Cave,  Shasta  County,  California  (Fig.  194, 
30). 

"         6.  Washtucna  Lake,  Franklin  County,  Washington  (Fig. 
194,  32). 

"         5.  Rancho  La  Brea,  the  asphalt  beds  of  southern  CaUfornia 
(Fig.  194,  28). 

"         4.  Ashley  River,  South  Carolina  (Fig.  194,  11). 
"         3.  Frankstown  Cave,  Blair  County,  Pennsylvania  (Fig.  194, 
3). 

Earher         2.  The  Port  Kennedy  Cave,  Schuylkill  River,  Pennsylvania 
(Fig.  194,  4). 

1.  Afton  Junction,  Iowa,  belonging  to  the  first  or  Aftonian 
Interglacial  epoch  (Fig.  194,  23). 

Aftonian  Interglacial  stage.  —  One  of  the  most  fortunate  discoveries  in 
recent  years  is  that  of  a  rich  deposit  of  mammalian  remains  in  gravels  of 
the  Aftonian  Interglacial  period,  which  lie  clearly  between  the  drifts  of  the 
I  pre-Kansan  and  Kansan  Glacial  epochs.^  These  mammals  apparently  be- 
longed to  the  early  part  of  the  Mylodon  or  Megalonyx  life  zone,  and  are  of 
exceptional  importance  in  enabling  us  to  correlate  this  zone  with  the  first 
Interglacial  epoch  in  North  America.  The  specific  determinations  have 
not  yet  been  made  positive,  but  there  is  little  doubt  that  we  have  here 
association  of  sloths,  camels,  bison,  horses,  Columbian  and  possibly  im- 
perial mammoths,  as  well  as  mastodons.  There  are  also  foot  bones  of  dwarf 
horses  which  resemble  those  of  the  protohippine  section.  An  anomalous 
feature  is  the  presence  of  a  large  antler  which  suggests  that  of  the  wapiti, 
or  true  Cervus.    The  teeth  of  the  horses  agree  in  size  with  those  of  E.  pad- 

^  The  name  Arctodus  (Leidy)  is  in  a  sense  preoccupied  by  Arctodon,  and  should  not  be  re- 
vived,  because  based  upon  an  indeterminate  type. 

2  Calvin,  Samuel,  Present  Phase  of  the  Pleistocene  Problem  in  Iowa.  Bull.  Geol.  Soc. 
Amer.,  Vol.  XX,  Mar.  18,  1909,  pp.  133-152. 


468 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


ficus  and  E.  ocddentalis.  Among  the  equine  remains  are  hock  bones,  or 
calcanea,  of  exceptional  size,  indicating  the  presence  of  a  horse  of  large 
dimensions;  and  there  were  also  small,  fine-limbed  types  of  horses.  The 
elephant  teeth  chiefly  belong  to  the  Columbian  mammoth,  presenting  about 
twenty  enamel  folds  in  a  space  of  ten  inches.  One  molar  approaches  the 
true  northern  mammoth  {E.  primigenius)  in  the  possession  of  twenty-five 
folds  in  a  space  of  ten  inches.  At  the  opposite  extreme  is  a  tooth  which 
exhibits  folds  varying  from  thirteen  to  fifteen  in  ten  inches,  which  appears 
to  indicate  the  presence  of  the  imperial  mammoth  (E.  imperator).  (See 
Fig.  190.)  The  identifications  of  E.  primigenius  and  E.  imperator  in  this 
fauna,  however,  await  final  confirmation.  This  would  be  the  first  positive 
association  of  these  species  with  the  Megalonyx,  or  Mylodon  fauna  in  early 
mid-Pleistocene  times. 

Upper  Lake  Lahontan  beds.  —  The  special  importance  of  the  few  mam- 
malian remains  found  in  the  Lake  Lahontan  deposits  is  that  they  are 
definitely  recorded  geologically.  Proboscidean  bones  are  found  in  the  'in- 
termediate gravels'  in  the  Lahontan  basins  (equivalent  to  the  gravels  of 
the  inter-Bonneville  epoch),  also  in  the  'Upper  Lahontan  beds'  (equivalent 
to  the  '  white  marl '  of  the  Bonneville) .  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  fossils 
were  all  derived  from  the  '  upper  lacustral  beds  '  ^ ;  they  include  an  elephant 
{?  E.  columbi),  a  horse,  a  bison,  and  a  llama,  none  of  which  has  been  iden- 
tified specifically.  In  the  same  '  upper  lacustral  clays '  an  obsidian  spear- 
head was  obtained  (see  p.  448),  positively  associated  with  proboscidean 
remains;  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  mammalian  remains  all  belong  to  the 
time  of  the  last  great  rise  of  the  lake  (op.  cit.  p.  273).  The  pres- 
ence of  bison  would  appear  to  indicate  that  these  '  upper  lacustral  clays ' 
and  the  fauna  which  they  contain  are  of  more  recent  date  than  the  Silver 
Lake  Equus  beds,  with  which  they  were  correlated  on  insufficient  grounds 
by  Gilbert  in  his  Bonneville  memoir.^ 

Port  Kennedy  Cave  of  Pennsylvania  is  situated  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
Schuylkill  River,  two  miles  below  Valley  Forge,  Pennsylvania  (Fig.  194,  4). 
As  studied  by  Cope  ^  and  Mercer  *  this  locality  has  yielded  sixty-four 
species  of  mammals,  of  which  twelve  are  known  to  be  still  in  existence  and 
forty  to  be  extinct ;  the  ratio  of  recent  to  extinct  forms  would,  however,  be 
greatly  increased  by  more  careful  comparison  and  more  conservative  deter- 
mination. The  animals  were  apparently  collected  here  by  a  series  of  fresh- 
water inundations,  carrying  with  them  the  clay,  stones,  and  earth  of  neigh- 
boring levels,  and  the  bones  of  mammals  separated  and  scattered  by 

1  Russell,  I.  C,  Geological  History  of  Lake  Lahontan,  a  Quaternary  Lake  of  North- 
western Nevada.    Monogr.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Vol.  XI,  1885,  p.  238. 

2  Gilbert,  G.  K.,  Lake  Bonnevolle.  Monogr.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Vol.  I,  Washington,  1890. 
^  Cope,  E.  D.,  Description  of  Some  Vertebrate  Remains  from  the  Port  Kennedy  Bone 

Deposit.    Proc.  Acad.  Xat.  Sci.  Phila.,  Vol.  XI,  1876,  Pt.  2,  pp.  193-267. 

Mercer,  H.  C.,  The  Bone  Cave  at  Port  Kennedy,  Pennsylvania,  and  its  Partial  Exca- 
vation in  1894,  1895,  and  1896.  Jour.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phila.,  Vol.  XI,  Pt.  2,  1899,  pp.  269-288. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  469 

decomposition.  The  chasm  into  which  these  remains  were  swept  is  from 
sixty  to  seventy  feet  deep,  and  twenty  to  thirty  feet  in  diameter  at  the 
mouth,  with  descending  walls  sloping  inward  and  forming  a  well-like  hole. 
It  is  evident  that  the  cave  was  not  fitted  for  human  habitation,  even  if  man 
had  existed  in  America  at  the  time.  The  remains  were  swept  in  by  floods 
and  not  drawn  in  by  animals,  as  in  the  case  of  many  of  the  European 
caves. 

Fortunately  a  portion  of  the  flora  is  preserved,  consisting  entirely  of 
modern  species  of  temperate  type,  such  as  the  pin-oak  (Q.  palustris),  white 
oak  (Q.  alba),  bur-oak  {Q.  macrocarpa),  the  beech  (F.  ferruginea),  the  hazel- 
nut (Corylus),  the  pitch  pine  {Pinus  rigida),  the  plum  (Prunus),  the  pig  nut 
hickory  (Carya  porcina),  the  shell-bark  hickory  {Gary a  alba),  the  Virginia 
creeper  {Ampelopsis  quinquefolia),  and  the  thorn  (Cratcegus)  (Mercer). 

Pennsylvania  in  mid-Pleistocene  times  must  have  been  a  land  of  forests, 
very  similar  to  those  of  the  present  time.  The  tapirs  and  sloths  are  the 
only  indications  of  temperate  conditions  of  the  winter  climate  or  of  the 
absence  of  extremely  low  temperatures.  All  the  other  mammals  are  of 
north  temperate  type.  The  remains  of  the  giant  sloths  are  most  abundant, 
following  which  in  order  of  frequency  come  those  of  the  rabbits,  tapirs, 
mastodons,  and  peccaries.  Among  the  larger  Carnivora,  the  bears  were 
more  numerous  than  the  felines,  such  as  the  saber-tooth  tigers  and  the 
jaguars.  The  identification  of  species  is  largely  based  upon  well-preserved 
remains,  and  has  passed  under  the  critical  eye  of  Cope  and  Mercer,  but 
probably  still  awaits  final  and  precise  revision.  Conspicuous  by  their 
absence  are  the  elephants  and  the  llamas,  a  fact  attributable  to  local  for- 
ested conditions'because  both  these  animals  were  probably  living  in  the 
plains  region  of  the  West  or  in  California  at  this  time.  One  ruminant 
{Teleopternus  orientalis)  is  described  by  Cope  as  an  extinct  ungulate, 
allied  either  to  the  deer  or  the  camels.  Matthew  suggests  its  affinity 
to  Ovibos. 

The  fauna  is  distinctly  divisible  into  forest,  glade  and  meadow,  and 
fluviatile  types,  as  follows : 

The  Forest  Fauna 


The  American  mastodon  (M.  americanus) 
The  extinct  tapir  {Tapirus  haysii) 
The  Virginia  deer  (Odocoileus)  * 
The  extinct  ground  sloths  (Megalonyx, 
Mylodon) 

The  Canadian  tree  porcupine  (Erethizon 

dor  Saturn) 
The  squirrel  (Sciurus  calicinus) 
Rabbits  and  picas  {Lepus,  Lagomys) 
Voles,  shrews,  moles,  and  bats  {Sycium, 

Blarina,  Scalops,  Vespertilio) 


Two  species  of  fox 

Martens,  wolverines,  skunks,  weasels 
{Mustela,  Gulo,  Mephitis,  Pelycictis) 

Giant  bear  allied  to  the  extinct  bear  of 
South  America  (Arctotherium  haplodon) 

Black  bear  (Ursus  americanus) 

Lynx,  eyra,  and  (?)  jaguar  (Uncia  inex- 
pectata) 


470 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


To  the  forest  fauna  should  be  added  an  extinct  species  of  turkey  (Mele- 
agris  alius),  as  well  as  the  frogs  (Rana)  and  several  species  of  turtles  allied 
to  modern  types. 

River  Fauna 

Belonging  to  the  fluviatile  or  river  fauna  were  the  following  forms  : 
The  beaver  and  the  otter  {Castor,  Lutra). 

Meadow  Fauna 

To  the  meadow  fauna  may  be  attributed  one  of  the  sloths  (Mylodon), 
as  well  as  the  following  forms : 

An  extinct  bison  (Bison)  A  giant  coyote,  or  prairie  wolf  {Canis 

Two  or  three  species  of  horses  {E.  frater-  priscolatrans) 

nus,  E.  pectinatus)  Two  species  of  saber-tooth  tigers  (SjuHo- 

An  extinct  species  of  peccary  {Mylo-      don  merceri,  S.  gracilis) 

hyus)  The  American  badger  ( Taxidea  americana) 

Field  mice,  meadow  voles  and  jumping  A  ruminant  (Teleopternus)  suggestive  of 

mice  {Hesperomys,  Microtus,  Zapus)        affinity  to  Ovibos 

It  will  be  observed  that  beside  the  camels  and  the  elephants  there  are 
many  other  absentees,  or  non-arrivals,  in  this  fauna.  There  are  no  European 
deer  (Cervus),  no  moose  (Aloes),  and  none  of  the  gigantic  sloths  known  as 
Megatherium.  Giant  sloths  of  this  genus  are  confined  to  the  southeastern 
states.  The  bison  and  the  bear  are  the  most  conspicuous  of  the  newly 
arriving  Old  World  mammals  which  appear  in  this  fauna.  Among  the 
surviving  indigenous  North  American  forms  are  the  saber-tooths  (Smilodon), 
the  tapirs,  horses,  and  peccaries.  Among  the  latter  the  modern  genus 
Mylohyus  replaces  Platygonus.  Mylohyus  is  a  large,  long-muzzled,  or  doli- 
chocephalic] peccary,  with  vestigial  upper  incisor  teeth;  it  is  quite  distinct 
from  Dicotyles.  Among  the  animals  of  South  American  affinity  are  the 
porcupines,  and  the  great  sloths  (Megalonyx  and  Mylodon).  It  is  note- 
worthy that  several  modernized  species  of  cats,  one  attaining  the  size  of  the 
jaguar  (F.  uncia),  competed  with  the  saber-tooths;  also  that  the  bear  include 
both  the  typical  North  American  and  South  American  types.  Summarizing 
this  fauna  on  the  basis  of  these  determinations,  there  is  a  great  predominance 
of  extinct  forms.  Out  of  a  total  of  thirty-six  genera  ten  are  now  extinct,  and 
out  of  forty-seven  identified  species  twenty-nine  are  now  extinct  (Mercer). 

Frankstown  Cave,  Pennsylvania.  —  The  riph  deposits  in  the  Frankstown 
Cave  as  investigated  by  Holland  ^  were  apparently  of  somewhat  more  recent 
date  than  those  of  Port  Kennedy.  This  is  a  large  limestone  cave  which 
has  yielded  remains  of  thirty  or  forty  species  of  mid-Pleistocene  mammals. 
On  the  whole  it  strongly  confirms  the  Port  Kennedy  fauna  as  an  assemblage 
of  -highly  characteristic  life  of  the  forested  regions  of  Pennsylvania  in  mid- 

1  Holland,  W.  J.,  A  Preliminary  Account  of  the  Pleistocene  Fauna  Discovered  in  a  Cave 
opened  at  Frankstown,  Pennsylvania,  in  April  and  May,  1907.  Ann.  Carnegie  Mus.,  Vol.  IV, 
nos.  3  and  4,  1908. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  471 


Pleistocene  times.    The  absence  from  this  cave  of  certain  forms,  such  as 
Mylodon  and  Equus,  may  be  due  to  local  causes,  since  it  represents  a  more 
purely  forest  fauna  than  that  of  Port  Kennedy;  it  may  indicate  also  a  more 
recent  period.    The  giant 
ground  sloth  (Megalonyx) 
is  represented,  though  not 
abundantly.  Mastodon 
remains  {M.  americanus) 
are  very  numerous,  being 
represented  by  an  adult 
and  five  or  six  immature 
specimens.    The  presence 
in  this  cave  of  these  infant 
mastodons  and  of  various 
species  of  artiodactyls,  as- 
sociated with  bones  of  a 
huge  bear,  suggest  that  the 
latter  preyed  upon  these 
animals.  This  bear  (Ardo- 
therium  haplodon)  is  a  huge 
form  related  to  the  extinct 
South  American  bear;  it 
was  somewhat  larger  than 
the  modern  grizzly,  and 
capable  of  attacking  the 
young  mastodons.  There 
are  a  number  of  peccaries, 
one  of  which  {Mylohyus  pennsylvanicus)  is  a  large  animal  with  long  tusks. 
Bison  and  three  kinds  of  deer  are  found,  one  of  the  latter  a  large  type  which 
may  represent  the  Cervalces  of  Scott,  a  moose.    The  small  herbivorous  and 
carnivorous  fauna  is  similar  to  that  of  Port  Kennedy.    Again  we  note 
the  absence  of  remains  of  the  mammoth,  reindeer,  musk  ox,  and  of  the 
southerly  Megatherium.    It  is  a  somewhat  hardy  temperate  fauna. 

Ashley  River,  South  Carolina  (Fig.  194,  11). 
—  These  deposits  of  the  Ashley  River  Forma- 
tion of  South  Carolina  attracted  the  attention  of 
Gibbes  and  Agassiz  as  early  as  1845,  and  were 
seriously  examined  by  Leidy;  but  we  owe 
chiefly  to  Francis  S.  Holmes  ^  the  study  of  the 
geologic  conditions.  The  principal  locality  is 
at  Ashley  Ferry  in  a  bluff  about  thirty  feet 


Fig.  204.  —  Group  of  American  mastodons  {M.  ame- 
ricanus). After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


Equus  fraternus 
Tapirus  americanus 
Mastodon  americanus 
Megalonyx 
Bison  latifrons, 

species  abundant  in 

the  southeast 


^  Holmes,  F.  S.,  Remarks  on  a  Collection  of  Fossils  from  the  Post-Pliocene  of  South 
Carolina.  Proc.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.,  July  12,  1859,  pp.  177-185;  ibid.,  Remains  of  Domestic 
Animals  among  Post-Pliocene  Fossils  in  South  Carolina,  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.  (Ser.  2),  Vol.  XXV, 
1858,  pp.  442-443. 


472  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

Hipparion  high,  having  at  its  base  a  Pliocene  limestone 

Megatherium  composed  of  marine  shells,  while  the  post-Plio- 

Mylodon  harlani  cene  layer  is  a  shallow  river  formation  consist- 

Procyon  ing  of  yellow  sands  with  bands  of  ferruginous 

Didelphys  clay  four  feet  in  thickness. 

Fiber     ,       .  The  fossilized  teeth  are  brown  or  black  in 

Castor  color.    The  remains  of  ancient  or  extinct  species 

Alces  of  animals  are  mingled  with  those  of  recent  spe- 

Dicotyles  cies;  thus  the  fossil  tapir  which  occurs  there, 

not  distinguishable  from  the  living  T.  ameri- 


canus,  is  an  animal  also  distributed  in  Texas,  Louisiana,  Kentucky,  Missis- 
sippi, Indiana,  Ohio,  and  South  Carolina.  Again,  the  common  gray 
rabbit  {Lepus  sylvaticus)  is  associated  with  fragments  of  the  teeth  of  the 
great  Megatherium  and  Mylodon.  The  original  specific  identifications  are 
very  doubtful,  and  are  therefore  omitted  in  the  table  opposite. 

The  species  of  horse  found  here  {E.  fraternus)  is  characteristic  of  the 
southeastern  United  States;  it  represents  an  animal  of  intermediate  size 
with  teeth  scarcely  larger  than  those  of  the  domestic  donkey  {E.  asinus), 
and  of  a  very  complex  pattern. 

Rancho  La  Brea,  southern  California  (Fig.  194,  28).  —  In  southern  Cali- 
fornia, about  nine  miles  west  of  Los  Angeles,  is  what  promises  to  be  •  the 
most  remarkable  deposit  of  Pleistocene  mammals  thus  far  discovered  in 
America.  As  described  by  Merriam  ^  (1906)  this  deposit  is  fifteen  feet  or 
more  in  thickness  and  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  extent.  It  is  located  im- 
mediately over  a  sharp  fold  of  rock,  heavily  impregnated  with  petroleum, 
which,  issuing  to  the  surface,  has  evaporated,  forming  springs  and  pools 
of  tar  which  have  dried  and  hardened  locally  to  the  consistency  of  asphalt. 
It  contains  scattered  bones  in  a  remarkably  fresh  condition,  and  pieces  of 
partly  lignitized  wood.  The  remains  are  those  of  mammals  and  birds. 
Among  the  latter  are  ducks,  geese,  pelicans,  eagles,  condors,  and  peacocks. 
The  smaller  mammals  include  mice,  rabbits,  and  squirrels;  the  larger  are 
represented  by  extinct  species  of  coyotes,  giant  wolves,  bear,  saber-tooth 
tigers,  horses,  bison,  camels,  mammoths,  and  large  ground  sloths.  In  the 
early  stages  of  the  accumulation  of  the  asphalt,  the  gummy  surface  appar- 
ently acted  as  a  trap  for  unwary  animals:  where  there  were  pools  of  water 
the  water  birds  of  all  kinds  were  entrapped  in  the  soft  tar  about  the  mar- 
gins, while  the  land  birds  and  smaller  mammals  were  ensnared  in  attempt- 
ing to  reach  the  water.  The  larger  percentage  of  the  birds  are  water  forms, 
and  the  larger  herbivorous  mammals  are  for  the  most  part  represented  by 
young  individuals.  A  relatively  large  number  of  carnivorous  animals  cor- 
responds with  what  is  observed  around  recent  asphalt  pools. 

In  attempting  to  estimate  the  age  of  this  fauna  we  first  observe  the 

1  Merriam,  J.  C,  Recent  Discoveries  of  Quaternary  Mammals  in  Southern  California. 
Science,  n.  s.,  Vol.  XXIV,  no.  608,  Aug.  24,  1906,  pp.  248-250. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  473 


association  of  horses,  mylodont  sloths,  saber-tooth  cats,  camels,  and  Colum- 
bian mammoths,  indicating  the  life  of  mid-Pleistocene  times.  With  these 
animals  also  occur  the  bison.  The  absence  of  remains  of  mastodons  and  tapirs 
may  be  due  to  local  causes,  since  this  fauna  is  chiefly  that  of  the  open  plains 
or  meadows  which  surrounded  this  ancient  asphalt  lake.  The  chief  forest 
types  thus  far  mentioned  are  the  deer  and  the  squirrrels. 

Among  the  characteristic  species  of  mammals  thus  far  recorded  are  two 
species  of  wolves,  a  saber-tooth  {Smilodon  calif ornicus),  a  leonine  cat  {Felis 


Fig.  205.  —  Rancho  La  Brea,  California.  Water  pool  with  asphaltic  margin  and  tar  ooz- 
ing out  at  many  points.  Great  numbers  of  animals  have  been  entrapped  at  such  localities  in 
the  past.  Recently  a  barn  owl  was  caught  in  the  tar  at  the  edge  of  the  pool.  Photograph  by 
J.  C.  Merriam,  1909. 

atrox  hebbi),  a  bison  {B.  antiquus),  a  mammoth  {f  E.  columhi),  a  sloth 
(Paramylodon  nehrascensis) ,  and  a  horse  (E.  pacificus).  Among  the  birds, 
according  to  the  studies  of  Miller,^  the  raptorial  species  predominate.  No 
less  than  thirty-three  individuals  of  the  golden  eagle  {Aquila  chrysaetos) 
have  been  recovered.  Among  the  non-predaceous  birds  are  the  great  blue 
heron  {Ardea  herodias),  the  American  raven  (Corvus  corax),  the  Canada 
goose  (Branta  canadensis).  A  new  form  is  Teratornis,  a  raptorial  type. 
Especially  novel  is  the  determination  of  a  fossil  peacock,^  because  the 

1  Miller,  L.  H.,  Teratornis,  a  New  Avian  Genus  from  Rancho  La  Brea.  Univ.  Col.  Publ., 
Bull.  Dept.  GeoL,  Vol.  V,  no.  21,  Sept.,  1909,  pp.  305-317. 

^  Miller,  L.  H.,  Pavo  californicus,  a  Fossil  Peacock  from  the  Quaternary  Asphalt  Beds  of 
Rancho  La  Brea.    Univ.  Cat.  Publ.,  Bull.  Dept.  GeoL,  Vol.  V,  no.  19,  1909,  pp.  285,  289,  PI.  25. 


474 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Phasianinae  belong  to  a  group  hitherto  unrecorded  in  America.  The  present 
range  of  the  sub-family  of  peacocks  is  now  limited  to  the  Oriental  region  of 
southern  Asia,  but  fossil  forms  are  recorded  from  the  Miocene,  Pliocene, 
and  Pleistocene  of  Europe,  and  from  the  Siwalik  beds  of  India.  The  occur- 
rence of  this  species  {Pavo  californicus)  in  America  is  therefore  to  be  con- 


FiG.  206.  —  Skeleton  of  the  great  South  American  saber-tooth  'tiger'  Smilodon  neogceus  of 
the  Pampean  Pleistocene.    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


sidered  in  connection  with  the  Pliocene  invasion  (p.  337)  of  the  Pacific 
Coast  by  Asiatic  antelopes. 

At  Washtucna  Lake,  Franklin  County,  Washington  ^  (Fig.  194,  32), 
there  is  a  large  proportion  of  forest  and  mountain  types  but  there  are  no 
aquatic  mammals.^  Whether  the  animals  found  here  are  truly  associated 
in  the  same  level  is  not  known.  In  the  same  neighborhood  are  boggy 
springs  from  which  Elephas  columhi  and  a  species  of  Bison  have  been  ob- 
tained, a  fact  which  adds  to  the  suspicion  that  this  is  a  mixed  fauna.  This 
appears  to  belong  to  the  latter  part  of  the  Equus-Mylodon-Camelops  Zone, 
and  associated  with  these  plains-living  forms  are  remains  of  distinctively 
forest  types,  including  two  species  of  moose  (Alces)  and  of  Virginia  deer 
(Odocoileus) ,  as  well  as  of  a  mountain  sheep  {Ovis  montana).  Among  the 
felids  we  find  the  puma  {Felis  concolor),  and  a  larger  leonine  cat  (F.  impe- 
rialis),  as  well  as  the  lynx  {F.  canadensis). 

^  Cope,  E.  D.,  The  Vertebrate  Fauna  of  the  Equus  Beds.  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XXIII, 
1889,  pp.  160-165. 

^  Matthew,  W.  D.,  List  of  the  Pleistocene  Fauna  from  Hay  Springs,  Nebraska.  Bull. 
Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XVI,  Art.  xxiv,  Sept.  25,  1902,  pp.  317-322. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  475 


Afton,  Indian  Territory  ^  (Fig.  194,  18),  is  situated  in  the  midst  of  a 
plain  in  the  extreme  northeastern  part  of  Indian  Territory,  or  north  of  the 
Arkansas  River  near  its  northern  tributary,  the  Grand.  In  or  near  a  spring 
were  found  one  hundred  mastodon  teeth,  twenty  mammoth  teeth,  beside  a 
considerable  number  of  teeth  of  fossil  bison  and  horse,  as  well  as  an  entire 
deposit  of  implements  and  recent  bones.  The  prevalence  here  of  the  great 
extinct  mammals  may  be  attributed  to  their  frequenting  the  spring  in  wet 


Fig.  207.  —  The  Lower  Pleistocene  saber-tooth  tiger  Smilodon  neogceus,  based  on  a  skeleton 
from  the  Pampean  Formation  of  South  America.  After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


seasons.  Especially  interesting  is  the  identification  of  both  varieties  of  the 
mammoth,  the  Columbian  and  the  imperial  mammoth.  The  human  imple- 
ments and  remains  of  more  recent  animals  are  matters  of  secondary  asso- 
ciation (see  p.  496). 

The  Erie  Clays  (Fig.  194,  5)  are  extensive  deposits  on  the  southern 
shores  of  Lake  Erie,  near  Cleveland,  constituting  a  '  forest  bed '  containing 
mastodon,  elephant,  and  Castoroides} 

Potter  Creek  Cave,  California^  (Fig.  194,30).  —  Environmental  conditions 
of  the  Pacific  coast  were  quite  different  from  those  in  the  Middle  and  Southern 

1  Holmes,  W.  H.,  Flint  Implements  and  Fossil  Remains  from  a  Sulphur  Spring  at  Afton, 
Indian  Territory.    Ann.  Kept.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  1901,  pp.  233-252. 
^  Dana,  J.  D.,  Manual  of  Geology.    4th  edition,  1895. 

*  Sinclair,  W.  J.,  A  Preliminary  account  of  the  exploration  of  the  Potter  Creek  cave,  Shasta 
County,  Cal.  Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XVII,  no.  435,  May  1,  1903,  pp.  708-712  ;  Sinclair,  W.  J., 
The  Exploration  of  the  Potter  Creek  Cave.  Univ.  Cal.  Publ.  Am.  Arch.  Ethnol.,  Vol.  II, 
No.  1,  1904,  pp.  1-27  ;  Sinclair,  W.  J.,  New  Mammalia  from  the  Quaternary  Caves  of  Cal- 
ifornia. Bull.  Dept.  Geol.  Univ.  Cal.,  Vol.  IV,  1905,  pp.  145-161  ;  Sinclair,  W.  J.,  and  Fur- 
long, E.  L.,  Euceratherium,  a  New  Ungulate  from  the  Quaternary  Caves  of  California.  Bull. 
Dept.  Geol.  Univ.  Cal.,  Vol.  Ill,  1904,  pp.  411-418  ;  Merriam,  J.  C,  Recent  Cave  Explora- 
tion in  California.    Amer.  AnthropoL,  n.s.,  Vol.  VIII,  April-June,  1906,  pp.  221-228. 


476  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

states.  The  glaciation  on  this  coast  occurred  comparatively  late  in  Pleistocene 
times,  and  was  of  the  Alpine  type,  that  is,  confined  to  the  higher  mountain 
levels.  It  is  quite  possible,  therefore,  that  many  kinds  of  mammals,  such 
as  the  elephants  and  camels,  survived  in  the  comparatively  mild  climate  of 
the  Pacific  after  they  had  become  extinct  in  more  easterly  regions.  These 
suggestions  are  made  in  the  course  of  the  admirable  studies  of  Merriam, 
Sinclair,  and  Furlong  (1903-1906)  on  the  very  rich  fauna  of  Potter  Creek 
Cave  in  Shasta  County.  The  life  here  is  quite  as  varied  as  that  of  Port 
Kennedy,  but  there  are  many  more  still  existing  species.  Out  of  thirty- 
seven  genera  and  forty-nine 
species  of  mammals,  eight 
genera  and  twenty-two  species 
are  known  to  be  extinct,  while 
thirty  of  the  genera  and  twenty- 
two  of  the  species  correspond 
with  living  forms.  The  now 
extinct  forms  found  in  this 
cave  are  the  giant  bear  {Ardo- 
therium),  peccaries,  camels, 
ground  sloths,  mastodons, 
mammoths,  and  the  horses. 
This  includes  the  entire  large 
fauna,  excepting  the  Virginia 
deer.  The  living  forms  found 
in  this  cave  embrace  nearly 
the  entire  existing  mammalian 
fauna  of  northern  California, 
Oregon,  and  Washington,  with  the  exception  of  the  mountain  sheep  (Ovis 
montana)  and  the  wapiti  (Cervus),  neither  of  which  occur  in  the  Potter 
Creek  deposits.  Conspicuous  among  the  new  arrivals  is  the  mountain  goat 
(Oreamnos),  the  first  member  of  the  rupicaprine  division  of  the  antelope 
family  to  be  recorded  in  North  America.  Here  also  occurs  an  extinct 
ungulate  (Euceratherium)  with  affinities  to  the  sheep  {Ovinoe)  and  to  Ovibos. 

As  compared  with  the  Port  Kennedy  Cave  or  even  with  the  asphaltum 
deposits,  we  observe  the  absence  of  certain  very  characteristic  early  Pleis- 
tocene forms,  especially  the  saber-tooths  (Smilodon)  and  the  giant  tapirs. 
It  is  of  course  possible  that  these  absences  are  due  to  local  causes.  The 
saber-tooths  certainly  frequented  the  plains  and  pampas  and  survived  into 
late  Pleistocene  times  in  North  America  (Conard  Fissure).  Similarly, 
Mylodon,  the  early  Pleistocene  sloth,  does  not  occur  here,  while  Megalonyx, 
a  forest  and  foothill  edentate,  is  abundant. 

It  is  a  very  striking  fact  that  the  Columbian  mammoth  {E,  columbi) 
is  found  here,  as  well  as  the  forest-dwelling  mastodon,  this  being  the  earliest 
record  of  the  mastodon  on  the  Pacific  coast.    Certainly  to  be  reckoned 


Fig.  208.  —  Skulls  of  (.4)  American  extinct  bear 
Arctotherium,  (B)  recent  black  bear  Ursus  a?n€rica- 
nns.    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  477 


among  the  older  surviving  forms  of  California  at  this  time  are  the  horses  of 
the  characteristic  species  of  the  Pacific  coast  {E.  pacificus,  E.  occidentalis) 
and  a  cameHd.  Here,  too,  are  remains  of  the  bison  (Bison  sp.).  Among 
the  smaller  artiodactyls  are  the  peccaries,  doubtfully  determined  as  Platy- 
gonus.  It  is  a  very  striking  fact  that,  while  the  American  deer  (Odocoileus) 
are  abundant,  there  is  no  trace  of  the  Old  World  deer  (Cervus). 

Preying  upon  this  herbivorous  fauna  is  a  highly  varied  and,  on  the  whole, 
very  modern  group  of  Carnivora.  As  in  the  Port  Kennedy  Cave,  we  ob- 
serve among  the  Ursidse  remains  both  of  the  typical  black  bear  of  North 
America  (U.  americanus)  and  of  the  giant  bear  of  South  American  affinity 
(Ardotherium) .  Among  the  cats  is  a  very  large  species  resembling  the 
puma  (F.  concolor),  and  the  lynx.  Among  the  wolves  and  foxes  we  discover 
the  gray  fox  of  northern  California  (Urocyon  townsendi),  th-e  red  fox  of  the 
Cascade  Mountains  {Vulpes  cascadensis) ,  a  large  extinct  species  of  wolf 
(Canis  indianensis) ,  also  the  badger,  the  raccoon-fox  of  Cahfornia  (Bassa- 
riscus  raptor),  also  California  types  of  skunks  and  weasels.  The  marmot 
(Marmota)  is  among  the  new  arrivals.  A  small  rodent  fauna,  chickarees 
(Sdurus),  flying  squirrels  (Sciuropterus) ,  the  spermophiles  (Spermophilus) , 
the  chipmunks  (Eutamias),  the  hares  and  rabbits  (Lepus,  4  sp.),  the  wood 
rats  (Teonoma,  Neotoma),  the  meadow  voles  (Microtus),  the  gophers 
(Thomomys),  are  of  western  mountain  or  Pacific  type.  We  also  discover 
here  the  first  of  the  sewellels  (Aplodontia) ,  the  ancestry  of  which  has  been 
traced  in  the  American  Ohgocene  (p.  229). 

The  fauna  as  a  whole  includes  a  mingling  of  plains  and  forest  types,  such 
as  would  be  fitted  to  the  topography  of  this  region  in  Quaternary  times; 
grazing  camels,  bison,  horses,  elephants  may  have  inhabited  the  broad 
valley,  while  the  deer  roamed  over  the  hillsides,  and  the  higher  peaks  afforded 
a  congenial  home  for  the  Rocky  Mountain  goat  (Oreamnos).  The  cave 
seems  to  have  remained  open  for  a  long  time,  receiving  bones  swept  in  from 
different  levels  by  freshets  in  seasons  of  wet  weather. 

The  fauna  is  not  too  old  to  preclude  the  idea  of  the  contemporaneity  of 
man.    In  the  opinion  of  certain  anthropologists  (Putnam)  the  presence  of 
^omo  is  indicated  by  the  fashioning  of  bone  implements;  others  (Merriam, 
1906)  regard  this  evidence  as  inconclusive  (see  p.  498). 

Samwel  Cave.  (Fig.  194,  30). — In  Samwel  Cave,  Shasta  County, 
alifornia,  as  described  by  Furlong,^  has  been  discovered  a  mammalian 
auna  of  somewhat  more  recent  origin  than  the  Potter  Creek  Cave.  Split 
X)nes  with  polished  surfaces  and  chipped  obsidian  and  basalt  fragments 
lave  been  found  here  which  may  represent  the  work  of  man;  in  fact, 
rutnam  (1905)  ^  considers  that  man  existed  at  this  time  in  California.  The 


-0 


1  Furlong,  E.  L.,  The  Exploration  of  Samwel  Cave.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  XXII, 
129,  Sept.,  1906. 

^  Putnam,  Evidence  of  the  Work  of  Man  on  Objects  from  Quaternary  Caves  in  California. 
mer.  Anthrop.,  n.s.  Vol.  VIII,  1905,  pp.  229-235. 


478 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


opinions  of  Putnam  and  Merriam  on  this  point  will  be  cited  on  a  later  page. 
Of  the  twenty  species  of  mammals  determined  here,  about  one  quarter,  or  25 
per  cent,  are  extinct.  Of  the  characteristic  animals  of  the  mid-Pleistocene, 
or  Megalonyx  Zone,  there  still  remain  Megalonyx,  the  Columbian  mammoth, 
and  the  western  horse,  which  appear  to  be  in  this  locality  the  last  survivors 
of  this  great  mid-Pleistocene  fauna.  No  mylodonts,  mastodons,  or  camels 
occur.  The  American  black  bear  (U.  americanus)  is  found  here,  but  the 
giant  South  American  bear  (Arctotherium)  is  not  recorded.  Of  the  new- 
comers the  sheep-like  ungulate  (Euceratherium) ,  with  affinities  to  the  musk 
ox,  again  occurs,  as  well  as  a  related  form  (Preptoceras) .  The  remainder  of 
the  fauna  is  the  modern  characteristic  mountain  fauna  of  North  America, 
similar  to  that  described  above  at  Potter  Creek,  and  very  similar  to  that 
of  the  present  day  with  the  exception  of  the  fact  that  the  wapiti,  or  European 
deer  {Cervus),  is  still  absent. 

Big  Bone  Lick,  Kentucky.  (Fig.  194,  8).  —  One  of  the  most  famous 
of  these  deposits  is  that  known  as  the  Big  Bone  Lick,  Kentucky,  discovered  in 
1830,  twenty  miles  southwest  of  Cincinnati,  where  remains  of  enormous  herds 
of  mastodons  and  Columbian  mammoths  are  mingled  with  more  sparse 
remains  of  other  members  of  the  Megalonyx  fauna.  From  the  very  early 
account  of  Cooper  ^  we  take  these  notes.  The  relative  frequency  is  a  point 
of  especial  interest,  as  shown  in  the  following  table :  ^ 


A  feature  of  great  interest  is  the  occurrence  here  of  Ovibos  and  Rangifer, 
two  members  of  the  third  Pleistocene  fauna.  In  fact,  the  presence  of  the 
true  deer  (Cervus),  the  musk  ox  (Ovibos),  and  the  reindeer  (Rangifer),  if 
properly  determined,  is  an  indication  either  of  the  approach  of  the  fauna  of 
the  third  life  zone,  or  that  these  Big  Bone  Lick  deposits  bridged  over  the 
periods  of  the  second  and  third  zones. 

1  Cooper,  W.,  Smith,  J.  A.,  and  De  Kay,  J.  E.,  Report  to  the  Lyceum  of  Natural  History 
on  a  collection  of  fossil  bones  disinterred  at  Big  Bone  Lick,  Kentucky,  in  September,  1830,  and  | 
recently  brought  to  New  York.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  XX,  1831,  pp.  370-372;  also,  Cooper,  W.,  j 
Notices  of  Big  Bone  Lick.  Monthly  Amer.  Jour.  Geol.  Nat.  Sci.,  I,  1831,  pp.  158-174;  205-217.  j 

2  Authority,  F.  A.  Lucas,  The  Fossil  Bison  of  North  America.  Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.  '\ 
Vol.  XXI,  no.  1172,  1899,  pp.  755-771,  Pll.  Ixv-lxxxiv.  \ 


Mastodon  americanus 
Elephas  columbi 
Bison  antiquus  ^ 
Bison  latifrons  ^ 
Odocoileus  virginianus 
Cervus  canadensis 
Alces  americanus 
(?)Rangifer 
Ovibos 
(?)Equus 

Megalonyx  jeffersoni 


100  individuals 


20  individuals 
2  individuals 
1  individual 
2  individuals 
(?)individuals 
(?)  individuals 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  479 


Fig.  209.  —  Skeleton  of  the  famous  '  Warren  Mastodon'  {Mastodon  americanus),  found  in 
a  Pleistocene  deposit  of  New  York  State.    In  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History. 


Fig.  210,  —  The  American  mastodon  {M.  americanus),  modeled  on  the  skeleton  of  the 
*  Warren  Mastodon.'  After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History. 


480 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


It  would  be  natural  to  suppose  that  these  remains  were  of  animals 
attracted  by  the  salt  deposits  at  this  locality,  but  the  waterworn  and  broken 
condition  of  the  bones,  as  well  as  the  entire  scattering  of  the  skeletons, 
indicates  that  the  remains  were  assembled  through  floods.  It  is  remarkable 
that  no  carnivorous  animals  were  reported  with  the  original  discovery. 

Cha/racteristic  Mid-Pleistocene  Mammals  of  the  Second  Fauna 

Mastodons.  —  The  known  geographic  range  of  the  American  mastodon 
extends  over  the  entire  United  States  northward  to  Lake  Winnipeg  and 
British  Columbia,  with  a  single  find  reported  in  Alaska  and  two  finds 
reported  in  Nova  Scotia.  East  of  the  Hudson  and  of  Lake  Champlain  it 
is  rare;  thus  very  few  specimens  have  been  found  in  New  England.  In 
New  York  the  geographic  and  geologic  distribution  has  been  most  carefully 
examined  by  Clarke;^  he  finds  no  evidence  of  the  existence  of  mastodons 
before  the  Glacial  period ;  they  first  appear  in  New  York  State  in  what  is 
kno\vn  as  the  pre- Wisconsin  Interglacial  (see  p.  444).  The  time  of  their 
disappearance  or  extinction  seems  to  have  been  nearly  coincident  with  the 
melting  and  recession  of  the  ice  floes,  glacial  lakes,  and  glacial  streams, 
in  other  words,  post-Glacial  times.  Mastodon  and  E.  columbi  remains  are 
found  in  surface  deposits  above  the  latest  glacial  drift  in  Indiana  and  Ohio, 
and  according  to  the  opinion  of  some  observers  (Brown)  these  genera  ex- 
isted in  the  Central  States  long  after  glacial  influence.  In  the  western  part 
of  New  York  the  remains  are  found  imbedded  in  old  glacial  lake  terraces 
caused  by  the  damming  back  of  ice  floes.  In  eastern  and  southern  New  York 
remains  are  invariably  found  in  more  or  less  completely  drained  swamps  and 
peat  bogs,  separated  by  narrow  rocky  divides,  which  apparently  formed  the 
chief  lines  of  north  and  south  migration  of  these  great  quadrupeds.  That 
these  animals  survived  to  a  late  stage  in  post-Glacial  history  and  were  con- 
temporaneous with  man  is  especially  indicated  by  the  mastodon  excavated 
at  Attica,  New  York,  by  Clarke  in  1887  {op.  cit.,  p.  864) ;  beneath  the  bones 
of  this  skeleton  were  found  several  pieces  of  charcoal.  In  another  part  of 
the  same  swamp,  under  four  feet  of  muck  and  one  foot  below  the  level 
of  the  bones,  was  found  a  considerable  quantity  of  charcoal  with  broken 
pottery. 

As  compared  with  the  mammoth,  the  mastodon  (Figs.  209  and  210)  is 
distinguished  by  its  low  forehead,  its  short,  massive  limbs,  enormously  broad 
pelvis,  the  height  at  the  shoulders  not  exceeding  9  ft.  (2.70  m.)  to  9  ft.  6  in. 
It  is  probable  that  it  was  clothed  with  hair,  with  an  undercoating  of  wool. 
In  the  only  instance  in  which  hair  has  been  discovered  it  is  described  as 
coarse,  long,  and  brown.  The  greatest  length  attained  by  the  tusks  is  ten 
feet,  the  average  in  fuU-gro^vn  specimens  being  seven  to  eight  feet.  The 

1  Clarke,  J.  M.,  Mastodons  of  New  York.  N.  Y.  State  Mus.,  Bull.  69,  Palceontol.  9, 
Nov..  1903,  pp.  921-933.  See  also  Lucas,  Animals  before  Man  in  North  America,  New  York, 
1902. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  481 

annular  structure  of  the  dentine  appears  to  indicate  (Osborn,  1908)  that 
the  growth  was  intermittent;  an  animal  with  tusks  eight  feet  in  length 
exhibits  twenty-four  of  these  growth  rings,  which  may  be  interpreted  as 
proving  that  it  attained  an  age  of  more  than  twenty-four  years.  The  in- 
dications are  that  mastodons  were  extraordina  ily  abundant ;  it  is  estimated 
by  Clarke  that  they  may  have  been  at  one  time  as  numerous  as  the  bison.  At 


Fig.  211.  —  The  Bison  in  Pleistocene  times.  Localities  from  which  principal  types  and 
other  specimens  of  fossil  bison  have  been  recorded.  Authority  of  F.  A.  Lucas.  1.  Bison 
bison.  2.  Bison  occidentalis.  3  Bison  antiquus.  4.  Bison  crassicornis.  5.  Bison  alleni. 
6.  Bison  ferox.    7.  Bison  latifrons. 


Big  Bone  Lick,  Kentucky,  remains  of  mastodons  far  outnumber  those  of  the 
Columbian  mammoth,  being  five  times  as  numerous  as  those  of  the  mam- 
moth and  a  hundred  times  as  numerous  as  those  of  the  bison.  If  these 
animals  were  contemporaneous  with  man  in  post-Glacial  timeSj  it  is  possible 
that  they  may  have  been  hunted  or  driven  to  extinction  through  his  agency. 
2i 


482 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Bison.  —  We  owe  to  Allen  (1876)/  Lucas  (1899),2  and  McClung  (1908)  ^ 
our  knowledge  of  the  skull  and  skeleton  of  the  many  kinds  of  great  bison, 
or  buffalo,  which  roamed  over  all  parts  of  North  America  during  Pleistocene 
times.  As  revised  by  Lucas,  there  are  seven  valid  species  of  fossil  bison, 
which  had  a  widely  extended  geographical  distribution  from  Florida  to 
Alaska  (Fig.  211).  They  also  undoubtedly  in  part  succeeded  each  other 
in  geological  time,  the  latest  bisons  culminating  in  the  recent  species,  Bison 

bison,  more  or  less  fossiUzed 
remains  of  which  have  been 
discovered  in  Kentucky,  Kan- 
sas, and  in  the  loess  deposits 
of  Missouri. 

The  early  and  gigantic  form 
(B.  latifrons)  reflects  the  favor- 
able conditions  of  life  during 
the  Megalonyx  Zone.  In 
Texas,  Mississippi,  Georgia, 
Ohio,  Kentucky,  and  Kansas 
remains  of  this  species  have 
been  found.  In  some  of  these 
localities  they  are  associated 
with  bones  of  the  American 
mastodon,  the  Columbian 
mammoth,  and  of  the  great 
sloths  Megalonyx  and  Mylodon.  The  horn  cores  are  so  long  and  thick  that 
they  exceed  by  two  feet  on  each  side  those  of  the  existing  Old  and  New 
World  bison,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying  figure.  Horns  in  the  collection 
of  the  Cincinnati  Natural  History  Society  measure  6  ft.  6  in.  (1.95  m.) 
along  the  curve  from  tip  to  tip.  This  measurement  is  exceeded  by  the 
magnificent  horn  cores  discovered  in  Kansas  and  secured  by  Sternberg 
for  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History;  they  measure  6  ft.  across 
from  tip  to  tip,  and  8  ft.  6  in.  (2.55  m.)  along  the  curve;  this  appears  to  be 
the  record  in  size.  Although  the  skeleton  is  unknown,  we  may  judge  from 
the  size  of  the  skull  that  B.  latifrons  far  exceeded  any  of  its  living  relatives. 

Remains  of  another  ancient  form,  Bison  antiquus,  have  been  found  in 
Kentucky  and  in  California  associated  with  remains  of  elephants,  mas- 
todons, horses,  and  camels.  Although  a  much  smaller  animal,  it  appears 
to  have  been  a  contemporary  of  B.  latifrons  in  the  Megalonyx  life  zone,  but 
may  have  survived  to  a  more  recent  date.    It  is  considerably  larger  than 

*  Allen,  J.  A.,  The  American  Bisons,  Living  and  Extinct.  Mem.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.  Har- 
vard Coll.,  Cambridge,  Vol.  IV,  no.  10,  1876. 

2  Lucas,  F.  A.,  The  Fossil  Bison  of  North  America.  Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  Vol.  XXI, 
no.  1172,  1899,  pp.  755-771. 

'  McClung,  C.  F.,  Restoration  of  the  Skeleton  of  Bison  occidentalis .  Kansas  Univ.  Sci. 
Bull.,  Vol.  IV,  no.  10,  Sept.,  1908,  pp.  249-254. 


Fig.  212. —Skulls  of  (A)  the  extinct  bison  of 
Kansas,  B.  latifrons,  and  of  (B)  the  recent  bison  of 
the  Groat  Plains,  B.  bison.  In  the  American  Museum 
of  Natural  History. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  483 


B.  bison,  and  is  readily  distinguished  by  the  position  of  the  horns,  which 
are  placed  almost  at  right  angles  to  the  long  axis  of  the  skull.  The  horns 
of  another  species  {B.  ferox),  resembling  those  of  B.  latifrons,  have  been 
found  in  the  Pleistocene  of  Nebraska.  The  Pleistocene  of  Idaho  and  Kansas 
has  yielded  the  horn  cores  of  a  fifth  species  (B.  alleni).  The  giant  north- 
western bison  found  in  Alaska,  which  may  have  existed  also  in  eastern  Siberia, 
is  B.  crassicornis.  There  also  lived  in  Alaska,  probably  in  late  Pleistocene 
times,  and  ranged  down  into  Kansas,  the  species  B.  occidentalis.  This  animal 
most  closely  resembled  the  living  bison,  with  which  it  was  probably  contem- 
poraneous for  a  time.    A  complete  specimen  of  a  bull  of  this  species  was 


Fig.  213.  —  Skeleton  of  the  extinct  bison  B.  occidentalis.    In  the  University  of  Kansas. 


discovered  with  seven  or  eight  other  skeletons  near  Russell  Springs,  Logan 
County,  Kansas,  in  association  with  a  flint  arrowhead. ^  The  skeleton  as 
mounted  in  the  Kansas  Museum  (Fig.  213)  is  considerably  larger  than 
that  of  the  largest  recent  bison  in  length  and  height,  and  in  the  length  of 
the  hind  limbs.    The  horn  cores  are  similar  in  shape  and  proportions. 

Mountain  antelopes.  —  A  late  arrival  in  the  western  mountain  region 
only  is  the  so-called  '  Rocky  Mountain  Goat '  (Oreamnos) .  This  animal 
is  the  sole  representative  in  North  America  of  the  very  aberrant  group  of 
mountain  antelopes  known  as  the  chamois  sub-family,  or  Rupicaprince,  a 
subdivision  of  the  Bovidse,  comprising  five  widely  scattered  animals,  which 
are  distributed  on  mountain  heights  from  the  Pyrenees  of  Spain  to  the 

1  McClung,  Restoration  of  the  Skeleton  of  Bison  occidentalis.  Kansas  Univ.  Sci.  Bull., 
Vol.  IV,  no.  10,  Sept.,  1908,  pp.  249-254. 


3 


After  McCIung. 


484 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Rocky  Mountains.  These  are  the  typical  chamois  (Rupicapra),  the  goral, 
the  takin,  the  serow,  and  finally  the  American  misnamed  'goat.'^ 

Tapirs.  —  The  tapir  of  the  Megalonyx  Zone  {T.  haysii)  has  been  dis- 
covered in  Kentucky,  Indiana,  Mississippi,  and  South  Carolina.  This 
species  is  apparently  more  robust  than  the  existing  South  American  tapir. 
A  somewhat  smaller  animal,  referred  by  Leidy  to  T.  Americanus,  is  indis- 
tinguishable in  size  and  form  from  the  living  T.  terrestris  of  Central  and 
South  America.  Its  remains  have  been  found  in  Texas,  Louisiana,  Missis- 
sippi, South  Carolina,  Virginia,  Ohio,  Illinois,  and  California.  The  tapir 
was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  most  characteristic  animals  of  the  Megalonyx 
life  zone,  especially  in  the  forests  of  eastern  North  America.  It  apparently 
migrated  to  the  South  during  the  period  of  the  Ovibos  life  zone. 

Horses.  —  As  studied  by  Gidley  ^  there  were  at  least  ten  forms  or 
species  of  horses  in  different  parts  of  the  United  States  and  Mexico  in  Pleis- 
tocene times,  distinguished  by  geographic  distribution,  by  size,  and  by  the 
proportions  of  the  body  and  skull,  and  by  the  characters  of  the  upper  grinding 
teeth.  The  E.  fraternus,  found  in  the  Ashley  River,  South  Carolina,  and 
characteristic  of  the  southern  United  States,  is  still  imperfectly  known;  it  rep- 
resents a  very  small  horse,  with  teeth  scarcely  as  large  as  those  of  the  Mexican 
donkey  and  of  a  very  complex  pattern.  The  E.  complicatus,  first  found 
near  Natchez,  Mississippi,  belonging  in  the  western,  southern,  and  middle- 
western  states,  is  a  well-known  animal  characterized  by  teeth  as  large  as 
those  of  the  ordinary  horse,  but  with  a  skeleton  of  intermediate  size;  the  skull 
is  especially  distinguished  by  its  short  muzzle,  in  which  respect  it  resembles 
that  of  an  ass.  From  the  Rock  Creek  Beds,  of  western  Texas  comes  the  E. 
semiplicatus,  which  in  certain  cranial  characters,  as  well  as  in  the  size  and 
proportions  of  its  teeth,  seems  to  present  a  close  relationship  to  the  ass  {E. 
asinus).  On  the  Staked  Plains  of  central  Texas  has  been  found  E.  scotti 
(see  Fig.  14),  intermediate  in  size  between  E.  complicatus  and  E.  padficus, 
with  a  long  face,  relatively  large  head,  long  body,  short  neck,  resembling  in 
its  proportions  the  quagga  {E.  hurchelli).  From  southwestern  Texas  comes 
also  E.  giganteus,  the  largest  species  of  horse  hitherto  recorded,  the  teeth 
exceeding  those  of  the  largest  modern  draught  horses  by  more  than  one 
third  of  the  diameter  of  the  latter.  In  contrast  ^vith  this  is  the  E.  tau  in 
the  valley  of  Mexico,  the  smallest  true  horse  known  in  America,  more  diminu- 
tive than  any  European  species  living  or  extinct.  Associated  with  this  in 
the  valley  of  Mexico  is  E.  conversidens. 

The  type  of  horse  found  in  the  Middle  Pleistocene  forested  region  of 
eastern  Pennsylvania  is  E.  pectinatus,  from  the  Port  Kennedy  Cave.  On 
the  Pacific  slope,  California,  has  been  found  E.  occidentalis,  with  teeth  of 

1  Grant,  Madison,  The  Rocky  Mountain  Goat.  N.  Y.  Zodl.  Soc.  New  York,  9th  Ann. 
Rcpl.,  1904,  pp.  230-261. 

2  Gidley,  J.  W.,  Tooth  Characters  and  Revision  of  the  North  American  Species  of  the 
Genus  Equus.   Bull.  Amer.  Afits.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIV,  Art.  ix,  May  31,  1901,  pp.  91-141. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  485 


uniformly  simple  pattern,  a  horse  of  about  the  size  of  E.  complicatus,  i.e. 
about  14:^  hands.  Another  horse  found  in  California  is  E.  pacificus,  best 
known,  however,  in  Oregon ;  next  to  E.  giganteus  this  is  the  largest  American 
Pleistocene  horse;  the  skeleton  indicates  a  horse  of  about  the  size  of  an 
ordinary  draught  horse;  the  skull  is  proportionately  larger. 


Fig.  214.  —  The  Musk  Ox  in  glacial  and  recent  times.  Localities  in  which  Pleistocene  fossil 
musk  oxen  have  been  recorded  =  solid  black.    Present  distribution  of  musk  oxen  =  circles. 


fil  Maximum  glaciation  of  North  America  shown  in  oblique  lines.  Cor  =  Cordilleran  ice  sheet, 
Kee  =  Keewacin,  Lab  =  Labradorean.  Pleistocene  lakes  =  dotted  areas.  A,  Lake  Agassiz, 
L,  Lake  Lahontan,  B,  Lake  Bonneville. 

Lions.  —  It  is  a  most  interesting  case  of  faunal  parallelism  that  the 
mid-Pleistocene  of  America,  like  that  of  Europe,  developed  a  leonine  species 
of  cat.  This  was  contemporaneous  with  the  Megalonyx  fauna.  Its  remains 
were  first  found  by  Leidy  in  1853  near  Natchez,  Mississippi,  and  described 


486 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


as  Felis  atrox,  while  a  larger  Pleistocene  form  in  California  was  named  F. 
imperialis.  Confirmation  of  its  character  has  recently  been  obtained  ^  in 
the  Asphalt  Beds  of  Rancho  La  Brea.  The  skull  {Felis  atrox  behbi)  is 
remarkably  similar  to  that  of  the  existing  African  lion  and  the  cave  lion 
of  the  European  Pleistocene.  This  California  variety  approaches  closely 
in  measurements  Leidy's  type  jaw  from  Natchez,  Mississippi,  with  some 
specific  variations.  The  muzzle  is  very  wide  compared  with  the  length  of 
the  skull.  As  in  the  European  form,  the  superior  outhnes  of  the  skull 
approach  the  lion  more  closely  than  the  tiger.  The  related  form,  F.  impe- 
rialis,  from  Livermore  Valley,  California,  associated  with  remains  of 
B.  latifrons,  and  of  Elephas,  Equus,  and  Canis  indianensis,  possibly  occurs 
in  the  Potter  Creek  Cave  ^  and  is  reported  at  Washtucna  Lake,  Washington. 
It  is  undetermined  whether  it  is  really  a  distinct  species. 

Summary. —  The  mammals  which  have  been  described  above  as  con- 
temporaneous with  Megalonyx  in  such  widely  scattered  regions  as  Pennsyl- 
vania and  California  appear  to  constitute  a  great  group  adapted  to  tem- 
perate and  north  temperate  conditions  of  climate.  Except  in  the  probably 
successive  deposition  of  Big  Bone  Lick,  not  a  single  boreal,  tundra,  or 
steppe  species  occurs  among  them;  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  large 
element  of  hardy  species  of  southern  affinity,  such  as  the  sloths. 

3.  The  Fauna  of  the  Ovibos  Zone,  Perhaps  Corresponding  with 
THE  Arctic  and  Tundra  Period  in  Europe 

This  is  an  impoverished  fauna,  reduced  in  numbers  and  in  variety.  Full 
of  modern  or  existing  species,  far  to  the  south  of  their  present  range. 

We  thus  enter  a  new  faunal  zone,  which  may  be  called  the  zone  of  Ovibos, 
or  the  musk  ox.  The  advent  of  this  northern  form  in  the  central  United 
States,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying  figure,  is  perhaps  coincident  with  the 
period  of  the  last  great  glacial  advance  which  is  recorded  in  the  great  terminal 
moraine.  The  glaciated,  or  partly  glaciated  areas  of  the  United  States  at 
this  period  of  maximum  advance  are  here  mapped  as  recorded  by  Dana. 
The  known  southerly  distribution  of  the  musk  ox  in  Pleistocene  times  is 
independently  plotted  from  various  records,  yet  it  appears  to  coincide  in 
the  most  remarkable  way  with  the  southerly  boundaries  of  the  great  ice 
sheet.  (See  Fig.  214.)  The  mammals  of  this  period  of  maximum  glaciation 
and  of  the  subsequent  recession  of  the  ice  may  be  considered  together  as 
constituting  the  third  great  life  zone  of  the  American  Pleistocene,  which 
may  correspond  with  the  third  life  zone  in  Europe. 

It  by  no  means  rests  upon  the  same  positive  or  cumulative  evidence  as 

*  Merriam,  J.  C.  The  SkuH  and  Dentition  of  an  Extinct  Cat  Closely  Allied  to  Felis  atrox 
Leidy.    Univ.  Cal.  Publ.,  Bull.  Dept.  Geol.,  Vol.  V,  no.  20,  Aug.,  1909,  pp.  291-304. 

*  Bovard,  J.  F.,  Notes  on  Quaternary  Felidae  from  California.  Univ.  Cat.,  Publ.,  Bull. 
Dept.  Geol.,  Vol.  V,  no.  20,  Sept.,  1907,  pp.  155-166. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  487 

the  second,  or  Megalonyx  life  zone,  and  cannot  be  described  with  equal 
certainty  because  only  a  single,  rich  faunal  assemblage  is  known,  namely, 
that  of  the  Conard  Fissure  in  Arkansas. 

It  appears  to  be  defined  negatively  by  the  absence  of  great  sloths  (Mylodon 
and  Megalonyx)  and  of  the  tapirs.  There  is  less  certainty  as  to  the  absence 
or  extinction  of  the  llamas  at  this  time.  Positively,  it  is  distinguished  by 
the  arrival  of  the  musk  ox  (Ovibos),  the  reindeer  (Rangifer),  and  the  Old 
World  deer  or  wapiti  (Cervus).  It  is  important  to  note  that  in  Big  Bone 
Lick  (p.  478)  these  disappearing  and  newly  arriving  forms  are  recorded 
together,  although  they  may  have  been  successively  deposited.  The  chief 
localities  are: 

!  4.  Alaska,  'ground  ice,'  Kowak  clays,  etc.,  scattered  deposits. 

3.  CoNARD  Fissure,  Newton  County,  Arkansas.    (Fig.  194,  17.) 
2.  Scattered  deposits  in  the  Middle  and  Western  states. 
1.  Big  Bone  Lick,  Kentucky,  in  part  (see  p.  487). 

If  the  Conard  Fissure  of  Arkansas  is  rightly  placed  in  this  zone,  it  appears 
that  the  horses  still  survive,  although  in  diminished  numbers.  The  saber- 
tooth  tigers  also  survive  in  modified  form.  It  is  probable,  but  by  no  means 
certain,  that  the  modern  mammoth  (E.  primigenius)  reached  its  most  south- 
erly distribution  near  the  city  of  Washington  at  this  time.  The  American 
i  mastodons  certainly  survived  in  the  eastern  forests.  The  characteristic 
types  of  this  period  may,  therefore,  be  summarized  as  follows : 

Musk  oxen  (Symbos,  Ovibos),  ranging  south  to  the  central  states. 
Reindeer  or  caribou  (Rangifer). 

Old  World  or  wapiti  deer  (Cervus),  in  the  central  and  southern  states. 

Bisons  (f  B.  occidentalism  f  B.  bison). 

Mastodons,  in  the  eastern  forests, 
j  Northern  mammoths  (Elephas  primigenius). 

Last  saber-tooth  tigers  (Smilodontopsis) ,  in  the  southern  states, 
i  Last  horses,  in  the  southern  states. 

Walrus  (Odobcenus),  along  the  south  Atlantic  coast. 

Conard  Fissure  of  Arkansas  (Fig.  194,  17).  —  It  is  important  to  note 
(Fig.  214)  that  this  locality  lies  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  south 
of  the  most  southerly  extension  of  the  great  terminal  moraine.  As  recorded 
by  Brown  ^  (1908)  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  this  fissure 
has  yielded  remains  of  thirty-seven  genera  and  fifty-one  species  of  mammals, 
of  which  only  four  genera  and  twenty-four  species  are  now  extinct ;  it  thus 
presents  a  great  contrast  to  the  Port  Kennedy  assemblage.  The  presence 
of  an  extinct  genus  of  musk  ox  (Symbos),  of  the  wapiti  (C.  canadensis),  and 
of  many  small  rodents  and  carnivores  which  at  the  present  time  range  far 

1  Brown,  Barnum,  The  Conard  Fissure,  a  Pleistocene  Bone  Deposit  in  Northern  Arkansas: 
with  Descriptions  of  Two  New  Genera  and  Twenty  new  Species  of  Mammals.  Mem.  Amer. 
Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  IX,  Pt.  iv,  Feb.,  1908. 


488 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


north  of  Arkansas,  shows  that  the  cHmate  was  of  a  northerly  type  similar 
to  that  of  the  forested  regions  of  British  Columbia.  With  the  exception  of 
the  musk  ox  —  which,  it  must  be  remembered,  formerly  had  a  more  south- 
erly range  than  at  present  —  it  is  certainly  in  no  sense  a  tundra  or  arctic 
fauna.  The  assemblage,  nevertheless,  indicates  the  crowding  southward  of 
northerly  forms,  such  as  may  have  occurred  during  the  advance  of  the  great 
ice  sheet.  There  is  no  evidence  of  the  existence  here  at  this  time  of  Mega- 
lonyx,  or  Mylodon,  of  the  tapir,  mammoth,  or  mastodon.  It  would  not  be 
safe,  however,  to  assume  from  this  evidence  that  the  tapir,  mammoth,  and 
mastodon  were  extinct  in  all  other  parts  of  the  American  continent  at  the 
time.  The  only  four  now  extinct  genera  which  give  an  ancient  character 
to  this  fauna  are  the  saber-tooth  tiger,  above  mentioned,  an  extinct  species 
of  horse  {E.  scotti  f),  an  extinct  genus  and  species  of  peccary  (Mylohyus), 
and  the  extinct  genus  of  skunk  (Brachyprotoma) ,  three  species  of  which  are 
found  in  the  Port  Kennedy  Cave. 

The  condition  of  the  bones  and  the  association  and  predominance  of 
certain  forms  indicate  that  this  fissure  was  the  home  of  several  contem- 
poraneous species  which  preyed  on  still  others  and  brought  their  remains 
into  it.  Cats  and  bears  probably  inhabited  parts  of  this  cavern,  dragging 
in  peccaries  and  deer ;  weasels  occupied  runways  in  the  rock,  which  are  filled 
with  remains  of  mice,  rabbits,  and  wood  rats.  Shrew  and  mice  bones  were 
probably  introduced  largely  by  owls,  which  may  have  lived  on  the  ledges  of 
the  fissure.  The  fauna  is  typically  that  of  a  forest  region,  with  open  glades, 
similar  to  the  present  conditions  of  the  same  region  in  Arkansas.  There 
are  five  species  of  shrews,  three  of  which  are  now  extinct,  a  mole,  two  bats, 
one  living  and  three  extinct  species  of  skunk.  Other  mustelines  are  the 
fisher  marten  (Mustela  pennanti),  the  mink  (Putorius  vison),  and  the  weasel. 
The  gray  wolf  (C.  occidentalis)  was  accompanied  by  the  red  fox  (Vulpes 
fulvus  f),  and  the  gray  fox  (Urocyon  sp.).  The  raccoon  (Procyon  lotor) 
was  abundant.  We  observe  the  black  bear  {U.  americanus) ,  but,  as  in  the 
Samwel  Cave  of  California,  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  giant  South  American 
bear  which  is  found  in  all  the  earlier  Pleistocene  deposits  of  the  Megalonyx 
Zone.  Among  the  cats  are  l3mxes  and  pumas,  beside  two  species  of  the 
extinct  saber-tooth  (Smilodontopsis  troglodytes,  S.  conardi). 

Among  the  larger  Herbivora  both  the  mule  deer  {Odocoileus  hemionus) 
and  the  white-tailed  deer  (0.  virginianus)  are  recorded,  as  well  as  the  wapiti 
(C.  canadensis)  and  the  extinct  genus  and  species  of  musk  ox  {Symbos  aus- 
tralis).  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  peccary  is  not  of  the  existing  southwestern 
type  (Dicotyles  torquatus),  but  belongs  to  the  genus  (Mylohyus)  character- 
istic of  the  Megalonyx  Zone. 

The  small  rodent  fauna  is  that  of  the  present  forested  regions  of  the 
Rocky  Mountain  area. 

Canadian  deposits.  —  The  Iroquois  Beach  deposits  (Fig.  194,  2)  are  con- 
sidered by  Canadian  geologists  of  post-Glacial  age.  They  contain  numerous 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  489 


horns  of  reindeer  (R.  caribou),  of  the  mammoth  (E.  primigenius) ,  of  the 
mastodon  (M.  americanus),  of  the  wapiti  (C.  canadensis),  and  of  the  beaver 
{Castor  fiber). ^  Seventy  feet  above  the  lake  (Lake  Ontario),  on  Burlington 
Bay,  the  western  part  of  the  lake,  has  been  recorded  the  mammoth  {Elephas 
jacksoni),  a  type  probably  referable  to  the  true  mammoth. 

The  Alaskan  fauna.  —  Alaska  was  free  from  glaciers  except  in  its  cen- 
tral mountainous  belt.  It  presents  a  rich  life  in  Pleistocene  times.  The  bones 


Fig.  215.  —  Map  of  Alaska  showing  localities  where  Pleistocene  mammalian  fossils  have  been 
J  discovered.    After  Dall  and  others.    Quackenbush,  American  Museum  Expedition,  1908. 


of  mammals  are  found  widely  distributed ;  ^  their  scattered  remains  occur 
throughout  the  unglaciated  region  of  Alaska  and  adjacent  Canadian  terri- 
tory in  several  quite  distinct  deposits :  first,  in  the  black  muck  accumulated 

1  Geology  of  Canada,  1863,  p.  914. 

^  Dall,  W.  H.,  and  Harris,  G.  D.,  Correlation  Papers.  The  Neocene  of  North  America 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Bull.  No.  84,  1892. 


490 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


in  gulches  and  valleys  of  the  smaller  streams;  second,  in  the  fine  elevated 
dsLVs  of  the  '  Yukon  silts '  and  '  Kowak  clays ' ;  and  third,  in  the  more  recent 
fluvial  and  alluvial  deposits.^  Of  these  the  most  remarkable  is  the  'ground 
ice '  formation  of  Dall,  in  which  solid  beds  of  ice  of  considerable  thickness 
take  the  place  of  rock  strata,  and  are  covered  by  beds  of  blue  clay  containing 
numerous  remains  of  Pleistocene  mammals.  The  distribution  of  these 
ground  ice  formations  and  of  the '  Kowak  Clays '  is  plotted  on  the  accom- 
panying Alaskan  map,  which  combines  the  results  of  Dall  and  of  Quacken- 
bush,  the  symbols  indicating  our  present  knowledge  of  the  distribution  of  the 
principal  types  of  mammals.  This  distribution  includes,  beside  the  above, 
bones  recorded  in  river  gravel  deposits.  In  some  of  the  clays  the  parts 
preserved  are  so  complete  as  to  indicate  that  the  animals  were  mired 
entire,  one  such  specimen  with  portions  of  the  hair  and  wool  having  been 
discovered  by  Quackenbush.^ 

Elephas  primigenius,  the  hairy  or  northern  mammoth. 

Elephas  columbi  (determination  somewhat  uncertain). 

Mastodon  americanus. 

Ovis  (determination  somewhat  uncertain). 

Ovihos  moschatus,  the  true  musk  ox. 

Ovibos  yukonensis,  an  extinct  species. 

Symbos  tyrelli,  with  much  smaller  horns  than  Ovihos, 

Ovis  montanus,  the  mountain  sheep. 

Oreamnos,  the  mountain  goat. 

Rangifer  sp.  ind.,  caribou,  probably  the  'barren  ground'  variety. 

Bison  crassicornis,  a  long-horned  species. 

Bison  occidentalis,  resembling  the  recent  bison. 

Bison  alleni,  with  long,  slender,  much  curved  horns. 

Alces,  the  moose  {f  Alces  americanus). 

Equus,  species  indeterminate. 

Ursus,  of  the  size  of  U.  americanus. 

Canis. 

Castor,  the  beaver. 
Odobcenus,  the  walrus. 

Judging  from  the  number  of  separate  bones  collected  or  examined  by 
Quackenbush,  the  mammoth  was  everywhere  the  most  abundant  animal, 
the  bison  followed  closely,  the  horse  and  caribou  existed  in  lesser  numbers, 
and  other  mammals  were  comparatively  scarce.  That  the  country  was 
forested  and  the  climate  somewhat  milder  than  that  of  the  present  time 
seems  to  be  proven  by  the  fact  that  large  trees  have  been  found  associated 

1  Gilmore,  C.  W.,  Smithsonian  Exploration  in  Alaska  in  Search  of  Pleistocene  Fossil 
Vertebrates,    Smiths.  Miscel.  Coll.,  part  of  Vol.  LI,  Washington,  1908. 

^  Quackenbush,  L.  S.,  Notes  on  Alaskan  Mammoth  Expeditions  of  1907  and  1908.  Bull. 
Amer.  Mus.  Xat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVI,  Art.  ix,  Mar.  24,  1909,  pp.  87-130. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  491 


with  horse  and  mammoth  remains  in  regions  which  are  now  barren  tundras 
with  frozen  subsoil.  The  preservation  of  the  flesh  and  hair  of  the  mam- 
moth found  at  Elephant  Point  was  not  due  originally  to  freezing,  but  to 
burial  in  soft  mud  which  protected  the  parts  from  bacterial  decay;  the 
parts  of  the  body  above  the  surface  were  rotted  away.  There  is  some  evi- 
dence that  these  mud  deposits  were  due  to  river  flood-plain  action  and  that 


Fig.  216.  —  Bluff  on  the  south  side  of  Eschscholtz  Bay,  Alaska,  where  remains  of  many 
Pleistocene  mammals  have  been  found  ('  big  bone  beach  ')•  The  cross  indicates  the  spot  where 
part  of  a  mammoth  skeleton  with  some  skin  and  hair  was  discovered.  After  Quackenbush, 
American  Museum  Expedition,  1908. 

a  part  of  the  deposits  have  since  become  frozen.  All  are  now  covered  by 
the  thick  vegetation  of  the  tundras  except  where  exposed  at  the  seashore 
and  along  river  borders. 

The  contemporaneity  of  these  Alaskan  species  is  by  no  means  demon- 
strated. They  may  represent  several  successive  periods  of  Pleistocene 
time:  the  moose  and  reindeer  in  the  forests,  the  horses  and  bison  (typical 
grazers)  grazing  on  the  uplands,  the  elephants  and  rare  mastodons  grazing 
and  browsing  in  the  forest  borders,  the  beaver  building  their  dams  from  the 
forests  along  the  streams.  The  musk  oxen  and  caribou,  adapted  to  the 
mosses  and  shrubs  of  the  barren  grounds,  are  indicative  of  different 
periods. 

Certainly  the  horse,  the  bison,  and  the  elephants  would  have  been 


492 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


favored  by  a  dry  or  arid  climate,  even  if  cold.  Dall  ^  remarks  that  the  eleva- 
tion of  the  continental  shelf  under  Behring  Sea  about  300  feet  would 
have  laid  bare  an  enormous  level  plain  covering  most  of  the  present  area 
of  Behring  Sea.  The  diminished  body  of  water  in  connection  with  the 
prevalence  of  the  northwest  trade  winds  would  have  given  to  this  region  such 
a  dry  climate  as  characterizes  much  of  Siberia  and  the  Yukon  Valley  in 
Alaska  to-day,  which  actually  suffers  from  severe  summer  droughts. 

Vast  shallow  lakes  of  muddy  water  might,  as  now  happens  in  the  same 
region,  freeze  solidly  to  the  bottom  and  be  covered  with  deposits  of  clay 
from  the  spring  freshets,  a  condition  explaining  the  great  ice  lenses  of  the 
'ground  ice'  formation.  Certain  mammals  might  have  been  trapped  in 
the  quagmires  formed  by  these  clays.  Finally,  with  the  subsidence  of  the 
coast  and  the  return  of  a  milder  climate,  the  ice  lenses  in  the  more  northern 
and  colder  regions,  especially  where  protected  by  the  clays,  by  the  freezing 
of  the  soil,  and  by  the  arctic  vegetation,  would  be  conserved  to  the  present 
day. 

Characteristic  Mammals  of  the  Third  or  Ovihos  Zone 

Distribution  of  musk  oxen.  —  Beside  the  extinct  short-horned  musk  ox 
(Symhos)  found  in  Arkansas,  remains  of  musk  oxen  are  recorded  ^  at  Fort 
Gibson,  Indian  Territory,  in  three  localities  in  Missouri,  in  Trumbull  County, 
Ohio,  at  Big  Bone  Lick,  Kentucky,  in  two  localities  in  Pennsylvania,  at 
Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  and  near  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  In  every  instance  the 
remains  have  been  recovered  either  directly  from  glacial  deposits  or  from 
deposits  that  may  be  correlated  with  some  stage  of  the  Glacial  Period.  The 
skull  of  a  musk  ox  {Ovihos  cavifrons),  discovered  in  part  of  the  glacial  terrace 
near  the  Ohio  River  in  West  Virginia,  one  mile  from  Steubenville,  was  asso- 
ciated with  the  shoulder  blade  of  a  mammoth  of  undetermined  species.  The 
reasonable  inference  seems  to  be  that  the  musk  oxen  moved  southward 
before  the  advancing  ice,  and  then  retreated  northward  to  their  present 
areas  of  distribution.    (See  Fig.  214.) 

Cervalces.  —  An  almost  complete  skeleton  of  an  extinct  moose  was  discov- 
ered in  1884  in  the  shell-marl  deposit  under  a  bog  at  Mt.  Hermon,  New  Jersey, 
and  described  by  Scott  in  1885.^  Its  occurrence  so  far  south  of  the  present 
range  of  the  moose  points  to  a  cold  climate  in  New  Jersey,  but  whether  this 
animal  belongs  to  the  Megalonyx  or  to  the  Ovibos  Zone  cannot  be  determined 
at  present.  It  is  a  remarkably  long-limbed  form,  perhaps  in  adaptation 
to  its  habitat  in  snowy  regions.  The  unusual  size  of  the  lateral  digits  would 
also  favor  the  supposition  of  walking  in  the  snow,  although  they  may 
have  been  an  adaptation  to  swampy  conditions.    The  antlers  are  large  and 

1  Dall  and  Harris,  op.  cit.,  p.  266. 

2  Hatcher,  J.  B.,  Discovery  of  a  Musk  Ox  Skull  (Ovibos  cavifrons  Leidy),  in  West  Virginia, 
near  Steubenville,  Ohio.    Science,  n.s..  Vol.  XVI,  Oct.  31,  1902,  pp.  707-709. 

^  Scott,  W.  B.,  Cervalces  americanus,  a  Fossil  Moose,  or  Elk,  from  the  Quaternary  of  New 
Jersey.    Proc.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Philadelphia,  1885,  pp.  181-202. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  493 


palmate,  and  are  especially  distinguished  by  broad  inferior  horizontal  plates.^ 
The  animal,  like  the  moose,  was  undoubtedly  a  tree-browser;  the  neck  is 
so  short  in  comparison  with  the  limbs  that  the  muzzle  could  not  have  been 
brought  within  fourteen  or  fifteen  inches  of  the  ground.  To  compensate 
for  this  the  animal  had  a  prehensile  upper  lip,  which,  however,  was  less 
pronounced  than  that  of  the  moose.    As  in  the  moose,  the  withers  are  higher 


Fig.  217.  —  The  American  deer-moose  Cervalces.  Restoration  from  a  skeleton  in  the 
Museum  of  Princeton  University.  After  original  by  Charles  R.  Knight  in  the  American 
Museum  of  Natural  History. 


than  the  rump.  Cervalces  was  a  contemporary  of  the  moose,  which  survived 
into  recent  times. 

Sirenians,  or  sea-cows.  —  On  both  the  Pacific  and  Atlantic  coasts  in 
Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  times  the  most  characteristic  littoral  mammals 
were  the  sirenians,  or  sea-cows,  which  were  either  derived  from  the  migra- 
tion of  Old  World  forms  from  Africa  by  way  of  the  north  Pacific  and  Asia, 
or  were  descendants  of  a  transatlantic  (Atlantis)  migration  (p.  340)  in 
Eocene  times  which  found  ready  access  to  the  Pacific  coast  through  one  of 
the  great  sea  routes  which  separated  North  and  South  America  as  late  as 
the  Pliocene  period.  In  favor  of  the  theory  of  north  Pacific  migration  is 
the  striking  similarity  which  exists  between  the  Japanese  and  Californian 

^  On  comparing  the  antlers  of  Cervalces  with  those  of  the  moose,  it  becomes  evident  that 
the  former  consist  of  the  same  parts,  with  something  added.  Just  what  these  additional  parts 
are  is  by  no  means  easy  to  say.  The  anterior  tine  (of  the  ear-shaped  process)  may  be  the  bez- 
antler,  while  the  posterior  one  may  correspond  to  the  tine  which  in  Megaceros,  the  fallow-deer, 
and  some  others,  is  given  off  from  the  hinder  surface  of  the  beam  nearly  opposite  the  bez- 
antler.    (Scott,  1885.) 


494 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


representatives  of  the  remarkable  Pliocene  mammal  known  as  Desmostylus 
(see  p.  344).  Favoring  the  less  probable  theory  of  transatlantic  migration 
from  the  African  coast  is  the  presence  in  supposed  Eocene  deposits  of 
Jamaica  of  one  of  the  most  primitive  of  sirenians,  the  Prorastomus  of  Owen,^ 
This  animal,  with  its  comparatively  straight  or  normal  upper  jaw  and  com- 
plete series  of  teeth,  is  even  more  primitive  in  structure  than  the  Eosiren 
libijca  of  the  Upper  Eocene  Mokattam  limestones  (Fig.  89)  of  the  Cairo 
and  Faytim  districts  of  Africa. 

The  great  northern  sea-cow  of  the  Pacific  (Rhytina  stelleri),  or  Steller's 
sea-cow,  was  discovered  by  Steller,  v/ho  accompanied  Behring  on  his  last 
expedition  of  1741  in  search  of  the  northwest  passage.^    It  inhabited  the 
shallow  waters  immediately  surrounding  certain  of  the  Aleutian  Islands, 
and  moved  by  means  of  two  small  anterior  flippers,  which  were  covered 
with  bristles,  and  by  its  fluked  tail.    The  short  fore  leg  terminated  abruptly  ' 
without  fingers  or  nails,  but  was  overgro^vn  with  a  number  of  short,  thickly 
placed  brush  hairs.    It  was  a  bulky  animal,  thirty  or  even  thirty-five  feet 
in  length,  and  twenty  feet  in  girth,  weighing  about  6,700  pounds,  and  covered 
with  a  very  thick,  much  wrinkled  skin  of  a  dark  browTi  color.    Of  all  the 
Sirenia  it  was  the  only  one  adapted  by  its  thick  undercoating  of  blubber  to 
inhabit  the  cold  seas  of  the  north.    In  Pleistocene  times  it  probably  ranged  ' 
much  farther  south  than  the  Aleutian  Islands.    It  probably  became  extinct 
toward  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  because  it  fell  an  easy  prey  to. 
the  sailors  and  fur  traders. 

Antiquity  of  Man  in  North  America 

The  time  of  the  first  appearance  of  man  on  the  North  American  con- 
tinent still  remains  to  be  determined,  and  is  a  problem  of  the  very  highest 
importance. 

Was  man  contemporaneous  with  the  closing  period  of  the  second  or 
Megalonyx  fauna,  or  with  the  third,  the  Ovibos  and  late  Mastodon,  fauna? 
Did  man  enter  this  country  from  Asia  or  from  South  America?  Are  traces 
of  human  occupation  found  first  on  the  Pacific  or  on  the  Atlantic  coast? 
All  these  are  questions  which  remain  yet  to  be  answered  positively. 

In  brief,  it  may  be  said  certainly,  so  far  as  anatomical  evidence  is  con- 
cerned, that  no  trace  of  human  skeletons  of  the  Palaeolithic  or  Neandertal 
type  of  Europe  have  been  found  in  North  America,  and  as  certainly  that 
all  skeletons  which  have  been  reported  have  been  referred  finally  to  the 
recent  Indian  type.  Second,  there  is  some  evidence  of  the  coexistence  of 
man  with  the  late  stages  of  the  Megalonyx  Zone  in  California  and  in  the 

'  Owen,  R.,  On  Prorastomus  sirenoides.  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Sac.  London,  Vol.  XXXI, 
1875,  p.  559,  PI.  18  and  19. 

*  Nordenskiold,  A.  E.,  The  Voyage  of  the  Vega  round  Asia  and  Europe,  with  a  Historical 
Review  of  Previous  Journeys  along  the  North  Coast  of  the  Old  World.  Translated  by  Alex- 
ander Leslie.    New  York,  1882. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  495 

central  states,  as  well  as  considerable  evidence  of  the  appearance  of  man 
before  the  disappearance  of  the  mastodon  in  the  eastern  states.  This 
raises  the  further  question  as  to  the  period  of  the  final  extinction  of  the 
mastodon. 

It  will  be  interesting  to  pass  in  review  some  of  the  alleged  or  actual  cases 
of  the  association  of  implements  of  human  manufacture  with  the  remains 
of  various  extinct  mammals. 

Man  and  the  mastodon.  —  As  early  as  1839  flint  arrowheads  were  reported 
by  Koch  in  association  with  the  bones  of  M.  americanus  in  Missouri.  Again, 
evidence  for  the  contemporaneity  of  man  and  the  mastodon  was  reported 
in  the  Pleistocene  near  Charleston  by  Holmes  in  1859  and  in  the  Pleistocene 
of  California  by  Whitney  (1866-1867).  In  1869,  however,  Leidy  declared  ^ 
that  neither  of  these  alleged  associations  established  beyond  doubt  the  coex- 
istence of  man  with  any  of  the  extinct  Pleistocene  mammals.  In  1885, 
however,  Putnam  reported  the  remains  of  man  and  mastodon  in  Worcester, 
Massachusetts,^  as  follows :  a  mastodon  tooth  and  a  human  skull  were  found 
associated  together  in  a  marsh  eighteen  feet  below  the  surface;  the  lower 
jaw  was  embedded  in  blue  clay;  both  showed  that  they  had  been  transported 
by  running  water,  and  brought  to  this  deposit  before  the  overlying  peat 
formation  began.  Norris,  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  reported 
some  fragments  of  elephant  or  mastodon  tusks  exhumed  from  a  mound  in 
Wisconsin.  In  1887  Scott  summed  up  the  evidence  as  follows:^  "It  is 
well  known  to  archaeologists  that  pipes  of  catlinite  shaped  like  the  elephant 
have  been  discovered  in  Iowa,  also  that  a  so-called  'elephant  mound'  in 
Wisconsin  has  been  much  debated,  since  it  is  situated  in  the  region  of  the 
effigy  mounds  of  the  northwest.  .  .  .  The  coexistence  of  man  and  the  mas- 
todon, or  mammoth,  in  America,  as  in  Europe,  has  advanced  now  beyond  the 
stage  of  presumption;  it  has  been  so  well  verified  that  it  can  hardly  be 
excluded  from  the  realm  of  science."  Still,  it  is  necessary  to  exercise  care 
in  the  use  of  facts  brought  to  light  which  seem  to  bear  on  this  question. 
In  1887  D.  G.  Brinton  *  reported  human  footprints  in  the  volcanic  tufa  at 
Lake  Managua,  about  ten  feet  above  which  were  mastodon  remains.  A 
striking  feature  of  these  footprints  is  that  the  second  toe  is  the  longest  of  all. 

In  1895  Mercer  ^  reported  at  Petit  Anse,  Louisiana,  the  discovery  of 
modern  implements,  fourteen  feet  below  the  surface,  underlying  remains 
of  an  extinct  elephant.    This  author  considers  that  this  may  be  a  case  of 

1  Leidy,  J.,  The  Extinct  Mammalian  Fauna  of  Dakota  and  Nebraska,  Including  an  Ac- 
count of  Some  Allied  Forms  from  Other  Localities,  together  with  a  Synopsis  of  the  Mammalian 
Remains  of  North  America.   Jour.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phila.,  (2)  Vol.  VII,  1869,  pp.  1-472. 

2  Putnam,  F.  W.,  Man  and  the  Mastodon.  Science,  Vol.  VI,  no.  143,  1885,  pp.  375-376. 

3  Scott,  W.  B.,  On  American  Elephant  Myths.  Scribner's  Magazine,  Vol.  I,  April,  1887, 
p.  469. 

*  Brinton,  D.  G.,  On  an  Ancient  Human  Footprint  from  Nicaragua.  Proc.  Amer.  Phil. 
Soc.  Phila.,  Vol.  XXIV,  1887,  pp.  437-444. 

^  Mercer,  H.  C,  The  Antiquity  of  Man  at  Petit  Anse  (Avery's  Island),  Louisiana.  Amer. 
Natural,  Vol.  XXIX,  no.  340,  April,  1895,  pp.  393-394. 


496 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


'intrusive  burial/  in  which  a  grave  was  dug  down  through  the  earth  to  the 
salt.  Another  case  of  obviously  artificial  or  accidental  association  is  that 
reported  in  a  sulphur  sprmg  at  Afton,  Indian  Territory,  by  Holmes^  (1901), 
where  flint  arrowheads  and  other  implements  were  found  in  association 
with  teeth  and  other  remains  of  mammoth  (probably  E.  primigenius,  E. 
imperator),  fossil  bison,  and  the  horse.  The  most  plausible  explanation  of 
this  accumulation  is  that  the  spring  was  regarded  as  magical  by  the  Indians, 
who  threw  into  it  not  only  such  fossil  bones  as  were  exposed  in  the  vicinity, 
but  also  their  most  precious  possessions,  including  their  various  weapons  and 
implements. 

By  far  the  most  authentic  case  is  that  reported  by  Clarke  ^  in  1903. 
A  small  tusk,  ribs  and  other  bones  of  a  young  mastodon  were  found  at 
Attica,  Wyoming  County,  New  York,  in  unlaminated  clay  overlaid  by  muck, 
etc.,  at  a  depth  of  two  to  three  feet.  Several  pieces  of  charcoal  were  dis- 
covered under  these  bones,  and  in  another  part  of  the  same  swamp  and 
one  foot  below  the  level  of  the  bones,  some  bits  of  broken  pottery  and  a 
considerable  quantity  of  charcoal  were  discovered. 

Man  and  Megalonyx.  — At  Natchez,  Mississippi,  a  human  pubic  bone 
was  found  in  1846  in  association  with  a  true  Megalonj^x  fauna.  The  bones 
were  reported  to  be  in  the  same  condition  of  preservation  as  the  larger  bones, 
and  hence  may  be  considered  contemporary.^  Leidy  considered  that  this 
pelvic  bone  might  have  fallen  in  from  one  of  the  Indian  graves  above  it. 
Wilson,^  however  (1892),  reported  that  a  chemical  investigation  of  the  human 
bone  showed  it  was  more  advanced  in  fossilization  than  that  of  the  asso- 
ciated Mylodon,  and  hence  might  be  considered  as  old  or  older.  Cope 
(1895)  ^  rejected  the  previous  evidence,  stating  that  no  trace  of  man  had 
been  found  in  the  Megalonyx  fauna. 

In  1896,  however,  Mercer  ®  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  remains  of 
Megalonyx  found  in  the  Big  Bone  Cave,  Van  Buren  County,  Tennessee  (Fig. 
194,  10),  were  not  appreciably  older  than  the  associated  human  remains. 
This  is  by  far  the  most  significant  of  these  associations,  and  is  more  fully 
described  below  (p.  498). 

The  most  recently  discovered  associations  of  Megalonyx  with  supposed 
artifacts  of  human  manufacture  are  in  the  Potter  Creek  and  Samwel  caves, 

^  Holmes,  W.  H.,  Flint  Implements  and  Fossil  Remains  from  a  Sulphur  Spring  at  Afton, 
Indian  Territory.    Ann.  Kept.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  1901,  pp.  233-252. 

2  Clarke,  J.  M.,  Mastodons  of  New  York.  A  List  of  Discoveries  of  their  Remains,  1705- 
1902.    N.Y.  State  Mus.  Bull.,  69,  Palaeontology,  9,  1903,  p.  932. 

»  Leidy,  1869. 

*  Wilson,  T.,  Man  and  the  Mylodon.  Their  Possible  Contemporaneous  Existence  in  the 
Mississippi  Valley.    Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XXVI,  no.  307,  July,  1892,  pp.  628-631. 

^  Cope,  E.  D.,  The  Antiquity  of  Man  in  North  America.  Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXIX, 
1895,  pp.  593-599. 

"  Mercer,  H.  C,  Cave  Exploration  by  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  Tennessee. 
Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XXX,  no.  355,  July,  1896,  pp.  608-611;  also.  Cave  Exploration  in  the 
Eastern  United  States,  Preliminary  Report.    Dept.  Amer.  Prehist.  ArcJioeol.  Univ.  Pa.,  1896. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  497 

the  fauna  of  which  is  described  above  (p.  476).  The  weight  of  this  evidence 
may  be  estimated  from  the  opinions  of  Putnam  (1905)  and  of  J.  C.  Merriam 
(1906)  cited  below. 

Human  implements  and  extinct  mammals.  —  None  of  the  early  reports  of 
association  afford  unequivocal  evidence:  the  arrowheads  found  by  Koch 
in  1839  in  association  with  the  bones  of  mastodon,  those  reported  by  Mer- 
cer, those  in  the  sulphur  spring  at  Afton  (Indian  Territory),  all  appear  to 
be  cases  of  accidental  association.  The  flints 
and  obsidian  artifacts  found  in  Fossil  Lake, 
Oregon,  with  the  mammals  of  the  Equus  fauna 
are  also  apparently  an  entirely  superficial 
association. 

The  most  important  case  of  association  of 
an  arrowhead  with  an  extinct  species  of  bison 
is  that  reported  by  Williston.^  As  above 
described  (p.  464),  underneath  the  scapula  of 
an  extinct  species  of  bison  {B.  occidentalis)  an 
arrowhead  was  found  imbedded  in  the  matrix, 
but  touching  the  bone  itself.  The  arrowhead 
must  have  been  within  the  body  of  the  animal 
at  the  time  of  death  or  lying  on  the  surface 
beneath  its  body.  At  no  great  distance  from 
this  point  bones  of  the  elephant  (E.  columhi) 
have  been  found  in  the  same  material,  namely, 
in  the  widespread  upland  marl  which  covered 
these  skeletons. 

Russell  2  describes  the  discovery  of  a  spear- 
head in  the  'upper  lacustral  clays'  of  the 
Lahontan  basin  as  follows:  "The  fossil  from  the  Lahontan  Basin,  which 
will  probably  be  considered  by  both  geologists  and  archaeologists  as  of 
the  greatest  interest,  is  a  spearhead  of  human  workmanship.  This  was 
obtained  by  Mr.  McGee,^  from  the  upper  lacustral  clays  exposed  in 
the  walls  of  Walker  River  Canon,  and  was  associated  in  such  a  manner 
with  the  bones  of  elephant  or  mastodon,  as  to  leave  no  doubt  as  to  their 
having  been  buried  approximately  at  the  same  time.  Both  are  genuine 
fossils  of  the  pre-Lahontan  period.  The  spearhead  is  of  chipped  obsidian, 
and  is  in  all  respects  similar  to  many  other  implements,  commonly  found 
on  the  surface,  throughout  the  far  West." 

The  most  recent  of  these  associations  is  the  alleged  evidence  of  man's 

1  Williston,  S.  W.,  An  Arrow-head  found  with  Bones  of  Bison  occidentalis  Lucas,  in  western 
Kansas.    Amer.  GeoL,  Vol.  XXX,  Nov.,  1902,  pp.  313-315. 

^  Russell,  I.  C,  Geological  History  of  Lake  Lahontan.  A  Quaternary  Lake  of  North- 
western Nevada.    Monogr.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Vol.  XI,  1885. 

^  W  J  McGee,  the  well-known  geologist  and  ethnologist. 
2k 


Fig.  218.  —  Flint  arrow-head 
discovered  under  skeleton  of  Bison 
antiquus  in  the  Pleistocene  of 
Kansas.    After  Williston. 


498 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


handiwork  in  the  Shasta  Caves  (Potter  Creek  and  Samwel)  of  California, 
which  contain  a  pure  though  late  Pleistocene  fauna.  Examination  by 
Putnam  ^  led  him  to  the  conclusion  that  the  evidence  of  man's  handi- 
work, consisting  chiefly  of  two  perforated  bones,  is  sufficiently  important 
to  warrant  belief  that  man  lived  in  the  vicinity  of  these  caves.  Merriam,^ 
however  (1900),  adopted  tl  somewhat  more  conservative  conclusion t 
the  "splintered,  polished,  perforated  fragments  of  bone,  etc.,  found  in  the 
Potter  Creek  and  Samwel  caves  look  like  human  artifacts,  but  cannot  be  | 
pronounced  such  with  certainty  at  present." 

Human  remains  in  cave  deposits.  —  It  is  noteworthy  that  while  the 
European  cave  deposits  are  of  late  Pleistocene  age,  frequently  containing 
remains  of  man,  American  caves  are  chiefly  of  mid-Pleistocene  age,  and  not 
until  we  reach  the  Potter  Creek  (p.  475)  and  Samwel  caves  (p.  477)  in 
California  do  we  find  any  evidence,  and  that  not  conclusive,  of  the  existence 
of  man. 

In  the  East  this  has  been  made  a  subject  of  special  investigation  by 
^Mercer.^  His  journey  of  six  hundred  miles  was  especially  directed  to  those 
mountain  passes  and  river  ways  by  which  early  man  may  have  first  pene- 
trated the  great  forests  of  the  Appalachians  in  traveling  from  the  Pacific 
coast  and  plains  region  of  the  West.  In  every  case  investigated  along  the 
Tennessee,  Ohio,  and  Kanawha  rivers  in  Ohio,  West  Virginia,  Indiana,  and 
Kentucky,  remains  of  man  were  found  associated  only  with  the  recent  fauna 
such  as  the  deer,  gray  fox,  raccoon,  opossum,  black  bear,  turkey,  etc. 

The  only  exception  was  the  Big  Bone  Cave,  Van  Buren  County,  Ten- 
nessee, where  nine  hundred  feet  from  the  entrance  were  found  remains  of  the 
fossil  sloth,  megalonyx,  fresh  in  appearance,  with  remains  of  the  cartilages 
attached,  associated  with  fragments  of  reeds  which  had  apparently  been 
used  as  torches  by  Indians,  thus  presenting  evidence  of  the  contemporaneity  ■ 
of  the  modern  Indian  with  the  extinct  megalonyx.  This  evidence  con- 
vinced Mercer  that  at  least  in  the  eastern  valley  of  Tennessee  at  a  height 
of  six  to  seven  hundred  feet  above  sea  level  man  coexisted  with  the  great 
sloth.  Again,  in  Zirkel's  Cave,  Jefferson  County,  Tennessee,  two  faunal 
levels  were  discovered,  the  lower  containing  the  tapir,  peccary,  and  bear, 
the  upper  containing  the  marmot,  or  woodchuck  (Marmota),  opossum 
(Didelphys),  rabbit,  and  cave  rat  associated  with  Indian  remains.  This 
appears  to  be  the  first  instance  thus  far  discovered  in  eastern  North  America 
of  the  occupation  of  caves  by  man,  and  of  a  modern  fauna  overlying  an 
ancient  fauna.    The  second  instance  is  that  of  Look  Out  Cave  on  the  left 

•  Putnam,  F.  W.,  Evidence  of  the  Work  of  Man  on  Objects  from  the  Quaternary  Caves  in 
California.    Amer.  Anthropol.,  n.s.,  Vol.  VIII,  1905,  pp.  229-235. 

2  Merriam,  J.  C,  Recent  Cave  Exploration  in  California.  Amer.  Anthropol.,  n.s., 
Vol.  VIII,  no.  2,  Apr.-June,  1906.  pp.  221-228. 

'  Mercer,  H.  C,  Cave  Exploration  in  the  Eastern  United  States.  Dept.  Amer.  Prehist. 
Archa-ol.,  Univ.  Penn.,  July  4,  1894;  Cave  Exploration  in  the  Eastern  United  States.  Dept. 
Amer.  PrehisL  Archoeol.,  Univ.  Penn.,  June  4,  1896. 

H 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  499 

bank  of  the  Tennessee  River,  containing  bones  of  the  tapir  and  mylodon  in 
in  the  lower  zone,  and  Indian  remains  in  an  upper  zone  of  black  earth. 

Skeletal  Remains  Attributed  to  Early  Man 

We  owe  to  Hrdlicka  ^  a  thorough  comparative  study  of  all  the  skeletal 
.^iijLPms  which  have  been  discovered  in  Nori  America  and  attributed  to 
early  man.  He  observes  that  proof  of  the  geological  antiquity  of  human 
remains  demands  indisputable  stratigraphic  evidence,  some  degree  of  fossil- 
ization,  and  marked  anatomical  distinctions  in  the  more  important  parts 
of  the  skeleton.  A  skeleton  which  agrees  with  that  of  a  recent  or  not 
very  ancient  race  in  the  same  locality  cannot  be  accepted  as  geologically 
ancient  unless  the  geological  evidence  be  absolutely  decisive. 

Since  1844  fourteen  discoveries  have  been  made  with  more  or  less  serious 
claim  of  considerable  geological  antiquity.  Of  these  the  chief  are  the 
Natchez  (Mississippi)  pelvic  bone  (1846),  the  Calaveras  (California)  skull 
(1866),  the  Trenton  (New  Jersey)  skulls  (1879,  1887),  the  Lansing  (Kansas) 
skeleton  (1902),  and  the  Nebraska  'loess  man'  (1894,  1906). 

In  some  instances  association  of  the  human  bones  with  those  of  extinct 
animals  is  due  to  'intrusive  burials,'  i.e.  burials  in  which  the  grave  hap- 
pened to  be  carried  below  the  level  of  a  stratum  containing  a  number  of 
extinct  forms.  The  Natchez  pelvic  bone  may  be  a  case  of  accidental 
association  of  a  bone  fallen  from  an  Indian  grave  and  mingled  with  older 
fossilized  bones.  The  famous  Calaveras  skull  agrees  closely  with  the  cave 
skulls  from  Calaveras  County  geologically  of  recent  age.  The  Trenton 
crania  found  in  glacial  gravels  along  the  Delaware  River  are  of  doubtful 
geological  age,  while  their  anatomical  characters  are  not  those  of  the  Dela- 
ware Lenape  Indians  recently  inhabiting  the  district,  but  appear  of  relatively 
modern  and  European  origin.  The  Lansing  skeleton  found  twenty  feet 
below  the  surface  in  the  loess-like  silt  was  heralded  as  a  find  of  real  geologic 
antiquity,  but  proves  to  agree  closely  with  the  typical  upper  Mississippi 
valley  Indian  of  the  present  day.  Similarly,  the  fossil  human  bones  from 
the  west  coast  of  Florida  show  a  marked  anatomical  likeness  to  recent 
Indian  bones.  The  Nebraska  loess  man,  which  was  regarded  by  the  present 
writer  (Osborn)  and  others  as  exceptionally  primitive,  proves  to  correspond 
in  its  low  forehead  with  certain  low-type  Indian  crania,  such  as  are  found 
among  the  mound-builders  of  Arkansas  and  even  among  certain  recent 
Indians. 

''Under  the  circumstances,"  concludes  Hrdlicka,  it  must  be  stated  that 
*' thus  far  on  this  continent  no  human  bones  of  undisputed  geologic  antiquity 
are  known,"  and  anatomically  the  remains  indicate  their  affinity  or  identity 
with  those  of  modern  Indians.    This  does  not  mean  that  early  man  did  not 

1  Hrdlicka,  A.,  Skeletal  Remains  Suggesting  or  Attributed  to  Early  Man  in  North 
America.    Smiths.  Inst.,  Bur.  EthnoL,  Bull.  33,  1907. 


500 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


exist  in  North  America,  but  that  convincing  proof  of  the  fact  from  the 
standpoint  of  physical  anthropology  still  remains  to  be  produced. 

Auriferous  gravels.  —  The  most  recent  review  of  this  question  is  that 
of  Sinclair,^  in  which  the  following  conclusion  has  been  reached:  ''A  review 
of  the  evidence  favoring  the  presence  of  the  remains  of  man  in  the  auriferous 
gravels  of  California  compels  one  to  regard  it  as  insufficient  to  establish  the 
fact.  It  has  been  sho\vii  either  that  there  have  been  abundant  opportunities 
for  the  relics  in  question  to  be  mixed  with  the  gravels  accidentally,  or  that 
the  g(M)logi('al  conditions  at  the  localities  are  such  as  to  render  it  improbable 
that  the  implements  and  bones  have  been  associated  in  the  gravels  to  the 
extent  supposed." 

M(TC(T  -  reached  a  negative  conclusion  in  his  survey  of  the  Trenton 
gravels:  "Nor  has  anything  yet  been  found  any^vhere  else  in  the  valley  to 
corroborate  the  alleged  antiquity  of  the  chipped  blades  from  Trenton. 
The  Trenton  case  has  been  somewhat  weakened  by  the  appearance  among 
the  drift  specimens  of  several  blades  of  common  Indian  pattern. 

Causes  of  Pleistocene  Extinction^ 

Certainly  the  most  direct  instance  of  widespread  extinction  of  quadrupeds 
contemporaneous  with  a  secular  change  of  climate  was  that  of  the  Glacial 
Period  in  the  entire  northern  hemisphere. 

As  we  have  seen,  the  beginning  of  the  Pleistocene  found  North  America 
peopled  with  the  following  kinds  of  great  quadrupeds,  all  of  which  disap- 
peared during  or  shortly  after  the  Ice  Age : 


Artiodactyla 
Perissodactyla 
Proboscidea 
Edentata 


Camelidae 

EquidiE 

TapiridiE 

IMastodontinse 

Elephantinae 

Gravigrada 


Glyptodontia 


Camels 

Llamas 

Horses 

Tapirs 

Mastodons 

Elephants 

Giant  Sloths 
M  egalonyx 
Megatherium 
Pararnylodon 

Glyptotherium 


It  would  be  natural  to  assume  that  extinction  was  directly  brought  about 
by  the  profound  changes  of  temperature  and  moisture,  accompanied  by 

'  Sinclair,  Wm.  J.,  Recent  Investigations  bearing  on  the  Question  of  the  Occurrence  of 
Neocene  Man  in  the  Auriferous  Gravels  of  the  Sierra  Nevada.  Univ.  Cal.  Publ.,  Amer.  Archceol. 
Ethnol.,  Vol.  VII,  no.  2,  1908,  pp.  107-131. 

2  Mercer,  H.  C,  The  Antiriuity  of  Man  in  the  Delaware  Valley.  Repr.  fr.  Publ.  Univ.  Pa., 
Vol.  VI.  1897,  pp.  1-85. 

'  Osborn,  H.  F.,  The  Causes  of  Extinction  of  Mammalia.  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XL, 
no.  479,  Nov.,  1906,  pp.  769-795,  no.  480.  Dec,  1906,  pp.  829-859. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  501 


changes  in  the  fauna  and  flora  consequent  upon  the  great  geologic  and 
physiographic  changes  of  Glacial  times;  but  this  simple  explanation  is  beset 
with  many  difficulties  and  contradictions,  and  the  results  must  be  analyzed 
with  some  care.  The  extinction  of  the  horse  in  North  America,  for  example, 
does  not  admit  of  such  a  simple  explanation. 

While  in  Europe  the  Mediterranean  Sea  presented  a  barrier  to  escape 
or  migration  to  the  south,  in  North  America  there  were  broad  continental 


RECENT 


Fig.  219.  —  Holocene  or  Recent  times.  A  period  of  continental  depression.  Asia  and 
North  America  completely  separated,  preventing  further  intermigrations  of  mammals.  The 
island  systems  of  the  New  and  Old  Worlds  and  of  Australia  mostly  separated.  Africa  united 
with  Europe  by  a  narrow  desert  strip,  a  barrier  to  further  migration. 

areas  and  high  plateaux  affording  easy  migration  routes  southward,  and 
every  means  of  escape. 

It  is,  therefore,  more  in  accord  with  the  facts  to  say  that  the  Glacial 
Period  in  North  America  originated  certain  new  conditions  of 
life  which  directly  or  indirectly  resulted  in  extinction. 

These  conditions  include  diminished  herds,  enforced  migrations,  the  pos- 
sible overcrowding  of  certain  southerly  areas,  changed  conditions  of  feeding, 
disturbances  in  the  period  of  mating  and  reproduction,  new  relations  with 
various  enemies,  aridity,  and  deforestation;  in  short,  a  host  of  indirect  causes. 

Protective  adaptation  to  secular  cold.  —  The  resistance  of  mammals  to 
cold  depends  upon  (a)  the  internal  heat-producing  power,  which  is  a 
progressive  adaptation  of  the  higher  Mammaha,  correlated  with  (6)  the 
accession  of  a  warm  external  covering  in  the  form  of  hair,  wool,  or  blubber 


502 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


as  in  the  case  of  aquatic  mammals.  The  well-known  cases  of  adaptation 
to  extreme  cold  among  elephants  {E.  primigenius,  woolly  mammoth),  rhi- 
noceroses {R.  antiquitatis,  woolly  rhinoceros),  steppe  camels  of  Asia  (Ca- 
vielus  hactrianus),  steppe  horses  (Equus  przewalskii) ,  and  steppe  antelopes 
{Saiga  tartarica)  indicate  that  we  must  not  assume  that  cold  was  in  all 
cases  the  direct  cause  of  extinction. 

Cold  and  the  numerical  diminution  of  herds.  —  As  suggested  by  Darwin, 
a  temporanj  diminution  in  numbers,  whether  caused  by  cold  waves,  long  or 
repeated  droughts,  floods,  epidemics,  or  other  unfavorable  conditions  of 
life,  may  indirectly  lead  to  extinction.  The  protection  of  a  herd  of  animals 
from  hostile  Carnivora  often  depends  on  its  numbers.  It  has  been  observed 
recently  that  the  woodland  bison  {B.  athahascce)  of  British  Columbia  is  in 
danger  of  extinction  because  the  bulls  are  not  sufficiently  numerous  to  pro- 
tect the  young.  Numerical  diminution  may  in  this  way  become  a  cause  of 
extinction. 

The  observations  of  Prichard  ^  in  Patagonia  give  an  interesting  instance 
of  the  influence  of  severe  winters  on  the  very  hardy  guanacos  and  deer  of 
that  region. 

"Around  the  lake  lay  piled  the  skulls  and  bones  of  dead  game,  guanaco  {Lama 
huanachus)  and  a  few  huemules  {Furcifer  chilensis).  These  animals  come  down 
to  live  on  the  lower  ground  and  near  unfrozen  water  during  the  cold  season,  and 
there,  when  the  weather  is  particularly  severe,  they  die  in  crowds.  We  saw  their 
skeletons  in  one  or  two  places  literally  heaped  one  upon  the  other"  {op.  cit.,  p.  132). 
"Again  we  came  upon  a  second  death-place  of  guanaco,  which  made  a  scene  strange 
and  striking  enough.  There  cannot  have  been  less,  than  five  hundred  lying  there  in 
positions  forced  and  ungainly  as  the  most  ill-taken  snapshot  photograph  could 
produce.  Their  long  necks  were  outstretched,  the  rime  of  the  weather  upon  their 
decaying  hides,  and  their  bone-joints  glistening  through  the  wounds  made  by  the 
beaks  of  carrion-birds.  They  had  died  during  the  severities  of  the  previous  winter, 
and  lay  literally  piled  one  upon  another"  {op.  cit.,  p.  189).  "The  meaning  of  this 
I  gathered  from  Mr.  Ernest  Cattle.  He  told  me  that  in  the  winter  of  1899  enor- 
mous numbers  of  guanaco  sought  Lake  Argentine,  and  died  of  starvation  upon  its 
shores.  In  the  severities  of  winter  they  seek  drinking-places,  where  there  are 
large  masses  of  water  likely  to  be  unfrozen.  The  few  last  winters  in  Patagonia 
have  been  so  severe  as  to  work  great  havoc  among  the  herds  of  guanaco"  {op.  cit., 
p.  255). 

Diminished  herds  and  inbreeding.  —  Another  danger  attending  dimin- 
ished herds  in  restricted  regions  is  close  inbreeding.  On  this  familiar 
subject  see  Gerrit  S.  Miller's"  paper  "Fate  of  the  European  Bison  Herd," 
in  which  the  author  shows  the  possibly  fatal  influence  of  inbreeding  on 
diminished  herds,  although  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  these  bison  are 
protected  and  are  thus  living  under  unnatural  conditions. 

'  Prichard,  H.  H.,  Through  the  Heart  of  Patagonia.    New  York,  1902. 
2  Miller,  G.  S.,  Jr.    The  Fate  of  the  European  Bison  Herd.   Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  IV,  no.  99. 
Nov.  20,  1896,  pp.  744-745. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  503 

In  a  paper  entitled  "Das  allmahliche  Aussterben  des  Wisents  (Bison 
honasus,  Linn.)  im  Forste  von  Bjelowjesha/'  ^  Mr.  Eugen  Biichner  gives  a 
detailed  history  of  the  bison  herd  in  the  Bieloviejsha  (or  Bialowitza)  forest, 
Province  of  Grodno,  in  Lithuania,  Russia,  during  the  present  century. 
''A  careful  study  of  the  breeding  habits  of  the  bis^n  in  the  Bieloviejsha 
forest  and  elsewhere  leaves  no  room  for  doubt  that  the  present  slow  rate  of 
reproduction  is  an  abnormal  condition,  and  that  to  it  is  due  the  rapid 
approach  of  the  extinction  which  is  the  certain  fate  of  the  herd  under  con- 
sideration. This  diminished  fertility  the  author  regards  as  a  stigma  of 
degeneration  caused  by  inbreeding.  .  .  .  Another  indication  of  the  degen- 
erate condition  of  the  Bieloviejsha  herd  is  seen  in  the  great  excess  of  bulls, 
which  probably  outnumber  the  cows  two  to  one.  This  is  doubtless  a  result 
of  inbreeding,  for  Busing  ^  has  shown  that  close  inbreeding,  like  a  reduced 
condition  of  nutrition,  is  favorable  to  the  production  of  an  excess  of  males. 
...  In  conclusion,  the  author  considers  that  his  studies  of  the  history  of 
the  Bieloviejsha  bison  leave  scarcely  room  for  doubt  that  inbreeding  is 
the  cause  of  the  final  extinction  of  most  large  mammals.  Inbreeding  must 
begin  and  lead  gradually  but  certainly  to  the  extinction  of  a  species  when  it, 
through  any  cause,  has  become  so  reduced  in  numbers  as  to  be  separated 
into  isolated  colonies." 

Influence  of  cold  during  the  reproduction  period.  —  Exceptional  cold  waves 
or  unusually  prolonged  cold  seasons  may  cause  a  temporary  loss  of  food 
supply  or  cause  the  death  of  the  young,  which  in  northern  latitudes  are 
usually  born  in  spring.  The  diminution  or  loss  of  young  from  this  cause 
might  act  as  the  first  of  a  series  of  destructive  effects  of  a  progressive  secular 
change.  These  may  be  summarized  as  follows  from  the  actual  observa- 
tions ^  of  zoologists  upon  the  Cervidae :  (a)  disturbed  conditions  during 
the  conjugation  (pairing,  mating,  rutting)  period;  (6)  enfeebled  (through 
hunger)  condition  of  females  during  parturition  period;  (c)  severe  weather 
conditions,  ice  storms,  crusted  snow,  prolonged  wet  and  sleet  at  time  of 
birth;  (d)  bulls  unable  to  protect  herds;  (e)  cows  unable  to  protect  young 
from  Carnivora  through  starved  condition,  or  abandoning  them  when 
attacked  by  wolves;  (/)  enfeebled  and  unprotected  condition  of  quad- 
rupeds favorable  to  increased  food  supply  and  consequent  multiplication  of 
cursorial  and  other  Carnivora,  especially  Canidse  and  Felidse. 

These  zoological  observations  are  to  a  certain  extent  borne  out  in  pale- 
ontology by  Leith  Adams'  ("British  Fossil  Elephants,"  1879,  Pt.  2,  p.  98) 
observations  of  the  exceptionally  large  number  of  milk  teeth  of  elephants 
found  in  certain  Pleistocene  deposits,  which  appears  to  indicate  a  high 
mortality  of  the  young.   (See  also  Holland,  p.  471.) 

^  Biichner,  Eugen,  Mem.  Acad.  Imper.  Sci.  St.  Petersbourg,  Vol.  Ill,  no.  2,  1895,  pp.  1-30. 
2  Busing,  Jen.  Zeitschr.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XVII,  1884,  p.  827. 

^  Communicated  by  Mr.  Madison  Grant,  Secretary  of  the  Zoological  Society  of  New- 
York. 


504 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Temperature  control  of  fertility  and  reproduction.  —  Merriam  ^  has  directed 
attention  to  one  of  the  physiological  effects  of  a  lowering  of  temperature, 
namely,  its  influence  upon  diminished  or  increased  fertility  and  the  rate  of 
reproduction  in  what  he  has  called  the  'law  of  temperature  control.'  This 
he  has  stated  as  follqjvs:  temperature  by  controUing  reproduction  prede- 
termines the  possibilities  of  distribution;  it  fixes  the  limits  beyond  which 
species  cannot  pass;  it  defines  broad  transcontinental  barriers  within  which 
certain  forms  may  thrive  if  other  conditions  permit,  but  outside  of 
which  they  cannot  exist,  be  the  other  conditions  never  so  favorable  (because 
the  sexes  are  not  fertile). 

Temperature  and  geographic  range. — In  discussing  how  species  are 
checked  in  their  efforts  to  overrun  the  earth  Merriam  points  out  that  more 
important  than  geographic  barriers  are  the  climatic  harriers  (as  observed 
by  Humboldt),  and  of  these  that  temperature  is  more  important  than 
humidity.  First,  in  1892,  this  author  attempted  to  show  ^  that  the  distribu- 
tion of  terrestrial  animals  is  governed  less  by  the  yearly  isotherm  or  mean 
annual  temperature  than  by  the  total  rather  than  the  mean  temperature 
during  the  period  of  reproductive  activity  and  of  growth  (adolescence). 
This  reproductive  period  in  the  tropics  extends  over  many  months  or  nearly 
the  whole  year,  and  within  the  Arctic  Circle  and  summits  of  high  moun- 
tains is  of  two  months  or  less  duration.  Later,  in  1894,  results  which  Mer- 
riam ^  obtained  from  extensive  comparison  of  temperatures  and  distribu- 
tion justified  the  belief  that  animals  and  plants  (Lower  Austral  and  tropical 
types  coming  from  the  South)  are  restricted  in  northward  distribution  by 
the  total  quantity  of  heat  during  the  season  of  development  and  reproduc- 
tion. Conversely  animals  and  plants  (Upper  Austral,  Transition,  and 
Boreal  types  coming  from  the  North)  are  restricted  in  southward  distribu- 
tion by  the  mean  temperature  of  a  brief  period  covering  the  hottest  part 
of  the  year.  Thus  in  the  Transition  Zone,  Boreal  and  Austral  types  mingle 
in  the  equable  climate  of  the  Pacific  coast  of  California,  while  they  are 
sharply  separated  by  the  inequable  extremes  of  cold  and  heat  of  the  interior 
continental  plateau. 

It  follows  from  these  observations  that  animals  forced  out  of  their 
natural  habitat  may  become  extinct  through  infertility. 

Influence  of  cold  and  snow  on  food  supply  and  choice  of  food.  —  It  is  prob- 
able that  during  the  Glacial  Period  the  great  winter  snow  blanket  cover- 
ing the  natural  food  supply,  rather  than  the  direct  influence  of  the  cold 
itself,  was  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  extinction.  The  death  of  great  numbers 
of  animals  from  hunger  or  starvation  through  the  covering  of  food  during 
the  winter  season  under  heavy  layers  of  snow  is  commonly  observed  among 

erriam,  C.  H.,  Laws  of  Temperature  Control  of  the  Geographic  Distribution  of  Terres- 
trial Animals  and  Plants.    Nat.  Geogr.  Mag.,  Vol.  VI,  Dee.  29,  1894. 

2  Merriam,  C.  H.,  The  Geographic  Distribution  of  Life  in  North  America  with  Special 
Reference  to  the  Mammalia.  Proc.  Biol.  Soc.  Washington,  Vol.  VII,  Apr.  13,  1892,  pp.  45-46. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  505 


506 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


the  large  herds  of  the  domesticated  horses  and  cattle  on  the  western  plains. 
Under  these  conditions  horses  are  driven  to  food,  such  as  the  branches  of 
willows,  which  is  very  deleterious  to  them.  Under  the  influence  of  hunger 
cattle  will  also  feed  eagerly  and  indiscriminately  on  plants  which  may  be 
injurious  to  them  or  to  their  young,  as  recorded  by  Chestnut  and  others  in 
the  United  States  Agricultural  Department.  After  heavy  snowstorms,  when 
the  grass  is  covered  with  snow,  it  often  happens  that  only  the  taller  species  of 
plants  are  exposed.^  In  such  cases  the  poisonous  larkspurs  {Delphinium 
glaucxun)  are  greedily  eaten  by  cattle  which  would  otherwise  avoid  these 
plants.  This  tendency  is  increased  by  the  fact  that  ruminants  do  not  feel 
at  ease  so  long  as  the  stomach  is  not  full,  and  are  inclined  to  eat  anything 
in  sight  after  a  snowfall. 

Similarly,  enforced  migrations  among  wild  as  among  domesticated 
animals  might  cause  them  to  become  less  fastidious  about  their  .food.  It 
is  observed  ^  among  domesticated  animals  that  when  feeding  quietly  on  the 
range  they  exercise  considerable  choice  in  the  selection  of  forage  plants, 
but  when  driven  six  or  eight  miles  daily  they  are  frequently  forced  by 
hunger  to  bite  off  almost  all  kinds  of  plants  which  grow  along  their  course. 
Animals  vary  greatly  in  adaptability  to  new  conditions  caused  by  long 
cold  and  heavy  snowfall;  horses  remove  snow  even  to  a  depth  of  three  or 
four  feet,  and  find  food  sufficient  to  carry  them  through  the  winter,  while 
cattle  under  the  same  conditions  starve. 

Forestation,  deforestation,  and  reforestation.  —  It  is  certain  that  the  Hol- 
arctic  region,  or  circumpolar  belt,  was  forested  even  to  the  shores  of  the  Arctic 
Ocean  in  early  Pleistocene  times.  The  remains  of  large  extinct  quadrupeds 
in  this  region  are  almost  everywhere  associated  with  evidences  of  forests, 
and  of  forest-frequenting  animals,  such  as  the  beaver.  The  forests  naturally 
furnished  the  necessary  conditions  of  life  of  certain  quadrupeds,  especially 
of  browsing  animals,  and  even  of  Proboscidea.  Among  Artiodactyla  the 
deer,  among  Perissodactyla  the  tapirs,  are  typical  forest  animals.  Condi- 
tions, therefore,  which  would  cause  deforestation  would  also  become  the 
means  of  diminution,  and  finally  of  extinction.  Such  conditions  are  intense 
cold,  (a)  heavy  snow-capping  of  the  tundra  regions  of  the  north,  (b)  the 
dry  cold  and  dust  storms  of  the  steppes.  In  Europe  a  period  of  deforesta- 
tion and  a  long  unforested  period  of  dry  cold  certainly  succeeded  each  other. 
In  North  America  we  have  evidence  of  similar  conditions  in  our  own  loess 
period,  and  there  certainly  occurred  a  great  deforestation  in  the  regions  now 
known  as  the  '  barren  grounds,'  which  pass  into  the  tundras  with  frozen 
subsoil  to  the  north. 

After  considering  the  diminution  of  life  in  Alaska,  Maddren^  summarizes 

'  Chestnut,  V.  K.,  The  Stock  Poisoning  Plants  of  Montana  U.S.  Dept.  Agric,  Div. 
Botany.,  Bull.  26.  Washington,  1901. 

'  Maddren,  A.  G.,  Smithsonian  Exploration  in  Alaska  in  1904,  in  Search  of  Mammoth  and 
other  Fossil  Remains.    Smiths.  Misc.  Coll.,  Vol.  XLIX,  1905,  p.  65. 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  507 

his  conclusions  as  follows:  that  the  most  rational  way  of  explaining  the 
extinction  in  Alaska  is  the  gradual  change  from  more  temperate  conditions 
which  reduced  and  finally  destroyed  the  forest  vegetation,  thus  reducing 
the  food  supply  and  reducing  the  fauna  to  those  forms  capable  of  adapting 
themselves  to  the  recent  tundra  vegetation. 

Extermination  of  horses.  —  Among  all  the  problems  of  Pleistocene  extinc- 
tion presented  in  America,  that  of  the  horses  is  certainly  one  of  the  most 
difficult.  These  animals  are  far  superior  to  cattle  in  their  adaptability  to 
changed  conditions  of  life  and  in  resourcefulness  during  severe  winter  sea- 
sons. They  were  extraordinarily  numerous  in  North  America  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Pleistocene;  at  the  close  it  appears  that  they  were  entirely 
extinct.  Similar  extinction  occurred  both  in  North  and  South  America 
in  Pleistocene  times.  It  is  consequently  impossible  to  connect  this  phenom- 
enon directly  with  the  Ice  Age.  In  Pleistocene  times  there  was  a  ready 
escape  to  the  high  plateaux  of  Mexico,  which  must  have  presented  all  the 
most  favorable  conditions  for  equine  life,  of  climate,  soil,  and  food.  The  nu- 
merous and  highly  specialized  horses  of  Mexico  shared  in  this  extinction.  It 
has  consequently  been  suggested  by  the  writer  and  by  others  that  the  horses 
may  have  been  swept  out  of  existence  by  some  epidemic  disease  or  diseases. 
These  diseases  are  carried  by  flies  and  are  favored  by  moist  conditions 
occurring  chiefly  during  or  immediately  after  heavy  rainfalls,  though  in 
sporadic  cases  they  may  occur  at  other  seasons  of  the  year;  such  moist 
conditions  occurred  periodically  in  the  Great  Basin  of  Oregon  and  Nevada 
and  in  the  valley  of  Mexico.  The  disease  known  in  India  as  '  surra '  has  a 
widespread  geographic  distribution.  In  Africa  there  is  a  similar  malady, 
'nagana,'  or  tse-tse  fly  disease.  In  Algeria,  France,  and  Spain  the  horse 
and  the  ass  are  both  liable  to  the  attacks  of  a  trypanosome  (T.  equiperdum). 
In  South  America  the  mal  de  caderas  affects  horses,  asses,  cattle,  and  certain 
other  animals,  and  is  attributed  to  a  trypanosome;  it  is  distinctively  a  wet 
weather  disease,  almost  completely  disappearing  in  the  dry  seasons.  The 
tse-tse  fly  of  Africa  renders  thousands  of  square  miles  uninhabitable  by 
horses.  The  rapid  rate  at  which  such  diseases  may  travel  is  illustrated  by 
the  spread  of  the  rinderpest,  which  traversed  the  whole  length  of  Africa  in 
fifteen  years. 

This  theory  of  an  epidemic  among  the  American  horses  during  the  wet 
weather  periods  of  Glacial  times  receives  some  support  from  the  discovery 
by  Cockerell  in  the  Miocene  insect  fauna  of  Florissant,  Colorado,  of  two 
species  of  tse-tse  fly  (Glossina)  very  similar  to  the  African  types.  The 
appUcation  to  the  Pleistocene  is  that  a  moist  or  rainy  period  extending 
over  the  Southern  States  and  down  into  Mexico  during  Pleistocene  times 
would  have  favored  the  distribution  of  some  flies  or  other  parasite-bearing 
insects,  such  as  ticks,  and  have  resulted  in  the  extinction  of  the  horses. 

Influence  of  increased  rain  supply.  —  Dry  or  moderately  dry  conditions, 
if  not  too  extreme,  are  generally  more  favorable  to  quadrupeds  than  moist 


508 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


conditions.  The  plains  and  forest  regions  most  densely  populated  with 
quadruped  life,  such  as  those  of  the  African  plateaux  of  the  present 
day,  are  regions  of  moderate  rainfall  and  even  of  prolonged  summer 
droughts.  The  regions  less  densely  populated  with  quadrupeds  are 
those  of  heavy  rainfall,  of  dense  forests  and  vegetation,  such  as  those 
of  the  equatorial  belt  of  South  America  or  the  Mango  region  of  Africa. 
Moisture  and  temperature  are,  therefore,  to  be  first  considered  in  relation 
to  forestation. 

Increased  rainfall  has  many  other  effects:  (1)  it  may  diminish  the  sup- 
ply of  harder  grasses  to  which  certain  quadrupeds  have  become  thoroughl}- 
adapted ;  (2)  it  may  at  the  same  time  produce  new  poisonous  or  deleterious 
plants;  (3)  it  may  be  the  means  of  introducing  new  insects  or  other  pests, 
and  new  insect  barriers;  (4)  it  may  be  the  means  of  introducing  new  proto- 
zoan diseases  and  new  insect  carriers  of  disease;  (5)  it  may  be  the  means  of 
erecting  new  forest  barriers  to  migration,  or  new  forest  migration  tracts 
for  certain  Camivora,  such  as  the  bears. 

It  follows  that  periods  of  secular  increasing  moisture,  such  as  the  early 
and  mid-Pleistocene  of  the  northern  hemisphere  is  supposed  to  have  been, 
may  have  been  unfavorable  to  certain  large  quadrupeds  which  had  become 
adapted  to  Pliocene  conditions  of  semi-aridity,  even  prior  to  the  advent  of 
extreme  cold.  As  regards  migration,  Merriam  observes  that  humidity  is  a 
loss  potent  factor  than  temperature  in  limiting  the  distribution  of  the  Mam- 
malia of  North  America.  Thus  many  genera  adapted  to  certain  restrictions 
of  temperature  ranged  east  and  west  completely  across  the  American  con- 
tinent, inhabiting  alike  humid  and  arid  subdivisions,  but  no  genus  adapted 
to  certain  conditions  of  humidity  is  able  to  range  north  and  south  across  the 
temperature  zones. 

Food  supply  and  moistyM^^  Sheep  and  cattle  owners  of  the  North- 
west have  observed  that  ij^majority  of  poisonous  plants  are  those 
which  flourish  during  moist  seasons,  such  as  the  death  camas  (Zygadenus), 
the  larkspurs  (Delphinium),  the  water  hemlocks  {Cicuta),  the  white  loco 
(Aragallus). 

It  is  a  matter  of  universal  observation  that  in  tick-  or  insect-infested 
countries  dry  seasons  result  in  the  reduction,  moist  seasons  in  the  increase 
of  diseases:  dry  localities  are  favorable;  moist  localities  are  unfavorable. 
Thus  the  tse-tse  fly  is  not  found  in  the  open  veldt;  it  must  have  cover. 
Warm,  moist,  steamy  hollows  containing  water,  inclosed  with  forest  growth, 
are  the  haunts  chosen. 

Ticks,  even  when  non-infection-bearing,  form  absolutely  effective  bar- 
riers to  the  introduction  of  quadrupeds  into  certain  regions.  In  certain 
forested  portions  of  South  and  Central  America  they  endanger  human  life. 
In  certain  regions  of  Africa  ticks  are  practically  fatal  to  horses.  As  observed 
by  Elliot,  thousands  of  ticks  would  sometimes  gather  on  a  horse  as  the 
result  of  a  single  night's  grazing.    The  mane  especially  serves  to  collect 


PLEISTOCENE  OF  EUROPE,  NORTH  AFRICA,  AND  NORTH  AMERICA  509 

these  pests;  thus  the  falling  mane  of  the  northern  horse  is  distinctly  dis- 
advantageous as  compared  with  the  upright  mane  of  the  asses  and  zebras. 
Ticks  abound  in  the  southern  plains  region  of  the  United  States,  as  well  as 
in  the  forests  bordering  the  Mexican  plateau,  and  are  thus  both  plains  and 
forest  pests.  They  are  certainly  to  be  considered  in  connection  with  the 
extermination  of  horses. 


OUTLINE  CLASSIFICATION 

OF  THE 

MAMMALIA 

EECENT  AND  EXTINCT 

INCLUDING  ESPECIALLY  THE   BETTER  KNOWN  GENERA 
AND  FAMILIES  AND   THOSE  MENTIONED  IN 
THIS  BOOK 

This  classification  has  been  prepared  under  the  direction 
of  the  author  by  W.  K.  Gregory  and  Johanna  Kroeber 
Mosenthal.  The  geological  range  and  revision  of  the  extinct 
genera  has  been  done  with  the  cooperatio]i  of  W.  D.  Matthew. 
The  scheme  of  classification  under  four  grand  divisions,  and 
the  order  throughout,  from  the  more  ancient  and  primitive  to 
the  more  specialized  forms,  is  that  of  the  author. 


511 


I 


APPENDIX 


LIST  OF  ABBREVIATIONS  AND  SYMBOLS 


f  extinct. 

Nom.  nov.  ...  new  (group)  name. 

Inc.  Sed  (Incertce  Sedis),  of  uncertain 

systematic  position. 

Fam  family. 

Bas  Basal. 

L  Lower. 

M  Middle. 

U  Upper. 


Trias.  .  .  .  Triassic. 

Jur  Jurassic. 

Cret  Cretaceous. 

Eoc  Eocene. 

Olig  Oligocene. 

Mioc.   .  .  .  Miocene. 
Plioc.   .  .  .  Pliocene. 
Pleist.  .  .  .  Pleistocene. 
Rec  Recent. 


In  cases  where  the  generally  accepted  name  is  preoccupied  it  is  placed  within 
quotation  marks,  and  the  technically  correct  name  is  placed  after  it  in  brackets, 
e.g.  ^Echidna'  (=  Tachyglossus). 


Following  is  a  list  of  the  general  works  consulted  in  drawing  up 
the  classification.  Works  dealing  with  particular  groups  are  cited 
below. 

Ameghino,  F.  .  .  .  Contribucion  al  Conocimiento  de  los  Mamiferos  Fosiles  de  la 
Republica  Argentina.    Buenos  Aires.  1889. 

Beddard,  F.  E.  .  .  Mammalia.  The  Cambridge  Natural  History,  Vol.  X.  Lon- 
don. 1902. 

Cope,  E.  D  The  Vertebrata  of  the  Tertiary  Formations  of  the  West. 

Rept.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  (Hayden).    Washington.  1884. 

Deperet,  C.  .  .  .  L'evolution  des  Mammiferes  tertiaires  ;  importance  des  migra- 
tions. C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Vol.  cxli,  sea.  Nov.  6,  1905; 
Vol.  cxlii,  se'a.  March  12, 1906  ;  Vol.  cxliii,  sea.  Dec.  24, 1906. 
Transl.  by  Johanna  Kroeber,  Anier.  Natural.,  Vol.  xlii,  Nos. 
494,  495,  497,  Feb.,  March,  and  May,  1908,  pp.  109-114, 
pp.  166-170,  pp.  308-307. 
[Latest  and  most  authoritative  review  of  Tertiary  faunas  of 
Europe.] 

Elliot,  D.  G.  .  .  .  A  Catalogue  of  the  Collection  of  Mammals  in  the  Field  Colum- 
bian Museum.  Field  Columbian  Museum  PubL,  No.  115. 
Chicago,  1907. 

The  Land  and  Sea  Mammals  of  Middle  America  and  the 
West  Indies.    Field  Columbian  Mus.  PubL,  95.  Chicago, 
1904.    [Very  numerous  illustrations,  including  drawings  of 
the  animals,  and  photographs  of  the  skulls.] 
513 


514 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Flowkr,  W.  II.,  and 
Lydekkkk,  R. 

Ghegoky,  W.  K.  .  . 


Hay,  O.  p.  .  .  . 
iioknaday,  w.  t. 

KiNGSLKY,  J.  S.  . 
LVDKKKKK,  R.  .  . 

OSBOKN,  H.  F. 


Palmer,  T.  S.     .  . 


ScLATER,  W.  L.,  and 

SCLATER,  P.  L. 
ScLATER,  W.  L.    .  . 


Tkouessaki,  E.  L.  . 
Weber,  M  

ZiTTEI.,  K.  A.  VON  . 


An  Introduction  to  the  study  of  Mammals  Living  and  Extinct. 
London,  189L  [Excellent  generic  descriptions  of  recent 
mammals.] 

The  Orders  of  Mammals.  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol. 
XXVII,  1910,  pp.  1-524.  [Part  I  treats  history  of  the 
ordinal  classification  of  mammals;  Part  II  discusses  the 
evolution  and  relationship  of  the  orders.] 

Bibliography  and  Catalogue  of  the  Fossil  Vertebrata  of  North 
America.  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  No.  179.  Washington, 
1902.  [A  remarkably  complete  key  to  the  literature  of 
extinct  mammals  of  America.] 

The  American  Natural  History.  New  York.  1904.  [Useful 
descriptions  and  illustrations,  especially  of  American  rodents, 
carnivores,  and  ungulates.] 

The  Standard  Natural  History,  Vol.  V,  Mammals.  Boston. 
1884. 

A  Geographical  History  of  Mammals.    Cambridge.  1896. 
The  New  Natural  History.    Vols.  I-III.    New  York. 

Evolution  of  Mammalian  Molar  Teeth.    New  York.  1907. 

[Figures  the  teeth  of  many  extinct  and  recent  genera.] 
Cenozoic  Mammal  Horizons  of  Western  North  America,  with 

Faunal  Lists  of  the  Tertiary  Mammalia  of  the  West  by 

W.  D.  Matthew.    U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Bull.  361.  Washington. 

1908.    [Numerous  sections  and  maps.    Faunal  migrations 

and  interchange  with  the  Old  World.] 

Index  Generum  Mammaliutn.  A  List  of  the  Genera  and 
Families  of  Mammals.  U.S.  Dept.  Agric,  Divis.  Biol.  Surv., 
No.  Amer.  Fauna,  No.  23.  Washington,  1904.  [Key  to 
history  of  generic  and  family  names.] 

The  Geography  of  Mammals.  London.  1899.  [Figures  of 
rare  modern  genera.] 

The  Mammals  of  South  Africa. 

The  Fauna  of  South  Africa,  ed.  by  W.  L.  Sclater.  2  vols. 
London.  1900-1901. 

Catalogus  Mammalium  tarn  Viventium  quam  Fossilium.  5th 
ed.  Berlin.  1904-1905.  [Key  to  the  literature  of  recent 
and  fossil  species.] 

Die  Siiugetiere.  Jena.  1904.  [The  leading  text-book  on 
mammals.   Especially  good  on  anatomy  and  classification.] 

Handbuch  der  Palaontologie.  Vol.  IV,  Vertebrata  (Mamma- 
lia). Munich.  1891-1893.  [Numerous  figures,  especially 
of  European  fossils.] 


APPENDIX 


515 


Class  MAMMALIA,  Mammals 

A.  Subclass  PROTOTHERIA.    Egg-laying  Mammals. 

1.    Order  PROTODONTA.i    Protodonts  (doubtfully  placed  here), 
f  Dromatherium.^    U.  Trias.,  N.  Amer. 
1  MicroconodonA    U.  Trias.,  N.  Amer. 

Inc.  Sed.  f  Karoomys.    U.  Trias.,  S.  Afr.    (Possibly  a  theriodont 
reptile.) 

IL    Order  MONOTREMATA.  Monotremes. 

Fam.  'Echidnidae'  (=  Tachyglossidse).    Spiny  Anteaters. 
*  £^cA<V/na  '  (=  Tachyglossus).    Echidna.  Austral. 
'  Proechidna  '  (  =  Zaglossus).    Long-snouted  Echidna.    New  Guin. 
Fam.  Ornithorhynchidae.  Duckbills. 

Ornithorhynchus.    Duckbill  or  Platypus.  Austral. 

B.  Subclass  EUTHERIA.2    Viviparous  Mammals. 

AA.    Infraclass  D  I  D  E  L  P  H  I  A  (Metatheria).  Marsupials. 

I.    Order  TRICONODONTA.^    Triconodonts  or  Mesozoic  Carnivorous  Mar- 
supials (?). 

t  Amphilestes.    M.  Jur.,  England. 

f  Phascolotherium.    M.  Jur.,  England. 

t  Triconodon.    M.  &  U.  Jur.,  England  &  N.  Amer. 

f  Spalacotherium.    U.  Jur.,  England. 

IL    Order  MARSUPIALIA.*    Marsupials  or  Pouched  Mammals. 

IL  1.    Suborder  Polyprotodontia.    Chiefly  Insectivorous  and  Car- 
nivorous Marsupials  and  their  Allies. 

Inc.  Sed.  f  Pediomys.    U.  Cret.,  N.  Amer. 

Inc.  Sed.  f  DidelpJiops.    U.  Cret.,  N.  Amer.  / 

Inc.  Sed.  f  Caroloameghinia.    Eoc,  S.  Amer. 

Superfam.  DiDELPiwiDEA.  Didelphoids. 

Fam.  Didelphiidae.  Opossums. 

t  Proteodidelphys.    L.  Eoc,  S.  Amer. 

1  Vide  Osborn,  Evolution  of  Mammalian  Molar  Teeth,  1907,  pp.  18-21. 

2  Gill  in  1871  used  this  term  to  embrace  both  Marsupialia  and  Placentalia.  Huxley  used  it 
to  designate  the  hypothetical  ancestors  of  the  Placentals.    Gill's  usage  is  here  followed. 

8  See  Osborn,  Evolution  of  Mammalian  Molar  Teeth,  1907,  pp.  21-30,  figs.  A-35. 

*  For  a  general  review  of  the  inter-relationships  of  the  mafsupial  families,  see  Bensley,  B.  A., 
On  the  Evolution  of  the  Australian  Marsupials,  with  Remarks  on  the  Relationships  of  the  Mar- 
supials in  General.  Trans.  Linn.  Soc,  London,  ser.  2,  Zool.  Vol.  IX,  Pt.  3,  Dec,  1903,  pp.  83- 
217;  and  Gregory,  W.  K.,  The  Orders  of  Mammals,  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVII, 
1910,  pp.  1-524.  The  present  arrangement  by  Gregory  embodies  the  chief  results  of  many 
earlier  authors  (especially  de  Blainville,  Owen)  and  of  Dollo,  Bensley,  Ameghino,  Sinclair,  and 
others. 


516 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


f  PeratJierium.    L.  Eoc.  to  M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. ;  U.  Eoc.  to  L. 
Mioc,  Eur. 

f  Amphiperatherium.    L.  to  U.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Microlnotherium.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

Marmom.    Murine  Opossum.    Brazil  to  Mex. 

Chironectes.    Water  Opossum.    Brazil  to  Panama. 

*  Philander '  {  =  Caluromys).    Woolly  Opossum.    C.  &  S.  Amer. 

Didelphis.    0[)0ssum.    Brazil  to  mid.  U.  S.  (Pleist.,  S.  Amer.). 
Fam.  Myrmecobiidae.    Banded  Anteaters. 

Aft/rmecobius.    Banded  Anteater.  Austral. 
Fam.  Dasyuridae.    Pouched  Mice,  Dasyures,  etc. 
SuBFAM.  Phascologalinse.    Phascologales,  etc. 

Phascolof/ale.    Phascologale.    Austral.,  New  Guin. 

Sminthopsis.    Pouched  Mouse.  Austral. 

Antechinomys.    Jerboa  Pouched  Mouse.  Austral. 

SuBFAM.  Dasyurinfe.    Dasyures,  etc. 

Basijurus.     Dasyure  or   'Native   Cat.'     Austral.,  New  Guin. 
(Pieist.,  Austral.). 

Sarcophilus.    Tasmanian  Devil.    Tasman.  (Pleist.,  Austral.). 

Fam.  Thylacynidae.    Thylacines  and  Sparassodonts. 

SuBFAM.  Thylacininae.    Australian  and  Tasmanian  Thylacines. 

Thylacynus.    Tasmanian  '  Wolf.'    Tasman.  (Pleist.,  Austral.). 

SuBFAM.  Borhyaeninae.    Extinct  South  American  Thylacines.^ 

t  Pharsophorm.    U.  Eoc,  S.  Amer. 

t  Amphiproviverra.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Cladosictis.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

t  Prothylacynus.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

t  BorhycEna.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

SuPERFAM.  Perameloidea.  Perameloids. 

Fam.  Peramelidae.  Bandicoots. 

Peratnf'/ps.    True    Bandicoot.    Austral.,    New    Guin.  (Pleist., 
Au-stnil.). 

Ckoernpus.    Pig-footed  Bandicoot.  Austral. 
Thylacomys.    Rabbit  Bandicoot.  Austral. 

SUPERFAM.  NOTORYCTOIDEA.  Notoryctoids. 

Fam.  Notoryctidae.    Pouched  Moles. 

Notoryctes.    Pouched  Mole.  Austral. 

1  Sinclair,  W.  J.,  Marsiipialia  of  the  Santa  Cruz  Beds.  Rep'ts  Princeton  Univ.  Exped.  Pata- 
gonia, 1896-1899.    Paljeont.,  Vol.  IV,  Pt.  Ill,  pp.  333^00. 


APPENDIX 


517 


2.    Suborder    Diprotodontia.    Mostly  Herbivorous  Marsupials. 

SUPERFAM.   C^NOLESTOIDEA.  CaBUOlestoids. 

Fam.  *  Epanorthidae   (^Palaeothentidse).  Epanorthids.^ 

t  ^Epanorthus'  (  =  PalcEothentes).    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Ahderites.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

Ccenolestes.    Csenolestes.    C.  Amer.,  Colombia. 
Fam.  Garzoniidae.  Garzoniids. 

f  Garzonia.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Stilotherium.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 
SuPERFAM.  P IIALANGEROIDEA.  Phalaiigeroids. 
Fam.  Phalangeridae.  Phalangers. 
SuBFAM.  Tarsipedinse.  Tarsipedes. 

Tarsipes.    Long-snouted  Phalanger.  Austral. 
SuBFAM.  Phalangerinae.  Phalangers. 

Acrohates.    Pigmy  Flying  Phalanger.  Austral. 

Distcechurus.    Pen-tailed  Phalanger.    New  Guin. 

Dromicia.    Dormouse  Phalanger.    Austral.,  New  Guin. 

Gymnohelideus.    Leadbeater's  Phalanger.  Austral. 

Petaurus.    True  Flying  Phalanger.    Austral.,  New  Guin. 

Dactylopsila.    Striped  Phalanger.    New  Guin.,  Austral. 

Petauroides.    Taguan  Flying  Phalanger.  Austral. 

Trichosurus.    True  Phalanger.  Austral. 

Phalanger.    Cuscus.    Austral.,  New  Guin.,  Moluccas,  Celebes. 

SuBFAM.  Phascolarctinae,  Koalas,  etc 

Pseudochirus.    Crescent-toothed  Phalanger.    Austral.,  New  Guin. 
(Pleist.,  Austr.). 

Phascolarctos.    Koala  or  '  Marsupial  Bear.'  Austral. 
Fam.  Thylacoleonidae.  Thylacoleos. 

f  Thylacoleo.    '  Marsupial  Lion.'    Pleist.,  Austral. 
Fam.  Macropodidae.    Kangaroos,  etc. 

SuBFAM.  Bettoiigiinae.    Musk  Kangaroos,  etc. 

^pyprymnus.    Rufous  Rat-Kangaroo.    Austral,  (from  Pleist.). 

Bettongia.    Brush-tailed  Rat-Kangaroo.    Austral,  (from  Pleist.). 

Potorous.    Common  Rat-Kangaroo.  Austral. 

Hypsiprymnodon.    Five-toed  or  Musk  Kangaroo.  Austral. 


1  Vide  Sinclair,  op.  cit.,  supra. 


518 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


SuBFAM.  MacropodinaB.    Kangaroos  and  Wallabies. 
Dorcopsis.    MuUer's  Kangaroo.    New  Guin. 
Dendrolagus.    Tree  Kangaroo.    New  Guin.,  Austral. 
Lagorchestes.    Hare  Wallaby.  Austral. 
Onijchogale.    Spur-tailed  AVallaby.  Austral. 
Petrogale.    Rock  Wallaby.  Austral. 

Macropus.    Kangaroo  &  Wallaby.    Austral.,  New  Guin.  (Pleist., 
Austral). 

t  Palorchestes.    Pleist.,  Austral. 

f  Sfhenurus.    Pleist.,  Austral. 
Fam.  Phascolomyidae.  Wombats. 

Phascoloings.    Wombat.    Austral,  (from  Pleist.). 

f  Phascolonus.    Pleist.,  Austral. 
Fam.  Diprotodontidae.    Giant,  Ground-sloth  Marsupials. 

f  Nototheriwn.    Notothere.    Pleist.,  Austral. 

f  Diprotodon.    Giant  Diprotodon.    Pleist.,  Austral. 

II.  3.    Suborder   'Multituberculata'   (  =  Allotheria).  Multitu- 
berculates.  Archaic  Diprotodont  Marsupials.^ 

Inc.  Sed.    t  Tritylodon.    (?)  L.  Jur.,  S.  Afr. 

Fam.  Plagiaulacidae.  Plagiaulacids. 

f  Microlestes.    U.  Trias.,  Eur. 

f  Triglyphus.    U.  Trias.,  Germany. 

f  Plagiaulax.    U.  Jur.,  Eur.  &  N.  Araer. 

f  Bolodon.    U.  Jur.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Allodon.    U.  Jur.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Ctenacodon.    U.  Jur.,  Eur.  &  N.  Amer. 

f  Ptilodus  (inch  Chirox).    U.  Cret.  &  Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Neoplagiaulax.    Bas.  Eoc,  Eur.  &  N.  Amer. 

f  Meniscoessus.    U.  Cret.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Pohjmasfodon.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

BB.    Infraclass  M  O  X  O  D  E  L  P  II I  A.  Placentals. 

a.    Cohort  UNGUICULATA.    Clawed  Mammals. 

1  Vide  Osborn.  H  F.,  The  Structure  and  Classification  of  the  Mesozoic  Mammalia.  Journ, 
Acad.  Nat.  ScL,  Phila.,  Vol.  IX,  1888,  pp.  18(>-2(j5. 

For  a  brief  review  see  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Evolution  of  Mammalian  Molar  Teeth,  1907,  pp.  101- 
106.    Gidley  has  recently  shown  that  the  skull  of  Ptilodus  is  of  the  marsupial  type. 

A  number  of  extinct  Patagonian  forms  (e.g.  Propoly mastodon,  Polydolops)  which  are 
referred  to  this  order  by  Ameghino  may  possibly  prove  to  represent  highly  specialized 
Caenolestoids.  (W.  K.  G.) 


APPENDIX 


519 


I.  Order  '  TRITUBERCULATA  '  in  part  (=  Pantotheria).  Trituberculates 

or  Mesozoic  Insectivores.^ 

Fam.  Amphitheriidae.  Amphitheres. 

f  Amphitherium.    Jur.,  England,  N.  Amer. 
Fam.  Amblotheriidae.  Amblotheres. 

t  Dryolestes.    Jur.,  N.  Amer.,  England. 

f  Amhlotherium.    U.  Jur.,  England. 

II.  Order  INSECTIVORA.^  Insectivores. 

1.    Suborder  Lipotyphla.    Insectivores  with  pubic  symphysis  typically 
short  or  absent.    Caecum  absent. 

Inc.  Sed.  Fam.  Pantolestidae.    Pantolestids.    Eocene  aquatic  Insec- 
tivores, with  creodont-like  teeth. 

f  Pentacodon.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Palceosinopa.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  '  Pantolestes  '  (=  Anisacodon,  Passalacodon).    M.  Eoc,  N,  Amer. 

1.    Section  ZALAMBDODONTA.   Zalambdodonts.  Molar  cusps  form- 
ing a  single  V. 

SuPERFAM.  Centetoidea.  Centetoids. 

Fam.  Apternodontidae,  Matthew.    Apternodonts.    North  American 
Oligocene  Centetoids. 

f  Apternodus.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

Fam.  Centetidae.    Madagascan  Tenrecs,  etc 

Subfam.  Oryzorictinae. 

Microgale.    Long- tailed  Tenrec.  Madag. 

Oryzorictes.    Rice  Tenrec.  Madag. 

Limnogale.    Limnogale.  Madag. 

Geogale.    Geogale.  Madag. 

1  Vide  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Evolution  Mammalian  Molar  Teeth,  1907,  pp.  21-30,  figs.  12-35^;  Gid- 
ley,  J.  W.,  Evidence  Bearing  on  Tooth-cusp  Development.  Proc.  Wash.  Acad.  Sci.,  Vol.  VIII, 
1906,  pi.  V  (teeth  of  Mesozoic  mammals). 

2  See  especially  the  following  authors : 

DoBSON,  G.  E.    A  Monograph  on  the  Insectivora.    London.  1882-1883. 

Gill,  T.    Synopsis  of  Insectivorous  Mammals.    B^dL  U.S.  Geol.  and  Geogr.  Surv.  Terr.,  No.  2, 
1875,  pp.  91-120. 

Gregory,  W.  K.    The  Orders  of  Mammals.    Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVII,  1910, 
pp.  231-287. 

Leche,  W.    Zur  Entwicklungsgeschichte  des  Zahnsystems  der  Saugetiere.    Chun's  Zodlogica. 
Stuttgart,  1895-1907. 

Matthew,  W.  D.    The  Carnivora  and  Insectivora  of  the  Bridger  Basin,  Middle  Eocene.  Mem. 

Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  IX,  pt.  vi,  1909. 
Mivart,  St.  George.    Notes  on  the  Osteology  of  the  Insectivora.    Journ.  Anat.and  Physiol.^ 

Vol.  I,  1867,  pp.  281-312;  Vol.  II,  1868,  pp.  117-154. 
The  present  arrangement  is  by  Matthew  and  Gregory. 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


SuBFAM.  Centetinae. 

Ericulu      Hedgehog  Tenrec.  Madag. 

Centetes.        ...mon  Tenrec.  Madag. 

Hemiamtt  '.s.    Streaked  Tenrec.  Madag. 

SuBFAM.  Potamogalinre.    West  African  Aquatic  Centetoids. 

Potumofjaie.    Potainogale.    W.  Afr. 

Fam.  Solenodontidae.  Solenodonts. 

Solenodon.    Alamiqui.    Cuba,  Haiti. 

f  Micropternodus.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

SuPERFAM.  CilRYSOCHLOROlDEA.  Chrysochloroids. 

Inc.  Sed.  Chrysochloroidea. 

f  Xenotherium.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Arctoryctes.    L.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

Fam.  Chrysochloridae.    Golden  Moles  or  Chrysochlorids  and  thei 
Allies. 

Chi-i/sorhloris.    Cape  Golden  Mole.    S.  Afr. 

Fam.  Necrolestidae.    Xecrolestids.    Patagonian  Chrysochloroids. 

t  Necrolestes.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

.    Section  ERTNACEOMORPHA.    Ancient  and  Modernized  Hedge 
hogs. 

Super  FAM.  Ertnaceoidea.  Erinaceoids. 

Fam.  Leptictidae.    Primitively  Trituberculate  Erinaceoids. 

f  Palceictops.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Parictops.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Ictops.    L.  to  M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Leptictis.    M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Mesodectes.    M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

Fam.  Erinaceidae.    Hedgehogs,  Quadrituberculate  Erinaceoids. 

t  Tetracus.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

]  Proterix.    M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

•f  Palceoerinaceus.    U.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Neurogijmnurus.    U.  Eoc  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

t  Galerix.    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 

f  Lanthanotherium .    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 

Hylomys.    Lesser  Gymnura.    E.  Indies,  Burma. 

Gymnura.    Bulau  or  Gymnura.    E.  Indies,  Burma. 

Erlnnceus.    Hedgehog.    Eur.,  Asia,  N.  Afr.  (L.  Mioc  to  Pleist, 
Eur.). 


APPENDIX  521 

Inc.  Sed.  Fam.  Dimylidae.  Dimylids. 

f  Dimylus.    U.  Olig.  to  U.  Mioc,  t. 

f  Cordylodon.    U.  Olig.,  L  v 

f  Plesiodimylus.    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 
.    Section  SORICOMORPHA  .    Shrews,  ^-hrew  Moles,  and  Moles. 
SuPEKFAM.  SonicoiDEA.  Soricoids. 
Soricoidea  Fam.  IncerL 

f  Nyctitlierium  (Talpavuf;,  Nyctilestes).    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
Fam.  Talpidae.    Moles  and  Shrew  Moles. 
SuBFAM.  Myogalinae.  Desmans. 

t  Georhynchus.    M.  blig.,  Colorado. 

\  Domninn.    M.  Olig.,  Colorado. 

f  Proscalops.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

Uropsilus.    Thibetan  Shrew  Mole.    Thibet,  China. 

Urotrichus.    Shrew  Mole.  Japan. 

Neiirotrichufi.    Shrew  Mole.    N.  Amer. 

Myogale.    Desman.  Em\ 
SuBFAM.  Talpinse.  Moles. 

•f-  An.phidozotherium.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Geotrypus.    M.  Olig.,  Eur. 

Talpa.    European  Mole,  from  U.  Olig.,  Eur. ;  M.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Proscapanus.    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 
f  Scaptonyx.    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 

Scalops.    American  Web-footed  Mole.    U.S.A.  (from  Pleist.). 
Scapanus.    Hairy-tailed  Mole.    West  N.  Amer. 
Condylura.    Star-nosed  Mole.  Amer. 
Fam.  Soricidae.  Shrews. 

SuBFAM.  Soricinse.    Red-toothed  Shrews, 
•j-  A  mphisorex.    M.  Olig.,  Eur. 

Sorex.    Shrew.    Eur.,  As.,  N.  Amer.  (M.  Olig.  to  Pleist.,  Eur. ; 
Pleist.,  N.  Amer.). 

f  Protosorex.    Olig.,  N".  Amer. 

Soriculus.    Oriental  Shrew.    India,  China. 

Blarina.    Short-tailed  Shrew.    N.  Amer.  (from  Pleist.). 

Crossopus.    Water  Shrew.    Eur.,  As.  (from  Pleist.). 

SuBFAM.  Crocidurinse.    White-toothed  Shrews. 

Crocidura.    Musk  Shrew.    As.,  Afr.  (M.  Mioc.  to  Pleist.,  Eur.). 


522  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

Myosorex.    Mouse  Shrew.    S.  Afr. 
Anurosorex.    Burrowing  Shrew.    Thibet,  Burma. 
Nectoynle.    Web-footed  Shrew.    Thibet,  China. 
Chimarrogale.    Mountain  Shrew.    As.,  E.  Indies. 

2.  Suborder  Hyopsodonta  <Hc.  novA  Hyopsodonts. 

Fam.  Hyopsodontidae.  Hyopsodonts. 

f  Hyopsodus.    L.  to  U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

3.  SuBORDKR  Proglires.    Proglires,  Diprotodont  or  Rodent-like  Insec- 

tivores. 

Fam.  Apatemyidae.  Apatemyids. 

^  Apatemys.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Uintasorex.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Troi/olemur.    M.  Eoc,  X.  Amer. 
Fam.  Mixodectidae.  Mixodectids. 

t  Mixodectes.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Olhodolea.    Bas.  Eoc,  X.  Amer. 

t  Indrodon.    Bas.  Eoc,  X.  Amer. 

f  Cynodontomys.    L.  Eoc,  X.  Amer. 

t  Microsyop!^.    M.  Eoc,  X.  Amer. 

Suhord.  Inc.  Fam.  Adapisoricidae.    Adapisoricids,  Primitive  Tupaia-like 

Insectivores. 

t  Adapisorex.    L.  Eoc,  Eur. 
t  Adapisoricidus.    L.  Eoc,  Eur. 

4.  SuBORDKR  Menotyphla.  Menotyphla. 

Fam.  Tupaiidae.    Oriental  Tree  Shrews. 

Tupaia.    Tupai  or  Tree  Shrew.    India,  E.  Indies. 

Ptilocercusi.    Pen-tailed  Tree  Shrew.  Borneo. 

t  ?  Enfomolesfes.    M.  Eoc,  X".  Amer. 
Fam.  Macroscelididae.    African  Jumping  Shrews. 

Macroscelides.    Elephant  Shrew.  Afr. 

Petrodromus.    Four-toed  Elephant  Shrew.  Afr. 

Rhynchncyon.    Long-nosed  Jumping  Shrew.  Afr. 
Suhord.  Inc.  f  Plesiosorex.    M.  Olig.,  Eur. 

1  Characters  given  in  Matthew,  The  Carnivora  and  Insectivora  of  the  Bridger  Basin,  Middle 
Eocene.  Mem.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  \o\.  IX,  pt.  vi,  1909,  pp.  507-51.^ 


APPENDIX 


523 


III.  Order  TILLODONTIA.   Tillodonts  or  Archaic  Diprotodont  Placentals.i 

Fam.  Esthonychidae  or  Anchippodontidae  (  =  Tillotheriid8e).  Anchip- 
podonts. 

f  (?)  Anchippodus.    Mioc.  (?),  N.J. 
t  Esihonyx.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Trogosuft.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
t  Tillotherium.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

IV.  Order  DERMOPTERA.  Dermoptera.2 

Fam.  Galeopithecidae.  Colugos. 

Galeopithecus.     Colugo,  Flying   "Lemur."   Burma  to  Borneo, 
Philippines. 

V.  Order  CHIROPTERA.  Bats.^ 

1.  Suborder  'Megachiroptera'  (  =  Frugivora).    Fruit-eating  Bats. 

Fam.  Pteropidae.    Fruit  Bats. 

SuiiFAM.  Pteropinae.    Common  Fruit  Bats. 

Epomophorus.    Epauleted  Fruit  Bat.  Afr. 

Pteropm.    Flying  Fox.    S.E.  As.,  E.  Indies,  Austral. 

Ptfiralopex.    Cusped- toothed  Fruit  Bat.    E.  Indies. 

^  Cynnnicteris'  (=  Rousettus).    Dog  Bat.    Afr.,  S.  As.,  E.  Indies, 
(M.  Mioc,  Eur.). 

'Harpi/ia'  (=  Nyctymene).     Tube-nosed  Fruit  Bat.    E.  Indies, 
Austral. 

Cynopterus.     Short-nosed  Fruit  Bat.    India,  Indo-China,  E.  In- 
dies. 

SuBFAM.  '  Macroglossinae  '  (  =  Kiodontinae).    Long-tongued  Fruit 
Bats. 

^  Macroglossus'  (  =  Kiodon).    Long-tongued  Fruit   Bat.  Indo- 
China,  E.  Indies,  Austral. 

SuBFAM.  Harpy ionycterin 86.    Harpy  Bats. 

Harpyionycteris.    Harpy  Bat.    Philippine  Islands. 

2.  Suborder   'Microchiroptera  '        Animalivora).  Insect-eating 

Bats. 

1  Vide  Marsh,  O.  C,  Principal  Characters  of  the  Tillodontia.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.  (3),  XI,  1876, 
pp.  249-252,  PI.  VIII,  IX.  For  reasons  for  regarding  the  tillodonts  as  an  offshoot  of  the 
insectivore-creodont  stock  not  related  to  the  rodents,  see  Gregory,  W.  K.,  The  Orders  of  Mam- 
mals. Bidl.  Amer.  Mm.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVII,  1910,  pp.  292-294. 

2  Vide  Weber,  Die  Saugetiere,  pp.  406-410. 

3  Vide  Weber.  Die  Saugetiere,  pp.  382-406;  Elliot,  D.  G.,  The  Land  and  Sea  Mammals  of 
Middle  America  and  the  West  Indies,  Pt.  II,  pp.  569-722 ;  Miller,  G.  S.,  The  Families  and  Genera 
of  Bats.    Smithsonian  Institution,  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  Bull.  57,  1907. 

The  present  arrangement  by  Gregory  is  adapted  chiefly  from  Miller,  and  aims  to  give  only 
the  better  known  genera  and  subfamilies. 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

Fam.  Emballonuridae.    Large-eared  Bats. 

SuBFAM.  llhinopomiiiai.    Long-tailed  Bats. 

Rhinopoma.    Long-tailed  Bat.    N.  Afr.,  8.  As. 

.  SuBFAM.  Emballonurinae.    Sheath-tailed  Bat,  Tomb  Bat,  etc. 

Emhallonura.    Sheath-tailed  Bat.    IMadag.,  Indo-China,  E.  Indies, 
Polynesia. 

Taphozous.    Tomb  Bat.    Afr.,  S.  As.,  E.  Indies,  Austral.  < 

Saccopteryx.    Pouch-winged  Bat.    S.  Amer.,  C.  Amer.,  Mexi. 
SuBFAM.  DiclidurinaB.    White  Bats. 

Diclidurus.    White  Bat.    C.  Amer.,  S.  Amer. 
Fam.  Rhinolophidae.    Noseleaf  Bats. 

SuBFAM.  MegaderminfE.    Hispid  Bat,  False  Vampire,  etc. 

Nycteris.    Hispid  Bat.    Afr.,  E.  Indies.  ; 

Megaderma.    False  Vampire.    Afr.,  India,  E.  Indies,  Austral. 
SuBFAM.  RhinolophinaB.    Cyclops,  Horseshoe  Bat,  etc.  • 

t  Pseudorhinolophus.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

Ehinolophus.    Horseshoe  Bat.    Eur.  (since  M.  Mioc),  As.,  E.  In- 
dies, Austral.,  Afr. 

SuBFAM.  Hipposiderinse. 

^  Phyllorh'ma'  (=  Hipposiderm).    Leaf-nosed  Bat,  Cyclops  Bat.  | 
Afr.,  S.  As.  (since  Pleist.),  E.  Indies,  Austral.  j 

Fam.  Noctilionidae.    Hare-lipped  Bats. 

NoctUin.    Hare-lipped  Bat.    S.  Amer.  ! 

Fam.  Phyllostomidae.    Vampire  Bats.  j 

SuBFAM.   '  Lobostominae '   (=  Chilonycterinae).     Cinnamon   Bat  ■; 
Hare-lipped  Bat,  etc.  ;  . 

^  Lobostoma'  (=  ChilonycteriK).     Chin-leafed    Bat.     W.   Indies,  ;| 
Mexi.  to  Brazil. 

Monnoops.    Cinnamon  Bat.   W.  Indies,  Mexi.,  C.  Amer.,  S.  Amer.  | 

SuBFAM.  Phyllostominae.    American  Leaf-nosed  Bats.  | 

Otopfenis.    California  Leaf-nosed  Bat.    W.  Indies,  Cal.,  Mexi. 

Lnnchorhina.    Tome's  Long-eared  Bat.    W.  Indies.  ' 

Vnmpyrus.    Vampire.    C.  Amer.  to  Brazil  (since  Pleist.).  j 

Phyllostomus.    Javelin  Bat.    S.  Amer.  (since  Pleist.). 

SuBFAM.  Glossophaginae.    Long-tongued  Vampire,  etc.  I 

Glosftophnga.    Long-tongued  Vampire.    Mexi.  to  Brazil,  Chili.  |j 

Choeronycferis.    Tres  Marias  Islands  Bat.    Mid.  Am.  l| 


APPENDIX  525 

SuBFAM.  Phyllonycterinse.    Poey's  Bat,  etc, 

Phyllonycteris.    Poey's  Bat.    W.  Indies. 
SuBFAM.  Stenoderminae.    Centurion  Bat,  Short-nosed  Vampire,  etc. 

Brachyphylla.    Cavern  Nose-leaf  Bat.    W.  Indies. 

Artibeus.    Short-nosed  Vampire.    Florida,  Mexi.,  C.  Amer.  S 
Amer.  '     '  * 

Stenoderma.    Cinereous  Bat.    W.  Indies,  Brazil. 

Centurio.    Centurion  Bat.    Mexi.,  C.  Amer.,  Cuba. 

Vampyrops.    White-striped  Bat.    Mexi.,  C.  Amer.,  S.  Amer 
(since  Pleist.).  ' 

SuBFAM.  Desmodontinse.    Blood  Vampires. 

Desmodus.    Common  Blood-sucking  Vampire.    Mexi.  to  Para- 
guay (since  Pleist.). 

Diphylla.    Smaller  Blood-sucking  Vampire.    Mexi.  to  Brazil. 
Fam.  Natalidae.    Funnel-eared  Bats. 

SuBFAM.  Natalinae.    Tall-crowned  Bat,  etc. 

Natalus.    Tall-crowned  Bat.    N.  Amer. 

Nycliellus.    Graceful  Bat.  Cuba. 
SuBFAM.  Furipterinae.  Fury. 

'  Furia '  (  =  Furipterus).    Fury.    S.  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Thyropterinae.    American  Sucker-footed  Bats. 

T^roptera.    Tricolor  Bat.    Tropical  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Myzopodidae.    Madagascan  Sucker-footed  Bats. 

Myzopoda.    Golden  Bat.  Madag. 
Fam.  Vespertilionidae.    Simple-faced  Bats. 
SuBFAM.  Vespertilioninse.    Common  Bats. 

t  Vespertiliavus.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  PalcEonycteris.    L,  Olig.,  Eur. 

Vei^pertilio.    Brown  Bat,  etc.    Asia,  Eur.  (since  M.  Mioc  )  •  N 
and  S.  Amer.  (since  Pleist.)  ;  Afr.,  Austral. 

'Vesperugo'  {=  Pipistrellm).  Pipistrelle,  Noctule,  etc  As 
Eur.  (since  M.  Mioc.)  ;  N.  Amer.,  S.  Amer.,  Afr.,  Austral.  " 

Myotis.  Pale  Bat,  Large-winged  Bat,  Small-winged  Bat  As 
Eur.,  N.  Amer.  (since  Pleist.)  ;  S.  Amer.,  Afr.,  Austral. 

'Atalapha'  (=  Lasiurus).  Hoary  Bat,  Red  Bat.  N.  Amer  S 
Amer.,  W.  Indies.  ' 

Nycticejus.    White-winged  Bat.    U.S.A.,  C.  Amer.,  W.  Indies. 

Rhogeessa.    Restless  Bat.    Mid.  Amer. 

Kerivoula.    Indian  Painted  Bat.    Afr.,  India,  E.  Indies. 


526  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

SuBFAM.  Plecotinii;.    Big-eared  Bats. 

Plecotus.    Big-eared  Bat.    Eur.,  Asia,  N.  Afr.,  U.S.A.,  Mexi. 

^Synotus'  (  =  Barhastella).    Barbastelle.    As.,  Eur.,  N.  Air. 

Otoni/cferis.    Ilempricirs  Eared  Bat.    N.  Afr.,  8.W.  As. 
SuBFAM.  Xvctophilinai.    Ilorseshoe-nosed  Bats. 

Ni/ctop/iilus.    Australian  Big-eared  Bat.    Austral.,  N.  Guin. 

Antrozofis.    Californian  Cave  Bat.    W.  U.S.A.,  Mexi. 

SuBFAM.  Miniopterinse.    Long-winged  Bats. 

Miniopterus.    Long-winged  Bat.    As.,  Eur.,  Afr.,  Austral.,  E. 
Indies. 

SuBFAM.  Murininae.    Tube-nosed  Bats. 

Murinn.    Murina.    Malay  region,  S.  and  E.  As. 

Harpiocephalua.    Tube-nosed  Bat.    Malay  Region,  India. 
S  r  B  F  A  M .  Tom  ope  at  i  n.T .  ^ 

Toinopeas.    Tomopeas.  Peru. 
SuBFAM.  Mystacopinre.    New  Zealand  Bat. 

Mi/stacops.    New  Zealand  Bat.    New  Zealand. 
SuBFAM.  Molossinse.    Mastilf  Bat,  Naked  Bat,  etc. 

Molossus.    MastifE  Bat.    Mexi.,  C.  Anier.,  S.  Amer. 

Promops.    Bonneted  Bat.    W.  U.S.A.,  C.  Amer.,  S.  Amer. 

Nyclinomus.    Free-tailed  Bat.    Afr.,  Eur.,  As.,  N.,  C,  S.  Amer., 
Austral. 

Chiromdeft.    Naked  Bat.    E.  Indies. 
VL    OuDKK  CARNIVORA.  Carnivores. 

\.    SuBOKDEK  Creodonta.    Creodonts  or  Archaic  Carnivores."-^ 
Inc.  Sed. 

Fam.  Oxyclaenidae.    Oxyclaenids  or  Tritubercular  Creodonts. 

t  Oxt/cl(piiii<.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Chriacus.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Tricentes.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Deltatlterium.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

Fam.  Arctocyonidae.    Arctocyonids  or  Omnivorous  Bear-like  Creo- 
donts (with  affinities  to  Eucreodi). 

t  A  rrtoci/oti.    Bas.  Eoc,  Eur. 

1  Peruvian  Bats  conneetiii;,'  ili  <  Molossiiue  with  the  more  primitive  Vespertilioninae  (Miller, 
l!if)7.  p.  2.Tr). 

Vale  Matthew,  W.  D..  The  Carnivora  and  Insectivora  of  the  Bridger  Basin,  Middle  Eocene, 
•'/).  r!t,  xu),nt.    The  present  arrangement  is  chiefly  hy  Matthew. 


APPENDIX  527 

f  Clcenodon.    B^is.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  A  nacodon.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

(1)  Section  .4  Ci^-EOi)/ (without  carnassial  teeth). 
SuPERFAM.  Mesonycjioidea.  Mesonjchoids. 

Fam.  Mesonychidae.    Mesonychids  and  Triisodonts. 
f  Triisodon.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Sarcothraustes.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Goniacodon.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Dissacus.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Hycenodictls.    Bas.  Eoc,  Eur. 
f  Pachycena.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer.  &  Eur. 
f  Mesonyx.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Synoplotherium  (incl.  Dromocyon) .    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Harpagolestes.    M.  to  U.  Eoc,  N,  Amer. 
t  Hapalodectes.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

(2)  Section  PSEUDOCREODI  (with  aberrant  carnassial  teeth). 
SuPKHFAM.  OxWENOlDEA.  Oxysenoids. 

Fam.  Oxyaenidae.    Oxyaenids  and  Palaeonictids. 

t  Palceonictis.    L,  Eoc,  N.  Amer.  &  Eur. 

f  Amhloctonus.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Oxycena.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Patriofelis.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Limnocyon.    M.  to  U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Thinocyon.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Oxycenodon.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
Fam.  Hyaenodontidae.  Hysenodonts. 

f  Proviverra.    M.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  Sinopa.    L.  to  M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. ;  M.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Tritemnodon.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Cynohycenodon.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  Gnlethylax.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  Qiiercytherium.    U.  Eoc.  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

j  Apferodon.    U.  Eoc.  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. ;  L.  Olig.,  N.  Afr. 

t  Pterodon.    U.  Eoc  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. ;  L.  Olig.,  N.  Afr. 

f  Melasinopa.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Afr. 

f  Hemipsalodon.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Hycenodon.    L.  to  M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer.  &  Eur. 


528  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

(3)    Section  EUCREODl  (with  typical  carnassial  teeth). 
Fam.  Miacidae.    Miacids  or  Primitive  Dog-like  Carnivores. 
Viverroid  or  Civet-like  (with  cutting  teeth), 
f  Diilijmictis.    Bas.  to  L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Virerrarus.    L.  to  M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
Cynoid  or  Dog-like. 

t  Miacls.    L.  to  U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Uintacynn.    L.  to  M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
Procyonoid  or  Raccoon-like. 

f  Oi'ulectes.    L.  to  M.  Eoc,  X.  Amer. 
f  Vulpavus.    L.  to  M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  PaUearctonijx.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
2.    Suborder  Fissipedia.    Modernized,  chiefly  Terrestrial  Cam ivora.^ 
(1)    Section  ARCTOIDEA.    Dogs,  Raccoons,  Bears,  Mustelines. 
Fam.  Canidae.    Dogs,  Wolves,  Foxes,  etc. 
Typical  Group. 

■f  Procynodictis.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Cynodictis.    U.  Eoc.  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. ;  L.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Cynodon.    U.  Eoc  to  U.  Olig.,  Eur. ;  L.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

^  Ain/tJiiri/nodon.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Cephalognle.    U.  Olig.,  Eur. 

t  Cynodesmus.    L.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Nothocyon.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Galecynus.    U.  Mioc,  Eur. 

t  Mesocyon.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Tephrocyon.    !M.  Mioc  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 

t  jElurodon.    U.  Mioc  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 

Canis.  Dog,  Jackal,  Wolf.  N.  Amer.,  S.  Amer.,  Eur.,  As.,  Afr., 
Austral.  (Since  L.  Plioc  in  As.;  U.  Plioc  in  Eur.;  elsewhere 
since  Pleist.) 

Vulpes.  Red  Fox.  Eur.,  Afr.,  As.,  N.  Amer.  (Since  U.  Plioc. 
in  As,;  Pleist.  in  Eur.) 

Urocyon.  Oray  Fox.  U.S.A.,  Mexi.  to  Colombia.  (X.  Amer.  since 
Pleist.) 

Otwyon.    Large-eared  Dog.    E.  &  S.  Afr. 

1  For  the  Kcncrul  classitication  see  Flower  and  Lydekker,  Introduction  to  the  Study  of 
Mammals,  1801:  Wt-ber,  Die  Siiugetiere,  1904  (pp.  529-538).  The  present  arrangement  is  by 
Matthew  and  Osboru. 


APPENDIX 


529 


Cyon  or  Dhole-like  Group, 
t  Daphoenus.    L.  to  M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
f  Temnocyon.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
t  Simocyon.    U.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  Eur. 
f  Enhydrocyon.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
f  Dinocynops.    Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 

Icticyon.     South  American  Bush  Dog.    Guiana,  Brazil  (since 
Pleist.). 

Cyon.    Dhole,  Buansuah,  etc.    As.,  E.  Indies  (?M.  to  U.  Mioc, 
N.  Amer.). 

Lycaon.    Cape  Hunting  Dog.    Afr.  (Pleist.,  Eur.). 
Amphicyon  Group  (Bear-like  Dogs), 
t  Daphcenodon.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Amphicyon.    U.  Olig.  to  M.  Mioc,  Eur. ;  M,  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc, 
N.  Amer. 

t  Pseudocyon.    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 

t  Hemicyon.    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 

t  Ischyrocyon.    U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Dinocyon.    U.  Mioc  to  Plioc,  Eur. 

t  Borophagus.    U.  Mioc.  to  M.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 

Fam.  Procyonidae.  Raccoons. 

SuBFAM.  Cercoleptinse.  Kinkajous. 

'  Cercoleptea*  {=  Potos).    Kinkajou.    N.  S.  Amer.  to  Mexi. 

SuBFAM.  Procyoninae.    Raccoons,  Coatis. 

Bassaricyon.    Bassaricyon.    C.  Amer.  to  Ecuador. 

Bassariscus.    Cacomistle.    W.  U.S.A.,  Mexi.,  C.  Amer.  (L.  Plioc, 
N.  Amer.). 

t  Phlaocyon.    Primitive  Raccoon.    L.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 
t  Leptarctus.    Primitive  Raccoon.    U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 
Procijon.    Raccoon.    S.  Canada  to  Paraguay  (Pleist.,  N.  Amer.). 
t  Cyonasua.    Plioc,  S.  Amer. 
Nasua.    Coati.    S,  Amer.  to  California. 
SuBFAM.  ^lurinae.  Pandas. 

^lurus.    Panda.    Himalayas  to  Assam  (Plioc,  Eur.). 
JEluropus.    Particolored  Bear.    C.  As. 
Fam.  Ursidae.  Bears. 

t  (?)  Ursavus.    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

f  (?)  Ilycenurctos.    L.  Plioc,  Eur.  &  As. 
f  Pseudarctos.    M.  Mioc,  Yuxxw 

Uraus.  Grizzly  Bear,  Black  Bear,  Brown  Bear,  etc.  N.  Amer. 
(since  Pleist.)  ;  As.  (since  L.  Plioc.)  ;  Eur.  (since  U.  Plioc.)  ; 
N.  Afr. 

Thalarctos.    Polar  Bear.    Arctic  Reg.  of  the  World. 
Tremnrctoa.    Spectacled  Bear.    W.  S.  Anier.  (Andes  Mts.). 
f  Arctotherium.    Pleist.,  N.  Anier.  &  S.  Anier. 
f  Pararctntherium.    Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 
Melursus.    Sloth  Bear.  India. 
Fam.  Mustelidae.  Mustelines. 
Suhfam.  Mustelinae.    Martens,  AVeasels,  Wolverines, 
f  Proplesictis.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 
f  Plesictis.    U.  Eoc.  to  L.  Mioc,  P]ur. 
f  Amphictis.    L.  to  U.  Olig.,  Eur. 
f  Palceogale.    U.  Eoc.  to  L.  Mioc,  Eur. 
f  Stenogale.    L.  Olig.  to  L.  Mioc,  Eur. 
f  Buncelurus.    L.  to  M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
t  Oligohunis.    U.  Olig.  to  L.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Procelurus.    U.  Olig.,  Eur. 
f  Sfenoplesictis.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 
t  ^lurocyon.    L.  Mioc,  N.  Amei'. 
f  Megalictis.    L.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Haplor/ale.    L.  Olig.  to  U.  Mioc,  Eur. 
f  Proputorius.    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 
f  Brachypsalis.    U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

Mustela.    Marten.    N.  Amer.,  Eur.,   As.,  E.  Indies  (since 
Mioc,  Eur.,  As.,  N.  Amer.). 

f  Canimartes.    Plioc,  N.  Amer. 

Galictis.    Tayra,  Grison.    C.  Amer.,  S.  Amer. 

Putorius.  AVeasel,  Ferret.  N.  Amer.  (since  U.  ]\Iioc.)  to  Peru, 
Eur.  (since  Plioc),  N.  Afr.,  As.,  E.  Indies. 

Gulo.  Wolverine.  N.  As.,  X.  Eur.,  Greenland,  N.  U.S.A.  (Pleist., 
Eur.). 

SuBFAM.  Melinae.    Badgers  and  Skunks. 

t  Trochictis.    Primitive  Badger.    M.  Mioc.  to  M.  Plioc,  Eur. 
t  Promelest.    Primitive  Badger.    L.  Plioc,  Eur. 
t  Pn/mep/iitis.    Primitive  Skunk.    L.  Plioc,  Eur. 


APPENDIX  531 

f  Bracliyprotoma.    Primitive  Skunk.    Pleist.,  N.  Amer. 

Mephitis.    Skunk.    N.  Amer.  (since  Pleist.),  C.  Amer. 

Spilogale.    Spotted  Skunk.    U.S.A.,  Mexi.,  C.  Amer.  (Pleist., 
N.  Amer.) 

Conepatus.    South  American  Skunk.     S.  Amer.  to  California, 
(Pleist.,  S.  Amer.). 

Meles.    European  Badger.    Eur.,  As.  (U.  Mioc,  Eur.  and  As.). 

MelUoora.    Ratel  or  Honey  Badger.    Afr.,  S.  As.  (L.  Plioc,  As.). 

Mydaus.    Malayan  Badger.    E.  Indies. 

Taxidea.    American  Badger.    jN".  Amer.  (since  Pleist.). 

Arctonyx.    Sand  Badger.    China,  Indo-China. 

Zorilla.    African  Polecat.    Afr.,  As.  Min.  (?  Mioc,  Eur.). 

Helictis.    Ferret  Badger.    China,  Indo-China,  E.  Indies. 

SuBFAM.  Lutrinse.  Otters. 

t  Pofainoiherium  (f  Lutrictis).    Primitive  Otter.    U.  Olig.  to  L. 
Mioc,  Eur. 

f  Enhydriodon.    Primitive  Otter.    U.  Mioc,  Eur. ;  L.  Plioc,  As. 

Lutrn.    Otter.    N.  Amer.,  S.  Amer.,  Eur.,  As.,  Afr.    (Since  U. 
Mioc,  N.  Amer.  &  Eur.;  L.  Plioc,  As.) 

Latax.    Sea  Otter.    Pacific  Coast  of  N.  Amer.  &  N".  As. 
(2)    Section  ^LUROIDEA.    Civets,  Hyaenas,  Cats,  etc 
Fam.  Viverridae.  Viverrines. 

SuBFAM.  Euplerinse.    Insectivorous  Yiverrids. 

Eupleres.    Falanouc.  Madag. 
SuBFAM.  Viverrinse.    Civets,  etc 

t  Progenetta.    M.  to  U.  Mioc,  Eur. 

Nandinia.    African  Palm  Civet.    W.  &  C.  Afr. 

Viverra.    True  Civet.    Afr.,  S.  As.,  E.  Indies  (M.  Mioc,  Eur.^). 

Genetta.    Genet.    Afr.,  Spain,  France,  Turkey  to  Arabia. 

Linsanga.    Linsang.    Himalayas  to  Borneo. 

Paradoxurus.    Palm  Civet.    China,  India,  Indo-China,  E.  Indies. 
Arctictis.    Binturong.    Himalayas  to  Borneo. 
Arctognle.    Small-toothed  Palm  Civet.    E.  Indies,  Indo-China. 
Hemigale.    Hemigale.    E.  Indies. 
Cynogale.    Cynogale.    E.  Indies. 
SuBFAM.  Herpestinae.    Mungooses,  etc. 

1  Also  recorded  from  U.  Eoc.  and  L.  Olig.,  Europe,  but  probably  wrongly  identified  with  the 
Ddern  genus. 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

Herpestes.  Mungoose.  Afr.,  Spain,  As.  Min.,  S.  As.,  E.  Indies 
(since  U.  Olig.,  Eur.). 

Crossarchus.    Banded  Mungoose,  Cusimanse.  Afr. 

Helogale.    Atkinson's  Mungoose.    E.  &  S.  Afr. 

Cynictis.    Thick -tailed  Mungoose.    S.E.  Afr. 

Suricata.    Meerkat.    S.E.  Afr. 

Galidictis.    Munguste.  Madag. 

Galidia.    Galidia.  Madag. 

Hemigalidia.    Ilemigalidia.  Madag. 
SuBFAM.  Cryptoproctinae.  Fossa. 

Cryptoprocta.    Fossa.  Madag. 
SuBFAM.  Inc.  (transitional  to  Hyaenidse). 

f  Iclilherium.    U.  Mioc,  Eur. 
Fam.  Protelidae.    Aard  Wolves. 

Proteles.    Aard  Wolf.    S.  &  E.  Afr. 
Fam.  Hyaenidae.  Hy?enas. 

f  Lycycena.    U.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  Eur.  &  As. 

f  Hycenictis.    L.  Plioc,  Eur.  &  As. 

Hycena.  Striped  and  Spotted  Hyaenas.  Afr.,  Syria  to  India  (U. 
Mioc.  to  Pleist.,  Eur. ;  L.  Plioc,  As.). 

Fam.  Felidae.  Cats. 

Subfam.  Machaerodontinse.    Saber-tooth  Cats. 

t  'uElnrogale'  (=  jElurictis).    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Dinictis.    L.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Nimravus.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Hoplophoneus.    M.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Eusmilus.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. ;  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Machairodus.    L.  Mioc.  to  L.  Pleist.,  Eur. ;  Plioc,  As. 

f  Smilodon.    Pleist.,  N.  Amer.  &  S.  Amer. 
•  Subfam.  Felinae.    True  Cats. 

f  Pseudceluruit.    M.  Mioc,  Eur.  &  N.  Amer. 

f  Hycencelurus.    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 

Felis.  Tiger,  Lion,  Leopard,  Puma,  Cat,  etc.  Eur.  (since  M. 
Mioc.)  ;  As.  (since  L.  Plioc)  ;  N.  Amer.  (since  L.  Plioc.) ; 
S.  Amer.  (since  Pleist.)  ;  Afr. 

Lynx.    Lynx,  Caracal.    Eur.,  As.,  N.  Amer.,  N.  Afr. 

Cyncelurm.  Cheetah  or  Hunting  Leopard.  Afr.,  Syria  to  India 
(since  L.  Plioc). 


APPENDIX  533 

Suborder  P  i  n  n  i  p  e  d  i  a.    Seals,  Walruses,  etc.^ 
Fam.  Otariidae.    Eared  Seals. 

f  Arctophoca.    (?)  L.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

Otaria.    Southern  Sea  Lion.    Coast  of  Peru,  Chili,  Argentine 
(since  Pleist.). 

Eumetopias.    Steller's  Sea  Lion.    Behring  Str.  to  California  & 
to  Japan. 

Zalophus.    California  Sea  Lion.    Coast  of  California,  Austral., 
N.  Zealand,  S.  Japan  (Plioc,  Austral.). 

Callotaria.    Fur  Seal  or  Sea  Bear.    Behring  Str.  to  S.  California 
&  to  Japan. 

Arctocephalus.    Southern  Sea  Bear.    Coast  of  S.  Amer.  (E.  &  W.), 
E.  Afr.,  Austral.,  N.  Zealand. 

Fam.  Odobaenidae.  Walruses. 

f  Alactherium.    U.  Mioc,  Eur. 

t  Prorosmarus.    U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

Odohaenus.    Walrus.    Arct.,  N.  Atlant.,  N.  Pacif.  Oceans  (Plioc, 
Eur.;  Pleist.,  N.  Amer.). 

Fam.  Phocidae.    Earless  Seals. 

f  Monatherium.    Mioc,  Eur. 

t  Prophoca.    Mioc,  Eur. 

f  Pristiphoca.    Plioc,  Eur. 

Phoca.    Harbor  Seal,  Greenland  Seal.    Coast  of  Eur.  (since  U. 
Mioc.)  ;  N.  As.,  N.  Amer.,  E.  &  W.  (since  Mioc). 

Hystriophoca.    Ribbon  Seal.    N.  Pacif.  Ocean  (E.  &  W.). 

Halichocrus.    Gray  Seal.    Coast  of  Greenland  &  E.  Canada. 

Monachus.    Monk  Seal,  West  Indian  Seal.    Mediter.,  Gulf  of 
Mexi.,  W.  Indies. 

CystopJiora.    Hooded  Seal.    Arct.  &  N.  Atlant.  Oceans  (E.  &  W.). 

^  MacrorJiinus'  (  =  Rhinophoca).     Elephant  Seal.    E.  Pacif.  (N. 
&  S.),  Indian  Oc,  S.  Austral. 

Ogmorhinus.    Leopard  Seal.    Antarct.  Oc,  S.  Austral.,  N.  Zea- 
land, Patagonia. 

Lohodon.    Crab-eating  Seal.    Antarct.  Oc,  S.E.  coast  of  S.  Amer. 

Leptonychotes.    Weddell's   Seal.    Antarct.   Oc,   S.E.  coast  of 
S.  Amer. 

Ommatophoca.    Ross's  Seal.    Antarct.  Oc. 
Vide  Flower  and  Lydekker,  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Mammals,  1891. 


534 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


yil.    Order  RODENTIA.  Rodents.i 

1.  SuBOKDEH  DUPLICIDENTATA.    Iliires  aiid  Picas. 

Fam.  Lagomyidae  (=  Ochotonidae).    Picas,  Mountain  Hares, 
t  TiUmomys.    M.  Olig.  to  L.  Mioc,  Eur. 
t  Prolagus.    L.  Mioc.  to  Pleist.,  Eur. 

Lagomys  (=  Ochotona).   Pica.   Mountains  of  Russia,  Asia,  W.  N. 
Amer.  (tJ.  Mioc.  to  Pleist.,  Eur.;  Pleist.,  N.  Amer.). 

Fam.  Leporidae.    Hares,  Rabbits. 

t  rd/fpolagus.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

Lepus.    Hare,  Rabbit.    N.  Amer.  (since  U.  Olig.)  ;  Eur.  &  As. 
(since  L.  Plioc.) ;  S.  Amer.,  Afr. 

Macrotolagus.    .lack  Rabbit.    S.W.  U.S.A.,  Mexi. 

Romerolagus.    Mexican  Cottontail.  Mexi. 

2.  Suborder  Simplicidentata.    Rodents  Proper. 
(1)    Section  SCIUROMORPHA.    Squirrel-like  Rodents. 

SuPEKKAM.  A  PLODOyTOlDEA.    Primitive  Sciuromorplis. 
Fam.  Ischyromyidae.    Ischyi  omyids,  Primitive  Sciuroids. 

t  Paramys.    L.  to  U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Plesiarctomys.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  Sciuravus.    L.  to  U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Pseudotomus.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Cylindrodon.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Ischyromys.    L.  to  M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Prosciurus.    L.  to  M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
Fam.  Pseudosciuridae.  Pseudosciurids. 

t  Sciuroides.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

t  Pseitdosciurus.    Olig.,  Eur. 

t  Sciurodon.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

t  Eomys.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  Phiomys.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Afr.  (Fayum). 

t  Mefaphiomys.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Afr.  (Fayum). 

f  Pihoddnnmys.    U.  Olig.,  Eur. 
Fam.  Aplodontiidae.  Sewellels. 

t  Mcinsconiys.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Mylagaulodon.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

Aplodontia.    Sewellel.    N.W.  N.  Amer.  (since  Pleist.). 

1  Vidp  Tnllbeiff.  T.,  Ueber  das  System  der  Nagethiere,  Upsala,  1890;  Weber,  M.,  Die  Sange- 
tiere,  IHOI;  Beddard,  Mammalia.  Ilt02;  Hornaday,  The  American  Natural  History,  1904.  The 
present  arrangement  is  by  Matthew. 


APPENDIX 


535 


Fam.  Mylagaulidae.    Honied  Gophers, 
t  Mesogaulus.    M.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Mylagaulus.    M.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Ceratogauius.    M.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Epigauliis.    L.  Plioc,  N,  Amer. 
SuPERFAM.  SciUROlDEA.  Sciuroids. 
Fam.  Sciuridae.  Squirrels. 

SuBFAM.    Nannosciurinse.    Pigmy  Squirrels. 

Nannosciurus.    Afr.,  Philipp.,  Indo- Austral. 
SuBFAM.  Arctomyinae.    Marmots,  Woodchuck,  etc. 
f  Palcearclomys.    U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

Spermophilus.   Spermophile,  Suslik.   E.  Eur.,  Siberia,  W.  N.  Amer. 

Arctomys'  (=  Marmota).    Marmot,  Woodchuck,  etc    N.  Amer. 
(since  U.  Mioc.)  ;  Eur.  (since  Pleist.),  N.  &  C.  As. 

Cynomys.    Prairie  Dog.    C.  U.S.A.  (since  U.  Mioc). 

SuBFAM.    Sciurinae.    True  Squirrels,  Chipmunks,  etc. 

Sciurus.    Squirrel.    Temperate  and  Trop.  Regions  of  the  World, 
exc.  Austral,  and  Madag.  (since  U.  Olig.,  Eur.  &  N.  Amer.). 

Tamias.    Chipmunk.    E.  &  C.  U.S.A.  (since  Pleist.),  S.  Canada. 

SuBFAM.  Xerinse.    Spiny  Squirrels,  Giant  Squirrels. 

Xerus.    Spiny  Squirrel.  Afr. 

Ratiifa.    Giant  Squirrel.    India,  Indo-China,  E.  Indies. 
SuBFAM.  Pteromyinae.    Flying  Squirrels. 

Pteromys.    Larger  Flying  Squirrel.    C.  &  S.E.  As.,  E.  Indies. 
Sciuropterus.    Lesser  Flying  Squirrel.    N.  Amer.,  As.,  Eur. 
Eupetaurus.    Woolly  Flying  Squirrel.  Thibet. 
SuPERFAM.  C ASTOROIDEA.    Beavers  and  Beaver-like  Rodents. 
Fam.  Castoridae.  Beavers. 

f  Eutypomys.^    M.  Olig.,  N".  Amer. 

t  Steneqfiber.    M.  Olig.  to  M.  Mioc,  Eur. ;  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Euhapsis.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Chalicomys.    U.  Mioc.  to  Plioc,  Eur. 

]  '  Dipoides'  (=  Eucastor).     U.  Mioc.   to   Plioc,  Eur.,  As.,  & 
N.  Amer. 

f  Hystricopfi.    U.  Mioc  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 

Castor.    Beaver.    N.  Amer.  (since  Pleist.)  ;  Eur.  (since  Plioc.)  ; 
W.  As. 

f  Trogontherium.    Pleist.,  Eur. 

1  Possibly  related  to  PteromyiuEB. 


536  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

Fam.  Castoroididae.    Beaver-like  Rodents. 

f  Castoro'ifles.    Pleist.,  N.  Ainer. 

t  A)nh/i/rJiiz(i.    Pleist.,  W.  Indies. 

SupKKFAM.  G KOMYOJDEA.    Pockct  Gophers,  Pocket  Mice,  Kangaroo 
Rats,  etc. 

Fam.  Heteromyidae.    Kangaroo  Rats  &  Pocket  Mice. 

f  '  Gt/mnopti/chus'  (  =  Adjidaumo).    L.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
t  Heliscomys.    M.  Olig.,  N.  Anier. 

Perognatlms.    Pocket   Mouse.    U.S.A.,    Mexi.(?L.    Mioc,  N. 
Amer.). 

Ileteromys.    Pouched  Spiny  Rat  &  Mouse.    Mexi.  to  Ecuador  & 
Venezuela. 

Dipodomysi.    Kangaroo  Rat.    U.S.A.,  Mexi. 
Fam.  Geomyidae.    Pocket  Gophers. 

f  Inc.  sed.  Protoptychus.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Entoptychus.    U.  Olig.  to  L.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Pleurolicus.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

Thoniomys.    Lesser  Pocket  Gopher.    U.S.A.,  Mexi.  (since  M. 
Mioc,  N.  Amer.). 

Geomys.  Pocket  Gopher.  U.S.A.,  Mexi.  (since  U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer.)- 

(2)    Section  J/mi/0/?P//.4.    Rat^like  Rodents. 

SupERFAM.  Myoidea.    Rats,  Jerboas,  etc. 

Fam.  'Gliridae'  (=  Myoxidae).  Dormice. 

Myo.vus.    Squirrel-tailed  &  Garden  Dormouse.    Eur.  (since  U. 
Olig.);  S.W.  As.,  Japan. 

Graphiurus.    African  Dormouse.  Afr. 

Platacanthomys.    Malabar  Spiny  Mouse.    S.  India,  Cochinchina. 

Muscardinm.    Common  Dormouse.   Eur.  (since  Pleist.),  As.  Min. 

Elioinys.    Lerot.    Eur.,  N.  Afr. 

Fam.  Muridae.    Rats,  Mice,  etc. 

SuBFAM.  'Cricetinfe'  ( =  Sigmodontinae).    Hamsters,  Field  Mice, 
and  Field  Rats. 

t  Cricelodon.    L.  Olig.  to  U.  Mioc,  Eur. 

t  Eumys.    M.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

SuBFAM.  Murinai.    Rats  and  Mice. 

Mus.    Rat,  ]Mouse.    Cosmop.  (Plioc.  &  Pleist.,  Eur.). 

Nesocia.    Bandicoot  Rat.    Palestine  to  Java  (Plioc.  &  Pleist., 
India). 

Acomys.    Spiny  Mouse.    E.  Afr.,  As.  (U.  Mioc  &  Plioc,  Eur.). 


APPENDIX  537 

Chiruromjjs.    Prehensile-tailed  Mouse.    N.  Guin. 

Uromys,  Hapalotis,  Mastacomys.    Jerboa  Rats.  Australia. 

Cricetomys.    Giant  Rat.    E.,  W.  &  S.  Afr. 

Saccostornus.    Pouched  Rat.    S.  Afr. 
SuBFAM.  Gerbillinse.  Gerbilles. 

Gerhillus.    Gerbille,  Afr.,  Russia,  W.  As.  to  China  (Pleist.,  India). 

Psammomys.    Sand  Rat.    N.  Afr.,  Palestine. 

Meriones.    Shaw's  Mouse.    S.E.  Russ.,  N.  Afr.  to  C.  Asia. 
SuBFAM.    Hydromyinse.    Australian  Water  Rats. 

Hydromys.    Australian  Water  Rat.    Austral.,  Guin. 

Xeromys.    Queensland  Rat.  Queensland. 
SuBFAM.  PhltEoniyinse.    Philippine  Rats,  etc. 

PhlcEomys.    Philippine  Rat.  Philippines. 

Carpomys.    Philippine  Fruit  Mouse.  Philippines. 

SuBFAM.    Rhynchomyinse.    Shrew  Rats. 

Celcenomys,  Chrotomys,  etc.     Philippine   Mice.     Mountains  of 
Luzon. 

Rhynchomys.    Shrew  Rat.  Philippines. 
SuBFAM.  Otomyinae.  Otomyins. 

Otomys.    Otomys.    S.  &  E.  Afr. 
SuBFAM.  Dendromyinse.    African  Tree  Mice. 

Dendromys.    African  Tree  Mouse.  Afr. 
SuBFAM.  Lophiomyinae.    Crested  Hamsters. 

Lophiomys.    African  Crested  Hamster.    N.E.  Afr. 

SuBFAM.  Microtinse.    Voles,  or  Meadow  Mice. 

Microtus.    Meadow  Mouse,  or  Vole.   Eur.  (since  Plioc.)  ;  W.  &  C. 
As.,  X.  Amer.  (since  Pleist.). 

Arvicola.    Water  Vole.    Palaearctic  (since  Pleist.). 

Myodes.    Lemming.   N.  Amer.,  N,  Eur.  (Pleist.,  Eur.,  N.  Amer.). 

Cuniculus.     Banded  Lemming.     Arctic  Eur.,  As.,  N.  Amer. 
(Pleist.,  Eur.). 

Evotomys.    Red-backed  Vole.    N.  Eur.,  Siberia,  N.  Amer. 
Fiber.    Musk  Rat.    Canada,  U.S.A.  (since  L.  Pleist.). 
Pkenacomys.    Mountain  Vole.    N".  Amer. 

Peromyscus   (Hesperomya) .     Field   Mouse.     N.  Amer.  (since 
Mioc). 

Cricetus.    Hamster.    Eur.  to  C.  As.  (since  Plioc,  Eur.). 
Sigmodon.    Cotton  Rat.    S.  U.S.A.  to  Peru  (Pleist.,  S.  Amer.). 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

Oryzomys.    Rice  Rat.    S.  Aiiier.,  S.  &  E.  U.S.A. 

lieithrodontomi/s.    Harvest  Mouse.  U.S.A. 

Ichthi/omys.    Fish-eating  Rat.    N.  S.  Aiuer.  to  Panama. 

Eliurus.    Madagascan  Rat.  ^ladag. 

Reilhrodon.    Reithrodon.    S.  Anier.  (since  Pleist.). 

Neotoma.    Wood  Rat,  Pack  Rat.         Amer.  (since  Pleist.)  ;  ( 
Amer. 

Hodonii/s.    Allen's  Wood  Rat.  Mexi. 

Fam.  Spalacidae.    Mole  Rats. 

Sjxildx.    Egyptian  Mole  Rat.    S.  Russia,  Balkan  Penin.,  Ei;y] 
to  Turkestan.    (Eur.  since  Mioc.) 

Rhizomys.    Haniboo  Rat.    Thibet,  China  to  Sumatra. 

Fam.  Dipodidae.    Jerboas  and  Jumping  ]Mice. 

f  Frotoplychus.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Paciculm.    U.  Olig.,  X.  Amer. 

Zapus.    Jumping  Mouse.    U.S.A.,  Canada,  China  (Pleist.,  N 
Amer.). 

Alactaga.    Five-toed  Jerboa.    Rnss.,  As.  Min.  to  China,  X.  Afr 
(Pleist.  Eur.) 

Dipm.    True  Jerboa.    N.  Afr.,  C.  &  S.W.  As. 

Sm'mthm.    Sminthus.    E.  Eur.,  W.  &  C.  As.  (Pleist.,  Eur.). 
SuPERFAM.  '  Axomaluroidea:  Anomaluroids. 
Fam.  Pedetidae.    Spring  Ilaas  Family. 

Fedetes.    Cape  Spring  Haas.    S.  Afr. 
Fam.  Anomaluridae.    African  Flying  Squii  rels. 

AnoiiHilurus.    African  Flying  Squirrel.  Afr. 

Idlunis.    Long-tailed  African  Flying  Squirrel.    S.W.  Afr. 
SupKUFAM    Bathyergoidea.  Bathyergoids. 
Fam.  Bathyergidae.    Cape  Mole  Rats. 

Bathyeryu^.    Large  Cape  Mole  Rat.    S.  Afr. 

Heteroce/tkalus.    Naked  Sand  Rat.    Abyssinia,  Somali. 

Georhychns.    Blesmol.    S.  &  W.  Afr. 
(3)  Sfxtion  HYSTniCOMORPHA.    Porcupine-like  Rodents. 
Fam.  Theridomyidae.    Ancestral  Hystriccmorphs. 

t  Trechomyst.     M.  Eoc.  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

t  F^roterhitnys.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

t  T/ieridoniys.    U.  Eoc.  to  L.  Mioc,  Eur. 


APPENDIX 


539 


f  Issiodoromys.  M.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Nesokerodon.  U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  ArchcBomys,    U.  Olig.,  Eur. 
Fam.  Ctenodactylidae.    African  Jumping  Mice. 

Ctenodactylus.    African  Gundi.    N.  Afr. 

Peclinalor.    Speke's  Jumping  Mouse.  Abyssinia. 
Fam.  Octodontidae.    Coypu  and  Spiny  Rats. 
SuBFAM.  Octodontinse.    Tuco-tucos,  etc. 

Octodon.    Degu.    W.  S.  Amer. 

Ctenomys.    Tuco-tuco.    S.  Amer.,  S.  of  Amazon  (since  Plioc). 

Petromys.    African  Rock  Rat.    S.  Afr. 
SuBFAM.  Loncherinje.    iSpiny  Rats. 

f  Spaniomys.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Sticliomys.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

Echinojiiys.    Spiny  Rat.    Paraguay  to  Panama. 

Loncheres.  Porcupine  Rat.    Paraguay  to  Venezuela  (since  Pleist.). 
SuBFAM.  Capromyinse.    Water  Rats,  Tree  Rats,  Cane  Rats. 

f  Neoreomys.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Scleromys.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

^Myocastor'  (=  Myopotamus).     Coypu  or  Water  Rat.     S.  &  C. 
S.  Amer.  (since  Plioc).  • 

Capromys.    Cuban  Tree  Rat  or  Hutia.    W.  Indies,  Bahamas. 

Aulacodus.    African  Cane  Rat.    W.,  E.  &  S.  Afr. 

Fam.  Hystricidae.  Porcupines. 

SuBFAM.  Erethizontinse.    New  World  Porcupines. 

f  Acaremys.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Steiromys.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

Erethizon.    Canada  Porcupine.    Alaska  &  Labrador  to  Arizona 
(Pleist.,  N.  Amer.). 

^  SyneiJieres  '  (=  Cercolabes).    Tree  Porcupine.    Bolivia  to  Mexi., 
W^.  Indies. 

Chcetomys.    Thin-spined  Porcupine.  Brazil. 

SuBFAM.  Hystricinae.    Old  World  Porcupines. 

Hystrix.    True  Porcupine.    Afr.,  S.  Eur.,  S.  As.,  E.  Indies  (M. 
Mioc,  Eur.). 

Atherura.    Brush-tailed  Porcupine.    Indo-Cliina,  W.  Afr.  (Pleist., 
India). 

Fam.  Chinchillidae.    Viscachas,  Chinchillas, 
t  Prolagostomus.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 


540. 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


t  Perimys.    Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

t  Megamys.    Giant  Chinchilla.    Plioc,  Argentina. 

f  Amhlyrhiza.    Giant  Chinchilla.    Pleist.,  W.  Indies. 

Chinchilla.    Chinchilla.    Andes  Mts. 

Lagostomus.    Viscacha.    Argentine  (since  Plioc). 

Lagidium.    Four-toed  Chinchilla.    Andes  Mts. 
Fam.  Dinomyidae.    Long-tailed  Pacas. 

Dinomys.    Branick's  Paca.  Peru. 
Fam.  Dasyproctidae.  Agoutis. 

Caelogenys.    Paca.    Paraguay  to  C.  Amer.  (Pleist.,  S.  Amer.). 

Dasyprocta.    Agouti.    Paraguay  to  Mexi.  (Pleist.,  S.  Amer.). 
Fam.  Caviidae.  Cavies. 

t  Eocardia.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

t  Schistomys.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

Cavia.    Guinea  Pig.    S.  Amer.  (since  Plioc). 

Hydrochcerus.    Capybara.    Guiana  to  Uruguay  (since  Plioc). 

Dolichotis.    Patagonian  Cavy.    Argentine  (since  Plioc). 
Inc.  Sed. 

f  Cephalomys.    Eoc,  S.  Amer. 
Inc.  Sed.  Edentata. 

VIII.  Order  TiENIODONTA.    Tseniodonts  (Ganodonts),  primitive  Eden- 

tates witli  enameled  teeth. ^ 

Fam.  Conoryctidae.  Conoryctids. 

f  Onychodectes.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Conoryctes.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
Fam.  Stylinodontidae.  Stylinodonts. 

t  ^  Hemiganus'  {=  Wortmania).    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Psittacotherium.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Calamodon.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Siyllnodon.    L.  to  M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

IX.  Okdkr  ' EDENTATA '  (Xenarthra).    American  Edentates.^ 
1.    Subori)p:r  '  PiLOSA  '  (  =  Anicanodonta).    Hairy  Edentates. 

1  Vi(h'  Wortinaii,  J.L.  The  Ganodonta  and  their  Relationship  to  the  Edentata.  Bull.  Amer. 
}fux.  Xat.  Hist.,  Vol.  IX,  1H«)7,  pp.  .");)-110.  The  supposed  ancestral  relationship  of  the  Gano- 
donta (Ta'nio«lonta)  t<»  the  Edentates  is  denied  hy  Scott  (Mammalia  of  the  Santa  Cruz  Beds, 
Edentata.     Princeton  Univer.^itij,  Exped.  to  Patagonia,  Vol.  V,  l!)0;3-liK)5). 

*  Vide  Flower  and  Lydekker,  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Mammals,  18<)2;  Weber,  Die  Siiu- 
getiere.  1?W0  ;  Scittt,  Mammalia  of  the  Santa  Cruz  Beds,  Edentata.  Princeton  Patagonian 
Exped.,  Vol.  V.    The  present  arrangement  is  by  Osborn  and  Matthew. 


APPENDIX 


541 


(1)  Section  GRAVIGRADA.    Ground  Sloths. 
Fam.  Megalonychidae.    Tusked  Ground  Sloths. 

SuBFAM.  Megalonychinge.    Megalonyx,  etc. 

f  Hapalops.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Pelecydon.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Schismotherium.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Planops.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Prepofherium.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Eucholceops.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Megalonychotherium.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

t  Megalonyx.    Plioc,  N.  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Mylodontinae.    Mylodon,  etc. 

f  Nematherium.    Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Analcitherium.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Scelidotherium.    Plioc.  to  Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 

f  ^  Lestodon'  (=  Pseudolestodon).    Plioc.  &  Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 

f  Catonyx.    Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 

t  Mylodon.    Pleist.,  N.  &  S.  Amer. 

f  '  Glossotherivm '  (  =  Neomylodon,  Grypotherium).   Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 
f  Paramylodon.    Pleist.,  N.  Amer. 
Fam.  Megatheriidae.    Megatheres  or  Giant  Ground  Sloths. 

f  Megatherium.  Plioc.  &  Pleist.,  S.  &  C.  Amer. ;  Pleist.,  N.  Amer. 
f  Nothrotherium.    Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 

(2)  Section  VERMILINGUA.  Anteaters. 
Fam.  Myrmecophagidae.    American  Anteaters. 

Tamandua.    Tamandua.    Argentine  to  Mexi. 

Myrmecophaga.    Great  Anteater.    Argentine  to  C.  Amer. 

^  Cycloturus'  (—  Cyclopes').    Little  Anteater.   N.  S.  Amer.  to  C. 
Amer. 

(3)  Section  TARDIGRADA. 
Fam.  Bradypodidae.  Sloths. 

Bradypus.    Ai,  Three-toed  Sloth.    Bolivia  to  C.  Amer. 
Choloepus.    Unau,  Two-toed  Sloth.    Ecuador  to  Costa  Rica. 
2.    Suborder  'LORi  cat  a'  (=  Hicanodonta).    Armored  Edentates. 
(1)    Section  DASYPODA.  Armadillos. 

Fam.  Metacheiromyidae.    Middle  Eocene  Armadillos, 
f  Metacheiromys.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

Fam.  Dasypodidae.    Fossil  and  Recent  Armadillos. 

SUBFAM.  Dasypodin*.     Six-,  Seven-,  Eight.,  Eleven-banded,  Giant 
Armadillo,  etc. 
f  Proeutatua.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 
I  Prozaedius.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 
t  Stenotatus.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 
f  Eutatus.    Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 
f  Chlamydotherium.    Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 

Dasypus.    Six-,  Seven-,  and  Eight-banded  Armadillos.    S.  Amer. 
Xenurus.    Cabassou,  Eleven-banded  Armadillo.    Paraguay  to  C. 
Amer. 

Priodon  (=  Priodontes).   Giant  Armadillo.  Argentine  to  Guiana. 

Tolypeutes.    Apar.    Argentine  to  Guiana. 

Zaedius.    Pichi,  Peludo.    S.  S.  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Chlamydophorinse.  Pichiciagos. 

Chlamydophorus.    Pichiciago.    W.  Argentine. 
SuBFAM.  Tatusiinse.    Peba  Armadillo,  etc. 

t  Stegotherium.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

'  Tatusia'  (=  Tatu).    Peba,  Nine-banded  Armadillo.  Argentine 
to  Texas  (Pleist.,  S.  Amer.). 
SuBFAM.  Peltephilin{«.  Peltephilins. 

t  Peltephilus.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Scleropleurinse.  Scleropleurins. 
Sderopleura.    Scleropleura.  Brazil. 
(2)  Section  GLYPTODONTIA.    Tortoise  Armadillos. 
Fam.  Glyptodontidae.  Glyptodons. 

SuBFAM.  GlyptodontinfB.    Glyptodons  Proper, 
t  Propalceohaplophorus.    U.  IMioc,  S.  Amer. 
t  Cnchlops.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 
f  Euciuepeltm.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 
t  Glyptodon.    Plioc,  S.  Amer.,  N.  Amer. 
f  Glyptotherium.    Plioc,  N.  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Doedicurinae.  Doedicurins. 

f  Dcedicurm.    Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Sclerocalyptinse.  Sclerocalyptins. 

t  '  Sclerocafyptus '  (=  Hoplophorus).  Plioc  to  Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 
t  Panochlhus.    Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 


APPENDIX  543 

X.  Order  PHOLIDOTA.    Scaly  Anteaters.i 

Fam.  Manidae.  Pangolins. 

t  Leptomanis.    M.  Olig.,  Eur.,  Afr. 
Manis.    Pangolin.    W.  Afr. 

Pholidotus.    Long-tailed  Pangolin.    W.,  S.,  &  E.  Afr.,  S.E.  As.  to 
Celebes  (Plioc,  As.). 

XI.  Order  TUBULIDENTATA.    Aard  Varks.2 

Fam.  Orycteropodidae.    Aard  Varks. 

t  PalcEorycteropus.    U.  Mioc,  Eur.,  Afr. 
Orycteropus.    Aard  Vark,  Afr. 
b.    Cohort  PRIMATES.    Mostly  Arboreal  Mammals  with  'nails'  as  distin- 
guished from  mammals  with  claws  (Unguiculates)  or  hoofs  (Ungulates). ^ 

XII.  Order  PRIMATES.  Primates. 

1.    Suborder  Lemuroidea.  Lemuroids. 

Fam.  Notharctidae.    Notharctids  or  Extinct  Lemur-like  Primates. 

t  Pehjcodm.    L.  to  M.  Eoc,  N".  Amer. 

t  Notharctus.    L.  to  U.  Eoc,  N.  Anier. 

t  (?)  Ccenopithecus.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

Fam.  Anaptomorphidae.     Anaptomorphids  or  Extinct  Tarsius-like 
Primates. 

t  Anaptomorphus.    L.  to  M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Omomys.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Hemiacodon.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Washalius.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Necrolemur.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  CO  Microchoerus.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 
Fam.  Adapidae.  Adapids. 

t  Plesiadapis.    L.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  Adapis.    M.  Eoc  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 
Inc.  Sed. 

t  Protoadapis.    L.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  Notopithecus.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

t  Homunculus.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

1  Vide  Weber,  Die  Saugetiere,  1904.  2  Vide  Weber,  Die  Siiugetiere,  1904. 

:Z  w  f'^^"*  Priniates,  see  especially:  Flower  and  Lydekker,  op.  cit.  1892;  Beddard,  op. 
W  n  K  '  P^™^'^^      ^^^'^  America  are  described  especially 

/L.  V  ;  4.;^?  no  '''''''  ^^2'       1^^214)  and  Wortman  (^..er. 

Re^h'    r'       1    ;  '''''       ''''  ^^'"^^-'^      Madagascar,  see  Grandidier, 

Kecherches  sur  les  Lemuriens  disparus,  etc.    Notw.  Arch,  du  Mus.,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  A^I,  Paris,  1905. 


544 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Fam.  Lemuridae.  Lemurs. 
SuBFAM.  Indrisinae.  Indris. 

Indris.    Indris  or  Babakato.  Madag. 

Propithecus.    Propitheque.  Madag. 

Avahis.    Avahi  or  Woolly  Lemur.  Madag. 
SuBFAM.  Megaladapinae.  Megaladapids. 

f  Megaladapis.    Pleist.  Madag. 
SuBFAM.  Archaeolemuriiiae.    Ape-like  Lemurs. 

f  Archceolemur.    Pleist.  Madag. 
SuBFAM.  Lemurinae.    True  Lemurs. 

Lemur.    Lemur.    Madag.  (since  Pleist.). 

Hapalemur.    Gray  Lemur.  Madag. 

Lepidolemur.    Weasel  Lemur.  Madag. 
SuBFAM.  Galaginae.    Galagos,  Mouse  Lemurs,  etc. 

Galago.    Galago.    Afr.  (except  N.W.). 

Chirogale.    Mouse  Lemur.  Madag. 

Microcehus.    Dwarf  Lemur.  Madag. 
SuBFAM.  Lorisinae.    Slow  Lemurs. 

Loris.    Slender  Loris.    S.  India,  E.  Burma. 

Nycticehus.    Gray  Loris.    N.  India  to  Philippines. 

Perodicticus.    Potto.    W.  Afr. 

Arctocebus.    Angwantibo.    W.  Afr. 
Fam.  '  Chiromyidae '  (  =  Daubentoniidae) .  Aye-ayes. 

*  Chiromys  *  (  =  Daubentonia).    Aye-aye.  Madag. 
Fam.  Tarsiidae.  Tarsiers. 

Tarsius.    Spectral  Tarsier.    E.  Indies. 
2.    Suborder  Ant  HR  OP  0  IDE  A.    Monkeys,  Apes,  Man. 
Platyrrhine  or  'Broad  Nostril'  Group  (New  World). 
Fam.  Hapalidae.  Marmosets. 

Midas.    Tamarin.    Brazil  to  C.  Amer. 

Hapale.    Short-tusked  Marmosets.    S.  Brazil  to  Colombia. 
Fam.  Cebidae.    South  American  Monkeys. 

Cebus.    Capuchin.    S.  Brazil  to  C.  Amer.  (Pleist.,  S.  Amer.). 

Lagothrix.    Woolly  Monkey.    N.  S.  Amer. 

Mycetes.    Howler.    S.  Amer.  to  Mexi.  (Pleist.,  S.  Amer.). 

Ateles.    Spider  Monkey.    Brazil  to  S.  Mexi. 

Nyctipithecus.    Douroucoli.    N.  Argentine  to  C.  Amer. 


APPENDIX  545 

Chrysothrix.    Squirrel  Monkey.    Bolivia  to  C.  Amer. 

CaUithrix.    Titi  Monkey.    E.  Brazil  to  Colombia  (Pleist.,  S. 
Amer.). 

Pithecia,    Saki.    N.  S.  Amer. 

Uacaria.    Uakari.  Brazil. 

Catarrhine  or  '  Narrow  Nostril '  Group  (Old  World). 

Fam.  Cercopithecidae.    Old  World  Monkeys. 

SuBP'AM.  Cercopithecinse.    Baboons,  Guenons,  Mangabeys,  etc. 

f  Oreopithecus.    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 

Macacus.    Macaque.    E.  &  S.  As.,  E.  Indies,  N.  Afr.,  Gibraltar 
(Plioc.  to  Pleist.,  Eur.,  As.;  Pleist.,  N.  Afr.). 

Cynopithecus.    Celebes  '  Black  Ape.'  Celebes. 

^  Cynocephalus'  (  =  Papio).     Baboon.    W.  &  S.  Afr.  to  Arabia 
(Plioc.  to  Pleist.,  India;  Pleist.,  N.  Afr.). 

Cercocebus.    Mangabey.    W^.  &  E.  Afr. 

Cercopithecus.    Guenon.    Afr.  (exc.  N.W.). 

SuBFAM.  Semnopithecinse.    Langurs,  Thumbless  Monkeys,  etc. 

f  Mesopithecus.    L.  Plioc,  Eur. 

f  Dolicliopithecus.    Plioc,  Eur. 

Semnopithecus.    Langur.    India  to  E.  Indies  (Plioc,  Eur.  &  As.). 
Nasalis.    Proboscis  Monkey.  Borneo. 
Colobus.    Colob,  Guereza,  etc.    E.  &  W.  Afr. 
Fam.  Simiidae.    Anthropoid  Apes. 

f  Dryopithecus.    M.  to  U.  Mioc,  Eur. 

f  Pliopithecus.    Ancestral  Gibbon.    L.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  Eur. 

f  Anthropodus.    U.  Mioc,  Eur. 

Hylohates.    Gibbon.    S.E.  As.  to  E.  Indies. 

Simla.    Orang-Utan.    Borneo,  Sumatra  (Plioc,  As.). 

Gorilla.    Gorilla.    W.  &  E.  Afr. 

Anthropopithecus.    Chimpanzee.    C.  Afr.  (Plioc,  As.). 

Fam.  Hominidae.  Mankind. 

f  Pithecanthropus.    Pleist.,  As.  (Java). 

Homo.    Man.    Whole  World. 

c.    Cohort  UNGULATA.    Hoofed  Mammals. 

XIII.  Order  CONDYLARTHRA.  Condylarths  or  Slender  Archaic  Ungulates.^ 

1  Vide  Cope  [Description  of  Phenacodus].  The  Vertebrata  of  the  Tertiary  Formations  of  the 
West.  Rept.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Washington,  1884;  Osborn,  Remounted  Skeleton  of  Phenacodus 
primxvus,  etc.  Bxdl.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  X,  1898,  pp.  159-164 ;  Matthew  [On  Euproto- 
gonia  and  the  relationships  and  classification  of  the  Condylarthra],  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist., 
Vol.  IX,  1897,  pp.  259-323. 


546 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Inc.  Sed.    Fam.  Mioclaenidae.  Mioclaenids. 

f  Mioclcenus.  Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
Inc.  Sed.    Fam.  Pleuraspidotheriidae.  Pleuraspidotheres. 

f  Pleurnspidof/ierium.  L.  Eoc,  Eur. 
Fam.  Meniscotheriidae.  Meniscotheres. 

f  Mr/iiscoi/icriuin.    L.  Eoc,  N,  Amer. 

Fam.  Phenacodontidae.     Phenacodonts  or  Slender-footed,  Archaic 
Ungulates. 

f  Prntofjonndon.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  IJuprotof/onia.    Bas.  Eoc,    N.  Amer. 

f  Pfienacodus.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Ectocion.    L.  Eoc.,N.  Amer. 

Fam.  Inc. 

f  Didolodus.    Bas.  Eoc,  S.  Amer. 

t  Notoprotogonia.    Bas.  Eoc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Lambdaconus.    Bas.  Eoc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Proectocion.    Bas.  Eoc,  S.  Amer. 

XIV.    Order  AMBLYPODA.    Amblypods  or  Short-footed,  Archaic  Ungu- 
lates.i 

1.  Suborder  Taligrada.    Taligrade  Amblypods. 

Fam.  Periptychidae.  Peiiptychids. 

f  Anisonchus.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Haploconus.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Ectoconus.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

•f  Conacodon.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Periptychm.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Hemithloius.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
Inc.  Sed.  (?  Periptychidae). 

t  Guilielmojioineria.    Bas.  Eoc,  S.  Amer. 

f  Picfn'doli/deJi'kerla.    Bas.  Eoc,  S.  Amer. 
Fam.  Pantolambdidae.  Pautolambdids. 

t  Pantolnmhda.    Bas.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

2.  Suborder  Pantodonta.    Panlodont  Amblypods  (or  with  a  full  set 
of  teeth). 

1  Vi<Jfi  Cope,  The  Vertobrata  of  the  Terti;iry  Formations  of  the  West,  1884  ;  Osborn,  Evolu- 
tion of  the  Amhlypochi.  Part  I.    Tali<rra<la  and  Pantodonta.   Bull.  Amer.  Miis.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol. 
X,  18U8,  pp.  l(;f>-'21H  ;  Matthew  [Osteology  of  Eiiprotononia  and  relationships  of  the  Condylar- 
thra].  A  Revision  of  the  Piiereo  Fauna.    Bull.  Am-r.  Mii^.  Xnt.  Hut.,  Vol.  IX,  18i)7,  pp.  299-.m;i 
Marsh,  Dinocerata.   Monographs  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Washington,  1884.  " 


APPENDIX 


547 


Fam.  Coryphodontidae.  Coryphodonts. 

t  Coryphodon.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
Fam. 'Uintatheriidae' (=  Eobasileidse).    Eobasileids  or  Uintatlieres. 

f  Bathyopsis.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  ^  Dinoceras,'  '  Tinoceras'  (=  Uintatherium).    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  '  Loxolophodon'  (=  Eobasileus).    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

XV.    Ordkr  ARTIODACTYLA.    Even-toed  Ungulates.i 

(1)  Section  PRIMITIVE  ARTIODACTYLS  (families of  more  or  less 
uncertain  affinities). 

A.  Bunodont  families,  with  conic  or  incipiently  cresceutic  molar  cusps. 
Fam.  Trigonolestidae.  Trigonolestids. 

f  Trigonolestes.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

Fam.  Leptochoeridae.  Leptochoeres. 

t  Stibarus.    L.  to  M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Leptochoerus.    M.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

Fam.  Dichobunidse.    Dichobunes  of  Europe,  Homacodonts  of  North 
Anierica. 

f  Dichobune.    M.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Mouillacitherium.    M.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Homacodon.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Bunomeryx.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

Inc.  Sed. 

» 

t  Microsus.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Antiacodon.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Sarcolemur.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
t  Nanomeryx.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 
t  Helohyus.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

B.  Biiiioselenodont  families,  with  combined  conic  and  crescentic  niolnr 

cusps. 

Fam.  Anthracotheriidae.  Anthracotheres. 
t  Lophiobunodon.    M.  Eoc,  Eur. 
t  Catodontherium.    M.  Eoc,  Eur. 

1  For  a  general  treatment  of  the  Artiodactyla  consult  the  textbooks  of  Flower  and  Lydekker, 
Beddard,  Weber,  and  Cope's  article,  The  Artiodactyla  {Amer.  Naturalist,  Vol.  XXII,  1888,  pp. 
1079-1095).  The  fossil  avtiodactyls  of  Europe  are  treated  in  Von  Zittel's  Handbuch  der  Palaon- 
tologie.  Mammalia,  and  in  Kowalevsky's  Monographie  der  Gattung  Anthracotherium  Cuv.  und 
Versuch  einer  natiirlichen  Classification  der  fossilen  Hufthiere  (Palseontographica,  Bd.  XXII, 
1873).  For  a  modern  view  of  the  interrelationships  of  the  artiodactyl  families,  consult:  Mat- 
thew, W.  D.,  A  Complete  Skeleton  of  Menjcodus,  Bull.  Amer.  Mas.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XX,  1904, 
pp  101-129.  and  Osteology  of  Blastomeryx  and  Phylogeny  of  the  American  Cervidae,  idem.  Vol. 
XXIV,  1908,  pp.  535-562.    The  present  arrangement  is  by  Osborn  and  Matthew. 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


t  Anthracotheriuin.    U.  Eoc.  and  Olig.,  Eur. 
f  Arretotheriuin.    L.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

t  '  // i/opotamus  '  (  =  A ncodon) .    L.  Olig.  to  L.  Mioc,  N.  Afr.,  Eur., 
N.  Amer. 

f  Brack t/odus.    L.  Mioc,  Eur. 

f  Merycopotamus.    U.  Mioc,  As. 
C.    Seleiiodont  families,  with  all  molar  cusps  crescentic, 
Fam.  Anoplotheriidae.  Aiioplotheres. 

SuBFAM.  Anoplotheriinjc    Anoplotheres  Proper. 

f  Anoplotherium.    U.  Eoc  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

t  Diplobune.    U.  Eoc.  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 
SuBFAM.  Csenotheriinae.  Caenotheres. 

•f-  Ccenotherium.    L.  to  U.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Plesiomeryx.    M.  to  U.  Olig.,  Eur. 
SuBFAM.  Dichodontinae.  Dichodonts. 

f  '  Dichodon  '  (  =  Dacrytherium),  U.  Eoc  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Tetraselenodon.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  llapUnneryx.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 
SuBFAM.  Xiphodontinae.  Xiphodonts. 

t  Xiphodon.    U.  Eoc  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  ^  Xiphodontherium'  (  =  Amphimeryx),  U.  Eoc.  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

(2)  Section  S  if  IN  A  or  Pig-like  Artiodactyls. 

Fam.  Suidae.  Pigs. 

t  Cehochoerus.    M.  Eoc  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Chceropotamtis.    U,  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Acotherulum.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  Propalceochoerus.    M.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  PalcBochoeius.    M.  Olig.  to  L.  Mioc,  Eur. 

f  DoUochoerns.    U.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Hyotherium.    L.  to  U.  Mioc,  Eur. 

t  Choerotherium.    M.  Mioc,  Eur. 

t  Listriodon.    L.  to  U.  Mioc,  Eur. ;  L.  Plioc,  As. 

Sus.    Pig,  Boar.    Eur.  &  As.  (since  U.  Mioc)  ;  E.  Indies,  N. 
Guini;  N.  &  E.  Afr.  (since  Plioc). 

Potamochcerus.    Red  River  Hog,  Bosch  Vark.    Afr.  (exc.  N.W.)  ; 
Mioc,  Eur.  As. 

Babirusa.    Babirusa.    Celebes  I. 


APPENDIX 


549 


Hijlochoerus.    Forest  Pig.  Afr. 

Phacochoerus.    Wart  Hog.    Afr.  (exc.  N.W.)  ;  (Pleist.,  Algeria 
and  S.  Africa). 

Fam.  '  Dicotylidae '  {  =  Tagassuidse) .    Peccaries  of  North  America, 
f  Thinohyus  (=  Perchcerus).    L.  to  U.  dig.,  N.  Amer. 
f  ChcEnohyus.    U.  Olig-,  N.  Amer. 
f  Desmathyus.    L.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Prosthennops.    U.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Platygonus.    M.  Plioc.  to  Pleist.,  N.  Amer. 
f  Mylohyus.    Pleist.,  X.  Amer. 

^Dicotyles'  (=  Tagassu).    Peccary.    Texas  to  Argentine  (since 
Pleist.). 

Fam.  Entelodontidae.    Entelodonts  or  Elotheres. 
SUBFAM.  Achsenodontinse.  Achsenodonts. 

f  Parahyus.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Achcenodon.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

SuBFAM.  'Elotheriinse'  (=  Entelodontinse).   Entelodonts  Proper. 

f  Entelodon  (incl.  Archwotherium,  Pelonax).    L.  to  U.  Olig.,  N. 
Amer.  &  Eur. 

f  Dceodon.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Boochoerm.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Dinohyus.    U.  Olig.,  N".  Amer. 

Fam.  Hippopotamidae.  Hippopotami. 

f  Hexaprotodon.    L.  Plioc.  to  Pleist.,  As. ;  U.  Plioc,  N".  Afr. 

Chceropsis  (=  Hyopotamus) .     Pigmy    Hippopotamus.  Liberia 
(Pleist.,  Madagascar,  I.  Cyprus). 

Hippopotamus.     Hippopotamus.     Afr.   (exc.  N.W.),  (Plioc.  & 
Pleist.  Eur.,  As.  and  N.  Afr.). 

Section  OREODONTA.    American  Primitive  Ruminants. 

Fam,  '  Oreodontidae  '  (=  Agriochoeridae).  Oreodonts. 

f  Protoreodon.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Protagriochoerus.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Agriochcerus.    L.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Oreodon.    L.  to  M.  Olig.,  Amer. 

f  Leptauchenia.    M.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Promerycochoerus.    U.  Olig.  to  U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

t  ^  Eporeodon'  (  =  Eucrotaphus).    U.  Olig.,  N".  Amer. 

f  Merychyus.    L.  Mioc  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 


550 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


f  Mesoreodon.    L.  Mioc,     .  Anier. 

f  Merijcochoerus.    L.  to  M.  Mioc,  X.  Amer. 

f  Phenacocoelus.    L.  Mioc,  N.  Anier. 

f  TichoUptus.    M.  Mioc,  N.  Amcr. 

f  Pronomotheriuin.    M.  to  U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Cyclopidius.    M.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

(4)  Section  TYLOPODA.    Camels  and  Llamas. 
Fam.  Camelidae.    Camels  and  Llamas. 

f  Protylopus.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Oromerijx.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Eoti/lopus.    L.  Olig.,  X.  Amer. 

f  Pothrotherium.    L.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Pseudolabis.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Oxydaclylus.    U.  Olig.  to  L.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Miolabis.    M.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Alticamelns.    M.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Protolabis.    M.  to  U.  Mioc,  Amer. 

t  Procamelus.    U.  Mioc  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Pliauchenia.    U.  JNlioc  to  M.  Plioc,  N.  Amer.  ? ;    Plioc,  India. 

f  Camelops.    Pleist.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Eschathis.    Pleist.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Palceolama.    Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 

Camelus.    Camel,  Dromedary.     C.  As.,  N.  Afr.  (Plioc,  As. ; 
Pleist.,  As.,  N.  Afr.,  N.  Amer.). 

Auchenia.    Llama,  Vicima.    \V.  S.  Amer.  (since  Plioc). 

SuBFAM.  Steiiomylinfe.  Stenomylins. 

f  Stenomylus.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

(5)  Section  TRAGULINA.     Tragulines.     Primitive    and  Ancestral 

Deer-like  Ruminants. 
Fam.  Gelocidae.  Gelocids. 

t  Gelocus.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Bnchitherium.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

t  Prodremotherium.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

t  Lophiomeryx.    U.  Eoc.  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 
Fam.  Hypertragulidae.    Hypertragulids,  Primitive  Traguloids. 
Subfam.  Leptotragulinae.  Leptotragulines. 

t  Lefitotraynlus.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Leptoreodon.    U.  Eoc,  X.  Amer. 


APPENDIX 


551 


SuBFAM.  Leptomerycinse.    Leptomerycines  or  Ancestral  Deer. 

f  Leptomeryx.    L.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Protoceratinse.    Four-horned  Traguloids. 

f  Protoceras.    U.  dig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Syndyoceras.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Hypertragulinae.  Hypertragulines. 

f  Hypertragulus.    M.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Hypisodontinpe.  Hypisodonts. 

t  Hypisodus.    M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
Fam.  Tragulidae.  Chevrotains. 

SuBFAM.  Dorcatheriinse.    Dorcatheres  or  Water  Chevrotains. 

f  Dnrcatherium.    L.  to  U.  Mioc,  Eur. ;  L.  Plioc,  As. 

HycemoscJius.    Water  Chevrotain.    W.  Afr. 

SuBFAM.  Tragulinae.    Chevrotains  Proper. 

T'ragulus.    Chevrotain.    India  (since  L.  Plioc);  Siam,  Malacca, 
E.  Indies. 

Section  PECORA.    True  or  Modernized  Ruminants. 
Fam.  Giraffidae.  Giraffes. 

f  Palceotragus.    L.  Plioc,  Eur. 

f  Samotherium.    An  Extinct  Okapi.    U.  Mioc,  Eur. 
Ocapia.    Okapi.  Congo. 

f  Helladothcrium.    An  Extinct  Giraffe.    L.  Plioc,  Eur.  &  As. 
f  Sicatherium.    L.  Plioc,  As. 
f  Hydaspitherium.    L.  Plioc,  As. 
f  Vishnutherium.    L.  Plioc,  As. 

Giraffa.    Giraffe.    E.,  W.  &  S.  Afr.  (L.  Plioc,  Eur.  &  As.). 
Fam.  Cervidae.  Deer. 

SuBFAM.  Palaeomerycinae.  Palaeomerycines. 

•j-  Blastorneryx.    L.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Palmomeryx.    M.  &  U.  Mioc,  Eur.;  (?)  Lo  Plioc,  India. 

f  Dromomeryx.    M.  &  U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Dremotherium.    M.  to  U.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Amphilragulus.    M.  to  U.  Olig.,  Eur. 
SuBFAM.  Moschinae.    Musk  Deer. 

Moschus.    Musk  Deer.   C.  As.,  Indo-China  (?  L.  Plioc,  India). 
SuBFAM.  Cervulinse.    Cervulines  or  Muutjacs. 

f  Dicrocerus.    L.  to  U.  Mioc,  Eur. 


552 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


f  Micromeryx.    M.  &  U.  Mioc,  Eur. 

Cervulus.    Muiitjac.    India,  China  to  Borneo  (U.  Mioc.  &  Plioc, 
Eur.). 

Elaphodus.    Tufted  Deer.  Thibet. 
Hydropotes.    Chinese  Water  Deer.    E.  China. 
SuBFAM.  Cervinae.    Old  and  New  World  Deer,  Elk,  Moose,  etc. 

A.  Plesiometacarpalia. 

Cerrus.    True  Deer,    Wapiti,  etc.     Entire  Palaearctic  realm. 
(Since  Plioc,  Eur. ;  Pleist.,  N.  Amer.) 

Subgenus  Rma.    Rusine  Group. 

C.  aristotelis,  etc.    Sambar  Deer.    India,  China,  Borneo, 
etc. 

Subgenus  Ruceri-us.    Rucervine  Group. 

C.  duvauceli,  etc.    India,  Siam,  Burma,  Hainan. 
Subgenus  Elaphurus.    Elaphurine  Group. 

C.  davidianus.    David's  Deer,  China. 
Subgenus  Axis.   Axine  Group. 

C.  axis.    Axis.    India  (Plioc,  Eur.,  India). 
Subgenus  Pseudaxis.    Pseudaxine  or  Sicine  Group. 

C.  sika,  etc.    Sika  Deer.     China,  Japan. 
Subgenus  Cervus.    Elaphine  Group. 

C.  elaphus.    Red  Deer.    C.  &  N.  As. ;  Eur.  (since  Pleist.). 

C.  canadensis.    Wapiti  (' Elk ').    N.  Amer. 

C.  maral.    Maral.    Persia,  etc. 
■(•  Subgenus  Megaceros.    Megacerotine  Group. 

t  C.  i/iganteus.    Megaceros,  '  Irish  Elk.'    Pleist.,  Eur. 
Subgenus  '  Polycladus '  (  =  Eucladocerus) .  Polycladine  Grouj . 

C.  polycladus.    Plioc,  France. 

C.  sedgwickii.    Plioc,  France  &  Brit. 
Subgenus  Dama.    Damine  or  Fallow  Deer  Group. 

C.  dama.    Fallow  Deer.    Eur.  (since  Pleist.). 

C.  mesopotamicE.    Persian  Fallow  Deer.  Persia. 

C.falcoueri,  etc.    Pleist.,  Eng. 

B,  Telemetacarpalia. 

Rangifer.    Reindeer,  Caribou.    Circumpolar;  (Pleist.  Eur.,  As., 
N.  Amer.). 

Alces.    Elk,  Moose.    Scandinavia  to  Siberia,  N.  N.  Amer.  (since 
Pleist.). 


APPENDIX 


553 


f  Cervalces.    Pleist.,  N.  Amer. 

Capreolus.    Roe  Deer.    Eur.,  W.,  N.  &  C.  As.  (since  L.  Plioc). 

^Cariacus'  {=  Odocoileus)'.    American  Deer.   N.  Amer  (since  L. 
Pleist.),  C.  Amer.,  W.  S.  Amer. 

^  Pudua'  (=  Mazama).   Pudu  Deer,  Brocket.    S.  Amer.  to  Mexi. 
(Pleist,  S.  Amer.). 

Fam.  Merycodontidae.   Merycodonts,  with  branched  deciduous  antlers. 

f  Merycodus.    M.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  N".  Amer. 

f  Capromeryx.    Pleist.,  Amer. 

Fam.  Antilocapridae.    Pronghorn  Antelopes,  with  forked  deciduous 
horn  sheaths  and  permanent  horn  cores. 

Antilocapra.    Pronghorn  Antelope.   W.  N.  Amer.  (since  Pleist.). 
Fam.  Bovidae.    Antelopes,  Sheep,  Goats,  Chamois,  Bovines,  etc. 
SuBFAM.  Tragocerinse,  with  flat  horns. 

f  Protragocerus.    L.  to  U.  Mioc,  Eur. 

f  Tragocerus.    U.  Mioc,  Plioc,  Eur.  &  As. 

f  Neotragocerus.    L.  Plioc,  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Bubalidinse.    Gnus,  Hartebeests,  etc. 

Buhalis.    Hartebeest.    Afr.,  Syria. 

Damaliscus.    Blessbok,  Sassaby,  etc.    E.  &  S.  Afr. 

Connochcetes.    Wildebeest,  Gnu.    E.  &  S.  Afr. 
SuBFAM.  Cephalophinse.    Duikers,  etc. 

Cephalophus.    Duiker,  Afr.  (exc.  N.). 

Tetraceros.    Four-horned  Antelope.    India  (since  L.  Pleist.). 
SuBFAM.  Neotraginfe.    Dik-dik,  Klipspringer,  etc  (small  forms). 
Oreotragus.    Klipspringer.    S.  &  E.  Afr. 
Ourehia.    Oribi.    E.  &  S.  Afr. 

Raphicerus.    Steenbok,  Grysbok.    S.,  E.  &  W.  Afr. 

Nesotragus.    Livingstone's  Antelope.    E.  Afr. 

Madoqua.    Dik-dik.    N.E.  to  S.W.  Afr. 
SuBFAM.  Cervicaprinse.    Waterbuck,  Rhebok,  etc.  (large  forms). 

Cobus.    Waterbuck.    Afr.  (exc.  N.). 

Cervicapra.    Reitbok.    S.  &  E.  Afr. 

Pelea.    Rhebok.    S.E.  Afr. 
SuBFAM.  Antilopinae.    Gazelles,  Blackbuck,  etc. 

Antilope.    Blackbuck.  India. 

Gazella.    Gazelle.    Afr.,  W.  &  C.  As.  (U.  Mioc.  &  Plioc,  Eur.  & 
As.). 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

Antidorcas.    Springbuck.    S.  Afr.  (L.  Plioc,  Eur.  &  As.). 
Saiga.    Saiga.    S.  Russ.,  W.  As.  to  Altai  Mts.  (Pleist.,  Eur.). 
Pantholops.    Chiru.    C.  As.,  Thibet. 
Lithocranius.    Gerenuk.    E.  &  N.E.  Afr. 
jEpyceros.    Pallah.    S.  &  S.E.  Afr. 
SuBKAM.  Hippotraginae.    Long-horned  Antelopes, 
t  Palaoryx.    Plioc,  Eur.,  As. 

Hippotragus.    Sable  Antelope,  Roan  Antelope.    S.  &  E.  Afr. 
Oryx.    Oryx.    Afr.  (exc.  X.),  Arabia. 
Addax.    Addax.    Morocco  to  Syria. 
SuBFAM.  Tragelaphinae.    Eland,  Kudu,  etc. 

f  Palceoreas.    U.  Mioc,  Eur. ;  L.  Plioc,  As. ;  Plioc,  Italy  &  X.  Afr. 
f  Protragelaphus.    L.  Plioc,  Eur.  &  As. 
Boselaphus.    Xilgai.    India  (since  Pleist.). 

Trngelaphus.     Harnessed  Antelope.     S.  Afr.  to  Congo  &  to 
Somali  (?  Plioc,  Eur.  &  As.). 

StrepsiceroK.   Kudu.   S.  Afr.  to  Somali  (Plioc,  Pleist.,  Eur.,  As.). 

Oreas.    Eland.    Afr.  (exc.  X.). 

f  Ilingoceros.    L.  Plioc,  X.  Amer. 

f  Sphenophalos.    L.  Plioc,  X.  Amer. 

SuBFAM.  Rupicaprinae.    Mountain  Goats,  Chamois,  etc. 

Bupicapra.    Chamois.    Mts.  of  S.  Eur.  &  S.  W.  As.  (Pleist.,  Eur.). 

Cenms.    Goral.    C.  As.,  China,  E.  Siberia. 

Ncemorhedus.    Serow.    C.  As.  to  Sumatra,  Japan. 

Budorcas.    Takin.    Thibet,  Indo-China. 

Haplocerus  (  =  Oreamnos) .   Rocky  Mountain  Goat.  Alaska,  Rocky 
Mts.  (Pleist.,  X.  Amer.). 

SuBFAM.  Caprinae.    Sheep  and  (ioats. 

t  Criotherium.    V.  Mioc,  Eur. 

Capra.    Goat,  Ibex,  Markhor.    Mts.  of  S.  &  C.  Eur.,  As.,  X.E. 
Afr.  (Plioc,  As.  ;  Pleist.,  Eur.). 

Hemitragus.    Tahr.    India,  Arabia. 

Ovis.    Bighorn,  Mouflon,  Sheep.    W.  X.  Amer.,  As.,  S.  Eur, 
Egj^pt. 

SuBFAM.  r)vibovinfP.  Musk-oxen, 
t  Prepfoceras.    Pleist.,  X.  Amer. 
t  Euceratherium.    Pleist.,  X.  Amer. 
t  Symhos.    Pleist.,  X.  Amer. 


APPENDIX 


555 


Ovibos.    Musk-ox.    Arctic  As.,  Eur.,  N.  Amer.  (Pleist.,  N.  Amer. 
&  Eur.). 

SuBFAM.  Bovinse.  Oxen. 

Anoa.    Pigmy  Buffalo.  Celebes. 

Buhalus.    Cape  or  African  Buffalo,  Indian  Buffalo.   Afr.  (exc. 
N.),  W.  As.  to  Borneo  (Pleist.,  N.  Afr.). 

Bibos.     Gayal,  Zebu,   Gaur.     India,  Indo-China,  East  Indies 
(Plioc,  China;  Pleist.,  India). 

Poephagus.    Yak.    Himalayas,  Thibet. 

Bos.    Domestic  Cattle,  Urus.    Cosmopolitan  (domestic) .  (Plioc. 
Pleist.,  As. ;  Pleist.,  Eur.) 

Bison.    American  Bison,  European  Bison  or  Wisent.  Prairies 
of  ^Y.  U.S.A.,  N.W.  Canada,  Caucasus  (Pleist.,  Ear.,  N.  Amer.). 

XVI.    Order  PERISSODACTYLA.    Odd-toed  Ungulates.i 

SuPERFAM.  HlPPOlDEA.    Horscs  and  Palseotlieres. 

Fam.  Palaeotheriidae.  Palseotheres. 

t  O  Propachynolophus.    L.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Propalceotherium.    M.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  PalcBotherium.    U.  Eoc.  to  L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

t  Plagiolophus.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

Fam.  Equidae.  Equines. 

SuBFAM.  Hyracotheriinse.  Hyracotheres. 

f  Hyracotherium.    L.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Eohippus.    L.  Eoc,  Amer. 

f  Pachynolophus.    M.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Lophiotherium.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Orohippus.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Epihippus.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

SuBFAM.  Anchitheriinge.  Anchitheres. 

f  AncMlophus.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Mesohippus.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

t  Miohippus.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Anchitherium.    U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer.;  L.  to  U.  Mioc,  Eur. 

f  Parahippus.    U.  Olig.  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer, 

t  Archceohippus.    M.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Hypohippus.    M.  Mioc  to  L.  Plioc,  Amer. 

1  For  the  classification  of  the  Perissodactyla,  see  Osborn,  The  Extinct  Rhinoceroses,  Mem. 
Amer,  Mus.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  I,  1898 ;  Weber,  Die  Saugetiere,  1904.  The  present  arrangement 
is  by  Osborn. 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

SuBFAM.  Protohippinse.     Protohippines,   or   American  Miocene 
Horses. 

f  Merychippus.    M.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 
•(■  Protuhippus.    U.  Mice,  X.  Auier. 
f  Pliohippus.    U.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Neohipparion.    U.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 
f  Hipparion.    Plioc,  Eur.,  As.,  N.  Amer. 
SuBFAM.  Equinae.    Hippidion,  Horse,  Ass,  Zebra, 
f  Onohippidion.    Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 
f  Hippidion.    Pleist.,  S.  Amer. 

Equui^.    Horse,  Ass,  Zebra,  C,  S.,  &  W.  As.,  Afr.  (U.  Plioc.  & 
Pleist.,  N.  Amer.,  As.,  Eur.,  N.  Afr.). 

SuPERFAM.  T ITANOTIIEROIDEA.  Titanotheres. 

Fam.  Palaeosyopidae.  Palaeosyopids. 

f  Lambd other ium.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Eotitanops.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Palceosyops.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Telmatheriwn.    M.  &  U.  Eoc,  N,  Amer. 

f  Manteoceras.    M.  &  U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

•(■  Mesatirhinus.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Metarhinm.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Dolichorhinus.    U.  Eoc,  N".  Amer. 

f  Diplacodon.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Protitanotherium.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Brnchi/d iastonatherium.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

Fam.  '  Titanotheriidae '  (=  Brontotheriidse).    Brontotheres  or  Titan- 
otheres. 

f  Megacerops.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
f  Titanntherium.    L.  Olig.,  X.  Amer. 
t  Symhorodon.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
f  Brontotherium.    L.  Olig.,  X.  Amer. 
Superfam.  Taptroidea.    Tapirs  and  Lophiodonts. 
Fam.  Tapiridae.  Tapirs. 

t  Systemodon.    L.  Eoc,  X.  Amer. 
t  Isectolophus.    M.  &  U.  Eoc,  X.  Amer. 
t  Protapiriis.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. ;  M.  &  U.  Olig.,  X.  Amer. 
t  Paratapirm.    M.  Olig.,  Eur. 
f  '  Tapiravus'  rarus.    M.  Mioc,  X.  Amer. 


APPENDIX  557 

Tapirus.    Tapir.    S.  Mex.  to  Paraguay,  S.  Siam  to  Sumatra 
(Plioc,  Eur.,  As.;  Pleist.  N.  Amer.). 

Fam.  Lophiodontidae.  Lophiodonts. 

t  Heptoduu.    L.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

t  Lophlaspis.    L.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  Helaletes.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  '  Trtplopus'  (amarorum).    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

•j-  Desmalotherium.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Auier. 

f  Chasmotherium.    M.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Lophiodon.    M.  to  U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

t  Colodon.    L.  &  M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

SuPERFAM.    Rhinogerotoidea.     Rhinoceroses  and  Rhinoceros-like 
Animals. 

Fam.  Hyracodontidae.  Hyracodonts. 

SuBFAM.  Hyracliyinae.    Cursorial  Rhinoceroses. 

f  Hyrachyus.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Colonoceras.    M.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

Subfam.  Amynodontinae.    Amynodonts  or  Semi-Aquatic  Rhinoce- 
roses. 

f  Amynodon.    IT.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Metamynodon .    L.  &  AI.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 
Inc.  Sed. 

f  Ronzotherium.    L.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Cadurcotherium.    M.  Olig.,  Eur. 
Subfam.  Hyracodontinse.    Hyracodonts  Proper. 

t  Triplopus  (cubitalis).    M.  to  U.  Eoc,  X.  Amer. 

f  Hyracodon.    L.  to  U.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

Fam.  Rhinocerotidae.    True  Rhinoceroses. 

Subfam.  Aceratheriinse.    Aceratheres  and  Diceratheres. 

f  Diceratherium.    M.  Olig.  to  L.  Mioc,  Eur.;  U.  Olig.  &  L.  Mioc, 
N.  Amer. 

f  Trigonias.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Leptacer other ium.    L.  &  M.  Olig.,  N.  Amer. 

f  Aceratherinni.    (?)  M.  Olig.  to  U.  Mioc,  Eur.  ;  L.  Plioc,  As. 

t  Cce7iopus.    L.  to  U.  Olig.  &  (?)  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Aplielnps.    M.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 

f  Peraceras.    U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

Subfam.  Teleoceratinse.  Teleoceratines. 

f  Teleoceras.    L.  Mioc,  Eur. ;  M.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  N.  Amer. 


558 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


SuBFAM.  RhinocerotinaB;  Rhinocerotines. 

Rhinoceros.    Indian  One-horned  Rhinoceros.    Himalayas  to  Str. 
of  Malacca,  Java.    (Plioc,  As.) 

*  Ceralor/nnus'    =  Dicerorhuius).     Sumatran   Two-horned  Rhi- 
noceros.   Burma  to  Borneo.    (L.  Mioc,  Eur.) 

*Atelodus'  (=  Diceros).    African  Two- horned  Rhinoceros.    E.  & 
S.  Afr.    (U.  Mioc,  Eur.) 

SuBFAM.  Elasmotheriinae.  Elasmotheres. 

f  Elasmotherium.    Pleist.,  Eur.  &  As. 


f  Pernatheriuiii.    U.  Eoc,  Eur. 

f  Schizotherium.    M.  Olig.,  Eur. 

f  Moropus.    U.  Olig.  to  U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

■f  MacroOieriiun.    U.  Olig.  to  M.  Mioc,  Eur. 

f  Chalicotherium.    U.  Mioc.  to  L.  Plioc,  Eur.  &  As. 

f  Ancylotherium.    L.  Plioc,  Eur. 


XVTIl.    Order  PROBOSCIDEA.  Proboscideans.^ 
Fam.  Mceritheriidae.  Moeritheres. 

t  meritherium.    U.  Eoc.  &  L.  Olig.,  X.  Afr. 
Fam.  Elephantidae.    Dinotheres,  Mastodons,  and  Elephants. 
SuBFAM.  Dinotheriinaj.  Dinotheres. 

t  Dlnotherium.    L.  Mioc.  to  Plioc,  Eur. ;  L.  Plioc,  As. 
SuBFAM.  Mastodontinae.  Mastodons, 
f  Palceomastodon.    L.  Olig.,  Egypt. 

t '  Trilophodon,' '  Tetrahelodon'  {  =  GompholTierhnn).  L.  toU.  Mioc, 
Eur.;  Mioc.  &  Plioc,  As.;  Plioc,  Afr. ;  M.  to  U.  Mioc,  N.  Amer. 

f  '  Tetralophodon  '  (  =  Dihelodon).    Plioc,  As.,  N.  Amer.;  Pleist., 
S.  Amer. 

^  t  Mastodon.    Plioc  &  Pleist.,  Eur.,  As. ;  Pleist.,  S.  Afr.,  N.  Amer. 


1  Vide  Osborn,  The  Ancylopoda,  etc.,  Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXVII,  1893,  pp.  118-133.  The 
Ancylopoda  are  probably  aberrant  perissodactyls.  See  also  Peterson,  Preliminary  Notes  on 
Some  American  Chalicotheres,  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XLI,  1{K)7,  pp.  73:3-752. 

2  An  excellent  review  of  the  evolution  of  the  group  is  given  by  Lull,  R.  S.,  The  Evolution  of 
the  Elephant.  Amer.  Jour.  Sci..,  Vol.  XXV,  March,  1<)08.  See  also  Osborn,  H.  F.,  Hunting  the 
Ancestral  Elephant  in  the  Fayum  Desert,  The  Century  Magazine,  Vol.  LXXIV,  October,  1907, 
pp.  8ir)-8;i.5.  For  the  Fayfim  genera,  M(pritherium  and  Palsenmrt.ifodon,  see  Andrews,  C.  W  ,  A 
Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Tertiary  Vertebrata  of  the  Fayflm,  Egypt,  Brit.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist., 
4to.  London.  Iit0(3. 


XVIL    Order  ANCYLOPODA.  Ancylopods.i 
Fam.  Chalicotheriidae.  Chalicotheres. 


SuBFAM.  Elephantinae.    Mammoths  and  True  Elephants, 
f  Stegodon.    Siwalik  Mammoth.    Plioc,  As. 


APPENDIX 


559 


Elephas.    Asiatic  Elephant.    India  to  Malacca,  Borneo;  Mam- 
moth (Plioc.  &  Pleist.,  Afr.,  Eur.,  As.,  N.  Amer.). 

Loxodonta.    African  Elephant.    Cameroons  to  Germ.  E.  Afr. 

Inc.  Sed. 

XIX.  Order  BARYTHERIA.  Barytheres.i 
Fam.  Barytheriidae.  Barytheres. 

f  Barytheriuni.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Afr.  (Fayum). 

XX.  Order  SIRENIA.    Sirenians  (Aquatic  modification  of  the  Ungulate 
type). 2 

Fam.  Halicoridae.  Halicorids. 

f  Prorastomm.    Eoc,  W.  Indies, 
f  Eotherium.    U.  Eoc,  Egypt, 
•j-  Eosiren.    U.  Eoc,  Egypt, 
f  Halitherium.    Olig.  &  L.  Mioc,  Eur. 
f  Metaxytherium.    Mioc,  Eur. 

^  Halicore  '       Hydrodamalis) .    Dugong.   Red  Sea,  Indian  Ocean. 
Manatus.    Manatee.    Rivers  of  N.E.  S.  Amer.,  W.  Afr. 
f  Rhytina.    Northern  Sea  Cow  (lately  extinct).    Behring  Sea. 
Fam.  Desmostylidae.  Desmostylids. 

f  Desmostylus.    Plioc,  W.  N.  Amer.,  Japan. 

XXI.  Order  HYRACOIDEA.    Hyraces  or  Coneys.^ 
Fam.  'Hyracidae'  (=  Procaviidse).  Hyraces. 

f  Saghatherium.  L.  Olig.,  Egypt, 
f  MegaloTiyrax.  L.  Olig.,  Egypt, 
f  Pliohyrax.    U.  Mioc,  Eur. 

^Hyrax'  (=  Procavia).    Coney  or  Dassie.    Afr.  (exc.  N.W.), 
Syria,  Arabia. 

Dendroliyrax .    Tree  Hyrax.    Afr.  (exc  N.). 

XXII.  Order  EMBRITHOPODA.  Embrithopods.* 
Fam.    Arsinoitheriidae.  Arsinoitheres. 

f  Arsino'itherium.    L.  Olig.,  N.  Afr. 

Vide  Andrews,  C.  W.,  A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Tertiary  Vertebrata  of  the  Fayiim, 
gypt.  1906. 

2  Vide  Weber,  Die  Saugetiere,  1904.  For  the  supposed  relationship  of  the  Sirenia  to  the  Pro- 
oscidea,  see  Andrews,  C.  W.,  A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Vertebrata  of  the  Fayum,  Egypt, 
ntroduction. 

8  Vide  Weber,  Die  Saugetiere,  1904. 

*  Vide  Andrews,  C.  W.,  A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Tertiary  Vertebrata  of  the  Fayum, 
ypt.  1906. 


560 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


SuPERORDER     NOTOUNGULATA.       Extinct    South  American 
Hoofed  Mammals.^ 

XXIII.    Ordeh  TOXODONTIA.    Toxodonts,  with  rhinoceros-like  grinding 
teeth. 

1.  SuBonnKK  HOMALODOTHERIA.  Homalodothercs. 

Fam.  Notostylopidae.  Notostylopids. 

f  Notostylops.    Notostylops  Beds  (?  Bas.  Eoc),  S.  Amer. 

f  Trifjonostylops.    Notostylops  Beds  (?  Bas.  Eoc),  S.  Amer. 
Fam.  Homalodotheriidae.  Homalodotheriids. 

f  Honiahdotherium.    Santa  Cruz  Beds  (?  U.  Mioc),  S.  Amer. 

Inc.  Sed. 

f  Asmodeus.    Pyrotherium  Beds  (?  Eoc),  S.  Amer. 

2.  Suborder  Astrapotheria.  Astrapotheres. 

Inc.  Sed.    Fam.    Albertogaudryidae.  Albertogaudryids. 

f  Albertogandnja.    Notostylops  Beds  (?  Bas.  Eoc),  S.  Amer. 

t  (?)  Astraponotus.    Astraponotus  Beds  (?  Bas.  Eoc),  S.  Amer. 
Lie.  Sed.    Fam.  Isotemnidae.  Isotemnids. 

f  Isotemnus.    Notostylops  Beds  (?  Bas.  Eoc),  S.  Amer. 

Fam.  Astrapotheriidae.  Astrapotheres. 

f  Astrapotherium.    Colpodon  Beds  (?  Mioc),  and  a  type  species  in 
Santa  Cruz  Beds  (?  U.  Mioc),  S.  Amer. 

3.  Suborder  TOXODONTIA.    True  Toxodonts. 

Inc.  Sed.  Fam.    Archaeohyracidae.  Archseohyracids. 

t  Archceohyrax.    Pyrotherium  Beds  (?  U.  Eoc),  S.  Amer. 

f  Rhynchippus.    Pyrotherium  Beds  (?  U.  Eoc),  S.  Amer. 
Fam.  Toxodontidae.  Toxodontids. 

f  Nesodon.    Santa  Cruz  Formation  (?  U.  Mioc),  S.  Amer. 

t  Toxodon.    Pampean  (?  Plioc  &  Pleist.),  S.  Amer. 

■(•  Colpodon.    Colpodon  Beds  (?  ]Mioc.),  S.  Amer. 

4.  Suborder  Typotheria.  Typotheres. 

Fam.  Interatheriidae.  Interatheres. 

t  Profypotherium.    Santa  Cruz  (?  U.  Mioc),  S.  Amer. 

1  Vide  Weber,  Die  Siiugetiere,  1904  (under  '  Litopterna,  Toxodontia,'  etc.) ;  A.  Smith  Wood- 
ward, Outlines  of  Vertebrate  Pabeontology,  Cambridge,  1808;  Von  Zittel,  Palaontologie,  IV  : 
Bd.,  Mammalia.  Among  the  numerous  monographic-  researches  by  Ameghino,  Lydekker,  Roth,  ' 
Gaudry,  Scott,  Sinclair,  may  be  mentioned  especially:  Lydekker's  A  Study  of  the  Extinct 
Ungulates  of  Argentina,  Paleoutoloffia  Argentina,  II,  An.  del  Museo  de  la  Plata,  1893;  the 
monographs  (now  in  press)  by  Professor  Srott  and  Dr.  Sinclair  in  the  Princeton  Univ.  Exped.to 
Patagonia  ;  Sinclair's  article.  The  Santa  Cruz  Typotheria,  Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XLVII, 
V.V)H,  pp.  (U-78 ;  and  Gaudry 's  memoirs  in  the  Annales  de  Palaontologie  (Marcellin  Boule),  1906- 
1909.   The  present  provisional  arrangement  is  by  Gregory. 


APPENDIX 


561 


f  Interatherium.    Santa  Cruz  (?  U.  Mioc),  S.  Amer. 
Fam.  Hegetotheriidae.  Hegetotheres. 

f  Hegetothei'iuni.    Santa  Cruz  (?  U.  Mioc),  S.  Amer. 

f  Pachyruklios.    Santa  Cruz  (?  U.  Mioc),  S.  Amer. 
Fam.  Typotheriidae.  Typotheriids. 

f  Typotherium.    Pampean  (?  Plioc.  &  Pleist.),  S.  Amer. 

XXIV.  Order  LITOPTERNA.   Litopterns,  with  palseothere-  and  horse-like 

grinding  teeth. 

Fam.  Proterotheriidae.  Proterotheres. 

f  Proterotherium.    Santa  Cruz  (?  U.  Mioc),  S.  Amer. 

f  Dindiapliorus.    Santa  Cruz  (?  U.  Mioc),  S.  Amer. 

f  T/toatherium.    Santa  Cruz  (?  U.  Mioc),  S.  Amer. 
Fam.  Macraucheniidae.  Macrauchenids. 

f  llieosodon.    Santa  Cruz  (?  U.  Mioc),  S.  Amer. 

f  ScalabriniiJierium.    Pampean  (?  Plioc.  &  Pleist.),  S.  Amer. 

t  Macrauchenia.    Pampean  (?  Plioc.  &  Pleist.),  S.  Amer. 

XXV.  Order  PYROTHERIA.    Pyrotheres,  Mastodon-like  South  American 

Ungulates. 1 

Fam.  Pyrotheriidae.  Pyrotheres. 

f  Carolozittelia.    Notostylops  Beds  (?  Bas.  Eoc),  S.  Amer. 
f  Propyrotherlum.    Pyrotheriuui  Beds  (?  U.  ICoc),  S.  Amer. 
f  Pyrotherium.    Pyrotherium  Beds  (?  U.  Eoc),  S.  Amer. 
d.    Cohort  CETACEA.    Whales  and  Dolphins.2 

XXVI.  Order  ZEUGLODONTIA  (Archseoceti).    Archaic  Cetaceans. 
Fam.  '  Zeuglodontidae '  (  =  Basilosauridse) .  Zeuglodons. 

f  Protocetm.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Afr. 
■f  Prozeuglodon.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Afr. 

If  '  Zeuglodon'  (=  Basilosaurus).    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer.,  Eur.,  N. 
Afr.;  Tertiary,  New  Zealand. 

XXVII.  Order  '  ODONTOCETI '  (=  Denticeti).    Toothed  Whales. 
Fam.  Squalodontidae.  Squalodonts. 

f  Squalodon.    U.  Eoc,  N.  Amer. ;  Mioc,  Eur.,  AustraL 
f  Profiqualodon.    Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

1  Vi(i(i  Gaudry,  A.,  Fossilesde  Patagonie:  Le  Pyrotherium,  Ann.  de  Paleontologie  (Marcellin 
Boule),  tome  IV,  1909;  for  review  and  summary  of  this,  see  Gregory,  W.  K.,  in  Science,  n.s.,  Vol. 
XXX,  1909,  pp.  180-182. 

2  Vide  Weber,  Die  Saugetiere,  1904 ;  Beddard,  F.  E.,  The  Book  of  Whales,  New  York,  1900 ;  and 
Beddavd  in  Cambridge  Natural  History,  volume  Mammals ;  Flower  and  Lydekker,  Introduction 
to  the  Study  of  Mammals,  1891. 

2o 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Fam.  Argyrocetidae.  Argyrocetids. 

f  Argifrocetus.    U.  Mioc,  S.  Amer. 

Fam.  Platanistidae.    River  Dolphins. 

Plaicmisla.    Susu,  Ganges  Dolpliin.    Rivers  of  India,  Burma, 
Assam. 

hiia.    Tnia,  Amazon  Dolphin.    Amazon,  Orinoco,  etc. 

Stenodelpliis.    La  Plata  Dolphin.    La  Plata,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul. 

Fam.  Delphinidae.    Dolphins,  Porpoises,  Killers,  etc. 

Sotalia.    White  River  Dolphin.   Ind.  Oc,  W.  Afr.,  Guiana,  Brazil. 

Steno.    Rough-toothed  Dolphin.    Atlant.,  Pacif.,  Ind.  Oc. 

Tursiops.    Bottle-nosed  Dolphin.    Pacif.,  Atlant.,  Medit.  &  Red 
Sea,  Ind.  Oc. 

Delphinus.    Dolphin.    Cosmopolitan  in  Oceans. 

Lagenorhynchus.    Spectacled  Dolphin.    Atlant.  &  Pacif.  (N.  & 
S.),  Ind.  Oc. 

Phoccena.    Porpoise.    Atlant.  &  Pacif.  (N".  &  S.),  Medit.  Sea. 

Orcella.    Orcella,  Irawadi  Dolphin.    Rivers  of  Bengal,  Burma, 
Borneo. 

Grampus.    Grampus.    N.  Atlant.,  Pacif.,  Ind.  Oc,  Medit.  Sea. 

Glohicephalus.    Ca'ing  '  Whale,'  Blackfish.    Atlant.,  Pacif.,  Ind. 
Oc,  Medit.  Sea. 

Psewlorca.    Lesser  Killer.    Cosmopolitan  in  Oceans. 

Orca.    Killer  *  Whale.'    Cosmopolitan  in  Oceans. 
Fam.  Delphinapteridae.    Belugas  and  Narwhals. 

Delphinapterm.    Beluga.    Arctic,  Atlant.,  N.  Pacif.  Oc. 

Monodon.    Narwhal.    Arctic,  N.  Atlant.  (W.)  Oc. 
Fam.  Physeteridae.    Sperm  Whales  and  Beaked  Whales. 
SuBKAM.  Physeterinse.    Sperm  W^hales. 

f  Physodon.    U.  Eoc,  S.  Amer.;  Mioc,  Eur. 

Physetef.    Sperm  Whale.    Atlant.,  Pacif.,  Ind.  Oc. 

Cogia.    Pygmy  Sperm  Whale.    Pacif.,  Ind.,  S.  Atlant.  Oc. 

SuBFAM.  Ziphiinae.    Beaked  W^iales. 

Hyperoodon.     Bottle-nose  Whale.    N.  Atlant.,  Medit.  Sea,  S. 
Pacif.,  Antarctic  Oc.  (Plioc,  Eur.). 

Ziphius.    Two  toothed  W^hale.    Cosmopolitan  in  Oceans. 

Mesoplodon.    Cow  Fish.    Atlant.,  Pacif.,  Ind.  Oc.  (Plioc.  Eur.; 
Pleist.,  N.  Amer.). 

Berardius.    New  Zealand  Two- toothed  Whale.    S.  Pac.  Oc.  near 
N.  Zealand. 


APPENDIX  563 

XXVIII.    Order  MYSTACOCETI.    Whalebone  Whales. 
Fam.  Balaenidae.    Whalebone  Whales. 
SuBFAM.  Rhachianectinae.    Gray  Whales. 

Rhachianectes.    Gray  Whale.    N.  Pacif.  Oc. 
SuBFAM.  Balsenopterinae.  Rorquals, 
t  (?)  Plesiocetus.    Mioc.  &  Plioc,  Eur. 
f  (?)  Cetotherium.    Mioc,  Eur.  &  N.  Amer. 

Balcenoptera.    Rorqual,  Fin  Whale,  etc.  Cosmopolitan  in  Oceans. 
(Phoc,  Eur.) 

Megaptera.     Hump-backed  Whale.     Cosmopolitan  in- Oceans. 
(Plioc,  Eur.) 

SuBFAM.  Baiseninse.    Right  Whales. 

Baloena.    Right  Whale.    Arctic,  N.  Pacif.,  N.  Atlant.  Oc 

Neohalcena.    Pygmy  Right  Whale.    S.  Pacif.  Oc.  (Austral,  to 
Chili). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


PRINCIPAL  WOEKS   CONSULTED   IN   THE  PREPARATION  OF 

THIS  VOLUME 

Abel,  0. 

'04    Die  Sirenen  der  mediterranen  Tertiarbilduiigen  Osterreichs. 
Ahh.  K.  K.  Geol.  ReichsansL,  Vol.  XIX,  No.  2,  Vienna,  1904. 

Adams,  A.  Leith. 

'80    On  the  Recent  and  Extinct  Irish  Mammals. 
ProG.  It  Dublin  Soc,  n.s.,  Vol.  2,  1880. 

Allen,  J.  A. 

'76    The  American  Bisons,  Living  and  Extinct. 

Mem.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.,  Harvard  Coll.,  Cambridge,  Vol.  IV,  No.  10, 
1876. 

'93    The  Geographical  Origin  and  Distribution  of  North  American  Birds 
considered  in  Relation  to  the  Faunal  Areas  of  North  America. 
TJis  Auk,  Vol.  X,  No.  2,  April,  1893. 

Ameghino,  F. 

'89    Contribucion  al  Conocimiento  de  los  Mamiferos  Fosfles  de  la  Re- 

piiblica  Argentina.    Buenos  Aires,  1889. 
'98    Sinopsis  Geologico-Panteoldgica  Segundo  Censo  de  la  Republica 

Argentina,  1895.    Capitulo  I,  Tercera  Parte,  1898,  pp.  113-255. 
'06    Les  Formations  Sedimentaires  du  Cretace  Superieur  et  du  Tertiaire 

de  Patagonie. 

An.  Mus.  Nac.  Buenos  Aires,  Vol.  XV,  pp.  1-568. 

American  Ornithologists'  Union. 

"10    Clieck-List  of  North  American  Birds.    (J.  A.  Allen,  Editor.)  3d 
and  revised  ed..  New  York,  1910. 

Andreae,  A. 

'83    Die  Alteren  Tertiarschichten  im  Elsass.    Strassburg,  1883.    p.  92. 
'84    Die  Oligocan-Schichten  im  Elsass.     Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  des 
Elsasser  Tertiars.    Strassburg,  1884.    R.  Schultz.    239  S. 

Andrews,  C.  W. 

'96    On  a  Skull  of  Orycteropus  gaudryi  Forsyth  Major  from  Samos. 

Proc.  Zool.  Soc.  London,  1896,  pp.  296-299. 
'06    A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Tertiary  Vertebrata  of  the  Fayum, 

Egypt.    London,  1906. 

564 


APPENDIX 


565 


H.  F.  B. 

'90    The  Climates  of  Past  Ages. 

Nature,  Vol.  XLII,  June  19,  1890,  pp.  175-180. 

Barbour,  E.  H. 

'92    On  a  New  Order  of  Gigantic  Fossils.    Nebr.  Univ.  Studies.  Vol. 

I,  No.  4,  July,  1892. 
'97    Nature,  Structure  and  Phylogeny  of  Dseraonelix. 

Bull.  Geol  jSoc.  Amer.,  Vol.  8,  April,  1897,  pp.  305-314. 
'03    Report  of  the  State  Geologist. 

Nebraska  Geological  Survey,  Vol.  I,  1903. 

Barrel!,  J. 

'08    Relations  between  Climate  and  Terrestrial  Deposits. 
Jour.  Geol,  Vol.  XVI,  Nos.  2,  3,  and  4,  1908. 

Bate,  D.  M.  A. 

'03    Preliminary  Note  on  the  Discovery  of  a  Pigmy  Elephant  in  the 

Pleistocene  of  Cyprus. 

Proc.  Roy.  JSoc,  Vol.  71,  1903,  pp.  498-500. 
'05    Pleistocene  Mammalia  in  Crete. 

Geol.  Mag.,  n.s.,  Decade  V,  Vol.  II,  May,  1905,  pp.  193-202. 
'07    On  Elephant  Remains  from  Crete,  with  Description  of  Eleplias 

creticus,  sp.n. 

Proc.  Zodl.  Soc,  London,  Aug.  1,  1907,  pp.  238-250. 

Beddard,  F.  E. 

'95    A  Text-book  of  Zoogeography.    London,  1895. 
'00    The  Book  of  Whales.    New  York,  1900. 

'02  The  Cambridge  Natural  History,  Vol.  X,  Mammalia.  London,  1902. 
Bensley,  B.  A. 

'01    On  the  Question  of  an  Arboreal  Ancestry  of  the  Marsupialia,  and 

the  Interrelationships  of  the  Mammalian  Subclasses. 

A7ner.  Nat,  Vol.  XXXV,  No.  410,  Feb.,  1901. 
'03    On  the  Evolution  of  the  Australian  Marsupials ;  with  Remarks  on 

the  Relationships  of  the  Marsupials  in  general. 

Trans.  Linn.  Soc.  London,  Ser.  2,  Zool.,  Vol.  IX,  Pt.  3,  Dec,  1903, 

pp.  83-217. 

Blanford,  W.  T. 

'76    The  African  Element  in  the  Eauna  of  India. 

Ann.  Mag.  Nat.  Hist.,  Ser  4,  Vol.  XVIII,  1876,  pp.  277-294. 
'85    Homotaxis  as  Illustrated  from  Indian  Formations. 

Rec.  Geol.  Surv.  Lidia,  Vol.  XVIII,  Pt.  1,  1885. 
'90    Address  delivered  at  the  Anniversary  Meeting  of  the  Geological 

Society  of  London.    London,  1890. 


566 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Boule,  M. 

'88    Essai  de  Paleontologie  Strati graphique  de  rHomme. 

Rev.  cVAnthrop.,  1888,  pp.  129-144,  272-297,  385-411,  647-680. 
'90    Sur  la  Limite  entre  le  Pliocene  et  le  Quaternaire. 

Extr.  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  XVIII,  pp.  945-947,  1890. 
'94    Note  sur  des  Restes  de  Glouton  et  de  Lion  Fossile  de  la  Caverne 

de  I'Herin  (Ariege). 

IJAntUropolocjie,  Paris,  1894. 
*96    Les  Mam  mi  feres  quaternaires  de  I'Algerie  d'apres  les  travaux  de 

Pomel. 

VAnthropologie,  Vol.  VII,  1896,  pp.  563-571. 
'99    Observations  sur  Quelques  Equides  Fossiles. 

Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  XXVII,  1899,  pp.  531-542. 
'02    La  Caverne  a  Ossements  de  Montmaurin  (Haute-Garonne). 

VAnthropologie,  Vol.  XIII,  1902. 
'06    Les  Grands  Chats  des  Cavernes. 

Ann.  Paleont.,  Vol.  I,  Paris,  Jan.,  1906. 
'08    Observations  sur  un  Silex  Taille  du  Jura  et  sur  la  Chronologie  de 

M.  Penck. 

VAnthropologie,  Vol.  XIX,  1908. 
'09    L'Homme  Fossile  de  la  Chapelle-aux-Saints  (Correze). 
VAnthropologie,  Vol.  XIX,  1909,  pp.  519-525. 

Boule,  M.,  and  Chauvet,  G. 

'99    Sur  I'existence  d'une  faune  d'animaux  arctiques  dans  la  Charente 
a  I'epoque  quaternaire. 

C.R.  Acad.  Sci.,  Paris,  Vol.  28,  1899,  pp.  1188-1190. 
Bovard,  J.  F. 

'07    Notes  on  Quaternary  Felidye  from  California. 

Univ.  Cal.  Publ,  Dept.  Geol.  Bull.,  Vol.  V,  No.  10,  Sept.,  1907, 
pp.  155-166. 

Brandt,  J.  F. 

"78    ]\Iittlieilungen  liber  die  Gattung  Elasmotherium,  besonders  den 
Scliadelbau  derselben. 

M^m.  Acad.  Imph\  JSci.  St.  Petersbourg,  Ser.  VII,  Vol.  XXVI,  No.  6, 
St.  Petersburg,  1878. 

Brinton,  D.  G. 

*87    On  an  Ancient  Human  Footprint  in  Nicaragua. 

Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Philadelphia,  Vol.  24,  1887,  pp.  437-^44. 

Brown,  Barnum. 

'03    A  New  Genus  of  Ground  Sloth  from  the  Pleistocene  of  Nebraska. 
Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Ncit.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX,  Art.  xxii,  Oct.  28,  1903, 
pp.  569-583. 


APPENDIX 


567 


'08  The  Conard  Fissure,  a  Pleistocene  Bone  Deposit  in  Northern 
Arkansas;  with  Descriptions  of  two  New  Genera  and  twenty 
New  Species  of  Mammals. 

Mem.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  IX,  Pt.  IV,  Feb.,  1908. 
Biichner,  E. 

'95  Das  allmahliche  Aussterben  des  Wisents  (Bison  bonasus  Linn.)  im 
Forste  von  Bjelowjesha. 

Mem.  Acad.  Imper.  Sci.  /St.  Petersbourg,  Vol.  Ill,  No.  2,  1895. 
Bulman,  G.  W. 

'93  The  Efeect  of  the  Glacial  Period  on  the  Fauna  and  Flora  of  the 
British  Isles. 

Natural  Science,  Vol.  Ill,  No.  20,  Oct.,  1893,  pp.  261-266. 

Calvin,  S. 

^09    Present  Phase  of  the  Pleistocene  Problem  in  Iowa. 

Bidl.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer.,  Vol.  20,  March,  1909,  pp.  133-152. 
W    Aftonian  Mammal  Fauna. 

Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer.,  Vol.  20,  Oct.,  1909,  pp.  341-356. 

Canu,  F. 

^95  Essai  de  Paleogeographie.  Eestauration  des  Contours  des  Mers 
Anciennes  en  France  et  dans  les  Pays  Voisins.  Paris,  1895, 
pp.  6-65. 

Capellini,  G. 

'07    Mastodonti  del  Museo  Geologico  di  Bologna. 

Mem.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Inst.  Bologna,  Ser.  6,  Vol.  IV,  Bologna,  1907. 

Chamberlin,  T.  C. 

'02    Human  Belies  of  Lansing,  Kansas. 

Jour.  Geol,  Vol.  X,  No.  7,  Oct.-Nov.,  1902. 

Chamberlin,  T.  C,  and  Salisbury,  R.  D. 

'06    Geology.    3  vols.    New  York,  1904-1906. 

Chestnut,  V.  K.  and  Wilcox,  E.  V. 

'01    The  Stock  Poisoning  Plants  of  Montana. 

U.S.  Dept.  Agric,  Divis.  Botany,  Bull.  26,  Washington,  1901. 

Clark,  W.  B. 

'91    Correlation  Papers.-Eocene.    The  Eocene  of  the  United  States. 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Bull,  No.  83,  1891,  pp.  9-159. 

Clarke,  J.  M. 

'99    Geological  Time. 

Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  X,  1899,  p.  695. 
'03    Mastodons  of  New  York.    A  List  of  Discoveries  of  their  Eemains, 

1705-1902. 

N.  Y.  State  Mas.,  Bull.  69,  Palseont.  9,  pp.  921-933,  1903. 


568 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Cockerell,  T.  D.  A. 

06    The  Fossil  Fauna  and  Flora  of  the  Florissant  (Colorado)  Shales. 

Univ.  Col  Studies,  Vol.  Ill,  No.  3,  Boulder,  Col.,  June,  1906. 
'08    The  Fossil  Flora  of  Florissant,  Colorado. 

Bull  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist,  Vol.  XXIV,  No.  4,  1908,  pp.  71-110. 
'09    A  Fossil  Ground  Sloth  in  Colorado. 

Univ.  Col.  Studies,  Vol.  VI,  No.  4,  Boulder,  Col.,  June,  1909,  pp.  309- 

312. 

'10    The  Miocene  Trees  of  the  Rocky  Mountains. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XLIV,  No.  57,  Jan.,  1910,  pp.  31-47. 

Coleman,  A.  P. 

"06    Interglacial  Periods  in  Canada. 

Internat.  Geol  Congr.,  Mexico,  1906. 

Cook,  H.  J. 

"09    A  New  Proboscidean  from  the  Lower  Miocene  of  Nebraska. 
Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  XXVIII,  Aug.,  1909,  pp.  183-184. 

Cooper.  W. 

'31    Notices  of  Big  Bone  Lick. 

Monthly  Amer.  Jour.  Geol  Nat.  Sci.,  Vol.  I,  1831,  pp.  158-174; 
205-217. 

Cooper,  W..  Smith,  J.  A.,  and  De  Kay,  J.  E. 

"31    Report  to  the  Lyceum  of  Natural  History  on  a  collection  of  fossil 
bones  disinterred  at  Big  Bone  Lick,  Kentucky,  in  September,  1830, 
and  recently  brought  to  New  York. 
Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  XX,  1831,  pp.  370-372. 

Cope,  E.  D. 

75    Report  on  the  Geology  of  Northwestern  New  Mexico,  examined 
during  1874. 

Append.  LL  Ann.  Rept.  Chief  Engin.,  Washington,  1875. 
'76    Description  of  Some  Vertebrate  Remains  from  the  Port  Kennedy 
Bone  Deposit. 

Acad.  Nat.  ScL  Phila.  Proc,  Vol.  11,  1876,  Pt.  2,  pp.  193-267. 
'79    The  Relations  of  the  Horizons  of  Extinct  Vertebrata  of  Europe 
and  North  America. 

U.S.  Geol  and  Geog.  Surv.  Terr.  Bull,  Vol.  5,  No.  1,  1879. 
"79-'80    Observations  on  the  Faunae  of  the  Pliocene  Tertiaries  of  Oregon. 

U.S.  Geol  and  Geog.  Surv.  Terr.  Bull,  Vol.  5,  1879-1880,  pp.  55-69. 
'80    The  Bad  Lands  of  Wind  River  and  their  Fauna. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XIV,  1880,  pp.  745-748. 
'81    On  some  Mammalia  of  the  Lowest  Eocene  Beds  of  New  Mexico. 

Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XIX,  1881,  pp.  484-495. 
'83    The  Vertebrata  of  the  Tertiary  Formations  of  the  West. 

Pept.  U.S.  Geol  Surv.  Terr.,  Vol.  3,  1883  (1884). 


APPENDIX 


569 


'83    On  the  Trituberculate  Type  of  Molar  Tooth  in  the  Mammalia. 
Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XXI,  Dec.  7,  1883,  pp.  324-326. 

'85  The  White  Kiver  Beds  of  Swift  Current  River,  Korth  West  Terri- 
tory. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XIX,  1885,  p.  163. 
'87    Origin  of  the  Fittest.    Essays  on  Evolution.    8vo,  New  York,  1887. 
'87    The  Perissodactyla. 

Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XXI,  1887,  pp.  985-1007 ;  1060-1076. 
'88    The  Artiodactyla. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXII,  1888,  pp.  1079-1095. 
'89    The  Vertebrate  Fauna  of  the  Equus  Beds. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXIII,  1889,  pp.  160-165. 
'89    The  Proboscidea. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXIII,  No.  268,  April,  1889,  pp.  191-211. 
'89    The  Silver  Lake  of  Oregon  and  its  Region. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXIII,  1889,  pp.  970-982. 
'91    On  Vertebrata  from  the  Tertiary  and  Cretaceous  Eocks  of  the 

Northwest  Territory. 

Geol  Surv.  Canada,  Contrib.  to  Canad.  Palceont.,  Vol.  Ill,  Montreal, 
1891,  pp.  1-25. 

'92  A  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Vertebrate  Paleontology  of  the  Llano 
Estacado. 

Geol  Surv.  Texas,  4th  Ann.  Rept.,  1892  (1893),  pp.  1-136. 
'95    The  Antiquity  of  Man  in  North  America. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXIX,  June,  1895,  pp.  593-599. 

Cope,  E.  D.,  and  Wortman,  J.  L. 

'84  An  Account  of  the  Mammalian  Fauna  of  the  Post-Pliocene  Deposits 
of  Indiana. 

State  Geol  Indiana,  14th  Rept.,  Pt.  2,  1884. 

CroU,  J. 

'75  Climate  and  Time  in  their  Geological  Relations.  A  Theory  of 
Secular  Changes  of  the  Earth's  Climate.    8vo,  London,  1875. 

'85    On  Arctic  Interglacial  Periods. 

Philos.  Mag.,  Ser.  5,  Vol.  XIX,  1885. 

Cummins,  W.  F. 

'91-92    Notes  on  the  Geology  of  Northwest  Texas. 

Geol  Surv.  Texas,  3d  Ann.  Rept.,  1891  (1892),  pp.  129-200 ;  4th 
Ann.  Rept.,  1892  (1893),  pp.  179-238. 

Cuvier,  G. 

'26  Discours  sur  les  Revolutions  de  la  Surface  du  Globe,  et  sur  les 
Changemens  qu'elles  ont  Produits  dans  le  Regne  Animal.  Paris 
and  Amsterdam,  1826. 

Cuvier,  G.,  and  Brongniart,  A. 

'21    Description  Geologique  des  Environs  de  Paris.    Paris,  1821. 


570  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

Dall,  W.  H. 

'91    Age  of  the  Peace  Creek  Bone  Beds  of  Florida. 

Aaid.  Xat  ScL  Phila.  Proc,  1891,  p.  121. 
'98    A  Table  of  the  North  American  Tertiary  Horizons,  Correlated  with 

One  Another  and  with  those  of  Western  Europe. 

U.S.  Oeol.  Sure,  18th  Ann.  "Kept.,  1896-1897. 
'03    Geological  Results  of  the  Study  of  the  Tertiary  Fauna  of  Florida. 

Trans.  Wcujner  Free  Inst.  Sci.  Phila.,  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  6,  1903,  pp. 

1549-1550. 

Dall,  W.  H.,  and  Harris,  G.  D. 

*92    Correlation  Papers.    The  Neocene  of  North  America. 
U.S.  Geol.  Sarv.  Bull.  No.  84,  1892. 

Dana,  J.  D. 

'94    Manual  of  Geology.    4th  ed..  New  York,  1894. 
Darton,  N.  H. 

'05    Preliminary  Report  on  the  Geology  and  Underground  Water  Re- 
sources of  the  Central  Great  Plains. 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Prof.  Paper,  No.  32,  1905. 

Darwin,  C. 

'45  Journal  of  Researches  into  the  Natural  History  of  the  Countries 
visited  during  the  Voyage  of  H.  M.  S.  Beagle.  (1845.)  New  ed., 
New  York  and  London,  1909. 

'59  On  the  Origin  of  Species  by  Means  of  Natural  Selection,  or  the 
Preservation  of  Favoured  Races  in  the  Struggle  for  Life.  6th  ed., 
London,  1878  (publ.  in  1859).  ' 

'71  The  Descent  of  Man,  and  Selection  in  Relation  to  Sex  (1871). 
2d  ed.,  revised  and  augmented,  New  York,  19*09. 

Darwin,  F.  (ed.) 

'88  The  Life  and  Letters  of  Charles  Darwin,  including  an  Autobio- 
graphical Chapter.    3  vols.,  London,  1888. 

Davis,  W.  M. 

*00  The  Freshwater  Tertiary  Formations  of  the  Rocky  Mountain 
Region. 

Proc.  Amer.  Acad.  Aits,  ScL,  Vol.  XXXV,  No.  17,  March,  1900. 
Dawkins,  W.  Boyd. 

'66    The  British  Pleistocene  jNlammalia; 

Palceont.  Soc.  London,  1866-1872. 
'68    On  the  Dentition  of  Rhinoceros  etruscus  Falc. 

Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  Vol.  XXIV,  1868,  pp.  207-218. 
'68    The  Former  Range  of  the  Reindeer  in  Europe. 

Popidar  Science  Review,  Vol.  VII,  1868. 
'79    On  the  Range  of  the  Mammoth  in  Space  and  Time. 

Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  Feb.,  1879. 


APPENDIX 


571 


'80  The  Classification  of  the  Tertiary  Period  by  Means  of  the  Mammalia. 
Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  Vol.  XXXVI,  pp.  379-403.  London, 
April  14,  1880. 

'80  Early  Man  in  Britain  and  his  Place  in  the  Tertiary  Period. 
London,  1880. 

'83    On  the  Alleged  Existence  of  Ovihos  moschatus  in  the  Forest-bed,  and 
on  its  Range  in  Space  and  Time. 
Quart.  Jour.  Geol  jSoc.    London,  1883,  pp.  575-581. 
'94    On  the  Relation  of  the  Palaeolithic  to  the  Neolithic  Period. 
Jour.  Anthropol.  Inst.,  Feb.,  1894,  p.  242. 
Dawson,  J.  W. 

'96    The  Geological  History  of  Plants.  1896. 
Dawson,  W.,  and  Penhallow,  D.  P. 

'90    On  the  Pleistocene  Flora  of  Canada. 

Bull.  Geol  Soc.  America,  Vol.  1,  April,  1890,  pp.  311-334. 
Deperet,  C. 

'85    Considerations  Generales  sur  les  Vertebres  Pliocenes  de  I'Europe. 

Ann.  Sci.  Geol.,  Vol.  XVII,  Paris,  1885,  pp.  231-272. 
'87    Recherches  sur  la  Succession  des  Faunes  Vertebres  Miocenes  de  la 

Vallee  du  Rhone. 

Extr.  Arch.  Mas.  Hist.  Nat.  Lyon,  1,  IV,  Lyons,  1887. 
'90    Les  Animaux  Pliocenes  du  Roussillon. 

Mem.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Paleont.,  No.  3,  Paris,  1890. 
'92    La  Faune  de  Mammiferes  Miocenes  de  la  Grive-Saint-Alban  (Isere). 

Arch.  Mus.  Hist.  Nat.  Lyon,  Vol.  V,  1892,  pp.  1-93. 
'92    Note  sur  la  Classification  et  le  Parallelisme  du  Systeme  Miocene. 

Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  1892,  pp.  145-156. 
'93    Note  sur  la  Succession  stratigraphique  des  Faunes  de  Mammiferes 

Pliocenes  d'Europe  et  du  Plateau  Central  en  particulier. 

Ball.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  XXI,  1893. 
'94    Sur  un  gisement  siderolithique  de  Mammiferes  de  I'eocene  moyen 

a  Lissieu  pres  Lyon. 

C.R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Apr.  9,  1894. 
'95    Resultats  des  fouilles  paleontologiques  dans  le  Miocene  superieur 

de  la  colline  de  Montredon. 

C.R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Sept.  9,  1895. 
'05    L'evolution  des  Mammiferes  tertiaires ;  importance  des  migrations. 

(Eocene.) 

C.R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris.,  Vol.  CXLI,  sea.  Nov.  6,  1905,  p.  702. 
'06    L'evolution  des  Mammiferes  tertiaires;  I'importance  des  migra- 
tions. (Oligocene.) 

C.R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Vol.  CXLII,  sea.  March  12,  1906,  p.  618. 
'06    L'  evolution  des  Mammiferes  tertiaires ;  importance  des  migrations. 
(Miocene.) 

CP.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Vol.  CXLIII,  sea.  Dec.  24,  1906,  p.  1120. 


572 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


'06    Relations  stratigraphiques  des  Faunes  de  Cernay  et  de  Meudon  au 
Mont  de  Berru. 

Bull  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  VI,  1906,  pp.  442-443. 
'06    Les  Vertebres  de  I'Oligocene  Inferieur  de  Tarrega  (Province  de 
Lerida). 

Memor.  Real  Acad.  Cienc.  AHes,  Barcelona,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  V,  No.  21, 
1906. 

'07    Les  Transformations  du  Monde  animal.    Paris,  1907. 

Dep6ret,  C.  (transl.) 

'08    The  Evolution  of  Tertiary  Mammals,  and  the  Importance  of  their 

Migrations.    (First  Paper.    Eocene  Epoch.) 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XLII,  No.  494,  Feb.,  1908. 
'08    The  Evolution  of  Tertiary  Mammals,  and  the  Importance  o^^  their 

Migrations.    (Second  Paper.    Oligocene  Epoch.) 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XLII,  No.  495,  March,  1908. 
'08    The  Evolution  of  Tertiary  Mammals,  and  the  Importance  of  their 

Migrations.    (Third  Paper.    Miocene  Epoch.) 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XLII,  No.  497,  May,  1908. 
'09    The  Transformations  of  the  Animal  World. 

Internat.  Sci.  Ser.,  ed.  by  F.  Legge,  London,  1909. 

Deperet,  C,  and  Douxami,  H. 

'02    Les  Vertebres  Oligocenes  de  Pyrimont-Challonges  (Savoie). 
Mem.  Soc.  Faleont.  Suisse,  Geneva,  Vol.  XXIX,  1902. 

Dobson,  G.  E. 

'82-'83    A  Monograph  on  the  Insectivora.    London,  1882-1883. 

Dollo,  L. 

'93    Les  Lois  de  revolution. 

Bull  Soc.  Beige  Geol,  Paleont.,  Hydrol,  Vol.  VII,  1893,  pp.  164-166. 
'99    Les  Ancetres  des  Marsupiaux  etaient-ils  arboricoles  ? 

Miscel  Biol,  ded.  au  Prof.  Alfred  Giard,  4to,  Paris,  1899,  pp.  188-203. 
'04    Resultats  du  Voyage  du  S.  Y.  Belgica  en  1897-1898-1899,  Zoologie, 

Poissons.    4to,  Anvers,  1904. 
Douglass,  E. 

'99    The  Neocene  Lake  Beds  of  Western  Montana,  and  Descriptions 

of  Some  New  Vertebrates  from  the  Loup  Fork. 

Univ.  Montana,  thesis,  June,  1899. 
'01    Fossil  Mammalia  of  the  White  River  Beds  of  Montana. 

Am.  Philos.  Soc.  Trans.,  n.s..  Vol.  XX,  1901,  pp.  1-42. 
'02    The  Discovery  of  Torrejon  Mammals  in  Montana. 

Science,  n.s..  Vol.  XV,  1902,  pp.  272-273. 
'02    A  Cretaceous  and  Lower  Tertiary  Section  in  South-central  Montana. 

Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XLI,  1902,  pp.  207-224. 
'03    New  Vertebrates  from  the  ^lontana  Tertiary. 

Ann.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  II,  1903,  pp.  145-200. 


APPENDIX 


573 


^07    PromerycochoRTus  and  a  New  Genus  of  Merycoidodonts  with.  Some 

Notes  on  Other  Agriochoeridae. 

Ann.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  IV,  No.  2,  1907. 
'08    Fossil  Horses  from  North  Dakota  and  Montana. 

Ann.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  IV,  Nos.  3  and  4,  1908. 
'08    Some  Oligocene  Lizards. 

A7in.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  IV,  Nos.  3  and  4,  1908,  pp.  278-285. 
^09    A  Description  of  a  New  Species  of  Procamelus  from  the  Upper 

Miocene  of  Montana,  with  Notes   upon   Procamelus  madisonius 

Douglass. 

Ann.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  V,  Nos.  2  and  3,  1909,  pp.  159-165. 
'09    A  Geological  Reconnaissance  in  North  Dakota,   Montana  and 

Idaho ;  with  Notes  on  Mesozoic  and  Cenozoic  Geology. 

A7in.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  V,  Nos.  2  and  3,  1909,  pp.  211-288. 
'09    Dromomeryx,  a  New  Genus  of  American  E/uminants. 

A7m.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  V,  No.  XI,  1908-1909,  pp.  457-479. 

Dubois,  E. 

'96    On  Pithecanthropus  Erectus :  A  Transitional  Eorm  between  Man 
and  the  Apes. 

Sci.  Trans.  Boy.  Dublin  Soc,  Vol.  VI  (Ser.  II),  Dublin,  1896,  pp. 
1-18. 

Dtising,  C. 

'84    Die  Regulierung  des  Geschlechtsverhaltnisses  bei  der  Vermehrung 
der  Menschen,  Tiere  und  Pflanzen. 

Jena.  Zeitschr.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XVII  (n.s..  Vol.  X),  1884,  pp. 
593-940. 

Eigenmann,  C.  H. 

'06    The  Fresh-water  Fishes  of  South  and  Middle  America. 
Pop.  Sd.  Monthly,  June,  1906,  pp.  515-530. 

Elliot,  D.  G. 

'04    The  Land  and  Sea  Mammals  of  Middle  America  and  the  West 
Indies. 

Field  Columbian  Mus.  Publ.,  No.  95,  Chicago,  1904. 
'07    A  Catalogue  of  the  Collection  of  Mammals  in  the  Field  Columbian 
Museum. 

Field  Columbian  Mus.  Public,  No.  115,  Chicago,  1907. 
ngler,  A. 

'79    Versuch  einer  Entwicklungsgeschichte  der  extratropischen  Floren- 
gebiete  der  nordlichen  Hemisphere.    Leipzig,  1879,  pp.  1-12. 

wart,  J.  C. 

'04    The  Multiple  Origin  of  Horses  and  Ponies. 

Repr.  Trans.  Higlil.  Agric.  Soc.  Scotland,  1904,  pp.  1-39. 


-y^  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

'07    On  Skulls  of  Horses  from  the  Koman  Fort  at  Newstead,  near  Mel- 
rose with  Observations  on  the  Origin  of  Domestic  Horses. 
Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Edinburgh,  Yo\.  XLV,  Ft.  HI,  No.  20,  1907,  pp. 

555-587.  ^     _  j_- 

•09  The  Possible  Ancestors  of  the  Horses  Living  under  Domestication. 
Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XXX,  No.  763,  Aug.  13,  1909,  pp.  219-223.  - 

^'^^°77^'  Recherches  sur  les  Phosphorites  du  Quercy.    Paris,  1877,  pp.*' 

79  Observations  sur  le  Memoire  de  M.  Cope  intitule  Relations  des 
Horizons  Renfermant  des  Debris  d'Animaux  Vertebres  Fossiles  en 
Europe  et  en  Amerique.  ^    .    -.or^n  in 

Bibl  Ecole  Ilautes  Etudes.    Vol.  XIX,  No.  3,  Pans,  18/9,  pp.  1-.>1 

•80  ttnde  des  Mammiferes  fossiles  de  Saint-Gerand  le  Puy  (All;er>  . 
Bibl  Ecole  Hautes  Etudes,  Sect.  Sci.  Nat.,  Vol.  XIX,  Art.  1,  1880. 

'81  -  £tudes  des  Mammiferes  fossiles  de  Ronzon  (Haute-Loire). 
Ann.  Sc.  Geol,  Vol.  XII,  5,  Art.  3.    Paris,  1881. 

'91    £tude  sur  les  Mammiferes  fossiles  de  Sansan. 
Ann.  Sc.  Geol,  Vol.  XXI,  1,  Art.  1.   Paris,  1891. 

Filhol,  H.,  and  Filhol,  E.  , ,  .  ^ 

'71    Description  des  Ossements  de   Felis  spelma  decouverts  dans  U 
Caverne  de  Lherm  (Ariege).    Paris,  1871. 

Flower,  W.  H.,  and  Lydekker,  R.  .  .  .  ^  ^- 

•91    An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Mammals  Living  and  Extinct 

London,  1891. 

Forbes,^E.^^  the  Connection  between  the  Distribution  of  the  Existing  Faunj 
and  Flora  of  the  British  Isles  with  the  Geological  Changes  whicl 
have  affected  their  Area. 
Mem.  Geol  Surv.,  Vol.  1, 1816. 

Forbes,  H.  0.  ,       ^  ^ 

'93    Antarctica:  a  Supposed  Former  Southern  Continent. 

Xat.  Sci.,  Vol.  Ill,  1893,  p.  54. 
'93    The  Chatham  Islands;  their  Relation  to  a  Former  Southern  Coi 

tinent. 

Roy.  Geoyr.  Soc,  Suppl.  Vol.  Ill,  1893. 

Fraas,  0. 

'70    Die  Fauna  von  Steinheim. 

JahreHheJle  Ver.  Vaterl  NaturMinde  Wurttem.,  Vol.  26,  Stuttgai 

1870. 

'85    Beitrage  zur  Fauna  von  Steinheim. 

Jahreshefle  Ver.  Vaterl  Naturkunde  Wurttem.,  Vol.  41,  Stuttgai 
1885. 


lardi 


tudt 


APPENDIX 

Fraipont,  J.,  and  Lohest,  M. 

'87    La  Race  de  Neanderthal  ou  de  Canstadt  en  Belgique 
Arch.  Biol,  Vol.  VII,  1887,  pp.  587-757. 

Fuchs,  T. 

'93    Uber  die  Natur  von  Dcemonelix  Barbour. 

Annal.  k.k.  Naturhist.  Hofmus.  Wien,  1893,  pp.  91-94. 
Furlong,  E.  L. 

'04  An  Account  of  the  Preliminary  Excavations  in  a  Recently  Explored 
Quaternary  Cave  in  Shasta  County,  Cal.  xpiorea 
Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  20,  July  8,  1904,  pp.  53-54. 

06  The  Exploration  of  Samwel  Cave. 

Am.  Jonr.  ScL,  September  1906,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  XXII,  pp.  235-247 

07  Reconnoissance  of  a  Recently  Discovered  Quaternary  Cave  Deposit 
near  Auburn,  Cal.  ^  -L'eposit 

Science,  n.s..  Vol.  XXV,  1907,  pp.  392-394. 
Gaillard,  C. 

'08    Les  Oiseaux  des  Phosphorites  du  Quercy. 

Ann.  Univ.  Lyon,  n.s.  I,  Sc.  Med.,  fasc.  23,  1908 

SCa1rr:)''~  """"^'"^  ^^^^"^  ^--Saint- 

Arch.  Mus.  Hist.  Nat.  Lyon,  Vol.  VII,  1899. 
rardner,  J.  S. 

'77    Tropical  Forests  of  Hampshire. 

Nature,  Vol.  XV,  1877,  pp.  229,  258,  279 

indln  th""'  '^''T-  f       ^^'^'^^  ^--^  -  Miocene? 

And  on  the  caiises  which  enabled  them  to  exist  in  high  latitudes 
Nature,  Vol.  XIX,  Dec,  1878,  pp.  123-126. 
86    Fossil  Grasses. 

Proc.  Geol.  Ass.,  Vol.  IX,  1885-1886,  pp.  441-454. 
fludry,  A. 

'93    f'SeS;  f  f-^^'-^r''        ^'        ^"I'  1886,  pp.  288-291 
W    L  Elephant  de  Durfort.    Paris,  4to,  1893. 

taXL.'^  P-tion  du  Monde  an- 

Pal.  (Marcellin  Boule),  Vol.  I,  1906. 


576 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


'09    Fossiles  de  Patagonie. 

Ann.  Paleont.  (Marcellin  Boiile),  Vol.  IV,  No.  1,  1909,  pp.  1-28. 

Gaudry,  A.,  and  Boule,  M. 

"88    Materiaux  pour  THistoire  des  Temps  Quaternaires.    3ieme  Fasc. 

L'Elasmotheriura.    Paris,  1888. 
'92    Materiaux  pour  I'Histoire  des  Temps  Quaternaires.    4ieme  Fasc. 

Les  Oubliettes  de  Gargas.    Paris,  1892. 

Geikie,  A. 

'81    Prehistoric  Europe.    London,  1881. 
'92    Address  Brit.  Ass.  Ad.  Sci.,  Edinburgh,  1892. 

Nature,  Vol.  XLVI,  Aug.  4,  1892,  pp.  317-^323. 
'93    Text-Book  of  Geology.    London,  1893. 
'99    Address  to  the  Geological  Section  of  the  British  Association 'for  the 

Advancement  of  Science  (on  the  age  of  the  earth). 

Brit.  Ass.  Adv.  Sci.,  Geol.  Sect.,  Dover,  1899. 

Geikie,  J. 

*94    The  Great  Ice  Age  and  Its  Eelation  to  the  Antiquity  of  Man.  3d 
ed.,  London,  1894. 

Gervais,  P. 

'59    Zoologie  et  Paleontologie  Francais.es.    2e  edit.    Paris,  1859. 
'69    Zoologie  et  Paleontologie  Generales.    Paris,  1867-1869,  pp.  1-245. 

Gidley,  J.  W. 

'00    A  new  Species  of  Pleistocene  Horse  from  the  Staked  Plains  of 
Texas. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIII,  No.  13,  1900,  pp.  111-116. 
'01    Tooth  Characters  and  Revision  of  the  North  American  Species  of 
the  Genus  Equus. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIV,  Art.  ix,  1901,  pp.  91-142. 

'03    A  new  Three-toed  Horse. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX,  Art.  xiii,  1903,  pp.  465-476. 

'03    The  Fresh- water  Tertiary  of  Northwestern  Texas,  Amer.  Mus.  Ex- 
pedition of  1899-1901. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX,  1903,  pp.  617-635. 
'03    On  Two  Species  of  Platygonus  from  the  Pliocene  of  Texas. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX,  Art.  xiv,  July  24,  1903, 
pp.  477-481. 

'04    New  or  little  known  Mammals  from  the  Miocene  of  South  Dakota* 
Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XX,  1904,  pp.  241-268. 

'07    Kevision  of  the  Miocene  and  Pliocene  EquidaB  of  North  America. 
Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIII,  Art.  xxxv,  Nov.  26,  1907, 
pp.  865-934. 

'07    A  New  Horned  Rodent  from  the  Miocene  of  Kansas. 

Proc.  U.  S.  Nat.  Mus.,  Vol.  XXXII,  June  29, 1907,  pp.  627-636. 


APPENDIX 

'08    Notes  on  a  Colleetion  of  Fossil  Mammals  from  Virgin  Vallev 
Nevada.  ^  ^ 

Urav.  Cal  Publ,  Bull  Dept.  Oeol.,  Vol.  5,  No.  15,  1908,  pp.  235-242. 
09    Notes  on  the  Fossil  Mammalian  Genus  Ptlloclus,  with  Descriptions 
of  New  Species.  ^ 

Proc.  U.  S.  Nat  Mus.,  Vol.  XXXVI,  June  19,  1909,  pp.  611-626. 
Gilbert,  G.  K.' 

'90    Lake  Bonneville. 

U.  S.  GeoL  Surv.  Monogr.,  I.    Washington,  1890 
mdo  ^"'^''^^'''^''^  ^^'^^'^  Arkansas  Valley  in  Eastern  Colo- 

U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  ITth  Ann.  Kept,  Pt.  2,  1896,  pp.  553-601. 

Gill,  T. 

75    Synopsis  of  Insectivorous  Mammals. 

Bull.  U.  S.  Geol.  and  Geog,  Surv.  Terr.,  No.  2,  1875,  pp.  91-120. 
Gilmore,  C.  W. 

vttltrat?  ^^^'^^      ^^^^'^^  «f  Pleistocene  Fossil 

^m^^ton^a^  Miscel  Coll.,  Part  of  Vol.  LI,  Washington,  1908. 
Grandidier,  G. 

'05    Recherches  sur  les  Lemuriens  Disparus  et  en  particulier  sur  ceux 
qui  vivaient  a  Madagascar. 

Extr.  Nouv.  Arch.  Mus.,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  VII,  Paris,  1905. 
Granger,  W. 

'08    A  Revision  of  the  American  Eocene  Horses 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIV,  Art.  xv,  1908,  pp.  221-224. 
09    Fauna  Horizons  of  the  Washakie  Formation  of  Southern  Wyoming 
Bull.  Amer,  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVI,  No.  3,  1909,  pp.  13-2g. 
Grant,  Madison. 

'02    The  Caribou. 

08    The  Rocky  Mountain  Goat. 

Ann.  Rept.  N.  Y.  Zool  Soc,  No.  9,  New  York,  1904,  pp.  230-261. 
Gregory,  J.  W. 

'95    Contributions  to  the  Palaeontology  and  Physical  Geology  of  the 
W  est  Indies. 

Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  Vol.  LI,  No.  22,  1895,  pp.  255-312. 
96    The  Great  Rift  Valley.    8vo,  London,  1896. 
Gregory,  W.  K. 

'10    The  Orders  of  Mammals. 

mill.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVII,  1910,  pp.  1-524. 


578 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Haacke,  W. 

'87    Der  Nordpol  als  Schopfungscentruni  der  Landfauna. 
Biol  Centralbi,  Vol.  6,  1886-1887,  pp.  363-370. 

Hall,  J.,  and  GUbert,  G.  K. 

'71    Notes  and  Observations  on  the  Cohoes  Mastodon. 

Notes  of  Investigations  at  Cohoes  with  Reference  to  the  Circum- 
stances of  the  Deposition  of  the  Skeleton  of  Mastodon. 
X.  Y.  State  Cab.  Xat.  Hist.,  21st  Ann.  Kept.,  1871,  pp.  99-148. 

Hann,  J. 

-03    Handbook  of  Climatology.   Pt.  I*  General  Climatology.   New  York, 
1903 

Harle,  E.,  and  Stehlin,  H.  G. 

'09    Une  Nouvelle  Faime  de  IVIammiferes  des  Phosphorites  du  Quercy. 
Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  IX,  1909,  pp.  39-52. 

Hatcher,  J.  B. 

'93    The  Titanotherium  Beds. 

Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XXVII,  Mar.  1893,  pp.  204-221. 
'94    On  a  Small  Collection  of  Vertebrate  Fossils  from  the  Loup  Fork 

Beds  of  Northwestern  Nebraska,  with  Note  on  the  Geology  of  the 

Pegion. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXVII,  Mar.,  1894,  pp.  236-248. 
*02    Discovery  of  a  ]Musk  Ox  Skull  {Ovibos  cavifrons  Leidy),  in  West 

Virginia,  near  Steubenville,  Ohio. 

Science,  n.s..  Vol.  XVI,  Oct.  31,  1902,  pp.  707-709. 
"02    Origin  of  the  Oligocene  and  Miocene  Deposits  of  the  Great  Plains. 

Proc.  Amer.  Fhilos.  Soc,  Vol.  41,  1902,  pp.  113-131. 
'02    Oligocene  Canidse. 

Mem.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  I,  Sept.,  1902. 

Haworth,  E. 

"97    Physical  Properties  of  the  Tertiary  (of  Kansas). 

Univ.  Geol  Surv.  Kansas,  Vol.  2,  1896,  pp.  247-281. 

Haworth,  E.,  and  Beede,  J.  W. 

'96    The  McPherson  Equus  Beds  (of  Kansas). 

Univ.  Geol  Surv.  Kansas,  Vol.  2,  1896  (1897),  pp.  287-296. 

Hay,  0.  P. 

'02    l^ibliography  and  Catalogue  of  the  Fossil  Vertebrata  of  North 
America. 

B»ll  US.  Geol  Surv.,  No.  179,  AVashington,  1902. 
'05    The  Fossil  Turtles  of  the  Bridger  Basin. 

Amer.  Geol,  Vol.  35,  June,  1905,  pp.  327-342. 
'08    The  Fossil  Turtles  of  North  America. 

Publ  Carneg.  Inst.,  Washington,  No.  75,  4to,  1908. 


APPENDIX 


579 


'09  The  Geological  and  Geographical  Distribution  of  Some  Pleistocene 
Mammals. 

Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XXX,  No.  781,  1909,  pp.  890-893. 
Hayden,  F.  V. 

'69    Preliminary  Field  Report  of  the  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  of  Col.  and 

Mex.  (separate),  Washington,  1869. 
'69    Eeport  of  the  Exploration  of  the  Yellowstone  and  Missouri  Eivers, 

by  F.  V.  Hayden,  assistant  to  Col.  William  F.  Raynolds,  U.S. 

Engineers.    Washington,  1869. 

Hedley,  C. 

'95    A  Zoogeographic  Scheme  for  the  Mid-Pacific. 

Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  N.  S.  Wales,  1899. 
'95    Considerations  on  the  Surviving  Refugees  in  Austral  Lands  of 

Ancient  Antarctic  Life. 

Proc.  Boy.  Soc.  N.  S.  Wales,  1895. 

Heer,  0. 

'53-'59    Flora  tertiaria  Helvetiee.    Winterthur,  1853-1859. 
'73    Die  Urwelt  der  Schweiz.    2d  ed.,  Zurich,  1873. 
'81    Contributions  a  la  Flore  Fossile  du  Portugal. 
Sect.  Trav.  Geol.  Portugal.    Lisbon,  1881. 

Hilber,  V. 

'97  Die  sarmatischen  Schichten  vom  Waldhof  bei  Wetzelsdorf,  Graz 
SW. 

Mitt.  Naturwiss.  Ver.  Steiermark,  Jahr.  1896,  No.  33,  Graz,  1897, 
pp.  182-204. 

Hill,  R.  T. 

'98  Geological  History  of  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  and  Portions  of 
Costa  Rica. 

Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.,  Vol.  XXVIII,  June,  1898,  pp.  270  fol. 
'99    Geological  Reconnoissance  of  Jamaica. 

Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool,  Vol.  XXXIV,  1899,  pp.  1-226. 

Hills,  R.  C. 

'88  Recently  Discovered  Tertiary  Beds  of  the  Huerfano  Basin.  Den- 
ver, 1888. 

Hofmann,  A. 

'93    Die  Fauna  von  Goriach, 

Ahhandl.  K.  K.  Geol.  Reichsanst.,  Vol.  XV,  No.  6,  Vienna,  1893. 

Holland,  W.  J. 

'08  A  Preliminary  Account  of  the  Pleistocene  Fauna  Discovered  in  a 
Cave  Opened  at  Frankstown,  Pennsylvania,  in  April  and  May,  1907. 
Ann.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  IV,  Nos.  Ill  and  IV,  1908. 


580 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Holmes,  F.  S. 

'58    Remains  of  Domestic  Animals  among  Post-Pliocene  Fossils  in 
South  Carolina. 

Anier.  Jour.  Scu,  Ser.  2,  Vol.  XXV,  1858,  pp.  442-443. 
'59    Keniarks  on  a  collection  of  fossils  from  the  Post-Pliocene  of  South 
Carolina. 

Proc.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.,  July  12,  1859,  pp.  177-185. 
Holmes,  W.  H. 

"01    Flint  Implements  and  Fossil  Remains  from  a  Sulphur  Spring  at 
Afton,  Indian  Territory. 

A,m.  Kept.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  1901,  pp.  233-252. 
'02    Fossil  Human  Remains  Found  near  Lansing,  Kansas. 

Amer.  AnthropoL,  n.s.,  Vol.  IV,  Oct.-Dec!,  1902. 
W    Articles :  "  Antiquity "  and  "  Calaveras  Skull "  in  Handbook  of 

American  Indians  North  of  Mexico,  ed.  by  Hodge,  F.  W. 

Smithson.  Inst.,  Bur.  Ethnol,  Bull.  30,  1907. 

Hornaday,  W.  T. 

"04    The  American  Natural  History.    New  York,  1904. 

Hrdlicka,  A. 

"07    Skeletal  Remains  Suggesting  or  Attributed  to  Early  Man  in  North. 
America. 

Sniithson.  Instit.,  Bur.  Ethnol.,  Bull.  33,  1907. 

Hue,  E. 

'08    Musee  Osteologique,    £tude  de  la  Faune  Quaternaire.  Osteome- 
trie  des  Mammiferes.    2  vols.,  Paris,  1908. 

Huxley,  T.  H. 

'98    Scientific  Memoirs.    4  vols.,  London,  1898. 

von  Ihering,  H. 

■91    On  the   Ancient  Relations   between  New  Zealand  and  South, 
America. 

Trans.  New  Zealand  Inst.,  Vol.  XXIV,  1891,  pp.  431-445. 
'00    The  History  of  the  Neotropical  Region. 

Science,  n.s..  Vol.  XII,  No.  310,  Dec.  7,  1900,  pp.  857-864. 
"06    The  Anthropology  of  the  State  of  S.  Paulo,  Brazil.  S.  Paulo,  1906. 

James.  J.  T. 

'95    Remarks   on  Daimonelix   or   ^  Devil's   Corkscrew,'   and  Allied 
Fossils. 

Amer.  Geol.,  Vol.  XV,  No.  6,  June,  1895,  pp.  337-342. 
Johannsen,  A. 

'10    Petrographic  Report  on  Rocks  Collected  by  Prof.  H.  F.  Osborn» 
In  Mss. 


APPENDIX 


581 


Johnson,  W.  D. 

'02    The  High  Plains  and  their  Utilization. 

U.S.  GeoL  Surv.,  22d  Ann.  Kept.,  Pt.  4,  1902,  pp.  631-669. 

Joly,  G. 

*99    The  Geological  Age  of  the  Earth,  as  Indicated  by  the  Sodium 
Content  of  the  Sea. 

Internat.  Congr.  jSci.,  June,  1900;  also  in  GeoL  Mag.,  Vol.  VII, 
Dec.  4,  1900,  et  seq. 

King,  C. 

78    Systematic  Geology. 

U.S.  Geol.  Explor.  40th  Parallel,  Clarence  King,  geologist  in 
charge,  1878. 

Kingsley,  J.  S. 

'84  The  Standard  Natural  History.  Vol.  V,  Mammals.  Boston,  1884. 
'85    The  Standard  Natural  History.    Vol.  IV,  Birds.    Boston,  1885. 

Kittl,  E. 

'87    Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  der  fossilen  Saugethiere  von  Maragha  in 
Persien.    I,  Carnivoren. 

Anji.  K.  K.  Natiirhist.  Hofmus.,  Vol.  II,  Vienna,  1887. 
^96    Fossile  Tapirreste  von  Biedermannsdorf. 

Ann.  K.  K.  Naturhist.  Hofmus.,  Vienna,  1896,  Notizen,  pp.  57-58. 

Knight,  W.  C. 

'99    Some  New  Data  for  Converting  Geological  Time  into  Years. 
Science,  n.s..  Vol.  X,  1899,  pp.  607-608. 

Knowlton,  F.  H. 

'93    Notes  on  a  Few  Fossil  Plants  from  the  Fort  Union  Group  of  Mon- 
tana, with  a  Description  of  one  New  Species. 
Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mas.,  Vol.  XVI,  1893,  pp.  33-36. 
'93    Fossil  Flora  of  Alaska. 

Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer.,  Vol.  5,  1893,  pp.  563-590. 
'93    Report  on  Fossil  Plants  from  near  Ellensburg,  Washington. 

Bvll.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  108,  Appendix,  pp.  103-104,  1893. 
'96    The  Tertiary  Floras  of  the  Yellowstone  National  Park. 

Amer.  Jour.  Set.,  Vol.  II,  pp.  51-58,  1896. 
'98    Report  on  the  Fossil  Plants  of  the  Payette  Formation. 

U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  18th  Ann.  Rept.,  1896-1897,  Pt.  Ill,  p.  735  fol., 
1898. 

'02    Fossil  Flora  of  the  John  Day  Basin,  Oregon. 

Bvll.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  204,  pp.  92-105,  1902. 
'04    Fossil  Plants  from  Kukak  Bay. 

Harrimayi  Alaska  Expedition,  Vol.  IV,  pp.  149-162,  1904. 


582 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


'09  The  Stratigraphic  Relations  and  Palaeontology  of  the  "  Hell  Creek 
Beds,"  "  Ceratops  Beds  "  and  Equivalents,  and  their  Reference  to 
the  Fort  Union  Formation. 

Proc.  Wash.  Acad.  Sci.,  Vol.  XI,  No.  3,  1909,  pp.  179-238. 

Knowlton,  F.  H.,  and  Stanton,  T.  W. 

'97  Stratigraphy  and  Palaeontology  of  the  Laramie  and  Related  Forma- 
tions in  Wyoming. 

Bnll.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer.,  Vol.  VIII,  pp.  127-156,  1897. 

Knowlton,  F.  H.,  and  Turner,  H.  W.,  and  Lucas,  F.  A. 

'00    The  Esmaralda  Formation,  a  Fresh-Water  Lake  Deposit  in  Nevada, 
by  H.  W.  Turner,  with  a  Description  of  the  Fossil  Plants,  by  F.  H. 
Knowlton,  and  of  a  Fossil  Fish,  by  F.  A.  Lucas. 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Extr.  XXI,  A^in.  Rept.,  pp.  210-220,  1899-1900. 

Kobelt,  W, 

'97-'98    Stndien  zur  Zoogeographie.    2  vols.,  Wiesbaden,  1897-1898. 

"02    Die  Verbreitung  der  Tierwelt.    Gemassigte  Zone.    Leipzig,  1902. 

Kowalewsky,  W. 

73    Monographie  der  Gattung  Anthracotheriuyn  Cuv.  und  Versuch  einer 
natiirlichen  Classification  der  fossilen  Hufthiere. 
Pahaontographica,  n.s.  II,  3  (XXII),  1873-1874. 

Lambe,  L.  M. 

'08  The  Vertebrataof  the  Oligocene  of  the  Cypress  Hills,  Saskatchewan. 
Canada  Dept.  Mines,  Contrib.  to  Canad.  Pala^ont.,  Vol.  Ill,  Ottawa, 
1908,  pp.  1-G5. 

Lamothe,  General  de 

'07  Le  Climat  de  PAfrique  du  Nord  pendant  le  Pliocene  superieur  et 
le  Pleistocene. 

Congr.  O^ol.  Intern.,  Sess.  X,  Mexico,  Vol.  I,  190G,  pp.  341-347 
(publ.  1907). 

de  Lapparent,  A. 

"85    Traite  de  Geologic.    Paris,  1906. 

Lartet,  E. 

'58  Sur  les  Migrations  Anciennes  des  Mammiferes  de  I'fipoque  Actuelle. 
C.R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Vol.  46,  1858. 

Leche.  W. 

■95-'07    Zur  Fntwicklungsgeschichte  des  Zahnsystems  der  Saugetiere. 
Clnui's  Zoologica,  Stuttgart,  1895-1907. 

Leidy,  J. 

"52  The  Ancient  Fauna  of  Nebraska  or  a  Description  of  Remains  of 
Extinct  Mammalia  and  Chelonia. 

Smithsort.  Contrib.  to  Knowledge,  Vol.  VI,  1852.  j 


APPENDIX 


583 


'69  The  Extinct  Mammalian  Fauna  of  Dakota  and  Nebraska,  Including 
an  Account  of  Some  Allied  Forms  from  Other  Localities,  together 
with  a  Synopsis  of  the  Mammalian  Remains  of  North  America. 
Philadelphia,  1869. 

'89    Description  of  Vertebrate  Eemains  from  Peace  Creek,  Florida. 

Trans.  Wagner  Free  Inst.  Set,  Phila.,  Vol.  II,  Dec,  1889,  pp.  19-32. 

Leidy,  J.  (Lucas,  F.  A.  ed.) 

'96    Fossil  Vertebrates  from  the  Alachua  Clays  of  Florida. 

Trans.  Wagner  Free  Inst.  Sci.,  Phila.,  Vol.  IV,  Jan.^  1896,  pp.  vii-xiv, 
15-61. 

Lemoine,  V. 

'80  Communication  sur  les  Ossements  Fossiles  des  Terrains  Tertiaires 
Inferieurs  des  Environs  de  Eeims. 

Assoc.  Franc.  Avanc.  Sci.,  sea.  29  aout,  1879.    Eeims,  1880. 
'88  (?)    Les  ]^tres  Infiniment  Petits  et  Infiniment  Anciens. 

Lepsius,  R. 

'92  Geologic  von  Deutschland  und  den  Angrenzenden  Gebieten.  Erster 
Teil.  Das  Westliche  und  Stidliche  Deutschland.  Stuttgart,  1887- 
1892. 

Lesquereux,  L. 

'59    On  Some  Fossil  Plants  of  Eecent  Formations. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.  Arts,  Ser.  2,  Vol.  XXVII,  May,  1859,  pp.  359-366. 
'82    Eeport  on  the  Fossil  Plants  of  the  Auriferous  Gravel  Deposits  of 

the  Sierra  Nevada. 

Mem.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.  Cambridge,  Mass.,  Vol.  II,  1882. 

Lesquereux,  L.,  and  Knowlton,  F.  H. 

'88  Eecent  Determinations  of  Fossil  Plants  from  Kentucky,  Louisiana, 
Oregon,  California,  Alaska,  Greenland,  etc.,  with  Descriptions  of 
New  Species.  (Compiled  and  prepared  for  publication  by  F.  H. 
Knowlton.) 

Froc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  1888,  pp.  11-38. 
Lindahl,  J. 

'91    Description  of  a  Skull  of  Megalonyx  Leidyi,  n.  sp. 

Trans.  Amer.  Fhilos.  Soc,  n.s..  Vol.  XVII,  1891,  pp.  1-10. 

Loomis,  F.  B. 

'04    Two  New  Eiver  Eeptiles  from  the  Titanothere  Beds. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Dec,  1904,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  18,  pp.  427^32. 
'05    Hyopsodidse  of  the  Wasatch  and  Wind  Eiver  Basins. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  XIX,  June,  1905,  pp.  416-424. 
'07    Origin  of  the  AVasatch  Deposits. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  May,  1907,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  23,  pp.  356-364. 
'07    Wasatch  and  Wind  Eiver  Eodents. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  XXIII,  Feb.,  1907,  pp.  123-130. 


584 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


08    Rhinocerotidae  of  the  Lower  Miocene. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sa'.,  Vol.  XXVI,  July,  1908,  pp.  51-64. 
'09    Turtles  from  the  Upper  Harrison  Beds. 

Amer.  Jour.  ^cL,  Vol.  XXVIII,  No.  163,  July,  1909,  pp.  17-26. 

Loudon,  J.  W. 

'55    Eiicyclopiedia  of  Plants.    New  ed.    London,  1855. 

Lucas.  F.  A. 

*99    The  Fossil  Bison  of  North  America. 

Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  Vol.  XXI,  No.  1172,  1899,  pp.  755-771. 
'00    The  Pelvic  Girdle  of  Zeuglodon,  Basilosaurus  Cetoides  (OweD)p 

with  Notes  on  Other  Portions  of  the  Skeleton. 

Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  Vol.  XXIII,  1900,  pp.  327-331. 
'01    Animals  of  the  Past.    New  York,  1901. 
'02    North  American  Elephantids. 

Science,  n.s..  Vol.  XV,  No.  379,  April  4,  1902,  pp.  554-555. 
'02  Animals  before  Man  in  North  America.  New  York,  1902. 
"08    (Notes  on  relative  height  of  Proboscidea.) 

Nature,  Sept.  10,  1908. 

Lund,  P.  W. 

'43    On  the  Occurrence  of  Fossil  Human  Bones  of  the  praehistorical 
world ;  extract  from  a  letter  from  Dr.  Lund  of  Lagoa  Santa,  South 
America,  transl.  and  communic.  by  E.  E.  Salisbury. 
Amer.  Jour.  Arts  Sci.,  Vol.  XLIV,  1843. 

Lydekker,  R. 

'86    The  Fauna  of  the  Karnul  Caves.   Indian  Tertiary  and  Post-tertiary 
Vertebrata. 

Pal.  Incl,  Mem.  Geol.  Snrv.  India,  Ser.  10,  Vol.  IV,  Pt.  2,  1886. 
'93    A  Study  of  the  Extinct  Ungulates  of  Argentina. 

Paleont.  Argentina,  11.    An.  del  Mus.  la  Plata,  1893. 
'96    A  Geographical  History  of  Mammals.  Cambridge,  1896,  pp.  1-400. 
'98    The  Deer  of  All  Lands.    London,  1898. 

'99    Wild  Oxen,  Sheep,  and  Goats  of  all  Lands,  Living  and  Extinct. 
London,  1899. 

The  New  Natural  History.    Vol.  I-III,  New  York. 

Lyell,  C. 

'39    The  Antiquity  of  Man.    London,  1839. 
MacCurdy,  G.  G 

'05    The  Eolithic  Problem.    Evidences  of  a  Kude  Industry  Antedating 
the  Paleolithic. 

Amer.  Anthropol.,  n.s..  Vol.  VII,  No.  3,  July-Sept.,  1905,  pp.  425- 
479. 

'09    Eolithic  and  Paleolithic  Man. 

Amer.  Anthrop.,  n.s.,  Vol.  XI,  No.  1,  Jan. -March,  1909,  pp.  92-100. 


APPENDIX 


585 


McClung,  C.  E. 

'08    Restoration  of  the  Skeleton  of  Bison  occidentalis. 

Kansas  Univ.  Sci.  Bull,  Vol.  IV,  No.  10,  Sept.,  1908,  pp.  249-254. 

Maddren,  A.  G. 

'05    Smithsonian  Exploration  in  Alaska  in  Search  of  Mammoth  and 
other  Fossil  Remains. 

Sinithso7i.  Miscel.  Coll,  Vol.  49,  1905,  pp.  5-117. 

Major,  Forsyth,  C.  J. 

'85    On  the  Mammalian  Fauna  of  the  Val  d'Arno. 

Quart.  Jour.  Geol  Soc.  London,  Vol.  XLI,  1885,  pp.  1-8. 
'87    Sur  un  gisement  d'ossements  fossiles  dans  I'ile  de  Samos,  contempo- 

rains  de  l'§,ge  de  Pikermi. 

C.R.  Acad.  Sd.  Paris,  1887,  p.  4. 
'91    Considerations  nouvelles  sur  la  faune  des  Vertebres  du  miocene 

superieur  dans  Pile  de  Samos. 

CM.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Nov.  2,  1891. 

Marsh,  0.  C. 

'74    Small  Size  of  the  Brain  in  Tertiary  Mammals. 
Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  VIII,  1874,  pp.  66-67. 

'76    Principal  Characters  of  the  Tillodontia. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  XI,  1876,  pp.  249-250. 

'77    Introduction  and  Succession  of  Vertebrate  Life  in  America. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  IX,  1877,  pp.  337-338 ;  also  in  Proc. 
Amer.  Ass.  Adv.  Sci.,  Nashville,  1877,  pp.  211-258. 

'84    Dinocerata.    A  Monograph  of  an  Extinct  Order  of  Gigantic  Mam- 
mals. 

Monog.  U.S.  Geol  Surv.,  Washington,  1884. 
'85    On  the  Size  of  the  Brain  in  Extinct  Animals. 

(Abstract  in)  Miture,  Vol.  32,  London,  1885,  p.  562. 
'88    Notice  of  a  New  Fossil  Sirenian  from  California. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  XXXV,  1888,  pp.  94-96. 

Matthew,  W.  D. 

'97    A  Revision  of  the  Puerco  Fauna. 

Bull  Amer.  Mus.  Nat  Hist,  Vol.  IX,  1897,  pp.  259-323. 
'99    A  Provisional  Classification  of  the  Fresh  Water  Tertiary  of  the 

West. 

Bull  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist,  Vol.  XII,  Art.  iii,  pp.  19-75.  New 

York,  March  31,  1899. 
'99    Is  the  White  River  Tertiary  an  Eolian  Formation  ? 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXXIII,  1899,  pp.  403-408. 
'99    The  Ancestry  of  Certain  Members  of  the  Canidse,  the  Viverridse, 

and  Procyonidse. 

Bull  Amer.  Mus.  Nat  Hist.,  Vol.  XII,  1899,  pp.  139-148. 


586 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


'01    Additional  Observations  on  the  Creodonta. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mas.  Nat.  Hist,  Vol.  XIV,  Art.  i,  pp.  1-38,  Jan.  31, 
1901. 

'01    Fossil  Mammals  of  the  Tertiary  of  Northeastern  Colorado. 

Mem.  Amer.  Mas.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  I,  Pt.  7,  Nov.,  1901. 
'02    List  of  the  Pleistocene  Fauna  from  Hay  Springs,  Nebraska. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XVI,  1902,  pp.  317-322. 
'02    A  Horned  Rodent  from  the  Colorado  ^Miocene.    With  a  Revision 

of  the  :\Iylagauli,  Beavers,  and  Hares  of  the  American  Tertiary. 

Ball.  A7)ier.  Mas.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XVI,  Art.  xxii,  Sept.  25,  1902. 
'02    The  Skull  of  Hypisodus,  the  Smallest  of  the  Artiodactyla,  with  a 

Revision  of  the  Hypertragulidae. 

Ball.  Amer.  Mas.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XVI,  Art.  xxiii,  pp.  311-316, 

Sept.  25,  1902. 
'03    The  Fauna  of  the  Titanotherium  Beds. 

Bull.  Amer.  Ma^.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIX,  1903,  pp.  197-226. 
'04    A  Complete  Skeleton  of  Merycodas. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XX,  1904,  pp.  101-129. 
'04    Notice  of  Two  New  Oligocene  Camels. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XX,  1904,  pp.  211-215. 
'04    The  Arboreal  Ancestry  of  the  Mammalia. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXXVIII,  Nos.  445-446,  Nov.-Dec,  1904. 
'06    Hypothetical  Outlines  of  the  Continents  in  Tertiary  Times. 

Ball.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXII,  Art.  xxi,  pp.  353-383, 

Oct.  25,  1906. 
'07    A  Lower  Miocene  Fauna  from  South  Dakota. 

Ball  Amer.  Mas.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIII,  1907,  pp.  169-219. 
'08    Osteology  of  Blastomeryx  and  Phylogeny  of  the  American  Cervidae. 

Ball  Amer.  Mus.  Nat  Hist,  Vol.  XXIV,  Art.  xxvii,  pp.  535-562, 

June  30,  1908. 
'09    Observations  upon  the  Genus  Ancodon. 

Bull  Amer.  Mas.  Nat  Hist,  Vol.  XXVI,  Art.  1,  Jan.  5,  1909, 

pp.  1-7. 

'09    The  Carnivora  and  Insectivora  of  the  Bridger  Basin,  Middle  Eocene. 
Mem.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat  Hist.,  Vol.  IX,  Pt.  VI,  1909. 

Matthew,  W.  D.,  and  Gidley,  J.  W. 

'04    New  or  Little-known  ^[ammals  from  the  ^Miocene  of  South  Dakota. 
Bull  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist,  Vol.  XX,  1904,  pp.  241-271. 

Matthew,  W.  D.,  and  Cook,  H.  J. 

'09    A  Pliocene  Fauna  from  Western  Nebraska. 

Bull  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVI,  No.  27,  1909. 

Mayer-Eymar,  C. 

*89    Tableau  des  Terrains  de  Sediment. 

S(,r.  His.  Nat.  Croatica.    1899,  pp.  1-35.    Zagreb  (Agram). 


APPENDIX 


587 


Mayet,  L. 

'08    Etude  des  Mammiferes  Miocenes  des  Sables  de  POrleanais  et  des 
Faluns  de  la  Touraine. 

An7L  Univ.  Lyon,  n.s.,  1,  Sci.  Me'd.,  fasc.  24,  1908. 
Mercer,  H.  C. 

'95    The  Antiquity  of  Man  at  Petit  Anse  (Avery's  Island),  Louisiana. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXIX,  No.  340,  April,  1895,  pp.  393-394. 
'96    Cave  Exploration  by  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  Tennessee. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXX,  No.  355,  July,  1896,  pp.  608-611. 
'96    Cave  Exploration  in  the  Eastern  United  States.  Preliminary 

Report. 

Dept.  Amer.  Prehist.  Archceol  Univ.  Fa.,  1896. 
'97    The  Antiquity  of  Man  in  the  Delaware  Valley. 

Repr.from  Publ  Univ.  Pa.,  Vol.  VI,  1897,  pp.  1-85. 
'99    The  Bone  Cave  at  Port  Kennedy,  Pa. 

Jour.  Acad.  Nat.  ^ci.,  Phila.,  Vol.  11,  1899,  Pt.  2. 

Merriam,  C.  H. 

'92    The  Geographical  Distribution  of  Life  in  North  America,  with 

Special  Reference  to  the  Mammalia. 

Proc.  Biol  Soc,  Washington,  Vol.  VII,  April  13,  1892. 
'98    Life  Zones  and  Crop  Zones  of  the  United  States. 

Bidl  Biol  Surv.,  No.  10,  1898. 
'04    Laws  of  Temperature  Control  of  the  Geographic  Distribution  of 

Terrestrial  Animals  and  Plants. 

Nat  Geog.  Mag.,  1904,  pp.  229-238. 

Merriam,  J.  C. 

'01    A  Contribution  to  the  Geology  of  the  John  Day  Basin. 

Univ.  Cal  Piihl,  Bull  DejJl  Geol,  Vol.  II,  1901. 
'06    Carnivora  from  the  Tertiary  of  the  John  Day  Region. 

Univ.  Cal  Publ,  Bull  Dept.  Geol,  Vol.  V,  No.  1,  1906,  pp.  1-64. 
'06    Recent  Cave  Exploration  in  California. 

Amer.  Anthropol,  n.s.,  Vol.  8,  1906,  pp.  221-228. 
'06    Recent  Discoveries  of  Quaternary  Mammals  in  Southern  California. 

Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XXIV,  No.  608,  Aug.  24,  1906,  pp.  248-250. 
'09    The  Skull  and  Dentition  of  an  Extinct  Cat  Closely  Allied  to  Felis 

atrox  Leidy. 

Univ.  Cal  Publ,  Bull  Dept.  Geol,  Vol.  V,  No.  20,  Aug.,  1909,  pp. 
291-304. 

'09    The  Occurrence  of  Strepsicerine  Antelopes  in  the  Tertiary  of 
Northwestern  Nevada. 

Univ.  Cal  Publ,  Bull  Dept  Geol,  Vol.  V,  No.  22,  pp.  319-330. 
Merriam,  J.  C,  and  Sinclair,  W.  J. 

'07    Tertiary  Faunas  of  the  John  Day  Region. 

Univ.  Cal  Publ,  Bull  Dept.  Geol,  Vol.  V,  No  11,  1907,  pp.  171-205. 


588 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


MUler,  G.  S. 

07    The  Families  and  Genera  of  Bats. 

Smithso7i.  List.,  U.S.  Nat.  j\Ius.,  Bull.  57,  1907. 

Miller,  L.  H. 

'09    Pavo  calif  or  nicus,  a  Fossil  Peacock  from  the  Quaternary  Asphalt 
Beds  of  Rancho  La  Brea. 

Univ.  Cal.  Publ,  Bull.  Dept.  Geol,  Vol.  V,  No.  19,  1909,  pp.  285-289. 
'09    Teratornis,  a  New  Avian  Genus  from  Rancho  La  Brea. 

Univ.  Cal.  Publ,  Bull.  Dept.  Geol,  Vol.  V,  No.  21,  Sept.,  1909, 
pp.  305-317. 

Milne  Edwards,  A. 

"69-'71  Recherches  Anatomiques  et  Paleontologiques  pour  servir  a 
I'Histoire  des  Oiseaux  Fossiles  de  la  France.  4to,  Paris,  18G9- 
1871. 

de  Mortillet,  A. 

"08    La  Classification  Palethnologique.    Paris,  1908. 

Murray,  A. 

'66    The  Geographical  Distribution  of  Mammals.    London,  1866. 
Nehring,  A. 

'80    Ubersicht  tiber  vierundzwanzig  mitteleuropaische  Quartar-Faunen. 

Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1880,  pp.  468-509. 
'90    Uber  Tundren  und  Steppen  der  Jetzt-  und  Vor-Zeit,  mit  besonderer 

Beriicksichtigung  ihrer  Fauna.  Berlin,  1890. 
'96    Die  kleineren  Wirbeltiere  vom  Schweizersbild  bei  Schaffhausen. 

Neue  Denkschri/L  allg.  schiveiz.  Gesell  gesam.  Naturwiss. ,Yo\.  XXXV, 

1896,  pp.  40-77. 

Newberry,  J.  S.,  and  HoUick,  A. 

'98    The  Later  Extinct  Floras  of  North  America.    Ed.  by  Hollick. 
U.S.  Geol  Surv.,  Vol.  XXXV,  1898. 

Newton,  E.  T. 

"80    Notes  on  the  Vertebrata  of  the  pre-Glacial  Forest  Bed  Series  of 
the  East  of  England. 

Geol.  Mag.,  Vol.  VII,  1880,  Pt.  1,  Carnivora,  pp.  152-155 ;  Pt.  2, 
Carnivora,  pp.  424-427 ;  Pt.  3,  Ungulata,  pp.  447-452. 
'90    On  Some  New  Mammals  from  the  Red  and  Norwich  Crags. 
Qncrrf.  Jour.  Geol  Soc,  Vol.  XLVI,  Aug.,  1890,  pp.  444-453. 

Newton,  A.,  and  Gadow,  H. 

*93-"96    A  Dictionary  of  Birds.    London,  1893-1896. 
Nicholson.  H.  A. 

79    A  Manual  of  Palaeontology.    Edinburgh  and  London,  1879. 


APPENDIX  ^gg 

Nordenskidld,  A.  E. 

^eviewTp"'       ""7"  ''"^"P^'  -''I^  =^  Historical 

Keview  of  Previous  Journeys  along  the  North  Coast  of  the  Old 

World.    Translated  by  Alexander  Leslie.    New  York,  1882. 
Ifuesch,  J.  ' 

'04    Das  Kesslerlooh,  eine  Hohle  aus  palaolithisoher  Zeit.    Neue  Gra 
bungen  und  Funde.  ^ 

Neue  BeMr.  allg  scUweiz.  Ges.  gesam.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XXXIX, 
rl.  z,  iyo4,  pjj.  1-72.  ' 

Oldham,  R.  D. 

'93    A  Manual  of  the  Geology  of  India.    Calcutta,  1893. 
Ortmann,  A.  E. 

Proc.  ^mer.  PAzYos.  Soc,  Vol.  XLI,  1902. 
Osborn,  H.  F. 

^t^^^z^:"-  ^--^ 

'88    The  Structure  and  Classification  of  the  Mesozoic  Mammalia. 

iT'^  PP-  186-265. 

89    The  Mammalia  of  the  Uinta  Formation  (Parts  i  and  ii,  Scott 
.    Parts  ni  and  ly,  Osborn),  iii.    The  Perissodactyla.    iv  Tl  e  Evo 
lution  of  the  Ungulate  Foot  ' 

pTsOsir  1889, 

'90    A  Review  of  the  Cernaysian  Mammalia.    Upon  the  Collection  of 

M.  Lemouie,  Eheims,  France. 

Proc.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phila.,  1890,  pp.  51-62 
92    PalwonicUs  in  the  American  Lower  Eocene 

Nahire,  Vol.  XLVI,  1892,  p  30 

raiy  Evolution  ot  Man.    2.  Difficulties  in  the  Heredity  Theory 
3.  Heredity  and  the  Germ  Cells.  ^ 
N  Y.  Medical  Record,  Vol.  20,  Mar.  5  and  Apr.  23  1892 
Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXVI,  1892,  pp.  455,  537,  642.  ' 
»J    Ihe  Ancylopoda,  Chalicotherhm  and  Artionyx. 

m   ;^r'"^^"'T'-'  ^'^•'  XXV"'  PP-  118-133. 

9J    The  Rise  of  the  Mammalia  in  North  America 

Proc.  Amer.  Msoc.  Adv.  Sci.,  1894,  pp.  188-227. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Nov.  and  Dec,  1893. 


590  THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 

'93    Fossil  Mammals  of  the  Upper  Cretaceous. 

Ball  Anier.  Mas.  J^at.  Hist.,  Vol.  V,  Art.  XVII,  Dec.  20,  1893,  pp. 
311-;330. 

'94  A  Division  of  the  Eiitherian  Mammals  into  the  Mesoplacentalia 
and  Cenoplacentalia  [terms  subsequently  altered  to  Meseutheria 
and  Ceneutheria]. 

Tmns.  N.  Y.  Acad.  Scl,  June  4,  1894,  pp.  234-237. 
'94    Fossil  Mammals  of  the  Lower  Miocene  White  Kiver  Beds ;  Collec- 
tion of  1892. 

Bnll.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  VI,  1894,  pp.  199-228. 
'97    The  Huerfano  Lake  Basin,  Southern  Colorado,  and  its  Wind  Eiver 
and  Bridger  Fauna. 

Ball.  Amer.  Mas.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  IX,  1897,  pp.  247-258. 
"98    Kemounted  Skeleton  of  Phenacodus  primcevus.    Comparison  with 
Eaprotogonia. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  X,  No.  IX,  May,  1898,  pp.  159-105. 
"98    Evolution  of  the  Amblypoda,  Ft.  I,  Taligrada  and  Pantodonta. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  X,  Art.  xi,  June,  1898,  pp.  169— 
218. 

'98    On  PlioUyrax  Kruppi  Osborn,  a  Fossil  Hyracoid,  from  Samos,. 

Lower  Pliocene,  in  the  Stuttgart  Collection. 

Proc.  Intern.  Cong.  Zo'Ol.,  Cambridge,  1898,  p.  172,  PI.  2. 
'99    Frontal  Horn  on  Aceratherium  indsivum.    Relation  of  the  Type  to 

Elasniotherium. 

Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  IX,  No.  214,  Feb.,  1899,  pp.  161-162. 

'99    The  Origin  of  Mammals. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  VII,  Feb.,  1899. 

'00  Correlation  Between  Tertiary  Mammal  Horizons  of  Europe  and 
America.  Preliminary  Study  with  Third  Trial  Sheet;  Pt.  I, 
Presid.  Addr.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.,  Feb.  27,  1899;  Pt.  II,  Faunal 
Relations  of  Europe  and  America  during  the  Tertiary  Period  and 
Theory  of  the  Successive  Invasions  of  an  African  Fauna  into 
Europe.  Presid.  Addr.,  Feb.  26,  1900. 
Ann.  N  Y.  Acad.  Sci.,  Vol.  XIII,  No.  1,  1900,  pp.  1-72. 

'00    The  Geological  and  Faunal  Relations  of  Europe  and  America 
during  the  Tertiary  Period  and  the  Theory  of  the  Successive 
Invasions  of  an  African  Fauna. 
Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XI,  Apr.  13,  1900,  pp.  561-574. 

'00  Phylogeny  of  the  Rhinoceroses  of  Europe.  Rhinoceros  Contribu- 
tions, No.  5. 

Bull  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XIII,  Art.  xix,  Dec.  11,  1900, 
pp.  229-268. 

'01    Professor  Fraas  on  the  aqueous  vs.  eolian  deposition  of  the  White 
River  Oligocene  of  South  Dakota. 
Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XIV,  1901,  pp.  210-212. 


APPENDIX  ggj 

'02    The  Law  of  Adaptive  Radiation. 

Mner  Natural.,  Vol.  XXXIV,  1902,  pp.  353-563. 
02    Dohcl^ocephaly  and  Brachycephaly  in  the  Lower  Mammals. 

"i'rr^tt  iSLf"'  ^'  PP- 

^02    The  Four  Phyla  of  Oligoceue  Titanotheres. 

pfw       """"       "^'^  ''''''      ''''  1^^^^ 

^02    The  Perissodactyls  typically  polyphyletic. 
Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XVI,  1902,  p.  715 

MirtLf"^^"^  ''"■""'^^  ^"^'P-^  ^^'l-t  family 

BuU.^Aner.  Mus.  NaZ.  Hist,  Vol.  XVI,  Art.  xvii,  June,  1902,  pp. 

iTZlT'r'T^l-  (^^^■"-'^aW^^ew  Mammal  fro,n  Japan 
Eocene  s     '  "''     J""'  Caafornian  Genus  Z>m„o.^^^««  Marsh 

sU  Horses.    The  Perissodactyls  typically  Polyphyletic.) 
^c*e»ce,  n.s.,  Vol.  XVI,  Oct.  31,  1902,  pp.  713-715. 
03    Evolution  of  the  Proboscidea  in  North  America 
Science,  n.s..  Vol.  XVII,  Feb.  13,  1903,  p  249 

2f  oTSl'^"'""'  ^  '"^^  P'ei^to- 

Hist,  Vol.  XIX,  Aug.  17,  1903,  pp.  491-494 
id     0  J  r^""  ?  Paleontology  of' North  Am't 

m  !  ^<"*?-/«««'^-  ^"o^-,  session  de  Berne,  1904,  pn  8(;- 

1905,  p;.T9-229  ''^  ^^^VI, 

'04         ArinadiUo  from  the  Middle  Eocene  (Bridger)  of  North  America 

'04    J     or'-      t"""*-  ^^'  May  10,  1904 

04    New  Ohgocene  Horses. 

Amer.  Mas.  Nat  Hist,  Vol.  XX,  May,  1904,  pp.  167-179 
04    New  Miocene  Rhinoceroses  with  Revision  of  Kn;''  Specie 

Z^:;^^  «ept. 
L'lrr'r!,'''^' °'  I'-'''0"tology  (Am-ess  before  Section  of 

5  S,tt  Lonrs7'*"''"'*"^  "'"^ 
'06    The  Causes  of  Extinction  of  Mammalia 

.irBerSpr82?i5^^^       -  — = 

The  American  Museum  Expedition  to  the  Fayum  Desert. 
TTie  Nation,  Vol.  84,  No.  2177,  March  21,  1907,  pp.  271-272 
Hunting  the  Ancestral  Elephant  in  the  Fayum  Desert 
Century  Magazine,  Vol.  LXXIV,  Oct.,  1907,  pp.  815-835 


07 
'07 


592 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


'07    Tertiary  Mamnial  Horizons  of  North  America. 

Bull.  Anier.  Mas.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIII,  Art.  xi,  Mar.  30,  1907, 
pp.  237-253. 

'07  A  ^[ounted  Skeleton  of  the  Columbian  Mammoth  (Elephas  colnmbi). 
Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Xat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIII,  Art.  xii.  Mar.  30,  1907, 
pp.  255-257. 

'07    Evolution  of  Mammalian  Molar  Teeth  (ed.  by  W.  K.  Gregory). 

New  York,  1907. 
'08    New  Fossil  Mammals  from  the  Fayum  Oligocene,  Egypt. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXIV,  Art.  xvi.  Mar.  25,  1908, 

pp.  205-272. 

'09  Cenozoic  IMammal  Horizons  of  Western  North  America,  with 
Faunal  Lists  of  the  Tertiary  Mammalia  of  the  West  by  W.  D. 
Matthew. 

U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Bull.  361,  Washington,  1909,  pp.  1-138. 
'09    New  Carnivorous  Mammals  from  the  Fayum  Oligocene,  Egypt. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVI,  Art.  xxviii,  Sept.,  1909, 
pp.  415-424. 

Osborn,  H.  F.,  and  Earle,  C. 

"95    Fossil  Mammals  of  the  Puerco  Beds.    Collection  of  1892. 
Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  VII,  Art.  1,  Feb.,  1895. 

Osborn,  H.  F.,  and  Wortman,  J.  L. 

'92  Fossil  ]\Iammals  of  the  Wasatch  and  Wind  River  Beds ;  collection 
of  1891. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  4,  1892,  pp.  81-147. 

Owen,  R. 

'60    Palaeontology  or  a  Systematic  Summary  of  Extinct  Animals  and 

their  Geological  Relations.    Edinburgh,  1860. 
'71    Monograph  of  the  Fossil  Mammalia  of  the  Mesozoic  Formations. 

Monogr.  Paloiont.  Soc,  1871. 
'75    On  Prorastomus  sirenoides. 

Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  London,  Vol.  XXXI,  1875,  pp.  559-567. 
Palacky,  J. 

'03    Die  Verbreitung  der  Ungulaten. 

Zoftl.  Jahrb.,  Aht.  Syst.,  Geog.,  Biol.  (J.  W.  Spengel  in  Giessen), 

Vol.  XVIII,  No.  2,  1903. 
Pallary,  P. 

"GO    Note  sur  la  Girafe  et  le  Chameau  du  Quaternaire  Algerien. 
Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  28,  1900,  pp.  908-909. 
Palmer,  T.  S. 

'04  Index  Generum  Mammalium.  A  List  of  the  Genera  and  Families 
of  Mammals. 

U.S.  Dept.  Agric,  Divis.  Biol.  Surv.,  N.A.  Fauna,  No.  23,  Wash- 
ington, 1904. 


APPENDIX  593 

Penck,  A. 

'96    Die  Glacialbildungen  urn  Schaffhaiisen  und  ihre  Beziehungen  zu  den 
praihistorischen  8tationen  des  Schweizersbildes  und  von  Thayngen 
Neue  Denkschr.  ally,  schweiz.  Ges.  gesam.  Naturwiss.,  Vol  XXXV 
1896,  pp.  155-179. 

'04    Die  alpinen  Eiszeitbildungen  und  der  prahistorische  Mensch 
Arch.  AnthropoL,  n.s.,  Vol.  I,  No.  8,  1904. 

'08    Das  Alter  des  Menscliengeschlechtes. 

Zeitschr.  Ethnol,  No.  3,  1908,  pp.  390-407 

fl  t^lllf''  Washington  Acad.  Sci., 

^We^  (abstract),  n.s..  Vol.  XXIX,  No.  739,  Feb.  26,  1909,  pp. 

Penhallow,  D.  P. 

'07    Contributions  to  the  Pleistocene  Flora  of  Canada 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XLI,  No.  487,  June,  1907,  pp.  443-452. 
Peterson,  0.  A. 

'04    Osteology  of  O^^c^ac^^//^^^    A  New  Genus  of  Camels  from  the  Loup 

-bork  of  Nebraska,  with  Descriptions  of  Two  New  Species 

Ann.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  2,  No.  3,  Feb.,  1904. 
'05    Description  of  New  Kodents  and  Discussion  of  the  Orimn  of 

Dcemonelix.  ^ 

Mem.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  II,  1905,  pp.  139-191. 
'06    New  Suilline  Eemains  from  t,he  Miocene  of  Nebraska 

Mem.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  II,  No.  8,  1906,  pp.  305-320* 
'06    The  Agate  Spring  Fossil  Quarry. 

Ann.  Carneg.  Mus.,  Vol.  Ill,  No.  4,  1906,  pp.  487-494. 
'07    Preliminary  Notes  on  some  American  Clialicotheres. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XLI,  1907,  pp.  733-752. 
'08    Description  of  the  Type  Specimen  of  Stenomylus  gracilis  Peterson 

Ann.  Carneg.  3fus.,  Vol.  IV,  Nos.  3  and  4,  1908. 
'09    A  "Revision  of  the  Entelodontidse. 

Mem.  Carneg.  Mas.,  Vol.  IV,  No.  3,  May,  1909,  pp.  41-158. 
Pilgrim,  G.  E. 

'07    Description  of  Some  New  Snidae  from  the  Bugti  Hills,  Baluchistan 
Mec.  Geol.  Sarv.,  India,  Vol.  XXXVI,  Pt.  1,  Nov.,  1907,  pp.  45-56. 
Pohlig,  H. 

'84    Vorlaufige  Mittheilungen  ilber  das  Plistoc^en,  insbesondere  Thli- 


'88 


Sitznngsber.  Niederrhein.  Ges.  Bonn,  Mar.  S,  1884,  pp.  2-15. 
Dentition  und  Kranologie  des  Elephas  antiquus  Falc.  mit  Beitragen 
uber  Elephas  primigenius  Blum,  und  Elephas  meridionalis  Nesti. 
Nov.  Act.  Ksl.  Leop.-Carol.  Deutsch.  Akad.  Naturforsch.,  Vol  LIII 
Ko.  1,  Halle,  1888.  ' 


594 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


'92    Die  Cerviden  des  tliiiringisclien  Diluvialtravertines  mit  Beitragen 
liber  andere  diluviale  uiid  liber  recente  Hirschformeii. 
Faluontographica,  Vol.  39,  1892,  pp.  215-262. 

'93    Eine  Elepliaiitenhohle  Siciliens  uud  der  erste  Nachweis  des  Cranial- 
domes  von  Elephas  antiquus. 

AbhamU.  kdnigl.  hayer.  Akad.  WissenscJi.,  Mlinchen,  1893,  pp.  37  fol. 
'05    Die  Eiszeiten  in  den  Rheinlanden. 

Zeitschr.  deutsch.  yeol  GeselL,  Vol.  57,  No.  3,  1905,  pp.  243-254. 
'07    Eiszeit  imd  Urgeschichte  des  Menschen.    Leipzig,  1907. 
'09    tiber  Elphas  trongontherii  in  England. 

Monatsber.  Deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  Vol.  61,  1909,  i^o.  5,  pp.  242-249. 

Pomel,  A. 

'93    Cameliens  et  Cervides. 

Carte  G^ol.  Alg^rie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1893. 
'93    Bubalus  antiquus. 

Carte  Giol.  Algerie,  PaUont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1893. 
'94    Les  Boeiifs-taureaux. 

Carte  Geol.  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1894. 
'94    Les  Boselaphes  Hay. 

Carte  G4ol.  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1894. 
'95    Les  Elephants  Quaternaires. 

Carte  Geol.  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1895. 
'95    Les  Antilopes  Pallas. 

Carte  Geol.  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monog7'.,  Algiers,  1895. 
'95    Les  Rhinoceros  Quaternaires. 

Carte  Geol.  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1895. 
'96    Les  Hippopotames. 

Carte  Geol  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1896. 
'97    Les  Equides. 

Carte  Geol.  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1897. 
'97    Les  ('arnassiers. 

Carte  Geol.  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1897. 
'97    Singe  et  Homme. 

Carte  Geol.  Algerie,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1897. 
'97    Les  Suilliens.  Porciens. 

Carte  Geol.  AlgeHe,  Paleont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1897. 
'98    Les  Ovides.  , 

Carte  Geol.  Algerie,  PaUont.  Monogr.,  Algiers,  1898. 

Poulton,  E.  B. 

'96    A  Naturalist's  Contribution  to  the  Discussion  upon  the  Age  of  the 
Earth. 

Trans.  (Sect.  Zo'Ol.)  Brit.  Ass.  Adv.  Set.,  Liverpool,  1896. 

Prichard,  H.  H. 

02    Through  the  Heart  of  Patagonia.    New  York,  1902. 


APPENDIX 


595 


Putnam,  F.  W. 

"85    Man  and  the  Mastodon. 

Scieiice,  Vol.  VI,  No.  143,  1885,  pp.  375-376. 
'05    Evidence  of  the  Work  of  Man  on  Objects  from  Quaternary  Caves 

in  California. 

Amer.  Anthrop.,  n.s.,  Vol.  8,  1905,  pp.  229-235. 

Quackenbush,  L.  S. 

"09    Notes  on  Alaskan  Mammoth  Expeditions  of  1907  and  1908. 

Bull  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XXVI,  Art.  ix,  Mar.  24,  1909, 
pp.  87-130. 

Reid,  C. 

'99    The  Origin  of  the  British  Flora.    London,  1899. 

Reid  C,  and  Reid,  E.  M. 

'08    The  P]'e-Glacial  Flora  of  Britain. 

Jour.  Linnean  Soc,  Botany,  Vol.  XXXVIII,  Jan.,  1908,  pp.  206-227. 

Renshaw,  G. 

'04    Natural  History  Essays.    London,  1904. 

*05    More  Natural  History  Essays.    London,  1905. 

Rodler,  A.,  and  Weithofer,  K.  A. 

'90    Die  Wiederkauer  der  Fauna  von  Maragha. 

Kais.  Akad.  Wiss.,  Math-Naturwiss.  Classe,  Vol.  LVII,  Vienna, 
1890. 

Roger,  0. 

'98    Wirbelthierreste  aus  dem  Dinotheriensande  der  bayerisch-schwa- 
bischen  Hochebene. 

Ber.  Natiirwiss.  Ver.  Scliwaben  u.  Neuhurg  in  Augsbiirg,  No.  33, 1898. 
'02    Wirbeltierreste  aus  dem  Obermiocan  der  bayerisch-schwabischen 
Hochebene.    IV  Teil. 

Ber.  Natxrwiss.  Ver.  Scliwaben  u.  Neuhurg  in  Augsburg,  No.  35, 1902. 
'04    Wirbeltierreste  aus  dem  Obermiocan  der  bayerisch-schwabischen 
Hochebene.    V.  Teil. 

Ber.  Naturwiss.  Ver.  Sohwahenu.  Neuhurg  in  Augsburg,  No.  36,  1904. 

Roman,  F. 

'09    Sur  un  Crane  de  Khinoceros  conserve  au  Musee  de  Nerac  (Lot-et- 
Garonne).    (Rhinoceros  [Ceratorhinus']  sansaniensis  Lartet.) 
Soc.  Linneenne  Lyon,  sea.  8  Mars,  1909,  Lyons,  1909. 

Roman,  F.,  and  Fliche,  M. 

'07    Le  Neogene  Continental  dans  la  Basse  Vallee  du  Tage  (Rive  Droite.) 
lere  Partie.  Paleontologie. 
Commis.  Serv.  Geol.  Portugal,  Lisbon,  1907. 


596 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Russell,  I.  C. 

'85    Geological  History  of  Lake  Lahontan,  a  Quaternary  Lake  of  North- 
western Nevada. 

U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Monogr.,  Vol.  XI,  1885. 
'97    Volcanoes  of  North  America.    New  York,  1897. 

Riitimeyer,  L. 

'62    Die  Fauna  der  Pfahlbauten  der  Schweiz. 

Neue  Deiikschr.  ally,  schiceiz.  Gesell.  gesam.  Natwrwiss.,  Vol.  XIX, 
Zurich,  18G2. 

'63    Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  der  Fossilen  Pferde  und  zu  einer  vergleicheu- 

den  Odontographie  der  Hufthiere  ini  Allgemeinen. 

Verh.  naturf.  Ges.  Basel,  Vol.  Ill,  No.  4,  18G3. 
'67    Ueber  die  Herkunft  unserer  Thierwelt.     Eine  Zoogeographische 

Skizze.    Basel  and  Geneva,  1867. 
'88    Ueber  einige  Beziehungen  zwischen  den  Saugethierstammen  Alter 

uhd  Neuer  Welt,  Erster  Nachtrag. 

Abhand.  schiceiz.  pal.  Ges.  Vol.  XV,  pp.  1-151,  Zurich,  1888. 
'91    Die  I^ocane  Saugethier-Welt  von  Egerkingen. 

Abhandl.  schweiz.  paldontol.  Gesell.,  Vol.  XVIII,  Zurich,  1891. 

Rutot,  A. 

"81    Sur  la  Position  Stratigraphique  des  Eestes  de  Mammiferes  Ter- 

restres  Recueillis  dans  les  Couches  de  I'Eocene  de  Belgique. 

Bull.  Acad.  Roy.  Belgique,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  I,  No.  4,  1881. 
'00    Sur  I'homrae  prequaternaire. 

Bull.  Mem.  Soc.  AntliropoL  Bruxelles,  Vol.  XIX,  1900. 
'02    Les  industries  primitives.    Defense  des   eolitlies.    Les  actions 

naturelles  possibles  sont  inaptes  a  produire  des  effets  semblables  a 

la  retouche  intentionelle. 

Bull.  Mem.  Soc.  Anthropol.  Bruxelles,  Vol.  XX,  Mem.  Ill,  1902. 
'03    L'etat  actuel  de  la  question  de  I'antiquite  de  I'homme. 

Bull.  Soc.  Beige  Geol.  Paleontol,  Hydrol,  Vol.  XVII,  1903,  p.  57. 

Salensky,  W. 

'04    Uber  die  Hauptresultate  der  Erforschung  des  im  Jahre  1901  am 
Ufer  der  Beresowka  entdeckten  mannlichen  Mammutcadavers. 
C.R.  Sea.  Six.  Cougr.,  Internal.  ZooL,  Berne,  1904,  pp.  67-86. 

de  Saporta,  G. 

'67    La  Flore  des  Tufs  Quaternaires  en  Provence. 

Extr.  Comptes  Bend.  Sess.  du  Congr.  Sci.  Fr.,  Aix,  1867,  pp.  21-32. 
'67    AperQU  sur  la  Flore  de  I'Epoque  Quaternaire. 

Extr.  Ann.  Inst.  Prov.,  Caen,  1867. 
'67    Sur  la  Temperature  des  Temps  Geologiques,  d'apres  des  Indices  tires 

de  rObservation  des  Plantes  Fossiles. 

Arch.  Sci.  Bihl.  Univ.,  Fevr.  1867,  pp.  46-47. 


APPENDIX 


597 


'79    Le  inonde  des  Plantes  avant  I'apparition  de  I'homme.  Paris, 
1879. 

Scharff,  R.  F. 

'97    On  the  Origin  of  the  European  Paima. 

Proc.  Roy.  Irish  Acad.,  Ser.  3,  Vol.  IV,  1897. 
'99    The  History  of  the  European  Fauna.    London,  1899. 
'07    European  Animals :  their  Geological  History  and  Geographical 

Distribution.    New  York,  1907. 
'09    On  an  Early  Tertiary  Land-Connection  between  North  and  South 

America. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XLIII,  Sept.,  1909,  pp.  513-531. 
'09    On  the  Evidence  of  a  Former  Land-Bridge  between  Northern  Europe 
and  North  America. 

Proc.  Roy.  Irish  Acad.,Yo\.  XXVIII,  Sect.  B,  No.  1,  Nov.,  1909,  pp. 
1-28. 

Schimper,  W.  P.,  and  Schenk,  A. 

'90    Handbuch  der  Palseontologie  herausgegeben  von  K.  A.  Zittel.  II 
Abtheilung,  Palseophytologie,  Munich,  1890. 

Schlosser,  M. 

'83-'97    Literaturbericht  in  Beziehung  zur  Anthropologie  mit  Einschluss 

der  fossilen  und  recenten  Saugethiere.    Munich,  1883-1897. 
'87-'90    Die   Affen,   Lemuren,  Chiropteren,    Insectivoren,  Marsupialier, 
Creodonten  und  Carnivoren  des  Europaischen  Tertiars  und  deren 
Beziehungen  zu  ihren  lebenden  und  fossilen  ausser  europaischen 
Verwandten.    Vienna,  1887-1890. 
'88    Ueber  die  Beziehungen  der  ausgestorbenen  Saugethierfaunen  und 
ihr  Verbal tniss  zur  Saligethierfauna  der  Gegenwart. 
Biol  Centralbl  1888,  Vol.  VIII,  pp.  582-650,  611-631. 
'99    tiber  die  Baren  und  Barenahnlichen  Formen  des  Europaischen 
Tertiars. 

Pakeontographica,  Vol.  XL VI,  Stuttgart,  1899. 
'00    Die  Neueste  Literatur  liber  die  Ausgestorbenen  Anthropomorphen. 

Zool  Anzeig.,  Vol.  XXIII,  No.  616,  May,  1900,  pp.  289-301. 
'01    Zur  Kenntniss  der  Saugethierfauna  der  bohmischen  Braunkohlen- 

formation.    Prag,  1901. 
'02    Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  der  Saugethierreste  aus  den  stiddeutschen 
Bohnerzen. 

Geol  Paleont.  Ahhandl.  Koken,  n.s..  Vol.  V,  No.  3,  Jena,  1902. 
'03    Die  fossilen  Saugethiere  Chinas  nebst  einer  Odontographie  der  re- 
centen Antilopen. 

Abh.  7c.  bayer.  Akad.  Wiss.,  CI.  II,  Vol.  XXII,  Pt.  1,  Munich,  1903. 
'04    Die  Fossilen  Cavicornia  von  Samos. 

Beitr.  Pal.  Geol  Osterreich-Ungarns  und  des  Orients,  Vol.  XVII, 
Vienna  and  Leipzig,  1904. 


598 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Schotensack,  0. 

'08  Dei-  Unterkiefer  des  Homo  Heidelbergensis  aus  den  Sariden  von 
Mauer  bei  Heidelberg:  Ein  Beitrag  zur  Palaontologie  des  Menschen. 
Leipzig,  1908. 

Schrbter,  C. 

'83    Die  Flora  der  Eiszeit.    Zurich,  1883. 

Schwalbe,  G.  j  i 

'01    Der  Neanderthalschadel.  j 

Bonner  Jahrb.,  No.  106,  Bonn,  pp.  1-72.  | 

'09    Uber  fossile  Primaten  und  ihre  Bedeutung  fur  die  Vorgeschichte  ] 

des  Menschen. 

Mitteil.  Philomath.  Ges.  Elsass-Lothringen,  Vol.  IV,  No.  1,  Decade  16  i 

(1908).   Strassburg,  1909,  pp.  45-61.  j 

Sclater,  P.  L.  \ 

'59    On  the  General  Geographical  Distribution  of  the  Members  of  the  j 
Glass  Aves. 

Jour.  Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  (Zool),  Vol.  II  (1857),  1859. 
Sclater,  W.  L.  \ 
OO-'Ol    The  Mammals  of  South  Africa,  in  The  Fauna  of  South  Africa, 

edited  by  W.  L.  Sclater.    2  vols.,  London,  1900-1901. 
Sclater,  W.  L.  and  P.  L.  I 
"99    The  Geography  of  Mammals.    London,  1899.  j  ( 

Scott,  W.  B. 

'85    Cervalces  americanus,  a  Fossil  Moose,  or  Elk,  from  the  Quaternary  | 
of  New  Jersey. 

Proc.  Acad.  Xat.  Sci.  Phila.,  1885,  pp:  181-202.  "  ; 

'87    American  Elephant  Myths.  j 

Scrihnei-'s  Magazine,  Vol.  I,  Apr.,  1887,  p.  469.  I 
'89    The  Geological  and  Faunal  Relations  of  the  Uinta  Formation.  Pt. 

I  of  Scott,  W.  B.,  and  Osborn,  H.  F.,  The  Mammalia  of  the  Uinta 

Formation. 

Trans.  Anier.  Philos.  Soc,  n.s.,  Vol.  XVI,  Pt.  2,  Aug.  20,  1889,  pp.  I 
462-470.  I 

'91    On  the  Osteology  of  Poehrotherium,  a  Contribution  to  the  Phylo-    |  Si 
geny  of  the  Tylopoda. 
Jour.  MorphoL,  Vol.  V,  No.  1,  pp.  1-78. 

'91    On  the  :\Iode  of  Involution  in  the  Mammalia  and  on  Some  of  the    ..  ' 
Factors  in  the  Evolution  of  the  Mammalia.  j 
Jour.  Morphol,  Vol.  V,  1891,  No.  3,  pp.  361-378,  378-402. 

'92    A  Revision  of  the  North  American  Creodonta,  with  Notes  on  Some 

Genera  which  have  been  referred  to  that  Group.  i  S 

Proc.  Acad.  Nat.  Sri.  Phila.,  1892,  pp.  291-323.  | 

"93    Tlie  Later  Tertiary  Lacustrine  Formations  of  the  West.  \ 
Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  America,  Vol.  9,  1893  (1894),  pp.  594-595.  .  | 


APPENDIX 


599 


'93    The  Mammals  of  the  Deep  River  Beds. 

*  Amer.  Natural.,  Vol.  XXVII,  1893,  pp.  659-662. 
'95    The  Mammalia  of  the  Deep  River  Beds. 

Trans.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  n.s.,  Vol.  XVIII,  1895,  No.  2,  pp.  ^b-l^b. 
'95    The  Osteology  of  Hycenodon. 

Jour.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.,  Phila.,  Vol.  IX,  1895,  p.  499. 
'98    The  Methods  of  Palfeontological  Inquiry. 

Biol.  Lect.,  Marine  Biol.  Lab.,  Woods  Hole,  1896-1897,  No.  IV, 

1898. 

'98    The  Osteology  of  Elotherium.    Notes  on  the  Canidse  of  the  White 
River  Oligocene. 

Trans.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XIX,  Sept.  2,  1898,  pp.  273-415. 
'99    North  American  Ruminant-like  Animals. 

Biol.  Lect.,  Marine  Biol.  Lab.,  Woods  Hole,  1898,  No.  XIV,  8vo, 
1899. 

'99    The  Selenodont  Artiodactyls  of  the  Uinta  Eocene. 

Trans.  Wagner  Free  Inst.  jScL,  Vol.  VI,  1899,  pp.  i-xii,  15-122,  pis. 
1-4. 

'03-'05  Mammalia  of  the  Saata  Cruz  Beds,  in  Reports  of  the  Princeton 
University  Expeditions  to  Patagonia.  1896-1899,  Vol.  V.  Stuttgart, 
1903-1905. 

'07    An  Introduction  to  Geology.    New  York,  2d  ed.,  1907. 

Scott,  W.  B.,  and  Osborn  H.  F. 

'87    Preliminary  Account  of  the  Fossil  Mammals  from  the  White  River 
Formation,  contained  in  the  Mus.  Com  par.  Zool. 
Bull.  Mus.  Compar.  Zool.,  Harvard  Coll.,  Vol.  XIII,  1887,  pp.  152- 
171. 

Scudder,  S.  H. 

'90    The  Tertiary  Insects  of  North  America. 

U.S.  Geol  Surv.  Terr.,  Vol.  XIII,  1890. 
'04    The  Effect  of  Glaciation  and  of  the  Glacial  Period  on  the  Present 

Fauna  of  North  America. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Sept.,  1904,  3d  Ser.,  Vol.  48,  pp.  179-187. 
Seward,  A. 

"92    Fossil  Plants  as  Tests  of  Climate.    London,  1892. 
^hufeldt,  R.  W. 

"92    A  study  of  the  Fossil  Avifauna  of  the  Equus  Beds  of  the  Oregon 
Desert. 

Jour.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phila.,  Vol.  IX,  1892,  pp.  389-425. 
Sinclair,  W.  J. 

'03    A  Preliminary  Account  of  the  Exploration  of  the  Potter  Creek 
Cave,  Shasta  County,  Cal. 
Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  17,  1903,  pp.  708-712. 


000 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


'04    The  Exploration  of  the  Potter  Creek  Cave. 

Univ.  Cal.  FahL,  Am.  Arch,  and  EthnoL,  Vol.  2,  1904,  pp.  i-27,  pis, 
1-14. 

"05    The  Marsupial  Fauna  of  the  Santa  Cruz  Beds. 

Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XLIX,  No.  179,  1905,  pp.  73-81. 
'06    Marsupialia  of  the  Santa  Cruz  Beds. 

Keports  of  the  Princeton  University  Expedition  to  Patagonia,  1896- 

1899.    Palteontology,  Vol.  IV,  Pt.  Ill,  pp.  333-460.  1906. 
'06    Volcanic  Ash  in  the  Bridger  Beds  of  Wyoming. 

Bull  Amer.  Mus.  mu.  Hist,  Vol.  XXII,  Art.  xv.,  1906,  pp.  273- 

280. 

'06    Some  Edentate-like  Remains  from  the  Mascall  Beds  of  Oregon. 

Univ.  Cal.  Publ,  Bull.  Dept.  Geol,  Vol.  5,  No.  2,  1906,  pp.  Gi}-G(j. 
'08    The  Santa  Cruz  Typotheria. 

Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  Vol.  XL VII,  1908,  pp.  64-78. 
'08    Recent  Investigations  Bearing  on  the  Question  of  the  Occurrence  of 

Neocene  Man  in  the  Auriferous  Gravels  of  the  Sierra  Nevada. 

Univ.  Cal.  Publ,  Amer.  Archceol.  and  Ethnol.,Yo\.  7,  No.  2,  Feb.,  1908. 
'09    Typotheria  of  the  Santa  Cruz  Beds. 

Repts.   Princeton  Univ.  Exped.  to  Patagonia,  1896-99 ;  Vol.  VI, 

Palaeontology,  Pt.  1,  1909,  pp.  1-110. 

Smith,  J.  P. 

'04    Periodic  Migrations  between  the  Asiatic  and  the  American  Coasts 
of  the  Pacific  Ocean. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,Yo\.  XVII,  Mar.,  1904,  pp.  217-233. 
'09    Salient  Events  in  the  Geologic  History  of  California. 
Science,  n.s.,  Vol.  XXX,  No.  767,  1909,  pp.  346-351. 

Soc.  Prehist.  France 

"06    Manuel  de  Recherches  Prehistoriques.    Paris,  1906. 

Sollas,  W.  J. 

'00    Evolutional  Geology.    Address  Geol.  Sect.  Brit.  Ass.  Ad.  Sci. 

Brit.  Ass.  Ad.  Sci.,  Bradford,  1900. 
'09    Anniversary  Address  of  the  President  of  the  Geological  Society. 

Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  Vol.  LXV,  Pt.  2,  No.  258,  May,  1909,  pp. 

i-cxxii. 

Stehlin,  H.  G. 

"99 -"00    i/ber  die  Geschichte  des  Suiden-Gebisses. 

Abh.  schweiz.  palaont.  Ges.,  Vols.  XXVI,  XXVII,  Zurich,  1899-1900, 
pp.  1-527. 

'04    Sur  les  Mammiferes  des  Sables  Bartoniens  du  Castrais. 

Bull.  Soc  GM.  France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  IV,  May,  1904,  pp.  445-475. 
'04    Une  Faune  a  Hipparion  a  Perrier. 

Bull.  Soc  Geol.  France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  IV,  1904. 


APPENDIX 


601 


^03-'06    Die  Saugetiere  des  schweizerischen  Eocseiis.    Critischer  Catalog 
der  Matei'ialien. 

Ahhandl.  schweiz.  palaont.  Ges.,  Vol  XXX-XXXII,  Zurich,  1903- 
1906. 

'07    Notices  Paleomammalogiques  sur  quelques  Depots  Miocenes  des 
Bassins  de  la  Loire  et  de  I'Allier. 

Bull  Soc.  Geol  France,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  VII,  1907,  pp.  525-550. 
Steinmann,  G. 

'06    Die  palaolithische  Keuntierstation  von  Munzingen  am  Tuniberge 
bei  Freiburg  i.  B. 

Arch.  Anthrop.,  Vol.  V,  Nos.  3  and  4,  1906,  pp.  182-203. 

Stejneger,  L. 

'01    Scharff's  History  of  the  European  Fauna. 
Amer.  Natural.^  Vol.  35,  1901 

Stewart,  A. 

'97    Notes  on  the  Osteology  of  Bison  antiquus  Leidy. 

Kansas  Univ.  Quar.,  Vol.  VI,  No.  3,  July,  1897,  Ser.  A,  pp.  127-138. 

Stirling,  E.  C,  and  Zietz,  A.  H.  C. 

'01    Fossil  Remains  of  Lake  Callabona. 

Mem.  Boy.  Soc.  S.  Australia,  Vol.  I,  Pt.  1,  1901. 

Studer,  T. 

'96    Die    Saugetierreste  aus  den  marinen  Molasseablagerungen  von 
Brtittelen. 

Abh.  schiveiz.  palaont.  Ges.,  Vol.  XXII,  Zurich,  1896. 
'96    Die  Tierreste  aus  den  pleistocaenen  Ablagerungen  des  Schweizers- 
bildes  bei  Schaffhausen. 

J^eue  Denkschr.  allg.  schweiz.  Ges.  gesam.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XXXV, 
1896,  pp.  1-38. 

'04    Die  Knochenreste  aus  der  Hohle  zum  Kesslerloch  bei  Thayngen. 
Neue  Denkschr.  allg.  schvjeiz.  Ges.  gesam.  Naturwiss.,  Vol.  XXXIX, 
Pt.  2,  1904,  pp.  73-112. 

Thomson,  J.  J. 

'09    Address   of  the  President  of  the  British  Association  for  the 
Advancement  of  Science.    (Winnipeg,  1909.) 
'  Science,  n.s..  Vol.  XXX,  No.  765,  Aug.  27,  1909,  pp.  257-279. 

Trouessart,  E.  L. 

'04-'05    Catalogus   Mammalium   tam  Viventium   quam   Fossilium.  5th 
ed.    Berlin,  1904-1905. 

Tullberg,  T. 

'99    Uber  das  System  der  Nagethiere.    Eine  Phylogenetische  Studie. 
Upsala,  1899. 


602 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Turner,  H.  W. 

'91    Geology  of  Mount  Diablo. 

BhU.  GeoL  Soc.  Amer.,  Vol.  II,  1891,  pp.  396-397. 

Upham,  W. 

'93    Estimates  of  Geologic  Time. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vol.  XLV,  1893,  pp.  209-220. 
'02    JNIan  in  the  Ice  Age  at  Lansing,  Kansas,  and  Little  Falls,  Minnesota. 

Amer.  GeoL,  Vol.  XXX,  No.  3,  Sept.,  1902. 

Vacek,  M. 

'00  iiber  Saiigethierreste  der  Pikermifauna  vom  Eichkogel  bei  Modling. 
Jahrbuch  K.-K.  Geol.  Heichsanst.,  Vol.  L,  Ko.  1,  Vienna,  1900. 

Veatch,  A.  C. 

'07    Geography  and  Geology  of  a  Portion  of  Southwestern  Wyoming, 
with  Special  Reference  to  Coal  and  Oil. 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Prof.  Paper,  No.  56,  1907. 

Walcott,  C.  D. 

"93  Geologic  Time  as  Indicated  by  the  Sedimentary  Eocks  of  North 
America. 

Proc.  Amer.  Ass.  Adv.  Sci.,  Sect.  Geol.  &  Geogr.,  Vol.  XLII,  1893. 
Wallace,  A.  R. 

76  The  Geographical  Distribution  of  Animals  with  a  Study  of  the 
Relations  of  Living  and  Extinct  Faunas  as  Elucidating  the  Past 
Changes  of  the  Earth's  Surface.    2  vols.,  London,  1876. 

'81  Island  Life  or  The  Phenomena  and  Causes  of  Insular  Faunas  and 
Floras,  including  a  Revision  and  Attempted  Solution  of  the  Problem 
of  Geological  Climates.    New  York,  1881. 

Ward,  L.  F. 

'95  Plants,  Fossil.  Johnson's  Univ.  Cyclo.,  Vol.  IX,  1895,  pp.  327-333. 
Ward,  R. 

'07    Records  of  Big  Game.    London,  1907. 
Warren,  J.  C. 

'55  Description  of  a  Skeleton  of  the  Mastodon  giganteus  of  North 
America.    2d  ed.,  4to,  Boston,  1855. 

Weber,  M. 

'04    Die  Saugetiere.   Jena,  1904. 

Weeks,  F.  B. 

'02    Bibliography  of  North  American  Geology,  Paleontology,  Petrology? 
and  ^lineralogy  for  the  Years  1892-1900,  inclusive. 
Btdl.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  No.  188,  199,  1902. 


APPENDIX 


603 


'03    North  American  Geologic  Formation  Names.    Bibliography,  Synon- 
ymy, and  Distribution. 
Bull  V.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  No.  191,  1902. 

'06    Bibliography  and  Index  of  North  American  Geology,  Paleontology, 
Petrology,  and  Mineralogy  for  the  Years  1901-1905,  inclusive. 
Bull.  U.S.  Geol  Surv.,  No.  301,  1906. 

Weiss,  A. 

'99    Die  Conchylienfauna  der  Kiese  von  Slissenborn  bei  Weimar. 
Zeitschr.  deutscli.  geol  Gesell,  Vol.  51,  1899,  pp.  156-167. 

Weithofer,  A. 

'89    tiber  die  tertiaren  Landsaugethiere  Italiens. 
Jahrh.  k.k.  geol  Eeichs.  Wien,  1889,  pp.  55-82. 

Williams,  H.  S. 

'95    Geological  Biology.    An  Introduction  to  the  Geological  History 
of  Organisms.    New  York,  1895. 

Wiiliston,  S.  W. 

'94    Restoration  of  Platygojius. 

Kansas  Univ.  Quarl,  Vol.  Ill,  1894,  pp.  23-39. 
'97    The  Pleistocene  of  Kansas. 

Univ.  Geol  Surv.  Kansas,  Vol.  2,  1897,  pp.  299-308. 
'02    An  Arrowhead  Found  with  Bones  of  Bison  occidentalis  in  Western 

Kansas. 

Ayner.  Geol,  Vol.  30,  1902,  pp.  313-315. 
'03    The  Fossil  Man  of  Lansing,  Kansas. 
Pop.  Sd.  Monthly,  Mar.,  1903. 

Wilson,  J.  H. 

'04    Recent  Journeys  among  Localities  Noted  for  the  Discovery  of 
Remains  of  Prehistoric  Man. 

Anytals  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.,  Vol.  XVI,  No.  2,  Mar.  17,  1905  (read 
Jan.  18,  1904),  pp.  65-74. 

Wilson,  T. 

'92    Man  and  the  Mylodon.    Their  Possible  Contemporaneous  Existence 
in  the  Mississippi  Valley. 

Amer.  Natural,  Vol.  XXVI,  No.  307,  July,  1892,  pp.  628-631. 

Winchell,  N.  H. 

'03    Was  Man  in  America  in  the  Glacial  Period  ? 

Bull  Geol  Soc.  Amer.,  Vol.  14,  Apr.,  1903,  pp.  133-152. 

Woldricb,  J.  N. 

'82    Die  diluvialen  Faunen  Mitteleuropas  und  eine  heutige  Sareptaner 
Steppenfauna  in  Niederosterreich. 

Mitth.  Anthrop.  Ges.  Wien,  Vol.  XI,  n.s.,  Vol.  I,  Vienna,  1882. 


604 


THE  AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


'96    Ueber  die  Gliederung  der  anthropologischen  Formationsgmppe 
Mitteleuropas. 

Sitzungsher.  kgl.  hdhm.  Ges.  Wiss.,  jnathemat.-naturwiss.  CI.,  1896. 
Kef.  von  Matiegka  in  Centralbl.  Anthropol,  1896,  pp.  142-143. 

Woodward,  A.  S. 

'98    Outlines  of  Vertebrate  Palaeontology,  for  Students  of  Zoology. 
Cambridge,  1898. 

'01    The  Bone-Beds  of  Pikermi,  Attica,  and  Similar  Deposits  in  Euboea. 

Geol  Mag.,  n.s.,  Dec.  IV,  Vol.  VIII,  Nov.,  1901. 
'03    The  Lower  Pliocene  Bone-Bed  of  Concud,  Spain. 

Geol.  Mag.,  n.s.,  Dec.  IV,  Vol.  X,  May,  1903. 

Woodward,  H. 

'83    The  Ancient  Fauna  of  Essex. 

Trans.  Epping  Naturalists'  Club,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  1.,  1883. 

Wortman,  J.  L. 

'93    On  the  Divisions  of  the  White  River  or  Lower  Miocene  of  Dakota. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  V,  1893,  pp.  95-106. 
'94    On  the  Affinities  of  Leptarctus  primus. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist,  Vol.  VI,  1894. 
'97    The  Ganodonta  and  their  Relationship  to  the  Edentata. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  IX,  1897,  pp.  59-110. 
'98    The  Extinct  Camelidse. 

Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  X,  1898,  pp.  93-142. 
'01    Studies  of  Eocene  Mammalia  in  the  Marsh  Collection,  Peabody 

Museum.    Pt.  I,  Carnivora. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Vols.  XI-XIV,  1901,  1902. 
'03    Studies  of  Eocene  Mammalia  in  the  Marsh  Collection,  Peabody 

Museum.    Pt.  II,  Primates. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  June,  1903,  Vol.  XV,  pp.  419-436. 
von  Zittel,  K.  A. 

'87-90    Handbuch  der  Palseontologie.     Band  III.    Vertebrata  (Pisces, 
Amphibia,  Reptilia,  Aves).    Munich,  1887-1890. 
"90    Handbuch  der  Palseontologie.     II  Abtheilung,  Palaeophytologie, 
Schimper,  W.  P.  u.  Schenck,  A.    Munich,  1890. 
'91-*93    Handbuch    der    Palseontologie.      Band    IV,   Vertebrata  (Mam- 
malia).   Munich,  1891-1893. 


INDEX 


Ahderites,  517.* 

Tertiary  Sirenia,  182,  183,  247,  255,  256. 
Acaremys,  539.* 
Aceratheriinse, 

first  appearance  in  Europe  (Stampian), 
190,  193  ;  first  American,  213  ;  Miocene, 
251,  272  ;  Burdigalian,  252  ;  Pontian, 
269,  271  ;  Miocene  of  India,  275  ; 
Ticholeptus  zone,  292;  Hipparion  zone, 
300;  China,  333,  334;  early  Pliocene 
( ?)  of  North  America,  346. 
Aceratherium, 

gannatense  of  Stampian,  190  ;  lemanense 
of  Aquitanian,  197,  198  ;  final  stages, 
233  ;  incisivum  of  Pontian,  269,  271  ; 
possible  ancestor  of  Elasmotherium, 
272  ;  blanfordi  of  Asia,  275,  327,  332, 
334;  557.* 
Achcenodon,  156  ; 

Washakie  and  Uinta,   167,  217,  218; 
549.* 
Achaenodontinse, 

Wasatch,    127 ;     Middle    and  Upper 
Eocene,  156  ;  549.* 
Acotherulum,  148,  548.* 
Adapis,  146,  149,  543.* 
Adapisorex,  522.* 
Adapisoricidse,  103,  522.* 
Adapisoriculus,  118,  522.* 
Adaptive  radiation, 

law  of,  22,  23,  24,  25  ;   of  orders  and 
within    orders,    25  ;     continental,    29  ; 
local,  29,  30  ;  titanotheres,  212,  213. 
jElurocyon,  288,  530.* 
^lurodon,  353  ; 

Hipparion    zone,    301  ;     Long  Island 
quarry,  349  ;  528.* 
Mlurogale,  327,  532.* 
JEluropsis,  327. 

Africa  as  an  evolution  center,  70,  71,  72,  73,  74. 
Afton  (Indian  Territory)  deposit,  475,  496. 
Afton  (Iowa)  deposits,  442,  467,  468. 
Aftonian  interglacial,  445  ; 

gravels    (photograph) ,  446 ;    at  Afton 
(Iowa),  467. 
Agriochoerus, 

lower  White  River,  214  ;  Oreodon  zone, 
220,  222  ;    phylum  reaches  its  climax, 
231  ;  549.* 
Ailurus,  321. 

Alachua  Clays,  346,  347,  348  ; 

alternation  of  shell-bearing  and  mammal- 
bearing  formations,  337. 

Alactaga,  415,  538.* 


Alactherium,  533.* 
Alaska, 

Eocene  carboniferous  of,  93  ;  Pleisto- 
cene physiography,  444 ;  Pleistocene 
deposits,  487,  (map)  489,  490,  (fauna) 
490,  491,  492  ;  causes  of  extinction  in. 
507. 

Alhertogaudrya,  560.* 
Alces, 

Forest  Bed  (?),  395;  Mid-Pleistocene 
Europe,  400,  403  ;  post-Pleistocene 
Europe,  428  ;  figured,  436  ;  arrival  in 
North  America,  436,  438,  440  ;  southern 
range  in  North  American  Pleistocene, 
449  ;  Kansas  Pleistocene,  464  ;  of 
Megalonyx  fauna,  466  ;  Ashley  River, 
472  ;  Washtucna  Lake,  474  ;  Big  Bone 
Lick,  478  ;  Alaska,  489,  490  ;  552.* 

Alcicephalus,  332,  334. 

Allen, 

Holarctica,  95 ;     origin    of  migratory 
instinct  in  birds,  450  ;  Pleistocene  bison 
of  North  America,  482. 
Alps, 

elevation  of,  59,  60,  177,  246,  305; 
Glacial  Period  in,  376,  377,  378. 

Alticamelus,  293  ; 

skull,  neck,  limbs  figured,  293  ;  Pliocene, 
299,  346,  352,  356,  357  ;  proportions, 
301  ;  outline  restoration,  364  ;  550.* 

Altippus,  287. 

Ambloctonus,  527.* 

Aynhlotherium,  519.* 

Amblypoda, 

Holarctic  origin,  68  ;  Puerco,  107  ;  Wa- 
satch, 125  ;  Wind  River,  132  ;  of  third 
faunal  phase,  139  ;  Bridger,  155 ;  ex- 
tinction, 168,  172  ;  evolution  and  ex- 
tinction in  North  America,  charted,  174; 
546.* 

Amblyrhiza,  536.* 

Amphictis,  197,  530.* 

Amphicynodon, 

Sannoisian,  189  ;  Aquitanian,  197  ;  529.* 

Amphicyon,  249  ; 

group  in  European  Oligocene,  179,  188, 
193,  197;  Burdigalian,  254;  Vindo- 
bonian,  259,  261  ;  Pontian,  269  ;  Mid- 
dle Miocene,  American,  296  ;  Hipparion 
zone,  302  ;  Siwaliks,  326,  327  ;  time  of 
extinction-,  338;  Blanco  (?),  366;  529.* 

Amphidozotherium,  521.* 

Amphilestes,  515.* 

Amphiperatherium,  194,  516.* 

Amphiproviverra,  516.* 


Reference  to  classification. 
605 


606 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Amphisorex,  191,  521  * 

Amphitherium,  519.* 

Amphitrayulus,  197,  551.* 

Amynodon,  166,  170,  557.* 

AmynodontinoB, 

Washakie  and  Uinta,  156,  167,  168; 
origin,  180;  Stampian,  190;^  lower 
White  River,  214;  last  appearance 
(Orcodon  zone),  221,  223;  557.* 

Anacodon,  126,  527.* 

Analcitheriurn,  541.* 

Analogous  evolution, 

law  of,  32;  illustrations  of,  33,  34. 

Anaptoinorphidaj,  161,  543.* 

Anaptomorphus, 

Wa.satch,  127;    Wind  River,  134;  543.* 

Anchilophus,  147,  555.* 

Anchitheriinjfi, 

Upper  Oligocene,  American,  233;  Chi- 
nese, 333;  555.* 

Anchitheriuvi, 

molar  figured,  11,  12;  prcestans  (John 
Day),  ■  230;  Burdigalian,  250,  251; 
Vindobonian,  262;  disappearance,  269; 
555.* 

Ancodonts, 

evolution,     149,     188;     Fayftm,  201. 

Ancodus, 

zone,  182;  Ronzon,  188;  FayClm,  201; 

lower  White  River,  214;  Oreodon  zone, 

220,  221,  222. 
Ancylopoda,  68,  558.* 
A  ncylotherium, 

Pontian,    268;     Siwaliks,     326,  327; 

China,  335;  558.* 
Andrews, 

fossil  mammals  of   Faydm,   72,  200; 

Orycteropus  from  Samos,  270. 
Anisonchus,  546.* 
Anoplotheriidae, 

Ludian,  146,  147 ;  decline  (Sannoisian) 

188,  (Aquitanian)  197;  548.* 
Anoplotherium,  146,  548.* 
Antarctica,  64,  65,  75,  76, 

(map),   77,  78,  137. 
Antelopes, 

enter  Europe,  247,  253,  264;  source  of, 

255;    Pontian    distribution,    270;  Si- 

walik,  of  Asiatic  and  African  affinities, 

328;    Pliocene   distribution    of  strep- 

sicerine  and   hippotragine  (map),  336; 

American    migration    of   Asiatic,  337, 

338,  357,  474;    tragocerine  appear  in 

America,  355. 
Anthracotheriidae, 

5  phyla  in  European  Eocene,  147,  148, 

149;    origin,     180,    188;    teeth,  180; 

dominant  in  Oligocene,  188;  Stampian, 

193;  Aquitanian,  194;  appear  in  North 

America,  213;  Oreodon  zone,  222,  223; 

decline,  247;    Miocene  of  India,  274; 

Punjab  Siwaliks,  325;  547.* 
A  nthracotheriu  m , 

phylogeny,  149;  Sannoisian,  188;  Aqui- 


tanian, 194;   lower  White  River,  213, 

Oreodon  zone,  220,  223;  fauna  of  India, 

274,  324;  548.* 
Anthropodus,  545.* 
Anthropoids, 

pre-Pliocene    of    South    America,  78; 

evolution  of,  263;    become   extinct  in 

Europe,  307;  south  Asiatic,  326,  327. 
Anthropopithecus,  307,  427,  545.* 
Antiacodon,  547.* 
Antidorcas,  268,  554.* 
Antilocapra, 

Equus  zone,   454;    Hay  Springs,  456; 

Silver  Lake,  460;  553.* 
Antilocapridaj,  357,  553.* 
Antilope,  319,  553.* 
Apatemys,  522.* 
Aphelops, 

foot  figured,  16;  megalodus  of  Ticholep- 
tus  zone,  292;  montanus  and  cerato- 
rhinus,  Flint  Creek,  300,  351;  brachtjo- 
dus  of  Hipparion  zone,  300;  early 
Pliocene  ( ?)  of  North  America,  346; 
malacorhinus,  348,  351;  557.* 

Apidium,  201. 

Apternodus,  216,  519.* 

Apterodon,  201,  527.* 

Aquitanian  stage,  193,  194,  195,  197,  198; 
correlation,  182;  paloeogeography,  183, 
193;  map  of  localities,  194;  palceo- 
geographic  map  of  France,  195. 

Archceohippus,  292,  555.* 

Archaeohyrax,  560.* 

Archceolemur ,  544.* 

Archceomys,  539.* 

Archceorycteropus,  192. 

Archceotherium,  217,  218. 

Archaic  mammals,  90,  97  ; 

Thanetian,  103  ;  Puerco  and  Torrejon, 
106,  107,  108,  109 ;  competition  with 
modern  mammals,  112,  172  ;  Lower 
Eocene,  113,  119,  132;  gradual  elimi- 
nation, 138  ;  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene, 
141,  153,  155,  170  ;  extinction  of  Eocene, 
172,  173,  174,  175,  176.  ■ 

Archer  Beds, 

see  Alachua  Clays. 

Archino  deposit,  266,  267. 

Arctocyon, 

Thanetian,  103,  104  ;  brain  figured,  173  ;  . 

526.* 
Arctocyonidffi, 

Torrejon,  111;    Wasatch,  126;  Wind 

River,  132,  133  ;  extinction,  138  ;  526.* 
Arctomys,  535.* 

(see  also  Marmota.) 
Ardophoca,  533.* 
Arctoryctes,  287,  520.* 
Arctotherium, 

Megalonyx  zone,  467 ;    Port  Kennedy 

Cave,   469 ;    Frankstown   Cave,   471 ; 

skull  figured,  476  ;  Potter  Creek  Cave, 

476;  530.* 
Argenton  deposit,  140,  143. 


Reference  to  classification. 


INDEX 


607 


Argyrocetus,  562.* 

Arikaree  formation,  231,  232,  234,  278,  285, 
288; 

correlation,  41,  249,  277  ;  sections,  280, 
287. 

Arretotherium,  189,  548.* 

Arsino'itherium,  200,  202  ; 

zone,  198,  199,  200  ;   restoration,  201  ; 
559.* 

Artiodactyla, 

Holarctic  origin,  68,  70,  202  ;  earliest, 
118;  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene  of 
Europe,  147  ;  begin  to  abound  in  North 
America,  170 ;  evolution  in  North 
America  charted,  174,  239  ;  little  inter- 
change of  between  New  and  Old  Worlds 
in  Tertiary,  179 ;  Miocene  evolution, 
248  ;  Lower  Pliocene  of  North  America, 
352. 

Arvicola,  407. 

Ashley  River  deposits,  467,  471,  472. 
Asiatic-American  land  connection, 

Caenozoic,  80,  81  ;   Eocene,  85  ;  Oligo- 

cene,  182  ;    Miocene,  244,  (map)  245  ; 

Pliocene,  (map)  303,  304;  Pleistocene 

(maps),  373,  443. 
Asmodeus,  560.* 
Astian  stage, 

correlation,  41,  309  ;  palaeogeography, 

305,  313  ;  localities  (map),  310  ;  fauna 

summarized,  310,  311. 
Astraponotus,  560.* 
Astrapotheria,  78,  560.* 
Astrapotherium,  560.* 
Atelodus,  558.* 

(See  also  Diceros.) 
Atlantis,  hypothesis,  37,  136,  340,  493. 
Auriferous  gravels, 

flora,  343  ;  remains  of  man,  500. 
Aurignacian  stage,  378. 
Autrey  deposit,  310,  312: 
Avejan,  lignites  de,  186,  187. 
Ay,  sables  de,  102,  117. 

Bachitherium,  550.* 
Badlands, 

distribution  and  origin,  204,  205,  206  ; 
of  South  Dakota,  photographs,  210, 
217  ;  section,  213  ;  rich  fauna  of,  221. 

Baltavar  deposit ,  266,  267. 

Barbour, 

Dcemonelix,  234,  235  ;    exploration  of 

Agate  Spring  Quarry,  235. 
Barton  clays,  143,  144. 
Bartonian  stage,  143,  144  ; 

correlation,  42,  83,  139  ;  palaeogeography, 

climate,  flora,  140  ;  fauna,  147,  148,  149, 

150,  151,  152. 
Barytherium,  200,  559.* 
Basilosaurus,  561.* 

(See  also  Zeuglodon.) 
Bassariscus, 

Snake  Creek,  356  ;  Potter  Creek  Cave, 

477;  529.* 

*  Reference  to 


Bate, 

pigmy  elephants,  398,  399,  410. 
Bate's  Hole,  204. 
Bathijovsis,  119,  130,  132  ;  547.* 
Beadnell, 

Fayum  exploration,  72,  200. 
Beauce,  calcaire  de,  246. 
Beaver  Divide, 

section,  131  ;  photographs,  178,  206. 
Belgium,  Cretaceous,  98,  99. 
Bensley, 

on  arboreal  ancestry  of  marsupials,  31,  32. 
Berolinian  Glaciation,  fauna,  377. 
Big  Bone  beach  (photograph),  491. 
Big  Bone  Lick,  467,  478,  480,  487. 
Big  Horn  basin, 

location,    86,    87  ;     photograph,    122  ; 

section,  123. 
Bipolar  theory,  65,  70. 
Birds, 

London  clay,  117  ;  Quercy  phosphorites, 
151,  152  ;  Eocene  North  America  and 
Europe,  152,  153 ;  Ronzon,  190 ;  St. 
Gerand-le-Puy,  195  ;  Sansan,  257,  258, 
259  ;  Pliocene  of  Europe,  307,  310  ; 
tundra  and  forest  types,  414  ;  migrations 
in  Pleistocene,  450  ;  Silver  Lake,  460  ; 
Rancho  la  Brea,  472,  473,  474. 
Bison, 

sivalensis,  329;  Snake  Creek  (?),  355; 
bonasus  in  Europe,  392,  394,  396  ; 
prisons,  403,  407,  (characters)  408 ; 
arrival  in  North  America,  438,  440 ; 
latifrons,  440,  466,  471,  478,  481,  482  ; 
Peace  Creek,  454  ;  occidentalis,  463, 
464,  481,  487,  490,  497;  alleni,  464, 
481,  483,  490  ;  bison,  464,  481,  482,  487  ; 
antiquxis,  466,  473,  478,  481,  482,  483  ; 
Port  Kennedy  Cave,  470  ;  Potter  Creek 
Cave,  477 ;  distribution  of  fossil  in 
North  America  (map),  481  ;  Pleisto- 
cene and  recent  of  North  America,  482, 
483  ;  skulls  figured  {B.  latifrons,  B. 
bison),  482  ;  skeleton  figured  (B.  occi- 
dentalis), 483  ;  ferox,  481,  483  ;  crassi- 
cornis,  481,  483,  490  ;  Alaska,  489,  490, 
491  ;  evidence  for  coexistence  of  extinct 
species  with  man,  464,  497  ;  extinction 
of  European  herds  due  to  inbreeding, 
502,  503  ;  555.* 

De  Blainville, 

classification  of  ungulates,  13. 

Blanco  formation,  360,  361,  362,  363,  364, 
365,  366  ; 

correlation,  41,  309,  341  ;  photograph, 
363. 

Blanford,  W.  T. 

palseogeographic  views  69 ;  geology 
of  Indian  Tertiaries,  273,  323,  324; 
Manchhar  fauna,  275. 

Blcrina,  469,  521.* 

Blastomeryx,  286,  295,  302  ; 

Madison  Valley,  281  ;  first  horned,  299^ 
301  ;  early  Pliocene,  352  ;  551.* 

classification. 


608 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Bonneville,  Lake.  447,  448; 

periods  of  rise  and  fall,  448 ;  '  upper 
terraces,'  453  ;  correlation  of  lacustral 
movements   with  Silver  Lake  deposit, 

459  ;  mapped,  485. 
Boochoerus,  218,  549  * 
Borhycena,  516.* 
Borophagus,  302,  366,  529.* 
Bos, 

primigenius  (in  Forest  Bed?),  394,395, 
(of  Mid-Ploistocene),  400,  402,  403, 
(characters)  408,  (post-Pleistocene)  428, 
429  ;  longifrons  (post-Pleistocene) ,  428  ; 
taurus  (phylogeny),  429  ;  Pleistocene, 
North  Africa,  432  ;  555.* 
Boselaphus,  328,  554.* 

BOULE, 

correlation  of  archaeological  and  geologi- 
cal divisions  (table),  380,  404,  410,  427  ; 
Montniaurin  fauna,  396  ;  cave  lion,  423  ; 
date  of  arrival  of  Magdalenian  man  in 
Schaffhausen  region,  425  ;  and  Chauvet 
on  Chateauncuf  fauna,  426 ;  African 
character  of  Quaternary  mammals  of 
Algeria,  429  ;  Equus  numidicus,  431. 

Bournemouth  flora,  140. 

Bovinje, 

source  of,  255,  311  ; 
Siwalik,  329  ;  555.* 

Brachydiastematheriuni,  118,  213,  556.* 

Brachyodus, 

Oligocene  of  Europe,  147,  188,  194 ; 
Fay  am,  201  ;  Burdigalian,  251,  255  ; 
Miocene  of  India,  274  ;  548.* 

Brack yprotoma,  488,  531.* 

Brachypsalis,  530.* 

Bracklesham  deposit,  143,  144. 

Brain, 

proportions    in    archaic    and  modern 

mammals,  figured,  173. 
Br.\ndt, 

E las m other ium,  422. 
Bridger  formation,  157,  158,  159,  160,  161, 

162,  163,  164  ; 

correlation,  42,  114.  139,  153;  zones, 
48,  49,  139  ;   location,  mode  of  origin, 
86,  87  ;  sections,  154,  157  ;  photograph, 
156. 
Brinton, 

coexistence  of  man  and  mastodon  in 

the  New  World,  495. 
Brongniart, 

gypse  flora,  147. 
Brontotheriian,  213  ; 

restoration  and  skeleton  figured,  209 ; 

restoration  (head),  212  ;    skull  figured, 

215;  556.* 
Brooke, 

Asiatic  origin  of  Cervidse,  418. 
Brown,  Barnum, 

Paramylodon,  456,  457  ;   significance  of 

presence  of  flamingoes  at  Silver  Lake, 

460  ;  Conard  Fissure,  487,  488. 
Browsing  types  of  Herbivora, 

*  Reference  to 


Middle  Eocene,  141  ;  diminish  in  Oligo- 
cene, 240  ;  prevalence  in  older  Miocene 
fauna,  249  ;  decline  in  Upper  Miocene, 
297,  298,  299. 
Brule  Clays,  219,  220,  221,  222,  223,  225, 
226,  227  ; 

photograph,  177 ;  location,  211  ;  sec- 
tion, 213. 

Briittelen  molasse,  250 ; 
fauna,  255. 

Bubalis,  432,  553.* 

Bubalus, 

Siwalik,  326,  329 ;   Pleistocene,  North 

Africa,  432  ;  555.* 
Bucapra,  328. 
Buchner, 

inbreeding,  503. 

BUFFON, 

an  evolutionist,   19 ;    direct  action  of 

environment,  19,  22 ;  palaeogeography, 

19,  20  ;    extinction,  20,  21  ;  analogous 

evolution,  133. 
Bugti  Beds, 

geology,  273,  274  ;  fauna,  72,  274,  275, 

276,  324. 
Buncelurus,  214,  530.* 
Bunomeryx,  170,  547.* 
Burdigalian  stage,  252,  253,  254,  255  ; 

physiography,  246  ;  correlation,  249. 

Cadibona  lignites,  190,  191. 
Cadurcotherium,  190,  557.* 
Ccenopithecus,  543.* 
Coenopus, 

occidentalis,  skeleton  and  restoration, 
196  ;  lower  White  River,  213  ;  Oreodon 
zone,  220  ;  tridactylus,  227  ;  Miocene, 
351;  557.* 

CaenotheriidiE, 

Ludian,  146  ;  evolution,  181  ;  Aquita- 
nian,  197,  198  ;  548.* 

Ccenotherium,  548.* 

Caenozoic, 

time  divisions  of,  40,  41,  43  ;  duration  of, 
63,  64. 

Cajarc  fauna,  396. 

Calaf  deposit,  186,  187. 

Calamodon, 

Wasatch,  125  ;  Wind  River,  132  ;  rela- 
tionships, 140  ;  540.* 

Calaveras  skull,  499. 

Calvin, 

Afton  deposit,  442,  467  ;  glacial  advances 
in  Iowa,  445.  446. 
Camelidae,  first  appearance,  138.  157  ;  poly- 
phj'letic  in  Uinta,  170 ;  lower  White 
River,  213,  214;  Oreodon  zone,  222; 
adaptive  radiation  in  Ticholeptus  zone, 
293,  294  ;  Hipparion  zone,  299  ;  first 
appearance  in  Asia,  299  ;  American  Pleis- 
tocene (disappearance),  438,  440,  500; 
Silver  Lake,  460  ;  llamas  of  Megalonjrx 
zone,  466  ;  Rancho  la  Brea,  473  ;  Potter 
Creek  Cave,  476,  477  ;  550.* 

classification.  f 


INDEX 


609 


Camelomeryx,  170. 

Camelopardalis, 

Siwaliks,  328 ;    Maragha,  332 ;  China, 
334  ;  Pleistocene  North  Africa,  432. 
(See  also  Giraffa.) 

Camelops, 

Hay  Springs,  456 ;    Silver  Lake,  460 ; 
Kansas  Pleistocene,  464  ;  550.* 
Camelus, 

earliest  Asiatic,  326,  328 ;  Pleistocene 
North    African    species,    432  ;  Equus 
zone,  452,  454  ;  Hay  Springs,  456  ;  550.* 
Canidse, 

first  appearance  (in  Europe)  146,  (in 
North  America)  169  ;  Sannoisian,  188, 
189 ;  Aquitanian,  197  ;  lower  White 
River,  213  ;  Oreodon  zone,  222  ;  John 
Day,  230  ;  Miocene,  248  ;  Burdigalian, 
254  ;  Pontian,  269  ;  Merycochoerus  zone, 
288  ;  Ticholeptus  zone,  296  ;  Hipparion 
zone,  301  ;  Astian,  317  ;  Lower  Pliocene, 
American,  353,  356  ;  528.* 

Canimartes,  366,  530.* 

Canis, 

brain  figured,  173  ;  megamastoides,  317, 
319  ;  lupus,  327,  407,  424,  429,  463,  464  ; 
Lower  Pliocene,  North  America,  353 ; 
Norfolk  Interglacial,  396  ;  corsac,  417  ; 
latrans,  457,  460,  464  ;  occidentalis,  460, 
488;  priscolatrans,  4.70  ;  Rancho  la  Brea, 
473  ;  Potter  Creek  Cave,  477  ;  Alaskan 
Pleistocene,  490  ;  528.* 

Capellini, 

mastodons  of  Italy,  314,  320. 

Capra, 

Siwaliks,  328  ;  ibex,  424,  428  ;  554.* 
Capreolus, 

appears  in  Europe,  264  ;  Pontian,  269  ; 
of  'older  Pliocene  fauna,'  311,  313,  316; 
of  'newer  Pliocene  fauna,'  319  ;  Nor- 
folk Interglacial,  392,  396  ;  mid-Pleisto- 
cene, 400,  407  ;  post-Pleistocene,  428  ; 
553.* 

Caprolagus,  327. 

Capromeryx, 

Equus  zone,  454 ;  Hay  Springs,  456 ; 
553.* 

Caprovis,  392. 

Caribou,  see  Rangifer. 

Carnivora  Fissipedia, 

Holarctic  origin,  68 ;  first  appearance, 
111,  127 ;  evolution  in  North  Amer- 
ica charted,  174 ;  community  of  Old 
and  New  World  in  Oligocene,  179  ; 
John  Day,  230  ;  Lower  Miocene  of 
Europe,  249  ;  extraordinary  assemblage 
in  SiwaHks,  327 ;  Forest  Bed,  395 ; 
Potter  Creek  Cave,  477. 

Caroloameghinia,  515.* 

Carolozittelia,  561.* 

Casino  lignites,  312,  313  ; 
location,  310. 

Cdstor, 

Pontian,  271  ;    Astian,  316 ;  Sicilian, 


320 ;  mid-Pleistocene,  Europe,  401, 
407  ;  post-Pleistocene,  Europe,  429  ; 
Silver  Lake,  459  ;  Port  Kennedy  Cave, 
470 ;  Ashley  River,  472  ;  Iroquois 
Beach,  489  ;  Alaskan  Pleistocene,  490  ; 
535.* 

Castoridae, 

first  appearance  in  Europe,  191  ;  Bur- 
digalian, 254  ;  Vindobonian,  259  ;  Pon- 
tian, 271  ;  535.* 

Castoro'ides, 

Equus  zone,  439,  454 ;  Hay  Springs, 
457  ;  Silver  Lake,  459  ;  Megalonyx 
zone,  466  ;  Erie  clays,  475  ;  536.* 

Catodontherium, 

Middle  Eocene,  147,  149  ;  547.* 

C atony X,  541.* 

Cave  bear, 

see  Ursus  spelceus. 

Cave  hysena, 

see  Hycena  spelcea. 

Cave  lion, 

see  Felis  spelcea. 

Cehochoerus,  148,  548.* 

Cedar  Creek  deposit,  204,  221. 

Cedar-root  chronology,  62. 

Celas,  lignites  de,  186,  187. 

La  Celle, 

flora  of  the  tuf,  387. 

Cephalogale, 

Aquitanian,  197 ;  Burdigalian,  254 ; 
528.* 

Cephalomys,  540.* 

Cephalophus,  432. 

Ceratogaulus,  297,  535.* 

Ceratorhinus,  558.* 

(See  also  Dicer orhinus.) 

Cereste  deposit,  190,  191. 

Cernay,  gravier  marin  de,  57,  99,  115. 

Cernaysian  fauna,  100,  103,  109. 

Cervalces,  492,  493  ;  Toronto  formation,  449  ; 
Frankstown  Cave  (  ?),  471  ;  New  Jersey, 
492  ;  restoration,  493  ;  553.* 

Cervicapra,  432,  553.* 

Cervidse, 

affinity  of  Leptomeryx  to  American,  216, 
302  ;  (Capreolus)  appear  in  Europe, 
264  ;  affinity  of  Blastomeryx  to  Amer- 
ican, 286  ;  302;  evolution  of  New  World, 
302  ;  Pliocene  European,  311,  319  ;  five 
phyla  in  Forest  Bed,  394,  395 ;  mid- 
Pleistocene  Europe,  403  ;  Asiatic  origin, 
418,  431  ;  Upper  Pleistocene  and  recent 
of  North  Africa,  431,  432. 

Cervulinae, 

enter  Europe,  247  ;  Miocene,  249  ;  Bur- 
digahan,  253  ;  Vindobonian,  259,  262  ; 
Pontian,  269  ;  551.* 

Cervus, 

dicranius,  source  of,  311  ;  axis,  319,  328  ; 
elaphus,  319,  396,  400,  403,  407,  418 
(post  Pleistocene),  428  ;  polycladus,  319, 
394  ;  rusa,  328 ;  sedgwicki,  392,  395 ; 
Forest  Bed  species,  394,  395  ;  carnutorum 


Reference  to  classification. 


2r 


610 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


396;  dama,  428;  canadensis  (figured), 
437.  (range)  450.  47S.  487.  488.  489; 
arrival  in  North  America.  438.  440. 
487  ;  distribution  in  Ovibos  zone,  487  ; 
552* 
Cetacea, 

prc-Pliocene    of    South    America,    78 ; 
Pliocene  of  Europe,  317. 
Cetotherium,  563.* 

Chadron  formation.  210.  211.  212.  213.  214. 
215. 

Choenohyus,  549.* 
Chalicomys, 

Burdigalian,  254  ;    Vindobonian,   259  ; 

of  'older  Pliocene  fauna,'  311  ;  535.* 
Chalicotheriid®, 

Bartonian  (?),   143;    Stampian,  193; 

A(iuitanian,  197 ;    Oligocene  of  North 

America,  216,  224  ;   Miocene,  247,  248, 

249.  251  ;   Vindobonian,  259  ;    time  of 

extinction,  338  ;  558.* 
Chalicotherium, 

Cypress  Hills  (?),  216;   Virgin  Valley 

(?).  357  ;  558.* 
Chamberlin, 

divisions  of  American  Pleistocene,  445. 
Champlain  stage,  435,  444,  453. 
La  Chapelle-aux-Saints  cavern, 

skull  of,   figured,   411  ;    discovery  of, 

412. 
Chasmotherium, 

Ypresian,    118;     disappearance,  143; 

557.* 

Chatcaunouf-sur-Charente,  426  ; 

location  and  correlation,  391,  413. 
Chavot.  sables  de,  102.  117. 
Cheiroptera,  259.  261.  523.* 
Chellean  stage,  404,  405  ; 

correlation  (Penck)  378,   (Boule)  378, 

380  ;  relative  length,  385  ;  implements 

in  North  Africa,  432. 
Chelles  deposit,  404  ; 

location,  391. 
Chestnut  and  Wilcox. 

effect    of    alkali    on    mammals,    371  ; 

plants  poisonous  to  cattle  and  horses, 

506,  508. 
China, 

Miocene  and  Pliocene  fauna,  322,  332, 
333,  334  ;  deposits  (map),  323. 

Chitenay,  sables  de,  246. 

Chlamydutherium,  542.* 

Chceromorus, 

phylogeny,  148 ;  260 ;  Vindobonian, 
262  ;  possible  ancestor  of  hippopotami, 
313. 

Choeropotamns,  148,  548.* 

Choerotherium, 

invasion  of  Europe  by,  253  ;  Vindobo- 
nian, 259,  260.  262  ;  548.* 

Chriacus,  111.  526.* 

Christmas  Lake. 

see  Silver  Lake. 

Chrysochloridce,  213.  520.* 


Cladosictis,  516.* 
Clcenodon,  111.  527.* 

Clarendon    formation.     298,     361,     362 ; 

correlation.  41.  277. 
Clarke. 

mastodons  in  New  York  State,  480,  481  ; 
coexistence    of    man    and  mastodon 
(Attica,  N.Y.),  496. 
Climate, 

Basal  Eocene,  95,  (Europe)  104  ;  Ypre- 
sian, 117  ;  Lutetian  and  Bartonian,  140  ; 
Oligocene  of  Europe,  184,  185  ;  Oligo- 
cene of  North  America,  185  ;  Stampian, 
190  ;  Miocene  of  Europe,  242  ;  Miocene 
of  North  America,  244,  282,  283,  284, 
285,  291  ;  Burdigalian,  251  ;  Upper 
Miocene  of  North  America,  297,  298  ; 
Pliocene,  304,  (of  Europe)  306,  307, 
(Great  Plains)  342,  351,  369,  370, 
(California)  343,  344;  Astian,  314; 
northern  India  in  Pliocene,  332  ;  Pleis- 
tocene general,  373,  (Europe)  386,  387, 
388,  (Interglacial  periods)  376,  387, 
(of  Italy)  388,  389,  (Norfolk  Interglacial) 
393  ;  mid-Pleistocene  of  Europe,  401, 
402 ;  Upper  Pleistocene  of  Europe 
(tundra  period)  415,  (steppe  period) 
416,  417,  (forest  period)  417  ;  Pleisto- 
cene, North  Africa,  430 ;  Glacial  and 
post-Glacial  of  North  America,  435, 
442,  447,  448;  California  in  Glacial 
Epoch,  443  ;  of  North  American  moun- 
tain basin  in  Pleistocene,  447,  448,  461  ; 
fluctuations  of  temperature  (Sangamon 
interglacial  and  following),  448,  449  ; 
Silver  Lake  region,  459,  460  ;  Pleisto- 
cene of  Kansas,  462,  463,  464  ;  Mega- 
loriyx  zone,  465  ;  mid-Pleistocene  (Port 
Kennedy  Cave),  469 ;  Ovibos  zone 
(Conard  Fissure),  488 ;  Pleistocene  of 
Alaska,  490,  491,  492. 
Cochlops,  542.* 

COCKERELL, 

North  American  Miocene  flora,  282,  283  ; 
Florissant  flora  and  insects,  283,  284, 
285  ;   Walsenburg  Mylodon,  457  ;  fossil 
tse-tse  fly  at  Florissant,  507. 
Coleman, 

divisions  and  duration  of  North  Amer- 
ican Pleistocene,  446,  447. 
Colodon, 

foot  figured,  16 ;  lower  White  River, 
213  ;  Oreodon  zone,  220,  223  ;  557.* 

Colonoceras,  557.* 

Colpodon,  560.* 

Conacodon,  546.*  • 
Conard  Fissure,  487,  488. 

Concise  lake  dwellings,  428.  ; 

Concud  deposits,  266,  267. 

Condon, 

discovery  of  John  Day,  227. 

Condylarthra, 

Holarctic  origin,  68 ;  pre-Pliocene  ofl 
South  America,  78 ;    Thanetian,   103 ; 


Reference  to  classification. 


INDEX 


611 


Puerco,  107;  Torrejon,  110;  Wind 
River,  132  ;  evolution  and  extinction  in 
North  America,  charted,  174  ;  545.* 

Connochcetes,  432,  553.* 

Conoryctes,  109,  540.* 

Cook, 

Gomphotherium,  285  ;  Neotragocerus,  337. 
Cooper, 

Big  Bone  Lick,  478. 
Cope, 

results  of  early  work,  10  ;  discovery  of 
widespread  primitive  trituberculy,  10 ; 
correlation  of  European  and  North 
American  Tertiaries,  53  ;  Puerto,  105, 
107  ;  Eohippus,  135  ;  American  Eocene 
deposits,  157  ;  Cypress  Hills,  216  ;  Deep 
River,  281,  289  ;  Dibelodon,  364  ;  Equus 
fauna,  453  ;  Rock  Creek  fauna,  458 ; 
Fossil  Lake  (Silver  Lake),  458,  459,460  ; 
Megalonyx  fauna,  464  ;  Port  Kennedy 
Cave,  468,  469  ;  Washtucna  Lake,  474  ; 
man  and  the  Megalonyx  fauna,  496. 

Coralline  Crag  of  Suffolk,  310,  312. 

Cordilleran  center  of  glaciation,  442,  (map) 
485. 

Cordylodon,  521.* 

Corral  Hollow  flora,  344. 

Correlation, 

Cuvier's  law  of,  2,  3 ;  evolutionary 
law  of,  3,  4,  18  ;  not  fixed,  25  ;  palseon- 
tological,  39,  40,  41,  42,  45,  46,  47,  50, 
51,  52,  53. 

Coryphodon, 

Landenian,  100;  zone  of,  103,  111,  114, 
117-119,  122,  123,  124;  skeleton  and 
restoration,  110;  ancestry,  110;  first 
appearance.  111  ;  restoration,  112  ; 
eocenus,  oweni,  115;  Wasatch,  119,  122, 
124,  125  ;  Wind  River,  132  ;  extinction, 
138,  172  ;  brain  figured,  173  ;  547.* 

Creodonta, 

Holarctic,  68 ;  Fayum,  73,  74,  201  ; 
Torrejon,  111;  Wasatch,  126,  127; 
Wind  River,  132,  133  ;  evolution  and 
extinction  in  North  America  (diagram), 
174  ;  causes  of  extinction,  174,  175  ; 
lower  White  River,  213  ;  526.* 

Cricetodon, 

Sannoisian,  188,  189  ;  Burdigalian,  254  ; 
Vindobonian,  259  ;  536.* 

Cricetus, 

Astian,  316  ;  Pleistocene  Europe,  407  ; 
537.* 

Criotherixim,  264,  554.* 
j  Crocidura, 

Vindobonian,  259  ;  Astian,  316  ;  521.* 
Croix  Rousse  deposits,  269  ; 

location,  267. 
Croll, 

climate  of  Tnterglacial  Periods,  387. 
Cromer, 

see  Forest  Bed  of. 
Crossopus,  521.* 
Cryptoprocta,  74,  532.* 


Cuis,  sables  de,  102,  117. 
Cummins, 

Texas  deposits,  360. 

CUVIER, 

imperfection  of  fossils,  1  ;  law  of  corre- 
lation, 2,  3  ;  chief  contributions  to 
palaeontology,  4  ;  effects  of  physiographic 
changes,  21,  22  ;  replacement  of  faunas, 
22  ;  gypse  fauna,  145,  146,  147,  152 ; 
Anchitherium  of  the  sables,  251. 

Cyclopidius,  293,  550.* 

Cylindrodon,  534.* 

Cynocephalus, 

Siwahks,  327  ;  Karnul  Caves,  335;  545.* 

Cynodesmus, 

Promerycochoerus  zone,  236 ;  Mery- 
cochoerus  zone,  288  ;  528.* 

Cynodictis, 

Ludian,  146 ;  Sannoisian,  189 ;  lower 
White  River,  213  ;  Oreodon  zone,  222  ; 
Protoceras  zone,  227  ;  John  Day,  230 ; 
528.* 

Cynodon,  189,  528.* 

Cynodontomys, 

Wasatch,  127  ;  Wind  River,  134  ;  522.* 

Cynohycenodon,  527.* 

Cynomys,  457,  535.* 

Cyan,  296,  529.* 

Cyonasua,  529.* 

Cypress  Hills  deposits,  216. 

Dacrytherium,  149,  548.* 
Dcemonelix, 

interpretations    of,    235 ;     beds,  234, 

(photograph)  235. 
Doeodon,  549.* 
Dall, 

correlation  of  Tertiary  horizons,  53  ; 
North  and  South  American  land  con- 
nection, 245,  339  ;  Alachua  Clays  and 
Peace  Creek,  337,  346,  347,  366,  367; 
Alaskan  Pleistocene  deposits,  490,  491, 
492. 
Dana, 

duration  of  Csenozoic,  58,  63  ;  heights  of 
North  American  mountains  in  Eocene, 
85 ;  duration  of  Pleistocene,  385 ; 
Pleistocene  physiography  of  North 
America,  442  ;  Erie  Clays,  475  ;  Pleisto- 
cene glaciated  areas  of  North  America 
(map) ,  485,  486. 

Danian  stage,  98,  99. 

Daphcenodon,  236,  529.* 

Daphcenus, 

White  River,  213,  222  ;  skeleton  figured, 
222  ;  529.* 

Darton, 

^       Arikaree  formation,  278. 
Darwin, 

influence   on   palaeontology,    5,    6,    7  ; 
divergence,    23  ;     zoogeographic  distri- 
bution, 35  ;   effects  of  great  drought  in 
Patagonia,  370,  371  ;  extinction,  502. 
Dasypodidaj,  138,  542.* 


*  Reference  to  classification. 


612 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Davidson, 

loess  formation,  386. 
Davis, 

geology  of  Bridger  and  Washakie,  158  ; 
fluviatile  vs.  lacustrine  origin  of  bad- 
lands, 205. 

Dawkins,  Boyd, 

southward  retreat  of  monkeys  in  Plio- 
cene of  Europe,  320  ;  Pleistocene  rhi- 
noceroses, 390  ;  Forest  Bed  mammals, 
392,  393,  394,  395  ;  early  Pleistocene  of 
France,  395,  396. 

D6hruge  lignites,  145. 

Declicadapis, 

Landenian,  100  ;  Ypresian,  118. 

Deep  River  formation,  281,  288,  289; 
location,  86,  87 ;  correlation,  41,  249, 
277. 

Delphinus,  317,  562.* 
Deltatherium,  111,  526.* 
Deperet, 

correlation  of  mammal-bearing  forma- 
tions of  Europe,  51  ;  Basal  Eocene 
formations  of  Europe,  99,  100 ;  first 
appearance  of  Coryphodon  and  Hyra- 
cotherium,  111  ;  Eocene  formations  of 
Europe,  113,  117,  143,  144,  145;  Propa- 
chynolophus  gaudryi,  118 ;  Oligocene 
formations  of  Europe,  186,  187,  190, 
191,  194;  Stampian  fauna,  192;  Pyri- 
mont  deposit,  193  ;  Miocene  formations 
of  Europe,  244,  250,  256,  258,  263,  267  ; 
Vindobonian  mammals,  256,  260,  261  ; 
Mont  Leberon,  Croix  Rousse,  Montre- 
don,  269  ;  Pliocene  flora  and  climate, 
306,  307  ;  Pliocene  formations  of  Eu- 
rope, 312,  314,  318;  Pliocene  fauna  of 
Europe,  307,  311,  313,  314,  317,  318,  319. 

Deshayes, 

on  geologic  time  divisions,  40,  41. 

Desmathyus, 

Promerycochcerus    zone,    236 ;  Mery- 
cochcerus  zone,  286  ;  549.* 

Desmatotherium,  557.* 

Dcsmostylus,  344,  394,  559.* 

Diacodon,  125. 

Diadiaphorus,  561.* 

Dibelodon,  558.* 

(See  also  Tetralophodon.) 

Diceralherium, 

place  of  origin,  180  ;  zone,  182,  227,  228, 
229,  230,  (photograph)  229  ;  minutum  of 
Stampian,  190,  193  ;  Aquitanian,  198  ; 
Upper  Oligocene,  American,  224  ;  John 
Day,  230 ;  Promerycochcerus  zone, 
233,  235  ;  decline,  247.  251  ;  phylum, 
272  ;  last  American,  287  ;  557.* 

Dicerorhinus,  252  ; 

phylum  enters  Europe,  247,  248  ;  tagi- 
cus  of  Burdigalian,  252,  255  ;  sansani- 
ensis  of  Vindobonian,  255,  259  ;  simor- 
rensis  of  Vindobonian,  260,  262  ;  schleier- 
macheri  of  Pontian,  269  ;  phylogeny  of 
phylum,    272 ;    Coralline   Crag,    312 ; 

*  Reference  to 


leptorhinus,  315  ;  etruscus,  318,  320,  390, 
392,  396,  399  ;  platyrhinus  of  Siwaliks, 
327  ;  of  China,  334  ;  me<jarhinus 
(merckii),  390,  396,  400,  402,  403,  404, 
405,  406,  (characters)  408;  558.* 
Diceros, 

hicornis  (source  of),  71  ;  first  appearance 
in  Europe,  264,  421  ;  phylum,  272  ; 
antiquitatis  (tichorhinus) ,  390,  412,  421, 
(restoration)  421,  (skull  figured)  425 ; 
simus  (skull  figured),  425  ;  mauritanicus 
and  subinermis  of  North  Africa,  431  ; 
558.* 

Dichohune,  547.* 

Dichobunidae, 

Ypresian,  117;  later  Eocene,  147,  170; 
547.* 

Dichodon,  548.* 

(See  also  Dacrytherium.) 

Dichodontinae,  147,  548.* 

Dicotyles,  472,  549.* 

Dicotylidae, 

affinity  to  Doliochoerus,  198 ;  lower 
White  River,  213,  214  ;  Oreodon  zone, 
223  ;  John  Day,  231  ;  Promerycochcerus 
zone,  232,  236  ;  affinities  to  Choeromorus 
phylum,  260  ;  Merycochoerus  zone,  286  ; 
Hipparion  zone,  301  ;  549.* 

Dicrocerus, 

affinities,  249  ;  Burdigalian,  253  ;  Vin- 
dobonian, 259,  262  ;  outline  restoration, 
262  ;  Pontian,  269  ;  551.* 

Didelphodus, 

Wasatch,  125  ;  Wind  River,  133. 

Didelphops,  515.* 

Didelphyidse, 

pre-Pliocene  of  South  America,  79 ; 
Wasatch  times,  124  ;  Wind  River,  133  ; 
Ludian,  146 ;  Sannoisian,  189  ;  dis- 
appear in  Europe,  194. 

Didelphys, 

Cypress  Hills,  216  ;  Ashley  River,  472  ; 
516.* 

Didolodus,  546.* 

Didymictis, 

Torrejon,  108,  111;  Wasatch,  127; 
Wind  River,  134  ;  528.* 

Digital  reduction,  law  of,  13,  14,  15. 

Dimylus,  521.* 

Dinictis, 

lower  White  River,  214,  216  ;  Oreodon 
zone,  222  ;  restorations,  223,  225 ; 
phylum,  230  ;  532.* 

Dinoceras,  547.* 

(See  also  Uintatherium.) 

Dinocerata, 

first  appearance,  163  ;  Washakie,  166  ; 
causes  of  extinction,  172. 

Dinocynops,  529.* 

Dinocyon,  249  ; 

Vindobonian,  261  ;  Pontian,  269  ;  Clar- 
endon, 302  ;  Equuszone  (  ?),   454  ;  529.* 

Dinohyus, 

skeleton  figured,  187  ;  restoration,  192, 
classification. 


INDEX 


613 


218,  219 ;    Harrison  beds,  218 ;  final 

stages,  233,  235  ;  549  * 
Dinotherium, 

enters  Europe,   244,   246 ;  restoration 

(head),  247;  Burdigalian,  254;  Vindo- 

bonian,  262  ;  Pontian,  268,  270  ;  Manch- 

har,  275  ;  Siwaliks,  325,  329  ;  558  * 
Diplacodoji, 

zone,     169,     170,    (photograph)    206 ; 

Uinta,  169  ;  556  * 
Diplobune,  548.* 
Dipoides,  356,  357,  535  * 

(See  also  Eucastor.) 
Diprotodon,  518.* 
Diprotodonty,  11,  12; 

Basal  Eocene  mammals,   109 ;  Lower 

Eocene  mammals,  125. 
Dissacus, 

Landenian,  100;  Torrejon,  111  ;  527.* 
Doedicurus,  542.* 

Dolichopithecus,  307,  310,  315,  316,  545.* 
Dolichorhinus, 

skull  figured,  17  ;  restorations,  139,  142  ; 

Washakie,  167  ;  Uinta,  168  ;  556.* 
Doliochoerus, 

Aquitanian,  198  ;  aflSnities,  198  ;  548.* 

DOLLO, 

on  anatomical  evidence  of  alternations 
of  habitat,  31,  32  ;  on  arboreal  ancestry 
of  marsupials,  31,  32  ;  on  irreversibility 
of  evolution,  34  ;  on  Antarctica,  77. 

Domnina,  221,  521.* 

Don  formation  flora,  449. 

Dorcatherium, 

aflinities,  249  ;  Vindobonian,  262  ;  Mio- 
cene of  India,  275 ;  Punjab  Siwaliks, 
325,  328  ;  551.* 

Douglass, 

Fort  Union,  105,  106,  109 ;  Oligocene 
lizards  of  North  America,  208  ;  Pipe- 
stone Creek,  212  ;  Oligocene  and  Mio- 
cene of  Montana,  279,  281,  289  ;  camels 
of  Montana,  301  ;  Dromomeryx,  301  ; 
Oligocene  rhinoceroses  of  North  Dakota 
and  Montana,  351. 

Dremotherium, 

Asiatic  origin,  190 ;  Stampian,  191  ; 
Aquitanian,  197;  551.* 

Dromatherium,  515.* 

Dromocyon, 

skeleton  figured,  150  ;  527.* 

Dromomeryx,  295,  296,  301,  302  ;  Madison 
Valley,  281  ;  Ticholeptus  zone,  289  ; 
Hipparion  zone,  299  ;  551.* 

Dryolestes,  519.* 

Dryopithecus, 

Vindobonian,  256,  263,  264;  as  an 
eolith  maker,  384  ;  545.* 

Dubois, 

Pithecanthropus,  384. 

DusiNG, 

inbreeding,  503. 

Durfort,  395,  396  ; 
location,  391. 


Earle, 

ancestry  of  oreodonts,  149. 
Echinogale,  198. 
Ectocion,  132,  546.* 
Ectoconus,  546.* 
Edentata, 

pre-Pliocene  of  South  America,  78 ; 
evolution  in  North  America,  charted, 
174  ;  in  Mascall,  289  ;  significance  of 
presence  in  Miocene  and  Pliocene  of 
North  America,  339  ;  540.* 

Egerkingen  fauna,  142,  143,  148. 

Eggingen  deposits,  193,  194. 

Eibiswald  deposits,  257,  258,  260. 

ElGENMANN, 

affinities  of  South  American  fish  fauna, 

339,  340. 
Elasmotherium,  421,  422  ; 

phylogeny,  271,  272,  422  ;  558.* 
Elephas, 

evolution,  330,  331  ;  hysudricus,  330 ; 
heights  of  recent  and  extinct  species, 
397  ;  dwarfed  species  of  Mediterranean 
islands,  397,  398,  410;  extinction  in 
Pleistocene  of  America,  500  ;  559.* 

E.  meridionalis, 

molar  figured,  12  ;  first  appearance,  311, 
318;  characters,  320,  397,  398;  Nor- 
folk Interglacial,  392,  396  ;  height,  397  ; 
North  Africa,  431. 

E.  antiquus, 

affinities,  330,  331,  398,  410  ;  Norfolk 
Interglacial,  392,  394  ;  characters,  398  ; 
mid-Pleistocene,  402,  403,  404  ;  stage, 
405, 406, 407  ;  type  in  North  Africa,  431. 

E.  columbi,  441,  442  ; 
J'eace  Creek  (?),  368;  height,  397; 
distribution  (map),  439,  441  ;  molar 
figured,  440 ;  Equus  zone,  454,  455 ; 
skeleton  figured,  455;  Silver  Lake  (?), 
459 ;  Kansas  Pleistocene,  463,  464 ; 
of  Megalonyx  fauna,  466,  468  ;  Rancho 
la  Brea  (  ?),  473  ;  Washtucna  Lake,  474  ; 
Potter  Creek  Cave,  476  ;  Samwel  Cave, 
Big  Bone  Lick,  478  ;  Alaska  (  ?),  490. 

E.  imperator,  441,  442  ; 

zone,  368,  369  ;  height,  397,  441  ;  dis- 
tribution (map),  439,  441  ;  molar 
figured,  440 ;  restoration,  441,  452 ; 
Equus  zone  (  ?),  454,  455  ;  Rock  Creek, 
458;  Kansas  Pleistocene  (?),  464; 
Megalonyx  fauna  (  ?),  468. 

E.  primigenius, 

height,  397,  442  ;  phylogeny,  405,  408  ; 
characters  (Beresowka  mammoth),  419, 
420  ;  restoration,  420  ;  time  of  disap- 
pearance (Europe),  427  ;  distribution  in 
North  America  (map),  439,  441  ;  molar 
figured,  440  ;  first  appearance  (Ovibos 
zone),  440;  characters,  442;  of  Mega- 
lonyx fauna  ( ?) ,  468  ;  southern  limit  of 
distribution,  487  ;  Iroquois  Beach,  489  ; 
{E.  jacksoni)  Burlington  Bay,  489 ; 
Alaska,  489,  490,  491. 


*  Reference  to 


classification. 


614 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


E.  trogontherU, 

affinities,    398,    405 ;     supersedes  E. 

meridionalis,    400 ;     stage,    402,    403  ; 

niid-Pleistocene,    402,    403,   405,  406; 

characters,  408. 
Elgg  lignites,  257,  258,  263. 
Elothcrium,  549.* 

(See  also  Entelodon.) 
Embrithopoda,  73,  559.* 
Enhijdriodon,  531.* 
EnJitjdrocyon, 

John    Day,    230 ;  Promerycochocrus 

zone,  236;  529.* 
Entelodon, 

ancestral  to  European  entelodonts,  217, 
218  ;  John  Day,  230  ;  549.* 

Entelodontidaj, 

Washakie,  167 ;  Uinta,  168 ;  origin, 
180 ;  teeth,  180 ;  restoration,  181  ; 
Sannoisian,  188  ;  extinction  in  Europe, 
193,  247  ;  lower  White  River,  213,  215  ; 
evolution  in  America,  217,  218  ;  Oreo- 
don  zane,  223  ;  John  Day,  230  ;  Pro- 
merycocho'rus  zone,  233,  235  ;  Siwaliks, 
326,  329  ;  549.* 

Entomoltstes,  522.* 

Entoptychufi,  536.* 

Environment, 

evolution  of,  18  ;  migration  of,  18. 

Eobasileus, 

zone,  166,  167,  168,  169  ;  outline  res- 
toration (head),  142  ;  restoration,  166  ; 
547.* 

Eocardia,  540.* 

Eocene  carboniferous  of  North  America,  93. 
Eohippus, 

evolution  of  molars,  45  ;  probable  date, 
58  ;  skeleton  figured,  60  ;  upper  molar 
figured,  61  ;  restorations,  116,  133,  135; 
borealis,  116;  validus,  117,  128;  Wa- 
satch, 119,  124;  venticolus,  130,  134, 
135;  W^ind  River,  133,  134;  skeleton 
figured,  295  ;  555.* 

Eolithic  stage,  381,  382,  384,  385,  403 ; 
(tables)  379,  381,  383. 

Eoliths, 

makers  of,  307,  384,  385 ;  history  of 
discovery  and  discussion  regarding, 
381,  382  ;  of  Mafflean  epoch,  figured, 
382;  distribution,  382,  384,  385,  399, 
404. 

Eomys,  534.* 

Eosiren,  182,  200.  559.* 

Eolherium,  182,  559.* 

Eotitanops,  130,  134,  556.* 

Eotijlopus,  550.* 

Epanorthus,  517.* 

Epigaulus,  352  ; 

outline  restoration,  291  ;  535.* 

Epihippus, 

figured,  14 ;  evolved  from  Orohippus, 
45  ;  corresponds  to  Lophiotherium,  145, 
170;  Uinta,  170;  555.* 

Eporeodon, 


Oreodon  zone,  220 ;    John  Day,  231  ; 
549.* 

Eppelsheim  deposits,  269,  270  ;  correlation, 

266,  267  ;  primates  of,  271. 
Equidai, 

Eocene,  138,  156  ;  absence  in  European 
Oligocene,  179,  188,  193,  195 ;  poly- 
phyletic  in  Oligocene  of  North  America, 
214,  223  ;  John  Day,  230 ;  Promery- 
cochocrus zone,  233,  236 ;  return  to 
Europe,  250  ;  Merycochoerus  zone,  287  ; 
varied,  of  Hipparion  zone,  297,  300 ; 
highly  polyphyletic  in  Lower  I*liocene 
of  North  America,  345,  346,  350,  351, 
355,  356  ;  Middle  Pliocene,  Anierican, 
365 ;  older  Pleistocene  distribution, 
401  ;  Ewart  on  relations  of  modern  to 
Pleistocene,  408,  409 ;  extinction  in 
American  Pleistocene,  438,  500,  507 ; 
of  Equus  zone,  454,  455  ;  Pleistocene, 
North  American,  484,  485 ;  last  in 
Ovibos  zone,  487  ;  distribution  of  fossil 
and  recent  (map),  505  ;  555.* 
Equus, 

North  American  origin,  46  ;  phylogeny, 
300,  321,  328,  350;  stenonis,  311,  318, 
321,  328,  394,  403,  409  ;  sivalensis,  321, 
328,  335,  409  ;  Pleistocene,  335  ;  Peace 
Creek,  368;  Norfolk  Interglacial,  392; 
doubtful  species  of  older  Pleistocene, 
401  ;  przewalskii,  409,  417  ;  numidicus, 
mauritanicus,  asinus  (type)  of  North 
Africa,  431,  432  ;  zone  of  North  America, 
439,  452-464,  497;  fauna  (date  and 
distribution),  453,  454;  complicatus, 
456,  484,  485  ;  fraternus,  456,  470,  471, 
472,  484  ;  pacificus,  460,  473,  477,  485  ; 
occidentalis,  460,  477,  484  ;  species  of 
Kansas  Pleistocene,  464  ;  distribution  in 
Megalonyx  zone,  466 ;  Afton  (Iowa), 
467,  468 ;  pectinatus,  470,  484 ;  semi- 
plicatus,  giganteus,  conversidens,  484 ; 
Alaskan  Pleistocene,  489,  490,  491  ; 
556.* 

E.  cahallus, 

molar  figured,  12  ;  foot  figured,  14 ; 
doubtful  references  in  older  Pleistocene 
of  Europe,  401,  402,  403,  407;  'forest  j 
variety,'  407,  409,  427,  428,  429; 
'plateau  variety,'  'steppe  variety,' 
409;  celticus,  409,  417,  428,  429;  of. 
Kesslerloch  resembles  E.  Przewalsly, 
426 ;  Solutre  palaeolithic  camp,  427 ; 
post-Pleistocene  of  Thuringia,  428. 

E.  scotti, 

skeleton    figured,    60 ;     Rock  Creek 
quarry  containing  six  skeletons  of,  456, 
457;  restoration,  458  ;  characters,  484  ; 
Conard  Fissure  (?),  488. 
Erethizon, 

Megalonyx  zone,  440,  466  ;  Port  Ken 

nedy  Cave,  469,  470  ;  539.* 
Erie  clays,  475. 
Erinaceidae, 


i 


*  Reference  to  classification. 


INDEX 


615 


first  appearance  (Europe),  149,  (North 

America),  221  ;  520  * 
Erinaceus,  259,  520  * 
Erquelinnes,  deposit  and  fauna,  100. 
Eschatius,  460,  550* 
Essex  Pleistocene  fauna, 

see  Ilford  and  Grays-Thurrock. 
Esthonyx, 

Wasatch,  125;  Wind  River,  132;  523* 
Eucastor, 

Hipparion  zone,  302  ;    lower  Pliocene, 

352;  535* 
Euceratheritim. 

appears  (Megalonyx  zone),  440,  466  ; 

Potter  Creek  Cave,  476  ;  Samwel  Cave, 

478;  554* 
Eucinepeltus,  542.* 
Eucoleops,  541.* 
Euhapsis,  535.* 
Eumys,  221,  536.* 
Euprotogonia, 

outline  restoration,  108;  Torrejon,  110; 

546.* 

Eusmilus,  227,  532.* 
Eutamias,  477. 
Euiatus,  542.* 
Eutypomys,  221,  535.* 
Euzet  deposit,  145. 

EWART, 

ancestry  of  existing  horses,  326,  328  ; 
Essex  horse,  407 ;  forest,  steppe,  pla- 
teau horses,  408,  409,  417,  427. 

Exploitation  Helin, 
section,  384. 

Extinction, 

Buffon  on,  20,  21  ;  causes  of,  34,  172, 
173,  174,  175,  176,  285,  370,  371 ,  501, 
502,  503,  504,  506,  507,  508;  as  basis 
for  palaeontologic  correlation,  47,  338  ; 
of  reptiles  at  close  of  Cretaceous,  98, 
101  ;  of  archaic  Eocene  mammals,  172, 
173,  174,  175,  176  ;  of  Oligocene  mam- 
mals, 237,  238,  239,  240,  241  ;  of  Plio- 
cene mammals,  369,  370,  371  ;  of  Pleis- 
tocene mammals,  500-509. 

Falconer, 

Siwalik  mammals,  323. 

Faunal  phases  of  Ctenozoic,  96  ; 

first,  102;  second,  112;  third,  138; 
fourth,  178;  fifth,  242;  sixth,  304; 
seventh,  374. 

Faune  ageienne,  117,  120. 

Fayum,  199,  200,  201,  202,  203  ; 

discovery  of  fossils  in,  72  ;  orders  repre- 
sented among  fossil  mammals,  73  ; 
photograph,  198  ;  section,  199. 

Felidae, 

appear  in  Europe  (Stampian),  192,  193  ; 
John  Day,  230  ;  Ticholeptus  zone,  296  ; 
Sicilian  stage,  319 ;  Siwaliks,  327 ; 
competition  with  saber-tooths  in  Amer- 
ican Pleistocene,  470  ;  532.* 
Felis, 


zitteli  (Vindobonian),  261  ;  lynx,  315, 
403  ;  christoli  (Astian),  316  ;  catus,  316, 
429 ;  Siwaliks,  327  ;  hiUianus  (earliest 
American),  366  ;  spelcea  (mid-Pleisto- 
cene), 400,  403,  407,  (affinities  and  dis- 
tribution) 422,  423  ;  nianul,  417  ;  atrox, 
467,  473,  486  ;  uncia,  469,  470  ;  concolor, 
474 ;  impcrialis,  474,  486  ;  canadensis, 
474  ;  532.* 

La  F^re,  glauconie  de,  103. 

Ferte  Alais  deposit,  190,  191. 

Fiber, 

Hay  Springs,  457  ;  Silver  Lake,  459  ; 
Ashley  River,  472  ;  537.* 

FiLHOL, 

Quercy,  151  ;  Ronzon,  189  ;  St.  Gerand- 
le-Puy,  195,  196  ;  Sansan,  257,  259. 
Fishes, 

Thanetian,  104  ;  Green  River  shales, 
136  ;  Bridger,  160  ;  Cypress  Hills,  216  ; 
CEningen,  263  ;  Roussillon,  316  ;  affini- 
ties of  North  and  South  American,  and 
significance  for  palseogeography,  339, 
340. 

Flint  Creek  deposit,  281,  288,  289  ; 

rhinoceroses  of,  300. 
Flora, 

as  key  to  evolution  of  herbivores,  93  ; 
evolution  of  grasses,  93,  94  ;  late  Cre- 
taceous and  early  Eocene,  94,  95,  (of 
North  America)  100,  101,  (Greenland) 
104  ;  Thanetian,  104  ;  Sparnacian,  114, 
115;  Ypresian,  117;  Green  River 
Shales,  136  ;  Bartonian,  140 ;  Oligo- 
cene of  Europe,  183,  184,  185  ;  Stam- 
pian, 190  ;  Oligocene  of  North  America, 
208  ;  Miocene,  242,  244  ;  Burdigalian, 
251  ;  of  CEningen,  263  ;  Congeria  grav- 
els, 266 ;  Miocene  of  North  America, 
282,  283,  284,  290,  291  ;  Pliocene  of 
Europe,  306,  307  ;  Pliocene  (California), 
343,  344,  (Eastern  States)  345  ;  Pleisto- 
cene of  Europe,  386,  387,  388  ;  Norfolk 
Interglacial,  393,  396,  397  ;  Quaternary 
tuffs  of  Provence  (mid-Pleistocene), 
401,  402  ;  Upper  Pleistocene  (tundra), 
415,  419,  (steppe)  417  ;  American  Inter- 
glacial, 444,  445  ;  Toronto  formation, 
449  ;  Scarborough  beds,  Leda  clays, 
449  ;  Silver  Lake  region,  459  ;  Port 
Kennedy  Cave,  469  ;  Pleistocene  of 
Alaska,  490,  491  ;  Holarctic  region  in 
Pleistocene,  506. 

Florida,  geological  map,  347. 

Florissant  Lake,  283,  284,  285. 

Forbes,  E., 

on  origin  of  British  fauna  and  flora,  35. 

Forbes,  H.  O., 

on  Antarctica,  75,  76. 

Forest  Bed  of  Cromer,  393,  394,  395  ;  loca- 
tion, 391  ;  correlation,  392. 

Forest  fauna, 

of  Pleistocene,  388,  (summarized)  414, 
(Schweizersbild)  418,  (Kesslerloch)  425  ; 


*  Reference  to  classification. 


616 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


horse  of,  409,  417 ;  post-Pleistocene, 
42S,  429. 
Formations, 

geologic,  47,  48  ;  kinds  of,  55. 

FORSHAY, 

on  rate  of  deposition  of  Mississippi,  61. 
Fort  I'nion  formation, 

flora,  95,  100,  101  ;  correlation,  99,  100  ; 

section,  101  ;   geology  and  fauna,  105, 

106,  109. 
Fossil  Lake, 

see  Silver  Lake. 
Fraas, 

aqueous  origin  of  White  River  formation, 

205  ;  Stcinheim,  261. 
Frankstown  Cave,  467,  470,  471. 
Frohnstetten  Bohnerz,  186,  187. 
Furlong, 

Samwel  Cave,  477,  478. 

Gaillard, 

Quercy    phosphorites,    151,    152 ;  La 

Grive-Saint-Alban,  261. 
Galecynus,  528.* 
Galerix, 

affinities,  254  ;  Vindobonian,  259  ;  520.* 
Galethylax,  527.* 
Gannat  deposits,  190,  191, 
Gardner, 

evolution  of  grasses,  94. 
Gargas,  lignites  de,  145. 
Garzonia,  517.* 
Gaudry, 

discovery  of  polyphyletic  law  as  applied 
to  mammals,  6  ;  Miocene  grasses,  244  ; 
Pikermi  fauna,  267,  268  ;  Mont  Leberon 
fauna,  269  ;  Chinese  fossils,  333  ;  mam- 
mals of  Durfort,  396  ;  and  Boule  on 
Pleistocene  bear,  423. 
Gazella, 

Pontian,  269  ;  Pliocene  of  Europe,  316, 
319  ;  Siwalik,  328  ;  China,  334  ;  Pleisto- 
cene of  North  Africa,  432  ;  553.* 

Geikie,  a., 

on  rates  of  deposition  by  rivers,  62  ; 
geology  of  Indian  Tertiaries,  273,  326. 

Geikie,  J., 

early  Pleistocene  geology  and  climate, 
392,  393. 

Gelocidse,  188,  189,  191,  550.* 

Gelocus, 

Sannoisian,  189  ;  Stampian,  191  ;  550.* 
Geniohyus,  201. 
Geomyidie, 

first  appearance,  230 ;    Miocene,  248 ; 

Pliocene,  357. 
Geomys, 

Virgin  Valley,  357  ;   Silver  Lake,  460  ; 

Kansas  Pleistocene,  464  ;  536.* 
Georgensgmund  deposits,  257,  258,  260. 
Georhynchus,  521.* 
Geotrypiis,  521.* 
Gering  formation,  231. 

GiDLEY, 


Ptilodus,  108; 'section  on  Llano  Esta- 
cado,  279  ;  discovery  of  Neohipparion 
whitneyi,  298,  351  ;  protohippine  horses, 
350,  365  ;  Mylagaulidae,  352  ;  Tertiary 
formations  of  Texas,  360,  361,  362; 
discovery  of  six  Equus  scotti  skeletons, 
458  :  Pleistocene  horses,  484,  485. 
Gilbert, 

Silver  Lake,  459 ;  Lakes  Bonneville 
and  Lahontan,  447,  461,  468. 

GiLMORE, 

Pleistocene  deposits  of  Alaska,  490. 
Giraffidae, 

first  appearance  in  Europe,  264 ;  Siwalik, 
328  ;  551.* 

Glacial  Period, 

general  southward  migration  during,  18  ; 
indications  of  advent,  318 ;  map  of 
Europe  during,  376 ;  temperature  of 
Europe  during,  388  ;  geologic  divisions 
in  America,  435,  444,  445  ;  maximum 
glaciation  in  North  America  (map),  485  ; 
followed  by  extinction  of  mammals  in 
North  America,  500,  501,  504. 

Glossotherium,  541.* 

Glyptodon,  542.* 

Glyptodontidae, 

first  appearance  in  North  America 
(Blanco),  363,  365;  Peace  Creek,  368; 
American  Pleistocene  (disappearance), 
438 ;  Equus  zone,  454 ;  extinction  in 
North  America,  500 ;  542.* 

Glyptotherium,  365,  366  ; 

zone,  360,  361,  362,  363,  364,  365,  366; 
fossU  remains  partly  exposed  (photo- 
graph), 360;  outline  restoration,  364; 
carapace  and  tail  figured,  365  ;  542.* 

Gomphotherium, 

Merycochoerus  zone,  285  ;  558.* 
(See  also  Trilophodon.) 

Goniacodon,  527.* 

Goodland  deposit,  461,  462,  463. 

Goriach  deposits,  257,  258,  260. 

Grandidier, 

on  zoogeographic  relations  of  Madagas- 
car, 74. 

Granger, 

Wind  River,  129  ;   geology  of  Bridger 
and  Washakie,  160  ;  Fayiim  exploration, 
200. 
Grant, 

caribou,  422  ;  effect  of  severe  winters  on 
Cervidae,  503. 
Grasses,  evolution  of,  93,  94,  185,  244,  283, 
351. 

Grays  Thurrock  deposit,  406,  407. 
Great  Plains  formations  of  North  America, 
54,  88,  89  ; 

Oligocene,  177,  204,  205,  206,  231,  232, 
233,  234,  235,  236  ;  Miocene  and  Plio- 
cene, 278,  279,  297. 

Greenland, 

Basal  Eocene  flora,  104. 

Green  River  Shales,  135,  136  ; 


Reference  to  classification. 


INDEX 


617 


location,  86,  87,  120 ;   correlation,  42  ; 

sections,  121,  153. 
Gregory,  J.  W., 

Atlantis    hypothesis,    340  ;     effect  of 

droughts  in  central  Africa,  370. 
Gregory,  W.  K., 

Orders  of  Mammals,  25. 
Guilielmofloweria,  546.* 
Gulo, 

Norfolk  Interglacial,  394  ;  post-Pleisto- 
cene, Europe,  429  ;  Port  Kennedy  Cave, 
469;  530.* 

Giinsburg  deposits,  257,  258,  263. 

Gymnoptychus,  536.* 

Haacke, 

North  Polar  theory,  66,  67,  70. 
Halitherium,  182,  248,  255,  317,  559.* 
Hall, 

'cedar-root  chronology,'  62. 

Hapalodectes,  527.* 

Hapalops,  541.* 

Haplohunodon,  148. 

Haploconus,  546.* 

Haplodontidae, 

first  appearance,  2^9 ;  Miocene,  248 ; 
(Aplodontiidae)  534.* 

Haplodontia, 

Virgin  Valley,  357  ;  Potter  Creek  Cave, 
477  ;  (Aplodontia)  534.* 

Haplognle,  530.* 

Haplomeryx,  548.* 

Harle, 

Cajarc,  395,  396. 

Harpagolestes, 

outline  restoration  (head),  142  ;  Washa- 
kie and  Uinta,  168,  169  ;  527.* 

Harrison  formation,  231,  234,  285  ; 

correlation,  41,  42,  277  ;  Lower  (photo- 
graph), 234  ;  section,  278  ;  Upper,  288. 

Harwich  deposits,  102,  115. 

Hassleben  peat  bogs,  428,  429. 

Hatcher, 

Titanotherium  zone,  52,  212  ;  fluviatile 
origin  Oligocene  Great  Plains  deposits, 
205,  206,  208  ;  Teleoceras,  252  ;  Miocene 
Great  Plains  formations,  279  ;  distribu- 
tion of  fossil  Ovibos  in  North  America,  492. 

Haughton, 

rate  of  denudation  in  river  basins,  62. 

Hay, 

geology  of  Bridger,  158  ;  Bridger  turtles, 
160,  161  ;   Oligocene  turtles,  208,  210  ; 
Pliocene  turtles  of  Kansas,  350  ;  Kansas 
plains  loess,  461. 
Hayden, 

explorations  in  Rocky  Mountains,  9,  10  ; 
attempts  at  correlation,  51,  52;  Wasatch, 
119;  Wind  River,  129;  and  Peale  on 
Montana  Tertiaries,  281  ;  Loup  River, 
368,  369. 

Hay  Springs  quarry,  453,  456,  457  ; 

photograph,  459 ;  age  compared  with 
Silver  Lake,  459. 


Hedley, 

on  Antarctica,  76. 
Heer, 

(Eningen  flora,  263. 
Hegetotherium,  561.* 
Heidenheim  fissure  deposits,  144. 
Helaletes,  161,  557.* 
Heliscomys,  536.* 
Helladotherium,  268,  269,  551.* 
Hell  Creek  beds, 

see  Laramie. 
Helohyus,  547.* 
Helvetian  Interglacial, 

fauna,  377,  378. 
Helvetian  marine  stage,  257. 
Hemiacodon,  543.* 
Hemibos,  327. 
Hemicyon,  259,  529.* 
Hemiganus,  540.* 
Hemimeryx,  275. 
Hemipsalodon,  216,  527.* 
Hemithlceus,  546.* 
Hempstead  deposit,  186,  187. 
Heptodon, 

Wasatch,  124,  127  ;  Wind  River,  135  ; 
557.* 

Heme  Bay  deposits,  102,  115. 
Herpestes, 

Aquitanian,  197 ;  Vindobonian,  261  ; 
532* 

Hesperomys,  470,  537.* 
Heteromyidse, 

Uinta,  168  ;  Merycochoerus  zone,  287  ; 

536.* 

Hexaprotodon,  329,  549.* 
Hilber, 

Miocene  conditions  in  Styria,  260. 
Hill, 

palseogeography  of  the  Americas,  81, 
245,  339. 
Hills, 

discovery  of  Huerfano  beds,  129. 

Himalayas,  elevation  of,  59,  60. 

Hipparion,  297  ; 

zone,  297-302  ;  fauna,  264,  (distribution 
charted)  265 ;  enters  Europe,  264  ; 
Pontian,  268,  269;  of  'older  Pliocene 
fauna,'  310,  315  ;  persists  into  L'pper 
Pliocene  of  Europe  (?),  317;  Siwaliks, 
327,  328  ;  Maragha,  332  ;  China,  333, 
334  ;  Alachua  Clays,  348  ;  North  Africa, 
431  ;  Ashley  River,  472  ;  556.* 

Hippidion,  556.* 

Hippohyus,  329. 

Hippopotamus, 

of  Madagascar,  74  ;  ancestry,  148,  313  ; 
brain  figured,  173  ;  enters  Europe,  311, 
313,317;  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  species 
and  range,  313,  318;  Siwalik,  329, 
major,  (Norfolk  Interglacial)  392,  396, 
(mid-Pleistocene  Europe)  400,  402, 
403,  405,  410;  dwarfed  of  Mediter- 
ranean islands,  410 ;  Asiatic  origin, 
430  ;     Pleistocene    species    of  North 


Reference  to  classification. 


618 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Africa,  433  ;  skeleton  of  Madagascan 
pigmy  figured,  433 ;  amphibius,  skull 
figured,  433  ;  549* 

Hippotragus, 

Siwaliks,  32S  ;  Pliocene  distribution  of 
antelopes  allied  to  (map),  336,  337  ; 
recent,  figured,  337  ;  554.* 

Holarctica,  64  ; 

as  center  of  evolution  of  mammals,  65, 
67  ;  pre-Miocene,  79  ;  to-day,  95  ; 
possible  origin  of  lower  Eocene  mammals 
in,  112;  broken  up  in  Middle  Eocene, 
137 ;  reestablished  in  Oligocene,  177 ; 
Miocene,  244,  (map)  245 ;  Pliocene 
(map),  303,  304  ;  Pleistocene  (maps), 
373.  443. 

Holland, 

Frankstown  Cave,  470,  471. 

HOLLICK, 

Mascall  flora,  291. 
Holmes,  F.  S., 

Ashley  River,  471  ;  man  and  the  masto- 
don, 495. 
Holmes,  W.  H., 

human  implements  and  animal  remains 

at  Afton,  475,  496. 
Holocene,  372,  428,  429,  (map  of  world)  501. 
Holomcniscus,  458. 
Homncodon,  157,  547.* 
Homalodolherium,  560.* 
Homo  heidelhergensis, 

finding  of  eoliths  with,  384  ;  age  of,  401, 

403  ;     contemporary    mammals,    403  ; 

characters,  404  ;  jaw  figured,  404. 
Homo  neandertalensis, 

age  of,  401;    restorations   (head),  406, 

420;  characters,  410,  411,  412;  absent 

from  North  America,  494. 
Homo  mousteriensis, 

see  note,  p.  411. 
Homo  primigenius, 

see  note  p.  411. 
Homotaxis,  39,  43,  45,  46,  47. 
Homunculus,  543.* 
Hooker, 

on  Antarctic  land,  75. 
Hoptocetus,  317. 
Hoplophonens, 

skeleton  figured,   197 ;    Oreodon  zone, 

222  ;  phylum,  230;  532.* 
Horse  flics, 

Florissant,  285. 
Horsetail  Creek  deposit,  87,  204. 
Horta  de  Tripas  deposit,  255. 
Hrdlicka, 

skeletal    remains    attributed    to  early 

man  in  North  America,  499,  500. 
Huerfano  deposits, 

correlation,  42,  114,  139,  153;  location, 

86,  87  ;  geology,  129. 
Humphreys  and  Abbott, 

on  rate  of  deposition  of  Mississippi,  61. 
Huxley, 

correlation,  2  ;  method  of  palaeontology, 
*  Reference  to 


6;  reconstruction  of  an  unknown  stem 
form,  7  ;  arboreal  ancestry  of  marsu- 
pials, 31  ;  time  value  of  fossils,  45  ;  a 
South  Atlantic  land  bridge,  75  ;  ances- 
tor of  horses,  146. 
Hycena, 

arvernensis,  315 ;  Sicilian  stage,  320 ; 
Siwaliks,  327;  China,  334;  Karnul 
Caves,  335  ;  spelcea,  407,  (characters  and 
affinities)  423,  424  ;  Asiatic  origin,  430  ; 
532.* 

Hycencelurus,  532.* 

Hyoenarctos, 

Pontian,  269;  Astian,  314;  Siwaliks,  327. 

Hyeenictis,  532.* 

Hycenodidis, 

Landenian,  100  ;  Thanetian,  104  ;  Ypre- 
sian,  118;  527.* 

Hyvenodon, 

Bartonian  and  Ludian,  145,  150  ;  skele- 
ton figured,  189 ;  Sannoisian,  189 ; 
Fay(im,  201  ;  outline  restoration,  215  ; 
Oreodon  zone,  222  ;  527.* 

Hyaenodontidae, 

Lower  Eocene  distribution,  127  ;  Wind 
River,  132,  133  ;  Ludian,  145  ;  extinc- 
tion (North  America),  170,  (Europe) 
193  ;  Fayum,  201  ;  lower  White  River, 
213,  216 ;  last  appearance  (Oreodoa 
zone),  221,  222;  527.* 

Hydaspitherium,  551.* 

Hyopotamus,  274,  548,*  549.* 

Hyopsodontidae,  125,  522.* 

Hyopsodus, 

Wasatch,  125 ;  Wind  River,  133 ; 
Washakie,  165  ;  522.* 

Hyotherium, 

phylpgeny,  253  ;  Vindobonian,  259,  260  ; 
Miocene  of  India,  275  ;  548.* 

Hypertragulidae, 

first  appearance  in  America,  157.  168, 
170;  lower  White  River,  213,  215; 
Oreodon  zone,  222;  John  Day,  231. 

Hypertragulus, 

lower  White  River,  215  ;  Oreodon  zone, 
220  ;  John  Day,  231  ;  551.* 

Hypisodus,  220,  551.* 

Hypohippiis,  350  ;  partially  exhumed  skele- 
ton figured,  56  ;  affinity  to  Mesohippus 
eidophus,  223;  Ticholeptus  zone,  292, 
293  ;  skeleton  figured,  295  ;  restoration, 
296  ;  Hipparion  zone,  297,  298  ;  China, 
297,  333,  334;  early  Pliocene  (?), 
North  America,  345,  350  ;  Snake  Creek, 
355;  555.* 

Hyrachyus, 

Wind  River,  130,  135;  Bridger  and 
Washakie,  162,  164  ;  outline  restoration, 
162;  557.* 

Hyracodon, 

restoration,  214 ;  Oreodon  zone,  220; 
557.* 

Hyracodontidae, 

Wind  River,  135 ;    Middle  and  Upper 

classification. 


INDEX 


619 


Eocene,  156  ;  lower  White  River,  213  ; 
Oreodon  zone,  223  ;  557  * 

Hyracoidea, 

possible  African  origin,  73  ;  Fayiim,  202, 
203  ;  enter  Europe,  264  ;  559  * 

Hyracotheriinse, 

Sparnacian,  115;  Ypresian,  117;  Wa- 
satch, 127,  128 ;  Middle  and  Upper 
Eocene  of  Europe,  147  ;  555.* 

Hyracothe  Hum, 

molar  figured,  11  ;  first  appearance,  111  ; 
Loudon  Clay,  116,  128;  skull  figured 
{H.  vulviceps),  116;  555.* 

Hystricops,  535.* 

Hystrix, 

Vindobonian,  256 ;  Pontian,  268 ;  Si- 
wahks,  327  ;  539.* 

Icticyon,  296,  529.* 

Ictitherium, 

enters  Europe,  264  ;  Plaisancian,  312  ; 
532  * 

Ictops,  520.* 

VON  Ihering, 

Tertiary  water  barrier  in  Amazon 
region,  339. 

Ilford  deposit,  406,  407. 

Ilingoceros,  338,  357,  554.* 

Illinoian  Glacial,  435,  444,  445  ; 
European  correlation,  379. 

Inbreeding, 

in  relation  to  extinction,  502,  503. 

Indrodon,  522.* 

Insectivora, 

origin  of,  68 ;  pre-Pliocene  of  South 
America,  78,  79;  Torrejon,  111  ;  Ypre- 
sian, 117;  Wasatch,  125;  Wind  River, 
132,  133  ;  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene, 
American,  155 ;  evolution  in  North 
America  charted,  174  ;  Stampian,  191  ; 
Pipestone  Creek,  216 ;  Vindobonian, 
259. 

Insects, 

(Eningen,  263  ;  Florissant,  284,  285, 
507  ;  effect  of  Glacial  Period  on,  450  ; 
Scarborough  beds,  451  ;  as  disease 
bearers  to  mammals,  507,  508,  509. 

Insular  conditions, 

effect  on  survival,  175,  176. 

Interatherium,  561.* 

Interglacial  periods, 

climate,  duration,  376. 

lowan  glacial,  435,  444,  446. 

Irawadi  Valley, 

deposits,  274,  323  ;  fauna,  324,  326. 

Iroquois  Beach  deposits,  488,  489. 

Irreversibility  of  evolution,  law  of,  34. 

Ischyrocyon,  301,  529.* 

Ischyromyidse,  179  ; 

Wasatch,  128;  Wind  River,  134; 
Middle  and  Upper  Eocene,  American, 
156,  168  ;  Pipestone  Creek,  216  ;  Oreo- 
don zone,  221  ;  534.* 

Ischyromys,  534.* 


Isectolophus, 

Bridger,  164;  Uinta,  170;  556.* 
Isotemnus,  560.* 
Issiodoromys,  539.* 

Japan, 

Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  deposits,  322, 
323  ;  separation  from  Asia,  374. 
Java, 

fossil  fauna,  322,  323 ;    cut  off  from 
Malayan  peninsula,  374. 
Jena  travertines,  428. 

JOHANNSEN, 

analysis   of    North   American  Eocene 
rocks,  91,  92,  123,  158. 
John  Day  formation, 

location,  204  ;  correlation,  42,  224 ; 
Lower,  226  ;  Middle,  227,  228,  229, 
230,  (photograph)  229  ;  Upper,  231, 
232,  (photograph)  232,  (section)  233  ; 
photograph,  358  ;  secti^)n,  359. 

JOURDAN, 

exploration  of  La  Grive,  260. 

Kansan  Glacial,  435,  445. 

European  correlation,  379,  445 ;  drift 

of  (photograph),  446. 
Kansas  Pleistocene  (map),  451,  453  ;  geologic 

succession,  461  ;  fauna,  461,  462,  463, 

464. 

Kapffnach  deposits,  257,  258,  263. 
Karnul  Caves  fauna,  335,  336. 
Karoomys,  515.* 

Keewatin  center  of  glaciation,  442,  444,  445, 

(map)  485. 
Kesslerloch  Cave,  425,  426  ; 

location  and  correlation,  413. 
King, 

volcanic  ash  in  Wasatch,  90  ;  geology 
of  Bridger  and  Washakie,  158. 
Kirker  Pass  flora,  344. 

KiTTL, 

Maragha,  270  ;  Tapirus  arvernensis,  320. 
Knight, 

duration  of  Csenozoic,  62,  64, 
Knowlton, 

North  American  flora  of  Cretaceous  and 

Eocene,  95,  100,  101  ;  of  Miocene,  282, 

283,  290,  291. 

KOBELT, 

steppe  mammals  no  sure  indication  of 
steppe  country,  417. 
Koch, 

flint  arrowheads  with  mastodon  bones, 

495. 
Koken, 

fossils  of  China,  333. 
Konigsberg  amber  beds, 

flora,  185. 

KOPPEN, 

Asiatic  origin  of  Cervidse,  418. 
Kowak  clays,  487,  490. 

KOWALEVSKY, 

modern  spirit  of  writings,  6  ;  biological 


*  Reference  to  classification. 


620 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


method  in  palaeontology,  8  ;  evolution 
of  ungulate  feet,  15,  16 ;  inadaptive 
feet  and  teeth,  238  ;  increase  of  grassy 
plains  in  Miocene,  244. 

Krapina  cave,  410,  411. 

Kyson  deposits,  102,  115. 

Labradorian  center  of  glaciation,  442,  444, 
(map)  485. 

Lagodus,  269. 

Lagomeryx,  262. 

LagoniyidiE, 

first  appearance  in  Europe,  191  ;  534.* 

Lagomys,  316  ; 

Port  Koimedy  Cave,  469  ;  534.* 

La  Grive-Saint-All)an, 

stage  of.  260,  261,  262 ;    deposit  and 
fauna,  260,  261. 

Lahontan,  Lake,  447,  448  ; 

periods  of  rise  and  fall,  448;  'upper 
terraces'  of,  453  ;  correlation  of  lacustral 
movements  with  Silver  Lake  deposits, 
459  ;  fauna  of  upper  beds,  468  ;  mapped, 
485  ;  spearhead  in  upper  lacustral 
clays,  497. 

Lake  dwellings,  428,  429. 

La  Levini6re  deposit,  143,  144,  148. 

L.\MARCK, 

on  divergence  or  embranchement,  22,  23. 
Lamhdoconus,  546.* 
Lambdotheriurn, 

Wasatch,  124  ;  zone,  Wind  River,  130 

134,  (photograph)  178  ;  556.* 
Lambe, 

Cypress  Hills,  216. 
Landenian  stage,  100. 
Langensalza  travertines,  428. 
Lansing  man,  499. 
Lanthanotherium,  520.* 
DE  Lapparent, 

palaiogeography  of  Europe,  80  ;  Eocene, 

114,    140;    Oligocene,    182,    183,  184; 

Miocene,  256,  265  ;   Pliocene,  305,  312, 

318  ;  Tertiary  flora  of  Europe,  104,  306. 
Laramie  formation, 

correlation,  99  ;    flora  and  fauna,  100, 

101  ;  sections,  101,  119. 
Laramie  Peak,  285. 
Lartet, 

Sansan  fauna,  257. 
Leda  Clays  flora,  449. 
Leidy, 

work  in  palaeontology,  2,  9,  10 ;  at- 
tempts at  correlation,  51,  52  ;  American 
Eocene  deposits,  157 ;  on  lacustrine 
origin  of  badlands,  205  ;  Alachua  Clays 
fauna,  347  ;  Peace  Creek  fauna,  367  ; 
Loup  River  mammals,  368,  and  forma- 
tion, 369  ;  Ashley  River  fauna,  471  ; 
^Felis  atrox,  485  ;  man  and  mastodon  in 
North  America,  495. 
Le.moine, 

Cernaysian     fauna,     100,     103,     104  ; 
faune  ageienne,  117. 

*  Reference  to 


Lemuria,  69. 
Lemuroidea, 

Holarctic  origin  of,  68  ;   Ypresian  ( ?) , 

117  ;  543.* 
Leporidae, 

Pipestone  Creek,  216 ;    Oreodon  zone, 
221  ;   John  Day,  230  ;  Promerycochoe- 
rus  zone,  236  ;  enter  Europe  (Pontian), 
248,  264,  269  ;  534.* 
Lepsius, 

age  of  Pontian  fauna,  266,  267  ;  Mos- 
bach  fauna,  402  ;  mid-Pleistocene  cli- 
mate of  Europe,  403  ;  Voklinshofen,  426. 

Leptaceratherium,  557.* 

Leptacotherulum,  148. 

Leptarctus,  301,  529.* 

Leptauchenia, 

of  Oreodon  zone,  220,  222  ;  zone,  225, 
226,  227,  (photographs)  177,  217,  226, 
228  ;  of  Promerycochoerus  zone,  233  ; 
549.* 

Leptictidse, 

Wasatch,  125  ;  lower  White  River,  213, 
520.* 

Leptictis,  520.* 

Leptobos, 

source  of,  311  ;  European,  319  ;  Siwalik, 
327. 

LeptochcBridae,  215,  222,  547.* 
Leptochaerus,  215,  547.* 
Leptomanis,  192,  543.* 

Leptomeryx,  215,  220,  302  ;  outline  restora- 
tion, 215  ;  551.* 
Leptoreodon,  168,  550.* 
Leptotragulus,  168,  170,  550.* 
Lepus, 

John  Day,  230 ;  Promerycochoerus 
zone,  236  ;  Astian,  316  ;  Lower  Pliocene 
of  North  America,  353  ;  post-Pleistocene 
of  Europe,  428 ;  Silver  Lake,  460 ; 
the  Port  Kennedy  Cave,  469  ;  Ashley 
River,  472  ;  the  Potter  Creek  Cave,  477  ; 
534.* 

Lesquereux, 

Pliocene  flora  of  California,  343 ;  of 
Eastern  states,  345. 

Lestodon,  541.* 

Life  zones,  47,  48,  55  ; 
North  American,  89. 

Limnocyon, 

AVind  River,  131,  133 ;  Bridger  and 
Washakie,  167  ;  527.* 

LiNDAHL, 

IMcPhcrson  County  deposits,  461,  462. 
Lissicu  deposit,  140,  143,  144,  148. 
Lititriodon, 

invasion  of  Europe  by,   253  ;  Vindo- 

bonian,  259,  260,   262  ;    Siwalik,  329 ; 

548.* 

Litopterna,  78,  561.* 

Llano  Estacado, 

geology,  279,  360,  361,  362  ;  Clarendon 
Beds  of,  298,  361  ;  section,  362. 

Lobsann  deposit,  186,  187. 

classification. 


INDEX 


621 


Loess,  57,  386  ; 

chief  time  of  formation  in  Europe,  412, 

416,  417  ;   deposits  in  North  America, 

447. 
London  Clay, 

deposit,  57,  102;  fauna,  115,  116,  117. 
Long  Island  quarry,  349. 

LOOMIS, 

Coryphodon  Zone,  124 ;    Wind  River, 
129  ;  White  River  crocodiles,  185. 
Lophiaspis,  557.* 
Lophiobunodon,  148,  547.* 
Lophiodon, 

Sparnacian,  115;  Ypresian,  118;  Lute- 
tian and  Bartonian,  143,  147  ;  557.* 
Lophiodontidae, 

Sparnacian,  115;    Ypresian,  117,  118; 
Wasatch,     127 ;     Wind    River,     135  ; 
Middle  Eocene,  of  Europe,  147,  of  Amer- 
ica, 156  ;   White  River,  213,  214,  223  ; 
557.* 
Lophiomeryx,  550.* 
Lophiotherium,  145,  147,  555.* 
Loup  Fork,' 

correlation,  41,  249,  277 ;    term,  297 ; 
of  Cope,  348. 
Loup  River '  formation,    297,    368,    369  ; 

correlation,  41,  309. 
Loxodonta, 

planifrons  of  Siwaliks,  330,  331  ;  never 
in  Europe,  410  ;  atlanticus  in  Pleistocene 
of  North  Africa,  431  ;  africanus,  prehis- 
toric North  Africa,  431  ;  559.* 
Loxolophodon,  547.* 

(See  also  Eohasileus.) 
Lucas, 

Zeuglodon  and  Zeuglodon  beds,  171  ; 
Alachua  Clays  faiuia,  347  ;  distribu- 
tion of  North  American  Proboscidea, 
439,  442 ;  Pleistocene  bison  of  North 
America,  482. 
Ludes,  marnes  de,  144. 
Ludian  stage,  144,  145, 

correlation,  42,  83, 139  ;  palaeogeography, 
climate,  flora,   140,   141  ;    fauna,  146, 
147,  148,  149,  150,  151,  152. 
Lutetian  stage,  143  ; 

correlation,  42,  83, 139  ;  palaeogeography, 
climate,  flora,  140 ;    map  of  localities, 
144  ;  fauna,  147,  148,  149,  150. 
Lutra, 

Burdigalian,  254  ;  Vindobonian,  261  ; 
appears  in  America  (Hipparion  zone), 
301  ;  Sicilian  stage,  320,  321  ;  Siwaliks, 
327  ;  China,  335  ;  Pleistocene,  Europe, 
395,  407  ;  post-Pleistocene,  Europe, 
429  ;  Silver  Lake,  459  ;  Port  Kennedy 
Cave,  470  ;  531.* 

utrictis,  254,  531.* 

utrinae, 

appear  in  Europe,  192,  193  ;  531.* 
ycycena,  532.* 

YDEKKER, 

origin  of  African  fauna,  69 ;  Siwalik 
*  Reference  to 


fauna,  275,  323,  327  ;   Siwalik  geology, 
324  ;  Chinese  fossil  fauna,  333  ;  Karnul 
Caves,  335,  336  ;    North  African  deer, 
432. 
Lyell, 

names  Tertiary  time  divisions,  41. 
Macacus, 

European,  311,  318,  320;  Siwalik,  327; 
Pleistocene  of  North  Africa,  433  ;  545.* 
McClung, 

North  American  Pleistocene  bison,  482, 
483. 

McCONNELL, 

discovery  of  Cypress  Hills  beds,  216. 

MacCurdy, 

table  of  Eolithic  and  Palaeolithic,  383. 

Machaerodontinae, 

appear  in  Europe,  192,  193  ;  lower 
White  River,  214  ;  Oreodon  zone,  222  ; 
Burdigalian,  254  ;  Hipparion  zone,  301  ; 
Siwaliks,  327  ;  last  in  American  Pleisto- 
cene, 438,  440,  487  ;  Equus  zone,  454  ; 
Megalonyx  zone,  467,  470  ;  532.* 

Machcerodiis, 

Vindobonian,  259,  261  ;  Astian,  314  ; 
Sicilian  stage,  318,  319  ;  Siwaliks,  325, 
327  ;  China,  335  ;  Norfolk  Interglacial, 
392,  396 ;  disappear  in  Europe,  400 ; 
532.* 

McMaster, 

and  Osborn  prepare  first  geologic  sec- 
tion, 52. 

McPherson  County   (Kansas)  gravels,  461, 
462. 

Macrauchenia,  561.* 

Macrotherium, 

named  Pangolin  by  Cuvier,  3  ;  regres- 
sion of  from  hoofed  to  clawed  type,  32  ; 
Aquitanian,  197 ;  Vindobonian,  259, 
262  ;  claw  figured,  259  ;  558.* 

Madagascar, 

former  land  connections  of,  66,  69,  70, 
74  ;  affinity  of  fauna  to  Eocene  types 
of  Europe,  74,  76. 

Madison  Valley  formation,  281,  298,  300  ; 
correlation,  41,  277  ;  geology,  281. 

Maestrichtian  stage,  98,  99. 

Magdalenian  stage,  426,  427  ; 

correlation,  378  ;  man  of  in  Schaffhausen 
region,  425,  426. 

Major,  Forsyth, 

Samos,  270;  Val  d'Arno,  318,  320; 
age  of  Siwaliks,  332. 

Mai  de  caderas,  507. 

Mammoth, 

see  Elephas  primigenius,  E.  trogontherii, 
E.  columbi,  E.  imperator,  etc. 

Man, 

evidence  of  work  of  in  North  America 
(Alachua  Clays) ,  348  ;  antiquity  in 
Europe,  384  ;  earliest  skeletal  remains 
in  Europe,  401  ;  prehistoric  of  North 
Africa,  433  ;  evidence  of  existence  during 

classification. 


622 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


late  Equus  zone,  461,  464,  during  Mega- 

lonyx  zone,  468,  477,  494  ;  antiquity  in 

North  America,  494-500. 
Manatus,  449,  559.* 
Manchhar  group, 

correlation,  41,  324  ;   geology,  273,  274  ; 

fauna,  274,  275,  276,  325. 
Man  is, 

Manchhar  beds,  276 ;    Karnul  Caves, 

335;  543.* 
Manosque  deposit,  190,  191. 
Mnntvocem^, 

skull  figured,  17  ;  restorations,  139,  142  ; 

Bridger  and  Washakie,  164,  167  ;  556.* 
Maragha  deposit  and  fauna,  266,  270,  332  ; 

location,  323. 
Mar  mot  a, 

Mid-Pleistocene  of  Europe,  401,  403,  407  ; 
Upper  Pleistocene  of  Europe,  417 ; 
post-Pleistocene  of  Europe,  429 ;  ap- 
pears in  North  America,  440,  466,  477  ; 
535.* 
Marsh, 

results  of  early  work,  10;  classification 
of  ungulates,  14  ;  on  supposed  Oligocene 
of  New  Jersey,  85  ;  American  Eocene 
exposures,  157,  169  ;  relation  of  brain 
growth  to  survival,  175  ;  Desmostylus, 
344. 

Marsupialia, 

arboreal  ancestry,  31,  32  ;  analogous 
evolution  to  placentals,  33  ;  origin  and 
early  distribution,  65,  68,  78  ;  evolution 
in  North  America,  charted,  174. 

Martin, 

temperature  of  Glacial  Period,  388. 

Martin  Canyon  deposit,  285. 

Mascall  formation,  288,  289,  290; 
correlation,  41  ;  flora,  282,  283,  290, 
291  ;    photograph,  358  ;  section,  359. 

Mastodon,  480,  481  ; 

molar  figured,  12  ;  borsoni,  315,  318 ; 
arvernensis,  315,  318,  320,  (outline 
restoration)  315  ;  Siwalik  species,  330, 
331  ;  diphyletic  evolution,  331  ;  flori- 
danus,  348  ;  mirificus,  366,  368  ;  North 
African  Pleistocene,  431  ;  americanus 
(distribution  map),  439  ;  possibly  in 
east  during  Equus  zone,  455  ;  Ovibos 
zone,  440 ;  Kansas  Pleistocene,  464 ; 
of  Megalonyx  fauna,  466,  471  ;  Port 
Kennedy  Cave,  469  ;  prey  to  Arcto- 
therium,  All  ;  restoration,  471  ;  earliest 
Pacific  coast,  476  ;  Big  Bone  Lick,  478  ; 
skeleton  ('Warren  mastodon')  and 
restoration,  479  ;  geologic  and  geographic 
distribution,  characters,  extinction,  480, 
481  ;  distribution  in  0\dbos  zone,  487  ; 
Iroquois  Beach,  489  ;  Alaska,  490 ; 
coexistence  with  man  in  North  America, 
495.  496.  497  ;  558.*  (See  also  Triloph- 
odon  and  Teiralophodon.) 

MastodontiniE, 

European,  descended  from  Palceomasto- 

*  Reference  to 


don,  203  ;  enter  Europe,  244,  246 ; 
two  phyla  in  Pontian,  271  ;  Miocene  of 
North  America,  281,  285,  288;  Plio- 
cene, 314,  315;  evolution,  330,  331; 
Chinese,  333  ;  early  Pliocene,  American, 
are  longirostral,  346,  353  ;  first  breviros- 
tral,  American,  364  ;  little  known  species 
of  Middle  Pliocene,  U.S.,  366 ;  Peace 
Creek,  368  ;  extinction  in  American 
Pleistocene,  500  ;  558.* 

Matthew, 

descent   of   most   placental  mammals 
from  arboreal  ancestors,   24  ;  correla- 
tion of  fresh-water  Tertiary  of  western 
North  America,  52  ;  palaeogeography,  64,  ! 
67,  80,  81,   137,   183,  245,  302,  373; 
geology  of  Bridger  and  Washakie,  158, 
160 ;    fluviatile  origin  of  White  River 
formation,  205,  206  ;   Leptomeryx,  215  ;  •,  j 
fauna  of  Oreodon  zone,  219,  220  ;  on  two  ^ 
phyla  of   machaerodonts,   230 ;  Agate 
Spring  fauna,  235,  236  ;  physiography  of 
Miocene  Great  Plains,  279  ;  heteromy- 
ids,  287  ;    Pawnee  Creek  horizon,  289 
Miocene  camels  parallel  giraffes,  293 
Merycodus,  295  ;   Miocene  Canidae,  296 
Dromomeryx,  301  ;  phylogeny  of  Amer- 
ican Cervidae,  302  ;  note  on  affinitj^  of 
certain  Chinese  and  American  types,  333 
Neotragocerus;  337  ;  Mylagaulidae,  352 
Hay   Springs   fauna,    455,    456,  460 
affinities  of  Teleopternus,  469.  j 

Mauer  sands,  ; 
age,  399  ;  Homo  heidelbergensis  of,  403, 
404  ;  photograph,  405.  | 

Mayet,  1 
sables  de  I'Orleanais,  246,  250,  251.  j 

Mediterranean  Islands,  j 
dwarfed  Pleistocene  fauna,  398,  399,  1 
410 ;  Pleistocene  connections,  409,  ) 
410.  ! 

Megacerops,  f 
restoration  (head),  212  ;  556.*  [ 

Megaceros, 

ancestors,  392  ;  restoration,  400  ;  mid- 
Pleistocene,  Europe,  400,  403,  407  ;  dis-  i 
tribution,  419  ;  552.*  j 

Megaladapis,  149,  544.* 

Megalictis,  288,  530.* 

Megalohyrax, 

Fayum,  202  ;  restoration,  202  ;  559.* 

Megalonychidae, 

first  appearance  in  North  America,  289, 
292  ;  Snake  Creek,  355  ;  Virgin  Valley 
(?),  357;  Blanco,  363;  extinction  in 
North  America,  500  ;  541.* 

Megalonychotherium,  541.* 

Megalonyx, 

zone  of  North  America,  439,  440,  464- 
480;  fauna  (age  of),  453,  454,  464; 
Silver  Lake  (?),  459;  McPherson 
County,  Kansas,  462  ;  skeleton  figured, 
465  ;  distribution  in  Megalonyx  zone^ 
466;    Port  Kennedy  Cave,  469,  4701 

classification. 


hi 


j 


I 


INDEX 


623 


Frankstown  Cave,  Ashley  River,  471  ; 

Potter  Creek  Cave,  476  ;  Samwel  Cave, 

Big  Bone  Lick,  478  ;   coexistence  with 

man  in  North  America,  496,  497,  498  ; 

541* 
Megamys,  540.* 
Megatherium, 

of  Megalonyx  fauna,  466  ;  Ashley  River, 

472;  541* 
Meles, 

China,  335  ;  Norfolk  Interglacial,  396  ; 
mid-Pleistocene,  401,  403,  407  ;  source, 
424  ;  post-Pleistocene  of  Europe,  429  ; 
531* 

Mellivora,  327,  531  * 

Meniscomys,  534.* 

Meniscotherium , 

outline  restoration,  108  ;  skeleton  figured, 
125  ;  Wasatch,  125  ;  Wind  River,  132  ; 
546.* 

Mephitis,  469,  531.* 

Mercer, 

Port  Kennedy  Cave,  468,  469,  470; 

early  man  in  North  America,  495,  496, 

498,  500. 
Merriam,  C.  H., 

on  laws  of  distribution,  38,  504  ;  law  of 

temperature  control,  504. 
Merriam,  J.  C, 

volcanic  origin  of  John  Day,  91,  92, 

227  ;  Carnivora  of  John  Day,  230,  296  ; 

Mascall,  290  ;   Virgin  Valley,  337,  338, 

356,  357  ;  Desmostylus,  344  ;  Rancho  la 

Brea,  472,  473  ;  Potter  Creek  Cave,  476  ; 

man  in  California  mid-Pleistocene,  477, 

498. 

Merrill  and  Peale, 

volcanic  ash  in  Bozeman  Lake  deposit, 
90. 

Merychippus,  293  ; 

zone,  277  ;  Hipparion  zone,  297  ;  early 
Pliocene  (?),  346,  350;    Snake  Creek, 

355  ;  Virgin  Valley,  357  ;  556.* 
\Merychyus, 

Deep  River,  281  ;   Merycochoerus  zone, 
286  ;  Ticholeptus  zone,  293  ;  Hipparion 
zone,  300 ;    becoming  rare,  345,  354 ; 
549.* 
iMerycochoerus , 

zone,  285,  286,  287  ;  skull  figured,  286  ; 
Ticholeptus  zone,  293  ;  Hipparion  zone, 
300  ;  becoming  rare,  345  ;  550.* 
IMerycodontidse, 

Ticholeptus  zone,  289,  295;  Snake  Creek, 

356  ;  last  of,  454  ;  553.* 
ferycodus,  295  ; 

outline  restoration,  291  ;  skeleton  figured, 
294 ;     Hipparion    zone,    301  ;  Lower 
Pliocene,  350,  352,  357  ;  553.* 
J^erycoidodon, 

skeleton  figured,  218. 
^erycopotamus,  189,  329  ; 

affinity  to  hippopotami,  313,  329  ;  548.* 
^esatirhinus,  164,  556.* 


Meseutheria,  107. 

Mesocyon,  230,  528.* 

Mesodectes,  520.* 

Mesogaulus,  535.* 

Mesohippus, 

tridactyl  foot  figured,  14 ;  restoration, 
223  ;  many  species  in  Oreodon  zone, 
220,  223  ;  evolution  in  Protoceras  zone, 
227;  555.* 

Mesonychidae, 

Torrejon,  111;  Ypresian  (?),  117; 
Wasatch,  126,  127;  Wind  River,  132, 
133  ;  typical  genus,  restored,  150 ; 
Washakie,  167  ;  Uinta,  168  ;  extinction, 
170;  527.* 

Mesonyx, 

of  third  faunal  phase,  139  ;  Bridger,  161, 

164  ;  Uinta,  170  ;  527.* 
Mesopithecus,  272,  545.* 
Mesoreodon,  233,  550.* 

Mesozoic  mammals,  location  of  deposits  of 
(map),  82. 

Metacheiromys, 

Bridger,  162,  163  ;  outline  restoration, 
162  ;  skeleton  figured,  164  ;  541.* 

Metamynodon,  219,  221,  223  ; 

restoration,  180  ;  zone,  182  ;  sandstones 
(photographs),  217,  219  ;  skeleton  fig- 
ured, 220  ;  557.* 

Metaphiomys,  201,  534.* 

Metarhinus,  166,  168,  556.* 

Metasinopa,  527.* 

Metaxytherium,  247,  248,  256,  559.* 

Meudon,  gravier  marin  and  conglomerat  de, 
57,  102,  114. 

Meximieux  flora,  307,  314. 

Miacidae, 

Torrejon,   111;    Wasatch,  127;  Wind 
River,  134  ;  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene, 
American,  156  ;  528.* 
Miacis, 

Wasatch,  127  ;  Wind  River,  134  ;  Uinta, 

170;  528.* 
Microbiotherium,  516.* 
Microchoerus,  543.* 
Microconodon,  515.* 
Microlestes,  518.* 
Micromeryx, 

Burdigalian,   253  ;    Vindobonian,   262  ; 

Pontian,  269  ;  552.* 
Microsus,  547.* 
Microsyopidae, 

ancestry,  127  ;  Wind  River,  134, 
Microsyops, 

Wind  River,   130,  134 ;    Bridger,  161  ; 

522.* 
Microtus, 

Hay  Springs,  457  ;  Port  Kennedy  Cave, 
470  ;  Potter  Creek  Cave,  477  ;  537.* 
Migration, 

during  glacial  period,  18,  449,  450 ; 
crude  theories  of,  19  ;  Cuvier's  views  on, 
21,  22  ;  routes  and  barriers,  38,  39 ; 
alternate    in    Pleistocene,    378,  389, 


*  Reference  to  classification. 


624 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


(table)  390,  407,  419  ;  areas  of  northern 

hemisphere  in  Pleistocene,  443. 
Miller,  G.  S., 

inbreeding,  502. 
Miller,  L.  H., 

l)ircis  of  Rancho  la  Brea,  473,  474. 
Milne  Edwards, 

birds  of  Ronzon,  190  ;    birds  of  Allier 

Basin,  195  ;  birds  of  Sansan,  257. 
Mindel-Riss  Interglacial,  378; 

length,  385  ;  flora  and  climate,  387,  402. 
MiodffinidjB,  109,  546.* 
Mioclcenus,  107,  546.* 
Miohippus, 

affinities  to  Mesohippus,  227  ;  John  Day, 

230;  555.* 
Miolabis,  294,  550.* 
Mississippi,  rate  of  deposition,  61. 
Mixodectes,  120,  522.* 
MixodectidjB,  109,  111,  522.* 
Maritherium, 

Fay  am,  200,  203;    restoration  (head), 

203  ;  558.* 
Mosskirch  deposit,  257,  258. 
Moissac  deposits,  190,  191. 
Molar  teeth, 

types,  10,  11,  12;  relation  of  to  extinc- 
tion, in  ungulates,  238,  239,  240,  241  ; 

adaptation   to   change   of  vegetation, 

240,  244. 
Monatherium,  533.* 
Monroe  Creek  deposit,  231. 
Montabuzard,  calcaire  de,  246,  250,  251. 
Monte  Bamboli  deposit,  257,  258,  263. 
Monte  Promina  deposit,  186,  187. 
Mt.  Leberon  deposits,  269  ; 

correlation,  266,  267. 
Montmartre  gypse,  144,  145  ; 

discovered  by  Cuvier,  22,  57 ;  fauna, 

146,  147,  152. 
Montmaurin  cavern,  396  ; 

location  and  correlation,  391,  413. 
Mt.  Pelee,  figure,  92. 

Montpellier  deposit  and  fauna,  314,  315,  316  ; 

bird  life,  307. 
Montredon  deposit,  269. 
Moosseedorf  lake  dwellings,  428. 
Moret  plant  beds,  395,  396. 
Mormont  deposit,  144,  148. 
Moropus, 

John   Day,   224,   230;    Agate  Spring 
Quarry,  235  ;  Merycochoerus  zone,  286  ; 
558.* 
de  Mortillet, 

European  culture  stages,  378 ;  table, 
381. 

Mosbach  deposit,  402  ;  location,  391. 

Moschus,  328,  551.*' 

Mouillacitherimn,  547.* 

Mousterian  stage,  410,  411,  412  ; 

correlation,  378  ;  relative  length,  385. 

Multitubcrculata, 

evolution  and  extinction  in  North  Amer- 
ica, diagram,  174. 

*  Reference  to 


Muridfle, 

first  appearance  (Oreodon  zone),  221  ; 
John  Day,  230  ;  536.* 
Mus, 

Astian,  316 ;    post-Pleistocene  of  Eu- 
rope, 429  ;  536.* 
MiLstela, 

Vindobonian,  261  ;  Pontian,  268  ;  Hip- 
parion  zone,  301  ;  mid-Pleistocene, 
Europe,  407 ;  Upper  Pleistocene,  Eu- 
rope, 417 ;  post-Pleistocene,  Europe, 
429  ;  Port  Kennedy  Cave,  469  ;  Conard 
Fissure,  488  ;  530.* 

Mustelidae, 

Sannoisian,  188,  189  ;  Aquitanian,  197  ; 
appear  in  North  America,  214 ;  John 
Day,  230;  Burdigalian,  254;  Vindo- 
bonian, 259,  261  ;  Merycochcerus  zone, 
288  ;  Ticholcptus  zone,  296  ;  Hipparion 
zone,  301  ;  530.* 

Mylagaulidae, 

Ticholeptus  zone,  289,  297;  lower 
Pliocene,  352,  356;  use  of  horns,  352, 
353  ;  535.* 

Mylagaulodon,  534.* 

Mylagaulus,  297,  352,  535.* 

Mylodon, 

zone,  439,  452-464 ;  superseded  by 
Megalonyx  in  North  America,  440 ; 
differs  from  Paramylodon,  457 ;  from 
Colorado  and  Nebraska,  457 ;  Rock 
Creek,  458;  Silver  Lake  (?),  459; 
Kansas  Pleistocene,  464 ;  Megalonyx 
zone,  465,  466  ;  Port  Kennedy  Cave, 
469,  470  ;  Ashley  River,  472  ;  541.* 

Mylohyus, 

Megalonyx  zone,  440,  466  ;  Port  Ken- 
nedy Cave,  470  ;  Frankstown  Cave,  471  ; 
Conard  Fissure,  488  ;  549.* 

Myodes,  415,  537.* 

Myogale,  259. 

Myolagus, 

Burdigalian,  254  ;  Vindobonian,  259. 

Myoxus,  259,  536.* 

Nagana,  507. 
Nanomeryx,  547.* 
Neal, 

Pliocene  of  Florida,  346,  347. 
Neandertal  Cave,  410,  412. 
Neandertal  man, 

see  Homo  neandertalensis. 
Nearctica,  35,  95  ; 

possible  origin  of  Lower  Eocene  mammala  f 

in,  112. 

'Nebraska'  formation,  87,  297. 
Nebraska  loess  man,  499. 
Necrolemur,  149,  543.* 
Necrolestes,  520.* 
Nehring, 

Peistocene  succession  of  faunas,    388,  r 
414,    415,    418;   Schweizersbild,  418;j 
cave  lion,  423  ;  Wiirzburg  fauna,  426.i{i 
Nematherium,  541.*  I 

classification.  i 


INDEX 


625 


Neohipparion,  350,  351  ; 

skeleton  and  restoration,  243  ;  Madison 
Valley,  281  ;  whitneyi,  discovery  of, 
298  ;  Snake  Creek,  355,  356  ;  two  spe- 
cies from  Rattlesnake  formation,  358  ; 
Blanco,  365  ;  556* 

Neolith,  Robenhausian,  figured,  382. 

Neolithic  period,  428,  429  ; 

transition  to  and  from,  380  ;  estimated 
length  in  years,  385. 

Neoplagiaulax, 

Cernaysian,  103  ;  zone  of  Puerco,  106  ; 
Torrejon  and  Fort  Union,  108  ;  518.* 

Neoreomys,  539.* 

Neotoma,  477,  538.* 

Neotragocerus,  337,  355  ; 

zone,  353,  354,  355,  (photograph)  355  ; 
553.* 

Nesodon,  560.* 

Nesokerodon,  539.* 

Neumayr, 

temperature  of  Ice  Age  in  Europe,  388. 

Neurogymnurus,  520.* 

Newton, 

Red  and  Norwich  Crag,  321  ;  Forest 
Bed  mammals,  393,  394. 
Nimravus,  230,  532.* 

NORDENSKIOLD, 

Steller's  sea  cow,  494. 

Norfolk  Interglacial,  391-399. 

North-American-Asiatic  land  connection, 
see  Asiatic-American  land  connection. 

North  and  South  American  land  connection, 
93,  292,  339. 

North  Polar  theory,  65,  66. 

Norwich  crag  fauna,  318,  321. 

Notharctidae, 

Wind  River,  134 ;  Bridger,  161,  164 ; 
543.* 

Notharctus, 

resembles  Orohippus  in  grinding  teeth, 
3  ;  Wind  River,  130,  134  ;  outline  resto- 
ration, 162  ;  Bridger  and  Washakie,  164  ; 
543.* 

Nothocyon, 

John  Day,  230 ;  Promerycochoerus 
zone,  236  ;  528.* 

Nothrotherium,  541.* 

Notopithecus,  543.* 

Notoprotogonia,  546.* 

Notostylops,  560  *  ;  zone,  97. 

Notoiherium,  518.* 

NUESCH, 

Kesslerloch  cave,  425,  426. 
Nummulitic  limestones  of  Europe,  83. 
Nyctilestes,  521.* 
Nyctitherium,  521.* 

Ocala  fauna,  348. 
Ocapia, 

figured,  270  ;  551.* 
Ochotona,  534.* 
Odoboenus, 

southward    migration    in  Pleistocene, 


449,   487;    Alaskan   Pleistocene,  489, 
490;  533.* 
Odocoileus, 

in  Alachua  Clays  (?),  348;  of  Mega- 
lonyx  fauna,  465,  466  ;  Port  Kennedy 
Cave,  469 ;  Washtucna  Lake,  474 ; 
Potter  Creek  Cave,  477  ;  Big  Bone 
Lick,  478;  The  Conard  Fissure,  488 
553.* 

CEningen  deposit,  257,  258,  263. 

Ogallala  formation,  298,  353,  354,  355  ; 

correlation,  277 ;  overlaid  by  Pleisto- 
cene, 461. 

Olhodotes,  522.* 

Oldham, 

geology  of  Indian  Tertiaries,  273,  323, 

324,  325,  326. 
Oligohunis, 

John  Day,  230 ;    Merycochoerus  zone, 

288;  530.* 
Olivola  deposit,  318. 
Olsen, 

discovery  of  Bathyopsis  skull,  132. 
Omomys,  543.* 
Onohippidion,  556.* 
Onychodectes,  540.* 
Oddectes,  131,  134,  528.* 
d'Orbigny, 

on  geologic  time  divisions,  41. 
Oreamnos, 

figured,  437  ;  arrival  in  North  America, 
438,  466,  476;  affinities,  483,  484; 
Alaska,  490  ;  554.* 

Oreas,  328,  432,  554.* 

Oreodon,  220  ; 

outline  restoration,  215 ;  zone,  219, 
220,  221,  222,  223,  (photographs)  210, 
217,  226,  228,  290  ;  549.* 

Oreodontidse, 

first  appearance,  138 ;  ancestry,  149 ; 
Uinta,  170 ;  lower  White  River,  214, 
215;  of  Oreodon  zone,  220,  221,  222; 
John  Day,  231  ;  Promerycochoerus 
zone,  236  ;  Merycochoerus  zone,  286  ; 
Ticholeptus  zone,  293  ;  decline  in  Hip- 
parion  zone,  299,  300 ;  last  (Snake 
Creek),  355  ;  extinction,  363  ;  549.* 

Oreonagor,  432. 

Oreopithecus, 

Vindobonian,  255,  263  ;  545.* 

rOrleanais,  sables  de,  246,  250,  251. 

Orohippus, 

evolution,  45  ;  zone,  48,  49,  139,  161, 
162  ;  Bridger,  161,  164  ;  outline  restora- 
tion, 162  ;  555.* 

Oromeryx,  170,  550.* 

Orsmael,  deposit  and  fauna,  100. 

Ortmann, 

on  history  of  Antarctica  theory,   76 ; 

von  Ihering's    hypothesis    of  Tertiary 

water  barrier  in  Amazon  region,  339. 
Orycteropus, 

source,  264  ;  Pontian,  270  ;  543.* 
Oryx,  432,  554.* 


*  Reference  to  classification. 


28 


626 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Ovibos, 

P\)rest  Bed  (?).  392,  394,  397;  Upper 
Pleistocene  of  Europe,  412,  413,  424  ; 
figured,  436  ;  arrival  in  North  America, 
436,  438,  440,  487  ;  zone,  440,  486-494  ; 
Big  Bone  Lick,  478 ;  distribution  in 
North  America  of  fossil  and  recent 
(map),  485,  492  ;  Alaska,  489,  490,  491  ; 
555* 

Ovis, 

Pleistocene  North  African  species,  433  ; 
montana,  474  ;  Alaska,  490  ;  554.* 
Owen, 

classification  of  ungulates,  13 ;  Hyra- 
cotherium  (  =Pliolophus)  116 ;  Eocene 
birds,  153 ;  Chinese  fossils,  333 ;  Pro- 
rastomus,  494. 

Oxyacodon,  107. 

Oxycena, 

Wasatch,  127  ;  restoration,  133  ;  Wind 
River,  133  ;  527.* 

Oxy£Enidae, 

Wasatch,  127  ;  Wind  River,  132,  133  ; 
Washakie,  167;  Uinta,  168,  170;  ex- 
tinction, 170  ;  527.* 

Oxycenodon,  527.* 

Oxycloenidffi,  111,  526.* 

Oxyclcenus,  526.* 

Oxydactylus, 

Promerycochcrrus  zone,  236 ;  Mery- 
cochcrrus  zone,  286 ;  outline  restora- 
tion, 291  ;  550.* 

Ozarkian  stage,  435,  443. 

Pachyoena, 

Sparnacian,  115;  Wasatch,  126,  127; 
Wind  River,  133  ;  527.* 

Pachyrukhos,  561.* 

Pachynolophus, 

Landenian,  100 ;  Middle  and  Upper 
Eocene  of  Europe,  147. 

Paciculus,  538.* 

Palacky, 

Upper  Miocene  ungulates,  246. 

Palaearctica,  35,  95  ; 

possible  origin  of  Lower  Eocene  mam- 
mals in,  112  ;  distinct  from  Nearctica, 
143. 

Palcearctomys,  535.* 

Palcearctonyx,  528.* 

Palceiclops,  125,  520.* 

PaloEochcerus, 

Aquitanian,  197,  198 ;  descendants, 
253  ;  Burdigalian,  255  ;  548.* 

Paloeoerinaceus,  520.* 

Palccogale,  254,  530.* 

Palaeogeographic  maps, 

world,  late  Cretaceous,  64 ;  France, 
Lower  Eocene,  114;  world.  Middle  Eo- 
cene, 137  ;  Europe,  Middle  Eocene,  140  ; 
world,  Oligocene,  183  ;  Europe,  Lower 
Oligocene,  184 ;  France,  Upper  Oligo- 
cene, 195 ;  world,  Miocene,  245 ;  Eu- 
rope,  Middle   Miocene,   256  ;  Europe, 


Upper  Miocene,  226 ;  world.  Pliocene, 
303  ;  Europe,  Lower  Pliocene,  312  ; 
world,  Pleistocene,  373  ;  Europe,  Gla- 
cial, 376 ;  northwestern  Europe,  late 
Pleistocene,  416. 

Paloeolagus,  221,  534.* 

Paloeolama,  550.* 

Pala?olith,  Chellean,  figured,  382. 

Palaeolithic  period, 

culture  stages,  378,  (tables)  379,  381, 
383  ;  close  of,  412  ;  mammals  contem- 
porary with  man  of,  427. 

PaloEomastodon, 

Faydm,  203;  restoration  (head),  203; 
558.* 

Palceomeryx, 

affinities,  262 ;  Pontian,  269 ;  Virgin 
Valley,  357  ;  551.* 

Palaeonictidae, 

Sparnacian,  115;  Wasatch,  126,  127; 
Wind  River,  132  ;  extinction,  138. 

PalcBonictis, 

Sparnacian,  115 ;  W^asatch,  119,  126, 
127;  527.* 

Paloeonycteris,  525.* 

Palceoreas, 

Pontian,  268  ;  China,  334  ;  554.* 

Palceorycteropus,  543.* 

Palceoryx, 

Pontian,  268  ;  of  'older  Pliocene  fauna,' 
310,  312,  316;  554.* 

Palceosinopa,  125,  519.* 

Paloeosyops, 

molar  figured,  11;  skull  figured,  17; 
Bridger  and  Washakie,  161,  164  ;  out- 
line restoration,  162  ;  skeleton  figured, 
163  ;  556.* 

Palasothentes,  517.* 

PaloBotheriidce, 

Middle  and  Upper  Eocene  of  Europe, 
141,  146,  147  ;  decline  in  Oligocene,  188  ; 
extinction,  193  ;  555.* 

Palceotherium, 

adaptive  radiation  observed  in  gyj^se, 
146  ;  Sannoisian,  188  ;  555.* 

Paloeotragus,  268,  551.* 

Palhycena,  334. 

Pall.\ry, 

Pleistocene,  North  African  giraffe,  432. 
Palorchestes,  518.* 

Panhandle  formation,  360,  361,  362. 

Panochthus,  542.* 

Pantolamhda, 

zone,    107;    outline   restoration,  108; 

skeleton  and  restoration,  110;  Torrejon, 

110,  111  ;  546.* 
Pantolambdidae,  110,  111,  546.* 
Pantolestes,  161,  519.* 
Pantolestidae, 

Torrejon,  109  ;  Wasatch,  125  ;  519.* 
Paracamelus,  333. 

Paradaphcenus,  230.  i 
Parahippus,  * 
first    appearance,    233 ;     zone,    277  ; 


Reference  to 


classification. 


INDEX 


627 


Merycochoerus  zone,  287  ;  Ticholeptus 
zone,  293  ;  Hippariorj  zone,  297,  298  ; 
Snake  Creek,  355  ;  Virgin  Valley,  357  ; 
555* 

Parahyus,  127,  549* 

Paramylodon,  457  ;  Equus  zone,  454  ;  Hay 
Springs,  456 ;  Rancho  la  Brea,  473 ; 
541  * 

Paramys, 

Wasatch,  128 ;  Wind  River,  134 ; 
Washakie,  165  ;  Uinta,  168  ;  534  * 

Pararctotherium,  530.* 

Paratapirus, 

Stampian,  190  ;  Aquitanian,  198  ;  556. 

Paratylopus,  231. 

Parictops,  520.* 

Paris  basin, 

lagoons  and  gypse,  140,  141  ;  calcaire 
grassier,  143,  144. 

Patriofelis, 

Wind  River,  131,  133  ;  outline  restora- 
tion, 162  ;  Bridger,  164  ;  skeleton  and 
restoration,  165  ;  527.* 

Pawnee  Buttes, 

correlation,  41,  277;   (photograph)  290. 

Pawnee  Creek  deposit,  288,  289. 

Peace  Creek  formation,  366,  367,  368; 
alternation  of  shell-bearing  and  mam- 
mal-bearing layers,  337  ;  commingling 
of  faunas,  453. 

Peale, 

volcanic  ash  in  Bozeman  Lake  deposit, 
90. 

Pediomys,  515.* 
Pelecydon,  541.* 
Peltephilus,  542.* 
Pelycictis,  469. 
Pelycodus,  134,  543.* 
Penck, 

duration  of  Quaternary,  64,  385  ;  divi- 
sions of  the  Quaternary  in  Switzerland, 
376,  377,  378,  (table)  379  ;  differs  from 
Boule  on  correlation,  380,  404,  410 ; 
Dryopithecus  as  an  eolith-maker,  384  ; 
origin  of  loess,  386 ;  temperature  of 
Glacial  Period,  388 ;  alternation  of 
faunas  in  Pleistocene,  388,  389  ;  age  of 
Schweizersbild  cave,  425  ;  correlation  of 
Solutrian,  427. 

Pentacodon,  519.* 

Peorian  Interglacial,  444,  446. 

Peraceras,  348  ; 

zone,  348,  349,  350  ;  superciliosus,  352  ; 
557.* 

Peratherium, 

Wind  River,  133  ;  Ludian,  146  ;  Bridger, 
154,  161  ;  Lower  White  River,  213,  216  ; 
Oreodon  zone,  221  ;  516.* 

Perchoerus, 

Oreodon  zone,  220,  223  ;  John  Day,  231. 

Perim  Island  deposit  and  fauna,  274,  324. 

Perimys,  540.* 

Periptychidse,  110,  111,  546.* 
Periptychus,  107,  546.* 


Perissodactyla, 

Holarctic  origin,  68,  202  ;  growing 
importance  in  Upper  Eocene,  147  ; 
grand  epoch  of,  156  ;  evolution  in  North 
America,  charted,  174  ;  of  Old  and  New 
Worlds  share  many  families  in  Oligo- 
cene,  179  ;  reduced  to  four  families,  230; 
evolution  in  North  America  charted, 
239. 

Pernatherium,  143,  558.* 
Perrier, 

hipparion  fauna,  316,  317 ;  Upper 
Pliocene  fauna,  319. 

Peterson, 

entelodonts,  217,  218  ;  Thinohyus,  232  ; 
Dcemonelix,  235  ;  exploration  of  Agate 
Spring  Quarry,  235  ;  Lower  Miocene  of 
Great  Plains,  285. 

Phacochoerus,  433,  549.* 

Pharsophorus,  516.* 

Phascolonus,  518.* 

Phascolotherium,  515.* 

Phenacocoelus, 

Promerycochoerus  zone,  233  ;  outline 
restoration,  236  ;  550.* 

Phenacodontidffi, 

Torrejon,  110,  111  ;  extinction,  138,  172  ; 
546.* 

Phenacodus, 

considered  stem  form  of  ungulates,  7, 
125;  Landenian,  100;  Wasatch,  119, 
124,  125 ;  skeleton  and  restoration, 
126  ;  Wind  River,  132  ;  causes  of  ex- 
tinction, 172  ;  brain  figured,  173  ;  546.* 

Philotrox,  230. 

Phiomys,  201,  534.* 

Phlaocyon,  288.  529.* 

Phocidae, 

Pliocene,  317,  321  ;  533.* 

Pholidota,  68,  71,  547.* 

Phosphorites,  58  ; 

Quercy,  151  ;  Pleistocene,  386. 

Physodon,  562.* 

Pikermi  deposit,  267,  268  ;  Wallace  on,  68  ; 

correlation,  266. 
Pilgrim, 

Bugti  hUls  Suidffi,  275. 
Pipestone  Creek  deposit,  212,  216,  217,  281. 
Pithecanthropus,  384,  385,  545.* 
Plagiaulacidae, 

Thanetian,  103;    Torrejon,  111;  Wa- 
satch times,  119,  124  ;  518.* 
Plagiaulax,  518  ;* 

evolution   of   molars   marks   lapse  of 

time,  45. 
Plagiolophus, 

Ludian,  146,  147  ;  Sannoisian,  188  ;  555.* 
Plaisancian  stage,  311,  312,  313  ; 

correlation,  41,  309  ;  palaeogeography, 

305,  (map)  312  ;   localities  (map),  310; 

fauna  summarized,  310,  311. 
Planops,  541.* 
Platygonus, 

Rattlesnake,  358  ;  Blanco,  364  ;  Equus 


*  Reference  to 


classification. 


628 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


zone,  439,  455  ;  Hay  Springs,  457  ; 
Rock  Creek,  458;  Silver  Lake  460; 
skeleton  figured,  462  ;  discovery  of  nine 
skeletons  at  Goodland,  463  ;  restora- 
tion, 463  ;  Twelve-mile  Creek,  463  ; 
Potter  Creek  Cave  (?),  477;  549* 

Plesiadapis, 

Landenian,  100;  Ypresian,  118;  543* 

Pleskidddx,  334. 

Plesiardomus,  118.  149,  534* 

PlesM,  197,  530  * 

Plesiocetus,  563.* 

Plenioditnylus,  521.* 

Plesiomcryx,  548.* 

Plesiometacarpal  deer,  302. 

Plesiosorex,  522.* 

Pleura.spulotherium,  103,  546.* 

Plciirolicun,  536.* 

Pliauchenin,  300,  346,  352  ; 

Hipparion    zone,    299 ;     Long  Island 
quarry,  349  ;  Snake  Creek,  356  ;  550.* 

Pliohippus,  350  ; 

early  Pliocene  (?),  346,  349;  Snake 
Creek,  355  ;  in  dental  type  approxi- 
mates Hippidion,  356  ;  Rattlesnake,  358  ; 
Blanco,  365  ;  556.* 

Pliohijlohatcs,  271. 

Pliohyrax,  71 ; 

appears  in  Europe,  264,  271  ;  559.* 

Pliopithecus,  271,  272  ; 

enters  Europe,  247,  254  ;  Vindobonian, 
260,  261  ;  545.* 

Poehrotherium,  220,  550.* 

POHLIG, 

Pleistocene  physiographic  changes,  373, 
374,  406,  410  ;  divisions  of  the  Pleisto- 
cene in  northern  Europe,  377  ;  E. 
trogontherii,  400,  407  ;  E.  hcmionus  in 
European  Pleistocene,  401  ;  phylogeny 
of  E.  primigcnius,  405 ;  reindeer  dis- 
tribution, 413  ;  woolly  rhinoceros,  421  ; 
fauna  of  Thuringian  Pleistocene,  426, 
428  ;  Solutrian,  427. 

Polymastodon, 

zone,  Puerco,  106  ;  Torrcjon,  108  ;  518. 

Poly phy let ic  law, 

discox  ered  by  Gaudry,  6  ;  in  Oligocene 
and  Miocene,  30,  31  ;  illustrated  among 
rhinoceroses,  272. 

POMEL, 

separation  of  Europe  and  North  Africa 
in  Quaternary,  430  ;  Pleistocene  fauna 
of  North  Africa,  431,  432,  433. 

Pont-a-Mousson  flora,  387. 

Pontian  stage,  264-272  ; 

physiography,    246,    265  ,  correlation, 
249  ;  palajogeographic  maps,  266.  267. 

Port  Kennedy  Cave,  467,  468,  469,  470. 

Potamothcrium, 

Stampian,  192  ;  Ticholeptus  zone,  289  ; 
Hipparion  zone,  301  ;  531.* 

Potter   Crock   Cave.   467,   475,   476,   477  ; 
e\'idence  of  early  man  in,  477,  498. 

Pourcy  deposits,  102,  115. 

*  Reference  to 


Prepotherium,  541.* 
Preptoceras, 

of  Megalonyx  zone,  466  ;  Samwel  Cave, 

478;  554.* 
Prichard, 

influence  of  severe  winters  on  guanacos 

of  Patagonia,  502. 
Primates. 

in  Fay<im,  73  ;  first  appearance,  127 ; 
modernization,  134  ;  evolution  in  North 
America  charted,  174  ;  Middle  Miocene, 
European,  263,  264  ;  Upper  Miocene, 
271.  272;  Pliocene,  307,  310,  311;  dis- 
appear from  Europe,  320  ;  Siwalik,  327. 

Prince's  Cave  of  Monaco,  410. 

Pristiphoca,  317.  533.* 

Procelurus,  197,  530.* 

Proboscidea, 

Africa  as  possible  source  of,  73,  431  ; 
evolution  in  North  America,  charted, 
174  ;  enter  Europe,  242,  244,  246 ; 
Vindobonian,  262  ;  evolution  in  Asia, 
327,  330.  331.  332  ;  distribution  in  North 
America  (maps),  439  ;  distribution  of 
fossil  and  recent  (map) ,  505  ;  558.* 

Procamelus,  300.  301  ; 

Madison  Valley,  281  ;  zone,  297-302  ; 
early  Pliocene  (?),  346,  352;  Snake 
Creek.  356  ;  Virgin  Valley,  357  ;  550.* 

Procynictis,  104. 

Procyhodictis,  169.  170.  528.* 

Procyon, 

Ashley  River,  472  ;  Conard  Fissure,  488  ; 
529.* 

ProcyonidfB, 

first  appearance.  288  ;  Hipparion  zone, 
301  ;  529.* 

Prodremotherium,  550.* 

Proectocion,  546.* 

Proeutatus,  542.* 

Progenetta,  261.  531.* 

Prolagostomus,  539.* 

Prolagus,  534.* 

Promeles,  530.* 

Promephitis,  268.  530.* 

Pronomotherium,  300  ; 

outline  restoration  (head),  291  ;  550,* 

Promerycochoerus, 

first  appearance,  231  ;  skull  figured,  231  ; 
zone,  231,  232,  233,  234,  235,  236, 
(photograph)  177,  232  ;  outline  restora- 
tion, 236  ;  Deep  River,  293  ;  549.* 

Propachynolophus,  118,  555.* 

Propalceochoerus, 

stem  form  of  Old  World  pigs,  198,  199  ; 
548.* 

Propalaeohoplophorus,  542.* 
Propalceotherium,  555.* 
Prophoca,  533.* 
ProplesicHs,  189.  530.* 
Proputorius,  530.* 
Propyrotherium,  561.* 
Prorastomus,  182,  494,  559.* 
Prorosmarus,  533.* 

classification. 


INDEX 


629 


Proscalops,  521  * 
Proscapanus,  521.* 
Prosciurus,  221,  534.* 
Prosqualodon,  561.* 
Prosthennops, 

Hipparion  zone,  301  ;    early  Pliocene, 

352  ;  Snake  Creek,  356  ;  Virgin  Valley, 

357;  549.* 
Protagriochoerus,  170,  549.* 
Protapirus, 

Stampian,    190 ;    Oreodon   zone,   223  ; 

Protoceras  zone,  227  ;  John  Day,  230  ; 

556.* 
Protechimys,  538.* 
Protelotherium,  168. 
Proteodidelphys ,  515.* 
Proterix,  221,  520.* 
Proterotherium,  561.* 
Prothylacynus,  516.* 
Protitanotherium, 

outline  restoration  (head),  142  :  Uinta, 

169;  556.* 
Protoadapis,  118,  543.* 

Protoceras,   226,   227  ;    molar  figured,    11  ; 

sandstones    (photograph),    217  ;  zone, 

225,  226,  227  ;  restoration  and  skeleton 

figured,  225  ;  551.* 
Protocetus,  561.* 
Protodichohune,  118. 
Protogonodon,  170,  546.* 
Protohippus,  297,  350  ; 

zone,    277 ;     Madison    Valley,    281  ; 

early  Pliocene  (  ?) ,  346  ;    Snake  Creek, 

355  ;  Blanco,  365  ;  556.* 
Protolabis,  299,  550.* 
Protomeryx,  286. 
Protoptychus,  168,  536,*  538.* 
Protoreodon,  170,  549.* 
Protorohippus, 

foot  figured,  14. 
Protosiren,  182. 
Protosorex,  521.* 
Protragelaphus,  554.* 
Protragocerus, 

first  appearance,  247,  249,  253,  255 ; 

Vindobonian,  259,  262  ;  553.* 
Protylopus,  170,  550.* 
Protypotherium,  560.* 
Proviverra,  527.* 
Prozaedius,  542.* 
Prozeuglodon,  200,  561.* 
Pseudcelurus, 

Stampian,  192  ;   Burdigalian,  254,  255  ; 

Vindobonian,     259,     261  ;  Hipparion 

zone,  301  ;  532.* 
Pseudarctos,  262,  530.* 
Pseudocyon,  529.* 
Pseudolabis,  227,  550.* 
Pseudotomus,  534.* 
Psittacotherium,  109,  540.* 
Pterodon, 

FayCim,  201  ;  restoration,  201  ;  527.* 
Ptilodus, 

skull  figured,  106  ;  Fort  Union,  108  ;  518.* 
*  Reference  to 


Puerco  -formation, 

location,   86,  87,  104 ;  correlation,  99 ; 

fauna,  106,  107. 
Putnam, 

man  in  California  mid-Pleistocene,  477, 
498  ;    human    and  mastodon  remains 
at  Worcester,  495. 
Putorius, 

Hipparion  zone,  301  ;   Conard  Fissure, 

488;  530.* 
Puy  Courny  deposits,  266,  267. 
Pyrenees,  elevation  of,  59,  60,  140,  177. 
Pyrimont  deposit,  193,  194  ; 

fauna,  197,  198. 
Pyrotheria,  78,  561.* 
Pyrotherium,  561.* 

QUACKENBUSH, 

Pleistocene  of  Alaska,  490,  491,  492. 
Quaternary, 

faunal  periods,  375  ;    time  divisions  in 

Switzerland,  376,  378,  in  Germany,  378. 
Quercy  phosphorites,  151,  152  ; 

discovered,   5 ;    correlation,    144,  145, 

168,  187  ;  final  deposits,  190. 
Quercytherium,  145,  527.* 

Rancho  la  Brea, 

asphalt,    58,    472  ;     correlation,    467 ; 

fauna,  472,  473,  474  ;  photograph,  473. 
Rangifer, 

mid-Pleistocene  (?)  Europe,  400,  403, 
407 ;  Upper  Pleistocene  of  Europe, 
412,  413  ;  Eurasiatic  and  American, 
422  ;  survival  in  Europe,  424 ;  post- 
Pleistocene,  Europe,  428  ;  figured,  436  ; 
arrival  in  North  America,  436,  438,  487  ; 
zone,  440 ;  Toronto  formation,  449  ; 
Pleistocene  range  in  North  America, 
449  ;  Big  Bone  Lick  (  ?),  478  ;  Iroquois 
Beach,  489 ;  Alaska,  489,  490,  491  ; 
552.* 

Rattlesnake  formation,  357,  358  ; 

correlation,  41,  309,  341  ;  photograph, 

358  ;  section,  359. 
Rectigradations,  45  ; 

early  titanothere  horns,  164. 
Red  Crag  of  Suffolk,  314,  317,  321,  393  ; 

bird  life,  307. 
Reid, 

flora  of  Norfolk  Interglacial,  393,  396  ; 

climate  of  Norfolk  Interglacial,  396,  397. 
Reindeer, 

see  Rangifer. 
Reindeer  Period,  378,  427. 
Reptiles, 

megalosaurs  of  Belgium  and  Rocky 
Mountain  region,  98  ;  Landenian,  100  ; 
Basal.  Eocene,  102  ;  Thanetian,  104 ; 
Puerco,  106 ;  Sparnacian,  115  ;  Ypre- 
sian,  117;  Wasatch,  124,  129  ;  Wind 
River,  129 ;  Lutetian,  140  ;  Ludian, 
147  ;  Bridger,  160,  161  ;  White  River, 
185;    Fayum,    200;    Oligocene  North 

classification. 


630 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


American,  208,  210;  Cypress  Hills, 
216  ;  John  Day,  228  ;  (Eningeu,  263  ; 
Arikaree,  288  ;  Roussillon,  316  ;  Peace 
Creek,  368  ;  Port  Kennedy  Cave,  470. 

Republican  River  formation,  348,  349,  350  ; 
correlation,  41,  309,  341. 

Rhagatherium, 

phylogeny,  148,  149;  Fayam,  201. 

Rheims,  Basal  and  Lower  Eocene  deposits 
near,  99,  100,  115. 

Rhinoceros, 

molar  figured,  11;  foot  figured,  16; 
brain  figured,  173. 

Rhinoceros, 

phylum,  272  ;  sivalensis  of  Miocene  of 
India,  275  ;  palceindicus  of  Siwaliks, 
327  ;  of  China,  334  ;  558.* 

Rhinocerotidae, 

Oligocene  of  Europe,  190,  197  ;  appear 
in  North  America  (Lower  White  River), 
213  ;  increased  by  two  new  phyla,  247  ; 
seven  Miocene  phyla,  272  ;  diminution 
in  European  Pliocene,  309  ;  Siwalik,  327  ; 
multiple  phyla  in  American  Pliocene, 
351,  352;  European  Pleistocene,  390; 
North  American  origin  of,  431  ;  distribu- 
tion of  fossil  and  recent  (map),  505. 

Rhinolophus,  259. 

Rhizomys,  327. 

Rhodanomys,  195,  534.* 

Rhynchippus,  560.* 

Rhytina  stelleri,  494,  559.* 

Ricardolydekkeria,  546.* 

RiCHTHOFEN, 

loess  formation,  417. 

RiGGS, 

Dcemonelix,  235. 
Rilly,  sables  blancs  siliceux  de,  99. 
Riss  Glaciation,  378  ; 

flora,  388. 
Riss-Wiirm  Interglacial,  378  ; 

length,  385. 
Rixdorf  deposit,  402  ; 

location,  391. 
Robenhausen  lake  dwellings,  428. 
Robiac  marls,  144. 
Roccaneyra  fauna,  316,  317. 
Rock  Creek  formation,  458  ; 

geology,  362  ;  correlation,  453  ;  quarry 

containing  Equus  sco«i  skeletons  (sketch) , 

456,  (photograph)  457. 
Rodentia, 

Holarctic  origin,  68;  Wasatch,  128;  Wind 
River,  134  ;  Eocene,  forest  living, 
149  ;  Middle  and  Upper  Eocene,  Amer- 
ican, 156  ;  evolution  in  North  America 
charted,  174;  Vindo))onian,  261;  Mery- 
cochoerus  zone,  287 ;  Hipparion  zone, 
302;  Siwaliks,  327;  early  Pliocene, 
American,  352,  353  ;  533.* 

RoDLER  and  Weithofer, 
Maragha,  270. 

Roger, 

Middle  Miocene  of  Germany,  262. 

*  Reference  to 


Roman, 

two  races  of  Dicerorhinus,  252 ;  and 
Fliche,  on  Horta  de  Tripas  deposits,  255. 

Ronzon  marls, 

fauna,  186,  187,  188,  189,  190;  dis- 
covered, 5. 

Ronzotherium,  188,  557.* 

Rorqualis,  317. 

Rosebud  formation,  231,  234,  285  ; 

photograph,  177;  correlation,  41,  277; 

section,  287. 
Roussillon  deposit  and  fauna,  314,  315,  316  ; 

bird  life,  307. 

RUTIMEYER, 

method  of  research,  8  ;  bipolar  theory, 
65,  75  ;  on  invasion  of  Africa  by  Euro- 
pean mammals,  68 ;  Middle  Eocene 
(Egerkingen)  mammals,  142,  143;  source 
of  North  African  fauna,  409  ;  fauna  of 
Swiss  lake  dwellings,  428  ;  phylogeny  of 
domestic  cattle,  429. 

Rupicapra,  424,  428,  554.* 

Ruscinomys,  311,  316. 

Russell, 

volcanic  ash  deposits,  92  ;  spearhead  in 
Lahontan  basin,  497. 

RUTOT, 

Eolithic  stage,  382,  384  ;  discovery  of 
eoliths,  399. 

Saber  tooth  tigers, 

see     Machaerodontinae,  MachoeroduSf 

Hoplophoneus,  Dinictis,  etc, 
Saghatherium,  202,  559.* 
Saiga,  417,  554.* 
St.  Gaudens, 

stage  of,  263,  264. 
St.  Gerand-le-Puy  deposits,  193,  194 ; 

fauna,  195,  196. 
St.  Ouen  deposits,  144. 
St.  Prest,  391,  395,  396,  399. 
Salensky, 

Beresowka  mammoth,  419,  420. 
Samos  deposit,  270  ; 

correlation,  266,  267. 
Samotherium,  270,  551.*  • 
Samwel  Cave,  467,  477,  478  ; 

evidence  of  early  man  in,  477,  498. 
Sangamon  Interglacial,  444,  445,  446  ; 

Toronto  formation  of,  447,  448,  449. 
San  Isidro  deposit,  257,  258,  263. 
Sanitherium,  329. 

Sannoisian  stage,  187,  188,  189,  190  ; 

correlation,  182  ;  palaeogeographic  map 
of  Europe,  184  ;    map  of  localities,  186. 

San  Pedro  stage,  444. 

Sansan, 

deposit  discovered,  4  ;     stage    of,  257, 
258,  259,  260. 
Santa  Fe  marls,  87,  298. 

DE  SaPORTA, 

Oligocene  climate  of  Europe,  185 ; 
Pontian  flora,  266  ;  flora  of  the  Quater- 
nary tuffs  of  Provence,  401,  402. 

classification. 


INDEX 


631 


Sarcolemur,  547.* 
SarcothrausieS;  111,  527.* 
Sarmatian  marine  stage,  257. 
Scalabrinitherium,  561.* 
Scalops,  469,  521.* 
Scaptonyx,  521.* 
Scarborough  beds,  flora,  449. 
Scelidoiherium ,  54 1 .  * 

SCHARFF, 

northern  center  of  evolution,  66,  67 ; 
early  Csenozoic,  North  and ,  South 
American  land  connection,  93,  292  ; 
steppe  mammals  no  sure  indication  of 
steppe  country,  417  ;  migration  of  rein- 
deer, 422  ;  origin  of  badger,  424. 

ScHiMPER  and  Schenck, 
fossil  grasses,  94. 

Schismotherium,  541.* 

Schistomys,  540.* 

Schizotherium,  193,  558.* 

SCHLOSSER, 

Liter aturhericht,  51  ;  origin  of  African 
fauna,  69  ;  theridomyids,  146  ;  Tertiary 
bear,  261,  269  ;  Samos  Cavicornia, 
270;  '  Anthracotherium '  fauna  of  India, 
274 ;  Maragha  fauna,  332  ;  Miocene 
and  Pliocene  fauna  of  China,  333,  334, 
335 ;  survival  of  chalieotheres  into 
Pleistocene,  338. 

SCHOTENSACK, 

age  of  Mauer  sands,  399  ;  Homo  heidel- 
hergensis,  403,  404. 

SCHUCHERT, 

Zeuglodon  beds,  171. 

SCHWALBE, 

Middle  Miocene  primates,  263,  264  ; 
Upper  Miocene  primates,  271,  272  ; 
Pliocene  primates,  307  ;  Pithecanthro- 
pus, 385. 

SCHWEINFURTH, 

discoveries  in  Fayum,  199. 
Schweizersbild  cave,  418,  419,  425. 

location  and  correlation,  391,  413. 
Sciuravus, 

Wasatch,  128  ;  Wind  River,  134  ;  534.* 
Sciuridae, 

ancestry,    128 ;     Oreodon    zone,    221  ; 

Vindobonian,  259  ;  535.* 
Sciurodon,  534.* 
Sciuroides,  534.* 
Sciuropterus, 

Vindobonian,  259,  261,  262;   of  'older 

Pliocene     fauna,'    311,     316;  Potter 

Creek  Cave,  477  ;  535.* 
Sciurus, 

Aquitanian,  195  ;  Vindobonian,  259  ; 
Pleistocene  forest  fauna  of  Europe,  415, 
417  ;  post-Pleistocene,  Europe,  428 ; 
Port  Kennedy  Cave,  469  ;  Potter  Creek 
Cave,  477  ;  535.* 

SCLATER, 

on  zoogeographic  divisions,  35,  36. 
Sderocalyptus,  542.* 
Scleromys,  539.* 

*  Reference  to 


Scott, 

convergence  in  evolution,  32  ;  ancestry 
of  oreodonts,  149  ;  Hycenodon  aquatic, 
222  ;  Middle  John  Day  corresponds  to 
St.  Gerand-le-Puy,  229  ;  Deep  River, 
281,  289 ;  Hypohippus,  293  ;  Miocene 
Canidae,  296 ;  Nebraska  formation, 
297  ;  Cervalces,  492,  493  ;  coexistence  of 
man  and  mastodon  in  North  America, 
495. 

Scott's  Bluff  (photograph) ,  228. 

SCUDDER, 

Florissant    Lake,    283  ;    effect   of  the 

Glacial  Period  on  American  insect  life, 

450,  451. 
Semnopithecus, 

of  'older  Pliocene  fauna,' 310,  312,315, 

316  ;  Siwaliks,  327  ;  545.* 
Sezanne,  travertin  de,  102,  114. 
Sheppey,  deposits  on  Isle  of,  102,  115,  117  ; 

birds  of,  152. 
Shufeldt, 

Silver  Lake,  459,  460,  461. 
Sicilian  stage,  317,  318,  319,  320,  321  ; 

correlation,  41,  309 ;  palseogeography, 

305,  318;   localities  (map),  310;  fauna 

summarized,  311. 
Sierran  stage,  435,  443. 
Silver  Lake  deposit,  458,  459,  460  ; 

age   of,    453 ;   comparison   with  Hay 

Springs  fauna,  457  ;  flints,  497. 
Simia,  327,  545.* 
Simocyon,  269,  529.* 
Simorre, 

stage  of,  260,  261,  262. 
Sinclair, 

Antarctica,  76 ;  volcanic  nature  of 
Bridger  and  Washakie,  91,  158  ;  eden- 
tates in  Mascall,  289  ;  section  of  John 
Day  formation,  359  ;  Potter  Creek  Cave, 
475,  476  ;  human  remains  in  auriferous 
gravels,  500. 
Sinopa, 

Wasatch,     127;     Wind    River,  133; 
Bridger  and  Washakie,  161,  164  ;  527.* 
Sirenia, 

possible  African  origin,  73,  493  ;  Eocene 
and  Oligocene,  182,  183  ;  possible  affini- 
ties to  Proboscidea,  204  ;  Miocene,  247, 
255,  256  ;  Pliocene,  317,  344  ;  source  of 
American,  493  ;  Pliocene  and  Pleisto- 
cene of  North  America,  493,  494  ;  559.* 

Sivameryx,  274. 

Sivatherium,  551.* 

Siwaliks, 

correlation,  41  ;  distribution,  geology, 
274,  323,  324,  325,  326 ;  fauna,  323- 
332  ;  age,  332. 

Skanian  Interglacial  fauna,  377. 

Smilodon, 

Megalonyx  zone,  467 ;  Port  Kennedy 
Cave,  470 ;  Rancho  la  Brea,  473 ; 
skeleton  figured,  474  ;  restoration,  475; 
532.* 

classification. 


632 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Smilodontopsis, 

Ovihos  zone,  487  ;  Conard  Fissure,  488. 
Smith,  J.  P., 

Tertiary  physiography  of  western  North 

America,  92,  93,  175,  282,  343,  443. 
Snake  Creek  formation,  353,  354,  355  ; 

correlation,  341. 
Soissons,  nrgiles  plastiques  et  lignites  de,  102, 

114,  115. 
Solhilac,  391,  392,  395. 

SOLLAS, 

thickness  of  sedimentary  deposits,  58, 
59  ;  duration  of  Canozoic,  64  ;  duration 
of  Pleistocene,  385. 

Solutre  palaiolithic  encampment,  427. 

Solutrian  stage,  427  ;  correlation,  378. 

Sorex,  259,  521.* 

South  polar  theory,  65. 

Spalacotherium,  515.* 

Spaniomys,  539.* 

Sparnacian  stage,  114,  115;  correlation,  42, 
83,  99,  100,  114  ;  map  of  localities,  102. 

Sperm  ophilus, 

Pleistocene  Europe,  407,  417 ;  Potter 
Creek  Cave,  477  ;  535.* 

Sphenophalos,  338,  357,  554.* 

Spy  Cave.  410. 

Squalodon,  251,  561.* 

Statzling  deposits,  258,  263. 

Stampian  stage,  190,  191,  192,  193;  corre- 
lation, 182 ;  map  of  localities,  191  ; 
Quercy,  151. 

Stegodon,  330,  331  ; 

Japan,  322  ;  Java,  323  ;  Siwaliks,  324, 
326  ;  type  in  America,  360,  364,  366  ; 
558.* 

Stegotherium,  542.* 

Stehlin, 

Africa  as  an  evolution  center,  70,  71,  72  ; 
separation  of  New  and  Old  Worlds  in 
Middle  Eocene,  137  ;  Middle  and  Upper 
Eocene  fauna  of  Europe,  141  ;  Dicho- 
bunidae,  147 ;  Eocene  suillines  and 
anthracotheres,  148,  149 ;  Oligocene 
suillines,  198,  199  ;  sables  de  I'Orleanais, 
251  ;  Miocene  suillines,  253,  260 ; 
ancestry  of  hippopotami,  313  ;  hip- 
parion  fauna  of  Perrier,  317;  and  Harle, 
Cajarc,  395,  396. 

Steinheim  deposit,  261. 

Steiromys,  539.* 

Steneofiber, 

Stampian,  191  ;  Aquitanian,  195,  198  ; 
Upper  Oligocene,  North  American,  224, 
226;  John  Day,  228,  229;  last  appear- 
ance, 233  ;  535.* 

Stenogale,  254,  530.* 

Stenomylus, 

Promerycochoerus  zone,  234,  236;  quarry 
(photograph),  234  ;  550.* 

Stenoplesictis,  254,  530.* 

Stenotatus,  542.* 

Steppe  fauna  of  Pleistocene,  388,  412; 
(summarized)     414,    415,     416,  417, 


(Schweizersbild)  418,  (Kesslerloch)  426 ; 
horse  of,  409,  412,  417  ;  retreat  of,  428. 
Sternberg, 

herds  of  tortoises '  on  Pliocene  Great 
Plains,  342,  350  ;  Long  Island  Quarry, 
349,  350. 

Sternberg's  elephant  bed,  461,  463. 

Sthenurus,  518.* 

Stibarus,  547.* 

Stichomys,  539.* 

Stilotherium,  517.* 

Strepsiceros, 

Siwaliks,  328  ;  Pliocene  distribution  of 
antelopes  allied  to  (map),  336,  337,  338  ; 
recent,  figured,  338  ;  554.* 

Strutt, 

on  geologic  time  measured  by  helium 
content  of  rocks,  62,  63. 
Studer, 

Briittelen  fauna,  255  ;  crowding  out  of 
tundra  fauna,  419  ;  Kesslerloch  horse,  426. 

Stylinodon, 

Wind  River,  133  ;  Bridger,  155  ;  540.* 

Sub-Aftonian  Glacial,  435,  445. 

SUESS, 

stability  of  North  America  during  Caeno- 

zoic,  84. 
Suessonian  Sea,  114,  141. 
Suidae, 

Ludian,  148;  three  phyla  in  European 
Eocene,  148 ;  Aquitanian,  197  ;  phy- 
logeny  of  Oligocene,  198,  199  ;  Miocene, 
253,260;  548.* 

Surra,  507. 

Sus, 

brain  figured,  173  ;  evolution  of,  260 ; 
Vindobonian,  262  ;  Miocene  of  India, 
275;  of  'older  Pliocene  fauna,'  312, 
316,  317  ;  SicUian,  321  ;  Siwalik,  329  ; 
mid-Pleistocene  of  Europe,  407;  post- 
Pleistocene  of  Europe,  428  ;  Pleistocene 
of  North  Africa,  433  ;  548.* 

Siissenborn  deposit,  402,  403  ; 
location,  391. 

Swift  Current  Creek  deposit,  212  ; 
location,  204  ;  titanotheres,  214. 

Symborodon, 

restoration  (head),  212;  556.* 

Symbos, 

Ovibos  zone  (Conard  Fissure),  487,  488 ; 

Alaska,  490  ;  554.* 
Synchronism,  39,  43,  44,  45,  46,  47. 
Syndyoceras,  236  ; 

outline  restoration  (head),  236 ;  skull 

figured,  237  ;  551.* 
Synoplotherium,  527.* 
Systemodon,  127,  556.* 

Taeniodonta, 

Holarctic  origin,  68 ;  Puerco,  107 ; 
Torrejon,  109,  111;  Wasatch,  125; 
Wind  River,  132  ;  last  appearance, 
Bridger,  155  ;  evolution  and  extinction, 
charted,  174  ;  540.* 


*  Reference  to  classification. 


INDEX 


633 


Talpa, 

Burdigalian,  254  ;  Astian,  316  ;  521* 
Talpavus,  521.* 
Talpidae, 

first  appearance  (Europe),  149  ;  Oreo- 
don  zone,  221  ;  Burdigalian,  254  ;  521  * 
Tapiravus, 

Hipparion  zone,  299  ;   Lower  Pliocene, 
352;  556* 
3i  jD  i  ri  d  SB 

Wasatch,  127;  Wind  River  (?),  135; 
Middle  and  Upper  Eocene,  American, 
156  ;  first  appearance  in  Europe,  190  ; 
Aquitanian,  197  ;  Miocene  of  Europe, 
251,  263  ;  of  North  America,  279,  293, 
299,  300  ;  PHocene  of  Europe,  315,  318, 
320 ;  Siwalik,  327 ;  American  Pleisto- 
cene (disappearance),  438,  440,  500 ; 
undoubted  existence  in  forests  of  Equus 
zone,  455 ;  of  Megalonyx  zone,  466 ; 
556* 
Tapirus, 

molar  figured,  11  ;    casino,  312  ;  arver- 

nensis,   315,   318,   320  ;    Siwalik,   327  ; 

China,  335;  Port  Kennedy  Cave,  469; 

Ashley   River,    471,   472  ;  Megalonyx 

zone,  484  ;  557.* 
Tarrega  deposit,  186,  187. 
Taubach,  406,  407  ; 

location,  391  ;  correlation,  405. 
Taxidea, 

Equus  zone,  439,  454  ;  Port  Kennedy 
Cave,  470  ;  531.* 

Telemetacarpal  deer,  302. 

Teleoceras,  252,  352  ; 

foot  figured,  16  ;  phylum  enters  Europe, 
247,  248,  249  ;  aurelianensis  of  Burdi- 
galian, 252  ;  skull  figured  252  ;  medi- 
cornutus  (skull  figured),  252,  (of  Pawnee 
Creek)  292,  352  ;  of  the  Tagus  valley, 
255  ;  hrachypus  of  Vindobonian,  262  ; 
perimensis  of  Miocene  of  India,  275,  327  ; 
crassus  of  Hipparion  zone,  300  ;  Chinese, 
333  ;  fossiger,  348,  349,  350,  (skeleton 
figured)  349  ;  restoration,  349  ;  557.* 

Teleoceratinae,  272  ; 

migration,  292  ;  Hipparion  zone,  300  ; 
highest  development,  338,  346. 

Teleopternus,  469,  470. 

Telmatherium,  164,  556.* 

Temnocyon,  230,  529.* 

'Temperature  zones,'  38. 

Teonoma,  477. 

Tephrocyon,  296,  356,  528.* 

Tetracerus,  328,  553.* 

Tetracloenodon,  110. 

Tetraconodon,  326,  329. 

Tetracus,  520.* 

Tetralophodon, 

longirostris  of  Pontian,  271,  331  ;  peri- 
mensis of  Miocene  of  India,  275,  331  ; 
SiwaUk  species,  330,  331  ;  campester, 
euhypodon,  353  ;  558.* 

Tetraselenodon,  548.* 


Thanetian  stage,  103,  104  ; 

correlation,  42,  83,  99  ;  map  of  localities, 
102. 

Theosodon,  561.* 
Theridomyidae, 

Fayum,  73  ;   Ludian,  146  ;  Sannoisian, 

189 ;    Aquitanian,    195 ;  Vindobonian, 

259;  538.* 
Theridomys,  195,  538.* 
Thiede  deposits,  415,  418. 
Thinocyon,  527.* 
Thinohyus, 

Promerycochoerus   zone,   232  ;  outline 

restoration  (head),  291  ;  549.* 
Thoatherium,  561.* 
Thomomys, 

Hay  Springs,  457 ;   Silver  Lake,  460 ; 

Potter  Creek  Cave,  477  ;  536.* 
Thompson-Seton, 

range  of  the  wapiti,  450. 
Thomson, 

Lower  Miocene  geology  of  Great  Plains, 
285,  287. 

Thousand  Creek  deposits,  356,  357  ; 

correlation,  41. 
Threeforks  deposit,  204. 
Thuringian  deposits,  413,  426. 
Thylacoleo,  517.* 
Ticholeptus, 

zone,  288-297,  (photograph)  290;  Deep 

River,  281  ;  skull  figured,  288  ;  affinities, 

293  ;  550.* 
Tillodontia, 

Holarctic    origin,   68 ;    Wasatch,    125  ; 

Wind    River,    132  ;     last  appearance, 

Bridger,  155  ;  evolution  and  extinction 

charted,  174  ;  523.* 
Tillotherium, 

Bridger,  155  ;   outline  restoration,  162  ; 

523.* 

Time  divisions  of  Csenozoic,  40,  41,  43. 

Tinoceras,  166,  547.* 

Titanomys, 

Stampian,  191  ;  Aquitanian,  195  ;  Pon- 
tian, 269  ;  534.* 

Titanotheriidse, 

Wind  River,  130,  134 ;  pecuHar  to 
North  America  (?),  156,  213;  become 
polyphyletic,  164;  restoration  of  Lower 
Oligocene  (heads),  212  ;  adaptive  radia- 
tion, 212,  213,  214  ;  extinction,  239,  240  ; 
556.* 

Titanotherium,  213  ; 

zone,  52,  210,  212-217,  (photographs) 
178,  206,  210;  restoration  (head),  212; 
Bulgaria,  213  ;  Oreodon  zone,  220  ;  556.* 

Tongrian  stage, 

see  Sannoisian  and  Stampian. 

Toronto  formation, 

flora  and  insects,  447,  449. 

Torrejon  formation, 

location,  86,  87,  104 ;  correlation,  99, 
photograph,  105;  fauna,  107,  108,  109, 
110,  111. 


*  Reference  to  classification. 


634 


AGE  OF  MAMMALS 


Tortonian  marine  stage,  257. 
Totissaint, 

Solutre  camp,  427. 
Toxodon,  560  * 
Toxodontia,  78,  560* 
Tragocenis, 

Pontian,  268,  269  ;  China,  334  ;  553  * 
Tragulidae, 

Miocene,  249 ;    Burdigalian,  253 ;  Si- 

waliks,  328  ;  551  * 
Trayulus,  328,  551  * 
Trechomys,  538.* 
Trenton  man,  499,  500. 
Tricentes,  111,  526.* 
Trichecodon,  395. 
Triconodon,  515.* 
Triglyphus,  518.* 
Trigonias,  213,  557.* 
Trigonolestes,  127,  547.* 
Trigonolestidae,  127,  547.* 
Trigonostylops,  560.* 
Triisodon,  527.* 
Trilophodon, 

angustidens  of  Burdigalian  and  Vindo- 

bonian,  -253,  254,  255,  259,  262,  275,  331  ; 

pygmceus   of   Algerian    Miocene,    254  ; 

pentelici  of  Pontian,  271,  331  ;  pandionis 

of  Miocene  of  India,  275  ;  Deep  River 

(?),  Madison  Vallej-,  281  ;  proavus  and 

brevidens    of    Ticholeptus    zone,    292  ; 

productus  of  Clarendon,  299,  300,  (skull 

figured)    299 ;     Siwalik    species,    331  ; 

restoration,  441  ;  558.* 
Trilophomys,  311,  316. 
Triplopus,  166,  168,  557.* 
Tritemnodon, 

Wind  River,  131,  133 ;    Bridger,  161  ; 

skeleton  figured,  163  ;  527.* 
Trituhercular  molar, 

of  Triisodon  figured  10;  evolution  of,  11. 
Trituberculy, 

prevalence  of  among  primitive  forms 

demonstrated  by  Cope,  10. 
Tritylodon,  518.* 
Trochidis,  530.* 
Trogolemur,  522.* 
Trogontherium, 

Pliocene    of    England,    321  ;  Norfolk 

Interglacial,  392,  396  ;  mid-Pleistocene, 

Europe,    401  ;    last   appearance,  403, 

404;  535.* 
Trofjosus,  523.* 
Tuhulidentata,  68,  71. 

TULLBERCJ, 

on  Africa  as  an  evolution  center,  70,  72. 

Tundra  fauna, 

of  Pleistocene,  388,  412,  (summarized) 
414,  415,  (Schweizersbild)  418,  (Kessler- 
loch)  426  ;  crowding  out  of,  419,  428. 

Turner, 

Pliocene  flora  of  California,  344. 

Twelve-mile  Creek  deposit,  461,  463,  464. 

Typotherium,  561.* 


Uinta  formation,  165,  166,  167,  168,  169,  170  ; 

correlation,  42.  139,  153  ;  location,  8©; 

87  ;  sections,  155,  169  ;  photograph,  168. 
Uintacyon,  127,  528.* 
Uintasorex,  522.* 
■Uintatheriidae,  132,  547.* 
Uintatherium, 

skeleton    figured,    155 ;     Bridger  and 

Washakie,   163,   164;    zone,  163-166; 

brain  figured,  173  ;  547.* 
Ulm  deposit,  193,  194. 
Upham, 

duration  of  Caenozoic,  63  ;   duration  of 
Pleistocene,  385. 
U  rmiatherium, 

Pontian,  270,  332  ;  China,  334. 

Urocyon, 

Potter  Creek  Cave,  477  ;  Conard  Fis- 
sure, 488  ;  528.* 

Ursavus,  261,  529.* 

Ursidae, 

Vindobonian,  255 ;  Eurasiatic  origin, 
431  ;  529.* 

U  rsus, 

hockhi  (Pontian),  261  ;  minutus  (Astian), 
315;  arvernensis  (Sicilian),  318,  319; 
arctos,  400,  403,  407,  423,  429  ;  spelceus, 
407,  (characters)  423 ;  Pleistocene  of 
North  Africa,  433  ;  arrival  m  Nor+h 
America,  437,  438  ;  americanus,  (figured) 
437,  469,  (skull  figured)  476,  477,  478, 
4.88  ;  Alaskan  Pleistocene,  490  ;  530.* 
Urus, 

see  Bos  primigenius. 

Val  d'  Arno, 

fauna,  318,  320,  321  ;  flora,  307  ;  upper 
deposits,  392  ;  E.  meridionalis  of,  398. 

Vermeil,  lignites  de,  186,  187. 

Vespertili-o, 

Vindobonian,  259  ;  Port  Kennedy  Cave, 
469;  525.* 

Vindobonian  stage,  255-264  ; 

physiography,  246,  256,  257 ;  correla- 
tion, 249  ;  palseogeographic  maps,  256, 
258. 

Virgin  Valley  formation,  356,  357  ;  correla- 
tion, 41  ;  antelopes,  338. 
Vishnutherium,  551.* 
Viverra, 

Vindobonian,  259,  261  ;    Astian,  315 ; 

Siwaliks,  327  ;  531.* 
Viverravus, 

W^asatch,  127  ;  Wind  River,  134  ;  528.* 
Viverridae, 

Aquitanian,    197 ;     Vindobonian,  259, 

261  ;  531.* 
Voklinshofen  deposits,  426  ; 

location  and  correlation,  391,  413. 
Voitsberg  deposits,  257,  258,  260. 
Volcanic  materials  in  North  American  forma- 
tions, 90,  91. 
Vulpavus, , 

Wasatch,  127  ;  Wind  River,  134  ;  528.* 


*  Reference  to 


classification. 


INDEX 


635 


Vulpes, 

Astian,  316 ;  Siwaliks,  327 ;  China, 
334  ;  Potter  Creek  Cave,  477  ;  Conard 
Fissure,  488  ;  528* 

Waagen, 

methods  in  invertebrate  palaeontology, 

7,  9  ;  '  mutations'  of,  45. 
Walcott, 

on  duration  of  Csenozoic,  63. 
Wallace, 

zoogeographic  divisions,  35 ;  duration 
of  Csenozoic,  58,  63  ;  invasion  of  Africa 
by  northern  mammals,  68  ;  means  of 
dispersal  of  mammals,  80 ;  effect  of 
insular  conditions  on  fauna,  176  ;  date 
of  last  glacial  advance,  385. 
Ward, 

Tertiary  flora,  94  ;  duration  of  Pleisto- 
cene, 385. 

Wasatch  formation,  118,  119,  122,  123,  124, 
125,  126,  127,  128  ; 

correlation,  42,  114  ;  location  and  origin, 
86,  87;  sections,  119,  123,  154;  photo- 
graph, 122. 

Washakie  formation,  158,  159,  160,  163,  164, 
165,  166,  167  ; 

correlation,  42,  139  ;  zones,  48,  49  ; 
location,  86,  87 ;  sections,  153,  159 ; 
photographs,  158,  167. 

Washakius,  130,  134,  543.* 

Washtucna  Lake  deposit,  456,  467,  474. 

Wauwyl  lake  dwellings,  428. 

Weisenau  deposit,  193,  194. 

White  Buttes  deposit,  204,  217. 

White  River  formation, 

lower,  210,  212-217  ;  upper,  219-223  ; 
correlation,  42,  182  ;  location,  87,  204  ; 
section,  154 ;  photograph,  177 ;  pano- 
rama, 207. 

Whitney, 

man  and  the  mastodon,  495. 

Wies  deposits,  257,  258,  260. 

Wight,  Isle  of,  deposits,  145. 

Wildkirchli  cave,  410. 

Williams, 

on  methods  of  calculating  rate  of  deposi- 
tion, 61  ;  duration  of  Pleistocene,  385. 

WiLLISTON, 

age  of  Equus  fauna,  453  ;  Kansas  Pleis- 
tocene, 454,  461  ;  discovery  of  Platy- 
gonus  at  Goodland,  462  ;  discovery  of 
arrowhead  under  bison  skeletons  at 
Twelve-mile  Creek,  463,  464  ;  Twelve- 
mile  Creek  fauna,  464. 

*  Reference  to 


Wind  River  formation,  128-135  ; 

correlation,  42,  114;    location,  86,  87; 

sections,  123,  131,  154  ;  photograph,  130. 
Wisconsin  glacial,  435,  444,  445  ; 

European  correlation,  379. 

WOLDRICH, 

succession  of  faunas  in  Pleistocene,  388, 
414,  415  ;  herbivores  reflect  changes  of 
environment,  424. , 
Wolf, 

first  occurrence  in  Europe,  317  ;  Siwalik, 
327 ;  mid-Pleistocene,  Europe,  407 ; 
cave,  424 ;  post-Pleistocene,  Europe, 
429. 

Woodward,  A.  S., 

deposition  of  Pikermi  beds,  268  ;  Con- 
cud,  270. 

W^ooUy  rhinoceros, 

see  Diceros  antiquitatis. 

Woolwich  Beds,  102,  114. 

WORTMAN, 

succession  of  mammals  in  White  River 
formation,  52  ;  north  polar  origin  of 
mammals,  66,  67  ;  Ganodonta  ( =  Tsenio- 
donta),  107;  109;  Wind  River,  and 
Huerfano  exploration,  129,  130,  134; 
Leptarctus,  301. 

TVortmania,  540.* 

Wlirm  Glaciation,  378  ; 
flora,  388. 

Wiirzburg  loess   deposits,   418,   426 ; 
location  and  correlation,  391,  413. 

Xenotherium,  520.* 
Xiphodon,  548.* 
Xiphodontherium,  548.* 
Xiphodontinse,  146,  147,  548.* 

Yarmouth  Interglacial,  444,  445,  446. 
Ypresian  stage,  115,  116,  117,  118  ; 

correlation,  42,  83, 1 14  ;  map  of  localities, 

102. 

Yukon  silts,  490. 

Zapus,  470,  538.* 
Zeuglodon,  171,  172,  200  ; 

zone,  of  United  States,  170,  171,  172  ; 

of  Fayum,  199,  200 ;  beds,  170,  171  ; 

restoration,  171  ;  561.* 
Zeuglodontia,  73,  559.* 
Zoogeographic  divisions, 

of  Sclater,  35,  36  ;  of  Wallace,  35  ;  of 

Huxley,  36  ;  accepted  at  present,  36,  37, 

38. 

classification. 


7 


li 


QE881.08 


„^  3  5002  00321  9305 

Osborn,  Henry  Fairfield  v'*-'vv-» 
The  aqe  of  mammals  in  Europe,  Asia  and  N 


Date  Due 


MAY  2  2 

1972 

All  1 ' 

r  ' 

Librmri  Buraaa  Cat.  no.  1137 


881 

^8  67364 


