ABOLITIONISM  EXPOSED 


CORRECTED. 


BY  A  PHYSICIAN 

Formerly  Resident  of  the  South. 


A  PLAN* 


ABOLISHING  THE  AMERICAN  ANTI-SLAVERY  SOCIETY  AND  ITS 

AUXILIARIES. 


BY  A  TENNESSEEAN. 


PHILADELPHIA  : 

J,  SHARP,  225  NORTH  SIXTH  STREET. 
1838. 


Copyright  secured  according  to  Laiv. 


PREFACE. 


It  may  be  considered  a  work  of  supererogation  to  attempt  to  ex- 
pose Abolitionism  any  further  than  has  been  done  by  the  able 
author  of  "  Abolitionism  Exposed,"  a  gentleman  who  had  the  bold- 
ness to  come  forward,  single-handed  and  alone,  as  champion  against 
a  host  of  abolitionists,  and  boldly  proclaimed  he  would  prove  the 
"principles  of  abolitionism  injurious  to  the  slaves  themselves,  dan- 
gerous to  this  nation,  and  contrary  to  the  express  commands  of  God." 
But  being  deprived  of  the  privilege  of  meeting  them  in  public  de- 
bate by  the  burning  of  Pennsylvania  Hall,  and  "  convinced  that  the 
best  interests  of  the  country  and  of  common  humanity  itself  are  in- 
volved in  the  question  of  abolitionism,"  he  has,  with  the  prompt- 
ness of  the  true  patriot,  published  a  large  pamphlet,  developing  at 
considerable  length,  with  his  usual  profundity  and  eloquence,  the 
pernicious  tendency  of  these  obnoxious  principles.  The  only  apo- 
logy which  the  writer  of  this  pamphlet  offers  for  retouching  the  sub- 
ject is,  his  having  travelled  and  resided  in  the  south,  which  have 
given  him  opportunities  for  the  personal  observation  of  slavery, 
which  it  is  presumed  the  learned  author  of  Abolitionism  Exposed 
has  not  enjoyed. 

It  would  seem,  from  the  silence  of  the  abolitionists  since  Dr. 
Sleigh  wrote  his  work,  that  they  are  all  killed  off,  or  at  least  stricken 
dumb.  Else  why  have  they  not  answered  it  ?  Does  it  not  look 
rather  suspicious  for  men,  who  pretend  to  be  lovers  of  truth,  and 
aTe  frequently  prating  about  free  discussion,  to  shrink  from  discus- 
sion when  an  opportunity  is  offered  them  ?  They  certainly  cannot 
plead  for  excuse,  that  the  work  of  a  gentleman  who  has  frequently 
signalized  himself  in  public  debate,  and  is  also  celebrated  in  the  lite- 
rary and  scientific  world,  is  not  of  sufficient  importance  to  merit  a 
reply  from  them.  The  only  legitimate  conclusion  is,  that  they  can- 
not answer  it, — that  it  has  completely  used  them  up ;  and  they 
have  not  a  word  to  say  for  themselves.  The  writer  of  these  pages 
waited  a  long  time  in  vain,  to  see  a  reply  to  Dr.  S. ;  but  from  their 


4 


silence,  he  thought  it  unnecessary,  especially  for  him,  to  take  up 
the  cudgel  against  a  dispersed  and  vanquished  sect ;  but  recent  in- 
formation has  convinced  "  him  that  abolitionists  are  like  a  certain 
species  of  animals,  which  must  be  killed  at  least  nine  times  before 
they  will  stay  killed.  For  notwithstanding  they  have  been,  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  country,  knocked  down  and  dragged  out,  and 
burnt  out  of  their  own  Pennsylvania  Hall,  it  is  said  that  a  new 
and  prolifiic  generation  of  at  least  ten  thousand  has  sprung  up, 
Phenix  like,  from  their  ashes  in  Philadelphia ;  and  that  in  all  parts 
of  the  country,  they  are  even  now  promulgating  their  pestiferous 
doctrines,  so  that  they  are  becoming  powerfully  terrific.  Therefore, 
though  the  author  of  this  pamphlet  is  no  champion,  slaveholder,  nor 
member  of  any  abolition  society,  he  deems  an  apology  unnecessary 
for  presuming  to  compete  with  the  celebrated  champion  for  a  few 
of  the  spoils  of  conquest. 

July,  1838. 


CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  I.  Difference  between  Words  and  Things.   Slavery  not  to  be  condemned 
on  account  of  its  abuse  any  more  than  Liberty  or  Christianity.   False  statements  of 


Abolitionists.  Their  recklessness  of  Truth,  proof  that  their  system  is  erroneous. 
The  slaves  as  incapable  of  taking  care  of  themselves  as  Lunatics,    ...  5 

CHAPTER  II.  Abolitionists  versus  Colonizationists.  Expose  of  W.  L.  Garrison.  "If 
Abolitionism  is  to  be  supported,  then  the  principles  of  Washington  must  be  aban- 
doned."  8 

CHAPTER  III.  Design  of  Europe  to  dissolve  the  Union.  Circulation  of  incendiary  pam- 
phlets, &c.  by  Abolitionists,  which  has  produced  worse  treatment  of  the  Slaves,  15 

CHAPTER  IV.   Practical  results  of  Abolition  fully  carried  out,  21 

CHAPTER  V.  "  Where  there  is  no  law  there  is  no  transgression."  The  Bible  sanc- 
tions slavery,. and  does  not  condemn  purchasing  or  selling  men.  Commands  every 
Slave  to  remain  a  Slave.  ........  26 

CHAPTER  VI.   Happiness  of  the  Slaves.    A  fatal  objection  to  Abolitionism,  -  30 

CHAPTER  VII.    Education  and  Morality  of  Slaves.    Sentiments  of  Slaveholders, 

Conclusion.  -        -        -        -        -        -        -        -  -34 

Plan  for  the  Abolition  of  Anti-slavery  Societies,     ......  36 


ABOLITIONISM  EXPOSED  CORRECTED. 


CHAPTER  I- 

Difference  between  Words  and  Things.  Slavery  not  to  be  condemned,  on  ac- 
count of  its  abuse,  any  more  than  Liberty  or  Christianity.  False  Statement* 
of  Abolitionists.  Their  Recklessness  of  Truth,  Proof  that  their  System  it 
errojieous.    The  Slaves  as  incapable  of  taking  care  of  themselves  as  Lunatics. 

Dr.  Sleigh  introduces  his  subject,  in  Chapter  I.  with  the  follow- 
ing trite  remarks : 

44  Mankind  has  ever  been  disposed  to  be  carried  away  with 
names  and  words, — with  the  representation  of  things  rather  than 
with  things  themselves  ;  and  that  portion  of  mankind  thus  apt  to  be 
deceived  by  mere  sound,  is  generally  the  most  innocent, — the  best, 
— the  most  unsuspecting, — the  most  charitable  :  these  very  qualities 
rendering  them  the  easy  victims  of  design  and  imprudence." 

He  might  have  added,  Therefore  let  all  persons  examine  things 
themselves,  and  not  be  deceived  by  mere  words  ;  so  that  they  may  act 
from  an  enlightened  judgment,  rather  than  from  a  blind  zeal  created 
by  the  crafty  and  designing,  and  take  care  that  they  are  not  used 
as  mere  4  cat's-paws'  to  subserve  the  interests  of  such  persons. 

44  Liberty,"  he  says,  44  is  a  glorious  term  ;  so  is  Christianity  : 
but  under  the  sacred  garb  of  both  one  and  the  other,  the  foulest 
deeds  have  been  and  may  be  perpetrated  !  Under  the  name  of 
Christianity,  the  holy  crusades,  in  which  thousands  were  slain,  were 
instituted  and  carried  on  by  Englishmen  ;  and  under  the  name  of 
Liberty,  men,  women  and  children  were  slaughtered  by  Frenchmen." 

Could  he  not  have  added,  And  under  the  name  of  liberty  millions 
of  human  beings  have  been  kept  in  bondage  ?  44  Be  not,  therefore, 
carried  away  by  sounds,  by  mere  words."  The  doctor's  advice  here 
is  certainly  very  good,  and  gives  an  earnest  of  the  candid  manner 
in  which  he  designs  to  treat  the  subject,  and  that  he  does  not  wish 
any  one  to  be  carried  away  by  the  mere  sound  of  his  words. 

2 


6 


And  now  it  is  hoped  that  the  reader  will  pay  attention  to  the 
words  of  Dr.  Sleigh,  which,  as  coming  from  a  champion  against 
Abolitionists,  may  be  very  useful  in  silencing  fanatics  and  amalga- 
mationists.  It  is  hoped  that  you  will  read  all  his  statements,  and  do 
them  justice,  as  I  desire  to  do. 

In  speaking  of  slavery,  he  asks  : 

"  Is  the  abuse  of  a  system  a  just  cause  of  condemnation  ?  Do  you 
say  it  is  ;  then  the  system  of  apprenticeship — of  guardianship — of 
matrimony — liberty  and  Christianity  themselves  ought  to  be  con- 
demned ;  for  they  all  have  been  abused  ;  all  have  had  the  most 
cruel,  tyrannical,  and  satanic  acts  committed  under  their  names  ! 
Therefore  according  to  the  argument  by  which  you  would  have 
slavery  condemned,  you  would  have  liberty,  Christianity  and  matri- 
mony banished  from  the  earth  !  You  cannot  get  out  of  the  dilemma 
— there  is  no  possible  alternative  ;  if  slavery  is  to  be  condemned 
because  it  has  been  abused,  so  are  liberty  and  Christianity  !  Out  of 
thine  own  mouth  thou  art  condemned  !" 

After  this  who  shall  dare  to  condemn  slavery  !  Some  have  even 
gone  so  far  as  to  call  it  a  Sin  !  but  the  doctor  shows  the  absurdity 
of  this  idea  by  reference  to  scripture.  According  to  his  reason- 
ing (which  all  must  admit  is  very  logical),  slavery  is  to  be  ranked 
among  heaven's  choicest  blessings,  as  further  proof  of  which  he 
might  have  added,  that  the  Israelites,  the  chosen  people  of  God,  had 
ihe  boon  granted  to  them  during  many  years,  and  were  only  de- 
prived of  it  by  the  accidental  circumstances  of  numerous  plagues, 
pestilences,  and  scourgings,  which  the  Egyptians  were  foolish 
enough  to  believe  were  sent  upon  themselves  for  retaining  these 
slaves  among  them. 

False  Statements  of  abolitionists.    Their  Recklessness  of  Truth,  Proof  that 
their  System  is  erroneous. 

"  A  total  recklessness  of  truth,  is  a  remarkable  feature  in  the 
arguments  adopted  by  the  advocates  of  abolitionism  ;  while  they 
give  no  credit  to  the  statements  of  those  differing  from  them  !  they 
unblushingly  assert  that  all  slaveholders  are  tyrants  and  cruel ! 
Does  truth  require  falsehood  to  make  it  conquer  ?  Ought  not  these 
preposterous  misstatements  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  public  to  the  real 
character  and  motive  of  those  men  ?  The  cause  of  God  they  cannot 
be  advocating,  for  his  cause  requires  not  the  weapons  of  Satan  ! 
Error  invariably  stands  in  need  of  lies  for  its  support." 


7 


It  is  true  I  never  before  heard  that  "  they  unblushingly  assert 
that  all  slaveholders  are  cruel,"  yet  the  doctor  says  so,  and  what  is 
the  use  of  his  spending  time  to  prove  this  and  the  preceding  modest 
little  item,  "a  total  recklessness  of  truth,"  &c. ;  but  as  inferential  evi- 
dence, although  not  exactly  in  order,  I  shall  place  here  a  really  can- 
did confession  of  the  doctor,  with  which  the  above  paragraph  may 
be  compared.    He  says, 

"  Let  not  abolitionists  at  large  mistake  me.  I  do  not  intend  to 
accuse  them  directly  or  indirectly  of  impure  motives, — quite  the 
reverse;  I  do  really  believe  all  the  abolitionists,  with  very  few 
exceptions,  are  the  best  and  most  moral  and  philanthropic  men 
in  America ;  and  are  actuated  by  the  purest  motives  of  doing  good 
to  all,  relieving  the  oppressed  and  crushing  tyranny." 

Some  persons  of  a  sceptical  turn  of  mind  may  be  disposed  to 
cavil  and  inquire — Why  is  it  that  "  the  best  and  most  moral  men  in 
America,  such  as  are  actuated  by  the  purest  motives,"  should  have 
this  44  total  recklessness  of  truth,"  and  how  these  men  can  be  so 
pure  and  good,  if  they  are  using  "falsehoods,  which  are  the  wea- 
pons of  Satan,— error  invariably  stands  in  need  of  lies  for  its  sup- 
port." Such  sceptics,  however,  deserve  no  other  answer  than  this  : 
You  want  to  know  too  much,  even  more  than  your  teacher !  If 
your  "  eyes"  do  not  yet  begin  "  to  open"  by  these  "  preposterous 
misstatements  to  real  motives,"  you  certainly  need  couching. 

The  Slaves  as  Incapable  of  taking  care  of  themselves  as  Lunatics, 
Again,  the  doctor  asks, 

"  Would  opening  the  doors  of  a  lunatic  asylum,  and  letting  free 
the  patients  thereof,  be  an  act  of  kindness,  or  friendship  towards 
them  ?  You  reply,  Certainly  not  ?  Yet  this  would  be  granting  them 
immediate  liberty — this  would  be  pure  abolitionism  ! 

"  But  you  rejoin,  The  condition  of  the  persons — their  mental  ina- 
bilities disqualify  them  for  liberty  till  they  are  cured — till  they  can 
take  care  of  themselves — till  there  is  no  danger  of  their  doing  vio- 
lence to  others ;  therefore,  keeping  them  confined,  till  then,  is 
in  fact  an  act  of  kindness  towards  them ;  and  the  opposite  course 
would  be  most  injurious  to  them  !  Thank  you,  kind  reader,  these 
are  identically  the  same  reasons  I  give  for  not  advocating  the  imme- 
diate emancipation  of  the  slaves.  I  give  you  full  credit  for  the 
wisdom  and  propriety  of  your  reasons  ;  be  so  liberal  as  to  grant  me 


8 


the  same  indulgence — to  give  me  the  same  credit  for  the  sincerity 
of  my  actions. 

"  It  is  probable  abolitionists  will  reply,  that  the  condition  of  the 
slaves  and  of  the  inmates  of  a  lunatic  asylum  is  very  different.  I 
answer,  without  fear  of  contradiction,  that  as  far  as  mental  incapa- 
bility, the  vast  mass  of  the  slaves  are  as  incapable  of  taking  care  of 
themselves,  as  the  great  proportion  of  lunatics,  and  this  we  shall 
fully  demonstrate  in  a  subsequent  chapter." 

It  is  found,  however,  on  close  examination,  that  he  has  not 
hrought  the  least  proof;  on  this  point  it  is,  therefore,  charitable  to 
suppose  it  has  slipped  his  memory. 

The  doetor  tells  us,  it  is  an  act  of  kindness  in  the  slaveholders 
to  hold  their  slaves  till  they  are  instructed  and  qualified  for  freedom  ; 
but  instruction  shows  them,  more  plainly,  the  deprivation  of  their 
rights,  and  makes  them  of  course  more  unhappy  while  in  slavery, 
and  more  likely  to  rebel  or  run  away.  They  cannot,  therefore, 
be  educated  till  they  are  set  free,  and  they  cannot  be  set  free  till 
they  are  educated.  Pray,  when,  according  to  the  doctor's  logic,  will 
they  ever  be  emancipated  ? 

He  tells  us,  in  another  place,  that  the  negroes  have  no  natural  in- 
feriority to  the  whites  ;  then  their  being  "  as  incapable  of  taking 
care  of  themselves  as  lunatics,"  is  simply  owing  to  their  want  of 
intellectual  and  moral  culture.  In  page  55,  of  his  pamphlet,  he 
makes  the  following  assertion,  which  if  it  do  not  prove  the  above 
proposition  of  his,  will  at  least  serve  to  show  the  doctor's  consis- 
tency, 

44  Another  calumny  circulated  is  respecting  the  ignorance  and 
irrcligion  in  which  the  slaveholders  keep  their  slaves.  This  is  as 
great  a  falsehood  as  was  ever  uttered  by  man  or  devils." 

Which  of  his  assertions  would  he  have  us  believe, — that  the 
slaves  are  ignorant  and  irreligious,  or  that  they  are  not  1  But  as 
many  people  profess  to  believe  that  the  slaves  are  incapable  of 
taking  care  of  themselves,  and  urge  this  plea  against  immediate 
emancipation,  I  think  proper  to  bring  forward  some  testimony,  not 
mere  assertion  or  speculation,  but  actual  experiment,  to  show 
what  foundation  there  is  in  fact  for  this  belief.  The  testimony 
which  I  shall  adduce  is  from  the  planters  and  former  slaveholders 
in  one  of  the  British  West  India  islands,  Antigua,  where  emanci- 
pation was  immediate,  full,  and  complete.    I  shall  not,  at  present, 


9 


go  into  the  general  effects  of  abolition  in  this  island,  or  the  West 
Indies  generally,  but  ecnfine  myself  to  the  point  in  question,  viz. 
"  That  the  vast  mass  of  slaves  are  as  incapable  of  taking  care  of 
themselves  as  the  great  proportion  of  lunatics."  Then  what  is  the 
evidence  cf  the  improvidence  of  the  slaves  : 

"  During  slavery,  the  negroes  squandered  every  cent  of  money  they  got, 
because  they  were  sure  of  food  and  clothing.  Since  their  freedom  they  have 
begun  to  cultivate  habits  of  carefulness  and  economy.' — Mr.  James  Howell. 

*  The  low  wages  of  the  labourers  [emancipated  negroes]  is  proof  of  their  pro- 
vidence. Did  they  not  observe  the  strictest  economy  they  could  not  live  on  fifty 
cents  per  week.  That  they  buy  small  parcels  of  land  to  cultivate,  is  proof  of 
their  economy  and  foresight.  The  planters  have  to  resort  to  every  means  in 
their  power  to  induce  them  not  to  purchase  land.  The  increasing  and  large 
sums  of  money  paid  into  the  friendly  societies  since  emancipation,  the  increasing 
attention  paid  to  their  provision  grounds,  is  further  proof  of  their  foresight.' — 
Dr.  Daniells. 

4  The  fact  that  the  negroes  are  able  to  support  their  aged  parents,  is  further 
proof,'  said  Mr.  Armstrong. 

*  The  negroes  are  exceedingly  quick  to  turn  a  thought.  They  show  a  great 
deal  of  shrewdness  in  everything  which  concerns  their  own  interests ;  to 
a  stranger  it  must  be  utterly  incredible  how  they  can  manage  to  live  on  such 
small  wages.  They  are  very  exact  in  keeping  their  accounts  with  the  managers. 
The  emancipated  people  manifest  as  much  cunning  and  address  in  business  as 
any  class  of  persons.' — Mr.  J.  Howel. 

4  The  capabilities  of  the  blacks  for  education  are  conspicuous ;  so  also  as  to 
mental  acquirements  and  trades.' — Hon.  N.  Nugent. 

'  It  is  a  little  remarkable,  that  while  Americans  fear  that  the  negroes,  if  eman- 
cipated, could  not  take  care  of  themselves,  the  West  Indians  fear  lest  they  should 
take  care  of  themselves.  Hence  they  discourage  them  from  buying  lands,  and 
from  all  employments  which  might  render  them  independent  of  sugar  cultiva- 
tion.'^Thome  &  Kimball. 

Much  more  testimony  might  be  brought,  of  the  same  character, 
but  if  there  should  be  any  doubt  of  the  slaves  being  able  to  take 
take  care  of  themselves,  it  will  be  fully  removed  when  subsequently 
the  general  effects  of  emancipation  are  shown. 


10 


CHAPTER  II. 

Abolitionists  versus  Colonizationists.  Expose  of  W.  L.  Garrison.  "  If  Abo- 
litionism is  to  be  supported,  then  the  Principles  of  Washington  must  be  aban- 
doned."   Dr.  Sleigh. 

It  is  not  intended  of  course  to  comment  on  every  paragraph  of 
Dr.  Sleigh's  pamphlet, — it  would  take  too  much  room  ;  but  every 
argument  or  assertion,  which  is  considered  of  any  consequence 
in  the  support  of  his  positions,  shall  be  correctly  quoted. 

In  the  doctor's  second  chapter  we  read  as  follows  : 

"  As  abolitionists  are  constantly  taunting  the  friends  of  coloniza- 
tion with  the  charge  that  the  founders  of  it  were  slaveholders  (which, 
by  the  by,  like  almost  all  their  other  statements,  as  will  be  shown 
in  a  subsequent  chapter,*  is  destitute  of  truth,)  they  cannot  complain 
of  their  opponents  taking  a  peep  into  the  principles  of  some  of  their 
chief  champions  and  promoters  of  abolitionism." 

Then  commences  his  expose  of  William  Lloyd  Garrison,  Esq. 

I  shall  not  stop  to  inquire  who  were  the  founders  of  the  Coloni- 
zation Society,  as  it  is  not  my  purpose  to  widen  the  breach  between 
societies  whose  objects,  though  a  little  different,  are  prompted  by 
good  motives.  But  I  beg  leave  here  just  to  observe,  that  I  think 
it  must  be  very  gratifying  to  slaveholders  to  see  these  societies 
spending  their  energies  in  endeavouring  to  demolish  each  other, 
instead  of  uniting  their  strength  to  destroy  the  monster  slavery. 
No  doubt  slaveholders  and  pro-slavery  men  try  to  widen  the 
breach  between  them  as  much  as  possible. 

The  Doctor  tells  us  in  another  place,  that 

♦'The  vast  majority  of  the  slaveholders  regret  the  necessity  of 
holding  slaves,  are  anxious  to  have  them  emancipated,  and  would 
hail  with  delight  any  plan  by  means  of  which  they  could  emanci- 
pate them  with  safety  to  themselves  and  safety  to  the  slaves." 

Then  why  do  they  not  "  hail  with  delight"  the  Colonization 
Society,  and  all  become  colonizationists?    That  many  slaveholders 

*  The  Doctor  has  referred  all  his  proofs  to  a  "  subsequent  chapter"  and  not- 
withstanding the  greater  part  of  his  pamphlet  is  made  up  of  extracts,  yet  he  has 
not  found  room  for  this  "  subsequent  chapter."  We  are  therefore,  unfortunately, 
left  entirely  without  proof  of  all  his  most  important  assertions. 


11 


are  friendly  to  the  Colonization  Society,  is  an  undeniable  fact ;  but 
that  the  vast  majority  of  them  would  be  willing  to  have  their  slaves 
sent  out  of  the  country,  I  cannot  for  a  moment  believe.  They 
want  their  labour,  and  cannot  cultivate  their  plantations  without  it. 

I  have,  indeed,  conversed  with  slaveholders  who  said  they  would 
willingly  set  their  slaves  free,  if  the  laws  of  their  state  allowed  it. 
These  were  probably  conscience-smitten  christians  ;  they  had  made 
the  calculation,  and  found  the  maintenance  of  the  old  and  infirm  of 
their  slaves,  paying  all  their  doctors'  bills,  feeding  and  clothing  and 
supporting  the  children  and  superannuated,  to  be  moie  expensive 
than  to  hire  the  labour  performed  by  the  healthy  adults. 

I  have  known  other  planters,  who  have  had  more  slaves  die  from 
bad  treatment,  and  have  lost  more  in  one  year  by  the  destruction  of 
their  cotton  set  on  fire  by  the  slaves  in  revenge  for  abuses,  than 
would  have  paid  for  the  labour  performed  by  them  for  many  years. 
Besides,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  many  of  them  feel  unsafe,  and 
the  practice  of  carrying  deadly  weapons,  which  are  so  often  used  on 
each  other  as  well  as  the  slaves,  is  a  proof  of  their  dread  of  assas- 
sination. Many,  therefore,  it  must  be  admitted — some  from  con- 
scientious scruples,  others  from  motives  of  economy,  and  others 
from  feeling  that  slavery  is  a  state  of  peril, — would  prefer  slavery  to 
be  abolished ;  but  public  sentiment  in  the  South,  I  presume,  is  yet 
against  abolition,  and  therefore  the  abolition  slaveholders  (if  it  be 
not  a  paradox)  dare  not  openly  avow  their  sentiments.  That 
M  the  vast  majority  of  them  are  anxious  to  have  them  emancipated," 
I  think  is  saying  a  little  too  much,  because  as  slavery  is  a  state 
concern,  and  the  majority  make  the  laws,  that  majority  might 
abolish  slavery.  As  it  regards  the  safety  of  emancipation,  is  it  not 
a  most  ridiculous  notion,  that  the  slaves  would  cut  their  masters' 
throats  for  giving  them  what  above  all  things  on  earth  they  desire 
most,  their  freedom  ?  They  well  know,  that  while  depriving  them 
of  liberty  and  every  thing  they  hold  dear,  treating  them  as  beasts, 
and  by  their  savage  torturing  oftentimes  driving  them  to  desperation, 
there  is  danger  of  assassination  :  but  what  earthly  motive  could  the 
negro  have  to  murder  his  master  for  granting  him  liberty  ?  Would 
he  not  rather  be  actuated  by  motives  of  gratitude  and  kindness  to- 
wards his  master  f  The  whole  history  of  the  world,  the  late  eman- 
cipation in  the  West  Indies,  reason  and  common  s'ens'e,  all  declare 


12 


that  slaves  are  not  made  worse  by  emancipation,  but  infinitely  better; 
then  what  shadow  of  reason  is  there  in  the  assertion,  "  that  the 
slaveholders  would  set  their  slaves  free  if  they  could  do  it  with 
safety." 

There  might  be  some  inconvenience  apprehended,  when  but  a 
few  are  set  free  among  slaves,  because  they  might  sympathize  so 
much  with  their  abused,  wronged,  and  outraged  brethren,  as  to  ex- 
cite insurrection ;  besides,  the  slaves  would  perhaps  become  more 
discontented,  from  seeing  blacks  around  them  enjoying  freedom. 

These  are  probably  the  reasons  which  gave  rise  to  the  laws  pro- 
hibiting the  emancipation  of  the  slaves,  unless  they  be  sent  out  of 
the  slave  country.  They  much  prefer  having  them  sent  to  Africa 
than  to  the  non-slaveholding  states,  where  they  would  expose  their 
masters,  and  proclaim  the  horrors  of  slavery. 

Hence  many  slaveholders  are  friendly  to  the  Colonization  So- 
ciety, because  it  takes  off  those  who  are  set  free,  and  the  refractory 
spirits,  or  in  other  words,  such  as  will  not  calmly  submit  to  be,  and 
to  see  their  fellows,  used  worse  than  brutes.  And  so  far  as  the 
Colonization  Society  operates  in  this  way,  it  is  very  agreeable  to 
some.  Other  planters  oppose  the  Colonization  Society,  because  it 
sometimes  sympathizes  too  much  with  the  slave,  because  some  of 
this  Society  look  upon  slavery  as  a  sin,  as  inhuman,  and  have  not 
always  defended  the  slaveholder.  So  long  then  as  the  Colonization 
Society  does  not  condemn  slavery  in  too  strong  terms, — does  not 
sympathize  too  much  with  the  dave,  and  does  nothing  more  than 
send  off  those  who  chance  to  be  set  free,  especially  if  they  will  not 
tell  them  slavery  is  wrong,  unjust,  and  sinful ;  but  most  of  all,  if 
they  get  excited  and  denounce  abolitionists, — slaveholders  will  bid 
them  God  speed,  and  even  give  them  a  doubloon*  occasionally,  to 
encourage  them  on. 

Slaveholders  do  not  object  generally  to  the  Colonization  So- 
ciety, because  it  does  not  strike  at  the  root  of  their  favourite  tree  ; 
it  only  takes  off  a  few  superfluous  twigs,  prunes  it  and  makes  it 
thrive  ;  and  the  colonization  is  ts  with  their  pruning  hooks  help  to  keep 

*  A  Reverend  gentleman  when  making  a  speech  at  a  colonization  meeting  in 
the  Musical  Fund  Hall,  denounced  the  abolitionists  with  such  vehemence  and 
enthusiasm,  that  he  won  great  applause,  and  pleased  a  southern  gentleman  so 
much,  that  he  presented  him  with  a  doubloon. 


13 


off  the  abolitionists,  who  with  their  axes  of  truth  are  trying  to  get 
at  it  to  cut  it  down.  Some  suppose  the  Colonization  Society  is 
doing  all  that  can  be  done  with  safety  ;  hence  it  prevents  them  from 
doing  any  thing  effectual ;  and  this  slavery  men  well  know.  For 
when  it  is  considered  that  the  yearly  increase  of  the  slaves  is  about 
sixty  thousand,  and  the  Colonization  Society  does  not  send  off 
yearly  Jive  hundred,  slaveholders  may  laugh  at  the  idea  of  its  doing 
away  slavery,  and  say  it  is  like  dipping  out  the  ocean  with  a  tea- 
spoon. 

I  am  disposed  to  think,  however,  that  the  Colonization  Society 
did  much  good  before  the  formation  of  the  American  Anti-Slavery 
Society,  by  bringing  the  subject  of  slavery  before  the  people;  and 
were  it  now  confined  to  the  South,  it  might  still  do  good,  if  con- 
ducted in  the  right  way.  It  can  penetrate  wheie  abolitionism  would 
be  martyred  ;  and  I  doubt  not  there  are  thousands  now  under  that 
banner  who  are  at  heart  full-blooded  abolitionists  ;  and  whose  object 
is  not  merely  to  get  up  a  contribution  of  a  few  dollars  to  send  off  a 
poor  slave,  but  who  feel  a  deep  and  abiding  interest  in  the  freedom 
and  happiness  of  the  whole  race  ;  and  such,  no  doubt,  regret  very 
much  that  any  one,  under  the  name  of  their  Society,  should  try  to 
prejudice  the  community  against  abolitionists.  They  know  it 
is  not  the  design  of  abolitionists  to  excite  the  slave  against  his 
master — that  this  would  only  aggravate  his  misery — and  that  no- 
thing could  be  more  impolitic,  for  the  furtherance  of  their  cause,  than 
to  "  exhort  and  encourage  the  slaves  to  disobedience,  insubordina- 
tion and  rebellion  ;"  and  who  will  believe  that  abolitionists  do  this, 
although  Dr.  Sleigh  repeatedly  asserts  it?  He  ought  to  have  given 
a  few  examples  or  proofs,  but  it  is  probable  these  are  contained  in 
his  "  subsequent  chapter." 

We  will  now  attend,  for  a  few  minutes,  to  Mr.  Garrison. 

Dr.  Sleigh  asserts  that  Mr.  Garrison  "  was  sent  to  Europe  a  few 
years  ago  as  the  representative  of  the  American  Anti-Slaveiy  So- 
ciety, and  that  he  spoke  the  sentiments  of  those  who  sent  him." 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  true  that  Mr.  Garrison  "  was  sent  to 
Europe  as  the  representative  of  the  American  Anti-Slavery  Society." 
He  went  to  England,  to  be  sure,  some  years  ago,  but  it  was  before 
the  formation  of  the  American  Anti-Slavery  Society  ;  so  that  this 
Society  has  nothing  to  do  with  what  Mr.  Garrison  said  in  England* 

3 


14 


If,  while  there,  he  said  any  thing  obnoxious  to  Dr.  S.,  Mr.  Gairison 
alone  is  responsible  for  it.  Mr.  Garrison  is  by  no  means  the  vocal 
organ  of  the  American  Anti-Slavery  Society,  and  probably  most 
of  the  abolitionists  do  not  agree  with  him  in  views  of  expedi- 
ency, and  do  not  consider  themselves  responsible  for  every  thing 
he  says,  any  more  than  all  good  christians  are  responsible  for  the 
assertions  of  Dr.  Sleigh. 

Again,  he  asserts  that  Mr.  Garrison  "  poured  forth  abuse  on  the 
memory  of  Washington  in  Pennsylvania  Hall."  If  Mr.  Garrison 
did  this,  he  was  very  foolish  indeed ;  for  next  to  holy  writ,  I  con- 
sider the  principles  of  Washington  most  to  be  revered.  But,  on 
inquiry,  I  have  ascertained  that  this,  like  many  other  statements  of 
the  Do<  tor,  has  no  foundation  ;  and  that  not  a  word  was  spoken  in 
the  Hall,  disrespectful  of  Washington,  by  any  one. 

To  show  the  improbability  of  abolitionists  abusing  his  memoryr 
and  also  to  disprove  another  important  assertion,  I  shall  here  give 
the  principles  of  Washington  on  the  subject  of  slavery  : 

In  a  letter  of  President  Washington  to  Robert  Morris,  he  says,  in 
reference  to  slavery,  "  There  is  not  a  man  living  who  wishes  more 
sincerely  than  I  do,  to  see  a  plan  adopted  for  the  abolition  of  it ;" 
and  speaking  of  the  legislative  authority  on  the  subject,  "  and  this, 
as  far  as  my  suffrage  will  go,  shall  not  be  wanting." 

In  a  letter  to  Lafayette  he  says,  in  reference  to  his  purchasing  an 
estate  with  a  view  of  emancipating  the  slaves,  "  This  is  a  generous 
and  noble  proof  of  your  humanity.  Would  to  God  a  like  spirit 
might  diffuse  itself  into  the  minds  of  the  people  of  this  country; 
but  I  despair  of  seeing  it." 

In  a  letter  to  John  F.  Mercer,  he  says,  "  It  being  among  my  first 
wishes  to  see  some  plan  adopted  by  which  slavery  in  this  country 
can  be  abolished  by  law." 

"A  toast  by  General  Washington  in  the  hospital  at  White  Plains  :. 

'  Health  to  the  sick  and  wounded,  honour  to  the  brave, 
Success  to  the  American  flag,  and  freedom  to  the  slave.'  " 

By  a  reference  to  Washington's  will,  it  will  be  seen  that  he  gave 
directions  for  the  emancipation  of  his  slaves.  Therefore,  it  is 
proved  that  Washington  was  both  in  principle  and  practice  an  aboli- 
tionist.   What  then  shall  be  thought  of  the  following  assertion  of 


15 


Dr.  Sleigh  ?  "  If  abolitionism  is  to  be  supported,  then  the  principles 
of  Washington  must  be  abandoned." 


CHAPTER  III. 

Des'gn  fjf  Europe  to  dissolve  the  Union.    Circulation  of  incendiary  Pamphlets, 
&c.  by  Abolitionists,  -which  has  produced  worse  Treatment  of  the  Slaves, 

"  Know  you  not  that  Europe  is  looking  on  these  states  with  a 
jealous  eye  ?  Weie  plans  never  devised  by  European  powers  to 
divide  the  friends  of  liberty, — to  break  up  unions,  and  crush  that 
goddess  (Liberty)  who  ever  haunts  the  bed  of  tyrants  ?" 

Crush  liberty,  by  crushing  slavery,  what  a  paradox ! 

It  is  admitted  that  England  has  shown  some  interest  on  the  sub- 
ject of  American  abolitionism  ;  but  let  us  look  into  her  motives,  and 
see  if  she  can  have  such  a  design  as  our  author  has  hinted  at.  Until 
a  few  years  ago,  England  herself  had  been  guilty  of  slaveholding  in 
her  West  India  Colonies.  She  abolished  her  slavery  there,  and 
what  has  been  the  result?  Peace,  happiness,  and  prosperity  to 
slaves  and  masters.  Abolition  was  as  vehemently  opposed  by  the 
slaveholders  in  her  colonies,  as  it  could  be  in  any  other  country ; 
they  declared  it  would  bring  death  and  destruction  upon  them  and 
the  slaves  !  but  so  far  from  such  consequences,  it  was  productive  of 
the  most  universal  happiness  to  all  parties,  which  will  be  hereafter 
proved  by  documentary  evidence.  Now  is  it  not  fair  to  infer,  that 
England,  having  seen  the  good  effects  of  abolition  in  her  own  colo- 
nies, wishes,  from  philanthropic  motives,  that  slavery  be  abolished 
in  the  United  States,  for  the  good  of  slaves  and  masters  ?  Moreover, 
England  is  the  principal  purchaser  of  the  cotton  produced  by  the 
slaves  in  the  United  States ;  her  interest  would,  therefore,  operate 
against  anything  that  would  directly  tend  to  rabe  the  price  of  that 
staple  commodity,  which  abolition  would  be  sure  to  do,  if  the  ne- 
groes should  not  work  as  well  as  before,  or  if  it  should  cost  more 
to  raise  cotton  by  free  labour.  But  the  fact  of  her  having  tried  the 
experiment  of  emancipation  herself,  and  found  it  to  have  produced 
incalculable  good,  is  at  least  presumptive  evidence  that  she  doe9 


MS 


not  wish  the  United  States  to  adopt  it  for  the  sake  of  bringing  evil 
upon  them.  But  if  it  were  the  design  of  foreign  powers  to  destroy 
and  "  break  up  unions,*  what  characters  would  most  likely  be  em- 
ployed ?"  such  as  the  gentleman  has  admitted  abolitionists  are,  "the 
best,  most  moral,  and  most  philanthropic  men  in  America,  and  such 
as  are  actuated  by  the  purest  motives  ?" 

*  Dissolving  the  Union  is  the  bugbear  which  the  South  has  long  held  up  to  the 
North,  to  frighten  her  from  her  duty  and  her  rights : 

"  But  you  may  reply, '  Do  you  think  the  South  is  not  in  earnest  in  her  threat 
of  dissolving  the  Union?  I  rejoin,  by  no  means; — yet  she  pursues  a  perfectly 
reasonable  course — (leaving  out  of  view  the  justice  or  morality  of  it) — just  such  a 
course  as  I  should  expect  she  would  pursue,  emboldened  as  she  must  be  by  her 
multiplied  triumphs  over  the  North,  by  the  use  of  the  same  weapon.  '  We'll 
dissolve  the  Union  !'  was  the  cry,  '  unless  Missouri  be  admitted  !'  The  IVorth 
were  frightened,  and  Missouri  was  admitted  with  slavery  engraved  on  her  fore- 
head. '  We'il  dissolve  the  Union  !'  unless  the  Indians  be  driven  out  of  tbe  South  ! 
The  north  forgot  her  treaties,  paited  with  humanity,  and  it  is  done — the  defence- 
less Indians  are  forced  to  *'  consent"  to  be  driven  out,  or  they  are  left,  undefended 
to  the  mercies  of  southern  land  jobbers  and  gold-hunters.  <  We'll  dissolve  the 
Union  !  if  the  Tariff,  (established  at  her  own  suggestion,)  be  not  repealed  or 
modified,  so  that  our  slave-labour  may  compete  with  your  free-labour.'  The  Tariff 
is  accordingly  modified  to  suit  the  south.  4  We'll  dissolve  the  Union  !"  unless 
the  freedom  of  speech  and  the  press  be  put  down  in  the  north  I !'  With  the 
promptness  of  commission-merchants,  the  alternative  is  adopted.  Public  assem- 
blies, met  for  deliberation,  are  assailed  and  broken  up  at  the  north ;  her  citizens 
are  stoned,  and  beaten,  and  dragged  through  the  streets  of  her  cities ;  her  presses 
are  attacked  by  mobs,  instigated  and  led  on  by  men  of  influence  and  character ; 
whilst  those  concerned  in  conducting  them  are  compelled  to  fly  fiom  their  homes, 
pursued  as  if  they  were  noxious  wild  beasts ;  or  if  they  remain  to  defend,  they 
are  sacrificed  to  appease  the  southern  divinity.  '  We'll  dissolve  the  Unio  i  !'  if 
slavery  be  abolished  in  the  Distiict  of  Columbia  !  The  north,  frightened  from 
her  propriety,  declares  that  slavery  ought  not  to  be  abolished  there  now.  «  We'll 
dissolve  the  Union  !'  if  you  read  petitions  from  your  constituents  for  its  abolition, 
or  for  stopping  the  slave-trade  at  the  Capital,  or  between  the  states.  Fiftt 
Northers  Representatives  respond  to  the  cry,  'down  then  with  the  right 
o?  petition  S  V  All  these  assaults  have  succeeded,  because  the  north  has, 
been  frightened  by  the  war-cry,  '  We'll  dissolve  the  U nfon  P 

After  achieving  so  much  by  a  process  so  simple,  why  should  not  the  south  per- 
sist in  it  when  she  strives  for  further  conquests!  l\o  other  course  ought  to  be 
expected  from  her  till  this  has  failed.  And  it  is  not  at  all  improbable  that  she  will 
persist,  till  she  almost  persuades  herself  that  she  is  serious  in  her  menace  to  dis- 
solve the  Union.  She  may,  in  her  eagerness,  oven  approach  so  near  the  verge 
of  dissolution,  that  the  earth  may  give  way  under  her  fjet,  and  she  be  dashed  in 
ruins  in  the  gulf  below. 

"  Nothing  will  more  surely  arrest  her  fury,  than  the  firm  array  of  the  north, 
setting  up  anew  the  almost  forgotten  principles  of  our  fathers,  and  saying  to  tho 
'dark  spirit  of  slavery,'  'thus  fur  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  farther.'  This  is  the 
be  t — the  only  means — of  saving  the  south  from  the  fruits  of  her  own  folly — 
fjlly  that  has  been  so  long,  and  so  strangely  encouraged  by  the  noith,  that  it  has 
grown  into  intojoiable  arrogance; — downright  presumption." — James  G.  Birneyt 
JE*9. 


1? 


The  Doctor  tells  us,  that 

"The  means  r.dopted  by  the  Abolitionists  to  accomplish  their 
object  are,  the  publication  and  circulation  of  vast  numbers  of  papers 
and  pamphlets,  by  way  of  enlightening  the  slave  and  slaveholder; 
but  which  consist,  for  the  most  part,  of  exhortations  and  encourage- 
ment to  the  slaves  to  disobedience,  insubordination  and  rebellion. 
This  advice  is  coupled  with  the  most  galling  denunciations  and 
threats  towards  the  slaveholder.  And  since  that  society  commenced 
its  distribution  of  incendiary  papers  and  pamphlets,  many  of  the 
slaveholders  have  prevented  their  staves  learning Jo  read;  so  that 
if  slaves  were  before  bound  with  fetters  of  hemp,  the  abolitionists 
have  converted  the  hemp  into  iron." 

It  will  be  recollected  that  the  Doctor  has  previously  stated,  "  that 
as  far  as  mental  incapability,  tho  vast  mass  of  the  slaves  are  as  in- 
capable of  taking  care  of  themselves  as  the  great  proportion  of  lu- 
natics." 

I  ask  the  why  ?  Does  he  not  mean,  because  they  are  so  ignorant 
and  uneducated  ?  He  says  as  much  in  another  part  of  his  work. 
I  have  before  cited  some  proofs  that  the  negroes  are  not  wanting  in 
natural  sense,  and  that  they  are  fuily  able  to  take  care  of  them- 
selves when  set  free  ;  but  I  do  admit  that  the  vast  mass  of  the 
slaves  are  very  ignorant,  and  do  not  know  how  to  read.  I  speak 
from  my  own  observation  ;  for  in  travelling-  in  most  of  the  slave 
states,  and  while  residing  some  months  in  several  of  the  most 
southern,  among  the  thousands  I  saw,  I  did  not  ascertain  that  more 
tha  1  two  or  three  could  read.  In  some  neighbourhoods,  in  certain 
states,  there  may  be  some  who  are  taught,  but  as  a  general  thing-, 
they  have  no  learning.  Then  how  are  the  slaves  to  get  a  know- 
ledge of  these  incendiary  pamphlets  and  "  encouragements  to  in- 
surrection" which  they  contain  ?  Are  the  masters  such  fools  as  to 
r?ad  them  to  their  slaves?  Every  one  who  has  been  or  resided  in 
the  south  knows  the  guards  upon  speech,  and  even  upon  post 
offices,  so  that  it  is  next  to  an  impossibility  for  the  slaves  to  get  a 
knowledge  of  such  pamphlets,  if  even  such  were  published. 

In  some  parts  of  the  south,  Louisiana  for  instav.ee,  it  is  against 
the  law  for  a  white  man  to  give  a  slave  a  piece  of  paper  without 
his  master's  permission.  He  might  be  Lynched  for  it,  perhaps  hung! 
But  what  evidence  have  we  that  the  condition  of  the  slaves  has 
b?en  made  worse  by  abolitionists  ?    Our  author  would  have  it  be- 


18 


lieved,  that  it  is  only  since  modern  abolition  societies  sprung  up,  that 
slaves  have  been  debarred  from  instruction.  What  reason  is  there 
for  such  a  belief?  If  masters  were  ever  in  the  habit  of  schooling 
their  slaves,  when  or  at  what  age  would  they  most  likely  do  it  ? 
Would  it  be  at  an  age  when  their  services  were  valuable  ;  or  would 
it  not  rather  be  in  childhood,  when  they  could  do  but  little  work  ? 
In  childhood,  of  course.  Well,  it  is  only  a  few  years  since  (1832) 
that  these  societies  commenced  their  career !  Consequently,  all 
adults,  and  the  greater  part  of  youth,  would  have  had  the  opportu- 
nity of  being  taught  before  the  American  Anti-Slavery  Society  ex- 
isted, and  would  now  be  able  to  read ;  it  would  be  only  children 
that  would  now  have  no  learning,  in  consequence  of  laws  passed  since 
the  formation  of  the  Anti-Slavery  Society.  But  the  fact  of  the  vact 
mass  of  the  slaves  having  no  learning,  is  a  proof  that  whether  there 
were  laws  against  it  or  not,  they  were  not  in  the  practice  of  instruct- 
ing them.  And  it  matters  very  little  to  an  innocent  man,  whether 
he  is  murdered  without  law,  or  according  to  a  law  which  a  set  of 
men  have  formed  for  his  destruction  ! 

The  fact  is,  laws  existed  in  the  past  century  prohibiting  slaves 
from  being  taught,  and  so  they  do  now  ;  but  public  opinion  was  al- 
ways nearly  or  quite  as  much  against  giving  them  learning,  as  at 
present ;  for  the  following  reasons :  If  slaves  were  learned  to 
read,  they  could  learn  geography,  and  leain  to  write,  so  that  they 
could  write  themselves  certificates  or  passes,  and  readily  get  off. 
Besides,  cultivating  his  mind  would  make  him  more  sensibly  feel 
the  injustice  of  slavery ;  and  as  knowledge  is  power,  he  would  of 
course  be  a  more  dangerous  animal  in  their  hands.  For  though 
ihe  negroes,  as  a  people,  are  the  most  mild  and  foi bearing  of  any 
on  the  face  of  the  globe,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose,  that  were  they 
r.s  well  educated  as  whites  of  our  country  generally,  they  could  not 
be  kept  in  bondage.  And  if  they  are  to  continue  in  slavery,  I  sin- 
cerely think  it  is  humanity  as  well  as  policy  not  to  instruct  them. 
True,  they  have  the  light  of  reason  and  the  love  of  liberty  which 
are  inherent,  and  though  many  of  them  weep  and  mourn  over  their 
sad  fate,  yet  they  do  not  generally  realize  so  much  mental  suffering 
as  if  they  were  enlightened.  It  was,  therefore,  motives  of  policy, 
which  have  always  existed,  which  have  prevented  them  from  teach- 
ing the  slaves,  and  not  the  dread  of  abolitionists. 


19 


That  the  slaves  are  treated  worse,  in  any  respect,  since  abolition 
societies  commenced,  is  not  supported  by  reason  or  facts.  Slave- 
holders know  that  their  conduct  is  more  inspected  now  than  former- 
ly ;  and  for  fear  of  giving  grounds  for  abolitionists  to  hold  up  their 
conduct  in  an  unenviable  light  and  expose  it  to  the  world,  they 
are,  if  any  thing,  more  careful  how  they  treat  their  slaves.  This 
may  be  corroborated  by  reference  to  an  analogous  case  of  the  ef- 
fects of  abolition  proceedings  in  the  West  Indies. 

'  The  treatment  of  the  slaves,  during  the  anti-slavery  discussion  m  England, 
was  manifestly  milder  than  hefore.' — Dr.  Daniell. 

*  The  effect  of  the  proceedings  in  parliament  against  slavery,  was  to  make  the 
slaveholders  treat  the  slaves  hetter — milder  laws  were  passed  by  the  assembly, 
and  the  general  condition  of  the  slave  was  greatly  ameliorated. — H.  Armstrong, 
Esq 

4  The  planters  did  not,  as  a  general  thing,  increase  the  rigor  of  their  discipline 
because  of  the  anti-slavery  discussions,  but  were  generally  more  lenient  than  for- 
merly.— S.  Bourne,  Esq. 

*  We  pursued  a  much  milder  policy  toward  our  slaves  after  the  agitation  began 
in  England.' — Mr.  James  Howell. 

*  The  planters  did  not  treat  their  slaves  worse  on  account  of  the  anti-slavery 
discussions  ;  but  were  more  lenient  and  circumspect  — Hon.  N.  Nugent. 

i  There  was  far  less  cruelty  exercised  by  the  planters  during  the  anti-slavery 
excitement  in  England.  They  were  always  on  their  guard  to  escape  the  notice 
of  the  abolitionists ;  they  did  not  wish  to  have  their  names  published  abroad,, 
and  to  be  exposed  as  monsteis  of  cruelty.' — David  Cranstown,  Esq.  * 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Practical  Results  of  Abolitionism  fully  carried  out. 

We  now  come  to  that  part  of  the  Doctor's  pamphlet  which  is  the 
most  important  of  all,  to  wit :  The  practical  results  oe  aboli- 
tion FULLY  CARRIED  OUT. 

This  affords  the  finest  specimen  of  the  Doctor's  fruitful  fancy. 
I  should  be  pleased  to  transcribe  his  picture,  so  that  the  reader 
might  view  it  in  ail  its  brightness  and  beauty,  but  unfortunately 

*  The  above  is  the  testimony  of  former  slaveholder*  of  Antigua. 


20 


have  not  room.  Suffice  it,  therefore,  to  say,  that  all  the  evils, 
horrors,  cruelties,  enormities,  bloodshed  and  carnage,  it  is  possible 
for  the  mind  of  man  to  conceive,  he  conjures  up  as  the  result  of  this 
dreadful  catastrophe,  the  freedom  of  the  slaves  !  The  finishing  touch 
of  his  picture  is  as  follows  : 

"  Her  ever-constant  companion,  Pestilence,  now  attends,  and 
thousands  and  thousands  die  of  Want  and  disease,  cillins"  down  from 
heaven  eternal  curses  on  the  heads  of  those  who  excited  them  to 
rebellion,  the  Abolitionists !  Take  a  view  of  the  subject  in  any 
possible  way;  let  the  blacks  conquer,  or  let  him  be  conquered, 
ruination  to  him  is  the  inevitable  result,  totally  independent  of  the 
awful  calamities  to  which  the  white  population  would  be  subjected. 
Here  is  a  two-horned  dilemma,"  &c. 

The  reader  will  observe,  however,  that  the  Doctor  does  not 
make  this  horrible  picture  as  the  result  of  emancipation,  but  of 
"  rebellion." 

Should  slavery  continue  in  the  states  much  longer,  there  is  really 
danger  to  be  apprehended  from  their  rising  in  mass  to  free  them- 
selves ;  for  it  is  a  moral  certainty,  that  the  rapid  increase  of  the 
slaves  over  the  white  population,  will  make  them  greatly  superior 
in  numerical  strength,  in  no  great  length  of  time  ;  and  then  some 
of  the  evils  above  alluded  to,  if  emancipation  be  not  soon  effected, 
may  be  realized. 

I  am  aware,  however,  that  many  persons  believe,  or  profess  to 
believe,  that  immediate  emancipation  is  unsafe,  and  fraught  with 
the  most  dangerous  consequences  to  masters  and  slaves.  This  may 
be  considered  the  grand  popular  objection  to  abolitionism.  But  it 
may  be  well  to  bear  in  mind,  not  only  the  ostensible  ground  of  op- 
position to  abolitionism,  but  the  real  motives  to  it,  to  wit,  pecuniary 
interest.*  There  is  no  doubt,  at  least  in  my  mind,  that  the  princi- 
pal reasons  why  slaveholders  oppose  abolition,  is  imaginary  self- 
interest,  and  love  of  power. 

I  think  the  reader  will  perceive,  from  the  facts  I  am  about  to  offer, 
that  they  are  mistaken,  in  abolition  being  against  their  interest. 
The  old  saying,  that  "  Honesty  is  the  best  policy,"  would  be  em- 
phatically true  in  this  case. 

*  The  Lord  have  mercy  on  the  souls  of  such  men  who,  for  the  sake  of  paltry 
lucre,  will  lie  against  God  and  their  own  consciences  I 


21 


Though  by  emancipation  they  would  relinquish  their  despotic 
power*  they  would  be  amply  compensated  by  peace  of  mind,  calm 
repose,  exemption  from  dread  of  insurrection,  an  approving  con- 
science, and  the  smiles  of  Heaven.  And  if  the  lights  of  reason 
and  experience  be  not  shut  out,  they  show  us  that  it  is  not  against 
our  interest  to  allow  men  to  be  men,  and  to  enjoy  those  inalienable 
rights  which  "  all  nature  cries  aloud''  are  theirs  ! 

The  extracts  which  I  shall  now  give,  are  from  the  report  of  the 
Rev.  James  A.  Thome  and  Joseph  H.  Kimball,  Esq.  who  were  de- 
puted to  the  West  Indies  to  make  the  proper  investigations  of  the 
great  experiment  of  abolition.  Mr.  Thome  is  a  native,  and  still  a 
resident,  of  Kentucky,  and  the  son  of  a  slaveholder ;  and  Mr.  Kim- 
ball was  well  known  as  an  able  editor  in  New  Hampshire.  Of 
course  they  were  men  in  whom  was  reposed  the  fullest  confidence 
to  fill  this  important  office.  And  no  doubt  has  ever  been  publicly 
expressed  with  regard  to  the  correctness  of  their  statements. — 
Messrs.  Thome  and  Kimball  say,  "  these  are  not  the  sentiments  of 
individuals  alone,  but  are  really  the  sentiments  of  the  whole  com- 
munity :" 

Suddenness  of  change  in  the  condition  of  Slaves,  and  views  of  Planters. 

Said  Mr.  Barnard,  of  Green  Castle  estate,  "  The  transition  from 
slavery  to  freedom,  was  like  the  passing  suddenly  out  of  a  dark 
dungeon  into  the  light  of  the  sun." 

R.  B.  Eldridge,  Esq.,  a  member  of  the  assembly,  remarked  that, 
"  There  never  had  been,  in  the  history  of  the  world,  so  great  and  in- 
stantaneous a  change  in  the  condition  of  so  large  a  body  of  peo- 
ple." 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Nugent,  speaker  of  the  house  of  assembly, 
and  proprietor,  said,  "  There  never  was  so  sudden  a  transition  from 
one  state  to  another,  by  so  large  a  body  of  people.  When  the 
clock  began  to  strike  the  hour  of  twelve  on  the  last  night  of  July, 
1834,  the  negroes  of  Antigua  were  slaves — when  it  ceased  they 
were  all  freemen!  It  was  a  stupendous  change,"  he  said,  "  and  it 
was  one  of  the  sublimest  spectacles  ever  witnessed,  to  see  the  sub- 
jects of  the  change  engaged,  at  the  very  moment  it  occurred,  in 
worshipping  God." 

These,  and  very  many  similar  ones,  were  the  spontaneous  ex- 
pressions of  men  who  had  lo)ig  contended  against  the  change  of 
which  they  spoke. 

Some  time  previous  to  the  abolition  of  slavery,  a  meeting  of  the 
4 


22 


influential  men  of  the  island  was  called  in  St.  John's,  to  memorial- 
ize parliament  against  the  measure  of  abolition.  When  the  meeting 
convened,  the  Hon.  Samuel  O.  BaijtT,  who  had  been  the  rham  ion 
of  the  opposition,  was  called  upon  to  propose  a  plan  of  procedure. 
To  the  consternation  of  the  pro-slavery  meeting,  their  leader  arose 
and  spoke  to  the  following  effect:  "  Gentlemen,  my  previous  senti- 
ments on  this  subject  are  well  known  to  you  all ;  be  not  surprised 
to  learn  that  they  have  undergone  an  entire  change.  I  have  not 
altered  my  views  without  mature  deliberation.  I  have  been  making 
calculations  with  regard  to  the  probable  results  of  emancipation,  and 
I  have  ascertained*  beyond  a  doubt,  that  J  can  cultivate  my  estate 
at  least  one-thirl  cheaper  by  free  labour,  than  1  y  slave  labour.'''' 
After  Mr.  B.  had  finished  his  remarks,  Mr.  S.  Shands,  member  of 
assembly,  and  a  wealthy  proprietor,  observed  that  he  entertained 
precisely  the  same  views  with  those  just  expressed  ;  but  he  thought 
that  the  honourable  gentleman  had  been  unwise  in  uttering  them  in 
so  public  a  manner;  "for,"  said  he,  "should  these  sentiments 
reach  the  ear  of  parliament,  as  coming  from  us,  it  might  induce 
them  to  withhold  the  compensation." 

Col.  Edwards,  member  of  the  assembly,  then  arose  and  said, 
that  he  had  long  been  opposed  to  slavery,  but  he  had  not  dared  to 
avoiv  his  sentiments. 

As  might  be  supposed,  the  meeting  adjourned  without  effecting 
the  object  for  which  it  was  convened. 

When  the  question  came  before  the  colonial  assembly,  similar 
discussions  ensued,  and  finally  the  bill  for  immediate  emancipation 
passed  both  bodies  unanimously. 

Slaves  Turned  Loose. 

For  some  time  previous  to  the  first  of  August,  forebodings  of 
disaster  lowered  over  the  island.  The  day  was  fixed  !  Thirty 
thousand  degraded  human  beings  were  to  be  brought  forth  from  the 
dungeon  of  slavery,  and  "turned  loose  on  the  community !"  and 
this  was  to  be  done  "  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye." 

Gloomy  apprehensions  were  entertained  by  many  of  the  plan-, 
ters.  Some  timorous  families  did  not  go  to  bed  on  the  night  of  the 
3Istof  July;  fear  drove  sleep  from  their  eyes,  and  they  awaited 
with  fluttering  pulse  the  hour  of  midnight,  feaiing  lest  the  same  bell 
which  sounded  the  jubiiee  of  the  slaves,  might  toll  the  death-ki.ell 
of  ihe  masters. 

The  more  intelligent,  who  understood  the  disposition  of  the  ne- 
groes, and  contemplated  the  natural  tendencies  of  emancipation, 
through  philosophical  principles,  and  in  the  light  of  human  nature 
and  history,  were  free  from  alarm. 

To  convey  to  the  reader  some  idea  of  the  manner  in  whicli  the 

*  Experiment  proved  this  calculation  to  he  true, 


'Z6 


great  crisis  passed,  we  give  the  substance  of  several  accounts  which 
were  related  to  us  in  different  parts  of  the  island,  by  those  who 
witnessed  them. 

The  Wesleyans  kept  "  watch-night,"  in  all  their  chapels  on  the 
night  of  the  3 1st  July.  One  of  the  Wesleyan  missionaries  gave  us 
an  account  of  the  watch-meeting  at  the  chapel  in  St.  John's.  The 
spacious  house  was  filled  with  the  candidates  for  liberty.  All  was 
animation  and  eagerness.  A  mighty  chorus  of  voices  swelled  the 
song  of  expectation  and  joy,  and  as  they  united  in  prayer,  the 
voice  of  the  leader  was  drowned  in  the  universal  acclamations  of 
thanksgiving  and  praise,  and  blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory  to  God, 
wiio  had  come  down  for  their  deliverance.  In  such  exercises  the 
evening  was  spent,  until  the  hour  of  twelve  approached.  The  mis- 
sionary then  proposed,  that  when  the  clock  on  the  cathedral  should 
begin  to  strike,  the  whole  congregation  should  fall  upon  their  knees 
and  receive  the  boon  of  freedom  in  silence.  Accordingly,  as  the 
load  bell  tolled  its  first  note,  the  immense  assembly  fell  prostrate  on 
their  knees.  All  was  silence,  save  the  quivering,  half-stifled  breath 
of  the  struggling  spirit.  The  slow  notes  of  the  clock  fell  upon  the 
multitude  ;  peal  on  peal,  peal  on  peal,  rolled  over  the  prostrate 
throng,  in  tones  of  angel's  voices,  thrilling  among  the  desolate 
chords  and  weary  heart-strings.  Scarce  had  the  clock  sounded  its 
last  note,  when  the  lightning  flashed  vividly  around,  and  a  loud  peal 
of  thunder  roared  along  the  sky — God's  pillar  of  fire,  and  trump  of 
jubilee  !  A  moment  of  profoundest  silence  passed — then  came  the 
burst — they  broke  forth  in  prayer ;  they  shouted,  they  sung, 
"  Glory,"  "  alleluia ;"  they  clapped  their  hands,  leaped  up,  fell 
down,  clasped  each  other  in  their  free  arms,  cried,  laughed  and 
went  to  and  fro,  tossing  upward  their  unfettered  hands ;  but  high 
above  the  whole  there  was  a  mighty  sound,  which  ever  and  anon 
swelled  up;  it  was  the  utterings,  in  broken  negro  dialect,  of  grati- 
tude to  God. 

After  this  gush  of  excitement  had  spent  itself,  and  the  conffresra- 
tion  became  calm,  the  religious  exercises  were  resumed,  and  the  re- 
mainder of  the  night  was  occupied  in  singing  anil  prayer,  in  reading 
ihe  Bible,  and  in  addresses  from  the  missionaries  explaining  th:1  na- 
ture of  the  freedom  just  received,  and  exhorting  the  freed  people  to 
be  industrious,  stea  y,  obedient  to  the  laws,  and  to  show  themselves 
in  all  things  worthy  of  the  high  boon  which  God  had  conferred 
upon  them. 

The  first  of  August  came  on  Friday,  and  a  release  was  proclaim- 
ed from  all  work  until  the  next  Monday.  The  day  was  chiefly  spent 
by  ihe  great  mass  of  the  negroes,  in  the  churches  and  chapels. 
Thither  they  flocked  "  as  clouds,  and  as  doves  to  their  windows." 
The  clergy  and  missionaries  throughout  the  island  were  actively  en- 
gaged, seizing  the  opportunity,  in  order  to  enlighten  the  people  on 


24 


all  the  duties  and  responsibilities  of  their  new  relation,  and  above 
all,  urging  them  to  the  attainment  of  that  higher  liberty  with 
which  Christ  maketh  his  children  free.  In  every  quarter  we  were 
assured  that  the  day  was  like  a  Sabbath.  Work  had  ceased  ;  the 
hum  of  business  was  still,  and  noise  and  tumult  were  unheard  in 
the  streets.  Tranquillity  pervaded  the  towns  and  country.  A  Sab- 
bath indeed !  when  the  wicked  ceased  from  troubling,  and  the 
weary  were  at  rest,  and  the  slave  was  free  from  his  master!  The 
planters  informed  us  that  they  went  to  the  chapels  where  their  own 
people  were  assembled,  greeted  them,  shook  hands  with  them,  and 
exchanged  the  most  hearty  good  wishes. 

The  churches  and  chapels  were  thronged  all  over  the  island.  At 
Cedar  Hill,  a  Moravian  station,  the  crowd  was  so  great  that  the  min- 
ister was  obliged  to  remove  the  meeting  from  the  chapel  to  a  neigh- 
bouring grove. 

At  Grace  Hill,  another  Moravian  station,  the  negroes  went  to  the 
missionary  on  the  day  before  the  fiist  of  August,  and  begged  that 
they  might  be  allowed  to  have  a  meeting  in  the  chapel  at  sunrise. 
It  is  the  usual  practice  among  the  Moravians  to  hold  but  one  sunrise 
meeting  during  the  year,  and  that  is  on  the  morning  of  Eastei  ;  but 
as  tha  people  besought  very  earnestly  for  this  special  favour  on  the 
Easter  morning  of  their  freedom,  it  was  granted  to  them. 

Early  in  the  morning  they  assembled  at  the  chapel.  For  some 
time  they  sat  in  perfect  silence.  The  missionary  then  proposed  that 
they  should  kneel  down  and  sing,  The  whole  audience  fell  pros- 
trate upon  their  knees,  and  sung  a  hymn  commencing  with  the  fol- 
lowing words : 

"  Now  let  us  praise  the  Lard, 
With  body,  soul  and  spirit, 
Who  doth  such  wondrous  things, 
Beyond  our  sense  and  merit." 

The  singing  was  frequently  interrupted  with  the  tears  and  sob- 
bings of  the  melted  people,  until  finally  it  was  wholly  arrested,  and 
a  tumult  of  emotion  overwhelmed  the  congregation. 

During  the  day,  repeated  meetings  were  held.  At  eleven  o'clock, 
the  people  assembled  in  vast  numbers.  There  were  at  least  a  thou- 
sand persons  around  the  chapel  who  could  not  get  in.  For  once 
the  house  of  God  suffered  violence,  and  the  violent  took  it  by  force. 
After  all  the  services  of  the  day,  the  people  went  again  to  the  mis- 
sionaries in  a  body,  and  petitioned  to  have  a  meeting  in  the  even- 
ing. 

At  Grace  Bay,  the  people,  all  dressed  in  white,  assembled  in  a 
spacious  court  in  front  of  the  Moravian  chapel.  They  formed  a 
procession,  and  walked  arm  in  arm  into  the  chapel.  Similar  scenes 
occurred  at  all  the  chapels,  and  at  the  churches  also.  We  were  told 
by  the  missionaries,  that  the  dress  of  the  negroes  on  that  occasion, 


25 


was  uncommonly  simple  and  modest.  There  was  not  the  least  dis- 
position to  gaiety. 

We  were  also  informed  by  planters  and  missionaries  in  every 
part  of  the  island,  that  there  was  not  a  single  dance  known  of, 
either  day  or  night,  nor  so  much  as  a  fiddle  played.  There  was  no 
riotous  assemblies,  no  drunken  carousals.  It  was  not  in  such  chan- 
nels that  the  excitement  of  the  emancipated  (lowed.  They  were  as 
far  from  dissipation  and  debauchery,  as  they  were  from  violence 
and  carnage.  Gratitude  was  the  absorbing  emotion.  From  the 
hill-tops,  and  the  valleys,  the  cry  of  a  disenthralled  people  w^nt 
upward,  like  the  sound  of  many  waters,  M  Glory  to  God,  glory  to 
God." 

The  militia  were  not  called  out  during  Christmas  holidays.  He- 
fore  emancipation,  martial  law  invariably  prevailed  on  the  holi- 
days, but  the  very  first  Christmas  after  emancipation,  the  Gover- 
nor made  a  proclamation,  stating  that  in  consequence  of  the  abolition 
of  slavery,  it  was  no  longer  necessary  to  resort  to  such  a  precau- 
tion. There  has  not  been  a  parade  of  soldiery  on  any  subsequent 
Christmas. 

"  Previous  to  emancipation,  many  persons  apprehended  violence 
and  bloodshed  as  the  consequence  of  turning  the  slaves  loose.  But 
when  emancipation  took  place,  all  these  apprehensions  vanished. 
The  sense  of  personal  security  is  universal.  We  know  not  of  a 
single  instance  in  which  the  negroes  have  exhibited  a  revengeful 
spirit. 

R.  Higinbothom,  United  States  Consul,  remarked :  "  The  gene- 
ral conduct  of  the  negroes  has  been  worthy  of  much  praise,  es- 
pecially considering  the  sudden  transition  from  slavery  to  unre- 
stricted freedom.    Their  demeanor  is  peaceable  and  orderly." 

44  The  Governor  informed  us  that  '  it  was  universally  admitted, 
that  emancipation  had  been  a  great  blessing  to  the  island.' 

44  They  are  as  a  body,  more  industrious  than  when  slaves,  for  the 
obvious  reason  that  they  are  working  fjr  themselves.'''' 

The  conduct  of  the  negroes  on  the  first  of  August,  1834,  is  am- 
ple proof  that  gratitude  is  a  prominent  trait  of  the  negro  charac- 
ter ;  and  their  uniform  conduct  since  that  event  manifests  an  ha- 
bitual feeling  of  gratitude.  Said  one,  44  The  liberty  we  received 
from  the  king,  we  can  never  sufficiently  thank  God  for  ;  whenever 
we  think  of  it,  our  hearts  go  out  in  gratitude  to  God."  Similar  ex- 
pressions we  heard  repeatedly  from  the  negroes.  We  observed  that 
the  slightest  allusion  to  the  first  of  August,  in  a  company  of  freed 
persons,  would  awaken  powerful  emotions,  accompanied  with  ex- 
clamations of  44  tank  de  good  Lord,"  44  bless  de  Saviour,"  44  praise 
de  blessed  Saviour,"  and  such  like. 

For  a  full  account  of  the  West  India  emancipation,  see  the  work 
of  Thome  and  Kimball. 


26 


CHAPTER  V. 

*  Whe-e  there  is  no  Law  there  is  no  Transgression."  The  Bible  sanctions 
Slavery  and  does  not  condemn  purchasing  or  selling  JVEtn — Commands 
every  Slave  to  remain  a  Slave. 

"  Yet,  yot,  degraded  man,  the  expected  day, 
That  breaks  your  b  tter  cup,  is  far  away  ; 
Trade,  wealth,  and  fashion  ask  you  still  to  bleed, 
And  aoLr  men  give  schipture  for  the  deed  !" 

"  Where  there  is  no  law  there  is  no  transgression."  (Rom.  iv.  4.) 
And  as  there  is  no  law  prohibitory  of  slaveholding,  it  cannot  be  con- 
sidered sin,  (foi  sin  <s  a  ttansgtessi  >n  of  the  law,)  by  any  except 
those  who  aim  at  possessing  a  higher  degree  of  moral  worth  and 
righteousness  than  Jesus  Christ  himself,"  &c. 

Let  us  examine  this  text  a  little,  and  see  whether  it  is  proper  to 
apply  it  so  as  to  sanction  slavery.  He  tells  us,  likewise,  there  is 
no  law  in  the  scriptures  against  selling  men.  Then  I  infer  there 
is  no  law  in  the  Bible  prohibitory  of  a  man's  selling  his  own  chil- 
dren ;  consequently  it  would  be  no  sin  for  any  man,  white  or  black, 
to  sell  his  own  children  for  money  into  perpetual  slavery.  It  is  not 
probable  this  will  be  done  in  Pennsylvania,  because  the  laws  of  the 
state  prohibit  it ;  but  in  Virginia,  if  a  white  man  happen  to  have 
children  that  are  part  black,  as  many  slaveholders  do.  would  it  be 
no  sin  to  sell  these  children,  because  scripture  does  not  gi<  e  a  spe- 
cial prohibitory  law  respecting  it  ?  "O  no  !"  replies  the  doctor; 
"  where  there  is  no  law  there  is  no  transgression."  Un  !er  these 
circumstances,  probably,  the  gentleman,  as  other  slaveholders, 
would  not  like  to  see  slaves  around  him,  who  resembled  their  father 
so  much,  and  considering  it  no  sin  to  sell  them,  and  as  keeping 
them  would  show  the.-e  had  been  a  violation  of  the  seventh  com- 
mandment, is  it  not  probable  he  would  sell  them  in  order  to  put 
away  this  sin  ?  It  is  true  that  slaveholders  do  not  all  sell  their  dark 
children  ;  I  know  of  some  exceptions  ;  for  I  have  seen  many  pretty 
little  mulattos,  who  resembled  their  master  very  much,  running 
about  his  plantation  ;  and  I  might  give  an  example  of  a  slaveholder 
at  the  south,  well  known  throughout  the  United  States,  who,  I  am 


27 


credibly  informed,  has  brought  up  his  mulatto  daughters  well,  given 
thsm  good  educations,  keeps  them  in  his  own  parlour,  and  h  is  at* 
tempted  to  introduce  them  into  good  white  society.  Were  ho  in 
Pennsylvania,  it  is  probable  he  would  not  be  permitted  to  do  so ; 
but  as  he  lives  in  the  south,  where  people  are  not  so  much  opposed 
to  amalgamation,  lie  is  not  molested  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  own 
taste.  Perhaps  these  gentlemen  do  not  understand  the  scriptures 
exactly  as  the  doctor  does,  and  are  conscientiously  scrupulous 
about  selling  them,  for  fear  it  is  a  sin  ;  and  others,  rather  than  disobey 
the  scriptures,  (right30us  men  !)  they  keep  their  natural,  colored  chil- 
dren, and  have  them  whipt  up  the  same  as  other  slaves,  to  have  it 
supposed  they  have  no  affection  for  them,  and  consequently  cannot 
be  their  fathers. 

Again,  according  to  Dr.  S.,  as  there  is  no  law  in  the  Bible 
against  selling  men,  there  can  be  none  against  selling  women ; 
hence  any  unprincipled  fellow*may  marry  a  black  woman  in  a  free 
state,  take  her  to  the  south  and  sell  her,  and  it  is  no  transgression, 
no  sin  !  Admirable  doctrine !  how  divine! 

We  will  now  examine  his  construction  of  this  other  text,  and  see  if  it 
sanctions  slavery.  It  is  as  follows :  "  He  thatstealethaman  and  selleth 
him,  or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand,  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death."  Ex. 
xxi.  16.  The  doctor  siys  it  does  not  read, 4  he  that  f  t  ^aleth  or  selleth.' 
The  whole  and  only  crime  condemned  here  was  stealing  the  man." 
Let  us  take  the  text  as  it  is,  and  see  what  we  can  make  out  of  it. 
When  this  law  was  given  by  Moses,  there  were  of  course  no  slaves  in 
Israel;  the  question  is,  how  could  they  come  in  possession  of  them  ? 
There  was  no  way  evcept  to  steal  them,  or  buy  them  of  those  who 
had  stolen  them.    First,  the  law  says,  he  that  stealeth  a  man  and 
selleth  him,  •*  shall  surely  be  put  to  death.*'    Then  none  could  be 
sold.    Second,  he  that  stealeth  a  man,  and  hath  him  found  in  his 
hand,  shall  surely  be  put  to  death.    Then  none  could  be  kept  by 
him  that  had  stolen  him.    Consequently,  if  a  man  perchance  had 
been  stolen,  he  could  not  be  sold,  and  could  not  be  kept.  There- 
fore, how  could  he  be  held  as  a  slave  ?    It  strikes  me,  that  this  was 
the  most  effectual  anti-slavery  law  that  it  was  possible  to  devise ; 
there  was  no  way  of  getting  round  it.    Prevention  is  always  better 
than  cure,  and  this  effectually  prevented  it.    What  would  be  the 
necessity  of  passing  a  law  to  prohibit  the  eating  of  stolen  fruit ;  if 


28 


there  was  a  law  to  prevent  stealing  it,  and  selling  it,  and  having  in 
hand?    But  the  Doctor  says  : 

"  When  we  read  of  individuals  having  been  sold,  having  been 
purchased,  having  been  bought  with  money,  &c,  we  cannot  doubt 
for  a  moment,  the  propriety  of  the  term  slave ;  and  that  no  mat- 
ter Whether  their  servitude  was  temporaiy  or  forever,  whelher  they 
had  sold  themselves  or  were  sold  by  others,  they  were  slaves  to  all 
intents  and  purposes,  from  the  moment  they  were  sold  they  became 
subject  to  involuntary  servitude." 

According  to  this  doctrine,  the  man  who  sells  his  time,  or 
hires  in  any  employment  for  a  year,  is  a  slave ;  every  appren- 
tice, whose  time  is  sold  for  a  term  of  years  to  his  master, 
for  and  in  consideration  of  a  trade,  is  a  slave.  Oh,  but  says  the 
Doctor,  if  these  persons  are  ill-treated  or  abused,  they  can  leave 
their  masters  !  I  reply,  so  could  the  bondmen  spoken  of  in  scrip- 
ture, and  Were  protected  effectually  from  their  master's  obtaining 
them  again,  by  the  following  law,  "  Thou  shalt  not  deliver 
unto  his  master,  the  servant  which  has  escaped  from  his  mas- 
ter unto  thee.  He  shall  dwell  with  thee,  even  among  you  in  that 
place  which  he  shall  choose,  in  one  of  thy  gates  where  it  liketh 
him  best;  thou  shalt  not  oppress  him,"  Deut.  xxiii.  c.  15,  16  v. 
Under  this  law,  no  slaveholder  in  the  south  could  hold  his  slaves 
for  a  single  day  !  As  soon  as  they  should  escape  from  their  mas- 
ter's plantation,  they  would  be  free  !  They  would  not  then  have 
to  present  their  written  pass,  but  none  would  dare  molest  them  ; 
and  they  could  "  dwell  where  it  liketh  them  best." 

But  notwithstanding  these  prohibitions  of  slavery,  lest  some 
should  clandestinely  and  unlawfully  hold  men  in  involuntary  servi- 
tude, and  entail  it  on  their  posterity,  all  bondmen  were  commanded 
to  be  set  free—so  that  there  should  be  no  deception,  no  mistake ; 
by  the  following  general  law,  "  And  ye  shall  hallow  the  fiftieth  year, 
and  proclaim  liberty  throughout  all  the  land,  unto  all  the  inhabi- 
tants thereof;  it  shall  be  a  jubilee  unto  you  J  and  ye  shall  return  every 
man  unto  his  family."  Lev.  xxv.  It  is  plain  from  the  above  texts, 
that  slavery  could  not  have  existed  according  to  the  laws  of  the  Bible, 
and  that  the  bondmen,  spoken  of  in  the  scriptures,  were  voluntary 
servants.  All  the  above  laws  prevented  and  guarded  against  slavery. 
But  even  admiting  that  contrary  to  these  laws  slaves  were  held,  or 
call  the  bondmen  slaves  if  you  please,  and  what  is  the  consequence  ? 


20 


If  we  go  according  to  the  Bible,  ("  and  to  its  authority  we  ought 
always  to  consent  to  strike,")  we  must  admit,  that  as  we  have  existed 
as  a  nation  sixty-two  years,  the  slaves  should  have  been  set  free 
twelve  years  ago  ;  and  that  we  are  indebted  to  them  for  twelve 
years'  labour ;  which,  at  the  moderate  calculation  of  twenty  dollars 
a  head  per  year,  (exclusive  of  their  keeping,)  amounts  to  about  six 
hundred  millions,  which,  (setting  aside  the  justice  or  injustice  of 
retaining  their  pay  from  them  for  fifty  years  previous,,)  we  are 
scripturally  bound  to  pay,  and  immediately  to  emancipate  them. 

But  our  author  has  gone  to  the  New  Testament,  also,  to  try  to 
get  some  excuse  for  slavery ;  and  had  he  merely  quoted  it  as  it  is, 
it  would  have  been  unnecessary  to  comment  upon  it ;  but  in  every 
one  of  these  quotations,  where  the  word  servant  occurs  in  the  text, 
he  has  made  it  slave.  He  pretends,  the  original  word  doulos  in  the 
Greek,  which  is  invariably  rendered  servant  in  English,  means 
slave  as  well  as  servant.  So  far  as  my  information  goes,  the  Doc- 
tor is  incorrect  in  this  particular ;  but  without  citing  any  learned  au- 
thorities, I  think  the  absurdity  of  his  version  will  be  seen  from  the 
scriptures  themselves.  The  following,  among  the  Doctor's  quota- 
tions, are  the  most  suitable  for  his  purpose,  at  least  according  to  his 
way  of  rendering  them  :  "  Art  thou  called,  being  a  slave,  care  not 
for  it."  1  Cor.  vii.  21.  "  Slaves  be  obedient  to  those  that  are  your 
masters  according  to  the  flesh"  Eph.  vi.  5.  "  Slaves  obey  in 
all  things  your  masters."  Col.  iii.  22.  The  Doctor  knew  very 
well,  that  to  quote  these  texts  with  the  word  servant,  would  not 
answer  his  purpose  ;  he  therefore  converted  it  into  slave.  If  he  pre- 
fers this  translation,  he  is  welcome  to  it ;  but  in  the  mean  time  I 
will  quote  a  few  passages,  which  have  the  word  servant,  and  the 
same  original,  (doulos,)  in  the  Greek.  1  Cor.  vii.  23 :  "  Ye  are 
bought  with  a  price,  be  not  ye  the  slaves  (servants)  of  men."  This 
is  contained  in  the  same  chapter  with  one  of  the  Doctor's  quota- 
tions, and  it  is  addressed  to  the  very  same  persons,  consequently, 
if  servant  means  slave,  here  there  is  a  positive  prohibition  of  sla- 
very. In  Philippians  i.  1,  we  have  as  follows :  "  Paul  and  Timo- 
theus,  slaves  (servants)  of  Jesus  Christ,"  &c.  Again,  Romans  i.  1, 
"  Paul,  a  slave  (servant)  of  Jesus  Christ,  called  to  be  an  apostle, 
separated  unto  the  gospel  of  God."  Then,  according  to  the  Doc- 
tor, St.  Paul  and  Timotheus  were  slaves,  and  the  Saviour  a  slave- 

5 


30 


holder.  The  Bible  sanction  slavery  !  What  folly !  what  wilful 
blindness !  what  perversion  will  not  men  be  guilty  of,  to  cloak 
highhanded  sin  against  Gcd  and  man  ! 


CHAPTER  VL 

Happiness  of  the  Slaves.    Fatal  objection  to  Abolitionism. 

We  are  told  by  Doctor  Sleigh,  "  the  very  persons  (the  slaves) 
whom  we  feed,  clothe,  mstruct,  &c,  thus  enjoy  more  comfort  and 
happiness,  than  nine-tenths  of  the  labouring  class  of  white  free 
persons  in  Europe  V* 

I  presume  he  has  drawn  his  conclusions  from  the  representations 
of  slaveholders,  or  from  a  few  fortunate  cases  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
free  states  ;  for  certainly,  his  observations  must  have  been  very  im- 
perfect and  partial  indeed,  if  they  were  made  in  the  southern  or 
south-western  states.  I  recollect,  from  the  first  superficial  glance 
of  slavery  I  had,  in  some  parts  of  Maryland  and  Kentucky,  I  was 
inclined  to  think  the  horrors  of  slavery  had  been  magnified,  for 
many  of  the  slaves  were  apparently  contented.  But  this  is  easily 
accounted  for ;  the  conduct  of  masters  here  is  so  much  exposed  to 
observation  of  people  of  the  free  states,  that  it  operates  as  a  great 
check  upon  the  bad  treatment  of  slaves.  The  circumstances  of  these 
and  the  more  southern  states  are  also  so  different,  that  there  is  not 
so  much  temptation  to  bad  usage ;  besides,  they  know  it  is  much 
easier  for  the  slaves  to  get  ofT,  -when  they  are  held  near  the  free 
states,  than  when  in  the  far  south.  Virginia,  Maryland  and  Ken- 
tucky is  the  principal  stock-raising  country  of  slaves;  from  these 
states  chiefly  are  driven  to  market  the  annual  supplies  for  the  south 
and  south-west,  to  stock  new  plantations.  The  cultivation  of  to- 
bacco, corn  and  wheat  in  these  states  is  comparatively  easy,  and 
does  not  give  such  chance  for  hard  driving,  as  the  sugar  and  cotton 
cultivation  in  the  south  and  south-west ;  and  those  which  are  in- 
tended for  market,  are  fed  and  clothed  tolerably  well.  But  even  in 
these  mild  states,  on  investigating  the  subject,  so  far  as  I  could  as- 
certain, the  slaves  were  anxious  to  be  free,  and  would  have  given 
worlds  for  liberty  !  The  moment  freedom  was  hinted  to  them, 
tears  started  in  their  eyes,  and  they  could  scarcely  give  utterance  to 


81 


their  emotions.    They  pine  for  liberty,  and  think  it  a  hard  case  to 
be  doomed  to  perpetual  slavery.    If  these  are  the  sentiments  and 
feelings  of  those  under  the  mildest  treatment,  what  must  be  the  feel- 
ings of  those  who  receive  such  treatment  as  the  generality  do  in  the 
far  south  and  west,  where  they  have  stinted  allowances  of  the  poor- 
est food  and  clothing,  and  are  treated  worse  than  brutes  ?    This  I 
speak  from  a  personal  knowledge  of  facts.    In  Mississippi  and 
Louisiana,  on  the  cotton  and  sugar  plantations,  they  are  a  part  of  * 
the  year  worked  from  daylight,  with  very  little  intermission,  till 
nine  o'clock  at  night  under  the  lash  ;  and  after  working  all  the  week 
they  are  frequently  made  to  butcher  or  do  other  work  on  Sundays. 
These  things,  however,  are  almost  too  trifling  to  mention,  when 
compared  with  the  many  outrageous  abuses  to  which  they  are  con- 
stantly subjected.    It  would  be  impossible  to  describe  them  in  a 
few  pages.    I  know  there  are  some  kind  masters,  but  most  of  them 
are  not.    There  seems  to  be  something  in  the  very  nature  of  sla- 
very, that  induces  a  tyrannical,  overbearing  and  unfeeling  dispo- 
sition towards  the  slave  ;  he  is  considered  property  over  which  they 
have  unlimited  control ;  they  may  abuse  him  to  any  extent,  and 
even  kill  him  with  impunity.    1  will  give  one  example.    A  hungry 
slave,  without  leave,  killed  a  pig  belonging  to  the  same  plantation 
with  himself;  the  master  had  him  stripped  naked,  staked  down  ac- 
cording to  custom,  that  is,  stakes  driven  in  the  ground  so  as  to  lock 
over  his  neck,  legs  and  arms,  then  whipped  him  till  he  was  tired, 
then  took  his  knife  and  cut  a  ring  round  from  the  shoulders  to  the 
hips,  and  told  his  overseer  to  whip  the  skin  all  out  of  the  space 
within  the  ring  before  he  should  quit.    In  vain  did  the  slave  plead 
in  extenuation  of  his  crime  of  killing  the  pig,  that  hunger  impelled 
him  to  it*  and  that  he  would  never  again  do  any  thing  to  offend  his 
master  !  Before  the  overseer's  task  was  finished,  the  gush  of  blood 
and  cries  ceased,  and  the  slave  expired !    A  hole  was  dug  for  the 
purpose,  the  body  thrown  in  and  covered,  and  that  was  the  last  of 
it !   Nothing  was  done  about  the  murder, — the  master  was  not  even 
turned  out  of  church,  of  which  he  was  a  member,  and  did  not  ap- 
pear to  be  disrespected  by  his  neighbours  on  account  of  it.  From 
my  knowledge  of  the  character  of  this  gentleman,  and  also  of  the 
clergyman  residing  in  the  neighbourhood,  who  related  to  me  the 


32 


case,  being  also  a  slaveholder,  I  had  no  reason  to  doubt  the  circum- 
stances were  literally  true. 

I  do  not  know  that  such  instances  are  common,  yet  they  some- 
times occur,  and  go  to  show  how  little  the  life  of  a  slave  is  regard- 
ed when  their  masters  get  in  a  passion.  Numerous  other  facts  might 
be  mentioned,  to  prove  not  only  that  the  slaves  are  unhappy,  have 
generally  hard  usage  and  cruel  treatment,  but  also  to  illustrate  the 
debasing  effect  which  slavery  has  on  slaveholders,  by  giving  them 
power  to  exercise  the  worst  passions  to  an  unlimited  extent.  In 
Louisiana  (as  in  some  other  states)  it  is  death  to  a  slave  to  strike  or 
draw  blood  in  anger  from  a  white  man,  no  matter  what  the  provoca- 
tion or  abuse  !  I  saw  one  hung  in  New  Orleans,  not  for  killing,  but 
inflicting  a  wound,  in  self-defence,  on  a  white  man ;  I  have  seen 
others  beaten  with  clubs,  and  dragged  to  prison  by  ruffians,  where 
they  were  again  cruelly  whipt,  for  no  other  offence  than  that  they  did 
not  cringe  as  doggedly  before  them,  as  it  was  supposed  comported 
with  the  fancied  dignity  of  these  worthless  dregs  of  white  society. 

It  would  be  endless  to  go  into  all  the  abuses  practised  upon  the 
slaves,  the  perplexities,  irritations  and  cruelties,  to  which  they  are 
obliged  to  submit ;  every  one  knows  that  husbands  and  wives,  chil- 
dren and  parents  are  liable  every  day  to  be  separated  and  sold; 
nothing  is  their  own ;  and  even  if  it  were  true  that  they  have 
enough  to  eat  and  to  wear,  and  we*re  not  shamefully  whipped,  what 
'  is  life  in  slavery  ?    Is  it  no  abuse  to  rob  a  man  of  liberty,  smother 

his  immortal  mind  in  darkness,  and  degrade  him  to  the  level  of  a 
brute  ?  Enough  has  been  said  on  this  point.  The  precepts  of  the 
blessed  Saviour,  the  good  and  great  of  all  nations  unanimously  de- 
clare, that  slavery  is  an  outrageous,  inhuman  monstrosity  !  Then 
who,  with  a  spark  of  reason,  can  unblushingly  defend  it,  and  affirm 
that  it  makes  men  happy  ! ! ! 

"  There  is  one  more  fatal  objection  to  the  abolition  system,  viz. 
That  its  whole  aim  is  the  removal  of  the  effect  and  not  the  cause  ! 
That  slavery  is  the  cause  of  much  evil,  I  do  not  pretend  to  deny ; 
but  then  slavery  itself  is  only  an  effect.  Abolitionism  is,  therefore, 
unphilosophical,  absurd,  fallacious  and  inefficacious.  For  example, 
a  person  gets  a  splinter  of  wood  into  his  finger,  the  finger  inflames, 
the  arm  inflames,  the  whole  body  inflames — delirium  or  lock-jaw 
supervenes,  and  death  closes  the  scene." 

Now,  previous  to  the  close  of  the  scene,  when  the  whole  body 


33 


is  inflamed,  delirium  or  lock-jaw  has  supervened  ;  the  Doctor,  in  or- 
der to  save  the  life  of  the  patient,  would  rest  his  hopes  on  pulling 
out  the  splinter.  It  would  be  uncourteous  to  question  the  profes- 
sional skill  of  a  "  Professor  of  Surgery,"  and  a  "  F.  R.  C.  S.  L. 
&c.  <fec.  &c,"  but  he  who,  at  this  stage  of  the  disease,  would  under- 
take to  save  the  life  of  the  patient  by  simply  pulling  out  the  splin- 
ter, could  have  no  great  fund  of  surgical  knowledge.  Every  scien- 
tific surgeon  or  physician  knows,  that  to  save  the  patient  when  the 
inflammation  has  proceeded  to  such  a  dnngerous  extent  as  to  have  in- 
volved the  whole  system,  when  delirium  and  lock-jaw  are  about  to 
take  place,  that  nothing  but  the  most  prompt  and  decisive  remedial 
agents,  applied  so  as  to  act  upon  the  whole  system,  could  have  any 
chance  of  success.  It  would  be  right  to  pull  out  the  splinter,  but 
the  idea  of  curing  by  this  alone  would  be  ridiculous.  The  splinter 
is  the  slave  trade,  or  cause ;  the  inflammation,  slaveholding,  or 
effect.  The  splinter  remained  in  the  United  States  till  it  produced 
extensive  inflammation,  and  was  then  extracted  (by  the  abolition  of 
the  slave  trade,)  but  the  inflammation  has  still  gone  on,  till  it  has 
involved  the  whole  system,  and  well-nigh  produced  lock-jaw.  How 
now  shall  we  save  this  system  from  impending  ruin  ?  Will  it  be  by 
setting  at  the  bedside  of  the  patient,  and  guarding  against  splinters  1 
Or  must  it  not  be  by  administering  powerful  antiphlogistics  to  sub- 
due the  inflammation,  and  prompt  antispasmodics,  to  throw  off  the 
lock-jaw?  Had  the  splinter  been  early  extracted,  nothing  more 
would  have  been  necessary  to  allay  the  inflammation  than  the 
application  of  a  topical  remedy  :  so,  had  the  slave  trade  been  abo- 
lished before  slavery  had  implicated  some  of  the  vital  organs,  the 
spontaneous  efforts  of  nature  might  have  eradicated  it ;  but  now, 
when  the  inflammation  is  so  extended,  and  rapidly  gaining  the  as- 
cendancy over  the  patient,  he,  furious  and  raving,  and  beginning  to 
fancy  his  best  friends  his  worst  enemies,  something  more  effectual 
must  be  done  than  merely  pulling  out  the  splinter  ;  if  it  be  not, 
we  shall  find  to  our  sorrow  that  not  only  delirium,  and  loch-jaw, 
but  death  will  supervene  ! 


i 


34 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Education  and  Morality  of  the  Slaves.  Sentiments  of  Slaveholders.  Conclusion. 

A  few  remarks  on  the  education  and  morality  of  slaves,  and  the 
sentiments  of  slaveholders,  will  conclude  our  review  and  exposi- 
tion. Towards  the  conclusion  of  Dr.  Sleigh's  pamphlet,  he  has 
given  us  reports  of  the  flourishing  state  of  education  and  religion  in 
some  particular  localities  of  the  south,  signed  Truth,  New  England 
Man,  &c.  ;  but  most  probably  written  by  slaveholders.  However, 
for  the  sake  of  argument,  we  will  allow  them  to  be  true.  Then 
what  do  they  prove  ? 

He  brings  them  forward  to  prove  the  "  calumny  circulated  re- 
specting the  state  of  ignorance  and  irreligion  in  which  all  the  slave- 
holders keep  their  slaves,  is  as  great  a  falsehood  as  was  ever  uttered 
by  man  or  devils."  If  they  prove  any  thing,  I  should  think  it 
would  be  the  reverse  of  what  he  has  told  us  in  the  first  part  of  his 
pamphlet,  viz.,  "  That  as  far  as  mental  incapability,  the  slaves  are 
as  incapable  of  taking  care  of  themselves  as  lunatics."  The  doctor 
seems  to  have  obtained  the  above  information  after  the  first  part  of 
his  book  had  been  stereotyped,  for  it  will  be  recollected  that  he 
there  avowed  his  reason  "  for  not  advocating  the  immediate  eman- 
cipation of  the  slaves,"  to  be  "  their  mental  inabilities  to  take  care 
of  themselves."  I  suppose,  after  receiving  this  intelligence  of  the 
learning  and  morality  of  the  slaves,  he  has  of  course  become  an  abo- 
litionist ;  and  the  abolitionists  may  now  calculate  on  his  "  powerful 
aid,"  in  the  promotion  of  their  cause.  Indeed,  it  would  seem  that 
his  sentiments,  wrhen  he  wrote  this  part  of  his  book,  had  under- 
gone an  entire  change  ;  for  in  the  first  part  of  his  woik  he  advo- 
cated slavery  with  such  eloquence,  as  almost  to  induce  people  to 
fall  in  love  with  it ;  in  the  latter  part,  he  gives  the  testimony  of 
about  a  dozen  slaveholders  against  slavery,  condemning  it  in  ihe 
strongest  terms,  and  expressing  abolition  sentiments.  The  follow- 
ing are  a  few  examples.    Mr.  Lavasseur  says  : 

"  Happily,  there  is  no  part  of  the  civilized  world,  in  which  it  is 
necessary  t3  discuss  the  justice  or  injustice  of  the  principle  of  negro 
slavery  ;  at  the  present  day,  every  sane  man  agrees  that  it  is  a  mon- 
strosity, and  it  would  be  altogether  inaccurate,  to  suppose  that  there 
are  in  the  United  States,  more  than  elsewhere,  individuals  sufR- 


35 


ciently  senseless*  to  seek  to  defend  it,  either  by  their  writings  or 
conversation.  For  myself,  who  have  traversed  the  twenty-four 
states  of  the  Union,  and  in  the  course  of  a  year  have  had  more  than 
one  opportunity  of  hearing  long  and  keen  discussions  upon  this 
subject,  I  declare  that  I  never  have  found  but  a  single  person  who 
seriously  defended  this  principle." 

Another  says  ;  "  It  is  shocking  to  human  nature  that  any  race  of 
mankind,  and  their  posterity  should  be  sentenced  to  perpetual  sla- 
very. "  And  another,  "  that  duty,  honour,  and  interest  call  upon  us 
to  prepare  the  way  for  its  removal,  we  must  act,"  <fcc. 

"  These,"  the  Doctor  says,  "  are  the  sentiments  of  men  of  emi- 
nent talents,  citizens  of  the  south,  and  slaveholders." 

If  Dr.  Sleigh  commenced  to  write  a  book  against  abolitionism, 
and  became  convinced,  after  investigating  the  subject,  that  he  was 
on  the  wrong  side,  I  suppose  it  would  not  have  done  to  injure  the 
sale  of  his  book  by  confessing  his  conversion ;  but  as  soon  as  his 
pamphlet  shall  have  been  sold,  I  think  we  may  reasonably  expect 
to  see  another  from  his  pen,  advocating  the  opposite  side  of  the 
question  ;  for  great  minds,  when  convinced  of  having  been  wrong, 
are  prompt  to  renounce  and  correct  their  errors. 

But  the  Doctor  hopes  the  "  short  time  consumed  in  writing"  his 
pamphlet,  "  will  be  received  by  the  public  as  a  sufficient  apology  for 
any  errors"  it  contains.  If  this  be  a  reasonable  excuse,  then  any 
man  may  write  a  book,  bring  erroneous  charges  against  persons 
and  societies,  and  because,  forsooth,  he  has  hurried  over  it,  so  as  to 
get  it  out  in  the  stage  of  public  excitement,  he  must  be  perfectly 
excused,  on  the  ground  of  doing  it  in  so  "  short  a  time."  This 
would  be  very  much  like  the  physician  who  should  administer 
fatal  medicine,  and  then  offer  as  an  apology  that  he  did  not  take 
time  to  ascertain  it  was  poison  ;  or  like  the  surgeon,  who,  in  his 
haste  to  make  a  fee,  should  amputate  the  sound  limb  instead  of  the 
diseased  one.  Would  the  despatch  with  which  he  performed  it 
excuse  him,  or  atone  for  the  mischief? 

The  author  has  only  to  add,  that  he  has  no  personal  acquaintance 
with  the  gentleman  whose  work  he  has  taken  the  liberty  to  review. 
He  has  made  this  exposition  at  his  own  suggestion,  solely  with  the 
purpose  of  giving  some  assistance  to  the  cause  of  truth  ;  and  for  its 
contents,  in  whatever  light  ttiey  may  be  considered,  as  no  other 
person  has  had  a  hand  in  it,  the  writer  is  alone  responsible. 

*  Dr.  S>  defends  it,  and  puts  it  on  a  par  with  liberty  and  Christianity. 


36 


PLAN* 

For  entirely  abolishing  the  American  Anti-Slavery  Society,  and  its  Auxiliaries, 
in  a  way  that  zvill  greatly  promote  the  interests  of  both  the  Slave  and  Free 
States,  by  a  Tennesseean. 

The  superior  piosperity  of  free  states,  strikingly  demonstrates  the  superior  ad- 
vantages of  free  labour.  The  slave  states,  with  all  their  advantages  of  territory, 
of  soil,  of  climate,  and  richness  of  products,  have  a  free  population  of  but  a  lit- 
tle upwards  of  three  millions ;  while  the  free  states  have  one  of  nearly,  if  not 
quite  ten  millions.  The  honest  hand  of  free  labour,  has  turned  the  cold  and 
barren  lands  of  New  England  into  fruitful  fields,  and  caused  them  to  teem  with 
a  wealthy,  healthy  and  happy  populati  n  ;  the  vast  wealth,  improvements  and 
population  of  I\ew  York  and  Pennsylvania,  aie  striking  evidences  of  the  supe- 
rior value  of  free  labour.  Its  value  is  equally  attested  by  the  equally  prosperous 
condition  of  Ohio  ;  a  few  years  since  she  sprung  up  in  a  mighty  forest;  now  be- 
hold her  splendid  cities,  her  stupendous  canals,  and  heir  million  inhabitants. — 
Witness  how  the  forests  of  Indiana  and  Michigan  are  falling  before  the  axe  of 
the  free  labourer.  See  how  the  hand  of  fiee  labour  is  turning  the  vast  prairies 
of  Illinois  into  fruitful  fields.  All  these  splendid  facts,  are  so  many  demonstra- 
tions of  the  \alue  of  free  labour;  and  the  sparse  population,  and  withering  aspect 
of  the  slave  states,  speak  the  curse  of  God  upon  slave  labour.  "  Wo  unto  him 
that  bu.ldeth  his  house  by  unrighteousness,  and  his  chambers  by  wrong ;  that 
useth  his  neighbour's  services  without  wages,  and  giveth  him  not  lor  his  work.'* 
Jer.  xxii.  19. 

The  immediate  abolition  of  slavery  will  remedy  the  sinking  condition  of  the 
slave  states.  A  more  productive  system  of  labour  will  be  substituted;  the  de- 
structive vices  resulting  from  the  slave  system  will  be  abolished ;  the  style  of 
living  will  be  changed ;  and  economy  will  take  the  place  of  extravagance ;  the 
labourers  themselves  will  acquire  property,  and  thus  increase  the  wealth  of  the 
country,  and  be  able  to  support  public  institutions.  Labour  will  become  reputa- 
ble, and  industry  will  pour  her  vials  of  health  and  morality  upon  all  classes  of 
society.  Churches  and  schools  will  be  multiplied,  the  long-banished  mechanics 
will  return  and  rear  their  shops  and  factories  all  over  the  land ;  the  blighted  vil- 
lages will  soon  grow  to  cities,  and  the  wasted  lands,  under  the  hand  of  free  la- 
bour, will  become  as  the  garden  of  Eden  ;  turnpikes,  rail-roads  and  canals  will 
abound,  and  be  crowded  with  the  rich  products  of  the  soih  And  the  south  shall 
soon  possess  a  population  more  dense,  and  rich  and  happy  than  of  the  north. 
Such  will  be  the  results  of  justice.  Surely,  then,  immediate  emancipation  will 
greatly  increase  the  wealth  and  happiness  of  the  slave  states. 

The  system  of  slavery  is  extremely  dangerous.  In  several  of  the  states 
the  slaves  are  a  majority.  Several  causes  contribute  to  increase  the  slave  popula- 
tion beyond  that  of  the  free.  One  is,  slaves  are,  contraiy  to  law,  secretly  brought 
from  Africa;  another  is,  the  promiscuous  manner  in  which  slaves  live,  and  in 
many  instances  they  are  bred  for  market  just  like  beasts ;  a  third  is,  the  free  in- 
habitants are  placed  without  employment,  and  afforded  the  means  of  luxurious 
living  and  vicious  habits  ;  consequently,  they  die  off  before  the  slave  population. 
Owing  to  these  causes,  the  slaves  are  increasing  vastly  beyond  the  free  people. 
This  increase  will  soon  give  them  such  a  majority,  as  will  enable  them  to  exter- 
minate the  white  population.    The  cruel  treatment  they  receive,  the  natural  love 

*  Our  limits  do  not  allow  the  inclusion  of  the  whole  of  this  excellent  plan. 
However,  this  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose. 


37 


of  liberty,  will  ever  place  them  under  the  strongest  temptations  to  insurrection. 
It  cannot  be  denied,  that  they  have  already  made  many  desperate  efforts  for  liber- 
ty ;  deep  and  dark  plans  have  been  laid  for  destroying  their  masters  ;  and  some 
of  them  have  been  partially  executed.  The  massacre  of  helpless  women  and 
children  at  Southampton,  stands  out  as  an  awful  warning  to  slaveholders  ;  and 
presents,  in  lines  of  innocent  blood,  the  danger  of  the  slave  system.  The  an- 
nual increase  of  slaves  over  all  that  die,  is  sixty  thousand.  And  the  increase  of 
that  must  be  added  every  year  in  future ;  therefore,  the  time  is  not  far  distant, 
when  their  annual  increase  will  be  a  million.  They  are  now  within  half  a  mil- 
lion of  being  equal  to  the  entire  white  population  of  the  slave  states.  Every  one 
capable  of  counting  twenty,  can  see  that  such  an  increase  will  inevitably  secure 
the  ruin  of  the  slave  states;  the  additional  power  of  the  free  states  cannot  long 
prevent  it.  The  number  will  soon  be  so  great,  that  they  can  accomplish  the  work 
of  slaughter  and  ruin,  before  it  will  be  possible  to  bring  aid  from  the  free  states. 
In  several  of  the  states,  the  danger  is  now  extreme ;  in  many  places,  the  people 
live  in  constant  apprehension  of  being  suddenly  murdered.  Indeed,  an  insurrec- 
tion may  suddenly  take  place,  even  where  slaves  are  comparatively  few,  and 
many  shocking  murders  may  be  committed,  which  has  frequently  been  the  case. 
The  danger  of  living  among  slaves,  tends  to  drive  out  the  free  inhabitants,  and 
thus  increases  the  evil.  The  desire  of  extending  their  farms,  induces  slavehol- 
ders to  engross  the  lands,  and  this  also  produces  a  decrease  of  the  free  population  ; 
from  these  several  causes,  the  danger  will  increase  every  year,  until  sudden  ruin 
will  desolate  the  land.  It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  the  deplorable  condition  of  the 
slave  states ;  they  seem  to  feel  as  if  they  were  living  upon  a  dreadful  volcano, 
heaving  beneath  their  feet  every  moment,  and  ready  to  overwhelm  them  in  inter- 
minable ruin.  Every  attempt  to  discuss  the  subject  of  slavery  gives  them  alarm  ; 
lest  the  slave  should  learn  his  rights,  and  be  instigated  to  insurrection ;  and  every 
public  effort  to  abolish  the  system  makes  them  frantic.  They  are  like  the  pa- 
tient who  has  abandoned  the  hope  of  life,  and  views  medicine  as  only  calculated 
to  shorten  his  hours,  and  therefore  desires  to  be  let  alone  to  breathe  as  long  as  he 
can.  They  seem  as  if  they  viewed  the  hour  of  remedy  past,  and  desire  to  be  let 
alone,  lest  the  remedy,  instead  of  giving  relief,  should  shorten  their  hours.  Like 
infuriated  devils,  they  cry,  let  us  alone, — "  Art  thou  come  to  torment  us  before 
the  time."  The  present  agitation  of  the  slave  states  strikingly  resembles  the 
madness  of  despair ;  it  is  unreasonable  in  the  extreme.  There  is  yet  a  remedy 
for  their  ruined  condition,  and  one  that  is  both  safe  and  practicable.  If  they  will 
but  abolish  immediately  the  entire  system  of  slavery,  the  danger  will  at  once  be 
over.  The  increase  of  the  coloured  population,  resulting  from  slavery,  will  for- 
ever cease ;  no  more  will  be  brought  from  Africa ;  no  more  will  be  bred  for  mar- 
ket ;  their  increase  will  be  by  the  regular  laws  of  marriage,  and,  of  course,  will 
not  exceed  that  of  the  white  people,  who  will  soon  assume  temperate,  moral 
and  industrious  habits;  the  result  of  which  will  be  health,  long  life,  and  a  nume- 
rous offspring:  Besides  all  this,  the  causes  that  now  prevent  the  settlement  of 
the  industrious  and  virtuous  classes  of  the  white  people  will  cease,  and  the  influ- 
ence of  such  will  be  great.  The  south,  as  before  stated,  is  capable  of  sustaining 
a  denser  population  than  the  north  ;  nothing  but  slavery  now  prevents  it.  But 
for  this,  there  would  be  stronger  inducements  to  settle  in  those  milder  and  more 
productive  regions.  There  is  yet  room  in  the  slave  states  and  territory,  for  a 
white  population  of  more  than  thirty  millions.  Among  such  a  population  as 
would  soon  flow  to  the  south,  the  coloured  people  would  scarcely  be  felt. 

If  our  southern  brethren  -would  calm  down  a  little,  and  look  at  this  plan  of 
abolishing  the  American  Anti-Slavery  Society,  and  all  its  auxiliaries,  they  will 
tee  that  it  is  not  only  safe  and  practicable,  but -will  vastly  enrich  the  slave  states; 
they  will  perceive  that  their  lands  will  increase  in  value,  equal  to  the  present 

6 


38 


-worth  of  their  slaves  ;  and  whole  states  -will  be  saved  from  a  dreadful  ruin.  Jill 
this  is  not  mere  theory  ;  it  is  matter  of  actual  experiment.  It  has  been  tested  un- 
der far  more  disadvantageous  circumstances.  In  Antigua,  -where  the  slaves 
were  fifteen  to  every  white  person,  and  where  we  may  reasonably  conclude  they 
were  more  degraded  than  the  generality  of  slaves  in  the  United  States,  they 
■were  all  liberated  in  a  single  day.  The  result  was  peace  and  freedom  from  dan- 
ger ;  the  armed  force  necessary  to  keep  them  from  insurrection  when  in  slavery, 
is  now  disbanded  ;  and  as  the  danger  of  living  on  the  island  has  passed  away, 
the  lands  have  greatly  increased  in  value.  The  planters  now  say,  that  what  the 
British  government  gave  them  for  their  slaves,  was  a  gratuity  ;  and  that  their 
circumstances  have  been  so  much  better,  that  they  would  not  change  back  again 
to  slavery,  for  any  consideration,  however  great.  A  similar  experiment  has  been 
made  in  Bermuda,  with  equal  success.  The  American  slave  states  afford  much 
greater  facilities  for  such  a  change,  as  the  number  of  slaves  is  not  so  great  in 
proportion  to  the  free  people  ;  and  besides  this,  there  is  room  for  a  vast  increase 
of  white  population,  and  the  contiguity  of  the  free  states,  so  densely  populated, 
would  afford  the  means  of  soon  filling  it.  This  plan  will  sitit  well  those  who  are 
in  favour  o  f  colonizing  the  coloured  people.  When  all  the  anti-slavery  societies 
are  abolished,  there  will  be  no  formidable  opposition  to  colonization,  unless  the 
planters  should  combine  to  oppose  carrying  so  many  labourers  from  the  country, 
lest  the  price  of  labour  should  rise.  From  this  source,  there  may  be  still  danger 
of  strenuous  opposition  ;  but  then,  colonizationists  will  have  the  consolatioji  of 
knowing,  that  their  labours  are  no  longer  needed. 

This  plan  of  abolishing  all  the  anti-slavery  societies,  will  be  greatly  to  the  in- 
terest of  the  free  states. 

1st.  Slavery  exists  in  the  District  of  Columbia  and  in  the  territory  of  Florida,  under  laws 
made  by  congress.  The  general  government  is  bound  by  the  constitution,  to  protect  every 
state  from  foreign  invasion  and  domestic  insurrection.  Hence  the  lives  and  property  of  the 
people  of  the  free  states  are  pledged  for  the  suppression  of  slave  insurrections.  The  foreign 
slave  trade  was  long  carried  on  under  the  geneial  government,  and  the  domes:  ic  slave  trade 
still  exists  in  all  its  horrors ;  and  under  it  have  existed  slave  territories  that  have  now  become 
slave  states.  In  all  these  respects,  the  free  states  lie  under  the  sin  and  disgrace  of  slavery. 
The  immediate  and  entire  abolition  of  slavery  would  relieve  them  from  this  sin  and  disgrace 
of  a  system  of  the  most  barbarous  cruelty.   This  would  be  greatly  to  their  interest. 

2nd.  Cruel  and  oppressive  laws  are  enacted  by  the  slave  states,  to  drive  out  fiom  among 
their  slaves  all  that  benevolent  persons  have  liberated  ftom  slavery.  As  many  as  three  hun- 
dred and  fifty  of  the  most  degraded  slaves  of  old  Virginia  were  liberated,  and  at  once  diiven 
to  the  stste  of  Ohio.  "W  nils  the  principles  of  Christianity,  and  even  common  humanity  re- 
quire us  to  allow  such  objects  of  oppression  an  asylum  amongst  us,  it  must  be  admitted,  that 
an  ignorant  and  degraded  population  of  any  sort,  white  or  black,  is  a  great  disadvantage.  And 
while  ever  slavery  exists,  such  a  population  will  be  thrown  upon  the  free  states.  Njw,  if  sla- 
very were  abolished,  this  tend-ncy  to  drive  out  the  coloured  people  would  ceas->;  diiving 
them  out  would  then  increase  the  price  of  labour,  and  would  be  contrary  to  the  interests  of 
planters  and  men  of  business.  It  is  now  their  in  erestto  drive  out  the  free  people  of  colour,  it 
would  then  be  their  interest  to  retain  them,  in  order  to  keep  down  the  price  of  labour ;  and  as 
the  products  of  the  south  are  more  valuable  than  those  of  the  north,  thry  will  be  able  to  give 
better  wages  ;  and  this,  together  with  the  love  of  kindred,  will  not  only  retain  the  coloured 
people  now  there,  but  will  induce  many  to  leave  the  present  free  states  and  go  to  the  south. 
Such  will  be  the  certain  result  of  the  immediate  and  entire  abolition  of  slavery;  and  they 
would  soon  be  educated,  and  become  an  enlightened  people,  and  a  benefit  to  society,  whether 
they  might  reside,  in  the  north  or  south.  This  would  be  greatly  to  the  interest  of  the  free 
states ;  the  coloured  people  would  cea6e  to  come  to  the  free  states,  and  if  they  should  come 
it  would  be  in  an  educated  state,  of  course  no  disadvantage  to  society. 


39 


3d.  The  abolition  of  slavery  would  soon  give  to  the  south  as  dense  a  population  as  the  north. 
This  would  vastly  increase  the  trade  of  the  free  states,  of  course  extend  all  kinds  of  business, 
and  thus  promote  the  interests  of  all  classes  of  society.  The  day-labourer  will  find  his  wages 
increased,  the  farmer  will  get  a  better  price  for  his  produce,  the  mechanic  will  get  more  prv>fi- 
table  and  prompt  returns  for  his  labour,  and  the  merchant  will  be  enabled  to  do  a  surer  and  a 
more  extensive  business ;  men  of  trie  learned  professions  will,  of  course,  find  a  better  support. 
These  will  be  the  certain  results  of  the  immediate  abolition  of  the  slave  system,  and  th-y  will 
be  greatly  to  the  interest  of  the  free  stales.  'J  he  notion  that  many  labouiing  men  entertain, 
that  the  abolition  of  slavery  will  lower  the  price  of  labour,  and  thus  ren  ler  them  unable  to 
support  their  families,  is  entirely  without  foundation.  By  extending  agriculture,  manufacto- 
ries, and  public  impiovements,  it  will  greatly  increase  the  demand  for  labour,  d..d  vv.il  make 
room  for  employing  thousands  of  mechanics  and  day-labourers;  the  compelling -.f  two  mil- 
lions and  a  half  of  people  to  work  without  v  ages,  must  ever  be  against  the  labouring  classes; 
and  besides  this,  slavery  attaches  disgrace  to  labour,  and  thus  tends  to  distress  and  degrade 
the  labouring  part  t  f  the  community.  Who  does  not  see  that  by  many,  labouring  people  are 
despised  ;  the  fact  that  a  man  is  a  farmer,  a  mechanic,  or  a  day-  abourer.  is  sufl  ient  to  ex- 
clude him  from  some  circles  i.f  society.  I  his  is  the  spirit  of  slavery  transplanted  into  the  free 
states;  the  abolition  of  slavery  will  tend  to  abolish  this  detestable  spirit  of  pride,  and  will 
elevate  the  labouring  classes  of  s  icieiy.  There  should  be  no  degraded  classes.  The  honest 
and  industrious,  however  poor,  should  always  be  highly  esteemed. 

The  labouring  classes,  above  all  others,  will  find  it  their  interest  to  promote  the  abolition  of 
slavery. 

It  is  said  by  some,  that  if  the  slaves  were  set  free,  they  would  work  fir  lower  wages  than 
white  men  do,  and  that  they  would  bring  down  the  price  of  labour;  but  such  should  remem- 
ber that  they  now  work  for  not  ing,  and  surely  that  is  much  more,  than  even  low  wages,  cal- 
culated to  lower  the  price  of  labour.  When  the  abolition  of  slavery  takes  plac°,  the  col  aired 
people  themselves  will  consume  much  more  provision  and  clothing  than  they  now  do,  and  thig 
itself  will  increase  the  business  of  the  north,  and  enable  farmers  and  manufacturers  to  give 
better  wages.  This  forms  a  good  argument  on  the  ground  of  interest,  against  the  coloured 
people  from  the  country.  The  sou'h  could  not,  at  present,  be  cultivated  without  them ;  and 
they  themselves,  by  their  own  consumption,  will  greatly  increase  the  business  and  wealth  of 
the  present  free  states.  Let  the  labouring  classes  examine  well  this  point  of  interest,  and  they 
will  here,  as  in  every  other  cas j,  find  true  interest  and  justice  combined.  It  will  be  greatly 
to  our  interest  to  do  justice  to  the  coloured  people. 

4ih  The  system  ol  slavery  will  soon  exhaust  the  wealth  of  the  free  states.  The  increase  of 
the  slaves,  will  soon  make  it  necessary  to  station  soldiers  in  almost  every  neighbourhood 
thr  ughout  the  slave  states,  to  keep  down  insurrection.  An  editor  in  Pennsylvania  has  already 
begun  to  advocate  the  increase  of  the  United  States  soldiers  in  South  Carolina  for  this  purpose. 
The  time  is  just  at  hand,  when  the  free  states  must  not  only  bear  their  part  of  the  expense  of 
supporting  such  military  forces ;  but  they  must  send  their  sons  to  stand  guard  over  slaves.  If 
they  cannot  be  enlisted,  they  must  be  drafted.  The  general  government  is  bound  by  the  con- 
stitution, to  protect  every  state  again -t  domestic  insurrection.  The  British  government,  pre- 
vious to  the  act  of  emancipation,  had  to  keep  standing  forces  in  the  West  Indies,  to  prevent 
the  insurrection  of  slaves.  Such  must  soon  be  our  condition.  Keeping  up  such  military  f  >rces 
will  soon  exhaust  the  wealth,  oppress  the  sons  of  the  free  states,  and  corrupt  their  morals,  and 
endanger  their  liberties;  such  will  ultimitely  be  the  result  of  the  slave  system.  Certainly 
then,  the  abolition  of  slavery  will  be  greaUy  to  the  interest  of  the  free  states. 

5th.  The  system  of  slavery  weakens  the  nation,  and  endangers  its  liberties. 

In  time  of  war,  the  slave  states  will  not  be  able  to  do  much  more  than  guard  their  slaves. 
Consequently,  the  burden  of  defending  the  count; y  must  devolve  upon  the  free  states ;  in  ad- 
dition to  this,  the  slaves  will  be  under  the  strongest  temptation  to  join  the  enemy.  Should 
a  powerful  nation,  such  as  the  British  or  French,  invade  us,  they  might  offer  the  slaves  both 
liberty  and  the  property  of  the  country,  as  inducements  to  join  them.  And  in  this  way  they 
might  organize,  in  our  own  country,  an  army  of  four  hundred  thousand  men,  inured  to  hard- 
ships, and  able  to  endure  the  fatigues  of  warfare— and  they  could  support  them  on  the  spoils 


40 


taken  *,  and  thus  they  might  overrun,  and  ruin  the  nation*  Slavery  puts  the  wealth,  the  lives 
and  the  liberties  of  the  free,  as  well  as  the  slave  states,  in  the  power  of  foreign  nations.  The 
abolition  of  slavery  would,  in  this  respect,  promote  the  highest  interests  of  the  free,  as  *  ell  as 
of  the  slave  states.  If  the  slaves  were  liberated,  they  would  acquire  families  and  property  that 
they  could  call  their  own.  They  would  be  pr  aected  l»y  equitable  laws,  and  theref  »re  would 
feel  it  their  interest  to  defend  the  country.  And  hence  the  s  >uth  would  become  equal  to  the 
north,  in  the  means  of  self-defence.   This  would  be  greatly  to  the  interest  of  the  states. 

Add  to  these,  the  domineering  spirit  of  slavery,  that  threatens  the  nation  with  a  cruel  despo- 
tism, would  be  driven  from  the  land;  and  civil  and  religious  liberty  would  be  extended  to 
bless  all  nations,  and  would  descend  to  the  latest  generations. 

Here  then  is  a  plan,  safe  and  constitutional,  by  -which  all  the  anti*slavery  so- 
defies  in  the  Union  can  be  forever  abolished,  and  greatly  to  the  interest  of  both 
the  slave  and  free  states.  To  this  plan,  there  can  be  no  just  objection  ;  even 
abortionists  themselves,  could  not  -well  oppose  such  a  plan  for  abolishing  their 
societies.  Let  all,  then,  -who  desire  the  abolition  of  anti-slavery  societies,  join  in 
this  plan,  and  success  tvill  be  certain.  Peace  and  liberty  -will  return  to  bless  our 
distracted  nation  ;  and  her  morality,  happiness,  and  her  fame  shall  increase  a 
thousand  fold.  But  if  slavery  be  not  abolished,  it  -will  increase  the  coloured 
people  and  destroy  the  -white  people,  until  it  -will  ruin  the  nation.  The  cloured 
population  is  now  but  one-sixth  part  of  the  nation,  and  now  liberated,  ivill  never 
become  a  greater  proportion  ;  and  consequently,  -will  never  be  able  to  do  mate- 
rial injury.  There  -will  always  be  ample  power  in  the  nation  to  govern  them. 
Hut  if  slavery  be  continued,  it  will  give  them  such  a  proportion,  as  must  sooner 
or  later  terminate  in  ruin.  According  to  their  present  ratio  of  increase,  they 
ivill  be  thirteen  millions  before  the  present  century  will  terminate.  To  hold  such 
a  body  of  people  in  slavery  will  be  impossible  ;  they  will  certainly,  if  not  libera- 
ted, one  day  exterminate  the  free  population  of  the  slave  states,  and  perhaps 
ruin  the  free  states.  JVbw  Ihere  is  less  danger  in  liberating  them,  than  ever  will 
be  again.  Now,  there  is  power  in  the  south  to  liberate  them  safely,  and  to  the 
heat  interests  of  the  nation.  Let  all,  then,  consult  the  general  good,  and  unite 
cheerfully  in  this  work  of  justice  and  mercy. 


i 


•  -  4 


\ 


