AMERICAN 
SAM 


m  ] 

id'  -r  { 


^ 


Do  justly  love  mercy  walk 
Humbly  with  thy  God^ 
Sarah  Bancrofts  V^ork  i7>d-  ♦ 


•'SSV      ij 


^ 


1 


i'-: 


KM 


iUxlnixxxi  xxi 


"^^ 


Mdkdm 


JitilWrnnnam 


iO^O loO      VJUWWXJL    £A^i>vcrW  ^ttWOtiL 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


Copyright  hy 

Massachusetts  Society 

OF  the 

Colonial  Dames  of  America 


\ 


LoARA  Standish's  SAMPLER.    Plymouth,  Mass.  Cir.  1640 
Pilgrim  Hall,  Plymouth 

Plate  presented  by  Mrs.  William  L.  McKee 


^ 


AMERICAN 
SAMPLERS 


BY 


ETHEL  STANWOOD  BOLTON 
and    EVA   JOHNSTON   COE 


,|uwx-^/z  J2:-:4.t.-.57Gy/c=;;/;;>/3  ^liSi 

\  abcde^"•^lv>;khTino•pqr^tu•vxvyxv^:  i*-^^ 


THE    MASSACHUSETTS   SOCIETY   OF   THE 
COLONIAL    DAMES    OF    AMERICA    .-.    1921 


I 


I 


% 


^^i^^^'i^^^^^^^i^^^i^i^^^^^'^'^'^^^^^^^^f^^^^i^i^i^^i^^^% 


I    0    t>   o>    ^  d 


J^ 


66 


THOMAS     TODD     COMPANY 

PRINTERS 
14  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass. 


PI>ATE  I 

AxxE  Gower's  Sampler.     Salem,  Mass.     About  1610 
Owned  bij  the  Esue.c  Institute 


PREFATORY  NOTE 

IN  preserving  the  memory  of  our  ancestors,  their  domestic  virtues 
have  been  scantily  recorded,  a  neglect  which  demands  attention. 
Unable  to  answer  many  inquiries  for  publications  on  early  Amer- 
ican needlework,  the  Massachusetts  Society  of  the  Colonial  Dames 
took  upon  itself  the  task  of  remedying  in  part  this  neglect.  Consider- 
ing samplers  to  be  the  primary  basis  and  training  school  of  American 
needlework  in  the  early  days  of  the  Nation,  our  associates  have  col- 
lected materials  and  discussed  needlework  in  this  volume. 

With  the  wish  to  make  this  work  national  and  not  local,  an  appeal 
for  aid  was  made  to  our  sister  societies,  which  brought  prompt  and 
generous  response.  Through  their  cooperation,  this  volume  contains 
contributions  from  many  of  the  societies  of  the  Colonial  Dames  in  the 
United  States  and  from  many  interested  friends.  The  New  Jersey 
Society,  through  its  chairman,  Mrs.  Trueman  Clayton,  has  furnished 
the  largest  number  of  descriptions  outside  of  Massachusetts.  Mrs. 
Clayton  worked  untiringly,  and  her  descriptions  were  so  clear,  not 
only  in  matter  but  in  chirography,  that  they  were  a  delight  to  all  who 
used  them. 

The  late  Mrs.  T.  Harrison  Garrett,  of  Baltimore,  had  gathered  for 
the  Maryland  Dames  more  than  a  hundred  records  of  samplers  from 
that  state,  which  were  most  welcome,  as  our  collection  of  Southern 
samplers  was  somewhat  meager.  The  Connecticut  and  Kansas  Socie- 
ties, and  many  others,  have  responded  to  the  best  of  their  ability. 
Mrs.  Cyrus  Walker,  of  California,  spent  one  of  her  summers  in 
northern  Maine,  collecting  and  photographing  the  samplers  she  found 
there. 

In  March,  1920,  the  Rhode  Island  Historical  Society  arranged  an 
exhibit  of  samplers,  partly  from  a  local  interest  in  such  things  and 
partly  to  aid  in  the  preparation  of  this  book.  It  was  under  the  direc- 
tion of  the  librarian,  Howard  M.  Chapin,  Esq.,  of  Providence,  assisted 
by  a  committee  of  the  Society.     It  was  a  most  successful  affair,  and 

Hi 


iv  .  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

brought  together  nearly  three  hundred  samplers  which  would  not 
otherwise  have  come  to  our  notice.  Mrs.  Powel,  the  acting  president 
of  the  Colonial  Dames  of  Rhode  Island,  contributed  to  the  book  de- 
scriptions of  all  the  samplers  in  the  exhibition. 

In  our  own  Society,  Mrs.  Edwin  A.  Daniels,  of  Boston,  collected 
a  very  large  number  of  descriptions. 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe,  of  New  York,  who  has  a  wonderful  collection 
of  her  own,  has  added  a  very  large  number  of  descriptions,  enhanced 
by  pictures  taken  with  her  kodak.  Many  friends  have  contributed 
pictures,  and  to  them  our  thanks  are  due.  The  Committee  wishes  that 
it  could  reproduce  in  the  book  many  more  pictures  of  very  real  interest 
which  it  has  in  its  archives ;  but  it  has  felt,  in  choosing  the  illustrations, 
that  the  pictures  must  be  either  typical  or  necessary  to  bring  out  some 
point  under  discussion.  Therefore,  those  only  have  been  chosen  which 
exhibit  American  types  or  are  interesting  historically. 

It  is  believed  that  there  are  here  reproduced  examples  of  most 
of  the  various  stitches  and  model  patterns  used  in  such  needlework. 
While  many  American  samplers  contain  only  the  alphabet  and 
numerals,  with  added  moral  mottoes,  yet  others  display  such  sense  of 
artistic  feeling  and  tasteful  ornamentation  as  merit  attention. 

The  book  is  based  upon  some  twenty-five  hundred  descriptions  of 
samplers  w^hich  have  been  collected  by  the  Committee  and  its  friends 
during  the  last  five  years.  We  have  also  got  together  nearly  four  hun- 
dred pictures  of  samplers  that  we  felt  might  be  especially  interesting. 
In  addition,  many  other  samplers  have  been  seen.  The  Committee 
believes  that  every  book  on  needlework,  ancient  and  modern,  has  been 
searched  in  the  hope  of  finding  material.  Of  course,  there  are  many 
samplers  that  are  not  recorded  here,  for  until  one  begins  the  search, 
it  is  impossible  to  realize  how  busy  the  fingers  of  our  young  ances- 
tresses were.  We  do  feel,  however,  that  we  have  collected  enough  to 
have  a  good  basis  for  our  assertions. 

In  order  to  increase  the  value  of  this  monograph,  it  seemed  wise 
to  focus  attention  on  that  period  in  which  sampler  work  was  at  its  best, 
and  no  samplers  have  been  included  of  later  date  than  1830. 


l«?^v^-v 


a-5So-i^?^; 


"m. 


m^--^ 


^?1 


PLATE  II 

Mary  Hollixgsworth's  Sajipler.     Salem,  Mass.     Cir.  1665 
Owned  by  the  Essex  Institute 


PLATE  III 

Sarah  Lord's  Sajipler.     1668 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Thomas  Sinnirkson,  Jr. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  v 

Although  this  volume  comprises  the  work  of  many,  the  successful 
consummation  of  the  plan  is  due  to  the  administrative  ability,  enthu- 
siasm, and  ready  sympathy  of  Mrs.  Barrett  Wendell,  President  of  the 
Massachusetts  Society  of  Colonial  Dames. 

Margaret  Woodbridge  Cushing, 

For  the  Committee. 

Newburyport,  Massachusetts, 
December,  1920. 


Margaret  Woodbridge  Cushing 
Ethel  Stanwood  Bolton 
Georgianna  West  Perry 


"He  errs  who  thinks  those  hands  were  set 

All  spinster-like  and  cold 
Who  spelt  a  scarlet  alphabet, 

And  birds  of  blue  and  gold, 
And  made  immortal  garden  plots 
Of  daisies  and  forget-me-nots. 

"The  bodkins  wove  an  even  pace. 
Yet  these  are  lyrics  too, 
Breathing  of  spectral  lawn  and  lace, 

Old  ardors  to  renew; 
For  in  the  corners  love  would  keep 
His  fold  among  the  little  sheep." 

John  Drinkwater,  "Samplers.' 


CONTENTS 


Prefatory  Note 

List  of  Illustrations 

Seventeenth  Century  Samplers 

Register  of  Samplers,  1600-1700 

Eighteenth  Century  Samplers 

Register  of  Samplers,  1700-1799 

Nineteenth  Century  Samplers 

Register  of  Samplers,  1800-1830 

Sampler  Verse,  Containing  a  Letter  from  Barrett  Wendell,  Esq. 

An  Anthology  of  Sampler  Verse,  1610-1830 

Schools  and  Schoolmistresses 

A  List  of  Early  Schools     . 

Materials,  Designs,  Stitches 

Embroidered  Heraldry 

Register  of  Embroidered  Arms 

Index 


Page 

iii 

vii 

1 

9 

10 

29 

90 

121 

247 

255 

355 

382 

388 

399 

403 

409 


VI 


■■■'v.-. .  "     >.-:-r-"  v-X-ro-.Y  ST-z-.-.-^-^-- ~- ¥>  •-••••  •••  ^''  C^'' 


PLATE  IV 

Isabella  Ercy's  Sampler.     1675 
Occned  hji  Daniel  Penfon  Hitchner,  Esq. 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


Cover.    Sarah  Bancroft's  Sampler 

Frontispiece.    Loara  Standish's  Sampler 
(Colored) 

Plate  I.    Anne  Gower's  Sampler 

Plate  II.    Mary  Hollingsworth's  Sampler 

Plate  III.    Sarah  Lord's  Sampler 

Plate  IV.    Isabella  Ercy's  Sampler 

Plate  Y.    Elizabeth  Robert's  lace  sampler 

Plate  VI.    Elizabeth  Robert's  Sampler 
(Colored) 

Plate  VII.    Portrait  of  Elizabeth  Robert 
Plate  VIII.    Miles  Fletwod   Abigal  Fletwood 
Plate  IX.    Mary  Hudson's  Sampler 
Plate  X.    Grace  Toy's  Sampler 
Plate  XI.    Mary  Daintery's  Sampler 
Plate  XII.    Mary  or  Martha  Bulyn's  Sampler 
Plate  XIII.    Katherine  Holden's  Sampler 
Plate  XIV.    Hannah  Trecothick's  Sampler 
Plate  XV.    Mariah  Deavenport's  Sampler 

Mary  Parker's  Sampler 
Plate  XVI.    Ruth  Haskell's  Sampler 
Plate  XVII.    Mary  Ellis's  Sampler 
Plate  XVIII.    Elizabeth  Pecker's  Sampler 

Plate  XIX.    Dorothy  Lynde's  Sampler 
(Colored) 

Plate  XX.    Mary  Webb's  Sampler 

Plate  XXI.    Catherine  Van  Schaick's  Sampler 

Plate  XXII.    Sally  Rea's  Sampler 

Plate  XXIII.    Margaret  Calef's  Sampler 

Plate  XXIV.    Hannah  Johnson's  Sampler 

Plate  XXV.    Grace  Welsh's  Sampler 

Plate  XXVI.    Abigail  Mears's  Sampler 

Plate  XXVII.    Betsy  Adams's  Sampler 

Plate  XXVIII.   Sampler  by  an  Unknown  Girl 

Plate  XXIX.    Frances  Brenton's  Sampler 

Plate  XXX.    John  Mason's  Sampler 

Plate  XXXI.    Rocksalana  Willes's  Sampler 

Plate  XXXII.    Hannah  Janney's  Sampler 

Plate  XXXIII.    Ann  Buller's  Sampler 

Plate  XXXIV.    Margaret  Ramsay's  Sampler 

Plate  XXXV.    Sally  Munro's  Sampler 

Plate  XXXVI.    Jane  Humphreys'  Sampler 

Plate  XXXVII.    Mary  Clark's  Sampler 

Plate  XXXVIII.    Zebiah  Gore's  Sampler 

Plate  XXXIX.    Sally  Baldwin's  Sampler 

Plate  XL.    Loann  Smith's  Sampler 


Plate  XLI.    Ann  Macomber's  Sampler 
Plate  XLII.    Patty  Coggeshall's  Sampler 

(Colored) 
Plate  XLIII.    Lucy  Warner's  Sampler 
Plate  XLIV.    Mary  Traill's  Sampler 
Plate  XLV.    Eliza  Cozzens's  Sampler 
Plate  XLVI.    Lydia  Stocker's  Sampler 

(Colored) 
Plate  XLVII.    Susan  Lehman's  Sampler 
Plate  XLVIII.    Mary  Hamilton's  Sampler 
Plate  XLIX.    Clarissa  Emerson's  Sampler 

Plate  L.    Laura  Bowker's  Sampler 

(Colored) 
Plate  LI.    Lucy  D.  Stickney's  Sampler 
Plate  LI  I.    Elizabeth  Funk's  Sampler 
Plate  LIII.    Sophia  Catherine  Bier's  Sampler 
Plate  LIV.    Maria  Lamborn's  Sampler 
Plate  LV.    Content  Phillips's  Sampler 
Plate  LVI.    Sarah  Dole's  Sampler 
Plate  LVI  I.    Sarah  Yeakel's  Sampler 
Plate  LVIII.   Ann  Sophia  Beckwith's  Sampler 
Plate  LIX.    Nancy  Piatt's  Sampler 
Plate  LX.    Betty  Brierley's  Sampler 
Plate  LXI.    Faith  Walker's  Sampler 
Plate  LXI  I.    Sarah  F.  Sweet's  Sampler 
Plate  LXIII.     Picture  of  William  and  Mary 

College 

Sarah:  Donna:  Leonora:  Saunders 

Plate  LXIV.    Emily  Clark's  Sampler 

Plate  LXV.    Ann  Watson's  Sampler 

Plate  LXVI. 

Elizabeth  Jane  Hosmer's  Sampler 

Plate  LXVII.    Eliza  F.  Budd's  Sampler 

Plate  LXVI  1 1. 

Sophia  Stevens  Smith's  Sampler 

(Colored) 
Plate  LXIX.    Mary  Gill's  Sampler.    Lace  sam- 
pler by  an  Ll^nknown  Girl 
Plate  LXX.    Elizabeth  Ann  Goldin's  Sampler 
Plate  LXXI.    Frances  Wade's  Sampler 
Plate  LXXI  I.    Sarah  S.  Caldwell's  Sampler 
Plate  LXXIII.    Margaret  Moss's  Sampler 

(Colored) 
Plate  LXXIV.    Hannah  Loring's  Sampler 
Plate  LXXV.    Harriet  Jones's  Sampler 
Plate  LXXVI.    Lucy  P.  Wyman's  Sampler 
Plate  LXXVII.  Elizabeth  Mclntyre's  Sampler 


VII 


VIU 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


Plate  LXXVIII. 

Hannah  J.  Robinson's  Sampler 

Plate  LXXIX.    Louisa  Gauffreau's  Sampler 

Plate  LXXX. 

Mary  Ann  Fessenden  Vinton's  Sampler 

Plate  LXXXI.     Eliza  Pickets's  Sampler 

Plate  LXXXII.    Susan  H.  Munson's  Sampler 

Plate  LXXXIII.     Margaret  Kerlin's  Sampler 

Plate  LXXXIV.    Fanny  Rines's  Sampler 

Plate  LXXXV. 

Elizabeth  A.  Harwood's  Sampler 

Plate  LXXXVI.  The  Down  Family  Record 

Plate  LXXXVII.    Eliza  Crocker's  Sampler 

Plate  LXXXVIII.    Sally  Shattuck's  Sampler 

Plate  LXXXIX.    Nancy  Wright's  Sampler 

Plate  XC.    Nabby  Mason  Peele 

Plate  XCI.    Sally  Witt's  Sampler 

(Colored) 
Plate  XCI  I.    C.  Sanderson's  Sampler 
Plate  XCIII.    Martha  Heuling's  Sampler 
Plate  XCIV.    Susana  Cox's  Sampler 
Plate  XCV.    Lydia  Burroughs's  Sampler 
Plate  XCVI.    Julia  Knight's  Sampler 

Barberry  Eagle's  Sampler 

Plate  XCVII.    Ann  E.  Kelly's  Sampler 

Plate  XCVIII. 

Sarah  Catherine  Moffatt  Odiorne's  Sampler 

Plate  XCIX.    Nancy  Hall's  Sampler 
Plate  C.    Nancy  Winsor's  Sampler 

(Colored) 
Plate  CI.    Lydia  Church's  Sampler 
Plate  CII.    Hetty  Lees'  Sampler 


Plate  cm.    Caroline  Vaughan's  Sampler 
Plate  CIV.    Sally  Johnson's  Sampler 

(Colored) 
Plate  CV.    Elizabeth  Stevens's  Sampler 
Plate  CVI.    Sukey  Makepeace's  Sampler 
Plate  CVII.    Jane  Merritt's  Sampler 
Plate  CVIII.    Nancy  Baker's  Sampler 
Plate  CIX.    Mary  Russell's  Sampler 
Plate  ex.    Ann  Robins's  Sampler 
Plate  CXI.    Sarah  Howell's  Sampler 
Ann  Tatnall's  Sampler 

Plate  CXII.    Abigail  Pinniger's  Sampler 

Ann  Almy's  Sampler 
Plate  CXIII.    Appha  Woodman's  Sampler 
Plate  CXIV.    Tryphenia  Collins's  Sampler 
Plate  CXV.    Patty  Kendall  Sterling's  Sampler 
Plate  CXVI.    Julia  Boudinot's  Sampler 
Plate  CXVII.    "Indian  Pink" 
Plate  CXVI  1 1.    "Strawberries  and  Acorns" 
Plate  CXIX.    "Rose  and  Trefoil" 
Plate  CXX.    "Some  Sampler  Stitches" 
Plate  CXXI.     Hatchment  of  the  Hon.  George 

Boyd 
Plate  CXXII.  Hatchment  of  Governor  Thomas 

Fitch 
Plate   CXXIII.     Embroidered    Arms    of    the 

Gilbert  Family 
Plate  CXXIV.    The  Arms  of  E.  Davis 

(Colored) 
Plate  CXXV.    Hatchment  of  the  Ives  Family 
Plate  CXXVI.     Arms  of  the  Hon.  Harrison 

Gray 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


SEVENTEENTH  CENTURY  SAMPLERS 

THOSE  who  go  fishing  for  whales  in  the  ocean  of  the  past,  some- 
times catch  only  sprats.  Unfortunately,  this  is  the  result  of 
fishing  in  the  past  for  the  origin  of  the  sampler.  Not  only 
are  sprats  the  only  fish,  but  they  are  thin  and  very  few.  Just  when 
samplers  began  to  be  worked  no  one  now  knows,  for  aside  from  a  few 
rather  casual  remarks  in  literature,  we  have  nothing  to  tell  us. 

The  earliest  mention  of  a  sampler  so  far  found  is  in  1502,  when 
Elizabeth  of  York  paid  8d.  for  an  ell  of  linen  cloth  for  one.  Her 
account  book  shows  the  entry  on  July  10,  1502:  "an  for  an  elne  of 
lynnjTi  cloth  for  a  sampler  for  the  Queen  viii  d.  To  Thomas  Fische." 
John  Skelton,  the  poet,  at  about  this  same  time  in  Norfolk,  wrote, 
"The  Sampler  to  sowe  on,  the  lacis  to  embroid." 

In  1546,  Margaret  Thompson,  of  Freston-in-Holland,  Lincoln- 
shire, left  a  will,  in  which  she  says,  "I  gyve  to  Alys  Pynchebeck  my 
syster's  doughter  my  sawmpler  with  semes."  This  last  item  would 
seem  to  indicate  that  probably  the  Tudor  sampler,  of  which  we  have 
no  survival,  was  the  same  long  and  very  narrow  affair  that  the  seven- 
teenth century  shows.  The  loom  of  the  day  was  quite  narrow,  and 
this  accounts  for  the  width  of  the  sampler.  Thus  the  "semes"  may 
mean  that  several  pieces  were  joined  together,  or  perhaps,  as  one 
writer  suggests,  the  word  is  used  in  an  obsolete  and  transferred  mean- 
ing, and  shows  that  it  was  made  in  ordered  rows,  like  the  seventeenth 
century  sampler.  Much  fine  work  was  done  to  make  beautiful  the 
"open  seam,"  which  the  narrow  loom  rendered  necessary. 

Certainly  toward  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  sampler 
was  growing  in  popularity,  for  an  inventory  taken  in  the  fourth  year 
of  Edward  VI's  reign  shows : 

"Item xii  samplers 

"  Item one  sampler  of  Normandie  Canvas  wrought  with 

green  and  black  silk."* 

•Harleian  Manuscript  No.  U19. 


2  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

The  raison  d'etre  of  the  sampler  is  most  practical.  Needlework 
and  embroidery  were  practically  the  only  relaxation  of  most  women, 
and  almost  everything  was  embroidered.  In  the  seventeenth  century 
a  book  called  "Needles  Excellency"*  gives  a  list  of  things  for  which 
a  sampler  was  required.  They  include  "handkerchiefs,  table  cloathes 
for  parlours  or  for  halls,  sheets,  towels,  napkins,  pillow-beares."  A 
long  period  of  peace  had  brought  luxury  to  the  household  in  the  six- 
teenth century.  Napery  and  drapery  increased,  and  along  with  them 
the  craze  for  embroidery.  In  fact,  so  great  was  the  craze,  that  cloth- 
ing, household  linen,  and  everything  of  the  sort  fell  a  victim.  France 
had  the  same  tendency,  and  in  1586  Catherine  de  Medici  was  petitioned 
to  put  a  stop  to  it,  on  the  plea  that  "mills,  pastures,  woods  and  all  the 
revenues  are  wasted  on  embroideries,  insertions,  trimmings,  tassells, 
fringes,  hangings,  gimps,  needleworks,  small  chain  stitchings,  quilt- 
ings,  back  stitchings,  etc.,  new  diversities  of  which  are  invented  daily." 
The  need  for  the  sampler  lay  in  the  fact  that  there  were  few,  if  any, 
books  of  patterns.  Thus  the  sampler  was  the  pattern-book,  and  long 
or  short,  contained  the  designs  which  appealed  to  each  girl's  taste. 
So  we  can  imagine  that  each  girl,  as  she  gathered  together  her  linen 
for  filling  one  of  those  lovely  old  oak  dower-chests,  added  a  sampler 
to  take  with  her  on  her  new  adventure  in  life. 

There  have  been  many  surmises  as  to  just  how  these  patterns  grew 
up  in  England,  and  manj^  experts  favor  the  idea  that  most  of  them 
came  from  Italy  and  from  other  foreign  sources.  Certainly  one  did, 
for  an  Italian  towel  shows  the  same  design  as  that  on  Mary  Hudson's 
sampler.     (See  Plate  ix.) 

One  book  tells  us  of  "a  tradition  that  Catherine  of  Aragon  taught 
the  Bedfordshire  women  cut-work  or  reticella  made  of  linen,  an  art 
which  we  know  to  have  been  practised  in  Italy  and  Spain  at  the  time, 
and  which  the  early  evidences  of  old  English  samplers  prove  to  have 
been  made,  though  with  less  taste,  in  England."  f 

•"The  Needles  Excellency.  A  New  Booke  wherein  are  Divers  admirable  workes  wrought  with  the  needle, 
newly  invented  and  cut  in  Copper  for  the  pleasure  and  profit  of  the  industrious.  Printed  for  James  Boler  and 
are  to  be  sold  at  the  Syne  of  the  Marigold  in  Paules  Churchyard.  1632."  There  were  twelve  editions  before  1640, 
but  the  book  is  extremely  rare. 

t "  Buckinghamshire  and  Bedfordshire  Lace  in  Point  and  Pillow  Lace,"  by  A.  M.  S.    1899. 


, ..../•  ■■."■■■       'I 


'J^Ai.m^'J^'JQ\i^.m^:f^^ 


PLATE  V 

Elizabeth   Robert's  Sampler.     Civ.   1665 
Owned  by  Mixx  (leorijiaunn    Welles  Saiyjent 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  3 

Perhaps  our  ancestors  did  have  "less  taste,"  but  I  think  there  is 
no  question  that  needlework  on  the  older  English  samplers  is  most 
exquisite.  The  earliest  samplers  which  we  know  were,  as  has  been  said, 
very  long  and  narrow.  The  upper  portion  was  nearly  always  given 
to  elaborate  running  designs  in  color  of  conventionalized  roses,  tulips, 
strawberries,  trefoil,  "Indian  pink,"  the  "tree  of  life,"  and  geometric 
designs,  either  alone  or  in  combination.  Sometimes  human  figures 
were  inserted,  but  not  often,  the  famous  "boxers"  being  the  most 
frequent.  The  lower  half  was  often  filled  with  lovely  drawn-  or  cut- 
work  designs  in  white.  Occasionally  an  alphabet  appeared,  but  in  so 
subordinate  a  position  that  it  is  quite  negligible,  and  was  evidently 
included  merely  as  a  pattern  for  marking  linen.  So  the  sampler  was 
really  an  "Examplar,"  as  some  of  our  modern  American  specimens 
still  call  it.  Some  early  English  references  call  them  "samp-cloths" 
or  "samplettes." 

A  great  deal  of  stress  has  of  late  been  laid  upon  the  affiliation  of 
the  sampler  and  the  horn-book,  but  it  seems  as  if  the  horn-book,  if  it 
had  any  influence  upon  the  sampler  at  all,  was  distinctly  toward  its 
degeneration.  Certainly  the  seventeenth  century  sampler  shows  not 
the  slightest  influence  of  the  horn-book,  for  it  was  not  until  the  early 
eighteenth  century  that  the  dismal  sampler,  containing  merely  rows 
of  alphabet,  appeared  at  aU. 

But  to  return  to  the  Tudor  sampler,  which  lives  only  in  our 
imagination,  it  is  interesting  to  know  that  Sir  Philip  Sydney,  in  his 
"Arcadia,"  wrote: 

"O  love,  why  dost  thou  in  thy  beautiful  sampler  set  such  a  work  for  my  desire, 
to  set  out  which  is  impossible?" 

and  that  Shakespeare,  in  the  "Midsummer  Night's  Dream,"  makes 
Helena  exclaim : 

"We,  Hermia,  like  two  artificial  Gods, 
Have  with  our  needles  created  both  one  flower, 
Both  on  one  sampler,  sitting  on  one  cushion." 

Shakespeare  certainly  reflected  the  state  of  mind  of  the  children  of 
a  later  date,  who  were  doomed  by  stern  schoolmistresses  to  sew  on 
samplers,  when  he  says : 


4   .  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

"Fair  Philomela,  she  but  lost  her  tongue. 
And  in  a  tedious  sampler  sew'd  her  mind."  * 

(Titus  Andronicus) 

These  first  samplers  had  no  names  or  dates  upon  them,  for  prob- 
ably they  were  a  continuous  performance,  and  so  could  never  be  dated. 
The  early  ones  were  kept  on  a  roll  as  a  convenience,  for  one  English 
sampler  done  in  1664,  while  but  seven  inches  wide,  was  three  feet  long. 
The  old  samplers  were  always  on  linen,  and  were  not  done  by  children, 
but  by  girls  and  women,  for  very  practical  use.  The  earliest  appear 
to  be  entirely  of  lace  or  drawn-work.  Of  seventeenth  century  sam- 
plers, it  may  also  be  said  that  the  needlework  in  itself  was  more 
beautiful  and  the  design  more  intricate  and  definite.  One  English 
writer  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  oldest  were  the  best  and  the  young- 
est the  worst.    That  would  not  be  entirely  true  of  American  samplers. 

As  the  sampler  grew  out  of  the  lack  of  books  on  embroidery, 
it  is  interesting  to  know  that  there  was  a  progressive  soul,  one 
Peter  Quentel,  who  printed  a  book  of  patterns  as  early  as  1527.  No 
copy  exists,  so  far  as  is  known;  but  in  1701  a  similar  book  "gives 
borders  and  corner  pieces,  some  few  of  which,  at  least,  are  derived  from 
those  included  in  the  book  of  patterns  for  various  kinds  of  needlework 
published  by  Peter  Quentel."  The  ubiquitous  Germans  also  printed 
a  book  in  Nuremberg,  in  1748. 

There  has  been  an  amusing  controversy  between  English  and 
American  collectors  as  to  which  nation  owned  the  oldest  dated  sampler. 
These  many  years  we  have  held  the  palm,  for  Anne  Gower's  sampler 
is  in  the  Essex  Institute  in  Salem,  Massachusetts.  Now  Anne  Gower 
became  the  wife  of  Governor  Endecott  before  1628;  and  while  it  was 
embroidered,  of  course,  in  England,  the  sampler  itself  was  here,  and 
we  claimed  it  as  American.  The  English  connoisseurs  date  it  at 
about  1610.  There  is  one  other  American  claimant  earlier  than 
the  earliest  English  one  of  1643;  this  is  Loara  Standish's,  now  in 
Pilgrim  Hall  at  Plymouth.  Loara  Standish,  the  daughter  of  Captain 
Myles  Standish,  was  born  in  1623  and  died  before  1656.  It  is  prob- 
able that  the  sampler  was  made  before  she  was  twenty,  so  that  it  was 

*  This  verse  is  on  the  sampler  of  Anne  Hathaway,  1797. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  5 

done  before  or  at  nearly  the  same  time  as  the  punto  in  aria  sampler 
of  Elizabeth  Hinde,  in  1643.  This  latter  sampler  would  be  more 
convincing  if  the  name  and  date  were  not  on  finer  linen  sewed  to  the 
bottom.  ^  :^  • 

Anne  Gower's  sampler  was,  of  course,  done  in  England,  and  is  a 
good  specimen  of  drawn-work,  filet,  and  the  flat  white-stitch  used 
on  damask.  So  it  is  to  Loara  Standish's  sampler  that  we  must  turn 
for  our  earliest  American-made  example.  It  is  in  the  regular  English 
style,  done  in  blues  and  browns,  soft  now  with  time.  The  designs  are 
intricate  ai\d  beautifully  done.  Our  Loara,  besides  making  the  first 
American  sampler,  worked  upon  it  the  first  aphorism  which  appears 
upon  any  sampler.  She  began,  poor  Pilgrim  maid,  that  long  line  of 
pious  verse  that  decorates,  even  unto  the  end,  both  English  and 
American  samplers. 

"Lord  Guide  my  Heart  that  I  may  do  Thy  Will 
And  fill  my  heart  with  such  convenient  skill 
As  wiU  conduce  to  Virtue  void  of  Shame 
And  I  will  give  the  Glory  to  Thy  Name." 

She  worked  upon  her  sampler,  also,  "Loara  Standish  is  my  name," 
and  so  was  the  forerunner  of  that  long  series  of  girls  who  so  indicated 
the  work  of  their  hands.  Evidently  she  did  not  know  the  whole  verse 
as  it  later  came  into  use. 

New  England  was  the  home  of  all  but  one  of  the  seventeenth 
century  samplers  that  have  so  far  been  reported.  The  next  oldest 
after  Loara  Standish's  was  made  by  Mary  Hollingsworth,  of  Salem. 
She  was  born  in  1650  and  married,  in  1675,  Phillip  English,  a  Salem 
merchant.  Her  sampler,  probably  made  about  1665,  is  typical  of 
the  time,  but  bears  an  alphabet  and  her  name.  Mary  Hollingsworth 
English  was  accused  of  witchcraft  in  1692,  but  escaped  with  her  life 
to  New  York.  She  was  so  overcome  by  the  shock  of  the  accusation 
that  she  died  soon  after  her  escape. 

At  about  the  same  time  another  New  England  maid,  Sarah  Lord, 
made  a  lovely  sampler  in  1668.  It  is  of  extremely  fine  needlework, 
and  shows  a  tendency,  which  was  apparently  developing  in  America, 
toward  shorter  and  broader  samplers.     The  workmanship  had  not 


6   .  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

degenerated  as  yet,  nor  had  the  patterns,  but  there  are  fewer  of  them. 
Sarah  Lord  made  one  pattern  upon  her  sampler  in  which  the  petals 
of  the  roses  are  raised  and  free  from  the  groundwork,  done  in  button- 
hole-stitch. Some  English  samplers  of  the  same  time  show  this  form 
of  work,  in  the  raised  draperies  of  ladies'  dresses  and  men's  coats. 

Only  two  other  American  seventeenth  century  samplers  have  been 
reported,  and  both,  perhaps,  may  be  questioned.  The  first,  done  in 
1675  by  Isabella  Ercy,  is  very  attractive,  though  it  shows  the  tend- 
ency toward  less  interesting  and  less  elaborate  design.  It  bears  the 
inscription : 

"WORKE.    ANd.    LETTERd.    1675 
WOULD.    HAVE.    MENDED-    BOTH- 
MY.    SKILL.    HAD.    BEN.    BETTER.    I. 
ROUGHT.    THE.    SAME.    BUT.    IF. 
WITH.    NEDEL.    AND-    SCILK.    I.    W. 
ISABELLA    ERCY    IS    MY   NAME." 

The  owner  of  this  sampler  frankly  acknowledges  that  he  does  not 
know  who  Isabella  Ercy  was,  and  so  we  cannot  be  sure  that  it  is  really 
American  after  all. 

The  other  sampler  bears  no  name,  but  has  the  date  1698.  It  is 
long  and  narrow  and  is  done  in  crewel  in  brilliant  hues,  which  is  not 
an  especially  common  medium  for  either  English  or  American  sam- 
plers of  the  period. 

It  is  impossible  to  call  this  chapter  complete  without  mentioning 
three  samplers  which  were,  of  course,  made  in  England,  but  which 
have  been  in  this  country  for  over  two  hundred  years.  About  1650, 
Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Nicholas  Roberts,  of  London,  was  born  in 
England.  As  a  young  girl,  about  to  be  married  to  a  Mr.  Breeden,  she 
embroidered  two  samplers ;  one  contains  designs  in  color,  and  one  is  of 
punto  tagliato.  The  lace  one  is  signed  "Elizabeth  Robert,"  and  the 
other  has  her  initials  "E  R"  many  times  repeated.  She  was  a  widow 
in  1672,  when  she  married  Colonel  Samuel  Shrimpton,  a  wealthy  mer- 
chant, and  owner  of  Noddle's  Island  in  Boston  Harbor.  When  she 
came  to  Boston  she  brought  her  samplers  with  her,  as  all  thrifty  house- 
wives should.    Later,  a  wealthy  widow,  she  married  Simeon  Stoddard, 


>s,:>j,^;^-S5ps*^^ 


PLATE  VI 

Elizabeth  Robert's  Sampler.     Cir.  1665 
Ozcned  by  Miss  GeonjUinnu   Welles  Saryent 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  7 

another  Boston  merchant,  and  she  lived  in  Boston  until  her  death  in 
1713.  The  chief  interest  that  these  two  samplers  have  is  this:  that 
they  are  the  earliest  samplers,  either  in  England  or  America,  which 
were  worked  by  some  one  whose  portrait  we  also  have.  The  portrait 
hangs  in  the  rooms  of  the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  and  for 
the  benefit  of  the  curious  we  will  say  that  the  eyes  and  hair  are  light 
brown,  and  the  dress  black  and  white. 

The  third  sampler,  which  was  brought  by  the  Quincys  to  New 
England  before  1700,  is  signed: 

"Miles  Fletwood,  Abigail  Fletwood  1654. 
In  prosperity  friends  will  be  plenty,  but 
In  adversity  not  one  in  twenty." 

Mrs.  Henry  Quincy,  who  was  Mary  Salter  and  herself  an  expert 
needlewoman,  gave  this  sampler  to  her  daughter,  with  the  remark 
that  it  was  "an  old  family  thing."  Tradition  says  that  a  General 
Charles  Fleetwood,  of  Cromwell's  army,  had  a  brother  JNIiles  who 
retained  his  allegiance  to  the  King.  His  experience  in  those  troublous 
times  perhaps  inspired  the  verse,  if  these  two  jNIiles's  are  the  same  man. 
The  connection  with  the  Quincys  is  not  clear,  but  it  is  true  that  at  this 
time  the  Quincys  lived  in  Thorpe-Achurch  and  the  Fleetwoods  in 
AldAvinckle,  in  Northamptonshire,  not  thirteen  miles  apart.  The 
sampler  has  the  figures  of  three  ladies  in  flowing  skirts  at  the  top. 
Over  the  central  one  are  the  initials  "S.  Q."  The  others  are  labeled, 
respectively,  "A"  and  "E."  The  former  owner  thinks  that  these 
letters,  added  in  steel  beads,  are  a  later  addition  when  the  sampler 
passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Quincys.  The  ladies  themselves,  as  you 
see  them  depicted  in  the  sampler,  are  Quincy  ladies.  The  heads  are 
stuffed  and  the  dresses  sewed  on.  Underneath  the  heads  and  the 
dresses  are  the  heads  of  the  Fleetwood  ladies,  and  their  much  more 
archaic  dresses.  The  back  of  the  sampler  discloses  the  substitution. 
Below  the  three  ladies  are  a  man  and  a  woman  on  either  side  of  an 
unrestful  lion  seated  beneath  a  tree.  The  rest  of  the  sampler  is  taken 
up  with  repeating  designs  of  more  or  less  elaborateness,  and  is  unusual 
and  lovely. 


8 


AJNIERICAN  SAMPLERS 


So  the  seventeenth  century  ended,  showing  several  distinct  tenden- 
cies in  sampler  art. 

Samplers  in  America  were  broadening  and  shortening,  they  were 
becoming  distinctly  less  interesting,  and  the  elaborate  embroidery  of 
household  linen  had  vanished  from  the  land.  Folk  were  too  busy 
taming  the  wilderness  to  attach  much  importance  to  the  frills  and 
furbelows,  and  one  can  feel  this  distinctly  as  one  realizes  how  very 
few  samplers  our  American  girls  did  in  the  seventeenth  century.  One 
may  say  that  the  sampler  of  that  type  became  extinct,  for  while  there 
were  echoes  of  a  design  here  and  there  in  the  next  century,  such  as  that 
of  Grace  Tay,  it  was  a  very  feeble  echo,  and  is  more  like  the  haunting 
of  a  ghost  than  anything  else.  The  reason  for  the  sampler  had  gone, 
and  the  revival  w^as  on  different  lines  and  for  a  different  purpose. 
As  one  caustic  writer  says,  "When  meaning  is  gone,  art  and  beauty 
vanish  too."  While  they  did  vanish  for  a  time,  a  purpose  later  crept 
in  which  gave  our  American  samplers  some  art  and  much  quaintness. 

Ethel  Stanwood  Bolton. 


Maey  Leavitt.     1718 
Owned  hy  Miss  A .  B.  Willson 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  9 


SAMPLERS— 1600-1700 

Eecy,  Isabella.  1676.  8"  x  16".  Line,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-borders  of  conventional- 
ized roses,  carnations,  urns,  birds,  animals,  etc.    Verse  128  (var.).    Illustrated. 

Daniel  Penton  Hitchner,  Esq. 

GowEB,  Anne.  [Cir.  1610.]  6"  x  16".  Alphabet.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  various  kinds  of  lace 
stitches.    Worked  in  bands  across  sampler.    Illustrated.  Essex  Institute,  Salem 

HoLLiNGSwoETH,  Maey.  [Cir.  1665.]  7"  x  25".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  The  patterns  in  the 
cross-borders  are  those  used  for  shawl  borders  and  the  squares  at  the  top  those  used  for 
the  corners.    Illustrated.  Essex  Institute 

Hudson,  Mary.  1700.  8  yrs.  7"  x  29".  Eyelet,  outline,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross- 
borders  of  conventional  leaves  and  rosebuds,  also  Italian  designs.    Illustrated. 

Miss  Sarah  Rebecca  Nicholson 

Lord,  Sarah.  1668.  9f"  x  17|".  Eyelet,  satin,  buttonhole,  chain,  outline,  and  cross-stitch. 
Wide  bands  of  elaborate  needlework  and  embroidery,  with  geometrical  and  floral  designs. 
In  band  across  center  the  flowers  and  figures  are  raised  from  linen  and  attached  only  at 
center  of  figure.    Illustrated.  Mrs.  Thomas  Sinnickson,  Jr. 

Standish,  Loara.  [Cir.  1636.]  Cross-borders  like  the  others  of  this  period.  Verses  128  (1st 
line),  338.    Illustrated  in  color.  Pilgrim  Hall,  Plymouth 

Unknown.  1698.  8J"  x  33".  1  alphabet.  Buttonhole,  eyelet,  flat,  and  cross-stitch,  also  hem- 
stitching.   Long  series  of  conventional  flowers  in  brilliant  crewel.    Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 


EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  SAMPLERS 

HISTORY  would  be  so  much  more  comfortable  for  those  who 
indulge  in  writing  it  if  its  terminations  were  more  abrupt, 
and  if  its  characters  had  a  less  ghost-like  manner  of  melting 
into  space — and  lo!  the  place  that  knew  them  knows  them  no  more. 
So  it  would  be  much  more  comfortable,  in  considering  samplers,  to  say 
that  when  we  meet  a  new  century  we  meet  a  new  style  of  sampler; 
but  the  truth  is  that  it  took  about  twenty  years  after  the  new  century 
came  in  before  the  English  sampler  types  became  sufficiently  ghostly 
to  ignore  in  favor  of  the  new  and  truly  American  development. 

The  maiden  to  be  married,  on  her  outlying  farm,  in  her  frontier 
town,  now  happily  freed  from  Indian  terror,  had  no  use  for  embroid- 
ery as  an  accessory  for  either  her  clothes  or  her  linen ;  she  was  thankful 
for  either  unadorned.  Life  in  the  towns,  too,  was  hard  and  poor  after 
the  Indian  wars  had  taken  their  toll  of  the  Colonies'  wealth.  Even  so, 
we  have  one  beautiful  specimen  of  the  old  English  style  which  was 
done  by  Grace  Tay,  or  Toy  as  she  calls  herself.  She  was  born  in 
Woburn,  Massachusetts,  May  18,  1704;  married,  in  1724,  Benjamin 
Walker,  and  went  with  him  to  Andover  to  live.  It  is  a  beautiful 
example  of  colored  and  white  work,  a  yard  long;  the  looms  were 
capable  of  making  quite  wide  linen  before  this  sampler  was  made, 
for  the  selvage  is  at  the  top  and  bottom.     (See  Plate  x.) 

Having  laid  this  last  ghost,  we  can  turn  to  other  samplers  made 
during  the  same  years  that  Grace  Toy  wrought,  and  we  see  the  begin- 
nings of  the  essentially  American  sampler.  Let  us  look  first  at  the 
English  sampler,  which  also  changed  at  this  same  period,  but  in  a 
different  way.  The  English  sampler  clung  much  longer  than  did  the 
American  to  the  form  of  the  seventeenth  century.  By  the  middle  of 
the  eighteenth  century,  by  gradual  stages,  it  had  become  square  and 
had  acquired  a  border.  It  soon  had  verses,  alphabets,  and  numerals ; 
and  then,  toward  the  end  of  the  century,  more  and  more  tended  toward 

10 


PLATE  VII 

Elizabeth  Robert 
Owned  bi/  the.  Massachusetts  Historical  Society 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  11 

a  mass  of  unrelated  designs ;  so  that  in  the  end  it  looked  more  like  a 
sale-sheet  of  a  modern  vender  of  cross-stitch  designs  than  anything 
else. 

We  may  consider  that  we  in  America  were  more  fortunate,  for 
while  many  of  the  samplers  contain  little  but  alphabets,  numbers,  and 
verses,  separated  by  rows  of  extremely  debased  patterns,  yet  as  a  rule 
they  had  form  and  coherence  of  design,  which  the  English  sampler 
lacks. 

In  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  as  in  the  entire  seven- 
teenth, New  England  furnishes  by  far  the  largest  number  of  samplers, 
followed  by  Long  Island,  New  Jersey,  and  Pennsylvania.  It  is,  per- 
haps, inevitable  that,  as  the  material  has  been  collected  from  Boston 
as  a  center,  New  England  should  have  been  more  easily  reached  and 
more  prolifically  represented  than  are  other  parts  of  the  coast. 

The  girls  of  most  of  the  great  nations  of  Europe  worked  sam- 
plers, quite  characteristic  and  differing  in  their  basic  essentials.  The 
Spaniards  brought  the  art  to  Mexico,  but  neither  the  early  Dutch  nor 
the  early  Germans  seem  to  have  brought  their  particular  form  to  this 
country.  In  the  late  eighteenth  and  early  nineteenth  centuries  in 
certain  localities — such  as  parts  of  Pennsylvania — a  certain  Dutch 
or  German  influence  can  be  seen,  but  it  is  quite  rare ;  so  we  are  really 
left  with  a  very  clear-cut  result.  We  have  first  a  century  of  imitation 
of  the  old  English  model,  good  but  gradually  degenerating,  followed 
by  a  very  distinct  type  of  American  sampler.  It  is  the  development  of 
this  second  type  with  which  we  now  have  to  do.  It  is  inevitable,  as  one 
considers  the  schools  of  this  century,  to  feel  that  the  samplers,  like  the 
schools,  fall  into  two  classes.  First  came  the  Dame  School,  where 
the  very  young  were  taught,  and  where  the  samplers  done  by  these 
small  hands  were  very  simple  things  indeed.  And  so  we  have  the 
commonest  form  of  sampler,  that  which  contains  merely  alphabets 
and  numbers.  Not  much  from  an  artistic  point  of  view,  we  shall  all 
agree,  but  very  much  as  an  indication  that  our  ancestresses  got  a 
little  learning,  meager  though  it  was.  This  sampler  must  have  been 
a  wonderful  assistance  in  driving  home  to  the  weary,  childish  brain 


12    .  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

the  letter  learned  from  her  horn-book  primer.  And  so  we  have  poor 
little  ]Mary  Smith,  in  her  sixth  year,  in  1714,  working  a  sunple  form 
of  the  long  sampler,  with  one  large  and  one  small  alphabet.  It  was 
done  on  fine  linen,  and  contained  that  most  frequent  of  all  verses, 
"Mary  Smith  is  my  name  and  with  my  nedel  I  wroght  the  same." 
She  is  not,  by  any  manner  of  means,  the  only  child  of  five  who  worked 
a  sampler  at  this  time. 

The  other  form,  done  by  the  older  girl  at  her  finishing  school, 
was,  as  a  rule,  a  more  elaborate  object.  Quite  early  in  the  century, 
originality  began  to  be  shown.  Take,  for  instance,  Mary  Leavitt's 
sampler,  done  in  1718.  Having  accomplished  the  stupid  task  of  em- 
broidering four  sets  of  alphabets  separated  by  the  simplest  of  cross- 
borders,  she  then,  at  the  bottom,  made  a  nice  green  hill,  with  one  fair 
plant  upon  it,  and  "Ashur"  and  "Elisha"  in  long-tailed  coats,  white 
stockings,  and  black  shoes,  dancing  and  playing  pipes  thereon.  ( See 
tailpiece,  page  8.)  Mary  Leavitt  was  a  Salem,  Massachusetts,  girl; 
and  that  same  year  Eunice  Bowditch,  another  Salem  girl,  embroidered 
a  sampler,  but  she  did  not  have  Mary's  originalitJ^ 

By  1721  we  may  feel  that  the  real  American  sampler  is  with  us, 
for  in  that  year  Mary  Daintery,  aged  eight,  embroidered  a  sampler 
broader  than  it  was  long,  and  put  a  border  all  around  it.  This  is  the 
first  example  of  a  border  as  a  frame  which  has  come  to  our  notice  on 
an  authentic  American  sampler,  though  of  course  there  may  be  earlier 
cases.  In  the  upper  center  stands  the  figure  of  Christ,  and  all  around 
and  beneath  is  "PUBLIUS  LEXTULUS  his  Letter  to  the  Senate 
OF  Rome  Concerning  JeSUS  ChrlST  (&c.)."  (See  Plate  xi.) 
This  fascinating  sampler  is  o\Mied  on  Long  Island,  but  came  from  a 
farmhouse  near  New  Haven,  Connecticut.  Until  1730,  with  this  one 
exception,  the  samplers  are,  as  a  rule,  alphabets  separated  by  very 
simple  cross-borders,  with  little  or  no  design.  A  few  had  framing 
borders.  The  childish  hands  were  not  able  to  make  the  lovely,  compli- 
cated "Indian  pink,"  the  rose,  and  "Tree  of  life"  that  the  older  girls 
of  a  previous  century  had  done  so  beautifully.  So  we  have  simple 
strawberry,  acorn,  and  Greek  frets,  varied  occasionally  with  a  vine 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  13 

made  free-hand.  One  small  girl,  in  1724,  Mary  Frye,  made  a  cross- 
border  of  hearts,  and  her  biographer  tells  of  her  that  "she  was  an 
orphan  from  infancy,  but  an  heiress  and  a  belle,  if  a  devout  Quaker 
maiden  can  be  called  a  belle.  When  young  Samuel  Willis  fell  in  love 
with  her,  he  found  he  must  win  her  from  many  competitors.  But  he 
had  this  in  his  favor,  she  was  his  father's  ward  and  was  dwelling  under 
his  father's  roof." 

In  1730,  Pennsylvania  contributes  a  wonderful  sampler;  it  is  only 
saved  from  ostracism  as  a  needlework  picture  by  the  fact  that  Mary 
or  Martha  Bulyn  signed  and  dated  it.  Thus  early  in  the  century 
does  the  decision  as  to  what  a  sampler  is  and  what  is  a  needlework 
picture  have  to  be  made.  The  needlework  picture  of  the  period,  like 
many  that  preceded  it,  was  done  all  over  the  linen  canvas  in  either 
petit-point,  cross-stitch,  or,  occasionally,  tent-stitch.  This  form  of 
needlework  had  been  done  in  England  since  the  days  of  the  Conqueror. 
Our  ancestors,  lacking  pictures  and  feeling  the  need  for  some  form 
of  wall  decoration,  used  the  needlework  pictures  and  samplers  in  that 
way.  The  story  has  come  down  to  us  of  one  little  girl  who  left  out 
her  middle  name  when  she  worked  her  sampler.  She  put  the  initial 
in  up  above,  but  her  parents  were  so  annoyed  at  the  omission  that  as  a 
punishment  they  refused  to  frame  her  sampler.  Poor  mite!  she  may 
have  hated  that  middle  name  as  many  of  us  hate  ours  to  this  day. 

To  return  to  our  muttons,  an  arbitrary  ruling  was  felt  to  be 
necessary  to  distinguish  between  these  two  forms,  and  so  all  needle- 
work signed  and  dated  by  the  maker  has  been  accepted  as  a  sampler. 
Thus  we  have  had  to  eliminate  much  that  was  lovely  and  interesting. 
Mary  Bulyn's  sampler  is  of  a  shepherdess  beneath  a  tree,  surrounded 
by  her  flocks  and  dogs.  The  perspective  is  what  one  expects  on  a 
sampler  of  any  age ;  the  flowers  are  much  bigger  than  the  sheep,  and 
the  birds  that  roost  upon  the  tree  inevitably,  in  any  other  world,  would 
tear  it  limb  from  limb,  so  large  and  fat  are  they.  But  it  is  most  charm- 
ing. (See  Plate  xii.)  Just  at  this  same  time,  Pennsylvania  gave 
us  another  form  of  sampler.  Two  lines  of  verse  and  then  a  rather 
elaborate  cross-border,  in  some  cases  returning  to  seventeenth  century 


14  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

design ;  then  two  more  lines  and  another  border,  and  so  on,  the  whole 
framed  in  a  simple  border  or  not,  as  the  case  might  be.  ( See  Plate  xiii, 
Sarah  Howell,  Plate  cxi,  and  Abigail  Pinniger,  Plate  cxii.)  This  pre- 
cise form  appears  but  once  after  1735,  though  the  alternation  of  verse 
and  cross-borders  in  other  mixtures  does  appear  spasmodically.  The 
exception  is  Ann  Tatnal's  sampler,  done  in  Delaware  in  1785;  and  it 
is  so  like  the  Pennsylvania  ones,  both  in  form  and  detail,  as  to  make 
us  suspect  that  she  copied  an  early  one.  Even  from  the  beginning, 
when  Loara  Standish  put  her  short  verse  upon  her  sampler,  pious 
verse  was  always  an  adjunct.  Verse  was  not  inevitable;  sometimes 
there  were  prose  quotations  of  a  religious  nature,  often  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  the  Creed,  or  a  metrical  version  of  the  Ten  Commandments. 
The  Lord's  Prayer  and  the  Creed  were  most  frequently  done  in  a  form 
to  reproduce  the  tablets  to  be  seen,  during  the  eighteenth  century,  in 
the  east  end  of  English  and  American  Episcopal  churches.  Hannah 
Trecothick,  of  Boston,  did  one  such  in  1738,  and  she  had  many 
followers.    (See  Plate  xiv.) 

About  this  time  some  school,  evidently  near  Boston,  conceived 
the  idea  of  using  Adam  and  Eve  and  the  apple  as  a  subject  for  the 
religious  enlightenment  of  its  pupils.  Two  samplers,  done  in  1741, 
and  one  in  1753,  are  practically  identical,  design  for  design.  The 
apple  trees  are  laden  with  fruit  of  such  a  size  as  to  make  the  modern 
farmer  green  with  envy.  Adam  is  accompanied  by  a  goose  and  Eve 
by  a  rabbit.  Let  us  hope  that  there  was  no  irony  in  the  tender  minds 
of  those  whose  fingers  wrought  so  well.  And  each  of  the  six  figures 
presses  one  hand  upon  man's  dearest  spot,  as  if  already  each  felt  the 
result  of  the  coming  indigestible  meal.  The  serpent — he  looks  much 
more  like  a  fat  angle  worm — embraces  the  tree  with  one  or  more  coils, 
tempting  our  universal  mother.  The  fig  leaves  are  large  and  very 
modest.  In  1745,  we  find  another  version  of  the  story,  for  Adam  and 
Eve  face  us ;  and  Adam  has  one  of  those  lovely  beards,  now  so  little 
seen,  running  under  the  chin  and  up  in  front  of  the  ears,  which  most 
Irish  laborers  of  our  earlv  childhood  fancied.  Eve  has  an  enormous 
quantity  of  hair,  and  the  serpent  has  his  eye  on  all  comers.     He  is 


f 


^ 


^:^  %::^  r"-'-      ■    ^      l^  .. 


:  !..'/-*  i 


-   <  ■     I  .'      <  --  - 


.  **^ 


':B^^iM^^^^-^j' 


''^'"^  li  '^  '<3l  d'M  '^  a'  cs'  W  *■■«"(' 


PLATE   \III 


Mir.ES  P'r.ETW'oD    Abigai.   Fletwood.     1()54- 
Owned  by  ^[rs.  Michael  Foster 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  15 

just  as  short  and  fat  as  his  predecessors.  Thereafter,  Adam  and  Eve 
appear  quite  often,  but  later  times  were  far  more  modest  and  less  true 
to  history  than  were  our  mid-eighteenth  century  grandmothers.  ( See 
Plates  XV  and  xvi. ) 

One  other  sampler  of  the  forties  is  unique.  Mary  Ellis,  of  Milton, 
Massachusetts,  inside  a  border  made  a  hundred  diamonds,  and  on 
the  diamonds  embroidered  the  multiplication  table.  Only  a  few  of  the 
figures  are  still  visible.  Of  course  she  made  such  a  sampler  at  school, 
for  no  one  but  a  schoolmarm  would  condemn  any  small  girl  to  such 
a  task  as  making  a  hundred  diamonds  all  alike  for  such  a  prosaic 
result.  Perhaps  Mary  wasn't  good  at  arithmetic  and  needed  severe 
discipline.  (See  Plate  xvii.)  At  this  time,  too,  we  first  find  the  two 
spies  returning  from  Palestine,  bearing  between  them  the  grapes  of 
Eschol.  Needless  to  say  that  none  of  our  sampler  artists  in  any  way 
scamped  the  bunch,  which  was  usually  carried  between  the  two  stagger- 
ing men  upon  a  pole. 

About  1750,  the  sampler  becomes  a  much  freer  and  more  original 
piece  of  work  than  was  true  of  the  first  half  of  the  century.  The 
"period  of  gloom,"  as  so  many  writers  designate  the  first  fifty  years, 
was  over.  The  wilderness,  so  far  as  our  original  thirteen  states  were 
concerned,  was  pretty  well  conquered,  and  prosperous  towns  had 
taken  the  place  of  struggling  and  toiling  settlements.  Once  again 
the  amenities  of  life  could  be  considered,  and  once  again  the  children 
had  some  leisure  to  cultivate  them.  The  result  is  an  increasing  variety 
of  design.  In  fact,  if  we  look  at  Elizabeth  Pecker's  sampler,  made 
at  the  age  of  fifteen  in  1750,  we  may  realize  that  the  sampler  artist  at 
this  time  went  back  to  nature  for  her  models — more  or  less.  Two  trees 
stand  on  hillocks  on  either  side,  with  birds  both  roosting  and  flying. 
Between  stands  a  mammoth  basket  of  flowers.  Deer,  dogs,  and  enor- 
mous fowl  disport  themselves  on  the  greensward  for  the  edification 
of  a  damsel  in  the  lower  left-hand  corner.  She  is  dressed,  not  in  em- 
broidery, but  in  a  lovely  brocaded  skirt,  appliqued  upon  the  canvas, 
and  she  has  a  lock  of  real  red-gray  hair  upon  her  head.  ( See  Plate 
xviii.)     The  truth  is  that  we  had  so  few  models  that  we  were  forced  to 


16  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

try  to  depict  the  scenes  around  us.  We  began  with  animals  and  trees, 
and  later  progressed  to  more  complicated  scenes.  Western  Pennsyl- 
vania,* in  1755,  contributes  a  sampler  with  verses  and  a  tapestry  design 
in  diamond  shapes;  while  the  next  year  conservative  Massachusetts, 
under  cross-borders  of  the  older  style,  gives  us  an  orchard  scenef  with 
an  apple  tree,  two  deer,  two  rabbits,  two  bumblebees,  and  two  eagles. 
"The  animals  walked  in  two  by  two"  upon  her  sampler.  The  chief 
interest,  however,  lies  in  the  fact  that  this  is  the  first  time  that  eagles, 
later  symbolic  of  the  country,  appear.  The  same  j^ear  Sarah  Afflick, 
whom  we  suspect  of  Pennsylvania  lineage,  put  three  open  baskets  at 
the  bottom  of  her  sampler,  and  therein  vines  of  an  infinite  variety 
of  leaves  upon  the  same  parent  stems;  while  tulips,  pinks,  roses, 
peonies,  and  flowers  only  conceived  by  the  imaginative  mind  of  seven 
adorn  the  vines  also.  And  while  we  laugh,  we  know  that  it  is  very 
lovely  as  a  piece  of  design,  harmonious  in  color,  and  covering  the  space 
most  interestingly.  Really  it  is  a  sampler  of  Oriental  design  tinged 
with  American  feeling,  and  is  unique  in  its  appeal. 

It  would  be  unfair  to  leave  this  period  without  mentioning 
Dorothy  LjTide's  sampler,  now  forever  on  exhibition  at  the  Old  South 
Church  on  Washington  Street,  Boston.  Most  of  it  is  beautifully 
worked  petit-point,  with  just  enough  embroidery  in  other  stitches  to 
give  it  the  needed  variety.  Overhead  is  a  very  startled-looking  sun, 
flanked  on  either  side  by  a  cherub.  Below,  on  either  side  of  the  square 
containing  the  lettering  and  verse,  stand  two  figures  upon  pedestals. 
The  left-hand  one  carries  a  book,  and  some  one  has  carefully  cut  out 
the  head.  Below  is  a  rural  scene ;  a  shepherdess  and  crook,  a  bound- 
ing, spotted  black  dog,  and  two  meek  sheep  with  huge  black  eyes. 
The  coloring  is  lovely,  and  the  illustration  gives  but  a  poor  idea  of 
its  beauty.     ( See  Plate  xix. ) 

When  once  you  have  let  originality  run  riot,  you  cease  to  have 
conventionality,  and  it  becomes  increasingly  hard  to  say  that  any 
sampler  belongs  to  any  period,  because  it  may  be  a  survival  of  an  older 
period,  copied  by  a  girl  in  an  isolated  town  where  new  models  were 

•Margaret  Simpson, 
t  Sarah  Toppan. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  17 

hard  to  come  at.  Perhaps  that  is  the  secret  of  the  charm  of  samplers, 
that  they  were  distinctly  the  expression  of  the  mind  of  the  girl  or  of 
her  mother  or  her  teacher,  and  so  they  are  pretty  nearly  as  varied 
as  the  mind  of  man.  Even  among  those  which  have  alphabets  alone, 
there  are  seldom  two  alike,  because  the  form  varies  and  so  does  the 
color.  Probably  it  is  lucky  for  us  that  many  years  separate  us  from 
the  new  and  freshly  done  sampler.  Home-dyed  colors  were,  as  a  rule, 
quite  soft  and  lovely,  and  the  combinations  were  almost  always  felici- 
tous and  according  to  our  taste — if  it  is  still  uncorrupted  by  futurist 
art.  It  is,  perhaps,  cruel  to  say  it  of  the  Shakers,  but  it  seems  as  if 
they  alone  had  held  over  from  an  earlier  century  their  delight  in 
crude  and  clashing  colors,  such  as  our  ancestresses  used  in  their  youth 
and  inexperience.  These  distressing  mixtures  time  and  the  sun  have 
softened  and  blended  into  an  harmonious  whole. 

And  so,  having  turned  to  nature  as  a  model,  these  dear  girls  saw 
it  through  the  distorted  glasses  of  their  imagination.  And  the  result? 
A  wonderful  mixture  of  animals,  birds,  trees,  houses,  urns,  baskets 
of  flowers  and  fruit.  Vines  bearing  six  kinds  of  flowers  are  the  ordi- 
nary sort  on  samplers.  Perspective  there  was  none,  and  comparative 
size  matters  not  at  all.  Usually  our  beruffled  shepherdess  is  at  least 
three  times  the  size  of  her  house,  and  once  in  a  while  her  sheep  are  so 
large  that  they  might  swallow  her  whole  ^vithout  inconvenience.  But 
all  this  was  a  fairy  story,  taking  form  under  the  child's  needle,  and  all 
such  things  happen  naturally  in  fairy  tales.  Sometimes  the  children 
painted  in  the  faces  of  their  people;  sometimes  they  gave  them  the 
real  hair  of  the  person  whose  portrait  they  were  attempting. 

About  1760  began  the  period  when  no  sampler  was  quite  complete 
without  its  pious  verse,  and  it  makes  our  untheological  modern  minds 
ache  to  think  what  these  children  nmst  have  been  like,  if  their  verses 
and  sayings  were  anything  more  than  conventional  usage.  Yet  when 
one  reads  the  records  of  almost  any  town,  it  is  to  have  the  realization 
thrust  upon  one  that  at  that  time  theological  discussion  gave  the  most 
abounding  joy  to  our  forefathers.  So  why  should  not  the  children, 
too,  have  put  forth  their  religious  or  pious  convictions  upon  the  sam- 


18  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

pier  which  was  to  hang  upon  the  wall  ?  They  wished  to  show  that  they 
were  not  one  whit  behind  their  elders  in  taking  up  cudgels  for  their 
pet  dogma,  to  show  that  death  and  the  tomb  had  no  terrors  for  their 
well-prepared  souls. 

Mary  Webb,  a  nice  little  Pennsylvania  girl,  in  1760  made  a  clever 
sampler.  She  encircled  it  with  a  carnation  border,  and  turned  the 
corners  with  a  tulip.  Inside  she  divided  the  space  into  nine  squares. 
The  middle  and  the  corners  she  decorated  with  delightful  flowers,  and 
in  the  four  remaining  squares  embroidered  her  pious  sentiments.  She 
also  gives  a  hint  here  of  the  genealogical  sampler  soon  to  come,  for 
she  put  her  parents'  names  upon  it.  This  type,  which  is  quite  unusual 
in  America,  was  more  common  in  England.  Perhaps  she  copied  some 
English  model  brought  overseas.     (See  Plate  xx.) 

The  genealogical  sampler,  in  all  its  glory,  did  not  come  into  ripe 
fruition  until  late  in  the  eighteenth  century,  but  as  early  as  1730 
Ann  Robins  put  her  father's,  mother's,  and  grandparents'  names  upon 
her  sampler.  Sarah  van  Forhies,  in  1742,  embroidered  the  initials  of 
her  family,  and  the  habit  was  quite  common  until  the  real  genealogy 
came  to  displace  them.  Margaret  Swain,  in  1754,  embroidered  the 
initials,  but  she  went  a  step  farther  and  added  the  dates  of  births  and 
deaths.  Catherine  Van  Maater,  in  1765,  records  that  her  "Father" 
was  Daniel  Van  Maater,  her  mother,  Mary  Covenhaven,  and  that  her 
brothers  and  sisters  were  Sarah,  Gilbert,  Micah,  and  Milly. 

The  first  real  genealogy  seems  to  be  of  the  Olmsteads,  of  Connecti- 
cut, made  in  1774,  but  it  has  not  half  the  charm  of  one  done  by  an 
unknown  girl,  recording  an  unknown  family,  which  probably  resided 
in  or  near  Springfield,  Massachusetts : 

"  Phoebe  Born  April  7,  1761 

"Lew"  bor  feb  23,  1763 

"Zebbo"  Au  29,  1755 

"Cal"  bor  Jun  29,  1758 

and  then  only  initials  up  to  the  last  child's  birth  in  1771. 

From  1780,  on  to  the  end  of  the  century,  the  real  genealogy  and 
the  one  containing  initials  only,  flourished  side  by  side,  but  were  never 


.    *-    -C-^-    -3!=  •!:.■-. 


•  m»»  ^  -  -  . 


'^  %.m 


-  niter-'- ■ 


:^- 


rx:€>S*i 


PLATE  IX 

Mary  Hudson's  Sampler.     1700 
O-icned  by  Minn  Sarah  Rebecca  Robinson 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  19 

nearly  as  common  as  they  were  after  1800.  These  samplers  are  just 
as  useful  to  the  student  as  the  Family  Bible,  and  should  be  cherished 
for  their  information  with  equal  care. 

It  is  just  at  this  time  that  the  little  Dutch  sampler  of  Catherine 
van  Schaick  was  done  in  Albany.  The  border  is  difficult  to  place ;  two 
birds  stand  on  two  unnameable  objects,  one  of  which  may  be  a  house. 
She  signed  it  "C  V  S-OUT  10-JAER  1763".     (See  Plate  xxi.) 

By  1766,  the  South  had  taken  up  Adam  and  Eve,  and  Sally  Rea 
gives  us  a  very  interesting  example.  Adam  and  Eve,  encircled  in 
ballet  skirts  of  fig  leaves,  stand  in  the  attitude  of  the  minuet,  holding 
the  apple  together.  The  serpent  coiled  around  the  tree  leans  out  and 
whispers  in  Eve's  ear,  while  her  accompanying  rabbit  stands  in  a  scared 
attitude,  ready  to  run  at  need.  Adam,  who  looks  a  most  courtly  and 
smiling  gentleman,  is  in  this  instance  accompanied  by  two  very  inter- 
ested dogs,  one  white  with  black  decorations,  the  other  "counter- 
changed."  The  whole  thing  is  adorable,  and  envy  surges  in  your 
breast.    (See  Plate  xxii.) 

The  same  year  a  child  in  Dighton,  Massachusetts,  Bath-sheba 
Searing  her  name,  began  that  noble  series  of  samplers  which  grew 
from  picturing  one's  own  house  and  yard  to  putting  public  buildings 
on  the  "carpet"  of  the  sampler,  and  finally  led  to  the  delineation  of 
whole  towns.  (See  tailpiece,  p.  254,  the  town  of  Crawford,  New 
Hampshire.)  Bath-sheba  made  a  picture  of  her  nice,  hip-roofed  brick 
house,  and  she  pictured  her  mother  in  one  window  and  her  father  in 
the  other.  Sarah  van  Forhies,  of  New  Jersey,  mentioned  above,  had 
made  a  house  in  1742,  but  it  seems  to  have  been  an  isolated  experiment 
and  had  no  copiers  until  this  later  time. 

About  this  time,  too,  the  girls  in  the  Southern  states  began  to  make 
samplers.  South  Carolina  has  one  as  early  as  1752,  and  Georgia 
in  1763.  Sarah  Jones,  of  Savannah,  did  the  Ten  Commandments  in 
verse,  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  the  Creed,  surrounded  it  with  a  flowered 
vine,  and  added  a  basket  and  flowers.  It  was  not  only  Puritan  New 
England,  but  the  South  also,  which  mixed  religion  and  samplers  in- 
extricably.   Philadelphia,  in  the  person  of  Elizabeth  Coleman,  oifers 


20  A3IERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Pope's  "Universal  Prayer";  and  so  it  is  with  relief  that  we  turn  to 
Margaret  Calef  and  her  wonderful  scene,  undisturbed  by  pious  senti- 
ments. This  Middleto^^Ti,  Connecticut,  girl  shows  us  the  fruit  of  her 
imagination  in  most  beautiful  petit-point.  There  is  a  brick  castle  with 
high  tower  and  many  windows,  with  five  straight  poplar  trees  looking 
over  the  roof;  on  either  side  an  apple  tree,  and  on  the  lawn  in  front 
a  lamb  and  a  mottled  dog.  To  the  left,  a  wasp-waisted  lady  sits  on  a 
chair,  with  one  dog  behind  and  one  with  three  white  spots  leaping  up 
in  front.  She  holds  an  enormous  rose  to  her  painted  face.  Before 
her  stands  her  husband,  long,  buttoned  coat,  silk  stockings,  and  shoes, 
all  of  the  latest  cut,  his  queue  correctly  tied,  holding  a  parrot  in  his 
hand.  And  as  a  background,  high  hills,  with  poplar  trees  and  deer, 
and  a  huge  tulip  plant,  that  dwarfs  the  trees.  The  sky  is  cloudy  and 
contains  one  star.  Each  time  you  look  you  find  some  new  delight. 
And  if  you  love  this  sampler,  doubly  will  you  love  Hannah  Johnson's, 
made  in  1768  in  "IN'ewbury  Newton"  (Newburyport).  Never  before 
and  never  again  will  the  mind  of  child  conceive  such  a  flirtatious  and 
lovely  cow  as  Hannah  Johnson  did.  The  deer  with  which  slie's  flirting 
is  almost  as  charming.     ( Plates  xxiii  and  xxiv. ) 

The  next  decade  seems  to  have  been  given  over  to  country  scenes, 
to  shepherds  and  shepherdesses,  flocks  and  herds,  houses  and  farm 
buildings.  It  also  introduced  a  new  stitch  which  was  developed  in 
two  ways.  At  this  period  appears  the  crinkled  silk,  which  looks  as 
if  it  were  unwound  from  larger  and  tight-twisted  hanks.  This  silk 
is  most  commonly  applied  in  long  stitches  as  a  background  for  vines  or 
animals  in  a  closer  satin-stitch.  Occasionally  it  is  appliqued,  when 
the  embroidery  represents  the  bricks  of  a  house  or  something  else 
appropriate.  At  one  school  in  Essex  County,  Massachusetts,  taught 
by  Sarah  Stivour,  the  children  used  long  stitches  in  this  crinkly  silk 
to  represent  the  grass  and  sky.  The  particular  use  is  limited  to  that 
school,  and  to  the  years  between  1778  and  1786.  Work  from  her  school 
can  be  identified  at  a  glance.     (See  Plates  xc  and  xci.) 


PLATE  X 

Ghace  Toy's  SAVnua.    Wohurn,  Moss.     Clr.  1717 

f.hL7i«rf  ly  Mrt.  .V   A.  PruntUt 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  21 

The  scenes  depicted  become  more  elaborate  during  this  ten  years, 
and  are  saved  from  being  classed  as  needlework  pictures  by  a  very 
narrow  margin.  This  is  true  as  far  south  as  Georgia.  But  even  in 
their  elaboration,  the  feeling  persists  that  if  one  could  only  really 
know  their  history,  many  samplers  that  are  now  far  separated  over 
the  coimtr}"  were  made  under  the  same  school-mistress's  eye.  These 
samplers  are  not  always  identical,  but  the  whole  action  and  design 
savor  of  the  same  controlling  mind.  Grace  Welsh,  Sukey  Makepeace, 
Abigail  JNIears,  and  perhaps  Elizabeth  Pecker,  who  used  a  form  of 
hunting  scene,  illustrate  very  well  the  probable  common  origin  of  a 
group.     (See  Plates  xxv,  cvi,  xxvi,  and  xviii.) 

Now  the  stiff  cross-stitch  trees  of  a  former  decade  give  place  to 
those  with  gracefully  bending  trunks,  and  tops  that  look  like  dejected 
and  lop-sided  feather  dusters.  This  is  well  exemplified  on  Betsey 
Adams's  sampler.  She  lived  in  Quincy,  INIassachusetts,  as  all  the 
great  Adamses  did,  but  I'm  sure  that  she  never  saw  the  prototype  of 
those  trees  in  Quincy.     ( See  Plate  xxvii. ) 

The  children  of  this  decade  abandoned  cross-stitch  and  its  kindred 
stitches  more  than  their  predecessors,  and  used  satin-stitch  increas- 
ingly. They  also  added  queen-stitch,  with  very  pleasing  results,  and 
often  included  punch- work  fruit. 

It  would  be  unfair  to  leave  tie  time  of  the  Revolution  without 
mentioning  the  unknown  child  who  embroidered  Christ  at  the  foot  of 
a  huge  tree,  with  arms  outstretched.  From  the  branches  hang  fruit 
labeled  "Peace,"  " Sanctification,"  "Election,"  "Refuge,"  "Repent," 
"Buffeting,"  "Temptation,"  "Reproach,"  "Everlasting  Love," 
"Death,"  and  many  more.  This  and  Mary  Daintery's,  earlier  in  the 
centurj^  are  the  only  representations  of  Christ  on  samplers  so  far 
known.     (See  Plate  xxviii.) 

A  form  of  sampler  very  conmion  in  England  was  little  used  in 
this  country,  though  a  few  have  been  recorded — the  map  sampler. 
The  earliest  example  which  has  come  to  light  in  the  Colonies  was  a 
map  of  France  done  on  an  oval  of  satin  by  Frances  Brenton,  of  New- 
port, Rhode  Island,  in  1775.    Perhaps  the  education  of  the  girls  began 


22  >  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

at  this  period  to  include  a  knowledge  of  the  world  outside  their  own 
narrow  horizon.  Ann  Smith  made  a  map  of  Europe  in  1787.  Later, 
in  1793,  Betty  Scott,  whose  mother  became  John  Hancock's  second 
wife,  made  a  beautiful  map  of  England,  very  accurate,  and  beautifully 
worked.  It  was,  perhaps,  one  of  those  stamped  in  England  and 
brought  to  this  country.  At  one  time  they  were  very  popular  with 
English  damsels.  Five  years  later,  Leonora  Louisa  Spechet  also  made 
a  map  of  England,  and  Frances  Wade  made  a  map  of  North  and 
South  America,  which  was  of  her  own  drawing,  one  might  surmise. 
Her  geography  was  almost  as  frenzied  as  that  during  the  war,  and 
even  Mercator's  projection  looks  far  less  queer.     (See  Plate  xxix.) 

During  the  last  years  of  the  Revolution,  the  sampler  began  to 
increase  in  the  land.  Originality  ran  riot,  and  everything  that  the 
children  saw  was  pictured  with  more  or  less  fidelity  to  nature. 
Perhaps  the  most  interesting  pair  of  samplers  done  in  the  1780's  are 
two  which  come  from  Tuckerton,  New  Jersey.  They  are  painted 
samplers  done  by  John  Mason,  in  1780,  and  by  Sarah  Piatt,  about 
1784.  ( See  Plate  xxx. )  Sarah  painted  a  picture  of  herself  in  an  oval 
at  the  bottom,  and  we  should  guess  that  John  tried  to  portray  his 
father  and  mother.  The  pair  of  samplers  is  most  interesting,  and  calls 
to  mind  that  later,  by  some  fifty  years,  pen  and  ink  samplers  were 
accomplished  by  some  pupils  in  the  schools.  They  are  quite  rare  now, 
as,  of  course,  paper  is  much  more  perishable  than  linen. 

There  is  a  unique  little  sampler  in  Essex  County,  Massachusetts, 
which  was  cut  in  the  form  of  a  Liberty  Bell,  with  a  little  ring  at  the 
top.  It  was  done  by  "Rocksalana  Willes,"  in  1783.  What  she  put 
on  the  sampler  was  neither  very  artistic  nor  interesting,  but  it  certainly 
was  of  the  era.     (See  Plate  xxxi.) 

Two  years  later,  Hannah  Janney  made  a  sampler,  and  worked 
upon  it  a  verse  "On  Education."  One  might  almost  feel  that  this 
was  truly  prophetic  on  her  part,  for  later  she  became  the  mother  of 
Johns  Hopkins,  who  founded  the  University  which  bears  his  name. 
Just  at  this  time  began  that  most  interesting  series  of  pictures  of 
Brown  University  which  is  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Schools.    They 


T^'^^^^i 


A.  »_j«  »t .  J 


*)«"•=»? 


"*V*"  ■  ■'***■■  ■ 


cujtea  OF  the  s-oman  <5o 
■ueKiu'jtKT  TO  j^auertis'f 

j  iPKOlrittC^S' 


X^^ 


^'.■ieiute  c^  ^x«»je  cowayjiiJVG  '^ 


""Ta^j-iu'i  .^e^^  the  Gifts' 
"SyoF  piTfcr.!ii-j  x-^'ifcuurs 

FO)LXPU.mi  spvjfj.'t  tti  the 
senate  -:.j-iae>fii^.-''U/  sa 


t 


IP 


my  CUP  Hss  «tA\?"  Kot  05?  %t~;:i 


Ti-.ere  jpyesKea  m  The;e  ouy  divr  ,i  naift  :^~  vK^it  viKtii*  wjja**  lesm 
chJfsair  x>M  ss  vet  LmwA  juaaxG  ixi*  a^iJ  of  t^i*  C5a-i-i<s  js  ^cce^^^eb  ir^ay 

tuye  soiHett..Kf.fc  T^a  3n/cil^e^^orl;vt^.  a  veciy  jaeveym  cuUHteiauce  suck 
jTS  t>.e  e''hi)J6<»yj-  may  sctTibue  ano  reay  *iJS  Jaiu'  or  The  caaLOuv  » 

^-.yjf.eKt  oif  coLoxT>  6o»ie%>Knt  coui-LaiA  ak»  luave)  at.aut  Mb  -^.inv.oeY:,"  i^ 

i'^UEnej'  8F  Th  ^Li^Ay?tes.  h?^  rove  Me-^ji  ?Li*.'.'i  ».'&''  icxxcate  ms  Fac<; 
Mihout  8?ot  cy  itoKsxuLe  geijuwVies  u*t>.  ii  c«eiv  bs^  aa&,iaiise  lai) » 
mmtf..e:)i.iCtty  ^oymes  **?;.  Bev»c-  twciThe  cotsuy  --—         •    •    ■"- 

^.aio  Quicx  iH  stepyoYJKcs  teyyiwte  tii  ■'4'^'f"'f"*^^tt'L__,     „„„,  ^.,  ,,^„, 
vv?iay  Htoett  JKD  iwse  ta  pyos'oyvK'i  of  !»"-*'/  n^ejx$hiip(.^  >2m  >.tiur&?ai 
>.iJif  T.j,jG>.  p\xb  mM9  um<  seeK  Mxk  ifi^ee?  jt  Jra-as  Fey  fejs  siaevaa^  »e3,y       , 
^y  sctyfase.'sjiiG  The  cKaE>yejr  or  x«t<h 

wiyy  P^tjrteyy  hkb.  r^oi'&  dwe  in  The  '^eay  or  ^HJ^^iE^P^   t??J^ 
s»sjt»  n>iis  »c«sj[  £>ece»!»e?f':.  Tiie  tT^eKtv-  secoso  ^icaosxjmBie      i:?x3 


r*! 


PLATE  XI 

Mary  Daixtery's  Sampler.     New  Haven,  Conn.? 
Ozcned  by  Mrs.  G.  H.  Buck 


1721 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  23 

are  so  lovely  that  it  is  impossible  to  refrain  from  mentioning  them 
again  here.  From  the  college  on  the  hill  at  Providence  to  Pennsylvania 
is  not  so  very  far,  so  at  the  same  time  that  our  New  England  maidens 
were  learning  to  embroider  what  they  saw,  little  Ann  Buller  made 
her  unique  contribution  in  Philadelphia.    She  pictured  scenes  which 
never  were  on  sea  or  land.     One  can  almost  see  the  child  sitting  in 
wrapt  silence,  drinking  in  the  strange  tales  of  some  sailor-man  who 
had  been  overseas  and  in  far  Eastern  lands.     He  had  told  her  of  the 
Arab  in  his  tent,  of  camels,  and  flocks,  and  herds.     Perhaps  she  re- 
membered Abraham  sitting  in  his  tent  door,  with  all  his  flocks  around 
him.    And  then  she  constructed  her  amazing  country.    In  the  middle, 
at  the  right,  sits  her  hero  in  the  door  of  a  large,  white  tent,  while  before 
him  graze  six  of  the  leanest  sheep  that  sampler-land  has  ever  produced. 
Next  a  lean  cow  stands,  wondering,  with  mournful  eyes;  and  then  a 
woman  and  two  men,  in  modern  dress,  one  of  whom  holds  a  camel  by 
its  bridle.    Below  two  camels,  with  protuberant  necks,  eat  fruit  from 
two  trees,  and  a  man  and  woman  stand  near  a  well-house.     Desert 
camels  and  a  typical  New  World  well !    ( See  Plates  xxxii  and  xxxiii. ) 
Then  we  come  to  the  very  modest  era  when  Adam  and  Eve  went 
clothed  to  their  doom,  and  fig  leaves  were  insufficient.    In  Salem, 
Massachusetts,  there  was  a  Quaker  maid  who  pictured  Adam  and  Eve 
in  plain  Quaker  dress,  with  Cain  and  Abel  standing  beside  them  in 
knee  breeches.    The  "tree  of  knowledge"  is  there  and  many  animals, 
but  Rebekah  Hacker's  childish  heart  was  too  tender  toward  the  sin- 
ful pair  to  put  in  the  serpent  as  a  reminder  of  their  fall.    Margaret 
Ramsay  (see  Plate  xxxiv)  helped  out  our  first  parents  in  a  different 
way,  for  she  planted  her  tree  of  knowledge  just  outside  the  garden 
fence,  and  back  of  its  flower-borders  she  put  a  comfortable  cottage, 
with  nice  lace  windows.    From  this  time  on,  Adam  and  Eve  again  be- 
come a  favorite  theme,  clothed  or  unclothed,  fat  or  lean.    Meanwhile, 
all  through  the  period,  we  have  lovely  pictures  of  workless  shepherds 
courting  with  pipes  the  equally  workless  shepherdesses;  beside  them 
bloom  flowers  as  large  as  cabbages.     Their  houses  are  flanked  with 
trees,  or,  as  Lucy  Cushing  embroidered  her  home,  set  between  two 


24  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

enormous  sunflowers  reaching  the  second-story  windows.  Newport 
and  Sally  Munro  give  us  a  wonderful  doctor's  gig  with  a  horribly 
knock-kneed  horse.     (See  Plate  xxxv.) 

By  1790,  the  variety  of  sampler  work  was  infinite.  Two  Phila- 
delphians,  Jane  Humphreys  and  Elizabeth  Lehman,  and  one  Dela- 
ware girl,  Mary  Clark,  each  made  on  fine  linen  a  basket  filled  with 
flowers  in  the  finest  "hollie-point."  These  three  samplers  are  exquisite 
things,  and  most  beautifully  wrought.  By  this  time,  sampler  making 
seems  to  have  become  an  art  and  many  new  stitches  came  in  fashion, 
so  Zebiah  Gore  made  her  lambs  in  bullion-stitch.  One  often  wonders 
just  how  the  child  carried  out  the  design  which  she  or  her  teacher  had 
conceived.  Sally  Baldwin,  of  Providence,  never  finished  her  sampler, 
and  so  our  question  is  answered.  A  house  and  a  cow  stand  stark  in 
their  nakedness  of  pen  and  ink.  In  one  case,  the  needle  and  thread 
are  left  to  this  day  in  a  child's  unfinished  work.  (See  Plates  xxxvi- 
xxxix.) 

At  the  end  of  the  century,  we  are  on  the  verge  of  several  new 
methods  of  work.  Again,  alas !  the  magic  of  a  new  century  does  not 
create  the  beginning  of  a  new  era  sharplj'',  though  one  may  feel  that 
the  increasing  prosperity  of  the  country  and  the  awakening  interest 
in  the  education  of  girls  elaborates  and  develops  what  has  gone  before. 
Pious  verse  is  not  always  a  sine  qua  non,  and  at  times  neither  verse  nor 
alphabet  appear.  The  borders,  done  now  as  fancy  wills,  are  not  the 
old  repeating  designs  which  have  held  sway  since  first  the  sampler 
formed  part  of  the  maiden's  outfit. 

The  genealogical  sampler  had  had  no  great  vogue,  and  the  new 
century  was  to  develop  that  form  most  interestingly.  Houses  at  this 
period  begin  to  sit  on  terraces,  each  step  of  which  displays  a  tree,  and 
on  many  samplers  the  house  is  broader  than  this  pyramid  of  green 
lawns.  True  to  this  pastoral  era,  sheep  and  a  shepherd  invariably 
disport  upon  the  lawns.  Beulah  Hollinshead  was  the  first  girl,  appar- 
ently, who  started  this  fashion,  which  the  new  century  adopted  most 
enthusiastically. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  25 

Ann  jNIacomber,  in  the  last  year  of  the  century,  revived  a  fashion 
originally  set  by  Miss  Polly  Balch,  of  Providence,  Rhode  Island,  at 
her  school.  No  one,  apparently,  had  followed  her  idea  of  depicting 
public  buildings,  until  Ann  Macomber  put  Liberty  Hall,  Philadel- 
phia, upon  her  work.  She  set  the  building  in  more  rural  surroundings 
than  we  are  used  to  associating  with  it,  for  a  horse  and  two  dogs  run 
merrily  about  in  the  grass  on  either  side.     ( See  Plates  xl  and  xli.) 

During  the  study  of  the  records  and  pictures  which  make  up  the 
material  from  which  these  facts  are  drawn,  certain  small  things 
obtrude  themselves  and  give  a  human  interest  to  all  this  needlework. 
We  are  struck,  at  first,  bv  the  number  of  surnames  which  have  died 
out  in  the  course  of  years.  Perhaps  some  of  them  have  only  gone 
West,  leaving  no  one  in  the  East  to  carry  on  the  family.  Certain  it  is 
that  many  names  are  strangers  to  their  east-coast  homes  now.  Again, 
the  names  left  by  the  Roundheads  impress  us,  and  we  meet  Constant 
Brayton,  Content  Silsbee,  Content  Wing,  Faithy  Trumbull,  Desire 
Williams,  Temperance  jVIatthews,  and  Charity  Peters.  Our  fore- 
fathers were  greatly  daring  in  their  choice  of  names,  as  witness: 
Rosefair  Brooks,  Welthe  Barker,  Lucretia  Creaton,  Sarah  Doubt, 
Perese  Hopton,  Leafea  Ide,  Maieson  Howard,  Rocksalana  Willes, 
Robe  A.  Ormsbee,  Lendamine  Draper,  Increase  Githernon,  Sibilah 
Moore,  and  Petheny  Geer.  The  most  amazing  family  as  to  names, 
however,  was  the  Jones  family,  duly  recorded  with  births  and  deaths 
in  1797.  Perhaps  the  name  Jones  seemed  too  feeble  in  its  appeal,  and 
so  "Pappa"  and  "Mamma"  Jones  named  their  children  Thetis, 
Thisbe,  Sabra,  Atlas,  the  twins  Mithra  and  Luna,  and  Andes.  No  one 
could  ever  brand  that  Jones  family  as  commonplace. 

Another  interest  is  in  noticing  just  what  each  girl  says  about  her 
work.  They  "wrought"  it  in  many  ways,  according  to  their  own 
testimony.  One  was  "written  by  Tabitha  Smith  Feb  18*^  1713  being 
then  aged  9  years."  Sometimes  they  tell  when  they  began,  as  did 
Sarah  Troup,  in  1738 ;  and  some  are  cryptic,  like  the  child  who  says, 
"I  made  it  in  the  year  of  January  1^*^  1751."  Most  children  tell  you 
when  they  finished  their  work,  and  you  can  almost  feel  the  pride  with 


26  '  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

which  they  worked  the  date.  There  are,  however,  some  rather  odd 
ways  of  conveying  their  meaning : 

"In  the  year  of  our  Lord,  1793". 
"Hannah  Sanderson  Her  Exampler",  1789. 
"DrusiUa  Tomlin  Her  Sampler  and  Work",  1793. 

But  of  them  all,  none  gives  the  hustling  American  view  of  life  so 
succinctly  as  did  one  child  in  the  strained  year  of  the  outbreak  of  the 
Revolution : 

"Sarah  Ann  Souder  worked  this  in  great  speed 
And  left  it  here  for  you  to  read." 

Of  the  children  who  embroidered  samplers,  there  were  some  who 
deserve  mention  because  they  themselves  or  their  near  relatives  became 
well-known.  We  have  recorded  the  sampler  of  Abigail  Williams, 
granddaughter  of  the  "Redeemed  Captive"  of  Deerfield,  Massachu- 
setts, the  Rev.  John  Williams.  Abigail  Wadsworth,  of  Hartford, 
whose  sampler  is  dated  1730,  was  the  daughter  of  Jonathan  Wads- 
worth,  the  great  Indian  fighter,  and  granddaughter  of  Joseph,  who 
hid  the  Charter  in  the  "Charter  Oak."  Dorcas  Gatcomb,  who  made 
a  sampler  two  years  later,  became  the  wife  of  John  Welch,  who  carved 
the  original  "Codfish"  weathervane,  now  in  the  Old  State  House; 
and  a  sampler  having  a  date  somewhat  later,  1751,  bears  the  name  of 
Dorcas  Welch,  daughter  of  the  carver.  Abigail  Janney,  as  we  have 
mentioned  before,  was  the  mother  of  Johns  Hopkins.  Mary  Sterrett, 
of  Baltimore,  made  a  sampler  when  she  was  eleven;  at  sixteen,  a 
famous  beauty  and  belle,  she  had  married  Richard  Gittings,  of  Long 
Green,  Maryland.  The  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  owns  a  pair, 
one  done  by  the  sister  and  one  by  the  niece  of  Governor  Thomas 
Hutchinson,  of  Massachusetts.  Doubtless  there  were  other  famous 
people  in  this  long  list  of  girls,  but  their  fame  has  not  come  down  to  us. 

Various  other  strange  things  may  be  noted  in  passing.  Mary 
Studley,  of  Portsmouth,  made  two  samplers  in  1753,  and  so  far  as 
we  know  broke  all  known  records  by  each  one.  The  habit  of  sampler 
makers,  as  a  rule,  was  to  make  the  numerals  from  1  to  9  and  then  to 
add  a  0.     Sometimes  they  go  to  12,  and  once  in  a  while  to  20;  but 


Marv  or  Martha  Bulyx.     Kensington,  Pa.     1730 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Frederick  F.  TJionipson 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  27 

Mary  Studley  made  one  sampler  with  the  numerals  from  1  to  49,  and 
another  one  marked  from  1  to  50.  One  sampler  bears  two  dates 
and  two  names,  that  of  "Mary  Wheatley,  1760,"  and  "Isabella 
Thompson,  1797."  Apparently,  Mary  Wheatley  never  finished  her 
work,  and  Isabella  Thompson  used  the  unfinished  linen  to  try  her  skill. 
Margaret  Starr,  in  1795,  worked  the  name  of  William  Cox  with  her 
design,  and  so  helps  us  all  to  suspect  a  romance. 

Roman  numerals  were  only  occasionally  used  on  samplers. 
Elizabeth  Holyoke  said  that  her  age  was  xiii  in  1784,  and  Susanna 
Holyoke  confessed  to  x  in  1790. 

The  average  age  of  the  sampler  makers  after  the  seventeenth 
century  was  about  thirteen,  but  we  have  a  record  of  one  made  by  a 
woman  of  sixty.  At  the  other  end  of  the  scale  we  find  Mary  Smith, 
who  was  six  years  old  in  the  year  "17014."  In  her  fifth  year,  Agnes 
Rust  made  one  which  was  only  three  and  a  half  inches  wide,  but  sixteen 
inches  long.  Polly  Fuller,  in  1790,  was  only  four  years  old;  and 
Catherine  Bispham,  in  1755,  was  five.  Phebe  Cash,  a  Negro  child 
belonging  to  the  widow  of  Dudley  Atkins,  Esq.,  of  Newbury,  Massa- 
chusetts, worked  her  sampler  in  1789.  We  might  add  that  there  are 
at  least  three  in  the  collection  done  by  boys.  Lemuel  Vose,  of  Milton, 
Massachusetts,  worked  one  in  1773;  and  two  years  earlier,  Gideon 
Freeborn,  of  Rhode  Island,  embroidered  one.  He  covered  the  canvas 
with  diagonal  lines  in  black,  with  diamonds  of  yellow,  purple,  pink, 
green,  blue,  and  red  between.  It  would  seem  to  be  a  rather  garish 
sampler.    Nicholas  Bleecker,  of  Albany,  worked  one  in  1790. 

And  so  the  century  ended  which  had  seen  the  growth  of  a  truly 
American  handicraft,  crude  in  many  cases,  but  a  real  and  sincere 
effort  to  develop  artistically.  Best  of  all,  it  was  a  growth  along 
original  lines,  and  no  slavish  copying  of  English  models;  for  the 
American  sampler,  bound  by  no  conventional  type,  is  more  varied  and 
more  interesting  from  1740  on  than  its  English  cousin.  Being  a  freer 
art,  the  result  is  generally  pleasing  and  often  quite  beautiful. 

Ethel  Stanwood  Bolton. 


28- 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


THE  EARLIEST  SAMPLER  KNOWN  IN  THE 

VARIOUS  STATES 


Massachusetts 
New  York 

Long  Island 
New  Hampshire 
Connecticut 
Pennsylvania 
Rhode  Island 
Vermont 
South  Carolina 


1630 

New  Jersey  (1675?) 

1720 

Delaware 

1713 

Maine 

1719 

Georgia 

1T21 

Virginia 

1724 

Maryland 

1725 

North  Carolina 

1728 

Kentucky 

1734 

Ohio 

1740 
1747 
1750 
1763 
1765 
1766 
1786 
1800 
1807 


EARLIEST  APPEARANCE  OF  VARIOUS  DESIGNS 


Cir.  1610  Alphabet  (part).     Anne  Gower. 

Cir.  1610  Name  of  maker.     Anne  Gower. 

Cir.  1610  Alphabet  in  eyelet-stitch.     Anne  Gower. 

1630-40     Verse.     Loara  Standish. 

1708  House  and  tree  (doubtful). 

1714  Church  (doubtful). 

1718  Pot  of  fiowers. 

1718  Use  of  "carpet."     "Ashur"  and  "Elisha."      Mary  Leavitt. 

1720  Numerals. 

1721  First  border  used  as  a  frame.     Mary  Daintery. 
1730  Shepherdess.     Mary  or  Martha  Bulyn. 

1738  Lord's  Prayer  and  Creed  in  Tablets.     Hannah  Trecothick. 

1738  Queen-stitch. 

1741  Adam  and  Eve. 

1742  House.     Does  not  appear  often  until  1766. 

1743  Multiplication  Table.     Mary  Ellis. 
1747  Grapes  of  Eschol. 

1750  Appliqud  dress  and  real  hair. 

1752  Abraham  and  Isaac.     South  Carolina. 

1754  Heart. 

1756  Eagle. 

1763  Revival  of  lace-work,  " hollie-point,"  "darned  lace,"  and  drawn-work. 

1766  House. 

1774  Genealogical  sampler. 

1775  Map.     France.     Frances  Brenton. 

1778  First  Public  Building.     Brown  University  and  the  Old  State  House,  Providence, 

Rhode  Island. 

1780  Painted  Sampler.       John  Mason. 

1791  Anchor. 

1799  Public  Buildings.     Liberty  Hall.     Ann  Macomber. 


REGISTER  OF  SAMPLERS,  1700-1799 

Adams,  Betsey.  [1773.]  Quincy  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  Born  in  1764.  17"  x  22".  1  alphabet.  Cross, 
satin,  French  knot,  and  stem-stitch.  Borders  of  carnation,  strawberry,  Greek  fret,  vine, 
tree  of  life.    House  and  trees.    Verse  603.    Illustrated.  Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 

Adams,  Elizabeth.     1776.    3  alphabets.    Cross  and  eyelet-stitch.    Strawberry  cross-border. 

Mrs.  Emma  B.  Hodge 

Adams,  Elizabeth.  [1791.]  Red  Hook  [N.  Y.].  12  yrs.  Born  March  20,  1779.  8"  x  10^". 
2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Border  of  cross-stitch  blocks.  Mrs.  Hubert  O.  Rose 

Adams,  Polly.  1779.  11"  x  8i".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross-stitch  border.  Conven- 
tional design,  punch-work  corners.  Herbert  N.  Hixon,  Esq. 

Adams,  Sahah.  1786.  Medway  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  Born  September  26,  1773.  6i"  x  8".  1  alpha- 
bet.   Cross-stitch.    Plain  border.  Herbert  N.  Hixon,  Esq. 

Afflick,  Sabah.  1766.  6  yrs.  Three  vases  containing  vines  which  cover  the  whole  sampler. 
Illustrated.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Akerly,  Susan.  1797.  8"  x  22".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch,  2  small  dogs,  2  small  trees,  large 
basket  of  flowers.  3Irs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Akin,  Mary.  1715.  Born  near  Providence  [R,  I.].  8^"  x  18^".  1  alphabet.  Cross,  satin,  and 
eyelet-stitch.    Strawberry  border.    Flower  and  conventional  cross-borders.    Verse  491. 

Miss  Alice  Henderson 

Algeb,  Sally.  1782.  [Providence,  R,  I.]  14^"  x  12".  Stem,  satin,  cross-stitch,  and  chain. 
House  with  figures  above  it.     [Miss  Polly  Balch's  School.]     Verse  611. 

Mrs.  Alfred  H.  Wilkinson 

Allen,  Abby.  [Cir.  1793.]  Born  September  6,  1782,  9"  x  5^",  1  alphabet.  Cross  and  chain- 
stitch.    Unfinished,  Miss  Marie  L.  Hawkins 

Allen,  Ame,    1791,    Medfield  [Mass,],    12  yrs,    8"  x  9".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Myra  B.  Whittemore 

Allen,  Elizabeth.    1774.    19  yrs.    6"  x  5".    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  William  H.  Gilbane 

Allen,  Elizabeth.    1793.    Smithfield.    7  yrs.     12"  x  5".     1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  377, 

The  Misses  Austin 

Allen,  Lydia,  1796,  11^"  x  16J",  1  alphabet.  Carnation  border.  Hill  surmounted  with  vase 
of  flowers,  also  2  trees  with  a  bird  on  the  top  of  each.    Verse  343  (1,  7). 

Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park,  Philadelphia 

Allen,  Maegaket.  [1728.  Vermont.]  7  yrs.  Born  January  20,  1721.  9"  x  12".  3  alphabets. 
Cross,  satin,  stem,  chain,  and  eyelet-stitch.  Plain  hemstitched  border.  Conventional  vine, 
leaves,  and  blossoms.  Mrs.  James  H.  Bailey 

Almy,  Ann.  1783.  11  yrs.  8"  x  19".  8  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Various  cross- 
borders  in  rose,  carnation,  and  strawberry  designs.     Verses  488,  489  (2,  3).    Illustrated, 

Mrs.  John  H.  Morison 

29 


30  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Almt,  Kathabine.  [Cir.  1728.]  6"  x  9i".  1  alphabet.  French  knot,  chain,  and  cross-stitch. 
Cross-borders  in  various  designs.  Initials  "H  T"  [Hannah  Townsend]  in  lower  corner. 
Verse  128.  The  Misses  Kenyan 

Alsop,  Mary.  1772.  9  yrs.  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch  and  eyelet-stitch.  Greek  fret.  Butter- 
flies, birds,  flowers,  animals.    Verse  602.  Mrs.  A.  E.  Alsop 

Andrew,  Elizabeth  Ann  Hereth.  1755.  [Woodbury,  Conn.?]  6  yrs.  and  10  dys.  8i"  x  13^". 
3  alphabets;  1  alone,  3  grouped.  Cross-stitch.  Trefoil  border.  Conventional  flowers  and 
cross-borders.  Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 

Anthont,  Ruth.    1797.    12  yrs.    6"  x  5".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Walter  Slade  Gardner 

Anthony,  Sarah.    Verses  129  (var.),  182  (1,  2),  488,  490. 

Arnold,  Elizabeth.    1737.    12  yrs.    9"  x  9".    2  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch.    Verse  184. 

Arthur  H.  Smith,  Esq. 

Atkins,  Hannah.  1758.  Boston  [Mass.].  20  yrs.  7^"  x  14|".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  and 
eyelet-stitch.    Cross-borders.  Miss  Helen  L.  Wells 

Atkins,  Mary  Rttssell.  1762.  Newbury  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  Born  August  30,  1753.  7"  x  11". 
2  alphabets.    Cross,  satin,  and  eyelet-stitch.    Greek  fret.  The  Misses  Marquand 

Atkinson,  Abigail.    12  yrs.    8"  x  12".    Cross-stitch.    Carnation  border.    Miss  Sarah  C.  Currier 

Atkinson,  Judith.  [Cir.  1735.]  Newbury  [Mass.].  6^"  x  11".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Cross-border.  Miss  Sarah  Jackson  Leigh 

Ayeb,  Patty.  1792.  Haverhill  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  13"  x  7".  2  alphabets  and  parts  of  3  others. 
Cross,  satin,  stem,  and  eyelet-stitch.  Strawberry  and  conventional  border.  Baskets  of 
flowers.    Verse  223.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Backler,  Sarah.  1788.  17^"  x  14".  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Border  of  strawberry,  rose,  carna- 
tion, and  other  flowers.    Trees,  birds,  butterfly,  and  rabbit.    Verse  210. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Bain,  Eliza  M.  1795.  East  Nottingham  [Md.].  8  yrs.  15"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Cross  and 
flat-stitch.    Greek  fret  border.    Verse  648.  Mrs.  A.  O.  Brandace 

Baker,  Betsy.     [Cir.  1789.]  Ipswich  [Mass.].    12"  x  13".    Verses  371,  490.    Mrs.  H.  C.  Bunner 

Baker,  Euzabeth.  1786.  [Milton  or  Dorchester?]  11  yrs.  Si"  x  18^".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Verse  40  (var.).  Mrs.  Lydia  Bowman  Taft 

Baker,  Lydia.  [Cir.  1790.]  Born  January  1,  1777.  8"  x  11".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  stem,  chain, 
French  knot,  cat,  hem,  queen,  buttonhole,  and  satin-stitch.  Vine  border  and  queen-stitch 
border.  Mrs.  Lydia  Bowman  Taft 

Balch,  Betty.  1786.  Bradford  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  8^"  x  10|".  1  alphabet.  Satin-stitch. 
Verse  364.     [Grandmother  of  General  Greeley.]  Mrs.  Adolphus  W.  Greeley 

Balch,  Polly.  [Cir.  1788.]  Born  December  3,  1776.  8i"  x  llf".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Border  of  wild  roses,  thistles,  clover.    Name  of  Clarissa  WaUingsford  at  bottom. 

Miss  Lucasta  J.  Boynton 

Baldwin,  Eliza.  1780.  10^"  x  12".  2^  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Baskets  of 
fruit  and  conventional  clover.  Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 


3?"-. 


'  i"HtauJ-' 


■    .  /  aj*?^irfc^-jj^«J^_5j.v;^^»-^? 


wOO    TKy  soft  BOSOM 

icet  r .  r  worLD 


...    ...-.(' '. !' 

-  ./V  ->»<   )ft-     ■"^  u' 


platp:  XIII 


M  -"  tMinirr'ii'nr  11'- 


Katiierixe  Holdex's  Sampler.     Providence,  R.  I.?     173.3 
Oicned  by  Mhx  M.  Frunces  Babcock  and  Mrs.  Wliislozc  Upton 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  31 

Baldwin,  Ruthe.  1794.  11  yrs.  Satin,  stem,  cat,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  floral 
border.  In  upper  section  large  bush  with  two  birds  and  lamb  on  mound.  In  lower  section 
two  large  birds  on  tree  stumps  and  sheep  on  mound  in  center.    Verse  92  (2). 

Edward  R.  Trowbridge,  Esq. 

Baldwin-,  Sally.  [Cir.  1794.]  Satin,  stem,  cat,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Floral  border.  House 
sketched  in  at  bottom  and  unfinished.  Two  birds  on  branch  growing  from  tree  stump  at 
right  and  bird  on  stump  at  left.  Sheep  at  either  side  of  house  climbing  up  steep  bank, 
house  and  one  sheep  sketched  in  but  unfinished.    Verse  72.     Illustrated. 

Edward  R.  Trowbridge,  Esq. 

Baley,  Sabah.  1738.  10  yrs,  8"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Cross  and  queen-stitch.  Conventional 
border.    Rose  and  carnation,  queen-stitch  strawberries.    Verse  184. 

Newport  Historical  Society 

Ball,  Jane.  1762.  Charleston  [S,  C,].  8i"  x  8^".  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  with  Greek 
key  design  on  sides,  4  hearts  forming  an  oval  at  top  and  bottom.  Verses  92  (2,  var.), 
185  (var,),  345.  .  Mrs.  William  Ball 

Bancroft,  Maey  Stancliffe.  1792.  7  yrs,  16"  x  16".  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Carnation 
border.    Cross-borders  of  animals,  trees,  dishes,  carnations,  and  acorns.    Verse  636, 

Robert  P.  Jordan,  Esq. 

Bancroft,  Rachel.  1793.  Barnard  [Vt.].  11  yrs.  17i"  x  17^".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  chain, 
eyelet,  and  loop-stitch.  Outside  border,  openwork;  inside  border,  vine  and  flowers.  Greek 
fret  cross-borders.    Verse  617.  Mrs.  W.  P.  Brooks 

Bancroft,  Sarah.  1795.  [12  yrs.]  8^"  x  8V'.  Cross,  stem,  and  tent-stitch.  Vine  border  with 
roses.  Scene  with  church,  house,  and  man  fishing.  "Do  justly,  love  mercy,  walk  humbly 
with  thy  God."    See  Cover.  Estate  of  Samuel  Bancroft,  Jr. 

Barclay,  Anne.  1797,  8  yrs,  12"  x  15",  2  alphabets.  Cross  and  eyelet-stitch.  2  large  vases 
containing  carnations,  1  small  vase.    Verse  655.  Barclay  Ward,  Esq. 

Barker,  Welthe.  1781.  9  yrs.  7f "  x  9J".  2  alphabets.  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.    Verse  506,  Miss  Ruth  B.  Franklin 

Barney,  Sarah.  1741.  11  yrs.  8"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Petit-point  and  very  fine  cross-stitch. 
Tulip  border  with  cross-borders  of  rose,  Greek  fret,  wide  conventionalized  tulip,  rose,  and 
fuchsia,  and  wide  conventionalized  passion  flower  and  bird,  and  trefoil  designs.    Verse  489, 

Brooks-Reed  Gallery 

Bartlett,  Elizabeth,  1762.  Plymouth  [Mass.],  7  yrs.  12i"  x  15",  1  alphabet.  Cross  and 
satin-stitch,  Strawberrj'  border.  Cross-borders  of  flowers  and  scrolls.  "Remember  your 
Creator,"  etc.    Verse  695.  Mrs.  Cora  L.  Pike 

Batchelder,  Mary.  [1773.]  Born  Jtme  13,  1757.  1(M"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Trefoil  border  on  three  sides.  Cross-borders  of  conventionalized 
carnations.  Large  vase  filled  with  carnations,  two  birds,  two  butterflies,  and  flowers  grow- 
ing in  the  grass.    Verse  211.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Beal,  Susanna.  1784.  10  yrs.  82"  x  91".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  with  Greek 
border  at  top.    Sheep,  Iambs,  and  trees.  Mrs.  Lillian  M.  Highley 

Beck,  Elizabeth.  1791.  Philadelphia  [Pa.].  21  yrs.  4^"  x  7|".  1  alphabet.  Cross,  cat,  and 
eyelet-stitch.    Conventional  cross-border,  pine  trees.  Mrs.  Henry  I.  Budd 

Becket,  Sally.  1782.  Salem  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  15"  x  18i".  1  alphabet.  Stem,  eyelet,  satin, 
and  tent-stitch.  Solid  stem-stitch  border.  Flowers,  trees,  house,  building  at  bottom; 
flowers,  birds,  vines,  plant  in  tub  at  top.    Verse  490  (var.).  Louis  D.  Millett,  Esq. 


32  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Beret,  Mahy.  1799.  11  yrs.  11"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  and  eyelet-stitch.  Border, 
baskets  of  flowers,  strawberries,  etc.    House,  2  women,  bird,  conventional  tree. 

Mrs.  Richard  H.  Hunt 

Bevis,  Hannah.  1769.  11  yrs.  7h"  x  9*".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Conventional  cross- 
borders.    Verse  9.  Miss  Susan  W.  Osgood 

BicKNALL,  Mahy.    [1798.    Barrington,  R.  I.    Born  in  1783.]    8"  x  7",    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch. 

Howard  M.  Chapin,  Esq. 

BiCKNEix,  Eliza  [or  Elizabeth].  1793.  Abington  [Mass.].  17  yrs.  9"  x  8".  Alphabet.  Cross- 
stitch.    Verse  490  (var.).  Mrs.  James  M.  Hunnewell 

BiGBi,  Elizabeth.  1796.  8  yrs.  and  8  mos.  12"  x  15".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Carnation 
and  vine  cross-borders.    Animals  and  plants.    Verses  230,  522.        Robert  P.  Jordan,  Esq. 

Billings,  Hannah  R.  1784.  15  yrs.  16^"  x  16*".  3  alphabets.  Border  of  flowers  and  vines. 
Verse  136.  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

BisPHAM,  Catherine.    1755.    5  yrs.    7|"  x  10".     Parts  of  3  alphabets.    Plain,  broad  border. 

Mrs.  R.  S.  Southard 

BLtJCKER,  Nicholas.    1790.     Albany  [N.  Y.].    9  yrs.,  7  mos.,  11  dys.    20^"  x  24".    2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.    Rose  border.    Conventional  cross-border.    Verse  215. 
Sons  and  daughters  of  John  N.  and  Margaret  Blucker 
Perry  Blucker,  Mary  Blucker,  Anatla  Blucker,  Letty 
Bliicker,  Elizabeth  Bliicker,  Hannah  Blucker,  Nicholas  Blucker 

Mrs.  Oeorge  Walton  Green 
Blunt,  Mart  Ann.    1799.    10  yrs.    Alphabet.    Verse  601  (1,2).  Miss  Frances  Goodwin 

BoAHDMAN,  Sarah.  1799.  Newburyport  [Mass.  12  yrs.].  Born  April  2,  1787.  8*"  x  11". 
3  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  and  eyelet-stitch.  Hemstitched  at  sides.  Greek  fret  cross- 
border  at  bottom,  also  birds,  tree,  and  strawberries.  Offin  Boardman  Marshall,  Esq. 

Bollard,  Susannah.  1787.  IIV  x  19J".  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Trees, 
antelope,  birds,  and  basket  of  flowers.  "If  thou  scorn  the  Rod,  Believe  and  tremble,  thou 
art  judged  of  God."    Verse  208.  Miss  Isabella  Hagner 

Bond,  Catherine.  1797.  12  yrs.  13"  x  14i".  Alphabet.  Cross  and  eyelet-stitch.  Conven- 
tional border.    Hearts,  pedestals,  baskets,  animals,  etc.    Verses  99,  282,  345. 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Bond,  Lydia.    1794.    Leicester  [Mass.].    12"  x  7".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.       Mrs.  Brouwer 

Boswohth,  Olive.  1795.  10  yrs.  9^"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Border  of 
flowers.    Panel  with  verse  and  flowers.    Verse  140.  Mrs.  Robert  Mercur 

Boutin,  Anne.  1769.  11  yrs.  9"  x  11".  1  alphabet.  Very  fijie  cross  and  satin-stitch.  Border 
of  upright  trees.    House  and  tree,  etc.    Verses  129,  358.      Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

BowDiTCH,  Eunice.  1718.  Salem  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  Born  March  22,  1707.  4  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Narrow  conventional  cross-borders.  Essex  Institute 

Bowers,  Martha.  [1790.]  11  yrs.  Born  May  21,  1779.  8"  x  11".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Cross-border  of  irregular  figures  at  top.  Horace  Cecil  Fisher,  Esq. 

Bowman,  Anne.  1779.  Brownsville  [Pa.].  8  yrs.  18"  x  21".  Cross  and  stem-stitch.  Rose 
border.    Trees,  flower-pots,  and  bees.    Verse  604.  Mrs.  William  G.  Park 

Bowman,  Lydia.     1767.     16  yrs.    6i"  x  7J".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  border. 

Mrs.  Lydia  Bowman  Taft 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  33 

BoYLSTOX,  Mary.  1763.  [Boston?].  11  yrs.  8"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry  cross-border.    Verse  596.  Mrs.  Charles  E.  Cotting 

Bradbuhy,  Harriet.  1786.  15"  x  17^".  Cross  and  stem-stitch.  Rose  border.  Vase  of  flowers. 
Verse  625.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Bradford,  Sylvia.    1788.    2^"  x  11".    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.  Pamelia  Washburn  Cram 

Bradlee,  Rachel.    1792.    Milton  [Mass.].    13  yrs.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  637. 

Mrs.  E.  D.  Wadsworth 

Bradley,  Elizabeth.  1792.  Dracut  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border. 
Verse  513.  Mrs.  Edward  Steese 

Bradway,  Sarah.  1792.  [Lower  AUoway  Creek  Township,  N.  J.  17  yrs.]  Born  June  12,  1775. 
8|"  X  12".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cross,  and  flat-stitch.  Flat-stitch  border.  Cross-borders, 
Greek  cross  and  strawberry.  Verse  586  (1,  2).  S.  B.  [Sarah  Bradway],  A.  B.  [Anna 
Bradway],  E.  B.  [Ezra  Bradway],  J.  B.  [John  Bradway],  R.  B.  [Rachel  Bradway]. 
William  Bradway,  Sarah  Bradway  [nee  Hancock],  [parents].  Miss  Kate  S.  Harris 

Bbay,  Nancy.  1799.  lOf"  x  171".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Plain  cross-stitch 
border.    Trees,  diamonds,  hearts,  etc.    "John  Bray    Susan  Bray."    Mrs.  William  H.  Chew 

Braytost,  Constant.  1770.  Somerset  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  15"  x  20".  [Born  1758.]  1  alphabet. 
Cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Conventional  cross-borders  of  flowers  and  birds.  Verses  127, 
488  (var.).  Miss  Nancy  Winslow  Mitchell 

Brayton,  Rebecca.     [1788.]     9"  x  9".    2  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  James  N.  Bourne 

Breck,  Margaret.     1741.     Dorchester  [Mass.].     12  yrs.     7^"  x  16".     1  alphabet.     Cross  and 

satin-stitch.    Conventional  cross-borders.    Verses  128  (1,  var.),  188.    Miss  Helen  M.  Shaw 

Breck,  Melia.  1781.  Boston  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  17"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  flat,  and 
cat-stitch.    Vine  border.    Verse  507.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Breed,  Hannah.  1760.  Charlestown[?].  [13  yrs.]  Born  December  28,  1747.  Hi"  x  7i". 
4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cross,  and  stem-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge.  Conventional  border  in 
cross  and  stem-stitch.    Conventional  cross-borders.    Verse  132  (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  Mary  H.  Hayes 

Brenton,  Frances.  1775.  Newport  [R.  I.].  Oval  shape.  Outline-stitch.  Border  of  flowers. 
Design,  map  of  France.    Illustrated.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Brewster,  Sarah.  1777.  Unfinished.  Preston  [Conn.?].  8  yrs.  &i"  x  11^".  1  alphabet. 
Cross-stitch.    Two  rows  of  stars  connected  by  cross-lines.    Verses  128  (1),  188. 

W.  O.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Briggs,  Anna.  1799.  Salem  [Mass.].  17"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and  chain-stitch.  Border 
of  vine  and  flowers.    Flower  baskets  in  corners  and  small  arbor  in  center. 

Mrs.  Lucy  Lyman 
Brigham,  Sukey  LoRiNDA.    1786.    Boston  [Mass.].    10  yrs.    12f"  x  16f".    2  alphabets.     Flat, 
cross,  and  stem-stitch.    Vine  border.    Wild  rose  vine  aroimd  panel. 

Thomas  Munroe  Shepherd,  Esq. 

Britton,  Catharine.  1786.  Near  Wilmington  [Del.].  7"  x  7^".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet,  flat, 
chain,  and  cross-stitch.    Cross-stitch  border.    Family  initials.  Mrs.  Richard  T.  Cann 

Bromfeild,  Abigail.  1737.  11  yrs.  8^"  x  16^".  3  alphabets.  French  knot,  stem,  eyelet,  and 
cross-stitch.    Cross-borders  in  rose  and  vine  designs.    Verse  185. 

Mrs.  M.  A.  DeWolfe  Howe 


34  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Brooks,  Rosefaih.  1786.  Barre  [Mass.].  15  yrs.  11"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cross,  and 
satin-stitch.  Berry  and  vine  border.  Ephraim  Brooks  her  father,  Eunice  Brooks  her 
mother.  Miss  Fanny  Young 

Browx,  Abigail  ("Nabby").  1774.  Tiverton  [R.  I.].  1.5  yrs.  10"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Symmetrical  floral  design.  Adoniram  B.  Judson,  M.D. 

Brown,  Axna.  1797.  13  yrs.  18"  x  22".  1  alphabet.  Tapestry,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Border  of  vivid  and  elaborate  conventional  flowers.  Conventional  cross-borders  of 
flowers.    House,  trees,  and  birds  in  center.    Verse  100.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Brown,  Betty.  1793.  Lexington  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  8"  x  9^".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    Border  of  scrolls.    Birds  and  strawberries.  Miss  Emily  A.  Peirce 

B[rown],  E[ijza].  1793.  Salem  [N.  J.].  7  yrs.  8"  x  7f".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet,  buttonhole, 
and  cross-stitch.  Border  across  top  and  sides  of  modified  Greek  fret  with  strawberries. 
F.  B.  E.  B.  F.  A.  E.  A.  F.  B.  A.  B.  E.  B.  A.  B.  M.  A.  B.  (Supposed  to  be  initials  of 
members  of  family  of  E.  B.)     Verse  343  (1).  Miss  Lucy  Dennis  Holme 

Brown,  Elizabeth.  August  16,  1770.  12i"  x  13".  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth  and 
carnation  border.    Hill,  sheep,  trees,  conventional  urns  with  flowers,  etc.    Verses  500,  501. 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Brown,  Eunice.    12  yrs.    7^"  x  21^".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Flower 

Brown,  Fannt.  1773.  9  yrs.  7i"  x  9^".  Cross-stitch.  Adam  and  Eve  and  Tree  of  Knowl- 
edge; Sim  and  moon  in  upper  corners.  Mrs.  Renwick  C.  Hurry 

Brown,  Joanna.    1794.    9  yrs.    8"  x  5".    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Willis  H.  White 

Brown,  Mary.  1761.  9"  x  11".  1  alphabet.  Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  vines 
and  rosebuds.    Trees  and  baskets  of  flowers.    Verse  594  (1).  Mrs.  Winthrop  H.  Wade 

Brown,  Mary.  [1785.]  9  yrs.  Born  January  19,  1776.  17"  x  23".  4  alphabets.  Petit-point, 
eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  vines,  strawberries,  and  saw-teeth.  Cross-borders. 
Trees,  birds,  animals,  baskets,  etc.    Verse  202  (1).  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Brown,  Mary.  1787.  [Salem,  Mass.?]  11  yrs.  17"  x  22".  1  alphabet.  Cross  and  overhand 
stitch.  Shepherd  and  shepherdess  at  bottom  with  lambs;  trees  and  vines  at  sides;  roses 
at  top.    Verse  40  (var.).  Francis  H.  Bigelow,  Esq. 

Brown,  Mary.  1792.  8  yrs.  13"  x  17".  Cross-stitch.  Carnation  border.  Adam  and  Eve, 
apple  tree,  serpent,  and  bay  trees,  at  bottom.  In  center,  two  men,  stag,  crowns,  etc. 
Verse  71.  Mrs.  Willard  Saulsbury 

Brown,  Mary.  1793.  New  Haven  [Conn.].  15  yrs.  10"  x  12".  [Born  1777.]  2  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  border.  Cross-borders,  trees,  and  fancy 
stitches.    Verse  377.  Edward  M.  Bradley,  Esq. 

Brown,  Mary.  1799.  Newburj'port  [Mass.].  16"  x  18".  Alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet,  stem, 
feather,  cross,  and  other  stitches.  "How  ridiculous  is  the  girl  who  wilfully  swallows  the 
poison  of  flattery.  For  any  personal  charms,  and,  in  the  height  of  her  intoxication  can  be 
insolent  or  conceited!  What  woman  of  spirit  should  not  aspire  to  qualities  that  are  less 
accidental  and  less  subject  to  change!  What  woman  of  reflexion  should  not  resolve  to 
adorn  and  cultivate  a  mind  whose  treasure  may  be  inexhaustible  and  whose  attractions 
never  die."  "Each  pleasing  art  lends  highness  to  our  minds,  and  with  our  studies  are  our 
lives  refin'd?"    Verse  102.  Newburyport  Historical  Society 


-y^] 


f  ;J'if  ry,£4>f  ^•^j'^r'''  '^>^r}?*t*gr  rkh^  tin  d  ^ii"  Gct4 1 


i4 


PLATE  XIV 


Haxxaii  Trecothick's  Sampler.     Boston,  Mass. 
Oicned  by  Mias  Jane  E.  C.  Chapincm 


1T38 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  85 

Beown,  Polly.  1785.  [Boston?]  15  yrs.  Born  May  19, 1770.  8*"  x  12^".  2  alphabets.  Cross 
and  stem-stitch.  Flowers  and  vines  around  panel  with  name;  also  flanked  by  Continental 
soldier.    Verse  599.  Thomas  Munroe  Shepherd,  Esq. 

Bhowx,  Sarah.  [Cir.  1750.]  Salem  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  11^"  x  15^".  4  alphabets.  Cross  and 
satin-stitch.     Strawberry  borders.  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Babbidge  Heald 

Beuce,  OLm:.  13  yrs.  8"  x  8".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  and  cat-stitch.  Cross-borders. 
Verse  668.  Fitchburg  Antique  Shop,  1917 

Buck,  Phebe.  1798.  [Fairfield  Township,  N.  J.]  10  yrs.  Born  November  4,  1787.  13f"  x 
17f ".  5  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  stem,  eyelet,  chain,  queen,  tent,  and  outline  stitch.  Cross- 
borders  of  rosebuds  and  strawberries;  urns  of  flowers  on  sides;  detached  geometrical  de- 
signs at  bottom.    Verse  662.  Mrs.  J.  Ogden  Burt 

BucKLiN,  Betsy.  1781.  Providence  [R.  I.].  12"  x  16".  Great  variety  of  stitches.  Strawberry 
border.    House,  trees,  a  man  and  two  women,  sheep,  and  angels.    Verses  2,  366. 

Miss  Elizabeth  L.  Betton 

BucKanNSTEE,  Maby.  [Cir.  1740.]  Framingham  [Mass.].  Born  November  5,  1726.  11"  x  9". 
2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Hemstitched  border.    Greek  fret  cross-borders. 

Miss  Frances  M.  Lincoln 

BuFFUM,  Ltjct.    1786.    14  yrs.    6"  x  4".    1  alphabet.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.    The  Misses  Collins 

BuLioD,  Mercy.  [Cir.  1770.]  Born  July  30,  1757.  7"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Petit-point,  queen, 
and  cross-stitch.  Queen-stitch  border.  Cross-stitch  designs  of  strawberries,  birds,  roses, 
house,  trees,  man,  and  woman.    Verse  undecipherable.  Miss  Deborah  Stoddard 

Bull,  Mabtha  H.    1795.    8"  x  8".    2  alphabets.    Eight  lines  and  a  serpentine  border  at  bottom. 

Walpole  Galleries,  1917 

BuLLABD,  Mab[y].  1781.  Oakham  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  Cross  and  stem-stitch.  Flowers.  Verse 
490  (var.).  Miss  Editha  Keefe 

BuLLEB,  Ann.  1786.  [Philadelphia?]  21"  x  20".  Fine  cross-stitch,  satin,  eyelet,  stem-stitch, 
buttonholing  in  scallops,  chain-stitch.  Strawberry  border,  trefoil  and  saw-tooth  cross- 
borders.  Man  sitting  in  a  tent,  orange  trees,  camels,  six  lean  sheep,  a  cow,  and  men  and 
women.    Also  a  well-house.    Verses,  top  and  middle,  too  indistinct  to  read.    Illustrated. 

Mrs.  Charles  M.  Greene 

BuLYN,  Maey  or  Martha [?].  1730.  Kensington  [Pa.].  9i"  x  9^".  Petit-point  and  back- 
ground stitch.    Tree,  birds,  shepherdess,  sheep,  and  other  animals.     Illustrated. 

Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 

Burgess,  Maey.  August  23,  1725.  10  yrs.  17"  x  17^".  1  alphabet.  Flat,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Cross-borders  of  carnation.  Greek  fret.  Rose,  vine,  trefoil,  trees,  birds,  and  small  designs. 
Verse  127.  The  Misses  Kenyon 

BuHRAGE,  Mehitabel.     1747.    6"  X  1\".    1  alphabet.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 

Miss  H.  E.  Cummings 

BuRRiLL,  Hannah.  June  2,  1770.  11  yrs.  "Born  September  10,  1758."  14"  x  18".  2  alphabets. 
Cross,  satin,  stem,  flat-stitch.  Floral  border.  At  top,  two  couples  sitting  imder  a  tree.  In 
center,  a  lady  and  gentleman,  each  with  a  large  bird  on  the  hand,  on  either  side  of  an  urn. 

George  L.  Shepley,  Esq. 

Butcher,  Mary.  1740.  [New  Jersey.]  12"  x  18".  1  alphabet.  Satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 
Greek  fret  border.    Father  and  mother,  John  and  Mary  Butcher.    Grandfathers  and  grand- 


36  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

mothers,  John  and  Damaris  Butcher,  Peter  and  Sarah  Harvey.  Brothers  and  sisters, 
Sarah,  John,  Jonathan,  Kathtura,  Thomas.  Chinese  designs,  trees,  and  birds.  Verse  488 
(var.).  Miss  Jessie  Nicholson 

C ,  B .     179-.    4  yrs.     Born  February  17,  [?].    8^"  x  11^".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Saw-tooth  border.    Strawberrj'  and  carnation  border  at  bottom.      Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

C ,  E .    1796.    4"  X  2|".    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Parrots  and  baskets  of  flowers. 

Mrs.  Miles  White,  Jr. 

Caldwell,  Ltdla.     1796.     [11  yrs.]     Born  March  27,  1785.     Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Verse  386.  Mrs.  George  F.  Choate 

Caldwell,  Ruth.     [Cir.  1780.]     Hartford  [Conn.].    Born  August  12,  1767.    8"  x  9i".    1  alpha- 
bet.   Cross-stitch.    Trees,  birds,  fruit,  flowers,  and  lambs.    Fancy  design  below  name. 

Mrs.  Henry  P.  Briggs 

Caldwell,  Susanna.    1797.    Ipswich  [Mass.].    9  yrs.     8"  x  9".    1  alphabet.    Chain  and  cross- 
stitch.    Scroll  border.    Verses  10  (1),  128  (1,  var.).  Miss  Martha  A.  Palmer 

Calef,  Margabet.     1767.     Middletown  [Conn.].     13"  x  16".     Cross-stitch.     House,  hill,  trees, 
man,  woman,  birds,  sheep,  and  flowers.     Illustrated.  Mrs.  W.  8.  Fulton 

Capen,  Maey.      1784.      11  yrs.     12"  x  14§".     2  alphabets.     Tapestry,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry  border.    Elaborate  pastoral  scene.    Unfinished  verse  43. 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Cabbutt,  Maby.    1761.    13  yrs.    8"  x  4".    2  alphabets.    Satin,  bird's-eye,  and  cross-stitch.    Plain 
cross-borders.    Birds  and  conventional  designs.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Cahleton,  Sarah.     1789.     Methuen  [Mass.].     10  yrs.    15"  in  length.    2  alphabets.    Tent,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Vine  and  strawberry  border.    Trees,  rose-bush,  and  bird. 

Miss  Lucy  W.  Davis 

Cahpentee,  Abby.    1795.    llj"  x  8J".    5  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch.    Cross-stitch  border. 
Verse  620  (2).     (Unfinished.)  Edward  I.  Mulchahey,  Esq. 

Cahpenteh,  Eliza.     1797.    16^"  x  16^".    1  alphabet.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Vine  and  straw- 
berry border.    Houses,  trees,  man,  woman,  children,  deer,  birds,  and  flowers. 

W.  B.  Lawshe,  Esq. 
Cake,  Wait.     1737.    10  yrs.    20i"  x  101".    3  alphabets.    Verses  186  (1),  343  (1,  2),  346. 

Cakrell,  Mehetable.    1773.     [Near  Salem,  Mass.]     10  yrs.    lOi"  x  16i".    2  alphabets.    Eyelet, 
flat,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.    Vine  and  flower  border.    Bunches  of  strawberries.    Verse  128. 

Miss  Elizabeth  R.  Colles 

Caeeoll,  Maey  Claee.    1738.    12"  x  24".    10  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Large  vases  of  flowers, 
roses  on  each  side,  flower  border  below.    Verses  130,  345  (1). 
Exhibited  in  National  Museum,  Washington,  D.  C,  by  National  Society  of  Colonial  Dames 

Caeeoll,  Maey  Clare.    1739.    18"  x  9".    Alphabets.    French  knot,  chain,  eyelet,  stem,  cat,  tent, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Flowers  and  cross-borders. 

Maryland  Society  of  the  Colonial  Dames 
Caevel,  Patience.    1785.    Middleborough  [Plymouth  County,  Mass.].    3  alphabets.   Unfinished. 

Old  Dartmouth  Historical  Society 

Cash,  Phebe.     1789.    Newbury  [Mass.].     14  yrs.    9|"  x  IIV'.    2  alphabets.    Eyelet,  cross,  and 

quadruple  cross-stitch.    House,  trees,  and  shed.     Below,  second  design  of  birds  and  trees. 

Made  by  Negro  child  belonging  to  Mre.  Sarah  (Kent)   Atkins,  widow  of  Dudley  Atkins, 

Esq.,  of  Newbury.  The  Misses  Marquand 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  37 

Chace,  Elizabeth  D.  1T43.  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Verses  189,  342  (var.),  390.  "Value 
your  time.    The  foundations  of  virtue  and  knowledge  are  laid  in  youth." 

Old  Dartmouth  Historical  Society 

Chace,  Mary.  1T88.  [North  Paxton,  Mass.]  11  yrs.  16"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Stem-stitch. 
Rose  border.    Shield,  eagle,  and  horn  of  plenty.    "  In  God  we  Hope."    Verse  2a. 

Mrs.  George  H.  Davenport 

Chadwick,  Chahlot.  1798.  [Huntington  or  Greenport,  L.  I.]  12"  x  14".  Cross-stitch. 
Acorn  border.  Verse  at  top;  scattered  designs  of  trees,  flowers,  houses,  etc.,  in  center; 
row  of  conventional  flowers  at  bottom.    Verse  26.  Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 

Chalmebss,  Kathrike.  1796.  12|"  x  17|".  Cross-stitch,  long  and  short.  Strawberry  border. 
Lady  and  gentleman  in  Colonial  dress,  also  dogs,  birds,  trees,  etc.      Mrs.  George  C.  Fraser 

Chamberlaix,  Hetty  S.    1774.    9"  x  8".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  border,  plain 

cross-borders.  Miss  Eleanor  8.  Hall 

Chaxdler,  Anxa  and  Elizabeth.     [Cir.  1774.]     Gloucester   [Mass.].     "A.  Chandler  born  in 

York  March  8th  1743     E.   Chandler   born  in   Gloucester   May  2nd  1763".     IQl"  x   15|". 

3    alphabets.     Ej-elet,   cross,   and   satin-stitch.      Small   triangular    pattern   cross-borders. 

Verses  128,  187,  490  (var.).  Dedham  Historical  Society 

Chase,  Sally.  [Cir.  1790.]  Newbury  [Mass.].  Born  September  5,  1779.  7"  x  7".  1  alphabet. 
Cross-stitch.    Cross-stitch  border.  The  Misses  Tenney 

Chaver,  Elizabeth.    1758.    8"  x  11".  Mrs.  H.  E.  Gilllngham 

Chelton,  Joanna.  1796.  10"  x  17^".  3  alphabets.  Tent,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose 
border.  Trees  and  scattered  blossoms  on  a  grassy  slope.  "J  C.  AC.  TEC.  W  C. 
J  C.    E  C."  W.  R.  Lawshe 

Chequire,  Axx  Louise.  1799.  Baltimore  [Md.].  9  yrs.  15"  x  18".  4  alphabets.  Cross,  eye- 
let, and  chain-stitch.    Hemstitched  edge  with  strawberry  border.    Verse  665. 

National  Museum,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Chester,  Elizabeth.  1784.  11  yrs.  9"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Elaborate  cross- 
stitch  border.    Rising  sun  in  center.  Elsie  Schuyler  Cram 

Child,  Elizabeth.  1764.  12  yrs.  13^"  x  114".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  bird's-eye,  and  cross-stitch. 
Zigzag  border.    Basket  of  carnations.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Church,  Hannah.  1747.  14  yrs.  10^"  x  26^".  2  alphabets.  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Conven- 
tional borders.  Figures  of  persons  and  trees  in  pots.  Verse  40  (var.)  and  Collect  for  the 
Fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity.  Edward  B.  Andrews,  Esq. 

Church,  Lydia.  1791.  New  Haven  [Conn.].  "Mrs.  Mansfield's  School."  4  alphabets.  Petit- 
point,  stem,  satin,  chain,  queen,  eyelet,  couching,  and  cross-stitch,  also  spangles  sewed  on. 
Vine  and  flower  border  rising  out  of  vases  at  lower  corners.  Large  flowers  in  upper 
corners.  At  bottom,  scene  with  house,  trees,  fence,  two  men  and  a  woman,  and  several 
small  animals.     Verse  217.     Illustrated.  Hartford  Historical  Society 

Chute,  Judith.  1762.  [Rowley,  Mass.]  18  yrs.  8"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Cross-borders  in  various  stitches.  Howard  M.  Chapin,  Esq. 

Clap,  Hannah.  1770.  Dorchester  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  13|"  x  I62".  Stem,  cross,  and  other 
stitches.  Strawberry  border.  Conventional  cross-borders.  Fruit  tree,  birds,  animals,  etc. 
Verse  129  (var.).  Miss  Marion  S.  Abbot 

Clapp,  Catherine.  1793.  Dorchester  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  16"  x  16".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border  and  cross-borders.     Flowers,  Uons,  etc.    Verse  516.  Miss  Anna  Humphreys 


38  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Clakk,  Mahy.  1716.  13  yrs.  7^"  x  18".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch,  very  little  satin-stitch.  Part 
of  sampler  worked  upside  down.  Mrs.  Charles  E.  Atkinson 

Clark,  Mahy.  1789.  19"  x  16f ".  Floral  and  vine  border  in  outline,  chain,  French  knot,  satin, 
stem,  and  cat-stitch.  Center  of  sampler  done  in  great  variety  of  hollie-point  lace.  Illus- 
trated. Mrs.  Caroline  R.  Patterson 

Clark,  Phcebe.  1798.  Stony  Brook  [N.  J.].  14J"  x  20".  Cross,  satin,  and  stem-stitch.  Carna- 
tion and  tulip  border.    House  on  terrace,  trees,  flowers,  cows,  and  sheep.    Verse  236  (var.). 

Charles  Clark  Black,  Esq. 

Clark,  Ruth.  [Cir.  1798.  Vermont.]  11"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret 
border  across  center.  Initials  of  13  persons  with  date  of  birth,  and  initials  of  4  persons 
with  date  of  death,  probably  the  Clark  family.  Mrs.  George  O.  Barnes 

Classen,  Maey.  1725.  [Newport,  R.  I.]  7  yrs.  10"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  and 
cat-stitch.  Carnation,  trefoil,  and  Greek  fret  borders.  Birds  and  flowers  at  the  bottom. 
Verse  342.  Mrs.  Charles  K.  Bolton 

Clayton,  Mary.  1787.  18"  x  25".  Cross-stitch.  Morning-glory  border.  Strawberry  and 
other  conventional  designs  across  top.    Verse  370. 

Sale  of  Boss  H.  Maynard,  Esq.,  March,  1916 

CoALE,  Mary  Abby.  1797.  ["Morven"  in  Anne  Arundel  County,  Md.]  8  yrs.  [Born  Febru- 
ary 4,  1789.]     7"  X  10^".    4  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Cross-borders  of  different  stitches. 

Mrs.  Francis  T.  Redwood 

CoALE,  Mary  Abby.  [1799  or  1800.  "Morven,"  Anne  Arundel  County,  Md.  10  or  11  yrs.] 
7i"  X  8i".    1  alphabet.    Cross-borders.  Mrs.  Francis  T.  Redwood 

Coffin,  Dorothy  F.  [Cir.  1785.]  Born  May  8,  1774,  at  Newburyport  [Mass.].  17"  x  22". 
4  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  and  eyelet-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Hill,  trees,  flowers,  birds, 
animals,  etc.    Verse  368.  Miss  Helen  Pike 

Coffin,  Mary  Johnson.  1799.  Newbury  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  11"  x  14^".  2  alphabets.  French 
knot,  stem,  satin,  outline,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  and  rose  borders.  Cherry  tree, 
bird,  lamb,  vase  of  roses,  etc.  Mrs.  Edward  O.  Shepard 

Coggeshall,  Eliza.  1784.  10  yrs.  16^"  x  12".  1  alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose 
border.     House,  people,  birds,  and  dogs.  "Duty  to  God    Fear  and  Love  we  owe  above." 

Miss  Eliza  A.  Kaighn 

Coggeshall,  Mary.  1774.  Newport.  15"  x  10^".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Verse 
502  (var.).  Miss  Eliza  A.  Kaighn 

Coggeshall,  Patty.  [Cir.  1790.]  "Bristol  New  E."  Born  February  15,  1780.  15"  x  20". 
1  alphabet.  Cross,  split,  satin,  and  queen-stitch.  Border  of  various  flowers  at  sides,  and 
at  top  figures  of  men,  women,  animals,  etc.  In  center,  two  scenes  with  men,  women,  chil- 
dren, trees,  birds,  animals,  etc.    Verse  594  (1,  var.).    Illustrated  in  color. 

Metropolitan  Museum,  New  York 

CoGiLL,  Martha.  1763.  Philadelphia.  18  yrs.  18"  x  12".  Eyelet,  satin,  petit-point,  drawn- 
work,  and  hemstitch.  Drawn-work  and  buttonhole-stitch  in  border.  Flower-pot  with 
sprays  of  flowers.  Flowers  in  drawn-work  in  14th  century  embroidery.  Name  and  date 
on  pot.  Mrs.  Clarence  North 

Cogswell,  Abigail.  1792.  Ipswich  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  Born  January  7,  1781.  8"  x  9^".  3  alpha- 
bets. Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Plain  hemstitched  border.  Conventional  design  in  eyelet- 
stitch.  Mrs.  William  C.  West 


■".0-.^  4   •      ■•■■- 

■   f^  v.: 

■■■-- 

<■.'■■■. 

?•:  ^-'■^: 

c^^^^:  ^:' :; 


u'--...  '--"A 


''Si.  fe- 


^  ; 


OS     »- 


S  ^ 


C 
Ed 

c 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  39 

Cogswell,  Betsy.  [Cir.  1775.]  Born  August  25,  1764.  13"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Cross  and 
satin-stitch.    Space  left  unfinished.  Mrs.  Henry  Lowell  Hiscock 

Cogswell,  Hannah.  [Cir.  1778.]  Born  November  6,  1767.  9^"  x  10".  1  alphabet.  Cross  and 
satin-stitch.    Cross-borders.    Trees.  Mrs.  Henry  Lowell  Hiscock 

Cogswell,  Sahah.  1773.  Born  June  8,  1763.  8"  x  8*".  2  alphabets.  Cross  and  satin-stitch. 
Cross-borders.  Mrs.  Henry  Lowell  Hiscock 

CoLcoTT,  Dorcas.  1796.  Romsey.  16"  x  24".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  petit-point,  eyelet,  cross, 
satin,  and  2-sided  line-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Darky  stealing  a  chicken,  bushes,  birds, 
parrot  on  a  tree,  pillars  of  flowers,  etc.,  in  center ;  at  bottom,  parrot  on  a  tree,  house,  fence, 
barn,  deer,  etc.    Verse  531a.  Mr.  Colket 

Coleman,  Ann.    Verse  341. 

Coleman,  Elizabeth.  1766.  Philadelphia  [Pa.].  9  yrs.  12^"  x  12^".  Cross,  satin,  stem,  and 
tent-stitch.     Floral  border.     Verse,  "The  Universal  Prayer,"  by  Pope. 

Horace  Wells  Sellers,  Esq. 

Collins,  Ruth.  [Cir.  1795.]  Hopkinton,  R,  I.  [Born  May  2,  1784.]  7|"  x  11".  2  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Floral  borders.  Fruit  trees  topped  by  large  birds. 
Verse  649.  Miss  F.  B.  Kenyan 

[CoLUNS,  Teyphenla.  Cir.  1790.]  21"  x  22".  Cross-stitch.  Rosebud  border.  Strawberry  and 
conventional  cross-borders.  Large  sprays  of  flowers  and  two  butterflies  in  center.  Verses 
23,  34.    Illustrated.  Mrs.  B.  Osgood  Peirce 

Conant,  Chahlotte.     1790.    4"  x  6i".    "Her  Examplar."     1  alphabet. 

A.  8  tain  forth,  Dealer,  1917 
Conant,  Sakah.    1790.    6"  x  4".    "Her  Exampler."    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch. 

M.  B.  Lemon,  Dealer 

Cooche,  Francis  Elizabeth.  1735.  11"  x  14".  Large  vase  with  handles,  holding  carnations, 
tulips,  and  rosebuds.     Flowers  scattered  on  grass. 

Mrs.  E.  A.  Whelan  and  Miss  Mary  Zellar 

Code,  Moeilla.  1714.  [Date  questionable.]  10  yrs.  9"  x  7".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  House, 
trees,  and  shrubs,  also  large  detached  rose  in  upper  corner.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Cooper,  Elizabeth.  1763.  Woodbury  [N.  J.],  11  yrs.  9"  x  11^",  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.  Cross-borders.  Initials:  J.  C.  A.  C.  T.  M.  M.  M.  D.  C.  S.  C.  A.  C. 
A.  C.    P.  C.     A.  C.    W.  C.    Verse  697.  3Iiss  Sibyl  T.  Jones 

Cooper,  Susanna.  1798.  12  yrs.  12^"  x  13 J".  Stem,  satin,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and 
flower  border.    In  center,  large  basket  filled  with  fruit.  Mrs.  G.  H.  Buek 

Copp,  Ester.  1755.  11  yrs.  12"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Tree  and  tulips.  "Better 
it  is  to  be  of  an  humble  spirit  with  the  lowly,  than  to  divide  the  spoil  with  the  proud." 

Gift  of  John  B.  Copp  to  the  National  Museum,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Cowan,  Eleanor.  1797.  Salem  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  124"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry.    Verse  601  (1,2,3).  Miss  Susan  W.  Osgood 

CowDREY,  Eliza.  1787.  12  yrs.  13"  x  17^".  Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  at  top  and 
bottom  of  carnations  and  vine;  at  sides  of  vine  and  triangular  leaves.  House,  peacocks  at 
each  side  of  door,  birds,  children,  men,  and  animals  in  upper  half.  Large  tree,  men,  chil- 
dren, birds,  flowers,  and  shrubs  in  lower  half.    Verse  41.  Alice  W.  Belcher 

Cowing,  Rachel.     1793.    Born  September  9,  1782.    Si"  x  8".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 


40  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Cowing,  Saeah.     [Cir.  1793.]  Born  March  29,  1782.    8^"  x  8^".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Cox,  Esther.  [Cir.  1768.  Near  Boston.]  Born  March,  1759.  9i"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Cross, 
satin,  stem,  chain,  French  knot,  and  buttonhole-stitch.  Border  of  conventional  flowers, 
which  spring  from  a  basket  in  middle  of  border  across  bottom;  peacock  in  middle  of  border 
at  top.  "  Nothing  lovelier  can  be  foimd  in  woman  than  to  study  household  Good  and  good 
works  in  her  Husband  to  promote."  "Remember  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth," 
etc,  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

CozzENS,  Eliza.  1795.  Satin,  split,  eyelet,  and  stem-stitch.  Border  of  vine  and  flowers.  In 
center,  basket  filled  with  fruit  and  berries;  birds  flying  above.    Illustrated. 

Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 

Crane,  Mehitable.  1793.  10"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  cross- 
stitch  borders.    Verse  641.  Miss  Hannah  Weston  Clap 

Ceeaton,  Lucretia.  1790.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  16^"  x  211".  Alphabet.  Split,  cat,  tent,  stem, 
satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Cross-borders  in  Greek  fret,  diamond, 
and  vase  designs.    Verses  92a  (2,  var.),  627.  Mrs.  John  F.  Bennett 

Cross,  Betsy.  1799.  Haverhill  [N.  H.].  9  yrs.  12^"  x  16^".  3  alphabets.  Border  design  is 
little  rings  linked  together.  Mrs.  Abram  Whitcomb 

Crow,  Elizabeth.  1747.  12^"  x  16".  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Double  strawberry  border.  At 
bottom,  trees,  rabbits,  basket  of  flowers,  etc.    Verse  131.  Mrs.  George  E.  Dadmun 

Crowninshield,  Mary.  1748.  Salem  [Mass.].  "Union  Academy."  8  yrs.  8"  x  8".  2  alpha- 
bets.   Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Carl  A.  de  Oersdorff 

Cummings,  Nancy.  1799.  Westford  [Mass.].  18^"  x  20".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cross,  satin, 
and  stem-stitch.  Border  of  strawberries,  carnations,  poppies,  roses,  and  vines,  also  berries. 
Trees  and  vase  filled  with  carnations,  roses,  etc.    Verse  601  (1,  2,  3,  var.). 

Mrs.  Henry  O.  Mitchell 

Curtis,  Lydia.  1799.  9  yrs.  10§"  x  11^".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
Carnation  border.    Trees  on  mounds.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Curtis,  Sarah.  1770,  Salem  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  8"  x  10",  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch,  Straw- 
berry border  on  three  sides.    Small,  separate  designs,  Essex  Institute 

CusHiNG,  Hannah,  [1796,]  10  yrs.  16"  x  12".  Cross-stitch,  Flowers  tied  with  a  blue  bow- 
knot.  Miss  Julia  Cushing 

CusHiNG,  Joanna.  1775.  Hingham  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  12"  x  14",  Alphabet,  Cross-stitch. 
Grecian  border.    Verses  128  (1,  var,),  607.  Mrs.  Frederick  Gate 

Cushing,  Lucy,  1792.  Turner  [Me,].  13  yrs.  12 J"  x  16".  3  alphabets  and  separate  letters. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border.  House,  grassy  terrace,  rose  bushes,  and  sun- 
flowers.   Verse  128  (1,  var,).    Tailpiece,  Mrs.  Paul  B  latch  ford 

Cushing,  Mary,  1799,  Scituate,  9§"  x  9§",  2  alphabets.  Drawn-work  and  cross-stitch. 
Verse  527,  A.  Stain  forth,  Dealer,  1917 

Cutter,  Hannah.  1771,  Portsmouth  [N.  H,],  11  yrs.  lOf"  x  221".  4  alphabets.  Cross, 
satin,  stem,  and  eyelet-stitch.    Trees  and  clover.  Miss  Mary  Hale  Wheeler 

Daintery,  Mary,  1721,  8  yrs,  [Born  December  22,  1713.  Near  New  Haven.]  12"  x  11". 
Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  vine  and  strawberry  blossoms,  and  cross-border  of 
the  same.  "Publius  Lentulus  his  Letter  to  the  Senate  of  Rome  concerning  Jesus  Christ." 
lUustrated.  Mrs.  G.  H.  Buek 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  41 

Davexpokt,  Abigail.  [Cir.  1750?]  11  yrs.  22"  x  8".  2  alphabets.  Two  crowned  lions  on  either 
side;  two  trees  topped  by  birds;  strawberries,  baskets,  etc.    Verse  126  (1,  2). 

Massachusetts  Historical  Society 

Davis,  Eles.    1798.    10"  x  12".    3  alphabets.   Cross-stitch.   Simple  line  border.   Verse  490  (var.). 

Miss  Charlotte  M.  Smith 

Davis,  Lydia.  1799.  Concord  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  15V'  x  17^".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Conventional  border  on  three  sides.  Conventional  designs.  Verses  142,  490 
(var.).  Mrs.  Joseph  B.  Ross 

Davis,  Mary.  1778.  [Burlington  County,  N.  J.]  8"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry  border.  Mrs.  Morris  D.  Wickersham 

Day,  Deborah.  177T.  Methuen  [Mass.?].  10"  x  16".  1  alphabet.  Stem-stitch.  Border  of 
carnations  at  top  and  vine  with  small  flowers  on  sides.  House,  tree,  birds,  dog,  two  ladies, 
etc.    Verse.  Mrs.  Charlotte  C.  Ames 

Deane,  Sylvia.    1784.    17  yrs.    9"  x  9".    2  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  L.  Earle  Rowe 
Deavenport,  Mariah.     1741.     12  yrs.     16"  x  10".    2  alphabets.    Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Conventional  cross-borders.    Adam  and  Eve  and  Tree  of  Knowledge.     Illustrated. 

Windham  Library 

De  Banc,  Suzanne  Louise.  1748.  8  yrs.  18"  x  8^".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Vine  border.  House,  trees,  birds,  animals,  woman,  two  angels,  etc.  Verse  in 
French,  588.  Mrs.  Rebecca  8.  Price 

Dejung,  Hannah.  1786.  Born  November  16,  1776.  9^"  x  8".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Cross-lines.    Verses  205,  206.  Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

DzmNG,  Sally.  1725.  3i"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Following  additions  probably 
put  in  by  Florence  Davis: 

Florence  Davis,  1865     Born  Dec  19 

Francis  Mead  Davis   1845    Dec  1 

Elizabeth  Deyo  Mead    1820    Jan  16 

Sally  Deming  Deyo    1799    March  15  Mrs.  Riley  A.  Vose 

Denny,  Polly.  1785.  Leicester  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  14"  x  7".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  eyelet,  and 
satin-stitch.  Mrs.  John  A.  Sweetser 

Derby,  Elizabeth.  1774.  Salem  [Mass.].  lOi"  x  14".  4  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  border  of  vine  and  flowers.  Conventional  cross-border  of  flowers,  "Idleness 
is  the  root  of  all  Evil."    "Modesty  becomes  the  fair  sex  thro  life."  Essex  Institute 

Dewey,  Charlotte.  1796.  11  yrs.  8"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  tent,  and  chain-stitch.  Vine 
border.    Tree  design.  Miss  Mary  Jeannette  Tilton 

Dick,  A[nna].  1797.  [Salem,  N.  J.  10  yrs.]  8^"  x  Hi".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  eyelet, 
buttonhole,  and  tent-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  [Father  and  mother]  Samuel  Dick 
Sarah  Dick.  [Sisters  and  brothers]  R.  D.  [Rebecca]  M.  D.  [Maria]  J.  D.  [Jane]  S.  D. 
[Sally]  A.  D.  [Anna]  I.  D.  [Isabel]  A.  D.  S.  D.  [Samuel]  W.  D.  [WiUiam],  Verse  343 
( 1  var. ) .  Miss  Maria  H.  Mecum 

Dick,  A[nna].  1799.  [Salem,  N.  J.  12  yrs.]  lOg"  x  llf".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  and 
buttonhole-stitch.  Conventional  border.  Cross-lines.  S  D  [Dr.  Samuel  Dick,  father] 
S  D  [Sarah  Dick,  mother]  R  D  [Rebecca]  M  D  [Maria]  J  D  [Jane]  S  D  [Sally] 
ID  [Isabel]  AD  [Anna,  who  made  sampler]  SD  [Samuel]  WD  [William]  MD  [Mary]. 
Verse  240.  Miss  Maria  H.  Mecum 


4.2  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Dickinson,  Polly.  1798.  Hadley,  Mass.  11  yrs.  Born  November,  1787.  Si"  x  9".  2  alpha- 
bets.   Cross-stitch.    Narrow  hem.    Verse  237.    [The  linen  was  woven  by  Polly  Dickinson.] 

Mrs.  H.  H.  Wells 

DiLLWYN,  Ann.  1753.  8  yrs.  [Born  in  1746  at  Burlington,  N.  J.]  8^"  x  9".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch  with  hole  in  center.  Miss  Susan  P.  Wharton 

Dole,  Elizabeth.  1752.  9  yrs.  Born  December  3,  1743.  lOJ"  x  14".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Twenty-two  cross-borders.  Newburyport  Historical  Society 

Dole,  Polly.  [1793.]  Newbury  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  Born  January  25,  1785.  7^"  x  9".  2  alpha- 
bets. Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Sides  hemstitched,  strawberry  vine  at  top,  picture  at  bottom. 
Basket  of  flowers.  Miss  Sarah  Jackson  Leigh 

DoLiBEB,  Anne  S.  1767.  [Marblehead.]  16  yrs.  7^"  x  10".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    Saw-tooth  border.    Carnation  cross-border  at  bottom.    Flower  designs.    Verse  357. 

Marblehead  Historical  Society 

Doubt,  Sabah.  1764.  9  yrs.  12"  x  20".  1  alphabet.  French  knot,  buttonhole,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Cross-borders  in  various  designs.  Elaborate  pastoral 
scene  at  bottom,  with  trees,  birds,  flowers,  animals,  man,  and  woman.    Verse  188. 

Mrs.  Richard  Cobb 

Douglass,  Peggy.  1796.  [Kent  County,  Del.  Worked  at  Mme.  Capron's  School,  Philadelphia, 
Pa.]  15^"  X  15^".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Roses,  carnations,  and  white 
berry  sprays  in  border.    Strawberry  wreath  at  bottom  enclosing  verse.    Verse  488  (var.). 

Miss  Harriet  Clayton  Comegys 

Dow,  Ruth.  1792.  12  yrs.  Born  May  3,  1780.  18"  x  21".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Double 
strawberry  border.  Cross-border  of  carnations.  Scene  with  house,  red  lion,  sheep,  birds, 
etc.    Verse  222.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Deafer,  Elizabeth.  1773.  [Age  worn  off.]  12J"  x  Hi".  3  alphabets.  Mostly  cross-stitch. 
Plain  border.    Trees  and  animais.    "Bless  the  Lord  O  My  Soul,"  etc. 

Miss  Sarah  M.  Draper 

Dhapeb,  Lendamine.  [Cir.  1791.  11  yrs.]  Born  in  Dedham,  March  30,  1780.  11"  x  15".  1  al- 
phabet. Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Double  border  of  eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Birds,  cats, 
vases,  trees,  etc.    Verse  373.  Mrs.  George  Marsh 

Draper,  Lydia.  1742.  13  yrs.  Born  December  16,  1729.  lOi"  x  15^".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  border.  "Nothing  is  so  sure  as  Death  &  nothing  is  so 
uncertain  as  the  Time  When  I  may  be  to  old  to  Live  but  I  can  never  be  to  young  to  Die 
I  will  so  live  every  hour  as  if  I  was  to  die  the  next."  Mrs.  Oliver  Wyeth 

Draper,  Susanna.  1778.  [10  yrs.]  12^"  x  17i".  3  alphabets.  Mostly  cross-stitch.  Plain 
border.    Trees  and  animals.    "Bless  the  Lord  O  my  Soul,"  etc.  Miss  Sarah  M.  Draper 

Driver,  Elizabeth.  1795.  Salem  [Mass.].  18"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Rose  border  across  top. 
Cross  and  stem-stitch.    Scene  with  man  and  woman  gayly  dressed,  hill,  dog,  and  butterflies. 

Essex  Institute 

Dudley,  Elizabeth.  1736.  Roxbury  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  8"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Great  variety 
of  stitches.  Plain  border.  Elaborate  design  with  birds,  etc.  Verse  128  (var.),  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  and  "Remember  thy  Creator,"  etc.     [Granddaughter  of  Governor  Joseph  Dudley.] 

Rev.  Dudley  Richards  Child 

Dudley,  Lucy.  1788.  Concord  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  10"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    Greek  fret  borders.  Miss  Gertrude  Pierce 


-,t 


foj-fl-ii V :-?,"•- ■■tt: J..        J  ,,',-,      -...-.  '-.-i    ■•:,--,..-  ■,"i--'- :■*•-.-  <  •      -f      ••,:    .■';     ,    ■!  i  :a  v,-;.!..^-i»    -v-  . 


•  ■■•'.      ;'<-«-4 


••  ,^       •       -iT-ini-Tiir«i-i^ i'~~t^  r™'*^'  ^1  r  r^^TT^l^^l;l^>«tll^|l■||llll|^^lfl^-^Wl■llnlJll>■ll■lln-•^n^nT^1^^  ,*.   •■).>•  ;    -f,-. 


^-- ""   '~^-At.^.:-''    -■■.;•  .."•    -■'.*,  ;  :":-:^vlJ-"'   ■"r-"^^''-''*  :--'V^!:- •»"•''■■'"'♦'''-•■'• "-  '•     ' -■*"^'i  -'':'•  i-' ^'  -^■"•-  J-J 


^la^t     'ill 


M 


PLATE  XVI 

Ruth  Haskell's  Sampler.     Cir.  1760 
Oieiied  by  the  Society  for  the  Preservation  of  Sexi:  England  Antiquities 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  43 

Duncan,  Esther.  1752.  8"  x  21".  Alphabets.  Ej'elet  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-borders  in 
scroll,  vine,  point,  lozenge,  and  circle.    Verse  495.  Mrs.  John  H.  Morison 

Dunn,  Harriet.    1790.     [New  Jersey.]     10  yrs.    7"  x  15".    4  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Miss  Katharine  Harriet  Oraham 

DuRBOROUGH,  Patty  Ringgold.  [Cir.  1791.  Ivy  HaU,  Kent  County,  Del.]  Born  in  1781. 
8"  X  8".    Alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Vine  border.  Mrs.  Frederic  Tyson 

Dyer,  Patty.  1797.  Providence  [R.  I.].  8  yrs.  12"  x  12".  4  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross- 
stitch.    Verse  47  (1).  Miss  Katherine  C.  Mitchell 

E ,  E.  D.    8"  X  10".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Simple  border.    Two  strawberry  plants  at 

bottom.  Groton  Historical  Society 

Eahl,  Esther.  1797.  [Near  Pemberton,  Burlington  County,  N.  J.]  11  yrs.  [Born  October  9, 
1786.]  12i"  X  17f".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  eyelet,  chain,  queen,  cat,  flat,  and  stem- 
stitch.    Strawberry  border. 

"  Esther  Earl    Daughter  of  Joseph  and 
Theodosia  Earl.    Her  work  in  her  11th  year 
1797.    Sarah  Shoemaker."    [Teacher?] 
Verse  654.  Miss  Sarah  Rowan  Budd 

Earl,  Maby.  [Cir.  1766.]  Born  September  9,  175(?).  8i"  x  20".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Cross-borders  in  various  designs.    Verse  128  (var.).  Mrs.  Fred  R.  Gibbs 

Easton,  Elizabeth.  1795.  10  yrs.  Born  June  8,  1785.  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Border, 
medley  of  flowers  and  birds.  Square  containing  her  name  and  date,  part  of  border.  In 
center  a  house,  with  a  man  on  the  left  and  a  woman  on  the  right.    Verse  10  (1  and  2). 

Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  New  York 

Eaton,  Elizabeth  A.  1797.  Dudley  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  16^"  x  16^".  2  alphabets.  Cross  and 
satin-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  In  center,  trees  with  birds ;  at  bottom,  house  in  right-hand 
corner,  basket  in  left-hand  corner,  verse  in  center.  Verse  235  (1).  [She  lived  to  be  one 
hundred  years  old.]  Mrs.  George  M.  Thornton 

Eddy,  Sabah  Ann.  1771.  Milbury.  11  yrs.  20"  x  20".  Alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  and  outline- 
stitch.    Vine  border.    House,  trees,  and  birds.    Verse  601  (1,  2,  var.). 

Mrs.  Augustus  Hemenway 

Edglow,  Jane.  1795.  "Begun  in  the  School  of  Industry,  1795."  16"  x  20".  Cross  and  chain- 
stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Man  and  woman  under  tree,  and  various  scattered  designs 
such  as  houses,  trees,  animals,  flowers,  etc.    Verse  521.  Mrs.  Richard  H.  Hunt 

Elkins,  Jean.  1796.  Marblehead  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  15^"  x  15".  1  alphabet.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.  Rose,  trefoil,  and  strawberry  border.  Stage  scene  with  curtain,  gentleman  present- 
ing a  flower  to  a  lady,  lamb  in  foreground  and  pots  of  flowers.    Verse  188. 

Mrs.  Arthur  A.  Bamford 

Ellery,  Maby  Gould.  1799.  6  yrs.  10"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Borders.    Verse  609  (var.).  Heirs  of  Mrs.  Henry  Rust  Stedman 

Ellis,  Elizabeth.  1799.  [Near  Crosswicks,  N.  J.  14  yrs.]  Born  October  5,  1785.  10^"  x  13". 
3  alphabets.  Cross  and  flat-stitch.  Strawberry  and  vine  border.  Sheep  and  lambs  in 
corner,  at  bottom;  also  birds,  trees,  and  large  flower-pot  between  two  green  plots. 

Mrs.  Rebecca  S.  Price 


44  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Ellis,  Mary.  1743.  Hem,  cross,  chain,  stem,  buttonhole,  and  lace-stitch.  Chain-stitch  border. 
Conventional  flowers.  Middle  worked  in  small  squares  to  leave  canvas  in  rows  of  diamond 
shape.  Some  of  these  contain  faint  figures,  probably  intended  for  a  multiplication  table. 
Illustrated.  Miss  Ellen  F.  Vose 

Ellis,  Mahy.  1749.  11  yrs.  7f "  x  12".  Cross-stitch.  Rosebud  border.  Large  vase  of  flowers 
and  small  baskets  of  fruit.    The  Lord's  Prayer.  Mrs.  H.  de  B.  Parsons 

Ellis,  Meeibah.  1793.  [Crosswicks,  N.  J.]  14  yrs.  [Born  January  8,  1779.]  9"  x  13^". 
3  alphabets.  Great  variety  of  stitches.  Strawberry  border.  At  bottom,  two  green  mounds 
with  two  trees  on  each,  flowers  growing  in  grass,  large  flower-pot  in  center.  Small  designs 
of  flowers,  baskets,  houses,  fruit,  and  birds.  Mrs.  Rebecca  8.  Price 

Elmer,  Esther.  1798.  [Fairfield  Township,  Cumberland  County,  N.  J.]  13i"  x  17i".  5  al- 
phabets. Cross,  satin,  stem,  eyelet,  queen,  tent,  and  outline-stitch.  Border,  carnation  and 
Greek  fret.  Strawberrj^  and  rosebud  cross-borders.  Urns  of  flowers  at  sides.  At  bottom, 
sprays  of  detached  geometrical  designs.  Verse  660.  J.  W.  E.  E.  [Esther  Elmer,  maker] 
D.  E.  [Daniel  Elmer,  brother]  W.  W.  [William  Westcott,  half-brother]  C.  E.  [Charles 
Elmer,  brother]     B.  T.  E.  [Benjamin  T.  Elmer,  brother].  Mrs.  J.  Ogden  Burt 

Elmer,  Sahah.  1787.  [Bridgeton,  N.  J.]  7  yrs.  10"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Fagot,  cross,  and 
satin-stitch.    Strawberry  plants  and  bird  on  branch.  Mrs.  Lewis  P.  Bush 

Emersok,  Axne.  1799.  13"  x  22".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  eyelet,  and  outline-stitch.  Hem- 
stitched edge.  Conventionalized  strawberry  and  carnation  border.  Rose  cross-borders  in 
flat-stitch.  Birds  and  sheep  under  trees  and  strawberry  plants;  sketchy  bird,  good  cow, 
etc.,  at  bottom.    Verse  634a.  For  sale  at  Koopman's 

Evans,  Eleanor.  1797.  13  yrs.  19"  x  19".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  stem,  and  chain-stitch. 
Vine  border  in  cross-stitch.  In  center  a  vase  full  of  flowers,  standing  on  a  table.  Names 
given  on  sampler,  as  follows:  Samuel  Evans,  Ann  Evans,  Edward  Morris,  Eleanor  Morris, 
Jacob  Evans,  Hannah  Evans,  Samuel  Evans,  Morris  Evans,  Jonathan  Evans,  George 
Evans,  Enos  Evans,  Aaron  Evans,  Eleanor  Evans,  Nathan  Evans,  Elizabeth  Evans. 
1797  A.  E.  "Behold  King  David  Tends  his  flocks  A  thousand  little  Lambs  Down"  .  .  . 
[needle  with  silk  at  end  of  this  unfinished  quotation].     Verse  503  (var.). 

Mrs.  E.  Boyd  Weitzel 

Farley,  Elizabeth.  1767.  10  yrs.  8"  x  9".  Alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Border  of  different 
patterns.    At  bottom,  conventional  design  in  fancy  stitches.     Verse  133. 

Miss  Florence  Farley  Caldwell 

Farley,  Sally.  1794.  Hollis  [N.  H.].  12  yrs.  15"  x  19i".  Cross,  laid,  and  stem-stitch. 
Strawberry  vine  around  three  sides.    At  bottom,  house,  sky,  and  trees.    Verse  645. 

Miss  Elizabeth  F.  Kelly 

Fearless,  Sallie.  1797.  15  yrs.  2O2"  x  24".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  stem,  French  knot, 
double-stitch,  and  hem-stitch.  Background,  solid  split-stitch.  Border,  Tree  of  Life,  on 
either  side  changing  into  conventional  wild  rose  design;  strawberry  design  at  base;  three 
doves  in  conventional  design  at  top.  Figures  of  man  and  woman,  etc.,  at  base.  Verse  40 
(var.).  Miss  Josephine  O.  Keniston 

Finney,  Eliza  A.    1703.    13  yrs.     12i"  x  9J".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  500. 

Mrs.  Hobart 

Fish,  Mary  Abrams.  10"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  eyelet,  and  satin-stitch.  Plain  cross-stitch 
border.  Fitchburg  Antique  Shop,  1917 

FisK,  Avis.  1790.  Waltham  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  12"  x  16".  1  alphabet.  Stem  and  cross-stitch. 
Greek  fret  border.  Leah  A.  Nunn 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  45 

Fitch,  Elizabeth  M.  1718.  9  yrs.  21"  x  2U".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cross,  and  queen-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.  Scattered  designs  at  top  of  birds,  flowers,  baskets,  etc.  Line  borders. 
Verse  340.  Lord's  Prayer.  "Remember  now  thy  Creator,"  etc.  "Follow  virtue  and  she 
will  guide  you  to  happiness."  Mrs.  H.  de  B.  Parsons 

FiTHiAN,  Rachel.  1756.  [Cumberland  County,  N.  J.]  12  yrs.  10"  x  124".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.  Trefoil  border.  Cross-borders  of  roses,  tulips,  and  strawberries.  "Samuel 
Fithian    Phebe  Fithian    E  P".    Verse  591. 

Mrs.  Helen  Pancoast  and  Miss  Anna  C.  Smith 

Fletcher,  Ann.  1792.  Chelmsford  [Mass.].  Born  July  20,  1780.  6^"  x  51".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  border.  Miss  Elizabeth  B.  Eeald 

Fletcher,  Anna.  1792.  Chelmsford  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  Born  July  20,  1780.  6J"  x  6i".  1  al- 
phabet.   Cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  border.  Miss  Elizabeth  B.  Heald 

Fletcher,  Rebecca.  [Cir.  1790.  Hopkinton,  N.  H.  Born  in  1776.]  11^"  x  12^".  Cross-stitch. 
Narrow  border  of  cross-stitch  and  laid-stitch.  4-inch  strawberry  vine  at  bottom.  [Sister- 
in-law  of  Daniel  Webster.]  "  Miss  Elizabeth  T.  Kelly 

Fletscher,  Mart.    1740.    8"  x  174".     185  letters  in  14  rows.  Mrs.  Siegfried  Wachsman 

Flint,  Priscilla.  1784.  Reading  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  16"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Cross  and  satin- 
stitch.     Border  of  conventionalized  cross.     Elaborate  design  at  bottom.     Verse  616. 

Harriet  Parsons  Abbott 

Flower,  Rebekah.  1785.  12"  x  14".  [London  Grove,  Pa.]  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Catherine  Wheel  border,  and  cross-borders  of  roses,  tulips,  and  strawberries.  "C.  M." 
"Richard  and  Alice."    Verses  360,  622,  623.  F.  F.  Sharpless,  Esq. 

FoLsoM,  Deborah.  1767.  Exeter  [N.  H.].  12  yrs.  17"  x  214".  3  alphabets.  Great  variety  of 
stitches.  Borders  of  rosebuds  and  leaves,  strawberry,  Greek  fret,  vine  and  berries.  At 
bottom,  strawberries,  fret,  black  and  white  dogs  in  corners.    Verse  128  (var.). 

Mrs.  Robert  S.  Morison 

Ford,  Bethiah.  1793.  [New  Castle  County,  Del.]  12  yrs.  10"  x  164".  1  alphabet.  Cross- 
stitch.    Verse  132  (1,  var.),  Mrs.  J.  Dale  Dilworth 

Ford,  Jane.  [1797.]  14  yrs.  7i"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Border  of  tulips  and 
strawberries.    Strawberry  border  at  bottom.    Verse  488  (var.).        Mrs.  J.  Dale  Dilworth 

Foster,  Hannah.  1743.  Evesham  [N.  J.].  15  yrs.  11"  x  18".  Eyelet,  satin,  cat,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Vine  border  with  odd  designs.  6  different  cross-borders.  2  verses,  but  not  legible. 
"My  Grandfathers  and  Mothers,  Josiah  and  Amy  Foster,  Enoch  and  Sarah  Core.  My 
parents,  William  and  Hannah  Foster."  Names  of  four  sisters,  but  not  legible.  "Elizabeth 
Sullivan  taught  me."  Miss  Elizabeth  C.  Saunders 

Foster,  Mehitable.  1786.  14  yrs.  15"  x  18^".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  eyelet,  stem,  and  satin- 
stitch.  Border  of  baskets,  flowers,  birds,  etc.  At  bottom,  elaborate  basket  of  flowers,  with 
two  large  birds  eating  flowers.  Mrs,  Stanley  H.  Lowndes 

Foster,  Polly.  1787.  [Canterbury,  N.  H.]  12  yrs.  16"  x  17".  Great  variety  of  stitches. 
3  alphabets.  Saw-tooth  border  and  nine  different  cross-border  designs.  At  bottom,  con- 
ventional baskets  of  flowers,  birds,  and  trees.  Mrs.  Vienna  Dodge  Pearson 

Freeborn,  Gideon.  1771.  8"  x  llf".  Cross-stitch.  Design  is  diagonal  bands  of  black,  forming 
diamonds  in  which  are  bright  colors.  If"  in  size.  Miss  Sophie  Pierce  Casey 

Freeborn,  Mary.  1743.  13  yrs.  7"  x  9".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Solid-line  border.  Rosettes 
and  vases  of  flowers  in  center,  in  lower  half.    Verse  347.  Mrs.  George  L.  Miner 


46  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Freemax,  Debohah.  1774.  Born  September  13,  1763.  6"  x  8".  2  alphabets.  Cross  and  satin- 
stitch.  Carnation  border  and  conventional  pine-cone  border  running  across  middle  of 
sampler.  Dr.  Oliver  W.  Huntington 

French,  Ann  Heulings.  1797-1800.  [Near  Mullica  Hill,  Gloucester  County,  N.  J.]  9  to  12 
jTS.  Born  September  29,  1788.  12J"  x  18f".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  eyelet,  and  queen- 
stitch.  Border,  two  rows  of  satin-stitch.  Cross-borders,  conventional  carnations,  berries, 
roses,  and  strawberries.    Verses  132  (1  var.),  656. 

"  Uriah  French  was  born  the  13th  of  the  7th  mo.  1770 
Jacob  French  was  born  the  30th  of  the  4th  mo.  1773 
Agnes  French  was  born  the  24th  of  the  2nd  mo.  1776 
Charles  French  was  born  the  22nd  of  the  4th  mo.  1777 
Samuel  French  was  born  the  10th  of  the  4th  mo.  1779 
Nancy  French  was  born  the  12th  of  the  5th  mo.  1781 
Sarah  French  was  born  the  24th  of  the  11th  mo.  1783 
Joseph  French  was  born  the  20th  of  the  7th  mo.  1786 
Ann  Heulings  French  was  born  the  29th  of  the  9th  mo.  1788." 

Miss  Mary  H.  Clark 

French,  Elizabeth  and  Ann.  1793.  Philadelphia  [Pa.].  13  yrs.  and  11  yrs.  18"  x  21". 
2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  eyelet,  and  stem-stitch.  Border  of  vine  and  small  flowers.  Roses 
and  violets  in  a  vine  and  flower  enclosure.  Names  on  sampler:  "Charles  French,  Rebecca 
French  [father  and  mother] ;  Mary  French,  Abigal  French,  Charles  French,  James  French" 
[children].    Verse  226.  Clara  M.  Lukens 

French,  Sally.  1793.  West  Dedham.  Born  June  1,  1781.  8i"  x  llj".  1  alphabet.  Cross- 
stitch.  Vine  border.  Verse  [unfinished].  "Those  Trifles  That  Amuse  In  Life  Promote  A 
higher  ..."  Mary  E.  Fisher 

French,  Sarah.  1794.  [Near  Mullica  Hill,  Gloucester  County,  N.  J.]  11  yrs.  [Born  Novem- 
ber 24,  1783.]  10:^"  X  15i".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  eyelet,  queen,  flat,  and  cat-stitch. 
Border,  double  row  of  cross-scitch.  Carnation,  strawberry,  and  diamond  cross-borders. 
Verse  343  (1  var.).  Miss  Mary  H.  Clark 

Frothingham,  Betst.  1784.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  17  yrs.  12"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
cross,  and  satin-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Large  tree,  vases  of  flowers,  animals,  birds, 
and  green  bank.    Verse  43  (var.).  Miss  Georgie  Bassett 

Fry,  Mary.  1724.  12  yrs.  9J"  x  15J".  [Born  Jericho,  L.  I.,  in  1712.]  1  alphabet.  Eyelet, 
cross,  and  satin-stitch.  Cross-lines,  conventional  cross-borders.  Names  and  initials  on 
sampler:  Mary  Frye,  M.  W.,  H.  W.,  I.  W.,  William  Willis,  Mary  Wil  .  .  .    Verses  581,  682. 

Mrs.  E.  C.  Tyson 

Frye,  Huldah.  1747.  Andover  [Mass.  10  yrs.  Born  May  13,  1737.].  8"  x  10".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Bird,  tree,  and  lion.  "Time  how  short,  Eternity  how 
long."    Verses  128  (1,  var.),  248  (1,  var.).  Miss  Charlotte  Osgood 

Fuller,  Abigail.  1775.  [Warner,  N.  H.?]  19  yrs.  10"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    Conventional  cross-border.     Verse  132  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  William  H.  Woodberry 

Fuller,  Polly.  1790.  Needham  [Mass.].  [4  yrs.?]  8"  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  tent,  and 
cross-stitch.  Miss  Emily  F.  Allen 

Fulton,  Frances  Burns.    1786.    7"  x  14".     1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Plain  cross-border. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Furlong,  Elizabeth.  1775.  7"  x  8".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  and  hem-stitch.  Hemstitched 
border,  with  a  solid  triangle  design  inside.  Mrs.  Sarah  F.  Bayley 


PLATE  XVII 

Mahy  Ellis's  Sajipler.     1743 
Owned  by  Miss  Ellen  F.  Vose 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  ^  47 

Gale,  Mary.  1787.  [Bangor,  Me.?]  14  yrs.  16*"  x  13*".  Alphabet.  Cross  and  satin-stitch. 
Border,  Greek  vine  with  leaves.    Landscape,  with  flowers,  birds,  trees,  etc.  Verse  496. 

Mrs.  S.  Oale  Treat 

Gansevooet,  .     1791.     22"  x  lOi".     Alphabet.     Cross-stitch.     Vase  with  roses.     "Leonard 

Gansevoort,  Mary  Gansevoort,  Maria  Gansevoort,   Arietta  Gansevoort,  Catharine  Douw, 
Eliza  Richards,  John  Gansevoort,  Rachel  Douw." 

Albany  Institute  and  Historical  and  Art  Society 

Gansevoort,  Maria.  1790.  Albany  [N.  Y.  Born  February  17,  1778.].  15"  x  20*".  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  "Leonard  and  Mary  Gansevoort,  1790.  Maria  Ganse- 
voort, Harrietta,  Katharine  Douw  and  John  Gansevoort."  Birds,  butterflies,  etc.  Federal 
bower  with  11  states  of  the  Union,  surmounted  by  gateway  with  birds. 

Mrs.  Marcus  T.  Hun 

Garrison,  Patience.  1796.  Trenton  [N.  J.].  13  yrs.  Born  [September  30]  1783.  16"  x  18". 
Cross-stitch.    Cross-border.    House,  trees,  flowers,  etc.  Mrs.  George  W.  Yeandle 

Gatcomb,  Dorcas.  1732.  Boston  [Mass.].  7^"  x  15 J".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Elaborate 
6-inch  border  of  animals,  trees,  birds,  and  other  designs.    Verse  490  (var.). 

Mrs.  Charles  E.  Cotting 

Gates,  Mary.  1796.  17  yrs.  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Triple  strawberry  border.  Trees, 
Adam  and  Eve,  flowers  and  bucks.    Verses  384,  385.  Mr.  Q.  H.  Buek 

Gay,  Elizabeth.    1787.    11  yrs.    12"  x  10".    2  alphabets.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  L.  A.  Arnold 

Geer,  Petheny.  1758.  10  yrs.  9"  x  31".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cross-stitch,  and  other  stitches. 
Cross-border  at  top.    Verse  128  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  C.  S.  Cobb 

Gerrish,  Mary.  1798.  13  yrs.  [Boscawen,  N.  H.]  12"  x  11".  Yellow  canvas.  3  alphabets. 
Hem  and  cross-stitch.    Flower  borders,  growing  out  of  grass  at  the  bottom. 

14  Sumner  Road,  Cambridge 

Gerry,  Catherine.  1796.  9  yrs.  11^"  x  20^".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cross,  and  6  kinds  of 
fancy,  open-work  stitches.    Triangular  design.  Miss  Bessie  H.  Lyman 

GiBBs,  Sarah.  1749.  Newport  [R.  I.].  11  yrs.  2  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Trefoil 
border,  carnation  cross-borders.  Elaborate  carnation  and  tulip  design  in  center.  Verse 
343  (1).  Mrs.  J.  West  Roosevelt 

Gibson,  Sarah.  1784.  Pelham  [Mass.].  27  yrs.  "Born  Sept  26,  1757".  4"  x  8".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.    Verse  200.  Mrs.  J.  A.  Noble 

Giddinge,  Lydia.  [Ipswich,  Mass.?]  12  yrs.  19"  x  23".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  border,  with  roses  in  upper  corners.  Birds  in  corners,  dog  running 
after  a  deer.  Mrs.  Charles  Kane  Cobb 

Gifting,  Hariot.    1799.    New  York  City.    7|"  x  10".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Vine  border. 

Miss  Estelle  Clements 

GiLKEY,  Sally.  1795.  Born  September  27,  1779.  14i"  x  17i".  3  alphabets.  All  kinds  of  fancy 
stitches.  Rose  border.  Divided  into  10  sections.  Trees,  birds,  vases,  etc.  Family  names 
on  sampler:  "Betty  Gilkey,  Born  July  29,  1775.  Martha  Gilkey,  Born  Au  23,  1777.  Sally, 
Born  Sep  27,  1779.  Phebe,  Born  June  3,  1782.  Ann,  Born  May  25,  1784.  Mary,  Born 
June  11,  1788.  Wm  &  Isaac,  Born  May  17,  1790.  My  Daddy  was  born  April  27,  1757.  He 
dyed  November  the  13,  Aged  Forty  3  years.  My  Mamma  was  born  April  the  27,  1755. 
AE  Forty  4  years."     Verses  606  (1,  var.),  609  (1,  var.).  Prof.  George  C.  Chase 


48  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Gill,  Mary.  1757.  13  yrs.  8"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Vine,  bird,  and 
basket    Verse  343  (1,  var.).    Initials:  I  G.    N  G.    MS.    W  S.    S  G.    L  G.    R  G. 

Mrs.  Henry  J.  Irick 

GiLMOHE,  Keziah.  1799.  8  yrs.  [Born  April  26,  1790.]  11"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch, 
Vine  border.  Weeping  willow,  with  verse  in  lower  half  and  inscription,  "Sarah  Gilmore 
born  Jan.  6th  1797",  evidently  a  younger  sister.    Verse  528.  Mrs.  John  V.  Craven 

GiTHERxoN,  Increase.  1796.  19"  x  16".  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  and  tulip  border. 
House,  sheep,  lambs,  and  trees.    Verses  13,  895  (4),  Mrs.  Stanley  H.  Lowndes 

Glassel,  Jane  M,  Born  November  17,  1785.  28"  x  17",  3  alphabets.  Strawberry  border. 
Family  tree  in  center.  Record  of  family  names  and  dates :  "Andrew  Glassel  and  Elizabeth 
Taylor  were  married  October  21,  1776.     Milly  Glassel  was  born  June  the  25,  1778;  John 

Glassel  was  born  Oct.  the  28,  1780;  Mary Glassel  was  born  May  the  4,  1783;  Helen  B. 

Glassel  was  born  (?)  the  28,  1785;  Jane  M,  Glassel  was  born  November  the  17,  1785; 
James  M.  Glassel  was  born  January  the  1,  1790;  Andrew  Glassel  was  born  May  15,  (  ?  )  ; 
Robert  was  born  May  18,  1795 ;  William  Glassel  was  born  May  the  17,  1797." 

Glazier,  EL\^RA.  [West  Boylston,  Mass.]  11"  x  12".  Alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
and  alphabet  border.  Mrs.  Melvin  W.  Longley 

Glover,  Mary.  1760.  [Marblehead.]  10  yrs.  11^"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Baskets  of  flowers  and  trees,  also  Caleb  and  Joshua  carrying  the  grapes 
of  Eschol.    Verse  352,  Estate  of  Miss  Sarah  Haskell  Crocker 

GoDDARD,  Haxxah,  [Cir,  1762.]  Born  October  10,  1750.  6"  x  17".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.  Mrs.  John  Brooks 

Goodwin,  Becky.  1774.  Charlestown  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  8"  x  12".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Simple  cross-borders.    Verse  128.  Groton  Historical  Society 

Goodwin,  P[riscilla].  1790.  [Salem,  N.  J.]  8V' x  12".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.     Line  border  on  sides;  rosettes  across  top.  Mrs.  Oakford  Woodnutt  Acton 

Gore,  Abigail.  1797.  Boston  [Mass.  Born  July  27,  1784.].  144"  x  10^",  2  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  border.     House  and  lamb.    Verse  233. 

Miss  Mary  H.  Leeds 

Gore,  Zebiah.  1791.  Boston  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  Born  July  27,  1780.  15"  x  17^".  2  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch,  and  bullion-stitch  for  sheep.  Eyelet-stitch  border  on  three 
sides.  Landscape  with  house,  trees,  dog,  birds,  sheep,  and  a  shepherd  and  shepherdess. 
The  background  above  is  filled  with  black  cross-stitch,  and  the  bottom  is  completely  filled 
with  fine  cross-stitch.  "Now  we  are  Caused  to  Live  there's  nothing  I  Esteem  Worth 
learning  but  the  way  to  Die,"    Illustrated.  Miss  Mary  H.  Leeds 

GoRHAM,  Sally.  1795.  13  yrs.  Born  December  28,  1781.  11"  x  12".  4  alphabets.  Stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.    Strawberry  vine  cross-border.    Scene  with  house,  trees,  etc.    Verse  228. 

Mrs.  Herman  Daggett  Clark,  Jr. 

Gould,  Esther.  17[??].  [Cir.  1798.]  "Agusta."  Born  1785.  11"  x  14".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  edge.     Basket  of  flowers.    Verses  128  (1,  var.),  667. 

Miss  Caroline  F.  Ware 

GovE,  Polly.    9"  x  13^".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Unfinished.    Verse  243. 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Ghatz,  Richea.  1789.  [Philadelphia,  Pa.  Born  in  1774.]  9*"  x  20",  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.     Strawberry- vine  border.    Verse  621   (1),  Miss  Laura  Mordecai 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  49 

Ghat,  Elizabeth  Cotjltas.  [Before  1760.  Gray's  Ferry,  Philadelphia.]  9J"  x  12^".  Petit- 
point  and  cross-stitch.    Design,  bunch  of  flowers  in  basket,  fills  entire  sampler. 

Mrs.  Robert  Bean 

Gray,  Sally  Ropes.  1796.  Salem  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  Born  March  27,  1788.  7V'  x  16".  2  alpha- 
bets.   Satin  and  cross-stitch.    Lambs  eating  strawberries.  Essex  Institute 

Green,  Betsy.  1798.  Alexandria  [Va.].  12  yrs.  17"  x  20^".  6  alphabets.  Great  variety  of 
stitches.    Border,  festoons  of  eyelets  and  bimches  of  strawberries.    Verse  202  (1,  var.). 

Virginia  L.  Maury 

Greene,  Catherine.  1785.  11  yrs.  16"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  House 
with  tree  on  either  side.  Charles  T.  Howard,  Esq. 

Greene,  Mary.  1766.  11  yrs.  9i"  x  13^".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Con- 
ventional strawberry  border.  Conventional  rose,  tiUip,  and  carnation  cross-border  in 
middle,  small  border  at  bottom.    Verses  488  (var.),  598.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Greene,  Sarah.  [1760-65.]  Boston  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  14"  x  7^".  4  alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet, 
cat,  and  cross-stitch.    Verse  693.  Mrs.  Roger  Wolcott 

Greenleaf,  Elizabeth.  1768.  Newburj'port  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  8"  x  13*".  1  alphabet.  Cross- 
stitch.  Fancy  cross-border  at  top.  "Deaths  terror  is  the  mountain  Faith  removes  Tis 
Faith  discovers  destruction.    Believe  and  look  with  triumph  on  the  Tomb" 

Mrs.  J.  Lewis  Stackpole 

Greenleaf,  Elizabeth.  1788.  HaverhiU  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  17"  x  18".  Cross,  satin,  and  chain- 
stitch.  2  alphabets.  Leaves  and  flower  border.  Two  girls,  a  boy  or  man  with  a  parasol, 
a  bird,  a  horse,  trees  and  flowers.    Verse  625.  Francis  B.  Manning,  Esq. 

Grenell,  Betsy.    1792.    13  yrs.    6"  x  8".    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.  George  Bird,  Esq. 

Gridley,  Anna.  1783.  13  yrs.  8"  x  21".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross-borders.  Conven- 
tional birds  and  baskets.    Verses  128,  508.  Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 

Grignoh,  Margaret.  1747.  9  yrs.  9"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Border  of  Greek  fret,  rose,  cross,  vine,  strawberry.  "Life  is  decietful  and  beauty  is  vain 
but  a  Woman  that  Feareth  the  Lord  she  shall"  .  .  .  Mrs.  George  A.  Plimpton 

Grover,  Euzabeth.  July  16,  1784.  Philadelphia,  Pa.  17"  x  17".  Flat  and  cross-stitch.  Car- 
nation border;  rose,  strawberry,  and  vine  cross-borders.     Verses  509,  615. 

Mrs.  Charles  Dickinson 

Hacker,  Rebekah.  1786.  Salem  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  13"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  French 
knot,  long,  and  cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth  border.  Garden  of  Eden,  with  Adam  and  Eve  and 
Cain  and  Abel  in  Quaker  dress.  Verses  128  (1,  var.),  248  (var.).    Miss  Anna  Hazen  Howell 

Hackett,  Elizabeth.  [Cir.  1782.]  Salisbury  Point  [Mass.].  Born  "Sept.  1771."  9"  x  10^". 
3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Conventional  design.  Mrs.  Dolly  C.  Ames 

Hail,  Mary.  1763.  Born  1754.  10"  x  20".  2  alphabets.  Eyelets  and  cross-stitch.  Plain  cross- 
stitch  border  at  top.    Verse  498.  Mrs.  David  P.  Penhallow 

Hale,  Polly.  1791.  [Mass.]  71"  x  7*".  Alphabet.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-border. 
Acorn  design  at  bottom.  Mrs.  Edwin  L.  Thompson 

Hall,  Elizabeth.  1750.  Dorchester  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  Born  1738.  8"  x  11".  3  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Miss  Marion  Stanley  Abbot 


50  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Haix,  Nanct.  August,  1788.  Providence  [R.  I.  12  yrs.].  14"  x  16".  "Miss  Polly  Balch's 
School."  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border,  rose,  carnation,  hyacinth,  and  myrtle. 
University  Hall,  Brown  University,  in  center  of  oval;  President's  reception,  above,  and 
more  people  going  to  President's  house,  below.    Verse  628.    Illustrated? 

Mrs.  W.  C.  Greene 

Hallek,  Abigail.  1750.  Mystic  [Conn.].  9  yrs.  8"  x  11".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Vine 
border.    Verse  191.  Mrs.  George  A.  Plimpton 

HAXLiiAN,  Mart.  Barren  HiU,  Pa.  13J"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch,  plain  and  fancy. 
Border  of  diamond  shapes.    Conventional  flower-pots,  birds  and  animals.    Verse  490  (var.). 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Hamlin,  Axne.  1790.  Providence  [R.  I.].  Born  March  12,  1776.  Probably  "Miss  Polly 
Balch's  School."  9"  x  9".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border, 
top  and  bottom;  straight  cross  on  sides.    Strawberry  plants.    Verse  628. 

Miss  Sarah  S.  Mumford 

Hamlin,  Mehttable.  1798.  Providence  [R.  I.].  9  yrs.  8"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.    Cross-border.    Rosebuds.    Verse  661.  Mrs.  H.  M.  Preston 

Hammond,  Abigail.  1743.  7  yrs.  8"  x  12".  8  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross-borders,  one 
conventionalized  carnation.    Debased  carnation.  C.  E.  Goodspeed,  Esq.,  1917 

Hance,  Maey.  1780.  Shrewsbury  [N.  J.].  12"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 
Trees.  Robert  H.  Oakley,  Esq. 

Hancock,  Fanny.    1736.    11  yrs.    3  alphabets.    Conventional  designs.    Hemstitched  edge. 

In  Machias,  Me.? 

Harding,  Prudence.  1795.  18"  x  18".  Partial  alphabet.  Cross,  satin,  stem,  eyelet,  queen,  and 
cat-stitch.    Rose-wreath  border.     Cross-border  of  single-stitch.    Verse  647. 

Fitchburg  Antique  Shop,  1917 

Haedyman,  Henrietta  Maria.  1765.  2  alphabets.  Tent,  satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 
Border  of  vine  and  strawberry  blossoms  and  berries.  Scene  with  large  basket  fiUed  with 
fruit,  trees,  large  deer,  and  two  small  dogs.  Mrs.  W.  W.  Richardson 

Hamman,  Elizabeth.     [Cir.  1789.]     Born  April  23,  1777.    12"  x  12",    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Colonial  Dames  of  the  State  of  New  York 

Haeeis,  Abiee.  1767.  12  yrs.  9"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Trefoil  border.  Tulip 
cross-border.    Verse  343  (1,  var.).  Harriet  A.  Bar  stow 

Haeeis,  Betsy.     [1790.]     16"  x  12".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  P.  A.  Waterman 

Haeeis,  Hitty.  1776.  Concord  [N.  H.].  11  yrs.  8"  x  10".  Mustard-colored  canvas.  2  alpha- 
bets.   Cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  cross-border.  Miss  Annie  Haven  Thwing 

Harris,  Polly.  [1750.  New  England.]  9  yrs.  10"  x  7i".  1  alphabet  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 
Saw-tooth  border.    Horses,  grass,  shrubs,  etc.  Rev.  Glenn  Tilley  Morse 

Habt,  Lydia.  February  4,  1731.  2  alphabets.  Tent,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross- 
borders  of  strawberry,  trefoil,  scroll,  and  several  different  Greek  fret  designs.  Verse  128 
(var.). 

Haet,  Mary  Eliza.  1771.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  7"  x  12i".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  hemstitch, 
satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  and  Greek  fret  borders.  "Remember  thy 
Creator,"  etc.  Mrs.  John  F.  Bennett 


^ 


if-^ 


D'       H   ^^L 


^^ 


# 

'%.. 


V^^fe 


...«v^^- 


r-J 


^>4k. 


L-rfLJli-rffc-'^  A[  ^^'   ^  ^^   iiBk.^^fa-^fc-^A>^ 


I  <fc  1^  lAi  frtii^      »%«w'- 


1^  -  "v^^^-  vV/:^^'^'Z^VT4;.^^. 

r'^^'ei-:.-.  v-------. 


■   1^^ 


PLATE  XA'III 

Elizabeth  Pecker's  SA:>rpLER.     1733 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Henri/  E.  Coe 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  51 

Haskell,  Ruth.  [Cir.  1760.]  11  yrs.  Alphabet.  Eyelet,  petit-point,  and  cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border  on  three  sides.     Adam  and  Eve  scene  at  bottom.    Verse  9.    Illustrated. 

Society  for  the  Preservation  of  New  England  Antiquities 

Haskell,  Sarah.  1782,  Lunenburg  [Pa.?].  Born  February  18,  1776.  10"  x  14".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Conventional  flowers,  etc.,  in  cross-borders.  Verses  182 
(1),  248  (1,  var.),  490.  Mrs.  Frank  8.  Willock 

Hastings,  Dorcas.  1793.  Lincoln  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  7^"  x  5**.  Alphabet.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    Simple  border.    Baskets  of  fruit.  Miss  Caroline  L.  Manett 

Hathaway,  Anne.      1797.     7  yrs.     12^"  x  12^".     2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.      Plain  border. 
Cross-borders  of  carnations  and  acorns.    Six  deer  and  three  flowers. 
I.    "Books  &  needle  both  content  to  make  a 
house  wif  and  a  friend" 
II.   "Fair  Philomel  she  lost  her  tongue 

end  in  a  tedious  sampler  sewed  her  mind" 

Mrs.  Siegfried  Wachsman 

Hathaway,  Rebekah.    1794.    11  yrs.    Verses  238,  379.  Miss  Helen  F.  Kimball 

Haven,  Anne.    1789.    Holliston.    9"  x  8".    2  alphabets.    Tree  design.    Verse  129a. 

Miss  Laura  Weeks 

Havens,  Mary  Catherine.  10  yrs.  8^"  x  11*".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  "Remember  j'ou 
are  in  the  hands  of  God".  Miss  Cornelia  Horsford 

Hawks,  Polly.  1798.  13  yrs.  Born  November  4,  1785.  13"  x  18".  6  alphabets.  Eyelet,  out- 
line, chain,  cross,  satin,  and  stem-stitch.  Sides  and  bottom,  border  of  vines  and  flowers; 
at  top,  diamonds.    Verse  235.  Miss  Edith  S.  Hall 

Hawks,  Sidney.  1794.  8  yrs.  8^"  x  10^".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border. 
Basket  of  flowers,  trees,  dogs,  etc.      Museum  of  Pocumtuck  Valley  Memorial  Association 

Haynes,  Anna.  1775.  8  yrs.  10"  x  llf".  3  alphabets.  Satin,  stem,  eyelet,  chain,  cross-stitch, 
and  hemstitch.  Border,  strawberries,  dogs,  birds,  flowers,  plants,  tree,  and  sunflower. 
Crosses  at  bottom.    Verse  363.  Dedham  Historical  Society 

H[aynes],  A[nna]  M[aria].  1762.  Hamburg.  9  yrs.  5"  x  16".  Lace,  and  cross-designs  in 
white.  Mrs.  G.  Clem  Goodrich 

Haynes,  Sally.  1785.  Boston  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  Born  in  Boston,  June  8,  1773.  9i"  x  lOi". 
3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  chain,  hemstitch,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Verses 
10  (1,  var.),  92  (1,  var.).  Dedham  Historical  Society 

Hays,  Slomey.  1788.  Boston  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  7"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  border.  Indian  design  with  chickens,  animals,  basket  of 
flowers,  bush,  etc.    Verse  128  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Edward  Cohen 

Hazard,  Alice.  1764.  [Little  Neck,  Narragansett,  R.  I.]  9  yrs.  13"  x  16^".  2  alphabets. 
Satin,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border.  Cross-borders.  Conventionalized  house, 
tree,  fence,  bush,  and  birds.    Verses  128  (1,  var.),  499.  Miss  Mary  A.  Hazard 

Hazard,  Sarah.  1740.  13  yrs.  S\"  x  16^".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine 
border.    Elaborate  flower  designs  with  birds.    Verse  489.  Miss  Susan  Woodman 

Hazeltine,  Abigail.  1777.  [Salem,  Mass.]  14  yrs.  15"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberries,  flowers,  lambs  in  border,  also  Greek  fret  design. 
Dogs,  trees,  and  birds.  Mrs.  Edward  M.  Vickery 


52  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Heard,  Nancy.  1794.  [Stepney,  Conn.]  13"  x  16".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border, 
detached  flowers  of  difl'erent  varieties.     Basket  [unfinished]  and  2  plants.    Verse  644. 

Robert  Fridenberg,  Dealer 

Heath,  Jake.  8  yrs.  [Virginia.]  18"  x  24".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border. 
Colonial  brick  house,  pine  trees,  etc.  Mrs.  WilUam  W.  Richardson 

Henderson,  Jane.  1795.  10  yrs.  "Chesterfield  School."  17"  x  21i".  Cross-stitch.  Conven- 
tionalized vine  border.  House  on  top  of  hill,  also  man,  woman,  bushes,  trees,  and  animals. 
Verses  383,  594  (1).  Miss  Susan  B.  Minor 

Herbert,  Elizabeth.  1764.  Salem,  Mass.  12  yrs.  15"  x  15".  6  alphabets.  Stem,  French 
knot,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Landscape  border,  showing  shepherdess  with  sheep, 
fisherman,  pond,  trees,  animals,  birds  and  butterflies,  etc.  Strawberry  cross-border. 
Verses  194,  495  (var.).  Miss  Ellen  E.  Bailey 

Heywood,  Hannah.  [Cir.  1792.  Royalston,  Mass.]  Born  January  6,  1781.  8"  x  lOi".  1  al- 
phabet.   Eyelet,  feather,  and  cross-stitch.     Slip-stitch  border.     Conventional  design. 

Miss  Mary  Heywood  Dean 

[Hill,  Mary.  Cir.  1770.]  7"  x  9".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch  and  petit-point.  Vine,  carna- 
tion, and  Greek  fret  borders.     [Unfinished.]     Verse  358.  The  Misses  Kenyon 

Hill,  Mary.    1773.    3^"  x  6 J".    1  alphabet;  parts  of  others.    Cross-stitch.    Verses  128  (1),  342. 

The  Misses  Kenyon 

Holbrook,  Aloua.  [1796.]  12"  x  7".  2  alphabets.  Flat,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Chain-stitch 
border.  Miss  Edith  R.  Blanchard 

Holbrook,  Edeny.    11  yrs.    7"  x  14^".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Trees  in  center. 

Miss  Edna  H.  Barger 

Holbrook,  Mella  [Meletiah.  Cir.  1791.  Born  in  Bellingham,  Mass.,  August  23,  1780.]. 
8"  X  14^".    2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Baskets  of  flowers. 

Benjamin  Stafford  Newton,  Esq. 

Holden,  Katherine.  1733.  14§"  x  10".  1  alphabet.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  and  bell 
border.    Verses  186,  343.     Illustrated. 

Miss  M.  Frances  Babcock  and  Mrs.  Winslow  Upton 

Hollinshead,  Beulah  W.  1797.  [Moorestown,  N.  J.]  13  yrs.  [Born  July  9,  1784.]  16"  x 
20i".     Stem,  tent,  flat,  and  cross-stitch.     Strawberry  border.     "Joshua  M.   Hollinshead 

was  born  of  July  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1786.    Jane  M.  Hollinshead  was  born  the 

29  September  1792.    Departed  this  life  July  31,  1798.    Aged  5  yrs.  10  mo.  6  days."    House 
on  a  terrace,  with  trees,  sheep,  and  shepherd  with  his  dog.    Verse  234. 

Mrs.  S.  A.  Cunningham 

Holmes,  Elizabeth.  [Cir.  1770.]  10  yrs.  10"  x  12".  1  alphabet.  Stem,  cross,  satin,  eyelet, 
and  hem-stitch.    Simple  cross-borders.    Bird  and  strawberries.    Verse  129  (var.). 

Miss  R.  Wiswell  Ex.    Deposited  in  the  Old  South  Meeting  House,  Boston 

Holton,  Mary  D.  1796.  Northfield  [Mass.].  15"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hem- 
stitched edge.    Large  vase  of  flowers,  rose  bushes,  trees,  etc.      Mrs.  Elizabeth  A.  Hubbard 

HoLYOKE,  Elizabeth.  [Cir.  1782.]  Salem  [Mass.].  xiii  yrs.  104"  x  12^".  Alphabet.  Cross- 
stitch.     Vine  and  cross-border.  Miss  Susan  Ward  Osgood 

HoLYOKE,  Mary.  1741.  11  yrs.  Born  April  30,  1730.  8i"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-borders.  Elaborate  strawberry  at  top  and  bottom,  with 
conventional  adaptation  of  Greek  fret.  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 


PLATE  XIX 

Dorothy  Lyxde's  Sampler.     1757 

Old  South  Meeting  House,  Boston 

Plate  presented  hij  the  Worcester  members  of  the  Massachusetts  Society  of  the  Colonial  Dames 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  53 

HoLYOKE,  Priscilla.  1752.  12  yrs.  9"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  feather,  stem,  eyelet,  and 
cross-stitch.    Inconspicuous  cross-lines.    Cross-stitch  crosses.    Verse  128  (var.). 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

HoLYOKE,  Susanna.  [Cir.  1790.]  Salem,  Mass.  10  yrs.  8"  x  11".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Cross-border.    "Idleness  is  the  mother  of  vice."  Miss  Susan  Ward  Osgood 

Hooker,  Hannah.    1728.    7  yrs.    6i"  x  17^".    Cross-stitch.    Verse  492. 

Newport  Historical  Society 

Hooker,  Ruth.  1773.  Farmington.  Sg"  x  8".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Narrow  cross- 
stitch  border.  Mrs.  E.  Morgan 

HooTON,  Sarah.    6"  x  12".    3  alphabets.    Satin  and  cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  border. 

M.  B.  Lemon,  Dealer 

Hopping,  Maria.  [1796.]  17"  x  17",  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Design,  First 
Baptist  Church  in  Providence,  R.  I.    Verse  40.  Miss  Caroline  E.  Briggs 

HoPTON,  Perese.    1786.    6"  x  18".    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  N.  James  Bouse 

Horner,  Eliza.  1788.  [Philadelphia.]  12  yrs.  16"  x  20".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin, 
queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Floral  border  of  strawberry,  rose,  forget-me-not,  violet,  etc. 
Beatitudes  at  the  top.     Verse  209.  Edward  Horner  Coates,  Esq. 

HoRNSBY,  Sarah.  [Cir.  1793.]  "Williamsburg"  [Va.].  Born  October  17,  1780.  Hi"  x  15^". 
1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch,  very  fine.  Ornamental  vine  border.  Tree  of  Life,  Adam  and 
Eve,  serpent  holding  apple,  and  detached  figures  such  as  birds,  trees,  castles,  baskets  of 
flowers,  etc.  Verse  610.  Names  on  sampler:  "Hannah  Hornsby  born  March  the  21st  1771, 
Mildred  Hornsby  born  February  the  20th  1774,  Joseph  Hornsby  born  March  the  28th 
1777,  Thomas  Hornsby  born  January  the  12th  1779,  Sarah  Hornsby  born  October  the  17th 
1780."  Mrs.  James  Henry  Watson 

HoRTON,  Polly.  1788.  10"  x  14".  1  alphabet.  Bird's-eye,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Plain 
border  all  around  and  three  more  elaborate  cross-borders  in  center.  Shepherds,  sheep, 
and  trees.    Verse  629.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

[HoRWELL,  Ann   (May)].     1798.     [Alexandria,  Va.]     Made  after  her  marriage  to  Richard 

Horwell.     Initials:      ^u'^  ^^"  ^  ^^"'     Liberty  Tree,  flowers,  and  crowned  hearts. 

Verse  3.  Miss  Frances  H.  Massoletti 

Howard,  Maieson.  1787.  Bridgewater  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  10^"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Flat  and 
cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge,  cross-stitch  border,  flat-stitch  cross-border  at  bottom. 
Large  tree,  flowers,  and  various  devices  in  lower  corners.    Verse  137. 

Mrs.  John  Rogers,  Jr. 

Howell,  Lydia.  1755.  12"  x  9".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  cross- 
borders.    Names  on  sampler:  "Jacob  Howell,  Mary  Howell,  Mary  Howell."    Verse  42. 

Miss  Sarah  Rebecca  Nicholson 

Howell,  Sarah.  1731.  Philadelphia  [Pa.].  12"  x  14".  Satin,  cross-stitch,  and  other  fine 
stitches.  Carnation  border,  and  rose,  carnation,  strawberry,  and  conventional  leaf  cross- 
borders.  Names  given:  "Sarah  Howell,  Jacob  Howell,  Sarah  Howell,  Jane  Howell." 
Verses  181,  183,  344  (1),  345  (var.).     Illustrated.  Mrs.  Clayton  McElroy 

Hubbard,  Hephzibah.  [1761.  Middletown,  Conn.  About  6  yrs.]  5|"  x  7^".  1  alphabet. 
Cross-stitch.    Simple  dividing  Unes,  Mrs.  Amos  Bush  McNairy 


54  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

HuBBS,  DoKOTHY.  1790.  11^"  X  15J".  4  alphabets.  Flat  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Verse 
343  (1).    "Her  heart  the  one  thing  needful!  that  good  part  witch  Mary  chose  withall", 

Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park 

Hughes,  Phebe.  1796.  Providence  [R.  I.].  7  yrs.  11"  x  13i".  2  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  bed  at  bottom.  To  the  right  of  verse,  two  tulips  and  two  birds. 
Verse  231.  Miss  Mary  Anne  Greene 

Hughes,  Susannah.  1793.  9  yrs.  14"  x  18".  1  alphabet.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border 
with  morning-glories,  rosebuds,  and  passion  flowers.  Large  hearts  and  crowns.  Verses 
66  (1,  var.),  226,  51-5  (1,  2,  var.),  Robert  B.  Jordan,  Dealer 

Hull,  Rachel.  1795.  [14  yrs.  Born  at  Morris (?),  N.  J.]  March  11,  1781.  9"  x  lOi".  2  al- 
phabets.    Eyelet,  star,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Strawberry  border  at  top.    Diamonds. 

Mrs.  J.  S.  Gale 

Humphreys,  Ann.  1796.  10  yrs.  9f"  x  15^".  5  alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet,  and  chain-stitch. 
Verses  387  (1),  631.  Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park 

Humphreys,  Jane.  1771.  11  yrs.  15"  x  I22".  HoUie-point,  lace,  and  drawn  filet.  Large 
basket  with  flowers  occupies  most  of  sampler.    Illustrated. 

Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park,  Philadelphia 

Hunt,  Content.  1799.  Norton  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  16"  x  22".  1  alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Carnation  and  rose  border.  Man  and  woman,  house,  trees,  birds,  lambs,  etc. 
Verse  129  (var.).  Mrs.  H.  J.  Gilbert 

Huntington,  Hannah.  [1766.]  12  yrs.  [Born  in  17.54.]  11*"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
queen,  single,  and  double  cross-stitch.  On  either  side,  poles  with  grapevine  running  up  it 
and  conventionalized  bunches  of  grapes  at  top;  other  flowers  are  growing  on  vine  and  the 
left-hand  side  is  unfinished.  Band  across  center,  with  conventionalized  rose  and  rose- 
sprays.  At  bottom,  row  of  conventionalized  thistles,  poppies,  carnations,  strawberry 
plant,  etc.  In  center,  at  top,  a  conventionalized  rose-tree.  "  Be  not  wise  in  thine  own  eyes 
fear  the  Lord  and  depart  from  evil."  George  H.  May,  Esq. 

Huston,  Esther.  1782.  8  yrs.  5  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  "Taught  by  Mrs.  Brunton." 
"Remember  now  thy  Creator",  etc.  Helen  C.  Little  field 

Hutchinson,  Lydia.  1727.  13  yrs.  18"  x  18".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry,  quatrefoil,  and 
Greek  fret  cross-borders.    Verse  128  (1,  var.).  Massachusetts  Historical  Society 

Hyrne,  Harriot.  1774.  [Clear  Spring  Plantation  on  Ashley  River,  S.  C]  9  j^rs.  Born 
July  28,  1765.  8"  x  19".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border. 
Three  roses  in  a  medallion.    "Remember  thy  Creator",  etc.      Mrs.  Emma  Drayton  Grimk4 

Hyene,  Harriot.  1774.  [Charleston,  S.  C]  9  yrs.  18"  x  18^".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Pomegranate  border  at  bottom.     "Remember  thy  Creator",  etc.    Mrs.  J.  Drayton  Grimk4 

Ide,  Leafea.  [1796?]  10  yrs.  15"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  House  with  tree  on 
either  side.    "Let  Virtue  be  made  for  her."  Mrs.  J.  F.  P.  Lawton 

Ilsley,  Charlotte.  1773.  Portland  [Me.  Born  1763.].  13"  x  21".  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Floral  and  vine  border.  Verse  355,  and  about  sixteen  lines  of  pious  sentiment  too  faded 
to  be  read.  Miss  Clara  Mossman  Hill 

Ingall,  Harriot.  1799.  Taunton  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  7*"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Tent,  cat,  and 
cross-stitch.  Angular  border  of  cross-stitch,  with  triangular  trees  and  ornaments.  Large 
tree,  dog,  elk,  and  bird  at  bottom;  in  center.  Colonial  house,  trees,  and  birds. 

Mrs.  J.  S.  Rounds 


•..«S3 


I 


PLATE  XX 

Mary  Webb's  Sampler.     York,  Pa.     1760 
Owned  hii  Mm.  Samuel  C.  Rumford 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  55 

Ingalls,  Ruthy.  1786.  8"  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Queen  and  cross-stitch.  Cross  and  vine  border. 
Carnation.  Miss  Caroline  M.  Burnham 

Ingell,  Rebekah.  1791.  Taunton  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  6^"  x  8y.  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Narrow  border  of  cross-stitch.    "Let  Wisdom  direct  thy  steps."  Mrs.  J.  S.  Rounds 

Ireland,  Phebe.  1793.  [Cohansey,  N.  J.]  14  yrs.  12"  x  9".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  tent,  queen, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-borders.  Geometrical  designs  and  conventionalized  flowers. 
Initials:  "SBTE     IV    AI    EI    PI    DI     AI    A  I."     Verse  490  (var.). 

Cumberland  County,  N.  J.,  Historical  Society 

I\-EBS,  Haxxah.  [Cir.  1780.]  1  alphabet.  Cross,  satin,  stem,  petit-point,  and  hem-stitch. 
Carnation  border  across  top  and  on  sides ;  rosebud  and  strawberry  cross-borders.  In  lower 
section,  two  shepherds  sitting  on  the  ground  beneath  trees;  birds  flying  above;  dogs  and 
sheep  in  grass.    Verse  505.  Mrs.  A.  Lawrence  Lowell 

Ives,  Betsy.  July  31,  1778.  [Hale  Farm,  Beverly.]  "Sarah  Stivour's  School"'  [Salem,  Mass.]. 
11  yrs.  74"  X  10^".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch  and  the  long-stitch  which  was  characteristic 
of  this  school.    Hemstitched  edge.    Scene  with  4  sheep  standing  in  grass.    Verse  129  (var.). 

Mrs.  Robert  Hale  Bancroft 

Jacksian-,  Ejuly  E.  Yorkshire,  Cattaraugus  County,  N.  Y.  12  yrs.  lOf "  x  12^".  3  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.    Cross-stitch  border  and  cross-borders.     House,  tree,  and  fence. 

A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

Jacksox,  Maeia.  1790.  Providence  [R.  I.].  12  yrs.  12"  x  15".  Alphabet.  Long,  knot,  cross- 
stitch,  and  laid-work.  Vine  border  with  ornamental-pink  design.  Strawberry  plants, 
pinks,  roses,  and  blue  flower.    Verse  630.  Miss  Ellen  Chase 

Jacobs,  Mabcy.  177(?).  [Ipswich,  Mass.?]  11  yrs.  17"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  French 
knot,  satin,  stem,  chain,  cross-stitch,  and  laid-work.  Elaborate  border  in  laid-work  and 
stem-stitch  of  flowers,  grass,  vase  with  flowers,  and  birds  on  boughs.    Verse  600. 

Miss  Harriet  Perkins 

Jacobs,  Mary.  1776.  Scituate  [Mass.].  24  yrs.  Born  January  27,  1752.  8"  x  10^".  Alphabet. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Simple  cross-stitch  lines.    Verses  187  (var.),  490  (var.). 

Miss  Edith  Tilden 

Jacobs,  Sarah.  1753.  Scituate  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  6^"  x  6^".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hem- 
stitched border.     Verse  128  (1,  var.).  2Iiss  Antoinette  Clapp 

James,  Mary.  1798.  [New  Castle  County,  Del.]  13"  x  14^".  Stem,  satin,  flat,  and  cross-stitch. 
Detached  sprays  of  strawberries,  tulips,  roses,  etc.,  and  birds,  in  border.  Verses  525,  526 
(var.).  Miss  Elizabeth  K.  Clark 

James,  Susaxxah.  1788.  [New  Castle  County,  Del.]  8  yrs.  12"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
tent,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose,  carnation,  tulip,  and  strawberry  border  (worked  in 
detached  clusters).    Verse  211.     [Teacher,  Mme.  Abigail  Giles.]  Mrs.  L.  B.  Rowley 

Jaxcy,  Judith.  1786.  5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  feather,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-stitch  and  feather- 
stitch border.    Bird  in  lower  right-hand  corner.    Verse  369.      3Irs.  Augustus  Bailey  Small 

Jaxxey,  Haxxah.  1785.  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  chain,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  and  vine 
border  rising  out  of  vases  at  lower  corners.  Strawberry  cross-borders,  also  vine  and  smaU 
blossoms,  small  figures  of  children  and  animals  and  insects.  Verses  94,  96.  Illustrated. 
[The  mother  of  Johns  Hopkms.]  Mrs.  Miles  White,  Jr. 


56  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Jaks,  Dorothy.  1762.  17"  x  22".  Cross-stitch.  Vine  and  strawberry  border  outside  and 
Greek  fret  inside.  Scene  with  Adam  and  Eve  with  three  children,  and  tree  at  bottom; 
at  top,  Abraham  with  his  son  and  the  ram  at  altar.    Verses  41  (var.),  162  (1,  var.). 

The  Misses  Laura  and  Lieze  Oreer 

Jaquelle,  Katherine  Wallace.  1799.  Wilmington  [Del.].  16  yrs.  22"  x  18^".  Stem-stitch 
and  painted.    Hector  taking  leave  of  his  wife  and  child.  Mrs.  James  C.  Rogers 

Jaques,  Elizabeth.  [Newburyport,  Mass.  12  yrs.]  8i"  x  11^".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  border.    Verse  203.  Miss  Ruth  M.  B.  Macintosh 

Jaques,  Mahtha.  [1784..  Newburyport,  Mass.]  "Born  July  6,  1772.AE  12  yrs."  17^"  x  22". 
4  alphabets.  Chain,  tent,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  design  of  trees,  flowers, 
birds,  animals,  basket  of  flowers,  hills,  diamonds,  etc.  Strawberry  and  rose  vine  around 
verse.    Verse  202  (1,  var.).  Miss  Ruth  M.  B.  Macintosh 

Jabvis,  Maby  (called  Betsy  on  sampler).  1780.  Cambridge  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  7^"  x  13". 
Alphabet.  Stem,  flat,  and  cross-stitch.  Angular  vine  border.  Horse,  dog,  etc.,  at  bottom. 
Verses  490  (var.),  612?  Nathaniel  J.  W.  Fish,  Esq. 

Jeffries,  Sarah.  [17]  97.  [Elsinboro  Township,  Salem  County,  N.  J.,  after  marriage.  12  yrs.] 
7i"  X  185".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border  and  Greek-cross 
vine  at  top.  Miss  Hannah  Hall  Acton 

Jenkins,  Abigail.  1767.  8"  x  10^".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional 
flower  and  name  at  bottom.    Verse  343  (1,  7,  var.).  Miss  Susan  P.  Wharton 

Jennings,  MarYu  1766.  8j"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional 
flower  border  at  bottom.  In  center,  large  flower  and  animal  on  either  side  of  it.  Verse  488 
(var.).  Names  on  sampler:  "Mary  Jennings,  Josiah  Jennings,  Temperance  Jennings, 
David  Jennings,  Mary  Jennings."  Mrs.  Richard  H.  Hunt 

Jewett,  Nabby  [Abigail].  1797.  Bradford  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  14"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.  Cross-stitch  border  in  diamond  pattern.  Diamond  pattern  in  cross-stitch  at  bottom. 
Verse  388.  George  Savary  Wasson,  Esq. 

Johnson,  Anna  Greenleaf.  1787.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  Born  March  18,  1780.  22"  x  17". 
4  alphabets.  French  knot,  chain,  eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  vine  border.  Land- 
scape with  animals,  birds,  trees,  urn  with  flowering  plants,  strawberries,  and  bees.  Verse 
627  (1).  Mrs.  Anne  Greenleaf  Johnson  Rogerson 

Johnson,  Catherine.  1789.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  8"  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Flat, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth  border.  Trefoil  cross-stitch  borders  at  bottom.  Verse 
627  (1).  Miss  Eleanor  Reed  Johnson 

Johnson,  Elizabeth.  [Cir.  1797.]  Born  September  9,  1784.  Alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  flat, 
stem-stitch,  and  French  knots.  Vine  border  with  blossoms  starting  from  two  upi^er  corners 
going  down  sides  and  across  top.  At  bottom,  tree  in  middle,  with  2  birds  on  it,  a  flower- 
ing tree  on  either  side,  sheep  and  strawberries  in  grass.    Verse  617  (var.). 

Mrs.  Francis  A.  Goodhue 

Johnson,  Emelea  Jane.  1783.  [Baltimore,  Md.]  7  yrs.  9"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.  Carnation  border.  House,  tree,  children,  and  dog  at  top  of  sampler.  Row 
of  birds  on  pedestals.    Verse  490  (var.).  Miss  Mary  Winchester 

Johnson,  Hannah.  1768.  "Newbury  Newton."  14  yrs.  18^"  x  16^".  2  alphabets.  Chain, 
eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  SmaU  geometric  cross-borders.  At  bottom,  cherry 
tree,  birds,  butterflies,  cow,  deer,  and  large  baskets  of  flowers.  Verse  490  (var.).  Illus- 
trated. Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  57 

Johnson,  Mary.  1769.  9  yrs.  12"  x  20".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  "Pitch  upon  such  a 
course  as  is  excellent  and  praise  worthy  and  custom  will  soon  make  it  both  easy  &  delight- 
ful." The  Colonial  Dames  of  the  State  of  New  York 

Johnson,  Molly.  [Cir.  1778.  Maine.  Born  in  1767.]  10^"  x  12i".  1  alphabet.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  border  and  inside  border  in  satin-stitch.  Cross-border  at  top. 
Verse  128  (var.).  Miss  E.  L.  Alden 

Johnson,  Sally.  1799.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  27"  x  19".  4  alphabets.  Stem,  satin, 
flat,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Elaborate  design  at  bottom,  with  house,  mill, 
ladies  and  gentlemen,  servants,  cattle,  flowers,  vine,  trees,  birds,  etc.  Verse  666.  Illus- 
trated in  color.  Mrs.  Francis  A.  Goodhue 

Jones,  Frances.  1789.  Providence  [R.  I.  Born  February  10,  1782.  "Miss  Polly  Balch's 
School."].  7i"  X  9J".  Satin,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  rosebuds  and  star-flowers. 
At  bottom.  State  House,  Providence,  and  strawberries.    Verse  9,5  (2). 

Mrs.  William  J.  Dyer 

Jones,  Luna.  1797.  Great  Barrington.  11  yrs.  33"  x  24".  5  alphabets.  Tapestry,  queen,  eyelet, 
chain,  and  cat-stitch.  Names  and  dates:  "Calvin  Jones  born  1775  April  2,  Heman  Aug  15, 
1777,  Horace  Feb  15  1780,  Atlas  Jan  18  1782,  Thetis  Nov  25  1783,  Mithra  &  Luna 
Apr  4  1786,  Thisbe  Feb  21  1790,  Andes  Apr  30  1792,  Sabra  May  20  1794,  Died  Sept  5 
1796."  "Ebnr  Jones  my  pappa  born  April  12,  1752.  Susanna  Jones  my  mamma  born 
Dec.  11,  1755."    Verse  669.  Mrs.  William  Shippen  Jenks 

Jones,  Martha.  1759.  Medford  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  12"  x  7f".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Cross- 
borders  of  strawberries  and  fruit  trees.    Verse  490  (var.).  Mrs.  Mary  H.  Hayes 

Jones,  Mary.  1792.  Vincentown  [N.  J.].  9  yrs.  12^"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  border  at  top.  At  bottom,  small  trees  with  green  leaves  and  red 
flowers.    Verses  353  (1),  635.  Mary  Stretch  Frick  Drexel 

Jones,  Mary.  1795.  Vine  border.  Center  bottom,  a  pot  of  flowers.  Above,  six  lace  circles 
around  a  seventh,  with  a  vine  interspersed.  Stem  and  satin-stitch  and  twenty-seven  differ- 
ent lace-stitches.  Mrs.  Robert  W.  de  Forest 

Jones,  Ruth.  1791.  10^"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cat,  flat,  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  cross- 
stitch  border.  Mrs.  Joseph  W.  Knight 

Jones,  Sarah.  1763.  Savannah  [Ga.].  7  yrs,  13"  x  13".  Cross-stitch.  Flowered  vine  border. 
Basket  and  flowers  at  bottom.  Verse  355  (var.).  The  Ten  Commandments,  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  and  the  Apostles'  Creed.  Mrs.  O.  N.  Torian 

Jordan,  Hannah.  1798.  Scituate  [Mass.].  18  yrs.  15^"  x  19^".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.    Cross-borders.    Verses  187,  490  (var.).  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Keating,  Ruth  L.  1799.  11  yrs.  12"  x  15".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  tent,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Cross-stitch  border.    Basket  of  flowers,  birds  and  vines  at  bottom. 

Mrs.  H.  C.  Bunner 

Keeler,  Catherine.  1718.  8"  x  11".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  border.  At  bottom, 
2  baskets  of  fruit,  bird  between,  large  vase  of  flowers  each  side,  candlesticks  between  birds, 
pine  tree  on  each  end.    Verse  66  (1,  var.).  A.  M.  Barnes,  Esq. 

Keith,  Jemima.    1785.     Bridgewater  [Mass.].     18  yrs.    5^"  x  5i".    1  alphabet.     Cross-stitch. 

Miss  Julia  M.  Howard 

Kellah,  Betsy  Otis  Lewis.    1785.    8"  x  10".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Mrs.  George  T.  Brown 

K[emp],  a.  M.    11^"  X  9".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  George  R.  Southwick 


58  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Kemp,  Harriot.  9  yrs.  12"  x  15",  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  At  bottom,  large  urn 
in  middle,  with  conventional  flowers.  Four  smaller  vases  of  roses  and  two  bowls  of  straw- 
berries.   Verse  515  (var.).  A.  Piatt  Andrew,  Esq. 

Kext,  Sally  [Sara  Evelixa].  January  17,  1794.  Suflaeld,  Conn.  15"  x  21".  3  alphabets. 
Cross  and  eyelet-stitch.  Eyelet  border  and  conventional  flower.  "Germanicus  Kent  Aged 
4  years  May  31.  Arrates  Kent  Aged  7  months  January  17,  1794.  SaUy  Kent  Dec  24". 
Verse  601.  Mrs.  Richard  Webb 

KiLLE,  Bathsheba.  1790.  13"  x  17".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched,  with  Greek  fret 
border  of  currants,  clover  leaves,  forget-me-nots,  rosebuds,  strawberries,  etc.  Floral  spray 
tied  with  bow-knot  around  verse.  Verses  631  (1),  633.  Names  on  sampler:  "Father  John 
Kille,  Mother  Mary  Kille."  Mrs.  John  Tyler 

Kimball,  Abigal.    1772.    KH"  x  10^".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

King,  Elizabeth.  1788.  12  yrs.  12"  x  14f".  Alphabet.  Laid-work,  cross-stitch,  and  other 
fancy  stitches.  Narrow  border  outside,  and  inside  border  with  set  patterns  of  strawberries 
and  animals.  Elaborate  pattern  of  animals  and  strawberries  at  bottom.  Elizabeth  King 
died  soon  after  completing  this  sampler,  and  this  fact  is  indicated  on  the  sampler  by  a 
black  letter  E.  Mrs.  A.  W.  Hitchcock 

King, .     [After  1795.]     12"  x  24".     2  alphabets.     Eyelet,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.     Family 

names  and  dates  on  sampler:  "Martlia  King  born  June  11,  1785;  Miles  King  born  June  9, 
1786;  Eliza  King  born  July  29,  1788;  Peggy  Cara  King  born  Oct.  5,  1792;  Maria  Custine 
born  June  25,  1795."  Mrs.  John  Southgate  Tucker 

KixG,  Mary.  1759.  Boston  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  14"  x  14".  Alphabet.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  border,  with  roses  on  top  and  sides.  Dogs,  squirrels,  flowers,  and  peacocks 
at  bottom.  Essex  Institute 

King,  Rhoda.  [Cir.  1780.]  Taunton  [Mass.  Born  October  10,  1767.].  7"  x  9".  Alphabets. 
Cross,  queen,  and  tent-stitch.  Miss  Emily  C.  Williams 

Kinsman,  Lucy.  1758.  Ipswich  [Mass.].  7"  x  92".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Plain  border 
in  cross-stitch,  also  cross-borders.  Miss  Lucy  8.  Jewett 

KiTCHiN,  Sarah.  1790.  [Solebury  Township,  Bucks  County,  Pa.]  13  yrs.  11"  x  15".  3  al- 
phabets.   Cross-stitch.    Cross-borders.  The  Misses  Ely 

Kneeland,  Lydia.  1741.  Boston  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  10^"  x  15^".  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Vine 
border.  Elaborate  cross-borders  of  roses,  strawberry  plants,  trees,  birds,  animals.  Verses 
8,  187,  490  (var.).  Miss  Charlotte  Hedge 

Kneeland,  Mary.  1793.  14  yrs.  14"  x  16".  Cross-stitch  and  petit-point.  Conventional  straw- 
berry border  with  filled-in  background.  Trees,  birds,  and  flowers.  Verses  40  (var.),  248 
(1,  var.).  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Knight,  Ales.  1737.  7"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  con- 
ventional cross-borders  in  seventeenth  century  style.    Verse  584.      Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Knight,  Eunice.  [Cir.  1752.]  Newbury  [Mass.].  Born  July  2,  1741.  12"  x  21*'.  3  alphabets. 
Rosette,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Hills,  trees  with  fruit,  and  flowers, 
birds,  baskets,  sheep,  etc.  Mrs.  Ann  M.  Ilsley 

Knight,  Eunice.  1799.  13  yrs.  11"  x  144".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge. 
Cross-border  of  roses.     Birds,  trees,  dogs,  flower-pots,  and  large  basket  of  flowers. 

Eunice  Harriet  Roery 


PLATE  XXI 

Catherine  Yax  Schaick.     Albany.     1763 
Owned  by  the  laie  2Irs.  Abraham  Lansing 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  59 

KxowLES,  Sabah.  1732  or  6.  12  yrs.  6^"  x  Si".  Cross-stitch.  Birds,  trees,  and  the  names, 
Gilpin  and  Knowles.    Verses  39,  92  (1,  var.),  345  (1).  Miss  Elizabeth  J.  Hopkins 

Ladson,  Mary  Smith.  1789.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  8  yrs.  lOJ"  x  lU".  Alphabet.  Cross- 
stitch,  eyelet,  and  satin-stitch.     Eyelet-stitch  border.     Verse  212.        Miss  Isabelle  Ladson 

Lake,  Sabah.  7"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Bird's-eye,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  roses, 
bachelor's  buttons,  birds,  etc.     Verse  343  (1,  var.).  Redwood  Library,  Newport 

Lamb,  Lydia.  1787.  lOV'  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Verse  343 
(1,  var.).  Mrs.  Stanley  H.  Lowndes 

Lamson,  Hanxah.  1766.  Medford  [Mass.].  Born  in  1756.  8"  x  10^".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  cross-border.  Names  on  sampler:  "Susanna  born  Dec.  27 
1753;  Hannah  Lamson  born  Jan.  2,  1756;  Elizabeth  Lamson  born  Dec.  4,  1760;  Joseph 
Lamson  born  Feb.  2,  1760;  Nathaniel  [Lamson  born]  April  10,  1762;  William  [Lamson 
born]  April  1,  1764."    "Whilst  we  are  here  ..."  Mrs.  Thomas  8.  Young 

Lane,  Fanny.  1791.  Bedford  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Ej'elet  and  cross- 
stitch.  Border  in  eyelet-stitch.  Cross-borders  of  strawberries  and  vine  and  strawberry 
blossoms  and  vine.  Mrs.  E.  A.  Rollins 

Langdon,  Caroline.  1790.  Portsmouth,  N.  H.  Born  December  31,  1780.  12"  x  20".  4  alpha- 
bets. Cross-stitch  and  variety  of  fancy  stitches.  Vine  border.  Fancy  design  using  dia- 
mond shapes.     Verse  632.  Mrs.  William  Gorham  Rice 

Langdon,  Caty  [Catherine  Smith].  1797.  Conventional  flowers.  Verse  128  (1,  var.).  [She 
married  Amos  Smith,  and  Washington  Allston  had  his  studio  in  her  house.] 

Miss  Catherine  Langdon  Rogers 

Labkins,  Suky.     1792.    12  yrs.    12"  x  8".    Stem  and  cross-stitch.    2  alphabets.    Verse  362. 

Miss  Lorimer 

Latham,  C.  W.  13^"  x  13".  4  alphabets.  Chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Verse 
515  (var.).  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Latham,  Maria  P.  8"  x  17i".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border. 
Flowers.     Verse  515  (var.).  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Lathrop,  Lucy.  11  yrs.  13"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  In  border, 
sprays  of  roses,  pinks,  heartsease,  tulips,  etc.,  also  basket  filled  with  different  flowers. 

Miss  Marian  Hague 

Lawrence,  Sally  Clay.  1798.  Exeter  [N.  H.].  7  yrs.  10"  x  16".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cat, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Sheep,  strawberry  plants  and  blossoms.      Mrs.  Walter  M.  Lincoln 

Lawton,  Mary.  1771.  Portsmouth  [R.  I.].  12  yrs.  Born  August  28,  1759.  9"  x  10". 
6  alphabets.    Satin  and  cross-stitch.     Strawberry  and  vine  border.    Verse  129  (var.). 

Mrs.  Fred  R.  Gibbs 

Laycock,  Hannah.  1787.  9  yrs.  Cross-stitch.  Hearts  and  hour-glasses.  "Remember  thy 
Creator,"  etc.  Mrs.  John  C.  Munro 

Laycock,  Sarah.    1787.    12  yrs.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Verses  198,  345  (var.). 

Mrs.  John  C.  Munro 

Lea,  Elizabeth.  1752.  [Born  at  Concord,  Pa.,  January  15,  1745.  O.  S.]  10"  x  14".  Cross 
and  stem-stitch.    Green  grass  and  flowers.  Miss  Anna  Lea 


60  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Leach,  Betsy.  1789.  Marblehead  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  17^"  x  18^".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.  Vase  with  flowers,  ram,  birds,  and  flowers.  Names  and  ages  given  on  sampler: 
"Henry  Leach  aged  43  yrs,  Betsy  Leach  aged  11  years,  Richard  Leach  aged  6  years, 
Hannah  Leach  aged  3  years,  Katharine  Leach  aged  42  years,  Nathaniel  Leach  aged  9  years, 
Salle  Leach  aged  2  years.  Mary  Magery  who  died  September  26,  aged  22  years."  Verses 
128,  213.  Marblehead  Historical  Society 

Leavitt,  Maey.  1718.  13  yrs.  8^"  x  16^".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch  and  tent-stitch.  Simple 
cross-borders.  Figures  of  "Ashur"  and  "Elisha"  dancing  on  green  momid  and  playing 
on  wind  instruments,  also  detached  letters  and  figures.     (See  tailpiece,  p.  8.) 

Miss  A.  B.  Willson 

Leech,  Maky.  1794.  Hatboro  [Pa.].  9  yrs.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Houses,  trees, 
and  birds.    Initials  of  the  family.    Verse  343  (1).  Descendants  of  Mary  Leech 

Lees,  Hetty.  1799.  9  yrs.  16i"  x  20".  Alphabet.  Queen,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
vine  border  in  satin-stitch.    Design  of  barn,  house,  trees,  etc.    Verse  198.    Illustrated. 

Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 

Lehman,  Elizabeth.     1790.     16"  x  17^".     HoUie-point  lace. 

Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park,  Philadelphia 

Lehman,  Susan.  [1799.]  9  yrs.  [Born  in  Philadelphia  in  1790.]  14"  x  12".  6  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  cross-borders.  Parrots  and  dogs  and  plant  at  bottom. 
Verse  239.    Illustrated.  Mrs.  Charles  Schiiffer 

Lehman,  Susan.  [1799.]  9  yrs.  [Born  in  1790.]  16^"  x  16i".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  -and,  inside,  saw-tooth  border.  Scene  with  house, 
barn,  fence,  and  trees. 

"One  Weeks  Extremity  May  Teach  Us  More  Than  Long  Prosperity 
Had  Done  Before  Death  Is  Forgotten  In  Our  Easy  State  But  Trou 
pies  Mind  Us  In  Our  Final  Fate  The  Doing  111  Affects  Us  not  with  Fears 
But  Suffring  111  Brings  Sorrow  Woe  And  Tears."  Mrs.  Charles  Schaffer 

Lehman,  Susanah.    1796.     [6  yrs.]    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Carnation  cross-borders. 

Mrs.  Charles  Schaffer 

Leigh,  Marcy.  [Cir.  1784.  Newbury,  Mass.]  Born  November  22  [1775].  7^"  x  9^".  Alpha- 
bets.   Cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  border.  Miss  Sarah  Jackson  Leigh 

Leonard,  Fanny.    1774.    12  yrs.    13"  x  8".    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  604. 

Charles  H.  Warren,  Esq. 

Levistone,  Olive.  1797.  11  yrs.  12"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Zigzag  borders,  with  eyelets  in  between.  Conventional  trees  and  birds  and  man  in  baggy 
breeches.    Verse  128  (var.).  Miss  Mary  C.  Wheelwright 

Lewis,  Elizabeth.  18"  x  18".  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  Hill  with  flower  garden, 
peacock,  tall  vases,  sheep,  lady  with  lamb,  rose  tree  with  white  squirrel  imder  it,  white 
French  poodle,  rabbit,  and  bluebird  between  poplars.    Verse  615.      Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Lewis,  Mabtha.  1740.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  12  yrs.  10^"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem, 
satin,  petit-point,  cat,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  little  trees  at  top;  border  of  birds 
and  geometrical  designs  at  bottom.  Mrs.  John  F.  Bennett 

Lewis,  Maey.  1790.  Born  November  8,  1780.  8"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Narrow 
cross-borders.    Conventional  tree,  etc.  Annie  Booth  Law 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  61 

Lewise,  Ann.  11  yrs.  16"  x  17^".  2  alphabets.  Tent,  filler,  cushion,  French  knot,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Flowered  vine  border.  Scene  with  house,  barn,  dovecote,  doves,  trees,  fence,  and 
two  flower  baskets.    Verse  494  (1  and  2).  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Lincoln,  Eunice.  1794.  24i"  x  20i".  Stem,  satin,  tent,  cat,  cross-stitch,  queen  and  petit- 
point.  Strawberry  border  outside,  next,  wide  conventional  border  in  solid  cross-stitch; 
vines  and  flowers  on  either  side,  and  across  top,  scene  with  shepherd  and  shepherdess  and 
black  and  white  sheep;  just  below,  angels,  birds,  trees,  and  animals;  then  house  and  trees, 
with  picture  of  farmer  and  his  wife  in  corners;  inscription,  "Let  Virtue  be  a  guide  to 
thee";  and  in  lower  section,  lord  and  lady  of  the  manor  on  either  side  of  shield  bearing 
name  and  date;  and  below  that.  Verse  646.  Mrs.  Miles  White,  Jr. 

LippiNcoTT,  Rachel.  1793.  17  yrs.  11"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Cat,  queen,  eyelet,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry  border.    Verse  375.  Anna  C.  Scott 

LippiTT,  Julia.  1797.  14"  x  12".  ["Miss  Polly  Balch's  School."]  Long  and  short,  stem,  satin, 
split,  eyelet,  and  cross-stifch.     Basket  of  fruit,  flowers  and  birds  inside  of  arch. 

Miss  M.  Frances  Babcock 

LipPiTT,  Phebe.  1787.  Cranston  [R.  I.].  11  yrs.  9^"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Tent,  chain,  eye- 
let, and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  and  strawberry  and  carnation  cross-borders. 
Verses  187,  490  (var.).  Mrs.  L.  C.  Harper 

Little,  Jane.  1786.  Newbury  [Mass.].  12"  x  13".  Alphabet.  Stem,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  and  vine  border.  Small  letters  in  needlework  frames.  "General  George  Wash- 
ington the  ornament  example  and  defense  of  our  nation".  Miss  Hannah  M.  W.  Merrill 

Little,  Ruth.  1766.  Marshfield  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  lOi"  x  21".  1  alphabet.  Cross  and  eyelet- 
stitch,  Greek  fret  and  trefoil  cross-borders.     Verses  182  (1,  3),  490  (var.). 

Miss  Florence  G.  Ford 

L[ockwood],  P[hebe].  1785.  Born  December  9,  1778.  13^"  x  t\".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Verses  10  (1),  201,  617  (var).  Mrs.  Lorenzo  Sears 

Lord,  Hannah.     1764.     7^"  x  93".     2  alphabets.     Petit-point,  queen,  tent,  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  border  of  flowers  and  vines.    Conventionalized  flower  in  cross-border. 
"Sing  unto  God,  sing  praises  to  his  name. 
Extol  him  that  rideth  upon  the  heavens 
by  his  name  jah  and  rejoice  before  him 
A  father  of  the  fatherless  and  a  judge  of 
the  widow        is  god  in  his  holy  habitation."  Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

LoRiNG,  Lydia.  1794.  Born  August  31,  1781.  "Derby  School."  11"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry  border,  with  diflFerent  designs  in  corners.    Verse  227.     [Massachusetts.] 

Mrs.  Frederick  H.  Tappan 

Loring,  Polly.  1787.  Born  February  16,  1778.  1  alphabet.  Cat-stitch.  Strawberry  border. 
Greek  fret  cross-border.  Mrs.  Frederick  H.  Tappan 

Lynde,  Anna.  14  yrs.  10"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional 
border  at  top.    Verse  132  (1,  var.).  Worcester  Art  Museum 

Lynde,  Dorothy.  1757.  12"  x  14".  10  yrs.  1  alphabet  and  2  parts  of  alphabets.  Petit-point 
covering  the  entire  canvas.  Eyelet  and  satin-stitch.  Border  contains  the  sun  at  the  top, 
cherubim  at  either  upper  corner,  figures  on  pedestals  at  either  side;  below,  a  scene  with 
house,  trees,  a  black  dog,  one  sheep,  and  a  shepherdess.  Verse  132  (1,  var.).  Illustrated 
in  color.  Old  South  Meeting  House,  Boston 


62  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Lynde,  Hannah.    7"  x  12^".    Alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  edge.    Verse  128  (var,). 

Worcester  Art  Museum 

Lynde,  Mary.    1761.    13  yrs.    6*"  x  8^".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.      Worcester  Art  Museum 

Lyon,  Elizabeth.  1791.  [New  Haven,  Conn.]  14  yrs.  18"  x  21".  2  alphabets.  Vine  border. 
Vases  in  corners  at  bottom.  Picture  of  an  old  girls'  school  on  State  Street,  with  ladies 
and  gentlemen  and  sheep.    Verse  218.  Mrs.  William  Lyon  Phelps 

Lyon,  Polly.    1786.    6  yrs.    6"  x  10".     1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.     Strawberry  design. 

Mrs.  William  Lyon  Phelps 

Lyon,  Sophia.  August  8,  1790.  [New  Haven,  Conn.]  5  yrs.  10"  x  11^".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    At  top,  bird  in  nest  and  flowers.    Greek  fret  at  bottom.    Verses  216,  340. 

Mrs.  William  Lyon  Phelps 

M.,  A.  F.  1762.  9  yrs.  Hamburg.  11"  x  14".  Twenty  imitations  of  materials,  from  silk 
stockings  to  brocade.    Even  the  selvage  is  imitated.  Mrs.  O.  Clem,  Goodrich 

Macomber,  Ann.  1799.  11"  x  13".  Alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Scene  with 
"Liberty  Hall,"  Philadelphia,  also  house,  fence,  two  gates,  sidewalk,  horse,  trees,  dog. 
Illustrated.  Mrs.  Lorenzo  Sears 

Makepeace,  Sukey.  [1750.]  16^"  x  23".  Alphabet.  Cross,  split,  satin,  and  knot-stitch. 
Pineapple  and  rose  border.  Landscape  with  peacock,  birds,  two  dogs,  and  stag.  Illus- 
trated. The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Mann,  Anna.  1791.  12  yrs.  7"  x  9".  2  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Crude  designs 
in  center.  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Mansfield,  Betsy  )       1772.         1772-1799.    8*"  x  lOV'.    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    "1.  Betsy 
Pierce,  Eliza  C      1796.     Mansfield  1772  aged  10.    2.  Eliza  Pierce  1796  aged  10.    3.  Har- 

Pierce,  Harriot      )       1799.     riot  Pierce  1799  aged  8."  Mrs.  Charles  J.  White 

Marquand,  Ann.  1796.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  Born  October  16,  1786.  11"  x  11". 
4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-borders:  lozenge  and  diamond, 
scroll,  heart,  diamond,  and  Greek  fret.    Four  baskets  and  two  rose  bushes.    Verse  617. 

Miss  Elizabeth  Marquand 

Marshall,  Betsy.  1799.  [Bridgewater,  Mass.]  9  yrs.  7^"  x  10^".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Vine  border.    Design  of  leaves  and  figures.  Theodore  P.  Tower,  Esq. 

Marshall,  Elizabeth.  1724.  11  yrs.  7i"  x  llj".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 
Scroll,  point,  and  strawberry  borders  at  top.  Bird  perched  on  branch  of  leaves  and  flowers. 
["From  the  West  Indies."]  Mrs.  John  H.  Morison 

Marshall,  Lydia.  11  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border,  saw-tooth  and 
strawberry  vine.    In  middle,  a  vase  with  small  tree  on  either  side.    Verse  164. 

Mrs.  Mabel  Hurley 

Martin,  Margaret.  1763.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  8^"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  hem-stitch,  and 
cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  and  drawn-work  border  at  top  and  bottom.    Verse  356. 

Mrs.  William  Dunkin 

Martin,  Nabby.  1786.  10^"  x  15".  Petit-point,  split,  stem,  satin,  tent,  queen,  and  cross-stitch. 
Brown  University  building  at  top,  and  at  bottom.  Old  State  House,  also  three  groups  of 
ladies  and  gentlemen.  Large  flowers  on  either  side  in  border.  Verse  97.  ["Miss  PoUy 
Balch's  School."]  Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 

Mascarene,  Elizabeth.  1762.  11  yrs.  6"  x  9".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Simple  cross-stitch 
design  at  top  and  bottom.  Edmund  M.  Dow,  Esq. 


'ssi-S'ta^'*— -««• 


'-'^Mrt^-y-BM 


PLATE  XXII 

Sally  Rea's  Sampler.     1766 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Miles  White,  Jr. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  63 

Mason,  John.  [Cir.  1780.]  Painted  sampler.  "Son  of  Solomon  Mason  and  Anna  his  wife, 
was  born  January  the  3rd  Anno  Domini  1767."  Floral  design  at  top,  and  at  bottom, 
figures  of  parents,  with  vase  filled  with  flowers  in  between  them.    Verse  365.    Illustrated. 

Maxcy  Applegate,  Esq. 

Mason,  Mary.  1797.  [Salem  County,  N.  J.]  12  yrs.  8^"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Buttonhole, 
tent,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Conventional  borders.  The  Misses  Holme 

Mason,  Polly.    1798.    Framingham  [Mass.].    9"  x  6".    Alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Unfinished. 

Lancaster  Library,  Massachusetts 

Mather,  Mary.  1767.  12  yrs.  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation, 
strawberry,  trees,  and  birds,  and  conventional  cross-borders.     Strawberry  design. 

Mrs.  J.  Henry  Small 

Matthews,  Temperance.  1750.  10  yrs.  10"  x  12".  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  pine 
trees  and  crowns.    Proverbs  31,  verses  29-31.  Robert  P.  Jordan,  Dealer 

Mawney,  Amey.  1787.  Providence  [R.  I.].  7^"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Cross-stitch  border.    Design  of  strawberry  vine,  but  incomplete.    Verses  617  (var.),  626. 

Miss  Amey  Lemoine  Willson 

May,  Catherine.  1770.  Boston  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  5^"  x  19i".  6  alphabets.  Tapestry,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.    Dog-tooth  border.    Landscape  with  house,  sheep,  figures,  trees,  etc. 

Dr.  Zabdiel  Boylston  Adams 

May,  Mary  Ann.  April  23,  1793.  11  yrs.  12"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  and  stem- 
stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Simple  cross-borders.  Tree,  two  baskets  of  fruit,  and  two 
butterflies.    Verses  45,  92a  (2).  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  New  York 

Mayhew,  Sally.  1787.  Newburj^port  [Mass.].  17"  x  8i".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  at  top.  Double  lines  of  cross-stitch  at  bottom.  "I'le 
praise  my  maker  while  I  have  breath."  Miss  Lillian  Adams 

McClitre,  Nancy.  1795.  7  yrs.  17"  x  16^".  3  alphabets.  Chiefly  stem  and  cross-stitch.  Vine 
border.  Mrs  I.  Tucker  Burr 

McCullough,  Elizabeth.  1787.  Newcastle  [Del.].  11"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Queen,  flat, 
stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  At  bottom,  tree  on  either  side  of  a  flower  piece  and 
medallion  at  right.    Verse  511  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Edmund  K.  Ooldsborough 

McDonald,  Mary.  1787.  Albany  [N.  Y.].  12  yrs.  7^"  x  10*".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Two  peacocks,  on  either  side  of  basket  of  flowers.  Mary  McDonald  Vosburgh 

McGary,  Lydl4  James.     [1785.]    8  yrs.    7^"  x  9".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Oeorge  Thurber  Brown 

McLean,  Elizabeth  H.  1785.  [Near  Gettysburg,  Pa.]  2  alphabets.  Outline,  eyelet,  and 
cross-stitch.  Top  border  of  strawberry;  bottom  border,  old  Indian  basket  pattern.  Verse 
619.  Mrs.  W.  P.  Stevenson 

McLean,  Mary.  [1773  or  1775.]  Border  and  cross-borders.  At  bottom,  pine  tree  with  bird 
on  top  branch.    Verse  197.  Maxcy  Applegate,  Esq. 

McLellan,  Eliza.  12  yrs.  11"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Queen,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross- 
borders.    Design,  basket  of  strawberries  and  two  plants  on  either  side. 

A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

Mears,  Abigail.  1772.  15"  x  19".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  eyelet,  imitation  couching-stitch. 
Border  of  conventionalized  flowers.  Strawberry,  saw-tooth,  and  Greek  fret  cross-borders. 
At  bottom,  a  hunting  scene  with  a  stag  and  four  dogs.    Verse  359.    Illustrated. 

Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 


64  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


It 


Merrick,   Maria.     1798.      [Brookfield,  Mass.]      8  yrs.     Born  October   14,  1790.     11"  x  12^ 
3    alphabets.      Cross-stitch.      Strawberry    border.      Trees,    birds,   plants,   flowers,    fruits, 
animals,  etc.,  divided  by  four  cross-borders.  Miss  Frances  M.  Lincoln 

Merrill,  Susaxxa  [Sukey].  1793.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  16V'  x  21".  3  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  chain,  herring-bone,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border  interwoven  with 
flowers.    Vase  of  flowers  with  bird  on  either  side,  also  sheep,  trees,  and  set  designs. 

"Sickness  may  strip  you  of 

The  bloom  of  the  rose 

But  the  beauties  of 

The  mind  will  endear 

Beyond  the  grave. 

My  young  friend 

Prepare  to  meet 

Your  God." 
Verse  601  (1,  2,  3).  Mrs.  F.  D.  Greene 

Messer,  Nancy.    1798.    New  London  [Conn.].    8"  x  8^".    3  alphabets.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 

Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Michexeh,  Deborah.  1774.  [Plumstead  Township,  Bucks  County,  Pa.].  17  yrs.  8i"  x  11^". 
Alphabet.  Family  initials:  "W  M  [William],  J  M  [John],  S  M  [Sarah],  B  M  [Barak], 
H  M  [Hannah],  D  M  [Deborah],  M  M  [Mordecai],  H  M  [Hannah],  E  M  [Elizabeth], 
R  M  [?],   KM  [Katharine],  M  M  [?],  S  M  [?]."  Captain  Capehart,  U.  S.  N. 

MicKLE,  Sarah.  1763.  9"  x  lOJ".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  flat,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-borders 
and  small  designs.  Mrs.  Edward  Dillon 

Miller,  [Anna]  Elizabeth.  1797.  [Kensington,  Philadelphia,  Pa.]  11  yrs.  16^"  x  17". 
1  alphabet.  Queen,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  cross-stitch,  and  other  stitches.  Border,  Greek  fret, 
strawberries  or  roses.  Cross-borders.  Trees,  birds,  houses,  and  fences.  Initials  of  father 
and  mother,  "CM,   M  M."    Verse  523.  Miss  Anna  E.  Murphy 

Miller,  Lucretia.  1798.  14  yrs.  7"  x  7i".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Narrow  cross-stitch 
border.     Cross-borders  of  Greek  fret.    Heart,  crown,  etc.  Mrs.  John  F.  Calder 

Miller,  Mary.  1775.  Savannah  [Ga.].  10"  x  12^".  Alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Floral  border.  Scene  with  ladies,  children,  servants,  tree,  fruit,  flowers,  and  insects. 
Verse  606  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Arthur  H.  Wright 

Miller,  Sally.  1783.  Middletown  [Conn.].  9  yrs.  16^"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Border,  strawberry  design  on  sides,  vine  with  small  baU  at  top  and  bottom.  Verses  41 
(var.),  132  (1,  var.),  191  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Stanley  H.  Lowndes 

Montgomery,  Nancy.     1798.     Middleborough.     9  yrs.     6"  x  8".     Alphabet.     Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  George  F.  Seaver 

Moore,  Sibilah.  1788.  [Mullica  Hill,  Gloucester  County,  N.  J.]  10  yrs.  [Born  February  8, 
1778.]  12i"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cat,  flat,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Borders  across 
top  and  bottom  of  strawberries,  roses,  vines.  Conventional  carnations  across  bottom. 
Verse  343  (1).  Family  names  and  initials  on  sampler:  father  and  mother,  "Joshua  Moore, 
Rachel  Moore;"  children,  "H  M,   R  M,   AM,   KM,   S  M,   P  M,   M  M." 

William  F.  Edwards,  Esq. 

MoREY,  Betsy  Jenkins.  1798.  [Vermont.  7  yrs.]  12"  x  4".  3  alphabets.  Satin,  stem,  and 
cross-stitch.    Border  of  stem-stitch  points.    Carnation  design.  Mrs.  James  N.  Bailey 

Morse,  Cynthia.    1748.    Foxboro.    3"  x  8".    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.      Mrs.  Ella  G.  Church 


J 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  65 

Morton,  Lydia.  1765.  12  yrs.  8"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Diamond 
border  and  plain  cross-borders.    Strawberry  design.    Verse  128  (1,  var.). 

M.  B.  Lemon,  Dealer 

Motley,  Mahy.  1795.  11  yrs.  Born  August  25,  1783.  1  alphabet.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Border  of  vine  and  strawberries.  In  center,  Mason's  square  and  compass  with  inscription, 
"Richard  Driver  departed  this  life  July  the  19  in  the  year  of  our  lord  1792;"  and  on 
either  side  a  large  flowering  plant,  also  the  words,  "Aged  seventy  seven."  In  upper  part, 
"Richard  Motley  was  married  to  Ann  Wilson  Driver  the  14th  of  July  in  Year  of  our  lord 
1780.  Ann  Motley  Born  July  8  1781,  Mary  Motley  Born  Aug  25  1783,  Sukey  Motley 
Born  March  5  1788,  Elizabeth  Motley  Born  February  4  1787,  James  Motley  Born  Aug  16 
1789,  WilHam  Motley  Born  October  6  1791,  John  Motley  Born  June  5  1794."    Verse  613. 

Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 

MoTTNTFORT,  Hannah.  May  22,  1736.  [Boston,  Mass.?]  12  yrs.  Born  February  5,  1724. 
18"  X  9".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Borders  of  carnation,  straw- 
berry, Greek  fret,  rose,  cross,  vine,  and  trefoil  designs.    Verse  128  (var.). 

Mrs.  Mary  A.  Rhodes 

MuHLEXBERG,  Hetty.  1797.  Reading  [Pa.].  12  yrs.  21^"  x  21V'.  2  alphabets.  Stem  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  and  carnation  cross-border  at  top.  Round  basket  out  of 
which  are  growing  carnations,  bluebells,  rosebuds,  and  heartsease.  Small  parrot  is  perched 
on  top  spray.    Verse  48.  Mrs.  John  A.  Hoogerwerf 

Muhlexberg,  Susanxa.  1790.  Trappe  [Pa.].  11  yrs.  18"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Borders,  Greek  fret  and  strawberry.  Cross  in  two  upper  corners. 
Verse  139.  Mrs.  John  A.  Kress 

MuiFORD,  Sarah.  1794.  [AUoway,  N.  J.]  10"  x  14",  5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  tent,  queen,  and 
cross-stitch.  Vine  and  carnation  border.  Cross-border  in  vine  and  strawberry  pattern. 
Two  trees  and  grass.    Verse  642.  Mrs.  William  K.  Andrews 

MuxRo,  Sally.  12"  x  17".  Queen,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border,  vine  rising  out  of  vases  in 
lower  corners,  also  strawberries  and  various  flowers.  Scene  1,  Adam  and  Eve  beautifully 
dressed,  and  Tree  of  Knowledge ;  Scene  2,  President's  house.  Brown  University,  and  people 
going  to  the  reception.    A  doctor's  gig  in  front  of  the  house.    Verse  4.    Illustrated. 

Newport  Historical  Society 

Murray,  Deborah.  1777.  6  yrs.  Alphabet.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Rows  of  strawberries, 
crowns,  and  saw-teeth.  "The  Expectation  of  future  Happiness  is  the  Best  Relief  of 
Anxious  Thoughts  the  most  perfect  cure  of  Milancholy  the  guide  of  Life  and  the  Comfort 
of  Death."    "Remember  thy  Creator,"  etc.    Verse  609  (2,  var.).      Mrs.  I.  Edwin  Ruggles 

Mutter,  Elizabeth.  [Cir.  1790.  Granville  County,  N.  C.  12  yrs.]  16^"  x  17".  Darning  and 
cross-stitch.    Floral  border.  Mary  Sumner  Kingsbury 

Nelson,  Mary  Ann.  1797.  Augusta,  Va.  12  yrs.  17"  x  21".  Flat,  eyelet,  stem,  and  satin- 
stitch.  Simple  borders.  "The  Message,"  St.  Luke,  Chapter  2,  verses  13,  14,  and  16. 
Verse  524.  Mrs.  E.  C.  Skaggs 

Newco3ib,  Edeth.  1795-96.  Cohansey,  N.  J.  17"  x  24".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Vine  border.  Cross-borders  of  flowers  and  vines.  Potted  flowers.  Family  initials:  "T  B, 
E  B,  E  B,  E  B,  A  B,  SB,  R  N,  E  N,  E  N,  K  N,  E  N,  R  N."     Verses  187,  490  (var.). 

Mrs.  C.  May  Neeld 

Newell,  Maby.    1792.    10  yrs.    7"  x  9".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.  Prof.  F.  P.  Oorham 


66  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Newhall,  Lucy.  1793.  Lynn  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  [Born  July  26,  1782.]  9"  x  18".  1  alphabet. 
Eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.     Strawberry  border.    Verses  490  (var.),  639. 

Miss  Bertha  M.  Larkin 

Nichols,  Anxa.  1778.  21  yrs.  7i"  x  6".  2  alphabets.  Herring-bone  and  cross-stitch.  Cross- 
stitch  border.  Mrs.  Emma  Cheney  Peabody 

Nichols,  Sarah.  1794.  Newbury  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  11"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Laid-stitch,  satin 
and  cross-stitch.  Diamond  border.  Design  at  bottom  consists  of  trees,  large  and  small 
birds,  animals,  baskets  of  flowers,  etc.    Verse  380.  Mrs.  Mary  F.  Hudson 

NicKALLs,  SusANNE.  1792.  Londonderry.  12  yrs.  9^"  x  15A".  2  alphabets.  Cross  and  satin- 
stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  and  strawberry  border.  Garden  of  Eden,  with  Adam  and  Eve 
and  Serpent.    Verse  10  (1).  Miss  Lucasta  J.  Boynton 

NiLEs,  Jaxe.  1791.  Philadelphia  [Pa.  18  yrs.  Born  July  7,  1773.].  18"  x  22".  2  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry,  rose,  carnation,  and  vine  border.  Trees,  birds, 
animals,  and  baskets  of  flowers.    Verses  219,  490  (var.).        Hannah  Niles  Freeland  Miller 

NoRCROss,  Polly.  [Cir.  1791.]  Pittston  [Me.].  7"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Cat,  rope,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Cat-stitch  border.    "There  is  nothing  of  so  much  worth  as  a  mind  well  instructed." 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Norton,  Abigail.  1775.  15  yrs.  21^"  x  7".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  "Remember  Thy 
Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  Youth."  Clarence  A.  Mathewson,  Esq. 

NoYES,  Katy.  1787.  Newbury  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  Born  August  17,  1773.  17"  x  22*".  4  alpha- 
bets. Eyelet,  French  knot,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  and  vine  border  on  three 
sides.    Landscape  with  hills,  sheep,  lambs,  trees,  sparrow,  and  parrot.    Verse  368. 

Mrs.  John  F.  Pearson 

Nugent,  Sally.  1784.  Philadelphia  [Pa.].  21  yrs.  7f"  x  17".  Alphabet.  Buttonhole,  stem, 
eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Vase  with  unfinished  flowers  and  cluster  of 
flowers.  Names  of  brotherr,  "Washington,  Charles,  James,"  and  one  too  indistinct  to 
make  out.    "Love  best  and  honor  thy  mother."  Miss  Mary  Hale  Coffin 

Oliver,  Sarah.  1755.  Boston  [Mass.].  Born  in  1745.  8^"  x  11".  Alphabets.  Conventional 
trees.       Hutchinson  Collection,  sold  at  American  Art  Galleries,  New  York,  April  11,  1918 

Olmsted,  Elizabeth.  [Cir.  1736.]  East  Hartford  [Conn.].  Born  August  26,  1726.  Cross- 
stitch.  Conventional  border.  Family  record:  "Ashbel  Olmsted  born  February  10,  1726; 
Hannah  Newberry  born  October  3,  1729;  Married  November  3,  1737;  Mabel  Olmsted  born 
January  21,  1759;  died  May  19,  1759;  Mabel  Olmsted  born  November  7,  1759;  Ashbel 
Olmsted  born  March  12,  1761;  Elizabeth  Olmsted  born  August  26,  1762;  Ursula  Olmsted 
born  January  29,  1764;  Elihu  Olmsted  born  September  7,  1765;  Hannah  Olmsted  born 
January  21,  1768;  Amelia  Olmsted  born  August  19,  1769;  Naomi  Olmsted  born  October  1.3, 
1772;  Elizy  Olmsted's  Registry."  Mrs.  A.  L.  Fanning 

Ohmsbee,  Robe  A.    1790.    10"  x  7".    5  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch.    Verse  617  (1). 

The  Misses  Peck 

Orne,  Lois.  1767.  Salem  [Mass.].  8"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Cross- 
stitch  border.     Strawberry  vine  design.  Mrs.  A.  G.  Bullock 

Orwin,  Margaret.  1786.  8^"  x  21".  5  alphabets.  Tent  and  eyelet-stitch.  Animals,  man  and 
woman,  and  many  initials.  Miss  Anne  Lee 

Osgood,  Lydia.  [Before  1800.]  12  yrs.  8i"  x  9".  4  alphabets.  Border  of  Greek  fret,  straw- 
berry, cross,  and  chain  patterns.    Several  hearts  on  right  side.  W.  G.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 


'■O 


c 
o 
O 


X 
X 


^^ 


rt      Si 

s 
o 

u 
o 

PS 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  67 

Owen,  Rebekah.  1745.  [Cambridge,  Mass.]  11  yrs.  8"  x  15".  1  alphabet.  Stem,  rose-point, 
and  cross-stitch  over  a  single  thread.  Strawberry  border.  Conventional  cross-stitch  cross- 
borders.  Adam  and  Eve,  Tree  of  Knowledge  and  Serpent,  also  detached  flowers  around 
scene.    Verse  348.    Illustrated.  Mrs.  George  E.  Smith 

OwixGS,  Sakah.    1799.    4  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Plain  border.    Verse  241.  Mrs.  Sighee 

Packard,  Sophia.  1791.  Providence  [R.  I.].  14"  x  12".  ["Miss  Polly  Balch's  School."]  3  al- 
phabets. Chain,  stem,  satin,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  border.  Oval  with  inscrip- 
tion inside.    Verse  503  (var.).  Mrs.  J.  H.  Hambly 

Padelford,  Susan  Sarah  Levett.  1794.  Taimton  [Mass.].  8J"  x  8i".  Cross,  satin,  chain,  and 
flat-stitch.    House,  with  arch  over  the  door  and  small  windowpanes.     [Born  1782.] 

Mrs.  J.  Lewis  Austin 

Pain,  Rachel.  1792.  [Marblehead?  Mass.]  8"  x  8".  Chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Chain-stitch  border.    Plant  in  flower-pot,  bush,  and  birds.    Verse  12.       Mrs.  B.  F.  Stacey 

Paine,  Harriet.  1787.  [St.  Johns,  New  Brunswick.]  12  yrs.  19"  x  19".  Alphabet.  Stem 
and  cross-stitch.    Vine  and  flower  border.    Verse  138.  Mrs.  Francis  H.  Lee 

Painter,  Susanna.  1724.  Philadelphia  [Pa.].  7  yrs.  11"  x  8V'.  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.    "The  blessing  of  the  Lord:  it  maketh  rich  and  he  addeth  no  sorrow  with  it." 

Miss  Susan  P.  Wharton 

Parker,  Betsy.  1799.  15  yrs.  11"  x  14^".  3  alphabets.  Satin,  queen,  petit-point,  stem,  eyelet, 
and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  carnations  and  cross-borders  of  rose  and  trefoil  patterns. 
Humpy  green  ground,  with  bush  and  unfinished  rose  [?].    Verse  627  (1). 

A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

Parker,  Mary.  1741.  13  yrs.  9i"  x  18^".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  eyelet,  and  various  other 
stitches.  Strawberry,  carnation,  and  other  conventional  cross-borders.  Scene  with  Adam 
and  Eve  and  Tree  of  Knowledge  and  Serpent.    Illustrated.  Mrs.  Henry  H.  Edes 

Parker,  Sally.  1796.  11  yrs.  2  alphabets.  Satin,  eyelet,  long,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek 
fret  border.    Trees,  grass,  and  flowers.    Verse  625  (1).  3Irs.  Savary  and  Miss  Parker 

Parker,  Susannah.  1790.  Portsmouth  [N.  H.].  10  yrs.  9"  x  14".  Alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.    Vine  border.  Merrill  Spalding,  Esq. 

Pahkhurst,  Hannah.  1781.  Newark  [N.  J.].  13  yrs.  Born  December  6,  1768.  7i"  x  9i". 
3  alphabets.    Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Miss  Frances  C.  Force 

Parrish,  Deborah.  1784.  Philadelphia  [Pa.].  10*"  x  12 J".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  long,  and 
cross-stitch.    Rose  and  strawberry  border.    Verse  609  (var.).  Miss  Susan  P.  Wharton 

Patten,  Experience.  1799.  Hartford  [Conn.].  12  yrs.  15"  x  22".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Plain  border.  Scene  with  house,  poplars,  fence,  and  grass. 
Verse  74.  The  Misses  Hill 

Patten,  Lucinda.  1794.  8  yrs.  12V'  x  20V'.  2  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Plain 
border.    Rose  in  center,  tulips  on  either  side.    Verses  46,  98,  129.  The  Misses  Hill 

Paul,  Judith.  [1791.]  Providence.  16^"  x  13^".  ["Miss  Polly  Balch's  School."]  Chain,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.    House,  figures,  and  trees.    Verse  606  (1,  var.). 

Rhode  Island  Historical  Society 

Peabody,  Sarah  Hazard.     17 .     [Cir.  1765?]     12"  x  15^".    4  alphabets.    Eyelet,  satin,  and 

cross-stitch.    Double  saw-tooth  border.     Pot  of  flowers  in  lower  corners,  baskets  of  fruit, 
with  flowers  arching  over.    Verse  95.  Miss  Susan  Woodman 


68  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Pearce,  Lydia.  1796.  8  yrs.  Alphabet.  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Plain  cross-stitch  border. 
Cross-stitch  dividing  lines.    Verse  129  (var.).  Described  by  Mrs.  A.  A.  Lawrence 

Pearson,  Hannah.  1793.  Ipswich  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  21".  2  alphabets.  French  knots, 
satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Flower  and  vine  border.  At  top,  in  center,  a  bouquet  in  jar, 
with  large  birds  on  either  side.    At  bottom,  flowers  and  leaves.  John  F.  Pearson,  Esq. 

Pearson,  Mary  HoLYOKE.  |     ^^  ^^p       16"  x  8i".    4  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Pearson,  Margaretta  Bromfield.   J 

Simple  zigzag  border.    Greek  fret  cross-border  at  bottom.    Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Pearson,  Susannah.  1756.  lOJ"  x  15^".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  flat,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross- 
border  at  top  and  bottom.    Verse  185.  Miss  Caroline  M.  Burnham 

Pecker,  Elizabeth.  1750.  Born  July  31,  1735.  15^"  x  20".  4  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.  Double  strawberry  border.  Elaborate  design  at  bottom,  with  two  trees,  large 
basket  of  flowers,  birds,  hens,  cat,  dogs,  and  lady.     Verse  128  (1,  var.).     Illustrated. 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Pedrick,  Elizabeth.  1787.  [Marblehead,  Mass.]  18"  x  21".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  satin, 
cross-stitch,  and  seed-stitch.  Adam  and  Eve  in  Garden  of  Eden,  etc.,  also  many  symbols, 
crowns,  doves,  animals,  trees,  vases,  etc.  "As  Soon  As  We  Are  Born  Then  Presently  We 
Cry  As  If  We  Knew  We  Came  Into  A  World  Of  Music."     Marblehead  Historical  Society 

Peele,  Nabby  Mason.  1778.  Boston  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  15i"  x  19".  "Miss  Sarah  Stivour's 
School."  Alphabet.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge.  Floral  border.  At 
bottom,  plant,  man  and  woman,  and  animals.    Verses  376,  502,  503  (var.). 

Essex  Institute 

Perkins,  Lucy.  1792.  Liverpool,  Nova  Scotia.  21^"  x  24".  2  alphabets.  French  knot,  stem, 
and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Green  lawn  and  two  rose  bushes.  Verse  24  (1,  2, 
3,  4,  var.).  Miss  Elizabeth  Perkins 

Perkins,  Lydia.  1774.  [Norwich,  Conn.]  7  yrs.  [Born  October  11,  1767.]  8"  x  12".  2  alpha- 
bets.    Cross-stitch.     Carnation  and  Grecian  cross-borders.     Verse  198  (lines  3,  4,  5). 

Miss  Anna  Perkins  Williams 

Perkins,  Lydia.  1776.  [Norwich,  Conn.]  8"  x  19".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Vine,  strawberry,  and  Greek  fret  cross-borders.    Strawberry  plant. 

Miss  Anna  Perkins  Williams 

Perkins,  Martha.  1773.  13"  x  10".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch  and  tent-stitch  in  silk  and  wool. 
House,  trees,  flowers,  sheep,  man,  and  woman.    Verse  490  (var.).  Mrs.  H.  C.  Hatch 

Perkins,  Martha.  [Cir.  1799.]  Nobleboro  [Me.?].  Born  in  1786.  8"  x  10".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.    Plain  border.    Ornamental  embroidery.    Verse  490  (var.). 

Mrs.  Albert  G.  Ropes 

Perkins,  Sarah.  1779.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  17"  x  23".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Trees,  rosebush,  basket  of  flowers,  lambs,  parrots,  bluebird, 
strawberries,  etc.    Verse  202  (1).  Miss  Georgiana  Augusta  Currier 

Perry,  Alfreda  Bailey.    Easton  [Mass.].     16"  x  6".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch  in  black. 

Sold  at  Libby's  Auction  Rooms,  Boston,  March  1,  1916 

Peters,  Charity.  1760.  7"  x  20".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Bands  of  cross- 
stitch.  Miss  Grace  Hewlett 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  69 

Peterson,  Sabah.  1792.  Hartford  [Conn.].  8  yrs.  Born  March  20,  1784.  15"  x  17".  Satin 
and  cross-stitch.  Greek  border.  Cornucopia  with  fruit  and  fiowers.  Family  names  and 
dates:  "Daniel  Peterson  born  1757;  Catherine  Caldwell  born  April  4,  1761;  Married 
January  18,  1781.  Harry  Peterson  born  Feb.  6,  1782;  Sarah  Peterson  born  March  20,  1784; 
Elizabeth  Peterson  born  April  27,  1787;  died  March  12,  1788;  David  Peterson  lost  at  sea, 
aged  29  yrs."  Mrs.  Henry  P.  Briggs 

Pettingell,  Maby.  [Cir.  1780.]  Newburyport  [Mass.].  Born  April  30,  1769.  11^"  x  15^". 
2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Trees,  hills,  baskets  of 
flowers,  and  owls.    Verse  203.  Miss  Helen  Pike 

Phillips,  Hannah.     1770.     13  yrs,    9"  x  6".     Cross-stitch.     Strawberry  design.     Verse  1. 

Mrs.  Josiah  Quincy 

Phillips,  Hannah.  1793.  [Hunterdon  County,  N.  J.]  15  yrs.  8"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Out- 
line, chain,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Mrs.  L.  W.  Orover 

Phillips,  Margaret.  1799.  [Near  Wickford,  R.  I.]  10  yrs.  8^"  x  12^".  Alphabet.  Cross- 
stitch.    Cross  and  vine  border.    Birds,  trees,  and  bird-house.  Mrs.  O.  W.  Slocum 

Pickering,  Lucia.  1759.  Salem  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  7^"  x  15^".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    7  different  cross-borders.    Verses  40  (var.),  248  (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  Frederick  A.  Whitwell 

Pickering,  Sarah.  1742.  Salem  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  10^"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.     Strawberry  border.  Mrs.  John  Pickering 

Pierce,  Eliza.    See  Betsy  Mansfield. 

Pierce,  Harriot.    See  Betsy  Mansfield. 

Pike,  Nancy.    11  yrs.    9^"  x  11^".    Alphabet.    Yellow  linen.    Cross-stitch. 

Miss  Elizabeth  F.  Kelly 

PiLLSBURY,  Eunice.  1778.  12"  x  20".  Satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  border  through 
center.  Adam  and  Eve  and  the  Serpent,  also  hearts,  baskets,  birds,  and  trees.  "  It  is  good 
for  me  to  draw  near  unto  God."  Miss  Caroline  C.  Tappan 

PiNER,  Elizabeth.  1776.  Dover  [Del.].  12  yrs.  18"  x  8i".  2  alphabets.  Stem-stitch.  Out- 
side border  in  diamond  pattern,  and  inside,  one  of  large  flowers.    Cross-lines. 

Mrs.  Eugene  du  Pont 

PiNNiGER,  Abigail.  1730.  9|"  x  16".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  flower  border.  Con- 
ventionalized tulip,  rose,  and  carnation  cross-borders.  Large  flower  and  vine  design  not 
quite  finished.    Verses  186  (2,  3,  4),  343  (3,  4,  5,  var.).     Illustrated. 

Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 

Piper,  Betsy.  1790.  13  yrs.  8i"  x  lOJ".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Modified 
strawberry  and  other  simple  borders.  A.  Stain  forth,  Dealer 

Piper,  Miriam.  1784.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  18"  x  24".  4  alphabets.  French  knot, 
eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Trees,  urns,  kids,  dogs,  and  birds.    Verse  202  (1). 

Miss  Lucie  A.  Peabody 

Platt,  Sarah.  [Cir.  1784.]  Painted  sampler.  "Sarah  Piatt  Daughter  of  Thomas  &  Mary 
Piatt  his  wife  Was  Born  July  25  Anno  Domini  1770."  Picture  of  Sarah  at  bottom  sur- 
rounded by  vines  and  flowers.  Maxcy  Applegate,  Esq. 

Plummer,  Molly.  1793.  Newbury  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  Born  October  6,  1784.  7^"  x  10".  2  alpha- 
bets.   Cat  and  cross-stitch.     Hemstitched  edge.    Strawberry  design. 

Miss  Edith  D.  Newman 


70  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Polk,  Maegahet  Jane.  [Before  1775.]  Born  Jiine  4,  1768.  8"  x  21^".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border  at  top.  Across  center,  band  of  strawberries 
and  branches  of  trees.  At  bottom,  band  of  saw-tooth  design,  with  little  cups  in  spaces. 
"Elizabeth  Polk  died  on  Tuesday  evening  at  7  o'clock  in  the  year  1775."    Verse  49. 

J.  Clifford  Haines,  M.D. 

Pope,  Sahah  E.  1773.  11  yrs.  10^"  x  13^".  Tent,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  with  vine 
and  strawberry  blossoms,  buds,  and  berries.  Cross-border  of  flowers,  dogs,  and  angels. 
Scene  with  house,  fence,  gate,  trees,  animals,  birds,  arbor,  and  high-shouldered  man  and 
woman.    Verse  360  (var.).  Newport  Historical  Society 

Poor,  Judith.  [1761.]  Newbury  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  Born  October  12,  1751.  4  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Trefoil  border  on  three  sides,  and  carnation,  rosebud, 
saw-tooth,  and  Greek  fret  cross-borders.    Verse  490  (var.). 

Potter,  Sarah.  1775.  Ipswich  [Mass.].  7^"  x  8^".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Simple  cross- 
stitch  border.  Large  candelabra  in  center,  birds  each  side  standing  on  branches;  below, 
sheep  and  grass.  Mrs.  William  Dole 

Pray,  Mary.  [10  yrs.?]  9^"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  and  cross- 
borders.    Verse  128  (1,  var.).  A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

Preston,  Elizabeth.  1787.  12"  x  8J".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Simple  border.  Strawberry 
cross-borders.  .Family  initials:  "A  P,  E  P,  I  P,  M  P,  M  P,  I  P,  A  S,  I  S,  M  S,  I  S, 
M  S,  E  S,  B  S,  I  D,  I  D,  Z  P,  I  P,  A  P,  M  P,  P  P,  E  P,  W  ,  I  P,  E  P,  M  S,  E  S, 
W  P,  E  P,  A  S,  R  S,  B  S,   I  S,  S  D,  T  D,  I  P,  R  P,  B  S,  M  S,  W    ." 

Mrs.  L.  D.  Samson 
PaiOR,  Martha  D.    1795.    5  yrs.    7^"  x  8".    2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 

Prior,  Mary.  1796.  [Priors  Mill  and  Bergen,  N.  J.]  13  yrs.  9"  x  11|".  Eyelet,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.    Strawberry  and  vine  border.     Birds,  baskets,  and  flowers. 

Miss  Emm,a  Post  Denniston 

Putnam,  Hannah.  [Cir.  1764.]  Danvers  [Mass.].  lOi"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Outline,  long, 
cross,  and  other  stitches.    Clover  border.    Verse  490  (var.).      Mrs.  Robert  Hale  Bancroft 

Putnam,  Martha.  1797.  Worcester  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  11^"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Greek  cross  in  corners,  and  lozenges  between  in  border.  Small,  conventional  trees. 
Verse  658.  Miss  M.  C.  Wheelwright 

QuAiLES,  Sally.  1793.  8  yrs.  8J"  x  13V'.  Alphabet.  Eyelet,  outline,  cross,  and  hem-stitch. 
Several  simple  motifs.    Verses  126  (1),  193.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Quash,  Sarah.  1783.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  10"  x  12".  Alphabet.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 
Hemstitched  edge  and  simple  cross-stitch  border.  Mrs.  William  Dunkin 

R ,  S .    1798.    12"  x  12".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Brouwer 

Ramsay,  Margaret.  1789.  Albany  [N.  Y.].  8  yrs.  8"  x  10".  Cross,  tent,  stem,  chain,  split, 
satin,  buttonhole,  and  a  lace-stitch.  Adam  and  Eve,  the  serpent,  and  the  Tree  of  Knowl- 
edge below;  above,  a  fence  with  flowers,  and  above  that  a  cottage.    Illustrated. 

The  New  York  Society  of  the  Colonial  Dames.    Van  Cortlandt  Manor 

Rand,  Elizabeth  Simpkins.    8"  x  6".    5  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Strawberry  border. 

Charles  W.  Jenks,  Esq. 


»ff .  ••:rtefTuji?lSit?5.*-'tifiu!!»ii)r!iu 


o 
1^ 


X 


^     X 


ID       S 

3   O 


^^  ■  •v."*  JSfc^S^^j' 


1 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  71 

Rand,  Lucy.  1770.  [Born  in  1762.]  9"  x  10^".  Alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry,  vine, 
and  Greek  fret  borders.    Verse  595.  Mrs.  Arthur  Crittenden  Smith 

Rand,  Maby.  1788.  11  yrs.  Hi"  x  15j".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Borders  of  double  strawberry,  birds,  baskets,  carnations,  crowned  passant  lions,  etc. 
Verses  22,  342.    "  Fear  God  and  .  .  ."  Charles  W.  Jenks,  Esq. 

Rand,  Susanah.  1798.  13"  x  19".  4  alphabets.  Satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Simple 
cross-border.  Flower-pots,  birds,  strawberries,  crowned  lions,  flowers,  etc.  Verse  128 
(var.).  Charles  W.  Jenks,  Esq. 

Randall,  Fanny.  1794.  Annapolis  [Md.].  9  yrs.  8"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Darning  and  cross- 
stitch.     Hemstitched  edge.     Birds.  Judge  A.  B.  Hagner 

Rawson,  Clara.  1795.  Warwick  [Mass.].  10"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.     Branches  of  strawberries.    Verse  128  (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  Edgar  H.  Bucklin 

Rawson,  Hannah.  [About  1799.]  16^"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Cross- 
stitch  border.    Verse  5.  Mrs.  Fred  A.  Morse 

Rawson,  Hannah.  [About  1799.J  12|"  x  8".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Simple  border. 
Verse  630.  Mrs.  Fred  A.  Morse 

Rayner,  Elizabeth.  1789.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  [Born  March  27,  1777.]  lOi"  x  9". 
Alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Double  and  triple  strawberry  border  divided  in  sec- 
tions.   Dogs,  sheep,  flowers,  double  strawberries,  and  birds.     Verse  372. 

Mrs.  R.  S.  Southard 

Rayner,  Katy.  1793.  [Newburyport,  Mass.]  12  yrs.  [Born  July  19,  1781.]  10"  x  18^". 
2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Strawberry  border.    Dogs,  cats,  and  strawberries.     Verse  224. 

Mrs.  R.  S.  Southard 

Rea,  Sally.  1766.  16"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  flower 
border,  and  cross-borders  of  carnations  and  strawberries.  At  bottom,  Adam  and  Eve  and 
Tree  of  Knowledge.  "If  women  will  not  be  inclined  to  seek  the  Information  of  the  mind, 
Believe  me  Sally  for  its  true.  Parrots  will  talk  as  well  as  you."    Illustrated. 

Mrs.  Miles  White,  Jr. 

Reynolds,  Clarissa.     1784.     10  yrs.    8"  x  9^".    3  alphabets.    Chain,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 

Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Rhodes,  Elizabeth.    1776.    8"  x  7".    3  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch.    Mrs.  Fred  A.  Morse 

Rhodes,  Elizabeth.  1776.  7"  x  5".  2  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Verses  186 
(1,  2),  343  (1,  3,  var.).  Mrs.  Fred  A.  Morse 

Rice,  Fanny.  1782.  Brookfield  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  Born  October  29,  1779.  7^"  x  9i".  3  alpha- 
bets. Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge,  with  narrow  cross-stitch  border.  Strawberry 
cross-border.  Miss  Frances  M.  Lincoln 

Richards,  Chloe.  1798.  13  yrs.  Born  December  8,  1785.  8i"  x  10^".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Simple  border,  hemstitched  edge.     Verse  187.  Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 

Richards,  Grace  Ann.     1794.    Verse  517.  Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 

Richards,  Sally.    1797.    10"  x  12".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Simple  border. 

Mrs.  H.  C.  Bunner 

Richardson,  Anstis  E.  1789.  8"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Cat,  chain,  queen,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry  border  with  roses  in  corners.  Charles  E.  Ooodspeed,  Esq. 


72  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Richardson,  Jane.  1790.  9  yrs.  17"  x  21^".  Punch-work  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  and 
zigzag  ciover  pattern  in  border.  Cross-borders  of  geometric  hearts  and  crowns,  tree  with 
birds,  man  and  woman,  flower  vases  and  baskets,  sailing  vessel,  fish,  bird,  etc. 

The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

RicHAEDsoN,  Maby.  1783.  Salem,  Mass.  12  yrs.  ["Miss  Sarah  Stivour's  School."]  20"  x 
2O2".  5  alphabets.  Carnation  and  vine  border,  with  head  of  cherub  in  center  at  top.  Man 
and  woman  standing  in  field  of  flowers  and  grass.  Verses  128,  129  (var.).  Illustrated  in 
"Memories  of  Old  Salem,"  p.  104.  Mrs.  Charles  R.  Waters 

RicHAHDsoN,  Maey.  1797.  7  yrs.  8"  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 
Hemstitched  edge  and  Greek  fret  border.    Large  tree,  birds,  and  strawberries. 

Edmund  M.  Dow,  Esq. 

Richahdson,  Sarah.  1780.  7  yrs.  Born  April  7,  1773.  6"  x  10".  1  alphabet.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.    Cross-stitch  cross-borders.    Rose  spray  at  bottom.    Verse  199. 

C.  E.  Ooodspeed,  Esq.,  1917 

Richmond,  Rhoda  M.  1795.  Providence  [R.  I.].  6^"  x  8".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  tent,  and 
cross-stitch.    Cross-border.  Miss  Alice  L.  Washburn 

Richmond,  Ruth.    1791.    12  yrs.    10"  x  4".    2  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Sydney  R.  Burleigh,  Esq. 

RiDOWAY,  Abigail.  1795.  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Conventional  trees,  flowers,  and  dogs, 
also  elaborate  carnation  and  rose  through  the  center.    Verse  229. 

Formerly  one  of  the  Drake  Collection 

RoBBiNS,  Jeeusha.  1795.  WiUiamstown  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  10"  x  8".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Plain  border.    Verse  187  (var.).  Mrs.  Charles  Read  Banks 

Robins,  Ann.  1730.  12"  x  16".  Tent,  satin,  long  and  short,  eyelet,  rope,  and  cross-stitch. 
Carnation  border  and  cross-borders  of  roses,  strawberries,  vines,  etc.  Verses  67,  181  (1, 
var.).  Names:  "Thomas  Robins,  Sarah  Robins,  Hester  Chandler,  John  Chandler,  Samuel 
Robins,  Ann  Robins,  Thomas  Robins,  John  Robins,  Sarah  Robins,  Rebecca  Robins, 
Mary  Robins,  Elizabeth  Robins,  William  Robins,  Jacob  Robins,  Mary  Robins,  Samuel 
Robins."    Illustrated.  Miss  Susan  P.  Wharton 

Robins,  Deborah.  1750.  10"  x  13f".  Alphabet.  Stem,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose-vine 
border.  Pastoral  scene,  with  shepherdess,  sheep,  dog,  birds,  flowers,  and  trees.  Verse  92a 
(var.).  Mrs.  Robert  O.  Patten 

RoBsoN,  Ane.  1768.  15  yrs.  6J"  x  6".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  borders.  Verse 
128  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Gertrude  Fuller  Nichols 

Rogers,  Hannah  Cutter.  1793.  Portsmouth  [N.  H.].  12  yrs.  12i"  x  16*".  3  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Trefoil  and  rose  border  at  sides,  scroU  and  satin- 
stitch  border  at  top,  wide  floral  design  at  bottom.  Miss  Mary  H.  Wheeler 

Rogers,  Nancy.  1797.  Gloucester  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  [Born  February  8,  1790.]  8"  x  13".  Alpha- 
bet.   Cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  edge.    Verse  129  (var.).  Miss  Judith  Rogers 

RoYLSTON,  Dorothy.  1731.  12  yrs.  7J"  x  13^".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry,  Greek 
fret,  and  geometrical  borders.    Verse  128  (var.).  Theodore  P.  Tower,  Esq. 

Rush,  Agnes.  1797.  4  yrs.  3^"  x  16".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Simple  cross-stitch  dividing 
lines.  Mrs.  Fred  W.  Smith 

Russell,  Abigail.    1782.    Very  small.    Cross-stitch.    Only  letters  on  it  besides  name. 

Miss  Betty  Russell 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  73 

Russell,  Elizabeth.  1719.  Marblehead  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  6^"  x  7^".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.    9  different  cross-borders.    Tree,  plants,  and  squirrels. 

Mrs.  Frederick  A.  Whitwell 
Russell,  Mary.    8"  x  10".    3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Very  plain  sampler. 

Belonged  to  Delano  Estate  and  sold  at  Libby's,  Boston,  March  1,  1916 

Russell,  Maey.  1784.  Alphabet.  Petit-point,  stem,  eyelet,  French  knot,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry  border.    Hunting  and  milking  scene.    Very  interesting. 

The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Russell,  Tabby.  [Cir.  1789.]  Born  September,  1779.  19"  x  20".  5  alphabets.  Laid  and  punch- 
work  and  cross-stitch.  3  borders,  outside  point,  black  punch-work,  vine  of  conventional- 
ized rose  leaves  and  Greek  fret.  Trees,  fruit,  squirrels,  birds,  butterflies,  turtle,  ducks, 
deer,  cow,  flowers,  etc.    Verse  undecipherable.  Miss  Harriet  D.  Perkins 

Sackett,  Sally.  [Cir.  1796.]  Long  Island.  Born  April  21,  1786.  10^"  x  17".  Cross-stitch. 
Vine  border  on  three  sides.  Medley  of  flowers,  baskets,  and  birds.  Verse  65.  "Stephen 
Sacket  born  May  23,  1752;  Eunice  Lovering  Born  December  28,  1748;  Married  Nob  25, 
1776.  Stepn  Sacket  jr  born  Aug  7,  1777;  Eunice  Sacket  born  April  25,  1779;  Hannah 
Sacket  born  Aug  7,  1781;  Sally  Sacket  born  April  21,  1786;  Daniel  Sact  born  Sept.  23, 
1790."  Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 

Saltonstall,  Anna.  1799.  Haverhill  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  14^"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
stem,  and  cross-stitch.    Rose-vine  border.    Grass,  tree,  and  shrub.    Verse  101. 

The  Misses  Ward 

Sandborn,  Elizabeth  Dearborn.  1786.  Meredith  Bridge  [now  Laconia,  N.  H.].  Born  Octo- 
ber 18,  1773.  17"  X  22".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  flat,  cat,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched 
edge  and  trefoil  border  across  top.    Verse  182  (1).  Mrs.  Arthur  F.  Titus 

Sanderson,  Hannah.  1789.  15"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Long  and  short,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Double  border  of  carnations  and  scrolls.    Cherry  tree  and  strawberry  bushes. 

The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Sanderson,  Sibbyl.   11"  x  7i".  3  alphabets.   Cross-stitch.   Hemstitched  edge  and  simple  border. 

A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

Sanford,  Bathsheba.    1783.    Medway  [Mass.].     12  yrs.     [Born  February  14,  1771.]     8"  x  9". 

Alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Simple  border.  Mrs.  Lyndon  Sanford  Macy 

Sanford,  Sarah.  1786.  20"  x  18".  Long  and  short,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  rose 
and  strawberry  border.  Shepherd  and  shepherdess  and  black  slave  under  a  tree.  Bees, 
birds,  animals,  and  flowers  fill  in  spaces.    Verse  363.  Mrs.  Maynadiere  Browne 

Saunders,  Sarah.  1789.  [Salem.]  Born  March  6,  1779.  9"  x  13^".  Alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  edge.    Verses  44,  138.  Mrs.  H.  A.  Everett 

Saunders,  Sarah  Donna  Leonora.  I62"  x  16".  Cross-stitch.  Border  of  strawberry  leaves. 
Picture  of  William  and  Mary  College,  Virginia,  in  center.  Initials:  "S  B  M,  LAM, 
MLS,  LAP,  E  J  N,  C  N  P,  PAR,  AC,  FAB,  M  C  H,  E  L  B,  C  A  M."  These 
are  probably  the  initials  of  friends  and  embroidered  by  them.  Also  the  names:  "John  S. 
Mary  Saunders."  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Savage,  Jane.  1747.  12  yrs.  Born  January  5,  1735.  9\"  x  16^".  Tent,  chain,  and  cross-stitch. 
Dogs  and  flowers  in  top  border.    Verse  190.  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Sawyer,  Betsey-.  1798.  "Born  August  24,  1785."  13"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Cross,  chain,  stem, 
and  flat-stitch.  Trefoil  and  saw-tooth  borders.  Carnation  cross-border.  Tree,  parrot, 
woman,  vase  of  flowers,  and  birds.    Verse  669a. 


74  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Scott,  Betsy.  1793.  Very  large.  Map  of  England  and  Wales,  showing  counties.  Wreath  of 
flowers  in  upper  right-hand  corner,  with  name,  etc.  Work  done  in  chain,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Mrs.  E.  L.  E.  Wood 

Scott,  Euzabeth.  1741.  Newport,  R.  I.  5  yrs.  8"  x  10".  Cross,  satin,  and  back-stitch.  Vine 
border.    Verse  342  (var.).    Also  "Lord  give  me  wisdom  to  direct  my  ways." 

Mrs.  Emma  J.  De  Blots 

Searing,  Bath-sheba.  1766.  Dighton,  Mass.  9  yrs.  lOi"  x  15i".  3  alphabets.  Tent,  stem, 
cross,  and  cat-stitch.  Border  of  conventionalized  strawberries  and  flowers.  Brick  house, 
tree,  gate,  bird,  etc.    Verse  128  (1,  var.),  and  another  illegible.      Arthur  F.  Wastcoat,  Esq. 

Seahs,  Hitty  [Mehitable].  1798.  Dennis  [Mass.  Born  October  21,  1788.].  8i"  x  lOi". 
3  alphabets.  Star  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border  and  hemstitched  edge.  Verse 
490  (var.).     "This  work  above  my  needle  wrought 

May  I  reflect  my  life  is  short."  Mrs.  B.  F.  Oraham 

Seaver,  Mary  G.  1709.  14  yrs.  7|"  x  8".  Alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Plain  border. 
Rose  design  in  stem-stitch.  Mrs.  E.  Morgan 

Shanahan,  Margaret.  3  alphabets.  Petit-point,  tapestry,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  in 
tapestry-stitch,  with  diamond  pattern  at  top  and  marigolds  on  sides.  House  and  flower- 
pots.    Verse  367a.  Illustrated  in  "Memories  of  Old  Salem,"  p.  104 

Shahpless,  Eliza.  1797.  Philadelphia  [Pa.  8  yrs.].  9^"  x  10^".  Eyelet,  chain,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Family  initials:  "J  S,  I  S,  E  S,  J  S,  E  S,  T  S,  J  S, 
M  S."  Houses,  baskets  of  flowers,  plants,  terraced  lawn,  trees,  bushes,  dogs,  and  conven- 
tionalized strawberry  plant.  The  Misses  Penniman 

Sharpuess,  Emily.  1796.  Philadelphia  [Pa.].  9  yrs.  22^"  x  21^".  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  vine  border.  Houses,  terraced  grass,  trees,  men,  women,  dogs,  rabbits,  birds, 
butterflies,  conventionalized  strawberry  plant,  etc.  The  Misses  Penniman 

Shaw,  Mary.  1754.  8"  x  12".  5  alphabets.  Flat,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  with  flowers 
across  top.    Heart.  Miss  Beulah  A.  Saunders 

Shaw,  Priscilla.  1771.  Plymouth  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  Born  January  11,  1758.  7^"  x  10". 
Alphabet.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Borders  of  rose,  carnation,  and  strawberry  designs. 
"Remember  thy  Creator,"  etc.  Mrs.  J.  B.  Shurtleff,  Jr. 

Sheafe,  Hetty.  1773.  Portsmouth  [N.  H.].  13  yrs.  11"  x  20".  Four  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Hemstitched  border.    16  border  designs. 

Miss  Lois  Sheafe  Joslyn 
Sheffield,  Elizabeth.     1784.     Born  July  20,  1771.     10"  x  14".     2  alphabets.     Petit-point  and 
cross-stitch.     Border  of  roses,  vine,  and  birds.    Man  and  woman  on  each  side  of  a  house. 
Cross-borders  of  strawberries,  and  below,  birds,  dogs,  and  trees. 

Koopman's,  Boston,  for  sale  February,  1919 

Sherburne,  Sarah.     [Cir.  1761.]     Born  March  27,  1748.    6  alphabets.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 

Simple  cross-borders.    Verse  490  (var.).  Mrs.  Charles  S.  Hamlin 

Sherman,  Margaret.  [1770.]  Jericho  [L.  I.].  7|"  x  llf".  Alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Very 
meager  design.  Mrs.  Henry  McAllister,  Jr. 

Shirlay,  Ann.    1776.    10"  x  8".    3  alphabets.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Mrs.  Arthur  O.  Beals 

Shoemaker.    See  also  Stevenson. 

Silsbee,  Content  P.    20"  x  17".    12  yrs.    Full-blown  rose  design  in  border. 

Sold  at  Walpole  Galleries,  New  York,  June  29,  1917 


^. 


eFGHIKLBnOPqRSTVWXY: 


X* 


'3: 


o»-»erfi;  ilnd   Aoiet     - 


^t 


'^?JS 


'4S>,    '\ 


4^- .. 


I  W**.';:.^ 


Orace     Welfh  Mer  Ss^mPlar  0'7.-^t  '1%'^ 


-c-^ 


^\.^.. 


PLATE  XXV 


Grace  Welsh's  Sampler.     1774 
The  Emma  B.  Hodrje  Collection 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  75 

SiMPKiNs,  Mary.  1757.  12  yrs.  11^"  x  16^".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 
Double  strawberry  border,  also  carnation  and  single  strawberry.  "Fear  God  and  Love 
Him."    Verses  202,  342,  350,  496.  Charles  W.  Jenks,  Esq. 

SiMPKixs,  SusANAH.  1745.  13  yrs.  8^"  x  13|".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Borders  of  carnation,  strawberry,  double  and  single,  and  tulip  designs.  Crowned  lions, 
baskets,  birds,  etc.  Charles  W.  Jenks,  Esq. 

Simpson,  Anke.  [Cir.  1735.]  Boston  [Mass.  Born  1720.].  8"  x  7".  4  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Greek  fret,  strawberry,  and  conventional  borders.    Verse  128  (1,  2). 

3Iiss  Margaret  C.  Wyman 

SiMPsox,  Margaret.  1755.  Born  in  1743.  8"  x  22".  4  alphabets.  Tapestry,  stem,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Narrow  hem.    Tapestry  design  in  diamond-shaped  figures.    Verse  589. 

Mrs.  James  Tuckerman 

Simpson,  Mart.  1725.  Boston  [Mass.  Born  October  18,  1714.],  8^"  x  18".  2  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Borders  of  scroll  and  strawberry  designs.    Verse  128  (var.). 

Mrs.  Mary  W.  Nichols 

SiNNiCKSON,  Mary.  1794.  Salem  [N.  J.].  Born  August  27,  1781.  10"  x  12^".  4  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Narrow  cross-border  at  each  end.     Line  of  flowers. 

Estate  of  Maria  H.  Eakin 

Sum,  Marian.  1780.  [Chester  Township,  Burlington  County,  N.  J.  11  yrs.]  8f"  x  9^". 
1  alphabet.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  border.  Initials  of  father  and  mother: 
"PS,   C  S."     [Her  parents  were  Holland  "Redemptioners."]  Mr.  Charles  Lippincott 

Smith,  ■ .     After  1797.     Sutton   [Mass.].  "Born  March  11,  1778."     "Born  Dec.  24,  1797." 

Names   given:   "Samuel   Smith,   Sally   Smith."     3   alphabets.      ISJ"   x   10".      Cross-stitch. 
Border  in  chain  design.  W.  G.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Smith,  Abigail.  1755.  Fairhaven  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  Born  June  21,  1743.  7|"  x  7f".  2  alpha- 
bets.   Cross-stitch.    Simple  border.  Miss  Mary  F.  Gill 

SsriTH,  Ann.  1787.  23"  x  22".  Map  of  Europe  done  in  chain  and  cross-stitch.  Festoon  at  top, 
bows,  cord,  and  tassel  in  center,  with  conventional  tulips  and  small  flowers  festooned  from 
bow.    Small  flowers  and  leaves  in  lower  corners.  Miss  F.  M.  Kerr 

Smith,  Cathahine.  1798.  Born  in  1788.  [Chester,  Orange  County,  N,  Y.]  16^"  x  12^". 
Alphabet.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  border.  "Make  the  study  of  the  Sacred 
Scriptures  your  daily  Practice  and  principal  Concern  and  Embrace  the  Doctrines  contained 
in  them,  as  the  real  Oracles  of  God  and  the  Dictates  of  .  .  ."  Mrs.  George  8.  Hamlin 

Smith,  Elizabeth.  1794.  Plainfield  [Conn.].  44"  x  7".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Plain, 
double  cross-stitch  border.  Mrs.  Albert  Babcock 

Smith,  Esther.     1798.     14  yrs.     17"  x  9".    3  alphabets.    Chain,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 

Miss  Alzada  Sprague 

Smith,  Loann.  1785.  13  yrs.  Born  September  27,  1772.  12"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.  Border  at  sides  of  vine  and  flowers;  at  top.  University  Hall  at  Brown,  with 
figures  of  man  and  woman,  trees  and  animals;  at  bottom.  Old  State  House,  with  woman, 
animals,  etc.    Verse  95  (2).    Illustrated.  Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 

Smith,  Lucy.  1794.  12J"  x  12V'.  9  alphabets.  Eyelet,  buttonhole,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine 
and  flower  border.  Elaborate  conventional  carnations,  strawberries,  roses,  and  vines. 
Verse  518.  Miss  Lucy  Dennis  Holme 


76  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Smith,  Maey.  "17014".  6  yrs.  8^"  x  21".  Double  alphabet.  Chain,  tent,  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  cross-borders.    Verse  128  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Charles  M.  Morse 

Smith,  Maky.  1782.  [Rowley,  Mass.]  16  yrs.  16"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  flat, 
eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  flowers,  leaves,  birds,  vases,  buds,  or  berries.  Flower 
design.  Miss  Caroline  M.  Bumham 

Smith,  Mahy.  1783.  [Salem  County,  N.  J.]  13"  x  13".  Satin,  chain,  and  French  knot. 
Whole  sampler  is  in  drawn-work  and  fine  embroidery.  Basket  filled  with  flowers  in  center. 
Open-work  and  embroidered  circles  in  lower  corners,  with  gathered  ribbon  around  them. 
Fine  hemstitched  border.  Mrs.  Ella  Maria  Hamilton 

Smith,  Polly.  1794.  Salem  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  12i"  x  16f".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  chain,  eyelet, 
tent,  and  cross-stitch.     Border  of  vine  and  roses.     Farm  scene.     Verse  129  (var.). 

Miss  M.  Lizzie  Bray 

Smith,  Sally.  Salem  [Mass.].  17"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Border  at  top 
of  carnations;  at  sides,  vine  with  small  flowers;  in  corners,  bunches  of  lily-of-the-valley. 
Large  flower-pot,  with  rose  bush  in  full  bloom.  Mrs.  John  Pickering 

Smith,  Saeah.  1794.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  Born  November  13,  1788.  20"  x  20". 
Alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation,  rose,  and  other  flowers  in 
border.    Landscape,  with  trees,  birds,  cow,  and  sheep.    Verse  601  (1,  2,  var.). 

The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection, 

Smith,  Tabitha.  1713.  Smithtown  [L.  I.].  9  yrs.  9"  x  lOJ".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    Hemstitched  edge.    Cross-borders.    Verse  180.  Mrs.  Charles  E.  Sherman 

Snow,  Lucy.  1796.  8  yrs.  5"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross- 
borders.    Verse  660.  Charlotte  M.  Smith 

SotiDEB,  Sarah  Anx.  [Cir.  1775.  Born  in  1760.]  12^"  x  18".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cat,  and 
cross-stitch.     Strawberry  border.    Verse  135.  Mrs.  H.  C.  Jones 

Spechet,  Leonora  Louisa.     1798.    13"  x  17".    Map  of  England.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Spenceb,  Phebe.  1763.  14  yrs.  11"  x  12".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Simple  border.  Vine 
cross-border.    Verse  68.  The  Misses  Chadsey 

Spooneh,  Hannah.  1785.  10  yrs.  7^"  x  12^".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet,  cross,  and  two  variations 
of  buttonhole-stitch.     Vine  and  flower  border.     Verses  41  (var.),  191,  620. 

W.  M.  Cooper,  Esq. 

Spooneb,  Sabah.     1781.    11  yrs.     12"  x  12^".    2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Verse  345  (var.). 

Mrs.  Sydney  B.  Burleigh 

Spbague,  Polly.  1798.  Petersham  [Mass.].  15  yrs.  8"  x  6^".  5  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Simple  border.    Cocks  standing  on  trees,  two  sets  of  two  pulling  worms  apart. 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Staats,  Mahgabet.  1795.  [Staats  Homestead,  Bound  Brook,  N.  J.]  14  yrs.  8"  x  11".  1  alpha- 
bet. Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  representing  a  fence  with  garden  gate.  At 
bottom,  trees  and  baskets  of  flowers.    "Remember  thy  Creator,"  etc. 

Eugene  DuBois  La  Tourette,  Esq. 

Staats,  Phebe.    1788.    13  yrs.    8"  x  11".    2  alphabets.  Eugene  DuBois  La  Tourette,  Esq. 

Staeb,  Maegabet.  1795.  11"  x  14".  Parts  of  alphabets.  Tent  and  cross-stitch.  Roman  border 
with  acorns.  Pine  trees,  birds,  dogs,  and  vase  of  flowers.  Name  "Wm.  Cox"  worked  in 
with  design.    Verse  132  (1,  var.).  Miss  Julia  L.  Muirheid 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  77 

Stebbins,  Caroline.  1798.  9  yrs.  7i"  x  13".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border. 
Casual  arrangement  of  animals,  birds,  flowers,  baskets,  etc.,  grouped  about  a  long  me- 
dallion bordered  with  hearts.  Museum  of  Pocumtuck  Valley  Memorial  Association 

Stebbins,  Eunice.      [Cir.  1787.]     Springfield   [Mass.].     Born  January  14,  1775.     8*"  x  22i". 

2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Names  and  dates  on  sampler:  "Daniel 
born  April  2,  1766.  Festus  born  March  5,  1768,  Eunice  born  April  5,  1770,  died  August  27, 
1771,  Quartus  born  November  21,  1772,  Eunice  born  July  14,  1775,  Lois  born  March  31, 
1777."    Verse  128,  unfinished.  Mrs.  Frederick  N.  Conner 

Stehett,  Mary.  1783.  Baltimore  [Md.].  11  yrs.  15"  x  9".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and 
vine  border.    Verses  612,  613,  614.  Miss  Mary  Sterett  Oittings 

Stevens,  Henrietta.  1788.  [Talbot  County,  Md.]  12  yrs.  Born  August  14,  1776.  16"  x  20". 
Cross-stitch  and  other  stitches.  Four  different  cross-border  designs.  "A  Silent  and  loving 
woman  is  a  gift  of  the  Lord."     Verses  70,  223.  Edwin  J.  Stevens,  Esq. 

{  Mary        \ 

Stevenson,  J  Martha    v 
(  Harriet    i 

Shoemaker,  Sarah.  1794.  13"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
and  vine  border,  with  roses  in  the  four  corners.  Large  urn  in  center,  with  roses;  also 
strawberry  vines,  pine  trees,  cats,  birds,  etc.    Verses  378,  381.  2Irs.  Harriet  S.  Earl 

Stocker,  Lydia.  1798.  12  yrs.  17"  x  16".  1  alphabet.  Split,  chain,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
Wide  and  elaborate  border,  with  flowers,  butterflies,  birds,  etc.  Scene  with  house,  tree, 
deer,  man,  and  woman.    Verse  73.     Illustrated  in  color.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Stokes,  Martha.  1799.  Boston  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  16"  x  21".  5  alphabets.  Satin  and  stem- 
stitch.  Vine  border.  Scene  with  Colonial  house,  tile  walk,  six  flower-beds,  fence,  trees, 
diamond,  heart,  and  birds,  also  English  crowns.     Verse  601  (1,  2,  3,  var.). 

Mrs.  Nellie  Wightman  Nason 

Stone,  Mary  Lightboubne.  1790.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  12^"  x  18".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.     Cross-design  in  border,  doubled  at  top.     Cross-borders  in  scroll  design. 

Miss  Anna  Bell  Bruns 

Stoodley,  Mary.  1753.  Portsmouth  [N.  H.].  11  yrs.  16"  x  22".  7  alphabets.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.     Strawberry  design.     The  Lord's  Prayer.  Miss  Mary  L.  Oilman 

Stoodley,  Mary.  [1753.]  Portsmouth  [N.  H.].  11  yrs.  20"  x  22".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Floral  design.     The  Lord's  Prayer.  Miss  Mary  L.  Oilman 

Storer,  Hannah.  1747.  Groton  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  llf"  x  15".  Alphabet.  Eyelet,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Elaborate  border,  with  roses  and  leaves.  Two  spies  bearing  the  grapes  of 
Eschol,  two  green  trees,  trefoil  border,  and  other  borders.    Verses  65  (var.),  248  (1,  var.). 

Massachusetts  Historical  Society 

Strobridge,  Anne.  1764.  Middleboro  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  8"  x  104".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Saw-tooth  border  at  top.    Verse  128  (var.).    Unfinished.  Miss  Harriet  A.  Barstow 

Sthudibo,  Ann.  1734.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  8i"  x  16^".  2  alphabets.  Petit-point,  stem,  satin, 
cat,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border  at  top  and  cross-borders  at  bottom  in  Greek 
fret,  trefoil,  tree,  and  strawberry  designs.    Verse  128  (var.).  Mrs.  John  F.  Bennett 

SuMMERiLL,  Mary.     1788.     [Upper  Penns  Neck,  Salem  County,  N.  J.]     16  yrs.     10^"  x  15^". 

3  alphabets.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Plain  border.     Urns,  crowns,  and  heart. 

David  C.  Helton,  M.D. 


78  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

SuTTOx,  Ann.  1T89.  17  yrs,  11^"  x  17V'.  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Dividing 
lines  in  cross-stitch.  Miss  Hannah  A.  Sheppard 

SwAix,  Maegaret.     1754.     8"  x   15".     1   alphabet.     Cross-stitch.     Family  initials  and  dates: 

"MS  Born  ye  5  day  of  4  month  1745         O  S 
T   S   Born  ye  3  day  of      month  N   S 

A  S  Born  the  day     of  12  month  1749 
L  S  Born  ye  13  day  of  ye  6  month  1752 
P  S  Died  the  9  day  of  May  in  the  yar  1754." 
Verses  343  (1,  var.),  585.  Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 

Swan,  Roth.  1785.  Leicester  [Mass.].  lO^"  x  7".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross-borders 
in  geometrical  design.    Verse  14  (var.).  Mrs.  John  A.  Sweetser 

SwEETSEE,  Polly.  [After  1776.]  "Born  at  Lynn,  in  the  County  of  Essex,  State  of  Mass." 
7f"  X  17§".  3  alphabets.  Flat,  tent,  stem,  outline,  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  cross-stitch 
border.    Verse  494.  Miss  Harriet  E.  Cummings 

Symonds,  LrcY.  1796.  Boxford  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  21^"  x  24*".  2  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.  Border  of  vine  and  flowers  on  three  sides.  Five  hills ;  on  middle  one,  large  vase  of 
flowers,  two  trees  on  the  next,  baskets  on  remaining  two,  from  which  a  vine  covered  with 
assorted  flowers  springs  and  continues  as  a  border  around  the  sampler.    Verses  141,  653. 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Tage  [probably  Montague],  Saeah.  1794.  Philadelphia  [Pa.].  18^"  x  22".  Satin-stitch. 
Landscape  with  man  and  woman  and  title,  "Belville  and  Rosina."        Mrs.  Mary  C.  Cooley 

Talbot,  Maey.  1796.  Providence  [R.  I.].  14"  x  16".  ["Miss  Polly  Balch's  School."]  Eyelet, 
chain,  tent,  queen,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  at  sides,  rose  vine,  and  at  bottom, 
strawberry.  Scene  with  State  House,  Providence,  lambs,  birds,  figures  of  man  and  woman. 
Verse  630  (var.).  Miss  Helen  H.  Greene 

Talman,  Kezia.  1788.  14  yrs.  11"  x  13".  [New  Jersey.]  Double  alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.    Floral  border.     Verse  343  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  S.  A.  Cunningham 

Tappan  [or  Toppan],  Mabtha.  [Cir.  1721.  Newbury,  Mass.  Born  1710.]  8"  x  10*".  2  alpha- 
bets.   Cross-stitch.    Strawberry  border.  Miss  Charlotte  M.  Smith 

Tatnall,  Ann.  1786.  12  yrs.  12 J"  x  17".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  border, 
with  strawberries  in  four  corners.  Cross-borders  of  strawberry,  rose,  elaborate  vine  with 
blossoms,  and  saw-tooth  designs.  Verses  132  (1,  var.),  204,  344  (var.),  510.  Names  of 
paternal  and  maternal  grandparents:  "Edward  Tatnall,  Betty  Tatnall,  James  Lea, 
Margaret  Lea."  Names  of  parents  and  children:  "Joseph  Tatnall,  Elizabeth  Tatnall; 
Sarah,  Margaret,  Elizabeth,  Edward,  Ann,  Joseph,  Esther,  Edward,  Thomas;  Thomas  Lea, 
Joseph  Lea."     Name  of  teacher:  "Mary  Askew."     Illustrated.  Henry  M.  Canby,  Esq. 

Tatnall,  Elizabeth.  1755.  Wihnington  [Del.].  11  yrs.  11"  x  16".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Border  a  combination  of  vine,  strawberry,  and  Greek  cross  in  corners.  Two  large 
carnations.  Verses  132  (1,  var.),  181,  (1,  var.),  192,  590.  Initials  of  father,  mother, 
3  sisters,  and  brother:  "E  T,  E  T,   M  T,   AT,   J  T,   I  T."  Mrs.  Alter  Megear 

Tatum,  Sybil.  1788.  Woodbury  [N.  J.].  26"  x  26".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Thirty-three 
large  bunches  of  flowers.  Miss  Sybil  T.  Jones 

Tatloe,  Alice.    1798.    10"  x  8".    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  390.    Mrs.  William  A.  Spicer 

Taylor,  Eliza.  [Cir.  1796.  Born  in  New  York,  July  14,  1786.]  12V'  x  16".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.     Strawberry  border.     Conventional  cross-lines  in  simple  designs.     Initials  on 


PLATE  XXVI 

Abigail  Mears's  Sampler.     1772 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Henri/  E.  Coe 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  79 

sampler:   "IT,    M  T  [John  Taylor  and  Margaret  Taylor,  father  and  mother];    E,    M  T, 
1ST,  I  B  T,  AT,  IT,  R  L  T,  ST  [brothers  and  sisters]."    Verse  652. 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Taylor,  Isabel.  1794.  [2  Liberty  St.,  New  York  City.]  8  yrs.  19"  x  23".  Alphabet.  Cross- 
stitch.    6  cross-borders  in  different  patterns.    Birds,  beast,  trees,  and  heart.    Verse  92. 

Mrs.  George  Thacher 

Tayloh,  Mary.  1740,  12  yrs.  9"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Tulip  border  with  minor  borders. 
Elaborate  cross-borders.    Verses  184,  489  (2,  3).  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Teacle,  Rachel  BracKHEAD.  1798.  11^"  x  12^",  2  alphabets.  Punch-work,  queen  and  cross- 
stitch.  Bits  of  fret-work  and  geometric  patterns.  "The  higher  character  a  person  suports 
the  more  he  should  regard  his  minutest  action."  Mrs.  James  Fortescue  Giffen 

Tenny,  Sarah.  1794.  16  yrs.  12V'  x  16^".  4  alphabets.  Bird's-eye,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberries  and  sheep.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Thayer,  Charlotte,    3^"  x  4",     1  alphabet.    Fine  cross-stitch.    Design  of  various  figures. 

Lancaster  Public  Library 

Thomas,  Mercy.  1797.  Plymouth  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  Alphabet,  Cross-stitch,  Carnation  border 
at  top.  Mrs.  J.  B.  Shurtlef,  Jr. 

Thojias,  Phiscilla,  [1795.]  7  yrs.  Born  in  Plymouth  [Mass.],  August  23,  1788.  7^"  x  Si". 
Alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge,  with  rose,  carnation,  and 
strawberry  border.    Carnation  design,  Mrs.  J.  B.  Shurtlef,  Jr. 

Thompson,  Isabella.  1771.  14  yrs.  19"  x  22*",  5  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.  3  green  hills  covered  with  sheep,  and  trees  set  between  the  hills,  also 
various  birds.    Verse  202  (1,  var.).  Miss  Mary  C.  Wheelwright 

Thompson,  Isabella.    1797.    See  Mary  Wheatley. 

Thompson,  Mary.  1749,  10  yrs,  8^"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Petit-point,  tapestry,  tent,  and 
cross-stitch.    7  cross-borders.  Mrs.  Theodore  Yates 

Thomson,  Margaret.  1793.  12"  x  18".  4  alphabets.  Buttonhole,  stem,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 
Border,    Basket  of  flowers,  crowns,  and  tree  at  bottom.  Miss  Alice  Morton 

Thornton,  Ann,  1798,  9  yrs,  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch,  Strawberry  border.  Carnation, 
rose,  and  conventional  cross-borders.  At  bottom,  very  uneven  ground  with  trees,  large 
and  small,  animals,  butterflies,  birds,  and  detached  baskets  of  flowers.    Verse  389. 

Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 

Thurber,  Sally.  1799.  Born  May  13,  1791.  11^"  x  12*".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Simple 
border.    Fir  tree  in  each  lower  corner.    Verse  4  (var.).  Mrs.  Richard  Greene  Davis 

Thurston,  Mehitable.  1795.  Born  October  5,  1782,  at  Newbury  [Mass.].  17"  x  21".  3  alpha- 
bets. Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation,  rose,  lily,  and  vine  border.  Vase  of  flowers 
on  each  side  a  hill  topped  by  a  tree,  also  bees,  bird,  goat,  lamb,  and  dog.    Verse  25. 

Mrs.  Maria  S.  P.  Hwrn-phreys 

Thwing,  Sarah.  1771.  Boston  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  [Born  in  Boston,  June  12,  1759.]  7"  x  14". 
3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  Greek  fret  borders.  Vine 
design.    Verse  185.  Mrs.  Joseph  M.  Bright 

TiLDEN,  Joanna.  1762.  8|"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  AU  kinds  of  stitches  used.  Sampler  divided 
into  seven  sections.  At  bottom,  9  green  mounds  in  three  rows,  with  strawberries  and 
strawberry  blossoms  growing  among  them.  Mrs.  Louise  J.  Home 


80  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

TippiT,  Bettt.  1774.  18  yrs.  6'  x  10".  Crewel,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Designs  of  ferns  and 
flowers.  The  lettering  is  all  in  cross-stitch  along  the  top,  the  foliage  in  sections  reaching 
up  toward  it.    Verse  128,  Mrs.  J.  A.  Noble,  Dealer,  1917 

Titus,  Polly.  1797.  8"  x  17".  Alphabets.  Cross,  eyelet,  and  hem-stitch.  Few  cross-stitch 
designs  and  a  tree.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Todd,  Sabah  L.  8  yrs.  Hi"  x  7f".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth 
border  in  cross-stitch,  and  cross-borders  in  eyelet  and  satin-stitch.  Green  wreath  and  two 
baskets  of  flowers.  A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

ToMLiif,  Drtisila.  1793.  8i"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-stitch 
border  at  top  and  sides,  and  tent-stitch  border  at  bottom.  /,  Cliford  Haines,  M.D. 

ToMsox,  Lucy.    1787.    11  yrs.    7"  x  8".    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  C.  M.  Eddy 

ToppAN^,  Mary.  1762.  12  yrs.  Born  June  26,  1750.  Newbury  [Mass.].  9"  x  12",  2  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek-fret  border  across  top;  triangles  of  flat-stitch  out- 
lined in  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  design  in  center.  "Goodness  and  Mercy  ever  follow  those 
that .  .  ."  Newbury  fort  Historical  Society 

ToppAK,  Sahah.  1756.  Newbury  [Mass.].  Born  May  16,  1740.  14"  x  20".  3  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret,  trefoil,  and  3rd  border  on  sides  and  top,  also  Greek 
fret  cross-borders.  At  bottom,  apple  tree,  two  deer,  two  rabbits,  two  bumblebees,  two 
eagles,  and  Scotch  thistle  in  each  upper  corner.    "Trust  in  God  at  all  times." 

Mrs.  Charles  H.  Atkinson 

Tow2s'SEND,  Haxnah.  1794.  11  yrs.  14"  x  17".  1  alphabet.  Tapestry,  satin,  cross-stitch,  and 
hemstitch.  Hemstitched  edge,  with  conventional  triple  strawberry  and  Greek  fret  border. 
Inside  frame  of  saw-tooth  and  strawberry  design,  and  several  different  cross-borders. 
Scene  with  house  and  two  trees,  topped  by  large  birds.    Verse  519.    Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

TowNSEND,  Lydia.  [Cir.  1750.1  Oyster  Bay  [L.  I.],  7^"  x  10".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Simple  cross-stitch  border,  with  hemstitched  edge.  Greek  border  through  middles,  and 
two  primitive-looking  rods  with  vines  on  each  side.  Mrs.  Henry  M.  Allister,  Jr. 

Toy  [or  Tay],  Grace.  [Cir.  1717.  Born  in  Woburn,  May  18,  1704.]  7"  x  36".  2  alphabets. 
Back,  cross,  and  close  rope-stitch,  also  darned  and  lace-stitch.  Sampler  consists  of  cross- 
bands  done  in  various  lace  stitches  and  many  different  conventionalized  flower  and  vine 
designs.    Illustrated.  Mrs.  N.  A.  Prentiss 

Traill,  Mary.  1791.  [Marblehead,  Mass.]  10  yrs.  12J"  x  161".  Satin,  stem,  chain,  outline, 
and  cross-stitch.  2  scenes  at  top,  man  with  rake,  man  with  wife  and  child,  each  holding 
a  parasol,  and  man  with  cow;  below,  pastoral  scene  with  trees,  house,  birds,  sheep,  shep- 
herd, and  shepherdess.    Illustrated.  Mrs.  Fletcher  Hodges 

Trecothick,  Hannah.  1738.  Boston  [Mass.  10  yrs.].  8^"  x  18".  Chiefly  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  cross-borders  in  Greek  fret,  vine,  strawberry,  and  medley  of  baskets,  hearts, 
birds  in  cages,  etc.  At  bottom,  figures  of  animals,  birds,  conventional  trees,  and  flowers. 
In  center  of  top  border,  a  crown,  with  initials  G  R.  Lord's  Prayer  and  Apostles'  Creed 
in  cross-stitch  frames.     Verse  128  (var.).     Illustrated.  Miss  Jane  E.  C.  Chapman 

Tripp,  Eijzabeth.  1765.  Providence,  R.  I.  12  yrs.  Born  December  20,  1753.  12"  x  8".  3  al- 
phabets.   Flat,  tent,  stem,  petit-point,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Miss  Jessie  Tripp 

Troup,  Sarah.  1738.  8  yrs.  9"  x  11|".  4  alphabets.  Cross-borders  with  crowns,  etc.  Vases 
of  flowers.    Verse  186.  Mrs.  J.  C.  Eraser 


■•■c^»?«;.i'- 


.tT 


It" 


PLATE  XXVII 

Betsy  Adams's  Sampler.     Quincy.     1773 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 


«as^.- 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  81 

Thumbuli,,  Faitht.  1781.  Lebanon  [Conn.].  12  yrs.  8i"  x  16^".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Hemstitched  edge.    Verse  367.  Miss  Henrietta  W.  Hubbard 

T[rumbui.l],  M[artha].  1775.  [Said  to  have  belonged  to  Martha  Trumbull  of  Connecticut.] 
5"  X  7".    Alphabet.    Cross-stitch.  Bliss  Arabia  C.  Harris 

Teton,  Catherine.  1794.  Lebanon  Springs  [N.  Y.].  12  yrs.  11^"  x  9V'.  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Conventional  border  in  geometrical  designs.  Mrs.  Albert  E.  Smith 

Tufts,  Susanna.  1789.  [Charlestown.]  9  yrs.  Born  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  December  8,  1780. 
8^"  X  9|".    2  alphabets.    Satin  and  cross-stitch.    Simple  border.    Verse  617  (var.). 

Miss  Edith  Johnson 

Turner,  Irene.  1799.  8  yrs.  8"  x  11".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge,  with 
border  of  points  in  cross-stitch.    Small  tree  with  birds  and  other  figures.     Mrs.  W.  S.  Rich 

Turner,  Polly.  1786.  Born  February  15,  1775,  at  Warren  [R.  I.].  Wrought  August  12,  1785, 
at  Providence.  Long  and  short,  tent,  satin,  stem,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Floral  border 
rising  out  of  vases  in  lower  corners,  with  birds  flying  about  at  top.  In  each  lower  corner, 
small  inset,  sheep  and  shepherdess  in  one,  and  sheep  and  shepherd  in  the  other.  In  center. 
President's  house,  Brown  University,  and  ladies  and  gentlemen  going  to  the  reception. 
Verse  624.     ["Miss  Polly  Balch's  School."]  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Tuttle,  Rebecca.  1785.  Brattleboro  [Vt.].  8*  yrs.  11"  x  16*".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Hearts  and  lozenges.  Verse  618  (unfinished).  [Linen  spun  by  the 
maker.]  Mrs.  Charles  E.  Reed 

TuxBURY,  Lydia.  1797.  Born  November  23,  1787.  8i"  x  8^".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.  Landscape  with  two  human  figures  and  a  very  black  goat,  and  an  urn  in  the  middle. 
Strawberries  and  initials  "L.  T."  at  the  top.    Verse  236.  W.  O.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Tyler,  Deborah.  1756.  9  yrs.  8"  x  20^".  4  alphabets.  Laid,  herring-bone,  catch,  cross,  and 
other  stitches.  Fine  hem.  Cross-borders  in  chain,  Greek  fret,  vine,  pyramid,  cube,  and 
diamond  designs.  Sampler  worked  in  cross-strips,  each  section  divided  by  different  stitches. 
Verse  193.  Mrs.  Alpheus  H.  Hardy 

Tyler,  Hannah.  1753.  Boston  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  About  23"  x  10*".  3  alphabets.  Flat,  eye- 
let, French  knot,  stem,  satin,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Adam  and  Eve  in  Garden  of  Eden, 
surrounded  by  animals  and  flowers.  Henry  Preston  Kendall,  Esq.,  and  others 

Tyler,  Lydia.  1797.  Methuen  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  Born  June  25,  1787.  18^"  x  11^".  3i  rows 
of  capital  letters.  Cross-stitch.  "This  work  I  wrought  when  at  School  to  Miss  Sally  Flint 
in  the  Year  1797."  Charles  H.  Tyler,  Esq. 

Underwood,  Mary.  1777.  Jamestown  [R.  I.].  12  yrs.  10"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Vine  border.    Trees,  butterflies,  etc.,  near  center.    Verse  490  (var.). 

Miss  Edna  D.  Hammond 

Unknown.    10"  x  8".    3  alphabets.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Cross-stitch  border  at  top. 

Mrs.  Robert  Bean 

Unknown.  Washington,  D.  C.  17"  x  27".  7  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Festoon  border. 
Strawberry  vine  and  baskets  of  berries  at  bottom.  N.  H.  McRoberts,  Esq. 

Unknown.  1704.  8"  x  19".  Double  alphabet.  5  borders  across  sampler,  with  three  figures, 
2  men  and  a  woman,  repeated.    2  borders  below  and  a  dog.  Francis  H.  Bigelow,  Esq. 

Unknown.  1708.  3  alphabets  and  letters,  M  E  L  B  E  I  W  L  C  E,  in  very  florid  and  com- 
plicated forms.    Same  on  both  sides.  .         Miss  Henrietta  Paige 


82  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Unknown.  1720.  [Sampler  came  from  the  Sharpless  family,  but  bears  no  name.]  8"  x  18". 
5  alphabets  and  part  of  a  sixth.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-borders  at  top  in 
horizontal  designs,  used  for  making  card  cases,  needlebooks,  etc.  A  bird,  flower,  and  dish 
on  lower  half  of  sampler,  which  appears  to  l)e  unfinished.  F.  P.  Sharjjfess.  Esq. 

Unknown.  1722.  [Probably  Marblehead.]  7"  x  7".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth 
border,  with  corners  filled  in  solid.  Blackbird  with  large  tail,  perched  on  vine  of  green 
leaves  and  blue  blossoms.  Mrs.  B.  F.  Stacey 

Unknown.  '35  [1735],  March  18th.  [This  sampler  was  handed  down  to  the  present  owner 
among  papers  dating  as  far  back  as  1649.]  14  yrs.  11"  x  17i".  3  alphabets.  Herring-bone, 
eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Design  in  center,  large  blossoms  of 
wild  rose  and  strawberry.  At  bottom,  basket  of  fruit,  dogs  on  each  side,  large  cedar  tree 
and  2  small  cedars,  deer  with  horns,  lying  on  his  legs  in  an  upright  pose. 

Mrs.  Anne  Pritchett  Richardson 

Unknown.  1778.  15"  x  15".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border;  also  crown  with  cup.  Flower- 
pot, roses,  and  animals.     Verse  342.  Mrs.  T.  Harrison  Garrett 

Unknown.  1775.  17J"  x  16".  Cross-stitch  and  satin-stitch.  Large  tree  with  spreading 
branches,  with  leaves  and  fruit  bearing  all  sorts  of  names;  cow  under  tree  and  Christ 
standing  in  front  of  trunk.    Verses  from  Revelation.    Illustrated,    Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Unknown.  [Cir.  1780.  Sampler  came  from  Springfield,  Mass.]  12"  x  12".  3  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.    Simple  border.    Saw-tooth  design  at  bottom.    Names  and  dates  on  sampler: 

"Phoebe,  Born  April     7,  1751 


Lew       bor        feb.      23, 

17.53 

Zebbo                 Au      29, 

1755 

Cal        bor         Jan      29, 

1758 

Lo.      bo.  Au     31  1760 

L.                        27     1763 

T                Au  29     1765 

W       Jan    24       1768 

M       Feb      2       1771" 

Mrs.  Richard  Jones 

Unknown.    1790.    9"  x  11".    2  alphabets.    Bird's-eye  and  cross-stitch.    Conventional  carnation 
border.     Basket  of  fruit,  birds,  strawberries  growing  from  pot,  etc.   [unfinished]. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Unknown.    1790.    8^"  x  lOi".    2  alphabets.    Queen  and  cross-stitch.     Carnation  cross-border. 
Pot  of  strawberries  and  birds  pecking  at  a  basket  of  fruit.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Unknown.     [Cir.  1790.]     16"  x  16V'.    Alphabet.    Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Floral  border. 
Man,  woman,  animals,  and  birds.    Verse  214.  Mrs.  George  A.  Plimpton 

Unknown.      75"    x   12".     3   alphabets.      Flat,  eyelet,   and    cross-stitch.      Strawberry    border. 
Verse  536.  Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park,  Philadelphia 

LTnknown.     [Cir.  1799.]     18"  x  li".     Alphabet.     Petit-point,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Cross- 
borders.    Adam  and  Eve  in  the  Garden.     Verse  529.  Miss  Caroline  Franklin 

Unknown.    Many  different  designs  done  in  lace  stitches  on  net.     Illustrated. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Unknown.     Cross-stitch.     3  alphabets.     Simple  cross-stitch  border.     Two  little  houses  and 
trees.    Verse  622.     Unfinished.  From  Machias,  Me. 

Unknown.    A  sampler  of  darned  lace  on  net.    Illustrated.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  83 

Unknown.  ["Katherin  Mury"?  Early  18th  Century  in  design.]  1  alphabet.  Satin,  eyelet, 
chain,  tapestry,  flat,  stem,  back,  buttonhole,  two-sided  line-stitch,  queen,  and  rope-stitch. 
At  bottom,  a  row  of  drawn-work  filet  containing  the  name.       Mrs.  William  Cabell  Brown 

Unknown.  [Early  18th  Century.]  Upper  half,  white  embroidery,  including  lace  squares; 
lower  half,  lace  designs  and  drawn-work.  Flat,  two-sided  line-stitch,  and  raised  button- 
hole stitch.  Mrs.  William  Cabell  Brown 

Van  Buken,  Elizabeth.  1785.  New  York.  12  yrs.  Born  August  30,  1773,  at  New  York. 
8"  X  12".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Small  pine  tree  at  bottom.  Verse 
41  (var.).     [Each  word  separated  by  single  cross-stitch.]  Mrs.  G.  H.  Buek 

Van  Forhies,  Sarah.  [Cir.  1742.  Blawanburgh,  Somerset  County,  N.  J.]  Born  February  4, 
1731.  8"  X  11".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Zigzag  border.  Man,  woman,  trees,  birds,  house, 
and  geometric  figures.  Initials:  [father  and  mother]  "C.  v.  F.  A.  v.  F."  [Children] 
"A.  V.  F.;   M.  V.  F.;   D.  v.  F.;   K.  v.  F.;  S.  v.  F.;   C.  v.  F.;  A.  v.  F."  Mrs.  A.F.  Albertson 

Van  Maater,  Catherine.  1765.  [Monmouth  County,  N.  J.]  Born  April  5,  1756.  7"  x  8". 
Alphabet.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border,  wider  at  top  and  bottom.  Birds  and  trees. 
Names:  "Daniel  Van  Maater  [father],  Mary  Covenhoven  [mother],  Catherine,  Sarah, 
Gilbert,  Micah,  Nelly"  [children].  Miss  Mary  Voorhees 

V[an]  S[chaick],  C[atherine].  1763.  [Albany,  N.  Y.]  "Out  10."  7V'  x  H".  Buttonhole 
and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border  of  strawberries  and  baskets.  House,  two  fowl,  two 
signs,  and  many  small  objects  not  nameable.    Illustrated.    The  late  Mrs.  Abraham  Lansing 

Vehien,  Elizabeth.  1716.  [Boston,  Mass.  12  yrs.]  Born  April  16,  1704.  7f"  x  18".  4  al- 
phabets. Eyelet,  outline,  cross-stitch,  and  one  other  stitch.  Borders  run  across  between 
the  alphabets  in  rather  simple  conventional  designs,  fret,  vine,  and  carnation.  5  conven- 
tional cross-borders  like  those  mentioned  above.  Mrs.  Charles  Knowles  Bolton 

ViCKERT,  Ann.  1755.  Taunton  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  10"  x  11".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross- 
stitch  border  in  black.    Verse  620.  Miss  Harriet  A.  Barstow 

ViCKERY,  Sally  CuLET.  1787.  Taunton  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  10"  x  14".  8  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Simple  border.    Verse  128  (var.).  Miss  Harriet  A.  Barstow 

Vila,  Eliza.  1799.  Belmont  [Mass.].  16V'  x  21".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch,  satin,  stem, 
eyelet,  chain,  French  knot,  tent,  and  punch-work.  Border,  conventionalized  leaf  and  flower 
done  in  punch-work  and  cross-stitch.     Basket  of  flowers.    Verse  669. 

Mrs.  H.  Mortim,er  Watson 

ViNAL,  Sophia.  [Cir.  1799.]  Born  at  Scituate  [Mass.],  June  30,  1788.  16^"  x  20i".  3  alpha- 
bets. Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border,  with  bunches  of  roses,  bluebells, 
and  carnations.    Sprays  of  strawberries.    Greek  cross-border.     Verses  242,  663. 

Mrs.  Lewis  Nichols  Curtis 

VosE,  LEMrEL.  [Cir.  1774.]  Born  July  20,  1763.  9"  x  10^".  Parts  of  alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Minor  border.  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

VosE,  Naomi.    1781.    Milton.  The  Misses  Vose 

AVade,  Frances.  1798.  Savannah  [Ga.].  16  yrs.  17"  x  20".  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Sampler 
represents  the  Western  Hemisphere.  In  upper  right-hand  corner  are  the  outlines  of 
Europe  and  Africa;  in  upper  left-hand  corner  is  a  compass  and  spray  of  flowers;  in  lower 
left-hand  corner,  wreath  of  flowers  with  words,  "North  and  South  America";  and  in 
lower  right-hand  corner,  wreath  with  name  of  maker  and  date.     Illustrated. 

Miss  Fannie  Bleecker  Seaman 


84  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Wadsworth,  Abigail.  1730.  Hartford  [Conn.].  12  yrs.  lOJ"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Simple  border.    Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Robert  A.  Wadsworth 

Wager,  Margaret.  1794.  Philadelphia  [Pa.].  8  yrs.  10^"  x  15".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.    Cross  and  strawberry  border.     Strawberry  design  at  bottom. 

Mrs.  Margaret  Wager  Austin 

Waixe,  Mary.  1795.  12  yrs.  Lazy-daisy,  split,  cat,  French  knot,  chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Vine  border  with  roses,  peonies,  and  other  flowers.  At  top,  houses,  trees,  stag,  bush,  and 
bird  upside  down ;  at  bottom,  horse,  cow,  sheep,  also  huge  bird  on  a  tree,  vase  with  flowers, 
man  with  a  dog,  and  woman  with  a  chained  bird  under  a  flowering  arbor.  Verse  92  (2, 
var.).  Francis  H.  Bigelow,  Esq. 

Wakefield,  Deliveraxce.  1757.  10"  x  12".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Garden  design.  Verse 
128  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Sybil  H.  Friedley 

Wallas,  Susannah.  1785.  [Boston,  Mass.]  Born  in  1773.  10^"  x  11*".  Alphabet.  Chain, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Across  center,  3  small  shrubs,  2  large 
birds.  Miss  Gertrude  Whiting 

Waring,  Dorothy.  1774.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  5  yrs.  8J"  x  11".  Cross-stitch.  Simple  border. 
Verse  362.  Miss  Leila  Waring 

Warner,  Ltjcy.  1785.  Middletown  [Conn.].  11  yrs.  17"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  stem, 
chain,  French  knot,  queen,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border  with  carnations,  roses,  and 
small  flowers.  Bird  in  each  upper  corner.  Countrj'^  scene  with  house,  barn,  fence,  well, 
horse,  trees,  grass,  and  road.    Verse  363  (1).     Illustrated.  Mrs.  Clarence  Weart 

Warren,  Polly.  1798.  Northborough  [Mass.].  12"  x  I25".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry  border.    Pine  tree  design.     Verse  94.  Mrs.  John  P.  Reynolds 

Waterman,  Phebe.     1760.     Cross-stitch.     Unfinished.  Mrs.  Lorenzo  Sears 

Watson,  Lucy.  1791.  Marblehead  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  12"  x  15".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Trefoil  border.    Sheep  and  small  trees.    Verse  98.  George  M.  Cushing,  Esq. 

Watson,  Nancy.     [1755.]     8^"  x  8".    1  alphabet.    Cross  and  flat-stitch.    Verse  248  (1,  var.). 

Clarence  A.  Mathewson,  Esq. 

Watts,  Jane.  1776.  12"  x  16".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Quatrefoil  and  tulip 
border,  and  cross-borders  of  tulips,  strawberries,  and  quatrefoil.  At  bottom,  two  large 
blossoming  plants  in  pots,  and  mound  in  center  with  5  strawberry  plants.  Medallion  with 
name  and  date.    Verses  66  (1,  var.),  608.  Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 

Wattson,  Elizabeth.  1795.  [Philadelphia,  Pa.]  11  yrs.  lOf"  x  12^".  2  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border  with  roses,  tulips,  and  carnations.  Small  spray  of 
flowers.    Verse  382.  Mrs.  Victor  B.  Woolley 

Wear,  Ann.  [Cir.  1792.]  Norfold  [Va.].  Born  in  1782.  8i"  x  13".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
cat,  and  cross-stitch.     Cross-border.     House.  Miss  Ellen  Coppuck  Curtis 

Weaver,  Mary.  1770.  7"  x  9".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Plain  border.  Design  of  carna- 
tions and  tulips.  Newport  Historical  Society 

Webb,  Mary.  1760.  [York,  Pa.]  13  yrs.  16"  x  17".  Tent,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation 
and  vine  border,  with  tulips  in  each  corner.  Inner  border  in  chain  design.  Sampler 
divided  into  9  squares,  with  sprays  of  dififerent  flowers  in  center  and  four  corners,  and 
verses  in  remaining  four.     Illustrated.     Verses  351,  353,  354,  592. 

Mrs.  Samuel  C.  Rumford 


PLATE  XXVIII 

Sampler  by  ax  Uxkxowx  Girl.     1775 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  85 

Weeks,  Hanxah.  [1787.]  Greenland  [N.  H.].  9  yrs.  [Born  in  1778.]  li"  x  12".  Alphabet 
and  parts  of  others.  Satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge,  with  trefoil  and 
geometrical  designs  in  border  at  bottom.    Verse  490  (var.).    Misn  Hannah  Bartlett  Rollins 

Weeks,  Hannah.  [1787.]  Greenland  [N,  H.].  9  yrs.  6"  x  8".  Alphabet.  Hemstitched. 
Satin  and  cross-stitch.    Geometrical  designs  at  the  bottom.    Miss  Hannah  Bartlett  Rollins 

Welch,  Dorcas.  1751.  Boston  [Mass.].  7i"  x  17".  Cross-stitch.  Elaborate  border.  Verse 
490  (var.).  F.  C.  Welch,  Esq. 


Weld,  H[ermioxe].  1775.  [Boston,  Mass.]  9i"  x  12".  1  alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Vine  and  floral  border  on  three  sides.  Large  conventionalized  flower,  birds,  and 
small  trees  in  cross-border  in  center ;  also  scroll  and  small  floral  cross-borders.  At  bottom, 
grass,  trees,  farmer  with  pole,  sheep,  and  cows;  flowers  growing  in  grass. 

Robert  Tracy  Jackson,  Esq. 

Weld,  Sabah.  1774.  Roxbury  [Mass.].  8i"  x  11".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched 
edge.    Cross-border  of  trees  and  birds  at  bottom.    Verse  490  (var.). 

Mrs.  Harrison  F.  Hunt 

Welsh,  Grace.  1774.  17"  x  24".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate 
floral  border.  Scene  with  trees,  hills,  deer  being  chased  bj'  dogs,  bird  of  paradise,  butter- 
fly, and  small  birds.    Verse  605.    Illustrated.  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Welsh,  Mary.  [Cir.  1770.]  12  yrs.  15"  x  21".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Strawberry  and  Greek  fret  cross-borders.  Elaborate  pastoral 
scene,  with  trees,  house,  birds,  animals,  man,  and  woman.    Verse  188.    Mrs.  N.  A.  Prentiss 

Wetherell,  Sally.  1795.  11  yrs.  17"  x  8".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 
Border  of  leaves  and  circles.  "H.W.  dj'ed  February  21.  in  the  year  1794  aged  5  years- 
6  months."  Rev.  Glenn  Tilley  Morse 


{ 


Wheatley,  Mahy.     1760. 

Thompson,  Isabella.  1797.  Alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border,  in 
squares.  Vase  in  center  at  bottom,  with  a  duck  on  each  side.  Above  Isabella's  name, 
a  basket,  purple  grapes,  flowers,  and  a  crown.  Below  Mary's  name,  design  mentioned 
above.    Verse  497.  Miss  Alice  Morton 


Whipple,  Abby'.    1796.    12  yrs.    8"  x  11".    3  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  H.  W.  Bradford 

Whitacar,  Sarah  Leake.  1791.  [Cumberland  County,  N.  J.]  10  yrs.  Born  November  1, 
1781.  10^"  X  12".  Cross-stitch.  Border,  double  line  of  cross-stitch,  with  genealogical  data 
between.  Names  on  sampler:  "Recompence  and  Martha  Leake  [mother's  father  and 
mother] ;  N.  M.  Whitacar  [father's  father  and  mother,  Nathaniel  and  Mary] ;  Ambrose 
and  Rachel  Whitacar  [father  and  mother]."  Design  in  center,  2  carnations,  1  tulip,  and 
little  trees,  with  border  of  vine  and  strawberries.    Verses  132  (1,  var.),  220,  221,  634. 

The  Misses  Van  Meter 

White,  Ruth.  1765.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  Born  in  1755.  7"  x  10".  Alphabets.  Eyelet, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Cross-stitch  border.    "Remember  I  was  born  to  die." 

Miss  Oeorgiana  Augusta  Currier 

White,  Ruth.  1774.  Weston  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  12"  x  10".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  queen,  and 
cross-stitch.     Strawberry  border.     Simple  dividing  lines  in  cross-stitch.    Verse  198  (var.). 

Rev.  Olenn  Tilley  Mor-te 


86  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

White,  Salla  [SAiAii].  1787.  [Born  in  1778,  at  Longmeadow,  Mass.]  8^"  x  7i".  Alphabet. 
Cross-stitch  and  various  fancy  stitches.  Simple  cross-stitch  border.  At  bottom,  oblong 
shapes,  squares,  and  triangles.  "Salla  White  her  sampler  worked  by  her  own  hand  at 
Mrs.  Horton's  Sc.   A.D.   1787."  The  Misses  Edith  and  Ruth  White 

White,  Sally.  1797.  Pembroke  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  Born  July  13,  1789.  6"  x  12".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.    Simple  border,  Mrs.  Louis  B.  Howe 

White,  Sally.  1795,  Portsmouth  [N.  H.].  11  yrs,  \2\"  x  14".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Two  baskets  of  flowers,  with  elaborate  flower  design  between 
them.  Miss  Hannah  M.  W.  Merrill 

White,  Sibel,  8^"  x  7f".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Plain  saw-tooth  border  in 
cross-stitch  and  satin-stitch,  A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

White,  Sophhoxia.    Lexington  [Mass.],    9  yrs.    10"  x  12".    1  alphabet.    Border  of  leaves, 

A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

Whiting,  Abigail,     1784.    5"  x  71",    Alphabet.     Simple  cross-stitch  border. 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Whitixg,  Abigail.  1787.  Wrentham  [Mass.].  19  yrs,  13"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Vine  border.     Verses  246,  490  (var.).  Miss  Annie  Sanford  Head 

Whitjiax,  Jane.  1756.  10  yrs.  12"  x  9".  Alphabet.  Flat,  satin,  chain,  French  knot,  and 
cross-stitch.  Mrs.  George  E.  Miller 

Whitmoee,  Susax.  [1799.  Providence,  R.  I.]  15^"  x  14J".  Satin  and  stem-stitch.  House 
and  basket  of  fruit.     [Probably  from  "Miss  Polly  Balch's  School."]     George  L.  Minor,  Esq. 

Whitney,  Hannah.  1795.  Lunenburg  [Mass.].  8"  x  10".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Simple 
border.    Conventional  roses  and  small  flowers.    Verse  132  (1,  var.).    C.  E.  Goodspeed,  Esq. 

Whitney,  Patty.  1796.  Boston  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  18"  x  18",  Alphabets.  Satin,  chain,  and 
cross-stitch.  Border,  a  series  of  Greek  urns,  with  flowers  in  corners.  Small  flowers  grow- 
ing out  of  three  green  moimds,  with  large  roses  between  the  mounds,  at  bottom.    Verse  651, 

Pauline  Emmons  Tappan  Brown 

Whitney,  Sckey.  1794.  Beverly  [Mass.],  9  yrs.  12"  x  8".  Alphabets,  Cross-stitch,  Cross- 
border,    Verse  643,  Mrs.  Charles  Whitney  Haddock 

Whittemore,  Olive,  1797,  Sharon  [Mass.],  Born  February  27,  1784,  14"  x  18".  3  alphabets. 
Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border,  with  Greek  cross  in  two  upper  corners.  House, 
trees,  and  shrubs  at  bottom.     Verse  129  (var.).  Mrs.  Frederick  N.  Prescott 

Wicks,  Elizabeth.  March  6.  15  yrs.  12^"  x  12|".  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Vine  border. 
"Tree  of  Life"  in  the  center,  with  four  small  baskets  of  flowers,  birds,  etc.  "Be  zealous 
to"  .  .  ,  William  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

WiGGiN,  Maby,  1797.  New  Market  [N.  H.].  22"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Tent,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Conventional  border  on  three  sides.  At  bottom,  two  apple  trees  with  fruit,  con- 
ventional rose  tree  in  vase,  and  two  green  hills  with  three  lambs  at  foot  of  each.    Verse  657. 

Mrs.  Ernest  Lovering 

Wiggins,  Hannah.  1730.  12  yrs.  16i"  x  16i",  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  tent,  queen,  outline,  cat, 
tapestry,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-borders  in  various  designs  of  conventional  flowers,  crowns, 
crosses,  urns,  etc.  "Ames  Wiggins  Hannah  Wiggin."  Verses  182  (1),  343  (1,  var.),  493, 
683.    "Remember  thy  Creator,"  etc.,  and  other  sayings  now  undecipherable. 

Miss  Kate  S.  Harris 


PLATE  XXIX 


Fraxces  Brextox's  Sampler.     Newport,  R.  I.     1775 
Mrs.  ThomdS  A.  Lawton 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  87 

Wilder,  Martha.  1794.  Lancaster  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  9"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Irregular  border,  with  small  crosses  on  sides  and  scroll  at  bottom.  Small 
trees  and  fancy  squares.  Verse  639  (var.).  "Favour  is  deceitful  and  beauty  is  vain,  but 
a  woman  that  feareth  the  Lord,  she  shall  be  praised."  Mrs.  Edward  H.  Kelly 

Wildes,  Elisey  [Elizabeth.  Cir.  1777.  Danvers  or  Topsfield.]  Born  in  1767.  8"  x  15". 
5  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.  3Irs.  Samuel  Hammond 

Wilkinson,  Hannah.  1747.  Smithfield  [R.  I.].  Born  February  1,  1733.  7"  x  7".  Alphabet. 
Cross-stitch.  Miss  Alice  A.  Razee 

WiLLARD,  Elizabeth.  [Before  1799.]  8"  x  17".  Alphabet.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Cross- 
border  at  bottom.     Verse  128  (var.).  Lancaster  Public  Library 

Willahd,  Sophronia.  [Cir.  1785.]  Still  River  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  Born  in  1774.  8V'  x  16". 
Alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Verses  183  (1,  3),  187  (var.),  490  (var.). 

Lancaster  Public  Library 

WiLLES,  Roxalana.  1783.  Sampler  in  shape  of  the  Liberty  Bell.  Cross-stitch.  2  alphabets 
and  single  letters.    Illustrated.  Rev.  Glenn  Tilley  Morse 

Williams,  Abigail.  1740.  [Deerfield,  Mass.]  10  yrs.  5i"  x  16^".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Cross-borders  in  various  designs,  carnations,  trees,  squares,  etc.  At  bottom,  baskets  of 
fruit,  tree,  and  two  crowned  lions.  Verses  128  (var.),  185.  "Favour  IS  Deceitful  And 
Beauty  is  Vaine  But  A  Woman  That  Feareth  The  Lord  She  Shall  Be  Praised." 

Museum,  of  the  Pocumtuck  Valley  Mem,orial  Association 

Williams,  Desier.  1754.  10"  x  155 ".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  knotted,  and  cross-stitch.  Elab- 
orate pattern  of  conventional  flowers,  two  birds,  etc.  Cross-border  of  vine  and  flowers. 
Verse  349.  "Let  not  mercy  and  truth  forsake  thee.  Bind  them  about  thj'  neck.  Write 
them  upon  the  tables  of  my  heart."  Mrs.  Frederick  Danforth 

Williams,  Hannah.  1783.  9^"  x  12V'.  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  border. 
At  top,  Noah's  Ark,  trees  alternating  with  urns  filled  with  flowers. 

Mrs.  Samuel  A.  Cunningham 

Williamson,  Anna.  1788.  Albany  [N.  Y.].  12V'  x  131".  5  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.    "John  Williams,  Marry  Williams,  Anna  Williams." 

Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 

Wilson,  Eliza.  1791.  "Concord,  County  Rockingham"  [N.  H.].  7"  x  12^".  2  alphabets. 
Petit-point,  stem,  chain,  eyelet,  cross-stitch,  and  hemstitch.  Simple  cross-borders.  3  con- 
ventional plants  at  bottom.     Verse  132  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Arthur  Williams 

Wing,  Anne.  1739.  Boston  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  7"  x  11".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border,  with  strawberry  in  middle  of  sides  and  corners  and  rest  of  leaves.  Conventional 
flowers,  sheep,  birds,  trees,  etc.    Verses  8  (var.),  187  (var.),  490  (var.). 

Museum,  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston 

Wing,  Content.    1770.    Smithfield.    5"  x  13".    3  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Dr.  Eugene  P.  King 

Wingate,  Mary.  [Cir.  1719.]  Hampton  [N.  H.].  Born  June  7,  1708.  8"  x  15|".  2  alphabets. 
Animals  and  birds.  Mrs.  Frederick  A.  Whitwell 

Winsor,  Nancy.  1786.  Providence  [R.  I.  "Miss  PoUy  Balch's  School."].  14"  x  14".  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  border.  Ship  in  center,  between  two  points  of  land. 
Verse  69.    Illustrated  in  color.  Mrs.  John  H.  Mason 


88  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

WiKTEH,  Haknah.  1796.  Tamworth  [N.  H.].  Border,  wreath  of  vines  and  flowers.  "The 
noblest  employment  of  the  mind  of  Man,  is  the  study  of  the  works  of  the  Creator.  To  him 
whom  the  science  of  nature  delighteth,  every  object  bringeth  a  proof  of  his  GoD.  Every 
thing  that  prayeth  it  giveth  cause  of  adoration."  Rutherford  L.  Coerr,  Esq. 

Wire,  Euza.  [Cir.  1800.  Philadelphia.]  8"  x- 8".  In  each  upper  corner,  basket  of  fruit, 
strawberries,  house,  lawn,  trees,  rose  bushes,  and  bird.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

WisTEE,  Sahah.  1773.  Cross-stitch.  Carnation  border,  with  cross-borders  of  carnations,  straw- 
berries, and  tulips.    Verses  342,  361.  Pennsylvania  Museum 

Witt,  Sallv.  1786.  Lynn  [Mass,  Made  at  "Miss  Sarah  Stivour's  School".].  14  yrs.  16"  x  17". 
Alphabet.  French  knot,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  border  of  flowers,  with 
birds,  arbor,  trees,  and  figures  of  a  man  and  woman.  Verse  129  (var.).  Illustrated  in 
color.  Mrs.  Charles  Pearson  Coker 

Wood,  Anna.  1795.  Uxbridge  [Mass.].  7"  x  8i".  Alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  "C  [Cynthia] 
Wood."  H.  W.  Erving,  Esq. 

Wood,  Dolly.  1796.  10  yrs.  10^"  x  7i".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  outline,  tent,  French  knot,  hem- 
stitch, and  cross-stitch.    Trees  and  flowers.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Wood,  Lydia.  1793.  11  yrs.  14"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Single  and  cross-stitch.  Floral  border. 
Birds  and  basket  full  of  flowers.    Verse  640.  Mrs.  Francis  Blake 

Wood,  Mahy.  1784.  Roxbury  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  10^"  x  7i".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Con- 
ventional cross-borders.   Verse  490  (var.).    Christ  Church  Parish  House,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

WooDBRmoE,  Mahy  Giljian.  1779.  Salem  [Mass.  Made  at  "Miss  Sarah  Stivour's  School".]. 
9  yrs.  16"  x  20".  Alphabet.  Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Wide  border  with  flowers  on 
either  side;  arbor,  birds,  and  basket  of  fruit  at  top;  tree,  man  and  woman,  and  sheep  at 
bottom.     Verse  503  (var.).  Frank  R.  Dow,  Esq. 

Woodmax,  Appha.  1787.  14  yrs.  [Born  May  2,  1773,  at  Sanbornton,  N.  H.]  18"  x  20". 
3  alphabets.  French  knot,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  made  up  of  flower,  tree, 
bird,  and  strawberry  designs.    Vine,  strawberry,  and  Greek  fret  cross-borders.    Illustrated. 

Miss  Anne  B.  Hamilton 

Woodkutt,  Mary.    1740.    Salem  [N.  J.].    13  yrs.    7f"  x  lOi",    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Henry  J.  Irick 

Woodnut,  Sarah.  1792.  Salem  [N.  J.].  14"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Seed,  eyelet,  stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Border,  vine  with  flowers  intersecting,  passion  flowers,  roses,  and  tulips. 
In  center,  spray  of  roses,  2  birds  with  branch  of  cherries  in  their  mouths,  and  2  butterflies. 
Verse  374.  Mrs.  I.  Oak  ford  Acton 

Woodruff,  Elizabeth.  1786.  [Born  at  Princeton,  N.  J.,  May  10,  1779.]  8"  x  13".  2  alpha- 
bets. Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry,  tulip,  fret,  and  rosebud  cross-borders; 
at  bottom,  two  trees.    Verse  207.  Mrs.  John  J.  Stubbs 

Woodwell,  Alice.  1760.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  Born  December  16,  1746.  8^"  x  8".  Done 
in  crewels.  Mrs.  George  B.  Pettingell 

Woodwell,  Hannah.  [Cir.  1754.]  Newburjport  [Mass.].  Born  October  3,  1742.  9"  x  6". 
Cross-stitch.  Cross-border  of  vine  and  flowers.  Names  on  sampler:  "Gideon  and  Hannah 
Woodwell  [father  and  mother]."  Mrs.  George  B.  Pettingell 

Weay,  Elizaetta.    1767.    14  yrs.    9^"  x  13".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Verses  93,  134,  196. 

Mrs.  George  A.  Plimpton 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  89 

Wright,  Azubah.     1772.    12  yrs.    7"  x  9".    5  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Simple  border. 

Mrs.  Lucy  Wadsworth  Leavenworth 

Wyatt,  Sahah.  1742.  [Salem  County,  N.  J.]  9  yrs.  Born  Jirne  8,  1733.  12^"  x  21f".  Flat, 
outline,  queen,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  cross  border  and  cross-borders.  A 
band  of  tape,  one  inch  wide,  with  tiny  stitches  overcast  all  around.  Upper  center,  gorgeous 
conventionalized  flowers.  Initials  and  names  on  sampler:  "I  T  H,  IT,  ST,  DT,  ET,  DT, 
IT,  SR,  IS,  SS,  RS,  ES,  EE,  IS,  DS,  ES,  KS;  bartholomew  wyatt,  sarah  wyatt, 
Joseph  tomlinson,  elizabeth  tomlinson  [grandparents] ;  bartholomew  wyatt,  elizabeth 
wyatt  [father  and  mother];  robert  smith,  elizabeth  smith;  John  ann  richason,  ephraim  s 
tomlinson,  Joseph  1  tomlinson,  John  mary  tomlinson;  william  r  tomlinson,  ebenezer  e  tom- 
linson, othmel  richard  tomlinson,  edward  margret  batton;  samuel  mary  sharp  C  E  H, 
bartholomew  wyatt,  ITITETMTSTITMTL  T."  Verses  344  (var.),  345  (var.), 
346a,  585  (var.),  586   (1),  587.  Miss  Hannah  Carpenter  Reeve 

Wymax,  Issac.  1796.  Charlestown  [Mass.].  16^"  x  17-^".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek 
border.  Miss  Mary  J.  Maguire 

Wyman,  Rhoda.  1708.  Bedford  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  9i"  x  16*".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
House  and  tree.    Verse  490  (var.).  Miss  Mary  J.  Maguire 

Wymax,  Sab  ATT  Augusta.  1792.  Ashby  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  10"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  French 
knot,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  2  geometric  and  strawberry  borders.  Fruit  tree  with  bird 
on  it,  also  bowl  of  fruit.    Verse  514.  Mrs.  Sidney  Harris 

Yeomans,  Maey.    1790.    16"  x  12".    Two  birds  at  top;  figures  of  man  and  woman  at  bottom. 

Miss  Harriet  L.  Sheldon 

Zaxe,  Maey.  1798.  Born  October  6,  1778.  18"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  flat,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Border,  vine  and  carnations  all  around,  with  rose  corners.  Vine  and  various  other 
designs  at  bottom.  Family  names  and  dates:  "The  ages  of  the  Children  of  William  Zane 
and  Sarah  and  Alice  his  wives: 

"WiUiam  Zane  was  Born  The  6th  of  the  3  month  1765 
Sarah  Zane  was  Born  The  21  of  the  10  month  1767 
Martha  Zane  was  Born  The  7  of  the  2  month  1770 
Jane  Zane  was  Born  The  2  of  the  9  month  1776 
Mary  Zane  was  Born  The  6  of  the  10  month  1778 
Ester  Zane  was  Born  The  29  of  the  4  month  1780 
Alice  Zane  was  Born  The  17  of  the  11  month  1781 
Rebecca  Zane  was  Born  the  15  of  the  6  month  1783" 
Verses  132  (1,  var.),  343  (1,  var.).    "Fear  God  and  Kep  his  Commands". 

Miss  Helen  Botsford  Clark 


NINETEENTH  CENTURY  SAMPLERS 

IN  looking  over  a  large  number  of  American  samplers,  we  find  the 
dates  between  1800  and  1810  occurring  with  such  frequency  that 
we  begin  to  realize  that  when  embroidery  revived  with  the  other 
arts  of  peace  after  the  Revolution,  it  was  considered  high  time  to  show 
the  mother  country  that  our  daughters  could  produce  specimens  of 
fine  needlework  which  were  not  merely  copies  of  old  designs. 

In  the  preceding  centuries,  when  England  was  producing  her  most 
beautiful  work,  life  in  the  Colonies  had  been  too  hard  and  too  serious 
to  allow  of  much  attention  to  the  gentle  arts  except  in  rare  cases,  and 
the  few  samplers  produced  at  that  time  were  generally  direct  copies 
of  English  models.  But  with  the  opening  j'-ears  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  our  independence  and  originality  were  shown  by  the  branch- 
ing out  on  quite  different  lines ;  and  if,  at  times,  we  find  these  early 
conceptions  a  trifle  crude,  it  must  be  remembered  that  these  samplers 
may  not  be  judged  as  critically  as  those  of  a  more  mature  civilization. 
Indeed,  even  in  the  nineteenth  century,  Colonial  life  was  no  bed  of 
roses.  The  old  Pryor  Mill,  in  Bergen  County,  New  Jersey,  the  birth- 
place of  the  little  sampler  maker,  Sarah  Van  Home,  1827,  was  run 
by  tidewater,  and  we  are  told  that  her  father  often  had  to  arise  in  the 
middle  of  the  night  to  grind  the  grain. 

In  England,  the  early  nineteenth  century  brought  a  type  of 
sampler  not  highly  esteemed  by  English  collectors.  The  specimens 
abound  in  small  figures  and  objects  not  well  adapted  to  needlework, 
especially  when  worked  in  the  ubiquitous  cross-stitch,  and  contrast 
unfavorably  with  the  wonderful  samplers  of  an  earlier  day,  so  rich 
in  beautiful  designs  adapted  from  all  that  was  best  in  the  patterns 
brought  from  Italy  and  elsewhere.  The  funny  little  houses  and  figures, 
neat  and  tidy,  but  so  evidently  copied  from  pattern  books,  seem  trivial 
compared  to  the  fine,  early  embroideries,  though  there  is  nothing  to 
criticize  in  the  quality  of  stitchery  exhibited.    It  is  wonderfully  fine — 

90 


X 


—   ^ 
>^     It 


« 
o 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  91 

we  do  not  like  to  let  our  minds  dwell  on  the  fearful  strain  to  those 
young  eyes ! 

It  was  just  the  reverse  with  the  American  sampler  of  the  same 
period.  Those  whose  interest  is  centered  entirely  on  the  fine  stitchery 
done  on  delicate  fabrics  will  find  comparatively  little  to  admire,  for 
although  fine  work  does  exist,  it  is,  however,  not  a  general  character- 
istic. Such  critics  should  learn  to  view  these  youthful  efforts  from  a 
completely  different  standpoint,  appreciating  the  handicaps  under 
which  they  were  made,  watching  the  development  of  the  design  which 
reflected  the  life  of  that  day,  and  thus  getting  at  the  spirit  and  true 
character  of  the  American  work;  or  else  they  would  do  well  to  con- 
fine themselves  to  the  study  of  the  better  regulated  sampler  of  the 
English  schools.  It  is  important  to  realize  the  conditions  and  influ- 
ences that  made  the  English  and  American  samplers  of  the  nineteenth 
century  so  unlike.  For  one  thing,  pattern  books  were  exceedingly 
scarce  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic,  and  although  the  practice  of  mak- 
ing samplers  in  schools  grew  with  the  years,  many  children  lived  in 
remote  villages  far  aw^ay  from  such  advantages,  and  were  forced  to 
draw  on  their  own  surroundings  for  inspiration.  Aid  in  composing 
the  design  must  have  been  frequently  sought  from  older  friends  or 
members  of  the  family,  and  as  they  were  not  past  masters  in  the  art 
of  drawing,  it  led  to  many  amusing  inaccuracies  in  perspective  and 
proportion.  For  instance,  notice  Rebecca  Slim's  gigantic  mouse,  1830. 
He  would  have  had  great  difficulty  in  squeezing  through  the  door  of 
her  little  house. 

Another  difficulty  lay  in  the  materials  available,  which  did  not  lend 
themselves  especially  well  to  very  fine  work,  much  of  the  linen  being 
of  a  coarse,  loose  weave,  with  threads  that  were  apt  to  pull  together 
awkwardly  when  cross-stitch  was  used.  Occasionally  a  child  was 
lucky  enough  to  procure  fine  muslin  or  tiffany  for  a  groundwork; 
the  latter  lends  a  peculiar  lightness  and  richness  to  the  background, 
the  colors  stand  out  well  upon  it,  but  unfortunately  it  cracks  and 
disintegrates  easily.  The  silk,  much  of  it  home-dyed,  must  have  been 
originally  in  a  very  thick  twist,  which  had  to  be  unraveled  before  being 


92  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

used,  for  this  is  the  only  way  we  can  account  for  the  crinkly  floss 
we  see  so  often  in  the  embroidery  of  the  flowers,  lawns,  animals,  and 
figures,  as  well  as  in  the  backgrounds,  and  which  lends  itself  particu- 
larly well  to  the  petals  of  the  flowers  worked  in  satin  or  split-stitch. 
But  when  it  comes  to  embroidering  a  church,  where  the  stitches  extend 
the  entire  distance  from  the  steeple  to  the  ground  without  a  break,  the 
result  is  fragile,  and  such  a  piece  of  work  should  be  preserved  under 
glass.  Silk  of  this  variety  is  practically  never  seen  in  foreign  em- 
broideries. It  is  different  from  the  floss  used  occasionally  on  the 
English  samplers,  and  is  quite  peculiar  to  our  country.  The  kink  is 
very  close  and  not  a  general  wave,  and  was  probably  considered 
pleasing  in  its  effect.  If  it  was  a  product  of  China  and  Japan,  and 
brought  home  by  the  old  American  sea  captains,  it  is  strange  that  the 
English  captains  did  not  do  likewise.  Why  were  they  less  thoughtful 
of  their  families'  needs? 

Usually  the  designs  were  drawn  directly  on  the  linen  with  pen  or 
pencil,  but  sometimes  the  back  of  a  sampler  shows,  by  the  bits  of  paper 
still  sticking  to  it,  that  the  outline  was  drawn  on  thin  paper  and  placed 
under  the  linen,  the  design  showing  through,  and  the  paper  being  torn 
away  after  the  embroidery  was  finished.  The  sampler  of  Julia  Ann 
Hoffner,  where  a  vivid  green  bird  is  to  be  seen  enjoying  a  meal  of 
scarlet  berries  growing  on  an  oak,  was  worked  in  this  way. 

From  time  immemorial,  stitchery  has  been  found  a  difficult  medium 
for  the  portrayal  of  the  human  face.  Undoubtedly  even  the  mature 
embroiderers  of  the  seventeenth  century  gave  sighs  of  relief  as  they 
traced  the  last  eyebrow  or  curved  the  final  smile  on  the  placid  face 
of  the  king  or  queen  in  their  needlework  pictures.  How  much  more 
difficult  the  problem  for  the  American  sampler  maker,  usually  a  little 
girl  under  twelve  years  of  age!  When  the  canvas  was  small  and  the 
figures  so  tiny  that  a  black  cross-stitch  could  stand  for  each  eye  and 
a  long  stitch  for  the  mouth,  they  could  cope  with  the  difficulty;  but 
in  the  larger  and  more  ambitious  scenes,  where  ladies  reclined  under 
a  tree  or  stood  in  front  of  a  sylvan  altar,  it  was  a  different  matter. 
It  was  felt  that  these  pictured  people  should  wear  the  bland,  almost 


PLATE  XXXI 

ROCKSALAXA    WlLLEs's    SAMPLER.       1783 

Owned  by  the  Rev.  Glenn  Tilley  Morse 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  93 

simpering  expression  considered  "comme  il  faut"  for  females  of  the 
period,  and  so  the  custom  arose  of  helping  out  the  embroidered  design 
by  painting  the  face  and  hands. 

Wilamina  Rine,  1813,  and  Mary  Hamilton,  1812  (Plate  xlviii), 
used  watercolor,  which  possibly  gave  a  satisfactory  effect  at  the  time, 
but  their  tints  have  become  somewhat  faint  with  the  lapse  of  years; 
perhaps  the  tiffany  or  fine  muslin  of  their  samplers  would  not  allow 
of  any  other  method.  Clarissa  and  Sophia  Emerson  (Plate  xlix), 
who  may  have  been  sisters  or  relatives,  since  their  work  is  similar  in 
style  and  date,  used  oil  paint  on  the  heavy  linen,  but  the  effect  is  a 
little  hard.  Laura  Bowker  (Plate  1),  1817,  showed  a  good  deal  of 
ingenuity  in  painting  a  face  for  her  shepherdess,  for  she  cut  it  out  of 
paper  and  pasted  it  on  the  linen,  and  she  did  the  same  with  some  lambs 
made  of  kid,  and  added  richness  to  her  cedar  trees  by  embroidering 
them  in  chenille.  Ann  E.  Kelly  (Plate  xcvii),  1825,  gives  an  ethereal 
look  to  her  damsel,  devoutly  offering  a  sacrifice  on  an  altar,  by  insert- 
ing the  painted  face  under  the  thin  muslin.  The  effect  is  very  good; 
in  fact,  this  is  the  most  successful  of  all  these  experiments.  In  other 
cases  the  distant  view  is  helped  out  by  paint,  as  in  the  Loring  family 
record,  or  in  the  reflection  in  the  w^ater  which  we  see  in  Lucy  Stickney's 
sampler  (Plate  li),  1830,  showing  the  house  and  trees  on  Charles- 
town  Neck,  near  Boston.  A  most  realistic  effect  was  sometimes  given 
by  applying  small  squares  of  mica  to  represent  glass  in  the  windows 
of  houses,  the  frames  being  indicated  by  criss-cross  threads,  but  this 
idea  was  borrow^ed  from  our  English  cousins.  So  we  find  that  our 
ancestresses  evolved  ideas  of  their  own  for  surmounting  difficulties, 
though  the  paint  and  other  extra  touches  may  not  have  been  applied 
by  the  same  hands  that  worked  the  samplers. 

In  some  sections  of  the  coimtry,  quaint  old  ribbons  were  used  as 
borders,  making  a  neat  and  pretty  edge.  Sometimes  two  ribbons  of 
different  widths  and  contrasting  colors  were  elaborately  quilled,  one 
on  top  of  the  other,  with  rosettes  at  the  corners.  Again,  loops  of  the 
embroidery  silk  were  sewed  on  in  clusters,  making  tufts  or  rosettes 
as  a  further  embellishment.    Elizabeth  Funk  (Plate  lii),  1813,  uses 


94  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

a  narrow  lute-string  ribbon,  gathered  and  shaded  darker  at  the 
bottom,  giving  a  pretty  effect.  The  custom  of  using  quilled  ribbon 
as  an  edging  was  much  in  vogue  among  the  German  sampler  makers, 
and  the  name  of  Funk  suggests  Pennsylvania  Dutch  parentage, 
although  the  sampler  is  thoroughh^ — rather  peculiarly — American  in 
design.  Elizabeth  evidently  wished  to  make  the  date  symmetrical, 
so,  regardless  of  accuracy,  she  embroidered  the  3  backward  in  order 
to  make  it  balance  with  the  8. 

Some  of  the  floral  wreaths  encircling  the  verses  and  names  of  the 
less  elaborate  samplers  are  very  pretty  and  graceful,  as  in  Sophia 
Catherine  Bier's  work  (Plate  liii),  1810,  and  one  does  not  regret 
the  absence  of  the  more  ambitious  scenes.  In  this  same  category  is 
one  made  by  Sophia  Lamborn  (Plate  liv),  whose  design  is  very 
similar  to  those  used  in  the  lamp-wick  embroidery  or  tufted  bedspreads 
of  that  day ;  perhaps  she  may  have  appropriated  the  pattern  from  her 
mother's  bed  linen. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  practice  of  making  samplers  ran  in 
families.  In  one  case,  five  successive  generations  embroidered  them, 
the  first  dating  back  to  1750,  and  the  fifth  a  production  of  the  last 
decade. 

Most  of  the  examples  of  the  nineteenth  century  were  made  by 
rather  young  children,  the  average  age  being  eleven,  though  some  poor 
tots  mark  theirs  as  having  been  made  at  a  much  earlier  age,  even  as 
young  as  six  or  seven.  On  the  other  hand,  many  girls  put  off  the  task 
until  they  were  almost  groTvu.  But,  on  the  whole,  we  think  of  them 
as  a  product  of  youth,  and  it  comes  as  a  distinct  surprise  to  find 
Hannah  Crafts,  at  the  ripe  age  of  sixty,  embroidering  a  rather  elab- 
orate sampler,  with  a  picture  of  her  own  home  at  the  bottom  labeled, 
"  Sweet  Home,  the  dearest  spot  on  earth  to  me."  Her  heart  probably 
reverted  to  the  days  of  her  youth,  when  samplers  were  even  more 
prevalent,  and  she  doubtless  reproduced  those  she  remembered,  instead 
of  copying  the  work  of  the  young  people  about  her.  She  started  to 
cover  the  canvas  like  tapestrj^  but  failing  eyesight  or  some  other  ill 
prevented  its  completion,  for  this  was  years  ago — before  the  era  of 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  95 

giddy  grandmothers,  when  a  woman  of  sixty  was  considered  old  and 
was  often  crippled  with  rheumatism. 

The  girls'  names  appearing  on  the  samplers  are  a  study  in  them- 
selves, and  very  different  from  those  now  in  vogue.  Submit  Weyman, 
Remember  Emmerton,  Electe  Phillips  are  reminiscent  of  Puritan 
daj^s.  Achsa  Clark,  Asenath  Holman,  Keturah  INIoore,  Tamson 
JNIulford  are  Bible  names.  Philadelphia  Webb  suggests  a  connection 
with  the  Quaker  city;  Lovey  and  Nabby  (the  latter  occurring  rather 
frequently)  are  probably  nicknames;  Britannia  Holbrook  proclaims 
her  English  parentage.  But  where  did  Amersha  Arnold,  Lucinthia 
Cone,  Emirancy  Howe,  Roxa  Tainter,  Anzolette  Hassan,  Oceana 
Harris,  Freelove  Turner,  Waite  Phetteplace,  and,  most  sonorous  of 
all,  Amorena  D.  T.  Roberts,  acquire  their  names?  One  wonders  if  in 
large  families  the  stock  of  names  became  exhausted  and  the  parents 
were  obliged  to  draw  on  their  imaginations.  In  the  Field  family 
register,  the  mother's  maiden  name  was  Miss  Piana  Petty.  On  a 
sampler  dated  1827,  we  find  the  following  statement: 

"Brooksania  Waters  is  my  name 
Milford  is  my  station 
Milford  is  my  place  abode 
And  Christ  is  my  Salvation." 

Another  delightful  name  is  Parley  Bates,  who  in  1811  made  a 
record,  with  one  of  the  pretty,  bright  red  berry-like  borders  that  were 
popular  in  the  vicinity  of  Providence;  the  berries  done  in  a  sort  of 
coarse  and  effective  cat-stitch.  Parley's  twin  brother's  name  was 
Nahum,  and  we  come  across  other  men's  names  that  are  strange  to  our 
ears,  such  as  Mickel  Trufry  and  Friend  Collens. 

A  great  many  fanciful  ways  are  used  for  inscribing  samplers,  the 
American  child  not  being  constant  to  the  expression  "Wrought  by," 
so  in  vogue  in  Great  Britain.  Sarah  Baker,  1811,  uses  the  expression 
"marked  her  sampler";  Anna  Brown  says,  "This  I  did  in  the  year 
1824";  Ruth  Davis's  sampler,  1817,  was  "performed  in  her  eleventh 
year" — she  was  evidently  a  motherless  child,  as  her  verse  runs: 

"This  work  I  did  to  let  you  see 
What  care  my  Papy  took  of  me." 


96  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

One  finds  the  expression,  "Lydia  Barcalow's  sampler  work";  also, 
"This  completed."  A  sad,  little  faded  specimen  was  begun  by  Mary 
Dealy,  1806,  who  died  before  its  completion,  a  friend  evidently  finish- 
ing it  for  her,  and  adding  this  inscription : 

"  She  was  a  blessing  here  below 
The  only  child  of  a  widow 
Subscribed  by  Sally  Parker." 

One  very  human  inscription,  showing  that  sampler  makers  did  not 
always  consider  their  tasks  entirely  congenial,  is  found  on  Patty  Polk's 
work.  She  states:  "Patty  Polk  did  this  and  she  hated  every  stitch 
she  did  in  it.  She  loves  to  read  much  more."  After  all,  the  youngsters 
of  those  times  were  probably,  at  heart,  pretty  much  as  they  are  now, 
only  terribly  repressed,  and  this  inscription  opens  a  more  intimate  door 
than  we  usually  happen  upon.  She  has  the  letters  G.  W.  inscribed 
on  a  tomb  in  the  distance,  and  as  the  embroidery  was  done  about  1800, 
these  letters  undoubtedly  stood  for  the  Father  of  our  Country. 

Occasionally  we  find  the  word  "Exampler";  sometimes  short 
didactic  axioms  are  throA^n  in,  such  as  "Imitate  the  Best";  "Sweet 
is  the  Counsel  of  a  Friend";  "May  Liberty,  Peace,  and  Prosperity 
ever  prevail  in  America". 

A  pleasing  verse  and  one  of  the  few  that  bears  a  sentiment  most 
admirable  for  modern  as  well  as  bygone  days,  barring  its  spelling, 
is  found  on  Ariadne  Hackney's  sampler  made  at  Mercer,  Virginia: 

"Believe  not  each  aspersing  tongue 
As  most  week  persons  do 
But  still  believe  the  story  wrong 
Which  ought  not  to  be  true." 

But  this  is  venturing  too  far  into  the  realm  of  the  verses,  and  must  be 
left  for  another  chapter. 

Elizabeth,  the  daughter  of  Captain  Peter  Harwood,  sea  captain 
and  Revolutionary  soldier,  combines  many  unusual  features  on  her 
sampler.  The  central  part  is  a  register,  in  which  she  makes  use  of 
rather  unusual  phraseology.    She  adds  after  her  parents'  names: 

"They  married  Jan.  22nd,  1787, 
He  hath  by  her  eleven  children,  viz: — " 


PLATE  XXXII     ' 

Hannah  Janxey's  Sampler.     1785 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Miles  White,  Jr. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  97 

and  below  are  the  names  of  the  eleven.  On  either  side  she  has  tall, 
slender  pedestals  surmounted  by  a  pair  of  celestial  and  terrestrial 
globes,  such  as  were  used  in  the  schools  of  that  period.  Directly  over 
the  register  is  a  very  elaborate  lambrequin,  similar  to  those  used 
over  the  tops  of  windows.  The  globes  and  the  lambrequin  fore- 
shadowed the  Victorian  Era  that  was  so  soon  to  come.  At  the  bottom, 
Elizabeth  has  a  landscape.  The  largest  house  which  she  depicts  was 
erected  by  her  father,  and  was  the  first  brick  house  built  in  North 
Brookfield,  Massachusetts.  A  smaller  building  in  the  very  corner 
represents  a  store,  wuth  its  swinging  sign  near  bj'-. 

In  1803,  two  little  New  York  girls  of  eight  and  ten,  named 
Caroline  and  Elizabeth  Grimes,  each  worked  a  sampler  and  sent  them 
across  the  ocean  as  gifts,  to  give  pleasure  to  their  English  grandmother. 
Caroline,  the  younger,  worked  a  quaint  poem  beginning,  "The  broad 
Atlantic  rolls  between  fair  England's  Isle  and  me,"  and  made  per- 
fectly lovely  portraits  of  "Nero"  the  dog  and  "Tiger"  the  cat  on 
the  canvas.  Elizabeth  had  a  more  ambitious  huntsman  and  some 
didactic  poetry  headed  ^^Jf^S  '  ^^  script  capitals.  This  is  not 
the  only  case  in  which  such  a  piece  of  work  was  embroidered  as  a  token 
of  affection  to  be  sent  across  this  "Broad  Atlantic,"  for  in  1799  a 
sampler  signed 

"Hannah  Wilson  Bradford,  Yorkshire,  Old  England 

to 
Phebe  Speakman,  Concord,  North  America" 

was  dispatched  from  the  other  side.  If  the  address  outside  the  package 
was  equally  vague,  the  postman  of  those  days  must  have  had  clever 
brains  to  have  enabled  it  to  reach  its  destination.  Still  another  instance 
of  a  sampler  taking  a  long  journey  is  that  worked  by  Lydia  Austin, 
a  little  Hindu  girl.  Though  made  in  British  India,  it  is  a  typical 
New  England  sampler,  which  leads  us  to  the  conclusion  that  she  had 
a  model  from  the  New  World  to  copy,  and  the  deeply  religious  verse 
confirms  the  belief  that  she  had  been  brought  up  as  a  Christian.  We 
know  that  she  was  supported  and  educated  by  Miss  Lydia  Austin, 
who  lived  and  died  in  New  Haven,  Connecticut,  and  who  bestowed 


98  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

her  name  upon  her  httle  protegee.  It  was  probably  a  token  of  grati- 
tude sent  to  the  benefactress. 

Two  specimens  from  Virginia  indicate  that  a  custom  may  have 
prevailed  there  of  making  samplers  and  giving  them  as  betrothal  or 
wedding  presents  to  a  relation  or  some  particularly  dear  friend.  One 
of  these  was  made  for  a  sister,  and  the  design  is  rich  with  turtle  doves, 
a  wedding  bell,  and  is  marked  "an  emblem  of  love". 

Still  another  one  from  Virginia  is  the  handiwork  of  "Content 
Phillips,  aged  12  October"  (Plate  Iv).  Her  alphabets  are  inscribed 
on  an  unmistakable  memorial  tablet,  but  this  does  not  interfere  with 
her  little  dream  of  romance.  For  the  urns  at  the  four  corners  of  her 
floral  border  contain  rosebuds  tied  with  true  lovers'  knots,  while  under 
the  vines  of  the  lower  border  the  true  lovers  approach  each  other  with 
arms  outstretched.  The  antlered  animal  just  between  them  in  the 
picture,  but  evidently  climbing  a  hillside,  seems  utterly  oblivious  of 
the  proximity  of  the  lovers.  Content  has  succeeded  in  giving  him  a 
sublimely  unbiased  expression.  This  charming  sampler  is  worked  in 
bright  colors  on  rich  tan  linen,  and  the  outline  of  the  tablet  gives 
it  distinction. 

Many  of  the  sampler  makers  were  descendants  or  relatives  of 
illustrious  people,  some  of  them  American  patriots,  some  English 
nobility.  Two  cousins  of  John  Adams  are  on  the  list.  Mary  Ann 
Fenno  had  as  ancestor  Governor  Thomas  Dudley,  of  the  Massachu- 
setts Bay  Colony;  Sarah  Jane  Fletcher  came  of  Mayflower  stock; 
Jane  Arthur  was  descended  from  James  Dalrymple,  Lord  Stair 
of  Scotland.  Rebecca  Old,  born  1808,  was  the  granddaughter  of 
Elizabeth  Stiegel  and  great-granddaughter  of  Henry  William  Stiegel, 
"Baron  Stiegel,"  the  pioneer  Pennsylvania  glass  maker.  The  list  of 
these  notables  could  go  on  indefinitely. 

In  1819,  the  great-great-great-granddaughter  of  "Marchant" 
Richard  Dole,  the  builder  of  the  first  public  wharf  in  Newburyport,- 
embroidered  a  charming  sampler,  which  is  still  cherished  by  the  family. 
This  little  Sarah  Dole  (Plate  Ivi),  aged  nine,  certainly  did  herself 
proud  in  her  choice  of  soft  and  harmonious  colors,  perhaps  having 


PLATE  XXXIII 


Axx  Buller's  Sampler.     1786 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Charles  M.  Greene 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  99 

inherited  this  good  taste  from  her  mother.  The  story  runs  that  when 
Washington  visited  Newburyport  lie  was  entertained  at  a  house  where 
the  guest-chamber  bed  and  windows  were  draped  with  a  beautiful 
orange-yellow  India  print.  In  those  days,  neighbors  and  friends  were 
often  called  in  to  assist  and  criticize  the  arrangements  made  for  hous- 
ing illustrious  guests ;  and  Sarah's  mother,  happening  to  see  this  room, 
found  the  effect  so  charming  that  she  secured  the  pattern  of  the 
curtains,  bought  the  goods  in  Newburyport,  and  reproduced  them 
for  her  daughter's  bed  when  she  was  married  in  1831.  Sarah's  sampler 
still  hangs  in  the  room  adorned  by  these  draperies,  and  the  sprightly 
bird  which  she  embroidered  in  the  lower  left-hand  corner,  while  keep- 
ing a  watchful  eye  on  a  stag  facing  him  from  the  further  side  of  a 
basket  of  flowers,  has  an  air  of  casting  an  occasional  wink  across  the 
room  at  these  cheerful-looking  curtains,  as  much  as  to  say,  "You  and 
I  are  in  very  good  taste,  are  we  not?" 

Caroline  Maria  Welch,  the  maker  of  a  sampler  in  1827,  was  the 
descendant  of  John  Welch,  the  carver  of  the  sacred  Codfish  so  much 
revered  by  all  Bostonians,  which  once  occupied  the  proud  position 
of  weathervane.  It  is  now  preserved  in  the  museum  inside  of  the  old 
State  House.  This  disposes  of  the  story  that  it  fell  from  Heaven  into 
the  Frog  Pond. 

It  gives  one  real  pleasure  to  find  family  samplers,  long  separated 
by  the  breaking  up  of  homes,  brought  together  again  at  last  between 
the  covers  of  this  book.  This  is  the  case  with  the  work  of  the  Rine 
sisters,  probably  Pennsylvania  Dutch,  who  both  attended  Mrs.  Arm- 
strong's school  at  Lancaster,  Pennsylvania,  where  they  did  the  em- 
broidery. Fanny,  having  rather  the  best  of  it,  was  twelve  years  old, 
while  Wilamina  had  to  struggle  through  hers  at  the  tender  age  of  six. 
No  wonder  that  the  younger  child's  flowers  and  vines  are  a  bit  clumsier 
in  workmanship. 

We  know  that  the  Pennsylvania  Dutch,  as  the  early  German 
settlers  of  that  region  were  called,  produced  many  samplers,  for  the 
children's  names  betray  their  Teutonic  origin.  Their  fathers  and 
mothers  must  have  inspired  or  exacted  awe,  for  the  children  often 


100  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

"Respectfully  present"  the  finished  product  to  then*  parents.  A  cer- 
tain sort  of  weeping  willow  must  have  been  indigenous  to  that  part 
of  the  country,  as  it  frequently  appears  on  these  samplers.  Sarah 
Yeakel  (Plate  Ivii),  1806,  shows  one  growing  beside  her  hilltop 
house,  evidently  buffeted  by  a  strong  easterly  wind.  A  velvety  lawn 
in  different  shades  of  green  sweeps  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  hill, 
where  some  sheep  are  browsing  in  the  shade  of  a  large  tree,  while  in 
the  distance  others  are  seen.  But  unfortunately  the  perspective  fails 
here  and  the  meadow  stops  at  the  nearer  sheep,  leaving  the  others 
suspended  in  mid-air.  Near  the  house,  a  thoroughly  English  peacock 
suns  himself — a  rather  unusual  variety,  however,  boasting  only  eight 
large  feathers  to  his  tail. 

Poplar  trees,  owing  to  their  contour,  always  lend  themselves  well 
to  embroidery;  but  Anna  Sophia  Beckwith  (Plate  Iviii),  1829,  makes 
it  distinctly  understood  that  her  farmhouse  stood  in  a  "Poplar  Grove", 
and  has  labeled  it  accordingly.  It  conveys  the  impression  that  farmers 
of  that  day  understood  the  art  of  placing  their  houses  happily,  for 
although  in  a  valley  it  looks  well  swept  by  breezes,  and  the  dark 
shutters  tightly  closed  seem  calculated  to  keep  out  the  heat. 

Nancy  Piatt  (Plate  lix),  1804,  presumably  lived  in  a  house  on 
a  terrace,  above  a  row  of  poplars.  Whether  or  not  she  moved,  later 
on,  to  the  home  of  many  windows  pictured  below  the  terraced  one, 
outdoor  life  was  evidently  to  her  taste,  for  we  find  a  cow  and  a  dog 
of  almost  equal  size ;  and  can  it  be  Herself  on  horseback  ? 

Another  pair  of  sisters  reunited  in  these  pages  are  Betty  and  Sally 
Brierly.  They  each  cut  a  generous  piece  of  pale  blue  linen  as  a  ground- 
work— a  departure  from  the  usual  white  or  cream  color — which  very 
possibly  may  have  been  spun,  woven,  and  dyed  in  their  home,  not  an 
unusual  task  and  sometimes  done  by  the  maker  of  the  sampler.  Both 
girls  were  inspired  by  English  ideals,  especially  Betty  (Plate  Ix), 
as  her  chief  ornament  is  "A  Representation  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon 
or  the  House  of  the  Lord",  a  curiously  thin-walled  edifice  which 
frequently  appears  on  English  samplers,  but  which  is  rarely  seen  on 
those  made  in  this  country.     Betty's  five  fruit  trees  below  are  very 


PLATE  XXXIV 

Margaret  Rajisay's  Sampler.     Albany. 


1T89 


Owned  by  the  New  York  Society  of  the  Colonial  Dames, 
Van  Cortlandt  Manor,  New  York 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  101 

ornamental,  and  her  "Evening  Meditation  on  the  Crucification", 
though  serious,  is  a  less  lugubrious  poem  than  we  usually  find.  Sally 
Brierly,  two  years  later,  copied  her  sister's  complicated  strawberry 
border  and  also  some  of  the  detached  roses,  but  contented  herself  with 
a  much  smaller  and  more  practical  church,  which,  strange  to  say, 
appears  unmistakably  in  an  earlier  sampler  by  Sarah  Bancroft.  How 
interesting  it  would  be  if  we  could  identify  it ! 

Still  another  child  of  this  period.  Faith  Walker  (Plate  Ixi), 
erects  a  Solomon's  Temple  on  her  sampler,  but  makes  up  for  the 
absence  of  the  usual  court  by  an  ornamental  fence  with  arched  gate- 
ways. It  does  not  appear  that  either  child  tried  to  follow  very  clearly 
the  description  given  in  the  Bible.  Below  is  a  most  original  repre- 
sentation of  Adam  and  Eve,  the  latter  overshadowed  by  a  huge  rooster, 
and  the  "grand  old  gardener  and  his  wife"  both  sadly  in  need,  not 
only  of  clothes,  but  also  of  a  course  in  physical  culture.  Those  spindle 
shanks  must  have  made  the  journey  out  of  Eden  very  arduous. 

The  same  couple  are  much  more  fully  clothed  in  Elizabeth  Rowe 
Terry's  handiwork ;  as  a  matter  of  fact,  she  goes  to  the  other  extreme 
and  has  dressed  them  in  the  fashion  of  1828.  Fortunately,  as  the 
serpent  has  been  omitted,  they  are  labeled,  so  one  is  saved  from  the 
error  of  mistaking  them  for  Elizabeth's  relations.  Eve's  train  is  very 
stiff  and  heavy,  as  if  whaleboned.  Adam  shows  no  enthusiasm  for  the 
proffered  apple. 

In  the  nineteenth  century,  however,  our  first  parents  are  not  often 
depicted.  They  evidently  did  not  appeal  to  our  little  countrywomen's 
taste  for  original  design,  though  it  is  amusing  to  note  a  decided  lack 
of  originality  in  two  samplers  of  1820,  worked  by  sisters,  Abigail  and 
Mary  Harding.  They  are  precisely  alike;  perhaps  the  younger  girl 
tried  to  emulate  her  sister  in  everything,  as  little  sisters  are  apt  to  do. 
The  Reding  sisters,  INIary  A.  and  Harriet  Biron,  embroidered  pictures 
of  the  same  house  and  distant  landscape,  simply  viewed  from  a  differ- 
ent angle.  Another  copy  was  the  sampler  of  Phebe  Esther  Copp, 
1822,  which  w^as  almost  a  facsimile  of  that  of  her  grandmother  and 
namesake,  Esther  Copp,  worked  in  1765. 


102  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Not  only  temples  and  churches,  but  all  sorts  of  public  buildings 
are  found  on  the  samplers  of  this  century.  The  architecture  was  fre- 
quently curiously  modified  to  suit  the  whim  of  the  maker  or  to  meet 
the  exigencies  of  embroidery,  but  we  must  not  be  too  critical  so  long 
as  these  scenes  bear  a  sufficient  resemblance  to  the  original  or  are 
labeled.  Unfortunately  this  is  often  not  the  case,  and  many  imposing 
buildings  depicted  may  be  real  structures  and  not  merely  flights  of 
fancy,  although,  alas,  they  cannot  now  be  identified.  The  earliest 
samplers  of  this  kind  show  the  public  buildings  at  Providence, 
Rhode  Island,  and  for  those,  undoubtedly,  our  thanks  are  due  to  old 
"Marm"  Balch's  Select  Female  Academy,  a  description  of  which 
will  be  found  in  the  chapter  on  schools. 

On  many  of  these  samplers  stand  the  old  State  House  and  the 
buildings  of  Brown  University;  some  ambitious  children  combine 
the  two.  The  First  Congregational  Church  of  Providence  also  proved 
popular.  Sarah  F.  Sweet  has  embroidered  it  with  great  attention  to 
detail  and  with  the  inscription  that  it  was  destroyed  by  fire  on  June  14, 
1814.  On  another  unsigned  piece  of  work  we  see  the  same  church, 
minus  the  towers.  The  child  undoubtedly  meant  to  add  them,  but 
my  theory  is  that  she  started  to  use  too  many  alphabets  above,  and 
realizing  when  she  reached  R  that  she  had  encroached  too  far  on 
the  space  required,  she  stopped  short  in  discouragement,  leaving  a 
long,  loose  end  of  silk  running  down  and  then  upward  through  the 
linen,  to  prevent  it  from  tangling.     (See  Plate  Ixii.) 

A  still  more  ambitious  undertaking  is  that  of  jNIaria  Hopping, 
who  essayed  the  First  Baptist  Church  of  Providence.  We  should  be 
devoutly  thankful  that  this  church  in  real  life  did  not  share  the  fate 
of  its  Congregational  brother,  for  in  its  lovely  setting  of  green  it  still 
remains,  a  delight  to  the  eye.  She  has  erected  a  rather  ungainly  arch 
over  the  church,  with  curious  bases  and  capitals,  in  the  nature  of  some 
of  the  Family  Record  arches  or  those  used  in  the  Balch  school 
samplers,  only  less  graceful. 

Another  sampler  (Plate  Ixiii)  bearing  many  names,  but  with 
that  of  Saunders  predominating,  shows  the  building  of  the  College 


PLATE  XXXV 

Saii.y  Muxro's  Sampler.     Cir.  1790 

Probably  clone  at  Miss  Polly  Balch's  School 

Owned  by  the  Newport  Historical  Society 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  103 

of  William  and  JNIary  at  Williamsburg,  Virginia.  This  college  shares 
with  Harvard  the  honor  of  being  a  pioneer  institution  of  learning 
in  this  country,  and  dates  back  to  1681,  though  it  did  not  receive 
its  charter  till  1693.  Many  illustrious  men  received  their  education 
in  this  historic  place.  Their  parents  may  have  especially  approved  of 
sending  their  sons  to  a  college  whose  rules  forbade  any  student  keep- 
ing a  race  horse,  and  ordered  that  drinking  be  confined  to  the  modera- 
tion that  becomes  a  prudent  and  industrious  student.  It  is  truly 
appropriate  that  this  college  should  appear  as  chief  ornament  on  a 
piece  of  needlework,  for  one  of  the  officials  appointed  in  1761  was 
a  stocking  mender,  who  received  the  munificent  salary  of  twelve 
pounds  a  year.  The  buildings  are  pictured  as  standing  on  the  banks 
of  a  river  or  lake,  upon  which  float  several  boats.  This  must  be  taken 
as  poetic  license,  as  both  the  York  and  James  Rivers  are  some  miles 
away. 

The  "Old  Brick  Row"  of  Yale  University,  which  was  the  chief 
feature  of  the  college  until  about  thirty  years  ago,  when  all  but 
Connecticut  Hall  was  demolished,  is  to  be  found  on  a  most  interest- 
ing sampler  by  Emily  Clark  (Plate  Ixiv).  The  whole  scene,  though 
so  tiny,  is  unmistakable,  for  every  building  is  there,  as  well  as  some 
of  the  elms  which  in  those  days  overshadowed  them.  As  the  colors 
are  beautifully  harmonious  and  the  stitchery  quite  wonderful,  this  is 
a  specimen  which  leaves  very  little  to  be  desired. 

"Princeton  College"  (Plate  Ixv)  is  the  imposing  label  at  the 
top  of  an  early  nineteenth  century  sampler.  But  what  a  different 
scene  from  the  Princeton  we  now  know!  If  the  child  meant  to  show 
Nassau  Hall,  Princeton's  oldest  building,  she  altered  the  architecture 
very  materially.  Whatever  building  is  represented  is  probably  still 
standing,  but  at  present  we  cannot  discover  its  identity. 

Sally  Whittington,  who  lived  at  Annapolis,  chose  St.  Ann's 
Church,  a  notable  bit  of  early  architecture,  as  the  chief  ornament 
of  her  work  made  in  1819 ;  and  the  New  York  City  Hall  proved  equally 
decorative  as  embroidered  by  Elizabeth  Jane  Hamil  (Plate  Ixvi)  in 
1828,  with  the  tall  trees  on  either  hand  and  the  charmingly  shaded 


104  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

lawn  in  the  foreground — a  far  cry,  indeed,  to  the  same  building  in 
the  midst  of  the  seething  business  crowds  of  today. 

Independence  Hall,  in  Philadelphia,  birthplace  of  our  Declara- 
tion of  Independence,  lends  great  dignity  to  Ann  Macomber's  ( Plate 
xli)  work,  1799,  and  below  it,  with  only  half  of  the  building  on  the 
canvas,  she  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  Carpenter's  Hall,  where  our  First 
Congress  met.  As  the  two  views  stand  alone,  without  border  or  alpha- 
bet, this  sampler  has  a  rather  unusual  appearance. 

Eliza  F.  Budd  (Plate  Ixvii),  1808,  crowned  a  delightful  hillside 
landscape  with  the  courthouse  of  Mount  Holly,  New  Jersey.  There 
is  some  effort  at  perspective  in  the  broad  path  leading  up  to  the  build- 
ing on  the  hill,  planted  with  trees  alternating  in  shape,  and  with  one 
neat  tree  on  each  step  of  the  terrace.  There,  strange  to  say,  David 
guards  his  sheep  on  one  side  of  the  slope  and  Ruth  gleans  on  the 
other;  though  why  these  Biblical  characters  should  appear  in  the 
vicinity  of  Mount  Holly,  history  does  not  tell. 

This  form  of  sampler,  where  a  building  stands  directly  in  the 
center  on  a  hilltop,  with  trees  or  jardinieres  outlining  the  slope  on 
either  side,  is  quite  characteristic  of  the  period.  Sometimes  the  build- 
ing looks  like  a  castle  or  church,  sometimes  a  more  humble,  homelike 
structure.  A  group,  consisting  of  a  man  and  woman  and  strange 
varieties  of  domestic  animals,  generally  occupies  the  foreground. 
Little  "E.  T.'s"  sampler  man  looks  as  if  he  had  donned  an  Indian  suit 
and  headdress  for  the  occasion.  He  is  shown  offering  a  flower  to  a 
lady. 

Julia  Ann  Nivers  tastefully  arranged  on  her  canvas  all  the  public 
buildings  of  the  main  street  of  Crawford,  New  Hampshire,  and  added 
a  long  poem  entitled  "The  Young  and  Giddy",  and  in  smaller  letters, 
"Invited  to  Christ".     (See  tailpiece,  p.  254.) 

Palmyra  M.  Keen  gives  us  a  large  church,  a  schoolhouse,  and  two 
other  buildings ;  not  in  a  row,  as  in  a  village  street,  but  detached,  with 
a  grapevine  wandering  between.  Sophia  Stevens  Smith  (Plate  Ixviii), 
1818,  shows  the  white  church  at  North  Branford,  Connecticut,  a 
near-by  red  farmhouse,  and  a  bridge  over  which  an  imposing  coach 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  105 

is  passing.  The  whole  scene,  well  composed  and  crowned  by  a  grace- 
ful garland  of  flowers  and  bow-knots,  was  easily  recognizable  until  a 
few  years  ago,  when  the  church  was  burned  to  the  ground. 

Though  beyond  the  period  dealt  with  in  this  book,  it  is  interesting 
to  note  that  by  1839  the  custom  of  sampler  making  had  penetrated 
as  far  wxst  as  Missouri,  for  a  child  from  Brunswick,  in  that  state, 
embroidered  one  with  a  picture  of  the  "Methodist  Episcopal  Church." 

Two  varieties  of  sampler,  much  in  vogue  in  England  at  the  period 
of  which  I  write,  never  became  popular  in  our  country.  I  refer  to 
those  showing  the  darning  stitches  and  to  the  embroidered  maps. 
The  Dutch  were  probably  the  originators  of  the  darned  samplers, 
those  fine  pieces  of  work  where  squares  of  the  linen  groundwork  are 
cut  out  and  the  holes  filled  in  with  different  damask  patterns  worked 
in  contrasting  shades  of  silk;  where  "barn  door"  and  "winklehawk" 
tears,  purposely  made,  are  darned  so  as  to  be  almost  invisible  unless 
a  colored  thread  is  used.  The  English  embellished  this  work  of 
"stoppage"  still  further  by  using  baskets  or  bunches  of  flowers  as  a 
central  ornament,  with  a  different  darning-stitch  in  each  flower  and 
leaf.  For  some  unknown  reason,  very  little  of  this  w^ork  was  pro- 
duced here.  It  is  distressing  to  reflect  that  even  at  this  early  period 
our  national  sin  of  extravagance  betrayed  itself  in  our  failure  to  train 
the  young  in  the  art  of  repairing  and  conserving. 

One  of  the  happy  exceptions  is  the  work  of  Julia  Boudinot  ( Plate 
cxvi) ,  1800.  It  is  a  real  darned  sampler,  giving  about  thirty  different 
designs  of  darned  damask-stitch,  the  colored  silk  threads  running 
only  in  one  direction,  and  the  pattern  made  by  picking  up  the  threads 
of  the  groundwork  which  has  not  been  cut  away.  This  resembles  the 
only  French  darned  sampler  which  has  been  brought  to  my  notice, 
so  one  is  not  surprised  to  learn  that  the  Boudinots  were  French 
Huguenots.  They  lived  in  New^ark,  New  Jersey,  and  when  Julia's 
sister  married  a  Baltimorian  she  was  one  of  the  six  bridesmaids  who 
accompanied  the  happy  pair  to  their  home  in  Baltimore,  where  they 
all  spent  a  most  delightful  winter,  society  being  especially  gay  that 
season,  because  of  the  visit  of  Jerome  Bonaparte  and  his  officers. 


106  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

The  charming  Northern  girls  were  evidently  a  great  success,  for  the 
story  of  their  merry  pranks  and  many  festivities  is  still  remembered 
by  their  descendants. 

Mary  Gill  (Plate  Ixix),  of  Wilmington,  Delaware,  1814,  made 
a  similar  sampler,  but  she  used  white  cotton  and  only  made  six  squares, 
filling  the  seventh  square  in  the  center  with  a  sort  of  knitting-stitch, 
such  as  could  be  used  for  repairing  stockings.  Hannah  Bennet,  of 
Hubbardston,  1800,  in  addition  to  a  panel  in  which  three  boats  are 
being  rowed  up  hill,  worked  a  border  across  the  bottom  with  some 
damask  patterns,  but,  following  Mary  Gill's  example,  the  groundwork 
is  not  cut  out  and  the  threads  run  only  one  way. 

It  is  easier  to  understand  the  rarity  of  our  map  samplers,  as  an 
embroidered  map  of  our  whole  country  would,  indeed,  be  an  under- 
taking. The  English  children  turned  out  maps  of  "England,  Scot- 
land and  Wales"  by  the  dozen,  some  of  which  are  interesting  because 
of  the  originality  of  the  geography,  embellishments  in  the  way  of 
pretty  boats  or  ships  in  the  surrounding  waters,  or  a  figure  of  Britannia 
in  the  corner,  guarding  a  coat  of  arms.  Some  are  so  exact  in  design 
as  to  recall  the  fact  that  they  were  sometimes  printed  on  silk  and 
could  be  bought  in  shops  ready  to  embroider,  with  an  inscription 
such  as  "A  New  Map  of  Scotland  for  Ladies  Needlework,  1797". 
Mr.  Huish,  in  his  book,  gives  an  illustration  of  a  Map  of  North 
America  made  in  1738,  but  implies  that  it  was  an  English  production. 
It  is  amusing  as  an  example  of  the  general  conception  of  our  country 
at  that  time,  the  "parts  unknown"  occupying  a  very  large  area. 

Only  about  a  dozen  maps  of  American  origin  have  come  to  light, 
among  them  the  State  of  New  Jersey;  the  State  of  Maryland,  by 
Elizabeth  Susannah  Bowie;  and  also  one  of  Massachusetts,  by 
Elizabeth  Stevens  (Plate  cv),  made  in  Public  School  No.  13  in  New 
York. 

Elizabeth  Ann  Goldin  (Plate  Ixx)  exercised  her  utmost  skill, 
which  was  considerable,  on  a  map  of  the  State  of  New  York ;  not  only 
is  her  stitching  wonderful — it  is  hard  to  guess  how  she  procured  silk 
fine  enough  for  the  curls  and  tendrils  that  ornament  her  capitals — 


iii^*i^--?  tg^i  jitaiT  -=i£igx--^^5^-r^S 


H^^i 


^^i" 


*^iS 


m^m 


*"^"  ""     "~"  ^^«5^';;;.  -^^^z 


rtKiS',; 


•2 


Oh 


s 
6 


C^tsHT^St-^ 


^#^« 


'■■S:.-l 


^:= 


rsc;?aa 


^^jfe. '■■■■' 


^ 


■^_>v*-^ 


iif>Tiiiiir 


'A 


X   :: 


^:    r- 


^ 


Ism 


& 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  107 

but  she  had  a  turn  for  statistics  and  gives  valuable  information, 
namely,  that  the  population  of  New  York  State  in  1829  was  1,392,812 
and  that  "Long  Island  is  the  most  important  Island  belonging  to  the 
State  of  New  York,  140  miles  in  length  and  from  10  to  15  broad, 
contains  three  counties  and  numerous  flourishing  towns,  population 
87,000".  She  gives  also  this  bit  of  history:  "Lake  Erie  is  the  cele- 
brated scene  of  Perry's  victory  over  a  British  fleet,  September  10th, 
1813",  and  "Lake  Champlain  is  celebrated  for  the  victory  gained  by 
Macdonough  over  a  British  fleet  of  far  superior  force,  September, 
1814".  So  many  of  our  little  sampler  makers  seemed  to  have  died  in 
early  life  that  it  is  refreshing  to  know  that  Elizabeth  Ann  lived  to  a 
ripe  old  age  and  is  buried  in  the  cemetery  at  Watkins  Glen,  New  York. 

Betsy  Scott  made  a  very  large,  clear  map  of  England  and  Wales, 
and  we  have  also  a  very  pretty  little  "New  Map  of  France"  embroid- 
ered by  a  small  American  child.  But  the  most  original  of  all  is  the 
map  of  North  and  South  America,  by  Frances  Wade  (Plate  Ixxi), 
1798,  for  the  "Great  War"  has  not  played  such  havoc  with  the  map 
of  Europe  as  did  the  little  needlewoman  with  the  countries  of  our 
hemisphere.  Chili  and  Patagonia  have  changed  places ;  the  "Amazon 
country"  occupies  a  big  section  of  Brazil;  Florida  is  more  than  half 
as  large  as  the  portion  marked  "United  States".  New  Mexico  is  even 
larger,  and  Louisiana  is  tucked  in  snugly  above,  right  in  the  heart 
of  the  Continent ;  while  Canada,  a  detached  section  toward  the  top  of 
the  map,  does  not  touch  the  United  States  at  all.  Altogether  it  would 
be  difficult  to  find  a  more  unusual  conception  of  the  Western  Hemi- 
sphere, and  one  wonders  if  it  was  due  to  a  vivid  imagination  or  to 
ignorance  on  the  part  of  her  instructors. 

Two  less  imaginative  but  even  more  courageous  children  actually 
embroidered  charts  of  the  world,  one  of  them  being  an  ambitious 
affair,  embellished  at  the  corners  with  allegorical  figures  of  Europe, 
Asia,  Africa,  and  America.     (See  Plate  xcii.) 

I  imagine  that  many  of  these  samplers  took  many  years  to  work, 
and  in  most  cases  one  such  effort  was  considered  sufficient  to  estab- 
lish a  reputation  for  proficiency  in  needlework;  but  cases  have  been 


108  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

found  where  one  child  made  two  samplers  in  one  year,  or  two  a  year 
or  so  apart.  Mary  Hatch,  in  1808,  set  an  example  in  industry  by 
embroidering  a  sampler  and  in  the  same  year  completing  a  most 
elaborate  pen-and-ink  drawing  of  the  State  of  New  York,  the  counties 
being  outlined,  the  rivers  and  even  the  turnpikes  traced;  altogether 
a  most  laborious  task. 

Here  and  there  we  find  a  child  incorporating  useful  bits  of  infor- 
mation from  other  branches  of  learning  on  her  work,  such  as  the 
"Boundaries  of  the  State  of  Connecticut"  on  Lucy  Ann  Jolinson's 
sampler,  1822,  and  Frances  Parker's  multiplication  table  done  at 
Piny  Grove,  Charles  City  County,  Virginia,  in  1800.  Frances  did 
not  waste  any  time  on  ornamentation,  not  even  as  much  as  did  the 
earlier  arithmetical  sampler  maker  mentioned  in  a  previous  chapter, 
but  contented  herself  with  marking  off  the  squares  in  plain  cross- 
stitch  and  placing  a  numeral  in  each. 

It  was  not  until  the  nineteenth  century  was  well  on  its  way  that 
the  American  Eagle  took  his  place  in  embroidery  as  an  emblem  of 
patriotism,  and  even  then  his  appearance  is  so  rare  as  greatly  to 
enhance  the  value  of  any  specimen  on  which  he  is  found.  His  rarity, 
however,  is  less  surprising  when  we  reflect  that  on  all  the  thousands 
of  English  samplers  we  see,  the  British  Lion  is  generally  conspicuous 
by  his  absence. 

South  Carolina  contributes  the  first  of  the  species  in  a  truly 
patriotic  form,  for  the  pennant  in  the  eagle's  beak  is  inscribed  with 
the  word  "Independence"  and  he  is  surrounded  by  stars.  On  those 
of  Sarah  S.  Caldwell,  1806,  and  Ann  Eliza  Eyre,  1829,  he  is  suspended 
in  the  sky  above  a  rural  landscape,  his  wings  outspread  and  the  shield 
upon  his  breast.     (See  Plate  Ixxii.) 

Mary  Hallowell,  at  the  very  end  of  this  period,  made  her  eagle 
look  so  singularly  like  a  dove  of  peace — even  giving  him  an  olive 
branch  to  carry — that  it  requires  the  surrounding  stars  and  a  study 
of  ornithology  to  identify  him  positively.  However,  in  those  peaceful 
days  he  could  afford  to  cultivate  this  resemblance.  JMargaret  Moss 
(Plate  Ixxiii),  1825,  makes  him  resplendent;  bearing  two  American 


s 

o 

ao 

«» 

Ci 

« 

QD 

■4-^ 

t- 

•K^l 

I— 1 

HM 

— 1 

s: 

-v* 

'-H 

^ 

^ 

>t 

", 

^ 

r  1 

X 
X 

< 

1^ 

o 

C3 

s 

o 

^ 

Ob 

<; 

*^ 

<* 

^ 

6 

S 

> 

^ 
O 

as 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  109 

flags  in  his  claws  and  an  E  plurihus  unum  streamer  in  his  beak.  He 
hovers  over  an  animated  scene,  in  which  we  see  a  red  house,  sheep  and 
shepherd,  cows  and  beehive  (around  which  the  bees  fly  most  symmetri- 
cally), while  the  father  and  mother  stroll  in  the  sunshine,  watching 
their  three  children  at  play.  In  a  wreath  in  the  upper  corner,  sup- 
ported by  cherubs  clad  in  dark  undershirts,  Margaret's  name  and  the 
date  of  her  work  are  recorded;  and  in  the  pendant  the  death  date, 
presumably  of  a  grandmother,  aged  eighty.  This  sampler  came 
from  the  vicinity  of  Philadelphia,  and  the  house  is  said  to  represent 
William  Penn's  little  brick  home  which  stands  in  Fairmount  Park. 
To  be  sure,  it  is  a  story  higher  than  the  original,  but  that  is  an  un- 
important detail.  Can  it  be  that  the  male  figure  is  intended  for 
William  himself?  It  would  not  be  an  anachronism  to  have  his  wife 
gayh"  clad,  as  she  was  not  a  Quakeress. 

Another  heraldic  animal,  a  cross  between  a  dog  and  a  lion,  and 
wearing  a  crown,  a  frequent  figure  on  English  work,  peeps  out  from 
the  corner  of  Emmeline  Ivins's  attractive  house  at  Mechanicks  Town. 
A  crown  is  another  Tory  emblem  which  is  rare  in  this  country,  and 
usually  indicates  an  English  origin. 

Lucy  P.  Wyman,  1810,  uses  the  aces  of  hearts,  diamonds,  clubs, 
and  spades  in  her  design,  which  strikes  one  as  rather  odd  in  a  day 
when  cards  were  usually  taboo  in  a  respectable  community. 

Other  bits  of  design  characteristic  of  European  countries  often 
crop  out  in  American  samplers  in  most  unexpected  places  and  appar- 
ently without  reason,  such  as  the  spies  bearing  the  grapes  of  Eschol 
or  the  gnarled  pear  trees  on  one  of  the  Brierly  samplers,  both  of  which 
patterns  might  have  been  transplanted  from  the  Dutch  samplers, 
where  they  were  favorites.  The  "West  Town"  School,  near  Phila- 
delphia, and  "Nine  Partners"  School,  near  New  York,  frequently 
used  the  geometric  figures  characteristic  of  those  from  the  Vierlande, 
in  Northern  German3\  Still  others,  composed  entirely  of  detached 
motives — baskets  of  flowers,  wreaths,  etc. — need  only  the  addition 
of  a  broken  column  or  two,  and  a  Temple  of  Love  or  a  grotto,  to  make 
them  resemble  the  rare  early  French  samplers  covered  with  patterns 
to  be  used  on  embroidered  waistcoats. 


110 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


Early  in  the  last  century,  the  custom  arose  of  making  samplers 
serve  the  double  purpose  of  decorative  needlework  and  a  record  of  the 
family  births,  marriages,  and  deaths.  This  idea,  in  its  simplest  form, 
originated  perhaps  fifty  years  before,  but  was  never  fully  developed 
till  later,  when  it  gained  rapidly  in  favor  and  very  many  were  made. 
They  are  generally  inscribed,  "Genealogy",  "Family  Register",  or 
"Family  Record"  (in  one  case  spelled  Rechord),  and  seem  to  have 
been  a  purely  American  specialty.  Many  of  the  records  are  simply 
worked  on  straight  lines  in  cross-stitch,  with  only  a  narrow  border  for 
decoration — very  dull  affairs  except  for  the  immediate  descendants, 
or  where  there  is  some  historical  interest  attached,  as  in  the  sampler  of 
Sophia  Smith,  the  founder  of  Smith  College. 

Another  type  manages  to  be  decorative  as  well  as  genealogical, 
for  many  of  them  have  architectural  pillars  at  the  sides  and  an  arch 
over  the  top,  frequently  beautified  with  garlands  of  flowers.  Dorcas  A. 
Kelly,  who  was  born  and  lived  at  Mendon  (called  Men  on  the  sam- 
pler), Massachusetts,  and  also  Betsy  Cleveland,  inscribed  on  their 
floral  arches,  "Keep  sacred  the  memory  of  thy  Ancestors".  On  several 
others,  one  of  them  the  Loring  Family  Record  (Plate  Ixxiv),  the 
following  lines  are  found  carefully  stitched  in  the  lower  corners : 


The  duty 
of    parents    in 
bringing  up  their 
children  is  great  and 
important  no  one  will  deny 
that  good  example  set  before 
children  will  induce   them 
to  follow  the  like   example 
and    may   lay   a    founda- 
tion for  their  usefulness 
in  the   world   and  a 
blessing  to  their 
parents. 


The  duty 
of  children  to- 
wards  parents   is  e- 
qually  great  and  impor- 
tant the  great  god  of heaven 
and  earth  has  given  a  com- 
mand to  children  to   honour 
their  parents  that  their  days 
may  be  long  upon  the  land 
children  would  do  well 
to  observe  this  great 
commandment. 
»     .     * 


One  can  imagine  that  enumerating  the  duties  of  parents  to  their 
children  was  a  far  more  congenial  as  well  as  important  task  to  the 
childish  mind  than  the  dry  recital  of  their  duties  to  their  parents. 
Usually  these  genealogies  only  give  the  names  of  two  generations, 
those  of  the  parents  and  children,  but  occasionally  the  grandparents' 
names  also  appear. 


■* 


;j»i^I^;J:-:3 


fmmsm'S^m.m  *»:*■*»*»« 


aasi^iwcafeiMiaw 


ii«ii»iPffiif^ 


iHf^ 


i 


PLATE  XXXVIII 

Zebiah  Gore's  Sampler.     Boston.     1791 
Owned  by  Miss  Mary  H.  Leeds 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  111 

Harriet  Van  Wart,  in  1822,  at  the  age  of  thirteen,  embroidered 
a  most  elaborate  Family  Record,  thirty  inches  square.  It  would  seem 
almost  the  work  of  a  lifetime,  as  she  gives  the  names  of  her  grand- 
parents, both  paternal  and  maternal,  her  parents,  also  those  of  her 
thirteen  brothers  and  sisters,  with  dates  of  birth  and  deaths,  all  of 
these  without  abbreviation.  Chain-stitching  in  human  hair  separates 
the  groups  of  genealogical  data. 

Second  and  third  marriages  seem  to  have  been  very  general,  and 
the  children  bestowed  equal  care  in  recording  the  names  of  mother 
and  stepmother.  Eliza  Ann  Hunt,  in  1824,  does  this  in  a  pretty  way 
by  entwining  three  hearts.  The  upper  left-hand  heart  is  devoted  to 
the  father's  name  and  date  of  birth;  the  upper  right-hand  heart  has 
one  lobe  assigned  to  the  mother,  the  other  to  the  stepmother;  while 
the  lower  inverted  heart  gives  the  two  marriages,  one  on  each  lobe. 
In  addition  to  the  genealogy,  this  sampler  shows  an  unusually  tall 
house  of  four  stories,  surrounded  by  spacious  grounds  and  lofty  trees. 

Jane  E.  Blatchford,  1814,  records  the  birth  of  seventeen  children 
between  the  dates  of  December,  1788,  and  March,  1811.  With  so 
many  brothers  and  sisters,  one  would  think  that  she,  as  well  as  the 
mother,  would  have  had  their  hands  too  full  to  embark  on  such  a  piece 
of  needlework.  In  our  utilitarian  age,  we  do  not  attempt  elaborate 
phraseology;  but  a  century  ago,  parents  were  "United  in  Marriage" 
or  "Departed  this  Life",  and  children  occasionally  listed  under  the 
head  of  "Progeny",  with  little  economic  regard  for  the  number  of 
stitches. 

One  of  the  earliest  and  handsomest  of  these  family  registers  is 
that  made  in  1802  by  Harriet  Jones  (Plate  Ixxv),  the  daughter  of 
William  Jones,  governor  of  Rhode  Island  from  1811  to  1817,  a  man 
who  could  boast  of  a  varied  career  previous  to  that  time.  During 
the  Revolution,  he  first  held  a  commission  in  Babcock's  regiment,  then 
became  Captain  of  Marines  on  the  frigate  Providence,  and  was  after- 
wards the  bearer  of  dispatches  to  Benjamin  Franklin  in  Paris  and 
the  first  delegate  from  the  United  States  to  be  received  at  the  French 
court.    The  record  is  a  pathetic  one,  because  of  the  fact  that  of  his  six 


112  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

children  only  two  survived.  Four  little  urns  in  a  row  surmount  a 
tomb  on  which  their  names  are  inscribed,  with  this  verse  below  the 
dates  of  their  deaths : 

"These  tender  blossoms  of  the  opening  year, 
e^  Secure  from  harms  still  claim  a  parents  tear." 

Another  sampler  records  the  birth  of  a  still-born  child.  It  is  sad 
to  find  how  great  was  the  mortality  among  the  young  children  of  large 
families.  From  Geneva,  New  York,  comes  the  cry  of  poor  little 
Catherine  Meach,  who  in  1824  bewails  the  loss  of  four  small  brothers 
and  sisters  "all  removed  from  this  world  in  the  course  of  five  months" ; 
she  adds,  "This  little  tribute  of  affection  is  recorded  by  a  sister  who 
deeply  mourns  their  loss". 

In  many  of  these  genealogies,  below  the  lines  of  names  and  dates, 
willow  trees  are  to  be  seen  shading  elaborate  monuments,  inscribed 
with  the  names  or  simply  the  initials  of  departed  members  of  the 
family.  These  closely  resemble  the  tombs  so  often  found  on  the  em- 
broidered pictures  of  the  period,  or  recall  the  designs  of  the  mourning 
rings  and  brooches  which  were  so  popular  with  our  ancestors.  Little 
Betsy  Cook  may  have  been  naturally  of  a  gloomy  disposition,  or 
perhaps  was  depressed  by  the  verse  she  embroidered,  so  common 
on  samplers : 

"This  work  in  hand  my  friends  may  have, 
W^hen  I  am  dead  and  laid  in  grave." 

In  either  case,  she  was  feeling  pretty  pessimistic  about  her  future  when 
she  placed  a  little  tomb,  surmounted  by  an  urn,  under  the  usual  willow 
tree,  and  carefully  labelled  it  "Miss  B.C."  Ruthy  Trufry,  of  Port- 
land, 1807,  embroidered  a  row  of  little  tombstones  under  her  weeping 
willows,  all  ready  for  the  inscriptions  should  any  one  of  the  family 
pass  away.  But  only  one  stone,  bearing  the  parents'  initials,  evidently 
was  needed  in  her  lifetime.  Poor  little  Ruthy  had  a  hard  time  with 
the  corners  of  her  rather  unusual  border  and,  after  all,  failed  to  make 
the  ends  of  the  vine  meet  at  the  bottom.  Mary  A.  Gale,  1825,  beauti- 
fied her  symmetrical  record  by  placing  a  tiny  wreath  of  flowers  about 
each  name  and  date.    The  little  Sawyer  girl  evolved  a  rather  ingenious 


PLATE  XXXIX 


Sally  Baldwin's  Sampler.     Cir.  1794 
Owned  bi/  Edward  R.  TrowhrkUje,  Esq. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  113 

idea  for  working  in  a  little  genealogical  information.  She  makes  a 
border  of  elongated,  interlacing  wreaths,  in  which  she  places  the  births 
of  her  brothers  and  sisters.  Her  name  and  date,  done  in  black,  have 
gone  the  way  of  most  of  the  black  silk  of  those  days,  which  was 
dyed  in  iron  rust  and  disintegrated  sooner  than  the  colored  threads. 
Chariot  Chadwick  recorded  the  birth  of  a  little  brother  in  slightly 
different  colored  silk  (probably  her  silk  had  given  out),  just  after  she 
had  finished  the  sampler.  One  finds,  frequently,  that  deaths  have  been 
added  to  the  records  years  after  their  original  completion. 

In  a  few  instances,  the  records  take  the  form  of  a  real  tree,  with 
the  names  inscribed  on  the  pendant  fruit,  such  as  Lydia  Russell's  tree, 
1809,  which  grows  in  a  meadow  surrounded  by  an  elaborate  landscape, 
and  flanked  by  two  large  pedestals  or  tombs  on  either  side,  bearing 
the  parents'  names  and  supporting  jardinieres,  from  which  admirably 
trained  rose  vines  wander  to  the  top  of  the  sampler,  where,  in  a 
thoroughly  Lord  Lovell  and  Lady  Nancy  Bell  manner,  "they  en- 
twine in  a  true  lover's  knot  for  all  lovers  true  (of  samplers)  to  admire 
— mire — mire".  Lydia's  apples,  as  well  as  the  names  thereon,  are 
painted. 

Lucy  Wyman  (Plate  Ixxvi),  1807,  kept  strictly  to  embroidery. 
Her  tree  springs  from  entwined  hearts  bearing  her  parents'  names, 
and  she  provides  for  such  a  contingency  as  the  arrival  of  a  baby  brother 
or  sister  by  supplying  an  upper  branch  with  one  extra  apple,  left 
blank.  Another  quaint  and  somewhat  lugubrious  tree  has  branches 
bearing  portrait  heads  of  the  different  members  of  the  family  instead 
of  fruit. 

The  Rice  family  genealogy,  and  that  embroidered  by  Eliza  F. 
Parker,  1818,  can  be  mentioned  in  the  same  category.  The  former 
is  on  dark  linen,  and  the  tree  grows  poetically  out  of  two  hearts  that 
form  a  sort  of  jardiniere.  The  latter  has  some  delightful  shading 
on  the  wiggly  tree  trunk.  One  wishes  that  the  records  more  often 
took  this  truly  decorative  form. 

Finally,  there  is  a  type  of  register  where  the  genealogical  data 
(generally  rather  brief)   is  squeezed  into  some  vacant  corner,  occa- 


lU  AMERICAX  SAMPLERS 

sionally  seeming  the  result  of  an  after-thought,  as  in  the  work  of 
Elizabeth  Mclntire,  1807,  where  the  names  and  dates  crowd  a  pastoral 
scene,  in  which  we  see  cows  grazing  under  a  double  row  of  trees  on 
the  banks  of  a  canal  or  river,  with  a  row  of  houses  on  the  farther  side. 
(See  Plate  Ixxvii.) 

The  record  of  the  Lamborn  family  (undated),  formerly  in  Mr. 
Alexander  Drake's  collection,  is  of  this  same  type,  and  very  elaborate 
and  beautiful.  A  large  jardiniere  filled  with  flowers  stands  on  the 
top  of  a  grassy  knoll,  while  three  white  lambs  reposing  in  the  fore- 
ground seem  rather  overawed  by  the  size  of  the  flowers  growing  in 
the  meadow  about  them,  the  whole  being  gracefully  bordered  with 
flowers  at  the  sides  and  a  grape  vine  winding  across  the  top. 

Considering  that  so  much  of  this  American  needlework  came  from 
states  bordering  on  the  Atlantic,  it  is  astonishing  that  ships  and  boats 
did  not  figure  more  often  in  the  designs.  We  occasionally  see  them 
in  distant  views,  but  rarelv  with  such  fine  effect  as  on  Susan  Munson's 
skillful  work,  1824.  Her  unique  contribution  is  the  good  ship  Potosi, 
in  black  with  white  sails,  American  flag  and  ensign,  on  a  light  green 
sea.  Behind  it  she  shows  a  blue  and  white  sky,  with  a  rainbow,  moon, 
and  star.  She  has  placed  the  ship  in  the  center  of  the  sampler,  and 
on  either  side  of  it  the  words : 

From  Rocks  O  God 

Shoals  and  Protect  the 

Stormy  Potosi 

Weather  ever. 

A  Is  a 

Rainbow  Sailors 

at  night  delight.    (See  Plate  Ixxxii.) 

As  we  have  seen,  the  samplers  of  the  nineteenth  century  were  used 
for  all  sorts  of  purposes  and  to  commemorate  many  different  events, 
having  traveled  far  from  their  original  purpose  of  simply  preserving 
valuable  patterns  in  convenient  form.  Sarah  Hillhouse,  1810,  chose 
a  long  poem  entitled  "The  Hermit"  as  the  j^i^ce  de  resistance  of  her 
work,  one  utterly  devoid  of  interest  to  a  child.  Let  us  hope  she  did 
not  realize  how  dull  the  poem  was.  Another  sampler,  depicting  a  rural 
scene,  eulogizes  Washington: 


PLATE  XL 


LoAxx  Smith's  Sampler.     Providence.     1785 

Done  at  Miss  Polly  Balcii's  School 
Oxcned  lnj  the  Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  115 

"Mourn  Hapless  Brethern  Deeply  mourn, 
The  source  of  every  joy  is  fled. 
Our  Father  dear,  the  Friend  of  Man, 
The  Godlike  Washington  is  dead." 

It  was  made  by  Eliza  Thomas,  in  1804,  but  probably  was  begun  nearer 
the  time  of  Washington's  death.  Still  another  one  of  much  later  date 
commemorates  the  death  of  McPherson,  with  a  poem  of  seventeen  lines 
bidding  "Columbia  mourn". 

Hannah  J.  Robinson  (Plate  Ixxviii),  1818,  embroidered  what  we 
might  call  a  missionary  sampler,  in  which  "every  prospect  pleases", 
man,  fortunately,  being  omitted.  An  eagle  perches  upon  a  tablet 
inscribed  with  a  verse,  "The  Spread  of  the  Gospel";  flowering  vines 
on  either  side  entwine  around  tall  stakes,  making  a  novel  border,  the 
whole  surrounded  by  a  solid  black  band  of  cross-stitch,  on  which  is 
Hannah's  name  in  white.  This  border  resembles  the  black  mats 
painted  on  glass  and  edged  with  gold,  so  often  used  in  framing  old 
prints  and  memorial  pictures. 

In  1821,  Lucinda  Brooks's  sampler  took  the  form  of  an  embroid- 
ered Marriage  Certificate  of  herself,  aged  sixteen,  and  Ruben  Dade, 
aged  twenty- two,  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other  these  words : 

"May  the  cares  that  bind  the  covetous  never  disturb  our  peace. 
May  we  yield  therefore  one  to  the  other  and  be  equally  yoked  together 
in  the  command  of  God.  May  neither  of  us  seek  basely  to  through  an 
undue  weight  on  the  other's  shoulders.  Suffer  no  interference  from 
any  other  to  interrupt  our  harmony.  We  are  connected  for  life, 
nothing  can  separate  our  fate  in  this  world.  Oh,  let  nothing  divide 
our  affections.  May  we  regard  each  other  with  the  fullest  confidence, 
the  least  spark  of  suspicion  from  either  might  forever  blast  the  com- 
fort of  both.    There  can  be  no  harmony  where  there  is  no  faith." 

Sixteen  seems  a  very  early  age  to  commit  matrimony,  but  we  find  that 
Elizabeth  Floyd,  also  a  sampler  maker,  was  married  at  Smithtown, 
Long  Island,  at  the  age  of  fifteen. 

A  curious  effusion  is  found  on  the  handiwork  of  Catherine  Snyder, 
of  Clarkstown,  New  York,  made  in  1800.    It  reads: 

"DIALOGUE" 

Men  "Tell  us  O  Woman,  we  would  know 

Whither  so  fast  we  move 
Women  We  called  to  leave  the  World  below 

Are  seeking  one  above 
Men  Whence  came  ye,  sa — " 


116  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

There  it  ends,  unfortunately,  as  we  would  greatly  enjoy  knowing 
whence  they  came. 

A  romantic  interest  attaches  itself  to  the  three  samplers  made  by 
a  son  and  two  daughters  of  the  Gauffreau  family  (Plate  Ixxix),  who 
immigrated  to  New  York  from  St.  Barthelemey,  one  of  the  Leeward 
Islands,  in  1815.  The  oldest  girl  lived  to  be  eighty-seven,  and  her 
account  of  the  family's  terrible  experiences  in  San  Domingo,  handed 
down  from  her  mother,  is  still  remembered.  During  the  slave  insur- 
rection of  1791,  the  members  of  the  family  had  a  narrow  escape,  having 
been  saved  by  a  faithful  slave,  who  hid  them  in  an  abandoned  chicken 
house  and  then  conducted  them  by  night  to  the  coast,  whence  they 
fled  to  Philadelphia.  All  these  sampler  inscriptions  are  in  French, 
and,  indeed,  the  one  embroidered  by  the  boy  Fortune  was  made  before 
coming  to  this  country,  and  is  therefore  not  strictly  American.  It  is 
interesting  as  being  the  only  one  of  this  period  made  by  a  boy,  although 
boys'  samplers  are  sometimes  found  in  Europe  and  INIexico.  The  girls, 
Louisa  and  Celestine,  dated  theirs  from  New  York.  Louisa  seems 
to  have  been  especially  fond  of  her  mother,  for  she  dedicated  her 
work  to  ''Ma  Mere''  and  accompanied  it  with  some  pretty  verses 
and  emblems  of  affection. 

Speaking  of  boys'  samplers,  the  signature  of  a  bo}^,  George  Terrell, 
is  found  with  her  name  on  the  work  of  Margareta  Whann,  but  one 
cannot  tell  whether  or  not  he  helped  with  the  embroidery.  Possibly 
he  furnished  the  design,  but  if  so  he  was  not  a  very  skillful  draughts- 
man, for  the  vine  border  wanders  aimlessly  about  and  the  central  oval 
containing  the  house  and  landscape  is  oddly  irregular.  We  forget, 
however,  these  shortcomings  in  the  charm  of  the  coloring  of  the  grass, 
the  trees,  and  the  pretty  draperies  above,  held  back  by  little  cords  and 
tassels.  This  feature,  i.  e.,  the  draperies,  is  generally  reserved  for  the 
sampler  scenes  where  it  is  desired  to  indicate  that  the  action  takes  place 
indoors.  AVe  see  it  on  a  choice  English  sampler  of  1767,  around  a 
group  of  charming  ladies  clad  in  stump-work  dresses,  with  real  lace 
fichus  and  headdresses,  who  are  sweeping  their  voluminous  trains 
across  a  tessellated  floor,  as  though  on  their  way  to  a  repast.    In  this 


: '"-^.-•"-  .J*' 


Ml 


,*:|..^  ^^ 


^1 

t 

^ 

1 

h- 

^- 

^ 

'^ 

^i 

u 

ii? 

i'- 

jC^ 

!ij 

g 

r 

«^ 

«■»«  :  :"  mm  '     ■"   J^;^'4 


^  ^ 


3 


^ 


*        . 

'as     £ 


S5    3 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  117 

case  the  curtains  are  also  in  stump-work.  Though  never  used  in  as 
elaborate  a  way,  the  American  samplers  made  at  Providence  quite 
often  resort  to  this  effect,  as  in  the  President's  Inaugural  Reception 
shown  on  Nancy  Hall's  (Plate  xcix)  sampler. 

Among  other  unusual  touches  that  add  interest  to  different  sam- 
plers we  may  mention  the  coach  and  four  horses  on  Priscilla  Ward's ; 
Melissa  INIarsh's  collection  of  sampler  stitches;  a  branch  of  autumn 
leaves  lending  a  note  of  color  to  the  background  of  Sally  Oliver's 
work;  the  hemstitching  and  fringing  done  by  Nancy  Merrill,  and 
bands  of  openwork  on  some  others. 

Several  unusual  samplers  of  a  very  distinctive  type  have  come  to 
light,  consisting  of  a  groundwork  of  white  net,  without  any  border, 
on  which  are  patterns  of  needle-run  lace,  such  as  was  in  vogue  about 
1825  (Plate  Ixix).  One  of  these  samplers,  which  is  in  the  Philadel- 
phia Museum,  though  unsigned,  has  a  piece  of  paper  sewed  to  the  net 
on  which  a  name  is  written.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  more 
about  these  samplers,  but  very  little  information  is  forthcoming.  We 
have  to  content  ourselves  with  believing  that  the  facts  point  to  their 
probably  being  of  American  production  some  time  between  1820  and 
1830. 

Having  touched  on  most  of  the  varieties  to  be  seen  in  the  examples 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  one  comes  to  what  is  perhaps  the  most 
attractive  type,  the  design  which  shows  the  little  girl's  own  home. 
Such  is  the  sampler  of  Sopliia  Cutter,  1801,  where  a  particularly  cosy 
farmhouse  nestles  against  a  hillside  shaded  by  a  fine  tree,  enlivened 
by  three  large  birds  perching  near  by,  all  seeming  to  indicate  a  happy 
home  in  the  country ;  the  effect  only  marred  by  a  dreadfully  gloomy 
verse,  which  "like  a  worm  i'  the  bud  preys  on"  the  peaceful  scene. 

Usually  the  little  needlewomen  were  not  ultra-realistic,  but  allowed 
a  playful  fancy  to  improve  upon  every-day  life;  especially  on  the 
sampler  lawns  do  we  meet  most  delightful,  unusual  things.  There 
gigantic  strawberries  grow  in  orderly  rows;  beside  them  graze  many 
strange  animals,  such  as  antlered  dogs  and  sheep;  sometimes  two 
white  horses  make  a  meal  of  strawberries.     Perhaps  a  gentleman 


118  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

advances  across  the  lawn,  hat  in  hand,  to  greet  a  lady  with  a  fan,  or 
a  man  is  seen  fishing  from  a  pond  set  in  the  midst  of  the  grass,  but  all 
has  a  charming  air  of  "make-believe";  and  it  is  only  occasionally 
that  we  come  upon  a  scene  such  as  Polly  Parker,  of  Bradford,  em- 
broidered in  1802,  which  is  truly  pastoral,  and  more  like  the  "petit- 
point"  pictures  of  a  far  earlier  period.  In  this  sampler,  the  shepherd's 
expression  as  he  pipes  to  his  lady-love,  seated  in  a  bosky  dell,  is  almost 
too  sweet  to  be  borne,  and  we,  as  well  as  the  sheep  dog,  share  her 
embarrassment.  We  often  find  incongruities  in  color  as  well  as  in 
perspective  and  proportion.  A  lovely  border  of  pink  roses  admirably 
shaded  in  natural  colors  will  suddenly  break  out  into  a  bright  blue  rose 
at  the  top.  Did  the  child  weary  of  pink,  and  take  liberties  in  the 
absence  of  her  mother  or  teacher;  or  had  she,  perhaps,  heard  of  the 
legend  that  a  blue  rose  means  happiness  or  love — or,  at  least,  some- 
thing pleasant  to  dream  of? 

Mary  Ann  Fessenden  Vinton  (Plate  Ixxx) ,  1814,  makes  her  work 
as  nearly  like  a  memorial  picture  as  possible,  and  yet  keeps  it  a  true 
sampler,  and  has  cleverly  arranged  the  alphabet  and  numerals  in 
different  styles,  so  as  to  form  a  narrow  inner  border  around  the  tomb 
and  the  weeping  female,  the  ornate  rose  border  being  quite  different 
in  character  from  the  earlier  conventionalized  pattern.  Olive  E. 
Hewins,  of  Boston,  1829,  has  done  very  much  the  same  thing,  except 
that  there  is  no  note  of  sadness  about  her  wide-awake  young  lady, 
clad  in  the  dress  and  coiffure  of  the  period,  and  the  landscape  is  en- 
riched with  chenille.  Elizabeth  Williams,  of  Baltimore,  uses  a  similar 
border,  and  depicts  a  very  spacious  Colonial  house  set  in  a  lawn,  across 
which  the  sun  casts  shadows  that  are  lovely  in  coloring.  The  proverbial 
Southern  hospitality  had  its  influence  on  the  young  sampler  makers, 
and  nearly  all  of  their  productions  show  generous-sized  mansions, 
capable  of  housing  many  guests.  Eliza  Picket's  (Plate  Ixxxi)  canvas 
has  given  us  a  particularly  spacious  house  of  this  type,  with  wings 
on  either  side ;  in  fact,  it  is  so  large  that  she  has  not  left  room  for  any- 
thing else  except  a  rose  border  and  her  name  and  age,  even  the  date 
being  omitted. 


PLATE  XLII 

Patty  Coggeshai.l's  Sajipi.er.     Bristol.     Cir.  1795 
Ozc'iied  by  the  Metropolitan  Mu-ieum  of  Art,  Xem  York- 
Plate  presented  by  Mrs.  Bayard  Thayer 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  119 

Aimena  Sherman  shows  an  amusing  scene.  The  imposing  house 
does  not  take  up  as  much  room  on  the  sampler  as  usual  (some  of  its 
shutters  are  invitingly  open,  showing  pretty  curtains,  while  other 
windows  are  tightly  closed),  so  there  is  space  for  ample  grounds,  with 
a  barn  at  one  side,  a  long  stretch  of  fence  and  a  road  in  front,  where  a 
procession  is  passing.  We  see  a  man  leading  a  horse  and  driving  three 
cows,  a  nurse  pulling  a  very  archaic  baby  carriage,  a  laborer  going 
to  work,  and  a  woman  leading  a  dog,  all  combining  to  make  an  ani- 
mated scene,  the  proportions  throughout  being  surprisingly  good. 

But  of  these  pictured  houses,  the  one  above  all  others  in  which 
I  would  choose  to  live  is  that  created  by  Hannah  Kibbes,  1806.  It  is 
embroidered  on  dark  green  tammy,  which  gives  a  mellow,  warm  tone. 
The  house,  viewed  from  a  slight  angle,  is  approached  by  a  winding 
path  leading  up  to  the  door,  on  which  hangs  an  engaging  knocker. 
On  one  side,  an  arbor,  shaded  by  a  sturdy  grape  vine,  forming  the 
border  across  the  top  of  the  sampler ;  on  the  other,  a  well,  with  hang- 
ing bucket,  offers  refreshment — how  many  pleasant  days  could  be 
spent  in  such  a  spot !  To  be  sure,  the  well  is  very  near  tlie  house,  and 
in  real  life  might  be  infected  with  typhoid  and  other  noxious  germs; 
but  sampler-land  has  its  advantages — disagreeable  things  simply  do 
not  exist.  The  poets  of  this  happy  country  are,  one  must  confess, 
a  rather  gloomy  band,  but  no  doubt  their  morbid  lines  have  but  little 
effect  on  the  peaceful  atmosphere  of  the  embroidered  scenes,  where 
large  families  can  live  happily  in  small  houses,  where  flowers  never 
fade,  where  there  is  always  leisure  and  every  one  looks  happy.  If 
laborers  rest  on  their  rakes  it  does  not  trouble  us,  as  the  crops  are  never 
spoiled;  the  sunny  summer  afternoon  is  just  comfortable  for  sitting 
out  of  doors  in  pretty  clothes;  though  flies  and  insects  sometimes 
assume  large  proportions,  they  never  molest.  Long  live  this  happy 
sampler-land,  a  delightful  refuge  for  the  imagination  in  times  of  stress 
and  worry ! 

Soon  after  1830,  a  general  deterioration  may  be  noticed  in  both 
the  quality  of  workmanship  and  the  number  of  samplers  produced; 
perhaps  the  demand  for  a  slightly  wider  education  for  girls  may  have 


120 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


led  them  to  devote  less  time  and  care  to  the  art  of  needlework;  but 
more  probably  it  was  due  to  the  craze  for  Berlin  wool-work,  with  its 
garish  colors,  coarse  cross-stitch,  and  banal  designs,  which  spread 
across  the  ocean,  the  mothers  and  teachers  thinking  the  new  patterns 
and  methods  more  modish,  and  wishing  their  daughters  to  be  up-to- 
date.  Whatever  the  cause,  the  custom  gradually  died  out,  and  so 
ended  the  most  prolific  and  characteristic  period  of  American  samplers. 

Eva  Johnston  Coe. 


Lucy  Cushing's  Sampler.     1792 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Paul  Blatchford 


REGISTER  OF  SAMPLERS,  1800-1830 

AcKERMAN,  Elizabeth.  1808?  [Born  in  1799.]  8"  x  16i".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.  Cross-borders,  with  tree,  birds,  dog,  chair,  woman,  and  small  floral  designs.  Verse 
343  (1).  Mrs.  Lucien  Lee  Kinsolving 

Adams,  Ellen  E.  11  yrs.  16\"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  cross,  and  satin-stitch.  Rose  and 
grape  borders.  House  with  trees  and  grass.  "Under  instruction  of  C.  Rockwood." 
Verses  179,  394.  Miss  Mary  C.  Wheelwright 

Adams,  Ltdia.  1814.  [Newington,  N.  H.]  14  yrs.  8"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Hemstitched  edge.  Strawberry  cross-border.  [Parents,  Samuel  Adams  and  Lydia  Cole- 
man.] Mrs.  Paul  H.  McMillin 

Alden,  Cyxthia.  1802.  Claremont,  Mass.  Born  August  10,  1784.  13"  x  14^".  4  alphabets. 
Cat  and  cross-stitch.    Cross-lines  and  cross-borders  in  simple  designs.     Verses  40,  247. 

Mrs.  Lathrop  C.  Harper 

Alger,  Abby.     1802.     11  yrs.     12"  x  11".    3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.    Verse  676  (1). 

George  H.  Havens,  Esq. 

Allen,  Chloe.    1802.    6  yrs.     17"  x  8".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  343  (1). 

The  Misses  Austin 

Allek,  Elizabeth  W.  1821.  10  yrs.  16"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Queen  and  cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.    Verse  90.  The  Misses  Austin 

Allex,  Maby.  1824.  14"  x  15^".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Verse 
472.  Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park 

Allex,  Polly  Axx.  1821.  Born  in  1810.  Connecticut.  7|"  x  7|".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Simple  border.  Mrs.  Harry  Hale  Goss 

Allen,  Sarah.     1823.     11  yrs.    8"  x  Hi".    3  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Vernette  R.  Mowry 

Allen,  Waity.     1802.    9  yrs.     18"  x  18*".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.     Verse  343  (1). 

The  Misses  Austin 

Alleyne,  Dorothy  Deborah  Foster.  1800.  12V'  x  8".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hem- 
stitched edge.  Mrs.  B.  M.  Chickering 

Almy,  Ruth.  1803.  9  yrs.  17"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Verses 
612,  614.  Mrs.  Howard  I.  Gardner 

Almy,  Ruth.  1810-1811.  19"  x  17".  Cro.ss-stitch.  Birds  and  flowers.  Ovals  containing 
initials  and  dates.  Mrs.  Howard  I.  Gardner 

Anderson,  Catherine.  1808.  [Stockton,  N.  J.  12  yrs.]  15"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Border,  a  single  line  of  cross-stitch  with  short  branches  on  either  side,  inclosing  a  vine  on 
which  are  leaves,  rosebuds,  and  carnations.  In  center,  at  top,  is  a  basket  of  flowers,  and 
on  either  side  of  basket  is  a  square  inclosing  two  initials:  "J  A"  [Joshua  Anderson, 
father],  "E  A"  [Elizabeth  Anderson,  mother].  Row  of  birds  standing  on  vine  at  bottom. 
In  four  other  squares  are  the  initials:  "C  A"  [Catherine  Anderson],  "E  A"  [Eliza 
Anderson,  sister],  "J  H  A"  [John  Hoppock  Anderson,  brother],  "S  A  A"  [Sarah  A. 
Anderson,  sister].  The  Misses  Anderson 

121 


122  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

AxDERsojf,  Elizabeth.  1814.  8  jrs.  11"  x  14".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch  and  padded-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.  Scene  with  house,  lambs,  dog,  rose  bushes,  and  man,  basket  of  apples, 
vases  and  conventional  flowers,  trees  and  birds.  Verse  343  (1).  Initials:  "A  A,  H  A, 
AA,   S  A."  ilrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Andehsox,  Mary  A.  E.  1802.  18"  x  17".  Satin,  cat,  and  cross-stitch.  Floral  border.  Scene 
with  house,  weeping  willow  tree  with  crow,  and  red  tree  with  robin.    Verse  398. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Anderson,  Mary  Aletta.  1814.  10  yrs.  12^"  x  21".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  cross  and  strawberry  vine  border.  Design  at  bottom  of  baskets,  peacocks, 
blue  strawberries,  and  vines.     Verse  488.  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Anderson,  Nancy.  1804.  [Hamilton  Township,  N.  J.]  20"  x  24".  Flat,  chain,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Carnation  border.  Scene  with  house,  lawn,  strawberries,  trees,  and  vines.  "George 
Anderson"  [father],  "Sarah  Anderson"   [mother].     Verse  594   (1,  var.,  3). 

Mrs.  John  H.  Scudder 

Anderson,  Rachel.  1803.  10  yrs.  16"  x  17".  "Andrew  Anderson,  Jane  Anderson,  Andrew 
Liburn,  Jane  Liburn,  Robert  Anderson,  Elizabeth  Anderson,  Andrew  Anderson,  Jane 
Anderson,  James  Anderson,  Thomas  Anderson,  Ann  Anderson,  Robert  Anderson, 
Anna  Anderson."     Verses  252,  403.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Anderson,  Rebecca  Ann.  1809.  Salem  [N.  J.  11  jts.  Born  September  26,  1798.]  lOi"  x  14". 
2  alphabets.  Outline,  stem,  and  satin-stitch.  Vine  border  with  brilliant  clusters.  Wreath 
incloses  name.  Green  mounds  surmounted  by  birds,  also  baskets  of  flowers,  sprays  of 
pansies,  carnations,  roses  and  rosebuds,  pine  tree  and  weeping  willow. 

Mrs.  John  V.  Craven 

Anear,  Thomasin  Painter.  1828.  12  yrs.  10"  x  Hi".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 
Saw-tooth  border.    Two  hearts  intertwined.  W.  G.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Angell,  Sally.     1804.    12^"  x  TV.    3  alphabets.     Cross  and  eyelet-stitch.     Verse  18. 

Mrs.  H.  W.  Bradford 

Antrim,  Euzabeth  S.  1827.  12  yrs.  16"  x  16".  Cross-stitch  in  worsted.  Strawberries  and 
leaves,  2  bunches  of  roses,  at  top;  2  bunches  of  carnations,  pitchers  with  an  aster  in  each, 
blue  vase  with  red  tulips,  2  birds,  at  bottom.    Verse  482.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Appleton,  Betsy.     1806.     Ipswich   [Mass.].     17"  x  20".     3  alphabets.     Stem  and  cross-stitch. 
Floral  border.     Willow  sprays  at  bottom.     "Family   Record.     Oliver  Appleton  Married 
Sarah  Cogswell  Dec.  19th  1790. 
Births  of  Children. 

1st  Child  a  daughter  born  &  died  Nov.  21,  1790 

Harry  Appleton  born  Jan.  25,  1793,  &  died  Aug.  18,  1793 

Betsy  Appleton  born  Nov  17,  1794 

Harriet  Appleton  born  July  9th  1796. 


Mr.  Oliver  Appleton  died  Dec.  11th  1797  aged  40  yrs  and  18  days." 
Verse  268.  Mrs.  Henry  Lowell  Hiscock 

Appleton,  Harriet.  1805.  Born  July  9,  1796,  at  Ipswicii.  15"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Conventionalized  clover  border.    Verse  538.  Mrs.  Henry  Lowell  Hiscock 

Archer,  Lydia.  1807.  Salem  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  16"  x  24".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  chain,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  border,  with  clump  of  strawberry  vines  alternating  with 
clumps  of  violets  or  white  flowers.  Grass,  huge  vase  of  roses  flanked  by  a  strawberry  vine, 
large  and  small  trees.     Verse  129  (var.).  Mrs.  Francis  H.  Russell 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  123 

Armstrong,  Mary  Ank.  182-1.  9  yrs.  Baltimore,  Md.  20"  x  25".  Split,  petit-point,  cat,  tent, 
chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border  outside,  and  running  design  in  flat-stitch 
inside.  Three-story  brick  house,  lawn,  fence,  driveway,  dogs,  weeping  willow  trees,  and 
birds.     Verse  526  (1).  Mrs.  Mary  Elizabeth  Elmer 

Armstrong,  Mary  Anx.  1824.  Baltimore,  Md.  9  yrs.  16"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  French  knot, 
queen,  tent,  cat,  petit-point,  split,  stem,  chain,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.    Divided  into  8  sections.    Tree  and  vase  on  either  side  of  verse.    Verse  526  (1). 

Mrs.  Mary  Elizabeth  Elmer 

Arxold,  Amebsha.  [1818.  Born  December  7,  1809,  in  Somers,  Conn.]  9  yrs.  12^"  x  9^". 
3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Heart  design.  Miss  Julia  Amersha  Carpenter 

Arnold,  Ann  L.     1802.     Providence.    17"  x  12".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  676. 

Miss  Rosamond  W.  Austin 

Arnold,  Juliana.  [Before  1830.  Born  in  1815.]  Troy,  N.  Y.  18"  x  18".  Cross-stitch.  Hem- 
stitched edge,  with  border  of  vine  and  carnations.     Verse  177.      Mrs.  William  H.  Walker 

Arnold,  Marcy.  1801.  13  yrs.  15"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  cat,  and  cross-stitch.  Basket 
of  flowers.  "Favor  is  deceitful  and  Beauty  is  vain.  But  Woman  that  feareth  the  Lord 
she  shall  be  praised".  Mrs.  William  A.  Spicer 

Arnold,  Mary  Elizabeth.  [After  1825.]  20?"  x  18".  Long  and  short  and  hem-stitch.  Arch 
with  landscape  at  bottom,  also  monument.  "  Family  Register :  Mr.  Welcome  Arnold  born 
Nov.  15th,  1777;  died  Feb.  15th,  1821;  Miss  Mary  Peirce  born  Oct.  22nd,  1779;  Married 
August  8th,  1803.  Christopher  Bentley  Arnold  born  May  13th,  1804;  Sally  James  Arnold 
born  Dec.  4th,  1805;  died  Aug.  14,  1825;  Welcome  Arnold  born  March  23rd,  1809;  William 
Peirce  Arnold  born  Sept.  3rd,  1811;  Mary  Elizabeth  Arnold  born  April  4th,  1816."  "Sacred 
to  the  best  of  Fathers.    May  angels  guard  thy  sleeping  dust." 

Frederick  W.  Arnold,  Jr.,  Esq. 

Arthur,  Jane.  1804.  9  yrs.  11^"  x  16^".  3  alphabets.  Cat,  satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.     In  center,  2  cross-borders  of  flowering  bushes.     Verse  408. 

Miss  Anna  Dunbar 

AsHBURNER,  Fanny.  1811.  17"  X  19".  Outline,  stem,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  flowers 
and  vine.  At  top,  spray  of  flowers;  in  center,  3  flowering  rose  bushes;  at  bottom,  roses 
and  other  flowers  in  urns  at  each  end.    Verse  515  (1,  var.).  Mr,  William  Boyer 

Atkinson,  Mary  C.     1810.     Newbury,  Mass.     12"  x  161".     Cross-stitch.     Strawberry  border. 
"Michael  Atkinson,  born  Feb.  14,  1774. 
Joanna  Lunt  born  Feb.  14,  1775. 

Married  April  17,  1794. 
Benj'n  Atkinson,  born  May  28,  1795. 
Joana'  C.  Atkinson,  born  Dec.      22,  1799. 
Mich'i  Atkinson,  born         Mar'h    18,  1801. 

Dyed  Mar'h   22,  1801. 

Josh'  Atkinson,    born  Aprl,    18,  1802. 

Eliza   Atkinson,   born  Mar,       6,  1804. 

Dyed  Sept.      1,  1805. 

Eliza  Atkinson,  born  June       5,  1806. 

Mary  C.  Atkinson,  born        Dec.      25,  1808. 

Dyed  March  27,  1810. 

Mary  C.  A"  [unfinished]  Randolph  Haigh,  Esq. 


124  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Atwood,  Esther.  [Cir.  1820.]  Born  October  23,  1807.  12"  x  16".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry- 
border.    Pine  tree,  cherry  tree,  and  2  birds.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Austin,  Martha.  1811.  [Buckingham,  Berks  County,  Pa.]  10  yrs.  llj"  x  14".  Cross-stitch. 
Border  of  carnations,  flowers,  and  buds,  also  2  birds  at  top.        Charles  Clarke  Black,  Esq. 

Austix,  Mary.  [Cir.  1819.]  7  yrs.  13J"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Fine  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.    "Remember  thy  Creator,"  etc.     Verse  458.  Bev.  Glenn  Tilley  Morse 

AusTix,  Sarah.    1822.    15"  x  8".    6  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch.  The  Misses  Austin 

Ai-ER,  Abigail.  1808.  Haverhill  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  19"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Petit-point,  tapestry, 
bullion,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Green  grass  at  bottom,  with  basket  of  flowers  in 
either  corner,  from  which  springs  a  vine  covered  with  flowers,  extending  aU  around  sides 
and  top;  baskets  with  fruit,  and  small  trees  on  grass,  and  strawberries  growing  in  grass. 
Conventional  borders  around  verse,  alphabets,  etc.    Verse  144.        Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Ayer,  Habbiet.  1829.  10  yrs.  HaverhiU  [Mass.].  17"  x  12^".  4  alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet, 
French  knot,  cross-stitch,  and  running  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  strawberry  border.  2  pine 
trees  in  lower  corners.  Mrs.  J.  W.  Hunter 

Bagg,  Mahy.  1811.  West  Springfield  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  13"  x  IS".  3  alphabets.  Chain  and 
cross-stitch.     Cross-stitch  border.     Trees.     Verse  291.  Miss  May  Bliss  Dickinson 

Baggs,  Elizabeth.  1811.  [Queen  Anne's  County,  Eastern  Shore,  Md.]  9  yrs.  Alphabet. 
Cross,  satin,  and  stem-stitch.  Carnation  border  with  birds.  House  and  trees.  "This  is  my 
Verse.  She  maketh  fine  linen  and  selleth  it  and  delivereth  the  goods  unto  the  merchant." 
Verse  424.  Mrs.  Frank  Bea 

Baily,  Rachel  P.  [Cir.  1800.]  Born  August,  1783.  12V'  x  17".  Flat,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 
2  alphabets.  Vine  and  pointed  flat-stitch  borders.  Wall  of  Troy  at  bottom.  Conventional 
flowers  at  top.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Baker,  Naxcy.  1808.  Warren  [R.  I.].  8  yrs.  19"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  House  with  terrace;  also  figures  of  men,  women,  and 
children  walking  about.  Verse  710.  [Same  style  as  those  done  in  Miss  Polly  Balch's 
School.]  Mrs.  Thomas  W.  Aldrich 

Baker,  Sahah.  1811.  Gorham  [Me.].  Born  May  4,  1800.  17V'  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.    Simple  border.    Conventional  design.  Mrs.  William  Tenter 

Baldwin,  Martha  A.  1820.  Newark  [N.  J.].  8  yrs.  15"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  carnation  border,  with  rosettes  in  lower  corners.  Cross- 
borders  in  Greek  fret  and  double  hemstitching.  House,  tree,  hedge,  and  flower-bed. 
Verse  560.  Miss  Martha  C.  Pollock 

Bancroft,  Eliza  A.  [1815.]  Chelmsford  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  12"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Satin, 
cat,  and  cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  edge  and  simple  inner  border.    Mrs.  Elizabeth  B.  Heald 

Baecalow,  Lydia.  1825.  [Butler  County,  O.]  11  yrs.  10"  x  14".  4  alphabets.  Outline,  stem, 
and  cross-stitch.    Cross-border  of  trees,  also  dividing  lines  in  various  stitches. 

Mrs.  Harvey  8.  Gruver 

Barker,  Mary  Jane.  1818.  Portland  [Me.].  9  yrs.  8"  x  23".  Outline,  chain,  satin,  cross, 
and  an  odd  cluster-stitch.  Rose-vine  border.  Green  wreath  around  verses.  Names  and 
dates  of  children  of  "Thomas  and  Sarah  Barker":  "Susan  M.  Barker  born  at  Hiram 
Aprilth  3,  1790;  Thomas  Barker  born  at  Hiram  Oct.  27,  1791;  died  N  3;  Sarah  Barker  born 
at  Limerick  Oct.  18,  1792;  Thomas  A.  Barker  born  at  Cornish  Oct.  28,  1794;  Pamela  Barker 
born  at  Cornish  Julyth  17,  1796;  Asenath  Barker  born  at  Cornish  Septh  23,  1798;  Sophia 


W^4::B 


'V- 


■I  I  ■'!         i»«»»««»HiW««i 


**— Mb— HIIM  "     ■  — -r^ 


"'f- 


/^  Ipteatnf  ffi  hfs  eyes. 


-•i-.^ 


^SMMiiHySl 


PLATE  XLIII 

Lucy  Warner's  Sampler.     Middletown,  Conn.     Cir.  1786 
Owned  l>i/  Mrs.  Clarence   Weart 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  125 

Barker  born  at  Hiram  Julyth  10,  1800;  Noah  Barker  born  at  Hiram  Augth  IQ,  1802; 
Elizabeth  P.  Barker  born  at  Hiram  Augth  27,  1804;  Peleg  Barker  born  at  Cornish  Mayth  29, 
1807;  Mary  Jane  Barker  and  Flavilla  Ann  Barker  born  at  Hiram  Julyth  8,  1809;  Caroline 
Barker  born  at  Hiram  Julyth  29,  1812."  [Mary  Jane  went  to  Mme.  Niel's  School  in  Port- 
land with  Henry  W.  Longfellow,  hand  in  hand.  They  were  playmates  and  near  neighbors.] 
Verse  515  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Jesse  B.  Thomas 

Barkes,  Sabah  E.     1812.    5i"  x  14".    3  alphabets.    Cross  and  hem-stitch.     Small  motifs. 

Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Barxhott,  Margaret.  1831.  12  yrs.  Cross-stitch.  Rose-vine  border  on  three  sides.  At 
bottom,  church  with  conventional  tree  on  either  side,  lawn,  fence,  shed,  animals,  and  men. 
Adam  and  Eve  scene.  Scene  with  tombstone,  weeping  willow,  man,  woman,  and  children, 
and  initials  "R  W"  and  "E  B"  on  stone.  Large  basket  of  flowers.  Trees  with  birds 
on  top,  and  animals  and  men  and  women  underneath.  Detached  flowers,  birds,  animals, 
and  angels  are  scattered  all  about.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Barnum,  Abigal.    1822.    12  yrs.    7"  x  10".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.     Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Barrett,  Charlotte  C.  1805.  14"  x  11".  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  "Family  Register:  John 
Barrett  Esq.  Born  Aug.  16th  1756;  Miss  Martha  Dickinson  Born  Oct.  13,  1761;  and  were 
married  Oct.  29th  1790.  Mary  Barrett  Born  July  19th  1791;  Eliza  E.  Barrett  Born 
Dec.  18th  1792;  Martha  D.  Barrett  Born  Sept.  12,  1794;  Died  July  18th  1804;  Charlotte  C. 
Barrett  Born  Feb.  27th  1796;  Sarah  P.  Barrett  Born  Dec.  3rd  1804;  John  Barrett  Born 
Feb.  21st  1802;  Charles  Barrett  Born  Jan.  6th  1804."  The  Misses  Vase 

Barrett,  Elizabeth.  1814.  Doddington.  9  yrs.  12V'  x  13".  Chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.     Floral  border.    Large  bunch  of  flowers  in  lower  half.    Verse  306. 

Mrs.  S.  A.  Cunningham 

Barrett,  Elizabeth  E.  After  1816.  16^"  x  12^".  Cross-stitch.  Rose  and  vine  border. 
"Family  Register:  John  Barrett  Born  Aug.  16th  1756;  Martha  Dickinson  Born  Oct.  18th 
1761;  and  were  married  Oct.  29th  1790.    Mary  Barrett  Born  July  19th  1791;  Elizabeth  E. 

Barrett  Born  Dec.  18th  1792;   [ ]  D.  Barrett  Born  Sept.  12th  1794;  Died  July  18th 

1804;  Charlotte  C.  Barrett  Born  Feb.  27th  1796;  Sarah  W.  Barrett  Born  Jan.  5th  1798; 
Louisa  W.  Barrett  Born  Dec.  3rd  1799;  Died  May  24th  1804;  John  Barrett  Jun'r  Born 

Feb.  21,  1802;  Charles  Barrett  Born  Jan.  6th  1804:  Died  Dec.  2,  1816; Died  May ; 

Died  June  19th  181[-]."  The  Misses  Vose 


Bartlett,  Elizabeth.  1818.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  16"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross- 
stitch.     Strawberry  border.     Basket  of  flowers  under  an  arbor  of  flowers. 

Miss  Margaret  Bartlet 

Bahtlett,  Emily.  [Cir.  1818.]  Born  June  28,  1807.  18"  x  22".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Fine  strawberry  border.  AVeeping  willows  over  a  tomb  and  urn.  Roses  growing  in  the 
grass.    Names  and  dates:        "Daniel  Bartlett,  Born  August  15,  1778 

Jemima  Smith,  Born  June  26,  1785 
They  were  married  April  10,  1806  and  have  issue 
Emily  Bartlett,  Born  June     28,  1807 
Daniel  Bartlett,  Born  April      7,  1809 
Eliza    Bartlett,    Born  March  21,  1810 
Adaline  Bartlett,  Born  May  6,  1812 
Stephen  S.  Bartlett,  Born  August  6,  1816." 
On  the  tomb  is  inscribed:  "Daniel  Bartlett    Died  May  2  1809     Altho  dead  not  forgotten." 

Miss  E.  B.  Batchelder 


126  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Bartlett,  Hannah.  1804.  Newburyport  [Mass.  Born  September  25,  1791.].  13  yrs.  17"  x  22". 
5  alphabets.  Queen,  French  knot,  eyelet,  stem,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border 
and  8  cross-borders.    Scene  with  shepherd,  sheep,  and  fruit  trees.     Verse  601  (1,  2). 

Newburyport  Historical  Society 

Bartlett,  Peggy.  1801.  "Haverhill,  County  Essex."  10  yrs.  12"  x  Hi".  4  alphabets.  Eye- 
let, stem,  tent,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border  on  sides.  At  bottom,  solid  bluish 
ground  on  which  strawberries  are  growing,  and  on  tops  of  mounds  are  small  trees  and 
large  basket  of  flowers.    Verse  94.  Mrs.  Richard  H.  Hunt 

Barton,  Betsy.  1813.  "Bloomsburg,  Columbia  County,  State  of  Pennsylvania."  12  yrs. 
7f "  x  10".    4  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Conventional  border.  Mrs.  Frederick  E.  Barber 

Bahton,  Bettlah.  1814.  "Laurelgrove  School.  Hannah  Barton,  Preceptress."  14^"  x  14". 
Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose-vine  border  at  sides.  At  bottom,  green  hill  with  trees, 
dogs,  and  bird.    Flowers  scattered  over  whole  sampler.    Verse  742.    Mrs.  Richard  H.  Hunt 

Barton,  Harriet.  July  4  [1809.  9  yrs.].  " Shirleysburgh."  7i"  x  17".  Cat,  buttonhole,  and 
eyelet-stitch.  2  alphabets.  Strawberry  border.  A  curious  medley  of  eyelet  stitches,  wavy 
lines,  bars,  and  an  urn  done  in  black,  green,  and  yellow.  The  effect  is  that  of  a  lot  of 
Indian  signs.  W.  J.  Kennedy,  Esq. 

Basset,  Rachel.  [Cir.  1807.]  12  yrs.  8"  x  lOJ".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Geometrical  designs  in  border.  Geometrical  design  in  center,  and  on  each  side  a 
branch  with  fruit.  Mrs.  Henry  J.  Irick 

Bassett,  Elizabeth.  1802.  11  yrs.  12^"  x  17f".  3  alphabets.  Flat,  eyelet,  tent,  queen,  and 
cross-stitch.     Conventionalized  carnation  border.    Cross-lines  in  different  stitches. 

Frances  D.  Smith 

Bates,  Parley.  1824.  13  yrs.  16"  x  17".  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Family  Register:  Nathan 
Bates,  born  April  7,  1773;  Parley  Ballou,  born  July  9,  1778;  married  June  4,  1797; 
Varnum  G.  Bates,  born  Feb.  28,  1798;  married  Dec.  2,  1821;  Whitman  Bates,  born  Jan.  21, 
1800;  died  Dec.  21,  1802;  Cal/an  Bates,  born  July  5,  1802;  Married  Nov.  24,  1824;  Whitman 
Bates,  born  Mar.  9,  1805;  married  Dec.  13,  1827;  Julia  Bates,  born  Oct.  9,  1807;  married 
Aug.  14,  1827;  Parley  Bates;  Nahum  Bates,  born  Mar.  6,  1811;  William  W.  Bates,  born 
Nov.  15,  1813;  Sylvia  W.  Bates,  born  Dec.  15,  1818.  Francis  H.  Anthony,  Esq. 

Bayley,  Mary  King.  1810.  Boston  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  8"  x  18".  Alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Greek  fret  design.  Essex  Institute 

Baylies,  Amelia  F.  July  26,  1826.  [Born  in  1817.]  Taunton  [Mass.].  16V'  x  16i".  3  alpha- 
bets.   Cross-stitch.     Conventional  border.     Verse  786.  Mrs.  William  Brewster 

Beach,  Anna  Maria.     1825.    9"  x  8".    3  alphabets.    Cat  and  cross-stitch. 

Miss  Anna  M.  Scholfield 

Beach,  Eliza.     [1812.]     10  yrs.    10"  x  7".    2  alphabets.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 

Miss  Anna  M.  Scholfield 

Beakes,  Lydia.  [Cir.  1804.]  Trenton.  [Born  April  3,  1791.]  17^"  x  12".  3  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.  Chain  design  in  border.  Small  basket  of  flowers  and  2  darning  designs. 
"Remember  thy  Creator,"  etc.    Verse  511  (1).  Miss  Anna  Morgan  Rossell 

Beall,  Harriet.  1801.  Georgetown  [D.  C.].  3  yrs.  16"  x  22".  Stem  and  buttonhole-stitch. 
"A  chart  of  the  World."  Jane  E.  Beall 

Bean,  Mary  A.  After  1820.  Brookville  [Mass.].  Born  August  21,  1807.  17^"  x  25".  French 
knot,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Trees,  birds,  and  baskets  of  flowers.     Family  record: 


PLATE  XLIV 

Mary  Traill's  Sampler.     Marblehead,  Mass.     1791 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Fletcher  Hodges 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  127 

"Simeon  Draper,  born  March  27  1755.  Mary  Lewis  born  Jan.  29,  1770.  Were  married 
August  24,  1785.  Their  Children:  Abagail  born  March  12,  1787;  Betsy  born  Sept  6,  1789; 
Henry  born  June  10,  1790;  Lorenzo  born  Mach  27,  1792;  Horace  born  Jan.  30,  1794; 
Mary  born  Dec.  5,  1796;  Sophia  born  Feb.  14,  1799;  William  F.  born  April  2,  1801; 
Francis  born  Dec.  26,  180  ;  William  B.  born  Feb.  15  1804;  Simeon  born  Jan  19,  1806; 
Mary  A.  born  Aug.  21,  1807;  Benjamin  H.  born  May  9,  1810;  Sally  A.  born  Feb.  27, 
1812;  Joshua  born  Sept.  3,  1814;  Theodore  E.  born  June  15,  1816;  Abagail  died  July  27, 
1788;  Mary  died  June  16,  1800;  William  F.  died  June  20,  1801;  Francis  died  Dec.  30, 
1802."  ..  Miss  S.  Ross 

Beckwith,  Ann  Sophia.  1829.  "Poplar  Grove."  11  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Petit-point,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Solid  cross-stitch  border.  House  in  a  valley,  with  trees  on  the  hillsides, 
name  "Poplar  Grove",  and  poplars  on  left.     Illustrated.     The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Bedford,  Mary  Axx.  1817.  13  yrs.  [Born  at  Old  Boonton,  Morris  County,  N.  J.,  August  9, 
1804.]     8"  X  10".     3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Border  in  point  design. 

Miss  Frances  A.  Force 

Beecher,  Sarah  P.  1822.  New  Haven  [Conn.].  9  yrs.  20^"  x  17|".  7  lines  of  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch  and  single-stitch.     Carnation  border.     Cross-borders.     Verse  467. 

Mrs.  H.  Croswell  Tuttle 

Benxett,  Axx  Margaret.  1820.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  17"  x  22".  4  alphabets.  Split,  flat, 
satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  with  Greek  fret  border,  with  stars  in 
corners.  Baskets  of  flowers  and  stars.  "We  are  in  nothing  more  unhappy  than  in  not 
being  truly  sensible  of  our  own  happiness  in  the  favor  of  God  under  free  and  easy  admin- 
istration" ".  .  .  .  according  to  the  real  want  of  advantage  of  a  liberal  Education". 
Verse  120.  Miss  Anna  Bell  Bruns 

Bennett,  Hannah.  [Cir.  1811.]  Born  at  Hubbardston,  July  27,  1800.  17"  x  12".  4  alphabets. 
Catch,  darning,  chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  across  middle.  Satin- 
stitch  border  in  a  variety  of  designs.  Sea  with  boats  in  one  section  at  bottom,  name  and 
date  in  middle,  and  carnation,  bird,  hen,  and  cat  in  the  third.  At  the  bottom,  darning 
stitches.    Verse  292.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Bennett,  Jane.  1813.  Bridgeton  [Cumberland  County,  N.  J.].  8  yrs.  12V' x  17*".  4  alpha- 
bets. Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  tent,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  Greek  fret  borders. 
Urns  of  flowers.  "Jane  Bennett  did  this  work  in  the  9th  year  of  her  age  1813  being  the 
38th  year  of  American  Independence  Modesty  is  one  of  the  chief  ornaments  of  youth. 
A  Contented  mind  is  an  inestimable  treasure."  Verse  736.  Initials:  "J  B"  [Jeremiah 
Bennett],  "J  B"  [Joanna  Bennett,  nee  Fish,  mother],  "R  S  B"  [Ruth  S.  Bennett, 
sister],  "M  B",  "J  B"  [Jeremiah  Bennett,  brother],  "S  F  B"  [Samuel  Bennett, 
brother],  "J  B"  [Jane  H.  Bennett].     Cumberland  County  Hist.  Society,  Bridgeton,  N.  J. 

Bentham,  Maby  Ann.  1820.  [Charleston,  S.  C]  8  yrs.  lOi"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.  Scroll  cross-border.  Rose  bush  in  bloom,  with  tree  on  each  side;  bird  on  mound 
on  each  side  of  trees.  3Iiss  Leila  Waring 

Bentham,  Mary  Ann.  1830.  22"  x  23".  [Charleston,  S.  C]  Satin,  stem,  eyelet,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Carnation  border.  Tree  in  a  basket;  moss  roses  in  an  urn;  tree  in  center,  with 
flowers;  design  repeated.  Miss  Leila  Waring 

Berr,  Sarah  Montgomery.  1804.  10  yrs.  "  Only  child  of  William  and  Sarah  Berr."  22"  x  19". 
Petit-point,  eyelet,  satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  and  tulip  border,  alternating. 
At  bottom,  house  with  four  steep  terraces;  path  in  front;  barn,  fence,  and  trees  flanking 
house;  variety  of  trees  surmounting  each  terrace  edge;  man  and  two  ladies  with  animals 


128  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

on  lawn.  Conventionalized  carnations  in  vases  on  either  side  of  picture.  Basliet  of  fruit 
on  either  side  of  verse.  Wreath  around  name,  age,  etc.,  and  trees  on  either  side;  tiny 
birds  in  each  corner.    Verse  343  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Berry,  Betsy.  1802.  Rye  [N.  H.].  12  yrs.  8"  x  18".  Alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Cross-border  of  flowers  and  vines.  Hannah  M.  W.  Merrill 

Berhy,  Sarah.  1813.  13  yrs.  12"  x  12".  Cross-stitch.  Scroll  design  in  border.  Conventional 
scroUs  and  flowers  in  cross-borders.     Verses  488  (var.),  737.        Robert  P.  Jordan,  Dealer 

Bethlem,  Lucy  Green.  September  6,  1804.  9  yrs.  11^"  x  4|".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Narrow  hem  with  simple  border  in  cross-stitch.    Maltese  cross.    "Let  Virtue  be  thy  guide." 

Mrs.  H.  E.  De  Yermand 

BiCKFORD,  LovEY.    1800.    8  yrs.    8*"  x  12".    2  alphabets.    Tent  and  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  George  C.  Fraser 

Bier,  Sophia  Catherine.  1810.  17^"  x  22".  French  knot,  eyelet,  stem,  tent,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.     Strawberry  border.    4  alphabets.     Verse  722.  Mrs.  Miles  White,  Jr. 

Billings,  Susanna.  1805.  11  yrs.  16^"  x  21".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Greek  fret  border;  inside  border,  vine  with  flowers  issuing  from  flower-pots  in  lower 
corners.     House  in  center;  trees;  basket  of  flowers  and  birds  above  house.     Verse  410. 

William  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

Bingham,  Mary  Sprague.  1823.  Andover  [Conn.].  10  yrs.  15"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Simple  border.     Trees,  birds,  and  baskets  of  fruit.  Mrs.  Lathrop  C.  Uarper 

BiNNS,  Martha  E.  1829.  [Silver  Hall,  New  Kent  County,  Va.]  18"  x  17".  4  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch  and  eyelet.     Strawberry  border.     At  bottom,  Greek  key,  vine,  and  cross. 

Mrs.  F.  B.  T.  Hollenberg 

Bissets,  Eliza.     1817.     lOi"  x  13".    2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.    Strawberry  border. 

Mrs.  George  Plimpton 

BixBY,  Jane.  July  the  1  [1812].  13  yrs.  15*"  x  21".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Floral  border.  Small  flowers.  Names  and  dates:  "James  F.  Bixby,  Born  September  10, 
1784;  Sarah  Bixby  Born  November  6,  1786;  William  Bixby,  Born  February  6,  1788; 
John  Bixby  Born  September  18,  1789;  Thomas  Bixby,  Born  May  12,  1791  and  died 
November  the  30  1793  aged  2  years;  Phebe  Bixby,  Born  April  30,  1793;  Polly  Bixby, 
Born  January  11,  1796;  Thomas  Bixby,  Born  October  15,  1797;  Jane  Bixby,  Born  Febru- 
ary 1,  1799;  Parker  Bixby,  Born  April  9,  1801;  Lydia  Bixby,  Born  August  12,  1803." 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Black,  Rebecca.  1803.  West  Town  School.  [Born  in  1792.]  13"  x  13".  5  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Vine  border.    Verse  406.  Elizabeth  Butcher  Page 

Blackhall,  Ann.  1817.  10  yrs.  11"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Flower-pots,  flowers, 
lions,  birds,  and  strawberry,  done  in  crewel.  Fitchburg  Antique  Shop,  1917 

Blanchard,  Adeline.  1813.  [Billerica,  Mass.]  8  yrs.  10^"  x  13V'.  4  alphabets.  Rose  border 
at  top  and  bottom,  and  vines  on  sides.    Chain,  flat,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Verse  162  (1). 

Miss  Adele  Blanchard  Randall 

Blanchard,  Adeline.  August,  1817.  [Billerica,  Mass.]  11  yrs.  17i"  x  17i".  3  alphabets. 
Chain,  flat,  satin,  cross,  and  hem-stitch.  Rose  border  on  three  sides.  House  in  center  and 
flowers  across  top.  Family  record:  "Jeremiah  Blanchard  born  July  10th,  1764;  Mary  Gowen 
born  July  22nd,  1769;  Married  June  17,  1776;  Jeremiah  Bhinchard,  junr,  born  January  29, 
1797;  John  G.  Blanchard  born  January  30,  1799;  Mary  Blanchard  born  September  7,  1801; 


I 


PLATE  XLV 


Eliza  Cozzexs's  Sampler.     Providence.     1705 

Done  at  Miss  Polly  Balch's  School 
Oxcned  by  the  Rhode  Island  School  of  Detif/n 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  129 

Sophia  Blanchard  born  November  27,  1803;  died  June  22nd,  1816;  Adaline  Blanchard  born 
December  8th,  1805;  Catherine  Blanchard  born  June  2th,  1810;  Rhoda  Blanchard  born 
February  19d,  1815;  died  May  5th,  1817."  Miss  AdMe  Blanchard  Randall 

Blatchford,  E.  Jane.    June  8,  1814.     [Lansingburgh,  N.  Y.]     8  yrs.    Born  November  23,  1805. 
20i"  X  16V'.    6  alphabets.    Eyelet,  flat,  and  cross-stitch.    Names  and  dates: 
"Samuel  Blatchford,  August  1,  1767.    [father] 
Alicia  Blatchford,     Nov.  19,  1767,    [mother] 

[Children] 
Henry  Blatchford,  Dec.  4,  1788. 

Mary  M.  W.  Blatchford,     Jan.  24,  1790. 
Alicia  W.  Blatchford,  Feb.  14,  1791. 

Sarah  Blatchford,  April  23,  1792. 

Samuel  Blatchford,  May  3,  1793. 

Thomas  W.  Blatchford,       July  20,  1794. 
Harriet  P.  Blatchford,       Oct.  25,  1795. 
Samuel  M.  Blatchford,       Jan.  5,  1797. 
R.  Milford  Blatchford,        April  23,  1798. 
John  Blatchford,  May  24,  1799. 

Sophia  Blatchford,  Aug.  21,  1800. 

Frederick  Blatchford,  Dec.  7,  1801. 

George  Blatchford,  Jan.  7,  1803. 

Charles  B.  Blatchford,       Sept.  6,  1804. 
E.  Jane  Blatchford,  Nov.  23,  1805. 

George  E.  Blatchford,         Aug.  1,  1807. 
Edgecumbe  Blatchford,      March  24,  1811." 

3Irs.  Alicia  Blatchford  Judson 

Bliss,  Rebecca.  1824.  [Marblehead?]  8  yrs.  10^'  x  17V'.  4  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  and  clover  borders.  Flower.  "O  virtue  how  amiable  thou  art".  Verses 
515  (1,  var.),  645.  Marblehead  Historical  Society 

Bliss,  Sarah  Ann.  1823.  12  yrs.  12"  x  16V'.  4  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Border 
in  conventional  clover  leaf.     Verses  188,  601   (1,  2).  Marblehead  Historical  Society 

Blood,  Lucinda.  1816.  Concord  [Mass.].  Born  November  18,  1805.  11  yrs.  16"  x  16". 
3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border  on  sides  and  across  top. 
At  bottom,  two  houses,  with  flowering  shrubs  between  and  vines  at  the  side.  Verses  308, 
691  (var.).  Miss  Helen  A.  Whittier 

Bloomfield,  Eunice.  1803.  "Weston  School."  13^"  x  13V'.  Cross-stitch.  Conventional 
border,  with  roses  at  corners.  Groups  of  flowers.  Initials  of  schoolmates  in  wreaths. 
["West  Town  School"].  Eleanor  A.  Bloomfield 

BoLLER,  Harriot.  1802.  10  yrs.  9V'  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth 
border  and  cross-borders.    Verse  248.  Mrs.  De  Forest  Danielson 

Bond,  Joann.  1810.  12  yrs.  19"  x  21".  6  alphabets.  Bird's-eye,  stem,  French  knot,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Double  strawberry  border,  with  inside  border  in  chain  pattern.  Vine 
and  flowers  on  either  side  of  upper  half,  and  a  weeping  willow  tree  on  either  side  of  lower 
half.    Verse  718.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Booth,  Fannie.     1807.    9  yrs.    11"  x  6V'-    3  alphabets.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 

Charles  F.  Smith,  Esq. 


130  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Booth,  Mary.  1814.  10  yrs.  18"  x  18^".  Cross-stitch.  Border  of  fern  and  autumn  leaves, 
foxgloves,  and  roses.    Basket  of  flowers.    Verse  160.  Mrs.  John  H.  Hall 

BoRTON,  Lydia.  1811.  12"  X  16".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Basket  of 
fruit,  pair  bluebirds,  basket  of  flowers,  rose,  3  carnations,  tulip  plant,  rosebuds,  urn  with 
3  flowers.    Initials:  "R  L  E".  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

BoswoHTH,  Angelina.     1818.     11  yrs.    8"  x  10^".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.     Verse  88. 

Miss  Emeline  B.  Butts 

BouDiNOT,  Julia.  April  23d  1800.  10"  x  7V'.  Twenty-five  parallelograms  of  darning-stitch, 
imitating  damask.  Mrs.  Theodore  Weston 

Bourn,  Celia  Sophia.  1822.  12  yrs.  16"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.    House.     Verse  121.  Mrs.  J.  F.  P.  Lawton 

BowEN,  Rachel  S.  1818.  [AUoways  Creek  Township,  Salem  County,  N.  J.]  12^"  x  13^". 
Alphabet.  Outline,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border  with  Oriental  design.  Willow 
tree  at  bottom.    "Behold  fond  man  thy  pictured  life".    Verses  119,  448. 

Richard  W.  Ware,  Esq. 

BowEN,  Sahah.  1824.  14  yrs.  17"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Cat  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.     Verse  563.  Old  Ladies'  Home,  Providence 

BowER,  Mahy.    1808.    18"  x  16".    Cross-stitch.    Double  carnation  border. 

Mrs.  Lathrop  C.  Harper 

Bowie,  Elizabeth  Susannah.  1800.  [Howard  Grove  or  Mulberry  Hill,  Anne  Arundel  County, 
Md.]     15  yrs.    Chain  and  cross-stitch.    Map  of  Maryland.  Allen  Bowie  Howard,  Esq. 

BowKEH,  Lauha.  1817.  11  yrs.  21V'  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Floral 
border.  Landscape  with  trees,  woman,  lambs,  and  gigantic  basket  of  flowers.  Woman's 
face  painted  on  paper  and  glued  on.  Some  of  trees  are  embroidered  in  chenille.  Lambs 
are  cut  out  of  kid  and  pasted  on.    Illustrated.    Verse  515  (1,  var.).        Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Bowman,  Harriet  Carpenter.  [Cir.  1820.]  Cambridge  [Mass.].  Born  August  25,  1811.  Cat, 
stem,  and  cross-stitch,  and  drawn-work.  3  alphabets.  Bands  of  cross-stitch  and  straw- 
berry vines.  Large  white  house  with  a  porch  at  either  end,  with  weeping  willows;  barn 
and  poplar  trees.    Verse  703  (1,  3).  Mrs.  B.  Percy  Mincher 

BowNE,  Elizabeth.  1805.  [Near  Trenton,  N.  J.]  11  yrs.  [Born  September  2,  1794.] 
12"  X  17".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cross-stitch,  and  other  stitches.  Rose  border.  Crown, 
stars,  and  dogs  at  bottom.  Mrs.  Henry  P.  Mason 

Boyd,  Catharine  Willsey  Van  Cleve.  1829.  Born  May  30,  1819.  "Made  at  Mrs.  Haywood's 
School,  Hackensack."  13V'  x  14V'-  3  alphabets.  Cat,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine 
border.  "Honor  thy  Father  and  thy  Mother  that  thy  days  may  be  long  .  .  ."  "Dilligence, 
Industry  and  proper  improvement  of  time  are  material  duties  of  the  young  and  the 
acquisition  of  Knowledge  is  one  of  the  most  honourable  occupations  of  youth."  "Remem- 
ber thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth."    Verse  94  (var.).  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Boyd,  Margaret.  1827.  Baltimore  [Md.].  7  yrs.  18"  x  18".  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border. 
Basket  of  flowers.  Landscape  on  either  side  under  verse.  Below,  larger  landscape. 
Verse  515.  Mrs.  Bertram  North  Stump 

BoYNTON,  Abigail  L.  1810.  Newbury  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  Born  August  19,  1800.  8"  x  8". 
3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Hemstitched  edge.     Cross-borders  of  vine  and  strawberry. 

Charlotte  M.  Smith 


PLATE  XLVI 

Lydia  Stocker's  Sampler.     1798 
Oumed  by  Mrs.  Ilenry  E.  Coe 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  131 

Brace,  Mary.  1809.  Salem  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  18"  x  20".  2  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  satin, 
cross,  and  hem-stitch.  Border  of  spreading  vine,  with  vase  at  lower  corners.  Pillars  with 
double  arch,  also  Horn  of  Plenty  and  vine  with  various  flowers.    Verse  515  (var.). 

Mrs.  Charles  W.  Ward 

Bradford,  Anna.  "September  the  8,  1811."  Plymouth  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  17V' x  17*".  2  alpha- 
bets. Two-sided  line-stitch,  flat,  eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  in  conventional 
design  of  diamond  and  octagon-shaped  units  around  three  sides,  with  festoon  of  knots 
and  tassels  across  the  top.  Basket  with  flowers,  trees  and  birds,  at  bottom.  Verses  673, 
725.  Miss  Bertha  Sumner  Johnson 

Bradford,  Maria.  1828.  Providence  [R.  I.].  9"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  "The 
United  States  of  America,  The  Eden  of  the  World  and  the  Best  of  the  Nations." 

Mrs.  William  C.  H.  Brand 

Bradford,  Nancy.    1817.    Charlestown  [Mass.].    11  yrs.    17"  x  20".    4  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Honeysuckle  border.    "Youth  is  the  time  for  Improvement  and  Instruction."     Verse  754i. 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Bradford,  Sarah  Greenotjgh.  1802.  12"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
Rose  border,  with  bowknot  in  center  at  bottom.    Verse  144. 

Bradley,  Rebecca  L.  1807.  9  yrs.  2"  x  2^".  3  alphabets.  Vine  border,  with  leaves  and 
flowers  in  corners.    Verse  203.  D.  A.  R.,  "Spalding  House,"  Lowell 

Bradway,  Sarah.  1820.  [Port  Elizabeth,  Cumberland  County,  N.  J.  Born  in  1809.] 
13"  X  20".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  vine  and  buds. 
Vase  with  flowers.     Verse  511   (1).  Mrs.  Elmer  Oriscom 

Braithwaite,  Emma.  1809.  7  yrs.  20"  x  16V'.  French  knots  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border. 
Scene  with  houses,  trees,  bushes,  lambs,  dog,  etc.    Verse  425.  Mrs.  Frank  Thompson 

Brannum,  Almira  Bates.  1828.  "Groton  Female  Seminary."  9  yrs.  19"  x  18".  5  alphabets. 
Flat,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Rose  vines  rising  out  of  cornucopias  at  the  side. 

Groton  Historical  Society 

Brannum,  Mahy  Eliza.  1825.  "Groton  Female  Seminary."  10  yrs.  19"  x  18".  5  alphabets. 
Flat,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Rose-vine  border.  Groton  Historical  Society 

Bray,  Susan.  1809.  17^"  x  171".  Outline,  fine  and  heavy  cross-stitch.  Border  of  floral  and 
geometrical  designs.  Cornucopia  of  flowers.  Trees  and  birds,  sprays  of  carnation  and 
bluebells.    Verse  426.     Family  initials.  Wilmer  Moore,  Esq. 

Brickett,  Abigail  T.  September  27,  1827.  West  Newbury  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  16"  x  17". 
5  alphabets.  French  knots,  stem,  satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  vines  rising  from 
vases  at  lower  corners,  with  roses  and  other  flowers  at  top.  Grass,  trees  with  fruit,  basket 
of  flowers,  etc.    Verse  692.  Mrs.  Lizzie  Huntington  Sargent 

Bridges,  Delia.  1820.  [Warren,  Mass.]  12  yrs.  16"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  cross,  and 
hem-stitch.  Vine  border.  Divided  into  sections;  1st,  alphabets  and  numerals;  2d,  trees, 
birds,  and  dogs;  3d,  trees,  birds,  two  houses,  basket  of  flowers;  4th,  trees,  flowering  plant, 
birds ;  5th,  trees,  birds,  lions,  and  name-plate  in  center.  Mrs.  William  N.  Eaton 

Brierly,  Betty.  1826.  18  yrs.  26"  x  26".  Blue  linen.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border. 
In  center,  reproduction  of  Solomon's  Temple,  surrounded  by  various  kinds  of  trees  and 
sprays  of  flowers.    Verse  567.  Mrs.  Renwick  C.  Hurry 

Brierly,  Sally.  1828.  [Delaware.]  15  yrs.  20"  x  22".  Blue  linen.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Triple  strawberry  border.  Two  jardinieres  in  lower  corners  with  tulip  plants,  and  tulip 
sprays  in  between.  Just  above,  church  flanked  by  birds  on  branches.  Verse  in  upper  half, 
flanked  by  conventionalized  rose  sprays  and  flowering  trees.  Verse  484.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 


132  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Bbiggs,  Anna.  1802.  Scituate.  9  yrs.  12^"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  cross, 
and  hem-stitch.  Conventional  cross-stitch  border.  House  with  fence,  trees,  and  bushes. 
Verse  609.  3Iiss  Antoinette  Clapp 

Bbiggs,  Elizabeth.  1805.  Salem  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Satin-stitch  made  with 
crinkly  silk,  couching,  French  knot,  stem,  eyelet,  split,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border,  with 
flowers  starting  from  vase  in  center  at  bottom  and  ending  in  large  conventional  blossom 
in  center  at  top ;  the  whole  border  is  solid  satin-stitch.  Bird  on  either  side  of  blossom  at 
top.     Verse  40  (var.).  Essex  Institute,  Salem 

Briggs,  Lauhentia.  September  11,  1801.  Pembroke  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  Born  September  20,  1792. 
8"  X  12 J".    3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.    Cross-border.  Miss  Adeline  Collomore  Young 

Bhiggs,  Sarah  Ann.  1828.  Dighton  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  15"  x  17*".  Cross,  satin,  stem,  eyelet, 
tent,  and  two-sided  line-stitch.    3  alphabets.     Verse  279.  Mrs.  Albert  Paull 

Briggs,  Sarah  Jacob.  1805.  10  yrs.  13"  x  16^".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  House,  fence, 
garden,  and  trees.    Verse  269.  Mrs.  Charles  J.  White 

Brigham,  Susan  B.  1814.  Grafton  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  11 V'  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Flat  and 
cross-stitch.     Flowering-vine  border.  Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

Brooks,  LtJciNDA.  1816.  Gloucester  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  8"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cross- 
stitch,  and  solid  embroidery.    Greek  fret  border,  with  hemstitched  edge.    Verse  166. 

Mrs.  W.  R.  Beecher 

Brooks,  Lucinda.     1821.     16"  x  16]".     Cross-stitch,  hemstitch,  and  solid  embroidery.     Hem- 
stitched edge  and  Greek  fret  border.    Large  bunch  of  roses  in  right-hand  corner.    "Mar- 
riage Certificate  between  Reuben  Dade  and  Lucinda  Brooks,  She,   16  yrs,  He  22  yrs." 
"Mutual  happiness  our  mutual  object." 

"May  the  cares  that  bind  the  covetous  never  disturb  our  peace." 

"May  we  yield  therefore  one  to  another  and  be  equally  yoked  together  in  the  com- 
mand of  God.  May  neither  of  us  seek  bfisely  to  throw  an  undue  weight  on  the 
others  shoulders.  Suffer  no  interference  from  any  other  to  interrupt  our  har- 
mony. We  are  connected  for  life- — nothing  can  separate  our  fate  in  this  world. 
Oh  let  nothing  divide  our  affections.  May  we  regard  each  other  with  the  fullest 
confidence — the  least  spark  of  suspicion  from  either  might  forever  blast  the 
comfort  of  both. 

There  can  be  no  harmony  where  there  is  no  faith." 
Verse  166.  Mrs.  William  R.  Beecher 

Brouse,  Eleanor.  1816.  [Hillsboro,  O.  Born  in  Berkley  Springs,  Va.,  March  8,  1803.] 
18"  X  17".  6  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine  and  flower  border.  House  with  pump  at  one 
side,  also  trees,  birds,  and  a  number  of  conventional  designs.  Mrs.  Charles  P.  Lesh 

Brown,  Abigail.  1821.  Seabrook  [N.  H.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  18",  5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  chain, 
stem,  French  knot,  cat,  flat,  solid  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-border.  At  bottom, 
scroll,  rose  and  vine,  with  conventional  designs  of  trees,  pyramids,  and  basket  of  flowers. 
Verse  763.  Dr.  A.  B.  Chase 

[Brown,  Ann  Carter.]     Providence  [R.  I.].    5"  x  10".    6  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Hon.  John  Carter  Brown  Woods 

Brown,  Anna.  1804.  Dover  [N.  H.].  8  yrs.  Born  May  19,  1796.  13"  x  15".  3  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  strawberry  border  with  flowers  in  corners. 
Verse  685.  Miss  Anna  H.  Hoxvell 


PLATE  XLVII 
SusAX  Lehjian's  Sampler.     Philadelphia. 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Charles  Schiiffer 


1799 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  133 

Browk,  Elizabeth.  1813.  Seabrook  [N.  H.].  11  yrs.  9"  x  7^".  2  alphabets.  Hemstitch, 
eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Double  hemstitched  border  with  cross-stitch  inside.  Greek 
fret  border  at  bottom.  Mrs.  George  L.  Greene 

Brown,  Elizabeth  A.  1826.  10  yrs.  11*"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  bor- 
der.   Verse  787.  A.  Stainforth,  Dealer,  1917 

Brown,  Elizabeth  M.  1818.  [Hartford  County,  Md.]  16^"  x  15V'.  Alphabet.  Solid  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Wide  border  with  roses,  pineapples,  and  trees  with  birds.  Verse 
757.  Mrs.  John  Butterfield 

Brown,  Martha.  1829.  11  yrs.  8"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Cat  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-borders. 
2  baskets  of  piled  fruit.  A.  Stainforth,  Dealer,  1917 

Brown,  Nancy.  1808.  10  yrs.  16"  x  19".  Alphabet.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Cornucopias  at 
lower  corners,  out  of  which  rise  vines  with  roses,  tulips,  strawberries,  etc.  2  trees  at  top. 
Verse  503.  Mrs.  H.  Russell  Perkins 

Brownell,  Mary  Ann.  1816.  11  yrs.  16"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Flat  and  cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.    Verse  245.  Mrs.  Boswell  B.  Burchard 

Brownell,  Pamela.  1803.  Westport  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  9^"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.  Conventional  designs  in  border  of  squares  and  trefoils,  also  cross-border  of 
the  same.    Verse  343  (1).    "Westport  School".  Mrs.  S.  Frank  Eammett 

Browning,  Rebecca  T.  1825.  7"  x  14V'.  4  alphabets.  Queen,  flat,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
Cross-border.     Flowering  trees,  birds,  and  dog.  Mr.  Joseph  C.  Street 

Brownrigg,  Mary  Ann.  July  18,  1805.  Warrenton  [N.  C.].  8  yrs.  15"  x  12".  2  alphabets. 
Fine  cross-stitch.  Conventional  borders.  Birds,  trees,  and  various  decorations.  Verse 
411a.  James  Hardy  Dillard,  Esq. 

Bryant,  Cynthia.  1815.  Lexington  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  11"  x  16".  Born  October  7,  1806. 
Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  3  alphabets.  Simple  cross-borders.  Strawberry  plant,  bird, 
insect,  and  conventional  designs.  A.  Cynthia  Shurtleff 

Bryant,  LusANNA  Tucker.  1815.  Lexington  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  11"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  cross-stitch  borders.  Spray  of  strawberry  blossoms  and 
leaves,  with  bird  and  bee  in  opposite  corners,  also  small  designs  on  each  side.  Conventional 
flowers  across  top  and  bottom.  Mrs.  Charles  C.  Goodwin 

Bryant,  Mary.  1812.  Portland  [Me.].  4  alphabets.  Satin,  eyelet,  stem,  buttonhole,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Rose  border.    Verse  144  (var.).  Boss  E.  Maynard,  Dealer 

Bryant,  Mary  P.  1815.  Boston,  Mass.  10  yrs.  10"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Scroll  borders. 
Verse  749.  Mrs.  Edward  D.  Brandegee 

Bryarly,  Elizabeth.  1812.  Winchester  [Va.  11  yrs.  Born  March  4,  1801.].  18"  x  18". 
Alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  at  top  of  strawberries  and  at  sides  of 
vine.  At  bottom,  turtle  doves,  harebells,  fuchsias,  roses,  blackberries,  and  carnations,  also 
baskets  of  fruit.    Names  of  father  and  mother:  "Robert  and  Sarah  Bryarly."    Verse  436. 

Mrs.  Worthington  Hopkins 

BuDD,  Eliza  F.  1808.  9  yrs.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  outside  and  saw-tooth  border 
on  the  inside.  In  center.  Mount  Holly,  N.  J.,  Court  House,  with  terraced  steps  and  lawn, 
each  terrace  surmounted  by  a  pine  tree ;  birds  flying  about.  Large  sprays  of  carnations  in 
four  corners,  and  small  designs  of  birds,  trees,  berries,  flowers,  etc.,  on  saw-tooth  borders, 
above  and  below  scene.  On  the  left,  Ruth  gleans  the  sheaves  of  Boaz,  and  on  the  right, 
David  tends  his  father's  flocks.    Verses  422,  708.  Miss  M.  Eliza  Smalley 


134  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

BuFFiNGTOx,  Maby.    1801.    9  yrs.    6"  x  5i".    1  alphabet.     Cross-stitch.    Verse  10. 

Miss  Amey  L.  Willson 

BuGBE,  Maky.  1803.  [Bristol.]  10  yrs.  11"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Cross-border.  Scroll  of  flowers  and  leaves,  also  conventional  flowers  in  pots. 
Verse  526  (last  six  lines  altered).  Mrs.  Mary  Chapman  Stetson 

Bull,  Esther  M[eahia].    1813.    Hartford  [Conn.].    Satin  and  cross-stitch.    Wreath  of  vine  and 
flowers,  open  at  the  bottom,  where  there  is  a  basket  of  flowers.     Sampler  filled  in  with 
names  and  dates  of  Esther's  maternal  grandfather's  family: 
"William  Whetten  born  Dec.  12,  1730. 
Margaret  Amy  Whetten  born  July  4,  1739. 
Were  married  September  7,  1756. 

William  Whetten  Junr  born  July  10th,  1757. 
Sarah  Whetten  born  June  16th,  1758. 

Margaret  W^hetten        born  August  23d,  1760. 
Jane  Whetten  born   January  27th,  1763. 

William  Whetten  born  June  2d,  1766. 

Samuel  Whetten  born  January  6th,  1768. 

Mary  Whetten  born  October  23d,  1771. 

Ann  Whetten  born   February  3d,  1773. 

Joseph  Whetten  born   August  23d,  1776. 

William  Whetten  Sr.    died  June  7th,  1778. 
Margaret  Whetten  Sr.  died   April  21st,  1809. 
William  Whetten  Jr.     died   September,  1801. 
Samuel  Whetten  died   1789. 

Joseph  Whetten  died  May  1778." 

William  W.  Huntington,  Esq. 

Bull,  Mabgaeet  Ann.  April  23,  1811.  Hartford  [Conn.].  8  yrs.  10"  x  16i".  11  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Cross-stitch  borders,  in  chain  design.     Verses  431,  433,  631. 

William  W.  Huntington,  Esq. 

Buxkee,  Elizabeth.  1812.  14  yrs.  17^"  x  20i".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Border  of  pop- 
pies, tulips,  and  carnations.    Verse  733  (2,  var.).  Newport  Historical  Society 

BuNTixG,  Jane  Elizabeth.  1818.  7  yrs.  15"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  cat,  and  cross-stitch. 
"Give  me  o  Lord  thy  early  Grace  to  guide  me  in  the  paths  of  life  and  fit  me  for  celestial 
scenes  where  Peace  and  joy  forever  reign."  Mrs.  David  S.  Seaman 

Btjedek-,  Mary.  [Cir.  1814.]  Born  February  25,  1801.  16^"  x  18".  Queen,  cat,  stem,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Inn,  with  swinging  sign  on  post;  another  house,  three  storied, 
and  fences.    Bound  with  tape.    Verses  333,  554.  Miss  Jennie  Allen 

BuBNS,  EuzA.  1808.  Gilmanton  [N.  H.].  8  yrs.  14"  x  17^".  4  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth  border.  Vase  of  flowers,  with  birds  and  flowers  on  either  side. 
Verse  110.  Mrs.  Edward  V.  Shepard 

BuEB,  Keziah.  1807.  11  yrs.  Mt.  Holly,  N.  J.  Born  July  31,  1796.  18"  x  23".  Cross  and 
satin-stitch.  Vine  and  pink  satin  rose  quilling.  House,  lawn,  trees,  men  and  women,  dogs, 
birds,  and  flowers.    Verse  278a.  Mrs.  Hervey  Muhlenburg  Sperry 

Bueboughs,  L>t)ia.  1809.  9  yrs.  and  6  mos.  16i"  x  20V'.  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Alter- 
nate strawberry,  rose,  and  lily  border.     Initials:  "F  B,   MR,   MB,   A  R." 

Mrs.  William  Howard  Crosby 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  135 

BuEROUGH,  Lydia.  1814.  "Chesterford  School."  16"  x  26".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Rose-vine  border.  In  upper  section,  wreath  inclosing  verse,  and  on  either  side  detached 
sprays  of  flowers  and  birds.  In  lower  section,  a  picture  of  the  Chesterford  schoolhouse, 
with  poplar  and  willow  trees  on  either  side,  path  directly  in  front,  lawn,  fence,  small  trees 
on  either  side  of  gate,  also  swans.    Verse  746.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Burroughs,  Mary  Akn.  1825.  "Red  Bank  School."  10%"  x  7".  3  alphabets.  Cat,  eyelet,  and 
cross-stitch.    Cross-stitch  border.    Fancy  cross-stitch  between  alphabets. 

Miss  Annie  Middleton 

Burroughs,  Maryaxn.  1825.  19"  x  15",  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  roses  and  rosebuds. 
At  bottom,  rose,  carnation,  lilies  of  the  valley,  tree  with  birds,  etc.  In  center,  rose  bush, 
vine  with  flowers,  and  tulips.    At  top,  two  baskets  of  flowers  and  two  birds. 

Miss  Annie  Middleton 

Burton,  Abigail.  1829.  [Unfinished.]  9  yrs.  Trumbull  [Conn.].  12"  x  8^",  2  alphabets. 
French  knot,  cat,  and  cross-stitch.  W.  G.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Butcher,  Ruth.  1804.  Salem  County  [N.  J.].  12  yrs.  16"  x  15i".  2  alphabets.  Outline, 
herring-bone,  flat,  tent,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border  with  rose- 
buds. At  bottom,  band  of  Greek  fret,  trees,  strawberries,  Greek  cross,  and  birds.  Verse 
683.    Initials:   "BB,   R  B,   H  B,   R  B,   E  B,   MB,  SAB  B."  Mrs.  John  Ogden 

Butler,  Haxnah.  1812.  13  yrs.  12"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Bird's-eye,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Trefoil  and  scroll  cross-borders.  Large  basket  of  flowers  and  butterfly. 
Verse  157,  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

BuTMAX,  Sally.  1801.  [Marblehead.]  1  alphabet.  Tulip  border.  Cross,  satin,  eyelet,  and 
other  stitches.  Man,  woman  with  a  fan  on  either  side  of  a  rose  bush.  Four  sheep  at  the 
bottom.    Verse  188,  Miss  Martha  D.  Howes 

BuTTRicK,  LucRETiA.  18 — (?),  Concord  [Mass.].  12"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Flat,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.     Unusual  strawberry  border.     Basket  and  two  trees.     Verse  92. 

Concord  Antiquarian  Society 

BuTTRiCK,  Miriam.  [Cir.  1805.  Concord,  Mass.]  8"  x  10".  1  alphabet  and  part  of  a  second. 
Cross  and  satin-stitch.     Scroll  and  saw-tooth  borders,  Mrs.  W.  C.  Dunton 

BuTTRiCK,  Miriam.  1812.  Concord  [Mass.  Ifi  yrs.].  Satin  and  stem-stitch  and  French  knots. 
Charity  with  a  child  in  her  arms.  Flowering  trees.  Five  Lombardy  poplars  and  three 
clipped  yews.    Farmhouse  and  fence.  Mrs.  W.  C.  Dunton 

BuxTOx,  Alice.    1805,    10  yrs.    12"  x  8",    3  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch.     Verse  132. 

Mr.  James  W.  Craig 

Buxton,  Lydia.  1814.  10  yrs.  13|"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.    Cross-stitch  dividing  lines.     Verse  553. 

William  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

C ,  T.  \  1800.    17"  X  32",    Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Carnation  and  tulip  border, 

C ,  M.  y  Birds,  trees,  butterflies,  and  large  conventionalized  flower  cross-borders.  Verse  530, 

P 5  E.  y  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Caise,  Mary  H.  1805.  [New  England.]  9  yrs.  13"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  flat,  chain, 
and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  unfinished  flat-stitch  points.  Green  lawn  with  rose  bushes 
and  conventional  flowers.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Calder,  Agnes  Elizabeth.    1817,    15"  x  11".    4  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Mrs.  Ralph  V.  Hadley 


136  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Calder,  Olivia  Caroline.  1820.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  13  yrs.  8i"^x  10^".  3  alphabets.  Greek 
fret  border.    Cross-stitch.    "May  I  govern  passions  absolute  sway."        Miss  Marie  Lebhy 

Caldwell,  Sarah  S.  July  7,  1806.  Barre  [Mass.].  15  yrs.  17"  x  21".  2  alphabets.  Stem 
and  cross-stitch.  Scene  with  house,  barn,  fence,  trees,  birds,  owner,  American  eagle,\and 
colored  man.    Verse  187  (var.).    Illustrated.  Mrs.  W.  P.  Allen 

Caxadey,  Claba.    1802.    9  yrs.    Stem  and  cross-stitch.    Verse  24  (3,  var.). 

Mrs.  Christine  Thayer  Calderwood 

Canfield,  Cornelia  C.  1825.  New  Haven,  Conn.  8  yrs.  I62"  x  I62".  5  alphabets.  Chain, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Cluster  of  roses  at  top.  Conventionalized 
roses  in  each  corner.     Verse  325.  Miss  Marion  Belden  Cook 

Cableton,  Caroline.  1819.  "Miss  Moody's  School."  8  yrs.  14^"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Eye- 
let, tent,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Basket  of  fruit,  pine  tree,  jardiniere, 
etc.,  in  row  at  bottom.  Mrs.  Lathrop  C.  Harper 

Carman,  Martha.  1826.  Bordentown.  8  yrs.  18"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry  border.    House,  trees,  birds,  and  basket  of  flowers.    Verse  480. 

Mary  F.  Wilgus 

Carmichael,  Almiha  Martha.  1829.  Born  October  21,  1814.  Sandlake  [Rensselaer  County, 
N.  Y.].  13"  X  13".  3  alphabets.  Flat  and  cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth  border.  At  top,  house, 
pine  trees,  weeping  willows,  rose,  basket  of  flowers,  etc.    Verse  703  (1,  var.). 

I  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Carson,  Ann.  July,  1818.  Alexandria  [Va.  10  yrs.].  Cross  and  one  other  stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.    Colonial  house,  and  two  cornucopias  filled  with  flowers. 

Miss  Ursula  Carson  Greene 

Carter,  Eliza.  1811.  Peterboro  [N.  H.].  11  yrs.  17"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.    Vine  and  cherry  border.    Verse  33.  Mrs.  George  Plimpton 

Carter,  Joanna  S.  1821.  10  yrs.  16^"  x  17^".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Border, 
Greek  fret  and  rose  vine.    Birds,  pots  of  carnations  and  leaves.   Charles  S.  Henry,  2d,  Esq. 

Carter,  Mary  Ann.  1818.  Danville  [Ky.].  8  yrs.  17^"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Tree,  baskets,  beehives,  bees,  butterfly,  and  dogs.  Verse 
515  (1,  var.).  Miss  Louisa  S.  Baird 

Carter,  Polly.  1828.  Killingworth  [Conn.].  9  yrs.  17"  x  13^".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.    Trees.     Verse  40  (var.).  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Cartys,  Martha  Ann  R.  [Cir.  1810.]  10  yrs.  17"  x  25^".  Cross-stitch,  eyelet,  and  tent- 
stitch.    Acorn  border.    House,  lawn,  trees,  birds,  butterflies,  deer,  dogs,  etc.    Verse  716. 

Mrs.  Siegfried  Wachsman 

Caey,  Hannah.  1821.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  Born  April  28,  1811.  8"  x  8".  3  al- 
phabets.   Cat  and  cross-stitch.  Abby  A.  Newman 

Case,  Clarissa.  April  14,  1824.  Canton  [Conn.].  10  yrs.  Teacher,  Miss  Lucy  W.  Case. 
13"  x  20".    4  alphabets.    Cat  and  cross-stitch.     Verses  128  (var.),  187  (var.). 

H.  W.  Erving,  Esq. 

Chace,  Elizabeth.    10  yrs.    21"  x  8".    2  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch.     Verse  342. 

3Irs.  Daniel  Beckwith 

Chace,  Elizabeth  Jones.    1816.    8  yrs.    15"  x  11".    Cross  and  stem-stitch.    Strawberry  design. 

Mrs.  William  C.  Greene 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  137 

Chadwick,  Naxcy.  1811.  13  yrs.  10"  x  14".  Petit-point,  cross-stitch.  Conventionalized 
carnation  border.  Landscape  with  house,  trees,  man,  lady  feeding  hens,  2  cows  lying  down, 
sheep,  dog;  and  below,  large  basket  with  conventional  flowers,  topped  on  each  side  by  a 
bird  and  conventional  tulip  and  pot,  with  carnation  on  either  side.     Verse  726. 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Champion,  Anx  W.  1816.  8  yrs.  8"  x  15J".  4  alphabets.  Flat,  queen,  eyelet,  stem,  and 
cross-stitch.    Cross-border.    Trees,  dogs,  flowers,  and  birds,  also  initials. 

Mrs.  Elizabeth  Kay 

Champxey,  Maey  Axx.  1822.  Roxbury  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  6"  x  6".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Hemstitched  edge.  Elizabeth  N.  Champney 

Champney,  Sally.  1801.  New  Ipswich  [N.  H.].  9  yrs.  12"  x  12|".  2  alphabets.  French 
knot,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border  in  scrolls  and  points,  also  vine  cross- 
borders.  Fence,  flowers,  trees,  and  birds,  also  large  urn  holding  leaves  and  flowers,  and 
on  either  side  a  basket  of  flowers.  "May  virtue  mark  my  footsteps  here.  And  point  the 
way  to  Heaven."  Mrs.  John  H.  Morison 

Chandler,  Sally.  [1805.]  Bedford  [N.  H.].  9  yrs.  [Born  March  3,  1796.]  18"  x  18". 
3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Conventional  borders.  Mrs.  Sarah  C.  Baldwin 

Chapel,  Mary.     1819.    4  alphabets.    "Lydia  Sata  Lee  Instructress."    Verse  132  (1,  var.). 

Alexander  W.  Drake  Collection,  1913 
Chapin,  Sarah.     1816.    18"  x  17".    2  alphabets.    Chain,  eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.    Straw- 
berry border.    Verse  603.  Mrs.  Louis  W.  Dowries 
Chaplik,  Eliza  C.     11"  x  13".    Cross-stitch.    Verse  64.                          Groton  Historical  Society 

Chaplin,  Harriot.  1803.  13  yrs.  lOV'  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Flat,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Three  urns,  one  with  flowers  and  two  with  fruit.  Groton  Historical  Society 

Chapman,  Charlotte.      1814.      Greenfield,  Mass.      I75"  x  16^".      3  alphabets.      Cross-stitch. 

Strawberry  border.     Tree,  dogs,  birds,  and  baskets  of  flowers.     Verse  647. 

Mrs.  Arthur  Clark  Nason 
Chase,  Mary.     1814.     Chester  [N.  H.].     11  yrs.     12"  x  16".     4  alphabets.     Tent,  cross-stitch, 

and  much  solid  work.     Rose  and  vine  border.     Verse  609.  Jennie  P.  Hazelton 

Chase,  Sally.  1800.  Saco  [Me.].  Born  May  10,  1793.  16|"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border.  Elaborate  design  of  flowers  and  basket.  Verse 
606  (1).  Miss  Caroline  Manett 

Chase,  Sally.  1810.  [Hopkinton,  N.  H.]  12"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Cat,  feather,  tent,  satin, 
herring-bone,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  and  saw-tooth  border.  Verse  182 
(1,  var.).  Arthur  Chase,  Esq. 

[Chattin,  Elizabeth.  1813.]  Born  April  5,  1804  [at  Chattinville,  near  Mullica  HiU,  N.  J.]. 
16^"  X  20".  2  alphabets.  Greek  cross-border.  Squirrel  seated  on  branch  eating  a  nut, 
and  flanked  on  either  side  by  large  full-blown  rose,  bud,  and  green  spray.  Names  and 
dates:     "The  age  of  Clark  Chatin  and  wife  and  children  he  was  born  July  the  first  1770. 

Anne  his  wife  was  born  April  forth  1780. 
James  Chattin  was  born  may  the  11  1798. 
Sarah  Chattin  was  born  September  the  29  1800. 
John  Chattin  was  born  february  the  5  1802. 
Elizabeth  Chattin  was  born  april  the  5  1804. 
Jonathan  Chattin  was  born  february  the  1  1806. 
Benjamin  Chattin  was  born  november  the  4  1807, 
Mary  and  Anne  was  born  March  the  28  1810."' 

Clark  Chattin  Hewitt,  Esq. 


138  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Cheeveh,  Mary  A.    1812.     10"  x  10".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.  C.  W.  Goodspeed,  Esq. 

Cheeveb,  Mahy  a.  1817.  Attleborough.  11  yrs.  16"  x  17".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Oak-leaf  border.    Family  Register: 

"Samuel  Blackinton  born  March  7,  A.D.  1753         George  Cheever  born  Oct.  10,  1771 
Mehetabel  Richards  born  Nov.  1,  1755  Sally   Blackinton   born   March  7,   1779 

They  were  Married  May  23,  1778  They  were  Married  April  27,  1800 

Sally  Blackinton  born  March  7,  1779  Samuel  B.  Cheever  born  Nov.  18,  1801 

Nabby  Blackinton  born  October  26,  1763  George  W.  Cheever  born  Augt  19,    1803 

Was  Married  to  Henry  Maxey  Jan.  1,  1806         Mary  A.  Cheever  born  Sept.  30,  1806 
And  Died  Dec.  26,  1807  Sally  Cheever  died  1816" 

Samuel  Blackinton  Died  March  14,  1816 
"Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth.     Yea,  saith  the  spirit  that 
they  may  rest  from  their  labours,  and  their  works  do  follow  them."     Verse  310. 

Mrs.  Lathrop  C.  Harper 

Cheftok,  Maria.  1810.  16"  x  18".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Double  strawberry  border.  Scene 
with  house,  trees,  gateway,  and  flowers.  Mrs.  Benwick  C.  Hurry 

Chew,  Frances.     1808.    8  yrs.    9"  x  7^".    Cross-stitch.    Simple  border.        Mrs.  H.  C.  Bunner 

Child,  Harriot.  1802.  Roxbury  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  113"  x  17^".  6  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.  Hemstitched  on  sides,  strawberry  border  at  top  and  bottom,  but  unfinished.  Cross- 
borders  with  birds,  animals,  trees,  fruit,  etc.     Verse  396.  Miss  Cornelia  P.  Stone 

Choate,  Clarissa.    1821.    Essex.    9"  x  12".    4  alphabets.    Cat,  cross,  and  hem-stitch. 

W.  O.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Church,  Sarah  Louise.  1824.  5  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Tulip  border,  and  dividing  lines 
in  scroll  pattern.    Verse  515.  Old  Dartmouth  Historical  Society 

Clapham,  Mary.  1813  or  15.  7^"  x  10^".  6  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  "Done  this 
20th  day  of  March  by  Mary  Clapham  for  Mary  Robertson  1813." 

Miss  Fanny  G.  Crenshaw 

Clark,  AcHSA.  1810.  Woodbury  [N.  J.].  14  yrs.  17"  x  21".  Cross-stitch.  Flowers  and  birds. 
Names  and  dates:  "Thomas  Clark  was  born  the  18th  of  the  first  mo.  1767.  Achsa  Clark 
was  born  the  26th  of  the  first  mo  1767  and  departed  this  life  the  10th  of  the  fifth  mo.  1808. 
The  ages  of  their  children  are  as  follows:  Hannah  Clark  was  born  the  18th  of  the  tenth 
mo.  1787.  Thomas  P.  Clark  was  born  the  17th  of  the  fifth  mo.  1789.  Mary  B.  Clark  was 
born  the  23rd  of  the  fifth  mo.  1791.  Beulah  Clark  was  born  the  25th  of  the  seventh  mo. 
1793.  Achsa  Clark  was  born  the  Gth  of  the  second  mo.  1796.  Eliza  Clark  was  born  the 
2nd  of  the  fifth  mo.  1798.  Edith  Clark  was  born  the  15th  of  the  ninth  mo.  1800.  Ann  Clark 
was  born  the  10th  of  the  third  mo.  1804.  Achsa  Clark  wife  of  Thomas  Clark  was  a  Pan- 
coast."  Miss  Eliza  W.  Knight 

Clark,  Clara.  1816.  Pelham  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  Born  in  1804.  18"  x  18".  Alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Cross-borders.    Verse  308a.  Mrs.  Mary  A.  Fisher 

Clark,  Sarah.  1811.  Bridgeton  [N.  J.].  10"  x  12".  [10  yrs.]  3  alphabets.  Chain,  queen, 
eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Basket  of  conventionalized  fruit;  3  trees  on  each  side; 
bird  on  central  tree.  Names:  "Arthur  Clark,  Mary  Clark  [father  and  mother];  James  C 
X  John  C  X  Susanna  C  x  Elisabeth  C  x  Sarah  C  x  Nicolas  C  x  Thomas  D  C  [children]." 

Mrs.  I.  Smith  Beed 

Clark,  Sarah.  1811.  Bridgeton  [N.  J.  10  yrs.].  14"  x  17".  1  alphabet.  Buttonhole,  queen, 
chain,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Borders  in  Greek  fret,  rose,  and  conventional 


AJVIERICAN  SAMPLERS  139 

geometrical  flower  designs.     House  surrounded  with  floral  design.     Verse  432.     "Sarah 
Clark  was  born  November  10th  1801."  Mrs.  I.  Smith  Reed 

Clark,  Sophroxia.  [Cir.  1800.]  Southampton  [Mass.].  18V'  x  16^".  Cross-stitch.  3  alpha- 
bets.   Flower  basket,  dogs,  trees,  and  geometrical  figures.    Edward  Clark  Bridgman,  Esq. 

Clarke,  Martha  Ann.  January  22,  1808.  [Westmoreland  County,  Pa.]  Born  May  21,  1792. 
17"  X  17".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Figures  of  children  at  bottom. 
Verse  707.  Mrs.  W.  H.  Udall 

Clarke,  Rachel.  1816.  Stony  Brook  [N.  J.].  18  yrs.  Born  November  10,  1798.  17"  x  21^". 
Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Rose  border  with  two  carnations.  Initials:  "C  C  [Charles  Clarke, 
father] ;  M  C  [Mary  Clarke,  mother] ;  TFC  [Thomas  F.  Clarke,  brother] ;  RN  C  [Robert 
N.  Clarke,  brother]."    Verse  558.  Charles  Clarke  Black,  Esq. 

Clarke,  Ruth.    1809.     10  yrs.     17"  x  12".    5  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.     Verse  223  (var.). 

E.  C.  Williams,  Esq. 

Clarke,  Susanka.  October  16,  1800.  8^"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Petit-point,  tent,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Conventional  tent-stitch  border,  strawberry  cross-borders.  Terrace  in  center, 
with  urn,  2  baskets  of  flowers,  flower-bed,  bird  on  tree,  2  swallows  flying.     Verse  46. 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Cleaver,  Haxnah.  May  9,  1814.  11  yrs.  14"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border. 
Conventional  designs.    Verse  too  faded  to  decipher.  Robert  P.  Jordan,  Esq. 

Clement,  Hannah  Ann.    1823.     [12  yrs.]     13"  x  12".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Beulah  A.  Saunders 

Clejient,  Isabella.  1812.  Philadelphia.  About  7  yrs.  6"  x  6i".  2  alphabets.  Flat,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.    Grapevine  border,  also  saw-tooth  border. 

The  Misses  Jennie  and  Helen  Gwynne 

Clement,  Mary.  1807.  Amesbury  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  12^"  x  12^".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet, 
and  cross-stitch.     Border  in  stem-stitch.     Pointed  design  at  bottom. 

Miss  Carrie  W.  Keniston 

Cleveland,  Mart  S.  1828.  14  yrs.  25"  x  21".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Realistic  straw- 
berry border.    Verses  94  (var.),  469.  Mrs.  Charles  Cleveland 

C[lews],  E[lizabeth]  A[nn].  1820?  Amherst  Court  House  [Amherst  County,  Va.].  4"  x  17". 
3  alphabets.    Great  variety  of  stitches  used.    Border  has  been  cut  off. 

Mrs.  Clementine  Watson  Boles 

Cloutman,  Sally  H.  1807.  Marblehead  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  16"  x  13V'.  1  alphabet.  Satin, 
stem,  and  cross-stitch.    Rose  border.    Scene  with  men,  women,  dog,  etc.    Verse  188. 

Mrs.  Theodore  Parker  Oooding 

Cobb,  Esther  G.  1813.  Springfield  [Vt.].  11  yrs.  16"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.  Border  design  a  cross  alternating  with  strawberry  on  a  criss-cross  vine.  Urn  with 
flowers,  woman,  two  large  trees,  two  dogs,  two  cats,  and  a  bunch  of  roses  at  bottom. 
Verse  732.  Mrs.  John  DeLoss  Underwood 

Cocke,  Ann  Blaws.  1822.  Bremo.  10"  x  12".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Hem- 
stitched border.  Mrs.  Richard  K.  Campbell 

Coffin,  Apphia.  1819.  Boscawen  [N.  H.].  8  yrs.  17f"  x  15i".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  carnation  border.  Pine  trees  on  either  side  at 
bottom.    Verse  279  (var.).  Miss  Mary  F.  Sawyer 


140  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

CoFFix,  Maey.  1801.  Newburj'port  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  Cross,  satin,  flat,  and  stem-stitch.  Saw- 
tooth and  vine  borders.  2  incomplete  alphabets.  At  the  bottom  a  grape  arbor,  and  in 
front  a  lady  with  a  train,  followed  by  a  Negro  slave  holding  a  parasol  over  her  head. 
In  the  center,  a  pond  with  four  ducks,  a  man  fishing,  and  two  women  under  an  orange 
tree.    There  are  two  weeping  willows  by  the  pond.    Verse  666.  Miss  Helen  Pike 

CoHEX,  Bella  H.  October  10,  1806.  [South  Carolina.]  14  yrs.  1  mo.  Cross,  eyelet,  and  satin- 
stitch.  Rose  border.  American  eagle  with  pennant,  with  word  "Independence"  on  it, 
surrounded  by  stars.  At  bottom,  house,  tree,  two  lambs,  rose  vine,  basliets  of  flowers. 
Verse  609  (var.).  Mrs.  M.  C.  Hammond 

CoiT,  Faxxy.  1801.  9  yrs.  7*"  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Simple  border.  Small 
basket,  birds,  and  animals.  Mrs.  H.  C.  Bunner 

CoiT,  Hakbiet.  1829.  [New  York.]  9  yrs.  [Born  in  New  London,  Conn.]  16^"  x  16^". 
Cross,  stem,  queen,  cat-stitch,  and  petit-point.  Carnation  and  strawberry  cross-borders. 
2  cornucopias  with  roses  and  grapes.    Verse  515.  Mrs.  John  Lester  Keep 

CoiT,  SusAX.     1806.    7  yrs.     10"  x  11".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.     Verse  46  (var.). 

Mrs.  H.  C.  Bunner 

Colby,  Elizabeth.     1803.     Haverhill,  County  Essex.    8  yrs.    8"  x  9".    Trees  and  urn. 

Mrs.  G.  C.  Fraser 

Cole,  Bbooksey.  1817.  Sutton  [Mass.].  14  yrs,  17"  x  18".  5  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.    Vine  border,  with  carnations  and  roses.    Verse  168. 

Miss  Mary  Lavey  Riley 

Cole,  Caholixe.  [Cir.  1800.]  Fayetteville  [Oneida  County,  N.  Y.].  9h"  x  6i".  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.    3  alphabets.    Plain  border.  Mrs.  Siegfried  Wachsman 

Cole,  Lauha  Mabgaret.  1814.  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.    Verse  734.  Reported  by  Mrs.  A.  A.  Lawrence 

Cole,  Mary  Axx.    1816.    Providence.    9^"  x  10".    Alphabet.    Cross-stitch.      Miss  Ellen  Chase 

Cole,  Zilpha.  1828.  "Carve."  8"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Borders  of  Greek  fret 
and  trees.     Basket  of  flowers  and  other  conventional  designs. 

Fitchburg  Antique  Shop,  1917 

Coles,  Mary.  1818.  EUisburg  School  [near  Philadelphia].  22"  x  21".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Floral  border  on  three  sides,  with  name,  date,  and  small  birds  in  center  at  top. 
At  bottom,  house,  queer  conventionalized  trees,  and  small  animals.  Detached  designs  of 
flowers,  baskets,  birds,  etc.,  fill  in  remainder  of  space.    Verse  758.         Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Collamoee,  Adeline.     1829.    Pembroke  [Mass.].    8  yrs.    9"  x  12".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Adeline  Collamore  Young 

CoLLAMOHE,  Lauha  Axx.  1829.  Pembroke  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  9"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.  Adeline  Collamore  Young 

CoLLExs,  Harriot.  1804.  14  yrs.  18"  x  16".  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Unusual  conventional 
flowers  in  border  at  top  and  sides;  at  bottom,  basket  of  fruit  in  center,  with  baskets  of 
carnations  and  poppies  on  either  side.  Family  record:  "Friend  CoUens  born  September  16, 
1726;  Philana  Norton  born  September  12,  1761;  Married  February  20,  1785.  John  Collens 
born  October  1,  1785;  Mary  Ann  Collens  born  March  21,  1787;  William  Henry  CoUens  born 
Nov.  3,  1788;  Harriot  Collens  born  September  2,  1790;  George  Lemon  Collens  born  Oct.  23, 
1792,  George  Lemon  Collens  died  Sept.  10,  1793;  Sophia  T.  Collens  born  Sept.  23,  1794, 
died  1795;  Sophia  Theresa  Collens  born  June  16,  1797;  Jonathan  Collens  born  December  19, 
1799;  Emily  Collens  born  March  6,  1801."  Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 


PLATE  XLYIII 

Mary  Hamii.tox's  Sampler.     Maytown.     1812 

Done  in  Mrs.  Welchan's  Scliool 

Owned  by  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Cue 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  141 

Collins,  Ann  S.  1801.  17V'  x  19".  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Carnation  border.  Elaborate 
rose  cross-border  at  bottom,  and  also  cross-border  of  roses  and  tulips.  Verses  132  (1,  var.), 
246  (var.),  359  (1).  Mrs.  Algernon  Sydney  Sullivan 

Collins,  Eliza.    1807.    8  yrs.     Verse  606  (1,  var.).     Names  and  dates: 
"John  Collins  Born  Aug.  80,  1771. 
Rebeckah  Collins  Born  May  1,  1773. 
Married  July  3,  1798 
Their  offspring. 
Eliza  Born  Mar  3rd  1799. 
George  Born  Mar  23rd  1801. 
Caroline  W.  Born  Ap  22d  1803. 
Charles  Born  Aug  8th  1807."  Miss  Susan  Varney 

Collins,  Eliza  M.  1828.  17"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  House. 
Verse  792.  The  Misses  Collins 

Collins,  Sarah  Ann  Mahriott.  1824.  9  yrs.  12"  x  12".  4  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  queen,  and 
cross-stitch.    Verse  60.  The  Misses  Collins 

CoLQUHOuN,  Rebecca  Bolling.  [Cir.  1800.]  Petersburg  [Va.].  12"  x  16".  7  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Simple  designs.    Verse  393.  Mrs.  James  N.  Edwards 

CoLTON,  Betsey.     1807.     Hartford  [Conn.].     11 V'  x  15".     Stem  and  cross-stitch.     Ornamental 
cross-stitch  border.     Large  design  at  bottom  of  fruits,  leaves,  etc.     Design  at  top,  bow- 
knot  and  festoon  of  moss  roses,  buds,  and  leaves.    Verse  277.    Names  and  dates: 
"Aaron  Colton  Born  December  5,  1758. 
Elizabeth  Olmsted  Born  August  26,  1762. 

Married  April  6,  1787. 

Laura  Colton  Born  May  2,  1788. 
Betsey  Colton  Born  March  18,  1794. 
Anson  Colton  Born  December  23,  1797. 
Nathan  Colton  Born  May  27,  1799." 

Miss  Bessie  Colton  Farr 

Combs,  Abigail.  1820.  15"  x  17".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border  and  conventional 
strawberry  along  3  sides.  Design  in  center  of  star,  fruit,  flowers,  birds,  and  animals. 
Initials:  "SC,   AC,  EC,   RC,   SC,   MC,   LC."    Verse  395  (4,  var.). 

Miss  Anna  Bell  Weatherby 

CoMPTON,  Hannah  B.  1826.  Port  Elizabeth  [Cumberland  County,  N.  J.].  10  yrs.  17"  x  18". 
1  alphabet.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  cross  and  Greek  fret  border.  Trees,  birds, 
flowers,  fruits,  sprays  of  strawberries,  cats  and  dogs,  urn  of  flowers,  basket  of  flowers, 
crowns,  swan,  doves,  etc.,  at  sides  and  at  bottom.    Verse  172.  Mrs.  Japhet  M.  Fox 

CoMSTOCK,  E.     1822.    9"  x  11".    3  alphabets.  Mrs.  C.  D.  Owen 

Cone,  Lucinthia.  1808.  Westchester  [Conn.].  11  yrs.  9^"  x  7".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.    Cross-border.     At  bottom,  rosebuds  and  some  large  flowers. 

Eveline  W.  Brainerd 

CoNGDON,  Mary  I.  1821.  New  Bedford  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  5  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Rose  border;  cross-borders  in  strawberry,  vine,  and  other  designs.  Two  cornu- 
copias, filled  with  flowers,  in  center,  at  bottom.    Verse  515. 

Old  Dartmouth  Historical  Society 

CoNGUox,  Rebecca  H.     1812.     13  yrs.     11"  x  94".    3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Miss  Eliza  B.  Hazie 


142  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

CoNKLiK,  Agnes  Mary.  1805.  Jamaica  [L.  I.].  9  yrs.  13"  x  16".  Trefoil  border.  House, 
tree,  and  fence  at  bottom;  dog  and  tree  in  center.    Verse  693  (1).         F.  C.  Thomas,  Esq. 

CoNovEH,  Alice.  10  yrs.  18"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Design  at  bottom,  replica  of  Mechanicstown, 
also  2  baskets  and  lions.     Verse  576.  Mrs.  Renwick  C.  Hurry 

CoNOVER,  Sarah  Ann.  [Cir.  1809.]  Born  July  8,  1797.  164"  x  21".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.  Triple  strawberry  border  on  sides.  Flowers  and  bird  across  top  and  baskets 
of  fruit  and  animals  at  bottom.  Scene  with  Adam  and  Eve  and  Tree.  "  Abraham,  Abra- 
ham here  am  I  and  he  said  lay  not  thine  hand."    Verse  515  (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

CoNovER,  Leah.  1826.  16  yrs.  Middletown  [now  Holmdel,  N.  J.].  15"  x  18".  Made  at 
Middletown  Academy.  1  alphabet.  Trees.  "Favor  is  deceitful  and  beauty  is  vain,  but 
a  woman  that  feareth  the  Lord  She  shall  be  praised.  Give  her  the  fruit  of  Her  hands 
and  let  her  own  Works  praise  her  in  the  gates."  Miss  Anna  Lawrence  Crawford 

Conway,  Elizabeth.  1807.  Marblehead,  Mass.  11  yrs.  13"  x  11".  French  knot,  stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.    Basket  of  flowers  with  a  spray  in  each  corner.  Miss  F.  P.  Hammond 

Cook,  Mary  Ann.  1823.  Newburyport,  Mass.  9  yrs.  6"  x  12".  4  alphabets.  Flat,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.     Verse  150  (1).  Elizabeth  B.  Myrick 

Cook,  Mary  Maria.  1820.  10  yrs.  Born  July  16,  1810.  16"  x  20".  Alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem, 
satin,  cross,  and  flat-stitch.  Strawberry  border  on  three  sides;  cross-borders  in  trefoil, 
heart,  carnation,  and  vine  designs.  At  bottom,  weeping  willow  trees,  with  tombstone  in 
center  bearing  inscription:  "Sacred  to  the  Memory  of  Humphrey  Cook  who  died  May  18, 
1812  Aged  24."  Names  and  dates:  "Humphrey  Cook  was  Born  March  21st  1788.  Died 
May  18,  1812.  Harriet  Cook  was  Born  August  8,  1790.  Mary  Maria  Cook  was  Born  July 
16,  1810.    Humphrej'  Cook  was  Born  Novr  5,  1811."    Verse  315.      Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Cook,  Nancy.  1823.  Lyme  [N.  H.].  18"  x  18".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Border  in  pointed 
design.  Large  candlestick  design.  Cross-borders  in  diamond,  candlestick,  or  flower  tree 
designs.    "S.  M."    Verse  511  (1).  Louise  Mears 

Cook,  Sally.     1809.    14  yrs.     5  alphabets.    Verses  155,  286. 

Cook,  Sarah.  1814.  7^"  x  13^".  Pineapple  border.  Scene  with  house,  trees,  and  deer,  also 
detached  birds,  trees,  butterflies,  large  dog,  and  leopard. 

On  sale  at  Walpole  Galleries,  June  29,  1917 

Cooke,  Elizabeth.     1818.     16"  x  10".    3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.    Verse  150. 

Mrs.  Harold  W.  Oatley 

Cooke,  Francis  Rebecca.  [Cir.  1810.]  Schenectady  [N.  Y.].  Born  April  7,  1798.  11^"  x  22". 
3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  border.    Medallion  design  at  bottom.    Verse  31. 

Mrs.  Quincy  O'M.  Gillmore 

Cool,  Abigail.  1810.  [14  yrs.]  Born  February  6,  1796.  14"  x  14".  6  alphabets.  Eyelet,  flat, 
and  queen-stitch  in  a  square.  Zigzag  border.   Verse  128  (1,  var.).    Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Coombs,  Eliza  Ann.  1818.  Newburyport.  8  yrs.  26V'  x  20".  Chain,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Flowery  hillside.  Family  record:  "The  family  of  Philip 
and  Ann  Jewett  Coombs.  Philip  Coombs  was  born  Dec.  16th,  1779 ;  Ann  J.  Morse  was  born 
May  11th,  1782;  (children)  Mary,  April  6th,  1807;  EUza  Ann,  July  15th,  1809;  John, 
Sept.  17th,  1812;  Philip,  July  26th,  1815."    Verse  513.  Mrs.  John  F.  Pearson 

Cooper,  Ann  P.  September  4,  1816.  19"  x  23".  Cat,  outline,  stem,  tent,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Vine  border  in  double  outline  with  flowers  and  buds.    Scene  with  terrace,  flowering 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  143 

tree,  squirrel  seated  between  limbs  of  tree,  at  bottom;  in  center,  green  bank  with  2  weep- 
ing willows.    Pleated  satin  ribbon  around  sampler,  with  rosette  at  each  corner. 

Mrs.  Walter  Hunt 

Cooper,  Martha  Ann.  1826.  Baltimore  [Md.].  8  yrs.  18"  x  20".  Split,  chain,  cat,  stem, 
tent,  queen,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  True  lovers'  knot  with  tassels,  also  carnations  with 
leaves  at  top;  vine  with  birds  and  flowers  alternating  at  sides.  House  with  peaked  roof, 
two  and  one-half  stories  high;  large  flower  urn  on  one  side;  flower  boxes  and  cedar  trees 
on  the  other  side ;  front  lawn  inclosed  with  panel  fence  and  iron  gate.    Verse  536. 

Mrs.  Lewis  Stewart  Elmer 

Copp,  Phebe  Esther.  1822.  8  yrs.  18"  x  24".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Double  zigzag  and 
strawberry  border.  Trees  and  rose  bushes,  also  hearts,  tulips,  etc.,  scattered  about. 
Verses  41,  553.  National  Museum 

CoRBix,  Jane  Virginia.  1825.  The  Reeds,  Caroline  County.  12"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.    Eyelet  border.    "Conscious  virtue  is  its  own  reward." 

Fitchburg  Antique  Shop,  1917 

Corey,  Sarah.  [Cir.  1800.]  Born  in  1787.  12"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Conventional  border.    Vases,  trees,  flowers,  birds,  grass,  etc. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Cornell,  Elizabeth  Baldwin.  1810.  White  Plains  [N.  Y.].  9  yrs.  12"  x  12".  Alphabet. 
Cross-stitch.  Cross-borders  of  vine,  rose,  fret,  and  cross-stitch  designs.  Beautiful  bouquet 
of  forget-me-nots,  jonquils,  and  roses,  also  a  spray  of  moss  roses,  harp  in  wreath,  pot  of 
flowers,  and  rabbit.  Mrs.  Thomas  W.  Strange 

Corning,  Patty  [Martha  Corning].  1803.  Londonderry  [N.  H.].  12  yrs.  Born  July  14,  1791. 
17"  X  17".  4  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  in  tree  and  diamond 
designs,  and  outlined  with  fancy  hemstitching.    Verse  679.  Miss  Louisa  A.  Orbeton 

CoHNSTOCK,  E.    1822.    9"  X  11".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  C.  D.  Owen 

Cortland,  Lucy  Maria  Randall.    1828.    18"  x  18".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Zigzag  border. 

National  Museum 

CoRTWHiGHT,  Hannah.  1807.  [ Wilkcs-Barrc,  Pa.  Born  February  7,  1798.]  9  yrs.,  6  mos., 
and  14  days  when  finished.    7^"  x  8;".    3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Robert  Miner  Abbott 

Costill,  Rebecca.    1817.    li"  x  7i".    Cross-stitch.    Vine  border.    Flowers  and  birds. 

Louise  Burr  Taylor 

CovELL,  Lydia.  [Cir.  1808  or  10.]  Glastonbury  [Conn.  Born  in  1800.].  11"  x  11".  3  alpha- 
bets.    Cross-stitch.     Greek  border.     Verse  163.  Mrs.  Eugene  C.  Stratton 

Cox,  SusANA.  [Cir.  1802.]  "West  Town  Boarding  School."  14"  x  13i".  [Born  in  1785.]  Very 
fine  cross-stitch.  28  designs  of  flowers,  fruit,  wreaths,  and  baskets  of  fruit  and  flowers. 
Illustrated.  Miss  Susan  P.  Wharton 

CozzENs,  Anne.  [Cir.  1804.]  Sherborn  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  [Born  in  1795.]  9"  x  12".  2  alpha- 
bets.   Cross-border.    Lines  of  feather-stitching  between  rows  of  letters.    Augusta  Barber 

Crawford,  Elizabeth.  1822.  Cape  May  [N.  J.].  8  yrs.  18^"  x  15*".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
outline,  and  queen-stitch.  Silk  fringe,  vine,  and  flower  design  in  border.  Births  of  chil- 
dren of  Jonathan  and  Hannah  Crowell  Crawford:  "Jonathan  and  William  Crawford  were 
born  May  15th,  1811;  Elizabeth  Crawford  was  born  July  22nd,  1814,  and  did  this  work 
April,  1822;  Rebecca  Crawford  was  born  Sept.  4th,  1818;  Barnabas  Crawford  was  born 
Aug.  27th,  1820;  Sarah  Crawford  was  born  May  7th,  1823;  Isaac  O.  Crawford  [no  date 
given]."  Mrs.  Thomas  Stevens 


144  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Crawford,  Rebecca.  1829.  Cape  May  [N.  J.].  11  yrs.  Born  September  4,  1818.  12^"  x  18". 
2  alphabets.  Star,  eyelet,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  links  and  diamonds,  also 
WaUs  of  Troy.     Vine  design.     Verse  553.  3Iiss  Mary  Elizabeth  Smith 

Ckespik,  Juli  Ann.  1830.  West  Chester  School.  16"  x  15".  Satin,  couch,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border  on  three  sides.  Heart-shaped  border  of  pink  rosebuds  and  leaves  in- 
closes verse.  In  center,  at  bottom,  brick  house,  trees,  lawn,  etc.  In  upper  left-hand  corner, 
an  aster  and  rosebud  within  border ;  outside  border,  in  upper  corners,  are  stars.    Verse  338. 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Crocker,  Eliza.  1803.  "At  Mrs.  Dobell's  Seminary  in  Boston."  16"  x  18".  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  In  center,  picture  with  house  and  tree  in  background  and  two  children  under 
tree  in  foreground.  Picture  surrounded  by  elaborate  floral  design  of  roses,  carnations, 
and  tulips.  Odd  conventional  strawberry  band  above  picture,  forming  sort  of  arch,  sup- 
ported by  solid  cross-stitch  pillars.  Verses  in  lower  corners  and  name,  date,  etc.,  in  upper 
corners.    Verse  634.     Illustrated.  Susan  P.  Peabody 

Crocker,  Leonice  H.  1806.  16"  x  20".  Eyelet,  cat,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  4  alphabets.  Con- 
ventional design  in  border.    Verse  412.  Miss  Lucy  G.  Peabody 

Croft,  Sarah  Eliza.  1829.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  9  yrs.  18"  x  18".  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 
Primrose  border.    Primrose  vine  and  flowers. 

"No  trees  bear  fruit  in  autumn  X  unless  they  blossom  in  the  spring  X  to  the  end  that 
our  age  may  be  profitable  and  laden  with  ripe  fruit  X  l^t  us  all  endeavour  that 
our  youth  may  be  studious  X   ^^^  flowered  with  blossoms  of  learning  and  ob- 
servation." 
"Virtue  is  the  greatest  ornament  of  youth,  it  is  the  foundation  of  honor  and  esteem  and 
the  source  of  all  beauty,  order  and  happiness  in  Nature.    Beauty  and  wit  will  die, 
learning  will  vanish  away  and  all  the  arts  of  life  will  soon  be  forgotten,  but  virtue 
will  remain  forever." 
"The  flower  of  youth  never  appears  more  beautiful  than  when  it  bends  toward  the  sun 
of  Righteousness." 
Verse  126.  Miss  Oeorgie  L.  Gready 

Crosby,  Elizabeth  H.  1812.  Born  August  12,  1804.  8  yrs.  10"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
stem,  and  cross-stitch.     Rose  and  vine  border.    Verse  601   (1,  2,  var.). 

Mrs.  Horace  N.  Fisher 

Grossman,  Nancy.     [Cir.  1823.    West  Boylston,  Mass.]     8"  x  10".    3  alphabets. 

Miss  Pamelia  H.  Parker 
Crowninshield,  Maria  Louisa.    1825.    Salem.    9  yrs.    17"  x  17".    4  alphabets.    Single,  double, 

and  quadruple  cross-stitch.     Conventionalized  strawberry  and  leaf  design  around  verse. 

"Do  as  you  would  be  done  by."    Verses  123,  645  (2).  Mrs.  Helen  Suzette  de  Gersdorf 

CuMMiNGs,  Judith.  1805.  Topsfield  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  12^"  x  151".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge.  Rose  border  at  sides  and  strawberries  in  center  at  top  and 
in  each  lower  corner.  Fuchsias  and  other  flowers  in  fancy  vase  in  center.  Pine  tree  and 
grass  on  each  side  of  vase.    Verse  270.  Mrs.  Horace  Plumer 

Cunningham,  Susannah.  [Before  1813.]  "August  27th."  14  yrs.  15J"  x  18J".  3  alphabets. 
Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  design  of  leaves  and  flowers  in  border.  Various 
designs  in  cross-borders.     Verse  649.  Mrs.  Andrew  C.  Wheelwright 

Currier,  Abigail  A.  1830.  Newbury,  Mass.  19  yrs.  10"  x  16".  5  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet, 
satin,  tent,  cross,  and  hem-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge.  Rose  border.  14  cross-bands.  Roses, 
leaves,  and  bow.  Verses  178,  236.  [Her  hands  were  lame  and  every  stitch  was  drawn 
through  with  her  teeth.]  Newburyport  Historical  Society 


PLATE  XLIX 

Clarissa  Ejiersox's  Sampler.     Lancaster,  Mass. 
Formerly  owned  by  Dzviyht  M.  Prouty,  Esq. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  145 

CuHHiEH,  Chahlotte.  1806.  Methuen  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  12"  x  5".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Geometrical  designs  in  border.    Rose  design  at  bottom.  Miss  Bessie  M.  Swan 

CuHRiER,  Chahlotte.  1808.  Methuen  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Cat  and 
cross-stitch.    Vine  border.  Miss  Bessie  M.  Swan 

CuaRiEH,  Sally.  1806.  Methuen  [Mass.].  Born  March  7,  1796.  12"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Satin 
and  cross-stitch.    Flat-stitch  design  in  border.  Miss  Bessie  M.  Swan 

CtJHTis,  Elisabeth.  1826.  Beverly  [Mass.].  16"  x  16".  Born  August  1,  1815.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Border  of  ivy  leaves  and  berries,  also  saw-tooth  border.  Family  record: 
"Mr.  William  Curtis  was  born  in  Beverly,  Mass.  Sept.  18,  1792.  Miss  Betsey  Dodge  was 
born  in  Wenham  Mass.  Nov.  25th,  1792.  They  were  married  1812.  Mr.  Curtis  died  in  Cape 
Henry,  West  Indies,  Feb.  17,  1820.  Blest  be  the  tie  which  binds  our  hearts  in  nuptial  love. 
Lucy  Ann  Curtis  born  May  3,  1813.  Elisabeth  Curtis  born  Aug.  1st,  1815.  Mary  S.  Curtis 
Born  Nov.  9th,  1817.    Abigail  Curtis  Born  Feb.  17,  died  20,  1820."    Verse  61. 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Gushing,  Jane  L.  1825.  Hull  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  Born  December  20,  1816.  12"  x  12".  3  alpha- 
bets.   Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Triangular  design  in  border.    Verse  515. 

A.  Stainforth,  Dealer,  1917 

CtJSHiNG,  Mary.  July,  1820.  Hull  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  10"  x  9i".  3  alphabets.  Petit-point  and 
cross-stitch.    Elaborate  vine  in  the  form  of  a  Greek  fret  in  border.    Birds,  beast,  and  plants, 

A.  Stainforth,  Dealer,  1917 

CusHiNG,  Mahy  Ann.  1822.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  6  yrs.  15"  x  16A".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Cross-borders  with  heart,  Greek  key,  trefoil, 
and  triangular  designs.    Tree  on  either  side  of  name.  Miss  Ellen  Gilliss  Todd 

CusHiNG,  Nancy.  1816.  [Probably  Hingham,  Mass.]  9i"  x  5i".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Two  diamonds  and  one  heart.     Initials  "S  C  B"  in  left-hand  corner. 

Miss  Margaret  W.  Cushing 

CuTLEH,  Abigail  Bigelow.  1808.  Rockingham  [Vt.].  8  yrs.  11"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Tent, 
eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Border  of  vine  and  double  tent.    Verse  615  (1,  var.). 

Arthur  Chase,  Esq. 

Cutler,  Hakriet.  1808.  Rockingham  [Vt.].  11  yrs.  Born  November  15,  1796.  12"  x  16". 
Cat,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border.  Verse  279  (var.).  Names  and 
dates:  "Samuel  Cutler  and  Jennett  Caldwell  were  married  July  15th  1786.  Maria  Ann  and 
John  Lenox  Cutler  born  April  23rd  1788.  James  Iredell  Cutler  born  May  20th  1792. 
Harriet  Cutler  born  Novr  15th,  1796.  Abigail  Bigelow  Cutler  born  Jany  7th  1799.  Abigail 
B.  Cutler  died  March  15th  1806."     [All  were  born  at  Hartford,  Conn.] 

Lawrence  Brainerd,  Esq. 

Cutler,  Lydia.  1818.  Royalston  [Mass.].  11"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Rose  border.  Basket  of  roses  and  several  other  flowers.  Plants  in  each  corner.  Wreath 
of  roses.  Mrs.  John  Brooks 

Cutler,  Sophia.  [Cir.  1807.]  Rindge  [N.  H.].  Born  January  30,  1794.  20"  x  17".  3  alpha- 
bets. Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Three  borders,  one  of  solid  work  and  two  in  Greek  fret. 
Verse  511  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Charles  H.  Atkinson 

Cutler,  Sophia.  1801.  8  yrs.  174"  x  21".  Wide  vine  border  on  three  sides.  Scene  with  house, 
bridge  over  a  river,  birds,  baskets,  etc.    Verse  222.  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 


146  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Daggett,  Maria.  1819.  Providence  [R.  I.].  9  yrs.  17"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.     Rose  border.    Verse  57.  Mrs.  Joseph  H.  Jewett 

Daggett,  Maby  M.  1813.  Holmes  Hole  [Mass.].  [8  yrs.]  17"  x  15".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.    Rose  border.    House.    Verse  94  (var.).  Mrs.  Rebecca  D.  Getchell 

Dallas,  Axx.  1810.  Salem  [N.  J.].  10  yrs.  Born  March  11,  1800.  17i"  x  22i".  7  alphabets. 
Buttonhole,  outline,  tent,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  strawberry  border.  Sam- 
pler divided  into  3  panels,  running  lengthwise.  Designs  of  blooming  plants  and  buds. 
"See  that  ye  fall  not  out  by  the  way."    Verses  54,  82,  511  (1,  var.). 

Miss  Adaline  Sinnickson 

Daka,  Mart.    1812.     10"  x  8".     1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  515.  3£rs.  B.  Bay  Phelan 

Danford,  Elizabeth  Parker.  1805.  16  yrs.  17"  x  12".  Flat  and  cross-stitch.  4  alphabets. 
Realistic  vine  border.    Verses  220a,  688.  Mrs.  William  Henry  Gilbane 

Dakforth,  Rebecca  Brown.  1820.  Newbury  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  Born  January  8,  1811.  17"  x  17". 
5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  tent,  flat,  cat,  French  knot,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Trefoil  bor- 
der. Vase  of  flowers,  trees,  lambs,  butterflies,  and  other  ornamental  designs.  Verse  515 
(1>  var.).  Etta  T.  Lovett 

Daniels,  Nabby  Shilaber.  Danvers  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  19"  x  25".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.  Vine  border  with  tulips,  carnations,  and  marguerites.  Vase  with  flowers  and  vine 
running  upward.    Verses  40  (var.),  128  (var.). 

Miss  Annie  S.  Symonds  and  Mrs.  Frank  M.  Ooss 

Daniels,  Sally.  1810.  Danvers  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  22"  x  24".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  French 
knots,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  and  tulip  border.  Elaborate  cornucopia  design  at  bottom. 
Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Lucy  F.  Caller 

Daniels,  Sarah  P.  1814.  Born  October  22,  1802.  16"  x  20".  5  alphabets.  French  knots, 
chain,  stem,  satin,  double  and  single  cross-stitch.  Carnation  and  vine  border.  Large  basket 
in  center,  holding  roses,  pansies,  tulips,  and  forget-me-nots;  at  left,  a  smaller  basket  of 
fruit;  at  right,  a  pitcher  with  sprays  of  berries.    Verse  609.  Sara  Adeline  Thompson 

Dare,  Jane.  1821.  Bridgeton  [Cumberland  County,  N.  J.].  11  yrs.  Born  January  11,  1810. 
17"  x  18".  5  alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet,  queen,  tent,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth  bor- 
der done  in  flat-stitch.  Sprays  of  flowers  and  buds  on  either  side  of  rectangle  inclosing 
verse.  Verse  319.  Initials:  "D  D  [David  Dare,  father];  R  D  [Rebecca  Dare,  mother, 
daughter  of  Jonathan  and  Mary  Fithian] ;  E  F  D  [Enoch  Fithian,  brother] ;  S  D  [Sarah, 
sister];  W  D  [William,  brother];  E  D;  M  H  D  [Mary  Hay,  sister];  J  F  [Jonathan 
Fithian,  maternal  grandfather] ;  M  F  [Mary  Fithian,  maternal  grandmother]';  A  F  [Ann, 
daughter  of  J.  &  M.  F.] ;  E  F  [Elizabeth,  daughter];  D  F  [Daniel,  son];  M  F  [Mary, 
daughter] ;  J  F  [Joel,  son] ;  E  F  [Emily,  daughter] ;  M  F  [Mary,  daughter] ;  S  F  [Sarah, 
daughter]."  Mr.  Charles  E.  Sheppard 

Darling,  Elizabeth.  1823.  Henniker  [N.  H.].  11  yrs.  16"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  vine,  roses,  carnations,  and  berries,  in  clusters.  Verse 
645  (2).  Julia  B.  Park 

Davenport,  Eliza.  1818.  New  Bedford  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  16"  x  18".  5  alphabets.  Stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.    Rose  border.    Verse  104  (2).  Francis  O.  Allen,  Esq. 

Davenport,  Joanna  C.  1826.  15  yrs.  16J"  x  16V'.  Saw-tooth  and  rose  borders.  Family 
register:  "Jereiiie  Davenport  Born  Feb.  1781;  Polly  B.  Davenport  Born  Aug.  2,  1784. 
Were  married  Sept.  19,  1806  and  had  the  following  children: — 


1^ 


^>^/.  # 


I.     '^.-^'^n 


,1 


I 


VS- 


1^ 


■//l'^ 


4i 


<PSE- 


1^ 


*f 


PLATE  L 

Lauka  Bowker's  Sampler.     1817 

Owned  by  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Plate  fresented  by  Mrs.  Barrett  Wendell 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  147 

Jereme  Davenport  died  September  19,  1838.    Polly  B.  Davenport  died  January  1,  1870. 

Warren  T.  &  Rufus  Born  Dec.  23,  1807.  Died  Apr.  25,  1809. 

Jereme  B.  Born  Jan.  28,  1809.  Died  Apr.  7,  1830. 

Rufus  W.  Born  Jan.  30,  1810. 

Joanna  C.  Born  Mar.  2,  1811.  Died  Sept.  13,  1831. 

Oliver  G.  Born  April  30,  1812. 

Ariel  H.  Born  Nov.  1813.  Died  Oct.  13,  1871. 

JohnN,  Born  Dec.  10,  1814. 

Aaron  K.  Born  Feb.  12,  1816. 

Jesse  C.  Born  Mar.  22,  1817.  Died  May  20,  1863. 

Mary  Born  Aug.  28,  1818. 

PhebeJ.  Born  Dec.  11,  1819, 

Jonas  Born  May  10,  1821. 

Joseph  C.  Born  June  2,  1822. 

Charles  W.  Born  Mar.  8,  1826. 

Abner  B.  Born  May  22,  1827." 

[The  dates  later  than  1826  were  put  in  by  some  member  of  the  family  other  than  Joanna.] 

A.  Stainforth,  Dealer,  1915 

Davenport,  Lydia.  1800.  Dorchester  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  13"  x  16".  1  alphabet.  Stem,  filler, 
chain,  cat,  and  cross-stitch.    Scene  with  house,  trees,  and  flowers.    Verse  490  (var.). 

The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Davis,  Abigail.  1820.  19^"  x  19^".  Queen,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  Scene 
with  house,  trees,  parrots,  and  flowers.     Verse  532.  Mrs.  Renwick  C.  Hurry 

Davis,  Hannah  (B.?)  1827.  Woodstown  [N.  J.].  13  yrs.  2\l"  x  2l\".  Cross-stitch.  Rose 
border.     Border  of  flowers,  trees,  animals,  and  birds  around  the  verse.    Verse  481. 

Mrs.  Isabella  Smith  Lippincott 

Davis,  Lucy  Ann.  1808.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  1^"  x  8^".  3  partial  alphabets. 
Satin  and  cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  border  across  top.  Lucie  A.  Peabody 

Davis,  Mara  Ann.  1816.  [Cumberland  County,  N.  J.]  7  yrs.  6f "  x  dV'.  2  alphabets.  Outline 
and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Strawberry  and  Greek  cross  designs  at  bottom.  Verse  41 
(var,).    Initials:  "J  A,  LA,  R  D,  M  D,  AD,  ED,  AD,  ED,  LA  D." 

Mrs.  Jonathan  W.  Acton 

Davis,  Mary  E,  1816.  Woodstown  [N.  J.].  17^"  x  21^".  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Bor- 
der of  strawberries  and  sprays  of  flowers.  Urn  with  flowers,  also  animals  and  birds,  in 
design  at  bottom.     Verse  750.  Mrs.  Isabella  Smith  Lippincott 

Davis,  Ruth.  1817.  Cumberland  [N.  J.].  11  yrs.  Hi"  x  13V'.  3  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  line  border.  At  bottom,  tree  surmounted  by  bird  and 
geometrical  and  floral  figures.  Verses  41  (var.),  490  (var.),  526  (1).  Initials:  "R  D, 
H  D,  J  A,  L  A,  S  D,  L  D,  D  A  D,  J  W  D,  W  D,  R  D,  A  D,  I  D,  S  D,  L  D,  G  B  D, 
H  W  D."  Miss  Josephine  McAltioner 

Deacon,  Ann  [Burr].  [Before  1810.]  Weston  School.  [Born  September  22,  1788.]  13"  x  14". 
Eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  18  sprays  of  flowers  around  outside;  inside,  11  different 
designs,  baskets  of  flowers,  wreaths  inclosing  initials,  etc.  Initials  "  I  D  H  "  stand  for  John 
and  Hannah  Deacon,  father  and  mother.  Gertrude  N.  Deacon 

Deacon,  Hannah  E.  1816.  Weston  School,  [Born  June  14,  1799.]  11"  x  11".  Flat,  darning, 
chain,  and  cross-stitch.    Sampler  divided  into  blocks  of  7  different  designs. 

Gertrude  E.  Deacon 


148  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Dealt,  Mary.  1806.  7  yrs.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vines  intertwined  across  sampler. 
Addition  made  to  sampler:  "She  was  a  blessing  here  below.  An  only  child  of  a  widow. 
Subscribed  by  Sally  Parker."  Mrs.  Richard  H.  Hunt 

Deax,  Catharine.  1813.  Charlestown  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  12"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Vine  and  rosebud  border.    Strawberry  cross-border.    Verse  159.      Worcester  Art  Museum 

Dean,  Elizabeth.  1806.  Taunton  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  14^"  x  18^".  5  alphabets.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.    Zigzag  border  and  floral  border.    Verse  647.  Sarah  B.  Williams 

Dean,  Mart.  1819.  11  yrs.  11"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross-stitch  motifs. 
Verse  79.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Dearth,  Elizabeth  B.     1825.     13"  x  8".    4  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.  Miss  Kate  Simmons 

Decow,  Abigail.  1821.  Chesterfield  School.  17"  x  19".  Outline,  flat,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Rose  border  with  bluebirds,  butterflies,  and  baskets  of  roses  and  buds.  Large  and  small 
pine  trees  and  rose  bushes  on  strip  of  green  grass.    Verse  316.      James  Linton  Engle,  Esq. 

Decow,  Margaret.  1825.  Chesterfield  [Burlington  County,  N.  J.].  18"  x  16".  Cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.  At  top,  five  plants  in  pots;  at  bottom,  scene  with  house,  tree,  birds, 
and  butterfly.    Verses  316,  478.  Mrs.  Margaret  T.  Engle 

Deerixg,  Ellen  D.    1810.    7  yrs.    17"  x  16".    6  alphabets.    Eyelet,  chain,  queen,  and  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Ellen  J.  Richardson 

Dennett,  Elizabeth.     1815.     11  yrs.     8"  x  12".     3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Dennis,  Elizabeth.  1822.  Salem  [N.  J.  9  yrs.  Born  in  1813.]  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border. 
Geometrical  design  in  center,  containing  2  birds,  name  and  date,  trees,  flowers,  vases,  2  dogs, 
and  verse.    Verse  377.  Miss  Elizabeth  Dennis  Holme 

Dennt,  Adeline.  [Cir.  1800.]  Leicester  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  17"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.  Simple  border.  Scene  with  large  brick  house,  one  large  tree,  and  two  unfinished 
trees.    Verse  511  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  William  Hooper 

Dennt,  Caroline.  1814.  Leicester  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  17"  x  12i".  1  alphabet.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  with  border  of  rose  design.  In  center,  a  large  brick  house 
with  road  in  front.    Verse  41  (var.).  Mrs.  John  A.  Sweetser 

[De  Vent,  Maria  Catherine  Elizabeth.]  181  [2].  New  Haven.  7  yrs.  8"  x  16".  2  alphabets. 
Hemstitched  edge.    Cross-stitch.  Howard  M.  Chapiri,  Esq. 

Devereux,  Mart.  1804.  [Marblehead,  Mass.]  10  yrs.  1  alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Verse  407.  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Diament,  Rosena.  1801.  Jones  Island  [near  Cedarville,  Cumberland  County,  N.  J.].  8  yrs. 
Born  January  11,  1793.  14"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  tent,  queen,  and  cross-stitch. 
Carnation  border.    Strawberry  and  baskets  of  flowers  at  bottom.    Verse  662. 

Mrs.  Rosena  Foster  Whitlock 

Dick,  Maria.  [Cir.  1807.]  Salem  [N.  J.  About  11  yrs.].  7^"  x  IIV'.  2  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Initials:  "S  D  [Dr.  Samuel  Dick,  father] ;  S  D  [Sarah  Dick, 
mother];  R  D  [Rebecca];  M  D  [Maria];  J  D  [Jane];  S  D  [Samuel];  A  D  [Anna]; 
I  D  [Isabel] ;  S  D  [Sally] ;  W  D  [William],  [children  of  Samuel  and  Sarah  Dick]." 

Miss  Maria  H.  Mecum 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  149 

DicKiNsox,  Ame  S.  August  28,  1805.  Amherst  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  16"  x  20".  3  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  border.    Trees,  mill,  basket,  hearts.  Harriet  Carr  Loomis 

Dickinson,  Mahy.  [Cir.  1809.  Berks  County,  Pa.]  12  yrs.  Born  in  1797.  17"  x  21".  1  alpha- 
bet. Queen,  outline,  stem,  and  various  other  stitches.  Elaborate  conventional  design  in 
border.  Urn  with  flowers,  rosebuds,  birds,  stars,  and  sprays  of  flowers  in  design  at  bottom. 
Verses  226,  488  (var.).  Emily  Haines 

DiMOND,  Ann.  1808.  8  yrs.  12"  x  16".  Flat  and  cross-stitch.  Red  berries  falling  from  top 
border  and  fringe  looped  across  with  cord  and  3  tassels;  large  perspective  portal  look- 
ing into  a  garden,  and  on  either  side  smaller  doors;  pine  trees  and  urns  of  tulips  seen 
through  doors.  Scene  with  brick  house,  dog  on  either  side,  2  urns,  2  pine  trees.  Under- 
neath, a  large  windmill,  with  large  bird  and  squirrel  on  either  side.  "The  eyes  of  the  Lord 
are  in  every  place  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good."  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

DivEBs,  Ann.    1813.     13  yrs.    17"  x  15^".    Verse  363  (2,  var.).  Mrs.  H.  E.  Oillingham 

DocKBAY,  Maby.  1829.  17"  x  14".  6  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Verses  615, 
796a.  Mrs.  M.  F.  Cocroft 

Dodge,  Abigail  M.  1824.  North  Beverly  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  16"  x  18".  5  alphabets,  French 
knot,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  Design  with  large  jars  of  roses  and  a  weeping 
willow  tree.    Verse  471.  Miss  Alice  M.  Dodge 

Dole,  Sabah.  1819.  9  yrs.  16"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Vine  and  flowers  on  either  side.  At  bottom,  basket  of  flowers,  with  deer  and  cow  on  one 
side  and  2  birds  on  the  other,  also  trees.    Verse  559.    Illustrated.  Leonard  Smith,  Esq. 

DoBBAXCE,  Maby.  1816.  Providence  [R.  I.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  8".  2  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet, 
cat,  and  cross-stitch.  "Life  and  immortality  are  brought  to  light  by  the  Gospel.  Remember 
thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth."  Mrs.  M.  L.  D.  Aldrich 

DoBSEY,  Peiscilla  Milcah.  1822.  EUicott  City  [Howard  County,  Md.].  9  yrs.  17"  x  17". 
Cross  and  hem-stitch.    Strawberry-vine  border.    Peacocks,  dogs,  and  crowns. 

Mrs.  Edward  M.  Hammond 

DoswELL,  Maby  Elizabeth  Pobthbess.  1802.  [Va.]  11  yrs.  17"  x  17^".  Stem,  satin-stitch, 
and  French  knots.  Strawberry  and  blackberry  border,  with  fruit  and  blossoms  and  a  kind 
of  tiger  lily.  Bow-knot  at  top  and  bottom.  In  the  center,  basket  filled  with  different 
flowers.    "Taught  by  Mrs.  Woodson."  /.  E.  Perkenson,  Esq. 

Douglas,  Angelina.  "July  the  1,  1823."  Wilton  [N.  H.].  12  yrs.  18"  x  16".  Cross,  satin, 
long  and  short,  and  stem-stitch.  3  alphabets.  An  oval  picture  of  Wilton,  with  the  back  of 
the  church  on  the  right.    Verses  627  (1),  771.  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Douine,  Margabet.  1826.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  13  yrs.  18"  x  16".  1  alphabet.  Eyelet,  tent, 
stem,  satin,  cross,  and  hem-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Basket  of  fruit  flanked  by  baskets 
of  roses;  stars  at  intervals  and  peacocks  in  corners.    Verse  783.      Miss  Margaret  B.  Mure 

Dover,  Cathobine.  1801.  Philadelphia.  8V'  x  17^".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  herring-bone,  tent, 
and  cross-stitch.    Cross-border.  Mrs.  William  E.  Black 

Dow,  Maby.  1805.  [Cumberland  County,  N.  C]  13  yrs.  11"  x  13i".  5  alphabets,  not  all  com- 
pleted. Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border  with  small  flowers  and  a  straw- 
berry in  each  corner.    At  bottom,  vines  crossing  and  forming  two  wreaths.    Verse  690. 

Miss  Nannie  MacQueen 


150  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Dowx,  M.  1828.  16"  x  18".  6  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  stem,  outline,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose, 
carnation,  and  vine  border. 

"Family  Record" 
M  T. 

John  .  Down  .  was  .  born  .  november  .  th  .  2  .  A.D.  17T7 
Amy  .  Down  .  was  .  born  .  sePtember  .  th  .  1.  A.D.  1782 
Mariah  .  Down  .  was  .  born  .  Jmie  .  th  .  2.  A.D.  1803 
Mary  .  Down  .  was  .  born  .  November  .  th  .  1.  A.D.  1813 
Charity  .  Down  .  was  .  born  .  July  .  th  .  16  .  A.D.  1816 
John  .  W.  Down  .  was  .  born  .  may  .  th  .  1.  A.D.  1824 
Amy  Down    deParted  this  life  October  .  th  .  4  A.D.  1828. 
E  T" 

Verse  187  (var.). 

Mrs.  William  D.  Frishmuth,  at  the  Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall, 
Pairmount  Park,  Philadelphia 

Doyle,  Mabgaret.  1806.  10  yrs.  17"  x  20".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border  at  top  and  bottom;  wide  border  at  sides  of  conventionalized  corn-flowers  and  other 
flowers ;  inside  border  of  fine  green  vine  with  little  pink  dots ;  below  verse,  band  of  straw- 
berries movmted  in  four  places  by  little  birds.  Diamond  border  incloses  verse.  Wreath  of 
strawberries  incloses  name  and  age,  and  flanked  on  each  side  by  conventional  pots  of  flowers. 
Verse  694.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Draper,  Harriet.  1829.  Providence.  17"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Verses 
113,  150.  Miss  Harriet  Sheldon 

Draper,  Sophia.  1806.  Brookville  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  17^"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  tent, 
and  cross-stitch.  Small  conventional  border.  Scene  with  house  on  a  hill,  4  trees  to  the  left, 
and  barn  and  door-yard  to  the  right.  Inset  of  2  pitchers  of  flowers  and  5  birds.  Verse 
601  (1,  2,  3,  var.).  Miss  S.  Ross 

Draper,  FAMiLy  Register.  [Cir.  1808.]  17"  x  20^".  Chain,  stem,  satin,  tent,  and  cross-stitch. 
Grape  vine  on  either  side.  Tree  in  lower  right-hand  corner  and  tombstone  in  lower  left, 
bearing  inscription:  "Mary  Draper  died  Dec.  9,  1800.  Dear  Babe  at  Rest  we  Hope  Thee 
Blest."    Verses  53,  83,  287. 

"Family  Register 
Nathan  Draper     Born  Sept.  18,  1761. 
Hannah  Whiting     Born  April  10,  1768. 

They  were  married  December  28,  1788. 
And  have  had  the  following  children  viz. 
Elizabeth  Draper    Born  April  16,  1790. 
Hannah  Draper     Born  August  23,  1792. 
William  W.  Draper     Born  August  18,  1794. 
Charlotte  Draper    Born  Sept.  6,  1796. 
Julia  E.  Draper    Born  November  13,  1798. 
Mary  Draper     Born  November  25,  1800. 
George  W.  Draper    Born  Nov.  30,  1801. 
Emily  Draper    Born  December  6,  1803. 
Caleb  E.  Draper    Born  June  9,  1806. 
Catherine  Draper    Born  May  1,  1808."  W.  K.  Draper,  Esq. 

Drew,  Sarah  SxELLixG.  1823.  9  yrs.  17"  x  7".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  "Be  virtuous  and 
be  happy."  Mrs.  Sydney  B.  Burleigh 


^^ 


M 


■i 


^ 


■""«  yliK 


"j-'^M  \'^    «"'*"j    S*  "e*  'i^  V    *••  o»  ••*       '.r^    ■  •  ^  ^» 


a  S-TUVWi;     '^-vV 


<^<^j?<<i:^<«^^<^»5^1^' 

■::;.^;;.-;.     ...  '^ 

>  '.i?  iS  -.••;;..•-;..•^•^ 

V  jodef g'hji.kiwii^opqr^- 

tu  x>-^  'Cs/ j<t| 2* J  2-3  <'4 1:  <-•;  7  ' 

rDs!  the  ^»t^t  (he  fits'^  Tiiwwag^ 
'5>h«ti'(ui  *Brn«g  wfth  -s-nJei  reu.li 


''-^■"^ '  <i  the*  ihoii  TrsAt  *Sr««c<>r     ■ 


^ate  the    ■i.^^-V  :■:%■   Cu>.; 


5  »e» 


PLATE  LI 


Lucy  D.  Stickney's  Sampler.     Charlestown,  Mass.     1830 

View  of  Charlestown 

Owned  by  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  151 

Deummond,  Maria.  1809.  Warrenton.  7  yrs.  11"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Border 
of  conventionalized  flowers  and  cross-stitch  scallop.  Scene  with  large  house,  3  smaller 
houses,  bird-house,  birds,  trees,  and  various  other  designs.     Verse  714. 

Dr.  William  A.  Hardaway 

Dukes,  Sara  Elizabeth.  1815.  9  yrs.  13"  x  15|".  Conventional  rose  border.  Leopard  rest- 
ing between  two  trees,  also  two  dishes  of  fruit. 

"Love  your  parents,  they  claim  your  love,  they  love  you  with  great  aflFection.  Who  is 
so  kind  to  you  as  your  parents  .  who  supplies  all  your  wants  .  who  provides  for 
your  education  .  who  delights  to  make  you  happy  .  who  but  your  Parents  There- 
fore return  love  for  love." 
"Endeavour  to  employ  yourself  in  something  useful  .  Take  great  pains  to  learn  .  Too 
great  a  thirst  for  play  is  unfavourable  to  learning." 
Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  George  C.  Fraser 

DuKBAH,  Mary  S.  1811.  Taunton,  Mass.  8  yrs.  Si"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross- 
border.  Miss  M.  W.  Baylies 

Dunham,  Jane.  1812.  7"  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  In  center,  wreath  of  leaves  with 
name  and  date;  birds  on  one  side;  flowers  at  each  side  of  top  and  a  tree  on  either  side  at 
bottom.  Mrs.  James  Moses 

Dunham,  LiYdia.    1805.    45"  x  li".    1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.    Simple  border. 

Miss  Lucy  C.  Sweet 

Dunham,  Semantha.  1806.  Mansfield  [Conn.].  7  yrs.  Born  November  25,  1799.  12"  x  12". 
4  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  border.    Verse  697.    Miss  Julia  McA  Imont  Warner 

Dunham,  Sophia.  1811.  [Hartford].  10^"  x  lOV'.  4  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Pillars  and  arch  design  with  baskets  of  flowers.  ,  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Dupee,  Susannah  "Wallis.  1813.  Boston.  10  yrs.  12i"  x  12i".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  tent, 
and  cross-stitch.     Simple  cross-stitch  border.    2  small  vases  of  flowers. 

Miss  Gertrude  Whiting 

DuRAND,  Louisa.  1827.  18"  x  18".  Cross-stitch.  Border  of  roses,  buds,  and  leaves.  Basket 
of  flowers.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Duefee,  Abby  W.  1810.  New  Bedford  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  IT'xUi".  3  alphabets.  Satin,  stem, 
and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  border,  top  and  bottom.  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God 
with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  strength; 
thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself."    "Remember  now  thy  Creator",  etc. 

Miss  Abbie  W.  Covel 

Dustin,  Abigail.     1800.     12  yrs.    9"  x  7^".     Alphabet.    Cross-stitch.     [Unfinished.] 

Miss  McCairnes 

DuTTON,  Abigail.  1825.  Jaffrey,  N.  H.  16^"  x  18".  Alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Trees  and 
basket  of  flowers.    Wide  floral  design  at  bottom.    Verse. 

Sold  at  American  Art  Galleries,  New  York,  April  11, 1918 

DwiER,  Mary  H.  1828.  Kensington  [Philadelphia,  Pa.].  7  yrs.  UV  x  12i".  Cross-stitch. 
Border  of  vine  and  strawberries.  Scene  with  brick  house,  grass  plot  on  either  side,  and 
in  front,  trees  and  fence.  Mrs.  John  S.  Swoyd 

Dyer,  Anstis.  1812.  Providence  [R.  I.].  15"  x  11".  Flat,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Flat-stitch 
border.    "The  Ten  Commandments."  Mrs.  Anstis  Pearce  Dyer  Manton 


152 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


Dyer,  Susanna.  1802.  8  yrs.  17"  x  19".  Alphabet.  Stem,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Simple 
cross-stitch  border.    Two  buildings,  one  with  fence  around  it,  also  trees  and  shrubs. 

Mrs.  Thomas  Baker 

Eager,  Rebekah.     1807.     10  yrs.     13"  x  12",    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.     Verse  128  (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  R.  M.  Chickering 

Eagles,  Barbahy.  1808.  Bristol  School  [Pa.].  14"  x  18".  4  alphabets.  Detached  sprays  of 
flowers  and  baskets  of  flowers  around  edge.  Vine  with  very  few  leaves,  inclosing  al- 
phabets, etc.  Initials  scattered  about:  "  J  E,  C  E,  BE,  ME,  S  E,  ME,  F  G,  A  E." 
Illustrated.  Mrs.  Arthur  M.  Waitt 

Earle,  Fanny  Holroyd.  1817.  Providence  [R.  I.].  11  yrs.  13"  x  17V'.  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Cross  design  in  border.    Family  Register: 

"  Fanny  Holroyd  Earle  Born  Tuesday  July  8th  1806 
William  Earle  Born  Saturday  April  16th  1808 
George  Earle  Born  Sunday  October  1st  1809 
Sarah  Waterman  Earle  Born  Friday  August  31st  1812 
Marcy  Arnold  Earle  Born  Monday  April  12th  1813 
Sarah  Arnold  Earle  Born  Friday  November  11th  1814 
Oliver  Earle  Born  Saturday  August  17th  1816 

Sarah  W.  Earle  Died  Sunday  May  9th  1813  Ag'd  1  yr  9  m 
Sarah  A.  Earle  Died  Saturday  August  19th  1815  Ag'd  9  m  8  d 
Oliver  Earle  Died  Thursday  June  26th  1817  Aged  10  m  9  d  " 

Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 

Earle,  Harriot  Adeline.  1830.  Providence  [R.  I.].  10  yrs.  17"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Cross  design  in  border.    "The  Family  Register: 

Births 
"  Fanny  H.  Earle  Born  Tuesday  July  8th  1806 
William  Earle  Born  Saturday  April  16th  1808 
George  Earle  Born  Sunday  October  1st  1809 
Sarah  W.  Earle  Born  Friday  August  31st  1812 
Marcy  A  Earle  Born  Monday  April  12th  1813 
Sarah  A  Earle  Born  Friday  November  11th  1814 
Oliver  Earle  Born  Saturday  August  17th  1816 
Sally  A  Earle  Born  Friday  April  3d  1818 
Harriot  A  Earle  Born  Thursday  Sept  18th  1820 
Julia  Earle  Born  Sunday  July  22nd  1822  " 

Deaths 
"Sarah  Waterman   Earle   Departed  this  life   Sunday   May  9th   1813   aged   1   year 
9  months 
Sarah  Arnold  Earle  Departed  this  life  Saturday  August  19th  1813  aged  9  m  8  d 
Oliver  Earle  Departed  this  life  Thursday  June  26th  1817  aged  10  m  9  d 
Our  dear  Father  Oliver  Earle  Departed  this  life  July  5th  in  the  year  1824  in  the 

55th  year  of  his  age. 
Providence  March  23d  A.D.  1830."  Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 


Cross- 


Earle,  Marcy  A[rnold].     1823.     8i"  x  12^".     3  alphabets.     Cross  design  in  border, 
stitch.    For  Genealogy,  see  samplers  made  by  Fanny  and  Julia  Earle. 

Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 


Earle,  Sally  Arnold. 
in  border. 


1828.    10  yrs.     13^"  x  17^".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Cross  design 

Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  153 

Eaton,  .     [Cir.  1805.]     16i"  x  12|".     3  alphabets.     Eyelet,  cross,  long,  and  short-stitch. 

Long  and  short-stitch  border.     Names  and  dates: 
"Job  Eaton  Born  May  26  1762 
Plioebe  Eaton  Born  December  20,  1765 
Sarah  Eaton  Born  November  22,  1786 
Job  Eaton  Born  January  21,  1789 
Moses  Eaton  Born  March  18,  1791 
Hannah  Eaton  Born  March  15,  1793 
Jonathan  M.  Eaton  Born  June  10,  1794 
Hannah  Eaton  Born  January  27,  1797 
Ezra  B.  Eaton  Born  August  24,  1799 
Worcester  Eaton  Born  December  17,  1801."  Mrs.  Oeorge  C.  Fraser 

Eaton,  Hannah.  1813.  10  yrs.  10"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth  design  in 
border.     Elaborate  baskets  of  flowers  and  trees.    Verse  373  (var.). 

Mrs.  Elisabeth  B.  Hutchins 

Eayre,  Maria.  1814.  Eayrestown  [N.  J.].  8  yrs.  Born  May  14,  1806.  8"  x  11".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.     Simple  line  border.     Baskets  of  flowers  and  birds.     Verse  343   (1,  2). 

Laura  Clarissa  Howell 

Eddey,  Betsey.  [Cir.  1815.]  13  yrs.  16i"  x  8".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  "Time  flies 
Eternity  hastens."  Miss  Emily  B.  Aldrich 

Eddy,  Maby.  1816.  Providence  [R.  I.].  9"  x  12^".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Line  border. 
Verse  721.  Miss  Elizabeth  L.  Betton 

Eddy,  Maby  Ann.  1813.  Baltimore  [Md.].  7  yrs.  19^"  x  18".  6  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Vine  border.    Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Marvin  F.  McNeil 

Edes,  Caroline.  1814.  Charlestown  [Mass.].  Born  October  16,  1805.  12^"  x  17".  3  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.    Border  of  conventionalized  vine  and  flowers.    Verse  692. 

3It<t.  Caroline  H.  Nicholson 

Edes,  Eliza  B.  1815.  [Boston?]  7  yrs.  9"  x  13^".  4  alphabets.  Cat  and  cross-stitch.  Hem- 
stitched edge.  Mrs.  E.  O.  Cutler 

Edington,  Mary  Ann.  1812.  11  yrs.  14"  x  18".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  vine 
with  flowers.  Scene  with  house,  fence,  tree,  and  to  the  right,  large  plant  in  pot  with  small 
animal  underneath.  Across  sampler  at  top,  tree  and  potted  plant,  and  on  ground,  chickens 
and  2  small  dogs.    Verse  297.  Robert  P.  Jordan,  Dealer 

Edmands,  Martha  Capen.  1820.  Charlestown  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  17^".  2  alphabets. 
Satin  and  cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  border.    Basket  of  fruit,  trees,  and  birds.    Verse  35. 

Charles  8.  Henry,  2nd,  Esq. 

Edwards,  Sarah  Ann  J[ackson].  1820.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  8^"  x  8^".  3  alpha- 
bets.   Satin  and  cross-stitch.    Cross-stitch  border  in  triangular  design. 

Abbie  Scott  Edwards 

Effingham,  Sally  Hobbs.    1824.    19  yrs.    12"  x  12".    6  alphabets.    Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Herbert  E.  Maine 

Elder,  Catherine  Jones.  1826.  [Harrisburg,  Pa.]  (7  yrs.)  14^"xl4^".  1  alphabet.  Cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  border.  House,  2  trees,  basket,  and  dog.  ["Litiz  School,"  near  Beth- 
lehem, Pa.]  Mrs.  Huger  Elliott 

Elder,  Catherine  Jones.  1827.  (8  yrs.)  22"  x  20".  Cross-stitch.  Wreath  of  roses,  carna- 
tions, and  other  flowers.     ["Litiz  School."]  Mrs.  Huger  Elliott 


154  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Ellet,  Hakkah.  1806.  Salem  [N.  J.].  West  Town  Boarding  School.  12i"  x  14".  8  alpha- 
bets.   Cross,  stem,  and  two-sided  line-stitch.     Vine  with  leaves  in  circular  shape. 

Miss  Elizabeth  Alford  Smith 

Ellet,  Makia  Chambless.  1805.  Salem  [N.  J.].  9  yrs.  17"  x  11".  7  alphabets.  Single  and 
double  cross-stitch.     Vine  border.     Verses  272,  409,  692  (var.). 

Miss  Elizabeth  Alford  Smith 

Ellet,  Mahia  Chamless.  1809.  Salem  [N.  J.  Born  in  1795.].  26"x22".  2  alphabets.  Satin 
and  stem-stitch.  Wreath  of  carnations,  buds,  other  flowers,  and  leaves.  Horn  filled  with 
flowers  in  center  of  wreath.  Mrs.  Ella  Maria  Hamilton 

Ellis,  Abigail.  1805.  [Born  on  Biddle's  Island  in  the  Delaware  River.]  8^"  x  11^".  3  alpha- 
bets. Flat,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Top  border  of  carnations  and  bottom  of  vine.  Flower 
design  at  bottom.  Abbie  Ellis  Folwell 

Ellis,  Caroline.  1818.  Brookfield  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  17"  x  17".  Cross-stitch  and  hemstitch. 
Strawberry  and  vine  border.    Crown  design.  Mrs.  William  M.  Ooorkies  or  Goodwin? 

Elwell,  Ann  Mahia.  [Cir.  1826.  New  Jersey.]  Born  November  10,  1818.  18"  x  16i".  2 
alphabets.  Flat,  outline,  queen,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation,  strawberry, 
and  vine  border.  4  birds  in  border.  In  center,  urn  of  flowers  and  bands  of  geometrical 
designs;  at  bottom,  sprays  of  flowers,  birds,  and  figures.  Verses  327,  327a.  Initials: 
"J  B  [John  Brooks,  grandfather];  M  B  [Mary  Brooks,  grandmother];  D  B  [Daniel, 
brother  of  mother] ;  R  B  [Rachel,  mother] ;  J  E  [John  Elwell,  father] ;  R  E  [Rachel  Brooks 
Elwell,  mother] ;  D  B  E  [Daniel  B.  Elwell,  brother] ;  G  W  E  [George  W  Elwell,  brother] ; 
J  M  E  [John  M.  Elwell,  brother] ;  A  M  E  [Ann  Maria  Elwell,  maker] ;  J  B  E  [James  B. 
Elwell,  brother,  died  aet.  10] ;  D  S  [Daniel  Simkins,  second  husband  of  mother] ;  R.  S 
[Rachel  Simkins,  mother's  name  after  second  marriage] ;  S  M  S  [Smith  M.  Simkins,  half- 
brother]  ;  D  B  E  [brother,  same  as  above] ;  M  J  E  [Mary  Jane  Dane  Elwell,  wife  of 
D.  B.  E.] ;  M  A  E  [Mary  Ann  Elwell,  daughter  of  D.  B.  E.  and  M.  J.  E.] ;  G.  W.  E  [George 
W.  Elwell,  as  above];  L  F  E  [Lovisa  Fithian  Elwell,  wife  of  G.  W.  E.]." 

Charles  S.  Sheppard,  Esq. 

Emerson,  Clarissa.  Lancaster  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  16"  x  22".  Cross,  flat,  satin,  long  and  short, 
stem-stitch,  and  couching.  2  alphabets.   House,  hillocks,  mother  and  child.  Verse  515  (var,). 

Dwight  M.  Prouty,  Esq. 

Emerson,  Ruth.  1815.  Machias  [Me.].  17J"  x  22".  4  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  wreath  of  strawberries  at  bottom.     Verse  606   (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  Frederick  E.  Hovey 

Emerson,  Sophia.  1815.  14  yrs.  18"  x  26^".  2  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  satin,  cross,  split,  and 
back-stitch.  Elaborate  floral  border.  Wreath  around  name,  etc.  Two  trees  with  woman 
sitting  underneath  and  holding  bunch  of  flowers  in  her  hand;  birds  resting  on  flowers; 
more  flowers  growing  in  grass.     Verse  86.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Emery,  Mary.  1809.  [Born  February  14,  1800,  in  New  York  State.]  17"  x  16".  3  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch  and  paint  russe.  Triangular  border  with  star  design.  Ornamental  cross-stitch 
border  lines.    Design  at  bottom  unfinished.    Verse  712.  Mrs.  I.  E.  Ingle 

Emmerton,  Remember.  1817.  Lynn  [Mass.].  8^"  x  12".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek 
fret  border.  Mrs.  Charles  E.  Reed 

Evans,  Francis  M.  1827.  9  yrs.  5V'  x  4^".  2  alphabets.  Fine  cross-stitch.  Narrow  hem- 
stitched border.  Bev.  Qlen  Tilley  Morse 


^-' ./ 


PLATE  LII 


Elizabeth  Fuxk's  Sajipi.ek.     1813 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Henri/  E.  Coe 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  155 

Evans,  TuLLANiA.  1809.  Pinegrove  School.  9  yrs.  Born  October  6,  1799.  "  Daughter  of  Jakob 
and  Rachel  Evans."  15^"  x  17^".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  eyelet,  and  tent-stitch.  Car- 
nation and  acorn  borders.      Trees,  flowers,  baskets  of  fruit,  birds,  dogs,  etc.    Verse  255. 

Mrs.  Siegfried  Wachsman 

Everett,  Hannah.  1800.  Wareham  [Mass.].  12"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Satin,  stem,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Plain,  double  strawberry  border.  "Beauty  as  the  flowers  blossom,  soon  fades  but 
the  divine  excellence  of  the  mind  like  the  medicinal  virtues  of  the  plant  remain  in  it  when 
all  those  charms  are  withered."  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

EvERS,  TiHZA.     1827.     14  yrs.    20"  x  17".    5  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Verses  569,  788. 

Mr.  Arthur  W.  Seavey 

Eyke,  Ann  Eliza.  1827.  8  yrs.  22"  x  16^".  Feather,  stem,  satin,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose 
border  on  three  sides.  Vine  around  verse  in  upper  section.  At  bottom,  scene  with  brick 
house,  trees,  lawn,  ducks,  cat,  horses,  birds  on  trees,  men  and  women.  Large  sprays  of 
flowers  in  pots  at  either  side;  detached  sprays  of  flowers  fill  in  remainder  of  space.  Verse 
515  (var.).    "Daughter  of  James  and  Margaret  Eyre."  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

F ,  A .    1804.    18"  x  13".    Cross-stitch.     Border  of  large  green  leaves.    Scene  with 

house,  trees,  yard,  duck,  and  hens,  street  with  cow,  and  2  horses. 

Sold  at  Libbie's  Auction  Rooms,  Boston,  December,  1915 

F[reas],  C .     (A  fragment,  6"  x  6".)     Outline,  chain,  stem,  and  satin-stitch.     Peacock 

surrounded  with  flowers,  wild  roses,  strawberries,  and  conventionalized  flowers.   [Secured 
from  Freas  family  near  AUoway,  Salem  County,  N.  J.]  Mrs.  William  Johnson 

F ,  S.  &  M[ahia].     "Begun  by  S.  F and  made  by  Maria."     1806.     12"  x  14".     3 

alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Strawberry  border.    Verse  413.  Robert  P.  Jordan,  Dealer 

Fabens,  Sarah.  1806.  Salem  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  [Born  in  Salem,  October  9,  1793.]  16"  x  23". 
Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  4  alphabets.  Border  of  flowers  starting  from  cornucopias  in 
lower  corners  and  broken  at  top  by  boat-shaped  pot  of  erect  strawberries,  with  bird  at 
each  end,  and  at  bottom  by  spray  of  carnations;  2  white  ammals  and  4  strawberry 
clusters  also  appear  in  bottom  border.  Below  verse  is  conventional  floral  design.  Verse 
129  (var.).  ,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  B.  Putnam 

Fabens,  Sarah.  1807.  Salem  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  9^"  x  11^".  [Born  October  9,  1793.]  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Floral  border,  starting  from  cornucopias  in  lower  corners.  Carna- 
tions in  upper  corners.  Large  spray  of  carnations  in  center  and  cluster  of  flowers  at  each 
side.  Oblong  wreath  of  leaves  incloses  name  and  date.  Verse  inclosed  between  pillars  sup- 
porting double  arch;  carnation  sprays  in  each  arch.    Verse  40  (var.). 

Mrs.  Elizabeth  B.  Putnam 

Farley,  Lucy  Mary.  1807.  Ipswich  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  10"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border  on  three  sides.  Strawberry  plants  and  blossoms  with 
grass  at  bottom.  Mrs.  Henry  Wardwell 

Farka,  Sussannah.  1809.  22"  x  23".  Cross-stitch.  Conventional  border  on  three  sides.  At 
bottom,  maple  tree  in  pot  and  smaller  potted  maple  trees  on  either  side,  also  baskets  of 
flowers.  Vine  with  carnations  and  strawberries  surrounds  name.  Family  names:  "  [grand- 
parents] Christianna  Ann  Dunnet,  Samuel  an  Hannah  Dunnet;  [parents]  John  and  Sus- 
sannah Farra  [worked  in  hair] ;  [brothers  and  sisters]  Daniel,  Ann,  Sussannah,  John, 
Chalter,  Carter,  Benjamin,  Christian,  Hannah,  Farra  Dunnet."  Verses  187  (var.),  226 
(var.).     "Hannah  Hollingswort."  Mrs.  Edward  Twaddell 

Fay,  Maria.  1811.  9  yrs.  16V'  x  16V'.  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cat,  satin,  cross-stitch,  and  a 
long  cross-stitch   that  runs  over  2  squares.     Greek  fret  border.     Vase  with  2  flowers; 


156  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

2  vases  with  strawberry  plants;  3  birds  and  a  crowned  lion,  in  design  at  bottom.     Verse 

92  (1,  var.).  A.  Stainforth,  Dealer,  1917 

Feasteh,  Rachel.     1823.     17"  x  17".     Rose  border.     Scattered  liowers,  with  birds,  at  bottom. 

"The  Wish    I  sigh  not  for  beauty  nor  languish  for  wealth",  etc.       Mrs.  H.  E.  GilUngham 

Fenno,  Mahy  Ank.  1801.  Salem,  Mass.  11  yrs.  8"  x  11".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  "Then 
let  my  heart  at  once  attend  Thy  all  sufficient" —  Frank  R.  Dow,  Esq. 

Fenwick,  Tehesia.  1802.  "St.  Mary's  County  in  Maryland."  15"  x  18i".  4  alphabets.  Cross- 
borders.  Urn  with  strawberries;  eight-pointed  star  in  each  corner;  2  flowers  below; 
Calvary  cross  above.  "I  glory  in  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ."  "When  this  you  see,  Pray 
for  me."  "Virtue  is  the  sweetest  jewel  that  can  adorn  the  fair."  "Eleanor  Morland" 
[governess].    Verse  128  (var.).  Miss  Madge  Fenwick 

Field  Family  Register.  [Cir.  1816.]  Northfield  [Mass.].  11"  x  13".  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  border.    "Family  Register" 

"Mr.  Walter  Field  Born  November  24th  1758 
Miss  Plana  Petty  Born  June  26th  1762 

Married  May  12th  1782 
Nancy  Field  Born  July  14th  1783 

Paul  Field  Born  Jan.  22nd  1785  Died  Sept  28th  1810 

Roxana  Field  Born  July  2nd  1787 
Mrs.  R.  Janes     Died  Nov.  5th  1810 

Philana  Field  Born  Sept  17th  1789     Died  June  22nd  1813 
Erastus  Field  Born  Dec.  24th  1791 

Sarah  Field  Born  Dec.  4th  1793  Died  Oct.  28rd  1794 

Sarah  Field  Born  Sept.  11th  1795 
Gratia  Field  Born  March  3rd  1798 

Plana  Field  Born  April  20th  1800       Died  Aug.  15th  1803 
Eloiza  Field  Born  Sept.  19th  1802 

,  Born  Aug.  19th  1803 

Walter  Field  Jun'r  Born  June  30th  1804     Died  July  1st  1804 

Walter  Field  Junr.  Born  Oct.  22nd  1805 

Eloiza  P.  Field  Born  June  4th  1808 

Lucretia  F.  Janes  Born  Dec.  17th  1808 

Roxana  Janes  Born  Sept  28th  1810     Died  March  20th  1811" 

Mrs.  Frank  A.  Hubbard 
Field,  Zilpha.     1812.     Bridgewater   [Mass.].    9  yrs.    7^"  x  61".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Julia  M.  Howard 
Fillmore,  Haheiot.     1814.     Franklin,  New  London  County,  Conn.  14^"  x  8^".     3  alphabets. 
Bird's-eye  and  cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

FisHEH,  Ellza.  1824.  24"  x  24".  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  carnation  and  straw- 
berry border.  In  one  top  corner,  white  dove,  2  stars,  bunch  of  carnations  in  vase,  2  large 
butterflies,  conventional  bunch  of  flowers.  Directly  under  this,  2  birds  picking  a  straw- 
berry; baskets  of  strawberries  on  each  side;  on  either  side  of  baskets,  one  large  red  rose 
with  buds;  below,  bunches  of  bluebells;  on  either  side,  pot  of  carnations;  imder  these, 
bunches  of  strawberries;  mider  berries,  elaborate  baskets  of  strawberries,  and  on  either 
side  the  name  a  half-wreath ;  on  either  side  of  wreath  a  little  pine  tree  in  triangle  of  lawn 
on  which  stands  a  little  dog.  Large  Colonial  house  with  fence,  gate,  2  weeping  willows,  and 
lawn.  Bunches  of  grapes  and  strawberries  are  also  in  design  around  house.  Verses  132,  778. 
Initials:  "J  S,  M  S,  W^  S,  V  S,  J  S,  J  D,  E  D,  S  S,  J  S,  R  S,  J  S,  G  S,  S  A  F, 
S  F,  E  W  F,  M  D,  J  F,  H  F,  S  D,  E  F,  M  F,  E  D,  W  S  F,  M  F,  J  D,  J  C  F,  J  A  F, 
J  D,   R  F."  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  157 

Fisher,  Maria  Ann.  1811.  Franklin  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  8"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Vine  border.  Miss  Annie  San  ford  Head 

Fisher,  S.  1804.  18"  x  17".  1  alphabet.  Queen,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Double  strawberry 
border.    Basket  of  flowers  just  above  border.     Verse  682.  Miss  H.  L.  Parrish 

FiSK,  Elizabeth  T.     1830.     8"  x  16".    4  alphabets.     Cat  and  cross-stitch.    Verses  28,  609,  700. 

Miss  Kate  Simmons 

Fisk,  Mary.  November  2,  180[5?].  [Cambridge,  Mass.]  8"  x  12".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch. 
Greek  fret  border.  [Probably  the  work  of  the  grandmother  of  John  Fiske  the  historian.] 
Verse  689.  Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

FisK,  Susanna.  Cambridgeport  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  12V'  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine 
border.    Verse  578.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Fitch,  Caroline  M.  1816.  Boston.  8  yrs.  7"  x  9".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret 
border.  Charles  W.  Jenks,  Esq. 

Fitzgerald,  Sarah.  1810.  Portsmouth  [N.  H.].  17"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.  Vine,  with  clover-leaf  border.  Conventional  cross-borders.  "  Sacred  to  the  Memory 
of  Mrs.  A.  Fitzgerald.  In  memory  of  an  affectionate  mother,  who  died  March  1st  1808, 
aged  40  years."  This  inscription  is  overshadowed  by  weeping  willow,  and  on  either  side 
are  small  trees,  dog,  bird,  large  basket  of  tall  flowers,  all  on  a  straight  green  base. 
"Wrought  by  her  daughter  Sarah  Fitzgerald  under  the  inspection  of  Mary  E.  Hill."  On 
either  side  of  verses,  basket  of  fruit,  with  bird  perched  on  spray  above.    Verse  289. 

Harriette  E.  Jones 

Flagg,  Georgianna.  1811.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  8  yrs.  15"  x  15".  Alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Rose-vine  border.  At  bottom,  Greek  fret  border,  with  a  carnation  at 
each  end.    Verse  547.  Mrs.  St.  John  P.  Kimloch 

Flagg,  Sally.  1802.  10  yrs.  11"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Wide  design  at 
bottom.    Verse  QO.  Lancaster  Public  Library 

Fletcher,  Sarah  Jane.  1829.  Albany  [N.  Y.].  10  yrs.  17"  x  17V'.  5  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Strawberry-vine  border.     Great  variety  of  cross-lines.     Verse  475. 

Mary  McDonald  Vosburgh 

Flitcraft,  Ann.  1831.  32"  x  20".  Vine  and  rosebud  border.  In  each  corner  conventional 
floral  design,  with  birds,  dog,  urns,  basket  of  fruit,  etc.  Brick  house  just  below  center, 
with  willow  trees  on  either  side;  also  2  little  dogs,  2  chickens  in  the  grass,  and  scattered 
through  the  sampler  are  rosebuds  and  butterflies.  Three-sided  border  of  leaves  around 
verse,  and  above  verse  is  a  vine  with  a  bird  at  each  end.    Verse  392.    Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Flitcraft,  Mary.  1800.  Eldridge's  Hill  [N.J.].  21"x21".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Vine,  coral, 
and  honeysuckle  border.  Large  bunch  of  flowers,  with  smaller  spray  at  corners ;  tulips  at 
top  and  roses  at  bottom.    Verse  132  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  William  T.  Flitcraft 

Floyd,  Elizabeth.  18"  x  15^".  Cross-stitch.  Rose  and  tulip  border.  Vases  of  flowers,  squir- 
rel, duck,  butterfly,  2  small  dogs,  house,  and  other  detached  designs.    Verse  579. 

Mrs.  Thomas  S.  Young 

FoLLEN,  Maby.  1812.  Needham  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  12"  x  16V'.  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  House  and  flowers,  at  bottom;  2  large  birds  and  conven- 
tionalized plant,  at  top.    Verse  410.  Mrs.  James  Y.  Noyes 

Ford,  Clarissa.    1801.    10  yrs.    12^"  x  8".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.        Mrs.  George  Plimpton 


1.58  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

FoED,  Elizabeth  M.  "Miss  Damon's  School,  Boston."  13  yrs.  4  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.    Odd  flowers  on  vine  in  border.    Flower-pots,  trees,  and  stars.    Verse  577. 

The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Ford,  Sasah.    1810.    Philadelphia,  Pa.    13"  x  12".    Cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  border.    Verse  647. 

Mary  Hall  Pennock 

Foster, .    1808.    14"  x  13^".    Satin  and  split-stitch.    Figures  of  weeping  man  and  woman 

dressed  in  mourning,  leaning  over  two  urns ;  weeping  willow  tree  in  background.  "  To  the 
memory  of  Samuel  Foster.  He  was  born  July  9th  A.D.  1789  and  died  Nov.  24th  A.D. 
1803";  also,  "To  the  memory  of  Mary  Foster.  She  was  born  May  8th  A.D.  1799  and  died 
Aug.  30th  A.D.  1803."  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Foster,  Sabra.    1811.    5"  x  8".    2  alphabets.    Cat  and  cross-stitch.    Sabra  Batchelder  Harwood 

Fowler,  Mary  Axx.  1817.  11  yrs.  12"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  design. 
Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Louise  Cranston 

Fowler,  Mehitable.  1809.  Pembroke  [N.  H.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Back- 
stitch, satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Saw-tooth  border.     Basket,  trees,  and  birds. 

Miss  Clara  Fowler 

Fox,  Makiox.  1802.  10  yrs.  11"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Green 
bush  in  center,  with  small  dog  on  each  side,  at  bottom ;  in  center,  2  bay  trees  on  either  side 
of  name,  with  bird  at  top;  imderneath,  2  baskets  of  flowers.    Verse  343  (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  William  Holland  Wilmer 

Fox,  Mary.  1826.  Hartford  [Conn.].  9  yrs.  18"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek 
fret  border.    Strawberry  design  at  bottom.    Verse  356.    Names  and  dates: 

"Gurdon  Fox,  born  Jan'y  30th  1791;  Sophia  Kendall,  born  Feb'y  4th  1796;  Married 
Oct'r  27st  1814;  Edward  Fox,  born  May  2,  1828;  Mary  Fox  born  Sept'r  21st  1816; 
Henry  Fox,  born  March  8th  1826."  Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

Fox,  Nancy.  1824.  "Woodstoc."  12  yrs.  17"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Lozenge  border.  Elaborate  conventional  design  of  branches,  topped  by  diamond-shaped 
figures ;  underneath,  row  of  sheep,  dogs,  and  basket  with  rose  branches.  On  topmost  branch 
is  large  pigeon  and  bird's  nest ;  on  another  branch,  a  small  bird ;  in  center  of  basket,  a  bird's 
nest  with  egg;  above  basket,  row  of  5  conventional  figures.     Verse  465. 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Fox,  Sophia  M.  1827.  "Waterford,  Washington,  Ohio."  9  yrs.  10 J"  x  12^".  4  alphabets. 
Herringbone,  queen,  French  knot,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine,  strawberry,  and  rose  bor- 
der.   Fir  tree,  with  jardiniere  on  either  side,  holding  rose  vines.  Mary  Allen  Taylor 

Fraxkux,  AaiELiA.  1818.  [Berlin,  Worcester  County,  Md.  Born  in  1802.]  18"  x  17".  Split, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  strawberry  border.  Scene  with  house,  grass,  ducks,  geese, 
men  feeding  them,  and  flowering  shrubs;  on  either  side  of  house  are  tall,  pointed  trees 
topped  by  birds.    Verse  738  (2,  var.).  Mrs.  J.  W.  Mcllvain 

Fhanklik,  AiiEUA.  1818.  [Maryland.]  13  yrs.  18"  x  19*".  Split,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Vine  border  with  leaves.  Landscape  with  house,  tall  trees,  gate,  fence;  dark  strip  of  silk 
inserted,  with  man  and  two  women  feeding  ducks,  cow,  and  pig.  Flowers  around  house 
and  birds  fljing  above  it,  also  butterflies.     Verse  733  (2,  var.). 

Miss  Louisa  Amelia  Covington 

Franklin,  Miloch  E.  1818.  18"  x  18".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border. 
Scene  with  house,  trees,  man,  children,  cow.s,  geese,  and  dogs.    Verse  733  (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  Renwick  C.  Hurry 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  159 

Fhazer,  Rebekah.  1816.  Duxbury  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  [Born  September  23,  1808.]  10"  x  9". 
3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Narrow  hemstitched  border.  At  bottom,  small  rectangle  of 
solid  cross-stitch  and  initials  "F  F".  Mrs.  A.  McK.  Gifford 

Frederick,  Deborah.  1830.  17"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Conven- 
tionalized strawberry  border.  Scene  with  house  with  railing  in  front,  large  rose  bush  on  one 
side  and  2  queer  colored  birds  on  the  other  side.  Mrs.  Renwick  C.  Hurry 

Freeborn,  Hannah.  1817.  11  yrs.  12^"  x  17^".  4  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet,  stem,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Double  trefoil  border.  "H.  L.  F.  Born  1st  mo.  9th  1806",  inclosed  in  wreath  with 
strawberry  below,  and  on  either  side  two  triangular  conventional  designs.    Verse  453. 

Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 

Freeborne,  Mary  G.   1826.   10  yrs.   15"  x  13".   Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.   Verse  784. 

Herbert  O.  Brigham,  Esq. 

French,  Hannah.  1805.  13  yrs.  [Born  in  West  Dedham,  Mass.,  in  1792.]  12^"  x  12". 
3  alphabets.    Satin  and  cross-stitch.    Strawberry  border.     Verse  609  (var.). 

Miss  Mary  E.  Fisher 

French,  Hannah.  1822.  [Mullica  HiU,  N.  J.]  9  yrs.  8"  x  19".  4  alphabets.  Flat,  eyelet, 
tent,  and  cross-stitch.    Simple  cross-stitch  border.    One  dog.  Mrs.  John  Gill  Whitall 

Frink,  Isabel.  [Before  1830.]  Rutland  [Mass.].  10^"  x  10*".  2  alphabets.  Stem-stitch. 
Vine  border.    Verse  660  (1).  Miss  Isabella  H.  Dana 

Frost,  Harriet.     [1820.]     6^"  x  9*".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Herbert  E.  Maine 

Feothingham,  Betsy.    1801.    Newburj-port  [Mass.].    Born  July  28,  1790.    11  yrs.    10"  x  154". 

2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Strawberry  border.    Verse  667.  Miss  Georgie  Bassett 

Frothingham,  Debby.     1803.     154"  x  204".    3  alphabets.     Chain,  cross,  long  and  short-stitch. 
.     Vine,  roses,  carnations,  and  other  flowers  in  border.    Wreath  around  inscription. 

The  Em,-na  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Fudge,  Sally.  [Cir.  1801.  Born  in  1790.]  11"  x  11".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Hemstitched  border  with  rosebud  design  at  top  and  bottom. 

Edmund  M.  Dow,  Esq. 

Fuller,  Cornelia.  1809.  New  York  City.  7  yrs.  12"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Satin,  chain,  French 
knot,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry,  flower,  and  vine  border.  Village  scene,  with  church, 
several  houses,  trees,  stream,  and  boats.    Verse  94.  Mrs.  C.  H.  Nelson 

Fuller,  Esther  G.  August,  1823.  Charlestown  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  18"  x  17^".  3  alphabets. 
Cross,  satin,  and  buttonhole-stitch.  Cross-borders.  House,  vine  with  blue  flowers,  and  3 
small  trees.    4  sprigs  of  pink  flowers  below.    Verse  515  (var.). 

William  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

Fuller,  Susannah.    [Cir.  1817.]    14  yrs.    [Born  in  Francestown,  N.  H.,  June  4,  1804.]   23"  x  20". 

3  alphabets.    Satin  stitch.    Border  of  roses,  pansies,  strawberries,  and  carnations.     Basket 
of  flowers  and  vine  at  bottom.  Lillie  Fisher  Brokaw 

Funk,  Ellzabeth.  1813.  17"  x  21^".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  flowers  and  leaves  at 
top  and  bottom.  Large  flowering  plant  in  pot  takes  up  most  of  space,  the  remainder  filled 
in  with  flower  sprays  and  animals.  Quilled  ribbon  border  and  rosettes  on  corners  of  the 
sampler.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Furlong,  Mary.    1806.    10  yrs.    20"  x  16".    2  alphabets.    Cross  and  satin-stitch.    Verse  19. 

Owner  not  recorded 


160  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

G ,  C .    1802.     Boston.    4>i"  x  3f ".    Partial  alphabet.    Cross-stitch. 

Miss  Marette  Longley 

G ,  H.  M.     1800.     8^"  X  12".     2  alphabets.     Long  and  short,  and  tent-stitch.     Done  in 

memory  of  the  birth  of  Lovey  Bickford.  Mrs.  George  C.  Fraser 

Gailliabd,  Emma  Axxa.  1823.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  9  yrs.  11"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Flat,  cat, 
eyelet,  cross-stitch,  and  hemstitch.  Hemstitched  edge  with  scroll  border.  Various  cross- 
borders.    Verse  773.  Mrs.  J.  Waring  Witsell 

Galbhaith,  Jane  Elizabeth.  [Cir.  1830.]  Birmingham  [Pa.].  Born  June  17,  1818.  18"  x  20J". 
3  alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  at  sides  and  vine  at 
top.  Scene  with  two  houses,  fence,  trees,  vases  of  flowers,  lion,  and  birds.  Verses  490 
(var.),  796.  Carolyn  Scribner  Barnes 

Gale,  Eliza  W.  1813.  12  yrs.  Worked  at  Mrs.  Tuft's  School,  Charlestown  [Mass.].  18"  x  22". 
2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Elaborate  rose  and  carnation  border.    Verse  741. 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Gale,  Mahy  A.  1825.  11  yrs.  Great  variety  of  stitches.  Elaborate  floral  border  on  sides.  At 
bottom,  basket  of  flowers  in  center,  and  on  either  side,  trees  and  smaU  sprays  of  flowers. 
Verse  at  top.  Verse  780.  9  wreaths,  5  of  which  contain  family  register  in  rows  of  three,  and 
between  rows  and  in  2  end  wreaths  sprays  of  flowers.  "Mary  Richards  Born  Dec.  17,  1790; 
Samuel  Gale  Born  Apr.  7,  1793;  Were  married  May  15,  1814;  Mary  A.  Gale  Born  Oct.  27, 
1814 (sic);  Samuel  Gale  Born  Nov.  12,  1821;  Eliza  E.  Gale  Born  June  8,  1824;  died  Oct. 
30,  1824."  Mrs.  H.  de  B.  Parsons 

Gale,  Sally  J.  1810.  13  yrs.  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Straw- 
berry cross-border  at  top.  Trees,  man,  and  woman.  Birds,  flowers,  and  baskets  of  fruit, 
at  bottom.    Verse  287a.  Mrs.  Daniel  Webster  Sanborn 

Gaxo,  Eliza.  1814.  9  yrs.  Pattenburg  [N.  J.].  20"  x  20".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek 
fret  border  and  cross-borders.    Large  and  small  trees,  and  baskets  of  flowers.    Verse  745. 

Ella  Felmly 

Gabdineb,  Esther.  1813.  Evesham  [N.  J.].  (12  yrs.)  19"  x  23".  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Vine  and  floral  border.  Plot  of  grass,  sheep  and  lambs,  geese,  weeping  willow  and  poplars, 
numerous  small  plants.    Clumps  of  flowers  all  around.     8-pointed  star  at  top.     Verse  442. 

Abigail  E.  Willitts 

Gabdiner,  Hanxah.  1820.  12  yrs.  "Evesham  School"  [N.J.].  19"  x  23".  French  knot,  chain, 
tent,  queen,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border  with  leaves ;  upper  corners  filled  with 
flowers  and  baskets  of  flowers.  Grape  vines  and  grapes,  in  center;  roses,  white  half-moon, 
baskets  of  flowers,  and  bunches  of  flowers  fill  in  remainder  of  space.     Verse  316  (var.). 

Esther  G.  Evans 

Gabneb,  Catherine.  1805.  15  yrs.  12"  x  19".  4  alphabets.  Outline,  chain,  satin,  knot,  loop, 
chrysanthemum,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  floral  border.  Verse  271.  Names:  "John  Garner, 
Frances  Garner,  Hendly  Garner,  I.  Garner,  E.  Garner,  J.  Garner."       Mrs.  D.  D.  Cameron 

Gaskill,  Mary  Ann.  1810.  12  yrs.  12"  x  15".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border. 
Basket  of  fruit;  rosebud  and  strawberries.  Josephine  B.  Osmond 

Gauffreau,  Celestine.  1822.  New  York.  8  jts.  16^"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.  House,  dogs,  cows,  baskets  of  flowers,  and  several  small  birds.  "Celes- 
tine Gauffreau  agee  de  8  ans  fait  le  2  d'aout  1822  a  New  York." 

Mrs.  J.  Herbert  Johnston 


PLATE  LIII 

Sophia  Catherixe  Bieh's  Sampler.     1810 

Owned  by  Mis.  Miles  White,  Jr. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  161 

Gauffreau,  Fortune.  1816.  12  yrs.  St.  Bartholomew  (an  island  of  the  West  Indies  belong- 
ing to  France).  13"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Small  cross-stitch  border.  House, 
birds,  dogs,  cows,  vases  of  flowers,  and  clover.  "  Fortune  Gauffreau  age  de  12  ans  fait  a  St. 
Barth'my  le  24  de  Juillet  1816"  (a  boy),  Mrs.  J.  Herbert  Johnston 

Gauffheait,  LomsA.  1821.  New  York.  8  yrs.  15"  x  13".  Cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  House, 
peacock,  vases  of  flowers,  pitcher,  and  dog.  "Louisa  Gauffreau  agee  de  8  ans,  New  York 
1821."    Verse  (in  French)  58.    Illustrated.  Mrs.  J.  Herbert  Johnston 

Gay,  Mary.  1808.  9  yrs.  16"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Trefoil  border.  House,  weep- 
ing willow,  cow,  lion  with  curly  tail,  and  baskets.    Verses  153,  511  (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Gay,  Mary  Otis.  1809.  Hingham  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  8"  x  12^".  Cross-stitch.  Conventional 
border.    "Apply  thine  heart  unto  instruction  and  thine  ears  to  the  words  of  knowledge." 

Mrs.  Oliver  Fiske 

George,  Isabella.  1826.  Baltimore.  8  yrs.  9"  x  17".  6  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet,  satin,  cross, 
cat,  tent,  hem-stitch,  and  two-sided  Une-stitch.  Strawberry,  Greek  fret,  cross,  and  vine 
borders.  Elizabeth  C.  Lee 

George,  Isabella.  1827.  Baltimore  [Md.].  9  yrs.  17"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  eyelet, 
chain,  queen,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Borders  of  Greek  fret,  cross,  vine,  and  strawberry 
designs.  Elizabeth  C.  Lee 

George,  Maria  Louisa.  [1827.]  8  yrs.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  8^"  x  8^".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Simple  cross-stitch  border.    "Be  virtuous  and  you  will  be  happy." 

Miss  Charlotte  M.  Smith 

George,  Mary  Elizabeth.  1817.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  18"  x  22".  3  alphabets.  Satin 
and  cross-stitch.  Rose-vine  border,  with  2  willow  trees.  Trees,  bush,  leaves,  and  flowers. 
Verse  515  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Emma  F.  Stephenson 

Gerrish,  Caroline.  1809.  11  yrs.  17"  x  21".  4  alphabets.  Satin,  catcl-  crow-foot,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Hemstitched  edge.    Design  at  bottom  like  steps  to  courthouse. 

Miss  Caroline  L.  Manett 

Gerry,  Sophia.  1810.  Stoneham.  13  yrs.  19"  x  24f ".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.     House,  yard,  trees,  sheep,  and  fowl.    Verse  not  given.  Mrs.  B.  C.  Hall 

Gibbon,  Sarah  Ann.  1825.  Salem  [N.  J.].  10  yrs.  9"  x  I65".  6  alphabets.  Queen,  eyelet, 
and  cross-stitch.     Simple  cross-stitch  border.     Short  vine  with  tree  and  2  strawberries. 

Mrs.  Robert  D.  Hughes 

GiBBS,  Elizabeth.  1812.  [Near  Crosswicks,  N.  J.  Born  October  26,  1798.]  14  yrs.  10^"  x  14". 
4  alphabets.  French  knot,  tent,  chain,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Fancy  cross- 
border  at  bottom  of  strawberries,  trees,  and  flowers,  with  hearts  in  each  corner. 

Rebecca  S.  Price 

Gibbs,  Lucinda.    1814.    Sturbridge.    9  yrs.    18"  x  8".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Henry  Lowell  Hiscock 

Gibbs,  Mercy.  1808.  Birmingham  [N.  Y.].  14  yrs.  9"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.    Twelve  rows  of  different  stitches  at  bottom.    "Love  the  path  of  truth." 

Miss  Bertha  Oibbs 

Gibbs,  Rachel  B.  1812.  11  yrs.  Born  May  14,  1801.  lOV'  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Great  variety 
of  stitches.     A'ine  border.    Double  row  of  strawberries  at  bottom.     Verse  94  (var.). 

Rebecca  S.  Price 


162  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Gibson,  Euzabeth.  1800.  Farmville  [Va.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Weaving,  eye- 
let, satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Vine  border.     Wide  floral  design  at  bottom.     Verse  66. 

Mrs.  Wallace  Delafield 

GiBsoK,  Hannah.  [1815.]  12  yrs.  14"  x  19^".  Born  August  11,  1803.  Hemstitch  and  cross- 
stitch.  Triple  strawberry,  rose,  and  carnation  border,  on  top  and  sides.  Verse  307.  "Regis- 
ter of  Mr.  Barnabas  Gibson  and  family.  He  was  born  July  12,  1767  and  married  Miss 
Hannah  Tate  Feb.  26,  1788.  She  was  born  17 —  and  died  Aug.  31,  1801.  He  married  Miss 
Betsy  Chase  July  16,  1802.  She  was  born  June  24,  1770.  By  him  they  have  the  following 
children : — 

Names  Born  Died 

Samuel  Gibson  April  26,  1794  July  30,  1864 

Mary  Gibson  Sept.   6,   1795 

Robert  Gibson  Nov.  4,  1797 

Hannah  Gibson  Aug.  31,   1801  Dec.  2,  1801 

Hannah  Gibson  Aug.  11,  1803 

Luther  Gibson  March     1805  April  16,  1805 

Elizabeth  Gibson  April   6,    1806 

David  Gibson  March  24,    1809  Sept.  16,  1865 

Sarah  Gibson  Nov.    12,    1810 

William  Gibson  July   12,    1812  May  4,  1854" 

(Dates  of  three  of  the  deaths  filled  in  later  on.)  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Gibson,  Mary.  1800.  Lexington  [Ky.].  14  yrs.  16^"  x  17^".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.     Carnations  at  bottom.     Verse  665  (var.).  Mrs.  G.  W.  Cain 

Gilbert,  Hannah.  1811.  [Near  Doylestown,  Pa.  12  yrs.]  22"  x  22".  Cross-stitch.  Waving 
line  of  cross-stitch  as  a  border.  In  top  corners  are  octagons  inclosing  swan  and  vines,  also 
smaU  bunches  of  roses  and  carnations,  with  squirrel  in  center  of  top  row.  Two  doves  above 
name.  Small  detached  bunches  of  roses  and  carnations  and  sprays  in  baskets  here  and 
there  on  sampler.  Mrs.  Bryan  H.  Taylor 

Gilbert,  Nancy.  1800.  10  yrs.  10^"  x  14".  1  alphabet.  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Double  straw- 
berry border.     House,  hillside,  tree,  sheep,  and  people.    Verse  595  (var.). 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Gilbert,  Nancy.  1806.  Born  September  20,  1793.  13  yrs.  15^"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  and  strawberry  borders.  2  vases  at  the  bottom  and  3  at  the 
top.    Verse  46.  Rev.  Glenn  Tilley  Morse 

Gilbert,  Rebecca  Swass.  1825.  10  yrs.  12"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  queen,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.  Miss  Bassell 

Giles,  Narcissa.     1802.     11  yrs.     12"  x  13".    5  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Straight-line  border. 

Cross-borders  of  strawberries,  hearts,  vines,  diamonds,  etc.  Arthur  Le,<ilie  Green,  Esq. 

Gill,  Elizabeth.     1805.     Boston.     9  yrs.     10^"  x  17V'.     4  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Vase  of 

flowers  in  center,  a  double  strawberry  on  either  side,  then  2  trees,  2  shrubs,  and  2  potted 

plants.    Border  patterns  between  alphabets.    Verse  128  (1,  var.). 

Miss  Marette  Longley 

Gill,  Mary.  1809.  Clarksboro  [N.  J.].  12  yrs.  17"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.    Carnation  and  vine  border.    "See  the  time  for  sleep  is  before  sun  rise." 

Mrs.  Joseph  W.  Merritt 

Gill,  Mary.  1814.  Wilmington  [Del.].  10"  x  10".  Cross-stitch.  Seven  square  white  designs 
worked  in  cotton,  six  of  darning  and  one  of  knitting-stitch.     Illustrated. 

Mrs.  Charles  C.  Jessup 


f" 


rftf!^%/>:>.,A.  51 


r'V-:    >5 

i. 


^-*-^">. 


:,W.| 


«> 


g  k> 


S    B 


fteiisi  y. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  163 

GiLLET,  Mary  Ann.  1827.  10  yrs.  8^"  x  7i".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border. 
House,  dog,  figures,  and  double  hearts  at  bottom.  Mrs.  Wallace  Holcomb 

GiLMAN,  Sahah  Hidden.     [1826.]     Meredith  [N.  H.].     11  yrs.    8"  x  10".    3  alphabets. 

Mrs.  George  H.  Williams 

GiLSON,  Mary.  1826.  17^"  x  15^".  2  alphabets.  French  knot,  outline,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Elaborate  rose  border.    Roses  in  pots.    Verse  328.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

GiTHENS,  Mary.  1814.  [Moorestown,  Burlington  County,  N.  J.]  Born  in  1806.  12"  x  12|". 
Stem,  cat,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  floral  border.  Grass  with  dog  and  sprays 
of  roses  above  and  birds  on  each  side.  In  center,  a  vine  wreath  with  tiny  flowers  inclosing 
the  following:  "J.G.,  J.  G.,  J.G.,  Mary  Githens  1814."  The  rest  of  sampler  filled  in  with 
floral  designs.  Mrs.  Henry  I.  Budd 

Gladding,  Susan  Cahy.  1805.  Providence,  R.  I.  (5  or  6  yrs.)  13"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  French 
knot,  chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border,  with  tulip  and  leaves  in  one  corner. 
At  bottom,  very  correct  (though  unfinished)  representation  of  First  Congregational  (Uni- 
tarian) Church  in  Providence.    Verse  40  (var.).     ["Miss  Polly  Balch's  School,"  perhaps.] 

Mrs.  Charles  W.  Lippitt 

Glasier,  Abigail.  1806.  13  yrs.  Born  August  26,  1793.  18^"  x  21".  3  alphabets.  Chain, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  has  elaborate  design  of  vine,  flowers,  and  fruit  start- 
ing from  two  vases  and  meeting  in  true  lover's  knot.  Basket  of  flowers,  at  bottom.  Verse 
538  (var.). 

"Family  Record:  Benjamin  Glasier  married  Deborah  Binder  October  20,  1792.  Births 
of  their  children:  Abigail  Glasier  born  June  26,  1793;  Lydia  and  Mary  Glasier 
born  January  9,  1795;  Lydia  died  January  25,  Mary,  February  25,  1795;  Mary 
Glasier  born  February  8,  1799;  Salome  Glasier  born  Sept.  4,  1800,  died  Sept.  17, 
1801;  Edmund  H.  and  Elizabeth  O.  Glasier  born  April  25,  1802;  Elizabeth  O.  died 
July  19,  Edmund  H.  August  25,  1802;  Lydia  H.  Glasier  born  July  19,  1804;  Wil- 
liam P.  Glasier  born  November  19,  died  December  6,  1806." 

Ipswich  Historical  Society 

Glass,  Sally.  1823.  14  yrs.  16"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.  Border  of  conventional  flowers  and  strawberries  surroimds  verse.  Verses  188, 
601  (1,  2,  var.).    "Praise  ye  the  Lord  all  his  Works".  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

GoDARD,  Marcy.    1811.    Born  November  7,  1803.    6"  x  15^".    3  alphabets.    Plain  border. 

Newport  Historical  Society 

GoDARD,  Mary.  1803.  Cambridge,  Mass.  11  yrs.  11"  x  14^".  2  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  and 
cross-stitch.    Vine  border  with  conventional  flowers.    Verse  259.  Mrs.  Thomas  O.  Kent 

GoDMAN,  Margahetta  ARABELLA.  1808.  [Baltimore.]  (8  yrs.)  16^"  x  20".  Satin  and  cross- 
stitch.  Wreath  of  flowers,  and  below  verse  small  green  wreath.  Design  copied  from 
brocade  of  her  mother's  wedding  gown.    Verse  709.  Mrs.  Davis  C.  Buntin 

Godwin,  Rachel.  1808.  20"  x  16".  Cross-stitch.  Entire  sampler,  except  oval  in  center,  cov- 
ered with  running  rose  design  coming  out  of  a  cornucopia  at  the  bottom.  Oval  of  green 
vine  and  leaves  around  verse.     Verse  416.  Mrs.  Marguerite  du  Pont  Lee 

GoLDiN,  Elizabeth  Ann.  1829.  New  York.  20"  x  17V'.  Stem,  back,  and  cross-stitch.  Map 
of  the  state  of  New  York.  "Lake  Erie  is  the  celebrated  scene  of  Perry's  victory  over  a 
British  fleet,  September  10,  1813."  "Lake  Champlain  is  celebrated  for  the  victory  gained 
by  Macdonough  over  a  British  fleet  of  far  superior  force,  Sept.  11,  1814."  "Long  Island 
is  the  most  important  island  belonging  to  the  state  of  New  York  140  miles  in  length  and 
from  10  to  15  broad,  contains  three  counties  and  numerous  flourishing  towns,  population. 


164 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


?7,000."     "population  of  the  State  of  New  York  in  1820  was   1,372,812.     Albany  is  the 
Ca'pital."    Illustrated.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Cog 

GooDMAK,  Eliza.  1821.  11  yrs.  Born  April  13,  1809.  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Simple  bor- 
der. Scene  with  farmhouse  with  two  ells,  birds,  and  conventional  tree.  Verses  41  (var.), 
7g4_  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

GooDRiDGE,  Jane.     1813.    Lynn  [Mass.].     11  yrs.    17"  x  16^".    Alphabets.    Seed,  outline,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Rose  border.    Wreath  of  forget-me-nots.     Other  vines  of  forget- 
me-nots  elsewhere.    Verse  129  (var.). 
"Family  Register" 
"Mr.  Moses  Goodridge,  born  Nov.  27,  1768. 
Miss  Hannah  Graves,  born  Jan.  22,  1774. 
Married  Aug.  7,  1795. 


Childrens  names 
Hannah  Goodridge 
Polly  Goodridge 
Jane  Goodridge 
Rand  G.  Goodridge 
Sally  B.  Goodridge 
Eliza  Goodridge 
Moses  Goodridge 
Joseph  B.  Goodridge 
Eliza  G.  Goodridge 


Births 

April  6,  1797. 
Dec.  18,  1798. 
Dec.  3,  1801. 
Feb.  25,  1804. 
Feb.  12,  1805. 
Dec.  29,  1806. 
May  12,  1808. 
March  20,  1810. 
March  23,  1812." 


Deaths 

Sept.  10,  1821. 

[d.  1906,  104  years  old.] 

March  17,  1804. 

Jan.  7,  1807. 


Mrs,  Frederick  C.  Leslie 


Goodwin,  Eliza.  1801.  [South  Berwick,  Maine.]  7  years.  Born  September  21,  1794.  18"  x  24". 
3  alphabets.  Satin,  stem,  chain,  French  knot,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  and  vine  border, 
starting  from  small  baskets  on  either  side  and  ending  in  large  basket  in  center  at  top. 
Trees  and  birds  across  bottom.  Rows  of  fancy  stitches  and  narrow  bands  in  strawberry 
designs.    Verse  601  (1).  Mrs.  William  8.  Whitney 

Goodwin,  Elizabeth.  1805.  Salem  [N.  J.  16  yrs.].  West-Town  Boarding  School.  9|"  x  12i". 
Satin  and  outline  stitch.    Vine  border.    Verse  515  (var.).    Miss  Anna  Elizabeth  Woodnutt 

Goodwin,  Sarah.  1824.  Marblehead  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  6  mos.  18"  x  12^".  3  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Panel  at  bottom  with  figures  of  boy  and  girl, 
also  sunflower  plant  with  bird  flying  about.     Verse  776.  Mrs.  Robert  B.  Dixon 

GoRHAM,  Lucy  Taylor.  1801.  Boston.  12"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border. 
Design  in  shape  of  peaks.    Initials  "G.  W."  underneath  verse.     Verse  5a. 

Mrs.  Shepherd  Brooks 

Gould,  Lucy  H.  [After  1803.]  9  yrs.  12"  x  16".  Cross,  satin,  stem,  eyelet,  long  and  short- 
stitch.  3  alphabets.  Flowering  vine  border  on  solid  embroidery.  At  bottom,  two  urns 
with  willow  branches,  and  under  both  "Eliza  Gould  M  9  Ys  Died  August  6,  1803."  Verse 
261.  Owner  not  recorded 


Graham,  Sophia.     1803.     Mobile  [Ala.].    "tV  x  9".    2*  alphabets. 


Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  John  Adams  Dix 


Graves,  Mary  McNeran.     1810.     Philadelphia, 
eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.    Verse  342  (var.). 


7  yrs.     Born  March  9,  1803.     8"  x  18".    Cat, 
Miss  Ellen  Coppuck  Curtis 

Gray,  Susan  (Young).  1803.  Boston.  13  yrs.  16*"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border.  Strawberry  design  at  top  and  bottom,  inside  border. 
Verse  718.  The  Misses  Sophia  and  E.  Frances  Morton 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  165 

Greely,  Maby  Ann.  1814.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  15".  6  alphabets.  Chain, 
satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberries  and  grass  at  base.  "The  family  of  Stephen 
and  Betsy  Greely;  Benjamin  born  Dec.  11,  1793;  Nathaniel  born  Nov.  11,  1795;  John  born 
June  19,  1798;  Alice  born  Nov.  14,  1800;  John  B.  born  July  20,  1802;  Mary  A.  born  Nov. 
19,  1804;  Elizabeth  born  July  20,  1810."  Lucius  H.  Greely,  Esq. 

Green,  Eliza.  1805.  Stoneli — .  10  yrs.  16"  x  23^".  4  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Elaborate  floral  border  in  satin-stitch.  Picture  of  a  house  with  trees  and 
two  little  dogs.    Verse  147.  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Green,  Mahy.  1813.  7  yrs.  15"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.     Verse  515  (var.).  The  Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 

Green,  Mary.  1814.  Cambridge,  New  York.  14  yrs.  9^"  x  16".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.  Marguerite  Emery 

Greene,  Martha.  1807.  Born  the  23rd  of  June,  1797,  at  Coventry,  R.  I.  8"  x  8".  3  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.  Border,  two  designs  in  cross-stitch,  also  cross-borders  in  different  designs. 
Verse  92a.  Emma  A.  Davis 

Greenleaf,  Dolly.  1804.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  Born  March,  1796.  11"  x  15".  3  alphabets. 
Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  saw-tooth  design.  Vase  with  flowers;  tulips,  roses, 
and  bachelor  buttons.  Mrs.  Francis  B.  Allen 

Greenleaf,  Eliza  Ann.  1808.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  18"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Satin, 
eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Garland  of  flowers  around  verse,  also  2  lines  of  Greek  key 
pattern.    Verse  202  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Francis  R.  Allen 

Greenough,  Eliza.  1809.  Essex  County,  Haverhill.  10"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  tent, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Grape-vine  border,  with  rosebuds.  Tulip  design  at  bottom.  Verse 
111.  Mrs,  Edward  Webster 

Greenwalt,  Eliza.  1822.  Cumberland  [Md.].  14^"  x  16".  Flat,  chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Flat-stitch  border.    Pastoral  scene.    Verse  435.  Mrs.  Lloyd  Lowndes 

Griffin,  Frances  Louisa.  1810.  Boston.  8  yrs.  4  alphabets.  Hemstitch  and  cross-stitch. 
Hemstitched  edge,  with  scroll  border.    Narrow  cross-border  designs.  Miss  F.  L.  Smith 

Grimes,  Caroline.  1803.  New  York.  8  yrs.  14"  x  16".  Cross-stitch.  Border  design  some- 
thing like  a  sweet-pea.  At  bottom,  house,  2  fir  trees,  man,  weeping  willow,  and  monument ; 
detached  designs  on  sides,  birds  on  branches,  sprays  of  bluebells,  and  rosebuds,  dog,  "Nero," 
cat,  "Tiger,"  with  basket  of  flowers  in  between.  Made  and  sent  to  Grandmother  in  Eng- 
land.   Verse  16.  Marshall  Cutler,  Esq. 

Grimes,  Elizabeth.  1803.  New  York.  10  yrs.  14"  x  16".  Cross-stitch.  Narrow  border  in 
diamond  design.  At  bottom,  house  with  tree  on  either  side,  bird  on  one  side  and  dog  on 
the  other,  baskets  of  flowers  at  each  end.  Detached  designs  around  verse  of  man  shooting 
at  birds,  with  a  dog  at  his  side,  conventional  tree,  sprays  of  flowers,  colored  man,  etc. 
Initials  above  verse:  "LINE  S."    Sent  to  maker's  grandmother  in  England.    Verse  145. 

Marshall  Cutler,  Esq. 


166  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Geoff,  Deborah.  1807.  Woodstown,  N.  J.  10  yrs.  18"  x  20".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross- 
stitch.  Border,  Walls  of  Troy  with  carnations.  Names:  "John  and  Deborah  GrofiF 
(parents)  ;  Thomas  GrofiF  (deceased),  Asa,  Sarah,  Letice  Martha,  John,  William,  Benjamin 
(brothers  and  sisters)."    Verse  52.  Mrs.  I.  Oakford  Acton 

Gross,  Eliza.    1820.    13  yrs.    20"  x  10".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  317. 

Mrs.  Arthur  Durfee 

Grow,  Eliza.  1810.  Ipswich  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  16i"  x  22^".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Border  of  vines  running  up  each  side  and  across  top  and  starting  from  flower- 
pots at  lower  corners.  Verse  538  (var.).  Family  names  and  dates:  "John  Grow  born 
Sept.  3,  1772;  Elizabeth  Caldwell  born  Aug.  17,  1772;  Married  June  19,  1798.  Eliza  Grow 
born  April  3,  1799."  Mrs.  Charlotte  M.  Jones 

Gmu),  Abigail.  1802.  Dedham  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  10^"  x  15^".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Vine  and  rose  border.     Rose  trees  at  bottom.     Verse  249.  Miss  Isabel  Russell  Brown 

Guild,  Lucy.  1802.  10  yrs.  14"  x  9".  2  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  bor- 
der.   Verse  250.  Miss  Louise  Cranston 

Guild,  Marianx.  1819.  Dedham  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  17^"  x  16^".  4  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross- 
stitch.    Verses  152,  249.  Mrs.  Howard  M.  Chapin 

Guild,  Rebekah.  1801.  Dedham  [Mass.],  8  yrs.  12"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry  border.    Design  at  top  of  trees,  flowers,  and  bouquets.    Verse  532. 

Annie  B.  Thayer 

Hackney,  Ariadne.  May  8,  1817.  Mercer  [Pa.].  12"  x  12".  French  knot,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Vine  border,  with  pink  flowers.  Four  bunches  of  roses,  an  urn,  and  wreath 
of  roses  in  center  around  verse.    Verse  755.  Miss  Addie  Venable 

Hackney,  Maria.  April,  1819.  Mercer  [Pa.].  10"  x  10".  Satin,  flat,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine 
border.  Sprays  of  roses  in  each  corner  with  2  blocks  in  between;  roses  at  top  and  bottom 
and  1  block  on  each  side.    Verses  733,  761.  Miss  Jane  Reid  Venable 

Hackney,  Maria.  1819.  Mercer  [Pa.].  10"  x  10".  French  knot,  chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Tulip  border.    Four  bunches  of  roses,  with  verse  between.    Verse  733. 

Miss  Jane  Reid  Venable 

Haines,  Jane.  1807.  18"  x  17".  Chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  2  alphabets.  Oval  incloses 
verse  and  alphabets ;  initials  around  the  border.    Verse  416.  The  Misses  Chdce 

Hall,  Abby  D.  1821.  11  yrs.  11"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose 
border,  with  violets  in  corners.  Mrs.  William  H.  Bradford 

Hall,  Eliza.  [1801?]  Westmoreland  [N.  H.].  9  yrs.  [Born  December  21,  1792,  in  Rayn- 
ham,  Mass.]  10"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cross,  and  hem-stitch.  Strawberry  border. 
Basket  of  flowers,  trees,  and  birds.  Miss  Cora  E.  Pierce 

Hall,  Lucy  Jones.  1820.  Medford  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  14"  x  15^".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  tent,  and 
cross-stitch.    Narrow  cross-borders  with  trees  and  hanging  fruits.  Mary  H.  Hayes 

Hall,  M.  [Cir.  1820.]  10"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Two  strawberries.  Initials: 
"M.W.H.  and  S.S."  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Hall,  M.  H.  [Cir.  1812.]  [Ann  Arundell  County,  Md.]  [Born  in  1799.]  5i"  x  6^".  2  alpha- 
bets.   Hem  and  cross-stitch.    Hemstitched  edge.  Miss  Stockett 


PLATE  LA^ 

Content  Phillips's  Sampler 
Owned  by  Florence  C.  McKenny 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  167 

Hall,  Mahgaret.  1823.  14"  x  19".  1  alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  floral 
border,  with  pineapple  at  top,  large  red  poppy  at  bottom,  roses,  poppies,  tulips,  and  carna- 
tions on  sides.  Large  weeping  willow  on  lawn,  two  large  butterflies,  and  tulips  in  grass. 
Grape  vines  on  either  side  of  verse.    Verse  774.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Hall,  Martha.  1808.  Medford  [Mass.].  16"  x  21".  3  alphabets.  Vine  and  flower  border. 
Cross-borders.  Basket  of  flowers  in  each  corner  and  circular  design  of  flowers  and  leaves 
in  center. 

"Friendship  is  like  a  debt  of  honour,  the  moment  it  is  talked  of  it  loses  its  name  and 

assumes  the  ungrateful  form  of  obligation." 
"Virtue  is  the  noblest  ornament  of  humanity  and  a  true  sense  of  sublime  pleasure.     It 
is  a  solid  foundation  of  honour  and  esteem."  Mary  H.  Hayes 

Hall,  Nabby  L.  1804.  Pembroke  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  21V'  x  16V'.  3  alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet, 
and  cross-stitch.     Vine  and  rose  border  at  sides  and  basket  of  roses  at  top  and  bottom. 

Charles  H.  Tyler,  Esq. 

Hall,  Phebe.  1812.  11  yrs.  7f"  x  n\".  2  alphabets.  Chain  and  stem-stitch.  Trefoil  border 
at  top;  small  alternating  squares,  containing  conventionalized  trees  and  flowers  across 
bottom.     Verse  441.  W.  G.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Hall,  Prudence.  1805.  Salem  [N.  J.].  [16  yrs.]  7i"  x  8J".  Cross-stitch.  Dove  inclosed  in 
wreath  tied  with  bow-knot.  Detached  designs  of  birds,  flowers,  and  fruit  on  balance  of 
sampler.  Miss  Adaline  Sinnickson 

Hall,  R .     1813.     10"  x  8".    Cross-stitch.     3  alphabets.  Mrs.  I.  Oakford  Acton 

Hallet,  Mary.  1803.  8  yrs.  13"  x  15".  Alphabet.  Queen,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.  Cross-borders.  In  upper  corners,  crowns  and  rabbits ;  across  center,  house,  trees, 
deer,  bushes,  and  chickens;  underneath,  flowers  in  vases,  design  with  name  and  date;  in 
lower  corners,  bowls  of  roses,  and  in  center  of  bottom,  2  trees.    Verse  535. 

Mrs.  Frederic  B.  Kellogg 

Hamil,  Jaite.  1802.  lOV'  x  17V'.  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.    2  small  ships  and  2  baskets  of  fruit.    Verses  41  (var.),  128  (1,  var.),  447,  534. 

Mrs.  Day  Brookmire  Hebard 

Hamilton,  Catherine.  1808.  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Tulip  border.  Wreath 
around  name.    Narrow  borders  across.    2  flowers  in  the  lower  corners.    Verse  424. 

Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park,  Philadelphia 

Hajulton,  E .  1819.  12"  x  16^".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Narrow  cross- 
borders.     Verse  29  (2).  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park,  Philadelphia 

Hamilton,  Mary.  1812.  Maytown,  Mrs.  Welchan's  School.  18  yrs.  17"  x  17".  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.  Border  made  up  of  series  of  squares,  containing  diflferent  designs  of  baskets 
and  sprays  of  flowers.  Oval  picture  in  center,  with  woman  standing  under  tree;  her  face 
and  arms  are  painted.  Inscription  in  center  square  at  bottom:  "Mary  Hamilton  a  daughter 
of  John  and  Catherine  Hamilton  was  born  in  County  Antrim  February  the  1  in  the  year  of 
our  Lord  1794  and  made  this  sampler  in  Maytown  in  Mrs.  Welchan's  School  in  the  year 
of  our  Lord  1812."    Illustrated.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 


168  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Hamilton,  Sakah.  [Cir.  1800.]  Philadelphia.  7J"  x  10".  Alphabets.  Variety  of  stitches. 
Cross-borders.  On  sale  by  American  Art  Association,  December  12,  1917 

Hammond,  Ann  J.  [Cir.  1805.]  17"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  queen,  and  cross-stitch. 
Unusual  strawberry  border.     Verse  515   (var.).  Mrs.  Algernon  Sydney  Sullivan 

Hammond,  Elizabeth  H.  September  3,  1823.  Ashford  [Conn.].  9  yrs.  IV'xlSi".  3 
alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth  design  in  border.  Conventional  cross- 
stitch  design  at  bottom.     Flower-pot   and  bird.     Verse  772. 

Mrs.  Grace  Buchanan  Reynolds 

Hammond,  Lydla.  A.  October,  1829.  Wickford  [R.  I.].  17i"xl8".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Rosebud  border.     "Hope  Eternal  Hope!     Where  yonder  Spheres  sublime." 

Abby  C.  Bullock 

Hamson,  Ann.  1808.  11"  x  13J".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  flat,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  has 
strawberries  on  the  outside  and  cherries  on  the  inside,  with  interesting  corners.  Eyelet- 
work  borders.  4  pine  trees  separated  by  conventional  stalks  of  flowers;  rose  tree  in 
center.     Verse  418.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Hancock,  E.  C.  1826.  Salem  [N.  J.].  14  yrs.  8J"x9J".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.     Flowers  and  animals.  Mrs.  James  F.  Barr 

Hancock,  Emilea.  1800.  8  yrs.  Cross-stitch.  Carnation  border  and  strawberry  cross- 
border.  Scene  with  house,  trees,  butterflies,  and  below,  trees,  stags,  birds,  lady,  dog,  and 
gate.     Verse  515  (var.),  ,  .  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Hanners,  Elizabeth  Jane.     1812.     18"  x  14".     Design  at  bottom,  New  York  City  Hall, 

Mrs.  Arthur  Curtis  James 

Haeden,  Eliza.  October  12,  1803.  Portland  [Me.].  11  yrs.  17"x24".  6  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  Scene  at  bottom  with  house,  garden,  trees,  birds, 
sheep,  fence,  shrubs,  and  girl.    Spray  of  roses  around  verse.     Verse  404. 

Mrs.  Pearl  Wight 

Hakdenbrook,  Rebekah.  Decbr  the  20,  1800.  7  yrs.  4  mos.  7"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.  Waving  line  border.  "  Margaret  Hardenbrook,  William  Hardenbrook 
X  1800."  Mrs.  Samuel  A.  Cunningham 

Harding,  Abigail.  1820.  Medway  [Mass.  Born  October  24,  1808.].  10|"  x  11",  3  alpha- 
bets. Cross-stitch.  Simple  border.  3  baskets  of  flowers,  with  2  trees  between,  at  bottom. 
Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Mary  H.  Wilder 

Harding,  Mary.  1820.  Medway.  [Born  March  17,  1811.]  10|"  x  11|",  '  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Simple  border.    3  baskets  of  flowers  and  two  trees,  at  bottom.     Verse  615  (var,). 

Mrs.  Mary  H.  Wilder 

Hahdman,  Ann.    1816.    6"  x  10".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.       Sold  at  Libbie's,  March  1,  1916 

Hardy,  Clarisa.  1816.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  floral  design  starting  from 
cornucopia  in  center  at  bottom.  In  center  is  the  "Family  Register:  William  Hardy 
Born  Aug  th  2  1779;  Clarisa  Worcester  Born  January  th  5  1786;  They  were  married 
November  the  30  1803.  A  list  of  the  name  birth  and  deaths  of  their  children:  Clarissa 
W.  Born  Dec.  th  11  1804;  William  Born  May  th  20  1806;  Hannah  W,  Born  Oct  12th  1808, 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  169 

William  the  husband  of  Clarisa  Hardy  died  Oct  2,  1808.  Ebenezer  Hunt  the  second 
husband  of  Clarissa  Hardy  Born  March  th  3.  They  were  married  Dec  th  29  1809." 
"  Now  hear  you  read  that  death  has  call  niy  parent  Dear  and  may  we  all  for  that  day 
prepare."    Verse  55.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Habforth,  Hannah.     1808.     13  yrs.    Alphabets.     Flowers  and  urn.     Verses  41a,  420,  541. 

Mrs.  J.  F.  Linder 

Hahhington,  Hannah.  1815.  Worcester  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  12i"  x  13".  2  alphabets  and  other 
letters.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  490  (var.).  Philip  Hope  Baker,  Esq. 

Harrington,  Mary.  1812.  Worcester  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Cross  and  eyelet  stitch. 
Zigzag  border.  Philip  Hope  Baker,  Esq. 

Harrington,  Ruth.  1809.  9  yrs.  12"  x  72",  2  alphabets.  Satin,  cross,  and  hem-stitch. 
Rose  border.     Several  conventional  figures.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Harris,  Adeline  Eleanor.  1816.  Cranston  [R.  I.].  Born  December  3,  1803.  17"  x  18". 
2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge.  Flower  design  at  bot- 
tom.    Verse  680.  Adeline  Harris  Sears 

Harris,  Elizabeth.  1806.  Born  July  27,  1796.  10"xl04".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin, 
tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Flowering  branches  and  small  trees  In 
bloom.  Mrs.  Lyman  Daniels 

Harris,  Henrietta  C.  1829.  13i"  x  13^".  5  alphabets.  Cat  and  cross-stitch.  Zigzag  border. 
Cross-borders  in  conventional  designs,     "  C.  L,  A."  W.  O.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Harris,  Maria  L.  1816.  3  alphabets.  Two  hillocks  with  pine  trees.  "  B,  C,  Harris.  A.  E, 
Harris."     "Daughter  of  Joseph  and  Sussina  Harris."     Verse  515   (var.), 

Ozemer  not  recorded 

Harris,  Oceana.  May  8,  1805.  Providence  [R.  I.].  8  yrs.  8"  x  19".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch  and  satin-stitch.  Simple  cross-stitch  border.  Pyramid  design  at  bottom.  Verse 
537.  Miss  Emma  A.  Taft  II 

Harris,  Pollt.  Before  1830,  10  yrs,  6"  x  10",  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret 
border.     Two   white  horses   eating  strawberries.  Rev.  Glenn  Tilley  Morse 

Harris,  S.  1808.  13"  x  15".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  around  lower 
half.    Two  doves  with  branches  in  mouths.    Verse  421.  Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 

Harrison,  Elizabeth.  [Cir.  1800.]  "Born  August  the  5,  1791."  8J"  x  16J",  4  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.     Verse  187.  Mrs.  H.  B.  Leary,  Jr. 

Harrison,  Mary.  1822.  9  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Cross,  eyelet,  and  satin-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.     Vase  of  flowers,  log  hut,  and  an  animal  under  a  tree.     Birds.     Verse  561. 

Mrs.  Mary  Harrison  Snow 

Harth,  Caroline.  1824.  10  yrs.  8"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry and  Greek  key  borders.  The  Misses  Laura  and  Lieze  Green 

Harwood,  Elizabeth  A.  1814.  [Massachusetts.]  17  yrs.  15J"x20".  Cross,  satin,  chain, 
stem,  cat,  and  tent-stitch.  Rose-vine  border.  The  Register  is  framed  between  two 
posts,  with  balls  at  the  top.     Between  them  is  a  draped  curtain  with  tassels. 


170 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


"  Register 

Capt.  Peter  Harwood  was  born  Sept  16  AD  1766. 
June   12   AD.    1770.     They   Married  Jan  22   1787. 
children.     Viz. 


Names 
Thomas  Airmet 
Fanny  Russell 
Sarah  Ann 
Esther  Brazier 
Elizabeth   Airmet 
Clarisse 
Ebenezer 
William  Brazier 
Ebenezer 
Peter  Branscome 
Clarisse  Branscome 


Births 
Feb  6th  1789 
Feb  7th  1791 
May  27th  1793 
May  3,th  1795 
May  28,  th  1797 
June  16,  th  1799 
Dec  21th  1801 
April  21th  1803 
June  28th  1805 
May  21th  1807 
June  16,  th  1812" 


Miss  Elizabeth  Airmet  was  born 
He   hath   by   her   the   following 

Deaths 


Died  June  15th  1803 
Died  Feb  13th  1807 


Died  April  th  22 


At  the  bottom  two  houses,  trees,  and  a  garden.  The  right-hand  house  was  built  by 
Captain  Peter  Harwood,  and  was  the  first  brick  house  in  North  Brookfield,  Mass.  Verse 
744.     Illustrated.  Mrs.  Grace  Craig  Stork 

Haskell,  Hannah  Phizst.  "  March  2."  [Cir.  1815.  Boston.]  6  yrs.  16"x20".  4  alpha- 
bets. French  knot,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  "  Modesty  and  Truth  To  Piety  add  Modesty 
and  Docility  Show  reverence  and  submission  to  those  who  are  your  superiors  in  Knowl- 
edge or  Station  and  note  that  Dependance  and  obedience  belong  to  youth.  Modesty  is 
one  of  the  chief  ornaments  and  tokens  of  piety.    Truth  is  a  precious  adornment." 

Mrs.  Delano   Wight 

Haskell,  Lucy  S.  1816.  12  yrs.  18^"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  French  knot,  stem,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Conventional  strawberry-vine  border  with  potted  strawberry  plant  in  center  at 
bottom,  flanked  by  sprays  of  star  flowers.  Detached  spray  of  strawberries  and  baskets 
of  flowers.     Conventional  cross-borders.     Verses   194    (var.),   751. 

Miss  Mary  O.  Longfellow 

Haskell,  Sarah  K[iddeh.  1811.  Boston.  Born  September  28,  1805.].  6  yrs.  18"  x  16". 
3  alphabets.     Satin  and  cross-stitch.     Strawberry  border.     Verse  724. 

The  Late  Miss  Sarah  Haskell  Crocker 

Haskins,  Mahy  Anx.  1828.  Rehoboth  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  16"x20".  3  alphabets.  Flat, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Rose  border.     House  and  flowers.     Verse  794. 

Sara  Lawrence  White 

Hassen,  Annzelette.  1821.  8  yrs.  24"x20".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border  with  flowers.  Large  basket  of  flowers  in  center  at  bottom,  and  on 
either  side  an  octagon  inclosing  name  and  dates;  garland  and  tassels  hang  from  inside 
of  each  octagon,  and  underneath   are  solid   cross-stitch  pyramids. 

National  Museum,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Hatch,  Mahy.  1808.  Paris  [N.  Y.].  10  yrs.  17"  x  9".  5  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.     Eyelet  and  cross-stitch  border.    Sprays  of  roses  in  corners.     Verse  154. 

Ella  M.  Russell 


Hatfield,  Emeline. 
and  split-stitch. 
Verse  615. 


[Cir.  1823  New  York.]     14  yrs.    22i"  x  22i".     Cross,  satin,  queen,  flat. 
Grape  and  diamond  border.     Two  cornucopias  and  a  basket  of  roses. 

Mrs.  John  Lester  Keep 


PLATE  LVI 

Sarah  Doxe's  Sampler.     1819 
Owned  by  Leonard  Smith,  Esq. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


171 


Hatfieu),  Mary.  1828.  [New  York.]  11  yrs.  17V'  x  16^".  Cross-stitch.  Rose-vine  border. 
Large  basket  at  the  bottom.  Mrs.  John  Lester  Keep 

Hatfield,  Sarah.  [New  York.]  22^"  x  22*".  Cross,  satin,  queen,  flat,  and  long-stitch.  Grape- 
vine and  diamond  border.    Large  basket  of  fruit.     The  handles  are  gracefully  curved. 

Mrs.  John  Lester  Keep 

Hathawat,  Betsey.  1828.  Freetown,  Assonet  Village.  14  yrs.  16"  x  16".  4  alphabets. 
Cat,  eyelet,  queen,  stem,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border  at  bottom  and  on  sides, 
and  poppies  across  top.     Cross-borders  in  variety  of  designs  and  stitches.     Verse  483. 

Mrs.  Mary  B.  Pierce 

Hathewey,  Ltjcy.  Freetown  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  19"x20".  3  alphabets.  French  knot,  chain, 
stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  border  at  sides.  House,  two  figures,  basket  of  flowers, 
sprays  of  flowers,  etc.     Verse  109.  Mrs.  Charles  A.  Clark 

Hawkes,  Elizabeth.  [Cir.  1815.]  Windham  [Me.  Cir.  20  yrs.].  20"x29".  Cross  and 
hem-stitch.  Strawberry  and  vine  border.  Births,  marriages,  and  deaths  of  Hawkes 
family: 

Births 
Ebenezer  Hawkes     April  25,  1766 
Rebecca  Legrow       September  9,  1772 
Married  November  20,  1794  in  Windham,  Maine 

Their  children  born  in  WindhaTn 


Elizabeth  Hawkes    July  27,  1795 
Ebenezer  Hawkes     February  23,  1797 
Sarah  Hawkes  October  8,  1798 

Joseph  Hawkes        July  7,  1800 
Anna  Hawkes  May  1,  1802 

Deaths 
Rebecca  Hawkes      July  12,  1819 

Aged  46 
July  28,  1825 
Aged  26 
September  23,  1825 
Aged  14 


Mary  Hawkes 
Lydia  Hawkes 
William  Hawkes 
Elias  Hawkes 


March  29,  1804 
March  29,  1806 
February  12,  1809 
April  6,  1811 


Jeremiah  Hawkes     April  17,  1815 


Sarah  Purrington 
Elias  Hawkes 


Mrs.  Franklin  P.  Shumway 


Hawthorke,  Rhoda.  1806.  Born  November  21,  1791.  12"  x  15^".  2  alphabets.  Bird's-eye 
and  cross-stitch.     Plain  border.     Verse  105.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Haydex,  Harriot  F.  1812.  Fitzwilliam  [N.  H.].  8  yrs.  17"  x  16i".  3  alphabets.  Cat, 
stem,  flat,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  at  top  and  bottom,  with  vine  on  sides. 
Verse  107.  Mrs.  Roger  Johnson 

Hays,  Eixex.  1808.  Philadelphia,  8  yrs.  16"  x  18".  11  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine 
border  with  strawberries.  Miss  Rosa  Mordecai 

Hays,  Rosa  Elizabeth.  1813.  Philadelphia.  [10  yrs.]  13"  x  13^".  6  alphabets.  Greek 
fret  border  with  conventional  designs.  3  flower-pots  with  flowers,  also  small  sprays,  at 
bottom.  Miss  Rosa  Mordecai 

Hazwell,  Frances.  1828.  12  yrs.  18"  x  12".  6  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 
House.     Verse  515.  Mrs.  W.  B.  Vine 

[Heacock,  Evauxe.  (?)  Bucks  County,  Pa.].  8"  x  13".  Alphabets.  Variety  of  stitches. 
Cross-stitch  border.     At  bottom,  dog,  bird  on  flowering  plant;   bird  on  plant  in  upper 


172  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

left-hand   corner   and  conventional   flower   in   upper   right-hand   corner;   in   center,  con- 
ventional design  with  two  birds,  beak  to  beak,  bell  flower,  carnations,  and  crown. 

Mrs.  J.  Baufmann 

Heath,  Rachel  A.     1829.     Pittsfield,  111.     11  yrs.     17"  x  17".     2  alphabets.     Cross,  satin,  and 

eyelet-stitch.  F.  Maude  Smith 

Heaton,  Rosamond  P.  1824.  Berlin  [Vt.].  10  yrs.  17"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  chain, 
and  cross-stitch.    Tree  and  flower  design.  Miss  M.  Louise  Gladding 

Hebbahd,  Habbiot.  1812.  10  yrs.  17"  x  14J".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Small 
zigzag  border.     Conventional  trees  and  baskets  at  bottom.        Miss  Mary  C.  Wheelwright 

Hempsted,  Caboline.  1823.  New  London  [Conn.].  9  yrs.  13"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.  Greek  fret  and  strawberry  border.  Rose  in  fancy  square  in  corners  at  bottom. 
Verse  515   (var.).  Dr.  Elmer  Hempstead  Ames 

Hendbjckson,  Alice.  1807.  [Monmouth  County,  N.  J.  Born  March  18,  1795.  Daughter  of 
John  and  Alche.]  12  yrs.  12J"  x  17".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Basket  of 
flowers,  birds,  rosebuds,  berries,  and  diamond-shaped  designs,  etc.    Verses  10  (1),  395  (4). 

Mrs.  Elwood  Davis 

Hendbickson,  Gebteude.  1805.  [Monmouth  County,  N.  J.  Born  December  28,  1792.] 
13  yrs.  15^"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Basket 
of  flowers  with  branches  and  berries  on  each  side.  Letitia  E.  Davis 

Hepbubn,  Ann.  1828.  10"  x  9".  Back-stitch  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  House, 
fence,  trees,  and  sheep,  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Hebbher,  Elizabeth.  1824.  8  yrs.  "Done  in  Ruth  H.  Redman's  School,  Strawsburg." 
12J"  X 17".  Alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Flower-pots,  birds,  and  two 
dogs  at  top.  Charles  S.  Henry,  2d,  Esq. 

Hereick,  Eunice.  1801.  11  yrs.  6J"x6^".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Variety  of  cross- 
stitch  designs  in  border.     Two  hearts  at  bottom.  Mrs.  E.  L.  Mark 

Heuling,  Mabtha.  1806.  Moorestown  [N.  J.  13  yrs.  Born  October  27,  1793.].  21"  x  22^". 
Chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  roses,  baskets  of  fruit,  birds,  stars,  and  car- 
nations. Picture  of  the  West  Town  School,  with  tree  on  either  side  and  birds  above  it. 
Verses  77  (var.),  399  (var.).     Illustrated.  Hannah  F.  Gardiner 

Heulings,  Mart  C.  1821.  Burlington  [N.  J.].  10  yrs.  21"xl8^".  4  alphabets.  Outline, 
chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  13  bunches  of  flowers  and  several  small  flowers; 
also  2  large  baskets  of  flowers.    Verse  765.  Miss  Margaret  S.  Bedell 

Hewins,  Olive  E.  1829.  Boston.  4  alphabets.  Great  variety  of  stitches.  Wide  and  elab- 
orate rose  border.  Picture  in  center,  with  tree  and  lady  in  foreground,  and  house,  trees, 
pond,  cow,  grass,  etc.,  in  background.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Hewling,  Rebecca  Ann.  1826.  15^"  x  17J".  6  alphabets.  Eyelet,  chain,  cat,  queen,  satin, 
buttonhole,  two-sided  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border.  Large  diamond 
in  four  parts,  pair  of  love  birds,  baskets  of  flowers,  dogs,  hearts,  tree,  and  rosebud. 

Frances  D.  Smith 

Hlbbard,  Elizabeth.  1813.  15  yrs.  18"x22i".  French  knot,  flat,  outline,  petit-point,  stem, 
and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  rose  border.  Baskets  of  flowers,  trees,  birds,  etc. 
Verse  132  (var.).  "My  parents,  William  and  Jane  Hibbard;  My  Brothers,  Walter, 
Thomas  &  William  Hibbard;  My  Grandparents,  Caleb  and  Phebe  Hibbard,  John  and 
Elizabeth  Williamson;  My  Sisters,  Esther,  &  Phebe  Hibbard." 

Miss  Josephine  Parry  Amos 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  173 

HiGGisrs,  Sarah.  1803.  Cape  May  City,  N.  J.  9J"  x  Hi".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.  Top  border  of  crowns  and  trees.  Rose  trees,  bunches  of  flowers,  and  dog. 
Verse  256.  Mrs.  Henry  B.  Diverty 

HiLDRETH,  Adaijne  S.  1820.  Hopkinton  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  8"xl0".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.  Simple  pyramid  border.  [Lived  in  the  house  where  Sir  Harry  Frankland 
and  Agnes  Surriage  once  lived.]  Mrs.  H.  O.  Stearns 

HiLLHOusE,  Sarah  G.    1800.    16"x7i".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  6T3. 

Sarah  O.  F.  Hillhouse 

Hills,  Abigah..    1802.    New  Bedford  [Mass.].     12  yrs.    13"  x  18".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch. 

Strawberry  border.  The  Canandaigua  Historical  Society 

HiNCHMAx,  Martha  Exgle.  1821.  [Mannington  Township,  Salem  County,  N.  J.] 
13  j^rs.  14i"xl9i".  Queen,  cat,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  vine  and  strawberry. 
Vase  with  large  bluebird,  sprays  of  strawberries,  rosebuds,  tulips,  birds,  baskets  of 
flowers,  horses,  lions,  goose,  etc.  Initials:  "  [father,  mother,  and  children,  E.H.  done  in 
black,  had  died]  L.H.  C.H.  M.H.  T.H.  E.H.  A.H.  M.H.  R.H.  M.H.  R.H.  C.H."  Verses 
399,  617.  Miss  Martha  Richman 

Hinckley,  Elizabeth  K.  1816.  Hingham  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  10"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     "  Let  Virtue  be  my  Guide."  Mrs.  John  Laidlaw  Buel 

Pupils  of  Sally  Hinsdale.  [Cir.  1825.]  New  Hartford  and  Harwinton  [Conn.].  7  to  15  yrs. 
16  small  samplers,  4J"  x  6"  to  l|"x3".  Alphabets  on  some  of  them.  Cross-stitch. 
Simple   borders.     Names   of   different   children.  Albert  C.   Bates,  Esq. 

Hitchcock,  Abagail  M.  A.  1809.  9  yrs.  13i"  x  15^".  3  alphabets.  French  knot,  chain, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  Greek  fret  border.  Festoons  of  roses  at 
top;  trees,  cornucopias,  and  basket  of  flowers  at  bottom.     Verse  515   (var.). 

Mrs.  David  P.  Coffln 

Hodge,  Lydia.     1770.    3"x8J".     Alphabet.     Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Eugene  C.  Stratton 

Hoes,  Catherine  Ann.  1827.  7  yrs.  Kinderhook.  10"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Verse  175  (1).  National  Museum,  Washington 

HoLBROOK,  Ann  P.  1810.  Medfield  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  16i"  x  16^".  3  alphabets.  Loop,  stem, 
and  cross-stitch.  Geometrical  design  in  border,  with  row  of  tassels  at  top.  House, 
fence,   garden,  potted   plants,   weeping  willow   trees,   and   two   tombstones. 

Mrs.  Abby  Alice  Bishop 

HoLBRooK,  Britainia.  1819.  14-  yrs.  17"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Queen  and  cross-stitch. 
"  Honour  thy  Father  and  Mother  that  it  may  be  well  with  thee  and  thou  live  long  on 
the  Earth."    Verse  119.  Mrs.  William  Henry  Gilbane 

Holbrook,  Julia.  [Cir.  1801.]  Born  May  7,  1790.  10i"xl5|".  4  alphabets.  Satin,  cross, 
and  fagoting-stitch.     Block  pattern  in  border.  Benjamin  S.  Newton,  Esq. 

Holbrook,  Mary  W.  [Cir.  1813.]  Grafton  [Mass.].  Born  May  6,  1800.  8"  x  18".  3  alpha- 
bets.    Eyelet,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Fitchburg  Antique  Shop,  July  1,  1917 

Holongsworth,  Rebecca  H.  1827.  7  yrs.  7|"  x  9|".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine 
border  at  bottom.  Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park 

Hollister,  Polly.  1808.  [Born  in  Glastonbury,  Conn.,  1798.]  10  yrs.  lOi"  x  11".  3 
alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Simple  border.  Mrs.  Robert  A.  Wadsworth 


174 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


Hollow  AY,  Makgaeet.  1807.  Waynesville,  O.  8  yrs.  18"  x  18".  Cross-stitch.  Birds  and 
ros€S  in  border.  At  top  of  sampler,  "  Waynesville  School,"  and  beneath  two  baskets 
of  fruit  and  blue  paraquat  on  small  flower-pot.  At  bottom,  four  conventional  designs, 
resembling  houses  with  vines  over  them.     Verse  704.  Mrs.  Charles  R.  Miller 

HoLLTDAY,  AxNA  Mahia.  [1814.  "  Radcliflfc"  near  Easton,  Md.]  9  yrs.  [Born  in  1805.] 
16^"  X  16J".  Alphabet.  Cross,  stem,  eyelet,  French  knot,  queen,  tent,  and  double  cat- 
stitch.  Strawberry  border.  In  center  at  bottom,  bird  on  tree  in  wreath  of  roses,  and  on 
either  side,  basket  of  flowers  with  bird  flying  over.    Verse  693.  Clara  G.  HoUyday 


HOLMAX, 


[Cir.  1814.]     13"  x  14".    3  alphabets.    Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Vine  and 


flower   border   on   three   sides.     Tomb,   willow   tree,   and   two   smaller   trees   at   bottom. 
"  Sacred  to  the  memory  of  Polly  Holman  who  died  May  31,  1814,  aet.  24."    Verse  289  (1). 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

HoLMAN",   AsENETH.      1804.      10   yrs.      Il^"x21".     2    alphabets.      Cross-stitch.      Conventional 
design  in  border.     Trees  and  birds  in  two  rows.     "  Teach  us  to  live." 

Lancaster  Public  Library 

HoLitAif,  AsEXETH.     [1806.]     12  yrs.     15"  x  18".     2  alphabets.     Fine  cross-stitch.     Border  of 
vine  and  flowers.    Verse  274.  Lancaster  Public  Library 


HoMEB,   Almiea 


[1826.]  Boston.  24"  x  18".  Satin  and  cross-stitch,  also  slanting-stitch 
used  for  dividing  lines.  Rose  border,  saw-tooth  border.  "  The  family  record  of  Eleazer 
and  Mary  Homer.  Eleazer  Homer  born  March  22,  1761;  Mary  Bartlett  born  Jan.  8th, 
1770.    Eleazer  Homer  and  Mary  Bartlett  married  Nov.  12,  1786." 


"  Names 

Births 

Marriages 

Deaths 

Jacob  Homer 

Aug. 

18,  1787. 

Aug. 

13,  1816. 

Sept.     10,  1829. 

Eleazer  Homer 

Mar. 

6,  1789. 

Sept.     18,  1795. 

Mary  C.  Homer 

Apr. 

21,  1790. 

Jan. 

8,  18— 

Sarah  M.  Homer 

June 

17,  1792. 

July 

27,  1814. 

Harriet  Homer 

July 

16,  1794. 

May 

26,  1816. 

Eleazer  Homer  2nd 

June 

28,  1796. 

June 

8,  1828. 

Eliza  B.  Homer 

Sept 

16,  1798. 

June 

1st,  1821. 

Abraham  B.  Homer 

Oct. 

18,  1800. 

Dec. 

2,  1821. 

William  F.  Homer 

Nov. 

12,  1802. 

Sept. 

1,  1831. 

James  B.  Homer 

Sept. 

16,  1804. 

Apr. 

14,  1833. 

Henry  Homer 

Jan. 

24,  1807. 

Charles  S.  Homer 

Mar. 

7,  1809. 

Almira 

Aug. 

1,  1811. 

Oct.      26,  1811. 

Almira 

Oct. 

26,  1812." 

Orenville 

Norcross,  Esq. 

Homer,  Sally  S.  1804.  6  yrs.  7i"  x  171".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Scroll  border.  Trees 
and  a  flower-pot.  Sold  at  Libbie's,  Boston 

Hooper,  Elizabeth.  1814.  Marblehead  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  15^".  2  alphabets.  Cross 
and  hem-stitch.     Vine  and  carnation  border.     Verse  445.  Mrs.  C.  G.  Betton 

HoPKixs,  Ellza.  1810.  17"  x  15^".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine,  straw- 
berry, carnation,  and  rose  border  on  top  and  sides;  conventional  flower  in  vase  in 
each  lower  corner  and  tiny  trees  in  between.     Verse  504.  Mrs.  Miles   White,  Jr. 


h^X^KWV-MX^ 


/< 


/■ 


^ 
^ 

■^  » 

7*    «-i     ' 

t  '2 

O      ^ 

X    p 

^^ 


^n 


K^  >^X$  >^  ^  ^^-^  ^  ^-^-^ 


X 


>iJ^ 

^ 

% 

<« 

§ 

O 

"U 

cc 

*A, 

<^ 

CO 

J 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  175 

Hopkins,  Sarah.  1816.  [Baltimore,  Md.]  Born  December  8,  1805.  10  yrs.,  4  mos.  18^"  x  17". 
3  alphabets.  Satin,  stem,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Floral  border  outside  and  saw-tooth 
design  on  inside.    Verse  515  (var.).  Miss  Fanny  G.  Crenshaw 

HoRifER,  Susanna.  1830.  16  yrs.  18"  x  24".  6  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Rose  border.  Basket  of  flowers  across  top  with  birds  above  it.  Little  dog  in  alphabet 
row.  House,  weeping  willows,  lambs,  and  dog.  On  right  of  house,  2  turtle  doves 
inclosed  in  octagon  surmounted  with  vase  of  strawberries  and  columbine.  On  left  of 
house,  swan  floating  on  water  and  a  vase  of  flowers  near  by.  Bowl  of  flowers.  Names 
and  dates:  "Susanna  Horner,  Daughter  of  Elijah  Horner  and  Elizabeth  his  wife,  was 
born  in  the  year  1814."     Verse  337.  Mrs.  I.  Oakford  dcton 

HoRSFtn.,  Rebecca.  1814.  Allentown  [N.  J.].  About  12  yrs.  10"  x  17^".  4  alphabets.  Eye- 
let and  cross-stitch.    Vine  border.  Hannah  8.  Cook 

HoRTON,  Mary  Elizabeth.  1815.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  9^"x8".  3  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  satin,  and   cross-stitch.     Cross-borders.  Mrs.  Eben  Bradbury 

[HoRWELL,  Ann.     1819.  Alexandria,  Va.     Made  for  her  sister,  Sarah  May  Horwell,  on  her 

marriage  in   1819.]  Petit-point   and   cross-stitch.     Tulip   and   strawberry  border;   cross 

and  trefoil  borders  at  top   and  bottom.     Scattered  flowers,  hearts,  baskets,  etc.     "  An 

emblem  of  love."  Miss  Frances  H.  Massoletti 

Horwell,  Sarah  M [ay].  1807.  Alexandria  [Va.].  8  yrs.  9J"  x  15".  5  alphabets.  Tapestry, 
four-sided  line-stitch,  rope,  star,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-stitch  border.  Strawberry 
cross-border.     Verse  702.  Miss  Frances  H.  Massoletti 

[Horwell,  Sarah  May.  Before  1819.  Alexandria,  Va.]  16"  x  19".  Petit-point,  stem, 
tent,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Tulip  border.     Trees,  flowers,  vines,  baskets,  etc. 

Miss  Frances  H.  Massoletti 

Hosmer,  Elizabeth  Jane.  1828.  Cross-stitch.  Narrow  conventional  outside  border,  and 
rose  and  vine  border  on  inside.  Picture  of  "City  Hall,"  New  York  City,  and  grounds. 
Above  building  and  repeated  on  either  side:  "EDUCATION."  "  It  is  a  com- 
panion which  no  misfortunes  can  depress,  no  clime  destroy,  no  enemy  alienate,  no  des- 
potism enslave.  At  home  a  friend,  abroad  an  introduction,  in  Solitude  a  Solace  and  in 
Society  an  ornament.  It  chastens  vice,  it  guides  virtue  it  gives  at  once  a  grace  and 
government  to  genius."    Illustrated.  Mrs.  Arthur  Curtis  James 

HorsToox,  Eliza.    1819.    3  alphabets.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Simple  cross-border  designs. 

Communicated  by  Mrs.  A.  A.  Lawrence 

H[oward],  C[aroline]  B[lanche]  and  J  [uliana]  W[est].  1808.  [About  11  and  10  yrs., 
respectively.]  "  Sherwood"  [Baltimore,  Md.].  22"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Cat,  stem,  cross, 
and  other  stitches.  Row  of  cat  and  cross-stitch  combined  for  border.  Various  objects 
such  as  chairs,  birds,  cats,  crowns,  trees,  flowers,  etc.     Family  initials. 

Miss  Victoria  Elisabeth  Oittings 

Howard,  Elizabeth.  1824.  8  yrs.  8"  x  9".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  French  knot,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Small  flower  designs.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 


George 

born 

April      9,  th  A.  D. 

1795 

Amos 

April      2,th  A.  D. 

1797 

Francis 

March  14,  th  A.  D. 

1799 

Oliver 

August  22,  th  A.  D. 

1801 

Charlotte 

Sept.     17,  th  A.  D. 

1804 

Charlotte  A 

, 

Jan.     18,  th    A.D. 

1807 

176  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Howe,  Charlotte.  1818.  11  yrs.  16"  x  17".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Trees,  stars, 
and  baskets  of  flowers. 

"Family   Register" 
"William  Howe  Born  Nov.  15,  th  17— 
Abigail  Crosby  born  May  27,  th  1762(59) 

were  married  Nov.  2,  1780 

Sally                   born  August  8,  th  A.  D.  1782 

Nancy                    "      Nov.        5,th  A.  D.  1784 

Jabez                     "      Feb.ry     5,  th  A.  D.  1787 

Otis                        "      Octr     27,  th  A.  D.  1788 

Otis  C.                  "      June     26,  th  A.  D.  1790 

William                "      Nov.r    20,  th  A.  D.  1792 

Mrs.  Abigail  Howe  Obt.  Feb.  14th,  1816.  Otis  Obt.  Mar.  15,  1790.     Charlotte  Obt.  Sept. 

19,  1708."  Mrs.  Wolcott  Howe  Johnson 

Howe,  Ejiiramcy.  1821.  Vernon,  Vt.  12  yrs.  10"  x  14".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Chain 
design  in  border.     Small  trees  and  fancy  motifs.     "  Win  gold  and  wear  it." 

Mrs.  Hiram  W.  Moore 

Howe,  Louisa.     1816.     Strawberry  border.     Trees.  Miss  Abbott 

Howe,  Sally  G[edney].     1807.    2  alphabets.  Miss  Abbott 

HtTGG,  Eliza.  1806.  Camden  [N.  J.].  12  yrs.  8"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  and  vine  border.  Across  bottom,  grass  and  picket  fence;  woman 
and  dog  in  front;  tree  and  shrubs  in  back.  Mrs.  Joseph  W.  Merritt 

HuGG,  Ltjct.  1806.  Camden  [N.  J.].  10  yrs.  8J"  x  18".  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and 
strawberry  border  on  three  sides;  cedar  trees  in  top  corners.  Grass,  picket  fence,  dog, 
trees,  flowering  shrubs,  and  vine  with  flowers.  Mrs.  Ella  P.  Housell 

HuGGixs,  Sally.  1809.  Granby  [Conn.  9  yrs.  Born  at  Branford,  Conn.,  February  2,  1800.]. 
12"xl2".    3  alphabets.     Cross-siitch.     Cross-border.     Verse  711. 

Herbert  M.  Lloyd,  Esq. 

HiTGHES,  Mary  Ass:  1825.  Cape  May.  12  yrs.  16i"  x  15i".  3  alphabets.  Outline,  eyelet, 
queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  vine  border.  At  bottom,  jars  of  flowers  and 
honeysuckle  vine.  "  Daughter  of  James  Hughes  and  Tryphena  his  wife  was  born  Sept. 
20th  in  the  yr  of  our  Lord  1813."     Verse  564,  Miss  Tryphena  Blake 

H[uGHEs],  M[ary]  V.  [1821.]  Greenwich  School.  8"  x  16^".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem, 
tent,  cat,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.     Strawberry  and  vine  border. 

Miss  Helen  Botsford  Clark 

Hughes,  Rosana.  1824.  Germantown.  13  yrs.  22"x21".  Queen,  chain,  stem,  and  cross- 
stitch.     Carnation  and  strawberry  border.     2  dogs  and  a  basket.  Mr.  Charles  Willing 

Hull,  Evelina.  1806.  Charlestown  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  16J"  x  16A".  1  alphabet.  Cross, 
satin,  and  tent-stitch.     Hemstitched  edge.     Vine  border  with  large  flowers.     Verse  695. 

Mrs.  Joshua  M.  Van  Cott 

Humphrey,  Lucy.  1800.  WejTuouth  [Mass.].  Bom  December  31,  1789.  7i"  x  12J".  2 
alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-stitch  borders.  Dove  in  center  with  flower- 
pot on  each  side.  Mrs.  Susan  C.  Humphrey 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  177 

HuMPHHEr,  R.  1807.  7i"  x  9|".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border 
at  bottom.  Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park 

Humphreys,  Eliza  [Elizabeth,  from  family  record.].  1807.  Sharptown  [Salem  County,  N.  J. 
11  yrs.  Born  February  3,  1796.].  8"  x  10".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Upper 
part  of  sampler  filled  in  with  floral  designs,  birds,  and  little  dogs;  lower  half  filled  in 
with  stars,  birds,  baskets  of  flowers,  and  cornucopia  filled  with  flowers. 

Miss  M.  Elizabeth  Hilliard 

HuNNEWELL,  Caholine  E.  1826.  13  yrs.  17"  x  17".  3i  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Two  garlands  of  flowers  meeting  at  top,  and  below,  simple  arch  supported  by 
columns;  grapevine  runs  across  from  tops  of  columns,  dividing  alphabets  from  "Family 
Register."  Names  and  dates:  "Mr.  William  Hunnewell  Born  Sept.  28th  1782;  Mrs. 
Anna  Hunnewell  Born  May  8th  1787;  Married  Apr  6  1809.  Sarah  A.  Hunnewell  Born 
March  5th  1810;  Caroline  E.  Hunnewell  Born  June  12th  1813;  Harriot  C.  Hunnewell 
Born  June  17th  1816;  Susan  M.  Hunnewell  Born  June  1st  1820."  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Hunt,  Eliza  Ann.  1824.  9  yrs.  17"  x  15V'.  4  alphabets.  Split,  back,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Simple  conventional  border.  Across  bottom,  row  of  single  strawberries  and 
strawberry  plants.  In  lower  left-hand  corner,  house  with  fence  in  front  and  6  trees;  in 
lower  right-hand  corner,  large  willow  tree  drooping  over  tombstone  with  inscription, 
"Sacred  to  the  memory  of  Mrs.  Eliza  Hunt  who  died  Jan.  6,  1817;  Mrs.  Sarah  Hunt  died 
Sept.  28,  1823."  Two  large  rose  sprays  on  either  side  of  three  hearts  twined  together 
inclosing  inscriptions,  "Reuben  Hunt  bn  Jan.  11,  1783;  Eliza  Tuft  bn  June  27,  1788; 
Sarah  Snow  bn  Dec.  14,  1785;  Married  to  E  T  Oct.  27,  1814;  to  S  S  March  10,  1819." 
Below,  "Eliza  A.  Hunt  bn  Sept  20  1815;  Reuben  Hunt  Jr  bn  Dec.  19  1816;  Sarah  Hunt 
bn  Feb  8  1820;  Martha  A.  Hunt  bn  Nov  7  1822.  Sacred  to  the  memory  of  Mrs.  Eliza 
Hunt  who  died  Jan  6  1817.     Mrs.  Sarah  Hunt  died  Sep.  26,  1823."     Verse  515   (var.). 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Hunt,  Maria  L.  1814.  10  yrs.  [Date  said  to  have  been  pulled  out  and  reworked  later 
to  make  Maria  appear  younger.]  14"  x  12|".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret, 
strawberrj%  and  carnation  cross-borders.  Large  house,  bird,  vase,  tree,  flowering  plant, 
and  small  animal.     Verse  515  (var.).  Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

Hunt,  Sarah.  1804.  [1804.  Salem?]  9  yrs.  18"x22".  1  alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.     Floral  and  vine  border.     Flowers  from  a  satin-stitch  base.         Miss  M.  E.  Stanley 

Hunt,  Sarah.  1812.  Woodstown  [N.  J.].  13  yrs.  16^x211".  Queen,  satin,  flat,  and 
cross-stitch.  Border  of  Greek  fret,  rosebuds,  leaves,  and  carnations.  Upper  half,  star, 
large  spray  of  carnations.  Another  spray  in  a  cornucopia,  strawberry  plant,  baskets  of 
fruit  and  flowers,  birds,  trees,  etc.  Lower  half,  names  and  dates:  "William,  January 
14th,  1761;  Mary  Hunt,  April  1.5th,  1774;  Margaret  Hunt,  January  th  1st,  1798;  Sarah 
Hunt,  Nov.  6th,  1799;  Jacob  Hunt,  November  16th,  1801;  W'illiam  Hunt,  June  20th, 
1804;  Mary  Hunt,  January  7th,  1807;  Eliza  Hunt,  June  11th,  1809;  James  B.  Hunt, 
William  Hunt,  March  17th,  1811."  Mrs.  Sarah  Hunt  Bridgman 

Hunt,  Sarah  Ann.  1818.  Providence  [R.  L].  13  yr.s.  154"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  at  bottom  of  vine,  trees,  and  strawberry.  Trees.  Verse 
759.  Irene  Borden  Butler 

Huntington,  Ann, M.  1824.  New  London  [Conn.].  11  yrs.  7|"  x  lOi".  4  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Trees  and  vines  at  bottom.     Cross-borders.  Mary  Saltonstall  Hebard 


178  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

HtTNTiNGTOif,  Anka.  Feb.  1816.  Snowdon  Hill,  New  Hartford  [Conn.].  "Worked  at 
Miss  L.  P.  Mott's  School."  14"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Herringbone-stitch  in 
border.    Verse  87a.  Miss  Cornelia  Horsford 

HuxTixGTON-,  Catherin-e.  1807.  9  yrs.  9|"  x  14i".  2  alphabets.  Great  variety  of  stitches. 
Buttonholed  edge,  with  vine  and  flowers  on  sides.  Turkey  work  in  gay  colors  at  bottom. 
"  Honor  thy  Father  and  thy  Mother  that  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  land  which  the 
Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee."  Miss  Cornelia  Horsford 

HrxTiNGTOX,  Fraxces.  1807.  7  yrs.  llj"  x  9^|".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch  and  turkey- 
stitch.  Outer  border  in  cross-stitch  and  inner  border  in  turkey  work.  Alphabets  and 
numerals  inclosed  in  heart-shaped  design.  Turkey  work  at  top.  Sprays  of  roses  on  each 
side.     Border  patterns.     "  Be  religious,  be  virtuous,  be  industrious  and  be  happy." 

Miss  Cornelia  Horsford 

HtTxnxGTOx,  Gloriaxa.  "June  2.5,  1818.  Miss  Orpha  Crane's  School,  Rome."  lOf"  x  16". 
4  alphabets.  Tent  and  cross-stitch.  Border,  two  rows  of  herringbone-stitch.  Edge 
bound  with  green  ribband  mounted  on  paper.  "  Let  Virtue  be  a  guide  to  thee."  Verses 
617  (var.),  756.  Miss  Cornelia  Horsford 

HuN-nxGTON,  Lucy.  1818.  "Miss  Orpha  Crane's  School,  Rome.'  lOf  x  16".  4  alphabets. 
Bound  with  green  silk  ribband.  Two  rows  of  herringbone-stitch  all  around.  Tent  and 
cross-stitch.     Verse  202.  Miss  Cornelia  Horsford 

HuxTiNGTOx,  Xaxcy.  July  8,  1814.  8i"  x  9".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Simple  border. 
House,  barn,  and  man  on  horseback.  Mrs.  H.  C.  Bunner 

HusE,  JoAXXA.  10  yrs.  "  Under  the  tuition  of  Maria  S.  Aiken."  18"  x  15".  4  alphabets. 
Satin  and  cross-stitch.     Saw-tooth  border  all  around  and  cross-borders. 

Frederick  W.  Hwse,  Esq. 

HuTCHixs,  Persis.  Oct.  4,  1814.  Bath  [N.  H.].  13  yrs.  17"  x  17J".  5  alphabets.  Eye- 
let, stem,  and  cross-stitch.     Vine  border.     Two  trees.     Verse  94   (var.). 

Mrs.  Edward  W.  Hutchins 

Htjitox,  Elizabeth  Helex.  February  18,  1823.  [New  York  City.]  10  yrs.  7i"x8".  2 
alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge.  Strawberries  at  bottom.  "Great  minds 
conquer  difBculties  by  daring  to  attempt  them."  Mrs.  H.  H.  Colbum 

Hyde,  Elizabeth  A.  H.  1812.  17i"  x  20".  4  alphabets.  Cushion,  long  and  short  and  cross- 
stitch.  Double  border,  geometric  and  floral.  Strawberry  panel  around  verse;  two 
flower  urns  and  tablet.     Verse  438.  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Hyde,  Mary.  180-.  10  yrs.  17"  x  20".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  and 
strawberry  border.     Strawberry  vine  around  verse.  Verse  162. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Hyde,  Mary  K.  [Cir.  1828.]  9  yrs.  [Born  1817.]  llJ"xl7".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border,  top  and  sides.    Verse  793.  Miss  Mary  Frances  Bigelow 

Hyde,  Sarah.  1813.  10  yrs.  16"  x  20".  4  alphabets.  Petit-point  and  cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border  outside  and  carnation  border  inside,  around  three  sides.  Conventional 
border  around  verse.    Baskets  of  flowers.    Verse  443.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Ide,  Nabby  Kollock.  July  16,  1804.  Wrentham.  14  yrs.  12^"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.  Hemstitched  edge,  with  strawberry  border.  "  Embroidery  decks  the  canvas  round 
and  yields  a  pleasing  view,  so  virtue  tends  to  deck  the  mind  and  form  its  blissful  state." 
At  the  bottom  in  cross-stitch  is  the  following:  "Nabby  K.  Ide  died  December  the  5th 
1813.     Aged  23  yrs.    Mrs.  Mary  I.  Wheaton  died  July  28th  1817."        Miss  Alice  W.  Hunt 


■■UtaMMMMriUiaw, 


■  ■■111  umieimitmM^i^tMm 


^5g*'f*-^*af 


•«x  iB*.-Hfc  mu  Mi  «M  1 


I 


WroH|1nr  bv  -4Ttfl  Sophift  Seck-«fl^:^2? 


•w 


i\i»»ii'ViMMwi»f;Swi««»iiiiiTlai^«»W^»i»iiriiii"^  i  \ii^ti^''^mmAmSimiS»m 


PLATE  LVIII 


AxN  Sophia  Beckwith's  Sampler.     1829 
The  Emma  B.  Hochje  Collection 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  179 

Islet,  Ank.  1810.  Newburyport.  11  yrs.  17^"  x  18^".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.     Strawberry  and  Greek  fret  border.     Verses  and  trees  unfinished. 

Ipsmich  Historical  Society 

Ingraham,  Mart  A.     1811.     12  yrs.     9"  x  10".     3  alphabets.     Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Clarence  A.  Mathewson,  Esq. 

Ingram,  Maktlla  S.  1825.  Amherst  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Strawberry  border. 
Columns  with  drapery  between;  two  baskets  of  flowers.  Verses  124,  826.  "The  liberal 
Arts  and  Sciences  are  seven:  Grammar,  Logic,  Rhetoric,  Arithmetic,  Geometry,  Music." 
"Important  branches  of  a  polite  Education:  Botany,  Chemistry,  History,  Philosophy, 
Mineralogj',  Drawing,  Painting."  "Mr.  John  Ingram  was  born  May  28,  1788;  Miss  Lucy 
Hubbard  born  April  11,  1788;  married  Feb.  4,  1813.  Marilla  Sophia  born  Jan  18,  1814; 
Cordelia  Maria  born  Jan  15,  1815;  Austin  born  Feb.  27,  1818;  died  March  2,  1819; 
Harrison  born  April  8,  1820.     Mrs.  Ingram  died  June  28,  1822." 

Frederick  Smith  Richards,  Esq. 

Irwin,  Elizabeth.  1814.  14  yrs.  8"  x  17".  Alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross-stitch  line-border. 
Verse  444.  Mrs.  George  L.  Miner 

IvTNS,  Emmeline.  July  4,  1823.  Mechanicks-  Town.  12  yrs.  22"x21".  Queen,  chain,  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  At  bottom,  house,  fence,  trees,  barn,  dogs,  and  birds. 
Large  basket  of  flowers  between  verses  at  top,  and  conventional  baskets  of  fruit  with 
birds  and  animals  on  either  side  of  third  verse.     Verses  468,  591  (var.). 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

J ,   A.   C.     1820.     Charleston    [S.   C.].     Il"xl3".     3    alphabets.     Eyelet    and   cross-stitch. 

Simple  border.     At  bottom,  church,  parish  house,  and  trees.     Detached  designs  of  baskets 
of  flowers,  vase  of  flowers,  lion,  dog,  andiron,  windmill,  woman,  cradle,  chair,  etc. 

Mrs.  George  Mofett 

Jackman,  Emilt  E.  December  21.  Yorkshire,  Cattaraugus  County,  X.  Y.  12  yrs.  10|"xl2i". 
3  alphabets  and  the  vowels.    House  with  green  blinds,  tree,  fence,  etc. 

A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

Jackson,  Sarah  Dubois.  1811.  Rockaway,  N.  J.  11  yrs.  10"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  cross-stitch  border.  Medallion  in  cross-stitch,  also  medal- 
lions in  stem-stitch  and  in  strawberry  design.     Strawberry  vine  below.     Verse  728. 

Mrs.  F.  B.  Kellogg 

Jacobs,  Elizabeth  Cutler.  1817.  7  yrs.  17"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Cross,  stem,  and  satin- 
stitch.     Rose  border.     Verse  387   (1).  Mrs.  Robert  C.  Root 

jAifviER,  Mart  Fries.  1828.  Pittsgrove  [Salem  County,  N.  J.].  10  yrs.  13"  x  18".  5  alpha- 
bets. Vine  and  strawberry  border.  Flower  baskets,  strawberry  plant,  little  birds,  and 
various  conventional  designs.     Verse  486.  Miss  Louise  Janvier 

Janvier,  Mart  Gaw.  1824.  [Wilmington,  Del.]  "Wilmington  Boarding  School."  13  yrs. 
10"  X  12".  Miss  Mary  F.  Janvier 

Jagues,  Anna.  1810.  Newbury  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  8i"x8^".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Simple  border.  Mrs.  W.  O.  Downs 

Jaques,  Anna.  1812.  [Newbury,  Mass.]  12  yrs.  13"  x  18^".  Satin,  French  knot,  and 
cross-stitch.  Floral  border  all  around,  starting  from  vase  in  center  at  bottom,  and  in 
lower  corners.  Row  of  trees  and  baskets  of  fruit  at  base.  Vines  cross  sampler  in  center. 
Verses  114,  298.  "Enoch  Jaques  born  February  13tli,  1763;  Joanna  Plumer  born  June 
18th,  1768;  Married  February  9th,  1797;  I'heir  children,  Joseph  born  September  22,  1798; 


180  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Anna  born  May  8th,  1800;  Enoch  l)orn  January  19th,  1802;  Eliza  born  July  11th,  1804." 

3Irs.  W.   W.  Downs 

Jaques,  EtJxicE.  [Cir.  1805.]  Newbury,  Mass.  [Born  in  1795.]  8J"  x  13".  Partial  alpha- 
bets. Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-border.  Two  trees  with  urn  in  center.  Verse 
617  (var.).  Mrs.  David  T.  Woodwell 

Jarrett,  Alice.  1810.  Jarrettown,  Pa.  Worked  at  West  Town  Boarding  School.  10^"  x  13". 
Flat,  outline,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  "  From  purity  of  thought  all  pleas- 
ure springs  and  from  an  humble  spirit  all  our  peace."     Verse  723.       Mrs.  William  Stokes 

Jarvis,  Elizabeth  Hakt.  Before  1816.  10  yrs.  18"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Double 
strawberry  border.     Verses  115,  450.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Jefferis,  Akx.  1804.  West  Chester,  Pa.  11  yrs.  17"  x  19i".  Cross  and  over-and-over 
stitch.  Rosebuds  and  vine  on  sides,  and  conventionalized  carnations  across  top  and  bot- 
tom. Conventionalized  pine  and  willow  trees,  vases  and  baskets  of  flowers,  wreath  of 
flowers,  basket  of  fruit  with  birds  nibbling  at  it,  and  fragment  of  tulip  border  fill  in 
spaces  across  top  and  bottom,  sides,  center,  etc.,  between  verses.  "  My  Parents  Jacob 
Jefferis  &  Elizabeth;  My  Brother  &  Sisters  Joseph  Sarah  Hannah  &  Rachel  Jefferis;  My 
Grandparents  James  Jefferis  &  Ann  Joseph  Coope  &  Ann."  Verses  132  (1,  var.),  226 
(van),  536.  F.  F.  Sharpless,  Esq. 

Jenks,  Lydia.  1802.  Born  May  13,  1793.  8"  x  17i".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  chain,  satin,  stem, 
long,  short,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemmed  edge  on  two  sides  and  two  rows  of  cross-stitch  all 
around.  Elaborate  design;  house,  large  trees,  strawberries  and  blossoms,  etc.  Verse 
401   (1).  Mrs.  Harrison  F.  Hunt 

Jewett,  Elizabeth.  1805.  [Elm  Street,  Northampton,  Mass.]  9  yrs.  11"  x  12".  Alphabet. 
Satin  and  cross-stitch.     Strawberry  border.     Trees,  flowers,  and  animals.     Verse  687. 

Mrs.  George  D.  Jewett 

Jewett,  Hitty  Jane.  1818.  Newburyport,  Mass.  9  yrs.  17"  x  18".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Broad  base  in  satin-stitch;  vine  on  each  side  and  between 
alphabets.  "  The  family  of  William  and  Hitty  Hobson  Jewett.  William  Jewett  born 
Aug.  13,  1773.  Hitty  H.  Dole,  June  15,  1778.  Married  1797.  Wilham  Jewett,  Feb.  21, 
1798.  Clarissa  Jewett,  Sept.  29,  1803.  Mary  A.  Jewett,  June  14,  1807.  Ebenezer  Jewett, 
Jan.  31,  1808.     Hitty  Jane  Jewett,  April  20,  1809."  Lucius  H.  Greely,  Esq. 

JoHXsox,  Eliza  R.  11"  x  13^".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Verse 
798.  Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park 

JoHxsox,  Faxxy.  June  8,  1823.  Hollis.  12  yrs.  18"  x  19".  6  alphabets,  not  complete. 
Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border  with  bunches  of  grapes  in  each  corner. 
Across  bottom,  house,  fence,  and  4  trees.  Wreaths  around  name,  age,  and  "  Sweet  is 
the  counsel  of  a  friend."  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

JoHxsox,  Lucy  Axx.  Oct.  8,  1822.  11  yrs.  17^"xlli".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Three 
houses  separated  by  trees  and  bushes.  "  Connecticut  bounded  north  by  Massachusetts 
east  by  Rhode  Lsland  south  by  Long  Island  Sound  west  by  New  York." 

Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 

JoHxsox,  Lydia.  1819.  Salem  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  8"x8".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  "Love 
Learning."     "  Wrought  at  L.  Johnson's  School."  Mrs.  Davis  P.  Coffin 

JoHXsox,  Sali.y.  1813.  13  yrs.  14"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of 
conventional  squares.  Flowers  at  bottom.  "The  names  and  births  of  Mr.  William  and 
Mrs.  Lucy  Johnson's  children.     Lucy  born  April   17,  1791;  Rebecca  born  May  16,  1793; 


PLATE  LIX 

Naxcy  Platt's  Sampler.     Wrightstown,  N.  J.     1801 
Owned  by  Miss  Fanny  Lippincott 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  181 

Sally  born  Feb.  29,  1796  and  died  Nov.  21,  1800;  William  born  March  2,  1798;  Sally  born 
Jan.  2,  1801;  Mary  born  July  22,  1804  and  died  June  20,  1807;  Eliza  born  Feb.  4,  1807 
and  died  Feb.  2,  1811;  Urania  born  July  12,  1810;  Harriet  born  April  23,  1813.  In  mem- 
ory of  the  three  sisters."     Verse  300.  Mrs.   Thomas  A.  Lawton 

JoHXSTON,  Eliza  S[usan>aj.  1809.  Boston  [Mass.  Born  December  12,  1800.].  9  yrs. 
13"  X  17J".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  roses  and  carnations-.  Verse 
284.  William  E.  Barnard,  Esq. 

Johnston,  Eliza  S[usannaJ.  1809.  Boston  [Mass.  Born  December  12,  1800.].  9  yrs. 
12"  X 12".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  without  leaves.  Basket  of 
flowers,  shrubs,  trees,  and  bird.  William  E.  Barnard,  Esq. 

Johnston,  Jane  E.  1827.  [New  Hartford,  Oneida  County,  N.  Y.]  9  yrs.  llfx  12|". 
4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  on  sides  and  across  top.  The  background 
of  the  sampler  is  entirely  filled  in  with  cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Amos  Bush  McNairy 

JoLLEY,  Elizabeth.  1824.  25i"x22".  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  border  and  cross- 
border.  In  upper  section,  small  basket  of  fruit  and  vines  in  center,  with  large  basket 
of  flowers  on  either  side.  In  lower  section,  brick  house,  fence,  three  willow  trees,  lawn, 
sheep,  birds,  flowers  growing  in  grass,  man  and  woman,  with  large  spray  of  roses  be- 
tween them,  etc.  Mrs.  H.  de  Berkely  Parsons 

Jones,  Abigail  Greenltef.  1806.  North  Yarmouth  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  18"x24".  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.  Vine  border  on  sides,  with  a  few  rosebuds  on  one  side.  "  The  Genealogy 
Of  David  and  Elizabeth  Jones  of  North  Yarmouth.  David  Jones  born  at  Wrentham 
March  21,  1748;  Elizabeth  Hobart  at  Abington  Feb  6  1761.  Married  at  Abington 
January  26  A  D  1778. 

Mary  Jones  born  at  Abington  Nov  7  1778. 
Jacob  H.  Jones  born  at  Abington  March  6  1780. 
Elizabeth  Jones  born  at  N.  Yarmouth  Jan  17  1784. 
Sarah  Jones  born  at  N.  Yarmouth  Oct  18  1785. 
David  Jones  born  at  N.  Yarmouth  Aug  11  1788. 
Esther  B.  Jones  born  at  N.  Yarmouth  Oct  2  1790. 
A  Son  born  December  28  1793  lived  36  hours. 
A  Son  born  December  25   1794  lived  18  hours. 
Abigail  C.  Jones  at  N.  Yarmouth  Sept  29  1795. 
Elias  Jones  born  at  N.  Yarmouth  Nov  30  1799. 
Jane  T.  Jones  born  at  N.  Yarmouth  Jan  8  1805. 
Executed    by    Abigail    Greenlief    Jones    aged    10- 
Northyarmouth  September  6   AD   1806.     [years." 

Mrs.   George  McLauchlan 

Jones,  Ellza  Fearce.  [Cir.  1810.]  Providence,  R.  I.  [Miss  Polly  Balch's  School.] 
10"  X  16".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  queen,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Cross- 
borders  with  flowers,  sheep,  trees,  strawberries,  dog,  etc.     Verse  721. 

Mrs.  William  J.  Dyer 

Jones,  Hannah.  1801.  Cross,  eyelet,  and  satin-stitch.  Border  of  hearts  and  flowers.  "May 
Liberty  Peace  and  Prosperity  Ever  Prevail  in  America."  Mrs.  John  Emerson 

Jones,  Hannah  B.  1824.  9  yrs.  16"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Cat,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  cross, 
and  hem-stitch.  Greek  fret  and  trefoil  borders  on  three  sides,  hemstitched  edge.  Three- 
story  house  with  a  tree  on  either  side.  Albert  Harrison  Hall,  Esq. 


182  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Jones,  Habriet.  1802.  10  yrs.  18"  x  20".  Stem,  satin,  long  and  short,  tapestry,  petit-point, 
French  knot,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  vine  on  two  sides;  upper  corners,  angels  with 
trumpets;  at  bottom,  two  trees  and  tombstone  with  four  urns  on  top;  tomb  has  names 
inscribed  on  it  as  follows:  "In  Memory  of  Samuel  D.  Jones,  Gary  D.  Jones,  William 
W.  Jones,  And  Sophia  Jones."  In  center,  an  arch  supported  by  three  columns,  dove 
perched  on  central  column  and  two  other  birds  flying  about.  Family  Register  of 
William  Jones  between  columns,  as  follows: 

"  William  and  Ann  Jones  were  Married  in  Boston  Feb.  28,  1796,  in  the  Evening  by 
the  Rev.  Samuel  Parker,  D.D. 
Samuel  Dunn  Jones  their  first  Child  was  born  July  1,  1787. 

And  died  April  17  1789.     Aged  21  months. 
Gary  Dunn  Jones,  their  second  Ghild  was  born  July  13,  1791. 

And  died  the  22.     Aged  9  days. 
Harriet  Jones  their  third  child  was  born  June  14,  1792. 
Elizabeth  Pearce  Jones  their  fourth  child  was  born  August  19,  1794. 
William  Washington  Jones  their  fifth  chUd  was  born  Dec.  30  1796. 

And  died  May  29,  1799.    Aged  2  years  and  6  Months. 
Sophia  Jones  their  sixth  child  was  born  March  8,  1801. 

And  died  Feb.  IG,  1802.     Aged  11  months  and  seven  days." 
Verse  251.  Mrs.  William  J.  Dyer 

Jones,  Marcy  H.  1810.  Gharlestown  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  17i"x21i".  4  alphabets.  Gross- 
stitch.    Vine  border.    "Modesty  is  an  ornament  to  the  female  sex."     Verse  29  (1). 

Miss  Sarah  M.  Draper 

Jones,  Maktha  Melvina  Milledge.  1810.  Louisville  [Ky.].  9  yrs.  6  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Gonventional  design  across  bottom.  Verse  511 
(var.).     "Taught  by  Mrs.  Mary  Scott  at  LouisviUe." 

Communicated  by  Mrs.  A.  A.  Lawrence 

Jones,  Mary  Ann.  1814.  Vincentown  [N.  J.].  11"  x  15".  Alphabets.  Blanket  and  cross- 
stitch.    Simple  border.     Conventional  bush  with  flowers.  Mary  Irick  Drexel 

Jones,  Sally.  1804.  Wrentham  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  "I  was  born  March  21,  1795."  8"x4i". 
1  alphabet.    Gross-stitch.  21rs.  W.  S.  Kimball 

Kay,  Henrietta;  1816.  [Born  near  Haddonfield.  Greenville  School.]  18"  x  13".  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.  Rose  border  at  sides  and  strawberry  border  across  top.  Elaborate  tree, 
flowers,  and  bird  in  bush.    Verses  409,  451.  Miss  Helen  Moore  Fogg 

Kay,  Family  and  Genealogy.  [Gir.  1809.]  23"x22".  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Rose  border  at  sides  and  strawberry  border  across  top.  Elaborate  scene  with  white 
animals,  sheep,  dogs,  cow,  rising  from  green  base,  with  foliage  and  white  flowers.  Verses 
488  (var.),  543.  In  a  square  in  center  is  the  following:  "M  Wood  R  Thom  Ages 
of  Josiah  and  Elizabeth  Kay  and  their  children.  Josiah  Kay  was  born  the  2nd  mo 
12th  1751.  Elizabeth  Kay  born  the  5th  mo  5th  1771.  Martha  S.  Kay  born  3rd  mo  11th 
1787.  Ann  T.  Kay  born  the  10th  mo  21st  1791.  Elizabeth  H.  Kay  born  the  Ist  mo  7th 
1794.  Henrietta  Kay  born  the  3rd  mo  26th  1805.  1809  E  Heulings  S  Heulings 
M  Ba(?)  E  Wood."  Miss  Helen  Moore  Fogg 

Ej:en,  Palmyra  M.  1824.  11  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  across 
bottom.  In  lower  half,  large  grapevine,  church,  barn,  two  houses,  various  kinds  of  trees, 
and  initials  "  J  M  K."    Verses  206,  279,  325a.  (Ornner  ?) 


:j<^S.*|^^^^<#^#% 


4't--f 


^<%  ■ 

jiU  MV  3^  wd  r,y  Sj^s«,t  ci.io,  For  salty  ,Jone, j  ukc  'tU  loU;  <^  fo  bve  Oil  fcrsp  nin?  <-/«.'  i-?*!!^*-  ^.  =*f=f-  '■■1;««*^*  ■'■o  X/"**  ^ 
^iJ^Tfe'  J^«  ^ii  5rfl«f  ••«»  •^'-'''ti  T«i  li  is  He  3cur<:«  Wttnst  J  my  confort  flc^t  Scwncl  ci»i«  kl  r/K»tf>  \''  »•=«  '"•J'^-  ^^'V  ^... 
'^'   iibis^o*  Ai,d  y<S  -^4  jicri'ics  My  kh/I trw, dedtt  UlK f.-ed-  tiv«> ..ol  W* Irwckroi*  Jew.  "M  <^ ^'»  ^dhi'nr,   Lf, ; > 
'^ • -'^   It «--' IwxK, «.-.,  Woe e (.■•«*<*«roi,s F« lU lit?.  T«m nof  fe ^oktjr's 5pw T-f.^  pKrocI ray  SiYKsS"^? »»•  »»" «T-       ',.  4 ■    ^ 
,'  '4'     inrt'ji»J<-  '>'i'  w^-'*'^. ""m^tk.  T-ht^i  v-erelk bWv  tSion-s  tVt  <ld  k len,pi«  ■scW.  An<S?wy  U«t  MCred drop.  _, 
H4|s"  t'a'-  cW '>«-<i«7.-  if.?  trowi  And  i?l.«>  fc;»  i^4^-«  w«ln  ^H-aw  hr^.  f *«l  isilWr  cry.  Me  ?<W«d  up  U  »«  x^or  rebefa  t!«h  ^..  v .    ^ 
\  l^-h     And cs« i  fW but  in£«m.  Vi'^hi;!, ske. «.<i rocks  d^  rosj  And  M-*.t«f:  "i<^  "wf  f»w.  Al  »slA  of  yjcfttf  ■:«.  «3f  *«■'!«•        '#* 
f  J  M^  -cuiic  Vtw/r^.?  U?'rBv»,-«.i3fd,  Ar.dd-^i,k  -  I  k-'"  v-ubi-'d  &:•■  (ii/  '•^■l'^.p^•.nl  iofd  >'''.l  o'^  t''?  ™i!mif^  se«i.     ' ' 

-"'■*   V  '    .  .'  ,  ..■:.■  ■        ■•  '    '       '    ■  ' 

V  ^ 

1/4'     ^  -^* 
A/  ".,-  ^ 


^1 


4i 

yarrMXf 
1  z  s  7.  i~ 


I  turn  I 
.fitaxti 


i" 


■f        '•'V 
■  z  j;  z  h — '~i  •!  Si  I 


,016, 


1  S  S  '.  t- : ■•  Z  S  7.  t ~ — ilK, ^e  >.  X.  \ 


s  ;  s  s; «  s:  «  R 


Z    K     ?    .  ,  .,. 


?.  ft  s  ^  X  ^  s  a .  Ji  ri 


PLATE  LX 

Betty  Brierley's  Sampler.     1826 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Benwick  C.  Hurry 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  183 

Keigle,  Sarah.  [Cir.  1809.]  Carlyle,  Pa.  Born  in  1796.  10"  x  17".  3i  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.    Chain  design  in  border.    Narrow  cross-borders.     William  D.  Pratt,  Esq. 

Keith,  Deborah.  1810.  Grafton  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  17"  x  17J".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  stem, 
chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  and  carnation  border  on  three  sides,  and  at  bottom  a 
basket  with  vine.     Verse  112.  Miss  Emma  A.  Taft 

Kelcey,  Caroline.  1814.  "  Huntington  Academy."  8|"  x  12^".  2  alphabets.  Cat  and  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  border.  At  bottom,  picture  of  Huntington  Academy  and  church. 
Verse  743.  Mrs.  Stanley  H.  Lowndes 

Kelley,  Mary  Ann.  July  31,  1826.  Portland  [Me.].  11  yrs.  13^"  x  15".  3  alphabets. 
Chain,  flat,  satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border  with  flowers  in  between. 
Trees  and  birds.  Mrs.  J.  H.  Kimball 

Kelly,  Ann  E.  1825.  11  yrs.  18"  x  18".  Chain,  buttonhole,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border 
made  up  of  series  of  squares  containing  different  designs,  such  as  birds,  sheep,  sprays 
of  flowers,  strawberries,  bunches  of  wheat,  etc.  In  center,  woman  with  garland  of 
flowers  in  her  hands  standing  beside  pedestal;  pitcher  at  her  feet;  her  face  is  painted 
and  inserted  under  the  muslin.  Border  of  wheat  sprays  around  this  picture.  In  one  of 
the  lower  squares  is  the  inscription:  "Ann  E.  Kelly  was  born  in  Halifax  April  20  in 
the  year  of  our  Lord  1814  and  made  this  sampler  in  Mrs.  Leah  Meguier's  School  in 
Harrisburg  January  21,  1826."  "  O  may  the  Lord  instil  good  principles  in  me  and  make 
me  a  good  and  faithful  servant."     Illustrated.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Kelly,  Dorcas  A.  1830.  Men[don,  Mass.].  11  yrs.  16"  x  17".  Cross,  satin,  stem,  and  a 
very  close  cat-stitch.  Wide  conventionalized  strawberry  border,  with  rose  sprays  in 
upper  corners.  Arch  supported  by  columns.  Inscription  on  arch,  "  Keep  Sacred  the 
Memory  of  thy  Ancestors."  Family  names  and  dates:  "David  Kelly  Bn.  Men.  12  mo. 
13,  1781;  Amy  Comstock  Bn.  Providence  8  mo.  19,  1788;  They  were  married  Men.  1  27 
1807.  Their  childrens  Births  Deaths  Marriages:  Eliza  A  K  Born  4  mo.  1  1809;  Mar. 
10  mo.  20  1821;  William  A  K  Born  12  mo  31  1812;  Dorcas  A  K  Born  10  mo.  30  1818." 
Weeping  willow  tree  in  center.  In  lower  section  between  columns,  vine  with  large  leaves 
inclosing  verse.     Verse  674.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Kelter,  Cecilia.  1829.  17  yrs.  25"x21".  Fine  cross-stitch.  Trefoil  and  strawberry 
borders.  Large  basket  of  flowers  in  upper  corners.  Circle  of  flowers  at  top  containing 
name,  date,  etc.  Scene  with  house,  perspective  lawn,  sheep,  rabbits,  dogs,  men,  bushes, 
trees,  flowers,  birds  on  trees,  and  cornucopias  of  flowers.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Kemp,  Sophia.  [Cir.  1800.]  8  yrs.  8|"  x  11|".  4  alphabets.  Herringbone  and  cross-stitch. 
Cross-border.  Mrs.  William  E.  Black 

Kempton,  Emily  Marla.  1824.  Fairhaven  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  5  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.     Rose  border.     Verse  777,     "  Remember  thy  Creator." 

Old  Dartmouth  Historical  Society 

Kendal,  Tryphena.  1815.  Woodstock,  Conn.  12  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine 
border.    Strawberry.     Verse  556a.  Edward  L.  Child,  Esq. 

Kendall,  Sarah  A.  1810.  [Billerica,  Mass.  ?]  10  yrs.  8"  x  lOi".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.  At  top,  cross-stitch  frame  around  Verse  617  (1,  var.),  and  on  either  side  a  plant 
in  a  basket.  At  bottom,  a  house,  tree  on  either  side  and  tops  of  two  others  showing 
above  roof,  and  a  large  spray  of  flowers  in  basket  at  either  end.       Mrs.  Charles  J.  White 


184  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Kennedy,  Mary  Ann.  1823.  Baltimore  [Md.].  9  yrs.  12"x21".  Split,  chain,  cat,  tent, 
stem,  satin,  cross,  queen,  and  hem-stitch.  Verse  framed  by  border  of  hem-stitching. 
Strawberry  border  at  bottom.  Two-thirds  of  sampler  consists  of  a  town  mansion  of 
brick,  two  stories  and  a  half  high;  also  large  weeping  willow  trees,  lawn  inclosed  by 
iron  fence;  outside  on  walk  two  neighbors  talking  together  (man  and  woman),  with  dog 
and  goose  beside  them;  moth  or  butterfly  between  trees.  Lower  third  of  sampler  con- 
tains framed  dates,  etc,  on  either  side  of  which  are  large  urns  filled  with  blooming 
flowers.     Vers«  23.  Mrs.  Hugh  P.  Mohler 

Kennedy,  Rebecca.  1817.  12^"  x  IBJ".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  tree,  birds, 
lily,  and  basket  of  flowers  at  bottom.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Kenney,  Elizabeth.  [Cir.  1808.]  "  Born  May  15,  A.  D.  1797,  North  Yarmouth."  12^"  x  16". 
4  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.     Simple  border.    Verse  423.  Elizabeth  B.  Hutchins 

Kenney,  Lydia.  [Cir.  1815.]  9  yrs.  17^"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  flat,  and  cross-stitch. 
Zigzag  and  moss-rose  border.  Flowering  trees,  basket,  parrot,  dog,  and  birds.  Verse  515 
(var.).  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Kent,  Judith.  1809.  Cape  May.  12  yrs.  [Born  August  29,  1797.]  12"  x  17".  3  alphabets. 
Outline,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  honeysuckle  border.  At  bottom,  pots  of 
flowers.  The  Misses  Hannah  and  Jane  Smith 

Keelin,  M  AEG  abet.  1801.  Burlington.  17J"x20i".  Long,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation 
border;  carnation  and  strawberry  cross-borders.  At  bottom,  house  with  terraced  lawn; 
willow  and  pine  trees  on  terraces,  birds  on  trees  and  on  ground;  sheep  grazing  on  lawn. 
Detached  sprays  of  flowers,  baskets  of  flowers,  and  trees  here  and  there,  filling  in  spaces 
between  verses,  etc.     Verse  395.     Illustrated.  Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 

Keyes,  Elizabeth.  1806.  14"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Italian  open-work  stitch  and  cross-stitch. 
Zigzag  and  clover  border.    Pine  trees  and  basket  of  flowers  at  bottom.    Verse  79. 

The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Klbbe,  Margaret.  1806.  17"  x  22".  3  alphabets.  Green  linen.  Rope,  French  knot,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Scene  with  brick  house,  well-house,  fence,  gate,  tree,  animals, 
birds,  and  large  grapevine.     Verse  698.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

KijyiBALL,  Lydia.  1818.  7  yrs.  10"  x  16^".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth 
border.  Border  at  bottom  of  little  pink  flowers  and  leaves.  Saw-tooth  border  around 
name.  Verses  455,  652.  "  Wrought  by  her  ingenuity  and  industry  in  the  8th  year  of 
her  age  by  my  superintendency  N.  L."  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Kimball,  Sarah.  1806.  13  yrs.  11"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.     At  bottom,  vine  and  flowers  in  vase.     Verse  538  (var.). 

Mrs.  Frank  Keyes 

King,  Experience.  1805.  Sufiield  [Conn.].  10  yrs.  7^"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem, 
and  cross-stitch.     Eyelet  and  stem-stitch  border.  Charles  L.  Spencer,  Esq. 

King,  Harriet.  [Cir.  1813.]  Boston  [Mass.  Born  in  1801.].  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Conventional  border.    Verse  272  (var.).  Mrs.  M.  G.  Goodmin 

KiNGSBL'RY,  Susan.  1811.  Walpole  [Mass.].  Il"x9i".  2  alphabets.  Vine  border.  Verse 
128  (2,  var.).  Mrs.  George  Plimpton 

Kibkland,  Eliza.  October  13,  1802.  ir'x9J".  2  alphabets.  Tent  and  cross-stitch.  Plain 
cross-stitch  border.     House  and  small  tree  at  bottom.     Verse  677. 

Mrs.  Stanley  H.  Lowndes 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  185 

KiTTREDGE,  Sally.  "Sept  til  3  1804."  Walpole  [N.  H.].  10  yrs.  Born  April  27  [1794]. 
Hi"  X 11^".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Name  and  dates  in  border  around  three  sides. 
Irregular  figures  across  bottom.     Small  birds  at  intervals.  Mrs.  Francis  B.  Austin 

KiTTREDGE,  Sarah.  1811.  10  \TS.  17"  X  1.5".  1  alphabet.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate 
rose  border.     Basket  of  roses  and  tree  at  bottom.     Verse   129   (var.). 

Mrs.  J.  Fred  Temple 

KxApp,  Julia.  [Cir.  1823.]  Stamford.  [Born  in  1816.]  9"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.     Cross-stitch  border.     Verse  41   (var.).     Initials  "J.  aA.  K." 

Mrs.  William  H.  Walker 

Knight,  Julia.  1808.  "Pleasant  Hill  Boarding  School."  14^"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.  Spray  of  flowers  in  each  corner.  Irregular  oval  line,  with  here  and  there  a  small 
leaf  inclosing  alphabets,  name,  date,  etc.  Small  wreath  on  either  side  of  verse,  one 
inclosing  a  bird  and  the  other  the  initials  "  SK  and  MK."     Verse  185. 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Knight,  Margerit.  August  21,  1805.  Boscawen  [N.  H.].  12^"  x  I5i".  5  alphabets.  Cross 
and  flat-stitch.     Saw-tooth  border  and  simple  cross-borders.  Owner  not  recorded 

Knight,  Mary  L.  January  1st,  1830.  New  Haven  [Conn.].  8  yrs.  18"  x  17".  3  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.  Conventional  diamond  pattern  in  border.  Flowers  and  baskets  alternating 
at  bottom.     Verses  835,  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Mary  Knight  Staples 

Knowles,  Harriet.  [Cir.  1829.]  Eastham.  Born  July  8,  1816.  ni"x7i".  5  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.     Cross  and  vine  border.     Stars  and  hearts.        Mrs.  R.  Chapman 

Ladd,  Sophia  B.  July  18,  1827.  HaverhiU  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  13"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Cross, 
stem,  outline,  flat,  and  solid  stem-stitch.  Floral  border.  In  lower  right-hand  corner,  a 
tree  in  full  leaf.     Verse  329.  Mrs.  George  Wright  Briggs 

Laing,  Martha.  1810.  Verse  inclosed  in  oval  with  birds  at  top,  and  2  animals  drinking 
from  vessel  at  bottom ;  in  four  corners  are  initials  "JL  ML  PC  H  C."  Initials  around 
outside  of  oval  are"MCPEECMTLPHWMHA  L."    Verse  226. 

Maxcy  Applegate,  Esq. 

Laird,  Barbara  L.  [Cir.  1807.  Georgetown.  Born  in  1795  at  Bladensburg,  Md.].  15.V' x  17^". 
5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  double  and  single  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  At  bottom,  vase  in 
center  with  fuchsia,  and  vases  on  either  side  with  roses;  terrace  with  pine  trees;  bushes 
on  either  side  with  birds.     Verse  80.  Mrs.  William  Laird  Dunlop 

Laird,  Margaret.  [Cir.  1809.  Born  in  1797  at  Bladensburg,  Md.]  17"  x  18".  5  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  At  bottom,  3  vases  with  flowers  and  2  baskets 
with  flowers;  above,  wreaths  with  birds.  Strawberry  vine  above  verse,  with  large  trees 
topped  by  birds  on  either  side  of  verse  and  2  smaller  trees  below.     Verse  274. 

Mrs.  William  Laird  Dunlop 

Lake,  Margaret.  "  May  the  1817."  "  Great  Eggharbor  School."  2  alphabets.  Cross,  eye- 
let, and  queen-stitch.  Line  of  stitching  across  top  and  bottom.  Initials  "JLxAxAJx 
D  M  X  S  X  S  Ax  L  J  X  H  L."  Miss  S.  N.  Doughty 

Lake,  Family  Record.  [After  1818.]  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  De- 
signs outside  of  border.  Urn  of  fruit  in  each  corner.  Tree  on  each  side  and  sheaf 
of  wheat  on  one  side.  Bird  on  branch  on  each  lower  side.  Names  and  dates  "  John 
Lakes  wosBorne  21  of  December  the  1773.  Abigail  Lake  Wos  Born  11  of  January  1775. 
Armenia  Lake  Wos  Born  26  of  April  1797.  John  Lake  AVos  Born  the  12  of  Jenuary 
1799.     Aseneth  Lake  Wos  Born  the  24  of  Dec  1801.     Daniel  Lake  Wos  Born  the  5  of 


186  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

May  1803.  Margaret  Lake  Wos  Born  the  30  of  November  1804.  Sarah  Lake  Wos  Born 
the  23  of  March  1808.  Jesse  Lake  Wos  Born  the  16  of  December  1810.  Simon  Lake 
Wos  Born  the  3  of  September  1813.  Lucas  Lake  Wos  Born  the  2.5  of  April  1814.  David 
Lake  Wos  born  the  17  of  Oct  1818."     Verses  343  (1),  800.  Miss  S.  N.  Doughty 

Lambeeson,  Catherine.  1803.  Jamaica,  Long  Island.  10  yrs.  7^"  x  Hi".  3  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.    Eyelet  border  across  bottom.  Mrs.  C.  E.  W.  McDonald 

Lambert,  Haxnah  D.  1812.  "North-School,  Philadelphia."  [Born  January  4,  1796.] 
16i"  X  13J".  7  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch  all  in  black.  Vine  with  leaves;  inverted 
tulip  hanging  from  center  at  top.  The  Misses  M.  L.  and  H.  C.  Anderson 

Lamboen,  Maria.  1827.  21^"  x  17".  Queen,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Basket  in  center 
at  bottom,  out  of  which  grow  elaborate  rose  vines;  sprays  of  roses  joined  together  at 
top;  small  baskets  of  fruit  on  either  side  of  verse.     Verse  790.     Illustrated. 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Lamson,  Susanna.  [Cir.  1805.]  Charlestown  [Mass.  Born  in  1792.].  16"  x  16".  French 
knot,  satin,  chain,  cross-stitch,  and  hem-stitch.  Cross  and  satin-stitch  border.  At  bot- 
tom, house  (unfinished),  tree  on  either  side.  In  center,  conventional  flowers  and  birds. 
Wide  band  on  top  and  sides  of  diagonal  chain  and  conventional  flowers  or  ornaments. 
Verse  691.  James  M.  Hunnewell,  Esq. 

Lancaster,  Eliza.  [1802.]  Born  January  11,  1786.  16  yrs.  Alphabet.  Basket  of  flowers 
with  verse  on  either  side.    Verses  unreadable.  Mrs.  W.  M.  Tenney 

Lane,  Judith.  1811.  7  yrs.  9"  x  10^".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  back-stitch,  and  cross-stitch. 
Band  of  flowers  across  bottom,  vine  border  across  top,  and  other  cross-borders  of  rose, 
strawberry,  carnation,  honeysuckle,  and  Greek  designs.  Tall  tree  on  either  side  of 
verse.  Below,  three  panels,  one  with  name  and  age,  second  and  third  with  pine  tree, 
dog,  and  birds.     Verse  615  (var.).  Mrs.  John  F.  Calder 

Lane,  Lucy  A[nn.  1824.]  Boston.  8  yrs.  12"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Hem-stitch  and  cross- 
stitch.  Trefoil  and  conventional  cross-borders.  "  'Tis  Education  forms  the  common 
mind."  Grenville  Norcross,  Esq. 

Larned,  Eunice.  1801.  Conway.  10  yrs.  8"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Green  vine  with  red  flower  or  berry  in  border.  At  bottom,  house  with  tree  on  either 
side,  also  woman  and  other  trees.  Below  this  is  a  basket  of  flowers  with  potted  plant 
on  either  side,  and  in  each  corner  a  sheep.  Mrs.  Jane  Allen  Crawford 

Lathbop,  Lucy.  11  yrs.  13"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Wide  border  of  tulips,  pinks,  and  other 
flowers.     Cross,  satin,  and  eyelet-stitch.     Background  covered  with  black  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Marian  Hajue 

Laurence,  Laura  Matilda.  [1822.  Born  in  1815.]  7  yrs.  13"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Vine 
border.  Two  cups  of  flowers,  tree  on  either  side;  2  wreaths  with  a  bird  above;  lovingcup 
on  a  pyramid.  Mrs.  A.  W.  Whitaker 

Laverty,  Mary.  1802.  [Chester  County,  Pa.]  16  yrs.  18"x23".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.  Vine  border.  Clusters  of  strawberries  and  flowers  at  bottom.  Initials  of  9 
brothers  and  sisters.  Three  parallel  panels,  first  with  fruit,  second  with  trees,  and 
third  with  flowers.  Miss  Mary  Hutchin 

Lawrence,  Euza.  1808.  Groton  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  13i"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  chain, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  flower  border.  At  top,  3  flower-pots;  at  bottom,  2 
flowers.    Verse  690.  Massachusetts  Historical  Society 


-J  each  ine  to  live  that  J  may  diread 
'J  he  ^rave  as  little  as  my  bed  j 
ik  U^each  rne  to  die,  that  so  J  may  ■ 
/r jumpKing  rise  at  the  last  day. 


PLATE  LXI 

Faith  Walker's  Samplek.     1820 
Owned  by  the  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  187 

Lawrence,  Polly  [Maky.]  1803.  Groton  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  13J"x21".  4  alphabets.  Eye- 
let, satin,  cross,  and  hem-stitch.  Conventional  flowers  in  cross-stitch  border.  At  bottom, 
house,  garden,  and  two  tall  strawberry  plants  standing  on  pyramids. 

Mrs.  Charles  8.  Minot 

Lawrence,  Mary  Oakes.  1819.  12  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Stiff  strawberry  border. 
House,  fence,  garden,  and  flower-pots.    Verse  515  (var.).  Miss  Charlotte  8.  Tower 

Lawrence,  Sarah  Ivine.  1827.  9  yrs.  6i"x8|".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  chain-stitch. 
Line  border.    Words  "  Virtue  "  and  "  Youth."  W.  G.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Lawrence,  Sukey.  1800.  12  yrs.  12|"  x  18|".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Zig- 
zag border  with  conventional  flowering  plant.     Flowers  in  pots  at  bottom. 

Mrs.  W.  A.  Lawrence 

Lea,  Maky.  1802.  "West-Town  School."  10i"xl3^".  2  alphabets.  Stem-stitch.  Vine 
border  with  leaves.    Verse  678.  Mrs.  Hampton  L.  Carson 

Leach,  Elizabeth.  1800.  Beverly  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  10"  x  10".  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  border.  Mrs.  Charles  Whitney  Haddock 

Le  Bahon,  Hannah  G.  1826.  [Bristol,  R.  I.,  or  Scituate,  Mass.]  9  yrs.  14"  x  16i".  4 
alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Her  mother's  tombstone  on 
either  side  with  inscriptions:  "  M.  L.  B.  Born  Sept  th  24  1787  M.  L.  B.  Died  Dec  th 
24  1825."    "  Enumbered  Blessings  from  Above  Encompass  us  Around."     Verse  568. 

Miss  Anne  Le  Baron  Drumm 

Le  Breton,  Charlotte.  1809.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  15"xl5".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.    Scroll  border.    Various  cross-stitch  cross-borders. 

Dr.  Charlotte  Le  Breton  Baker 

Lee,  Eliza  J.  Before  1816,  Worcester  [Mass.].  8"x8tJ".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine 
border.  Esther  H.  Bucklin 

Lee,  Sarah.  1800.  10  yrs.  11"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Acorn  border.  Straw- 
berry border  at  bottom.  Mrs.  H.  de  B.  Parsons 

Lee,  Sarah.     1803.    8  yrs.     9|"  x  19|".     4  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Strawberry  border. 

Edward  Hicks  Bassett,  Esq. 

Lego,  Louisa.     1824.     10  yrs.     16^"  x  8".    3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.  Vernette  B.  Mowry 

Leggett,  Jane.  1807.  West  Farms  [N.  Y.  Born  July  27,  1797.].  10  yrs.  9"  x  13".  Cross- 
stitch.     Greek  border.    Verse  276.  Robert  H.  Oakley,  Esq. 

Leiper,  Mary  Ann.  1824.  Philadelphia  [Pa.].  16"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Variety  of  stitches. 
Floral-vine  border  at  top  and  bottom.  Verses  473,  474.  "August  11th  1824  Washington 
and  Lafayette  Welcome."  Mrs.  Oeorg  A.  Leiper 

Lester,  LuciNDA.  1803.  10  yrs.  Born  December  16,  1783.  Ilj"xl3".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Vine  border.     3  large  conventional  flower  patterns  at  bottom.     V£rse   17. 

Mrs.  H.  C.  Bunner 

[Letson,  Mary.  Cir.  1816.  Three  Mile  Run,  3  miles  from  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.  Born 
November  7,  1792.]  5"x5J".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Cross>-lines.  Greek  fret  across 
bottom,  also  Greek  cross.    Letters  on  sampler:     "ANEHILL Y." 

Miss  Hannah  A.  Sheppard 

Levis,  Kitty  Ann.  1809.  Springfield  [Delaware  County,  Pa.  16  yrs.].  8i"x9f".  3  alpha- 
bets.   Cross  and  eyelet-stitch.    Rose  border.    Basket  of  flowers,  two  trees,  and  animals. 

Mrs.  Charles  Lippincott 


188  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Levy,  Maria.  1828.  7  yrs.  16"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  "  I  will 
praise  God  for  he  is  exceeding  great.  I  will  bless  God  for  he  is  very  good  and  thy  heart 
shall  love  him.  The  little  birds  sing  praises  to  God,  when  they  warble  sweetly  in  the 
green  shade.  The  brooks  and  rivers  praise  God  when  they  murmur  melodiously  among 
the  smooth  pebbles.  I  will  praise  God  with  my  voice  for  I  may  praise  him  though  I 
am  but  a  little  child.  A  few  years  ago  and  I  was  a  little  infant  and  my  tongue  was 
dumb  within  my  mouth  and  I  did  not  know  the  great  name  of  God  for  my  reason  was 
not  come  unto  me.  But  now  I  can  speak  and  my  tongue  will  praise  him.  I  can  think 
of  all  his  kindness  and  I  will  obey  him."  Mrs.  Steinert 

LE\Tr,  Martha.  1803.  Philadelphia.  5  yrs.  8|"  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Simple 
line  border.    Various  patterns  in  dividing  lines.  Mrs.  Robert  Hale  Bancroft 

Lewis,  Anh^.  1800.  Born  October  12,  1790.  10  yrs.  12i"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  At  bottom,  scene  with  shepherd  and  shepherdess, 
strawberry  tree,  birds,  and  sheep.     Verses  57-5,  594  (1,  var. ).         Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Lewis,  Akka.  1811.  Athol  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  14"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch  and  hem- 
stitch.    Hemstitched  edge.     Three  small  trees  at  bottom.  Miss  Emma  P.  Rhodes 

Lewis,  Anne.  1813.  11  yrs.  13"xl5J".  Carnation  border.  Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
In  upper  section,  shepherd  and  shepherdess  with  sheep;  in  center  section,  scene  with  barn, 
windmill,  haycock,  trees,  birds,  insects,  etc.     Verse  550.         Mrs.  Frederick  P.  Thompson 

Lewis,  Mary  Ann.  [Cir.  1820.]  New  Haven  [Conn.].  8  yrs.  At  Miss  Pierce's  School, 
Litchfield,  Conn.  3  alphabets.  A  row  of  stiff  cross-stitch  flowers  and  strawberries  at 
the  bottom.  "  Diligence  and  Perseverance  are  the  Keys  to  imijrovement  and  Subdue 
all  difBculties."  Prom  an  illustration 

Lewis,  Miranda.     1812.     Walpole   [Mass.].     10  yrs.     12i"xl2i".     Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  A.  B.  Wallace 

Lewis,  Sarah  Hobart.  1813.  13"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Small 
crosses  in  side  borders,  and  elaborate  trees  and  flowers  across  top.     Verse  551. 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

L'HoMMEDiEU,  Mary  Catherine.  1813.  Middletown.  6  yrs.  7"  x  9".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Line  border.    At  bottom,  cross-border  of  lozenge  design.     Miss  Cornelia  Horsford 

[L'Hommedieu,  Mary  Catherine.]  8"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Tent  and  cross-stitch.  20  dif- 
ferent cross-border  patterns.  Miss  Cornelia  Horsford 

Lillie,  Patience  Holbrook.  1800.  Milton.  11  yrs.  7f "  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Simple  border.     Verse  669.  Mrs.  Lydia  Bowman  Taft 

LiNCKLAEN,  Helen  A.  L.  1821.  Cazenovia  [N.  Y.].  10  yrs.  [Born  November,  1811.] 
18"  x  16".     4  alphabets.     Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.     Rose  border.     Verse  169. 

Mrs.  Charles  S.  Fairchild 

Lincoln,  Betsy.  1804.  Cohasset  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  10"xll".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Three  strawberries  in  vases,  also  birds.     Verse  146.  Mrs.   Walter  M.  Lincoln 

Lincoln,  Mehitable.  1829.  Hingham  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  9J"  x  13".  4  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Vine  border.     Verse  487.  Lancaster  Public  Library 

Lincoln,  Nancy.  1801.  Norton  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  [Born  November  28,  1792.]  13i"xl2J". 
6  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border  with  colored  corners.  In  lower  half, 
scene  with  house,  trees,  birds,  cats,  dogs,  bushes,  and  flowers;  over  all  is  an  arch  and 
extending  over  arch  is  a  vine  with  flowers.     Verse  617   (1,  var.). 

Miss  Olive  Lincoln  Guild 


PLATE  LXII 

Sarah  F.  Sweets  Sampler.     Providence,  R.  I.     After  1814 
Oxvned  by  Miss  M.  Frances  Babcock 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  189 

Lindsay,  Mary  T.  1828.     Hillsboro   [N.  C,  at  school;  home  at  Greensboro,   N.  C.     About 

14  or  16  yrs.].  17"  x  19".     8  alphabets.     Eyelet,  buttonhole,  stem,  satin,  queen,  two-sided 

line-stitch,  and  cross-stitch.      Cross-borders  in  Greek  fret  and  cross  designs.      2  ribbon 

scrolls.  MLis  Emma  Morehead  Whitfield 

LrppiNCOTT,  Ann  F[olwelt.].  1828.  [Near  Bridgeport,  N.  J.  16  yrs.]  16"xl6".  4  alpha- 
bets. Eyelet,  chain,  tent,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-borders  in  various  stitches. 
Basket  of  fruit  and  flowers,  rose  sprays,  and  blackbirds.  Verse  571.  Initials:  "NYL 
[Nathan  Yarnall  Lippincott] ;  SL  [Samuel  Lippincott] ;  GL  [George  Lippincott] ; 
[brothers]."  Mrs.  Lydia  Davis 

Lippincott,  Anna.  1820.  Riverton  [N.  J.].  19"x22".  Chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine 
and  rose  border.  At  bottom,  farmhouse  with  weeping  willow  tree  on  one  side  and  pine 
on  the  other.  In  the  yard  are  sheep,  a  mouse,  swan,  bird,  horse,  rooster,  duck,  etc. 
Verses  430,  460,  544.  8.  Frances  Moore 

Lippincott,  Mary.  1828.  10  yrs.  17"  x  17".  Cross  and  solid  stem-stitch.  Vine  border  with 
leaves  and  flowers  on  three  sides.  Conventional  scene  at  bottom,  with  brick  house,  fence, 
six  trees,  terraces,  and  animals.  Just  above  house,  two  hearts  enclosing  initials  "C  P  L" 
and  "  A  L."  Wreath  in  center  at  top  inclosing  name  and  age,  and  on  either  side 
baskets  of  fruit.     Sprays  of  flowers  fill  in  remainder  of  space.  Mrs.  Fred  W.  Smith 

Lippincott,  Sarah.  1810.  "  Westfield  School"  [N.  J.].  13"  x  14".  Chain,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Rose-vine  border,  with  bunch  of  strawberries  in  each  upper  corner.  At 
bottom,  lawn  with  trees  and  flowers.  In  center,  lake  with  swan  sitting  under  over- 
hanging bush.     Vine  around  verse.     Verse  395   (1,  2).  Mrs.  Lewis  D.  Horner 

Lippitt,  Mary.  1804.  Cranston  [R.  I.].  9  yrs.  9J"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hera- 
stitched  on  two  sides.  Conventional  flower  and  bird  design  at  top,  and  narrow  border 
at  bottom.     Flower  and  bird  design  above  verse.    Verse  92a  (1).        Mary  Lippitt  Mason 

LiTHGOw,  Mary.  1807.  Augusta  [Me.].  9  yrs.  13"  x  15".  5  alphabets.  French  knot,  tent, 
chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  Greek  fret  borders.  Vase  of 
flowers,  birds  on  top  of  pine  trees,  and  large  strawberry  plants.     Verse  81. 

Mary  Devens 

Little,  Abbie  N.  1829.  Georgetown  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  16i"xl6J".  4  alphabets.  Satin, 
stem,  flat,  tent,  cat,  and  cross-stitch.  Morning-glory  vine  on  two  sides  and  halfway 
across  the  top.  Wreath  of  strawberries  in  center  at  top.  Across  bottom,  basket  of 
flowers  in  center;  on  each  side  two  mounds,  one  with  two  trees  on  top,  and  in  corners 
two  larger  trees.     Verse  515  (1).  3Irs.  Charlotte  H.  Howard 

Little,  Mary.  1800.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  22^"  x  18J".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  and  floral  borders.  At  bottom,  trees,  fruit,  flowers,  children, 
lady,  gentleman,  colored  servants,  dog,  large  insect,  arbor,  and  vine.     Verse  666   (var.). 

Mrs.  Charles  H.  Atkinson 

Little,  Rutha.  1801.  West  Newbury  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  13"xl6i".  3  alphabets.  French 
knot,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross  and  satin-stitch  border.  At  bottom,  solid  satin- 
stitch.    Verse  674.  Mrs.  .T.  B.  Nutter 

Livingston,  Jane.  August,  1813.  Born  September  4,  1804.  [Livingstone,  N.  Y.]  13"  x  13". 
2  alphabets.  Bird's-eye,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border.  Verse  611 
(1,  var.).  Mrs.  Harold  Wilson 

Llewellyn,  Rachel.      [Cir.   1816.]      10i"xl34".     Lace  stitches  on  fine   net. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lazcton 


190  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Locke,  Eliza.  1813.  13  yrs.  Satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Floral  border.  Elaborate 
landscape  at  bottom.    Verse  305.  Mrs.  J.  Hamilton  Woodsum 

Locke,  Sttsanka  Brown.  1814.  Woburn  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  ll"xH".  4  alphabets.  Satin 
and  cross-stitch.  Narrow  hemstitched  edge  with  pointed  border.  At  bottom,  spray  of 
roses  with  leaves,  and  two  little  birds  and  two  urns  at  each. 

Mrs.  Albert  F.  Swaine 

Locke,  Susanna  Brown.     1819.    Woburn  [Mass.].     16  yrs.     17"  x  20".    Locke  family  record: 
"  Mr.  Josiah  Locke  Born  Mary  Locke  Born 

December   the   23rd   1779  May   the   13th   1808 

Mrs.   Susanna  Locke  Josiah   Locke   Born 

August   the   27th    1779.  Aug  the  20th   1810 

Names  and  Births  of  their  Children  Louisa  Locke  Born 


Susanna  Brown  Locke  Born  Sept  the  18th  1811 

November  the   15th   1803  Rebekah    Ann   Locke    Born 

Elizabeth  Locke   born  July  the  13th   1813 

May  the  8th   1805  Frances    Frost   Locke    Born 

Cherry  Adams  Locke  born  October  27th   1815 

January  the   13th   1807  Lucy  Frost  Ivocke  Born 

February   9th    1818 
Deaths 
Mr.   Josiah   Locke   Died   August  21st    1818 

Aged  88  years 
Josiah  Locke  Died  October  11th  1810 
Aged  7  weeks." 

Mrs.  Albert  F.  Swaine 

Logan,  Sarah  B.     1826.    7i"  x  9".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Hampton  L.  Carson 

Lombard,  Elsa.  1800.  [Springfield,  Mass.]  10  yrs.  10|"  x  11|".  4  alphabets.  Herringbone 
and  cross-stitch.     Border,  double  row  of  cross-stitch.     "  Improve  in  virtue  and  be  happy." 

Mrs.  Edward  W.  Hutchins 

Long,  Fanny.  1801.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  [Born  July  8,  1790.]  22"xl8".  4 
alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Vine  of  wild  roses 
around  verse;  below  verse  are  violets,  tulips,  roses,  butterily,  and  goldfinch.  Verse  515 
(var.).  Miss  Georgiana  Augusta  Currier 

Longfellow,  Eliza.  1828.  Machias  [Me.].  9  yrs.  4  alphabets.  Satin,  eyelet,  petit-point, 
and  cross-stitch.  Arch  supported  by  two  columns,  and  twined  around  it  are  vines  and 
roses.    Verses  148,  795.  Sold.    Owner  unknown 

Longfellow,  Sarah.     1813.     Machias   [Me.].     15  yrs.     7;^"x8"^    3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

W.  B.  Parlin,  Esq. 

LooNT,  Martha.     1828.      [Charleston,  S.  C]      8  yrs.  17"xl6".     Cross-stitch.     Border  of 

clover,  leaves,  and  vine,  with  roses  in  each  corner.  In  center,  large  house,  grass,  fence, 

trees,  and  two  dogs.     "  Children  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord  for  this  is  right.     Eph. 

Chap  VI,  1  verse."  Miss  Mary  Miller 

Lord,  Hannah.  1816.  Ipswich,  Mass.  12  yrs.  10"  x  8".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hem- 
stitched edge  and  Grecian  border  inside.     Verse  116.  Miss  Lucy  8.  Jeioett 


I'  JW 


•lift 


>, 

,^^ 


'/^•^l 


i' 


PLATE  LXIII 

Sakaii   :  Donna   :  Leonora   :  Saunders 

View  of  William  and  Mary  College,  Virginia 

Owned  by  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  191 

Lord,  Hannah  Noble.  1804.  South  Berwick,  Me.  11  yrs.  20^"  x  14".  4  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.    Modified  Greek  fret  border.    Verse  601  (1,  2).  Mrs.  Ellen  RolUns 

LoRiNO  [Family  Record].  1804.  19"x22".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border,  with 
brilliant  flowers  and  leaves.  At  bottom,  2  black  weeping  willows  and  a  black  wreath. 
Verse  262. 

"  Jerom  Loring  and  Mary  Hodgkins  were  married  November  6th  1787  at  Bath." 

"  Progeny  " 
"  John  Loring  was  born  August  16th  1783 
Jerom  C.  Loring  was  born  October  28th  1789 
Mary  Loring  was  born  October  11th  1791 
Rachel  Loring  was  born  November  25th  1794 " 

"Death" 
"  John  Loring  died  February  25th  1804  " 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Loring,  Ann  M.  1822.  Boston.  11  yrs.  13^"  x  19J",  2  alphabets.  Fine  cross-stitch.  14 
rows  of  rainbow  design.     Verse  769.  Mrs.  Henry  P.  Briggs 

Loring,  Hannah.     1812.     Made   "At  Miss  Perkin's  Academy,  Boston."     12  yrs.     17"x26". 
French  knot,  satin,  and  cross-stitch;  part  of  background  painted.     Arch  supported  by 
tall  pillars;  clock  set  at  six  o'clock  in  center  of  arch;  funeral  urn  flanked  by  weeping 
willows  in  center  at  base,  and  birds  on  pedestals  close  to  pillars.     Two  circles  at  base, 
one  bearing  dissertation  on  "  The  Duty  of  Parents  in  bringing  up  their  children "  and 
the    other    on    "  The    Duty    of    children    towards    parents."      Under    urn    is    inscription 
"Sacred  to  Memory  of  Ebenezer  Loring  Obt.  July  22, nd  1791,  AEt  19  mo;  Mrs.  Nancy 
Loring  Obt.  March  28, th  1798,  AEt  31  yrs;  Mrs.  Sarah  Loring  Obt.  Oct.  30, th  1800,  AEt 
37;  Mrs.  Sarah  Newcomb  Obt.  Jany  11,  th  1812,  AE  24."     In  center  of  sampler  are  the 
names,  births,  and  marriages  of 
"  The 
Family 
of  Matthew  Loring  & 
Nancy,  Sarah  &  Mercy  Loring 

Matthew  Loring  Born  Hull  Jan  17,  1761 

Nancy  Floyd  Born  Boston  May  18,  1767 

Married  by  the  Rev.  Doct.  Stillman  Boston  January  1st  1768 

Sarah  Blake  Born  Boston  April  4,  1763 

Married  by  the  Rev.  Doct.  Baldwin  Boston  June  17th  1799 


Mercy  Bates  Born  Bath  June  16,  1765 

Married  by  Rev.  Doct.  Baldwin  Boston  June  6th  1801 

Sarah  Loring  Born  Boston  October  20th  1787 

Ebenezer  Loring  Born  Boston  January  23d  1790 

Nancy  Loring  Born  Boston  Sept  llth  1792 

William  P.  Loring  Born  Boston  January  28th  1795 

Jane  B.  Loring  Born  Boston  May  15th  1797 

Hannah  B  Loring  Born  Boston  October  22d  1800 

Joseph  B  Loring  Born  Boston  May  15th  1802 

Caroline  M  Loring  Born  Boston  Decern  8th  1806 

Francis  M  Loring  Born  Boston  Aug  27th  1811 
Verse  437.    Illustrated.                                                                              Mrs.  Lathrop  C.  Harper 


192  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

[LouKS,  Rachel.]  1830.  [Pennsylvania.]  10i"xll".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine  at 
top.    Carnations,  birds.  Mrs.  Edgar  Henry  Summerfield  Bailey 

LovEJOT,  Sally  C.  1811.  Born  March  10,  1801.  5J"x6|".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Simple  border.    Verse  295.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

LovELL,  Lydia  D.  1820.  East  Medway.  Born  February  27,  1810.  10  yrs.  8^"  x  12f ". 
2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Cross-border.    Verse  377  (var.).  Mrs.  E.  C.  Butler 

Lowe,  Abigail.  Ashburnham  [Mass.].  10|"  x  12^".  Cross-stitch.  Border  of  vine  and  Greek 
fret  designs,  with  flower-pots  on  each  side.  At  bottom,  an  inn  with  swinging  sign,  trees, 
and  bird.     Verse  797.  Mrs.  Edwin  L.  Thompson 

LuMESs,  Patty  N.     1810.     H"x20".     5  alphabets.     Satin  and  cross-stitch.     Verse  717. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Lynde,  Eliza.  1807.  8  yrs.  14"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Cross,  chain,  eyelet,  French  knot, 
and  satin-stitch.    Simple  border  design.     Floral  design  ;it  bottom. 

3Iiss  Helen  Lynde  Sullivan 

Lyon,  Mary  W.     1821.     Milton   [Mass.].     11  yrs.     17"  x  17".     Chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Heavy  vine  border,  springing  from  two  large  vases  in  lower  corners;  third  large  vase 
filled  with  flowers  in  center  at  bottom.     Verses  320,  767. 
"  Family  Register 
Reuben  Lyon  was  born  November  7th  178.5 
Abigail  W.  Dalie  was  born  August  23rd  1789 

Married  April  22d  1810 
Mary  Willis  Lyon  was  born  July  16th  1811 
Catherine  Manly  Lyon  was  born  Sepptm  8th  1813 
Charles  Reuben  Lyon  was  born  Octbr  lOth  1816 
Susan  Abigail  Lyon  was  born  September  —  1819 
Charles  Lyon  died  Jany  26th  18—." 

Miss  Anne  F.  Randall 

Lyoks,  Sally.  1800.  New  Haven  [Conn.].  10  yrs.  8  mos.  12J"xl2i".  Alphabets.  Satin, 
stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross,  vine,  and  strawberry  border.  At  top  of  sampler  is  a  large 
house  with   fence  and  trees  on  either  side.     Verses  24   (2,  3),  245. 

Mrs.  George  A.  Hill 

M ,   A.     1810.     Cross-stitch.     Scattered   conventionalized   flower   and   Greek   fret   designs, 

with   wreath   in   center,   inclosing   initials   and   date;   bird   at   lower   left-hand   corner   of 
.     wreath.    Made  at  a  Pennsylvania  school.  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  New  York 

M ,  T.  R.,  also  I.  C.  S.     1803.     12V' x  19".     2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Cross-borders  in 

trefoil,  strawberry,  double  strawberry,  and  several  Greek  fret  designs.     At  top,  isolated 
animals,  flowers,  etc.  Delano  Estate.     Sold  at  Lihbie's,  March  1,  1916 

Mack,  Esther  Clarke.  1820.  8  yrs.  18"  x  17".  6  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cat,  and  cross-stitch. 
Verse  129.  Miss  Esther  Stone 

Mackubin,  Eijzabeth.  [Cir.  1801.]  Born  April  29,  1788.  22"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  House,  and  fence  across  bottom.  "The  grace  of  our 
I.,ord  Jesus  Christ  and  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  (Jhost  be  with  us  ever  mo."  Verse 
not  legible.  Miss  Caroline  Franklin 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  193 

[Malcolm,  Maria  K.]  1800.  [Hanover  Street,  Boston,  Mass.  Born  in  1792.]  6i"x23". 
3  alphabets.     Chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     7  cross-border  designs.        John  Taylor,  Esq. 

Manning,  Hannah  P.  [Cir.  1818.]  14i"xl0i".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border. 
House  and  birds.  2  willow  trees  with  an  urn  under  each,  and  initials:  "Mr.  A.  P. 
Mrs.  H.  M."  Mrs.  Eva  R.  Oreeley 

Manning,  Sarah  H.  [Cir.  1818.]  15"  x  11".  Cross-stitch.  2  alphabets.  Vine  border. 
House  with  a  cupola.  One  willow  tree  and  a  conventional  tree  with  tablet:  "Died  in 
1818.     Mrs.  H.  M.  AD  31."  Mrs.  Eva  B.  Oreeley 

March,  Lydia.  1806.  Salisbury  [Mass.  7  yrs.].  18"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross- 
stitch.  Cross-borders  of  vines  and  forget-me-nots.  At  bottom,  meeting  house  and  trees. 
Names  and  dates:  "Mary  March  born  Dec.  25,  1785;  Lydia  March  born  March  25,  1799; 
Susanna  March  born  Feb,  6,  1802;  Samuel  March  born  June  21,  1804." 

Newburyport  Historical  Society 

Mareford,  Abby.  Jencks  Street  School,  Providence.  21"  x  17i".  5  alphabets.  Chain  and 
cross-stitch.     Verse  127.  Mrs.  John  H.  Mason 

Magarge,  Susanna.  1827.  "Bristol  School."  12"  x  15".  Petit-point,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
Greek  fret  border  inside  and  strawberry  border  outside.  Verse  511.  [Made  at  Quaker 
School  at  Bristol,  Pa.]  Mrs.  Arthur  M.  Waitt 

Makoarge,  Susanna.  1827.  "  Bristol  School."  17"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.  Baskets  of  flowers  and  sprays  of  flowers  in  upper  and  lower  corners; 
wreath  in  center  at  bottom,  with  bird  standing  on  twig  inside.  Mrs.  Arthur  M.  Waitt 

Maris,  Alice.    Marple.    20"  x  21".     Floral  border.     Arbor,  animals,  etc.,  at  bottom. 

Mrs.  H.  E.  Oillingham 

Marsh,  Elizabeth  Hannah.  1823.  11  yrs.  Il"xl2|".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.  Roses  and  garland  in  border.  At  bottom,  deer,  birds,  trees,  pots  and  baskets 
of  flowers;  hearts,  squares,  and  diamonds  complete  end  of  lines.  Verse  59.  "Under  her 
mother's  tuition."  Mrs.  Blanton  C.  Welsh 

Marsh,  Melinda.  1812.  10  yrs.  9|"x9J".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  queen,  buttonhole,  line, 
and  satin-stitch.     Cross-border.     Collection  of  sample  stitches.        Mrs.  Blanton  C.  Welsh 

Marsh,  Rebecca.  1803.  "  West  Town  School."  16"  x  12".  4  alphabets.  Stem-stitch.  Verse 
405.     Initials:     "MB,  A  L,  R  B,  MS."  Anthony  Morris  Tyson 

Marshall,  Elizabeth  Pilsbury.  1823.  West  Newbury  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Satin, 
stem,  and  cross-stitch.    Elaborate  floral  border.    Verse  562.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Marsters,  Hannah.  1818.  Manchester  [Mass.].  Born  October  8,  1818.  16"  x  17".  4  alpha- 
bets. Cross-stitch.  Conventional  border.  At  bottom,  small  trees  and  birds,  also  four 
peacocks.     Verse  104.  Miss  Helen  L.  Marsters 

M4RTIN,  Cordelia.  1830.  7  yrs.  13"xll".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  2  houses,  trees, 
jardiniere  on  table;  2  female  figures,  etc.,  at  bottom  of  sampler.  "Youth  is  the  season 
for  improvement."  Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

Martin,  Mary  Ann.  1806.  Verona  [N.  J.].  15"  x  18".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Three 
kinds  of  strawberry  designs  in  border.  At  bottom,  large  basket  of  flowers,  small 
basket  of  flowers,  6  fancy  trees,  3  sprays  of  flowers,  black  dog,  peacock  with  spread 
tail,  etc.    Vers€  150  (1).  M.  Anna  Sickley 

Mathewson,  Amy  Ann.  1828.  11  yrs.  17"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  and  cross- 
stitch.    Strawberry  border.    "  A  record  of  the  family  of  Mr.  Obediah  and  Mrs.  Susannah 


194  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Mathewson:  George  Mathewson  was  born  January  3,  1816;  Amy  Ann  Mathewson  was 
born  July  9,  1817;  Brockholst  L.  Mathewson  was  born  October  2,  1818;  Charles  R. 
Mathewson  was  born  October  28,  1820.    Mr.  0[bediah]  Mathewson  was  born  Jan.  22,  1793; 

died  April  27,  1822 Mrs.  S[usannah]   Mathewson  was  born  Oct.  22,  1796;  died  Aug. 

27,  1824."  Mrs.  George  M.  Smith 

Maxwell,  Ann.  1808.  Carlisle  [Pa.].  13"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  chain,  flat, 
and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border  design  resembling  daisies  done  in  eyelets.  Fancy 
bands  across  in  hemstitching.    Verse  706.  Maxwell  Cathcart,  Esq. 

Mayhew,  Saeah.  1825.  Daretown  [Salem  County,  N.  J.  23  yrs.].  19i"x26i".  1  alphabet. 
Variety  of  stitches.  Greek  fret  and  carnation  borders.  Peacocks,  birds,  bowl  of  fruit, 
geometrical  figures,  branches  of  strawberries,  urns  with  sprays  of  flowers,  fruit,  branches 
of  roses  and  forget-me-nots.    Verse  662  (var.).  Owner  not  recorded 

McAltioneh,  Rachel  E.  1830.  [Pilesgrove  Township,  Salem  Coimty,  N.  J.]  10  yrs. 
17"  X 16".  Flat,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  across  top  and  on  sides. 
Band  of  flat-stitch  across  bottom.  In  center,  large  basket  of  fruit  and  flowers;  on 
right  side,  tulip  plant;  and  on  left  side,  rose  bush  and  small  tree.  Bunch  of  roses  in 
center  at  top.  In  right  corner,  carnation  plant  in  urn;  in  left  corner,  bouquet  of  droop- 
ing flowers.  On  each  side  of  verse,  basket  of  fruit  and  flowers,  small  basket,  and  a  tulip. 
Verse  573.  Mrs.  Elizabeth  McAltioner  Coles 

McCahtht,  Sarah.  1802.  15  yrs.  16"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  tapestry,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.     Elaborate  carnation  border.  Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

McClaix,  Mart.  1820.  18"  x  22i".  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Acorn  border.  At  bottom, 
flowers  dotted  around.    Wreath  around  name.    Verses  79,  532.         Mrs.  Renwick  C.  Hurry 

McClttre,  Emily  Jane.  1816.  Baltimore.  7  yrs.  27"  x  15".  2  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet, 
cat,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  and  strawberry  border.  House,  trees,  and 
birds.    Verse  515  (var,).  Miss  Ella  Howard  Hardie 

McClure,  Lucretia.  1800.  7  yrs.  9^"  x  9^".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Verse  (unfinished) 
670.  Mrs.  I.  Tucker  Burr 

McGilliard,  Eijsa.  1816.  17"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Japanese  stitch,  crewel  and  cross-stitch. 
Vine  and  flower  border,  and  cross-borders  in  varied  patterns.  Lower  left-hand  corner, 
pot  containing  flowers.    "  The  things  unseen  do  not  deceive  us."     Verse  526. 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

McIxTiRE,  [Elizabeth  P.]  3  alphabets.  Satin,  stem,  cat,  French  knot,  and  cross-stitch. 
Elaborate  grapevine  and  rose  border  on  sides  and  across  top.  Village  scene  (Fitchburg), 
trees,  and  animals  in  foreground,  a  village  street  with  church;  across  a  pond  houses, 
men,  women,  etc.,  and  several  boats  on  pond.  Detached  spray  of  flowers  and  willow 
tree  in  center  section.  Verse  760.  Names  and  dates:  "Mr.  Elijah  Mclntire  Jr  born 
Wedny  Feb  th  10  1784;  Miss  Sophia  Cowdin  born  frid  Sept  th  24  1779;  Married  in 
Fitchburg  by  Rev-^  T.  T.  Barton  May  28  1806;  Elizabeth  P.  Mclntire  born  frid  April 
th  24,  1807;  Farrington  Mclntire  born  tuesd  Feb  th  4,  1818.  Died  21st."  Verse  461. 
Illustrated.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

McKellar,  Catherine  Wyres.  1828.  Machias,  Me.  3  alphabets.  Vine  and  flower  border 
at  sides.    Verse  (unfinished)  606  (1,  var.).  Owner  not  recorded 

McKiM,  Margaret.  1827.  [Fairfax  Court  House,  Va.].  12J"  x  12§".  Cross-stitch.  2 
alphabets.  Vine  across  top.  Church  with  weathervane  in  center  at  bottom;  remainder 
of  sampler  filled  in  with  detached  baskets,  flowers,  wreaths,  angels,  two  men  carrying 


<-.-,  V 


hi  thi 


<  4  <     * 


fS  ><«*r  wf-tef  a^«-  Wi'icp  i.h< 


Emily  Clark's  Sampler 

View  of  Yale  College 

Owned  by  Mrs.  A.  J.  Dozens 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  195 

large  bunch  of  grapes  on  a  pole,  small  house  and  part  of  fence,  and  small  scene  with 
houses  and  trees.  Mrs.  William  Ay  res  Cook 

McLellax,  Mary  Ann.  1816.  Portland.  [12  yrs.]  16^"x21i".  Eyelet,  satin,  cross,  and 
various  other  stitches.  Conventional  border  design,  also  inside  floral  border  with  bunches 
of  flowers  in  each  corner.  Genealogy:  "Stephen  McLellan  born  at  Portland  Feb.  26, 
1766.  Charlotte  Ilsley  wife  of  Stephen  McLellan  born  at  Portland  Jan.  25,  1763;  died 
Sep.  22,  1802.  Hannah  IlsIey  wife  of  Stephen  McLellan  born  at  Portland  Jan.  19,  1771. 
The  Births  of  their  Ofspring:  Mary  Ann  McLellan  born  at  Portland  Nov.  27,  1803; 
Isaac  Ilsley  McLeUan  born  at  Portland  Feb.  6,  1806;  Augusta  Ilsley  McLellan  born 
at  Portland  March  16,  1808,  died  August  16,  1812;  Charlotte  Ilsley  McLellan  born  at 
Portland  Oct.  28,  1810."     Verse  703  (var.).  Miss  Clara  Mossman  Hill 

Mead,  Harriet.  1804.  12  yrs.  12"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Conven- 
tional flower  design  in  border.  At  bottom,  rose  bush  with  conventional  pot  of  flowers  on 
either  side.  Mrs.  William  D.  Eaton 

MeCrackin,  Margaret.  1815.  16"x21".  Stem,  satin,  split,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border. 
Two  large  willow  trees,  one  pine  tree,  and  two  lambs  at  bottom.  Flowers  in  pots,  baskets 
of  fruit,  and  sprays  of  flowers  scattered  around.  "  Parents  Names,  George  and  Mary  A. 
Mecrakin;  William  Rebecca  Mecrakin,  James  Margaret  Bodly,  Brother  and  Sisters, 
Rebecca,  Mary  Ann,  William,  Hannah  Sidney,  Susanna  Mecrakin."     Verses  448,  557. 

Mrs.  H.  de  Berkeley  Parsons 

Medham,  Mary  Ann.  1802.  Lynnfield  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  16"  x  14i".  3  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  design  in  border.  Jars  and  plants  at  bottom,  and  flower 
in  center.  Mrs.  Frederick  W.  Hatch 

Melton,  Mary  Ann.  [Early  19th  Century.]  9  yrs.  12"  x  15^".  Cross-stitch.  Carnation 
and  vine  border.     Basket  of  flowers,  deer,  and  pine  trees.     Verse  515. 

William,  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

Mendinhall,  Hannah.  1810.  Westown  [Pa.  West  Town  School.].  16  yrs.  12"  x  13". 
Cross-stitch  and  pen-and-ink  lettering.     Vine  around  verses.     Verses  430,  544. 

Mrs.  A.  D.  Warren 

Merrill,  Mary  W.  1817.  Portland  [Me.].  14  yrs.  18"x20i".  Chain,  eyelet,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Rose-vine  border.  Verse  753.  "  The  Genalogy  of  John  and  Martha 
Merrill.  John  Merrill  born  July  9,  1769;  Martha  Merrill  born  Oct.  16,  1775;  Lydia 
Merrill  born  Dec.  2,  1799;  Died  June  22,  1802.  So  fades  the  lovely  blooming  flower. 
Mary  W.  Merrill  born  Mar.  15,  1803;  Lydia  Merrill  born  Feb.  19,  1805;  John  M.  Merrill 
born  Dec.  5,  1807;  Martha  Merrill  born  July  9,  1810;  Susannah  Merrill  born  July  9, 
1810."     Two  geometrical  designs  in  lower  corners,  with  initials  "  L  M  "  and  "  P  W." 

Susan  I.  Merrill 

Merrill,  Nancy.  1813.  Born  in  1796.  5i"x3".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched 
and  fringed  edge.  Elizabeth  C.  B.  Bradbury 

Merritt,  Jane.  1803.  12^"  x  14^".  Sampler  is  an  all-over  design  of  plants,  flowers,  and 
birds.  Mrs.  James  Richardson 

Mehseilles,  Hannah  Smith.  1812.  Bridgeton  [N.  J.].  13  yrs.  14"  x  19".  3  alphabets. 
French  knot,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  At  bottom, 
2  baskets  of  flowers.     Verse  236  (1).  Mrs.  H.  B.  Pierce 

Metcalf,  Frances  Calder.  1817.  10  yrs.  21"x20".  Eyelet,  satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.  Columned  arch  inclosing  family  register.  "Mr.  Samuel  Metcalf,  born 
Dec.  29,  1783;  Miss  Frances  Calder,  born  Sept.  10,  1785.     They  were  married  in  Provi- 


196  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

dence  by  the  Rev.  Stephen  Gano  July  13,  1806.  Their  first  child  Frances  Calder 
Metcalf,  March  31,  1807;  their  second  child  Julia  Metcalf,  April  29,  1809;  died  January 
31,  1823;  their  third  child  Samuel  Augustus  Metcalf,  March  21,  1811;  their  fourth  child 
Sophia  Perin  Metcalf,  February  18,  1813;  their  fifth  child  Harriet  Newell  Metcalf, 
February  28,  1815;  their  sixth  child  Sarah  Calder  Metcalf,  Sept.  12,  1816;  died  Dec.  13, 
1822;  their  seventh  child  Eliza  Gray  Metcalf,  Dec.  20,  1818;  their  eighth  child  Albert  Met- 
calf, January  31,  1821;  died  August  16,  1822;  their  ninth  child  Caroline  Julia  Metcalf, 
Dec.  25,  1824;  their  tenth  child  Cornelia  Sarah  Metcalf  Dec.  25,  1824  (twins)  ;  their  eleventh 
child  Levi  Lincoln  Metcalf,  June  11,  1825."    Verse  309. 

Miss  F.  G.  Ormsbee  and  Mrs.  E.  C.  Harrington 

Metcalf,  Melia.  1801.  Franklin  [Mass.  Born  in  1783.].  18"  x  18".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Cross-stitch  borders.     Verse  490  (var.).  Mrs.  Lena  Fisher  Wyman 

Metcalf,  Rhoda.  1811.  [Ashburnham,  Mass.].  12  yrs.  10^"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Mostly 
cross-stitch.  Conventionalized  flower  bands  around  register  of  names.  Family  names 
and  dates: 

"  Mr.    Ezekiel  S.  Metcalf  born    Oct  13th  1769 
Mrs.  Eunice  Metcalf  Oct  20  1768 

Eunice  Metcalf  Oct  10  1782 

Ezekiel  Metcalf  Nov  7  1784 

Joseph  Metcalf  Jan  21  1786 

Dinah  Metcalf  June  7  1787 

Jeremiah  Metcalf  May  24  1789 

Lucy  Metcalf  July  26  1791 

Asa  Metcalf  June  8  1793 

Rhoda  Metcalf  May  4  1799 

Asa  Metcalf  died  Sept  8th  1794" 

Mrs.  C.  E.  Corwin 

Mettiss,  Matilda  Catherine.  [C'r.  1829.]  18"x22".  Born  November  10,  1817.  Eyelet, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  flower  border  with  two  yellow  stars.  Green  lawn 
with  long,  low,  red  building  with  belfry,  2  spruce  trees,  and  steps  on  to  lawn.    Verse  331. 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Mickle,  Keziah.  1800.  [West  Town  School.]  10"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine 
at  top  with  flowers  in  center.  Mrs.  Edwin  Dillon 

Middleton,  Mart.  1804.  Worked  at  "Southern  Boarding  School."  13J"xl6".  Verse  264. 
Genealogical  data:  "Robert  Middleton  and  Mary  Armitage  were  married  the  19th  of 
the  8th  month  1788.  Dorcas  Middleton  was  born  the  8th  of  the  10th  month;  Mary 
Middleton  was  born  the  30th  of  the  6th  month  1791;  John  Middleton  was  born  the 
14th  of  the  11th  month  and  deceased  the  25th  of  the  4th  month  1795;  Robert  Middleton 
was  born  the  19th  of  the  1st  month  1796;  Marianne  Middleton  was  born  the  14th  of  the 
7th  month  1798;  William  Middleton  was  born  the  11th  of  the  11th  mo.  1801;  Joseph 
Middleton  was  born  the  22nd  of  the  8th  mo.  1804;  Mary  Middleton  was  deceased 
the  31st  of  the  8th  mo.  1804;  Robert  Middleton  was  deceased  the  2nd  of  the  1st  month 
1805."  Mrs.  Eleanor  Armitage  Whelan  and  Miss  Mary  B.  Zellar 

Miles,  Maria.  1804.  9  yrs.  [New  Haven.]  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge 
with  simple  cross-stitch  cross-borders.    Double  strawberry  border  across  top.     Verse  340. 

Mrs.  Jack  Boss  Bowdre 

MiiEs,  Mary  D.     1807.    Leicester  [Mass.].     8  yrs.     8"  x  7f ".     3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  John  A.  Sweetser 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  197 

Miller,  Anne.  1815.  [Near  Greenwich,  N.  J.]  15  yrs.  17"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  French 
knot,  chain,  eyelet,  tent,  stem,  satin,  cross,  and  other  stitches.  Vine  border.  At  bottom, 
house  and  grounds.  Mrs.  H.  B.  Pierce 

Miller,  Euphemia.  1823.  [Near  Allentown,  N.  J.  Born  November  12,  1812.]  11  yrs. 
14"  X 16".  2  alphabets.  Chain,  long  and  short,  outline,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  and  vine  border.  House,  tree,  flowering  bushes,  butterflies,  man,  woman, 
dog,   and   double   terrace   of   grass.     Verse   775.  Euphemia  Augusta   Orover 

Miixer,  Excy.  1816.  9  yrs.  16^"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Variety  of  stitches.  Strawberry, 
rose,  leaf,  and  other  flower  designs  in  borders.     Verse  452.  Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

Miller,  Hannah.  July  14,  A.  D.  I8[25].  11  yrs.  Born  18[14].  Middlefield  [Conn.]. 
12V'  X IV'.    5  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Cross-borders. 

Mrs.  Edgar  Henry  Summerfield  Bailey 

Miller,  Hannah.  [1826.  Middlefield,  Conn.]  12  yrs.  10"x9J",  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Cross-stitch  border.     House,  basket  of  flowers,  birds,  and  trees.    Worn  and  frayed. 

Mrs.  Edgar  Henry  Summerfield  Bailey 

Miller,  Hannah  Mary.  August  30,  1830.  Middletown  [Conn.  16  yrs.].  17"  x  19".  2 
alphabets.  French  knot,  chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Divided 
into  three  sections:  upper  section,  inverted  cornucopias  of  flowers  in  each  corner;  middle 
section,  "  Register "  with  births  and  deaths,  also  verses ;  lower  section,  landscape  with 
four  houses,  pine,  maple,  weeping  willow,  and  fruit  trees,  fence,  gates,  and  tombstone 
bearing  letters  "  C  S  M."  "Register:  Seth  Miller  born  November  2nd  17  77;  Charity 
Birdsey  born  May  9th  1779;  United  in  marriage  December  16th  1802  and  have  the 
following  children:  Mila  born  October  1st  1803;  Alma  born  September  18th  1808; 
Hannah  Mary  born  June  21st  1814;  Caroline  Sarah  born  December  15th  1818;  Deaths: 
Caroline  Sarah  died  March  7th  1819;  Mila  died  January  16th  1856*;  Hannah  Mary  died 
August  17th  1865;  Alma  died  July  27th  1877.  Mr.  Seth  Miller  died  April  7th  1831;  Mrs. 
Seth  Miller  died  Nov.  15th  1845."     Verse  384.         Mrs.  Edgar  Henry  Summerfield  Bailey 

Miller,  Hannah  N[iles].  1808.  Philadelphia.  10  yrs.  13"  x  17".  2|  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
cross-stitch,  and  hem-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  The  Niles  was  omitted  by  the  child. 
As  punishment  her  sampler  was  never  framed.  Hannah  Niles  Freeland  Miller 

Miller,  Maria.  1820.  [Near  Deerfield,  Cumberland  County,  N.  J.]  13  yrs.  10"  x  12".  4 
alphabets.  Flat,  outline,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border.  At  bottom, 
small  basket  of  flowers  with  2  birds  on  it.      •  Mabel  H.  Turner 

Miller,  S[arah]  W[yatt].  1802.  Salem  [N.  J.  11  yrs.  Born  September  24,  1791.]. 
6i"  X  8".  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Verses  77,  399.  "  West-town  School "  inscribed 
at  top.    "S.  W.  Miller  to  E.  W.  Miller"  [her  mother].  Miss  Hannah  Hall  Acton 

Mills,  Sarah.  [Cir.  1800.]  11  yrs.  16^"  x  16|".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border 
with  roses  in  corners;  roses  and  carnations  alternate  with  leaves  in  rest  of  border. 
Carnation  cross-border.  Basket  of  flowers  on  either  side  of  verse.  Basket  of  flowers  in 
lower  section.     Verse  108. 

William  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

Miskey,  Elizabeth.  1822.  Philadelphia.  11  yrs.  24"  x  16".  Chain,  stem,  queen,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Carnation  border.  Large  basket  of  grapes  embroidered  in  crewel  in  center,  with 
spray  of  flowers  on  either  side.  Vine  and  flowers  around  panel  containing  verse.  At 
bottom,  "  Respectfully  presented  to  Anthony  and  Elizabeth  Miskey  by  their  affectionate 
daughter  Elizabeth  Miskey."     Verse  720.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

These  dates  are  evidently  a  later  insertion. 


198  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Mitchell,  Marie  Sutherland.  1818.  ICharleston,  S.  C]  8  yrs.  10^"  x  8",  2  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Two  small  houses  at  bottom  connected  by 
fence;  trees  at  either  end.     Verse  454.  Mrs.  Robert  Bee  Lebby 

Mitchell,  Mary.  1803.  Bridgewater  [Mass.  7  or  9  yrs.,  indistinct.].  15"x21".  3  alpha- 
bets. Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  cross-stitch  border.  Rosebuds  in  stem-stitch 
at  bottom.     Verse  647.  Miss  S.  Lizzie  Dunbar 

Monks,  Sttsanna.  1822.  16"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  border 
at  top  and  strawberry  on  sides;  saw-tooth  border  inside.  Sprays  of  carnations  and  wild 
roses,  baskets  of  flowers,  large  vase  with  conventional  carnations,  bunches  of  lilies  of 
the  valley,  bunches  of  strawberries,  sprays  of  tulips,  crowns,  and  green  wreath.  In  one 
corner.  Wall  of  Troy  design  with  conventionalized  design.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Montgomery,  Harriot.  1804.  Middleborough.  11  yrs.  [Born  in  1793.]  12"  x  15".  4  alpha- 
bets. Eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Stem-stitch  border.  At  bottom,  vine  with  flowers 
in  lower  corners.  Mrs.  George  F.  Beaver 

Moody,  Fajuly  Record.  [Cir.  1830.]  15"  x  18".  Eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of 
heavy  green  stem  with  roses,  etc.,  held  at  top  center  by  large,  true  lovers'  knot  with 
small  ones  on  ends.  Across  bottom,  2  paths  in  a  hilly  lawn,  one  leading  to  3  poplars  and 
one  to  3  pines.  In  center,  a  huge  basket  of  flowers.  "Family  Rechord:  Cutting  Moody 
born  November  6,  1780;  Mary  Penny  born  June  10,  1781;  Mary  A.  born  April  20,  1808; 
Moses  V.  born  April  30,  1818   [Married  May  1807].     Faith,  Hope,  Charity." 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Moore,  Fanny.  1826.  New  Town.  10  yrs.  17"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry-vine border.     Verse  173.  Miss  Frances  Moore  Dickinson 

Moore,  Hannah  E.  1822.  "  Easton  School."  28"  x  30".  Stem,  tent,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Floral  border  on  three  sides.  House,  trees,  path,  fence,  birds  and  sheep  on  terraced 
lawn.  Wreath  of  flowers  around  verses,  and  flowers  in  pots  and  detached  sprays  in 
remainder  of  space.     Initials  E.  M.,  D.  M.,  E.  M.,  J.   R.   M.     Verse  387. 

Mrs.  F.  Leonard  Kellogg 

Moore,  Keturah.  1800.  [Mullica  Hill,  Gloucester  County,  N.  J.  12  yrs.]  lOJ"  x  17".  3 
alphabets.  Flat,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-border.  Cross-borders  of  strawberry 
and  carnation,  strawberry  and  rose.  In  each  corner  there  is  a  tulip  spray.  "  Joshua 
Moore    and   Rachel   Moore"    [parents].     Verses   49a,   244.  Elizabeth   G.   Barton 

Moore,  Laltiixda.  1819.  Acworth.  Born  November  22,  1810.  20"  x  20".  4  alphabets.  Eye- 
let, tent,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Saw-tooth  border.  Flower-pots,  hearts,  trees 
with  birds,  etc.     "  Remember  thy  Creator,"  etc.     Verse  314. 

Fitchburg  Antique  Shop,  July  1,  1917 

Moore,  Lydia.  1807.  [Lumberton,  N.  J.]  9  yrs.  14i"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem, 
and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  at  top  and  Greek  fret  on  sides.  At  bottom,  2  pine 
trees,  2  birds,  2  tulips,  2  roses,  also  basket  of  flowers.  Initials  of  brothers  and  sisters: 
"MM,   HM,  LM,  AM,  MM,  S  M,   AM."     Verse  343    (1).  Mrs.   Adelaide  Joyce 

MooHE,  Mary  A.  1828.  7  yrs.  18"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  queen,  and  cross-stitch. 
Carnation  border  at  top  and  bottom.     Verse  37.  Mrs.  Renmick  C.  Hurry 

Morse,  Lucy.  1810.  Boston.  12  yrs.  5  alphabets.  Petit-point,  cat,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  cross-border  and  wreath.  Formal  garden  with  trees  and  peacocks.  "  There's 
no  dependance  upon  a  mind  that  wants  feeling  and  ...  of  nature."  Verse  720 
(var.).  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 


I 


■  ■..•■^ '!  J^ij^., , 


o 


^^1 


2  "S  '^ 


12; 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  199 

MoETON,  Mary.  1809.  9  yrs.  13"  x  17".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border. 
Rose  and  saw-tooth  cross-borders.  Baskets  of  flowers  and  fruit,  sprays  of  flowers,  deer 
and  dogs  in  cross  rows;  a  lion  in  each  lower  corner.     Verse   198. 

Canandaigua  Historical  Society 

Moss,  Margaret.  1825.  [Philadelphia.]  11  yrs.  26"x27i".  Tent,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Elaborate  conventionalized  passion-flower  border.  In  center,  scene  with  brick 
house,  weeping  willows  on  either  side,  and  tops  of  pine  trees  showing  above  roof;  beehive, 
boy  guarding  sheep,  2  girls,  ducks,  dog,  cows,  man,  and  woman.  Above  scene,  American 
Eagle  with  wreath  on  either  side,  inclosing  name  and  age  of  maker  in  one  and  inscrip- 
tion "  Elizabeth  Wiert,  aged  80,  died  1825  "  in  the  other.  Words  "  E  Pluribus  Unum  " 
above  eagle,  and  detached  figures  of  angels  and  stars  in  rest  of  space.  Illustrated  in 
color.  Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 

MowHY,  Alcy.  1825.  Providence.  8"xir'.  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  "Let  Virtue  be  a 
guide  to  thee."  Mrs.  Nicholson 

Muhlenberg,  Susanna.  1790.  Trappe  [Pa.].  11  yrs.  18"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  on  three  sides,  also  fret  border,  and 
a  cross  in  upper  corner.  Verse  139.  Family  record:  "Henry  M.  Muhlenberg  born  1711, 
died  1787;  Ann  Mary  Weifer  born  1727.  Phillip  Hall  B.  1733  and  Catharine  Seckel 
Born  1728;  Henry  Muhlenberg  Born  1753;  Catharine  Hall  Born  1756;  Catharine  Muhlen- 
berg Born  1776;  Susanna  B.  1779;  Henry  Born  1782;  Phillip  B  1784;  Peter  Born 
1786;  Maria  Born  1789;  Elisabeth  Born  1791;  F.  Augustus  B.   1795." 

Mrs.  John  A.  Kress 

MuLFORD,  Emma.  1806.  [Cumberland  County,  N.  J.]  10  yrs.  [Born  in  1796.]  13*"  x  14^". 
3  alphabets.  Flat,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  cross  and  Greek  fret  borders. 
Line  of  flat-stitch  all  around.  At  bottom,  floral  spray,  2  pine  trees,  2  fir  trees,  small 
geometrical  designs.  Initials  of  father  and  mother  and  brothers  and  sisters:  "HM 
[Henry  Mulford] ;  PM  [Phebe  Mulford] ;  HM  [Henry];  CM  [Charles];  EM 
[Edward];  E  M   [Emma];  ISM   [Isaac];  D  M   [record  lost]."     Verse  540. 

William  C.  Mulford,  Esq. 

Mulford,   Phebe.      1803.      Roadstown    [Cumberland   County,    N.   J.].     8   yrs.      Il"xl5".     3 
alphabets.     Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Greek  fret  border.     At  bottom,  apple  tree, 
rose  bush;  in  center,  urn  of  mixed  flowers. 
"  When  Abraham's  servant 

To  procure  a  wife  for  Isaac,  went, 

He  met  Reckah,  Told  his  wish 

Her  parents  gave  Consent 

Then  'twas  for  ten  days  urg'd  the  man 

his  journey  to  delay 

Hinder  me  not  I  must  be " 

Verses  253,  254.  Family  names:  "Isaac  Mulford  [father];  Phebe  Ludlum  [mother]"; 
other  names  and  initials:  "J,  S.  Mulford  L.  H.  Polin,  I.  M.,  S.  M.,  W.  B.,  T.  B.,  G. 
Washington,  John  Adams."  Mrs.  Edgar  Haas 

Mulford,  Tamson.  1803.  Salem  [N.  J.].  13  yrs.  Il"xl3".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Simple  cross-stitch  line-border.  Band  of  trees  and  stars  across  center. 
Verses  255,  488  (var.).  Family  initials:  "F  R  M  [Furman  and  Rhoda  Mulford,  parents] ; 
H  M  [Hannah];  L  M  [Lewis];  I  M  [Isaac];  D  M  [David];  T  M  [Tamson] ;  W  M  [record 
lost];  FM  [Furman];  TM  [Thomas];  FM  [Furman];  RM  [Rhoda];  [brothers  and 
sisters]."     "Remember   now   thy   Creator,"   &c.  Mrs.  Clark  H.  Thompson 


200  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

MtTKsoK,  Grace.  August  14,  1803.  10  yrs.  16"  x  21".  Dark  green  linen.  3  alphabets. 
Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  grapes  and  flowers.  At  bottom,  house,  fence,  trees, 
birds,  butterfly,  man,  and  sailboat  on  small  pond.     Verses  78,  260. 

Mrs.  Douglas  C.  Despard 

MuNsoN,  Susan  H.  1824.  15  yrs.  18"  x  17".  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  A  ship  in  full  sail, 
called  the  "  Potosi." 

"  From  rocks   and  shoals   and  stormy  weather 

O  God  protect  the  Potosi  ever." 
"  A  rainbow   at  night 
Is  sailor's  delight." 

George  8.  McKearin,  Esq. 

MuRDOCK,  Beulah.  1800.  Newton  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  8"  x  12J".  2i  alphabets.  Hemstitch, 
satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross  and  vine  borders.  At  bottom,  flowers  and  vase  with 
rosebud.     Verse   182    (1,   var.).  Mrs.   Edward   F.   Jackson 

MuRDOCK,  Beulah.  1812.  Newton  [Mass.].  24  yrs.  22"x24".  2  alphabets.  Petit-point 
and  cross-stitch.  Borders  of  strawberry  and  conventional  rose,  scroll,  and  Greek  fret 
designs.  Design  of  blue  crescent  with  sun,  moon,  and  planets;  below  is  a  landscape 
[unfinished,  she  evidently  intended  to  make  a  church].     Verse  729. 

Mrs.  Edward  F.  Jackson 

Murphy,  Rhoda.  1803.  Born  October  25,  1787.  16  yrs.  8"  x  11".  2  alphabets.  Queen, 
stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  Greek  fret  borders.  At  bottom^  two  pots  of 
tulips  with  leaves.  Rhoda  Lee 

MxmEAY,  AnDELAmE  M.  1825.  Providence  [R.  I.].  16"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  cat,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.     Verse  515    (var.).  Mrs.    W.   C.  Angell 

Nash,  Nancy  K.  July  18,  1821.  Williamsburgh,  Mass.  11  yrs.  8"  x  17".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.  Simple  border  design.  Basket  of  flowers,  two  ornaments,  dog,  and  water- 
ing-pot.    Verse  162   (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Lorenzo  Sears 

Neal,  Sarah  C.  1826.  Newmarket,  N.  H.  18  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  chain,  eyelet, 
and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  borders.  Three  jardinieres  at  base,  out  of  which  grow 
archaic  rose  vines;  two  birds  also  at  bottom.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Nealon,  Isabella.  1816.  Paradise  Row,  St.  John,  N.  B.  11  yrs.  8"  x  17i".  3  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch  and  other  stitches.  Narrow  cross-borders.  "  Remember  now  thy  Creator 
in  the  days  of  thy  youth.  While  the  evil  days  come  not  nor  the  years  draw  nigh  when 
thou  shalt  say,  '  I  have  no  pleasure  in  them.' "  Anna  W.  Jordan 

Newbold,  Ann.  1810.  13|"  x  18",  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border.  At  bottom,  scene 
with  hous€,  trees,  and  shrubs.     Verse  32. 

Mrs.  George  C.  Eraser,  Formerly  in  the  Drake  Collection 

Newbold,  Ann  T.  1813.  [Springfield  Township,  Burlington  County,  N.  J.]  "Weston 
School."  13  yrs.  [Born  November  17th,  1799.]  9^"  x  9J".  Darning  and  cross-stitch. 
Blocks  done  in  diflferent  stitches.  Mrs.  John  B.  Atkinson 

Newell,  Elmina.  Shirley  Shaker  Community.  14  yrs.  17^"  x  lOJ".  4  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.  Mrs.  William  E.  Barnard 

Newhall,  Mary.  [1815.]  12  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Solid  stem,  satin,  French  knot,  long  and 
short,  and  cross-stitch.  Roses,  other  flowers  and  leaves,  and  bleeding  hearts  in  border. 
Family  register:  "Mr.  David  Newhall  born  May  13,  1757;  married  Miss  Elizabeth 
Goss  Sept.  1,  1779;  Died  Sept.  19,  1807.     Childrens'  names:  Elizabeth  born  May  23,  1780; 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  201 

died  June  17,  1814;  Thomas  Goss  born  May  15,  1782;  Frances  born  Feb.  13,  1784; 
Gustavus  born  April  11,  1786;  Nancy  born  March  27,  1789;  Abigail  born  May  10,  1791; 
David  born  Feb.  22,  1795;  Susan  born  March  2,  1797;  Samuel  Coats,  born  Sept.  23,  1799. 
Mr.  David  Newhall  married  Miss  Mary  Holman  Sept.  19,  1802;  died  Sept  11,  1815. 
Mary  born  Oct.  18,  1803."  Mrs.  George  B.  Walton 

Newman,  Mahy  Hale.  1820.  Newbury  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  8J"xlOJ".  3  alphabets.  Flat,  cat, 
chain,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.     Hemstitched   edge.  Etta   T.  Lovett 

Newman,  Phebe.  1815.  Newbury  [Mass.  Born  April  9,  1804.].  11  yrs.  12"  x  17".  5  alpha- 
bets. Eyelet,  satin,  chain,  flat,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Trees,  vase 
of  flowers,  and  other  ornamental  designs.    Verse  449.  Edith  D.  Newman 

Newman,  Sarah.  1806.  9  yrs.  Born  November  2,  1797.  lOJ"  x  15^".  3  alphabets.  Chain, 
stem,  tent,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Flowers  with  true  lovers'  knot 
at  bottom.     Verse  538  (var.).  Miss  Abby  Newman 

Newton,  Sophia.     1807.     Woodbridge.     12  yrs.     10"  x  15".    3  alphabets.     Verse  278. 

Annie  B.  Law 

NicHOLL,  Lucy  E.  1826.  Salem  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  16^"xl6|".  Chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Elaborate  cross-borders;  around  edge,  solid  chain  and  cross-stitch;  inside,  two 
rows  of  detached  8-pointed  stars  and  a  Greek  fret  border.  Two  plants.  "  Sincerity  and 
truth  form  the  basis   of   everything."     Verse   94    (var.).  A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

Nichols,  Eliza  Arnold.  1829.  [Providence,  R.  I.]  12  yrs.  17"  x  15^".  3  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.     House  and  trees  in  lower  section.     Verse  332.  A.  W.  Claflin,  Esq. 

Nichols,  Lydia.  1802.  Salem  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  1  mo.  22  dys.  18"x20i".  3  alphabets. 
Stem,  cross-stitch,  and  long,  loose  stitches.  Rose  border.  Vase  with  flowers  on  green 
base.    Design  like  a  pineapple  in  each  lower  corner.     Verse  40  (var.). 

Mrs.  W.  H.  Varney 

Nicholson,  Rebecca.  1801.  14  yrs.  14"  x  28".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Carnation  border 
with  two  designs  at  top;  carnations  growing  in  pots.  At  bottom,  2  trees,  bowl  of 
flowers,  spray  of  rosebuds,  strawberries  and  plant.  Upper  center,  2  doves  in  circlet  with 
names  under  them,  "  Abel  and  Mary  Nichoson."  Verses  132  (1,  var.),  143,  226  (var.),  617. 
Names  and  dates: 

"  Rebecca  Nicholson  was  Born  the  18th  of  12  month  1787 
Isaac  Nicholson  was  born  the  18th  of  2  month  1790 
Samuel  Nicholson  was  Born  the  18th  of  4  month  1793 
Abel  Nicholson  was  Born  the  11th  of  10  month  1795 
Joseph  Nicholson  was  Born  the  18th  of  5  month  1798 
Mary   Nicholson  was   born  the    15th  of   12   month   1801 " 

Miss  Sarah  Rebecca  Nicholson 

Nightingale,  Susan  Elizabeth.     1820.     11  yrs.     5i"x8".     3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Charles  H.  Warren,  Esq. 

Noble,  Mary.  1808.  South  Berwick  [Me.].  11  yrs.  23|"  x22".  2  alphabets.  Stem-stitch. 
Modified  Greek  fret  border.  Rose  bushes,  a  memorial  urn  and  weeping  willow,  under 
which  is  inscription,  "  An  affectionate  child  pays  this  tribute  of  respect  to  the  memory 
of  her  father  who  died  19th  June  1808.     Aet  48."     Verse  542.  Mrs.  Ellen  Rollins 

NoRRis,  Elinor.  [Early  19th  Century.]  Born  March  20th,  1789.  8"  x  15".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-borders.  William  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 


202  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Norwood,  Haeeiet  G.  1822.  Camden  [Me.].  11  yrs.  Ili"xl8i".  4  alphabets.  Hemstitch, 
eyelet,  stem,  queen,  tent,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  border.  House  in  lower 
center,  with  trees,  pots  of  flowers,  and  tulip  plants  on  either  side. 

Mrs.  Nathan  Atherton  Middleton 

NouRSE,  Abigail.  Before  1830.  6"  x  6".  3  alphabets.  Petit-point  and  cross-stitch.  Elab- 
orate hemstitched  border.  Cross-borders.  "  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance  and 
with  the  first  fruit  of  all  thine  increase."  A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

Oakes,  Sarah  B.  1826.  [Probably  Cohasset,  Mass.]  7  yrs.  12"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Two  willows  drooping  over  monuments, 
separated  by  a  rose  and  leaves  with  love  knot  above.  "  Josiah  Oakes  Born  Aug.  20,  1789; 
Mary  C.  Oakes  born  Jan.  6,  1798;  Their  daughter,  Sarah  B.  Oakes  Born  Aug.  18,  1819." 
Verses  62,  782.  Heirs  of  E.  S.  Remington 

Oakley,  Eliza.  1803.  White  Plains  [N.  Y.].  14  yrs.  [Born  December  5,  1789.]  17"  x  18". 
2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  flowers,  leaves,  apples,  and 
birds.     Apple  tree  and  vases.     Verse  27.  Robert  H.  Oakley,  Esq. 

O'Brien,  Cynthia.  1807.  12^"  x  19^".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  tent,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch. 
Vine  and  floral  border.  "  Lean  not  on  earth,  twill  pierce  the  to  the  heart.  A  broken 
reed  at  best  but  oftn  spear.     On  its  sharp  point,  peace  bleeds  and  hope  expires." 

Mrs.  George  E.  Claplin 

O'Brien,  Julia.  1812.  Washington  City.  20"x20".  Cross-stitch.  Border  of  convention- 
alized tulips  and  roses.  At  bottom,  large  brick  house  with  garden,  trees,  woman,  duck, 
etc.     Verse  435.  A.  Piatt  Andrew,  Esq. 

Odiorne,  Sarah  Catherine  Moffatt.  1802.  Portsmouth,  N.  H.  12  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  petit-point,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Simple  cross-stitch  border  in  waving  design  and 
dots.  In  upper  half,  2  vine  wreaths  inclosing  verses,  with  flower  sprays  under  verses 
and  birds  perched  on  twig  at  top;  the  Ten  Commandments  in  between.  In  lower  half, 
funeral  urn  on  pedestal  in  center,  with  initials  "  S  C  M  " ;  and  imderneath,  "  In  memory 
of  Mrs.  Sarah  Catherine  Moftatt  Obiit.  December  (?)  1802  A  E  (.»  ?)."  On  either  sides 
wreaths  of  leaves,  with  flower  on  mound  at  bottom.  In  one  is  the  name  and  date  of 
maker,  also  the  inscription,  "Worked  at  Miss  Ward's  School  New  Hampshire;  Fear  God 
Honor  your  Parents."  In  the  other  is  a  verse.  Above  urn  is  a  short  band  of  loops  and 
tassels.     Verses  190,  397,  647.     Illustrated.  Mrs.  John  Fremont  Hill 

Odiorne,  Ellen  Maria.  1822.  9  yrs.  16i"x21".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Elaborate  grapevine  border  on  three  sides.  Large  basket  of  flowers  in  center 
at  bottom,  with  two  trees  on  either  side  topped  by  birds.     Verse  770. 

Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 

OFay,  Eij^A.     1818.     11  yrs.     Ui"x8".     3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Strawberry  border. 

W.  G.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Ogden,  Elizabeth.  1810.  Swedesboro  [N.  J.].  9  yrs.  16J"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.  Vine  border  with  trees  and  other  designs.  In  center  an  eight-sided  design 
with  two  birds.    Initials:  "  S  O,  M  A  O,  J  T,  E  T,  J  O,  S  O,  D  O,  S  O,  E  O,  J  O,  M  O." 

Miss  Sibyl  T.  Jones 

Ogden,  Laura  E.  [Cir.  1828.  New  Germantown,  N.  J.,  at  "  Barnet  Hall."]  16"  x  18".  3 
alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  strawberry  border.  Grape- 
vine cross-border.    Verse  515  (var.).  Laura  Ogden  Ross 


X 

IM 

•JC 

a 

"-» 

n 

as 

< 

X 

X 

'a: 

.•? 

^^ 

O 

-*<* 

L^ 

X 

^ 

•^ 

^ 

--' 

^— 

,'-' 

hJ 

^ 

K^ 

d, 

^ 

«; 

^ 

^ 

'Z 

— 

;^ 

<» 

< 

^ 

N 

^. 

AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


203 


Oliver,  Sally.  1801.  14  yrs.  21^"  x  22|".  2  alphabets.  French  knot,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Satin-stitch  border  in  saw-tooth  design.  Border  at  bottom  of  trees,  vine,  tulips, 
carnations,  fruit,  and  other  flowers.  Also  at  bottom,  trees  with  fruit  on  lower  branches, 
rose  tree  in  center;  on  one  side  a  man,  dove,  and  two  lambs;  on  the  other  side  a  woman 
with  bouquet  of  roses,  and  behind  her  a  bough  of  colored  leaves.  "  Establish  unto 
Thyself  Principles  and  See  that  Thou  Ever  Act  According  to  Them." 

Mrs.  John  Walker 
Olmstead,  Anjinette.     [Cir.  1819.     Bridgewater,  Conn.]       Born  June   13,  1809.     6"  x  6".     2 
alphabets.  Mrs.  J.  Herbert  Redding 

Orcutt,  Adeline.     [Cir.  1820.]     13  yrs.     Born  in  1807.     20"x24".     Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.     Scroll   border   with   long   satin-stitch   leaves.      Willow   trees,   tablet,   and   woman 
weeping.     "  Record  of  Jonathan  Orcutt  family.     He  was  born  Oct.  2,  1769  and  married 
May  Humphrey  1783.     She  was  born  Nov.  14,  1766  and  they  hath  the  following  children: 
Names  Births  Deaths 

"Rebecca  Feb.  the  15,  1783 

Sophia  June  the  20,  1786 

Mary  May  the  4,  1789 

George  March  9,  1791  June  6 

Silvia  Oct.  the  24,  1793 

David  Sept.  the  19,  1796 

Silence  May  11,  1802" 

"  Mrs.  Orcutt  died  June  20,  1805.     Death  where  is  thy  sting  o  grav." 
"Capt  Orcot  Miss  Alice  Graves  Married  Oct  1806." 


"  Adeline 
Abner  G. 
Alice  A. 
Azuba 
Abner  G. 
Jonathan 

OsBORN,  Sophia  B.     1829. 
berrv    border.      Two 


AprU  13,  1813 


July  6,  1807 
Feb.  20,  1808 
April  8,  1809 
Dec.  9,  1811 
March  5,  1815 
Dec.  26,  1816." 

Fitchburg  Antique  Shop,  July  1,  1917 
Ware  [Mass.].     10  yrs.     16"  x  16".     Satin  and  cross-stitch.     Straw- 
baskets    of    flowers    with    weeping   willow    tree. 
"Family  Register 


Names 
John  Osborn,  Jr. 
Eunice  Bemis 
John  H.  Osborn 
Eliza   B.   Osborn 
Thomas  D.  Osborn 
Sophia  B.  Osborn 
James  Osborn 
David  W.  Osborn 
George  C.  Osborn 


Births 
Sept.  29,  1783 
April  23,  1790 

Sept.  11,  1809 
Sept.  27,  1811 
Sept.  8,  1816 
Nov.  7,  1819 
July  31,  1822 
Sept.  24,  1828 
Sept.  28,  1830" 


Marriages 
May  9,  1808 


Deaths 


Jan.  16,  1813 


Osgood,  Charlotte.     1817. 
chain,  and  cross-stitch 


Oraydon  Stetson,  Esq. 
Newburyport  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  15"  x  16".  5  alphabets.  Flat, 
Verse  601  (1,  2).  Family  record:  "  Alfred  Osgood  Born  March  7, 
1773;  Mary  Osgood  Born  April  4,  1778;  Nathaniel  Osgood  Born  April  23,  1801;  John 
Osgood  Born  Sept.  1,  1803;  Charlotte  Osgood  Born  Jan.  30,  1806;  Alfred  Osgood  Born 
June  1,  1809;  William  H.  Osgood  Born  Sept.  5,  1811;  Mary  Ann  Osgood  Born  Dec.  14, 
1814."  Mrs.  H.  Anthony  Dyer 


204  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Osgood,  Lydia.  1823.  12  yrs.  Born  December  12,  1811.  9"x8|".  4  alphabets.  Chain- 
stitch.  Greek  border  at  top,  strawberry  at  bottom.  2  hearts,  panel  and  strawberry 
pattern  alternating.  W.  O.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Owen,  Ada.    1809.    9^"  x  8".    2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.    Verse  377.        Mrs.  Daniel  Beckmith 
[Oxrr],   Nancy.      1814.     25"x21^".     Eyelet   and   cross-stitch.     Strawberry   border.     Verses 
10  (1),  40,  556.  Mrs.  Arthur  Barker 

Paix,  Laura.  1826.  16^"  x  8".  8  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  House  and  tree  at  bottom. 
Verses  125,  692.  A.  Stainforth,  Dealer 

Palmer,  Elizabeth  C.  [1820-25.]  Boston  [Mass.  9  to  12  yrs.].  8"x8".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.     Simple   border.     Stars   in  corners. 

Mrs.  William  B.  Stevens  and  Miss  Mary  Foster  Light 

Palmer,  Susan  M.  1826.  Boston  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  18"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Grapevine  border.  At  bottom,  house,  trees,  and  grass.  On 
each  side,  flower-pots  with  flowering  plants,  and  wild  rose  design  in  between.  Verse 
515  (var.).        Miss  Martha  A.  Palmer,  Mrs.  William  B.  Stevens,  Miss  Mary  Poster  Light 

Parker,  Ann.  1815.  7  yrs.  16"  x  8|".  5  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Double  line  of  cross- 
stitch  all  around.     Small  detached  design.  Anne  Parker  Appleton 

Parker,  Catharine.  [1826.]  9  yrs.  Il"xl3".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched 
edge.    Verse  601  (1,  2,  3).  Anne  Parker  Appleton 

Parker,  Eliza  E[leanor].  1818.  [Lexington,  Mass.]  16J"  x  19J".  Satin,  stem,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Wreath  of  vine  and  flowers  around  edge.  Large  tree  in  center,  with  fruit 
inscribed  with  names  and  dates.  At  base  of  tree,  two  hearts  with  the  inscriptions: 
"  Robert  Parker  born  April  15,  1771  "  and  "  Elizabeth  Simonds  born  July  4,  1772."  Under- 
neath, "Married  Oct.  25,  1793."  Apples  bear  names  of  children:  "Mary  born  Dec. 
25,  1794;  Josiah  born  July  6,  1798;  Thomas  born  March  16,  1800;  Eliza  E.  born 
Sept.  20,  1804;  Almira  born  Aug.  30,  1806;  Jonathan  S.  born  Aug.  8,  1808;  Jonathan 
S.  born  July  30,  1812;  William  B.  born  Jan.  13,  1817."  The  Misses  Bobbins 

Parker,  Elizabeth  T.  1819.  8  yrs.  16"  x  8^".  5  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Simple-line 
border.     "  Life  is  but  a  dream."  Anne  Parker  Appleton 

Parker,  Harriot.  1808.  [Pepperell,  Mass.]  10  yrs.  22"  x  26".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin, 
stem,  chain,  cat-stitch,  and  petit-point.  Clover  vine  and  Greek  fret.  Three-story  house 
with  Captain's  walk,  fence,  gate,  weeping  willow,  and  many  birds.  Verse  601  (1,  2,  3, 
var.).  Miss  Harriet  E.  Freeman 

Parker,  Marie  Antoinette.  9  yrs.  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  and  nar- 
row floral  border.    Verse  129  (var.). 

Parker,  Mary  Morse.  1826.  Keene  [N.  H.].  9  yrs.  17^"  x  12^".  3  alphabets.  Cat,  satin, 
cross,  and  hem-stitch.  Strawberry  border;  trefoil  and  conventional  cross-borders.  In 
center  of  lower  half,  a  standard  basket  of  fruit  flanked  by  trees,  an  evergreen  and  a 
flowering  fruit  tree.  Below  basket,  an  oblong  space  containing  name  and  date,  and 
guarded  on  each  side  by  small  black  dog  with  yellow  collar.  Mrs.  George  Sheffield 

Parker,  Polly.  1802.  Bradford  [Mass.  15  yrs.].  22^"xl7J".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Garland  of  flowers  around  upper  section,  tied  at  top  corners  and  in 
center  at  bottom  with  bowknots.  In  center  at  top,  drapery  with  fringe  and  tassels,  on 
which  is  inscribed  name,  date,  etc.  In  lower  part  of  sampler  is  pastoral  scene,  with 
lovers  in  one  corner  sitting  under  tree  and  playing  on  instruments;  sheep  and  dogs 
are  wandering  around  in  front  of  them.     Verse  601   (1,  2,  3,  var.). 

Mrs.  Alice  C.  Savary  and  Miss  Elizabeth  Parker 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  205 

Partridge,  Catherine.  1813.  Boston  [Mass.].  8  jrs.  12"  x  18".  Cross-siitch.  Straw- 
berry border.  Basket  of  flowers  and  two  peacocks  at  bottom.  Verse  — .  [Not  on 
description.]  Dr.  James  C.  White 

Parvix,  Lydia.  1809.  Deerfield  [X.  J.].  9  yrs.  Gi"x8.\".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet,  outline, 
and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border.  Initials:  "J.  P.  [Jerry  Parvin,  father]; 
S.  P.  [Sarah  Parvin,  mother];  [Children],  L.  P.  [Lydia];  J.  P.  [Jerry];  A.  R.  P.  [Anna 
R.];  H.  P.  [Harriet]."  Anria  M.  Jaquette 

Patterson,  Sarah  Ann  Ewalt.  1819.  "Pittsburg."  [13  yi'S.]  18"  x  17".  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  House,  trees,  fence,  birds  on  trees,  and  cat  on  fence. 
Upper  verse  flanked  by  basket  of  fruit  and  bushes  in  flower;  lower  verse  flanked  by 
jar  of  flowers  and  basket  of  flowers.    Verses  226  (var.),  .511  (1,  var.).  Elzeria  Allen 

Patne,  Sarah  Ann.  1825.  14  yrs.  20"  x  20".  3  alphabets.  Cross  and  queen-stitch.  Rib- 
bon border.  Verse  surrounded  by  flowers.  Basket  of  flowers  with  parrots  on  either 
side;  growing  flowers  and  bowknots.     Verse  56.5.         National  Museum,  Washington,  D.  C. 

pAYSON,  Abigail  Welsh.  1808.  Chelsea.  8  yrs.  6i"x8".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek 
fret  border  across  top.     Verse  30.  Mrs.  N.  A.  Prentiss 

Peabody,  Luceetia.  [1810?]  10  yrs.  13"  x  16".  5  alphabets.  Tapestry,  petit-point,  eyelet, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Solid  tapestry  all  around.  Cross-borders.  At  bottom,  urn 
of  flowers  flanked  by  two  baskets  of  fruit.     "  Just  as  the  twig  is  bent  the  tree  inclined." 

Mrs.  William.  S.  Eaton 

Peabody,  Mary.  1800.  Ipswich.  Il"x20".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Greek 
fret   border.  Mrs.   H.    C.   Lazelle 

Peabody,  Roxcena.  1808.  Bradford  [Mass.].  "Bradford  Academy."  Born  March  6,  1793. 
17"x22".  4  alphabets.  Stem-stitch.  Outside  border  of  triangular  design;  inside  border, 
vine  with  bunches  of  flowers.    Verse  worn  away. 

The  Misses  Eleanor  and  Grace  Kimball 

Pearce,  Susanna  Stevens.  [Cir.  1804.  Born  about  1793.]  11^"  x  12".  4  alphabets.  Tent 
and  cross-stitch.     Vine  border.     Verse  265.  Mrs.  D.  P.  Penhallow 

Pearse,  Hannah  S.  April  15,  1814.  10  yrs.  12J"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Double 
strawberry  border.     At  bottom,  tree,  birds,  and  flower-pots.     Verse  515. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Pearse,  Mary.  July  22,  1810.  Portsmouth.  8  yrs.  8A"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross- 
stitch.  At  bottom,  basket  of  strawberries,  and  four  strawberries  growing  on  mounds. 
Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Pearse,  Mary.  1812.  Portsmouth.  11  yrs.  8i"x8i".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  At  bot- 
tom, birds,  baskets,  and  strawberries  in  pots.    Verse  731.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Pearson,  Abigail.  1802.  10  yrs.  7|"  x  9|".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Conventional  rose 
or  strawberry-vine  border.  Mrs.  George  C.  Eraser 

Pearson,  Eunice.  1813.  [Newburyport,  Mass.]  "Born  January  23,  1801,  AE  12  yrs." 
9i"  X 12J".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  "  Let  virtue  be  your 
guide."  Ruth  M.  B.  Macintosh 

Pearson,  Lydia.  1802.  Born  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  June  24,  1791.  11  yrs.  12"  x  16^". 
3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Clover  border.  At  bottom,  vase  with  flowers. 
Verse  601   (1,  2,  var.).  Mrs.  George  F.  Poor 


206  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Pease,  Emily.  1806.  SuflSield  [Conn.].  10  yrs.  ll"xl7A".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.    Eyelet  border.    Verse  696.  Mrs.  E.  A.  Fuller 

Peck,  Amanda  M.     1828.    10  yrs.    8"  x  17".    3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  E.  A.  Gary 

Peck,  Harriet.     1825.     Coventry.     11  yrs.     12"  x  8".     2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Verse  779. 

Mrs.   Willis  H.  White 

[Peck],  Lydia.  1807.  15"  x  lOf ".  3  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  [Verses  too  indis- 
tinct to  read.]  Mrs.  Ralph  V.  Hadley 

Peck,  Lydia  Wickes.  1822.  Coventry.  11  yrs.  12"  x  8".  2  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross- 
stitch.     Verse  91.  Mrs.  Willis  H.  White 

Peck,  Martha  E.  1819.  11  yrs.  4  partial  alphabets.  Petit-point,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Elaborate  rose  border.    Design  is  Town  of  Ipswich,  Mass.     Verse  144  (1). 

The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Peck,  Mary  Ank.  1825.  Coventry.  10  yrs.  12"  x  8".  2  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch. 
Verse  171.  Mrs.  Willis  H.  White 

Peckham,  Esther.  1806.  10  yrs.  12"  x  17".  Tent,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
and  rose-vine  border.  At  bottom,  strawberry  and  rose  design  in  tent-stitch.  Verse  273. 
Names  and  dates:  "Augustus  Peckham  born  January  1,  1761;  Esther  Peckham  born 
March  21,  1762;  married  June  the  10  1792.  Their  issues  is  as  followeth:  James  Hervey 
Peckham  born  May  22,  1793;  Esther  Peckham  born  May  6,  1796;  Sarah  Peckham  born 
March  12,  1797;  Augustus  Peckham  born  October  28,  1798;  George  Peckham  born 
November  8,   1800."  Antoinette  8.  Peckham 

Peihce,  Hankah.     1814.     Somerset.     13  yrs.     8"  x  16".     3  alphabets.     Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Stephen  O.  Metcalf 

Peirce,  Rebecca  B.  1813.  Philadelphia,  Pa.  17"x21".  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate 
floral  border  of  roses,  carnations,  lilies,  and  leaves.  At  bottom,  corjiucopia  and  floral 
designs.     Verse  85.  Emily  Haines 

Penniman,  Mary  Olive.  [1813.  Machias,  Me.]  10  yrs.  15J"xl6i".  3  alphabets.  Tent, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Vine  and  flower  border.    Verse  735.      Owned  in  Machias,  Me. 

Perkins,  Nancy  S.  1821.  14  yrs.  16"  x  17".  Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border. 
Landscape  in  center.     Verse  766.  Mrs.  Philip  B.  Sumner 

Perkins,  Nancy  S.  1821.  14  yrs.  17"  x  18".  Satin,  stem,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose 
border.  Square  in  center  of  sampler  containing  scene  with  shepherdess  tending  flock 
of  sheep.     Verse  766.  Mrs.  Edith  M.  Noble 

Perkins,    Sarah.      1808.      South    Kingston.      14   yrs.      9"  x  12".      3    alphabets.      Cross-stitch. 

Emily  J.  Anthony 

Perry,  Alice  H.  1807.  "Nantucket"  [Mass.].  "Born  Novr  the  28,  in  1797."  15"xl9". 
Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  floral  border.  Carnation  cross-border.  Floral  design 
in  center,  with  birds  and  trees.     Verse  345  (1,  var.). 

William  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

Perry,  Ann  Catherine.  [Cir.  1800.]  8  yrs.  13"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Vine  border  with  flowers.  Ornamental  cross-borders.  Border  of  flowers  around 
verse.    Lower  section,  pastoral  scene  with  trees,  gate,  lambs,  and  shepherds.    Verse  594. 

William  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 


S  :^  ^ 
.  s 


.      c      ^ 

^  V  ~^ 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  207 

Perry,  Jerusiia,  Mary,  and  Sarah.  Before  1830.  Miss  Pierce's  School  in  Litchfield,  Conn. 
19"  X  19".  Long-stitch  and  French  knots.  Oak  leaves  and  acorns  in  border.  At  bot- 
tom, 3  girls  with  man  and  woman  standing  by  tombstone;  hands  and  faces  painted; 
big  urn  on  top  of  stone.  In  background,  weeping  willow  tree,  house,  stream,  waterfall, 
grass,  and  sky  (painted  in).  Inscription  on  stone:  "In  memory  of  Florilla  daughter  of 
the  Rev.  David  and  Mrs.  Jerusha  Perry,  who  died  May  28th  1807  aged  16  years. 
Although  dead  she  still  forcibly  yet  silently  repeats  her  dying  admonition  '  Prepare 
for  Death.' "  Mrs.  Lewis  S.  Rice 

Perry,  Syrena.  1811.  Putney  [Vt.].  12  yrs.  12i"  x  15^".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Cross-border.  At  bottom,  conventionalized  tree,  houses,  bowls  of  flowers,  and  smaller 
trees.    Verse  490  (var.).  Mrs.  Edgar  M.  Morsman,  Jr. 

Peters,  Hannah.  1818.  Marlborough  [Mass.].  "Under  the  care  of  L.  Brigham."  14  yrs. 
Born  April  25,  1804.  4  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Broad  vine  and  flower 
border  on  three  sides;  three  baskets  filled  with  flowers  across  base.     Verse  56. 

Mrs.  Charles  J.  White 

Petehsox,  Elizabeth.  1824.  [Millville  and  Port  Elizabeth,  Cumberland  County,  N.  J.] 
11  yrs.  16|"x21f".  5  alphabets.  Chain,  outline,  petit-point,  flat,  stem,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Rosebud  and  carnation  border.  At  bottom,  house,  birds,  pheasant,  peacocks, 
flowers,  and  vase.  "  Make  good  use  of  your  time  for  this  life  will  not  be  long.  The 
Lord  is  good  and  Kind  to  us  and  we  must  pray  to  him  for  help."  Verse  594  (1,  var.). 
Names  and  dates:  [father  and  mother]  "  Hollingshead  Peterson  was  born  September  the 
24,  1789;  Elcey  Peterson  was  born  January  the  29,  1795;  [children]  Elizabeth  Peterson 
was  born  December  the  14,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1813;  Aaron  Peterson  was  born 
January  the  31,  1816;  Mary  Peterson  was  born  May  the  31,  1818;  William  Peterson  was 
born  November  the  25,  1820;  Hollinshead  Peterson  was  born  July  the  6,  1824." 

Mrs.  John  H.  Ballinger 

Peterson,  Rebecca.  1813.  "  Haines  Neck  School."  [Born  in  1798.]  10"  x  17".  4  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Triangles  in  solid  cross-stitch  in  lower  corners.  Cross- 
border.  At  bottom,  2  urns  of  flowers,  rose  in  center  with  small  rose  on  either  side. 
Space  left  unfinished.  Miss  Rebecca  Webber  Austin 

Petit,  Rachel.  1813.  9  yrs.  22|"  x  18^".  Carnation,  strawberry,  and  rose  border.  Basket 
of  fruit  at  top  corners;  strawberries  in  lower  corners;  flower  in  pot  at  sides.  Six  trees 
at  bottom.  Verse  299.  Initials  in  circles,  doves  facing  them,  and  words  "  Emblem  of 
love  1813,"  "  W  P,  S  P  "  and  "MS,  S  P."  Mrs.  Warren  W.  Flitcraft 

Pettengell,  Charlotte.  [Cir.  1820.]  Newburyport  [Mass.].  91"  x9?/'.  5  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Rose  border  at  top,  vine  at  bottom.  Mrs.  John  Wheeler 

Pettingill,  Olive.  1828.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  17i"xl7".  3  alphabets.  Cross 
and  satin-stitch.  Saw-tooth  design  in  border.  Two  bunches  of  roses.  Verse  572. 
"Family  Record:  Cuttin  Pettingill  and  Olive  Smith  were  united  September  1808.  Cuttin 
Pettingill  born  July  4,  1809;  died  December  7,  1810,  Age  17  months;  Cutting  Pettingill 
Jr.  born  July  16,  1812;  Olive  Pettingill  born  Nov.  14,  1815;  Moses  Pettingill  born 
Oct.  14,  1818;  Lydia  S.  Pettingill  born  Nov.  9,  1821;  Lucy  S.  Pettingill  born  July  5,  1823." 

Mrs.  E.  C.  Pearson 

Peyton,  Mary  Dent.  1822.  12"  x  15".  Partial  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border,  top  and  bottom;  side  border  in  scroll  design.  At  bottom,  lawn  with  7  large 
and  10  small  fir  trees  in  distance.    Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Kensey  John  Hammond 


208  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Phetteplace  Family.  [About  1818.]  17"xl7".  Cross-stitch.  "We  feel  to  lament  yet  we 
will  silence  every  murmur  that  our  first  born  brother  before  he  was  three  years  of 
age  fell  asleep  in  the  arms  of  death,  also  our  much  beloved  brother  Riley  while  in  his 
25th  year  of  age  to  our  great  distress  he  fell  in  her  cold  icy  arms.  It  has  so  pleased  our 
Savior  to  call  for  these  in  the  bloom  of  life  we  would  wish  not  to  recall  thee  thoughg 
(sic)."  "Record  of  the  children  of  Eber  and  Waite  Phetteplace.  The  former  was  born 
176.5;  the  latter  1775.  Dexter  Phetteplace  was  born  .  .  .  .  ;  Clarke  Phetteplace  was 
born  .  .  .  .  ;  Amy  Phetteplace  was  born  Nov.  the  18  ....  ;  Celia  Phetteplace  was 
born  Jan ;  Riley  Phetteplace  was  born  April  18th  .  .  .  .  ;  Miranda  Phette- 
place was  born  June  8th  1811;  Dexter  S.  Phetteplace  was  born  April  28,  18 — ;  .... 
A.  Phetteplace  was  born  April  30,  18—."  Mrs.  P.  R.  Kendall 

Phuxips,  Amt  Anx.  1811.  Waterford  [Va.].  12  yrs.  18"x24".  1  alphabet.  Chain  and 
cross-stitch.  In  border,  cross-stitch  forming  running  monogram  A.  P.  Vase  with  flowers, 
strawberry  design,  and  a  drooping  fuchsia.  T.  P.  [Thomas  Phillips,  father] ;  S.  P.  [Sarah 
Phillips,  mother].  Names  of  two  teachers  Amelia  Hough  and  Mary  Lawrence.  Verse 
413  (var.).  Miss  Amy  P.  Miller 

Phillips,  Electe.  September  1st,  1803.  Bridgewater  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  Born  February, 
1793.  12"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  of  rosebuds  and  leaves, 
starting  from  a  basket  at  the  top  and  falling  down  two  sides.  Two  robin  redbreasts  on 
a  large  bough  of  a  small  tree  looking  at  each  other.    Verse  606  (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Phillips,  Harriet  Jane.  1817.  Portland  [Me.].  9  yrs.  17i"xl6i".  3  alphabets.  Rose 
border.     House  with  tall  trees.     Verse  752.  Fanny  L.  Emerson 

Phipps,  Sally.  [1813.]  10  yrs.  [Born  in  Framingham,  Mass.,  November  25,  1803.] 
12i"  X  12i".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Hemmed  all  around.  Greek  design 
in  border.     Elaborate  scroll  design  around  verse.    Verse  739.  Mrs.  Harrison  F.  Hunt 

Pickering,  Eliza  C.  1815.  9  yrs.  13"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Pillars 
with  arched  top  rising  out  of  vases,  flowers  along  the  side.  C.  E.  Goodspeed,  Esq. 

Picket,  Eliza.  1823.  Baltimore  [Md.].  9  yrs.  24"  x  17".  6  alphabets.  Eyelet,  tent,  and 
cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  and  rose  and  vine  borders.  Sprays  of  flowers  and  leaves,  rose 
spray.     Verse  36.  Miss  Lida  Bartlett 

Picket,  Eliza.  1825.  Baltimore,  Md.  11  yrs.  21"  x  18".  Chain,  stem,  tent,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Border  of  acorns  and  oak  leaves.  Large  brick  house,  fences,  and  flowering  trees. 
Illustrated.  Miss  Lida  Bartlett 

PiDGEON,  Hannah  Sophia.  1813.  [Born  at  Chews  Landing,  N.  J.,  May  11,  1803.  Lived  at 
5th  St.,  below  Washington  Ave.,  Philadelphia,  where  Wharton  School  now  stands.]  10  yrs. 
17i"  X  17i".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border.  In  center,  three-story  brick  house 
showing  front  and  back  doors;  on  lawn  below,  a  lady,  an  armchair,  2  dogs,  3  lambs,  6 
bees,  birds  on  trees,  chicken,  etc.  Other  designs  are  urns,  baskets  of  flowers,  and  border 
around  name.  Mrs.  Edward  Ogg 

Pierce,  Mary.  1824.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  13"  x  8".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Double  cross-stitch  border.  At  bottom,  large  basket  of  flowers  in  center,  with  two 
smaller  baskets  and  two  bushes  in  bloom;  also  grass  and  flowers.  Five  rows  of  em- 
broidery. Old  Newbury  Historical  Society 

Pierce,  Silvia.  [Cir.  1809.]  23"x29".  Satin,  stem,  cross,  and  many  other  stitches.  Large 
tomb  with  funeral  vase  on   top   bearing  verse,  willows   drooping  over  it  and  woman  in 


rP 


••',> 
^ 


3  boieirh.JkliTiv.i-i '-"^i  rStvvwxy 
I  .::M^^7S7j[Q. AuS  /  J8X8 


Aiaa  «Le  fcriKlt  cla.y 

fi,AK    hKiilt  our  !bo<XV  fir  it 

A(">c(  ev-ri-/  iT"Ov.!i,  dCiJ  eve  I 

'>  ii&y 

Tis  ri'iovl-j(trit>?  back  to    d'Jot 

PLATE  LXVIII 

Sophia  Stevexs  Ssiith's  Sabipler.     1818 

View  of  North  Branford,  Conn. 

Oximed  by  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  209 

black  leaning  on  it;  child  in  white  at  her  side  wrapped  in  black,  shroudlike  drapery. 
On  another  tombstone,  with  pillars  on  either  side,  is  the  inscription,  "  Sacred  to  the 
memory  of  Mr.  Thomas  Tingley  who  died  Jan.  9,  1809  in  the  77  year  of  his  age  and  Mrs. 
Martha  Tingley,  his  wife,  who  died  Nov.  22,  1805  in  the  74  year  of  her  age."  On  a 
smaller  tomb  is  the  inscription,  "  Inscribed  to  the  remains  of  Miss  Ruth  Tingley,  daughter 
of  Mr.  Thomas  Tingley,  who  died  Nov.  30,  1803  in  the  39  year  of  her  age."     Verse  283. 

Mrs.  Otis  Tinffley 

Pike,  Eleaxoe  S.  1826.  Salisbury  [R.  I.].  Born  August  22,  1816.  17"  x  17".  3  alphabets. 
Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Roses  and  leaves  in  border  and  Grecian  work  inside  the  border. 
At  bottom,  "  The  Homestead,"  house,  wharf,  trees,  bushes,  and  small  flowers.  Seven 
rows  of  cross-stitch  in  different  designs.  Verse  174.  On  either  side  of  verse  is  a  vase 
filled  with  a  mixed  bouquet.  Mrs.  John  C.  Bolfe 

Pike,  Ruth.  [1809.  North  Providence,  R.  I.]  13  yrs.  8"  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  cross, 
queen,  and  three  openwork  stitches.  Simple  cross-stitch  border.  At  bottom,  three  trees. 
Seven  different  cross-lines.  Miss  Elizabeth  H.  Snow 

PiLSBTiKT,  Betsy.  [Cir.  1800.]  7^"  x  lOi".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  satin,  eyelet,  cross-stitch, 
and  hem-stitch.    Row  of  cross-stitch  all  around.  Mrs.  B.  H.  Little 

Piper,  Martha.  1829.  Dublin  [N.  H.].  12  yrs.  [Born  November  23,  1817.]  9i"x9*". 
3  alphabets.  Flat  and  cross'-stitch.  She  pulled  threads  to  keep  her  lines  straight. 
Verse  128.  Mrs.  W.  J.  Stewart 

PiTMAur,  Mary  A.     1812.     12  yrs.     10"  x  8".     3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Clarence  A.  Matthewson 

PiTTEE,  Mary  W.  10  yrs.  10"  x  8".  Tapestry  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  cross-borders 
at  top  and  bottom  and  across  center.  House  and  four  fir  trees;  house  is  white  at  bottom 
and  yellow  at  top.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

PiTTMAN,  Abigail.     1830.     8"  x  11".    2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Lydia  Satterthwait 

PiTTMAX,  Lydia.  1810.  [New  Jersey.]  18"  x  18".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and 
rose  border.  At  bottom,  house,  birds,  cattle,  fowl,  chicken  house,  trees,  and  flowers  in 
pots.     "Daughter  of   Aaron   Pittman   and   Elizabeth   his   wife."     Verse   290. 

Mrs.  Lydia  Satterthwait 

Platt,  Nancy.  1804.  [Wrightstown,  N.  J.]  16  yrs.  20"x20".  Eyelet,  flat,  stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Design  represents  large  country  estate.  Across  top  is  farmhouse  set 
on  knoll,  tree  on  either  side,  fence  running  down  banking,  10  fir  trees,  one  lady  stand- 
ing and  another  seated  on  mound.  In  center  is  the  residence,  with  large  willow  tree 
on  either  side  and  one  fir  tree.  Below,  a  lady  on  horseback,  cow  eating  grass,  dog,  trees, 
and  bird.  In  lower  right-hand  corner  is  distant  view  of  the  spring  house,  with  fence  and 
trees.     Illustrated.  Miss  Fanny  Lippineott 

Plumer,  Eliza.     1809.     Newburyport    [Mass.     Born   October  20,   1799.].     10  yrs.     9"  x  12". 

3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  with  band  of  eyelets  inside. 
At  bottom,  animals,  trees,  and  baskets  of  flowers.  Miss  Judith  Rogers 

Plumer,  Lydia.  1812.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  8^"xll".  3  alphabets.  Cross  and 
eyelet-stitch.    Cross-stitch  border.  Miss  Judith  Rogers 

Plumer,  Mary.     1816.    Newburyport  [Mass.].    11  yrs.     [Born  November  20,  1805.]     8^"xll". 

4  partial  alphabets.  Satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge.  At  bottom, 
elaborate  design  consisting  of  three  hills  with  two  trees;  between  the  trees  a  horn  of 
plenty  filled  with  roses  and  buds.  Miss  Judith  Rogers 


210  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Polk,  Martha  Surborough.  [Kent  County,  Md.]  9  yrs.  12"  x  14".  Vase  of  roses  and 
leaves;  one  rose  has  fallen  over  the  vase.  Mrs.  Frederic  Tyson 

Polk,  Patty.  [Cir.  1800.  Kent  County,  Md.]  10  yrs.  16"xl6".  Stem-stitch.  Large 
garland  of  pinks,  roses,  passion  flowers,  nasturtiums,  and  green  leaves;  in  center,  a 
white  tomb  with  "  G  W "  on  it,  surrounded  by  forget-me-nots.  "  Patty  Polk  did  this 
and  she  hated  every  stitch  she  did  in  it.     She  loves  to  read  much  more." 

Mrs.  Frederic  Tyson 

PoBiEROT,  Rosamund  Porter.  1806.  Burlington  [Vt.].  9  yrs.  17"  x  15".  3  alphabets. 
Flat,  outline,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Above  verse,  3  vases  of  flowers, 
and  below,  3  sprays  of  flowers.    "Verse  106.  Mrs.  Charles  W.  Baker 

PoKD,  Chloe.  1811.  Walpole  [Mass/.].  13  yrs.  16"  x  12i".  3  alphabets.  Flat  and  cross- 
stitch.  Border  has  a  basket  in  each  lower  corner,  from  which  runs  an  elaborate  vine 
bearing  large  pink  flowers.     Across  top  are  four  trees  and  a  large  bird.     Verse  162  (1). 

Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

Pond,  Cynthia.  1816.  Burlington  [Conn.].  12  yrs.  14"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  her- 
ringbone, and  cross-stitch.  Border  done  in  herringbone-stitch.  Strawberry  design  across 
bottom,  with  two  vases  of  flowers,  small  bird,  and  animal.     Verse  95. 

Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

Porter,  Hannah.  1800.  Bridgewater  [Mass.].  13"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Con- 
ventional border.  Saw-tooth  design  at  bottom.  Initials  "  C  B  R  "  in  left  lower  corner. 
Vers*  672.  Mrs.  Francis  Collamore 

Porter,  Hannah  S.  1823.  14  yrs.  16"  x  16".  Cross-stitch.  Small  conventional  border. 
House  in  right-hand  corner ;  scattered  trees ;  stars  and  baskets.  "  Family  Register : 
Nathaniel  Porter  born  April  4,  1760;  Nancy  Porter  born  June  12,  (1864)  sic;  Benjamin 
A.  Porter  born  June  12,  1864  (sic);  Nathan  Porter  born  May  12,  1767  (87?);  George 
Porter  born  June  12,  1769  (89?);  Betsy  Porter  born  March  12,  1792  (1892  sic);  Eliza- 
beth Porter  born  Feb.  4,  (1813)?;  Joseph  Porter  born  April  20,  (1810?);  William 
Porter  born  Oct.  22,  1800;  Warren  Porter  born  July  23,  1803;  Edward  P.  Porter  born 
April  31,  1809;  Hannah  S.  Porter  born  June  12,  1812;  Nancy  A.  Porter  born  Sept.  23, 
1813;    Betsy    Porter    died    March    19,    1794;    Warren    Porter    died    February    17,    1810." 

Wilder's  Bookshop,  1920 

Porter,  Rachel  A.  1829.  9  yrs.  7"  x  16".  5  alphabets.  Split,  stem,  hem,  cat,  tent,  and 
cross-stitch.     Double  border;  vine  interlined  with  a  border  of  solid  stem-stitch. 

Mrs.  O.  Clem  Goodrich 

Porter,  Sally.  1808.  Born  in  Danvers,  March  15,  1797.  11  yrs.  14"  x  17".  3  alphabets. 
French  knot,  chain,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border  with  smaller  cross- 
stitch  design  inside.  Lower  third  of  sampler  is  a  rose  pattern  over  a  conventional  de- 
sign, with  trees  on  either  side.     Five  different  cross-borders. 

Winthrop  Porter  Abbott,  Esq. 

Potter,  Elizabeth.  1801.  [Philadelphia.?]  17"x20".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Simple 
conventional  flower  border.  Above  name,  17  little  trees  arranged  on  steps.  In  lower 
corners,  two  jardinieres  full  of  flowers.  Near  center,  two  birds  in  wreaths  of  flowers. 
Verse  633.  Mrs.   William  Nelson  Marye 

Potts,  Serena  M[atilda].  1823.  7"x20".  2  alphabet.?.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Con- 
ventional border.  9  different  cross-borders.  2  large  and  1  small  conventional  flowers  at 
bottom.    Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Mary  T.  Schaffer 


Z     y. 


<  § 


X 


^^ 


c 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  211 

Potts,  Serexa  Matilda.  1822.  8"x8i".  2i  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Simple 
cross-stitch  lines.  Mrs.  Mary  T.  Schaffer 

PoYAS,  Elizabeth  C.  1800.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  6  yrs.  Il"xl3".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
tent,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge,  with  strawberry  and  carnation  border 
at  top  and  bottom.  Mrs.   William  Ball 

Peaxdall,  Susax.  1808.  [Born  at  Gloucester,  Mass.,  1799.]  16i"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Satin 
and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Elaborate  bow  and  garland  over  the  verses.  Verse 
152   (var.).  William  H.  Swasey,  Esq. 

Pratt,  Eliza.  1822.  [13  yrs.]  22"x30".  Petit-point,  couching,  long,  short,  cat,  stem,  satin, 
cross-stitch,  and  appliqued  satin  pieces.  Large  design  of  arch  with  2  columns.  Clock 
at  top  set  at  3  minutes  past  4.  At  bottom,  tomb  with  urn  on  top.  Other  designs  are 
baskets  of  flowers,  spray  of  roses,  and  8-pointed  stars.  Appliqued  satin  piece  on  tomb, 
inscribed  with  deaths  of  Thomas  and  Eliza.  Appliqued  satin  circles  on  either  side  of 
tomb;  one  has  "Duty  of  Parents  to  Children"  and  the  other  has  "Duty  of  Children  to 
Parents."  In  between  columns  is  family  register.  "  Family  of  Thomas  B.  and  Betsy 
Pratt.  Parents  ages,  Thomas  Brooks  Pratt  born  January  8,  1774;  Betsy  Smith  born  April 
13,  1776;  Married  March  16,  1796.  Children's  ages:  John  Foster  adopted  son  born  July 
26,  1796;  Mary  Pratt  born  July  12,  1796;  died  Aug.  9,  1796;  Mary  Pratt  born  July  29, 
1796;  died  July  30,  1796;  Thomas  Pratt  born  Dec.  28,  1798;  died  Aug.  12,  1800;  Thomas 
Pratt  born  Dec.  26,  1800;  Eliza  Pratt  born  Oct.  8,  1802;  died  Dec.  26,  1807;  Caleb  Pratt 
born  Dec.  2,  1804;  Mary  Pratt  born  Dec.  25,  1806;  Eliza  Pratt  born  Jan.  21,  1809;  John 
Murray  Pratt  born  Feb.  23,  1811;  Samuel  Pratt  born  April  29,  1813;  Nathan  Pratt  born 
May  20,  1817."     Verses  21,  322.  Carbone's,  December  10,  1919 

Presbrey,  Abbt  B.  1828.  Taunton  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  18"  x  12i".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Plain  border.  5  diamond-shaped  designs  at  bottom.  "  Happy  is  the  man  that  findeth 
wisdom's  length  of  days  is  in  her  right  hand  and  in  her  left  hand  riches  and  honour. 
Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness  and  all  her  paths  are  peace." 

Mrs.  George  W.  Barrows 

Peescott,  EsnxT.  September  1,  1804.  16"x20".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  stem,  and  flat- 
stitch.  Broad  and  elaborate  carnation  border.  Two  rose  and  other  simple  cross-borders. 
Verse  47  (1,  2).  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  New  York 

Preston,  Eliza.  [1824.]  Boston  [Mass.].  6  yrs.  [Born  in  1818.]  6"  x  12".  3  alphabets. 
Cat,  flat,  and  cross-stitch.     At  bottom,  two  bowls  of  flowers. 

Henry  Preston  Kendall,  Esq.,  and  His  Sisters 

Preston,  Mary.  [1805.]  Roxbury  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  12"  x  14i".  3  alphabets.  Hem-stitch, 
chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Flowers  in  pots  alternate  with  trees  on  sides  and  across  bottom; 
birds  sitting  on  treetops;  other  birds  and  bees  flying  about.  Cross-borders  of  small 
flowers.     Verse  411.  Miss  Alice  Wetherbee 

Purinton,  Eunice.  [1810.]  11  yrs.  Born  September  28,  1799.  East  Harpswell  [Me.]. 
23i"xl7^".  5  alphabets.  Long  and  short  and  cross-stitch.  Double  border;  long  and 
short  on  outside  and  strawberry  border  inside.  Hourglass  surmounted  by  basket  of 
flowers;  also,  man,  woman,  dogs,  cats,  sheep,  birds,  tree,  and  vine.  "  Samplar  completed 
when  child  was  eleven  years  old.  Certified  by  Temperance  P.  Jackson  Instructor."  Verse 
257.     The  register  not  received.  Mrs.  George  Carroll  Smith 

Purinton,  Priscilla.  1805.  Harpswell  [Me.].  Born  September  7,  1795.  15V' x  17i".  5 
alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border  outside  and 
saw-tooth  design  inside.     Strawberry-vine  cross-border  at  bottom.     Also  at  bottom,  large 


212  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

tree  with  birds  on  several  branches,  and  under  tree  are  sheep,  dog,  man  and  woman  in 
Colonial  dress  shaking  hands.  In  center  is  a  large  basket  filled  with  flowers,  and  on 
the  right  side  a  large  bush  with  a  bird  on  top  and  a  cage  hanging  from  a  branch. 
Various  cross-borders.  Mary  Chapman  Stetson 

PuTifEY,  HAaRioT.  1809.  Boscawen  [N.  H.].  10  yrs.  16"x22".  Partial  alphabets.  Eye- 
let, stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  at  top  and  sides  and  Greek  fret  at 
bottom.     Stiff-looking  tree  in  each  lower  corner.     Verses  285,  715.  Esther  D.  Gill 

QuiGLET,  Ann.  1814.  17"  x  17".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  wreath  of  small  flowers 
and  leaves.     A  black  octagonal  frame  incloses  an  acrostic.     Verse  446. 

Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 

Ramsdell,  Mary.  1815.  Lunenburg  [Mass.].  15  yrs.  17"  x  17V'.  3  alphabets.  Chain, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  Triangular  border  in  satin-stitch.  At  bottom, 
upright  strawberries;  in  center,  2  baskets  of  flowers;  below,  3  baskets  with  2  dogs 
between.  Verse  164  (var.).  Names  and  dates:  "Freedom  Ramsdell  born  May  25,  1794; 
Mary,  born  Feb.  28,  1800;  Lydia  born  Dec.  14,  1801;  Lucy  born  Nov.  23,  1803;  AUaseba 
and  Lucinda  born  June  6,  1805;  Abagail  born  Feb.  9,  1807;  John  born  June  29,  1810." 

Frank  J.  Lawton,  Esq. 

Rand,  Jake.  1811.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  9"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Seed,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.    Cross-stitch  border.    Basket  of  flowers-  at  bottom.        Miss  Jane  Rand  Wood 

Randall,  Elizabeth  Paljier.  182?.  8  yrs.  Partial  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Scroll  design 
in   border.     Simple,   narrow   cross-borders.     Verse   515    (1,    var.). 

Communicated  by  Mrs.  A.  A.  Lamrence 

Randall,  Mary  A.  1818.  Smithfield.  8"  x  9".  3  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Verses 
94,  117.  Mrs.  H.  W.  Bradford 

Randall,  Mary  O.  1822.  18"  x  17^".  5  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  House. 
Verse  122.  Mrs.  H.  W.  Bradford 

Randell,  Frances  D.     1830.     North  Providence.    8"  x  12".    3  alphabets.     Cat  and  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  H.  W.  Bradford 

Randel,  Mary  Amanda.  1826.  [Harlem,  New  York  City.]  9  yrs.  17"  x  17i".  2  alpha- 
bets. Cross-stitch.  Greek  border  with  strawberry  design.  At  bottom,  urn  with  tulips 
and  leaves,  basket,  and  bush.     Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Charles  G.  Trumbull 

Randolph,  Sally  French.  1812.  16i"x20i".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Violet  and  vine  border.  Same  runs  across  center.  Inner  border  in  conventional 
design.  In  lower  section,  two-story  house  with  sheds  on  one  side  and  garden  on  the 
other;  ladies  in  garden  and  on  path  in  front  of  house.  In  middle  section,  verse  flanked 
by  two  pedestals  topped  by  urns.     Verse  434.  Max  Williams,  1916 

Ransom,  Sophla  Ann.  1824.  12  yrs.  17i"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border.  Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

Rapp,  Mary  Ann.  1827.  8"  x  11".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Scroll  and  other 
designs  in  cross-borders.  Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 

Rapp,  Catherine.  1827.  7"  x  12i".  1|  alphabets.  Eyelet,  tent,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  In 
lower  half,  basket  of  fruit  and  detached  flowers.  Mrs.  Henry  Eugene  Coe 

Rathbun,  Ltdta.     1812.     11  yrs.     ll^"xlli".    3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  Barton  A.  Ballou 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  213 

Ratner,  Catherine.  1818.  Boston  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  [Born  in  1809.]  9"  x  12".  Cross-stitch. 
Double  strawberry  border.     3  alphabets.  Mrs.  B.  S.  Southard 

Read,  Ruth.  1812.  12  yrs.  12J"xl3|".  5  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Conventional  border 
in  cross-stitch  and  drawn-work.     Conventional  design  of  same  at  bottom.     Verse  439. 

Mrs.  Octavia  Pickens 

Reading,  Mary  A[nn].  1820  or  22.  [Born  June  23,  1810.]  lOJ"  x  lOJ".  3  alphabets.  Eye- 
let and  cross-stitch.     Cross-stitch  border.  Miss  Mary  Reading  Sco field 

Reding,  Harriet  Biron.  [Portsmouth,  N.  H.]  4  alphabets,  not  all  complete.  Satin,  stem, 
and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border  and  three  cross-borders.  Scene  at  bottom  with 
three-story  house,  fence,  trees,  lawn,  harbor,  sailboat,  and  man  fishing  from  banking. 
Verse  323.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Laxcton 

Reding,  Mary  A.  April  3,  1824.  Portsmouth  [N.  H.].  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  tent,  and 
cross-stitch.  Rose  border  with  wreath  around  name,  date,  etc.,  in  center  at  top.  Scene 
with  large  white  house,  fence,  barn,  trees,  pond,  boats,  and  houses  in  the  distance. 
Verses  823,  324.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Reed,  Eliza.  13  yrs.  "  Under  the  tuition  of  Harriet  Ellis."  16"  x  15".  4  alphabets.  Border 
of  conventional  flowers  inside  squares  that  are  joined  together.  At  bottom,  large 
house,  tree,  fence,  small  house,  and  baskets  of  flowers.     Verse  94  (var.). 

Miss  Harriet  Perkins 

Reed,  Phebe.  1805.  14  yrs.  17"  x  20".  1  alphabet.  Chain,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Grape- 
vine border  around  three  sides.  Wreath,  oblong  in  shape,  at  bottom.  House,  tree  in 
blossom  on  either  side.     Verse  601  (1,  2,  var.).  Arthur  Leslie  Green,  Esq. 

[Rejiington],   [Cynthia  T.]      [1825.]     8J"x8i".     5  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  A.  W.  Love 

Remington,  Sally  Ann.     1818.     Coventry.     6"x8i".     3  alphabets.     Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Mr.  Arthur  W.  Claflin 

Rendoi^,  Sarah  C.  1828.  Boston  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  [Salem  Street  Academy.]  18"  x  18".  3 
alphabets.     Satin  and  cross-stitch.     Vine  border.    Verse  485.  Mrs.  Graydon  Stetson 

Reynolds,  Lucretia  C.  1822.  Shepardtown,  Va.  About  10  yrs.  16"  x  16i".  3  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  design  in  border.  Greek  fret  cross-border 
and  several  others.     At  one  side  of  verse  is  an  urn.    Verse  515  (var.). 

Estelle  Lucretia  Wheeler 

Rhodes,  Mary.  1806.  Southampton  [L.  I.].  11  yrs.  11"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Queen  and 
cross-stitch.  Queen-stitch  border  in  saw-tooth  design.  Band  of  solid  embroidery  across 
the  bottom,  with  geometric  figures  in  queen-stitch.     Verse  699. 

Mrs.  Thomas  B.  Clarke 

Rhodes,  Phebe.  1820.  10  yrs.  16"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  chain,  French  knots,  and 
cross-stitch.  Flowers  and  strawberries.  Verse  515.  Family  record:  "Robert  Rhodes 
born  Apr.  22,  1804;  William  P.  Rhodes  born  Apr.  8,  1807;  died  Jan.  5th,  1808;  Mary  M. 
Rhodes,  March  5,  1807;  died  February  18th,  1812;  Phoebe  Rhodes  born  December  18th, 
1810;  Sally  A.  Rhodes  born  August  8th,  1813;  died  September  14th,  1813;  Mary  H. 
Rhodes  born  September  12th,  1815;  Sally  A.  Rhodes  born  August  11th,  1819;  died 
August  7th,  1820."  Mrs.  George  Arnold 

Rice,  Elmira.  [Cir.  1813.]  Ashby  [Mass.  Cir.  10  yrs.  Born  January  31,  1803.].  16i"x23". 
2  alphabets.     Italian,  laid,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Strawberry  vine  on  sides,  flower-pots 


214  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

at  top  and  bottom.  Inscriptions  on  two  hearts  at  bottom  of  sampler  are:  "John  Rice, 
born  in  Ashby,  Mass.,  March  18,  1768,"  and  "Lucy  (Hubbard)  Rice  born  in  Concord, 
Mass.,  Aug.  16,  1775."  Births  of  children  are  inscribed  on  the  fruit  on  family  tree  as 
on  Lucy  Rice's  Sampler,  below.    Verses  552,  738.  Miss  Elizabeth  F.  Kelly 

Rice,  Lucy.  1811.  Ashby  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  16"  x  19i".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  laid,  and  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  vine  on  three  sides  and  scroll  design.  Verse  and  5  floral  designs  at 
bottom.  Verse  727.  "Mr.  John  Rice  born  March  18th,  1768;  Mrs.  Lucy  Rice  born 
Aug.  16th,  1775;  [children],  Rebecca  [born  Feb.  20],  1793;  Lucy  [born  March  11],  1799; 
Almira  [born  Jan.  31],  1803;  John  H.  [born  Aug.  13],  1806."        Miss  Elizabeth  F.  Kelly 

Rice,  Maey.  1810.  12  yrs.  15J"x21i".  3  alphabets.  Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross 
and  diamond  designs  in  border.  Baskets  of  flowers  on  each  side  of  tree  at  bottom. 
Verse  40  (var.).    Family  record  of  Samuel  and  Mary  Rice  [father  and  mother  of  maker]. 

Heirs  of  E.  O.  Remington 

Rice,  Peesis.  September,  1815.  Marlborough  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  14^"  x  18".  3  alphabets. 
Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  with  strawberry-vine  border.  Tree  in  center 
at  bottom.    Verses  165,  515  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  William  H.  Hackett 

Rice,  Phebe.     1815.     9  yrs.     10"  x  8".     3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Brouwer 

RiCHAEDS,  Nancy.    August  20.     Newton  [Mass.].     9  yrs.    Alphabets.    Verse  799. 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

RiCHAEDS,  Sally.  July  8,  1805.  Dedham  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  10^"  x  16i".  2  alphabets.  Chain, 
eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Double  hemstitching  on  three  sides.  Greek  design  at 
bottom.  Elaborate  design  at  bottom  of  large  pot  of  flowers  and  leaves,  and  two  urns 
with  handles  on  either  side.     Fancy  design  underneath.  Mrs.  Harrison  F.  Hunt 

RiCHAEDS,  Sally.  [Cir.  1806.]  Dedham  [Mass.  Born  in  1794.].  5i"  x  7|".  2  alphabets. 
Satin  and  cross-stitch.     Hemstitched  edge.    Spaces  left  for  age  and  date. 

Mrs.  Harrison  F.  Hunt 

RiCHABDSON,  Maey.  1812.  Westford  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  17"  x  17".  3^  alphabets.  Stem  and 
cross-stitch.  Grapevine  border.  At  bottom,  house  with  trees,  deer,  dog,  birds,  garden 
seat,  vines,  and  plants.  Verse  732  (1,  var.).  Under  the  design  at  bottom,  "Mary  Cum- 
mings,  Instructress."  J.  V.  Fletcher  Library,  Westford 

RiDGWAY,  Abigail.  Done  in  the  year  1795.  17"  x  18".  Tent  and  cross-stitch.  Decorative 
and   unusual  design   arrangement.     Verse   229.  Miss   Belle   Skinner 

Ridgway,  Elizabeth.     1830.     Alphabets.     Cross-stitch.    Verse  337.        Maxcy  Applegate,  Esq. 

RiDGWAY,  Maey  J.  May  24,  1822.  [New  Jersey.]  8  yrs.  19^"x21i".  Cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.  House,  trees,  arbor,  deer,  dog,  and  3  doves.  Entire  sampler  covered 
with  flowering  shrubs  in  jars  and  flowers  in  bowls.     Verse  515   (var.). 

Mrs.  B.  A.  Rodrick 

Riemak,  Sophia.  1812.  Baltimore  [Md.].  9  yrs.  16"  x  17".  9  alphabets.  Cat,  eyelet,  and 
cross-stitch.     Conventional  border,  with  alternate  roses  and  carnations. 

Mrs.  Michael  B.  Wild 

RjGcs,  .     [Cir.  1809.]     17"x20".     Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Vine  border  with 

red  ends.     Elaborate  flower   in   each   corner.     Family   Register:     "William   Riggs  born 


PLATE  LXX 

Elizabeth   Anx  Goldix's  Sampler.     New  York.     1829 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  215 

May   2,   1769;   Mary   Riggs   born   Octr    18,    1772.      Married   December    13,    1792;    Nabby 

Gootch  born  Deer  3,  1753. 

Births  Deaths 

"Fanny   Riggs     born   sepr       10,  1793  "Daniel    Riggs   died   octr        28,  1795 

Daniel  Riggs     born   Augt      11,  1796  Hannah  Riggs  died    feby       28,  1805 

Eliza   Riggs        born    Augt     22,  1797  Mary  Riggs      died   march      5,  1806 

Mary   Riggs       born   Augt     13,  1799  Mary  Riggs      died   march    30,  1806 

Hannah  Riggs  born    Novr     12,  1801  Hannah  Riggs  died    augt       22,  1809 

Joann  Riggs      born    feby       14,  1804  Eliza  Riggs       died    octr        28,  1809" 

Mary  Riggs  born  feby  4,  1806 
Hannah  Riggs  born  jany  24,  1807 
William  Riggs  born  jany  14,  1810 
Jane  Riggs  born  March  5,  1813 
Eliza  Riggs        born    March  11,  1815  " 

Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq, 

ItiNE,  Fakny.  1808.  Borough  of  Lancaster  [Pa.].  "Made  at  Mrs.  Armstrong's  School." 
14  yrs.  17^"  x  18^".  2  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  flowers  on  three 
sides,  and  narrow  frame  inside.  In  upper  section,  wreath  inclosing  girl  with  lamb, 
sitting  under  a  willow  tree;  sprays  of  flowers  in  four  corners  of  frame.  Inscription, 
alphabets,  and  verses  in  lower  section.  Verses  282,  417.  Inscription  as  follows: 
"  Fanny  Rine  a  daughter  of  Christian  and  Barbara  Rine  was  born  in  the  borough  of 
Lancaster  the  26th  day  of  Sept.  1796  and  made  this  sampler  in  Mrs.  Armstrong's  School 
A.  D.  1808."  Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 

Rine,  WiLLAMiNA.  1813.  "  Mrs.  Armstrong's  School,"  Lancaster  [Pa.].  12  yrs.  19"  x  15^". 
Stem-stitch.  "  Willamina  Rine  a  daughter  of  Christian  and  Barbara  Rine  was  born 
November  6th  1801  and  Made  this  Sampler  at  Mrs.  Armstrong's  School,  Lancaster." 
Verse  282  (var.).  In  center,  oval  with  girl  (painted  face)  standing  under  a  weeping 
willow  tree,  and  above  and  below  oval  are  sprays  of  leaves  and  flowers  tied  with  bow- 
knots  to  form  a  wreath.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Ring,  Eliza.  1808.  Salem  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  15"  x  18".  Partial  alphabet.  Stem-stitch. 
Rose-vine  border  at  sides.  Roses  and  tulips  in  vase  in  center  at  bottom;  horns  of 
plenty  on  either  side,  filled  with  flowers;  small  trees  in  vases  in  each  upper  corner. 
Verse  in  center  at  top.    Verse  40.  Edward  Rivers  Lemon,  Esq. 

RiNGWALT,  Hahriet  A.  1806.  7  yrs.  20"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  20"  x  18".  Cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry and  carnation  border,  with  basket  of  flowers  in  upper  corners  and  birds  in  lower 
corners.  At  bottom,  house  on  a  terraced  lawn,  with  fence  on  either  side,  at  end  of 
which  are  two  huge  vases  of  flowers;  small  pine  trees  on  either  side  at  bottom  of  ter- 
race; a  buck  and  two  lambs  on  lawn.  Mrs.  Lathrop  Brown 

Ripley,  Lucy.  1802.  Hartford,  Conn.  13  yrs.  16"  x  12i".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Simple  cross-stitch  border.     Verses  76,  515.  Miss  Laura  M.  Ripley 

Ripley,  Sarah  Shurtleff.  [Cir.  1804.]  Born  February  1,  1794.  7"  x  12|".  Alphabet. 
Cross-stitch.  Across  center,  3  rows  of  conventional  flowers,  ?nd  at  bottom,  2  large  and 
totally  different  trees.  Mrs.  Charles  J.  White 

Rising,  Sallie  M.  September  22nd,  1812.  Rupert  [Vt.].  12  yrs.  7"x8i".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  border  in  three  styles  of  cross-stitch.  Miss  Agnes  M.  Arnold 

Roach,  Harriot.  March  25th,  1805.  Charleston  [S.  C.].  12V' x  18".  Hem-stitch,  satin,  petit- 
point,  stem,  and   cross-stitch.     Tulip   border   all  around   and   across  upper  center.     In 


216  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

center,  house,  trees,  sheep,  dog,  and  eight-pointed  stars.  At  bottom,  baskets  of  flowers 
with  birds  on  either  side  of  them,  and  a  large  vase  of  flowers  in  between.  Large  insects 
on  either  side.    Sprays  of  flowers  on  either  side  of  verse  at  top.    Verse  lOi  (1,  2,  3,  var.). 

Mrs.  Middleton  Guerard  Fuller 

RoBERDEAN,  SusAN.  1811.  9"  X 12".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched 
edge.  At  bottom,  large  green  tree  in  center,  with  2  smaller  trees  on  either  side  with  a 
bird  on  top.  National  Museum,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Roberts,  Ajiorena  D.  T.  1828.  Born  August  28th,  1818.  18"  x  18".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
stem,  satin,  queen,  tent,  petit-point,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border.  In  lower 
left-hand  corner,  scene  with  house,  orchard,  fence,  and  large  blossom  growing  in  grass. 
Wreath  of  roses  and  basket,  fruit,  and  leaves  over  verse.     Verse  515. 

Mrs,  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Robertson,  Elizabeth.  September  30th,  1817.  14"  x  16".  Alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Con- 
ventional diamond-shaped  design  in  border.  Strawberry-vine  cross-border  at  top,  and 
scroll  across  center.  Oblong  wreath  of  vine  and  flowers  at  bottom,  with  a  basket  in  top 
center.  Over  it  are  the  words,  "  It  is  no  shame  to  learn,  the  shame  is  to  be  ignorant." 
Verse  720  (var.).  Mrs.  W.  B.  Gillican 

Robertson,  Lydia.  1807.  14"  x  17".  Alphabet.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  rose- 
vine  border.  At  bottom,  child  standing  on  hilltop,  with  large  flowers  in  pots  at  either 
side;  butterflies,  birds,  etc.,  also  in  picture.     Verse  601.  A.  Piatt  Andrews,  Esq. 

Robinson,  Adeline  E.  [Cir.  1800.]  12  yrs.  17J"  x  16J".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Rose-vine 
border.  Floral  border  inclosing  verses  and  acrostic;  spray  of  roses  below.  Verses  539, 
701.     Acrostic.  William  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

Robinson,  Hannah  J.  1818.  18"  x  16".  Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Heavy  black  line 
around  edge.  High  green  hill,  with  weeping  willow  on  top;  maple  tree  at  right  and  rose- 
bush at  left;  flowers  growing  in  grass  at  foot  of  hill;  on  either  side  of  hill  are  brown 
poles  with  vines.  At  top  of  sampler  is  a  spread  eagle  holding  framed  verse  in  claws. 
Verse  456.     Illustrated.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Robinson,  Mary.  1814.  Exeter.  10  yrs.  7i"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Simple 
border.    Strawberry  design  at  bottom.     Verse  161.  Boston  Museum  of  Fine  Arts 

Robinson,  Mary.  1820.  13  yrs.  13"  x  15^".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  and 
triangular  figure  in  border.  At  bottom,  2  birds  on  bush;  strawberry  bush  below  them; 
strawberry  vine  on  each  side  and  in  between;  basket  of  fruit  on  one  side  and  basket  of 
flowers  on  the  other;  also,  spray  of  rosebuds  and  bunch  of  grapes.  Initials:  "BR 
[Benjamin  Robinson,  father];  ER  [Elizabeth  Robinson,  mother];  JR  [Joseph];  MR 
[Mary] ;  W  R  [William] ;  A  R  [Angeline] ;  C  R  [Caroline] ;  E  R  [Emaline,  brothers  and 
sisters]."     Verse  546   (1).  Miss  Emma  R.  Burt 

Robinson,  Mary  A.  June  27,  1804.  13  yrs.  8"  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross- 
border.    At  bottom,  little  animals.    Verse  91rt  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  J.  8.  Brace 

Robinson,  Susan.  1809.  7  yrs.  Augusta  [Me.].  8"xll".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Simple 
cross-borders.  Mrs.  Henry  P.  Briggs 

Rogers,  Amelia.  1830.  Baltimore  [Md.].  15  yrs.  17"x22".  4  alphabets.  Tent,  stem,  and 
cross-stitch.     Cross-stitch  border.     At  bottom,  urns  with  flowers  and  willow  trees. 

Nannie  Dryden  Kensett 

Rogers,  Deidamia  S.  1826.  10  yrs.  Border  at  sides  and  top  of  rose  vine,  and  of  solid  work 
across  bottom.     Corners  filled   (?)   in  bunches  of  berries,  and  in  between  is  inscription: 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  217 

"Family  Record  Mr.  Josiah  Rogers  born  April  28,  1759;  Miss  Diedamia  Reed  born 
Dec.  Married  June  1,  1813."     Below,  in  3  circles  of  tiny  flowers  weaving  into  each 

other,  are  names  and  birth  dates  of  children:  "Lucy  J.  Rogers  born  Dec.  22,  1814; 
Deidamia  S.  Rogers  born  Jan.  16,  1816;  Martha  Rogers  born  March  20,  1819."  At  bot- 
tom, in  saw-tooth  medallion  from  which  sprout  weeping  willow  branches,  is  inscription, 
"  Josiah  Rogers  died  Dec.  4,  1822."  Mrs.  L.  I.  Hathaway 

Rogers,  Elizabeth.  1810.  Burlington.  18"  x  22".  5  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Tulip  and 
carnation  border.     Flowers  and  baskets  of  fruit.     Verse  515  (var.). 

Mrs.  Siegfried  Wachsman 

Rogers,  Joanna.  1807.  Newbury  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  6  mos.  Born  February  14,  1797. 
15J"x22^".  3  alphabets.  French  knots,  petit-point,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek 
fret  border.  Design  of  trees,  animals,  and  men.  At  bottom,  a  square  on  either  side 
filled  with  geometrical  figures.     Verses  128  (var.),  187.  Mrs.  John  F.  Hibbs 

Rogers,  Martha.  1824.  17"x20".  [Born  at  Hainesport,  N.  J.].  17"x20",  4  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.     Design  of  tree,  basket  of  flowers,  ship,  and  turtle  doves. 

Deborah  J.  Peacock 

RoGEHS,  Mary  A.  1826.  11  yrs.  10"x20".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border  on 
three  sides.  Simple  cross-borders.  Across  bottom,  house,  trees,  basket  of  fruit,  basket 
of  flowers,  sprays  of  flowers,  windmill,  birds,  etc.  Above  house,  in  center  at  bottom,  are 
two  white  birds  holding  band  on  which  is  inscribed  name,  age  and  date. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Rogers,  Patience.  1801.  Warren.  10  yrs.  12^"  x  17^".  Alphabet.  Stem  and  cross-stitch. 
Greek  fret  border.     Verse  606.  Lyra  Brown  Nickerson 

Rogerson, .     1808.     15^"  x  14|".     French  knots,  long  and  short,  and  cross-stitch.     Willow 

tree,  urn,  and  weeping  figure.  "  Sacred  to  the  Memory  of  Dr.  Robt.  Rogerson  Obt. 
April  1st,  1806  AE  49  yrs;  Lucy  Rogerson  Obt.  March  4th,  1807  AE  39;  Danl  H.  Rogerson 
Obt.  March  25th,  1808  AE  14;  Lucy  H.  Rogerson  Obt.  1803  AE  11  months." 

Mrs.  George  C.  Fraser 

RoLFE,  Rhoda  C.  1824.  Concord  [N.  H.].  12  yrs.  Born  May  26,  1812.  17"  x  17".  6  alpha- 
bets. Flat,  cat,  satin,  eyelet,  stem,  cross-stitch,  and  Van  Dyke  stitch.  Cat-stitched  hem 
all  around.  Large  basket  with  plant  in  center  at  bottom,  and  on  either  side  large  plants 
in  pots.     Verse  703   (3).  Miss  Lydia  Bolfe  Farnum 

Rollings,  Sally.  1800.  9^"  x  12i".  3  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  At  bottom,  large 
spray  of  flowers,  with  two  smaller  sprays  on  each  side.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Rossell,  Mary  T,  1828.  Trenton  [N.  J.].  17"  x  15".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry-vine border.  In  center,  vine  inclosing  verse  and  name;  star  on  each  side;  large 
flowers  and  basket  of  flowers  in  rest  of  space.     Verse  791.  Margaret  Rossell 

RowAND,  Sarah  W.  1810.  [Southampton  Township,  Burlington  County,  N.  J.]  14  yrs. 
[Born  November  10,  1796.]  18"xl6|".  5  alphabets.  Cat,  queen,  flat,  eyelet,  and  cross- 
stitch.     Cross-border.     At  bottom,  strawberries,  flowers,  birds,  and  crown. 

Miss  Sarah  Rowand  Budd 

RowE,  A[nne].  1814.  Milton.  7  yrs.  7J"x8".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitclied 
edge.  Mrs.  Caleb  Loring  Cunningham 

RowE,  P.  9  yrs.  1814.  Milton.  7i"  x  8".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge. 
A.     7  yrs.  Mrs.  Caleb  Loring  Cunningham 


218  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

RoTAL,  Polly.  1811.  [Salem  County,  N.  J.]  11  yrs.  [Born  October,  1800.]  12"  x  12^". 
3  alphabets.  Outline,  eyelet,  chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border. 
At  bottom,  butterflies,  trees,  birds,  plants,  stars,  diamonds,  strawberries,  rosebuds,  baskets, 
and  baskets  of  flowers.  Initials:  "  D  R  [David  Royal,  father] ;  R  R  [Ruth  Royal, 
mother];  PR  [Phebe] ;  PR  [Polly];  JR  [John];  DR  [David]."    Verse  594  (1,  var.). 

Miss  Mary  E.  Hives 

RuDDEROW,  Anna.  1816.  9"  x  14".  4  alphabets.  Cat,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of 
straight  and  irregular  rows  of  cross-stitch.  Initials:  "  E.  Jones  [Elnora  Jones,  grand- 
mother]; JR   [Jane];  AR   [Abigail];  CR   [Catharine];  BR   [Beulah,  sisters]." 

Mrs.  Oustavus  M.  Murray 

Rue,  Hannah.  1827.  10  yrs.  Born  December  3,  1817.  "  Time  swiftly  flies.  Improve  each 
passing  moment."  Maxcy  Applegate,  Esq. 

RuNDiJiTTE,  Olive  H.  C.  1830.  Newcastle  [Me.?].  16i"x8i".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.  Key  pattern  in  border  done  in  eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  design 
at  bottom.    Initials:    "  S  R,  R  R,  D  R,  J  R,  F  R,  P  R,  R  R,  H  C,  O  C." 

A.  Stainforth,  Dealer,  August,  1917 

Russell,  Amanda.  November  12,  1829.  [Ohio.]  17^"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.  Conventionalized  rose  and  tulip  border.  Small  urns  and  geometrical  designs  at 
bottom.     Verse  487a.  Mrs.  Walter  L.  Milliken 

Russell,  Amey.  1808.  Providence  [R.  I.].  12|"  x  15J".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  outline,  and 
cross-stitch.    Vine  and  flower  border.    Verse  503.  D.  A.  B.  Museum,  Kingston,  B.  I. 

Russell,  Lydia.  1809.  Born  February  26,  1791.  [West  Cambridge,  now  Arlington,  Mass.] 
Satin,  stem,  French  knots,  long  and  short  stitch.  Tombstones  in  each  lower  corner  with 
urn  on  top,  out  of  which  rises  a  vine  with  blossoms  forming  arch,  and  tied  at  the  top 
with  ribbon.  In  center  at  bottom  is  a  large  apple  tree,  each  apple  bearing  the  name 
and  birth  of  a  child.  Underneath  tree  is  a  tiny  house,  trees,  animals,  etc.  On  one 
tombstone  is  inscription,  "  Edward  Russell  Born  Octr  5th,  1764.  Was  Married  May  11th, 
1786.  Died  Novr  3rd,  1808."  On  the  other  is  the  inscription,  "  Lydia  Adams  Born  Sept. 
2d,  1767.  Lydia  R.  1st  *— .  Died  Augst  28,  1790."  On  the  apples  are  the  following: 
"Jeremiah  born  Augst  28th,  1786;  Leonora  born  February  24,  1787;  Lydia  1st  born 
Jany  22,  1789;  Lydia  2nd  born  Febry  26th,  1791;  Sophia  born  Sept.  2d,  1793;  Edward  born 
October  15,  1795;  Mary  born  March  12,  1801."  Bussell  Carter,  Esq. 

Russell,  Makia.  1808.  Gettysburg  [Pa.].  About  7  yrs.  SV'  x  22".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.     Verse  281.  Marianne   W.  Stevenson 

Russell,  Mary  Jane.  1827.  10  yrs.  18"  x  15J".  4  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Fine 
strawberry  border  and  cross-borders.  At  bottom,  two  baskets  of  strawberries  and  two 
diamonds.    Verse  176.  A.  Stainforth,  Dealer,  1917 

Russell,  Susan.  1820.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  9"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Drawn- 
work  border.  Miss  Mary  E.  Wills 

Rutherford,  Jane.  1804.  10  yrs.  17"  x  12".  Alphabets.  Variety  of  stitches.  Yellow  bird, 
tree,  and  foliage.  Diamond-shaped  shields  with  name  and  date.  (Six-line  verse  not  given 
in  sales  catalogue.)  Walpole  Galleries,  New  York  City,  sold  June  29,  1917 

RuTHVEN,  Marion.  [1803  or  4.]  Charlestown.  [7  yrs.]  9"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Buttonhole 
and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border.  Initials  repeated  often:  "  H  C,  M  R,  J  R,  S  R, 
B  R,  I  R."  "  Quintilian,  an  accurate  judge  of  men  was  pleased  with  children  who  wept 
when  their  schoolfellows  outdid  them,  for  the  sense  of  disgrace  would  make  them  emulous, 


PLATE  I.XXI 


Fraxces  Wade's  Sampler.     Savannah.  Ga.     1798 
Owned  by  Miss  Fannie  Sleeker  Seaman 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  219 

and  emulation  would  make  them,  schoolars."     "  The  best  school  for  a  good  life,  is  the 
frequent  meditation  upon  a  happy  death."  Miss  Mary  H.  Deane 

Sage,  Emmelixe.  1816.  [Middletown,  Conn.,  or  Northampton,  Mass.]  8  yrs.  lU"xl2i". 
3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  At  bottom,  2  baskets  of  flowers  with  tree  in 
between.     Verse  616  (1,  var.).  Elizabeth  Sage 

Saker,  Susan  and  Elizabeth.  1826.  10  yrs.  18"x24".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  3 
borders  of  Greek  fret,  strawberry,  and  zigzag  designs.  Two  small  baskets  of  flowers. 
"  Remember  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  while  the  evil  days  come  not  nor  the 
years  draw  nigh,  when  thou  shalt  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  them." 

Louise  Salter  Codwise  Collection,  National  Museum 

Saltonstall,  Sarah.  1810.  Haverhill,  Essex  County.  18"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Petit-point, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Dark  green  grass,  with  strawberries,  3  trees,  and  baskets 
of  apples.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Edwin  Oarcia 

Sanders,  Anna.  "September  the  1,  1801."  Warren  [R.  I.].  "Born  April  20,  1791  at 
Warren."  13"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  stem,  flat-stitch.  Vines  growing  up  the 
sides  from  flower-pots.  At  the  toji,  two  birds  holding  a  heart  in  chains  perhaps.  Under 
the  arch  is  a  house,  with  steps  down  right  and  left.  A  tree  stands  on  either  side,  with  a 
woman  under  one  and  a  man  under  the  other.  In  front,  a  group  of  men,  women,  and 
children.  A  shepherd,  shepherdess,  and  lambs.  The  verse  is  labeled,  "  An  acrostic  Pre- 
sented To  Miss  Anna  Sanders  by  her  very  affectionate  friend  Luther  Bayer."  Verse 
675.     [Taught  by  the  same  teacher  who  instructed  at  Polly  Balch's  School.] 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Sanders,  Martha.  March  25,  1825.  Central  Falls  [R.  I.].  9  yrs.  16^"xl7^".  3  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.     Verses  150  (last  2  lines  of  verse  1),  476,  566,  655. 

Miss  Harriet  L.  Sm.ith 

Sanderson,  C.  1809.  "  Frankford  School."  Stem,  cross-stitch,  and  needle  etching.  Design 
is  the  World  showing  2  hemispheres.  In  four  corners  are  figures  representing  America, 
Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa.     Illustrated.  Mrs.  Robert  Garrett 

Sanderson,  Mary.  1818.  16"  x  16^".  13  yrs.  Variety  of  stitches.  Elaborate  border  con- 
taining house,  trees  of  various  kinds,  and  serpentine  floral  side-borders.  "  A  Family 
Record  "  containing  the  birth  dates  of  her  father,  mother,  and  their  six  daughters. 

Sold  at  Walpole  Galleries,  New  York,  June  29,  1917 

Sanford,  Elener.  [Cir,  1800.]  Berkley  [Mass.  Born  in  1791.].  12"  x  12".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  George  W.  Colby 

Sarish,  Abigail  Ann.  1828.  [Salem  County,  N.  J.  Born  March  31,  1814.]  17"  x  14^".  1 
alphabet.  Eyelet,  flat,  outline,  queen,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  and  Greek  cross 
borders.  At  bottom,  meetinghouse  with  weeping  willow  tree.  Lines  of  drapery  with 
hanging  tassels.  Miss  Sarah  Krom 

Sahle,  Julia  Ann.     1814.     14"  x  10".     3  alphabets.     Chain  and  cross-stitch.     Verse  747. 

Miss  A.  C.  Westcott 

Saunders,  Frances  Respass.  1803.  Leesburg  [Va.].  12  yrs.  18"x24".  5  alphabets.  Eye- 
let and  cross-stitch.     Tulip  and  vine  border.     House  with  trees  on  each  side. 

Jeannette  R.   White 

Saunders,  Lucy  D.  [Cir.  1810.]  11  yrs.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  16^"  x  17".  3  alphabets. 
French  knots,  chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border,  with  leaves  and  berries.  A 
figure  with  six  curved  rays  in  all  four  corners.    Verse  113  (var.).  Lucie  A.  Peabody 


220  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Saunders,  Sarah.  1789.  Salem  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  10"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Hem-stitch, 
eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge.  Verse  44.  (Tliis  sampler  went  through  the 
Salem  fire  in  1914.    The  frame  is  scorched  by  great  heat.)  Mrs.  H.  A.  Everett 

Saunders,  Sarah  Donna  Leonora.  16^'  x  16".  Vine  leaves  framing  a  circle,  in  which  is  a 
representation  of  William  and  Mary  College,  Virginia.  There  are  two  boats  in  the 
stream  in  the  foreground.  The  names  "John  S.  Mary  Saunders"  and  the  initials 
"S.  B.  M.  L.  A.  M.  M.  L.  S.  L.  A.  P.  E.  J.  N.  C.  N.  q.  P.  A.  R.  A.  C.  F.  A.  B.  M.  C.  H. 
E.  L.  B.  C.  A.  M."     Illustrated.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Sawyer,  Mary.     1815.     Sterling  [Mass.].     12  yrs.     Cross-stitch.     Floral  border.     Verse  748. 

Mr.  Oeorge  T.  Tilden 

ScHEACK,  Elizabeth.  1802.  9  yrs.  18"  x  llj".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation 
border  all  around.  Scene  with  house,  trees,  shepherd,  dog,  sheep,  barn,  etc.  Verse  132 
(1,  var.).  Mr.  H.  L.  Stowell 

ScHRACKS,  Catherine.  1812.  15^"  x  18".  8  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  and 
tulip  border.     Verse  187  (var.).     Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park 

Scot,  Mary  A.  1808.  Winchester  [Va.].  8  yrs.  13"  x  18".  5  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Car- 
nation and  Greek  fret  borders.     Trees  and  plants  at  bottom.  Mrs.  Harry  B.  Maybin 

Scot,  Mary  A.  1808.  Winchester  [Va.].  13"  x  18".  5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.     Cross-border.     At  bottom,  birds,  geese,  trees,  vine,  tulips,  and  roses. 

Mrs.  Harry  R.  Maybin 

Scot,  Mary  A.  1808.  Winchester  [Va.].  10"  x  18".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 
Vine  and  Greek  fret  border.     Strawberry  design  at  bottom.  Mrs.  Harry  B.  Maybin 

Scot,  Mary  Ann.  [Cir.  1810.]  Winchester,  Va.  Born  April,  1799.  18"x24".  Eyelet,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Across  top  and  bottom,  tulips,  birds,  strawberries,  vine,  and 
leaves.     Elaborate  wreath  of  roses  and  morning-glories  around  verse.     Verse  545. 

Mrs.  Harry  R.  Maybin 

Scott,  Hannah.  [Cir.  1807.]  Newburyport  [Mass.].  Born  September  1,  1796.  18"xl6|". 
5  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Rose  tree,  other 
trees,  plants,  butterflies,  birds,  and  other  designs.  "  Names  of  the  family  of  Joel  and 
Mary  Scott.  John  born  Jan.  8  1790;  Mary  born  Jan.  6,  1792;  Elizabeth  born  Dec.  1, 
1794;  Hannah  born  Sept.  1,  1796;  Sylvanus  born  Sept.  1,  1798;  Sylvanus  born  July  7, 
1799;  Sylvanus  died  Oct.  21,  1799;  Sally  A.  born  Jan.  27,  1801;  Abraham  Tyler  born 
Oct.  1,  1803;  Sally  born  Sept.  12,  1805;  Caroline  born  Aug.  16,  1807;  Rufus  born  July 
11,  1809;  Sally  A.  died  Oct.  18,  1803;  Rufus  died  Jan.  29,  1810." 

The  Misses  Sarah,  Annie,  and  Effle  Tenney 

Scripture,  Sarah.  12  yrs.  13"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Bird's-eye,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  border.     Flower  design  at  bottom.     Verse  150  (1). 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Seaver,  Hertilla.  1817.  Taunton  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  13"  x  8^".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  chain, 
and  cross-stitch.  Cat-stitch  border  top  and  sides,  and  chain-stitch  across  bottom.  De- 
sign at  bottom  of  sprays  of  flowers,  tree,  and  pot  of  flowers.  Mrs.  W.  H.  Boynton 

Seavey,  Rebecca.  1811.  124"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine 
border  with  pink  flowers.  "  From  purity  of  thought,  all  pleasure  springs.  And,  from  an 
humble  spirit,  all  our  peace."  Mrs.  Willis  N.  Allen 

Sellman,  Ann.  1807.  [Ann  Arundel  County,  Md.]  8J"  x  llj".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cat, 
tent,  and  cross-stitch,  initials:  "  A  S.  A  S.  A  S.  J  S.  J.  H.  Sellman,  ....  [Har]wood." 
(Harwood  was  mother's  family  name.)  Miss  Stockett 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  221 

Sergeant,  Sarah.  1830.  [Philadelphia.  10  yrs.]  Il"xl3".  8  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  border  across  top,  and  smaller  twin  berries  on  longer  stems  at  bot- 
tom. Mrs.  W.  T.  Oppenhimer 

Sewaix,  Mahy.  1804.  7  yrs.  12^"  x  14".  4  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of 
vine  and  conventional  rose  design.  Grass  at  bottom,  out  of  which  border-vines  seem 
to  spring.  Mrs.  Herbert  A.  Coffeen 

Shanahan,  Margaret.  2  alphabets.  Tapestry.  Cross,  stem-stitch,  and  petit-point.  Tapestry 
diamonds  top  and  bottom.     House  and  flower-pots  at  bottom.     Verse  580. 

"  Reminiscences  of  Old  Salem,"  page  114 

Sharp,  Jan.  1827.  "Northern  Liberty  School."  22"  x  18".  Cross-stitch.  Tulip  border, 
with  rosebud  and  bird  in  middle.  Vases  of  flowers  and  sprays  scattered  about;  also  2 
butterflies.  Mrs.  Benwick  C.  Hurry 

Sharp,  Keziah.  1825.  23i"x24".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  At  bottom, 
large  house  with  2  men  and  2  women,  sheep,  ducks,  birds,  trees,  dogs,  swan,  and  man  on 
horseback.  "  K.  S.  daughter  Isaac  Sharp  and  Hannah  Sharp  his  wife  was  born  12  day 
12  month."     Verse  132  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Shattuck,  Mary  Ann.  [Cir.  1824.]  West  Cambridge  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  17".  Alpha- 
bets. Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Two-inch  embroidered  space  with  rose  in  the  center,  straw- 
berry plants  on  each  side,  and  pot  of  flowers  in  each  lower  corner.  Alphabets  and 
genealogical  matter  inclosed  in  an  arch  11  inches  wide,  supported  by  a  Corinthian  Column 
8  inches  high.  Over  the  arch  are  2  sprays  of  wild  roses  and  leaves.  "Family  Record: 
Isaac  Shattuck  April  9,  1778;  Hannah  Shattuck  Oct.  21st,  1788;  Isaac  Shattuck  April 
17,  1809;  Hannah  Shattuck      May  10,  1812;  Mary  A.  Shattuck      April  18,  1814." 

Col.  A.  L.  Varney 

Shattuck,  Sally.  13  yrs.  20|"x22".  4  alphabets.  Feather-stitch,  petit-point,  satin,  stem, 
cat,  and  cross-stitch.  Floral  border  on  three  sides.  Scene  with  house,  barn,  and  shed  all 
joined  together,  trees  in  background,  fence  at  one  end,  lawn  and  path  in  front.  Verse 
601  (1,  2,  var.).     Illustrated.  Rhode  Island  School  of  Design 

Shaw,  Abigah..  [1808.]  Chester  [N.  H.].  11  yrs.  Born  April  8,  1797.  10"  x  14".  3  alpha- 
bets.    Greek  fret  border.  Jennie  P.  Hazelton 

Shaw,  Charlotte.  1819.  17"  x  26".  Alphabet.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Half  Greek  cross, 
border  design.  At  bottom,  weeping  willow  tree  behind  and  above  garden  wall,  also  gray 
house  with  gold  roof,  flower  pots.  "Motto:  In  youth  the  tear  of  sympathy  is  graceful." 
Verse  432  (1st  2  lines  of  2d  verse).  Charles  S.  Henry,  2nd,  Esq. 

Shaw,  Lucy  [Woods].  1822.  Denmark,  Lewis  County,  N.  Y.  10  yrs.  8^"  x  10".  3  alpha- 
bets.    Cross-stitch.     Simple  line  border.     Three  weeping  willow  trees. 

Lucy  Shaw  Maxwell 

Sheapard,  Hannah  Wood.     1830.     10  yrs.     17i"  x  16*".     7  alphabets.     Verses  515,  647. 

Shearman,  Peace.  1822.  14  yrs.  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Conventional  diamond  design 
in  border.     Verse  488  (var.).  Old  Dartmouth  Historical  Society 

Sheldon,  Celia.  1806.  Cranston.  12  yrs.  21"x21".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Verses 
28,  609,  700.  Mrs.  Kingman 

Sheldon,  Mary.  1808.  Deerfield  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  9"  x  16^".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.  Most  of  sampler  given  up  to  well-balanced  arrangement  of  birds, 
hearts,  flowers,  baskets,  and  trees,  that  surround  an  oblong  framed  by  a  heart  border, 
containing  the  name  and  date.  Museum  of  the  Pocumtuck  Valley  Association 


222  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Sheijjok.  Mahy.  1810.  SuflBeld  [Conn.].  10  yrs.  8i"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.     Hemstitched  edge  and  cross-stitch  border  in  conventional  design. 

Miss  Alena  F.  Owen 

Shermax,  R.  1808.  [Jericho,  Long  Island.  Made  at  West  Town  School.  16  yrs.] 
12V'xl2i".  Cross-stitch.  Very  elaborate  floral  and  geometrical  border  on  three  sides. 
Individual  designs  of  flowers,  wreaths,  birds,  etc.,  in  the  manner  of  the  Pennsylvania 
School.  Mrs.  Henry  McAllister,  Jr. 

Sherman,  Sarah.  November  3,  1811.  9  yrs.  8|"x3J".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Simple 
border.  Miss  Lena  H.  Clarke 

Shixx,  ADELAmE  H.  1827.  New  Egypt  [N.  J.].  9  yrs.  8"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Variety 
of  stitches.  Cross-stitch  border.  Flower  in  each  lower  corner.  Dividing  lines  in  dif- 
ferent stitches.  Blanche  8.  Jobes 

Shinn,  Martha  N.  1801.  [Near  Pemberton,  N.  J.]  13  yrs.  9i"xl2".  5  alphabets.  Stem, 
cat,  flat,  queen,  eyelet,  cross,  and  two-sided  line-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  At  bottom, 
tree,  basket  of  fruit,  birds,  and  flowers.  Mrs.  William  Wills 

Shuhtleff,  Abby  Atwood.  1815.  Boston  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  13"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Verse  734  (var.).  Miss  Eleanor  Share 

Shute,  Rebecca.  1830.  24"  x  16".  Tent  and  solid  stem-stitch.  Top  border  of  strawberries 
with  2  birds;  side  borders  of  flowers;  bottom  border  of  flat-stitch.  In  upper  half,  roses, 
2  butterflies,  wreath  around  verse,  2  more  butterflies,  basket  of  roses,  tulips,  poppies,  and 
basket  of  fruit.  Wreath  is  made  up  of  strawberries  on  sides  and  top,  with  birds  and 
myrtle  below.     Verse  132  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

SiAxiHo,  I.TTCY  A.  1819.  "Stonington,  State  of  Connecticut,  U.  S."  14  yrs.  8i"x8|". 
2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     "  Lucy  Sianson."    Verse  89. 

"  DETH  IS  CERTIN  AND  ROOST  THAT  AN 
IF  THE  CAT  AND  DUST  INDUSE  " 

W.  G.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

SicKFRiTs,  Ellzabeth.  1824.  10  yrs.  22"  x  16".  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation  border. 
Scene  in  center  with  brick  house,  fence,  and  large  and  small  trees.  Inscription: 
"Respectfully  presented  to  Joseph  and  Sarah  Sickfrits  by  their  affectionate  daughter 
.    .    .    .   "  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Sipples,  Eliza  Tatxall.  1804.  Wilmington  [Del.  Born  in  1795.].  10"  x  12".  Southern 
Boarding  School.  Cross-stitch  done  on  one  thread.  Strawberry  vine  at  sides;  carnation 
in  lower  corners.     Greek  fret  border  around  verse.     Verse  263. 

William  M.  Canby,  Esq. 

Sissox,  Hanxah.  1812.  10  yrs.  11"  x  9".  2  alphabets.  Flat,  chain,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
Flat-stitch  border.     House  with  man,  two  women,  and  a  child.     Verse  548. 

Miss  Lois  Anna  Greene 

Sissox,  Lois.  [1819.]  15  yrs.  7"x8".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Verse 
457.  Miss  Lois  Anna  Greene 

Sissox,  Sussaxa.  1811.  9  yrs.  12"  x  10".  2  alphabets.  Flat,  stem,  cross,  and  queen-stitch. 
Flat-stitch  border.     House  with  man  and  woman  standing  on  each  side.     Verse  294. 

Miss  Lois  Anna  Greene 

Skeltox,  Judith  O.  [1819.]  18*"  x  15".  1  alphabet  and  part  of  2  others.  Tulip  border  and 
simple  cross-border.  Cross  and  eyelet-stitch.  At  bottom  2  roses  with  birds  perched  upon 
them  and  a  carnation  plant  in  the  center.  Mrs.  Walter  Carter  Moore 


\ 


^"%V3 


? 


ytsf 


—  I      nil  iininwjiiiiiMi  ■■!  ii||ifii[-fd*'''f'"'***""'*'*****'^"''t'""'*'*'*'^*^**"l'  •• 


^   Is;  ten  w^wtlaf  >^;se#«-t)f^^ 


i 


-.,^ 


'^-''^^i-<^' 


'if 


1 


-fsi;:  '^SS: 


Si  is  is::  l^,-|ift-     •«-.,■ -^ 
I!  19 


"taitctiirTfffitiy?BtgJH-" 


V- 


-< 


PLATE  LXXII 


Sarah  S.  Caldwell's  Sampler.     Barre,  Mass.     1806 
O-cCned   hi)  Mrs.   W.   F.  Allen 


^. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  223 

Skinner,  Mary  HuRD.  1815.  Charlestown  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  10"xH".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
cat,  cross,  and  hem-stitch.  Simple  zigzag  border  design.  "  Be  virtuous  while  thou  art 
young."  Katharine  French 

Skinner,  Rebecca.  1824.  Philadelphia.  8  yrs.  22"x25".  5  alphabets.  Flat,  eyelet,  and 
cross-stitch.  Vine  and  strawberry  border,  with  flat-stitch  inside.  Near  the  base,  a  brick 
house  with  2  rabbits  and  a  dog  in  front;  at  one  side,  a  boy  and  bush  with  birds;  under  a 
willow  tree,  a  girl  with  crook  and  dog  tending  5  sheep,  2  trees  back  of  house;  above 
house,  3  birds  with  twigs  in  bills,  an  eagle,  the  sun,  pair  of  birds  with  strawberry  between 
them,  and  other  fancy  designs.  "God  is  love."  Initials:  "WES"  [William  and 
Esther  Skinner,  parents].  Miss  Mable  Adaline  Stiles 

Skinner,  Rebecca.  1826.  Philadelphia.  10  yrs.  26"  x  27".  Outline,  chain,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.     Border  of  heavy  passion  flowers.     Wreath  around  name  and  age. 

Mrs.  Clement  Beeves 

Slade,  Ruth  G.  August,  1806.  "  Swanzy "  [now  called  Swansea].  Born  in  Swanzy,  Jan- 
uary the  4th,  1796.  10"  x  12".  4  alphabets.  Pineapple,  feather,  chain,  eyelet,  satin,  cross, 
and  over-and-under  stitch.  Cross-stitch  border.  At  bottom,  conventional  trees  and  fruit. 
Dividing  lines  in  different  stitches.  Anna  H.  Borden 

Slim,  Rebecca.  1830.  25"  x  21  J".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border,  with  leaves  and  blos- 
soms on  three  sides;  two  birds  nibbling  at  spray  in  center  at  top.  At  bottom,  scene  with 
brick  house,  trees,  huge  mandolin,  lawn,  cows,  hens,  dogs,  geese,  sheep,  etc.  Remainder 
of  space  filled  in  with  detached  birds  and  flowers.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Sluman,  Mary.  1807.  13  yrs.  15y'x23".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  3  alphabets. 
Floral  border  in  satin-stitch.     Flowers,  sheep,  and  a  vase  at  bottom.     Verse  703  (3). 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Small,  Sally  D.  July  28,  1818.  Portland  [Me.].  Born  December  28,  1804.  17"x21".  Flat, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border.  In  lower  left-hand  corner,  monument  sur- 
mounted by  bust  and  bearing  inscription  "A.  Small"  on  the  base;  willow  tree  in  back- 
ground and  weeping  woman  in  foreground.  Remainder  of  sampler  contains,  "  A 
Genealogy:  Alexander  Small  born  Dec.  27,  1777;  Sarah  Mariner  born  Apr  21,  1779; 
Married  Sept.  16,  1799.  Moses  Mariner  born  June  17,  1742;  Rebecah  Parker  born  July 
2,  1746;  Married  Nov.  27,  1766.  Abagail  Mariner  born  Sept.  12,  1767;  Died  Jan.  7,  1769. 
Abagail  Mariner  born  Nov.  31,  1769.  Joseph  Mariner  born  Sept.  12,  1772.  Hannah 
Mariner  born  Apr  21,  1775.  Sarah  Mariner  born  Apr  21,  1779.  Moses  Mariner  Jun. 
born  May  27,  1782.  Joseph  Mariner  died  Sept.  8,  1784.  Rebecah  Mariner  born  Jul 
4,  1786.  Joseph  Mariner  born  Oct.  26,  1791.  Joseph  Mariner  born  Oct.  26,  1791.  Moses 
Mariner  Jun.  died  March  1,  1803.  Arthur  M.  Small  born  Sept.  12,  1800.  Alexander 
Small  jr.  born  Dec.  3,  1802.  Sally  D.  Small  born  Dec.  28,  1804.  Alexander  Small  died 
Sept.  16,  1806."  Marshall  Cutler,  Esq. 

Smith,  Betsy  K.  1818.  12  yrs.  17"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Realistic 
strawberry  border.     House  with  an  animal  on  either  side.    Verse  118. 

Mrs.  Leroy  A.  White 

SMirn,  Electra.  1809.  Bristol  [R.  I.].  10  yrs.  17"  x  14i".  Cross-stitch.  Pointed  cross- 
stitch  design  at  bottom.  Festoon  of  rests  and  bowknot.  Family  register :  "  John  Smith 
born  April  10th,  1764;  Anna  Smith  born  May  23rd,  1773;  Married  August  7th,  1791. 
George  Smith  born  May  5th,  1793;  Anna  Cook  Smith  born  April  23rd,  1796;  Electra 
Smith  born  June  16th,  1799;  John  Smith  Jr.  born  April  3rd,  1801;  Richard  Smith  born  Dec. 
3rd,  1804;  John  Atwood  Smith  born  Sept  29,  180?;  Richard  Dimoch  Smith  born  September 


224  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

20,  1808.     John  Smith  Jr.   Son   of  John   &  Anna   Smith  died  Dec.   25th,   1801;   Richard 
Smith  Son  of  John  &  Anna  Smith  died  Jan.  23rd,  1809."  Miss  Jane  L.  Anthony 

Smith,  Esther.  1823.  Born  April  21,  1811.  "  Brookhaven,  Long  Island,  Suffolk  County, 
State  of  New  York."  Cross-stitch.  Dividing  lines  in  different  designs.  4  partial  alpha- 
bets.   Large  baskets  of  flowers  at  bottom,  and  smaller  ones  elsewhere.    Verse  169a. 

Dr.  James  W.  Walker 

Smith,  Hannah  H.  [Cir.  1824.]  Hampstead  [N.  H.].  Born  April  6,  1813.  6"x6".  2 
alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Three  baskets  at  base,  one  with  flowers  and  two 
with  blocks.  Miss  Harriet  M.  Smith 

Smith,  Isabel.  1811.  11  yrs.  7"  x  12i".  2  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Scroll  design 
on  three  sides.  Lancaster  Public  Library 

Smith,  Lucy.  1806.  Sterling  [Mass.].  lli"xllV'.  2  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Narrow  border   with  satin-stitch  points.     Strawberry   design   at  bottom. 

Lancaster  Public  Library 

Smith,  Lydia  C.  1828.  Holmes  Hole  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  17"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet, 
satin,  cross,  and  hem-stitch.  Conventional  rose-tree  border.  At  bottom,  picture  of 
birthplace,  showing  house,  garden,  fence,  and  trees.  Mrs.  F.  LeBaron  Monroe 

Smith,  Mary.  1821.  9^"x9".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Birds,  flowers,  and  acorn  designs. 
[Found  in  Tarry  town.]  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Smith,  Mary  Amanda.  1813.  Hanover  [N.  H.].  10  yrs.  17^"  x  11".  3  alphabets.  Top 
border,  heavy  trefoil;  side  borders,  outline  trefoil;  lower  border,  zigzag  shell  design. 

Mrs.  Edward  C.  Wood 

Smith,  Sophia  Stevens.  1818.  14  yrs.  23"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Elaborate  scene  with  church,  farmhouses,  stream,  boats,  bridge,  coach  and 
horses  on  bridge,  trees,  etc.  Scene  represents  the  North  Branford  (Conn.)  church,  which 
was  burned  down  recently.  Elaborate  garland  of  flowers  across  top,  and  caught  up  by 
bowknots.    Verse  311.     Illustrated  in  color.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Smithher  (?),  Emma.  [Cir.  1810.]  8  yrs.  9^"  x  10^".  Petit-point,  tent,  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  border.     House,  little  girl,  and  dogs.  Mrs.  Siegfried  Wachsman 

Snead,  Sarah  H.  1818.  Worcester  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  9J"xl3J".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Greek  fret  border  outside,  saw-tooth  design  next,  and  third  border  of  Greek  fret.  Divid- 
ing lines  in  different  designs.  Mrs.  D.  W.  Kuhn 

Snodgras,  Mary.  1802.  Harrisburgh  [Pa.].  Born  in  Philadelphia,  August  13  A  D  1787. 
14"  X  14".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  has  squares,  with  straw- 
berries, roses,  bachelor  buttons,  and  conventional  designs.  In  center,  lady  under  a  tree 
writing;  tree  to  the  left  with  apples;  at  bottom,  a  house  with  a  large  bird  on  the  right 
and  tree  on  the  left.    An  intertwined  vine  around  central  picture.  Dr.  Mary  O.  Hood 

Snively,  Mary.  1814.  [Cumberland  County,  Pa.]  13  yrs.  Born  May  13,  1801.  10"xl2". 
4  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Strawberry  vine  at  bottom. 
Verse  20.  Mrs.  Frederick  D.  Rose 

Snyder,   Catherine    Stringham.      1800.      [Clarkstown,   Orange   County,   N.   Y.]       15"  x  18". 
Alphabet.     Cross-stitch.    Vine  border.     Geometrical  figures  at  bottom. 
"  Dialogue: 

Men:     Tell  us  O  women,  we  would  know  whither  so  fast  we  move. 
Women:     We  call'd  to  leave  the  world  below  are  seeking  one  above. 
Men:     When  came  ye,  sa." 

Mrs.  William  H.  Dickson 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  225 

SouTHWORTH,  MiRA.  1818.  7  jTS.  14.f "  X 15".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border. 
Verse  129  (var.).  Mrs.  Lewis  Bass 

Spaldixg,  Maria  E.  1819.  Brooklyn  [N.  Y.].  10  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Rope,  satin,  queen,  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  across  top,  with  solid  pillars  on  sides.  Two  trees  and 
lozenges.  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Spaulding,  Emeline.  1828.  Hillsboro  [N.  H.].  8  yrs.  10"xll".  Cross-stitch.  Greek 
fret  border.  Mrs.  Nettie  Spalding  Ferebee 

Spaulding,  Mary.  1823.  Lowell  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  Born  January  24,  1812.  13"  x  13".  3 
alphabets.     Stem,  French  knots,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Rose  and  vine  border. 

Mrs.  Nettie  Spalding  Ferebee 

Speakman,  Phebe  Ann.  1820.  "West  Town  School."  22"x21".  Cross-stitch.  Geometric 
figures  cut  in  half-form  border.     Scattered  vines  at  bottom.     Verses  462,  762. 

Mrs.  Edward  H.  Johnson 

Speer,  Polly.  1804.  [Near  Gettysburg,  Pa.]  12"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.     Top  border  of  strawberries.  Mrs.  William  Paxton  Stevenson 

Spicer,  Abigail.  1808.  11  yrs.  12"  x  9".  4  alphabets.  Flat,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross- 
stitch  border.    Verse  280.  Mrs.  C.  B.  Stark 

Spooxer,  Mary  Ann.  1808.  9  yrs.  Born  in  Boston,  October  18,  1799.  16"  x  21".  3  alpha- 
bets.    Satin  and  cross-stitch.     Rose  border.     Verses  162  (var.),  187  (var.),  419. 

Mrs.  Frederick  Cate 

Sprague,  Esther  S.  1823.  9  yrs.  16"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.     Rose  border.     Verse  515  (1,  var.).  Miss  Alzada  J.  Sprague 

Sprague,  Mary.  1807.  16"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Trees  and  birds. 
Verses  28,  609,  700.  Mr.  Arthur  W.  Claflin 

Sprague,  Phebe.     1807.     11  yrs.     16"  x  16".    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.     Verses  28,  609,  700. 

Mr.  Arthur  W.  Claflin 

Sprogell,  Mary  Cathakine.  [Cir.  1814.  10  yrs.]  17^"  x  17".  Birds,  flowers,  and  baskets 
of  flowers.     Strawberry  border.     Verse  555.  Mrs.  J.  F.  Barr 

Squire,  Abigail.  1821.  New  Bedford  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  4  alphabets.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Roses  and  six-pointed  stars  inclosed  in  squares  in  border.    Verse  104  (var.). 

Old  Dartmouth  Historical  Society 

Stanifohd,  Sarah.  1808.  11  yrs.  22"x22".  3  alphabets.  Tent,  stem,  and  cross-stitch. 
In  center  at  bottom  is  a  basket  of  roses,  tulips,  and  leaves,  from  which  a  wreath  of 
flowers  tied  with  blue  bowknots  extends  around  the  sampler.  Family  register:  "Aaron 
Staniford  born  March  10th,  1754;  Lucy  Lord  born  October  4th,  1765;  They  were  married 
March  18th,  1787.  Aaron  Staniford  born  January  4th,  1788;  Lucy  Staniford  born  May 
22,  1790;  Mary  Staniford  born  July  22d,  1794;  Sarah  Staniford  born  October  15th,  1797; 
Mr.  Aaron  Staniford  died  July  22  1801  aged  47."  Thomas  Todd,  Esq. 

Stanley,  Euza  Matilda.  1829.  Hamilton  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  16i"xl6J".  5  alphabets. 
Satin,  eyelet,  chain,  and  cros.s-stitch.  Rose  border;  bouquets  separated  by  triangular 
line.  Charles  T.  Gallagher,  Esq. 

Stanley,  Phebe  M[ARra.  1828.  Norton,  Mass.].  13  yrs.  [Born  October  21,  1815.] 
17i"  X  ni".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross-stitch  border.  House  in  Norton,  Mass., 
with  curving  fence,  unfinished.  Ralph  M.  Messinger,  Esq. 


226  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Stanton,  Mahy.  1825.  11  yrs.  20"xl7".  4  alphabets.  Flat,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  House, 
with  man  and  woman  under  a  tree  at  one  side.     Verse  272.        Mrs.  Alfred  H.  Wilkinson 

Starhy,  Marv  E.  1824.  Charlestown.  18"  x  \1V.  7  alphabets.  Queen,  back,  eyelet,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border;  larger  pattern  on  sides.  Cross-borders  in 
crescent,  scroll,  and  other  conventional  designs.  At  bottom,  2  roses,  1  clover  plant,  and 
1  rose  plant.     Verse  515   (var.).  Mrs.  S.  E.  Cunningham 

Stearns,  Mary  Hall.  1810.  Lunenburg  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  18J"  x  15i".  3^  alphabets.  Eyelet 
and  cross-stitch.  Mrs.  Alexander  8.  Porter 

Stearns,  Nancy.  1805.  16"  x  20".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Climb- 
ing rose-vine  on  three  sides.  At  bottom,  cluster  of  flowers  with  fruit  trees  on  each 
side.     Verse  645   (2).  Miss  Mary  Louisa  Adams   Clement 

Steer,  Rachel.  1800.  Frederick  County,  Va.  9  yrs.  Born  in  1791.  14"  x  17".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.    Strawberry  border  at  bottom.  Elma  C.  Collins 

Steer,  Sarah.  1806.  9  yrs.  12"  x  20".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  floral  border. 
Floral  border  around  verses.     Verse  275. 

WilUam  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

Sterling,  Patty  Kendall.  1806.  12  yrs.  18"  x  17^".  3  alphabets.  Herringbone  and  satin- 
stitch.     Strawberry  beds  at  bottom.    Verse  107  (var.).         The  Emmti  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Stetson,  Huldah.  May  18th,  1809.  Bridgewater  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  21"x2r'.  3  alphabets. 
Chain,  cross,  and  flat-stitch.     Conventional  designs.  The  Misses  Ford 

Stevens,  Anne.  [Cir.  1803.]  Marblehead  [Mass.].  8"x8i".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Simple  line  border.  At  bottom,  2  girls  with  floral  design  between  and  birds  perched 
around  bottom.     Fancy  cross-borders.  Mrs.  Fletcher  Hodges 

Stevens,  Elizabeth.  1810.  New  York  City.  9"  x  12".  French  knots,  chain,  stem,  tent,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Cross-stitch  border.  Map  of  Massachusetts.  "  New  York  Public  School 
No.  13."  ^t^^-  F.  E.  Wallace 

Stevens,  Elizabeth  H.  1820.  16"  x  17".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  At 
bottom,  house,  trees,  and  grass.    Verse  655  (2).  Mrs.  John  Wahl  Queen 

Stevens,  Emma  A.  [Cir.  1825.]  Salisbury  [N.  H.].  21i"x2r'.  Stem,  satin,  French  knots, 
and  cross-stitch.     Elaborate  rose  border.     Border  and  wreath  around  name.     Verse  477. 

Shreve,  Crump  i'  Low,  March,  1910 

Stevenson,  Mary  Ann.  1829.  Philadelphia.  13  yrs.  17i"x21V'.  Satin  and  cross-stitch. 
Greek  fret  border,  also  flower  and  tree  border.  Three  white  roses  with  leaves  in  upper 
center;  cherries,  grapes,  currants,  and  basket  of  strawberries  in  lower  center.  Verses  515 
(var.),  622   (var.).  ^J^^f-  Charles  H.  Tindall 

Stickney,  Lucy  D.  1830.  Charlestown  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  23V' x  25".  3  alphabets.  French 
knots,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  rose  border  on  three  sides,  caught  up  with 
bowknots  in  upper  corners.  At  bottom,  .scene  with  Charlestown  Neck  Hous€,  trees,  marsh, 
wharf,  and  water.  Sky  and  reflection  in  water  are  painted.  On  either  side  of  verse  in 
center  are  sprays  of  flowers.    Verse  38.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Stickney,  Sarah  Ann.  1813.  Newburyport.  11  yrs.  18"x21i".  Chain,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Clover  border.  At  bottom,  three  tombstones  with  three  weeping  willow 
trees,  bearing  inscriptions:  "In  memory  of  Thomas  Adams,  Obt.  Oct.  11,  1795,  aged  37; 
In  memory  of  Wm.  Stickney  Obt.  Sept.  22,  1802,  aged  20  months;  Sacred  to  the  memory 
of  Thomas  Stickney  Obt.  Sept.  6,  1803,  aged  30."     Family  register:     "Thomas  Adams 


'  wTf-*-*'^^.  Hf    ■ 


PLATE  LXXIII 

Margaret  Moss's  Sampler.     Philadelphia.     1825 

Owned  by  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Plate  presented  by  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  227 

born  December  22,  1758;  Alice  Moody  born  January  11,  1768;  Married  May  28,  1789. 
Thomas  Adams  born  March  11,  1790;  James  Adams  born  January  27,  1794';  Thomas 
Stickney  born  May  28,  1773;  Alice  Adams  married  September  22,  1798;  David  Stickney 
born  June  24,  1799;  William  Stickney  born  January  7,  1801;  Sarah  Ann  Stickney  born 
Oct.  16,  1802;  Silas  Moody  born  Dec.  5,  1775;  Alice  Stickney  married  June  9,  1808." 
Verse  302.  »  Mrs.  Alice  Genn 

Stiles,  Elizabeth  S.  M.  1810.  15"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Birds'-eye  and  cross-stitch.  Small 
and  queer  strawberries  in  border.     Unfinished  vase  of  flowers  at  bottom.     Verse  288. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawfon 

Stites,  Rhoda.  1826.  [Beasley's  Point,  Cape  May  County,  N.  J.]  17"  x  17f .  4  alphabets. 
Flat,  cross,  and  other  stitches.     Strawberry-vine  border.     Flowers  in  vase.     Verse  781. 

Mrs.  M.  V.  B.  Scull 

Stockton,  Ann.  1804.  [Springfield  Township,  N.  J.]  17"  x  18".  Cross,  satin,  stem,  chain, 
solid  stem-stitch.  Flat-stitch  border.  At  top  a  house  with  fence,  two  poplar  trees,  wil- 
low tree,  and  basket  of  plums.  At  bottom,  fence,  girl  on  horseback,  dog,  and  cow.  Tenant 
house  in  corner,  with  lambs,  hill  and  trees.  Miss  Xancy  Brown 

Stockton,  Ltdia.  1803.  [Springfield  TowTiship,  Burlington  County,  N.  J.]  10  yrs.  Born 
October  30,  1793.     8|"  x  Hi".     4  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Cross-border. 

Miss  Mary  Taylor  Black 

Stockton,  Mahgaret.  1802.  Marlton  [N.  J.].  17"x23".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  queen,  and 
cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Rose,  carnation,  duck,  and  bird  at  bottom.  Verse. 633  (1, 
var.).  Dr.  J.  C.  Haines 

Stockwell,  Ann  C.  1802.  10  yrs.  9i"  x  Hi".  Alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Small  church  in 
center.  For  Sale  May  29,  1917,  at  The  Walpole  Galleries 

Stoddard,  Ann.  1801.  Hlngham.  11  yrs.  12"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Trefoil  border.  "In- 
dustry is  the  law  of  our  nature,  the  indispensible  condition  of  a  possessing  of  a  sound 
mind  and  a  sound  body."  M.  Anna  Pierce 

Stokes,  Caroline.  1818.  21i"x23".  Edged  with  ribbon.  (This  sampler  is  very  similar  to 
Sarah  Cole's.)  Mrs.  H.  E.  GilUngham 

Stone,  Mary.  August  20,  1806.  Topsham  [Me.].  7  yrs.  19"  x  17".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Strawberry  border.     Verse  693   (1).  Mrs.  George  Plimpton 

Stone,  Mary.  1808.  Cambridge  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  13"  x  14".  2  alphabets.  Border  of  double 
cross-stitch,  with  drawnwork  between  all  around,  s-croll  design  at  top  and  sides ;  con- 
ventional border  in  cross-stitch  and  drawnwork  also  at  top.  Square  in  center  with  5 
trees,  each  with  dove  on  top.     Wide  band  of  flat-stitch  around  square. 

Nathaniel  J.   W.  Fish,  Esq. 

Storer,  Hannah.  1821.  Waldoboro  [Me.].  9  yrs.  12"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  with  vine  border.  At  bottom,  basket,  cross,  urn 
with  flowers,  tree;  also  elaborate  design  of  plant  in  receptacle,  on  which  are  leaves  and 
flowers.    Verse  515  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  William  H.  Shurtlef 

Stratten,  Sarah  B.  September  26,  1813.  Northborough.  14  yrs.  3  alphabets.  Great 
variety  of  stitches.  Spray  of  flowers  in  each  corner;  then  wreath  of  vine  and  berries, 
with  inner  circle  of  conventional  pointed  design.  Basket  of  flowers  at  top  and  vase  of 
berries  and  leaves  at  bottom.  Dividing  lines  between  alphabets  and  Greek  fret  border 
inclosing  verse.     Verse  40  (var.).  Mrs.  Richard  H.  Hunt 


228  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Stretch,  Axn  W.  [Salem  County,  N.  J.]  13i"  x  14".  Cross-stitch.  Grapevine  border.  At 
bottom,  mound  surmounted  with  vase  containing  carnation  and  2  strawberries,  and  flanked 
on  each  side  with  vases  of  flowers  and  fruit.  Design  in  center,  2  doves  with  branch  in 
mouths  surroimded  by  octagonal  inclosure,  with  words  "  Emblem  of  Love."  Trees,  bowls 
of  fruit,  sprays  of  flowers,  etc.,  scattered  all  over  sampler.     Verse  377  (var.). 

Miss  Kate  S.  Harris 

Steoxg,  Fraxces.  1821.  [Northampton,  Mass.]  10  yrs.  [Born  February  4,  1821.]  18"  x  13". 
3  alphabets.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  Alternate  squares  in  borders.  At  bottom,  large 
basket  of  flowers  in  each  lower  corner  and  five  trees  in  a  row,  three  large  and  two 
small.  Fancy  stitches  in  dividing  lines.  Cross-stitch  shield  around  name.  Verses  321, 
768.  Miss  Harriet  J.  Kneeland 

Sturges,  Nancy  A.  1830.  Vassalborough,  Me.  12  yrs.  9"  x  19".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Two  alternate  rows  of  cross-stitch  in  border.  Mrs.  Charles  Vose 

Stjluvax,  Elmira.  1818.  Portsmouth  [N.  H.].  10  yrs.  12"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Flat, 
eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Beneath  row  of  eyelets  are  the  words, 
"Youth  is  the  time  to  improve."    Verse  601  (1,  2,  var.).  Caroline  Stavers 

Sweet,  Sar.\h  F.  Before  1814.  10i"x9".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Picture  of  the 
First  Congregational  Church  in  Providence.  The  Church  was  destroyed  by  fire  June  14, 
1814.     Illustrated.  Miss  M.  Frances  Babcock 

SwEETLAXD,  Harriet.  1811.  Hecbson  [Conn.  Born  November  20,  1798].  Il"xl2".  1 
alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-stitch  border  at  top.  At  bottom,  house 
with  a  rose  bush  on  each  side,  fence  around  green  space,  more  rose  bushes,  white  pot  of 
roses,  and  green  wreath  around  letters  "SB"  [initials  of  a  cousin  living  with  her]. 

Mrs.  John  L.  Jerome 

Sweetser,  Cornelia.  February  22,  1807.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  7  yrs.  18"  x  13".  4  alpha- 
bets. Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Narrow  saw-tooth  border.  Dividing  lines  in  various 
designs.  Miss  Frances  W.  Sweetser 

SwEETSER,  Mart  Jaxe.  August  28,  1813.  8  yrs.  13"  x  9^".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.    Verse  680  (1).  Mrs.  John  A.  Sweetser 

Sweetser,  Sally.  April  18,  1808.  Newburyport  [Mass.].  6  yrs.  18"  x  13".  3  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Narrow  saw-tooth  border.    Verse  639. 

Mrs.  John  A.  Sweetser 

Swift,  Rosanxah.  September  10,  1817.  9|"x8".  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  3  alphabets. 
Various  different  cross-borders  in  conventional  designs.     Verse  182   (1). 

W.  G.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

T ,  E.     1810.     20"xl8".     Cross-stitch.     Elaborate  carnation  border.     Hill  with  house  on 


top;  four  trees  on  either  side  of  hill;  birds  on  first  tree  on  either  side;  man  in  Indian 
costume  and  a  woman  standing  with  hands  clasped,  with  deer  and  sheep  around  them; 
baskets  of  flowers  hang  in  raid-air  on  either  side  of  house.  Verse  428.  Wreaths  inclosing 
single  initials  "  E  "  and  "  T."  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Taixter,  Roxa.     June  20,  1806.     Leicester   [Mass.].     13  yrs.     8"  x  16".     2  alphabets.     Cross- 
stitch  and  hem-stitch.     Hemstitched  edge.     Verse  414.  Myra  M.  Gilbert  Morrill 

Talbot,    Eliza.      1810.      "West    School."      16"  x  17".      Chain    and    cat-stitch.      3    alphabets. 
Verse  515   (var.).  ^^rs.  Howard  Gardner 

Tallman,  Lydia.     1808.     New  Bedford    [Mass.].     10  yrs.     17"x21".     4   alphabets.     French 
knots,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.     Tulip  border.     Verse  104  (var.).  3/w*  BelU  Skinner 


-r:Vi5^> 


'jV 


.''■-;'-r*.C€>-£'  c.-''oorri 


M-xrrUtdb-:,  tYi..  (T"-/..'.  J  ■  0o.:^    i^>ald«*m    ^^o.^tov,     .r?m,4> 


'.     Si^T.tiU     J?"*;" 


i-f         ■.--.  '-^ 


'ilotJi'*'  20 

" '    ua-nvity  2  ? 

-.  <-r;p   ^' 

;■■    --... 

^^  j;'ir^vi>i;-J8 

.'  ••■   '  T-- 

•J 

.!.•■".-■.' 

./?otai.^'  ii" 

/800 

a-  1^ 


r 


PLATE  LXXIV 

Haxxaii  Lorixg's  Sampler.     Boston.     1812 

Made  in  Mi.ss  Perkins's  Academy,  Boston 

Owned  by  Mrs.  Lathrop  C.  Harper 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  229 

[Tawn,  Mary  Axx.  1812.  Philadelphia,  Pa.]  26"  x  18".  Long  and  cross-stitch.  Scene  at 
bottom  with  three-story  brick  house,  tall  poplars,  bushes,  groups  of  men  and  women 
on  lawn  at  either  side,  sheep,  and  urn  of  flowers  in  front,  and  two  flocks  of  birds. 

Mrs.  Edward  Twaddell 

Ta-exor,  Eliza.  September  1,  1804.  Little  Compton  [R.  I.].  8  yrs.  17"  x  11".  Cross-stitch. 
3  alphabets.    Scene  with  house  and  rose  bushes.  Miss  Alice  Martin  Morgan 

Taylor,  Elizabeth.  1812.  Baltimore  [Md.].  9  yrs.  18"x20".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cat, 
tent,  and  cross-stitch.     Double  border,  strawberry  and  crow-foot;  also  cross-borders. 

Miss  Grace  Evelyn  Bouldin 

Taylor,  Eunice.     1817.       11  yrs.     12"  x  16".     Alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     2  lines  of  a  proverb. 

Sold  at  American  Art  OalUries,  N.  Y.,  April  11,  1918 

Taylor,  Hester  Dashiell.  1800.  Alexandria  [Va.].  17"  x  17".  Alphabets.  Satin,  stem, 
and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  At  bottom,  house  with  trees  and  cornucopia  of 
flowers.     Verses  103,  671.  Mrs.  John  Van  Rensselaer 

Taylor,  Julian.  1804.  10  yrs.  16i"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
House.  Mrs.  William  E.  Miller 

Taylor,  Sally.     1800.     Providence.     8  yrs.     21"  x  8".     5  alphabets.     Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Mr.  Elisha  H.  Howard 

Teackle,  Eliza  Custis.  January  12,  1804.  11^"  x  14i".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Geometrical 
design   in   border   and   cross-borders.     "  Prepare   to   meet   Thy  God."     Verses   266,   681. 

Mrs.  James  Fortescue  Oiffen 

Temple,  Lydia  Anx.  1821.  16"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  stem,  queen,  long  and  short, 
two-sided  line-stitch,  and  French  knots.    Verse  464.  Rhode  Island 

Texches,  Nancy  R.  S.  [Before  1830.]  3  alphabets.  Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Wide 
floral  border.     Wreath  of  roses  around  name  and  date.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Terry,  Elizabeth  RowE.  1828.  [Cutchogue,  L.  I.]  16"xl5^".  Cross-stitch.  Simple  border. 
Sampler  divided  into  4  sections:  at  top,  conventionalized  basket  of  fruit  in  center,  and 
baskets  of  flowers  on  either  side;  2d  section,  conventionalized  "Adam  and  Eve"  scene, 
flanked  by  huge  plants  and  small  trees;  3d  section,  odd-looking  structure  in  center,  with 
lady  carrying  flowers  on  one  side  and  unfinished  figure  of  man  on  the  other  side,  and 
small  trees  topped  by  birds  at  ends,  also  small  dogs  following  man  and  woman;  at 
bottom,  baskets  of  fruit,  flowers,  peacock,  and  small  birds.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Thackrey,  Ebxa  Ann.  1822.  21J"x21.\".  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Vine 
and  flowers  on  sides;  green  mound  at  bottom,  topped  by  small  trees  and  animals;  birds 
and  sprays  of  flowers  at  top;  detached  sprays  of  flowers  and  baskets  of  fruit  and 
flowers,  and  birds  scattered  all  about.  Verse  466.  "  Joseph  Thackrey "  and  "  Abigail 
Thackrey  "  inscribed  across  top.  Mrs.  H.  de  B.  Parsons 

Thaw,  Ann  Margaret.  May,  1819.  17"x21i".  Satin,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation 
and  tulip  border  all  around,  and  cross-borders  of  rosebud,  carnation,  and  strawberry 
designs.  In  upper  section,  large  pots  with  flowering  plants,  vines,  etc.  In  lower  section, 
house,  fence,  gate,  trees,  and  sheep.  Mrs.  Lathrop  C.  Harper 

Thayer,  Harriot  A.  [1811.  Greenfield,  Mass.  Born  in  1800.]  11"  x  1.5".  3  alphabets.  Flat 
and  cross-stitch.     Flat-stitch  all  around,  with  strawberry  vine  across  top. 

Elizabeth  DeKalb  Peace 

Thayer,  Levina  K.     [1824.     Mendon.]     8"  x  10".     3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Mr.  Francis  H.  Anthony 


230  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Thomas,  Eliza.  ISO*.  Media  [Pa.].  16"  x  18".  Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry 
border,  with  stars  in  the  corners  and  a  canopy  above.  Two  baskets  of  fruit,  wuth  leaves 
at  bottom.  Scene  with  brick  house  on  a  hill  bordered  by  trees,  under  which  are  two  stags 
and  a  dog;  also  an  arch  bordered  by  trees  and  a  fence.     Verses  6,  684. 

Mrs.  V.  S.  Chinn 

Thompsok,  Ann.  1801.  [Near  Repaupa,  N.  J.]  17  yrs.  1.5"  x  17".  Cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry and  vine  border.  Wild-rose  design  at  bottom.  "  Love  the  Lord  and  he  will  be  a 
tender  father  unto  thee."  (Children  of  Isaac  and  Ann  Thomson  as  recorded  on  sampler): 
"Margaret  born  Jan.  23,  1777;  Benjamin  born  Aug.  18,  1779;  Isaac  born  Nov.  21,  1782; 
Ann  born  Nov.  11,  1784;  Mary  born  April  6,  1787;  Charles  born  March  14,  1790;  Nathan 
born  Feb.  9,  1793;  Jane  born  Dec.  (?)   1798."     Verse  343  (1).  E.  Arlington  Jones 

Thompson,  Ann.  "  2rd  moth  9th  18010."  1810.  11  yrs.  18"  x  16".  Outline,  stem,  and  satin- 
stitch.  Conventional  floral  border,  with  roses  and  leaves.  In  center,  basket  of  rosebuds 
and  carnations.  Miss  Linda  Lippincott 

Thompson,  Hannah  E.  W.  1817.  Stratham  [N.  H.].  11  yrs.  8i"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Flat, 
eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.     Hemstitched  edge,  with  conventional  cross-borders. 

Miss  Hannah  Bartlett  Rollins 

Thompson,  Rachel.     1800.     3  alphabets.     Simple  cross-borders.     Cross  and  eyelet-stitch. 

Mrs.  Herbert  E.  Black 

Thohnton,  Diana.  1813.  19"  x  17".  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and 
floral  border.     Verse  515   (var.).     "In  thy  fair  book  of  life  devine." 

Mr.   Arthur    W.    Claflin 

Tedey,  Mary  Ann.  1830.  8"  x  12".  Cross-stitch.  Floral  border.  Three  divisions  on  sampler; 
upper  third  contains  picture  of  Adam  and  Eve  with  serpent,  tree,  bushes,  and  birds; 
center  division  contains  conventional  pot  of  flowers,  flanked  by  rose  bushes  and  animals; 
lower  third  contains  row  of  plants  in  pots,  a  cock,  crowns,  etc. 

Mrs.  S.  Van  Rensselaer  Thayer 

Tileston,  .     [After  1814.]     Satin  and  cross-stitch.     Conventional  design  on  three  sides. 

Three  sprays  of  flowers  at  top.  Names  and  dates:  "  Nathaniel  Tileston  born  Feb.  16, 
1764;  Elizabeth  Draper  born  Sept  10,  1767;  Married  Nov.  9,  1790.  Nathaniel  Tileston 
Junr.  born  June  14,  1798;  George  Tileston  born  Nov.  21,  1795;  Eliza  Tileston  born  May 
10,  1793;  Draper  Tileston  b.  Jan  20,  1801;  John  Tileston  b.  Feb.  16  1803;  William  D. 
Tileston  born  Aug.  16,  1806;  Charles  Tileston  born  Nov.  1,  1810;  Catherine  S.  Tileston 
born  Sept.  30,  1814."  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Tn-TON,  Amelia.  1814.  Hopkinton  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  12i"  x  13".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  tent, 
and  cross-stitch.    Greek  fret  border.  Mrs.  Charles  M.  Morse 

Tisdale,  Rhoda.  1816.  Taunton  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  7"  x  12".  Cross-stitch.  Zigzag  design  in 
border.  Emily  C.  Williams 

TiSE,  Sarah  Axx.  1827.  10  yrs.  [Born  November  1,  1817,  at  Bergen,  N.  J.]  17"  x  19".  3 
alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Greek  fret  and  strawberry  borders.  "  Honor  thy  Parents." 
"  Fear  God."    Verse  63.  Mrs.  Vincent  R.  Schenck 

Todd,  L.  [Cir.  1814.  Born  in  1800.  Salisbury,  N.  Y.]  30"  x  24".  Quilting-stitch.  Cornu- 
copia quilted  all  in  white  fruits  and  flowers.  Grapevine  at  bottom  and  on  sides.  Name 
in  circle  of  knots.  Mrs.  Edward  S.  Isham 

ToPLiFF,  Sarah.  1810.  Dorchester  [Mass.].  12"  x  12".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Pointed 
design  in  border.     Verse  669  (var.).  Harriet  M.  Cutler 


1 


■^ 


r    I 


l^m  Jones' 

•-.d  ;t,  <^o,-toi.  9f<,.  29.  PSJ.  in  the 
e:  £>.  S-. 


Ciry  ^u&^i  J^oaes,  *i,tiT  i^cooi 

^>*,Hd.    VO*o    ft'jrv,  jTttly  )3.  -.^Jl. 

'ti^rttitiorm  n,i\(  ttnid  <^Nld 
«'>,;■  i,orr,  ^uv,»  tA    I??!. 

fourth  Shlio  -^-'.8- torn  :4utix*t 
ly.  ]->-(. 

6c-phi4  ^on<-*   thfiv  oi^.O-  'C*b!Hi 


C4r^  dl?*  C-<7r-i  f   17*?.  e4«^<l  21 


Ct.iit  <li»cl  o^^y  2»-  IT'S;.  0<it* 


PLATE  LXXV 

Harriet  Joxes's  Sampler.     1802 
Oxcnecl  by  Mrs.  William  J.  Dyer 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  231 

ToppAN,  Elij:n  M.  1814.  8"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross  borders  in  chain  de- 
sign.    Versus  516,  714  (var.).  Miss  L.  Gertrude  Winship 

Topping,  Harriet  Newell.  1828.  Bridgehampton  [L.  I.].  11  yrs.  18"  x  13i".  3  alphabets. 
Herringbone,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.     Rose-vine  border.     Verse  515. 

Helen  Topping  French 

TowNE,  Elizabeth.  1820.  Shepards  Town,  Va.  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  herringbone,  and 
cross-stitch.  Border  in  cross-stitch  and  herringbone-stitch.  Strawberry  design  in  cross- 
borders.  Mrs.  Knox  Taylor 

TowNSEXD,  Charlotte.  1827.  [Seaville,  Cape  May  County,  N.  J.]  11  yrs.  [Born  October 
1,  1816.]  8i"  X 16".  3  alphabets.  Cat,  eyelet,  tent,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.  Diamond 
patterns.     Cross  design  in  border.  Mrs.  Isabelle  Townsend  Keeney 

Trask,  Nabby.  1804.  8  yrs.  22"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Leaves  and  flowers  in  border.  Scene 
with  house,  fence,  garden,  and  flower-beds.     Verse  of  eight  lines. 

On  sale  at  Walpole  Galleries,  May  29,  1917 

Treadwell,  Lucy  A.  1809.  Ipswich.  Born  August  4,  1802.  7f "  x  8".  Hem-stitch  and  cross- 
stitch.    3  alphabets.    Greek  fret  border.     Rows  across  of  single  and  double  cross-stitch. 

Miss  Lucy  S.  Jewett 

Treat,  Sally  Ann.  1813.  South  Britain,  Conn.  8  yrs.  lOJ"  x  10^".  2  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.     At  top,  house,  trees,  flowers,  and  fence.     Verse  303. 

Mrs.  Pitts  H.  Burt 

Treat,  Sarah.  1818.  Mllford,  Conn.  10  yrs.  10"  x  14".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch  and  eye- 
let.    Verse  312.  Mrs.  Henry  Champion 

Trufhy,  Ruthy.  1807.  Portland  [Me.].  12  yrs.  16"x21".  Great  variety  of  stitches. 
Conventionalized  vine  and  flower  border.  Squares  in  lower  corners,  with  pictures  of 
tombs  and  weeping  willow  trees,  one  bearing  initials  "  H  T,  P  T  "  and  the  other  ""  B  T." 
"  The  Genealogy  of  Mickel  and  Mary  Truf ry.  Mickel  Trufry  born  dec.  25,  175  ;  Mary 
Trufry  born  sept.  18,  1766;  [Mic]kel  Trufry  born  feb.  11,  1781;  Polly  Trufry  born  oct. 
30,  1791;  Ruthy  Trufry  born  aug.  20,  1787;  Sarah  Trufry  born  oct.  9,  1789;  Ruthy 
Trufry  born  jan.  22,  1795;  Mary  Trufry  born  jan.  22,  1795;  Mary  Trufry  born  oct.  19, 
1798;  Eliza  Trufry  born  nov.  10,' 1801."  Mrs.  G.  H.  Buek 

Truman,  Sarah.  1820.  Providence  [R.  I.].  7  yrs.  4  alphabets.  Long  and  short,  eyelet, 
chain,  and  cross-stitch.     Cross-stitch  border.     Verse  515   (var.). 

Frederick  W.  Arnold,  Jr.,  Esq. 

Tubes,  Mary.  1814.  12  yrs.  22"  x  9".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Dividing  lines  in  various 
designs.     At  bottom,  basket  of  fruit  flanked  by  birds  and  trees;  below,  three  tiny  dogs. 

Miss  Mary  Reading  Scofield 

Tucker,  Elizabeth  Crosman.  1800.  11  yrs.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  buds, 
flowers,  and  birds.  Miss  Rebecca  Tucker 

Tucker,  Lydia.  1809.  Andover  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  15^"  x  18".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  seed, 
stem,  French  knots,  and  cross-stitch.     Conventionalized  rose  border.     Verse  616. 

Mrs.  J.  S.  Andrews 

Tucker,  Mary.     1807.     Milton  [Mass.].     9  yrs.     Verses  40  (var.),  151.     "Virtue  is  amiable." 

Mrs.  Stephen  A.  Tucker 

Tucker,  Rhoda.  [1818.]  New  Bedford.  12  yrs.  "  Born  27th  1 1th  month,  1806."  18"  x  17". 
4    alphabets.      Mostly    cross-stitch.      Conventional   border    with    leaves.      Various    cross- 


232  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

borders.     Leaves   and   flowers   on   either   side   of   verse.      "Benjamin   Tucker   born   1781 
Lucretia  Tucker  Born  1778."     Verse  2a.  Mrs.  George  H.  Davenport 

Tufts,  Abigail.  8  yrs.  12"  x  17".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventionalized  floral 
border  on  three  sides.  Three  houses  in  center;  above,  tree  with  birds  and  basket  of 
flowers;  below,  wreath  around  name  and  date,  with  baskets  of  flowers  and  two  birds 
nibbling  at  strawberry  above  it.     "  The  fairest  flower  will  soon  decay." 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Turner,  Frzelove.  1823.  12  yrs.  17"  x  15".  3  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Cross- 
stitch  border.     "  In  all  my  past  concerns  with  thee."     Verse  470. 

Mrs.  G.  Richmond  Parsons 

Turner,  Louisa.  1811.  Medway  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  20^"x21^".  3  alphabets.  Outline,  satin, 
and  cross-stitch.  Leaf  border.  Vine  with  small  star-shaped  flowers  at  bottom.  Verse 
293.  Mrs.  W.  S.  Rich 

Turner,  Lucy.  1806.  Salem  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  21"x23".  Alphabet.  Stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.     Vase  with  roses  and  vine  in  border.     Verses  40  (var.),  128   (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  Lavinia  T.  Snow 

TuRN-ER,  Mary.  [Cir.  1803.]  Fort  Covington,  N.  Y.  Born  in  1792.  11"  x  11".  3  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  At  bottom,  tree,  animal,  and  vase  with  plant.  Sixty-six  sets  of 
initials  beginning  with  "A  T"  [Alexander  Turner],  "S  T"  [Susan  Turner,  parents  of 
maker].  Mrs.  Samuel  Elliott  Perkins 

TuTiE,  L.  August  29,  1810.  New  Hampshire.  13  yrs.  13"  x  12".  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Pyramid  design  in  border.  Mrs.  S.  G.  Stevens 

TuTLE,  Lydia.  6i"  X  17^".  3  alphabets.  Cushion,  long  and  short,  satin,  eyelet  and  cross- 
stitch.     Six  narrow  rows  of  designs  at  top.     Verse  40   (var.). 

The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Tyler,  Mary.  1804.  [Made  in  a  Boston  School.]  7  yrs.  14"  x  13".  4  alphabets.  Stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  flower  border.  Strawberry  design  at  bottom.  Verse 
274.  Harvard  Historical  Society 

Tyler,  Nabby  S.  1805.  14  yrs.  22"  x  17^".  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  vine  at  sides  and 
across  top.    Three-story  house,  with  trees  and  lamb.    Verse  267.         Charles  H.  Tyler,  Esq. 

Tyson,  R.  C.  1825.  [Germantown,  Pa.]  16"  x  17".  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border 
with  leaves  and  tulips  on  three  sides.  Verse  in  center,  with  "  J  &  K  Tyson"  just  below 
it,  and  underneath  this,  wreath  inclosing  name  of  maker.  Remainder  of  sampler  filled 
in  with  detached  sprays  of  flowers,  trees,  and  basket  of  flowers.     Verse  418  (var.). 

Mrs.  Harley  L.  Stowell 

Ulrich,  Elizabeth.  1803.  [She  came  from  Hamburg,  Germany,  in  1795.]  Baltimore 
[Md.].  9  yrs.  8"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Tent  and  cross-stitch.  Elaborate  cross-borders 
in  strawberry  and  other  designs.     Crown,  and  urns  filled  with  flowers. 

Mrs.  G.  Clem  Goodrich 

Unknown.  1801.  12"  x  lOJ".  Split  and  satin-stitch.  Elaborate  tombstone,  with  weeping 
willow  tree  in  background.  Inscription  on  stone:  "  M.  T.  OB.  Oct.  19,  1801.  AE  8." 
Verse  15.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Unknown.  1804.  Il"xl3".  Cross  and  tent-stitch.  Fret  border.  Bird  on  a  bough,  flowers, 
leaves,  deer,  and  a  rabbit. 

William  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,   University  of  Kansas 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  233 

Unknown.  1818.  Boston  [Mass.].  2  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional 
border.     Verse  363  (1,  var.).  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Unknown.  1820.  13  yrs.  Alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  chain,  cross,  long  and  short  stitch. 
Elaborate  floral  border.  Cross-borders.  Verse  almost  completely  worn  ofif.  Verse  538 
(var.).  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Unknown.  1821.  10"  x  12^".  Flat,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  design  in  border. 
4  alphabets.     "  Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth.     Eccl.  12th   1st." 

Mrs.  John  R.  Varney 

Unknown.     1824.    5|"  x  12i".     6  alphabets.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Unknown.  1825.  8|"x6|".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Tree,  urn,  and  tombstone.  "In  Mem- 
ory of  Miss  Nancy  Chamberlain  who  died  May  12,  1825  aged  21  years."  "Memento 
Mori."  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Unknown.     1829.     Double  strawberry  and  carnation  border.  Miss  Abbott 

Unknown.  [Before  1830.]  10"  x  16^".  2  alphabets.  Mostly  cross-stitch.  Tent-stitch  in 
border.     Little  pyramids  in  different  colors  between  letters  and  numerals. 

Miss  Elizabeth  E.  Dana 

Unknown.     6^"  x  10".    2  alphabets.     Cross-stitch.     Simple  border.     [Design  unfinished.] 

Groton  Historical  Society 

Unknown.  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Scroll  design  around  edge  with  conventionalized 
rosebud  sprays  on  sides-  and  at  top,  with  basket  of  flowers  in  center  at  top.  "  There  is 
a  world  where  souls  are  free.     Where  tyrants  taint  not  natures  bliss.     If  in    .    .    .    .  " 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Unknown.  6J"  x  11".  1  alphabet.  Cross-stitch.  Conventionalized  strawberry  border.  Straw- 
berry design  at  bottom  in  queen-stitch.  "  Remember  Thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy 
Youth  Before  the  Evil  Days."  Newport  Historical  Society 

Unknown.  16"  x  15^".  3  alphabets.  Bird's-eye,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Carnation 
cross-border.  Basket  of  fruit  in  center,  with  a  bird  and  spray  of  flowers  on  either  side. 
Below,  strawberry  plant  in  large  pot  and  small  plants  growing  in  grass. 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Unknown.  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch  and  satin-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge,  with  simple  cross- 
stitch  line-border.    Saw-tooth  design  across  sampler.     Verse  536. 

Unknown.  [Before  1810,  in  Vermont.]  12i"  x  16^".  2  alphabets.  Tent,  satin,  stem,  and 
cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  across  top;  geometrical  design  on  sides;  hourglass  in 
upper  corners.     Basket  of  flowers  in  center  at  bottom,  flanked  by  geometrical  designs. 

Mrs.  Amos  Bush  McNairy 

Unknown.  [After  1812.]  16"  x  13".  2  alphabets.  Cross,  satin,  stem  and  tent-stitch.  Border 
of  detached  sprays  of  flowers.  At  the  bottom  an  unfinished  picture  of  the  First  Con- 
gregational Church,  Providence,  R.  I.,  which  burned  in  1812  or  14? 

[Vaixte,  Jane  Catherine  Louise.     1827.]     8"  x  10".     3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Howard  M.  Chapin,  Esq. 

Van  Allen,  Euphemia  Antonnette.  1830.  [Belvidere,  N.  J.]  7  yrs.  8^"  x  17".  3  alpha- 
bets. Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  vine  border.  Large  strawberry  border  at  bottom, 
with  house,  tree,  flower  in  pot,  basket  of  fruit,  bird,  butterflies,  and  daisies. 

Mrs.  George  A.  Walter 


234  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Van  Dohen,  Mary.  1801.  [Bedminster,  Somerset  County,  N.  J.]  10  yrs.  12"  x  17".  2 
alphabets.  Outline,  herringbone,  and  cross-stitch.  Waving  line  in  border,  with  straw- 
berries. Mrs.  William  Johnston  Taylor 

Van  Horn,  Sarah.  1829.  [Bergen  County,  N.  J.]  11  yrs.  8"x6i".  Cross-stitch.  Cross 
and  vine  border.  Miss  Clara  Post 

Van  Rensselaer,  Catherina  Visschel.  [1827?]  Cherry  Hill,  Albany,  N.  Y.  7  yrs. 
19"  X 17".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border.  At  bottom,  house  and 
barn  with  trees,  and  man  with  gun  aiming  at  bird.    Verse  515  (var.).       Emma  C.  Bcnney 

Van  Rensselaer,  Harriet  Maria.  1826.  Cherry  Hill,  Albany,  N.  Y.  8  yrs.  19"  x  17". 
4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border.  At  bottom,  house,  barn,  tree,  and 
man  shooting  at  bird.     Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Harriet  V.  R.  Gould 

Van  Wart,  Harriet.     1822.     13  yrs.    30"  x  30".    Chain,  queen,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Cluster 
of  roses   and  other  flowers  in  center  at  top.     Clover   blossom,  etc.,   at  bottom.     Chain- 
stitching,  done  in  hair,  separates  different  genealogical  groups.     "  A  record  of  the  births 
and  deaths  of  Isaac  Van  Wart  and  Forster  Families." 
"  Isaac  Van  Wart  was  Born  October  25,  1762 

"  Isaac  Van  Wart  died  May  23,  1828. 
Rachel  his  Wife  was  Born  June  4,  1760 
Anna  their  daughter  was  Born  March  24,  1782 

Anna  their  first  daughter  died  Oct.  30,  1820. 
Abraham  their  son  was  Born  Aug.  12,  1785 

Abraham  their  first  son  died  May  15,  1823. 
Fanny  their  daughter  was  Born  May  12,  1793 

Fanny  their  second  daughter  died  May  2,  1824. 
Alexander  their  son  was  Born  Sept.  28,  1799 
•  Marmaduke  Forster  was  Born  July  29,  1738 

Marmaduke   Forster   died   Aug.  13,  1825. 
Jemima  his  wife  was  Born  June  29,  1743 

Jemima  his  wife  died  July  20,  1825. 
Annah  their  daughter  was  Born  Nov.  13,  1762 

Annah  their  daughter  died  March  24,  1762 [-3.] 
John  their  son  was  Born  March  27,  1764 
Mary  their  daughter  was  Born  May  6,  1766 

Mary  their  daughter  died  Aug.  5,  1767. 
Elizabeth  their  daughter  was  Born  Jan.  10,  1768 

Elizabeth  their  daughter  died  June  19,  1772. 
Jane  their  daughter  was  Born  Sept.  17,  1769 

Jane  their  daughter  died  Aug.  16,  1770. 
James  their  son  was  Born  May  13,  1771 

James  their  son  died  June  15,  1772. 
Elizabeth  their  daughter  was  Born  Apr.  16,  1773 
Rachel  their  daughter  was  Born  Sept.  27,  1775 

Rachel  their  daughter  died  March  1,  1828. 
William  their  son  was  Born  Oct.  30,  1777 
James  their  son  was  Born  July  17,  1779 

James  their  son  died  Jan.  5,  1790. 
Isaac  their  son  was  Born  July  5, 1781 

Isaac  their  son  died  Feb.  1819. 


U.J^.     ^/  JUL 

rilk.rtei..      '         \^^_^Ja^ 


^- 


'^'   ^^■^\v<,>         r/tfrnam.-  *■    .,      .     -,;   v.  > 


V 


y^!^ 


t  , 


> 


/  5 


^7 


"1 


PLATE  LXXVI 


LrcY  P.  Wyjiax's  Sampler.     1807 
Ozc'iied  by  Mrs.  Bradburi/  Bedell 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  235 

Jane  their  daughter  was  Born  Aug.  29,  1783 

Phebe  their  daughter  was  Born  Aug.  16,  1785 

Sarah  their  daughter  was  Born  Oct.  9,  1788 

A  Record  of  the  Births  and  Deaths  of  Abraham  Van  Warts  family 

Abraham  Van  Wart  was  Born  Aug.  12,  1785 

Abraham  Van  Wart  died  May  15,  1823. 
Phebe  Foster,  his  wife  was  Born  Aug.  16,  1785 
Adelia  their  daughter  was  Born  June  5,  1808 
Harriet  their  daughter  was  Born  Jan.  11,  1810 
Sarah  their  daughter  was  Born  July  16,  1812 
Jane  their  daughter  was  Born  Oct.  21,  1815 
Isaac  Foster  their  son  was  Born  Nov.  14,  1819 
Anna  their  daughter  was  Born  Sept.  21,  1821." 

Van  Wtck,  Elizabeth.  1807.  Huntington.  "  Born  March  15,  Anno  Domini  1796." 
17"  X  15^".    2  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Conventional  border.     Verse  10  (1,  2,  var.). 

Mi^s  Grace  Hewlett 

Vanzant,  Jane.  10  yrs.  8i"x21".  Alphabets  doubled  and  trebled.  Cross-stitch.  Verse 
198  (var.).  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Varnet,  Susannah.     1808.    Danvers  [Mass.].     14  yrs.     Verse  248.  Miss  Susan  Vamey 

Vaughan,  Caroline.  October  28,  1818.  10  yrs.  "Worked  at  Mary  Walden's  School." 
18"  X  15  J".  3  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet,  stem,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  border 
of  flowers  and  Greek  fret.  Basket  with  flowers  on  either  side  of  verse,  and  below,  small 
house,  barn,  trees,  fence,  birdhouse,  and  several  birds.     Verse  515   (var.). 

Mrs.  Miles  White,  Jr. 

ViCKERY,  Sally  Amy.  1807.  Taunton  [Mass.].  10  yrs.  8"  x  12i".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Border  in  black  cross-stitch.     *' Imitate  The  Best."  Harriet  A.  Barstow 

ViNiNG,  Emily.  [Cir.  1827.  Weymouth,  Mass.]  10  yrs.  Stem,  cat,  satin,  couching,  and 
cross-stitch.  Floral  border,  with  two  small  baskets  of  flowers  in  center  at  top.  Funeral 
urns  in  each  lower  corner,  one  "  In  memory  of  Delia  Vining  who  died  Aug.  the  1st  aged 
7  months,"  and  the  other  "  In  Memory  of  James  Vining  who  died  June  the  6th  aged  38 
years."  "Family  Register:  James  Vining  was  born  Feb.  the  10th  A.  D.  1779;  Lucy 
Cushing  was  born  Oct.  the  27th  A.  D.  1781.  Jared  Vining  was  born  July  the  17th  A.  D. 
1800;  Elias  Vining  was  born  June  the  24th  A.  D.  1802;  Lydia  B.  Vining  was  born  Nov, 
the  23rd  A.  D.  1804;  Martin  Vining  was  born  Mar.  the  20th  A.  D.  1806;  Lucy  Vining 
was  born  Oct.  the  2nd  A.  D.  1810;  Emily  Vining  was  born  Feb.  the  8th  A.  D.  1814; 
Delia  Vining  was  born  Jan.  the  2nd  A.  D.  1817."  Mrs.  Fifield 

Vinton,  Esther  E.  1813.  ll^"xll".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Cross-border.  At  bot- 
tom, 2  houses  and  5  small  trees.  Albert  C.  Bates,  Esq. 

Vinton,  Mary  Ann  Fessenden.  1819.  3  alphabets.  Petit-point.  Border  of  heavy  rose- 
sprays  repeated.  Tomb,  urn,  weeping  willow,  and  weeping  lady.  "MS  of  John  Vmton 
Obt.  April  14,  1813  Aged  43  years."     Illustrated.  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Vose,  Elizabeth  Eliot.  1820.  7  yrs.  13"  x  10".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Verse  515  (1, 
var.).  The  Misses  Vose 

VosE,  Eunice.    1807.    Watertown.    11  yrs.    Cross-stitch.    Verse  104  (3).     Mrs.  John  Emerson 

Vose,  Sarah  Ann  G.     1808.     Milton.    8  yrs.    Verse  669  (var.).  The  Misses  Vose 


236  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Vreeland,  Martha.  1800.  Newark  [N.  J.].  10  yrs.  18"  x  18".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Greek  fret  border.  Mrs.  Charles  F.  Lonergan 

Wadleigh,  Mary  Ann.  1824.  Salisbury  [Mass.  18  yrs.].  22"x24".  4  alphabets.  Stem, 
flat,  cat,  eyelet,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Outside  border  in  cross  design;  inside  border 
of  flowers,  worked  in  silk  and  chenille.  Landscape  with  houses,  trees,  pond,  and  boat. 
Verse  475.  Mrs.  George  H.  Williams 

Wadsworth,  JxjiJA  Ann.  [1806.]  Hartford  [Conn.].  23i"xl61".  French  knots  and  stem- 
stitch.  Design  is  the  south  front  view  of  Lord  Oxford's  seat  in  England.  Background 
is  done  in  water-colors.  Mrs.  Robert  A.  Wadsworth 

Wadsworth,  Mary.     1810.     Milton  [Mass.].     Cross-stitch.     Hemstitched  edge. 

Mrs.  E.  D.  Wadszi}orth 

Waldron,  Betsy.  1816.  Taunton  [Mass.].  [Born  February  22,  1800.]  16  yrs.  Sf"  x  i3J". 
1  alphabet.    Cross-stitch.  Ruth  A.  Tew 

Waldron,  Hannah.  1810.  11  yrs.  14"  x  10".  1  alphabet.  Chain  and  cross-stitch.  House. 
"  O  God  I  beg  The  to  impart  Thy  Grace  to  sanctify  my  heart."  Mrs.  Frank  L.  Bowen 

Waldron,  Lydia  Dean.  1815.  Taunton  [Mass.].  13  yrs.  17^"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
flat,  and  cross-stitch.  Zigzag  design  in  border.  Verse  in  center,  and  on  either  side  are 
figures  of  boys  and  girls,  also  birds  on  perches,  shrubs,  bowls,  and  squares  in  lower 
corners.    Verse  515  (var.).  Ruth  A.  Tew 

Walker,  Elizabeth.  1813.  8^"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge.  Hearts, 
diamonds,  birds,  and  trees  worked  at  end  of  alphabets.     Verse  440. 

Mrs.  W.  H.  Walker 

Walker,  Faith.  [After  1800.]  Design  at  bottom  is  a  building  marked  "Solomon's  Temple," 
and  underneath  picture  of  Adam  and  Eve.    Verse  258.         Estate  of  James  L.  Little,  Esq. 

Walkley,  Eliza.    1814.    10  yrs.    8i"  x  7^".    5  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.     [Probably  Hartford.] 

Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Wallis,  Caroline.  1827.  Salem  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  19"  x  16^".  Alphabets.  Satin,  cross,  and 
many  fancy  stitches.  Greek  fret  border  outside,  with  fancy  inner  border.  Wreath  of 
roses  and  purple  grapes.     Verse  330.  Miss  Carrie  M.  Lefavour 

Wallis,  Eliza.  June  23,  1817.  Brookline  [Mass.].  16  yrs.  1  alphabet.  Great  variety  of 
stitches.  Elaborate  vine  border,  with  leaves  and  blossoms.  At  bottom,  two  trees,  with 
huge  sprays  of  roses  in  between.    Verse  318.  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Walton,  Caroline.  November  18,  1806.  Lebanon.  "  Polly  Huntington,  instructoress."  9 
yrs.     4  alphabets.     Cross-stitch. 

Walton,  Elizabeth.  1826.  25"x20^".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border,  with 
leaves  and  blossoms.     Thirteen  different  sprays  of  flowers  occupy  most  of  space. 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 
Wandel,  Sarah.     6f  x  17  J".     3  alphabets.     Cross-stitch, 

Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park 

Ward,  Matilda.  1808.  [Washington,  Ky.]  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  "Domestic  Acad- 
emy." Names  and  initials:  "Susan  P.  G;  L  C  Keets;  T  Keets;  HL;  FB;  CP;  BE;  PL; 
FD;  GE;  FE;  BD."  "A  grateful  mind  by  owing  owes  not,  but  still  pays  at  once 
indebted  and  discharged."  Mrs.  Mary  Ward  Holton 


'^..  .. 


>  T  IT  V  W  X  Y  z  a^.  2yZ--Z-^-Zx^.^.-  -^    t^^j 


A*^.  *• 


^^TA  ^eth  ^  c  i't^  5^-^'ire  her  \rf^tA  pnVZA  /f  -■^?>^ 


PLATE  LXXVII 

Elizabeth  McIntyre's  Sampler.     Fitchburg,  Mass.     Cir.   1820 

View  of  ritchl)urg 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Laii'ton 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


237 


Ward,  Priscilla.  1812.  Providence  [R.  I.].  9  yrs.  26"x20".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Ivy  and  strawberry  border.     A  coach  and  four  horses,  a  road,  and  fruit  trees. 

Once  owned  by  Henry  D.  Sleeper,  Esq. 

Ward,  Sarah  B.  1822.  11  yrs.  16"  x  17".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Vine  and  flower  border.     House  with  trees,  grass,  and  flowers.     Verse  601   (1,  2,  var.). 

Pennsylvania  Museum,  Memorial  Hall,  Fairmount  Park 

Wardeli.,  Mary.  1812.  23"  x  22".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Rose  border  on  three  sides. 
Central  design  of  carnations  in  low  basket,  with  pedestal  flanked  by  trees,  topped  by 
birds;  and  below,  yellow  cowslips.  Mrs.  Sabin  W.  Colton,  Jr. 

Ware,  .      [Cir.   1805.]      12^"  x  16".     Satin  and  cross-stitch.     "A  Register  of  the  Family 

of  Joseph  Ware  who  was  born  October   15th   1753  and  Esther  Ware  his  wife  who  was 
born  January  15th  1756." 


"  Births 
Nov.      9th,  1772 
Aug.     3tli,  1774 
June  25,      1785 
June    10th,  1789 
Sept.  10th,  1791 
July    19,      1793 
April  12,      1795 
Joseph  Ware  deceased  Nov.   12,  1805 
Esther  Ware" 
Verse  50. 


Joseph  Ware 
William  Ware 
George  Ware 
Dolly  Ware 
Abigal  Ware 
Ralph  Ware 
Mary   Ware 


Marriages 
Jan.  1,  1812 


Waring,   Catherine   Sophia.      1815.      Charleston    [S.    C.]. 
stitch.    Cross-stitch  lines  around  edge. 


Deaths 

April       5,  1796 
March  20,  1800 

Miss  Angelica  C.  Post 

9i"  X 10".     4   alphabets.      Cross- 
Miss  Leila  Waring 


Warner,  Polly.  11  yrs.  n^"x2l".  2  alphabets.  Satin,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Wide  rose- 
border  with  wider  border  at  bottom.    Verse  168  (1,  var.).  Lancaster  Public  Library 

Warren,  Betsy.  1805.  Portland  [Me.].  14  yrs.  16"x21".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Rose-vine  border,  with  rosebuds  in  corner.  At  bottom,  three-story  brick 
house,  fence,  garden,  and  tree;  also  two-story  wooden  house,  fence,  garden,  and  trees. 
(Made  at  a  young  ladies  boarding  school  in  Portland  Me.)     Verse  686. 

Mrs.  Pamelia  Washburn  Crane  Agry 

Wabren,  Sarah  Curtis.     1828.    3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Rose  border.    Verse  175  (var). 

The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Washburn,  Latietia  M.  1825.  8"x8i".  9  yrs.  [Born  September  3,  1816.]  3  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  stem,  and  satin  stitch.     Conventional  border.     Verse  785.         Mrs.  J.  W.  Hawkins 

Washburn,  Latietia  M.  1826.  Orange.  10  yrs.  20i"xl7^".  Cross-stitch.  Elaborate 
border.     Six  varied  conventional  designs  and  three  fancy  division  lines.     Verses  7,  479. 

Mrs.  J.  W.  Hawkins 

Washburn,  Louisa.  1818.  Taunton  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  12"  x  6".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet,  cat, 
tent,  and  cross-stitch.    "  Virtue  the  best  treasure."  Harriet  B.  Monroe 

Washburn,  Mary  A.  1818.  Middleborough  [now  Lakeville,  Mass.].  14  yrs.  8"  x  15".  4 
alphabets.    Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Mrs.  George  F.  Seaver 

Waterman,  Betsy.  1808.  12  yrs.  17"  x  17".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry-vine  border.  "  Family 
Record:    Eliphalet  Waterman  born  January  th  15,  1764  aged  44  years;  Silvina  Waterman 


238  AMERICAX  SAMPLERS 

born  June  19th,  1772  aged  37  years;  Married  November  th  25,  1790;  Sophronia  Waterman 
born  December  th  16,  1791;  died  January  th  17  1792  aged  4  weeks,  4  days;  Martin 
Waterman  born  October  th  l,  1793  aged  15  years;  Betsy  Waterman  born  July  th  12,  1796 
aged  12  years;  Ela  B.  Waterman  born  November  th  24,  1803;  died  January  th  20,  1804 
aged  1  year  2  months;  Thomas  H.  Waterman  born  October  th  9,  1807  aged  2  years." 

New  England  Historic  Genealogical  Society 

Watkixsox,  Mary.  [Cir.  1815.]  New  York  City.  9"  x  13".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Greek  border.  Scroll  design  at  bottom.  "  The  Golden  Rule  Be  unto  others  just  and 
true,  As  you  would  have  others  be  unto  you.     Think  twice  before  you  speak  once." 

WilUam  H.  Walker,  Esq. 

Watsox,  Axx.  1808.  Cross,  satin,  and  stem-stitch.  Greek  fret  border.  Representation  of 
Princeton  College.  Miss  Anna  Reed 

Watsox,  Betty.  1803.  Leicester  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  lOJ"  long.  2  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Hemstitched  edge.     Conventional  cross-border,  and  another  with  dogs,  birds,  plant,  etc. 

Mrs.  E.  T.  Draper 

Watson,  Caholixe  B.  1824.  Leicester  [Mass.].  lOA".  2  alphabets.  Tent  and  cross-stitch. 
Hemmed  edge.     Two-story  house  with  fence,  trees,  and  paths.     Strawberry  cross-border. 

Mrs.   W.  A.  Dick 

Watsox,  Hannah.  1803.  Jamestown  [R.  L].  11  yrs.  16i"  x  18".  4  alphabets.  Tent,  satin, 
eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Flowers  and  conventional  figures  at  bot- 
tom. "  In  all  th}'  desires  let  religion  go  along  with  thee.  Fix  not  thy  hopes  beyond  the 
bounds  of  possibility  nor  the  reach  of  thy  fortune."  "  Every  one  should  mind  their  own 
business  for  we  only  torment  ourselves  with  that  of  other  people."     Hannah  Watson  Tefft 

Watson,  Lydia.  1813.  Princeton  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  [Born  December  17,  1802.]  17^"  x  15|". 
Stem,  buttonhole,  laid,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventionalized  pinks  in  border.  At  bottom, 
house,  fruit  tree,  willow  tree,  and  3  small  trees.  Mrs.  A.  B.  Curtis 

Watsox,  Mary.  October  6,  1804.  Jamestown  [R.  I.].  10  yrs.  17"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Eye- 
let, satin,  and  cross-stitch.     Rose  border.     Wreath.  Mrs.  G.  A.  Clarke 

Watson,  Sabra  B.  May  30,  1821.  Barrington  [R.  L].  10  yrs.  17i"x22".  2  alphabets. 
Chiefly  cross-stitch.     Rose  border.     Verse  94.  Mrs.    W.  E.  Byerly 

Watson,  Susanna  M.  1809.  [Bristol,  Pa.]  10  yrs.  12"  x  15".  4  alphabets.  Satin  and 
cross-stitch.     Greek  fret  border  at  top,  and  strawberry  border  across  bottom. 

Mrs.  S.  H.  Shearman 

Webb,  Philadelphia.  1818.  13i"  x  8".  4  alphabets.  Triangle,  darning  and  cross-stitch. 
Cross-border.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart  and  with  all  thy 
mind.  This  is  the  first  and  great  Commandment.  And  the  second  is  like  unto  it.  Thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thy  self."  "  St.  Matthew,  Chapter  22nd,  Vers«  37th,  38th  and 
39th,"  also,  "  All  things  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  you  even 
so  to  them."     "  St.  Matthew,  Chapter  7th,  Verse  12th." 

Woman's  Club,  Elizabeth,  N.  J. 

Webster,  Abigail.  1802.  11  yrs.  24"  x  17".  Alphabets.  Elaborate  border  filled  in  to 
represent  grass,  through  which  runs  a  serpentine  pattern  in  leaf  and  flower.  Five  lines, 
worked  by  another  hand,  state  the  death  of  Adelaide  and  her  little  brother. 

Sold  at   Walpole  Galleries,  June  29,  1917 

Webster,  Eliza  Anne,  1816.  12  yrs.  [Born  December  31,  1804.]  2"  x  If ".  2  alphabets. 
Eyelet,  satin,  catch,  and  cross-stitch.     Verse  87.  Mrs.  Charles  T.   Upton 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  239 

Webster,  Ltdia  B.  1819.  [12  yrs.]  Woodbury  [N.  J.].  17"  x  19".  Flat  and  cross-stitch. 
Rose  border  on  three  sides.  At  bottom,  mound  with  3  trees  topped  by  birds,  p.nd  2 
bushes.  Sprays  of  flowers,  vases  of  flowers,  birds,  duck,  basket,  etc.,  fill  in  spaces 
around  vefse.     Verse  459.  Sara  Webster  Stokes 

Weedex,  Sally.  1803.  Jamestown  [R.  I.].  12  yrs.  16"  x  17i".  3  alphabets.  Tent,  stem, 
eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Wreath  around  name  and  date.  "  Endeavor 
to  be  first  in  thy  calling,  let  not  any  one  go  ahead  of  thee  in  well-doing.  Envy  not  the 
merits  of  another,  but  improve  thine  own  talents.  In  the  practise  of  piety  is  satisfaction 
on  earth  and  its  reward  is  on  high,  in  the  regions  of  bliss  and  immortality." 

Carr  Homestead 

Welch,  Caroline  Marl\.  1827.  Boston  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  15i"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Strawberry,  Greek  fret,  and  scroll  borders.     Trefoil  design  across  bottom. 

Mrs.  Carl  A.  de  Oersdorf 

Wentworth,  Eliza.  1807.  Bridgewater  [Mass.].  "  Bridgewater  Academy."  10  yrs. 
15i"  X  17i".  3  alphabets.  Queen  and  cross-stitch  and  drawnwork.  Strawberry-vine 
border.     Bands  of  queen-stitch  and  drawnwork.    Verse  104  (3).     Mrs.  Cassander  Gilmore 

Wetherby,  Mary.     1813.     Harvard   [Mass.].     10  yrs.     10"  x  11".     3  alphabets.    Cross-stitch, 

Simple  border.     Verse   301.  Harvard  Historical  Society 

Whann,  Margereta.  Satin,  stem,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  and  vine  all  around; 
outside  vine,  on  sides,  detached  sprays  of  flowers,  birds,  and  butterflies.  Oval  frame  in 
center,  with  fringe  at  top  inclosing  picture  of  small  house,  four  trees,  fence,  and  lawn. 
Remainder  of  sampler  filled  in  with  detached  baskets  with  fruit  and  flowers,  birds,  etc. 
At   bottom   are   the   names,   "  Margereta   Whann "   and   "  George   Terrell." 

Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Wheaton,  Mary.  [Cir.  1804.]  Cumberland  County,  N.  J.  [Born  in  1789.]  9^"x9".  3 
alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-design  in  border,  with  intersecting  lines 
across.  Mr.   William  C.  Midford 

Wheaton,  Mary  W.  P.  180-5.  [15  yrs.]  17i"  x  17".  5  alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet,  cat,  and 
cross-stitch.     Rose  border.    Trees.     Verse  135  (var.).  Juliet  Hammond  Price 

Wheeler,  Almira.  1828.  12  yrs.  17"  x  16".  2  alphabets.  Flat,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 
Flat-stitch  border.  Mrs.  George  Tilden  Brown 

Wheldex,  Ruth  M.  1812.  12  jts.  18"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Conventional 
carnation  border.     Houses  and  trees  at  bottom.     Verse  515  (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Lawton 

Whipple  Family.  [Cir.  1806.]  18"x28".  2  alphabets.  Feather  and  cross-stitch.  Verse 
372  (1st  two  lines).  Vine  and  flower  border.  "Family  Record  of  WTiipple  Family: 
John  Whipple  born  Octr  the  11,  1743;  Martha  Cogswell  born  March  the  30,  1742;  they  were 
United  in  marriage  Jany  the  8  1767;  Martha  Whipple  born  October  the  11,  1768;  John 
Safi'ord  born  Octr  the  15,  1750;  United  in  marriage  Dec'r  the  30,  1785;  Edward  Whipple 
born  Dec'r  the  8,  1771;  deceased  Jan'y  the  8,  1772;  Susannah  Whipple  born  March  the 
16,  1774;  John  Botang  born  Sept'r  the  16,  1769;  United  in  marriage  Feby  the  28,  17—; 
J.  B.  departed  this  life  August  the  14,  1797;  Philip  Cilley  born  August  the  19,  1774; 
United  in  Marriage  June  the  21,  1801;  Polly  Whipple  born  Sept'r  the  5,  1777;  Isaac 
Warding  born  Dec'r  the  10,  1770;  United  in  marriage  Nov'r  the  29,  1796;  I.  H.  [M.?] 
departed  this  life  March  the  27,  1801;  Edward  Whipple  born  June  the  23,  1780;  Clarissa 
Brimmer  born  Feb'y  the  9,  1783;  United  in  marriage  June  the  27,  1802;  Bridget  Whipple 


240  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

born  April  the  17,  1782;  David  Giddings  born  March  the  18,  1771;  United  in  marriage 
May  the  28,  1804."     "  Is  their  ambition  in  my  heart  Search  Gracious  God  and  see." 

Ifsmich  Historical  Society 

Whipple,  Prusia.     1801.     10  yrs.     8^"x8^".     2  alphabets.     Chain  and  cross-stitch. 

Miss  Emily  B.  Aldrich 

Whitakzr,  Jake  Maria.  March  3,  1814.  7  yrs.  Tapestry  and  cross-stitch.  Greek  fret 
border.     Verse  545  (var.).  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Whitcomb,  Nancy  Axn.  Before  1816.  Keene  [N.  H.].  7  yrs.  6"  x  14".  4  alphabets. 
Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.     Cross-stitch  border.  Lucy  H.  Bucklin 

Whitcomb,  Sallt.  [Cir.  1814.]  Randolph  [Mass.].  15"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch. 
Verses  40  (var.),  490  (var.).  Parents'  names  and  births:  "Moses  Whitcomb  was  born 
April  8,  1789;  Rachel  Whitcomb  was  born  June  30,  in  the  year  1765."  Names  and  births 
of  children:  "  Bathsheba  Whitcomb  was  born  September  24,  1788;  Moses  Whitcomb  was 
born  January  3,  1791;  Clarissa  Whitcomb  was  born  May  6,  in  the  year  1794;  Sally 
Whitcomb  was  born  August  17,  in  the  year  1800."  "  Robert  Harris  was  married  to 
Bathsheba  Whitcomb  April  30,  in  the  year  1809."  Mrs.  Clara  Wales  Alden 

White,  Ann.  1828.  Taunton  [Mass.].  14  yrs.  16"x20".  4  alphabets.  Stem  and  cross- 
stitch.     Rose  border.     House  and  trees  at  bottom.     Verse  794.  Dora  I.  Tetlow 

White,  Clarissa.  [Cir.  1822.]  Mansfield  [Mass.].  14"  x  18".  Stem,  queen,  and  cross-stitch. 
Conventional  flowers  at  bottom.  Scene  with  house,  trees,  birds,  sheep,  flowers,  man, 
woman,  and  angels.     Verse  648.  Mrs.  Charles  T.  Hubbard 

White,  Elizabeth.  1823.  [Pilesgrove  Township,  Salem  County,  N.  J.]  About  8  yrs. 
9|"  X  9|".  4  alphabets.  Queen,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Conventional  strawberry  and 
rose  border.  Gertrude  W.  Callahan 

White,  Malvina.  1804.  9^"  x  8".  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border  on  sides.  Divided  into 
three  sections:  at  top,  basket  of  flowers,  strawberry  plants,  and  trees;  in  center,  con- 
ventional tree  flanked  by  potted  plants;  in  lower  third,  tall  tree  in  center,  with  birds 
on  fences  at  either  side,  also  two  insects  flying  about.  Mrs.  Florence  S.  Babbitt 

White,  Mart  Elizabeth.  1828.  Leesburg,  Va.  12  yrs.  18"x20".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border.  Pope's  Universal  Prayer  on  right  side,  and 
hymn  on  left  side.  Jeannette  B.  White 

White,  Riba.  1806.  Newport  [R.  I.].  10"  x  12".  Queen,  French  knots,  satin,  stem,  and 
cross-stitch.  Rose  border  done  in  queen-stitch.  Elaborate  house,  birds,  trees,  and  people. 
Verse  606   (1,  var.).  Newport  Historical  Society 

Whiteley,  Kitty.  1807.  Newark  [Del.].  18i"x21".  2  alphabets.  Stem,  satin,  fagot,  and 
cross-stitch.  Elaborate  border  with  bunches  of  roses  in  corners,  bird  and  strawberries 
in  center  at  bottom,  basket  and  2  large  butterflies  in  center  at  top,  and  sprays  of  wild 
honey  on  sides.  At  bottom,  2  rabbits  on  grass  and  conventional  tree.  Sprays  of  lilies 
around  verse.    Verse  29  (1,  var.).  Mrs.  Lewis  P.  Bush 

Whiting,  Elizabeth.  1817.  Billerica  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  16"  x  16^".  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Conventional  border.     Verse  732  (1,  var.).  The  Mioses  Cummings 

Whiting,  Elizabeth.  1817.  Billerica  [Mass.].  9  yrs.  12V' x  17^".  6  alphabets.  Stem, 
eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.     Two  trees  with  birds  in  each,  and  several  border  patterns. 

Mrs.  Stephen  H.  Blodgett 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  241 

Whitixg,  Julia  Ann.  1817.  10  yrs.  17"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Flat,  stem,  satin,  and  cross- 
stitch.     Realistic  carnation  border.     Verse  515  (var.).  Mrs.  Thomas  W.  Aldrich 

Whitino,  Sarah.  May  8,  1818.  Billerica  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  16|"  x  15f .  3  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Conventional  border.     Verse  732   (1,  var.).  The  Misses  Cummings 

Whitney,  Abigail  C.  1821.  11  yrs.  19"x20".  1  alphabet.  Darning,  satin,  chain,  French 
knots,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  and  parrot  border.  Baskets  and  rosettes.  Parrots  and 
baskets  scattered  around  the  verses.  Verses  463,  635  (var.).  Initials  of  parents: 
"  S  W,  B  W."  Mrs.  Albert  Caldwell  Manning 

Whitney,  Cynthia.  [After  1800.]  Winchendon  [Mass.].  3  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Heart 
and  crosses.  John  H.  Edmunds,  Esq, 

Whitney,  Harriot  F.  March  24,  1812.  Roxbury  [Mass.].  15  yrs.  16"  x  16".  3  alphabets. 
Stem,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  diamonds  on  sides  and  top.  Three-story  house 
in  center,  with  tree,  plant,  shrubs,  and  women.  Dish  of  fruit  at  top.  Vines  and  vases 
on  each  side.     Verse  158.  Mrs.  Edward  Mock 

Whitney,  Lydia.  1807.  Bolton  [Mass.].  11  yrs.  11^"  x  12V'.  Cross-stitch.  Line  of 
squares  inside  a  scroll  border.     Alphabets.  /.  V.  Fletcher  Library 

Whitney,  Martha.  1815.  Warwick.  11  yrs.  16"  x  16|".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  cross,  and 
four-sided  line-stitch.  Diamond  design  in  border.  Three-story  house  in  center,  with 
potted  plants,  trees,  and  women  on  each  side;  child  and  pet  dog  or  cat  on  left  side. 
Vase  of  flowers  on  each  side  of  alphabets.  Dish  of  fruit  in  center  at  top.  Vine  around 
verse.     Verse  40  (var.).  Mrs.  Edward  Mock 

Whitney,  Permelia.  1812.  Needham,  Mass.  13  yrs.  17"  x  12V'.  2  alphabets.  Eyelet, 
tent,  cross,  and  hem-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge  with  rosebud  border;  also  line  of  herring- 
bone design  with  narrow  set  designs;  strawberry  border  with  birds  in  between.  Verse 
40  (var.).  Miss  Emily  F.  Allen 

Whiton,  Mary  Ann.  1825.  Hingham  [Mass.].  8  yrs.  13"  x  14".  3  alphabets.  Greek  fret 
border.  Spray  of  roses  at  the  bottom.  "  Diligence,  industry  and  proper  improvement 
of  time  are  the  material  duties  of  the  young.  The  acquisition  of  knowledge  is  one  of  the 
most  honorable  occupations  of  youth."  Miss  Anna  Pierce 

Whittier,  Hannah.  1805.  14  yrs.  12"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Basket  of  flowers 
at  bottom.    Verse  149.  M.  B.  Lemon,  Dealer,  Boxton 

Whittington,  Sally.  1819.  [Annapolis,  Md.]  Born  January  15,  1809.  13A"xl6i".  2 
alphabets.  Tent,  stem,  chain,  and  cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Scene  at  bottom, 
with  church  surrounded  by  stone  wall  and  trees  on  either  side.  Mrs.  E.  C.  Mallison 

Wicks,  Elizabeth.  March  6  [Cir.  1800].  15  yrs.  12|"xl22".  Cross  and  satin-stitch.  Vine 
border,  with  small  pink  and  blue  flowers.  Tree  of  life  in  center,  four  baskets  of  flowers, 
birds,  and  flowers.     "  Be  zealous  to   ....   " 

William  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

Wilcox,  Francis.  1820.  14  yrs.  17V'  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Chain,  eyelet,  tent,  and  stem- 
stitch.     Vine  border.     4  rosettes  in  the  corners.     Verses  undecipherable.     2  caskets. 

W.  G.  Bowdoin,  Esq. 

Wilder,  Lydia.  September,  1813.  Hingham  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  Born  January  24,  1801.  8 
alphabets.     Eyelet,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.     Cross-stitch  border.     3  bells  or  tassels  at  top. 

Mrs.  Elliott  Bradford  Church 


242  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Wiley,  Elizabeth  W.  1812.  Philadelphia.  10  yrs.  3^"  x  16".  Alphabet.  Eyelet,  stem, 
satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-borders  in  vine,  rose,  and  strawberry  designs.  Verses 
undecipherable.  Elizabeth  Wiley  Cheney 

WiLET,  Phoebe  Louisa.  September  24th,  1800.  13i"xl5".  3  alphabets.  Very  fine  cross- 
stitch.  Strawberry  and  vine  border.  Conventional  border  across  bottom,  with  baskets 
of  fruit,  two  plants,  pyramid,  and  a  section  on  each  end  of  solid  tapestry-stitch  in  con- 
ventional designs.    Verse  531.  Historical  Society,  Canandaigua,  N.  Y. 

WiLKiNS,  Hester  Akn.  1815.  Baltimore  [Md.].  6  yrs.  18"  x  18".  Alphabets.  Eyelet,  cat, 
single  and  double  cross-stitch,  petit-point,  and  hemstitching.  Greek  fret  border  and 
strawberry  vine.    Verse  515.  Mary  Dorsey  Davis 

Wilkinson,  Lydia.  1817.  Pawtucket  [R.  I.].  9  yrs.  12^"  x  17i".  2  alphabets.  Cross- 
stitch.     Verse  167.  Mrs.  Amory  Eliot 

Wilkinson,  Ruth.     1808.    Walpole  [Mass.].     11  yrs.    Cross-stitch.     Verse  162  (1,  var.). 

Mrs.  Nathan  Bill 

WiLLAHD,  Mahy  Ann.  1830.  Cambridge  [Mass.].  [Born  October  21,  1821.]  Il"xl2".  3 
alphabets.     Tent,  flat,  and  cross-stitch.     Simple  cross-stitch  border. 

Miss  Elizabeth  E.  Dana 

WiLLARD,  Phebe  S.  [Cir.  1817.]  Francestown  [N.  H.].  9  yrs.  Born  February  4,  1808. 
21i"x21J".  3  alphabets.  Stem,  tent,  chain,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Floral  border  with 
vine,  beginning  at  lower  corners;  drooping  spray  in  center  at  top;  large  roses  in  lower 
corners;  above,  strawberries  with  leaves  and  blossoms,  pinks,  pansies,  etc.;  in  upper 
corners,  conventionalized  roses,  peas,  etc.;  in  center  at  bottom,  a  basket  with  roses  and 
drooping  sprays  of  strawberries  and  blossoms.  On  either  side  of  verse  a  heavy  stem, 
ending  in  drooping  grasses.     Verse  732  (1,  var.).  Edna  A.  Clark 

Williams,  Ann  Elizabeth.  June  5th,  1801.  Baltimore.  27"x25".  Petit-point,  flat,  and 
cross-stitch.  Rose  and  geometric  borders.  Three-story  brick  house  in  center,  with  two 
weeping  willow  trees,  two  large  flower  urns,  and  one  basket  of  fruit. 

The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

Wiluams,  Anna.  September  26th,  1815.  Taunton  [Mass.].  12  yrs.  ey  xU".  3  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.  Sarah  B.  WilliaTn^^ 

WiLLLiMs,  Marhxa  G.  1827.  Plainfield  [X.  J.].  15"  x  17^".  Cross  and  tent-stitch.  4  alpha- 
bets.    House  and  cup.     Verses  570,  789.  Wilbur  M.  Stone,  Esq. 

Williams,  Mary  Pain.  1816.  10  yrs.  12"  x  14".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Border  of  run- 
ning vine  with  flowers.  Mrs.  Lettie  Carlile  Strader 

Williams,  Matilda  Ann.  June  6,  1822.  [Culpepper  County,  Va.  10  yrs.]  9"  x  17".  Eye- 
let, stem,  and  cross-stitch.     Hemstitched  edge.     Alphabets.  Elizabeth  Hill  Gentry 

Williams,  Sarah.  1801.  16"  x  8".  Satin  and  cross-stitch.  Battlemented  border.  Verse 
515  (var.).  Dealer 

Williams,  Susan  McPhehson  Sibley.  1820.  Providence,  R.  I.  7  yrs.  9"  x  8i".  3  alphabets. 
Chain  and  cross-stitch.  "  Behold  the  child  of  innocence  how  beautiful  is  the  mildness  of 
its  countenance  and  the  diffidence  of  its  looks."     "  Be  good  and  be  happy." 

Miss  Emily  H.  Crouch 

Williams,  Virginia  F.  [Lunenburgh  County,  Va.]  16"  x  16".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and 
cross-stitch.     Conventional  border  and  cross-borders.     Verse  594   (1,  var.). 

/.  E.  Perkinson,  Esq. 


HANNAH   J   KOfilNSON   1818 


PLATE  LXXVIII 

Haxxah  J.  Robinson's  Sampler.     1818 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  243 

'-  •^n'^m 

WiLLiNOTON,  LucRETiA  G.  [Cir.  1814.]  Worcester  [Mass.].  Born  January  4,  1803. 
8J"  X 17".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Hemstitched  edge.  Vine  and  tree  at  bottom. 
Verse  401.  Miss  Dora  Janette  Brown 

Wills,  Anx.  1812.  Rancocas  [N.  J.].  "  Rancocus  School."  [Born  December  23,  1799.] 
16"  X  21".  Outline,  stem,  and  cross-stitch.  Vine  border,  with  inner  border  of  various 
designs,  carnation,  rose,  birds,  urns,  baskets,  etc.  At  bottom,  basket  of  flowers,  rose 
sprays,  and  lilies  of  the  valley.    Verse  730.  Rachel  A.  Williams 

Wills,  Rachel  Ann.  1811.  Rancocas  [Burlington  County,  N.  J.  Born  February  21,  1797]. 
11"  X  18".     4  alphabets.     Eyelet,  queen,  and  cross-stitch.     Carnation  border.    Verse  725a. 

Rachel  A.  Williams 

Wilis,  Sarah.  1803.  12  yrs.  17^"  x  15J".  Alphabets.  Tent,  eyelet,  and  cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border,  with  flowers  and  leaves.  Love-birds,  basket  of  flowers,  tulip,  strawberries, 
and  diamond.     Verse  399  (var.).  Frances  D.  Smith 

WiLLSON,  Ltdla,  A.     1803.    Newark,  N.  J.  Born  September  2,  1797.     12"xl0i".     2  alphabets. 

Cross  and  vine  border.     Verse  402.  Miss  Prances  C.  Force 

WiLLSON,  Rachel.  1802.  Windsor,  N.  J.  [16  yrs.]  22"x24",  2  alphabets.  Long  and  short, 
outline,  chain,  eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Border  of  vine  with  flowers.  At  bot- 
tom, pine  tree,  house,  flowering  bush  in  vase,  man,  woman,  children  on  see-saw,  other 
children,  deer,  dog,  butterfly,  birds,  and  sheep.     Verses  187   (var.),  400,  490  (var.). 

Mrs.  L.  W.  Grover 

Wilson,  Alicia  Ann.  1812.  [Clermont,  N.  Y.]  13  yrs.  16"x20^".  Cros«-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.  At  bottom,  2  vases  with  flowers,  basket  with  fruit,  birds,  and  ornaments. 
Verse  84.  Miss  Anne  Lee 

Wilson,  Clarissa.     1805.    10  yrs.    Cross-stitch  and  eyelet.    Verse  129.  Mrs.  Samuel  Lord 

Wilson,  Dovey  Winslow.  [Cir.  1805.  Mecklenburg  County,  N.  C.  14  yrs.]  9"  x  12". 
Satin-stitch  and  oil  painting.  Vine  border.  Tree,  figure  of  woman,  with  face  done  in  oil 
painting,  weeping  at  tomb;  inscription  on  tomb  done  in  ink,  "  M.  W.  W.  Born  Oct.  26, 
1804.  Died  Oct.  30,  1805";  also  an  oval  space  with  verse  done  in  ink.  Verse  51.  [Done 
at  Salem  Female  Academy,  Salem,  N.  C]  Miss  Violet  Graham  Alexander 

Wilson,  Hannah.  Canaan  Family  [Shakers].  Teacher,  Emma  Johnson.  7i"x3^".  2  alpha- 
bets.    Cross-stitch.  Mrs.  H.  C.  Bunner 

Wilson,  Mary.  1808.  [Jewett  City,  Conn.]  9  yrs.  12"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Stem,  eyelet, 
and  cross-stitch.     Conventional  border.  Mrs.  George  B.  Batch 

Wilson,  Rachel.  1812.  12  yrs.  16J''xl7i".  4  alphabets.  Chain,  knot,  cushion,  filling,  and 
cross-stitch.  Trees,  houses,  and  wild  roses  in  borders.  At  bottom,  wreath,  two  houses, 
and  shrubbery.     Verse  242   (1).  The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 

WiNANS,  Mary  Fitz  Randolph.  1810.  Morristown  [N.  J.].  9  yrs.  12"  x  16".  2  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.     Cross-border.     Verse  429.  Mrs.  Frederic  R.  Kellogg 

Wire,  Eli^a.  [Cir.  1800.]  Philadelphia.  8"  x  8".  Upper  corners,  baskets  of  fruit,  straw- 
berries. House  with  pea-green  front  door,  red  door  with  knocker.  Pink  side  of  house, 
sky-blue  door,  blue  lawn,  and  blue   trees.  Mrs.  Bradbury   Bedell 

WisNER,  Mary.  1801.  New  York.  [Born  in  1781.]  9"  x  12".  Alphabets.  French  knots, 
stem,  tent,  and  cross-stitch.  Rose,  briar,  and  saw-tooth  borders.  Crosses  inclose  date. 
Verse  226  (var.).  Laura  Ogden  Ross 

WiTHCiM,  Catharine.  1818.  Easton  [Pa.?].  8  yrs.  8"  x  8".  Queen  and  cross-stitch.  Border 
of  vine  and  buds.     House  and  2  birds  at  bottom.     3  roses  in  a  tub  in  center. 

Mrs.  Adelaide  Moore  Joyce 


244  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Wolf,  Mary  Magdalen.  [1819  or  1820.  Born  in  1812.]  Philadelphia,  at  a  kindergarten. 
10"  X 13".     3  alphabets.     Cross  and  eyelet-stitch.     Cross-borders. 

The  Misses  WUheJmina  M.  and  Catherine  Bromn 
Wood,  Eliza  C.     March  21,  1810.     MuUica  Hill   [N.  J.].     18"x22".     Flat,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.     Outside  border  of  Greek  fret;  inside  border  of  carnations,  roses,  and  vine. 
Tree,  squirrel,  and  animals  at  bottom.    Verses  187  (var.),  490  (var.),  546  (var.). 

Miss  Anna  Belle  Weatherby 
Wood,  Frances  Wolcott.  [Cir.  1821.]  16"  x  19".  3  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 
Strawberry  border.  "  Joseph  Wood  was  born  at  Stanwlck  Mar.  24th,  Frances  Wood, 
wife  of  Joseph  Wood,  was  born  at  Windsor  Aug.  31,  A.  D.  1784.  Their  children  —  Frances 
Wolcott  Wood  was  born  at  Stamford  Mar.  25  A.  D.  1810,  Oliver  Ellsworth  Wood  was 
born  at  Stamford  April  14  A.  D.  1812,  George  IngersoU  Wood  was  born  at  Stamford 
May  20  A.  D.  1814.  Their  third  son  was  born  at  Stamford  Nov  30th  A.  D.  1816  and  died 
Dec  5  A.  D.  1816.     Delia  Williams  Wood  was  born  at  Stamford  Sept  13th  [1819]." 

Chester  W.  Lyman,  Esq. 
Wooden,  Mary.     1810.     11  yrs.     20"  x  7".     4  alphabets.     Eyelet  and  cross-stitch. 

Mrs.  William  H.  Seaman 

Woodnutt,  M.      1813.     "Wilmington   Boarding   School."      11   yrs.      13|"  x  11".     3   alphabets. 

Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.    Oval  done  in  stem-stitch  with  an  occasional  leaf.    Verse  304. 

Mrs.  Warren  W.  Flitcraft 
Woodnut,  Margaret.     1805.     11  yrs.     16"  x  16".     4  alphabets.     Eyelet,  petit-point,  and  cross- 
stitch.     Border  of  vine  with  berries.    Two  birds  on  a  branch,  2  baskets  of  fruit.     1  basket 
of  flowers,  2  sprays  of  roses,  2  strawberry  vines.     Initials  of  father,  mother,  brothers, 
and  sisters.  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Woodnut,  Martha.  1814.  Weston.  12|"  x  9".  Stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Grapevine 
border;  oval  in  black.    Verses  430  (var.),  692.  Mrs.  Warren  W.  Flitcraft 

Woods,  Laura  Ann.  1828.  Westford  [Vt.].  171"xl5i".  4  alphabets.  Cross-stitch.  Rose 
border.     Verse  647.  Mrs.  George  B.  Walton 

Woods,  Margaret.  "  May  the  9,  1825."  6  yrs.  [Coila,  now  Cambridge,  N.  Y.]  7*"  x  lOJ". 
5  alphabets.    Cross-stitch.    Cross-borders.  Miss  Gertrude  Gilmore 

Woods,  Margaret  Oliver.  1824.  11  yrs.  15i"  x  16^".  4  alphabets.  Eyelet,  stem,  satin,  and 
cross-stitch.  Double  trefoil  border.  Large  basket  of  flowers  with  fruit  designs  each  side, 
apples,  strawberries,  and  elderberries.     Rows  of  fancy  stitches.     Verse  692. 

Marblehead  Historical  Society 

Woodward,  Ann.  1824.  Baltimore.  12  yrs.  Alphabet.  Floral  border  and  cross-borders. 
Central  design  is  that  of  house  on  Fayette  Street,  Baltimore,  with  large  tree  on  either 
side  and  steps  and  fence  in  front;  two  gates,  one  at  each  end  of  fence;  driveway;  scattered 
rose-sprays.     Verse  170.  Miss  Anna  E.  Brown 

Wooley,  Attylanta  Shafter.  1819.  Grafton  [Vt.].  15  yrs.  17"  x  17".  4  alphabets.  Stem, 
cat,  and  cross-stitch.    Tree  design.    Verse  515  (1,  var.).  Mr.  Leon  Wyman 

Woolley,  Ruth.  1816.  [Rumson,  Monmouth  County,  N.  J.]  8  yrs.  9"  x  15".  4  alphabets. 
Cross-stitch.  Edna  R.  Kennedy 

Wright,  Abigail,  1811.  Medfield  [Mass.  Born  December  21,  1792.].  18"  x  27".  3  alphabets. 
Stem  and  cross-stitch.  Tassel  and  fringe.  Two  urns  at  bottom,  with  inscriptions:  "In 
memory  of  E.  M."  and  "  In  memory  of  J,  M."  Two-story  brick  house  with  fence,  front 
yard,  four  flower-pots  with  plants  in  bloom,  and  two  weeping  willow  trees  over  urns. 
Verses  34,  296.  Mrs.  Marcia  M.  WinsloTO 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  245 

Wright,  Axx.  January  27,  1830.  Trenton.  20"  x  23".  Cross-stitch.  Conventional  tulip 
border.  Willow  tree,  tombstone,  and  large  baskets  of  flowers.  "  Sacred  to  the  memory 
of  S.  Wright."  Box  trees,  with  birds  perched  on  branches.  Above,  horn  of  plenty 
filled  with  flowers;  and  on  each  side,  sprays  of  flowers.     Verse  336.        Frances  D.  Smith 

Wright,  E .     August,  1803.     9  yrs.     11"  x  15".     Alphabet.     Queen,  satin,  and  cross-stitch. 

Carnation  border.     House,  gate,  trees,  and  birds,  Mrs.  Hampton  L.  Carson 

Wright,  Nancy.  September  4,  1800.  [Lower  Penns  Neck,  Salem  County,  N.  J.  Born  in 
1789.]  8^"  x  15V'.  3  alphabets.  Satin,  cat-stitch,  chain,  herringbone,  buttonhole,  French 
knot,  and  cross-stitch.  Cross-stitch  dividing  lines.  Conventional  design  at  top.  "  Virtue 
Excelleth  Vice  as  Far  as  Light  Exceeds  Darkness."  Miss  Maria  H.  Mecum 

Wright,  Priscula  Caroline.  1813.  Wilton  [N.  H.].  Born  October  23,  1804.  9"  x  14".  4 
alphabets.     Cross-stitch.    Vine  and  clover  border.  Mary  Priscilla  Bunce 

Wyckoff,  Maria.  [Cir.  1800.]  Millstone  [N.  J.].  Born  September  17,  1789.  8"  x  10".  2 
alphabets.     Cross-border.  Catharine  L.  A.  Brokaw  Staats 

Wyman,  Lucy  P.  1807.  Born  September  21,  1791.  13"  x  17".  Satin  and  stem-stitch.  Vine 
with  leaves  around  edge.  Three  hearts  at  bottom,  from  which  springs  fruit  tree.  In- 
scribed on  hearts:  "Abel  Wyman  bn.  April  1,  1747;  Ruth  Putnam  bn.  March  28,  1751; 
Married  Oct.  20,  1772."  On  fruit  names  and  births  of  children:  "Elizabeth  bn.  June 
25th,  1773;  Samuel  bn.  April  15th,  1775;  Ruth  bn.  July  5th,  1776;  Abel  bn.  Sept.  28th, 
1778;  Pamela  bn.  Jan.  24th,  1781;  Abel  bn.  Aug.  31st,  1783;  William  and  Levi  born  March 
18th,  1786;  Sarah  bn.  July  8th,  1789;  Francis  bn.  July  30th,  1790;  Lucy  P.  bn.  Sept.  21st, 
1791."  Mrs.  Bradbury  Bedell 

Wymast,  Lucy  P.     1810.     Jay   [Me.].  9  yrs.     7^"  x  12".     2  alphabets.     Bordered  with  hem 

and  divided  into  fourteen  sections.  At  bottom,  tree,  horse,  house,  dog,  and  another  tree. 

Section  4  contains  four  characters,  corresponding  to  ace  of  hearts,  diamonds,  clubs,  and 

spades.     Verse  490  (var.).  George  C.  Wing,  Esq. 

Wyman,  Sophia.  1807.  Charlestown.  12  yrs.  15i"  x  17i".  2  alphabets.  Chain,  stem,  and 
cross-stitch.  Conventional  pomegranates,  roses,  feathers,  etc.,  in  border.  "  Virtue  hath 
secret  charm,  which  all  men  love.  And  those  that  do  not  choose  her,  yet  approve." 
Verse  705.  •  Marblehead  Historical  Society 

Wyman,  Submit.  1805.  12  yrs.  12"  x  16".  Stem  and  cross-stitch.  2  alphabets.  Rose  and 
carnation  border  on  three  sides.  Lancaster  Public  Library 

Yeakels,  Sarah.  1806.  22"  x  16h".  1  alphabet.  Queen,  stem,  satin,  and  cross-stitch.  Straw- 
berry border.  Hill  on  right-hand  side  with  house  on  top,  shaded  by  a  curious  tree; 
bush  and  large  peacock  beside  house;  fence  running  down  ridge  of  hill;  large  bush  and 
weeping  willow  tree,  with  sheep  underneath;  birds  flying  about;  detached  trees  in  open 
space.     Illustrated.  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 

Yeates,  Harriet.  1813.  131"  x  16V'.  Cross-stitch.  Strawberry  border.  Conventionalized 
fruit  trees,  flowers,  and  animals.     Verse  531   (6). 

William,  B.  Thayer  Memorial  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

Yerrington,  Catherine  B.  1819.  21"  x  17".  Satin,  chain,  and  stem-stitch.  Rose  border. 
Arch  containing  family  register,  with  fruit  basket  at  base.  "  Mr.  James  Yerrington  was 
born  Decbr  31,  1772;  Miss  Catherine  Brown  was  born  April  11,  1768;  They  were  mar- 
ried by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Hitchcock  August  25,  1796."  "  Births:  James  B,  December  4,  1800; 
Barker  T,  April  20,  1803;  Catherine  B.,  March  22,  1806;  Sarah  W.,  December  25,  1807." 

Mrs.  Preston  Yerrington 


246  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Young,  Elizabeth  Loring.     1812.     Boston  [Mass.].     8  yrs.     2  alphabets.     Cat-stitch. 

Elizabeth  Loring  Tappan 

Young,  Elizabeth.  1826.  [Cumberland  County,  N.  J.]  13"  x  16".  4  alphabets.  Cross, 
eyelet,  queen,  and  stem-stitch.  Walls  of  Troy  on  sides  and  across  bottom,  and  cross- 
design  in  border  across  top  and  bottom.  At  bottom,  gable  end  of  house  inclosing 
initials,  flanked  on  each  side  by  shallow  urns  of  flowers,  buds,  single  conventional  flowers, 
geometrical  designs,  etc.     Initials  in  house:     "  J  Y,  R  Y";  and  outside,  "S  Y." 

Mrs.  Trueman  H.  Clayton 

Young,  Elizabeth.  182.3.  Baltimore.  17"  x  20".  5  alphabets.  Intricate  strawberry  border. 
Flowers  in  pots,  trees,  and  birds.    Verse  733  (1).  Mrs.  William  Nelson  Marye 

Young,  Polly.  [1801.]  "Aged  11,  born  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  90."  12i"  x  15i".  Cross, 
satin,  eyelet,  chain,  and  cat-stitch.    Saw-tooth  cross-borders.    Verse  187  (var.). 

Williwm  B.  Thayer  Collection,  University  of  Kansas 

Z ,  S.  E.,  AND  C ,  M.*  1816.  21"  X  21".  7  alphabets.  Eyelet  and  cross-stitch.  Tent- 
stitch  border  all  around,  with  carnations,  strawberries,  birds,  etc.  Inscription:  "Through 
the  industry  of  two  dear  girls  I  have  been  made  the  proprietor  of  this  very  excellent 
sampler  to  whom  I  feel  much  indebted.     M.  Robertson.     Mary  Robertson  her  sampler." 

Mrs.  Edward  Dillon 

*  Perhaps  Mary  Clapbam. 


These  three  Registers  were  compiled  from,  description  blanks,  from 
photographs,  and  som.etimes  from  "  viva  voce"  descriptions  by  Mrs. 
Wolcott  West  Treadway,  and  their  excellence  is  largely  due  to  her. 


i 


.-.-•'..  "lies- 

lii  MJlllif'Tl'l'  'niaimM 


e.   &n  un  moment  «lie  eH  fktrie 


$ 
^ 


4 


/" 


«#«  fmit^  qa  avec  ma  vie  /, 

, .  4^  cum 


# 


# 


PLATE  LXXIX 

Louisa  Gauffreau's  Sa.mpler.     New  York.     1821 
Opened  by  Mrs.  J.  Herbert  Johnston 


4 


SAMPLER  VERSE 

PoETSMOUTH,  15  June,  1920. 
My  dear  Mrs.  Bolton  : 

Fantastically  enough,  the  first  thought  which  comes  to  mind  as  I 
glance  through  the  verses  laboriously  stitched  into  your  century  and 
ia  half  of  samplers  is  one  of  devout  thanksgiving  that  you  did  not 
submit  them  to  me  when  I  was  still  a  practicing  professor.  For,  while 
so  employed,  I  might  have  been  tempted  to  discern  in  them  good 
material  for  a  thesis  tending  toward  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Philos- 
ophy; and,  if  such  degree  had  thus  been  attained,  the  winner  thereof 
would  have  been  apt  presently  to  offer,  wherever  he  chanced  to  be 
employed,  elaborate  courses  of  instruction  in  Sampler  Poetry. 

Nothing  short  of  this  intensive  study  could  so  deal  with  the  matter 
as  to  result  in  any  definite  contribution  to  literary  history.  Were  I  a 
little  younger,  or  a  good  deal  stronger,  your  wish  would  tempt  me  to 
undertake  it ;  except  that,  as  it  would  demand  patient  months,  if  not 
years,  it  could  hardly  be  completed  in  time  for  the  first  edition  of  your 
book.  This  consideration,  which  somewhat  consoles  me,  must  be  my 
excuse  for  comments  so  cursory  that  you  may  rightly  find  them 
unworthy  of  place  in  your  pages. 

To  begin  with,  the  evidence  on  which  not  long  ago  I  based  a 
message  to  you  that,  so  late  as  1812,  the  verses  on  a  sampler  in  my 
possession  were  composed  by  the  poetastic  father  of  the  rather  weak- 
minded  stitcher — whom  I  remember  as  an  old  woman — proves  worth- 
less.   I  possess  the  draft  in  her  father's  handwriting : 

"Tell  me,  ye  knowing  and  discerning  few. 
Where  I  may  find  a  friend  both  firm  and  true, 
Who  dares  stand  by  me  in  my  deep  distress, 
And  then  her  love  and  friendship  most  express?" 

The  normal  answer,  I  suppose,  would  have  been  "My  Mother" ;  in  this 
case,  domestic  circumstances  altered  it  to  "My  Ant".  Until  I  saw 
your  collection  of  verses,  I  had  supposed  it  original.    To  my  dismay, 

247 


248  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

I  discover  a  version  of  it  there  as  early  as  1718;  and  it  is  repeated  five 
times — last  in  1827.  The  conclusion  I  draw  from  these  incomplete 
premises  I  believe  tenable:  namely,  that  throughout  the  whole  range 
of  sampler-poetry  the  only  trace  of  originality  to  be  found  is  in  the 
signatures  and  the  dates. 

By  far  the  most  frequent  of  the  rhymes  tends  to  confirm  this 
opinion.  Among  the  examples  you  have  sent  me  it  is  the  only  one 
which  occurs  frequently  before  1700.  So  nearly  as  I  can  make  out, 
it  first  appears  in  1675,  somewhat  as  follows: 

"Isabel  Ercy  is  my  name 
And  with  my  needle  I  wrought  the  same". 

With  variations,  you  will  find  it  repeated  more  than  a  hundred  times 
before  1830,  most  frequently  in  some  such  form  as  this: 

"Hannah  Weeks  is  my  name. 
New  England  is  my  nation, 
Greenland  is  my  dwelling-place. 
And  Christ  is  my  salvation". 

The  next  most  usual,  also  with  many  variations,  appears  to  be  the 
familiar  couplet,  perhaps  metrically  based  on  the  New  England 
Primer : 

"  When  this  you  see 
Remember  me," 

duly  followed  by  signature  and  date,  though  generally  lacking  the 
precise  local  address.  The  two  are  more  than  once  combined,  by  add- 
ing to  something  like  the  first  a  third  couplet : 

"And  which  whenever  you  chance  to  see 
May  kind  remembrance  picture  me." 

These  examples  fairly  indicate  the  general  poetical  and  literary  quality 
of  the  species  of  expression  which  they  represent. 

To  pass  to  the  substance  of  these  artless  epigrams,  a  great  many 
of  them  concern  religion,  mostly  of  Calvinistic  shade,  sometimes  pretty 
deep.  Whoever  has  classified  them  for  you  has  put  seventy-eight,  of 
which  a  dozen  or  so  are  often  repeated,  under  the  head  of  Christ,  and 
one  hundred  and  ten,  of  which  ten  are  repeated  more  or  less,  under 
that  of  the  Old  Testament.    Among  the  latter,  by  the  way,  are  two 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  249 

rhymed  versions  of  the  Ten  Commandments,  and  among  the  former 
two  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  by  no  means  so  skillful  as  that  in  the  Divine 
Comedy.  For  general  purposes,  the  subdivision  appears  needless;  it 
were  better  to  say  that  at  least  one  hundred  and  eighty-eight  of  these 
rhymes  directly  concern  the  orthodox  principles  of  New  England 
religion,  and  that  a  great  many  more  imply  them.  Death  and  Sorrow, 
for  example,  are  represented  by  no  less  than  one  hundred  and  sixty- 
eight  examples  between  1730  and  1830;  and  Virtue,  which  appears  to 
have  become  increasingly  popular  with  the  rise  of  Revolutionary 
sentiment,  by  two  hundred  and  twenty-eight,  between  1730  and  1829. 
Patriotism,  though,  was  of  late  growth ;  there  are  only  nine  classified 
examples,  the  first  of  1770  and  the  last  of  1826;  and  at  least  two  of 
these  might  just  as  well  have  been  placed  under  Death  and  Sorrow. 
The  shorter  runs  thus : 

"Mourn,  hapless  brethren,  deeply  mourn! 
The  source  of  every  joy  is  fled; 
Our  Father  dear,  the  Friend  of  Man, 
The  God-like  Washington  is  dead." 

A  comparison  of  this  quatrain,  probably  composed  in  1799  or  1800, 
with  the  earlier  verses  I  have  happened  to  set  down,  instantly  shows 
what  is  generally  true :  on  the  whole,  the  later  verses — those  which  first 
appear  after  1760,  let  us  say — are  apt  to  be  a  little  smoother,  a  bit 
more  sophisticated,  than  those  formerly  found  satisfactory.  Not  many, 
however,  display  any  memorable  degree  of  literary  culture.  Quite 
possibly,  to  be  sure,  some  of  them  might  be  traced  by  study  to  higher 
origin  than  I  have  happened  to  detect.  Pope  is  often  quoted:  in  1785 
occurs  the  couplet 

"'Tis  education  forms  the  common  mind; 
Just  as  the  twig  is  bent,  the  tree's  inclined;" 

and  in  1794,  the  following  lines  are  specifically  referred  to  him : 

"Virtue  outshines  the  stars,  outlives  the  tomb, 
Climbs  up  to  heaven  and  finds  a  peaceful  home". 

One  could  find  many  traces  of  him  on  later  samplers,  but  none,  I  think, 
in  contemporary  ones.  When  the  first  of  these  couplets  was  stitched, 
he  had  been  dead  forty-one  years,  and  the  second  was  stitched  nine 


250  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

years  later.  Of  Johnson  I  have  discovered  no  evident  influence,  and 
but  a  little  of  Goldsmith  or  of  Gray.  Minute  scrutiny  does  reveal  a 
gloomy  ray  or  two  from  Young. 

And  here  are  a  few  casual  examples,  from  more  or  less  similar 
origin.  Whoever  cares  to  find  out  where  they  came  from  can  probably 
do  so  from  the  Anthology  which  follows,  without  excessive  pains : 

1.  (1766)    "Beauty  and  Pride  we  often  find 

Betray  the  weakness  of  the  mind  ; 
He  handsom  is  and  merits  praise 
'Ihat  handsom  does,  the  Proverb  says."  • 

2.  (1787)    "Teach  me  to  feel  another's  wo. 

To  hide  the  fault  I  see; 
That  mercy  I  to  others  show 
That  mercy  show  to  me." 

3.  (1798)    "So  let  me  live,  so  let  me  die, 

That  I  may  live  eternally." 

4.  (1805)    "Man  wants  but  little  here  below",  etc. 

5.  (1805)    "My  thoughts  on  awful  subjects  roll, 

Damnation  and  the  dead,"  etc. 

6.  (1812)    "Good  when  He  gives,  supremely  good, 

Nor  less  when  he  denies. 

Even  crosses  from  his  sovereign  hand 

Are  blessings  in  disguise". 

7.  (1820)    "Harl<,  from  the  tombs  a  doleful  sound",  etc. 

8.  (1824)    "When  I  can  read  my  title  clear 

To  mansions  in  the  skies, 
I  bid  farewell  to  every  fear 
And  wipe  my  weeping  eyes." 

9.  (1827)    "Jesus,  Lover  of  my  Soul",  etc. 

The  familiar  poets,  though,  seem  chiefly  to  have  been  the  native 
Yankee  classics — Wigglesworth  and  the  New  England  Primer — and 
the  writers  of  popular  hymns.  I  have  been  so  careless  as  to  mislay 
my  reference  to  one  sampler  clearly  based  on  Wigglesworth's  "Day 
of  Doom".  The  rhythm  of  the  New  England  Primer  reveals  itself 
fourteen  times  between  1724  and  1821  in  the  lines 

"Let  virtue  be 
A  guide  to  thee. 
And  innocence 
Be  thy  defence." 

The  76*^  Hymn,  on  the  other  hand — I  know  not  from  what  collection 
— occurs  twice,  once  in  1795  with  six  stanzas,  of  which  the  first  begins, 
"Lo,  He  comes  with  clouds  descending". 


4 


\  f 


,;  .r..>,  (j'ltBkji^C'i'irC?  ^'^^C»ic-r  u;:rajvo-;,?-\r'^'lV='98^£  .^ii4.  I-:-/-:--?,":!//,  VV 


■^^r^ 


■  -A^*' 


W    V;. 


y^-^iy^J-l-^j 


1*1 


Mv  4 


Of.' 


k.-\> 


'v'-*i!^*(.^'''^'"'""''P1"'*'^^''>:"«'H'4rx  ©4>ni>   S'ei.<^find«n   <V*lfl»on  i?c»7  /./«.  J/f 


M 


i    ' 


i'  A<^^^; 


'>^^  ^ 


J 


1 


PLATE  LXXX 

Mary  Axx  Fessexdex  Vixtox's  Sampler.     1819 
The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  251 

As  I  have  turned  over  your  hundreds  of  slips,  very  few  have  im- 
pressed me  as  at  all  exceptional.    Here  are  some  of  these : 

1.  (1757)    "In  Mother's  womb  Thy  fingers  did  me  make, 

And  from  the  womb  Thou  didst  me  safely  take ; 
From  breast  Thou  hast  me  nurst  my  life  throughout. 
I  may  say  [that]  I  never  wanted  ought." 

2.  (1795)    "I've  been  to  church  and  love  to  go, 

'Tis  like  a  little  heaven  below ; 
Not  for  my  pleasure  or  my  play 
Will  I  forget  the  Sabbath  Day." 

3.  (1796)    "Adam  alone  in  Paradise  did  grieve, 

And  thought  Eden  a  desert  without  Eve, 
Until  God  pitying  of  his  lonesome  state 
Crowned  all  his  wishes  with  a  loving  mate. 
What  reason  then  hath  Man  to  slight  or  flout  her. 
That  could  not  live  in  Paradise  without  her?" 

(Mary  Gates) 

(Incidentally,  one  may  hope  that  the  heavenly  joys  of  Mary  Gates, 
who  stitched  these  germinal  lines,  are  enhanced  by  the  rapid  growth 
of  female  suffrage  nowadays.) 

4.  (1810)    "God  counts  the  sorrows  of  His  saints. 

Their  groans  afl'ect  his  ears, 

He  has  a  book  for  their  complaints, 

A  bottle  for  their  tears". 

(A  hundred  and  ten  years  ago,  of  course,  the  deplorable  view  of 
stimulants  implied  by  the  Second  Chapter  of  the  Gospel  according 
to  Saint  John  had  not  yet  been  irradiated  by  the  light  of  constitutional 
prohibition.) 

5.  (1817)    "  Father  of  light  and  life !    Thou  God  supreme  ! 

O,  teach  me  what  is  good !    Teach  my  Thyself, 
Save  me  from  folly,  vanity  and  vice. 
From  every  low  pursuit,  and  feed  my  soul, 
With  knowledge,  conscious  peace,  and  virtue  pure. 
Sacred,  substantial,  never-fading  bliss." 

( This  is  noteworthy  as  almost  the  only  unrhymed  verse  in  your  whole 
collection. ) 

6.    (1828)    " Could  we  with  ink  the  ocean  fill.  Nor  could  this  scroll  contain  the  whole 

Were  the  whole  earth  of  parchment  made,  Though  stretcht  from  sky  to  sky. 

Were  every  single  stick  a  quill.  Were  the  whole  realm  of  Nature  mine. 

And  every  man  a  scribe  by  trade,  That  were  a  present  far  too  small; 

To  write  the  love  of  God  above  Love  so  amazing,  so  divine. 

Would  drain  the  ocean  dry,  Demands  my  soul,  my  life,  my  all." 


252  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

One  might  go  on  like  this  forever,  remarking,  for  example,  that 
in  1819  Mary  Austin,  at  the  end  of  a  long  celebration  of  the  glories 
of  God,  reveals  extensive  knowledge  of  infant  prayer  in  the  lines 

"  I  lay  my  body  down  to  sleep ; 
Let  angels  guard  my  head, 
And  through  the  hours  of  darkness  keep 
Their  watch  about  my  bed." 

We  should  never  get  away  from  where  we  began.  It  seems  like  an 
atmosphere  of  stiflingly  priggish  formalism,  saved  from  hypocrisy 
only  by  unintelligence,  and  refreshed — if  at  all — only  by  occasional 
whiffs  of  lukewarm  sentimentality.  You  will  find  counterparts  of 
these  verses  in  the  commencement  parts  of  our  Yankee  colleges 
throughout  the  generations  when  the  faded  lines  were  stitched.  You 
will  find  epitaphs  to  match  them  on  plenty  of  gray  slate  Yankee  grave- 
stones. You  will  find  dreary  models  for  all  these  conventions  in  the 
long  unread  and  no  longer  deeply  revered  Yankee  sermons  which 
make  sleepy  the  shelves  of  our  older  libraries.  You  may  smile,  or  chafe, 
as  you  choose,  rejoicing  that  we  breathe  air  more  free  than  ever  invig- 
orated our  ancestors.  But,  after  all  is  said  and  done,  you  can  hardly 
deny  that  they  bred  a  race  earnest,  strong,  and — so  far  as  humanity 
may  be — pure  of  heart.  In  moods  like  this,  the  prayer  on  the  seal  of 
Boston  city  comes  to  mind: 

"Sicut  patribus  sit  Deus  nobis". 
(As  to  our  fathers  so  be  God  to  us.) 

It  is  impossible,  you  see,  to  plunge  into  old  New  England  without 
falling  to  moralizing,  which  does  no  harm  here;  for  until  one  begins 
flatly  to  moralize,  one  cannot  imagine  what  manner  of  beings  the  dead 
and  gone  children  were  who  stitched  the  samplers. 

Forgive  me  for  not  writing  about  them  more  learnedly,  and  believe 

me  always 

Sincerely  yours, 

(Signed)    Barrett  Wendell.^ 


'  Mr.  Wendell  did  not  live  to  read  the  proof  of  the  letter  which  he  so  kindly  contributed  to  the  book. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  253 

Under  the  stimulus  of  Mr.  Wendell's  letter,  it  was  almost  impos- 
sible to  refrain  from  delving  into  contemporary  literature  to  see  what 
a  short  digging  in  that  unaccustomed  soil  would  produce  in  the  way 
of  authorship  for  the  verses  following.  The  ordinary  quotation  books 
have  proved  themselves  almost  useless  in  the  search.  Moreover  mis- 
quotation, quotations  adapted  to  the  youthful  mind,  and  paraphrased 
quotations  have  proved  a  great  stumbling  block  in  the  progress  of  the 
searcher.  A  girl  in  those  days  thought  nothing  of  blending  Pope  and 
Edward  Young  in  one  uneasy  whole,  which  it  is  hard  for  the  would-be 
identifier  to  detect. 

But  there  is  one  result  too  evident  to  be  ignored  by  any  who  study 
these  verses,  and  that  is  the  overwhelming  influence  of  the  Rev.  Isaac 
Watts.  He  is  by  far  the  oftenest  quoted  writer,  and  if  the  local 
ministers  or  school-teachers  wrote  a  verse  to  be  put  upon  the  children's 
samplers,  they  were  sure  to  copy  Watts  as  nearly  as  they  dared — 
and  sometimes  nearer  than  they  ought.  The  strange  part  is  that  the 
children  in  their  quotations  from  Watts  seldom  chose  his  cheerful  verse. 
"Hark  from  the  tombs  a  doleful  sound"  was  much  more  to  their  taste 
than  one  of  his  triumphal  psalms.  Truly  the  terror  of  the  law  and  of 
death  was  early  inculcated,  in  those  days.  After  a  prolonged  contem- 
plation of  these  lugubrious  expressions,  one  turns  to  our  own  time 
with  a  sense  of  relief,  and  the  reflection  that,  though  w^e  may  not  be 
so  intent  on  saving  our  own  souls,  we  may  contribute  by  joy  and  good 
cheer  to  the  saving  of  others. 

Of  secular  authors,  Alexander  Pope  leads  all  the  rest.  The  same 
uneasy  feeling  again  assails  the  searcher  after  knowledge,  for  one  is 
entirely  unable  to  distinguish  at  a  glance  or  even  after  much  study 
the  real  Pope  from  his  close  imitators.  His  style  of  verse  and  his  some- 
what cynical  outlook  are  imitated  again  and  again.  Edward  Young, 
Goldsmith,  Cowper,  Congreve,  Thompson,  John  Bunyan,  Gay,  and 
Milton  all  have  their  admirers,  but  only  one  girl  so  far  quoted 
Shakespeare.  She  embroidered  the  famous  sampler  quotation  from 
Titus  Andronicus — perhaps  because  she  hated  doing  her  sampler  so — 
and  remains  the  only  user  of  the  works  of  the  great  poet. 


254 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


There  are,  of  course,  many  crude  verses  which  must  have  been  the 
work  of  local  poets,  and  m  a  few  cases  the  tradition  has  come  down 
that  the  sampler  maker  wrote  her  own.  One  and  all,  however,  reflect 
the  philosophy  of  the  time.    As  Margaretta  Arabella  Godman  wrote : 

"  By  virtue  ripened  from  the  bud 
The  flowers  angelic  odors  breathe, 
The  fragrant  charm  of  being  good 
Makes  gaudy  vice  to  smell  like  weeds." 

Ethel  Stanwood  Bolton. 


M- 


f 

i- 


Julia  Axk  Ni\t:rs's  Sampler.     1831 
View  of  Crawford,  New  Hampshire 


:Mi. 


-  :r--  -'"fl 


r  -m^- 


it" 


^■^'^m.- 


Mfe^--- :-^-r -^^^.^. 


'^  •  u.. 


^r 


'"■  ::°.|iy'S^''^   • -■-" ''^^^M- ~-  :|"---'H:--wv.-  ■  ■-„_,.-:..,  .v;.:v  ^,,   ■..-..^ v..     ^■■%^^. JN-:^5r^#*-r^.•v{p-^-•- 


PLATE  LXXXI 

Eliza  Pickets's  Sampler.     Baltimore,  Md. 
Owned  by  Miss  Lida  Bartlett 


1825 


AN  ANTHOLOGY  OF  SAMPLER  VERSE 


IN  PRAISE  OF  PATRIOTISM 

1770 

The  Love  of  Liberty  with  life  was  given 
And  Life  itself  is  the  inferior  gift  of  heaven. 


2 


1781 


While  hostile  foes  our  coasts  invade, 
In  all  the  pomp  of  war  arrayed, 
Americans  be  not  dismayed, 
Nor  fear  the  Sword  or  Gun. 


While  innocence  is  all  our  pride, 
And  virtue  is  our  only  Guide 
Women  would  scorn  to  be  defyd 
if  led  by  Washington. 


2a  1788 

LINES  ON  PEACE  BY  AN  ENGLISH  LADY 
Janus  has  closed  his  blood-stained  door  To  keep  her  kindred  smile  alive 

And  war  and  carnage  rage  no  more  Nor  envy's  breath  nor  blast  be  near 

Long  may  sweet  Peace  her  olive  twine  To  force  from  virtue's  eye  to  war 

Round  Britain  and  Columbia's  line  But  each  brave  country  prove  this  creed 

May  generous  friend  hip's  ardour  strive  That  truth  and  honour  best  succeed 

ANSWER  BY  A  DAUGHTER  OF  COLUMBIA 
Thus  sung  a  muse  of  Britains  Isle  Yes  from  henceforth  let  discord  cease 


Columbia's  goddess  with  a  smile 
Responded  to  the  lay 


And  all  the  world  be  wrapt  in  peace 
And  shine  in  Heaven's  own  day. 


1798 

ON  WAR 


Why  these  scenes  that  would  the  feeling  mind 
This  sport  of  death,  this  cockpit  of  mankind 
Why  sobs  the  widow  in  perpetual  pain 
Why  cries  the  orphan  x  oh  my  father's  slain 
Why  hangs  the  sire  his  paralytic  head 


And  nods  with  manly  grief  x  my  son  is  dead 
Oh  could  I  paint  the  passion  I  can  feel 
Or  paint  a  horror  that  would  wound  like  steel 
To  the  unfeeling  unrelenting  mind 
I'd  send  a  torture  and  releive  mankind 


1799 


With  love  she  is  queen 
ve  American  fair 


to  adorn  your  mind 
bend  all  your  care. 


O 


After  1799 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  GENERAL  GEORGE  WASHINGTON 
WHO  DIED  DECEMBER  14,  1799 

Illustrious  Shade  if  artless  hands  are  mine 
Could  for  the  Hero's  now  a  chaplet  twine. 
The  muse  for  thee  would  cull  each  opening  bloom. 
And  with  unfading  garlands  deck  thy  Tomb. 

256 


256 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


5a 


1801 

G.  W. 


Mute  be  the  voices  of  Eulogy 

For  who  can  justly  speak  his  praise 


But  the  sad  tear  that  fills  each  eye 
A  deathless  monument  shall  raise 


6  1804 

Mourn  Hapless  Brethren  Deeply  Mourn  Our  Father  Dear  The  Friend  Of  Man 

The  Source  Of  Every  Joy  Is  Fled  The  Godlike  Washington  Is  Dead. 

7  1826 

[ON  LIBERTY] 

Oh  Liberty!  thou  Power  supremely  bright, 
Profuse  of  bliss,  and  fragrant  with  delight, 
Perpetual  pleasures  in  thy  presence  reign, 
And  smiling  plenty  leads  thy  wanton  train. 

Religion  smiles  beneath  thy  heavenly  light, 
And  Industry  looks  cheerful  in  thy  sight, 
Thou  mak'st  the  gloomy  face  of  nature  gay, 
Giv'st  beauty  to  the  sun,  and  pleasure  to  the  day. 

Nathaniel  Low's  Almanack.    Boston.    1775. 


IN  PRAISE  OF  LOVE 


8 


9 


1739 

One  did  commend  me  to  a  Wife  Fair  and  Young 
That  had  French  Spannish  and  Italian  Tongue 
I  thankd  him  kindly  and  told  him  I  loved  none  such 
For  I  thought  one  tongue  for  a  Wife  too  much 
What  love  ye  not  the  Lamed    Yes,  as  my  Life 
A  Learned  Schollar,  but  not  a  Lamed  Wife.' 


1769 


When  in  love  I  do  commence 
May  it  be  with  a  man  of  sense 


Brisk  and  arey  may  he  be. 
Free  from  a  spirit  of  jealousy. 


10 

1.  When  this  you  see,  remember  me  . 

2.  And  bear  me  in  your  mind. 


1785 


What  others  say  when  I'm  away 
Speak  of  me  as  you  find. 


11 


1790 


Little  Bud  of  opening  red 
Where  the  blooming  Graces  dwell, 
Nodding  o'er  thy  dewy  bed, 
In  thy  verdant  mossy  cell. 


With  lovers  hand  should  some  fond  youth 
To  Delia's  breast  thy  beauties  bear. 
Go  and  learn  this  sacred  truth, 
That  greater  beauties  flourish  there. 


' "  Samplers  bearing  this  verse  are  known  as  the  '  Milton's  Daughter '  samplers,  in  reference  to  his  sentiments 
as  to  women  knowing  foreign  tongues." 

'(If  sleeping  in  the  icy  arms  of  death.    Susanne  Nickalls.) 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


257 


12 


1792 

No  Star  so  bright 
As  my  delight. 


13 


1796 


As  on  some  lonely  building  top 
The  sparrow  tells  her  moan 


Far  from  the  tents  of  joy  &  hope 
I  sit  and  grieve  alone 


14 


1796 


When  this  you  see 
Think  of  me 
Tho  many  a  mile 
We  distant  be 


Tne  gift  is  small 
But  love  is  all 
Death  only  parts 
Unighted*  hearts 


15 


1801 

Belov'd  till  life  coul'd  charm  no  more 
And  mourn'  I  till  life  shall  thee  restore. 


16 


The  broad  Alantic  rolls  between 
Fair  England's  isle  and  me 
On  Fancy's  wings  I  fly  unseen 
And  oft  converse  with  thee. 


1803 


No  barrier  Ocean  can  divide 
Affection's  kindred  love 
And  that  I've  ne'er  forgotten  thee 
Let  this  Memento  prove 


17 


Kind  heaven  O  grant  me  but  this 
I  would  not  by  many  be  known 


1803 


And  to  fill  up  my  measure  of  bliss 
I  ask  the  esteem  of  but  one 


18 


O  let  my  name  engraven  stand 
Both  on  thy  heart  and  on  thy  hand 


1804 


Seat  me  upon  thine  arm  and  wear 
That  pledge  of  love  forever  there 


19 


Sweet  bud  to  Myra's  bosom  go 
And  live  beneath  her  eye 
There  in  the  sun  of  beauty  blow 


1806 


Or  taste  of  heaven  and  die 

Sweet  earnest  of  the  Blooming  year 

Whose  dawning  beauties  speak 


20 


1814 

The  rosey  red,  the  violet  blue. 

Sugar  is  sweet  my  dear  and  so  are  you. 


21 


1822 

When  two  fond  hearts  as  one  unite, 
The  yoke  is  easy  and  the  burdon  light. 


I  United. 


258  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


IN  PRAISE  OF  NATURE 

22  1788 

O  what  a  pleasant  sight  it  is  to  see 

The  fruitful  Clusters  Bowing  down  the  Tree. 

23  1790 

The  industrious  bee  extracts  from  evr'y  flower 
It's  fragrant  sweets,  and  mild  balsamic  pow'r 
Learn  thence  with  greatest  care  and  nicest  skill 
To  take  the  good,  and  to  reject  the  ill 
By  her  example  taught,  enrich  thy  mind 
Improve  kind  nature's  gifts,  by  sense  refind. 
Be  thou  the  honey-comb  in  whom  may  dwell 
Each  mental  sweet,  nor  leave  one  vacant  cell. 

24  1792 

1.  When  snow  descend,  and  robes  the  fields  3.  Fresh  in  the  morn  the  summer  rose 
In  winters  bright  array  Hangs  withering  ere  tis  noon 
Touched  by  the  sun  the  lustre  fades                      We  scarce  enjoy  the  balmy  gift 
And  weeps  itself  away  But  mourn  the  pleasure  gone. 

2.  When  Spring  appears — when  violets  blow        4.  With  gilding  fire  an  evening  star 
And  shed  a  rich  perfume  Streaks  the  autumnal  skies 

How  soon  the  fragrance  breathes  its  last  Shook  from  the  sphere  it  darts  away 

How  short  lived  is  the  bloom.  And  in  an  instant  dies. 

25  1795 

In  native  winte  and  red  And  free  from  Pride  their  beauties  spread 

The  Rose  and  Lilly  stand  To  Shew  thy  skilful  Hand. 

"A   Collection  of  Hymns"  for  "use  of  the  West  Society  in 
Boston."    1803.     {Hymn  29,  verse  3.    No  author  given.) 

26  1798 

First  SPRING  advancing  with  her  flowery  train 
Next  SUMMER'S  hand  that  spreads  the  sylvan  scene 
Then  AUTUMN  with  her  yellow  harvest  crownd 
And  trembling  WINTER  close  the  annual  round 

27  1803 

[UPON   THE  PROMISING  FRUITFULNESS  OF   A  TREE] 
A  comely  sight  indeed  it  is  to  see  But  how  much  more  might  one  upon  it  see 

A  world  of  blossoms  on  an  apple  tree  If  all  would  hang  there  till  they  ripe  should  be 

Yet  far  more  comely  would  the  tree  appear       hut  more  of  all  in  beauty  would  abound 
If  all  its  dainty  blooms  young  apples  were  if  every  one  should  then  be  truly  sound 

John  Banyan.    "Divine  Emblems." 


PLATE  LXXXII 


SusAx  H.  Mrxsox's  Sampler.     1824 
Ozemed  by  George  S.  McKenrin,  Esq. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  2.59 

28  1806 

I  have  seen  the  bright  azure  of  morn  I  have  found  that  the  rose  has  a  thorn 

With  darkness  and  clouds  shadowed  o'er  Which  will  wound  when  its  bloom  is  no  more 

29  1807 

1.  How  fair  is  the  rose  what  a  beautiful  flower 
The  glory  of  april  and  may 

But  the  leaves  are  beginning  to  fade  in  an  hour 
And  they  wither  and  die  in  a  day 

2.  [Yet]  The  Rose  has  one  powerful  virtue  to  last 
Above  all  the  flowers  of  the  field 

When  its  leaves  are  all  dead  and  the  colors  lost 
[Still,]  How  sweet  a  perfume  will  it  yield. 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Moral  Songs.    Ill,  "The  Rose." 

30  1808 

The  flowers  in  varied  colours  drest 
Proclaim  their  author's  high  behest 

31  1810 

Down  in  a  greend  &  shady  bed  And  yet  it  was  a  lovely  flower 

A  modest  violet  grew  It's  colors  bright  &  fair 

It's  stalks  was  bent,  it  hung  it's  head  It  might  have  graced  a  rosy  bower 

As  if  to  hide  from  view.  Instead  of  hiding  there. 

Then  let  me  to  the  vally  go 
This  pretty  flower  to  see 
That  I  may  also  learn  to  grow 
In  sweet  humility. 

32  1810 

Sweet  bird  thy  bower  is  ever  green  Thou  hast  no  sorrow  in  thy  song 

Thy  sky  is  ever  clear  No  winter  in  thy  year. 

33  1811 

From  natures  beauteous  works  are  fitly  drawn 
The  buding  forest  &  the  spreading  lawn 
These  please  the  eye  and  lead  the  aspireing  mind 
To  nobler  scenes  of  pleasure  more  refind 

34  1811 

Fair  Verna  lovely'  village  of  the  west 

Of  every  joy  and  every  charm  possessed. 

*♦*«♦»♦ 

HaiF  smiling  village  happiest  of  the  hills 

How  green  thy  grove [s]  how  pure  thy  [glassy]  rills! 

"Picture  of  a  New  England  village."     Timothy  Dwight,  D.D., 
in  The  Columbian  Muse.    1794. 

*  Loveliest. 
■-^  Sweet. 


260  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

35  1820 

BUDDING  ROSE 
[THE  ROSEBUD] 

Queen  of  fragrance,  Lovely  Rose  Soft  gales  breathe  gently  thro  the  sky; 

The  beauty  of  thy  leaves  disclose;  The  lark  sweet  vi^arbling  on  the  wing 

The  winter's  past,  the  tempests  fly,  Salutes  the  gay  return  of  spring 

Dr.  William  Broome. 

36  1823 

[THE  ROSE] 
The  rose  had  been  washed  just  washed  in  a  shower, 
Which  Mary  to  Anna  conveyed 
The  sleuthful  moisture  encumbered  the  flower 
And  weighed  down  its  beautiful  head,  [haid] 

The  Columbian  Songster.     Thomas  and  Waldo,  Brookfield,  Mass.    1795. 

37  1828 

See  the  early  blossoms  springing  Hear  the  lark  and  linnet  singing 

See  the  jocund  lambkins  play  Welcome  to  the  new-born  day 

38  1830 

A  MORNING  IN  SPRING 
To  the  bright  the  rosy  morning  Praise  to  thee  thou  great  Creator 

Calls  me  forth  to  take  the  air  Praise  be  thine  from  every  tongue 

Cheerful  spring  with  smiles  returning  Join  my  soul  with  every  creature 

Ushers  in  the  new  born  year.  Join  the  universal  song. 


IN  PRAISE  OF  PARENTS  AND  FAMILY 

39  1732  or  6 

Francis  &  Sarah  Knowles  Mj^  parents  dear 
Paid  for  this  which  I  have  heare 

40  1747 

Next  unto  God  dear  parents  I  address  The  means  of  learning  unto  me  allowd 

My  self  to  you  in  humble  thankfulness  Go  on  I  pray  and  let  me  still  pursue 

For  all  your  care  and  charge  on  me  bestowd       The  golden  art  the  vulgar  never  knew 

41  1752 

This  I  did  to  let  you  see 

what  care  my  parents  took  of  me. 

41a  1808 

Behold  And  See 

AVhat  My  Parents  Has  Don  For  Me 


PLATE  LXXXIII 


Margaret  Kerlix's  Sampler.     Burlington.     1801 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Frederick  P.  Thompson 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  261 

42  1755 

Can  I  forget  that  hand  that  first  did  lay 
My  mean  foundation  out  of  dust  &  clay 

43  1784 

Respects  to  parents  always  must  be  paid 
Or  God  is  angered  and  they  are  disobeyed 

44  1789 

How  happy  is  the  lovely  child  Sure  pleasure  to  her  friends  impart 

Of  manners  gentle,  temper  mild  Tis  thus  my  Parents  sweeten  toil 

Who  learns  each  useful  pretty  art  And  my  reward  is  in  your  smile. 

45  1793 

Bless  Lord  my  parents  who  for  me  Provide 
let  grace  and  virtue  ever  be  thy  Guide 

46  1794 

Thanks  be  to  my  friends  for  their  care  of  my  breeding 
Who  taught  me  betimes  to  love  Worliing  and  Reading 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Moral  Songs.    "The  Sluggard." 

47  1797 

1.  Happy  the  child  whose  green  unpractised  years 
The  guiding  hand  of  parent  fondness  rears 

To  rich  instructions  ample  field  removes 
Prunes  every  fault  and  every  worth  improves. 

2.  Till  the  young  mind  unfolds  each  secret  charm 
With  genius  bright  with  cherished  virtue  warm 
Like  the  Spring's  boast  the  lovely  plant  shall  rise 
In  grateful  odors  to  the  nurturing  skies. 

48  1797 

TO  THE  MOTHER 

Say,  while  you  press  with  growing  love.  Then  wispers  busy  cruel  fear 

The  darling  to  your  heart,  The  child,  alas,  may  die 

And  all  a  mother's  pleasures  prove.  And  nature  prompts  the  ready  tear 

Are  you  entirely  blest?  And  heaves  the  rising  sigh 

Ah  no !  a  thousand  tender  cares  Say !  does  not  Heaven  our  comforts  mix 

By  turns  your  thoughts  employ  With  more  than  equal  pain 

Now  rising  hopes,  now  anxious  fears  To  teach  us  if  our  hearts  we  fix 

And  grief  succeeds  to  joy  On  earth  we  fix  in  vain 

Dear  innocent  her  lovely  smiles  Then  be  our  earthly  joys  resign'd 

With  what  delight  you  view.  Since  here  we  can  not  rest. 

But  every  pain  the  infant  feels  For  earthly  joys  were  ne'er  design'd 

The  mother  feels  it  too !  To  make  us  fully  blest— 


262 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


49  Before  1800 

Accept  dear  shade  if  Heaven  it  wills  who  loosing  the  with  grief  it  fills 

an  infants  artless  tear,  my  heart,  altho  of  tender  years 


49a 


1800 

Joshua  Moore  and  Rachel  Moore  Is  my  Parents  Names 
And  I  do  hope  to  Honor  Them  while  Life  Remains. 

(See  also  Number  52) 


50 


1805 


The  Father  fled  to  Worlds  unknown 
When  aged  fifty  two 


The  Mothers  left  and  may  we  all 
Her  virtuous  steps  pursue. 


51 


1805 


With  Garlands  of  Roses, 
I'll  daily  entwine 
The  tomb  of  my  brothers 
That  sacred  shrine, 


And  over  the  green  bank 
I'll  hourly  strew. 
Forget-me-nots 
Vieing  with  the  sky 
In  their  hue. 


52 


1807 

John  and  Deborah  Groff  is  the  name  my  parents  bare 
To  love,  lionor  and  obey  them  be  it  my  constant  care 


53  Cir.  1808 

When  soon  or  late  we  reach  that  coast  May  we  rejoice  no  wanderer  lost 

O'er  life's  rough  ocean  driven  A  Family  in  Heaven. 

54  1810 

1.  When  young,  life['s]  Journey  I  began  2.  The  drooping  spirit  you  can  raise 

The  glittering  prospect  charm'd  my  eyes  And  make  objection  gay 

I  saw  along  the  extended  Plain  It  is  your  Power,  be  it  your  praise 

Joy  after  Joy  successive  rise —  To  banish  care  away. 


55 


1816 

Now  hear  you  read  that  death  has  call  my  parent  Dear, 
and  may  we  all  for  that  day  prepare 


56 


1818 


All  they  that  worship  God  and  give 
Their  parents  honour  due 


Here  on  this  they  long  shall  live 
And  live  hereafter  too. 


57  1819 

The  God  of  Heaven  is  pleased  to  see  For  love  and  kindness  please  him  more 

A  little  Family  agree  Than  if  we  give  him  all  our  store 

And  will  not  slight  the  praise  they  bring  And  children  here  who  dwell  in  love 

When  loving  children  join  to  sing.  Are  like  his  happy  ones  above. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  263 

58  1821 

A  MA  MERE 
La  rose  nait  en  un  instant  Mais  ce  que  pour  vous  mon  coeur  sent 

En  un  moment  elle  sot  fletrie  Ne  finira  qu'avec  ma  vie. 

59  1823 

Thank's  to  my  mothers  tender  care  And  thanks  to  God  who  reigns  above 

Who  these  materials  did  prepare  For  all  the  blessings  of  His  love 

And  taught  my  hands  to  sew  And  all  the  good  I  know 

60  1824 

My  parents  care  points  out  the  way  And  with  my  needle  let  you  see 

And  I  as  cheerfully  obey  What  pains  my  tutor  took  with  me. 

Cowper. 

61  1826 

Children  like  tender  osiers  take  the  bow. 
As  they  first  are  fashioned  grow. 

62  1826 

Remembrance  gives  to  childrens  sorrows  vent 
A  granddaughters  love  inscribes  the  monument. 

63  1827 

When  first  my  lisping  accents  came,  Who  taught  my  bosom  to  rejoice 

And  called  Father  beloved.  In  God  above  who  hears  my  voice. 

Who  felt  transport  fill  his  frame,  And  make  his  ways  my  pleasant  choice, 

My  Father.  My  Mother. 


64 


Me  let  the  tender  office  long  engage 
To  rock  the  cradle  of  declining  age 

Explore  the  thought  explain  the  asking  eye 
And  keep  awhile  one  parent  from  the  sky 

Alexander  Pope.    "Epistle  to  Dr.  Arbuthnot." 


IN  PRAISE  OF  FRIENDSHIP 

65  1684 

In  prosperity  friends  are  plenty 
In  adversity  not  one  in  twenty.* 

•Supposed  to  have  been  written  at  the  time  of  the  Civil  War,  when  families  were  divided  between  the 
adherents  of  Cromwell  and  the  Kinp.  Miles  Fleetwood,  whose  name,  with  that  of  Abigail  Fleetwood,  appears 
on  a  sampler  containing  this  verse,  was  a  follower  of  King  Charles,  and  his  brother  was  a  General  in  Cromwell's 
army. 


264  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

66  1718 

1.  Tell  me  ye  knowing  and  discerning  few 
Where  I  may  find  a  friend  thats  firm  and  true 
Who  dares  stand  by  me  when  in  deep  distress 
And  then  his  love  and  friendship  most  express 

2.  Who  by  a  secret  sympathy  can  share 
My  joy,  my  grief,  my  misery  my  care 

He  must  be  prudent,  faithful,  just  and  wise. 
Who  can  to  such  a  pitch  of  friendship  rise. 

67  1730 

Despair  of  nothing  that  you  would  attain 
Unwearied  diligence  your  point  will  gain 

Diligently  practice  what  is  good  and  then 
Great  will  be  thy  reward  in  Bliss — amen 

Refrain  much  talk,  you  seldom  hear  of  any 
Undone  by  hearing,  but  by  speaking  many. 

Make  spare  in  youth,  least  age  should  find  thee  poor 
When  time  is  past  and  thou  canst  spare  no  more. 

Remember  well  &  bear  in  mind 
A  faithful  friend  is  hard  to  find. 

68  1763 

[PRECEPT  I] 
[HOW^  TO  GET  RICHES] 
In  things  of  moment  on  thy  self  depend. 
Nor  trust  too  far  thy  servant  or  thy  friend. 
With  private  views  thy  friend  may  promise  fair. 
And  servants  very  seldom  prove  sincere. 

Printed  in  Nathaniel  Low's  Almanack  for  1773. 

69  1781 

1.  Look  on  these  flowers  2.  Honour  and  Renown 

So  fade  my  Hours.  Shall  the  ingenious  crown 

3.  Your  friend  sincerely  love 
And  imitate  the  Dove. 

70  1788 

To  each  unthinking  being,  heaven,  a  friend 
Gives  not  the  useless  knowledge  of  its  end; 
To  man  imparts  it;  but  with  such  a  view 
As,  whilst  he  dreads  it,  makes  him  hope  it  too, 
The  hour  concealed,  and  so  remote  the  fear 
Death  still  draws  nearer,  never  seeming  near. 

Alexander  Pope.    "Essay  on  Man."    Epistle  III. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  265 

71  1792 

Give  me  a  House  that  never  will  decay  Give  me  a  Friend  that  never  will  depart 

And  Garments  that  never  will  wear  away —       Give  me  a  Ruler  that  can  rule  my  Heart 

72  Cir.  1794 

Let  Us  Be  Friends,  In  Tender  Years  To  Share  The  Early  Joys  And  Prove 

When  Infant  Genius  First  Appears,  The  New  Born  Votary  Of  Our  Love. 

73  1798 

Happy  is  the  man  that  hath  a  friend,  Well  may  he  feel  and  recommend 

Form'd  by  the  God  of  nature.  Friendship  to  his  creator 

74  1799 

How  much  to  be  prized  and  esteemed  is  a  Friend 
On  whom  we  may  always  with  safety  depend 
Our  joys  when  extended  will  alwajs  increase 
And  griefs  when  divided  are  hushed  into  peace. 

76  1802 

The  world  my  dear  Mary  is  full  of  deceit 
And  friendships  a  jewell  we  seldom  can  meet 
How  strange  does  it  seem  that  in  searching  around 
The  source  of  content  is  so  rare  to  be  found. 

77  1802 

Absent  or  dead  still  let  a  friend  be  dear 
A  sigh  the  absent  claim,  the  dead  a  tear 

78  1803 

Friendship  outlives  the  stars  survives  the  tomb 
Climbs  up  to  Heaven  &  finds  a  peaceful  home 
Joys  beyond  joys  in  endless  circles  rise 
Till  thought  can't  follow  and  bold  fancy  dies. 

79  1806 

And  what  is  friendship  but  a  name  A  shade  that  follows  wealth  &  fame 

A  charm  that  lulls  to  sleep  But  leaves  the  wretch  to  weep. 

Oliver  Goldsmith.    "The  Hermit." 

80  1807 

Friendship's  a  pure  a  Heav'n  descended  flame 
Worthy  the  happy  region  whence  it  came 
The  sacred  eye  that  virtuous  spirits  binds 
The  golden  chain  that  links  immortal  minds 


266 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


81 


1807 

A  generous  friendship  no  cold  medium  knows, 
Warms  with  one  love — with  one  resentment  shows, 
One  should  our  interests,  one  our  passions  be, 
My  friend  must  slight  the  one  that  injures  me. 


82 


1810 


Farewell  my  friend  a  long  farewell 
A  mornful  sad  adieu 
I  call  to  mind  the  happy  hours 
So  Sweetly  Spent  with  you 


Your  gayety  inspir'd  delight 
And  made  the  moments  fly 
quick  as  the  radiant  beams  of  light 
That  Sparkle  in  your  eye 


83 


1810 


How  pleasing  t'is  to  view 

The  only  happy  few 

Whom  friendship's  bands  unite 


Brothers  and  sisters  joined 
In  social  love  refined 
Give  and  receive  delight. 


84 


1812 


Love  is  but  a  moving  shade 
Oft  [changing?]  with  the  sun 


Valued  friendship  n'er  will  fade 
Till  our  earthly  course  is  run 


85 


1813 

A  solitary  blessing  few  can  find 

Our  joys  with  those  we  love  are  intertwined 

And  he  whose  wakeful  tenderness  removes 

The  obstructing  thorn  which  wounds  the  friend  he  loves 

Smooths  not  anothers  rugged  path  alone 

But  scatters  roses  to  adorn  his  own. 


86 


1815 


Friendship's  a  name  to  few  confin'd, 
The  offspring  of  a  noble  mind. 


A  generous  warmth  which  fills  the  breast, 
And  better  felt  than  e'er  exprest. 


87 


1816 


Be  thine  those  feelings  of  the  mind 
That  wake  to  honour  friendship's  call. 


Benevolence  that  unconfined 
Extends  her  liberal  hand  to  all. 


87« 


1816 

[I  show  thee]  Friendsliip  is  delicate,  as  dear, 

[Of  tender  violations  apt  to  die?] 

Reserve  will  wound  it,  and  distrust,  destroy. 

Deliberate  on  all  things  with  thy  friend. 

But  since  friends  grow  not  thick  on  every  bough 

Nor  every  friend  unrotten  at  the  core. 

First,  on  thy  friend  deliberate  with  thyself. 

Pause,  ponder,  sift;  nor  eager  in  the  choice. 

Nor  jealous  of  the  chosen;  fixing  fix; 

Judge  before  friendship,  then  confide  till  death. 

Dr.  Edward  Young.    '•  Night  Thoughts."    Night  II,  line  559. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


267 


88 


89 


1818 

Ann  thou  art  fair  divinely  fair 
Nor  can  I  in  this  work  declare 
Near  half  the  beauties  of  thine 

1819 

Except  this  posey  from  a  Friend 
Whose  Love  will  never  end. 


90  1821 

Give  me  a  mind  to  range  the  silvan  scene  While  social  joys  and  friendly  intervene 

And  taste  the  blessings  of  the  vernal  day  To  chase  the  gloomy  cares  of  life  away. 

91  1822 

Friendship  of  origin  divine  And  lighten  all  my  load  of  care 

O  mayest  thou  warm  this  heart  of  mine  Through  this  dark  veil  of  doubt  and  fear 

So  it  shall  cease  to  beat  And  give  a  blest  retreat. 


IN  PRAISE   OF  LEARNING 

92  1732  or  6 

1.    Labor  for  learning  before  you  grow  old         2.    When  silver  is  gone  and  money  is  spent 
for  it  is  better  than  silver  or  gold  then  learning  is  most  excellent 

or 


92a 

Learning  is  an  ornament 
a  portion  never  to  be  spent. 


1750 


WHien  land  is  gone  and  money  spent, 
then  learning  proves  most  excellent. 


93  1767 

Adorn  thyself  with  grace  &  truth 
And  learning  prize  now  in  thy  youth. 

94  1785 

L    Tis  education  forms  the  tender^  mind 
Just  as  the  twig  is  bent  the  tree's  inclin'd 

Alexander  Pope.    "Moral  Essays."    Epistle  I,  line  149. 

95  1785 

1.  Vain  are  the  hopes  of  those  who  think  to  gain 
This  noble  treasure  without  taking  pains 

2.  Youth  is  the  time  for  progress  in  all  arts 
Then  use  your  youth  to  gain  the  noblest  parts. 

•  "  Common  "  is  correct.    Evidently  changed  to  "  tender  "  and  "  youthful  "  to  drive  the  lesson  home. 


268  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

96  1785 

As  diamonds  rough  no  lustre  can  impart 
Till  polish'd  and  improv'd  by  aiding  Art 
So  untaught  youth  we  very  rarely  find 
Display  the  dazzling  Beauties  of  the  mind 
Till  art  and  science  are  with  nature  joined 

97  1786 

To  Colleges  and  Schools  ye  Youths  repair 
Improve  each  precious  Moment  while  you're  there 

98  1791 

If  to  learning  you  will  attend,  Dunces  ever  meet  with  shame 

Learning  will  be  your  surest  friend  And  never  rise  to  work  or  fame. 

99  1797 

Delight  in  Learning  Soon  doth  Bring 
a  Child  to  Learn  the  Hardist  Thing. 

100  1797 

Each  pleasing  Art  lends  softness  to  the  mind       As  soft  refinements  flow  from  works  of  Art 
And  with  our  Studies  are  our  lives  refined  Our  virtuous  Actions  real  Bliss  impart. 

101  1799 

Rear'd  by  blest  Education's  nurturing  hand       Deep  in  lier  heart  the  seeds  of  virtue  lay 
Behold  the  maid  arise  her  mind  expand  Maturing  age  shall  give  them  to  the  day 

102  1799 

Vain,  very  vain  my  wearj^  search  to  find 
That  bliss  which  only  centres  in  tlie  mind 
Why  have  I  strayed  from  pleasure  and  repose 
To  seek  a  good  each  government  bestows 
In  every  government  though  errors  reign 
Though  tyrant  kings  or  tj^rant  laws  refrain 
How  small  of  all  that  human  heart  endure 
That  part  which  laws  or  kings  can  cause  or  cure 

103  1800 

O  Praise  thy  language  was  by  heaven  designed 
As  manna  to  the  faint  bewildered  mind 
Beauty  and  diffidence  whose  hearts  rejoice 
In  the  kind  comfort  of  thy  heavenly  voice 
In  this  wild  wood  of  life  wert  thou  not  nigh 
Must  like  the  wandering  babes  lie  down  and  die 
But  thy  sweet  accents  wake  new  vital  powers 
And  make  this  thorny  path  a  path  of  flowers. 


PLATE  LXXXIV 

Faxxy  Rixes's  Sampler.     Lancaster,  Pa.     1808 

Made  at  Mrs.  Armstrong's  School 

Owned  hi/  Mrs.  Frederick  F.  Thompson 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


269 


104 


1805 

Plain  as  this  canvas  was,  as  plain  we  find. 
Unlettered  unadorned  the  female  mind. 
No  fine  ideas  fill  the  vacant  soul, 
No  graceful  coloring  animates  the  whole. 

With  close  attention  carefully  inwrought. 
Fair  education  paints  the  pleasing  thought, 
Inserts  the  curious  line  on  proper  ground. 
Completes  the  whole,  and  scatters  flowers  around. 

My  heart  exults,  while  to  the  attentive  eyes 
The  curious  needle  spreads  the  enamell'd  dyes, 
While  varying  shades  the  pleasing  task  beguile. 
My  friends  approve  me,  and  my  parents  smile 


105 


1806 

Learning  do  but  try  to  love 
And  then  you  surely  will  improve 


106  1806 

Get  learning  tis  the  grace  of  science  fair  Get  Wisdom  in  her  train  the  vertues  shine 

That  give  the  lib'ral  mind  its  noblest  air  Thy  guides  with  hope  and  faith  to  bliss  divine 


107 


1806 


The  Youth  witli  greatest  talent  born 
Is  rough,  while  unrefined. 


Learning  will  every  heart  adorn 
And  polish  every  mind. 


108 

Industry  taught  in  early  days 
Not  only  gives  the  teacher  praise 
But  gives  us  pleasure  when  we  view 
The  works  that  Innocence  can  do 

109 

Learning  is  a  beauty  bright. 
In  learning  take  great  delight. 


Cir.  1806 


110 


The  Parents  with  exulting  joy 
Survey  it  as  no  childish  toy 
But  as  a  prelude  that  each  day 
A  greater  genius  will  display 


1807 


Beauty  will  soon  fade  away, 
But  learning  never  will  decay. 


1808 

Adorn  your  heart,  adorn  your  mind 
With  knowledge  of  the  purest  kind 


111 

While  thus  we  practice  every  art 
To  adorn  and  grace  our  mortal  part 


1809 


Let  us  with  no  less  care  devise 

To  improve  the  mind  that  never  dies. 


112 


1809 

Sweet  is  the  morning  of  youth 
Inspired  with  knowledge  and  truth. 


270  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

113  1810 

As  memory  o'er  this  task  shall  wake  Oft  shall  I  wish  but  wish  in  vain 

And  retrospective  pleasure  take  To  enjoy  youth's  careless  hours  again 

114  1812 

Youth  if  set  right  at  first  with  ease  go  on 
And  each  new  task  is  with  new  pleasure  done 
But  if  neglected  till  they  grow  in  years 
And  each  fond  Mother  her  dear  children  spares 
Errour  becomes  habitual  and  you'll  find 
Tis  then  hard  labour  to  reform  the  mind 

115  Before  1816 

In  this  early  life  to  me  oh  Lord  And  while  my  mind  is  early  taught 

Thy  pard'ning  mercy  show  May  I  in  knowledge  grow 

116  1816 

Let  the  mind  your  noblest  thoughts  engage 
Its  beauties  last  beyond  the  flight  of  age 

117  1818 

Delightful  task,  to  rear  the  tender  thought 
And  teach  the  young  idea  how  to  shoot 

James  Thomson.    "The  Seasons."    Line  1149. 

118  1818 

Let  solid  sense  her  mind  inform  Let  her  be  void  of  foolish  pride 

Let  gentle  love  her  bosom  warm  And  modesty  her  bosom  guide. 

119  1819 

Let  wreaths  of  laurel  twine  the  brow  But  Education  should  endow 

Of  him  who  strides  in  arms  With  grace  the  female  charms. 

120  1820 

LEARNING 
From  art  and  study  true  content  just  [must?]  flow 
For  'tis  a  God-like  attribute  to  know: 
He  most  improves  who  studies  with  delight 
And  learns  sound  morals  while  he  learns  to  write. 

121  1822 

Here  the  fair  form  liy  nobler  views  refind 
Shines  the  bright  mirror  of  the  faultless  mind 
With  pity's  dew  the  eye  of  radiance  flows 
With  Learnings  gem  the  breast  of  beauty  glows. 


<-„. 


^S^ 


born   ^ept  J*'    eA4i.   fa   ^^'^'''    ^''^Abeth  7 

*4jrm.:x  wa>   Wn  A/n.*   12.     i^^^'    ^"^    ?K*^ 


1^ 


2i 


yin 


line     ^'m? 


^&th 


}j    %<nn    aSe    to    ^«    uowmJbei-'d   *re5Atw  shine 
»     'vWlJh    and    he»    5hadO>P'V    kw»    w^  c*!;  ©j^y 
„»gW5Pa»M{   PjAoe-  and  trm?  &e  iub^c«  «»  ew'  swax  ,VWV, 


PI, ATE  I.XXXV 

Elizabeth  A.  Harwood's  Sampler.     Massachusetts.     1814 
Owned  by  Miss  Grace  Craiy  Stork 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  271 

122  1822 

Science  adorns  and  virtue  beams  divine 

How  bright  tlieir  radience  when  they  both  combine. 

123  1825 

By   degrees   The   human   blossom   blows 
and  every  day  Soft  as  it  rolls  along  shows 
some  new  charm  Then  infant  reason  grows 
apace  and  calls 
The  kind  hand  of  an  assiduous  care. 

124  1825 

The  feast  of  reason  which  from  reading  springs 
To  reasoning  man  the  highest  solace  brings 
Tis  books  a  lasting  pleasure  can  supply 
Charm  while  we  live  and  teach  us  how  to  die 

125  1826 

May  improvement  stamp  each  hour  Each  Month  new  stores  of  Knowledge  yield 

Well  employed  each  Day  be  found  With  added  worth  each  year  be  crowned 

126  1829 

True  dress  is  this,  be  not  to  modes  confined, 
True  ornament's  a  well  instructed  mind. 

127 

CELESTIAL  WISDOM 

How  happy  is  the  youth  who  hears  A  length  of  liappy  years 

Instructions  warning  voice  And  in  her  left  a  prize  of  fame 

And  who  celestial  wisdom  makes  With  honour  bright  appears 

His  early  only  choice  She  guides  the  young  with  innocence 

For  she  has  treasures  greater  far  In  pleasures  path  to  tread 

Than  east  or  west  unfold  According  as  her  labours  rise 

And  her  reward  is  more  secure  So  her  rewards  increase 

Than  is  the  gain  of  gold  Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness 

In  her  right  hand  she  holds  to  view  And  all  her  paths  are  peace. 

IN  PRAISE   OF  SAMPLERS 

128  Cir.   1630 

1. is  my  name  2.  And  if  my  skil  had  been  better 

And  with  my  needle  I  rought  the  same  I  would  Iiave  mended  every  letter. 

129  1707 

This  needle  work  of  mine  can  tell  And  by  my  elders  I  was  taught 

When  I  was  young  I  learned  well  Not  to  spend  my  time  for  naught. 


272  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

129a  1789 

This  needlework  of  mine  was  taught 
not  to  spend  my  time  for  naught. 

130  1738 

Not  pleasing  objects  which  soon  pass  the  sight, 
Or  richest  food  that  highest  tastes  delight. 
Not  numbered  music  which  captivates  the  ear, 
Or  gayest  dress  that  pleases  much  the  fair, 
Witu  virtue  equal  are,  my  greetings,  maid. 
These  clog  our  sense,  this  to  the  mind  gives  aid, 
This  New  Year's  gift  your  sampler  may  adorn, 
And  pattern  be  to  others  yet  unborn. 

131  1747 

Behold  the  labour  of  my  tender  age 

And  view  this  work  which  did  my  hours  engage 

With  anxious  care  I  did  these  colours  place 

A  smile  to  gain  from  mj^  dear  parents  face 

Whose  care  for  me  I  ever  will  regard 

And  hope  that  heaven  will  give  a  kind  reward 

My  little  faults  I  hope  you  will  excuse 

Then  your  commands  on  me  I'll  not  refuse. 

132  1752 

1.  This  work  in  hand  my  friends  may  have 
When  I  am  dead  and  in  my  grave 

2.  And  which  wheneer  you  chance  to  see 
May  kind  remembrance  picture  me 
While  on  this  glowing  canvas  stands 
The  labour  of  my  youthful  hands 

133  1767 

Blame  not  my  work,  if  fault  you  see 
Few  earn  with  -) — |-  you 

134  1767 

My  friends  I  hope  you  are  pleased  &  so  shall  I 
If  this  my  work  I  may  get  credit  by 
Much  labor  &  much  time  it  hath  me  cost 
I  will  take  care  that  none  of  it  be  lost 

135  Cir.  1775 

[Sarah  Ann  Souder]  worked  this  in  great  speed 
And  left  it  here  for  you  to  read. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


273 


136 

Oft  as  thine  eye  shall  fondly  trace 


1784 


Those  few  lines  I  here  exact 


Whate'er  the  time  where'er  the  Place 
Remember  me  my  Friends. 


137 


1787 

Though  young  in  age  And  small  in  stature 
Yet  I  have  skill  To  form  a  letter. 


138  1787 

Behold  when  I  try 
My  needle  can  vie 
With  my  pen  and  my  pencil  to  prove 

139  1790 

Behold  this  early  sampler  may 
Show  Readers  at  a  future  day 

140  1795 

Olive  Bosworth  is  my  name 

and  with  my  needle  I  work  the  same 


My  very  fond  wish 

Is  centerd  in  this 

To  gain  my  dear  parents  your  love 


That  I  was  taught  before  too  late 
All  Sorts  of  idleness  to  hate 


A  time  to  work  my  parents  give 
I  will  ne'er  forget  it  while  I  live 


141 


1796 

These  poUish'd  arts,  have  humaniz'd  mankind 
Soften'd  the  rude  and  calm'd  the  boistrious  mind. 


142 


1799 

Here  you  may  see  my  work  tho  course* 
When  I  lie  moulding  in  the  dust. 


143 


1801 

I  cannot  perceive  This  business  design'd 
For  anything  more  Than  to  pleas  a  raw  mind 


144 

1.  Of  female  arts  in  usefulness 
The  needle  far  excels  the  rest 
In  ornament  there's  no  device 
Affords  adornings  half  so  nice 

145 

While  I  my  needle  ply  with  skiU 
With  mimic  flowers  my  canvas  fill 
O  may  I  often  raise 

146 

Betsy  Lincoln  is  my  name 

At  ten  years  old  I  wrought  the  same 

'  Coarse. 


1802 

2.  While  thus  we  Practice  every  art 
To  adorn  and  grace  our  mortal  part 
Let  us  with  no  less  care  device 
To  improve  the  mind  that  never  dies. 


1803 


My  thoughts  to  Him  who  made  the  flowers 
And  gave  us  all  that  we  call  ours 
And  render  youthful  prais 


1804 


What  days  more  happy  mark  lifes  busy  stag* 
Than  those  when  education  forms  our  age 


274  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

147  1805 

[ON  THE  INVENTION  OF  LETTERS— THE  ANSWER] 

The  noble  art  to  Cadmus  owes  its  rise  The  airy  voice  and  stopp'd  the  flying  sound 

Of  painting  words  and  speaking  to  the  eyes       The  various  figuers  by  his  pencil  wroght 
He  first  in  wondrous  maggick  letters  bond  Gave  colour  form  and  body  to  the  thought 

Nathaniel  Low's  Almanack.    1806.    No  author  given. 

148  1828 

Whence  did  the  wondrous  mystic  Art  arise  That  we  by  tracing  magic  lines  are  taught 

Of  painting  speech  and  speaking  to  the  eyes       How  both  to  colour  and  embody  thought. 

149  1805 

This  to  my  friends  when  I  am  gone  Remember  that  I  wrought  the  same 

I  leave  for  them  to  look  upon  For  underneath  you  find  my  name. 

150  1806 

I.  When  Youth's  soft  season  shall  be  o'er  2.  As  memory  o'er  this  task  shall  wake 
And  scenes  of  Childhood  charm  no  more  And  retrospective  pleasure  take 

My  riper  years  with  Joy  shall  see  How  shall  I  wish  but  wish  in  vain 

This  proof  of  infant  Industry.  To  enjoy  Youth's  careless  hours  again. 

151  1807 

Mary  Tucker  Is  My  Name  ^       And  Practice  Every  Useful  Art 

May  I  Excell  in  Deeds  Of  Fame  That  May  My  Happiness  Impart. 

152  1808 

In  fair  proportion  see  the  letters  stand 

A  beauteous  equal  and  impressive  band 

With  eye  of  care  we  must  their  structure  raise 

A  point  too  much  the  hand  unskilled  betrays 

A  thread  misplaced  their  symmetry  despoils 

And  the  fond  hope  of  excellence  beguiles 

So  my  sweet  girl  the  path  of  life  survey 

And  tread  with  caution  o'er  devious  way 

An  erring  step  would  blast  thy  budding  fame 

And  with  dishonor  stamp  my  Mary's  name 

From  rules  of  virtue  shouldst  thou  careless  stray 

Nor  sighs  nor  tears  can  e'er  the  forfeit  pay 

For  female  reputation  wounded  dies 

No  blest  Panaceas  this  wide  world  supplies. 

153  1808 

When  I  was  young  and  quite  untaught  But  when  Im  older  and  know  more 

These  letters  I  with  needle  wroght  111  make  them  better  than  before 


0  ( -  ^^^^^rp^i""'"'^^^^ 


$-.m 


,£       i : 


'  ;     >v\.      ■•        '  *  ■     ^  ■■■""I 


PLATE  LXXXVI 

The  Dow>r  Family  Record.     1828 

Made  by  "M.  D." 

Owned  by  Mrs.  William  D.  Frishmuth 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


27.5 


154 


1808 

Thus  when  my  draught  some  future  time  invades 
The  silk  and  figure  from  the  canvas  fades 
A  rival  hand  recalls  from  every  part 
Some  latent  grace  &  equals  art  with  art 
Transported  we  survey  with  dubious  strife 
Each  form  &  figure  starts  again  to  life. 


155 

When  with  the  needle  I'm  imploy 
Or  whatsoever  I  pursue 


1809 


Teach  me  O  Thou  Almighty  Lord 
To  keep  my  final  end  in  view. 


156  1811 

Dear  Mother  I  am  young  and  cannot  show  Be  pleased  to  smile  upon  my  first  endeavor 

Such  work  as  I  unto  your  goodness  owe  And  111  strive  to  be  obedient  ever 


157 


1812 

Industrious  ingenuity  may  find 

Noble  employment  for  the  female  mind 


158 


1812 

Parents  and  patrons  of  my  age  I  now  present  to  you 
This  work  in  which  I  do  engage  for  you  to  read  and  view. 
I  ask  your  counsel  seek  your  love  and  approbation  too 
And  beg  a  blessing  from  above  on  all  the  works  I  do. 


159 

In  vain  my  sampler  does  assume 

To  paint  the  garb  of  nature  to  the  eye 


1813 


Art  can  imitate,  tho  she  presume 
The  noblest  work  of  nature  to  outvie 


160 


1814 


This  sampler  which  appears  in  view, 
When  first  begun  cost  many  a  tear ; 
The  merit  to  my  friends  is  due, 
Who  taught  me  the  right  course  to  steer. 

The  silken  threads  both  long  and  fine 
Did  often  break  and  make  me  sigh ; 
At  crosses  oft  we  do  repine. 
But  still  our  hope's  in  him  on  high. 


Oh  heavenly  Father  bless  my  friends 
Oh  bless  them  with  peculiar  care 
For  I  can  ne'er  make  them  amends 
Oh  heavenly  Father  hear  my  prayer. 

The  thread  of  life  may  soon  decay. 
The  knot  may  slip — then  all  is  o'er; 
Oh :  may  the  needle  ne'er  give  way, 
Until  we  reach  the  happy  shore. 


161 


1814 

Now  while  my  needle  does  my  hours  engage 
And  thus  with  care  I  mark  my  name  and  age 
Let  me  reflect  though  few  have  been  my  years 
Crowded  with  sins  this  narrow  space  appears 


276 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


162 


1808 


While  rosy  cheeks  their  bloom  confess 
And  youth  thy  bosom  warms 
Let  Virtue  and  let  Knowledge  dress 
Thy  mind  in  brighter  charms 


163 

In  the  soft  scenes  of  life 
When  cares  are  small  and  few 

164 

The  book  the  needle  and  the  pen 
Each  hours  of  all  will  divide 


Cir. 


2.  Daily  in  some  fine  page  to  look 
Lay  meaner  sports  aside 
And  let  the  needle  and  the  book 
Thy  useful  hours  divide. 

1808 

I'll  show  to  others  of  my  age 
What  busy  hands  can  do. 


1815 


And  Virtue  with  her  Peaceful  train 
Within  my  breast  reside. 


165 


166 


1815 

Please  to  survey  this  with  a  tender  eye 
Put  on  good  nature  and  lay  judgment  by. 

1816 

An  idler  is  a  watch  that  wants  both  hands. 
As  useless  when  it  goes  as  when  it  stands. 

William  Cowper.    "Retirement."    Line  681. 


167  1817 

By  this  Exemplar  I  am  taught 

How  letters  great  and  small  are  wrought 


So  by  the  example  of  the  wise 
May  I  true  virtue  learn  to  prize 


168  1817 

1.  Ye  sprightly  are  whose  gentle  mind  incline    2.  Then  let  the  needle  whose  unrivalled  skiU 
To  all  that's  joyous  innocent  and  fine 
With  admiration  in  your  works  are  read 
The  various  texture  of  the  twining  thread. 


Exalts  the  needle  above  the  noble  quill. 


169  1821 

This  little  piece  of  work  I've  done 
And  finished  to  my  mind 

169a 

These  letters  which  you  now  behold 
May  serve  to  guide  a  feeble  hand 

170  1824 

This  early  labor  of  my  hand 


And  when  I've  this  life's  journey  run 
I  hope  a  heaven  to  find. 


When  many  years  away  have  rolled 
These  letters  will  securelv  stand 


A  sacred  monument  shall  stand 

And  speak  when  years  have  flown  away 

The  efiForts  of  an  infant  day. 

O  grant  me  then  this  one  request 
And  I'll  be  satisfied 
That  love  divine  may  rule  my  breast 
And  all  my  actions  guide. 


Should  bounteous  nature  kindly  pour 
Her  ricliest  gifts  on  me 
Still,  O  my  God,  I  should  be  poor 
If  void  of  love  to  Thee. 


PLATE  LXXXVII 

Eliza  Crocker's  Sampler.     1803 

'At  Mrs.  Dobell's  Seminary  in  Boston" 

Owned  by  Miss  Susan  P.  Peabody 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  277 

171  1825 

This  sampler  wrought  with  so  much  care  With  like  industry  may  it  thou  gain 

Adorned  with  colours  rich  and  fair  That  Peace  which  will  thy  mind  sustain 

My  little  friend  let  it  impart  In  every  trying  time  of  need 

A  moral  lesson  to  thy  heart  Then  wilt  thou  happy  be  indeed. 

172  1826 

In  the  glad  morn  of  blooming  youth  When  gay  youth  shall  charm  no  more 

The  varied  thread  I  drew  And  age  shall  chill  my  blood 

And  pleas'd  beheld  the  finished  piece  May  I  my  life  review  and  say 

Rise  glowing  to  the  view  Behold  my  works  are  good. 

173  1826 

May  you  dear  Fanny  with  your  needle  trace, 

A  small  memorial  of  your  youthful  days. 

W^hen  learnings  page,  with  useful  arts  combined. 

To  engage  your  fancy  and  improve  your  mind, 

And  from  this  source  may  you  each  pleasure  know, 

Which  from  wise  precepts  and  industry  flow. 

And  as  through  life's  inconstant  scenes  you  wave  ' 

In  duties  pathway  ever  humbly  move 

Of  virtue.  Innocence  and  truth  possessed. 

By  friendship  cherished  by  religion  blessed. 

174  1826 

Happy  the  maid  whose  artless  mind  The  landscape  on  this  canvass  lay 

In  works  of  innocence  can  find  By  which  the  blended  colors  may 

Amusement  and  delight  Give  charm  and  please  the  sight 

175  1827 

1.  Accomplishments  by  heaven  were  first  designed 
Less  to  adorn  Than  to  amend  the  mind 

Each  should  contribute  To  the  general  end 
and  all  to  virtue,  as  their  centre  bend. 

2.  Th'  acquirements  which  our  best  esteem  invite 
Should  not  project  but  soften  mix  imite 

In  glaring  light  not  strongly  be  displayed 
But  sweetly  lost  and  melted  into  shade. 

176  1827 

The  canvas  thus  in  colours  laid  Thus  education  good  or  bad 

Gives  a  just  emblem  of  mankind  Shows  on  the  canvas  of  the  mind. 

177  Before  1830 

INDUSTRY 
Tho  age  may  shew  life's  best  pursuits  are  vain 
And  few  the  pleasures  to  be  here  enjoy'd 
Yet  may  this  work  a  pleasing  proof  remain 
Of  youth's  gay  period. 


278 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


178 


1830 

Whoever  thinks  a  faultless  piece  to  see 
Thinks  what  ne'er  was,  nor  is,  nor  e'er  shall  be. 

Alexander  Pope.    "Essay  on  Criticism. 


Part  II. 


179 

My  youthful  days  will  soon  be  o'er 
And  time  with  me  will  be  no  more 


Laid  in  the  grave  we  all  must  be 

And  this  I  have  wrought  for  you  to  see 


REFLECTIONS  OX  DEATH  AND  SORROW 
180  1713 

DEAR   CHILD   DELAY  NO  TIME  THE    LONGER   THOU  DOST   LIVE 

BUT   WITH   ALL   SPEED   AMEND  THE   NEARER   TO   THY   END 


181 


1730 

1.  If  All  Mankind  Would  Live  In  Mutual  Love 
This  World  Would  Much  Resemble  That  Above. 

2.  Remember  Time  Will  Come  W^hen  We  Must  Give 
Account  To  God  How  We  On  Earth  Did  Live, 


182 

1.  The  rose  is  red  the  grass  is  green 
The  days  are  past  That  I  have  seen 


1730 

2.  My  friends  when  you  Those  lines  do  see 
In  reading  This  remember  me. 


183 


3.  And  when  the  bell  begins  to  toll 
The  Lord  have  mercy  on  my  soul 

1731 

My  Life  Is  A  Flower  The  Time  It  Hath  To  Last 
Is  Mett  With  Frost  And  Shook  With  Every  Blast 


184 


1737 

It  is  no  wonder  that  men  turn  to  Clay 

When  Rocks  and  Stones  and  monuments  decay 


185 

Remember  time  will  shortly  come 
When  we  a  strict  account  must  give. 


1737 


To  God  the  righteous  Judge  of  all 
How  we  upon  this  earth  do  live. 


186 


1738 

Did  we  but  know  our  nearness  to  the  grave 
What  thoughts  what  cogitations  should  we  have 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


279 


187 

When  I  am  dead  and  in  my  grave 
And  all  my  bones  are  rotten. 


1739 


When  this  you  see,  remember  me 
That  I  mant  be  forgotten. 


188 


On  earth  let  my  example  shine 
And  when  I  leave  this  state, 


1741 


May  heaven  receive  this  soul  of  mine. 
To  bliss  divinely  great. 


Bev.  Isaac  Watts.    Hymn  for  his  39th  sermon,  verse  6. 


189 

No  room  for  mirth  or  trifling  here. 
For  worldly  hope  or  worldly  fear, 
If  life  so  soon  is  gone; 


1743 


If  now  the  Judge  is  at  the  door, 
And  all  mankind  must  stand  before 
The  inexorable  throne! 


190 

Our  days  begin  with  trouble  here 
Our  life  is  but  a  span, 
And  cruel  death  is  always  near 
So  strange  a  thing  is  man. 


1747 


Then  sew  the  seeds  of  grace  whilst  young 
That  when  thou  comest  to  die 
Thou'll  sing  that  triumphant  song 
Death  where  is  thy  victory. 


191 


1750 

Despise  the  world  with  all  its  fading  joys 
Compared  with  Heaven  are  but  trifling  toys. 

(See  also  Verse  248) 


192  1755 

As  One  Day  Goes  Another  Comes 
And  Sometimes  Shew  Us  Dismal  Dooms 
As  Time  Rolls  On  New  Things  We  See 
Which  With  us  Seldom  Do  Agree 
Tho  Now  And  Then  a  Pleasant  Day, 


Its  Long  A  Coming,  Soon  Away 
Wherefore  The  Everlasting  Truth 
Is  Good  For  Aged  And  For  Youth 
For  Them  To  Set  Their  Hearts  Upon 
For  What  Will  Last  When  Time  is  Done 


193 


1756 

Remember  man  thou  art  but  dust 

From  Earth  thou  came  to  Earth  thou  must 


194 


1764 

Awake,  Arise,  Behold.    Thou  hast 
thy  life ;  a  leaf,  thy  breath,  a  blast. 


195 


1767 


Redeem  the  mispent  life  that's  past. 
Live  each  day  as  it  were  thy  last. 


Then  of  thy  talents  take  great  care, 
For  the  last  day  thyself  prepare. 


280  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

196  1767 

Nothing  is  so  sweet  and  beautiful  as  a  flower 
But  yet  it  blows  and  fades  all  in  an  hour 
For  life  as  fairest  flowers  soonest  fades 
So  God  takes  home  the  most  beautiful  maids 
Therefore  in  blooming  youth  pray  now  be  wise 

197  1773  or  5 

How  oft  the  laughing  brow  of  joy  And  thro  the  cloisters  deth  in  pain 

A  sick  heart  conceals  No  sorrow  feels 

198  1774 

Fragrant  the  rose  is  but  it  fades  in  time, 
the  violet  Sweet  but  quickly  past  the  prime 
While  lilies  Hang  their  heads  and  soon  decay 
and  whiter  Snow  in  minutes  melt  away 
such  and  so  with'ring  Are  our  early  joys 
which  time  or  sickness  speedily  Destroys. 

199  1780 

How  soon  the  [wheel?]  of  Fortune  turns 
they  late  who  smiled  in  Sorrow  mourns. 

200  1784 

Time  cuts  them  all 
Both  great  and  small. 

201  1785 

Why  should  I  say  'tis  yet  too  soon 
to  seek  for  heaven  or  think  of  death, 
When  I  may  fade  before  'tis  noon. 

202  1771 

1.  Swift  as  the  Sun  Revolves  the  Day  2.  'Tis  air  that  lends  us  life  when  first 

we  hasten  to  the  Dead  The  vital  billows  heave. 

Slaves  to  the  wind  we  Puff  away  Our  flesh  we  borrow  of  the  dust 

and  to  the  ground  we  tread.  And  when  a  mother's  care  has  nurst 

The  babe  to  manly  size,  we  must 
,  With  usury  pay  the  grave. 

203  1780 

While  God  doth  spare 
For  death  prepare. 

204  1786 

Aim  not  in  gaudy  cloathes  to  shine,  Reflect  how  short  must  be  thy  stay, 

let  dress  take  up  but  little  time.  How  vain  to  deck  a  piece  of  clay. 


i 


205 


206 


207 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

1786 

Death  is  a  debt  to  nature  due 
that  i  must  pay  and  so  must  you. 

1786 

When  this  you  see 
Remember  me. 


281 


1786 


Make  the  Extended  skys  Your  Tomb 
Let  Stars  record  your  Worth 


Yet  Know  Vain  Mortals  all  must  die 
As  Nature  Seeketh  Birth. 


208 


209 


210 


1787 

You  whose  fond  wishes  do  to  Heaven  aspire 
Who  make  those  blest  abodes  yr.  sole  Desire 
If  you  are  wise  &  hope  that  Bliss  to  gain 
Live  well  yr.  Time,  live  not  an  hour  in  vain 
Let  not  the  Morrow  yr.  vain  thoughts  employ. 
But  think  this  Day  the  last  you  shall  enjoy. 

1788 

Sleep  by  night  and  cares  by  day 
Bear  my  fleeting  life  away 

1788 

Keep  Death  and  Judgment  always  in  y  eye 
None's  fit  to  live  that  is  not  fit  to  die. 

u 

Make  much  of  precious  time  because  y  must 

Take  up  your  Lodging  shortly  in  the  dust 

Its  dreadful  to  behold  the  setting  Sun 

And  Night  approaching  e'er  your  work  is  done. 


211 


1788 


Why  should  this  Earth  delight  us  so 
Why  should  we  fix  our  Eyes 
On  this  low  Ground  where  Sorrows  grow 
And  every  Pleasure  dies. 

While  Time  his  sharpest  Teeth  Prepares 

Our  Comforts  to  devour 

There  is  a  Land  above  the  Stars 

And  Joys  above  his  Power. 


Nature  shall  be  dissolv'd  and  die 
The  Sun  must  end  his  Race 
The  Earth  and  Sea  for  ever  fly 
Before  my  Saviour's  Face. 

When  will  that  glorious  Morning  rise 
When  the  last  Trumpet  sound 
And  call  the  Nations  to  the  Skies 
From  underneath  the  Ground. 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Hymns.    Book  II,  144- 


212  1789 

Soft  Sleep  be  thou  companion  of  my  bed  And  lull  my  senses  in  a  sweet  repose 

Tho'  thou  bear'st  the  image  of  the  dead  For  oh !  how  charming  thus  intranc'd  to  lie 

Oh  lovely  rest  my  weary  eyes  compose  Live  without  life  and  without  death  to  die. 


282 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


213 


1789 

The  wise  the  foolish  and  the  brave, 
must  try  the  cold  and  silent  grave. 


214 

My  soul  come  meditate  the  day 
And  think  how  near  it  sta[n]ds 


Cir.  1790 

When  thou  must  quit  this  house  of  clay 
And  fly  to  unknown  lands. 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Hymnal,    Book  II,  61,  verse  1. 


215  1790 

How  vain  are  all  thy  earthly  treasures  The  time  diminishes  at  leasure 

Created  beauty  cannot  long  last — 


What  human  hands  can  form  or  cast. 


216 

There  is  an  hour  when  I  must  die 
Nor  do  I  know  how  soon  'twill  come 


1790 


A  thousand  children  young  as  I 

are  called  by  death  to  hear  their  doom 


217 


1791 

Death  like  an  over  flowing  stream  sweeps  us  away 
Our  life's  a  dream  an  Empty  tale 
An  empty  tale,  a  moving  flower 
Cut  down  and  withered  in  an  hour. 

"A  Collection  of  Hymns  .  .  .  for  the  use  of  the  West  Society 
in  Boston."    1803.     {Hymn  I46,  verse  S.    No  author  given.) 


218 

The  brightest  beauty  fades 
The  fairest  flowers  decay 

219 

My  flesh  shall  slumber  in  the  ground 
Till  the  last  trumpets  joyous  sound 


1791 


The  inevitable  hour  of  death 
there  is  none  can  keep  away 


1791 


Then  burst  the  chorus  with  sweet  surprise 
And  to  my  Saviour's  image  rise 


220 


220a 


Life  is  uncertain 
Death  is  sure 


Life  is  short 
Death  is  sure 


1791 


sin  is  The  death 
Christ  The  cure. 


1805 


Sin  is  the  wound 
Christ  is  the  cure. 


221  1791 

Still  a  new  spring  shall  Bless  the  earth  Each  year  fulfils  Some  new  event 

that  Heaven  long  decreed  Before. 


and  a  New  harvest  rise 

But  the  last  year  shall  Never  again 

revisit  Mortal  eyes 


Removes  Unnumbered  lives  aWay 
and  gives  unNumbered  more 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


283 


222 


How  like  the  fleeting  wind  away 
Whole  years  of  joy  depart 


223 

Lord  when  i  Leave  this 
Mortal  ground  and  thou 
Shall  bid  me  rise  and  come 


1792 

[A  THOUGHT] 

But  oh  how  slowly  does  one  day. 
Move  to  the  mournful  heart. 

Nathaniel  Loxsfs  Almanack.    1778. 


1792 


Send  a  beloved  angle  down 
Safe  to  conduct  my  spirit  home 


224 


225 


1793 

Death  at  a  distance  we  but  slightly  fear 
He  brings  his  terrors  as  he  draws  more  near 
Through  poverty  pain  slavry  we  drudge  on 
The  worst  of  beings  better  please  than  none 
No  price  too  dear  to  purchase  life  &  breath 
The  heaviest  burdens  easier  borne  than  death 

1793 

Remember  maid  for  die  thou  must 
And  all  thy  glory  turn  to  dust. 


226 

May  I  with  innocence  and  peace. 
My  fleeting  moments  spend; 

227 


1793 

And  when  this  vale  of  life  shall  ceace. 
With  calmness  meet  my  end. 

"Hannah  Hollingswort." 

1794 

When  my  short  glass  its  latest  sand  shall  run 
&  Death  approach  to  fright  the  lookers  on 
Softly  may  I  sigh  out  my  soul  in  air 
Stand  thou  my  pitying  guardian  Angels  there. 

Nathaniel  Low's  Almanack.    1770. 


228 


1795 

Yet  shall  thy  grave  with  rising  flowers  be  drest 
And  the  green  turf  lie  lightly  on  thy  breast 
There  shall  the  morn  her  earliest  tears  bestow 
There  the  first  roses  of  the  year  shall  blow 


229 

How  can  I  weep  or  mourn  at  all 
For  one  that  fell  asleep 


1795 


Oh  was  I  fit  for  that  same  call 
That  I  might  cease  to  weep. 


230  1796 

Religion   should  your   thoughts   engage  To  fit  yourself  for  

Amidst  your  youthful  bloom.  And  for  the  awful  tomb. 


age 


284 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


231  1796 

When  tides  of  youthful  blood  run  high,  Health  presuming,  beauty  blooming. 

And  scenes  of  greatest  joy  are  nigh,  Oh  how  dreadful  'tis  to  die! 

232  1797 

Gay  dainty  Flowers  go  Swiftly  to  decay  we  eat  drink  we  sleep  but  lo  anon 

Poor  wretched  Life  Short  Portion  flies  away       old  Age  Steals  on  us  never  thought  upon 


233 


1797 

He  that  Knows  how  to  Live  say  I 
WiU  easily  learn  the  way  to  Die. 


234 


1797 


Her  Morning  Sun   Gone  Down 
Her  Noon  Her  Suffrin  Time  Is  Oer 
She  Shouts  Salvation  to  her  King 
On  Zion's  Peaceful  Shore. 


Where  All  Our  Toils  Are  O'er 
Our  Suflfrin  And  Our  Pain 
Who  Meet  On  That  Eternal  Shore 
Shall  Never  Part  Again. 


235  1797 

1.  O  God  how  swift  my  moments  fly  2.  O  God  of  love  almighty  Power 
How  great  the  thought  that  I  must  die  May  I  improve  this  present  hour 

How  shorts  a  day  a  month  a  year  Devote  myself  to  thee  in  time 

How  fast  my  moments  disappear  And  ripen  fast  for  joys  sublime. 


236 


1797 

This  Life  is  like  a  morning  Flower 
Cut  Down  &  Withered  in  an  hour. 


237 


1798 

So  let  me  live  so  let  me  die 
That  I  may  live  eternally 


238 

1.  Short  is  the  longest  day  of  life 
And  soon  its  prospect  ends. 
Yet  on  this  days  uncertain  date 
Eternity  depends. 


1798 

2.  Yet  equal  to  our  beings  aim 
The  space  to  virtue  given 
And  every  minute  well  improved 
Secures  an  age  in  heaven 


239 


1799 

One  Weeks  Extremity  May  Teach  L^s  More 
Than  Long  Prosperity  Had  Done  Be  Fore 
Death  Is  Forgotten  In  Our  easy  State 
But  Troubles  Mind  Us  In  Our  Final  Fate 
The  Doing  111  Affects  Us  not  with  Fears 
But  Suffring  111  Brings  Sorrow  woe  And  tears 


PLATE  LXXXVIII 

Sally  Shattuck's  Sampler 
Owned  by  the  Rhode  Island  School  of  Desif/n 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


285 


240  1799 

To  God  above  and  to  your  frfends  below  Earnest  of  pleasure  remedy  for  pain 

Still  let  your  breast  with  zeal  and  duty  glow       Seize  on  the  winged  hours  without  delay 
Time  well  employed  is  a  most  certan  gain  Nor  trust  to  morrow  while  we  Live  to  day 


241 


1799 

Ah !  why  so  vain,  though  in  thy  spring, 
Thou  shining,  frail  adored  and  wretched  thing; 
Old  age  wiU  come,  disease  may  come  before. 
Fifteen  is  full  as  mortal  as  threescore. 
Thy  fortune  &  thy  charms  may  soon  decay, 
But  grant  those  fugitives  prolong  their  stay. 
Their  bases  totter,  the  foundation  shakes 
Life  that  supports  them  in  a  moment  brakes, 
Then  wrought  into  the  soul  let  virtue  shine 
The  ground  eternal  as  the  work  divine. 


242 

1.  When  death  transfers  me  to  the  dust, 
May  I  be  numbered  with  the  just 
My  soul  ascend  to  World  of  bliss 
Where  dwells  immortal  happiness 

243 

Lo  the  young  tribes  of  Adam  rise 
And  thro  all  natur[e  rove?] 
Fulfill  the  wishes  of  their  eyes 
And  taste  the  joys  they  love 

They  give  a  loose  to  wild  desires 
But  let  the  sinners  know 
The  strict  account  that  God  requires 
Of  all  the  works  they  do 


1799 


2.  Ere  here  I  leave  my  name  behind. 
Forgetful  mortals  to  remind. 


The  Judge  prepars  his  throne  on  high 
The  frighted  Earth  and  seas 
Avoid  the  fury  of  his  eye 
And  flee  before  his  fall 

How  shall  I  bear  that  dreadful  day 

And  stand  the  firey  test 

I'd  give  all  mortal  joys  away 

To  be  for  ever  blest. 


Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Hymns  and  Spiritual  Songs.    Book  I,  XC. 


244 

Oh  if  my  days  should  be  but  few 
Then  I  would  freely  bid  adue 


1800 


To  all  things  that  are  here  below 
There  is  nothing  surer  than  I  must  go 


245  1800 

Wlien  Spring  appears  when  violets  blow  Fresli  in  the  morn  the  summer  rose 

And  shed  a  rich  perfume  Hangs  withering  ere  tis  noon 

How  soon  the  fragrance  breathes  its  last  We  scarce  enjoy  the  balmy  gift 

How  short  lived  is  the  bloom  But  mourn  the  pleasure  gone 


246 


1787 

When  I  am  dead  and  worms  me  eat 
here  you  shall  se  my  name  complete 


286 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


247 

The  eye  findeth 
The  heart  chooseth 


1802 


The  hand  bindeth 
And  death  looseth 


248  1747 

1.  Behold  alass  our  days  we  spend  2.  May  useful  arts  employ  my  youth 

How  vain  they  are  how  soon  they  end  with  love  of  vertue  &  of  truth 

That  when  these  fleeting  moments  end, 
A  Crown  imortal  I  may  find. 


249 

We  stand  exposed  to  every  sin 
While  idle  and  without  employ. 
Rev.  Isaac  Watts. 


1802 


But  business  holds  our  passions  in 
And  keeps  out  all  unlawful  joy. 


The  Inscription  on  several  small  French  Pictures,  translated." 


250 

Great  God  how  frail  a  thing  is  man 
How  swift  his  minutes  pass 


1802 


His  age  contracts  within  a  span 
He  blooms  and  dies  like  grass. 


251 


1802 

These  tender  blossoms  of  the  opening  year 
Secure  from  storms  still  claim  a  parents'  tear. 


252 

When  I  am  dead 
And  laid  in  Grave 
And  all  my  flesh  decayd 


1803 


When  this  you  see 
Pray  think  on  me 
A  poor  young  harmless  maid 


253 


1803 

When  the  solemn  mandate  fly 
The  Father  and  the  infant  die 


254 


1803 

Death  often  nips  the  tender  bloom 
And  vows  the  blossom  to  the  Tomb 


255  1803 

And  Must  this  body  die  And  Must  these  active  limbs  of  Mine 

This  Mortal  frame  decay  Lie  mould'ring  in  the  clay 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.  Hymns  and  Spiritual  Songs.    Book  II,  CX,  verse  1. 


256 

Grant  me  O  God  A  day  of  rest 
When  time  shall  Cease  may  I  be  Blest 


1803 


In  tlie  Heavens  Where  Angels  Dwell 
And  not  be  Summoned  Down  to  Hell 


PLATE  LXXXIX 

Naxcy  Wright's  Sampler.     Lower  Penns  Neck,  N.  J.     1800 
Owned  btf  Miss  Maria  H.  Mecum 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


287 


257 


Cir.  1803 

As  runs  the  glass 
Our  lives  do  pass. 


258 

Teach  me  to  live  that  I  may  dread 
The  grave  as  little  as  my  bed 


Cir.  1803 

Teach  me  to  die  that  so  I  may 
Triumphing  rise  at  the  last  day 

Bishop  Thomas  Ken.    1709.    3d  verse. 

{"Glory  to  Thee,  My  God,  this  night") 


259 


1803 

O!  Death 

As  those  we  love  decay  we  die  in  Parts 
String  after  String  is  severd  from  the  hearts 
Till  loosend  life  at  last  but  breathing  Clay 
Without  one  pang  is  glad  to  fall  away 


260 


1803 

An  hour  will  come  when  you  will  bless 
Beyond  the  brightest  dreams  of  life 
Dark  days  of  our  distress 


261 

Earthly  cavern  to  thy  keeping 
We  commit  Eliza's  dust 


After  1803 

Keep  it  safely,  softly  sleeping 
Till  the  Lord  demands  the  trust 


262  1804 

Rest  lovely  youth  cscap'd  this  mortal  strife       Tir'd  with  vain  life,  will  close  the  willing  eye 
Above  the  joys,  beyond  the  woes  of  life  'Tis  the  great  birthright  of  mankind  to  die. 

Yes  we  must  follow  soon,  will  glad  obey 


263 

O  God  of  Grace  and  God  of  truth 
Who  formed  me  by  thy  power 
It  is  thine  hand  arrests  my  youth 
And  nips  the  opening  flower 


1804 


Reluctant  nature  thinks  it  soon 
But  if  my  morning  sun 
Must  set  in  darkness  ere  its  noon 
Thy  sovereign  will  be  done 


From  thee  I  had  my  life  at  first 
'Tis  thou  supports  my  frame 
At  thy  command  I  turn  to  dust 
And  bless  thy  holy  name. 


264  1804 

How  loved  how  honored  once  avails  thee  not       A  heap  of  dust  alone  remains  of  thee 
To  whom  related  or  bj'  whom  begot  Tis  all  thou  art  &  all  the  proud  shall  be 


288 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


265 


1804 

To  Thee,  O  Death,  my  fleeting  moments  tend. 
In  Thee  the  hurricane  of  life  must  end. 
For  tho'  the  seas  have  leave  to  ebb  &  flow, 
The  streams  of  life  must  always  forward  go. 


266  1804 

Quickly  will  my  glass  of  life  be  run  No  more  shall  I  these  Earthly  Toys  desire 

And  with  it  all  my  gain  and  sorrow  gone  But  cold  and  peaceful  to  the  grave  retire 

267  1805 

Happy  the  maid  who  privileged  by  fate  Received  but  yesterday  the  gift  of  breath 

Too  shorter  labour  and  a  lighter  weight  Order'd  tomorrow  to  return  to  death 


268 


1805 


Farewell  my  friends  who  die  so  soon. 
My  earthly  friends  adieu 


No  more  to  us  will  ye  return 
But  we  must  follow  vou. 


269  1805 

Then  mortal  torn  thy  cares  forgo. 
AU  earthborn  cares  are  wrong. 

270  1805 

Our  life  is  ever  on  the  wing 
And  death  is  ever  nigh 


Man  wants  but  little  here  below. 
Nor  wants  that  little  long. 

Oliver  Goldsmith.     "The  Hermit." 


The  moment  when  our  lives  begin 
We  all  begin  to  die. 


271 


1805 


My  thoughts  on  awful  subjects  ran 
Damnation  and  the  dead 
What  horrors  seize  the  guilty  soul 
Upon  a  dying  bed 


Lingering  about  these  mortal  shores 
She  makes  a  long  delay 
TiU  like  a  flood  with  rapid  force 
Death  sweeps  the  wretch  away. 


272 


1805 


Seize  mortals  seize  the  transient  hour 
Improve  each  moment  as  it  flies 


Life's  a  short  Summer,  man  a  flow'r 
He  dies,  alas  how  soon  he  dies. 


273  1806 

Life  is  the  time  to  serve  the  Lord 
The  time  to  improve  the  great  reward 
And  while  the  lamp  holds  out  to  burn 

274  1804 

The  fairest  forms  that  nature  shows 
Sustain  the  shortest  doom 


The  vilest  sinner  may  return. 

He  tells  them  of  Gods  service  them  regard 

The  eternal  crown  of  life  is  their  reward. 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Hymn  88. 


Beauty  is  like  the  morning  rose 
That  withers  in  its  bloom 


^:         ^'-Hh^ 


.--f-^ 


r/- 


» 


5    ^  V-6       _. 


'*7>l¥^ 


■  /- 


:,-  ^J- 


*■«; 


5^^ 


;3 


PLATE  XC 

Nabby  Masox  Peeie,  of  Boston.     1778 

Miss  Sarah  Stivour's  School 
Oicned  by  the  Essex  Institute,  Salem 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  289 

275  1806 

ON  THE  DEATH  OF  A  ONLY  SON 

1  4 

Here  drooping  by  thy  lifeless  side  Ah  me :  that  once  such  sweetness  gracd 

Pensive,  retir'd,  with  grief  o'erborne  Those  winning  smiles  that  angel  form 

Lovely  in  death  my  darling  pride,  Corruption's  greedy  train  shall  waste 

Thee,  the  long  weeping  Muse  shall  mourn.  The  mouldering  dust  the  feasting  worm. 

2  5 

Farewell  thou  dearest  in  my  heart.  By  night  my  eyes  the  search  repeat 

Whom  neither  tears  nor  prayers  could  save:  Sad  to  the  glittering  skies  they  roll 

Tis  death's  redoubled  pain  to  part.  Tell  me,  I  say  the  happy  fate 

And  leave  such  beauty  in  the  grave.  Say  where  resides  the  blissful  soul. 

3  6 

Strong  was  thy  wisdom  wondrous   child  That  day  shall  bring  thee  to  my  sight 

Active  and  bright  its  early  ray  Thy  presence  shall  my  joys  restore 

Thy  temper  grateful,  winning  mild,  Fill  me  thou  thought  with  vast  delight 

And  love  rul'd  all  the  smiling  day.  When  death  shall  never  part  us  more. 

276  1807 

ON  DEATH 
When  we  have  once  resigned  our  sinful  breath 
for  we  can  die  but  once 

then  after  Death  the  immortal  Soul  immediately  goes 
to  endless  joys  or  everlasting  Woes. 
Wise  thens  the  Man  who  labours  to  secure 
His  passage  safe  and  his  Reception  sure. 

277  1807 

Our  God  how  faithful  are  his  ways !  Thus  to  the  Parents  and  Their  Seed 

His  Love  endures  the  same:  Shall  Thy  Salvation  come 

Nor  from  the  promise  of  His  Grace:  and  num'rous   Households   Meet  at  last, 

blot  out  Thy  Children's  name:  In  One  Eternal  Home. 

277a  1807 

This  work  in  hand  my  friends  may  have 
When  I  am  dead  and  in  my  grave. 

278  1807 

Youth  you  must  not  on  numerous  years  depend, 
For  imknown  accidents  your  steps  attend 
Some  sudden  illness  soon  may  stop  thy  breath 
And  prove  an  inlet  to  Eternal  Death. 

278a  1807 

From  Stately  Pallaces  we  Must  remove 
The  narrow  lodgings  of  a  grave  to  prove 
Leave  this  fair  train  of  this  Light  guilded  room 
To  lie  alone  Beneathed  in  a  tomb 


290 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


279  1808 

So  fades  the  lovely  blooming  flower  So  our  transient  comforts  fly 

Frail  smiling  solace  of  an  hour  And  pleasure  only  blooms  to  die 

Belknap.     In  Middlesex  Collection  of  Church  Music.    Boston,  1808. 

280  1808 

Death  cannot  make  our  soul  afraid  "We  may  walk  through  her  dark  [est  shade] 

If  God  be  [with  us]  there  And  never  yield  to  fear. 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Hymns  and  Spiritual  Songs.     Book  II,  XLIX. 


281 


1808 

Take  comfort  Christian  when  your  friends  in  Jesus  fall  asleep 
Their  better  being  never  ends,  why  then  defeated  weep. 
Why  inconsolable  as  those,  to  wliom  no  hope  is  given. 
Death  is  the  messenger  of  Peace,  and  calls  the  soul  to  heaven 
The  saints  of  God  from  death  set  free,  with  Joy  shall  mount  on  high 
The  heavenly  hosts  with  Praises  loud  shall  meet  them  in  the  sky 
A  few  short  years  of  evil  past,  we  reach  the  happy  shore 
Where  death  divided  friends  at  last  shall  meet  to  part  no  more. 


282 

Teach  me  the  measure  of  my  days 
Thou  maker  of  my  frame 


1808 


I  would  survey  life  narrow  space 
And  learn  how  frail  I  am 


283 


1809 

The  wise,  the  just,  the  copious  and  the  brave 
Live  in  their  deaths,  &  flourish  from  the  grave. 
Grain  hid  in  earth,  repays  the  peasants  care 
And  evening  suns  but  set  to  rise  more  fair. 


284  1809 

"THE  YOUTHS  MANUEL,  &C" 

In  the  short  season  of  thy  youth,  Remember  thy  Creator  God 

s  For  him  thy  powers  employ 

Make  him  thv  fear  thv  love 


In  nature      smiling  bloom 
Ere  age  arives  &  trembling 
Waits  its  Summons  to  the  Tomb 


Thy  hope   thy  confidence  &  joy. 


28.5 

All  our  gaiety  is  vain 

All  our  laughter  is  but  pain 


1809 


Only  lasting  and  divine 
Is  an  innocense  like  thine. 


286 

When  with  the  needle  I'm  imploy'd 
Or  whatsoever  I  pursue 


1809 


Teach  me  O  Thou  Almighty  Lord 
To  keep  ray  end  in  view 


PLATE  XCI 

Sally  Witt's  Sampler.     Lynn,  Mass.     1786' 

Miss  Sarah  Stivour's  School 

Owned  by  Mrs.  Charles  Pearson  Coker 

Plate  presented  by  Mrs.  C.  H.  W.  Foster 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  291 

287  1810 

Dear  Babe  at  rest 
We  hope  thee  blest 

287fl  1810 

B  is  a  beauty  all  cheerful  and  gay 

But  her  beauty  soon  fades  like  a  flower  in  May 

288  1810 

E'en  while  we  speak  the  envious  time  Then  seize  the  Present  use  thy  Prime 

Doth  make  swift  haste  away  Nor  trust  another  day. 

289  1810 

[THE  DEATH  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS] 

1.  Sweet  is  the  scene  when  virtue  dies  2.  A  holy  quiet  reigns  around 

When  sinks  a  righteous  soul  to  rest  A  calm  which  nothing  can  destroy 

How  mildly  beams  the  closing  eyes  Nought  can  disturb  that  peace  profound 

How  gently  heaves  the  expiring  breast.  Which  their  unfettered  souls  enjoy. 

Printed  in  "The  Clergyman's  Almanack  for  1S14-" 

290  1810 

This  work  in  hand  my  friends  may  have 

To  look  upon  when  I  am  dead 

When  days  are  short,  but  longer  be  our  rest 

Our  Saviour  calls  us  home  because  he  thinks  it  best 

291  1811 

The  finest  mould  the  soonest  will  decay  May  this  a  warning  be  to  all 

Hear  this  ye  fair  for  you  yourselves  are  clay       That  God  will  judge  both  great  and  small. 

292  1811 

Death  will  desolve  the  tenderest  tie  That  nature  forms  below 

Our  dearest  friends  are  call'd  to  die  And  we  are  left  in  wo 

293  1811 

ON  TIME 

See  see  the  moments  how  they  pass  O  waste  not  then  thy  youthful  prime 

How  swift  they  speed  away  In  folly's  crooked  road 

Louisa  here  as  in  a  glass  Be  circumspect  redeem  the  time 

Behold  thy  life's  decay.  Acquaint  thyself  with  God. 

So  when  the  pulse  of  life  shall  cease 
Its  throbbing  transient  play 
Thy  soul  to  realms  of  endless  peace 
Shall  wing  its  joyful  way. 


292 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


294.  1811 

That  awful  day  will  surely  come 
The  appointed  hour  makes  haste 

295  1811 

Come  now  let  us  forget  our  mirth 
And  think  that  we  must  die 


When  I  must  stand  before  my  judge 
And  pass  the  solenm  test. 


What  are  our  best  delights  on  earth 
Compared  with  those  on  high 


296  1811 

May  day  improve  on  day  and  year  on  year       Till  death  unfelt  this  slender  frame  destroy 
Without  a  sigh  a  trouble  or  a  fear.  In  some  soft  dream  or  extacy  of  joy. 

Alexander  Pope.    Epistle  to  Mrs.  M.  B. 


297 


1812 

Why  start  men  at  death,  so  vain  a  thing. 
When  Christ  himself  hath  taken  out  the  sting 
Live  unto  him  in  godliness  and  fear 
And  then  believe  me  there's  no  cause  to  fear 
It's  but  a  passage  and  a  step  to  be  crown'd 
With  a  crown  of  immortality. 


298 


1812 

Behold  alas  our  days  we  spend 
'But  it  is  in  vain  they  soon  will  end. 


299 

Make  use  of  present  time 
Because  thou  must 
Shortly  take  up  thy 
Lodging  in  the  dust 


1813 


Learn  to  avoid 
What  thou  believest  is  sin 
Mind  what  reproves 
Or  justifies  within 


300 


1813 

IN  MEMORY  OF  THREE  SISTERS 
Cold  is  their  form  once  fill'd  with  youthful  bloom, 
They  sleep  alas  within  the  lonely  tomb. 
Commingling  with  the  dust  they  wear  away, 
Companion  only  for  their  fellow  clay. 


301  1813 

Come  Muse  and  lend  your  mournful  aid  Come  mourn  with  me  a  lovely  flower 

Dressed  in  pale  sorrow's  sable  shade  The  smiling  comfort  of  an  hour 


302 

Years  like  mortals  wear  away 
Have  their  birth  and  dying  day 


1813 


Youthful   spring  and   wintry   age 
Then  to  others  quit  the  stage 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


293 


303 

When  I  have  bid  a  long  adieu 
To  life  and  all  things  here  below 


1813 


Look  here  my  friend  and  think  of  me 
That  I  may  not  forgotten  be. 


304. 


1813 

Why  all  this  toil  for  triumph  of  an  hour? 
What  though  we  wade  in  wealth,  or  soar  in  fame, 
Earth's  highest  station  each  in  "  Here  he  lies," 
And  "dust  to  dust"  concludes  her  noblest  song 


305 


1813 


When  sin  and  sorrow  fear  and  shame 
My  trembling  heart  dismay. 


My  feeble  strength  alas  how  vain 
It  sinks  and  dies  awav. 


306 


307 


1814 

When  the  pure  soul  is  from  the  body  flown 
No  more  shall  Night's  alternate  reign  be  known 
The  sun  no  more  shall  rolling  light  bestow 
But  from  the  Almighty  streams  of  glory  flow 
Oh  may  some  nobler  thought  my  soul  employ 
Than  empty  transient  sublunary  joy 

1815 

Fate  steals  along  with  silent  tread 
Lays  the  fond  mother  in  the  dead 
Two  lovely  babes 


308 

Behold  the  blooming  rose 
Behold  the  fading  flower 


1816 


The  fairest  prospect  how  it  goes 
To  vanish  in  an  hour 


308a 

The  fairest  flowers  of  the  Spring 
Has  faded  fled  away 


1816 


So  blooming  youth  as  time  glides  on 
Swift  hastens  to  decay. 


309  1817 

These  various  branches  rising  from  one  root 
May  soverign  mercy  bless,  and  guard  the  fruit; 
Till  the  great  harvest  when  our  souls  shall  be. 
Ripe,  and  prepared  to  live  in  Heaven  with  thee. 

310  1817 

ON  THE  TRUTH  WE  BELIEVE 

Gr[ant]  rem[emb]ranc[e  well  t]o  paint  While  they  have  gained  we  loose 

The  moment  after  death  We  miss  them  day  by  day 

The  glory  that  surround  the  saint  But  thou  canst  ev'ry  breach  .  .  .  , 

When  yielding  up  their  breath  And  wipe  our  tears  away. 


294 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


311  1818 

Alas  the  brittle  clay 
That  built  our  body  first 

312  1818 

Swept  with  a  hasty  torrent  hence 
Like  a  vain  dream  we  pass 

313  1819 

See  the  leaves  around  us  falling, 
Dry  and  wither'd  to  the  ground, 
Thus  to  thoughtless  mortals  calling. 
In  a  sad  and  solemn  sound. 

314  1819 

And  am  I  born  to  die 
To  lay  this  body  down 

315  1820 

Soon  as  we  draw  our  infant  breath, 
The  seeds  of  sin  grow  up  to  death. 


And  every  month  and  every  day 
Tis  mouldering  back  to  dust. 


Spring  up  and  grow  and  wither  soon 
As  doth  the  short-lived  grass 


On  the  tree  of  life  eternal, 
Maid  let  all  thy  hope  be  staid. 
Which  alone  for  ever  vernal, 
Bears  a  leaf  that  will  not  fade. 


And  must  my  trembling  spirit  fly 
Into  a  world  unknown. 

Bev.  Charles  Wesley. 

Rise  then  my  thoughts  to  God  on  high. 
For  we  are  mortals  born  to  die. 


316  1820 

Enough  had  Heaven  indulged  of  joy  below.         Enough  had  Heaven  ordain'd  of  useful  woe 
To  tempt  our  tarriance  in  this  loved  retreat,        To  make  us  long  for  a  happier  seat. 


317 


1820 


Hark  from  the  tombs  a  doleful  sound 
My  ears  attend  the  cry 


Ye  living  men  come  view  the  ground 
Where  you  must  shortly  lie. 
Tate  ^-  Brady's  Hymnal.    Hymn  66. 


318 


1820 

My  days  just  hastning  to  there  end 
Are  like  an  evening  shade 
My  beauty  does  like  wither'd  grass 
With  waning  lustre  fade 


319 


1821 


The  rising  morn  can't  assure 
That  we  shall  end  the  day 


For  death  stands  ready  at  the  door 
To  take  our  lives  away. 


320  1821 

O'er  thy  grave  shall  friendship  lingering  pause 
And  view  the  weeping  flowerets  there  that  bloom 
Shall  heave  the  generous  sigh  in  virtuous  cause 
While  resignation  points  beyond  the  tomb.' 

'  Tradition  tells  us  that  this  verse  was  composed  by  the  maker  of  the  sampler,  Mary  W.  Lyon. 


S^SSyE^SJ^lFTpJ "'  '■  ■ 


■^ix-.-yi 


r. 


o   Bq 


«> 

s 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


295 


321 


1821 

Ye  whose  fond  wishes  do  to  heaven  aspire. 
Who  make  those  blest  abodes  their  souls  desire 
If  you  are  wise  and  hope  that  bliss  to  gain 
Use  well  your  time  spend  not  an  hour  in  vain 
Let  not  tomorrow  your  vain  thoughts  employ 
But  think  this  day  the  last  you  shall  enjoy 


322  1822 

In  the  deep  corners  of  the  grave 
Love  lingers  though  it  cannot  save. 

323  1824 

There  is  a  calm  for  those  who  weep, 
A  rest  for  weary  Pilgrims  found. 


Yes, 


of  the  dust 


Aifection  springs  and  ever  must. 


They  softly  lie  and  sweetly  sleep, 
Low  in  the  ground. 


324  1824 

Time  well  employd  is  a  most  certain  gain  The  chief  of  blessings  on  its  course  attends 

Earnest  of  pleasures  remedy  of  pain  Since  on  its  use  eternity  depends 


325 

Life  is  short,  the  wings  of  time 
Bear  away  our  early  prime. 

Swift  with  them  our  spirits  fly, 
The  heart  grows  chill  &  dim  the  eye. 


Cir.  1825 

Seize  the  moment,  snatch  the  treasure. 
Sober  haste  is  wisdom's  leisure ; 

Summer  blossoms  soon  decay. 

Gather  the  rose-buds  while  you  may. 


325a 


326 


327 


1824 

Of  joys  in  perspection  how  fondly  you  dreamed 
While  the  visions  of  fancy  were  ready  to  fade 

And  the  day  star  of  hope  how  resplendant  it  beamed 
While  swiftly  descending  to  death's  silent  stream 

1825 

Youth  is  not  rich  in  time,  it  may  be  poor 
Part  with  it  as  with  money,  sparing  pay 

No  moment  but  in  purchase  of  it's  worth 

And  what  its  wortli,  ask  death-beds,  they  can  say 

Cir.  1826 

"VERSES  OF  ANN  MARIA  ELWELL" 


Thou  God  of  love  thou  ever  blest 
Pity  my  suffering  state 
When  wilt  thou  set  my  soul  at  rest 
From  lips  that  love — 

Hard  lot  of  mine  my  days  are  cast 
Amongst  the  sons  of  strife 
Whose  never  ceasing  brawlings  waste 
My  golden  hours  of  life. 


Not  from  the  dust  affliction  grows 
Nor  troubles  rise  by  chance 
Yet  we  are  bound  to  care  and  woes 
A  sad  inheritance 

As  sparks  break  out  from  burning  coals 
And  still  are  upward  borne 
So  grief  is  rooted  in  our  souls 
And  man  grows  up  to  mourn. 

Isaac  Watts.    Psalm  CXX. 


296 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


328 

Lord  what  is  life   Tis  like  a  flower 
That  blossoms  and  is  gone 
We  see  it  flourish  for  an  hour 


1826 


With  all  its  beauty  on 

But  death  comes  like  a  wintry  day 

And  cuts  the  pretty  flower  away 


329  1827 

The  grass  and  flowers  which  clothe  the  field,       Touched  by  the  sythe  defenceless  yield 
And  look  so  green  and  gay  And  fall  and  fade  away. 

330  1827 

Mortal  be  wise,  imProve  the  Present  hour  Thy  time  e'en  while  advancing  speeds  away, 

The  last  is  gone  the  next  beyond  thy  Power.       Mortal  be  wise  nor  risk  an  hour's  delay. 


331 

My  flying  years  time  urges  on 
Who  is  human  must  decay 


1829 


My  friends  my  young  companions  gone 
Can  I  expect  to  stay. 


332 


1829 


Sweet  spring  of  days  and  roses  made 
Whose  charms  for  beauty  vie 


Thy  days  depart  thy  roses  fade 
Thou  too  alas  must  die. 


333 


Before  1830 

Tis  true  twas  long  ere  I  began  to  seek  to  live  forever 
But  now  I  run  as  fast  I  can,  tis  better  late  than  never 


334  1830 

THE  UNCERTAINTY  OF  LIFE 

How  short  the  connexions  we  form  Tho'   pleasure  may   charm  with  her  breath 
In  a  world  so  uncertain  as  this  And  point  to  her  magical  bowers 

How  soon  will  eternitys  storm  Yet  she  hides  the  keen  dagger  of  death 
Sweep  away  all  the  phantoms  of  bliss  In  a  sheath  made  of  blossoms  and  flowers 

335  1830 

The  Sun  that  Lights  the  World  shall  fade       But   I   a  Child  imortal  made 
The  Stars  shall  pass  away  Shall   Witness   this   decay. 


336 

Here   the   beauteous   slumberer   bear 
Soft  ye  /ephyers  smooth  the  air 
Earth  thy   fragrant  breast  unfold 
Lightly  lay  the  hallowed   mould 
Twine  ye  woodbines  round  his  tomb 


1830 


Rosses  Lilies  lend  your  bloom 
Yet  no  flowrets   eer  can  shew 
Half  the   charms   that  fade  below 
Feet   unhallowed   shun   this  shade 
Here  an  angel  form  is  laid. 


337 


1830 

Dear  youth  prepare  tho  in  thy  prime 

Death  may  be  near  and  short  thy  time 

O  dear  youth  prepare  against  the  call 

For  death  does  cut  down,  both  great  and  small 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  297 

338  1830 

Oh  stranger  let  your  melting  heart,  And  eer  you  from  this  earth  depart; 

Mark  well  this  fresh,  and  verdant  sod  O  let  your  soul,  commune  with  God. 

RELIGIOUS    VERSE— OLD    TESTAMENT 

339  Cir.  1636 

Lord  guide  my  Heart  that  I  may  do  thy  will       As  will  conduce  to  Virtue  void  of  shame 
And  fill  my  hands  with  such  convenient  skill       And  I  will  give  the  Glory  to  Thy  Name 

340  1718 

God  loves  the  child 
whose  words  are  mild 

341  1723/4 

Lord  Thou  from  dust  didst  raise  me  and  I  in  flesh  to  praise  the 

when  I  no  being  had  a  living  soul  was  made 

342  1725 

Lord  give  Me  Wisdom  to  Direct  My  Ways 
I  beg  not  riches  nor  yet  length  of  days 

343  1730 

LOVE  THOU  THE  LORD 

1.  O  love  the  Lord  and  He  will  be,  4.  Sweet  slumbers  come  and  chase  away 
A  Tender    (faithful)    Father  unto  Thee  The  toyles  and  Follys  of  the  day. 

2.  His  glories  shine  with  beams  so  bright  5.  On  thy  soft  bosom  let  me  lie 

No  mortal  eye  can  bear  the  sight  Forget  The  world  and  learn  to  die. 

3.  Slep  downey  slep  come  clos  my  eyes  6.  A  Mother's  Want  God  can  Supply 

Tired  with  upholding  vanityes  And  may  he  Guard  Ycu  With  a  Watchful  Eye. 

7.  Neglect  not  thou  thy  doing  well 
But  strive  in  virtue  to  excell. 

344  1731 

1.  The  bed  was  earth  the  raised  pillar  stone  2.  poor  state  of  Jacob  hear  it  seems  to  me 
whereon  poor  Jacob  rested  his  head  and  bones  his  cattle  found  as  souft  a  bed  as  he 

Heaven  was  his  Canopy  the  shades  of  night  yet  god  appeared  their  joy  his  crown 

were  his  drawn  Curtains  to  exclude  the  light.  god  is  not  always  found  in  beds  of  down 

345  1731 

1.  See  how  the  Lillies  flourish  white  and  fair 
see  how  the  Ravens  fed  from  Heaven  are 

2.  then  ne'er  distrust  thy  God  for  Cloth  and  Bread 
whilst  Lillies  flourish  and  the  Ravens  fed. 

An  adaptation  of  an  "Epigram  on  Providence"  by  John  Hawkins  of  Boston. 


298 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


346 

I  Have  A  God  In  Heaven 
Who  Care  For  Me  Doth  Take 


1737 


And  If  I  To  Him  Constant  Prove 
He  Will  Not  Me  Forsake. 


346a  1742 

That  truth  my  tongue  might  alway  tie  that  by  each  word,  each  deed,  each  thought 

from  ever  speaking  foolishly  glory  to  my  god  be  brought 

That  no  vain  thoughts  might  ever  rest  but  what  are  wishes  lord  on  the! 

or  be  conceived  in  my  breast  (2  lines  undecipherable) 


347 

My  heart  resolve.  My  tongue  obey 
While  Angels  shall  rejoice 


1743 


To  hear  thine  Heavenly  Maker  praise 
Long  from  a  feeble  voice. 


348 

Adam  and  Eve  in  paradise 
that  was  their  pedigree. 


1745 


They  had  a  grant  never  to  die, 
wold  they  obedient  be. 


349 

But  how  my  childhood  runs  to  waste 
My  sins  how  great  their  sum 


1754 


Lord  give  me  pardon  for  the  past 
&  strength   for  days  to  come 


350 


1757 

In  Mothers  womb  Thy  fingers  did  me  make 
And  from  the  womb  thou  didst  me  safely  take 
From  Breast  Thou  hast  me  nurst  my  life  through  out 
I  may  say  I  never  wanted  ought. 


351  1760 

Let  us  my  Friend  all  peevish  self  withstand       And  travel  forward  to  the  Holy  Land, 
And  in  the  meekness  of  the  spotless  lamb  Where  the  Redeemed  on  Mount  Zion  stand, 

Lead  one  another  gently  by  the  Hand  With  Harps  of  living  praises  in  their  Hands 


352 


1760 

MY  CHILD  TO  YOVR  CREATOR  GOD 
YOVR   EARLY   HONOVRS  PAY 
WHILE   VANITY  AND  YOVTHFVL  BLOOD 
WOVLD  TEMPT  YOR  THOVGHTS  ASTRAY 


THE  MEMORY  OF  HIS  MIGHTY  NAME 
DEMAND  YOR  FIRST  REGARD 
NOR  DARE  INDVLGE  A  MEANER  FLAME 
[T]ILL  YOV  HAVE  LOVED  THE  LORD 


mmim-mM'mmmw 


^^^'^0^       I 


^.-Vh^*^ 


•ffr 


m 


•*'M 


%C] 


-,* 


^  ~~  itlil  Hiif*>iiilli»Vi*i 


PLATE  XCIII 

Martha  Heumng's  Sampler.     Moorestown,  N.  J.     1809 

The  West  Town  Boarding  School,  and  containing  a  picture  of  the  School 

Owned  by  Hannah  F.  Gardiner 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


299 


353 


Oh  if  My  Mind 

Should  be  inclined 

This  would  increase  my   fear 

Lord   from   above 

Thou  God  of  love 

Reveal   thy   counsel  near 


1760 

2.  That  I  may  know 
That  I  may  do 
Thy  ever   blessed  will 
Ah !    thine    alone 
And  not  mine  own 
Great   King!   do   thou   fulfil 


354 

1.  One  look  of  mercy  from  thy  eye 
One  whisper  of  thy  voice 
Exceed  a  whole  eternity 
Employ'd  in  carnal  joys 


1760 

2.  Could  I  the  spacious  earth  command 
Or  move  the  boundless  sea 
For  one  dear  hour  at  thy  right  hand 
I'd  give  them  both  away. 


355 


1763 

THE  TEN  COMMANDMENTS. 
I.  Adore  no  other  gods  but  only  me. 
II.  Worship  not  God  by  anything  you  see. 

III.  Rever  Jehovahs  name  swear  not  in  vain. 

IV.  Let  Sabbaths  be  a  rest  for  beast  and  men. 
V.  Honour  thy  parents  to  prolong  thy  days. 

VI.  Thou  shalt  not  kill  nor  murdring  quarrels  raise. 
VII.  Adultry  shun  in  chastity  delight. 
VIII.  Thou  shalt  not  steal  nor  take  anothers  right. 
IX.  In  bearing  witness  never  tel  a  ly. 
X.  Covet  not  what  may  damnify. 


356 


1763 


In  life's  gay  morn  when  sprightly  youth 

AVith  vital  ardor  glows 

And  smiles  with  all  the  fairest  charms 

Which  beauty  can  disclose 

Deep  on  thy  heart  before  its  powers 

Are  yet  by  vice  enslaved 

Be  thy  creator's  glorious  name 

And  character  engraved 


For  soon  the  shades  of  grief  shall  cloud 

The  sunshine  of  thy  days 

And  cares  and  toils  in  endless  round 

Encompass  all  thy  ways 

Soon  shall  thy  heart  the  woes  of  age 

In   mournful   groans    deplore 

And  sadly  muse  on  former  joys 

That  now  return  no  more. 


357 

Lord  let  the  Sonshine  of  thy  face 

So  clear  my  Eyes  and  dense  my  heart 


1767 


That  being  seasoned  with  thy  grace 
My  soul  mav  tast  how  sweet  thou  art. 


358 


1769 

Thine  eye  my  bed  and  path  survey 
My  public  haunts  and  privit  ways. 


300 
359 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 
1772 

From  my  beginning  may  the  almighty  powers, 
Blessing  bestow  in  never  ceasing  showers ; 
Oh,  may  I  happy  be  and  always  blest. 
Of  every  joy,  of  every  wish  possessed. 
May  plenty  dissapate  all  worldly  cares 
And  smiling  peace  bless  my  revolving  years. 


360 


1773 

Give  unto  God  the  flower  of  thy  j'outh 

take  for  thy  guide  the  blessed  word  of  truth 

Adorn  thyself  With  Grace,  Prize  Wisdom  more 

Than  all  the  Pearls  upon  the  Indian  shore 

Labour  to  have  a  conscience  Pure 

When  all  things  fade  that  will  endure. 


361 

Oh  happiness  our  being  end  and  aim 
Good  pleasure e'er  thy  name 


1773 


Plant  of  celestial  seed  of  dropd  below 

Say  in  what  mortal  soul  thou to  grow 


362 

1.  Why  should  I  love  my  sport  so  well, 
so  constant  in  my  play 

And  lose  the  thoughts  of  heaven  and  hell 
and  then  forget  to  pray, 

2.  What  do  I  read  my  bible  for 
but  Lord  to  learn  thy  will 

And  shall  I  daily  know  thee  more 
and  less  obey  thee  still 


1774 


3.  How  senseless  is  my  heart  and  wild 
How  vain  are  all  my  thoughts 
Pity  the  weakness  of  a  child 

And  pardon  all  my  faults 

4.  Make  me  thy  heavenly  voice  to  hear 
And  let  me  love  to  pray 

Since  God  will  lend  a  gracious  ear 
To  what  a  child  can  say. 


Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Divine  Songs  for  Children.    XXIV. 


363 


When  we  devote  our  youth  to  God 
'Tis  pleasing  in  his  eyes 
A  flower  when  offered  in  the  bud 
Is  no  vain  sacrifice 


1775 


2.  To  Thee,  Almighty  God,  to  Thee 
Our  childhood  we  resign 
Twill  please  us  to  look  back  and  see 
That  our  whole  lives  were  Thine 
Isaac  Watts.    Divine  Songs.    XII,  verses  2  and  5. 


364 

My  soul  lies  cleaving  to  the  dust 
Lord  give  me  life  divine — 


1780 


From  vain  desires  and  every  lust. 
Turn  off  these  eyes  of  mine. 


365 

Nothing  I  ask  but  which  include 
Of  all  thy  earthly  power 


1780 


But  let  me  kneel  and  pray 
That  I  may  live  today. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


301 


366 


1781 

Care  use  with  all  thy  power. 
To  serve  God  every  hour. 


367 


1781 

Duty,  Fear  &  Love 
We  Owe  to  God  Above 


367a  178- 

Sweet  are  thy  works  my  God,  my  King  To  show  thy  works  by  Morning  Light 

To  praise  Thy  name  give  thanks  and  Sing  And  talk  of  all  thy  truths  at  Night 

"Select  Psalms  and  Hymns:  Adapted  to  the  use  of  Christians." 
Dublin,  1762.     {No  author  given.) 


368 


Cir.  1785 

It  grieves  me  I-ord  it  grieves  me  sore 
That  I  have  lived  to  thee  no  more. 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Lyric  Poems  sacred  to  Devotion. 


369 


1786 

All  things  from  nothing  to  their  Sovereign  Lord 
Obedience  tole  at  his  commanding  word. 


370 

Jehovah  speaks  the  healing  word 
And  no  disease  withstands, 


1787 


Fevers  and  plagues  obey  the  law 
And  fly  at  his  command 


371  1789 

O.  Give  my  soul  thy  welfare  to  his  trust  Can  raise  thy  sleeping  dust 


He  that  hath  raised  the  world 


He  wil  when  nature 


372 

Is  there  ambition  in  my  heart 
Search  gracious  God  and  see 


1789 


or  do  I  act  a  haughty  part 
Lord  I  appeal  to  the. 


373 

O  God  of  Mercy,  Grace  and  Truth 
Guard  &  Protect  an  Orphan  Youth, 


1791 


Thro'  Life's  perplexing  thorny  road 
Conduct  me  safe  to  thine  abode. 


374  1792 

Still  as  Thro  Life's  Meanaring*  Path  I  Stray       A  Kind  Conductor  To  The  Blest  Abode, 
Lord  Be  The  Sweet  Companion  On  My  Way       Of  Light  Of  Life  Of  Happiness  And  God 

'  Meandering. 


302 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


375  1793 

During  the  time  of  life  alotted  me 

grant  me  great  God  my  health  and  liberty, 


I  ask  no  more  if  more  thou'rt  please  to  give 
the  overplus  111  gratefully  receive 


376 


1793 

First  give  to  God  the  Flower  of  thy  youth. 
Talie  for  thy  guide  the  blessed  word  of  Truth. 


377 

Give  me  O  Lord  thine  early  Grace 
Nor  let  my  soul  complain 


1793 


That  the  young  morning  of  my  days 
Has  all  been  spent  in  vain. 


378 

Oh  keep  in  fear  and  lend  an  ear 
To  what  the  Lord  doth  say 


1794 


Oh  come  retire  and  heal  inspire 
Thy  soul  in  Wisdom's  Way 


379 


yV  few  more  rolling  seas  at  most 
Will  land  me  on  fair  Canaan's  coast 


1794 


Where  I  shall  sing  my  song  of  Grace 
And  see  my  glorious  Hiding  Place 


380 

Get  Thou  the  Lord  &  prize   him  more 
tlian  shining  gold  &  silver  orr — 


1794 


for  when  thy  worldly  treasures  past 
The  fear  of  God  will  ever  last? 


381 


1794 

Read  thou  the  scriptures  let  them  be  thy  rule 
So  shall  the  fear  of  God  Reign  in  thy  Soul 


382 

Adieu  ye  fanciful  delights 
Ye  fleeting  vanities 


1795 


A  nobler  good  my  soul  invites 
To  soar  above  the  skies. 


383 

I've  been  to  church  and  love  to  go, 
Tis  like  a  little  heaven  below; 


1795 


Not  for  my  pleasure  or  my  play. 
Will  I  forget  the  sabbath  daj-. 


384 


1796 

Adam  alone  in  Paradise  did  grieve 
and  thought  Eden  a  desert  Without  Eve 
Until  God  Pittiing  of  his  lonesome  state 
Crowned  all  his  Wishes  with  a  Loveing  mate 
What  reason  than  hath  Man  to  slight  or  flout  her 
That  Could  not  Live  in  Paradise  without  her. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


303 


385 

Adam  and  Eve  whilst  innocent 
in  Paradise  was  placed 


1796 


but  soon  the  serpent  by  his  viles 
the  happy  Pair  disgraced 


386 

Thus  fair  tis  well  you  Read  you  Pray 
You  Hear  God  holy  word 


1796 


You  hearken  what  your  Parent  say 
and  learn  to  Serve  the  Lord. 


387 

1.  Religion's  sacred  lamp  alone, 
Unerring,  points  the  way 
Where  happiness  forever  shines 
With  unpolluted  ray: 


1796 


Oh !  may  the  everlasting  truth. 
My  staff,  and  standard,  be. 
The  best  companion  for  a  youth 
Join'd  with  humility. 

(Verse  5 — the 


Anne  Steele.    "Searching  after  Happiness 
second  verse  appears  not  to  be  hers.) 


388 

Glittering  Stones  and  golden  things. 
Wealth  and  Honors  that  have  wings 
Ever  fluttering  to  be  gone, 
I  could  never  call  my  own ; 
Riches  that  the  world  bestows 
She  can  take,  and  I  can  lose ; 


1797 


But  the  treasures  that  are  mine. 
Lie  afar  beyond  her  line; 
When  I  view  my  spacious  soul, 
And  survey  myself  awhole, 
And  enjoy  myself  alone, 
I  am  a  Kingdom  of  my  own. 


389 


1798 

God  give  me  grace  I  ask  no  more 
Contentment  is  a  constant  store 


390  1798 

Oh  Heaven  kind  new  form  my  mind. 
And  give  me  view  divine. 

391  1798 

Religion  what  treasures  untold 
Reside  in  that  Heavenly  word 

392  1800 

Be  it  my  only  wisdom  here 

To  serve  the  Lord  with  filial  fear 

With  loving  gratitude 


That  my  small  sum  of  days  to  come 
With  nobler  deeds  may  shine. 


More  precious  than  Silver  or  Gold 
Or  all  that  the  world  can  afford. 


Superior  sense  may  I  display 
By  shunning  every  evil  way 
And  walking  in  the  good 


393 


1800 

As  pants  the  wearied  hart  for  cooling  streams 
That  sinks  exhausted  in  the  summer's  chase 

So  pants  my  soul  for  Thee  great  King  of  kings 
So  tliirsts  to  reach  Thy  sacred  dwelling  place 

Bishop  B.  Lowth. 


1753. 


304 
394 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

After  1800 

Fear  &  Love 
God  above 


395 


Teach  me  oh  thou !  that  teacher  art, 
Of  every  duty  here  below 
The  number  of  my  days  impart 
Be  thou  my  guide  where'er  I  go 

I  ask  no  gold  nor  length  of  days 
I  meet  thy  will  thy  will  be  done 
I  know  that  time  itself  decays 
And  gold  but  sparkles  in  the  sun 

When  chastend  let  me  kiss  the  rod 
I  wish  no  transient  joy  to  claim 
Be  thou  my  portion  oh  my  God 
Thro  heavens  eternal  vear  the  same 


1801 

4.  The  Lord  can  change  the  darkest  skies 
Can  give  us  day  for  night 

Make  floods  of  sacred  sorrows  rise 
To  rivers  of  delight 

5.  Let  those  that  sow  in  sadness  wait 
Till  the  fair  harvest  come 

They  shall  confess  their  sheaves  are  great 
And  shout  the  blessing  home 

6.  Adversity  is  virtue's  school 

To  those  who  right  discern 
Let  us  observe  each  painful  rule 
And  each  hard  lesson  learn. 


396 


1802 

Give  Glory  unto  God  above 

He  Only  Doth  Deserve  Our  Love 


397 


1802 

THE 
TEN  COMMANDMENTS 

1  Thou  shalt  have  no  God  but  me, 

2  Before  no  Idoll  bow  thy  knee ; 

3  Take  not  the  name  of  God  in  vain: 

4  Nor  dare  the  Sabbath  to  prophane 

5  Give  both  thy  parents  honor  due 

6  Take  heed  that  thou  no  murder  do 

7  Abstain  from  words,  and  deeds  unclean, 

8  Nor  steal,  tho  thou  are  poor,  and  mean 

9  Nor  make  a  wilful  lie,  nor  love  it 

10     What  is  thy  neighbours,  dare  not  covet. 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Divine  Songs  for  Children. 


398 

Thou  art  O  Lord  my  only  trust 
When  friends  are  mingled  with  the  dust 
And  all  my  loves  are  gone 


1802 


When  earth  has  teaching  to  bestow 
And  every  flower  is  dead  below 
I  look  to  thee  alone 


399 

Almighty  power!  whose  tender  care 
Did  infancy  protect, 


1802 


Let  riper  years  thy  favor  share, 
And  every  step  direct 


PLATE  XCIV 

SusANA  Cox's  Sampler.  Cir.  1802 
The  West  Town  Boarding  School 
Owned  by  Miss  Susan  P.  Wharton 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


305 


400 

There  is  a  land  of  pure  delight 

Where  saints  immortal  reign 
Eternal  day  excludes  the  night 

And  pleasures  banish  pain 
There  everlasting  spring  abides 

And  never  fading  flowers 
Death,  like  a  narrow  sea,  divides 

This  heavenly  land  from  ours 

4-01 

1.  To  be  resign'd  when  ills  betide, 
Patient  when  favors  are  denied 
And  pleased  with  favors  given. 
Dear  Lord,  this  is  Wisdom's  part. 


1802 

Bright  fields  beyond  the  flood 

Stand  dressed  in  living  green 
So  to  tiie  Jews  fair  Canaan  stood 

While  Jordan  rolled  between 
But  timorous  mortals  start  and  shrink 

To  cross  the  narrow  sea; 
And  linger  trembling  on  the  brink 

And  fear  to  launch  away. 

Bev.  Isaac  Watts. 

1802 

2.  This  is  that  incense  of  the  heart 
Whose  fragrant  silence  is  heaven 


402 

Though  I  am  young,  a  little  one 
If  I  can  speak  and  go  alone 


1803 


Then  I  must  learn  to  know  the  Lord 
And  learn  to  read  his  holv  words. 


403  1803 

The  Lord  my  pasture  shall  prepare 
And  feed  me  with  a  shepherd's  care 

404  1803 

May  my  fond  genious  as  I  [wjrite 

Seek  the  fair  fount  where  knowledge  lies 


His  presence  shall  my  wants  Supply 
And  guard  me  with  a  watchful  eye 

Joseph  Addison. 


On  wings  sublime  trace  heavens  abode 
And  learn  my  duty  to  my  God. 


405 


1803 


Be  sovereign  grace  the  guardian  of  my  youth 
May  Heaven-born  virtue  in  my  breast  preside 


While  wisdom,  honor,  innocence,  and  truth 
Attend  my  steps,  and  all  mj'  actions  guide. 


407 

The  spacious  firmament  on  high 
With  all  the  blue  etherial  sky 

And  spangled  heaven  a  shiny  frame 
The  great  original  proclaim 


408 


1804 


The  unwearied  sun,  from  day  to  day 
Does  his  creator's  pow'r  display 

And  publishes  to  every  land 
The  work  of  an  Almighty  hand. 

.Joseph  Addison.    1712. 


1804 

Young  children  in  their  early  days 
shall  give  the  God  of  Abram  Praise 


409 


1805 


Grant  I  may  ever  at  the  morning  ray 
Open  with  pray'r  the  consecrated  day 


Tune  the  great  praise  and  bid  my  soul  arise 
And  with  the  morning  sun  ascend  the  skies. 


306 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


410 

In  Paradise  within  the  gates 
An  higher  entertainment  waits 


1805 


Fruit  new  and  old  laid  up  in  store 
Where  we  shall  feed  and  thirst  no  more 


411 

Not  in  thyself,  in  God  confide 
Let  reason  all  thy  actions  guide 
Thy  prayers  to  heav'n  be  daily  sent 
And  with  thy  portion  be  content. 
Speak  seldome  but  attentive  hear 


1805 


Ever  superior  worth  revere 
An  equal  without  envy  bear. 
Ne'er  on  inferiors  look  disdain 
Entrusted  secret  close  retain. 


411a  1805 

O  GOD! 
Not  to  my  wish,  but  to  my  Want  Unasked  what  good  thou  knowest  grant 

Do  thou  thy  Gifts  apply  What  ill  thou'rt  asked  deny 

"A  Collection  of  Hymns"  for  "use  of  the  West  Society  in  Boston." 
1803.    {Hymn  25,  verse  8.    xVo  author  given.) 


412 

Parent  of  all!    Omnipotent, 
In  Heaven  and  earth  below, 
Thro'   all   creation's  bounds  unspent, 
Whose  streams  of  goodness  flow. 

Teach  me  to  know  from  whence  I  rose 
And  unto  what  design'd; 
No  private  aims  let  me  propose, 
Since  linked  with  human  kind. 


1806 


But  chief  to  hear  fair  virtue's  voice, 
May  all  my  thoughts  incline: 
'Tis  reason's  law, — 'tis  wisdom's  choice, 
'Tis  nature's  call  and  thine. 

Teach  me  to  feel  a  brother's  grief. 
To  do  in  all  what's  best, 
To  sufiFering  man  to  afford  relief, 
And  blessing  to  be  blest. 


413  1806 

Grant  me  great  God,  a  heart  to  Thee  inclin'd.       And  point  my  motions  to  the  paths  of  Truth. 
Increase  my  Faith  to  rectify  my  mind  Teach  me  betimes  to  tread  Thy  sacred  ways 

Conduct  the  steps  of  my  unguarded  youth  And  to  Thy  service  consecrate  my  days. 


414 


1806 

To  wake  the  Soul  by  tender  strokes  of  art, 
To  raise  the  genius,  and  to  mend  the  heart. 


415 


1807 

Grant  me  to  live  and  if  I  live,  to  find 
The  dear  lov'd  portion  of  a  peaceful  mind 
That  health,  that  sweet  content,  that  pleasing  rest 
Which  God  alone  can  give,  as  suits  me  best. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


307 


416  1808 

MEDITATION 

Arise  my  soul,  survey  the  morn,  The  grass,  the  shrubs,  the  flow-rets  show. 

And  purple  beauties  of  tlie  dawn  Their  maker  all  divine 

The  herbs  that  with  the  dew-drops  glow 


417 

The  Lord  my  Shepherd  is 
I  shall  be  well  supply'd 
Since  he  is  mine  and  I  am  his 
What  can  I  want  beside 


1808 


He  leads  me  to  the  place 
Where  heav'nly  pasture  grows 
Where  living  waters  gently  pass 
And  full  salvation  flows 


The  stars  which  in  their  courses  roll 
Have  much  instruction  given 
But  thy  good  word  informs  my  soul 
How  I  may  get  to  heav'n 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Psalm  XIII.    Short  metre. 


418  1808 

Preserve  me  Lord  amidst  the  crowd 
From  every  thought  that's  vain  and  proud 


And  raise  my  wond'ring  mind  to  see 
How  good  it  is  to  trust  in  thee 


419 


God  of  my  life  and  author  of  my  days 
Permit  my  feeble  voice  to  lisp  my  praise 
Teach  me  to  quit  this  transitory  scene 


1808 


With  decent  triumph  and  a  look  serene 
Teach  me  to  fix  my  ardent  hopes  on  high 
And  having  live'd  to  thee  in  thee  to  die. 


420 

My  Thirteenth  Year  Of  Age  Is  Past 
O  Lord  Point  Me  The  Way 


1808 


To  Anchor  In  Thy  Narrow  Path 
And  Never  From  It  Stray. 


421 

My  God  the  steps  of  pious  men 
Are  order'd  by  thy  will 
Tho  they  should  fall  they  rise  again 
Thy  hand  supports  them  still 


1808 


I  choos  the  path  of  heavenly  truth 
And  glory  in  my  choice 
Not  all  the  riches  of  the  earth 
Could  make  me  so  rejoice. 


422 


Of  aU  the  sorows  that  attend  mankind 
With  patience  bear  the  lot  to  thee  assign 


1808 

Nor  think  it  chanc  nor  murmur  at  the  Load. 
What  man  calls  fortune  if  from  God. 


423 


1808 

Great  God  Create  my  Soul  Anew 
Conform  my  hea[r]t  to  thine 
Melt  down  mv  will  and  let  it  flu- 


308  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

424  1808 

When  all  thy  mercies  O  My  God,  Transported  with  the  view,  I'm  lost 

My  rising  soul  surveys,  in  wonder,  love  and  praise. 

Joseph  Addison,  1712. 

425  1809 

Keep  silence  all  created  things  and  wait  your  Makers  nod. 

My  soul  stands  trembling  while  she  sings  the  honours  of  her  God. 

426  1809 

Lord  let  thy  spirit  witnefs  bare  Still  make  my  precious  soul  thy  care 

That  I  am  all  thy  own  And  guard  it  to  thy  throne 

428  •  1810 

God  counts  the  sorrows  of  his  saints  He  has  a  book  for  their  complaints 

Their  groans  affect  his  ears  A  bottle  for  their  tears. 

429  1810 

Great  is  the  Lord  His  works  of  Might,  Great  is  the  mercy  of  the  Lord 

Demand  our  noblest  songs.  He  givs  his  children  food, 

Let  His  Assembled  Saints  unite  and  ever  mindful  of  His  [word,] 

their  harmony  of  tongues  [he  makes  his]  Promise  good 

His  Son  the  great  Red[eemer,  came.] 

Rev.  Isaac  Wafts.    Psalm  CXI.     (Part  S.  verses  1  and  4,  and  line  1  of  verse  5.) 

430  1810 

Yield  to  the  Lord  with  simple  heart  Renounce  all  strength,  but  strength  Divine 

All  that  thou  hast,  and  all  tliou  art  And  peace  forever  shall  be  thine 

431  1811 

"  Live  while  you  live,"  the  Epicure  would  say 
And  seize  the  pleasures  of  the  present  day 
"Live  while  you  live,"  the  sacred  Preacher  cries 
"And  give  to  God  each  moment  as  it  flies" 
Lord  in  my  views  let  both  united  be 
I  live  in  pleasure  when  I  live  to  Thee 
"On  Dr.  Doddridge's  motto,  ' Dum  vivimus  vivamus.'    By  Himself." 

432  1811 

Though  heaven  afflict  I'll  not  repine  amid  the  various  scene  of  ills 

Each  heart  felt  comfort  still  is  mine  Each  stroke  some  kind  design  fulfils 

Comforts  that  will  oer  deth  prevail  And  shall  I  murmer  at  my  god 

and  journey  with  me  through  the  vale  when  soverign  love  directs  the  rod 

433  1811 

Conscience  distasteful  truths  may  tell  Who  ever  lives  with  her  at  strife 

But  mark  her  sacred  lessons  well  Loses  his  better  friend  for  life. 


IIW  ■  |HIIP»J|1H 


^"■^—^Mi*" 


L 


Y-:] 


tff  tit  ataara  •»$  4'  ^i" 


/ 


1^1 


PLATE  XCV 

I>YDiA   BuRRorc.Hs's  Sa.mpikr.      1.S14 

The  Chesterford  School,  and  tontaiiiing  a  picture  of  the  School 

Owned  by  Mrs.  Bradhiiry  Bedell 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


309 


434 

Long  as  I  live  I'll  bless  thy  name 
My  King  and  God  of  love 


1812 


My  work  and  joy  shaU  be  the  same 
In  the  bright  worlds  above 
Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Psalm  CXLV.    Part  first,  C.  M. 


435 

Oh  may  I  live  to  reach  the  place 
Where  he  unveils  his  lovely  face 


1812 


Where  all  his  beauties  you  behold 
And  sing  his  name  to  harps  of  gold. 


436  1812 

"BLISS  OF  CELESTIAL  ORIGIN" 

Restless  mortals  toil  for  nought  That  never  wanders.    Mortals  try, 

Bliss  in  vain  from  earth  is  sought  Then  you  can  not;  seek  in  vain 

Bliss  a  native  from  the  sky  For  to  seek  her  is  to  gain. 


437 

There  is  a  land  of  pure  delight 
Where  friends  once  parted  shall  unite 


1812 


And  meeting  on  that  blessed  shore 
With  fond  embrace  shall  part  no  more 


438 

Father  of  light  conduct  my  feet. 
Through  life's  dark  dangerous  road 
Let  each  advancing  step  still  bring 
Me  nearer  to  mj'  God. 


1812 


Let  heavenly^  prudence  be  my  guide 
And  when  I  go  astray 
Recall  my  feet  from  folly's  path 
To  wisdom's  better  waj'. 


Smart.    Hymn  57.    Manning  ^  Loring  Collection.    Boston,  1799. 


439 


1812 


Good,  when  he  gives,  supremely  good 
Nor  less  when  he  denies 


Even  crosses  from  his  soverign  hand 
Are  blessings  in  disguise. 


440 

I  want  a  heart  to  pray 
To  pray  &  never  cease 


1813 


Never  to  murmur  at  thy  

Or  wish  my  sufferings  less. 
Rev.   Charles 


Wesley. 


441 

To  thee  again  my  gracious  God 
I  lift  my  heart  and  eyes 


1812 


Thou  art  my  only  safe  abode 
Thou  only  just  and  wise 


442 


1813 

Mysterious  Heaven  how  wondrous  are  thy  waj'S 
Let  us  not  presume  thy  ways  to  scan 
Nor  dare  'gainst  God  a  murmuring  thought  to  raise 
For  resignation  is  the  part  of  Man. 


'  heav'n  ey'd. 


a  10 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


443 

Oh  Source  of  wisdom !     I  implore 
Thy  aid  to  guide  me  safely  o'er 
The  slippery  paths  of  youth: 
O  deign  to  lend  a  steady  ray 
To  point  the  sure,  the  certain  way 
To  piety  and  truth  ! 


1813 


Let  thy  unerring  influence  shed 

Its  soft  blessings  on  Sarahs  head. 

While  piety  and  peace 

Thy  genuine  offspring  round  her  wait 

And  guard  her  through  this  transient  state, 

To  joys  that  never  cease. 


444 

There  is  a  land  of  pleasure 
Where  streames  of  joy  forever  roll 


1814 


Tis  there  i  have  my  treasure 

And  there  i  hope  to  rest  my  soul. 


445 

Give  thanks  aloud  to  God 
To  God  the  heavenly  King 


1814 


And  let  the  spacious  earth 
His  works  and  glories  sing. 


446 

Amidst  my  learning  and  my  care 
Nothing  can  equal  God  most  dear. 
Nor  ought  with  him  my  heart  to  share 
Quick  as  my  fingers  move  this  thread 
Under  just  rules  do  act  with  speed 


1814 


In  wisdom  paths  still  may  I  tread 
Giving  to  virtue  constant  heed 
I^ove  to  be  good  and  therefore  wise 
Youth  finds  in  these  the  greatest  prize 


447 


Before  1815 

I  can  be  safe  and  free  from  care 
On  any  shore  if  Thou  be  there. 


448 

By  Babels  Streams  we  sat  and  we 

I 
When  Zion  we  thought  on  I 


pt 


1815 


In  the  midst  thereof  we  hung  our 


The  willow  tree  upon. 


harps 


137th  Psalm. 


449 


Grace  is  a  plant  Where  eer  it  grows 
Of  Pure  and  Heavenly  root 


1815 


But  Fairest  in  the  Youngest  Shows 
And  Yields  the  Sweetest  Fruit. 


450  Before  1816 

In  this  early  life,  to  me,  Oh  Lord  And  while  my  mind  is  early  taught 

Thy  pard'ning  mercy  show  May  I  in  knowledge  grow. 


451 


Look  gently  down  Almighty  Grace 
Prison  me  round  in  thy  embrace 


1816 


Pity  the  heart  that  would  be  thine 
And  let  thy  power  my  love  confine. 


X  -  - 

■I  "c  ^ 

-;  V  s, 

-'  X  ^ 


o 


^ 


<  i  I 

"     1/    a 


\ 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  311 

452  1816 

Then  let  me  Love  my  Bible  more  By  day  To  read  These  wonders  o'er 

And  take  A  fresh  Delight  And  meditate  By  night. 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Divine  Songs  for  Children.     VII.    Verse  7. 

453  1817 

STUDIOUS 

Father  of  light  and  life !  thou  God  supreme 
O  teach  me  what  is  good !  teach  me  thyself. 
Save  me  from  folly,  vanity,  and  vice. 
From  every  low  pursuit,  and  feed  my  soul 
With  knowledge  conscious  peace  and  virtue  pure 
Sacred  substantial  never  fading  bliss. 

454  1818 

Oh  how  unlike  the  Complex  works  of  Man  From  ostentation  as  from  weakness  free 

Heavens  easy  artless  unincumbered  plan  It  stands  like  the  Cerulean  arch  we  see 

Its  meretricious  graces  to  beguile  Majestic  in  its  own  Simplicity 
No  clust'ring  ornaments  to  clog  the  pile 


455  1818 

Where'er  I  turn  my  ravish'd  eyes  and  while  I  view  the  wondrous  whole 

new  scenes  of  beauty  round  me  rise  to  the  creative  power  o'er  flows 

and  my  heart  exulting  glows  my  soul  with  gratitude 


456  1818 

To  distant  lands  thy  Gospel  send  To  Gentile,  Turk,  and  stubborn  Jew 

And  thus  thy  empire  wide  extend  Thy  Almighty  grace  and  salvation  show. 


457  [1819] 

Know  God  and  bring  thy  heart  to  know 
The  joys  which  from  religion  flow. 


458                                                 Cir.  1819 

SONG  XXV. 

My  God  who  makes  the  sun  to  know  But  round  the  world  he  shines ; 

his  proper  hour  to  rise  so  like  the  Sun  would  I  fulfill 

and  to  give  light  to  all  below —  the  business  of  the  day 

Doth  send  him  round  the  skies —  Begin  my  work  [betimes,  and  still] 

When  from  the  chamber  of  the  east  [March  on  my  heavenly  way] 

his  morning  race  begins  Young  morning  of  my  days 

He  never  tires  nor  stops  to  rest,  has  all  been  spent  in  vain 


312 


AMERICAX  SAMPLERS 


SONG  XXVI. 

And  now  another  day  is  gone,  Lord  give  me  pardon  for  the  past 

I'll  sing  my  Makers  praise;  and  strength  for  days  to  come. 

My  comforts  every  hour  malie  known.  I  lay  my  body  down  to  sleep 

His  Providence  and  grace,  I>et  angels  guard  my  head, 

but  how  my  childhood  runs  to  waste,  and  thro  the  hours  of  darkness  keep 

my  sins  how  great  their  sum —  their  watch  around  my  bed. 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Divine  Songs  for  Children. 


459 

^ly  God  my  all  sufficient  good 
My  portion  and  my  choice 
In  thee  are  all  my  hopes  renewed 
And  all  my  powers  rejoice 


1819 


In  God  place  all  thy  confidence 
And  make  his  word  thy  guide 
He  will  protect  thy  innocence 
And  for  thy  wants  provide 


460 


1820 

Behold  the  path  that  I  have  trod 
My  path  till  I  go  home  to  God 


461 

O  may  their  natal  morn 
Be  registered  in  heaven 


1818 


And  they  this  life  adorn 
With  every  blessing  given 


462 


1820 

God  of  my  soul  without  thy  strengthening  grace 
How  weak  how  blind  is  human  race 


463 

Author  of  good,  to  thee  I  turn 
Thv  ever  wakeful  eve 


1821 


Alone  can  all  my  wants  discern 
Thy  hand  alone  supply. 

Merrick. 


464 


1821 

I  read  l^s  awful  name,  emblazoned  high 
With  golden  letters  on  th'  illumined  sky: 
Nor  less,  the  mystic  characters  I  see 
Wrought  in  each  flower;  inscrib'd  on  ev'ry  tree; 
In  every  leaf  that  trembles  on  the  breeze, 
I  hear  the  voice  of  God  among  the  trees. 


46.5  1821 

Religion,  fair  descendant  from  above  Grant  me  a  heart  obedient  to  thy  laws 

Eternal  source  of  happiness  and  love  Incline  to  reverence  and  maintain  thy  cause 

Low  at  thy  throne  I  fall  and  do  implore  O  grant  my  steps  to  your  celestial  skies 

In  my  soft  bosom  all  thy  grace  store  Nor  leave  me  here  till  I  to  them  shall  rise 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


313 


466 

Be  mine  a  calm  a  thankful  heart 
From  every  murmur  free 
The  blessings  of  Thy  grace  impart 
And  make  me  live  to  Thee 


1822 

If  thou  my  father  Still  art  nigh 
Cheerful  I  live  and  peaceful  die 
Secure  when  mortal  comforts  flee 
To  find  ten  thousand  worlds  in  Thee 
Anne  Steele.    1760.    2nd  and  —  verses. 


467 


1822 

As  heat  increases  with  the  rolling  hours 
Draws  up  the  vapours  and  expands  the  flowers 
So  with  my  childhood  may  my  follies  cease 
So  may  my  wisdom  with  my  years  increase 
So  may  religion  early  warm  my  soul 
Encourage,  actuate  and  cheer  the  whole. 


468  1823 

A  charge  to  keep  I  have 

A  God  to  glorify 

A  never  dying  soul  to  save 

And  fit  it  for  the  sky 

To  serve  the  present  age 

My  calling  to  fulfil 

O  may  it  all  my  powers  engage 

To  do  my  masters  will. 


Arm  me  with  jealous  care 
As  in  thy  sight  to  live 
And  O  thy  servant  Lord  prepare 
A  strict  account  to  give 
Help  me  to  watch  and  pray 
And  on  thyself  rely 
Assur'd  if  I  my  trust  betray 
I  shall  for  ever  die. 

Rev.  Charles  Wesley.     1762. 


469  1823 

Author  of  being  sourse  of  light 
With  unfading  beauty  bright 
Fullness  goodness  rolling  round 
Thy  own  fair  orb  without  a  bound 

Whether  thy  suppliants  call 
Truth  or  good  or  all  or  all 
God  or  father  thee  we  hail 
Essense  that  can  never  fail 


Grecian  or  Barbarick  name 
Thy  steadfast  being  still  the  same 
Thee  when  morning  greets  skies 
With  rosy  cheeks  and  humid  eyes 

Then  when  sweet  declining  day 
Sinks  in  purple  waves  away 
Thee  my  lips  shall  still  proclaim 
And  teach  the  world  to  bless  thy  name. 


470 

In  all  my  vast  concerns  with  thee 
In  vain  my  soul  would  try 


1823 


To  shun  thy  presence  Lord  or  flee 
The  notice  of  thine  eye. 


471 

I  ask  not  gold  or  length  of  days, 
I  ask  for  wisdoms  brighter  rays. 


1824 


O  clasp  me  in  thy  arms  when  yours 
Accept  hosannas  from  my  tongue. 


472 

Ah  lend  me  the  wings  of  a  dove, 
To  fly  from  these  regions  of  woe, 


1824 


My  hopes  and  my  joys  are  above 
And  thither  my  spirit  would  go. 


314 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


473 

When  I  can  read  mj^  title  clear 
To  mansions  in  the  sky 


1824 

I  bid  farewell  to  every  fear 
And  wipe  my  weeping  eyes. 
Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Book  II,  Hymn  LXV. 


474 

still  the  orphan  &  the  stranger 
Still  the  widow  owns  thy  care 


1824 


Screened  by  the  in  every  danger 
Heard  by  the  in  every  prayer 


475  1824 

Now  in  thy  youth  beseech  of  Him 

Who  giveth  upbraiding  not 

That  His  light  in  thy  heart  become  not  dim 


And  His  love  be  unforgot 

And  thy  God  in  the  darkest  of  days  will  be 

Goodness  and  beauty  and  strength  to  thee. 


476 

One  day  amidst  the  place 
where  my  dear  god  hath  been 
is  sweeter  than  ten  thousand  days 
of  pleasurable  sin 


1825 


My  willing  sould  would  stay 
in  such  a  frame  as  this 
i  sit  and  sing  myself  away 
to  everlasting  bliss. 


477 


Cir.  1825 

HEAVEN  BRIGHTER  THAN  EARTH. 


Those  skies  no  night  that  wear 

Nor  cloud  nor  tempest  know 
Those  flowers  no  blight  that  bear 

Those  streams  that  stainless  flow 
Are  they  not  brighter  far 

Than  all  that  lures  us  here 
Where  storms  may  fright  each  timid  star 

From  midnights  lonety  sphere. 

Here  Hope  of  Sorrow  drinks 

Here  fades  with  care 
And  Virtue  from  Temptation  shrinks 

And  Folly  finds  Despair 
But  mid  that  world  above 

No  baneful  step  may  stray 
The  white  winged  seraphs  glance  of  love 

Would  melt  each  ill  away. 


Friendship  is  there  the  guest 

Of  chilling  doubt  no  more 
And  Love  with  thornless  breast 

Whose  Pangs  and  fears  are  o'er 
There  is  no  farewell  sigh 

Throughout  that  blessed  clime 
No  murmuring  voice  nor  severed  tie 

No  change  of  weary  time 

Why  plant  the  Cypress  near 

The  Pillow  of  the  Just 
Why  dew  with  murmuring  Tear 

Thier  calm  and  holy  dus  [t] 
Rear  there  the  roses  Pride 

Bid  the  green  myrtle  bloom 
Pic[k]  emblems  of  their  joys  who  bide 

Beyond  the  insateate  tomb. 


Mid  that  celestial  Place 

Our  searing  thoughts  would  glow 
E'en  while  we  run  this  Pilgrim  race 

Of  Weariness  and  Woe. 
For  who  would  shrink  from  death 

With  sharp  and  icy  hand 
Or  heed  the  paths  of while  breath 

To  win  the  glorious  land. 


iy^m^^^ 


.0^  mta»  ^  #«inpter  TO 


«  («•<  And  #«m£<«<  «^ 


PLATE  XCVII 

Axx  E.  Kelly's  Sampler.     Halifax.     182-5 

Mrs.  Eeah  Meguier's  School,  Harrisburg,  Pa. 

Oxcned  hi/  Mrs-.  Hi'iini  E.   Coe 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


315 


478 


1825 

Heaven  notes  the  sigh  afflicted  goodness  heaves. 
Hears  the  low  plaint  by  mortal  ear  unheard, 
And  from  the  cheek  of  patient  sorrow  wipes 
The  tear  by  mortal  eye  unseen  or  scorned. 


479 


1825 

When  all  thy  mercies  o'er  me  roll, 
Thy  favors,  Lord !  surprise  my  soul. 


480 

Now  in  the  heat  of  youthful  blood, 
Remember  your  Creator,  God; 
Behold  the  days  come  hastening  on. 
When  you  shall  say,  My  joys  are  gone. 


1826 

When  we  give  up  our  youth  to  God 
'Tis  pleasing  in  his  eyes, 
A  flower  thats  ofifer'd  in  the  bud 
Is  no  mean  sacrifice. 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.     Book  I,  Hymn  XCI. 


481  1827 

Lift  up  thy  Thoughts  and  let  thine  heart  From  the  earliest  mornings  dawn 

a  grateful  sence  To  God  impart  To  the  latest  setting  sun 


482 

Prepare  me  Gracious  God ! 
'I'o  stand  before  thy  face. 


1827 


Thy  spirit  must  the  work  perform 
For  it  is  all  of  grace 


483  1828 

Tis  useless  that  the  fingers  learn  to  draw  If  innate  virtue's  not  a  welcome  guest 

And  soaring  reason  scans  all  natures  law  And  pure  religion  glows  not  in  the  breast. 


484 

[SUBLIME  THOUGHT. 

Could  we  with  Ink  the  Ocean  fill 
Were  the  whole  earth  of  parchme[n]t 
Were  every  single  stick  a  Quill 
And  every  man  a  scribe  by  trade 
To  write  the  Love  of  GOD  above 
Would  drain  the  Ocean  dry 


1828 

Said  to  be  written  by  nearly  an  idiot.] 

Nor  could  this  Scroll  contain  the  whole 

made       Tho  stretcht  from  sky  to  sky 

Were  the  whole  realm  of  nature  mine 
That  were  a  present  far  too  small 
Love  so  amazing  so  divine 
Demands  my  soul  my  life  my  all 

Prom  The  Clergyman's  Almanack  for  1812. 


485 


1828 

Fountain  of  being!    Teach  us  to  devote 

To  Thee  each  purpose,  action,  word  and  thought ! 

Thy  grace  our  hope,  thj^  love  our  only  boast. 

Be  all  distinctions  in  the  Christian  lost! 

Be  this  in  every  state  our  wish  alone. 

Almighty,  wise  and  good.    Thy  will  be  done! 


316 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


486 

Tis  religion  that  can  give 
Sweetest  comfort  while  we  live 


1828 


Tis  religion  must  supply 
Solid  comfort  when  we  die. 


487 

Guide  of  my  youth  to  thee  I  cry 
Great  God  to  me  be  ever  nigh 


1829 


Lighten  mine  eyes  convert  my  heart 
Nor  let  me  from  thy  ways  depart 


487a 

Save  me  alike  from  foolish  pride 
Or  impious  discontent 


1829 


At  aught  thy  wisdom  has  denied 
Or  aught  thy  goodness  lent. 


RELIGIOUS  VERSES— NEW  TESTAMENT 


488 

The  loss  of  a  father  is  much 
The  loss  of  a  Mother  is  more 


1700 


The  loss  of  Christ  is  such  a  loss 
As  no  other  can  restore 


489  1700 

1.  Love  God,  love  not  gold,  2.  Arise,  awake,  your  lamps  to  take 

Love  God  both  young  and  old;  And  do  no  longer  slumber; 

3.  You  must  them  trim  to  wait  on  him, 
Unto  his  wedding  chamber. 


490 


1708 


—  IS  my  name 
is  my  nation 


is  my  dwelling  place 

And  Christ  is  my  salvation 


491 


1715 

Behold  and  have  regard 

ye  servants  of  the  Lord 

which  in  his  house  of  night  do  watch. 

Praise  him  with  one  accord. 

Lift  up  your  hands  on  high  unto  his  holy  place. 

Give  the  Lord  his  praises  due,  his  benefits  embrace. 

In  every  land 

there  none  shall  stand 

and  happy  be  indeed 

but  onlv  those  whom  God  hath  chosen  That  on  Christ  Jesus  Feed. 


492 

Run  thou  Christs  race 
be  swift  like  to  the  sun 


1728 


have  not  they  work  to  do 
when  ten  is  done     etc. 


■■■•i  knee ; 


■'X 


-w  'K^ 


.^ 


■\r 


.^' 


in  ti    s  t'  - 


^c^' 


nr  wak* 


i"? 


ii- 


X 


:|  ,^^^..^ ^^ 


) 

/ 


v~~»5^.- 


•■"^ 


i? 


V 


V    t^f     ,;!>'''  d:>.;}  loitf  whole  bv^' 
^1    l"r.>-8!  thy  t.%fl<l  ■#©;wei'tH-' 


j.'jtiO'ii    AaP'. 


.^■'' 


^i^Sbi^ 


.^,^^.,^ 


.-V^^-.^-'V_-^V_^ 


5S  /, 

:■'■      \ 

J  4 


4 


PLATE  XCVIII 

Sarah  Catherine  Moffatt  Odiorxe's  SA:Nrpi.ER.     1802 

Miss  Ward's  School,  PortMiiouth,  N.  H. 

Owned  by  Mrs.  John  Fremont  Hill 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


317 


493 


1730 


Twelve  tribes  their  were  in  days  of  old 
Twelve  Articles  of  faith  we  hold 


Twelve  gates  in  new  Jerusalem  their  be 
unto  which  city  christ  bring  the  and  me 


494 

Hosanna  to  Jesus  our  King 

Who  comes  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 


1750 


By  children  he's  welcom'd  on  Earth 
By  angels  in  Heaven  ador'd 


49o  1752 

The  Waikful  Shepherds  Hear  Their  Flocks       But  Better  News  from  heaven  Was  Brought 


Where  Watchful  of  The  Morn 


Your  Saviour  Christ  Is  Born- 


496 

O  may  I  always  ready  stand 
With  my  lamp  within  my  hand 


1757 

May  I  in  sight  of  heaven  rejoice 
Whence  I  hear  the  bridegrooms  voice 
Thomas  Ken.    "Midnight  Hymn,"  verse  6. 


497 


1760 


Christ  when  our  nature  He  assumed 
redeemed  the  world  from  sin, 


&  by  his  burial  in  the  grave, 
to  life  we  rise  again. 


498  1763 

To  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son, 
and  God  the  Spirit,  Three  in  One, 

Rev.  Isaac  Watts.    Doxology  in  "Divine  Songs  for  Children." 


Be  honor,  praise  and  Glory  given 
Bv  all  on  Earth  and  all  in  Heaven 


499 


1764 

Cheer  up  ray  Soul  redeem  thy  life  with  mine 
My  soul  shall  smart  my  heart  shall  bleed  for  thine 
Sinner,  Oh  Groundless  deeds,  O  Love  beyond  decree 
the  offender  dies  to  set  the  offender  Free 


500 


501 


1770 

Zaccheus  short  of  stature  fain  would  see 

his  Saviour  pass  and  climb  into  a  Tree, 

if  we  by  Faith  would  see  this  glorious  King, 

Our  thoughts  must  mount  on  contemplations  W^ing. 

1770 

Dear  Saviour  oh !  What  ails  this  heart,  sure  tis  of  stone 
it  cannot  'nor  yet  resent  the  death  of  thee 
whose  death  alone  could  ransom  me. 


502 

Lord  I  address  Thy  heavenly  throne 
Call  me  a  child  of  Thine 


1778 


Send  down  the  spirit  of  Thy  Son 
To  form  mv  heart  divine. 


318 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


503 

In  thy  fair  book  of  life  divine 
My  God  inscribe  my  name 

Bev.  Isaac  Watts. 


1778 

There  let  it  fiU  some  humble  Place 
Beneath  the  slaughtered  Lamb 

Lyric  Poems  Sacred  to  Devotion.     Verse  XII. 


504 


1779 

Father  of  all  in  Heaven  and  earth  supreme 
Praisd  blessed  &  hallowed  be  Thy  awful  name 
Thy  Kingdom  haste  Thy  soverign  will  be  done 
Alike  on  earth  as  near  Thy  radient  throne 
Give  daily  bread  &  may  our  sins  receive 
Of  Thee  forgiveness  even  as  we  forgive 
From  all  temptation  guard  our  steps  we  pray 
yVnd  turn  from  vice  to  virtues  better  way 
To  Thy  blest  Kingdom  every  heart  incline 
For  goodness  power  &  glory  all  are  Thine. 


505  Cir.  1780 

While  Shepherds  watch'd  their  flocks  by  night 

All  seated  on  the  ground 
The  angel  of  the  Lord  came  down 

And  glory  shone  around 


"Fear  not,"  said  he,  for  mighty  dread 
Had  seized  their  troubled  mind 

"Glad  tidings  of  great  joy  I  bring, 
To  you  and  all  mankind"  etc. 

Nahum  Tate.    1703. 


506 


1781 

Who  walk  below  In  Light  and  Love 
Are  sure  to  live  With  Christ  above. 


507 

May  works  of  nature  and  of  art 
Combine  to  raise  our  thoughts  to  God 


1781 


And  Jesus  Christ  his  grace  impart 
To  guide  us  to  his  blest  abode. 


508 

When  our  Nature  he  assumd 
Redeemd  the  world  from  sin 


1783 


and  by  his  Burial  in  the  grave 
to  Life  We  rise  again. 


509 

Our  Father  who  in  Heaven  art. 
All  hallowed  be  thy  name. 
Thy  Kingdom  come,  thy  will  be  done, 
Throughout  this  earthly  frame. 

As  chearfully  as  by  those, 
Who  dwells  with  thee  on  high, 
Lord,  let  thy  bounty  day  by  day 
Our  daily  food  supply. 


1784 


As  we  forgive  our  enemys. 
Thy  pardon  Lord  we  crave, 
Into  temptation,  lead  us  not. 
But  thus  from  Evil  save. 

For  Kingdom,  power  and  glory 
All  belong,  O,  Lord  to  thee. 
Thine  from  Eternity  they  were 
And  thine  shall  ever  be. 

Tate  <|-  Brady's  Uymnal.    Hymn  XXXI. 


AMERICAN  SA^NIPLERS 


319 


510 

Wash   Lord   and   purify  my   heart 
and  make  it  clean  in  every  part 


1786 


And  when  its  clean.  Lord  keep  it  to, 
for  that  is  more  than  I  can  do. 


511 

1.  Teach  me  to   feel  another's  woe 
To  hide  the  fault  I  see 
That  mercy  I  to  others  shew 
That  mercy   shew  to   me. 


1787 

2.  While   some   in   Folly's   Pleasures   roll, 
And  seek   the   joys   that  hurt  the   soul, 
Be  mine  that  silent  calm  repast 
A   Peaceful   conscience  to  the  la-st. 

Alexander  Pope.     "The   Universal  Prayer." 


512 


1788 

In  his  blest  life 
I  see  the  path  and  in  his  death  the  price 
And  in  his  great  ascent  the  proof  supreme 
Heare  it,  O  ye  Nation,  hear  it  O  ye  dead 
He  rose,  he  rose,  he  burst  the  bars  of  death 


513 

The  loss  of  gold  is  great 
The  loss  of  time  is  more 


1792 


The  loss  of  Jesus  is  so  great 
That  no  more  can  restore. 


514 

Nothing  beneath  the  sun  can  give 
That  bliss  to  which  our  Souls  aspire 


1792 


If  God  we  love,  if  Christ  we  live 
Our  joys  shall  equal  our  desire. 


515  1793 

1.  Jesus  permit  thy  gracious  name  to  stand         2.  And  while  her  fingers  o'er  this  canvass  move 


As  the  first  efforts  of  an  infants  hand 


Engage  her  tender  heart  to  seek  thy  love. 
With  thy  dear  children  let  her  share  a  part 
And  write  thy  name  thyself  upon  her  heart.^ 


516 

Hosanna  to  King  David's  son 
Who  reigns  on  a  superior  throne 
We  bless  the  prince  of  heavenly  birth 
Who  brings  Salvation  down  to  earth. 


1793 

Let  every  nation,  every  age 
In  this  delightful  work  engage 
Old  men  &  babes  in  Zion  sing 
The  growing  glories  of  her  King. 

Isaac  Watts.    Hymnal.    Book  III.    XLII. 


o\7 


1794 

By  Truth  conducted,  and  by  Scripture  taught 
To  Christ  the  Door,  the  humble  Youth  is  brought, 
Sees  and  admires  him,  as  the  Rose:  the  Vine; 
The  Tree;  the  Shepherd;  and  the  Ark  divine. 


'  English  Notes  and  Queries  says  that  this  verse  was'written'by  the'Rev.  John  Newton!forihis  niece.  Miss  Eliz- 
abeth Catlett.    He  was  at  the  time  Rector  of  St.  Mary's  Woolnooth.  London. 


320 
518 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

.    1794 

Within  the  Rock  the  Rock  Himself  Was  Laid 
Which  Both  the  tomb  and  the  tomb  Maker  Made 
He  Was  a  Man  No  Such  Man  Beside 
Lived  Without  Sin  And  yet  for  sin  He  dyed 


519 

Virgins  and  youth  engage 
To  sound  his  praise  divine 


1794 


While  Infancy  and  age 
Their  feeble  voices  join 


520 

2.  Jesus  who  reigns  above  the  sky 
And  keeps  the  world  in  awe 
Was  once  a  child  as  young  as  I 
And  kept  his  father's  law. 


1795 


6.  Then  why  should  I  so  long  delay 
What  others  learnt  so  soon 
I  would  not  pass  another  day 
Without  this  work  begun 


Isaac  Watts.    Divine  Songs  for  Children.    XXV.     Verses  2  and  6. 


521  1 

"THE 

Lo  He  Comes  With  Clouds  Descending 
Once  For  Favor'd  Sinners  Slain 
Thousand  Thousand  Saints  Attending 
Hallelujah  Hallelujah  Amen 

Ev'ry  Eye  Shall  Now  Behold  Him 
Rob'd  In  Dreadful  Majesty 
They  Who  Set  At  Nought  And  Sold  Him 
Pierc'd  And  Nail'd  Him  To  The  Tree 
Deeply  Wailing  Shall  the  true  Messiah  be 


Ev'ry  Island  sea  And  Mountain 
Heav'n  And  Earth  Shall  flee  Away 
All  who  Hale  Him  must  Confounded 
Hear  the  Trump  Proclaim  the  Day 
Come  To  Judgment  Come  Away 


795 

76  HYMN 

Now  Redemption  Long  Expected 

See  in  Solemn  pomp  Appear 

All  His  Saints  By  Man  Rejected 

Now  Shall  Meet  Him  in  The  Air 

Hallelujay  See  The  Day  of  God  Appear 

Answer  Thine  Own  Bride  And  Spirit 
Hasten  Lord  The  Gen'ral  Doom 
The  Low  Heav'n  And  Earth  Inherit 
Take  Thy  Pining  Exile  Home 
All  creation  Travails  groans  and  Bids  The 
Come 


Yea  Amen  Let  All  Adore  Thee 
Rigt  On  Thine  Eternal  Throne 
Saviour  Take  The  Pow'r  And  Glory 
Claim  The  Kingdom  For  Thine  Own 
O  Come  quickly  Hallelujah 
Come  Lord  Come" 

Rev.  J.  Cennick,  1752;  Rev.  Charles  Wesley,  1758. 


522 

I.  Give  to  your  God  immortal  praise. 
Mercy  &  Truth  is  all  his  ways 
Wonders  of  Grace  to  God  belong. 
Repeat  his  mercies  in  your  song. 


1796 


Give  the  Lord  of  Lords  renown 

The  King  of  Kings  with  glory  crown. 

His  mercies  ever  shall  endure 

Where  Lords  &  Kings  are  known  no  more. 

Isaac  Watts.    Psalm  136. 


AMERICAN  SAISIPLERS 


321 


3.  Now  begin  the  heavenly  theme 
Sing  aloud  in  Jesus  name 
Ye  who  Jesus  kindness  prove 
Triumph  in  redeeming  love. 

523 

Keep  far  from  a  careless  heart 
From  which  my  Saviour  would  depart 


1797 


Ye  who  see  the  earthly  grace 
Beaming  in  the  Savior's  face 
On  to  Canaan  on  ye  move 
Praise  &  bless  redeeming  love. 

Verses  3  and  4-    Author  unknown. 

O,  Bless  and  prosper  all  my  ways. 
That  they  may  issue  in  thy  praise 


524 


1797 

Swift  fly  the  years  &  rise  the  expected  morn 
O  spring  to  light,  auspicious  Babe  be  born 
See  nature  hastes  her  earliest  wreathe  to  bring 
With  all  the  incense  of  the  breathing  spring 
See  lofty  Lebanon  his  herd  advance. 
See  nodding  forests  on  the  mountain  dance 
See  spicy  clouds  from  lowly  sharon  rise 
And  carmels  flowery  top  perfumes  the  skies. 
Hark  a  glad  voice  the  lonely  desert  cheers, 
Prepare  the  way  a  God  a  God  appears 
A  God  a  God  the  vocal  hills  reply 
The  rocks  proclaim  the  approaching  Deity, 
Lo  earth  receives  him  from  the  bending  skies 
Sink  down  ye  mountains,  &  ye  vallies  rise 
With  heads  declined  ye  cedars  homage  pay 
Be  smooth  ye  rocks  ye  rapid  floods  give  way 
The  Saviour  comes  by  ancient  bards  foretold. 
Hear  him  ye  deaf  &  all  ye  blind  behold 
He  from  thick  films  shall  purge  the  visual  ray 
And  on  the  sightless  ej'e-ball  pour  the  day 
Tis  he  the  obstructed  paths  of  soiind  shall  hear 
And  bid  new  musick  charm  the  unfolding  ears. 
The  dumb  shall  sing  the  lame  his  crutch  forget 
And  leap  exulting  like  the  bounding  roe. 


525 


1798 


Ye  Hearts  with  youthful  Vigor  warm 
In  smiling  Crowds  draw  near 
And  turn  from  every  mortal  charm 
A  Savior's  Voice  to  hear. 

He  Lord  of  all  the  Worlds  on  high 
Stoops  to  converse  with  you 
And  lays  his  radiant  Glories  by 
Your  Friendship  to  Pursue. 


The  Soul  that  longs  to  see  my  Face 
Is  sure  my  Love  to  gain 
And  those  that  early  seek  my  Grace 
Shall  never  seek  in  vain. 

What  Object  Lord  my  Soul  should  move 
If  once  compar'd  with  thee 
What  Beauty  should  command  ray  Love 
Like  what  in  Christ  I  see. 


Away  ye  False  delusive  Toys 
Vain  Tempters  of  the  Mind 
Tis  here  I  fix  my  lasting  Choice 
For  here  true  Bliss  I  find. 

Hymn  660.    John  Dobell's  Collection.    Morristown. 


1810. 


322 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


526 


1798 


Beset  with  snares  on  ev'ry  hand 

In  life'  uncertain  path  I  stand 

Father  Divine!  diffuse  thy  light, 

To  guide  my  doubtful  footsteps  ri[gh]t 


Engage  this   roving  treacherous   Heart 
To  fix  on  Mary's  better  Part 
To  scorn  the  Trifles  of  a  Day 
For  Joys  that  none  can  take  away. 

Philip  Doddridge. 


527 


1799 

Upon  his  head  shall  honours  rest 

And  every  age  pronounce  Him  blessed. 


528 

In  vain  doth  earthly  life  afford 
A  momentary  shade 
It  rises  like  the  prophet's  gourd, 
And  withers  o'er  my  head 


1799 


But  of  my  Saviour's  love  possest. 
No  more  for  earth  I  pine 
Secure  of  everlasting  rest 
Beneath  the  heavenly  vine 


529 


Cir.  1799 

If  you  know  Christ  you  need  no  little  more 
If  not  all's  lost  that  you  have  learnt  before. 


530 


1800 


LoVing  •  Jesus  .  Gentle  •  Lamb 
In  -  thy  .  Gracious  .  hands  .  I  •  am 
Make  ■  Me  •  Saviour  .  What  •  Thou  ■  Art 
Live  .  Thyself  •  Within  •  My  •  Heart 


I  .  Shall  .  Then  •  Shew  •  Forth  •  Thy  •  Praise 
Serve  •  Thee  .  All  .  My  •  Happy  .  Days 
Then  •  The  •  World  •  Shall  .  Always  .  See 
Christ  .  The  .  Holy  •  Child  .  In  •  Me. 


Rev.  Charles  Wesley.    "For  A  Child."     Verses  3  and  4. 


531  1800 

Come  Lord  and  never  from  me  go 
This  world's  a  darksome  Place 
I  find  no  Pleasure  here  below 
When  thou  dost  veil  thy  Face 

Come  spread  thy  Saviour  on  my  Frame 

No  sweetness  is  as  sweet 

Till  I  get  up  to  sing  thy  name 

Where  all  thy  Singers  meet. 


There's  no  such  thing  as  Pleasure  here 
My  Jesus  is  my  all 
As  thou  dost  shine  or  disappear 
Mv  Pleasures  rise  and  fall 


532 

Teach  me  to  feel  anothers  smart. 
And  teach  my  tears  to  flow 


1801 


Teach  me  to  sooth  the  sorrowing  heart 
And  give  relief  to  woe. 


533 

Almighty  Power  whose  tender  care 
Did  infancy  protect. 


1801 


Let  riper  years  thy  favour  share 
And  every  step  direct. 


PLATE  XCIX 

Xaxcy  Hall's  Sampler.     1788 

Miss  Polly  Balch's  School,  Providence,  R.  I. 

OiCned  by  Mrx.  W.  C.  Greene 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


323 


534 


1802 

I  can  be  safe  and  free  from  care 
On  any  shore  if  thoii  be  there 


535  1803 

Jesus  invites  young  children  near 
Oh,  may  we  straight  Obey 

536  1804 

Be  Christ  my  pattern  and  my  guide 
His  image  may  I  bear 


Give  us,  O  Lord,  the  attentive  ear 
And  teach  our  hearts  to  pray. 


O  may  I  tread  his  sacred  steps 
And  his  bright  glories  share 


537 


1805 


The  Saviour  who  in  glory  reigns 
Who  made  the  earth  &  sea 
Whose  arm  imnumbered  worlds  sustains 
Was  once  a  child  like  me. 


He  stooped  so  low  that  I  might  rise, 
To  dwell  with  him  above 
Lord  send  thy  blessing  from  the  skies 
To  teach  a  child  thv  love. 


538  1805 

As  this  fair  sampler  shall  continue  still  May  Christ  the  great  exemplar  of  mankind 

The  guide  and  model  of  my  future  skill  Direct  my  ways  and  regulate  my  mind. 


539 


AN  ACROSTICK 
Love  O  Love  thine  origin  are  divine 
Of  all  human  emotions  the  most  sublime 
Verily  thou  first  came  down  from  above 
Ever  thv  name  will  be  known  for  Gods  love 


540 

Yonder  amazing  sight  I  see 
The  incarnate  Son  of  God 


1806 

Expireing  on  the  accursed  tree 
And  weltering  in  his  blood 

Mrs.  Barbauld.    Hymn  on  the  "Death  of  Christ.' 


541 

Bear  Thou  In  Mind 
The  Saviour  Kind 
Who  Did  Upon  A  Tree 

542 

Precept  may  teach,  example  move 
And  living  pattern,  lead  to  love; 
N'or  love  alone;  but  imitate 
The  truly  Good  and  therefore  great; 
And  dost  thou  pant,  dear  girl,  to  find 
To  best  examplar  for  the  mind? 
"Which  n'eer  shall  lead  thy  yough  astray; 
To  follow  vice  in  pleasured  way, 


1808 


His  Body  Rent 

His  Blood  Was  Spent 

And  All  For  Love  Of  The. 


1808 


N'or  tempt  thy  feet  to  heedless  rove 
Where  Serpent  man  in  ambush  sleeps 
N'or  heed  the  ruined  girl  that  weeps. 
Is  this  thy  wish,  my  lovely  friend. 
On  Mary's  steps  do  thou  attend. 
She  leads  to  Jesus  sacred  feet 
And  there  is  Virtues  peaceful  seat. 


324 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


543 

No  man's  tongue  can  tell 
What  grief  to  him  befell 


1809 


When  he  was  doomed  to  die 
On  Mount  Calvary 


544 


1810 


Silence  and  thought  the  mind  improve 
They  kindle  joy  in  pious  hearts 


On  them  descends  the  mystic  dove 
And  every  Christian  grace  imparts 


545  1810 

ON  CHRISTMAS  DAY 
What  words,  what  voices  can  we  bring,  O  'tis  too  little  all  we  Can, 

Which  way  our  accents  raise,  For  this  unbounded  Love, 

To   welcome   our  mysterious    King,  All  that  was  ever  wrote  by  Man, 

And  sing  a  Saviour's  praise.  Or  sung  in  Hymns  above. 


546 

1.  Tho  youth  may  fade  with  aU  its  bloom 
And  nervous  strength  decline 
Yet  age  shall  yield  a  rich  perfume 
If  innocence  be  thine 


1810 


2.  He  carve  my  passion  on  the  bark 
And  every  wounded  tree 
Shall  droop  and  bear  some  mystic  mark 
That  Jesus  died  for  me. 


547  1811 

The  Lord  is  come  the  heavens  proclaim  AU  ye  bright  armies  of  the  skies 

His  birth  the  nations  learn  his  name  Go  worship  where  the  saviour  lies 

An  unknown  star  directs  the  road  Angel  and  Kings  before  him  bow 

Of  eastern  sages  to  their  God.  Those  gods  on  high  and  gods  below. 

Let  idols  totter  to  the  ground 

And  their  own  worshippers  Confound 

But  Judah  shout  but  Zion  sing 

And  earth  confess  her  sovereign  king. 

Isaac  Watts.    Hymnal.    Book  II.     CVII. 


548 

The  soul  who  seeks  me  shall  obtain 
Immortal  wealth  and  heavenly  gain 


1812 


Immortal  life  is  his  reward 
Life  and  the  favor  of  the  Lord, 


549 


Before  1813 

All  ye  faithful  servants  are  of  our  almighty  King, 

both  high  and  low  and  small  and  great.  His  praise  devoutly  sing. 

Let  us  rejoice  and  render  thanks  to  his  most  Holy  name. 

Rejoice  rejoice  for  now  is  come  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb. 

His  bride  herself  has  ready  made  How  pure  and  white  her  dress 

Which  is  her  saints  Integrity  and  spotless  holiness. 

O  therefore  blest  is  every  one  who  to  the  marriage  feast 

and  Holy  Supper  of  the  Lamb  is  called  a  welcome  guest. 


I 


AT»tii  iw'tait^  the  Bo ve  K  W 


'v''?'« 


x^ 


>af^ 


:-;^ 


r* 
ii<^ 


ooK 


PLATE  C 

Naxcy  Wixsoe's  Sampler.     1786 

Miss  Polly  Balch's  School,  Providence,  R.  I. 

Owned  by  Mrs.  John  H.  Mason 

Plate  presented  by  the  Rhode  Island  Society  of  the  Colonial  Dames 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


325 


550 


1813 


SHEPHERDS  rejoice  lift  up  your  eyes. 
And  send  your  fears  away. 
News  from  the  region  of  the  skies, 
The  saviour's  born  to  day. 


Go  shepherds  where  the  infant  lies, 
And  see  his  humble  throne, 
With  gladness  sparkling  in  your  eyes, 
Go  and  behold  the  son. 


Tate  §-  Brady's  Hymnal.    Hymn  XXXIII.     Verses  1  and  4- 

551  1813 

May  grace  and  truth  preserve  my  youth  And  I  be  led  by  Christ  my  head 

From  sin  and  danger  free.  To  fountains  rich  and  free. 

552  Cir.  1813 

Attend  dear  Girl  the  words  of  truth  Inclind  to  feel  a  Savior's  love 

Let  no  false  way  deform  thy  Youth  Rest  not  thy  hope  beneath  the  skies 

Make  every  thought  obedient  move  A  heart  renewed  to  Heaven  will  rise. 

553  1814 

Let  the  sweet  work  of  prayer  &  praise,  Thus  I  am  prepared  for  longer  days, 

Employ  my  youngest  breath.  Or  fit  for  early  death. 

Isaac  Watts.    Divine  Songs  for  Children.    XII.    Verse  6. 


o54i 

Tis  true  tis  long  ere  I  began 
To  seek  to  live  forever 


Cir.  1814 

But  now  I  run  as  fast  as  I  can 
Tis  better  late  than  never 


555 


Cir.  1814 

Jesus  all  hail,  Thou  risen  Savior  hail 

At  thy  command  the  seventh  trump  shall  sound 

The  sun  retires,  the  moon,  the  stars  turn  pale 

And  heaven  and  earth  and  sea  no  more  be  found   etc. 


556 


1814 

Break  Forth  into  singing  ye  trees  of  the  Wood 
for  Jesus  is  bringing  Lost  sinners  to  God. 


556a 

O,  may  I  stand  before  the  lamb 
When  earth  and  sea  are  fled 


1815 


And  hear  the  judge  pronounce  my  name 
With  blessings  on  my  head 


557 

O  Lord  regard  me  from  above 
And  grant  me  my  request 


1815 


And  lead  me  on  by  faith  and  love 
To  lean  upon  thy  breast 


326 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


558 


May  I  now  in  the  morning  of  my  day 
Resolve  to  choose  the  narrow  way 
The  way  that  leads  to  life  and  peace 
Where  all  trouble  and  sorrow  cease. 


1816 


Engage  this  frail  and  wavering  heart 
Wisely  to  choose  the  better  part 
To  scorn  the  trifles  of  a  day 
For  those  that  never  fade  away 


559 

Some  listen  to  the  scripture's  voice 
Its  sacred  truths  obey 


1819 


With  wisdom  then  ye  shaU  rejoice 
In  Christ  the  only  way. 


560 

Behold  the  Savior  at  thy  door 

He  gently  knocks,  has  knocked  before 

Has  waited  long,  is  waiting  still 


1820 


You  treat  no  other  friend  so  ill 
Admit  him  or  the  hour's  at  hand 
When  at  his  door  denied  you'U  stand. 


Hymn  326.    John  Dobell's  Collection.    Morristown.    1810. 


561 

In  Sharon's  lovely  rose 


1822 


Immortal  beauties  shine 


Its  sweet  refreshing  fragrance  shows 
Its  origin  divine 


562 


1823 

Observe  the  rising  lily's  snowy  grace; 

Observe  the  various  vegetable  race 

They  neither  toil  nor  spin  but  careless  grow, 

Yet  see  how  warm  they  blush  how  bright  they  glow ! 

Will  he  not  care  for  you  ye  faithless  say? 

Is  he  unwise?  or  are  ye  less  than  they 


563 

Now  in  thy  youth  attend  to  truth 
let  Jesus  be  thy  guide, 


1824 


Be  always  mindful  of  the  lord 
Prepare  to  be  his  bride. 


564 


1825 

O  Render  thanks  to  God  above, 
The  fountain  of  eternal  love. 


565  1825 

In  other  men  we  faults  can  spy 

And  blame  the  mote  that  dims  the  eye 

Each  little  spark  and  blemish  find 

566  1825 

Welcome  sweet  day  of  rest 
that  saw  the  lord  arise 
Welcome  to  this  reviving  breast 
and  these  rejoicing  eyes 


To  our  own  stronger  errors  blind 

Ere  we  remark  anothers  sin 

Let  our  own  conscience  look  within 


The  king  himself  comes  near 
and  feasts  his  saints  to  day 
here  we  may  sit  and  see  him  here 
and  love  and  Praise  and  Pray 


Isaac  Watts.    Hymns  and  Spiritual  Songs.    XIV.    Verses  1  and  2. 


Bm' 


^ 


Mml^ 


m 


p.  A  b  c  d.  e  f  5  b  i  J  k  1 »  nop  «f r  1 1  u  y  w  ><  r  Z:-  ^^'JsJyixVM'Wi^' 
' ivtJ empiy  ul?.  j,  ffiovnt-ns tlovvet  cut  dr.wft  a n<J  wuKerd '>« Atuhf 


,^ir'Vvx"nfv^^i*x-  >  *  --*■ 


-^  *t*  >«»  ^t^> 


^»>  ■«S*>s-  ♦'J'*^ 


^  m 


^ 


^r^*^^^|^j|^ti^^***^^^^^^A^^aaB^ 


PLATE  CI 

Lydia  Church's  Sa.mi'i.er.     Xew  Haven,  Conn.     1791 

Mrs.  Mansfield's  School 

Owned  by  the  Hartford  Historical  Society 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


327 


567 


1826 

EVENING  MEDITATION  ON  THE  CRUCIFIXION 
My  Lord  my  Saviour  died,  For  guilty  sinners  sake: 
The  tokens  of  his  lovo  Oft  keep  mine  eyes  awake. 
I  cannot  chuse  but  mourn,  That  He  should  suffer  so; 
And  yet  it  is  the  source  Whence  all  my  comforts  flow. 
I  cannot  chuse  but  mourn.  Whose  sin  made  him  To  bleed; 
And  yet  such  sacrifice  My  soul  from  death  hath  freed. 
Twas  not  the  treacherous  Jews  That  did  my  Lord  betray; 
It  was  heinous  sins,  More  treacherous  far  than  they. 
Twas  not  the  soldier's  spear  That  pierc'd  my  Saviour's  side, 
Twas  my  Ingratitude.    My  unbelief,  my  pride. 
These  were  the  bloody  thorns  That  did  his  temples  wound. 
And  caus'd  those  sacred  drops,  That  did  bedew  the  ground. 
And  when  his  Father's  wrath  Drew  forth  that  bitter  cry. 
He  yielded  up  his  life  For  rebels  such  as  I. 
And  can  I  chuse  but  mourn,  When  skies  and  rocks  did  rend. 
And  Nature  veil'd  her  face.  At  sight  of  such  an  end. 
But  haste  My  soul  to  view.    Thy  happiness  restor'd. 
And  death  and  hell  subdu'd.    By  the  triumphant  Lord. 
Put  off  thy  mourning  weed.  Thy  Jesus  reigns  on  high. 
Receiving  gifts  for  men,  For  rebels  such  as  I. 


568 

And  must  I  Part  with  all  I  Have 
My  dearest  Lord  for  Thee. 
It  is  But  right  since  Thou  hast  done 
Much  more  than  this  for  me. 


1826 


III  Let  It  go,  One  Look  from  Thee 
Will  more  than  make  Amends 
For  all  the  Losses  I  Sustain 
Of  Credit,  Riches,  Friends. 


569  1827 

Jesus  lover  of  my  soul 
Let  me  to  thy  bosom  fly 

570  1827 

Hopes  vivid  beams  the  fancy  cheers 
As  down  the  slopes  of  ills  we  stray 

571  1828 

Mary  loved  her  Master 
And  washed  his  holy  feet 


While  the  billows  near  me  roar 
While  the  tempest  still  is  nigh. 

Rev.  Charles  Wesley. 


Smiles  through  the  wilderness  of  tears 
The  simshine  of  a  brighter  day 


Here  I  am  coming  after 
His  blessing  may  I  greet 


572  1828 

Happy  the  soul  where  innocence  does  reign       Where  truth  and  piety  its  actions  sway 
Where  pure  religion  does  its  right  maintain       And  all  its  pleasure  is  its  God  t'obey. 


573 

To  God  who  guards  us  all  the  night 
And  gives  us  length  of  days 


1830 


To  God  who  sheds  the  morning  light 
Be  honour,  love  and  praise. 


328 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


574 


Beyond  the  narrow  vale  of  time. 
Where  bright  celestial  ages  roll, 


1830 

RELIGION 

To  scenes  eternal  scenes  sublime, 

She  points  the  way  and  leads  the  soul. 


575 

Firm  as  a  rock  elevated  mind 

Stand  [s]  Faith  the  comforter  of  human  kind. 

Against  each  earthly  evil  we  endure 

She  points  at  one  an  everlasting  cure 


Soft  smiling  hope  thou  anchor  of  the  mind 
And  only  comforter  the  wretched  find 
All  fly  to  thee  when  troubles  wring  the  heart 
To  soothe  by  future  prospect  present  smart 


576 

Let  all  my  thoughts  &  actions  rise 
From  innocence  &  truth  &  thou 


O  Lord  will  not  despise 
The  Prayrs  of  early  youth. 


577 


Jesus  thy  gracious  name  I  wiU  inscribe 
Be  Thou  my  Counsellor,  my  Friend  and  guide 
Protect  me  from  the  dangerous  snares  of  youth 
And  write  upon  my  heart  thy  word  of  truth. 


578 

To  Thee  my  God  will  I  devote 
The  morning  of  my  days 


Oh  keep  me  from  the  snares  of  youth 
And  I  will  sing  Thy  praise. 


579 

Lord  how  delightful  tis  to  see 
A  whole  assembly  worship  thee 


At  once  they  sing  at  once  they  Pray 
They  hear  of  heaven  &  love  the  way 
Isaac  Watts.    Divine  Songs  for  Children.    XXVIII. 


580 


Sweet  are  thy  works  my  God  my  King  To  show  thy  works  by  Morning  Light 

To  praise  thy  name  give  thanks  and  sing  And  talk  of  all  thy  truths  at  night 

Isaac  Watts.    Psalm  XCII.     (Not  quoted  quite  correctly.) 


IN  PRAISE  OF  THE  VIRTUES 


581 


1724 

Be  not  wise 
in  thy  own  eyes. 
Be  just  and  wise 
and  virtue  prize 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


329 


582 


1724 

Beauty  and  virtue  when  they  do  meet 

with  a  good  education  make  a  lady  complete 


583 


1730 

Vertuous  Man  Needs  No  Great  Dangers  Fear 

No  troubled  Conscience  Nor  Black  Despair 

Can  th[e]re  Find  Place  Or  Room  to  harbour  there 

Vertue  in  Man  guides  him  the  safest  way 
as  the  bright  son  that  rules  the  gracious  day 
Doth  on  his  head  as  beauteous  rays  display 


584 


1737 

VIRTUE  AN[D]  LOVE 
IS  FROM  A[BOVE] 


585 

The  winter  tree  resembles  me 
Whose  sap  lies  in  the  root, 


1742 


The  spring  draws  nigh;  as  it,  so  I 
Shall  bud,  I  hope,  and  shoot. 


586 

1.  O  that  Mine  Eye  Might  Closed  Be 
To  What  Becomes  Me  Not  To  See 
That  Deafness  might  Possess  Mine  Ear 
To  What  concerns  Me  Not  To  Hear 


1742 


That  Truth  My  Tongue  Might  Alway  Tie 
From  Ever  Speaking  Foolishly 
That  No  Vain  Thought  Might  Ever  Rest 
Or  Be  Conceived  In  My  Breast 


3.  that  by  each  word  each  deed  each  thought 
glory  to  my  god  be  brought 
but  what  are  wishes  lord  on  the! 


587 


1742 


Where  The  Contented  Mind  Is  Known 
There  Is  As  well  Increas 
Of  Solitude  Where  Thy  Son  Lies  Down 
In  Everlasting  Peace 


True  Peace  And  Joy  Not  To  Be  Found 
In  Vain  Thirristial  Things 

True  Holy  Praises  Doth  B- —  V 

The  King  of  Kings 


588  1748 

Les  enfants  son  comme  des  jeune  plante  Cest  un  devoir  qui  nous  doit  captivez 

Avec  grand  soint  11  faut  les  cultivez  pour  les  remplire  de  vertus  excellente 


589 

Force  may  indeed  the  heart  invade 
but  Kindness  only  can  perswade 


1755 


Shun  the 
With  the 


(rest  undecipherable) 


330  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

590  1755 

Modest  Attire  And  Meekness  Signify  Yea  Modesty  Doth  Many  Ways  Express 

a  Mind  Composed  of  Native  Purity  To  All  Beholders  Innate  Comeliness. 

591  1756 

Lay  All  the  Steps  of  Pride  Aside  Let  All  Thy  Homage  be  To  Wisdom  Paid 

Let  Truth  And  Wisdom  Be  Your  Guide  Seek  Her  Protection  and  In  Love  Her  Aid 

592  1760 

Consider  well  some  by  past  days  And  see  if  thou  in  all  thy  ways 

On  former  Times  reflect  Are  truly  Circumspect. 

593  [1760-5] 

Make  much  of  precious  Time  While  in  your  power. 
Be  careful  well  to  husband  every  Hour 
or  Time  will  come  when  you  shall  sore  lament 
The  unhappy  minutes  that  you  have  mispent. 

594  1761 

"ON  RELIGION" 
1.  If  I  [am  right,  O  teach  my  heart]  2.  Save  me  alike  from  foolish  pride 

Still  in  the  right  to  stay  Or  impious  discontent 

If  I  am  wrong  thy  grace  impart  At  aught  thy  wisdom  has  deny'd 

To  find  that  better  way  Or  aught  thy  goodness  lent 

3.  This  day  be  bread  and  peace  my  lot 
All  else  beneath  the  Sun 
Thou  know'st  if  best  bestowed  or  not 
And  let  thy  will  be  done 

595  1762 

In  books  or  work  and  healthful  play,  That  I  may  give  for  every  day, 

Let  my  first  years  be  past,  A  good  account  at  last. 

Isaac  Watts.    Divine  Songs  for  Children.    XX.     Verse  4- 

596  1763 

To  vindicate  my  Works  and  Tell  Not  one  of  all  my  thousend  Faiths 

I'll  make  no  more  pretence  Can  bear  a  just  Defence 

597  1763 

Let  not  thy  mind  be  lifted  high, 
but  grace  thy  face  with  modisty. 

598  1766 

Beauty  And  Pride  We  Often  Find  He  Handsom  Is  And  Merit  Praise 

Betrays  The  Weakness  Of  The  Mind  That  Handsom  Dos  The  Proverb  Says 


fj' 


"Ix 


■r'-l'' 


i.jP'j  4-1*.,'"^  Wu..;l.i|.   >f   '^:  •'^^:is.:'^K.W-^^^ 


^-  -^  .  '  /  ^x  -^'        .*w^F      .  -ill 

'  Nil*  '^^  -  ^^  (     •'      ^  i'^    *'^'^-  -  <  '       ■*  /      n 


PLATE  CII 

Hetty  Lees'  Sampler.     1799 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Henry  E.  Coe 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


331 


599 


1770 

Trust  not  to  those  who  love 
What  God  doth  disapprove 


600 

Why  Virtue  dost  thou  blame  desire, 
Which  Nature  hath  imprest 


177- 


Wliy  Nature  dost  thou  soonest  fire. 
The  mild  and  Gen'rous  breast 


601 


1771 

1.  How  blest  the  maid  who  circling  years  improve 
Her  God  the  object  of  her  warmest  love 

2.  Whose  useful  hours  successive  as  they  glide 
The  book  the  Needle  and  the  Pen  divide 

3.  Who  sees  her  parents  heart  exult  with  joy 
And  the  fond  tear  stands  sparkling  in  their  eye. 

4.  Blest  with  the  hope  when  the  lifes  cares  dismiss 
Of  a  Kind  welcome  to  the  realms  of  bUss 


602 


1772 

Age  does  alas  disclose  the to  wise 

A  thousand  troubles  hid  from  youthful  eyes 


603 

Time  has  Wings  and  swiftly  flies 
Youth  and  Beauty  fade  away 

604 

O  Youth  thy  Duty  Observe 

So  Ne'er  shall  thv  Pleasures  Decav 


1773 


Virtue  is  the  only  prize 

Whose  sacred  joys  will  ne'er  decay 


1774 


Twill  Prove  the  Best  Honour  to  Serve 
The  Glory  Twil  be  to  Obey. 


605 


1774 

When  Wild  Ambition  In  The  Heart  We  Find 
Farewel  Content  And  Quiet  Of  The  Mind 
For  Glittring  Clouds  We  Leave  The  Solid  Shore 
And  Wonted  Happiness  Returns  No  More 


606 

1.  Let  spotless  innocence  and  truth 
All  my  actions  guide 
And  guard  my  unprotected  youth 
From  vanity  and  pride. 


1775 

2.  Let  truth  and  virtue  guide  my  feet 
They  are  angelic  charms 
They  lead  my  steps  to  Jesus  seat 
And  waft  me  in  his  arms 


607 


1775 

Know  then  this  truth  enough  for  man  to  know, 
Virtue  alone  is  happiness  below 

Alexander  Pope.    "Essay  on  Man.' 


332  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

608  1775 

Seek  Virtue  and  of  that  Possest  Early  your  thought  to  Virtue  bend 

To  Providence  resign  the  rest  Forgive  your  foe  and  love  your  friend. 

609  17— 

(VIRTUE  AND  HONOR  — 1806) 

1.  Virtue's  the  chiefest  Beauty  of  the  mind 
The  noblest  Ornament  of  Human-Kind 

2.  Virtues  our  Safe  guard  and  our  Leading  Star 
That  Stirs  up  reason  though  the  senses  err. 

610  1780 

Oh  Heavenly  Virtue  Thine  A  Sacred  Flame 
And  Still  My  Soul  Pays  Homage  To  Thy  Name. 

611  1782 

While  idle  drones  supinely  dream  of  fame 
The  industrious  actually  do  get  the  same. 

612  1783 

With  early  virtues  plant  your  breast 

The  spaciousi  Arts  of  Vice  detest 

******* 

Learn  to  contemn  all  Praise  betimes 
For  flattery's  the  nurse  of  crimes. 

John  Gay.    Dedication  of  his  Fables  to  William,  Duke  of  Cumberland, 

613  1783 

[THE  BULL  AND  THE  MASTIFF] 

Seek  you  to  train  your  Favorite  Boy,  Let  his  Preceptor's  Heart  be  tried 

Each  caution  every  care  employ.  Weigh  well  his  Manners  Life  and  Scope 

And  ere  you  Venture  to  confide  On  these  depends  thy  future  hope 

John  Gay.    Fable  IX. 

614  1783 

INDUSTRY 
Observe  the  Ant  for  she  instructs  the  man 
And  Preaching  Labour  gathering  all  she  can 
Then  brings  it  to  increase  her  Heap  at  home 
Against  the  Winter  which  she  knows  will  come 
And  when  that  comes  she  creeps  abroad  no  more 
But  lies  at  home  and  Feasts  upon  her  store 

615  1784 

In  this  wide  world  the  scene  of  woe,  From  her  clear  stream,  all  comforts  flow, 

let  virtue  be  thy  choice  that  can  the  soul  rejoice. 

'  Specious. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  333 

616  1784 

stamp  virtue's  law  upon  thy  youthful  heart 

Then  meek  eyed  innocence  shall  never  thee  desert; 

But  thou  shall  imitate  the  rising  sun, 

Increase  thy  virtuous  splendor  till  life's  glass  hath  run. 

617  1784 

1.  Let  Virtue  be 
a  guide  to  the 

2.  And  Innocence 
Be  thy  defence 

618  1785 

d 
I  blushe    This  Morn  To  See  The  Sun  ^Vhen  I  A  Day  His  Work  Is  Done 

d  And  Min 

So  Far  Advance    His  Stage 

619  1785 

Excess  of  wit  may  often  time  beguile, 

Jests  are  not  always  pardoned  by  a  smile — 

Men  may  disguise  their  malice  at  the  heart, 

and  seem  at  ease  though  pained  with  inward  smart 

620  1785 

In  Virtues  ways 
I  spend  my  days 

621  1785 

1.  Let  me  O  God  my  labours  so  employ  2.  I  ask  no  more  than  my  life's  wants  supply 

That  I  a  competency  may  enjoy.  And  leave  their  due  to  others  when  I  die. 

622  1785 

Beauty  Is  a  Flower  That  Fadeth  Away 

But  Virtue  Is  a  Jewel  That  Will  Never  Decay. 

623  1785 

Cast  oflF  all  needless  and  Distrustful  Care 
Little  is  enough  and  much  a  Snare 

624  1786 

Honour  and  renown 
will  the  ingenious  crown 


334  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

625  1786 

The  maid  who  led  by  wisdom's  guiding  hand, 
Seek's  virtue's  temple  and  her  law  reveres: 
She,  She  alone  in  honour's  dome  shall  stand, 
Crownd  with  Rewards  and  rais'd  above  her  peers 
Recording  annals  shall  preserve  her  name, 
And  give  her  virtues  to  immortal  fame. 

626  1787 

Cato  doth  say  to  Old  and  to  Young 

The  first  steps  to  Virtue  is  bridle  the  Tongue. 

627  1787 

1.  Beauty  soon  grows  familiar  to  the  eye 
Virtue  alone  has  charms  that  never  die 

2.  For  blessings  ever  wait  on  virtuous  deeds 
And  tho  a  late  a  sure  reward  succeeds 

William  Congreve.    "The  Mourning  Bride." 

628  1788 

O  Heaven  kind.  New  form  my  mind.  That  my  small  sum  of  days  to  come 

And  give  me  views  divine.  With  nobler  deeds  may  shine. 

629  1788 

Whatever  different  path  mankind  pursue  'Tis  thee  in  every  action  we  intend 

Oh  happiness  'tis  thee  we  keep  in  view  The  noblest  motive  and  superior  end. 

630  1790 

Patience  will  wipe  the  streaming  tear  Content  will  always  happiness  supply 

And  hope  will  paint  the  pallid  cheek  of  fear       And  Virtue  calls  a  blessing  from  on  high. 

631  1790 

1.  Conscience  distasteful  truths  may  tell  2.  Whoever  lives  with  her  at  strife 

But  mark  her  sacred  lessons  well  Loses  his  better  friend  for  life 

632  1790 

The  Charms  of  Beauty  soon  will  fade 

To  Time  must  yield  their  power 

But  Virtues  Charms  tho'  Time  invade 

Live  to  the  latest  hour. 

Thy  choice  Be  Virtue  then  thy  Guide  her  Charms 

Listen  attentive  to  her  guardian  Voice 

Her  bright  example  keep  in  constant  view 

And  all  her  precepts  steadily  pursue. 

Let  Modesty  ("the  females  best  defence) 

Sweetness  of  temper,  Truth,  Benevolence 

With  all  the  virtues  that  true  bliss  impart 

Possess  thy  mind  &  ever  rule  thy  heart. 


PLATE  cm 

Caroline  Vaughax's  Sampler.     1818 

Mary  Walden's  School 

Owned  by  Mrs.  Miles  White,  Jr. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


335 


633 


1790 


Let  Youth  To  Virtue's  Shrine  Repair, 
And  Men  Their  Tribute  Bring 
Old  Age  Shall  Lose  Its  Load  of  Care, 
Death  Shall  Lose  Its  Sting. 


2.  Borne  Upwards  On  Seraphic  Wing, 
Their  Happy  Souls  Shall  Soar, 
And  There  Enjoy  Eternal  Spring, 
Nor  Fear  A  Winter  More 


634  1791 

Tho  Plunged  In  Ills  And  Exercised  In  Care       ForBlesings  Always  Wait  On  Virtous  Deeds 
Yet  Never  Let  The  Noble  Mind  Despair  And  Tho  a  late  a  Sure  Reward  Succeeds. 


634a 


1799 


Tho  plung  in  ills  and  Exercised  with  [care] 
Yet  never  let  the  noble  mind  desp[air] 


When  prest  by  dangers  and  beset 
The  gods  their  timely  succor  


635 


To  crown  both  my  Age  and  my  Youth 
Let  me  mark  where  Religion  has  trod 


1792 


Since  nothing  but  Virtue  &  truth 
Can  reach  to  the  Throne  of  my  God. 


636 


1792 

Constraint  in  all  things  makes  the  pleasure  less 
Sweet  is  the  love  that  comes  with  willingness. 


637 


1792 

External  Pomp  and  Visible  Success 
Sometimes  contributes  to  Our  Happiness 
But  that  which  makes  us  Genuine  and  Refined 
I  A  Good  Conscience  and  a  Soul  Resigned. 


638 


1792 

ON  HUMAN  GRANDEUR 

'Tis  not  in  Grandeur  peace  of  mind  to  give. 
Nor  are  those  happiest  who  in  splendor  live, 
Content  alone  those  blessings  can  bestow, 
Which  teach  the  mind  with  heart-felt  Joy  to  glow. 
Banish  vain  care  and  all  her  dismal  train, 
And  give  true  pleasure  unallay'd  by  pain. 


639 


1793 

'Tis  A'irtue  only  makes  our  bliss  below 

And  all  our  knowledge  is  ourselves  to  know. 

Alexander  Pope.    Essay  on  Man.    Epistle  IV. 


640 

The  frowns  of  fortune  ne'er  regard 
But  trust  Almighty  Love 


1793 


Virtue  shall  meet  her  sure  reward 
In  realms  of  bliss  above. 


336  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

641  1793 

Be  careful  your  innocence  ere  to  maintain  Since  no  other  distress  so  deprives  us  of  hope 

Be  assured  it  is  worthy  your  care  Or  so  soon  sinks  the  soul  in  despair. 

642  1794 

Let  Virtue's  lamp  thy  footsteps  guide  the  peaceful  vale  the  golden  mean 

and  shun  the  dangerous  heights  of  pride,  the  path  of  life  persue  serene. 

643  1794 

For  age  &  want  save  while  you  may 
No  morning  sun  lasts  a  whole  day. 

644  1794 

Our  youthful  passions  soon  will  take  their  flight 
What  flows  from  virtue  gives  sincere  delight 

645  1794 

1.  In  all  my  behaviour,  I  try  to  do  well 
In  all  my  improvement  I'll  try  to  excel 

2.  May  I  govern  my  passions  with  absolute  sway 
And  grow  wiser  and  better  as  life  wers  away. 

Dr.  Walter  Pope.    "The  Old  Man's  Wish." 

646  1794 

"Virtue  outshines  the  stars,  outlives  the  tomb 
Climbs  up  to  heaven  and  finds  a  peaceful  home. 

Mr.  Pope." 

647  1795 

Count  that  day  lost  whose  low  descending  sun 
Views  from  thy  hand  no  worthy  action  done. 

Stamford's  Art  of  Reading.    3rd  Edition.    Boston.     1803. 

648  1795 

Let  virtue  inosence  and  truth  So  where  celistial  virtue  wind 

Bring  reward  to  sorry  youth  Form  an  incomparable  mind 

That  lerning  will  direct  the  mind  Crowns,  scepters,  beauties  choice  and  aire 

The  path  of  happiness  to  find.  Stand  out  as  shining  servents  there. 

649  Cir.  1795 

When  Virtue's  paths  do  first  appear 
They  lead  the  mind  to  be  sin  [cere] 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


337 


650 


1796 

Thrice  blest  is  he  who  through  lif  s  thorny  road 
Can  pass  with  pleasure  and  without  a  sigh 
Who  views  unmov'd  this  frailty  of  abode 
Who  lives  in  peace,  and  never  fears  to  die 
Who  craves  but  little,  and  but  little  wants 
Whose  aims  are  noble,  and  his  vices  few. 


651 

The  Daily  Labours  of  the  Bee 
Awake  my  Soul  to  Industry 


1796 


And  from  the  most  minute  and  mean 
A  virtuous  mind  can  morals  glean. 


652 

1.  Be  you  to  others  kind  and  true 
As  you  would  have  others  be  to  you 


1796 

2.  Nor  neither  do  nor  say  to  men 

What  you  are  unwilling  to  take  again 

Isaac  Watts.    Divine  Songs  for  Children. 


653 

Sweetly  blooms  the  rose  of  may 
Glitt'ring  with  the  tears  of  morn 


1796 


So  insideous  smiles  betray 

While  they  hide  the  treach'rous  thorn 


654 


1797 

Improve  thy  time 
Now  in  thy  prime 


655 

1.  I  envy  no  other  birth  nor  fame 
Their  little  train  or  dress 
Nor  have  my  pride  erestretch  its  aim 
Beyond  what  I  possess 


1797 

2.  I  ask  not,  wish  not  to  appear 
More  beauteous,  rich  or  gay 
Lord  make  me  wiser  every  year 
And  better  every  day 


656 

Sweet  the  roseate  breath  of  morn 
Sweet  the  blossom  of  the  thorn 
Sweet  the  incense  violets  raise 


1797 


Sweeter  far  the  breath  of  praise 
Sweet  and  useful  when  it  draws 
The  tender  mind  to  virtues  cause 


657 


1797 


Remark  this  truth,  enough  to  know 
Virtue  in  vouth,  is  bliss  below. 


Seek  virtue,  and  of  that  possest, 
To  Providence  resign  the  rest. 


658 


1797 

To  lead  the  tender  mind  to  virtue's  bower 
Pluck  out  the  weed  &  cultivate  the  flower 


338 

659 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

1797 

Reasons  whole  pleasure  all  the  Joys  of  sense 
Lie  in  three  wo[r]ds  health  peace  and  competence 
But  health  consists  with  temperance  alone 
And  peace  oh  Virtue  peace  is  all  thy  own. 

Alexander  Pope.    "Essay  on  Man."      Epistle  IV. 


Line  79. 


659a 


1798 

First  Follow  nature  and  you  Judgment  frame 
By  her  Just  standard,  which  is  still  the  same 

Art  from  that  fund  a  Just  suply  Provides 

Work  without  Show  and  without  PomP  Presides 


660  1798 

1.  Would  you  the  bloom  of  youth  should  last      2.  Time  which  all  things  else  removes 


Tis  virtue  that  must  bind  it  fast 


Still  heightens  virtue  and  improves. 


661 


1798 

How  empty  learning  And  how  vain  is  art 
But  as  it  mends  the  life  And  guides  the  heart 


662 

Virtue's  sacred  lamp  alone 
Unerring  points  the  way 


1798 


Where  happiness  forever  shines 
With  unpolluted  ray 


663 


1799 

Ye  heavens  from  high  the  dewy  nectar  pour, 
And  in  soft  silence,  shed  the  kindly  shower. 
The  sick  and  weak  the  healing  plant  shall  aid, 
From  storms  a  shelter  and  from  heat  a  shade 
All  crimes  shall  cease  and  ancient  fraud  shall  fail, 
Returning  justice  lift  aloft  her  scale. 
Peace  o'er  the  world  her  olive  wand  extend. 
And  white  rob'd  innocense  from  heav'n  descend. 


664 


1799 


thy  breast 


That  seat  of  soft  passion,  that  bosom  of  rest 


Where  every  bright  virtue  alternately  glows 
In  a  form  that  is  spotless  and  fair  as  my 
rose. 


665 


1799 

Youth  like  softened  wax  with  ease  will  take 
Those  images  that  first  impressions  make 
If  those  are  fair  their  actions  will  be  bright, 
If  foul,  they'll  clouded  be  with  shades  of  night. 


PLATE  CIV 

Sally  Johxsox's  Sa3ipij:r.     Newburyport,  Mass.     1799 

Owned  by  Mrs.  Francis  A.  Goodhue 

Plate  f  resented  by  Mrs.  Arthur  Crittenden  Smith 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


339 


Here  in  this  green  and  shady  bower 
Delicious  fruit  and  fragrant  flowers 


1799 


Virtue  shall  dwell  within  this  seat 
Virtue  alone  can  make  it  sweet 


667 

Youth's  a  s-t  scenei 
But  trust  her  not 


17- 


Her  minutes  fly 

More  swift  than  thought. 


668 

still  let  bright  virtue  shine  confest 
With  sweet  discretion  kind 


17- 


Let  mildness  calm  the  peaceful  breast 
And  wisdom  guide  the  mind. 


669 

Let  Virtue  be  thy  constant  guide 
And  truth  in  ev'ry  word  Preside 


1800 


Whilst  knowledge  gives  to  life  a  zest 
And  pure  religion  makes  thee  blest 


670 


1800 

The  little  ant  for  one  poor  grain 
Labours  &  tugs  &  strives 
But  we  who  have  a  Heaven  to  obtain 
(unfinished) 


671 


1800 

O  Praise  thy  language  was  by  Heaven  designed — 
As  manna  to  the  faint  bewildered  mind, 
Beauty  and  diflBdence  whose  hearts  rejoice — 
In  the  kind  comfort  of  thy  heavenly  voice. 
In  this  wild  wood  of  life  wert  thou  not  nigh 
Must  like  the  wandering  babes  lie  down  and  die. 
But  thy  sweet  accents  wake  new  vital  powers 
And  make  this  thorny  path  a  path  of  flowers 


672 


ODE 

Come  peace  of  mind  delightful  guest 
Return  and  make  thy  downy  nest 
Once  more  in  this  sad  heart 
Nor  riches  I  nor  Power  Pursue 
Nor  hold  forbidden  Joys  in  view 
We  therefore  need  not  Part 
Where  wilt  thou  dwell  if  not  with  me 
From  avarice  and  ambition  free 
And  Pleasure's  fatal  wiles 
*  Youth  is  a  shadow. 


1800 

TO  PEACE 

For  whom  also  dost  thou  prepare 

The  sweets  that  I  was  wont  to  share 

The  banquet  of  thy  smiles 

For  thee  I  Panted  for  thee  I  Prized 

For  thee  I  gladly  sacrificed 

What  ere  I  loved  before 

And  shall  I  see  thee  start  away 

And  helpless  hopeless  hear  thee  say 

Fareweel  we  meet  no  more 


340  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

673  1800 

THE  HERMIT 

1.  At  the  close  of  the  day  when  the  hamlet  is  still 
And  mortals  the  sweet  of  forgetfulness  prove 
When  naught  but  tlie  torrent  is  heard  on  the  hill 
And  nought  but  the  nightingale's  song  in  the  grove 
Twas  then  by  the  cave  of  the  mountain  afar 

The  hermit  his  song  of  the  night  thus  began 
No  more  with  himself  or  with  nature  at  war 
He  thought  as  a  sage  while  he  felt  as  a  man 

2.  Oh  why  thus  abandon  to  darkness  and  woe 
Why  thus  to   .  .   .   flows  thy  sad  strain 

For  spring  shall  return  and  a  favor  bestow 
And  no  trace  of  misfortune  thy  bosom  retain. 
See  truth,  love  and  mercy  in  triumph  descending 
And  nature  aU  glowing  in  Edens  first  bloom 
On  the  cold  cheek  of  death  smiles  and  roses  are  blending 
And  beauty  immortal  awakes  from  the  tomb, 
(last  lines  of  6th  verse) 
Can  be  found  in  "The  Songster's  Companion."    Brattleboro,  Vt.     1815. 

No  author  given.    Another  book  gives  the  author  as  "Beattie.'- 

G74  1801 

Candour  enrobed  in  spotless  white  appears 
Around  her  head  a  fragrant  wreath  she  wears 
Indulgence  uniformly  marks  her  reign 
While  information  mingles  in  her  train 
And  as  the  spark  of  genius  brightning  glows 
The  weed  of  merit  gladly  she  bestows. 

675  1801 

AN  ACROSTIC  TO  MISS  ANNA  SANDERS 
A  virtuous  life  is  surely  worth  So  Anna  you  should  lead  j^our  life 

No  small  expense  or  care  And  always  keep  in  view 

Nor  is  the  Ruby  so  Esteemd  Never  from  virtue  to  depart 

As  virtuous  persons  are  Delightful  is  its  due 

Even  in  youth  be  this  thy  care 
Religion  always  to  revere 
So  that  its  Blessing  you  may  share 
"To  Miss  Anna  Sanders  by  her  very  affectionate  friend  Luther  Bayer' 

676  1802 

THE  CONTRAST 

1.  Virtue  alone  has  that  to  give  2.  Now  Vice  can  only  that  supply 

Which  makes  it  worth  our  while  to  live  Which  makes  it  pain  to  live  or  die 

For  if  we  live  our  life  in  peace  For  if  we  live  tis'  pain  tomorrow 

And  if  we  die  our  joys  increase.  And  if  we  die  tis'  endless  sorrow. 


^      X    X    ^ 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  341 

677  1802 

Let  virtue  guide  your  mind  to  rest 
The  Innocent  alone  are  truly  blest 

678  1802 

Be  sovereign  grace  the  guardian  of  my  youth, 
May  Heaven-born  virtue  in  mj"  breast  preside. 
While  Wisdom,  honour,  innocence  and  truth. 
Attend  my  steps,  and  all  my  actions  guide. 

679  1803 

Happy  the  youth  who  always  treads  There  seasons  no  more  run  their  round 

Fair  virtues  path  which  upward  leads  But  constant  verdure  clothes  the  ground 

To  climes  beyond  the  sky,  And  air  breathes  love  and  joy 

680  1803 

1.  Virtue  not  rolling  suns  the  mind  matures 

2.  Happy  the  soul  that  virtue  shows 
To  fit  the  place  of  her  repose 
Needless  to  mo^-^e  for  she  can  dwell 
In  her  own  Grandsire's  Hall  as  well 
Virtue  that  never  loves  to  roam 
And  easy  on  a  native  throne 

Of  humble  turf  sits  gently  down. 

681  1804 

Peace  thou  white  rob'd  child  of  light  Still  attend  thy  sylvan  reign 

Thine  is  every  softer  scene  Whene'er  thou  deign'st  to  be  the  guest 

Young  eyed  pleasure  gay  delight 

682  1804 

PROCRASTINATION 

Be  wise  today  'tis  madness  to  defer  Thus  on  till  wisdom  is  pushed  out  of  life 

Next  day  the  fatal  precedent  will  plead  Procrastination  is  the  thief  of  Time. 

Edward  Young.    "Night  Thoughts."    Night  I. 

683  1804 

I  choose  the  path  of  heav'nly  truth  Not  all  the  riches  of  the  earth 

And  glory  in  my  choice  Could  make  me  so  rejoice 

684  1804 

How  Great  The  Blessing  And  How  Vast  The  Art 
To  Live  On  Little  With  A  Thankful  Heart. 

685  1804 

Be  my  Ambition  only  to  exceU 

In  the  blest  art,  the  art  of  doing  weU. 


342 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


686 


1805 

She  fares  the  best  whose  every  virtuous  deed 
With  truth  is  registered  in  realms  above 
Eternal  happiness  shall  be  her  need 
Crowned  by  the  blessing  of  th'  Almightys  love. 


687 


1805 

Oh  innocence  protect  my  youth 
And  guide  me  in  the  paths  of  truth. 


688 

Virtue's  the  friend  of  life 
The  soul  of  health 


1805 


The  poor  mans  comfort 
And  the  rich  man's  wealth. 


689 

Quite  equal  to  our  Being's  aim 
The  space  to  virtue  given 


1805 


And  every  minute  well  improved 
Secures  an  age  in  Heaven. 


690 


1805 

Let  us  suppose  the  virtuous  mind  a  rose, 
Which  nature  plants  and  education  blows 


691 


1805 

Let  virtue  prove  your  never  fading  bloom, 
For  mental  beauty  will  survive  the  tomb 


692 


693 


William  Cowper. 


1805 

The  only  amaranthine  flower  on  earth 

Is  virtue:  The  only  lasting  treasure — truth 

1805 

1.  What  is  the  blooming  tincture  of  the  skin 
To  peace  of  mind  and  harmony  within 
Or  the  bright  sparkling  of  the  finest  eye 
To  the  soft  soothing  of  a  calm  reply 

2.  Can  comliness  of  form  or  shape  or  air. 
With  comliness  of  words  or  deeds  compare. 
No.  those  at  first  the  unwary  heart  may  gain, 
But  these,  these  only  can  the  heart  retain. 

Nathaniel  Low's  Almanack. 


I8O4. 


694  1806 

Oh  may  our  follies  like  the  falling  trees  Then  when  old  age  life's  winter  shall  appear 


Be  stripped  ev'ry  leaf  by  autumn's  wind 
May  ev'ry  branch  of  vice  embrace  the  breeze 
And  nothing  leave  but  virtue's  fruit  behind 


In  conscious  hope  all  future  ills  we'll  brave 
With  fortitud  our  disillusion  bear 
And  sink  forgotten  in  the  silent  grave. 


PLATE  CVI 

SuKEY  Makepeace's  Sampler.     1750 
The  Emma  B.  Hodge  Collection 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


343 


695 


1806 

Let  virtue  heavenly  maid  your  steps  attend 
Through  lifes  perplexing  scenes  your  constant  friend 
While  smiling  hope  will  gently  point  the  way 
And  smooth  the  path  which  leads  to  endless  day 


696 

Ever  faithful  ever  kind, 

Firm  and  gen'rous  be  thy  mind. 

Vice  a  stranger  in  thine  heart 


1806 


Virtue  there  a  constant  guest 

Health  and  friendship  crown  your  days 


697 

Milder  than 


May  piety  my  power  refine 


1806 


And  like  yon  rising  orb  of  day 
May  virtue  guide  my  dubious  way. 


698 


1806 

Scarce  an  ill  to  human  life  belongs 
But  what  our  follies  cause  or  mutual  wrongs 
Or  if  some  stripes  from  providence  we  feel 
He  strikes  with  pitty  and  but  wounds  to  heal 


699 


1806 

While  education  cultivates  the  mind 
May  sacred  virtue  lead  to  joj^s  refined. 


700 


1807 

Virtue  is  the  chiefest  beauty  of  the  mind 
The  noblest  ornament  of  hvmian  kind, 
Virtue  is  our  safeguard  and  our  guiding  star, 
That  stirs  up  true  reason  when  our  senses  err. 


701  1807 

May  virtue  o'er  our  steps  preside 
[Possession^]   prove  your  constant  bride 


In  Heavenly  endels  [angels]  point  the  way 
To  blissful  realms  of  perfect  day. 


702 


1807 

Merit  should  be  forever  plac'd 

In  Knowledge  Judgement  Wit  and  Taste. 


703 


'  Illegible. 


1807 

While  beauty  and  pleasure  are  now  in  their  prime 
And  folly  and  fashion  expect  our  whole  time 
Oh  let  not  those  Phantoms  our  wishes  engage 
Let  us  live  so  in  youth  that  we  blush  not  in  age 


34,4 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


2.  Tho  the  vain  and  the  gay  may  attend  us  a  while, 
Yet  let  not  their  flattery  our  prudence  beguile; 
Let  us  covet  those  charms  that  will  never  decay, 
Nor  listen  to  all  that  deceivers  can  say. 

3.  I  sigh  not  for  beauty  or  languish  for  wealth 
But  grant  me  kind  Providence  virtue  and  health 
Then  richer  than  kings,  and  as  happy  as  they 
My  days  shall  pass  sweetly  and  swiftly  away. 


704 

Thro'  Life  be  this  resolve  pursued 
What'er  thy  lot  may  be 
To  act  with  perfect  rectitude 
And  keep  a  conscience  free 


1807 


Hope  not  thy  happiness  to  find 
Abroad,  but  homeward  bend 
And  always  let  thy  peace  of  mind 
Upon  thyself  depend. 


705 


1807 

Virtue  hath  secret  charm  Which  all  men  love 
And  those  that  do  not  choose  her,  yet  approve. 


706 

The  mind,  prepar'd  for  each  event. 
In  every  state  maintains  content 


1808 


She  hopes  the  best  when  storms  prevail 
Nor  trusts  too  far  the  prosperous  gale. 


707 

It  is  neatness  points  the  dart 
And  virtue  guides  it  to  the  heart 


1808 


Let  neatness  then  and  virtue  strive 
To  keep  a  wavering  flame  alive. 


708 


1808 

Of  aU  the  sorrows  that  attend  mankind 
With  patience  bear  the  lot  to  thee  assign 
Nor  think  it  chance,  nor  murmur  at  the  Load, 
that  man  calls  fortune,  if  [it  comes]  from  God. 


709 

By  Virtue  ripened  from  the  bud 
The  flower [s]  angelic  odors  breathe. 


1808 


The  fragrant  charm  of  being  good 
Makes  gaudy  vice  to  smell  like  weeds- 


710 

No  worth  is  so  esteemed 
As  virtue  in  the  fair 

Nor  diamond  shine  so  bright 
Celestial  pure  and  clear 

Your  practice  then  in  youth 


1808 


Be  sure  to  order  so 

always  shaU  ensure 
Kindness  to  friend  and  foe 
Ever  respect  all  virtue  laws 
Respect  it  brings  and  gains  applause 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


345 


711 

In  family  happiness  we  find 
Industry  and  virtue  joined 
This  early  specimen  in  rhyme 
Shows  that  my  hands  to  work  incline 


1809 


My  heart  to  goodness  may  it  tend 
Relieve  the  poor  console  the  friend 
And  thus  in  virtue  shine 


712 


1809 


When  virtue  guides  the  youthful  mind 
How    pleasing    to    behold 


Beau[ty]  and  innocence  combined 
With  [         ]  more  bright  than  gold 


713 


714 


1809 

May  virtue  be  my  only  guard. 
And  heaven  at  last  my  sure  reward. 
Then  i  shall  always  happy  be 

1809 

Indulge  the  true  Ambition  to  excel 

In  that  best  Art,  the  Art  of  living  weU. 


715 

All  our  gaiety  is  vain 

All  our  laughter  is  but  pain 

716 

May  I  with  innocence  and  peace 
My  tranquil  moments  spend 


1809 


Only  lasting  and  divine 
Is  an  innocence  like  thine. 


1810 


And  when  the  toils  of  life  shall  cease 
With  calmness  meet  my  end. 


717 


1810 

To  feel  undeserving  of  friendly  esteem 

Is  the  worst  of  all  evils  below 

We  may  suffer  from  pain  but  he  sings  of  remorse 

Is  the  heaviest  grief  one  can  know 


718 


1803 


Happy  the  woman  who  can  find 
Constant  resources  in  her  mind 
Thrice  happy  she  whose  chief  enjoyment 
Is  placed  in  regular  employment 
She  for  amusement  need  not  roam 


Her  pleasure  centres  in  her  home 
And  when  the  spring  of  life  is  o'er 
She  still  enjoys  the  sacred  store 
Which  youth  should  seek  and  value  most 
And  when  once  gain'd  can  ne'er  be  lost 


720 


1810 

THE  TEAR  OF  SYMPATHY 

No  radiant  pearl  which  crested  fortune  wears 
No  gem  that  sparkling  hangs  from  beauties  ears 
Nor  the  bright  stars  which  nights  blue  arch  adorn 
Nor  rising  sun  that  gild  the  vernal  morn. 
Shines  with  such  lustre  as  the  tear  that  breaks, 
For  others  woe  down  virtues  lovely  cheeks. 


346  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

721  Cir.  1810 

Virtue  alone  has  that  to  give  But  vice  can  only  that  supply 

Which  makes  it  joy  to  die  or  live  Which  makes  it  vain  to  live  or  die. 

(See  also  No.  676) 

722  1810 

Virtue  and  wit,  with  science  join'd  And  when  with  industry  they  meet 

Refine  the  manners,  form  the  mind  The  female  character's  complete. 

723  1810 

EXTRACT. 

Virtue  the  strength  and  beauty  of  the  soul 

Is  the  best  gift  of  Heaven;  a  happiness 

That  ever  above  the  smiles  and  frowns  of  fate. 

Exalts  great  Nature's  favorites ;  it  is  the  only  good 

Man  justly  boasts  of,  or  can  call  his  own. 

724  1811 

In  youth  improve  your  tender  mind  Pursue  the  paths  of  truth  and  love 

Let  virtue  be  with  knowledge  join'd  And  you'll  arrive  to  bliss  above 

725  1811 

See  truth,  love  and  mercy  in  triumph  descending 
And  nature  all  glowing  in  edens  first  bloom 
On  the  cold  cheek  of  death  smiles  and  roses  are  blending 
And  beauty  immortal  awakes  from  the  tomb. 

725a  1811 

O!  lost  to  virtue,  lost  to  manly  thought 
Lost  to  the  noble  saUies  of  the  Soul 
Who  think  it  solitude  to  be  alone. 

726  1811 

I  live  in  a  cottage  &  yonder  it  stands 

And  while  I  can  work  with  these  two  honest  hands 

I'm  as  happy  as  those  that  liave  houses  and  lands. 

727  1811 

Virtue's  a  flower  which  ne'er  will  fade  Make  her  your  friend,  seek  her  in  time 

It  buds  in  youth  and  blooms  in  age.  Then  all  true  joys  of  life  are  thine. 

728  1811 

Loveliness  needs  no  ornament 

But  is  when  unadorned,  adorned  the  most 


PLATE  CVII 


Jaxe  Mehritt's  Saimpi.f.r.     1803 

Nine  Partners"  Boarding  Sciiool,  New  York 

Owned  bij  Mrs.  James  Rlvhardsdn 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


347 


729 


1812 

Oh  that  important  time  could  back  return 
Those  mispent  hours  whose  loss  I  deeply  mourn 
Accept  kind  heaven  my  penitence  sincere 
My  heartfelt  sorrow  and  my  fervent  prayer. 


730 


1812 

In  its  true  life  this  transient  life  regard 

A  state  of  trial  only  not  reward; 

Though  rough  the  passage  peaceful  is  the  port 

The  bliss  is  perfect  the  probation  short. 


731 


1812 

Beauties  like  princes  from  their  very  youth 
Are  perfect  strangers  to  the  voice  of  truth. 


732 

1.  Were  innocence  our  garb  alone, 
And  natures  blooms  our  only  pride. 
The  needle  still  had  been  unknown 
and  worth  the  want  of  art  supplied. 


1812 

2.  Virtue  wit  with  science  join'd 
Refine  the  manners  form  the  mind. 
And  when  with  industry  they  meet, 
the  female  character  is  complete. 
(See  also  No.  722) 


733 


Thou  canst  not  steal  the  roses  bloom 
To  decorate  thy  face 
But  the  sweet  blush  of  modesty 
Will  lend  an  equal  grace. 


1812 

2.  Now  in  the  opening  spring  of  Life 
Let  every  floweret  bloom 
The  budding  virtues  in  thy  breast 
Shall  yield  the  best  perfume. 


734 


1812-14 

With  Pleasure  Let  us  own  our  errors  past 
And  make  each  day  a  critic  on  the  last. 


735 


1813 

On  virtues  chains 
hangs  heavenly  gains 


730 

The  flowers  the  path  of  life  adorn 
Yet  often  will  the  rugged  thorn 
Amidst  the  flowers  arise: 


1813 


Think  not  then  on  earth  to  share 
Enjoj-ment  unallied  with  care 
But  seek  it  in  the  skies. 


737 

I>et  no  revenge  inflame  my  heart 
No  anger  sieze  my  mind 


1813 


But  let  me  have  a  christian  part 
Toward  God  and  all  mankind. 


348 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


738 

Riches  lasting  may  you  share 
Innocence  and  virtue  rare 

739 

The  traveler  if  he  chance  to  stray 
May  turn  uncensored  to  his  way 
Polluted  streams  again  are  pure, 

741 


Cir.  1813 

Courteous  manners  void  of  art 
Emblems  of  the  pure  in  heart 


1813 


The  deepest  wounds  admit  a  cure, 
But  woman  no  redemption  knows, 
The  wounds  of  honor  never  close. 


1813 


When  Nature  sheds  her  beauties  rare 
Oer  tree  and  shrub,  plant  and  gay  parterre 
Mark  how  the  bee  employs  each  hour 
Extracting  sweets  from  every  flower 
So  gentle  maid  while  youth  shall  last 
Eer  the  gay  morn  of  life  is  past 
Select  each  sweet  with  care  and  art 


To  store  the  head  and  mend  the  heart 
Happy  the  woman  who  can  find 
Constant  amusement  in  her  mind 
Thrice  happy  she  whose  chief  enjoyment 
Is  placed  in  regular  employment 
In  works  of  genius,  use  or  taste 
Nor  lets  one  moment  run  to  waste. 


742 

Oh  never  let  my  youthful  breast 
With  angry  passions  frought 

743 

Let  every  rising  hour  bring 
Some  useful  lesson  on  its  wing 


1814 


Let  malice  dark  its  peace  infest 
By  one  revengeful  thought 


1814 


Let  every  moment  as  it  flies 
Record  you  good  as  well  as  wise 


744 


745 


746 


1814 

Hail  memory,  hail;  in  thy  exhaustless  mine. 
From  age  to  age  unnumber'd  treasures  shine. 
Thought  and  her  shadowy  brood  thy  calls  obey. 
And  Place  and  time  are  subject  to  thy  sway. 

1814 

With  passions  unruffled,  untainted  with  pride 
By  reason  my  life  let  me  square 
The  wants  of  my  nature  are  cheaply  supplied 
And  the  rest  are  but  folly  and  care 

How  vainly  through  infinite  trouble  and  strife 

The  many  their  labours  employ 

Since  all  that  is  truly  delightful  in  life 

Is  what  all  if  they  please  may  enjoy. 

1814 

As  yet  lis  mid  night,  deep.  The  Weary,  clouds 

Slow  meeting  mingle  into  solid  gloom 

Now  while  the  drowsy  lies  lost  in  sleep 

Let  me  associate  with  serious  night 

And  contimplate  the  sedate  compeer; 

Let  me  shake  off  the  intrusive  cares  of  day 

And  lay  the  meddling  senses  all  aside 


S: 


^: 


^ 


'1 


PLATE  CVIII 

Naxcy  Baker's  Sampler.     Warren,  R.  I.     1808 
Owned  by  Thomas  W.  Aldrich 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


349 


747 


1814 

Beauty  makes  virtue  lovelier  still  appear. 
Virtue  makes  beauty  more  divinely  fair. 


748 

Let  Virtue  be  your  guide 
Religion  be  your  friend 


1815 


Then   Mary  you  shall  glide 
In  safety  to  life's  end. 


749 

By  care  alone  we  can  attain 

The  Age  which  slowly  here  we  gain 


1815 


Then  be  resolv'd  what  so  much  cost 
By  Indolence  shall  ne'er  be  lost 


750 

May   tenderness    thy    bosom    warm 
And  sorrow  flow  at  other's  harm 


1816 


May    prudence    every    act    attend 
And   virtue   be   thy   constant   friend. 


751 


1816 

The  Pink  will  fade  the  tulip  wither 
But  a  virtuous  mind  will  bloom  forever 


752 


1817 

May  happy  hours,  that  roll  through  golden  days 
Repressing  every  sad  exciting  praise 
Be  thine,  'till  that  fair  hour  when  all  prepared 
Angels  shall  lead  thee  to  a  bright  abode. 


753 


1817 


O  resignation  heavenly  power 
Our  warmest  thoughts   engage 
Tliou  art  the  safest  guide  of  youth 
The  sole  support  of  age 


Teach  us  the  hand  of  love  divine 
In  evils  to  discern 
'Tis  the  first  lesson  which  we  need 
The  latest  which  we  learn 


754 


1817 


"With  Gentle  hand  your  daughters  train 
The  Housewifes  various  art  to  gain 
Or  scenes  domestic  to  preside 
The  needle  wheel  and   shuttle   guide 

755 

Believe  not  each  aspersing  tongue 
As  most  week  persons  do 

756 

How  blest  is  she  among  the  fair. 
By  gentlest  stars  inclined, 
Who  cherishes  with  love  sincere, 
The   virtues  of   the  mind. 


On  Things  of  use  to  Fix  the  Heart 
And  gild  with  every  graceful  art 
Teach  them  with  neatest  simplest  dress 
A  neat  and  Lovely  Mind  to  express 


1817 


But  still  believe  the  story  wrong 
Which  ought  not  to  be  true. 


1818 


For  these  shall  live  when  others  die, 
And  cease  the  heart  to  warm. 
Prove  sweeter  than  the  sweetest  eye. 
And  more  than  beauty  charm. 


350 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


757  1818 

My  care,  my  hope,  my  first  request 
Are  all  compris'd  in  this 

758  1818 

No  longer  I  follow  a  sound 
No  longer  a  dream  I  pursue 


To  follow  where  the  Saints  have  led 
And  then  partake  their  bliss. 


O  happiness  now  to  be  found 
Unattainable  treasure  Adieu 


759 


1818 

Plant  in  thy  breast  oh  lovely  youth 

The  seed  of  virtue  love  and  truth 

They  charm  and  bloom  when  beautv  fades. 


760 

O  may  their  natal  morn 
Be  register'd  in  Heaven, 

761 

In  lifes  gay  morn  what  vivid  hues 
Adorn  the  animating  views 
By  flattering  fancies  drawn 


After  1818 

And  they  this  life  adorn. 
With  every  blessing  given. 


1819 


No  storms  with  gloomy  aspects  rise 
To  cloud  the  azure  of  the  skies 
No  mists  obscure  the  dawn. 


762  1820 

AN  EXTRACT 

By  love  directed  and  in  mercy  meant 
Are  trials  suffer'd  and  afflictions  sent 
To  stem  impetuous  passions  furious  tide 
To  curb  the  insolence  of  prosperous  pride 
To  wean  from  Earth  and  bid  our  wishes  soar 
To  that  best  clime  where  pain  shall  be  no  more. 

763  1821 

Fair  virtue,  industn,',  and  truth  combined 
Adorn  and  elevate  the  female  mind 

764  1821 

Convince  the  world  that  you  are  just  and  true 
Be  just  in  all  you  say  and  all  you  do 

What  soever  be  your  birth  your  sure  to  be 
A  man  of  the  first  Magnitude  to  me. 

765  1821 

Learn  little  maid  each  useful  art  I^arn  to  improve  thy  tender  heart 

Which  may  adorn  thy  youth  In  virtue  peace  and  truth 

Tho  age  must  show  that  life's  best  pursuits  are  vain, 
And  few  the  pleasures  to  be  here  enjoyed: 
Yet  may  this  work  a  pleasing  proof  remain 
Of  youth's  gay  period  usefullj'  employed 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


351 


766 


1821 

If  happiness  be  your  pursuit 
Plane  virtue  and  contents  the  fruit. 


767 


768 


769 


770 


1821 

O  Modesty !  dear  friend  of  truth  revive  your  honoured  day 
Without  you  all  the  charms  of  youth  and  beauty  lose  their  sway 

1821 

Ye  when  forcd  wishes  do  to  heaven  aspire 
Who  made  those  blest  abodes  their  souls  desire 
If  you  are  wise  and  hope  that  bliss  to  gain 
Use  well  your  time  spend  not  an  hour  in  vain 
Let  not  tomorrow  your  vain  thoughts  employ 
But  think  this  day  the  last  you  shall  enjoy 

1822 

HAPPINESS 
Remember  man,  the  Universal  Cause 
Acts  not  by  partial,  but  by  general  law[s] 
And  makes  what  happiness  we  justly  call 
Subsist  not  in  the  good  of  one  but  all, 
There's  not  a  blessing  individuals  find 
But  some  way  leans  and  hearkens  to  the  kind 
No  bandit  fierce,  no  tyrant  mad  with  pride 
No  caverned  hermit  rest  all  satisfied. 
Who  most  to  shun  or  hate  mankind  pretend, 
Seek  an  admirer,  or  would  fix  a  friend, 
Each  has  his  share  and  who  would  more  obtain 
Shall  find  the  pleasure  pays  not  half  the  pain. 

Alexander  Pope.    Essay  on  Man.    Epistle  IV. 

1822 

How  various  her  employments  whom  the  world 

Calls  idle  and  who  justly  in  return 

Esteems  that  busy  world  an  idler  too 

Friends,  books,  her  needle  and  perhaps  her  pen, 

Delightful  industry  enjoyed  at  home. 

Can  she  want  occupation  who  has  these? 


771 

Virtue  has  a  thousand  Charms 
Which  vice  can  seldom  see 

772 

Source  of  wisdom  I  implore. 
Thy  aid  to  guide  me  safely  o'er. 
The  slippery  path  of  youth. 


1823 


Till  beckoned  by  the  hand  of  death 
Then  vice  would  virtue  be. 


1823 


O  deign  to  lend  a  steady  ray. 

To  point  the  sure  the  certain  way. 

To  honor  and  to  truth 


352 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


773 

May  virtue  in  your  heart  preside 
May  prudence  all  your  actions  guide 


1823 


May  peace  attend  your  future  hours 

May  love  your  pathway  strew  with  flowers. 


774 

Make  an  unguarded  youth 
The  object  of  thy  care 


1823 


Help  me  to  choose  the  way  of  truth 
And  fly  from  every  snare 


775 

1.  We  are  a  garden  walled  around, 
chosen  and  made  peculiar  ground 
A  little  spot  inclosed  by  grace, 
Out  of  the  worlds  wild  wilderness, 


1823 

3.  Awake  O  heavenly  wind  and  come, 
blow  on  this  garden  of  perfume. 
Spirit  divine  decend  and  breathe, 
a  gracious  gale  on  plants  beneath ! 


Isaac  Watts.    Hymns  and  Spiritual  Songs.    LXXIV.     Verses  1  and  3. 


776 

The  blessings  first  of  Heaven  sent 
Nor  trust  your  youthful  heart 


1824 


You  must  Divine  assistance  have 
To  act  a  prudent  part. 


777 

Virtue,  soft  balm  of  every  woe. 
Of  every  gift  the  cure, 


1824 


'Tis  thou  alone  that  canst  bestow 
Pleasures  unmix'd  and  pure. 


778 


1824 

No  other  care  than  this  I  knew 

But  perseverance  brought  me  through. 


779 

Life  is  a  gift  by  Heaven  bestowed 
And  if  we  rightly  use  the  boon 
It  is  indeed  a  pleasant  road 
That  leads  us  to  a  blissful  home 


1825 


And  though  some  rugged  steeps  we  find 
For  our  refinement  doubtless  given 
Yet  resignation  gives  the  mind 
A  blessed  e'en  of  Heaven. 


780 

I  will  my  youthful  mind  improve 
In  all  that's  good  admire  and  love 


1825 


At  Virtue's  throne  my  homage  pay 
And  tread  the  path  to  everlasting  day 


781 


We'll  therefore  relish  with  content 
What'er  kind  Providence  has  sent, 
Nor  aim  bevond  our  Pow'r 


1826 


For  if  our  stock  be  very  small 
'Tis  Prudence  to  enjoy  it  all 
Nor  lose  the  Present  hour. 


782 


1826 

Let  virtue  guide  this  docile  mind 
And  to  my  heart  its  image  bind. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  353 

783  1826 

Virtue  is  amiable,  mild,  serene 
Without  all  beauty  &  all  peace  within 

784.  1826 

Let  meek-eyed  innocence  her  sceptre  sway  Thus  Mary  at  ten  years  will  prove 

And  teach  each  wayward  passion  to  obey  A  rich  possession  of  unwed  love. 

Refining  every  grace  her  lustre  shines  Justly  reward  her  parents  anxious  care 

The  brightest  ornament  of  female  minds.  And  the  blest  fruit  herself  will  doubly  share. 

785  1826 

To  temper'd  wishes,  just  desires,  is  happiness  confin'd. 
And  deaf  to  folly's  call,  attends  the  musics  of  the  mind. 

786  1826 

While  through  this  fleeting  life's  short  various  day 
An  humble  pilgrim  here  I  plod  my  way 
May  no  ambitious  dreams  delude  my  mind 
Impatience  hence  be  far  &  far  be  pride 
Whate'er  my  lot  on  Heaven's  kind  care  reclined 
Be  Piety  my  comfort  Faith  my  guide. 

787  1826 

[THE  LILY  OF  THE  VALLEY] 

'Tis  not  Beauty  that  we  prize  But  humility  will  last 

Like  a  Summer  flower  it  dies  Fair  and  Sweet  where  beauty  ['s]   past. 

This  can  be  found  in  a  small  collection  of  "Poems  for  Children," 

printed  and  sold  by  Jesse  Cochran.    1815.     Windsor,  Vt. 

788  1827 

Tirza  I  have  you  near  my  heart  O  may  you  never  from  grace  depart 

I  have  you  in  my  mind  But  be  to  virtue's  sway  inclined. 

789  1827 

Hopes  vivid  beams  the  fancy  clears  Smiles  through  the  wilderness  of  trees 

As  down  the  slopes  of  ills  we  stray  The  sunshine  of  a  brighter  day 

790  1827 

When  beautys  charms  decay  as  soon  they  must 
And  all  its  glories  humbled  in  the  dust 
The  virtuous  mind  beyond  the  reach  of  time 
Shall  ever  blossom  in  a  happier  clime 

791  1828 

Let  all  my  vices  be  subdued 
Replace  them  Lord  with  gratitude 

792  1828 

The  morning  sun  begins  the  day  So  virtue  doth  her  beams  display 

And  warms  all  natures  face  And  fill  the  mind  with  grace. 


354 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


793 


794 


795 


1828 

Virtue  should  guard  the  tender  fair 
From  man's  deceptive  flattering  snare 

1828 

Whilst  in  the  morning  of  your  days 

Renounce  the  world  and  sinful  ways 

For  learning  ardently  aspire 

And  may  virtue  be  your  first  and  great  desire. 

1828 

Auspicious  Hope  in  thy  sweet  garden  grow 
Wreaths  for  each  toil  a  charm  for  every  woe! 


796 


Let  no  one  in  tears  pass  my  cot 
To  whom  I  can  render  relief 


Before  1830 

But  may  I  make  happy  their  lot 
And  dry  up  the  source  of  their  grief. 


796a 


1829 

From  purity  of  heart  all  pleasure  springs 
And  from  an  humble  spirit  all  our  peace 


797 


A  WISH 
Heaven  Grant  me  this  The  utmost  that  I  crave 
Tis  to  enjoy  the  good  of  what  I  have 
Accept  my  fortune  either  Good  or  bad 
And  be  content  not  say  if  I  had  had 
With  less  than  this  no  happiness  we  know 
And  more  than  this  the  world  cannot  bestow. 


798 


The  modest  snowdrop  emblem  of  fair  truth 
Convey  this  lesson  to  the  thoughtless  youth 


That  unassuming  worth  will  ever  find 
A  warm  reception  in  a  generous  mind. 


799 


While  through  lifes  various  scenes  I  stray 
May  virtuous  friendship  clear  my  way 


May  wisdom  strew  my  paths  with  flowers 
And  blessings  crown  ray  fleeting  Hours 


800 

Yesterdays  past  tomorrows  not  thine, 
today  thy  life  to  virtuous  arts  incline 


delight  virtue  vice  be  sure  to  shun 

Shes  happy  that  a  virtuous  race  doth  run. 


The  accuracy  of  these  verses  is  due  to  the  great  care  and 
interest  of  Miss  Evelyn  M.  Coker,  who  copied  and  filed  them 


^.»c»£FG3esi-^^.iao£S 


C33' 


F^ 


*iC '« 


*►  «' 


%^^ 


\^     XS^ 


PLATE  CIX 

Mary  Russell's  Sampler.     1784 

The  Emma  B.  Uod(/e  Collection 

Plate  presented  by  the  Illinois  Society  of  the  Colonial  Dames 


SCHOOLS  AND  SCHOOLMISTRESSES 

"One  did  Commend  me  to  a  Wife  Fair  and  Young 
Who  had  French,  Spannish  and  Italian  Tongue. 

I  thank'ed  him  Kindly  and  Told  him  I  love'd  none  such 
For  I  thought  one  tongue  for  a  Wife  too  much. 

'What  love  ye  not  the  Larned?'    Yes,  as  my  Life 
A  Learned  scholar,  but  not  a  Larned  Wife!" 


THIS  Lydia  Kneeland  laboriously  embroidered  upon  her  sam- 
pler in  1743,  in  the  Athens  of  America.  She  herself  did  not 
belong  to  the  unlearned  classes,  for  her  brother  married  the 
daughter  of  President  Holyoke,  of  Harvard  College,  and  so  she  must 
have  echoed  the  sentiment  of  the  time. 

It  seems  to  have  been  true  throughout  the  Colonial  life  that  the  girls 
were  never  considered  worth  educating,  except  in  the  "graces."  From 
Massachusetts  south,  there  never  seems  to  be  any  question  during  the 
first  century  of  our  country's  life  that  the  boy  must  be  educated;  so 
grammar  schools,  Latin  schools,  and  colleges  grew  up.  In  fact,  one 
writer  savs  frankly  that,  at  least  in  Massachusetts,  the  break  with  the 
past  hardly  existed,  and  that  the  earliest  New  England  schools  were 
best  studied  in  Old  England.  This  is  also  true  in  a  large  measure  of 
the  schools  in  Xew  Jersey  after  the  advent  of  the  Scotch  and  English. 
The  Swedes  had  founded  a  school  at  Bergen  in  1664,  but  were  not 
very  energetic  about  founding  more. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  write  a  history  of  education  in  the  Colonies, 
but  as  no  history  of  the  education  of  girls  is  available,  and  as  nearly  all 
the  samplers  which  have  come  down  to  us  were  probably  made  in  the 
schools  of  the  period,  it  may  be  interesting  to  know  just  how  each  of 
the  Colonies  met  the  situation. 

The  records  of  New  Hampshire  schools  are  very  meager,  and 
we  find  that  "no  public  provision  for  any  regular  school  for  the  edu- 
cation of  females"  had  been  made  up  to  1815.  That  date  approxi- 
mately marks  the  awakening  of  all  the  states  to  the  claims  of  girls  for 

355 


356  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

an  education  such  as  a  boy  had  received  for  some  time.  We  are  assured 
that  New  Hampshire  had  had  good  private  schools  for  girls  since  the 
Revolution,  though  the  first  mentioned  is  that  of  Mrs.  Montague,  in 
Portsmouth,  who  had  a  private  school  for  a  year  and  a  half,  beginning 
in  1784.  The  samplers  themselves  give  us  two  other  Portsmouth 
schools.  In  1802,  Mrs.  Ward  had  as  her  pupil  Sarah  Catherine 
Moffat  Odiorne,  whose  ancestors  had  built  the  "Manor  House"  on 
Odiorne's  Point,  the  first  house  in  New  Hampshire.  Who  Mrs.  Ward 
was  we  have  no  means  of  knowing,  nor  do  we  know  who  INIary  E.  Hill 
was  who  taught  a  school  in  Portsmouth,  in  1810,  when  Sarah  Fitz- 
Gerald  worked  a  sampler.     (See  Plate  xcviii.) 

Massachusetts,  which  of  course  at  the  time  included  Maine,  is  on 
the  other  hand  verv  rich  in  material,  but  alas !  not  much  better  in  its 
treatment  of  the  "female"  within  its  border;  for,  until  the  Revolution, 
a  girl's  education  was  considered  by  most  people  finished  when  she 
could  read  the  New  England  Primer. 

As  early  as  1642,  there  was  compulsory  education  in  Massachusetts 
for  any  town  in  which  there  were  fifty  families.  This  was  frankly  said, 
in  1647,  in  the  Preamble  to  the  Law  concerning  schools,  to  be  the 
means  of  besting  the  Evil  One.  "The  prince  of  darkness  is  shrewd 
enough  to  know  that  where  the  languages  flourish  there  his  power  will 
be  so  rent  and  torn  that  he  cannot  readily  repair  it.  Few  of  us  per- 
ceive the  craft  and  snare  of  the  Devil." 

Children  of  that  time  were  enveloped  at  home  and  at  school,  every 
day  in  the  week,  by  an  atmosphere  saturated  with  religion.  So  in  many 
places  the  Bible  and  the  Catechism  were  almost  the  only  text-books. 
The  larger  towns  had  English  schools,  Latin  schools,  and  soon  Har- 
vard College  was  founded.  The  smaller  towns  offered  little  to  the  boy 
and  less  to  the  girl;  for,  though  the  law  decreed  that  every  town  of 
fifty  families  or  more  should  maintain  a  school,  many  a  town  felt  that 
it  was  cheaper  to  pay  the  £20  fine  for  not  doing  so. 

Often  the  minister  was  also  the  schoolmaster,  and  often  those  men 
in  the  town  who  could  read  and  write,  taught  in  rotation.  The  girls 
had  a  very  small  chance  of  learning.     Dorchester,  for  instance,  left 


W  ..''■ 


'Jhrriz-- 


L-ifa- 


'fiif-i 


cC*'^^ 


Pr.ATE  cx 

Axx  RoBixs's  Sampler.     1730 
Owned  by  Miss  Susan  P.   Whartoti 


AMERICAX  SAMPLERS  357 

girls'  education  to  the  discretion  of  the  selectmen,  who  decided  against 
co-education.  During  these  first  seventy  years  of  supreme  indiffer- 
ence to  education  for  girls,  the  history  of  the  sampler  in  America  is 
meager  also. 

As  we  come  to  the  eighteenth  century,  there  is  a  distinct  change 
for  the  worse  as  regards  boys  as  well  as  girls.  There  is  less  enthusiasm 
for  learning,  and  the  reasons  are  not  far  to  seek. 

"To  one  familiar  with  the  early  history  of  our  state  this  decadence 
of  the  primitive  ardor  does  not  seem  strange.  It  would  seem  more 
strange  had  the  high  level  been  maintained,  for  during  these  seventy 
years  the  little  bark  of  state  had  been  tossed  on  troubled  waters.  The 
educational  history  of  Massachusetts  is  projected  on  a  somber  back- 
ground. Scarcely  had  the  colonists  become  settled  in  their  new  homes 
along  the  bay  before  dissensions  among  themselves  brought  the  whole 
enterprise  into  hazard  —  dissensions  so  sharp,  differences  of  opinion 
so  radical,  as  to  reach  down  to  the  bed-rock  both  of  their  civil  and 
ecclesiastical  foundations. 

"During  this  same  period  heavier  calamities  had  fallen  upon  them 
in  the  terrible  struggle  known  as  King  Philip's  War.  Four  years  of 
anxious  solicitude  were  followed  by  fourteen  months  of  continuous 
and  unmitigated  horror.  As  the  messengers  came  in  quick  succession 
to  the  patriarch  Job,  each  telling  of  a  new  calamity,  until  he  was 
stripped  and  desolate,  so  from  north,  east,  south,  and  west,  every  day, 
sometimes  almost  every  hour,  brought  news  of  villages  burned  and 
their  inhabitants  massacred,  or  of  the  troops  sent  to  their  rescue  am- 
bushed and  butchered.  From  one  end  of  the  colony  to  the  other  the 
people  in  their  dreams  heard  the  war-whoop  of  savages  and  the  crack- 
ling of  flames,  and  saw  the  tomahawk  and  the  scalping-knife  doing 
their  bloody  work.  Happy  were  they  if  they  were  not  wakened  to  the 
reality. 

"When  all  was  over,  more  than  half  a  million  dollars  had  been 
spent,  thirteen  towns  had  been  destroyed,  six  hundred  buildings 
burned,  and  six  hundred  men,  the  flower  of  the  colony,  had  been 
killed.     Some  towns  were  so  impoverished  that  their  share  of  the 


358  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

colony  tax  was  remitted,  and  for  three  years  the  smaller  towns  were 
relieved  from  the  obligation  to  support  the  grammar  schools. 

"Only  six  years  later,  and  the  gloom  of  the  witchcraft  delusion 
settled  like  a  pall  over  the  province,  and  swift  upon  the  heels  of  this 
calamity  came  the  war  with  the  French,  with  Sir  William  Phipps's 
disastrous  expedition  against  Quebec,  and  the  new  Indian  atrocities 
upon  the  frontier  settlements  on  the  north  and  east. 

"Such  is  the  record  of  these  first  seventy  years,  and  in  them  all 
not  one  without  some  danger  or  some  menace  of  danger.  When  a 
French  statesman  was  asked  what  he  did  during  the  Revolution,  he 
replied,  'I  lived.'  It  was  much  that  the  schools  of  Massachusetts 
lived  through  the  trying  vicissitudes  of  this  first  period. 

"With  the  close  of  Queen  Anne's  War  the  province  entered  upon 
a  new  epoch,  which  brought  with  it  changes  in  the  school  system  whose 
influence  we  have  not  yet  outlived.  In  the  early  days  the  fear  of  Indian 
invasion  had  served  to  hold  the  settlers  somewhat  closely  together; 
indeed,  in  a  part  of  the  towns,  as  in  Dedham,  the  people  were  for- 
bidden to  build  beyond  a  fixed  distance  of  one  or  two  miles  from  the 
meeting-house.  But  now  that  this  danger  seemed  to  be  over,  the 
people  began  to  push  out  into  the  wilderness. 

"Outlying  portions  of  the  older  towns  were  occupied,  and  new 
settlements  made  so  rapidly  that  between  1700  and  1760  one  hundred 
and  twenty-three  towns  were  incorporated,  and  during  the  next  ten 
years  forty-five  more,  chiefly  west  of  the  Connecticut."* 

Many  of  these  new  towns  were  spread  out  all  over  the  farming 
lands,  with  no  nucleus  other  than  the  isolated  church,  which  was 
usually  perched  on  a  hill.  Thus  educational  problems  were  more 
difficult  than  before,  and  led  eventually  to  the  town  being  "districted 
off"  so  that  each  small  unit  might  solve  its  problems. 

There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  throughout  this  period  girls  were 
entirely  dependent  on  the  Dame  School  and  the  "finishing  school." 
The  Dame  School  is  hard  to  come  at,  because  no  records  were  pre- 
served of  these  little  schools  for  very  young  children,  kept  in  kitchens, 
or  sometimes  in  little  log  schoolhouses.    Early  in  the  eighteenth  cen- 

•  George  H.  Martin.    "Evolution  of  the  Massachusetts  Public  School  System." 


•^ 

5^ 

■jt: 

=5 

' ' 

~:, 

X 

■"^ 

u 

■«- 

s^ 

C) 

r^ 

, 

< 

^ 

■J-. 

=S5 

— 

= 

S! 

c- 

^ 

-T) 

-s 

/, 

«> 

/, 

-> 

a 

^ 

X 


i     - 


< 
■J) 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  359 

tury,  in  most  towns,  the  horn-book  was  the  only  text-book  used  in  these 
schools.  This  was  a  square,  flat  piece  of  wood  with  a  handle.  Upon 
the  flat  part  was  put  a  printed  sheet  containing  the  alphabet  —  per- 
haps the  Lord's  Prayer  or  something  else,  always  religious;  over  this 
was  placed  a  piece  of  thin  horn  bound  to  the  wood  by  brass  strips  and 
nails.  These  were  the  first  primers,  chained  to  the  wall,  like  the  books 
in  a  monastery  library,  and  from  these  every  child  was  taught  to  read. 
This  was  true  of  boys  and  girls  alike,  for  boys  did  not  go  to  public 
schools  until  they  were  seven  years  old,  "having  previously  received 
the  instruction  usual  at  women's  schools."  This  same  scheme  of  edu- 
cation requires  "that  the  children  begin  to  learn  arithmetic  at  11  years 
of  age;  that  at  12  years  they  be  taught  to  make  pens."*  This  was,  of 
course,  after  the  Revolution,  when  a  slightly  more  lenient  tone  towards 
girls  was  adopted. 

Meantime,  the  finishing  school  flourished.  It  is  hard  to  tell  just 
when  it  began,  but  certainly  it  was  "in  our  midst"  as  early  as  1706. 
The  Boston  News-Letter  for  September  9th  and  23rd  advertised : 

"Mistris  Mary  Turfrey  at  the  South  End  of  Boston  Intends  to  board  Young 
Gentlewomen:  If  any  Gentlemen  desires  their  Daughters  should  be  under  her 
Education ;  they  may  pleas'  to  agree  with  her  on  Terms." 

"Mistris  Turfrey"  does  not  say  that  she  will  teach  the  "Young  Gentle- 
women "  to  make  samplers.  Perhaps  it  was  because  that  was  the  period 
when  samplers  were  least  in  favor,  and  such  as  were  made  seem  to  be 
the  very  simple  kind,  whose  form  somewhat  resembles  the  horn-book 
from  which  girls  learned  their  letters.  If  sampler  art  had  begun  with 
1700,  one  might  agree  with  those  who  think  that  the  horn-book  was 
the  prototype  of  the  sampler.  That  contention  cannot  be  maintained, 
but  the  sampler  was  a  very  wonderful  adjunct  to  the  horn-book  to 
educate  the  budding  "female"  mind.  We  have  records  of  two  quite 
early  eighteenth  century  samplers  made  by  girls  of  five,  which  must 
have  been  done  at  some  school-dame's  knee. 

Apparently  Boston,  Salem,  and  Newburyport  were  the  Massa- 
chusetts centers  for  the  finishing  school,  and  by  1714,  Boston  had  a 
real  one.    The  Boston  News-Letter  for  April  19th  of  that  year  con- 

•*'  System  of  Education  Adopted  by  the  Town  of  Boston." 


360  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

tains  an  advertisement  which  gives  the  curriculum  of  one  of  these 
schools. 

"At  the  House  of  Mr.  James  Ivers  formerly  call'd  Bowling  Green  House  in 
Cambridge  Street  Boston,  is  now  set  up  a  Boarding  School,  where  will  be  Care- 
fully taught  Flourishing,*  Embroidery,  and  all  Sorts  of  Needlework,  also  Filigree, 
Painting  upon  Glass,  writing,  arithmetick,  and  singing  Psalm  Tunes." 

This  was  frivolous,  practical,  and  religious,  but  furnished  not 
much  real  education.  Perhaps  the  mixture  of  a  girls'  boarding  school 
and  the  Bowling  Green,  "where  gentlemen,  ^Merchants  and  others, 
that  have  a  Mind  to  Recreate  themselves  could  be  accommodated" 
was  not  a  good  one,  for  Mr.  Ivers  sold  the  Bowling  Green  the  next 
month  and  so  made  the  boarding  school  safe  for  girls. 

Mr.  Ivers  was  followed  by  Mr.  Brownell,  who  apparently  wished 
to  out-advertise  the  school  at  the  Bowling  Green  House. 

"This  is  to  give  Notice,  That  at  the  House  of  Mr.  George  Bro-wneU,\  late 
School  Master  in  Hanover  Street  Boston,  are  all  sorts  of  Millinary  Works  done; 
making  up  of  Dresses,  and  flowering  of  Muslin,  making  of  furbelow'd  Scarffs, 
and  Quilting,  and  cutting  of  Gentlewomens  Hair  in  the  newest  fashion;  and 
also  young  Gentlewomen  and  Children  taught  all  sorts  of  fine  Works,  as  Feather- 
Work,  Filagre  and  Painting  on  Glass,  Embroidering  a  new  way,  Turkey-Work 
for  Handkerchiefs  two  ways,  fine  new  Fashion  Purses,  flourishing  and  plain 
Work,  and  Dancing  cheaper  than  ever  was  taught  in  Boston,  Brocaded-Work  for 
Handkerchiefs  and  short  Aprons  upon  muslin,  artificial  Flowers  work'd  with  a 
needle." 

These  two  men  were  not  without  their  rival  in  JNIrs.  Rebecca 
Lawrence,  who  had  a  school  in  Boston  for  many  years.  The  New 
England  Weekly  Journal  for  ^londay,  October  4th,  1731,  gives  a 
notice  of  her  death. 

"On  Saturday  last  died  Mrs.  Rebecca  Lawrence,  a  noted  and  useful  School- 
mistress in  this  Town." 

From  1741  to  1760,  somewhere  near  Boston,  if  not  in  the  city 
itself,  some  teacher  set  her  children  the  task  of  making  a  semblance 
of  the  older  type  of  sampler.  There  are  five  of  these  still  in  existence, 
three  of  which  are  so  alike  as  to  be  as  nearly  identical  as  the  person- 
alities of  the  makers  allow.  The  cross-borders  at  the  top  are  alike  in 
sequence,  and  at  the  bottom  are  Adam  and  Eve,  the  Tree  of  Knowl- 
edge, and  a  wonderful  fat  worm  of  a  serpent,  j: 

*  Flourishing  thread  was  a  flat  linen  thread  used  for  darning  damask  and  linen,  and  also  used  for  netting. 

i  Neirs-IMter.  August  i7.  1716. 

+  Mary  Parker,  1741 ;  Maria  DavenDort,  1741 :  Rebekah  Owen,  1745  ;  Hannah  Tyler,  1753  ;  Ruth  Haskell,  1760. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  361 

Rebecca  Owen  made  one  four  years  later,  but  aside  from  the  fact 
that  the  serpent  has  a  family  resemblance  in  its  obesity,  one  could  not 
be  sure  that  it  was  the  product  of  the  same  school.  (See  Plates  xv 
and  xvi.) 

Just  at  this  time  Elizabeth  Waldron  had  a  boarding  school  at  the 
foot  of  the  Common.  She  advertised  her  removal  in  The  Boston 
Weelxiy  News-Letter  for  Friday,  ^larch  19,  1752. 

"Elizabeth  Waldron  who  hath  kept  a  Boarding  School  at  the  Bottom  of  the 
Common,  purposeth  next  Monday  to  remove  to  Milton,  Within  half  a  mile  of 
the  Paper  Mills: — Where  young  Ladies  that  intend  to  escape  the  Distemper  may 
be  accommodated  as  usual." 

There  had  been  a  universal  and  often  fatal  throat  distemper  in 
the  thirties,  and  it  was  perhaps  fear  engendered  by  the  remembrance 
that  induced  this  flight. 

Salem,  in  point  of  time,  contributes  the  next  school  for  finishing 
young  ladies,  and  it  is  interesting  because  it  is  the  first  instance  that 
the  word  Academy  is  used  to  designate  a  girls'  school.  After  1790, 
the  word  became  very  common,  and  so  it  is  interesting  that  in  1748 
there  was  a  "Union  Academy"  in  which  Mary  Crowninshield*  em- 
broidered a  sampler. 

Just  at  this  time  the  Boston  papers  were  full  of  advertisements 
of  boarding  schools  for  girls.  From  February  to  May,  1748,  a  very 
clever  person  sought  pupils,  and  if  she  could  do  w^ell  all  that  she 
advertised  she  surely  deserved  to  be  a  very  popular  schoolmistress. 

"This  may  inform  young  Gentlewomen  in  Town  and  Country,  That  early  in 
the  Spring,  Mrs.  Hiller  designs  to  open  a  Boarding-school  at  the  House  where  she 

lives,  in  Fifth  Street,  at  the  North  End  of  Boston,  next  Door  to  Doctor  

Wax-Work,  Transparent  and  Filligree,  Painting  upon  glass.  Japanning,  Quill- 
Work,  Feather-Work  and  embroidering  with  Gold  and  Silver,  and  several  other 
sorts  of  Work  not  here  enumerated,  and  may  be  supplied  with  Patterns  and  all 
sorts  of  Drawing  and  Materials  for  their  work." 

Mrs.  Sarah  ^Morehead,  "at  the  Head  of  the  Rope  Walks,  Fort 
Hill,"  also  taught  "Drawing,  Japaning,  and  Painting  on  Glass." 

Certainly  by  the  middle  of  the  century,  Boston  had  become  quite 
prosperous,  and  was  beginning  to  have  most  advanced  ideas  in  the 
handicraft  of  the  time.    It  is  too  bad  that  we  cannot  tell  in  which  of 

•b.  1740  d.  John  and  Anstus  (Williams)  Crowninshield. 


362  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

these  schools  of  the  period  the  Boston  samplers  were  made,  but  the 
girls  certainly  had  opportunities  offered  them  to  learn. 

It  is  impossible  to  tell  now  how  long  each  of  these  schools  flour- 
ished, since  we  have  only  the  advertisements  to  rely  upon.  A  cessation 
of  publicity  might  mean  either  that  the  school  had  not  paid,  or  had 
become  so  popular  that  it  needed  no  further  aid  from  the  press.  The 
next  candidate  for  favor  seems  to  be  a  shade  less  ambitious  than  her 
predecessors  in  knowledge,  but  more  so  in  her  stock  of  goods.  The 
advertisements  appear  from  1751  to  1753. 

"ELIZABETH  MURRAY 

Next  door  to  Deacon  Bouteneau's  in  Cornhill,  Boston. 
Teaches  Dresden,  and  other  kinds  of  Needle  Works,  likewise  accomodates 
young  Ladies  with  Board,  and  half-Board  at  a  reasonable  Price;  sells  flowered 
and  clear  Lawns,  Cambricks,  Muslins,  Gauze,  newest  Fashion  Caps,  Ruffles, 
Tippits,  Stomachers,  Solitairs,  Necklaces,  Ear  Rings,  Ivory,  Ebony  and  Bone 
Stick  Fans,  Womens  Shoes,  Stockings,  Gloves  and  Mittens,  Canvas,  Crewels,  Floss, 
Flowering  and  Nuns  Threads,  Needles,  Pins  and  Tapes,  with  Sundry  other  Arti- 
cles."   (1751.) 

Miss  Murray  evidently  had  a  deadly  rival  during  her  first  year,  but 
as  the  Misses  Purcell  advertised  but  once,  and  Miss  Murray  kept  on 
advertising,  the  supposition  is  that  one  succeeded  and  the  other  did 
not;  but  on  our  former  line  of  argument,  the  result  is  a  good  deal 
like  "the  Lady  or  the  Tiger,"  and  one  guess  is  as  good  as  another. 
Here  is  the  Purcell  announcement : 

"Taught  by  Elinor  and  Mary  Purcell  opposite  the  Rev.  Mr.  Checkley's 
Meeting  House,  Summer  Street,  Boston. 

Dresden  on  Lawn  and  Muslin,  and  Work  in  Imitation  of  Brussell  lace  and  all 
other  Sorts  of  Needle  Work  and  Shell  Work,  and  Flower  for  the  Head,  in  the 
neatest  Manner ;  Likewise  accommodate  young  Ladies  with  Board  and  half  Board, 
at  a  reasonable  Rate. 

N.B.  Likewise  make  up  all  sorts  of  Millinery  Work;  after  the  newest 
Fashion."    (17.51.) 

Miss  Murray  continued  to  call  attention  to  her  school : 

"Elizabeth  Murray" 

"Teaches  Dresden  and  Embroidery  on  Gauze,  tent  Stitch,  and  all  sorts  of 
colored  Work;  takes  young  Ladies  to  board  or  half-board,  at  a  very  reasonable 
Rate;  likewise  sells  Gold  and  Silver  Gymp,  Plate,  Twist  and  Thread,  Shades  of 
Naples,  Floss,  and  fine  Silk,  Cambrick  and  Cotton  Thread,  and  Muslin  for  Dres- 
den, with  a  variety  of  Cambrick  and  Lawn  and  Gauze,  with  other  Millinery  Goods 
and  white  Gauze  Shades."    (1753.) 


V.i  <i  !■  J  '^  1  - 


I    f  I  lU^      Ullf«  I  I 


>^j,.  mt^um/vf*^ 


'^.'Mi>fi^- ,v  !-*Jl  9^^  ^y•■■f'm•f'>i■'-:■ 


(i  tfv  •*,•!/;  ,•'■*£' ,-'---;,i 


^!?-iii$'iC^' 


Ja» 


4) 

CO     ^ 


OQ 


< 

"^ 

'Xi 

^ 

T 

» 

••M^ 

u 

;? 

^ 

7 

^ 

7, 

-^ 

K 

o 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  363 

Miss  Murray  was  followed  in  1757  and  1758  by  Eleanor  Mcllvaine, 
who  had  a  school  opposite  the  Governor's.  Her  advertisement  is 
modest  and  short  and  she  does  not  wish  to  "board  or  half-board"  her 
pupils. 

The  following  year  a  new  person  steps  into  the  limelight,  and 
thereafter,  except  for  a  few  vague  hints  here  and  there,  w^e  hear  little 
of  Boston  schools  for  nearly  forty  years. 

"Mrs.  Jane  Day  opposite  the  Brazen  Head  in  Cornhill,  Boston,  Has  opened 
School,  and  teaches  in  the  neatest  and  newest  manner,  Embroidering  in  Gold  and 
silver,  and  all  sorts  of  Shaded  Work  in  Colours,  Dresden  and  plain  Work,  etc. 
where  also  Ladies  may  be  boarded  or  half-boarded  as  may  be  most  convenient 
for  Town  or  Country,  and  can  supply  her  Scholars  with  Materials  for  Work. 

N.B.    Maker  in  the  newest  Fashion  all  sorts  of  Millinary  Work." 

About  1764,  Mary  Dedman  made  a  most  beautiful  needlework 
picture  in  a  Boston  school,  probably  taught  by  a  Mrs.  Rawson,  but 
no  research  has  yet  brought  to  light  any  more  knowledge  of  her  school. 

Newburyport  has  been  mentioned  as  another  flourishing  center  for 
girls'  finishing  schools,  and  certainly  there  were  a  large  number  of 
samplers  of  a  very  elaborate  kind  done  in  the  town.  The  only  specific 
mention  of  any  school  is  on  a  sampler  made  by  Eliza  Reed,  aged  thir- 
teen, "under  the  tuition  of  Harriet  Ellis."  The  sampler  contains  a 
picture  of  a  large  house,  which  was  probably  a  view  of  the  girl's  own 
home,  or  the  house  in  which  the  school  was  held.  The  sampler  is  un- 
dated, but  is  of  the  type  more  common  after  the  Revolution ;  in  fact, 
common  as  late  as  samplers  were  embroidered. 

A  little  later  appear  three  samplers  worked  by  Newburyport  girls, 
Sally  Johnson  (1799),  Mary  Little  (1800),  and  Mary  Coffin  (1801), 
which  bear  the  trade-mark  of  some  teacher's  imagination,  stimulated 
by  commerce  with  the  tropics.  Each  shows  one  or  more  negro  slaves 
waiting  upon  gentlemen  and  ladies,  all  have  orange  trees,  and  the 
most  elaborate  (see  Plate  civ)  contains  also  banana  and  date  palms. 
These  samplers  are  not  actually  alike,  but  are  too  nearly  so  in  spirit 
not  to  have  been  done  under  the  same  teacher's  eye.  Perhaps  one  girl 
a  year  was  allowed  to  use  this  subject  as  a  reward  for  her  deftness  with 
the  needle.     Joanna  Huse  of  Newburyport  in  her  undated  sampler 


364  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

records  that  she  did  it  in  her  eleventh  year  "under  the  tuition  of  Maria 
S.  Aiken." 

The  Revolution  slowed  down  many  activities  which  had  to  do  with 
the  amenities  of  life ;  and  girls'  education  of  the  period  might  certainly 
be  called  one  of  these.  The  only  girls'  school  of  which  we  have  record 
during  this  period  is  Sarah  Stivour's.  This  school  was  probably  in 
Salem,  since  Beverly,  Salem,  and  Lynn  girls  went  there.  Four  sam- 
plers of  her  teaching  have  come  down  to  us,  and  they  are  all  distin- 
guished by  a  form  of  very  long  stitch  in  crinkly  silk  to  designate  the 
grass  in  dark  green,  and  in  blue  and  white  overhead  to  indicate  the  sky. 
This  stitch  is  often  two  inches  long,  and  slants  in  parallel  lines  from 
the  top,  in  the  case  of  the  sky.  The  lower  edge  is  in  long  scallops  or 
waves.  The  grass  below  in  dark  green  has  the  same  wavy  edge  at  the 
top.  Upon  this  precarious  perch  stand  a  man,  a  woman,  sheep,  and  a 
spotted  dog.  A  floral  border  surrounds  three  sides,  and  sometimes 
above  the  alphabets  is  an  arbor.*  This  school  lasted  from  1778  to  1786 
certainly,  and  if  all  the  samplers  there  are  could  be  gathered  together 
we  might  find  that  it  lasted  longer  still.     (See  Plates  xc  and  xci.) 

Other  Massachusetts  schools  are  recorded  before  1800.  Miss 
Southerland  had  a  schoo)  in  Boston  about  1785,  where  embroidery  was 
taught.  No  sampler  that  can  be  identified  has  come  from  this  school, 
but  a  piece  of  embroidery  done  by  Hannah  G.  Gowen,  when  eleven 
years  old,  is  still  extant,  as  a  proof.  This  embroidery  is  in  Louis  XVI 
style,  a  bimch  of  flowers  tied  with  a  bow,  embroidered  on  black  satin ; 
and  to  this  is  appended  a  certificate,  in  French,  from  her  teacher.  A 
rather  simple  sampler  is  inscribed,  "Salla  White  her  sampler,  made 
by  her  own  hand  at  Mrs.  Horton's  School.  A.D.  1787."  This  school 
was  probably  either  at  Springfield  or  at  Longmeadow,  where  "Salla" 
lived.  It  is  a  little  sampler,  about  eight  inches  square,  done  in  her 
ninth  year. 

The  next  school  that  we  know  of  was  kept  in  Salemf  by  Mrs. 
Mehitable  Higginson,  the  wife  of  Mr.  John  Higginson,  Registrar  of 
Deeds  for  Essex  County.    Mr.  Higginson  died  just  before  the  Revo- 

•  Betsy  Ives.  1778 ;  Nabby  Mason  Peele,  1778  ;   Mary  Oilman  Woodbridge,  1779  ;  Sally  Witt,  1786. 
t "  Half  Century  in  Salem."    M.  C.  D.  Silsbee. 


PLATE  CXIII 

Appha  WooDaiAx's  Sampler.     Sanborntoii,  X.  H.     1787 
Owned  by  Miss  Anne  B.  Hamilton 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  365 

lution,  and  his  wife  and  daughter  Hetty  were  very  outspoken  and 
loyal  supporters  of  King  George.  They  were  so  unpopular  that  they 
went  to  Halifax,  where  they  remained  until  1782.  Dr.  Joseph  Orne 
wrote  of  her  to  Colonel  Timothy  Pickering,  on  her  return,  "Your  old 
friend,  Mrs.  Higginson,  has  returned,  but  as  she  is  liable  to  be  sent 
back  and  is  quite  as  disagreeable  to  the  people  as  any  man  would  be, 
there  is  so  great  a  ferment  among  them  that  she  is  obliged  to  live  with 
her  friends  in  Beverly." 

She  and  her  daughter  opened  a  school  in  Salem  as  soon  as  the  war 
was  over.  After  her  mother's  death,  in  1818,  ^liss  Hetty  kept  her 
school  for  many  years,  but  for  younger  children,  and  was  much  beloved 
by  her  pupils.  It  is  said  that  Miss  Hetty  could  divide  a  large  straw- 
berry among  six  or  eight  of  her  scholars,  and  that  they  were  more 
pleased  by  this  atom,  given  with  her  praise,  than  with  a  saucerful 
without  her  approbation.  William  Bentley,  in  his  Diary,  says  that 
this  "was  the  school  of  fashion  for  many  years,  till  the  infirmities  of 
the  mother  prevented  her  better  energies." 

During  this  same  period,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Nathaniel  Rogers  also 
kept  a  school  for  "young  Ladies"  in  Salem.  In  the  Holyoke  Diaries 
is  a  very  interesting  and  formal  letter  from  them  to  Doctor  and  Mrs. 
Holyoke,  dated  November  6,  1794,  in  which  they  "inform  them  of 
their  determination  to  relinquish  the  School  which  they  have  hereto- 
fore kept  for  the  tuition  of  young  Ladies."  The  reason  was  the 
"injury  done  to  Mrs.  ROGERS  health  by  a  Sedentary  Employment" 
and  "the  duties  which  she  owes  to  her  family."  The  school  was  re- 
opened in  March,  1796. 

Salem  did  not  have  an  entire  monopoly  of  good  schools  in  Essex 
County,  it  seems,  for  in  1802,  William  Bentley  notes  with  surprise  the 
fact  that  during  a  dinner  with  Captain  Gibaut  he  "assured  me  that 
a  Mrs.  Saunders  keeps  a  school  in  Gloucester  for  5^oung  ladies,  where 
needlework  will  bear  comparison  with  any  of  the  work  of  our  Schools 
not  excepting  Mrs.  Rogers  of  Salem."  Gloucester  had  another 
teacher  for  many  years.  She  finished  her  earthly  career  in  1814,  and 
our  diarist  notes  "another  among  the  many  Examples  of  longevity  in 


366  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

School  mistresses.  Widow  Hanna  Tucker  of  Gloucester  died  Jan. 
present  at  Gloucester,  set.  91.  For  four  generations  school-mistresses. 
My  school  mistress,  Madam  Jenkins,  lived  many  years  over  that  age. 
Madam  Babbidge  of  Salem,  my  next  neighbor,  lived  &  taught  over 
90  years  of  age.  And  a  tag  has  been  given  me  by  M.  Whitford,  get  80, 
which  belonged  to  Madam  Jiggles,  marked  EI,  who  was  born  on  the 
passage  to  America  &  lived  in  the  first  framed  house  in  Salem  &  who 
lived  to  a  very  advanced  age  &  was  a  school  mistress." 

With  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  girl  came  into  her  own, 
and  the  "Female  Academy"  multiplied  in  the  land.  One  of  the  earli- 
est was  at  Bridgewater;  it  was  founded  in  1799.  The  building,  burned 
in  1822,  was  fifty- four  feet  by  twenty-seven,  was  two  stories  in  height, 
and  had  a  square  tower  which  rose  ten  feet  above  the  ridgepole.  In 
1807,  Eliza  Wentworth  embroidered  a  sampler  at  the  school,  under 
Miss  Martha  Pullen,  of  Abington,  who  was  then  Preceptress. 

Bradford  Academy  opened  in  1803,  and  "originated  from  the 
sense  of  want  which  was  felt  in  relation  to  education,  especially  female 
education."  Leicester  Academy  and  many  others  followed,  and  edu- 
cation for  girls  was  an  established  fact.  Mr.  Littlefield  tells  us  that 
in  Boston,  in  1817,  there  were  one  hundred  and  sixty-four  private 
schools,  and  two  thousand  two  hundred  and  eighteen  girls  attending. 
There  were  so  many  girls  to  educate  that  the  academies  would  not 
hold  them  all ;  and  as  many  of  the  conservative,  distrusting  advanced 
education,  still  sent  their  daughters  to  the  finishing  school,  the  two 
forms  flourished  side  by  side,  as  they  have  until  this  day.  We  are  told 
that  it  was  a  mark  of  aristocracy  in  Salem  to  be  admitted  to  one  of 
these  private  schools.  They  were  usually  kept  by  some  gentlewoman 
of  diminished  fortune,  who  taught  the  younger  children  of  the  better 
class  reading,  spelling,  sewing,  and,  most  of  all,  manners.  Many  a 
sampler  was  made  in  these  schools,  but  the  Salem  samplers  are  so 
varied  in  their  design  as  to  render  no  grouping  sufiiciently  sure  to  say 
that  an 3^  two  were  made  in  the  same  school. 

The  result  of  comparing  the  descriptions  of  the  samplers  sent 
in  is  most  interesting  and  intriguing.    Many  times  you  feel  sure  that 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  367 

certain  girls  must  have  worked  their  samplers  side  by  side  in  school — 
and  yet  one  can  never  be  certain,  because  there  were  vaguely  indefinite 
styles  in  samplers  which  pertained  over  a  large  part  of  the  country, 
as  there  were  in  clothes.  Some  years  ago  there  was  an  exhibition  of 
samplers  in  an  old  house  in  Lowell,  Massachusetts;  it  was  not  large, 
and  yet  two  samplers  hung  side  by  side  which  were  almost  alike.  It 
transpired  afterward,  when  the  owners  met,  that  the  two  as  girls  had 
lived  in  Concord,  and  that  the  same  teacher  had  instructed  them  both. 
The  teacher  apparently  drew  the  pattern  on  the  linen  in  ink,  and  as 
there  were  no  ways  in  those  daj^s  of  transferring  patterns,  she  did 
them  free-hand,  and  she  often  set  free  her  imagination  at  the  same 
time.  This  would  account  both  for  their  similarity  and  for  their 
divergence. 

Perhaps  the  most  interesting  example  of  this  grouping  of  descrip- 
tions will  be  found  in  the  samplers  worked  between  1785  and  1810  in 
Miss  Polly  Balch's  Seminary  in  Providence,  Rhode  Island.  It  is  a 
unique  set  of  samplers;  thirteen  it  is  possible  to  be  sure  of,  and  there 
are  a  few  more  which  were  quite  possibly  done  there  also. 

Five  of  these  samplers  contain  a  picture  of  the  Old  State  House 
in  Providence,  or  of  old  University  Hall  at  Brown,  and  some  contain 
both.  The  girls  were  always  fairly  accurate  in  the  architecture  of 
University  Hall,  but  they  were  far  less  sure  of  the  Old  State  House. 
The  cupola  rises  and  sinks  in  size,  and  the  clock  in  the  tower  sometimes 
descends  into  the  building  itself.  Nancy  Hall  and  Sally  Alger  con- 
centrated on  University  Hall,  and  add  to  the  picture  of  the  building 
the  President's  House.  Above,  each  has  given  her  idea  of  the  First 
President's  reception  at  the  College.  The  President  stands  under 
curtains,  looped  back  on  either  side  with  cords  and  enormous  tassels. 
Below  are  pictured  the  guests  on  their  way  to  the  festivity.  The  two 
samplers  are  not  identical,  for  one  incloses  hers  with  an  oval,  and  the 
other,  Sally  Alger,  uses  the  pseudo-classic  arch,  so  very  common  to 
the  samplers  made  in  Miss  Balch's  School.  The  arch  was  echoed  by 
Miss  Sarah  Stivour's  School  in  Salem,  Massachusetts,  which  was 
giving  us  another  interesting  group  of  samplers  of  the  same  period. 


368  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Miss  Balch's  School  was  responsible  for  the  wonderful  maritime  scene 
done  by  Xancy  Winsor,  which  is  reproduced  in  color.  ( See  Plates  xlv, 
Ixii,  xcix,  and  c. ) 

Miss  Mary  Balch,  known  later  variously  as  "Polly  Balch"  or 
"Marm  Balch,"  was  the  second  child  of  Timothy  Balch,  a  Boston  man, 
who  had  gone  to  Newport  early  in  his  career,  and  there  married  Sarah, 
daughter  of  Captain  Joseph  Rogers,  of  that  city.  The  daughter  Mary 
was  born  in  Newport,  February  9,  1762.  Before  she  was  twenty- 
three  she  had  started  a  school  in  Providence,  sometime  before  1785. 
At  one  time  the  school  was  in  George  Street,  for  a  paper  of  the  time 
says  that  "A  prominent  private-school  whose  influence  lasted  many 
years,  was  opened  on  George  Street  early  in  1800  or  late  in  the  previ- 
ous century."  The  mystery  is  very  puzzling  as  to  just  who  the  teacher 
was  who  made  the  delectable  samplers  coming  from  the  school.  Who- 
ever it  was  who  was  responsible,  certain  it  is  that  she  was  with 
INIiss  Balch  from  1785  to  1800.  About  1800,  the  character  of  those 
made  in  jNIiss  Balch's  School  changes,  if,  as  is  probable,  the  representa- 
tion of  the  First  Baptist  Church  by  Maria  Hopping,  and  the  two  of 
the  First  Congregational  Church,  were  the  work  of  her  pupils.  The 
only  other  one  which  we  are  certain  was  done  in  her  school,  that  of 
Eliza  Pearce  Jones,  is  a  reversion  to  the  usual  type  of  sampler, 
hitherto  not  in  the  least  characteristic  of  her  school. 

Strangely,  there  are  two  samplers,  those  of  Anna  Sanders,  1801, 
and  Nancy  Baker,  1808  (see  Plate  cviii) ,  both  made  in  Warren,  which 
carry  on  the  former  tradition  of  Polly  Balch's  School.  Therefore  it 
seems  probable  that  the  sewing  teacher  was  not  JSIiss  Balch  herself, 
for  Miss  Balch's  School  continued  in  Providence  till  her  death  in  1831 ; 
and  after  that  time  it  was  carried  on  by  one  of  her  assistants,  Miss 
Walker,  for  many  years.  In  1820,  the  school  was  at  427  and  429 
North  ]Main  Street,  in  a  building  which  is  still  standing.  ]Miss  Balch's 
gravestone  in  the  North  Burying  Ground  is  still  to  be  seen. 

"Consecrated  to  the  memory 

of  Miss  Mary  Balch 

the  1st  to  establish  a  female  Academy 

in  Providence 

Who  departed  this  life 

Jan.  3rd,  1831,  in  her  69th  year." 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  369 

Whoever  it  was  who  taught  needlework  at  Miss  Balch's  School, 
she  certainly  had  by  far  a  finer  sense  of  what  the  art  was  capable  of 
than  any  one  who  was  in  a  like  position.  She  had  a  sense  of  color, 
form,  and  design,  and  she  taught  her  pupils  to  use  their  silks  so  that 
they  not  only  made  harmonious  color,  but  they  were  applied  in  such 
a  way  as  to  bring  out  the  luminosity  of  the  silk.  The  backgrounds 
in  many  cases  are  entirely  covered  with  a  whitish  silk  in  split-stitch, 
which  gives  a  most  wonderful  sheen  to  the  whole.  She  had  certain 
mannerisms  and  certain  forms  of  design,  of  which  eacli  sampler  con- 
tains one  or  two,  so  that  they  are  very  easy  to  identify,  even  though 
they  are  not  marked,  and  they  are  never  commonplace.  Aside  from 
the  Old  State  House,  usually  depicted  with  five  windows  on  the 
facade,  is  a  house  with  nine  windows  and  a  fence  between  the  two 
chimneys.  It  has  two  dormer  windows  in  the  roof,  and  a  long  flight 
of  steps  on  either  side.  Polly  Turner,  of  Warren,  made  an  example  of 
this  in  1786,  at  Miss  Balch's  School,  and  Anna  Sanders  made  one 
in  Warren  in  1801.  They  are  very  alike  all  through,  except  for  the 
style  of  dress  in  the  people  walking  by  the  house  and  standing  under 
the  trees  on  either  side.  Nancy  Baker  again  did  it  in  Warren  in  1808. 
Between  these  two  extremes  we  find  it  on  Susan  Whitmore's  sampler, 
which  thouffh  imdated  was  certainlv  made  at  INIiss  Balch's  School. 
Again  it  appears  on  the  funny  little  sampler  of  Frances  Jones,  1789. 
Julia  Lippit  and  Eliza  Cozzens  used  the  split-stitch  background  and 
the  arch  to  frame  baskets  of  fruit  in  wonderfully  harmonious  colors, 
and  Susan  Whitmore  put  a  basket  of  fruit  under  her  house  and 
pseudo-classic  arch.  After  1800,  the  samplers  which  come  from  JNIiss 
Balch's  School  are  less  elaborate  and  have  a  less  sure  touch.  None  the 
less,  nowhere  else  can  so  interesting  a  group  of  samplers  be  found  as 
those  coming  from  this  school,  where  for  many  years  the  girls  of  the 
best  Rhode  Island  families  were  taught. 

But  Miss  Balch's  School  was  the  flowering  of  a  rather  barren  twig. 
Rhode  Island  had  not  paid  great  heed  to  education,  as  far  as  girls 
were  concerned,  but  private  schools  helped  there  as  they  did  elsewhere. 
In  1758: 


370  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

"Sarah  Osborne,  school  mistress  in  Newport,  proposes  to  keep  a  boarding 
school.  Any  person  disirous  of  sending  children  may  be  accomodated  and  have 
them  instructed  in  reading,  writing,  plain  work,  embroidery,  tent  stitch,  samplers, 
&c.  on  reasonable  terms." 

It  is  sad  to  think  that  no  Newport  sampler  of  the  date  has  so  far 
come  to  hand.  About  1770,  private  schools  were  few  and  far  between ; 
they  were  "but  little  thought  of;  there  were  in  my  neighborhood  three 
small  schools,  perhaps  about  12  scholars  each.  Their  books  were  the 
Bible,  spelling  book  and  primer."*  But  in  the  end,  Miss  Balch  and 
her  numerous  rivals  changed  all  this,  and  gave  the  Rhode  Island  girls 
as  good  an  education  as  the  times  considered  necessary. 

Of  Connecticut  schools  for  girls  we  know  but  little,  and  yet  there 
must  have  been  very  good  ones  quite  early,  if  we  are  to  judge  by 
Margaret  Calef's  wonderful  scene  which  she  worked  in  1767.  (See 
Plate  xxiii.)  The  perspective  and  architecture  might  perhaps  be 
considered  odd,  for  certainly  neither  the  man  nor  the  animals  could 
possibly  get  inside  the  house.  But  sampler  land  is  a  very  different 
country  from  ours,  and  there  the  impossible  happens  every  day;  so 
why  not  enjoy  the  gorgeousness  of  a  poppy  bigger  than  a  poplar  tree, 
and  consider  it  in  the  light  of  a  perpetual  sunset?  Samplers  come 
from  all  the  towns  which  we  of  later  days  associate  with  seats  of  learn- 
ing— JSIiddletown,  Farmington,  New  Haven,  Hartford. 

In  1791,  Mrs.  Mansfield  had  a  school  in  New  Haven,  where 
Lydia  Church  embroidered  a  sampler.  One  is  tempted  to  think  that 
she  made  a  picture  of  her  school,  for  that  same  year  Elizabeth  Lyon 
also  embroidered  a  "picture  of  an  old  girls  school  on  State  Street," 
and  in  both  ladies  and  "gentlemen  with  crooked  sticks"  walk  about, 
and  in  each  is  a  flock  of  sheep. 

In  Litchfield,  Connecticut,  "Miss  Sarah  Pierce  opened  a  School 
in  this  town  for  the  instruction  of  Females  in  the  year  1792,  which 
has  very  justly  merited  and  acquired  a  distinguished  reputation." 
The  school  was  opened  with  one  pupil  in  the  dining-room  of  her  house, 
but  it  soon  grew.  The  diaries  of  two  girls  who  went  there  as  day 
scholars  have  been  printed,  and  they  give  the  impression  of  a  rather 

•  Samqel  Th«rber. 


!  ■,    I  r9.<ts  from  <vi-y      fiov/<jr 

/:  sw-icis.aftd    milrf    balTimic     powr     ^^ 

.    .       '^  :  .  .    ..     -....-,..    witH'    greatest     .:>r-    and   mccsl   skill/ 
^1^%^"  T;'uu"lhe      %ocd.      ay    to     rn«c.       the      /It     ,c 

"*  '  .iX'^mpk-    laught.      encich       thy      mirtd 

vf  ., ^       kirtcf       natures       ?jns.      by    sense     i-efind 

.X  /  /    iho'o     Vnt;      Kofiev.comb    in     whom,     may    dwell 

■Sn  f        .yi  --eh      mcfitai      sweet    nor    ieav«    one    vacant     cell 


.      f- 


.'-^J-V 


X. 


'/^ 


^'■•^- — iii.- 


'V''  of  open  in  •; 

f^  _  ''.'V  here     the    b!oomin|,    '*.••.•  vi'.'; 
^^^  Tioddiftt    otr     liif     dewy      feed.  '^^  "^ 


fi     Ih'y      v^'-tljn'.       mossy      c 
'^       ,.:tj.       'V' 


eti. 


'  ','%  lovers 'haiKJ  shoiW  soiTes  Tond  y<AilJi  , 

,^,.-,  "R'-.-iiic;  t« ■.»;!?!.  ttiv  Wauties  biar.     ,**<  ^  i 

•^._.-     ....  .     v.-cy      .      ^-      .-    /  ; 

Thsl   w-is*eK  besiulies    flourish   %w-- /  i 


' ' -v-^^^^/^"^ 


PLATE  CXIV 

THYniENiA  CoLi.TNs's  SAMPLER.     Cir.   1790 
Oic-ned  by  Mrs.  B.  Osijood  Peirce 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  371 

casual  attendance.  During  1797  and  1798,  both  girls  embroidered 
shawls,  so  that  the  work  that  they  did  upon  their  samplers  was  not 
wasted.  The  first  building  was  made  in  1798,  and  in  1827  it  was 
incorporated  as  the  "Litchfield  Female  AcademJ^"  Miss  Pierce 
maintained  the  school  for  forty  years.  In  1802,  Nancy  Hale,  of 
Glastonbury,  who  was  a  pupil  in  the  school,  wrote  her  sisters  a  letter 
which  gives  a  far  better  pictin-e  of  what  a  school  was  in  those  days 
than  can  we,  who  only  imagine. 

Litchfield  Septr  1802 
Dear  Sisters 

Miss  Sophia  Hale  informs  me  that  she  expects  her  Parents  in  Litchfield  to- 
morrow who  are  going  directly  on  to  G — y*  and  she  with  them  &  I  very  soon  have 
retired  from  my  studies  to  enquire  after  your  health  &  that  of  all  friends.  My 
Dreams  often  present  me  with  you  enjoying  great  happiness;  but  I  awake  &  find 
it  nothing  but  the  visionary  fancies  of  a  Dream;  not  that  I  am  by  any  means 
Home-sick  tho  I  wish  to  hear  from  their  very  much  indeed.  I  spend  my  time  very 
agreeably  am  very  much  engaged  about  my  Picture.  C  Smith  began  one  when 
she  first  came  here  like  mine  but  I  have  got  some  ways  before  her  I  shall  endeavor 
to  be  as  diligent  as  possible.  I  have  visited  a  few  times,  Miss  Pierce  gave  me  an 
invitation  to  visit  her  last  Fryday  and  several  others ;  their  was  40  that  drank  tea 
in  one  room  at  one  time;  Their  was  some  Gentlemen  came  in  the  afternoon  and 
gave  us  all  an  invitation  to  attend  a  Ball  that  Evening  the  greatest  part  of  us 
attended.  Miss  P.  approves  of  our  dancing  very  much  she  says  that  we  set  so 
much  that  it  is  verj*  necessary  that  we  should  dance  sometimes  for  exercise. 
Besides  Embroidering  I  study  Geography  and  write  Composition  I  get  my  lessons 
in  Evening,  she  does  not  allow  any  one  to  Embroider  without  they  attend  to  some 
study  for  she  says  she  wishes  to  have  them  ornament  their  minds  when  they  are 
with  her. 

Parson  Morgan  of  Canaan  call'd  on  me  this  Afternoon  and  brought  me  a 
Letter  from  Nancy  M.  he  says  that  our  Friends  are  all  weU  their  &  he  gave  me 
a  very  polite  invitation  to  go  that  way  when  I  go  home  &  make  his  daughter  a 
visit.  He  is  now  on  his  way  to  N.  Haven —  I  shall  expect  a  Letter  when  S.  Hale 
returns,  for  her  Parents  are  going  to  leave  her  here  when  they  return.  I  hope  to 
finish  my  Picture  before  I  return  home  which  I  hope  you  will  let  me  stay  as  long 
as  you  possibly  are  willing  Vacation  is  either  2  or  7  weekes  from  now  their  has 
several  left  the  School  since  I  have  been  here  2  young  Ladies  that  board  in  the 
House  with  me  that  are  going  home  tomorrow  the  school  being  so  much  less  makes 
it  much  better  for  us  that  are  here,  their  has  been  70  in  the  School  since  I  have 
been  here  but  there  is  two  Miss  Pierces  who  assist  in  the  School.  If  the  wether 
continues  as  cold  as  it  is  now  (as  very  probably  it  will  be)  I  wish  you  to  bring  my 
Habit  when  you  come  after  me.  Last  Sundaj-  we  all  wore  woolen  Shawls  and 
several  wore  cloaks  to  Meeting  and  there  was  several  that  carried  Muffs.  Tuesday 
Morn  9  oClock  Coll  Hale  &  Lady  have  arrived  in  Town  this  Morning  Colonel 
Hale  I  have  seen  he  knew  me  altho  I  was  with  a  number  of  others  he  says  he 
shall  be  here  either  next  week  or  the  beginning  of  week  after     I  shall  certainly 

•Glastonbury. 


372  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

expect  a  Letter  then —  I  have  some  silk  paper  in  my  drawer  in  the  Case  of 
Drawers  I  wish  you  to  enclose  it  in  a  Letter  and  send  it  to  me  as  I  am  in  great 
want  of  some  and  their  is  none  to  be  had  in  town  I  want  it  for  my  Picture  I  am 
with  sentiments  of  esteem  your 

AflFectlonate 

Sister  Nancy  Hale. 
Addressed  to 

Miss  Hannah  Hale 
Glastonbury.* 

As  we  leave  New  England,  we  embark  on  more  uncharted  seas, 
for  we  leave  the  familiar  English  school  to  encounter  those  of  other 
nations.  So  it  gives  us  quite  a  shock  to  find  that  the  Dutch  were  far 
more  liberal  in  their  attitude  toward  educating  girls  than  were  our 
English  ancestors. 

Dame  Schools  were  very  common  in  Holland  at  the  time  when  the 
Dutch  came  to  New  York,  but  the  records  are  silent  as  to  whether 
they  brought  their  Dame  Schools  with  them  or  not.  An  author  tells 
us  that  "a  continuation  of  discreet  ignorance  seems  the  wisest  course" 
in  discussing  them.  The  school  dame  was  not  an  early  product  of 
Dutch  New  Netherlands,  except  that  the  summer  school,  if  it  con- 
sisted of  less  than  twenty  children,  might  be  taught  by  the  school- 
master's wife.  The  parochial  school  seems  to  have  taken  in  both  boys 
and  girls.  In  1698,  they  appear  to  have  had  a  sort  of  contest,  in  which 
forty-four  boys  and  twenty-one  girls  took  part,  in  repeating  psalms, 
hymns,  etc.  Dr.  SeljTis  reported  that  "the  girls  though  fewer  in  num- 
ber, had  learned  and  recited  more  in  proportion  than  the  boys."  The 
girls  evidently  had  their  intellects  much  better  attended  to  in  New 
York  than  in  New  England,  but  the  needle,  alas !  was  neglected,  for 
almost  no  Dutch  samplers  done  in  New  York  have  come  down  to  us. 
The  early  New  York  samplers  all  come  from  Long  Island.  Avhere 
the  English  influence  was  strong.  The  only  exception  is  the  sampler 
of  Catherine  Van  Schaick  "out  10",  worked  "  Jaer  1763",  in  Albany. 
It  is  a  very  plain  little  sampler,  but  most  interesting,  as  it  stands 
almost  alone. 

New  York  also  had  finishing  schools,  as  did  all  the  other  large 
cities  up  and  down  the  coast.    Before  1800,  the  Yearly  Meeting  of  the 

*  Letter  owned  by  George  Dudley  Seymour,  New  Haven. 


1^1 


w 


Sue  • 


c-<:»i'  n 


^    -    -^   <      I5l«£i  Pofa^' Vvey  «>«<'<<^  "^    If  I 


PLATE  CX\' 

Patty   Kexdai.i.  Steri.ixg's  Sampler.      180G 
The  Emma  B.  Hoihje  Collection 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  373 

Society  of  Friends  of  the  State  of  Xew  York  had  opened  a  boarding 
school.  The  real  name  of  the  school  was  so  long  that,  like  other  Quaker 
schools,  it  went  by  a  nickname,  and  was  called  the  "Nine  Partners' 
Boarding  School".  There  the  same  patterns  were  used  as  those  at  the 
other  Quaker  school  at  West  Town,  Pennsylvania.  The  designs  are 
quite  simple,  and  run  to  scattered  flowers  and  geometric  figures. 
These  latter  are  most  often  in  the  form  of  half  hexagons  along  the 
edge  of  the  sampler,  and  have  a  Dutch  or  German  effect.  Another 
school  in  New  York  had  the  interesting  name  of  "African  Free 
School."  Rosena  Disery  made  a  sampler  at  this  school  in  1820.  The 
sampler  was  seen  in  a  shop,  and  unfortunately  nothing  beyond  the 
name  of  the  girl  and  the  name  of  the  school  were  reported. 

New  Jersey  offers  us  the  earliest  sampler  with  a  teacher's  name 
upon  it.  Hannah  Foster,  of  Evesham,  records  in  1743,  "Elizabeth 
Sullivan  taught  me."  The  state  also  had  so  many  schools  that  one 
might  think  that  all  education  in  the  early  nineteenth  century  centered 
around  Philadelphia  and  the  adjacent  coasts  of  New  Jersey.  Though 
the  schools  were  many  and  all  of  them  enticed  the  girls  on  in  the  art 
of  sampler  making,  the  result  as  a  whole  was  not  thrilling.  The 
samplers  are  nearly  all  very  simple.  In  fact,  only  two  of  the  collec- 
tion stand  out  as  interesting.  In  1808,  Eliza  F.  Budd  made  an 
elaborate  picture  of  the  Court  House  at  Mount  Holly,  New  Jersey, 
and  cro^\Tied  the  corners  and  the  top  of  the  hip  roof  with  noble  urns. 
Beneath,  on  the  Court  House  terraces,  Ruth  gleans  the  sheaves  of 
Boaz;  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  approach.  King  David  tends  his 
flocks.  And  overhead  fly  birds,  quite  undisturbed  that  they  are  living 
both  in  Palestine  and  New  Jersey  at  the  same  time.* 

The  reason  for  the  great  numbers  of  schools  in  Pennsylvania  and 
New  Jersey  was  that  the  Society  of  Friends  believed  in  education; 
but  again,  alas !  in  the  early  days,  not  in  the  education  of  girls.  Female 
education  was  limited  to  the  bare  understanding  of  the  rudiments. 
Many  have  deplored  the  lack  of  letters  from  Colonial  women ;  the  lack 
was  not  in  preserving  them,  for  the  absence  of  letters  is  the  direct 

*See  also  Margaret  Kerlin  and  Sarah  Montgomery  Blair. 


374  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

result  of  insufficient  education.  It  is  most  amusing,  as  one  reads  the 
educational  history  of  each  state,  to  see  how  each  author  in  turn  calls 
the  period  of  1700-1750  one  of  "gloom  and  darkness."  New  Jersey 
made  a  struggle  in  the  right  direction,  but  it  apparently  was  a  very 
real  struggle.  There  was  a  young  ladies'  seminary  in  Elizabethstown 
in  1789,  but  it  soon  failed.  Two  years  later  a  French  school  was 
opened  to  teach  the  fashionable  accomplishments,  but  no  permanent 
school  resulted. 

In  1808,  Red  Bank,  a  farm  belonging  to  Barnes  Smock,  was  made 
into  a  school,  whose  first  teacher  was  George  Morford.  In  1825, 
Mary  Ann  Burroughs  embroidered  a  sampler  at  the  school  and  marked 
it  so.  The  school  was  made  an  Academy  in  1830,  and  is  or  was  the 
most  important  industrial  school  in  Monmouth  County.  The  Evesham 
School,  which,  as  we  know  from  the  samplers,  flourished  from  1808 
to  1820,  at  least,  furnishes  us  with  a  very  interesting  example  of  the 
fact  that  the  schools  in  Southern  New  Jersey  and  Eastern  Pennsyl- 
vania used  common  designs.  In  1808,  Julia  Haines,  at  the  Evesham 
School,  used  the  same  flattened  oval  wreath,  a  single  stitch  in  width, 
which  the  Bristol  and  Pleasant  Hill  Boarding  Schools  employed,  and 
which  the  North  School,  Philadelphia,  used  in  even  simpler  form. 
Outside  this  she  embroidered  a  border  which  is  distinctly  reminiscent 
of  many  which  are  found  on  the  samplers  from  the  West  Town  School. 

Pennsylvania,  very  early,  thanks  to  the  Moravians,  had  schools 
which  seem  to  have  taught  even  the  girls  some  sort  of  learning.  In 
1746,  the  sect  founded  a  school  at  Lititz,  near  Bethlehem,  in  Lancaster 
County.  The  school  was  in  the  midst  of  the  community,  and  one 
suspects  was  at  first  only  for  the  children  of  the  Moravians.  It  had 
early  a  national  reputation,  and  was  later  known  as  Linden  Hall 
Seminary. 

In  1799,  Mr.  John  C.  Ogden,  "Presbyter  in  the  Protestant  Epis- 
copal Church  in  the  United  States,"  printed  a  book  called  "An  Excur- 
sion into  Bethlehem  of  Nazareth,  in  Pennsylvania."  One  is  led  by 
the  title  to  expect  other  things,  but  our  learned  presbyter  certainly 


PLATE  CX^  I 

Julia  Boudixot's  Sampler.     1800 
Ozaned  by  Mrs.  Theodore  Weston 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  375 

took  his  expedition  in  almost  the  same  spirit  in  which  he  might  if  he 
had  gone  to  more  sacred  lands. 

He  found  things  much  to  his  taste  in  this  Moravian  settlement, 
and  it  may  have  been  the  seal  of  his  approval  which  later  led  good  little 
Episcopalians  like  our  sampler  maker  to  go  to  this  school. 

Having  gone  to  the  boys'  school,  our  traveler  next  visited  the  girls'. 

"The  hour  being  convenient  for  visiting  the  girls  school,  so  much  celebrated, 
a  pleasing  groupe  appeared  in  diflferent  rooms,  under  the  care  of  their  tutresses, 
where  they  learn  reading,  writing,  arithmetic,  embroidery,  drawing,  and  music. 

Since  the  application  to  receive  pupils  from  abroad,  have  become  so  frequent 
and  numerous,  a  new  building  has  been  erected  for  their  use,  upon  a  similar 
model,  with  the  sisters  house.  A  small  courtyard,  or  grass  plat,  is  between  these 
buildings. 

In  the  rear  of  this,  is  another  small  enclosure,  which  forms  a  broad  grass 
walk,  and  is  skirted  on  each  side  by  beds  devoted  to  flowers,  which  the  girls 
cultivate  as  their  own." 

The  visitor  goes  on  to  explain  that  the  teachers  are  in  no  respect 
like  nuns,  but  nevertheless  the  "instructresses  are  treated  with  due 
respect.  All  females  are  educated  by  them."  Then  when  he  has  seen 
all  that  there  was  to  see,  read  their  books,  and  enjoyed  their  hospitality, 
he  ends  enthusiastically  with  these  words: 

"The  whole  system  is  well  calculated  to  make  mankind  wiser  and  better;  to 
ameliorate  the  conditions  of  the  untutored,  and  correct  the  devious:  It  softens  the 
rugged  temper,  and  expands  the  benevolent  heart." 

With  this  seal  of  approval  from  a  high  dignitary  of  her  church, 
is  it  any  wonder  that  some  twenty  years  later  Catherine  Jones  Elder 
was  sent  there,  so  that  the  good  influences  of  the  place  might  be  very 
strongly  felt?  Catherine  was  seven,  and  was  sent  to  Lititz  to  recover 
from  an  unfortunate  love  affair !  A  schoolmate  had  written  her  a  love- 
letter,  and  the  occasion  was  felt  by  her  family  to  demand  a  separation 
of  the  lovers.  She  made  two  samplers  at  the  school,  one  in  1826  and 
one  in  1827.  Tradition  does  not  tell  whether  these  very  youthful  lovers 
were  faithful  or  not. 

Rather  earlier  than  most,  the  Society  of  Friends  discerned  the 
great  lack  of  education  among  girls  and  its  consequent  retarding  force 
on  the  growth  of  the  nation.  Pennsylvania  had  had  schools  perhaps 
of  the  same  sort  that  were  prevalent  farther  north,  but  Philadelphia 


376  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

had  no  boarding  schools  until  the  Revolution.  In  1770,  Mr.  Griscom 
advertised  his  private  "Academy"  at  the  North  End  of  Philadelphia; 
but  until  Mr.  Horton  started  the  idea  of  a  separate  school  for  girls 
in  1795,  education  for  them  had  been  purely  ornamental.  The  same 
year,  Poor's  "Academy  for  young  ladies"  was  at  No.  9  Cherry  Street. 

The  Society  of  Friends  carried  Mr.  Horton's  idea  out,  but  in  a 
different  form.  The  "Philadelphia  Yearly  Meeting"  started  a  school 
in  1794,  to  give  children  "a  guarded  religious  education."  The  land 
was  purchased  at  West  Town  the  next  year,  and  in  1796  the  school 
was  founded,  and  the  brick  building  a  hundred  feet  long  by  fifty-six 
wide  was  built.  It  was  three  stories  high,  as  Martha  Heuling's  sampler 
pictures  it  for  us.  In  1799,  "5  mo  6",  it  opened  with  twenty  pupils 
of  both  sexes,  but  by  midwinter  boasted  a  hundred  of  each.  From  that 
time  on,  the  school  was  in  continuous  session  for  thirty-seven  years, 
without  a  single  vacation.  Scholars  entered  at  any  time  for  a  year  or 
more.  The  sexes  were  kept  strictly  apart  in  the  early  years.  It  is 
somewhat  of  an  indication  of  the  popularity  of  the  school  that  we  have 
sixteen  samplers  which  were  known  to  have  been  made  there  between 
1802  and  1820.  Of  these,  ten  are  distinctly  plain,  usually  showing 
a  vine  or  conventional  border,  with  a  verse — true  Quaker  plainness. 
Two  show  a  rather  German  influence,  as  they  are  covered  with 
detached  sprays  of  flowers,  like  Susanna  Cox's  (see  Plate  xciv). 
Martha  Heuling  portrayed  the  first  building  of  the  school.  Her 
sampler  is,  unfortunately,  dim  with  age,  and  as  a  consequence  the 
reproduction  is  quite  vague.  There  were  other  forms  of  samplers  done 
in  the  school.  One  is  in  white  blocks  two  inches  square,*  with  the 
maker's  name  and  the  date  in  black;  another  is  entirely  in  blue;t 
while  a  third  has  the  lettering  done  with  pen  and  ink. J  (See  Plate 
cxiii.) 

The  game  of  matching  descriptions  is  quite  exciting  when  brought 
to  bear  on  the  Philadelphia  collection,  though  the  result  is  not  very 
definite.    From  1796  to  1828,  some  school  in  Philadelphia  evidently 

•Hannah  E.  Deacon,  1816. 
t  Phebe  Ann  Speakman,  1820. 
t  Hannah  Mendinhall,  1810. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  377 

specialized  on  houses  and  scenes.  Two  of  the  earlier,  Susan  Lehman's 
and  Hetty  Lees',  both  done  in  1799,  show  half  a  house  on  the  left, 
trees,  a  fence,  and  half  a  barn.  Thereafter  follows  a  somewhat  long 
line  of  houses,  with  weeping  willows,  poplars,  sheep,  cattle,  men,  and 
women.  The  sky  is  sometimes  filled  with  small  flowers;  one  has  the 
sun,  one  the  stars  with  the  sun,  and  three  the  American  Eagle  with 
outspread  wings.  They  are  none  of  them  actually  alike,  but  they  give 
the  impression  that  one  mind,  having  conceived  a  general  type,*  used 
it  in  varying  forms.  Another  interesting  fact  develops  by  this  com- 
parison. The  Pleasant  Hill  Boarding  School  and  the  Bristol  School 
evidently  exchanged  patterns;  and  Mary  Hamilton,  who  went  to 
Mrs.  Welchan's  School  at  Maytown,  Pennsylvania,  in  1812,  and 
Ann  E.  Kelly,  who  went  to  Mrs.  Leah  Meguire's  School,  in  Harris- 
burg,  in  1825,  embroidered  samplers  wiiose  form  is  almost  identical. 
The  North  School,  in  Philadelphia,  echoes  in  a  much  simpler  form 
that  used  by  the  Pleasant  Hill  and  Bristol  Schools. 

William  Penn  provided  for  education  in  Delaware,  which  seemed 
to  his  mind  most  important  in  order  that  "all  wicked  and  scandalous 
living  may  be  prevented  and  that  youth  may  be  successively  trained 
in  virtue,  and  useful  knowledge  and  arts." 

It  w^as  also  agreed  that  all  children  of  the  age  of  twelve  years 
"shall  be  taught  some  useful  trade  or  skill  to  the  [end  that]  none 
may  be  idle,  so  the  poor  could  may  be  work  to  live  and  the  rich  if  they 
became  poor,  may  not  want."t  In  his  last  lines  to  his  wife,  William 
Penn  exhorts  her  to  let  his  "children  be  husbandmen  and  housewives; 
it  is  industrious,  healthy,  honest  and  of  good  example."  In  order  to 
gain  this  result,  she  is  "to  spare  no  cost"  for  their  education. 

Penn's  high  ideals,  like  those  of  our  Pilgrim  and  Puritan  ances- 
tors, had  no  long  duration  in  fact;  and  Delaware  fell  a  prey,  as  did 
the  other  colonies,  to  the  period  of  "gloom  and  darkness"  which  held 
sway  until  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century. 

The    Swedes   founded   schools   early  in   the   eighteenth   century 

*  Emily  Sharpless,  Hetty  Lees,  Susan  Lehman,  Eliza  Wire,  Mary  Ann  Tawn,  Mary  Magdalen  Wolf,  Rebecca 
Skinner,  Margaret  Moss,  Mary  H.  Dwier.    (See  Plates  xliv  and  cii.) 
t  U.  S.  Dept.  Interior.    "  Monograph  on  Education  in  Delaware." 


378  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

where  they  endeavored  to  educate  both  boys  and  girls.  In  1717,  a 
school  was  opened  in  the  house  of  Johan  Gustafsson,  in  Christiana, 
Delaware,  and  the  schoolmaster  examined  the  children  sent  to  him. 
There  were  eleven  scholars,  of  whom  five  were  girls,  whose  capabilities 
were  duly  recorded  by  Mr.  Gioding : 

Mary  Geens,  9  years  old,  can  read  Swedish  and  say  the  Ten  Commandments. 

Mans  Gustaf's  daughter  Anika,  6  years  old  can  spell  Swedish  tolerably  well. 

Anders  Gustaf's  daughter,  Catherina,  12  years  old,  can  read  in  a  book,  but  must 
begin  to  learn  to  spell  right. 

Margaretta,  the  late  Peter  Stalcop's  daughter,  11  years  old,  reads  Swedish  in- 
differently well,  but  must  learn  to  spell  anew. 

Annika,  Anders  Gustaf's  daughter,  8  years  old,  can  spell  a  little. 

The  girls  were  not  so  far  behind  the  boys  in  education,  and  when  the 
school  ended  the  next  year,  it  was  so  wonderful  a  success  as  to  bring 
tears  to  the  parents'  eyes. 

The  English  schools  of  the  same  time  seem  to  have  been  in  a  much 
w^orse  way.  The  Rev.  George  Ross,  in  a  sketch  of  the  history  of  his 
church  at  New  Castle,  Delaware,  described  the  condition  of  education 
in  1727.  "There  are  some  private  schools  within  my  reputed  district 
which  are  put  very  often  into  the  hands  of  those  who  are  brought 
into  the  country  and  sold  for  servants.  Some  school  masters  are  hired 
by  the  year  by  a  knot  of  families  who  in  their  turns  entertain  him 
monthly  and  the  poor  man  lives  in  their  houses  like  one  that  begged 
an  alms,  more  than  like  a  person  in  credit  and  authority.  When  a  ship 
arrives  in  the  river  it  is  a  common  expression  with  those  who  stand  in 
need  of  an  instructor  for  their  children,  'let  us  go  and  buy  a  school 
master.'  The  truth  is,  the  office  and  character  of  such  a  person  is 
generally  very  mean  and  contemptible  here,  but  it  cannot  be  other- 
wise 'til  the  public  takes  the  education  of  children  into  their  mature 
consideration."* 

This  dismal  period  and  dismal  education  eventually  came  to  an 
end,  and  with  it  the  girls'  education  arose  to  what  was  normal  through- 
out the  colonies.  During  the  Revolution,  John  Thelwell  had  a  famous 
school  in  Wilmington.  His  first  school  was  at  the  foot  of  Quaker 
Hill,  but  he  soon  moved  to  the  little  Senate  Chamber  over  the 
Market  House, t  at  the  corner  of  King  and  Third  Streets.    Most  boys 

•"History  of  Public  School  Education  in  Delaware."    Stephen  B.  Weeks.    P.  16. 
t  "History  of  Education  in  Delaware."    Lyman  Pierson  Powell. 


«e 


Ind 


I  an 


Pir^k.' 


'T*^'  ''7i^' 


\y^o-  1 1^8^.  (806  wjH,  tfc^on. 

01  ;^ 


i8q3-»8;IV 


PLATE  CXVII 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  379 

and  girls  were  his  pupils,  at  least  during  part  of  their  school  days. 
The  attitude  of  the  times  toward  girls'  education  is  still  quite  evident, 
from  the  fact  that  the  boys  went  in  the  front  door,  and  the  girls  had 
to  go  through  a  side  door  up  an  alley.  Miss  Debby  Thelwell,  his 
eldest  daughter,  had  charge  of  the  girls.  Her  sister,  Miss  Polly,  was 
too  timid  to  teach,  but  after  their  father's  death  the  two  sisters  carried 
on  the  school  for  many  years. 

In  1785,  Ann  Askew  had  a  school  for  girls  in  Wilmington,  where 
Ann  Tatnall  embroidered  a  sampler,  which  resembles  in  a  marked 
degree  those  of  about  1730.  Nineteen  years  later,  her  daughter,  Eliza 
Tatnall  Sipples,  embroidered  her  sampler  at  the  "Southern  Boarding 
School"  in  Wilmington.  Later  the  Wilmington  Boarding  School, 
which  lasted  from  1813  to  1824,  taught  the  girls  in  that  city  the  gentle 
arts.     (See  Plate  cxi.) 

Again,  we  are  disturbed  because  there  is  a  definite  bond  of  type 
betw^een  samplers.  The  first  pair  might  easily  be  put  down  to  family 
taste.  Susannah  James,  in  1788,  and  Mary  James,  in  1798,  embroid- 
ered their  samplers,  not  entirely  alike,  but  distinctly  of  the  same  sort. 
The  other  pair  is  more  remarkable.  Sarah  Bancroft,  in  1795  (see 
Cover),  and  Sally  Brierly,  in  1828,  thirty-three  years  apart,  each 
embroidered  the  same  church  upon  her  sampler.  That  coincidence 
would  not  be  extremely  remarkable  except  for  the  fact  that  the  two 
are  almost  identical,  stitch  for  stitch.  Sally  Brierly  did  not  add  the 
scene  in  front,  with  the  pond,  boat,  and  swans,  but  she  made  the 
groundwork  of  her  sampler  more  ornate. 

On  Second  Street,  Wilmington,  from  1790  on,  Mrs.  Elizabeth 
Way  kept  a  school.  She  "was  a  celebrated  teacher  of  needlework,  so 
important  for  misses  in  those  times  that  even  the  art  of  shirt-making 
was  strictly  attended  to ;  the  fitting  and  cutting  were  taught  here  with 
neatness  and  care.  Most  of  the  older  females  brought  up  in  this  town 
have  been  her  pupils.  INIrs.  Way  was  a  very  respectable  and  worthy 
woman.  She  had  received  an  education  superior  to. most  women  of  her 
day  and  was  endowed  with  a  strong  mind  and  strict  principles  of 
morality;  yet  an  irritable  temper  was  a  drawback  to  her  usefulness 


380  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

and  it  was  annoying  to  some  of  her  pupils.  She  was  a  disciplinarian 
of  the  old  school  and  strictly  adhered  to  the  wise  king's  advice.  A 
bunch  of  switches  of  cat-o'-nine-tails  were  freely  used  to  correct  the 
naughty. 

"Leather  spectacles  were  worn  for  slighted  work.  Much  attention 
was  paid  to  the  position,  for  if  the  head  leaned  down  Jamestown-weed 
burs  strung  on  tape  were  ready  for  a  necklace ;  or  if  a  person  stooped 
a  steel  was  at  hand — this  was  the  length  of  the  waist — and  held  up  the 
chin  by  a  piece  extending  around  the  neck,  and  a  strap  confined  it 
down.  It  was  not  very  comfortable  to  the  wearer,  though  fitted  to 
make  the  'crooked  ways  straight',  but  a  morocco  spider  worn  on  the 
back  confined  to  the  shoulders  by  a  belt  was  more  usual. 

"The  celebrated  painter,  Benjamin  West,  had  been  a  companion 
of  Mrs.  Way's  childhood  and  youth.  As  absent  friends  they  kept  up  a 
correspondence  and  it  seemed  much  pleasure  to  her  to  relate  anecdotes 
of  his  early  days." 

In  1797,  Mr.  Crips  built  the  house  called  the  "Old  Boarding 
School."  Here,  a  few  years  later,  Mrs.  Capron,  who  had  had  a  school 
in  Philadelphia,  came  and  taught  the  young  ladies  of  Wilmington. 
She  was  succeeded  by  Joshua  Maule  and  Eli  Hilles.  After  Mr.  Maule 
died,  Samuel  Hilles  joined  his  brother,  and  the  school  was  continued 
by  one  or  both  until  about  1832. 

Delaware  and  Maryland  children,  both  boys  and  girls,  we  are  told, 
were  often  sent  abroad  to  English  schools,  and  many  must  have  had 
private  tutors,  because  plantation  life  meant  that  there  were,  outside 
the  cities,  fewer  towns  than  there  were  in  the  more  northern  states. 
The  southern  cities,  however,  furnished  the  same  sort  of  "finish"  to 
girls  that  the  northern  cities  did.  The  following  advertisement  might 
as  easily  have  emanated  from  Boston  as  from  Annapolis : 

"Mahy  Salisbuhy  proposes  keeping  school  in  Annapolis,  at  the  house  where 
Mr.  Sparrow  lived,  near  the  church,  to  teach  young  ladies  French  and  all  sorts 
of  fine  needlework,  tapestry,  embroidery  with  gold  and  silver,  and  every  other 
curious  work  which  can  be  performed  with  a  needle,  and  all  education  fit  for 
young  ladies  except  dancing."* 

*  "History  of  Education  in  Maryland."    Bernard  C.  Steiner. 


X 


J 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  381 

The  Chesterfield  School  seems  to  have  existed  quite  early,  for  we 
have  samplers  marked  with  the  school  name  from  1795  to  1821.* 
Teresia  Fenwick  had  a  governess,  Eleanor  Norland,  and  the  sampler 
done  under  her  care  is  the  only  one  so  far  reported  which  has  a  Calvary 
Cross  upon  it.  Mary  Robertson  may  also  have  been  a  governess; 
certainly  if  the  two  samplers  done  under  her  care  are  any  criterion, 
she  was  well  beloved,  for  her  pupils  gave  her  their  samplers,  and  she 
recorded  the  gift  with  words  of  praise  and  affection.  The  childish 
heart  is  hard  to  know,  and  the  childish  mind  is  sometimes  quite  canny 
in  its  reading  of  adult  character.  Perhaps  "the  two  dear  girls"  were 
flatterers,  and  had  gauged  Miss  Robertson's  gullibility.  Only  one 
other  school  in  Marjdand  is  known,  Mary  Walden's,  in  Baltimore, 
where,  in  1818,  Caroline  Vaughan  embroidered  a  sampler. 

Virginia  samplers  hardly  exist  before  the  nineteenth  century,  if  the 
records  so  far  gathered  are  of  any  value  as  proof,  and  there  is  no  school 
recorded  among  them.  We  do  know,  however,  that  in  1811  Amelia 
Hough  and  Mary  Lawrence  were  the  teachers  of  Amy  Ann  Phillips, 
of  Waterford,  Virginia. 

North  Carolina  boasted  a  Female  Academy  at  Salem,  at  least  as 
early  as  1805.  It  was  a  Moravian  school,  and,  judging  the  rest  of  the 
education  by  the  very  elaborate  sampler  done  by  Dovey  Winslow 
Wilson  while  a  student,  they  must  have  given  the  girls  a  very  fair 
knowledge.  They  allowed  her  to  use  not  only  embroider}^  but  pen 
and  ink,  and  oil  painting  for  the  face  of  the  mourning  woman.  And 
Hillsboro  had  a  school  in  1828,  where  Mary  T.  Lindsay,  of  Greens- 
boro, embroidered  a  simple  sampler. 

The  states  to  the  south  give  us  no  inkling  at  all  as  to  how  their  girls 
were  educated,  for  they  record  neither  teachers  nor  schools  upon  the 
rather  meager  collection  of  descriptive  blanks  which  have  come  to 
hand.  Perhaps  the  Pennsylvania  schools  received  their  share  of  pupils, 
and  governesses  and  mothers  taught  the  rest.  Kentucky  seems  to 
have  awakened  to  the  academy  idea  when  all  the  more  northern  states 
did,  and  Ohio  had  one  school  at  least,  at  Waynesville,  as  early  as  1807. 

•Jane  Henderson,  Abigail  andjMargaret  Decou. 


382  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

On  the  whole,  it  is  quite  surprising  to  find  how  large  a  contribution 
to  the  history  of  girls'  education  these  samplers  furnish.  While  the 
information  is  meager  in  itself,  it  still  gives  an  impetus  to  the  inquir- 
ing mind  to  find  out  the  condition  of  our  forebears ;  and  of  course  it 
increases  our  feeling  of  smug  satisfaction  that  we  of  the  present  day 
are  not  as  they  were,  but  quite  emancipated  from  the  dominating 
intellect  and  erudition  of  man. 

Ethel  Stanwood  Bolton. 

A  LIST  OF  EARLY  SCHOOLS 

MAINE  SAMPLER    WORKERS 

1799     Temperance  P.  Jackson,  instructress,  East  Harpswell.  Eunice  Purinton 

1805     Boarding  School,  Portland.  Betsy  Warren 

1818    Mme.  Neil's  School,  Portland.  Mary  Jane  Barker 

NEW  HAMPSHIRE 
1784-5    Mrs.  Montague's  School,  Portsmouth. 

1802     Miss  Ward's  School,  Portsmouth.  Sarah  Catherine  Moffat  Odiorne 

1810     Mary  E.  Hills  School,  Portsmouth.  Sarah  FitzGerald 

Canaan  Family  (Shakers).     Emma  Johnson,  teacher.  Hannah  Wilson 

VERMONT 

MASSACHUSETTS 
1706    Mistress  Mary  Trufrey,  South  End,  Boston. 
1714     James  Ivers  Boarding  School,  Bowling  Green  House,  Cambridge  Street, 

Boston. 

17 1731     Mrs.  Rebecca  Lawrence,  Boston.    Died  October  2,  1731. 

1739-1741     No  school  named.  Anne  Wing 

Lydia  Kneeland 

1742-1747     Mrs.  Condy,  embroidery  school. 

1747-1748     Mrs.  HiUer,  5th  Street,  North  End,  Boston. 

1748     Mrs.  Morehead,  Head  of  the  Rope  Walks,  Fort  Hill,  Boston. 

1748     Union  Academy,  Salem.  Mary  Crowninshield 

1750  Susanna  Babbidge,  Salem.     (Cir.  aet.  90,  1804,  "a  superior  woman".) 

1751  Elinor  and  Mary  Purcell,  Summer  Street,  Boston. 
1751-1753     Elizabeth  Murray,  Cornhill,  Boston. 

17 —    Elizabeth  Waldron,  near  the  Common,  Boston.     1752,  removed  to  Milton. 
1757-1758     Eleanor  Mcllvaine,  opposite  the  Governor's,  Boston. 
1759     Mrs.  Jane  Day,  opposite  the  Brazen  Head,  Cornhill,  Boston. 


lio^ie  and  Trefoil. 


'8S 


Ro^q^Ioud. 


.745- .7-^3 


y 


G 


''^  i 


'7^ 


%£>^^<3,/ 


1 

n 


f 


'-tu_EU_U' 


Tufi]o  and  Honqy^T^a^is. 


PLATE  CXIX 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


383 


1764    Mrs.  Rawson's  School  (?). 

1769     Amy  and  Elizabeth  Cumings  School,  Boston. 

177S-1786     Sarah  Stivour's  School,  Salem? 


SAMPLER    WOEKEHS 

Mary  Dedman 

1778  Betsy  Ives 

1778  Nabby  Mason  Peele 

1779  Mary  Gilman  Woodbridge 
1779  Sarah  Perkins? 

1786     Sally  Witt 

Hannah  G.  Gowen 


1785    Miss  Southerland's  School,  Boston. 

1784-1800     Lydia  Babbidge,  Salem. 

1800  "Died  Lydia  Babbidge  aet.  67  who,  with  her  mother  now  aged  86, 
has  kept  a  school  for  little  children.  Her  mother  has  been  a  School 
Dame  above  I  a  Century."* 

1787  Mrs.  Horton's  School,  Springfield? 

1788  on     Mrs.  Higginson's  School,  later  Miss  Hetty  Higginson's.    Miss  Higgin- 

son  died  in  1846.* 

1790  Priscilla  Gill,  schoolmistress,  Salem.* 

1791  Madam    Mansfield,   Salem.      "April    18.      Last   Saturday   died    suddenly 

Madam  Mansfield  a  very  aged  Matron,  who  for  many  years  has  been 
a  School-Mistress."  (d.  aet.  82,  "the  good  habits  suited  to  her  times 
&  her  success."*) 

17  to  1794      ) 

,w«^  r     lo      >  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Nathaniel  Rogers,  Salem.* 

1796  to  18 —  j  * 

1792  Sarah  Knight,  Schooldame,  Ivers  Lane,  Salem.* 
1792     Hannah  MascoU,  Schooldame,  Salem.* 

1794    Derby  School,  Leominster? 

1797  Miss  Sally  Flint's  School,  Methuen. 

1802  Mrs.  Saunders,  Gloucester.* 

1803  Mrs.  Dobell's  Seminary,  Boston. 
1803  Westport  School,  Westport. 
1803  "A  Boston  School." 

1807  Bridgewater  Academy,  Bridgewater. 

1808  Bradford  Academy,  Bradford. 
1812    Miss  Perkins  Academy,  Boston. 


Salla  White 


Lydia  Loring 
Lydia  Tyler 


1812     Miss  Mary  Cummings  School,  Westford. 

1812  Mrs.  Rowson's  Academy,  Boston. 

1813  Mrs.  Tufts'  School,  Charlestown. 

to  1814     Mrs.  Hannah  Tucker,  Gloucester,* 

1818     L.  Brigham's  School,  Marlborough. 

1818  N.  L.,  "  by  my  superintendency." 

1819  L.  Jolmson's  School,  Salem? 
1825-1828     Groton  Female  Seminary,  Groton. 


1825 
1828 


Eliza  Crocker 

Pamela  Brownell 

Mary  Tyler 

Eliza  Wentworth 

Roxana  Peabody 

Hannah  Loring 

Eliza  Pratt  (?) 

Mary  Richardson 

Mary  Ann  Barry 

Eliza  W.  Gale 

Hannah  Peters 

Lydia  Kimball 

Lydia  Johnson 

Mary  Eliza  Brannum 
Almira  Bates  Brannum 


•  William  Bentley's  Diary. 


384 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


1825     Mr.  Thomas  Cole,  Salem. 
1828     Salem  Street  Academy,  Boston. 
Undated     Harriet  Ellis'  School,  Newburyport. 
Undated     Miss  Damon's  School,  Boston. 
Undated     Maria  S.  Aiken's  School,  Newburyport. 

RHODE  ISLAND 

1785-1810     Miss  Polly  Balch's  Seminary,  Providence. 

1785 
1786 
1786 
1786 
1788 
1789 
1789 
1790 
1791 

1796 

1797 
1798 

[1799] 
1810 

Undated 
Undated 


SAMPLER   WORKERS 

Sarah  C.  Bendols 

Eliza  Reed 

Elizabeth  M.  Ford 

Joanna  Huse 


Loana  Smith 
Polly  Turner 
Nab  by  Martin 
Nancy  Winsor 
Nancy  Hall 
Frances  Jones 
Sally  Alger 
Ann  Hamlin? 
Sophie  Packard 
Judith  Paul 
Mary  Talbot 

Phebe  Hughes? 
Julia  Lippitt 
Mehitable  Hamlin? 
Eliza  Cozzens 
Susan  Whitm,ore 
Eliza  Pearce  Jones 
Maria  Hopping? 

Unknown.    1st  Congregational  Church 


After  1814  Sorafe  F.  Sweet? 


1801     Warren. 

1810     West  School,  Providence? 

Undated     Jenck's  Street  School,  Providence. 

CONNECTICUT 

1791  Mrs.  Mansfield's  School,  State  Street,  New  Haven. 

1792  on     Miss  Sarah  Pierce's  School,  Litchfield. 

1816     Miss  L.  P.  Mott's  School,  Hartford. 

1824  Miss  Lucy  W.  Case,  teacher.  Canton. 

1825  Sally  Hinsdale,  New  Hartford. 


Anna  Saunders 
1809     Nancy  Baker 

Eliza  Talbot 
Abby  Mare  ford 


Lydia  Church 

Elizabeth  Lyon? 

Jerusha,  Mary  and  Sarah  Perry 

1820     Marian  Lewis 

Anna  Huntington 

Clarissa  Ca^se 

Sixteen  small  samplers 


NEW  YORK 

1800  The  School  of  the  Yearly  Meeting  of  the  Society  of  Friends, 
of  the  State  of  New  York,  nicknamed  the  "Nine  Partners 
Boarding  School",  New  York  City. 

1810     School  No.  13. 


1800     Eliza  Bowne 

1805     Jane  Merritt 

Elizabeth  Stevens 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


38.5 


1814     Huntington  Academy,  Long  Island. 
1820    African  Free  Sctiool,  New  York  City. 


SAMPLER    WORKEBS 

Caroline  Kelcij 
Rosena  Disery 


NEW  JERSEY 

1743  Elizabeth  Sullivan,  teacher,  Salem. 

1797  Sarah  Shoemaker,  teacher,  Pemberton. 
1808-1820     Evesham  School. 

1810  Westfteld  School. 

1812  Rancocus  School. 

1813  Haines  Neck  School. 

1816  Greenville  School. 

1817  Great  Egg  Harbor  School.    Monthly  Meeting  of  Friends. 
1821  Greenwich  School. 

1825  Red  Bank  School. 

1826  Middletown  Academy. 

1829  Mrs.  Hayward's  School,  Hackensack. 

1835  Mrs.  Elmendorf's  Seminary,  Kingston. 


Hannah  Foster 

Esther  Earl 

1808     Jane  Haines 

1820     Hannah  Gardiner 

Sarah  lAppincott 

Ann  Wills 

Rebecca  Peterson 

Henrietta  Kay 

Margaret  Lake 

Mary  V.  Hur/hes 

Mary  Ann  Burroughs 

Leah  Conover 

Catherine  A.  Va7i  C.  Boyd 

Catherine  De  Wit  Young 


PENNSYLVANIA 

1746-1827     Linden  Hall  Seminary,  Lititz,  Lancaster  County 
1827.) 

1796     Mrs.  Capron's  Boarding  School,  Philadelphia. 

1796-1820     The  School  of  the  Yearly  Meeting  of  Friends  of  the  City 
of  Philadelphia   at   West  Town,   called   the  "West   Town 


(1826  and 

Catherine  Jones  Elder 
Peggy  Douglas 


Boarding  School."    (Quaker.) 


1808-1827     Bristol  School,  Bristol.     (Quaker.) 

1808     Pleasant  Hill  Boarding  School. 
1808-1813     Mrs.  Armstrong's  School,  Lancaster. 


1800     Keziah  Mickle 

1802  Susanna  Cox 
Mary  Lea 

8.  W.  Miller 

1803  Eunice  Bloomfield 
Rebecca  Black 
Elizabeth  Goodwin 
Hannah  Ellet 
Martha  Heuling 
Alice  Jarrett 
Ruth  Almy 
Ann  Deacon 
Ann  T.  N'ewbold 
Hannah  E.  Deacon 
Phebe  Ann  Speakman 

1808     Barbary   Eagles 
1827     Susanna   Magarge 

Julia  Knight 

1808     Fanny  Rice 
1813     Willamina  Rine 


1805 
1806 

1810 


1813 
1816 
1820 


386 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


1812    North  School,  Philadelphia. 

1812    Mrs.  Welchan's  School,  Maytown,  near  Pottstown. 

1813-1822     Easton  School,  Easton. 

1814    Chesterford  School,  near  West  Chester. 

1818  Ellisburg  School,  near  Philadelphia. 

1819  Mrs.  Buchanan's  School,  Wrightsvllle. 
Dame  School,  Philadelphia. 

1824  Ruth  H.  Redman's  School,  "Strawsburg"  [Strasburg]. 

1825  Mrs.  Leah  Meguire's  School,  Harrisburg. 
1827  Northern  Liberty  School,  Philadelphia? 
1830  West  Chester  School. 

1833     Mrs.  D.  H.  Maundel's  Seminary,  101  South  5th  Street,  Philadelphia 


SAMPLER    WORKERS 

Hannah  D.  Lambert 

Mary  Hamilton 

Hannah  E.  Moore 
Catherine  Withcim 

Lydia  Burroughs 

Mary  Coles 

Mary  Fitz 

Mary  Magdalen  Wolf 

Elizabeth  Herrher 

Ann  E.  Kelley 

Jane  E.  Sharp 

Juli  Ann  Crispin 

.     Victorine  Delacroix 


DELAWARE 

1775  on    Miss  Debby  Thelwell,  Wilmington.    Taught  first  in  her  father's  school. 
Later,  she  and  her  sister  taught  many  years. 

1785    Ann  Askew,  teacher,  Wilmington. 

1788     Mme.  Abigail  Giles,  an  Englishwoman,  Newcastle  County. 

1790  on     Mrs.  Elizabeth  West,  Wilmington. 

1798    "Old  Boarding  School",  Wilmington,  taught  by 
1797     Mr.  Crips 

1798-1809     Mrs.  Capron  of  Philadelphia  q.v. 
1809    Joshua  Maule  and  Eli  Hilles 
Later,  Eli  and  Samuel  Hilles 
1828    Samuel  Hilles 

1804    Southern  Boarding  School. 


1809    Frankford  School. 

1813-1824     Wilmington  Boarding  School. 

1827     Middletown  Academy. 

Girls'  School.    Miss  Isabella  Anderson,  preceptress. 


Ann  Tatnall 
Susanna  James 


Eliza  Tatnall  Sipples 
Mary  Middleton 

C.  Sanderson 

M.  Woodnut 
Mary  Gaw  Janvier 


MARYLAND 
1764    Mary  Salisbury,  teacher,  Annapolis. 
1795-1821     Chesterfield  School. 

1798    Easton  Academy,  Talbot  County. 

1802     Eleanor  Norland,  governess. 

1811     Amelia  Hough  and  Mary  Lawrence,  teachers,  Waterford. 


Jane  Henderson 
Abigail  Decou 
Margaret  Decou 

Teresia  Fenwick 
Amy  Ann  Phillips 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


387 


SAMPLER    WORKERS 

1813     Mary  Robertson,  teacher. 

"Mary  Clapham  for  Mary  Robertson.  1813  or  1815  S.E.Z.  and 
M.C.  [Mary  Clapham?]  through  the  industry  of  two  dear  girls  I 
have  been  made  the  proprietor  of  this  very  excellent  sampler  to  whom 
I  feel  much  indebted.    M.  Robertson,  1816." 

1818     Mary  Walden's  School,  Baltimore.  Caroline  Vaughan 


VIRGINIA 
1809     Piney  Grove  School,  Charles  City  County. 


TuUiania  Evans 


NORTH  CAROLINA 

1805     Salem  Female  Academy  (Moravian  School),  Salem. 
1828     Hilisboro  School. 


Dovey  Winslow  Wilson 
Mary  T.  Lindsay 


KENTUCKY 

1808    Domestic  Academy,  Washington. 

Mrs.  Keats,  principal. 
1810    Mrs.  Mary  Scotts'  School,  Louisville. 


Matilda  Ward 


Martha  Malvina  Miledge  Jones 


TENNESSEE 
1832     Carthage  Female  Institute. 


Penelope  C.  Williams 


OHIO 

1807     Waynesville  School,  Waynesville. 


Margaret  Holloway 


UNIDENTIFIED 

1782     Miss  Brunton,  teacher. 

1795     "School  of  Industry." 

1802    Mrs.  Woodson's  School. 

1814     Laurel  Grove  School. 

Hannah  Barton,  preceptress. 

1816     Polly  Huntington,  teacher,  Lebanon. 

1819     Miss  Moody's  School. 

1819    "Lydia  Sata  Lee,  Instructress." 

Samplers  probably  worked  in  the  same  School: 
Hunting  Scene. 


Scene  with  Black  Backgrounds. 


Esther  Hoston 

Jane  Eglow 

Mary  Elizabeth  Porthress  Doswell 

Beulah  Barton 

Caroline  Walton 

Caroline  Carleton 

Mary  Chapel 


Sukey  Makepeace 
Grace  Welch 
Abigail  Mears 
Mary  Russell 
Patty  Coggeshall 


MATERIALS,  DESIGNS,  STITCHES 

IN  1738,  Sarah  Troup  embroidered  on  her  sampler,  "Let  none 
despise  the  criss-cross  row."  It  is  in  this  spirit  that  we  would  have 
our  readers  approach  the  consideration  of  the  material,  design, 
and  stitchery  of  the  sampler.  For  we  are  here  not  considering  great 
works  of  art,  but  the  spontaneous  growth  of  a  handicraft  in  a  very- 
young  civilization. 

Of  the  three  subjects  under  discussion,  the  first  is  by  far  the  easiest 
to  approach,  for  we  have  a  very  solid  foundation  in  the  fact  that  the 
greater  number  of  samplers  in  all  periods  were  worked  upon  linen. 
The  English  writers  on  samplers  tell  us  that  the  early  hand-looms  wove 
linen  but  eight  or  nine  inches  wide,  and  adduce  from  the  fact  the  reason 
that  the  early  sampler  was  long  and  narrow.  Perhaps  that  may  have 
been  the  case  with  those  very  earliest  examples,  which  have  so  com- 
pletely disappeared,  but  a  study  of  the  seventeenth  centurj^  sampler 
does  not  bear  out  the  contention.  Very  many  of  the  samplers  of  that 
period  have  the  selvage  at  the  top  and  bottom.  The  continental  looms 
were  much  broader  than  the  English,  and  the  linen  for  these  samplers 
was  evidently  imported.  Perhaps  the  truth  is  that  the  narrow  English 
loom,  and  the  fact  that  eight  inches  was  amply  wide  to  accommodate 
the  ordinary  repeat  pattern,  set  the  style.  So  the  English  embroiderer 
was  bound  by  convention  to  the  narrow  form,  even  though  the  wide 
continental  linen  allowed  more  freedom  in  shape  and  size.  Gradually, 
as  the  English  wove  wider  linen,  the  long  sampler  gave  place  to  the 
square,  and  the  latter  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century  saw  the  final 
passing  of  the  narrow  type.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth  cen- 
tury, the  English  began  to  use  a  mustard  colored  linen,  not  very 
attractive  to  our  modern  taste.  Toward  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth 
century  it  became  quite  common.  This  material  was  not  so  much 
used  in  America,  though  there  are  some  examples.  The  American 
linen,  of  the  same  color,  was  coarser  and  rougher  than  the  English, 

388 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  389 

which  was  often  quite  fine  enough  for  the  making  of  lace  samplers. 
We,  on  the  other  hand,  sometimes  used  a  dark  green  linen,  which  is 
at  times  mournful  and  at  times  artistic.  The  two  Brierlv  sisters  used 
a  light  blue. 

We  have  the  record  of  one  sampler  done  on  brown  linen  in  differ- 
ent shades  of  brown  and  dark  green.  The  result  must  be  rather 
monotonous  and  subdued.  The  linen  used  was  not  always  the  plain 
homespun  which  forms  the  background  of  the  great  majority,  for 
once  in  a  while  the  more  elaborately  woven  "bird's-eye"  linen  was 
used.  Elizabeth  Lea,  who  lived  in  Delaware,  embroidered  on  this  kind 
of  linen  in  1752. 

Some  of  the  early  samplers  were  bound  with  silk  tape.  Hannah 
Wiggins  did  it  in  1730;  and  the  habit  was  never  quite  abandoned, 
though  the  later  ribbons  were  sometimes  put  on  with  gathers,  and 
were  generally  wider  than  Hannah  Wiggins's,  which  was  only  half  an 
inch  wide.  JNIany  put  rosettes  in  the  corners,  and  some  children  sewed 
their  samplers  to  paper.  Perhaps  these  were  ancient  forms  of  passe- 
partout, and  used  when  parents  were  too  poor  or  too  indifferent  to 
frame  the  children's  work. 

Another  background  was  used  in  England,  called  "catgut,"  a  kind 
of  canvas,  but  whether  we  in  America  ever  used  it  or  not  is  quite 
difficult  to  answer.  1  fancy  that  the  material  is  not  well  kno^vn,  be- 
cause in  the  "Vicar  of  Wakefield,"  where  a  young  lady  was  spoken  of 
as  "flourishing  upon  catgut,"  most  people  inferred  that  she  played  the 
violin.  One  critic,  however,  discovered  that  she  did  no  such  unmaidenly 
act.  This  was  merely  another  way  of  saying  that  she  did  embroidery 
on  canvas,  with  "flourishing  thread,"  which  is  a  flat,  very  shiny  linen 
thread.  "Flourishing"  was  advertised  to  be  taught  in  Boston  as  early 
as  1716. 

The  English  began,  about  1750,  to  use  tammy  cloth  and,  sad  to 
say,  some  of  our  ancestors  also  used  it.  This,  being  of  w^ool,  did  all 
the  evil  things  it  could:  it  shrank,  it  curled,  and  it  furnished  food  for 
moths.  The  stuff  itself  resembles  mohair  in  its  sheen,  and  was  prob- 
ablv  chosen  because  the  threads  were  more  even  than  in  linen,  and 


390  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

finer  in  quality.  The  sampler,  when  just  finished,  was  probably  much 
more  symmetrical  and  perhaps  more  attractive  than  one  done  on 
linen.  Cotton  was  sometimes  used,  but  never  imparted  an  elegant 
appearance.  Canary  canvas  and  Penelope  canvas  were  used  in  the 
nineteenth  century.  The  finest  samplers  were  embroidered  on  bolting- 
cloth,  a  very  transparent  woolen  gauze,  used  to  bolt  flour.  This  form 
of  sampler  was,  of  course,  as  useful  as  food  for  moths  as  were  those 
on  tammy  cloth,  and  as  a  result  many  lovely  ones  have  regrettable 
holes.  Satin  was  sparingly  used  for  samplers  proper,  being  as  a  rule 
reserved  for  the  *' mourning  pieces,"  with  tombs,  willow  trees,  and 
mourning  shepherdesses.  Satin  was  better  for  these  doleful  pictures 
because  usually  the  tombs  and  their  inscriptions  were  painted  in,  and 
satin  was  a  better  medium  than  anything  else  for  the  combination  of 
paint  and  embroidery.  One  sampler  at  least  was  made  on  "lute- 
string" silk.  A  few  of  the  samplers  in  Providence,  Rhode  Island, 
by  a  skillful  running  of  blue  silk  thread  from  the  back,  give  the  effect 
of  a  combination  of  silk  and  linen  that  is  very  charming  and  quite 
misleading,  if  only  the  right  side  is  seen. 

The  thread  that  was  used,  whatever  its  nature — silk,  linen,  wool, 
or  cotton — was  always  home  dyed,  and  so  the  resulting  color  was 
dependent  upon  the  taste  and  skill  of  the  dyer.  The  colors  were 
made  from  our  native  herbs,  from  log-wood,  cochineal,  and  indigo 
from  overseas,  from  saffron,  from  the  planta  genesta,  which  gave  its 
name  to  a  line  of  Kings,  and  which  now  runs  wild  in  Essex  County, 
Massachusetts. 

Linen  thread  was  sometimes  used,  and  crewels  are  known  on 
samplers  as  early  as  1686,  but  neither  of  these  threads  ever  really 
rivalled  silk  as  a  medium.  Crewels  appear  somewhat  sporadically. 
Alice  Woodwell,  of  Newburyport,  in  1760,  used  them,  and  so  did 
Betty  Tippit  in  1774.  This  latter  sampler  is  the  most  remarkable 
that  has  come  to  be  recorded.  It  is  about  six  feet  long  and  ten  inches 
wide,  and  done  on  rather  heavy  cotton.  The  whole  is  divided  into 
squares,  and  on  each  is  a  crewel-worked  flower,  fern,  or  branch.  Across 
the  top,  running  the  whole  length  of  the  sampler,  is  embroidered  in 


PLATE  CXXI 


Arms  of  the  Hox.  George  Boyd,  of  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  impaling  Brewster 

Hatchment  embroidered  by  Submit  Boyd,  cir.   1795 

Owned  hi/  Barrett   Wiiidcll.  Exq. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  391 

cross-stitch  the  verse,  "Betty  Tippit  is  my  name,  and  with  my  needle 
I  wroght  the  same"  etc.,  with  her  age,  eighteen,  and  the  year,  1774. 

Some  of  the  silk  thread  on  our  American  samplers  shows  a  queer 
kinkiness,  which  looks  as  if  it  had  been  twisted  in  large  hanks,  and 
later  ravelled  to  finer  thread  for  use.  Some  of  this  silk  is  on  samplers 
which  can  be  traced  back  to  Essex  County,  Massachusetts,  particu- 
larly to  the  environs  of  Salem,  whence  ships  went  to  all  parts  of  the 
world.  The  hint  has  come  to  us  that  such  silk  can  be  seen  in  Japan 
and  China,  and  so  we  wonder  whether  these  Essex  County  maidens 
were  not  using  early  spoils  from  the  Orient,  brought  overseas  by 
Yankee  captains.  The  Dutch  of  Pennsylvania  also  used  it,  and  they 
were  traders,  too. 

The  effect  of  this  kinky  silk  is  very  attractive,  and  gives  a  more 
interesting  surface  than  the  smooth  or  tightly  twisted  silks.  It  is 
nearly  always  used  in  very  long  stitches,*  couched  sometimes,  and 
sometimes  left  free.  All  the  threads  they  used  were  wound  on  card- 
board "stars,"  or  on  those  lovely  ivory  winders  that  our  merchants 
brought  from  China.  Most  of  our  great-grandmothers  used  a  gold 
thimble,  which  they  had  inherited,  cherished,  and  handed  down  till 
the  top  was  so  worn  as  to  let  the  needle  through,  instead  of  pushing  it, 
as  its  duty  w^as.  Some  of  them  had  no  top  at  all,  like  a  tailor's  thimble. 
Sometimes  chenille  was  added  to  make  the  sampler  more  elaborate, 
but  this  was  general  only  after  1800. 

As  we  turn  to  design  we  are  already  plunged  into  the  midst  of 
a  controversy,  which  depends  so  much  more  on  tradition  than  on  fact, 
that  it  seems  in  a  fair  way  to  continue  forever.  This  is  the  contro- 
versy as  to  the  origin  of  English  design.  With  a  rather  grim  lack 
of  confidence  in  English  ability  to  evolve  things  artistic,  the  experts 
seek  foreign  influence  for  everything.  Some  say  it  is  all  Italian,  and 
others,  looking  to  broader  fields,  contend  that  Holland,  Spain,  France, 
Persia,  and  the  other  countries  may  also  have  contributed.  Again 
some  English  experts  agree  that  the  purely  lace  sampler  antedates 
those  in  colored  work,  while  others  maintain  that  those  that  have  the 

•See  Sarah  Stivour's  School.    Sally  Witt,  Plate  xci,  and  Nabby  Mason  Peele,  Plate  xc. 


392  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

isolated  designs  in  color  are  the  oldest  of  all.  As  there  are  none  at  all 
that  can  be  dated  with  accuracy  until  about  1610,  when  Anne  Gower, 
the  wife  of  Governor  Endecott,  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  Colony, 
made  hers,  neither  side  can  prove  its  claim.  So  it  will  be  better  to  say 
that  these  three  kinds  exist,  separate  often,  and  oftentimes  all  upon 
the  same  sampler. 

The  lace  sampler  certainly  was  very  early,  and  was  the  earliest 
to  disappear.  Tradition  tells  us  that  Catherine  of  Aragon  taught 
the  Bedfordshire  women  punto  tagliato,  and  whether  the  tradition  is 
true  or  not,  that  form  appears  very  early,  combined  with  punto  tirato 
and  some  filet.  Punto  tagliato  is  lace  made  on  linen,  where  both  the 
warp  and  the  woof  are  removed;  punto  tirato  is  also  made  on  linen, 
where  the  threads  are  drawn,  but  part  of  the  warp  and  woof  remain 
to  be  used  as  a  background.    With  filet  we  are  all  familiar. 

The  lace  sampler,  of  either  kind,  was  always  exquisitely  done,  par- 
ticularly about  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  which  seems 
to  mark  the  crest  of  the  wave  of  all  sampler  work.  These  lace  samplers 
contained  repeating  designs,  in  almost  every  case,  and  so  they  were 
worked  in  bands  across  the  linen.  The  punto  tagliato  was  often  en- 
hanced by  raised  petals  of  flowers,*  and  the  coats  and  draperies  on 
small  human  figures  made  separately  and  sewed  on.  This  was  not 
often  done  in  America,  but  perhaps  it  is  unfair  to  generalize  too  much 
on  the  few  American  seventeenth  century  samplers  that  remain  to  us. 
One  always  has  the  feeling  that  there  must  have  been  many  more, 
but  that  the  Inal  n  wars,  with  their  burning  houses,  and  the  destruc- 
tion which  comes  of  careless  and  indifferent  owners  through  two  cen- 
turies and  more,  have  diminished  them  most  unfortunately.  The  lace 
sampler  as  developed  by  the  English  showed  designs  that  were 
beautiful  and  varied,  and  had  real  distinction.  We  in  America  in  the 
seventeenth  century  fell  rather  below  the  best  English  level.  Our 
samplers  were  somewhat  shorter,  and  were  not  always  as  elaborate 
in  design. 

Turning  now  to  the  embroidered  design,  we  find  that  the  seven- 

•  See  Sarah  Lord,  Plate  iii,  and  the  Fleetwood  sampler,  Plate  viii. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  393 

teenth  and  the  early  eighteenth  centuries  give  us  two  kinds,  one  done 
in  white,  and  one  in  color.  The  white  embroidery  was  nearly  always 
done  in  satin-stitch,  in  repeating  geometric  designs.  Anne  Gower's* 
sampler  is  a  good  example  in  the  seventeenth  century,  and  Grace 
Tay'sf  in  the  eighteenth.  This  form  fell  into  disuse  about  the  time 
that  the  lace  sampler  did,  so  that  its  history  in  America  was  nearly 
over  in  1720.  We  seldom  find  white  thread  used  in  the  later  samplers, 
except  in  darning  or  stocking  stitch.  Mary  Gill's^  sampler,  done  in 
white  cotton,  is  an  illustration  of  its  later  use. 

In  the  seventeenth  century  the  designs  in  color  were  most  compli- 
cated and  elaborate,  and  the  stitches  used  were  many.  The  designs 
were  always  conventionalized  flowers  or  fruits,  partly  because  the 
angular  cross-stitch  and  tent-stitch  were  the  most  common  means  of 
expression,  and  partly  because  a  repeating  motif  demanded  it.  The 
commonest  designs  were  the  rose,  "Indian  pink,"  trefoil,  strawberry, 
acorn,  and  the  "  Tree  of  Life."  These  and  others  were  mixed  into  most 
complicated  combinations.  The  designs  are  sometimes  so  conven- 
tionalized that  their  origin  is  lost  in  obscurity.  In  addition,  there  were 
patterns  of  a  purely  geometric  character.  The  popularity  of  the  acorn 
is  supposed  to  have  arisen  from  King  Charles's  adventure  in  the 
"Boscabelle  Oak."  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  acorn  and  strawberry  were 
soon  so  distorted  from  their  pristine  form  that  it  is  a  bold  person  who 
would  say  with  definiteness  which  is  which.  Strawberry  and  acorn 
became  so  conventionalized  that  they  resembled  each  other  more  than 
they  resembled  their  original.  Two  other  designs  on  these  early  sam- 
plers are  worth  a  word,  for  both  so  suddenl^^^  disappear.  The  first  are 
the  famous  "boxers,"  which  can  be  seen  on  Elizabeth  Robert's§  sam- 
pler. Of  course,  their  pose  is  not  the  least  like  a  boxer's,  though  their 
attitude  is  always  the  same.  They  vary  onh^  in  what  they  hold  in  their 
upraised  hand.  They  are  akin  in  reality  to  the  Greek  Erotes,  and  the 
Renaissance  Cupids.  The  second  is  a  design  which  may  be  seen  in 
Mary  Hudson's  ||  sampler  near  the  middle,  which  resembles  an  S  on 

•Plate  i. 
t  Plate  X. 
t Plate  Ixix. 
§  See  Plate  vi 
II  See  Plate  ix. 


394  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

a  V-shaped  running  design.  This  is  called  by  some  the  "  Stuart  S," 
but  another  critic,  still  grudging  to  England  any  originality,  shows 
this  same  design  on  an  Italian  towel  of  an  earlier  period. 

These  seventeenth  and  early  eighteenth  century  samplers  are  less 
interesting  from  a  pictorial  point  of  view  than  many  that  succeeded 
them,  but  from  the  point  of  view  of  design,  of  use,  and  of  needlework, 
they  make  the  latter  hide  their  diminished  heads. 

With  the  coming  of  the  eighteenth  century,  many  changes  came 
to  the  American  sampler.  The  original  use  had  passed  away,  and  the 
new  sampler  was  an  exercise  for  children,  and  had  no  longer  a  place 
in  the  maiden's  dower  chest.  So  both  in  England  and  America  the 
complicated  and  lovely  repeat  designs  were  abandoned,  and  after  a 
dreary  period  of  alphabets,  horn -book  style,  we  emerge  again  with 
a  new  form,  with  new  designs,  founded  on  the  old  ones,  but  simplified 
for  childish  fingers.  In  the  sampler  which  contained  alphabets  only, 
the  cross-border  lingered  in  a  debased  state,  becoming  a  simple  row  of 
cross-stitch  or  Greek  fret,  a  poor  substitute  for  its  former  glory.  So 
the  sampler,  originally  made  to  fix  and  retain  a  pattern  for  later  use, 
was  now  become  a  childish  exhibition  of  skill.  In  England  the  result 
was  what  one  writer  calls  a  "thoroughly  mixed  affair,"  with  isolated 
bits  of  pattern  strewn  across  its  surface. 

About  1725  the  border  became  a  frame,  and  matching  the  corners 
tortured  the  childish  mind  and  fingers.  So  about  this  time  the  old 
English  cross-borders  reappear  in  simple  form,  and  again  strawberry, 
"Indian  pink,"  rose,  tulip,  and  the  rest  bloom  modestly  upon  our  sam- 
plers. It  would  be  interesting  to  know  whence  these  new  patterns 
sprung,  for  they  are  entirely  lacking  in  the  elaborateness  of  the  earlier 
century.  Yet  it  seems  as  if  they  must,  even  in  earlier  days,  have 
lingered  somewhere  in  the  background,  for  the  English  and  American 
borders  of  this  period  resemble  each  other  in  their  general  appearance 
too  closely  not  to  have  been  developed  from  a  common  source.  Perhaps 
after  all  it  was  only  a  combination  of  nature  and  the  exigencies  of  an 
angular  stitch  which  forced  both  nations  to  a  common  result. 

Drawings  have  been  made  from  the  many  pictures  which  we  have, 


PLATE  CXXII 

Arms  of  Govt;rxoe  Thomas  Fitch,  of  Connecticut,  impaling  Hall.     Cir.  1773 
Owned  by  Miss  Margaret  W.  Cushing 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  395 

and  from  available  samplers,  of  the  strawberry,  "Indian  pink,"  rose,* 
and  other  flowers  as  they  appear  chronologically  upon  the  samplers. 
This  was  done  with  the  hope  that  in  some  way  the  series  would  show 
development,  but  the  hope  was  an  ignis  fatuus.  No  particular  evolu- 
tion is  traceable  in  any  of  the  various  forms.  Often  the  same  type 
persists  through  a  long  period,  and  some  are  never  even  approximately 
repeated.  The  Rhode  Island  School  of  Design  at  Providence  owns 
a  sampler  made  in  1730  by  Abigail  Pinniger.f  It  is  lovely,  though 
unfinished,  and  is  an  example  of  the  hesitation  between  the  new 
eighteenth  century  and  the  old  seventeenth  century  types.  It  has  one 
cross-border  of  rose,  which  was  echoed  with  marvelous  exactitude  fifty- 
three  years  later,  when  Ann  Almy|  made  her  sampler  in  1783.  More- 
over, she  copied  the  earlier  type  of  sampler,  containing  nothing  but 
cross-borders  throughout,  and  without  the  date  to  guide  us  it  would 
inevitably  be  put  in  the  earlier  period.  All  of  which  goes  to  prove 
that  those  who  would  date  samplers  which  have  no  date  must  not  be 
too  sure,  but  should  add  that  saving  clause  with  which  we  swear,  "to 
the  best  of  my  knowledge  and  belief."  This  same  amazing  persistence 
in  type  may  be  seen  if  one  examines  the  samplers  of  Sarah  Howell,  of 
Philadelphia,  in  1731,  and  Ann  Tatnall,  of  Wilmington,  Delaware, 
in  1785.  The  arrangement  is  the  same;  both  are  framed  by  "Indian 
pink."  While  the  cross-borders  are  not  identical,  they  differ  no  more 
than  would  the  borders  on  the  samplers  of  two  girls,  embroidered  under 
the  same  teacher.     (See  Plate  cxi.) 

The  earlier  borders,  done  in  cross-stitch,  follow  the  angular  lines 
which  the  stitch  demands,  but  very  soon  some  of  the  children  shook 
off  the  shackles  of  the  stitch,  and  less  stiff  vines  of  a  combined  satin  and 
stem-stitch  came  into  favor.  The  cross-stitch  border  was,  however, 
never  abandoned.  So  passion-flowers  and  forget-me-nots  rioted  on 
the  same  vine,  and  blue  roses  vied  with  green  pinks  upon  the  same 
parent  stem.  We  find  lovely  grapevines  and  morning  glory  borders 
in  the  nineteenth  century ;  in  fact,  there  were  few  flowers  which  were 
sufficiently  simple  to  copy  which  were  not  used.     The  cross-border 

*See  Plates  cxvii,  cxviii,  cxix. 
tSee  Plate  cxii. 
J  See  Plate  cxii. 


396  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

of  the  olden  time  had  entirely  passed  away  in  the  nineteenth  century, 
or  survived  only  like  a  thin  and  tired  ghost  in  the  bare  cross-stitch 
division  lines  between  the  letters  of  the  alphabet. 

Just  before  the  Revolution  there  was  a  revival  of  the  lace  sampler, 
this  time  in  "hollie  point."  Jane  Humphreys*  (1763)  and  Mary 
Clarkf  (1783)  are  both  good  examples  of  this  work.  In  1783  we  find, 
too,  a  dra^vnwork  sampler,  and  a  little  later  "darned  lace":}:  samplers 
came  into  vogue.  At  about  this  same  time  there  was  a  tendency,  shown 
best,  perhaps,  in  Sarah  Bancroft's  sampler  (see  Cover),  to  outline  the 
design  in  black  or  some  dark  color.  Appha  Woodman  §  did  it,  not  in 
cross-stitch,  but  stem-stitch.  Others  who  copied  this  method  of  accen- 
tuating the  design  were  Mary  J.  Condon  and  Mehitable  Foster.  The 
custom  never  became  popular. 

The  nineteenth  century  designs  echoed  those  of  the  century  before 
and  added  some  new  ones.  In  a  few  instances  they  elaborated  the 
common  forms  to  almost  the  same  degree  that  the  seventeenth  century 
workers  did,  but  less  elegantly. 

The  stitches  that  were  used  throughout  the  whole  period  are  few; 
cross-stitch,  tent-stitch  or  petit-point,  satin-stitch,  and  eyelet  pretty 
much  comprise  the  list.  Cross-stitch  and  tent-stitch,  with  their  kindred 
tapestry  stitches  learned  from  the  older  embroideries,  were  the  founda- 
tion. The  seventeenth  century  added  back-stitch,  which  is  much  like 
the  hand-stitching  that  our  grandmothers  did,  and  rope-stitch,  which 
is  done  in  the  opposite  direction  to  stem-stitch,  making  a  more  solid 
line.  All  through  the  period  the  square  eyelet-stitch  vied  in  popularity 
with  cross-stitch  for  making  alphabets,  and  few  indeed  were  the 
samplers  which  did  not  contain  one  alphabet  worked  in  it.  Satin- 
stitch,  originally  used  mostly  in  white  embroidery,  had  great  vogue  in 
the  eighteenth  century  in  making  a  saw-tooth  border-frame  for  the 
alphabets,  inside  the  more  elaborate  floral  one.  Queen-stitch  next 
came  into  vogue,  and  was  used,  though  rather  sparingly,  until  the 
sampler  perished. 

•See  Plate  xxxvi. 
tSee  IMate  xxxvii. 
iSee  Plate  Ixix. 
§See  Plate  cxiii. 


PLATE  CXXIII 

Embroidered  AR>rs  oh   the  Giibert  Famii.y 
Owned  hi/  Mrs.  Horatio  J.  Gilbert 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


397 


During  about  a  decade,  at  the  time  of  the  Revolution,  Sarah 
Stivour,  who  had  a  school  near  or  in  Salem,  used  a  long-stitch  to  indi- 
cate sky,  clouds,  and  grass.*  These  stitches  were  sometimes  two  or 
three  inches  in  length,  and  were  always  placed  diagonally.  The  outer 
edge  was  irregular,  and  upon  this  were  perched  men,  women,  and 
sheep.  Sometimes  the  sheep  disporting  thereon  have  the  aspect  of 
drowning  in  a  dark  green  sea. 

As  one  contemplates  the  millions  of  stitches  worked  by  these  young 
girls,  one  wonders  what  their  thoughts  were  as  they  sewed  them. 
Children  are  conventional  and  conservative  beings,  and  so,  perhaps, 
the  universality  of  the  employment  kept  most  from  boredom.  But 
there  must  always  have  been  a  residuum  of  the  discouraged,  and  of  the 
rebels  "who  hated  every  stitch,"  and  so  made  their  samplers  badly  or 
left  them  unfinished  if  they  could  possibly  shirk  their  task.  A  plodding 
schoolmistress,  whose  whole  artistic  horizon  was  bordered  by  alphabets 
and  numerals,  must  have  been  torture  to  an  imaginative  child,  who 
saw  all  nature  to  mimic  with  her  colored  threads. 

Ethel  Stanwood  Bolton. 


SOME  DESIGNS  USED 


Tree  of  life     17th  century 

Fleur-de-lis     ITtii  century 

Indian  Pink 

Pineapple     17th  century 

Acorns,  "Boscabelle  oak" 

Stuart  S     17th  century 

Strawberry 

Rose 

Rosebud 

Greek  fret  and  geometrical  designs 

"Wall  of  Troy" 


Trefoil 

Greek  cross 

Tulip 

Honeysuckle 

Grapevine,  after  1800 

Morning  glory,  after  1800 

Passion  flowers 

Forget-me-nots 

Fuchsia,  1740 

Vine  with  berries,  1763 

Clover 


•See  Plates  xc  and  xci. 


398  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


SOME  OF  THE  STITCHES  USED 

Cross  stitch  Long  and  short  stitch 

Tent  stitch  or  petit  point  "Sarah  Stivour's"  stitch 

Satin  stitch  Tapestry  stitch 

Rope  stitch  Darning  stitches 

Stem  stitch  Stocking  stitch 

Eyelet  stitch  Punch  work 

Chain  stitch  Two-sided  line  stitch 

French  knot  Flat  stitch 

Queen  stitch  Feather  stitch     1716 

Bullion  stitch  Chenille 

Van  Dyke  stitch  "Lazy  Daisy"  (Mary  Train) 

Cat  stitch  1795 

Hem  stitch  Knotted  stitch   (Desire  Williams) 

Split  stitch  1754 


R 


EiMBROIDERED  HERALDRY 

E VENGEFUL  LAERTES,  speaking  of  his  father's  fu- 
neral, said  that 

"No  Trophee,  Sword,  nor  Hatchment  o'er  his  bones 
No  Noble  rite,  nor  formal  ostentation, 
Cry  to  be  heard." 

When  Shakespeare  Hved,  respect  for  the  dead  was  to  be  shown  in  no 
small  measure  by  display  at  the  funeral.  The  dramatist  had  not  heard 
of  the  modern  biographical  dictionary  which  can  assuage  grief  if  one 
is  willing  to  make  a  liberal  expenditure  for  a  memoir  and  engraved 
portrait.  So  it  was  that  the  "ordering  and  marshalling  of  funerals" 
had  come  to  be  a  part  of  the  ostentation  of  pride  as  well  as  of  grief. 
So  much  so  that  strife  between  the  two  reapers  of  harvests  in  these 
endeavors — the  Kings  of  Arms,  on  the  one  side  (those  who  tried  to 
regulate  the  use  of  heraldic  devices),  and  funeral  undertakers  and 
heraldic  painters,  on  the  other — came  to  blows.  Parliament  sided  with 
the  Kings  of  Arms  in  their  attempt  at  a  monopoly  of  the  funeral  per- 
quisites, but  their  decision  conflicted  with  the  charter  of  the  Painter- 
stainers  Company,  and  the  battle  went  on.  Persons  of  standing  often 
buried  their  dead  in  private,  to  avoid  extortionate  fees;  while  "others 
again" — to  quote  Edmondson — "under  the  notion  of  their  dying 
seized  of  estates,  had  hatchments  publicly  affixed  to  the  fronts  of  their 
houses."  In  the  Netherlands  the  hatchment,  or  family  coat  of  arms 
on  a  lozenge,  was  "sett  upon  theire  doores  for  a  j^eare  following,  and 
the  widowe  so  long  kept  her  house."  This  custom  was  observed  by 
Fynes  Moryson  in  his  "Itinerary  of  the  Year  1617,"  and  the  Dutch 
of  New  Netherland  may  have  brought  the  custom  with  them.  Little, 
however,  has  yet  been  recorded  of  heraldic  embroidery  in  New  York 
or  the  South,  although  much  has  been  written  of  social  life  there  in 
Colonial  times. 

Hatchments  were  often  painted  on  wood,  like  those  to  be  seen  in 
English  churches.    At  St.  Chad's,  in  Shrewsbury,  for  example,  there 

399 


400  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

are  said  to  be  over  one  hundred  of  these  memorials  of  the  dead.  An 
excellent  example  is  that  brought  to  this  country  by  William  Avery, 
and  now  in  the  rooms  of  the  Dedham  Historical  Societv.  More  often, 
no  doubt,  they  were  done  on  canvas  stretched  over  a  wooden  frame, 
to  be  carried  in  a  funeral  procession  and  then  hung  for  a  time  in  the 
church.  The  account  of  the  funeral  of  Colonel  Samuel  Shrimpton, 
in  1697/8,  mentions  heraldic  hatchments  and  death's  heads  as  part  of 
the  panoply  of  grief.  The  hatchment  was  in  the  form  of  a  diamond 
or  lozenge,  painted  black,  with  the  arms  in  color  upon  it  in  a  shield. 
For  a  married  person  it  was  the  custom  to  divide  the  lozenge,  as  well 
as  the  shield,  by  a  perpendicular  line,  and  to  blacken  the  half  of  the 
lozenge  Vhich  included  the  arms  of  the  deceased  person.  The  hus- 
band's arms  were  in  the  left  half  of  the  shield,  and  the  wife's  arms  in 
the  right  half,  as  seen  by  the  observer.  (Heraldry,  it  should  be  said, 
views  the  coat  as  on  an  owner's  breast,  and  the  side  next  his  right  hand 
is  the  dexter  side  of  the  shield.) 

How  far  an  embroidered  hatchment  was  in  actual  use  at  funerals 
in  America  cannot  be  known  until  specific  statements  from  contem- 
porary Colonial  letters  and  diaries  are  brought  together  for  study. 
Perhaps  it  was  the  reverential  needlework  of  a  gentle  lady — an  echo 
merely  of  an  ancient  custom,  just  as  the  giving  of  the  right  hand  in 
greeting  is  a  survival  of  the  ancient  sign  of  trust  when  one  gave  over 
the  sword  arm  into  the  keeping  of  another,  standing  defenseless  for 
the  moment. 

We  may  be  certain,  however,  that  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic 
embroidered  heraldry  was  in  vogue.  In  an  old  English  romance, 
reference  is  made  to  the  custom  of  embroidering  heraldic  devices  on 
the  gowns  of  ladies : 

"A  Coronell  on  hur  hedd  set, 
Hur  Clothys  with  bestes  and  byrdes  wer  bete 
all  aboute  for  pryde." 

Hulme,  in  his  "History  of  Heraldry,"  writes: 

"In  the  palmy  days  of  heraldry  ladies,  if  unmarried,  wore  the  paternal  arms 
embroidered  on  their  rol)es,  or  if  married,  the  paternal  arms  and  those  of  their 
husband,  one  on  either  half  of  their  dress,  so  that  in  old  brasses,  stained  glass,  etc.. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  401 

we  may  see  the  whole  of  the  dexter  half  of  the  figure  covered  with  certain  devices, 
while  the  sinister  half  has  entirely  different  forms  and  tinctures." 

In  1773,  Rebecca  Robins  sent  to  her  uncle,  John  Rowe,  the  Boston 
merchant  and  diarist,  an  heraldic  embroidery  which  she  did  at  Exeter, 
in  old  England.  The  three  little  paschal  lambs  still  carry  their  silver 
staves  and  banners,  as  they  did  in  Rebecca's  day.  As  early  as  1715, 
we  find  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Captain  John  Charnock,  of  Boston, 
doing  a  hatchment  of  the  Charnock  arms  impaling  the  arms  of  King, 
her  mother.  One  or  two  examples  in  the  seventeenth  century  might 
be  named,  but  the  eighteenth  century  was  the  period  of  heraldic  em- 
broidery in  America.  With  many  of  these  works  of  young  hands  there 
went  stories  of  romance,  if  we  could  but  conjure  them  back  from  the 
past.    With  more,  perhaps,  were  tales  of  filial  sorrow. 

It  is  strange  that  the  custom  of  embroidering  arms  seems  to  have 
been  limited  to  New  England  in  the  New  World.  So  far,  none 
have  been  found  without  its  bounds,  and  the  period  from  1750  to 
1770  was  by  far  the  most  prolific.  One  advertisement  in  the  Boston 
Chronicle  tells  us  who  may  have  been  responsible  for  the  many  hatch- 
ments and  coats  of  arms  which  are  found  in  and  around  Boston : 

"Amy  (f  Elizabeth  Cumings" 
"Hereby  inform  the  public,  that  they  have  This  day  opened  their  School  for 
instructing  young  ladies  in  embroidery,  Coats  of  arms,  Dresden,  Catgut,  and  all 
sorts  of  coloured  work,  at  their  house  on  Corn  Hill  opposite  the  Old  Brick  Meet- 
ing, where  they  have  to  see,  a  great  variety  of  Goods  suitable  for  the  season. 
Also  blue  China  and  yellow  ware."     (May  1st,  1769.) 

Hatchments  were  most  often  done  on  a  frame  in  what  is  known 
as  ecclesiastical  embroidery.  They  used  gold  and  silver,  and  wonder- 
ful smooth  silks.  In  nearly  every  case  the  whole  surface  was  covered 
with  silk,  couched  or  done  in  long  and  short  stitch,  though  some — 
such  as  Amy  Davis's — were  entirely  worked  in  cross-stitch.  A  few 
combine  the  two  forms.     ( See  Plate  cxxiv. ) 

Captain  Nicholas  Johnson,  of  Newburyport,  in  one  of  his  voyages, 
in  1773,  along  the  New  England  coast,  came  one  day  upon  a  deserted 
ship — perhaps 

"As  idle  as  a  painted  ship 
Upon  a  painted  ocean" 


402  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

or  as  weird  and  iinhiiman  as  the  schooner,  with  shivering  sails,  watched 
by  the  lad  of  "Treasure  Island"  from  his  unstable  coracle.  Climbing 
on  board,  Johnson  took  from  the  cabin  an  embroidered  hatchment, 
described  in  heraldic  language  as  "Vert  a  chevron  argent  between 
three  leopards'  faces  of  the  second.  Impaling  argent  a  chevron  sable 
between  three  columbines  azure."  Above  was  a  leopard's  face  pierced 
by  a  cruel  sword.  These  three  silver  leopards'  faces  proclaim  the 
Fitch  family,  and  the  columbine  is  the  symbol  of  the  Hall  family.  We 
find  that  this  is  probably  the  hatchment — or,  to  use  the  original  term, 
the  achievement — of  Governor  Thomas  Fitch,  of  Connecticut,  who 
married  Hannah,  daughter  of  Richard  Hall,  of  New  Haven.  Was 
it  wrought  by  the  fair  Hannah  or  by  a  daughter?  And  where  was  it 
bound  on  its  lonely  voyage  ?  What  a  wealth  of  questioning  a  mystery 
like  this  may  call  forth !  Here  and  in  other  examples  the  mantling  or 
foliage  is  gracefully  and  effectively  embroidered,  showing  the  color 
and  form  with  delightful  precision.  In  the  case  of  heraldic  pictures 
(not  in  a  diamond-shaped  frame),  the  decoration  is  sometimes  even 
more  delicate,  as  in  the  shields  of  the  Norwood  or  Gilbert  families. 
(See  Plates  cxxi,  cxxii,  cxxiii,  cxxv,  cxxvi.) 

Our  ancestors  knew  little  of  the  rules  of  heraldry  and  less  about 
"the  right  to  bear  arms,"  a  subject  for  endless  controversy  and  of  little 
profit.  The  distinguished  Page  family,  of  Virginia,  complacently 
permitted  the  Pagit  arms  to  adorn  a  Page  family  tomb.  Thomas 
Jefferson,  the  great  Democrat,  sent  to  London,  in  1771,  for  his  family 
arms;  and  ordered  his  agent,  in  case  none  could  be  found,  "to  become 
a  purchaser,  haveing  Sterne's  word  for  it  that  a  coat-of-arms  may  be 
purchased  as  cheap  as  any  other  coat."  The  love  of  symbolism  is 
inborn,  and  "the  right  to  bear  arms"  is  only  limited  in  our  day 
by  leisure  to  cultivate  a  taste  for  good  design  along  heraldic  lines,  and 
a  willingness  to  difference  a  coat  so  that  it  shall  not  give  a  false  im- 
pression as  to  the  ancestry  of  the  user.  Even  these  ideals  our  Colonial 
needle  worker  did  not  always  take  to  heart.  But,  such  as  they  are, 
these  examples  of  heraldic  embroidery  have  a  human  interest  above 
and  bej^ond  that  of  most  Colonial  handicraft. 

Ethel  Stanwood  Bolton. 


^  J^^-J-"1^  rater n^-t C^f 
<^nfio  ('677'' 


\s*' 


PLATE  CXXIV 

The  Arms  of  E.  Davis 

Orcnrd  bi/  the  Rev.  Glenn  Tilley  Morse 

Plate  presented  by  Mrs.  Perry,  Miss  Gushing,  and  Miss  Vaughan 


REGISTER  OF  EMBROIDERED  ARMS 


BimxGs 

Gules  a  fleur-de-lis  or,  a  canton  argent. 

Crest:  a  buck  trippant  proper,  an  arrow  in  its  breast. 

"Wrought  by  Mrs.  Eunice  (Minot)  Glover,  mother  of  John  I.  Glover,  when  15  years 
.old;  born  Sept.  28,  1781.  Her  mother's  maiden  name  was  Eunice  Billings."  Cross 
and  Kensington  stitches.    Framed.    C.  F.  Libbie  &  Co.  auction,  Boston,  Dec.  6,  1915. 


Boyd 

Quarterly:  1  and  4,  Argent  a  fess  chequy  gules  and  or;  2  and  3,  sable  a  chevron  ermine 
between  3  six  pointed  estoiles  argent  (Brewster). 

Tapestry  hatchment,  signed  "Submit  Boyd",  daughter  of  George  Boyd. 

Owned  by  Barrett  Wendell,  Esq.,  Portsmouth,  N.  H.    Framed. 

Illustrated.    Plate  cxxi. 


Charxock 

Argent  on  a  bend  sable  3  crosses  crosslet  of  the  field. 

Impaling:  Sable  a  lion  rampant  between  3  crosses  crosslet  or  (King). 

A   hatchment,   1715,  by  Elizabeth,   daughter   of  Captain   John  Charnock,   of   Boston. 

Mrs.  Mary  Charnock  was  daughter  of  Captain  Ralph  King,  son  of  Daniel,  of  Watford, 

Herts,  and  Lynn,  Mass. 


Cheever 

Per  bend  dancettee  argent  and  azure,  3  cinquefoils,  2  in  chief  and  1  in  base,  counterchanged. 
Crest:  a  stag's  head  couped. 

Embroidered  by  M[ary]  C[heever],  1700.    Owned  by  Mrs.  William  S.  Eaton. 


Chester 

Ermine  on  a  chief  sable  a  griffin  passant  or. 

Miss  Sarah  Perkins,  of  Norwich,  Conn.,  sold  this  embroidered  hatchment  to  W.  N. 
Andrews  of  that  town.    It  was  seen  in  his  shop  by  Mrs.  Coe. 

Coxey.     See  Foxchoft 


CUHWEX 

Argent  a  fret  gules,  on  a  chief  gules  a  crescent  argent. 

Impaling:  argent  a  chevron  sable  between  3  crosses  crosslet  fitchee  (Russell). 

Crest:  a  demi  unicorn  erased. 

Embroidered  hatchment,  Essex  Institute,  Salem,  Mass. 

403 


404  AJSIERICAN  SAMPLERS 

CUSHINO 

Quarterly:  1  and  4,  [Giiles]  an  eagle  displayed  [argent]    (Cosyn) ;  2  and  3,  [Gules]  two 
dexter  hands  couped   [argent]  each  bendways,  fingers  up,  one  in  the  2d  quarter,  one  in 
the  3d;  a  canton  chequy  [or  and  azure].     (Denvers,  of  County  Norfolk.) 
Crest:  Two  lion's  gambs  erect  erased  [sable]  supporting  a  marquis's  cor.  [or]  from  which 
hangs  a  heart  [gules]. 

An  embroidered  hatchment  17  inches  square,  owned  by  the  Misses  Newman,  Concord, 
Mass.    Deborah  Cushing  m.  Henry  Newman,  1781.    Cross-stitch  and  petit  point. 
The  same  arms  in  a  hatchment,  but  embroidered  in  satin  and  split-stitch,  and  with  elab- 
orate mantling,  is  owned  by  the  Misses  Vose,  of  Milton,  Mass.,  and  Providence,  R.  I. 

CUTTS? 

Argent  on  a  bend  engrailed  sable,  3  plates. 
Crest:  a  bird  rising. 

Owned  by  Mrs.  William  S.  Eaton. 

Davis 

Or  a  chevron  azure  between  3  pierced  mullets  sable. 
Crest:  a  swan  rising  proper. 

Also  two  supporters  in  liberty  caps,  brown  coats,  and  blue  boots.    Signed  Amy  Davis, 
1763,  "being  the  arms  of  E  Davis  And  is  the  Paternal  Coat  Armour  of  the  Right  Hon- 
orable Thomas  Davis,  Kt.  Lord  Mayar  of  London  Anno  1677."    On  a  stand  and  used 
as  a  fire  screen.    There  was  a  Sir  Thomas  Davies,  sheriff,  1667. 
Owned  by  Rev.  Glenn  Tilley  Morse,  West  Newbury,  Mass. 
Illustrated  in  color.    Plate  cxxiv. 

DOANE 

Azure  2  bars  argent  [embroidered  dark] ;  on  a  bend  over  all  gules  3  arrows  points  down- 
ward in  bend  argent  [embroidered]  dark. 

Impaling:  sable   [embroidered  bluish]   a  chevron  ermine  [embroidered  or]  between  2  lions 
passant  argent  [embroidered  dark].     (Rich.) 
Crest:  a  sheaf  of  arrows,  points  down,  or,  bound  [gules]. 

Hatchment  by  Hope  Doane,  1750-1830,  later  wife  of  Samuel  Savage,  of  Barnstable, 

Mass.    Embroidery,  very  elaborate. 

Henry  Savage,  Esq.,  Camden,  S.  C,  from  Samuel  Savage  Shaw,  Esq.,  Boston.    Hope 

Doane  was  the  daughter  of  Colonel  Isaiah  and  Hope  (Rich)  Doane,  of  Cape  Cod,  Mass, 

Duncan 

Gules  a  chevron  or  between  in  chief  two  cinquefoils  and  in  base  a  hunting  horn  argent 

[garnished  azure]. 

Crest:  a  ship  with  3  sails  spread  on  foremast,  2  on  main  and  one  on  mizzen  mast. 

Motto:  Disce  pati. 

Embroidered  hatchment  made  by  Isabella  Duncan,  daughter  of  Mrs.  Isabella  Caldwell 
Duncan.  Owned  by  Mrs.  Richard  Morgan,  Plymouth,  Mass.,  daughter  of  Judge  Davis. 
The  red  has  faded. 

Elus 

Per  chevron  sable  and  gules  a  chevron  or  between  3  fleurs-de-lis  argent. 

Embroidery  by  Elizabeth  Ellis,  born  1732,  daughter  of  Dr.  Edward  Ellis,  of  Boston. 
Owned  by  Henry  W.  ^Montague,  Esq.,  Boston. 


PLATE  CXXV 

The  Ives  Arms 

Embroidered  by  Rebecca  Ives,  cir.  1770 

Owned  by  Mrs.  Robert  Hale  Bancroft 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  405 

FiSK 

[         ]  three  battle  axes  erect,  turned  to  the  sinister,  and  in  chief  a  crescent. 
Crest:  an  arrow  erect,  point  down. 

"The  name  of  Fisk"  below.    Embroidered  hatchment  owned  by  a  grandson  of  General 

John  Fisk,  of  Salem.    Possibly  from  a  painting  by  John  Coles.    Gibbs  arms  (?),  but 

not  their  crest. 

Owned  by  the  Essex  Institute,  Salem,  Mass. 

Fitch 

Vert  (?)  a  chevron  between  3  leopards  faces  argent. 

Impaling:  argent  a  chevron  sable  between  3  columbines  azure  (Hall). 

Crest:  a  leopard's  face  of  the  field,  pierced  in  the  mouth  by  a  sword  bend-sinister  ways. 
Embroidered  hatchment  found  about  1773  at  sea,  in  the  cabin  of  a  deserted  ship,  by 
Captain  Nicholas  Johnson,  of  Newburyport.    Owned  by  his  great-granddaughter,  Miss 
Margaret  W.  Cushing,  Newburyport.    Arms  of  Governor  Thomas  Fitch,  who  married 
Hannah,  daughter  of  Richard  Hall,  of  New  Haven. 
Illustrated.    Plate  cxxii. 

Forbes 

Azure  a  cross  pattee  argent  between  3  bears'  heads  couped  argent  muzzled  gules. 

Crest:  a  cross  of  the  field. 

Hatchment  embroidered  in  silk  by  Mary  Forbes  Coffin,  in  Boston;  born  1774,  married 
Henry  Phelps,  1795.    Owned  by  Mrs.  Charles  C.  Goodwin,  Lexington,  Mass. 

FOXCROFT 

Quarterly  per  chevron  sable  and  azure  a  chevron  between  3  foxes'  heads  or. 

Crest:  A  head  of  the  arms. 

Embroidered  framed  arms  about  40  by  32  inches.  The  arms  of  Coney,  Sable,  on  a  fess 
between  3  conies  dormant  or,  as  many  escallops  of  the  field,  occupy  the  top  of  the  above 
shield,  the  third  coney  being  placed  between  the  two  foxes'  heads.  Elaborate  roses  and 
lilies  surround  the  shield.  Owned  by  the  Misses  Gertrude  and  Agnes  Brooks,  Marl- 
borough Street,  Boston,  daughters  of  William  Gray  Brooks. 

Francis  Foxcroft,  of  Cambridge,  married,  1722,  Mehitable  Coney.  Their  daughter 
married  Lieutenant  Governor  Samuel  PhiUips,  founder  of  Phillips  Academy,  Andover, 
Mass. 


Gardner 

[Azure]  a  chevron  [ermine?]  between  3  griffins'  heads  erased  [argent?]. 
Crest:  a  griffin's  head. 

For  Samuel  Gardner  (Harvard  College,  1732),  of  Salem. 

Embroidered  hatchment  by  Lois  Barnard,  made  before  1769. 

Picture  in  Pickering  Genealogy  (1897),  Volume  1,  page  91. 

Same  arms  on  a  silver  teapot  owned,  1897,  by  Colonel  Henry  Lee,  Brookline,  Mass. 

Gerrish 

Argent  a  dart  between  3  escallops  sable. 

Embroidered  hatchment  by  Elizabeth  Gerrish.    Owned  by  the  late  Mrs.  Gordon  Prince, 
Boston. 


406  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Gilbert 

Azure  a  chevron  ermine  between  3  eagles  displayed  or. 
Crest:  a  lion  rampant. 

"By  the  name  of  Gilbert"  and  palm  branches  (?)  with  pendant  chains. 

An  embroidery,  framed,  owned  by  Mrs.  Horatio  J.  Gilbert,  Milton,  Mass. 

Illustrated.    Plate  c.xxiii. 


Ghat  i 

Gules  a  lion  rampant  argent  within  a  bordure  engrailed  of  the  second. 
Impaling:  sable  a  chevron  between  3  trefoils  slipped  argent  (Lewis). 
Crest:  a  stag  trippant. 

Embroidered  hatchment  by  Elizabeth  Gray,  who  married  Samuel  Alexander  Otis,  in 

1764.     Her  father,  Hon.  Harrison  Gray,  married  Elizabeth  Lewis,  in  1734.    Owned  by 

Mrs.  John  H.  Morison,  Boston. 

Illustrated.    Plate  cxxvi. 


Ives  \ 

Argent  a  chevron  sable  between  3  Moors'  heads  in  profile  erased  proper. 

Embroidered  arms  of  Robert  Hale  Ives,  22  x  15  inches,  worked  by  his  sister,  Mrs. 
Rebecca  Ives  Oilman,  1746-1823.     Owned  by  Mrs.  Robert  H.  Bancroft,  Boston. 
Illustrated.    Plate  cxxv. 


Jones 

Sable  a  stag  statant  argent  attired  or. 
No  crest. 

"By  the  name  of  Jones".  Embroidered  hatchment,  framed,  arms  of  Colonel  EUsha 
Jones,  of  Weston,  Mass.,  great-grandfather  of  Henry  D.  Thoreau,  writer.  Owned  by 
Concord  (Mass.)  Antiquarian  Society. 


Norwood 

Ermine  a  cross  engrailed  gules. 

Crest:  a  demi  lion  rampant  and  erased  argent,  holding  in  his  gambs  a  palm  branch  vert. 
"By  the  name  of  Norwood"  and  palm  branches  [not  after  Coles].     Framed  embroid- 
ery by  Judith  Norwood,  of  Gloucester,  Mass.,  who  died  in  1762.    Owned  by  Mrs.  J.  L. 
Stevens,  Milton,  Mass. 


Peibce 

Argent  a  fess  humettee  gules  between  three  ravens  rising  sable. 
Crest:  a  raven  or. 

Embroidered  hatchment  in  the  Nichols  House,  Salem,  Mass.,  made  by  Sarah,  daughter 

of  Jerathmiel  Peirce,  in  1796.    Arms  of  Peirce,  of  London. 

Pickering 

Ermine  a  lion  rampant  [azure]  crowned  [or]. 

Embroidered  hatchment  by  [Mrs.]  Sarah  Pickering  [Clarke],  1753. 
Picture  in  Pickering  Genealogy,  1897,  Volume  1,  page  11. 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS  407 

Prescott 

Quarterly  1  and  4:  Salle  a  chevron  between  three  owls  argent.     2  and  3:  Ermine  a  cross 

raguly  argent  [gules?]  (Lawrence). 

Crest:  Out  of  a  mural  crown  a  head  (boar's?)  erased. 

Embroidered  hatchment,  24  x  24,  framed,  given  to  Groton  (Mass.)  Historical  Society 
by  Rev.  F.  J.  Walton,  whose  wife  is  a  descendant  of  the  Rev.  Daniel  Chaplin,  who  m., 
1779,  Susanna  (b.  1757),  daughter  of  Hon.  James  and  Susanna  (Lawrence)  Prescott, 
of  Groton. 


QUINCY 

Gules  7  mascles  3,  3,  1  or. 

Impaling:  Azure  a  chevron  between  3  crosses  crosslet  fitch^e  within  a  bordure  engrailed  or 

(Sturgis). 

Crest:  A  plume  of  ostrich  feathers  (?). 

Embroidered   hatchment   owned    by   Mrs.   Josiah    Quincy,   Boston.    An  early   Josiah 
Quincy  married,  1733,  Hannah,  daughter  of  John  Sturgis,  of  Yarmouth. 

Ripley 

Argent  a  chevron  vert  between  3  lions  rampant  or. 

Motto:  Regard  the  end. 

Embroidered  hatchment,  21  x  17  inches,  done  by  Lucy  Ripley,  at  the  Hartford  Female 
Seminary,  in  1802.     Signed  L.  R.    Owned  by  Laura  M.  Ripley,  of  Connecticut. 

llowE 

Gules  3  paschal  lambs,  2  and  1,  staves  and  banners  argent. 

Motto:  Libera  nos  Domine. 

Embroidered  in  Exeter,  England,  the  shield  surrounded  by  a  wreath  of  flowers  caught 
at  the  bottom  with  a  bowknot  of  blue  ribbons.     Underneath  the  ribbon,  "17  Rebecca 
Robins  73."    Sent  to  her  uncle,  John  Rowe,  the  Boston  merchant  and  diarist,  who  used 
the  paschal  lamb  as  a  crest  on  silver  and  seal. 
Owned  by  Mrs.  Caleb  L.  Cunningham,  Milton,  Mass. 


Russell 

Argent  a  chevron  between  3  crosses  crosslet  fitchee  sable. 
Impaling:  Argent  a  lion  rampant  gules  (Russell?). 
Crest:  a  lion  rampant  gules. 

Hatchment  owned  by  Russell  Gray,  Esq.,  Boston.     The  foliage  about  the  shield  was 

done  by  Mrs.  Horace  Gray  (born  in  1807). 

Salter 

[Gules]  10  billets,  4,  3,  2,  1  or,  a  bordure  engrailed  argent  charged  with  8  [hurts  and  tor- 

teaux  alternating]. 

Impaling:  Or  3  piles  meeting  in  the  base  [azure?]   (Bryan). 

Crest:  a  unicorn. 

Needlework  by  Mary  Salter  (Mrs.  Henry  Quincy,  of  Boston),  1726-55.  For  picture, 
see  "Earle's  Home  Life  in  Colonial  Days,"  1898,  opposite  page  266.  Owned  by  Mrs. 
Frank  Bolles,  Cambridge,  Mass. 


408  AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 

Saegent 

Argent  a  chevron  between  3  dolphins  embowed  sable. 

Impaling:  Sable  on  a  chevron  between  3  leaves  argent  as  many  crosses  crosslet  of  the  field 

(Norwood?). 

Crest:  an  arm  erect,  grasping  a  serpent. 

An  embroidery  marked  "Nathaniel  and  Mary  Ellery,  Anno  Dom.  1745."  Mary  was 
Nathaniel's  daughter  by  Abigail  Norwood.  His  second  wife  was  Anne,  daughter  of 
William  and  Ann  Sargent.    Heraldic  Journal,  Volimae  4,  page  42. 

Selbt 

Azure  a  negro  head  sable,  a  chief  bendy  sable  and  argent. 

Sampler,  1678,  owned  by  Mrs.  Eugene  Hale,  Ellsworth,  Me. 

Shebbxthxe 

Quarterly:  1  and  4,  Vert  an  eagle  displayed  argent;  2  and  3,  argent  a  lion  rampant  or. 

(Bayley.) 

Crest:  a  unicorn's  head  argent. 

"By  the  name  of   Sherburne".     Embroidery  on  silk.     Owned  by   Merrill  Spalding, 

Walnut  Street,  Brookline,  Mass.    Colors  not  as  in  Burke. 

SOUTHWOETH 

Sable  a  chevron  between  three  crosses  flory  [i.e.,  crosslet?]  argent. 

Crest:  a  buU's  head  proper. 

Embroidered  hatchment  with  elaborate  mantling.  Mentioned  in  Governor  Bradford's 
inventory  as  "a  crest".  From  Major  William  to  David,  to  Lydia  (Mrs.  Lebaron), 
to  PrisciUa  (Mrs.  M.  A.  Hammett),  to  Elizabeth  (Mrs.  Isaac  Goodwin),  to  J.  A.,  to 
William  Bradford  Goodwin,  of  Lowell,  present  owner.  Alice,  widow  of  Edward  South- 
worth,  married  Governor  WiUiam  Bradford.    Fine  floss  (?)  silk  on  fine  mesh  canvas. 

Stedmajt 

Or  a  cross  crosslet  vert. 

Crest:  a  demi-virgin,  gowned  vert,  her  hair  dishevelled,  and  holding  in  her  dexter  hand  a 

cross  crosslet  fitch^e  of  the  same. 

Owned  by  the  Historical  Society  of  Old  Newbury,  Mass. 

WiLLABD 

Argent  3  leopards'  heads  or. 
Crest:  Leopard's  head. 

Made  about  1780-90.    Miss  Susanna  Willard,  the  donor,  calls  this  imaginary. 

Embroidered   hatchment  by   Miss   Mary   Willard,   daughter  of  Joseph,  President  of 

Harvard  College. 

Owned  by  the  Massachusetts   Society   of   the   Colonial   Dames,   Quincy   Homestead, 

Quincy,  Mass. 

WlLLIAMSOX 

Argent  a  chevron  gules  between  three  trefoils  slipped  sable. 

Crest:  out  of  a  ducal  coronet  gules  a  dragon's  head. 

Motto:  Constare  in  sententia. 

Embroidered  hatchment,  llf  inches  by  9  inches.  Owned  by  Mrs.  Henry  H.  Edes,  Cam- 
bridge, Mass. 


INDEX 


Abraham  and  Isaac,  28 
Acorn  in  design,  393 
Adam  and  Eve,  14,  19,  101 
Adam  and  Eve,  clothed,  23 
Adam  and  Eve  first  used,  28 
Adams,  Betsej%  sampler,  21 
Adams,  Lydia,  218 
Adams,  Thomas,  226 
Afflick,  Sarah,  sampler,  16 
Ages  of  workers,  12,  27,  94 
Aiken,  Maria  S.,  364 
Airmet,  Elizabeth,  170 
Alger,  SaUy,  367 
Almy,  Ann,  395 
Alphabet  first  used,  28 
American  type,  11 
Anchor  used,  28 
Annapolis,  St.  Ann's,  103 
Anthology,  255 
Aphorism,  first,  5 
Appliqu^  first  used,  28 
Architectural  samplers,  102 
Armitage,  Mary,  196 
Ashur  and  Elisha,  12 
Askew,  Ann,  379 
Askew,  Mary,  78 
Atkins,  Dudley,  36 
Austin,  Lydia,  sampler,  97 
Austin,  Mary,  252 
Axioms,  96 

Babbidge,  Madam,  366 

Back-stitch,  396 

Baker,  Nancy,  368 

Balch,  Polly,  teacher,  25,  367,  868,  369 

Baldwin,  Rev.  Dr.,  191 

Baldwin,  Sally,  sampler,  24 

Bancroft,  Sarah,  379,  396 

Barnard,  Lois,  405 

Bartlett,  Mary,  174 

Barton,  Rev.  T.  T.,  194 

Bates,  Mercy,  191 

Bates,  Parley,  sampler,  95 

Batton,  Edward,  89 


Bayer,  Luther,  219 

Beckwith,  Anna,  sampler,  100 

Bennet,  Hannah,  sampler,  106 

Bickford,  Lovey,  160 

Billings  arms,  403 

Bier,  Sophia,  sampler,  94 

Birdsey,  Charity,  197 

Bispham,  Catherine,  age,  27 

Blake,  Sarah,  191 

Blatchford,  Jane,  sampler.  111 

Bleecker,  Nicholas,  sampler,  27 

Bodly,  James  and  Margaret,  195 

Border  first  used,  12,  28,  394 

Botang,  John,  239 

Boudinot,  Julia,  sampler,  106 

Bouteneau,  Deacon,  362 

Bowditch,  Eunice,  sampler,  12  . 

Bowie,  Elizabeth,  sampler,  106 

Boxers,  3,  393 

Boyd  arms,  403 

Boys,  makers  of  samplers,  27,  116 

Bradford,  Hannah,  sampler,  97 

Bradford,  William,  408 

Bradford  Academy,  366 

Brenton,  Frances,  sampler,  28 

Bridgewater  Academy,  239 

Brierly,  Sally,  379 

Brierly  sisters,  100 

Brigham,  L.,  207 

Brimmer,  Clarissa,  239 

Bristol  School,  377 

Brooks,  Lucinda,  sampler,  115 

Brooks,  Mary,  154 

Brown,  Catherine,  245 

Brownell,  George,  360 

Brunton,  Miss,  387 

Budd,  Eliza,  sampler,  104,  373 

Buller,  Ann,  sampler,  23 

Bullion-stitch,  24 

Bulyn,  Martha,  sampler,  13;  also  Plate  xii 

Burroughs,  Mary  Ann,  374 

Cain  and  Abel,  23 
Calder,  Frances,  195 


See  also  names  on  pages  29  and  121 

409 


410 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


Caldwell,  Catherine,  69 

CaldweU,  Elizabeth,  166 

Caldwell,  Sarah,  sami)ler,  108 

Calef,  Margaret,  sampler,  20,  370 

Canary  canvas,  390 

Carthage  Female  Institute,  387 

Cash,  Phebe,  sampler,  27 

Catgut  background,  389 

Catlett,  Elizabeth,  319 

Chadwick,  Chariot,  sampler,  113 

Chamberlain,  Nancy,  233 

Chandler,  Hester,  72 

Chaplin,  Rev.  Daniel,  407 

Charnock,  Elizabeth,  401 

Charnock  arms,  403 

Cheever  arms,  403 

Chester  arms,  403 

Chesterfield  school,  381 

Church,  Lydia,  370 

CiUej',  Philip,  239 

Clapham,  Mary,  246 

Clark,  Emily,  sampler,  103 

Clark,  Mary,  sampler,  24,  396 

Cleveland,  Betsy,  sampler,  110 

Codfish  on  Old  State  House,  26 

Coflin,  Mary,  363 

Coffin,  Mary  Forbes,  405 

Cogswell,  Martha,  239 

Cogswell,  Sarah,  122 

Coker,  Evelyn  M.,  mentioned,  354 

Coleman,  Elizabeth,  sampler,  19 

Comstock,  Amy,  183 

Condon,  Mary  J.,  396 

Coney  arms,  405 

Connecticut  schools,  370,  384 

Cook,  Betsy,  sampler,  112 

Copp  samplers,  101 

Core,  Enoch,  45 

Cowdin,  Sophia,  194 

Cox,  Susanna,  376 

Cozzens,  Eliza,  369 

Crafts,  Hannah,  sampler,  94 

Crawford,  N.  H.,  on  sampler,  104 

Creed,  14 

Crewels,  390 

Crips,  Mr.,  380 

Crosby,  Abigail,  176 

Crown,  109 

Crowninshield,  Mary,  361 

Cumings,  Amy  and  Elizabeth,  401 


Curwen  arms,  403 
Cushing,  Lucy,  sampler,  23 
Cushing  arms,  404 
Custine,  Maria,  58 
Cut-work,  2 
Cutter,  Sophia,  sampler,  117 

Dade,  Ruben,  115 

Daintery,  Mary,  sampler,  12;  also  Plate  xi 

Dalie,  Abigail  W.,  192 

Dame  schools,  372 

Darned  lace,  28 

Darned  samplers,  105 

Dated  samplers,  4 

Davenport.    See  also  Deavenport 

Davis  arms,  404 

Davis  famil}',  41 

Dealy,  Mary,  her  sampler,  96 

Death,  poems  on,  278 

Dedman,  Mary,  363 

Delaware  schools,  377,  386 

Design,  how  made,  92 

Designs,  earliest,  28 

Designs  of  samplers,  391 ;  list  of,  397 

Deyo,  SaUy,  41 

Doane  arms,  404 

Dole,  Hitty  H.,  180 

Dole,  Sarah,  sampler,  98,  99 

Douw,  Catharine  and  Rachel,  47 

Draper,  Elizabeth,  230 

Draperies,  116 

Driver,  Ann  Wilson,  65 

Duncan  arms,  404 

Dunnet  family,  155 

E  Pluribus  unum,  199 

Eagle,  108 

Eagle  first  used,  28 

Earliest  samplers  by  states,  28 

Education  in  America,  355 

Eighteenth  century  samplers,  10 

Elder,  Catherine  Jones,  375 

Elizabeth  of  York's  sampler,  1 

Ellery,  Mary,  408 

Ellis,  Harriet,  213,  363 

EUis,  Mary,  sampler,  15 

EUis  arms,  404 

ElweU,  Ann  Maria,  295 

Embroidered  heraldry,  399 

Embroiderj'  in  France,  1586,  2 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


411 


England  to  America,  97 

English,  Mrs.  Philip,  5 

English  samplers,  19th  century,  91 

Ercy,  Isabella,  sampler,  6,  9 

Evesham  School,  374 

Eyre,  Ann  Eliza,  sampler,  108 

Families  as  makers,  94 

Famous  sampler  makers,  26,  98 

Father,  tribute  to,  95 

Filet,  392 

Fisk  hatchment,  405 

Fitch,  Thomas,  402 

Fitch  arms,  405 

Fithian,  Jonathan,  146 

FitzGerald,  Sarah,  356 

Fleetwood,  Abigail,  263 

Fleetwood  sampler,  7 

Fhnt,  Sally,  81 

Flourishing,  389 

Flowers,  394,  395 

Floyd,  Elizabeth,  115 

Forbes  arms,  405 

Forhies,  Sarah  van,  sampler,  18,  19 

Forster  family,  234 

Foster,  Hannah,  373 

Foster,  Mehitable,  396 

Foxcroft  arms,  405 

Freeborn,  Gideon,  sampler,  27 

Friends,  Society  of,  373 

Friendship,  poems  in  praise  of,  26S 

Frye,  Mary,  sampler,  13 

Fuller,  Polly,  age,  27 

Fvmk,  Elizabeth,  sampler,  94 

Gano,  Rev.  Stephen,  196 

Gardner  arms,  405 

Gatcomb,  Dorcas,  parentage,  26 

Gates,  Mary,  251 

Gauffreau  family,  116 

Genealogical  samplers,  18,  28,  110,  111 

Gerrish  arms,  405 

Gibaut,  Captain,  365 

Giddings,  David,  240 

Gilbert  arms,  406 

Gill,  Mary,  sampler,  106 

Gilman,  Rebecca  Ives,  406 

Gittings,  Mrs.  Richard,  sampler,  26 


Godman,  Margaretta,  254 

Goldin,  Elizabeth,  sampler,  106 

Goodwin,  Mrs.  Isaac,  408 

Goose  and  rabbit,  14 

Gootch,  Nabby,  215 

Gore,  Zebiah,  sampler,  24 

Goss,  Elizabeth,  200 

Gowen,  Hannah  G.,  364 

Gowen,  Mary,  128 

Gower,  Anne,  4,  9,  392,  393 

Grapes  of  Eschol,  15,  28 

Graves,  Alice,  203 

Graves,  Hannah,  164 

Gray,  Mrs.  Horace,  407 

Gray  arms,  406 

Great  Egg  Harbor  School,  385 

Grimes  sisters,  sampler,  97 

Griscom's  Academy,  376 

Gustafsson,  Johan,  378 

Hacker,  Rebekah,  sampler,  23 

Hackney,  Ariadne,  her  verse,  96 

Haines,  Julia,  374 

Hair  first  appliqued,  28 

Hale,  Hannah,  372 

Hale,  Nancy,  letter  from,  371 

Hall,  Nancy,  sampler,  117,  367 

Hall,  Philip,  199 

Hall,  Richard,  402 

Hallowell,  Mary,  sampler,  108 

Hamil,  Elizabeth,  sampler,  103 

Hammett,  Mrs.  M.  A.,  408 

Harding  sisters,  101 

Harris,  Robert,  240 

Harvey,  Peter  and  Sarah,  36 

Harwood,  Elizabeth,  her  sampler,  96 

Harwood  family,  220 

Hatch,  Mary,  sampler,  108 

Hathawaj',  Anne,  her  sampler,  4 

Hawkins,  John,  297 

Haywood,  Mrs.,  her  school,  130 

Heart  used,  28 

Heraldry,  399 

Heuling,  Martha,  376 

Hewins,  Olive,  sampler,  118 

Higginson,  Hetty,  365 

Higginson,  Mehitable,  364 

Hill,  Mary  E.,  teacher,  356 


See  also  names  on  pages  29  and  121 


412 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


Hiller,  Mrs.,  teacher,  361 

HiUes,  Eli,  380 

Hilles,  Samuel,  380 

Hillhouse,  Sarah,  sampler,  114 

Hinde,  Elizabeth,  sampler,  5 

Hobart,  Elizabeth,  181 

Hodgkins,-  Mary,  191 

Hoffner,  Julia  Ann,  sampler,  92 

HoUie-point,  28,  396 

HoUinshead,  Beulah,  sampler,  24 

Hollingsworth,  Hannah,  155,  283 

Hollingsworth,  Mary,  sampler,  5,  9 

Holman,  Mary,  201 

Holyoke  samplers,  23 

Hopkins,  Johns,  22,  65 

Hopping,  Maria,  sampler,  102,  368 

Horn-book,  influence  of,  3 

Horton,  Mrs.,  teacher,  364 

Hough,  Amelia,  208,  381 

House  first  used,  28 

House  of  maker,  117 

Howell,  Sarah,  395 

Hubbard,  Lucy,  179 

Hudson,  Mary,  her  sampler,  2,  9,  393;  also 

Plate  ix 
Humphrey,  May,  203 
Humphreys,  Jane,  sampler,  24,  396 
Hunt,  Eliza,  sampler.  111 
Huntington,  Polly,  387 
Huse,  Joanna,  363 

Ilsley,  Charlotte,  195 

Ilsley,  Hannah,  195 

Independence  Hall,  104 

Ivers,  James,  360 

Ives  arms,  406 

Ivins,  Emmeline,  sampler,  109 

James,  Mary,  379 
James,  Susannah,  379 
Janney,  Hannah,  sampler,  22 
Jenkins,  Madam,  366 
Jiggles,  Madam,  366 
Johnson,  Hannah,  sampler,  20 
Johnson,  Lucy,  sampler,  108 
Johnson,  Nicholas,  401 
Johnson,  Sally,  363 
Jones,  Eliza  Pearce,  368 
Jones,  Elnora,  218 
Jones,  Frances,  369 


Jones,  Harriet,  sampler.  111 
Jones,  Sarah,  sampler,  19 
Jones  arms,  406 
Jones  family,  25 

Keen,  Palmyra,  sampler,  104 

Keets,  L.  C,  236 

Kelly,  Ann  E.,  377 

KeUy,  Dorcas,  sampler,  110 

Kent,  Sarah,  36 

Kentucky  schools,  381,  387 

Kibbe,  Margaret,  sampler,  119 

King,  Ralph,  403 

Kneeland,  Lydia,  355 

Lamborn,  Sophia,  sampler,  94 

Lamborn  family,  114 

Lamp-wick  embroidery,  94 

Lawrence,  Mary,  208,  381 

Lawrence,  Rebecca,  360 

Lea,  Elizabeth,  389 

Lea  family,  78 

Leake,  Recompence,  85 

Learning,  poems  in  praise  of,  267 

Leavitt,  Mary,  sampler  pictured,  8,  12 

Legrow,  Rebecca,  171 

Lehman,  Elizabeth,  sampler,  24 

Lewis,  Elizabeth,  406 

Liberty  Bell,  22 

Liberty  Hall,  25 

Linden  Hall  Seminary,  374 

Lindsay,  Mary  T.,  381   ' 

Lippit,  Julia,  369 

Litchfield  Female  Academy,  371 

Lititz,  school  at,  375 

Little,  Mary,  363 

Lord,  Lucy,  225 

Lord,  Sarah,  sampler,  5,  9 

Lord's  Prayer,  14 

Loring  family,  110 

Love  poems,  256 

Lovering,  Eunice,  73 

Ludlum,  Phebe,  199 

Lynde,  Dorothy,  sampler,  16;  also  Plate  xix 

Macomber,  Ann,  sampler,  25,  104 
Maine  schools,  382 
Makepeace,  Sukey,  sampler,  21 
Mansfield,  Mrs.,  teacher,  370 
Map  first  used,  28 


PLATE  CXXVI 

Ak.^is  of  tiik   Hox.   Hakrisox  Gray,  Treasurer  of  the  Province 

of  Massachusetts,  impaling  Lewis 

Hatchment  emhroiciered  by  Elizabeth  Tracy 

Owned  by  Mrs.  John  H.  Morison 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


413 


Map  samplers,  21,  105,  106,  107 

Mariner  family,  223 

Marsh,  Melissa,  sampler,  117 

Maryland,  map  of,  106 

Maryland  schools,  380,  386 

MascoU,  Hannah,  383 

Mason,  John,  sampler,  22 

Massachusetts,  map  of,  106 

Massachusetts  schools,  356,  382 

Mclntire,  Elizabeth,  sampler,  114 

Meach,  Catherine,  sampler,  112 

Mead,  Elizabeth  D.,  41 

Mears,  Abigail,  sampler,  21 

Meguire,  Leah,  school,  377 

Merrill,  Nancy,  sampler,  117 

Materials  of  samplers,  388 

Maule,  Joshua,  380 

Minot,  Eunice,  403 

Missionary  sampler,  115 

Missouri  sampler,  105 

MofFatt,  Sarah  C,  202 

Moravian  education,  374 

Morehead,  Sarah,  361 

Morford,  George,  374 

Moss,  Margaret,  sampler,  108 

Mount  Holly,  N.  J.,  on  sampler,  104,  373 

Multiplication  table  first  used,  28 

Munro,  Sally,  sampler,  24 

Munson,  Susan,  sampler,  114 

Murray,  Elizabeth,  362 

Names,  Christian,  25,  95 

Nature  poems,  258 

Needlework  pictures,  13 

Needle's  excellency,  referred  to,  2 

Negro  sampler,  27 

Net  samplers,  117 

New  England  Primer,  250 

New  Hampshire  schools,  356,  382 

New  Jersey  schools,  373,  385 

New  York,  map  of,  106,  108 

New  York  schools,  372,  384 

Newberry,  Hannah,  66 

Newcomb,  Sarah,  191 

Newton,  Rev.  John,  319 

Nickalls,  Susanne,  256 

Nine  Partners  Boarding  School,  384 

Nineteenth  century  samplers,  91 


Nivers,  Julia,  sampler,  104 

Norland,  Eleanor,  381 

North  Branford,  Conn.,  on  sampler,  104 

North  Brookfield,  Mass.,  house  in,  97 

North  Carolina  school,  381,  387 

Norwood  arms,  406 

Numbers  on,  27 

Numerals  first  used,  28 

Odiorne,  Sarah,  356 
Ogden,  John  C,  374 
Ohio  school,  387 
Oliver,  Sally,  sampler,  117 
Olmstead  sampler,  18 
Open  seam,  1 
Orne,  Joseph,  365 
Owen,  Rebecca,  361 

Painted  samplers,  22 

Pale,  Mary,  sampler,  112 

Paper  backs,  389 

Parents,  poems  in  praise  of,  260 

Parker,  Frances,  sampler,  108 

Parker  family,  113 

Pastoral  samplers,  118 

Patriotic  poems,  255 

Pecker,    Elizabeth,    sampler,    15,    21;    also 

Plate  xviii 
Peirce  arms,  406 
Penelope  canvas,  390 
Penn,  William,  his  house,  109 
Pennsylvania  samplers,  99 
Pennsylvania  schools,  374,  385 
Perkins,  Sarah,  403 
Petty,  Plana,  166 
Phillips,  Amy  Ann,  381 
Pickering  arms,  406 
Picket,  Eliza,  sampler,  118 
Picture  samplers,  19,  118,  119 
Pierce,  Sarah,  370 
Pinder,  Deborah,  163 
Piney  Grove  School,  387 
Pinniger,  Abigail,  395 
Piatt,  Nancj%  sampler,  100 
Piatt,  Sarah,  sampler,  22 
Playing  cards,  109 
Pleasant  Hill  School,  377 
Plumer,  Joanna,  179 


See  also  names  on  pages  29  and  121 


414 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


Poets  and  samplers,  253 

Polk,  Patty,  her  sampler,  96 

Pope,  Alexander,  253 

Poplars,  100 

Prescott  arms,  407 

Princeton  College,  103 

Providence  buildings  in  samplers,  102 

Pullen,  Martha,  366 

Punch-work,  21 

Punto  in  aria,  5 

Punto  tagliato,  392 

Punto  tirato,  392 

Purcell,  Miss,  362 

Putnam,  Ruth,  245 

Queen-stitch,  21,  28,  396    . 
Quentel,  Peter,  his  book,  4 
Quilled  ribbon,  93 
Quincy  arms,  407 
Quincy  sampler,  7 

Ramsay,  Margaret,  sampler,  23 

Rancocas,  N.  J.,  243 

Reding  sisters,  101 

Reed,  Diedamia,  217 

Reed,  Eliza,  363 

Religious  verse,  297,  316 

Reticella,  2 

Rhode  Island  samplers,  28 

Rhode  Island  schools,  367,  384 

Rice  family,  113 

Richards,  Eliza,  47 

Richason,  John  and  Ann,  89 

Ripley  arms,  407 

Roberts,  Elizabeth,  samplers,  6,  393 

Robertson,  Mary,  246,  381 

Robins,  Ann,  sampler,  18 

Robins,  Rebecca,  401 

Robinson,  Hannah,  sampler,  115 

Rogers,  Nathaniel,  365 

Rowe  arms,  407 

Russell,  Lydia,  sampler,  113 

Russell  arms,  407 

Rust,  Agnes,  sampler,  27 

Salisbury,  Mary,  teacher,  380 
Salter  arms,  407 
Samp-cloths,  3 
Sampler  verse,  247 
Samplers,  child  hates,  96 


Samplers,  poems  in  praise  of,  271 

Samplers,  1600-1700,  register  of,  9 

Samplers,  1700-1799,  register,  29 

Samplers,  1800-1830,  register,  121 

Sanders,  Anna,  368 

Sanderson,  Hannah,  sampler,  26 

Sargent  arms,  408 

Satin-stitch,  396 

Satin  used,  390 

Saunders,  Mrs.,  teacher,  365 

Schaick,  Catherine  van,  sampler,  19 

Schools  and  schoolmistresses,  355 

Schools,  list  of  early,  382-387 

Scott,  Betty,  sampler,  22 

Searing,  Bath-sheba,  sampler,  19 

Seckel,  Catharine,  199 

Selby  arms,  408 

Seventeenth  century  samplers,  1 

Shakespeare,  William,  3,  253 

Sharp,  Samuel,  89 

Sheep,  24 

Shepherdess  first  used,  28 

Sherburne  arms,  408 

Sherman,  Aimena,  sampler,  119 

Silk,  crinkled,  20,  92 

Silk  thread,  391 

Simkins,  Daniel,  154 

Simonds,  Elizabeth,  204 

Sipples,  Eliza,  379 

Skelton,  John,  refers  to  samplers,  1 

Smith,  Ann,  sampler,  22 

Smith,  Betsy,  211 

Smith,  Jemima,  125 

Smith,  Mary,  sampler,  12 

Smith,  Olive,  207 

Smith,  Robert,  89 

Smith,  Sophia,  sampler,  104 

Smith,  Tabitha,  sampler,  25 

Smith  College,  110 

Smock,  Barnes,  374 

Snyder,  Catherine,  sampler,  115 

Sorrow^,  poems  on,  278 

Souder,  Sarah  Ann,  sampler,  26 

Southerland,  Miss,  364 

Southworth  arms,  408 

Speakman,  Phebe,  sampler,  97 

Spechet,  Leonora,  sampler,  22 

Stalcop,  Peter,  378 

Standish,  Loara,  her  sampler,  4,  9 

Starr,  Margaret,  sampler,  27 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


415 


states,  earliest  samplers  in,  28 

Stedman  arms,  408 

Steiner,  Bernard  C,  380 

Sterrett,  Mary,  sampler,  26 

Stevens,  Elizabeth,  sampler,  106 

Stickney  family,  227 

Stiegel,  Baron,  and  samplers,  98 

Stillman,  Rev.  Samuel,  191 

Stitches,  396;  list  of,  398 

Stivour,  Sarah,  20,  364,  367,  397 

Stoppage,  105 

Studley,  Mary,  samplers,  26 

Sturgis  arms,  407 

Sullivan,  Elizabeth,  373 

Surriage,  Agnes,  173 

Swain,  Margaret,  sampler,  18 

Swedes'  schools,  377 

Sydney,  Sir  Philip,  on  samplers,  3 

Tammy  cloth,  389 

TatnaU,  Ann,  sampler,  14,  395 

Tay,  Grace,  sampler,  8,  10,  393 ;  also  Plate  x 

Taylor,  Elizabeth,  48 

Ten  Commandments,  19 

Tennessee  school,  387 

Terrell,  George,  on  sampler,  116 

Terry,  Elizabeth,  sampler,  101 

Thelwell,  Debby,  379 

Thelwell,  John,  378 

Thomas,  Eliza,  sampler,  115 

Thompson,  Isabella,  sampler,  27 

Thompson,  Margaret,  her  sampler,  1546,  1 

Thoreau,  Henry  D.,  406 

Thread,  390 

Tippit,  Betty,  390 

Tomlin,  Drusilla,  sampler,  26 

Tomlinson  family,  89 

Townsend,  Hannah,  30 

Train,  Mary,  398 

Treadway,  Mrs.  W.  W.,  246 

Trecothick,  Hannah,  sampler,  14 

Trees,  genealogical,  113 

Troup,  Sarah,  sampler,  25,  388 

Trufry,  Ruthy,  sampler,  112 

Tucker,  Hanna,  366 

Tucker,  Mary,  274 

Tudor  sampler,  shape  of,  1 

Tufts,  Eliza,  177 


Turfrey,  Mary,  359 
Turner,  Polly,  369 
Tyler,  Abraham,  220 

Unfinished  sampler,  24 
Universal  prayer,  20 

Vaughan,  Caroline,  381 

Van  Home,  Sarah,  sampler,  91 

Van  Maater,  Catherine,  sampler,  18 

Van  Schaick,  Catherine,  372 

Van  Wart,  Harriet,  sampler.  111 

Verse  first  used,  28 

Verse,  sampler,  247 

Vinton,  Mary  A.  F.,  sampler,  118 

Virginia  schools,  381,  387 

Virtues,  poems  in  praise  of,  328 

Vose,  Lemuel,  sampler,  27 

Wade,  Frances,  22,  107 

Wadsworth,  Jonathan,  fighter,  26 

Walden,  Mary,  381 

Waldron,  Elizabeth,  361 

Walker,  Faith,  sampler,  101 

Wallingsford,  Clarissa,  30 

Ward,  Mrs.,  teacher,  856 

Ward,  Priscilla,  sampler,  117 

Warding,  Isaac,  239 

Waters,  Brooksania,  sampler,  95 

Watts,  Rev.  Isaac,  influence  of,  253 

Way,  Elizabeth,  379 

Waynesville  school,  387 

Webb,  Mary,  sampler,  18 

Wedding  samplers,  98 

Weifer,  Ann  Mary,  199 

Welch,  Caroline,  sampler,  99 

Welch,  John,  carver,  26 

Welsh,  Grace,  sampler,  21 

WendeU,  Barrett,  letter  by,  252 

Wentworth,  Eliza,  366 

Westcott,  William,  44 

Whann,  Margareta,  sampler,  116 

AVheatley,  Mary,  sampler,  27 

Wlieaton,  Mary  I.,  178 

Whetten  family,  134 

White,  Salla,  364 

Whiting,  Hannah,  150 

Whitmore,  Susan,  369 


See  also  names  on  pages  29  and  121 


416 


AMERICAN  SAMPLERS 


Whittington,  Sally,  sampler,  103 

Wiert,  Elizabeth,  199 

Wiggins,  Hannah,  389 

Willard  arms,  408 

Willes,  Rocksalana,  sampler,  22 

William  and  Mary  College,  103 

Williams,  Desire,  398 

Williams,  Elizabeth,  sampler,  118 

Williams,  Rev.  John,  26 

Williamson  arms,  408 

Willis,  Mrs.  Samuel,  13 


Wilson,  Dovey  Winslow,  381 
Winklehawk,  105 
Wolcott,  Frances,  244 
Woodman,  Appha,  396 
Woodson,  Mrs.,  149,  387 
Woodwell,  Alice,  390 
Worcester,  Clarisa,  168 
Wyman,  Lucy,  sampler,  109,  113 

Yale  College,  108 

Yeakel,  Sarah,  sampler,  100 


CtWfr 


3  5002  00259  4708 

Bolion,  Ethel  Sunwooti 
American  samplers, 


