S.  G.  and  E.  L.  ELBERT 


.ro 


*re 


m$ 


[»W. 


JKLLAj  SMTEH  J1LB3R0L    «8& 


mt 


XkTBARim.  3C.  COMAN 


s\ 


/  .  " 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2012  with  funding  from 

Boston  Library  Consortium  Member  Libraries 


http://archive.org/details/americanslaveryc1857cham 


AMEEICAK 


SLAVERY  AND  COLOUR 


BY  WILLIAM  CHAMBERS 

AUTHOR    OF    'THINGS    AS    THEY    ARE    IN   AMERICA' 


LONDON 

W.   &   R.   CHAMBERS,  PATERNOSTER   ROW 

AND    DIX    AND    EDWARDS,    NEW    YORK 

1857 


Edinburgh : 
rrinted  by  \V.  and  R.  Chambers. 


The  sight  of  a  few  Slave  Sales  lias  a  wonderful  effect  in 
awakening  the  feelings  on  the  subject  of  Slavery.  The 
thing  is  seen  to  he  an  undeniable  reality — no  mere  invention 
of  the  novelist.  From  time  to  time,  the  spectacle  of  an 
auction-stand  on  which  one  man  is  selling  another,  flashes 
back  upon  the  mind.  For  three  years,  I  have  been 
haunted  by  recollections  of  that  saddening  scene,  and 
taken  a  gradually  deepening  interest  in  American  Slavery 
— its  present  condition,  its  mysterious  future.  Having 
already  referred  to  the  subject,  I  should  not  again  have 
intruded  on  public  notice,  but  for  the  recent  exciting 
discussions  concerning  Slavery,  the  protracted  struggle 
in  Kansas,  and  the  probability  of  further  contests  between 
Slavery  and  Freedom,  consequent  on  the  organisation  of 
new  States  in  the  southern  section  of  the  Union. 

The  present  volume,  tracing  the  progress  of  Slavery, 
and  presenting  such  other  particulars  as  may  afford  a 
comprehensive  view  of  the  subject,  is  offered  as  a  small 
contribution  to  a  department  of  literature  daily  increasing 
in  interest — an  expression  of  sympathy  from  an  unenrolled 
adherent  of  a  great  and  sacred  cause. 

W.  C. 


Edinburgh,  March  1857. 


AMERICAN 


SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 


SOUTHERN      DEMONSTRATIONS. 

c  Race  !  Do  not  speak  to  us  of  race — we  care  nothing 
for  breed  or  colour.  What  we  contend  for  is,  that 
slavery,  whether  of  black  or  white,  is  a  normal,  a 
proper  institution  in  society.'  So  proclaim  southern 
writers  in  the  United  States.  The  principle  of  enslav- 
ing only  coloured  persons,  descendants  of  imported 
Africans,  is  now  antiquated,  and  a  scheme  which 
embraces  slavery  of  every  race  and  variety  of  com- 
plexion is  at  length  put  forward  as  a  natural  and 
desirable  arrangement  for  all  parties — a  highly  com- 
mendable state  of  things.  Any  one  could  have 
foreseen  that  it  must  come  to  this.  The  prodigious 
and  irregular  amalgamation  of  races  in  the  south,  with 
the  deterioration  and  helplessness  of  the  less- affluent 
class  of  whites  in  the  slaveholding  states,  has,  as 
may  be  supposed,  led  to  a  pretty  nearly  pure,  nay, 
absolutely  pure  breed  of  white  slaves.  A  new  style 
of  reasoning  is  consequently  required.  If  slavery  is 
to  be  at  all  vindicated,  it  must  not  now  be  on* the 
narrow  basis  of  colour,  but  on  the  broad  grounds,  that 


2  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

there  is  an  inherent  right  in  the  stronger  and  more 
wealthy  classes  to  reduce  the  poorer,  and,  it  may  be, 
more  ignorant  orders  to  a  state  of  perpetual  bondage. 
The  cool  announcement  of  this  extraordinary  doctrine, 
from  influential  parties  in  a  great  thriving  republic, 
strikes  one  with  so  much  wonder,  that  we  almost 
inquire  if  we  have  heard  aright,  or  if  we  are  really 
living  in  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

The  most  casual  glance  at  the  products  of  the 
southern  press  leaves  no  room  for  doubt  on  the 
subject.  A  few  scraps  cannot  but  be  classed  among 
the  curiosities  of  modern  literature.  Mr  Fitzhugh,  a 
southern  writer,  says :  '  We  do  not  adopt  the  theory 
that  Ham  was  the  ancestor  of  the  negro  race.  The 
Jewish  slaves  were  not  negroes,  and  to  confine  the 
justification  of  slavery  to  that  of  race,  would  be  to 
weaken  the  Scriptural  authority,  and  to  lose  the  whole 
weight  of  profane  authority ;  for  we  read  of  no  negro 
slavery  in  ancient  times.  Slavery,  black  or  white,  is 
right  and  necessary/  The  Richmond  Inquirer,  an  able 
Virginian  paper,  says  :  '  Until  recently,  the  defence  of 
slavery  has  laboured  under  great  difficulties,  because 
its  apologists — for  they  were  mere  apologists — took 
half-way  grounds.  They  confined  the  defence  of 
slavery  to  mere  negro  slavery;  thereby  giving  up  the 
slavery  principle,  admitting  other  forms  of  slavery  to 
be  wrong.  The  line  of  defence  is  now  changed.  The 
south  now  maintains  that  slavery  is  right,  natural,  and 
necessary.  While  it  is  far  more  obvious  that  negroes 
should  be  slaves  than  whites — for  they  are  only  fit  to 
labour,  not  to  direct — yet  the  principle  of  slavery  is 
itself  right,  and  does  not  depend  on  difference  of 
complexion.' 

Mr  G.  W.  Weston,  a  writer  in  the  cause  of  emanci- 
pation in  the  New  York  Tribune,  observes  :  '  It  is  not 
true,  in  law  or  in  fact,  that  the  condition  of  slavery  at 


SOUTHERN    DEMONSTRATIONS.  3 

the  south  is  confined  to  the  African  race.  The  prin- 
ciple of  American  slavery  which  distinguishes  it  from 
the  slavery  of  patriarchal  times,  and  from  oriental 
slavery  at  this  day,  is,  that  where  the  mother  is 
enslaved,  the  offspring  follow  the  condition  of  the 
mother.  The  female  slaves,  exposed  of  necessity  to 
the  disorderly  passions  of  the  whites,  are  made  the 
instruments  through  whom  the  Caucasian  race  is  itself 
reduced  to  the  condition  of  servitude.  The  blood  of 
orators,  statesmen,  generals,  and  even  presidents,  flows 
in  the  veins  of  thousands  who  are  bought  and  sold  like 
mules  and  horses.  The  time  is  not  distant  when  the 
genuine  unmixed  African  will  not  be  found  at  the 
south.  He  is  already  rare,  although  it  is  less  than 
half  a  century  since  the  prohibition  of  the  foreign 
slave-trade/  Besides  the  source  of  whiteness  above 
referred  to,  it  is  understood  that  numbers  of  purely 
Anglo-American  children  pass  into  slavery.  In  some 
instances,  the  indigent  whites  of  the  south  sell  their 
children  to  traders ;  and  the  practice  of  kidnapping 
white  children  in  the  northern  states,  and  transferring 
them  southward,  is  said  to  be  notoriously  on  the 
increase.  We  see  it  mentioned  that,  in  the  city  of  New 
York  alone,  as  many  as  thirty  children  on  an  average 
are  stolen  yearly ;  it  being  shrewdly  guessed  that  many 
of  them  are  carried  to  the  markets  of  the  south,  where 
a  good  price  for  them  can  be  readily  obtained.  If  there 
be  the  slightest  truth  in  the  supposition  that  gently 
nurtured  white  infants  are  so  abstracted  from  the 
homes  of  their  parents,  nothing  could  give  a  more 
forcible  impression  of  the  horrors  entailed  on  American 
society  by  the  tolerance  of  slavery  within  its  bosom. 

It  has  been  customary  to  blame  England  for  having, 
in  the  first  instance,  introduced  negro  slavery  into  the 
States;  but,  admitting  to  its  full  extent  her  guilt  in 
the   slave-trade,   we   can   hardly  see   how  her   doings 


4  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    xVND    COLOUR. 

in  this  respect  are  to  be  consistently  condemned,  if 
American  writers  be  sincere  in  thinking  that  slavery  is 
a  normal  and  absolutely  necessary  institution.  From 
the  sentiments  lately  avowed,  it  would  appear  that  there 
can  be  no  right  condition  of  affairs  without  slaves. 
Free  labour  is  spoken  of  as  improper,  and  a  thing  that 
must  end  in  national  disaster.  The  only  security  is 
for  every  man  who  has  the  means  to  buy  slaves,  and 
get  all  his  work  done  by  them.  A  widely  circulated 
newspaper — the  New  Orleans  Delta — says  :  f  We  have 
a  proposition  to  lay  down  that  may  appear  startling 
to  many  because  it  is  new,  but  will  have  weight  and 
consideration  with  the  thinking,  inasmuch  as  it  is 
based  on  both  philosophy  and  experience.  We  there- 
fore declare  that  slavery  is  not  only  national  in  its 
origin,  but  it  is  essential  to  republican  nationality. 
But  for  slavery,  republicanism  would  have  long  since 
become  a  tale  in  these  United  States.  It  is  among 
the  slaveholding  population  that  republicanism  has 
had  its  true  home  and  only  defence.  It  is  they  who 
have  made  the  Union  what  it  is  commercially  and 
politically.  It  is  only  they  who  can  hereafter  main- 
tain a  safe  and  honourable  union,  and  enjoy  rational 
liberty.  History  is  instructive ;  heed  its  teachings ; 
they  are  invariable  and  unerring.  It  tells  us  that 
a  great  republic  never  existed  without  slavery.  It 
tells  us  that  where  partial  and  denned  slavery  did 
not  exist  of  law,  the  mass  of  the  working-people  have 
been  slaves,  and  worse  than  slaves.  It  tells  us  that 
wherever  universal  freedom  has  nominally  existed, 
poverty,  want,  and  possible  famine,  and  humiliating 
dependency  of  the  poor  on  the  rich,  have  been  the 
price  of  painted  delusion.  Slavery  was  an  institution 
in  all  the  ancient  republics,  but  in  two  we  have 
eminent  examples.  In  Home,  the  mightiest  in  arms, 
and  Athens,  the  most  glorious  in  art  of  all   the   old 


SOUTHERN    DEMONSTRATIONS.  5 

republics,  slavery  prevailed  to  a  greater  extent  than 
in  any  state  of  the  Union.  In  Athens,  the  proportion 
of  slaves  to  freemen  was  about  two  to  one — in  Rome, 
scarcely  less;  and  yet  with  this  institution  imbedded 
in  their  very  hearts,  they  lived  and  flourished,  century 
after  century,  and  reached  a  magnificence  and 
grandeur  of  which  the  history  of  modern  free  society 
affords  no  example.  Modern  free  society,  as  at  pre- 
sent organised,  is  radically  wrong  and  rotten.  It  is 
self-destroying,  and  can  never  exist  happily  and 
normally  until  it  is  qualified  by  the  introduction  of 
some  principle  equivalent  in  effect  to  the  institution  of 
negro  slavery.  In  the  northern  states,  free  society  has 
proved  a  failure.  It  is  rotten  to  the  core.  Let  the 
dominion  which  its  putrescence  has  engendered  suc- 
ceed, and  society,  with  its  most  sacred  sanctions  and 
its  holiest  institutions,  will  fall  before  it,  both  in  the 
north  and  south,  and  the  country  must  become  the 
seat  of  howling  anarchy  or  iron  despotism.  Negro 
slavery,  then,  is  the  conservative  element  of  republic- 
anism, and  the  firmest  basis  of  society  in  these 
United  States.  Such  being  the  social  and  political 
value  of  slavery,  its  diffusion  and  extension  are  of  the 
first  importance,  and  nothing  at  the  present  time 
should  more  nearly  interest  the  wise  philanthropist 
and  the  patriotic  statesman,  than  to  devise  measures 
to  effect  these  objects — to  restore  slavery  to  its 
original  national  character,  and  make  it  an  object  of 
political  solicitude.' 

These  notions  are  far  from  singular.  By  several 
writers,  freedom  is  spoken  of  with  coarse  contempt. 
'  Free  society  ! '  says  the  Muscogee  Herald,  an  Alabama 
newspaper.  ( We  sicken  at  the  name.  What  is  it  but 
a  conglomeration  of  greasy  mechanics,  filthy  operatives, 
small-fisted  farmers,  and  moon-struck  theorists?  All 
the  northern,  and  especially  the  New  England  States, 


6  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

are  devoid  of  society  fitted  for  well-bred  gentlemen. 
The  prevailing  class  one  meets  with  is  that  of 
mechanics  struggling  to  be  genteel,  and  small  farmers 
who  do  their  own  drudgery,  and  yet  who  are  hardly 
fit  for  association  with  a  southern  gentleman's  body- 
servant.  This  is  your  free  society,  which  the  northern 
hordes  are  endeavouring  to  extend  into  Kansas.' 
It  would  be  unjust  to  lay  too  much  stress  on  the 
grotesque  ravings  of  an  obscure  print,  did  they  not 
find  an  echo  in  the  Richmond  Inquirer,  a  paper  which, 
as  already  hinted,  is  conducted  with  no  mean  ability. 
'  Repeatedly,'  says  its  editor,  '  have  we  asked  the 
north — Has  not  the  experiment  of  universal  liberty 
failed  ?  Are  not  the  evils  of  free  society  insufferable  ? 
and  do  not  most  thinking  men  among  you  propose 
to  subvert  and  reconstruct  it  ?  Still  no  answer. 
This  gloomy  silence  is  another  conclusive  proof,  added 
to  many  other  conclusive  evidences  we  have  furnished, 
that  free  society  in  the  long-run  is  an  impracticable 
form  of  society ;  it  is  everywhere  starving,  demoralised, 
and  insurrectionary.  We  repeat,  then,  that  policy 
and  humanity  alike  forbid  the  extension  of  the  evils 
of  free  society  to  new  people  and  coming  generations. 
Two  opposite  and  conflicting  forms  of  society  cannot, 
among  civilised  men,  co-exist  and  endure.  The  one 
must  give  way,  and  cease  to  exist;  the  other  become 
universal.  If  free  society  be  unnatural,  immoral, 
unchristian,  it  must  fall,  and  give  way  to  slave  society 
— a  social  system,  old  as  the  world,  universal  as  man.' 
It  would  seem  that  the  measure  of  public  liberty 
which  Washington  fought  for  and  achieved,  is  a 
blunder;  and  that  for  the  much-venerated  free  insti- 
tutions of  the  States,  must  be  substituted  the  mixture 
of  aristocracy  and  helotism  of  the  ancient  world. 

Another  Virginian  print,  the  Richmond  Examiner, 
about  two  years  ago  came  out  with  a  flat  contradiction 


SOUTHERN    DEMONSTRATIONS.  7 

of  there  being  any  longer  a  desire  to  see  the  country 
clear  of  slavery.  f  It  is  all  a  hallucination  to  suppose 
that  we  are  ever  going  to  get  rid  of  African  slavery, 
or  that  it  will  ever  be  desirable  to  do  so.  It  is  a  thing 
that  we  cannot  do  without — that  is  righteous,  'profitable, 
and  permanent,  and  that  belongs  to  southern  society 
as  inherently,  intricately,  and  durably  as  the  white 
race  itself.  Yea,  the  white  race  will  itself  emigrate 
from  the  southern  states  to  Africa,  California,  or 
Polynesia,  sooner  than  the  African.  Let  us  make  up 
our  minds,  therefore,  to  put  up  with  and  make  the 
most  of  the  institution.  Let  us  not  bother  our  brains 
about  what  Providence  intends  to  do  with  our  negroes 
in  the  distant  future,  but  glory  in  and  profit  to  the 
utmost  by  what  He  has  done  for  them  in  trans- 
planting them  here  and  setting  them  to  work  on  our 
plantations.  Let  the  politicians  and  planters  of  the 
south,  while  encouraging  the  " Baptists  and  Methodists" 
- — and  other  denominations  having  a  less  number 
of  votes — in  Christianising  the  negro,  keep  their 
slaves  at  hard  work,  under  strict  discipline,  out  of 
idleness  and  mischief,  while  they  live ;  and  when  they 
come  to  die,  instead  of  sending  them  off  to  Africa,  or 
manumitting  them  to  a  life  of  u  freedom,"  licentious- 
ness, and  nuisance,  will  them  over  to  their  children,  or 
direct  them  to  be  sold  where  they  will  be  made  to 
work  hard,  and  be  of  service  to  their  masters  and  to 
the  country.  True  philanthropy  to  the  negro  begins, 
like  charity,  at  home;  and  if  southern  men  would 
act  as  if  the  canopy  of  heaven  were  inscribed  with  a 
covenant,  in  letters  of  fire,  that  the  negro  is  here,  and 
here  for  ever ;  is  our  property,  and  ours  for  ever ;  is 
never  to  be  emancipated ;  is  to  be  kept  hard  at  ivork, 
and  in  rigid  subjection  all  his  days  ;  and  is  never  to  go 
to  Africa,  to  Polynesia,  or  to  Yankee  Land — far  worse 
than  either — they  would  accomplish  more  good  for  the 


8  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

race  in  five  years  than  they  boast  the  institution  itself 
to  have  accomplished  in  two  centuries,  and  cut  up  by 
the  roots  a  set  of  evils  and  fallacies  that  threaten  to 
drive  the  white  race  a- wandering  in  the  western 
wilderness,  sooner  than  Cuffee  will  go  to  preach  the 
gospel  in  Guinea.' 

We  should  imagine  that  to  most  of  our  readers 
these  sentiments  will  come  with  startling  novelty. 
While  the  philanthropists  of  England  are  contriving  all 
kinds  of  meliorations  in  social  economy,  they  do  not 
appear  to  be  aware  that  in  the  progress  of  events 
beyond  the  Atlantic,  views  have  arisen  respecting  the 
slave  question  which  are  altogether  obstructive  of 
popular  freedom,  and  calculated  to  reduce  every 
unprotected  labourer  to  the  condition  of  a  chattel. 
'  We  have/  says  the  South-side  Democrat,  a  Virginian 
contemporary  of  the  Inquirer — '  we  have  got  to  hating 
everything  with  the  prefix  free,  from  free  negroes  down 
and  up  through  the  whole  catalogue — free  farms,  free 
labour,  free  society,  free  will,  free  thinking,  free 
children,  and  free  schools.  But  the  worst  of  all  these 
abominations  is  the  modern  system  of  free  schools.' 
The  only  relief  can  arise  from  a  return  to  that  blessed 
state  in  which  the  bulk  of  the  population  shall  be 
kept  in  ignorance  and  servitude  under  a  strong-handed 
minority — there  is,  it  is  alleged,  no  other  means  to 
assuage  the  poverty  incidental  to  universal  competition. 
All  who  are  unable  to  maintain  their  families  in 
decency,  had  better  be  at  once  sold  to  those  who  are 
disposed  to  take  charge  of  them.  '  Sell  the  parents 
of  these  children  into  slavery.  Let  our  legislature 
(continues  the  authority  just  quoted)  pass  a  law,  that 
whoever  will  take  these  parents,  and  take  care  of  them 
and  their  offspring,  in  sickness  and  in  health,  clothe 
them,  feed  them,  and  house  them,  shall  be  legally 
entitled  to  their  services;  and  let  the  same  legislature 


SOUTHERN    DEMONSTRATIONS.  9 

decree,  that  whoever  receives  these  parents  and  their 
children,  and  obtains  their  services,  shall  take  care  of 
them  as  long  as  they  live/  We  infer  from  all  that  is 
told  of  the  condition  of  the  impoverished  '  white  trash ' 
in  the  southern  states,  that  the  legislative  measures 
here  pointed  at  would  present  a  natural  and  not 
unlikely  solution  of  a  somewhat  puzzling  question. 
Sanguine  as  are  our  expectations  of  social  advancement, 
under  prudent  safeguards,  who  can  tell  that  at  least  a 
section  of  a  great  nation  may  not,  even  in  our  times, 
return  to  the  almost  forgotten  usages  of  medieval 
Europe.  The  world  is  after  all,  perhaps,  not  so  vastly 
improved  as  one  would  be  inclined  to  think. 

Unlike  the  serfdom  of  the  middle  ages,  when  war 
and  famine  carried  off  no  small  share  of  the  redundant 
population,  southern  slavery  cannot  be  successfully 
maintained  unless  means  be  found  for  employing  the 
increase  on  adjoining  lands,  or  disposing  of  it  for 
transit  to  distant  settlements.  The  pressing  necessity 
for  extending  limited  properties  into  large  possessions, 
is  stated  to  be  operating  on  a  gigantic  scale  in 
Alabama.  The  Hon.  C.  C.  Clay,  Jun.,  on  lately 
addressing  a  Horticultural  Society  in  that  great  cotton- 
growing  state,  laments  the  absorption  of  small  properties. 
'  Our  wealthier  planters,'  he  observes,  { with  greater 
means,  and  no  more  skill,  are  buying  out  their  poorer 
neighbours,  extending  their  plantations,  and  adding 
to  their  slave  force.  Of  the  20,000,000  of  dollars 
annually  realised  from  the  sales  of  cotton  crop  of 
Alabama,  nearly  all  not  expended  in  supporting  the 
producers  is  reinvested  in  land  and  negroes.  Thus, 
the  white  population  has  decreased,  and  the  slave 
increased,  almost  pari  passu  in  several  counties  in  our 
state.  In  1825,  Madison  county  cast  about  3000 
votes ;  now  she  cannot  exceed  2300.  In  traversing 
that  county,  one  will  discover   numerous  farmhouses, 


10  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

once  the  abode  of  industrious  and  intelligent  freemen, 
now  occupied  by  slaves,  or  tenantless,  deserted,  and 
dilapidated  ;  be  will  observe  fields  once  fertile,  now 
unfenced,  abandoned;  he  will  see  the  moss  growing 
on  the  mouldering  walls  of  once  thrifty  villages,  and 
will  find  "one  only  master  grasps  the  whole  domain," 
that  once  furnished  happy  homes  for  a  dozen  white 
families.'  To  this  dismal  description,  that  respectable 
authority,  Olmsted,  says  that  the  political  experiment 
of  Old  Virginia,  the  Carolinas,  and  Georgia,  is  being 
repeated  to  the  same  fatal  result  in  Young  Alabama. 

The  generally  blighting  influence  of  slavery  is 
clearly  a  main  cause  of  its  extension.  To  exist  at  all, 
it  must  push  into  new  regions,  everywhere  exhaust- 
ing lands,  extinguishing  freedom,  and  dishonouring 
independent  rural  industry.  Pursued  by  a  fearful 
Nemesis,  the  slave-power  still  seeks  for  more  and 
more  scope  for  its  devastating  encroachments.  An 
amount  of  labour  far  beyond  the  bounds  of  internal 
supply  is  in  demand.  If  the  great  west  is  to  be  added 
piecemeal  to  the  slave  states  of  the  Union,  the  breed- 
ing establishments  of  Virginia  will  fail  to  furnish  stock 
except  at  exorbitant  prices.  Nothing,  accordingly, 
remains  but  a  legalised  revival  of  the  slave-traffic  from 
the  coast  of  Africa,  or  the  legal  extension  of  slavery  to 
the  poorer  classes  of  the  white  population.  We  have 
seen  what  is  said  of  the  latter  expedient ;  and  a  desire 
to  supply  the  labour-market  by  the  former  odious 
means,  is  likewise  expressed  in  no  reserved  terms.  The 
New  Orleans  Delta  says,  on  a  late  occasion,  { We  not 
only  desire  to  make  territories,  now  free,  slave  terri- 
tories, and  to  acquire  new  territory  into  which  to 
extend  slavery — such  as  Cuba,  North-eastern  Mexico, 
&c. — but  we  would  reopen  the  African  slave-trade,  that 
every  white  man  might  have  a  chance  to  make  himself 
owner  of  one  or  more  negroes,  and  go  with  them  and 


SOUTHERN    DEMONSTRATIONS.  11 

their  household  gods  wherever  opportunity  beckoned 
to  enterprise.  But  the  North  would  never  consent 
to  this;  they  would  dissolve  the  Union  rather  than 
grant  it,  say  the  croaking  impracticables.  Gentlemen, 
you  do  not  know  the  North,  oracular  as  you  look  when 
dubiously  shaking  your  heads.  It  would  not  oppose 
any  more  bitterly  a  large  demand  like  this,  boldly 
made,  than  the  smallest  one,  faintly  and  politely  urged. 
Try  it.  There  is  nothing  to  lose  by  the  experiment. 
At  all  events,  if  the  attempt  to  reopen  this  trade 
should  fail,  it  would  give  one  more  proof  of  how 
injurious  our  connection  with  the  North  has  become 
to  us,  and  would  indicate  one  more  signal  advantage 
which  a  southern  confederacy  would  have  over  the 
present  heterogeneous  association  called  the  Union.' 
How  the  North  has  deserved  that  cut !  The  advant- 
ages of  a  revived  African  slave-trade  were  argumenta- 
tively  pointed  out  by  the  Charleston  Standard  so 
recently  as  last  October.  c  From  first  to  last,  there 
has  been  a  constant  want  of  labour.  Three  millions 
of  our  people  have  perhaps  as  many  slaves  as  they 
naturally  require ;  but  there  are  three  millions  more 
who  are  unsupplied.  They  would  take  slaves  if  they 
could  get  them ;  but  they  are  not  to  be  had  at  prices 
which  will  enable  them  to  be  used  in  competition 
with  the  free  labour  of  the  world.  All  we  have  are 
wanted  for  agriculture,  and  even  these  are  not  enough. 
While  all  are  employed,  and  employed  most  profitably, 
lands  all  over  the  country  are  parched  and  unprofitable, 
for  the  want  of  labour,  and  millions  more  could  have 
been  absorbed.  The  labour  of  those  brought  one  year, 
would  have  paid  for  those  to  be  brought  the  next;  as 
employments  opened,  white  men  of  enterprise  would 
have  come  in  more  abundance  than  they  have  done ; 
the  stream  of  labour  from  Africa  would  have  met  a 
stream  of  enterprise  from  Europe ;    both  would  have 


12  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

poured  in  together ;  the  population  of  the  southern 
states  would  have  been  more  dense;  the  population 
of  the  northern  states  would  have  been  more  sparse ; 
Georgia  would  have  been  to  New  York  as  New  York 
is  now  to  Georgia;  other  states  from  Texas  and  New 
Mexico  would  have  been  brought  in ;  and  thus,  if  the 
slave  states  had  held  on  to  the  sources   of  their  real 

power,  the  South  would  have  been  the  Union 

There  is  now  buried  under  every  acre  of  land  in  South 
Carolina  at  least  fifty  dollars  in  gold;  and  the  day 
that  the  savage  African  is  landed  on  our  shores  to 
cultivate  it,  that  gold  will  glitter  on  its  surface.' 

It  will  not  be  imagined  that  these  wild  opinions 
meet  with  universal  response  in  the  South,  where, 
indeed,  many  planters  above  the  ordinary  standard 
are  conscious  of  the  evils  of  slavery,  and  would  gladly 
listen  to  any  reasonable  plan  for  relieving  themselves 
of  their  coloured  dependents.  Least  of  all  do  such 
notions  meet  with  approval  in  the  North.  But  it  is 
not  less  certain  that,  from  causes  not  far  to  seek,  a 
new  tone  of  sentiment  has  begun  to  prevail  among  the 
general  slaveholding  interest.  What  was  long  lamented 
and  reluctantly  endured,  is  now  resolutely  maintained, 
and  arguments  are  found  to  vindicate  its  indefinite 
extension.  A  high  civil  functionary,  Mr  Adams, 
governor  of  South  Carolina,  in  his  late  message  to 
the  legislature  of  that  state,  goes  quite  as  far  a  length 
as  any  of  the  newspapers  above  quoted.  Referring 
to  the  pressure  against  slavery,  he  speaks  of  the 
necessity  for  prompt  measures  to  fortify  and  extend  it. 
He  recommends  the  passage  of  a  law  exempting  from 
legal  seizure  and  sale,  at  least  one  slave;  so  that  every 
family  of  whites  may  be  stimulated  to  possess  pro- 
perty 'in  some  degree  above  the  casualties  of  debt/ 
Referring  to  the  increasing  demand  for  slaves  to 
cultivate  cotton,  he  sees  no  other  means  for  retaining 


SOUTHERN    DEMONSTRATIONS.  13 

a  monopoly  in  producing  that  article,  than  the  import- 
ation of  slaves.  Cheap  labour  must  be  obtained,  and 
this  can  be  done  only  in  one  way — by  reopening  the 
African  slave-trade.  What  followed,  we  give  in  Mr 
Adams's  own  words : 

1  Until  Providence  interposes  and  changes  his  organ- 
ism, the  African  must  continue  to  be  a  "  hewer  of  wood 
and  drawer  of  water."  It  is  a  diseased  sentimentality 
which  starts  back  at  the  idea  of  legalising  the  slave- 
trade,  and,  at  the  same  time,  contemplates  without 
emotion  the  cruel  servitude  which  capital  exacts  of 
labour,  all  the  world  over.  There  was  a  time  when 
canting  philanthropists  had  instilled  into  us  a  belief 
that  slavery  was  wrong.  Investigation  has  entirely 
changed  the  once  common  sentiment  on  this  point. 
The  South  now  believes  that  a  mysterious  Providence 
has  brought  the  two  races  together  on  this  continent 
for  wise  purposes,  and  that  the  existing  relation  has 
been  mutually  beneficial.  Southern  slavery  has  elevated 
the  African  to  a  degree  of  civilisation  which  the  black 
race  has  never  attained  in  any  other  age  or  country. 
"  We  see  it  now  in  its  true  light,  and  regard  it  as  the 
most  safe  and  stable  basis  for  free  institutions  in  the 
world."  Had  the  slave-trade  never  been  closed,  the 
equilibrium  between  the  North  and  the  South  would 
not  have  been  destroyed.  The  North  has  had  the  Old 
World  from  which  to  draw  her  supply  of  labour,  and 
hence  the  rapid  settlement  of  the  north-west.  Since 
1808,  the  South  has  supplied  her  own  labour,  and 
has  necessarily  made  slower  progress  in  settling  up 
the  south-west.  If  the  trade  were  open  now,  I  am 
persuaded  that  the  South  would  not  consent  to  close 
it;  and  this  is  perhaps  the  best  answer  to  the  argu- 
ment derived  from  the  mere  sentiment  that  is  arrayed 
against  the  proposition.  It  is  apprehended  that  the 
opening  of  this  trade  will  lessen  the  value  of  slaves, 


14  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

and  ultimately  destroy  the  institution.  It  is  a  suffi- 
cient answer  to  point  to  the  fact,  that  unrestricted 
immigration  has  not  diminished  the  value  of  labour 
in  the  north-western  section  of  the  confederacy. 
The  cry  there  is,  want  of  labour,  notwithstanding 
capital  has  the  pauperism  of  the  Old  World  to  press 
into  its  grinding  service.  If  we  cannot  supply  the 
demand  for  slave-labour,  then  we  must  expect  to  be 
supplied  with  a  species  of  labour  we  do  not  want,  and 
which  is,  from  the  very  nature  of  things,  antagonistic 
to  our  institutions.  In  all  slaveholding  states,  true 
policy  dictates  that  the  superior  race  should  direct,  and 
the  inferior  perform  all  menial  service.  Competition 
between  the  white  and  black  man  for  this  service  may 
not  disturb  northern  sensibility,  but  it  does  not  exactly 
suit  our  latitude.  Irrespective,  however,  of  interest, 
the  act  of  congress  declaring  the  slave-trade  piracy,  is 
a  brand  upon  us  which  I  think  it  important  to  remove. 
If  the  trade  be  piracy,  the  slave  must  be  plunder ;  and 
no  ingenuity  can  avoid  the  logical  necessity  of  such 
conclusion.  My  hopes  and  fortunes  are  indissolubly 
associated  with  this  form  of  society.  I  feel  that  I  would 
be  wanting  in  duty  if  I  did  not  urge  you  to  withdraw 
your  assent  to  an  act  which  is  itself  a  direct  condem- 
nation of  our  institutions.  But  we  have  interests  to 
enforce  a  course  of  self-respect.  I  believe,  as  I  have 
already  stated,  that  more  slaves  are  necessary  to  a 
continuance  of  our  monopoly  in  plantation  products.  I 
believe  that  they  are  necessary  to  the  full  development 
of  our  whole  round  of  agricultural  and  mechanical 
resources ;  that  they  are  necessary  to  the  restoration 
of  the  South  to  an  equality  of  power  in  the  general 
government,  perhaps  to  the  very  integrity  of  slave 
society,  disturbed  as  it  has  been  by  causes  which  have 
induced  an  undue  proportion  of  the  ruling  race.  To 
us  have  been  committed  the  fortunes  of  this  peculiar 


SOUTHERN    DEMONSTRATIONS.  15 

form  of  society  resulting  from  tlie  union  of  unequal 
races.  It  has  vindicated  its  claim  to  the  approbation 
of  an  enlightened  humanity.  It  has  civilised  and 
Christianised  the  African.  It  has  exalted  the  white 
race  itself  to  higher  hopes  and  purposes,  and  it  is 
perhaps  of  the  most  sacred  obligation  that  we  should 
give  it  the  means  of  expansion,  and  that  we  should  press 
it  forward  to  a  perpetuity  of  progress.' 

In  making  the  foregoing  propositions  to  revive  the 
foreign  slave-trade,  the  more  eager  spirits  of  the  South 
do  not  appear  to  have  sufficiently  considered  the  politi- 
cal difficulties  which  were  presented  to  a  measure  of 
that  kind.  The  North,  little  as  it  is  to  be  respected  for 
its  general  lethargy,  would  not  tolerate  so  gross  an  out- 
rage, and  it  is  almost  unnecessary  to  say,  that  the  bare 
attempt  to  legalise  the  importation  of  slaves,  would  pro- 
duce a  rupture  with  England  and  other  European  powers, 
which  might  end  in  a  speedy  solution  of  the  whole 
question  of  slavery  and  colour.  The  federal  authorities 
hastened  to  repudiate  the  sentiments  of  the  extreme 
southern  party.  Shortly  after  the  meeting  of  congress, 
a  resolution  was  brought  into  the  House  of  Eepresenta- 
tives,  December  15, 1856,  repelling  the  notion  of  opening 
the  slave-trade,  and  it  was  carried  by  a  majority 
of  152  to  57.  Immediately  afterwards,  a  resolution 
was  introduced,  declaring  it  to  be  inexpedient,  unwise, 
and  contrary  to  the  settled  policy  of  the  United 
States,  to  repeal  the  laws  against  the  slave-trade ;  and 
this  expression  of  feeling  was  carried  by  a  majority 
of  183  to  8.  To  think  it  was  necessary  at  this  time 
of  day,  for  the  representatives  of  a  great  nation  to 
make  these  avowals !  The  motive  for  doing  so,  how- 
ever, is  alleged  to  have  been  less  a  regard  for  the 
outraged  opinion  of  Christendom,  than  a  desire  to 
discountenance  a  project  for  lowering  the  value  of  slave- 
property,  which  would   be  an  inevitable   consequence 


16  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

of  large  importations  of  blacks  from  the  coast  of 
Africa.  Whatever  truth  may  be  in  this  supposition, 
surely  all  except  a  few  indiscreet  persons  must  have 
felt  that  southern  demonstrations  had  gone  a  little  too 
fast — -and  too  far. 


SLAVERY     AT     THE     REVOLUTION — ACQUISITION 

OE     LOUISIANA. 

In  the  dashing  times  which,  produced  the  Declaration 
of  Independence,,  and  opened  up  the  most  glowing 
anticipations  of  a  political  millennium,  in  which  we 
were  to  '  hold  these  truths  as  self-evident,  that  all  men 
are  created  equal — that  they  are  endowed  by  their 
Creator  with  certain  inalienable  rights — that  among 
these  are  life,  Liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness ' 
— we  say,  in  the  midst  of  these  announcements  of  a 
brighter  day  for  hitherto  down-trodden  human  nature, 
and  of  what  was  actually  done  towards  founding  a 
great  republic,  who  could  have  foreseen  that  in  eighty 
years  the  result  would  be  a  state  of  things  in  which  a 
sixth  part  of  the  population  would  be  slaves — human 
beings  of  every  variety  of  complexion  and  diversity  of 
intelligence,  placed,  from  no  fault  of  their  own,  on  a 
level  with  the  brute  creation;  and  further,  that  this 
sorrowful  and  abject  condition  would  come  to  be 
extended,  perpetuated,  vindicated  as  an  essential 
element  in  civil  society !  The  world,  as  it  appears  to 
us,  has  hardly  awakened  to  a  consciousness  of  this 
historical  anomaly ;  and  this  is  not  surprising,  for  the 
Americans  themselves  are  as  yet  only  beginning  to 
see  the  awkwardness  of  the  dilemma  into  which  they 
have  allowed  themselves  to  be  drifted. 

It  was  from  no  qualm  of  conscience  on  the  part  of 
the  committee  appointed  to  draw  up  the  Declaration — 
Jefferson,  Adams,  Livingston,  Sherman,  and  Franklin 
— that  the  passages  relative  to  slavery  were  struck 
out  from  the  celebrated  document.     f  He  [the  king  of 

B 


18  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

Great  Britain]  has  waged  cruel  war  against  human 
nature  itself,  violating  its  most  sacred  rights  of  life  and 
liberty  in  the  persons  of  a  distant  people,  who  never 
offended  him,  captivating  and  carrying  them  into 
slavery  in  another  hemisphere,  or  to  incur  a  miserable 
death  in  their  transportation  thither.  This  piratical 
warfare,  the  opprobrium  of  infidel  powers,  is  the 
warfare  of  the  Christian  king  of  Great  Britain. 
Determined  to  keep  open  market  where  men  should 
be  bought  and  sold,  he  has  prostituted  his  negative 
for  suppressing  every  legislative  attempt  to  prohibit 
or  to  restrain  this  execrable  commerce/  *  &c.  It 
was  quite  as  well  that  these  ungentle  accusations 
should  have  been  withdrawn,  in  consideration,  as  is 
said,  for  the  feelings  of  southern  members  of  the 
infant  confederacy ;  that  so  there  might  remain  no 
historical  doubt  of  the  fact,  that  Union  was  secured 
only  by  conciliating  the  more  intractable  order  of 
slaveholders.  Whatever,  therefore,  may  be  our  surprise 
at  the  present  anomalous  complication  of  American 
liberty  and  slavery,  the  marvel  would  seem  to  be 
lessened  by  the  explanation,  that  from  the  very  com- 
mencement, on  that  memorable  4th  of  July  1776,  when 
the  Declaration  of  Independence  was  signed  in  the 
city-hall,  Philadelphia,  there  never  has  been  a  condi- 
tion of  universal  freedom.  The  Declaration,  doubtless, 
propounded  the  doctrine  of  human  equality;  but  this 
document  never  seems  to  have  had  the  validity  of  law. 
At  all  events,  as  regards  the  principle  of  slavery,  the 
lofty  preamble  of  the  Declaration  about  '  inalienable 
rights'  has  proved  to  be  only  a  respectable  piece   of 

*  The  first  draught  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  embracing  these 
erased  passages,  is  shewn  in  the  rooms  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society 
in  Philadelphia,  an  institution  founded  by  Franklin.  It  was  the  greatest 
archaeological  curiosity  (if  such  a  term  be  allowable)  which  the  present 
writer  saw  in  the  United  States. 


SLAVERY  AT  THE  REVOLUTION.  19 

Bunkum — words  which  serve  their  purpose,  and  signify 
nothing. 

At  the  opening  of  the  revolutionary  war,  there  were 
slaves  in  all  the  revolted  colonies ;  even  in  Massa- 
chusetts, the  land  of  the  '  Pilgrim  Fathers,'  there  were 
slaves,  and  sales  of  slaves  too;  though  it  is  proper  to 
add,  that  Massachusetts  was  the  first  to  set  the  example 
of  passing  an  act  for  general  emancipation. 

England,  of  course,  must  be  charged  with  the  crime 
of  having  introduced,  in  the  first  instance,  the  Africans 
as  an  article  of  merchandise  into  the  plantations, 
against  the  repeatedly  expressed  wishes  of  the  settlers, 
and  of  having  fostered  slavery  till  it  took  root  as  a 
social  usage.  Lawyers  might  now  speculate  on  the 
question — whether,  at  the  period  of  the  revolutionary 
troubles,  slaves  could  be  legally  held  in  the  colonies  ? 
A  short  time  previously,  it  had  been  decided  by  courts 
of  justice,  that  a  slave  landing  in  England  became  free; 
and  as  the  common  law  was  extended  over  all  parts  of 
the  realm,  it  is  demonstrable  that  the  maintenance  of 
slavery  in  distant  dependencies  was,  to  say  the  least  of 
it,  open  to  challenge.  The  question  was  not,  however, 
tried ;  and,  as  is  well  known,  a  vigorous  English  slave- 
trade  was  carried  on  for  many  years  afterwards  with 
the  West  Indies  and  other  possessions — much  to  the 
profit  of  Liverpool  and  Bristol,  and  apparently  to  the 
satisfaction  or  indifference  of  all,  except  the  few  indivi- 
duals who  deigned  to  feel  an  interest  in  the  unhappy 
objects  of  ruthless  deportation — which  individuals,  as 
is  usual  in  such  cases,  were  set  down  as  visionaries, 
crack-brained  enthusiasts,  who  had  no  proper  regard 
for  national  greatness.  When  the  House  of  Commons 
was  at  length  induced,  in  1792,  to  pass  a  bill  for  the 
suppression  of  the  slave-trade,  it  was  rejected  by  the 
House  of  Lords,  on  the  ground  of  its  damaging  effects 
upon  great  commercial  and  colonial  interests.     As  the 


20  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

famous  abolition  act  did  not  pass  till  1807,  and  the 
trade  did  not  absolutely  cease  till  the  1st  of  January 
1808 — as,  in  fact,  slaves  were  held  in  the  colonies  until 
our  own  times — and,  what  is  still  more  to  the  point, 
as  our  continued  national  prosperity  depends  in  no 
small  degree  on  the  purchase  and  manufacture  of 
slave-grown  cotton — the  English  have  not  much  reason 
to  be  boastful  on  the  subject. 

For  several  years  after  the  termination  of  the 
revolutionary  war — 1784  to  1789 — the  Americans  had 
no  proper  federal  constitution,  and  public  matters  were 
regulated  during  this  interregnum  by  what  was  called 
the  Continental  Congress,  sitting  in  Philadelphia  or 
New  York.  To  have  anything  like  a  correct  notion 
of  the  American  slave  question,  we  need  to  look 
back  to  the  operations  of  this  august  body.  One 
of  the  subjects  that  fell  under  its  discussion,  was 
the  management  of  certain  western  territories  which 
several  states  relinquished  for  the  benefit  of  the  general 
commonwealth,  in  consideration  that  congress  should 
liquidate  debts  and  obligations  incurred  by  these  states 
during  the  war.  The  cessions  were  made  on  these 
terms;  and  congress  henceforth  exercised  a  direct 
sovereignty  over  large  tracts  of  country,  from  which 
new  states  could  be  excavated.  Plans  for  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Western  Territory  occupied  considerable 
attention ;  Mr  Jefferson  apparently  taking  a  lead  in 
the  business,  and  producing  schemes  by  which  slavery 
was  never  to  be  intruded  into  this  vast  region.  A 
proposal  of  this  nature  was  lost  on  coming  to  a  vote ; 
but  at  length,  in  1787,  in  the  last  continental  congress, 
was  passed  an  '  Ordinance  for  the  Government  of  the 
Territory  of  the  United  States,  North-west  of  the  Ohio/ 
which  embraced  this  provision :  '  There  shall  be  neither 
slavery  nor  involuntary  servitude  in  the  said  territory, 
otherwise  than  in  punishment  of  crimes,  whereof  the 


SLAVERY  AT  THE  REVOLUTION.  21 

parties  shall  be  duly  convicted/  The  enactment  of 
this  law,  which  will  afterwards  come  frequently  under 
notice,  would  seem  to  settle  the  point,  that  congress 
is  entitled,  among  other  regulations,  to  enjoin  that 
slavery  shall  or  shall  not  be  a  constituent  element  in 
the  Territories  under  its  special  jurisdiction;  yet  no 
constitutional  question  has  produced  such  angry 
discussion. 

The  circumstance  of  Jefferson  not  being  able  to 
carry  his  larger  measure,  which  comprehended  terri- 
tories south  of  those  just  mentioned,  shews  that  the 
leading  men  of  the  time  were  cramped  in  their  bene- 
volent efforts  to  extend  the  sphere  of  freedom.  They 
were  thoroughly  aware  that  slavery  in  any  form,  or 
wherever  situated,  was  a  bad  thing;  and  on  suitable 
occasions,  they  spoke  plainly  out  on  the  subject.  Not 
disguising  the  fact  from  themselves  or  from  others, 
they  nevertheless  thought  proper  to  temporise.  Be- 
lieving that  any  attempt  at  emancipation  through 
federal  agency  would  probably  alienate  slaveholders, 
and  so  jeopardise  the  consolidation  of  the  States,  they 
were  inclined  to  leave  the  subject  to  the  action  of 
public  opinion,  of  which  there  were  hopeful  symptoms. 
As  early  as  1775,  the  representatives  of  a  district  in 
Georgia  passed  a  resolution,  declaring  their  disappro- 
bation and  abhorrence  of  the  unnatural  practice  of 
slavery  in  America — fa  practice,'  they  say,  f  founded 
on  injustice  and  cruelty,  and  highly  dangerous  to  our 
liberties,  as  well  as  lives ;  debasing  part  of  our  fellow- 
creatures  below  men,  and  corrupting  the  virtue  and 
morals  of  the  rest;  and  as  laying  the  basis  of  that 
liberty  we  contend  for  on  a  wrong  foundation/  Other 
anti-slavery  sentiments  shine  out  during  the  ensuing 
ten  years.  Massachusetts,  as  has  been  said,  took  the 
lead  in  emancipation ;  other  New-England  States,  and 
also    Pennsylvania,     denounce     slavery,     provide    for 


22  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

securing  freedom  to  all  born  after  a  certain  day,  and 
prohibit  the  import  of  any  more  slaves.  Virginia 
likewise  prohibits  importation,  and  removes  legal 
restrictions  on  emancipation.  From  North  Carolina, 
New  York,  and  New  Jersey,  are  issued  edicts  against 
the  further  import  of  slaves.  In  short,  it  appears  as 
if  slavery  was  everywhere  about  to  be  given  up,  and 
done  with.  Some  expectations  of  this  kind,  along 
with  an  anxiety  to  conciliate  doubtful  friends,  afford 
the  only  excuse  for  the  perpetuation  of  slavery  under 
the  constitution.  With  a  distinct  consciousness  of 
its  injustice,  its  dangers,  slavery  was  recognised  under 
ambiguous  terms — singular  anomaly  ! — in  the  great 
charter  of  republican  freedom.  It  was  competent  to 
repudiate  it ;  it  was  advisable  to  maintain  a  discreet 
silence  respecting  it.  Neither  was  done.  Here  lies 
the  first  great  blunder  of  American  statesmanship, 
never  to  be  rectified.  The  constitution  was  framed 
in  1787,  and  was  in  general  operation  in  1789. 

This  constitution,  which  still  gives  cohesion  to  the 
States  under  a  federal  government,  is  an  instrument 
divided  into  articles,  each  subdivided  into  clauses. 
The  passages  referring  to  slavery  are  as  follows :  In 
the  second  clause  of  the  first  article  there  is  a  pro- 
vision for  representation  and  taxation — '  Representa- 
tives and  direct  taxes  shall  be  apportioned  among 
the  several  states  which  may  be  included  within  this 
Union,  according  to  their  respective  numbers,  which 
shall  be  determined  by  adding  to  the  whole  number 
of  free  persons,  including  those  bound  to  servitude 
for  a  term  of  years,  and  excluding  Indians  not  taxed, 
three-fifths  of  all  other  persons.'  By e all  other  persons ' 
is  signified  slaves.  Accordingly,  in  whatever  state 
slavery  exists,  there  is  till  this  day  a  statutory  method 
of  making  up  an  artificial  constituency :  in  other 
words,  the  number  is  swelled  by  counting  slaves;  but 


SLAVERY  AT  THE  REVOLUTION.  23 

as  the  slaves  have  no  vote,  it  happens  that  a  limited 
constituency  of  free  white  persons  possess  a  political 
power  equal  to  that  of  a  constituency  altogether  free. 
That  so  acute  a  people  as  the  Americans  should  have 
accepted  this  as  a  fair  thing  in  representation,  and 
still  submit  to  it,  almost  passes  belief.  To  proceed, 
however.  The  next  reference  to  slavery  in  the  con- 
stitution is  contained  in  another  clause  of  the  first 
article — c  The  migration  or  importation  of  such  persons 
as  any  of  the  states  now  existing  shall  think  proper  to 
admit,  shall  not  be  prohibited  by  the  congress  prior 
to  the  year  1808;  but  a  tax  or  duty  may  be  imposed, 
not  exceeding  ten  dollars  on  each  person/  By  one  of 
the  clauses  of  the  fourth  article,  it  is  ordained  that 
'  No  person  held  to  service  or  labour  in  one  state  under 
the  laws  thereof,  escaping  into  another,  shall  in  conse- 
quence of  any  law  or  regulation  therein  be  discharged 
from  such  service  or  labour,  but  shall  be  delivered 
up  on  claim  of  the  party  to  whom  such  labour  may 
be  due.' 

Other  clauses  have  a  remote  bearing  on  slavery. 
It  is  ordained,  that  ?  congress  shall  have  power  to 
suppress  insurrections,'  and  quell  c  domestic  violence ;  * 
consequently,  a  rebellion  of  slaves  may  be  suppressed 
with  the  whole  force  that  the  federal  government  can 
bring  against  it.  According  to  another  clause,  c  con- 
gress shall  have  power  to  dispose  of,  and  make  all 
needful  rules  and  regulations  respecting  the  territory 
or  other  property  belonging  to  the  United  States.' 
How  this  privilege  has  been  tortured  to  infer  the  right 
of  granting  permission  to  extend  slavery  over  new 
territories,  will  soon  appear. 

The  use  of  such  ambiguous  phraseology  in  the 
constitution,  as  '  persons  held  to  labour/  leads  one  to 
infer  that  the  fathers  of  the  constitution  were  ashamed 
of  the  thing  indicated.     In  the  face  of  mankind,  and 


24  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

fresh  from  a  successful  struggle  for  liberty,  they  do 
not  appear  to  have  had  the  courage  to  employ  a  candid 
phraseology.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  constitution  had 
taken  its  ground  in  maintaining  the  rights  of  slave- 
holders. They  could  hold  persons  to  service/  pursue 
and  secure  them  if  they  fled ;  and  at  least  until  1808, 
they  could  migrate  with  them  to  new  possessions,  and 
receive  fresh  supplies  by  importation. 

Possibly,  the  national  conscience  felt  no  alarm  in 
adopting  these  legal  institutes.  All  were  jubilant  over 
late  successes.  A  mighty  power  three  thousand  miles 
off  had  been  humbled;  f  glory,'  as  Emerson  says,  had 
been  ( bought  cheap.'  The  new  republic  could  afford 
to  lecture  England — which,  we  are  thankful,  has 
always  been  able  to  stand  a  good  deal  of  sound  scolding 
— on  the  doctrine  of  inherent  human  rights.  In  the 
address  of  the  first  congress  under  the  constitution,  to 
the  people  of  Great  Britain,  what  grandeur  in  the 
passages  about  liberty,  oppression,  slavery,  and  chains. 
'  When  a  nation,  led  to  greatness  by  the  hand  of 
liberty,  and  possessed  of  all  the  glory  that  heroism, 
munificence,  and  humanity  can  bestow,  descends  to  the 
ungrateful  task  of  forging  chains  for  her  friends  and 
children,  and  instead  of  giving  support  to  freedom, 
turns  advocate  for  slavery  and  oppression,  there  is 
reason  to  believe  that  she  has  ceased  to  be  virtuous,  or 
has  been  extremely  negligent  in  the  appointment  of 
her  rulers.'  With  such  remonstrances  against  wrong- 
doing, which  seem  as  if  addressed  to  the  living  genera- 
tion of  Americans,  who  could  suppose  that  this  same 
congress  required  to  be  reminded  that  a  section  of 
the  population  was  still  deprived  of  its  rights  ?  As 
president  of  the  Abolition  Society  of  Philadelphia, 
Franklin  signed  a  memorial  to  the  first  congress, 
praying  that  the  blessings  of  liberty  may  be  rightfully 
administered,  ( without  distinction  of  colour/  and  that 


SLAVERY  AT  THE  REVOLUTION.  25 

congress  would  be  pleased  to  countenance  the  restora- 
tion to  liberty  of  those  unhappy  men,  who  alone  in  a 
land  of  freedom  are  degraded  into  perpetual  bondage.' 
We  all  admire  the  philanthropy  breathed  in  these 
words;  but  are  unpleasantly  reminded  that  Franklin, 
with  his  compatriots,  would  perhaps  have  acted  more 
wisely  in  not  constitutionally  sanctioning  a  thing 
which  required  afterwards  to  be  spoken  of  in  terms  of 
reprobation. 

Let  us,  however,  not  bear  too  hard  on  the  first 
congress,  which  in  1789  set  a  worthy  example  for 
future  legislation.  If  the  constitution  had  given 
congress  no  power  to  meddle  with  slavery  in  any  of 
the  states,  it  had  at  least  enabled  it  to  regulate  the 
affairs  of  the  territories,  from  which,  both  by  law  and 
precedent,  slavery  could  be  peremptorily  excluded. 
This  congress  accordingly  ( recognised  and  affirmed  the 
doctrine,  embodied  by  Jefferson  in  the  ordinance  of 
1787,  which  for  ever  excluded  slavery  from  the  terri- 
tory that  now  embraces  Ohio,  Indiana,  and  Illinois 
[also  Iowa  and  Wisconsin]  ;  and  in  1800,  the  same 
doctrine  was  approved  by  John  Adams  in  the  Territorial 
Act  for  Indiana/  * 

Kept  as  yet  within  bounds,  and  no  means  being 
immediately  adopted  to  push  slavery  beyond  certain 
old  limits,  the  number  of  f  persons  held  to  labour '  in 
the  United  States,  in  1790,  was  only  697,897;  and  as 
their  average  market- value  was  then  comparatively 
small,  there  could  have  been  no  insurmountable 
difficulty  in  providing  means  for  their  liberation  on 
equitable  terms.  But  no  effort  of  this  kind  required 
to  be  made.  The  progress  of  local  emancipation  which 
was  clearing  slavery  from   the   northern,  would   soon 

*    America    Free,    or    America    Slave — Address    to    the    Citizens    of 
Westchester.     By  John  Jay,  Esq. 


26  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

remove  it  from  the  middle  states;  and  all  that  the 
legislators  of  the  day  were  called  on  to  do  was  to 
adopt  such  measures  as  would  prevent  slavery  from 
extending  and  intrenching  itself  permanently  in  the 
south.     Neglectful  on  this  point,  all  was  lost. 

Engaged  in  the  task  of  establishing  a  great  nation — 
building  cities,  reclaiming  wildernesses,  opening  up 
channels  of  internal  communication,  extending  com- 
merce, planting  churches,  schools,  printing-presses,  and 
other  engines  of  civilisation;  successful  in  almost  all 
arts,  and  flourishing  beyond  the  hopes  of  the  wildest 
imagination — the  Americans  never  seem  to  have 
attained  a  clear  consciousness  that  there  was  any 
lurking  possibility  of  social  dislocation  in  consequence 
of  slavery  being  tolerated  within  their  political  system. 
Not  that  there  has  not  always  been  a  party  who 
augured  danger  from  this  quarter;  but  in  the  main, 
things  have  been  left  to  take  their  course;  or  more 
correctly,  the  nation  has,  with  singular  indifference, 
seen  a  series  of  events  successively  and  more  and  more 
hopelessly  interweave  slavery  with  the  constitution. 

It  was,  we  believe,  a  crotchet  of  Washington 
that  the  federal  capital  of  the  United  States  should 
be  a  city  removed  from  popular  influences — as  if 
there  was  any  imaginable  Olympus  from  which  the 
pleasant  constitutional  practice  of  Lobbying  could  by 
any  stratagem  be  excluded.  New  York  would  not  do. 
Philadelphia — more  the  pity — would  not  do.  There 
must  be  a  metropolis  standing  alone  in  virtuous 
solitude,  somewhere  about  the  centre  of  the  .Union. 
Accordingly,  a  site  was  pitched  upon,  on  the  banks  of 
the  Potomac,  the  contiguous  states  of  Virginia  and 
Maryland  severally  resigning  a  patch  of  a  few  miles 
square  for  the  purpose,  henceforth  called  the  District 
of  Columbia.  "When  Washington  here  planned  and 
built  the  city^  which  bears  his  name,  he  could  not  have 


SLAVERY  AT  THE  REVOLUTION.  27 

had  any  great  horror  of  slavery,  although  he  would 
much  rather  there  had  been  no  such  thing  in  the 
world.  Virginia  and  Maryland  were  then,  as  now, 
slave  states.  Slavery  accordingly  remained  in  the 
District  of  Columbia,  as  if  indigenous  in  the  soil ;  and 
from  this  time  the  supreme  authorities  of  the  United 
States  became  the  civic  magistracy  of  a  kind  of  minia- 
ture independent  state,  in  which  slavery  was  a  recog- 
nised institution.  It  could  be  shewn  that  this  plantation 
of  a  political  metropolis  in  the  bosom  of  slavery  did 
much  disservice  to  the  cause  of  freedom — the  sight 
of  slaves,  slave- depots,  slave-sales,  and  the  looseness 
of  morals  usual  in  communities  affected  by  slavery, 
producing  no  good  effect  on  representatives  from 
the  free  states.  It  might  be  argued  that,  as  Columbia 
was  surrounded  by  slave  states,  freedom  within  this 
small  domain  was  impracticable.  That,  however,  is 
not  the  question.  The  thing  to  be  deprecated  was, 
making  federal  authority  responsible  for  an  institution 
which  American  writers  never  cease  to  represent  as 
belonging  exclusively  to  the  states  in  their  individual 
capacity.  If  any  one  up  till  this  time  imagined  that 
slavery  was  independent  of  national  administration, 
his  faith,  we  think,  must  have  received  a  considerable 
shock.  There  were  remonstrances,  but  they  sunk  and 
disappeared  under  a  general  acquiescence. 

We  are  now  referring  to  the  close  of  the  last  and 
beginning  of  the  present  century,  and  shortly  after- 
wards came  an  event  far  more  serious  than  the  organ- 
isation of  the  capital  of  the  Union.  This  was  a  vast 
accession  of  new  territory  on  the  south  and  west. 
Left  to  themselves,  with  a  wide  continent  invitingly 
open  for  acquisition,  the  Anglo-Americans  only  seemed 
to  fulfil  an  obvious  destiny  in  carrying  their  flag 
beyond  the  limits  of  the  colonies  which  had  been  reft 
from   the  British  crown.      A   favourable   opportunity 


28  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

for  making  a  large  acquisition  occurred  in  1803,  when 
the  French  under  Bonaparte  offered  to  sell  the  province 
of  Louisiana,  which  embraced  the  whole  of  the  west 
bank  of  the  Mississippi.  A  little  better  management 
on  the  part  of  England  would  perhaps  have  saved  the 
French  the  trouble  of  bargaining  away  this  valuable 
foreign  possession,  which  they  could  no  longer  keep; 
but  as  Louisiana  was  not  so  secured,  it  fell  naturally, 
and  we  must  say  justifiably,  into  the  hands  of  the 
Americans.  The  purchase,  which  was  made  for  the 
sum  of  fifteen  millions  of  dollars,  excited  the  first  of 
that  series  of  struggles  in  congress  between  North  and 
South,  which  has  lasted  till  our  own  times.  The 
country  acquired,  was  already  settled  in  its  lower  part 
with  French  slaveholders  engaged  in  the  culture  of 
sugar  and  cotton,  and  covered  an  area  of  about  900,000 
square  miles — a  space  larger  than  all  the  old  thirteen 
states  put  together,  and  including  the  territories  of 
Missouri,  Kansas,  and  Nebraska,  which  have  latterly 
engaged  so  much  angry  disputation,  and  caused  no 
little  bloodshed. 

On  the  one  hand,  it  was  scarcely  in  human  nature 
to  resist  the  easy  acquisition  of  so  splendid  a  domain ; 
on  the  other,  there  were  not  unreasonable  fears  among 
northern  politicians  that  the  addition  would  in  some 
way  imperil  the  security  of  the  Union.  Prognostica- 
tions of  disaster,  remonstrances,  legal  doubts,  availed 
not  against  the  controlling  desire  for  national  greatness. 
It  mattered  not  that  Washington,  in  his  farewell 
address  to  the  people  of  the  United  States,  had  uttered 
the  solemn  warning — '  Let  there  be  no  change  from 
usurpation.'  It  mattered  not  that  Jefferson,  at  the 
time  president,  shewed  argumentatively  that  fthe 
constitution  has  made  no  provision  for  our  holding 
foreign  territory,  still  less  for  our  incorporating  foreign 
nations   into    our    Union/    and    intimated    that    the 


ACQUISITION    OF    LOUISIANA.  29 

acquisition  of  Louisiana  ■  would  make  the  constitution 
blank  paper  by  construction/  Against  his  better 
judgment,  Jefferson  acquiesced  in  the  opinions  of  those 
who  differed  from  him,  and  passed  the  bill  which 
incorporated  Louisiana  with  the  Union.  No  provision 
was  made  for  excluding  slavery  from  the  ceded  terri- 
tory :  the  inhabitants,  on  the  contrary,  were  insured 
the  enjoyment  of  all  their  existing  property,  rights, 
and  privileges ;  and  as  the  holding  of  slaves  was  one 
of  these  immunities,  it  continued,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
to  be  incorporated  with  the  public  policy. 

The  passage  of  the  Louisiana  Bill  has  been  justly 
referred  to  as  the  turning-point  in  the  history  of  the 
United  States.  It  at  once  reduced  the  northern 
and  free  communities  to  an  inferior  political  position, 
and  gave  an  immense  preponderance  to  the  slaveholding 
interests  of  the  south.  In  accounting  for  so  extra- 
ordinary a  change  in  affairs,  the  future  historian  will 
probably  point  to  other  reasons  besides  the  vulgar 
outcry  for  national  enlargement.  He  will  doubtless 
find  occasion  to  lament  the  decline  of  public  spirit. 
Whether  it  be  that  Providence  at  certain  periods  sends 
great  men  into  the  world  to  accomplish  particular 
purposes ;  or  that  such  at  all  times  latently  exist,  and 
are  developed  into  notice  by  national  convulsions;  or, 
to  hazard  another  alternative,  that  republics  are  not 
favourable  to  the  growth  of  prominent  individuals,  the 
fact  is  undeniable  that  the  great  men  who  effected  the 
American  and  French  revolutions,  and  who,  be  it 
remarked,  were  bred  up  under  monarchical  rule,  left 
behind  them  no  equals  in  magnitude  of  intellect  or 
indomitable  force  of  character.  It  is  true  that  several 
persons  who  figured  in  the  commotions  of  776  were 
still  on  the  stage  when  the  Louisiana  Bill  came  under 
discussion;  but  there  was  now  a  general  collapse  in 
heroism ;  intrigue  took  the  place  of  patriotic  ardour ; 


30  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

the  men  of  the  north,  for  the  sake  of  material  interests, 
succumbed  to  a  course  of  treatment,  which  their  more 
sturdy  ancestors  -would  not  have  endured  from  an 
English  ministry.  Unfortunately,  also,  a  deterioration 
of  manners  was  visible  among  slaveholders.  The  gentle- 
manly spirit  of  the  old  planters  was  passing  away. 
Virginia  was  beginning  to  be  '  overrun  by  time-servers, 
office-hunters,  and  political  blacklegs/  Power  was 
subsiding  into  the  possession  of  this  disreputable  class 
of  personages.  Nor,  all  things  considered,  could  much 
else  be  expected.  Certain  radical  mistakes,  as  had 
been  seen,  were  committed  in  the  general  terms  of 
union.  The  constitutional  recognition  of  slavery  had 
fixed  and  given  breadth  to  the  institution.  The  slave- 
holders had  secured  a  franchise  to  which  nothing 
corresponded  in  the  North.  Of  course,  such  a  flagrant 
piece  of  injustice  could  not  have  been  tolerated  for 
any  length  of  time,  had  the  North  been  true  to  itself. 
But  this,  as  we  may  afterwards  have  occasion  to 
particularise,  it  has  never  been — a  large  proportion 
of  northern  men  having  on  all  occasions  cast  in  their 
lot  with  the  political  party  represented  by  the  more 
imperious  aristocracy  of  the  South.  With  such  facts 
before  us,  can  we  feel  surprise  at  the  passage  of  the 
Louisiana  Bill,  and  all  subsequent  bills  of  the  same 
nature?  Freedom  had  been  delivered  up,  bound 
hand  and  foot,  to  the  interests  of  slavery,  and  all 
that  followed  was  a  natural  consequence  of  this 
fundamental  error. 

We  are  justified  in  these  opinions  by  the  remarks 
of  the  venerable  Josiah  Quincy,  a  survivor  of  the 
youthful  era  of  the  republic.  In  his  late  admirable 
address  on  this  subject,  he  says :  f  The  passage  of  the 
Louisiana  Admission  Bill  was  effected  by  arts  which 
slaveholders  well  know  how  to  select  and  apply.  Sops 
were  given  to  the  congressional  watch-dogs  of  the  free 


ACQUISITION    OF    LOUISIANA.  31 

states.  To  some,  promises  were  made,  by  way  of 
opiates;  and  those  whom  they  could  neither  pay  nor 
drug,  were  publicly  treated  with  insolence  and  scorn. 
Threats,  duels,  and  violence  were  at  that  day,  as  now, 
modes  approved  by  them  to  deter  men  from  awakening 
the  free  states  to  a  sense  of  danger.  From  the 
moment  the  act  was  passed,  they  saw  that  the  free 
states  were  shorn  of  their  strength;  that  they  had 
obtained  space  to  multiply  slaves  at  their  will ;  and  Mr 
Jefferson  had  confidently  told  them  that,  from  that 
moment,  the  "constitution  of  the  United  States  was 
blank  paper ; "  but  more  correctly,  there  was  no  longer 
any  constitution.  The  slaveholders,  from  that  day, 
saw  they  had  the  free  states  in  their  power ;  that  they 
were  masters,  and  the  free  states  slaves ;  and  have 
acted  accordingly.  From  the  passage  of  the  Louisiana 
Bill  until  this  day,  their  policy  has  been  directed  to 
a  single  object,  with  almost  uninterrupted  success. 
That  object  was  to  exclude  the  free  states  from  any 
share  of  power,  except  in  subserviency  to  their  views ; 
and  they  have  undeniably,  during  all  the  subsequent 
period  of  our  history  (the  administration  of  John 
Quincy  Adams  only  excepted)  placed  in  the  chair  of 
state  either  slaveholders  or  men  from  the  free  states, 
who,  for  the  sake  of  power,  consented  to  be  their  tools 
— "Northern  men  with  Southern  principles;"  in 
other  words,  men  who,  for  the  sake  of  power  or  pay, 
were  willing  to  do  any  work  they  would  set  them 
upon.'  * 

With  the  widening  scope  for  slave-labour  opened 
up  by  the  passage  of  the  Louisiana  Bill,  also  the 
contemporary  extension  of  slavery  over  portions  of  the 
southern  states,  it  will  not  appear  strange  that  in  1810 

*  Address  Illustrative  of  the  Nature  and  Power  of  the  Slave  States,  and 
the  Duties  of  the  Free  States:  delivered  at  Quincy,  Massachusetts,  June 
5,1856.     Boston:  Ticknor  and  Fields. 


32  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

(notwithstanding  the  removal  of  the  institution  from 
several  states,  and  the  stoppage  of  the  foreign  slave- 
trade  in  1808),  the  number  of  slaves  in  the  Union  had 
increased  to  1,191,364 — a  significant  commentary  on 
the  hallucinations  of  the  patriot  founders  of  the 
republic. 


THE       MISSOURI      COMPROMISE. 

Starting  with  lofty  notions  of  liberty  and  equality, 
the  United  States,  as  already  noticed,  have  always, 
and  now  more  than  ever,  been  hampered  with  an  insti- 
tution at  variance  with  public  profession,  and  which 
— from  a  European  point  of  view — is  lowering  in  110 
small  degree  to  national  dignity.  Seemingly  ashamed 
of  slavery  as  a  too  obvious  fact,  American  writers 
hasten  to  assure  us  that  it  is  a  mere  local  usage 
depending  on  the  municipal  law  of  the  states  in  which 
it  happens  to  exist,  and  therefore  in  no  way  concerns 
the  federal  constitution.  We  are  not  going  to  plunge 
into  a  political  dispute  on  this  point.  It  is  true  that 
slavery  derives  its  vitality  from  the  laws  of  individual 
states,  and  if  these  laws  were  severally  abrogated,  the 
institution  would  be  no  more ;  but  it  is  equally  certain, 
that  while  these  laws  are  in  operation,  the  federal 
power  is  bound  to  give  them  international  efficacy. 
The  constitution  imparts  authority  to  slaveholders  to 
pursue  and  seize  their  property,  { persons  held  to 
service,'  anywhere  within  the  boundaries  of  the  Union 
— even  where  no  slavery  exists.  Besides  this  old 
Fugitive  Slave-law,  lately  strengthened  by  an  act  of 
congress,  the  constitution  prescribes  a  method  of 
making  up  a  constituency  to  appoint  members  to  the 
House  of  Representatives,  by  reckoning  the  ratio  of 
free  and  bond  persons.  Doubtless,  it  is  unfortunate 
that  the  constitution  in  any  manner,  however  equivocal, 
recognised  and  gave  force  to  the  practice  of  holding 
slaves,  and  so  took  that  mean  stand  in  the  matter 
of    human    equality    which     embarrasses     American 


34  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

jurisprudence;  but  nothing,  we  think,  is  to  be  gained 
by  shirking  the  fact,  and  taking  a  disingenuous  view  of 
the  subject. 

It  has  been  mentioned  that  the  purchase  of 
Louisiana,  in  1803,  was  a  turning-point  in  the  history 
of  the  Union.  At  this  time,  the  institution  was  disap- 
pearing from  the  more  northern  Atlantic  states;  and 
by  the  celebrated  ordinance  of  1787,  it  was  excluded 
from  the  large  Indiana  territory  on  the  north-west, 
from  which  have  been  formed  the  prosperous  free 
states  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois,  Michigan,  Wisconsin, 
and  Iowa.  It  lingered  still  in  New  York  and  New 
Jersey,  but  southward  from  Pennsylvania,  and  west- 
ward as  far  as  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi,  it  was 
as  yet  confined  to  the  limits  of  the  'Old  Dominion/ 
Kentucky  was  formed  from  a  ceded  portion  of  Virginia, 
Tennessee  from  North  Carolina,  and,  in  like  manner, 
Alabama  and  Mississippi  from  portions  of  Georgia; 
but  though  adding  to  the  number  of  states,  and 
swelling  the  slaveholding  interests  in  congress,  these 
re-arrangements  did  not  geographically  extend  the  area 
of  slavery. 

The  acquisition  of  the  French  province  of  Louisiana 
opened  up  a  boundless  prospect  for  slavery  extension. 
For  a  number  of  years,  the  newly  acquired  tract  of 
country  remained  a  territory  under  federal  authority. 
At  length,  in  1812,  the  lower  part  on  the  Gulf  of 
Mexico  was  admitted  as  the  state  of  Louisiana.  The 
remainder  of  the  purchase,  stretching  northwards  on 
the  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi,  and  embracing  the 
rivers  Arkansas  and  Missouri,  was  henceforth  known 
as  the  Missouri  Territory,  over  which  settlers  gradually 
spread  themselves.  In  March  1818,  a  sufficient  popu- 
lation being  consolidated,  petitions  from  the  inhabitants 
were  presented  to  congress,  praying  for  the  admission 
of  Missouri  as  a  state.     Now  began  the  first  resolute 


THE    MISSOURI    COMPROMISE.  35 

struggle  between  slavery  and  freedom.  It  was  the 
wish  of  the  petitioners  to  have  the  state  admitted  on 
equal  terms  with  the  state  of  Louisiana,  in  which  the 
inhabitants  were  guaranteed  all  the  privileges,  that  of 
holding  slaves  among  others,  which  they  had  enjoyed 
under  the  French  rule.  This  was  firmly  opposed.  A 
degree  of  alarm  concerning  the  spread  of  slavery  had 
taken  possession  of  legislators  from  the  free  states; 
and  it  was  felt  that  now  or  never  was  the  opportunity 
for  checking  its  wonderful  and  unexpected  growth  in 
the  far  west.  It  must  be  allowed,  that  members  of 
congress  had  been  rather  late  in  making  this  notable 
discovery — the  whole  nation,  indeed,  had  been  strangely 
negligent  on  the  subject.  If  there  was  a  general  desire 
to  admit  no  more  states  with  slavery,  the  proper 
precaution  would  have  consisted  in  enacting  a  law,  like 
that  of  the  ordinance  of  1787,  for  ever  excluding  the 
institution  from  the  territories  out  of  which  such  states 
could  possibly  be  formed.  The  defects  of  the  federal 
constitution  seemed  to  necessitate  such  a  legislative 
measure. 

It  has  been  graphically  said,  that  when  a  number 
of  adventurers,  British  subjects,  land  on  a  newly 
discovered  territory,  and  take  possession  in  the  name 
of  the  Queen,  the  common  law  of  England  is  ipso  facto 
established;  and  from  that  moment  every  member  of 
the  infant  community,  no  matter  what  be  his  breed  or 
colour,  enjoys  all  the  privileges,  and  comes  under  the 
usual  obligations  of  free-born  Englishmen.  In  such 
manner  does  the  British  constitution  act,  and  there  is 
a  decision  and  simplicity  about  it  which  cannot  but 
command  respect.  The  constitution  of  the  United 
States  is  less  comprehensive  and  peremptory.  Plant  it 
where  you  will,  it  settles  no  determinate  social  system. 
It  proclaims  freedom,  but  admits  of  slavery.  All 
men  are  free,  but  freemen  may  hold  slaves — ( chattels 


36  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

human ' — who  though  men  de  facto,  are  seemingly  not 
men  de  jure.  The  British  flag,  God  knows,  has  in  its 
day  sheltered  much  insolence,  injustice,  cruelty.  Under 
it,  eighty  years  ago,  an  audacious  attempt — since 
regretted  and  atoned  for — was  made  to  rob  English 
colonists  of  their  inherent  rights,  and  what  the  end  of 
that  was,  we  all  know.  Things  are  somewhat  altered 
since  Grenville  passed  the  Stamp  Act,  or  since  good 
old  Dr  Johnson  wrote  Taxation  no  Tyranny.  When 
we  see  the  Union  Jack  floating  from  a  vessel  in  the 
Atlantic,  we  feel  a  sound  assurance  that  there  is  not 
the  vestige  of  a  slave  on  board.  A  sight  of  the 
American  flag  does  not  convey  the  same  confidence; 
seen  south  from  the  capes  of  Virginia,  two  to  one  it  is 
covering  a  cargo  of  slaves  on  the  way  to  the  market 
for  '  chattels  human  '  at  New  Orleans;  for  though  the 
foreign  slave-trade  terminated  in  1808,  the  coasting 
slave-trade  did  not,  and  is  till  this  day  in  full  operation. 
If  this  be  thought  a  hard  view  of  practices  prevailing 
under  the  federal  constitution,  we  cannot  help  it. 
The  constitution  is  not  that  of  a  distinct  nation,  but 
simply  the  terms  of  compact  by  which  a  number  of 
sovereignties — at  present  thirty-one — agree  to  hold 
together  for  the  sake  of  mutual  convenience  and 
purposes  common  to  the  whole.  Some  of  these 
sovereignties  exclude  slavery,  some  maintain  it.  The 
federal  constitution,  consequently,  operates  with  con- 
siderable reserve  on  this  delicate  subject.  It  is  any- 
thing you  like  to  make  of  it.  When  extended  over 
new  territories,  unless  congress  interpose  an  order  to 
the  contrary,  the  choice  of  domestic  institutions  is 
nominally  left  to  the  parties  concerned.  If,  when  the 
time  comes,  they  choose  to  inaugurate  slavery,  good 
and  well;  it  is  all  the  same  to  the  constitution.  This 
is  called  f  freedom.'  So  much  for  theory.  Let  us  now 
see  how  the  thing  practically  works. 


THE    MISSOURI   COMPROMISE.  37 

When  a  new  tract  of  country  is  acquired  by  the 
United  States,  it  passes  into  the  possession  and  under 
the  control  of  the  federal  authorities,  who  hold  it  for 
the  general  behoof.  If  it  be  resolved  to  lay  it  out  for 
a  new  state,  it  is  first  created  a  e  territory/  As  such, 
it  is  the  subject  of  an  act  of  congress,  from  which 
body  it  receives  an  interim  constitution,  prescribing 
its  boundaries,  divisions,  executive  authorities,  laws, 
judicial  and  political  system.  With  a  governor 
appointed  by  the  president,  it  remains  under  federal 
tutelage,  till  on  petition  of  its  inhabitants  it  is  admitted 
into  the  sisterhood  of  states.  All  this  seems  reason- 
able, and,  in  its  general  features,  the  practice  affords  a 
fine  instance  of  that  self-creative  political  organisation 
for  which  the  Americans  are  celebrated.  Analysing 
the  acts  of  congress  and  presidents,  we  observe  some- 
thing less  favourable.  The  federal  constitution  is  silent 
about  race  or  colour;  but  in  interpreting  it,  American 
lawgivers  arrive  at  the  conclusion,  that  the  United 
States  are  the  property  of  whites,  and  that  persons 
with  a  tinge  of  dark  colour  in  their  countenance, 
though  born  free,  are  not  citizens.  A  short  time  ago, 
this  view  of  citizenship  was  enforced  by  a  high  federal 
officer,  one  of  the  secretaries  of  state,  who  refused 
passports  to  some  coloured  free  persons,  on  the  ground 
that  they  'were  not  citizens  within  the  meaning  of 
the  constitution/  This  may  be  a  right  or  a  wrong 
interpretation  of  the  fundamental  charter  of  the  Union : 
it  is,  at  all  events,  acted  on  without  apparently  exciting 
public  challenge.  Accordingly,  in  passing  an  act  to 
organise  a  territory — as,  for  example,  that  of  1854, 
constituting  the  territories  of  Nebraska  and  Kansas — 
there  is  the  following  regulation  in  regard  to  voters : 
1  Every  free  white  male  inhabitant,  twenty-one  years 
old,  an  actual  resident  in  the  territory  at  the  time  of 
the  passage  of  this   act,    and  with   the   qualifications 


38  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

after  described,  may  vote/  &c.  Thus,  at  the  very 
outset,  a  disqualification  is  imposed  on  free  coloured 
persons,  without  the  slightest  regard  to  their  means 
or  their  ability ;  and  from  this  to  '  holding  persons 
to  service/  is  an  easy  transition.  Such,  however,  are 
the  prejudices  against  colour  in  the  United  States, 
that  the  most  ardent  lovers  of  freedom  in  Kansas, 
while  suffering  from  pro-slavery  aggression,  never 
proposed  to  give  the  franchise  to  any  but  whites. 

The  federal  constitution  being  indifferent  to  the 
spread  or  limitation  of  slavery,  the  will  of  congress 
and  president  for  the  time  being  is  a  kind  of  supple- 
mental constitution,  whence  the  internal  policy  of  a 
new  territory  is  moulded.  Much  usually  depends  on 
the  political  leanings  of  the  president,  who,  being 
irremovable  for  four  years,  and  armed  with  an  enor- 
mous power  of  appointment  to  office,  may  be  said  to 
exercise  a  control  more  resembling  that  of  a  despot 
than  a  constitutional  sovereign.  The  presidents  of 
past  times  have,  for  the  most  part,  had  strong  pro- 
slavery  convictions,  and  thrown  the  balance  of  authority 
in  that  direction.  Still  affecting  to  allow  fair-play  in 
the  scramble  between  slavery  and  anti-slavery  prin- 
ciples in  the  inchoate  states,  they  would  rather  seem 
to  have  aided  in  imparting  to  them  pro-slavery  con- 
stitutions. Mr  Pierce,  the  late  president,  thought 
that  if  things  are  left  to  take  their  course  in  a  terri- 
tory, slavery,  from  its  intrinsic  qualities,  will  outstrip 
freedom.  In  his  late  message  to  congress,  he  says : 
1  It  is  the  fact  that  in  all  the  unsettled  regions  of  the 
United  States,  if  emigration  be  left  free  to  act  in  this 
respect  for  itself,  without  legal  prohibitions  on  either 
side,  slave  labour  will  spontaneously  go  everywhere  in 
preference  to  free  labour.  Is  it  the  fact  that  the 
peculiar  domestic  institutions  of  the  southern  states 
possess  relatively  so  much  of  vigour,  that  wheresoever 


THE    MISSOURI    COMPROMISE.  39 

an  avenue  is  freely  open  to  all  the  world,  they  will 
penetrate,  to  the  exclusion  of  those  of  the  northern 
states  V  Leaving  the  North  to  answer  Mr  Pierce's 
question,  it  is  enough  for  us  to  know  that  the 
pretended  freedom  communicated  by  congress  and  the 
constitution,  produces  an  unseemly  fracas  in  territorial 
organisation ;  so  that  ever  and  anon  a  battle  is  raging 
somewhere  in  the  south  or  west. 

The  act  being  passed  which  throws  open  the  territory 
for  settlement,  a  rush  ensues  from  all  points  in  the 
Union.  Lawyers,  schoolmasters,  printers,  and  preachers 
from  Massachusetts;  farmers  from  Vermont  and  New 
Hampshire ;  mechanics  and  pedlers  from  Connecticut ; 
storekeepers  from  Cincinnati,  Philadelphia,  and  New 
York ;  planters  with  bands  of  '  servants '  from  Alabama 
and  Kentucky;  and  loafers,  rowdies,  and  ragamuffins 
from  everywhere,  are  hastening  on  by  steam-boat, 
railway,  wagon,  horseback,  wheel-barrow,  and  on  foot 
to  the  land  of  promise — struggling,  pushing,  driving, 
drinking,  swearing,  cheating,  and  it  may  be,  fighting. 
The  rule,  if  there  be  a  rule,  is  every  man  for  himself. 
The  great  thing  is,  who  shall  get  the  earliest  clutch  at 
the  best  localities;  and  not  much  ceremony  is  used 
in  squatting  and  taking  possession.  In  no  time,  a 
capital  city  is  planted,  hotels  struck  up,  a  state-house 
inaugurated,  newspapers  set  agoing,  and  voting  for 
territorial,  civic,  and  judicial  officers  is  in  'full  blast.' 
In  one  sense,  there  is  something  grand  in  this  restless 
onflow  of  Anglo-Americans  over  the  domains  of  unre- 
claimed nature.  We  are  carried  in  imagination  back  to 
that  most  ancient  of  injunctions,  f  to  go  forth  to  replenish 
the  earth,  and  subdue  it.'  To  be  sure,  the  thing  is  done 
coarsely — very.  But  it  is  done  somehow;  and  from 
the  chaos  of  a  first  settlement,  spring  in  due  time  order 
and  civilisation.  What  we  have  occasion  to  deplore  is, 
the  totally  unnecessary  and  undesirable  scramble  for 


40  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

slavery  or  freedom  in  the  new  settlements.  We  need 
hardly  say  that,  according  to  all  accounts,  the  slave- 
holding  interests  take  care  to  assume  such  a  dictatorial 
attitude  in  these  freshly  opened  lands,  that  under 
favour  of  the  federal  executive,  they  are  able  to 
overawe  opposition,  and  to  prefer  claims  to  congress 
for  a  pro-slavery  constitution,  which  cannot  well  be 
withstood.  That  congress  should  all  the  while  com- 
placently stand  aside,  on  the  presumption  that  a  free 
choice  is  to  be  made,  and  at  last  legislate  on  this 
understanding,  seems  only  to  be  a  method  of  wilfully 
extending  slavery  to  the  further  limits  of  the  Union. 
Of  course,  should  congress  attempt  to  legislate  pros- 
pectively in  favour  of  freedom,  it  will  have  imputed  to 
it  that  it  is  unconstitutionally  taking  a  side — doing 
what  it  has  no  business  to  do;  acting  as  umpire 
between  free  and  slave  states.  There  are  grounds, 
however,  for  believing  that  congress  possesses  authority 
to  exclude  slavery  from  the  territories.  Jefferson's 
ordinance  of  1787,  excluding  it  from  the  north-west 
territory,  was  an  enactment  of  the  last  continental 
congress,  which  has  been  repeatedly  recognised  and 
sanctioned  by  the  federal  congress.  It  is  evident, 
therefore,  that  until  a  new  and  more  comprehensive 
federal  constitution  is  adopted — if  ever  that  will  be 
— the  proper  course  of  policy,  if  it  be  at  all  practicable 
amidst  party  contentions,  is  for  congress  to  pass  a 
general  enactment,  for  ever  excluding  slavery  from 
all  the  territories  of  the  United  States.  Mr  Buchanan, 
we  believe,  maintains  the  doctrine,  that  the  constitu- 
tion limits  the  power  of  congress  in  this  respect; 
while,  on  the  contrary,  his  late  opponent,  Colonel 
Fremont,  holds  to  the  opinion  that  congress  is  con- 
stitutionally entitled  'to  prohibit  in  the  territories 
those  twin-relics  of  barbarism — polygamy  and  slavery.' 
Moderate  men  of  all  parties,  we  should  think,  would 


THE    MISSOURI    COMPROMISE.  41 

wish  to  see  congress  resolutely  embrace  this  latter 
opinion ;  but  in  order  to  do  so  with  any  chance  of 
success,  northern  men  would  require  to  abandon  that 
singularly  temporising  policy — that  anomalous  sub- 
serviency to  southern  interests — for  which  they  have 
earned  an  unenviable  reputation.  It  is  notorious,  that 
with  all  the  prevalent  alarm  respecting  the  increasing 
power  of  slaveholders,  and  all  the  professions  in  favour 
of  freedom,  the  North  expresses  no  desire  to  do  more 
than  seclude  slavery  within  a  certain  geographical 
limit.  That  this  has  generally  been  the  hapless  policy 
of  the  free  portion  of  the  Union,  is  conspicuous  in  the 
history  of  the  Missouri  Compromise  and  subsequent 
events. 

We  now  approach  this  famed  Compromise.  In 
February  1819,  the  petition  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Missouri  for  the  admission  of  their  state,  which  had 
been  some  time  under  consideration,  led  to  a  hot 
debate  in  congress.  In  the  House  of  Representatives, 
Mr  Tallmadge  of  New  York  moved  the  following 
amendment  on  the  proposed  constitution:  'And  pro- 
vided that  the  introduction  of  slavery,  or  involuntary 
servitude,  be  prohibited,  except  for  the  punishment  of 
crimes,  whereof  the  party  has  been  duly  convicted,  and 
that  all  children  born  within  the  said  state,  after  the 
admission  thereof  into  the  Union,  shall  be  declared  free 
at  the  age  of  twenty-five  years.'  To  this  restriction, 
southern  members  objected,  for  the  reason  that  congress 
had  no  right  to  impose  such  offensive  terms.  Missouri 
was  entitled,  like  every  other  state,  to  choose  its  own 
institutions,  so  far  as  slavery  was  concerned.  Threats 
were  thrown  out,  that  if  the  restriction  were  carried, 
the  South  would  dissolve  its  connection  with  the  Union. 
Tallmadge,  who  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  daunt- 
less energy,  referred  to  this  new  outcry  :  { If  a  dissolu- 
tion of  the  Union  must  take  place,  let  it  be  so.     If  civil 


42  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

war,  which  gentlemen  so  much  threaten,  must  come,  I 
can  only  say,  let  it  come.  My  hold  on  life  is  probably 
as  frail  as  that  of  any  man  who  now  hears  me;  but 
while  that  hold  lasts,  it  shall  be  devoted  to  the  service 
of  my  country — to  the  freedom  of  man.  If  blood  is 
necessary  to  extinguish  any  fire  which  I  have  assisted 
to  kindle,  I  can  assure  gentlemen,  while  I  regret  the 
necessity,  I  shall  not  forbear  to  contribute  my  mite. 
Sir,  the  violence  to  which  gentlemen  have  resorted  on 
this  subject  will  not  move  my  purpose,  nor  drive  me 
from  my  place.  I  have  the  fortune  and  the  honour  to 
stand  here  as  the  representative  of  freemen,  who  pos- 
sess intelligence  to  know  their  rights — who  have  the 
spirit  to  maintain  them.  As  their  representative,  I  will 
proclaim  their  hatred  to  slavery  in  every  shape — as 
their  representative,  here  will  I  hold  my  stand,  till 
this  floor,  with  the  constitution  of  my  country  which 
supports  it,  shall  sink  beneath  me — if  I  am  doomed  to 
fall,  I  shall  at  least  have  the  painful  consolation  to 
believe  that  I  fall  as  a  fragment  in  the  ruins  of  my 
country.'  Referring  to  menaces  of  violence,  he  con- 
tinued :  '  Has  it  already  come  to  this :  that  in  the 
congress  of  the  United  States — that  in  the  legislative 
councils  of  republican  America,  the  subject  of  slavery 
has  become  a  subject  of  so  much  feeling — of  such 
delicacy — of  such  danger,  that  it  cannot  be  safely 
discussed !  Are  we  to  be  told  of  the  dissolution 
of  the  Union,  of  civil  war,  and  of  seas  of  blood? 
And  yet,  with  such  awful  threatenings  before  us, 
do  gentlemen  in  the  same  breath  insist  upon  the 
encouragement  of  this  evil ;  upon  the  extension  of  this 
monstrous  scourge  of  the  human  race?  An  evil  so 
fraught  with  such  dire  calamities  to  us  as  individuals, 
and  to  our  nation,  and  threatening  in  its  progress  to 
overwhelm  the  civil  and  religious  institutions  of  the 
country,  with  the  liberties  of  the  nation,  ought  at  once 


THE    MISSOURI    COMPROMISE.  43 

to  be  met,  and  to  be  controlled.  If  its  power,  its 
influence,  and  its  impending  dangers,  have  already- 
arrived  at  such,  a  point  that  it  is  not  safe  to  discuss  it 
on  this  floor,  and  it  cannot  now  pass  under  considera- 
tion as  a  proper  subject  for  general  legislation,  what 
will  be  the  result  when  it  is  spread  through  your 
widely  extended  domain?  Its  present  threatening 
aspect,  and  the  violence  of  its  supporters,  so  far  from 
inducing  me  to  yield  to  its  progress,  prompt  me  to 
resist  its  march.  Now  is  the  time.  It  must  now  be 
met,  and  the  extension  of  the  evil  must  now  be 
prevented,  or  the  occasion  is  irrecoverably  lost,  and 
the  evil  can  never  be  controlled.' 

Next,  alluding  to  the  extension  of  empire  over  the 
vast  territories  of  the  west,  Tallmadge  says :  '  People 
this  fair  domain  with  the  slaves  of  your  planters ; 
extend  slavery,  this  bane  of  man,  this  abomination  of 
Heaven,  over  your  extended  empire,  and  you  prepare 
its  dissolution;  you  turn  its  accumulated  strength  into 
positive  weakness ;  you  cherish  a  canker  in  your  breast ; 
you  put  poison  in  your  bosom;  you  place  a  vulture 
preying  on  your  heart — nay,  you  whet  the  dagger  and 
place  it  in  the  hands  of  a  portion  of  your  population, 
stimulated  to  use  it  by  every  tie,  human  and  divine. 
The  envious  contrast  between  your  happiness  and  their 
misery,  between  your  liberty  and  their  slavery,  must 
constantly  prompt  them  to  accomplish  your  destruc- 
tion. Your  enemies  will  learn  the  source  and  the  cause 
of  your  weakness.  As  often  as  external  dangers  shall 
threaten,  or  internal  commotions  await  you,  you  will 
then  realise  that,  by  your  own  procurement,  you  have 
placed  amidst  your  families,  and  in  the  bosom  of  your 
country,  a  population  producing  at  once  the  greatest 
cause  of  individual  danger  and  of  national  weakness. 
With  this  defect,  your  government  must  crumble  to 
pieces,  and  your  people  become  the  scoff  of  the  world.' 


44  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

Finally,  the  bill  embodying  the  restriction  was  lost. 
The  men  of  the  north,  we  have  said,  strangely  content 
themselves  with  seeing  slavery  fortify  and  extend  itself, 
provided  it  keep  within  a  certain  limit.  The  required 
line  of  division  appears  to  be  that  which  bounds  the 
cotton-producing  lands  of  the  south.  Having  lost 
Missouri  territory,  as  a  whole,  the  friends  of  freedom 
did  not  prevent  the  southern  portion  of  it  being 
organised  as  a  territory,  without  any  restriction  as  to 
slavery.  This  was  accordingly  done.  Arkansas  was 
set  off  as  a  distinct  territory;  and  the  usual  means 
being  employed  to  give  it  pro-slavery  tendencies,  it 
became  ultimately  (1836)  a  slave  state. 

The  struggle  about  Missouri  was  renewed  in 
December  1819  and  January  1820.  As  there  seemed 
no  possibility  of  reconciling  both  branches  of  congress 
to  a  plan  of  restriction  within  Missouri,  the  idea  of  a 
compromise  was  suggested.  It  was  proposed  by  Mr 
Thomas  of  Illinois  to  admit  Missouri  as  a  slave  state ; 
but,  as  a  compensation,  to  exclude  it  prospectively 
from  all  the  remainder  of  the  old  Louisianan  territory, 
north  of  a  certain  latitude.  His  provision  was — 
f  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  in  all  that  territory 
ceded  by  France  to  the  United  States  under  the  name 
of  Louisiana  which  lies  north  of  thirty-six  degrees 
thirty  minutes,  north  latitude,  excepting  only  such 
part  thereof  as  is  included  within  the  limits  of  the 
state  contemplated  by  this  act,  slavery  and  involuntary 
servitude,  otherwise  than  in  the  punishment  of  crime 
whereof  the  party  shall  have  been  duly  convicted,  shall 
be,  and  is  hereby  for  ever  prohibited.'  This  com- 
promise, after  various  divisions  in  both  houses,  was 
adopted.  Missouri  was  enabled  to  enter  the  Union  as 
a  slave  state.  There  was  yet,  however,  another  struggle 
connected  with  this  troublesome  matter.  When  the 
Missourians,  in  November  1820,  submitted  their  state 


THE    MISSOURI   COMPROMISE.  45 

constitution  to  the  approval  of  congress,  it  was  found 
to  contain  some  objectionable  clauses,  preventing  the 
settlement  of  free  men  of  colour  in  the  state.  As 
several  northern  states  acknowledge  free  coloured 
men  to  be  citizens,  though  the  federal  constitution, 
as  usually  interpreted,  is  much  more  exclusive,  the 
objectionable  clauses  met  with  a  warm  opposition.  At 
this  juncture,  a  new  character  comes  on  the  stage. 
Throughout  the  whole  Missouri  affair,  Henry  Clay, 
a  statesman  of  no  mean  eminence,  had  given  the  aid 
of  his  counsels.  If  every  man  has  his  mission,  Clay's 
seems  to  have  been  that  of  inventing  compromises. 
He  was  an  orator,  a  schemer — one  of  those  mighty 
geniuses  who  have  always  a  plan  in  their  pocket  to 
tide  over  difficulties,  and  who,  in  securing  present 
peace,  do  not  mind  sowing  the  seeds  of  future  discord. 
Clay's  plan  of  engineering  a  difficulty  was  sublimely 
simple.  It  consisted  in  compounding  for  so  much  evil 
by  so  much  good.  If  a  certain  quantity  of  slavery 
was  put  in  one  scale,  the  same  quantity  of  freedom,  or 
what  looked  like  freedom,  was  put  in  the  other ;  so  the 
balance  was  adjusted,  and  all  parties  satisfied.  He  is 
understood  to  have  been  the  real  concocter  of  the 
Missouri  Compromise;  and  now,  at  this  fresh  and 
unexpected  collision,  he  interposed  with  a  scheme  of 
settlement.  It  consisted  in  exacting  a  pledge  from 
the  Missouri  legislature,  that  no  advantage  should  be 
taken  of  its  constitution,  and  it  should  pass  no  act  f  to 
exclude  any  of  the  citizens  of  either  of  the  states '  from 
the  enjoyment  of  the  privileges  they  enjoy  under  the 
constitution  of  the  United  States.  This  qualifying 
provision  was  accepted.  The  only  question  is — who 
are  'citizens  within  the  meaning  of  the  constitution?' 
So  ended  the  contests  about  Missouri,  which  was 
received  into  the  Union  as  a  full-blown  slave  state — 
a  circumstance  ever  to  be  regretted,  for,  independently 


46  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

of  other  considerations,  the  state,  as  will  be  seen  on 
looking  at  a  map,  projects  considerably  northward  into 
free  territory,  and  so  stops  the  way  to  free  migration 
westward. 


FLORIDA TEXAS CLAy's     OMNIBUS     MEASURE. 


Sympathising  with  the  Americans  in  their  unfortunate 
inheritance  of  slavery,  and  making  every  allowance 
for  the  constitutional  difficulties  which  are  presumed 
to  surround  any  plan  for  its  eradication,  we  must 
regret  the  manner  in  which  this  portentous  evil  has 
not  only  been  suffered  but  actually  stimulated  to  grow 
in  dimensions.  At  no  period  since  the  foundation  of 
the  Union,  has  the  number  of  slaves  diminished ;  on 
the  contrary,  it  has  regularly  increased;  and  at  the 
period  at  which  our  narrative  has  arrived,  1820,  it 
amounted  to  1,538,064. 

From  the  time  the  Missouri  Compromise  came 
under  agitation,  there  was  a  succession  of  measures, 
all  calculated  to  extend  the  sphere  of  compulsory 
servitude.  The  first  of  these  was  the  annexation  of 
Florida,  which  did  not  excite  any  particular  hostility. 
The  peninsula  of  Florida — swampy,  rich  in  alluvial 
marshes  and  savannahs,  and  eminently  suitable  for 
the  production  of  rice  and  the  sugar-cane — possesses  a 
history  abounding  in  picturesque  incident.  Discovered 
and  settled  by  the  Spaniards ;  captured  by  the  English ; 
then  rendered  back  to  the  Spaniards ;  it  ultimately, 
during  the  early  years  of  the  present  century,  became 
an  object  of  desire  to  the  United  States — to  which, 
by  contiguity,  it  formed  so  convenient  an  appendage, 
that  its  fate  from  the  outset  could  easily  have  been 
foretold. 

The  Americans,  as  their  best  friends  allow,  have 
never,  on  suitable  occasions,  been  at  a  loss  to  make 
out  a  good  case  of  injury,  requiring  smart  reparation. 


48  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

The  Floridans  were  a  bad  set.  They  had  preyed  like 
freebooters  on  American  commerce,  and  the  sufferers 
were  denied  all  redress  from  Spain;  they  had  excited 
the  Indians  to  molest  the  frontiers  of  the  states;  and, 
worst  of  all,  they  had  given  refuge  to  runaway  slaves 
from  Georgia  and  Louisiana.  Such  proceedings  were 
intolerable.  Pacific  overtures  having  failed,  the  United 
States  government  despatched  a  military  force  to 
overrun  Florida.  Negotiations  followed,  in  which  the 
Americans  advanced  a  claim  to  Texas,  as  having  been 
a  portion  of  the  old  French  province  of  Louisiana, 
which  the  Spaniards  ought  long  since  to  have  relin- 
quished. Spain  was  thankful  to  buy  off  this  strange 
demand,  and  otherwise  adjust  the  claims  against  it,  by 
ceding  Florida;  the  United  States  at  the  same  time 
undertaking  to  indemnify  American  citizens  for  their 
losses.  In  virtue  of  a  treaty  to  this  effect,  Florida  was 
taken  possession  of  by  General  Jackson  in  the  summer 
of  1821.  As  a  territory  of  the  Union,  this  hapless 
peninsula  endured  for  some  time  the  horrors  of  a  war 
levied  against  the  Seminole  Indians,  with  a  view  to 
recover  fugitive  slaves  and  their  descendants.  The 
narrative  of  this  ruthless  war  of  races,  aggravated  by 
the  use  of  blood-hounds  to  trace  the  Indians  and  negroes 
through  the  brakes  and  swamps,  involves  instances  of 
more  fearful  suffering  and  daring  heroism  than  perhaps 
any  history  of  modern  times.  Finally,  the  Indians 
being  subdued  and  removed  in  a  body,  and  the  real 
or  alleged  fugitives  secured,  Florida  settled  down  into 
the  ordinary  condition  of  a  state,  with  slavery  as  a 
legalised  institution. 

The  claim  on  Texas  on  the  above  occasion,  shewed 
pretty  conclusively  that  there  were  parties  in  the 
United  States  who  cast  a  longing  eye  in  that  direction. 
The  practice  of  acquiring  new  countries  and  adding 
them  to  the  Union,  began  with  Louisiana  and  Florida, 


TEXAS.  49 

and  with  these  precedents,  might  be  carried  to  any 
extent.  The  desire  for  these  territorial  acquisitions, 
though  partly  owing  to  the  restless  character  of  the 
Americans,  as  well  as  to  certain  necessities  in  their 
position,  arose  in  no  small  degree  from  causes  con- 
nected with  slavery.  Not  to  speak  of  the  exhaustion 
of  lands  by  slave-labour,  and  the  corresponding 
obligation  to  seek  for  fresh  scenes  of  operation,  there  is 
an  incessant  natural  increase  in  the  slave  population, 
which  leaves  to  planters  no  choice  between  being 
eaten  up  by  servants,  sending  them  adrift  through 
the  agency  of  the  slave-trader,  or  causing  their  sons 
to  remove  with  detachments  to  new  lands.  On  this 
account  alone,  there  is  positively  no  limit  to  the 
extension  of  slavery.  Unless  the  surplus  be  carried 
off  by  emancipation — and  to  that  the  law  in  several 
states  presents  serious  obstacles — there  is  no  restricting 
it  in  amount  or  keeping  it  within  a  definite  locality. 
Then,  we  have  the  commercial  principle  giving 
active  impulse  to  the  institution.  Slave  breeders  and 
traders  rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  new  settlements  and 
new  purchasers;  and  if  the  matter  rested  with  them, 
they  would  be  glad  to  see  the  Wnion  ingulf  country 
after  country,  till  at  length  there  was  nothing  more 
to  incorporate.  To  this  wild  demand  for  territorial 
enlargement,  the  central  government,  for  obvious 
reasons,  can  give  no  external  concurrence  in  the  first 
instance ;  but  that  is  of  little  consequence. 

The  condition  of  affairs  in  America  is  at  all  times 
favourable  to  the  commission  of  daring  exploits  by 
private  adventurers,  whose  acts  can  be  repudiated  or 
sanctioned  as  circumstances  shall  determine.  In  no 
country  in  Europe  could  be  found  groups  of  individuals 
at  all  to  compare  with  these  adventurers,  of  the  true 
filibuster  type.  They  are  the  refuse  of  the  world 
— penniless,     reckless,    confident,    and    unscrupulous. 


50  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

Refugee  Poles,  Italians,  and  Frenchmen ;  exiles  from 
the  British  Islands,  bankrupt  in  character  and  fortune; 
Portuguese  and  Spaniards,  with  predatory  habits 
acquired  in  the  slave-trade  or  in  freebooting ;  immi- 
grant Germans,  who,  instead  of  pushing  off  to  inland 
rural  settlements,  as  is  usual  with  their  countrymen, 
have  become  frequenters  of  taverns,  and  copiously 
indulge  in  '  lager  beer ; '  sons  of  American  gentlemen, 
who,  brought  up  without  restraint,  and  having  gone 
through  their  fortune,  loiter  about  bar-rooms  and 
gaming-houses,  get  up  dog  and  cock  fighting  matches, 
and  at  night  tormentiug  the  streets  as  rowdies — all 
are  ready  for  any  sort  of  mischief.  Such  are  some  of 
the  elements  of  a  filibustering  expedition,  of  which, 
however,  the  '  white  trash '  of  the  south,  by  whom 
honest  labour  is  deemed  a  disgrace,  usually  form  the 
staple  material.  Equip,  arm,  and  ship  off  company 
after  company  of  this  heterogeneous  mass — see  them 
land  in  grotesque  costume,  their  trousers  stuffed  into 
dirty  boots,  their  red  woollen  shirts,  their  rusty  beards, 
hats  of  every  imaginable  shape,  belts  stuck  with 
bowie-knives  and  revolvers,  and  rifles  slung  over 
their  shoulders — chewing,  spitting,  swearing — and  you 
have  an  army  of  marauders  such  as,  we  venture  to 
say,  could  be  nowhere  else  produced  on  the  face  of  the 
earth. 

Nature  accomplishes  great  designs  by  rough  agencies. 
The  Old  World  was  not  peopled  and  settled  as  we 
now  see  it,  without  going  through  centuries  of 
violence  and  bloodshed.  Greeks,  Persians,  Romans, 
Goths,  Saxons,  Normans,  and  Sea-kings,  all  in  their 
turn  conquered  without  justice  or  mercy.  But  that 
was  long  ago,  and  one  imagines  that,  under  the  lights 
of  Christianity  and  modern  civilisation,  things  should 
be  managed  differently.  True  in  one  respect,  but 
not  in   another.      Much   of  the   American  continent 


TEXAS.  51 

is  now  going  through  its  ancient  and  middle  ages. 
Filibusters  are  the  Sea-kings  of  the  nineteenth  century. 
Who  is  to  restrain  them,  so  long  as  they  confine 
their  stealthy  attacks  to  regions  under  a  weak  rule, 
adjoining  the  southern  states,  and  the  annexation  of 
which  to  the  Union  flatters  the  desire  for  national 
aggrandisement?  If  to  this  we  add  the  ardent  demand 
for  new  territories  over  which  to  disseminate  slave- 
labour,  the  impulse  for  acquisition  not  only  becomes 
irresistible,  but,  to  judge  from  past  events,  is  almost 
certain  to  receive  the  countenance  of  the  highest  federal 
authorities. 

Looking  about  for  means  of  advancing  their  interests, 
slaveholders  and  slave-traders  saw  no  outlet  so  avail- 
able as  that  westward  along  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  into 
Texas.  This  province,  of  almost  matchless  fertility, 
producing  cotton  equal  to  the  finest  in  the  United 
States,  extended  over  twelve  degrees  of  latitude,  with 
an  area  large  enough  to  form  eight  or  nine  ordinary 
sized  states ;  and  it  was  calculated  that,  if  freely 
opened  to  planters  and  their  servants,  the  value  of 
human  stock  would  probably  rise  fifty  per  cent.  Ever 
seeking  new  spots  for  settlement,  parties  of  emigrants 
had  begun  to  find  homes  in  Texas  as  early  as  1819. 
They  were  chiefly  from  the  north,  and,  for  the  sake  of 
material  interests,  were  fain  to  submit  to  the  petty 
tyranny  which  usually  accompanies  the  Spanish  rule. 
Some  years  elapsed  before  there  appeared  any  chance 
of  success  for  a  filibustering  expedition.  As  soon 
as  Mexico  had  shaken  off  Spain,  and  declared  itself 
a  republic,  things  seemed  ripe  for  striking  a  blow. 
From  this  time,  1834-5,  we  hear  of  migration  into 
Texas  on  a  formidable  scale.  It  is  no  longer  parties 
of  industrious  yeomen  who  come  across  the  frontier, 
but  companies  of  armed  men,  under  southern  leaders 
of  military  reputation.     Claiming   to    have   territorial 


52  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

rights  under  grants  from  Mexican  authorities,  there 
arrive  in  their  train,  flocks  of  greedy  speculators  and 
jobbers,  holders  of  scrip  in  real  or  pretended  joint- 
stock  land  companies,  besides  a  floating  mass  of 
adventurers  anxious  to  secure  whatever  good  might  fall 
in  their  way — and  when  we  recollect  that  there  was  a 
country  as  large  as  France  to  be  won  by  dint  of  a  little 
impudence  and  fighting,  and  that  the  first-comers  had 
the  best  chance,  the  rush  to  Texas  is  no  great  matter 
for  surprise.  The  method  of  appropriation,  however,  is 
curious.  It  resembles  nothing  so  much  as  that  of  a 
lodger  who,  taking  a  fancy  to  his  quarters,  begins  by 
finding  fault  with  his  landlord,  and  ends  with  turning 
him  out  of  doors.  Clearly,  the  Americans  had  no 
business  in  Texas — not  any  more  than  the  English  had 
in  India — and  if  they  went  thither,  it  was  their  duty  as 
foreigners  to  remain  quiet.  But  good  order  and  respect 
for  rights  are,  in  such  cases,  against  all  rule.  How 
the  Texan  settlers  and  their  allies  picked  endless 
quarrels  with  the  wretched  government  to  which  the 
province  nominally  belonged — how,  under  General  Sam. 
Houston,  the  invading  host  unfurled  the  standard 
of  rebellion — the  significant  lone-star — which  like  a 
meteor  they  carried  through  the  country,  as  far  as 
the  banks  of  the  Rio  Grande  del  Norte — how  they 
overpowered  the  Mexicans,  and  in  one  of  their  battles 
captured  Santa  Anna,  whom  they  set  at  liberty  only 
on  having  conceded  to  them  the  independence  of 
Texas — are  all  circumstances  well  known.  In  short, 
in  the  space  of  two  years,  by  the  desultory  movements 
of  a  body  of  unauthorised  adventurers,  an  extensive 
and  valuable  province  was  wrested  from  Mexico.  The 
brilliance  of  this  exploit  is  somewhat  lessened  by  the 
fact,  that  a  large  army  entered  Texas,  by  order  of  the 
United  States  government,  professedly  to  allay  Indian 
disturbances,   but   really  to  hang  about  as  a  reserve, 


TEXAS.  53 

to  countenance,  and,  if  need  be,  to  support,  the 
filibusters.  The  object  of  the  invasion  was  never  a 
matter  of  doubt.  It  was  to  secure  independence,  and 
then  to  seek  annexation,  with  a  view  to  strengthening 
southern  interests,  by  adding  several  new  slaveholding 
states  to  the  Union.  On  the  character  of  this  splendid 
manoeuvre,  we  should  prefer  allowing  an  American 
writer  to  speak.  f Some  crimes  by  their  magnitude,' 
says  Channing,  l  have  a  touch  of  the  sublime ;  and  to 
this  dignity  the  seizure  of  Texas  by  our  citizens  is 
entitled.  Modern  times  furnish  no  example  of  indi- 
vidual rapine  on  so  grand  a  scale.  It  is  nothing  less 
than  the  robbery  of  a  realm.  The  pirates  seize  a  ship. 
The  colonists  and  their  coadjutors  satisfy  themselves 
with  nothing  short  of  an  empire.'  Shrinking  from 
annexation,  he  adds  that  this  act  will  be  accomplished 
only  at  the  f  imminent  periP  of  American  '  institutions, 
union,  prosperity,  virtue,  and  peace/  * 

In  the  wilful  perpetuation  and  extension  of  slavery 
— its  infliction  on  a  country  from  which  it  was  expelled 
— lies,  perhaps,  the  chief  odium  of  this  great  deed  of 
spoliation.  Although  accustomed  to  look  with  con- 
tempt on  Spain  and  the  transatlantic  nations  which 
she  has  planted,  we  are  obliged  in  the  present  instance, 
as  an  act  of  simple  justice,  to  state,  that  when  the 
Mexicans  attained  independence,  they  at  the  same 
time  loosened  the  bonds  of  the  slave — decreeing,  '  that 
no  person  thereafter  should  be  born  a  slave,  or  intro- 
duced as  such  into  the  Mexican  states ;  that  slaves  then 
held  should  receive  stipulated  wages,  and  be  subject 
to  no  punishment  but  on  trial  and  judgment  of  the 
magistrate.'  Doubtless,  these  humane  provisions  were 
partly  a  consequence  of  the  large  infusion  of  mixed 


*  Channinrjs    Letter    to    the    Hon.  Henry   Clay,  on   the  Annexation    of 
Texas.     1837. 


5i  AMERICAN    SLAVERY'  AND    COLOUR. 

breeds  and  persons  of  colour  in  all  ranks  of  Mexican 
society;  but  be  this  as  it  inay,  slavery  had  been 
abolished  in  Texas  when  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
Americans.  After  this  occurrence,  however,  slaves 
were  rapidly  introduced,  and  with  avowed  slavery  in- 
stitutions, the  republic  claimed  to  be  admitted  into  the 
Union.  When  annexation  was  formally  proposed,  there 
was  a  considerable  division  of  opinion  as  to  its  expe- 
diency. Petitions  were  presented  to  congress,  and 
Daniel  Webster,  among  other  men  of  note,  offered  some 
wholesome  oratorical  opposition  to  the  measure,  on  the 
ground  that  the  admission  of  so  large  a  region  as 
Texas  would  give  a  most  undue  preponderance  to  the 
South.  In  one  of  his  speeches,  he  says  :  '  I  frankly 
avow  my  entire  unwillingness  to  do  anything  which 
shall  extend  the  slavery  of  the  African  race  on  this 
continent,  or  add  other  slaveholding  states  to  the 
Union.  When  I  say  that  I  regard  slavery  in  itself  a 
great  moral,  social,  and  political  evil,  I  only  use  lan- 
guage which  has  been  adopted  by  distinguished  men, 
themselves  citizens  of  slaveholding  states.  I  shall  do 
nothing,  therefore,  to  favour  or  encourage  its  further 
extension.  In  my  opinion,  the  people  of  the  United 
States  will  not  consent  to  bring  a  new,  vastly  extensive, 
and  slaveholding  country,  large  enough  for  half-a-dozen 
or  a  dozen  states,  into  the  Union.  In  my  opinion,  they 
ought  not  to  consent  to  it.  Indeed,  I  am  altogether 
at  a  loss  to  conceive  what  possible  benefit  any  part  of 
this  country  can  expect  to  derive  from  such  annexa- 
tion. All  benefit  to  any  part  is  at  least  doubtful  and 
uncertain — the  objections  obvious,  plain,  and  strong. 
On  the  general  question  of  slavery,  a  great  portion  of 
the  community  is  already  strongly  excited.  The  sub- 
ject has  not  only  attracted  attention  as  a  question  of 
politics,  but  it  has  struck  a  far  deeper-toned  chord — 
it  has  arrested  the  religious  feeling  of  the  country ;  it 


TEXAS.  55 

lias  taken  a  strong  hold  on  the  consciences  of  men. 
He  is  a  rash  man,  indeed,  and  little  conversant  with 
human  nature,  and  especially  has  he  a  very  erroneous 
estimate  of  the  character  of  the  people  of  this  country, 
who  supposes  that  a  feeling  of  this  kind  is  to  be  trifled 
with  or  despised.  It  will  assuredly  cause  itself  to  be 
respected.'  In  conclusion,  he  said :  '  I  see,  therefore, 
no  political  necessity  for  the  annexation  of  Texas  to 
the  Union — no  advantages  to  be  derived  from  it,  and 
objections  to  it  of  a  strong,  and,  in  my  judgment, 
decisive  character.  I  believe  it  to  be  for  the  interest 
and  happiness  of  the  whole  Union  to  remain  as  it  is, 
without  diminution  and  without  addition.' 

Expostulation  was  useless.  By  the  election  of  Mr 
Polk  as  president,  November  1844,  the  people  shewed 
their  desire  for  annexation.  When  the  subject  was 
debated  in  congress,  a  resolution  to  annex  was  carried, 
and  Texas  was  accordingly  incorporated  as  a  state  in 
1845,  without  any  restriction  as  to  slavery.  It  was 
provided  that  four  new  states  of  convenient  size  might 
afterwards  be  formed  out  of  it;  and  further,  that 
slavery,  at  the  discretion  of  the  inhabitants,  might 
exist  in  all  the  new  states,  south  of  36°  30'  north 
latitude,  commonly  known  as  the  Missouri  Compromise 
line. 

Out  of  the  annexation  of  Texas  sprung  a  war,  which 
in  its  turn  produced  still  greater  extensions  of 
the  Union.  According  to  Mexican  topography,  the 
boundary  of  Texas  on  the  west  was  the  river  Nueces. 
The  Texans,  however,  insisted  that  the  proper  limit 
was  the  Bio  Grande  del  Norte;  and  in  1846,  an  army 
of  occupation  under  General  Taylor  was  marched  into 
the  disputed  region.  On  this  and  some  other  grounds 
of  dispute,  a  collision  with  the  Mexicans  ensued ;  and 
for  two  years  subsequently,  there  raged  a  war  by 
sea   and   land   with   the    United    States.     The   result, 


56  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

as  might  have  been  expected,  was  disastrous  to  the 
Mexicans,  who  were  no  match  for  the  Americans. 
Under  General  Scott,  the  war  was  prosecuted  with 
consummate  skill,  and  nothing  could  have  been  more 
easy  than  the  conquest  of  the  whole  of  Mexico,  had  it 
been  expedient  to  carry  matters  that  length.  By  the 
final  terms  of  adjustment,  the  United  States  govern- 
ment paid  large  sums  to  Mexico  for  extensive  tracts 
of  country  which  might  have  been  retained  or  taken 
by  force.  The  possessions  acquired  on  this  occasion 
included  California,  and  certain  regions  in  the  interior, 
now  composing  the  territories  of  New  Mexico  and 
Utah — in  fact,  by  these  annexations,  in  conjunction 
with  rights  founded  on  pre-occupation,  the  dominion 
of  the  United  States  engrossed  the  entire  continent 
from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  and  from  the  British 
possessions  on  the  north  to  the  shrunken  republic 
of  Mexico  on  the  south ;  and  it  seemingly  became 
only  a  question  of  expediency  as  to  the  time  when  all 
that  remained  of  Mexico  should  swell  the  gigantic 
proportions  of  the  Union. 

To  procure  a  command  of  money  for  the  purchases 
from  Mexico,  a  bill  of  appropriation  was  laid  before 
congress.  Now  ensued  a  long  and  entangled  contest 
between  parties  respecting  the  restriction^  or  non- 
restriction  of  slavery  in  the  lands  about  to  be  acquired 
from  Mexico;  it  was,  in  fact,  a  resumption  of  the  old 
dispute,  whether  congress  had  the  power  to  determine 
the  institutions  of  the  territories.  The  debate  in  the 
first  instance  turned  on  the  motion  of  Mr  David 
Wilmot  of  Pennsylvania,  usually  called  the  Wilmot 
proviso,  which  was  to  the  effect  of  passing  the  bill, 
'  provided  neither  slavery  nor  involuntary  servitude 
shall  ever  exist  in  any  part  of  the  territory  to  be 
acquired  from  Mexico.'  This  and  similar  restrictive 
clauses  were  lost.     In  the  succeeding   congress,  1847, 


TEXAS.  57 

a  bill  was  carried  to  organise  the  territory  of  Oregon, 
according  to  the  provisions  in  the  ordinance  of  1787. 
This  latter  point,  which  insured  freedom  to  the  territory, 
was  carried  with  some  difficulty.  It  may  here  be 
added,  that  the  territory  of  Minnesota  was  organised, 
1849,  and  that  of  Washington,  1853;  both  have  free 
institutions.  The  northern  situation  of  these  terri- 
tories, we  presume,  rendered  them  not  very  available 
for  slavery. 

During  the  passage  of  the  Oregon  bill,  an  attempt 

was   made    by    the    slaveholding    interest    to    extend 

the  line  36°  30'  to  the  Pacific;   but  it  was   defeated. 

The  object  of  the  movement  was,  in  effect,  to  make  a 

distinct  division  of  the  United  States  into  North  and 

South,    each   with   its   peculiar   institutions.      Such   a 

division  was  felt  to  be  essential  to  the  permanence  of 

slavery;  for  if,  at  any  subsequent  period,  free  states 

should  be   organised   on  the  borders   of  Texas,  they 

would  be  a  ready  refuge  for  the  whole  slave  population. 

The  defeat  of  the  proposed  division,  which  was  a  kind 

of    northern    triumph,    did   no   more,   however,   than 

postpone  for  a  short  time  the  tug  of  war.     Hitherto, 

while    there   were    plenty   of    new   lands    north   and 

south  to  annex,  free  and  slave  states  had  been  added 

in  so  equal  a  proportion,  that  the  numerical  balance 

was  kept  tolerably  even.     Now,  the  unoccupied  lands 

in  the  north  were  becoming  scarce;  many  new  free 

states   in   that   direction   were   hopeless ;    and  if   the 

balance  was  to  be  maintained,  the  North  would  require 

to   seek   for   an   equipoise   south   of  the   line   of  the 

Missouri    Compromise.      The    game   of  pitching  new 

states  into  the  Union  was  getting  serious — the  result 

critical. 

Nations,  like  individuals,  usually  add  more  to  their 
cares  than  their  comforts  by  their  acquisitions  of 
property.       The     United     States     had     from     small 


58  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

beginnings  become  a  mighty  empire ;  but  while 
prosperous  in  its  material  interests,  it  was  vexed  with 
intestine  commotions.  It  had  acquired  enormously- 
large  possessions  in  the  south;  but  what  was  to  be 
done  with  them?  Eager  discussions  respecting  these 
acquisitions  occurred  in  congress,  1849-50.  Zachary 
Taylor,  the  new  president,  having  recommended  the 
organisation  of  California  as  a  state,  and  New  Mexico 
and  Utah  as  territories,  of  the  Union,  there  arose 
a  contest  on  that  everlasting  subject — the  imposition 
of  restrictions  as  to  slavery.  Once  more,  Henry  Clay 
interposes  to  allay  the  storm  with  an  ingeniously 
complicated  and  specious  compromise.  To  understand 
the  purport  of  this  beautiful  piece  of  legislation,  it 
is  necessary  to  have  some  notion  of  the  state  of  affairs 
since  1834.  The  invasion  of  Texas,  and  its  probable 
results  in  extending  slavery,  greatly  stimulated  the 
party  of  Abolitionists,  who  about  this  time  began  to 
agitate  with  uncommon  zeal — perhaps  more  zeal  than 
discretion — through  the  agency  of  speeches,  pamphlets, 
and  petitions.  One  of  the  things  they  especially 
demanded  was  the  expulsion  of  slavery  from  the 
District  of  Columbia,  where  it  was  a  scandal  to  the 
official  capital  of  the  States.  So  numerous  were  the 
petitions  presented  to  congress  on  this  and  analogous 
subjects,  that  at  length  the  extraordinary  resolution 
to  receive  no  more  was  adopted,  and  for  several  years 
the  very  right  of  petition  was  so  far  suspended.  It 
was  during  this  turbulent  decade  (1830-40),  that  a  bill 
was  brought  in  to  extend  the  slave  state  of  Missouri. 
The  prescribed  boundaries  of  this  state  on  the  west 
having  excluded  a  triangular  district,  which  remained 
free  soil  in  virtue  of  the  ordinance  of  1787,  the  incor- 
poration of  it  was  anxiously  desired  by  the  Missourians, 
for  it  was  exceedingly  fertile,  and  lay  on  the  route 
to  the  rich  and  still  unappropriated  lands  of  Kansas. 


CLAY^S    OMNIBUS    MEASURE.  59 


Strange  to  say,  the  bill  to  incorporate  tins  region 
— legally  insured  to  freedom — was  passed  in  1836 
without  any  perceptible  opposition.  The  tract  so 
annexed  composes  six  counties,  and  has  become  one  of 
the  most  populous  and  wealthy  sections  of  the  state, 
devoted  to  the  growing  of  hemp,  tobacco,  and  other 
articles,  and  cultivated  by  slaves.  This,  we  are  told, 
fis  the  most  pro-slavery  section  of  the  state,  in  which 
was  originated,  and  has  been  principally  sustained, 
that  series  of  inroads  into  Kansas,  corruptions  of  her 
ballot-boxes,  and  outrages  on  her  people,  which  have 
earned  for  their  authors  the  appellation  of  border 
ruffians?  * 

Not  discouraged,  the  ultra  anti-slavery  party  kept 
up  a  constant  war  of  argument  and  remonstrance 
through  the  press.  The  Texan  invasion  and  its 
consequences  imparted  fresh  energy  to  the  remon- 
strants. Petitions  for  a  dissolution  of  the  Union,  for 
amendments  in  the  constitution,  for  a  reform  of  the 
representation,  were  poured  into  congress,  and  when 
discussions  arose  respecting  the  admission  of  California, 
the  contest  overshadowed  all  other  questions.  Clay, 
as  has  been  said,  now  comes  on  the  scene,  with  his 
plan  of  conciliation,  which,  being  embodied  in  several 
bills,  was  cleverly  carried  through  congress  in  August 
1850.  This  famous  '  omnibus '  measure,  as  it  was 
called,  was  worthy  of  Clay's  genius.  The  South  had 
complaints  against  the  North,  on  account  of  the 
difficulties  thrown  in  the  way  of  recovering  fugitive 
slaves.  The  North  complained  that  slavery  continued 
to  exist  in  the  District  of  Columbia.  Clay  projected 
some  mutual  concession  on  these  points;  and  as  the 
South  was  the  more  intractable,  adjusted  its  demands 


*   Histoi*y   of  the  Straggle  for   Slavery   Extension  or  Restriction.     By 
Horace  Greeley.     Dix  &  Edwards,  New  York,  1850. 


60  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

by  conceding  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  new  southern 
acquisitions  should  exercise  the  right  of  introducing 
or  excluding  slavery;  further,  the  original  compact 
with  Texas  was  confirmed,  and  its  western  boundary 
fixed  at  the  Rio  Grande  del  Norte.  California  was 
admitted  as  a  state,  and  New  Mexico  and  Utah  as 
territories,  on  the  basis  of  '  squatter  sovereignty  '— a 
circumstance  of  no  moment,  as  it  proved,  to  California, 
which,  though  already  intruded  on  by  some  planters 
and  their  slaves,  made  choice  of  freedom.  Slavery 
was  not  abolished  in  Columbia,  but  the  slave-trade 
and  open  sales  of  slaves  were  prohibited  under  heavy 
penalties  in  the  District.  Lastly,  the  Fugitive  Slave 
Bill  strengthened  those  provisions  in  the  federal  con- 
stitution for  recovering  runaways,  which  in  many  parts 
of  the  country  had  become  practically  inoperative. 

These  united  measures  did  not  become  law  without 
incurring  opposition  on  both  sides;  but  we  are  con- 
cerned to  observe,  that  in  all  the  divisions  in  the 
legislature,  members  from  free  states  voted  with  the 
South — the  only  rational  explanation  of  this  being, 
that  the  principle  of  freedom  versus  slavery  had  not 
attained  force  sufficient  to  overcome  party  connec- 
tion or  individually  selfish  considerations.  Among  the 
eminent  men  who  on  this  occasion  voted  in  violation 
of  formerly  professed  principles,  was  Daniel  Webster — 
a  circumstance  of  which  he  was  so  painfully  reminded 
by  his  rejection  at  a  convention  for  proposing  candi- 
dates for  the  presidentship,  that  he  languished  and  died 
'  a  damaged  man/  October  1852.  Clay,  a  short  time 
before,  made  an  equally  abrupt  and  unlamented  exit. 

It  is  now,  we  believe,  generally  admitted  by  its 
partisans,  that  Clay's  Fugitive  Slave  Bill  was  a  grave 
political  blunder;  for,  besides  failing  in  its  professed 
object,  it  caused  considerable  exasperation  in  the 
northern  states,  in  some  of  which  it  is  already  as  much 


clay's  omnibus  measure.  61 

a  dead-letter  as  were  the  original  obligations  on 
which  it  was  founded.  So  much  for  Clay's  omnibus 
measure,  which  was  to  insure  universal  harmony  !  So 
much  for  what  a  committee  of  congress  in  1854, 
sagaciously  proclaimed  as  having  been  'a  final  settle- 
ment of  the  controversy,  and  an  end  of  the  agitation/ 
Well  may  one  say,  with  how  little  wisdom  is  the  world 
governed  ! 

With  the  incentives  to  increase,  to  which  we  have 
drawn  attention,  it  will  not  be  thought  remarkable 
that  in  1850,  the  number  of  slaves  in  the  United 
States  had  risen  to  3,204,313. 


THE      KANSAS- NEBRASKA      AFFAIR. 

It  will  be  recollected  that  on  the  occasion  of  consti- 
tuting the  state  of  Missouri,  in  1820,  there  was  a 
compromise  among  parties  to  the  effect  that,  in  all  the 
territory  which  had  been  ceded  by  France  north  of 
36°  30',  the  state  of  Missouri  excepted,  slavery  should 
be  for  ever  prohibited;  and  the  act  which  admitted 
the  state  to  the  Union  bore  a  clause  of  this  kind.  Here 
was  a  law  settling  the  question  so  far,  one  would 
think.  Events  proved  that  this  was  not  so  certain. 
Missouri  having  edged  itself  in  as  a  slave  state,  there 
the  affair  rested;  and  when,  in  1836,  a  slice  of  fresh 
free  territory  was  added  to  this  slave  state,  the  com- 
promise clause  does  not  appear  to  have  been  agitated. 
It  was  reserved  for  Mr  Pierce's  first  congress  to  be 
troubled  with  the  resurrection  of  a  measure  which 
the  bulk  of  the  members — and  Pierce  to  boot — had 
probably  begun  to  hope  was  past  being  brought  to  life. 
On  the  15th  of  December  1853,  a  bill  was  submitted 
to  the  senate  to  organise  the  territory  of  Nebraska; 
and  on  this  occasion  the  unhappy  compromise  rises 
from  the  dead.  Let  us  look  at  our  maps,  and  see 
where  lies  the  region  which  was  to  provoke  one  of  the 
severest  party  contests  that  has  ever  occurred  in  or  out 
of  congress. 

Nebraska  was  the  name  at  first  given  to  a  large 
tract  of  country,  having  on  the  east  Missouri,  Iowa,  and 
Minnesota,  and  stretching  from  36°  30'  or  thereabouts, 
to  the  borders  of  Canada.  Its  limits  on  the  west 
were  New  Mexico,  Utah,  Oregon,  and  Washington. 
The  more   eastern  portion  of  this  vast  territory,  was 


THE    KANSAS-NEBRASKA    AFFAIR.  63 

fertilised  by  the  rivers  Platte,  Kaw  or  Kansas,  and 
other  tributaries  of  the  Missouri,  and  its  only  occu- 
pants were  certain  tribes  of  Indians.  The  rich  lands 
on  the  borders  of  the  rivers,  and  beyond  them  the 
rolling  and  flowery  prairies,  were,  however,  becoming 
too  attractive  to  be  much  longer  exempted  from  the 
ever-operating  law  of  Anglo-American  migration. 
The  federal  government  had  begun  to  cause  regular 
explorations  west  of  Missouri,  about  1838,  but  on 
so  imperfect  a  scale,  that  fresh  and  much  more 
extensive  investigations  were  ordered  in  1842 ;  the 
commander  of  the  scientific  explorers  on  this  occasion 
being  Lieutenant  John  Charles  Fremont.  The  history 
of  this  journey  of  discovery  to  the  shores  of  the  Pacific 
is  full  of  romantic  incident,  and  as  affording  accurate 
accounts  of  that  great  western  wilderness  which  will 
shortly  afford  a  home  for  millions  of  civilised  men,  is 
deserving  of  more  notice  than  it  has  generally  obtained 
in  Europe.  Fremont,  l  the  pathfinder/  was  eminently 
successful  in  his  explorations  through  the  obscure  passes 
of  the  Rocky  Mountains.  On  one  of  the  topmost 
peaks  of  this  lofty  range,  upwards  of  13,000  feet  above 
sea-level,  he  gallantly  waved  in  triumph  the  national 
flag,  where,  as  he  says,  c  never  flag  waved  before.' 

The  discoveries  of  Fremont  opened  the  way  for 
settlements,  but  none,  except  in  an  irregular  manner, 
could  take  place  till  the  territory  was  organised  and 
surveyed;  and  these  final  measures  were  pushed  on 
by  Missourians  and  others  personally  acquainted  with 
the  capabilities  of  the  unappropriated  lands.  Among 
the  parties  who  urged  forward  the  bill  for  organising 
the  territory,  there  could  hardly  fail  to  be  a  conscious- 
ness that,  as  Nebraska  lay  directly  north  of  36°  30',  it 
was  exempted  from  the  contamination  of  slavery,  in 
virtue  of  the  compromise.  But  then,  was  this  com- 
promise of  abiding  effect — was  it  a  compromise  at  all  ? 


64  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

All  admitted,  what  was  undeniable,  that  there  was  a 
statute  which  guaranteed  that  all  lands  north  of  the 
line  36°  30',  should  be  consecrated  to  freedom.  This 
awkward  difficulty  was  got  rid  of  by  declaring  that 
the  statute  was  unconstitutional,  an  interference  with 
the  rights  of  squatter  sovereignty.  As  for  there  having 
been  a  compromise,  where  was  it  seen  in  any  valid 
obligation?  It  was  only  a  fond  tradition,  of  no  binding 
effect  whatsoever.  There  may  have  been  some  mutual 
concessions  among  parties  when  the  Missouri  bill  was 
passed,  more  than  thirty  years  ago ;  but  what  had  the 
present  generation  to  do  with  the  parliamentary  strata- 
gems of  a  past  age  ?  Besides,  the  compromise  measures 
of  1850  affirm  and  rest  upon  the  proposition,  c  that  all 
questions  pertaining  to  slavery  in  the  territories,  and 
the  new  states  to  be  formed  therefrom,  are  to  be  left 
to  the  decision  of  the  people  residing  therein,  by  their 
appropriate  representatives,  to  be  chosen  by  them  for 
that  purpose.'*  According  to  this  view  of  the  subject, 
the  Missouri  Compromise  of  1820  was  over-ridden  by 
Clay's  omnibus  measure  of  1850,  which  was  said  to 
obliterate  the  line  36°  SO'  from  the  map.  Neither 
branch  of  congress  unanimously  adopted  so  sweeping 
a  doctrine.  The  progress  of  the  bill,  which  speedily 
assumed  a  form  for  organising  two  territories,  Kansas 
and  Nebraska,  was  opposed  at  every  step.  Among  the 
more  energetic  friends  of  freedom  on  this  occasion, 
we  see  the  name  of  Mr  Seward  (of  New  York),  who, 
in  the  course  of  a  long  and  able  speech  on  the  subject, 
made  the  following  remarks  : 

(  I  know  there  have  been  states  which  have  endured 
long,  and  achieved  much,  which  tolerated  slavery ;  but 
that  was  not  the  slavery  of  caste,  like  African  slavery. 


*  Report  of  Senate's  Committee  on   Territories,  in  Reference  to  Nebraska, 
January  1853. 


THE    KANSAS-NEBRASKA    AFFAIR.  65 

Such  slavery  tends  to  demoralise  equally  the  subjected 
race  and  the  superior  one.  It  has  been  the  absence  of 
such  slavery  from  Europe  that  has  given  her  nations 
their  superiority  over  other  countries  in  that  hemi- 
sphere. Slavery,  wherever  it  exists,  begets  fear,  and 
fear  is  the  parent  of  weakness.  What  is  the  secret  of 
that  eternal,  sleepless  anxiety  in  the  legislative  halls, 
and  even  at  the  firesides  of  the  slave  states,  always 
asking  new  stipulations,  new  compromises  and  abroga- 
tion of  compromises,  new  assumptions  of  power  and 
abnegations  of  power,  but  fear  ?  It  is  the  apprehension, 
that,  even  if  safe  now,  they  will  not  always  or  long  be 
secure  against  some  invasion  or  some  aggression  from 
the  free  states.  What  is  the  secret  of  the  humiliating 
part  which  proud  old  Spain  is  acting  at  this  day, 
trembling  between  alarms  of  American  intrusion  into 
Cuba  on  one  side,  and  British  dictation  on  the  other, 
but  the  fact  that  she  has  cherished  slavery  so  long  and 
still  cherishes  it,  in  the  last  of  her  American  colonial 
possessions  ?  Thus  far  Kansas  and  Nebraska  are  safe, 
under  the  laws  of  1820,  against  the  introduction  of  this 
element  of  national  debility  and  decline.  The  bill 
before  us,  as  we  are  assured,  contains  a  great  principle, 
a  glorious  principle ;  and  yet  that  principle,  when  fully 
ascertained,  proves  to  be  nothing  less  than  the  sub- 
version of  that  security,  not  only  within  the  territories 
of  Kansas  and  Nebraska,  but  within  all  the  other 
present  and  future  territories  of  the  United  States. 
Thus  it  is  quite  clear  that  it  is  not  a  principle  alone 
that  is  involved,  but  that  those  who  crowd  this  measure 
with  so  much  zeal  and  earnestness  must  expect  that 
either  freedom  or  slavery  shall  gain  something  by  it  in 
those  regions.  The  case,  then,  stands  thus  in  Kansas 
and  Nebraska :  Freedom  may  lose,  but  certainly  can 
gain  nothing ;  while  slavery  may  gain,  but  as  certainly 
can  lose  nothing.' 

E 


66  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

Again,  expostulation  was  useless.  The  bill  passed 
both  branches  of  the  legislature  in  May  1854,  the 
majority,  as  customary  on  similar  questions,  being 
swelled  by  northern  Whigs.  An  act  was  accordingly 
framed  for  organising  Kansas  and  Nebraska  as  separate 
territories,  with  the  whole  apparatus  of  local  govern- 
ment and  legislation.  The  clause  empowering  the 
inhabitants  to  legalise  or  reject  slavery,  is  given 
below.*  The  two  territories  being  now  fairly  estab- 
lished, that  kind  of  rush  of  settlers  ensues  which 
has  been  already  pictured.  In  their  choice,  Nebraska 
appears  to  have  been  passed  over  in  favour  of  Kansas, 
which,  lying  to  the  south,  on  the  parallel  36°  30', 
immediately  adjoining  Missouri,  drew  crowds  towards 
it;  and,  as  is  well  known,  became  the  object  of  a  keen 
and  disorderly  competition  between  the  southern  slave- 
holding  party  and  the  free-soilers  of  the  north.  There 
was  little  time  to  spare.  In  the  Old  World,  kingdoms 
and  principalities  have  taken  centuries  to  mature.  The 
greater  number,  after  a  thousand  years  of  social  organ- 
isation, have  not  yet  acquired  so  much  as  the  capacity 
to  keep  order  at  a  public  meeting,  let  alone  the  power 
of  self-government.     Even  the  British  monarchy,  with 

*  '  That  the  constitution,  and  all  the  laws  of  the  United  States  not 
locally  inapplicable,  shall  have  the  same  force  and  effect  within  the 
territory  of  Kansas  as  elsewhere  within  the  United  States,  except  the  eighth 
section  of  the  act  preparatory  to  the  admission  of  Missouri  into  the  Union, 
approved  March  6,  1820,  which  being  inconsistent  with  the  principles  of 
non-intervention  by  congress  with  slavery  in  the  states  and  territories,  as 
recognised  by  the  legislation  of  1850,  commonly  called  the  compromise 
measures,  is  hereby  declared  inoperative  and  void,  it  being  the  true  intent 
and  meaning  of  the  act  not  to  legislate  slavery  into  any  state  or  territory,  or 
exclude  it  therefrom ;  but  to  leave  the  people  thereof  perfectly  free  to  form 
and  regulate  their  domestic  institutions  in  their  own  way,  subject  only  to  the 
constitution  of  the  United  States.  Provided,  that  nothing  herein  contained 
shall  be  construed  to  revive  or  put  in  force  any  law  or  regulation  which  may 
have  existed  prior  to  the  act  of  the  6th  of  March  1820,  either  protecting, 
establishing,  prohibiting,  or  abolishing  slavery.' 


THE    KANSAS-NEBRASKA    AFFAIR.  67 

all  its  appliances,  seems  to  be  unable  to  ripen  its 
ordinary  run  of  colonies  under  a  period  of  some  years 
— indeed,  several  of  the  more  elderly  of  these  com- 
munities are  now,  after  long  tutelage,  only  beginning 
to  walk  alone.  The  United  States  contrive  to  do  the 
thing  in  a  few  weeks  or  months.  Kansas  was  organised 
on  the  30th  of  Mav  1854,  and  on  the  29th  of  November 
following,  it  was  to  elect  a  delegate  to  represent  it  in 
congress.  In  the  short  intermediate  period,  cities, 
towns,  and  voting-places  were  to  receive  legal  signifi- 
cance; though,  as  the  materials  of  architecture  were 
principally  deals  and  canvas,  this  feat  was  perhaps  no 
great  stretch  of  genius.  Previously  to  its  organisation, 
the  region  had  become  a  hopeful  field  of  labour 
to  several  missionaries  connected  with  one  of  the 
divisions  of  the  Methodist  body,  which  is  known  to 
have  done  good  service  in  carrying  a  knowledge  of 
religion  into  remote  quarters  of  the  Union.  It  is  true 
these  missionaries  are  often  described  as  being  coarse 
and  illiterate,  but  such,  perhaps,  are  the  only  men 
adapted  for  the  rough  circumstances  that  surround 
them  in  the  backwoods  and  prairies.  Whether  to  please 
the  parties  among  whom  they  minister,  or  from  other 
motives,  it  unfortunately  happens  that  these  missionaries 
do  not  scruple  to  advocate  slavery  in  union  with  Scrip- 
tural doctrine,  and  so  act  as  pioneers  of  a  system  of 
brutalising  oppression,  which  is  clearly  at  variance  with 
every  principle  we  are  taught  to  revere.  Among  those 
who  in  this  manner  had  set  up  their  tabernacle  in 
Kansas,  was  a  somewhat  renowned  personage,  the  Rev. 
Tom  Johnson,  who  is  described  as  ultra  coarse  and 
presuming — a  violent  pro-slavery  partisan,  and  a  ready 
tool  of  those  planters  in  Missouri  who  had  an  eye  to 
the  fertile  plains  of  the  territory.  This  worthy,  whose 
head-quarters  were  at  a  place  called  the  Shawnee 
Mission,    a   short  way  from   the  frontier,   held  slaves 


68  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

long  before  the  organisation  of  Kansas — a  circum- 
stance which  helped  materially  forward  the  plan  of 
introducing  and  holding  slaves  on  a  large  scale.  Of 
the  Rev.  Tom's  clerical  accomplishments,  we  possess 
no  record.  All  we  know  is,  that,  located  in  a  hulking 
brick  building  at  Shawnee  Mission,  he  was  a  leading 
man  among  those  who  charged  themselves  with  enlight- 
ening the  Shawnees,  Delawares,  Kaws,  Sacs,  Foxes, 
and  other  tribes  of  Indians,  some  of  whom,  as  our 
authority  states,  already  possessed  in  an  '  eminent 
degree  the  marks  of  whisky  civilisation.'  *  We  do  not 
learn  that  Tom  kept  a  barrel  to  aid  him  in  his  labours ; 
but  that  is  of  no  consequence.  There  were  barrels  at 
hand,  and  they  were  doing  their  usually  horrid  work 
on  the  unhappy  Indians — a  doomed  race.  The  bill 
opening  the  territory  to  white  immigration,  provided 
that  the  natives  should  not  be  illegally  deprived  of  their 
reserves;  but  no  arrangement  however  humane,  short 
of  the  annihilation  of  whisky,  could  sustain  them  in 
their  possessions,  and,  unless  removed,  they  were 
evidently  destined  to  become  beggars  and  plagues 
to  society.  A  number,  wisely  ceding  their  lands  on 
reasonable  terms,  were  transferred  to  localities  at  a 
suitable  distance,  where  they  remain  till  a  fresh  wave 
of  white  immigration  overtakes  them. 

As  the  aborigines,  half-demoralised,  gloomily  clear 
out,  the  whites  pour  in;  land-offices  are  opened; 
'  claims'  begin  to  dot  the  face  of  the  country ;  and  the 
cluster  of  ugly  buildings  at  Shawnee  Mission,  becomes 
a  rallying-point  for  the  settlers.  We  are  to  view 
Kansas  in  this  transition  state  in  July  1854,  when  the 
contest  between  pro-slavery  and  anti-slavery  emigrants 
comes  distinctly  into  notice.     According  to  the  account 


*  The  Conquest  of  Kansas  by  Missouri  and  her  Allies.     By  W.  Phillips. 
Boston.     1856. 


THE    KANSAS-NEBRASKA    AFFAIR.  69 

of  the  pro-slavery  Missourians,  they  were  stung  by 
newspaper  reports  that  great  bands  of  New  Englanders 
would  soon  be  on  their  way  to  introduce  free  institu- 
tions into  Kansas.  About  this  time,  several  joint- 
stock  concerns  were  formed  in  the  free  states  for  this 
avowed  purpose.  One  of  them,  called  the  New- 
England  Emigrant  Aid  Company,  with  a  capital  stock 
of  5,000,000  dollars,  was  legalised  by  an  act  of 
incorporation  from  the  legislature  of  Massachusetts. 
The  plan  proposed  by  the  company  was  this :  Agents 
were  to  buy  lands  in  Kansas,  and  sell  them  in  lots  to 
immigrants,  until  the  territory  was  organised  as  a  free 
state;  then,  all  funds  being  realised,  and  a  dividend 
declared,  the  agents  were  to  select  a  fresh  field  of 
operations  in  order  to  organise  another  free  state.  In 
short,  it  was  a  grand  device  to  give  free  institutions 
to  all  the  new  territories,  one  after  the  other;  and  if 
unopposed,  there  could  have  been  little  doubt  of  its 
success.  These  projects  alarmed  the  Missourians — at 
least,  such  is  their  story.  It  is,  however,  quite  as 
clear  that  the  pro-slavery  men  were,  from  the  first, 
equally  on  the  alert ;  and  we  are  to  conclude  that  both 
parties  had  some  time  previously  determined  to  run 
a  race  for  the  territory.  The  committee  of  congress 
which  afterwards  investigated  the  matter,  states  in  its 
report,  that  '  within  a  few  days  after  the  organic  law 
was  passed,  and  as  soon  as  its  passage  could  be  known 
on  the  border,  leading  citizens  of  Missouri  crossed  into 
the  territory,  held  squatter  meetings,  and  then  returned 
to  their  homes.  Among  the  resolutions  are  the  follow- 
ing: That  we  will  afford  protection  to  no  abolitionist 
as  a  settler  of  this  territory  :  that  we  recognise  the 
institution  of  slavery  as  already  existing  in  this 
territory,  and  advise  slaveholders  to  introduce  their 
property  as  early  as  possible/  Then,  early  in  July, 
a  meeting  of  an  association,  having  the  same  object  in 


70  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

view,  takes  place  at  Westport,  and  resolves  that  it  will 
hold  itself  in  readiness  to  remove  any  and  all  emigrants 
who  go  into  Kansas  under  the  auspices  of  the  Northern 
Emigrant  Aid  Societies.  Thus,  two  opposite  parties 
were  distinctly  pitted  against  each  other.  Had  the 
Missourians  confined  themselves  to  the  peaceful  settle- 
ment of  planters  and  slaves,  no  fault  could  be  found 
with  them  under  the  constitution,  however  much,  on 
moral  grounds,  we  might  have  lamented  their  aggres- 
sions. But  the  pro-slaveryites  went  a  step  beyond  their 
constitutional  rights.  Not  contenting  themselves  with 
a  plan  of  peaceful  emigration,  they  resolved,  as  we 
have  seen,  to  gain  their  ends  by  violence.  One  excuse 
for  their  outrages  is,  that  in  giving  a  charter  of  incor- 
poration to  the  New-England  Emigrant  Aid  Company, 
the  legislature  of  Massachusetts  committed  a  trespass 
on  the  constitution;  because  no  state  is  warranted  in 
doing  anything  which  will  operate  on  the  institutions 
of  another  state.  For  anything  we  can  tell,  this  may 
have  been  an  indiscreet  and  federally  unlawful  act; 
but,  if  such  were  the  case,  there  was  surely  legal 
redress  before  the  supreme  courts  of  the  Union. 
Nothing,  in  a  word,  can  justify  the  Missourians  in 
having  armed  themselves  to  oppose  the  settlement  of 
the  northern  emigrants ;  and  for  this  they  stand  con- 
demned in  the  estimation  of  all  right-thinking  persons 
in  Europe  and  America. 

A  number  of  quietly  disposed  emigrants  had  begun 
to  spread  themselves  on  the  banks  of  the  Kaw,  when 
they  heard  that  they  were  to  be  attacked.  They 
were  discomposed,  but  not  frightened,  and  stood 
their  ground.  It  seems  to  be  customary  to  give  the 
inhabitants  of  many  of  the  states  certain  nicknames, 
by  which  they  are  generally  known.  The  natives  of 
Illinois  are  called  Suckers ;  those  of  Indiana,  Hoosiers  ; 
and   the   Missourians    receive    the    unpleasant    name 


THE    KANSAS-NEBRASKA    AFFAIR.  71 

of  Pukes.  Well,  the  story  ran  in  Kansas  that  the 
Pukes  were  coming,  and  soon  a  squad  of  them  did 
make  their  appearance.  Phillips,  whose  work  presents 
the  only  intelligible  narrative  of  the  Kansas  troubles 
that  has  fallen  in  our  way,  gives  a  graphic  account 
of  the  Pukes,  or  '  border  ruffians/  They  are  of  several 
kinds.  Those  of  the  unadulterated  type,  are  decided 
characters.  '  Most  of  them/  he  says,  '  have  been  over 
the  plains  several  times ;  if  they  have  not  been  over 
the  plains,  the  probability  is,  they  have  served  through 
the  war  in  Mexico,  or  seen  "  a  deal  of  trouble  in 
Texas,"  or  at  least  run  up  and  down  the  Missouri 
river  often  enough  to  catch  imitative  inspiration  from 
the  catfish  aristocracy.  I  have  often  wondered  where 
all  the  hard  customers  on  the  Missouri  frontier  come 
from.  They  seem  to  have  congregated  here  by  some 
law  of  gravity  unexplainable.  Perhaps  the  easy 
exercise  of  judicial  authority  in  frontier  countries 
may  explain  their  fancy  for  them.  Amongst  these 
worthies,  a  man  is  estimated  by  the  amount  of  whisky 
he  can  drink ;  and  if  he  is  so  indiscreet  as  to  admit 
he  "  drinks  no  liquor,"  he  is  set  down  as  a  dangerous 
character,  and  shunned  accordingly.  Imagine  a  fellow, 
tall,  slim,  but  athletic,  with  yellow  complexion,  hairy 
faced,  with  a  dirty  flannel  shirt,  red,  or  blue,  or 
green,  a  pair  of  common-place,  but  dark-coloured  pants, 
tucked  into  an  uncertain  altitude  by  a  leather-belt,  in 
which  a  dirty-handled  bowie-knife  is  stuck  rather 
ostentatiously,  an  eye  slightly  whisky  red,  and  teeth 
the  colour  of  a  walnut.  Such  is  your  border  ruffian  of 
the  lowest  type.  His  body  might  be  a  compound  of 
gutta-percha,  Johnny-cake,  and  badly  smoked  bacon ; 
his  spirit,  the  refined  part,  old  Bourbon,  "  double 
rectified;"  but  there  is  every  shade  of  the  border 
ruffian.  Your  judicial  ruffian,  for  instance,  is  a 
gentleman ;  that  is,  as  much  of  a  gentleman  as  he  can 


72  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

be  without  transgressing  on  his  more  purely  legitimate 
character  of  border  ruffian.  As  "  occasional  imbibing  " 
is  not  a  sin,  his  character  at  home  is  irreproachable; 
and  when  he  goes  abroad  into  the  territory,  for 
instance,  he  does  not  commit  any  act  of  outrage,  or 
vote  himself,  but  after  "  aiding  and  comforting  "  those 
who  do,  returns,  feeling  every  inch  a  gentleman.  Then 
there  are  your  less  conservative  border-ruffian  gentlemen. 
They  are  not  so  nice  in  distinctions,  and,  so  far  from 
objecting,  rather  like  to  take  a  hand  themselves; 
but  they  dress  like  gentlemen,  and  are  so  after  a 
fashion.  Between  these  and  the  first-mentioned  large 
class,  there  is  every  shade  and  variety;  but  it  takes 
the  whole  of  them  to  make  an  effective  brigade ;  and 
then  it  is  not  perfect  without  a  barrel  of  whisky.  The 
two  gentlemanly  classes  of  ruffians  are  so  for  political 
effect,  or  because  they  fancy  it  is  their  interest.  The 
lower  class  are  pro-slavery  ruffians,  merely  because 
it  is  the  prevalent  kind  of  rascality;  the  inference  is, 
that  they  would  engage  in  any  other  affair  in  which 
an  equal  amount  of  whisky  might  be  drunk,  or  as 
great  an  aggregate  of  rascality  be  perpetrated.  Such 
was  the  kind  of  customers  who  presented  themselves  to 
the  astonished  gaze  of  the  early  citizens  of  Lawrence, 
while  it  spread  its  tent-like  butterfly  wings,  just 
emerging  from  its  chrysalis  state,  on  the  banks  of  the 
Raw.' 

A  description  of  the  arrival  of  the  Pukes  is  given 
with  picturesque  effect.  ( They  came  in  wagons,  and 
were  truly  an  "  army  with  banners."  Every  wagon 
appeared  to  be  supplied  with  a  piece  of  cloth,  which 
was  patched  something  to  represent  a  star,  or  other 
more  mysterious  border-ruffian  symbols,  and  also  a  jug 
of  whisky.  They  had  a  fiddler  or  two  with  them,  their 
nearest  approximation  to  "  martial  music".  They 
might  be   styled  the   shot-gun,   or    backwoods'    rifle, 


THE    KANSAS-NEBRASKA    AFFAIR.  73 

brigade.  In  a  representation  of  the  Forty  Thieves, 
they  would  have  been  invaluable,  with  their  grim 
visages,  their  tipsy  expression,  and,  above  all,  their 
oaths  and  unapproachable  swagger.  As  the  first 
detachment  only  numbered  eighty  men,  they  took  to 
the  north  side  of  the  ravine  which  runs  through  town, 
this  being  the  Rubicon  between  them  and  the  Yankees. 
When  there,  they  proceeded  to  swagger  and  drink,  and 
shoot  at  marks,  and  swear  by  all  that  was  good  and 
bad  that  they  would  exterminate  all  the  Yankee 
abolitionists  that  dare  come  to  Kansas.  Towards  the 
evening  of  the  day  they  came,  a  reinforcement  of  some 
twenty-five  more  arrived ;  but  they  either  did  not 
deem  themselves  strong  enough  yet,  or  had  adopted 
some  plan  of  operations  requiring  delay.'  Some 
diplomatic  intercourse  follows,  but  there  was  as  yet  no 
fighting.  The  New  Englanders  would  not  give  way, 
and  ultimately  the  border  ruffians  retired. 

The  two  principal  officers  appointed  by  the  pre- 
sident to  initiate  the  territorial  government,  were 
A.  H.  Reeder,  as  governor,  and  S.  D.  Lecompte,  as 
chief-justice.  Reeder  was  evidently  not  the  man  for 
the  situation.  He  arrived  in  October,  and  the  election 
of  a  delegate  to  congress  took  place,  as  has  been  said, 
on  the  29th  of  November.  At  this  election,  Whitfield, 
the  pro-slavery  candidate,  was  returned;  but  the 
majority  in  his  favour  was  increased  by  1729  illegal 
votes,  given  by  bands  of  men  who  crossed  the  frontier 
from  Missouri — another  act  totally  unjustifiable.  The 
report  of  the  committee  of  congress  declares  it  to 
have  been  e  a  systematic  invasion  from  an  adjoining 
state,  by  which  large  numbers  of  illegal  votes  were 
cast  in  remote  and  sparse  settlements,  for  the  avowed 
purpose  of  extending  slavery  into  the  territory,'  and 
which,  feven  though  it  did  not  change  the  result  of 
the   election,  was   a   crime   of  great   magnitude.     Its 


74  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

immediate  effect  was  to  further  excite  the  people 
of  the  northern  states,  induce  acts  of  retaliation,  and 
exasperate  the  actual  settlers  against  their  neighbours 
in  Missouri/  * 

Dire  events  followed,  but  we  must  leave  an  account 
of  them  to  next  chapter. 

*  According  to  Phillips,  the  intruders  represented  only  a  faction  in 
Missouri ;  large  numbers  in  that  state  repudiated  their  proceedings,  but  from 
the  terrorism  that  prevailed,  were  unable  to  interfere.  '  Although,'  says 
this  authority,  '  Missouri  is  a  slave  state,  slavery  is  chiefly  to  be  found  in  a 
few  counties,  and  even  there  the  large  majority  of  the  white  men  are  not 
slave- owners.  They  are  men  who  have  come  from  all  states  of  the  Union, 
some  of  them  enterprising  business-men,  who,  in  advancing  their  private 
interests,  have  still  a  reasonable  pride  in  those  liberties  and  privileges 
guaranteed  to  them  by  the  constitution,  and  bought  by  the  blood  of  the 
early  patriots.  But  freedom  of  speech  is  suppressed  as  thoroughly  as  ever 
it  was  in  the  days  of  the  Inquisition.  Not  only  is  the  subject  of  slavery 
itself  interdicted,  but  all  opinions  growing  out  of  it,  or  that  might  haply 
endanger  it,  are  forbidden.'  An  organisation  of  secret  lodges  compels  silence 
and  passive  obedience.  '  An  election  is  to  be  carried ;  and  if  there  is  not  a 
sufficient  number  of  rowdies  to  engage  in  it,  from  a  natural  love  of  mischief, 
and  an  acquired  love  of  liquor,  why,  more  respectable  men  must  go.     And 

if  they  do  not  go,  they  must  at  least  pay  the  expenses  of  those  who  do 

Not  a  whisper  must  be  breathed  against  this  cruel  taxation,  or  else  the 
luckless  wight,  whose  love  of  principle  (or  parsimony)  made  him  object, 
would  be  subjected  to  a  loss  of  caste,  to  which  the  condition  of  an  Indian 
Pariah  is  a  happy  one.  The  following  speech,  delivered  by  General  String- 
fellow,  in  St  Joseph,  Missouri,  at  a  public  meeting  where  he  was  sustained 
and  indorsed,  will !  tell  something  of  the  story :  "  I  tell  you  to  mark  every 
scoundrel  among  you  who  is  the  least  tainted  with  abolitionism  or  free-soilism, 
and  exterminate  him.  Neither  give  nor  take  quarter  from  the  ....  rascals. 
I  propose  to  mark  them  in  this  bouse,  and  on  the  present  occasion ;  so  you  may 
crush  them  out.  To  those  who  have  qualms  of  conscience  as  to  violating 
laws,  state  or  national,  the  time  has  come  when  such  impositions  must  be 
disregarded,  as  your  rights  and  property  are  in  danger.  I  advise  you,  one 
and  all,  to  enter  every  election  district  in  Kansas,  in  defiance  of  Keeder  and 
his  vile  myrmidons,  and  vote  at  the  point  of  the  bowie-knife  and  revolver. 
Neither  give  nor  take  quarter,  as  the  cause  demands  it.  It  is  enough  that  the 
slaveholding  interest  wills  it,  from  which  there  is  no  appeal."' — Phillips, 
p.  47. 


THE     STRUGGLE     IN     KANSAS. 

The  election  of  a  delegate  to  congress,  from  the  terri- 
tory of  Kansas,  in  November  1854,  was  followed,  as 
has  been  said,  by  dire  events.  The  free  settlers  were 
indignant  at  the  unauthorised  voting  of  pro-slavery 
men  from  Missouri,  and  the  Missourians  endeavoured 
by  acts  of  outrage  to  intimidate  and  expel  the 
settlers.  Violence,  however,  had  not  yet  attained  its 
climax.  The  great  struggle  was  to  take  place  on  the 
30th  of  March  1855,  when  the  inhabitants  were  to 
choose  a  legislature.  Preparatory  to  this  event, 
Governor  Reeder  caused  a  census  to  be  taken  of  the 
population,  which  was  found  to  consist  of  8501  souls. 
This  number  included  the  unenfranchised  part  of  the 
community,  242  slaves  and  151  free  negroes;  those 
entitled  to  vote  amounting  to  2905. 

As  the  great  day  approached,  parties  of  Missourians 
entered  the  territory,  and  planted  themselves  at  every 
polling-place,  with  the  avowed  design  of  voting  for 
candidates  who  would  make  Kansas  a  slave  state.  As 
many  as  5000  of  these  desperadoes,  equipped  with 
arms,  and  bringing  tents  and  provisions,  thus  took 
their  ground,  resolved  to  commit  a  grossly  illegal  act, 
by  representing  themselves  as  actual  inhabitants  of 
the  territory.  As  there  is  not  usually  any  register 
of  voters  in  the  States,  where  elections  are  often  a 
kind  of  scramble — the  very  sheriffs,  on  such  occasions, 
lending  themselves  to  party  purposes — it  is  not 
difficult  for  bands  of  resolute  individuals  to  carry 
everything  as  they  please.  Even  in  the  city  of  New 
York,   at   the  last  election,  as  is  stated  by  the  local 


76  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

press,  parties  of  rowdies  floated  from  polling-place  to 
polling-place,  and  cast  votes  at  them  all,  in  order  to 
return  their  favourite  candidate.  How  much  more 
easily  could  such  infamous  proceedings  occur  in  the 
wildernesses  of  Kansas ! 

Well,    the   election   takes   place.      Notwithstanding 
threats  of  personal  violence,  the   settlers  came  pretty 
freely  forward ;  but  of  what  avail  against  the  host  of 
intruders  ?     On   examination,  it  was   found   that   the 
number  of  legal  voters  was  1310,  and  of  illegal  voters, 
4908.     With  the  exception  of  two,   all  the  members 
returned  were  pro-slavery  men,  and  a  number  of  them 
were  residents  in  Missouri.     It  being  the  duty  of  the 
governor  to  receive  the  returns,  and  grant  certificates 
to   enable   members  to   assume   office,    Eeeder,    after, 
as   is   alleged,   investigating   each   case,   set   aside  the 
election    in    seven    disputed    districts,   thus    creating 
two  vacancies  in  the  council,  and  nine  in  the  house  of 
representatives.      He   issued  a   certificate,  besides,  to 
one  member  of  council  and  one  member  of  the  house, 
not  the  individuals  whom  the  judges  of  the  election 
had   returned.     To   all   the    remainder,    consisting    of 
eleven  councilmen,  and   seventeen   representatives,    he 
granted  certificates.     On  his  ordering  a  new  election 
to   be   held   on   the  24th  of  May  for  filling  up   the 
vacancies,  the  pro-slavery  party  broke  into  a  storm  of 
indignation.     They  declared   that  no  special   election 
was   valid   under   the   organic  law;    they  resolved  to 
disown  the  authority  of  the  present  one,  and  vowed 
vengeance  against  iteeder  and  all  who  adhered  to  him. 
Without  waiting  for  the  new  election,  the  governor, 
in    April,    issued   his    proclamation,    summoning   the 
legislature    to    meet    at    Pawnee    City — a    cluster   of 
tents  and  deals  about  a  hundred  miles  from  the  frontier 
— on  the  2d  of  July. 

At  the  May  election,  there  was  little   disturbance, 


THE    STRUGGLE    IN    KANSAS.  77 

and  the  free-soilers  had  almost  everything  their  own 
way;  the  result  being  the  return  of  a  number  of  new 
members,  to  whom  the  governor  granted  certificates. 
There  were  now,  as  we  may  say,  double  returns,  some 
apparently  valid,  others  the  reverse.  No  proceedings, 
however,  were  founded  on  this  point  till  the 
assemblage  of  the  two  houses,  when,  on  the  third  day 
of  the  session,  a  committee  made  a  report  respecting 
disputed  elections.  Not  to  go  into  tiresome  minutise, 
the  result  of  the  inquiry  was,  to  deprive  of  his  seat 
one  of  the  members  whom  the  governor  had  certified 
in  March,  and  to  turn  out  six  members  certified  under 
the  election  in  May — the  effect  of  the  whole  being  to 
restore  affairs  to  nearly  that  position  in  which  they 
had  been  placed  by  the  outrageous  intrusion  of  the 
Missourians  in  March.  E-eeder,  it  may  be  presumed, 
had  now  an  opportunity  of  repudiating  a  legislature 
so  vitiated  by  its  own  act,  but,  as  previously  hinted, 
though  a  man  of  good  intentions,  he  was  scarcely  fitted 
for  controlling  the  wild  democracy  over  whom  he  was 
called  to  rule.  One  of  the  earliest  projects  started 
in  the  house  of  representatives  was  the  removal  of 
the  seat  of  legislature  to  Shawnee  Mission,  near  the 
borders  of  Missouri;  and  a  bill  to  this  effect  was  sent 
to  the  governor,  who,  on  the  6th  of  July,  returned 
it  with  a  message  declining  to  sanction  the  proposed 
change.  His  reason  was,  that  the  legislature  had 
transcended  its  authority  in  adopting  this  particular 
measure ;  but  in  making  this  communication,  he 
distinctly  recognised  the  council  and  house  of  repre- 
sentatives as  constituting  the  legislature  of  the  territory 
of  Kansas.  As  may  be  supposed,  the  legislative  body 
paid  no  attention  to  the  governor's  objections,  and 
accordingly  removed,  on  the  16th  of  July,  to  a  school- 
house  at  Shawnee  Mission.  Still,  the  governor  by 
messages  respecting  bills   continued  to  recognise  the 


78  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

authority  of  the  legislature,  although  at  the  same  time, 
on  the  21st  of  July,  he  declared  that,  by  the  act  of 
removal,  the  two  houses  were  dissolved,  and  henceforth 
he  suspended  all  intercourse  with  them.  We  are 
conscious  that  these  are  dry  details,  but  being  gathered 
chiefly  from  a  report  of  congress  respecting  the 
struggle  in  Kansas,  and  freed  from  party  exaggerations, 
they  throw  a  useful  light  over  what  has  become  a 
question  of  deep  interest  connected  with  the  progress 
of  slavery.  Up  to  the  point  we  have  reached,  the 
Missouri  intruders  were  decidedly  in  the  wrong;  the 
denunciations  in  their  newspapers  and  speeches  at 
the  public  meetings  were  atrocious — language  which 
we  could  not  possibly  transfer  to  these  pages.  But 
unfortunately,  Reeder,  in  whose  hands  was  the  destiny 
of  Kansas,  compromised  freedom.  His  recognition  of 
the  corrupt  legislature  on  the  21st  of  July,  was  a  grave 
blunder;  for  in  a  legal  point  of  view  (as  we  humbly 
assume),  no  subsequent  repudiation  of  that  body  could 
deprive  it  of  an  authority  he  had  already  acknowledged. 
The  false  position  taken  by  Reeder  was  greedily  seized 
hold  of  by  his  antagonists,  who,  as  an  explanation  of 
his  conduct,  alleged  that  his  preference  for  Pawnee 
arose  from  the  fact  of  his  having  town-lots  to  dispose 
of  in  that  quarter.  Whatever  truth  may  be  in  the 
scandal  circulated  on  the  occasion,  there  can  be  no 
doubt,  if  we  are  to  believe  Phillips,  that  Shawnee  was 
a  much  more  agreeable  place  of  meeting  than  Pawnee. 
'At  the  Mission,  the  legislature  were  at  home;  that 
is,  they  were  nearly  so.  It  was  only  one  mile  from  the 
Missouri  line,  and  four  miles  from  Westport.  Hacks 
left  the  Mission  every  evening,  on  the  adjournment, 
taking  the  members  to  Westport,  and  brought  them 
back  in  the  morning.  And  such  splendid  junketings 
and  racketings  these  fellows  had !  A  due  supply  of 
whisky  was  brought  in  bottles  and  jugs  each  morning, 


THE    STRUGGLE    IN    KANSAS.  79 

in  order  to  keep  the  legislature  in  spwits  during  the 
long  summer  days.' 

Having  set  to  work,  the  Bogus  legislature,  as  this 
body  is  usually  designated,  speedily  produced  a  code 
of  laws  connected  with  '  slave  property/  such  as  the 
world  has  not  seen  for  many  a  day.  The  following  are 
a  few  of  the  penalties  :  To  any  person  concerned  in 
raising  an  insurrection  among  slaves,  or  free  coloured 
persons — death.  To  any  person  who  shall  entice, 
decoy,  or  carry  away  any  slave  from  the  territory 
— death,  or  imprisonment  for  ten  years  with  hard 
labour.  To  any  person  who  shall  entice  or  persuade 
a  slave  to  escape  from  his  master — imprisonment  for 
ten  years  with  hard  labour.  To  any  person  resisting 
an  officer  who  attempts  to  arrest  an  escaped  slave — 
imprisonment  with  hard  labour  for  two  years.  The 
following  sections  are  too  good  to  abridge : 

'  If  any  person  print,  write,  introduce  into,  or  cir- 
culate, or  cause  to  be  brought  into,  written,  printed, 
or  circulated,  or  shall  knowingly  aid  or  assist  in 
bringing  into,  printing,  publishing,  or  circulating 
within  this  territory,  any  book,  paper,  pamphlet, 
magazine,  handbill,  or  circular  containing  any  state- 
ments, arguments,  opinions,  sentiment,  doctrine,  advice, 
or  innuendo  calculated  to  produce  a  disorderly,  dan- 
gerous, or  rebellious  disaffection  among  the  slaves  of 
the  territory,  or  to  induce  such  slaves  to  escape  from 
the  service  of  their  masters,  or  to  resist  their  authority, 
he  shall  be  guilty  of  felony,  and  be  punished  by 
imprisonment  at  hard  labour  for  a  term  not  less  than 
five  years.  If  any  free  person,  by  speaking  or  writing, 
assert  or  maintain  that  persons  have  not  the  right 
to  hold  slaves  in  this  territory,  or  shall  introduce 
into  this  territory,  print,  publish,  write,  circulate, 
or  cause  to  be  introduced  into  the  territory,  written, 
printed,   published,    and    circulated   in   this    territory 


80  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

any  book,  paper,  magazine,  pamphlet,  or  circular, 
containing  any  denial  of  the  right  of  persons  to  hold 
slaves  in  this  territory,  such  person  shall  be  deemed 
guilty  of  felony,  and  punished  by  imprisonment  at 
hard  labour  for  a  term  of  not  less  than  two  years. 
No  person  who  is  conscientiously  opposed  to  holding 
slaves,  or  who  does  not  admit  the  right  to  hold  slaves 
in  this  territory,  shall  sit  as  a  juror  on  the  trial  of  any 
prosecution  for  any  violation  of  any  of  the  sections 
of  this  act/  This  extraordinary  code  was  subscribed  by 
J.  H.  Stringfellow  as  Speaker  of  the  House,  and  Thomas 
Johnson  (the  Rev.  Tom),  President  of  the  Council. 

The  bills  passed  by  the  Bogus  legislature  being,  as  a 
matter  of  form,  submitted  to  Reeder  for  his  sanction, 
he  transmitted  a  message  in  reply,  stating  that  his 
opinion  remained  unchanged  respecting  the  illegality 
of  that  body,  but  that  independently  of  this  fact,  he 
had  received  official  intimation  that  his  functions  as 
governor  were  withdrawn.  The  latter  part  of  this 
reply  was  probably  anticipated ;  for  the  legislature  had 
memorialised  the  president  to  remove  the  governor 
from  office;  nor  can  we  feel  any  surprise  at  his 
dismissal.  Will  it  be  credited — his  message  just 
alluded  to  (August  16)  was  still  addressed  'To  the 
honourable  the  members  of  the  council  and  house 
of  representatives  of  the  territory  of  Kansas'* — an 
acknowledgment  of  their  authority  at  variance  with  his 
repeated  declarations,  and  greatly  calculated  to  com- 
plicate the  whole  question.  Amidst  these  difficulties, 
the  Bogus  legislature  obtained  an  opinion  from  Judge 
Lecompte,  to  the  effect,  that  the  bills  passed  would 
receive  the  force  of  law  without  the  signature  of  the 
governor,  and  so  they  appear  to  have  actually  come 
into  operation. 

*  Majority  Report  of  Committee  of  Congress.     March  1856. 


THE    STRUGGLE    IN    KANSAS.  81 

Reeder,   who   now  withdrew   into  private  life,    was 
replaced  by  Governor  Shannon,  who  was  declared  to 
be  ' sound  on  the  goose' — that  is,  in  favour  of  slavery 
in  the  territory — and  who,  in  general  character,  was  no 
improvement  on  his  predecessor.     Indignant  at  being 
subjected  to  laws  which  they  believed  to  rest  on  no 
proper  authority,    and  exposed  to  personal   sufferings 
from  the  Missourians,  the  citizens  of  Kansas  spent  the 
summer  of  1855  in  a  state  of  extreme  agitation.     The 
proper   means   for   redress   lay   in   a   calm   appeal   to 
congress.      They   did  memorialise   that   body   on   the 
subject  of  their  grievances ;  and  ultimately  a  committee 
inquired   into   and   reported  on  the   subject   at  volu- 
minous  length.      Without,  however,    waiting  for  the 
action   of  the   supreme   government,   the    citizens    of 
Kansas    held    mass-meetings    denunciatory    of    their 
oppressors,  and  went  the  extreme  length  of  appointing 
a   governor,    C.    Robinson,  to  'occupy   the   executive 
chair  of  the  new  state  of  Kansas/     Under  this  official 
took  place  an  entirely  new  organisation  of  the  territory 
—alleged  by  the   parties  concerned   to  be  exactly  in 
terms    of   the    constitution,    but    considered    by   the 
supreme  government  as  totally  irregular  and  inadmis- 
sible.    The    people   in    the    several    districts    elected 
delegates,  with  perfect  seriousness,  to  constitute  a  con- 
vention, or  rival  body  to  the  Bogus  legislature;  and  on 
the  meeting  of  the  assembly  on  the  19th  of  September 
at  Topeka,   a  message  was  delivered  from  "Governor 
Robinson/  which  would  have  done  no  discredit  to  the 
president  of  the  United  States. 

Looking  at  the  acts  and  resolutions  of  the  Topeka 
convention,  it  was  decidedly  the  better  legislature  of 
the  two.  Considering  the  nature  of  its  materials,  and 
the  circumstances  calling  it  into  existence,  one  cannot 
but  feel  amazed  at  the  cool  and  business-like  way  in 
which  it  set  aside  the  whole  proceedings  of  the  Bogus 


82  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

assembly,  drew  up  a  constitution,  organised  committees 
on  education  and  other  affairs,  and  appointed  an 
executive  for  the  territory.  None  but  an  American, 
however,  can  do  justice  to  its  character.  l  This  consti- 
tutional convention,'  says  Phillips,  '  was  by  far  the  most 
respectable  body  of  men  in  point  of  talent,  that  was 
convened  in  Kansas ;  indeed,  it  would  have  compared 
favourably  with  legislative  bodies  anywhere.  Talent, 
and  the  weak  vanity  which  apes  it,  were  there; 
true  virtue,  and  a  more  plastic  school  of  morality; 
patriotism,  and  number-one-ism ;  outside  influence, 
and  a  lobby;  sober,  staid,  business  habits;  brandy, 
temperance,  whisky,  prayers  by  the  chaplain,  profanity 
and  oyster-suppers.  It  lacked  none  of  the  great 
essentials.'  Taken  all  in  all,  it  was  an  honourable 
body,  with  the  usual  sprinkling  of  skilful  politicians, 
who  knew  how  to  indoctrinate  an  infant  community 
with  the  principles  of  party  manoeuvring. 

There  were  now  two  rival  parliaments  in  Kansas, 
each  thundering  forth  laws ;  but  of  what  use  are  all  the 
laws  in  the  world,  if  there  is  nobody  to  execute  them  ? 
Even  in  despotic  countries,  it  is  the  people  who  control 
the  people.  The  Bogus  legislature  of  Kansas  was  an 
exotic,  the  governor  an  exotic,  and  the  judges  and 
sheriffs  exotics :  the  people  repudiated  the  whole  con- 
cern, and  defied  them.  There  being,  properly  speaking, 
neither  law  nor  government,  and  outrages  being  of 
daily  occurrence,  the  settlers  got  up  secret  military 
organisations,  the  chief  of  these  being  called  the  Kansas 
Legion — a  kind  of  Vehmgericht,  holding  mysterious 
meetings,  and  the  members  of  which  recognised  each 
other  by  peculiar  signs.  To  counteract  these  move- 
ments, and  aid  the  Bogus  legislature,  the  pro-slavery 
men  held  what  they  called  a  'Law  and  Order  Con- 
vention' at  Leavenworth  on  the  14th  of  November; 
and   of   this    professed   auxiliary    of   the  constituted 


THE    STRUGGLE    IN    KANSAS.  83 

authorities,  Governor  Shannon  was  appointed  presi- 
dent. From  this  period  may  be  dated  the  condition  of 
anarchy  in  Kansas.  At  all  points,  there  was  open 
defiance  between  the  two  parties.  Of  the  fights, 
slaughterings,  burning  of  houses,  destruction  and 
stealing  of  property,  and  personal  outrages  of  every 
kind,  we  are  fortunately  spared  from  giving  any 
account,  as  ample  details  of  the  atrocities  committed 
by  the  border  ruffians  have  been  made  widely  known, 
and  more  particularly  as  that  greatest  atrocity  of  all, 
the  burning  and  sacking  of  the  city  of  Lawrence,  in 
May  1856,  must  be  fresh  in  every  one's  recollection. 
By  Mrs  Robinson,  wife  of  Governor  Robinson,  who 
was  carried  away  a  prisoner,  a  circumstantial  and 
graphic  account  of  the  troubles  in  Kansas  has  been 
given  to  the  world. 

In  July  1856,  the  Topeka  convention  was  brought 
to  a  termination  by  order  of  Colonel  Sumner,*  at  the 
head  of  a  troop  of  dragoons,  despatched  by  the  supreme 
government  to  suppress  the  insurrections  in  the  terri- 
tory. With  the  interruption  of  the  free-state  convention, 
the  seizure  of  some  prisoners,  and  the  occupancy  of 
Kansas  by  the  federal  forces,  the  territory  was  substan- 
tially handed  over  to  the  Missourians.  How  far  the 
president  was  justified  in  sending  an  army  into  Kansas, 
has  been  matter  of  much  angry  discussion;  his  pro- 
ceedings in  this  respect,  while  ostensibly  designed  to 
keep  the  peace,  had  the  effect  of  vindicating  the 
conduct  of  the  Missourian  intruders,  and  leaving  the 
actual  settlers  helpless.  The  subject,  it  will  be  recol- 
lected, brought  congress  to  a  dead-lock  at  the  end  of 
August  1856,  when  an  appropriation  for  the  army 
required  to  be  voted.     On  this  occasion,  the  members 


*  Meetings  of  the  Topeka  convention  took  place  subsequently,  but  not  to 
any  good  purpose. 


84  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

of  the  House  of  Representatives  from  the  free  states 
had  it  in  their  power  to  stop  the  supplies,  and  thus 
withdraw  the  army  from  Kansas.  This  grand  chance 
of  historical  renown  was  not  embraced.  By  a  majority 
of  101  to  98,  the  vote  for  appropriation  was  ultimately 
carried — 21  members  from  free  states  being  numbered 
in  the  majority. 

Under  Governor  Geary,  Kansas  has  latterly  been 
tranquil,  and  things  may  be  said  to  be  mending.  But 
the  laws  of  the  Bogus  legislature,  which  impose  and 
bolster  up  slavery,  remain  in  force.  It  is  only  barely 
possible  that  they  may  be  abolished,  and  a  new  order 
of  things  introduced  by  congress.  Some  New  York 
newspapers,  we  observe,  are  recommending  free- 
state  emigrants  to  proceed  to  the  territory,  which 
presents  cheap  and  fertile  lands  for  settlement;  and, 
considering  the  mighty  stake  at  issue,  we  are  not 
surprised  that  fresh  attempts  should  be  made  to  pour 
in  an  independent  class  of  settlers.  He  would  ill 
understand  the  nature  of  the  struggle  in  Kansas,  who 
supposed  it  to  relate  solely  to  the  freedom  of  that 
territory.  No  doubt,  that  was  the  great  and  proximate 
object ;  but  when  we  say  that  by  making  Kansas  free, 
slavery  would  be  checked  in  its  north-western  flank, 
and  receive  a  severe  blow  throughout  its  whole  system, 
the  character  of  that  desperate  life-and-death  struggle, 
which  we  have  faintly  portrayed,  will  perhaps  be  better 
understood.  By  way  of  a  final  settlement,  possibly, 
some  one  on  whom  has  dropped  the  mantle  of  Henry 
Clay,  may  propose  a  new  Compromise  ! 

In  judging  of  past  events  in  this  unhappy  territory, 
a  sense  of  impartiality  obliges  us  to  say  that  all  parties 
were  in  the  wrong.  Congress  committed  in  the  first 
place  a  grievous  wrong,  by  instituting  squatter  sove- 
reignty in  direct  opposition  to  the  Missouri  Compromise. 
Pierce  seems  to  have  done  wrong  throughout,  in  his 


THE    STRUGGLE    IN    KANSAS.  85 

invariable  leaning  to  the  pro-slavery  party,  and  so 
encouraging  their  aggressions.  Then,  as  regards  the 
two  local  parties,  wrong  was  met  with  wrong,  illegality 
by  illegality.  The  intrusions  of  the  border  ruffians 
were  in  every  point  of  view  iniquitous;  but  the  free- 
soil  settlers,  though  grossly  insulted  and  oppressed,  did 
surely  wrong  in  inaugurating  an  irregular  legislative 
convention,  and  in  trying  to  support  their  plans  by 
secret  military  organisations.  As  for  Heeder,  the 
central  figure  in  the  group  of  wrong-doers,  he,  by  his 
incorrigible  folly,  rendered  confusion  worse  confounded 
— a  fine  instance  of  what  mischief  may  be  done  by 
good  easy  men,  when  placed  in  circumstances  demand- 
ing vigour  of  character.  For  all  these  complications  of 
wrong,  of  which  no  one  can  yet  see  the  end,  the  more 
peaceful  and  honestly  disposed  immigrants  to  Kansas 
paid  a  heavy  penalty.  Their  sufferings  were  acute, 
their  losses  ruinous.  Of  the  deplorable  condition  to 
which  their  agricultural  operations  were  reduced,  we 
could  advance  no  more  convincing  proof  than  that 
which  above  all  things  shocks  the  sensibility  of  an 
American — white  women  were  seen  labouring  in  the 
fields ! 


MANOEUVRING. 

Squatter  sovereignty ! — shall  it  exist  or  not,  is  the 
question  which  for  half  a  century  has  perplexed  and 
demoralised  American  statesmanship,  and  will  do  so 
apparently  for  some  time  to  come.  Calhoun  is  said 
to  have  been  the  first  to  use  the  term  e  squatter 
sovereignty '  in  joke,  though  no  joke  has  it  proved  to 
congress ;  but  Cass  is  alleged  to  have  had  the  high 
merit  of  giving  it  a  place  in  serious  parliamentary 
nomenclature,  and  so  conferring  upon  it  an  air  of 
official  respectability.  We  do  not  absolutely  pledge 
ourselves  as  to  the  authorship  of  either  of  these 
distinguished  statesmen ;  nor  does  it  much  matter. 
Squatter  sovereignty  is  no  new  thing.  We  have 
referred  to  it  again  and  again  as  the  alleged  right  of 
the  inhabitants  of  the  newly  organised  territories  of 
the  Union  to  make  choice  of  their  own  institutions. 
How  that  choice  is  for  the  most  part  a  foregone 
conclusion,  as  regards  slavery,  is  already  explained. 
An  early  rush  of  planters  with  their  slaves  usually 
settles  the  business,  before  the  more  slow-moving  and 
freedom-loving  emigrants  enter  on  the  scene.  Yet, 
the  fiction  is  still  contended  for  in  congress,  that  the 
inhabitants  are  entitled  to  exercise  precisely  the  same 
right  of  assuming  or  rejecting  slavery  as  are  the 
citizens  of  any  of  the  constituted  states. 

People  who  do  not  keep  quite  abreast  of  great 
social  questions,  probably  imagine  that  the  contest 
about  slavery  in  the  United  States  refers  to  emanci- 
pation or  non-emancipation.  Except  by  the  incon- 
siderable party  of  abolitionists,  the   struggle  has  not 


MANOEUVRING.  87 

got  within  e  a  long  chalk J  of  this  ultimatum.  The 
past  and  present  subject  of  debate,  is  what  is  to  be 
done  with  the  territories,  which  are  from  time  to 
time  absorbed  into  the  Union.  The  South,  which  has 
the  knack  of  carrying  statesmen  and  presidents  along 
with  it — no  matter  where  these  personages  are  ( raised' 
— argues  strongly  in  favour  of  squatter  sovereignty; 
for  the  good  reason,  that  it  can  fabricate  pro-slavery 
squatters  to  any  desired  amount.  The  North,  on  the 
other  hand,  which  talks  heroically  about  freedom  in 
its  Faneuil  Halls,  its  Tabernacles,  and  what  not,  and 
is  clear  that  at  least  all  territories  on  the  northern 
side  of  36°  30'  should  be  for  ever  free  from  slavery, 
cuts  a  poor  figure  when  it  comes  to  voting.  In  plain 
terms,  it  allows  itself  to  be  mystified — sends,  among 
a  few  brilliant  exceptions,  so  many  self-interested 
persons  to  congress,  that  all  'who  are  not  identified 
with  cotton  or  democracy  are  naturally  disgusted '  * — 
and  thus,  to  end  the  matter,  the  South  gets  pretty 
nearly  always  its  own  way. 

Ever  since  the  battle  of  the  territories  began,  nearly 
forty  years  ago,  there  has  been  a  continual  reckoning 
of  gains  and  losses  between  South  and  North.  On 
our  conscience,  we  believe  that  the  question  of  slavery 
has  never,  as  a  general  rule,  been  seriously  entertained 
by  the  great  northern  orators  in  congress.  The  thing 
which  was  really  fought  for — as,  for  example,  in  the 
magnificent  speeches  of  Webster — was  political  power. 
If  the  South,  with  the  peculiar  energy  it  has  usually 
employed,  were  to  secure  a  disproportionately  large 
number  of  states,  the  North  would  relatively  sink  in 
its  member-creating  capacity;  and  losing  in  members, 
it  would  lose  in  chances  of  place  as  well  as  of  the 


*  Whig  Policy  Analysed  and  Illustrated.     By  Josiah  Quincy.     Boston. 
1856. 


88  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

many  good  things  which  issue  from  the  federal 
treasury.  Unless  one  is  pretty  well  '  posted  up '  in 
the  history  of  these  party  manoeuvres,  he  can  hardly 
comprehend  the  actual  merits  of  the  squatter 
sovereignty  discussions. 

Slavery,  once  simply  a  social  and  seemingly 
temporary  evil,  has,  through  the  course  of  events,  of 
which  we  have  presented  a  summary,  become  a  great 
political  institute,  within  which  is  intrenched  an 
oligarchy  that  holds  the  balance  of  power,  and  is, 
in  effect,  the  government.  Undoubtedly,  the  primary 
cause  of  this  preponderance  is  the  constitution  of  the 
United  States,  which  is  eminently  conservative  of 
slavery,  and,  as  usually  interpreted,  has  afforded 
reasons  for  greatly  extending  this  odious  institution. 
In  that  constitutional  arrangement  alone,  whereby 
slaves  form  an  element  in  apportioning  the  ratio 
of  representative  population,  a  ground  was  laid 
for  the  political  aggrandisement  of  the  South.  As 
formerly  stated,  three-fifths  of  all  the  slaves  in  the 
United  States  are  numbered  in  the  constituency  for 
the  House  of  Representatives,  though  not  one  of 
them  has  a  vote.  Three  out  of  every  five  slaves  in 
the  South,  are  thus  equivalent  to  three  freemen  in 
the  North ;  and  practically,  by  this  singular  method 
of  making  up  a  constituency,  the  South  is  able  to 
send  upwards  of  twenty  members  to  the  House  of 
Representatives  beyond  what  it  ought  properly  to  be 
entitled  to  do. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  however,  that,  notwith- 
standing this  remarkable  advantage,  the  South  is  not 
able  to  keep  pace  with  northern  constituencies.  By 
the  last  decennial  census,  on  which  the  present  repre- 
sentation is  based,  while  the  free  states  contribute  145 
members,  the  slave  states  return  no  more  than  90. 
How,  then,  being  in  such  a  minority,  is  the  South  able 


MANOEUVRING.  89 

to  exert  so  extraordinary  an  influence  in  the  national 
legislature?  The  explanation  involves  some  strange 
disclosures.  In  the  first  place,  the  South  uniformly 
acts  with  an  esprit  du  corps  totally  wanting  in  the 
North.  The  constituency  of  the  slave  states  is,  in 
point  of  fact,  narrowed  to  ahout  350,000  slave-owners, 
in  whom  power  is  entirely  reposed ;  the  surplus  of 
southern  white  population  being  little  better  than  a 
nonentity.  A  body  so  limited  acts  with  a  vigour  and 
unity  not  to  be  attained  by  the  many  millions  of 
northern  freemen.  Throughout  the  South,  free  labour 
is  dishonourable,  and  the  business  of  life  is  politics : 
the  universal  consideration  is  the  attainment  and 
retention  of  power.  The  North,  on  the  contrary,  is 
a  hive  of  industry,  in  which  there  is  little  time  to 
devote  to  political  stratagems,  and  unfortunately  the 
people,  generally,  are  so  much  under  the  dominion 
of  material  interests,  as  well  as  prejudices  respecting 
colour,  as  to  be  easily  misled  by  deceptive  party 
representations. 

Accustomed  as  we  are  to  associate  slavery  and  its 
multifarious  horrors  with  the  doings  of  the  South, 
one  is  apt  to  neglect  the  important  truth,  that  but 
for  the  selfish  compromises  of  the  North,  slavery  must 
long  since  have  been  extinct.  No  fact  has  been  more 
conclusively  proved  than  that  the  existence  of  this 
monster  evil  depends  on  territorial  aggression.  Seclude 
it  within  a  certain  circle,  and  it  will  inevitably  perish. 
Slavery  is  synonymous  with  waste.  It  is  a  waste  of 
human  beings,  a  waste  of  means,  a  waste  of  land,  a 
waste  of  moral  feeling — everything  deteriorates  in 
connection  with  it.  As  an  institution,  it  has  drawn 
its  vitality  from  the  rich  lands  lying  beyond  the 
borders  of  the  Old  Dominion.  The  most  striking 
evidence  of  its  ruinous  effects  on  land,  as  well 
as    morals,    is    given    by    Mr    Olmsted    in   his   two 


90  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

dispassionately  written  works  on  the  slave  states.  In 
the  latest  of  these  productions,  A  Journey  through 
Texas,  he  speaks  of  that  frequent  and  melancholy 
spectacle  in  the  older  slave  states — fan  abandoned 
plantation  of  "  worn-out "  fields,  with  its  little  village 
of  dwellings,  now  a  home  only  for  wolves  and  vultures.' 
'  This/  he  adds,  '  but  indicates  a  large  class  of  observ- 
ations, by  which  I  hold  myself  justified  in  asserting 
that  the  natural  elements  of  wealth  in  the  soil  of  Texas 
will  have  been  more  exhausted  in  ten  years,  and  with 
them  the  rewards  offered  by  Providence  to  labour 
will  have  been  more  lessened  than,  without  slavery, 
would  have  been  the  case  in  two  hundred.  Do  not 
think  that  I  use  round  numbers  carelessly.  After 
two  hundred  years'  occupation  of  similar  soils  by 
a  free  labouring  community,  I  have  seen  no  such 
evidences  of  waste,  as  in  Texas,  after  ten  years  of 
slavery.  And  indications  of  the  same  kind  I  have 
observed,  not  isolated,  but  general,  in  every  slave 
state  but  two — which  I  have  seen  only  in  parts  yet 
scarcely  at  all  settled.  Moreover,  I  have  seen  similar 
phenomena  following  slavery  in  other  countries  and 
other  climates.7 

The  effects  of  this  wastefulness  of  land,  are  of 
national  concern.  Present  existence  is  secured  by 
drawing  on  future  resources.  To  after  generations, 
bread,  meat,  cotton,  and  other  articles  will  all  be 
enhanced  in  cost  by  the  present  system  of  territorial 
exhaustion.  e I  consider,'  adds  this  writer,  c  that 
slavery  is  no  less  disastrous  in  its  effects  on  industry 
- — no  less  destructive  to  wealth.  The  laws  and  forces 
sustaining  it,  where  it  has  been  long  established, 
may  become  a  temporary  necessity,  as  poisons  are 
to  the  life  of  some  unfortunate  invalids.  But  laws 
intended  to  extend  its  field  of  improvidence  are 
unjust,    cruel,    and    oppressive.'      If    slavery    be    so 


MAN(EUVRING.  91 

ruinous,  why  should  it  be  continued?  It  is  tolerably 
evident  that  the  buying  of  labourers,  instead  of  hiring 
them,  must  be  a  most  extravagant  method  of  culti- 
vating lands.  Olmsted  shews  how  capital  is  needlessly 
absorbed  by  investments  in  slaves,  and  that  on  this 
account  alone,  the  South  deprives  itself  of  vast  means 
of  improvement.  But  independently  of  the  profits 
derived  by  Virginians  in  raising  and  selling  slave-stock, 
there  are  powerful  reasons  why  slavery  is  maintained 
and  contended  for. 

The  first  of  these  reasons  is  the  inordinate  love  of 
power.  Reared  in  the  uncontrolled  exercise  of  autho- 
rity, the  slave-owner  will  submit  to  many  inconveniences 
and  even  loss  of  profit,  rather  than  tolerate  what  he 
considers  the  arrogance  of  an  independent  labourer. 
To  ask  a  servant  to  do  a  thing  instead  of  ordering  him, 
is  intolerable.  The  idea  of  hired  labourers  presuming 
to  have  rights,  is  repugnant  to  southern  notions.  Those 
who  degrade  themselves  with  labour,  are  bound  to  sub- 
mit to  any  kind  of  treatment.  The  reckless  homicide 
of  a  waiter  at  Washington  by  a  member  of  congress 
from  Alabama,  in  the  spring  of  1856,  was,  for  example, 
justified  by  southern  newspapers,  on  the  ground  that 
it  was  proper  to  teach  free  labourers  their  place.  An- 
other reason  for  sustaining  slavery,  is  the  status  which 
is  derived  from  the  possession  of  negro  property.  The 
owning  of  even  one  slave  raises  a  person  in  southern 
society,  although  the  possessor  of  this  miserable  piece 
of  property  is  under  the  necessity  of  hiring  it  out  for 
his  own  subsistence.  Addressing  a  southern  man, 
Olmsted  says :  l  It  is  fashionable  with  you  to  own 
slaves,  as  it  is  with  the  English  to  own  land,  with 
the  Arabs,  horses ;  and  as  beads  and  vermilion  have 
a  value  among  the  Indians  which  seems  to  us  absurd, 
so,  among  you,  has  the  power  of  commanding  the 
service  of  slaves.     Consequently,   you   are  willing   to 


92  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

pay  a  price  for  it  which,  to  one  not  educated  as  you 
have  been,  seems  absurdly  high.  Nor  are  you  more 
likely  to  dispense  with  slaves  when  you  have  it  in 
your  power  to  possess  them,  than  the  Chinese  with 
their  fashion  of  the  queue,  Turks  with  their  turban, 
or  Englishmen  with  their  hats/ 

Wrong  in  principle,  and  in  all  respects  ineconomical, 
as  compared  with  free  labour,  slavery  is  on  all  hands 
acknowledged  to  exist  only  by  fraud  and  violence, 
by  disregard  of  the  rights  of  citizens,  by  suppress- 
ing freedom  of  discussion  and  freedom  of  election, 
by  preventing  general  education,  by  interrupting  and 
annoying  commerce,  by  exhausting  lands,  dishonouring 
industry,  checking  public  improvements,  degrading 
the  national  character,  and,  in  short,  by  establishing 
an  almost  universal  terrorism,  unworthy  of  a  free 
people.  The  dexterity  with  which  these  enormities 
has  been  sustained,  is  exceedingly  marvellous.  A  few 
facts  must  be  plainly  stated.  Practically  a  despotism, 
the  great  slaveholding  interest,  with  far-sighted  policy, 
professes  those  extreme  principles  of  democracy  which 
are  upheld  by  the  larger  proportion  of  northern 
citizens — much  as  if  the  high  conservative  body  in 
England  were,  for  party  purposes,  to  declare  for  ex- 
treme radicalism.  Northern  men,  on  the  other  hand, 
seek  to  conciliate  the  South,  for  the  sake  of  selfish 
interests.  The  doctrine  that  high  protective  duties  are 
an  essential  element  of  national  prosperity,  though  long 
since  exploded  by  political  economists,  is  still  current 
in  the  northern  states  of  the  Union.  Doubtless,  it  is 
only  through  the  efficacy  of  such  protective  duties  as 
30  per  cent.,  that  certain  northern  manufacturers 
can  keep  open  their  establishments ;  and  we  may 
assume  that  if  these  restrictions  were  removed,  much 
misdirected  capital  would  flow  into  more  natural 
channels,   and  produce   results  more  advantageous  to 


MANOEUVRING.  93 

all  parties.  Northern  manufacturers,  however,  being 
the  immediate  gainers  by  so  preposterous  a  system  of 
protection,  cling  as  closely  to  the  privilege  of  taxing 
the  community  as  ever  did  the  landowners  of  Great 
Britain  by  their  restrictions  on  the  free  import  of  food. 
Such  prepossessions  could  meet  with  no  response  in 
the  South,  but  for  the  necessity  of  buying  party  sup- 
port. All  the  clothing,  shoes,  hats,  and  other  articles 
required  on  southern  plantations,  are  imported  coast- 
wise from  northern  manufacturers ;  so  that,  in  reality, 
the  South  taxes  itself  in  an  enormous  sum  annually,  in 
purchasing  dear  northern  goods.  '  Up  to  the  present 
moment,'  says  an  American  writer, f  the  North  has  been 
a  commercial  and  equal  partner  with  the  South  in  all 
the  material  values  or  pecuniary  results  produced  by 
slavery.  In  the  first  place,  the  great  southern  staples, 
cotton,  tobacco,  and  rice,  with  their  vast  valuation, 
constituting  virtually  the  commercial  currency  between 
America  and  Europe,  have  mostly  passed  through  the 
hands  of  northern  merchants  and  factors,  enriching 
them  with  lucrative  profits.  Then,  slavery  rendered 
the  southern  states  dependent  upon  the  North  for  all 
the  manufactured  articles  they  used ;  from  parlour 
books  to  kitchen  brooms;  from  beaver-hats  for  the 
master  to  the  coarsest  chip-hats  for  the  slave ;  from 
penknives  to  ploughs.  Nearly  all  the  goods  they 
used  were  either  manufactured  or  imported  for  them 
by  the  North.  Their  teas,  coffees,  and  other  foreign 
productions  either  came  to  them  through  New  York, 
Philadelphia,  or  Boston,  or  were  brought  to  them 
direct  from  across  the  sea  in  northern  ships.  The 
factories  and  ships  of  the  eastern  states  and  the  fertile 
prairie  lands  of  the  west,  teemed  with  the  industrial 
activities  which  these  important  staples  employed  and 
rewarded.  What  three  millions  of  slaves  grew  under 
the  lash  in  the  South,  made  a  continuous  and  profitable 


94  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

business  for  at  least  twice  that  number  of  freemen  in 
the  North.  The  latter,  by  that  species  of  compromise 
for  which  it  has  been  distinguished,  grasped  at  the 
lion's  share  of  the  dividends  of  this  commercial  part- 
nership. It  coveted  to  sell  to  the  southern  states, 
far  more  than  it  purchased  from  them.  If  they  would 
only  consent  to  a  high  protective  tariff,  which  would 
give  their  market  for  manufactures  exclusively  to  the 
North,  anti-slavery  agitation  in  the  free  states  should 
be  put  down  and  extinguished.  The  mobbing  of 
"abolition  agitators"  in  Boston,  New  York,  Phila- 
delphia, and  other  northern  cities,  was  a  part  of  this 
business  transaction — a  small  instalment  of  the  pur- 
chase-price of  protection.'*  The  case  then  stands  thus : 
the  South  pretends  to  be  democratic,  to  gain  northern 
votes ;  and  the  North  sells  itself  for  public  money.  Or, 
to  come  to  the  subject  in  hand — the  South  votes  for 
Protection,  and  the  North  in  return  votes  for  Slavery. 

Slavery,  at  least  on  its  present  footing,  may  there- 
fore be  said  to  exist,  in  some  degree,  on  commercial 
protection.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  South  is 
unanimous  in  submitting  to  this  thraldom  to  northern 
interests.  At  the  risk  of  breaking  up  the  mutual 
understanding,  southern  orators  and  newspapers  have 
strongly  advocated  free-trade  with  Europe,  and  numer- 
ous have  been  the  projects  to  establish  southern 
harbours,  shipping,  and  commerce — all,  of  course, 
impracticable,  on  account  of  want  of  capital  as  well 
as  want  of  business  calculations  and  habits.  Did  the 
South  really  find  it  safe  to  break  with  the  North,  it 
would,  perhaps,  with  its  legislative  influence  find  little 
difficulty  in  forcing  free-trade  measures ;  and  from 
present  appearances,  acts  of  congress  may  take  this 
direction. 

*  Plan  of  Brotherly  Copartnership.     By  Elihu  Burritt. 


MAN(EUVRING.  95 

It  can  admit  of  little  doubt,  that  as  protection  is 
relaxed,  so  will  a  material  cement  between  North  and 
South  be  dissolved — an  event  so  far  favourable  to  the 
interests  of  freedom.  But  as  long  as  the  principles  of 
democracy  are  in  the  ascendant,  the  anti-slavery  party 
will  not  have  great  cause  to  rejoice.  According  to  the 
confession  of  political  faith,  demonstrated  in  recent 
elections,  democracy  signifies  the  vindication  of  squatter 
sovereignty,  the  boundless  extension  of  the  Union,  and 
consequently  the  illimitable  addition  of  new  slave 
states.  Can  such  principles  be  carried  out?  Are 
they  not  of  a  character  with  all  that  has  been  tolerated 
since  the  acquisition  of  Louisiana?  It  is  confidently 
expected  that  the  rising  and  somewhat  formidable 
opposition  presented  by  the  republican  party,  will 
interpose  to  prevent  the  further  spread  of  slavery. 
Eut  this,  we  fear,  is  only  one  of  those  idle  expecta- 
tions, with  which  the  less  sophisticated  part  of  the 
nation  has  been  long  deceitfully  amused.  The  South 
has  many  methods  of  disarming  opposition.  It  can 
threaten  dissolution  of  the  Union,  and  that  few  can 
endure;  for  devotion  to  the  Union  is  a  predominant 
sentiment  with  almost  every  American.  By  its  vigorous 
action,  the  South  can  retain  possession  of  power,  and 
so  effectually  swamp  the  majority  of  free-state  votes 
in  congress  by  dispensation  of  place,  that  it  laughs 
to  scorn  the  still  unpopular  efforts  of  disunionists 
and  abolitionists. 

Referring  to  the  change  of  sentiment  on  the  subject 
of  slavery  in  the  North,  Mr  Quincy,  whom  we  have 
already  quoted,  shews  how,  step  by  step,  the  principles 
of  freedom  have  sunk  under  party  influences.  Soon 
after  the  adoption  of  the  constitution,  he  says,  'a 
change  of  feeling  began  to  spread  in  the  free  states, 
in  which,  from  envy,  jealousy,  rivalry,  ambition,  and 
other  passions,  parties  arose,  of  which  the  slaveholders 


9G  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

had   the   tact  to    avail    themselves It   was 

the  mutual  interest  which  resulted  from  the  alliance 
between  slavery  and  democracy,  that  at  first  softened, 
and  in  time  changed,  in  Massachusetts,  the  early, 
inherent  detestation  of  negro  slavery.  This  change 
did  not  extend  beyond  the  democratic  party.  But 
after  the  lapse  of  twenty  or  thirty  years,  another 
element  of  slaveholders'  influence  was  introduced.  In 
the  course  of  these  years,  the  profits  arising  from  the 
cultivation  of  cotton  in  the  southern  states,  changed 
the  opinion  of  the  rich  planters  concerning  the  evil 
of  slavery,  which  at  first  began  there  to  be  considered 
as  a  good,  and  then  subsequently  as  a  chief  good.  A 
like  change,  contemporaneously,  came  over  the  free 
states,  in  certain  localities,  where  cotton-spinning  and 
cotton-weaving  began  to  be  a  source  of  wealth,  and 
consequently  of  political  power.  This  interest  acquired 
strength  with  time  and  prosperity,  and  began  to  be 
a  predominating  influence,  about  the  period  the  Whig 
party  was  formed,  constituting  in  truth  the  chief  part 
of  its  cement.  It  was  formed  out  of  the  broken 
materials  of  the  old  parties,  which  time  and  circum- 
stances had  dissolved,  and  was  composed  of  recently 
fledged  politicians,  with  a  mixture  of  some  democrats 
and  some  federalists,  who  joined  the  new  party,  not 
because  its  principles  were  to  their  mind,  but  because 
it  was  the  best  in  the  field.  It  took  the  name  of  Whigs, 
not  from  any  affinity  with  those  of  the  Revolution,  but 
because  the  name  had  a  savour  of  liberty,  and  thus 
formed  a  convenient  cover  for  those  whose  interests 
led  to  the  support  of  slavery.  Boston  became  one  of 
the  localities  where  the  head-quarters  of  the  Whigs 
was  established,  and  of  course  became  identified  with 
the  cotton-spinning  and  cotton-weaving  interests. 
Here,  therefore,  the  interests  of  the  slaveholder  were 
espoused  with  zeal,  under  the  guise  of  upholding  the 


MANOEUVRING.  97 

constitution  of  the  United  States,  of  which  the  pro- 
vision for  returning  runaway  slaves  began  to  appear 
a  most  important  feature.' 

And  so,  by  general  confession,  the  protracted  and 
seemingly  high-souled  contest  to  check  the  progress 
of  slavery,  has  been  only  a  disguise  under  which 
to  advance  the  interests  of  party.  We  are,  in  fact, 
to  understand,  that  until  the  present  time,  the  great 
thing  held  in  view,  is  the  power  of  returning  members 
to  congress  to  suit  particular  purposes,  and  that  an 
objection  to  slavery  has  never  attained  the  position  of  a 
substantive  question — scarcely  been  ever  anything  else 
than  a  convenient  sham.  On  the  seizure  of  Texas, 
and  afterwards  on  the  outbreak  of  the  war  with 
Mexico — whenever  fresh  territory  for  slavery  purposes 
was  to  be  added  to  the  Union — the  Whigs  blazed  forth 
{ Resolutions/  about  l  the  duty  of  the  free  states  not  to 
submit.'  But  with  the  firing  off  of  these  wind-guns, 
'  the  clamour,  the  courage,  and  patriotism  of  the 
Whigs  oozed  away;'  and  on  each  occasion,  when  the 
special  object  for  noisy  demonstration  was  one  way 
or  other  set  at  rest — as  has  been  recently  exhibited 
in  the  case  of  Kansas — down  sunk  all  ebullition  of 
public,  or  more  properly,  party  sentiment.  Are  the 
modern  republicans  to  be  more  sincere  and  trust- 
worthy than  the  now  '  fossilised  *  Whigs?  We  know 
not.  Avowing  a  merely  defensive  policy,  they  have 
disclaimed  any  intention  to  interfere  with  southern 
institutions ;  and  looking  at  the  past,  we  may  be 
pardoned  for  not  entertaining  high  expectations  of 
what  is  to  ensue  should  they  get  into  power — an  event 
in  itself  doubtful.  Meanwhile,  strong  language  is 
occasionally  used  by  c  free-soilers '  in  and  out  of  con- 
gress, denunciatory  of  slaveholders,  and  we  always 
seem  to  be  on  the  eve  of  something  being  done  to  put 
an  end  to  slavery.     Alas !  after  talking  and  scheming 

G 


98  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

for  the  last  fifty  years,  slavery  is  more  vigorous  and 
lifelike  than  ever.  According  to  the  well-known  ratio 
of  increase — about  150,000  per  annum — the  present 
number  of  slaves  in  the  United  States  cannot  be 
fewer  than  4,100,000,  shewing  an  addition  of  900,000 
since  1850.  We  think  it  may  be  safely  averred  that 
party  manoeuvring  has  had  a  fair  trial  and  been  found 
wanting.  Slavery  is  to  be  abated  neither  by  abuse, 
nor  by  selfish  political  partisanship.  The  free  states, 
if  they  feel  inclined,  may  appoint  representatives  in 
congress  who  could  shiver  the  principle  of  squatter 
sovereignty  to  atoms,  and  consequently  reduce  slavery 
to  a  sectional  institution,  preliminary  to  its  extinction. 
How,  in  the  aggregate,  they  have  failed  to  do  so,  let 
late  elections  testify. 


OUTRAGE     ON     MR     SUMNER. 

In  the  spring  and  summer  of  1856,  the  illegal 
proceedings  of  the  Missourians  in  Kansas,  produced 
much  resentment  throughout  the  free  states — discus- 
sions on  the  subject  being,  doubtless,  aggravated  with 
a  covert  reference  to  the  approaching  presidential 
election.  In  congress,  too,  the  struggle  in  Kansas 
produced  a  debate,  whence  arose  an  incident  which 
takes  a  prominent  place  in  the  history  of  American 
slavery.  "We  allude  to  that  most  dastardly  and  disgrace- 
ful assault  on  the  person  of  Mr  Sumner,  which  no 
provocation  could  justify. 

The  Hon.  Charles  Sumner,  for  some  years  a  member 
of  senate  from  Massachusetts,  and  a  lawyer  by  pro- 
fession, is  at  present  one  of  the  most  accomplished 
scholars  and  orators  in  the  United  States — as  a  free- 
soiler,  an  uncompromising  enemy  of  slavery,  and  well 
known  for  his  advocacy  of  all  proper  measures  for 
social  melioration.  If  we  were  asked  to  name  a 
member  of  the  supreme  legislature,  of  whom  the 
American  people  had  reason  to  be  specially  proud, 
we  would  unhesitatingly  refer  to  Charles  Sumner. 
Mild  and  gentlemanly  in  manners,  he  is  the  last 
person  whom  we  could  have  supposed  to  be  the  victim 
of  the  unseemly  outrage,  of  which  we  may  give  a  brief 
account.  On  the  19th  and  20th  of  May  1856,  Mr 
Sumner  delivered  in  his  place  in  the  senate  at 
Washington,  one  of  his  most  effective  harangues  on 
the  iniquities  which  had  been  perpetrated  in  Kansas. 
Calling  on  the  legislature  for  redress,  he  began  by 
describing   the   crime  which  had   been  promoted  by 


100  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

4 

the  Slave  Power — an  oligarchy  exercising  a  thraldom 
which  it  was  his  intention  and  duty  to  expose.  He 
then  proceeded : 

'  Before  entering  upon  the  argument,  I  must 
say  something  of  a  general  character,  particularly 
in  response  to  what  has  fallen  from  senators  who 
have  raised  themselves  to  eminence  on  this  floor  in 
championship  of  human  wrongs;  I  mean  the  senator 
from  South  Carolina  [A.  P.  Butler],  and  the  senator 
from  Illinois  [S.  A.  Douglas],  who,  though  unlike  as 
Don  Quixote  and  Sancho  Panza,  yet,  like  this  couple, 
sally  forth  together  in  the  same  adventure.  I  regret 
much  to  miss  the  elder  senator  from  his  seat;  but 
the  cause,  against  which  he  has  run  a  tilt,  with  such 
activity  of  animosity,  demands  that  the  opportunity 
of  exposing  him  should  not  be  lost;  and  it  is  for  the 
cause  that  I  speak.  The  senator  from  South  Carolina 
has  read  many  books  of  chivalry,  and  believes  himself 
a  chivalrous  knight,  with  sentiments  of  honour  and 
courage.  Of  course  he  has  chosen  a  mistress,  to  whom 
he  has  made  his  vows,  and  who,  though  ugly  to  others, 
is  always  lovely  to  him;  though  polluted  in  the  sight 
of  the  world,  is  chaste  in  his  sight — I  mean  the  harlot, 
Slavery.  For  her,  his  tongue  is  always  profuse  in 
words.  Let  her  be  impeached  in  character,  or  any 
proposition  made  to  shut  her  out  from  the  extension 
of  her  wantonness,  and  no  extravagance  of  manner 
or  hardihood  of  assertion  is  then  too  great  for  this 
senator.  The  frenzy  of  Don  Quixote,  in  behalf  of 
Dulcinea  del  Toboso,  is  all  surpassed.  The  asserted 
rights  of  slavery,  which  shock  equality  of  all  kinds, 
are  cloaked  by  a  fantastic  claim  of  equality.  If 
the  slave  states  cannot  enjoy  what,  in  mockery  of  the 
great  fathers  of  the  republic,  he  misnames  equality 
under  the  constitution — in  other  words,  the  full 
power  in   the   national  territories  to   compel  fellow- 


OUTRAGE    ON   MR   SUMNER.  101 

men  to  unpaid  toil,  to  separate  husband  and  wife, 
and  to  sell  little  children  at  the  auction-block — then, 
sir,  the  chivalric  senator  will  conduct  the  state  of 
South  Carolina  out  of  the  Union!  Heroic  knight! 
Exalted  senator  !  A  second  Moses  come  for  a  second 
exodus ! 

'But  not  content  with  this  poor  menace,  which  we 
have  been  twice  told  was  "  measured,"  the  senator,  in 
the  unrestrained  chivalry  of  his  nature,  has  undertaken 
to  apply  opprobrious  words  to  those  who  differ  from 
him  on  this  floor.  He  calls  them  "  sectional  and 
fanatical;"  and  opposition  to  the  usurpation  in  Kansas, 
he  denounces  as  "an  uncaleulating  fanaticism."  To 
be  sure,  these  charges  lack  all  grace  of  originality, 
and  all  sentiment  of  truth;  but  the  adventurous 
senator  does  not  hesitate.  He  is  the  uncompromising, 
unblushing  representative  on  this  floor  of  a  flagrant 
sectionalism,  which  now  domineers  over  the  republic; 
and  yet  with  a  ludicrous  ignorance  of  his  own  position 
— unable  to  see  himself  as  others  see  him — or  with 
an  effrontery  which  even  his  white  head  ought  not  to 
protect  from  rebuke,  he  applies  to  those  here  who  resist 
his  sectionalism  the  very  epithet  which  designates 
himself.  The  men  who  strive  to  bring  back  the 
government  to  its  original  policy,  when  freedom  and 
not  slavery  was  national,  while  slavery  and  not  freedom 
was  sectional,  he  arraigns  as  sectional.  This  will  not 
do.  It  involves  too  great  a  perversion  of  terms.  I 
tell  that  senator,  that  it  is  to  himself,  and  to  the 
"  organisation "  of  which  he  is  the  ' c  committed 
advocate,"  that  this  epithet  belongs.  I  now  fasten  it 
upon  them.  For  myself,  I  care  little  for  names;  but 
since  the  question  has  been  raised  here,  I  affirm  that 
the  republican  party  of  the  Union  is  in  no  just  sense 
sectional,  but,  more  than  any  other  party,  national; 
and  that  it  now  goes  forth  to  dislodge  from  the  high 


102  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

places  of  the  government,  the  tyrannical  sectionalism  of 
which  the  senator  from  South  Carolina  is  one  of  the 
maddest  zealots. 

'  To  the  charge  of  fanaticism  I  also  reply :  Sir, 
fanaticism  is  found  in  an  enthusiasm  or  exaggeration 
of  opinions,  particularly  on  religious  subjects;  but 
there  may  be  a  fanaticism  for  evil  as  well  as  for  good. 
Now,  I  will  not  deny  that  there  are  persons  among 
us  loving  liberty  too  well  for  their  personal  good,  in  a 
selfish  generation.  Such  there  may  be,  and,  for  the 
sake  of  their  example,  would  that  there  were  more  | 
In  calling  them  "  fanatics,"  you  cast  contumely  upon 
the  noble  army  of  martyrs,  from  the  earliest  day  down 
to  this  hour ;  upon  the  great  tribunes  of  human  rights, 
by  whom  life,  liberty,  and  happiness,  on  earth,  have 
been  secured;  upon  the  long  line  of  devoted  patriots, 
who,  throughout  history,  have  truly  loved  their 
country;  and,  upon  all,  who,  in  noble  aspirations  for 
the  general  good,  and  in  forgetfulness  of  self,  have 
stood  out  before  their  age,  and  gathered  into  their 
generous  bosoms  the  shafts  of  tyranny  and  wrong,  in 
order  to  make  a  pathway  for  truth.  You  discredit 
Luther,  when  alone  he  nailed  his  articles  to  the  door  of 
the  church  at  Wittenberg,  and  then,  to  the  imperial 
demand  that  he  should  retract,  firmly  replied  :  "  Here 
I  stand ;  I  cannot  do  otherwise,  so  help  me  God ! " 
You  discredit  Hampden,  when  alone  he  refused  to  pay 
the  few  shillings  of  ship-money,  and  shook  the  throne 
of  Charles  I. ;  you  discredit  Milton,  when,  amidst  the 
corruptions  of  a  heartless  court,  he  lived  on,  the  lofty 
friend  of  liberty,  above  question  of  suspicion ;  you 
discredit  Russell  and  Sidney,  when,  for  the  sake  of 
their  country,  they  calmly  turned  from  family  and 
friends,  to  tread  the  narrow  steps  of  the  scaffold;  you 
discredit  those  early  founders  of  American  institutions, 
who  preferred  the  hardships  of  a  wilderness,  surrounded 


OUTRAGE    ON    MR    SUMNER.  ]03 

by  a  savage  foe,  to  injustice  on  beds  of  ease ;  you 
discredit  our  later  fathers,  who,  few  in  numbers  and 
weak  in  resources,  yet  strong  in  their  cause,  did  not- 
hesitate  to  brave  the  mighty  power  of  England,  already 
encircling  the  globe  with  her  morning  drum-beats. 
Yes,  sir,  of  such  are  the  fanatics  of  history,  according 
to  the  senator.  But  I  tell  that  senator,  that  there  are 
characters  badly  eminent,  of  whose  fanaticism  there  can 
be  no  question.  Such  were  the  ancient  Egyptians,  who 
worshipped  divinities  in  brutish  forms;  the  Druids, 
who  darkened  the  forests  of  oak,  in  which  they  lived, 
by  sacrifices  of  blood ;  the  Mexicans,  who  surrendered 
countless  victims  to  the  propitiation  of  their  obscene 
idols  j  the  Spaniards,  who,  under  Alva,  sought  to  force 
the  Inquisition  upon  Holland,  by  a  tyranny  kindred  to 
that  now  employed  to  force  slavery  upon  Kansas ;  and 
such  were  the  Algerines,  when  in  solemn  conclave,  after 
listening  to  a  speech  not  unlike  that  of  the  senator 
from  South  Carolina,  they  resolved  to  continue  the 
slavery  of  white  Christians,  and  to  extend  it  to  the 
countrymen  of  Washington !  Ay,  sir,  extend  it !  And 
in  this  same  dreary  catalogue  faithful  history  must 
record  all  who  now,  in  an  enlightened  age,  and  in  a  land 
of  boasted  freedom,  stand  up,  in  perversion  of  the 
constitution,  and  in  denial  of  immortal  truth,  to  fasten 
a  new  shackle  upon  their  fellow-man.  If  the  senator 
wishes  to  see  fanatics,  let  him  look  round  among  his 
own  associates ;  let  him  look  at  himself. 

'But  I  have  not  done  with  the  senator.  There  is 
another  matter  regarded  by  him  of  such  consequence, 
that  he  interpolated  it  into  the  speech  of  the  senator 
from  New  Hampshire  [J.  P.  Hale],  and  also  announced 
that  he  had  prepared  himself  with  it,  to  take  in  his 
pocket  all  the  way  to  Boston,  when  he  expected  to 
address  the  people  of  that  community.  On  this  account, 
and  for  the  sake  of  truth,  I  stop  for  one  moment,  and 


104  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

tread  it  to  the  earth.  The  North,  according  to  the 
senator,  was  engaged  in  the  slave-trade,  and  helped  to 
introduce  slaves  into  the  southern  states ;  and  this 
undeniable  fact  he  proposed  to  establish  by  statistics, 
in  stating  which  his  errors  surpassed  his  sentences  in 
number.  But  I  let  these  pass  for  the  present,  that  I 
may  deal  with  his  argument.  Pray,  sir,  is  the  acknow- 
ledged turpitude  of  a  departed  generation  to  become 
an  example  for  us?  And  yet  the  suggestion  of  the 
senator,  if  entitled  to  any  consideration  in  this 
discussion,  must  have  this  extent.  I  join  my  friend 
from  New  Hampshire  in  thanking  the  senator  from 
South  Carolina  for  adducing  this  instance ;  for  it  gives 
me  an  opportunity  to  say,  that  the  northern  merchants, 
with  homes  in  Boston,  Bristol,  Newport,  New  York, 
and  Philadelphia,  who  catered  for  slavery  during  the 
years  of  the  slave-trade,  are  the  lineal  progenitors  of 
the  northern  men,  with  homes  in  these  places,  who  lend 
themselves  to  slavery  in  our  day;  and  especially  that 
all,  whether  north  or  south,  who  take  part,  directly  or 
indirectly,  in  the  conspiracy  against  Kansas,  do  but 
continue  the  work  of  the  slave-traders,  which  you 
condemn.  It  is  true,  too  true,  alas  !  that  our  fathers 
were  engaged  in  this  traffic ;  but  that  is  no  apology  for 
it.  And  in  repelling  the  authority  of  this  example,  I 
repel  also  the  trite  argument  founded  on  the  earlier 
example  of  England.  It  is  true  that  our  mother- 
country,  at  the  peace  of  Utrecht,  extorted  from  Spain 
the  Assiento  Contract,  securing  the  monopoly  of  the 
slave-trade  with  the  Spanish  colonies,  as  the  whole  price 
of  all  the  blood  of  great  victories;  that  she  higgled 
at  Aix-la-Chapelle  for  another  lease  of  this  exclusive 
traffic;  and  again,  at  the  treaty  of  Madrid,  clung  to 
the  wretched  piracy.  It  is  true,  that  in  this  spirit  the 
power  of  the  mother-country  was  prostituted  to  the 
same  base   ends    in    her  American   colonies,   against 


OUTRAGE    ON    MR    SUMNER.  105 

indignant  protests  from  our  fathers.  All  these  things 
now  rise  up  in  judgment  against  her.  Let  us  not 
follow  the  senator  from  South  Carolina  to  do  the 
very  evil  to-day,  which  in  another  generation  we 
condemn/ 

Next,  referring  to  Mr  Douglas,  senator  from  Illinois, 
he  proceeded:  ' Standing  on  this  floor,  the  senator 
issued  his  rescript,  requiring  submission  to  the 
usurped  power  of  Kansas;  and  this  was  accompanied 
by  a  manner — all  his  own — such  as  befits  the 
tyrannical  threat.  Very  well.  Let  the  senator  try. 
I  tell  him  now  that  he  cannot  enforce  any  such 
submission.  The  senator,  with  the  slave-power  at  his 
back,  is  strong,  but  he  is  not  strong  enough  for  this 
purpose.  He  is  bold.  He  shrinks  from  nothing.  Like 
Danton,  he  may  cry,  "  Uaudace  !  Vaudace !  toujours 
faudace!"  but  even  his  audacity  cannot  compass  this 
work.  The  senator  copies  the  British  officer,  who,  with 
boastful  swagger,  said  that  with  the  hilt  of  his  sword 
he  would  cram  the  "  stamps  "  down  the  throats  of  the 
American  people;  and  he  will  meet  a  similar  failure. 
He  may  convulse  this  country  with  civil  feud.  Like 
the  ancient  madman,  he  may  set  fire  to  this  temple  of 
constitutional  liberty,  grander  than  Ephesian  dome ; 
but  he  cannot  enforce  obedience  to  that  tyrannical 
usurpation. 

( The  senator  dreams  that  he  can  subdue  the  North. 
He  disclaims  the  open  threat,  but  his  conduct  still 
implies  it.  How  little  that  senator  knows  himself, 
or  the  strength  of  the  cause  which  he  persecutes ! 
He  is  but  a  mortal  man;  against  him  is  an  immortal 
principle.  With  finite  power,  he  wrestles  with  the 
infinite,  and  he  must  fall.  Against  him  are  stronger 
battalions  than  any  marshalled  by  mortal  arm — the 
inborn,  ineradicable,  invincible  sentiments  of  the 
human  heart ;  against  him  is  nature  in  all  her  subtile 


106  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

forces;  against  him  is  God.     Let   him  try  to  subdue 
these/ 

We  need  not  follow  Mr  Sumner  through  his 
lengthened  speech,  for  the  narrative  of  the  struggle 
in  Kansas,  which  formed  its  main  feature,  has  been 
already  presented  in  these  pages.  In  concluding,  he 
admonitorily  appealed  to  the  sense  of  justice  of  the 
people.  'The  contest  which,  beginning  in  Kansas, 
has  reached  us,  will  soon  be  transferred  from  congress 
to  a  broader  stage,  where  every  citizen  will  be  not 
only  spectator,  but  actor ;  and  to  their  judgment  I 
confidently  appeal.  To  the  people,  now  on  the  eve 
of  exercising  the  electoral  franchise,  in  choosing  a 
chief  magistrate  of  the  republic,  I  appeal,  to  vindicate 
the  electoral  franchise  in  Kansas.  Let  the  ballot-box 
of  the  Union,  with  multitudinous  might,  protect  the 
ballot-box  in  that  territory.  Let  the  voters  everywhere, 
while  rejoicing  in  their  own  rights,  help  to  guard  the 
equal  rights  of  distant  fellow-citizens ;  that  the  shrines 
of  popular  institutions,  now  desecrated,  may  be  sancti- 
fied anew ;  that  the  ballot-box,  now  plundered,  may  be 
restored ;  and  that  the  cry,  "  I  am  an  American  citizen," 
may  not  be  sent  forth  in  vain  against  outrage  of  every 
kind.  In  just  regard  for  free  labour  in  that  territory, 
which  it  is  sought  to  blast  by  unwelcome  association 
with  slave  labour;  in  Christian  sympathy  with  the 
slave,  whom  it  is  proposed  to  task  and  to  sell  there ; 
in  stern  condemnation  of  the  crime  which  has  been 
consummated  on  that  beautiful  soil;  in  rescue  of 
fellow-citizens,  now  subjugated  to  a  tyrannical  usurpa- 
tion; in  dutiful  respect  for  the  early  fathers,  whose 
aspirations  are  now  ignobly  thwarted;  in  the  name 
of  the  constitution,  which  has  been  outraged — of  the 
laws  trampled  down — of  justice  banished — of  humanity 
degraded — of  peace  destroyed — of  freedom  crushed  to 
earth;    and,   in   the   name   of  the  Heavenly   Father, 


OUTRAGE    ON    MR    SUMNER.  1C7 

whose  service  is  perfect  freedom,  I  make  this  last 
appeal.' 

Candidly  considered,  there  were  some  passages 
in  this  speech  neither  in  the  best  taste,  nor  in 
accordance  with  English  notions  of  parliamentary 
licence ;  but  there  was  nothing  out  of  the  usual  routine 
of  congressional  harangues  on  occasions  of  party 
difference ;  and  we  have  to  remember  that  Mr  Sumner 
spoke  under  a  deep  sense  of  the  grievous  wrongs  com- 
mitted in  Kansas,  through  the  agency  of  the  party 
of  which  Mr  Butler  and  Mr  Douglas  were,  in  a  sense, 
the  leaders.  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  Mr  Sumner's 
harangue,  nothing  could  justify  the  form  of  reprisal, 
a  bare  allusion  to  which  shocks  every  sensitive 
feeling. 

Mr  Sumner's  speech  enraged  the  extreme  southern 
party  in  congress;  and  as  is  now  alleged,  the  Hon. 
Preston  S.  Brooks,*  member  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, from  South  Carolina,  was  appointed  to  commit 
an  assault  on  Mr  Sumner,  under  the  name  of  a 
chastisement  for  his  allusions  to  Mr  Butler,  who  was 
at  the  time  absent.  Whether  Brooks  so  acted  from 
the  incitement  of  his  friends  or  only  from  his  own  will, 
is  indifferent.  On  the  22d  of  May,  the  senate  adjourned 
at  an  early  hour,  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  a 
member ;  but  after  the  adjournment,  as  is  not  unusual 
with  senators,  Mr  Sumner  remained  at  his  desk 
writing.  There  were  also  present  Mr  Crittenden,  of 
Kentucky,  and  several  other  senators,  who  had  not 
left  the  chamber,  some  of  the  subordinate  officers,  and 
a  number  of  other  persons.  While  Mr  Sumner  was 
seated  writing,  Mr  Brooks,  accompanied  by  Mr  Keitt, 


*  Members  of  both  brandies  of  congress  receive  the  title"  of  Honourable, 
which  they  seem  to  retain  through  life — a  curious  example  of  titular 
distinction  in  a  republican  country. 


108  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

from  tlie  same  state,  entered,  and  forthwith  Brooks 
with  a  cane  struck  Mr  Sumner  a  severe  blow  over 
the  head.  Mr  Sumner  sprang  from  his  seat,  hut 
staggered  under  the  effect  of  the  blow,  reeling  about 
and  falling  partially  over  the  desk.  Notwithstanding 
his  helpless  condition,  Brooks  repeated  his  blows  with 
great  force  and  rapidity.  Mr  Sumner,  who  lay  on 
the  floor  in  a  state  of  partial  stupor,  was  raised  by  his 
friends,  and  carried  into  the  outer  apartment,  where 
medical  service  was  promptly  procured.  No  one  of 
the  many  persons  about,  interfered  to  check  the 
outrage,  the  explanation  of  this  somewhat  strange 
circumstance  being  that  the  attack  was  sudden  and 
unexpected. 

Such  is  the  substance  of  the  reports  given  of  this 
horrible  affair  in  the  New  York  and  Boston  newspapers. 
The  following  is  the  statement  of  Mr  Sumner : 

1 1  attended  the  senate  as  usual  on  Thursday,  the 
22d  of  May.  After  some  formal  business,  a  message 
was  received  from  the  House  of  Representatives, 
announcing  the  death  of  a  member  of  that  body  from 
Missouri.  This  was  followed  by  a  brief  tribute  to  the 
deceased  from  Mr  Geyer,  of  Missouri,  when,  according 
to  usage  and  out  of  respect  to  the  deceased,  the  senate 
adjourned  at  once.  Instead  of  leaving  the  senate- 
chamber  with  the  rest  of  the  senators,  on  the  adjourn- 
ment, I  continued  in  my  seat,  occupied  with  my  pen, 
and  while  thus  intent,  in  order  to  be  in  season  for  the 
mail,  which  was  soon  to  close,  I  was  approached  by 
several  persons  who  desired  to  converse  with  me,  but  I 
answered  them  promptly  and  briefly,  excusing  myself 
for  the  reason  that  I  was  much  engaged.  When  the 
last  of  these  persons  left  me,  I  drew  my  arm-chair  close 
to  my  desk,  and  with  my  legs  under  the  desk  continued 
writing.  My  attention  at  this  time  was  so  entirely 
drawn  from  all  other  subjects  that,  though  there  must 


OUTRAGE    ON    MR    SUMNER.  109 

have  been  many  persons  in  the  senate,  I  saw  nohody. 
While  thus  intent,  with  my  head  bent  over  my  writing, 
I  was  addressed  by  a  person  who  approached  the  front 
of  my  desk;  I  was  so  entirely  absorbed  that  I  was 
not  aware  of  his  presence  until  I  heard  my  name 
pronounced.  As  I  looked  up  with  pen  in  hand,  I  saw 
a  tall  man,  whose  countenance  was  not  familiar, 
standing  directly  over  me,  and  at  the  same  moment 
caught  these  words :  "  I  have  read  your  speech  twice 
over  carefully;  it  is  a  libel  on  South  Carolina,  and 
Mr  Butler,  who  is  a  relative  of  mine."  While  these 
words  were  still  passing  from  his  lips,  he  commenced 
a  succession  of  blows  with  a  heavy  cane  on  my  bare 
head,  by  the  first  of  which  I  was  stunned  so  as  to 
lose  my  sight.  I  saw  no  longer  my  assailant,  nor 
any  other  person  or  object  in  the  room.  What  I  did 
afterward  was  done  almost  unconsciously,  acting  under 
the  instincts  of  self-defence.  With  head  already  bent 
down,  I  rose  from  my  seat — wrenching  up  my  desk, 
which  was  screwed  to  the  floor — and  then  pressing 
forward,  while  my  assailant  continued  his  blows.  I 
had  no  other  consciousness  until  I  found  myself  ten 
feet  forward  in  front  of  my  desk,  lying  on  the  floor 
of  the  senate,  with  my  bleeding  head  supported  on 
the  knee  of  a  gentleman  whom  I  soon  recognised  by 
voice  and  manner  as  Mr  Morgan,  of  New  York.  Other 
persons  there  were  about  me  offering  me  friendly 
assistance,  but  I  did  not  recognise  any  of  them. 
Others  there  were  at  a  distance,  looking  on  and  offering 
no  assistance,  of  whom  I  recognised  only  Mr  Douglas, 
of  Illinois,  Mr  Toombs,  of  Georgia,  and  I  thought  also 
my  assailant  standing  between  them.  I  was  helped 
from  the  floor  and  conducted  into  the  lobby  of  the 
senate,  where  I  was  placed  upon  a  sofa.  Of  those  who 
helped  me  here,  I  have  no  recollection.  As  I  entered 
the  lobby,  I  recognised  Mr  Slidell,  of  Louisiana,  who 


110  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

retreated,  but  I  recognised  no  one  else  until  I  felt  a 
friendly  grasp  of  the  hand,  which  seemed  to  come  from 
Mr  Campbell,  of  Ohio.  I  have  a  vague  impression  that 
Mr  Bright,  president  of  the  senate,  spoke  to  me  while 
I  was  on  the  floor  of  the  senate  or  in  the  lobby.  I 
make  this  statement  in  answer  to  the  interrogatory 
of  the  committee,  and  offer  it  as  presenting  completely 
all  my  recollections  of  the  assault  and  of  the  attending 
circumstances,  whether  immediately  before  or  imme- 
diately after.  I  desire  to  add,  that  beside  the  words 
which  I  have  given  as  uttered  by  my  assailant,  I  have 
an  indistinct  recollection  of  the  words  "  old  man ;" 
but  these  are  so  enveloped  in  the  mist  which  ensued 
from  the  first  blow,  that  I  am  not  sure  whether  they 
were  uttered  or  not/ 

Mr  Sumner's  recovery  was  slow  and  doubtful,  and 
till  the  present  time,  he  has  not  been  able  to  resume 
his  senatorial  duties.  His  appeal  for  legal  redress  was 
so  poorly  answered — damages  being  awarded  to  the 
amount  of  only  300  dollars — that  faith  in  public 
justice,  we  should  think,  must  be  considerably  shaken. 
The  most  extraordinary  circumstance  connected  with 
the  outrage,  was  the  approval  of  Brooks's  proceedings 
in  the  southern  states.  We  may  gather  general 
opinion  from  the  following  tirade  in  the  Richmond 
Inquirer,  of  June  12  : 

'  In  the  main,  the  press  of  the  South  applaud 
the  conduct  of  Mr  Brooks,  without  condition  or 
limitation.  Our  approbation,  at  least,  is  entire  and 
unreserved.  We  consider  the  act  good  in  conception, 
better  in  execution,  and  best  of  all  in  consequence. 
The  vulgar  abolitionists  in  the  senate  are  getting 
above  themselves.  They  have  been  humoured  until 
they  forget  their  position.  They  have  grown  saucy, 
and  dare  to  be  impudent  to  gentlemen  !  Now,  they 
are  a  low,  mean,  scurvy  set,  with  some  little  book- 


OUTRAGE    ON    MR    SUMNER.  Ill 

learning,  but  as  utterly  devoid  of  spirit  or  honour  as 
a  pack  of  curs.  Intrenched  behind  "  privilege,"  they 
fancy  they  can  slander  the  South,  and  insult  its 
representatives  with  impunity.  The  truth  is,  they 
have  been  suffered  to  run  too  long  without  collars. 
They  must  be  lashed  into  submission.  Sumner,  in 
particular,  ought  to  have  nine-and-thirty  early  every 
morning.  He  is  a  great  strapping  fellow,  and  could 
stand  the  cowhide  beautifully.  Brooks  frightened 
him,  and  at  the  first  blow  of  the  cane,  he  bellowed 
like  a  bull-calf.  In  the  absence  of  an  adequate  law, 
southern  gentlemen  must  protect  their  own  honour 
and  feelings.  It  is  an  idle  mockery  to  challenge  one 
of  these  scullions.  It  is  equally  useless  to  attempt 
to  disgrace  them.  They  are  insensible  to  shame,  and 
can  be  brought  to  reason  only  by  an  application  of 
cowhide  or  gutta-percha.  Let  them  once  understand 
that  for  every  vile  word  spoken  against  the  South,  they 
will  suffer  so  many  stripes,  and  they  will  soon  learn 
to  behave  themselves  like  decent  dogs — they  can  never 
be  gentlemen.  Mr  Brooks  has  initiated  this  salutary 
discipline,  and  he  deserves  applause  for  the  bold, 
judicious  manner  in  which  he  chastised  the  scamp 
Sumner.  It  was  a  proper  act,  done  at  the  proper 
time,  and  in  the  proper  place. 

c  Of  all  places  on  earth,  the  senate-chamber,  the 
theatre  of  his  vituperative  exploits,  was  the  very  spot 
where  Sumner  should  have  been  made  to  suffer  for 
his  violation  of  the  decencies  of  decorous  debate,  and 
for  his  brutal  denunciation  of  a  venerable  statesman. 
It  was  literally  and  entirely  proper  that  he  should  be 
stricken  down  and  beaten  just  beside  the  desk  against 
which  he  leaned  as  he  fulminated  his  filthy  utterances 
through  the  capitol.  It  is  idle  to  talk  of  the  sanctity 
of  the  senate-chamber,  since  it  is  polluted  by  the 
presence  of  such  fellows  as  Wilson,  and  Sumner,  and 


112  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

Wade.  They  have  desecrated  it,  and  cannot  now  fly 
to  it  as  to  a  sanctuary  from  the  lash  of  vengeance. 
We  trust  other  gentlemen  will  follow  the  example 
of  Mr  Brooks,  that  so  a  curb  may  be  imposed  upon 
the  truculence  and  audacity  of  abolition  speakers.  If 
need  be,  let  us  have  a  caning  or  cowhiding  every  day. 
If  the  worst  come  to  the  worst,  so  much  the  sooner, 
so  much  the  better.' 

The  ovations  to  Brooks  in  South  Carolina — the 
approval  of  his  conduct  at  public  meetings — the 
presenting  him  with  elegantly  mounted  canes,  and  so 
forth,  are  vividly  in  the  recollection  of  every  reader. 
No  event,  take  it  from  first  to  last,  has  been  so 
derogatory  to  the  American  character  in  Europe ; 
although,  of  course,  it  is  allowed  that  blame  should 
rest,  where  it  has  been  indignantly  put  by  the  unani- 
mous voice  of  the  people  of  Massachusetts.  We  may 
know  what  that  voice  was,  as  well  as  learn  a  few 
useful  particulars  as  to  the  relationship  of  North  and 
South,  from  a  speech  delivered  at  Cambridge,  near 
Boston,  by  Mr  Richard  Dana,  junior,  author  of  the 
popular  work,  Two  Years  Before  the  Mast.  The 
following  are  the  principal  passages : 

'  The  last  census  has  demonstrated  what  many  have 
declared,  but  few  have  believed,  that  under  the  form 
of  a  republic,  this  country  is  now,  and  has  long  been, 
governed  by  an  oligarchy.  In  the  free  states  there 
are  now  about  17,000,000  free  inhabitants  and  no 
slaves.  In  the  slave  states  there  are  4,000,000  slaves, 
owned  by  350,000  owners.  These  350,000  owners  of 
slaves  own  the  valuable  land  and  the  labourers,  and 
monopolise  the  government  of  the  slave  states.  The 
non-slaveholding  free  population  is  of  little  account. 
This  forms  the  privileged  class,  the  oligarchy.  It  is  not 
for  the  purpose  of  making  them  odious  that  I  use  this 
name.     It  is  the  only  proper  designation.     Including 


OUTRAGE    ON    MR    SUMNER.  113 

the  families  of  tlie  owners,  there   may  be  2,000,000 
persons  in  the  dominant  class  or  order. 

'This  oligarchy  has  governed  the  whole  country, 
and  governs  it  now  with  a  sway  of  increasing  demands 
and  exactions.  Of  seventeen  presidential  elections, 
natives  of  slave  states  have  carried  thirteen,  and  natives 
of  free  states  four.  Of  the  life  of  our  government, 
forty-nine  years  have  been  passed  under  slaveholding 
chief  magistrates,  and  eighteen  under  non-slaveholders. 
They  have  always  had  a  majority  of  the  judges  of  the 
supreme  court  of  the  United  States.  The  population, 
the  arts,  the  sciences,  commerce,  inventions,  copyrights, 
manufactures,  all  are  with  the  free  states.  Yet  the 
slave  states  hold,  and  have  always  held  the  judiciary. 
They  almost  monopolised  the  army  and  navy  when 
appointments  were  open.  At  this  moment,  though 
there  are  sixteen  free  states,  and  fifteen  slave  states, 
a  majority  of  the  senate  are  slaveholders.  To  make 
a  long  story  short,  there  has  never  been  a  question 
between  the  slave  power  and  the  free  power,  on  the 
floor  of  congress,  in  which  the  slave  power  has  not 
triumphed. 

'I  will  not  go  over  the  recital  of  the  successive 
defeats  of  freedom  and  aggressions  of  slavery.  The 
subjugation  of  Kansas  is  the  latest  triumph.  The 
subjugation  of  free  speech  is  its  object  now.  At  first, 
you  recollect,  no  man  can  have  forgotten,  the  right 
of  petition  was  denied.  For  that  John  Quincy  Adams 
perilled  all  a  public  man  has  to  peril,  and  life  itself. 
Next,  through  resolves  of  congress  and  platforms  of 
both  the  great  parties,  they  tried  again  to  suppress 
free  speech.  Now,  they  chastise  it  by  violence,  in  the 
very  sanctuary  of  its  refuge.  No  man  has  received 
a  national  nomination  that  is  not  acceptable  to  them. 
No  man  can  be  confirmed  in  a  national  office,  from 
Secretaiy  of  State   or  minister  at  St  James's  to  the 


114  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

humblest  postmaster,  that  is  not  satisfactory  to  them. 
Mr  Everett's  appointment  at  St  James's  hung  in 
suspense  because  he  was  suspected  of  having  uttered, 
somewhere,  a  sentiment  hostile  to  slavery  and  its 
interests.  The  country  is  one  vast  Dionysius's  ear. 
Every  whisper  in  the  closet  is  transmitted  and  punished. 
Before  parting  to-night,  let  me  ask  any  doubting 
friend,  if  there  be  one  here,  what  provocation  more 
he  proposes  to  wait  for  ?  They  have  added  slave 
states  by  a  coup  d'etat ;  will  you  wait  until  they  have 
added  Cuba  or  Central  America?  They  have  tried 
to  force  slavery  on  Kansas ;  will  you  wait  until  they 
have  succeeded?  They  have  violated  one  solemn 
compact;  how  many  more  must  they  violate,  before 
you  will  assert  your  right?  They  have  struck  down 
a  senator  in  his  place.  Some  of  their  presses  have 
designated  the  next  victim ;  will  you  wait  until  he 
has  fallen?' 

The  assault  by  Mr  Brooks  did  not  escape  reproof  in 
the  House  of  Representatives.  He  resigned,  and  was 
re-elected.  Although  his  conduct  so  far  met  with  the 
approval  of  his  constituents,  although  feted  and  lauded, 
Brooks  was  probably  conscious  that  an  indelible  stain 
would  rest  on  his  reputation.  At  Washington,  in  the 
early  part  of  the  session  1856-7,  he  is  said  to  have 
encountered  cold  looks  from  former  acquaintances. 
His  fate  was  remarkable.  He  was  suddenly  seized 
with  an  inflammation  of  the  throat,  resulting  in  croup. 
By  this  fatal  disease,  his  life  was  abruptly  and  painfully 
terminated,  January  27,  1857 — an  event  which,  from 
all  the  associated  circumstances,  could  hardly  fail  to 
send  a  chill  through  that  department  of  southern 
society  which  had  indiscreetly  applauded  his  outrage. 


BLACK     LAWS     AND     USAGES. 

The  condition  of  slaves  in  the  United  States  has  been 
so  luminously  described  in  the  recent  works  of  Mrs 
Stowe  and  others,  that  further  explanations  do  not 
seem  to  be  necessary.  It  is  now  pretty  well  known, 
that,  by  the  laws  of  the  southern  states,  a  slave,  what- 
ever be  his  colour,  belongs  as  a  piece  of  movable 
property  to  his  master,  who  may  sell  him,  put  him 
to  any  kind  of  labour  he  deems  advisable,  appropriate 
his  earnings,  and  feed,  clothe,  and  retain  him  in  an 
abject  servitude  till  the  end  of  his  days.  Like  one  of 
the  lower  animals,  a  slave  is  a  '  chattel  personal/  a 
thing  without  rights ;  his  duty  being  unqualified  sub- 
mission to  the  will  of  his  proprietor.  To  carry  out 
the  comparison  with  the  lower  animals,  the  slave  cannot 
legally  marry.  He  may  indeed  go  through  the  cere- 
monial of  marriage,  but  the  tie  is  altogether  invalid. 
As  regards  progeny,  the  law  is,  that  children  follow  the 
condition  of  the  mother ;  children  born  in  slavery, 
therefore,  are  the  property  of  the  owner.  A  slave 
can  raise  no  suit  at  law  on  claim  of  damage  or  assault. 
If  injured  by  a  third  party,  his  master  may  alone  sue 
for  damages,  in  the  same  manner  as  if  he  complained 
of  an  injury  done  to  his  horse.  The  master  may 
punish  his  slave  without  mercy;  whip,  cudgel,  brand, 
and  torture  him  as  he  thinks  fit.  Though  owners  may 
not  lawfully  and  wilfully  put  their  slaves  to  death, 
practically,  according  to  all  accounts,  they  occasionally 
do  so,  through  the  impulse  of  passion,  to  the  sacrifice 
of  their  property.  At  all  events,  whatever  cruelties  are 
perpetrated  on  a  southern   estate,  no   slave   can  bear 


116  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

witness  against  them,  for  legally  he  is  not  permitted  to 
make  a  declaration  on  oath  against  whites.  Worthless, 
unfriended,  it  appears  to  be  still  a  question  in  law 
whether  he  is  a  reasonable  being. 

The  natural  increase  of  slaves  on  a  plantation  causes 
a  continual  pressure  on  the  means  of  owners.  More 
are  born  than  are  wanted  for  local  purposes,  and  the 
overplus,  as  a  matter  of  necessity,  must  be  sold  to 
traders  for  transfer  to  public  markets;  and  on  such 
occasions  there  occur  most  distressing  separations 
among  members  of  families.  There  is,  however,  reason 
to  believe,  that  in  many  instances,  planters  part  with 
their  servants  with  reluctance,  and  only  under  the 
pressure  of  extreme  necessity.  We  do  not  mention  the 
fact  from  our  own  knowledge,  but  from  what  we  heard 
stated  in  America,  that  in  some  cases,  masters  are 
relieved  of  an  embarrassment,  by  slaves  asking  to  be 
sold ;  the  slaves  in  such  cases  being  influenced  by  the 
false  representations  of  decoy-negroes  sent  to  recruit 
for  labourers.  That  there  frequently  exists  the  most 
kindly  feeling  between  the  families  of  proprietors  and 
their  slave  dependents,  is  undeniable ;  and  it  is  the 
spectacle  of  this  harmony  between  master  and  servant, 
that  fascinates  travellers  in  the  South,  and  induces  them 
to  declare  that  slavery  is  by  no  means  so  bad  a  thing 
as  it  is  usually  represented. 

Unhappily,  the  slave  has  no  security  in  the  indulgence 
of  his  proprietor.  He  is  at  all  times  liable  to  be  sold 
on  account  of  the  death,  insolvency,  not  to  speak  of 
the  ordinary  necessities,  of  his  owner ;  and  may  at  any 
moment  be  precipitated  from  a  state  of  comparative 
comfort  to  a  condition  of  utter  wretchedness.  Some 
owners,  affected  by  the  evils  of  slavery,  would,  though 
at  a  great  pecuniary  sacrifice,  emancipate  their  slaves, 
and  so  leave  them  to  assume  the  status  of  free 
labourers.     But,  independently  of  a  general  dislike  of 


BLACK   LAWS    AND    USAGES.  117 

free  labour  in  the  South,  there  are  laws  to  check  the 
benevolent  intentions  of  slave-owners.  Emancipations 
take  place  in  particular  circumstances,  and  by  tolerance 
in  certain  states ;  but  as  a  general  rule,  an  owner 
desiring  to  liberate  his  slaves  would  need  to  send  them 
into  the  free  states  or  out  of  the  country.  Were 
he  to  emancipate  them  in  defiance  of  this  law,  without 
exiling  them,  they  would  be  seized  and  sold  by  the 
public  authorities;  by  which  arrangement  liberation 
is,  to  a  great  extent,  impracticable.  These  difficulties, 
however,  cannot  be  deemed  an  apology  for  slavery. 
If  owners  were  generally  disposed  to  adopt  means 
for  securing  freedom  to  their  slaves,  they  could 
surely  agitate  for  a  reconsideration  of  the  state  laws 
which  at  present  hamper  their  operations.  Accord- 
ing to  southern  notions,  the  freeing  of  slaves  is 
immoral — a  crime  against  social  order.  The  slaves, 
consequently,  are  not  allowed  to  purchase  their  own 
freedom,  by  the  savings  of  extra  industry.  The 
whole  earnings  of  a  slave  belong  to  his  master; 
unless  by  particular  favour,  he  can  retain  nothing 
for  himself.  In  Brazil,  as  was  the  law  in  the  British 
West  Indies,  slaves  are  humanely  entitled  to  certain 
holidays,  which  are  at  their  own  disposal,  by  which 
arrangement  they  are  enabled  to  cultivate  small  patches 
of  land,  and  accumulate  wherewith  to  buy  their 
freedom.  In  the  United  States,  the  slaves  can  legally 
claim  no  holidays;  though  a  week  at  Christmas  is 
usually  granted,  and  in  most  quarters  they  are  allowed 
to  be  at  rest  on  Sunday.  This  denial  of  the  power  of 
labouring  to  buy  themselves  from  their  owners,  forms 
a  feature  in  American  slavery  which  distinguishes  it 
from  aught  in  ancient  or  modern  times.  The  slavery 
of  Russia  is  liberty  itself,  in  comparison.  A  natural 
result  is  the  desire  to  escape,  in  defiance  of  all  pre- 
cautions  to   the  contrary.     Large   numbers  flee  from 


118  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

slavery,  and  through  the  aid  of  friends  at  different 
parts  of  the  country,  make  their  way  to  Western 
Canada.  One  person  with  whom  we  have  been 
made  acquainted,  has  afforded  means  of  escape  to 
upwards  of  2000  slaves,  and  we  doubt  not  he  will,  from 
a  conscientious  feeling  of  duty,  help  away  many  more. 
So  numerous  are  now  the  channels  of  escape,  that 
towards  the  more  northern  sections  of  the  slave  states, 
owners  begin  to  entertain  a  sense  of  considerable 
insecurity  in  their  human  property. 

Besides  fears  on  this  account,  slave-owners  over 
the  whole  South  are  less  or  more  under  a  constant 
apprehension  of  outbreak;  the  best  evidence  of  their 
uneasiness  being  the  rigorous  measures  of  coercion 
by  which  their  power  is  sustained.  As  a  security 
against  plots  for  insurrection  or  escape,  the  slave  in 
the  United  States  is  necessarily  kept  in  ignorance.  It 
is  illegal  to  teach  him  to  read;  and  although  some 
masters  and  mistresses  evade  the  law  in  this  respect, 
the  slaves  generally  know  nothing  of  the  arts  of  reading 
and  writing.  Further,  they  are  not  allowed  to  travel 
from  home  without  written  passes,  which,  in  their 
ignorance  of  letters,  they  are  unable  to  counterfeit. 
The  seizure  and  imprisonment  of  vagrant  slaves  form 
a  staple  subject  of  advertisements  in  southern  news- 
papers; and  so  likewise  is  the  tracking  of  runaways 
by  means  of  ' negro  dogs'  a  matter  of  frequent 
announcement. 

Such  is  an  outline  of  the  ordinary  condition  of 
American  slaves — in  some  states  better,  and  in  other 
states  worse,  according  to  circumstances.  An  antici- 
pated insurrection,  for  example,  being  always  followed 
with  additional  severities;  such  as,  preventing  the 
slaves  from  assembling  for  religious  worship,  or  from 
enjoying  various  petty  indulgences.  Among  the  fifteen 
slave    states,   that    of   Delaware   possesses    the  most 


BLACK    LAWS    AND    USAGES.  119 

liberal  slave  code;  and  but  for  party  manoeuvring, 
a  small  exertion  would  add  it  to  the  number  of  the 
free  states.  In  travelling  southward,  the  stranger 
becomes  aware  that  he  has  passed  the  boundary  of 
freedom,  by  the  general  aspect  of  dilapidation  in  the 
rural  districts,  by  the  want  of  commercial  life  in 
the  towns,  and  in  particular,  by  the  appearance,  for 
the  first  time,  of  soldiers  on  guard  in  the  evenings  at 
public  buildings — -a  phenomenon  strikingly  indicative 
of  a  peculiar  and  not  very  satisfactory  social  condition. 

Despite  the  various  restrictions  on  emancipation  and 
the  settlement  of  free  negroes,  there  have  grown  up 
throughout  the  slave  states  a  certain  number  of  free 
persons  of  colour — some  black,  others  nearly  as  light 
in  the  complexion  as  whites.  In  Louisiana,  in 
particular,  free  persons  of  colour  own  large  possessions, 
though  labouring  under  social  disabilities.  The  number 
of  free  coloured  persons  in  the  whole  of  the  slave 
states,  in  1850,  amounted  to  228,128.  In  the  free 
states,  at  the  same  period,  there  were  196,016  free 
persons  of  colour ;  the  total  number  in  the  Union  being 
424,144. 

From  all  that  fell  under  my  observation  in  America, 
I  arrived  at  the  conviction  that  as  long  as  the  free 
persons  of  colour  were  legally  and  socially  oppressed 
in  the  northern  states,  the  people  of  these  states 
generally  could  not  with  a  good  grace  address  remon- 
strances to  the  South  on  the  subject  of  slavery;  and, 
indeed,  an  entire  reversal  of  free-state  policy  on  this 
point,  would,  in  my  opinion,  be  necessary  as  a  pre- 
liminary to  making  any  proposal  to  southern  planters 
that  they  should  dismiss  their  slaves  and  resort  to  free 
labour.  It  is  not  possible  to  speak  without  indignation 
of  the  contumelies  to  which  free  coloured  persons  are 
exposed  throughout  the  United  States;  and  what  is 
most  offensive  of  all  is,  that  more   flagrant   cases  of 


120  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

maltreatment   occur   in   the  North  than  the  South — 
affectedly    religions    people    in    various     free    states 
shrinking  with  mnch  greater  horror  from  coloured  indi- 
viduals in  railway-cars  and  hotels  than  even  l  southern 
chivalry.'     Yet,  the   laws    respecting   free   persons   of 
colour   in  most    of    the    slave   states   are    sufficiently 
barbarous,  and  any  relaxations  in  the  way  of  personal 
intercourse  depend  more  on  private  than  public  feeling. 
In  the  southern  states,  free  persons  of  colour  have 
always  been   a  source  of  anxiety,   in   consequence   of 
the  increase  in  their  numbers  and  their  advancement 
in  wealth  and  intelligence.     Their  very  success  as  free 
labourers  and  artisans  is  viewed  ungraciously,  for  it 
is  a  standing  protest  against  the  often-repeated  doctrine, 
that   if  the  slaves  were  emancipated  they  would   not 
work,  and  so  become  a  dangerous  class  and  a  burden 
to  the  community.     As  conservative  of  slavery,  it  has 
been    deemed    desirable    to    repress   the   rise   of  free 
coloured  persons  to  situations  of  trust,  by  the  enact- 
ment  of  numerous  disqualifying  laws.     In   Virginia, 
these  laws  are  exceedingly  obnoxious.     In  this  state,  it 
is   a   penal   offence   to   teach    free   coloured    children 
to  read — imprisonment  to  a  white  person,  and  stripes 
or  imprisonment  to  a  negro.     Two  or  three  years  ago, 
a  lady  was  imprisoned  for  this  offence.     In  Virginia, 
a  free  negro  cannot  keep  a  gun  in  his  house,  under  a 
penalty  of  stripes  or  imprisonment.     He  must  not  go 
from  home  after  dark,  unless  provided  with  a  pass; 
annual  licences  or  passes  are  issued  for  a  certain  fee. 
He   must   not   keep   a   store   or  tavern;    every  effort 
being  made  to  restrict  him  to  such  industrial  pursuits 
as  will  not  compete  with  the  white  business  part  of 
the  community.     Should  he  leave  the   state,  and  go 
even  for  the   shortest  distance  into   a  free   state,  he 
returns  only  at  the  risk  of  being  imprisoned  and  tried 
for  the  offence ;  if  found  guilty,  he  is  ordered  to  leave 


BLACK    LAWS    AND    USAGES.  121 

the  state  within  ten  days,  never  to  return,  except  under 
the  penalty  of  being  sold  as  a  slave.  He  may  hold  real 
estate  in  his  own  name,  a  rather  remarkable  indulgence ; 
but  in  the  condition  of  an  owner  of  property,  and  in 
his  attempts  to  conduct  any  business  transaction,  he 
is  greatly  hampered  in  consequence  of  his  testimony 
not  being  valid  in  a  court  of  justice,  in  any  case  where 
the  interests  of  a  white  man  are  at  stake,  or  where 
his  evidence  would  conflict  with  that  of  one  of  the 
governing  class.  The  taxes  that  Virginia  imposes  on 
this  unfortunate  class  are  burdensome  in  the  extreme. 
In  addition  to  the  numberless  petty  rates  they  are 
compelled  to  pay  to  city  and  county  authorities,  a  state 
tax  of  one  dollar  per  head  has  been  levied  from  them 
for  the  last  five  years;  from  which  the  state  annually 
derives  a  revenue  of  nearly,  if  not  quite,  fifty  thousand 
dollars.  The  tax  was  originally  imposed  as  an  aid 
towards  removing  free  persons  of  colour  to  Liberia,  but 
has  latterly  been  misappropriated. 

As  a  general  rule  in  slave  states,  every  free  person 
of  colour  is  obliged  to  procure  from  the  court  of  the 
county  in  which  he  resides,  a  set  of  papers  to  shew 
when  required,  in  proof  of  his  freedom.  Should  he 
quit  the  state,  he  will  find  that  even  these  papers, 
which  any  white  man  may  demand  a  sight  of,  are  not 
considered  sufficient  evidences  of  freedom,  without 
additional  sworn  testimony  of  some  well-known  white 
citizen.  Should  he,  when  in  a  distant  part  of  the 
country,  by  any  misfortune  lose  his  'free  papers/  as 
they  are  called,  he  is  at  any  moment  liable  to  arrest ; 
his  colour  being  presumptive  evidence  that  he  is  a 
fugitive  slave.  If  arrested,  and  unable  to  communicate 
with  his  friends,  he  would  be  detained  in  jail  for  a 
certain  period,  be  advertised,  and  if  unable  to  pay 
prison  and  other  expenses,  he  would  be  sold  by  public 
auction,  like  a  stray  heifer. 


122  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

Free  coloured  persons  with  more  than  three  quarters 
of  white  blood,  are  relieved  from  the  operation  of  the 
laws  which  bear  with  most  severity  on  those  of  darker 
complexion.  They  may  engage  in  any  business  that 
the  extent  of  their  capital  will  admit ;  their  testimony 
will  be  received  in  court  in  opposition  to  that  of  white 
citizens ;  and  they  may  leave  the  state  and  return  at 
pleasure.  But  by  these  concessions,  they  gain  no 
social  status;  nor  do  they  acquire  political  equality 
with  whites.  Free  coloured  persons  of  any  shade 
are  pronounced  by  federal  authority  not  to  be  citizens 
under  the  constitution — a  fact  formerly  adverted  to, 
in  speaking  of  a  recent  case. 

In  North  Carolina,  the  laws  affecting  coloured 
persons  are  as  severe  as  they  are  in  Virginia,  if  not 
more  so.  According  to  one  of  these  laws,  a  free 
coloured  person  incurs  a  penalty  of  500  dollars  on 
entering  and  residing  in  the  state,  and  failing  payment, 
he  will  be  sold  as  a  slave  for  a  sufficient  length  of 
time  to  pay  the  amount.  Lately,  a  young  man,  a  free 
coloured  seaman,  from  the  state  of  New  York,  having 
shipped  to  a  port  in  North  Carolina,  he  was  there 
detained  by  illness,  and  shortly  afterwards  put  in  jail. 
Some  parties  on  the  spot  interested  themselves  in 
him,  and  with  immense  trouble,  he  was  released.  His 
journey  homewards,  in  company  of  a  white  person, 
was  attended  with  extreme  difficulty.  The  account  of 
the  whole  transaction  occupies  three  columns  in  the. 
Tribune,  New  York  newspaper,  February  13,  1857, 
and  gives  a  vivid  idea  of  the  troubles  and  perils 
to  which  free  coloured  persons  from  the  North  expose 
themselves  within  the  verge  of  the  slave  states. 

In  South  Carolina,  free  coloured  children  enjoy 
a  remarkable  immunity;  they  are  permitted  to  go 
to  school.  In  Charleston,  the  principal  city  of  the 
state,  there  is  an   excellent  school  supported   entirely 


BLACK    LAWS   AND    USAGES.  123 

by  the  free  coloured  people,  who  form  an  intelligent 
and  industrious  body.  They  are,  however,  exposed 
to  many  annoyances,  and  made  to  feel  their  subor- 
dinate condition.  A  free  coloured  man  must  not 
carry  a  cane,  and  his  wife  is  not  allowed  to  wear 
a  veil.  Should  they  walk  out  together  in  the  street, 
she  must  not  take  his  arm ;  that  would  be  regarded 
as  an  act  of  flagrant  impertinence.  If  they  meet  a 
white  person,  and  the  path  is  narrow,  they  must  go 
aside  into  the  gutter  to  give  unobstructed  passage  to 
a  white.  Even  in  their  dwellings,  they  are  not  safe 
from  indignities.  The  sound  of  many  voices  issuing 
at  night  from  their  houses  is  a  suspicious  circumstance, 
and  will  warrant  the  intrusion  of  any  white  person  to 
inquire  the  cause. 

"When  a  coloured  mother  wishes  to  have  her  infant 
christened,  and  desires  to  invite  a  few  friends  to  be 
present,  she  must  inquire  at  her  white  neighbours  if 
they  have  any  objections  to  the  proposed  party ;  then, 
she  must  procure  the  permission  of  the  authorities, 
without  which  the  whole  assembly  might  be  arrested, 
punished  with  fine  or  stripes,  at  the  option  of  the 
magistrate.  In  this,  as  in  other  slave  states,  all 
mechanical  pursuits  are  open  to  free  coloured 
persons,  for,  as  it  is  deemed  a  degradation  to  a  white 
man  to  engage  in  manual  labour,  no  competition  is 
feared.  But  they  are  not  allowed  to  enter  the  learned 
professions,  nor  can  they  in  any  slave  state,  except 
Louisiana,  where  there  are  a  few  coloured  physicians 
and  some  men  of  colour  engaged  in  commercial 
pursuits. 

In  Georgia,  in  addition  to  the  usual  disabilities,  a 
free  coloured  person  is  not  permitted  to  hold  real  estate 
in  his  own  name.  He  is  compelled,  no  matter  what  be 
his  age,  to  select  a  white  guardian,  who  holds  his  pro- 
perty, and  is  answerable  for  him  in  law.     Should  the 


124:  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

guardian  prove  faithless  to  his  trust,  his  ward  has  no 
redress,  as  no  evidence  of  his  would  have  a  feather's 
weight  when  opposed  to  that  of  a  white. 

In  Louisiana,  as  above  stated,  the  free  coloured  people 
are  more  privileged — a  circumstance  perhaps  traceable 
to  the  kindliness  of  the  French  towards  the  negro 
race.  From  whatever  cause,  the  oath  of  a  coloured 
man  in  a  court  of  justice  has  equal  weight  with  that 
of  a  white  citizen.  Several  attempts  have  been  made 
to  extinguish  this  privilege,  and  render  the  laws  of  the 
state  more  in  harmony  with  those  of  other  slave  states  ; 
but  on  the  side  of  negro  testimony  are  arrayed  strong 
interests,  some  of  the  largest  land  claims  in  the  state 
being  sustained  by  the  testimony  of  persons  belonging 
to  this  class.  The  very  great  mixture  of  races  in 
Louisiana  probably  assists  in  thus  doing  something  like 
justice.  For  years,  the  free  coloured  people  of  New 
Orleans  were  taxed  to  support  the  public  schools  of  the 
city,  and  at  the  same  time  no  provision  was  made  for 
the  education  of  their  own  children.  For  some  time, 
the  public  school  committee  refused  any  appropriation 
to  support  schools  for  free  coloured  children,  nor  were 
these  children  allowed  to  attend  the  schools  for  whites. 
At  length,  after  receiving  numerous  petitions,  the  com- 
mittee was  induced  to  make  an  appropriation  of  a  very 
limited  kind,  which  was  gratefully  accepted,  though 
very  inadequate  to  meet  the  general  wants. 

The  laws  of  Texas,  Alabama,  Tennessee,  and  Missouri 
are  in  their  general  character  like  those  of  Virginia. 
In  Texas  there  are  severe  laws  against  introducing  free 
people  of  colour,  enacted  with  additional  penalties  in 
1856;  yet,  we  are  told  by  Olmsted  that  many  of  this 
class,  from  Louisiana,  have  established  themselves  in 
the  state,  though  at  the  cost  of  feuds  and  bloodshed. 
The  laws  of  Kentucky  are  somewhat  milder ;  but  there, 
as  elsewhere,  much  depends  on  transitory  circumstances 


BLACK    LAWS    AND    USAGES.  123 

—  law  and  administration,  in  slave  states  especially, 
being  two  very  different  things. 

The  insurrections  that  have  occurred  at  various  times 
in  different  parts  of  the  South,  have  invariably  been  dis- 
astrous to  the  free  people  of  colour,  though  they  have 
been  no  way  concerned  in  the  negro  outbreaks.  The 
contemplated  insurrection  of  Denmark  Vesey  in  South 
Carolina,  which  was  discovered  only  a  short  time  before 
the  period  appointed  for  the  outbreak,  deprived  the  free 
coloured  people  of  many  privileges  which  they  had 
enjoyed.  A  subsequent  attempt  of  a  similar  character 
in  Virginia,  under  the  leadership  of  Nat  Turner,  was 
followed  by  corresponding  results.  The  recent  real  or 
alleged  attempt  at  insurrection  in  Tennessee,  bids  fair 
to  entail  more  severe  suffering  on  the  free  coloured 
population  than  any  previous  transaction  of  this  nature. 
A  law  has  been  lately  under  consideration  in  Arkansas, 
which,  if  carried,  will  in  all  probability  consign  at  least 
an  eighth  part  of  the  now  free  coloured  population  to 
slavery.  By  the  provisions  of  this  bill,  the  alternative 
is  presented  to  the  free  coloured  people  in  the  state, 
either  immediate  removal,  or  unconditional  sale  as 
slaves.  Surrounded  by  slave  states  which  forbid  the 
ingress  of  free  negroes,  and  with  several  hundred  miles 
interposed  between  them  and  the  free  states,  it  can  be 
imagined  how  little  is  the  chance  of  escaping  the 
penalties  of  this  proposed  law. 

While  in  the  slaveholding  states,  the  free  coloured 
people  are  subject  to  great  injustice  from  the  laws 
directly  framed  to  oppress  them,  in  the  free  states 
generally  they  have  been  persecuted  by  a  cruel  pre- 
judice, that  has  not  always  allowed  them  to  remain 
secure  in  life  and  limb.  Their  political  and  civil 
privileges  differ  in  different  states.  The  statute-books 
of  Indiana  and  Illinois,  both  free  states,  are  disgraced 
with  a  series  of  what  are  termed  f  Black  Laws ; '  the 


126  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

effect  of  which  is  to  deprive  the  coloured  man  not  only 
of  all  political  privileges,  but  even  the  validity  of  his 
oath.  The  state  of  Ohio  has  repealed  her  black  laws 
only  within  the  last  few  years,  after  a  long  agitation  on 
the  subject.  Yet,  the  laws  respecting  the  qualification 
of  voters  are  not  clearly  defined,  and,  as  a  consequence, 
in  the  northern  part  of  the  state,  where  a  strong  anti- 
slavery  feeling  prevails,  free  men  of  colour  are  permitted 
to  vote;  but  in  the  southern  districts  that  border  on 
the  slave  state  of  Kentucky,  the  reverse  is  the  rule. 
In  Iowa,  Michigan,  Pennsylvania,  and  Connecticut, 
whilst  they  are  not  oppressed  by  direct  legislation,  they 
are  deprived  of  all  political  privileges.  In  the  state 
of  New  York,  they  are  entitled  to  vote  at  elections, 
provided  they  are  possessed  of  real  estate  to  the  value 
of  250  dollars.  Gerrit  Smith,  a  well-known  philan- 
thropist and  reformer,  about  six  years  since,  created  in 
this  state  nearly  one  thousand  voters  in  this  class,  by 
endowing  them  with  property  for  the  necessary  quali- 
fication from  his  vast  landed  possessions.  In  all  the 
New-England  States,  Connecticut  excepted,  the  votes  of 
free  coloured  persons  are  received  on  equal  terms  with 
those  of  the  whites;  and  in  Massachusetts,  they  are 
eligible  to  the  highest  offices  in  the  gift  of  the 
commonwealth. 

Nothing  is  more  common  in  the  northern  states 
than  to  hear  the  free  people  of  colour  spoken  of 
disparagingly,  if  not  a  nuisance  which  the  country 
would  be  gladly  rid  of.  As  is  well  known,  the  plan  of 
expatriation  was  proposed,  and  has  been  partly  carried 
out  by  the  American  Colonisation  Society,  the  well- 
conducted  settlement  of  Liberia  on  the  coast  of  Africa 
being  the  consequence.  The  remarkable  prosperity  of 
that  free  republic,  which  is  susceptible  of  immense 
increase,  indicates,  if  nothing  else  did,  that  the  world 
has  laboured  under   some   mistake  about  the   mental 


BLACK    LAWS    AND    USAGES.  127 

qualities  of  negroes  and  mulattoes;  and,  on  this 
account,  the  plantation  of  Liberia,  apart  from  all  con- 
siderations as  to  the  motives  of  its  projectors,  must,  I 
think,  be  accepted  as  a  great  fact  in  favour  of  negro 
improvability.  But  it  is  not  necessary  to  go  to  Liberia 
in  vindication  of  the  character  of  this  abused  branch 
of  the  human  race.  That  the  progenitors  of  the 
present  free  coloured  population  of  northern  states 
were  degraded  and  ignorant,  none  will  deny;  but  to 
say  that  their  descendants,  now  in  the  third  and  fourth 
generation,  are  deserving  of  the  same  reputation,  would 
be  unjust  and  untruthful.  Should  we  grant  that  they 
were  generally  degraded,  which  we  by  no  means  admit, 
can  those  who  are  inclined  to  disparage  and  revile  them, 
point  out  what  they  have  done  towards  their  enlighten- 
ment and  elevation?  Far  from  assisting  them  on  the 
road  to  honour  and  preferment,  they  have  left  no 
means  untried  to  crush  in  them  every  noble  aspiration, 
to  forbid  the  rise  of  every  sentiment  of  ambition,  to 
keep  the  whole  of  every  shade  of  darkness  in  a  con- 
temptuously mean  position — exiles  from  all  communion 
in  joy,  hope,  sorrow. 

The  force  and  prevalence  of  this  prejudice  can 
scarcely  be  imagined  by  any  one  out  of  America.  That 
the  colour  of  a  man's  skin,  without  the  slightest 
reference  to  his  moral  qualities,  or  to  his  wealth,  should 
determine  his  social  or  political  position,  savours  of  the 
ridiculous  to  Europeans.  Yet  such  is  the  case  in  the 
United  States.  Nay  more,  even  when  all  trace  of  the 
negro  is  lost  by  intermixture,  and  he  no  longer  presents 
any  distinction  in  features,  the  knowledge  that  he  has 
in  some  way  come  of  African  ancestry,  is  sufficient 
to  place  him  in  the  proscribed  list;  he  is  consigned 
beyond  the  possibility  of  extrication  to  the  difficult 
position  sustained  by  the  free  coloured  people  of  the 
northern  states. 


128  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

The  sufferings  endured  by  this  class,  from  1835  to 
1842,  were  of  a  shocking  kind.  It  was  no  unusual 
occurrence  for  an  inoffensive  man  of  colour,  particularly 
if  he  was  decently  dressed,  to  be  openly  assaulted  by 
white  persons,  for  no  cause  whatever ;  and  if  his  outcries 
attracted  attention,  no  notice  was  taken  when  they 
were  understood  to  come  from  f  only  a  nigger/  With 
the  exception  of  a  few  abolitionists,  the  free  coloured 
people  had  no  friend  ;  the  agitation  of  the  slave- 
question  at  that  period  being  unscrupulously  visited  on 
them.  In  scarcely  any  of  the  large  cities  of  the 
North  did  they  escape  violence.  Riots  of  the  most 
frightful  nature  occurred  in  New  York,  Philadelphia, 
Boston,  and  Cincinnati.  The  dwellings  of  the  coloured 
people  were  burned  down,  their  furniture  destroyed, 
and  their  lives  were  taken  by  the  miscreants  who  were 
permitted  to  give  unchecked  rein  to  their  hateful 
passions.  In  some  instances,  their  churches  were 
razed  to  the  ground,  as  if  it  had  been  a  crime  for 
this  unfortunate  race  to  form  part  of  a  Christian 
community. 

This  storm  of  persecution  having  passed  over,  the 
free  coloured  population  in  the  northern  states  gradually 
improved  in  public  opinion.  In  some  quarters,  and 
among  certain  classes  of  whites,  prejudice  is  as  strong 
as  ever;  but  on  the  whole,  it  has  been  greatly  meli- 
orated— a  circumstance  attributable  not  less  to  the 
general  progress  of  enlightened  sentiment,  than  the 
feelings  of  compassion  excited  by  the  picturesque  and 
affecting  incidents  in  the  lifelike  narrations  of  Mrs 
Stowe.  Yet,  except  in  Massachusetts,  these  feelings 
do  not  go  the  length  of  giving  complete  justice  to  the 
people  of  colour.  Though  subject  to  a  general  school- 
rate,  their  children  are  not  admitted  to  the  higher  kind 
of  academies;  the  mere  elements  of  education,  at 
district   coloured   schools,   being  their  full  allowance. 


BLACK    LAWS   AND    USAGES.  129 

In  the  Sabbath  schools,  the  same  division  is  observable. 
St  Andrew's  Episcopal  Church  at  Philadelphia  has 
under  its  patronage  and  care  a  black  as  well  as  a  white 
Sabbath  school,  in  separate  establishments.  Once  in 
each  year,  the  children  of  both  schools  are  brought 
into  the  church,  that  their  progress  may  be  ascertained. 
The  white  lambs  of  the  flock  are  placed  beside  the 
pastor  under  the  shadow  of  the  pulpit,  whilst  the  black 
sheep  are  stuck  up  in  an  obscure  part  of  the  organ  loft. 
The  whites  are  usually  catechised  in  presence  of  the 
congregation,  and  the  blacks  are  kindly  permitted  to 
sing  a  doxology  while  the  congregation  are  dispersing. 

The  common  practice  of  excluding  coloured  people  from 
all  but  certain  inferior  classes  of  seats  in  the  churches, 
is  well  known;  and  to  such  an  extent  has  this  been 
carried,  that  in  most  large  towns  they  have  established 
and  support  churches  for  themselves.  In  passing  along 
the  streets  of  New  York  on  Sunday,  you  see  churches 
pouring  out  none  but  whites,  and  others  none  but 
people  of  various  shades  of  colour,  just  as  if  there  were 
a  white  and  black  Gospel.  Only  a  few  years  ago,  in 
one  of  the  Presbyterian  churches  of  New  York,  there 
were  pews  in  the  gallery  marked  B.  M.,  signifying 
Black  Members.  An  English  clergyman  on  a  visit 
to  the  States,  who  had  heard  of  these  proscribed 
seats,  took  an  opportunity  of  testifying  against  such 
unchristian  arrangements,  by  taking  his  family  to  this 
church,  and  seating  himself  in  the  midst  of  the  B.  M.s, 
to  the  astonishment  and  chagrin  of  the  reverend 
gentleman  who  officiated,  and  the  horror  and  disgust 
of  the  deacons,  who  were  greatly  scandalised  by  the 
stranger's  want  of  self-respect.  This  quiet  method 
of  reproving  the  congregation  of  this  church  had  the 
desired  effect,  and  the  B.  M.s  have  since  been  removed. 
Negro  pews  are  not  now  so  fashionable  as  formerly; 
yet  a  coloured  man  would  have  to  stand  a  long  time  in 


130  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

a  genteel  New  York  church  before  he  would  be  offered 
a  seat. 

C.  K.  Whipple,  in  his  able  tract,  entitled  Relations  of 
Anii-slavery  to  Religion,  relates  the  following  incident : 
■ In  the  year  1830,  a  coloured  man  bought  and  paid 
for  a  pew  in  Park  Street  Church,  then  and  since  the 
head-quarters  of  "orthodoxy"  in  Boston.  He  occupied 
it,  with  his  family,  a  Sunday  forenoon ;  but  on 
returning  in  the  afternoon,  a  constable,  employed  by 
the  church  committee,  forcibly  prevented  his  entrance ; 
the  Prudential  Committee  wrote  him  a  prohibitory  * 
letter;  and  the  church,  in  a  church-meeting  called 
thereafter  for  the  express  purpose,  voted  that  he  should 
not  be  allowed  to  occupy  his  own  pew.  They  then 
proceeded  to  discuss,  in  five  or  six  meetings  following, 
each  opened  and  closed  with  prayer,  the  most  convenient 
and  effective  way  of  excluding  the  whole  coloured  race 
from  equal  participation  in  their  worship.  Finally,  at 
the  suggestion  of  one  who  bore,  while  he  lived,  the 
very  highest  reputation  for  piety  in  that  church,  a  new 
pew-deed  was  framed,  containing  a  provision  enabling 
them  to  effect  their  purpose,  and  the  pews  of  that 
church  are  still  held  under  that  deed.  It  has  been  so 
perfectly  obvious  that  any  similar  attempt  %ould  meet 
the  like  result,  that  the  trial  has  never  been  repeated 
in  Boston.  A  Baptist  church,  however  (Rev.  Baron 
S tow's,  in  Rowe  Street),  has  guarded  itself  against 
such  attempts,  by  inserting  in  its  pew-deeds  the  re- 
striction that  the  pews  shall  be  sold  only  to  "respectable 

*  *  Boston,  March  6,  1830. 
Mr  Frederick  Brinsley. 

Sir — The  Prudential  Committee  of  Park  Street  Church   notify 

you  not  to  occupy  any  pew  on  the  lower  floor  of  Park  Street  Meeting-house 

on  any   Sabbath,  or  on  any  other  day  during  the  time  of  divine  worship, 

after  this   date ;    and  if  you  go   there  with  such  intent,  you  hazard  the 

consequences.     The  pews  in  the  upper  galleries  are  at  your  service. 

George  Odiorne,  for  the  Committee.'' 


BLACK    LAWS   AND    USAGES.  131; 

white  persons."  Whoever  of  that  congregation  is 
not  a  saint,  can  at  least  claim  the  credit  of  being  a 
respectable  white  sinner.' 

Notwithstanding  these  and  all  other  indignities,  it 
is  an  undoubted  fact,  that  the  free  people  of  colour 
persevere  in  improving  their  circumstances,  and  in 
seizing  on  every  possible  advantage  in  the  way  of 
education.  Still  excluded  from  the  colleges  in  New 
York  or  Philadelphia,  coloured  young  men  are  admitted 
as  a  favour  to  some  of  the  other  northern  colleges  and 
higher  order  of  academies  on  a  footing  of  equality  with 
whites.  The  consequence  of  this  irrepressible  desire 
for  instruction  is  observable  in  the  rise  of  coloured 
men  in  northern  society;  there  being  now  in  Boston 
coloured  lawyers  practising  at  the  bar,  coloured 
physicians,  lecturers,  and  manufacturers.  A  prejudice, 
however,  long  outlives  its  expulsion  from  the  minds  of 
the  more  intelligent  classes,  of  which  we  have  till  this 
day  a  lamentable  example  in  the  treatment  of  Jews  in 
England.  Educated,  refined  in  sentiment,  wealthy, 
admitted  to  the  highest  society,  Jews  are  still  excluded 
by  technical  forms  from  the  House  of  Commons;  and 
time  after  time,  the  city  of  London  returns  a  gentle- 
man to  parliament  who  is  not  allowed  to  take  his  seat, 
unless  he  make  a  declaration  of  a  religious  nature  in 
violation  of  his  conscience.  So  does  prejudice  operate 
in  America.  All  are  not  to  be  blamed,  because  the 
free  people  of  colour  are  subject  to  vulgar  persecution. 
The  prejudice  against  them  has  not  yet  vanished  from 
the  minds  of  every  variety  of  the  '  snob '  genus.  By 
white  workmen,  who  fear  rivalry  and  contamination; 
by  conceited  parvenus,  who  dread  a  lowering  of  their 
dignity;  by  a  miscellaneous  body  of  hotel-keepers, 
railway-car  conductors,  managers  of  theatres,  deacons 
of  churches,  and  others  who  are  alarmed  for  offending 
c  customers/  the  repugnance  to  associate  with,  or  to 


132  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

give  house  or  seat  room  to  coloured  people,  is  still 
daily  manifested.  Public  feeling  on  the  subject  seems 
to  be  in  a  transition  state.  A  coloured  person,  in 
travelling  about,  will  sometimes  be  treated  well, 
sometimes  ill;  sometimes  insulted,  sometimes  passed 
over  with  indifference.  The  very  administration  of  the 
law  partakes  of  the  feelings  of  its  administrators. 

Not  long  since,  a  coloured  gentleman,  a  dealer  in 
real  estate,  was  compelled  to  ride  in  one  of  the  negro- 
cars,  although  at  the  time  he  held  stock  in  the  company 
to  the  amount  of  ten  thousand  dollars.  The  ejection 
of  a  coloured  lady  and  her  infant  from  the  cars  in 
Massachusetts,  created  so  much  sympathy  as  to  cause 
the  passage  of  a  law  in  that  state,  imposing  a  fine  of 
six  thousand  dollars  on  any  railway  company  or 
individual  guilty  of  this  offence  in  future.  In  the  city 
of  New  York,  suits  have  at  various  times  been  insti- 
tuted against  the  proprietors  of  omnibuses  and  street 
railway-cars  for  the  forcible  ejection  of  coloured  people. 
In  one  instance,  judgment  was  given  in  favour  of  the 
plaintiff,  and  damages  awarded  to  the  amount  of  250 
dollars.  But  there  is  no  dependence  on  these  decisions. 
The  case  of  the  Rev.  J.  W.  Pennington,  a  coloured 
preacher  in  New  York,  a  most  respectable  and  amiable 
person,  who  was  well  received  in  Europe,  and  holds 
a  degree  of  Doctor  of  Divinity  from  the  University  of 
Heidelberg,  deserves  particular  attention.  Recently,  he 
was  expelled  from  a  railway-car  belonging  to  the  Sixth 
Avenue  Railway  Company,  and  forthwith  brought  an 
action  before  the  superior  court  of  New  York.  Below, 
we  give  some  notes  of  the  proceedings  in  this  curious 
affair,  from  the  pages  of  the  European,  an  independent 
New  York  newspaper.*     It  will  be  seen  that  the  judge 


*  The  counsel  for  the  defendants  contended  that  they  were  not  bound 
to  carry  coloured  people  in  all  their  cars.     He  referred  to  the  constitution  of 


BLACK    LAWS    AND    USAGES.  ]33 

uttered  some   strange  sentiments,  and   that  the  jury 
decided  against  Dr  Pennington. 

Mrs  Webb,  a  coloured  lady,  apparently  a  quadroon, 
from  the  United  States,  has  lately  visited  England  on 
an  elocutionary  tour.  Accomplished  in  manners,  well 
educated,  and  every  way  acceptable  as  a  guest  in  the 
houses  of  people  of  distinction,  this  lady  has  become 
well  known  for  her  elegant  readings  of  the  works  of 
popular  writers.  It  gives  one  a  curious  idea  of 
American  notions  on  colour,  to  know  that  this  ladylike 
person    has    been  subject  to   indignities  in  different 

the  United  States,  to  shew  that  there  was  a  line  of  demarcation  between  the 
two  races,  and  asked  the  jury  if  a  coloured  man  would  be  permitted  to  sit  at 
the  public  table  of  the  St  Nicholas,  or  any  of  our  principal  hotels.     He  also 
stated  that  the  number  of  cars  provided  by  the  defendants  for  the  coloured 
people  was   larger  in   proportion  to  the  population  than   the   number  for 
white  people.     Judge    Slosson,  in  charging   the  jury,    spoke   of  this   as  a 
peculiarly  difficult  case ;  the  chief  point  for  consideration  being,  whether  the 
business  and  interests  of  the  company  would  suffer,  from  allowing  blacks 
an  equality  as  passengers  with  whites.     The  jury,  after  two  hours'  deliber- 
ation,  found   a   verdict   for  the   defendants.      The   European   quotes   the 
following   opinion   from    the   New  York   Herald:    'Upon   this   point  our 
northern  people  are  remarkably  squeamish,  while  we  know  that  all  over  the 
South  it  is  quite  a  common  thing  to  see  master  and  mistress  and  slave, 
whites  and  blacks,  occupying  the  same  stage  or  car,  without  any  symptom 
of  a  turned-up  nose  on  account  of  the  presence  of  Pomp  or  Dinah.'      The 
European  adds   the  remark:  'If  no   legal  distinctions  were   made   in  the 
free  states  between  white  and  coloured  men,  the  prejudice  against  the  latter 
would  soon  disappear  (it  has  no  existence  in  Europe),  and  they  would  be 
allowed  by  the  whites  to  work  along  with  them,  learn  trades,  and  become 
lawyers  and  physicians.     They  are  now  a  persecuted  race — reviled,  too,  on 
account  of  the  direct  and  inevitable  consequences  of  the  bad  treatment  to 
which  they  are  subjected.     When  sick,  they  must  be  doctored,  if  at  all,  by  a 
white  physician  ;  when  their  property,  their  lives,  liberties,  or  reputations  are 
imperiled  by  judicial  procedures,  if  they  have  any  counsel  at  all,  he  must  be 
a  white  man — for  no  coloured  man  is,  in  this  city,  allowed  to  become  a 
physician  or  a  lawyer.     It  is  different,  however,  in  Massachusetts.     This 
brutal  prejudice,   which  exists   in  no  other  country,  is  encouraged  by  the 
slave-owners    for   their  own  purposes.      The   enforced   degradation   of  the 
coloured  man  of  the  North  is  used  as  an  argument  for  keeping  up  slavery  in 
the  South.' 


134  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

parts  of  the  states,  for  no  other  reason  than  she  is 
not  a  pure  white.  She  has  mentioned  to  us,  that  in 
travelling  through  Pennsylvania,  she  was  refused  access 
to  a  railway-car,  although  she  had  purchased  the  appro- 
priate ticket.  On  presenting  herself  for  admission,  the 
conductor  put  his  arm  across  the  door,  to  debar  her 
entrance,  and  could  not  be  induced  to  admit  her. 
With  much  spirit,  she  stooped  suddenly  below  his  arm, 
and  gaining  an  entrance,  she  pushed  his  arm  down,  to 
enable  her  husband  to  follow  her  into  the  car,  where 
both  received  the  congratulations  of  the  passengers. 
The  conductor  was  enraged,  but,  from  the  aspect  of 
affairs,  did  not  dare  to  expel  them. 

About  a  year  ago,  on  visiting  Boston,  Mrs  Webb 
went  by  recommendation  to  the  Marlboro  Hotel  in 
that  city.  The  Marlboro  is  known  as  '  the  pious  hotel/ 
It  is  an  establishment  celebrated  for  its  religious 
usages — public  prayers  every  morning,  and  a  grace  at 
every  meal  to  which  the  guests  assemble.  Well,  here, 
surely,  she  was  safe?  Quite  the  reverse.  Mrs  Webb 
was  not  allowed  to  attend  prayers,  nor  to  take  her 
meals  at  the  public  tables,  but  compelled  to  remain  in 
her  own  apartment.  This  was  not  all.  The  landlord 
had  the  meanness  to  charge  the  usual  additional 
price  for  private  meals,  although  remonstrated  with, 
and  shewn  that  exclusion  from  the  public  rooms  was 
his  own  act.  Much  to  the  credit  of  the  press  of 
Massachusetts,  this  abominable  treatment  was  strongly 
condemned;  and  we  can  fancy  that  by  the  drilling 
on  the  occasion,  the  Marlboro's  sense  of  religious 
consistency  must  have  undergone  some  improvement. 

In  Massachusetts  and  some  other  free  states, 
coloured  persons  are  legally  recognised  as  American 
citizens;  but  this  is  only  a  local  advantage.  As 
formerly  mentioned,  the  federal  government  does  not 
allow  that   they   belong   to  the   category  of  citizens. 


BLACK    LAWS   AND    USAGES.  l35 

fan  ar!1,t0lerat,f'and  have  a  kind  of  protection ,  thai 
is  all.  They  wfll  be  given  a  pass,  hut  not  a  passport. 
They  are  all  of  them  'niggers/  not  Americans ;   and 

IrfiT  ITr  aS°  l4  ^  n°  UnCM™  «**  to  hear  an 
Irish  or  German  nnmigrant,  who  had  not  heen  six 
months  m  the  states,  talk  of  sending  the  niggers  ont 
of  the  country,  hack  to  Africa,  to  which  they  Monged 
In  the  refusal  of  citizenship,  the  supreme  govern! 
ment  has  forgotten  the  pnhlic  services  of  the  coloured 
race  m  the  trying  times  of  American  history,  when  the 
clouds  of  adversi  y  were  most  threatening.     Answering 

1  J    \b  ^  °f  eyery  shade  st0°d  «de  hy  sidf 
HnL  ^  7    I"  "  fte  revoluti°™ry  war.     The  first 
hlood  shed  m  the  cause  of  American  independence  was 
tha  of  Christopher  Attacks,  a  mulatto,  who  was  shot  by 
British  troops  m  the  streets  of  Boston.     In  the  swamps 
of  the  Carohnas,  under  the  hanners  of  Sumpter  and 
Marion -with    Lafayette    at    Yorktown,    and    with 
Washington  at  Valley  Forge   and  Trenton-wherever 
the  flag  of  the   struggling  Americans   was   unfurled, 
there  might  he  found  the  negro   cheerfully  fighting 
for  the  national  cause,  for  that  liberty  in  which  his 
descendants   are  denied  to  participate.     Hundreds  of 
coloured  men,  who  are  to-day  deprived  of  all  political 
privileges  ,n  the   United   States,   can  remember  the 
scars  displayed  hy  their   grandfathers-scars  inflicted 
m  defence  of  a  country  which  has  not  only  bestowed 
on  their  children  obloquy  and  the  hardest  bondage,  but 
denies  their  right  to  call  themselves  Americans. 

io  resume  a  former  comparison,  the  free  coloured 
people  inhabiting  the  United  States  have,  like  the 
down-trodden  Hebrew  race  in  England  and  other 
parts  of  Europe,  thriven  under  adversity.  As  the  Jews, 
by  being  excluded  from  the  enjoyment  of  common 
political  privileges,  bestowed  their  whole  energies  on 
certain    hranches    of    trade,    and    thus    accumulated 


130  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

immense  wealth,  so  have  the  free  coloured  race — negroes, 
mulattoes,  quadroons,  and  so  forth — betaken  themselves 
to  such  industrial  courses  as  were  left  open  to  them, 
and  in  many  instances  with  the  most  favourable  results. 
Though  contemned  or  neglected,  they  form  among 
themselves  social  circles  of  no  mean  quality.  They 
dress  as  well  as  their  white  compeers ;  and  in  point  of 
manners  there  is  nothing,  as  a  general  rule,  to  find 
fault  with.  At  all  events,  we  can  testify  that  the  more 
aspiring  among  them  who  have  visited  Great  Britain, 
do  no  discredit  to  the  land  of  their  nativity,  and  are 
treated  in  every  respect  as  if  they  could  boast  of  a 
purely  Anglo-Saxon  origin. 


WHAT      THE      CLERGY      THINK      OF     IT. 

Slavery,  and  also  the  general  prejudice  against  free 
people  of  colour,  in  the  United  States,  are  understood 
to  have  been  in  no  small  degree  fortified  by  the  conduct 
of  the  clergy  of  nearly  every  denomination — some 
better,  some  worse,  but  in  too  many  instances,  for  the 
sake  of  conciliation,  chargeable  with  perverting  the 
religious  doctrines  which  it  is  their  duty  to  inculcate 
in  a  state  of  purity.  It  may  be  admitted  that  the 
position  of  clergymen,  north  as  well  as  south,  is  exceed- 
ingly difficult  and  unpleasant.  They  see  that  the 
federal  constitution  and  civil  laws  are  in  conflict  with 
the  law  of  the  Gospel.  Conviction  may  draw  one  way, 
livelihood  another.  Ministering  to  congregations  who, 
to  say  the  very  least,  are  opposed  to  all  action  on  the 
slavery  question,  it  may  be  said  their  choice  is  in  many 
quarters  narrowed  to  the  single  point — either  to  follow 
public  opinion,  or  give  up  preaching  altogether,  and  so 
leave  society  in  a  state  of  spiritual  destitution.  Unfor- 
tunately, the  American  clergy  do  not  confine  themselves 
to  passive  obedience,  nor  with  simply  and  conscien- 
tiously protesting  on  all  suitable  occasions  against  acts 
falling  within  the  sphere  of  their  duty.  They  indus- 
triously throw  the  weight  of  their  influence  and  their 
dialectics  on  the  side  of  slavery,  which  they  make  out  to 
be  a  truly  Christian  institution,  of  the  highest  spiritual 
value  to  its  victims;  and,  further,  seize  every  oppor- 
tunity of  reviling  those  who  advocate  anti-slavery 
principles — calling  them  confusionists,  infidels,  and 
what  not.  Many  clergymen  in  the  South  hold  slaves ; 
and  also  connive  at  their  congregations  possessing  and 


138  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

hiring  out  slaves  as  a  branch  of  ecclesiastical  revenue. 
Clergy  and  congregations  concur  in  occasionally  raising- 
funds  for  missionary  schemes,  Bible  societies,  and  the 
erection  of  new  places  of  worship  by  selling  parcels  of 
slaves.  Joseph  Sturge,  in  his  Visit  to  the  United 
States  (1841),  mentions  the  case  of  a  congregation  of 
Roman  Catholics  in  Maryland,  who  sold  some  of  their 
own  church  members  in  order  to  apply  the  proceeds  to 
the  building  of  a  new  place  of  public  worship !  How 
many  of  the  clergy,  likewise,  at  command,  unite  slaves 
in  marriage,  though  quite  aware  that  the  ceremony  is 
a  mockery,  and  that  the  man  and  woman,  perhaps  both, 
are  already  married  to  other  parties.*  In  short,  instead 
of  deploring  this  monstrous  social  evil,  they  absolutely 
encourage  its  growth,  and  speak  of  it  as  a  marvellous 
blessing  to  the  country.  Who  can  speak  with  com- 
posure of  this  scandalous  abuse  of  common  sense  and 
the  most  marked  principles  of  Christianity  ?  A  griev- 
ous wrong  is  inflicted  on  the  religion,  of  which  these 
men  pretend  to  be  the  true  expositors. 

Before  us  lie  a  number  of  documents  containing 
flagrant  evidences  of  this  dereliction  of  duty;  and  in 
making  a  selection,  the  only  difficulty  is  to  know  where 
to  begin.  We  may  at  a  venture  first  take  up  a 
pamphlet,  purporting  to  be  Ten  Letters  on  the  Subject 
of  Slavery,  by  N.  L.  Rice,  D.D.,  Pastor  of  the  Second 
Presbyterian  Church,  St  Louis,  Missouri,  published  at 

*  '  At  the  Shiloh  Baptist  Association,  which,  met  at  Gourdvine,  a  few  years 
since,  the  following  query,  says  the  Religious  Herald,  was  presented  from 
Hedgman  church — namely,  Is  a  servant,  whose  husband  or  wife  has  been 
sold  by  his  or  her  master,  into  a  distant  country,  to  be  permitted  to  marry 
again?  The  query  was  referred  to  a  committee,  who  made  the  following 
report,  which,  after  discussion,  was  adopted :  That,  in  view  of  the  circum- 
stances in  which  servants  in  this  country  are  placed,  the  committee  are 
unanimous  in  the  opinion  that  it  is  better  to  permit  servants  thus 
circumstanced  to  take  another  husband  or  wife.' — Key  to  Uncle  Tom's 
Cabin. 


WHAT    THE    CLERGY    THINK    OF    IT.  139 

St  Louis  in  1855.  Dr  Rice  writes  to  shew  that  those 
who  oppose  abolitionists  do  not  fear  discussion,  and 
trusts  that  what  he  has  to  say  will  allay  prejudice  and 
passion.  He  considers  slavery  to  be  a  providential 
fact,  highly  beneficial  to  the  negro,  and,  '  God  has 
permitted  it,  for  wise  reasons,  in  order  to  the  accom- 
plishment of  some  great  and  important  ends/  He 
then  asks :  e  Brethren,  has  it  ever  occurred  to  you, 
and  to  those  with  whom  you  act,  that  God  has  some 
great  and  benevolent  ends  to  accomplish,  by  permitting 
slavery  to  exist  in  our  country  ?  You  may  regard  this 
as  a  strange  question ;  but  although  I  have  been  in  the 
habit,  for  years,  of  reading  the  writings  of  abolitionists, 
I  do  not  remember  to  have  seen  the  question  discussed 
in  a  single  instance.  Their  minds  seem  to  have  been 
fixed  exclusively  upon  the  wrongs  which,  as  they 
suppose,  have  been  inflicted  upon  the  slaves ;  and  their 
time  and  energies  have  been  expended  in  condemning 
and  denouncing  slaveholders.  The  Presbyterian  church 
has  taken  a  widely  different  view.  She  has  endeavoured 
to  understand  the  designs  of  an  All- wise  Providence, 
in  permitting  the  existence  of  slavery  in  our  country. 
She  has  believed,  that  she  did,  to  some  extent,  under- 
stand them;  and  her  treatment  of  slavery  has  been 
influenced,  in  no  small  degree,  by  her  views  of  the 
leadings  of  God's  providence/ 

In  short,  the  African  has  been  sent  to  America  to 
'  receive  the  light  of  the  Gospel ;'  and  '  you  will  not 
deny,  moreover,  that  the  spiritual  and  eternal  interests 
of  the  slaves  are  of  infinitely  greater  importance  than 
their  freedom  from  human  bondage/  In  fact,  abolition 
is  a  matter  of  e  comparatively  trifling  importance ; '  and 
'  you  are  compelled  to  admit  that  abolitionists,  instead 
of  rightly  interpreting  the  providence  of  God,  have 
perseveringly  fought  against  it — that  they  have  been  the 
most  determined  enemies  of  a  great  work  of  God — one 


140  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

of  the  most  important  of  this  eventful  age/  Slavery, 
Dr  Bice  afterwards  says,  was  authorised  by  Moses,  and 
no  way  denounced  by  the  apostles.  Abolitionism,  by 
a  natural  consequence,  leads  to  infidelity.  \  No  wonder, 
one  of  you  told  the  General  Assembly,  last  spring,  of 
the  unsettled  state  of  men's  minds  in  Massachusetts, 
and  of  the  increase  of  infidelity  there.  If  abolitionism 
much  longer  holds  the  sway,  there  will  be  little  else 
there  but  infidelity.'  Another  argument — '  Since  the 
free  states  are  throwing  insuperable  obstacles  in  the 
way  of  the  settlement  of  free  coloured  people  in  their 
limits;  and  since  the  abolitionists  denounce  African 
colonisation,  it  really  seems  reasonable  that  they 
should  stop  their  denunciations  long  enough  to  tell 
conscientious  masters  what  to  do  with  their  slaves.' 
As  for  the  churches  in  New  England  who  may  now 
denounce  slavery,  they  never  did  so  while  slavery  was 
sustained  by  law.  'Am  I  not  correct?  It  passed 
away  from  New  England  rather  because  it  was  un- 
profitable, I  presume,  than  because  congregationalists 
expelled  it.  It  required  no  extraordinary  piety  to 
denounce  it,  after  it  had  passed  away  from  you,  and 
when  you  had  nothing  to  lose  by  so  doing.' 

This  slap  at  the  New  England  clergy  is  perhaps  not 
ill-deserved.  The  majority  of  them,  we  believe,  made 
no  objection  to  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law;  and  it  is  stated 
on  good  authority,  that  many  of  them  in  sermons  and 
otherwise  openly  approved  of  Webster's  pro-slavery 
measures.  In  1830,  as  formerly  stated,  a  coloured 
family  were  excluded  from  their  own  purchased  seat 
in  Park  Street  Church,  Boston.  In  May  1851,  while 
Boston  was  agitated  by  the  seizure  of  a  refugee  slave, 
the  Eev.  Dorus  Clarke,  minister  of  the  Old  South 
Church,  refused  to  pray  that  God  might  be  pleased 
to  arouse  the  churches  in  that  city  to  a  sense  of  the 
duty  of  not  delivering  up  this  unhappy  fugitive.     On 


WHAT    THE    CLERGY    THINK    OF    IT.  141 

these  and  some  other  facts,  Mr  Whipple,  in  the  tract 
already  referred  to,  makes  the  following  remarks : 

*  Park  Street  Church  turns  a  coloured  man,  because  he  is  coloured, 
out  of  a  pew  which  he  has  bought  and  paid  for,  and  then  votes  that 
no  coloured  man  shall  be  allowed  even  to  buy  a  pew  any  more  among 
them ;  and  their  minister  says  nothing  against  it.  Bowe  Street  Church 
votes  that  only  respectable  white  persons  shall  own  pews  among 
them ;  and  their  minister  says  nothing  against  it.  The  minister  of 
the  Old  South  Church  publicly  defends  slavery  from  the  Bible,  and 
his  people  agree  with  him.  To  carry  out  their  idea  of  the  best 
mode  of  promoting  piety  and  good  morals,  they  establish  a  daily 
meeting  for  prayer  and  exhortation.  Whatever  is  "  their  hearts' 
sincere  desire  "  in  the  departments  of  religion  and  good  morals,  it  is 
appropriate  to  express  in  that  meeting,  to  God  by  prayer,  to  men  by 
exhortation.  A  man,  who  represents  himself  as  a  member  of  an 
evangelical  church  in  communion  with  them,  is  kidnapped  in  their 
own  city,  and  about  to  be  enslaved  for  life  in  a  region  where  the 
laws  forbid  him  to  read  the  Bible.  His  friend  asks  their  prayers, 
exhortations,  and  efforts  on  his  behalf.  All  these  are  refused,  jointly 
refused  by  three  persons,  each  a  representative  of  the  highest  form 
of  piety  cultivated  by  that  church  and  that  meeting,  and  refused 
because  piety  is  just  then  in  an  unusually  flourishing  state  among 
them.* 

As  the  anti-slavery  cause  grows  in  importance,  we 
expect  to  hear  that  the  New-England  clergy  will  he 
able  to  assume  a  more  independent  position — will  be 
able,  one  and  all,  to  preach  down  the  sentiment 
proclaimed  by  the   Rev.   Nehemiah   Adams,*   in  his 

*  The  vagaries  of  this  and  other  '  evangelicals '  produced  the  following 
Resolutions  of  the  New  England  Anti-slavery  Convention,  May  1855  : 
*  Whereas,  the  popular  religion  of  the  land  is  thoroughly  impregnated  with 
the  slaveholding  spirit,  and  from  the  organisation  of  the  government  to  the 
present  time  has  given  its  sanction  to  a  colossal  and  ever-enlarging  system 
of  robbery,  licentiousness,  heathenism,  and  soul-murder,  until  the  victims 
thereof  are  counted  by  millions;  and  whereas,  an  extensive  revival  of  this 
religion  is  said  to  be  going  on  in  Boston,  under  the  sanction  and  with  the 
co-operation  of  such  men  as  the  Rev.  Dr  Nehemiah  Adams  and  the  Rev.  Dr 
Blagden,  the  defenders  of  slavery  against  every  assault  upon  it;  therefore, 
resolved,  That  the  multiplication  of  converts  to  such  a  religion,  instead  of 
indicating  any  progress  in  the  cause  of  justice,  freedom,  and  Christianity,  or 
furnishing  any  occasion  for  congratulation,  is  a  sure  sign  of  moral  degeneracy, 


142  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

South-side  View  of  Slavery,  that  '  While  it  [the 
constitution]  remains,  all  our  appeals  to  a  Higher  Law 
are  fanaticism.' 

J.  G.  Birney  in  a  pamphlet,  entitled  The  American 
Churches  the  Bulwark  of  Slavery  (1840),  cites  some 
odious  passages  from  the  discourses  of  American 
clergymen,  in  favour  of  slavery.  One  of  these  says  of 
slavery  :  c  It  is  not  a  moral  evil.  It  is  the  Lord's 
doing,  and  marvellous  in  our  eyes.  And  had  it  not 
done  for  the  hest,  God  alone,  who  is  able,  long  since 
would  have  overruled  it.  It  is  by  divine  appointment/ 
We  can  fancy  even  southern  men  being  disgusted  with 
these  sentiments. 

Volumes  could  be  filled  with  such  extracts  from 
sermons  of  American  clergymen,  not  only  vindicating 
slavery  by  the  perversion  of  Scripture  in  its  general 
scope  and  tendency,  but  misstating  the  meaning  of  the 
plainest  texts.  In  the  front  rank  of  Bible-perverters 
stands  Bishop  Meade,  an  Episcopal  clergyman  of 
Virginia,  who  writes  a  book  of  sermons  and  tracts, 
specially  intended  to  reconcile  slaves  to  their  condition. 
In  the  whole  range  of  literature,  there  is  perhaps 
nothing  to  match  the  following  address,  in  which  is 


judicial  blindness,  and  pharisaical  malignity,  to  be  denounced  as  an  im- 
posture ;  and  that  such  a  "  revival "  is  only  a  device  of  time-serving 
hirelings  to  withdraw  attention  from  the  reforms  of  the  age,  and  especially 
from  the  anti-slavery  movement ;  to  affect  a  zeal  for  God  for  the  benefit  of 
their  craft ;  and  to  shield  themselves  from  the  condemnation  which  they 
deserve  for  their  treachery  to  the  rights  of  man.  Resolved,  That  the  charge 
brought  by  abolitionists  against  the  northern  church,  that  it  is  the  bulwark 
of  American  slavery,  finds  its  justification  in  much  that  transpires  in 
what  are  denominated  the  religious  anniversary  meetings  ;  and  as  a  special 
illustration  of  our  meaning,  we  would  point  to  the  prayer-meeting  in  the 
Winter  Street  Church,  which  was  opened  with  prayer  by  the  Rev.  Nehemiah 
Adams — a  man  standing  before  the  world  as  the  confessed  champion  of 
slavery,  and  yet  retaining  the  unimpaired  confidence  and  fellowship  of  the 
evangelical  (so-called)  churches.' 


WHAT    THE    CLERGY    THINK    OF    IT.  143 

systematically  perverted  one  of  the  clearest  Christian 
injunctions.  Speaking  very  solemnly,  the  bishop 
proceeds : 

*  When  people  die,  we  know  of  but  two  places  they  have  to  go  to ; 
and  one  is  heaven,  the  other  hell.  Now,  heaven  is  a  place  of  great 
happiness,  which  God  has  prepared  for  all  that  are  good,  where  they 
shall  enjoy  rest  from  their  labours.  And  hell  is  a  place  of  great 
torment  and  misery,  where  all  wicked  people  will  be  shut  up  with 
the  devil  and  other  evil  spirits,  and  be  punished  for  ever,  because 
they  will  not  serve  God.  If,  therefore,  we  would  have  our  souls 
saved  by  Christ,  if  we  would  escape  hell,  and  obtain  heaven,  we  must 
set  about  doing  what  he  requires  of  us — that  is,  to  serve  God. 
Your  own  poor  circumstances  in  this  life  ought  to  put  you  parti- 
cularly upon  this  and  taking  care  of  your  souls Almighty 

God  hath  been  pleased  to  make  you  slaves  here,  and  to  give  you 
nothing  but  labour  and  poverty  in  this  world,  which  you  are  obliged 
to  submit  to,  as  it  is  His  will  that  it  should  be  so.  And  think  within 
yourselves  what  a  terrible  thing  it  would  be,  after  all  your  labours 
and  sufferings  in  this  life,  to  be  turned  into  hell  in  the  next  life, 
and,  after  wearing  out  your  bodies  in  service  here,  to  go  into  a  far 
worse  slavery  when  this  is  over,  and  your  poor  souls  be  delivered 
over  into  the  possession  of  the  devil,  to  become  his  slaves  for 
ever  in  hell,  without  any  hope  of  ever  getting  free  from  it!  If, 
therefore,  you  would  be  God's  freemen  in  heaven,  you  must  strive 
to  be  good  and  serve  Him  here  on  earth.  Your  bodies,  you  know,  are 
not  your  own ;  they  are  at  the  disposal  of  those  you  belong  to  ;  but 
your  precious  souls  are  still  your  own,  which  nothing  can  take  from 
you,  if  it  be  not  your  own  fault.  Consider  well,  then,  that  if  you 
lose  your  souls  by  leading  idle,  wicked  lives  here,  you  have  got 
nothing  by  it  in  this  world,  and  you  have  lost  your  all  in  the  next. 
For  your  idleness  and  wickedness  are  generally  found  out,  and  your 
bodies  suffer  for  it  here ;  and  what  is  far  worse,  if  you  do  not  repent 
and  amend,  your  unhappy  souls  will  suffer  for  it  hereafter. 

'  Having  thus  shewn  you  the  chief  duties  you  owe  to  your  great 
Master  in  heaven,  I  now  come  to  lay  before  you  the  duties  you  owe 
to  your  masters  and  mistresses  here  upon  earth.  And  for  this  you 
have  one  general  rule,  that  you  ought  always  to  carry  in  your  minds, 
and  that  is,  to  do  all  service  for  them  as  if  you  did  it  for  God  himself. 
Poor  creatures !  you  little  consider  when  you  are  idle  and  neglectful 
of  your  masters'  business ;  when  you  steal,  and  waste,  and  hurt  any 
of  their  substance ;  when  you  are  saucy  and  impudent ;  when  you  are 
telling  them  lies  and  deceiving  them ;  or  when  you  prove  stubborn 
and  sullen,  and  will  not  do  the  work  you  are  set  about  without  stripes 
and  vexation — you  do  not  consider,  I  say,  that  what  faults  you  are 


144  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

guilty  of  towards  your  masters  and  mistresses,  are  faults  done  against 
God  himself,  who  hath  set  your  masters  and  mistresses  over  you  in 
His  own  stead,  and  expects  that  you  will  do  for  them  just  as  you 
would  do  for  Him.  And  pray  do  not  think  that  I  want  to  deceive 
you  when  I  tell  you  that  your  masters  and  mistresses  are  God's  over- 
seers, and  that,  if  you  are  faulty  towards  them,  God  himself  will 
punish  you  severely  for  it  in  the  next  world,  unless  you  repent  of  it, 
and  strive  to  make  amends  by  your  faithfulness  and  diligence  for  the 
time  to  come  ;  for  God  himself  hath  declared  the  same. 

'  And  in  the  first  place,  you  are  to  be  obedient  and  subject  to 

your  masters  in  all  things "All  things  whatsoever  ye  would 

that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  unto  them;"  that  is,  do 
by  all  mankind  just  as  you  would  desire  they  should  do  by  you,  if 
you  were  in  their  place,  and  they  in  yours. 

1  Now,  to  suit  this  rule  to  your  particular  circumstances.  Suppose 
you  were  masters  and  mistresses,  and  had  servants  under  you,  would 
you  not  desire  that  your  servants  should  do  their  business  faithfully 
and  honestly  as  well  when  your  back  was  turned  as  while  you  were 
looking  over  them  ?  Would  you  not  expect  that  they  should  take 
notice  of  what  you  said  to  them,  that  they  should  behave  themselves 
with  respect  towards  you  and  yours,  and  be  as  careful  of  every- 
thing belonging  to  you  as  you  would  be  yourselves?  You  are 
servants :  do,  therefore,  as  you  would  wish  to  be  done  by,  and  you 
will  be  both  good  servants  to  your  masters,  and  good  servants  to 
God,  who  requires  this  of  you,  and  will  reward  you  well  for  it,  if  you 

do  it  for  the  sake  of  conscience,  in  obedience  to  His  commands 

Take  care  that  you  do  not  fret,  or  murmur,  or  grumble  at  your 
condition ;  for  this  will  not  only  make  your  life  uneasy,  but  will 
greatly  offend  Almighty  God.  Consider  that  it  is  not  yourselves — it 
is  not  the  people  you  belong  to — it  is  not  the  men  that  have  brought 
you  to  it,  but  it  is  the  will  of  God,  who  hath  by  His  providence  made 
you  servants,  because,  no  doubt,  He  knew  that  condition  would  be 
best  for  you  in  this  world,  and  help  you  the  better  towards  heaven, 
if  you  would  but  do  your  duty  in  it.  So  that  any  discontent  at  your 
not  being  free,  or  rich,  or  great,  as  you  see  some  others,  is  quarrelling 
with  your  heavenly  Master,  and  finding  fault  with  God  himself.  .... 
There  is  only  one  circumstance  which  may  appear  grievous  that  I 
shall  now  take  notice  of;  and  that  is  correction. 

'Now,  when  correction  is  given  you,  you  either  deserve  it,  or  you 
do  not  deserve  it.  But  whether  you  really  deserve  it  or  not,  it  is 
your  duty,  and  Almighty  God  requires,  that  you  bear  it  patiently. 
You  may,  perhaps,  think  that  this  is  hard  doctrine ;  but  if  you 
consider  it  rightly,  you  must  needs  think  otherwise  of  it.  Suppose, 
then,  that  you  deserve  correction ;  you  cannot  but  say  that  it  is 
just  and  right  you  should  meet  with  it.     Suppose  you  do  not,  or 


WHAT    THE    CLERGY   THINK    OF    IT.  145 

at  least  you  do  not  deserve  so  much  or  so  severe  a  correction  for 
the  fault  you  have  committed;  you  perhaps  have  escaped  a  great 
many  more,  and  are  at  least  paid  for  all.  Or  suppose  you  are  quite 
innocent  of  what  is  laid  to  your  charge,  and  suffer  wrongfully  in 
that  particular  thing;  is  it  not  possible  you  may  have  done  some 
other  bad  thing  which  was  never  discovered,  and  that  Almighty 
God,  who  saw  you  doing  it,  would  not  let  you  escape  without  punish- 
ment one  time  or  another  ?  And  ought  you  not  in  such  a  case  to 
give  glory  to  Him,  and  be  thankful  that  He  would  rather  punish  you 
in  this  life  for  your  wickedness,  than  destroy  your  souls  for  it  in 
the  next  life  ?  But  suppose  that  even  this  was  not  the  case — a  case 
hardly  to  be  imagined — and  that  you  have  by  no  means,  known  or 
unknown,  deserved  the  correction  you  suffered ;  there  is  this  great 
comfort  in  it,  that  if  you  bear  it  patiently,  and  leave  your  cause  in 
the  hands  of  God,  he  will  reward  you  for  it  in  heaven,  and  the 
punishment  you  suffer  unjustly  here  shall  turn  to  your  exceeding 
great  glory  hereafter.' 

All  that  need  be  said  is — after  this,  anything! 
Mrs  Stowe  (Key  to  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin)  observes  that 
such  discourses  only  'shew  how  perfectly  use  may 
familiarise  amiable  and  estimable  men  with  a  system 
of  oppression,  till  they  shall  have  lost  all  conscious- 
ness of  the  wrong  which  it  involves.'  The  bishop,  she 
adds,  has  since  emancipated  all  his  slaves. 

By  way  of  variety,  we  shall  conclude  with  a  quota- 
tion from  a  recent  work,  entitled  The  Hireling  and  the 
Slave,  by  William  J.  Grayson,  published  at  Charleston, 
South  Carolina,  1856.  Mr  Grayson  is  a  poet  who 
devotes  his  muse  to  the  praise  of  southern  institutions ; 
and  thinks,  with  Dr  Rice,  that  the  negro  is  brought  to 
America  for  wisely  providential  purposes,  and  that 
nothing  can  equal  the  comforts  of  his  position  as  a 
slave.     Here  is  his  picture : 

'  And  yet  the  life,  so  unassailed  by  care, 
So  blessed  with  moderate  work,  with  ample  fare, 
With  all  the  good  the  starving  pauper  needs 
The  happier  slave  on  each  plantation  leads ; 
Safe  from  harassing  doubts  and  annual  fears, 
He  dreads  no  famine  in  unfruitful  years ; 

j 


146  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

If  harvests  fail,  from  inauspicious  skies, 
The  master's  providence  his  food  supplies ; 
No  paupers  perish  here  for  want  of  bread, 
Or  lingering  live,  by  foreign  bounty  fed ; 
No  exiled  trains  of  homeless  peasants  go, 
In  distant  climes  to  tell  their  tales  of  wo : 
Far  other  fortune,  free  from  care  and  strife, 
For  work,  or  bread,  attends  the  negro's  life, 
And  Christian  slaves  may  challenge  as  their  own, 
The  blessings  claimed  in  fabled  states  alone — 
The  cabin  home,  not  comfortless  though  rude, 
Light  daily  labour,  and  abundant  food, 
The  sturdy  health  that  temperate  habits  yield, 
The  cheerful  song  that  rings  in  every  field, 
The  long,  loud  laugh,  that  freemen  seldom  share, 
Heaven's  boon  to  bosoms  unapproached  by  care, 
And  boisterous  jest  and  humour  unrefined, 
That  leave,  though  rough,  no  painful  sting  behind ; 
While,  nestling  near,  to  bless  their  humble  lot, 
Warm  social  joys  surround  the  negro's  cot, 
The  evening  dance  its  merriment  imparts, 
Love,  with  its  rapture,  fills  their  youthful  hearts, 
And  placid  age,  the  task  of  labour  done, 
Enjoys  the  summer  shade,  the  winter  sun, 
And,  as  through  life  no  pauper  want  he  knows, 
Laments  no  poor-house  penance  at  its  close.' 

Mr  Grayson  subsequently  tells  his  mind  freely  about 
the  whole  tribe  of  fault-finders  with  slavery.  Mrs 
Stowe  comes  in  for  a  large  share  of  coarse  abuse. 


ECONOMIC     VIEW     OF     THE     SUBJECT. 

The  number  of  slaves  in  the  United  States  in  1850, 
as  formerly  stated,  was  3,204,313.  The  ratio  of 
increase  differs  greatly  in  different  states.  While  very 
rapid  in  the  more  southern,  it  is  comparatively  small 
in  the  more  northern  slave  states;  the  explanation  of 
this  being,  that  there  is  a  breeding  and  a  consuming 
set  of  states.  The  increase  of  slaves  in  the  whole 
slave  states,  was,  between  1790  and  1800,  27*9  per 
cent. ;  between  1800  and  1810,  33*4  per  cent.  ; 
between  1810  and  1820,  29*1  per  cent;  between  1820 
and  1830,  30*6  per  cent.;  between  1830  and  1840, 
23*8  per  cent. — the  average  of  all  these  ratios  being 
28*96  per  cent  These  statistics  are  given  in  a  well- 
digested  compendium  of  official  documents,  by  Messrs 
Chase  and  Sanborn,*  who  proceed  to  say :  c  In 
1840,  the  slave-exporting  states,  Delaware,  Maryland, 
Virginia,  North  and  South  Carolina,  Kentucky, 
and  Tennessee,  contained  1,479,601  slaves.  Had 
they  increased  in  the  ratio  of  28*96  per  cent.,  the 
number  in  1850  would  have  been  1,908,093.  The 
actual  number  given  is  1,689,158,  being  a  difference 
of  218,935,  or  21,893  for  each  year  to  be  accounted 
for.  Applying  the  same  rule  to  the  slave-import- 
ing states,  we  have  the  following  result  :  Georgia, 
Florida,  Alabama,  Louisiana,  Mississippi,  Arkansas, 
and  Missouri  contained,  in  1840,  1,002,031  slaves. 
Increasing   in    the    ratio   of    28*96   per   cent.,    their 

*  The  North  and  the  South ;  a  Statistical  View  of  the  Condition  of  the 
Free  and  the  Slave  States.  By  Henry  Chase  and  Charles  W.  Sanborn. 
Boston:  1856. 


148  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

number  in  1850  would  have  been  1,292,219.  The 
number  given  in  the  census  is  1,453,035 ;  a  difference 
the  other  way  of  160,816,  or  16,081  per  year,  which 
they  had  received  by  importation.  The  difference  of 
nearly  6000  between  the  import  and  export  may  be 
accounted  for  by  the  following :  a  writer  in  the  New 
Orleans  Argus,  in  1830,  says — "The  loss  by  death  in 
bringing  slaves  from  a  northern  climate,  which  our 
planters  are  under  the  necessity  of  doing,  is  not  less 
than  25  per  cent."  And  the  planters  in  those  states, 
when  advertising  for  sale  a  plantation  and  a  lot  of 
negroes,  always  mention  distinctly  the  fact  that  they 
are  "  acclimated  " — if  that  be  the  case — as  enhancing 
their  value.' 

According  to  the  best  information,  the  number  of 
slaves  annually  sold  from  the  breeding  to  the  con- 
suming states  is  estimated  at  25,000.  As  regards  the 
value  of  this  amount  of  '  stock/  a  conjecture  may  be 
hazarded.  The  price-list  furnished  to  me  by  a  dealer 
at  Richmond  in  1853,  stated  the  value  of 'best  men 
18  to  25  years  old,'  to  be  1200  to  1300  dollars;  'fair 
ditto,'  950  to  1050;  'boys  4  feet  5  inches  high,'  500 
to  600;  'girls  5  feet  high,'  750  to  850;  and  'girls  of 
4  feet/  350  to  432.  Since  that  time,  slaves  have 
considerably  risen  in  price,  and  are  continually  rising, 
in  consequence  of  the  increasing  demand  for  cotton. 
The  average  value  of  male  and  female  negroes  raised 
for  export,  might  now  be  moderately  set  down  at  600 
dollars,  at  which  price  the  total  market-value  of  the 
25,000  slaves  sent  southward  every  year  is  15,000,000 
dollars.  The  negroes  exported  are  usually  between 
the  ages  of  10  and  25;  neither  infants  nor  old 
persons  being  available  for  the  purpose.  The  trader, 
also,  leaves  a  residuum  of  defective  stock,  which 
although  fed,  doctored,  and  dressed  up  for  sale,  cannot 
easily  be   disposed   of,   even   at   very  reduced   prices. 


ECONOMIC    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT.  149 

I  learned  in  America  that  there  are  quack-doctors 
skilful  in  giving  a  sleek  and  robust  appearance  to 
negroes  in  poor  health;  but  from  the  sharp  scrutiny 
which  I  saw  exercised  by  the  buyers  at  public  auctions, 
I  should  imagine  it  to  be  much  more  difficult  to  push 
off  a  faulty  negro  than  a  faulty  horse. 

Taking  old  and  young,  of  every  quality,  the  average 
value  of  slaves  is  quoted  by  Chase  and  Sanborn  at  400 
dollars  each;  and  on  the  basis  of  this  calculation,  the 
entire  value  of  the  slaves  in  the  slave  states,  in  1850, 
was  1,280,145,600  dollars.  The  value  of  the  farms  in 
the  slave  states  in  the  same  year  was  1,117,649,649 
dollars  —  excess  in  value  of  slaves  over  lands, 
162,495,951  dollars.  The  number  of  slaveholders  in 
the  slave  states,  in  1850,  was  346,048.  If  each  of  the 
slaveholders  be  valued  at  the  average  price  of  his  slaves 
(400  dollars),  the  united  value  of  lands  and  owners 
will  be  1,256,068,849  dollars,  or  a  little  less  than  the 
value  of  the  slaves.  'Thus/  observe  our  authorities, 
i  has  the  industry  and  political  and  domestic  economy 
of  the  slaveholders,  in  two  hundred  and  thirty  years, 
been  able  to  bring  the  value  of  their  lands  and  them- 
selves nearly  up  to  the  market-value  of  their  slaves; 
and  all  three  together — lands,  slaves,  and  slaveholders 
— to  nearly  half  the  value  of  the  property  of  the  free 
states.' 

The  contrast  between  the  northern  and  southern 
states  is  strongly  brought  out.  In  1850,  the  value 
of  real  and  personal  estate  in  the  free  states  was 
4,107,162,198  dollars;  the  value  of  real  and  personal 
estate  in  the  slave  states,  2,936,090,737  dollars ;  but 
deducting  value  of  slaves,  as  above,  the  true  value  in 
slave  states  was  1,655,945,137.  The  whole  area  of  the 
free  states  is  392,062,080  acres,  and  value  of  real  and 
personal  estate,  in  1850,  10  dollars  47  cents  per  acre. 
The  area  of  the  slave  states  is  544,926,720  acres,  and 


150  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

value  of  real  and  personal  estate  per  acre,  in  1850, 

3  dollars  and  4  cents  per  acre.  According  to  fresh 
statistical  returns  in  1856,  the  value  of  real  and 
personal  estate  in  the  free  states  had  then  risen  to 
14  dollars  72  cents  per  acre,  and  the  value  of  the  real 
and  personal  estate  in  the  slave  states  had  reached  only 

4  dollars  59  cents  per  acre.  The  valuation  of  the  state 
of  New  York,  in  1855,  was  1,401,285,279  dollars— a 
sum  greater  than  the  whole  value  of  the  slave  states 
in  1850.  The  value  of  real  and  personal  estate  of 
Massachusetts,  in  1850,  was  more  than  that  (slaves 
excepted)  of  the  states  of  Virginia,  North  and  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  Florida,  and  Texas.  Massachusetts 
measures  4,992,000  acres;  the  six  slave  states  just 
mentioned  measure  317,576,320  acres.  In  Massa- 
chusetts, the  value  of  real  and  personal  estate  per 
acre  was  114  dollars  85  cents  per  acre;  the  value  of 
the  real  and  personal  estate  in  these  six  slave  states 
was  1  dollar  81  cents  per  acre.  In  fact,  says  the 
authority  before  us,  '  Massachusetts  is  able  to  buy 
and  pay  for  considerably  more  than  half  the  great 
empire  of  slavery,  and  have  more  money  left  than  the 
Pilgrims  landed  with  at  Plymouth ;  while  Pennsylvania 
could  easily  buy  out  the  other  half.' 

It  is  further  shewn,  from  a  close  analysis  of  facts, 
that  the  effects  of  slavery  and  freedom  on  the  value 
of  adjacent  lands  is  reciprocal — the  proximity  of 
slavery  lessening  the  value  in  the  free  states,  and  the 
neighbourhood  of  freedom  raising  the  value  in  the 
slave  states.  The  abolition  of  slavery  would  in  a  few 
vears  more  than  treble  the  value  of  all  the  lands  of  the 
slave  states  now  under  culture;  and  by  such  increase 
of  value,  any  loss  by  emancipation  would  more  than 
compensate  for  the  sacrifice.  All  this  is  proved 
beyond  a  doubt  by  figures. 

The  contrast  between  North  and  South,  with  respect 


ECONOMIC    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT.  151 

to  education,  libraries,  and  other  agencies  of  social 
improvement,  is  not  less  striking.  Not  to  tire  with 
dry  statistics,  we  shall  present  only  a  few  of  the  more 
remarkable  particulars.  The  number  of  public  schools 
in  the  slave  states  is  18,507;  in  the  free  states,  62,433. 
Number  of  scholars  in  slave  states,  581,861 ;  in  free 
states,  2,769,901.  In  the  slave  states,  there  are 
in  private  academies  and  schools,  104,976  scholars. 
But  comparing  the  number  of  pupils  at  public  and 
private  establishments,  North  and  South,  the  free 
states  have  a  majority  of  2,241,046,  being  three  times 
the  entire  number  attending  school  in  the  slave 
states.  The  money  expended  annually  on  schools  in 
the  slave  states  is  4,799,258  dollars;  and  in  the  free 
states,  9,237,709  dollars.  Ohio,  a  free  state,  is  not 
quite  two-thirds  as  large  as  Virginia;  Virginia  has 
77,764:  scholars,  and  Ohio  has  502,826.  Virginia  has 
been  settled  upwards  of  two  centuries;  Ohio,  about 
sixty  years  since.  Virginia  occupies  one  of  the  finest 
situations  in  the  world,  on  the  coast  of  the  Atlantic; 
Ohio  is  a  thousand  miles  inland.  In  1854,  Virginia 
expended  for  the  education  of  poor  children,  69,404 
dollars;  for  the  maintenance  of  a  public  guard, 
73,189  dollars.  The  New-England  States,  with  an  area 
less  than  one-twelfth  greater,  appropriated  2,000,000 
dollars  for  public  schools,  and  felt  secure  without  a 
guard.  In  the  same  year,  Kentucky  expended  on 
public  schools,  146,047  dollars;  Ohio,  adjoining  it, 
appropriated  2,266,609  dollars.  The  number  of  native 
white  citizens  who  cannot  read  or  write,  in  the  free 
states,  is  248,725 ;  and  in  the  slave  states,  493,026 — a 
number  about  twice  as  great,  in  a  population  of  far  less 
than  half.  The  number  of  native  white  adults  who 
cannot  read  and  write,  in  Tennessee,  is  77,017,  in  a 
white  population  of  756,836;  the  number  in  New 
York,  23,241,  in  a  white  population  of  3,048,325.     In 


152  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

Virginia,  there  are  75,868  native  whites  over  twenty 
years  of  age  who  can  neither  read  nor  write ;  North 
Carolina,  73,226;  Georgia,  40,794;  Kentucky,  64,340. 
The  number  of  white  inhabitants  in  the  state  of  New 
Hampshire  is  174,232.  Among  these,  the  number  of 
native  adults  who  cannot  read  and  write  is  893,  or  1 
in  201 ;  in  Connecticut,  it  is  1  in  277 ;  in  Vermont, 
1  in  284;  in  Massachusetts,  1  in  517.  Applying  the 
same  test  to  the  slave  states — in  South  Carolina  it 
is  1  in  7;  in  Virginia,  1  in  5;  in  North  Carolina, 
lin3. 

The  total  number  of  volumes  in  the  public  libraries 
in  the  slave  states,  is  649,577;  in  those  of  the  free 
states,  3,888,234 — 6  to  1.  The  Sunday-school  libraries 
of  the  North  are  nearly  twice  as  great  as  all  the  college 
libraries  of  the  South.  The  very  small  state  of  Rhode 
Island  has  more  volumes  in  her  libraries  than  Virginia. 
The  daily  press  of  the  South  issues  47,000,000  copies 
annually;  the  North,  181,000,000  copies  annually. 
One  New  York  paper  has  a  circulation  about  half  as 
large  as  all  the  daily  papers  of  the  slave  states.  The 
number  of  copies  of  scientific  papers  printed  in  the 
slave  states  is  372,000;  in  Massachusetts  alone,  the 
number  is  2,000,000 — more  than  five  times  as  many. 

Chase  and  Sanborn  give  some  useful  explanations 
concerning  representation.  ( The  number  of  free 
inhabitants  in  the  slave  states  is  6,412,605  ;  and  in  the 
free  states,  13,434,686.  The  number  of  freemen  in  the 
free  states  is,  therefore,  over  600,000  more  than  double 
the  number  in  the  slave  states.  The  representation  in 
congress  is,  from  the  slave  states,  ninety  members, 
representing  the  6,000,000 ;  and  from  the  free  states, 
144,  representing  the  13,000,000.  This  discrepancy 
between  population  and  representation  arises  from  the 
fact  that,  in  determining  the  number  of  representatives 
to  which  each  state  is  entitled,  five  slaves  are  reckoned 


ECONOMIC    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT.  153 

equal  to  three  freemen.  The  3,200,304  slaves, 
therefore,  in  the  slave  states  are  reckoned  equal  to 
I,920,182f  freemen,  and  are  represented  accordingly. 
The  slaves  of  the  South  have,  therefore,  a  representation 
equal  to  that  of  the  free  states  of  New  Hampshire, 
Vermont,  Connecticut,  Iowa,  and  Wisconsin.  Without 
the  representation  allowed  to  slave  property,  the 
number  of  representatives  from  the  slave  states  would 
be  75,  instead  of  90;  and  from  the  free  states,  159, 
instead  of  144 — a  gain  of  30  in  favour  of  the  free 
states ;  making  their  representation  double  that  of  the 
slave  states,  even  without  the  representation  of  Rhode 
Island,  Wisconsin,  California,  and  Iowa.  It  will  be 
seen  that  in  the  late  severe  contests  in  the  House  of 
Representatives,  had  freemen  only  been  represented, 
the  question  would  invariably  have  been  decided  in 
favour  of  the  North.' 

Of  the  346,048  slaveholders  in  the  slave  states,  it 
appears  from  the  census  tables,  that  '  173,204  hold  less 
than  five  slaves,  leaving  1 72,844  who  are  holders  of  more 
than  four  slaves ;  and  if  we  deduct  the  numbers  holding 
less  than  ten  slaves,  there  will  remain  92,215.  The 
whole  number  of  slaveholders,  then,  is  less  than  350,000, 
including  females  and  minors.  The  number  of  voters 
in  this  class  is  therefore  much  smaller/  shewing  an 
immense  balance  in  favour  of  the  North,  in  point  of 
power  at  elections. 

Then,  take  agricultural  produce,  there  is  the  same 
preponderance  in  favour  of  the  North.  In  1850,  the 
value  of  the  agricultural  produce  in  the  free  states  was 
358,634,334  dollars,  or  342  dollars  per  head;  in  the 
slave  states,  631,277,417  dollars,  or  171  dollars  per 
head.  '  The  North/  adds  our  authority,  '  with  half  as 
much  land  under  cultivation,  and  two-thirds  as  many 
persons  engaged  in  farming,  produces  227,000,000 
dollars'  worth  of  agricultural  produce  in  a  year  more 


154  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

than  tlie  South;  twice  as  much  on  an  acre,  and  more 
than  double  the  value  per  head  of  every  person  engaged 
in  farming.'  This  occurs,  while  the  South  paying 
nothing  in  the  form  of  wages  for  labour,  has  better 
land,  a  monopoly  of  cotton,  rice,  cane-sugar,  and  nearly 
so  of  tobacco  and  hemp,  with  above  all,  a  climate 
yielding  two,  and  sometimes  three,  crops  in  a  year. 

Compare  South  and  North  in  the  matter  of  manu- 
factures. In  the  slave  states,  the  capital  employed  in 
manufactures  is  64,196,736  dollars;  hands  employed, 
104,101;  annual  product,  95,116,284  dollars.  As  re- 
gards the  free  states,  the  capital  invested  is  467,015,720 
dollars ;  hands  employed,  838,212 ;  the  annual  product, 
942,882,801  dollars.  The  value  of  the  products  which 
enter  into  the  commerce  of  the  two  sections,  in  1850, 
was,  for  free  states,  1,377,199,968  dollars;  slave  states, 
410,754,992  dollars.  While  the  North  employs  in 
commerce  188,271  hands,  the  South  employs  70,165. 
The  length  of  railroads  in  the  free  states  in  1854  was 
13,105  miles;  slave  states,  4212  miles.  Canals  in  free 
states,  3682  miles;  slave  states,  1116  miles.  In  1855, 
the  tonnage  of  vessels  was  five  times  as  much  in  the 
North  as  in  the  South.  The  tonnage  built  this  year  in 
Massachusetts  was  79,670  tons;  in  South  Carolina,  61 
tons.  The  tonnage  built  in  Maine  alone  was  four 
times  greater  than  that  built  in  the  whole  slave  states. 
Even  of  that  built  in  the  South,  the  tonnage  is  the 
work  of  northern  and  foreign  mechanics.  In  the  case 
of  a  dissolution  of  the  Union,  and  hostilities  between 
the  North  and  South,  the  highest  naval  science,  and 
large  amount  of  capital,  would  need  to  be  called  into 
requisition  by  the  South,  in  order  to  protect  its  seven 
thousand  miles  of  exposed  sea-coast. 

The  South  is  continually  projecting  schemes  for 
extending  commerce,  manufactures,  literature,  every- 
thing; but  national  wealth  is  not  a  result  of  talk,  but 


ECONOMIC    VIEW   OF    THE    SUBJECT.  155 

of  combined  intelligence  and  industry.  An  English 
traveller  fears  that  the  South  will  aggravate  its  pecu- 
liar institutions  by  employing  slaves  in  manufactures. 
Such  apprehensions  are  groundless.  Skilled  labour 
infers  education,  and  that  is  totally  irreconcilable  with 
slavery,  by  maintaining  which,  the  South  restricts  itself 
to  the  rudest  kind  of  unskilled  operations,  leaves  the 
finest  water-power  in  the  world  unused,  places  itself  in 
a  condition  of  dependence  on  northern  ingenuity. 

The  extent  of  correspondence  by  letters  is  usually  an 
indication  of  the  degree  of  mental  and  commercial 
activity.  It  appears  that  the  amount  paid  for  postages 
in  the  South  does  not  pay  expenses  of  transportation 
by  over  800,000  dollars,  while  the  free-state  postages 
more  than  pay  expenses  by  over  2,000,000  dollars. 
The  slave  states  get  their  letters  carried  at  the  expense 
of  the  free  states,  which  pay  their  own  expenses  besides. 
The  value  of  the  churches  in  the  slave  states  is 
21,674,581  dollars;  in  the  free  states,  67,773,477 
dollars.  The  churches  in  New  York  equal  in  value  all 
the  churches  in  the  fifteen  slave  states. 

These  are  instructive  particulars.  They  conclusively 
shew  the  relative  inferior  position  of  the  South ;  and 
the  wonder  grows  how  a  section  of  the  Union  which 
has  so  little  to  boast  of,  should  have  had  the  address 
to  obtain  supreme  command.  Political  supremacy, 
however,  cannot  compensate  for  social  decay.  As 
almost  every  natural  aptitude  for  prosperity  is  in  favour 
of  the  South,  the  only  reasonable  explanation  of  the 
backward  condition  revealed  by  statistics,  is  the  blight 
of  slavery.  On  that,  if  the  South  were  wise,  its  mind 
should  rest.  Judiciously  disregarding  all  extraneous 
circumstances,  we  can  imagine  that  its  true  course 
would  be  to  consider  whether  slavery,  though  possibly 
advantageous  to  a  limited  number  of  individuals,  is  not 
an  insurmountable  obstacle  to  general  prosperity.     Not 


150  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

alone  from  official  statistics,  but  from  a  variety  of 
details  gathered  from  other  sources,  we  can  see  that 
slavery  is  an  error  in  social  economics,  independently 
of  its  moral  pollutions. 

Slavery,  as  has  been  stated,  gradually  disappeared  in 
the  northern  states,  by  the  plan  of  allowing  the  slaves 
to  die  out;  all  born  after  a  certain  date  being  free. 
We  observe,  by  the  census  tables,  that  as  lately  as 
1820,  there  were  in  Rhode  Island  48  slaves;  Con- 
necticut, 97;  New  York,  10,088;  New  Jersey,  7657. 
In  1830,  there  were  in  Rhode  Island  17;  Connecticut, 
25;  New  York,  75;  New  Jersey,  2254.  In  1840, 
there  were  in  Rhode  Island  5 ;  Connecticut,  1 7 ;  New 
York,  4;  New  Jersey,  674.  Advancing  to  1850,  the 
whole  had  died  out  in  Rhode  Island,  Connecticut,  and 
New  York,  and  there  remained  in  New  Jersey  only 
236,  in  the  character  of  apprentices.  Slavery  was 
abolished  in  New  York  in  1825,  and  this  act  of  justice 
and  humanity  may  be  said  to  have  taken  place  from 
a  deliberate  conviction  that  there  could  be  no  sound 
prosperity  or  social  advancement  so  long  as  the  insti- 
tution lasted.  Of  the  change  effected  by  emancipation, 
we  have  some  account  in  the  work  of  the  late  Mr 
Johnston,  who  visited  the  States  on  an  agricultural  tour 
a  few  years  ago.*  This  intelligent  observer  resided 
for  some  days  with  Dr  Beekman  at  Kinderhook  on 
the  Hudson;  and  his  host,  referring  to  the  times  of 
slavery,  mentioned  the  following  circumstances,  to 
which  we  call  the  attention  of  gentlemen  in  the  slave 
states  generally,  and  more  particularly  those  in 
Maryland,  Virginia,  and  Kentucky : 

'■  Those  were  the  times  when  only  the  blacks  laboured. 
The  white  man  considered  himself  above  labour.     The 


*  Notes   on   North   America.       By    J.    F.    W.    Johnston,    Lecturer   on 
Chemistry,  University  of  Durham.     2  vols.     1851. 


ECONOMIC    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT.  157 

work  of  the  slaves  had  to  support  the  white  man  and 
his  family,  besides  themselves  and  their  own  families. 
With  the  useless  mouths  to  feed,  and  useless  hacks  to 
clothe,  he  was  considered  a  successful  farmer  who  could 
make  both  ends  meet. 

'It  was  then  the  custom  for  the  white  men,  both 
old  and  young,  of  a  neighbourhood,  by  eleven  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  to  collect  at  the  nearest  public-houses. 
In  many  townships  there  were  scores  of  these,  and 
Kinderhook  had  its  share.  Here  they  remained  talking 
and  drinking  till  early  dinner-time,  returned  again  by 
five  in  the  afternoon,  and  spent  the  evening,  till  pro- 
bably midnight,  in  drinking,  gambling,  cock-fighting, 
horse-racing,  or  perhaps  fighting  among  themselves. 
Idleness  led  the  way  to  immorality,  and  to  frequent 
ruin  on  the  part  of  the  whites. 

'But  when  the  abolition  of  slavery  came — "Who 
will  till  our  farms?"  it  was  asked;  "we  shall  all  be 
ruined."  But  gradually  good  sense  overcame  pre- 
judice. The  freed  blacks  were  at  first  hired  as 
labourers,  but  white  labour  gradually  took  its  place 
— and  now  "the  dignity  of  labour"  is  the  watchword 
of  a  powerful  party  in  the  confederation.  The  sons  of 
the  farmer,  instead  of  spending  their  time  in  idleness 
and  dissipation,  from  a  kind  of  necessity,  became 
first  producers,  and  afterwards  intelligent  interested 
improvers.  Old  uncomfortable  houses  gave  way  to 
new  and  commodious  ones.  The  outbuildings  were 
enlarged,  improved,  and  made  ornamental.  Waste  land 
has  been  brought  into  cultivation;  fences  erected  that 
will  secure  the  crops;  the  stock  changed  into  objects 
of  beauty  as  well  as  profit;  roads,  bridges,  school- 
houses,  and  churches  completed — all  these  things  are 
creditable  to  us,  as  we  are  now  an  industrious,  thriving, 
intelligent,  moral,  and  religious  people.  Such  I  have 
seen  to  be  the  fruits  of  free  labour ;  and  whereas  in 


j 


158  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

those  days  money  to  borrow  could  scarcely  be  met 
with,  I  know  that  the  rural  population  of  4000,  now 
living  round  this  place,  have  at  least  a  million  of 
dollars  lent,  and  at  interest.  This  is  the  fearful  ordeal 
which  the  growers  of  wheat  by  slave-labour,  in 
Maryland  and  Virginia,  dread  to  encounter;  though 
experience  proves  it  to  be  the  sure  way  to  independence, 
comfort,  and  wealth.' 

Are  we  to  assume  that,  for  the  sake  of  exporting 
fifteen  millions  of  dollars'  worth  of  negroes,  annually, 
from  Virginia  and  adjacent  states,  slavery  is  inflicted 
like  a  chronic  disease  on  the  community?  It  is,  we 
believe,  at  least  undeniable,  that  but  for  the  power 
exercised  by  slave  breeders  and  dealers,  Virginia  would 
speedily  be  added  to  the  number  of  free  states.  Olmsted 
says  there  are  in  Virginia  f  a  very  large  number  of 
voters,  strongly  desirous,  either  from  selfish  or  other 
motives,  that  the  state  should  be  free  from  slavery.' 
But  no  candidate  who  advocated  freedom,  would  be 
allowed  to  open  his  mouth  publicly  on  the  subject.  All 
the  ordinary  means  of  collecting  assemblages  would  be 
denied  him ;  all  the  newspapers,  bar-room  orators,  and 
clergy  would  be  against  him ;  and  the  poor  traders  and 
mechanics,  fearful  of  offending  their  customers,  would 
not  dare  to  support  him.  Thus,  local  efforts  to  suppress 
slavery  are,  in  present  circumstances,  impracticable. 

Mr  Olmsted  compares  the  start  in  life  of  a  farmer 
in  the  free  state  of  Iowa,  and  that  of  a  planter  in 
Texas.  Each  has  the  same  amount  of  capital.  The 
Iowan  hires  his  labour,  buys  the  best  implements,  and, 
besides,  contributes  to  the  construction  of  churches, 
schools,  railways,  and  other  public  works.  The  Texan 
sinks  his  capital  in  buying  negroes,  and  is  embarrassed 
at  the  outset.  He  can  help  forward  no  improvements, 
can  buy  no  improved  implements,  but  must  employ 
'  such  rude  substitutes  as  his  stupid,  uninstructed,  and 


ECONOMIC    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT.  159 

uninterested  slaves  can  readily  make  in  his  ill-furnished 
plantation  workshop.7  It  is  true,  the  keep  of  the  slaves 
is  less  than  the  wages  paid  to  the  free  workmen ;  yet, 
this  is  an  illusory  benefit.  The  planter  has  to  support 
old  and  young,  occasionally  lose  a  slave  by  death  or 
escape,  and  he  lives  in  a  moral  desert,  terribly  annoyed 
with  his  servants,  whom  he  declares  to  be  the  laziest 
rascals  in  existence.  The  Iowan  hires  only  those 
hands  whom  he  really  wants.  The  wages  he  gives 
them  are  spent  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  form  a  fund 
for  all  kinds  of  public  and  private  improvements.  By 
means  of  these  improvements — railways,  for  example 
— the  whole  operations  of  the  free-state  farmer  are 
facilitated.  His  outlays  return  to  him  fourfold.  He 
is  at  ease;  the  minds  of  his  children  are  not  tainted 
by  the  sights  and  sounds  which  accompany  slavery. 
If  the  Texan  gets  rich  in  slaves,  he  has  few  public 
advantages;  and  just  as  he  attains  opulence,  he  finds 
that  his  lands  are  becoming  exhausted,  and  that  the 
produce  of  labour  is  sensibly  diminishing. 

The  answer  of  the  planters  to  remonstrances  against 
slavery  would  of  course  be,  that  by  no  other  means 
could  their  sugar,  rice,  or  cotton  plantations  be  culti- 
vated— there  is  no  body  of  free  labourers,  supposing 
that  free  labour  was  desirable — were  the  slaves  eman- 
cipated, they  would  not  work  for  hire,  and  consequently 
would  become  a  nuisance,  as  the  North  declares  the 
free  coloured  population  to  be.  We  can  suppose  that 
such  would  be  the  aggregate  answer;  for  we  have 
repeatedly  seen  something  of  the  kind  in  the  southern 
newspapers.  The  answer  is  worthy  of  more  calm  con- 
sideration from  the  opponents  of  slavery  than  it  has 
usually  received. 

To  fortify  its  argument,  the  South  appeals  to  the 
case  of  the  planters  in  the  British  West  Indies; 
ruined,  as   they  allege,  by  emancipation.     The  West 


160  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

Indian  proprietary  was  in  an  unwholesome  condition 
in  1833,  perhaps  as  bad  as  was  the  Irish  proprietary, 
until  rectified  by  the  Encumbered  Estates  Court. 
Possibly,  the  southern  proprietary,  take  it  all  in  all, 
is  not  much  better,  as  we  hear  occasionally  of  northern 
holders  of  mortgages — New  York  merchants,  probably 
standing  in  the  same  relation  to  Louisiana  as  did  those 
of  Liverpool  and  London  to  Jamaica.  So  far,  then, 
there  is  perhaps  some  analogy  between  the  financial 
position  of  American  and  British  West  Indian  planters. 
That  emancipation  greatly  dislocated  labour  in  the  West 
Indies,  is  beyond  a  doubt;  nor  could  such  a  sudden 
change  take  place  without  less  or  more  social  disturb- 
ance. The  plans  of  gradual  emancipation  pursued  in 
the  Northern  states  were,  however,  attended  with  so 
little  difficulty  to  farmers,  notwithstanding  their  fears 
on  the  subject,  as  ought  to  convince  the  South  that 
processes  of  emancipation  are  not  in  all  circumstances 
ruinous. 

In  the  bountifulness  of  a  sub-tropical  climate,  we 
are  aware  that  persons  of  idle  habits,  reared  under 
forced  labour,  will  be  inclined  to  depend  more  on 
simple  natural  products  for  subsistence  than  on  settled 
wages.  But  from  this  state  of  demoralisation  there 
is  a  rebound,  as  is  instanced  in  the  British  colonies. 
Things  right  themselves  at  last.  On  this  point,  we 
cannot  do  better  than  offer  some  remarks  which  lately 
appeared  in  an  ably  conducted  print,  the  Anti-slavery 
Advocate :  * 

'The  impression,  we  believe,  prevails  among  the 
American  planters,  that  the  British  West  Indies  are 
rapidly  returning  to  a  state  of  nature;  and  especially 
are  fast  abandoning  the  sugar-cane,  as  too  much  for 
the  energies  of  free  labour.     Happily,  the  commercial 


*    XTnml 


Number  for  February  1857.     Tweedie,  Strand,  London. 


ECONOMIC    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT.  161 

returns  dispel  this  ridiculous  illusion.  Slavery  was 
abolished  by  the  Act  of  1833 ;  the  system  of  forced 
labour  being  still  continued  for  some  years  under  the 
name  of  apprenticeship,  and  the  monopoly  by  differ- 
ential duties  remaining  unbroken  until  1845.  If  we 
take  the  produce  of  the  three  years  1835,  1845,  and 
1855,  we  shall  see  at  a  glance,  1st,  The  latest  achieve- 
ments of  the  slave  system  with  protection  duties; 
2dly}  The  result  of  free  labour  without  free  trade; 
and  3dly,  The  most  recent  operation  of  a  system  doubly 
free.  In  the  first  of  the  three  selected  years,  our  slave 
colonies  (West  Indies  and  Mauritius)  furnished  for 
home  consumption  only,  178,000  tons  of  sugar  and 
molasses;  in  the  second,  180,626;  in  the  third, 
211,631.  Thus  the  free  produce,  instead  of  dwindling 
away  in  obedience  to  prediction,  has  increased  about 
19  per  cent.  Still,  while  defending  the  results  of  the 
great  British  experiment  from  misapprehension,  we  are 
far  from  denying  that  the  curse  of  slavery  has  been 
redeemed  by  vast  effort  and  sacrifice.  Nor  could  it 
be  removed  from  the  adjacent  continent  without  still 
greater  and  more  protracted  loss,  during  the  transition 
to  a  better  system.  Under  slavery  alone  do  men  exist 
for  the  mere  soil's  sake.  With  freedom,  nature 
reasserts  her  rights,  and  the  soil  is  found  to  exist  for 
the  sake  of  men :  and  as  in  Jamaica,  so  in  America, 
the  labourer,  left  at  his  own  disposal,  will  be  content 
with  the  kind  and  degree  of  work  which  suffices  to 
supply  his  customary  wants.  It  is  not  reasonable  to 
expect  from  the  African,  trained  in  the  worship  of 
idleness,  a  spontaneous  and  superfluous  industry.  The 
energy  which  only  the  competition  of  numbers  extorts 
from  a  white  peasantry,  will  reserve  itself  for  the  same 
stimulus  among  the  coloured  races.'  The  writer 
candidly  adds,  that  it  would  be  {  a  waste  of  time  to 
discuss  the  relative  cheapness  or  clearness  of  free  labour 

K 


162  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

under  conditions  which  tempt  it  to  retire  from  market 
altogether.  Such  conditions,  we  fear,  are  present  over 
a  large  area  in  the  southern  states,  and  constrain  us  to 
admit  a  powerful,  though  not  permanent,  economic 
interest  in  favour  of  the  existing  system.'* 

The  South  is,  happily,  not  without  examples  of 
successful  free  rural  labour  within  the  slave  states. 
There  are  now  nourishing  colonies  of  New  Englanders 
and  other  settlers  in  Western  Virginia,  Scotch  in 
Georgia,  and  more  particularly  Germans  in  Texas — 
these  latter  already  considerable  in  numbers.  We 
shall  immediately  call  attention  to  the  account  of 
a  thriving  German  settlement  given  by  Mr  Olmsted, 
who  visited  it  in  1856.  The  same  writer  has  done 
good  service  to  his  country  in  describing  the  in- 
dustrial arrangements  on  a  large    rice-plantation  in 

Georgia,  belonging  to  a  Mr  X ,  whose  treatment 

of  his  '  servants '  is  of  the  most  exemplary  kind.  To 
all  the  slaves,  tasks  are  assigned  according  to  their 
ability.  The  tasks  are  so  moderate,  that  many  finish 
their  labour  at  three  or  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon ; 
and  they  can  employ  the  remainder  of  the  day  in 
labouring  for  themselves.  They  are  allowed  half-acre 
lots  of  land,  besides  a  garden,  to  cultivate  on  their 
own  behalf.  They  are  likewise  at  liberty  to  keep  swine 
and  fowls.  All  they  do  not  need  for  themselves,  they 
sell.     The  family  of  Mr  X— — —  have  no  other  supply 

*  'At  a  meeting  held  in  the  Mansion  House,  London,  January  5,  1857,  for 
the  purpose  of  presenting  a  testimonial  to  Dr  Livingstone,  Mr  Montgomery 
Martin  stated  that  he  had  recently  visited  the  West  Indies,  to  ascertain  if  the 
emancipation  of  the  slaves  had  produced  ruin  there.  "  He  found  there  a  free, 
happy,  and  prosperous  population;  and,  speaking  commercially,  the  West 
Indies  now  yielded  more  rum,  sugar,  and  other  produce,  than  it  had  ever  done 
during  the  existence  of  slavery.  Since  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the  West 
Indies,  not  a  drop  of  blood  was  shed — not  a  single  crime  was  committed — 
nor  was  there  any  destruction  of  property  throughout  the  whole  of  the  West 
Indies." ' 


ECONOMIC    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT.  163 

of  poultry  and  eggs  than  what  is  so  obtained  from  their 
own  negroes;  they  also  purchase  game  from  them. 
By  these  various  means,  the  slaves  realise  money,  and 
actually   become   creditors   of  their  master.     At  the 

time   of    Mr   Olmsted's  visit,    Mr   X owed    his 

slaves  1500  dollars. 

The  picture  here  presented  is  truly  suggestive.  We 
are  sure  our  readers  will  be  glad  to  see  the  result  at 
which  Mr  Olmsted  arrives.  "The  ascertained  prac- 
ticability of  thus  dealing  with  slaves,  together  with  the 
obvious  advantages  of  the  method  of  working  them 
by  tasks,  which  I  have  described,  seem  to  me  to  indi- 
cate that  it  is  not  so  impracticable  as  is  generally 
supposed,  if  only  it  was  desired  by  those  having  the 
power,  to  rapidly  extinguish  slavery,  and  while  doing 
so,  to  educate  the  negro  for  taking  care  of  himself,  in 
freedom.  *■  Let,  for  instance,  any  slave  be  provided  with 
all  things  he  will  demand,  as  far  as  practicable,  and 
charge  him  for  them  at  certain  prices — honest,  market 
prices  for  his  necessities,  higher  prices  for  harmless 
luxuries,  and  excessive,  but  not  absolutely  prohibitory, 
prices  for  everything  likely  to  do  him  harm.  Credit 
him,  at  a  fixed  price,  for  every  day's  work  he  does, 
and  for  all  above  a  certain  easily  accomplished  task  in 
a  day,  at  an  increased  price,  so  that  his  reward  will 
be  in  an  increasing  ratio  to  his  perseverance.  Let  the 
prices  of  provisions  be  so  proportioned  to  the  price  of 
taskwork,  that  it  will  be  about  as  easy  as  it  is  now 
for  him  to  obtain  a  bare  subsistence.  When  he  has 
no  food  and  shelter  due  him,  let  him  be  confined  in 
solitude,  or  otherwise  punished,  until  he  asks  for 
opportunity  to  earn  exemption  from  punishment  by 
labour. 

fWhen  he  desires  to  marry,  and  can  persuade  any 
woman  to  marry  him,  let  the  two  be  dealt  with  as  in 
partnership.     Thus,  a  young  man  or  young  woman  will 


164  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

be  attractive,  somewhat  in  proportion  to  his  or  her 
reputation  for  industry  and  providence.  Thus  industry 
and  providence  "will  become  fashionable.  Oblige  them 
to  purchase  food  for  their  children,  and  let  them  have 
the  benefit  of  their  children's  labour,  and  they  -will  be 
careful  to  teach  their  children  to  avoid  waste,  and  to 
honour  labour.  Let  those  who  have  not  gained  credit 
while  hale  and  young,  sufficient  to  support  themselves 
in  comfort  when  prevented  by  age  or  infirmity  from 
further  labour,  be  supported  by  a  tax  upon  all  the 
negroes  of  the  plantation,  or  of  a  community.  Im- 
providence, and  pretence  of  inability  to  labour,  will 
then  be  disgraceful. 

1  When  any  man  has  a  balance  to  his  credit  equal  to 
his  value  as  a  slave,  let  that  constitute  him  a  free  man. 
It  will  be  optional  with  him  and  his  employer,  whether 
he  shall  continue  longer  in  the  relation  of  servant. 
If  desirable  for  both  that  he  should,  it  is  probable  that 
he  will;  for  unless  he  is  honest,  prudent,  industrious, 
and  discreet,  he  will  not  have  acquired  the  means  of 
purchasing  his  freedom.' 

Our  author  adds,  that  such  a  system  would  partake 
of  the  emancipation  law  of  Cuba,  where,  he  says, 
'  every  slave  has  the  privilege  of  emancipating  himself, 
by  paying  a  price  which  does  not  depend  upon  the 
selfish  exactions  of  the  masters;  but  it  is  either  a  fixed 
price,  or  else  is  fixed,  in  each  case,  by  disinterested 
appraisers.  The  consequence  is,  that  emancipations 
are  constantly  going  on,  and  the  free  people  of  colour 
are  becoming  enlightened,  cultivated,  and  wealthy.  In 
no  part  of  the  United  States  do  they  occupy  the  high 
social  position  which  they  enjoy  in  Cuba/ 

It  is  exceedingly  to  be  regretted,  that  the  South, 
for  whatever  reason,  should  reject  explanations  on 
matters  of  this  kind ;  for  from  the  facts  above  advanced 
from  credible  authorities,  the  planters  do   themselves 


ECONOMIC    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT.  165 

less  than  justice  by  the  course  they  have  hitherto 
thought  fit  to  pursue.  Perhaps  they  unite  in  the 
common  belief,  that  cotton  could  not  possibly  be  culti- 
vated by  free  white  labour.  Olmsted's  description  of  the 
German  colony  of  New-Braunfels,  in  Texas,  puts  this 
notion  to  flight.  He  found  hundreds  of  small  farms 
on  which  cotton  was  cultivated  year  after  year  by  white 
farmers  and  their  families — 'the  result,  a  total  of 
800  bales,  which,  at  Galveston,  brought  from  one  to 
two  cents  a  pound  more  than  that  produced  by  slaves, 
owing  to  the  more  careful  handling  of  white  and 
personally  interested  labour.'  He  adds,  that  these  800 
bales,  though  a  drop  in  the  bucket  to  the  whole  crop, 
are  a  very  substantial  evidence  of  the  possibilities  of  not 
only  white,  but  well-regulated  free  labour  in  the  South.' 

We  can  readily  understand  that  the  present  urgent 
demand  for  cotton,  indisposes  planters  to  run  any  risks 
in  exchanging  slave  for  free  black,  and  it  may  be,  free 
white  labour.  They  must  at  the  same  time  feel,  how- 
ever, that  their  tenure  of  slave-property  is  far  from 
secure — that  they  sleep  on  a  volcano,  which  may  any 
day  overwhelm  them  and  their  possessions — or,  at  the 
very  least,  that,  from  revelations  recently  made  of 
southern  policy,  the  sentiments  of  every  civilised  nation 
are  setting  more  steadily  against  them. 

There  are  other  considerations.  We  have  reason  to 
believe  that  a  considerable  and  steadily  directed  effort 
will  speedily  be  made,  in  Great  Britain,  to  procure  sup- 
plies of  cotton  from  India  and  Africa,  where,  by  means 
of  cheap  labour,  improved  machinery,  railways,  English 
capital,  and  other  advantages,  it  is  hoped  that  the  cotton 
produce  will  rise  materially  in  quantity  and  quality. 
This  effort  arises  from  no  bad  feeling  towards  American 
planters,  but  from  the  circumstance,  that  they  cannot 
send  us  a  sufficient  supply  of  cotton,  great  as  that  is — 
1,758,301  bags  in  1856;  the  total  consumption  of  all 


166  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

kinds  of  cotton  in  Great  Britain,  per  annum,  being 
2,468,160  packages,  and  more  wanted.  It  is  not 
expected  that  the  demand  for  the  finer  kinds  of 
American  cotton  will  be  lessened;  yet,  the  successful 
opening  of  fresh  fields  of  culture  could  hardly  fail  to 
act  in  the  usual  way  of  competition,  by  lowering  prices, 
and  ultimately  diverting  trade  into  new  channels. 
The  anti-slavery  party  in  England  look  with  no  little 
interest  on  this  movement. 


WHAT     IS     TO     BE     DONE? 

The  reader  has  been  conducted  through  a  history — 
such  as  it  is — of  American  slavery,  and  been  made 
acquainted  with  some  prominent  features  in  its 
character.  He  perceives  that,  as  a  carefully  nourished 
institution,  it  imparts  a  tone  to  the  whole  social  system 
of  the  United  States,  interweaves  itself  with  the 
national  constitution,  laws,  usages,  sentiments,  the 
most  vital  principles  of  public  polity. 

Though  marvellous  in  many  respects,  this  institution 
has  not  seemingly  attained  its  full  proportions.  It  is 
still  growing.  Sixty-seven  years  ago,  under  a  million — 
now  approaching  five  millions — soon  there  will  be  ten 
millions  of  human  beings  in  the  condition  of  ( chattels 
personal' — a  nation  of  slaves  within  a  nation  of  free- 
men, a  people  dangerous  in  their  numbers  and  sense 
of  wrongs,  dangerous  as  an  engine  of  intestine  discords 
in  the  event  of  hostilities  with  an  unscrupulous  foreign 
enemy. 

Can  no  practicable  measures  be  devised  to  arrest  this 
monster  evil  in  its  desolating  course?  We  may  be 
better  able  to  reply  to  this  inquiry  after  glancing  at 
the  causes  which  have  conspired  to  bring  about 
present  results. 

Fir  sty  and  at  the  foundation  of  the  whole  mischief, 
lie  the  provisions  of  the  federal  constitution,  which,  as 
formerly  shewn,  pledge  the  whole  states  to  maintain 
slavery  inviolate  in  any  individual  state  where  it  exists 
— which  authorise  a  method  of  representation  in  the 
House  of  Representatives,  based  on  a  certain  numerical 
proportion  of  slaves;    whereby  the   southern  faction 


1G3  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

gains  thirty  votes — and  which,  by  giving  national 
efficacy  to  a  fugitive  slave  law,  bring  the  whole  country 
within  the  operation  of  southern  institutions. 

Practically,  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  is 
incapable  of  change.  To  amend  it,  there  would  need 
to  be  a  very  effective  rousing  of  public  feeling  through- 
out the  various  states.  Congress  must  be  besieged  with 
petitions — which  would  have  little  effect,  constituted 
as  that  body  now  is.  Supposing  this  difficulty  to  be 
overcome,  a  proposal  for  amendment  must  be  concurred 
in  by  two-thirds  of  both  branches  of  congress — 
hopeless.  Supposing  this  difficulty  also  overcome, 
conventions  to  take  the  matter  into  consideration 
must  be  called  by  the  legislatures  of  the  several 
states.  Lastly,  the  decision  of  the  conventions  must 
be  ratified  by  three-fourths  of  the  states ;  by  which  is 
inferred  the  consent  of  six  of  the  slave  states — hopeless. 
To  all  appearance,  therefore,  reform  is  constitutionally 
impossible. 

Second.  With  such  constitutional  advantages  in  its 
favour,  as  well  as  by  superior  address,  the  southern 
party  has  obtained  such  political  supremacy,  as  enables 
it  to  secure  northern  votes.  Having  thus  a  majority 
in  congress,  it  has  from  time  to  time,  by  legislative 
measures,  extended  slavery  over  newly  acquired  terri- 
tories; and  judging  from  recent  elections,  it  has  now  a 
greater  power  of  doing  so  than  ever. 

Third.  Northern  selfishness,  by  which  freedom  and 
independence  are  bartered  for  place,  pay,  commercial 
monopoly,  and  other  material  interests. 

Fourth — although  this  might  almost  be  placed  first 
— There  is  the  universal  desire  to  support  the  Union, 
which,  having  attained  great  eminence  and  glory,  is, 
right  or  wrong,  idolised  to  a  very  extraordinary  degree. 

Fifth.  Fears  of  destroying  this  object  of  worship, 
along  with  the  blinding  effects  of  political  partisanship, 


WHAT    IS    TO    BE    DONE?  163 

produce  a  Public  Opinion  that  acts  despotically  in  sup- 
pressing freedom  of  speech ;  wherefore,  all  who  express 
a  detestation  of  slavery,  and  agitate  for  its  restriction 
or  extinction,  are  proscribed  as  e abolitionists ' — a  name, 
in  popular  acceptation,  synonymous  with  everything 
that  is  infamous. 

Sixth.  The  propagation  of  corrupt  doctrines  by 
religious  teachers  of  almost  every  denomination,  to 
the  effect  that  slavery  is  an  institution  beneficently 
designed  by  Providence  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  its 
victims.  And  along  with  this  agency  may  be  classed 
the  dissemination  of  pro-slavery  sentiments,  and  the 
ridicule  of  anti-slavery  efforts,  by  a  great  part  of  the 
press,  which  takes  its  tone  from  Public  Opinion. 

Seventh.  The  prejudice  respecting  colour  throughout 
the  greater  part  of  the  free  states ;  and  the  notion, 
generally,  that  the  negro  is  from  nature  of  an  inferior 
and  servile  race. 

Eighth.  The  continually  growing  demand  for  cotton, 
before  which  every  consideration  of  humanity,  or  dread 
of  consequences,  disappears. 

Some  other  causes  might  be  assigned  ;  as,  for 
example,  party  violence  by  mobs  at  elections,  by 
which  quietly  disposed  and  respectable  persons  are 
driven  from  the  field  of  politics,  and  power  handed 
over  to  those  who  aim  as  much  at  selfish  ends  as  the 
public  advantage.  And  then,  to  account  for  these 
scenes  of  violence,  as  well  as  for  much  newspaper 
abuse,  we  might  allude  to  the  strange  practice  of  dis- 
charging almost  all  government-officers  and  appointing 
new  ones,  according  to  political  changes,  by  which 
a  state  of  disorder  is  kept  up  in  the  country  by  all 
classes  of  office-seekers. 

Out  of  this  complication  of  causes,  we  leave  any 
one  to  say  how  American  slavery  is  to  be  alleviated. 
Congress   has   only   a    power   of  restraining    it  from 


170  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

entering  the  territories — and  even  this  power  is  not 
undisputed.  Slavery  can  be  legally  abolished  only  by 
the  separate  action  of  each  individual  state ;  and  within 
each  slave  state  there  exists  a  dominating  power, 
apparently  impervious  to  any  reasonable  proposition 
on  the  subject.  Not  even  the  respective  legislatures 
of  these  states  could  relax  the  slave  code,,  without  a 
very  general  consent  of  the  people.  In  the  matter 
of  slavery,  Vigilance  Committees  are  above  all  law. 
And  measures  for  emancipation,  supposing  them 
attempted,  might  be  followed  by  revolution. 

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  an  evil  so  conspicuous, 
so  fraught  with  probabilities  of  mischief,  and,  to  say 
the  least  of  it,  so  damaging  to  the  character  of  those 
by  whom  it  is  cherished,  should  have  escaped  the 
notice  of  Americans.  But  unfortunately,  it  has  never 
attained  the  position  of  a  public  or  generally  discussed 
question — it  seems  as  though  an  impression  prevailed 
that  nothing  could  be  made  of  it,  or  that  for  certain 
reasons  it  was  improper  to  speak  of  it  at  all.  Slavery, 
in  short,  is  a  kind  of  tabooed  subject  in  the  States.  It 
is  not  an  agreeable  thing  to  think  of,  certainly  not  to 
talk  about. 

When  tourists,  in  their  curiosity  to  arrive  at  the 
truth,  refer  to  this  grievous  evil,  they  find  little  to  put 
in  their  note-book.  The  best  they  get  is  the  pious 
remark,  'that  slavery  is  one  of  those  sad  evils  which 
will  doubtless  pass  away  in  God's  own  good  time/ 
And,  thus,  worthy  people  consoling  themselves  with  a 
highly  edifying  sentiment,  go  placidly  to  sleep,  and 
leave  slavery  to  take  its  chance.  It  must  be  deemed 
odd  that  this  great  people,  renowned  for  their  shrewd- 
ness, should  for  any  reason  shrink  from  the  open 
discussion  of  a  social  question  which  so  intimately 
concerns  their  welfare.  { Abolition '  haunts  them  like  a 
spectre.     Let  us  have  a  look  at  this  terrible  apparition. 


WHAT    IS    TO    BE    DONE  i  171 

A  number  of  years  ago,  there  sprung  up  anti-slavery 
societies,  differing  considerably  in  their  views.  Some 
of  the  older  associations  have  disappeared,  others  with 
more  vitality  have  become  permanent.  The  American 
Anti-slavery  Society,  located  at  New  York,  takes  the 
lead  among  existing  institutions.  Massachusetts  has 
several  associations  in  vigorous  operation,  the  chief  one, 
as  we  believe,  being  called  the  Massachusetts  Anti- 
slavery  Society,  which  began  in  1832,  and  holds  annual 
festivals  of  much  oratorical  importance.  This  society 
was  formed  e  on  the  ground  of  the  Absolute  Sin  of 
Slaveholding,  and  the  Duty  of  Immediate  and  Uncon- 
ditional Emancipation.7  The  president  is  William  Lloyd 
Garrison;  and  among  the  office-bearers  or  adherents 
are  other  leading  abolitionists  —  Wendell  Phillips, 
Samuel  May,  Edmund  Quincey,  Maria  M.  Chapman, 
Lucy  Stone,  Lucretia  Mott,  and  Theodore  Parker. 
The  abolitionists,  represented  by  these  and  similar 
societies,  will  make  no  compromise  on  the  subject  of 
slavery;  nor  do  they  design  to  work  through  religious 
or  political  organisations.  They  declare,  there  is  an 
inherent  wickedness  in  slavery,  with  which  there  can 
be  no  association.  It  is  not  clear  to  us  from  their 
writings  what  is  their  plan  for  effecting  '  immediate 
emancipation.'  We  presume,  they  merely  insist  that 
the  whole  of  the  slaves  should  be  instantly  liberated, 
without  compensation  to  owners,  and  without  any 
preparation,  educational  or  otherwise,  for  the  enjoy- 
ment of  freedom.  A  number  of  the  members  are 
Non-resistants — a  class  of  persons  who  repudiate  the 
federal  constitution,  and  decline  to  take  any  part  in 
elections.  Those  who  entertain  these  ultra  views, 
desire  to  dissolve  the  Union,  in  order  to  be  entirely 
rid  of  any  connection  with  the  South. 

Next  comes  the  Liberty  party,  which  also  advocates 
immediate  emancipation,  but  does  not  think  so  badly  of 


172  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

the  constitution,  and  accordingly  is  opposed  to  a  dis- 
solution of  the  Union.  Its  members  do  not  withdraw 
from  their  church  relations,  on  account  of  slavery,  and 
hope  to  effect  their  purposes  by  moderate  means. 
Many  of  the  party  are  connected  with  societies,  which 
rely  on  the  diffusion  of  religious  knowledge  in  the 
South  as  one  of  the  best  plans  for  promoting  anti- 
slavery  sentiments  in  that  quarter. 

We  believe  the  Liberty  party  is  now  pretty  nearly 
swallowed  up  in  the  new  Republican  party.  Europeans 
have  heard  much  lately  of  the  Republicans,  and  it  is 
interesting  to  know  what  really  is  their  anti-slavery 
doctrine.  In  point  of  fact,  they  are  not  abolitionists  at 
all.  No  doubt,  many  members  would  wish  immediate 
emancipation,  and  their  papers  and  orations  in  favour 
of  liberty  are  unexceptionable.  But  the  members  gene- 
rally are  only  Free-soilers.  They  disclaim  any  intention 
of  meddling  with  slavery  where  it  exists,  and  will  be 
satisfied  with  seeing  it  kept  out  of  the  territories,  which 
would  doubtless  be  a  great  point  gained.  They  do  not 
advocate  a  dissolution  of  the  Union ;  though  it  is  not 
unlikely,  should  other  projects  fail,  that  they  will 
come  to  that.  They  have  confident  anticipations  of 
carrying  Fremont  as  president  in  1860,  and  live  on  in 
this  hope.  To  this  great  political  organisation  belong 
Charles  Sumner,  Hall,  Giddings,  Chase,  Henry  Ward 
Bcecher,  Seward,  and  Horace  Greeley. 

Finally,  we  might  mention  the  party  called  Union- 
savers,  represented  by  Fillmore,  who  look  upon  slavery 
as  a  bad  thing  in  principle,  but  deprecate  all  agitation 
on  the  subject.  By  lending  themselves  politically 
to  the  democrats,  they  sink  the  question  of  slavery 
altogether,  and  serve  materially  to  impose  that  restraint 
on  free  opinion  which  is  so  injurious  to  the  cause  of 
freedom. 

It  will  be  observed  that  among  these  parties  there 


WHAT   IS   TO   BE    DONE?  173 

is  only  one  entitled  to  be  called  true  abolitionists ;  all 
the  others  postponing  the  question  of  emancipation, 
or  subordinating  it  to  certain  political  and  religious 
considerations. 

As  a  reason  for  persecuting  abolitionists,  it  has  been 
alleged  that  their  object  is  to  stir  up  mischief  in  the 
South;  that  by  means  of  tracts  and  other  agencies, 
they  endeavour  to  spread  incendiary  doctrines,  and 
place  the  owners  of  slaves  in  constant  danger  of 
insurrection  and  loss  of  property.  It  is  further 
alleged,  that  the  laws  against  teaching  slaves  to  read, 
are  a  consequence  of  these  attempts  to  promote  dis- 
content through  the  press;  and  that  the  proceedings 
of  abolitionists  generally  having  greatly  exasperated 
the  slaveholders,  the  condition  of  slaves  was  now  very 
much  worse  than  if  there  had  been  no  abolition 
movement.  There  is  perhaps  some  truth,  but  also 
some  error,  in  these  statements.* 

It  may,  we  think,  be  candidly  admitted,  that  the 
ultra-abolitionists — like  the  old  English  Puritans  and 
the  Scotch  Covenanters — take  extreme  views  of  the 
subject,  are  rather  intractable,  and,  from  conscientious 
but  not  extensively  appreciated  motives,  do  not  scruple 
to  denounce  what  they  consider  to  be  a  great  national 
sin.  Thus,  they  give  offence.  Their  language  is  occa- 
sionally coarse  and  irreverent.  For  example,  one  of 
Garrison's  common  expressions  is,  that  'the  United 
States  constitution  is  a  Covenant  with  Death,  and  an 

*  According  to  the  Baltimore  American,  slaves  are  now  much  better 
treated  than  formerly :  '  Though  abolitionists  may  disguise  the  fact,  the 
general  current  of  legislation  at  the  South  for  years  past  has  been  in  favour 
of  the  slave.  His  rights  have  been  more  looked  after,  his  person  better 
protected ;  and  when  these  ends  have  not  been  sought  by  positive  enactment, 
the  gradual  but  firm  influence  of  the  moral  sentiment  of  the  people  has 
tended  practically  to  the  most  beneficial  amelioration  of  his  condition.' 
If  this  be  correct,  what  becomes  of  the  charge  that  the  proceedings  of 
abolitionists  have  greatly  aggravated  the  hardships  of  the  slaves  ? 


174  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

Agreement  with  Hell' — an  abuse  of  Scriptural  phrase- 
ology not  exactly  accordant  with  modern  notions.  It 
may  be  also  allowed  that  the  anti-slavery  cause  has 
been  sullied  by  unseemly  party  differences,  and  that, 
assuming  the  worst  qualities  of  sectarians,  its  adherents 
have  too  often  demonstrated  a  spirit  of  intolerance 
and  persecution. 

Until  very  lately,  we  were  disposed  to  think  that  no 
abolitionists  had  gone  the  length  of  recommending 
insurrection  as  a  means  of  abolition ;  and  still  it  would 
be  hard  to  fix  the  charge  of  doing  so  on  the  whole  party 
which  should  in  justice  apply  only  to  a  few  of  the  less 
prudent  members.  We  here  allude  to  certain  propo- 
sitions of  Frederick  Douglass,  in  his  newspaper  for 
November  28,  1856,  in  which  he  appears  to  contend 
for  the  right  and  duty  of  revolt.*  Garrison,  on  the 
other  hand,  who  is  in  many  respects  a  remarkable  man 
— bold,  independent,  and  indefatigable — has,  we  believe, 
always  disclaimed  an  appeal  to  physical  violence,  and 
by  the  force  of  his  character  has  stamped  a  pacific 
policy  on  the  movement  with  which  he  is  associated. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  opinions  entertained 

*  '  While  we  feel  bound  to  use  all  our  powers  of  persuasion  and  argument ; 
to  welcome  every  instrumentality  that  promises  to  peacefully  destroy  that 
perpetual  contemner  of  God's  laws,  and  disturber  of  a  nation's  peace — 
Slavery;  we  yet  feel  that  its  peaceful  annihilation  is  almost  hopeless,  and 
hence  stand  by  the  doctrines  enunciated  in  those  resolutions,  and  contend 
that  the  slave's  light  to  revolt  is  perfect,  and  only  wants  the  occurrence  of 

favourable  circumstances  to  become  a  duty We  cannot  but  shudder 

as  we  call  to  mind  the  horrors  that  have  ever  marked  servile  insurrections — 
we  would  avert  them  if  we  could ;  but  shall  the  millions  for  ever  submit  to 
robbery,  to  murder,  to  ignorance,  and  every  unnamed  evil  which  an  irre- 
sponsible tyranny  can  devise,  because  the  overthrow  of  that  tyranny  would  be 
productive  of  horrors  ?  We  say  not.  The  recoil,  when  it  comes,  will  be  in 
exact  proportion  to  the  wrongs  inflicted ;  terrible  as  it  will  be,  we  accept  and 
hope  for  it.  The  slaveholder  has  been  tried  and  sentenced,  his  execution 
only  waits  the  finish  to  the  training  of  his  executioners.  He  is  training  his 
own  executioners.' 


WHAT    IS    TO    BE    DONE?  175 

respecting'  abolitionist  doctrines,  the  time  has  come 
when  they  must  be  spoken  of  at  least  in  terms  of 
extenuation.  The  occurrences  of  the  last  twelve 
months  have  immeasurably  advanced  the  anti-slavery 
cause  in  the  minds  of  Europeans ;  and  we  may  add,  that 
on  the  relative  situation  of  abolitionists  and  slaveholders 
a  new  and  more  distinct  light  has  been  thrown.  The 
recent  declaration  by  leading  organs  in  the  South, 
that  slavery  was  there  and  there  for  ever — that  no  plan 
of  emancipation  would  be  listened  to — that  slavery  is 
a  natural  and  proper  institution — that  free  society  has 
been  a  failure — that  the  whole  free  coloured  and  poor 
white  population  of  the  States  should  be  reduced  to 
perpetual  bondage — that  the  foreign  slave  trade  ought 
to  be  revived — together  with  eulogies  on  slavery  by  the 
Governors  of  a  state,  and  also  by  a  President  of  the 
United  States — declarations  by  the  highest  authorities 
that  there  is  an  inherent  vitality  in  slavery  which  will 
insure  its  illimitable  growth ;  and  a  distinct  avowal  of 
the  design  to  absorb  new  countries  for  the  sake  of 
protecting  and  greatly  extending  the  institution — these 
extraordinary  announcements,  along  with  the  unprovoked 
and  unredressed  outrages  committed  by  Missourians  in 
Kansas,  the  brutal  assault  of  Brooks  on  Mr  Sumner, 
not  to  speak  of  other  barbarities,  defended  and  gloried 
in — all  this,  we  say,  entirely  alters  the  aspect  under 
which  we  are  to  view  the  operations  of  the  abolitionists. 
As  long  as  the  world  was  under  the  impression  that 
a  calm  consideration  of  emancipation  was  postponed 
in  consequence  of  the  intemperate  harangues  of  what 
were  deemed  a  body  of  fanatics,  the  slaveholders  com- 
manded that  degree  of  sympathy  which  was  thought 
to  be  due  to  their  undesired  and  very  unfortunate 
situation.  But  now,  with  the  facts  before  us,  we  are 
at  a  loss  to  see  how  the  matter  is  to  be  treated  in 
the  same  indulgent  spirit. 


176  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

Lamenting  the  past  rudeness  with  which  abolitionists 
have  pressed  their  opinions — believing  they  would 
have  more  successfully  promoted  their  aims  by  using 
milder  persuasives — persons  of  enlarged  views  will 
join  us  in  looking  beyond  the  Faneuil  Hall  and  Exeter 
Hall  aspect  of  the  anti-slavery  cause.  This  cause  is 
not  to  be  regarded  merely  as  it  affects  the  blacks,  but 
the  whites — not  merely  the  South,  but  the  North — 
not  merely  the  United  States,  but  the  whole  family  of 
mankind.  All  the  communities  on  earth  are  interested 
in  the  solution  of  this  mighty  question — which,  like 
other  social  questions  of  any  consequence,  has  had  to 
pass  primarily  through  the  hands  of  agitators  who  care 
little  for  conventional  respectabilities.  The  question, 
we  apprehend,  has  now  got  beyond  the  narrow  sphere 
of  anti-slavery  societies.  Supposing,  that  the  whole 
of  the  associations  were  dissolved  and  done  with,  that 
no  such  men  as  Garrison,  Wendell  Phillips,  or  Sumner 
were  in  existence,  we  return  to  general  principles,  and 
hope  it  will  not  be  thought  intrusive,  if  we  ask  the 
American  people  to  be  so  good  as  explain,  what  they 
propose  to  do  with  four  millions  of  negro  slaves  and 
their  progeny  ? 

Abolition  principles  are  said  to  be  making  progress 
in  the  North.  The  protracted  struggle  in  Kansas 
affords  evidence  of  a  desire  somewhere,  to  outflank 
slavery  on  its  own  ground.  Still,  there  is  a  universal 
disinclination  to  meddle  with  southern  institutions.  If 
we  admit  that  an  important  end  is  gained  by  excluding 
slavery  from  Kansas,  is  there  not  the  great  south  and 
south-west  at  disposal?  From  Texas  and  New  Mexico, 
a  number  of  new  slave  states  may  be  carved  out.  We 
are  aware  that  by  the  more  sanguine  class  of  American 
writers,  it  is  confidently  believed  that  Mexico,  peopled 
as  it  is  by  mixed  breeds  hostile  to  American  usages,  will 
form  an  impregnable  barrier  to  slavery  in  the  south- 


WHAT    IS    TO    BE    DONE?  177 

west.  How  like  one  of  the  delusive  fancies  ordinarily 
indulged  on  the  subject !  With  power  in  the  hands  of 
the  pro-slavery  party,  and  under  a  pressure  for  labour, 
the  absorption  of  Mexico,  Central  America,  and  Cuba  is 
only  a  question  of  time  and  expediency.  The  very 
mixture  of  breeds  in  Mexico  invites  aggression.  In  the 
growing  scarcity  and  costliness  of  negroes,  there  lies  in 
that  doomed  country  ample  material  at  hand,  ready  for 
seizure  and  inter-state  deportation.  For  anything  the 
present  generation  can  tell,  the  South,  Mexico  included, 
may,  some  hundreds  of  years  hence,  form  a  great  free 
republic  of  blacks,  the  refuge  of  oppressed  colour.  Such, 
indeed,  is  likely  to  be  the  case;  but  before  that  era 
comes  round,  what  suffering,  what  convulsions,  what 
bloodshed ! 

Slavery,  we  repeat,  is  seemingly  destined  to  push  far 
beyond  its  present  limits.     Is  no  check  practicable  ? 

The  Constitution — it  can  do  nothing. 

The  Republicans — they  possess  little  political  power  ; 
and  besides,  they  propose  to  act  solely  through  the 
constitution. 

The  North — the  majority  of  its  representatives 
faithless ;  confidence  in  politicians  gone. 

The  Anti-slavery  Societies — a  scattered  body,  with 
unfashionable  views,  and  no  political  weight. 

Enlightened  Opinion — suppressed  by  mob  violence  and 
outvoted;  the  less  opulent  and  more  numerous  classes 
being  democrats,  and  supporters  of  the  slave  power. 

The  South — resolute  in  maintaining  its  institutions, 
and  master  of  the  situation. 

Patience :  the  next  decennial  census  will  add  to  the 
number  of  members  in  congress  from  the  free  states;  the 
free  states  will  be  increased  in  number  by  Minnesota, 
Nebraska,  Oregon,  and  Washington — perhaps  so  much 
the  worse;  more  democratic  votes,  more  political 
manoeuvring,  more  slavery  ? 


178  AMERICAN    SLAVERY  AND    COLOUR. 

There  exists  a  hope  of  modifying  slavery,  by  a 
diversion  of  the  cotton  trade  from  America,  and  by 
a  removal  of  protective  duties.  A  falling  off  in  the 
demand  for  American  cotton,  by  lessening  the  demand 
for  negroes,  would  affect  the  slave-breeding  states,  and 
dispose  them  to  adopt  freedom.  By  the  removal  of 
protection,  the  present  compact  between  North  and 
South  would  be  greatly  shaken.  The  former  point 
is  for  the  consideration  of  Englishmen ;  the  latter  for 
that  of  Americans. 

There  is  another  hope  to  which  we  may  call  attention. 
It  is  the  possibility  of  creating  a  free  state  in  Western 
Texas,  by  means  of  the  German  and  other  European 
immigrants  who  have  settled  in  that  slave  section  of 
the  Union.  Whether  the  Eree-soilers  may  here  be  able 
to  outflank  slavery,  is  doubtful;  but  the  attempt  will 
be  made,  and  the  people  of  England  need  not  be  sur- 
prised to  learn  that  the  outrages  by  slaveholders  in 
Kansas  are  re-enacted  on  a  scale  of  greater  desperation 
near  the  shores  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico. 

We  would  not  willingly  resign  our  faith  in  the  capa- 
city of  Americans  for  overcoming  dangers  and  difficul- 
ties. They  possess  a  wonderful  power  of  rallying  when 
things  are  at  their  worst.  Some  grand  movement,  inspired 
by  virtuous  indignation  and  despair,  may  dislodge 
the  oligarchy  which  controls  public  policy  on  the  slave 
question.  New  Washingtons,  Franklins,  and  Quincey 
Adamses  may  arise,  to  sustain  the  cause  of  freedom, 
now  basely  pronounced  to  be  a  failure.  It  is  consoling 
to  know  that  sudden  and  unforeseen  changes  for  the 
better  take  place  in  the  social  as  in  the  physical 
atmosphere.  Luther's  reformation  was  precipitated  by 
the  sale  of  some  paltry  indulgences.  The  fear  of 
abolitionism,  which  now,  like  a  superstition,  hangs  over 
the  United  States,  preventing  the  dispassionate  con- 
sideration of  a  subject  of  momentous  concern,  may, 


WHAT    IS   TO    BE    DONE?  179 

from  some  unforeseen  cause,  be  speedily  and  happily- 
dispelled. 

Looking  at  matters  as  they  stand,  however,  making 
every  allowance  for  contingencies,  we  sorrowfully  admit 
that  these  events  do  not  seem  probable.  To  be  quite 
plain :  there  appear — at  least  on  the  surface — to  be  but 
two  expedients,  by  which  this  fearfully  embarrassed 
question  is  to  be  solved — Revolution,  Insurrection,  both 
to  be  earnestly  deprecated. 

Lately,  apart  from  the  old-school  abolitionists,  there 
have  sprung  up  societies  in  Massachusetts  and  other 
quarters,  with  the  distinctly  professed  object  of  dis- 
solving the  Union ;  in  order  that  the  free  states  may 
no  longer  be  associated  with,  or  made  responsible  for 
slave  institutions.  Which  states  are  to  be  disunited, 
these  societies  do  not  mention ;  that  apparently  being 
left  to  chance.  They  expect  to  operate  through  peti- 
tions to  congress — hopeless.  The  law,  unchangeable  by 
peaceful  means,  is  against  them ;  and  with  the  univer- 
sally prevailing  respect  for  the  Union,  which  with 
Americans  is  a  kind  of  sub-religion,  we  do  not  imagine 
that  the  doctrines  of  the  Disunionists  will  meet  with 
wider  acceptance  than  those  of  the  Abolitionists,  of 
which  they  are  only  a  new  version.* 

By  writers  who  have  taken  notice  of  this  new  move- 
ment, Disunion  is  disapproved  of,  on  the  ground  that 
if  effected,  slavery  would  be  maintained  with  greater 
vigour  in  the  South;  they  even  speculate  on  the  pro- 
bability of  some  millions  of  abject  whites  in  the  southern 
states  being  made  slaves.  We  think  differently.  The 
withdrawal  of  the  northern  states  from  the  confederacy 
whether  peacefully  or  by  armed  force,  would  so  shake 
and  weaken  the  whole  fabric  of  southern  institutions, 


*  For   Resolutions    proposed   at   a   Disunion    Convention    at  Worcester, 
Massachusetts,  see  Appendix. 


180  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

that  an  insurrection  by  the  slaves  would  be  inevitable 
— slavery  would  dissolve  in  a  sea  of  blood. 

The  South  knows  this.  It  has  often,  in  its  vaunting 
and  reckless  mode  of  speaking,  threatened  to  quit  the 
Union.     Let  it  try.* 

Feeling  its  power,  the  North,  if  true  to  itself  and 
animated  by  higher  motives,  could  in  a  short  space 
of  time  extinguish  slavery.  It  could  say  to  the  South : 
'  Unless  you  proceed  to  follow  our  example,  and  make 
provision  for  the  gradual  emancipation  of  your  slaves, 
the  partnership  between  us  must  be  dissolved ;  we  must 
quit  the  confederacy,  and  be  to  you  in  future  a  foreign 
country/  A  resolute  but  friendly  address  in  these 
terms  from  an  aggregate  convention  of  free  states  is 
what  civilisation  would  point  to,  instead  of  a  resort  to 
arms.  But  what  a  glow  of  patriotism — what  an  arousing 
of  sensibilities — what  a  casting  forth  of  selfishness — 
what  a  disruption  of  venerated  traditions — what  an 
enlightening  of  the  masses — must  ensue  before  the 
North  assumes  this  grand  attitude !  It  will  not  do 
so.     The  execution  of  the  threat  would  be  Revolution. 

A  declaration  of  independence  by  Massachusetts,  or 
any  other  single  state,  is  equally,  if  not  more  improb- 
able ;  for  that  would  be  equivalent  to  civil  war — an 
issue  not  likely  to  be  contemplated.  We  would  not, 
however,  say  with  any  certainty,  that  Massachusetts 

*  Mr  T.  D.  Arnold  of  Tennessee,  in  a  speech  in  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives, stated  the  case  correctly :  '  He  would  ask  his  southern  friends  what 
the  South  had  to  rely  on  if  the  Union  were  dissolved  ?  Suppose  the  disso- 
lution could  be  peaceably  effected — if  that  did  not  involve  a  contradiction 
in  terras — what  had  the  South  to  depend  upon?  All  the  crowned  heads 
were  against  her.  A  million  of  slaves  were  ready  to  rise  and  strike  for 
freedom  at  the  first  tap  of  the  drum.  They  were  cut  loose  from  their  friends 
at  the  North — friends  that  ought  to  be,  and  without  them  the  South  had  no 
friends — whither  were  they  to  look  for  protection?  How  were  they  to 
sustain  an  assault  from  England  or  France,  with  that  cancer  at  their  vitals  ? 
The  more  the  South  reflected,  the  more  clearly  she  must  see  that  she  had  a 
deep  and  vital  interest  in  maintaining  the  Union.' 


WHAT    IS   TO    BE    DONE?  181 

would  tamely  submit  to  a  very  lengthened  repetition  of 
the  indignities  to  which  it  has  latterly  been  subjected 
by  federal  agencies.  Spectators  at  a  distance  wait  with 
some  interest  to  see  which  is  to  be  the  last  outrage 
that  is  to  revive  the  spirit  of  Bunker's  Hill 

The  consideration  of  pacific  adjustment  being  deli- 
berately rejected,  and  Disunion,  Revolution,  or  Civil 
War  abjured — the  case  is  not  mended.  Slavery  goes 
on  uninterruptedly  in  its  course.  The  sore  spreads, 
festers,  and  the  longer  a  corrective  is  delayed,  the 
disease  becomes  worse,  the  danger  more  imminent. 

One  trembles  at  the  fatal  alternative :  Revolution — 
Insurrection.  Can  insurrection  be  avoided  either  way  ? 
Revolution  would  produce  insurrection.  Successful 
insurrection  would  be  followed  by  revolution;  for  we 
can  scarcely  expect  that  the  North  would  remain  in 
union  with  a  nation  of  blacks. 

But  while  the  whole  federal  power  may  be  brought 
to  suppress  revolt,  how  can  the  slaves  be  successful  in 
insurrection?  "War  with  one  of  the  great  European 
powers  would  furnish  the  means  at  once !  God  forbid 
that  we  should  advocate  such  a  crisis ;  but  the  history 
we  have  been  tracing  leads  the  mind,  however  reluct- 
antly, to  such  a  possibility;  and  it  is  impossible  to  avoid 
seeing  that  events  are  within  the  range  even  of  prob- 
ability which  would  render  insurrection,  if  it  occurred, 
not  only  formidable,  but  successful.  If  these  pages 
awaken,  before  it  is  too  late,  some  of  the  more  powerful 
minds  of  America  to  the  catastrophe  to  which,  in  the 
eyes  of  dispassionate  observers,  the  history  of  their 
country  seems  tending,  I  shall  not  have  written  in 
vain. 


APPENDIX 

ILLUSTRATIVE  SCRAPS  FROM  VARIOUS  SOURCES. 


GUILT   OP   GREAT  BRITAIN   IN  INTRODUCING    SLAVERY. 

Since  writing  the  early  chapters  of  the  present  volume,  my 
attention  has  been  called  to  a  work,  entitled  Who  is  to  Blame  ?  by 
James  Grahame,  Esq.,  author  of  a  History  of  the  United  States 
(London :  Smith  and  Elder,  1842).  Mr  Grahame's  object  is  to  shew 
that  British  traders  only  offered  facilities  to  the  colonists  for 
purchasing  slaves  ;  that  the  proprietary  colonies  adopted  slavery, 
and  strenuously  supported  it  of  their  own  accord;  and  that  the 
English  government  had  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  planting 
slavery  in  America.  We  recommend  Mr  Grahame's  scholarly  and 
temperately  written  work  to  the  perusal  of  those  who  feel  interested 
in  this  historical  question. 

Eeferring  to  a  panegyric  on  slavery  by  Governor  Miller  of  South 
Carolina,  as  early  as  1829,  Mr  Grahame  observes  : 

'  While  America  was  subject  to  British  domination,  no  magistrate 
of  an  American  state  ever  gave  the  sanction  of  magisterial  authority 
to  such  sentiments  as  these  ;  and  no  pulpit  was  ever  profaned  with 
the  apologies  for  slavery  which  the  clergymen  of  republican  America 
are  now  not  ashamed  to  preach.  Jonathan  Edwards,  the  most 
admirable  teacher  of  Christian  doctrine  and  pattern  of  Christian 
character  that  America,  or  perhaps  the  world,  has  produced  since 
the  apostolic  age,  during  the  ascendancy  of  Britain,  denounced  the 
system  of  slavery,  and  urged  its  immediate  abolition  by  his  country- 
men, with  a  boldness  and  security  of  unreproved  freedom  to  which 
the  present  race  of  Americans  are  utter  strangers.  And  was  it  then 
to  make  America  a  theatre  for  such  disgraceful  display  as  we  hav*e 
witnessed,  that  the  pious  Puritans  undertook  their  pilgrimage  to 
New  England — that  the  peaceful  Quakers  retired  to  Pennsylvania 
— that  Catholics  flying  from  persecution  in  Britain,  set  to  the  world 
the  first  example  of  religious  toleration  in  Maryland — that  La 
Fayette  and  Kosciusko  shed  their  blood  in  the  cause  of  American 
Independence — and  that  Washington,  Eranklin,  Adams,  Jefferson, 
Jay,  and  Henry,  made  for  themselves  and  their  country  a  glorious 
and  immortal  name  ?  Every  one  of  these  men  entertained  and 
expressed  a  strong  abhorrence  of  negro  slavery.  If,  by  fatal 
necessity,  America  must  copy,  in  her  civil  policy,  the  vices  as  well  as 
the  virtues  of  Greece  and  Rome — if  the  lawless  abuse  must  always 
be  proportioned  to  the  legitimate  enjoyment  of  freedom — then  is 
America  fated  to  afford  the  most  humiliating  illustration  ever 
witnessed  by  the  world,  of  Milton's  melancholy  sentiment : 

"  Since  the  original  lapse,  true  liberty 
Is  lost,  -which  always  with  right  reason  dwells 
Twinn'd,  and  from  her  hath  no  dividual  being."  ' 


184 


AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 


POPULATION    OP    THE   UNITED    STATES    ACCORDING    TO    THE    SEVENTH 
CENSUS,    AND   REPRESENTATIVES    IN    CONGRESS.* 


States. 


Maine, 

New  Hampshire, 

Vermont,  . 

Massachusetts, 

Rhode  Island,    . 

Connecticut,  . 

New  York, 

New  Jersey,  . 

Pennsylvania,    . 

Delaware, 

Maryland, .        . 

Virginia, 

North  Carolina, 

South        //       , 

Georgia,    . 

Florida, 

Alabama,  . 

Mississippi, 

Louisiana, 

Texas,    . 

Arkansas,  . 

Tennessee, 

Kentucky, 

Missouri, 

Ohio, 

Michigan, 

Indiana,     . 

Illinois, 

Wisconsin, 

Iowa,     . 

California, 

Total, 

Dist.  of  Columbia, 
Minnesota, 
New  Mexico, 
Oregon, 

Utah, 

Total,  . 


White 
Population. 


581,813 
317,456 
313,402 
985,450 
143,875 
363,099 

3,048,325 
465,513 

2,258,463 
71,169 
417,943 
894,800 
553,028 
274,567 
521,572 
47,211 
426,486 
295,718 
255,491 
154,034 
1G2,189 
756,753 
761,417 
592,004 

1,955,108 
395,097 
977,628 
846,035 
304,758 
191,879 
91,632 


19,423,915 

38,027 

6,038 

61,530 

13,  OSS 
11,330 


Free 
Coloured 
Popula- 
tion. 


1,356 

520 

718 

9,064 

3,670 

7,693 

49,069 

23,820 

53,323 

18,073 

74,723 

54,333 

27,463 

8,956 

2,931 

921 

2,293 

930 

17,462 

397 

60S 

(3,401 

10,007 

2,618 

25,319 

2,557 

10,788 

5,435 

633 

335 

965 


123,384 

9,973 

39 

17 

206 

24 


Total 
Free. 


583,169 
317,976 
314,120 
994,514 
147,545 
370,792 

3,097,391 
489,333 

2,311,786 
89,242 
492,666 
949,133 
580,491 
283,523 
524,503 
48,135 
428,779 
296,648 
272,953 
154,431 
162,797 
763,154 
771,421 
594,622 

1,980,427 
397,654 
988,416 
851,470 
305,391 
192,214 
92,597 


19,847,301 

48,000 
6,077 
61,547 
13,294 
11,354 


19,553,928  433,643ll9,9S7,573  3,204,347 


Slaves. 


222 

2,290 

90,368 

472,528 

288,548 

384,984 

381,682 

39,309 

342,892 

309,878 

244,809 

58,161 

47,100 

239,460 

210,981 

87,422 


3,200,634 
3,687 


26 


Federal 
Represent- 
ative 
Popula- 
tion. 


583,169 
317,976 
314,120 
994,514 
147,545 
370,792 

3,097,394 
489,466 

2,311,786 

90,616 

546,886 

1,232,649 
753,619 
514,513 
753,512 
71,720 
634,514 
482,574 
419,838 
189,327 
191,057 
906,830 
898,012 
647,075 

1,980,427 
397,654 
988,416 
851,470 
305,391 
192,214 
92,597 


L 

d  " 


21,767,673 


6 

3 

3 

11 

2 
4 

33 
5 

25 
1 
6 

13 
8 
6 
8 
1 
7 
5 
4 
2 
2 

10 

10 
7 

21 
4 

11 
9 
o 
2 

*2 


234 


*~ 

>.  to 

■si 

o  2 
•a 


1 
1 
— 1 

+  1 


Frac- 
tions 
over. 


—  1 

+  1 


—  2 

—  1 

—  1 


+  1 


+  1 
1 

+  2 

+  1 

+  1 

+  2 


22,631 

37,707 

33,851 

+60,281 

+54,122 

1 90, 523 

14,435 

22,351 

+69,634 

+79,771 
18.150 

6,235 
+47.39S 

6,128 

+73,976 

15,495 

46,146 

2,481 

4,211 

+66,023 

+57,205 

+86,537 

18,544 

23,962 

+54,186 

10,663 

25,122 

5,368 


RECAPITULATION. 


Total 

Population 

in  1840. 

Slaves 

in 
1840. 

Total 

Population 

in  1850. 

Total  Free 

Population 

in  1850. 

Slaves 

in 
1850. 

Represent- 
ative Pop. 
in  1850. 

Rep. 
in 

1850. 

Gain 
or 

Loss. 

Free  States, 
Slave  States, 
Dist.  and  Ter. 

Total,      . 

9,654,865 

7,290,719 

117,769 

1,102 

2,481,532 

4,721 

13,434,922 

9,612,969 

143,985 

13,434,798 

6,412,503 

140,272 

222 

3,200,412 

3,713 

13,436,931 
8,330,742 

141 
90 

234 

+  1 
—  1 

17,063,353'2,487,355 

23,191,876 

19,987,573 

3,204,347 

21,767,673 

*The  aggregate  representative  population  (21,767,673),  divided  by  233— the 
number  of  representatives  established  by  law — gives  93,423  as  the  ratio  of  appor- 
tionment among  the  several  States.  But  this  gives  only  220  members,  leaving  13  to 
be  assigned  to  the  States  having  the  largest  residuary  fractions. 

+  In  the  column  of  fractions,  those  marked  thus,+,  entitle  the  State  to  an  additional 
Representative,  who  is  included  in  the  number  given  the  State  in  the  column  of 
Representatives. 

J  By  the  act  of  July  30,  1852,  an  additional  representative  is  assigned  to  California, 
making  the  whole  number  of  Representatives  234.  The  ratio  of  representation 
remains  unchanged.  The  last  published  census  tables  differ  slightly  from  the  above, 
but  as  the  apportionment  of  representation  is  made  by  above  table, "it  is  continued. 


POPULATICXN 

r    OF    THE    UNITED    STATE 

S. 

185 

States. 

1790. 

1800. 

1810. 

1820. 

1830. 

1810. 

1850. 

Maine, 

96,540 

151,719 

228,705 

298,335 

399,955 

fiOl.793 

583,169 

N.  Hampshire 

141,899 

183,762 

214,360 

244,161 

269,328 

284,574 

317,976 

Vermont,    . 

85,416 

154,465 

217,713 

235,764 

280,652 

291,948 

314,120 

Massachusetts 

378,717 

423,245 

472,040 

523,287 

610,408 

737,699 

994,514 

Rhode  Island, 

69,110 

69,122 

77,031 

83,059 

97,199 

108,830 

147,545 

Connecticut, 

238,141 

251,002 

262,042 

275,202 

297,665 

309, 97S 

370,792 

New  York, 

340,120 

580,756 

959,949 

1,372,812 

1,918,608 

2,428,921 

3,097,394 

//    Jersey, 

184,lo9 

211,949 

249,555 

277,575 

320,823 

373,306 

489,555 

Pennsylvania, 

434,373 

602,365 

810,091 

1,049,458 

1,348,233 

1,724,033 

2,311,786 

Delaware, 

59,098 

64,273 

72,674 

72,749 

76,748 

78,085 

91,532 

Maryland,  . 

319,728 

341,548 

380,546 

407,350 

447,040 

470,019 

533  034 

Virginia, 

748,308 

880,200 

974,612 

1,065379 

1,211,405 

1,239,797 

1,421,661 

N.  Carolina, 

393,751 

478,103 

555,500 

638,829 

737,987 

753,419 

869,039 

S.        //        , 

249,073 

345,591 

415,715 

502,741 

581,185 

594,398 

668,507 

Georgia, 

82,548 

162,101 

252,433 

340,987 

516,823 

691,392 

906,185 

Florida, . 

34,730 

54,477 

87,445 

Alabama,    . 

20,845 

127,901 

309,527 

590,756 

771,623 

Mississippi, 

8,850 

40,352 

75,44^ 

136,621 

375,651 

606,526 

Louisiana,  . 

76,556 

153,407 

215,739 

352,411 

517,762 

Texas,    . 

212,592 

Arkansas,  . 

14,273 

30,388 

97,574 

209,897 

Tennessee, 

30,791 

105,602 

261,727 

422,813 

681,904 

829,210 

1,002,717 

Kentucky,  . 

73,077 

220,955 

406,511 

564,317 

687,917 

779,828 

982,405 

Ohio, 

45,365 

230,760 

581,434 

937,903 

1,519,467 

1,980,329 

Michigan,  . 

4,762 

8,896 

31,639 

212,267 

397,654 

Indiana, 

4,875 

24,520 

147,178 

343,031 

685,866 

988,416 

Illinois,       . 

12,282 

55,211 

157,455 

476,183 

851,470 

Missouri, 

20,845 

66,586 

140,445 

383,702 

682,044 

Wisconsin, 

30,945 

305,391 

Iowa, 

43,112 

192,214 

Dis.  of  Colum. 

14,093 

24,023 

33,039 

39,834 

43,712 

51,687 

California, 

Total,       . 

92,597 

3,929,872 

5,305,952 

7,239,814 

9,638,131 

12,866,920 

17,063,353 

23,191,876 

SLAVES    IN    THE    1 

UNITED 

STATES. 

States. 

1790. 

1800. 

1810. 

1820. 

1E30. 

1840. 

1850. 

Maine, 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

N.  Hampshire 

1.58 

8 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

Vermont,    . 

17 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Massachusetts 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Rhode  Island, 

952 

381 

103 

48 

17 

5 

0 

Connecticut, 

2,759 

951 

310 

97 

25 

17 

0 

New  York, 

21,324 

20,343 

15,017 

10,088 

75 

4 

0 

a    Jersey, 

11,423 

12,422 

10,851 

7,657 

2,254 

674 

236 

Pennsylvania. 

3,737 

1,706 

795 

211 

403 

64 

0 

Delaware,  . 

8,887 

6,153 

4,177 

4,509 

3,292 

2,605 

2,290 

Maryland, 

103,036 

105,635 

111,502 

107,398 

102,294 

89.737 

90,368 

Virginia,     . 

203,427 

345,796 

392,518 

425,153 

469,757 

448,987 

472,528 

N.  Carolina, 

100,572 

133,296 

168,824 

295,017 

235,601 

245,817 

288,548 

S.        a       , 

107,094 

146,151 

196,365 

258,475 

315,401 

327,038 

384,984 

Florida,  . 

15,501 

25,717 

39,310 

Georgia, 

29,264 

59,404 

105,218 

149,656 

217,531 

280,944 

381,682 

Alabama, 

41,879 

117,549 

253,532 

342,844 

Mississippi, 

3,4S9 

17,038 

32,814 

65,659 

195,211 

309,878 

Louisiana, 

34,660 

69,064 

109,588 

168,452 

244,809 

Texas, 

58,161 

Arkansas, 

1,617 

4,576 

19,935 

47,100 

Tennessee, 

3,417 

13,584 

44,535 

80,107 

141,603 

183,059 

239,459 

Kentucky,  . 

11,830 

40,343 

80,561 

126,732 

165,213 

182,258 

210,  £81 

Ohio, 

0 

3 

0 

Michigan,  . 

24 

32 

0 

0 

Indiana,  . 

135 

237 

190 

0 

3 

0 

Illinois, 

168 

117 

747 

331 

0 

Missouri, 

3,011 

10,222 

25,031 

£8,240 

87,422 

Wisconsin, 

11 

0 

Iowa, 

16 

0 

California, 

0 

Dis.  of  Colum. 
Total,      . 

3,244 

5,395 

6,377 

6,119 

4,694 

3,6S7 

697,897 

893,041 

1,191,364 

1,538,064 

2,009,031 

2,487,355 

3,204,313 

186  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

PROGRESSIVE   INCREASE   OF    POPULATION. 

Comparative  population  of  the  United  States  in  1800,  1850,  and 
1900 — adding  3  per  cent,  per  annum,  the  ascertained  increase  from 
1800  to  1850,  to  the  latter  period : 

Total  in  Total  in  Estimated  in 

1800.  1850.  lyoo. 

Free  States,        .        .    2,684,625  13,527,300  62,000,000 

Slave  States,  .        .         2,621,300  9,664,576  36,000,000 

Total  estimate  of  Population  in  1900,     .        .    98,000,000 

Of  which,  by  ascertained  ratio  of  increase,  the  slave  population  will 
be  12,000,000,  leaving  86,000,000  freemen  in  the  year  1900,  of 
which  only  24,000,000  will  be  in  the  southern  states. 

Estimated  increase  from  1850  to  1900,  in  periods  of  ten  years, 
adding  3  per  cent,  per  annum  : 

Total  Pop.  Slaves. 

Total  population  in  1850,  .  .        .    23,191,876  3,204,313 

tr            n            it   1860,          .  .         31,095,535  4.157,787 

ii            a           a  1870,  .     •  .        .    40,617,708  5,405,173 

a            a            if  18S0,          .  .         54,586,795  7,026,659 

a            u            ii  1890,  .  .        .    73,332,185  9,134,656 

n            it            n  1900,          .  .         98,595,512  11,875,000 

Long  before  this  latter  period  arrives,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that 
slavery  will  have  ceased  to  exist  in  these  United  States,  and  that 
the  census  of  this  modern  republic  will  not  be  disgraced  by  a  display 
of  freemen  and  bondmen  side  by  side,  as  at  present  appears  in  fifteen 
out  of  thirty-one  of  the  States  of  the  Union. — American  Newspaper. 

DANGEROUS   CONDITION   OF   COLOURED   PERSONS. 

It  has  been  stated  that  free  persons  of  colour  from  the  northern 
states  are  in  danger  of  lapsing  into  slavery,  by  merely  intruding 
within  the  verge  of  a  slave  state.  In  Maryland,  there  was  a  law 
passed  in  1839,  to  prohibit  the  ingress  of  free  persons  of  colour, 
under  the  penalty  of  a  heavy  fine.  The  enactment  is  as  follows  : 
'No  free  negro  or  mulatto,  belonging  to,  or  residing  in  any  other 
state,  is  permitted  to  come  into  Maryland,  whether  such  free  negro 
or  mulatto  intends  settling  in  this  state  or  not,  under  the  penalty  of 
20  dollars  for  the  first  offence.'  For  a  second  offence,  the  penalty 
is  500  dollars  ;  and,  failing  the  payment  of  such  fines,  the  offender 
'  shall  be  committed  to  the  jail  of  the  county,  and  shall  be  sold 
by  the  sheriff  at  public  sale  to  the  highest  bidder.' 

Under  this  law,  a  free  coloured  person  wandering  inadvertently 
into  Maryland  in  quest  of  employment,  may  be  seized,  and  if 
poor  and  unable  to  pay  the  fine,  sold  after  a  few  days'  public  notice, 
just  as  if  he  were  a  stray  heifer.  A  case  of  this  kind  occurred  not 
long  ago. 

In  1851,  there  resided  in  Philadelphia  a  negro  named  Edward 
Davis,  who,  finding  employment  fail,  went  to  the  country  in 
quest  of  the  means  of  subsistence.  He  could  not  have  possessed 
very  bright  intelligence,  for  he  ought  to  have  known  that  it  was 
dangerous  for  him  to  enter  the  borders  of  a  slave  state.  His  original 
intention  was  to  go  no  further  than  Hollidaysburgh,  a  flourishing 
town  in  Blair  county,  Pennsylvania ;  but  for  some  reason  he 
abandoned  this  design,  and  crossing  the  Susquehanna,  reached 
the  populous  village  of  Havre  de  Grace,  in  Maryland.  Here  he 
sought    for,    and    obtained    employment;    and  was    thoughtlessly 


APPENDIX.  187 

pursuing  his  occupation,  when  he  was  arrested,  and  taken  before 
a  magistrate,  to  answer  the  charge  of  having  violated  the  law, 
which  prohibits  the  settlement  of  free  negroes  in  the  state.  The 
offence  was  clear,  and  the  fine  of  twenty  dollars  incurred.  Destitute 
of  money,  and  without  friends,  he  was  confined  in  prison,  where 
he  lay  about  two  months.  At  the  end  of  this  period,  he  was  brought 
out,  and  after  due  advertisement,  sold  by  auction  to  pay  his  fine 
and  expenses — altogether  amounting  to  fifty  dollars.  The  following 
is  a  copy  of  the  sheriff's  certificate  of  sale,  which  we  give  as  a 
curiosity : 

*  State  of  Maryland,  Harford  county — I,  Eobert  M'Gan,  sheriff 
of  Harford  county,  do  hereby  certify,  that  whereas  negro  Ned  Davis 
was  found  guilty  by  the  Orphan  Court  of  Harford  county  of  a 
violation  of  the  Act  of  Assembly  of  the  state  of  Maryland,  passed 
1839,  chapter  38  ;  and  the  said  negro  having  refused  to  pay  the 
fine  and  costs,  as  in  the  said  law  directed,  I  did,  having  first  given 
the  notice  prescribed  by  law,  expose  the  said  negro  at  public  sale, 
at  the  court-house  doors  in  Bell  Air,  and  Dr  John  G.  Archer, 
of  Louisiana,  being  the  highest  bidder,  became  the  purchaser  of 
the  said  negro.  Given  under  my  hand  and  seal,  this  tenth  day 
of  November  1851.     Robert  M'Gan,  sheriff.' 

Davis,  now  a  slave,  was  subsequently  transferred  from  master 
to  master;  and  we  find  that,  in  June  1852,  he  was  sold  to  a 
Mr  Dean  of  Macon,  Georgia,  for  300  dollars.  As  this  is  only  about 
a  third  of  the  market- value  of  an  able-bodied  negro,  we  infer 
that  he  was  past  the  prime  of  life,  or  otherwise  defective.  In  one 
of  the  accounts  of  the  transaction,  he  is  spoken  of  as  being  thirty- 
four  years  of  age.  Be  this  as  it  may,  Ned  Davis  was,  to  all  intents 
and  purposes,  a  slave ;  and  as  such,  was  first  employed  to  cook 
for  a  large  number  of  slaves  in  Baltimore;  and  subsequently,  on 
being  purchased  by  Mr  Dean,  was  sent  southward,  through 
Washington  and  Charleston,  to  Georgia.  On  arriving  in  Macon, 
he  was  put  to  work  on  a  railway ;  but  the  labour  of  an  excavator 
being  beyond  his  strength,  his  health  failed,  and,  as  a  relief,  he 
was  placed  on  a  cotton-plantation.  He  was  afterwards  sent  back 
to  the  railway.  This  second  time,  however,  he  utterly  broke  down, 
and  was  removed  to  an  hospital.  This  occurred  in  July  1853. 
In  the  hospital,  he  related  his  history  to  the  attending  physicians, 
who,  taking  pity  on  him,  offered  to  buy  him  for  400  dollars ;  but 
the  price  was  refused.  Although  shattered  in  health,  and  partially 
lame,  the  unfortunate  Ned  was  again  put  to  some  kind  of  work, 
and  he  continued  in  servitude  till  the  12th  of  March  1854.  On 
this  day,  after  long  brooding  over  his  wrongs,  he  ran  away  from 
Macon,  and  went  to  Savannah,  a  seaport  from  which  steam- vessels 
traded  to  northern  free  states.  Davis's  object  was  to  get  on  board 
one  of  these  vessels ;  and  he  secreted  himself  in  a  stable  till  the 
14th,  on  which  day  he  went  on  board  the  steamer  Keystone  State, 
which  was  to  sail  next  morning  for  Philadelphia.  The  remainder 
of  the  narrative  may  be  given  in  the  words  of  a  New  York 
newspaper : 

'  At  nine  o'clock  the  next  morning,  the  steamer  sailed  with 
Davis  on  board.  The  following  day,  the  men,  while  heaving  the 
lead,  heard  a  voice  from  under  the  guards  of  the  boat,  calling 
for  them  to  throw  him  a  rope.     Upon  examination,  it  was  found 


188  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

that  the  voice  proceeded  from  a  coloured  man,  concealed  on  a  beam 
under  the  guards  of  the  wheel-house.  He  was  rescued  from  his 
perilous  situation,  in  a  state  of  great  exhaustion :  his  clothes  were 
saturated  with  sea-water,  as  the  sea  had  become  rough,  and  he 
was  dipped  in  the  water  at  every  rock  of  the  vessel.  The  hands 
furnished  him  with  a  dry  suit,  and  made  him  comfortable;  but 
the  commander  of  the  boat  was  differently  disposed.  Fearing  the 
effects  of  Georgian  law,  in  case  he  should  bring  a  slave  to  a  free 
state,  he  ordered  his  vessel  to  put  into  Newcastle,  Delaware,  where 
he  had  the  unfortunate  man  imprisoned,  with  the  intention,  it  is 
stated,  of  taking  him  back  to  Savannah  on  his  return-trip.  But 
the  facts  of  the  case  having  leaked  out,  public  sympathy  was  enlisted, 
and  a  determination  shewn  that  Davis  should  not  go  back  to 
Georgia,  unless  it  could  be  established  that  he  was  not  entitled 
to  his  freedom.  On  the  20th  of  March,  the  case  was  brought  before 
Justice  Bradford,  of  Newcastle.  A  number  of  witnesses  were 
examined,  and  his  freedom  clearly  proved.  On  hearing  this 
testimony  in  his  favour,  the  magistrate  discharged  him  from 
custody,  there  being  no  reason  why  a  free  citizen  of  Pennsylvania 
should  be  kept  in  a  Delaware  prison,  with  no  crime  charged  against 
him.  After  his  discharge,  and  before  he  had  left  the  magistrate's 
office,  the  commander  of  the  Keystone  State  appeared ;  made  affidavit 
that  he  believed  Davis  to  be  a  fugitive  slave,  and  also  a  fugitive 
from  justice ;  whereupon  he  was  detained,  and  again  shut  up  in 
prison.'  On  the  return  of  the  captain  of  the  steamer  to  Savannah, 
measures  were  adopted  to  reclaim  possession  of  Davis  by  legal 
proceedings.  The  case  came  on  for  trial  at  Newcastle,  April  16 ; 
and  it  was  clearly  proved  by  evidence,  that  the  negro  had  been 
legally  seized  and  sold  in  Maryland,  and  transferred  by  his  owners 
to  his  present  claimant,  Mr  Dean.  A  decision  was  given  accordingly; 
the  runaway  being  adjudged  to  be  a  slave,  and  put  at  the  disposal 
of  his  proprietor.  Whether  he  was  actually  taken  back  to  Georgia, 
is  not  stated.  If  alive,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  his  being  still 
in  a  condition  of  slavery.  The  laws  of  Pennsylvania  possess  no 
power  to  reclaim  a  citizen,  whose  liberty  is  legally  forfeited  in 
another  state ;  and  if  the  friends  of  Ned  Davis  fail  to  buy  him, 
there  are,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  no  other  lawful  means  by  which 
they  can  restore  him  to  freedom. 


AMALGAMATION. 

There  was  published  in  London,  in  1853,  a  small  volume,  entitled 
The  American  Prejudice  against  Colour ;  an  Authentic  Narrative.  By 
Willam  G.  Allen.*  Allen's  narrative  is  curious.  He  tells  us  that 
he  is  a  quadroon,  one-fourth  African  blood,  and  three-fourths  Anglo- 
Saxon.  He  received  a  good  education,  and  graduated  at  Oneida 
Institute,  in  Whitesboro,  state  of  New  York,  in  1844.  Subsequently, 
he  studied  law,  and  became  professor  of  the  Greek  and  German 
languages,  and  of  rhetoric  and  belles-lettres,  of  New  York  Central 
College,  in  M'Grawville,  Cortland  county — the  only  college  in 
America  that  has  ever  called  a  coloured  man  to  a  professorship.     In 

*  W.  and  F.  G.  Cash,  Bishopsgate  Street.    Price  One  Shilling. 


APPENDIX.  189 

April  1851,  he  visited  Fulton  to  deliver  a  course  of  lectures.  Here 
he  was  kindly  received  by  the  Kev.  Lyndon  King,  a  Wesleyan 
Methodist  clergyman,  to  one  of  whose  daughters,  Miss  Mary  King, 
he  ultimately  became  attached.  The  sentiment  was  reciprocal. 
The  father  of  the  young  lady  had  no  objection  to  his  offer  of 
marriage ;  one  of  the  young  lady's  sisters,  also,  favoured  the  pro- 
posal ;  but  Mrs  King — a  step-mother — and  the  other  members  of  the 
family,  were  violently  opposed  to  the  idea  of  forming  a  connection 
with  a  man  of  colour.  The  greatest  opponent  of-  all  was  one  of  the 
brothers,  the  Rev.  J.  B.  King,  a  prodigiously  pious  gentleman,  who 
had  for  some  time  been  engaged  in  gathering  funds  to  build  a 
church,  which  should  exclude  from  membership  those  who  held  their 
fellow-men  in  bondage,  and  all  who  would  not  admit  the  doctrines  of 
the  human  brotherhood!  Professing  an  abhorrence  of  slavery,  he 
nevertheless  seems  to  have  possessed  the  usual  northern  prejudice 
against  persons  of  colour.  He  was  incensed  beyond  measure  at  the 
atrocity  of  the  proposed  alliance ;  and  through  him  and  the  step- 
mother the  public  indignation  appears  to  have  been  excited.  From 
less  to  more,  all  Fulton  and  its  neighbourhood  were  roused  to  a  sense 
of  the  impropriety  of  the  intended  marriage — the  objections  resting 
on  no  other  grounds  than  the  damage  that  might  be  done  to  the  pure 
Anglo-Saxon  race  by  amalgamation  with  the  African  type. 

Professor  Allen  and  Miss  King  were  now  placed  in  an  awkward 
and  dangerous  predicament.  Besides  the  lady's  sister,  their  only 
friend  was  Mr  Porter,  a  schoolmaster,  and  his  wife.  Porter  allowed 
the  parties  to  meet  at  his  house.  Having  gone  thither  on  Sunday 
evening,  January  30,  1853,  for  the  purpose  of  talking  over  their 
affairs,  they  were  alarmed  by  the  intelligence  that  an  infuriated  mob 
was  collecting,  which  would  soon  surround  the  house,  and  commit 
some  serious  personal  outrage.  Allen  was  informed  that  '  tar, 
feathers,  poles,  and  an  empty  barrel,  spiked  with  shingle  nails,  had 
been  prepared  for  his  especial  benefit ; '  Mr  Porter  was  to  be  tar- 
and-feathered,  and  ridden  on  a  rail ;  and  Miss  King  was  to  be  con- 
ducted away  in  a  sleigh  to  the  house  of  her  parents.  Aware  of  the 
extremities  to  which  the  mob-spirit  is  carried  on  such  occasions, 
Allen  prepared  for  death.  Unless  the  mob  relented,  no  earthly  power 
could  save  him. 

Up  the  outrageous  multitude  at  length  came.  They  consisted  of 
all  classes  of  persons,  including  the  most  respectable  in  the  place. 
The  churches  were  emptied  ;  all  went  off  to  enjoy  the  fun  or  mischief 
of  hunting  'the  nigger,'  and  protesting  against  the  sin  of  amal- 
gamation. With  shouts  and  yells,  the  mob  called  to  'bring  out 
the  nigger,'  '  to  kill  him,'  and  '  to  tear  down  the  house.'  Some 
members  of  a  committee  who  had  been  appointed  to  regulate  pro- 
ceedings, entered  the  dwelling,  and  declared  that  Allen's  life  could 
only  be  saved  by  his  instant  departure,  and  that  Miss  King  would 
at  the  same  time  require  to  go  home  to  her  parents.  The  young 
lady  having,  after  some  demur,  gone  off  in  a  sleigh,  Allen  was  next 
escorted  from  the  house  by  the  members  of  committee  to  a  hotel — not, 
however,  without  being  well  kicked  and  buffeted  by  the  mob,  who 
crowded  about  him  during  the  march.  At  the  hotel,  after  a  little 
delay,  he  was  smuggled  away  by  a  back-entrance,  and  conveyed  in  a 
sleigh  to  Syracuse — a  distance  of  about  twenty-five  miles. 

Dark  days  ensued.      The  newspapers  were  furious  at  the  idea  of 


190  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

amalgamation,  and  it  was  some  time  before  the  lovers  were  able  to 
arrange  an  interview.  We  must  refer  to  Allen's  narrative  for  an 
account  of  what  indignities  were  suffered  by  both  parties  at  this 
I>eriod.  Some  time  in  March,  they  were  enabled  to  see  each  other, 
and  to  arrange  future  movements.  At  this  interview  they  resolved 
to  exercise  their  undoubted  legal  rights — to  enter  into  the  holy  state 
of  matrimony ;  but  having  done  so,  to  flee  the  country.  This  daring 
resolution  they  successfully  put  into  effect.  They  were  married  in 
New  York,  and  shortly  afterwards  departed  from  Boston  for  Liver- 
pool. Professor  Allen  carried  recommendations  with  him  to  gentle- 
men in  England,  by  whom  he  has  probably  been  put  in  the  way  of 
earning  a  livelihood.  He,  in  conclusion,  informs  his  readers,  that  Mr 
Porter,  who  gave  him  refuge  in  adversity,  was  dismissed  from  his 
situation  as  schoolmaster,  in  consequence  of  outraging  public  opinion 
by  favouring  the  union  of  a  white  lady  with  a  man  degraded  by 
the  taint  of  African  blood.  If  all  this  be  true — and  we  have  no 
reason  to  doubt  its  authenticity — we  are  furnished  with  a  striking 
example  of  that  loathing  and  detestation  of  the  free  coloured  popu- 
lation which  prevails  in  the  northern  states  of  the  Union,  and  which 
has  seemed  to  us  so  irreconcilable  with  the  profession  of  anti-slavery 
principles. 

TEACHING   FREE   COLOURED   CHILDREN  TO   READ. 

1  Slavery  not  only  precludes  education  by  its  very  nature — it 
enacts  laws  to  secure  ignorance  among  the  free  citizens  of  the  slave 
states.  By  the  laws  of  Virginia,  Mrs  Douglass,  of  Norfolk,  was 
pronounced  guilty  of  a  "crime"  for  teaching  free  coloured  children 
to  read.  She  suffered  thirty  days'  imprisonment  in  the  city  jail,  not 
because  it  is  actually  a  crime  to  teach  a  free  coloured  child  to  read, 
but  because  intelligence  is  dangerous  to  slavery.  It  was  necessary 
to  make  an  example  of  her,  to  deter  all  future  offenders.  Judge 
Baker  has  won  an  unenviable  notoriety  in  his  delivery  of  her  sen- 
tence. He  says  that  the  idea  that  universal  culture  is  necessary  to 
religious  instruction  and  education  is  "  mischievous  " — a  well-chosen 
term.  He  says  that  of  all  the  negroes  in  the  world,  none  are  so 
intelligent,  so  inclined  to  the  Gospel,  and  so  blessed  by  the  elevating 
influences  of  the  Gospel,  as  the  slaves  of  the  United  States,  and  that 
if  any  one  would  have  their  interests  more  carefully  regarded  than 
they  are  by  the  laws  of  Virginia,  it  must  be  from  a  sickly  sensi- 
bility tOAvards  them.  Then  he  proceeds  to  vindicate  the  justice  of 
the  sentence  by  the  fact  that,  "  in  good  sense  and  sound  morality,  his 
discretionary  power  to  imprison  for  six  months  or  less  does  not 
authorise  a  mere  minimum  punishment,"  since  the  question  of 
"guilt"  is  beyond  a  doubt;  and  there  are  many  "aggravating 
circumstances."  "  Therefore,  as  a  terror  to  those  who  acknowledge 
no  rule  of  action  but  their  own  evil  will  and  pleasure,  and  in  vindica- 
tion of  the  justness  of  our  laws,  the  judgment  of  the  court  is,  that 
you  be  imprisoned  for  the  period  of  one  month  in  the  jail  of  this 
city."  Because  Mrs  Douglass  chose  to  remain  and  suffer  the  full 
penalty  of  the  law,  though  all  the  citizens  hoped  she  would  leave  the 
city,  the  Norfolk  Argus  of  February  9,  1854,  says :  "Then  sympathy 
departed,  and  in  the  breast  of  every  one  rose  a  righteous  indignation 
towards  a  person  who  would  throw  contempt  in  the  face  of  the  laws, 


APPENDIX.  191 

and  brave  the  imprisonment  for  the  '  cause  of  humanity.'  H  '—Tract : 
Influence  of  Slavery  upon  the  White  Population, 


SLAVERY,   A  DOMESTIC   INSTITUTION. 

*  By  a  strange  misnomer,  slavery  has  been  called  a  "  domestic " 
institution;  but  before  its  presence  all  that  is  properly  implied  in 
that  word  domestic  vanishes  like  an  exorcised  spirit.  The  desolation 
wrought  among  the  coloured  victims  of  slavery  is  terrible,  and 
mighty  indeed  is  their  demand  for  redress ;  but  they  have  their 
revenge  in  the  wreck  of  the  domestic  happiness  of  their  oppressors. 

'  I  have  said  that  the  white  child  is  committed  entirely  to  the  care 
of  the  coloured  nurse,  and  thus  the  process  of  contamination  begins 
in  infancy.  Young  children  are  familiarised  to  sights  and  associa- 
tions which  destroy  the  instinctive  modesty  of  youth.  They  are 
also  placed  in  such  relations  to  the  coloured  children,  through  the 
ignorance  or  malice  of  the  nurse,  as  to  stimulate  the  passions  into 
premature  activity.  Some  nurses  believe  that  personal  intimacies 
between  the  young  master  and  his  young  female  companions  culti- 
vate a  closer  affection,  and  insure  the  latter  from  the  chances  of 
being  sold.  Others,  of  a  fiercer  temper,  seek  their  revenge  for 
outrages  committed  on  themselves,  in  order  to  exult  over  the  wreck 
of  early  manhood  always  resulting  from  self-indulgence.  By  which- 
ever process  the  result  is  attained,  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that 
purity  among  southern  men  is  almost  an  unknown  virtue. 

'  There  are  thousands  of  proofs  of  this  in  the  prevalence  of  the 
fair  skin,  smooth  and  glossy  hair,  blue  eyes,  straight  nose,  delicate 
foot,  and  arched  instep,  which  are  everywhere  to  be  met  among  the 
slaves.  But  why  should  we  expect  purity  when  every  restraint  is 
removed  which  helps  to  subdue,  the  clamours  of  the  animal  nature, 
while  every  possible  opportunity  is  offered  for  its  indulgence  ?  .  .  .  . 

'  Nor  is  one  class  of  society  more  base  than  another  in  this 
respect.  The  highest  social  life  is  often  the  most  vile  in  its  secret 
history.  A  young  man  at  the  age  of  twenty-one  takes  possession  of 
his  portion  of  the  paternal  estate,  erects  a  house  upon  it,  where  he 
retires  and  establishes  a  household  for  himself.  He  secures  what 
means  of  gratification  his  taste  can  select,  and  thus  lives,  sometimes 
ten  or  fifteen  years,  if  no  heiress  or  beauty  cross  his  path  of  sufficient 
attractions  to  induce  him  to  add  her  as  an  ornamental  appendage 
to  his  establishment.  Meanwhile  his  human  "property"  steadily 
increases,  both  in  numbers  and  value ;  for  the  lighter  the  mulatto, 
the  more  desirable  among  the  fastidious :  and  rare  beauty  is  often 
the  result  of  a  second  intermingling  of  the  same  aristocratic  blood 
with  the  offspring  of  a  former  passion.  From  time  to  time,  friends 
come  to  visit  this  bachelor  hall,  and  in  due  season'  the  master  is 
repaid  for  his  hospitality  to  them  by  a  valuable  addition  to  his  stock 
of  human  chattels 

1  Peace  and  happiness,  and  the  faith  which  is  as  immovable  as 
the  everlasting  hills  in  the  heart  of  pure  and  constant  love,  those 
essential  elements  of  the  true  home,  are  nowhere  to  be  found  in 
slavery.  The  wife  constantly  sees  the  likeness  of  her  husband  in 
children  that  are  not  hers  ;  the  husband  welcomes  every  new-comer 
among  them  as  so  many  hundreds  of  prospective  gain,  and  devotes 


192  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

himself  to  their  increase,  while  his  legal  children  are  born  with 
feeble  minds  and  bodies,  with  just  force  enough  to  transmit  the  family- 
name,  and  produce  in  feebler  characters  a  second  edition  of  the 
father's  life.  The  plantation  in  Virginia  is  "  stocked  "  with  negroes 
that  are  bought  with  sole  reference  to  their  capacities  for  reproduc- 
tion, and  master  and  slave  unite,  the  former  consciously,  the  latter 
unconsciously,  in  the  same  odious  enterprise  of  raising  victims  for 
the  southern  market.' — Tract :  Influence  of  Slavery  upon  the  White 
Population. 

KIDNAPPING. 

The  dangers  to  which  free  persons  of  colour  are  exposed  by 
entering  a  slave  state  doubtless  tends  to  fix  the  coloured  population 
in  a  particular  spot,  and  to  render  them  suspicious  of  overtures  of 
employment  from  strangers  ;  for  they  may  be  unwittingly  trans- 
ported to  one  of  the  nearest  slave  states,  and  there  sold.  The 
following  are  cases  in  illustration  : 

The  first  case  is  that  of  Solomon  Northrup,  a  negro  who  was  kid- 
napped in  a  very  extraordinary  manner.  In  the  year  1841,  Northrup 
lived  at  Saratoga  Springs,  in  the  state  of  New  York  ;  he  was  then 
thirty-four  years  of  age,  and  had  a  wife  and  three  children.  He  was 
a  clever,  handy  person  ;  could  drive  a  carriage,  play  on  the  fiddle, 
and  make  himself  generally  useful.  One  day,  two  strangers,  named 
Merrill  and  Russell,  were  introduced  to  him.  They  spoke  of  being 
connected  with  a  travelling-circus,  and  required  an  assistant  possessing 
Northrup's  accomplishments.  The  wages  offered  were  fair — a  dollar 
a  day,  and  expenses  till  he  returned.  Pleased  with  the  offer,  Solomon 
hired  himself  to  the  strangers  ;  and  bidding  good-bye  for  a  short 
time  to  his  wife  and  family,  mounted  the  box  of  a  travelling-carriage, 
and  drove  off  on  his  journey.  The  party  went  first  to  the  city  of 
New  York,  and  there  Northrup  expressed  a  disinclination  to  proceed 
southward ;  but  being  finally  persuaded  to  go,  he  took  the  precau- 
tion to  procure  from  the  custom-house  papers  certifying  his  being  a 
freeman ;  and  forthwith  went  off  with  his  employers  through  New 
Jersey  and  Pennsylvania  to  Baltimore,  in  Maryland,  and  thence  to 
Washington.  Here,  Northrup  was  told  he  would  see  the  circus 
company,  and  be  employed  with  his  violin.  The  party,  meanwhile, 
conducted  him  to  a  tavern,  to  get  some  refreshments — an  arrange- 
ment to  which,  of  course,  he  could  have  no  objection.  He  ate  and 
drank  unreservedly.  The  drugged  liquor  did  its  work,  and  he  soon 
became  sick,  and,  finally,  insensible.  How  long  he  remained  in  this 
condition,  he  could  not  tell ;  but  when  he  came  to  his  senses,  he 
found  himself  handcuffed  in  a  slave-pen,  with  his  legs  fettered  to  a 
ring  in  the  floor.  In  reply  to  his  alarmed  and  indignant  questions, 
he  was  told  that  he  was  a  runaway  slave  from  Georgia.  It  was  vain 
to  assert  that  he  was  a  freeman,  from  the  state  of  New  York ;  his 
remonstrances  were  met  by  threats  of  the  lash.  "What  could  the 
unfortunate  negro  do  ?  His  coat,  hat,  money,  and  free  papers  had 
been  taken  from  him.  Continuing  to  remonstrate,  he  was  actually 
whipped  with  a  cat-o'-nine-tails,  and  otherwise  beaten  in  a  savage 
manner,  with  the  view,  possibly,  of  breaking  his  spirit,  and  render- 
ing him  submissive.  He  was  now  left  to  ruminate  over  his  hapless 
condition ;  and  after  a  confinement  of  a  few  days,  carried  off  with  a 


APPENDIX.  193 

number  of  other  negroes,  by  steam-boat  and  railway,  to  Norfolk,  in 
Virginia ;  from  which  place  he  was  shipped  with  his  companions  to 
New  Orleans.  Here  he  was  sold  to  a  planter,  to  go  up  to  Red  River  ; 
and  was  subsequently  purchased  twice,  and  kept  in  slavery  for  a 
period  of  nearly  twelve  years,  up  to  January  3,  1853.  He  was  on 
that  day  unexpectedly  set  at  liberty,  and  returned  to  his  family. 

After  Merrill  and  Russell  had  fraudulently  disposed  of  Northrup, 
and  pocketed  the  sum  for  which  they  had  sold  him,  they  returned 
northward,  and  carried  on  similar  practices  with  other  negroes 
whom  they  inveigled  into  their  power.  Their  tricks  were  at  length 
discovered  ;  and  it  was  probably  through  this  circumstance  that 
Northrup  regained  his  liberty.  The  two  kidnappers  were  taken  into 
custody,  and  brought  for  examination  before  the  justices  at  Ballston 
Spa,  on  the  11th  of  July  1854.  Northrup,  and  other  witnesses, 
appeared  against  them ;  and  it  is  from  the  narrative  of  this  judicial 
inquiry,  in  a  Saratoga  newspaper,  that  we  have  gathered  the  fore- 
going facts.  The  parties  accused  did  not  deny  the  charge;  but 
claimed  their  release  on  account  of  the  Statute  of  Limitations, 
requiring  an  indictment  to  be  found  within  three  years  of  the  com- 
mission of  the  offence.  The  district-attorney,  in  reply,  maintained 
that  the  offence  was  committed  up  till  the  day  that  Northrup  was  set 
at  liberty,  in  January  1853.  The  magistrates,  taking  the  same  view 
of  the  case,  remanded  Merrill  and  Russell  to  prison,  to  await  the 
course  of  law.  And  the  last  thing  we  hear  of  them  is,  that  they 
were  held  to  bail  by  Northrup  in  the  sum  of  5000  dollars,  to  answer 
in  a  civil  suit  of  personal  damages  for  having  sold  him  into 
slavery. 

A  number  of  the  New  Yorh  Evening  Post  (Mr  Bryant's  ably  con- 
ducted paper),  copies  the  following  case  of  kidnapping  from  the 
Cincinnati  Columbian  of  January  4,  1855.  We  give  it  exactly  as  it 
is  therein  related : 

1 A  deeply  interesting  reunion  of  a  severed  family  took  place  at  the 
house  of  Mr  Levi  Coffin  on  last  Saturday.  The  story,  as  told  us  by  the 
parties,  runs  in  this  wise :  Forty-eight  years  ago,  tAvo  little  coloured 
boys,  named  Peter  and  Levin  Still,  were  playing  in  the  highway  near 
their  father's  house,  on  the  Delaware  river,  when  a  stranger  passing 
by  in  a  gig,  asked  them  to  take  a  ride.  The  boys  did  so  ;  and  were 
thus  kidnapped,  and  carried  to  Lexington,  Kentucky,  where  they 
were  sold  to  one  John  Fisher.  They  were  ultimately  sold  to  other 
masters  ;  and  after  thirteen  years'  slavery  in  Kentucky,  were  sent 
south,  where  they  were  purchased  by  John  Hogan,  of  Franklin 
county,  South  Alabama.  At  the  age  of  twenty-four,  Levin  died  ;  but 
Peter  continued  a  slave  for  thirty-one  years.  During  this  period,  he 
married  a  female  slave  belonging  to  one  Barnard  M'Kinon,  a  neigh- 
bour of  his  master,  and  had  three  children — two  sons  and  a  daughter. 
By  years  of  extreme  economy,  Peter  at  last  saved  500  dollars.  This 
was  enough  to  purchase  his  freedom;  and  a  worthy  Jewish 
gentleman,  acting  for  Peter,  paid  the  money. 

'  Peter  bade  farewell  to  his  family,  and  went  north,  to  Philadelphia, 
to  discover  his  relatives.  He  found  his  aged  mother  and  eight 
brothers  and  sisters  still  living.  He  laboured  for  some  time  to  save 
enough  to  buy  the  freedom  of  his  wife  and  family ;  but  as  his 
accumulations  were  slow,  and  the  amount  to  be  raised  very  large — 
5000   dollars — he   at   last   determined  to   appeal  to  the   charitable 

M 


194  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

public  for  aid.  He  went  from  place  to  place,  telling  his  story,  and 
asking  assistance.  In  the  meantime,  his  family  ran  away  from  their 
master ;  travelling  at  night,  and  remaining  concealed  in  the  daytime, 
they  escaped  from  the  slave  states  to  Indiana,  where,  however,  they 
were  captured  by  a  Avhite  man,  who  returned  them  to  their  master. 

'  On  being  taken  back,  they  became  hopeless  of  ever  getting  free. 
At  last,  after  four  years  of  effort,  Peter  had  raised  the  5000  dollars ; 
and  a  few  weeks  ago,  an  agent  was  despatched  to  Alabama.  He 
purchased  the  wife  and  children,  and  brought  them  on  to  this  city,  to 
which  Peter  had  come  from  Philadelphia  to  meet  them.  The  reunion 
was  deeply  affecting.  One  of  the  sons  is  twenty-seven,  and  the  other 
twenty-four  years  of  age.  One  of  them  had  a  wife  in  Alabama,  who 
died,  leaving  a  baby  only  a  few  months  old.  When  coming  away, 
the  father  begged  hard  for  this  little  one,  but  it  was  worth  200 
dollars :  he  had  nothing,  and  came  away  without  it.  If  these  are 
fair  samples,  southern  slaves  have  not  been  so  much  degraded  and 
brutalised  as  is  sometimes  represented.  Peter  expects,  when  he 
reaches  Philadelphia,  to  publish  a  card  of  thanks  to  those  who  have 
aided  him.    He  and  his  family  will  leave  this  morning.' 


AN   OPULENT   SLAVEHOLDER. 

In  the  summer  of  1854  there  appeared  a  communication  in  a 
Richmond  newspaper,  giving  an  account  of  a  Mr  Samuel  Hairston, 
a  planter,  who  is  described  as  the  wealthiest  man  in  Virginia,  if 
not  in  the  United  States.  The  account,  which  we  copy,  will  be 
read  with  interest.  '  I  have  thought  for  some  time  I  would  write  for 
your  paper  something  in  relation  to  the  richest  man  in  Virginia, 
and  the  largest  slaveholder  in  the  Union,  and  perhaps  in  the  world, 
unless  the  serfs  of  Russia  be  considered  slaves ;  and  the  wish 
expressed  in  your  paper,  a  few  days  ago,  to  know  who  was  so 
wealthy  in  Virginia,  induces  me  to  write  this  now.  Samuel 
Hairston,  of  Pittsylvania,  is  the  gentleman.  When  I  was  in  his 
section  a  year  or  two  ago,  he  was  the  owner  of  between  1600  and 
1700  slaves,  in  his  own  right,  having  but  a  little  while  before 
taken  a  census.  He  also  has  a  prospective  right  to  about  1003 
slaves  more,  which  are  now  owned  by  his  mother-in-law,  Mrs  R. 
Hairston,  he  having  married  her  only  child.  He  now  has  the 
management  of  them,  which  makes  the  number  of  his  slaves  reach 
near  3000.  They  increase  at  the  rate  of  nearly  100  every  year : 
he  has  to  purchase  a  large  plantation  every  year  to  settle  them 
on.  A  large  number  of  his  plantations  are  in  Henry  and  Patrick 
counties,  Virginia.  He  has  large  estates  in  North  Carolina.  His 
landed  property  in  Stokes  alone  is  assessed  at  600,000  dollars.  His 
wealth  is  differently  estimated  at  3,000,000  to  5,000,000  dollars; 
and  I  should  think  it  nearer  the  latter.  You  think  he  has  a  hard 
lot;  but,  I  assure  you,  Mr  Hairston  manages  all  his  matters  as 
easy  as  most  would  an  estate  of  10,000  dollars.  He  has  overseers 
who  are  compelled  to  give  him  a  written  statement  of  what  has 
been  made  and  spent  on  each  plantation,  and  his  negroes  are  all 
clothed  and  fed  from  his  own  domestic  manufacture;  and  raising 
his  own  tobacco-crop,  which  is  immensely  large,  as  so  much  clear 
gain  every  year  besides  his  increase  in  negroes,  which  is  a  fortune 


APPENDIX.  195 

of  itself.  And  now  for  his  residence.  I  have  travelled  over  fifteen 
states  of  this  Union,  and  have  never  seen  anything  comparable 
to  his  yard  and  garden,  except  some  of  those  in  the  Mississippi 
delta,  and  none  of  them  equal  to  it.  Mrs  Hairston  has  been 
beautifying  it  for  years :  and  a  good  old  minister,  in  preaching 
near  the  place,  and  describing  paradise,  said  "  it  was  as  beautiful 
as  Mrs  Hairston's;"  or,  as  a  friend  who  visited  Washington  city 
for  the  first  time,  remarked  that  "  the  public  grounds  were  nearly 
as  handsome  as  Samuel  Hairston's."  He  is  a  plain,  unassuming 
gentleman,  and  has  never  made  any  noise  in  the  world,  though 
he  could  vie  with  the  Bruces,  the  M'Donoughs,  and  Astors ;  and 
it  is  strange,  that  while  their  wealth  is  co-extensive  with  the  Union, 
he  is  not  known  100  miles  from  home.  I  believe  he  is  now  the 
wealthiest  man  in  the  Union,  as  William  B.  Astor  is  only  worth 
about  4,000,000  dollars,  and  the  estates  of  city  people  are  vastly 
overrated,  while  Mr  Hairston  can  shew  the  property  that  will  bring 
the  cash  at  any  moment.  Mr  Hairston  was  raised  within  a  few  miles 
of  where  he  now  lives,  in  Henry  county.  He  has  several  brothers, 
who  are  pretty  well  to  do  in  the  world.  One  of  them,  Marshall 
Hairston,  of  Henry,  owns  more  than  700  negroes ;  Kobert  Hairston, 
who  now  lives  in  Mississippi,  near  1000 ;  and  Harden  Hairston, 
who  has  also  moved  to  Mississippi,  about  600  slaves.  George 
Hairston,  of  Henry,  has  given  almost  all  of  his  property  to  his 
children,  reserving  only  about  150  slaves  for  his  own  use.  This, 
I  believe,  is  a  correct  statement  of  the  circumstances  of  the 
Hairston  family.' 

A   COACH  PASSENGER. 


The  following  appears  in  the  Independent,  an  American  newspaper  : 
'While  travelling  not  long  ago  in  one  of  the  south-western 
counties  of  Virginia,  the  following  thrilling  incident  took  place. 
Starting  in  the  stage-coach  soon  after  breakfast,  the  morning  being 
a  delightful  one  in  the  latter  part  of  the  month  of  May,  I  took  my 
seat  on  the  box  by  the  side  of  the  driver ;  and  behind  me,  on  the  top, 
was  seated  a  bright,  intelligent-looking  mulatto  boy,  apparently  of 
eighteen  or  nineteen  years  of  age.  After  being  on  the  road  a  few 
minutes,  I  turned  about  and  asked  him  where  he  was  going.     He 

replied,  he  was  going  down  a  few  miles  to  live  with  Master  , 

who  kept  the  stage-house  at  the  west  stand  ;  that  he  had  lived  with 
him  the  last  summer,  and  that  his  master  had  sent  him  down  to  live 
with  him  the  coming  season.  Turning  from  the  boy,  the  driver 
remarked  to  me,  in  an  under-tone :  "  The  boy  is  deceived ;  I  am 
taking  him  down  to  the  slave-pen,  a  few  miles  on,  where  slaves  are 
kept  preparatory  to  being  sent  to  Louisiana :  this  deception  is 
practised  to  get  him  from  his  home  and  mother  without  creating  a 
disturbance  on  the  place."  Shortly  after,  as  we  drew  near  to  the 
place  where  the  boy  supposed  he  was  to  stop,  he  began  to  gather  up, 
preparatory  to  leaving  the  stage,  the  few  articles  he  had  brought 
away  from  his  home.  The  driver  said  to  him,  in  a  decided  tone  of 
voice  :  "  You  are  not  to  get  off  the  stage  here." 

'The  boy,  in  astonishment,  replied:  "Yes,  I  is;  I'se  got  a  letter 

for  Master .     I'se  going  to  live  there  this  summer." 

'  By  this  time  we  had  reached  the  house,  and  Master making 


186  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

his  appearance,  Johu — for  that  was  the  name  of  the  boy — delivered 

his   letter,  and  appealed  to  Master  to  be  relieved  from  the 

command  of  the  driver.  The  master  made  no  reply,  as  this  kind 
of  deception  was  no  new  thing  to  him.  After  reading  the  letter  and 
folding  it  up,  he  was  about  putting  it  into  his  pocket,  when  it  flashed 
on  the  mind  of  the  boy  that  he  was  sold,  and  was  bound  for  the 
slave-pen. 

'  He  exclaimed  in  agony:  "Tell  me,  master,  if  I'se  sold?" 

'  No  reply  was  made. 

'  He  exclaimed  again  :  "  Tell  me,  master,  if  I'se  sold  ?  " 

'  This  last  appeal  brought  the  response :  "  Yes,  John,  you  are  sold." 

'The  boy  threw  himself  back  on  the  top  of  the  stage,  and,  rolling 
in  agony,  sent  up  such  a  wail  of  wo  as  no  one  in  the  stage  could 
endure:  even  the  hotel-keeper  walked  away  in  shame,  and  the 
driver  hurried  into  his  box,  and  drove  off  in  haste  to  drown  the 
noise  of  his  cry.  The  passengers  were  all  deeply  moved  at  the 
distress  of  the  boy,  and  tried  in  various  ways  to  soothe  his 
wounded  and  crushed  spirit,  but  his  agony  was  beyond  the 
reach  of  their  sympathy.  When  his  agony  had  somewhat  abated, 
he  exclaimed :  "  Oh,  if  they  had  only  let  me  bid  my  mother 
good-bye !  They  have  lied  to  me !  They  have  lied  to  me ! 
If  they  had  a'  told  me  I  was  sold,  and  I  could  a'  bid  my  mother 
good-bye,  I'd  a'  gone  without  making  them  trouble,  hard  as  it 
is  ! "  By  this  time  we  had  passed  on  some  two  or  three  miles 
since  leaving  the  last  stand,  when,  drawing  near  to  a  pretty  thick 
wood,  the  boy  became  tranquil.  Waiting  till  we  had  entered  the 
wood  a  few  rods,  he  darted  from  the  top  of  the  stage,  and  ran  into 
the  woods  as  agile  as  a  deer,  no  doubt  with  the  feeling  that  it  was 
for  his  life.  The  driver  instantly  dropped  his  reins,  and  pursued  the 
boy.  Proving  himself  no  match,  he  returned,  exclaiming :  "  You 
see  I  have  done  what  I  could  to  catch  him."  He  mounted  his  box 
and  drove  on  a  mile  or  so,  when  he  reined  up  his  horses  to  a  house, 
and,  calling  to  the  keeper,  asked  :  "  Where  are  your  sons  ?  " 

'  He  replied,  they  left  home  that  morning  with  the  dogs,  to  hunt 
a  negro,  and  would  not  be  home  before  night.      The  driver  said 

to  him,  that  Mr  had  sent  his  boy  John  on  the  stage  that 

morning,  to  be  delivered  at  the  pen,  and  that  he  had  jumped  from 
the  top  of  the  stage  and  taken  to  the  woods.  His  reply  was  :  "  We 
will  hunt  him  for  you  to-morrow."  The  driver  said  he  wished 
only  to  notify  him  of  his  being  in  the  woods. 

'  As  we  drove  on,  I  made  inquiry :  "  How  long  have  you  driven  a 
stage  on  this  road  ?  " 

'  He  replied :  "  About  fifteen  years." 

"  Do  you  frequently  take  down  negroes  to  this  slave-pen  ?  " 

"  Yes,  frequently." 

"  What  will  become  of  this  boy  John  ?  " 

'  He  replied  :  "  He  will  skulk  about  the  woods  until  he  is  nearly 
starved,  and  will  some  night  make  his  way  up  to  his  master's  house, 
and  in  about  two  weeks  I  shall  bring  him  down  again  to  the  slave- 
pen  in  handcuffs."  After  a  pause,  even  this  driver,  feeling  his 
degradation  in  being  the  instrument  of  such  misery,  broke  out  in 
the  exclamation :  "  This  is  a  cursed  business  ;  but  in  this  case  this 
is  not  the  worst  feature  in  it:  the  man  who  sold  him  is  his  own 
father  I " ' 


APPENDIX.  197 


TUGITIVE    SLAVE    LAW. 


Since  the  passing  of  this  law,  a  considerable  number  of  seizures 
under  its  provisions  have  taken  place  in  the  northern  states  ;  though 
in  Massachusetts  and  some  other  states,  from  resolutions  adopted  on 
the  subject,  it  will  in  future  be  scarcely  possible  to  apply  the  law 
without  producing  a  collision  between  federal  and  state  authorities. 

One  of  the  most  noted  cases  of  seizure  was  that  of  Anthony  Burns, 
who  was  carried  off  from  Boston  in  May  1854 ;  a  large  military 
force  being  required  to  aid  the  federal  officers  on  the  occasion. 
Burns  was  afterwards  purchased  from  his  owner,  and  restored  to 
liberty.  Philadelphia  has  obtained  an  unfortunate  distinction  for 
the  manner  in  which  the  law  has  been  strained  to  secure  fugitives. 
The  harsh  treatment  of  a  gentleman  in  that  city,  Mr  Passmore 
Williamson,  who  was  imprisoned  for  some  months  on  a  frivolous 
charge  connected  with  the  case  of  an  alleged  fugitive  woman  and  her 
family,  will  be  in  every  one's  recollection. 

The  latest  fugitive  slave  case  coming  under  our  notice  is  that 
of  Thomas,  a  mulatto,  seized  at  Philadelphia  in  January  1857.  A 
letter  from  that  city,  in  the  Anti-slavery  Standard,  gives  the  following 
narrative : 

'  Our  city  has  been  disgraced  by  another  fugitive  slave  case.  I 
had  half  hoped  that  we  were  to  witness  no  more  of  these  revolting 
spectacles ;  but  this  was,  of  course,  looking  for  too  much.  As 
long  as  we  have  fugitive  slaves  and  a  fugitive  slave  law — fugitive 
slave-officers  and  fugitive  slave-courts — and  on  our  borders,  slave- 
breeders,  slave-traders,  and  professional  slave-catchers,  we  shall 
not  be  without  liability  to  a  recurrence  of  these  outrages.  The 
particulars  of  this  last  case  you  will  find  in  the  newspaper  reports 
of  the  proceedings,  several  of  which  I  herewith  send  you.  The 
chief  facts  are  these : 

'  On  Thursday  last,  a  young  mulatto  man,  of  about  twenty  years 
of  age,  was  arrested  in  this  city  as  the  property  of  a  William 
H.  Gatchell  of  Baltimore.  The  parties  who  apprehended  him  were 
Deputy  Marshals  Jenkins  and  Crossin — the  same  that  were  so 
disgracefully  connected  "with  the  outrage  perpetrated  on  the  fugitive 
Thomas,  several  years  ago,  at  Wilkesbarre.  They  seized  him  on 
a  warrant  issued  by  David  Paul  Brown,  jun.,  who,  it  appears,  has 
been  appointed,  since  the  death  of  the  infamous  Ingraham,  a  United 
States  commissioner.  This  David  Paul  Brown,  jun.,  is  a  son  of  the 
lawyer  of  the  same  name,  who,  in  times  past,  won  for  himself  an 
honourable  reputation  as  a  champion  of  freedom,  but  whose  char- 
acter, in  this  respect,  it  must  be  confessed,  has  of  late  days  lost  a 
good  deal  of  its  lustre.  There  are  associations,  however,  still  con- 
nected with  the  name  which  could  not  fail  to  give  rise  to  astonish- 
ment, when  the  facts  were  announced  that  an  alleged  slave  had  been 
arrested  under  a  warrant  from  David  Paul  Brown,  jun.,  and  that 
David  Paul  Brown,  jun.,  was  the  commissioner  who  was  to  sit 
in  judgment  upon  the  case.  "Who  is  this  David  Paul  Brown, 
jun.  ?  "  was  a  question  that  was  in  every  one's  mouth.  "  Is  it  true 
that  he  is  a  son  of  our  old  friend,  David  Paul  Brown,  the  man  wrho 
used  to  scathe  with  such  eloquent  indignation  all  aiders  and  abettors 
in  this  infamous  business  ? "     Of  course,  there  was  but  one  answer 


198  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

to  be  given  to  these  interrogatories.  Yon  can  well  imagine  the 
expressions  of  surprise  and  disgust  with  which  that  answer  would  be 
received. 

'  The  counsel  for  the  slave-catcher  was  also  a  new  man  in  this 
dirty  business.  Prom  some  of  his  antecedents,  perhaps,  there  was 
nothing  better  to  be  expected ;  but  from  his  looks,  almost  any  one 
would  have  supposed  that  he  would  have  recoiled  from  an  offer 
to  engage  his  services  for  so  base  a  purpose.  His  name  is  Daniel 
Dougherty ;  he  is  an  Irishman  by  birth,  and  a  pseudo-democrat  in 
politics.  These  two  circumstances  would  naturally  suggest  the 
probability  of  his  sympathies  being  on  the  side  of  the  slaveholder ; 
but  from  his  ingenuous  countenance  and  upright  and  manly  port, 
one  could  hardly  fail  to  infer  a  heart  that  would  spurn  a  fee  from 
the  hand  of  a  low-lived  slave-catcher.  But  Mr  Dougherty  did  not 
seem  to  be  troubled  with  any  of  the  qualms  of  weak  humanity.  He 
conducted  his  case  with  the  utmost  sang  froid,  and  laboured  to  send 
an  innocent  man  to  endless  slavery,  with  less  apparent  emotion 
than  many  a  humane  person  would  exhibit  in  inflicting  a  slight 
punishment  on  a  convicted  criminal. 

'  The  counsel  for  the  prisoner  was  William  S.  Peirce,  Esq.,  an  able 
lawyer  and  a  conscientious  man.  For  many  years,  Mr  Peirce  has 
been  the  most  prompt  and  efficient  lawyer  we  have  had  in 
Philadelphia  in  cases  of  this  kind.  He  is  always  ready  to  act 
when  called  upon,  and  never  fails  to  exert  himself  to  the  utmost 
for  his  client  and  for  the  cause  involved.  In  this  case,  he  even 
excelled  himself,  leaving  no  expedient  untried  which  held  out  any 
hope  of  foiling  the  oppressor  and  rescuing  the  victim.  He  appealed 
to  the  humanity  of  the  commissioner  and  to  his  respect  for  legal 
precedent ;  he  shewed  a  palpable  informality  in  the  preliminary 
proceedings,  and  urged  the  justifiableness  and  the  duty  of  giving  to 
the  prisoner  the  benefit  of  the  irregularities ;  but  his  appeals  and  his 
proof  of  defective  forms  were  alike  unavailing.  Mr  Brown  decided 
the  case  by  declaring  the  man  to  be  the  property  of  his  claimant,  and 
issuing  a  warrant  for  his  rendition. 

'  Por  his  services  in  this  act  of  mock-judicial  outrage,  Commissioner 
Brown  will  receive  the  price  of  blood — ten  dollars — together  with 
the  thanks,  doubtless,  of  the  Judas  who  employed  him.  He  will, 
also,  on  the  other  hand,  have  the  execrations  of  the  unhappy  victim 
of  his  decision,  and  the  contempt  or  pity  of  all  good  men  who  are 
or  may  be  cognizant  of  the  transaction.  He  may  try  to  persuade 
himself  that  he  has  only  been  discharging  a  conscientious  duty ;  but 
he  will  not  succeed.  He  knows  that  he  voluntarily  assumed  the 
duties  of  his  office ;  and  he  knew,  when  he  solicited  and  accepted  his 
appointment,  that  one  of  its  functions  would  be  to  sit  in  judgment 
on  innocent  men,  wickedly  put  on  trial  for  their  liberty.  If  he  may 
lay  the  flattering  unction  to  his  soul  that  he  is  but  executing  the 
law,  and  therefore  without  blame,  so  may  Graham,  the  Baltimore 
slave-catcher,  to  whom  he  granted  his  warrant ;  so  may  Alberti ;  so 
may  every  professional  slave-catcher  and  duly  appointed  hangman 
that  snaps  the  "  nippers  "  on  his  victim's  wrists,  or  slips  a  noose  on 
the  platform  of  a  gallows. 

'  This  base  outrage  was  perpetrated  in  a  manner  and  by  instru- 
ments altogether  becoming  its  character.  Official  insolence,  and 
a  disregard  of  decent  usage,  characterised  its  performance  from 


APPENDIX.  199 

beginning  to  end.  It  was  a  sad  spectacle;  and  that  too,  not  so  much 
from  the  mute  despair  of  the  wretched  victim  thus  robbed  of  all  that 
was  dear  to  him,  as  from  the  mute  indifference  of  the  400,000  people 
who  make  up  the  population  of  this  great  city.  It  is  melancholy 
and  depressing  to  observe  how  little  sensation  an  atrocious  incident 
of  this  kind  excites  in  this  great  and  loud-professing  metropolis. 
We  have  churches  and  Quaker  meeting-houses,  and  thousands  upon 
thousands  of  religious  professors  of  every  variety  of  creed,  but  how 
few  of  them  all  feel  any  concern  for  the  wrongs  of  the  slave,  or  the 
cruel  injustice  of  the  oppressor.  It  is  true  that  yesterday  the  Eev. 
Dr  Furness  made  this  case  the  subject  of  a  touching  sermon  to  his 
people,  and  Lucretia  Mott  preached  upon  it  faithfully  at  the  meeting 
which  she  attends ;  and  doubtless  there  were  some  others  occupying 
similar  positions  who  were  not  unmindful  of  their  duty  in  this 
regard ;  but  the  great  mass  of  our  ministers  and  their  hearers,  our 
editors  and  their  readers,  care  for  none  of  these  things.  The  slave  is 
manacled  in  our  midst,  and  how  few  there  are  to  lay  it  to  heart ! ' 


UNDEKGROUND   RAILEOAD. 

It  need  hardly  be  explained  what  is  meant  by  this  phrase.  Over 
the  extensive  district  of  country  from  the  borders  of  the  slave  states 
to  Canada,  there  are  places  known  to  negroes  where  they  will  receive 
aid  to  help  them  on  their  way  to  the  land  of  freedom.  Unable  to 
read,  and  exposed  to  great  dangers,  the  fugitives  generally  avoid 
roads,  and  hold  on  their  course  according  to  certain  landmarks  by 
day,  and  the  north  star  by  night.  Such  is  the  Underground  Rail- 
road. Exciting  narratives  descriptive  of  escapes  are  constantly 
appearing  in  northern  newspapers. 

The  following  appears  in  the  Syracuse  Standard,  a  newspaper 
of  the  state  of  New  York  : 

'  The  Underground  Railroad  occasionally  brings  out  rich  things. 
Yesterday  a  beautiful  mulatto  woman  from  the  Maryland  shore,  near 
Baltimore,  called  upon  Mr  Loguen.  She  was  a  fugitive  from  high- 
life  in  slavedom.  Her  dress,  address,  and  conversation,  shewed  she 
had  been  valued  and  cared  for.  She  naturally  inquired  into  the 
quality  and  amount  of  business  at  the  Syracuse  Depot.  Mrs  Loguen 
took  the  record  of  the  names  of  the  fugitives  that  had  called  at  her 
house,  and  commenced  reading  them. 

' "  That  is  the  name  of  my  husband,"  she  exclaimed  with 
enthusiasm,  when  a  certain  name  was  read. 

'  Mr  and  Mrs  Loguen  instantly  called  to  mind  an  accomplished 
semi-coloured  man  they  had  sent  on  to  Rev.  Mr  Mansfield  &  Co.,  at 
Auburn,  three  weeks  ago.     She  told  her  story  as  follows : 

'  She  had  been  married  about  six  weeks.  Her  husband  and  herself 
were  house-slaves  of  two  notable  and  wealthy  families  in  Maryland, 
and  were  greatly  attached.  About  three  weeks  since,  her  master 
suspected  that  she  intended  to  escape  with  her  husband,  and  arrested 
her,  and  put  her  in  jail.  She  managed  to  notify  her  husband  of  her 
case,  and  he  instantly  fled  to  avoid  a  similar  fate,  and  probable  sale 
to  the  far  South.  Her  mistress  and  daughter  were  greatly  attached 
to  her,  and  procured  her  release,  and  in  three  days  thereafter  she 
fled  on  foot  to  Philadelphia,  with  the  aid  of  the  man  who  helped  her 


•200  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

husband  off.  Anti- slavery  men  put  her  on  the  road,  and  now  for 
the  second  time  she  has  got  track  of  her  husband. 

'  Mr  Loguen  at  once  thought  it  his  duty  to  go  to  Auburn  with  her, 
and  help  to  find  her  husband.  On  arrival  at  Auburn,  he  placed  her  in 
the  parlour  of  one  of  the  best  hotels,  and  called  on  Mr  Mansfield,  who 
went  with  him  to  another  clergyman  to  whom  he  was  directed.  He 
was  at  meeting,  and  Mr  Loguen  saw  a  coloured  man  in  a  distant 
part  of  the  meeting  who  resembled  the  fugitive,  and  sent  a  person  to 
bring  him  to  the  lobby  to  see  Mr  Loguen.  The  poor  man  was  seized 
with  a  tremor.  The  fact  was,  he  was  an  excellent  machinist,  and 
instead  of  going  to  Canada,  had  hired  out  at  good  wages  at  Auburn 
rather,  as  instructed  to  do  by  Mr  Loguen,  if  he  found  a  chance. 

"  They  are  after  you,  Fred,"  said  Mr  Loguen ;  "  but  hold  up  your 
head — I  '11  take  you  where  you  won't  be  hurt." 

"  Who  is  after  me  ?  " 

"  Who  but  your  master  could  be  here  after  you  ?  But  don't  be 
scared.     Follow  me,  and  you  will  be  safe." 

"  Can  you  fight  ?  " 

"  It  depends  on  whom  I  am  to  fight." 

"  Will  you  fight  slaveholders  if  they  have  come  to  take  you  ?  " 

"  Yes — I  would  fight  a  regiment  of  them." 

1  By  this  time  they  arrived  at  the  hotel,  and  Mr  Loguen  proceeded 
directly  to  the  parlour,  which  was  richly  furnished  and  gas-lighted. 
The  fellow's  feelings  were  worked  up  to  the  highest  point  by  being 
led  to  such  a  place,  where  he  could  expect  to  see  no  one  but  a  slave- 
holder. On  entering  the  room,  he  saw  his  beautiful  wife  alone.  He 
was  so  overcome  that  he  almost  fell  to  the  floor,  exclaiming  at  the 
same  time :  "  It  is  my  wife  ! "  They  rushed  together,  and  a  happier 
bride  and  bridegroom  could  not  be  found  in  the  world — we  '11  venture 
to  say.' 

TAKE    HIM,    DEAD    OR   ALIVE. 

The  New  York  Tribune,  of  February  24,  1857,  has  the  following: 
'  We  find,  in  a  North  Carolina  paper,  the  following  advertisement, 

which    presents    a    curious    illustration   of   slaveholding    law  and 

slaveholding  manners : 

"  State  op  N.  Carolina,  Jones  County. — Whereas  complaint 
upon  oath  hath  this  day  been  made  to  us,  Adonijah  McDaniel  and 
John  N.  Hyman,  two  of  the  Justices  of  the  Peace  of  said  county, 
by  Franklin  B.  Harrison  of  said  county,  planter,  that  a  certain 
male  slave  belonging  to  him,  named  Sam,  hath  absented  himself 
from  his  master's  services,  and  is  lurking  about  said  county,  com- 
mitting acts  of  felony  and  other  misdeeds.  These  are,  therefore,  in 
the  name  of  the  State,  to  command  the  said  slave  forthwith  to 
surrender  himself  and  return  home  to  his  master  ,  and  we  do  hereby 
require  the  Sheriff  of  said  County  of  Jones  to  make  diligent  search 
and  pursuit  after  the  said  slave,  and  him  having  found,  to  apprehend 
and  secure,  so  that  he  may  be  conveyed  to  his  said  master,  or  other- 
wise discharged  as  the  law  directs ;  and  the  said  Sheriff  is  hereby 
authorised  and  empowered  to  raise  and  take  with  him  such  power 
of  his  county  as  he  shall  think  fit  for  apprehending  the  said  slave  ; 
and  we  do  hereby,  by  virtue  of  the  Act  of  Assembly  in  such  case 
provided,  intimate  and  declare  that  if  the  said  slave,  named  Sam, 


APPENDIX.  201 

dotli  not  surrender  himself  and  return  home  immediately  after  the 
publication  of  these  presents,  that  any  person  may  kill  and  destroy  the 
said  slave,  by  such  means  as  he  or  they  may  think  Jit,  without  accusation 
or  impeachment  of  any  crime  or  offence  for  so  doing,  and  without  incurring 
any  penalty  and  forfeiture  thereby. 

"  Given  under  our  hands  and  seals  the  29th  day  of  September, 
a.d.  1856.— A.  McDaniel,  J.  P.     J.  N.  Hyman,  J.  P. 

"  0  100  Eeavard. 

"  I  will  give  Fifty  Dollars  for  the  apprehension  and  delivery  of  the 
said  boy  to  me,  or  lodge  him  in  any  Jail  in  the  State  so  that  I  get 
him,  or  One  Hundred  Dollars  for  his  head. 

"  Oct.  1st,  '56.  F.  B.  Harrison." 

1  Fifty  dollars  for  the  person  of  "  the  said  boy  "  Sam,  but  one 
hundred  dollars  for  his  head,  the  killing  of  him,  "  without  incurring 
any  penalty  or  forfeiture  thereby,"  being  fully  authorised  in  a  legal 
document  under  the  hands  and  seals  of  two  justices  of  the  peace ! 
Even  if  Sam  reads  the  newspapers,  and  the  above  proclamation 
should  come  to  his  knowledge,  no  reasonable  man  would  advise  him 
to  give  himself  up  under  it.  It  is  not  so  much  the  danger,  if  he  did 
so,  of  being  whipped  to  death  by  the  amiable  Mr  F.  B.  Harrison, 
who  is  evidently  in  a  considerable  state  of  excitement,  as  the 
certainty  that  in  a  community  that  tolerates  the  publication  of  such 
advertisements,  there  must  be  plenty  of  sportsmen  who  would  jump 
at  the  chance  of  shooting  a  negro,  to  say  nothing  of  the  hundred 
dollars  to  be  got  by  doing  so;  and  as  there  is  no  time  limited  within 
which  he  is  to  deliver  himself  up,  this  right  of  killing,  without 
incurring  any  penalty  or  forfeiture,  must  be  considered  as  accruing 
from  the  very  issue  of  the  proclamation.  However,  there  is  no 
restriction  on  the  way  of  doing  the  deed,  the  volunteer  executioner, 
under  this  act,  being  allowed  the  choice  of  "  any  means  "  that  may 
be  thought  fit.' 

NEGRO   DOGS. 

The  following  is  an  exact  copy  of  an  advertisement  from  a  negro- 
dog  tracker,  in  the  Lexington  Democratic  Advocate ;  Lexington  being 
in  Missouri,  near  the  borders  of  Kansas.  The  advertisement  appeared 
during  the  Kansas  troubles,  in  1855  : 

'  NEGRO  DOGS. — I  would  inform  the  citizens  of  Holmes  County 

that  I  still  have  my  NEGRO  DOGS,  and  that 

they  are  in  good  training,  and  ready  to  attend 

to  all  calls  of  hunting  and  catching  RUN- 
AWAY NEGROES,  at  the  following  rates.  For  hunting  per  day,  five 
dollars,  or  if  I  have  to  travel  any  distance,  every  day  will  be  charged  for,  in 
going  and  returning,  as  for  hunting,  and  at  the  same  rates.  Not  less  than 
five  dollars  will  be  charged  in  any  case,  where  the  Negroes  come  in  before  I 
reach  the  place.  From  fifteen  to  twenty-five  dollars  will  be  charged  for 
catching,  according  to  the  trouble ;  if  the  Negro  has  weapons,  the  charge  will 
be  made  according  to  the  difficulty  had  in  taking  him,  or  in  case  he  kills  some 
of  the  dogs,  the  charge  will  not  be  governed  by  the  above  rates.  I  am 
explicit  to  prevent  any  misunderstanding.  The  owner  of  the  slave  to  pay 
all  expenses  in  all  cases.     I  venture  to  suggest  to  any  person  having  a  slave 


202  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

runaway,  that  the  better  plan  is  to  send  for  the  dogs  forthwith  when  the 
negro  goes  off,  if  they  intend  sending  at  all,  and  let  no  other  person  go  in 
the  direction,  if  they  know  which  way  the  runaway  went ;  as  many  persons 
having  other  negroes  to  hunt  over  the  track,  and  failing  of  success,  send  for 
the  dogs,  and  then  perhaps  fail  in  consequence  to  catch  their  negro,  and 
thus  causelessly  fault  the  dogs.  Terms  cash.  If  the  money  is  not  paid 
at  the  time  the  negro  hunted  for  is  caught,  he  will  be  held  bound  for  the 
money.  I  can  be  found  at  home  at  all  times,  five  and  a  half  miles  east  of 
Lexington,  except  when  hunting  with  the  dogs.  John  Long. 

Feb.  14,  1855.' 

SLAVE   HEROISM. 

The  following  was  communicated  by  a  correspondent  to  the 
New  York  Tribune : 

'In  November  last  [1855],  while  on  a  tour  in  the  southern  states, 
on  account  of  my  business  connections  in  Vermont  and  Massa- 
chusetts, upon  the  plantation  of  Mr  G.  W ,  in  Wayne  County, 

Mississippi,  a  negro,  for  some  trifling  offence,  as  pretending  sickness, 
was  sentenced  to  twenty-five  lashes,  on  the  bare  back,  to  be  given 
at  his  plantation,  in  presence  of  his  wife,  and  all  the  other  slaves. 
He  was  tied,  hand  and  foot,  in  a  most  painful  manner,  in  a  dark 
hole,  called  the  "black  hole,"  until  the  punishment  was  inflicted, 
which  was  done  in  the  most  inhuman  manner.  After  an  attempt, 
and  only  for  appearance'  sake,  to  cure  his  wounds,  he  was  dismissed 
to  the  field,  in  a  miserable  condition.  In  about  a  week,  he  was 
strong  enough  to  avail  himself  of  an  opportunity  offered  him  to 
escape ;  and,  taking  no  clothing  but  what  was  absolutely  necessary, 
he  went  to  a  large  swamp  in  the  vicinity  ;  and,  in  about  two  hours, 
he  heard  the  horrid  braying  of  blood-hounds,  or,  as  they  call  them, 
"negro  dogs."  After  most  terrible  agony  for  forty-eight  hours,  and 
the  slightest  possible  chance  of  escape,  he  was  left  alone ;  and  then 
commenced  his  trials.  In  a  state  the  most  inhuman  in  the  Union, 
with  no  friends  to  assist  him,  not  even  the  necessaries  of  life,  /  met 
him.  I  gave  him  a  suit  of  clothes,  some  money,  and  by  dint  of 
concealment  in  the  daytime,  and  only  travelling  at  night,  he  passed 
through  Kentucky,  and  arrived  in  the  land  of  freedom — that  is,  on 
the  borders  of  Ohio — in  January  1855.  The  weather  was  intensely 
cold,  his  feet  horribly  frosted,  his  clothes  torn  to  shreds,  but  his 
heart  uplifted  by  the  hope  of  liberty.  Meeting  some  kind,  friends, 
as  they  always  do  in  Cincinnati,  he  was  working  manfully  in  a 
secret  place,  to  obtain  money  to  go  to  Canada ;  and  h>y  this  time  he 
is  well  on  the  way,  or  I  would  fear  to  expose  his  whereabouts.  I 
have  since  heard  from  a  friend  of  mine  there,  that  his  wife  received 
ten  lashes  for  aiding  in  his  escape.  He  is  determined  to  coin  enough 
money  to  buy  his  faithful  wife,  and  both  to  live  in  a  free  state,  where 
slaveholders  and  blood-hounds  are  not  the  boast  of  the  community.' 

SLAVE-WHIPPING  IN  MISSOURI. 

A  gentleman  travelling  through  the  states  west  of  the  Mississippi, 
sent  lately  to  a  New  York  newspaper  the  following  account  of  an 
incident  which  came  under  his  notice,  in  Lexington,  Missouri : 

'  In  the  morning  of  the  21st  February  1856/  he  says,  '  I  was,  for 


APPENDIX.  203 

tlie  first  time  in  my  life,  a  spectator  of  the  sale  of  slaves.  Two 
young  men  and  a  girl,  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  were  placed  upon 
the  block,  surrounded  by  forty  or  fifty  slaveholders.  The  first  put 
up  was  a  "nigger"  of  great  beauty  and  fine  form.  The  auctioneer 
commenced  by  exhorting  the  farmers  to  remember  that  the  hemp 
was  all  down — hands  were  scarce— niggers  had  taken  a  rise;  and 
told  them  that  there  stood  one  of  the  best-looking  niggers  in  the 
state ;  that  he  was  a  slave  for  life,  and  had  no  wife  to  trouble  him 
— was  sound — had  good  teeth  and  eyes  ;  in  short,  was  an  "  excellent 
nigger !  "  The  bidding  proceeded  until  1250  dollars  was  reached,  and 
the  hammer  fell  upon  the  nigger,  who  was  led  away  by  the  highest 
bidder.  During  the  sale,  the  auctioneer  and  others  indulged  in 
witticisms  and  puns  upon  the  boy,  which  set  the  crowd  to  laughing ; 
but  the  slave  did  not  laugh.  Not  a  smile  nor  a  tear  did  I  notice 
during  the  whole  time.  His  expression  was  that  of  deep 
despondency. 

1  Being  called  away,  I  did  not  see  the  other  two  sold.  Several 
others  were  sold  in  that  place  during  the  same  week  at  Sheriff's 
sale.  On  the  succeeding  Friday,  a  scene  was  presented  in  that  same 
court-house  which  almost  beggars  description. 

'  Sheriff  Withers,  having  a  "  nigger  woman,"  who,  on  the  previous 
day,  had  been  neglectful  of  her  taskwork,  sent  for  a  blacksmith  to 
come  and  chastise  her.  He  came,  bolted  the  door,  tied  the  woman's 
hands  together,  and  lashed  them  over  her  head  to  the  ceiling,  and 
commenced  whipping.  The  screams  of  the  woman  brought  her 
husband  to  the  rescue.  He  broke  open  the  door,  and  with  a  butcher- 
knife  in  his  hand,  rushed  forward  to  cut  his  wife  loose.  The  slave 
and  blacksmith  encountered  each  other,  and  in  the  affray  the  latter 
got  his  arm  cut.  The  slave  finally  surrendered,  and  was  led  away  to 
the  jail,  while  the  woman  received  a  double  whipping.  These  are 
the  facts  in  the  case. 

'  News  of  this  "  horrible  outrage  "  was  soon  circulated,  and  the 
excitement  became  intense.  At  four  o'clock,  the  mob,  numbering 
two  or  three  hundred,  moved  towards  the  court-house.  The  "  boy  " 
— a  quadroon  of  about  forty  years  of  age — was  brought  into  the 
building  and  placed  within  the  bar.  Colonel  Reed  was  called  to 
preside,  and  Colonel  Walton  explained  the  object  of  the  meeting. 

'  He  said  :  "  A  great  crime  has  been  committed — an  outrage  upon 
one  of  our  citizens  by  a  nigger.  We  have  come  together,  not  to 
imbrue  our  hands  in  the  blood  of  innocence ;  but  rebellion  of  slaves 
is  becoming  common.  Something  must  be  done  to  put  a  stop  to  it, 
to  protect  our  wives,  our  children,  and  our  sacred  homes." 

'  A  member  of  the  legislature  earnestly  remonstrated  against  mob- 
law,  and  recommended  that  a  day  be  appointed  to  whip  the  boy,  and 
have  all  the  slaves  of  the  county  present.  He  was  not  heard  through, 
for  the  speech  did  not  suit  the  mob.  A  committee  of  twelve  was 
appointed  to  decide  immediately  what  punishment  the  boy  should 
receive.  That  committee  retired,  but  soon  returned,  with  Colonel 
Reed  at  their  head,  who  read  the  following  announcement : 

'  Your  committee  have  decided  that  the  boy  shall  receive  one  thousand 
lashes  on  his  bare  back,  two  hundred  to  be  administered  this  evening  (if 
he  can  bear  it),  and  the  remaining  eight  hundred  from  time  to  time, 
as  in  the  judgment  of  the  committee  his  physical  nature  can  bear  up 
under  it.    Also,   we  advise   that  a  committee  of  three  physicians  be 


204  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

appointed  to  superintend  the  operation,  and  three  citizens  he  chosen 
to  whip  him.  Also,  that  the  person  whose  arm  was  cut  by  the  slave 
have  the  privilege  of  giving  him  the  last  two  hundred  lashes. 

1  The  report  was  almost  unanimously  adopted ;  the  wretched  slave 
was  stripped  of  his  clothing,  and  made  to  kneel  down  in  front  of 
Colonel  Reed,  while  his  hands,  extending  over  the  top  of  a  bench, 
were  tied  to  the  floor. 

'  Let  the  reader  now  imagine  Colonel  Reed  upon  the  bench,  cigar 
in  mouth,  three  honoured  physicians  on  the  right,  and  three  burly 
slaveholders  (whips  in  hand)  on  the  left  of  a  poor  slave  who  was 
kneeling  before  them,  with  his  whole  person  bared  to  the  chilling 
atmosphere,  the  thermometer  marking  zero.  Outside  the  bar  are 
two  or  three  hundred  border-ruffians,  all  eager  for  blood.  Such 
was  the  scene  presented  in  the  court-house  of  Lexington,  in  the 
state  of  Missouri,  on  the  last  Friday  of  February  1856. 

'The  whipping  commenced.  Colonel  Reed  sprang  to  his  feet 
with  curiosity;  more  than  a  hundred  heads  were  peering  in  to 
get  a  sight  of  their  miserable  victim.  But  before  a  dozen  lashes 
had  been  administered,  the  slave  fell  to  the  floor,  bleeding  and 
writhing  in  agony.  The  slaveholder  struck  the  harder,  and  ordered 
him  to  get  up.  The  physicians  interfered,  and  felt  his  pulse,  and 
declared  that  he  could  never  stand  such  lashes. 

'  Some  one  cried  out :  "  988  yet  to  come,"  and  the  whipping  was 
resumed.  Lash  upon  lash  was  inflicted,  until  one  hundred  had 
been  given,  when  his  whole  back,  from  the  top  of  his  shoulders  down 
to  his  very  feet,  was  a  mass  of  blood  and  mangled  flesh. 

1  The  whipping  was  continued  without  cessation,  amid  the  most 
piteous  and  beseeching  wails   and  cries,  such  as :    "  O   gen'lemen, 

0  gen'lemen,  have  mercy  ! "  "  O  gen'lemen  ! "  "  O  Lord  ! "  "  O 
Lord  ! "  until  they  became  fainter,  and  died  away  upon  the  ear. 

'When  they  commenced  giving  him  the  second  hundred,  I  left 
the  room  in   anguish  of  spirit,  exclaiming   to   myself:    "Oh,  that 

1  were  a  dog,  that  I  might  not  call  man  my  brother ! " 

'  He  was  not  permitted  to  rise  until  the  two  hundred  were  given. 
He  was  taken  out  the  next  day,  but  it  was  decided  he  was  too  sore 
to  whip.  On  the  third  day,  he  was  taken  out  and  whipped  again 
in  the  presence  of  a  large  crowd ;  but  when  they  had  given  him 
twenty,  his  strength  completely  failed  him. 

'  Whether  the  whole  of  the  thousand  lashes  were  administered, 
or  whether  he  gave  out  before  receiving  the  complete  penalty,  I  have 
no  means  of  knowing;  but  I  do  know  that  some  of  the  leading 
slaveholders  pledged  themselves  to  each  other  to  carry  it  through, 
despite  the  indignation  of  a  portion  of  the  community  and  of  the 
entreaties  of  his  master,  although  at  first  the  master  had  given  him 
up  to  the  mob  heartily,  and  was  even  willing  they  should  hang  him.' 


BRUTAL    MURDER   OF   A    SLAVE   BY   HIS    OWNER. 

*  Michael  Boylan,  a  German,  residing  on  Lover's  Lane,  near  this 
city,  was  arrested  yesterday  by  Sergeant  Wilson  and  Privates 
Richardson  and  Waller,  of  the  mounted  police,  on  a  charge  of 
whipping  his  own  slave,  a  man  named  Stepney,  to  death.  The 
circumstances  of  this  outrage,  as  we  have  learned  them,  are  as 


APPENDIX.  205 

follows  :  It  appears  that  the  negro  had  been  runaway  for  some  time, 
and  was  taken  on  Tuesday  last  and  carried  to  jail  by  Constable 
Jones.  He  was  then  whipped,  and  turned  over  to  his  master. 
Yesterday,  Boylan,  while  under  the  influence  of  liquor,  renewed  the 
punishment,  and  continued  it  until  the  negro  sank  under  the 
infliction,  and  died.  When  Sergeant  Wilson  arrived  at  the  spot, 
the  negro  was  lying  on  the  ground  lifeless,  and  Boylan  by  the  side 
of  him,  completely  stupified  by  liquor.  The  latter,  together  with 
his  nephew,  whose  name  we  did  not  learn,  were  arrested  and  carried 
before  Justice  Russel,  who  committed  them  both  to  jail  for  further 
examination.  Sergeant  Wilson  is  of  opinion  that  but  for  his 
prompt  arrival  on  the  spot,  the  negro  would  have  been  buried  and 
the  crime  concealed,  as  the  coflin  was  already  prepared  and  a  hole 
dug  to  receive  it.  We  are  shocked  to  record  such  a  crime  in  our 
midst,  and  trust  that  the  law  will  be  rigidly  enforced  against  the 
offender.' — Savannah  newspaper. 


THE   INSURRECTIONS   IN    TENNESSEE. 
From  The  Memphis  Appeal. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  citizens  of  Sumner  County,  held  at  the  Court- 
house on  Saturday,  the  6th  of  December,  1856,  Thomas  C.  Douglas, 
Wiley  G.  Douglas,  and  L.  A.  Edwards,  were  appointed  chairmen,  and 
Thomas  T.  T.  Tabb,  secretary. 

The  object  of  the  meeting  having  been  explained  in  very  pertinent 
and  appropriate  remarks  by  Messrs  John  W.  Head  and  Houston 
Solomon,  it  was  resolved  that  the  chairmen  appoint  a  committee  of 
twelve  to  consider  the  developments  of  an  insurrection  elicited  from 
some  of  the  leaders  thereof,  and  to  draft  resolutions  by  Monday, 
12  o'clock,  when  this  meeting  will  meet  again  to  receive  or  reject 
them,  and  to  adopt  some  plan  for  the  better  security  of  the  com- 
munity ;  whereupon  the  chairmen  appointed  the  following  gentlemen 
the  committee — namely,  Albert  Eranklin,  William  Parker,  Dr  James 
E.  Blackmore,  Dr  Raymond  Head,  J.  Seawell  Carr,  Joseph  Walton, 
Robert  Myers,  John  W.  Head,  M.  S.  Singleton,  W.  L.  Baber,  Dr  J. 
M.  Porter,  and  Leonidas  Baker. 

The  meeting  then  adjourned  to  Monday,  12  o'clock. 

Monday,  Dec.  8. — The  meeting  having  been  called  to  order,  the 
committee  reported  the  following  resolutions,  which  were  unanimously 
adopted : 

1.  Resolved,  That  we  have  the  clearest  evidence  that  there  was  a 
contemplated  insurrection  among  a  portion  of  the  slaves  of  our 
county ;  in  this  we  all  concur,  and  that  the  present  investigation  by 
which  the  plot  has  in  part  been  unravelled  and  known  to  exist,  be 
carefully  prosecuted  until  the  whole  plan  is  fully  developed,  and  that 
such  an  investigation  be  set  on  foot  in  the  various  civil  districts  of 
the  county  by  the  magistrates  thereof. 

2.  Resolved,  That  the  various  magistrates  of  the  county  hand  over 
the  leaders  of  the  conspiracy  to  a  jury  of  twelve  slaveholders  of  this 
county,  appointed  by  this  meeting;  which  jury  shall  try  said  slaves, 
and  deal  with  them  as  the  interest  of  the  community  may  require ; 
said  jury  to  adopt  such  regulations  in  regard  to  the  trial  as  they 
think  proper. 


206  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

3.  Resolved,  That  each  civil  district  in  the  county  meet  and 
organise  a  sufficient  patrol,  or  body  of  men,  prepared  for  any  emer- 
gency, whose  duty  it  shall  be  to  see  that  the  negroes  remain  on  their 
masters'  premises  at  night  and  on  the  Sabbath,  unless  absent  by 
written  permission  of  the  owner  or  hirer,  designating  the  time  they 
are  to  be  absent,  and  the  place  they  are  to  go  to ;  that  said  patrol 
also  perform  such  other  services  as  the  safety  and  peace  of  the 
community  may  require,  and  this  organisation  be  kept  up  for  thirty 
days. 

4.  Resolved,  That  in  addition  to  the  above  regulations,  each  master 
patrol  his  own  premises,  see  that  his  own  slaves  remain  home  at 
night  and  on  the  Sabbath  ;  and  that  other  negroes  do  not  congregate 
with  his. 

5.  Resolved,  That  no  voluntary  assemblage  of  negroes  be  permitted 
at  night,  or  on  the  Sabbath,  for  any  purpose,  for  twelve  months  to 
come. 

6.  Resolved,  That  during  the  Christmas  holidays  no  slave  be  per- 
mitted to  leave  his  master's  premises,  unless  on  business  of  the 
master  or  owner,  and  with  his  written  permission,  specifying  the 
time,  place,  and  business. 

7.  Resolved,  That  all  citizens  be  vigilant  in  seeing  that  the 
laws  relative  to  slaves,  hiring  their  time,  carrying  arms,  buying 
ardent  spirits,  assembling  together,  going  off  their  masters'  premises 
with  white  men  and  free  persons  of  colour,  talking  to  them  in  a 
manner  calculated  to  excite  discontent,  trading  with  them,  &c,  be 
promptly  executed. 

8.  Resolved,  That  we  recommend  that  the  law  be  rigorously 
enforced  against  free  negroes,  when  found  guilty  of  a  violation  of  it ; 
and  that  a  vigilant  watch  be  kept  over  their  movements.  Should 
any  one  or  more  of  them  in  any  community  be  a  nuisance,  then  the 
community  might  take  such  steps  in  reference  to  them  as  it  is 
regarded  necessary  for  its  peace  and  safety.  No  free  persons  of 
colour  shall  remove  to  and  settle  in  this  county. 

9.  Resolved,  That  there  are  persons  in  our  midst  who  are  selling 
liquor  to  slaves,  in  violation  of  the  law,  and  we  recommend  all  such 
to  cease  their  traffic,  and  if  not,  they  will  be  required  to  leave  the 
county,  or  the  severest  penalties  will  be  inflicted  upon  them. 

On  motion — Resolved,  in  addition,  That  no  school  be  kept  open  for 
the  education  of  negroes,  whether  free  or  slave. 

Resolved,  That  if  any  of  the  jury  (of  twelve  appointed  now),  under 
the  second  resolution,  should  fail  to  act,  that  the  president  of  the 
meeting  supply  their  places  by  others,  and  that  we  endorse  all  such 
appointments  made  by  him. 

Resolved,  That  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  be  published  in 
The  Sumner  Flag,  Union  and  American,  Nashville  Banner,  and  The 
Gazette,  and  that  a  copy  thereof  be  furnished  to  each  magistrate  in 
the  county. 

Having  appointed  the  jury  of  twelve,  in  conformity  with  the 
second  resolution,  the  meeting  adjourned.  (Signed)  Thomas  C. 
Douglas,  Wiley  G.  Douglas,  L.  A.  Edwards. 


APPENDIX.  207 


PRICE   OP   SLAVES. 

The  price  of  slaves,  as  has  been  said,  has  risen  considerably  during 
the  past  two  or  three  years,  and  is  still  rising.  In  a  letter  from 
Lexington,  Georgia,  December  2,  1856,  to  the  Augusta  Chronicle,  the 
writer  says : 

*  About  100,000  dollars'  worth  of  property  was  sold  here  to-day — 
land  and  negroes.  Some  of  the  sales  were  ahead  of  anything  we 
have  ever  heard.  A  negro  girl,  fifteen  years  old,  sold  for  1280 
dollars ;  another  girl,  fourteen  years  old,  sold  for  1280  dollars ; 
another  girl,  fourteen  years  old,  for  1305  dollars ;  another  girl, 
eighteen  years  old  (in  family  way),  for  1500  dollars ;  a  boy,  eighteen 
years  old,  for  1290  dollars ;  a  fellow,  twenty-two  years  old,  for  1500 
dollars.  These  negroes  belonged  to  the  estate  of  John  Wynn, 
deceased,  and  were  sold  on  a  credit  of  twelve  months.  There  were 
fifty-seven  of  Wynn's  negroes  sold  to-day,  and  brought  44,026  dollars. 
Of  these,  a  great  number  (more  than  ordinary)  were  women  and 
children ;  and  a  few  diseased  and  old  sold  low.  It  is  also  proper  to 
state,  that  but  few  of  these  negroes  were  bought  by  the  legatees,  and 
not  one  of  those  of  which  we  have  mentioned  specific  prices.  They 
were  common  negroes — field-hands. 

'  But  the  most  extraordinary  sales  were  of  three  negroes  belonging 
to  the  estate  of  Mrs  Mary  "Watson :  Leah,  a  negro  girl,  sixteen  years 
old,  sold  for  1525  dollars;  Harriet,  about  twenty  years  old,  and 
child  in  her  arms,  sold  for  1840  dollars — term,  twelve  months. 
These  prices  appear  incredible,  but  all  who  are  disposed  to  doubt 
can  be  satisfied  by  referring  to  the  Record  of  the  Court  of  Ordinary 
of  Oglethorpe  County.' 

In  an  article  recommending  the  South  to  unite  in  defending  its 
institutions,  the  Charleston  Mercury  offers  the  following  explanations 
respecting  the  rise  in  the  price  of  negroes : 

1  Cheapness  of  labour  is  essential  to  the  material  progress  of  every 
people ;  but  this  can  only  obtain  with  the  abundance  of  supply. 
Now,  slave-labour  is,  and  ought  to  be,  the  cheapest  kind  of  labour. 
It  will  only  become  otherwise,  when  foreign  and  hostile  influences  are 
made  to  bear  against  it.  The  abolition  of  the  slave-trade,  by  cutting 
off"  the  supply,  tends  to  this  result.  Slaves  were  never  before  so  high 
in  the  South.  They  have,  within  the  last  few  years,  advanced  50  per 
cent,  in  price,  and,  in  some  instances,  even  more.  To  what  is  this 
attributable  ?  Is  it  to  an  increase  in  the  value  of  their  productions  ? 
We  think  not.  Taking  the  three  great  staples — cotton,  rice,  and 
sugar — as  the  standards,  we  can  discover  no  such  increase  in  the 
profits  of  their  culture  as  would  warrant  this  advance.  Indeed,  it 
may  well  be  doubted,  whether  planting,  throughout  the  South, 
during  the  last  ten  years,  has  been  as  profitable  as  for  the  same 
preceding  period.  It  has  certainly  not  been  more  so ;  and  the  pur- 
chaser now  of  slaves,  at  six  hundred  dollars  each,  has  no  promise  of 
better  returns  for  their  labour,  than  when  he  bought  them  at  four 
hundred  dollars.  The  slave  can  neither  cultivate  nor  produce  more 
now  than  formerly.  Thus,  so  far  as  the  planting  interest  is  con- 
cerned, the  anomaly  is  presented,  of  an  advance  in  the  market-value 
of  the  capital  employed,  without  any  corresponding  increase  in  its 
profits.  We  must  therefore  seek  elsewhere  for  the  real  cause  of  the 
present  high  price  of  slaves, 


208  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

'  The  influx  of  gold  from  California,  in  swelling  the  cost  of  almost 
every  species  of  property,  necessarily  affected  that  of  slaves.  But 
there  is  a  reason  deeper  and  beyond  this :  it  is  the  scarcity  of,  as 
compared  with  the  multiplying  demands  for,  labour ;  demands,  too,  so 
imperative  that  they  must  be  supplied  at  almost  any  cost.  In  the 
last  few  years,  internal  improvements  in  the  South  have  been  pro- 
secuted on  a  scale  greater  than  ever  before.  With  the  consciousness 
of  her  resources,  has  come  the  determination  to  develop  them.' 


THE    NEGROES    OF    "WASHINGTON. 

'The  coloured  population  voluntarily  sustain  several  churches, 
schools,  and  mutual  assistance  and  improvement  societies,  and  there 
are  evidently  persons  among  them  of  no  inconsiderable  cultivation  of 
mind.  Among  the  police  reports  of  the  city  newspapers,  there  was 
lately  (April  1855)  an  account  of  the  apprehension  of  twenty-four 
"genteel  coloured  men" — so  they  were  described — who  had  been 
found  by  a  watchman  assembling  privately  in  the  evening,  and  been 
lodged  in  the  watch-house.  The  object  of  their  meeting  appears  to 
have  been  purely  benevolent,  and,  when  they  were  examined  before 
a  magistrate  in  the  morning,  no  evidence  was  offered,  nor  does  there 
seem  to  have  been  any  suspicion  that  they  had  any  criminal  purpose. 
On  searching  their  persons,  there  were  found  a  Bible,  a  volume  of 
Seneca's  Morals;  Life  in  Earnest;  the  printed  constitution  of  a 
society,  the  object  of  which  was  said  to  be  "  to  relieve  the  sick,  and 
bury  the  dead;"  and  a  subscription  paper,  to  purchase  the  freedom  of 
Eliza  Howard,  a  young  woman,  whom  her  owner  was  willing  to  sell 
at  650  dollars.  I  can  think  of  nothing  that  would  speak  higher  for 
the  character  of  a  body  of  poor  men,  servants  and  labourers,  than  to 
find,  by  chance,  in  their  pockets,  just  such  things  as  these.  And  I 
cannot  value  that  man  as  a  countryman,  who  does  not  feel  intense 
humiliation  and  indignation,  when  he  learns  that  such  men  may  not 
be  allowed  to  meet  privately  together,  with  such  laudable  motives,  in 
the  capital  city  of  the  United  States,  without  being  subject  to  dis- 
graceful punishment.  Washington  is,  at  this  time,  governed  by  the 
Know  Nothings  ;  and  the  magistrate,  in  disposing  of  the  case,  was 
probably  actuated  by  a  well-founded  dread  of  secret  conspiracies, 
inquisitions,  and  persecutions.  One  of  the  prisoners,  a  slave  named 
Joseph  Jones,  he  ordered  to  be  flogged ;  four  others,  called  in  the 
papers  free  men,  and  named  John  E.  Bennett,  Chester  Taylor, 
George  Lee,  and  Aquila  Barton,  were  sent  to  the  workhouse ;  and 
the  remainder,  on  paying  costs  of  court  and  fines,  amounting  in  the 
aggregate  to  one  hundred  and  eleven  dollars,  were  permitted  to 
range  loose  again.' — Olmsted's  Journey  in  the  Seaboard  Slave  States. 


AN   INCIDENT   IN   KANSAS. 

Among  the  many  anecdotes  now  in  circulation  connected  with 
affairs  in  Kansas,  is  the  following,  which  we  condense  from  the 
Herald  of  Freedom,  a  Kansas  newspaper,  January  10,  1857. 

For  some  time,  a  number  of  free  negroes  have  been  residing 
among  the  Cherokee  Indians,  following  various  occupations,  and 
intermarrying  with  the   Indian  women.      A  young  man,  son  of  a 


APPENDIX.  209 

negro  by  one  of  these  Indian  wives,  wandered  lately  into  Kansas, 
where  he  procured  employment  as  a  groom  at  the  stage-station  on 
Stranger  Creek.  One  day,  while  he  was  engaged  at  the  door  of  the 
stable,  two  white  men  rode  up  to  the  place,  and  eyeing  the  young 
man,  thought  they  might  make  a  good  booty — probably  1200  dollars 
— by  carrying  him  off,  and  selling  him.  With  this  design,  they 
entered  into  conversation  with  him ;  they  charged  him  with  being  a 
fugitive  slave  from  Platte  County,  and  ordered  him  immediately  to 
come  along  with  them.  This  charge  the  lad  denied,  and  refused  to  go 
with  them.  Threats  were  now  used ;  and  when  a  pistol  was  presented 
to  intimidate  him,  he  ran  hurriedly  to  the  house  to  find  a  gun  with 
which  to  defend  himself.  As  he  went  towards  the  house,  one  of  the 
ruffians  fired  his  revolver,  and  shot  the  poor  young  man  in  the  left 
side.  Fortunately,  the  bullet,  from  the  position  in  which  the  assailant 
was  standing,  glanced  outwardly,  or  it  might  have  proved  fatal.  He 
reached  the  house,  and  getting  a  gun  from  it,  chased  one  of  the  fellows 
till  he  disappeared  down  a  ravine ;  then,  returning,  he  managed  to 
intercept  the  other,  who  piteously  begged  for  mercy,  and  finally 
gave  up  a  five-inch  Colt's  revolver.  Thus  free  from  an  infamous 
attempt  on  his  liberty,  he  found  it  necessary  to  attend  to  his 
wounded  side.  He  went  to  Lawrence,  where  his  wound  being 
attended  to,  he  soon  recovered. 

NEGROES    AND   MULATTOES   KEEPING    SLAVES. 

Mr  Olmsted,  in  travelling  through  Texas,  arrived  one  night  at 
a  house  where  he  learns  some  curious  particulars  respecting  free 
negroes  and  mulattoes. 

'At  the  house  where  we  stopped — in  which,  by  the  way,  we 
ate  our  supper  by  the  light  of  pine-knots  blazing  in  the  chimney, 
with  an  apology  for  the  absence  of  candles — we  heard  some  conver- 
sation upon  a  negro  of  the  neighbourhood,  who  had  been  sold  to 
a  free  negro,  and  who  refused  to  live  with  him,  saying  he  wouldn't 
be  a  servant  to  a  nigger.  All  agreed  that  he  was  right,  although 
the  man  was  well  known  to  be  kind  to  his  negroes,  and  would 
always  sell  any  of  them  who  wished  it.  The  slave  had  been  sold 
because  he  wouldn't  mind.  "  If  I  had  a  negro  that  wouldn't  mind," 
said  the  woman  of  the  house,  "  I  'd  break  his  head,  or  I  'd  sell  him. 
I  wouldn't  have  one  about  me."  Her  own  servant  was  standing 
behind  her.  "  I  do  think  it  would  be  better  if  there  wasn't  any 
niggers  in  the  world,  they  do  behave  so  bad,  some  of  'em.  They  steal 
just  like  hogs." 

'  We  inquired  about  the  free  negroes  of  whom  they  were  speaking, 
and  were  told  that  there  were  a  number  in  the  county,  all  mulattoes, 
who  had  come  from  Louisiana.  Some  of  them  owned  many  negroes, 
and  large  stocks.  There  were  some  white  people,  good-for-nothing 
people,  that  married  in  with  them,  but  they  couldn't  live  in  Texas 
after  it ;  all  went  over  into  Louisiana.  They  knew  of  no  law 
excluding  free  negroes  from  the  state  ;  if  there  were  any  such  law,  no 
one  here  cared  for  it. 

4  This  county  has  been  lately  the  scene  of  events,  which  prove  that 
it  must  have  contained  a  much  larger  number  of  free  negroes  and 
persons  of  mixed  blood  than  we  were  informed  on  the  spot,  in 
spite  of  the  very  severe  statute  forbidding  their  introduction,  which 

N 


210  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

* 

has  been  backed  by  additional  legislative  penalties  in  1856.  Banded 
together,  they  have  been  able  to  resist  the  power,  not  only  of  the 
legal  authorities,  but  of  a  local  "  Vigilance  Committee,"  which  gave 
them  a  certain  number  of  hours  to  leave  the  state,  and  a  guerrilla  of 
skirmishes  and  murders  has  been  carried  on  for  many  months,  upon 
the  banks  of  the  Sabine,  with  the  revival  of  the  old  names  of 
"  Moderators  and  Regulators,"  of  the  early  Texans. 

'  The  feud  appears  to  have  commenced  with  the  condemnation,  by 
a  justice  of  the  peace,  of  a  free  mulatto,  named  Samuel  Ashworth, 
to  receive  twenty-five  lashes,  on  a  charge  of  malicious  killing  of  his 
neighbour's  hogs,  and  of  impertinent  talking.  The  Ashworths  were 
a  rich  mulatto  family,  settled  in  Texas  in  the  earliest  days  of  the 
republic,  and  exempted  by  special  mention  from  the  operation  of 
the  law  forbidding  residence  to  free  negroes.  They  are  now  three 
and  four  generations  removed  from  black  blood,  and  have  had  a 
reputation  for  great  hospitality,  keeping  open  house  for  all  who  call. 
The  member  of  the  family  who  was  condemned  to  the  indignity  of 
being  publicly  whipped,  rose  upon  his  guard  while  in  the  hands  of 
the  sheriff,  and  escaped.  In  a  few  days  after,  he  returned  with  a 
mulatto  companion,  and  shot  the  man  on  whose  testimony  he  was 
condemned.  Upon  this  the  Vigilance  Committee  was  organised,  and 
the  sheriff,  who  was  suspected  of  connivance  at  the  escape  of 
Ashworth,  and  all  the  Ashworth  family  with  their  relatives  and 
supporters,  summoned  to  leave  the  county  on  pain  of  death.  On  the 
other  hand,  all  free  men  of  colour  on  the  border,  to  the  number  of 
one  hundred  and  fifty,  or  more,  joined  with  a  few  whites  and 
Spaniards,  formed  an  organised  band,  and  defied  the  committee ;  and 
then  ensued  a  series  of  assassinations,  burnings  of  houses  and  saw- 
mills, and  open  fights.  The  Moderators,  or  committee-men,  became 
strong  enough  to  range  the  county,  and  demand  that  every  man, 
capable  of  bearing  arms,  should  join  them,  or  quit  the  county  on 
pain  of  death.  This  increased  the  resistance  and  the  bloody 
retaliation,  and,  at  the  last  accounts,  they  were  laying  regular  siege 
to  the  house  of  a  family  who  had  refused  to  join  them.  Thirty 
families  had  been  compelled  to  leave  the  county,  and  murders  were 
still  occurring  every  week.  Among  those  killed  were  two  strangers, 
travelling  through  the  county;  also  the  deputy-sheriff,  and  the 
sheriff  himself,  who  was  found  concealed  under  the  floor  of  a  lonely 
house,  with  a  quantity  of  machinery  for  the  issue  of  false  money, 
and  instantly  shot ;  the  proprietor  of  the  house,  defending  himself, 
revolver  in  hand,  fell  pierced  with  many  balls.  The  aid  of  the 
military  power  of  the  state  had  been  invoked  by  the  legal  authorities ; 
but  the  issue  I  have  not  seen  in  the  newspapers.' 

We  take  this  opportunity  of  recommending  for  perusal  the  two 
excellent  works  of  Mr  Olmsted — Journey  in  the  Seaboard  Slave  States, 
and  A  Journey  through,  Texas.  (London :  Sampson  Low ;  New  York : 
Dix  and  Edwards.) 

VOTING    AT   ELECTIONS. 

On  this  subject,  an  article  appears  in  Putnam's  Monthly  (a  New 
York  magazine),  for  November  1856.  The  writer,  in  lamenting 
that  respectable  persons  should  systematically  refuse  to  take  part 
in  elections,  makes  the  following  observations : 

'  The  whole  white  male  population  of  the  United  States,   for 


APPENDIX.  211 

* 

instance,  over  twenty-one  years  of  age,  and,  to  be  presumed,  entitled 
to  vote,  is  about  5,100,000 ;  and  yet  the  votes  cast  at  a  presidential 
election  seldom  exceed  3,100,000 ;  leaving  two  millions  of  inhabitants 
who  do  not  use  their  franchise.  In  the  state  of  New  York,  in  1852,  the 
voting  population  exceeded  800,000,  yet  the  votes  returned  did  not 
exceed  500,000.  In  Massachusetts,  where  there  are  more  people, 
comparatively,  capable  of  forming  an  opinion  than  in  any  other  state 
in  the  Union,  the  white  males,  over  twenty-one,  are  nearly  300,000  ; 
and  yet  the  vote,  in  1852,  was  only  133,000;  shewing  that  nearly 
two-thirds  of  the  adult  population,  for  some  cause  or  other,  had 
stayed  away  from  the  polls.  And  the  proportion  is  nearly  as  great 
in  several  other  states.  Some  of  these  delinquents  are,  of  course, 
kept  away  by  illness,  others  by  engagements  abroad,  but  the  majority, 
we  have  no  doubt,  by  their  own  voluntary  indifference  and  neglect.' 
The  writer  adds:  'The  effect  is,  that  the  polls  are  controlled  by 
interested  or  inferior  persons,  who  get  themselves  or  their  fellows 
into  important  trusts,  and  shape  the  laws,  and  the  administration  of 
the  laws,  to  suit  their  own  debased  purposes.  They  increase  the 
taxes,  they  dispense  jobs,  they  peculate  in  the  public  funds,  they 
degrade  the  entire  business  and  character  of  office,  and  arrange 
elections  so  as  to  secure  a  kind  of  hereditary  tenure  for  themselves 
and  their  friends.  But,  suddenly,  by  some  tremendous  malfeasance, 
the  community  is  aroused,  and  it  looks  with  extreme  surprise  upon 
the  enormity  to  which  abuses  have  been  carried.  Why,  however, 
should  it  be  surprised  ?  Was  anything  else  to  be  expected  ?  If  the 
best  men  of  society — well-informed  and  upright  men — withdraw 
from  a  participation  in  public  affairs,  leaving  them  to  any  and  all 
sorts  of  cliques,  or  to  professional  jobbers,  who  manage  primary 
meetings  and  conventions,  have  they  any  one  to  blame  but  them- 
selves? If  the  clergyman  and  the  scholar,  if  the  lawyer  and  the 
merchant,  if  the  peaceable  mechanic  and  the  honest  labourer,  refuse 
to  take  an  active  part  in  nominating  and  choosing  good  representa- 
tives, they  cannot  complain  that  the  rowdy  and  the  ballot-stuffer 
take  advantage  of  their  remissness.' 

It  might  have  been  added  that  the  principal  reason  why  respect- 
able persons  absent  themselves  from  elections  in  some  of  the  large 
cities,  is  the  dread  of  suffering  personal  outrage;  and  on  this 
account,  they,  surely,  have  good  cause  for  complaint  that  the 
'rowdies  and  ballot-stuffers '  are  not  promptly  dealt  with  by  the 
authorities.  In  consequence  of  the  outrages  at  the  polls  at  the  last 
elections  in  New  York,  the  recorder  of  that  city  thus  addressed 
the  grand  jury  on  the  subject  (Nov.  1856) : 

'  Within  the  present  week,  our  city  has  been  the  scene  of  outrages 
at  the  polls  which  are  humiliating  to  us  as  citizens,  and  disgraceful 
to  those  having  the  power  to  check  them.  In  the  first  ward  of  this 
city,  and  almost  within  hearing  of  the  office  of  the  mayor  and  chief 
of  police,  from  the  opening  to  the  closing  of  the  polls,  there  was  one 
constant  scene  of  riot  and  bloodshed.  Respectable  citizens,  who  went 
peaceably  to  the  polls  to  deposit  their  votes,  were  knocked  down  and 
dragged  through  the  streets  without  any  interference  on  the  part 
of  the  police  to  prevent  the  outrages.  Hundreds  were  driven  from 
the  polls  by  an  organised  band  of  desperadoes,  who  openly  refused  to 
allow  the  electors  to  deposit  a  vote,  unless  it  contained  the  name  of  a 
certain  candidate. 


212  AMERICAN    SLAVERY   AND    COLOUR. 

'  I  have  made  these  remarks  that  you  may  the  better  appreciate 
the  necessity  of  prompt  action  on  your  part  in  certain  cases  which 
will  be  presented  for  your  consideration.  I  will  here  add,  that  a 
large  number  of  the  police  force  was  withdrawn  from  the  first  ward 
by  order  of  the  mayor  of  our  city,  and  that  a  large  number  of  the 
police  force  was  on  furlough  on  the  day  of  election,  and  were 
engaged  in  advancing  the  interests  of  certain  candidates,  instead 
of  being  engaged  in  keeping  the  peace  at  the  polls.' 


VOTING   IN    SLAVE    STATES. 

Some  strange  disclosures  occasionally  take  place  respecting  the 
system  of  voting  at  elections  in  the  slave  states.  A  person  named 
Underwood  was  lately  under  the  necessity  of  advertising  his  property 
for  sale,  and  quitting  Virginia,  in  consequence  of  displeasing  the 
popular  opinion.  The  case  of  T.  Stannard,  as  told  by  himself  in  a 
letter  to  the  Neichavcn  Palladium,  Nov.  18,  1856,  is  worth  narrating. 

'  I  formerly  resided  at  Fair  Haven,  where  my  family  are  now,  and 
ever  have  been ;  but  having  myself  been  engaged  for  several  years 
past  in  the  commission  business  in  Norfolk  [Virginia],  and  having 
paid  taxes  there,  and  to  the  best  of  my  abilities  discharged  my 
duties  as  a  citizen  of  that  place,  I  have  considered  it  my  residence — 
and  in  the  spring  of  1855,  I  offered  to  vote  at  their  election,  when, 
upon  a  full  statement  of  my  case  to  the  proper  authority,  and  with 
their  knowledge  that  my  family  were  here,  it  was  decided  that  I  was 
entitled  to  vote  there,  and  I  did  so. 

1 1  have  never  in  any  way  meddled  with  the  subject  of  slavery — 
having  no  inclination,  nor,  as  I  believed,  any  right  to  do  so — conse- 
quently there  has  been  no  ill-feeling  towards  me  on  that  account. 

'  Before  the  election,  many  political  meetings  were  held  in  Norfolk, 
but  I  did  not  attend  any  of  them,  nor  did  I  converse  with  any  one 
on  the  subject,  except  on  one  occasion,  in  answer  to  an  inquiry  made 
by  a  friend,  and  then  for  a  moment  only.  But  although  neither  an 
abolitionist  nor  a  politician,  I  examined  the  subject  as  a  question  of 
duty,  for  me  as  well  as  for  every  citizen  of  the  United  States,  and  I 
made  up  my  mind  that  the  election  of  Fremont  would  be  best  for  all 
sections  of  the  country,  and  determined  to  vote  for  him — not  dream- 
ing that,  under  our  republican  government,  and  in  the  democratic 
state  of  Virginia,  any  one  would  question  my  right  to  do  so. 

'  On  the  day  of  election,  I  heard  one  gentleman  ask  another  at  the 
post-office  who  he  should  vote  for,  and  he  replied :  "  For  John  C. 
Fremont " — and  the  other  said  he  should  do  so  too.  They  may  not 
have  been  in  earnest,  but  I  then  supposed  they  were,  and  I  had  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  others  would  vote  the  same  way ;  and  in  the 
afternoon  I  wrote  a  vote  for  Fremont  and  Dayton,  and  went  to  the 
place  of  voting.  My  right  to  vote  was  again  examined,  and  on  a 
statement  of  my  case  it  was  admitted,  and  I  then,  as  the  rules 
require,  wrote  my  name  on  the  back  of  my  vote,  and  handed  it  to 
the  inspector,  who,  as  is  customary,  read  aloud  my  first  name,  and 
then  the  names  of  my  candidates.  As  soon  as  he  declared  that  I 
voted  for  John  C.  Fremont,  a  large  number  of  voices  from  the 
crowd  shouted:  "Hang  him — hang  him;"  and  the  inspector  handed 
me  my  vote,  and  said :  "  There  is  no  such  ticket  voted  here  :  we  can- 
not receive  this."      I  replied  :  "  Very  well,"  and  took  my  vote  again. 


APPENDIX.  213 

Some  threats,  which  in  the  confusion  that  took  place  I  did  not 
distinctly  understand,  were  made  by  those  standing  near  me ; 
and  the  presiding  officer  exclaimed :  "  Don't  touch  this  man  ; "  and 
then  said  to  two  persons  who  were,  I  presume,  policemen :  "  Take 
him  away  from  the  polls." 

'  The  officers  seized  hold  of  me,  and  hurried  me  through  the  crowd, 
and  then  left  me ;  and  I  proceeded  through  a  violent  storm  of  wind 
and  rain  to  my  boarding-house,  and  from  thence  to  my  store.  I 
afterwards  returned  to  the  house ;  and  when  at  the  supper-table,  I 
heard  persons  speak  of  the  vote  which  had  been  offered  at  the  polls 
for  Fremont,  those  who  spoke  of  it  not  knowing  by  whom  the  vote 
was  offered,  and  therefore  speaking  freely  of  it  in  my  presence. 
From  what  I  saw  and  heard  at  the  polls,  and  what  was  said  at  the 
table,  I  was  apprehensive  that  I  had  misunderstood  my  right  as  an 
American  citizen,  and  that  I  had,  though  unconsciously,  so  offended 
public  sentiment  by  my  vote,  as  to  be  in  danger  of  popular  violence, 
and  I  therefore  went  from  the  table  to  my  room,  and  locked  the 
door. 

'  Soon  after,  I  heard  some  one  inquire  for  me ;  and  the  landlady 
sent  a  servant  to  my  door  to  say  that  a  gentleman  wished  to  see 
me.  On  learning  that  he  was  alone,  I  invited  him  to  my  room ;  and 
he  said  that  he  came  by  request  of  another  person — whom  he  named 
— to  ask  me  if  I  had  offered  to  vote  for  Fremont.  I  replied  :  "  Yes." 
He  then  inquired  :  "  What  was  your  motive  ?  "  And  I  told  him  that 
I  conscientiously  believed  it  my  duty  to  do  so.  He  then  said :  "  I 
am  requested  to  advise  you  not  to  appear  in  the  street  to-night ;  "  . 
and  I  replied  that  I  should  not  go  out  of  the  house.     He  retired, 

but  soon  after  returned,  and  said :  "  Mr  F wishes  to  see  you  at 

the  door."     I  told  him  that  I  should  not  leave  my  room  that  night, 

but  if  Mr  F wished  to  see  me,  he  might  come  to  my  room.     He 

then  left  me,  and  another  person  came  to  my  door,  and  informed  me 

that  Mr  F was  not  at  the  front  door,  but  that  several  men, 

whom  he  named,  were  there  ;  and  I  knew  those  men  to  be  some  of 
the  most  desperate  characters  in  Norfolk. 

'  This  was  in  the  evening  ;  and  by  the  city  lamps  I  could  see  from 
my  window  a  collection  of  persons  in  the  street,  whose  number 
increased  till  late  in  the  night ;  and  I  heard  their  threats  of  violence 
to  my  person  and  destruction  to  my  property.  Towards  morning,  a 
fire  occurred,  and  an  engine  passed  near  by,  which  drew  after  it  a 
portion  of  those  around  the  house,  and  attracted  for  a  time  the 
attention  of  others ;  and  I  took  the  opportunity  to  leave  the  house 
unobserved,  and  went  to  a  place  of  concealment.  While  in  my 
hiding-place,  some  friends  took  pains  to  ascertain  whether  it  was 
prudent  for  me  to  appear  again  in  public,  and  they  found  such  a 
state  of  excitement  and  exasperation  existing  in  consequence  of  my 
vote,  that  my  life  would  be  in  danger  if  I  was  discovered.  They 
also  found  that  the  customary  routes  of  travel  to  the  North  were 
closely  watched,  although  many  believed  that  I  had  already  left  the 
city. 

'  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  second  day  after  my  unfortunate 
vote,  I  escaped  from  the  city  by  an  unusual  route,  and  in  disguise, 
and  made  my  way  to  my  family ;  and  I  hope  now,  that  when  the 
excitement  has  passed,  I  may  safely  return  to  Norfolk,  at  least  to 
remain  till  I  can  settle  up  my  affairs  in  that  place.' 


214  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 


A    MICHIGAN   MAN   DRIVEN   FROM  GEORGIA. 

In  the  Detroit  Advertiser,  the  following  letter  appears,  from  a 
correspondent  in  Vermontville,  Michigan  : 

'  Under  date  of  August  19,  1856,  Mr  Moses  C.  Church,  formerly  a 
resident  of  this  place,  where  his  parents  now  live,  but  then  being  in 
the  employ  of  his  uncle,  Harvey  Hall,  in  Columbus,  Georgia,  wrote 
a  letter  to  his  father,  which  contained  the  following  paragraph : 

"  Politics  just  now  are  all  the  go  here — in  fact,  I  never  saw  a 
community  so  wholly  given  up  to  it  in  my  life.  We  have  only  two 
tickets — Fillmore  and  Buchanan,  though,  if  there  was  a  little  more 
courage,  and  a  little  more  concert  of  action,  it  would  not  be  hard  to 
get  up  a  Fremont  ticket ;  and  though  there  would  be  no  chance  of 
his  carrying  the  state,  he  would  get  more  votes  than  many  suppose. 

"  Another  four  years  will  see  great  changes  throughout  the 
entire  South.  All  this  talk  about  dissolving  the  Union,  if  Fremont 
is  elected,  is  nothing  but  so  much  gas.  The  working,  non-slavehold- 
ing  mechanics,  and  others  who  are  dependent  upon  their  daily  labour 
for  their  support,  feel  sorely  the  competition  of  non-paid  labour ;  and 
they  do  not  hesitate  to  say  they  would  vote  for  Fremont  if  they  had 
a  chance.  As  voters,  they  are  three  to  one  of  the  slaveholders,  and 
they  are  fast  finding  out  their  strength.  Thinking,  sober  men  here 
acknowledge  that  they  already  see  the  beginning  of  the  end ;  and 
one  remarked  to  me  only  last  week  that,  in  his  opinion,  ten  years 
from  that  day  would  not  see  a  slave  in  America.  So  strong  is  his 
belief,  that  he  has  disposed  of  all  his  property  of  that  kind,  and  does 
not  intend  to  own  any  more.  It  is  a  current  remark  here  among 
the  working-classes,  that  for  the  future  those  who  own  slaves,  and 
have  the  benefit  of  them,  may  do  their  own  watching — they  will 
not.  I  claim  to  know  what  I  say,  as  we  employ  a  good  many  hands, 
and  I  know  what  they  say." 

'  This  paragraph  was  published  in  the  Eaton  County  Republican, 
and  some  person,  actuated  either  by  a  mean,  low-lived  spirit  of 
mischief,  or  a  deep-seated,  infernal  malignity,  enclosed  a  half-sheet 
of  the  paper  in  an  envelope,  and  forwarded  it  to  Mr  Harvey  Hall. 
On  receiving  it,  Mr  Hall  repaired,  in  hot  haste,  and  full  of  fiery 
indignation,  to  the  boarding-place  of  liis  nephew,  to  pour  out  the 
phial  of  red-hot  wrath  upon  his  head.  Mr  Church  unhesitatingly 
informed  his  uncle  that  he  wrote  the  paragraph,  and  that  it  contained 
his  honest  convictions,  though  he  did  not  in  the  least  seek  to  promul- 
gate them  at  the  South.  Mr  Hall  then  told  him  that  if  these  were 
his  sentiments,  he  could  not  entertain  them  at  the  South ;  and  he 
felt  it  to  be  his  duty  to  rid  the  community  of  his  presence.  He 
also  threatened  him  with  personal  violence  unless  he  speedily  left 
the  country.  This  was  on  Saturday.  Mr  Hall  added  further,  that 
he  must  leave  the  first  part  of  the  next  week ;  and  if  he  concluded 
to  do  so,  he  need  have  no  apprehension  of  personal  violence,  as  he 
(Hall)  was  the  only  one  that  knew  of  the  letter,  and  no  measures 
would  be  taken  to  forcibly  expel  him  until  he  should  report  in  the 
matter.  There  were  two  other  members  of  the  firm  which  employed 
Mr  Church.  On  consulting  with  them,  though  they  wished  his 
services,  yet  they  told  him  he  had  better  leave,  for  his  uncle  would 
surely  carry  his  threat  into  execution  if  he  did  not,  and  the  result 


APPENDIX.  215 

would  be  riot  and  bloodshed.  Mr  Church  saw  that  if  he  undertook 
to  remain,  his  life  would  be  endangered,  and  his  wife  and  young 
child  left  to  the  tender  mercies  of  a  Georgia  mob,  and  all  heathen- 
dom, except  Missouri,  could  not  have  furnished  one  more  blood- 
thirsty, reckless,  and  unprincipled.  Wisely,  then,  he  concluded  to 
leave ;  and,  arranging  his  business  as  best  he  could,  though  at  a 
sacrifice  of  four  or  five  hundred  dollars,  did  so  on  the  next 
Wednesday. 

'  Mr  Hall  is  a  native  of  Vermont.  He  emigrated  to  Georgia. 
There  he  acquired  wealth  and  slaves,  and  has  become  what  he  is. 
At  his  solicitation,  Ms  nephew  left  a  lucrative  situation  in  New 
York  city  to  enter  his  employ ;  and  for  writing  the  above  paragraph 
to  his  father,  he  is  threatened  with  "  personal  violence "  at  the 
hands  of  the  slave-driving  interest  of  one  of  the  cities  of  one  of  our 
confederate  republics,  unless  he  speedily  leaves.' 


DISUNION   CONVENTION. 

At  a  Disunion  Convention  held  at  Worcester,  Massachusetts, 
January  15,  1857,  the  following  Resolutions  were  submitted: 

Resolved,  That  the  meeting  of  the  State  Disunion  Convention, 
attended  by  men  of  various  parties  and  affinities,  gives  occasion  for  a 
new  statement  of  principles,  and  a  new  platform  of  action. 

Resolved,  That  the  cardinal  American  principle  is  now,  as  always, 
liberty  ;  while  the  prominent  fact  is  now,  as  always,  slavery. 

Resolved,  That  the  conflict  between  the  principle  of  liberty  and  this 
fact  of  slavery  has  been  the  whole  history  of  the  nation  for  fifty 
years ;  while  the  only  result  of  this  conflict  has  thus  far  been  to 
strengthen  both  parties,  and  prepare  the  way  for  a  yet  more  desperate 
struggle. 

Resolved,  That  in  this  emergency  we  can  expect  little  or  nothing 
from  the  South  itself,  because  it  is,  too,  sinking  deeper  into  barbarism 
every  year :  nor  from  a  Supreme  Court,  which  is  always  ready  to 
invent  new  securities  for  slaveholders :  nor  from  a  President  elected 
almost  solely  by  Southern  voters :  nor  from  a  Senate  which  is  per- 
manently controlled  by  the  slave-power :  nor  from  a  new  House  of 
Representatives,  which,  in  spite  of  our  agitation,  will  be  more  pro- 
slavery  than  the  present  one,  though  the  present  one  has  at  length 
granted  all  which  slavery  asked :  nor  from  political  action  as  now 
conducted  ;  for  the  Republican  leaders  and  presses  freely  admitted,  in 
public  and  private,  that  the  election  of  Fremont  was,  politically 
speaking,  '  the  last  hope  of  freedom  ; '  and  even  could  the  North  cast 
a  united  vote  in  1860,  the  South  has  before  it  four  years  of  annexa- 
tion previous  to  that  time. 

Resolved,  That  the  fundamental  difference  between  mere  political 
agitation  and  the  action  we  propose,  is  this  :  That  the  one  requires 
the  acquiescence  of  the  slave-power,  and  the  other  only  its 
opposition. 

Resolved,  That  the  necessity  for  disunion  is  written  in  the  whole 
existing  character  and  condition  of  the  two  sections  of  the  country 
— in  their  social  organisation,  education,  habits,  and  laws — in  the 
dangers  of  our  white  citizens  in  Kansas,  and  of  our  coloured  ones  in 
Boston — in  the  wounds  of  Charles  Sumner,  and  the  laurels  of  his 


216  AMERICAN    SLAVERY    AND    COLOUR. 

assailant — and  no  government  on  earth  was  ever  strong  enough  to 
hold  together  such  opposing  forces. 

Resolved,  That  this  movement  does  not  seek  merely  disunion,  but 
the  more  perfect  union  of  the  free  states  by  the  expulsion  of  the 
slave  states  from  the  confederation,  in  which  they  have  ever  been  an 
element  of  discord,  danger,  and  disgrace. 

Resolved,  That  it  is  not  probable  that  the  ultimate  severance  of  the 
Union  will  be  an  act  of  deliberation  and  discussion,  but  that  a  long 
period  of  deliberation  and  discussion  must  precede  it,  and  this  we 
meet  to  begin. 

Resolved,  That  henceforward,  instead  of  regarding  it  as  an  objection 
to  any  system  of  policy,  that  it  will  lead  to  a  separation  of  the  states, 
we  will  proclaim  that  to  be  the  highest  of  all  recommendations,  and 
tbte  grateful  proof  of  statesmanship ;  and  will  support,  politically 
or  otherwise,  such  men  and  measures  as  appear  to  tend  most  to  this 
result. 

Resolved,  That  by  the  repeated  confession  of  northern  and  southern 
statesmen,  '  the  existence  of  the  Union  is  the  chief  guarantee  of 
slavery ;'  and  that  the  despots  of  the  whole  world  have  everything  to 
fear,  and  the  slaves  of  the  whole  world  everything  to  hope,  from  its 
destruction,  and  the  rise  of  a  free  northern  republic. 

Resolved,  That  the  sooner  the  separation  takes  place,  the  more 
peaceful  it  will  be ;  but  that  peace  or  war  is  a  secondary  considera- 
tion, in  view  of  our  present  perils.  Slavery  must  be  conquered, 
1  peaceably  if  we  can,  forcibly  if  we  must.' 

Among  the  more  eloquent  speakers  at  this  Disunion  Convention 
was  Wendell  Phillips,  who  took  occasion  to  say,  that,  'if  high 
thought,  high  character,  a  noble  party,  a  notile  state,  with  noble 
impulses,  be  the  test  of  government,  this  Union  is  a  failure  ;  for  the 
character  of  this  nation  has  been  so  barbarised  in  fifty  years,  that  we 
must  hide  our  faces  when  we  compare  the  Senate  of  to-day  with 
that  over  which  Aaron  Burr  presided.'  This  said  in  New  England 
in  1857 ! 


THE    END. 


Edinburgh : 
Printed  by  W.  &  R.  Chambers. 


Just  Published, 
PRICE   6s.   BOUND   IN   CLOTH, 

Things  as  they  Are  in  America. 

BY  W.    CHAMBERS. 

Second  Edition. 

WITH  AN  APPENDIX,   CONSISTING  OF  HINTS 

TO  EMIGKANTS. 


W.  &  R.  CHAMBERS,  LONDON  AND  EDINBURGH. 


