"  I  have  discovered  lately  that  I  am  a  great  sinner."— Page  78. 


TELE 


AFRICAN  PREACHEE. 


AN  AUTHENTIC  NARRATIVE. 


BY  THS 

REV.  WILLIAM  S.  WHITE, 

Pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  Lexington,  Virginisu 


PHILADELPHIA: 
PRESBYTERIAN  BOARD  OF  PUBLICATION, 

NO,  265  CHESTNUT  STREET. 


Entered  accoramg  to  the  Act  of  Congress  in  the  year  1849,  by 
A.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D., 
lu  the  Office  of  the  Clerk  of  the  District  Court  for  the  Eastern  District 
of  Pennsylvania. 


Stereotyped  by  Wyi.  S.  Slote,  No.  19  St.  James  Street, 
Philadelphia. 


To  the  Rev.  Benjamin  H.  Rice,  D.  D., 

Pastor  of  Hampden  Sidney  Church,  Va. : 

Rev.  and  Dear  Brother — By  your  counsel,  my 
humble  labours  as  a  Domestic  Missionary  were  com- 
menced in  the  county  of  Nottoway ;  and  to  your 
sympathy  and  co-operation  is  to  be  ascribed  a  large 
portion  of  the  little  good  which  may  have  resulted 
from  those  labours.  It  is,  therefore,  most  reason- 
able that  a  narrative  resulting,  as  this  does,  from 
that  mission,  should  be  inscribed  to  you. 

Accept  it,  then,  as  an  humble  expression  of  the 
respect,  the  gratitude,  and  the  love  of 

Your  Friend  and  Brother, 

William  S.  Whitb. 

The  Manse,  Lexington,  Fa.,  March  10, 1849. 


(3) 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHEE. 


The  prominence  given  in  the  Scrip- 
tures to  the  characters  and  lives  of 
such  persons  as  Ruth,  Esther,  and 
Nehemiah,  proves,  that  "  God  hath 
chosen  the  poor  of  this  world,  rich  in 
faith,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  which 
he  hath  promised  to  them  that  love 
him" — that  he  hath  moreover  "chosen 
the  foolish  things  of  the  world,  to  con- 
found the  wise,  and  the  weak  things  of 
the  world,  to  confound  the  things  that 
are  mighty."  Since  the  days  of  inspi- 
ration ended,  the  dealings  of  God's 
providence  and  the  dispensations  of  his 
grace,  have  beautifully  harmonized  with 
the  revelations  of  his  word.  Hence, 
in  all  ages  of  the  world,  down  to 
the  present  hour,  many  of  the  loveliest 
1*  (5) 


6  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

specimens  of  true  piety,  have  been  found 
in  the  humblest  walks  of  life.  Here, 
God's  wisdom,  love,  and  mercy  shine 
with  a  lustre  all  their  own ;  and  here  re- 
ligion displays  its  richest  fruits. 

The  narrative  now  to  be  given  is 
designed  to  illustrate  these  remarks. 
The  subject  of  it  was  a  native  of  Africa. 
When  about  seven  years  of  age,  he  was 
kidnapped,  brought  to  this  country,  and 
enslaved.  He  was  supposed  to  belong 
to  one  of  the  last  cargoes  of  this  sort, 
ever  landed  on  the  shores  of  Virginia. 
He  was  purchased  at  Osborne's,  on 
James'  river,  by  a  Mr.  Stewart,  and 
was  subsequently  taken  to  the  county 
of  Nottoway,  Virginia,  where  the  whole 
of  his  long  and  interesting  life  was 
spent. 

He  grew  to  manhood,  ignorant  of 
letters,  and  a  stranger  to  God;  engaged 
in  the  occupations  common  to  those  in 
a  state  of  bondage.    The  region  of  coun- 


THE  AFRICAN  PKEACHER.  7 

try  in  which  he  lived,  was,  at  this 
period,  deplorably  destitute  of  the  means 
of  grace.  The  gospel  was  seldom  preach- 
ed, the  Sabbath  scarcely  known  as  a 

day  of  sacred  rest,"  and  few  were  found 
willing  to  incur  the  odium  of  a  public  pro- 
fession of  religion. 

Before  we  proceed  further  with  our 
narrative  it  is  important  to  state,  that 
"Uncle  Jack,"  for  so  he  was  univer- 
sally called,  possessed  great  acuteness 
of  mind,  and  understood  and  spoke  the 
English  language  far  better  than  any 
native  of  Africa  we  have  ever  known. 
His  pronunciation  was  not  only  distinct 
and  accurate,  but  his  style  was  chaste 
and  forcible.  His  great  superiority  in 
this  respect  must  be  ascribed  to  the 
following  causes: — First,  to  his  having 
left  his  native  land  at  so  early  an  age. 
Next,  to  the  freedom  with  which  he 
was  permitted  and  encouraged  to  mingle 
in  the  best  society  the  country  afforded; 


"8  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

and  above  all,  to  the  familiar  acquaint- 
ance he  soon  formed  with  the  language 
of  the  Bible.  The  reader  must  not  be 
surprised,  therefore,  that  nothing  occurs, 
in  what  we  quote  from  his  own  lips,  of 
the  jargon  peculiar  to  the  African 
race.  Nobody  ever  heard  the  good  old 
preacher  say  ?nassa  for  master^  or  ine 
for/. 

It  was  during  the  period  of  intel- 
lectual and  moral  darkness  already  re- 
feiTed  to,  and  when  he  had  probably 
reached  the  fortieth  year  of  his  age, 
that  he  became  anxious  on  the  subject 
of  rehgion.  The  account  he  gave  of 
his  early  rehgious  impressions  was 
very  simple.  He  said  nothing  of  dreams 
and  visions,  as  is  so  common  with 
persons  of  his  colour.  His  attention 
was  first  arrested,  and  his  fears  excited, 
by  hearing  from  a  white  man  that  the 
world  would  probably  be  destroyed 
in  a  few  days.    On  hearing  this,  ha 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  Q 


asked  his  informant  what  he  must  do 
to  prepare  for  an  event  so  awful.  He 
was  told  to  pray.  "  This/'  he  said,  "  I 
knew  nothing  about.  I  could  not  pray." 
At  length  he  was  enabled  to  recall  some 
portions  of  the  Lord  s  prayer,  which 
lie  continued  to  repeat  for  a  considerable 
time.  But  these  efforts  brought  him  no 
relief. 

That  which  thus  commenced  in 
mere  alarm,  soon  led  to  a  deep  and 
thorough  conviction  of  his  guilt,  help- 
lessness, and  misery,  in  the  sight  of 
God.  He  now  exerted  himself  in  vari- 
ous ways,  and  with  untiring  zeal,  to 
obtain  a  knowledge  of  the  truth  as  it 
is  in  Jesus.  There  were  literally  none 
in  his  vicinity,  either  in  the  ministry, 
or  among  the  private  members  of  the 
church,  quaUfied  to  teach  and  to  guide 
an  inquiiing  mind  Hke  his.  The  Pres* 
byterian  church,  then  recently  estab- 
lished in  Prince  Edward,  was  within 


10  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

thirty  miles  of  his  residence.  The 
ministers  of  the  gospel  from  that  coun- 
ty, made  occasional  excursions  into 
Nottoway.  From  these  he  soon  obtain- 
ed the  help  he  needed.  His  own  state- 
ment on  this  subject  is  as  follows :  "  I 
had  a  very  wicked  heart,  and  every 
thing  I  did  to  make  it  better,  seemed 
to  make  it  worse.  At  length  a  preacher 
passed  along;  they  called  him  Mr.  Presi- 
dent Smith."^  He  turned  my  heart 
inside  out.  The  preacher  talked  so 
directly  to  me,  and  about  me,  that  I 
thought  the  whole  sermon  was  meant 
for  me.  I  wondered  much,  who  could 
have  told  him  what  a  sinner  I  was. 
But  after  a  while  there  came  along 
a  young  man  they  called  Mr.  Hill;f  and 
about  the  same  time  another,  with  a 
sweet  voice,  they  called  Mr.  Alexan- 

*  The  Rev.  John  Blair  Smith,  D.  D.,  then  Presi- 
dent of  Hampden  Sidney  College. 

tThe  Rev.  Wm.  Hill,  D.  D.,  of  W^inchester,  Va, 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  11 

der.*  These  were  powerful  preachers 
too,  and  told  me  all  about  my  troubles ; 
and  brought  me  to  see  that  there  was 
nothing  for  a  poor,  helpless  sinner  to  do, 
but  to  go  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  trust  in  him  alone  for  salvation. 
Since  that  time,  I  have  had  many  ups 
and  downs;  but  hitherto  the  Lord  has 
helped  me,  and  I  hope  he  will  help  me 
to  the  end." 

He  now  became  deeply  interested  in 
hearing  the  Scriptures  read.  As  his 
knowledge  of  the  Bible  increased,  he 
found,  to  use  his  own  language,  "  that  it 
knew  all  that  was  in  his  heart."  He 
wondered  how  "  a  book  should  know  so 
much." 

He  was  still  unable  to  read,  but  now 
determined  to  learn.  To  this  end  he 
appUed  to  his  master  s  children  for  as- 
sistance ;  promising  to  reward  them  for 

*The  Rev.  Archibald  Alexander,  D.  D.,  afterwards 
Professor  of  Theology,  Princeton,  New  Jersey. 


12  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

their  pains  with  nuts  and  other  fruits, 
as  tuition  fees.  By  the  aid  of  his  youth- 
ful instructors,  his  object  was  soon  at- 
tained, and  .he  read  the  word  of  God 
with  ease.  The  sacred  volume  now  be- 
came the  constant  companion  of  his  lei- 
sure hours.  So  rapid  was  his  progress 
in  divine  knowledge,  and  such  his  pru- 
dence, good  sense,  and  zeal,  that  many 
of  the  most  intelligent  and  pious  people 
of  his  neighbourhood  expressed  the  de- 
sire to  have  him  duly  authorized  to 
preach  the  gospel.  The  Baptist  church, 
of  which  he  had  become  a  member,  took 
this  matter  into  serious  consideration; 
and  after  subjecting  him  to  the  trials 
usually  imposed  by  that  denomination, 
licensed  him  to  labour  as  a  herald  of  the 
cross. 

Upon  the  duties  of  his  new  and  re- 
sponsible office,  he  entered  with  a  truly 
apostohc  spiiit.  He  commenced  his 
ministry  in  a  neighbourhood  where  there 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  13 

were  literally  none  to  break  statedly  to 
the  people  the  bread  of  life.  His  labours 
were  abundant  and  faithful.  He  was 
often  called  to  preach  at  a  distance  of 
more  than  thirty  miles  from  his  home. 
He  was  still  a  slave^  and  never  seemed 
to  think  of  any  better  state,  until  his 
attention  was  called  to  it  by  others.  He 
belonged  to  the  undivided  estate  of  his 
original  purchaser,  who  was  now  dead. 
Some  of  the  legatees  of  this  estate  were 
willing  to  emancipate  him,  but  others 
were  not.  This,  however,  constituted 
no  serious  obstacle.  He  had  rendered 
himself  so  useful,  and  had  gained  the 
confidence  and  good  will  of  the  com- 
munity to  so  great  an  extent,  that  a 
sum  of  money  was  soon  raised  by  sub- 
scription, quite  sufficient  to  satisfy  the 
demands  of  those  who  were  unwilling 
to  liberate  him.  Some  idea  may  be 
formed  of  the  estimation  in  which  he 
was  held,  when  it  is  known  that  many 
2 


14  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

contributed  liberally  to  the  fund  thus 
created^  who  were  not  professors  of  reli- 
gion. Having  thus  secured  his  free- 
dom^ he  settled  on  a  small  tract  of  land, 
of  which  he  became  the  proprietor^  chiefly 
through  the  munificence  of  others^  and 
lived  in  a  way  which  satisfied  his  hum- 
ble wishes.  Here  he  hterally  earned 
his  bread  with  the  sweat  of  his  brow, 
while  he  faithfully  dispensed  to  others 
the  bread  of  life,  with  scarcely  any  com- 
pensation, except  the  consciousness  of 
doing  good. 

The  late  Rev.  John  H.  Rice,  D.  D., 
had  a  brief  interview  with  our  preacher, 
in  which  he  was  deeply  interested.  This 
occurred  during  the  summer  of  1826, 
when  the  old  man  had  nearly  reached 
the  80th  year  of  his  age,  and  one  year 
before  our  acquaintance  with  him  com- 
menced. 

Referring  to  this  interview  after- 
wards, Dr.  Rice  said,  "  The  acquaint- 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  15 

ance  of  this  African  preacher  with  the 
Scriptures  is  wonderful.  Many  of  his 
interpretations  of  obscure  passages  are 
singularly  just  and  striking.  In  many 
respects,  indeed,  he  is  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  men  I  have  ever  known." 

At  this  period,  Dr.  Rice  was  editor 
of  the  Vu'ginia  Literary  and  Evangeli- 
cal Magazine ;  and  entertaining  the  \iews 
expressed  above,  it  is  not  surprising 
that  the  pages  of  this  valuable  periodical 
should  contain  a  brief  but  interesting 
memoir  of  "Uncle  Jack."  It  may  be 
found  in  the  first  number  of  Vol.  10. 
In  this  memoir.  Dr.  Rice  expresses 
himself  thus :  "  There  lives  in  a  neigh- 
bouring county,  an  old  African,  named 
Jack,  whose  history  is  more  worthy  of 
record  than  that  of  many  a  man  whose 
name  has  held  a  conspicuous  place  in 
the  annals  of  the  world.  There  is  a 
book  which,  I  have  no  doubt,  contains 
the  name  of  Old  JacJc^  but  not  those, 


16 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 


I  fear,  of  many  great  men  and  nobles 
of  this  world.  It  is  '  the  Lamb's  book 
of  Hfe/ 

^' Jack  possesses  the  entire  confidence 
of  the  whole  neiahbom-hood  in  which  he 
lives.  Xo  man  doubts  his  integrity  or 
the  sincerity  of  his  piety.  All  classes 
ti^eat  him  with  marked  respect.  Every- 
body gives  unequivocal  testimony  to  the 
excellence  of  his  character. 

"  He  possesses  a  strong  mind,  and,  for 
a  man  in  his  situation,  has  acquired  con- 
siderable rehgious  knowledge.  His  in- 
fluence among  people  of  his  own  colour 
is  very  extensive  and  beneficial. 

"  Old  Jack  is  as  entoely  free  from  all 
bigotry  and  party  spirit,  as  any  Chris- 
tian I  have  ever  seen.  He  acknowledges 
every  man  to  be  a  brother,  whom  he 
beheves  to  be  a  Christian.  A  very 
striking  proof  of  his  humble,  teachable, 
cathohc  spii'it,  is  given  in  his  conduct 
towards  two  Presbjierian  missionaries, 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  17 

who  were  successively  sent  to  the  part 
of  the  country  where  he  resides.  On 
their  arrival,  he  seemed  very  cautiously 
to  investigate  their  character.  The  re- 
sult was  a  conviction  that  they  were 
pious  and  devoted  men;  and  a  hearty 
recognition  of  them  as  ambassadors  of 
Christ.  He  found,  too,  that  they  knew 
a  great  deal  more  than  he  did,  and  re- 
solved to  employ  his  influence  in  bring- 
ing the  black  people  in  his  neighbour- 
hood under  their  instruction.  He  also 
frequently  consulted  them  in  regard  to 
matters  of  difficulty  with  himself,  and 
used  their  attainments  for  the  increase 
of  his  own  knowledge,  and  for  enabling 
him  the  better  to  instruct  the  numerous 
blacks  who  looked  up  to  him  as  their 
only  teacher. 

^^It  has  before  been  said,  that  the 
conduct  of  this  old  Christian  had  se- 
cured the  respect  and  confidence  of  the 
white  people.    As  evidence  of  this,  some 
2* 


18  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

time  ago  a  lawless  white  man  attempted 
to  deprive  him  of  his  land,  under  a  plea 
that  his  title  was  not  good.  As  soon  as 
the  design  was  known,  a  number  of  the 
first  men  in  the  neighbourhood  volun- 
teered to  assist  him  in  maintaining  his 
right,  and  a  lawyer  of  some  distinction, 
not  then  a  behever,  rendered  gratuitous 
service  on  the  occasion,  because  every- 
body said,  Uncle  Jack  was  a  good 
man. 

"  But  while  the  white  people  respect, 
the  blacks  love,  fear,  and  obey  him. 
His  influence  among  them  is  unbounded. 
His  authority  over  the  members  of  his 
own  church  is  greater  than  that  of  the 
master,  or  the  overseer.  And  if  one  of 
them  commits  an  offence  of  any  magni- 
tude, he  never  ceases  dealing  with  him, 
until  the  offender  is  brought  to  repen- 
tance, or  excluded  from  the  society. 
The  gentlemen  of  the  vicinity  freely 
acknowledge,  that  this  influence  is  highly 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  19 

beneficial.  Accordingly,  he  has  permis- 
sion to  hold  meetings  on  the  neighbour- 
ing plantations  whenever  he  thinks  pro- 
per. He  often  visits  the  sick  of  his 
own  colour,  and  preaches  at  all  the  fune- 
rals of  the  blacks  who  die  any  where 
within  his  reach." 

The  high  source  from  whence  this 
extract  is  taken,  and  the  extent  to 
which  it  must  sustain  and  enforce  the 
subsequent  portion  of  our  narrative,  is 
a  sufficient  excuse  for  its  introduction. 

One  of  the  most  gifted  and  honoured 
sons  of  old  Virginia,"^  who  resided  for 
more  than  forty  years  within  one  mile 
of  the  subject  of  this  narrative,  and 
was  thoroughly  acquainted  with  his 
public  and  private  life,  and  even  ac- 
knowledged himself  under  obligations 
to  this  humble  preacher  of  righteous- 
ness as  a  spiritual  instructor,  furnished 

*  Dr.  James  Jones,  of  ^lountain  Hall. — See  Ap-  * 
pendix. 


91^  THE  AFRICAN  PREACBDER. 

the  following  just  and  beautiful  delinea- 
tion of  his  character. 

"  I  regard  this  old  African  as  a  burn- 
ing and  shining  light,  raised  up  by 
Christian  principles  alone  to  a  degree 
of  moral  purity  seldom  equalled,  and 
never  exceeded  in  any  country.  Think 
of  him  as  an  African  boy,  kidnapped  at 
seven  years  of  age,  torn  away  from  his 
heathen  parents,  thrust  into  a  slave- 
ship  among  hundreds  of  the  most  de- 
graded beings,  transported  across  the 
Atlantic,  landed  on  our  coast,  brought 
by  a  very  obscure  planter  in  what  was 
then  the  back-woods  of  Virginia,  here 
kept  in  bondage  at  the  usual  occu- 
pation of  slaves,  under  circumstances 
but  little  calculated  to  improve  the 
mind,  or  mend  the  heart;  without 
letters,  without  instruction,  until  a 
glimpse  of  divine  truth,  caught  by  hear- 
ing the  Bible  read,  arrested  his  atten- 
tion.   Seizing  on  the  truth  thus  obtain- 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  21 

ed,  and  appreciating  its  excellence, 
almost  without  assistance,  he  soon  leams 
to  read  the  sacred  volume.  His  re- 
searches are  now  pui'sued  with  growing 
zeal,  and  signal  success,  until  he  is  en- 
abled to  penetrate  into  some  of  its 
most  sublime  mysteries,  to  feel  the 
force  of  its  obligations,  to  enjoy  its  con- 
solations, and  to  become  an  able  and 
successful  expounder  of  its  doctrines  to 
others. 

^*As  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  he 
gained  the  good  will  and  secured  the 
confidence  of  all  who  were  capable  of 
appreciating  true  excellence  of  charac- 
ter, gained  admittance  into  the  best 
families,  and  was  there  permitted  to 
enjoy  a  freedom  of  intercourse  that  I 
never  witnessed  in  any  other  similar 
case. 

"All  these  views  of  this  old  man's 
character,  have  excited  in  my  mind 
somewhat  of  an  enthusiastic  admiration 


3t  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

seldom  felt  by  me  for  any  member  of 
the  human  family,  of  any  rank  or  sta- 
tion. Such  effects  under  aU  the  circum- 
stances of  the  case,  must  be  traced  up 
to  a  cause  altogether  superhuman,  and 
set  the  seal  to  the  superlative  excellence, 
the  di^dne  authenticity^  of  the  Christian 
system." 

A  lady,  whose  rank,  intelligence  and 
piety,  place  her  among  the  first  of  her 
sex,  and  who  still  lives  to  bear  testi- 
mony to  the  literal  truth  of  this  narra- 
tive, has  kindly  furnished  the  following 
statement  written  more  than  ten  years 
ago. 

"  My  acquaintance  with  the  old  man 
commenced  about  thirty  years  since, 
when  there  was  scarcely  a  vestige  of 
piety,  especially  among  the  higher  classes 
in  this  community.  The  Baptist  church 
to  which  he  belonged  was  in  this  region 
nearlv  extinct.  The  few  members  who 
remained,  he  regularly  Aisited  and  in- 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  23 

structed.  His  first  visit  at  our  house 
was  intended  for  a  Baptist  lady  who 
was  spending  some  time  with  us.  In 
his  conversation  with  this  lady,  I  was 
surprised  at  the  readiness  and  propriety 
with  which  he  quoted  the  Scriptures; 
and  especially  at  the  sound  sense  which 
characterized  his  practical  reflections  on 
the  passages  quoted.  This  induced  me 
to  seek  a  more  intimate  acquaintance 
mth  him;  and  as  he  found  I  was  inter- 
ested in  his  conversation,  he  often  called 
on  me. 

"He  has  been  eminently  useful  to 
many  persons  of  my  acquaintance. 
When  under  spuitual  concern,  they 
would  apply  to  no  other  teacher.  During 
the  period  of  dreadful  darkness,  to  which 
I  have  already  alluded,  he  went  from 
house  to  house,  doing  good.  About 
this  time,  he  became  signally  instru- 
mental in  the  conversion  of  his  former 
master  s  youngest  son.    This  youth  gave 


24  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 


abundant  evidence  of  vital  piety,  both  in 
his  life  and  his  death. 

"  I  think  the  most  prominent  traits 
in  his  character,  are  meekness,  humility, 
and  rigid  integrity.  He  possesses  na- 
turally a  strong  mind,  a  very  retentive 
memory,  with  the  happiest  talent  for 
illustrating  important  truth,  by  the  ob- 
jects of  sense,  and  the  ordinary  employ- 
ments of  life.  I  trust,  dear  sir,  you  will 
be  able  to  furnish  the  pubHc  with  an  in- 
structive account  of  this  humble  and  ob- 
scure, but  interesting  and  useful  old 
man." 

This  communication  was  designed  to 
aid  in  the  preparation  of  a  series  of 
biographical  sketches  of  ^^The  African 
Preacher,"  which  appeared  in  the  co- 
lumns of  the  Watchman  of  the  South 
in  1839;  and  was  so  used.  The  writer 
still  lives,  and  would  doubtless  acknow- 
ledge that  in  her  transition  from  dark- 
ness to  light,  and  from  the  power  of 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  25 

Satan  unto  God,  she  was  mainly  indebt- 
ed, through  divine  grace,  to  the  visits 
and  conversations  of  the  good  old  African, 
referred  to  in  her  letter. 

Uncle  Jack's  views  of  the  funda- 
mental doctrines  of  the  Bible,  were 
thoroughly  evangelical.  He  was  parti- 
cularly fond,  to  use  his  own  words,  of 
"  that  preaching  which  makes  God  every- 
thing, and  man  nothing."  The  total 
depravity  of  man — the  absolute  sove- 
reignty of  God  in  electing  him  to  salva- 
tion through  the  imputed  righteousness 
of  Christ — ^the  necessity  of  regeneration 
by  the  Spirit,  through  the  belief  of  the 
truth — the  growth  in  grace  and  final 
salvation  of  all  who  truly  repent  and 
believe  the  gospel;  these  were  his 
favourite  themes,  both  in  his  sermons 
and  conversation.  And  these,  with 
all  their  kindred  topics,  he  could  illus- 
trate by  allusions  to  nature  and  art, 
with  a  clearness  which  left  no  obscu- 
3 


2&  THE  AFEICAN  PREACHER. 

rity  about  his  real  sentiments.  He 
was  particularly  fond  of  the  Epistle 
to  the  Romans,  and  often  spoke  of  it, 
as  containing  "the  very  marrow  of 
the  gospel."  He  often  bestowed  much 
time  on  a  single  passage.  On  one  occa- 
sion, he  called  our  attention  to  the  third 
verse  of  the  eighth  chapter  of  Romans, 
saying,  "Master  C.  and  I  have  been 
studying  a  great  deal  over  that  verse 
for  the  last  three  weeks,  and  we  do  not 
fully  understand  it  yet.  Do  tell  me  all 
about  it." 

Anxious  to  know  what  his  own  con- 
struction was,  we  insisted  that  he 
should  give  us  his  opinion,  promising 
to  give  him  ours  when  he  had  con- 
cluded. With  this  proposition  he  was 
very  reluctant  to  comply,  but  finally 
consenting,  he  proceeded  as  follows. 
We  give  the  exposition  in  his  own 
order,  and  almost  verbatim  as  he  gave 
it  to  us.    "  WeU;'  said  he,  "  I  wiU  do 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER  27 

the  best  I  can.  The  verse  begins  thus : 
'  For  what  the  law  could  not  do/  And 
what  is  it  the  law  can't  do?  Why,  it 
can't  justify  us  in  the  sight  of  God. 
"Why  not?  Because  ^it  was  weak 
through  the  flesh.'  There  is  no  weak- 
ness in  the  law.  That  is  as  strong  as 
its  Author.  But  the  weakness  is  in 
man's  flesh.  Observe,  this  is  a  weak- 
ness 'through  the  flesh!  That  is,  the 
weakness  is  in  man's  corrupt  nature. 
Now,  what  is  to  be  done  for  man  in  his 
helplessness  and  guilt?  The  text  tells  us 
plainly,  ^  God  sending  his  own  Son' — 
for  what  ?  Why,  to  do  for  ruined  man 
what  the  law  could  not  do  on  account  of 
his  sinfully  weak  nature.  And  when 
God  sent  his  Son,  hoiv  did  he  come? 
'  In  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh.'  I  sup- 
pose that  means,  he  came  as  a  man, 
though  not  a  sinful  man;  for  he  knew 
no  sin.  And  tvhi/  did  he  come  ?  The 
text  answers,  ^and  for  sin,  condenmed 


28  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

sin  in  the  flesh/  That  is,  on  account  of 
sin  in  man,  he  suffered  the  condemna- 
tion due  to  that  sin  in  his  own  person. 
So/'  says  the  old  African — ^his  dark 
visage  brightening  with  the  emotions- 
within — "  what  God's  law  cannot  do,  his 
own  Son  can  do.  Thanks  be  to  God  for 
his  unspeakable  gift 

We  could  only  join  in  his  closing  ex- 
clamation, assuring  him  that,  according 
to  our  best  judgment  he  had  adopted 
the  true  interpretation  of  the  passage, 
and  we  left  him,  blessing  God,  as  we 
shook  his  hand,  for  bestowing  such  grace 
and  knowledge  upon  one  so  humble  and 
so  unpretending. 

His  knowledge  of  human  nature  was 
profound,  because  it  was  derived  wholly 
from  the  Bible,  confirmed  by  his  own 
observation.  Hence  his  extensive  use- 
fulness, not  only  among  those  of  his 
own  colour,  but  also  in  a  large  circle  of 
whites,  embracing  many  of  the  most 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 


29 


intelligent^  wealthy,  and  refined  people 
of  the  county. 

In  the  familiar  intercourse  to  which 
he  was  admitted  by  the  latter  class,  he 
was  never  known  to  offend  by  any 
thing  like  forwardness.  Says  one  who 
knew  him  well :  "  His  humility  has 
always  been  of  the  most  rational  kind — 
entirely  removed  from  all  cant  and 
grimace.  Before  he  became  superan- 
nuated, the  great  field  of  his  operations 
as  a  preacher  was  the  funeral  sermons 
called  for  by  the  owners  of  deceased 
slaves.  He  was  universally  employed 
in  this  way,  with  the  hearty  consent  of 
persons  of  all  descriptions  in  this  com- 
munity. I  have  known  him  to  be  sent 
for  to  a  distance  of  more  than  thirty 
miles  to  attend  to  a  service  of  this  kind. 
In  every  instance  he  would  receive  the 
most  polite  and  friendly  attentions  of 
the  white  portion  of  the  family;  and 
even  by  the  iiTcHgious,  was  frequently 
3* 


S9  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

remunerated  in  money  for  his  ser- 
vices." 

Through  hfe,  he  manifested  a  sur- 
prising thirst  for  knowledge.  He  em- 
braced with  avidity  every  opportunity 
of  getting  instruction,  both  in  pubhc 
and  in  private.  Nothing  pleased  him 
more  than  the  opportunity  of  conversing 
with  ministers  of  the  gospel.  Moun- 
tain Hall,  the  dehghtful  residence  of 
the  late  Dr.  Jones,  was  a  home  for 
Christ's  ministering  servants  as  they 
journeyed  through  that  part  of  the 
country.  The  African  Preacher  lived 
at  the  distance  of  a  mile  from  this  place. 
He  seemed  to  know,  almost  by  intui- 
tion, when  a  minister  called  to  spend 
the  night  with  the  good  doctor  and  his 
lady.  And  however  dark  or  even 
stormy  the  night  might  be,  when  the 
bell  rang  for  evening  family  worship, 
the  good  old  African  would  be  seen 
with  tremulous  steps  slowly  entering, 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  31 

and  with  deep  solemnity,  seating  him- 
self  in  a  retired  part  of  the  room  to  at- 
tend upon  the  service.  A  stranger 
would  not  be  likely  to  observe  him, 
unless  indeed  the  person  conducting 
the  worship  should  happen  to  sing 
Windham,  or  Mear,  or  Old  Hundred, 
to  some  appropriate  psalm  or  hymn. 
Then  his  attention  would  very  pro- 
bably be  arrested  by  a  voice,  not  re- 
markable for  its  melody,  nor  yet  remark- 
able for  its  strength — ^but  a  voice  so 
solemn,  so  tremulous  with  the  emotions 
which  seemed  to  accompany  it  from  the 
depths  of  a  heart  all  alive  to  God's  praise, 
that  he  could  no  longer  remain  unob- 
served. 

When  the  service  closed,  he  resumed 
his  seat — so  modest  as  never  presuming 
to  seek  an  introduction  to  the  reverend 
visitor.  The  poUshed,  but  pious  in- 
mates of  that  mansion,  were  his  special 
patrons  and  friends,  and  had  given  him 


8S  THE  ArPJCA>'  PREACHER. 

a  prescriptive  right  to  that  comer  and 
to  that  chair.  But  he  was  never  per- 
mitted to  remain  unnoticed.  The  visi- 
tor was  invariably  taken  to  the  place 
where  the  old  man  sat.  and  told.  this 
is  our  friend  and  neighbour,  Uncle  Jack, 
who  has  come  to-night  expressly  to 
join  in  oui'  worship,  and  to  make  your 
acquaintance,  with  a  view  to  his  im- 
provement in  divine  knowledge."  Then 
followed  an  inter^-iew,  in  which  the 
teacher  rarely  failed  to  learn  as  much  as 
the  scholar. 

He  greatly  delighted  in  hearing  the 
gospel  preached  by  those  who  were  well 
educated,  as  well  as  pious;  and  never 
seemed  to  enjoy  a  sermon  which  con- 
sisted mainly  in  empty  declamation.  We 
have  often  heard  him  say,  "  I  don't  like 
to  hear  more  sound  than  seme  in  the 
pulpit." 

He  uniformly  opposed,  both  in  public 
and  private,  every  thing  like  noise  and 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  33 

disorder  in  the  house  of  God.  His 
coloured  auditors  were  very  prone  to  err 
in  this  way.  But  whenever  they  did, 
he  susjDended  the  exercises  until  they 
became  sUent.  On  one  of  these  occar 
sions,  he  rebuked  his  hearers  substan- 
tially as  follows :  "  You  noisy  Christians 
remind  me  of  the  little  branches  (streams) 
after  a  heavy  rain.  They  are  soon  full, 
then  noisy,  and  as  soon  empty.  I  would 
much  rather  see  you  like  the  broad,  deep 
river,  which  is  quiet,  because  it  is  broad 
and  deep." 

On  another  occasion,  when  a  very 
large  assembly  had  convened,  and  when 
he  had  reason  to  suppose  there  might  be 
a  good  deal  of  mere  animal  excitement, 
before  he  sung  or  prayed,  address- 
ing himself  to  one  of  his  audience  by 
name,  he  said,  Suppose  your  master 
had  directed  you  to  go  to  Petersburg 
to-morrow;  and  suppose,  on  your  tell- 
ing him  you  knew  nothing  of  the  road, 


#1  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

and  therefore  could  not  go,  he  should 
repeat  the  command,  and  say,  ^^You 
shaU  go,  whether  you  know  the  way 
or  not,  and  shall  be  severely  punish- 
ed, if  you  fail  to  go."  Now  you  are  in 
great  trouble,  and  going  to  look  for 
some  one  who  can  tell  you  the  way, 
you  happen  to  find  a  good  many  peo- 
ple together,  all  of  whom  say  they 
know  the  way  perfectly.  You  tell 
them  the  trouble  you  are  in,  and  beg 
them  to  tell  you  the  way  to  Petersburg. 
Now,  there  happens  to  be  one  in  that 
crowd,  older  than  the  rest,  and  who  is 
thought  to  know  the  way  rather  better 
than  they.  So,  all  wait  for  him  to  talk. 
Now,  suppose  that,  just  as  this  old  man 
begins  to  tell  you  about  the  road — 
where  this  fork,  and  where  that  is — 
when  you  must  turn  this  way,  and 
when  that,  aU  his  companions  com- 
mence clapping  their  hands,  groaning 
and  shouting  so,  that  you  cant  hear  dis- 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  35 

iindly  a  tvord  the  old  man  says.  Could 
he  possibly  teach  you  the  road  to  Peters- 
burg, unless  they  ^vould  keep  still? 
Now,  here  are  a  great  many  sinners, 
who  must  find  the  road  to  heaven  or 
perish  for  ever.  I  am  about  to  tell 
them  as  well  as  I  can,  how  they  may 
find  that  road,  and  escape  that  destruc- 
tion, and  don't  t/ou  Christians  lather  me^ 
and  hinder  their  learning  hy  your  noise. 
Let  every  mouth  be  stopped,  and  let  all 
keep  quiet  until  I  am  done." 

His  sentiments  and  his  practice  on 
this  subject  seem  the  more  remarkable, 
when  it  is  remembered,  that  at  this 
time  nothing  was  more  common,  not 
only  among  the  blacks,  but  also  among 
the  whites,  than  noise  and  confusion 
during  pubhc  worship.  Indeed,  they 
were  thought  the  best  Christians  who 
shouted  the  oftenest  and  prayed  the 
loudest.  This  sentiment  he  literally 
abhon^ed,  and  did  his  utmost  to  exter- 


36  THE  AFBICAN  PREACHEE. 

minate.  He  was  particularly  fond  of  a 
tract  published  by  the  xlmerican  Tract 
Society^  entitled,  "  The  importance  of 
distinguishing;  between  true  and  false 
conversions/'  He  often  applied  for  this 
tract,  that  he  might  take  it  to  some 
^hite  neighboiu-,  who  had  recently  pro- 
fessed conversion;  expressing  the  fear, 
that  the  individual  for  whose  benefit  he 
wanted  it,  was  in  danger  of  resting  in  a 
groundless  hope.  With  those  of  his 
own  colour,  he  talked  thus  on  this  sub- 
ject: "Tou  who  can  read  the  Bible, 
should  read  it  much ;  and  you  who  can- 
not, should  embrace  every  opportunity 
of  hearing  it  read.  If  you  do  not,  how 
will  you  ever  know  that  your  rehgion 
is  such  as  God  will  approve  ?  God  alone 
knows,  and  he  alone  can  tell  us,  what 
will  satisfy  him,  and  this  he  has  done 
in  his  word.  Why,  persons  fond  of 
smoking,  can  t  tell  whether  their  pipe 
b  lighted,  if  they  smoke  in  the  dark; 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  37 

much  less  can  you  tell  whether  your 
heart  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God,  unless 
the  light  of  his  word  is  poured  upon 
your  experience. 

The  reader  will  be  interested  also  in 
knowing  something  of  his  sentiments 
in  regard  to  revivals  of  religion.  More 
mistaken  views  on  this  subject  could 
hardly  prevail  any  where,  or  at  any 
time,  than  prevailed  in  the  region  of 
country  in  which  the  African  Preacher 
lived,  and  during  the  time  of  his  minis- 
try. His  sentiments  may  be  fairly  and 
fully  learned  from  the  following  inci- 
dent. 

On  a  certain  occasion,  he  attended  a 

protracted  meeting,  conducted  by  some 

of  the  best  white  preachers  in  that  part 

of  the  country;  at  which  "the  new 

measures"  were  used,  and  at  which 

there  was  a  great  deal  of  excitement 

and  no  little  noise.    On  his  return,  he 

called  to  see  me,  and,  during  his  visit, 
4 


36  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

gave  me  the  following  account  of  the 
meeting :  "  There  were  a  great  many- 
people,  and  a  great  deal  of  talking,  and 
singing,  and  pra\ing»  They  call  it  a 
reAdval;  and  if  by  a  revival,  they  mean 
a  great  increase  of  confusion  and  noise, 
they  are  right.  But  so  it  is,  I  had  no 
enjoyment  at  the  meeting.  I  heai'd 
very  little  of  what  I  call  real  preaching. 
I  was  constantly  thinking,  and  it  may 
be,  this  was  a  temptation  of  the  de^dl — 
any  how,  I  was  constantly  thinking  of 
what  I  have  sometimes  noticed  in  neio 
grounds.  If  a  man  clears  up  a  piece  of 
land  in  the  summer,  and  has  not  time 
to  cut  down  and  take  away  all  the  trees, 
but  helts  a  good  many,  and  leaves  them 
standing  about  in  the  field,  the  leaves 
die,  but  don't  fall.  Now,  when  winter 
comes,  and  the  wind  blows  hard,  I 
always  noticed  that  one  of  these  lelted 
trees  made  more  noise  in  the  wind, 
than  a  half  dozen  green,  living  trees. 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  39 

These  noisy  Christians  look  to  me  so 
much  like  belted  trees  with  the  leaves  on, 
in  a  windy  day^  that  I  could  not  enjoy 
the  meeting  at  all?^  And  yet  the  fault 
might  have  been  in  me." 

Few  things  delighted  him  more  than 
to  be  made  acquainted  with  the  views 
of  standard  evangelical  authors  on  doc- 
trinal subjects.  He  was  at  all  times 
particularly  interested  in  clear  and  sound 
expositions  of  such  passages  of  Scripture 
as  are  hard  to  be  understood.  A  friend 
says,  "  After  I  had  read  to  him,  at  some 
length,  the  opinions  of  one  of  our  ablest 
divines  on  a  disputed  point  in  theology, 
he  said,  '  Well,  I  have  long  wanted  to 
have  that  matter  explained,  but  all  I 
could  gather  about  it,  was  like  picking 
up  a  few  scanty  crumbs  and  dry  pieces 
of  crust,  which  could  not  satisfy  my 
hunger;  but  now,  you  have  given  me  a 
great  loaf,  that  I  may  eat  and  be  full  at 
once;" 


40 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 


At  another  time^  on  lia^dng  a  very 
difficult  text  explained  to  him^  he  said, 
"  Whenever  I  came  to  that  text,  I  was 
like  a  little  child  two  or  three  years  old, 
trying  to  go  from  one  room  of  his' 
fathers  house  into  another.  After 
trjdng  again  and  again  to  reach  and 
raise  the  latch,  but  all  in  vain,  his 
father  comes  along,  and  does,  without 
tiie  least  difficulty,  what  the  child  could 
not  possibly  do.  Just  so  with  me.  You 
have  opened  the  door,  and  now  I  can  go 
in." 

He  was  a  close  observer  of  passing 
events — an  accurate  discemer  of  the 
signs  of  the  times.  He  looked  at  every 
thing  in  its  bearing  on  the  cause  of 
Christ.  He  said  to  us  on  one  occasion, 
"Real  Christians  are  the  salt  of  the 
earth;  and  I  do  beheve  that  this  world 
would  have  been  destroyed  long  ago, 
but  for  them.    Does  not  the  word  of 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  41 

God  sajj  that  for  the  elect  s  sake  those 
days  shall  be  shortened 

There  were  two  individuals  in  the 
circle  of  his  acquaintance,  remarkable, 
not  only  for  their  own  destitution  of 
religious  principle,  but  also  for  doing  all 
they  could  to  suppress  it  in  the  large 
families  of  which  they  were  the  heads. 
During  their  lives,  no  member  of  either 
household  made  any  advance  towards 
forming  a  connection  with  the  church. 
Soon  after  their  deaths,  which  happened 
nearly  about  the  same  time,  the  widow 
and  several  of  the  children  of  each,  be- 
came pious,  active  members  of  the 
church.  When  his  attention  was  called 
to  this  fact,  he  said,  "  I  have  often  seen 
a  large,  spreading  oak,  standing  alone  in 
a  field,  with  nothing  growing  under  it — 
but  only  cut  that  tree  down  and  take  it 
away,  and  a  little  culture  will  make  the 
land  very  productive." 

We  have  already  learned  that  he  was 
4* 


4A  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

admitted  to  terms  of  great  familiarity 
with  persons  of  every  grade  in  society; 
and  yet  Ms  deportment  never  savoured 
of  arrogance  or  presumption.  There 
was  but  one  class  of  persons  with  whom 
he  ever  used  a  freedom  which  the  most 
fastidious  could  censure.  These  were 
such  as  scoffed  at  sacred  and  divine  sub- 
jects. Persons  of  this  sort  would  some- 
times jeer  him  about  his  rehgion;  and 
endeavour  to  make  Christ  and  his  pre- 
cious cause  subjects  of  buffoonery  and 
ridicule.  The  old  African  was  far  more 
jealous  of  his  Master's  glory  than  of  his 
own  ease  or  reputation.  On  such  occa- 
sionSj  his  usual  diffidence  and  reserve 
would  give  place  to  a  firm  but  dignified 
defence  of  the  truth ;  and  most  happUy 
could  he  answer  a  fool  according  to  his 
folly."  Nor  did  one  of  this  fraternity 
ever  encounter  him  without  being  seri- 
ously worsted. 

A  man  addicted  to  horse-racing  and 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  43 


card-plajdng,  stopped  him  in  the  road 
one  day,  and  addressed  him  as  follows : 
"  Old  man,  you  Christians  say  a  great 
deal  about  the  way  to  heaven  being 
very  naiTOW.  Now,  if  this  be  so,  a  great 
many  who  profess  to  be  travelling  it, 
will   not  find   it  half  wide  enough." 

That's  very  true,"  said  the  good 
African,  of  all  who  merely  have  a 
name  to  live,  and  of  all  like  your 
^^Why  refer  to  meT  asked  the  man; 

if  the  road  is  wide  enough  for  any,  it  is 
for  me."  By  no  means,"  was  the  per- 
tinent reply;  ^^when  you  set  out,  you 
will  wish  to  take  along  a  race-horse  or 
two,  and  a  card-table.  Now  there's  no 
room  along  this  way  for  such  thiags,  and 
what  would  you  do,  even  in  heaven, 
without  them?" 

Another  individual  of  large  fortune, 
who  was  accustomed  to  treat  the  sub- 
ject of  rehgion  rather  sportively,  and 
who  at  the  same  time  prided  himself 


44  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER 

on  his  morality,  said  to  him,  "  I  think, 
old  man,  I  am  as  good  as  need  be.  I 
can't  help  thinking  so,  because  God 
blesses  me  as  much  as  he  does  you 
Christians,  and  I  don't  know  what  more 
I  want  than  he  gives  me;  and  yet  I 
never  disturb  myself  about  preaching  or 
praying."  To  this  the  old  preacher  re- 
plied with  great  seriousness,  "Just  so 
with  the  hogs.  I  have  often  seen  them 
rooting  among  the  leaves  in  the  woods, 
and  finding  just  as  many  acorns  as  they 
needed,  and  yet  I  never  saw  one  of  them 
look  up  to  the  tree  from  which  the  acorns 
feU." 

He  was  fond  of  considering  piety, 
both  internal  and  external,  as  progres- 
sive in  its  developments.  He  opposed 
with  the  utmost  firmness  and  faithful- 
ness, the  idea  of  one's  getting  religion^ 
as  the  phrase  is,  and  then  folding  his 
hands  in  utter  idleness.  He  was  fully 
aware  that  this  error  prevailed  to  a 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER*  45 

deplorable  extent,  among  those  of  his 
own  colour,  and  he  spared  no  pains  to 
resist  and  eradicate  it.  He  was  accus- 
tomed to  say,  "  I  have  no  notion  of  that 
reUgion  which  is  better  at  first  than  it 
ever  is  afterwards.  When  Christians 
hear  a  sermon  on  the  text,  '  Tui^n  ye, 
turn  ye,  for  why  will  ye  die  ?'  they  are 
apt  to  conclude  that  it  don't  suit  them, 
because  they  have  turned  long  ago. 
Now,  the  truth  is,  to  be  the  real  chil- 
dren of  God,  we  must  continue  to  turn 
as  long  we  live.  For  my  own  part, 
I  often  feel  as  if  I  had  as  much  turning 
to  do  now,  as  I  had  when  I  first  set 
out." 

His  views  on  this  subject  were  un- 
usually enlarged  and  scriptural.  They 
reached  into  eternity.  Nothing  less 
than  the  expectation  of  an  eternal  pro- 
gression in  knowledge,  holiness,  and 
usefulness  satisfied  his  desires.  Of 
this,  we  are  furnished  with  a  striking 


46  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

illustration  in  the  following  incident.  A 
pious  young  man,  of  considerable  intelli- 
I  gence,  conversing  with  him  on  growth 
in  grace,  said,  "  We  should  strive  to 
grow  until  we  die."  ^^Yes,"  replied 
our  preacher,  "  and  hope  to  grow  after 
we  die.  I  trust  in  God  I  shall  grow 
for  ever." 

Standing  one  day  in  sight  of  a 
field  of  tobacco,  he  said  to  me,  "  Some 
fifty  years  ago,  I  expected  the  time 
would  come,  when  I  should  be  of  some 
account  in  the  Lord's  vineyard.  But 
now,  I  am  very  old,  and  have  given 
up  this  hope."  Then  pointing  to  the 
tobacco,  which  grew  near  us,  he  said, 
^^That  is  very  promising  tobacco,  but 
it  must  be  cut  and  cured^  before  it  will 
be  of  any  service  to  its  owner.  And  so 
it  is  with  me.  All  that  now  comforts 
me  on  this  subject,  is  the  hope  that 
God  will  make  some  good  use  of  me 
in  another  and  better  world.    The  re- 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  47 

deemed  of  the  Lord  are  said  to  serve  him 
in  heaven.  What  a  service  that  must 
be!  How  unhke  any  thing  seen  or 
known  on  earth !" 

Here  let  the  reader  pause  and  con- 
sider, that  this  old  African  could  barely 
read,  and  never  learned  to  write.  He 
was  taught  in  the  school  of  Christ,  and 
only  there.  We  never  knew  him  read, 
nor  do  we  think  he  cared  to  read,  any 
book  except  the  Bible,  or  something  of 
a  kindred  character.  He  was  literally 
taught  of  God,  and  thus  became  wise 
unto  salvation.  With  the  jet  black 
colour,  and  all  the  features  of  the  Afri- 
can race  fully  developed,  such  were 
the  beauties  of  his  mind  and  heart,  as 
to  render  him  an  object  worthy  of  the 
highest  respect — the  most  profound 
veneration.  Often  have  we  rejoiced 
to  sit  at  his  feet  and  learn,  and  with  no 
little  delight  do  we  anticipate  the  day 
when  we  shall  walk,  side  by  side, 


48  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

along  the  banks  of  the  river  of  life,  and 
partake  together  of  the  fruits  of  that  ti^ee, 
whose  leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the 
nations. 

Another  very  striking  characteristic 
of  the  African  Preacher  was  solicitude 
for  the  prevalence  of  pure  and  undefiled 
religion.  He  sought,  in  every  legitimate 
way,  the  advancement  of  Christ's  cause. 
Most  truly  could  he  say,  "  If  I  forget 
thee,  0  Jerusalem,  let  my  right  hand 
forget  her  cunning."  Perhaps  few,  if 
any,  have  ever  lived,  who  entered  more 
fully  into  the  spirit  of  the  80th  Psalm 
— or  who,  with  reference  to  the  interests 
of  Zion,  could  with  greater  sincerity  or 
deeper  earnestness,  adopt  the  beautiful 
language  of  one  of  our  hymns : 

"  If  e'er  my  heart  forget 
Her  welfare  or  her  woe  ; 
Let  every  joy  this  heart  forsake, 
And  every  grief  overflow. 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  49 

"  For  her  my  tears  shall  fall 
For  her,  my  prayers  ascend; 
To  her  my  toils  and  cares  be  given, 
'TiU  toils  and  cares  shall  end." 

All  who  \dsited  him  might  expect 
to  be  questioned  on  this  subject^  as 
closely  as  good  manners  would  war- 
rant. No  one,  who  made  the  attempt, 
ever  failed  to  interest  him  deeply  on 
the  subject  of  missions.  We  have 
often  seen  the  tear  roll  down  his  dark 
and  furrowed  cheek,  as  he  listened  to 
some  thrilling  statement  respecting  the 
spread  of  the  gospel  among  the  hea- 
then. He  fully  believed,  that  ''the 
field  is  the  world" — that  the  great  com- 
mission of  the  ascending  Saviour  binds 
the  Church  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature,  and  make  disciples  of  all  na- 
tions. Here  his  faith  and  zeal  were 
Buch  as  to  put  to  shame  many  who, 
with  advantages  far  superior  to  his,  are 
still  strangers  to  the  missionary  spirit, 
5 


80  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

which  is  but  another  name  for  the  spirit 
of  the  Gospel — the  spirit  of  Christ. 

When  he  prayed^  as  we  know  he  did 
with  unusual  faith  and  fervour,  "  Thy 
kingdom  come,  thy  will  be  done  on  earth, 
as  it  is  in  heaven/'  his  far-reaching  mind 
and  heart  extended  to  every  nation  and 
kindred  and  tribe,  upon  the  whole  earth. 
He  had  known  what  it  was  to  live  amidst 
the  darkness  of  heathenism,  and  what  it 
is  to  enjoy  the  genial  hght  of  the  Sun  of 
righteousness. 

On  one  occasion,  after  hstening  with 
fixed  attention  and  deep  feeling  to  a 
statement  of  a  discouraging  character 
respecting  the  state  of  rehgion  in  a 
neighbouring  county,  he  said,  There 
seems  to  be  a  great  coldness  and  dead- 
ness  on  the  subject  of  religion  every 
where.  The  fire  has  almost  gone  out, 
and  nothing  is  left,  but  a  few  smoking 
chunks  lying  about  in  places!'  How 
striking  is  the  thought  of  one's  having 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  51 

just  religion  enough  " to  smoke but  not 
enough  to  burn.  No  light,  no  heat/ — • 
only  a  httle  smoke.  Who  that  has  the 
fire  of  divine  love  in  his  heart,  can  be 
content  to  lead  such  a  life  ?  Indeed  it 
is  extremely  doubtful,  whether  a  prin- 
ciple of  such  potency  can  exist,  and  yet 
exert  no  more  influence.  Let  the  inac- 
tive, useless  member  of  the  church, 
ponder  the  homely  but  expressive  lan- 
guage of  the  good  old  African,  and  hang 
his  head  for  shame,  that  he  should  hold 
no  higher  place,  and  act  no  better  part 
in  the  vineyard  of  his  Master,  than  that 
of  a  "smoking  chunk''  lying  by  the  way- 
side. 

Speaking  of  the  causes  of  a  low  state 
of  piety,  he  said,  "  Christians  don't  love 
each  other  enough.  They  don't  keep 
close  enough  together.  They  are  too 
much  like  fire-coals,  scattered  over  a 
large  hearth.  Coals  in  that  condition, 
you  know,  soon  die  out.    Only  gather 


52  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

them  up^  and  bring  them  close  together, 
and  they  soon  become  bright  and  warm 
again.  So  it  is  with  Christians.  They 
must  be  often  and  close  together — ^in 
the  church — at  the  prayer  meeting,  and 
thus  help  one  another  along." 

His  attention  was  frequently  called 
to  the  purposes  and  plans  of  the  Ameri- 
can Colonization  Society.  He  always 
said  it  would  succeed  if  the  natives 
were  duly  restrained.  Young  as  he 
was  when  taken  from  that  country,  he 
seems  to  have  formed  a  just  estimate  of 
the  African  character.  Comparing  their 
superstitious  practices  and  degraded 
condition,  with  the  privileges  enjoyed 
under  the  Christian  system,  he  was  often 
heard  to  thank  God  that  he  had  been 
brought  to  America.  "  For,"  he  would 
say,  "  coming  to  the  white  man's  country 
as  a  slave,  was  the  means  of  making  me 
free  in  Christ  Jesus."  He  remembered 
very  distinctly  having  often  been  forced 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  53 

to  participate  in  the  idolatrous  rites  and 
ceremonies  practised  by  his  parents ;  and 
he  seldom  exhibited  deeper  emotion  than 
when  referring  to  these  things.  From 
this  subject  he  seldom  passed^  without 
adding,  "  If  I  were  only  young  enough, 
I  should  rejoice  to  go  back  and  preach 
the  gospel  to  my  poor  countrymen. 
But/'  he  would  say,  "it  would  be  a 
great  trial  to  live  where  there  are  no 
white  people.'' 

In  every  situation,  whether  of  freedom 
or  of  bondage,  he  had  found  in  the  white 
man  a  friend  and  a  brother.  And  we 
scruple  not  to  say,  that  the  black  man 
has  no  better  friend  on  all  this  earth, 
than  he  finds  in  the  educated,  pious  son 
of  the  good  old  commonwealth,  in  which 
the  African  Preacher  lived,  preached  and 
died — ^respected  Avhile  he  lived,  and  la- 
mented when  he  died. 

Perhaps  no  Christian  grace  shone 
more  brightly  in  his  character,  than  hu- 
5* 


54  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

mility.  The  attentions  bestowed  upon 
him  by  persons  of  the  highest  standing, 
were  remarkable.  He  was  invited  into 
their  houses — sat  with  their  famihes — 
took  part  in  their  social  worship^  some- 
times leading  in  prayer  at  the  family 
altar.  Many  of  the  most  intelligent 
people  attended  upon  his  ministry^  and 
listened  to  his  sermons  with  great  de- 
light. Indeed,  previous  to  the  year  1825, 
he  was  considered  by  the  best  judges 
the  best  preacher  in  that  county.  His 
opinions  were  respected,  his  advice  fol- 
lowed, and  yet  he  never  betrayed  the 
least  symptom  of  arrogance  or  self-con- 
ceit. When  in  the  presence  of  white 
people,  he  seldom  introduced  conversa- 
tion, and  when  he  did,  it  was  invariably 
done  by  modestly  asking  some  very  per- 
tinent question  on  some  very  important 
subject.  He  was  perpetually  employed 
either  in  seeking  or  communicating  in- 
formation, and  when  no  opportunity  pre- 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  55 

sented  itself  of  doing  either,  he  was  ha- 
bitually silent. 

His  dwelling  was  a  rude  log  cabin; 
his  apparel  of  the  plainest  and  even 
coarsest  materials^  and  yet  no  one 
ever  heard  him  utter  one  "murmuring 
word."  Like  the  shepherd  of  Salisbury 
Plain,  his  gratitude  for  what  he  had, 
precluded  all  anxiety  for  what  he  had 
not. 

The  tones  of  his  voice,  the  expression 
of  his  countenance,  together  with  every 
word,  and  every  action,  proclaimed  that, 
in  true  lowliness  of  mind,  he  esteemed 
others  better  than  himself. 

An  illustration  of  his  meekness  and 
humility  is  furnished  by  the  fact,  that 
when  asked  his  opinion  respecting  the 
law,  then  recently  enacted  by  the  State 
Legislature,  prohibiting  coloured  men 
from  preaching,  he  very  promptly  ex- 
pressed his  approbation  of  the  law;  add- 
ing, "It  is  altogether  wrong  for  such  as 


§6  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

have  not  been  taught  themselves,  to 
undertake  to  teach  others.  As  to  my 
preaching,  I  have  long  thought  it  was  no 
better  than  the  ringing  of  an  old  cow- 
bell, and  ought  to  be  stopped."  He  ac- 
cordingly bowed  to  the  authority  of  this 
law;  and  although  often  told  that  the 
penalty  for  its  violation  would  not  be 
inflicted  on  him,  he  never  preached  after- 
wards ;  but  became  a  constant  and  devout 
worshipper  in  a  neighbouring  Presby- 
terian congregation,  which  had  been  re- 
cently organized,  and  over  which  the 
first  pastor  of  that  denomination  ever 
settled  in  the  county  of  Nottoway,  had 
been  recently  installed. 

Another  incident,  illustrating  his  hum- 
ble and  contented  disposition,  must  not 
be  omitted.  Previous  to  the  cessation 
of  his  pubhc  ministry,  a  pious  and 
wealthy  lady,  feeHng  grieved  to  see  him 
BO  rudely  clad,  presented  him  with  a 
well  made  suit  of  black  cloth.  This 


THE  AFRIPAX  PRF \CHKK, 


Pagft  57. 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  57 

suit,  he  wore  but  once,  and  then  return- 
ed it  to  his  kind  friend,  begging  that  she 
would  not  be  displeased  at  his  doing  so, 
and  justified  his  conduct  thus :  "  These 
clothes  are  a  great  deal  better  than  are 
generally  worn  by  people  of  my  colour. 
And  besides,  if  I  wear  them,  I  find  I 
shall  be  obhged  to  think  about  them 
even  at  meeting T 

We  have  already  spoken  of  the  polite 
attentions  he  received  at  the  hands  of 
white  people.  In  truth,  Uncle  Jack 
was  always  a  welcome  guest.  In  warm 
weather,  he  always  insisted  on  sitting 
in  the  portico,  or  on  the  steps  leading 
into  the  house,  as  a  place  better  suited 
to  his  rank  and  character,  than  the  par- 
lour. Whenever  he  took  this  humble 
position,  the  whole  family  would  soon 
gather  around  him,  and  hang  upon  his 
words,  as  long  as  he  could  be  induced 
to  remain.  We  have  known  the  whole 
of  a  large  and  fashionable  dining  party, 


6S  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 


leave  the  gay  attractions  of  the  parlour, 
and  repair  to  the  porch^  or  to  the  shade 
of  some  venerable  tree,  under  which  he 
had  taken  his  position,  each  saying  as 
they  went,  "  Uncle  Jack  has  come,  let's 
go  and  hear  him."  On  such  occasions, 
he  displayed  great  prudence  and  wisdom 
in  the  topics  introduced.  He  seemed 
fully  to  reahze  the  importance  of  not  re- 
pelling or  disgusting  the  young  and  irre- 
ligious, by  pressing  reHgious  truth  upon 
their  consideration,  any  further  than  they 
were  disposed  to  give  him  their  serious 
attention.  The  skill  with  which  he  could 
^'  rightly  divide  the  word  of  truth,  and 
give  to  each  his  portion  in  due  season," 
might  well  rebuke  some  far  better  educa- 
ted and  more  distinguished  ministers 
than  he. 

He  never  seemed  to  suppose  for  a 
moment,  that  the  attentions  shown  him, 
were  the  result  of  any  personal  merit  of 
his  own.    He  considered  them  all  aS 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  59 

flowing  directly  from  a  regard  to  his 
Master,  and  his  Master's  cause.  Nor 
was  he  led  by  such  attentions  to  con- 
sider himself  above  those  of  his  own 
•  colour.  Most  meekly  and  humbly  did 
he  "  condescend  to  men  of  low  estate." 
Most  tenderly  did  he  love,  fervently  did 
he  pray,  and  faithfully  did  he  labour  for, 
his  "brethren,  his  kinsmen  according 
to  the  flesh."  He  sought  theu*  society, 
and  mingled  with  them  in  their  cabins, 
with  the  utmost  familiarity.  The  re- 
spect shown  him  by  the  whites,  united 
with  the  vast  superiority  of  his  intel- 
lectual and  moral  attainments  over 
theirs,  rendered  him  the  object  of  sus- 
picion and  jealousy  with  the  more  igno- 
rant, and  vicious  of  this  class.  He  was, 
moreover,  a  rigid  disciphnarian.  He 
was  the  relentless  enemy  of  all  pre- 
tended sanctity.  Every  departure  from 
what  he  deemed  an  orthodox  creed,  or 
a  consistently  pious  life,  was  sure  to 


60  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

meet  with  his  most  decided  opposition. 
Hence,  all  feared,  and  some  really  hated 
him.  He  was  no  stranger  to  persecu- 
tion for  righteousness'  sake. 

A  gentleman  of  our  acquaintance  de- 
tected one  of  his  servants,  who  belonged 
to  Uncle  Jack's  pastoral  charge,  in  some 
petty  theft.  The  master  merely  ad- 
monished the  offender,  and  dismissed 
him,  saying,  ^^I  shall  content  myself 
with  laying  this  matter  before  your 
preacher."  He  retired,  but  soon  re- 
turned, and  with  the  deepest  concern  de- 
picted in  his  countenance,  said,  "  Mas- 
ter, I  have  come  back  to  say  to  you, 
that  if  you  think  I  deserve  punishment 
for  what  I  have  done,  I  would  much 
rather  you  would  punish  me  at  once, 
as  you  think  I  deserve,  than  to  tell 
Uncle  Jack  about  it."  The  gentleman 
very  wisely  concluded  not  to  comply 
with  this  strange  request,  and  the  ser- 
vant-was commended  to  the  moral  dis- 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  61 


cipline  of  the  good  old  pastor,  which  re- 
sulted very  favourably. 

It  is  somewhat  remarkable,  that  just 
about  the  time  that  Alexander  Campbell, 
of  Bethany,  commenced  the  propagation 
of  his  pecuhar  sentiments,  which  so 
seriously  disturbed  and  divided  the 
Baptist  churches  in  the  west,  a  coloured 
preacher  whose  name  was  Campbell, 
entered  upon  the  work  of  ^^reforma- 
tion" among  the  Baptists  of  his  own 
colour  in  south-eastern  Virginia.  This 
man,  however,  struck  out  a  course  of 
his  own — in  some  respects  the  reverse 
of  the  system  adopted  by  his  more 
learned  namesake,  but  possessing  equal, 
if  not  superior  claims  to  originality.  It 
will  be  quite  sufficient  for  our  present 
purpose,  to  mention  two  articles  in  the 
new  creed  of  this  sable  reformer.  One 
of  these  may  be  expressed  thus :  Inas- 
much as  very  few  of  the  blacks  are  able 
to  read,  they  should  no  longer  rely 
6 


62  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

upon,  or  be  directed  in  their  faith  or 
practice  by,  the  written  word  of  God, 
but  depend  entirely  upon  the  teachings 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  other  was, 
that  the  old  Jewish  law,  forbidding  the 
use  of  swine's  flesh,  was  still  in  force, 
and  hence  it  was  a  great  sin  to  eat  pork 
or  bacon. 

Our  Mr.  Campbell  could  read,  but, 
he  said,  God  had  shown  to  him  in  a 
dream  the  great  impropriety  of  his  doing 
so,  as  so  many  of  his  people  were  de- 
prived of  this  privilege.  He  accord- 
ingly called  a  number  of  his  congrega- 
tion together,  told  them  his  dream,  and 
gave  them  the  interpretation  thereof — 
said  it  was  very  wrong  for  the  preacher 
to  be  above  the  people,  and  then,  with 
great  affected  solemnity,  threw  his  Bible 
into  the  fire  and  burned  it  to  ashes.  The 
success  of  this  fanatic  was  considerable ; 
so  much  so,  as  to  awaken  no  httle  alarm 
among  the  owners  of  slaves  in  that  seo- 


THE  AFKICAN  PREACHER.  63 

tion  of  the  country.  As  soon  as  tidings 
of  these  things  reached  our  old  African, 
true  to  his  principles,  and  faithful  to 
the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness,  he 
determined  to  make  an  effort  to  check 
the  evil.  Accordingly,  he  set  out  on  a 
visit  to  the  "  reformer/'  and  on  reaching 
the  neighbourhood  in  which  he  lived, 
called  on  several  gentlemen  whose  ser- 
vants had  become  his  "  disciples" — stated 
the  object  of  his  visit,  and  desired  that  a 
meeting  might  be  held  for  the  purpose 
of  checking,  if  possible,  these  new  and 
strange  doctrines.  His  approach  was 
hailed  by  these  gentlemen,  as  if  he  had 
been  a  second  Luther,  come  to  with- 
stand another  Tetzel.  The  meeting  was 
held. 

Mr.  Campbell  commenced,  with  all 
the  self-importance  so  common  to  self- 
constituted,  and  self-styled  reformers — 
pouring  forth  torrents  of  "great  swelling 
words  of  vanity."    The  people  sympa- 


M  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER, 

thized  with  their  leader,  and  joined 
warmly  in  the  clamour.  The  African 
Preacher  maintained  the  utmost  silence 
for  a  considerable  time,  but  at  length 
arose  with  great  solemnity  and  said, 
"  My  Bible  teaches  me,  in  all  my  ways 
to  acknowledge  God,  and  never  to  lean 
to  my  own  understanding.  Hence,  I 
can  go  no  further  in  this  business  until 
we  have  prayed  for  God's  guidance  and 
blessing."  This  proposition  was  evi-. 
dently  unexpected,  and  to  many  very 
unacceptable-  But  the  dignified  and 
solemn  manner  in  which  it  was  made, 
awed  them  into  momentary  silence,  and 
kneeling,  he  prayed  with  strong  faith 
and  deep  feeling,  that  God  would  be 
pleased  to  direct  and  bless  them  in  their 
efforts  to  learn  and  do  his  will.  The 
impression  made  by  this  prayer  was 
eminently  salutary.  Finding  that  the 
people  had  become  silent  and  more  re- 
spectful, our  good  preacher  proposed  to 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  65 

this  "  setter  forth  of  strange"  doctrines, 
to  state  and  prove  his  creed.  He  com- 
menced with  an  attempt  to  sustain  his 
positions  by  quotations  from  the  Bible. 
To  this  Uncle  Jack  objected,  on  the 
ground  that  he  had  burned  his  Bible, 
and  accordingly  had  no  right  to  the  use 
of  any  thing  it  contained.  This  was 
extremely  embarrassing.  But  the  pro- 
hibition was  very  properly  enforced 
with  the  utmost  firmness.  An  appeal 
to  the  audience  as  to  the  propriety  of 
this  course,  met  with  so  much  favour, 
that  Campbell,  finding  the  current  be- 
ginning to  turn  against  him,  became 
very  angry,  and  resorted  to  personal 
abuse  of  the  good  old  African.  Upon 
this,  the  latter  arose  and  with  a  good 
deal  of  biting  sarcasm — a  weapon  he 
knew  quite  well  when  and  how  to  use — 
said  to  the  people :  "  My  friends,  you  all 
see  that  what  this  man  says  about  doing 
without  the  Bible,  and  depending  on 
6* 


66  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

the  Spirit,  cannot  be  true;  for  he  was 
not  able  to  talk  at  all,  when  I  told  him 
he  had  no  right  to  quote  a  book  he  had 
burned.  And  you  can  all  see,  by  his 
getting  so  angry,  that  if  any  spirit  came 
to  his  help,  it  was  not  the  Holy  Spirit. 
And  as  to  that  notion  of  his  about  the 
sin  of  eating  hog-meat^  if  the  half  of  what 
I  hear  about  him  and  a  great  many  of 
his  members  be  true,  the  white  people 
ought  to  do  all  they  can  to  encourage 
that  beUef,  as  it  will  make  the  raising  of 
hogs  down  this  way,  much  easier  and 
more  certain  than  it  is  now."  With  this 
he  took  his  leave,  and  with  coloured 
Camphellism  died  entirely. 

The  life  of  the  African  Preacher  was 
one  of  no  little  toil  and  suffering.  Per- 
haps the  most  imprudent  step  he  ever 
took,  was  marrying  a  woman  who  was 
in  no  respect  "a  help  meet  for  him." 
Without  mental  culture,  without  reli- 
gion, encumbered  with  a  large  family 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  67 

of  children,  the  fruits  of  a  former  mar- 
riage, and  surrounded  by  an  extensive 
circle  of  other  relatives,  she  only  served 
to  burden  him  with  domestic  cares,  suffi- 
cient to  have  crushed  the  spirit  of  any 
ordinary  man.  These  people  were  idle 
and  profligate ;  he,  industrious  and  econo- 
mical. They  hung  around  and  imposed 
upon  him  in  the  most  shameful  manner. 
Often  would  they  filch  from  him  the 
products  of  his  own  daily  labour,  and 
then  add  insult  to  injury,  by  the  gross- 
est personal  unkindness,  and  even  cruel- 
ty. But  all  this  only  served  to  give  ad- 
ditional brightness  and  purity  to  his 
piety.  Some  metals  become  the  more 
brilliant  on  being  rubbed,  and  some 
flowers  are  all  the  more  fragrant  when 
trodden  upon.  So  it  is  with  pure  and 
undefiled  rehgion,  and  so  it  was  with 
this  good  old  African  Preacher. 

His  thoughts,  his  affections,  his  aims, 
were  all  lifted  so  far  above  the  din  of 


6ft  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

domestic  strife,  that  it  seldom  or  nerer 
disturbed  his  equanimity  even  for  a 
moment.  The  dreariness  of  his  home 
on  earth  only  served  to  make  him  sigh 
more  deeply  for  "  that  house  not  made 
with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens/' 
He  rarely  alluded  to  these  things,  and 
whenever  he  did,  he  never  failed  to  say 
all  he  could  in  extenuation  of  the  guilt 
of  those  who  had  injured  him.  To  the 
writer,  he  never  alluded  to  these  trials 
but  once,  and  then  he  said,  "I  am  such 
a  hard-headed^  disobedient  child,  that  I 
need  a  whipping  every  day."  At  an- 
other time,  referring  to  his  poverty,  and 
also  to  the  fact  that  he  had  no  descen- 
dants, he  said,  "  I  left  nothing  in  Africa, 
and  I  brought  nothing  to  this  country. 
When  I  die,  I  shall  leave  nothing  be- 
hind me,  and  shall  carry  nothing  with 
me,  but  the  merits  of  my  Saviour  s  obe- 
dience and  death." 

The  simpHcity  of  faith,  and  the  self-ap- 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  69 

plication  with  which  our  good  preachei 
was  accustomed  to  attend  upon  the  min- 
istrations of  the  sanctuary^  were  truly 
remarkable.  "A  day  in  thy  courts  is 
better  than  a  thousand/'  was  not  only 
the  language  of  his  lips,  but  of  his  heart 
and  of  his  life.  When  more  than  ninety 
years  of  age,  we  have  known  him  to 
walk  two,  and  sometimes  four  miles  to 
reach  the  house  of  God.  And  this  he 
would  sometimes  do  in  very  inclement 
weather.  Nor  was  he  a  forgetful  hearer, 
but  a  doer  of  the  word.  We  have  often 
been  surprised  at  the  accuracy  with 
which  he  could  give  the  outlines  of  a 
sermon  many  days,  and  even  weeks, 
after  he  had  heard  it.  Under  faithful 
and  pungent  exhibitions  of  the  truth, 
he  was  often  very  deeply  affected. 
After  hearing  a  very  lucid  and  impres- 
sive sermon  on  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  we  found  him,  when  the  service 
had  ended,  in  the  rear  of  the  church. 


70  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

leaning  against  the  side  of  the  house, 
bathed  in  tears.  On  asking  him  why 
he  wept,  he  replied,  "  I  am  afraid,  sir, 
that  after  all,  I  shall  never  realize  what 
that  young  preacher  talked  about  to- 
day. The  glories  of  the  resurrection 
unto  life  are  too  high  for  me."  He  was 
reminded  of  what  the  preacher  had  said 
about  the  changes  which  annually  occur 
in  nature,  as  to  some  extent  illustrative 
of  the  resurrection.  He  was  told  to 
recollect  the  astonishing  difference  in 
the  appearance  of  the  trees  in  winter 
and  spring;  and  was  then  asked,  if  the 
God  who  caused  this  difference,  who, 
in  the  spring  thus  adorned  the  forest, 
could  not,  with  perfect  ease,  beautify 
and  adorn  his  body  in  an  infinitely 
higher  degree.  To  this  he  said,  "  I  do 
not  doubt  the  power  or  the  love  of  God ; 
but  that  which  troubles  me  is  this.  If 
the  tree  has  not  a  good  root,  God  will 
never  make  it  bloom.    And. so  it  is  with 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  71 

me.  If  I  have  not  the  root  of  the  matter 
in  me,  I  shall  never  know  any  thing  of 
the  resurrection  unto  life." 

On  another  occasion,  we  found  him 
in  no  little  distress  of  mind;  and  on 
askmg  the  cause,  were  answered  sub- 
stantially as  follows:  "About  a  week 
ago,  I  heard  a  sermon  on  the  text, 
*  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  for  why  will  ye  die 
The  preacher,  who  came  from  the 
school  up  here  in  Prince  Edward, 
took  more  pains  than  common  to  tell 
us  what  was  meant  by  turning.  He 
made  the  gate  appear  so  strait,  and 
the  way  so  narrow^,  that  he  soon  made 
me  fear  I  had  never  tm^ned  at  all.  He 
certainly  convinced  me  that  I  had  still 
a  great  deal  of  turning  to  do,  and  that 
this  turning  must  be  the  great  business 
of  the  Christian's  whole  life."  This  was 
a  very  favourite  thought  with  him.  In 
strict  conformity  with  his  views  on  this 


72  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

subject,  he  preferred  the  term  converting 
to  converted. 

In  the  course  of  a  sermon  on  regene- 
ration,  he  once  introduced  the  following 
illustration  to  enforce  the  duty  of  grow- 
ing in  grace :  "  If  a  farmer/'  said  he, 

in  clearing  and  preparing  a  piece  of 
ground  for  cultivation,  should  do  no 
more  than  to  cut  down  the  trees,  and 
remove  the  bodies  and  branches  of 
those  trees,  whilst  all  the  stumps  were 
left  undistui'bed,  he  would  very  soon 
find  that  around  every  one  of  those 
stumps  a  considerable  number  of  sprouts, 
of  the  very  nature  of  the  old  tree,  had 
put  up^  and  he  would  have  even  more 
clearing  to  do  than  he  had  at  first. 
Now,  to  get  his  land  in  a  proper  condi- 
tion, he  must  not  only  cut  down  the 
trees,  but  he  must  grub  up  the  stumps. 
Yes,  he  must  continue  to  grub  as  long 
as  any  part  of  the  root  is  left.    Just  so 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  73 

with  sin  in  a  man's  heart  and  life.  He 
must  not  only  forsake  open  sin,  he  must 
look  to  the  heart,  where  the  roots  of  this 
open  sin  are,  and  these  roots  must  be 
grubbed  up.  And  this  grubbing  he  must 
keep  at,  as  long  as  life  lasts,  or  he  will 
never  bring  forth  the  peaceable  fruits  of 
righteousness  to  the  praise  of  God's  free 
grace." 

Our  good  preacher  was  much  oppos- 
ed to  the  hasty  admission  of  members 
into  the  Church.  He  was  accustomed 
to  say,  "  It  is  much  easier  and  safer,  to 
keep  unworthy  persons  out  of  the 
Church,  than  to  get  them  outj  after  they 
have  been  once  received."  And  again 
he  would  say,  "  The  Church  will  not 
suffer  half  as  much,  by  keeping  a  dozen 
worthy  members  out,  a  little  too  long, 
as  she  will  by  admitting  one  individual 
too  soon.  If  you  adopt  this  method  of 
admitting  members,  you  must  see  to  it, 
that  your  hack  door  is  as  zvide  as  the 
7 


74  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER, 

front.  You  must  prepare  for  dropping 
them^  as  readily  as  you  took  them  upT 

It  should  be  remembered,  that  these 
views  were  entertained  and  expressed, 
by  a  native  of  Africa,  at  different  pe- 
riods, between  the  years  1828  and  1836, 
Every  one,  at  all  acquainted  with  the 
history  of  the  Presbyterian  Church 
during  those  eight  years,  will  be  struck 
with  the  difference  between  the  senti- 
ments of  this  sable  son  of  a  Pagan  cou'- 
tinent,  and  some  who  stood  high,  as 
learned  doctors  of  divinity,  and  even 
professors  in  Theological  Seminaries,  in 
these  enlightened  ends  of  the  earth.  And 
we  presume  there  are  few  or  none  now 
in  our  communion,  who  would  hesitate 
to  say^  that  the  Church  would  have 
fared  much  better,  had  she  asked  coun- 
sel of  the  African  Preacher,  instead  of 
following  the  advice  of  some  of  her 
^^most  enhghtened  and  pious  divines.'* 
Had  this  been  done,  our  motto  would 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER,  75 

have  been,  a  'pure  churchy  or  no  church. 
It  is  true,  the  course  recommended  by 
the  African,  would  not  have  embla- 
zoned our  church  registers  with  so  long 
and  imposing  an  array  of  names;  but 
the  purity,  and  by  consequence  the 
moral  power  of  the  Church,  would  have 
been  far  greater.  The  eflSciency  of  an 
army  depends  upon  the  patriotism,  the 
Qourage,  and  the  activity  of  each  soldier, 
more  than  it  does  upon  the  gorgeous 
uniform,  the  graceful  movements,  or 
even  the  imposing  numbers  of  those 
'who  fill  its  ranks.  So  every  one  desti- 
tute of  the  essential  qualities  of  "  the 
good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ,"  hinders 
the  progress,  and  detracts  from  the  effi- 
ciency of  ^^the  sacramental  host  of 
God's  elect."  Such  views  as  these  led 
the  good  African  Preacher  to  make  the 
Saviour's  rule  his,  and  they  should  lead 
us  to  make  it  ours.  It  is  the  only 
reliable  rule :  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall 


76  THE  AFRICAJ^  PREACHER. 

know  them."  The  application  of  this 
rule  in  any  given  case^  requires  more 
than  a  day^  a  week^  or  a  month. 

The  next  thing  deserving  of  conside- 
ration in  the  character  of  this  excellent 
old  man,  was  his  method  of  dealing  with 
persons  awakened  to  a  sense  of  their 
sinfulness  in  the  sight  of  God.  He  was 
very  often  consulted  by  persons  in  this 
state  of  mind,  of  every  grade  in  society; 
as  also  by  those  who,  having  hope  in 
Christ,  were  asking  what  step  they 
should  take  next,  to  honour  Christ  and 
do  good.  Here,  as  in  other  matters,  his 
course  was  characterized  by  good  sense 
and  discretion. 

On  one  occasion,  a  lady  of  great  re- 
spectability told  him  that  she  consi- 
dered herself  a  Christian,  but  at  the 
same  time  avowed  the  purpose  of  not 
making  a  profession  of  religion  by  con- 
necting herself  with  the  Church.  At 
this   he  expressed   great   surprise — 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  77 

reminded  her  of  what  our  Saviour  said 
of  those  who  "  confessed/'  and  of  those 
who  denied''  him,  and  then  added, 
^'  Mistress,  if  you  should  suddenly  come 
in  possession  of  a  large  sum  of  money, 
would  you  lock  it  up  in  your  house, 
and  try  to  keep  it  a  great  secret?  It 
would  neither  do  you  nor  any  body  else 
much  good,  to  take  that  course  with 
it.'^ 

At  another  time,  one  gave  him  a  long 
account  of  a  remarkable  dream  she  had 
had,  and  desired  his  opinion  on  the  sub- 
ject. To  this  he  replied,  "  The  Scrip- 
tures do  tell  us  something  about  dreams, 
but  no  where  that  I  remember,  of  any 
one  converted  by  a  dream  or  converted 
when  he  was  asleep.  I  can  under- 
stand people  a  great  deal  better  when 
they  tell  me  of  what  they  say  and 
do  when  they  are  awake,  and  when 
they  talk  about  a  work  of  grace  in  their 
hearts," 


78  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

There  lived  in  his  immediate  vici- 
nity, a  very  respectable  man  who  had 
become  interested  on  the  subject  of 
religion,  and  who,  with  some  earnest- 
ness, had  begun  to  search  the  Scrip- 
tures." He  had  been  thus  employed 
but  a  short  time  when  he  became 
greatly  perplexed  with  some  of  those 
passages  which  even  an  inspired  apos- 
tle has  said,  are  "hard  to  be  under- 
stood." In  this  state  of  mind  he 
repaired  to  our  preacher  for  instruc- 
tion, and  found  him  at  noon,  on  a  sul- 
try day  in  summer,  occupied  in  his 
field,  hoeing  corn.  As  the  man  ap- 
proached, the  preacher  saluted  him 
with  his  accustomed  politeness;  and 
then  with  patriarchal  simplicity,  leaning 
upon  the  handle  of  his  hoe,  listened 
to  his  story.  "Uncle  Jack,"  said  he, 
"  I  have  discovered  lately  that  I  am  a 
great  sinner,  and  I  have  commenced 
reading  the  Bible  that  I  may  learn 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  79 

what  I  must  do  to  be  saved.  But  I 
have  met  with  a  passage  here/'  holding 
up  his  Bible^  "which  I  cannot  under- 
stand^ and  which  greatly  perplexes  me. 
It  is  thisj  '  God  will  have  mercy  on 
whom  he  will  have  mercy,  and  whom 
he  will  he  hardeneth;'  what  does  this 
mean?'*  A  short  pause  intervened,  and 
the  old  African  answered  as  follows: 
"Master,  if  I  have  been  rightly  in- 
formed, it  has  only  been  a  short  time 
since  you  commenced  reading  the  Bible, 
and  I  think  the  passage  you  have  just 
read  is  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans. 
Long  before  you  get  to  that,  at  the  very 
beginning  of  the  gospel  it  is  said,  '  Re- 
pent, for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand.'  iVb^^,  have  you  done  with  that  ? 
The  truth  is,  you  read  entirely  too  fast. 
You  must  begin  again,  and  learn  the 
lesson  as  God  has  been  pleased  to  give 
it  to  you.  When  you  have  done  what 
you  are  told  to  do  in  Matthew,  come  to 


80  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

see  me,  and  we  will  talk  about  that  pas- 
sage in  Romans."  Having  thus  answer- 
ed, he  resumed  his  work,  and  left  the 
visitor  to  his  own  reflections. 

Who  does  not  admire  the  simplicity 
and  good  sense  displayed  in  thus  deal- 
ing with  a  person  of  this  description? 
Could  the  most  learned  polemic  more 
effectually  have  met  and  disposed  of 
such  a  difficulty?  The  gentleman  par- 
ticularly interested  in  this  incident 
gave  the  foregoing  account  of  it  to  the 
writer,  and,  if  he  still  lives,  will  joyfully 
say  now,  as  he  did  when  he  first  spoke 
of  it,  "  It  convinced  me  fully  of  the  mis- 
take into  which  I  had  fallen.  I  took 
the  old  man  s  advice,  soon  saw  its  pro- 
priety and  wisdom,  and  hope  to  bless 
God  for  ever  for  sending  me  to  him.'* 
The  consequence  was,  that  he  soon  be- 
came an  intelligent,  consistent  Chris- 
tian, connected  himself  with  the  Church, 
and  contributed  in  no  small  degree  to 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  81 

the  promotion  of  a  cause  he  had  once 
hated  and  opposed. 

Our  preacher  was  not  only  skilful  in 
imparting  instruction^  but  patient  and 
submissive  in  the  endurance  of  evil. 
We  have  already  seen  with  what  meek- 
ness he  bore  the  domestic  trials  which 
befell  him.  He  sometimes  suffered 
abroad  as  well  as  at  home.  But  his 
Christian  submission  was  every  where 
and  at  all  times  conspicuous.  When 
reviled^  he  reviled  not  again.  He  re- 
joiced in  being  counted  worthy  to  suffer 
shame  for  the  name  of  Christ.  We 
know  of  but  one  instance  in  which  he 
was  threatened  with  personal  violence. 
A  party  of  such  as  the  Apostle  Paul 
denominates  ^^lewd  fellows  of  the  baser 
sort/'  on  one  occasion  interrupted  him 
while  preachings  and  took  him  into  cus- 
tody. After  reviling  him  a  good  deal, 
they  avowed  the  horrid  purpose  of  pun- 
ishing him  with  stripes,  and  asked  him, 


82  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

tauntingly,  what  lie  had  to  say  in  his 
own  defence.  "  I  wish  to  know/'  said 
the  good  old  man,  "  why  you  intend  to 
punish  me.  K  it  is  for  preaching  the 
gospel,  I  have  not  a  word  to  say." 
^'  Why,"  asked  one  of  the  party,  you 
are  not  willing  to  be  whipped,  are  you?" 

Perfectly  willing,"  was  the  emphatic 
answer,  "perfectly  willing;  and  I  will 
tell  you  why  I  am.  I  can  read  the  Bible 
a  little;  and  in  reading  it,  hardly  any 
thing  surprises  and  grieves  me  more 
than  to  find  that  such  a  man  as  the 
Apostle  Paul,  '  five  times  received  forty 
stripes  save  one,'  for  preaching  this 
same  gospel.  Now,  when  I  remember 
this,  and  then  remember  that  an  old 
sinner,  such  as  I  am,  should  have  been 
preaching,  or  trying  to  preach  this  gos- 
pel for  more  than  forty  years,  and  never 
yet  had  one  lick  for  it,  I  am  perfectly 
willing  to  be  whipped." 

This  reply  wholly  disarmed  his  ad- 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  83 

versaries.  They  were  literally  silenced. 
With  a  moral  courage  which  was  fully 
equal  to  his  humility,  he  resolved  to  im- 
prove the  advantage  he  had  thus  gained* 
The  whole  of  his  audience,  frightened 
by  the  brutal  assault  of  these  wicked 
men,  "  forsook  him  and  fled."  He  stood 
alone,  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies,  with 
no  eye  to  pity,  and  no  hand  to  help. 
But  He  who  said,  "  I  will  never  leave 
thee  nor  forsake  thee,"  fulfilled  his  gra- 
cious promise.  Thus  sustained,  thus 
cheered,  he  addressed  his  persecutors 
in  language  so  pungent,  and  yet  so  ten- 
der, that  one  by  one,  they  walked  quietly 
away,  leaving  him  in  the  undisturbed 
possession  of  the  ground.  The  leader 
of  this  party,  who  gave  us  this  story, 
and  who  subsequently  became  a  pious 
man,  was  often  heard  to  say,  "  the  im- 
pression made  on  my  mind  and  heart  by 
that  incident,  was  never  effaced." 

Ejiowing  that  the  African  Preacher 


84  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

was  now  very  old,  and  evidently  near  the 
end  of  his  earthly  pilgrimage,  and  our 
personal  intercourse  with  him  having  for 
several  years  ceased,  we  addressed  a 
letter,  early  in  the  winter  of  1838,  to  our 
best  earthly  friend  and  his^  Dr.  James 
Jones,  asking  for  information  of  his  state, 
now  that  the  shadows  were  lengthening, 
and  his  end  supposed  to  be  near.  To 
this  letter,  the  good  Doctor  promptly 
Bent  us  the  following  reply : 

"  Mountain  Hall,  Nottoioay^  Dec,  31,  1838. 

My  Dear  Sir — There  are  very  few 
persons,  either  among  the  living  or  the 
dead,  with  whom  I  have  had  so  long 
personal  intercourse,  as  with  Uncle  Jack. 
I  found  him  among  my  nearest  neigh- 
bours, when  I  first  settled  at  my  present 
residence.  His  deportment,  under  all 
circumstances,  has  never  varied ;  always 
modest,  unassuming  and  humble.  His 
serene  and  placid  countenance  is  sel- 
dom without  a  smile,  if  engaged  in 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  85 

conversation,  or  great  gravity,  if  disen- 
gaged. Ever  prone  to  enter  into 
conversation,  where  he  thinks  it  not  dis- 
agi'eeable,  he  scarcely  ever  fails  to  make 
rehgion  the  topic  before  it  ends.  He 
visits  my  family  with  the  utmost  free- 
dom, on  all  sorts  of  business  and  occa- 
sions which  are  legitimate,  and  I  think  I 
cannot  be  mistaken  in  the  assertion  just 
made.  His  visits  are  now,  perhaps,  more 
frequent  than  ever;  and  seem  to  be  made 
almost  exclusively  for  the  purpose  of 
getting  information  on  some  text  or 
parable  or  naiTative  in  the  Bible.  When 
this  is  his  object,  he  announces  it  imme- 
diately on  his  arrival,  asks  to  have  it 
read  from  the  Bible,  and  frequently  in- 
quires what  our  commentators  say  on 
the  subject. 

"  It  is  proper  here  to  state,  that  while 
his  memory  is  greatly  impaired  on  all 
matters  of  secular  concern,  it  is  reten- 
tive and  ready  on  every  thing  relatiag 
8 


86  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

to  the  Scriptures,  in  connection  with  his 
own  experience  of  the  influence  of  divine 
truth.  On  propounding  his  questions 
for  information,  he  invariably  quotes, 
most  accurately,  the  chapter  and  verse; 
not  unfrequently,  the  words  themselves. 
Very  frequently  he  will  refer  to  the 
occasion  on  which  he  first  heard  it  read 
or  spoken  of;  perhaps  thirty  or  forty 
years  ago,  in  some  sermon  or  private 
conversation. 

^^Both  his  physical  and  mental 
powers  are  evidently  on  the  wane. 
He  exhibits  no  little  debility  by  his 
unsteady  gait,  his  head  inclining  for- 
wards, so  that  his  chin  almost  rests 
upon  his  breast;  and  he  complains 
much  of  rheumatism.  Still,  he  mani- 
fests great  reluctance  to  confinement, 
so  long  as  he  can  use  the  organs  of 
motion.  He  gives  his  personal  atten- 
tion to  every  branch  of  business  in  his 
little  establishment;  and  is,  at  this  time, 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  87 


in  a  most  comfortable  situation,  as  re- 
spects his  supplies  of  the  necessaries  of 
life.  I  perceive  no  alteration  at  aU  in 
the  temper  and  disposition  of  his  mind* 
The  same  equanimity  which  has  so  long 
distinguished  him,  still  prevails ;  and  so 
remarkable  has  his  character  been,  in 
this  respect,  that  I  have  never  yet  seen 
an  individual  who  has  known  him  to  be 
put  out  of  temper,  or  to  show  any  thing 
like  petulance,  or  irritation,  or  resent- 
ment, on  any  occasion  whatever,  through- 
out his  whole  hfe. 

"Weak  and  feeble  as  he  is  at  this 
time,  he  seems  to  have  been  most 
highly  excited,  both  in  mind  and  body, 
by  the  revival  of  religion  which  has 
been  for  some  time  past  in  progress  in 
the  churches  around  him.  He  is  un- 
able to  attend  distant  meetings,  but 
frequently  walks  to  those  near  at  hand. 
He  takes  special  care,  however,  to  get 
to  very  many  of  the  families  ia  which 


8S  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

conversions  have  been  reported,  let  them 
be  far  or  near.  I  am  often  surprised  to 
hear  from  him  an  account  of  what  passed 
between  him  and  certain  families,  in  re- 
cent conversations.  Upon  inquiry,  I  find 
he  has  walked  aU  the  way  expressly  to 
see  them.  He  would  say,  '  I  could  not 
resist.  I  was  obliged  to  try  and  get  to 
them,  that  I  might  tell  them  all  I  knew, 
to  help  them  on  their  way.' 

"  I  can  only  add  the  assurance  of  the 
undiminished  esteem  and  affection  of 
Yours  truly, 

James  Jones." 

It  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  the  sub- 
ject of  this  narrative  was  supposed  to 
be  nearly  eighty  years  of  age  when  the 
writer  first  made  his  acquaintance. 
Both  in  mind  and  body  he  was  already 
on  the  wane.  Little  or  nothing  is  re- 
membered of  what  he  was  in  the  vigour 
of  mature  age.    There  were  none  at 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  89 

that  period^  whose  feelings  and  habits 
prompted  them  to  preserve  for  future 
use  the  incidents  of  a  life  so  unpre- 
tending and  so  humble.  They  who 
have  rendered  us  so  much  assistance, 
were  not  then  professors  of  religion; 
and  few,  if  any,  of  those  who  were  could 
be  considered  capable  of  appreciating 
the  old  man's  real  worth.  We  have 
therefore  only  called  the  attention  of  the 
reader  to  the  rays  of  a  luminary  near 
the  horizon.  For  any  adequate  concep- 
tions of  his  noon-day  brilhancy,  we  are 
left  wholly  to  conjecture.  We  have, 
moreover,  sketched  the  lineaments  of  a 
mind  almost  entirely  destitute  of  culti- 
vation. With  thorough  training,  may 
we  not  reasonably  suppose  that  our 
African  Preacher  would  have  attained  to 
the  intellectual  stature  of  an  Augustine 
or  a  Cyprian — those  distinguished  sons 
of  his  father-land  ? 

.  But  we  must  resume  our  narrative. 

8* 


99  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

Shortly  after  the  foregoing  letter  was 
written^  he  became  extremely  ill.  He 
thought  the  time  of  his  departure  had 
arrived;,  and  so  thought  all  his  friends. 
Dr.  Jones,  who  attended  him  as  his 
physician,  during  this  illness,  has  kindly 
furnished  us  with  the  following  account 
of  the  old  man's  views  and  feelings  at 
this  trying  time. 

"  During  his  illness,  I  often  listened 
with  intense  interest  to  the  views  and 
feehngs  he  expressed,  as  he  lay  upon 
what  he  supposed  to  be  his  death-bed. 
And  views  more  rational  and  scriptural 
I  never  heard  from  any  one.  The  most 
perfect  calmness,  as  to  his  future  des- 
tiny, pervaded  his  bosom.  Gratitude 
to  God  for  all  his  merciful  dealings 
towards  him,  was  the  prominent  exer- 
cise of  his  mind.  The  neighbours  vied 
with  each  other  in  acts  of  kindness  in 
that  crisis.  In  view  of  this,  he  said  to 
me,  ^What  have  I  done  to  deserve  all 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  91 

this?  I  came,  a  stranger  to  all,  thou- 
sands of  miles  across  the  great  water, 
and  as  long  as  I  have  lived,  I  have  never 
wanted  a  friend.  And  now,  when  I  am 
about  to  die,  I  am  loaded  with  kindness 
far  beyond  any  thing  that  I  deserve.'" 
The  Doctor  closes  his  statement  thus : 
Whenever  this  venerable  African  de- 
parts hence,  it  may  be  truly  said,  that 
a  purer  spirit  than  his  never  escaped 
its  clay  tenement  on  earth,  to  its  house 
not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the 
heavens." 

From  this  attack,  however,  he  reco- 
vered, and  Uved  about  four  years  longer. 
During  this  period,  his  hearing,  sight, 
and  speech  were  all  impaired.  Still  he 
enjoyed  surprising  health  for  one  of  his 
advanced  age.  Nor  did  his  interest  in 
the  cause  of  Christ  suffer  the  least  abate- 
ment. His  path  was  emphatically  that 
of  the  just,  "which  shineth  more  and 
more  to  the  perfect  day."    The  truth 


9^  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

is,  when  every  thing  else  failed  to  arrest 
his  attention  and  excite  his  feelings,  the 
bare  mention  of  that  name  which  "is 
above  every  name/'  imparted,  in  no 
small  degree,  the  lustre  of  youth  to  his 
almost  sightless  eyes,  and  the  animation 
and  vigour  of  mature  age  to  his  emaciat- 
ed frame. 

In  July,  1842,  we  saw  him  for  the 
last  time.  On  reaching  Mountain  Hall, 
we  soon  learned  from  the  famUy  that 
Uncle  Jack  was  then  with  them.  He 
had  recently  come  on  one  of  his  accus- 
tomed visits,  and  was  taken  suddenly  so 
ill  that  he  could  not  return  to  his  own 
cottage.  This  was  very  favourable  to  his 
comfort.  For  here  he  was  supphed  with 
every  thing  necessary  to  check  his  dis- 
ease or  to  cheer  his  spirit.  On  propos- 
ing to  go  to  his  room,  we  were  told  that 
he  had  been  for  some  days  in  a  stupor; 
that  he  could  scarcely  be  induced  to  say 
any  thing,  or  to  notice  any  body  j  and 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  93 

that  it  would  be  painful  to  see  him.  But 
we  determined  to  go,  not  doubting  that 
he  could  be  roused.  He  had  no  fever,  and 
Buffered  no  pain.  The  candle  had  sunk 
in  the  socket,  and  only  needed  raising^ 
to  make  it  shine  as  brilliantly  as  eyer. 
And  there  was  a  way  by  which  this 
might  be  done.  Accordingly,  we  went 
to  his  room,  accompanied  by  the  good 
friend,  whose  guests  both  Uncle  Jack 
and  we  were,  as  we  had  often  been 
before.  We  found  him,  on  entering  his 
apartment,  surrounded  with  as  many 
conveniences  and  comforts  as  any  one 
could  reasonably  have  desired.  He  lay, 
calm  and  tranquil,  with  his  eyes  fixed 
on  the  ceiling.  Approaching  his  bed- 
side, we  took  his  black  and  bony  hand 
in  ours,  but  he  spoke  not,  nor  moved 
his  eyes.  We  then  saluted  him  in  the 
usual  style  of  ordinary  civihty,  inquir- 
ing, in  a  very  distinct  voice,  after  his 
health.     Perceiving  that  he  scarcely 


94  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

noticed  what  we  said  to  him,  Dr.  Jones 
advanced  and  said,  "  Old  man,  don't  you 
know  who  this  is  ?"  He  replied,  "  My 
hearing  is  better  than  my  eye-sight.  I 
don't  know  the  face,  but  I  am  sure  I 
have  heard  the  voice  before.  I  think  I 
have  heard  that  voice  in  the  pulpit." 
We  then  determined  to  try  the  experi- 
ment of  rousing  him,  by  merely  quoting 
passage  after  passage  of  Scripture  in  his 
hearing;  and  soon  succeeded,  far  beyond 
our  most  sanguine  expectations.  When 
the  passage,  commencing,  "For  God 
so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only 
begotten  Son,"  was  mentioned,  he  re- 
sponded with  great  animation,  "  That  he 
did — that  he  did;  and  there  rests  all  my 
hope." 

He  now  expressed  great  pleasure  in 
recognizing  an  old  acquaintance,  and 
said,  "  Sometimes  I  hear  of  you  in  one 
place,  and  sometimes  in  another;  but 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  95 

go  where  you  may,  the  Lord  takes  care 
of  you." 

On  being  asked  how  he  felt  in  pros- 
pect of  death,  he  replied:  "Every 
thing  I  call  my  own  will  soon  be  dis- 
solved and  pass  away.  Without  Christ, 
I  am  but  as  sounding  brass  and  a  tink- 
ling cymbal."  After  a  short  pause,  he 
proceeded  to  speak,  substantially  as 
follows :  "  Some  years  ago  I  heard  you 
preach  a  sermon  on  the  text,  ^Behold,  I 
stand  at  the  door  and  knock!'  That 
text,  I  think,  is  in  Revelations.  I  have 
thought  of  that  day  and  that  sermon  a 
great  many  times  since.  You  seemed 
to  be  much  in  earnest,  but  I  was  S9rry 
to  see  how  little  interest  the  people  took 
in  it.  They  seemed  to  go  away  uncon- 
cerned. Then  I  thought,  what  will  all 
our  knocking  come  to,  unless  the  Lord 
adds  his  blessing?"  After  another  pause, 
during  which  he  seemed  to  be  asleep, 
he  opened  his  eyes  and  said,  "  We  have 


96  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER* 

had  a  revival  here  lately.  Some  call  it 
a  revival,  and  some  say  it  is  all  trash. 
Any  how,  the  Lord  can  take  even  trashy 
and  make  a  real  fire^  if  he  chooses." 

Having  joined  with  him  in  prayer  and 
praise,  we  left  him  for  the  night,  greatly 
revived  both  in  body  and  spirit.  We 
bad  seen  and  heard  that  over  which  the 
goul  of  man  might  well  rejoice,  and  we 
could  but  utter,  in  silent  ejaculation, 
thanksgiving  to  Him  who  not  only  came 
into  our  world  "  to  seek  and  to  save" 
the  rich  publican,  Zaccheus,  but  also  to 
provide  that  the  poor  should  have  the 
gospel  preached  to  them. 

On  the  ensuing  morning  we  found 
him  improved  in  health,  but  depressed 
in  spirit.  "  I  have  lived  a  long  time," 
he  said,  "  but  all  to  no  purpose.  I  do 
not  see  the  least  fruit  of  any  thing  I 
ever  did;  and  I  suppose  it  would  be  no 
better  if  I  should  hve  as  long  again. 
For  a  long  time  I  have  tried  to  get  a 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  97 

new  heart  and  a  right  spirit,  but  fear  I 
never  succeeded.  Such  thoughts  and 
feelings  as  trouble  me,  would  never  dis- 
turb a  real  Christian."  Here  he  was 
reminded  of  the  Christian  warfare,  and 
particularly  of  what  the  Apostle  says 
about  "  wrestling."  He  repKed,  "  That 
is  all  true.  I  have  many  a  time  gone 
into  the  woods  and  wrestled  in  prayer, 
untU  my  enemies  would  all  flee,  and  I 
would  think  they  were  gone  for  ever; 
but  they  soon  came  back  and  worried 
me  worse  than  ever." 

His  attention  was  next  called  to  our 
Saviour's  interview  with  the  woman  of 
Samaria;  and  particularly  to  this  ex- 
pression :  "  K  thou  knewest  the  gift  of 
God,  and  who  it  is  that  saith  to  thee, 
Give  me  to  drink,  thou  wouldest  have 
asked  of  him,  and  he  would  have  given 
thee  living  water."  In  this  he  was 
deeply  interested,  and  made  many 
pertinent  remarks  about  the  water  of 
9 


98  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

life,  and  concluded  as  follows :  "  This 
water  springeth  up:  it  don't  run  down 
like  common  water.  It  is  very  pleasant 
and  refreshing  water.  Sometimes  we 
suffer  the  trash  of  this  world  to  get  into 
it,  and  then  it  is  not  so  good.  But  it  is 
our  own  fault.  The  fountain  is  in 
heaven,  but  there  are  streams  of  this 
water  now  running  about  almost  every- 
where.  I  am  nearly  done  with  the 
stream,  and  hope  soon  to  be  at  the  foun- 
tain." 

Speaking  of  prayer,  he  said,  "Where- 
ever  there  is  a  praying  heart,  there  is  the 
throne  of  grace." 

He  was  next  told  that  a  missionary 
had  recently  returned  from  Africa,  his 
native  land,  and  brought  the  pleasing 
intelligence  that  many  of  his  country- 
men had  received  the  gospel.  At  this 
announcement  he  clasped  his  withered 
hands,  and,  with  much  emotion,  said, 
"  Every  word  that  cometh  out  of  the 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  99 

mouth  of  the  Lord  is  true.  He  said  that 
his  word  should  be  a  witness  among  all 
nations — ^that  it  should  have  free  course, 
run,  and  be  glorified — ^and  so  the  gospel 
has  gone  across  the  great  sea,  all  the  way 
to  Africa.  When  the  Lord  works,  none 
can  hinder.  Then,  I  suppose,  I  shall 
meet  some  of  my  countrymen  in  heaven. 
Bless  the  Lord !  As  we  shall  all  sing 
one  song,  I  suppose  we  shall  all  speak 
one  language." 

When  we  rose  to  leave  him,  he  said, 
smiling,  "  You  have  given  me  a  snack 
upon  which  I  can  feed  for  some  time; 
such  talk  is  meat  and  drink  to  me. 
You  must  not  go  away  to-day.  I  wish 
you  to  say  and  do  all  you  can  before 
you  leave,  to  keep  me  from  wandering 
away  any  more.  It  is  no  wonder  that 
God's  child,  when  he  leaves  his  father  s 
side,  should  get  crippled ;  and  when  he 
does,  he  has  nobody  to  blame  but  him- 
self."   Shortly  after  we  had  left  his 


100  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

apartment,  one  of  his  attendants  came 
to  me,  saying, "  Uncle  Jack  has  sent  me 
to  tell  you  that  his  doubts  and  fears 
and  difficulties  are  all  gone ;  that  he  is 
now  very  peaceful  and  happy,  and  has 
nothing  more  to  do  but  to  die  and  be  at 
rest/' 

To  the  surprise  of  every  one,  he 
lingered  for  several  months,  but  never 
fully  regained  his  health.  We  left  him, 
never  expecting  to  see  his  face  in  the 
flesh  again.  Nor  did  we.  All  that  we 
subsequently  learned  of  his  state  was, 
that  he  so  far  recovered  as  to  be  carried 
to  his  own  humble  home,  where  he  lin- 
gered a  little  longer,  and  then  rested 
from  his  labours,  and  now  his  works 
follow  him. 

In  the  Watchman  of  the  South,  of  May 
4th,  1843,  the  following  announcement 
occurs : 

THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER— He  is  Gone. 

The  following   obituary,  written  by 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  101 


one  who  had  some  knowledge  of  the  de- 
ceased through  the  last  fifty  years  of  his 
life,  will  be  read  with  lively  interest  by 
many  of  God's  people. 

"  The  African  Preacher,  ahas  Uncle 
Jack,  departed  to  his  rest  on  the  6th 
of  April,  full  of  years,  and  full  of  the 
hopes  of  the  gospel.  A  perfect  calm 
marked  his  last  moments.  am  ready 
and  waiting  to  go,'  were  his  last 
words. 

"  Since  the  publication  of  a  series  of 
biographical  sketches  of  this  extraor- 
dinary man,  in  the  cpjumns  of  the 
Watchman  of  the  South,  between  four 
and  five  years  ago,  there  has  occurred 
nothing  in  his  subsequent  life,  different 
from  the  uniform  tenor  of  it,  as  de- 
picted in  those  sketches.  Both  body 
and  mind  gradually  sunk,  and  gave 
way  to  the  pressure  of  nearly  one  hun- 
dred years,  which  he  had  numbered  on 
earth,  J.  J.'* 

9* 


102  THE  AFKICAN  PREACHER. 

About  the  time  the  foregoing  obituary 
appeared,  we  received  the  following 
communication  from  another,  but  a  kin- 
dred pen. 

"  Nottoway,  April  12,  1843. 

"Uncle  Jack  is  no  more.  He  sunk 
gently  down  to  the  grave  on  the  6th  in- 
stant, under  the  pressure  of  nearly  one 
hundred  years.  His  last  days,  like  his 
whole  life,  were  calm  and  peaceful.  But 
little  could  be  gathered  of  the  exercises 
of  his  mind,  except  from  the  attitude  of 
prayer,  which  was  indicated  by  the  fre- 
quent raising  of  his  hands  and  eyes  up- 
wards. A  few  hours  before  he  died,  he 
revived  a  little,  and  said,  '  I  am  ready 
and  waiting  for  the  Saviour;'  then  gently 
breathed  his  last. 

C.  J." 

It  is  pleasing  to  review  such  a  life, 
terminating  in  such  a  death.  It  might 
be  profitable  to  detain  the  reader  with 


THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER.  103 

the  reflections  which  very  obviously 
arise  from  this  unpretending  narrative 
of  so  humble  and  obscure  a  man.  But 
the  writer  is  conscious  that  the  moral 
of  these  simple  annals^  will  at  once 
occur  to  every  serious  reader.  Let  him 
only  remember,  that  this  old  man's  pil^- 
grimage  commenced  on  the  dark  shores 
of  Africa:  that  when  a  heathen  boy, 
he  was  captured  and  brought  to  this 
land;  for  a  time  enslaved,  but  soon 
emancipated:  that  he  was  indebted 
for  his  freedom,  imder  God,  to  the  libe- 
rality of  benevolent  and  Christian  mas- 
ters, whose  sole  object  was  to  confer  oH 
him  the  merited  reward  of  an  upright 
life,  and  to  enlarge  his  sphere  of  use- 
fulness to  others.  Visited  by  "the  day- 
star  from  on  high,"  he  was  numbered 
among  those  whom  the  Son  makes  free. 
And  having  led  a  very  long  life  of 
humble,  consistent,  and  devoted  piety; 
a  life  which  won  for  him  the  kind 


104  THE  AFRICAN  PREACHER. 

attentions  and  afFectionate  confidence 
of  the  best  people  of  the  country  in 
which  Providence  had  placed  him,  he 
died,  cheered  by  the  bright  prospect  of 
a  blessed  immortality.  And  through 
all  that  country,  his  memory  is  cherish- 
ed, and  his  influence  felt  to  this  day. 
True,  to  use  his  own  striking  language, 
having  done  with  the  stream,  he  is 
now  beside  the  fountain,"  but  still  he 
lives,  and  will  live,  as  the  wise,  the 
good,  the  useful  always  do,  to  the  end 
of  time. 

We  conclude  with  the  prayer,  that 
he  who  writes,  and  they  who  read,  may 
only  live  the  life,  and  share  at  last,  the 
heavenly  inheritance  of  the  African 
Preacher. 


/ 


APPENDIX  I. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF  DR.  JAMES  JONES. 

There  occurs,  very  frequently,  in  the 
foregoing  narrative,  the  name  of  one  with 
whom  the  reader  may  wish  to  become  better 
acquainted.  Such  a  wish  is  reasonable,  and 
should  be  gratified.  But  a  higher  purpose 
may  be  answered  by  the  brief  sketch  we  now 
propose  to  give.  In  thus  associating  two 
individuals,  in  many  respects  so  different,  it 
must  be  gratifying  to  the  pious,  and  may  be 
useful  to  aU,  to  see  how  the  religion  of  the 
Bible  reaches  up  to  the  highest,  then  down 
10  the  lowest;  and  disdaining  the  distinc- 
tions which  birth,  education,  rank  and  for- 

105 


106         BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

tune  create,  can  make  companions  and 
friends  of  both.  Thus  it  was  with  the  Afri- 
can Preacher  and  the  late  Dr.  James  Jones, 
of  Mountain  Hall.  During  the  last  twenty 
years  of  their  lives,  it  was  difficult  to  know 
one,  without  knowing  the  other.  They  re- 
sided for  almost  fifty  years  within  one  mile 
of  each  other.  The  former  was  poor,  the 
latter  rich;  the  former  almost  wholly  des- 
titute of  the  knowledge  of  letters,  the 
latter  educated  in  the  best  schools  on 
two  continents.  The  one  humble  in  his 
circumstances,  unpretending,  and  unknown; 
the  other  occupying  several  of  the  highest 
civil  stations  ever  held  in  this  country,  be- 
sides shining  as  one  of  the  brightest  orna- 
ments of  the  medical  profession.  What  but 
the  gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  could  have 
brought  together  two  individuals,  so  diverse 
from  each  other,  and  called  forth  so  much 
condescending  kindness  in  the  one,  so  much 


DR.  JAIVDES  JONES.  107 

reverential  regard  in  the  other,  and  so  much 
fraternal  sympathy  in  both  ? 

Dr.  James  Jones,  was  born  in  the  county 
of  Nottoway,  Virginia,  December  11th,  1772. 
His  parents  were  among  the  most  reputable 
and  wealthy  citizens  of  the  county  in  which 
they  lived.  They  wisely  determined  to  spare 
neither  care  nor  money  in  the  education  of 
their  son.  He  was  accordingly  sent  to  the 
best  schools,  and  as  early  as  1788,  he  matri- 
culated at  Hampden  Sidney  College,  during 
the  presidency  of  the  celebrated  Dr.  John 
Blair  Smith.  Here  his  mind  became  deeply 
imbued  with  rehgious  principles,*  during  one 
of  the  most  remarkable  revivals  of  religion 
ever  known  in  this,  or  any  other  country, 
since  the  great  revival  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost, recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
He  left  College,  however,  without  making  a 
profession  of  religion,  and  mainly  to  gratify 
his  desire  for  religious  knowledge,  he  became 


108         BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

a  temporary  resident  in  the  family  of  the 
celebrated  Devereux  Jarret,  an  Episcopal 
clergyman  of  Dinwiddle.  Here  his  religious 
impressions  were  fostered;  and  although  he 
sometimes  thought  of  the  gospel  ministry  as 
his  profession,  he  seems  not  to  have  been 
really  converted.  He  remained  but  a  short 
time  in  the  family  of  his  friend  Mr.  Jarret, 
and  at  the  earnest  solicitation  of  his  father, 
repaired  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  prose- 
cuted the  study  of  medicine  with  great  suc- 
cess, under  the  celebrated  Dr.  Benjamm 
Rush.  Thence  he  was  transferred  to  the 
University^f  Edinburgh,  where  he  gradua- 
ted with  signal  honour,  and  returned  to  his 
native  State,  and  native  county,  a  physician, 
whose  talents  and  education  soon  placed  him 
at  the  head  of  his  profession. 

Shortly  after  his  return  from  Europe,  he 
married  Miss  Catherine  Harris,  of  Surrey ;  a 
lady,  whose  mind,  manners  and  education 


DR.  JAMES  JONES.  109 

were  such  as  to  enable  her,  in  a  very  high 
degree,  to  promote  his  happiness  and  con- 
tribute to  his  success.  Her  dignified  and 
gentle  manners,  her  polished  mind,  her 
amiable  disposition,  her  warm-hearted  hos- 
pitality, are  extensively  known  and  highly 
appreciated  through  Virginia  and  else- 
where, especially  by  travelling  ministers  of 
the  gospel,  who  so  often  found  in  her  a  sister, 
and  in  her  house  a  home.  She  survives  her 
husband  5  and  now,  at  an  advanced  age,  in 
all  the  loneliness  of  a  childless  widowhood, 
she  awaits,  with  Christian  meekness,  the 
summons,  which  must  ere  long  call  her  to 
that  land,  where 

"  Everlasting  spring  abides, 
And  never  withering  flowers." 

Dr.  Jones  was  not  permitted  to  continue 

long  in  private  life.    He  was  frequently 

called  to  represent  his  county  in  the  State 
10 


110         BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

Legislature.  He  served  as  Privy  Counsellor 
under  the  elder  John  Tyler;  represented  his 
district  in  Congress  during  the  administra- 
tion of  Mr.  Madison,  and  was  chosen  to  act 
as  a  member  of  the  Electoral  College  in  the 
election  of  four  successive  Presidents.  In  all 
these  important  stations,  he  discharged  his 
duty  with  signal  faithfulness  and  ability. 

His  extreme  modesty,  and  nothing  but 
this,  prevented  his  becoming  distinguished  as 
a  debater  in  our  national  councils.  But  he 
was  a  politician  whose  prudence,  whose  accu- 
rate and  varied  knowledge,  sound  judgment, 
purity  of  purpose,  and  practical  wisdom,  ren- 
dered him  eminently  useful. 

His  residence,  as  a  student  of  medicine,  in 
Philadelphia,  and  still  more,  his  subsequent 
residence  in  Europe,  was  by  no  means  fa- 
vourable to  the  development  of  the  religious 
feelings  and  principles  which  had  been 
awakened  at  Hampden  Sidney.    Indeed,  an 


DR.  JA]MES  JONES.  Ill 

opposite  and  a  disastrous  influence  was  ex- 
erted. He  returned  to  his  native  land  very 
decidedly  skeptical  in  his  views.  Unfortu- 
nately, such  views  had,  at  this  time,  become 
very  popular  in  Virgmia,  and  particularly  so 
m  the  region  of  country  in  which  our  friend 
commenced  the  practice  of  medicine.  Here 
a  number  of  the  wealthiest  and  most  intelli- 
gent gentlemen,  had  united  in  the  formation 
of  an  "  infidel  club,''  the  place  of  whose 
meetings  is  known  to  this  day  as  Paine^ 
viUe^^ — thus  named  in  honour  of  Tom  Paine. 
The  high  intellectual  character  of  these  gen- 
tlemen was  such,  as  to  give  them  great  influ- 
ence over  our  young  physician;  and  he  was 
accordingly  led  to  think,  and  feel,  and  act  as 
they  did.  Thus  he  lived  for  many  years, 
and  thus,  to  use  his  own  language,  he  "  did 
much  to  embitter  the  latter  portion  of  his  life 
with  wormwood  and  gall.'' 

His  domestic  relations  were  eminently 


I 


112         BIOaRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OP 

happy,  and  perhaps  no  man  was  ever  better 
fitted,  by  high  social  qualities,  to  impart  and 
to  enjoy  happiness  as  a  husband  and  father. 
In  the  wise  but  inscrutable  providence  of 
God,  the  sources  of  our  purest  and  most 
elevated  enjoyments  often  become  the  occa- 
sions of  our  deepest  grief.  It  was  thus  with 
these  fond  parents.  God  had  given  them 
two  lovely  daughters,  the  only  children  He 
ever  gave  them.  One  of  these  died  in  in- 
fancy. The  other  had  nearly  attained  matu- 
rity, and  gave  abundant  promise  of  the  rarest 
excellences.  A  lovely  person,  a  sprightly 
and  well-cultivated  mind,  a  tender  and  amia- 
ble heart,  made  her  almost  the  idol  of  her 
doting  parents.  She  seemed  to  them  as  a 
source  of  light  and  comfort,  by  which  their 
footsteps  were  to  be  directed,  and  their 
hearts  cheered,  amidst  the  darkness  of  old 
age.  But,  in  all  this,  they  were  sadly  disap- 
pointed.   Death  came  again,  and  laid  this 


DR,  JAMES  113 

lovely  form  by  the  side  of  her  who  had  been 
buried  in  infancy,  and  bore  her  spirit  to  Him 
who  is  the  resurrection  and  the  Ufe. 

The  death  of  two  such  children,  with  none 
to  supply  their  place,  was  an  affliction  almost 
too  heavy  to  be  borne,  and  threatened  to 
crush  those  upon  whom  it  fell. 

The  following  extract  is  taken  from  a 
paper  found  in  his  desk  after  his  death,  and 
written  at  the  time  of  his  sad  loss.  It  is 
here  presented,  as  furnishing  proof  of  the 
strength  of  his  parental  feelings,  an  illustra- 
tion of  the  greatness  of  his  grief,  and  as  a 
specimen  of  the  efforts  made  by  a  vigorous 
mind  and  tender  heart — as  yet,  unenlight- 
ened and  unrenewed  by  divine  grace — to 
find  consolation  in  sorrow.  The  extract  is 
as  follows  : 

"  She  was  her  parents'  sole  delight ; 
They  had  but  one — one  only  child." 

"  The  loss  of  this  fair  bud  of  bemg,  just 
10* 


114         BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OP 

beginning  to  bloom  and  spread  all  its  sweets 
abroad  to  our  enraptured  senses,  nipped  by  an 
untimely  frost,  has  left  me  to  wail  in  gloomy 
silence.  Ever  dear,  ever  sacred  shall  be  the 
recollection  of  her !  Yes,  an  all-wise  Provi- 
dence permitted  her  to  shed  on  this  benighted 
world,  the  eflfulgent  beams  of  her  brilliant 
soul,  for  a  short  time  only,  and  then  took  her 
back  to  himself,  in  order  to  attract  more 
forcibly  the  earnest  longings,  the  ardent 
aspirations  of  her  afflicted  parents  towards 
himself.  Never  can  I  again  plunge  into  the 
gay  scenes,  the  flattering,  beguiling  plea- 
sures of  this  troubled  ocean  of  time.  Whilst 
I  possessed  such  a  treasure  as  she  was,  far 
short  of  its  intrinsic  value  was  my  estimate 
of  it.  Now  that  I  am  bereft  of  it,  my  fond, 
my  mortified  recollection  goes  back  to  scenes, 
which,  could  I  return  to  them  again,  would 
aS*ord  me  the  most  exquisite  delight — the 
dntepast  of  heaven.     To  cultivate  such  a 


DR.  JAMES  JONES.  115 

mind;  to  cherish  all  its  virtuous  emotions; 
to  guard  it  against  the  attacks  of  vice;  to 
direct  its  expansive  operations  in  the  fields 
of  fancy  and  of  science !  0  God !  what  ex- 
quisite enjoyments  didst  thou  put  within  my 
reach,  and  what  shameful  indifference  did  I 
betray!  Pardon,  0  pardon,  my  gross  in- 
gratitude !  Give  me  resignation  to  thy  hea- 
venly will,  believing  that  all  things  shall 
work  together  for  good  to  those  who,  through 
faith  and  patience  in  well-doing,  seek  for 
immortality  of  bliss  in  thy  favour  only/' 

Here  the  manuscript  ends  abruptly.  About 
this  time,  whether  before  or  after  writing  the 
above  we  are  not  informed,  the  deeply-dis- 
tressed father  addressed  a  letter  to  a  distin- 
guished gentleman,  whose  acquaintance  he 
had  made  in  Congress,  asking  for  consola- 
tion. His  friend,  who  was  an  utter  stranger 
to  the  Bible,  if  not  an  avowed  unbeliever, 
replied  with  promptitude  and  kindness,  say- 


11$         BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

ing  all  that  the  light  of  nature,  and  all  that 
reason,  unassisted  by  revelation,  could  say,  to 
cheer  the  heart,  when  well  nigh  crushed  with 
grief.  Having  read  this  letter  again  and 
again,  he  exclaimed,  "Is  this  all?  Can 
nothing  more  be  said  or  done  to  cheer  me  in 
my  sorrow  ?  There  must  be  a  God.  This 
I  have  always  believed.  It  is  equally  ob- 
tIous,  that  this  God  is  benevolent ;  and  if  so, 
he  has  somewhere  made  provision  for  support 
and  comfort  at  a  time  like  this.  But  where 
is  this  provision  to  be  found?  The  letter  of 
my  friend  shows  plainly  that  this  world  has 
it  not.  Had  it  been  discoverable  by  reason, 
the  writer  would  have  known  it.  But,  in- 
stead of  giving  comfort,  his  communication 
adds  poignancy  to  my  grief.  It  must  be  in 
the  Bible.  I  will  look.^^  Thus  he  reasoned. 
Then  opening  the  inspired  volume,  he  turned 
its  leaves  somewhat  at  random,  when  his 
eyes  fell  on  this  passage,  "For  our  light 


DR.  JAMES  JONES.  117 

affliction  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh 
for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory ;  while  we  look  not  at  the 
things  which  are  seen,  but  at  the  things 
which  are  not  seen:  for  the  things  which  are 
seen,  are  temporal,  but  the  things  which  are 
not  seen,  are  eternal.'^  2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18. 

This  arrested  his  attention.  This  touched 
his  heart,  and  he  exclaimed,  "I  have  found 
it.  This  meets  my  case.^'  Thus  encouraged, 
he  read  on,  and  in  process  of  time,  became  a 
true  believer  in  Christ,  and  a  consistent  and 
useful  member  of  his  church. 

He  now  sought  to  promote  the  spiritual 
good  of  his  friends  and  of  the  world,  with 
.great  liberality  and  zeal.  Upon  thorough 
investigation,  he  became  a  Presbyterian,  and 
sought  and  obtained  from  the  Presbytery  a 
missionary,  who  found  in  his  house  a  home, 
and  at  his  hands  a  support,  which  enabled 
him  to  prosecute  his  work  with  some  success; 


118         BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OP 

and  thus,  through  the  instrumentaUty  of 
this  distinguished  physician  and  statesman — 
now  an  humble  Christian — were  the  founda- 
tions of  a  church  laid,  which  has  increased 
in  numbers  and  elBciency,  until  it  has  be- 
come one  of  the  largest  and  strongest  coun- 
try churches  in  the  Synod  of  Virginia. 

At  an  early  period  of  his  Christian  life, 
he  became  a  ruling  elder  in  the  church  which 
he  had  so  materially  aided  in  organizing; 
and  for  many  years  served  with  great  fidelity 
in  all  our  church  courts,  from  the  Session  to 
the  General  Assembly. 

Dr.  Jones  had  mingled  freely,  until  about 
the  fiftieth  year  of  his  age,  in  the  gayest, 
most  fashionable,  and  the  least  religious 
circles  of  society.  His  manners  and  his 
habits  were  accordingly  such,  as  strongly 
incline  those  who  make  a  profession  of  reli- 
gion, from  the  higher  walks  of  life,  to  con- 
tent themselves  with  the  shadow,  rather  than 


DR.  JAMES  JONES.  119 

the  substance.  As  an  illustration  of  the 
mighty  power  of  divine  truth  in  remodeling 
the  character,  and  as  a  proof  of  the  sincerity 
and  depth  of  his  piety,  it  should  be  stated, 
that  on  connecting  himself  with  the  church, 
he  engaged  promptly  and  zealously  in  the 
active  duties  of  the  Christian  life.  He 
erected  an  altar,  around  which  his  family 
were  regularly  called  to  offer  their  morning 
and  evening  devotions.  He  took  the  deepest 
interest  in  the  religious  instruction  of  his 
large  family  of  servants ;  and  few  have  suc- 
ceeded so  well  in  inducing  this  class  of  per- 
sons to  attend  regularly  and  seriously  on 
divine  worship,  both  social  and  public.  From 
his  earliest  connection  with  the  Church,  to 
the  end  of  his  earthly  pilgrimage,  he  had  a 
neat  apartment  kept  as  a  private  chapel, 
where  divine  service  was  regularly  performed 
on  the  Sabbath,  for  the  benefit  of  his  own 
servants,  and  such  of  his  neighbours'  servants 


120         BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

as  might  choose  to  attend.  For  several 
years,  the  writer  was  accustomed  to  officiate 
in  this  place,  and  to  this  people,  on  the  Sab- 
bath afternoon;  and  never  can  he  forget  the 
dignified,  yet  subdued  and  chastened  manner, 
with  which  this  excellent  man  regularly  seated 
himself  in  the  midst  of  this  humble  audience, 
to  hear  with  them  the  words  of  life  eternal. 
There,  too,  sat  the  good  old  African  Preacher, 
with  his  dark  visage,  but  brilliant  mind  and 
pious  heart,  who  never  failed,  when  the  ser- 
vice was  over,  to  remain,  that  he  might  pro- 
pound questions,  and  make  remarks  suggested 
by  the  sermon  just  delivered. 

Our  lamented  friend  became  the  early  and 
zealous  champion  of  the  temperance  reforma- 
tion. As  early  as  the  year  1828,  he  attended 
and  addressed  the  first  temperance  meeting 
ever  held  in  that  part  of  the  country.  He  was 
one  of  only  eight  persons  who  could  be  m- 
duced  to  favour  the  holding  of  this  meeting; 


DR.  JAMES  JONES.  121 

and  shared  largely,  but  cheerfully,  in  the 
public  odium  which  this  movement  elicited. 
In  this  war — and  war  it  was  of  a  truth — he 
enlisted  for  life,  and  lived  and  died  its  wise 
and  prudent,  but  firm  and  fearless  friend  and 
promoter.  It  was  his  happiness,  too,  to  see 
this  cause,  as  well  as  that  of  his  church,  both 
of  which  had  so  feeble  a  beginning,  surmount 
every  obstacle,  and  attain  a  high  degree  of 
prosperity  and  usefulness. 

All  the  benevolent  enterprises  of  the 
Church,  enjoyed  his  confidence,  and  shared 
in  his  benefactions.  We  have  rarely  known 
a  man,  whose  judgment  more  promptly  ap- 
proved, and  whose  heart  more  warmly  era- 
braced^  whatever  tended  to  elevate  and  bless 
his  race.  Thoroughly  educated  himself,  he 
was  the  firm  friend  of  the  education  of 
others.  An  alumnus  of  Hampden  Sidney 
College,  and  subsequently  a  trustee,  he  was 

the  warm  friend  and  liberal  supporter  of  that 
11 


122        BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

venerable  and  useful  institution.  He  saw, 
too,  the  obvious  difference  in  rank  and  im- 
portance, between  the  College  and  the  Uni- 
versity; and  hence  his  zeal  for  the  former 
did  not  make  him  the  blind  opponent  of  the 
latter.  His  private  letters  abound  with  ex- 
pressions of  the  highest  admiration  for  the 
University  of  Virginia.  He,  more  than  once, 
visited  this  seat  of  learning,  and  informed 
himself  thoroughly  respecting  its  course  of 
instruction  and  system  of  discipline  by  per- 
sonal inspection;  the  result  of  which  was, 
an  abiding  conviction,  that,  without  an  in- 
stitution planned,  endowed,  and  conduct- 
ed as  that  is,  the  literary  and  scientific 
wants  of  the  commonwealth  could  not  be 
supplied. 

From  the  period  of  Dr.  Jones's  conversion 
no  subject  more  constantly  occupied  his 
thoughts,  or  more  deeply  enlisted  his  feel- 
:ngs,  than  the  condition  and  future  prospects 


DR.  JAMES  JONES.  123 

of  his  servants.  We  have  already  seen  the 
measures  he  adopted  for  their  reUgious  in- 
struction. But  when  taught,  he  wished 
them  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  that  instruction 
to  the  fullest  attainable  extent.  In  a  word, 
he  desired  and  he  purposed  to  emancipate 
them. 

He  fully  believed  that  the  only  wise  and 
benevolent  method  of  doing  this,  was  to  send 
them  to  Liberia,  under  the  auspices  of  the 
American  Colonization  Society.  Accord- 
ingly, after  corresponding  with  Mr.  Elliot 
Cresson,  and  other  distinguished  friends  of 
this  cause,  in  reference  to  this  matter,  he 
and  Mrs.  Jones,  whose  sentiments  and  feel- 
ings were  identical,  commenced  a  course  of 
instruction  designed  to  enlighten  their  minds, 
and  to  form  their  characters  with  a  view  to 
emigration. 

But  the  condition  of  these  servants  was 
rendered  so  extremely  comfortable,  by  the 


12i         BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

parental  treatment  received  at  the  hands  of 
their  excellent  master  and  mistress,  that  not 
one  of  them  could  be  induced  to  go,  until 
that  master  and  mistress  should  be  taken 
from  them  by  death. 

In  1837  he  made  his  will,  in  which  he 
provides  amply  for  the  emancipation  and 
emigration  to  Liberia  of  as  many  as  could  be 
induced  to  go,  leaving  the  whole  to  be  exe- 
cuted at  the  death  of  his  widow.  This  will 
contains  the  following  clause:  "The  whole 
subject  is  to  be  fully  and  intelligibly  pre- 
sented to  their  minds,  so  that  they  may  have 
the  option  of  going  to  the  Colony,  or  remain- 
ing in  bondage.  And  I  particularly  desire 
that  any  of  them  who  may  be  willing  to  go, 
shall  at  any  time  be  emancipated  by  due 
form  of  law,  by  my  executors,  and  trans- 
ferred to  such  agents  of  said  Colony  as  may 
be  willing  to  receive  them.  I  would  prefer 
that  point  known  as  Bassa  Cove,  under  the 


DR.  JAMES  JONES.  125 

direction  of  the  New  York  and  Pennsylvani? 
Colonization  Societies.'^ 

The  will  of  1846,  which  is  his  last  will 
does  not  differ  materially  from  the  former 
Knowing  how  tenderly  his  loved  wife  felt  on 
this  subject,  he  only  leaves  the  whole  matter 
more  fully  in  her  hands. 

She  has  accordingly  commenced  the  work, 
both  of  colonization  and  emancipation;  hav- 
ing tendered  to  some  of  them  the  privilege 
of  going  this  spring  to  Liberia,  and  having 
actually  emancipated  others,  in  the  best  and 
only  way  permitted  by  the  laws  of  Virginia, 
with  the  privilege  of  remaining  in  the  com- 
monwealth. 

Were  it  expedient,  we  might  easily  and 
greatly  extend  this  sketch.  We  should  like 
to  speak,  as  truth  would  warrant,  of  his 
purity  and  patriotism;  his  unshaken  con 
stancy  as  a  friend;  and  particularly  of  his 
almost  excessive  tenderness,  faithfulness  and 
11* 


126         BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OP 

affection  as  a  husband.  But  we  can  only 
glance  at  his  last  moments. 

He  had  lived  the  life  of  the  enlightened 
patriot,  the  hospitable  and  polished  gentle- 
man, the  consistent,  useful  Christian.  Such 
fi  life  might  be  expected  to  terminate  in  a 
calm  and  peaceful  death.  His  last  illness 
was  protracted  and  severe ;  but  borne  with 
Christian  fortitude  and  Christian  submission. 
He  was  among  the  first  to  discover,  that  his 
sickness  would  be  unto  death.  With  the 
utmost  composure,  he  proceeded  to  give  such 
directions  respecting  his  temporal  concerns, 
as  he  deemed  necessary;  not  neglecting  a 
full  expression  of  his  wishes  as  to  his  buriaL 
Having  done  this,  he  said  to  a  friend,  who 
had  travelled  many  miles  to  visit  him,  "I  am 
glad  to  see  you.  I  have  endeavoured,  from 
the  first,  to  cast  myself  upon  a  gracious  God, 
through  a  Redeemer.  This  I  now  do.  The 
violence  of  my  disease  interrupts  thought, 


DR.  JAMES  JONES.  127 

and  hinders  devotion.  /  can  only  trusts 
Shortly  after  this,  he  seemed  to  have  drawn 
his  last  breath.  All  perceptible  signs  of  life 
were  gone.  His  fond  wife  bent  over  him  in 
agony,  exclaiming,  "  It  is  all  over.^'  To  the 
surprise  of  all  around  him,  he  opened  his 
.  eyes,  and  looked  tenderly  upon  her  who 
*  was  dearer  to  him  than  his  own  life,  and 
said,  "Be  still  and  wait.  I  am  waiting 
quietly." 

On  another  occasion  he  said,  "  When  I  do 
go,  I  hope  to  go  straight  to  a  better  world.'^ 
He  was  now  unable  to  carry  on  a  connected 
conversation,  but  as  he  lay,  struggling  for 
breath,  and  expecting  every  moment  to  be 
his  last,  he  was  heard,  from  time  to  time, 
indulging  in  such  expressions  as  these: 
"  Bluntly  prepared.  Yes,  ready,  and  some- 
times very  anxious,  to  go." — "  There  is  still 
a  great  deal  of  evil  in  the  world.  Satan  is 
«till  permitted  to  have  much  power.  But 


128        BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

the  Lord  reigns,  and  will  do  all  things  well.'* 
To  the  friend  before  referred  to,  who  was,  at 
this  critical  moment,  very  reluctantly  forced 
to  leave  him,  and  whom,  with  much  difficulty, 
he  was  made  to  recognize,  he  said,  "  Fare- 
well !  God  bless  you !  It  is  all  that  I  can 
say.'' 

These  were  among  the  last  expressions 
which  fell  from  that  tongue  which  had  so 
often,  and  with  so  much  eloquence,  edified 
and  delighted  the  intelligent  and  pious  visi- 
tors, who  were  accustomed  to  frequent  his 
delightful  residence.  That  tongue  is  now 
silent  in  death,  but  the  spirit  which  animated 
it,  lives  in  a  purer  and  brighter  world.  That 
body  which,  with  so  much  dignity  and  grace, 
was  accustomed  to  move  through  the  apart- 
ments, and  over  the  fields  and  gardens  of 
Mountain  Hall,  now  lies  beside  the  remains 
of  the  loved  ones  lost  in  childhood;  but  his 
character  and  his  example  still  live,  to  teach 


DR.  JAMES  JONES.  129 

surviving  friends  and  relatives  how  to  bo 
useful  in  life  and  happy  in  death. 

Thus  lived  and  thus  died,  the  African 
Preacher  and  his  distinguished  friend  and 
patron.  The  former  ended  his  days  on  the 
6th  of  April,  1843,  supposed  to  be  nearly 
one  hundred  years  old.  The  other  followed 
on  the  25th  of  April,  1848,  in  the  77th  year 
of  his  age. 

We  bless  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  for  that  gospel  which  can  thus 
influence  all  classes  in  society ;  revealing,  as 
it  does,  a  Saviour,  who  could  thus  lay  one 
hand  on  the  kidnapped  African,  and  the 
other  on  the  polished  graduate  of  a  European 
University;  then  mould  and  fashion  their 
habits  and  tastes  so  much  alike,  that  it  is 
hard  to  say,  whether  the  power  and  grace  of 
that  Saviour  are  most  conspicuous,  in  ele- 
vating the  former,  or  humbling  the  latter. 
As  milike  by  nature  as  the  two  continents 


130  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH 

which  gave  them  birth,  by  grace  they  be- 
came one  in  Christ  Jesus,  and,  beyond  a 
doubt,  are  now  together  before  the  throne, 
singing,  as  with  one  voice  and  one  heart 
the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb.^' 


APPENDIX  !!• 


It  is  stated  at  page  29,  that  Uncle  Jack 
was  very  often  called  upon  to  officiate  at  the 
funerals  of  the  coloured  people.  Such  occa- 
sions on  the  plantations  often  exhibit  scenes 
of  much  solemn  interest,  both  on  the  part  of 
the  planters  and  the  slaves.  The  following 
extract  from  a  popular  journal,  gives  a 
graphic  sketch  of  such  a  scene. — [Editor  op 
Presb.  Board  op  Publication.] 

THE  NIGHT  FUNERAL  OP  A  SLAVE. 
Travelling  recently  on  business,  in  the 
interior  of  Georgia,  I  reached,  just  at  sunset, 

the  mansion  of  the  proprietor  through  whose 

131 


132  THE  NIGHT  FUNERAL 

estate,  for  the  last  half  hour  of  my  journey, 
I  had  pursued  my  way.  My  tired  companion 
pricked  his  ears,  and  with  a  low  whinny 
indicated  his  pleasure,  as  I  turned  up  the 
broad  avenue  leading  to  the  house.  Calling 
to  a  black  boy  in  view,  I  made  him  inquire 
of  his  owner  if  I  could  be  accommodated 
with  lodgings  for  the  night. 

My  request  brought  the  proprietor  himself 
to  the  door,  and  from  thence  to  the  gate, 
when,  after  a  scrutinizing  glance  at  my  per- 
son and  equipments,  he  inquired  my  name, 
business,  and  destination.  I  promptly  re- 
sponded to  his  questions,  and  he  invited  me 
to  alight  and  enter  the  house,  in  the  true 
spirit  of  Southern  hospitality. 

He  was  apparently  thirty  years  of  age, 
and  evidently  a  man  of  education  and  refine- 
ment. I  soon  observed  an  air  of  gloomy 
abstraction  about  him.  He  said  but  little, 
and  even  that  little  seemed  the  result  of  an 


OF  A  SLAVE.  133 

effort  to  obviate  the  seeming  want  of  civility 
to  a  stranger.  At  supper,  the  mistress  of 
the  mansion  appeared,  and  did  the  honours 
of  the  table,  in  her  particular  department. 
She  was  exceedingly  lady-like  and  beautiful. 
She  retired  immediately  after  supper,  and  a 
servant  handmg  some  splendid  hahanas  on 
a  small  silver  tray,  we  had  seated  ourselves 
comfortably  before  the  enormous  fire  of  oak 
wood,  when  a  servant  appeared  at  the  end 
door  near  my  host,  hat  in  hand,  and  uttered, 
in  subdued  but  distinct  tones,  the,  to  me, 
startling  words : 

Master,  de  coffin  hab  come.'' 

"Very  well,"  was  the  only  reply,  and  the 
servant  disappeared. 

My  host  remarked  my  gaze  of  inquisitive 
wonder,  and  replied  to  it — 

"I  have  been  sad,  sad,''  said  he,  "to-day. 

I  have  had  a  greater  misfortune  than  I  have 

experienced  since  my  father's  death.    I  lost 
12 


134  THE  NIGHT  FUNERAL 

this  morning  the  truest  and  most  reliable 
friend  I  had  in  the  world — one  whom  I  have 
been  accustomed  to  honour  and  respect  since 
my  earliest  recollection.  He  was  the  play- 
mate of  my  father's  youth,  and  the  mentor 
of  mine ;  a  faithful  servant,  an  honest  man, 
and  sincere  Christian.  I  stood  by  his  bed- 
side to-day,  and  with  his  hands  clasped  in 
mine,  I  heard  the  last  words  he  uttered; 
they  were,  ^Master,  meet  me  in  heaven.^ 

His  voice  faltered  a  moment,  and  he  con- 
tinued, after  a  pause,  with  increased  excite- 
ment: 

^^His  loss  is  a  melancholy  one  to  me.  If 
I  left  my  home,  I  said  to  him,  ^  John,  see  that 
all  things  are  taken  care  of,'  and  I  knew 
that  my  wife  and  child,  property  and  all, 
were  as  safe  as  though  they  were  guarded  by 
a  hundred  soldiers.  I  never  spoke  a  harsh 
word  to  him  in  all  my  life,  for  he  never 
merited  it.    I  have  a  hundred  others,  many 


OF  A  SLAVE.  135 

of  them  faithful  and  true,  but  his  loss  is 
irreparable/^ 

I  came  from  a  section  of  the  Union  where 
slavery  does  not  exist;  and  I  brought  with 
me  all  the  prejudices  which  so  generally 
prevail  in  the  free  States  in  regard  to  this 
institution.'^  I  had  already  seen  much  to 
soften  these,  but  the  observation  of  years 
would  have  failed  to  give  me  so  clear  an 
insight  into  the  relation  between  master  and 
servant  as  this  simple  incident.  It  was  not 
the  haughty  planter,  the  lordly  tyrant,  talk- 
ing of  his  dead  slave  as  of  his  dead  horse, 
but  the  kind-hearted  gentleman,  lamenting 
the  loss  and  eulogizing  the  virtues  of  his 
good  old  friend. 

After  an  interval  of  silence,  my  host  re- 
sumed : 

"There  are,''  said  he,  "many  of  the  old 
man's  relatives  and  friends  who  would  wish 
to  attend  his  funeral.    To  afford  them  oppor- 


136  THE  NIGHT  FUNERAL 

tunity,  several  plantations  have  been  notified 
that  he  will  be  buried  to-night.  Some,  I  pre- 
sume, have  already  arrived ;  and  desiring  to 
see  that  all  things  are  properly  prepared  for 
his  interment,  I  trust  you  will  excuse  my 
absence  a  few  moments/^ 

"Most  certainly,  sir;  but,'^  I  added,  "if 
there  is  no  impropriety,  I  would  be  pleased 
to  accompany  you/' 

"There  is  none,'' he  replied;  and  I  fol- 
lowed him  to  one  of  a  long  row  of  cabins, 
situated  at  the  distance  of  some  three  hun- 
dred yards  from  the  mansion.  The  house 
was  crowded  with  negroes.  All  arose  on  our 
entrance,  and  many  of  them  exchanged 
greeting  with  my  host,  in  tones  that  con- 
vinced me  that  they  felt  that  he  was  an 
object  of  sympathy  from  them!  The  corpse 
was  deposited  in  the  coffin,  attired  in  a 
shroud  of  the  finest  cotton  materials,  and  the 
coffin  itself  was  painted  black 


OF  A  SLAVE.  137 

The  master  stopped  at  its  head,  and  laying 
his  hand  upon  the  cold  brow  of  his  faithful 
bondsman,  gazed  long  and  intently  upon  fea- 
tures with  which  he  had  been  so  long  fami- 
liar, and  which  he  now  looked  upon  for  the 
last  time  on  earth.  Raising  his  eyes  at  length, 
and  glancing  at  the  serious  countenances 
now  bent  upon  his,  he  said  solemnly,  and 
with  much  feeling — 

"He  was  a  faithful  servant  and  true  Chris* 
tian.  If  you  follow  his  example,  and  live  ag 
he  lived,  none  of  you  need  fear  when  the 
time  comes  for  you  to  lie  here/^ 

A  patriarch,  with  the  snow  of  eighty  win- 
ters on  his  head,  answered, 

"Master,  it  is  true,  and  we  will  try  to  live 
like  him/^ 

There  was  a  murmur  of  general  assent, 

and  after  giving  some  instructions  relative 

to  the  burial,  we  returned  to  the  building. 

About  nme  o'clock  a  servant  appeared 
12* 


138  THE  NIGHT  FUNERAL 

with  the  notice  that  they  were  ready  to  move, 
and  to  know  if  further  instructions  were 
necessary.  My  host  remarked  to  me  that, 
by  stepping  into  the  piazza,  I  would  proba- 
bly behold,  to  me,  a  novel  scene.  The  pro- 
cession had  moved,  and  its  route  led  within 
a  few  yards  of  the  mansion.  There  were 
one  hundred  and  fifty  negroes,  arranged 
four  deep,  and  following  a  wagon  in  which 
W£is  placed  the  coffin.  Down  the  entire 
length  of  the  line,  at  intervals  of  a  few  feet 
on  each  side,  were  carried  torches  of  the 
resinous  pine,  here  called  light-wood.  About 
the  centre  was  stationed  the  black  preacher, 
a  man  of  gigantic  frame  and  stentorian  lungs, 
who  gave  out  from  memory  the  words  of  a 
hymn  suitable  to  the  occasion.  The  Southern 
negroes  are  proverbial  for  the  melody  and 
compass  of  their  voices,  and  I  thought  that 
hymn,  mellowed  by  distance,  the  most  so- 
lemn, and  yet  the  sweetest  music  that  had 


OF  A  SLAVE.  139 

ever  fallen  upon  my  ear.  The  stillness  of 
the  night,  and  strength  of  their  voices,  en- 
abled me  to  distinguish  the  air  at  the  dis- 
tance of  half  a  mile. 

It  was  to  me  a  strange  and  solemn  scene, 
and  no  incident  of  my  life  has  impressed  me 
with  more  powerful  emotions  than  the  night 
funeral  of  the  poor  negro.  For  this  reason 
I  have  hastily  and  most  imperfectly  sketched 
its  leading  features. 


THE  END. 


# 


t 


