S.  G.  &  E.  L.  ELBERT 


C  tit  mini  uf 


^ITStalfil  by        ELLA  SMITH J5LBBRI._»fi8_. 

Jhx  jUcmiuimn 

X«  KATHARINE  E.  COMAN 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AFRICANS 


LONDON- 
PRINTED    BY    SPOTTISWOODE    AND  CO. 
NEW-STREET  SQUARE 


Digitized  by 

the  Internet  Archive 

in  2014 

https://archive.org/details/africansathomebeOOmacb 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME 

BEING-  A  TOPULAR  DESCEIPTION  OF 

AFRICA  AND  THE  AFRICANS 

CONDENSED  FROM  THE  ACCOUNTS  OF  AFRICAN  TRAVELLERS  >FROM ,  THE 
TIME  OF  MUNGO  PARK  TO  THE  PRESENT  DAY 

BY 

THE  EEV.  E.  M.  MACBBAIB,  M.A. 

Author  of  the  Mandingo  and  Foola  Grammars  &c. 


WITH  MAP  AND  NUMEROUS  ILLUSTRATIONS 

SECOND  EDITION 

WITH  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  DISCOVERY  OF  THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  NILE 


LONDON 

LONGMAN,  GREEN,  LONGMAN,  ROBERTS,  &  GREEN 

1864 


PR K  Y ACE 

TO 

THK   SKCOM)  KDITION. 


SlNOE  this  compendium  of  African  Travels  was  pub- 
lished, a  very  important  addition  to  African  geography 
has  been  made  by  the  return  of  Oaptaim  Bpeke  and 
(irant  from  their  successful  mission  to  discover  tin* 
source  of  the  Nile.    This  long-disputed  question  is 
now  set  at  rest  :  and  we  are  furnished  with  one  of  the 
last  keys  necessary  to  a  general  understanding  of  the 
physical  character  of  Central  Africa.     The  fancied 
and  famous  "Mountains  of  the  Moon"  must  now 
disappear  from  our  maps  :  or  this  name  must  be  given 
to  a  plateau  of  conical  hills  enclosing  large  lakes  or 
reservoirs,  which  receive  moderate  rains  from  heaven 
falling  in  a  temperate  climate  upon  a  luxuriant  soil, 
and  giving  birth  to  some  of  the  greatest  rivers  of 
Africa. 

Such  a  striking  addition  to  our  knowledge  of 
Africa,  together  with  the  very*  flattering  notices  of 
this  work  by  the  periodical  press,  have  induced  the 
Publishers  to  send  forth  a  Second  Edition,  containing 
a  succinct  account  of  the  late  discoveries. 

A  2 


PREFACE. 


Tins  book  is  a  pictorial  description  of  Africa.  We 
ask  the  reader  to  accompany  us  through  the  interior 
of  that  continent,  whilst  we  point  out  to  him  what- 
ever is  peculiar  to  the  different  countries  and  their 
inhabitants.  By  thus  travelling  over  several  thou- 
sands of  miles,  in  the  short  time  required  for  pe- 
rusing this  volume,  he  will  get  a  view  of  various 
Negroes,  Moors,  Arabs,  and  mixed  races,  in  their 
own  places  of  abode.  He  will  become  acquainted 
with  their  peculiar  customs  and  manners,  the  cha- 
racteristics of  each  country,  and  its  natural  phe- 
nomena. We  hope  that  we  have  omitted  nothing  of 
importance  which  would  tend  to  depict  the  condition 
of  the  "  Africans  at  Home." 

These  pages  contain  the  condensed  information 
supplied  by  thirty  or  forty  volumes  of  travels, 
some  of  portentous  size.  All  these  narratives  contain 
much  that  was  personal  to  the  heroic  men  who  pene- 
trated into  regions  before  unknown  to  Europeans. 

A  3 


vi 


PREFACE. 


It  is  interesting  to  follow  the  individuals  of  this 
gallant  band,  through  their  laborious  researches,  their 
difficulties  and  privations,  and  the  dangers  or  suffer- 
ings which  they  had  constantly  to  endure.  But 
many  of  them  perished  in  their  enterprise,  and  had 
not  an  opportunity  of  doing  justice  to  their  own 
journals,  or  their  jottings  of  what  they  had  seen 
and  heard.  Some  have  not  had  the  power  of  writing 
an  interesting  book.  Others  have  furnished  a  good 
account  of  their  own  wanderings,  which  were  neces- 
sarily limited  to  one  part  of  this  vast  continent. 

The  Author  does  not  wish  to  appear  as  a  traveller, 
using  the  pronoun  "  I."  His  experiences  of  Africa 
are  not  worthy  of  being  mentioned  along  with  those  of 
real  discoverers.  Yet  no  one  could  have  written  this 
book,  without  having  previously  visited  that  country. 
Everything  in  Africa  is  different  from  what  is  seen 
in  Europe.  The  colour  of  the  sky,  the  air,  the  land, 
the  seasons,  the  rains,  the  animals  (and  we  speak 
feelingly  of  insects),  the  length  of  the  grass,  the 
fields,  the  trees,  the  colour  of  the  people,  their  dress 
or  want  of  dress,  their  habitations,  food,  amusements, 
and  occupations, — all  is  strangely  diverse  from  what 
Europeans  have  been  accustomed  to.  A  very  sensi- 
ble man,  who  had  always  lived  in  an  inland  county 
of  England  until  he  went  to  Western  Africa,  said  that 
when  he  landed  in  that  country,  he  became  so 
bewildered  that  he  did  not  recover  the  proper  use 
of  his  senses  for  a  fortnight. 


PREFACE. 


vii 


The  Author  has  been  in  both  the  east  and  west 
sides  of  Africa ;  but  he,  confessedly,  did  not  pene- 
trate far  into  the  interior.  Yet  he  obtained  a 
general  idea  of  its  atmospheric  phenomena,  the 
character  of  the  people,  their  simple  mode  of  living, 
their  ignorance  and  cunning,  their  rude  arts  and 
incipient  commerce.  He  gained  a  good  deal  of  in- 
formation from  free  converse  with  the  natives,  who 
are  capital  talkers,  and  some  of  them,  such  as  pilgrims 
and  traders,  considerable  peregrinators.  With  this 
preparation  of  mind,  he  has  appropriated  to  himself 
the  researches  of  many  travellers,  and  incorporated 
them  with  his  own  previous  knowledge.  This  justi- 
fies his  using  the  familiar  pronoun  "  we,"  in  acting  as 
an  expositor  of  Africa  to  those  who  will  accept  his 
guidance. 

In  order  to  save  repetition,  and  to  give  our  readers 
a  connected  view  of  the  numerous  countries  of  Africa, 
we  describe  them  in  regular  order.  Beginning  from 
the  west,  we  take  a  long  journey  to  the  east,  through 
the  densest  parts  of  the  population ;  occasionally  stop- 
ping to  notice  what  is  on  either  hand,  to  the  north 
and  south  of  our  route.  Thus,  we  make  excursions 
to  visit  the  Moors,  to  brave  the  perils  of  the  Great 
and  Little  Deserts,  to  see  what  lies  south  of  the  Niger 
and  Lake  Chad,  to  trace  this  noble  river  through 
most  of  its  course,  and  to  view  the  bloody  lands  of 
Dahomey  and  Ashantee.    Arriving  in  the  east,  we 

A  4 


viii 


PREFACE. 


look  at  Darfur,  Nubia,  and  Abyssinia ;  not  forgetting 
to  visit  the  source  of  the  Blue  Nile.  We  manage  also 
to  take  a  peep  at  Harar  and  the  adjacent  country, 
towards  the  Eed  Sea.  Imagining  ourselves  back  in 
Sennaar,  we  pass  to  the  south  in  the  company  of 
Negro  slaves  and  Arab  merchants ;  and  we  thus 
rapidly  traverse  the  burning  latitudes  of  the  equator, 
till  we  reach  the  lake  regions  recently  visited  by 
Captains  Burton  and  Speke.  A  stride  westward 
brings  us  into  the  countries  lately  discovered  by  the 
indefatigable  and  intrepid  Livingstone.  We  get  a 
few  jottings  from  his  rich  stores  of  information,  all 
down  the  middle  of  the  continent,  till  we  pass  the 
deserts  inhabited  by  Bushmen,  and  reach  the  out- 
skirts of  Cape  Colony ;  where  we  take  leave  of  the 
courteous  reader. 

We  have  tried  to  enliven  our  style  by  the  inser- 
tion of  authentic  anecdotes,  and  by  varying  the 
manner  of  description.  For  this  purpose,  we  have 
sometimes  employed  the  first  and  second  persons 
plural,  "we"  and  " you,"  in  delineating  places  and 
circumstances  where  neither  we  nor  our  readers  ever 
imagined  ourselves  to  be  placed :  and  we  have  adopted 
a  few  short  extracts  from  published  volumes,  in  which 
the  pronoun  "  I "  has  been  used  with  good  effect. 
Subjects  of  natural  history  peculiar  to  Africa  have 
been  scattered  as  much  as  possible  through  the 
narrative.     Minute  details  of  religious  creeds  and 


PREFACE. 


ix 


ceremonies  have  been  avoided ;  as  also  of  the  history, 
wars,  and  political  changes  of  different  tribes:  for 
these  are  of  little  interest  to  the  general  reader,  and 
add  nothing  to  his  stock  of  useful  information. 

Africa  is  a  large  place ;  and  no  one  can  be  said  to 
understand  geography  and  the  different  races  of  men 
without  some  knowledge  of  this  immense  region. 
The  present  volume  will  give  a  bird's-eye  view  of  this 
continent ;  and  from  its  size  and  style,  may  be  read 
with  interest,  or  even  as  a  source  of  amusement,  by 
those  who  would  shrink  from  perusing  a  number  of 
large  or  erudite  works.  But  in  order  to  become 
well  acquainted  with  any  particular  part  of  Africa, 
and  especially  if  you  have  any  intention  of  travelling 
in  that  country,  you  must  have  recourse  to  the 
original  authorities. 

It  is  a  puzzling  matter  to  know  how  to  write  the 
names  of  African  places,  since  different  travellers  spell 
them  in  different  ways,  ilungo  Park  and  the  first 
British  adventurers  adopted  the  orthography  conge- 
nial with  an  English  pronunciation:  and  the  names, 
as  they  gave  them,  were  inserted  in  our  maps.  But 
Dr.  Barth,  Captain  Burton,  Dr.  Livingstone,  and 
others,  have  followed  the  continental  mode  of  writing 
the  vowel  sounds  ;  and  our  mappers  have  inserted  the 
names  of  newly-discovered  places,  as  they  have  been 
thus  severally  furnished.  Hence  the  orthography  of 
our  African  maps  is  a  medley  of  confusion,  since  some 


X 


PREFACE. 


words  must  be  read  after  the  English,  some  after  the 
Italian  manner  of  pronunciation.  In  the  present 
volume,  we  have  endeavoured  to  harmonise  these  two 
modes  of  spelling,  so  as  to  make  the  names  easy  to 
an  English  reader,  and  enable  him  to  recognise  them 
on  any  good  map,  if  he  will  attend  to  the  following 
simple  observations. 

We  always  use  oo  in  the  middle  of  a  name,  though 
some  travellers  write  on,  and  others  u :  but  in  de- 
ference to  the  new  style  we  change  the  oo  final  into 
U ;  as  in  Fooladu,  which  Park  wrote  Fooladoo,  and 
others  write  Fuladu.  Words  ending  in  a  are  to  be 
pronounced  as  if  it  were  ah,  which  is  the  old  method 
of  spelling ;  thus  Park  wrote  Foolah  and  Fellattah, 
which  are  now  spelt  without  the  h.  Final  ee  and  ie 
are  the  same  sound,  which  Barth  expresses  by  the 
continental  i,  as  Ashantee  or  Ashanti,  Birnie  or 
Birni  (we  think  the  first  best  for  an  English  map). 
Final  ey,  ay,  e,  e,  are  intended  for  the  same  sound, 
and  ought  probably  to  have  been  all  written  eh ;  but 
v:e  cannot  venture  upon  making  so  sweeping  a 
change.  Our  final  i  must  be  read  as  ih  or  short  ie. 
Therefore,  if  our  readers  will  pronounce  every  African 
name  terminating  in  a  single  vowel  as  if  it  had  an  h 
after  it,  they  will  be  pretty  correct.  (Pronounce 
Fool  a,  Jenne,  Kirri,  Bornu,  as  if  they  were  Foolah, 
Jenneh,  Kirrih,  Bornuh). 

For  most  of  the  illustrations  which  embellish  this 


PREFACE. 


xi 


volume,  we  are  indebted  to  those  works  from  which 
much  of  the  narrative  has  been  gleaned ;  so  that  they 
may  be  regarded  as  correct  drawings. 

We  trust  that  this  attempt  to  give  a  familiar  de- 
scription of  Africa  will  meet  with  public  approval, 
and  will  induce  many  persons  to  become  acquainted 
with  a  most  interesting  subject,  from  which  they  may 
have  been  hitherto  deterred  by  want  of  a  condensed 
and  lively  account  of  the  "  The  Africans  at  Home." 
We  have  not  enlarged  upon  the  cotton  question,  im- 
portant as  it  is  at  the  present  epoch ;  but  we  have 
pointed  out  in  the  narrative  how  this  plant  flourishes 
in  most  parts  of  Central  Africa,  so  that  it  might  be 
grown  there  in  sufficient  quantity  to  supply  the  pre- 
sent wants  of  the  world. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  L 

The  African  Coast. — Landlocked  and  Shipwrecked. — The  Gambia. — 
The  White  Man's  Grave.  —  St,  Mary's.  —  A  Jollof's  Hut  — The 
Oyster-tree.  —  Up  to  Jillifree.  —  Cluster  of  Dwellings. — A  Fortune 
in  Wives. —  Mangrove  Trees. —  Creeks. — Villagers.  —  A  drunken 
Chief. — Buffoons. —  The  Baobab. — Death  of  Seamen. — "  Plenty  of 
Time,  Massa." — An  Excursion. —  The  Bentang.  —  Mandingoes. — 
TheirLanguage. —  Greegrees. — Anecdotes  of  Marraboos. — Moses's 
Mother. — Monkeys. — "  One  good  Gun." — Eoolas. — Their  Villages. 
— Handsome  Girls. — Language.  —  Cotton  Spinning,  Weaving,  and 
Dyeing    .......    Page  1 

CHAP.  II. 

Patience  in  Africa.  — Hippopotamus.  —  Alligators.  —  Gipsy  Foolas. 
— Macarthy's  Island.  —  A  Negro  King.  — Effects  of  a  Mirror. — 
Voyage  upwards.  —  A  Robin  Hood.  —  His  strange  Doings,  and 
appalling  Greegree.  —  A  British  Misadventure.  —  Visiting  the 
Robber's  Den.  —  African  Timber.  —  White  Ants.  —  Palm  Wine. 
—  Fatatenda.  —  Tedious  Trading.  —  The  King  of  Woolli. — Koos- 
koos. — Medina. — White  Negroes. — Mumbo  Jumbo. — Wives  30 

CHAP.  III. 

African  Fever. — Sand-spouts. — Dreadful  Heat.  —  Cure  of  Fever. — 
The  First  Shower. — Sowing  and  Reaping. — A  Tornado.  —  Atmo- 
spheric Phenomena. — Bondu. — Boolibany.  — Dress. — Teucolars. 


xiv 


CONTENTS. 


— Visits  to  the  King.  —  Commerce.  —  Kajaaga.  —  Serawoollies. — 
Anecdotes  of  Abdul-kader.  —  Mahometan  Proselytes.  —  Slave 
Coffle. — Poor  Nealee. — Hunting  Slaves. — Domestic  Slavery. — 
Country  of  Kasson. — Hyaenas. — Dressing  Leather.  —  Negro  Sur- 
gery ......       Page  56 

CHAP.  IV. 

Ludamar  and  the  Moors. — Their  Encampments. — Ferocity. — Treat- 
ment of  Christians. — Ladies. — Beauties. — Horsemanship.  Life  in 

the  Desert.  —  A  Whirlwind.  —  Oases.  —  Gum.  —  Description  of  a 
Gum  Fair     .......  80 

CHAP.  V. 

Wilderness  of  Kaarta. — A  Traveller  lost. — Kindness  of  Women. — 
Corn-Spirit. — Wild  Beasts  abroad. — Hunting  Elephants. — "White 
Man's  Lies." — Woods  of  Tenda. — Wolves. — Lions. — How  to  catch 
a  live  Lion! — Discomfiture  by  Bees.  —  Gold  District. — Iron. — 
Native  Lawsuits. — The  Beginning  of  Troubles. — Failure  of  British 
Expeditions.  —  Crossing  Rivers. — Fight  with  an  Alligator. — 
Palavers. — A  difficult  Choice. — Negro  Philosophy.  —  The  Jalonka 
Wilderness  and  People. — Nitta-Tree. — Soap-making. — Manding. 
— Park's  Deliverer  .  .  .  .  .  .94 

CHAP.  VI. 

The  Niger  at  Bambaku. — Rapids.  —  Sego. — The  King. — Shea,  or 
Butter-tree. — Sansanding. — Moorish  Intolerance. — White  Man's 
Saphie.  —  Jenne. — Negro  Umbrella.  —  Burial  of  the  Dead. — To 
Korome. — Foolbe — Their  stern  Bigotry. — Rascality  of  Arabs. — 
The  Servant  is  Master. — Disorderly  State  of  Timbuctu.  —  Sidi 
Alawate. — A  candid  Robber.  —  Rags  on  a  Tree. — Devil  Worship. 
— Reception  of  a  Stranger. — Sheik  el  Bakay — His  noble  Conduct 
—  His  Camp  in  the  Desert.  —  What  is  Timbuctu?  —  Caravans. — 
The  Great  Desert. — Storms  of  Sand. —  Thirst. — Serpents. — Dis- 
tricts South  of  the  Niger. — The  Reformer  of  Masina. — A  Village 
Market. —  Buying  Money     .....  122 


CONTENTS. 


XV 


CHAP.  TIL 

Description  of  the  Niger. —  Tin-sherifen. — A  Lady's  Offer. — Straits. 
— Gogo.  —  Changes  in  the  River. — Yaoori.  — The  Palace. — The 
Sultan's  Daughters. — Scene  of  Mungo  Park's  Death. — Islanders 
and  their  Nests. — Boossa.  —  Our  Hostess.  —  The  Widow- Warrior. 
— A  Holiday. — Royal  Dancing. — Eclipse. — King  of  Wowow. — 
Strange  Reception. — A  Tinder-Box. — The  Fetish  and  Priestess. — 
Down  to  Rabba.  —  Demoralised  People.  —  Fantastic  Dress  of  the 
King  of  Eboe.  —  King  Yarro.  —  Sorrow  of  the  Governor  of  Jenna. 
—  Fetish  Priest. — An  old  Lady's  Love  of  Life.  —  Strolling 
Musicians      ......     Page  152 

CHAP.  VIII. 

Guinea. — Dahomey. — Army  of  Women. — Large  Harems.  —  Abso- 
lutism and  Espionage.  —  Abomey. — Presentation  to  the  King. — 
Review  of  the  Amazons.  —  Exhibition  of  Royal  Chattels.  —  A 
Scramble.  —  Human  Victims.  —  Fetish. — Ashantee. — Royal  Mes- 
sengers.— Victims  of  our  Journey.  —  Singular  Reception  in  Coo- 
massie. —  A  poor  Drummer.  —  Human  Sacrifices. — Awful  Funeral. 
— The  Death-Drum.  —  "  Customs."  —  Suicide  of  Queens.  —  Only 
Blood  and  Gold.— Royalty.— 3333  Wives.— Infant  Wives.—  State 
Governess. — Polygamy. —  Houses. — Plenty  of  Gold. — Wealth  of  a 
Cabooceer. — Population. — Demonolatry. — How  to  drive  away  the 
Devil. — Cunning  Priests. — Unlucky  Days. — Obstacles  to  Civilisa- 
tion .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .178 

CHAP.  IX. 

Eastward  from  Say.  —  Gando.  —  Royal  Covetousness.  —  Sockotu. — 
Sultan  Bello. — Civet  Cats. — An  impudent  Executioner.  —  Wurno. 
— Sultan  Aliyu. — The  Pistols. — Providing  for  a  Guest. —  Journey 
in  the  Desert. — Agades. —  Its  Palace. — Sultan. — Royal  Procession. 
— Men  and  Women. — Markets.  —  Court  of  Justice.  —  More  of  the 
Desert. — A  narrow  Escape. —  Effects  of  Thirst. — Route  by  Bilma. 
— Skeletons. — Fate  of  Couriers. — Mutual  Fears.— Blood  Feuds.— 
Salt  Lakes. — Surgical  Operation. — Sons  of  the  Desert.  —  Plun- 
dering        .......  200 


xvi 


CONTENTS. 


CHAP.  X. 

Eastward  from  Wurno. — A  Biter  bit. — Kano.  — Vultures. — City  and 
Market.  —  Luck-Penny.  —  Interview  with  Governor.  —  Women 
painting  themselves.  — Politeness. — Whining  of  a  Bride.  —  Jug- 
glers. —  Cotton  and  Indigo.  —  Eastward. — A  Felatta  Girl. — White 
and  black  Skins.  —  Death  of  Dr.  Oudney.  —  Katagoom.  —  The 
Governor.  —  Eine-shooting.  —  Lucky  Omen.  —  A  large  Eat.  — 
Medicinal  Charms.  —  Bedee.  — Death  of  Eichardson. — Kooka  Tree. 
—  Goorjee  Tree.  —  Old  Birni.  —  Sultan  in  his  Cage.  —  Singular 
Fashions. — Angornu.  —  "No  Breeches."  —  The  Eoyal  Guards 

Page  226 

CHAP.  XI. 

Bornu.  —  Dashing  Entrance  into  Kooka.  —  Interview  with  the  Sheik. 
— Mode  of  Life. — Looseness  of  Manners.  —  Two  guilty  Girls. — 
Market.  —  Shifts  for  Money. — A  Lion  for  sale. — Houses. — Penal 
Decisions.  — Eockets  and  Musical  Box.  —  Quack  Doctors.  —  Strange 
Presents. — Poor  Barca  Gana.  — Mandara. — Its  Troops.  —  Sultan  in 
State.  —  Men  and  Women. — Beauties. — Eight  with  a  Panther. — 
Battle  with  the  Felattas. — Disastrous  Plight. — The  Shuwas. — 
The  Marghi. — New  Mode  of  Duelling.  —  Substitutes  for  Dress. 
— Kanuri  people. — Pullo  Country. — Meeting  of  the  Eivers. — 
Adamawa. — Yola  and  its  people  .  .  .  250 


CHAP.  XII. 

Lake  Chad. — Its  Inhabitants.  —  Catching  and  cooking  Fish.  —  Ele- 
phants.— Monsters. — Burwha. — Woodi. — Lari. — Death  of  Mr. 
Overweg. — Wild  Guides  andEobbers. — Elephant  Hunt. — Angala. 
— Death  of  Ensign  Toole. — Battle  with  the  Baghirmis.  —  Showy 
on  the  Shary.  —  Giraffes.  — The  Shuwas.  — Conversations  with  them. 
— Nude  Skippers. — Up  the  Eiver  to  Loggun. — Polite  Eeception. 
— A  Bundle  of  Clothes. — Mercantile  Sultan. — Whispering. — 
Lady  Thieves. — Family  Poison  wanted. — Mosquitoes.      .  277 


CONTENTS. 


xvii 


CHAP.  XIII. 

Our  Situation. — A  new  Region. —  Baghirmi. —  Legions  of  Worms. — 
Army  of  Black  Ants. —  Massena. — The  Palace. — Sultan. — Tribute 
in  Slaves. — Triumphal  Procession  and  Captives. — Waday. — Wara. 

—  Caravans  to  Darfur.  —  Nubian  Slaves.  —  Cobbe. —  Sharpers. — 
The  Sultan. —  Sennaar. — The  King's  Cut-throat. — Garb. — Harem. 

—  Strange  Notion  of  Beauty. —  Change  of  Government. —  Berbers. 

—  Female  Decoys. — Nubian  Desert. — The  Simoom. — Catastrophe. 
— Abyssinia.  —  Gondar.  —  The  former  King. — His  grandeur. — 
The  People.  —  Eating  a  live  Bullock.  —  About  the  Town.  —  "Was 
Nebuchadnezzar  a  Saint  ?" — A  monkish  King.  —  How  to  fill  the 
Exchequer. —  "For  my  life.'' — Credulity  of  a  Lady. —  Squabbling. 
—Late  Revolution    .  *    .       .       <       .       .       .    Page  298 


CHAP.  XIV. 

Source  of  the  Blue  Nile. — Dangerous  Road  to'Shoa.  — Ankobar.  — 
Strange  Detectives. — The  Gallas. — How  to  get  to  Harar. — Its 
Palace  and  Sultan. — Zayla. — Somal  Village. — Flitting  of  a  Camp. 
— Poisoned  Arrows. —  Use  of  a  black  Skin. —  Geographical  Infor- 
mation.—  Eventful  History  of  Dilbo. — Enarea, —  Kaffa. —  Queen 
Balbi. —  Doko  Pigmies. —  Sacrifices.  —  Unyoro.  —  Uganda.  —  The 
Wondrous  Kabuja. — The  mighty  Sultan  Suna. — Karawak. — Corpu- 
lent Ladies. — Wotosi  and  Usui. —  Lake  Nyanza. —  Kazeh. — Arab 
Merchants. — Native  Doctor  and  Witch. —  Sad  Travelling. —  Im- 
practicable Servants  and  Chiefs. —  A  petty  Sultan.  —  Ugogo. — 
Usugara  Mountains. —  Rubero  and  Tamarind  Hills. —  The  Savage 
Wadoe. —  Burying  alive. —  The  Wakhutu. —  The  Wazaramo.  —  A 
Oircsean  Town. — Wanyamwesi. —  Sorcerers. — Lake  Tanganyika. — 
Lake  Tribes  329 


(  HAP.  XV. 

Countries  about  the  Equator. — Cannibals. —  Gorillas. — Matiamvo. — 
Despotism. —  Katema. — Some  Words  about  the  King. — Kawawa, 
—  Tricks  of  the  Chiboque. —  Nudity. — Etiquette.  —  Superstitious 
Fears. — Cabango. — Women. — "  A  fine  Funeral." — Employments, 
a 


xviii 


CONTENTS. 


—  A  naked  Amazon.  —  Shinte  and  his  Town.  —  Reception  of  Dr. 
Livingstone. —  Manioc  root. —  Blood  Relationships. — Animal  Life. 

—  Libonta. — Linvanti.  —  Heavy  Ornaments. — Female  Beauty. — 
The  Looking-Glass. — Royal  Wives  and  Widows. — Game. — Dances. 
— The  Batoka. —  Singular  Customs. —  Other  Tribes. — Cazembe. — 
Living  "according  to  Nature." — Estimate  of  their  Character.— 
Marshes. —  Tsetse. — Black  Soldier  Ant. —  Bushmen. — Desert  of 
Kalahari. —  The  Bakalahari. —  Summary. —  Civilisation  and  Com- 
merce< — Discovery  of  the  Nile  by  Captains  Speke  and  Grant. — 
Route  to  Lake  Nyanza. — Uzinli. — Route  through  Karagweh  to 
Uganda. — Lake  Nyanza  and  the  Source  of  the  Nile. — Vast  Water- 
shed.—Introduction  to  King  Mtessa. — His  Character  and  Govern- 
ment.—  Course  of  the  Nile. —  Geography  of  Central  Africa 

Page  361 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


MAP. 

Map  of  Africa,  prepared  expressly  for  this  Work    .    To  face  page  1 


ILLUSTRATIONS  (A* 

View  of  Lake  Chad 

To  face  Title-page. 
Negro  Town  in  the  Interior 

To  face  page  77 
Moorish  Horsemen  .  .  .90 
Scene  on  the  Niger  .  .  .124 
The  Niger  at  Kabara  .  .132 
Camp  of  Sheik  el  Bakay  .  140 
Negro  Dancers  .  .  .  .162 
Oil  Palm  Tree  ....  185 
The  Niger  at  Say  ....  200 
Agades  in  the  Desert  .  .214 
Negro  of  Bornu    .    .    .  .250 


SEPARATE  PLATES). 

Shuwa  and  Marghay  Lads,  p.  261 
Musgu  Chief  and  Slaves  .  269 
Hamlet  of  Kanembo  Cattle 

Breeders  277 

Return  of  the  Sultan  of  Mas- 

sena  304 

Heads  of  Africans  in  the 

Lake  District  ....  329 
j  Porters  of  East  Africa  .  .  346 
Party  of  Wak'hutu  Women  354 
Head  Dresses  of  Wanyam- 

wesi  358 

Bushwoman  390 


ILLUSTRATIONS  IN  THE  TEXT. 

Young  Negro  of  Benguela  Mandingo  Chief  .    .     page  15 

Vignette  on  Title-page.  Green  Monkey     .    .    .    .  23 

Jollof  Chief     ....  page  5      Foola  Village  25 

Mangrove  Tree     ....      9      Hippopotamus  31 

African  Eagle  10  !  White  Ants'  Nest ....  44 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Palm  Trees  ....    page  47 
If  umbo  Jumbo     .    .    .    .  52 
Slave-chain  at  the  Coast    .    72  ! 
African  Sandal     ....  78 

Dromedary  81 

Young  African  Elephant    .  99 

Smelting  Iron  Ill 

Plan  of  Timbuctu .    .    .    .  142 

Leathern  Bag  144 

Leathern  Ornament  .  .  .145 
Tawarick  Camp  in  Motion  .  153 
Elevated  Sleeping-hut  .  .158 
Female  Soldier  of  Dahomey  180 
Gates  of  Abomey  .  .  .  .183 
Ashantee  Chief  ....  190 
A  Fetish  Man  and  the  Go- 
vernor of  Wydah  .    .  .197 

Civet  Cat  204 

Audience  Hall  of  Agades  .  211 
Mesurata  Chief    .    .    .  .221 

Arab  Juggler  ■  234 

Guinea-fowl  Shirt     .    .    .  235 


Kanembo  Spearman  .  page  254 
Covered  Granary  ....  274 
Kanembo  Chief  and  Men  .280 

Giraffe  288 

Ladies  of  Loggun .  .  .  .295 
Lancer  of  Baghirmi  .  .  .301 
Sycamore  Tree     .    .    .  .306 

Suakin  Chief  312 

Abyssinian  Chief  ....  323 

Heads  350 

African  standing  Posture    .  356 

GoriUa  363 

Katema  on  the  Shoulders  of 

his  Minister  367 

Woman  of  Congo  .    .    .  .371 
Londa  Ladies'  mode  of  wear- 
ing their  Hair  ....  374 

Tsetse  387 

Inside    of    a  Bushman's 

Hut  389 

Bush  woman  391 

Bakalahari  Women  .    .    .  392 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


CHAPTEE  I. 

The  African  Coast. — Landlocked  and  Shipwrecked. — The  Gambia. — 
The  White  Man's  Grave.  — St,  Mary's.  —  A  JoUof's  Hut,  — The 
Oyster-tree.  — Up  to  Jillifree.  —  Cluster  of  Dwellings. — A  Fortune 
in  Wives. —  Mangrove  Trees. —  Creeks. — ViUagers. — A  drunken 
Chief. — Buffoons. —  The  Baobab. — Death  of  Seamen. — "  Plenty  of 
Time,  Massa." — An  Excursion. —  The  Bentang. — Mandingoes.— 
Their  Language. —  Greegrees. — Anecdotes  of  Marraboos.^ — Moses's 
Mother. — Monkeys. — "  One  good  Gun." — Foolas. —  Their  Villages. 
— Handsome  Girls.  — Language.  —  Cotton  Spinning,  Weaving,  and 
Dyeing. 

Long  before  a  voyager  comes  within  sight  of  Western 
Africa,  he  feels  the  influence  of  that  parched  and 
sandy  region.  The  genial  air  of  the  trade-wind  is 
exchanged  for  a  hot  and  oppressive  atmosphere.  If 
the  land-breeze  happens  to  blow,  it  is  laden  with  par- 
ticles of  fine  dust  which  cover  the  vessel  at  a  great- 
distance  from  the  coast.  The  azure  sky  assumes  a 
yellowish  hue  from  the  reflection  of  glistening  sand  : 
and  the  blue  waters  of  the  ocean  become  of  a  lighter 

B 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


colour.  Those  huge  creatures  which  swim  round 
your  vessel,  as  it  sluggishly  approaches  the  shore,  are 
the  much  dreaded  sharks  ;  which  have  not  learned  to 
distinguish  one  ship  from  another,  but  hope  that  yours 
may  be  a  slaver,  from  which  some  dead  Negro  may 
be  thrown  overboard,  to  their  advantage. 

The  promontory  before  us  is  Cape  Verd ;  and  the 
rest  of  the  coast  lies  low.  We  must  take  care  not  to 
keep  too  near  to  it,  lest  we  should  be  becalmed  in  the 
bay.  Many  poor  seamen  have  been  thus  land-locked, 
till  they  have  perished  of  fever,  or  their  hapless  craft 
has  become  a  wreck.  This  accident  seldom  happens 
in  sailing  to  the  Gambia,  as  captains  know  to  keep 
away  from  this  inhospitable  shore :  but  it  is  not  an 
unusual  casualty  when  leaving  the  coast.  It  is  a  sad, 
sad  thing,  to  be  thus  detained  within  the  purlieus  of 
destruction,  unable  to  move  away,  till  the  fate  which 
you  dread  slowly  overtakes  you.'  We  have  heard  it 
described  by  two  survivors  of  a  gallant  crew.  Their 
vessel  lay  within  sight  of  shore,  as  if  drawn  to  it  by  a 
magnet  ;  and  the  sails  hung  motionless,  or  sometimes 
faintly  flapped  as  if  to  mock  their  hopes.  A  tropical 
sun  poured  down  his  flaming  heat  on  their  fainting 
bodies,  which  had  been  exhausted  by  the  African 
fever.  This  disease  broke  out  afresh,  and  no  succour 
was  at  hand.  The  dispirited  crew  gave  themselves  up 
to  hopelessness,  and  one  after  another  perished,  till 
the  enervated  survivors  were  obliged  to  let  the  ves- 
sel drift  as  she  listed,  and  their  lives  were  saved  by 
her  being  wrecked  on  a  reef  of  sand.  The  natives 
proved  more  merciful  than  was  anticipated ;  they 


THE  GAMBIA  —  BATHURST. 


a 


contented  themselves  with  the  spoils  of  the  ship,  and 
saved  the  two  surviving  mariners. 

The  discoloured  water  tells  us  that  we  are  entering 
the  wide  mouth  of  the  Gambia.  Its  stream  must  be 
very  sluggish,  as  the  tide  rises  in  it  for  five  hundred 
miles.  A  gentle  sea-breeze  helps  us  to  creep  for- 
ward, and  enables  us  to  reach  St.  Mary's  before  night- 
fall, when  this  wind  ceases.  We  anchor  in  the  chan- 
nel; for  here  is  no  wharf,  pier,  or  other  landing 
place  :  and  we  are  conveyed  ashore  in  boats. 

The  town  of  Bathurst  has  some  good  houses,  built 
of  stone  and  shell  lime.  These  buildings,  being 
ranged  along  the  beach,  present  a  pretty  appearance, 
with  their  piazzas  and  whitewashed  fronts.  Here  is 
a  British  colony,  the  seat  of  government,  and  the 
emporium  of  European  merchandise  for  this  district  of 
Africa.  But  the  little  island  of  St.  Mary's,  on  which 
it  is  situated,  lies  very  low,  and  is  swampy  during 
the  rainy  season.  The  last-named  evil  might  probably 
be  palliated  by  some  good  engineering.  If  the  land 
were  entirely  cleared  and  drained,  the  inhabitants 
would  be  saved  from  miasma,  and  many  lives  might 
be  preserved.  But  the  British  government  has  never 
seemed  to  think  how  many  emigrants,  governors, 
officers,  or  missionaries  perish  in  that  land  wThich  has 
been  designated  66  the  white  man's  grave."  Still  it  is 
possible  that,  by  a  different  line  of  policy,  Bathurst 
might  now  have  been  a  little  African  Calcutta,  expor- 
ting to  England  large  quantities  of  cotton,  coffee,  and 
indigo,  besides  other  precious  commodities. 

There  are  also  some  native  "  towns  "  or  villages  on 

B  2 


J.  THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 

St.  Mary's  where  all  kinds  of  Africans  are  protected, 
and  many  liberated  slaves  are  settled.  Let  us  enter 
one  of  these  little  towns ;  it  consists  of  a  few  broad 
streets,  along  both  sides  of  which  the  houses  or  huts 
of  the  negroes  are  erected.  Each  is  built  in  a  yard  or 
garden  belonging  to  its  tenant ;  but  all  differ  in  shape, 
size,  and  appearance.  Here  is  a  neat  one,  inhabited 
by  a  Jollof.  It  is  an  oblong,  divided  into  two  cham- 
bers, and  whitewashed  :  it  has  a  hut  or  two  behind  it, 
which  serve  for  a  "  cook-house"  and  store-room.  The 
sitting-room  contains  a  few  articles  of  European  fur- 
niture, manufactured  in  Africa,  and  two  or  three 
books  lie  on  a  shelf,  including  a  Bible,  Prayer-book, 
and  hymn  book.  These  books,  or  rather  the  truths 
which  they  teach,  have  made  the  dwelling  to  be 
so  neat.  Many  years  ago,  the  lamented  Sir  Charles 
Macarthy  was  walking  with  a  missionary  near  some 
huts,  and  pointing  to  them,  he  said  :  u  Some  of  your 
people  live  there  ;"  the  other  answered,  "  How  do  you 
know,  Governor?  "  His  reply  was,  " Because  the  houses 
are  whitewashed."  It  is  hard  to  persuade  the  Negro 
to  change  his  old  customs  and  indolent  habits,  and 
still  more  difficult  to  give  him  a  love  of  cleanliness, 
temperance,  industry,  honesty  and  domestic  order, 
until  he  comes  under  the  power  of  true  religion.  All 
the  native  dwellings  in  this  town  are  not  so  good  as 
the  one  we  have  seen ;  and  there  are  "towns"  on  the 
island  little  better  than  those  on  the  continent. 

The  Jollofs  are  a  fine  race  of  men,  and  when 
christianised,  they  are  brave,  faithful,  and  generous ; 
good  samples  of  what  Africans  can  become.  Some 


THE  J0LL0FS. 


5 


of  the  most  industrious  and  skilful  mechanics  of 
Eathurst  are  of  this  tribe.    Their  hands  built  much 


JOLLOF  CHIEF. 


of  this  town,  including  the  merchants'  houses,  the 
spacious  residence  of  the  governor,  and  the  noble 
hospital.  Perhaps  we  shall  hereafter  meet  with  them 
in  a  ruder  state  of  life. 

b  3 


G 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


Before  leaving  the  island,  let  us  look  a/t  these 
oyster-trees.  What !  Do  oysters  grow  on  trees,  like 
apples  or  pears  ?  Not  exactly  ;  yet  it  is  true  enough 
that  they  grow  on  trees ;  and  if  you  look,  you  will  find 
the  lower  parts  of  these  mangroves  covered  with  shell- 
fish. This  fact  of  natural  history  puzzles  a  stranger, 
till  he  learns  how  it  comes  to  pass.  The  mangrove 
grows  in  brackish  water,  lining  the  sides  of  the  river 
and  creeks  as  far  as  salt-water  reaches.  Then, 
as  there  are  oyster-beds  in  the  small  creek  which 
separates  one  side  of  the  island  from  the  mainland, 
the  fish  adhere  to  the  lower  branches  of  the  trees  in- 
stead of  rocks,  when  the  tide  is  high.  At  low  water 
they  are  exposed  to  view,  and  are  gathered  to  be  eaten 
or  to  be  burnt  into  lime. 

A  largish  vessel  is  ready  to  sail  up  the  river, 
freighted  with  a  variety  of  merchandise.  As  she 
will  stop  at  several  native  towns  on  the  banks,  we 
shall  take  a  passage  in  her ;  and  thus  we  shall  have 
opportunities  of  seeing  the  Africans  in  their  own 
homes.  There  are  small  craft  built  entirely  for  the 
river  trade  by  some  of  those  Jollofs  whom  we  saw, 
which  can  sail  up  all  the  way  to  Fatatenda.  But  a 
ship  of  200  or  300  tons  burden  can  manage  to  reach 
Macarthy's  island,  about  250  miles  up  the  stream. 

It  is  far  from  unpleasant  to  perform  a  river  voyage 
during  the  cool  season  of  the  year,  which  lasts  for 
three  or  four  months.  Of  course,  you  live  on  deck. 
An  awning  affords  shelter  from  the  sun  by  day, 
and  from  the  moon  and  dew  by  night.  For  eight 
months  of  the  year  there  is  no  fear  of  rain,  nor  does 


JILLIFREE  —  NATIVE  DWELLINGS. 


7 


a  dark  cloud  blacken  the  sky.  The  sea-breeze  wafts 
you  up  the  stream  for  some  days;  then  you  must 
trust  mainly  to  the  tide  and  boats.  When  the  land- 
breeze  blows,  you  must  cast  anchor,  and  must  always 
stop  whilst  the  tide  ebbs.  The  air  is  now  fresh  and 
cool,  till  the  sun  approaches  the  zenith,  when  you 
are  glad  to  be  under  the  shade  for  a  few  hours,  the 
temperature  being  at  about  80°  Fahrenheit.  The 
nights  are  very  pleasant  when  you  are  in  mid-stream, 
away  from  the  torments  of  mosquitoes,  and  from  too 
close  proximity  with  the  natives.  You  are  then  free 
from  all  fear  of  disturbance,  and  can  enjoy  the  mag- 
nificent solitudes  of  nature,  particularly  when  the 
moon  lights  up  the  landscape,  and  casts  shadows  from 
the  vast  trees  which  line  the  river. 

We  stop  at  Jillifree,  one  of  the  chief  trading  places 
in  the  kingdom  of  Barra  (though  the  sovereignty  of 
the  bank  has  been  ceded  to  Great  Britain).  The 
town  is  surrounded  with  a  mud  wall,  to  keep  out 
wild  beasts  during  the  night,  and  to  prevent  a  surprise 
by  some  marauding  chieftain.  The  dwellings  of  the 
people  consist  of  huts,  huddled  together  in  a  number 
of  small  enclosures  or  yards,  also  formed  of  mud  walls. 
Each  head  of  a  family  has  one  of  these  enclosures,  in 
which  huts  are  erected  according  to  the  number  of 
his  wives  and  other  wants.  The  hut  consists  of  a 
round  room,  made  of  mud  and  thatched  with  grass. 
The  better  kind  have  a  double  wall,  including  between 
them  a  narrow  circular  space,  which  serves  for  an 
outer  or  sitting  apartment.    They  have  no  windows, 

B  4 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


and  only  one  low  door,  which  admits  the  light  and 
lets  out  the  smoke. 

In  order  to  visit  a  native  trader,  we  have  to  pass 
through  a  number  of  small  winding  alleys,  between 
mud  walls,  with  an  occasional  door  leading  into  a 
yard.  A  stranger  would  not  easily  find  his  way  out 
again,  for  it  is  a  labyrinth.  At  length  the  gentle- 
man's door  is  reached,  and  we  are  ushered  into  a 
space  containing  huts  of  all  sizes,  erected  without  any 
regard  to  order  or  appearance,  like  a  number  of  large 
bee-hives  fallen  from  the  clouds.  There  is  a  hut  for 
the  master,  a  hut  for  each  of  the  women  and  her 
children,  huts  for  cooking,  a  hut  for  horses,  a  hut  for 
stores  and  merchandise  —  a  motley  group  ! 

These  huts  are  almost  as  bare  inside  as  they  are 
unsightly  without.  A  few  domestic  utensils,  and  a 
wicker  platform  for  a  bedstead,  compose  the  usual 
furniture.  The  Negroes  are  mere  children  of  nature ; 
their  wants  are  few  and  easily  supplied.  When  a 
man  can  purchase  three  or  four  wives  he  becomes  a 
gentleman  ;  for  the  ladies  and  slaves  (if  he  have  any) 
cultivate  his  farm  and  provide  for  all  the  wants  of  the 
household.  He  can  hunt,  barter,  smoke,  drink,  fight, 
and  gossip  at  pleasure. 

Our  voyage  soon  becomes  monotonous,  on  account 
of  those  perpetual  mangroves,  which  form  an  im- 
penetrable forest  on  either  bank  for  about  150  miles. 
This  tree,  as  we  have  said,  grows  in  the  stream,  above 
low- water  mark.  It  propagates  by  letting  down  shoots 
from  its  upper  parts,  which  take  root,  if  they  can  find 
room,  and  form  new  stems.   As  the  tops  of  the  roots 


MANGROVES. 


9 


are  not  covered  with  earth,  they  have  a  singular  ap- 
pearance when  the  tide  leaves  them,  exhibiting  .a 
confused  mass  of  twisted  and  tortuous  fibres,  rising 


MANGROVE. 


into  cones,  on  the  tops  of  which  the  trunks  seem  to 
be  perched.  You  cannot  find  mould  enough  amongst 
them  to  make  a  grave. 

We  are  glad  to  reach  a  break  in  the  mangroves, 


10 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


caused  by  a  creek,  much  resembling  a  canal,  the 
sides  of  which  are  also  lined  with  this  interminable 
tree.  It  is  only  a  few  yards  wide,  and  branches  meet 
over  head.  The  vessel  anchors  at  the  mouth  of  the 
creek,  and  in  the  morning  we  row  up  in  a  boat.  It 
seems  gloomy,  for  the  sun's  beams  rarely  penetrate 
the  thick  foliage  with  wThich  we  are  overhung. 
There  is  not  a  rustle  of  the  leaves  or  any  other 
sound  to  be  heard,  except  the  chattering  of  monkeys 
over  head,  and  the  more  distinct  cry  of  the  hawk  or 
eagle. 


surrounded  with  a  low  stockade,  and  the  huts  are  of 
the  meanest  kind. 

The  villagers  crowd  to  see  a  white  man,  which  is 
an  uncommon  sight  in  this  outlandish  place.  They 
are  mostly  clad  in  a  single  garment ;  the  men  in  a 
loose  shirt  or  smock,  the  women  in  a  cloth  wrapped 
round  their  waist.    The  former  have  a  small  cap  ; 


AFRICAN  EAGLE. 


At  last,  after  rowing  for  a  couple 
of  miles,  we  land  at  an  open  space ; 
and  on  climbing  up  the  bank  are 
presented  with  a  new  panorama. 
The  sun  shines  brightly  on  large 
fields,  studded  with  occasional 
trees.  Birds  of  exquisite  plumage, 
but  wanting  song,  fly  about  the 
bushes.  In  the  distance  is  a  small 
town.  Whilst  the  supercargo  is 
trading  with  the  Negroes  —  rather 
a  long  business  —  we  shall  go  to 
visit  this  poor  settlement.    It  is 


THE  GAMBIA 


—  A  DRUNKEN  CHIEF. 


I  I 


the  latter  have  their  hair  bound  up  in  a  coloured 
handkerchief.  The  children  run  about  in  nature's 
attire.  We  wished  to  see  the  chief;  but  found  that 
he  was  asleep  on  a  mat  outside  his  hut.  As  no 
one  but  his  wife  durst  awake  him,  we  sent  for  this 
important  personage.  She  was  an  ugly,  haggard 
creature ;  and  in  no  way  to  be  distinguished  from 
the  other  women.  They  were  all  in  their  dishabille 
or  ordinary  clothes  ;  for  in  full  dress  they  would  have 
had  another  cloth  thrown  over  their  shoulders  and 
bosom,  with  necklaces,  bracelets,  or  other  ornaments. 
The  men,  also,  would  have  worn  loose  trowsers  or 
drawers. 

The  chief  was  awakened,  but  not  to  right  reason ;  for 
he  was  drunk.  He  was  almost  blind,  had  few  teeth, 
was  almost  naked,  and  presented  a  most  unsightly 
form  of  humanity.  He  tried  to  understand  what 
was  said  by  our  interpreter  in  his  own  language,  but 
could  not.  A  jester  sat  by  his  side  and  seemed  alone 
to  have  the  privilege  of  making  free  with  him.  These 
buffoons  have  certain  immunities  and  privileges 
during  life,  but  their  dead  bodies  are  not  interred  in 
the  ground,  but  deposited  in  the  hollow  trunk  of  a 
monkey-bread  tree.  They  amuse  their  patron  by 
singing,  jesting,  making  antics,  and  attempts  at  music. 
It  is  singular  that  the  same  custom  of  having  court 
buffoons  should  exist  in  uncivilised  Africa,  which  used 
to  prevail  in  Germany  and  other  parts  of  civilised 
Europe.  In  this  place,  we  had  a  very  meagre  speci- 
men of  Negro  life  at  home. 

Look  at  one  of  those  celebrated  monkey-bread 


12 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


trees !  It  is  the  Baobab  or  Adansonia  digitata, 
which  though  found  in  Abyssinia  and  some  other 
warm  regions,  seems  to  flourish  most  in  Western 
Africa.  Its  size  is  enormous,  the  trunk  sometimes 
reaching  to  thirty  feet  in  diameter.  But  its  height 
does  not  correspond  with  its  thickness,  seldom  exceed- 
ing seventy  feet.  Its  lateral  branches  shoot  out  and 
droop  down,  so  as  to  form  a  beautiful  shade  of  ver- 
dure, impenetrable  by  the  sun,  extending  more  than 
twenty  yards  from  every  side  of  the  trunk.  The 
roots  also  are  of  great  length.  Unlike  most  African 
trees,  the  baobab  has  a  soft,  light  coloured  wood, 
easily  perforated  by  wild  bees,  who  make  it  a 
favourite  place  for  hiving.  Both  the  leaves  and  the 
juice  of  the  fruit  are  used  by  the  natives  medicinally. 
The  fruit  itself,  being  acid  and  agreeable,  constitutes 
an  important  article  of  food  and  of  commerce.  The 
tree  grows  very  slowly  and  attains  an  immense  age, 
not  becoming  very  large  till  it  has  lived  a  thousand 
years. 

After  being  exposed  to  the  heat  of  mid-day  sun  in 
Africa,  you  will  be  glad  to  find  yourself  again  upon 
the  water,  under  the  friendly  shelter  of  the  mangroves. 
Yet  these  woody  creeks  have  caused  the  death  of 
hundreds  or  thousands  of  British  seamen.  Vessels 
often  go  up  them  during  the  rainy  season,  to  load 
timber,  which  is  cut  on  the  higher  lands,  and  brought 
to  the  banks  by  natives.  After  labouring  all  day  in 
the  heat,  and  stimulating  his  exertions  with  plenty  of 
rum,  the  sailor  lies  down  to  sleep  upon  deck.  He 
could  not  breathe  in  the  cabin.    He  inhales  noxious 


DEATH  OF  SEAMEN. 


malaria,  and  is  seized  with  fever.  Myriads  of  mos- 
quitoes destroy  his  rest,  and  render  the  usual  medicines 
abortive.  If  he  cannot  be  hurried  down  to  St.  Mary's 
hospital,  his  doom  is  certain :  sometimes  he  reaches 
it  too  late,  for  nature  is  exhausted. 

The  Negro  works,  but  not  like  an  Englishman  ;  he 
takes  it  easy,  and  husbands  his  strength.  He  appears 
indolent,  and  is  often  blamed  as  such  :  but  indolence 
is  a  relative  term.  To  labour  in  tropical  Africa  as 
one  does  in  England  would  be  infatuation.  The 
British  captain  kills  his  men  by  making  them  do  the 
work  which  black  limbs  ought  to  perform.  But  he 
has  no  patience  with  the  "lazy  lubberly  Niggers," 
who  tell  him:  "Plenty  of  time,  Massa,  to-morrow 
come  after  to-day."  The  captain  thinks  that  the 
Negro  has  no  just  notion  of  the  value  of  time;  and 
in  this  he  is  correct.  Yet  the  Negro  also  is  right  in 
thinking  health  to  be  more  valuable  than  time. 

At  length  the  mangroves  are  left  behind,  and  the 
face  of  the  open  country  appears  from  the  deck  of  the 
vessel.  There  is  not,  indeed,  much  to  be  seen,  ex- 
cept extensive  plains  and  woodlands,  with  an  occa- 
sional mud  town  or  village  peeping  through  the  trees, 
yet  few  and  far  between.  Whilst  the  vessel  is  at 
anchor  waiting  for  the  tide,  let  us  take  a  ramble  to  a 
small  town  at  no  great  distance  from  the  river's  bank. 

This  pure  balmy  air  is  delicious.  Were  it  not  quite 
so  hot  out  of  the  shade,  the  weather  would  be  alto- 
gether desirable.  But,  in  January,  we  must  take  this 
mixture  of  hot  days  and  cool  evenings  with  thank- 
fulness: for  months  of  scorching  heat  are  fast  ap- 


14 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


proaching.  We  soon  enter  a  wood  of  large  trees,  not 
very  close  together,  and  often  with  a  small  space 
c  lear  of  foliage.  The  boughs  are  almost  vocal  with  the 
chattering  of  monkeys,  who  seem  to  be  talking  about 
the  strangers,  and  expressing  their  displeasure  at  one 
intruding  into  their  domains.  The  open  areas  swarm 
with  paroquets  and  other  birds  of  richest  plumage. 
But  our  attention  must  not  be  too  much  taken  up 
with  what  is  going  on  overhead ;  we  must  also  look 
to  our  feet,  and  take  care  not  to  tread  upon  a  snake. 
For  this  is  a  land  of  serpents.  See,  there  is  one 
about  four  feet  long,  skulking  in  the  lower  branches 
of  the  tree  which  we  are  approaching !  Our  black 
lads  rush  at  it  with  their  sticks ;  and  the  frightened 
creature,  taken  by  storm,  is  soon  disabled  and  knocked 
on  the  head.  The  boys  would  not  be  so  brave  if  alone 
and  unarmed. 

It  is  a  small  settlement  of  Mandingoes  that  we 
have  reached.  In  the  structure  of  its  dwellings,  it 
does  not  differ  much  from  those  which  we  have 
already  described.  As  strangers,  we  do  not  enter  it 
at  once,  but  sit  under  the  palaver  tree,  till  the  chief 
or  somebody  else  comes  to  gossip  with  us,  and  per- 
haps invite  us  in.  There  is  generally  a  wide-spread- 
ing tree,  often  the  tabba-tree,  beside  an  African 
village,  under  which  a  platform  of  cane-work  is 
erected,  called  the  bentang.  This  answers  the  same 
purpose  as  the  "  gate "  or  gateway  used  to  do  in 
eastern  towns.  It  is  a  public  lounging-place,  where 
the  men  gossip,  dispute,  hear  lawsuits,  transact  public 
business,  receive  strangers,  and  perform  all  other 


MAN  DINGOES. 


15 


things  which  require  much  palaver  or  talkee.  And 
Negroes  are  capital  talkers.  Here  comes  the  chief 
and  a  few  others ! 


MAND1NGO. 


The  Mandingoes  are  tall,  slender,  and  often  hand- 
some. Their  hair  is  woolly  and  their  skin  quite 
dark ;  but  they  have  not  the  flat  nose  and  thick  lips 
of  the  Negro  proper.  They  are  nimble,  active  in 
war,  and  enterprising  in  commerce.    Their  disposi- 


16 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


tion  is  naturally  gentle  and  cheerful ;  so  that  when 
they  become  Mahometans,  they  do  not  show  that 
religious  rancour  and  intolerance  which  the  Moors 
and  Felattas  exhibit.  They  are  simple  in  their 
habits,  credulous,  and  fond  of  flattery.  Mungo 
Park  found  fault  that  they  had  an  insurmountable 
propensity  to  steal  from  him,  and  to  get  posses- 
sion of  the  few  effects  which  he  possessed.  He, 
indeed,  made  some  excuse  for  them,  in  the  great 
temptation  to  which  they  were  exposed  when  they 
saw  his  goods,  which,  though  paltry  in  an  Eng- 
lishman's eyes,  were  a  fortune  in  their  estima- 
tion. We  fear  that  this  covetous  and  thievish  pro- 
pensity is  common  to  human  nature;  it  certainly 
prevails  amongst  every  nation,  tribe,  and  order  of 
men  in  Africa.  We  question,  moreover,  how  long  a 
man  wrould  be  able  to  carry  a  bag  of  gold  or  precious 
things  through  England,  or  even  through  the  streets 
of  London,  if  there  were  no  police  to  protect  him, 
and  no  laws  to  punish  any  one  who  might  rob  him 
of  his  treasures. 

The  Mandingo  language  is  simple,  but  harmo- 
nious, abounding  in  vowels  and  liquids,  so  that  it  has 
a  smoothness  and  mellowness  of  pronunciation  like 
the  Italian.  But  the  structure  of  the  language  is 
thoroughly  eastern.  In  some  of  its  grammatical 
forms  it  resembles  the  Hebrew  and  Syriac ;  its  most 
peculiar  sound  is  of  the  Malay  family ;  its  manner  of 
interrogation  is  similar  to  the  Chinese ;  and  in  the 
composition  of  some  verbs  it  is  like  the  Persian.  A 
few  religious  terms  have  been  borrowed  from  the 


GREEGREES. 


17 


Arabic,  and  some  articles  of  foreign  manufacture  are 
called  after  their  European  names. 

The  men  who  have  come  to  the  bentang  are  armed 
with  spears,  which  they  generally  carry  with  them,  as 
the  country  is  in  a  very  unquiet  state,  and  men- 
stealers  prowl  about.  Being  seated  under  the  palaver 
tree,  we  talk  about  the  news  of  the  day,  the  English 
and  the  Mandingoes.  They  parry  off  any  particular 
questions  concerning  their  own  town  and  its  inhabi- 
tants, being  suspicious  of  the  object  of  our  visit. 
Instead  of  inviting  us  inside  the  village,  they  bring 
us  some  milk  in  a  calabash,  and  we  give  them  in  return 
a  little  tobacco,  which  they  eagerly  receive. 

All  the  men  wear  greegrees  or  amulets  :  the  chief 
has  his  breast  well-nigh  covered  with  them.  The 
greegree  is  familiar  to  the  sight  and  to  the  ear  of  a 
sojourner  in  Africa  from  the  day  that  he  lands  in 
Senegambia.  But  here  is  a  favourable  opportunity 
for  having  the  matter  explained,  since  a  notorious 
greegree  maker  lives  in  this  town.  Let  us,  in  as- 
sumed ignorance,  ask  the  chief  what  is  the  use  of  those 
leathern  things  that  are  suspended  round  his  neck, 
and  fastened  like  bracelets  round  his  arms  ?  They 
are  generally  of  a  square  or  oblong  shape ;  but  some 
resemble  a  horn,  others  are  round,  and  of  other  forms. 
He  replies,  that  they  are  greegrees,  and  that  whilst 
he  wears  them,  he  will  be  secure  from  injury.  Then 
why  wear  so  many;  would  not  one  be  sufficient? 
w  Yes,  one  potent  greegree,  like  those  which  I  have, 
will  save  me  from  harm.  But  harm  is  of  different 
kinds,  and  so  there  are  different  kinds  of  greegrees 
c 


I  8 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


to  protect  from  different  sorts  of  evil.  This  greegree 
is  strong  against  a  fever ;  this  other  will  keep  me  from 
danger  on  a  journey ;  this  other  will  prevent  my 
being  injured  by  a  gun-shot."  "  Hold  there,  friend  ! 
Let  me  try :  let  me  fire  this  pistol  at  you,  and  see  if  I 
cannot  wound  you  ?  99  Of  course  the  chief  demurs  to 
such  a  trial  of  his  amulet,  lest  some  accident  should 
happen.  Let  us,  then,  propose  that  he  hang  the 
greegree  on  the  bough  of  a  tree,  and  that  we  fire  at 
it  as  at  a  target ;  for  surely  if  it  can  save  him  from 
being  hurt,  it  can  save  itself  from  being  blown  to 
pieces.  At  this  proposal,  he  looks  rather  confused ; 
for  in  reality  he  only  half  believes  in  his  amulet. 
But  the  marraboo,  or  priest,  comes  to  his  help,  and 
suggests  that  the  greegree  which  is  available  against 
a  black  man  may  not  protect  against  the  attempts 
of  a  white  man.  This  logic  is  decisive,  and  so  the 
matter  ends. 

Rogues  always  have  a  back  door  by  which  they 
may  escape.  So  these  marraboos  take  care  to  have 
a  subterfuge,  by  which  they  may  be  saved  from  blame 
through  the  failure  of  their  pretensions.  The  potency 
of  a  greegree  depends  upon  the  wearer's  fulfilling  some 
condition  which  is  attached  to  it  by  the  maker,  so 
that  when  it  fails,  it  is  easy  to  show,  or  at  least  to 
affirm,  that  this  condition  has  been  broken.  Take 
the  following  examples. 

A  poor  fellow  was  going  on  a  journey  into  an  un- 
healthy part  of  the  country,  and  being  afraid  of  the 
prevailing  fever,  he  bought  a  strong  greegree  to  save 
him  from  its  power.  Nevertheless,  he  was  assailed  by 


GREEGREES. 


19 


this  disease,  and  had  a  narrow  escape  with  his  life. 
On  his  recovery  and  return  home,  he  went  with  his 
friends  to  upbraid  the  marraboo  who  had  sold  the  use- 
less charm,  and  called  him  a  liar  and  cheat.  "  I  say- 
that  my  greegree  was  good,"  replied  the  priest.  "  Then 
why  was  I  taken  with  fever  and  almost  killed  ?  "  re- 
joined the  injured  man.  "My  greegree  was  good," 
retorted  the  other,  "  but  you  must  have  spoiled  it  by 
your  folly.  What  did  I  tell  you  to  do,  or  not  to  do, 
when  I  gave  it  to  you?"  "  You  bade  me  not  eat  any 
goat's  flesh  ;  and  I  was  very  careful  not  to  do  so ;  I 
have  eaten  none."  The  impostor  then  asked  him 
where  he  had  been,  and  on  receiving  an  answer, 
replied :  "  Oh  you  fool !  don't  you  know  that  a  man 
in  that  town  wished  to  do  you  harm,  and  so  he  mixed 
the  juice  of  goat's  flesh  with  your  kooskoos,  and  broke 
the  power  of  my  spell ! "  There  was  no  possibility  of 
answering  such  a  bold  assertion  as  this,  by  showing 
that  the  thing  could  not  have  happened;  and  the 
complainants  went  away  crest-fallen. 

On  another  occasion,  some  natives  wished  to  cross 
the  river  when  the  water  was  very  rough  by  reason 
of  a  strong  east  wind.  Being  rather  afraid,  they  ap- 
plied to  a  greegree  maker  who  lived  not  far  from  the 
stream  for  an  amulet  to  ensure  their  safe  return. 
Of  course  he  furnished  them  with  one.  But  after 
transacting  their  business,  on  recrossing  the  river, 
their  canoe  was  upset,  and  some  of  the  party  were 
drowned.  Indignant  at  having  been  imposed  upon, 
they  went  to  the  marraboo  and  informed  him  of  the 
catastrophe.  He  heard  their  story  with  great  patience, 


20 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


and  put  sundry  questions  to  them  about  the  accident ; 
meanwhile  rummaging  his  brain  for  a  plausible  excuse 
for  the  failure  of  his  greegree.  Then,  assuming  an 
air  of  injured  innocence,  he  exclaimed,  "  Did  you  not 
see  that  the  man  who  steered  the  canoe  got 
afraid,  and  put  his  paddle  down  to  try  and  touch  the 
bottom  ?  That  act  spoiled  my  greegree,  and  the  wind 
was  able  to  upset  the  canoe."  The  rogue  had  ascer- 
tained that  the  steersman  was  among  the  drowned, 
and  as  he  knew  that  a  dead  man  could  not  answer 
for  himself,  he  cunningly  laid  the  blame  upon  him, 
attributing  the  catastrophe  to  his  unbelief. 

Thus  the  ignorant  Africans  are  deceived  and  fleeced 
by  impostors.  It  is  so  all  over  the  world,  for  where 
there  are  simpletons  there  will  also  be  knaves.  Even 
the  Mahometan  Negroes  are  not  free  from  this  super- 
stition, but  most  of  them  wear  a  greegree,  contain- 
ing, as  they  think,  "  the  name  of  Grod  "  or  some  words 
from  the  Koran.  These  amulets,  however,  are  not 
limited  to  such  writings,  but  are  made  of  a  great 
variety  of"  articles  to  which  fancy  has  attributed  a 
kind  of  sacredness. 

The  African  has  a  great  dread  of  the  unseen  world, 
which  he  supposes  to  be  peopled  with  genii,  fairies,  or 
evil  spirits  who  wish  to  play  tricks  upon  men.  Hence 
the  greater  part  of  their  religion,  if  such  it  may  be 
called,  consists  in  obviating  the  designs  of  these  ima- 
ginary foes.  The  heathen  marraboos  encourage  their 
superstitious  fears,  and  devise  antidotes  to  the  pre- 
tended mischief.  Mahometan  marraboos  say  that 
wearing  the  name  of  God  must  do  good,  and  they 


SENEGAMBIA  —  MONKEYS. 


21 


prepare  written  amulets,  which  are  enclosed  in  the 
usual  leathern  purse  or  pouch. 

It  is  a  common  idea  in  Senegambia,  that  the  supe- 
riority of  white  men  depends  upon  their  possessing  a 
more  sacred  greegree  than  the  Negroes  can  find ;  and  it 
is  currently  supposed  that  this  magic  charm  consists 
in  a  knowledge  of  the  name  of  Moses's  mother !  Euro- 
pean merchants  and  sailors  are  often  surprised  and 
confounded  at  being  asked  "Who  was  the  mother 
of  Moses  ?  "  When  they  reply  in  truth,  that  they  do 
not  know  (the  name  only  occurs  once  in  the  Bible), 
the  African  believes  that  they  are  wilfully  concealing 
it,  and  becomes  more  confirmed  in  his  supposition : 
for  why  should  they  hide  it,  if  they  had  not  a  reason 
for  so  doing  ? 

Can  anything  be  said  about  the  monkeys,  which 
have  been  described  as  peopling  the  trees  of  African 
forests,  and  chattering  about  the  strangers  who  visit 
them  ?  There  are  a  great  many  species  of  the  Simia 
or  ape  genus,  and  several  are  found  in  the  region  of 
Senegambia.  The  ourang-outang,  that  caricature  of 
the  human  figure,  does  not  seem  to  be  met  with  in 
the  interior  ;  but  it  still  frequents  the  districts  which 
border  on  the  gulf  of  Guinea.  Ancient  mariners  were 
dreadfully  afraid  of  these  animals,  which  attacked 
them  when  landing  on  the  coast,  throwing  nuts,  stones, 
and  sticks  at  them,  and  screaming  in  a  frightful 
manner,  so  that  they  were  thought  to  be  satyrs  or 
sylvan  deities.  They  are  still  formidable  creatures, 
when  a  troop  of  them  meet  one  or  two  lone  Negroes  ; 
for  they  are  very  strong,  so  that  several  men  cannot 
c  3 


22 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


hold  one  of  them.  A  Negro  boy  is  said  to  have  been 
carried  off  by  them,  and  kept  in  their  society  for  some 
months.  They  behaved  very  kindly  to  him,  especially 
the  females,  who  furnished  him  with  plenty  of  nuts 
and  fruits,  and  defended  him  from  serpents  and  beasts 
of  prey. 

A  person  living  on  the  Gambia  kept  several  mon- 
keys taken  in  the  neighbourhood  when  young.  They 
became  quite  domesticated,  and  more  familiar  than 
was  always  agreeable.  Their  name  was  "  mischief." 
It  was  impossible  to  put  them  anywhere  but  they 
would  play  some  mischievous  pranks.  They  took 
the  eggs  out  of  the  hens'  nests  and  sucked  them,  they 
milked  the  goats,  they  rolled  bottles  of  wine  and 
beer  along  the  floor  of  the  piazza  for  their  amusement, 
they  turned  sand-glasses  several  times  and  then  broke 
them,  apparently  to  see  what  was  in  them,  they 
picked  mats  and  mops  to  pieces,  and  delighted  to 
play  tricks  upon  other  animals.  Though  forbidden  to 
enter  the  rooms  of  the  house,  —  a  prohibition  which 
they  well  understood, — they  would  sometimes  venture 
a  dash  at  the  cupboard  where  sugar  or  sweetmeats 
were  kept,  running  the  risk  of  a  thrashing,  which 
they  were  conscious  of  deserving.  In  fine,  they  were 
so  intolerably  mischievous  that  at  length  it  was  found 
necessary  to  destroy  them. 

Some  of  these  monkeys  are  rough  and  shaggy 
creatures,  capable  of  bearing  hardships ;  others  are 
very  delicate,  and  pine  and  die  if  exposed  to  cold  or 
other  severities.  The  different  species  live  separately  ; 
but  they  are  amazingly  numerous,  not  being  much 


SENEGAMBIA  —  MONKEYS. 


exposed  to  destruction  by  other  brutes.  Their  prin- 
cipal enemy  is  the  serpent,  which  follows  them 
through  the  boughs  of  the  trees,  and  glides  softly 
upon  them  when  asleep.  Leopards  and  others  of 
of  the  feline  race  also  manage  to  catch  monkeys. 
They  themselves  live  principally  upon  fruits,  leaves, 
insects,  and  perhaps  the  eggs  of  birds.  For  though 
the  feathered  tribe  of  Africa  seem  to  have  an  instinct  of 
building  their  nests  in  places  where  monkeys  cannot 
get  at  them,  yet  they  do  not  always  succeed  in  elud- 
ing their  nimble  neighbour,  who  will  rob  and  destroy 
their  nests  for  mere  mischief's  sake.  They  leap  from 
bough  to  bough,  and  from  tree  to  tree,  with  great 
activity,  even  when  burdened  with  their  young  ones 
clinging  to  them ;  so  that  they  literally  follow  a  tra- 
veller through  the  wood,  chattering,  making  grimaces, 
and  sometimes  throwing  things  at  him  or  shaking  the 
boughs  over  him.    Green  monkeys  abound  in  some 


GREEN  MONKEY. 


of  the  woods  which  border  on  the  Niger,  and  from 
their  colour  it  is  almost  impossible  to  see  the  animals 
which  persist  in  keeping  you  company  over  head. 

C  4 


24 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


As  the  vessel  continues  to  stop,  let  us  try  to  procure 
a  little  game  for  dinner.  If  you  are  a  good  sports- 
man your  bag  will  soon  be  filled  with  partridges,  guinea 
fowls,  or  wild  pigeons ;  for  these  birds  are  far  from 
being  shy,  not  having  learned  to  fear  the  gun.  A  native 
may  have  occasionally  shot  a  bird,  but  probably  not 
in  this  immediate  neighbourhood,  and  he  never  fires 
at  one  when  on  the  wing.  Blackie  is  a  bad  marksman, 
and  he  does  not  know  what  a  good  gun  means.  As 
iron  is  very  precious  in  his  eyes,  he  thinks  that  the 
value  of  a  gun  depends  much  upon  its  weight. 
Another  sign  of  its  goodness  is  its  flashing  well  in  the 
pan.  So  Blackie  goes  to  a  merchant's  store,  where 
every  article  imported  from  Europe  is  sold,  from  a  bar 
of  iron  or  a  bale  of  cloth  to  a  needle  and  thread.  He 
carries  with  him  some  gold,  ivory,  bees  wax,  ground- 
nuts, or  other  African  commodity,  to  exchange  for  a 
gun.  He  knows  the  value  of  his  own  articles,  or  at 
least  the  merchant  does  not  quarrel  with  him  on 
their  account.  "  Now  show  me  one  good  gun."  The 
gentleman  offers  him  a  nice  light  fowling-piece, 
with  which  he  might  manage  to  kill  a  bird."  "  How 
much  him  be  ?  "  "  Thirty  dollars,"  says  the  merchant. 
"  You  tink  me  fool-man,  gib  tirty  dollars  for  dis  gun : 
him  no  weigh  notting."  The  merchant  shows  him 
another,  which  he  says  will  perhaps  suit  him  better. 
It  is  of  Birmingham  manufacture,  worth  nothing ;  its 
prime  cost  being  only  a  few  shillings :  but  it  is  heavy, 
and  has  a  good  steel  and  flint.  "  This  is  only  five 
dollars."  The  Negro  feels  that  it  has  weight  of  metal, 
and  his  eyes  brighten  with  hope.    It  is  new  and  clean, 


FOOLA  VILLAGE. 


25 


makes  a  good  click,  and  sparkles  well  when  the  trig- 
ger is  drawn.  So,  after  a  while,  he  tries  it  with  a 
charge  of  powder.  Bravo !  How  it  flashes !  The  bargain 
is  concluded,  and  five  dollars'  worth  of  goods  are  given 
for  this  trumpery  article,  which  no  bird  need  fear  at 
a  distance  of  many  yards ;  and  which  will  soon  need 
to  be  repaired,  if  it  does  not  burst ;  especially  as  the 
owner  has  no  mercy  on  his  powder. 


FOOLA  VILLAGE. 


Perhaps,  in  this  shooting  ramble,  you  may  fall  in 
with  a  village  of  the  pastoral  Foolas  who  abound  in 
this  neighbourhood.  For  there  has  been  no  war  here 
for  some  years ;  and  this  timid  tribe  frequent  the 
most  peaceful  parts  of  the  country.    Let  us  enter  this 


26 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


village  or  encampment  of  theirs  and  observe  it 
minutely,  for  it  is  different  from  any  town  that  we 
have  yet  seen. 

It  is  of  an  oblong  shape,  fenced  with  a  stockade- 
On  passing  through  the  gate,  you  see  a  long,  broad 
street  before  you,  with  another  exit  at  the  farther  end. 
Cane  huts  thatched  with  grass  are  erected  along  each 
side  of  the  street  in  a  regular  manner ;  in  this  respect 
quite  differing  from  a  Mandingo  or  Jollof  town.  These 
dwellings  are  pretty,  clean,  and  orderly.  They  consist 
of  a  single  apartment,  with  a  raised  platform  of  cane- 
work,  like  the  frame  of  a  couch,  to  answer  the  pur- 
poses of  bed  and  sofa.  Behind  each  hut  is  a  little 
garden,  reaching  to  the  barricade  of  the  town.  Few 
of  the  men  are  at  home,  for  they  are  out  herding  their 
cattle.  There  is  one,  however,  sitting  beside  the  gate 
to  keep  watch,  but  employing  himself  in  weaving 
strips  of  cloth  in  a  very  primitive  manner.  Women 
are  walking  about  or  gossiping,  and  the  children  play 
with  each  other,  without  any  impediment  of  clothing. 

The  colour  of  these  Foolas  is  as  peculiar  as  their 
customs  and  modes  of  living.  Their  complexion  is 
light,  and  they  have  none  of  the  peculiarities  of  the 
Negro  form  or  countenance.  Some  of  those  young 
women  are  fair  enough  to  be  Mulattoes  or  Spaniards, 
and  are  of  very  handsome  shape.  You  probably  never 
saw  finer  specimens  of  the  human  frame,  except  in 
statuary.  Nor  is  the  work  of  nature  disguised,  for  the 
rotund  limbs  and  graceful  figures  of  these  Foolah 
girls  have  no  covering.  The  narrow  strip  of  calico 
tied  round  their  loins  only  prevents  their  modesty  and 


PASTORAL  FOOLAS. 


27 


yours  from  being  offended,  whilst  you  look  at  their 
unartificial  gracefulness.  But  the  charms  of  women 
in  tropical  climates  fade  early,  and  the  demi-nude 
figure  of  a  matron  is  far  from  pleasing. 

The  pastoral  Foolas  do  not  follow  agriculture,  but 
only  attend  to  cattle ;  they  are  the  herdsmen  of 
Western  Africa.  They  have  no  lands  or  dwelling- 
places  of  their  own.  They  put  themselves  under  the 
protection  of  a  powerful  chieftain,  to  whom  they  pay 
cattle  for  tribute.  When  the  grass  is  eaten  up  in  one 
locality,  they  emigrate  to  another;  and  a  removal  costs 
them  very  little  trouble.  It  is  probably  on  this  ac- 
count that  they  use  cane  huts  in  preference  to  mud 
buildings. 

The  Foolas  have  a  language  of  their  own,  though 
they  generally  speak  Mandingo.  It  is  a  very  peculiar 
language,  altogether  differing  in  pronunciation  and 
structure  from  other  native  dialects.  The  Mandingo, 
as  we  have  said,  is  simple  in  its  grammar,  soft  and 
melodious  in  its  sounds.  The  Jollof  is  rather  gut- 
tural, and  a  little  more  involved  in  its  syntax.  The 
Foola  is  altogether  complex  in  its  structure,  with 
many  intricate  changes  of  number  and  person,  show- 
ing that  it  was  once  the  language  of  an  elegant  and 
probably  a  learned  people.  In  pronunciation  it  has  a 
hiatus,  like  the  Kaffir  click,  which  is  a  strange  co- 
incidence. But  there  are  other  points  of  resemblance 
between  the  herdsmen  of  Senegambia  and  those  of 
South  Africa. 

Who  are  these  Foolas  ?  How  did  they  come  here  ? 
They  are  doubtless  the  Leucothiopes  of  Ptolemy  and 


28 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


Pliny,  the  former  placing  them  near  to  Foota-Jallon, 
the  latter  to  Foota-Foro.  Some  think  them  to  be  the 
remains  of  the  Carthaginians  or  Phoenicians  who 
colonised  the  northern  shores  of  Africa,  and  were  con- 
quered by  the  Romans  and  afterwards  by  the  Maho- 
metans. Many  of  their  words  end  like  Hannibal, 
Hasdrubal,  Hamilcar,  &c.  They  are  evidently  the 
relics  of  a  civilised  people,  and  they  declare  them- 
selves to  be  descended  from  white  men.  Two  other 
tribes  speak  the  same  language  with  themselves,  the 
Teucolars  and  Lowbies,  whom  we  shall  meet  with 
hereafter. 

We  saw  a  man  weaving  at  the  gate  of  the  Foola 
village.  This  introduces  us  to  one  of  the  manufac- 
tures of  Western  Africa ;  and  it  may  be  well  to  de- 
scribe this  art  from  the  beginning.  When  the  cotton 
is  gathered  from  the  trees,  the  women  lay  a  small 
quantity  of  it  upon  a  smooth  stone  or  piece  of  wood, 
and  roll  out  the  seeds  with  an  iron  spindle.  They 
then  spin  it  into  thread  with  the  common  distaff.  As 
may  be  supposed,  the  thread  is  not  fine,  but  it  is 
strong,  and  garments  made  of  it  are  very  durable.  It 
is  woven  by  men  on  a  narrow  loom,  so  that  the  lengths 
of  cloth  do  not  exceed  four  inches  in  width.  These 
lengths  are  sowTn  together  to  make  a  garment,  by 
which  means  it  can  be  made  of  different  colours,  by 
intermingling  strips  of  blue. 

Negroes  understand  the  art  of  dyeing.  The  indigo 
plant  grows  luxuriantly  in  this  country,  and  blue  is 
the  most  common  colour  used  by  the  people.  The 
dye  is  obtained  from  the  fresh  plant,  without  any  pro- 


SENEGAMBIA  —  MANUFACTURES. 


29 


cess  of  manufacturing  it  into  the  indigo  of  commerce. 
The  leaves,  either  fresh  or  dried  in  the  sun,  are  put 
into  a  pot,  and  a  very  strong  ley  is  poured  upon  them. 
This  ley  is  called  by  the  Mandingoes  sai-gee,  or  ash- 
water,  and  it  is  made  by  filtering  water  through 
wood  ashes  (principally  of  the  Mimosa  nitta  and 
Mimosa  pulverulenta).  The  leaves  remain  in  the 
ley  for  about  four  days,  during  which  time  it  is  oc- 
casionally stirred ;  then  the  pot,  which  was  only  half 
full,  is  filled  up  with  the  sai-gee,  and  frequently 
stirred  during  other  four  days.  By  this  time  it  has 
fermented  and  thrown  up  a  copper-coloured  scum. 
It  is  allowed  to  rest  for  another  day,  and  is  then  fit 
for  use.  The  cloth  is  wetted  with  cold  water,  wrung 
out,  and  put  into  the  pot,  where  it  remains  for  two 
hours.  Being  taken  out,  it  is  hung  upon  a  stick, 
washed  in  cold  water,  beaten  with  a  flat  stick,  wrung 
hard,  and  again  put  into  the  pot.  This  dipping  is 
repeated  four  times  a  day  for  four  successive  days, 
when  the  dyeing  is  completed,  and  a  very  beautiful 
colour  is  obtained.  As  it  requires  some  little  art  to 
perform  this  operation  successfully,  so  as  to  clear  the 
cloth  and  admit  the  indigo  to  all  parts  of  it  alike,  there 
are  women  who  make  it  their  business  or  profession. 
They  use  no  mordant,  and  yet  secure  a  lasting  dye. 
When  the  operation  fails,  which  is  seldom  the  case 
in  experienced  hands,  it  happens  during  the  ferment- 
ing process. 


30 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


CHAP.  II. 

Patience  in  Africa. — Hippopotamus. — Alligators. — Gipsy  Foolas. 
— Macarthy's  Island.  —  A  Negro  King.  — Effects  of  a  Mirror. — 
Voyage  upwards.  —  A  Robin  Hood.  —  His  strange  Doings,  and 
appalling  Greegree.  —  A  British  Misadventure.  —  Visiting  the 
Robber's  Den.  —  African  Timber.  —  White  Ants.  —  Palm  Wine. 
—  Fatatenda.  —  Tedious  Trading.  —  The  King  of  Woolli. —  Koos- 
koos.  —  Medina.  —  White  Negroes.  —  Mumbo  Jumbo.  —  Wives. 

We  continue  our  voyage  very  slowly  up  the  river. 
The  sea-breeze  begins  to  fail  us,  even  by  day,  so  that 
we  cannot  proceed  whilst  the  tide  ebbs.  Whilst  it 
flows,  our  boats  tow  us  on,  and  we  have  the  satisfac- 
tion of  knowing  that  we  do  make  progress  in  the 
right  direction.  Patience  is  a  very  necessary  virtue 
in  Africa.  You  can  do  nothing  in  a  hurry,  except  it 
be  to  die.  All  kinds  of  business  and  locomotion  are 
performed  leisurely.  But  in  sickness  you  travel  at 
railway  speed  to  reach  the  last  goal.  If  you  would 
have  any  enjoyment  in  Africa,  you  must  get  a  merry 
and  contented  heart,  which  Solomon  says  S€  is  a  con- 
tinual feast."  Imitate  the  natives,  who  make  no 
account  of  time,  and  who  only  try  to  make  them- 
selves comfortable  for  the  present  moment.  Always 
remember  that  "  to-morrow  comes  after  to-day." 


HIPPOPOTAMUS. 


3! 


What  is  this  snorting  which  we  hear  in  our  vicinity, 
especially  in  the  evening  ?  And  that  black  head  which 
occasionally  appears  above  the  water,  playing  at  water- 
works like  a  whale  ?  It  is  the  hippopotamus  or  river- 
horse;  but  the  Negroes  term  it  more  rightly  the 
river-pig.    This  is  an  innocent  monster,  never  injur- 


HIPPOPOTAMUS. 


ing  any  one  except  in  revenge.  Then  its  anger  is 
furious.  One  of  them,  having  been  fired  at  from  a 
boat  in  the  Gambia,  rushed  forward,  and  fixing  its 
tusks  on  either  side  of  the  keel  crushed  the  skiff  to- 
gether, as  if  it  had  been  a  nut-shell.  Whilst  the 
beast  was  venting  its  anger  upon  the  innocent  boat, 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


the  guilty  men  happily  escaped  by  swimming  ashore. 
We  only  remember  to  have  seen  one  herd  of  these 
creatures  feeding  on  the  grass,  early  in  the  morning ; 
for  they  live  chiefly  in  the  water,  and  are  very  timid 
on  land. 

The  ivory  of  the  hippopotamus's  tusk  is  harder 
than  that  of  the  elephant,  and  is  valued  by  the 
dentist.  The  flesh  of  the  young  animal  is  eaten  by 
natives.  The  skin  is  sometimes  made  into  thongs 
and  bucklers.  A  formidable  whip  for  driving  donkeys 
and  camels  made  from  this  hide  is  well  known  in 
Egypt  and  elsewhere,  under  the  name  of  coorbash. 
The  animal  attains  the  great  size  of  nearly  twelve 
feet  in  length,  and  is  of  enormous  bulk.  We  believe 
that  it  is  peculiar  to  the  rivers  and  lakes  of  Africa. 

Up,  up,  up  the  river.  We  pass  several  verdant 
isles,  the  larger  inhabited  by  men,  the  others  by  wild 
beasts.  We  now  become  very  familiar  with  the  sight 
of  alligators.  They  lie  in  multitudes  on  the  sunny 
banks  of  the  stream,  and  on  hearing  the  least  noise 
slip  into  the  water.  If  you  float  gently  down  in 
a  boat  during  the  heat  of  the  day,  you  will  see  them 
well ;  as  you  can  thus  pass  by  without  alarming  them, 
or  disturbing  their  light  slumbers.  At  night,  they 
prowl  about,  and  hesitate  not  to  make  a  prey  of  small 
animals,  and  sometimes  even  of  human  beings.  But 
they  will  seldom  attack  a  man  on  shore  whilst  there 
is  light.  Ludicrous  tales  are  told  by  the  Negroes  of 
their  dodging  the  alligator, — which  takes  much  time 
in  turning  its  long  body, — and  even  of  their  catching 
it,  or  getting  upon  its  back.  But  of  course  this  is  mere 


SENEGAMBIA  —  GIPSY  F00LAS. 


33 


talkee.  It  is  commonly  said  that  an  alligator  cannot 
bite  in  the  water,  when  it  is  not  able  to  rest  its  tail 
on  the  ground.  Whether  or  not  this  be  an  apocry- 
phal piece  of  natural  history,  we  cannot  say.  We 
always  feared  to  make  the  experiment,  lest  a  white 
body  should  be  more  delicate  than  a  black  one.  For 
the  Negro  is  bold  enough  in  the  water.  We  have 
seen  lots  of  children  swimming  in  places  abounding 
with  alligators,  and  sporting  themselves  there  for 
hours  together,  like  ducklings  without  fear,  and  with- 
out accident.  We  had  no  means  of  inquiring  of  Mr* 
Alligator,  if  he  was  frightened  at  the  children's  splash- 
ing, or  if  he  thought  them  too  nimble  for  him  to 
catch,  or  if  they  were  in  too  deep  water  for  him  to 
rest  his  tail  on  the  ground.  The  fact  of  their  being 
there  was  patent :  and  it  was  as  certain,  that  the  same 
urchins  would  not  have  dared  to  wade  in  the  margin 
of  the  river  by  day,  or  to  have  passed  near  it  by  night. 
The  eggs  of  this  reptile  are  often  found  in  the  sand: 
they  are  large,  strong  flavoured,  and  anything  but 
delicate  eating. 

Landing  near  a  small  town,  in  order  to  dispose  of 
some  cargo,  we  fell  in  with  some  Loubies  or  Gipsy 
Foolas.  They  are  a  stunted  and  ill-looking  set  of 
people  ;  roving  about,  making  and  selling  calabashes, 
canoes,  and  other  pieces  of  wood-work.  Two  or  three 
women  came  and  offered  to  sell  some  calabashes. 
These  are  bowls,  made  of  the  rind  or  shell  of  the  fruit 
of  a  large  gourd,  something  like  a  pumpkin.  It  is 
cut  into  two  hemispheres;  the  inside  is  taken  out; 
and  the  thick  rind  is  scraped,  polished,  and  perhaps 

D 


34 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


carved.  Those  offered  to  us  for  sale  were  very  pretty, 
and  we  wished  to  buy  one  or  two.  But  with  what 
kind  of  money  ?  The  black  ladies  wished  for  beads 
in  exchange.  Not  being  merchants,  we  did  not  happen 
to  have  any  of  these  female  ornaments  on  hand.  We 
had  n  cut-moneys,"  that  is,  quarter  pieces  of  a  dollar, 
which  is  current  coin  with  the  traders  of  the  Gambia. 
But  the  women  said  they  did  not  know  how  to  buy 
or  sell  cut-monies.  We  replied,  that  money  would 
purchase  food  and  clothes,  but  that  beads  were  use- 
less, as  they  could  not  be  eaten  or  drunk.  They 
laughed  at  this  philosophy,  and  went  away  with  their 
calabashes. 

Where  did  these  Loubies  come  from  ?  Nobody 
can  tell.  There  are  gipsies  in  all  lands,  most  of  them 
descended  from  an  Arab  stock ;  the  blood  of  Ishmael 
being  mixed  with  that  of  the  people  among  whom 
his  children  dwell.  According  to  this  theory,  the 
Loubies  are  descendants  of  some  wandering  Arabs, 
who  sojourned  amongst  the  pastoral  Foolas  when 
they  were  a  powerful  nation.  This  hypothesis  may 
be  as  near  the  truth  as  any  other. 

Now  we  reach  Macarthy's  island,  where  we  may 
take  a  little  rest ;  as  it  is  a  British  colony,  the  out- 
post of  civilisation  and  Christianity  on  the  western 
part  of  Senegambia.  The  island  is  about  six  miles  in 
length,  and  a  mile  and  a  half  wide  in  its  broadest  part. 
It  was  bought  from  the  King  of  Catabar  by  the  un- 
fortunate Sir  Charles  Macarthy ;  from  whom  it  has 
obtained  its  European  name.  The  natives  call  it 
Jinjinberry.    Its  soil  is  in  general  rich  and  productive. 


SENEGrAMBIA  —  MACAItTHY's  ISLAND.  35 

Many  parts  are  woody ;  as  only  the  valuable  part  of 
the  timber  has  been  cut  down.  A  considerable  portion 
of  the  land  is  flooded  during  the  rainy  season.  A  little 
clearing  and  good  engineering  would  probably  make 
it  a  healthy  station,  and  save  many  valuable  lives.  But 
this  would  cost  money ! 

Some  thousands  of  liberated  Africans  have  been 
sent  to  this  island  and  located  here,  for  whose  be- 
hoof the  Wesleyan  Missionary  Society  maintain  a 
small  establishment,  chiefly  conducted  by  native 
teachers  from  St.  Mary's  or  Sierra  Leone.  The  set- 
tlement has  a  commandant,  and  a  small  military  force 
of  native  soldiers ;  and  several  merchants  of  St. 
Mary's  have  stores  here,  to  facilitate  their  trading  with 
the  interior.  The  principal  town  is  called  Fort  St. 
George. 

On  such  an  island  there  are  no  native  "  lions  "  to 
be  seen.  Stay !  here  is  one :  no  less  a  personage  than 
his  majesty,  the  king  of  Catabar,  who  has  come  to 
visit  his  English  friends.  A  royal  visit !  what  does 
it  mean  in  this  outlandish  part  of  the  world  ?  Why, 
he  has  come  to  receive  presents,  or,  in  plain  language, 
to  beg.  Not  that  he  personally  asks  for  anything, 
unless  there  should  be  some  article  to  which  he  takes 
a  great  fancy :  but  his  attendants  have  no  modesty 
in  soliciting  presents  for  their  sovereign  and  them- 
selves. 

It  is  worth  while  to  see  how  so  great  a  king  as  that 
of  Catabar  conducts  himself  on  a  visit :  so  let  us  step 
into  a  British  house  which  he  has  entered.  He  is  a 
tall  fine  looking  person  (twenty  years  ago),  still  in 

D  2 


36 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


youthful  manhood  ;  but  his  face  does  not  bespeak 
much  wisdom  or  talent:  and  we  afterwards  hear 
that  his  reputation  does  not  stand  very  high  either 
for  council  or  war.  He  is  well-dressed  in  African 
fashion;  but  most  of  his  attendants  ate  uncouth 
mortals,  poorly  attired.  Salutations  have  passed  with 
the  master  of  the  house.  The  king  then  looks  round 
at  the  furniture,  and  admires  some  of  the  articles. 

What  now  is  the  matter  ?  The  king  catches  sight 
of  a  mirror,  and,  seeing  himself  in  it,  smiles  in  ad- 
miration of  his  own  handsome  figure.  The  others 
crowd  round,  and  look  in  the  glass  with  amazement. 
It  contains  the  whole  group,  and  everything  that  is 
in  the  room.  If  they  had  ever  seen  a  looking-glass 
before,  it  was  a  small  one;  they  never  saw  anything 
like  this.  But  presently  a  marraboo,  who  is  in  the 
royal  train,  comes  and  pulls  the  king  by  the  sleeve 
to  draw  him.  away,  urging  him  to  leave  the  house 
directly.  Surely  there  is  some  magical  incantation 
in  that  mirror  !  It  is  a  white  man's  greegree  !  It  is 
a  charm  which  will  throw  its  spells  around  you,  and 
make  you  the  white  man's  servant ! 

The  monarch  hesitates  for  a  moment.  But  he  is 
not  going  away  so  quickly,  without  any  presents ;  and 
he  likes  to  see  himself  in  the  mirror.  He  stands 
erect ;  he  is  a  head  taller  than  any  of  the  rest,  and 
his  embroidered  tunic  and  white  turban  set  him  off 
to  advantage.  So  the  marraboo  is  quieted,  and  the 
company  talk,  and  smile,  and  laugh  at  themselves 
and  at  each  other  before  the  mirror.  They  are  a 
singular  group !    A  little  conversation  ensues  on  the 


VISIT  FROM  THE  KING  OF  CATABAH.  37 

state  of  the  country.  The  use,  also,  of  a  few  European 
articles  is  explained  to  the  Africans,  who  cannot  help 
expressing  their  admiration  of  everything  European, 
and  throwing  out  some  hints  which  cannot  easily  be 
mistaken. 

Now  a  bottle  of  wine  is  produced,  and  his  majesty 
is  asked  to  take  a  little.  He  tastes  it,  and  puts 
down  the  tumbler.  One  of  his  attendants,  a  black- 
smith (who  is  an  important  personage  in  Africa,  and 
is  generally  one  of  the  royal  councillors),  intimates 
that  his  majesty  has  a  stomach-ache  this  morning, 
and  that  he  would  prefer  some  rum.  A  bottle  of 
this  fiery  liquor  is  immediately  produced  and  un- 
corked. The  blacksmith  takes  it  up,  fills  a  large 
tumbler — which  will  hold  nearly  a  pint — to  the  brim, 
and  gives  it  to  the  king,  who  without  an  instant's 
hesitation  drinks  it  off.  The  glass  is  replenished, 
and  the  blacksmith  helps  himself  to  a  good  draught, 
and  gives  the  remainder  to  one  or  two  others.  He 
then  pockets  the  bottle,  and  another  takes  possession 
of  the  tumbler,  both  for  the  use  of  royalty.  Some 
little  presents,  including  tobacco,  are  nowT  given ;  the 
king  shakes  hands  with  the  Englishman,  and  takes 
his  leave, — to  visit  another  friend.  We  suppose  that 
he  had  a  stomach-ache  in  every  house  to  which  he 
went,  for  when  he  set  off  to  return  home,  he  seemed 
to  walk  down  to  the  canoe  in  a  serpentine  manner. 
His  horses  were  on  the  other  side  of  the  river;  and 
we  hope  that  a  long  ride  would  restore  his  mental 
equilibrium  before  he  reached  home.  But  some  of 
these  fellows  are  never  quite  sober. 

D  3 


38 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


Leaving  Macarthy's  island,  we  embark  in  a  smaller 
vessel,  laden  with  those  species  of  merchandise  which 
suit  the  wants  and  tastes  of  the  interior  tribes;  and  we 
again  pursue  our  slow  voyage  up  the  noble  river.  We 
soon  pass  the  border  of  a  country  which  was  famous, 
at  that  time,  as  the  residence  of  King  Kemingtan. 
This  dreaded  chieftain  kept  the  whole  neighbourhood 
in  a  state  of  trouble,  did  much  damage  to  trade,  and 
even  annoyed  the  British  in  a  variety  of  ways.  He 
was  a  savage,  reckless  robber,  who  hesitated  not  to 
commit  crimes  of  greatest  enormity.  He  was  a  spe- 
cimen of  what  a  bold  freebooter  can  do  in  such  a 
country  as  Africa. 

Kemingtan  usurped  the  sovereign  power,  by  kill- 
ing his  two  elder  brothers,  to  whose  dead  bodies  he 
denied  the  rights  of  sepulture.  On  one  occasion,  a 
messenger  brought  him  tidings  of  a  defeat  sustained 
by  his  troops,  upon  which,  in  his  rage,  he  levelled 
his  musket,  and  shot  the  luckless  reporter  dead  upon 
the  spot.  On  another  occasion,  being  angry  at  a 
marraboo,  whom  it  is  not  lawful  to  kill,  he  cut 
off  his  hands  and  feet,  and  let  him  bleed  to  death, 
saying,  "  It  was  Grod  who  killed  him,  not  I,  for  I 
only  maimed  him."  This  was  probably  spoken  in  de- 
rision of  the  Mahometan's  Grod,  in  whom  he  did  not 
believe,  being  an  infidel.  Yet,  though  denying  the 
existence  of  a  supreme  ruler,  this  chieftain  was  not 
exempt  from  the  superstitious  fears  of  his  country- 
men; but  in  an  emergency  had  recourse  to  gree- 
grees  of  a  dreadful  kind.  Being  afraid  of  an  attack 
from  a  powerful  neighbour  whose  country  he  had 


SENEGAMBIA — A  HORRIBLE  GREEGREE.  39 

pillaged,  he  adopted  the  following  expedient,  sug- 
gested by  a  diviner  as  cruel  as  himself.  The  people 
were  summoned  together  outside  the  gate  of  Dunka- 
seen,  his  capital,  as  if  for  a  religious  purpose.  Vari- 
ous incantations  were  performed  by  his  marraboos, 
and  two  holes  were  dug  in  the  ground  close  to  each 
other.  The  drums  beat,  the  musical  instruments 
were  sounded,  and  the  dance  was  commenced  by  the 
griots.  All  at  once,  a  girl,  who  was  amongst  the  by- 
standers, was  pointed  out  to  Kemingtan's  men,  who 
seized  and  pinioned  her,  and  dragged  her  to  the  holes. 
One  of  her  legs  was  thrust  into  each  hole,  which  was 
immediately  filled  up  with  earth.  As  she  stood  in 
this  helpless  condition,  a  number  of  men  brought 
large  lumps  of  wet  clay,  and  built  round  her  body, 
until,  in  spite  of  her  entreaties  and  screams,  and 
those  of  her  mother  who  was  present,  they  covered 
her  head,  and  made  her  the  tenant  of  a  tomb.  This 
pillar  containing  a  human  victim  was  declared  to  be 
a  powerful  greegree,  sufficient  to  deter  any  mortal 
from  assaulting  the  town.  And  it  had  the  desired 
effect;  for  the  atrocious  deed,  which  was  noised  abroad, 
struck  such  terror  into  the  enemy,  that  they  dreaded 
to  assail  a  place  guarded  by  such  infernal  spells. 

At  length  Kemingtan  came  in  collision  with  the 
English.  He  seized  upon  a  British  vessel  laden  with 
merchandise,  and  appropriated  the  cargo  to  his  own 
use.  A  handful  of  native  troops  were  sent  out  against 
him,  commanded  by  a  gallant  captain,  who  knew 
nothing  of  the  art  of  war,  or  how  to  conduct  an  ex- 
pedition in  such  a  country  as  Africa.    The  soldiers, 


4(1 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


who  were  eager  enough  to  fight,  were  conveyed  in 
boats  up  a  creek  towards  Dunkaseen.  Having  landed, 
they  cut  their  way  through  a  dense  forest,  dragging 
with  them  two  or  three  small  pieces  of  brass  cannon. 
At  length  they  came  within  sight  of  the  town,  and, 
without  waiting  to  rest  or  refresh  themselves  after  a 
fatiguing  march,  immediately  opened  fire  upon  the 
walls,  thinking  that  these  would  fall  at  once,  and  that 
they  would  obtain  an  easy  victory.  But  it  required 
a  great  many  rounds  of  shot  to  make  a  breach  in 
mud  walls ;  and  when  this  was  effected,  their  allies, 
commanded  by  Mantumba  king  of  Woolli,  refused 
to  make  the  assault  as  they  had  promised  to  do.  By 
this  time,  the  British  native  troops  were  entirely 
exhausted,  especially  from  want  of  water.  Then  the 
lion  came  out  of  his  den,  and  boldly  attacked  them. 
A  skirmish  ensued,  in  which  some  native  soldiers  were 
killed,  and  two  Europeans  were  wounded.  A  hasty 
retreat  was  sounded,  and  had  not  their  flight  been 
covered  by  Mantumba  with  his  Mandingoes,  they 
would  probably  have  been  all  slain.  They  left  their 
cannon  behind  them,  which  Kemingtan  took  pos- 
session of,  and  mounted  on  a  mud  fort  in  his  town. 
He  now  defied  the  world  to  attack  him. 

Notwithstanding  his  victory,  the  chief  of  Dunka- 
seen was  very  angry  with  the  British  for  having 
joined  with  his  enemies ;  and  it  is  said  that  he  even 
threatened  to  attack  Macarthy's  island,  the  report  of 
which  kept  some  of  its  inhabitants  in  great  fear.  He 
intended,  however,  to  make  a  greegree  of  the  first 
white  man's  head  that  he  could  get.    This  terrified 


VISITING  THE  ROBBEITS  DEN. 


41 


the  traders,  as  their  small  vessels  were  not  prepared 
to  withstand  an  armed  force  brought  against  them  in 
canoes. 

It  happened  that  the  first  white  man  who  ventured 
into  Kemingtan's  presence  was  a  missionary,  who 
went  to  ask  him  to  send  his  sons  to  an  educational 
institution  for  natives  on  Macarthy's  island.  The 
king  seems  to  have  been  pleased,  both  with  the  bold- 
ness of  the  man  who  thus  ventured  into  the  lion's  den, 
and  with  the  generosity  of  the  offer.  He  allowed  him 
an  interview.  e(  His  looks  were  depraved,  determined, 
and  malignant.  Whilst  I  was  addressing  him,  he 
scarcely  looked  towards  me,  but  amused  himself  by 
playing  with  a  double-barrelled  gun ;  and  truly  I 
was  not  sorry  when  I  saw  him  lay  it  down.  He 
made  me  no  reply,  which  I  am  informed  he  rarely 
does  until  a  second  interview."  In  the  evening,  he 
sent  the  missionary  and  his  interpreter  some  rice, 
goat-mutton,  and  a  mess  of  milk  and  kooskoos. 
Next  morning  they  were  again  favoured  with  an 
interview.  u  He  received  us  very  civilly,  and  even 
condescended  to  look  at  me.  He  said  that  too  much 
talk  was  not  good,  but  what  he  said  he  meant ;  he 
was  glad  to  see  me ;  that  the  object  I  came  for  was 
very  good,  but  it  was  so  new  and  strange,  that  he 
could  not  promise  me  to  send  his  children ;  however, 
he  would  think  of  it."  He  then  accepted  the  pre- 
sents offered  to  him,  and  in  return  provided  the 
strangers  with  horses  and  guides  to  Fatatenda. 

As  the  level  of  this  part  of  the  country  is  con- 
siderably above  that  of  the  river,  it  is  not  overflowed 


42 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


by  the  annual  rains.  Here,  as  on  other  dry  districts, 
you  may  see  those  fine  species  of  timber  growing 
which  are  so  much  valued  in  England ;  such  as  the 
African  oak,  mahogany,  teak,  and  lignum  vitse. 
These  kinds  of  timber  do  not  crack  nor  warp  with 
change  of  weather.  They  have  been  seasoned  by  long 
growth  under  the  rays  of  a  tropical  sun,  and  have 
become  almost  indestructible,  except  by  fire.  Hence 
they  are  very  valuable  for  ship  furniture  and  fittings ; 
and  all  that  can  be  obtained  from  Africa  finds  a  ready 
market  in  Europe  and  America.  The  difficulty  of 
carriage  down  to  the  rivers,  and  the  effects  of  a 
tropical  climate  upon  British  ships  and  seamen,  alone 
prevent  more  being  exported.  These  hard  woods 
would  be  of  great  importance  in  the  country  itself  if 
good  houses  were  built,  as  they  are  not  destroyed  by 
the  white  ant. 

This  insect,  the  Termes  bellicosus,  is  one  of  the 
plagues  and  blessings  of  Africa ;  and,  as  one  of  the 
extraordinary  phenomena  of  natural  history,  we  must 
not  pass  it  by  without  observation.  We  could  not 
forget  it  in  Africa,  for  there  it  obtrudes  itself  upon 
our  attention  continually,  in  a  variety  of  ways.  It  is 
an  incessant  pest  to  the  traveller  when  he  rests  for  the 
night.  He  cannot  lay  any  of  his  boxes  or  traps  on 
the  ground,  for  fear  of  their  being  eaten  into,  or  wholly 
devoured  by  white  ants.  They  are  very  fond  of  soft 
wood,  and  will  spoil  a  good  plank  in  one  night.  They 
throw  up  mould  against  the  object  of  their  attack, 
and,  under  this  covered  way,  they  carry  on  their  de- 
predations with  extraordinary  despatch.   Suppose  you 


WHITE  ANTS. 


43 


have  left  a  box  on  the  earth,  or  against  the  side  of  a 
hut  for  a  few  days ;  when  you  come  to  look  at  it,  you 
find  a  little  mould  cleaving  to  it,  and,  as  it  were, 
glueing  it  to  the  earth  or  clay  wall.  On  removing  it, 
you  find  all  the  under  part  of  the  wood  gone,  a  thin 
surface  alone  remaining,  which  falls  into  dust  on 
being  touched.  The  cunning  insects  do  not  make 
holes  quite  through  the  wood,  lest  their  operations 
should  be  discovered. 

But  this  source  of  annoyance  is  also  a  means  of 
promoting  public  good.  The  termes  is  one  of  nature's 
scavengers.  The  immense  mass  of  wood  which  falls 
in  the  African  forests  and  plains  would  produce  a 
pestilence,  if  left  to  rot  slowly  on  the  surface  of  the 
ground ;  the  routes  also  would  be  obstructed.  But 
now,  as  soon  as  a  branch  or  tree  comes  down,  it  is 
attacked  by  the  white  ants,  which  soon  devour  its 
pith  and  fibre,  so  that  the  first  heavy  rain  breaks  the 
thin  shell,  and  mixes  its  debris  with  the  soil ;  and 
the  whole  soon  disappears.  So  do  native  towns,  when 
they  have  been  deserted  for  a  short  time.  The 
rafters  of  bamboo,  which  supported  the  thatch  of  the 
huts,  are  destroyed  by  termites  ;  the  roofs  fall  in  and 
become  a  prey ;  the  walls  of  unburned  clay  are  washed 
down  by  pitiless  showers,  and  nothing  remains  of  the 
late  habitations  of  men  save  a  few  mounds  of  earth, 
which  the  white  ant  now  occupies. 

Look  at  those  earthen  cones !  Some  of  them  are 
several  feet  high,  and  almost  as  big  as  a  small  hut. 
If  you  could  examine  one  of  them,  by  first  getting  rid 
of  its  inhabitants,  you  would  be  surprised  at  the  ac- 


44 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


curacy  and  beauty  of  its  internal  structure.  It  is 
composed  of  arched  chambers,  galleries,  and  maga- 


zines, all  communicating  with  one  another,  and  with 
the  royal  apartments  in  the  centre.  It  has  roads, 
staircases,  and  bridges,  not  excavated,  but  built  in 
the  most  scientific  manner.  The  skill  of  the  termes 
probably  exceeds  that  of  any  creature  except  civilised 
man. 

Each  town  or  colony  consists  of  three  distinct 
orders  of  termites.  The  highest  class,  or  nobility, 
are  the  only  perfect  insects,  as  having  wings.  They 
are  of  great  size,  being  equal  in  bulk  to  thirty  of  the 
labourers,  and  seem  to  enjoy  a  short  life  of  ease,  as 
they  neither  work  nor  fight.  But  their  honours  are 
of  brief  duration.  As  soon  as  their  four  wings  have 
grown  to  maturity,  they  either  sally  forth,  or  are 
driven  out  to  seek  and  form  new  settlements.  Then 
the  air  is  full  of  them.  They  fly  at  random,  knock- 
ing against  your  face  and  everything  else  that  comes 
in  their  way.    In  a  few  hours,  their  aerial  flights  are 


"WHITE  ANT'S  NESTS. 


WHITE  ANTS. 


45 


terminated,  and  all  their  soaring  is  gone  for  ever. 
They  lose  their  wings,  and  become  the  prey  of  birds, 
insects,  and  reptiles ;  or  they  fall  into  the  water  and 
perish.  They  are  also  captured,  roasted,  and  eaten 
by  the  negro.  A  few  pairs,  only,  out  of  many 
millions  survive,  and,  being  found  by  some  of  the 
lower  class  who  are  out  at  work,  are  by  them  elected 
kings  and  queens.  One  pair  founds  a  new  colony. 
The  new  sovereigns  are  immediately  enclosed  in  a 
large  chamber  of  clay,  from  which  they  have  no 
egress,  and  which  protects  them  from  enemies.  Their 
willing  subjects  begin  the  work  of  building  about  the 
royal  pair,  and  provide  for  the  future  "  hope  of  the 
nation."  The  queen  soon  becomes  very  big,  re- 
sembling a  large  white  snail.  She  is  said  to  reach 
to  20,000  or  30,000  times  the  size  of  an  ordinary 
termes,  and  to  become  1000  times  larger  than  her 
consort.  She  then  produces  eggs  with  extraordinary 
rapidity,  from  50,000  to  100,000  in  24  hours,  which 
are  quickly  carried  away  by  the  labourers,  and  placed 
in  the  cells  and  apartments  prepared  for  their  recep- 
tion. We  obtained  possession  of  two  or  three  of 
these  queens  by  storming  small  colonies.  It  is 
dangerous  to  attack  larger  ones ;  and  the  usual  way 
of  destroying  their  habitations  is  by  blowing  them  up 
with  gunpowder. 

The  second  class  of  termites  is  the  military,  or 
fighting  order.  They  do  nothing  else  than  act  as 
police  and  soldiers.  They  are  a  much  larger  and 
more  perfect  insect  than  the  lowest  class,  but  inferior 
to  the  nobility.    They  are  fierce  and  vindictive ;  so 


4G 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


that  great  care  must  be  used  in  approaching  a  settle- 
ment, especially  with  hostile  purposes.  The  bulk  of 
the  population  consists  of  labourers,  which  are  nearly 
a  hundred  times  as  numerous  as  the  soldiers.  They 
are  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  in  length,  and  re- 
semble our  ants.  By  a  wonderful  instinct,  given  by 
the  all-wise  Creator,  these  insects  pursue  their  respec- 
tive occupations  with  consummate  skill  and  perfect 
order,  each  knowing  its  own  sphere  of  labour,  and 
actively  performing  it,  as  if  it  were  the  only  work  to 
be  done  under  the  sun.  It  is  a  wonderful  community. 
Should  you  ask,  why  the  same  insect  lays  three  kinds 
of  eggs  at  the  same  time,  which  will  undergo  dif- 
ferent stages  of  development,  and  become  labourers, 
soldiers,  or  princes  ?  How  they  elect  their  sovereigns  ? 
Why  they  treat  royalty  with  so  much  honour,  and  yet 
imprison  it  more  closely  than  a  Chinese  emperor? 
How  each  comes  to  know  its  own  functions,  and  to 
fill  its  own  place  ?  How  they  understand  architec- 
ture; and  even  the  building  of  arches,  which  the 
ancient  Egyptians  did  not  know  ?  To  these,  and  all 
like  queries,  we  can  only  reply,  that  they  are  amongst 
the  mysteries  of  nature.  The  facts  are  so.  Let  him 
who  thinks  that  such  a  marvellous  economy  could  be 
produced  by  chance,  or  developed  from  inert  matter, 
explain  it  if  ne  can.  We  see  in  it  the  work  of  an 
Omnipresent  Deity. 

Do  you  see  that  man  climbing  the  lofty  palm,  which 
has  a  stem  straight  and  branchless  as  a  ship's  mast  ? 
You  perceive  that  he  has  a  hoop  of  rope  or  some 
other  material  round  his  waist  and  the  tree,  by  which 


47 


PALM  WINE. 


means,  with  the  help  of  hands  and  legs,  he  is  able  to 
mount  with  much  agility.    Yet  it  is  a  dangerous 


PALM  TREE. 


business.  He  is  a  gatherer  of  palm-wine.  He  makes 
incisions  in  the  bark  of  the  branches  at  the  top ;  hangs 
a  calabash  under  them,  and  leaves  the  matter  to 


48 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


Nature.  She  causes  the  juice  to  exude  from  the  palm, 
and  by  her  own  heat  ferments  the  liquid,  so  that 
when  the  man  returns,  he  finds  the  new  wine  ready 
for  sale  or  use.  It  is  something  like  our  cider  ;  and 
is  very  largely  drunk  by  the  Negroes  in  places  where 
this  palm  grows. 

The  beautiful  tamarind-tree  also  abounds  in  this 
neighbourhood,  and  in  most  parts  of  tropical  Africa. 
The  natives  understand  its  value  as  a  medicine,  and 
use  it  as  a  cooling  and  laxative  draught  in  all  fevers 
and  inflammatory  disorders. 

We  at  length  reach  Fatatenda,  a  trading  town  of 
some  importance.  It  is  about  500  miles  up  the  Gam- 
bia, and  the  most  inland  depot  of  European  mer- 
chandise. The  river  is  here  about  100  yards  wide, 
and  two  fathoms  deep  when  not  swollen  in  the  rainy 
seasons.  The  tide  rises  several  feet  at  this  great  dis- 
tance from  the  sea ;  but  vessels  proceed  no  farther,  as 
a  little  higher  up  are  the  falls  or  rapids  of  Barraconda. 
A  good  deal  of  commerce  is  here  transacted  by  servants 
of  European  merchants.  We  have  said  that  the  pro- 
cess of  trading  with  Negroes  is  very  tedious.  It  is 
impossible  to  bring  them  to  conclude  a  bargain,  if 
they  expect  to  gain  a  farthing  by  protracting  the  nego- 
tiation, and  wearying  you  out  with  endless  clamour. 
So  we  shall  proceed,  without  envying  the  merchant's 
vocation,  but  only  wishing  we  had  his  patience. 

A  ride  of  two  days  from  Fatatenda  will  bring  you 
to  Medina,  which  may  be  called  the  capital  of  Woolli, 
since  the  king  resides  in  this  town.  The  journey 
thither  is  through  a  deep  forest,  which  can  only  be 


W00LLI  —  HOW  TO  MAKE  KOOSKOOS.  49 

safely  traversed  by  a  person  well  acquainted  with  its 
intricate  and  devious  ways.  If  you  wish  to  have  an 
interview  with  his  sable  majesty,  you  can  obtain  it 
through  his  minister,  to  whom  a  suitable  present  must 
be  made.  Indeed,  everything  is  done  in  Africa  by 
means  of  gifts.  Without  these,  you  could  achieve 
nothing.  The  Frenchman,  Caillee,  who  went  into  the 
country  empty-handed,  was  treated  like  a  slave,  except 
when  his  falsehoods  about  his  early  history  and  con- 
version to  Mahometanism  were  believed  by  Moslem 
zealots.  On  the  contrary,  Dr.  Barth,  who  travelled 
like  a  gentleman  and  gave  gifts  to  every  one,  was 
treated  like  a  prince. 

When  you  have  satisfied  the  rapacity  of  the  Premier 
of  Woolli,  you  send  through  him  a  present  to  the 
king,  requesting  an  audience.  If  he  be  pleased  with 
your  offering,  he  will  grant  an  interview ;  otherwise, 
you  must  increase  the  value  of  your  present.  If 
satisfied,  he  sends  you  some  food,  which  costs  him 
nothing.  If  your  company  be  large,  a  sheep  or  goat 
may  be  furnished ;  if  small,  the  supply  will  probably 
consist  of  fowls  and  kooskoos.  The  last  named  dish  is 
universal  amongst  the  Negroes  of  Western  and  Interior 
Africa,  so  that  it  has  obtained  a  world-wide  fame. 
Would  you  like  to  taste  it  ?  Then  you  may  try  to 
make  some  in  the  following  manner. 

Take  some  flour  prepared  after  the  African  fashion. 
It  is  made  from  a  small  kind  of  grain,  called  millet  or 
Guinea  corn,  from  which  the  husk  is  separated,  and  it 
is  then  pounded  into  flour  in  large  mortars  by  the 
women  or  slaves.    Kice-flour  is  also  used.  A  kind  of 

E 


50 


TEE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


mutton  broth,  either  from  sheep  or  goat's  flesh,  is 
poured  over  the  meal  and  well  stirred,  so  that  a  sort  of 
hasty-pudding  is  the  result.  But  those  who  prepare 
kooskoos  in  the  most  approved  and  delicate  way,  do 
not  pour  broth  over  the  flour,  but  steam  the  latter 
over  a  pot  containing  a  stew  and  condiments,  so  that 
it  imbibes  the  flavour  of  the  meat  and  the  seasoning. 
This  is  a  slow  process  of  cooking,  but  a  very  success- 
ful one.  The  kooskoos  prepared  in  this  manner  has 
been  highly  commended  by  Europeans,  and  is  indeed 
far  from  unpalatable.  Of  course,  it  is  eaten  after  the 
simple  fashion  of  the  East.  The  food  is  put  into  a 
large  bowl,  and  the  guests  squat  round  it.  With 
some  fingers  of  the  left  hand  they  steady  the  bowl, 
and  with  those  of  the  right  they  help  themselves  to 
its  contents.  Sometimes  a  wooden  spoon  is  used. 
Flesh  or  shea-butter  is  also  eaten  with  the  kooskoos. 
But  in  whatever  way  this  dish  ma)^  be  prepared,  or 
whatever  may  be  its  accompaniments,  it  forms  the 
staple  supper  of  the  Negroes.  This  is  their  chief  meal. 
Breakfast  generally  consists  of  a  gruel,  with  perhaps 
a  little  tamarind  in  it,  to  give  it  an  acid  taste. 

When  Mungo  Park  visited  Medina,  the  existing 
king  was  named  Jatta.  He  was  a  venerable  old  man, 
favourably  spoken  of  by  Major  Houghton.  The 
traveller  was  forewarned  not  to  presume  to  shake 
hands  with  his  majesty,  as  this  was  not  etiquette. 
"  I  found  him  seated  upon  a  mat  before  the  door  of 
his  hut ;  a  number  of  men  and  women  were  arranged 
on  each  side,  who  were  singing  and  clapping  their 
hands.    I  saluted  him  respectfully,  and  informed  him 


INTERVIEWS  WITH  THE  KING  OF  WOOLLI.  51 

of  the  purport  of  my  visit.  The  king  graciously 
replied,  that  he  not  only  gave  me  leave  to  pass  through 
his  country,  but  would  offer  up  his  prayers  for  my 
safety.  On  this,  one  of  my  attendants,  seemingly  in 
return  for  the  king's  condescension,  began  to  sing,  or 
rather  to  roar,  an  Arabic  song,  at  every  pause  of 
which  the  king  himself,  and  all  the  people  present, 
struck  their  hands  against  their  forehead,  and  ex- 
claimed with  devout  and  affecting  solemnity,  Amen, 
Amen."  His  majesty  then  promised  a  guide.  Next 
morning  Mr.  Park  repeated  his  visit,  and  found  him 
sitting  upon  a  bullock's  hide,  warming  himself  before 
a  large  fire.  He  received  the  traveller  tenderly,  and 
entreated  him  to  desist  from  trying  to  penetrate  into 
the  interior ;  for  fear  he  should  meet  the  same  fate 
as  Major  Houghton. 

The  Eev.  W.  Fox,  probably  the  last  white  man  who 
has  visited  Medina,  describes  it  as  a  walled  town,  con- 
taining about  twelve  hundred  inhabitants,  most  of 
whom  are  pagans.  "  The  wall  is  about  eight  feet 
high,  and  has  three  entrances  or  gates,  between  each 
of  which  the  ground  is  excavated  several  feet  deep." 
The  king's  name  was  Mansa  Koi.  He  was  rather 
stout,  about  sixty  years  old,  and  had  reigned  thirteen 
years.  His  residence  and  apparel  differed  little 
from  those  of  his  subjects.  "  We  found  the  old  king 
lounging  upon  his  bed  inside  his  hut,  and  I  was  seated 
beside  him,  the  rest  of  the  company  squatted  on  the 
floor."  His  majesty  was  very  complaisant,  said  u  very 
good  "  to  what  was  proposed,  and  gave  free  permis- 
sion to  "  pass  on." 

£  2 


52 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


At  this  time,  there  might  have  been  seen  in  Bam- 
bako,  a  neighbouring  town,  two  of  those  singular 
beings,  called  by  the  Mandingoes  "Funne,"  and  by- 
Spaniards  "  Albinos,"  or  White  Negroes.  These  are 
occasionally  met  with  in  tropical  Africa.  Their 
colour  evidently  proceeds  from  a  disease,  probably  of 
the  skin,  as  they  are  very  sensitive  to  the  stings  of 
insects.  They  seldom  live  long.  Those  at  Bambako 
were  females  ;  one  about  twenty-five  years  of  age,  the 
other  about  fifteen.    They  appeared  sickly,  but  were 

robust,  and  said  to 
enjoy  good  health. 
Their  parents  had 
other  children  quite 
black.  Albinoes  are 
regarded  as  pheno- 
mena, or  "  wonder- 
ful things,"  by  the 
natives,  but  they  are 
not  shunned. 

Here  is  another 
strange  sight !  It  is  a 
singular  dress,  made 
of  bark,  hanging 
upon  a  tree  near 
the  entrance  of  the 
town.  It  belongs  to  Mumbo  Jumbo.  Who  is 
he  ?  and  when  is  his  dress  worn  ?  Let  us  see.  As 
the  darkness  of  night  is  approaching,  dismal  cries  are 
heard  in  the  woods.  They  gradually  approach  the 
town,  till  by  and  by  a  figure,  dressed  in  the  habit 
above  mentioned,  comes  to  the  bentang.    He  is 


SENEGAMBIA  —  MUMBO  JUMBO. 


53 


armed  with  a  rod  of  public  authority,  and  all  the  in- 
habitants assemble  around  him,  women  as  well  as 
men.  Indeed  the  fair  sex  are  chiefly  concerned  in 
the  issues  of  this  pantomime.  The  usual  songs  and 
dances  commence,  and  are  continued  till  midnight. 
But  the  wonted  gaiety  and  mirth  with  which  these 
amusements  are  ordinarily  pursued,  are  absent  from 
many  breasts  on  the  present  occasion.  Conscience 
is  doing  its  work  in  female  hearts,  which  are  trem- 
bling for  the  results.  By  and  by  Mumbo  Jumbo 
points  out  his  victim,  who  is  immediately  seized, 
stripped  naked,  tied  to  a  post,  and  severely  beaten 
with  his  rod.  It  is  Lynch  law.  There  is  no  resisting 
— no  appeal.  The  unfortunate  woman  is  thus  publicly 
scourged,  amidst  the  derisive  laughter  of  the  whole 
population;  and  none  mock  her  more  than  her  own  sex, 
when  their  own  fears  have  been  dissipated  about 
themselves. 

What  has  the  woman  done  ?  and  who  is  Mumbo 
Jumbo  ?  He  is  either  her  husband,  or  some  friend  to 
whom  has  been  committed  the  charge  of  this  business; 
but  the  mask  prevents  his  being  known.  And  the 
wife's  fault,  for  which  she  is  thus  indecently  chastised, 
is,  that  she  has  been  a  quarrelsome  termagant  in  the 
house.  For,  as  the  Pagan  Negroes  are  not  limited 
in  the  number  of  their  wives,  and  some  of  them  have 
a  great  many,  family  broils  often  arise,  as  might  be 
expected.  Sometimes  the  women  quarrel  so  violently 
that  they  refuse  to  submit  even  to  their  husband's 
decision.  When  he  finds  that  his  authority  is  despised, 
and  that  he  can  no  longer  rule  his  own  household,  he 

E  3 


54 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


appeals  to  the  town  councillors,  who  have  recourse  to 
Mumbo  Jumbo.  It  is,  therefore,  a  device  of  the  men 
reserved  for  cases  of  emergency,  to  uphold  their  own 
dignity,  and  "  tame  the  shrew  "  of  their  large  family. 
So  also  the  ominous  dress  is  hung  up  in  terrorem,  in 
a  place  where  it  is  likely  to  be  often  seen  by  the 
women ;  just  as  a  rod  is  sometimes  exhibited  on  the 
master's  desk  at  school,  to  keep  unruly  lads  in  check, 
through  fear  of  unpleasant  consequences. 

Wives  are  usually  purchased  in  Africa,  their  price 
in  the  west  being  commonly  reckoned  at  the  value  of 
two  slaves.  If,  however,  the  girl  be  handsome,  so 
that  the  man  is  thought  to  be  in  love,  her  parents 
ask  a  great  deal  more  for  her.  As  the  money  is  pro- 
fessedly given  in  compensation  for  the  services  which 
the  young  woman  could  render  to  her  parents,  the 
bargain  is  struck  with  them.  The  girl's  consent  may, 
or  may  not  be  asked  —  it  is  of  no  importance ;  she 
must  obey,  or  take  the  direful  consequences.  For  if 
the  parents  have  once  testified  their  consent  to  the 
suitor's  proposals,  by  eating  some  kola-nuts  which 
he  has  given  them  as  a  sign  of  agreement,  their 
daughter  must  either  take  this  man  or  remain  a 
spinster.  If  an  attempt  should  be  made  to  give  her 
to  another  at  any  future  period,  the  old  sweetheart 
could  come  and  take  her  for  his  slave. 

The  day  of  the  wedding  is  now  fixed  upon  (we 
speak  of  the  Mandingoes  and  their  neighbours),  and 
a  few  friends  are  invited  to  be  present.  Plenty  of 
food  is  prepared  for  the  occasion.  At  sunset,  the 
bride  is  taken  by  some  women  into  a  hut,  and  arrayed 
in  a  white  cotton  dress  which  reaches  to  her  feet. 


SENEGAMBIA  —  MARRIAGE. 


65 


The  poor  thing  is  then  seated  in  the  middle  of  the 
hut,  and  the  old  cronies  squat  round  her,  and  give 
her  a  long  lecture  about  her  future  behaviour.  The 
monotony  of  this  instruction  is  happily  interrupted 
by  gay  girls,  who  come  in  occasionally,  dancing  and 
singing.  The  rest  of  the  company  have  been  feasting 
and  eating  kola-nuts.  When  all  are  satiated,  the 
usual  amusements  take  place,  and  are  continued  till 
dawn  of  day.  But  about  midnight,  the  bride  is 
silently  led  to  the  hut  which  she  is  to  occupy  in 
future ;  and  upon  a  given  signal,  the  bridegroom  also 
steals  away  from  the  mirthful  company. 

Some  rich  Negroes  boast  of  having  a  great  many 
wives ;  but  Mahometans  are  limited  to  four.  As 
these  latter  usually  pay  more  for  their  consorts,  they 
expect  even  a  greater  deference  and  submission  to 
their  will  than  the  Pagan  Negroes  do.  Except  where 
a  stern  Moslemism  prevails,  in  the  central  regions, 
Negro  wives  have  much  liberty,  and  are  permitted  to 
enjoy  all  public  amusements.  Indeed,  their  cheerful 
singing  and  agile  dancing  form  a  great  part  of  the 
usual  night's  entertainments.  The  husband's  autho- 
rity is  very  great,  and  he  has  the  liberty  of  adminis- 
tering gentle  castigations  in  case  of  disobedience  or 
unruliness.  If  a  wife  should  think  that  she  is  treated 
with  undue  severity,  she  may  appeal  to  a  public 
council ;  but  as  this  is  composed  of  husbands,  she 
has  little  chance  of  success.  If  she  should  be  heard 
to  complain  of  their  decision  against  her,  she  will 
probably  be  brought  to  submission  by  the  rod  of  the 
redoubtable  Mumbo  Jumbo. 


E  4 


5G 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


CHAP.  III. 

African  Fever.  —  Sand-spouts. —  Dreadful  Heat.  —  Cure  of  Fever. — 
The  First  Shower.  —  Sowing  and  Keaping.  —  A  Tornado.  —  Atmo- 
spheric Phenomena. — Bondu. — Boolibany. — Dress. — Teucolars. — 
Visits  to  the  King. — Commerce. — Kajaaga. — Serawoollies. — Anec- 
dotes of  Abdul-kader. — Mahometan  Proselytes. — Slave  Come. — 
Poor  Nealee. — Hunting  Slaves. — Domestic  Slavery.  —  Country  of 
Kasson. — Hyaenas. — Dressing  Leather. — Negro  Surgery. 

Let  us  suppose  that  your  exposure  to  the  heat  during 
this  journey  to  Medina  has  brought  on  a  fever.  This 
is  very  likely  to  be  the  case.  It  would,  also,  be  very 
convenient  to  have  your  "  seasoning "  attack  before 
you  go  farther  into  the  interior,  and  especially  before 
the  commencement  of  the  rains.  Time  has  been 
passing  whilst  you  have  been  looking  about  the 
country,  and  the  month  of  May  has  set  in  with 
terrific  heat.  The  sun  is  vertical,  and  the  thermo- 
meter rises  in  the  forenoon  to  104°  or  110°  of  Fahr.  in 
the  shade,  where  it  remains  till  ten  o'clock  at  night ; 
it  then  recedes  a  few  degrees  only  till  morning. 
"  The  grasshopper  is  a  burden,"  and  the  least  exertion 
is  irksome  during  many  hours  of  the  day.  The 
broken  and  restless  slumbers  of  night  afford  little 
refreshment.     Perhaps,  also,  the  "  prickly  heat  " 


AFRICAN  FEVER. 


57 


covers  your  body  with  distressing  itchiness.  In  the 
evening,  if  you  burn  a  candle,  millions  of  mosquitoes 
assail  you,  and  at  length  drive  you  to  bed,  to  hide 
yourself  under  the  mosquito-curtains. 

The  wind  is  sometimes  high,  coming  from  the 
desert,  blowing  in  gusts  and  whirlwinds,  with  columns 
of  sand,  which  are  singular  to  behold,  especially  if 
they  cross  the  river.  When  one  of  these  sand-spouts 
passes  a  hut,  it  will  probably  whirl  the  roof  high  into 
the  air,  and  leave  every  corner  of  the  dwelling  full  of 
debris  of  the  desert.  The  air  is  scorching  hot,  as  if  it 
came  from  a  fiery  furnace,  and  it  licks  up  every  drop 
of  water  except  the  river.  Wooden  articles  are  cracked 
or  warped.  Drawers  refuse  to  open,  boxes  and  desks 
will  not  shut :  everything  feels  hotter  than  yourself, 
whilst  you  feel  burning.  The  water  is  at  the  tem- 
perature of  a  hot-bath  in  England :  and  the  sailor  says 
that  a  chop  could  be  cooked  on  the  iron  of  the  ship's 
anchor. 

You  feel  peculiarly  heavy,  dull,  and  restive :  next 
day  you  are  in  a  burning  fever.  The  primary  object 
is  to  break "  it,  or  obtain  an  intermission ;  for  if 
you  can  change  it  to  an  intermittent,  you  may  soon 
recover.  You  take  all  kinds  of  sudorific  medicines, 
apparently  without  success.  A  friend  says,  "  Try  this 
native  tea,  I  am  sure  it  will  do  you  good."  So,  you 
swallow  down  a  basin  of  it,  sorely  against  your  will. 
You  try  another,  and  another,  and  now  you  break  out 
into  a  profuse  perspiration.  Quinine  and  port  wine, 
with  good  nursing,  will  complete  your  cure.  Quinine 
seems  to  be  a  specific  remedy  in  intermittents ;  it 


58 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


never  fails  to  cure,  if  the  patient  has  not  previously 
sunk  too  low. 

The  first  shower  falls  in  Senegambia  during  the 
third  week  of  May.  For  some  time  previously,  the 
evenings  have  been  cloudy,  and  much  sheet-light- 
ning has  been  seen  in  the  distance.  The  days  are 
still  clear,  but  each  succeeding  night  the  sky  be- 
comes more  lowering  and  the  lightnings  more  vivid. 
The  natives  are  now  busily  engaged  in  clearing  the 
ground  for  sowing  seed.  Guinea  corn,  and  other 
similar  species  of  grain  used  in  these  parts,  grow  to  a 
great  height ;  so  that  when  the  harvest  is  ripe,  the 
natives  bend  down  the  tall  stalks,  and  cut  off  the 
bunches  of  ears  with  a  knife.  The  stubble  is  left  on 
the  ground,  where  it  does  not  rot,  but  remains  dry  on 
the  surface  until  the  approach  of  the  rainy  season, 
when  it  is  burned.  It  is  a  grand  sight,  on  a  dark 
evening,  to  see  the  country  all  in  a  blaze.  But  the 
operation  of  burning  requires  some  caution,  lest  this 
fire  should  spread  too  far,  or  catch  the  trees  and  con- 
sume valuable  timber. 

After  the  first  showers  have  fallen,  a  person,  gene- 
rally a  woman,  goes  out  with  a  hoe,  and  makes  small 
holes  in  the  earth.  Another  woman  or  child  follows, 
and  drops  a  few  corn-seeds  into  the  hole,  and  covers 
them  over  with  the  foot.  Thus  the  grain  grows  in 
small  clumps  or  clusters  of  plants,  and  is  not  scattered 
over  the  soil,  as  is  the  case  with  rice.  The  young 
corn  requires  to  be  cleaned  with  the  hoe,  as  weeds 
also  grow  most  luxuriantly.  The  whole  period  which 
elapses  between  clearing  the  ground  and  gathering 


TORNADOES. 


the  harvest,  is  from  four  to  five  months ;  but  the  pro- 
cess is  attended  with  very  little  labour.  When  the 
blade  appears,  some  of  the  natives,  particularly  the 
Foolas,  sow  cotton  seeds  among  the  corn,  which 
spring  up  about  the  time  of  corn  harvest.  In  this 
case,  the  stubble  is  removed  to  make  room  for  the 
cotton  plants.  Thus  two  valuable  crops  are  obtained 
from  the  same  ground  in  one  year,  the  cotton  being 
gathered  in  March. 

In  Senegambia,  the  first  tornado  blows  near  the 
end  of  May,  and  these  terrific  storms  last  for  a 
month.  Then  two  months  of  "  rain  "  follow,  which 
are  succeeded  by  another  month  of  tornadoes.  The 
drying  month,  October,  is  the  most  unhealthy  of  the 
whole  year,  as  the  air  is  then  saturated  with  the 
effluvia  of  decayed  vegetable  matter. 

No  one  will  forget  the  phenomena  of  the  first 
tornado  which  he  has  witnessed.  Dark  clouds  begin 
to  rise  from  every  part  of  the  horizon.  They  gradu- 
ally creep  up  to  the  zenith,  the  blue  of  which  be- 
comes smaller  and  smaller,  until  it  disappears,  and 
the  whole  heaven  is  covered  with  a  mantle  of  thick 
darkness.  It  becomes  gloomy  even  at  mid-day. 
Distant  rumbling  has  been  heard  for  some  time,  and 
faint  flashes  of  electric  fluid  have  been  seen  playing 
in  the  firmament.  When  the  last  speck  of  blue  has 
left  the  heavens,  the  storm  may  be  immediately  ex- 
pected. It  is  preceded  by  a  death-like  stillness  of 
nature.  Not  a  breath  of  wind  moves ;  not  a  sound  is 
heard,  except  the  bleating  of  goats,  or  the  cry  of  the 
feathered  tribe,  as  they  hurry  away  in  fright  to  their 


60 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


wonted  places  of  shelter.  Then,  in  a  moment,  comes 
a  terrific  blast,  which  almost  seems  as  if  it  would 
sweep  the  earth  with  the  besom  of  destruction.  All 
fences  fall  before  it ;  huts  are  unroofed,  trees  are  up- 
rooted, and  boats  are  hurried  down  the  river  with 
frightful  rapidity.  The  blast  passes ;  then  rain  falls. 
It  is  rain  indeed  !  It  does  not  drop,  it  pours  like 
water  from  the  rose  of  a  watering-can.  The  ground 
is  deluged  in  a  few  minutes,  and  vapour  ascends  from 
the  heated  soil  like  a  thick  mist.  Then  comes  a  flash, 
and  a  crash  of  thunder,  as  if  it  would  rend  both 
heaven  and  earth.  It  roars  with  deafening  noise, 
and  nothing  else  can  be  heard.  The  lightning  in- 
creases in  vividness,  and  the  artillery  of  heaven  plays 
incessantly.  Lightning  bursts  from  every  point  of 
the  compass,  though  the  storm  comes  from  the  east. 
The  electricity  is  so  brilliant,  that  the  smallest  ob- 
jects can  be  discerned  at  midnight,  and  no  shutters 
can  keep  out  the  lurid  glare.  After  the  sheet-light- 
ning has  thus  flashed,  there  is  a  momentary  darkness, 
and  then  the  forked-lightning  plays  on  the  dense 
clouds  with  dazzling  brightness,  and  finally  darts  into 
the  earth.  Woe  to  any  creature,  man  or  beast,  who 
is  near  the  spot  where  the  electric  fluid  falls !  It 
even  scorches  trees,  sets  fire  to  huts,  and  tears  up  the 
ground. 

The  tornado  is  one  of  the  sublimest  displays  of 
nature's  powers,  as  all  its  phenomena  are  exhibited 
on  the  grandest  scale.  A  man  then  truly  feels  that 
he  is  a  weak  and  insignificant  creature.  He  is  in  the 
midst  of  mighty  elements  in  great  commotion,  any 


THE  RAINY  SEASON. 


61 


one  of  which  could  annihilate  him  in  an  instant, 
and  he  is  helpless  as  an  insect.  This  terrific  storm 
sometimes  lasts  for  two  or  three  hours.  At  first,  it  is 
repeated  after  an  interval  of  several  days ;  afterwards 
it  occurs  almost  daily.  It  merges  into  the  proper 
rainy  season.  Yet,  from  this  appellation,  you  must 
not  suppose  that  it  rains  incessantly  for  two  months, 
every  day  and  all  day  long.  This  would  soon  pro- 
duce a  flood  that  would  overwhelm  all  the  plains. 
It  pours  down  for  half  a  day  at  a  time.  It  literally 
66  pours/'  as  we  have  said,  not  drops,  for  as  great  a 
depth  of  water  has  been  known  to  fall  in  one  day  in 
Africa,  as  during  a  whole  year  in  England. 

Proceeding  eastward  from  Woolli,  we  next  come  to 
Bondu.  The  royal  residence  has  been  removed  from 
Fatteconda,  where  the  king  lived  during  Mungo 
Park's  time,  to  Boolibany.  This  is  one  of  the 
strongest  towns  of  Western  Africa.  It  is  situated  in 
a  large  plain,  where  it  is  surrounded  by  a  number  of 
small  towns  or  villages.  Its  walls  are  constructed  of 
solid  clay,  ten  feet  in  height,  of  a  zigzag  form,  with 
strong  bastions,  and  pierced  with  loopholes.  The 
gateways  are  also  surmounted  by  small  turrets,  fur- 
nished with  holes  to  shoot  through.  It  has  wells  of 
water  inside  as  well  as  outside  the  town. 

The  sovereign  of  Bondu  is  called  an  Almami, 
which  probably  expresses  the  same  thing  as  a  caliph 
or  religious  king,  for  he  is  a  Mussulman  and  receives 
sacred  honours.  His  residence  or  palace  resembles  & 
castle.  It  is  built  of  mud  walls  of  great  thickness,, 
wThich  are  intersected  with  partitions  of  clay,  sup- 


02 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


ported  by  strong  timbers.  These  divide  it  into 
several  courts  and  chambers,  which  communicate 
with  each  other  by  intricate  passages.  Some  of  the 
rooms  are  for  domestic  use,  some  for  store-places, 
some  serve  for  an  arsenal,  containing  fire-arms  and 
ammunition,  and  are  guarded  by  sentries.  The  flat 
roof  is  very  strong,  surrounded  by  a  thick  parapet, 
on  which  three  small  cannons  are  mounted  :  the 
whole  is  encompassed  by  a  strong  outer  wall. 

Artillery  in  Africa !  This  is  a  new  idea.  We  sup- 
pose these  pieces  of  ordnance  once  belonged  to  some 
slaver  condemned  on  the  coast,  and  sold  to  a  mer- 
chant. Useless  to  a  European,  who  would  not  dare 
to  fire  them,  these  old  cannon  are  highly  vaunted  by 
a  native  prince,  who  supposes  they  will  last  for  ever. 
If  an  enemy  should  appear,  the  same  thing  would 
probably  occur  at  Boolibany  as  happened  to  a  negro 
neighbour  of  ours.  His  black  gunners  crammed  an 
old  field-piece  full  of  powder  and  shot  of  all  kinds, 
filling  it  up  to  the  muzzle.  A  train  of  gunpowder 
was  laid  to  the  touch-hole.  It  is  fired.  Bang !  The 
enemy  are  safe  enough,  for  the  piece  has  burst  and 
killed  some  of  the  artillery  novitiates. 

Boolibany  has  a  large  mosque,  where  prayers  are 
read  or  chanted  in  Mahometan  style  five  times  a  day. 
The  priest  or  marraboo  wears  a  white  turban,  red  or 
blue  crown,  and  long  white  robe  with  large  sleeves, 
like  a  surplice.  Sometimes  he  uses  a  low  hat  made 
of  rushes,  with  a  tremendous  brim,  to  serve  as  a  para- 
sol. The  respectable  inhabitants  have  their  smocks 
embroidered  wTith  coloured  worsteds.    Some  of  this 


BONDU. 


63 


class  live  in  square  houses  with  flat  roofs,  but  the 
common  people  dwell  in  the  ordinary  African  hut. 
The  female  gentry  are  distinguished  by .  a  broad 
bandage  worn  round  the  forehead,  adorned  with  beads 
of  gold,  silver,  amber,  coral,  or  coloured  glass.  They 
have  also  large  gold  ear-rings,  which  reach  nearly  to 
the  shoulder,  and  are  supported  by  a  string  of  red 
leather  passing  over  the  head.  Both  sexes  wear 
sandals. 

In  the  best  African  houses  you  would  find  little 
worth  stealing,  except  articles  of  dress  and  female  or- 
naments, as  above  mentioned.  The  sheep-skin  mat,  or 
bullock's  hide,  elevated  on  a  platfrom  of  clay  or  canes, 
forms  the  Negro's  best  bedstead  ;  and  a  wrapper,  his 
bed-clothes.  Two  or  three  low  stools,  earthen  jars, 
pots,  calabashes,  and  the  all-important  pestle  and 
mortar,  constitute  the  furniture  of  the  wealthiest  in- 
dividuals.   They  do  not  "  live  "  in  the  house. 

The  inhabitants  of  Bondu  are  principally  Teuco- 
lars ;  but  Boolibany,  as  a  place  of  much  trade,  has  a 
mixed  population.  Being  now  a  Mahometan  country 
it  ought  to  be  more  civilised  than  its  Pagan  neigh- 
bours, and  it  is  so  in  some  respects.  But  the  Moslem 
faith  has  always  a  baneful  influence  upon  the  temper 
of  the  Negro,  which  is  naturally  mild  and  hospitable. 
In  Bondu  there  is  a  regular  code  of  laws,  and  a 
court  for  the  trial  of  offenders.  The  principal  laws 
refer  to  assaults,  manslaughter,  theft,  adultery,  mur- 
der, and  high  treason.  Only  the  last  two  crimes  are 
punished  with  death,  which  is  inflicted  by  strangula- 
tion.   Assaults  are  punished  by  fines  or  lashes ;  man- 


64 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


slaughter  by  the  price  of  six  slaves ;  theft  by  ampu- 
tation of  the  right  hand,  or  in  confirmed  cases  by 
starvation.  For  adultery,  the  male  offender  is  visited 
with  loss  of  property,  or  if  he  be  poor,  with  a  severe 
flogging :  but  the  woman  generally  escapes  punish- 
ment from  her  husband,  or  is  even  rewarded  by  him 
for  entrapping  a  victim,  from  whom  he  gets  "  heavy 
damages." 

Mr.  Park's  account  of  his  interview  with  the  Al- 
mami  of  Bondu  exhibits  some  of  the  characteristics 
of  African  princes  in  a  humorous  way.  The  traveller 
had  concealed  some  valuables  in  the  roof  of  his  hut ; 
expecting  his  luggage  to  be  searched  during  his  ab- 
sence at  court.  He  put  on  his  best  blue  coat,  in 
order  to  preserve  it ;  and  he  took  with  him  a  present 
of  gunpowder,  amber,  tobacco,  and  his  umbrella.  It 
was  a  state  visit,  as  he  had  in  the  morning  seen  the 
king  privately  under  a  tree. 

"  We  found  the  monarch  sitting  upon  a  mat  (in  the 
court)  and  two  attendants  with  him.  I  repeated  what 
I  had  before  told  him  concerning  the  object  of  my 
journey,  and  my  reasons  for  passing  through  his 
country.  He  seemed,  however,  but  half  satisfied. 
The  notion  of  travelling  for  curiosity  was  quite  new 
to  him.  He  thought  it  impossible,  he  said,  that  any 
man  in  his  senses  would  undertake  so  dangerous  a 
journey,  merely  to  look  at  the  country  and  its 
inhabitants.  However,  when  I  offered  to  show  him 
the  contents  of  my  portmanteau,  and  everything 
belonging  to  me,  he  was  convinced ;  and  it  was 
evident  that  this  suspicion  had  arisen  from  a  belief, 


VISIT  TO  THE  KINGr  OF  BONDU. 


65 


that  every  white  man  must  of  necessity  be  a  trader. 
When  I  had  delivered  my  presents,  he  seemed  well 
pleased,  and  was  particularly  delighted  with  the 
umbrella,  which  he  repeatedly  furled  and  unfurled, 
to  the  great  admiration  of  himself  and  his  two  attend- 
ants, who  could  not  for  some  time  comprehend  the 
use  of  this  wonderful  machine."  Being  desired  to 
remain,  Mr.  Park  says,  "  he  proceeded  to  an  eulogium 
on  my  blue  coat,  of  which  the  yellow  buttons  seemed 
particularly  to  catch  his  fancy;  and  he  concluded 
by  entreating  me  to  present  him  with  it;  that  he 
would  wear  it  on  all  public  occasions,  and  inform 
every  one  who  saw  it  of  my  great  liberality  toward 
him."  The  traveller  knew  what  this  humble  request 
meant ;  and  taking  off  his  coat,  laid  it  at  the  mon- 
arch's feet. 

In  the  morning,  Mr.  Park  was  again  sent  for  to 
the  palace  by  the  king,  who  asked  to  be  bled.  But 
as  soon  as  he  saw  the  lancet,  his  heart  failed  him ;  so 
he  proposed  to  postpone  the  operation,  "  as  he  felt 
himself  much  better  ; "  and  requested  the  stranger  to 
favour  his  wives  with  a  visit.  "  I  had  no  sooner 
entered  the  court  appropriated  to  the  ladies,  than  the 
whole  seraglio  surrounded  me ;  some  begging  for 
physic,  some  for  amber;  and  all  of  them  desirous  of 
trying  that  great  African  specific,  blood-letting.  They 
were  ten  or  twelve  in  number,  most  of  them  young 
and  handsome,  wearing  on  their  heads  ornaments  of 
gold  and  beads  of  amber. 

"They  rallied  me  with  a  good  deal  of  gaiety  on 
different  subjects;  particularly  upon  the  whiteness  of 

F 


66 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


my  skin;  and  the  prominency  of  my  nose.  They  in- 
sisted that  both  were  artificial.  The  first,  they  said, 
was  produced  when  I  was  an  infant,  by  dipping  me 
in  milk :  and  they  insisted  that  my  nose  had  been 
pinched  every  day,  till  it  had  acquired  its  present 
unsightly  and  unnatural  conformation.  On  my  part, 
without  disputing  my  own  deformity,  I  paid  them 
many  compliments  upon  African  beauty.  I  praised 
the  glossy  jet  of  their  skin,  and  the  lovely  depression 
of  their  noses.  But  they  said  that  flattery,  or  (as 
they  emphatically  termed  it)  6  honey-mouth,'  was  not 
esteemed  in  Bondu."  However,  they  presently  sent 
him  ajar  of  honey  and  some  fish.  Simple  creatures ! 
What  man  or  woman  does  not  really  like  "  honey- 
mouth,"  however  much  he  or  she  may  rail  against 
it? 

There  are  many  merchants  in  Boolibany  and  other 
towns  of  Bondu,  on  account  of  its  central  situation. 
They  trade  with  Gredumah  and  other  Moorish  countries 
on  the  north ;  bartering  corn  and  blue  cotton  cloths 
for  the  salt  of  the  desert  and  sweet-smelling  gums. 
They  carry  the  salt  to  Dentila  and  more  southern 
states,  where  they  exchange  it  for  shea-butter,  iron, 
and  gold-dust.  The  customs  or  duties  levied  on  mer- 
chandise in  transit  are  very  heavy,  and  sometimes 
consist  of  muskets  and  gunpowder  or  Indian  baft. 

Beyond  Bondu  is  the  petty  kingdom  of  Kajaaga, 
inhabited  by  Serawoolies.  They  are  jet  black,  like 
the  Jollofs,  and  are  also  an  active  and  commercial 
people.  They  make  long  journeys  in  the  pursuit  of 
trade.    Their  language  is  very  guttural.    It  was  in 


KASSON —  ITS  CONVERSION  TO  6i  THE  FAITH/'  67 

this  country  that  Mungo  Park's  hardships  first  began, 
as  he  was  here  pillaged  of  much  of  his  property  by 
the  king's  servants,  on  the  pretext  that  he  had  not 
paid  the  usual  transit  dues  for  his  goods,  nor  sent 
a  present  to  the  sovereign.  He  was  delivered  from 
his  precarious  situation  by  a  nephew  of  the  Kiug  of 
Kasson  (on  the  eastern  border  of  Kaarta),  who  came 
to  arrange  some  disputes  which  threatened  a  rupture 
between  the  two  countries. 

The  inhabitants  of  Kasson  were  converted  to  the 
Moslem  faith  after  the  most  approved  fashion.  An 
embassy  came  to  Teesee  from  the  redoutable  mo- 
narch Almami  Abdulkader,  King  of  Foota  Torra,  a 
country  on  the  west  of  Bondu.  They  demanded  a 
public  audience  of  Tiggity  Sego,  King  of  Kasson. 
It  was  granted;  and  the  ambassadors  then  declared 
it  to  be  the  will  of  their  august  sovereign,  that  the 
King  and  all  the  people  of  Kasson  should  embrace  the 
Mahometan  faith,  otherwise  he  would  join  his  arms 
to  those  of  Kajaaga,  with  whom  there  was  then  a  vari- 
ance ;  for  he  could  not  stand  neutral,  and  see  an  in- 
fidel nation  attack  the  te  faithful  "  people  of  Kajaaga. 
Abdulkader  had  seized  upon  this  critical  moment  to 
carry  out  his  schemes  of  proselyting  Kasson,  which  he 
probably  would  not  have  ventured  to  do  at  another 
time.  As  the  case  was  urgent,  and  nothing  but  de- 
struction seemed  to  await  their  refusal,  the  people  of 
Teesee  agreed  to  submit.  They  offered  up  eleven 
prayers  out  of  the  Koran,  which  was  the  recognised 
sign  of  their  conversion,  and  the  whole  country  be- 
came nominally  Mahometan. 

F  2 


<>8 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


But  Abdulkader  was  not  always  so  successful  in 
his  religious  expeditions.  He  made  a  similar  attempt 
to  convert  Darnel,  a  king  of  the  Jollofs.  On  this 
occasion,  the  ambassador  was  accompanied  by  two 
chief  Bushreens,  or  Moslem  teachers,  who  carried 
each  a  large  knife  fixed  on  the  top  of  a  long  pole. 
itf  As  soon  as  he  had  procured  admission  into  the  pre- 
sence of  Darnel,  and  announced  the  pleasure  of  his 
sovereign,  he  ordered  the  Bushreens  to  present  the 
emblems  of  his  mission.  The  two  knives  were  ac- 
cordingly laid  before  Darnel,  and  the  ambassador 
explained  himself  as  follows :  '  With  this  knife  Ab- 
dulkader will  condescend  to  shave  the  head  of  Darnel, 
if  Darnel  will  embrace  the  Mahometan  faith ;  and 
with  this  other  knife,  Abdulkader  will  cut  the  throat 
of  Darnel,  if  Darnel  refuses  to  embrace  it — take  your 
choice.'  Darnel  coolly  told  the  ambassador  that  he 
had  no  choice  to  make;  he  neither  chose  to  have  his 
head  shaved,  nor  his  throat  cut ;  and  with  this  an- 
swer the  ambassador  was  civilly  dismissed." 

To  fulfil  his  threats,  Abdulkader  raised  a  powerful 
army  and  invaded  the  Jollof  country.  By  their 
king's  command,  the  people  retired  before  the  ad- 
vancing foe,  filling  up  the  wells,  and  destroying  what 
provisions  and  effects  they  could  not  carry  off.  The 
assailants  pressed  onward  till  they  were  exhausted 
from  hunger  and  thirst.  Having  at  length  found  a 
watering-place  in  the  woods,  they  sat  down  to  rest 
and  fell  asleep.  Before  morning,  they  were  suddenly 
attacked  by  Darnel's  army,  which  was  fresh  and  vigor- 
ous ;  by  whom  the  invaders  were  completely  routed 


ANECDOTES  OF  ABDULKADER. 


and  almost  annihilated,  being  pursued  and  cut  down 
by  the  Jollof  horsemen.  Amongst  the  prisoners  was 
Abdulkader  himself,  the  ambitious  and  vain-glorious 
fanatic. 

"  When  his  royal  prisoner  was  brought  before  him 
in  irons,  and  thrown  upon  the  ground,  the  magnani- 
mous Darnel,  instead  of  setting  his  foot  upon  his 
neck,  and  stabbing  him  with  his  spear,  according  to 
custom  in  such  cases,  addressed  him  as  follows:  c  Ab- 
dulkader, answer  me  this  question  !  If  the  chance 
of  war  had  placed  me  in  your  situation,  and  you  in 
mine,  how  would  you  have  treated  me  ? 5  < 1  would 
have  thrust  my  spear  into  your  heart/  returned  Ab- 
dulkader, with  great  firmness ;  6  and  I  know  that  a 
similar  fate  awaits  me.'  6  Not  so,'  said  Darnel ;  6  my 
spear  is  indeed  red  with  the  blood  of  your  subjects 
killed  in  battle,  and  I  could  now  give  it  a  deeper 
stain  by  dipping  it  in  your  own ;  but  this  would  not 
build  up  my  towns,  nor  bring  to  life  the  thousands 
who  fell  in  the  woods.  I  will  not,  therefore,  kill  you 
in  cold  blood,  but  I  will  retain  you  as  my  slave,  until 
I  perceive  that  your  presence  in  your  own  kingdom 
will  be  no  longer  dangerous  to  your  neighbours,  and 
then  I  will  consider  of  the  proper  way  of  disposing  of 
you.'" 

The  events  of  this  war  soon  became  a  favourite 
topic  of  conversation  throughout  all  that  region  of 
Africa,  and  Darnel  obtained  a  great  reputation.  The 
singing  men  joined  in  his  praises,  and  spread  his 
fame  far  and  wide.  Mr.  Park  declares  that,  strange 
as  this  history  may  appear,  he  heard  it  from  so  many 

F  3 


70 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


quarters  that  he  could  not  doubt  of  its  truth  ;  and  it 
was  afterwards  confirmed  by  nine  men,  who  were  taken 
in  the  wood  along  with  Abdulkader,  and  having  been 
sold  as  slaves,  sailed  in  the  same  ship  with  himself 
(Park)  to  the  West  Indies.  Darnel  liberated  his 
royal  prisoner  at  the  end  of  three  months'  "penal 
servitude,"  in  compliance  with  the  earnest  request  of 
the  people  of  Foota  Torra.  We  presume  that  he 
was  cured  of  his  propensity  to  proselyte  men  by  the 
knife  and  sword. 

Nobody  could  suppose  that  much  religion  would 
ensue  from  this  summary  and  wholesale  method  of 
conversion  pursued  by  Moslem  kings.  The  faith  of 
the  proselytes  is  at  first  quite  nominal.  Soon,  how- 
ever, Bushreens  come  amongst  them,  teach  them  a 
few  prayers  or  verses  of  the  Koran,  narrate  the 
legends  of  their  faith  and  the  exploits  of  Mahomet, 
and  institute  the  daily  prayers.  They  thus  obtain  a 
few  staunch  disciples;  but  the  greater  part  of  the 
people  know  little  and  care  less  about  these  things. 
So  that  even  in  nominally  Mahometan  states,  there 
are  a  great  many  professed  pagans,  and  the  bulk  of 
the  rest  are  heathens  in  their  heart.  It  is  somewhat 
different,  as  we  shall  see,  in  towns  situated  on  the  Niger. 

Here  is  a  little  noisy  company !  Who  can  they  be  ? 
What  are  they  doing  ?  A  venerable  sort  of  man  is 
sitting  on  the  ground,  with  a  number  of  urchins  in  a 
circle  about  him.  Some  of  them  are  naked,  some 
have  a  rag  about  their  loins,  and  a  few  have  a  shirt. 
The  Bushreen  is  repeating  some  lines  from  the  Koran, 
wagging  his  head,  and  intoning  his  words  in  the  most 


SLAVE  C0FFLE. 


71 


ceremonial  fashion.  The  little  fellows,  squatting 
around,  repeat  his  words,  with  similar  intonations  and 
waggings  of  the  head,  so  that  the  whole  scene  is  most 
ludicrous.  This  is  their  education;  and  it  is  in 
Arabic,  of  which  few  understand  a  single  word,  ex- 
cept the  name  of  Allah.  We  have  found  some  of 
the  Bushreens  themselves  to  be  as  innocent  of  com- 
prehending the  Koran  as  any  of  their  followers.  But 
a  few  literati  from  the  interior  are  pretty  good  Arabic 
scholars.  When  these  settle  in  the  west,  they  are 
treated  with  great  respect ;  and  under  Moslem  princes 
they  obtain  much  distinction  and  legislative  power, 
since  they  explain  the  laws  of  the  Koran  by  which  a 
people  ought  to  be  governed. 

Our  mention  of  slavery  in  connection  with  Abdul- 
kader's  defeat,  introduces  us  to  this  sad  subject.  It 
is  as  common  in  Africa  as  kooskoos  or  white  ants. 
It  meets  you  everywhere.  It  often  obtrudes  upon 
your  view  in  a  painful  manner,  and  presents  sights 
of  tearful  woe  and  sad  desolation. 

Here  is  a  coffle  or  slave-caravan  entering  the  town 
of  which  some  of  the  travellers  are  natives !  They 
have  been  long  absent  from  home,  and  now  return  in 
a  sort  of  triumph.  Some  singing  men  come  first. 
The  other  free  people  follow.  Then  come  the  poor 
slaves,  four  abreast,  fastened  to  one  another  by  a 
twisted  thong  passed  round  each  of  their  necks ;  a 
spear-man  walking  between  each  four.  These  are 
followed  by  the  domestic  slaves,  the  free  women,  and 
baggage.  On  their  march,  the  slaves  are  also  secured 
with  fetters  on  their  legs  which  must  be  held  up  with 


72 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


a  string.  At  night,  an  additional  pair  of  fetters  is  put 
on  their  hands :  and  sometimes  also  a  light  chain  of 
iron  is  passed  round  their  necks.  The  poor  creatures 
are  dreadfully  afraid  of  approaching  the  coast,  lest 
they  should  be  carried  over  the  sea,  where  they  ex- 
pect to  be  eaten  by  white  cannibals.  If  any  of  them 
show  evident  signs  of  refractoriness,  farther  means 
are  taken  to  secure  them  from  running  away. 


THE  SLAVE  CHAIN  AT  THE  COAST. 


The  slaves  suffer  much  in  travelling  through  the 
forests,  especially  those  that  are  weak.  They  must 
keep  up  with  the  coffle,  or  else  they  would  be  lost  or 
devoured  by  wild  beasts.  When  they  lag  behind, 
from  sheer  fatigue,  they  are  beaten  and  dragged  along 


POOR  NEALEE. 


73 


by  their  neck-rope ;  nor  are  any  means  of  cruelty  or 
violence  spared  to  force  them  onwards.  To-night, 
their  irons  will  be  examined,  the  hand-fetters  put  on, 
and  they  will  be  stowed  away  in  huts  guarded  by  men. 
In  the  morning,  they  will  be  led  under  the  shade  of 
a  tree,  and  encouraged  to  play  at  amusing  games  and 
to  sing  songs,  in  order  to  cheer  them  up.  Some  of 
them  will  abandon  themselves  to  their  fate,  and  try 
to  enjoy  the  present  hour:  but  others  will  sit  de- 
murely on  the  ground,  plunged  in  melancholy,  brood- 
ing over  the  past  and  imagining  the  dark  future. 
These  slaves  are  going  to  Morocco,  over  the  Great 
Desert,  where  their  sufferings  will  probably  be  intense, 
and  perhaps  most  of  them  will  perish  amid  the  sands. 

This  is  no  fiction.  The  truth  of  the  account  can  be 
substantiated  by  any  amount  of  native  testimony  that 
may  be  desired.  It  was  witnessed  for  several  months 
by  Mungo  Park,  who  travelled  with  a  coffle  from  the 
interior  to  the  coast.  He  gives  a  mournful  account 
of  the  fate  of  a  female  slave  belonging  to  Karfa,  under 
whose  kind  protection  he  journeyed.  Poor  Nealee 
complained  of  pains  in  her  legs,  lagged  behind,  and 
refused  her  victuals.  She  was  ordered  to  the  front  of 
the  coffle,  and  relieved  of  her  load.  The  party  were 
endeavouring  to  rob  a  hive  in  a  tree  of  its  honey, 
when  they  were  assailed  by  myriads  of  bees,  and 
scattered  in  all  directions.  Their  bundles  were  only 
recovered  by  firing  the  grass,  and  rushing  through 
the  smoke  which  had  scared  the  bees.  After  a  search, 
poor  Nealee  was  found  lying  near  a  brook,  stung  in  a 
dreadful  manner.    She  was  washed,  and  her  wounds 


74 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


anointed  with  certain  bruised  leaves :  but  she  refused 
to  proceed  further.  The  whip  was  applied,  and  at 
length  she  started  up  and  walked  for  four  or  five 
hours  longer :  she  then  fell  on  the  grass,  utterly  ex- 
hausted. The  whip  was  again  applied  without  effect. 
She  was  tied  iipon  an  ass,  but  could  not  sit  up ;  and 
the  beast  proved  so  refractory  under  this  burden, 
that  Nealee  wTas  obliged  to  be  taken  off.  A  sort  of 
litter  was  made  of  bamboo  canes,  and  being  tied  on 
it  with  slips  of  bark,  she  was  carried  on  the  heads  of 
two  slaves.  At  night,  the  whole  coffle  were  so  much 
fatigued  and  discouraged,  that  some  of  them  snapt 
their  fingers,  which  is  a  sign  of  desperation.  They 
were  all  put  in  strong  irons.  After  a  night's  rest 
they  were  much  recovered. 

But  poor  Nealee's  limbs  were  so  stiff  and  painful, 
that  she  could  not  walk  or  even  stand.  She  was  once 
more  tied,  like  a  corpse,  on  the  ass,  which  again  became 
so  unruly  that  she  was  thrown  down  and  had  one  of 
her  legs  injured.  Then  the  cry  of  the  whole  coffle 
was  kang-tegi,  Icang-tegi !  "  Cut  her  throat,  cut  her 
throat ! "  On  hearing  this,  Mungo  Park  hurried  to 
the  front  of  the  coffle,  that  he  might  not  see  the 
death  of  the  poor  woman.  In  a  short  time  one  of 
Karfa's  domestic  slaves  came  up  to  him  "  with  poor 
Nealee's  garment  on  the  end  of  his  bow,  and  ex- 
claimed Neallee  affeeleeta!  (Nealee  is  lost.)  I  asked 
him  whether  the  slatees  had  given  him  the  garment 
as  a  reward  for  cutting  her  throat.  He  replied 
that  Karfa  and  the  schoolmaster  would  not  consent 
to  that  measure,  but  had  left  her  on  the  road."  This 


HUNTING  SLAVES. 


75 


was  cruel  pity!  The  knife  would  have  ended  her 
woes  quickly :  but  now  she  was  left  to  linger  a  while, 
till  some  wild  beast  or  bird  should  tear  her  in  pieces. 
The  coffle  were  deeply  impressed  with  this  tragedy, 
and  hasted  on  in  mournful  silence.  But  the  whole 
company  had  to  endure  great  privation  and  suffering 
before  they  reached  a  town  where  they  could  rest. 

Who  are  these  slaves?  and  what  has  been  their 
crime,  that  they  are  held  in  bondage,  and  sold  as 
cattle  ?  Grentle  reader !  their  only  offence  has  been 
that  they  were  the  weaker  party  in  war,  or  were  un- 
able to  defend  themselves  against  the  sudden  attack 
of  an  enemy.  All  prisoners  taken  in  battle,  and  in 
the  pillage  resulting  from  a  defeat,  become  slaves. 
But  there  are  more  wicked  and  atrocious  ways  of 
procuring  them.  While  on  McCarthy's  island,  we 
were  one  day  thrown  into  much  excitement  by  the 
flight  of  many  natives  to  this  place  of  refuge.  Their 
towns,  not  many  miles  off,  were  attacked  in  the  night 
by  a  marauding  foe  and  destroyed  in  the  usual  way. 
Some  miscreants  band  together  to  steal  the  bodies  of 
men.  They  approach  stealthily  in  the  dark,  and 
rushing  through  the  stockade  of  the  town,  set  fire  to 
the  thatch  of  the  huts.  The  inmates,  startled  by  the 
noise  and  the  flames,  rush  out ;  when  most  of  the 
men  are  massacred  :  the  women,  young  persons,  and 
children  are  caught  and  taken  for  slaves.  This 
slave-hunting  goes  on  continually.  Every  night 
witnesses  these  bloody  horrors:  and  every  morning 
sees  villages  or  towns  newly  destroyed  and  deserted. 

Kidnapping  is  another  mode  of  obtaining  slaves. 


76 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


A  strong  man  will  lurk  armed  near  some  place  of 
resort  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  village  :  and  when 
he  sees  a  child,  woman,  or  young  person  passing  by, 
will  spring  upon  his  victim  like  a  tiger,  drag  his 
prey  into  the  thicket,  and  carry  it  off  at  night. 

This  slave-catching  is  the  bane  of  Africa.  It  sets 
town  against  town,  and  man  against  man ;  rouses 
the  worst  passions  of  the  human  breast ;  and  often 
turns  the  gentle  Negro  into  a  raging  wild  beast. 
Excuses  for  attacking  a  weak  neighbour  are  easily 
found  by  a  strong  nation  ;  the  real  object  being,  not 
to  avenge  an  affront  or  injury  received,  but  to  catch 
human  beings  and  sell  them  for  slaves.  Of  course, 
retaliation  often  follows;  and  thus  the  murderous 
flame  is  kept  alive  by  the  pouring  on  of  oil,  till  the 
country  is  desolated,  or  at  least  minished  of  its  in- 
habitants.   Many  fall,  to  procure  one  slave. 

A  large  part  of  the  population  are  domestic  slaves 
or  serfs.  Their  condition  is  not  usually  bad.  They 
cannot  (we  speak  of  the  western  parts)  be  sold  except 
for  a  crime  committed  by  themselves,  or  from  the 
bankruptcy  of  their  masters :  and  there  are  laws  for 
their  protection  against  hard  usage.  Still,  it  is  a  bad 
system.  And  as  the  domestic  slaves  form  the  foot 
soldiers  in  war,  and  are  generally  armed  only  with 
spears,  they  are  the  most  easily  taken  prisoners,  when 
their  condition  is  entirely  changed.  They  are  also 
sometimes  furtively  sold  by  their  owners,  or  exchanged 
for  others.  Alas  !  "  might  overcomes  right  "  all  over 
the  world ;  and  no  where  more  than  in  Africa ! 

In  passing  through  the  kingdom  of  Kasson,  we 


LEATHER  DRESSING. 


77 


shall  find  it  a  populous  country,  full  of  towns  and 
villages  and  cultivated  plains,  surrounded  by  woods 
and  rocky  hills.  The  last-mentioned  districts  have 
their  own  inhabitants,  as  they  abound  in  wolves  and 
hycenas.  When  pressed  by  hunger,  these  wild  beasts 
do  not  hesitate  to  form  into  companies  and  assault 
the  dwellings  of  man.  "  Some  of  these  animals  paid 
us  a  visit  in  the  evening.  Their  approach  was  dis- 
covered by  the  dogs  of  the  village,  which  did  not 
bark,  but  howl  in  the  most  dismal  manner.  The 
inhabitants  no  sooner  heard  them,  than,  knowing  the 
cause,  they  armed  themselves:  and  providing  bunches 
of  dry  grass,  went  in  a  body  to  the  inclosure  in  the 
middle  of  the  village  where  the  cattle  were  kept. 
Here  they  lighted  the  bunches  of  grass,  and  waving 
them  to  and  fro,  ran  hooping  and  hallooing  towards 
the  hills.  This  manoeuvre  had  the  desired  effect  of 
frightening  the  wolves  away  from  the  village :  but 
on  examination,  we  found  that  they  had  killed  five 
of  the  cattle,  and  torn  and  wounded  many  others." 
One  could  almost  imagine  that  these  beasts  had 
learned  a  lesson  from  the  slave-hunters.  Poor 
Africa !  there  is  no  security  within  thy  borders ! 
Thy  villagers  dwell  in  a  state  of  alarm  by  day,  and  in 
a  state  of  siege  by  night ! 

In  Kasson,  there  are  some  good  manufacturers  of 
leather ;  wrhich  is  one  of  the  regular  trades  of  Africa. 
It  is  learned  and  pursued  by  a  class  of  mechanics 
called  karankeeas.  These  men  tan  the  hides  by 
steeping  them  in  a  mixture  of  wood-ashes  and  water 
till  they  lose  the  hair ;  and  afterwards  in  a  decoction 


78 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


of  the  leaves  of  the  goo  tree,  which  is  a  powerful 
astringent.  They  rub  and  beat  the  hides  frequently, 
to  make  the  leather  soft  and  pliable ;  in  which  they 
succeed  admirably.  Bullock-leather  is  used  princi- 
pally for  sandals  :  sheep- skin  and  goat-skin  are  con- 
verted into  belts,  sheathes,  and  bags ;  into  coverings 
of  greegrees,  saddles,  and  other  articles;  and  into 
ornaments  of  various  kinds.  They  are  first  dyed  red 
or  yellow ;  by  means  of  certain  plants  known  to  the 
natives,  whose  workmanship  in  leather  is  far  from 
despicable. 


SANDAL. 


The  Negroes  are  bad  physicians,  seeming  only  to 
know  the  use  of  some  sudorifics,  bitters,  and  purga- 
tives ;  though  this  amount  of  knowledge  is  of  no . 
little  importance  in  a  land  of  fevers.  They  also 
suffer  much  from  dysentery,  for  which  they  have  no 
successful  remedies.  They  are  pretty  good  at  re- 
ducing dislocations  and  binding  up  fractures.  They 
also  perform  bleeding  and  cupping,  especially  where 
they  can  obtain  European  lancets.  The  cupping 
operation  is  very  simple.  When  plenty  of  incisions 
have  been  made  on  the  inflamed  part,  a  bullock's 
horn  is  applied  over  the  place,  having  a  small  hole 
in  the  end.    The  operator  takes  a  piece  of  bees'-wax 


NEGRO  SURGERY. 


79 


in  his  mouth,  and  having  sucked  out  the  air  from 
the  horn,  manages  to  stop  up  the  hole  with  the  wax 
by  a  dexterous  movement  of  his  tongue.  This  plan, 
is  generally  successful  in  taking  away  a  large  quan- 
tity of  blood,  and  reducing  a  local  inflammation. 

We  have  thus  described  most  of  the  things  worthy 
of  observation  amongst  the  Negroes  of  the  fertile 
regions  of  Senegambia.  Eastward  from  Kasson  the 
route  into  the  interior  lies  through  the  wildernesses 
of  Kaarta  and  Bambarra,  until  you  reach  Sego  on 
the  Niger.  We  shall  glance  at  a  few  things  worthy 
of  observation  in  this  vast  wilderness,  after  we  have 
looked  at  a  very  different  race  of  people  who  dwell 
on  the  southern  border  of  the  Great  Desert,  or  on 
the  northern  side  of  the  countries  which  we  have 
now  visited.  Here  is  the  kingdom  of  Ludamar,  pos- 
sessed by  the  far-famed  and  much-dreaded  Moors  of 
the  desert.  We  must  not  pass  them  by  without 
notice. 


80 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


CHAP.  IV. 

Ludamar  and  the  Moors.  —  Their  Encampments. — Ferocity. — Treat- 
ment of  Christians. — Ladies. — Beauties. — Horsemanship. — Life  in 
the  Desert.  — A  Whirlwind.  —  Oases.  —  G-um. — Description  of  a 
Gum  Fair. 

When  we  speak  of  the  Moorish  kingdom  of  Ludamar, 
we  do  not  mean  that  all  its  inhabitants  are  Moors. 
The  majority,  in  fact,  are  Negroes,  who  have  been 
brought  into  subjection  by  their  Moslem  conquerors, 
and  obey  their  rule  with  abject  submission,  These 
Moors  crossed  the  Great  Desert  from  the  northern 
coast  of  Africa,  and  subjugated  some  of  the  border 
tribes.  They  still  wage  frequent  wars  with  other 
Negro  countries  for  the  sake  of  pillage,  not  of  settle- 
ment. They  like  the  confines  of  the  desert,  into 
which  they  repair  whenever  it  is  convenient.  But 
their  merchants  trade  with  the  inland  towns,  in 
which  many  of  them  are  located,  and  where  they 
exercise  great  influence. 

Having  traversed  a  sandy  and  barren  district,  in 
which  you  would  probably  suffer  much  from  heat 
and  thirst,  you  would  arrive  at  the  residence  of  the 
Moorish  prince.  It  is  a  camp  of  tents,  covering  a 
large  space  of  ground,  on  which  they  are  erected 


LUDAMAR  —  MOORISH  ENCAMPMENT.  81 

without  any  regard  to  order.  A  wild  people,  indeed, 
are  these  swarthy  sons  of  the  desert.  Indolent  and 
energetic  by  turns,  they  love  to  lounge  in  their  tents, 
or  to  scour  the  plains  on  their  swift  horses.  The 
heat  is  sometimes  so  excessive  that  it  is  painful  to 
touch  the  sand  ;  and  even  Negroes  will  not  run  over 
it  with  bare  feet.  The  Moors  seem  to  deserve  the 
character  which  they  have  received,  of  being  the 
most  ferocious,  hard-hearted,  and  bigoted  people 
under  heaven.  They  are  ready  for  any  acts  of 
violence  or  rapine,  and  they  show  no  pity.  Their 
slaves  are  treated  in  the  most  imperious  manner,  or 
put  to  death  without  mercy.  They  are  always  in  the 
extremes  of  gluttony  or  abstinence.  They  can,  like 
their  dromedaries,  endure  hunger  and  thirst  for  a 
long  time  with  great  patience ;  but  when  they  have 
opportunity,  they  will  eat  as  much  at  one  meal  as 
would  satisfy  three  or  four  ordinary  men.  They 
have  a  ferocious  appearance,  with  wild  staring  eyes, 
as  if  they  were  lunatics. 


DROMEDARY. 


Here  is  the  king's  tent.  It  is  larger  than  the 
others,  and  has  a  white  cloth  over  it.    But  the  chief 

a 


82 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


is  only  distinguished  by  the  fineness  of  his  dress. 
Though  he  is  possessed  of  absolute  authority,  he 
indulges  in  free  intercourse  with  his  subjects;  and 
sometimes,  when  travelling,  will  eat  out  of  the  same 
bowl  with  his  camel-driver,  or  recline  on  the  same 
couch.  We  must  let  Mungo  Park  describe  an  inter- 
view with  Ali  and  his  ladies ;  as  he  is  probably  the 
only  European  who  has  had  much  communication 
with  them,  and  escaped  from  their  savage  hands  to 
tell  the  tale.  Poor  Mungo  had,  with  many  mis- 
givings, sent  to  Ludamar,  to  ask  permission  to  pass 
through  the  Moorish  territory.  The  answer  was  an 
invitation  to  go  and  see  the  prince,  whose  prisoner 
he  soon  discovered  himself  to  be  made. 

f€  We  reached  at  length  the  king's  tent,  where  we 
found  a  great  number  of  people,  men  and  women 
assembled.  Ali  was  sitting  upon  a  black  leather 
cushion,  clipping  a  few  hairs  from  his  upper  lip ;  a 
female  attendant  holding  up  a  looking  glass  before 
him.  He  appeared  to  be  an  old  man,  of  the  Arab 
cast,  with  a  long  white  beard ;  and  he  had  a  sullen 
and  indignant  aspect.  He  surveyed  me  with  atten- 
tion, and  inquired  of  the  Moors  if  I  could  speak 
Arabic  :  being  answered  in  the  negative,  he  appeared 
much  surprised,  and  continued  silent.  The  surround- 
ing attendants,  and  especially  the  ladies,  were 
abundantly  more  inquisitive :  they  asked  a  thousand 
questions;  inspected  every  part  of  my  apparel, 
searched  my  pockets,  and  obliged  me  to  unbutton 
my  waistcoat,  and  display  the  whiteness  of  my  skin. 
They  even  counted  my  toes  and  fingers,  as  if  they 


MOORISH  FEROCITY. 


83 


doubted  whether  I  was  in  truth  a  human  being." 
The  Moors  afterwards  tormented  him  with  a  hog, 
which  they  wished  him  to  kill  and  eat :  and  on  his 
refusal,  tied  it  in  derision  to  the  door  of  the  hut 
which  was  assigned  for  his  use.  They  again  assem- 
bled around  him,  and  made  him  dress  and  undress, 
button  and  unbutton,  show  them  his  stockings  and 
everything  about  his  person.  At  night  Ali  sent  him 
some  kooskoos  and  salt  and  water. 

During  the  night,  a  constant  watch  was  kept  over 
the  traveller;  and  a  Moor  even  entered  his  hut 
stealthily,  and  laid  his  hand  on  his  shoulder.  "I 
sprang  up  the  moment  he  laid  his  hand  upon  me ;  and 
the  Moor  in  his  haste  to  get  off,  stumbled  over  my 
boy,  and  fell  with  his  face  upon  the  wild  hog,  which 
returned  the  attack  by  biting  the  Moor's  arm.  The 
screams  of  this  man  alarmed  the  people  in  the  king's 
tent,  who  immediately  conjectured  that  I  had  made 
my  escape,  and  a  number  of  them  mounted  their 
horses  and  prepared  to  pursue  me."  On  understand- 
ing the  reason  of  the  outcry,  they  went  away,  and 
left  him  in  quiet  till  morning. 

This  little  incident  was  the  means  of  farther  un- 
folding the  Moorish  character.  For  amongst  others, 
the  king  came  galloping  on  a  white  horse,  not  from 
his  own  proper  dwelling,  but  from  a  tent  at  a  con- 
siderable distance.  Such  was  the  tyranny  of  his 
usual  conduct,  and  such  the  jealousy  with  which  he 
regarded  everybody,  that  his  own  family  and  slaves 
did  not  know  in  what  tent  he  would  sleep  on  any 
particular  night.    He  was  afraid  of  assassination,  and 

G  2 


84 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


would  not  let  his  place  of  rest  be  known.  For  the 
same  reason,  he  never  eat  of  any  dish  that  was  not 
cooked  under  his  own  immediate  inspection ;  from  a 
fear  of  being  poisoned.  When  he  was  going  on  a 
journey,  he  provided  his  food  beforehand,  by  slaugh- 
tering a  bullock  and  drying  some  thin  slices  of  its 
flesh  in  the  sun.  This,  and  bags  of  dry  kooskoos, 
were  carried  by  him  for  provision  on  the  road. 

"With  the  returning  day,  commenced  the  same 
round  of  insult  and  irritation :  the  boys  assembled  to 
beat  the  hog,  and  the  men  and  women  to  plague  the 
Christian.  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  describe  the 
behaviour  of  a  people  who  study  mischief  as  a  science, 
and  exult  in  the  miseries  and  misfortunes  of  their 
fellow-creatures.  Anxious,  however,  to  conciliate 
favour,  and  if  possible,  to  afford  the  Moors  no  pre- 
tence for  ill-treating  me,  I  readily  complied  with 
every  command,  and  patiently  bore  every  insult. 
But  never  did  any  period  of  my  life  pass  away  so 
heavily:  from  sunrise  to  sunset,  was  I  obliged  to 
suffer,  with  an  unruffled  countenance,  the  insults  of 
the  rudest  savages  on  earth."  They  soon  stripped 
him  of  all  his  property,  except  the  clothes  which  he 
had  on. 

Wishing  to  make  him  useful  to  them  in  some  way, 
they  devised  various  expedients  of  employing  him. 
At  length  they  hit  upon  the  office  of  a  barber :  and 
Mr.  Park  was  ordered  to  try  his  hand  in  shaving  the 
young  prince's  head.  "A  small  razor  about  three 
inches  long  was  put  into  my  hand,  and  I  was  ordered 
to  proceed.    But  whether  from  my  own  want  of  skill, 


TREATMENT  OF  CHRISTIANS  BY  MOORS.  85 

or  the  improper  shape  of  the  instrument,  I  unfortu- 
nately made  a  slight  incision  in  the  boy's  head,  at 
the  very  commencement  of  the  operation.  And  the 
king,  observing  the  very  awkward  manner  in  which 
I  held  the  razor,  concluded  that  his  son's  head  was  in 
very  improper  hands,  and  ordered  me  to  resign  the 
razor  and  walk  out  of  the  tent.  This  I  considered  as 
a  very  fortunate  circumstance:  for  I  had  laid  it 
down  as  a  rule,  to  make  myself  as  useless  and  insig- 
nificant as  possible,  as  the  only  means  of  recovering 
my  liberty." 

Mungo  Park  had  to  endure  annoyances,  insult, 
and  persecution  of  various  kinds,  renewed  from  day 
to  day;  till  life  became  an  intolerable  burden,  and 
he  envied  the  lot  of  the  poor  slaves.  A  council  of 
war  was  repeatedly  held  concerning  him ;  some 
advising  to  put  him  immediately  to  death,  some  to 
put  out  his  eyes,  which  they  said  resembled  those  of 
a  cat.  But  the  king  would  not  injure  him,  until 
his  principal  wife  Fatima,  who  was  then  absent, 
should  have  seen  him ;  since  such  was  her  desire. 

The  Moorish  ladies  were  very  troublesome,  im- 
pelled by  an  ungovernable  curiosity.  One  day  a 
party  of  them  came  to  his  hut,  and  gave  him  dis- 
tinctly to  understand  that  they  wished  to  inspect 
every  part  of  his  person,  in  order  to  satisfy  themselves 
on  some  points  which  were  rather  indelicate.  Filled 
with  surprise,  the  traveller  determined  to  treat  the 
matter  jocularly,  and  informed  them  that  it  was  not 
customary  in  his  country  to  strip  before  so  many 
beautiful  women;  but  that  if  all  of  them  would 

G  3 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


retire  except  the  young  lady  to  whom  he  pointed 
(selecting  the  youngest  and  handsomest),  he  would 
satisfy  her  curiosity.  The  ladies  enjoyed  the  jest, 
and  went  away  laughing  heartily:  and  the  young 
damsel  was  so  flattered  by  his  compliment  to  her 
superior  beauty,  as  she  rightly  understood  it,  that  she 
sent  him  some  meal  and  milk  for  supper.  Since 
several  of  Ali's  own  women  wished  to  see  the  white 
man,  he  was  conducted  round  the  tents  of  four  of  his 
ladies,  having  first  dressed  in  his  loose  cloak,  as  his 
nankeen  trowsers  were  said  to  be  not  only  inelegant, 
but  also  very  indecent.  The  ladies  were  very  in- 
quisitive about  his  person,  but  feigned  to  be  shocked 
with  the  whiteness  of  his  skin.  They  each  presented 
him  with  a  bowl  of  milk  and  water. 

As  a  war  with  a  neighbouring  state  was  now 
imminent,  Ali  and  his  warriors  moved  off  to  another 
camp,  whither  Mungo  Park  followed  with  the  rest  of 
the  people.  On  his  arrival,  he  immediately  waited 
on  the  king,  in  order  to  pay  his  respects  to  Queen 
Fatima  who  had  now  joined  him.  u  He  seemed 
much  pleased  with  my  coming,  shook  hands  with  me, 
and  informed  his  wife  that  I  was  a  Christian.  She 
was  a  woman  of  the  Arab  cast,  with  long  black  hair, 
and  remarkably  corpulent.  She  appeared  at  first 
rather  shocked  at  the  thought  of  having  a  Christian 
so  near  her :  but  when  I  had  (by  means  of  a  negro 
boy,  who  spoke  the  Mandingo  and  Arabic  tongues) 
answered  a  great  many  questions,  which  her  curiosity 
suggested,  respecting  the  country  of  the  Christians, 
she  seemed  more  at  ease,  and  presented  me  with  a 


CURIOSITY  OF  MOORISH  WOMEN. 


87 


bowl  of  milk,  which  I  considered  a  very  favourable 
omen." 

If  these  Moorish  women  were  curious,  (and  who 
can  blame  them  for  being  so,  shut  out  as  they  are 
from  the  rest  of  the  world?)  they  were  nevertheless 
far  kinder  than  the  men.  Fatima  supplied  the  cap- 
tive with  a  larger  quantity  of  provisions  than  he  had 
formerly  received,  gave  him  water  which  had  become 
a  great  scarcity,  and  procured  him  permission  to  ac- 
company Ali  to  Jarra,  whence  he  hoped  to  make  his 
escape ;  in  which  he  was  not  disappointed.  Fatima 
sent  for  his  bundle  of  clothes,  and  required  him  to 
explain  the  method  of  putting  on  stockings,  boots, 
and  other  articles  of  European  apparel. 

Notwithstanding  her  kindness,  he  was  often  in 
great  distress  for  water ;  since,  when  there  was  any 
in  the  wells,  the  men  refused  to  let  his  boy  draw  it 
in  order  to  supply  a  Christian  dog.  "  I  frequently 
passed  the  night  in  the  situation  of  Tantalus,  No 
sooner  had  I  shut  my  eyes,  than  fancy  would  convey 
me  to  the  streams  and  rivers  of  my  native  land. 
There,  as  I  wandered  along  the  verdant  brink,  I  sur- 
veyed the  clear  stream  with  transport,  and  hastened 
to  swallow  the  delightful  draught :  but,  alas  !  dis- 
appointment awakened  me ;  and  I  found  myself  a 
lonely  captive,  perishing  of  thirst  amidst  the  wilds  of 
Africa!" 

Here  is  a  Moorish  school!  The  priest  is  also 
schoolmaster.  He  has  assembled  his  pupils  in  the 
evening  on  an  open  spot  before  his  tent ;  and  there 
by  the  light  of  a  large  fire,  he  teaches  them  some 

G  4 


88 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


verses  of  the  Koran,  which  they  write  upon  their 
boards,  like  slates.  When  they  have  succeeded  in 
acquiring  a  few  prayers  in  this  manner,  their  educa- 
tion is  completed,  and  they  are  very  proud  of  their 
proficiency. 

The  training  of  girls  is  wholly  neglected,  except  in 
the  art  of  making  them  beautiful.  Women  are  re- 
garded by  the  Moors  as  inferior  creatures,  made  for 
the  pleasure  of  man,  to  whom  they  must  yield  a 
slavish  subjection.  So,  they  have  singular  ideas  of 
female  beauty.  It  is  measured  almost  entirely  by 
size  and  corpulence.  "  A  woman  of  even  moderate 
pretensions,  must  be  one  who  cannot  walk  without  a 
slave  under  each  arm  to  support  her :  and  a  perfect 
beauty  is  a  load  for  a  camel."  All  Ali's  wives  were 
very  fat.  In  consequence  of  this  prevalent  taste  for 
unwieldiness  of  bulk,  the  Moorish  ladies  take  great 
pains  to  increase  their  size.  Mothers  compel  their 
young  daughters  to  drink  a  large  bowl  of  camel's  milk, 
and  swallow  a  great  quantity  of  kooskoos  every  morn- 
ing. If  the  girl  has  no  appetite  or  feels  sick,  it  does 
not  matter :  she  must  take  the  prescribed  quantity, 
that  she  may  become  fat  and  get  a  husband.  "  I 
have  seen  a  poor  girl  sit  crying,  with  a  bowl  at  her 
lips,  for  more  than  an  hour ;  and  her  mother,  with  a 
stick  in  her  hand,  watching  her  all  the  while,  and 
using  the  stick  without  mercy,  whenever  she  observed 
that  her  daughter  was  not  swallowing.  This  singular 
practice,  instead  of  producing  indigestion  and  disease, 
soon  covers,  the  young  lady  with  that  degree  of 


MOORISH  HORSEMANSHIP. 


89 


plumpness,  which  in  the  eye  of  a  Moor  is  perfection 
itself." 

The  ladies  of  rank,  therefore,  do  nothing  but 
gossip  or  look  at  themselves  in  a  glass :  indeed, 
they  are  physically  incapacitated  for  any  exertion. 
But  they  are  humoursome,  and  vent  their  anger  upon 
their  poor  female  slaves.  Their  dress  is  scanty;  con- 
sisting of  a  broad  piece  of  cloth  wrapped  round  the 
waist,  and  hanging  nearly  to  the  ground;  to  the 
upper  part  of  which,  two  square  pieces  are  sewed, 
one  before,  and  the  other  behind,  which  are  fastened 
together  over  the  shoulders.  A  bandage  of  cotton 
cloth  surrounds  the  head,  so  arranged  as  partially  to 
screen  the  face  from  the  sun.  Many  of  them  veil 
themselves  from  head  to  foot  when  they  go  abroad. 
This  economy  in  dress  is  the  result  of  their  indolence  ; 
since  they  do  not  manufacture  cloth,  and  are  com- 
pelled to  purchase  it  from  the  Negroes.  Some  of  the 
men  are  good  workers  in  leather. 

The  Moors  are  splendid  horsemen.  This  is  their 
pride  and  their  security.  See,  how  they  gallop  at 
full  speed  over  the  dusty  plain,  and  rein  up  their 
fiery  steeds  in  a  moment!  You  would  think  that 
both  horse  and  man  must  come  down  together,  or 
that  the  rider  must  be  thrown  far  over  his  charger's 
head.  Sometimes,  indeed,  the  animal  is  pulled  down 
upon  his  haunches  by  a  jerk  of  the  strong  bit:  but 
it  is  rare  for  a  Moor  to  lose  his  seat.  He  sticks  to 
the  saddle  as  if  it  were  a  part  of  himself ;  which  its 
peculiar  shape  enables  him  to  do.  It  is  high  both 
before  and  behind.    This  form  renders  it  very  un- 


90 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


comfortable  to  a  European,  at  least  for  a  while :  but 
we  can  easily  imagine  how  constant  practice  removes 
this  difficulty :  after  which,  a  skilful  rider  feels  as  safe 
in  his  Moorish  saddle  as  a  child  fastened  into  his  chair. 
For  ourselves,  we  never  attained  the  aptitude  of 
yielding  to  the  motions  of  the  horse;  but  always 
pronounced  the  native  saddle  to  be  a  bore.  And  the 
same  with  the  stirrups.  But  "  habit  is  second  nature." 

The  Moors  procure  and  breed  the  best  horses, 
which  are  sometimes  valued  at  twenty  slaves.  They 
are  very  fleet,  and  some  of  them  truly  valuable.  "Ali 
always  rode  upon  a  milk-white  horse,  with  its  tail 
dyed  red.  He  never  walked,  unless  when  he  went 
to  say  his  prayers.  And,  even  in  the  night,  two  or 
three  horses  were  always  kept  ready  saddled  at  a 
little  distance  from  his  own  tent."  These  horses  are 
fed  three  or  four  times  a  day ;  and  in  the  evening  re- 
ceive a  large  quantity  of  milk,  which  they  relish  much. 

Their  boldness  and  the  swiftness  of  their  steeds 
make  the  Moors  a  terror  to  the  Negro.  Two  or  three 
of  them  will  come  suddenly  upon  a  herd  of  cattle ;  and 
before  the  keepers  can  collect  in  their  defence,  will 
drive  a  large  part  of  them  away  ;  which  they  can  do  at 
a  gallop  with  consummate  skill.  One  bold  horseman 
has  been  known  to  accomplish  the  feat  of  carrying  off 
several  bullocks  from  under  the  walls  of  a  town,  in 
sight  of  the  Negroes,  whose  arrows  fell  harmlessly 
around  him.  They  use  their  spear  on  horseback 
with  great  skill :  and  some  of  them  are  said  to  be 
equally  expert  with  the  musket.  Though,  therefore, 
they  are  no  match  for  the  Negroes  in  numbers,  and 


DESERT  LIFE. 


91 


are  often  worsted  by  them  in  a  pitched  battle;  yet 
they  are  generally  successful  in  a  marauding  expedi- 
tion. When  the  native  kings  combine  against  them, 
they  strike  their  tents  and  retire  into  the  desert, 
where  they  are  safe. 

Contrary  to  the  habits  of  the  Negro,  the  Moors 
live  a  good  deal  on  the  flesh  and  milk  of  their  cattle. 
They  procure  arms,  ammunition,  and  other  articles,  by 
the  sale  of  the  slaves  which  they  take  in  their  preda- 
tory excursions.  This  commerce  is  carried  on  by  the 
caravans  which  cross  the  desert  to  Barbary.  They 
also  exchange  salt  for  corn  and  cloth  from  the  Negroes  : 
and  those  tribes  who  own  the  gum  oases  trade  with 
the  French  on  the  Senegal.  Their  women  spin  goat's 
hair  into  a  strong  thread,  of  which  they  weave 
coverings  for  their  tents.  They  make  saddles,  bridles, 
and  pouches,  out  of  the  skins  of  their  cattle,  which 
they  know  how  to  tan. 

This  desert  life  would  be  intolerable  to  any  but  an 
Arab  or  a  Moor.  It  would  be  so  painfully  mono- 
tonous. As  their  slaves  perform  all  the  drudgery  of 
getting  wood  and  water,  and  watering  the  cattle ;  the 
people  themselves  have  literally  nothing  to  do.  No 
wonder  they  indulge  so  much  in  sensual  pleasures  at 
home,  and  love  to  pick  up  a  quarrel  with  their 
neighbours.  No  wonder  they  have  seized  upon  the 
border  lands,  where  they  may  enjoy  a  little  variety 
of  foliage  and  pleasant  fields. 

There  are  some  oases  in  the  desert ;  beautiful  spots 
of  verdure  in  the  midst  of  a  wild  of  barren  sand. 
Here  there  are  perennial  springs  of  water,  lofty  palms 


32 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  IIOME. 


and  other  trees,  with  small  patches  of  pasturage. 
These  have  their  respective  owners,  who  occasionally 
frequent  them  to  gather  the  fruits  and  feed  their 
cattle.  The  chief  oases,  in  this  part  of  Africa,  are 
those  in  which  the  gum-tree  grows.  The  principal 
gum-forests  are  Sahel,  El  Hiebar,  and  El  Fatech. 
The  acacia  grows  to  the  height  of  twenty  feet,  and 
is  two  or  three  feet  in  circumference;  a  stunted, 
crooked,  ragged-looking  tree,  with  leaves  of  dirty 
green.  The  gum-tree  swells  with  the  moisture  of 
the  rainy  season,  and  its  bark  cracks  with  the  super- 
vening heat.  Then  the  juice  flows  out  and  dries  on 
the  surface,  in  small  lumps  or  large  drops,  of  the  size 
of  a  partridge's  egg.  In  a  month's  time  nature  has 
completed  her  work,  without  the  aid  of  human 
gardener  or  husbandman. 

The  tribe  to  which  the  gum-oasis  belongs  then 
assemble  in  a  tumultuous  manner,  to  gather  the 
harvest.  It  occupies  them  about  six  weeks  to  pick 
it  off  the  trees  and  stow  it  away  in  large  sacks  made 
of  tanned  hides.  Having  slung  their  merchandise 
over  the  backs  of  cattle,  the  whole  multitude  proceed 
to  the  gum-fair  which  is  held  on  the  banks  of  the 
Senegal.  The  princes  and  chief  men  are  mounted 
on  their  fleet  horses  or  dromedaries,  which  are  gaily 
caparisoned.  Armed  horsemen  ride  about,  to  act  as 
police  in  keeping  some  kind  of  order,  and  defend  the 
caravan  from  an  attack  of  enemies.  The  chief 
women  are  seated  in  large  baskets  fastened  on  the 
backs  of  camels,  and  covered  with  an  awning. 
Crowds  of  foot  passengers,  mixed  with  cattle,  goats, 


GUM  FAIR. 


93 


beasts  of  burden,  and  slaves,  form  a  promiscuous 
assembly,  filling  the  air  with  shrill  and  discordant 
sounds, 

Thus  they  journey  to  a  desolate  plain  on  the  bank 
of  the  river.  It  is  a  dreary  spot,  in  a  sea  of  glistening 
sand,  unrelieved  by  a  single  tree  or  plant.  Here  the 
French  merchants  await  the  coming  of  the  caravan, 
which  takes  a  long  time  to  compose  itself  and  encamp 
in  peace.  On  a  given  signal,  the  fair  commences ; 
and  an  attempt  is  made  to  transact  business.  What 
wrangling,  disputations,  high  words,  and  threatenings 
ensue !  The  price  has  to  be  fixed :  but  the  Moors 
find  a  hundred  reasons  for  delay.  The  Franks  are 
urgent ;  for  their  time  is  precious.  The  Moors  care 
nothing  about  time,  and  spin  out  the  negotiation  as 
long  as  possible,  hoping  that  their  customers  will  be 
obliged  to  give  in.  The  Moors  wish  to  overreach  in 
the  price  of  the  gum;  the  Franks  cheat  in  the  size  of 
the  measure.  At  length  the  gum  changes  hands; 
cottons,  blue  caps,  and  other  goods  are  received  in 
barter.  The  fair  ends  ;  the  tumultuous  parties  retire ; 
and  the  desert  resumes  its  wonted  silence  and  soli- 
tude. 


94 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


CHAP.  V. 

Wilderness  of  Kaarta. — A  Traveller  lost. — Kindness  of  Women. — 
Corn-Spirit. — Wild  Beasts  abroad. — Hunting  Elephants. — "White 
Man's  Lies." — Woods  of  Tenda. — Wolves. — Lions. — How  to  catch 
a  live  Lion! — Discomfiture  by  Bees. — G-old  District. — Iron. — 
Native  Lawsuits. — The  beginning  of  Troubles. — Failure  of  British 
Expeditions.  —  Crossing  Kivers.  —  Fight  with  an  Alligator.  — 
Palavers. — A  difficult  Choice. — Negro  Philosophy.  —  The  Jalonka 
Wilderness  and  People. — Nitta-Tree. — Soap-making. — Manding. 
— Park's  deliverer. 

Returning  from  our  excursion  to  the  Moors  of 
Ludamar  and  the  desert,  we  travel  into  the  heart 
of  Africa  through  the  vast  wilderness  of  Kaarta  and 
Bambarra.  We  call  it  a  wilderness,  because  it  is 
neither  a  champagne  country  nor  a  desert.  Many 
portions  of  the  soil  are  barren :  but  the  greater  part 
consists  of  woodland,  sometimes  thinly  and  sometimes 
thickly  covered  with  trees.  Here  and  there  you 
meet  with  a  solitary  town  or  village,  and  its  surround- 
ing patch  of  culture.  The  human  inhabitants  are 
principally  Foolas,  who  can  here  find  pasture  for  their 
cattle.  But  it  is  chiefly  the  abode  of  wild  beasts  and 
birds  of  the  largest  species. 

It  was  in  this  wilderness  that  Mungo  Park 
wandered  for  three  weeks,  after  effecting  his  escape 


KINDNESS  OF  AFRICAN  WOMEN. 


95 


from  the  Moors;  suffering  many  privations  from 
hunger,  thirst,  and  fatigue.  He  was  frequently 
taken  for  a  Moor,  and  laughed  at  by  the  Negroes  on 
account  of  his  sad  plight  ;  at  other  times  he  was 
rejected  as  a  white  man.  As  he  had  been  robbed  of 
everything  but  his  clothes  and  pocket  compass,  he 
had  no  means  of  procuring  a  guide  or  of  buying  food. 
Ashamed  and  repulsed  by  the  male  sex,  he  found 
mercy  at  the  hands  of  women.  They  pitied  his  dis- 
tress, and  frequently  gave  him  something  to  eat,  un- 
known to  their  lords. 

u  At  the  door  of  one  of  these  huts  an  old  motherly 
woman  sat,  spinning  cotton:  I  made  signs  to  her 
that  I  was  hungry,  and  inquired  if  she  had  any 
victuals  with  her  in  the  hut.  She  immediately  laid 
down  her  distaff,  and  desired  me,  in  Arabic,  to  come 
in.  When  I  had  seated  myself  on  the  floor,  she  set 
before  me  a  dish  of  kooskoos,  that  had  been  left  the 
preceding  night,  of  which  I  made  a  tolerable  meal ; 
and  in  return  for  this  kindness  I  gave  her  one  of  my 
pockethandkerchiefs ;  begging  at  the  same  time  a 
little  corn  for  my  horse,  which  she  readily  brought 
me." 

Again  he  says,  "  In  the  morning,  I  endeavoured, 
both  by  entreaties  and  threats,  to  procure  some 
victuals  from  the  Dooty,  but  in  vain.  I  even  begged 
some  corn  from  one  of  his  female  slaves,  as  she  was 
washing  it  at  the  well ;  and  had  the  mortification  to 
be  refused.  However  when  the  Dooty  was  gone  to 
the  fields,  his  wife  sent  me  a  handful  of  meal,  which 
I  mixed  with  water,  and  drank  for  breakfast." 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


"  I  set  off  for  the  village ;  where  I  found  to  my 
great  mortification,  that  no  person  would  admit  me 
into  his  house.  I  was  regarded  with  astonishment 
and  fear,  and  was  obliged  to  sit  all  day  without 
victuals,  in  the  shade  of  a  tree.  The  night  threat- 
ened to  be  very  uncomfortable,  for  the  wind  rose, 
and  there  was  great  appearance  of  heavy  rain :  and 
the  wild  beasts  are  so  very  numerous  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, that  I  should  have  been  under  the  necessity  of 
climbing  up  the  tree,  and  resting  among  the  branches. 
About  sunset,  however,  as  I  was  preparing  to  pass 
the  night  in  this  manner,  and  had  turned  my  horse 
loose  that  he  might  graze  at  liberty ;  a  woman,  re- 
turning from  the  labours  of  the  field,  stopped  to 
observe  me:  and  perceiving  that  I  was  weary  and 
dejected,  inquired  into  my  situation,  which  I  briefly 
explained  to  her.  Whereupon,  with  looks  of  great 
compassion,  she  took  up  my  saddle  and  bridle,  and 
told  me  to  follow  her.  Having  conducted  me  into 
her  hut,  she  lighted  up  a  lamp,  spread  a  mat  on  the 
floor,  and  told  me  I  might  remain  there  for  the 
night.  Finding  that  I  was  very  hungry,  she  said  she 
would  procure  me  something  to  eat.  She  accord- 
ingly went  out,  and  returned  in  a  short  time  with  a 
very  fine  fish ;  which  having  caused  to  be  half  broiled 
upon  some  embers,  she  gave  me  for  supper." 

The  good  woman  then  called  to  the  female  part  of 
her  family,  who  were  gazing  upon  the  stranger,  to 
resume  their  task  of  spinning ;  in  which  they  were 
employed  a  great  part  of  the  night.  "  They  lightened 
their  labours  by  songs,  one  of  which  was  composed 


KINDNESS  OF  AFRICAN  WOMEN. 


97 


extempore ;  for  I  was  myself  the  subject  of  it.  It 
was  sung  by  one  of  the  young  women,  the  rest  joining 
in  a  sort  of  chorus.  The  air  was  sweet  and  plaintive; 
and  the  words  literally  translated  were  these:  — 

*  The  winds  roared  and  the  rains  fell, — 
The  poor  white  man,  faint  and  weary,  came  and  sat  under  our  tree ; 
He  has  no  mother  to  bring  him  milk,  no  wife  to  grind  his  corn. 

Chorus.    Let  us  pity  the  white  man ; 
No  mother  has  he  to  bring  him  milk,  no  wife  to  grind  his  corn,  &c.' 

Trifling  as  this  recital  may  appear  to  the  reader,  to  a 
person  in  my  situation,  the  circumstance  was  affect- 
ing in  the  highest  degree :  I  was  oppressed  by  such 
unexpected  kindness ;  and  sleep  fled  from  my  eyes." 

Perhaps,  one  reason  why  the  men  were  so  suspicious 
and  unfeeling  to  Mungo  Park,  was,  that  he  could 
give  them  no  satisfactory  reason  for  passing  through 
their  country.  The  idea  of  travelling  from  curiosity 
is  so  utterly  repugnant  to  an  African's  mind,  that  he 
cannot  possibly  believe  it.  Had  the  white  man  been 
a  trader  or  a  pilgrim  to  Mecca,  he  might  have  fared 
better.  But  who  was  he  ?  What  was  he  doing  here? 
were  questions  which  it  sorely  puzzled  them  to  solve. 
The  same  reason  would  militate  against  the  conve- 
nience and  safety  of  any  other  European  traveller. 
When  Dr.  Barth  went,  on  a  kind  of  embassy,  with 
the  avowed  purpose  of  making  a  treaty  of  trade  with 
the  native  kings;  his  reception  amongst  them  was 
very  different.  They  could  understand  this  reason : 
it  commended  itself  to  their  heart  and  judgment. 

Yet  Mr.  Park  testifies,  "  I  do  not  recollect  a  single 

H 


98 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


instance  of  hard-heartedness  towards  me  in  the 
women.  In  all  my  wanderings  and  wretchedness,  I 
found  them  uniformly  kind  and  compassionate.  And 
I  can  truly  say,  as  my  predecessor  Mr.  Ledyard  has 
eloquently  said  before  me,  'To  a  woman,  I  never 
addressed  myself  in  the  language  of  decency  and 
friendship,  without  receiving  a  decent  and  friendly 
answer.  If  I  was  hungry  or  thirsty,  wet,  or  sick, 
they  did  not  hesitate  to  perform  a  generous  action. 
In  so  free  and  so  kind  a  manner  did  they  contribute 
to  my  relief ;  that  if  I  was  dry,  I  drank  the  sweetest 
draught,  and  if  hungry,  I  ate  the  coarsest  morsel  with 
a  double  relish.' " 

Still,  the  traveller  was  sometimes  kindly  enter- 
tained by  the  men,  especially  when  he  journeyed  in 
company  with  natives ;  who  were  thus  a  kind  of 
voucher  for  his  respectability.  On  one  occasion,  he 
observes,  "  In  the  morning,  when  I  was  about  to 
depart,  my  landlord,  with  a  great  deal  of  diffidence, 
begged  me  to  give  him  a  lock  of  my  hair.  He  had 
been  told,  he  said,  that  white  men's  hair  made  a 
saphie,  that  would  give  to  the  possessor  all  the  know- 
ledge of  white  men.  I  had  never  before  heard  of  so 
simple  a  mode  of  education ;  but  instantly  complied 
with  the  request :  and  my  landlord's  thirst  for  learn- 
ing was  such,  that  with  cutting  and  pulling,  he 
cropped  one  side  of  my  head  pretty  closely ;  and 
would  have  done  the  same  with  the  other,  had  I  not 
signified  my  disapprobation  by  putting  on  my  hat, 
and  assuring  him,  that  I  wished  to  reserve  some  of 
this  precious  merchandise  for  a  future  occasion." 


INTOXICATING  DRINKS. 


99 


In  the  midst  of  this  wilderness  you  would  find  "beer- 
shops/'  where  the  Pagans  enjoy  themselves  as  much 
as  the  more  civilised  people  of  Europe.  A  number  of 
Negroes  collect  in  one  of  these  houses,  and  sit  round 
large  vessels  of  "  corn-spirit "  (as  they  call  it),  drink- 
ing of  it  plentifully  until  some  of  them  at  least  are 
inebriated.  This  intoxicating  liquor  is  not  the  palm- 
wine,  formerly  mentioned;  it  is  brewed  from  corn. 
They  also  make  use  of  a  kind  of  mead.  They  have 
thus  three  kinds  of  exhilarating  drink ;  from  which 
devout  Mahometans  abstain.  The  latter  take  their 
revenge  in  a  large  consumption  of  tobacco  and  snuffy 
of  which  all  Africans  are  very  fond. 


YOUNG  AFRICAN  ELEPHANT. 


This  vast  wilderness  is  a  favourite  haunt  of  ele- 
phants. Here  they  are  comparatively  undisturbed- 
The  African  species  seems,  from  the  shape  of  its 
grinder,  to  be  different  from  the  Asiatic.  It  is  gene- 
rally very  wild ;  and  modern  Africans  do  not  try  to 
tame  them,  like  the  Carthaginians  of  old.    In  fact, 


100 


TIIE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


whenever  any  one  comes  near  the  habitations  of  men, 
it  is  pursued  till  it  is  either  killed  or  frightened  away 
from  the  human  presence.  At  some  seasons  of  the 
year,  elephants  roam  over  the  country  in  large  herds, 
seeking  food  and  water.  When  the  pools  are  dried 
up,  they  frequent  the  rivers :  and  it  is  at  this  time 
that  the  hunters  are  chiefly  on  the  look  out.  With 
these  men,  the  occupation  is  a  matter  of  business, 
not  of  pleasure.  The  hunt  has  nothing  of  the  chivalry 
and  eclat  with  which  it  is  pursued  in  India.  It  has 
no  semblance  of  sport  Here  is  the  description  of 
one,  of  course  as  given  by  a  native. 

"  Wishing  to  see  the  way  in  which  elephants  are 
killed,  I  joined  a  party  of  four  hunters,  who  were 
armed  with  long  guns,  and  each  furnished  with  a  bag 
of  dry  provisions,  that  would  serve  him  for  five  or 
six  days.  We  started  for  one  of  the  loneliest  parts 
of  the  forest,  when  my  companions  began  to  search 
for  the  usual  marks  of  the  elephants'  whereabouts. 
These  consisted  of  the  prints  of  feet,  fallen  dung,  and 
broken  branches  of  trees.  At  length  we  discovered 
these  unequivocal  marks  of  a  small  herd  having 
recently  passed.  On  a  careful  examination,  the 
hunters  declared  that  the  beasts  must  have  been 
there  on  the  previous  day,  and  would  probably  now 
be  not  far  off.  We  followed  the  track  till  night-fall, 
and  then  slept  in  the  trees. 

*  Next  morning,  we  continued  the  pursuit,  assured 
that  we  were  approaching  our  prey.  Occasionally 
stopping  to  listen,  at  last  we  heard  a  crashing  of 
boughs  in  the  distance,  caused  by  the  marching  of 


KAARTA —  ELEPHANT  HUNT. 


101 


these  bulky  creatures  through  underwood  and  small 
trees.  We  became  very  excited,  but  proceeded  in 
silence,  as  stealthily  as  cats.  The  herd  is  now  in 
sight,  and  we  follow  them,  dodging  behind  trees,  so 
as  not  to  be  seen;  but  keeping  an  eye  upon  their 
movements.  Our  guns  are  all  ready,  loaded  with 
ball,  and  primed.  At  last  we  see  what  we  desired,  one 
of  the  younger  animals  wandering  a  little  from  its 
companions.  We  press  forward,  and  intercept  its 
return  to  the  herd.  Drawing  nearer  and  nearer  to  it 
unperceived,  we  select  a  moment  when  it  is  passing 
in  front ;  and  on  a  given  signal,  we  all  fire  from  our 
lurking  places,  and  then  fall  flat  on  the  ground.  The 
elephant  has  received  two  or  three  of  our  balls ;  but 
on  looking  round,  he  can  see  no  enemy ;  for  the  long 
grass  quite  conceals  us  from  his  view.  He  applies 
his  trunk  to  the  wounds,  but  cannot  extract  the  balls; 
and  then  runs  about  frantically,  to  seek  his  foe.  Ap- 
proaching us,  he  affords  an  excellent  opportunity  for 
a  second  volley,  under  most  favourable  circumstances. 
We  can  scarcely  miss  him :  every  ball  from  our  long 
guns  enters  his  body  or  head;  and  he  falls  dead 
before  us.  The  rest  of  the  troop  are  scared  away  by 
the  noise,  not  knowing  the  calamity  which  has  befallen 
one  of  their  number. 

"We  immediately  run  up  to  our  victim,  whose  teeth 
we  strike  out  with  light  hatchets.  Taking  off  the 
skin,  we  extend  it  on  the  ground  to  dry.  Then 
cutting  out  the  most  delicate  parts  of  the  flesh,  we 
cook,  and  feast  upon  a  portion,  and  dry  thin  slices  for 
future  provision.  The  lions  and  hyaenas  would  after- 
h  3 


102 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


wards  dispute  for  our  leavings  with  the  birds  of  prey, 
which  were  hovering  around,  and  which  would  come 
in  for  the  first  share.  We  killed  three  more  elephants 
before  returning  home,  having  been  absent  for  nearly 
a  month.  During  this  time,  we  lived  on  flesh,  wild- 
honey,  and  the  meal  which  we  carried  with  us.  We 
became  rich  by  our  expedition." 

The  desire  of  Europeans  for  ivory,  and  the  price 
which  they  pay  for  it,  is  another  subject  of  wonder  to 
the  Negroes.  True,  they  are  told  that  it  is  used  for 
handles  to  knives  and  similar  purposes;  but  this  does 
not  explain  the  matter  in  a  satisfactory  way.  For 
why  will  not  common  bone  or  wood  do  for  handles  ? 
Ivory  does  not  make  the  blade  cut  better;,  nor  is  it 
more  easily  handled.  They  generally  doubt  this 
account  of  its  use ;  and  put  it  down  as  one  of  the 
"white  man's  lies."  The  bundle  of  these  "lies"  is 
supposed  to  be  very  large.  They  naturally  give  us 
credit  for  no  more  veracity  than  is  current  amongst 
themselves:  and  the  strange  things  which  we  tell 
about  our  country,  though  all  true,  utterly  stagger 
their  belief. 

The  return  of  some  of  their  own  countrymen  from 
sojourning  in  England,  is  beginning  to  enlighten 
them  a  little  on  foreign  subjects.  Still,  many  listen 
to  the  accounts  of  what  these  Negroes  have  seen, 
as  to  the  "  Arabian  Nights'  Entertainments."  When 
we  have  told  them  about  white  rain  (snow),  and  the 
water  becoming  so  hard  that  men  can  walk  upon  it ; 
they  have  asked,  "  Do  you  think  me  fool  enough  to 
believe  that  ?  "    Many  of  them  still  suppose  that  we 


WHITE  MAN'S  LIES. 


103 


dwell  upon  the  water,  and  that  there  is  no  other  terra 
firma  in  the  world  than  their  own.  Those  who  live 
near  the  coast,  or  who  come  in  contact  with  Barbary 
merchants,  know  better ;  and  the  appearance  of 
steam-boats  in  some  of  their  own  rivers,  is  beginning 
both  to  instruct  and  to  confound  them.  But  if  we 
have  plenty  of  land  of  our  own,  why  do  we  want 
African  timber,  and  rice,  and  hides,  and  ground-nuts, 
and  bees'- wax,  and  palm  oil,  and  spices,  and  gold  ? 
What  fools  we  are  to  give  good  cloth  and  ammunition 
for  useless  ivory  ?  And,  then,  to  take  away  slaves 
(probably  to  eat  them)  !  There  is  some  mystery 
about  all  this ;  as  much  as  about  the  knotty  question, 
"  who  was  Moses'  mother  ?  " 

If  we  had  taken  you  straight  eastward  from  the 
Gambia,  without  veering  to  the  north  in  order  to 
visit  Kasson  and  Ludamar,  we  should  have  led  you 
through  a  number  of  petty  kingdoms,  which  lie  about 
the  upper  parts  of  the  great  African  rivers.  The  chief 
of  these  countries,  in  the  direct  route,  are  Tenda, 
Fooladu,  and  Manding.  They,  with  several  others, 
may  all  be  said  to  be  included  in  a  vast  wilderness, 
which  finally  unites  with  that  of  Kaarta ;  but  they 
are  more  thickly  peopled  than  most  of  the  kingdom 
of  Bambarra.  It  is  high  land,  forming  the  com- 
mencement of  the  mountains  which  bound  Sene- 
gambia  on  the  south ;  and  there  is  much  rocky  and 
sandy  ground  interspersed  with  the  forests.  As  the 
length  of  this  wilderness  includes  ten  or  twelve 
degrees  of  longitude,  we  may  glance  at  a  few  of  its 
phenomena. 

H  4 


104 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


One  of  the  things  of  which  you  would  be  most 
painfully  sensible  in  traversing  this  region,  is  the 
presence  of  wild  beasts,  of  large  size  and  ferocious 
character.  They  literally  swarm  here;  so  that  you 
would  have  to  keep  a  constant  look  out,  by  day  and 
by  night.  Think  of  the  impudence  of  the  wolves  by 
the  following  accounts.  "  The  wolves  killed  one  of 
our  best  asses  within  twenty  yards  of  the  place  where 
we  slept."  "  We  had  not  time  to  cook,  and  the  rain 
prevented  the  watch-fire  from  burning;  owing  to 
which,  one  of  our  asses  was  killed  by  the  wolves.  It 
was  only  sixteen  feet  distant  from  a  bush  under  which 
one  of  the  men  was  sleeping. — Watched  with  the 
sentries  all  night,  as  the  wolves  kept  constantly 
howling  around  us.  During  the  night,  the  wolves 
carried  away  two  large  cloth  bundles  from  the  tent 
door  to  a  considerable  distance ;  where  they  eat  off  the 
skins  with  which  they  were  covered,  and  left  them." 
The  poor  things  must  have  been  very  hungry ! 

The  lion  is  quite  as  bold  as  the  wolf,  and  rather 
more  dangerous  to  the  human  species.  "We  heard 
a  particular  sort  of  roaring  or  growling,  not  unlike 
the  noise  of  a  wild  boar ;  there  seemed  to  be  more 
than  one  of  them,  and  they  went  all  round  our  cattle. 
Fired  two  muskets  to  make  them  keep  at  a  distance ; 
but  as  they  still  kept  prowling  round  us,  we  collected 
a  bunch  of  withered  grass,  and  went  in  search  of  the 
animals,  suspecting  them  to  be  wild  boars.  We  got 
near  one  of  them,  and  fired  several  shots  into  the 
bush,  and  one  at  him  as  he  went  off  among  the  long 
grass."    The  travellers  then  found  out  that  the 


TENDA  —  LIONS  ABROAD. 


105 


intruders  were  nobler  animals  than  boars,  and  kept  a 
good  watch.  "About  midnight,  these  young  lions 
attempted  to  seize  one  of  the  asses,  which  so  much 
alarmed  the  rest,  that  they  broke  their  ropes,  and 
came  at  full  gallop  in  amongst  the  tent  ropes.  Two 
of  the  lions  followed  them,  and  came  so  close  to  us, 
that  the  sentry  cut  at  one  of  them  with  his  sword, 
but  did  not  dare  to  fire  for  fear  of  killing  the  asses." 

*  We  had  not  proceeded  a  hundred  yards  farther, 
when,  coming  to  an  opening  in  the  bushes,  I  was  not 
a  little  surprised  to  see  three  lions  coming  towards 
us.  They  were  not  so  red  as  the  lion  I  formerly  saw 
in  Bambarra,  but  of  a  dusky  colour,  like  the  colour 
of  an  ass.  They  were  very  large,  and  came  bounding 
over  the  long  grass,  not  one  after  another,  but  all 
abreast  of  each  other.  I  was  afraid,  if  I  allowed  them 
to  come  too  near  us,  and  my  piece  should  miss  fire, 
that  we  should  be  all  devoured  by  them.  I  therefore 
let  go  the  bridle,  and  walked  forwards  to  meet  them. 
As  soon  as  they  were  within  a  long  shot  of  me,  I  fired 
at  the  centre  one.  I  do  not  think  I  hit  him ;  but 
they  all  stopped,  looked  at  each  other,  and  then 
bounded  away  a  few  paces,  when  one  of  them  stopped 
and  looked  back  at  me.  I  was  too  busy  in  loading 
my  piece  to  observe  their  motions  as  they  went  away, 
and  was  very  happy  to  see  the  last  of  them  march 
slowly  off  amongst  the  bushes."  The  lions  again 
approached  them  in  the  forest,  when  the  travellers, 
with  a  loud  call,  whistle,  and  other  noises,  scared 
them  away. 

The  account  of  an  attempt  to  catch  a  live  lion 


106 


THE  ALBICANS  AT  HOME. 


used  to  be  told  by  the  Negroes  of  these  parts,  as  a 
joke  against  the  people  of  Doomasansa,  amongst 
whom  the  following  ludicrous  but  fatal  incident 
occurred.  Being  much  annoyed  by  a  lion  which 
committed  frequent  depredations  on  their  cattle, 
they  determined  to  go  and  hunt  him  out.  They 
found  him  concealed  in  a  neighbouring  thicket, 
where  they  managed  to  approach  him  near  enough 
to  get  a  good  shot  at  him.  They  fired  and  wounded 
the  royal  beast  in  the  leg.  He  immediately  sprang 
at  them,  but  fell  down  among  the  grass  and  was 
unable  to  rise.  Finding  that  he  could  not  move,  and 
was  therefore  completely  within  their  power,  they 
held  a  council  of  war  as  to  what  should  be  done.  It 
was  easy  to  dispatch  him  by  another  volley ;  but  they 
wished,  if  possible,  to  take  him  alive.  This  would  be 
an  undeniable  proof  of  their  bravery;  and  if  they 
should  convey  him  to  the  coast,  they  might  sell  him 
to  the  Europeans  for  a  good  sum  of  money.  But 
how  was  it  to  be  done?  No  one  durst  approach 
him,  to  fasten  a  rope  round  his  neck.  Various 
schemes  were  proposed,  amongst  which  was  the  fol- 
lowing ;  to  strip  the  roof  of  a  hut  of  its  thatch,  and 
carry  the  bamboo  frame  to  where  the  lion  wras,  and 
throw  it  over  him.  He  would  then  be  in  a  cage; 
and  could  be  tamed  at  leisure.  If,  however,  he 
should  attempt  to  spring  upon  the  men  who  carried 
the  roof,  they  would  only  require  to  let  it  down  upon 
themselves,  and  fire  at  the  lion  through  the  rafters. 

This  plan  met  with  general  approbation.  The 
men,  each  armed  with  a  gun  in  his  right  hand,  and 


ASSAULTS  BY  BEES. 


107 


supporting  the  roof  with  the  left  shoulder,  boldly 
approached  the  enemy.  But  as  they  drew  near, 
they  were  so  frightened  by  the  horid  fierceness  of  his 
looks,  that  they  stopped  short,  and  consulted  for  their 
own  safety  by  covering  themselves  with  the  roof.  At 
this  critical  moment,  the  lion,  who  had  recovered 
strength,  and  was  in  a  dreadful  rage,  exerted  all  his 
energy,  and  made  a  spring  at  them.  He  was  too 
quick  for  the  men,  and  got  amongst  them  before  the 
roof  reached  the  ground ;  so  that  he  was  caught  with 
them  in  the  same  cage ;  and  as  they  could  not  escape, 
he  tore  them  in  pieces,  and  devoured  them  at  leisure. 
It  is  said,  that  nothing  will  enrage  "an  inhabitant  of 
Doomasansa  more  than  to  bid  him  66  catch  a  live 
lion." 

If  the  traveller  escapes  harm  from  the  larger 
denizens  of  the  forest,  such  as  wolves,  lions,  ele- 
phants, hyenas,  and  wild  boars;  he  may  still  suffer 
much  inconvenience  from  a  smaller  animal,  to  which 
allusion  has  already  been  made.  The  number  of 
bees  which  hive  in  the  trees  is  enormous.  Their 
rich  stores  of  honey  are  a  great  temptation  to  parched 
and  hungry  mortals.  Surely  a  little  can  be  spared  for 
the  use  of  man !  The  bees  think  differently ;  calcu- 
lating that  they  have  a  right  to  all  that  they  gather 
by  their  own  labour:  and  they  are  prepared  to 
defend  their  property  with  their  lives.  It  requires 
persons  of  experience  and  tact  to  get  honey  and  bees'- 
wax  out  of  the  woods  of  Africa ;  but  large  quantities 
are  obtained  and  are  purchased  by  foreign  mer- 
chants. 


108 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


A  native  who  was  travelling  with  a  caravan,  in- 
cautiously went  to  rob  a  hive  near  the  place  of 
encampment;  thinking  that  he  could  easily  defend 
himself  against  a  few  bees.  He  miscalculated  the 
number  and  spirit  of  the  enemy.  As  soon  as 
they  found  their  precincts  disturbed,  they  came  out 
in  such  multitudes,  and  assailed  him  with  such 
fury,  that  he  instantly  took  to  flight,  and  ran  for 
refuge  to  the  coffle.  The  bees  pursued,  and  attacked 
the  caravan,  which  they  completely  routed.  Horses 
and  asses  broke  away  and  dispersed ;  men  and  women 
followed  helter  skelter ;  and  the  bees  took  possession 
of  the  camp.  It  was  a  long  time  before  the  people 
could  find  courage  to  collect,  and  return  to  the 
baggage,  with  large  firebrands.  Having  set  fire  to  the 
grass,  the  flames  spread  more  widely  than  they  an- 
ticipated, and  they  could  with  difficulty  save  their 
effects  from  being  burnt. 

We  have  heard  of  the  defeat  of  a  large  army  by 
bees,  which  took  place  farther  eastward.  A  wood 
through  which  the  troops  were  marching  happened 
to  be  full  of  hives  :  and  some  of  the  horsemen  having 
committed  a  trespass  on  the  honey,  they  were  assailed 
by  myriads  of  insects,  which  hung  over  them  like  a 
cloud.  The  stung  horses  became  unmanageable, 
and  broke  in  amongst  the  footmen;  these  in  turn 
became  panic-stricken,  and  the  whole  army  consist- 
ing of  ten  or  twelve  thousand  men  were  put  to  flight. 
The  wounds  which  the  soldiers  received  from  their 
aerial  foes  were  not  mortal;  but  their  march  was 
impeded  for  that  day. 


MANDING —  GOLD  DIGGINGS. 


109 


In  the  hilly  parts  of  this  wilderness,  many  streams 
arise,  which  constitute  the  bulk  of  the  great  rivers  of 
Western  Africa,  the  sources  of  which  are  situated  a 
little  higher  up  in  the  mountains.  This  region  forms 
also  the  principal  gold  district  of  Africa.  The  pre- 
cious metal  used  to  be  obtained  by  washing  the  sand 
and  gravel  which  form  the  beds  of  streams ;  and  this 
plan  is  still  sometimes  resorted  to.  But  as  these 
sands  have  been  often  searched,  little  gold  can  now 
be  found  in  them ;  unless  when  heavy  rains  have 
caused  the  water  to  deviate  from  its  usual  channel. 
Then,  gold  is  found  in  large  grains,  quite  pure. 

The  usual  mode  pursued  by  the  gold  seekers  is 
that  of  digging.  This  process  also  is  very  simple. 
Pits  are  sunk,  first  by  way  of  trial.  A  deep  hole  is 
made,  and  several  calabashes  of  sand  taken  out  of  it 
are  carefully  washed,  to  see  if  the  soil  contains  any 
precious  dust.  When  the  presence  of  gold  has  been 
ascertained,  the  diggers  proceed  to  their  work  in 
earnest.    It  has  been  described  as  follows. 

We  saw  a  large  field  containing  a  number  of  pits 
of  two  kinds.  The  one  sort,  out  of  which  the  metal 
was  obtained,  were  about  twice  as  deep  as  a  man. 
The  other  kind  were  shallow,  and  lined  with  clay,  for 
the  purpose  of  holding  water.  When  a  man  in  the 
pit  had  thrown  out  some  of  the  gravel,  a  woman  took 
up  a  portion  and  put  it  in  a  large  calabash  with  a 
little  water.  She  crumbled  it  as  much  as  possible, 
and  then  threw  out  the  large  pebbles.  Mixing  up 
the  rest,  she  whirled  the  calabash  quickly  round,  so 
that  some  water  with  the  coarser,  part  of  the  sand 


110 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  IIOME. 


flew  out.  She  added  more  water,  and  continued  the 
process,  till  there  was  little  left  but  a  quantity  of 
dark  earthy  matter,  which  is  called  gold  rust.  In 
looking  through  this  rust,  two  or  three  grains  of 
yellow  metal  were  found.  (These  grains  differ  much 
in  size ;  some  being  very  small,  and  others  of  con- 
siderable magnitude.)  The  woman  put  what  she 
found  into  a  quill,  which  she  stopped  with  cotton, 
and  then  fastened  it  in  her  hair. 

The  average  value  of  gold  obtained  by  one  digger 
during  the  dry  season  is  the  price  of  two  slaves.  The 
greater  portion  of  what  is  obtained  is  bartered  with 
the  Moors  for  salt.  Another  part  finds  its  way  to 
the  coast  and  it  is  sold  to  European  traders.  The 
rest  is  manufactured  by  the  natives  themselves  into 
ornaments  for  their  women,  such  as  rings,  ear-rings, 
bracelets,  and  chains.  Some  ladies  in  full  dress  have 
more  than  fifty  pounds'  worth  about  their  persons. 
The  articles  which  African  goldsmiths  make  would  be 
esteemed  heavy  and  clumsy  by  Europeans ;  but  it  is 
wonderful  how  neat  they  are,  considering  the  simple 
and  coarse  tools  which  the  Negroes  are  obliged  to 
employ.  We  have  seen  rings  that  were  far  from 
inelegant. 

The  smith  puts  the  native  gold,  without  any  flux, 
into  a  crucible  of  clay  dried  in  the  sun.  This  he 
places  in  a  heap  of  charcoal,  which  he  lights,  and 
blows  with  a  common  double  bellows,  until  the  gold 
is  fused.  He  pours  the  metal  into  a  mould,  to  form 
it  into  a  thin  bar ;  and  then  works  and  draws  it  out 
with  pincers,  heating  it  again  if  necessary,  till  he  gets 


MANDING  —  SMELTING  IRON. 


Ill 


it  into  the  desired  shape.  As  it  is  unalloyed,  it  is 
very  soft,  and  of  a  deep  yellow  colour.  The  natives 
are  very  jealous  about  foreigners  inquiring  after  the 
sources  of  their  rivers ;  as  they  suppose  it  to  be  con- 
nected with  the  finding  of  gold :  having  no  idea 
whatever,  as  we  have  said,  of  geographical  curiosity. 

Manding  and  other  countries  also  contain  iron- 
stone, which  the  natives  know  how  to  smelt,  and 
manufacture  into  different  instruments  and  utensils. 
As  European  articles  are  cheaper  and  better  made, 
Negroes  on  the  coast  supply  themselves  from 
abroad:  but  those  in  the  interior  are  obliged  to 
manufacture  for  themselves.  The  blacksmith,  who 
is  also  goldsmith,  is  an  important  man,  and  ranks  as 
an  artizan  along  with  the  worker  in  leather. 


SMELTING  LEON. 


The  furnace  is  a  tunnel  of  clay,  about  three  feet 
wide,  and  eight  or  ten  feet  high ;  the  bottom  of  it 
being  lower  than  the  ground.    "  A  little  higher  up, 


112 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


we  make  holes,  into  each  of  which  we  insert  a  tube 
of  clay.  Air  is  admitted  by  these  tubes,  which  we 
open  or  stop  up  at  pleasure.  We  put  some  dry  wood 
into  the  furnace,  and  cover  it  with  charcoal.  Over 
this,  we  lay  a  course  of  iron-stone  broken  into  pieces. 
Then  we  put  more  charcoal,  and  more  iron-stone ; 
and  so  on,  till  the  furnace  is  filled.  We  blow 
up  the  fire  with  our  bellows,  through  one  of 
the  tubes,  till  a  flame  appears  above  the  top ;  after 
which  it  burns  violently.  It  is  frequently  supplied 
with  new  charcoal;  but  after  the  first  day,  is  not  suf- 
fered to  burn  so  fiercely.  At  the  end  of  three  days, 
all  the  tubes  are  taken  out,  and  it  is  allowed  to  cool. 
This  requires  several  days  more :  after  which,  part  of 
the  furnace  is  taken  down,  and  the  iron  is  found  in 
a  large  cake.  Part  of  this  lump  is  useless  ;  the  rest 
is  worked  by  means  of  a  forge  and  anvil.  We  have 
a  double  bellows,  made  from  two  goats'  skins,  with 
separate  tubes,  which  unite  before  entering  the  forge. 
We  can  make  many  things  out  of  this  iron ;  but  it  is 
harder  and  more  brittle  than  yours."  (It  is  in  fact 
steel.) 

Many  were  the  sufferings  of  Mungo  Park  in  this 
vast  wilderness,  both  on  his  return  from  his  first 
journey,  and  in  performing  his  second  expedition. 
On  the  latter  occasion,  he  wisely  chose  this  route  in 
preference  to  a  more  northerly  one.  It  was  far  more 
direct.  The  kingdoms  through  which  he  had  to  pass 
were  weak,  with  a  widely-scattered  population;  so 
that  he  trusted  to  be  able  to  overcome  any  resistance 
that  might  be  offered.    He  had  three  companions, 


FAILURE  OF  BRITISH  EXPEDITIONS.  113 

along  with  a  lieutenant  and  thirty-five  soldiers,  from 
a  regiment  which  had  been  serving  at  Goree.  They 
appeared  to  be  dashing  men  ;  but  were  found  in  the 
sequel  to  be  of  shattered  constitution,  and  far  from 
up  to  the  mark  as  useful  soldiers.  However,  he  was 
delayed  too  long  in  his  preparations ;  and  the  rainy 
season  came  on  before  he  could  reach  the  Niger. 
His  men  began  to  droop  and  die  in  this  wilderness, 
until,  out  of  a  company  of  forty-two,  he  was  left  with 
Mr.  Martyn  and  three  others  to  perform  the  voyage. 
They  had  all  died  of  fever  or  dysentery. 

It  was  a  fatal  mistake  to  travel  during  the  rains. 
Had  he  remained  in  one  of  the  most  healthy  parts  of 
the  Gambia  till  the  rains  were  over,  he  would  have 
gone  forward  with  seasoned  men,  though  their  num- 
ber might  have  been  reduced ;  and  he  would  have 
travelled  during  the  most  favourable  part  of  the  year. 
He  pressed  forwards,  and  lost  all. 

Other  expeditions  into  West  Africa  have  failed  from 
the  same  reason.  Some  persons  have  thought  that 
by  going  in  the  dry  season,  Europeans  may  escape 
fever  altogether.  Their  spirits  have  been  buoyed  up 
with  this  hope;  and  they  have  been  led  to  expect, 
that  with  care  and  temperance  they  would  avoid  this 
African  pest.  When  the  reverse  has  happened,  and 
they  have  all  been  "laid  down,"  they  have  become 
panic-stricken,  and  the  consequences  have  been  un- 
usually disastrous.  This  proved  fatal  to  the  grand 
Niger  expedition,  which  was  arranged  and  conducted 
with  so  much  skill  and  prudence  in  other  respects- 
It  is  a  general,  and  we  may  say,  invariable  rule,  that 
I 


114 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


every  European  who  stays  for  any  length  of  time  in 
tropical  Africa,  will  have  an  attack  of  fever.  This  is 
his  et  seasoning."  If  he  have  it  in  the  dry  season,  so 
much  the  better ;  as  his  recovery  is  likely  to  be  more 
rapid  and  perfect.  If  he  do  not  have  it  till  the  rainy 
season  has  set  in,  he  is  likely  to  have  frequent  relapses, 
unless  he  take  a  voyage.  It  is  hard  to  recover  strength 
during  this  humid  and  debilitating  period  of  the 
year :  and  many  who  have  weathered  it  out  till  the 
drying  month,  have  sunk  at  last  from  mere  exhaus- 
tion. After  his  "  seasoning,"  the  European  need  not 
fear  much,  if  he  be  careful  and  temperate.  Future 
attacks  of  fever,  which  he  must  expect  to  have  occa- 
sionally, will  cause  no  more  inconvenience  than  an 
English  influenza. 

Hence,  it  is  manifest,  that  none  but  seasoned  men 
should  penetrate  into  the  interior.  An  expedition 
cannot  afford  to  wait  for  the  recovery  of  every  sick 
person :  and  the  first  attack  of  fever  is  always  a 
critical  one.  Many  die  of  it  at  once.  What  the 
average  of  recoveries  is,  we  should  hesitate  to  say : 
but  it  will  be  very  small,  unless  great  care,  more 
than  skill,  is  employed.  In  this  respect,  a  steam- 
boat expedition  has  great  advantages  over  a  land 
journey.  But  the  vessel  should  not  penetrate  far, 
until  the  men  have  had  their  first  fever ;  and  when 
this  happens,  it  should  be  ready  to  run  out  to  sea, 
and  remain  there,  well  off  the  coast,  until  they  are 
quite  recovered.  Some  would  probably  die  ;  others 
would  have  to  be  sent  home ;  the  vigorous  remainder 
would  return  to  their  enterprise,  with  the  best  hopes 


BATTLE  WITH  AN  ALLIGATOR. 


115 


of  success.  A  journey  inland,  of  only  a  few  weeks, 
undertaken  during  the  early  part  of  the  dry  season,  is 
quite  another  thing.  But  even  then,  the  party  must 
be  prepared  for  the  consequences  of  any  undue  ex- 
posure or  exertion  ;  and  must  be  content  to  wait  with 
their  sick,  and  nurse  them  until  they  recover.  Our 
own  "  seasoning"  took  place  in  very  hot  but  dry 
weather ;  but  we  had  not  a  second  attack. 

In  passing  through  this  part  of  Africa,  there  are 
many  rivers  to  cross.  When  these  cannot  be  forded, 
and  the  natives  have  baggage  to  convey,  they  have 
recourse  to  the  expedient  of  a  temporary  bridge.  This 
is  easily  made;  trees  are  cut  down  or  uprooted  on  either 
side,  and  their  tops  firmly  fastened  together  in  mid- 
stream. Against  these,  forked  sticks  rest,  whose  tops 
support  poles,  about  a  foot  above  the  water.  Two  rows 
of  these  are  made,  and  bamboos  laid  across  them  for 
a  platform.  One  of  these  suspension  bridges  is  con- 
structed in  a  few  hours  over  a  rapid  stream,  so  that  a 
whole  caravan  can  pass  in  safety.  Where  there  is  a 
village  near  the  bank,  there  will  generally  be  canoes, 
in  which  case,  the  people  are  ferried  across,  and  the 
beasts  are  made  to  swim  over. 

If  you  are  fording,  you  must  beware  of  alligators* 
which  in  most  parts  are  large  and  fierce.  We  can 
furnish  an  authentic  account  of  a  battle  between  a 
native  and  one  of  these  huge  reptiles.  The  man  was. 
actively  employed  in  driving  some  asses  of  the  coffle 
across  the  water,  where  it  was  shallower ;  the  rest  of 
the  company  being  engaged  with  the  canoes  a  little 
I  2 


116 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


higher  up.  When  he  reached  the  middle  of  the 
stream,  being  wholly  intent  on  the  beasts  before  him, 
he  did  not  perceive  the  approach  of  an  alligator. 
The  monster  seized  him  by  the  thigh  and  was 
dragging  him  under  water.  He  did  not  lose  his 
presence  of  mind  in  this  critical  situation;  but,  not 
being  furnished  with  any  weapon  of  offence,  he 
thrust  his  finger  into  the  eye  of  his  enemy.  Stung 
with  pain,  the  creature  let  go  its  hold,  and  the 
Negro  cried  out  to  his  companions  for  a  knife. 
Before  they  could  come  to  his  aid,  the  alligator 
returned  to  the  charge,  and  seized  him  by  the  other 
leg.  In  despair,  the  man  thrust  his  hands  into  both 
its  eyes  with  such  force,  that  it  was  evidently  stupi- 
fied.  It  quitted  him,  floundered  about,  and  then 
made  off,  before  it  could  be  attacked  with  weapons. 
The  Negro  was  much  lacerated,  having  a  large  wound 
in  either  thigh,  besides  several  marks  of  the  reptile's 
teeth  in  other  places.  The  reader  will  now  know 
what  to  do,  if  he  should  ever  find  himself  in  such  a 
predicament.  A  cool  head,  and  ready  hand  will  save 
out  of  many  difficulties  and  deaths. 

Before  leaving  this  part  of  the  country,  we  must 
refer  to  the  'palavers  or  law-suits  of  the  natives. 
Blackie  is  a  capital  talker,  an  accomplishment  which 
is  not  confined  to  the  female  sex.  The  practised 
pleaders  amongst  them  would  split  a  hair  with  a 
chancery  barrister,  and  would  certainly  win  the  cause, 
if  success  depended  upon  much  speaking.  Mungo 
Park  was  detained  with  the  cofHe  of  his  protector, 
for  a  period  of  no  less  than  four  days,  in  order  to 


A  DIFFICULT  CHOICE  OF  HUSBANDS.  117 


settle  a  dispute  which  was  publicly  litigated.  The 
circumstances  were  as  follows. 

Modi  Lemina,  one  of  the  Slatees  belonging  to  the 
coffle,  had  formerly  married  a  woman  of  Tambacunda, 
in  which  the  party  were  now  resting.  It  was  a  walled 
town,  of  some  little  importance  in  those  parts;  so 
that  a  proper  assembly  could  be  called  to  hear  the 
suit.  The  fruit  of  the  marriage  was  two  children. 
But  the  husband  subsequently  went  to  Manding,  and 
remained  there  for  eight  years,  without  sending  any 
account  of  himself  to  his  dear  wife.  She,  supposing 
herself  deserted,  and  seeing  no  prospect  of  her  hus- 
band's return,  prudently  waited  for  three  years  in  her 
desolate  condition;  and  then  united  herself  to  an- 
other man,  by  whom  also  she  had  two  children. 
Lemina,  now  passing  through  the  town,  found  out 
and  claimed  his  former  spouse.  The  second  husband 
refused  to  deliver  her  up :  insisting,  that  by  the  laws 
of  Africa,  when  a  man  has  been  absent  from  his  wife 
for  three  years,  without  giving  her  notice  of  his 
being  alive,  she  is  at  liberty  to  marry  again.  Such 
was  the  subject  of  litigation  between  the  two  hus- 
bands. However,  it  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
asserted,  that  the  fair  one  was  really  ignorant  of  her 
first  spouse  being  alive:  but  he  certainly  had  not 
intimated  it  to  her,  so  that  the  point  of  law  seemed 
to  be  in  favour  of  the  second  husband. 

"  After  all  the  circumstances  had  been  fully  inves- 
tigated in  an  assembly  of  the  chief  men,  it  was  de- 
termined that  the  wife  should  make  her  choice ;  and 
be  set  at  liberty  either  to  return  to  the  first  husband, 

I  3 


118 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


or  continue  with  the  second,  as  she  alone  should  think 
proper.  Favourable  as  this  determination  was  to  the 
lady,  she  found  it  a  difficult  matter  to  make  up  her 
mind,  and  requested  time  for  consideration :  but  I 
think  I  could  perceive  that  first  love  would  carry  the 
day.  Lemina  was  indeed  somewhat  older  than  his 
rival,  but  he  was  also  much  richer.  What  weight 
this  circumstance  had  in  the  scale  of  his  wife's  affec- 
tions, I  pretend  not  to  say." 

Negro  philosophy  is  very  simple  and  meagre. 
They  do  not  presume  to  pry  into  the  knowledge  of 
things  remote  or  unseen.  They  form  no  conjectures 
about  astronomy :  but  take  it  for  granted  that  every 
new  moon  is  a  new  creation.  They  know  nothing 
about  years,  as  such ;  but  count  time  by  rainy  seasons, 
moons,  and  suns  or  days.  The  Pagans  generally 
believe  in  a  Grod,  but  would  consider  it  idle  or  pre- 
sumptuous to  form  any  opinion  of  his  character  or 
ways.  Yet  custom  has  induced  them  to  offer  a  short 
prayer  on  the  appearance  of  the  new  moon.  Having 
said  it  in  a  whisper,  they  spit  upon  their  hands  and  rub 
them  over  their  faces.  Many  of  them  think  there 
will  be  a  future  world,  better  than  the  present ;  but 
"no  man  knows  anything  about  it."  They  believe  that 
spirits  or  demons,  and  consequently  witchcraft,  have 
great  influence  over  human  affairs.  Hence  their  use 
of  greegrees,  offerings,  and  magical  ceremonies. 

The  Jallonka  wilderness  lies  between  Tenda  and 
Manding.  It  is  a  very  barren  country.  The  villages 
are  wretchedly  poor ;  and  all  the  inhabitants  are 
thieves.    Perhaps  there  is  no  place  on  earth,  where 


JALLONKA.  VILLAGE  ROBBERS. 


119 


the  people  are  more  determined  and  barefaced  robbers. 
They  prowl  about  a  coffle  by  day  and  by  night,  ready 
to  steal  anything  on  which  they  can  lay  hands,  be  it 
large  or  small.  If  one  of  the  company  loiter  a  little 
behind,  he  will  probably  be  pounced  upon  by  men 
lurking  among  trees,  who  will  strip  him  of  everything, 
including  his  clothes,  and  send  him  forward  in  a  state 
of  complete  nudity,  if  they  dare  not  keep  him.  On 
other  occasions,  when  they  have  sufficient  notice,  they 
will  form  into  a  band,  to  attack  and  plunder  the  coffle. 
If  they  succeed  in  overcoming  it,  they  make  slaves  of 
all  the  people  who  do  not  belong  to  the  neighbour- 
hood. 

During  part  of  the  year,  the  people  live  much  on 
the  fruit  of  the  nitta  tree,  a  species  of  mimosa  which 
abounds  in  this  district.  The  long,  but  thin,  pods  of 
the  tree  contain  a  yellow  powder,  enveloping  a  few 
black  seeds.  This  meal  has  a  sweet  gummy  taste, 
which  is  not  unpalatable  when  mixed  with  milk  or 
with  flour  and  water.  The  seeds  of  the  bamboo, 
also,  are  pounded  and  dressed  for  food,  having  a  taste 
somewhat  similar  to  rice. 

Their  only  articles  of  commerce,  besides  a  little 
gold,  are  iron  and  soap,  which  they  manufacture  and 
barter  at  Bondu.  The  soap  is  prepared  by  boiling 
down  ground  nuts,  and  adding  a  ley  of  wood  ashes. 
The  article  produced  by  this  means  is  far  from  des- 
picable. 

Manding,  to  which  we  have  already  referred  as  the 
chief  gold-country  of  Africa,  is  better  peopled  than 
the  regions  through  which  we  have  recently  conducted 

I  4 


120 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


the  traveller.  Yet  it  is  by  no  means  populous.  The 
inhabitants  are  partly  Mahometan,  partly  Pagan ;  an 
industrious  race,  and  not  inhospitable.  It  was  here, 
in  Kamalia,  that  Mungo  Park  fell  in  with  Karfa 
Taura,  whose  brother  had  been  kind  to  him  at 
Kinyeto.  This  Slatee  proved  the  warm  friend  and 
preserver  of  the  white  man.  He  gave  him  a  hut  to 
live  in,  supplied  him  with  provisions,  nursed  him 
during  an  alarming  and  tedious  fever  ;  and  afterwards 
conducted  him  with  his  coffle,  in  a  journey  of  600 
miles  to  the  Gambia;  where  he  delivered  him  in 
safety  to  his  friends,  who  had  long  given  him  up  for 
dead.  It  is  true  that  Mr.  Park  had  agreed  to  give 
Karfa  a  recompense  for  his  trouble,  viz.,  the  price  of 
one  prime  slave  :  but  it  must  have  appeared  doubtful 
whether  this  would  be  realised  in  case  of  the  traveller's 
death. 

When  Karfa  reached  Pisania  on  the  Gambia,  and 
saw  a  schooner  lying  there  at  anchor,  he  was  almost 
overwhelmed.  Its  build  and  size,  its  masts  and  sails, 
and  the  contrivance  of  propelling  it  by  the  force  of 
wind,  were  quite  new  to  him.  "I  found  that  the 
schooner  with  her  cable  and  anchor  kept  Karfa  in 
deep  meditation  the  greater  part  of  the  day."  "  This 
good  creature  had  continued  to  manifest  towards  me 
so  much  kindness  that  I  thought  I  made  him  but  an 
inadequate  recompense,  when  I  told  him  that  he  was 
now  to  receive  double  the  sum  I  had  originally  pro- 
mised." Other  instances  of  kindness  were  shown 
towards  Karfa,  upon  whom  they  were  not  lost.  "  He 
would  often  say  to  me,  f  my  journey  has  indeed  been 


A  NOBLE  NEGRO. 


121 


prosperous.'  Then,  when  he  saw  the  superiority  of 
European  arts,  he  would  become  pensive,  and  say 
with  a  sigh,  6  Black  men  are  nothing.'  "  At  other 
times,  he  asked  Mr.  Park  with  great  seriousness,  what 
could  possibly  have  induced  him  to  think  of  exploring 
so  miserable  a  country  as  Africa  ? 


122 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


CHAP.  VI. 

The  Niger  at  Bambaku. — Eapicls.  —  Sego. — The  King. — Shea,  or 
Butter-tree.  —  Sansanding. — Moorish  Intolerance. — White  Man's 
Saphie. — Jenne.  —  Negro  Umbrella.  —  Burial  of  the  Dead. — To 
Korome. — Foolbe — Their  stern  Bigotry. — Kascality  of  Arabs. — 
The  Servant  is  Master. — Disorderly  state  of  Timbuctu. — Sidi 
Alawate. — A  candid  Kobber.  —  Kags  on  a  Tree. — Devil  Worship. 
— Reception  of  a  Stranger. — Sheik  el  Bakay — His  noble  Conduct 
—  His  Camp  in  the  Desert. —  What  is  Timbuctu? — Caravans. — 
The  Great  Desert.  —  Storms  of  Sand. —  Thirst. — Serpents. — Dis- 
tricts South  of  the  Niger. — The  Reformer  of  Masina. — A  Village 
Market. — Buying  Money. 

We  now  arrive  at  the  Niger.  It  becomes  navigable 
just  after  it  bends  eastward,  to  pursue  its  long  course 
through  the  heart  of  Africa.  Previously  it  has  been 
flowing  southward,  down  from  the  mountains  in  which 
it  takes  its  rise,  and  where  it  is  joined  by  other 
streams  which  increase  its  magnitude.  The  great 
bend  takes  place  where  the  kingdom  of  Handing 
joins  that  of  Bambarra.  Here  is  the  town  of  Bam- 
baku ;  at  a  village  near  which  you  may  embark  in  a 
canoe,  and  sail  down  some  rapids  to  Marrabu.  Three 
rapids  have  to  be  passed,  which  are  navigable  when 
the  river  is  swollen  with  rain. 

The  first  regular  port  on  the  Niger,  to  which 


SEGO. 


123 


canoes  come  from  the  east,  is  Marrabu,  in  N. 
lat.  12°  48',  and  about  4°  20'  of  W.  long.  From 
hence,  sailing  is  easy  to  Sego,  the  capital  of  Bam- 
barra,  situated  at  the  south-eastern  extremity  of  this 
country.  The  banks  of  the  river  are  marshy,  with 
much  woodland. 

Sego  is  an  important  town,  and  ranks  high  in  the 
estimation  of  the  natives.  It  is  built  on  the  south 
side  of  the  Niger,  though  there  is  a  suburb  on  the 
north  side,  in  which  the  king  formerly  dwelt.  It  is 
said  to  be  composed  of  several  towns  joined  together  ; 
which  probably  means  a  town  divided  into  different 
quarters,  after  the  Arab  fashion.  This  is  the  first  city, 
as  you  come  from  the  west,  which  has  been  wholly 
revolutionised  by  the  Moors  and  Arabs.  It  can,  there- 
fore, scarcely  be  called  a  native  town,  though  Mandin- 
goes  form  the  bulk  of  the  population.  Moorish  resi- 
dents have  great  influence,  both  socially  and  politically. 
They  have  improved  upon  the  native  plan  of  building 
houses ;  making  them  square,  with  flat  roofs,  many  of 
them  with  upper  stories.  Of  these  habitations  we  shall 
speak  more  at  large,  when  we  get  nearer  Timbuctu. 
Sego  contains  many  mosques ;  and  the  forms  of  Is- 
lamism  are  strictly  kept  up  by  the  Moors  and  native 
Mahometans.  The  whole  population  of  the  capital 
and  suburbs  is  said  to  amount  to  30,000:  which  is 
a  large  number  for  an  African  town.  Indeed,  it  is 
described  as  a  place  of  considerable  civilisation  and 
magnificence.  But  the  influence  of  the  Moors  would 
prevent  any  European  from  entering  it;  and  they 
hindered  Mungo  Park  from  so  doing. 


124 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


There  is  a  ferry  across  the  river,  which  brings  in  a 
considerable  revenue  to  the  king.  The  canoes  are 
lorn  led  of  the  trunks  of  two  large  trees,  excavated 
and  joined  together,  but  only  placed  side  by  side  for 
half  their  length.  They  are,  therefore,  very  long  and 
narrow,  and  have  an  awkward  appearance,  but  are 
large  and  roomy.  Sego  is  a  place  of  considerable 
merchandise,  for  which  it  is  well  situated,  and  has 
good  markets. 

.  The  King  Mansong  seems  to  have  been  well  dis- 
posed towards  Mungo  Park,  when  he  came  to  this 
part  of  the  river  during  his  first  journey;  but  pre- 
judiced councillors  forbade  the  traveller's  having  an 
interview  with  him.  The  Moors  were  doubtless 
jealous  of  Europeans,  lest  they  should  share  in  their 
own  lucrative  trade ;  and  it  was  easy  for  them  to  arouse 
the  suspicions  of  the  natives.  "What  did  the  stranger 
want  ?  To  see  the  river !  What  nonsense !  Wrere 
there  no  rivers  in  his  own  country  that  he  could  look 
at  ?  And  is  not  one  river  like  another  ?  "  So  Man- 
song  sent  a  message,  that  he  could  not  possibly  see 
Mungo  Park,  until  he  knew  what  really  brought  him 
into  the  country.  Afterwards,  finding  that  he  was 
destitute,  he  sent  him  a  bag  of  5000  cowries,  and  told 
him  to  leave  the  neighbourhood. 

On  his  second  expedition,  Mr.  Park  sent  forward 
his  guide  Isaaco,  with  a  handsome  present  to  the 
king,  requesting  a  safe  passage  through  his  country ; 
declaring  that  his  object  was  to  open  up  a  passage  for 
trade  between  the  white  and  black  men;  but  that 
this  must  be  kept  secret  from  the  Moors.    In  reply, 


SEGO. —  KINGLY  DECLARATION. 


125 


Mansong  sent  Modibinne,  his  prime  minister,  and 
four  of  his  friends,  to  converse  with  Mr.  Park :  and 
they  said,  "  We  have  heard  what  you  have  spoken. 
Your  journey  is  a  good  one,  and  may  God  prosper 
you  in  it :  Mansong  will  protect  you.  We  will  carry 
your  words  to  Mansong  this  afternoon ;  and  to-morrow 
we  will  bring  you  his  answer."  This  answer  was  a 
promise  of  protection,  as  far  as  his  power  extended. 
M  If  you  wish  to  go  to  the  East,  no  man  shall  harm 
you  from  Sego  till  you  pass  Timbuctu.  If  you  wish 
to  go  to  the  West,  you  may  travel  through  Fooladu 
and  Manding,  through  Kasson  and  Bondu  :  the 
name  of  Mansong's  stranger  will  be  a  sufficient  pro- 
tection for  you.  If  you  wish  to  build  your  boats  at 
Samee,  or  Sego,  at  Sansanding,  or  Jennie,  name  the 
town,  and  Mansong  will  convey  you  thither." 

This  was  a  kingly  declaration.  In  consequence, 
Mungo  Park  chose  Sansanding  as  the  place  of  his 
boat-building ;  and  there  he  continued  in  peace  till 
he  embarked  on  his  fatal  voyage.  Wlien,  after  a 
time,  Isaaco  returned  from  the  Gambia  to  seek  tidings 
of  the  unfortunate  traveller,  he  found  Dacha  occupy- 
ing his  father's  place  as  King  of  Bambarra:  from 
whom  he  requested  to  be  farthered  on  his  journey  of 
search.  "  On  my  entrance  in  the  first  yard,  I  found 
a  guard  of  forty  men,  young,  strong,  and  without 
beards.  On  entering  another  yard,  I  met  another 
guard,  well  armed  and  very  numerous,  lying  in  the 
shade.  A  little  farther  on,  I  found  the  king  sitting. 
There  were  four  broadswords  stuck  in  the  ground, 
on  each  side  and  behind  him,  which  had  been  given 


126 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


to  him  by  Mr.  Park.  He  had  on  his  military  coat, 
which  he  is  obliged  to  wear  when  he  sends  out  an 
army,  and  cannot  leave  off  until  the  army  returns. 
He  commonly  wears  dresses  of  white  or  blue  cotton 
or  silk,  with  a  great  many  greegrees,  covered  with 
plates  of  gold  or  silver,  sewed  about  his  dresses." 
Dacha  promised  and  gave  the  assistance  required. 

Sego  Somma  used  to  be  the  residence  of  the  Bam- 
barra  princes :  and  before  the  king  proceeds  to  war, 
he  goes  to  this  suburb,  to  have  greegrees  made,  and 
to  see  that  all  things  are  ready.  For,  when  a  king 
or  noble  is  taken  prisoner,  they  keep  him  until  the 
fasting  moon  is  come.  He  is  then  brought  to  this 
village  ;  and  being  laid  down  in  a  house  reserved  for 
this  purpose,  his  throat  is  cut.  When  the  blood  has 
all  flowed  out,  the  body  is  carried  into  the  fields  and 
left  as  a  prey  for  wild  beasts.  The  blood  is  an  offer- 
ing to  some  imaginary  spirit,  and  is  supposed  to  have 
a  magic  spell  about  it.  The  place  of  sacrifice  is 
sacred  for  eight  days ;  and  no  man  is  allowed  to  pass 
by  it,  without  taking  off  his  cap  or  shoes.  This  shows 
how  little  influence  Mahometanism  has  upon  the 
hearts  of  the  Negroes.  Another  bloody  custom  is, 
that  when  a  male  child  is  born  of  one  of  th^  king's 
wives  on  a  Friday,  its  throat  is  instantly  cut.  Poor 
Friday  seems  to  be  an  unlucky  day  all  the  world 
over ! 

This  neighbourhood  abounds  with  the  celebrated 
Shea  or  butter-tree,  which  is  found  in  many  parts  of 
tropical  Africa,  and  is  highly  prized  by  the  natives. 
For  butter  grows  on  trees  in  Africa,  as  well  as  oysters. 


THE  BUTTER-TREE. 


127 


The  Shea  is  something  like  a  pear  tree.  Its  leaves, 
which  are  six  inches  in  length,  grow  in  tufts,  sup- 
ported by  a  short  foot-stalk.  Its  blossoms  proceed 
from  the  extremities  of  its  branches,  are  small,  and 
grow  in  clusters.  The  petals  are  white  and  the 
stamina  numerous.  The  fruit  is  oval,  of  the  size  of 
a  Gruinea-hen's  egg,  and  of  agreeable  flavour.  Under 
a  thin  rind,  is  found  a  dark  kernel  covered  with  a 
sweet  pulp.  This  kernel  is  dried  in  the  sun,  then 
pounded,  and  kneaded  to  the  consistence  of  dough, 
when  it  is  mixed  with  hot  water,  till  the  butter  is 
separated  and  rises  to  the  surface.  It  is  then  boiled 
and  skimmed,  and  wrapped  up  in  leaves.  It  will 
keep  well  for  two  years,  without  being  salted ;  and  is 
as  palatable  as  butter  made  from  milk ;  having  the 
additional  recommendation  of  being  firmer.  A  great 
deal  of  this  butter  is  made  in  Bambarra,  where  the 
tree  grows  in  the  woods  without  culture;  and  furnishes 
a  valuable  article  both  of  food  and  commerce. 

The  character  of  the  Moors  may  be  farther  seen 
from  an  incident  which  took  place  on  Mr.  Park's  first 
visit  to  Sansanding,  when  he  was  alone  and  unpro- 
tected. He  had  himself  been  at  first  taken  for  a 
Moor ;  but  this  mistake  was  unhappily  discovered. 
The  Moors  assembled  in  numbers  around  him  and 
questioned  him  about  his  religion.  They  "  insisted 
that  like  the  Jews,  I  must  conform  so  far  as  to  repeat 
the  Mahometan  prayers :  and  when  I  attempted  to 
waive  the  subject,  by  telling  them  I  could  not  speak 
Arabic,  one  of  them,  a  shereef  from  Tuat  in  the 
Great  Desert,  started  up  and  swore  by  the  Prophet, 


128  THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 

that  if  I  refused  to  go  to  the  mosque,  he  would  be 
one  that  would  assist  in  carrying  me  thither.  And 
there  is  no  doubt  but  this  threat  would  have  been 
immediately  executed,  had  not  my  landlord  interposed 
on  my  behalf.  He  told  them  that  I  was  the  king's 
stranger,  and  that  he  could  not  see  me  ill-treated 
whilst  I  was  under  his  protection.  He  therefore 
advised  them  to  let  me  alone  for  that  night;  assuring 
them,  that  in  the  morning,  I  should  be  sent  about 
.  my  business." 

In  the  evening,  however,  the  Moors  renewed  their 
annoyances.  "  They  climbed  over  the  top  of  the 
mud  wall  (of  the  yard),  and  came  in  crowds  into 
the  court,  in  order,  they  said,  to  see  me  perform  my 
evening  devotions  and  eat  eggs.  The  former  of 
these  ceremonies  I  did  not  think  proper  to  comply 
with  ;  but  I  told  them  I  had  no  objection  to  eat  eggs, 
provided  they  would  bring  me  eggs  to  eat.  My  land- 
lord immediately  brought  me  seven  hens'  eggs,  and 
was  much  surprised  to  find  that  I  could  not  eat  them 
•  raw :  for  it  seems  to  be  a  prevalent  opinion  among 
the  inhabitants  of  the  interior,  that  Europeans  subsist 
almost  entirely  on  this  diet.  When  I  had  succeeded 
in  persuading  my  landlord  that  this  opinion  was 
without  foundation,  and  that  I  would  gladly  partake 
of  any  victuals  which  he  might  think  proper  to  send 
me;  he  ordered  a  sheep  to  be  killed,  and  part  of  it 
to  be  dressed  for  my  supper." 

"  About  midnight  when  the  Moors  had  left  me,  he 
paid  me  a  visit,  and  with  much  earnestness  desired 
me  to  write  him  a  saphie.    6  If  a  Moor's  saphie  is  good 


SANSANDING. 


129 


(said  this  hospitable  old  man),  a  white  man's  must 
needs  be  better.5  I  readily  furnished  him  with  one, 
possessed  of  all  the  virtues  I  could  concentrate ;  for 
it  contained  the  Lord's  Prayer.  The  pen  with  which 
it  was  written  was  made  of  a  reed :  a  little  charcoal 
and  gum-water  made  very  tolerable  ink,  and  a  thin 
board  answered  the  purpose  of  paper."  What  strange 
and  crude  ideas  these  Negroes  must  have !  What 
perplexing  notions  of  the  white  men  ! 

Sansanding  contains  about  11,000  inhabitants,  and 
has  two  large  and  not  inelegant  mosques.  It  can 
boast  of  a  good  market  crowded  with  buyers  and  sel- 
lers. Here,  in  a  large  open  square,  are  a  number  of 
stalls,  shaded  from  the  sun  with  mats.  Some  contain 
nothing  but  beads  ;  others  are  supplied  with  balls  of 
indigo ;  others  have  cloth  from  Howssa  and  Jenne. 
One  has  bits  of  antimony,  another  has  sulphur,  a 
third  has  rings  and  bracelets  made  of  copper  and 
silver.  In  the  opposite  houses,  you  may  purchase 
amber,  silks,  and  tobacco.  Near  this,  is  the  salt- 
mart,  and  in  the  centre  are  the  shambles  where  good 
meat  can  be  bought.  Not  far  off,  is  the  depot  for 
beer,  of  which  200  gallons  are  often  sold  in  a  day. 
The  leather-market  is  in  an  adjoining  space.  The 
profits  on  foreign  articles  are  very  large :  as  an  ex- 
ample of  which  it  may  be  sufficient  to  state  that  a 
dollar  will  fetch  from  six  to  twelve  thousand  cowries, 
or  from  twenty-five  to  fifty  shillings !  European 
arms,  beads,  and  cloths,  of  certain  descriptions,  meet 
with  a  ready  sale. 

Lions  of  ]arge  size,  and  other  wild  beasts,  infest 
K 


130 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


this  neighbourhood.  Small  green  islands,  of  an  en- 
chanting kind,  are  inhabited  by  Foolas,  whose  herds 
are  here  secure  from  beasts  of  prey.  The  broad 
river  abounds  with  excellent  fish,  which  are  caught 
with  nets  made  of  cotton,  after  the  European  mode. 
Lower  down  the  river  is  Silla,  and  still  farther,  the 
large  town  of  Jenne.  It  is  two  miles  and  a  half  in 
circumference,  and  contains  10,000  inhabitants ;  but 
its  government  is  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  Moors, 
who  have  a  governor  of  their  own  creed,  though  ap- 
pointed by  the  King  of  Bambarra.  It  has  some  good 
houses  made  of  sun-dried  bricks  ;  and  contains  shops 
well  stocked  with  European  commodities.  Thirty  or 
forty  Moorish  merchants  reside  in  this  place,  and,  with 
their  usual  intolerance,  do  not  allow  infidels  to  enter 
the  town,  which  is  situated  on  an  island. 

After  Jenne,  the  Niger  contracts  to  about  half  a 
mile,  and  becomes  deep.  It  is  navigated  by  many 
trading  canoes,  which  often  unite  into  flotillas.  The 
river  boats,  made  of  planks  fastened  together  by  ropes, 
are  nearly  100  feet  long,  twelve  or  fourteen  feet 
broad  at  midships,  and  drawing  six  or  seven  feet  of 
water.  There  are  rocks  in  the  river,  and  some  vil- 
lages on  its  banks  which  are  low ;  and  much  of  the 
country  is  overflowed  during  the  rainy  season.  We 
must  not  forget  to  mention  a  very  simple  umbrella 
used  by  the  natives,  consisting  of  a  large  ciboa  leaf 
placed  on  the  head ;  which  completely  protects  the 
body  from  a  pelting  shower. 

Finally,  in  taking  leave  of  the  Negroes  of  this  part 
of  Africa,  we  may  advert  to  the  last  office  that  is  per- 


NATIVE  EURIAL.  —  KOROME. 


131 


formed  for  a  man  by  his  friends, — his  burial.  When 
death  takes  place,  the  relatives  and  neighbours  as- 
semble, and  testify  their  sorrow  by  loud  dismal  howl- 
ings.  Food  is  provided  for  these  mourners  :  and  in 
the  evening,  the  corpse  is  dressed  in  white  cotton, 
wrapped  up  in  a  mat,  and  buried  under  the  floor  of 
the  deceased's  hut,  or  under  a  favourite  tree.  In  the 
latter  case,  prickly  bushes  are  laid  over  the  grave,  in 
order  to  prevent  the  wolves  or  hyenas  from  digging 
up  the  body. 

Sailing  down  the  Niger  the  traveller  will  at  length 
reach  Korome,  a  village  on  the  bank  of  this  noble 
stream,  insignificant  in  itself,  but  important  as  being 
the  outer  harbour  of  Timbuctu.  The  Korome  lends 
its  name  to  a  branch  or  creek  of  the  river  which  runs 
up  some  miles  to  Kabara,  the  proper  harbour  of  that 
far-famed  city.  Mungo  Park,  on  his  second  expe- 
dition, did  not  attempt  to  penetrate  to  Timbuctu, 
but  kept  in  the  main  stream,  repelling  several  armed 
canoes  which  came  from  the  shore  to  stop  his  passage. 
M.  Caille,  in  1827,  accomplished  the  task  of  ascend- 
ing to  Timbuctu:  but  his  information  is  meagre 
compared  with  that  of  Dr.  Barth,  who  reached  this 
place  in  September  1853.  The  journal  of  this  last 
traveller  is  very  circumstantial,  and  seems  in  every 
way  worthy  of  credit ;  so  that  wa  shall  implicitly  con- 
fide in  the  account  which  he  has  furnished  of  these 
strange  regions. 

Proceeding  from  Korome,  you  would  sail  to  Kabara, 
the  channel  being  at  first  about  200  yards  wide,  then 
narrowing  till  it  becomes  a  mere  canal.    This  is  also 

K  2 


L32 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


dry  during  a  part  of  the  year;  so  that  Timbuctu  cannot 
be  always  approached  by  water.  Kabara  is  built  on 
a  mound  of  earth,  to  preserve  it  from  being  washed 
away  by  the  annual  overflowing  of  the  Niger.  The 
house  in  which  Dr.  Barth  lodged  was  of  oblong  shape 
and  built  with  massive  clay  walls.  It  had  ante-rooms, 
an  inner  court-yard  leading  to  a  number  ot  small 
chambers,  and  an  upper  story.  This  introduces  us 
to  a  new  description  of  African  houses,  bespeaking 
a  higher  grade  of  civilisation.  And,  in  reality,  we 
must  now  take  leave  for  a  time  of  the  semi-savage 
Negro,  living  in  a  state  of  simplicity  and  rudeness, 
and  contemplate  him  in  a  more  civilised  condition. 

This  change  is  doubtless  owing  to  the  spread  of 
Mussulman  tenets  and  customs  in  these  parts  of  central 
Africa.  The  whole  of  the  country  along  the  Niger, 
from  Howssa  (or  Haussa)  on  the  east  to  Jenne  on 
the  west,  has  for  many  centuries  been  under  the 
dominion  of  a  strict  Mahometanism.  The  bigotry 
of  this  religion  has  greatly  increased  the  ferocity  of 
the  native  population,  but  has  also  saved  them  from 
sundry  pagan  vices,  and  has  materially  added  to  their 
social  comforts.  These  subjects  will  be  amply  illus- 
trated in  the  details  of  our  narrative.  Meanwhile, 
we  confine  our  observations  to  the  houses  of  the  res- 
pectable inhabitants,  which  are  built  on  the  eastern 
idea  of  seclusion,  especially  of  the  females.  You 
enter  through  one  or  two  ante-rooms  for  servants  or 
slaves,  and  pass  into  a  court  which  has  chambers  for 
the  men ;  and  then  through  another  ante-room  and 
court  with  apartments  for  the  women.  Sometimes, 


TIMBUCTU.  — THE  FOOLBE. 


133 


a  flight  of  stairs  leads  from  one  of  the  ante-rooms  to 
the  chambers  of  an  upper  story.  But  these  spacious 
edifices  seldom  contain  much  furniture. 

The  principal  inhabitants  of  this  more  civilised 
region,  according  to  Dr.  Barth,  are  Foolbe  (or  Fulbe) 
or  Fellani,  a  branch  of  the  warlike  Foolas  whom  we 
have  already  noticed.  These  enterprising  people  have 
here  embraced  the  Mahometan  religion  in  all  its 
severity,  so  as  to  outdo  Mahomet  himself.  Especially 
in  Timbuctu,  which  is  reckoned  a  sacred  city,  they 
have  carried  their  fanaticism  to  the  utmost  pitch  of 
rigour.  Few  of  its  inhabitants  have  more  than  one 
wife,  though  the  Koran  allows  four :  and  not  only  is 
strong  drink  utterly  prohibited,  but  smoking  is  dis- 
allowed. The  very  presence  of  a  Christian  or  infidel  in 
their  city  is  deemed  a  sacrilege.  Their  daily  prayers 
and  periodical  fasts  are  most  scrupulously  observed. 

It  is  this  vaunted  sacredness  of  Timbuctu  which 
has  given  it  so  much  renown  amongst  the  natives, 
and  has  kept  it  so  secret  from  Europeans.  The  town 
is  well  situated  as  a  mart  of  trade,  being  in  the  route 
of  several  caravans  ;  but  Timbuctu  has  never  been  the 
head  or  centre  of  a  great  kingdom,  as  we  have  usually 
thought.  It  has  "  never  acted  more  than  a  secondary 
part :  and  now  it  is  only  the  chief  town  of  a  province  of 
the  Songhay  empire."  The  reader  of  African  travels  is 
often  puzzled  with  finding  so  many  kingdoms  in  this 
district,  and  so  many  kings,  sultans,  or  emirs.  But 
these  names  are  given  to  the  chiefs  of  all  provinces, 
and  even  of  principal  towns.  In  reality,  when  we 
have  left  Bambarra,  we  enter  into  the  Foolbe  and 

K  3 


134 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


Songhay  empires,  containing  a  number  of  provinces 
or  kingdoms,  tributary  to  the  great  sultans  or  sheiks, 
whose  present  residences  are  Masina  and  Wurno. 
The  Songhay  empire  was  formed  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  present  century  by  Othman,  a  celebrated 
Mussulman  saint.  He  inspired  his  followers  with 
a  religious  zeal  which  overcame  all  obstacles,  till  it 
placed  him  on  the  throne  of  an  extensive  dominion. 
He  died  as  he  had  lived,  u  in  a  sort  of  fanatical  ecstasy 
or  madness." 

Dr.  Barth  had  learned  the  character  of  the  people 
before  he  journeyed  to  Timbuctu.  He,  therefore, 
wished  to  appear  amongst  them  as  an  eastern  sheik ; 
and,  although  he  did  not  conform  to  Mahometan 
usages,  he  hoped  that  he  might  be  able  to  conceal  his 
own  religious  tenets,  at  least  until  he  could  place  him- 
self under  the  protection  of  the  liberal  Sheik  El  Bakay, 
to  whom  he  was  recommended.  Yetv  he  did  not 
wholly  succeed  in  keeping  his  secret,  of  which  one  or 
two  persons  were  cognizant.  The  principal  of  these 
was  his  Arab  guide,  named  El  Walati,  a  thorough 
rogue  and  deceiver.  This  crafty  man  practised  all 
kinds  of  deception  on  his  employer,  who  became  aware 
of  his  rascality,  but  could  not  free  himself  from  his 
trammels.  Had  it  been  known  that  he  was  a  Chris- 
tian, he  would  not  have  been  allowed  to  go  near  Tim- 
buctu ;  but  would  have  been  sent  back  from  one  of  the 
distant  towns.  El  Walati,  therefore,  was  really  master, 
as  he  had  the  traveller  completely  in  his  power. 
He  constantly  extorted  from  him  new  gifts  in  addition 
to  his  pay  as  guide,  and  made  him  give  presents  to 


THE  GUIDE'S  RASCALITY. 


135 


his  own  friends  and  to  whomsoever  he  pleased.  He 
seems  to  have  sometimes  appropriated  part  of  the 
goods  to  his  own  use ;  and  at  other  times,  to  have 
sent  Dr.  Barth's  presents  to  a  chief  as  if  they  came 
from  himself.  He  stayed  as  long  as  he  pleased  in  the 
towns  through  which  they  passed,  and  disposed  of 
horses  and  camels  furnished  for  the  journey ;  making 
a  lucrative  trade  all  the  way  through.  So  that  he 
must  have  become  rich  at  the  Doctor's  expense. 

But  a  traveller  must  have  a  guide  and  servants,  if 
he  travels  as  a  gentleman :  and  though  he  assuredly 
knows  that  they  are  fleecing  him,  he  can  do  no  better 
than  submit,  and  be  as  much  on  his  guard  as  possible. 
Major  Laing  was  killed  by  his  treacherous  guide,  for 
the  sake  of  his  property ;  and  Dr.  Barth  had  to  be 
constantly  on  the  watch  lest  he  should  meet  a  similar 
fate. 

Now  for  the  far-famed  mysteries  of  Timbuctu! 
The  Sheik  El  Bakay  was  absent  on  an  expedition  at 
the  time  of  Dr.  Barth's  arrival  at  Kabara.  El  Walati 
was  prevailed  upon,  by  new  gifts  to  himself  and 
friends,  to  carry  a  message  to  the  city ;  and  about 
midnight,  Sidi  Alawate,  brother  of  the  sheik,  arrived 
with  a  party  of  followers.  After  sapper,  he  had  an 
interview  with  the  traveller,  concerning  whom  he  had 
been  privately  informed  by  the  messengers  that  he 
was  a  Christian,  but  under  the  special  protection  of 
the  Sultan  of  Stambool  or  Constantinople.  Dr.  Barth 
required  to  use  all  the  dexterity  of  which  he  was 
master,  to  parry  the  close  interrogatories  of  Sidi 
Alawate  on  this  important  point.    A  letter  from  the 

K  4 


136 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


Turkish  Sultan,  the  acknowledged  head  of  Islamism, 
would  have  made  his  way  clear:  but  this  had  not 
been  sent  after  him,  as  he  had  desired.  However  he 
managed  so  far  to  satisfy  the  young  chief  that  he  pro- 
mised him  protection  :  whilst  the  others  of  the  party 
still  thought  him  to  be  a  Mahometan.  Next  morning 
they  all  set  out  for  Timbuctu. 

The  city  and  neighbourhood  were  in  a  very  dis- 
tracted and  unsettled  condition.  It  had  been  con- 
quered by  the  Foolbe,  (or  Foollan)  of  Masina  in  1826 : 
but  they  ruled  over  the  inhabitants  and  occasional 
residents  with  such  oppression,  that  the  neighbours 
induced  the  powerful  Sheik  El  Mukhtar,  elder  brother 
of  El  Bakay,  to  remove  from  his  residence  in  Azawad 
to  the  city  itself,  in  order  to  restrain  the  overbearing 
power  of  the  Foolbe.  Afterwards,  the  Tawarek 
Arabs,  who  inhabit  the  adjoining  deserts,  got  posses- 
sion of  Timbuctu,  about  the  year  1844.  The  Foolbe 
were  conquered  in  battle  and  driven  out  of  the  town. 
In  return,  they  cut  off  the  usual  supply  of  provisions, 
and  reduced  the  city  to  great  distress.  Then  a  com- 
promise was  effected,  by  the  mediation  of  the  £heik 
El  Bakay,  and  the  place  was  given  up  to  the  Foolbe, 
under  Songhay  officers  or  emirs.  Thus  there  were 
four  different  and  often  contending  powers  at  work, 
the  Foolbe,  the  Tawareks,  the  Songhay  emirs,  and  the 
Sheik  El  Bakay.  The  result  of  such  divided  interests 
may  easily  be  guessed. 

The  cavalcade  is  now  passing  through  the  desert 
which  intervenes  between  Kabara  and  Timbuctu ! 
The  path  is  beset  with  thorny  bushes  and  underwood, 


SAINT  AND  DEVIL-WORSHIP. 


137 


where  roving  Tawareks  lurk,  to  attack  and  plunder 
unprotected  travellers.  One  spot,  about  midway  of 
the  distance,  bears  the  omnious  name  of  "  He  does 
not  hear ; "  because  it  is  too  distant  from  either  place 
for  the  cry  of  an  assaulted  person  to  be  heard.  One 
of  the  gentlemen  who  frequent  this  road,  had  called 
on  Dr.  Barth  at  Kabara,  and  tried  to  extort  a  present 
from  him,  by  giving  him  the  comfortable  information 
that  he  was  a  tf  great  evil-doer,"  "  and  might  do  him 
much  harm."  But  this  flattering  account  of  himself 
failed  to  gain  its  desired  object;  as  the  traveller  and 
his  servants  were  well  armed,  and  they  journeyed  to 
Timbuctu  in  the  company  of  Alawate  and  his 
followers. 

The  next  object  of  curiosity  on  the  route  was  the 
Talha  tree  of  the  Weli  Salah.  It  is  dedicated  to  a 
Mahometan  saint,  by  whom  his  devotees  expect  to  be 
recompensed,  if  they  pay  due  honour  to  his  memory. 
So,  for  some  reason  or  other,  they  suppose  that  if  they 
hang  a  rag  on  one  of  the  boughs,  the  saint  will  not 
fail  to  reward  their  kind  attention  with  a  new  shirt ! 
This  present  is  not  sent  down  from  heaven,  but  is 
furnished  in  the  ordinary  dealings  of  Providence. 
Though,  therefore,  it  can  never  be  known  that  a  Dew 
shirt  is  more  the  reward  of  piety  than  of  industry ; 
yet  superstition  hopes  the  best,  and  the  tree  is  actually 
covered  with  rags.  It  is  regarded  as  a  cheap  lottery. 
How  hard  is  it  to  get  rid  of  superstition !  This 
seems  to  be  a  mere  relict  of  the  pagan  Devil-worship, 
transformed  to  Mahometanism.  For,  we  remember, 
when  sailing  up  the  Gambia,  that  we  passed  a  spot 


133 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


deemed  sacred  to  the  Prince  of  Darkness.  He  is 
thought  to  have  an  invisible  seat  or  temple  in  that 
locality,  and  to  have  the  power  of  levying  black-mail 
upon  all  passers-by.  So  the  natives  offer  him  a  small 
portion  of  every  part  of  the  cargo  of  their  vessel,  by 
throwing  it  into  the  stream  in  the  name  of  the  Devil. 
Otherwise,  they  suppose  that  Satan  would  brand  them 
with  a  mark  of  his  displeasure,  which  would  issue  in 
their  speedy  death. 

News  had  reached  the  city  that  a  stranger  of  im- 
portance, a  sheik  from  the  East,  was  coming  to  pay 
it  a  visit.  A  number  of  people  issued  forth  to  meet 
him,  to  pay  their  compliments,  and  to  invoke  his 
blessing.  For  a  holy  man  has  power  to  bless ;  and 
Dr.  Barth  had  previously  been  obliged  to  go  through 
this  ceremony,  by  laying  his  hand  on  a  knot  of  kneel- 
ing expectants,  and  muttering  a  benediction  in  Arabic. 
This  might  do  when  passing  through  a  village  which 
he  would  not  revisit  after  his  real  religion  had  been 
discovered  :  but  he  dared  not  attempt  it  at  Tim- 
buctu.  The  rage  of  a  Mussulman  would  know  no 
bounds,  if  he  found  that  he  had  been  blessed  by  a 
Christian,  instead  of  by  a  veritable  sheik.  What  was 
to  be  done  on  this  emergency  ?  An  Arab  is  seldom 
at  a  loss  for  a  trick  or  subterfuge.  Alawate  advised 
the  traveller  to  gallop  forward,  gun  in  hand,  and 
meet  the  strangers  with  a  flourish.  This  ruse  suc- 
ceeded. He  was  received  with  many  salaams,  which 
were  easily  returned  by  a  flying  horseman,  who  has- 
tened to  get  under  cover. 

Passing  the  ruins  of  the  clay  wall  with  which  the 


UNPLEASANT  NEWS. 


139 


town  was  formerly  surrounded,  Dr.  Earth's  cavalcade 
traversed  some  narrow  streets,  where  two  horses  could 
scarcely  proceed  abreast,  till  he  reached  the  house 
provided  for  him,  nearly  opposite  that  of  the  Sheik 
El  Bakay.  As  he  was  the  professed  guest  of  the 
sheik,  it  was  arranged  that  his  house  should  be  locked 
up  and  no  visitors  allowed,  till  that  prince  returned 
home.  How  mortifying  to  be  in  the  midst  of  Tim- 
buctu,  and  yet  unable  to  see  the  place,  except  from 
the  roof  of  his  house ! 

It  was  soon  rumoured  that  a  Christian  had  entered 
the  town,  and  that  the  Foolbe  were  determined  to 
kill  him.  These  news  were  far  from  pleasant  to  Dr. 
Earth.  Besides,  Sidi  Alawate,  who  had  promised 
protection,  took  advantage  of  this  untoward  circum- 
stance, to  extort  a  large  present  from  the  helpless 
traveller,  who  was  now  a  kind  of  state  prisoner.  The 
crafty  Arab  took  care  to  make  hay  whilst  the  sun 
shone,  by  getting  all  that  he  could  from  his  guest 
before  his  brother's  arrival.  He  tried  to  rouse  his 
fears  by  giving  him  to  understand  that  the  house 
would  be  attacked,  and  yet  promising  to  defend  him  ; 
—  at  the  same  time  asking  for  more  gifts.  At  length, 
the  sheik  himself  returned,  a  fine,  generous,  and 
noble-spirited  man,  who  immediately  assured  his 
guest  of  personal  safety,  and  entered  into  long  con- 
versations with  him  about  arts  and  politics.  An 
order  which  soon  came  from  the  capital  to  drive  the 
Christian  out  of  the  town,  roused  the  spirit  of  the 
sheik,  who,  in  order  to  show  his  own  importance, 
determined  to  keep  him  there.    At  length,  however, 


140 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME, 


they  were  obliged  to  retire  to  the  sheik's  camp,  about 
seven  miles  distant  from  the  city. 

Tent-life  in  the  desert  has  irresistible  charms  for 
an  Arab,  until  his  tastes  are  changed  by  a  long  resi- 
dence in  a  town,  where  his  manners  become  sophisti- 
cated. He  loves  the  pure  air  and  free  country  of 
Nature ;  for  his  wants  are  few,  and  his  habits  are 
simple.  Look  at  the  camp  of  Sheik  El  Bakay!  Two 
large  tents  of  white  cotton  cloth,  with  top  coverings 
of  chequered  design,  mark  the  residence  of  the  chief 
and  his  family.  The  interior  is  furnished  with 
woollen  curtains  of  various  colours,  wrought  by  the 
women.  These  divide  the  dwelling  into  two  apart- 
ments, the  outer  for  the  men,  the  inner  for  their 
wives  and  children.  The  same  chamber  serves  for 
parlour,  bedroom,  and  storehouse ;  and  sometimes 
contains  a  strange  medley  of  articles  heaped  together. 
A  number  of  smaller  tents,  formed  on  the  same 
simple  model,  but  made  of  skins,  are  grouped  round 
those  of  the  chieftan. 

Morning  and  evening  afford  busy  scenes,  when  the 
cattle,  goats,  and  camels  are  being  driven  out  to 
pasturage,  or  are  being  brought  home  for  the  night. 
Then  the  whole  camp  is  animated.  The  slaves  are 
bringing  water  on  the  backs  of  asses  ;  the  women  are 
preparing  a  frugal  repast :  and  the  men  are  perform- 
ing their  devotions  in  a  sanctuary  of  nature  fenced 
with  thorny  bushes.  In  the  evening,  they  form  into 
groups  around  blazing  fires,  to  chant  the  Koran  with 
their  deep  voices,  or  engage  in  conversation  on  various 
topics,  till  a  late  hour  of  the  night.    For  the  Arabs 


INTRIGUES  OF  THE  FOOLBE. 


141 


are  great  talkers  and  story-tellers.  Some  of  them 
are  adepts  in  inventing  tales  of  fiction,  which  they 
deliver  impromptu  without  the  least  hesitation,  to 
the  great  delight  of  their  hearers.  The  Negro 
dancing  and  music  are  not  allowed  by  good  Mussul- 
men.  Thus  the  life  of  these  mixed  Arabs  runs  on 
very  tranquilly,  except  when  they  are  engaged  in 
predatory  excursions,  or  in  war:  for  they  never  miss 
a  good  occasion  or  pretext  for  plunder. 

The  sheik  himself  and  most  of  his  followers  had  only 
one  wife,  and  were  very  domesticated  persons.  The 
women  of  the  Tawareks  are  said  to  possess  much 
more  personal  liberty  than  those  of  the  Moors  and 
Arabs;  and  to  go  about  freely  unveiled,  which  is 
never  the  case  with  the  latter. 

The  country  around,  though  called  a  desert,  is  not 
altogether  devoid  of  herbage.  Small  acacias  and 
thorny  bushes  abound,  affording  good  browsing  for 
the  goats:  and  camels  can  always  manage  to  find 
sustenance  in  such  broken  grounds,  when  the  proper 
pastures  fail.  During  part  of  the  year,  there  are  even 
"streams  in  the  desert,"  owing  to  the  rise  of  the 
river,  which  then  shoots  out  liquid  branches  in  all 
directions. 

We  need  not  narrate  the  quarrels  and  manoeuvres 
of  the  different  factions  who  sought  to  have  the  pre- 
eminence in  Timbuctu,  whilst  Dr.  Barth  was  among 
them ;  nor  the  intrigues  that  were  used  by  the  Foolbe 
to  get  him  into  their  own  hands ;  nor  the  noble  con- 
duct of  his  host  in  shielding  him  from  harm,  at  the 
risk  of  coming  into  open  collision  with  powerful  rivals. 


142 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


The  traveller  was  preserved;  but  he  was  never  allowed 
to  perambulate  the  city.  In  riding  to  and  from  the 
sheik's  quarters,  he  necessarily  passed  through  a  few 
streets ;  and  he  once  visited  one  of  the  outskirts,  and 
surveyed  the  outside  of  the  "  great  mosque  "  situated 
in  that  neighbourhood.  He  also  had  a  good  view  of 
the  north  quartet  of  the  town  from  the  terrace  of  his 
house.  For  the  rest  of  his  information  about  the 
place,  he  was  necessarily  indebted  to  others,  with 
whom  he  casually  conversed,  or  whom  he  employed 
to  make  proper  surveys. 


\  1  i       l       l  1  1  !  1  J  \       1  !  !  J  1  1 

100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000  1100  1200 1300  1400  1500  1600  Yards. 

PLAN  OF  TIMBUCTU. 


DESCRIPTION  OF  TIMBUCTU. 


143 


What  then  is  Timbuctu?  It  is  a  town  of  trian- 
gular form,  with  its  base  pointing  to  the  river,  from 
which  it  is  about  six  miles  distant;  situated  in  a 
plain,  rising  not  many  feet  above  the  average  level  of 
the  stream.  Its  entire  circumference  is  three  miles. 
The  streets  are  partly  straight,  partly  winding,  paved 
with  hard  sand  and  gravel ;  some  of  them  having  a 
gutter  in  the  middle.  There  are  nearly  1000  clay 
houses,  generally  in  good  repair ;  with  about  200 
conical  huts,  chiefly  in  the  outskirts.  The  houses 
resemble  that  which  we  have  already  described ;  only 
that  the  inferior  ones  have  but  one  court-yard  and  no 
rooms  on  the  terrace.  In  true  Mahometan  fashion, 
there  are  no  public  buildings  of  any  consequence, 
except  mosques ;  for  the  old  palace  has  been  removed. 
There  is  a  large  and  a  small  market,  and  a  few  open 
areas.  The  northern  angle  of  the  town,  wrhere  the 
mosque  of  Sank  ore  is  situated,  is  considerably  elevated 
by  large  accumulations  of  rubbish,  through  the  re- 
peated ruins  which  have  taken  place.  The  "  Great 
Mosque,"  is  a  noble  building,  262  French  feet  in 
length,  by  194  in  width;  having  a  large  open  yard 
which  encloses  the  principal  tower.  It  has  nine  naves 
and  seven  gates.  %-l 

Timbuctu  has  no  resources  of  its  own,  and  no 
produce  either  agricultural  or  mechanical,  except 
leather-work,  which  is  of  a  superior  description.  It 
depends  entirely  on  trade  by  the  transit  of  caravans, 
and  on  being  the  residence  of  some  wealthy  merchants 
and  powerful  chiefs.  Its  importance  has  therefore 
declined  in  proportion  as  other  towns,  like  Jenne  and 


144  THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 

Sego  have  enlarged,  and  as  the  river  navigation  has 
increased.  But  the  serious  obstacles  which  occur 
lower  down  the  stream  prevent  much  river-traffic 


LEATHERN  BAG. 


from  the  east ;  so  that  the  merchandise  brought  from 
that  direction  must  pass  through  Timbuctu,  until 
such  time  as  the  districts  south  of  the  Niger  shall  be 


TIMBUCTU.  —  CARAVANS. 


145 


made  peaceful  and  secure.  Meanwhile,  most  of  the 
foreign  goods  that  come  to  this  part  of  the  interior 


LEATHERN  ORNAMENTS. 


are  brought  from  Morocco  or  Tripoli  across  the 
desert,  for  which  the  peculiar  situation  of  Timbuctu 
is  very  advantageous  as  an  advanced  station. 

The  caravans  generally  consist  of  two  or  three 
thousand  camels  to  carry  men  and  merchandise. 
The  slaves  are  obliged  to  walk,  and  they  form  a 
considerable  part  of  the  exports  of  central  Africa  to 
the  northern  coaSfcs.  A  large  caravan  is  under  no 
absolute  commander,  being  an  assemblage  of  persons 
who  travel  together  for  mutual  defence  against  the 
lawless  tribes  of  the  desert.  Smaller  parties  place 
themselves  under  the  protection  of  one  of  these 
tribes,  whom  they  pay  for  the  trouble  of  escorting 
them  in  safety.  Yet  these  may  be  attacked  by  a 
powerful  rival. 

L 


146 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


In  crossing  the  Great  Desert,  there  are  convenient 
stations  for  nearly  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  from 
Timbuctu  as  far  as  El  Arouan  or  Arawan,  a  town 
inhabited  by  Moors,  a  mere  place  of  trade,  de- 
pendent upon  strangers  for  its  supplies.  Afterwards, 
the  desert  becomes  frightfully  arid,  and  the  daily 
heat  is  excessive.  M.  Caillie  describes  the  thirst  as 
awfully  tormenting.  The  water  of  the  caravan,  which 
is  carried  in  skins,  is  doled  out  twice  a  day  with  the 
utmost  care,  that  it  may  last  until  they  reach  a  well 
or  station,  which  is  not  for  many  days.  Of  course, 
the  travellers  who  have  plenty  of  good  camels  to 
carry  skins  of  water,  are  better  supplied  than  others. 
M.  Caillie  literally  went  about  begging  a  few  drops 
from  his  neighbours,  as  his  guide  and  protector  (so 
called)  would  not  give  him  enough.  The  east  wind 
brings  mountains  of  sand  which  threaten  to  over- 
whelm a  caravan.  Occasionally  pillars  of  sand,  like 
waterspouts  at  sea,  come  across  their  track,  whirl 
them  about  like  straws,  and  throw  them  upon  one 
another  in  the  utmost  confusion.  The  sand  wraps 
them  up  in  darkness,  as  in  a  dense  fog,  confounding 
earth  and  heaven,  and  blending  them  into  one :  so 
that  the  travellers  know  not  where  they  are,  and 
can  scarcely  distinguish  anything  at  the  distance  of  a 
foot.  It  is  surprising  that  they  ever  perform  such  a 
journey  in  safety. 

But  the  poorer  class  and  the  slaves  suffer  much 
from  thirst,  and  many  of  them  as  well  as  of  the 
camels  succumb  to  exhaustion,  and  perish.  "When 
I  had  drunk,  I  had  an  unpleasant  sensation  all  over 


THE  GREAT  DESERT. 


147 


me,  which  was  quickly  succeeded  by  fresh  thirst." 
Sometimes  the  expected  wells  are  dry;  and  the 
fainting  caravan  must  push  forward  to  the  next 
station.  Here  the  wells  may  be  rilled  up  and  require 
to  be  cleared  out ;  during  which  operation,  the  camels 
will  literally  fight  for  the  first  draught  of  water.  The 
poor  beasts  suffer  dreadfully,  finding  only  a  few 
thorny  plants  (hedysarum  alhagi)  to  feed  upon. 
This  plant  is  a  merciful  provision  of  Provi- 
dence, without  which  the  desert  could  hardly  be 
traversed.  It  grows  to  the  height  of  about  eighteen 
inches,  and  is  green -all  the  year.  Its  roots  are  thick, 
and  serve  the  travellers  for  fuel.  When  a  camel 
appears  to  be  failing,  it  is  slaughtered,  that  it  may  be 
fed  upon  by  the  company.  In  great  emergencies, 
these  animals  are  killed,  in  order  to  get  the  few  drops 
of  water  which  may  be  in  their  stomach. 

Enormous  serpents  frequent  the  desert,  lurking 
amongst  the  brushwood,  and  sometimes  darting  upon 
a  traveller,  and  inflicting  a  poisonous  wound.  One 
is  described  as  nearly  five  feet  in  length,  whilst  its 
body  did  not  exceed  an  inch  and  a  half  in  thickness. 
It  is  strange  how  people  can  be  found  willing  to  tra- 
verse this  desert  repeatedly,  or  to  live  encamped  in 
its  environs,  like  the  Moors. 

In  the  interior  regions  of  the  Niger,  there  is  a 
short  rainy  season  in  the  spring.  A  couple  of  showers, 
not  of  long  duration,  fall  during  the  day,  and  are  re- 
peated about  seven  times,  though  not  on  successive 
days.  At  Timbuctu  it  commences  near  the  end  of 
March.    This  atmospheric  phenomenon  does  not 

L  2 


148 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


prevail  at  the  coast,  nor  in  the  more  southerly  parts 
of  Negroland.  It  is  perhaps  a  provision  for  the  skirts 
of  the  desert.  But  along  with  the  benefits  which  it 
confers,  it  helps  the  production  of  flies  and  mosquitoes, 
which  are  enough  to  drive  a  stranger  almost  to 
despair.  Horses,  also,  are  nearly  maddened  by  the 
stings  of  these  insects. 

The  country  south  of  the  Niger  belongs  to  the 
empires  of  Masina  on  the  west  and  Grando  on  the 
east.  Between  these  people  there  is  no  amity. 
The  Eeformer  of  Masina  wished  to  force  his  neigh- 
bours to  reduce  the  number  of  their  wives  to  two,  to 
change  their  wide  dresses,  and  conform  to  other  modes 
of  asceticism.  The  others  resisted  such  an  interference 
with  their  liberties  :  so  that  a  religious  enmity  has 
sprung  up  between  the  Foolbe  and  Songhay,  who  form 
the  strongest  parts  of  the  population.  The  country 
is,  therefore,  in  a  state  of  anarchy.  Otherwise,  the 
best  route  from  Timbuctu  to  the  great  towns  of  the 
east  would  be  across  the  angle  which  is  formed  by  a 
great  bend  of  the  Niger  southward,  about  three 
degrees  east  of  Timbuctu.  This  short  cut  meets  the 
river  at  Say. 

The  people  of  this  district  are  various  in  appearance 
and  manners.  In  one  town,  you  may  meet  with  men 
of  slender  shape,  sharp  features,  and  expressive  coun- 
tenance, dressed  in  white.  In  the  next  village,  you 
may  find  a  race  of  sturdy  negroes,  with  rotund  face, 
black  curly  hair,  and  robust  limbs,  clad  in  light  blue 
shirts,  and  armed  with  muskets. 

The  country  is  generally  fertile  and  thickly  peopled. 


A  VILLAGE  MARKET. 


149 


It  is  mostly  a  vast  plain,  with  swampy  forests,  inter- 
sected by  numerous  streams,  abounding  in  grain  and 
cattle.  Farther  south,  is  the  mountainous  district 
which  bounds  the  valley  of  the  Niger,  still  unexplored, 
but  said  to  be  peopled  by  rude  savages,  even  by  some 
cannibals. 

The  towns  and  villages  of  this  district  are  composed 
of  clay  huts,  which  differ  a  little  from  any  that  we 
have  hitherto  seen.  Let  us  look  at  one,  in  the  little 
town  of  Sebba.  It  is  a  circle,  twenty  feet  in  diameter, 
having  the  walls  ten  feet  high.  They  are  made  of 
matting  coated  with  clay,  which  is  well  polished :  and 
the  roof  is  supported  by  a  pole  in  the  centre.  It 
has  a  number  of  clay  benches,  to  serve  for  seats, 
sideboard,  and  other  conveniences.  The  fireplace 
consists  of  four  lumps  of  clay,  near  the  middle  of  the 
hut,  with  a  slight  wall  between  it  and  the  door,  to 
protect  it  against  gusts  of  wind.  Several  large  jars 
of  day,  for  holding  corn,  serve  for  furniture.  As  ants 
abound  in  the  place,  a  basket  for  containing  small 
articles  is  suspended  from  the  roof. 

Here  is  a  village  market,  where  a  good  deal  of 
business  is  transacted.  The  people  attending  it 
number  from  two  to  five  hundred.  It  is  held  in  an 
open  space  on  the  border  of  the  village.  For  the 
convenience  of  strangers,  there  is  plenty  of  ready- 
cooked  pudding,  tiggera  or  cold  paste,  and  sour 
milk,  offered  for  sale.  The  merchandise  consists  of 
corn,  nuts,  salt,  kola  nuts,  cotton-strips,  dyed  cloth, 
copper  drinking-vessels,  and  asses.  Many  of  the 
people  have  copper  ornaments ;  and  some  of  the 

L  3 


150 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


young  girls  wear  in  the  plaits  of  their  hair  a  copper 
device,  representing  a  warrior  on  horseback,  having 
a  sword  in  his  hand  and  a  pipe  in  his  mouth.  This 
ornament  is  probably  emblematical  of  the  kind  of 
husband  which  the  damsels  wish  to  get.  It  is  also 
perhaps  a  demonstration  that  the  Songhay  will  fight 
for  their  pipe  and  dancing,  the  chief  pleasures  of 
their  life,  against  the  fanatical  followers  of  the  Re- 
former. 

But  if  you  would  wish  to  buy  anything  in  this 
market,  you  must  first  buy  the  money.  The  cur- 
rency is  one  of  the  difficulties  of  an  African  traveller: 
for  it  varies  in  different  places,  even  in  adjoining 
towns.  Cowrie  shells  are  the  most  common  medium 
of  exchange  :  but  in  some  markets,  it  is  shirts ;  in 
others,  as  in  this  village,  it  is  cotton  cloth.  A  num- 
ber of  narrow  strips,  such  as  they  weave  in  Africa, 
are  sewn  together,  to  form  a  certain  breadth  and 
length  of  material;  and  this  is  the  standard  coin  of 
the  place.  If  you  wish  to  purchase  food  or  anything 
sold  in  public,  you  must  furnish  yourself  with  some 
of  these  "  farawel "  or  66  feruwal."  To  get  these, 
you  will  generally  have  to  part  with  your  goods  at 
a  loss:  and  you  may  sustain  several  losses  before 
you  have  obtained  the  right  medium  of  exchange. 
Such  are  some  of  the  inconveniences  resulting  from 
a  want  of  standard  money.  Sometimes  Dr.  Barth 
could  not  procure  food  or  fodder,  because  he  had 
not  the  money  of  a  particular  village.  We  may 
meet  with  other  difficulties  on  this  matter. 

Before  leaving  this  district,  we  should  notice  a 


THE  NIGER  ACACIA. 


151 


beautiful  tree  which  grows  in  these  forests.  It  is  a 
species  of  acacia,  of  large  size,  conspicuous  amongst 
other  trees,  growing  to  the  height  of  eighty  feet, 
with  a  wide-spreading  crown.  The  inhabitants  call 
it  mur  ;  "  other  natives  call  it  "  korgum."  Out  of 
its  trunk  and  largest  branches  they  manufacture 
their  canoes ;  and  from  its  pith,  they  make  a  kind 
of  vegetable  butter.  A  small  bush,  called  "  kirche," 
produces  a  small,  white,  sweet  fruit,  a  little  of  which 
is  not  unpalatable. 


L  4 


152 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


CHAP.  VII. 

Description  of  the  Niger. — Tin-sherifen. — A  Lady's  Offer. —  Straits. 
— G-ogo. — Changes  in  the  Kiver. — Yaoori.  —  The  Palace. — The 
Sultan's  Daughters. — Scene  of  Mungo  Park's  Death. — Islanders 
and  their  Nests. — Boossa.  —  Our  Hostess.  —  The  Widow- Warrior. 
— A  Holiday. — Koyal  Dancing. — Eclipse. — King  of  Wowow. — 
Strange  Eeception. — A  Tinder-Box. — The  Fetish  and  Priestess. — 
Down  to  Kabba. — Demoralised  People. — Fantastic  Dress  of  the 
King  of  Eboe.  — King  Yarro.  —  Sorrow  of  the  Governor  of  Jenna. 
—  Fetish  Priest.  —  An  Old  Lady's  Love  of  Life.  —  Strolling 
Musicians. 

Let  us  now  take  a  glance  at  the  far-famed  Niger, 
in  its  course  from  Timbuctu  towards  the  sea.  This 
course  is,  like  most  earthly  things,  uneven  and  not 
to  be  depended  upon.  A  few  miles  below  Korome, 
the  low  and  marshy  banks  are  exchanged  for  a  stony 
district,  which  commences  with  a  small  island  en- 
tirely surrounded  by  large  rocks  of  granite.  The 
stream  is  now  broken  by  a  number  of  islets  and 
cliffs,  its  banks  are  steep,  and  its  general  aspect  wild. 
Soon,  an  immense  ledge  of  granite  projects  into  the 
middle  of  the  river,  leaving  a  channel  not  more  than 
350  yards  wide.  This  place  is  called  Tinalshiden. 
It  is  ascertained  that  Mungo  Park  passed  these  de- 
files in  safety. 

A  large  and  well-built  town,  Tin-sherifen,  is  next 


COURSE  OF  THE  NIGER. 


153 


reached.  It  is  inhabited  by  the  Sook  tribe,  distin- 
guished amongst  their  quarrelsome  neighbours  for 
their  peaceful  character  and  literary  pursuits.  A 
young  lady,  daughter  of  one  of  the  chiefs,  visited 
Dr.  Barth  in  this  town.  She  was  very  handsome, 
with  soft  and  regular  features,  and  inclined  to  cor- 
pulency; clothed  in  a  becoming  upper  garment  of 
red  and  black  silk,  in  alternate  stripes,  which  she 
sometimes  drew  over  her  head.  Perceiving  that 
the  traveller  was  interested  in  her  appearance,  she, 
half-jokingly,  proposed  a  matrimonial  union:  to  which 
the  other  laughingly  consented,  provided  one  of  his 
weak  camels  could  bear  her  weight. 

East  of  Korome,  the  Niger  flows  through  a  barren 
region,  in  which  are  a  number  of  encampments  of 


TAWAREK  CAMP  IN  MOTION. 


the  Tawarek  Arabs,  who  move  about  according  to 
their  taste  and  necessities. 


154 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


These  wild  tribes  infest  all  the  desert  country  on 
the  north  of  the  river,  and  thus  prevent  a  free  inter- 
course between  the  negroes  of  the  Niger  and  those  of 
the  east. 

Farther  down,  the  river  is  shut  in  by  two  masses 
of  rock,  which  obstruct  it  like  an  iron  gate,  making 
the  navigation  very  difficult.  Still  lower,  the  stream 
is  confined  by  steep  banks  to  the  breadth  of  about 
150  yards,  but  of  great  depth.  Then  it  is  divided 
into  several  small  channels :  then  begins  to  widen 
and  assume  its  former  noble  appearance. 

In  this  changeable  way,  the  Niger  flows  to  Grogo, 
once  the  capital  of  the  Songhay  empire,  and  six. 
miles  in  circumference ;  now  consisting  of  some  300 
mud  huts,  amidst  heaps  of  ruins,  and  only  able  to 
muster  one  good  canoe.  A  large  mosque  still  re- 
mains, having  seven  terraces,  which  gradually  di- 
minish in  diameter,  the  lowest  being  forty  to  fifty 
feet  on  a  side,  the  upper  about  fifteen.  Below 
Gogo,  the  Proteus  Niger  becomes  studded  with  sand- 
banks: and  again,  grand  masses  of  rock  start  up 
from  its  bed  to  a  height  of  seventy  or  eighty  feet. 
Afterwards,  an  unbroken  sheet  of  water  appears, 
encompassed  with  beautiful  scenery.  A  short  dis- 
tance lower,  it  is  divided  by  ledges  of  rocks  ;  and 
below  this,  it  surrounds  a  large  and  verdant  island, 
containing  a  village  of  200  huts.  Once  more,  it 
stretches  out  into  a  breadth  of  several  miles,  studded 
with  numerous  and  pretty  islets.  But  it  would  be 
tedious  to  describe  all  its  turnings  and  changes,  as 


TOE  NIGER.  —  YAOORI. 


155 


it  progresses  southward,  passing  by  Say,  toward  the 
ocean. 

Yet  we  must  advert  to  the  most  difficult  part  of 
the  navigation  of  the  "Father  of  Kivers,"  as  the 
Niger  is  termed  by  the  natives.  This  is  between 
Yaoori  and  Boossa,  where  the  intrepid  Mungo  Park 
met  his  fate.  His  pilot  was  discharged  at  Yaoori ; 
and  himself,  Mr.  Martyn,  and  three  white  boys  con- 
tinued their  voyage,  without  having  any  person  to 
point  out  the  safest  channel,  or  warn  them  of  coming 
danger.  His  oarmen,  who  were  slaves,  are  said  to 
have  been  chained  to  the  canoe,  to  prevent  their 
running  away.  We  shall  presently  revert  to  this 
melancholy  incident :  but  let  us  now  take  a  glance 
at  Yaoori. 

The  city  is  of  great  extent,  and  is  said  to  be 
as  populous  as  any  other  in  central  Africa.  The 
wall  is  from  twenty  to  thirty  miles  in  circuit,  and 
though  made  of  clay,  is  strong  and  high.  It  has 
eight  gates,  which  are  fortified.  The  inhabitants 
make  neat  saddles  and  good  cloth :  and  they  cultivate 
indigo  and  tobacco,  besides  various  kinds  of  grain 
and  onions.  They  also  manufacture  a  coarse  gun- 
powder. The  sultan's  residence,  as  well  as  the 
houses  of  the  chief  inhabitants,  are  two  stories  high, 
having  thick  stairs  of  clay  leading  to  the  upper 
apartments.  A  few  are  square,  but  most  are  of  a 
circular  form ;  and  they  have  good  door-ways.  The 
palace  consists  of  a  group  of  buildings  inclosed  within 
a  high  wall.  On  passing  through  the  gate,  a  visitor 
is  conducted  through  a  low  avenue  formed  by  pillars, 


156 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


and  perfectly  dark;  which  leads  to  a  large  square  yard, 
frequented  by  the  domestics,  a  number  of  naked 
girls  and  boys.  Advancing  into  another  yard,  you 
would  find  the  sultan  sitting  alone  in  the  centre  of 
the  square,  on  a  piece  of  carpet,  with  a  pillow  on 
either  side.  He  assumes  much  consequence,  and 
exacts  from  his  visitors  the  most  humiliating  forms 
of  address;  so  that  even  the  Arabs  must  speak  to 
him  on  their  knees. 

Yet  the  Messrs.  Landers  found  some  of  His 
Majesty's  daughters  to  be  most  troublesome  ac- 
quaintances; and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  that 
they  could  get  rid  of  them  at  any  time.  The 
monarch  himself  had  recourse  to  all  kinds  of  mean- 
ness, to  obtain  possession  of  everything  belonging  to 
the  travellers  that  he  happened  to  fancy  ;  expressing 
his  admiration  of  one  article,  offering  to  purchase 
another,  and  wishing  to  examine  another  more 
minutely.  These  were  only  different  modes  of 
begging.  He  seemed  to  try  and  keep  his  guests 
in  the  town,  under  a  variety  of  excuses,  until  he 
should  fleece  them  of  all  their  property,  as  he  had 
done  to  other  unfortunate  travellers. 

Near  Yaoori,  the  Niger  presents  a  very  noble 
appearance,  flowing  in  one  large  continuous  stream, 
unbroken  by  rocks  or  sand-banks.  A  little  lower 
down,  two  beautiful  islands  clothed  with  verdure 
render  the  scenery  still  more  picturesque.  But  soon 
afterwards,  the  navigation  becomes  very  difficult. 
A  range  of  black  rocks  runs  directly  across  the 
channel ;  and  the  water  has  only  one  narrow  passage, 


THE  NIGER. — SCENE  QF  PARK'S  DEATH.  157 

through  which  it  rushes  with  great  impetuosity.  In 
ascending  the  stream,  it  is  said  that  the  natives  require 
to  lift  the  canoes  over  this  dangerous  pass,  planting 
themselves  on  the  rocks  on  either  side.  Still  farther 
down,  the  river  is  divided  into  branches ;  but  each 
channel  is  filled  with  rocks,  sand-banks,  and  low 
islands  covered  with  tall  rank  grass.  Again  the 
stream  widens  to  a  breadth  of  two  miles ;  and  again 
it  is  divided  by  a  number  of  inhabited  islands.  Once 
more,  it  appears  as  smooth  as  a  lake,  and  the  country 
about  it  like  a  park,  adorned  with  lofty  trees,  waving 
corn,  and  grazing  cattle.  Now  its  width  has 
diminished  to  half  a  mile,  and  again  it  spreads  forth 
into  a  large  expanse,  obstructed  by  islands  and 
shoals  :  till,  near  Eoossa,  it  is  not  more  than  a  stone's 
throw  across,  and  black  rugged  rocks  rise  up  in  the 
centre  of  the  stream.  Here  Mr.  Park  is  said  to  have 
perished.  He  had  repeatedly  driven  off  the  canoes 
of  natives  who  approached  with  hostile  purposes,  and 
in  one  instance  had  killed  a  number  of  them.  The 
chief  of  a  village  to  whom  he  committed  some  pro- 
perty, to  be  conveyed  to  the  king,  as  a  present  from 
the  white  man,  failed  in  doing  so,  appropriating  the 
articles  to  himself :  and  the  king  being  angry  that 
the  travellers  passed  by  without  seeing  him  or  for- 
warding a  gift,  sent  armed  men  to  intercept  the 
boat  when  it  was  passing  by  the  black  rocks  above 
mentioned.  They  attacked  the  Englishmen  with 
lances,  pikes,  arrows  and  stones.  Mr.  Park  and  his 
companion  defended  themselves  for  a  long  time ; 
but  some  of  the  men  were  killed,  and  the  boat  got 


160 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


They  seem  to  have  little  feeling  about  the  past,  the 
present,  or  the  future.  They  are  now  contented  and 
pleased,  if  they  can  have  their  favourite  pastimes  of 
dancing,  singing  and  music.  During  moonlight, 
both  sexes  continue  all  night  in  these  sports,  skipping 
and  dancing  in  the  wildest  manner,  clapping  hands, 
shouting  and  screaming  with  delight,  in  the  full  hey- 
day of  animal  and  muscular  enjoyment. 

The  town  of  Boossa  consists  of  a  great  many 
groups  of  huts,  near  to  each  other ;  bounded  on  one 
side  by  the  river,  and  on  the  other  sides  by  a  semi- 
circular wall,  with  turrets  and  a  moat.  Some  years 
ago,  wrhen  it  was  assailed  and  taken  by  the  Felattas, 
the  people  fled  to  the  islands  of  the  river ;  and  then 
uniting  with  their  neighbours,  attacked  their  common 
enemy  and  retook  the  town. 

"  Our  hostess  is  an  agreeable  and  good-natured 
woman,  but  she  is  excessively  vain  of  her  person ;  so 
much  so,  that  she  employs  several  hours  a  day  in 
dressing  her  hair,  which  hangs  down  below  the  face 
in  three  plaited  cues,  one  from  the  forehead,  and  one 
from  each  side  of  the  head :  after  which,  she  affixes 
ornaments  on  different  parts  of  her  body,  and  stains 
her  lips  and  teeth  a  shining  red  colour  with  henna 
(a  species  of  myrtle).  When  all  this  is  done,  she 
admires  herself  in  a  broken  looking-glass  which  we 
have  given  her.  This  is  the  most  whimsical  and 
diverting  part  of  the  ceremony.  She  approaches  the 
glass  and  retreats  from  it  again ;  smiles  when  she 
fancies  that  she  looks  pretty ;  and  distorts  her  fea- 
tures and  throws  her  body  into  all  manner  of  comical 


BOOSSA. — THE  WIDOW  WARRIOR. 


161 


attitudes,  to  ascertain  which  is  the  most  engfagincr. 
Although  only  a  drummer's  wife,  our  hostess  is  con- 
sidered a  person  of  respectability ;  for  her  husband's 
situation  is  one  of  the  most  important  in  the  king- 
dom." 

A  woman  of  very  different  character  was  the  widow 
Zuma,  sister  of  the  king.  She  was  a  warrior  prin- 
cess, of  light  copper  colour,  good  features,  matronly 
appearance,  excessively  corpulent,  and  plainly  attired. 
She  delighted  to  relate  her  quarrels  with  her  own 
prince,  the  ruler  of  Wowow,  and  how  she  escaped 
from  his  resentment  by  climbing  over  the  wall  at 
night,  and  travelling  on  foot  to  Boossa.  She  com- 
plained that  having  fought  with  the  Yarribeans 
against  Alorie,  she  had  received  no  recompense  for 
her  valour,  though  she  had  lost  some  of  her  slaves 
in  the  engagement ;  which  neglect  so  disgusted  her 
with  the  military  profession,  that  she  abandoned  it 
and  retired  into  private  life.  But  she  had  gained  a 
name  of  renown. 

It  is  a  holiday  at  Boossa ;  and  the  people  assemble 
to  witness  some  public  sports.  The  queen  is  present, 
dressed  in  a  neglige  of  rich  English  silks ;  behind 
her  are  other  wives  of  the  king,  and  her  female 
slaves.  The  rest  of  the  spectators  are  standing,  sit- 
ting in  groups  on  the  grass,  or  lolling  against  trees. 
The  men  are  generally  dressed  in  a  tobe,  trousers, 
and  cap.  Most  of  the  women  are  clad  in  country 
cloths;  but  some  wear  Manchester  cottons  of  a  large 
and  showy  pattern.  Eight  drummers  and  a  fifer  are 
animating  the  dancers.    A  man  starts  forward  from 

M 


160 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


They  seem  to  have  little  feeling  about  the  past,  the 
present,  or  the  future.  They  are  now  contented  and 
pleased,  if  they  can  have  their  favourite  pastimes  of 
dancing,  singing  and  music.  During  moonlight, 
both  sexes  continue  all  night  in  these  sports,  skipping 
and  dancing  in  the  wildest  manner,  clapping  hands, 
shouting  and  screaming  with  delight,  in  the  full  hey- 
day of  animal  and  muscular  enjoyment. 

The  town  of  Boossa  consists  of  a  great  many 
groups  of  huts,  near  to  each  other ;  bounded  on  one 
side  by  the  river,  and  on  the  other  sides  by  a  semi- 
circular wall,  with  turrets  and  a  moat.  Some  years 
ago,  when  it  was  assailed  and  taken  by  the  Felattas, 
the  people  fled  to  the  islands  of  the  river ;  and  then 
uniting  with  their  neighbours,  attacked  their  common 
enemy  and  retook  the  town. 

"  Our  hostess  is  an  agreeable  and  good-natured 
woman,  but  she  is  excessively  vain  of  her  person ;  so 
much  so,  that  she  employs  several  hours  a  day  in 
dressing  her  hair,  which  hangs  down  below  the  face 
in  three  plaited  cues,  one  from  the  forehead,  and  one 
from  each  side  of  the  head :  after  which,  she  affixes 
ornaments  on  different  parts  of  her  body,  and  stains 
her  lips  and  teeth  a  shining  red  colour  with  henna 
(a  species  of  myrtle).  When  all  this  is  done,  she 
admires  herself  in  a  broken  looking-glass  which  we 
have  given  her.  This  is  the  most  whimsical  and 
diverting  part  of  the  ceremony.  She  approaches  the 
glass  and  retreats  from  it  again ;  smiles  when  she 
fancies  that  she  looks  pretty;  and  distorts  her  fea- 
tures and  throws  her  body  into  all  manner  of  comical 


BOOSSA. — THE  WIDOW  WARRIOR. 


161 


attitudes,  to  ascertain  which  is  the  most  engaging. 
Although  only  a  drummer's  wife,  our  hostess  is  con- 
sidered a  person  of  respectability ;  for  her  husband's 
situation  is  one  of  the  most  important  in  the  king- 
dom." 

A  woman  of  very  different  character  was  the  widow 
Zurna,  sister  of  the  king.  She  was  a  warrior  prin- 
cess, of  light  copper  colour,  good  features,  matronly 
appearance,  excessively  corpulent,  and  plainly  attired. 
She  delighted  to  relate  her  quarrels  with  her  own 
prince,  the  ruler  of  Wowow,  and  how  she  escaped 
from  his  resentment  by  climbing  over  the  wall  at 
night,  and  travelling  on  foot  to  Boossa.  She  com- 
plained that  having  fought  with  the  Yarribeans 
against  Alorie,  she  had  received  no  recompense  for 
her  valour,  though  she  had  lost  some  of  her  slaves 
in  the  engagement ;  which  neglect  so  disgusted  her 
with  the  military  profession,  that  she  abandoned  it 
and  retired  into  private  life.  But  she  had  gained  a 
name  of  renown. 

It  is  a  holiday  at  Boossa ;  and  the  people  assemble 
to  witness  some  public  sports.  The  queen  is  present, 
dressed  in  a  neglige  of  rich  English  silks;  behind 
her  are  other  wives  of  the  king,  and  her  female 
slaves.  The  rest  of  the  spectators  are  standing,  sit- 
ting in  groups  on  the  grass,  or  lolling  against  trees. 
The  men  are  generally  dressed  in  a  tobe,  trousers, 
and  cap.  Most  of  the  women  are  clad  in  country 
cloths;  but  some  wear  Manchester  cottons  of  a  large 
and  showy  pattern.  Eight  drummers  and  a  fifer  are 
animating  the  dancers.  A  man  starts  forward  from 
M 


162 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


the  crowd,  flourishing  a  bundle  of  rushes  over  his 
head ;  and  after  moving  about  according  to  the 
music,  is  joined  by  two  women  who  imitate  his  ac- 
tions, and  dance  together  till  they  are  tired.  Another 
party  instantly  take  their  place,  and  are  succeeded 
by  others.  The  king  now  appears  with  a  guard  of 
honour,  and  seems  to  take  great  delight  in  the  en- 
tertainment. Then  a  tall,  awkward  woman  dances 
alone  before  his  majesty,  using  such  extraordinary 
motions  of  the  body  as  to  gain  universal  applause. 
The  king  is  fired  with  noble  emulation ;  and  when 
the  tall  lady  has  ceased,  he  steps  forward  to  display 
his  own  proficiency  in  the  dance.  All  the  company 
rise  out  of  respect  to  the  sovereign,  and  uproariously 
applaud,  as  is  meet,  his  slow  and  stately  movements, 
which  are  far  from  graceful.  When  this  dance  is 
ended,  his  majesty  commences  a  second,  in  which  he 
imitates  the  canter  of  a  horse  going  into  battle ;  and 
then  retires,  amidst  the  acclamations  of  his  admiring 
subjects. 

The  people  await  his  return,  when  he  comes  from 
his  hut,  followed  by  a  boy  carrying  two  calabashes  of 
cowries ;  some  of  which  are  distributed  amongst  the 
musicians  and  dancers,  and  the  rest  scattered  by  the 
royal  hand  among  the  crowd  for  a  scramble ;  which 
produces  its  usual  ludicrous  effects.  The  kind  king 
gives  his  people  a  parting  treat,  by  dancing  sideways 
till  he  reaches  his  residence.  This  gracious  act  fills 
them  with  joy  and  gratitude  ;  and  they  return  home 
delighted  with  the  day's  sport. 

Lo !  the  popular  mirth  is  suddenly  turned  into  sad- 


AFRICAN  THEORY  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  163 

riess,  and  a  cry  is  raised  throughout  the  town !  "  The 
sun  is  dragging  the  moon  across  the  heavens."  Some 
great  calamity  is  at  hand,  and  perhaps  the  end  of  the 
world  is  come.  The  Mahometan  priests  tell  the  king 
that  the  moon  was  displeased  with  her  appointed  path 
through  the  heavens,  because  it  was  thorny  and  diffi- 
cult :  and  she  had  to-night  slipped  out  of  her  own 
orbit,  and  got  into  the  track  of  the  sun :  whereupon 
he,  in  just  indignation,  is  forcing  her  back,  and  cloth- 
ing her  with  darkness,  that  she  may  not  shine  upon 
the  earth.  This  is  their  theory  of  an  eclipse.  King, 
queen,  and  people  believe  the  story ;  and  they  en- 
deavour to  avert  the  threatened  catastrophe  of  an 
extinguished  moon,  by  shouting  and  making  all  kinds 
of  noises,  to  frighten  away  the  sun  from  injuring  the 
luminary  of  the  night.  Their  cries,  bodily  contor- 
tions, blowing  of  trumpets,  clashing  of  cymbals, 
shaking  of  empty  calabashes,  beating  of  drums, 
blowing  on  bullock's  horns,  clinking  of  chains,  and 
every  other  sort  of  din  possible, — produce  one  of  the 
most  extraordinary  scenes  that  can  be  imagined.  A 
stranger,  ignorant  of  the  cause,  and  suddenly  placed 
amongst  these  people,  might  suppose  himself  to  be 
amongst  a  legion  of  bedlamites  or  devils  holding  a 
grand  revelry ;  so  outrageously  wild  and  horrifying 
is  the  appearance  of  the  company.  The  Negroes  con- 
tinue their  efforts  until  they  are  supposed  to  be  crowned 
with  success ;  and  the  sun  having  let  go  the  terrified 
moon,  she  has  returned  to  her  proper  course,  and  re- 
gained her  privilege  of  enlightening  the  earth. 
Below  Boossa,  the  Niger  again  becomes  a  noble 

M  2 


164 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  IIOME. 


stream,  flowing  down  in  placid  grandeur.  Its  banks 
are  covered  with  dense  forests,  having  a  few  scattered 
villages,  but  chiefly  peopled  with  wild  beasts  of  the 
largest  description.  The  natives  here  have  adopted 
a  simple  way  of  destroying  the  elephants.  They  fix 
a  large  harpoon  firmly  in  the  midst  of  a  path  which 
these  animals  frequent  in  their  nightly  visits  to  the 
water,  inclining  the  point  of  the  weapon  so  as  to  come 
in  contact  with  their  huge  breasts,  and  then  cover- 
ing it  with  stubble.  When  an  elephant  comes 
hastily  against  it,  it  enters  his  flesh;  and  not  knowing 
the  cause,  he  presses  forward  and  forces  it  deeper 
into  his  body.  The  natives  then  attack  and  destroy 
him  with  ease. 

Farther  down  the  Niger  is  Wowow,  a  place  of  con- 
siderable importance  in  river  navigation.  The  king 
comes  to  the  gate  to  receive  his  visitors.  He  is  pre- 
ceded by  a  number  of  Mallams,  and  followed  by  a 
man  bearing  a  heavy  sword ;  behind  whom  is  a  train 
of  his  royal  wives  and  children.  In  the  town  wall, 
on  each  side  of  the  gateway,  is  a  large  niche,  one  of 
which  the  king  enters  and  there  stands  like  a  statue, 
until  the  interview  takes  place.  In  the  other  is  a 
pole,  which  a  naked  youth  has  mounted,  entwining 
his  legs  around  it,  and  continuing  perfectly  motion- 
less, like  his  sovereign.  This  scene  continues  until 
a  royal  messenger  from  the  last  town  which  the 
travellers  have  visited  introduces  them  to  His 
Majesty.  If  he  tarry,  all  the  company  must  wait 
in  their  present  position  ;  the  king  and  boy  in  their 
niches,  the  queens  and  their  children  squatting  in 


W0W0W. —  ROYAL  BEGGING. 


165 


the  entrance,  the  visitors  in  front,  the  Mallams 
sprawling  between  them  and  the  king,  and  groups  of 
people  sitting  at  a  respectful  distance.  The  cere- 
mony of  introduction  is  completed  in  a  few  moments ; 
as  the  monarch  thinks  it  more  dignified  not  to  look 
on  his  guests,  or  raise  his  head  above  a  certain  height. 
On  holidays,  they  have  horse-races  in  the  vicinity. 

The  customs  of  this  people  resemble  those  of  most 
Negro  towns.  But  it  seems  that  the  marriage  tie  is 
not  here  considered  to  be  very  binding.  When  a  man 
dislikes  or  gets  tired  of  a  wife,  he  treats  her  with  dis- 
respect and  unkindness,  the  meaning  of  which  she 
understands,  and  returns  to  her  friends.  They  then 
come  to  the  husband's  dwelling,  and  formally  ask  him 
if  it  be  his  wish  that  his  wife  should  remain  away. 
If  he  answer  in  the  affirmative,  the  marriage  is  re- 
garded as  dissolved,  and  the  woman  is  free  to  enter 
into  a  new  union. 

A  characteristic  incident,  showing  the  way  in  which 
these  Negro  kings  ask  for  presents,  is  given  by  Mr. 
Lander.  The  latter  had  sent  an  old  latten  tinder- 
box  to  his  majesty,  requesting  him  to  fill  it  with  a 
little  pure  salt ;  as  that  sold  in  the  market  was  very 
bad.  But  both  king  and  queen  coveted  the  salt- 
cellar, and  spoke  in  rapturous  terms  of  its  form  and 
lustre.  "He  exclaimed,  6 Alia,  how  wonderful !  even 
the  most  trifling  articles  belonging  to  the  white  men 
are  fit  for  the  use  of  mightiest  kings.  Alas  !  Alia 
has  given  them  all  the  riches  and  glory  of  the  world, 
and  its  knowledge ;  and  left  none  whatever  for  black 
men.'    The  king  was  affected.    He  thrust  the  vessel 

21  3 


166 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


into  the  pocket  of  his  tobe,  smoothed  it  down  with 
his  hand,  looked  melancholy,  and  said,  6  How  nicely 
it  fits !  what  a  beautiful  thing !  how  convenient  it 
would  be  in  travelling ! '  He  then  took  it  out  again, 
turned  it  round  and  round,  opened  and  shut  it  re- 
peatedly, and  then  bestowing  on  it  a  last  commenda- 
tion, as  outrageous  as  any  of  the  former,  it  was 
returned  to  us  filled  with  genuine  salt."  The  mean- 
ing of  all  this  was  obvious.  The  tinder-box  was  im- 
mediately sent  as  a  present  to  his  Majesty,  who 
handsomely  rewarded  the  bearer,  and  sent  his  best 
thanks  to  the  donor.  It  must,  however,  be  under- 
stood, that  if  this  way  of  obtaining  what  they  covet 
by  hints  does  not  succeed,  the  chiefs  find  some  other 
means  of  accomplishing  their  object. 

Though  a  species  of  Mahometanism  prevails  in 
Wowow,  the  old  religion  is  not  abolished  ;  and  the 
fetish  is  still  worshipped  by  many  of  the  people. 
See,  here  is  a  long  procession  of  female  devotees, 
walking  and  dancing  through  the  town,  with  large 
branches  in  their  hands !  The  priestess  has  just 
swallowed  the  fetish-water,  and  is  now. supposed  to 
be  inspired  by  a  demon.  She  is  convulsed  all  over, 
her  features  terribly  distorted,  and  her  eyes  widely 
fixed  on  vacuity.  She  is  carried  on  the  shoulders  of 
one  woman  and  supported  by  two  others.  They  all 
appear  to  be  out  of  their  senses,  fantastic  and  frantic 
in  all  their  movements ;  singing  or  shrieking  to  the 
music  of  drums  and  fifes,  and  brandishing  their 
weapons  in  the  air.  Now  the  priestess  enters  the 
traveller's  hut  to  bless  its  inmates.    She  is  singularly 


FETISH  PRIESTESS. 


107 


dressed  in  man's  apparel,  and  rolling  her  dis- 
torted eyes,  utters  a  yell  more  dismal  than  a  dog's 
at  midnight.  She  falls  down  on  her  knees  before 
the  stranger,  gazes  at  him  with  a  look  of  tenderness^ 
holds  out  a  friendly  hand,  and  blesses  him.  A  native 
receives  her  benediction  in  a  rougher  style.  The 
female  places  him  in  a  stooping  posture,  and  twists 
his  left  arm  behind  his  back :  then  letting  this  go, 
to  his  great  relief,  she  presses  down  his  shoulders 
with  both  her  hands,  muttering  the  blessing  which 
he  desired.  It  is  supposed  to  be  given  by  a  spirit, 
and  he  is  satisfied.  The  followers  of  "the  ancient 
faith  "  believe  in  a  Grod  and  spirits,  in  a  future  state 
of  bliss,  and  also  in  a  purgatory. 

We  go  down  the  Niger  to  Kabba.  The  river 
varies  in  width  from  one  to  three  miles,  sometimes 
flowing  in  an  undivided  stream,  sometimes  dotted 
with  islands,  sometimes  divided  into  branches  by  a 
large  island.  The  banks  are  very  verdant,  studded 
with  mean  and  dirty  villages,  interspersed  amongst 
mighty  trees  and  luxuriant  foliage.  In  your  pas- 
sage, you  would  meet  many  canoes,  formed  out  of  a 
single  trunk,  built  up  with  planks,  and  having  a 
cabin  in  which  the  voyagers  dwell. 

Now  a  vast  rock  appears  in  mid-stream,  rising  to  a 
height  of  300  feet.  It  is  very  steep,  and  forms  an 
object  of  much  observation.  It  is  called  Mount 
Kesa,  and  is  supposed  to  be  the  residence  of  a  bene- 
volent genius,  who  supplies  the  wants  of  the  needy,  re- 
stores the  wearied  traveller,  and  alleviates  the  sorrows 
of  the  oppressed. 

21  4 


168  THE  AFRICANS  AT  II0ME. 

We  need  not  tarry  at  Rabba,  except  to  mention  its 
being  an  extensive  and  populous  town,  supplied  with 
abundance  of  provisions,  and  all  kinds  of  African  pro- 
duce and  manufactures.  It  has  large  flocks  and 
herds,  and  excellent  horses.  The  little  town  of 
Zagozhi,  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  Niger,  is  famous 
for  canoes,  of  which  the  chief  has  about  600.  Their 
chief  is  styled  "  king  of  the  dark  water."  He  can 
furnish  you  with  means  of  conveyance  down  the 
river.  If  you  proceed,  you  will  find  that  the  width 
of  the  stream  increases,  though  it  is  still  very  variable ; 
and  that  the  banks  are  mere  marshes  and  morasses, 
so  that  it  is  impossible  to  land  for  a  great  many 
miles.  Hippopotami  abound  in  prodigious  numbers; 
and  it  is  unsafe  to  be  near  the  shore  at  night  for  fear 
of  enormous  crocodiles.  The  Coodiana,  the  Chadda 
or  Sharry,  and  other  rivers  join  the  Niger  and  swell 
its  waters.  The  towns  and  their  inhabitants  become 
more  rude  and  inhospitable.  Some  of  the  pagan 
tribes  are  very  savage,  and  have  become  river-pirates, 
to  the  great  annoyance  and  loss  of  merchants.  So 
great  is  their  mutual  distrust,  that  when  the  crew  of 
a  canoe  stops  to  purchase  a  few  yams,  both  buyers 
and  sellers  are  armed,  and  the  goods  are  laid  down 
on  a  spot  mid-way  between  them ;  since  neither 
party  can  trust  the  other.  This  little  affair  may 
require  several  hours  for  its  completion. 

Such  an  increased  demoralisation  of  the  natives  to- 
wards the  sea-coast  proceeds  from  their  slave-trade 
with  Europeans,  which  has  been  carried  on  in  the 
outlets  of  the  Niger  for  hundreds  of  years.  These 


VANITY  OF  THE  KING  OP  EBOE. 


169 


Negroes  have  imbibed  the  worst  vices  of  foreigners, 
and  joined  them  with  their  own.  They  seem  lost  to 
pity  and  every  spark  of  righteousness ;  intent  only  on 
gain  and  selfish  gratifications,  without  any  considera- 
tion for  their  fellow-creatures.  The  Messrs.  Lander 
had  ample  experience  of  the  brutality  of  these  pagan 
tribes.  They  describe  the  Kirri  people  as  a  savage- 
looking  race,  strong,  and  well-proportioned.  Their 
clothing  is  the  skin  of  a  tiger  or  leopard  fastened 
round  the  waist.  Their  hair  is  plaited  and  plastered 
with  red  clay  ;  and  their  face  full  of  deep  incisions  so 
as  to  resemble  furrows,  and  dyed  with  indigo.  The 
Eboes  have  the  same  ferocious  look,  and  are  said  to 
be  cannibals. 

A  mixture  of  savage  childishness  and  pride  in 
European  ornaments  was  seen  in  the  king  of  Eboe. 
On  his  head  was  a  cap,  shaped  like  a  sugar-loaf, 
covered  with  strings  of  coral  and  bits  of  looking- 
glass.  His  neck  was  also  encircled  with  several 
necklaces  of  coral;  and  long  strings  of  it  hung 
down  to  his  knees.  He  wore  a  short  Spanish  sur- 
tout  of  red  cloth,  much  too  small  for  him,  orna- 
mented with  gold  lace,  epaulettes,  and  coral  beads. 
On  each  wrist  were  thirteen  or  fourteen  bracelets 
fastened  with  old  copper  buttons.  His  trousers,  of 
the  same  material  as  his  coat,  reached  only  to  the 
middle  of  his  legs ;  the  lower  parts  of  them  being 
adorned  with  coral.  A  string  of  little  brass  bells 
ornamented  his  ankles,  and  his  feet  were  naked. 
He  was  amazingly  proud  of  this  finery. 

Other  inhabitants  of  the  outlets  of  the  Niger  re- 


170 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


semble  those  now  described.  They  are  well  armed 
with  guns  and  small  cannon,  delight  in  drinking 
rum,  are  slave-catchers  and  slave-dealers,  plunder 
and  extort  from  all  who  come  within  their  reach, 
—  greater  rogues  and  villains  than  can  be  well 
imagined. 

In  tracing  the  course  of  the  Niger  downward,  we 
made  mention  of  Boossa,  which  was  visited  both  by 
Clapperton  and  the  Landers.  If  instead  of  following 
the  river,  we  had  taken  the  shortest  route  to  the  Gold 
Coast,  we  should  have  been  in  the  track  of  all  these 
travellers.  Let  us  just  glance  at  two  or  three  of  the 
towns  and  other  curiosities  which  they  saw  in  their 
journeys. 

Kiama  is  a  town  of  huts,  built  after  the  Negro 
fashion.  The  king's  habitation  is  erected  in  an  en- 
closure, with  a  number  of  huts  for  his  several  wives, 
having  such  small  doors  o'r  apertures  that  it  is  neces- 
sary to  creep  in  order  to  enter  them.  In  the  outer 
apartment  of  King  Yarro's  dwelling,  there  were 
several  sacred  figures,  or  fetishes,  which  were  sup- 
posed to  guard  the .  sovereign,  and  to  which  the 
people  applied  for  protection  from  various  dangers. 
In  an  inner  apartment,  the  travellers  found  Yarro 
sitting  alone  on  buffalo  hides.  The  walls  were 
adorned  with  objects  which  one  would  not  have  ex- 
pected to  see  in  the  heart  of  Africa.  There  were 
prints  of  King  George  the  Fourth,  the  Duke  of 
York,  Lord  Nelson,  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  an 
officer  of  dragoons,  and  a  smart  English  lady.  On 
the  floor  was  a  confused  heap  of  muskets,  lances,  and 


AFRICAN  HORSE-RACE. 


171 


other  weapons  of  war.  The  royal  wires  were  very 
curious,  and  they  were  afterwards  heard  scolding  his 
Majesty  severely  for  not  giving  them  part  of  a  bottle 
of  rum  presented  to  him  by  his  guests.  This  shows 
how  loosely  these  people  hold  their  Mahometan  pre- 
cepts. 

How  did  these  barbarians  learn  to  have  horse- 
racing?  It  would  almost  seem  as  if  they  wished  to 
mimic  the  English.  A  race  is  held  once  a  year  on 
the  anniversary  of  the  Bebun  Salah  :  and  no  Derby 
day  "  can  be  looked  forward  to  with  greater  impa- 
tience. All  the  townsfolk  are  out  upon  this  occasion, 
dressed  in  their  best  attire.  One  distinguished  group 
consists  of  the  king's  wives  and  children.  Manchester 
cloths  of  the  most  showy  patterns,  and  dresses  made 
of  our  common  bed-furniture,  are  fastened  round  the 
waist  of  sooty  maidens.  All  the  women  have  adorned 
their  necks  with  strings  of  beads,  and  their  wrists 
with  a  variety  of  bracelets  made  of  glass  beads, 
brass,  and  copper.  Kings  of  different  materials 
ornament  their  ankles.  No  efforts  have  been  spared 
in  order  to  set  themselves  off  to  advantage,  and 
to  draw  the  eyes  of  others  to  admire  their  charms 
and  finery.  The  veils  and  mufflers  which  prevail 
in  the  latitudes  of  Timbuctu  and  Howssa  are  here 
unknown,  and  personal  liberty  is  the  order  of  the 
day.* 

Now  the  royal  cavalcade  appears.     Four  horse- 

*  This  is  seen  in  the  young  virgins,  who  have  no  dress  but  beads 
and  wild  flowers,  and  seem  perfectly  unconscious  of  any  shame  in 
nakedness. 


172 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


men  lead  the  way.  They  are  followed  by  several 
men  carrying  on  their  heads  a  great  quantity  of 
arrows  in  quivers  of  leopard's  skin.  Then  come  two 
buffoons,  throwing  up  and  catching  sticks,  and  per- 
forming other  antics.  Next  are  a  number  of  little 
boys,  nearly  naked,  flourishing  cows'  tails  over  their 
heads  and  dancing  along  merrily.  These  precede  the 
king  himself,  who  is  on  horseback,  followed  by  a 
number  of  fine  men  on  handsome  steeds.  When  he 
draws  up  in  front  of  his  house,  where  the  royal  group 
are  assembled,  two  or  three  soldiers  fire  a  salute  from 
muskets  of  the  sixteenth  century. 

The  race-horses  now  appear,  caparisoned  with  bright 
cloths,  silk  tassels,  little  brass  bells,  and  greegrees. 
Their  riders  are  dressed  in  caps,  loose  tobes,  and 
trousers  of  different  colours,  red  morocco  boots,  and 
white  or  blue  turbans.  Upon  a  given  signal,  the 
eager  steeds  bound  forward  and  gallop  along  the 
course.  All  are  excited.  The  riders  brandish  their 
spears,  the  little  boys  flourish  their  cows'  tails,  the 
musketeers  discharge  their  pieces,  the  buffoons  per- 
form their  antics,  and  the  king  is  watching  the  race 
with  earnest  delight.  The  sun  shines  on  a  variety  of 
dresses  of  brilliant  colours,  crimson,  green,  white, 
yellow,  blue,  which  flutter  in  the  breeze ;  a  host  of 
spears  glitter  in  the  sunbeams ;  the  horses  prance  and 
their  bells  tingle.  It  is  an  animated  and  extraordi- 
nary sight.  Honour  and  fame  are  the  only  reward  of 
the  victors  in  the  course.  A  second  race  is  run  by 
some  naked  boys,  on  ponies  without  saddles.  An- 
other race,  like  the  first,  closes  the  entertainment. 


THE  KING  OF  KATUNGA. 


173 


But  dancing  and  singing  will  be  kept  up  throughout 
the  night. 

Katunga  is  the  capital  of  Yarriba.  It  lies  at  no 
great  distance  from  Eabba  on  the  Niger,  and  is  a 
town  of  considerable  importance  in  this  locality.  The 
vast  plains  in  which  it  stands  are  beautiful  and  fruit- 
ful :  but  they  do  not  seem  to  be  well  cultivated,  as 
provisions  are  dear,  and  the  people  seldom  eat  animal 
food  except  that  of  the  lowest  kind,  as  reptiles,  vermin, 
and  insects.  The  British  travellers  were  received  by 
King  Mansola  in  a  very  cordial  and  familiar  manner. 
He  was  dressed  in  robes  of  state.  Instead  of  a  tur- 
ban, he  wore  a  headpiece  like  a  bishop's  mitre, 
adorned  with  strings  of  coral.  He  had  a  tobe  of 
patchwork,  made  of  green  silk,  crimson  silk  damask, 
and  green  velvet.  His  legs  were  covered  with  Eng- 
lish stockings,  and  his  feet  with  native  sandals.  A 
large  piece  of  light  blue  cloth,  given  by  the  late 
Captain  Clapperton,  served  for  a  carpet.  His  eunuchs 
and  others  prostrated  themselves  before  him,  and 
rubbed  their  heads  with  earth  two  separate  times ; 
they  kissed  the  ground  before  him,  and  placed  each 
cheek  on  it  reverently.  Some  rolled  about  on  the 
ground,  like  porpoises  in  the  water,  till  Ebo  their 
chief  desired  them  to  rise :  for  these  black  eunuchs 
are  very  fat  and  unwieldy. 

On  a  more  private  occasion,  his  majesty  wore 
only  the  ordinary  costume  of  the  country,  consisting 
of  tobe,  trousers,  sandals,  and  antiquated  cap.  On  his 
right,  some  eunuchs  and  old  people  were  reposing  on 
the  ground ;  on  his  left  was  a  circle  of  his  young 


174 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


wives ;  and  behind  them  sat  some  widows  of  his 
royal  predecessors.  The  only  musician  present  was 
a  whistler,  who  occasionally  treated  the  company 
with  a  few  of  his  performances.  After  a  while,  there 
seemed  to  be  something  important  going  on ;  for  a 
great  deal  of  whispering  took  place  between  the 
monarch  and  his  wives ;  and  both  parties  left  the 
yard  two  or  three  times.  At  length  the  secret  came 
out.  Mansola  presented  2000  cowries,  equal  to 
about  three  shillings  and  sixpence,  to  the  guides  who 
had  accompanied  the  travellers,  that  they  might  pur- 
chase provisions  on  their  way  home.  As  his  majesty 
could  not  or  would  not  afford  this  contemptible 
present,  he  had  required  his  wives  to  contribute  it 
among  them,  each  paying  her  portion.  It  seems 
that  these  queens  are  obliged  to  work  for  their  own 
food  and  clothing,  and  to  furnish  a  quota  towards  the 
king's  expenses.  They  do  this  chiefly  by  trading, 
which  sometimes  compels  them  to  take  long  journeys. 
Such  is  royal  life  at  Katunga. 

The  king  is  quite  despotic,  and  seems  to  make 
little  of  the  lives  of  his  subjects  ;  since  he  issued  an 
order  that  if  any  of  them  annoyed  the  strangers  by 
impertinent  curiosity,  Ebo  should  take  off  their 
heads.  This  mandate  insured  to  the  travellers  a 
greater  degree  of  quiet  than  they  had  ordinarily 
enjoyed  in  Negro  towns. 

Bohu  was  the  old  capital  of  Yarriba,  and  is  of 
large  extent,  fortified  with  a  triple  wall  and  moats. 
The  governor  was  very  complaisant  to  the  strangers, 
sending  them  a  bullock,  yams,  bananas,  and  a  huge 


JENNA.  —  DYING  IN  COMPANY. 


175 


calabash  of  milk  containing  at  least  six  gallons.  His 
chief  minister  is  appointed  by  the  king,  and  seems  to 
act  as  a  kind  of  spy  on  the  governor. 

The  former  governor  of  Jenna,  near  the  coast,  had 
recently  died,  and  the  king  of  Yarriba  put  one  of 
his  meanest  slaves  into  the  vacant  office.  This  was 
done  from  motives  of  jealousy;  lest  if  a  person  of 
any  influence  were  made  governor,  he  might  rebel 
and  become  independent.  When  the  governor  re- 
ceived his  present  from  the  travellers,  he  expressed 
his  gratitude  and  satisfaction ;  but  said  sorrowfully 
that  he  must  send  some  of  it  to  the  king,  who  would 
not  allow  him  to  wear  red  cloth  till  he  had  been 
longer  in  his  situation. 

Who  is  this  that  comes  dancing  and  yelling  into 
your  hut,  pretending  to  be  possessed  of  an  evil  spirit? 
It  is  the  fetish  priest ;  and  you  had  better  take  no 
notice  of  his  fooleries,  but  give  him  a  few  cowries  and 
let  him  go.  He  imposes  upon  some  of  the  people, 
but  others  call  him  a  knave  and  a  devil.  On  his 
shoulders  he  has  a  large  club,  on  which  a  human 
head  is  carved.  To  this  weapon  strings  of  cowries 
are  suspended,  with  bells,  broken  combs,  sea-shells, 
bits  of  iron  and  brass,  nut-shells,  and  bits  of  wood 
having  a  rude  face  imprinted  on  them.  This  club  is 
an  ominous  weapon.  It  is  sometimes  used  on  melan- 
choly occasions.  For  instance,  when  a  governor  dies, 
two  of  his  favourite  wives  are  obliged  to  quit  the 
world  with  him,  to  bear  him  company,  as  it  is  called, 
in  the  future  state.  They  may  either  die  by  this 
fetish  club,  or  drink  poison.    The  real  reason  for  this 


176 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


sacrifice  probably  is,  that  they  may  try  to  keep  their 
lord  alive  as  long  as  possible,  and  pay  all  manner  of 
attention  to  his  health  and  comfort,  knowing  that 
their  own  fate  is  involved  in  his.  At  the  death  of 
the  last  governor,  the  two  ladies  in  question,  not  being 
tired  of  life,  hid  themselves ;  but  one  of  them  was 
found  whilst  the  Landers  were  in  the  town.  The  old 
woman  on  receiving  her  choice  of  deaths,  preferred 
the  poison ;  but  was  putting  off  the  evil  hour  from 
time  to  time,  hoping  to  escape ;  and  was  bribing  the 
chief  inhabitants  to  pass  over  the  circumstance.  Other 
people  were  clamouring  for  the  fulfilment  of  her  duty. 
Notwithstanding  the  representations  and  remon- 
strances of  the  priest,  and  her  own  prayers  for  forti- 
tude to  drink  the  fatal  cup,  she  could  not  find 
resolution  to  accomplish  the  deed.  "  She  has  entered 
our  yard  twice,  to  expire  in  the  arms  of  her  women ; 
and  twice  has  she  laid  aside  the  fatal  poison,  in  order 
to  take  another  walk,  and  gaze  once  more  on  the 
splendour  of  the  sun  and  the  glory  of  the  heavens ; 
for  she  cannot  bear,  the  idea  of  losing  sight  of  them 
for  ever."  Her  friends  and  slaves  condoled  with  her 
at  her  approaching  death  ;  her  grave  was  dug  in  her 
hut ;  and  preparations  were  made  for  a  a  wake 99  at 
her  funeral ;  but  the  lady  clung  to  life.  Spies  were 
set  over  her  that  she  might  not  leave  the  yard,  and 
she  would  probably  soon  require  to  submit  to  her 
fate.  The  governor  of  Jenna  himself  must  die  when 
news  arrive  of  his  royal  master's  decease ;  and  then 
some  of  his  wives  must  bear  him  company.  Such  is 
the  bloody  custom  of  heathenism. 


STROLLING  MUSICIANS. 


177 


There  are  here  strolling  musicians,  with  drums, 
whistles  and  horns ;  who  perform  much  to  their  own 
satisfaction,  if  not  to  that  of  strangers.  The  drum  is 
of  peculiar  construction,  and  its  top  is  encircled  with 
brass  bells.  It  is  held  under  the  left  arm,  and  is 
played  with  one  hand,  the  other  being  engaged  with 
the  bells.  It  is  also  pressed  with  the  arm  and  utters 
a  shrill  sound ;  so  that  it  serves  at  once  for  drum, 
tambourine  and  bagpipe.  The  musicians  are  sup- 
ported by  voluntary  contributions  of  the  public,  who 
require  their  services  on  all  festive  occasions. 


N 


178 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


CHAP.  VIII. 

Guinea. — Dahomey. — Army  of  Women. — Large  Harems.  —  Abso- 
lutism and  Espionnage.  —  Abomey. — Presentation  to  the  King. — 
Keview  of  the  Amazons.  —  Exhibition  of  Eoyal  Chattels.  —  A 
Scramble.  —  Human  Victims. — Fetish. — Ashantee. — Royal  Mes- 
sengers.— Victims  of  our  Journey.  —  Singular  Reception  in  Coo- 
massie. — A  poor  Drummer. — Human  Sacrifices. — Awful  Funeral. 
— The  Death-Drum.  —  "  Customs."  —  Suicide  of  Queens.  —  Only 
Blood  and  Gold.— Royalty.— 3333  Wives.— Infant  Wives.— State 
Governess. — Polygamy. —  Houses. — Plenty  of  Gold. — Wealth  of  a 
Cabooceer. — Population. — Demonolatry. — How  to  drive  away  the 
Devil. — Cunning  Priests. — Unlucky  Days. — Obstacles  to  Civiliza- 
tion. 

Before  we  leave  the  western  parts  of  Africa,  we  shall 
go  a  little  further  on  our  present  route,  to  look  at 
the  interior  of  Guinea.  Yet  the  country  between 
us  and  Dahomey  is  wasted  by  wars  and  is  very  in- 
secure, so  that  travelling  to  it  would  be  difficult, 
though  the  distance  is  not  great.  Nor  could  we 
easily  reach  it  from  Senegambia,  from  which  it  is 
separated  by  very  high  mountains,  inhabited  by 
Foolas  of  different  tribes.  For  the  people  of  these 
hilly  districts  are  rude  and  inhospitable ;  as  will  be 
manifest  to  any  one  who  reads  the  adventures  of 
M.  Mollien,  in  his  journey  to  discover  the  sources 
of  the  Gambia  and  Senegal,  or  the  wanderings  of 


GUINEA. 


179 


M.  Caillee  in  his  attempt  to  reach  Timbuctu  by  this 
way.  Many  of  these  Foolas  are  Mahometans ;  and 
the  mountains  of  Kong  are  steep  and  rocky,  inter- 
sected by  numerous  streams,  torrents,  and  dense 
forests.  Near  them,  are  the  pagans  of  Wassulo  and 
other  petty  kingdoms,  living  in  a  state  of  primitive 
simplicity.    Farther  east,  is  a  tribe  of  Cannibals. 

It  is  easy  to  enter  Guinea  from  the  Gold  or  Slave 
Coast,  on  account  of  the  British  colonies  planted 
there.  We  may  enter  Dahomey  by  Whydah,  its 
only  seaport,  and  we  can  reach  Ashantee  from  Cape 
Coast  Castle.  These  are  two  principal  kingdoms  of 
Guinea.  For  the  Fantis  (or  Fantees)  who  live  on 
the  coast,  though  a  numerous  people,  are  divided 
into  small  independent  kingdoms  or  districts;  the 
chief  of  whom,  called  the  Braffo  or  nominal  Lord 
paramount,  resides  in  Abrah  ;  and  another  lives  in 
Cape  Coast  beside  the  British.  But  the  two  powerful 
kingdoms  which  Ave  have  mentioned  are,  in  some 
respects,  unique  in  their  circumstances  and  national 
customs.  It  is  barbarism  on  a  grand  scale.  Every 
feature  of  savagism,  except  cannibalism,  is  here 
exhibited  in  a  striking  manner ;  united  with  attempted 
grandeur  in  a  gorgeous  display  of  gold,  and  of  finery 
obtained  from  Europeans. 

We  suppose  ourselves  in  Dahomey,  by  stepping 
over  the  intervening  district.  Here  is  a  country 
which  has  been  increasing  in  dominion,  and  diminish- 
ing in  population.  Its  proper  inhabitants  are  nearly 
extinct,  and  it  has  become  a  kingdom  of  united 
freebooters.    It  exists  by  war  and  plunder,  to  which 

N  2 


180 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


all  the  men  and  women  are  addicted.  Of  200,000 
inhabitants,  not  more  than  20,000  are  free  people ; 
yet  its  standing  army  consists  of  about  12,000,  of 
whom  5000  are  women.  The  latter  is  a  strange 
institution. 

These  female  soldiers  are  dressed  in  a  uniform 
like  the  men,  and  are  regularly  armed  with  muskets, 


FEMALE  SOLDIER  OF  DAHOMEY. 


which  they  know  how  to  use.  The  uniform  for  both 
sexes  is  a  tunic,  short  trowsers,  and  skull  cap.  The 
female  officers  wear  a  coral  necklace  and  garments 


DAHOMEY.  FEMALE  SOLDIERS. 


181 


of  richer  material  than  the  privates.  These  Amazons 
are  highly  esteemed  by  the  king,  whose  guard  they 
form  on  public  occasions.  They  have  peculiar  pre- 
rogatives ;  they  may  not  be  gazed  at  by  men  ;  they 
are  sometimes  called  the  king's  wives,  though  they 
bear  no  connubial  relationship  to  him.  They  are 
single  ladies,  who  have  renounced  the  uses  of  their 
sex,  often  declaring,  "We  are  men,  not  women." 
They  are,  like  the  male  army,  under  a  commander 
who  is  also  head  executioner ;  which  two  functionaries 
hold  the  first  place  of  authority  under  the  king. 

Imagine,  then,  a  band  of  these  women,  dressed  in 
a  short  tunic  of  blue-striped  cotton  reaching  below  the 
thighs,  and  wide  trowsers  which  reach  a  little  lower ; 
their  arms  bare  from  the  top  of  the  shoulder,  and 
legs  bare  from  above  the  knee ;  with  a  close  white 
cap  variegated  with  blue,  and  a  belt  in  which  a  short 
sword  and  club  are  stuck ;  grasping  in  one  hand  a 
long  bright-burnished  musket,  and  in  the  other  a 
grizzly  human  head, — surrounding  the  royal  throne, 
clamouring  to  be  sent  forth  to  battle,  and  protesting 
that  their  valour  is  greater  than  that  of  the  men,  — 
and  you  have  some  notion  of  these  African  Amazons. 
In  fact,  the  nation  goes  to  war  every  year ;  easily 
finding  a  pretence,  often  of  the  most  frivolous  kind, 
for  attacking  a  neighbouring  tribe,  to  whom  they 
are  formidable  on  account  of  their  weapons  and  the 
bravery  of  their  female  army.  Before  each  cam- 
paign, a  "  custom"  of  a  month  is  made,  with  feasting, 
dancing,  and  human  sacrifices.  The  chiefs  or  caboo- 
ceers  bring  their  own  men  to  the  war ;  for  which 

N  3 


182 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


they  receive  no  pay,  except  booty,  and  presents  from 
the  sovereign. 

When  we  consider  that  the  king  has  thousands  of 
wives,  that  each  of  his  nobles  has  hundreds,  that 
5000  women  are  warrior  celibates,  and  that  war  and 
royal  jealousy  constantly  demand  their  victims  ;  we 
do  not  wonder  that  the  Dahomans  are  decreasing 
in  number,  and  that  the  population  is  only  pre- 
served by  mixing  with  the  female  slaves  taken  in 
the  annual  forages. 

The  power  of  the  monarch  is  absolute  in  the 
fullest  sense  of  the  term.  People  of  all  ranks  pros- 
trate themselves  before  him,  throwing  dust  over 
their  heads.  When  the  king's  stick  is  shown,  all 
who  are  present  bow  down  and  kiss  the  dust.  A 
king's  daughter  and  two  officers  reside  in  each  of 
his  minister's  houses  as  spies,  and  to  exact  tribute 
according  to  his  success  in  trade.  No  man  can  say 
that  his  head  is  safe  on  his  shoulders  for  the  next 
twenty-four  hours.  For  an  accusation  is  easily  made 
where  it  is  desired ;  and  the  laws  are  as  bloody  as 
those  of  Draco,  every  crime  being  punishable  with 
instant  death. 

Savages  they  are,  and  savages  they  are  resolved  to 
continue.  It  is  forbidden,  under  penalty  of  im- 
prisonment or  slavery,  to  alter  the  construction  of  a 
house,  to  sit  on  a  chair,  to  be  carried  on  a  hammock, 
or  to  drink  out  of  a  glass.  Only  the  king,  who  is 
above  law,  may  do  these  things.  His  revenue  is 
maintained  by  taxes,  custom  duties,  toll  gates,  and 
a  tithe  of  palm  oil,  which  is  the  principal  article  of 


ABOMEY.  —  PLENTY  OF  SKULLS. 


183 


exportation  besides  slaves.  Cowries  are  the  circu- 
lating medium,  but  dollars  have  also  been  introduced. 
The  dress  and  dwellings  of  the  people  resemble  those 
of  other  Africans. 

Would  you  look  at  Abomey,  the  capital  of  this 
robber  kingdom  ?  It  has  no  walls,  but  a  ditch  and 
hedge  of  prickly  acacia,  about  eight  miles  in  circuit, 


THE  GATES  OF  ABOMEY. 


You  must  enter,  however,  through  one  of  its  six 
gates  or  blocked  passes.  But  take  care !  each  of 
these  passes  consists  of  two  openings,  one  for  the 
king,  the  other  for  his  subjects.  Take  the  proper 
one !  As  you  enter,  you  see  a  fit  emblem  of  the 
kingdom,  a  human  skull  on  each  side  of  you :  it  is  a 
wholesome  warning.    Inside,  is  a  pile  of  skulls  of 

N  4 


184 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


men  and  beasts :  but  there  is  no  announcement  of 
what  this  means.  You  find  no  regular  streets ;  and 
the  houses  are  surrounded  with  high  walls  of  red 
clay :  so  that  you  would  scarcely  suppose  yourself  in 
a  town  of  30,000  inhabitants.  You  see  no  shops, 
but  some  stalls  in  the  smaller  market-places ;  beside 
which  there  are  two  large  markets  for  occasional 
use. 

You  wish  to  be  presented  to  the  king,  as  a 
stranger  of  importance,  perhaps  as  Commander 
Forbes  was  presented  in  1849  and  1850!  Some 
cabooceers  and  their  followers  come  and  pay  homage 
to  you  and  conduct  you  to  the  palace.  Its  walls  are 
surmounted  with  human  skulls :  the  buildings 
within  are  like  those  of  other  Dahomans.  The 
square  is  full  of  musqueteers,  with  plenty  of  the 
banners  and  umbrellas  of  cabooceers.  Women- 
soldiers  stand  on  each  side  of  his  majesty,  who  sits 
under  a  thatched  gateway,  dressed  in  a  loose  robe  of 
yellow  silk  adorned  with  spangles,  and  a  Spanish 
hat  trimmed  with  gold  lace.  A  gold  chain  of  Euro- 
pean manufacture  is  his  only  ornament.  The 
cabooceers  pass  before  him  three  times,  kissing  the 
dust  each  time.  He  rises.  Forty  bands  of  music 
strike  up  their  discordant  notes,  and  all  the  ministers 
and  officers  prostrate  themselves,  whilst  royalty 
shakes  hands  with  his  welcome  guests.  After  the 
usual  compliments  and  gossip,  his  sable  majesty  asks 
if  you  would  like  to  see  a  review  of  his  Amazons. 
Certainly !  And  they  perform  various  evolutions, 
which  you  do  not  understand  ;  but  you  can  see  that 


OIL  PALM  TREE 


PRESENTATION  TO  THE  KING. 


185 


they  know  how  to  fire  and  handle  a  musket, — these 
brazen-faced  wenches, — and  that  their  officers  know 
how  to  use  a  small  whip  with  which  they  are 
furnished. 

The  favourite  wife,  at  least  for  the  present  time, 
sits  behind  her  royal  husband,  under  a  large  parasol 
of  crimson  and  gold,  decked  in  silks  and  gold  orna- 
ments. The  king  asks  if  you  will  drink  with  him  ? 
Yes.  He  rises  :  and  as  you  touch  glasses,  a 
salute  is  fired  (a  salute  seems  to  be  fired  whenever 
the  king  does  anything);  and  eunuchs  and  ladies 
hastily  hold  up  clothes  before  his  person ;  —  for  his 
subjects  must  not  see  him  drink. 

Your  presents  have  been  received  ;  and  the  king 
sends  you  some  in  return;  —  a  bullock  to  each 
guest,  with  cloths,  cowries,  rum,  oil,  flour,  pepper, 
and  soap :  so  that  you  can  feast  yourself  well,  wash 
yourself,  and  buy  what  other  things  you  need.  A 
small  gift  is  also  made  to  each  of  your  attendants. 
Every  day  you  remain  in  Abomey,  you  receive  oil, 
soap,  and  provisions.  The  people  use  much  palm  oil 
mixed  with  their  corn,  beans,  and  meat.  Palm  oil 
is  now  the  staple  article  of  export  from  Guinea  to 
England  and  other  countries  which  have  renounced 
the  slave  trade.  The  quantity  brought  to  Liverpool 
alone  is  very  large. 

Once  a  year  the  king  makes  a  public  display  of  his 
wealth  :  —  for  what  is  the  use  of  it,  unless  it  can  be 
seen  ?  All  his  goods  and  chattels,  including  carriages 
and  sofas,  are  borne  along  the  street  by  six  or  seven 
thousand  people.    Amongst  them  is  a  drum  orna- 


186 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


merited  with  skulls  and  jaw-bones,  and  a  princess's 
umbrella  decorated  with  148  human  jaw-bones.  In 
the  procession  are  twelve  canoe-shaped  baskets,  each 
containing  a  human  victim,  his  hands  and  feet  tied, 
dressed  in  white ;  who  is  presented,  at  the  foot  of  the 
throne,  with  a  head  of  cowries,  of  the  king's  royal 
bounty,  to  purchase  a  good  last  meal,  as  he  is 
destined  to  die  on  the  morrow.  Next  day,  a  scramble 
is  given  by  the  king  from  the  platform,  of  cowries, 
cloth,  tobacco,  &c.  Bum  is  largely  given  to  the 
elite  on  the  platform.  On  the  occasion  above  referred 
to,  when  the  victims  were  brought  forward,  the 
Englishmen  offered  a  hundred  dollars  for  several 
of  them ;  and  the  lives  of  three  were  thus  spared. 
The  others  were  stripped,  and  the  baskets  containing 
them  were  severally  placed  on  the  parapet,  whence 
by  a  royal  kick,  they  fell  into  the  pit,  where  the 
men's  heads  were  instantly  cut  off ;  and  after  their 
bodies  had  been  clubbed,  they  were  thrown  out  to 
be  devoured  by  vultures  and  dogs.  On  the  follow- 
ing day,  presents  were  made  to  the  ministers  and 
officers,  crawling  in  the  dust  before  the  royal 
monster. 

Victims  are  still  permitted  by  the  king  to  be 
offered  on  the  death  of  a  person  of  note ;  but  not  as 
in  Ashantee,  or  as  formerly  used  to  be  in  Dahomey. 
These  people  worship  the  fetish  of  the  leopard,  which 
is  held  sacred,  and  to  which  sacrifices  of  blood  are 
made.  The  knowledge  of  their  religious  mysteries 
is  confined  to  the  priests  and  the  initiated. 

You  would  find  no  particular  difficulty  in  getting 


VISITINO  ASHANTEE. 


187 


into  Ashantee  from  Cape  Coast.  The  danger  would 
be  in  reference  to  your  getting  out  of  it  again. 
Passing  through  the  forest  land  of  Fantee,  you  cross 
the  river  Prah,  and  reach  Quisah,  the  frontier  town 
of  Ashantee.  You  must  obtain  permission  to  proceed, 
from  the  chief  of  Adansi,  who  lives  in  Fomuna,  a 
neat  town  about  a  mile  farther.  You  would  be  in- 
troduced to  him,  sitting  in  front  of  his  house,  under 
a  large  umbrella,  with  his  principal  men  on  either 
side.  If  this  chief  approves  of  your  journey,  he  will 
keep  you  at  Fomuna,  till  he  has  received  a  message 
from  the  king  at  Coomassie,  to  whom  your  arrival 
is  immediately  reported.  You  may  be  detained  for 
some  time  at  this  place :  for  the  king  has  to  consult 
his  fetish,  and  find  a  lucky  day,  or  omen,  for  every- 
thing that  he  does  or  allows  to  be  done. 

Let  us  suppose  ourselves  in  the  company  of  the 
Eev.  Mr.  Freeman,  on  his  first  visit  to  Coomassie. 
The  king  is  dreadfully  alarmed  at  his  coming.  He 
is  also  afraid  to  refuse  him,  lest  the  white  fetishman, 
as  he  calls  him,  should  injure  him  by  magic  spells* 
Yet  his  own  fetishmen  are  adverse  to  allowing  the 
religious  stranger  to  come  to  the  capital.  At  length 
permission  is  given.  We  arrive  at  Esargu,  about 
nine  miles  from  Coomassie,  where  we  have  again  to 
wait  for  another  summons.  We  now  advance,  and 
are  met  by  another  royal  messenger,  who  invites  us 
forward  :  and  immediately  afterwards,  three  officers 
make  their  appearance,  wearing  gold-hilted  swords. 
A  number  of  soldiers  also  arrive  and  precede  us  to 
the  suburbs  of  the  town. 


188 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


Here  we  again  wait  under  a  large  tree  for  another 
invitation  from  the  king.  Presently,  the  royal 
linguist,  who  is  one  of  his  chief  men,  comes  in  a 
palanquin,  over  which  a  large  umbrella  is  held.  He 
is  attended  by  other  officers  bearing  gold-headed 
canes.  These  take  care  of  our  baggage.  Another 
messenger,  attended  by  troops  and  umbrella-men, 
requests  us  to  meet  the  king  in  the  market-place ; 
and  we  proceed  in  his  company.  But  what  are 
these  two  heaps  of  earth,  newly  made,  on  each  side 
of  our  road  ?  They  are  the  graves  of  two  unhappy 
men,  who  have  just  been  buried  alive,  as  fetish 
victims,  to  prevent  any  evil  happening  to  the  king 
or  country  through  our  visit.  Nothing  can  be  done 
by  the  sovereign  of  Ashantee  without  a  sacrifice  of 
human  life,  in  order  to  propitiate  the  unknown 
powers  of  the  air.    This  is  a  land  of  bloodshed. 

The  king  sits  to  receive  us,  surrounded  by  his 
nobles,  officers,  and  captains,  a  large  body  of  mili- 
tary, and  thousands  of  unarmed  attendants.  A 
narrow  path  is  opened  for  us  to  the  royal  presence, 
but  we  must  salute  all  the  cabooceers  as  we'  pass 
along.  This  will  occupy  some  time.  At  last  we  are 
graciously  received  by  his  majesty.  According  to 
the  etiquette  of  the  country,  it  is  now  our  turn  to  be 
saluted  ;  so,  the  king  retires  to  a  little  distance  with 
his  people.  His  cabooceers  now  advance  and  greet 
us  as  we  are  seated ;  the  cavalcade  being  mixed  up 
with  bands  of  music,  umbrellas,  and  all  kinds  of 
fantastic  ornaments.  At  length,  the  king  passes  with 
his  suite,  who  are  nearly  covered  with  gold ;  and  the 


COOMASSIE. — SINGULAR  RECEPTION.  189 


procession  is  closed  by  the  war-captains  and  their 
troops.  It  requires  an  hour  and  a  half  for  this 
gorgeous  pageant  to  pass  by  our  station.  The 
number  of  persons  present  cannot  be  less  than 
40,000.  One  poor  drummer  has  lost  an  ear  because 
of  this  exhibition.  He  was  walking  a  little  behind 
the  king,  as  he  passed  by  us ;  and  his  performance  on 
the  drum  not  being  deemed  satisfactory,  the  king 
snatched  a  sabre  from  one  of  his  attendants  and 
aimed  a  blow  at  his  head.  The  poor  fellow  avoided 
the  cut,  and  threw  himself  upon  the  protection  of  a 
powerful  cabooceer,  who  interceded  for  his  life. 
This  was  spared ;  but  he  was  condemned  to  lose  an 
ear,  for  his  carelessness  in  drumming  badly  before 
the  king's  stranger. 

A  stay  in  Coomassie  is  very  unpleasant  to  a 
humanised  mind.  We  cannot  be  there  many  days 
without  witnessing  bloodshed,  or  at  least  hearing  the 
death-drum.  When  any  relative  of  the  king,  or  of 
a  chief  dies,  a  sacrifice  is  made,  that  the  deceased 
may  not  go  unattended  into  the  other  world.  On 
ordinary  occasions,  the  victims  are  principally  slaves  : 
but  one  respectable  freeman  at  least  is  also  sacrificed. 
When  a  person  of  distinction  expires,  all  the  slaves 
rush  out  of  the  house,  and  hide  themselves  in  the 
bush :  as  one  or  two  are  instantly  slain  to  accompany 
the  deceased.  The  relatives  and  friends  of  the 
family  then  send  presents  of  gold,  cloth,  rum,  and 
powder,  to  be  used  at  the  funeral.  The  king  sends 
the  largest  contribution.  The  worst  cruelty  takes 
place  at  the  interment. 


190 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


Think  of  the  funeral  of  a  woman  of  quality,  when  a 
f<  custom"  or  sacrifice  is  made !  Companies  of  females, 
daubed  with  red  earth,  in  imitation  of  blood,  dance 
along,  screaming  and  bewailing  the  deceased.  Other 
women  carry  rich  cloths  and  other  articles  which 
belonged  to  her.  A  tumultuous  crowd  rush  forward 
with  a  confused  noise  of  drums,  horns,  musketry, 
yells,  groans,  and  cries.  Chiefs  and  captains  assemble 
with  flourishes  of  trumpets  and  firing  of  muskets. 
These  all  wend  their  way  to  the  market,  where  the 
king  is  said  to  have  arrived,  and  to  which  the  funeral 
procession  hastens.  The  son  of  the  deceased  leads 
it,  dancing  like  a  madman,  and  looking  with  savage 


ASHAXTEE  CHIEF. 


delight  on  a  number  of  victims,  who  are  hurried 
along,  with  knives  passed  through  their  cheeks.  The 
reason  of  these  knives  is  to  prevent  the  victims  from 
devoting  any  person  to  destruction  by  an  oath  or 


COOMASSIB.  —  FUNERAL  CUSTOMS. 


191 


curse,  at  the  time  of  their  immolation. .  They  arrive 
before  the  king,  sitting  in  his  usual  form  of  state. 

Discharges  of  musketry  are  now  made  for  the 
space  of  an  hour.  The  chiefs  after  firing  their 
pieces  run  about  like  maniacs,  attended  by  their 
sycophants,  who  wave  their  flags,  and  call  out  the 
" strong  names"  of  their  masters.  The  common 
soldiers  retain  their  places.  The  women  outside  the 
circle  of  men,  vociferate  the  funeral  dirge  at  the 
utmost  pitch  of  their  voices.  The  head  fetishwoman 
of  the  family  rushes  through  the  ranks,  screaming  as 
if  in  violent  agony.  When  the  noise  has  abated, 
rum  and  palm  wine  are  drunk  in  abundance ;  and 
the  females  of  the  family  come  forth  and  dance. 
Then  a  present  of  sheep  and  rum  is  exchanged 
between  the  king  and  the  son  of  the  deceased. 

Now  the  death-drum  sounds  its  knell.  Thirteen 
victims  have  been  placed  near  the  left  side  of  the 
king.  Each  of  the  cabooceers  casts  a  savage  look  on 
them.  Then  an  executioner  lops  off  the  right  hand 
of  one  of  them,  who  is  thrown  down,  and  his  head  is 
severed  from  his  body.  The  rest  are  mangled  in  the 
same  way.  The  body  of  the  deceased  lady  is  carried  to 
"  the  bush,"  where  a  large  grave  is  made ;  here  many 
other  victims,  principally  females,  are  butchered. 
The  heads  of  these  victims  are  placed  in  the  grave, 
and  some  retainers  of  the  family  are  called  in  a 
hurry  to  assist  in  lowering  the  corpse  ;  —  when,  just  as 
it  touches  the  pavement  of  heads,  one  of  the  freemen 
is  stunned  with  a  blow  from  behind ;  a  deep  cut  is 
made  in  his  neck ;  he  is  rolled  in  upon  the  lady's 


192 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


body,  and  the  grave  is  instantly  filled  up.  The 
"  custom  "  often  lasts  for  a  week  or  ten  days ;  and  if 
it  be  a  relative  of  the  king's  who  has  died,  sacrifices 
are  made  every  day.  The  carcases  of  the  victims 
are  thrown  out  for  the  vultures,  dogs,  and  wild 
beasts  to  devour. 

The  funeral  customs  for  the  king  or  a  member  of 
his  family  are  conducted  on  a  large  scale.  Three  or 
four  thousand  victims  have  been  put  to  death  on 
such  an  occasion,  during  a  war  when  many  prisoners 
were  "  on  hand."  When  the  king  dies,  all  his  chief 
slaves,  in  number  above  a  hundred,  who  are  dis- 
tinguished by  the  large  circle  of  gold  which  they 
wear  round  their  necks,  are  put  to  death.  Ashantee 
is  then  like  a  field  of  blood  ;  for  all  the  customs  made 
by  subjects  during  the  late  reign  must  be  repeated 
along  with  that  for  the  king  himself.  For  some 
days  no  one  is  safe  in  the  streets,  and  few  people, 
even  of  the  highest  rank,  venture  out  of  doors,  for 
men  run  about  with  swords,  cutting  down  any  whom 
they  may  meet. 

These  horrid  customs  prevail  in  the  independent 
states  around  Ashantee.  Dahomey  used  to  be  quite 
as  bad.  When  the  king  of  that  country  died,  his 
wives  began  to  break  and  destroy  everything  they 
could  lay  hands  on,  and  then  to  kill  each  other.  On 
one  occasion,  two  hundred  and  eighty  thus  perished 
before  the  successor  could  reach  the  palace  and  stop 
the  carnage.  All  these,  and  six  of  the  remain- 
ing living  wives  were  interred  with  the  deceased 
monarch.    We  are  sorry  to  learn  that  the  new  king 


THE  KOJAL  HOUSEHOLD. 


193 


of  Dahomey  is  reviving  the  H  customs  "  on  a  larger 
scale. 

Enough  of  this  sickening  subject ;  which  yet  could 
not  be  omitted  in  a  description  of  the  "  Africans  at 
Home."  In  all  this  region  it  is  bloody  blood,  blood  ! 
And  the  pride  is  in  gold,  gold,  gold ;  and  in  glittering 
gewgaws  which  gold  purchases.  The  great  wealth 
(in  gold)  of  the  country  seems  to  increase  its  savagism. 
Before  leaving,  let  us  take  a  glance  at  the  royal 
household,  and  one  or  two  other  curiosities. 

The  power  of  the  king  is  absolute  over  the 
lives  and  property  of  his  subjects,  so  that  he  can 
instantly  punish  any  one  who  has  broken  a  law  or 
spoken  disrespectfully  of  himself.  Yet  he  himself  is 
bound  by  the  laws  which  are  made ;  and  which,  like 
those  of  the  ancient  Medes  and  Persians,  cannot  be 
changed.  The  customs  of  their  forefathers  must  be 
maintained  inviolate ;  and  a  late  king  lost  his  throne 
by  attempting  to  alter  some  of  them.  The  captains 
and  cabooceers,  also,  are  consulted  on  all  matters  of 
war  and  peace,  or  other  relations  with  foreign  states, 
in  order  to  make  the  country  appear  combined,  and 
therefore  more  formidable  to  foreigners. 

The  royal  household  is  usually  very  large.  The 
king  is  permitted  to  have  3333  wives,  A  few  only 
of  these  women  live  in  the  palace  at  the  same  time ; 
the  rest  reside  at  the  royal  country  house,  or  in  a 
part  of  the  town  consisting  of  two  streets  reserved  for 
their  use.  This  locality  is  enclosed,  and  guards  are 
placed  at  the  gates,  which  no  persons  are  permitted 
to  enter.    Their  female  friends,  and  even  the  royal 

o 


194 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


messengers  converse  with  them  at  the  barricades. 
When  they  go  abroad,  which  does  not  often  occur, 
they  are  attended  by  a  number  of  boys,  furnished 
with  whips  of  elephant's  hide,  which  they  use  freely 
upon  all  persons  who  do  not  instantly  turn  away  and 
cover  their  eyes.  Whipping  and  fining  are  penalties 
inflicted  on  those  who  look  at  the  king's  wives.  On 
great  public  occasions,  however,  several  hundred  of 
these  royal  dames  accompany  their  consort,  arrayed 
in  a  profusion  of  silks  and  gold.  Of  course,  it  some- 
times happens,  that  his  majesty  does  not  know  how 
many  wives  and  children  he  possesses. 

The  cabooceers,  also,  practise  polygamy  on  a  large 
scale.  Infants  are  sometimes  contracted  in  marriage 
to  elderly  men ;  and  a  provisional  contract  is  made 
before  the  child's  birth,  as  in  India.  It  is  therefore 
dangerous  to  play  with  female  children,  lest  they 
should  really  be  wives,  and  a  heavy  fine  should  be 
the  penalty.  The  women  do  not  live  in  the  same 
house  with  their  husband,  but  in  a  cluster  of  huts 
by  themselves,  or  under  the  care  of  their  mothers. 
Nor  do  they  ever  eat  in  their  husband's  presence. 

One  of  the  king's  sisters  is  appointed  governess,  a 
ruler  of  all  the  women  in  the  country ;  and  settles,  or 
tries  to  settle,  all  grave  disputes  amongst  this  sex. 
They  are,  however,  under  the  most  absolute  control 
of  their  domestic  lords.  If  any  one  is  caught  listen- 
ing to  her  husband's  conversation,  the  loss  of  an  ear 
is  the  inevitable  consequence ;  or,  if  she  blab  out  any 
of  his  secrets,  her  upper  lip  is  the  forfeiture. 

Where  some  people  have  so  many  wives,  it  follows 


DISPLAY  OF  GOLD  IN  ASHANTEE. 


195 


that  many  must  have  none,  which  is  specially  the 
case  with  slaves.  To  provide  for  this  emergency,  a 
number  of  females  are  set  apart  for  the  common  use  ; 
and  wealthy  women  bequeath  slaves  to  the  state  for 
this  purpose,  as  an  act  of  religious  righteousness. 
Other  irregularities  may  be  expected  to  occur.  In 
fact,  no  distinction  between  right  and  wrong  is  made 
respecting  the  relationship  of  the  sexes  to  each  other ; 
it  is  treated  as  a  mere  matter  of  property. 

This  covered  porch  or  piazza,  in  which  a  great 
man  sits,  smoking,  drinking,  and  gossiping,  is  the 
front  of  his  house.  A  door  through  it  leads  into  the 
yard  and  court,  in  which  are  a  number  of  sheds  or 
huts  built  of  66  swish,"  that  is,  of  sticks  and  mud. 
The  front  of  the  wall  is  sometimes  ornamented  with 
various  devices  in  plaster  work. 

The  king  is  on  public  occasions  magnificently 
appareled  in  silk  and  gold.  His  person  is  loaded 
with  all  kinds  of  ornaments  of  this  precious  metal, 
mixed  with  charms;  and  his  "stool"  or  throne  is 
covered  with  plates  of  gold.  Grold  adorns  the  belts 
and  muskets  of  his  guards,  and  forms  the  breast- 
plates and  sword-hilts  of  his  messengers.  His 
treasurer  carries  blow-pan,  boxes,  scales,  and  weights 
of  solid  gold  ;  and  his  linguists  carry  bundles  of 
gold  canes.  All  the  other  officers  carry  the  badges 
of  their  office,  made  of  gold.  The  chief  slaves  and 
servants  of  the  household  wear  stars,  crescents,  or 
neck-bands  of  gold ;  and  the  royal  executioner 
carries  a  massive  golden  hatchet. 

As  the  chiefs  vie  with  each  other  in  a  display  of 
o  2 


196 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


their  wealth,  after  the  manner  of  royalty,  the  amount 
of  gold  in  Ashantee  must  be  immense.  Some  parts  of 
the  soil  are  said  to  be  impregnated  with  this  metal ; 
and  in  one  stream,  many  thousands  of  slaves  are 
employed  in  washing  for  it.  There  are  also  gold 
mines,  in  which  large  lumps  are  sometimes  found 
imbedded  in  loam  and  granite.  The  bracelets  on 
the  arms  of  some  of  the  cabooceers  would  weigh 
several  pounds  each. 

Consider  this  grand  display  of  wealth  by  one  of 
the  great  cabooceers  !  He  thinks  himself  free  from 
all  faults  which  might  cause  a  palaver  and  loss  of 
property ;  and  he  is  too  vain  to  keep  the  knowledge 
of  his  riches  within  his  own  breast.  He  exhibits 
them,  once  in  his  life,  in  a  noisy  procession  through 
the  streets,  in  which  his  numerous  slaves  carry  and 
display  his  goods  and  chattels.  Amongst  these 
valuables  are  gold  chains  for  the  neck,  arms,  and 
legs ;  various  ornaments  for  the  ankles,  consisting 
of  keys,  bells,  chains,  and  padlocks ;  similar  orna- 
ments for  his  wives,  children,  and  captains ;  a  superb 
war-cap  of  eagle's  feathers;  fetishes  and  charms; 
caps  and  silk  dresses  ;  purses,  bags,  &c. ;  other 
articles  made  of  monkey-skin  ;  fans  of  tiger-skin, 
with  ivory  handles,  and  adorned  with  silk;  gold 
swords ;  figures  of  birds,  beasts,  and  fishes,  in  gold ; 
bows  covered  with  silk  and  skin,  and  ivory  arrows ; 
drums  and  other  instruments  of  music,  covered 
with  tiger-skin ;  many  weapons  of  war ;  and  a 
variety  of  other  articles.  The  ornaments  of  gold  are 
declared  to  weigh  more  than  sixteen  hundred  ounces. 


C00MASSIE* —  THE  FETISH. 


197 


The  population  of  Coomassie  may  be  estimated  at 
one  hundred  thousand ;  that  of  all  the  chief  towns 
in  the  district  is  also  large.  Hence  the  great 
number  of  captives  that  are  taken  in  their  inter- 
national wars ;  and  as  the  kingdom  of  Ashantee  is  the 
strongest  and  most  consolidated*  it  seldom  wants  a 
full  stock  of  slaves.  The  soil  is  in  general  very  rich, 
producing  many  valuable  fruits  and  vegetables ; 
together  with  cotton,  indigo,  bamboos,  and  oil  nuts. 

We  have  already  mentioned  the  fetish,  which  is 


THE  FETISH  MAN,  AND  THE  GOVERNOR  OF  WYDAH. 


the  common  worship  of  the  negroes  of  Guinea,  It 
is  a  species  of  demonology.    Spirits  of  various  kinds 
are  supposed  to  reside  in  natural  objects  which  have 
o  3 


198 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


been  properly  consecrated, — spirits  of  both  sexes,  and 
requiring  food  for  their  support.  Each  town  has  at 
least  one  rude  temple  or  fetish  house  erected  in  a 
grove.  Many  kinds  of  objects,  animate,  inanimate, 
and  fanciful,  are  consecrated  for  the  abode  of  these 
imagined  spirits.  Images  abound.  In  some  places 
the  crocodile  is  worshipped,  or  dangerous  serpents, 
or  wild  beasts.  Certain  rivers,  lakes,  and  ponds 
are  held  peculiarly  sacred.  The  fetish  men  and 
women  work  upon  the  credulity  and  superstitious 
fears  of  the  people,  and  make  them  serve  their  own 
purposes  of  gain  and  power. 

Under  the  same  influence  of  fear,  some  negroes 
worship  the  devil,  whom  they  suppose  to  be  a  great 
evil  spirit  ever  intent  upon  mischief.  So  that 
when  a  person  rises  from  his  seat,  his  attendants  are 
wont  immediately  to  lie  down  on  their  side,  and 
cover  the  spot  where  their  master  sat,  lest  the  devil 
should  slip  into  his  place.  But  on  the  Gold  Coasts 
instead  of  being  honoured,  he  is  annually  expelled 
from  the  country  with  great  ceremony.  The  people 
collect  on  a  certain  evening,  furnished  with  mus- 
kets, sticks,  and  other  noisy  weapons ;  and  shouting, 
hallooing,  and  making  all  the  din  that  is  possible, 
they  beat  about  the  houses.  Then  they  rush  out  of 
town  with  flambeaux,  and  fire  muskets,  and  shout  as 
after  a  retreating  enemy,  till  they  imagine  Satan  to 
be  driven  far  away  from  them. 

We  need  not  describe  the  forms  of  their  puerile 
idolatry,  or  the  tricks  of  the  priests,  who  live  by  the 
offerings  of  a  deluded  people.   These  impostors  even 


DEGRADED  CONDITION  OF  GUINEA.  199 

pretend  to  divine,  by  acting  in  concert  with  one  an- 
other, and  becoming  possessed  of  the  circumstances 
and  private  histories  of  individuals,  which  they 
disclose  as  if  received  by  inspiration.  They  also 
announce  what  days  are  lucky  and  unlucky.  Of  the 
former  there  are  not  above  one  hundred  and  sixty  in 
a  year.  On  the  unlucky  days,  men  must  not  do  any 
public  business,  engage  in  battle,  or  even  march 
forward  their  troops. 

Similar  forms  of  superstition  and  immorality 
prevail  throughout  Ashantee,  Dahomey,  Fantee,  and 
the  smaller  adjoining  kingdoms.  Their  civil  and 
social  condition  is  also  nearly  the  same.  Slavery, 
bloodshed,  polygamy,  and  fetish,  with  a  childish 
pride  in  gold  and  gaudy  apparel,  prevail  in  these 
benighted  regions.  A  little  light  is  beginning  to 
spread  amongst  the  natives,  especially  on  the  coast, 
through  the  influence  of  Protestant  missions  from 
England,  and  the  establishment  of  Liberia. 

Native  converts  are  penetrating  into  the  country, 
and  proclaiming  the  glad  tidings  of  the  Grospel: 
schools  are  established,  and  an  example  of  peaceful 
civilisation  is  afforded.  But  the  opposing  obstacles 
from  fetish  priests,  66  customs,"  slavery,  and  poly- 
gamy are  great  and  powerful ;  and  the  mass  through 
which  the  holy  leaven  has  to  spread  is  great.  Yet, 
if  Mahometanism  has  effected  changes  in  many 
nations  of  the  Negro  family,  it  may  be  expected  that 
Christianity  and  a  healthy  commerce  will  be  no  less 
mighty,  in  pulling  down  the  strongholds  of  a  base 
superstition  and  bloody  savagism. 

o  4 


200 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


CHAP.  IX. 

Eastward  from  Say.  —  Grando.  —  Koyal  Covetousness.  —  Sockotu.  — 
Sultan  Bello. — Civet  Cats.  —  An  impudent  Executioner. — "Wurno. 
— Sultan  Aliyu. — The  Pistols. — Providing  for  a  Guest. —  Journey 
in  the  Desert. — Agades. —  Its  Palace. — Sultan. — Koyal  Procession. 
— Men  and  Women.  — Markets.  —  Court  of  Justice.  —  More  of  the 
Desert. — A  narrow  Escape. — Effects  of  Thirst. — Koute  by  Bilma. 
—  Skeletons. — Eate  of  Couriers. — Mutual  Fears. — Blood  Feuds.— 
Salt  Lakes. — Surgical  Operation. — Sons  of  the  Desert.  —  Plun- 
dering. 

We  must  now  return  to  Say,  where  we  left  the  Niger, 
and  proceed  on  our  travels  eastward;  in  order  to 
visit  one  of  the  most  populous  and  powerful  regions 
of  Africa.  This  country  has  the  general  appellation 
of  the  Howssa  States,  and  contains  several  small  and 
tributary  kingdoms  or  provinces,  as  Grando,  Sockotu, 
Katsena. 

Canoes  of  all  sizes  are  ready  to  transport  you  and 
your  effects  across  the  river  at  Say.  But  if  your  lug- 
gage is  very  bulky,  you  must  have  one  of  the  larger 
sort.  Such  a  boat  is  about  forty  feet  in  length,  and 
four  to  five  feet  in  width  in  the  middle;  formed 
of  two  hollowed  trunks  of  trees  sewn  together  in  the 
centre.    It  will  carry  three  camels.    The  stream  is 


SALT  YALE. 


201 


here  contracted  by  a  rocky  bank,  and  is  only  about 
700  yards  broad,  but  has  a  noble  appearance. 

The  main  route  from  this  place  eastward  is  pretty 
much  frequented ;  and  the  road  is  varied,  being  by 
turns  rocky,  woody,  and  swampy.  The  people  are 
poor,  and  the  villages  and  towns  of  no  particular 
interest.  But  here  is  a  salt-hamlet,  of  which  there 
are  several  in  this  locality  !  It  adjoins  a  large  mound 
of  rubbish  about  200  yards  square,  and  from  20  to 
50  in  height,  formed  of  the  mould  of  the  valley  from 
which  the  saline  particles  have  been  extracted.  The 
earth  of  the  salt  vale  is  put  into  large  funnels  made 
of  straw  and  reeds;  so  that  when  water  is  poured 
upon  the  earth,  it  is  strained  through  the  funnels. 
Being  received  into  vessels  placed  underneath,  it  is 
boiled,  and  the  sediment  is  formed  into  small  loaves 
of  salt.  The  product  is  of  a  greyish  yellow  colour, 
and  of  tolerable  quality,  especially  for  culinary 
purposes.  The  natives  also  extract  salt  from  the 
ashes  of  burnt  grass,  which  has  grown  in  a  brackish 
soil.  Other  kinds  of  salt  are  brought  from  the  de- 
sert ;  but  the  produce  of  the  pits  is  of  very  different 
qualities. 

This  country,  like  that  on  the  other  side  of  Say,  is 
inhabited  by  Foolbe  and  Songhay,  and  is  in  a  very 
distracted  condition.  Travellers  must  keep  a  con- 
stant watch,  to  prevent  being  surprised  by  some  band 
of  marauders.  The  principal  towns  contain  seven  or 
eight  thousand  inhabitants,  and  are  all  walled  and 
fortified.  A  singular  incident  here  befel  one  of  Dr. 
Barth's  camels.    It  went  raving  mad,  leaped  about 


202 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


in  the  most  ludicrous  manner,  kicked  in  every  direc- 
tion, and  at  length  fell  to  the  ground. 

The  next  place  of  importance  is  Grando,  the  capi- 
tal of  the  Kebbi  district,  and  residence  of  a  powerful 
Pullo  prince.  He  is  a  nephew  of  the  reformer  Oth- 
man,  and  like  all  his  relatives,  is  a  stern  and  bigoted 
Mussulman.  He  spends  his  life  in  a  secluded,  monk- 
ish manner,  and  would  not  allow  Dr.  Barth  to  see  his 
holy  face.  The  traveller  was  obliged  to  leave  his 
presents  in  the  palace,  without  speaking  to  its  august 
occupant.  But  the  sanctity  of  the  sultan  did  not 
prevent  his  being  quite  alive  to  his  temporal  interests, 
and  trying  to  extort  the  utmost  from  a  stranger. 
At  first,  he  signified  his  approval  of  the  presents 
sent  to  him ;  but  having  heard  that  his  guest  had 
given  a  pair  of  silver  mounted  pistols  to  the  emir  of 
Sockotu,  he  refused  to  let  him  depart  until  he  had 
received  a  similar  gift.  This  was  very  mortifying, 
as  the  pistols  were  reserved  for  a  person  of  more 
importance  in  furthering  the  traveller's  interest ;  but 
the  holy  man  would  not  be  content  with  less.  The 
town,  which  is  situated  in  a  narrow  valley  and  sur- 
rounded with  walls,  is  only  noted  for  its  onions  and 
cotton  cloth. 

Sockotu,  or  rather  Sackatu,  is  the  capital  of  the 
province  of  Zanfara,  and  one  of  the  chief  and  most 
populous  towns  in  Central  Africa.  It  is  known  to 
Europeans  as  the  place  where  the  gallant  Clapperton 
died,  worn  out  with  sufferings  and  disappointments. 
It  does  indeed  seem  to  require  the  patience  of  Job 
to  travel  through  these  regions  with  anything  like 


S0CK0TU. — THE  SULTAN. 


203 


a  happy  equanimity:  for  all  the  kings  and  chiefs, 
great  and  small,  try  to  detain  the  foreigner  as  long 
as  possible,  in  order  to  get  more  presents  from  him, 
and  through  jealousy,  lest  he  should  bestow  his  gifts 
on  a  neighbour  or  a  rival.  Sockotu  is  surrounded 
with  a  good  wall,  between  twenty  and  thirty  feet 
high,  and  has  twelve  gates,  which  are  regularly 
closed  at  sunset.  It  has  two  large  mosques,  besides 
other  places  for  prayer;  and  is  laid  out  in  well 
arranged  streets.  The  dwellings  of  the  aristocracy 
consist  of  enclosures  containing  several  houses  built 
in  Moorish  style.  The  inhabitants  are  chiefly  Felattas, 
possessing  numerous  slaves;  and  it  is,  therefore,  a 
Mahometan  city,  though  the  people  are  not  so  in- 
tolerant as  in  Timbuctu  and  Jenne.  The  situation 
of  the  town  is  healthy,  being  on  a  long  ridge ;  but 
an  adjacent  marsh  and  stagnant  pools  cause  it  to  be 
very  agueish. 

A  stranger  is  first  introduced  to  the  vizier  or 
gadado.  The  vizier,  during  Clapperton's  sojourn  in 
the  town,  was  an  elderly  man,  very  polite,  speaking 
Arabic  exceedingly  well.  The  sultan  seemed  to 
live  in  greater  simplicity  than  some  of  the  chiefs  of 
inferior  places.  Captain  Clapperton  passed  through 
several  guard  houses,  and  was  then  introduced  to 
Sultan  Bello,  seated  on  a  small  carpet,  between  two 
pillars  which  supported  the  roof.  The  walls  and 
pillars  were  painted  blue  and  white,  in  the  Moorish 
taste;  and  on  the  back  wall  was  the  sketch  of  an 
ornamented  fire-screen. 

Sultan  Bello's  brother  sold  to  Clapperton  some  of 


204 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


the  remains  of  Major  Denham's  baggage,  which  had 
been  lost  in  a  military  foray  which  he  had  joined. 
"  He  told  me  that  he  possessed  a  great  number  of 
slaves;  and  I  saw  many  females  about  his  person, 
most  of  them  very  beautiful."  The  prince  kept  civet 
cats,  of  which  he  had  two  hundred.  These  animals 
were  very  ferocious,  and  were  confined  in  separate 
wooden  cages.  They  were  about  four  feet  long, 
from  the  nose  to  the  tip  of  the  tail ;  and  resembled 
a  small  hyena,  except  in  the  greater  length  of  body 
and  tail.  They  were  fed  with  pounded  Guinea  corn 
and  dried  fish  made  into  balls.     The  civet  was 


CIVET  CAT. 


scraped  off  every  second  morning,  with  a  shell  like 
that  of  a  muscle ;  during  which  operation  the  animal 
was  thrust  into  a  corner,  and  its  head  held  down 
with  a  stick. 

"  I  was  sitting  in  the  shade  before  my  door,  with 
Sidi  Sheik,  the  sultan's  fighi,  when  an  ill-looking 
wretch,  with  a  fiend-like  grin  on  his  countenance, 
came  and  placed  himself  directly  before  me.  I 
asked  Sidi  Sheik  who  he  was  ?  He  answered  with 
great  composure,  'The  executioner.'  I  instantly 
ordered  my  servants  to  turn  him  out.    6  Be  patient,' 


AN  IMPUDENT  EXECUTIONER. 


205 


said  Sidi  Sheik,  laying  his  hand  on  mine,  6  he  visits 
the  first  people  in  Sockotu,  and  they  never  allow  him 
to  go  away  without  giving  him  a  few  goora  nuts,  or 
money  to  buy  them.'  In  compliance  with  this  hint, 
I  requested  forty  cowries  to  be  given  to  the  fellow, 
with  strict  orders  never  again  to  cross  my  threshold." 

This  villain  had  applied  to  the  governor  for  the 
office  of  executioner,  which  his  own  brother  then 
held,  boasting  of  his  superior  adroitness  in  the  family 
vocation.  The  governor  said,  "We  will  try:  —  go 
fetch  your  brother's  head."  The  wretch  immediately 
went  to  his  brother's  house,  and  finding  him  quietly 
sitting  in  the  doorway,  struck  off  his  head  at  one 
blow  with  a  sword,  giving  him  no  notice  or  warning 
whatever  of  his  mission.  He  then  carried  the  bleed- 
ing trophy  to  the  governor,  and  claimed  the  pro- 
mised office,  which  was  given  to  him.  He  has  had 
plenty  of  work  to  do.  The  capital  punishments 
inflicted  in  Sudan  are  beheading,  impaling,  and 
crucifixion ;  the  first  being  inflicted  on  Mahometans, 
the  two  latter  on  Pagans.  Wretches  linger  on  the 
cross  for  a  period  of  three  days,  before  death  termin- 
ates their  sufferings. 

During  Clapperton's  stay  in  Sockotu,  provisions 
were  regularly  sent  him  from  the  sultan's  table  on 
pewter  dishes,  with  the  London  stamp :  and  one 
day,  meat  was  served  to  him  in  a  white  wash-hand 
basin  of  English  manufacture. 

A  little  north  of  Sockotu  is  Wurno,  the  capital  of 
the  great  sovereign  who  reigns  over  the  Howssa  States, 
holding  the  provinces  which  we  have  described  in 


206 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


a  kind  of  subjection  as  tributaries.  His  empire  ex- 
tends to  Songhay  on  the  west,  and  Bornu  on  the 
east.  He  is  a  liberal  man,  not  haunted  with  the 
ghost  of  Mahometan  bigotry  or  asceticism.  At  the 
same  time  he  wants  energy  of  character,  and  is  only 
a  nominal  warrior.  His  dominions  are,  therefore, 
held  with  a  feeble  hand,  and  the  border  country  is 
in  a  state  of  much  insecurity  and  distraction.  This 
is  specially  the  case  on  the  western  side,  where  the 
stern  followers  of  Othman  wield  a  firm  sway,  and  are 
anxious  to  extend  the  reforms  (so  called)  of  a  stern 
Islamism.  Aliyu,  on  the  other  hand,  is  content  with 
the  present  state  of  things,  and  has  no  zeal  for  pro- 
selytism;  as  is  evident  from  his  allowing  a  pagan 
people  to  skirt  his  eastern  frontier.  We  shall  glance 
at  these  Bedee  when  we  come  to  them  in  our  journey. 

Aliyu,  on  hearing  of  Dr.  Barth's  arrival,  sent  him  a 
supply  of  provisions,  consisting  of  an  ox,  four  fat 
sheep,  and  two  large  sacks  of  rice,  each  containing 
about  two  hundredweight ;  intimating  his  desire  to 
see  him  immediately.    He  was  found  sitting  on  a 
raised  platform  under  a  tree  in  front  of  his  dwelling. 
He  received  the   traveller  with  great  cordiality, 
shaking  hands  with  him,  and  begging  him  to  sit 
down  in  front  of  him.    He  said  that  he  had  heard 
of  all  his  movements,  had  received  his  letter  sent 
through  the  Sultan  of  Agades,  and  entered  heartily 
into  the  views  of  his  mission :  so  he  was  ready  to 
form  a  commercial  treaty  with  the  Queen  of  England, 
and  engage  to  protect  British  merchants  and  travellers. 
He  affirmed  that  it  would  be  his  greatest  pleasure  to 


THE  SULTAN  OF  WURNO. 


207 


help  in  drawing  the  nations  together  in  bonds  of 
amity,  which  would  conduce  to  the  good  of  all :  and 
professed  great  regret  that  Captain  Clapperton,  called 
Abd  Allah  ("servant  of  Grod")  had  died  in  his 
dominions,  fearing  lest  this  untoward  event  might 
arouse  the  suspicion  of  Europeans. 

At  the  next  interview,  when  Dr.  Barth  went  to  the 
palace  with  his  presents,  he  found  Aliyu  in  a  room 
built  of  reeds,  sitting  on  a  wooden  divan.  The 
sultan  is  a  stout  man,  of  middle  size,  with  a  round, 
fat,  good-humoured  face ;  inheriting  the  features  of 
his  mother,  who  was  a  Howssa  slave,  rather  than 
those  of  his  father.  He  was  quite  frank,  and  had 
thrown  off  his  paternal  reserve,  not  even  using  the 
face-covering  worn  by  Pullo  princes  in  the  presence 
of  strangers.  His  dress  consisted  of  little  more  than 
a  grey  tobe  or  smock-shirt.  He  was  greatly  pleased 
with  his  presents,  chiefly  consisting  of  brocaded 
garments  of  various  colours,  a  carpet,  razors,  looking- 
glasses,  sugar  and  spices :  but  was  enraptured  with 
the  last  offering,  a  pair  of  silver  mounted  pistols,  the 
like  of  which  he  had  never  seen.  With  childish  joy 
he  frequently  exclaimed,  "  I  thank  you,  I  thank  you : 
God  bless  you,  Grod  bless  you." 

As  the  sultan  was  on  the  eve  of  departing  on  a 
short  expedition,  and  the  etiquette  of  the  country 
did  not  allow  a  distinguished  stranger  to  leave  in 
his  absence,  Dr.  Barth  was  obliged  to  wait  in  the 
capital  till  his  return.  But  Aliyu  sent  him  100,000 
kurds,  equivalent  to  about  10£.,  to  defray  his  house- 
hold expenses  in  the  interim.    He  also  furnished 


208 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


liim  with  all  the  papers  that  he  desired.  What  a 
pity  that  other  sovereigns  do  not  resemble  this  negro 
prince  in  his  pacific  and  enlightened  policy  !  Verily 
all  the  wisdom  of  the  world  does  not  dwell  in  Europe 
and  America. 

One  would  like  to  see  a  real  "  city  of  the  desert," 
if  it  were  not  for  the  dangers  and  difficulties  of  the 
journey.  In  twenty  days'  hard  travelling  from  Wurno, 
you  could  reach  the  ancient  and  royal  city  of  Agades, 
once  the  capital  of  a  Desert  empire,  now  in  a  half 
deserted  and  ruinous  condition.  The  danger  from 
robbers  in  this  district  is  not  great,  if  you  travel  in 
company  with  one  of  the  large  salt  caravans,  which 
are  under  the  protection  of  powerful  chieftains; 
though  these  are  sometimes  attacked  by  a  hostile  tribe. 
But  small  companies  of  men  are  never  secure  in  these 
wild  regions.  The  present  inhabitants  chiefly  consist 
of  the  Tagama,  Kelgeres  and  Kelowi :  but  the  Tawa- 
rek  and  other  Arab  tribes  infest  the  neighbourhood. 

Here  and  there,  if  you  keep  the  proper  route,  you 
will  meet  with  a  well,  a  village,  or  even  a  small 
town.  Sometimes  you  must  travel  several  days  with- 
out finding  any  water,  which  you  must  carry  with  you 
in  bags  of  skin.  Then  you  must  stop  a  day  or  two 
to  recruit  yourself  and  camels.  Strong  and  cold 
winds  blow  over  the  rocky  mountains,  so  that  you 
would  be  glad  of  a  blazing  fire  at  night.  The  brush- 
wood which  grows  in  the  valleys  is  a  fine  covering 
for  ostriches,  antelopes,  and  lions.  The  last-men- 
tioned animal  is  an  active  thief,  though  apparently 
not  very  ferocious.    It  has  scarcely  any  mane,  and 


CITY  OF  THE  DESERT. 


209 


differs  in  this  respect  from  the  lion  of  central  Africa, 
whose  mane  is  large  and  beautiful.  These  wild  beasts 
hunt  in  companies  of  four  and  five,  and  will  not 
hesitate  to  steal  a  camel. 

The  people  of  the  desert  dwell  in  small  villages  of 
huts,  built  of  mats  attached  to  stalks  of  corn  or  to 
young  trees,  and  roofed  with  branches  covered  with 
hides.  They  subsist  chiefly  by  cattle  breeding, 
hunting,  stealing,  and  convoying  caravans.  Their 
manners  are  very  free,  and  the  morals  of  both  sexes 
are  described  as  extremely  loose. 

The  naturalist  could  find  some  objects  of  interest 
in  the  desert.  There  is  a  plant,  called  in  Howssa 
"  kumkummia,"  a  species  of  euphorbia,  which  grows 
to  the  height  of  nearly  two  feet.  It  is  very  poisonous, 
and  is  used  to  anoint  the  tips  of  arrows.  Then  there 
is  the  "  aido,"  a  grass  covered  with  large  and  strong 
prickles,  very  distressing  to  naked  feet.  One  part  of 
the  country  is  nearly  covered  with  the  Asclepias 
gigantea,  on  the  leaves  of  which  the  cattle  feed. 
It  has  a  milky  juice  (used  by  pagans  to  foment  their 
"  giya  ")>  which  spots  clothes,  and  even  injures  the  hair 
of  horses.  Acacias,  dwarf  laurels,  and  other  stunted 
plants  grow  in  the  more  fertile  places. 

Now  suppose  that  we  could  be  transported  across 
this  desert  region,  which  we  gladly  leave  to  its  pre- 
sent occupants,  and  that  we  could  be  set  down  in 
Agades  itself.  This  once  far  famed  city  deserves  a 
little  notice.  It  used  to  be  surrounded  with  a  wall, 
but  this  has  disappeared  from  one  side,  and  what  re- 
mains is  in  a  dilapidated  state.    The  southern  part 

P 


210 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


of  the  town  is  almost  entirely  deserted,  and  many 
ruined  houses  are  found  in  every  street.  In  the  zenith 
of  its  prosperity,  Agades  had  a  circuit  of  about 
three  miles  and  a  half,  and  probably  contained  a 
population  of  fifty  thousand  souls.  Its  greatest  de- 
cline took  place  at  the  close  of  last  century,  when 
the  conquests  of  the  Tawareks  destroyed  its  principal 
markets ;  and  a  tide  of  emigration  set  in  for  Howssa. 
Dr.  Barth  estimates  the  present  number  of  inhabited 
houses  to  be  six  or  seven  hundred,  and  the  inhabi- 
tants to  be  about  seven  thousand.  A  large  portion  of 
the  male  population  are  always  from  home,  on  mer- 
cantile expeditions  of  their  own  or  in  convoying 
caravans,  so  that  the  armed  force  of  the  place  at  any 
one  time  seldom  musters  more  than  six  hundred. 

More  than  fifty  houses  are  raised  to  two  stories,  or 
rather  have  a  garret  planted  on  their  flat  roofs.  The 
better  sort  have  a  vestibule,  with  inner  apartments, 
and  a  spacious  court-yard,  in  which  is  an  enormous 
bedstead.  Turtle-doves,  goats,  and  young  ostriches 
may  be  found  running  about  here,  and  plenty  of 
children.  In  the  back  court  are  several  apartments 
for  the  women.  The  great  bedstead  is  a  piece  of  furni- 
ture peculiar  to  the  Songhay  tribes.  In  Agades,  it 
is  like  a  small  house,  built  of  strong  boards,  and 
furnished  with  a  canopy  of  mats.  The  dwellings 
require  to  be  spacious,  as  they  sometimes  contain  a 
little  clan  of  people. 

Let  us  look  at  the  palace.  It  forms  a  small  quarter 
of  the  town,  consisting  of  more  than  twenty  buildings, 
included  in  a  large  court-yard.    The  sultan's  own 


AGADES — THE  SULTAN. 


211 


house  is  of  neat  appearance,  well  polished,  and 
furnished  with  a  wooden  door.  The  vestibule  is 
divided  by  a  balustrade,  so  as  to  form  a  kind  of  inner 
room.  Passing  through  another  door,  you  are  ushered 
into  the  presence  chamber  of  the  king.  It  is  a 
spacious  apartment,  forty  or  fifty  feet  square,  the 
low  roof  being  supported  by  two  massive  columns  of 
clay.  On  these  pillars  are  placed  large  boards,  which 
sustain  lighter  ones;  on  which  branches  are  laid, 
which  are  again  covered  with  mats ;  and  over  all  is  a 
firm  coating  of  clay.    On  either  side  of  the  hall,  is 


AUDIENCE  HALL  OF  AGADES. 


an  opening  to  admit  light ;  and  at  the  farther  end, 
another  door  leads  to  the  interior  of  the  palace. 

When  Dr.  Earth  was  introduced  to  the  sultan,  he 
was  seated  between  the  right  column  and  the  wall, 
clothed  in  a  white  "  litham,"  having  the  lower  part 
of  his  face  covered  with  a  white  shawl.  He  saluted 
the  traveller,  and  immediately  entered  into  a  conver- 
sation about  England,  of  which  he  had  never  heard, 
though  he  had  used  "  English  powder."  He  ex- 
pressed great  indignation  on  hearing  that  the  travel- 
lers had  been  wronged  by  tribes  under  his  jurisdiction, 
who  had  deprived  them  of  presents  intended  for  the 
P  2 


212 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


sultan  himself.  He  vowed  vengeance  for  this  offence, 
which  he  afterwards  made  a  pretext  for  enriching 
himself  with  the  spoils  of  these  tribes ;  since  one  part 
of  his  revenue  consists  of  fines  levied  on  marauders. 
The  rest  of  his  income  is  derived  from  the  presents 
or  contributions  received  at  his  accession,  and  a  small 
tax  on  foreign  merchandise  and  salt. 

This  sultan  had  been  deposed  a  few  years  previ- 
ously, to  make  way  for  another ;  but  a  restoration  was 
effected;  and  subsequently,  another  change  was 
made ;  so  that,  though  the  people  adhere  to  one 
family  of  kings,  they  seem  to  think  that  a  change  of 
persons  "  is  lightsome."  His  re-installation  was  now 
at  hand ;  and  Dr.  Barth  witnessed  the  procession.  The 
ceremony  was  as  follows.  Abd  El  Kader  was  con- 
ducted from  his  private  apartment  to  the  public  hall. 
Then  the  chiefs  of  two  tribes,  Itisan  and  Kelgeres, 
asked  him  to  sit  down  on  a  couch  made  of  palm 
trees,  covered  with  niats  and  a  carpet.  He  did  so, 
but  kept  his  feet  on  the  ground,  till  the  chiefs  of  the 
Kelowi  desired  him  to  lift  them  up  on  the  divan,  and 
so  recline  fully  in  Eastern  style.  This  was  to  show 
the  joint  investiture  of  their  new  sovereign  by  all 
these  tribes.  A  procession  was  then  formed  to  the 
chapel  or  tomb  of  a  Mahometan  saint  outside  the 
town,  where  the  sultan  said  his  prayers,  and  on  his 
return  the  company  dispersed. 

In  the  procession,  the  new  prince  rode  first  on  a 
fine  horse  of  the  Tawati,  a  most  famous  breed, 
wearing  a  fine  robe  of  coloured  cotton  and  silk,  with 
a  blue  bernoose  over  it,  and  in  his  girdle  a  golden 


THE  PEOPLE  OF  AGADES. 


213 


handled  scimitar.  Then  came  several  officers  of  the 
household.  Next  rode  the  chiefs  of  the  Itisan  and 
Kelgeres,  in  full  dress  and  armour,  consisting  of 
sword,  dagger,  long  spear,  and  immense  shield.  The 
sultan  of  the  Kelowi  followed,  with  a  long  train  of 
his  people  on  swift  camels.  The  men  of  the  town 
closed  the  procession,  some  on  horseback,  but  most 
on  foot,  armed,  and  dressed  in  their  best  finery. 
Several  of  the  costumes  were  very  picturesque ;  and 
the  whole  had  a  gorgeous  and  martial  appearance. 

Some  of  the  men  of  Agades  are  tall,  with  broad 
face  and  coarse  features ;  and  they  allow  their  hair 
to  hang  down  upon  their  shoulders.  These  belong  to 
a  mixed  tribe  of  Berbers  and  Songhay.  The  Itisan 
chiefs  were  tall  and  slender,  of  light  colour,  and  fine 
countenance.  Their  dress  was  simple  but  elegant, 
consisting  of  trowsers  and  tobes  of  a  pepper  colour, 
made  of  a  mixture  of  silk  and  cotton,  with  em- 
broidery. 

Many  of  the  women  are  of  good  figure  and  fair 
complexion,  with  fine  black  hair.  The  richer  class 
dress  well,  in  garments  of  white  or  coloured  silk  and 
cotton,  and  are  fond  of  silver  and  other  ornaments. 
Dr.  Barth  formed  a  very  low  estimate  of  their  morals, 
from  the  freedom  with  which  they  behaved  when 
the  sultan  and  most  of  the  men  had  left  the  town ; 
so  that  he  was  obliged  to  be  very  reserved,  and  even 
to  seclude  himself  more  than  he  wished.  There 
are  several  markets  in  Agades.  That  for  live  stock 
contained  a  number  of  camels.  The  vegetable 
market  is  not  so  well  supplied,  the  stock  being  small, 

P  3 


214 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


except  of  cucumbers,  and  Molukhia  {Cor chorus 
olitorius).  The  butcher's  market  has  a  sufficient 
quantity  of  meat ;  and  numbers  of  large  vultures  are 
sitting  on  the  ruined  walls,  ready  to  seize  upon  any 
kind  of  offal  that  may  be  let  fall. 

In  another  market  or  bazaar,  held  in  a  kind  of  hall 
supported  by  stems  of  the  doom-tree,  women  sell  a 
variety  of  ornamental  and  other  articles ;  such  as  neck- 
laces and  beads,  sandals,  small  boxes  of  leather  and 
tin,  and  saddles.  The  leathern  boxes  or  purses  are 
very  neatly  made,  of  different  colours,  and  a  variety 
of  sizes.  The  sandals,  also,  are  very  neat,  and  are 
highly  prized  throughout  the  country.  The  artisans 
in  leather  work  are  almost  entirely  women,  who  live 
together  in  a  quarter  of  the  town,  which  used  to  be 
separated  from  the  rest  by  a  gate.  Though  the 
inhabitants  are  Moslems,  and  are  far  from  bearing 
good  will  to  infidels,  Christians,  or  Jews ;  yet  they  do 
not  deny  themselves  in  their  favourite  amusements 
of  dancing  and  music.  These  pastimes,  with  gossip- 
ing, occupy  the  leisure  time  of  the  evening,  and  are 
often  protracted  to  a  late  hour  of  the  night.  A  spec- 
tator of  one  of  their  moonlight  balls  represents  the 
young  men  as  dancing  in  pairs,  placed  opposite  to 
each  other,  stamping  with  the  foot,  and  whirling 
round  in  circles ;  the  performance  meeting  with  the 
applause  of  numerous  admirers,  who  signify  their  ap- 
probation by  loud  clapping  of  hands.  Besides  the 
usual  players  on  instruments,  one  musician  attracted 
attention,  by  performing  a  solo  on  a  sort  of  guitar, 
accompanying  it  with  an  extemporaneous  song. 


A  LAW-SUIT. 


215 


There  is  a  crowd  of  persons  assembled  in  the 
vestibule  of  a  house  detached  from  others,  and 
furnished  with  a  verandah !  It  is  the  residence  of 
the  cadi  or  judge,  who  is  listening,  to  an  interesting 
lawsuit.  A  stolen  camel  has  been  traced  to  the 
possession  of  a  townsman,  who  proves  that  he  bought 
it  of  a  man  who  swore  it  was  his  own  property.  The 
complainant,  who  lost  the  camel,  wishes  to  recover 
its  price  from  the  defendant,  who  had  bought  and  sold 
it  again  under  suspicious  circumstances.  After  hear- 
ing the  evidence  adduced  on  both  sides,  the  judge 
decides  in  favour  of  the  defendant. 

Dr.  Barth  was,  on  the  whole,  pleased  with  this 
city  of  the  desert ;  though  he  had  to  submit  to  some 
inconveniences  from  the  bigotry  of  the  Mussulmans, 
whose  religious  zeal  is  especially  excited  at  the  time 
of  a  religious  festival.  Though  shorn  of  its  former 
splendour,  Agades  did  not  present  any  appearances 
of  misery  and  want.  On  the  contrary,  the  inhabi- 
tants seemed  to  enjoy-  life  with  a  considerable  degree 
of  cheerfulness.  Its  healthy  situation,  partial  civili- 
sation, and  germs  of  national  vigour,  afforded  some 
pleasing  ideas  of  prosperity.  The  looseness  of  its 
morals  may  be  attributed  to  the  numerous  caravans 
which  are  passing  through  it,  especially  in  connection 
with  the  salt  trade  of  the  desert. 

The  vast  region  which  lies  beteen  Tripoli  and  the 
heart  of  Africa,  forming  the  eastern  skirt  of  the  Sahara, 
has  been  crossed  by  several  enterprising  travellers. 
But  it  is  not,  therefore,  either  easy  or  secure.  There 
are  two  principal  caravan  routes  through  it,  the  more 
p  4 


216 


TOE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


westerly  one  passing  near  Agades,  and  the  easterly 
passing  through  Bilma.  By  either  of  these,  the 
journey  is  fraught  with  many  hardships  and  dangers. 
High  mountains  of  barren  rocks  and  sand  have  to  be 
surmounted,  and  many  intricate  denies  to  be  passed, 
vast  plains  must  be  crossed,  of  the  dreariest  descrip- 
tion, with  only  here  and  there  a  spot  of  verdure; 
whilst  lawless  tribes,  hostile  to  each  other  and  bent 
on  plunder,  hover  around,  waiting  for  an  opportunity 
of  becoming  rich  at  another's  expense.  During  most 
of  the  route,  water  is  scarce,  and  provisions  are  not 
easily  obtained.  Cold  winds  and  storms  alternate 
with  scorching  heat  and  clouds  of  sand. 

Woe  to  the  unhappy  traveller  who  deviates  from 
the  proper  track,  and  gets  lost  in  the  desert !  His 
fate  may  be  gathered  from  the  narrow  escape  of  Dr. 
Barth,  who  left  his  companions  to  visit  a  remarkable 
mountain  near  which  the  caravan  would  pass.  He 
took  with  him  a  few  dry  biscuits  and  dates,  which 
he  soon  found  to  be  a  very  bad  kind  of  food  without 
water.  As  the  sun  reached  the  zenith,  the  traveller 
got  tired  and  exhausted,  and  found  at  last  that  he 
was  lost.  In  vain  he  fired  his  pistols  to  give  a 
signal  to  his  friends,  and  ascended  one  mound  after 
another,  to  try  and  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  caravan. 
When  the  sun  set,  he  intended  to  light  a  fire,  but 
could  not  muster  strength  to  gather  wood;  and 
therefore  scrambled  to  an  old  tree,  under  which  he 
might  lie  down.  After  reposing  for  an  hour  or  two, 
he  discovered  a  large  fire  in  the  valley,  which  he 
hoped  to  be  that  of  his  companions.    He  fired  again 


LOST  IN  THE  DESERT. 


217 


and  again,  but  received  no  response.  He  tried  to 
sleep,  but  could  not ;  and  lay  tossing  on  the  ground, 
feverish  and  restless,  longing  for  the  dawn  of 
day.  Collecting  all  his  strength,  he  then  loaded  his 
pistols  with  a  heavy  charge,  and  fired  once,  twice. 
The  sound  seemed  loud  enough  to  wake  the  dead ; 
strongly  did  it  echo  and  reverberate  from  the  oppo- 
site hills,  and  roll  round  the  valley.  But  all  in 
vain. 

"  The  sun  that  I  had  half  longed  for,  half  looked 
forward  to  with  terror,  at  last  rose.  My  condition, 
as  the  heat  went  on  increasing,  became  more  dread- 
ful ;  and  I  crawled  around,  changing  every  moment 
my  position,  in  order  to  enjoy  the  little  shade  afforded 
by  the  leafless  branches  of  the  tree.  About  noon, 
there  was  of  course  scarcely  a  spot  of  shade  left  — 
only  enough  for  my  head,  and  I  suffered  greatly  from 
the  pangs  of  thirst,  although  I  sucked  a  little  of  my 
blood,  till  I  became  senseless,  and  fell  into  a  sort  of 
delirium,  from  which  I  only  recovered  when  the  sun 
went  down  behind  the  mountains.  I  then  regained 
some  consciousness,  and  crawled  out  of  the  shade  of 
the  tree,  throwing  a  melancholy  glance  over  the  plain ; 
when  suddenly  I  heard  the  cry  of  a  camel.  It  was 
the  most  delightful  music  I  ever  heard  in  my  life ; 
and  raising  myself  a  little  from  the  ground,  I  saw  a 
mounted  Tarki  passing  at  some  distance  from  me, 
and  looking  eagerly  around.  He  had  found  my 
footsteps  in  the  sandy  ground,  and  losing  them  again 
on  the  pebbles,  was  anxiously  seeking  traces  of  the 
direction  I  had  taken.    I  opened  my  parched  mouth, 


218 


THE  AF1ICANS  AT  HOME. 


and  crying,  as  loud  as  my  faint  strength  allowed 
'aman,  aman,'  (water,  water,)  I  was  rejoiced  to  get 
for  answer  <  iwah,  iwah,'  and  in  a  few  minutes  he 
sat  at  my  side,  washing  and  sprinkling  my  head." 
The  man  then  gave  him  a  draught,  set  him  on  his  camel, 
and  carried  him  to  his  friends,  who  almost  despaired 
of  his  safety.  The  traveller's  throat  was  so  dry,  that 
he  could  scarcely  speak  and  could  eat  little  for  three 
days ;  after  which  he  began  to  recover  strength. 

Major  Denham  and  Captain  Clapperton,  who  took 
the  route  from  Tripoli  to  Bornu  by  Bilma,  describe 
some  parts  of  their  desert  journey  as  having  been  very 
toilsome  and  distressing.  The  caravan  lost  many 
camels  through  fatigue ;  and  they  often  passed 
numerous  skeletons  of  unhappy  persons,  chiefly 
slaves,  who  had  died  of  exhaustion  on  their  way  to 
Tripoli.  Near  one  well  they  counted  more  than  a 
hundred,  some  of  which  had  the  skin  still  attached 
to  the  bones.  During  a  day's  journey  of  twenty- 
six  miles,  they  passed  107  of  these  skeletons.  No 
wonder !  The  poor  slaves  are  marched  with  chains 
round  their  legs  and  necks,  with  a  scanty  supply  of 
provision,  and  with  no  warm  clothing.  Their  priva- 
tions, therefore,  must  be  great;  for  the  traveller 
says,  ss  it  was  the  eighth  day  since  our  camels  had 
tasted  water, —  and  at  night  it  blew  a  hurricane." 
Again  he  writes,  "  During  the  last  two  days,  we  had 
passed  on  an  average  from  sixty  to  eighty  or  ninety 
skeletons  each  day ;  but  the  numbers  that  lay  about 
the  wells  at  El  Hammar  were  countless ;  those  of  two 
women  whose  perfect  and  regular  teeth  bespoke 


THIRST  IN  THE  DESERT. 


219 


them  young,  were  particularly  shocking.  Their 
arms  still  remained  clasped  round  each  other  as  they 
had  expired;  although  the  flesh  had  long  since 
perished,  by  being  exposed  to  the  burning  rays  of 
the  sun,  and  the  blackened  bones  only  were  left. 
The  nails  of  the  fingers,  and  some  of  the  sinews  of 
the  hand,  also  remained ;  and  part  of  the  tongue  of 
one  of  them  still  appeared  through  the  teeth.  We 
had  now  passed  six  days  of  desert  without  the  slight- 
est appearance  of  vegetation,  and  a  little  branch  of 
the  suag  {Cap'paris  sodada)  was  brought  me  here 
as  a  comfort  and  a  curiosity.  On  the  following  day 
we  had  alternately  plains  of  sand  and  loose  gravel, 
and  had  a  distant  view  of  some  hills  to  the  west. 
While  I  was  dozing  upon  my  horse  about  noon,  over- 
come by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  which  at  that  time  of 
the  day  always  shone  with  great  power ;  I  was  sud- 
denly awakened  by  a  crashing  under  his  feet,  which 
startled  me  excessively."  It  was  treading  upon  skulls. 
We  shall  not  envy  the  Arabs  their  desert  home. 

Sometimes  couriers  are  sent  from  Bornu  to  Moor- 
zuk ;  but  only  the  Tibbu  will  undertake  this  arduous 
service.  Two  are  always  sent ;  for  the  chances  are 
against  both  of  them  returning  safe.  They  are 
mounted  on  the  finest  maheries  (or  swift  drome- 
daries) ;  and  carry  with  them  a  bag  of  parched  corn, 
one  or  two  skins  of  water,  a  brass  basin  and  a  wooden 
bowl,  a  little  meat  cut  in  strips  and  dried  in  the  sun. 
A  bag  is  suspended  under  the  tail  of  the  maheri  to 
catch  the  dung  which  falls,  that  it  may  serve  for  fuel 
at  night.    The  journey  occupies  about  forty  days, 


220 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


travelling  at  best  speed.  It  is  wonderful  that  such 
couriers  can  be  found. 

The  Arabs  acknowledge  that  it  is  a  most  exciting 
circumstance  when  two  caravans  are  about  to  meet 
each  other  in  the  desert;  and  they  have  songs  to 
commemorate  such  events.  As  soon  as  a  dark  object 
appears  in  the  distance,  the  stern  question  comes 
home  to  every  heart,  Is  it  a  friend  or  a  foe  ?  Are  they 
travellers  like  ourselves,  or  are  they  a  body  of  plun- 
derers? Both  parties  are  subjects  of  the  same 
feelings,  and  both  prepare  for  action.  Guns  are 
loaded,  the  cattle  are  sent  into  the  rear,  and  the 
men  form  in  front,  as  if  to  meet  an  enemy.  Great 
joy  it  is  when  the  strangers  are  discovered  to  be 
friendly,  when  they  can  exchange  salutations  and 
news,  and  furnish  each  other  by  barter  with  any 
commodity  that  either  may  stand  in  need  of. 

When  different  tribes  of  Arabs  meet,  there  is 
another  danger  besides  that  of  bandits.  There  may 
be  a  blood-feud  between  the  parties,  If  an  Arab's 
friend,  kinsman,  or  even  one  of  his  clan  has  been 
murdered,  he  must  avenge  his  death  on  the  criminal 
or  on  one  of  his  friends.  Eetaliation  follows :  and 
thus  a  blood-feud  is  perpetuated  from  father  to  son, 
through  successive  generations. 

"  Two  Mesuratas  (Arabs  of  a  town  near  Tripoli), 
who  had  killed  a  Tibbu  chief  and  his  followers  two 
years  before,  were  of  our  party ;  and  although  the 
Tibbu  had  taken  ample  vengeance  by  murdering 
twenty-five  men  for  eight,  five  of  whom  they  had  assas- 
sinated in  the  night  since  our  passing  the  road,  yet 


BLOOD-FEUDS. 


221 


they  contended  there  was  blood  between  them,  and 
we  all  feared  a  disturbance.  This  morning  it  broke 
out,  and  was  very  near  being  serious:  the  Arabs' 
guns  were  twice  presented,  and  had  any  blood  been 


MESURATA  CHIEF. 

spilt  on  either  side,  we  should  have  probably  been 
all  prisoners  to  the  Tibbu,  or  if  victorious,  have 
sacked  their  whole  town." 

It  seems  that  a  relation  of  the  deceased  chief  went 
to  the  tent  of  one  of  the  Mesuratas,  and  talking  of 
the  death  of  his  kinsman,  shook  his  spear  at  the 
Arab,  who  seized  his  gun  and  shouted  the  alarm. 
Both  parties  flew  to  arms,  and  a  fight  seemed  immi- 
nent. Captain  Denham  and  a  Fezzan  merchant, 
however,  went  unarmed  to  the  Tibbu  (who  were 
evidently  afraid  of  the  Arabs),  declared  the  cause  of 
the  offence,  and  pointed  out  the  offender,  who  they 
said  ought  to  be  punished.    The  dispute  was  after- 


222 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


wards  referred  to  Hadj  Mohammed  Abedeen,  to  be 
decided  "  according  to  the  book."  He  first  made 
the  parties  swear  that  they  would  abide  by  his  de- 
cision, and  then,  in  presence  of  the  chiefs  of  both 
sides,  opened  the  Koran,  and  read  therefrom.  It 
was  found  written,  that  if  any  man  lifts  his  hand 
higher  than  his  shoulder,  in  a  menacing  attitude, 
though  he  should  not  be  armed,  the  adversary  is  not 
to  wait  the  falling  of  the  blow,  but  may  strike  even 
to  death.  This  law  was  in  favour  of  the  Arab,  who 
could  and  did  prove,  that  the  Tibbu  chief  had 
raised  his  hand  above  his  head,  armed  with  a  spear, 
to  attack  him,  when  he  shot  him  dead.  This  decision 
settled  the  matter ;  though  the  crowing  of  the  Arabs 
for  gaining  their  cause  was  so  great  as  almost  to 
cause  a  new  quarrel,  by  aggravating  the  Tibbu. 

Near  Bilma,  are  several  lakes,  in  which  are  great 
quantities  of  pure  crystallised  salt,  beautifully  white, 
and  of  excellent  flavour.  A  coarser  kind,  also,  meets 
a  ready  sale  throughout  Sudan.  The  Tawareks  help 
themselves  to  salt  from  the  wadeys  of  the  Tibbu, 
without  taking  the  trouble  to  pay  for  it,  as  they 
have  a  thorough  contempt  for  buying  any  goods  which 
they  can  steal. 

Would  you  like  to  see  the  wild  Arabs  performing 
a  surgical  operation  on  a  sick  man?  Here  is  a 
specimen.  A  merchant  of  Tripoli,  travelling  in  the 
caravan,  has  been  suffering  on  the  road  from  an  en- 
larged spleen.  He  is  advised  to  undergo  the  opera- 
tion of  burning  with  a  red-hot  iron ;  which  the  Arabs 
think  an  unfailing  remedy  for  most  internal  disorders. 


SUHGICAL  OPERATION. 


223 


He  consents.  They  lay  him  down  on  his  back  in 
the  sand,  where  five  or  six  men  hold  him  steady. 
The  rude  surgeons  commence  their  work  by  burning 
him  in  three  places  under  the  ribs  of  the  left 
side;  each  wound  being  of  the  size  of  a  sixpence. 
Whilst  the  iron  is  again  heating,  a  number  of  thumbs 
are  pressed  into  his  side,  to  know  if  he  feels  pain :  and 
their  rough  pressure  is  so  great,  that  the  sick  man 
declares  he  feels  pain  all  over.  The  operators  then 
make  four  more  brands  near  the  former  ones ;  then 
turning  him  over,  they  make  three  larger  ones  near 
his  back  bone.  Finally,  an  old  Arab,  who  has  been 
feeling  his  throat,  declares  that  he  requires  a  large 
burn  near  the  collar  bone.  The  patient  submits  to 
this  savage  treatment  with  admirable  patience,  and 
getting  up,  drinks  a  large  draught  of  water,  and  re- 
mounts his  camel  for  the  journey.  We  should  think 
that  this  mangling  must  either  end  or  mend  the 
sufferer. 

Wild  and  lawless  are  these  children  of  the  desert. 
The  escort  of  a  caravan  think  themselves  privileged 
to  lay  hold  of  any  thing  or  any  body  which  comes  in 
their  way,  and  to  help  themselves  to  whatever  they 
need.  When  any  of  the  camels  die  of  fatigue,  they 
try  to  replace  them  without  money.  When  they 
are  hungry  or  wish  for  a  little  flesh,  woe  to  the  shep- 
herd who  crosses  their  track,  or  in  fear  has  fled  at 
their  approach.  te  What,  not  stay  to  sell  their  sheep, 
the  rogues  !  We'll  take  them  now  without  payment " 
(as  if  they  would  ever  have  paid  for  them,  except 
in  blows !)    So  a  dozen  of  the  escort  start  off  in  the 


224 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


direction  of  the  sheep-marks,  and  scouring  the  val- 
leys,  at  length  discover  the  hapless  fugitives.  There 
are  about  twenty  persons,  including  men,  women, 
and  children,  having  ten  camels  to  convey  their  tents 
and  goods,  with  about  two  hundred  head  of  cattle. 
Their  retreat  is  intercepted  by  some  of  the  free- 
booters, whilst  the  others  dash  forward,  and  in  a 
moment  the  capture  is  made.  "The  most  rapid 
plunder  that  I  could  have  conceived  quickly  com- 
menced. The  camels  were  instantly  brought  to  the 
ground,  and  every  part  of  their  load  rifled.  The  poor 
women  and  girls  lifted  up  their  hands  to  me,  stripped 
as  they  were  to  the  skin ;  but  I  could  do  nothing 
for  them  beyond  saving  their  lives."  The  chief  soon 
came  up,  and  seemed  ashamed  of  the  paltry  booty, 
and  was  moved  by  the  tears  of  the  sufferers.  "  I 
seized  the  favourable  moment,  and  advised  that  the 
Arabs  should  give  everything  back,  and  have  a  few 
sheep  and  an  ox  for  a  feast.  This  was  finally  agreed 
to :  the  women's  wrappers  were  thrown  down,  and 
the  robbers  went  off  with  ten  sheep  and  a  fat  bullock. 

The  chief  of  the  escort  sent  forward  a  messenger 
with  a  camel  and  man,  to  the  sheik  of  the  next 
place,  announcing  his  approach.  Before  reaching 
the  town,  they  found  the  messenger  stripped  naked, 
and  tied  to  a  tree,  and  almost  famished,  having  been 
twenty-four  hours  without  food.  He  had  been  at- 
tacked by  eighteen  men,  who  had  stripped  him  and 
taken  away  his  camel  and  attendant,  saying,  that 
the  latter  should  have  his  throat  cut  if  he  were  not 
ransomed:   "they  cared  nothing  about  the  chief 


BANDITS  OF  THE  DESERT. 


225 


nor  the  sheik  either."  This  bandit-tribe  consists  of 
about  a  thousand,  who  subsist  chiefly  by  plunder. 
They  live  far  in  the  desert,  where  no  large  body  of 
men  can  follow  them,  for  want  of  water;  as  there 
are  no  wells  for  four  days  in  the  line  of  their  retreat. 

Thus  these  wandering  tribes  live  with  every  man's 
hand  against  his  neigbour,  plundering  wherever  they 
can,  and  expecting  no  better  treatment  from  a 
stronger  party  who  may  fall  in  with  themselves.  It 
is  merely  a  question  of  who  happens  to  be  the  most 
powerful.  They  are  perfect  adepts  in  thieving,  as 
well  as  in  plundering ;  and  in  this  art,  the  women 
are  not  inferior  to  the  men. 


Q 


226 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME 


CHAP.  X. 

Eastward  from  Wurno. — A  Biter  bit.  — Kano. — Vultures. — City  and 
Market.  —  Luck-Penny.  —  Interview  with  Governor.  —  Women 
painting  themselves. — Politeness. — Whining  of  a  Bride.  —  Jug- 
glers.—  Cotton  and  Indigo.  —  Eastward. — A  Eelatta  Girl. — White 
and  black  Skins.  —  Death  of  Dr.  Oudney.  —  Katagoom.  —  The 
Governor.  —  Bifle-shooting.  —  Lucky  Omen.  —  A  large  Eat.  — 
Medicinal  Charms.  — Bedee.  — Death  of  Richardson. — Kooka  Tree. 
—  Goorjee  Tree.  —  Old  ^Birni.  —  Sultan  in  his  Cage.  —  Singular 
Fashions. — Angornu.  —  "No  Breeches."  —  The  Royal  Guards. 

Pursuing  our  journey  eastward  from  Wurno  (from 
which  we  deviated  in  order  to  visit  Agades),  we 
traverse  a  varied  country  of  hill  and  dale,  rocky 
deserts,  fertile  valleys,  and  large  forests,  intersected 
with  rivers.  Here  are  many  valuable  trees  yielding 
food  and  medicine,  extensive  cotton  grounds,  and  rich 
fields  of  onions  and  corn ;  so  that  the  markets  of  the 
towns  are  well  stocked  with  provisions.  One  of  these 
was  observed  to  be  attended  by  nearly  ten  thousand 
persons,  and  was  largely  supplied  with  cotton,  millet, 
slaughtered  oxen,  fresh  butter,  and  onions;  ex- 
hibiting a  degree  of  civilisation  and  comfort  which 
one  would  scarcely  expect  to  find  in  a  third-rate 
African  town,  imbedded  in  a  deep  forest. 

Negroes  are  pretty  sharp  and  cunning ;  but  they 


A  BITER  BIT. 


227 


are  no  match  for  Arabs  in  the  accomplishment  of 
deception.  The  biter  is  often  bit:  of  which  the 
following  incident  is  an  example.  The  Governor  of 
Katsena  coveted  an  Arab  youth  in  the  service  of  Dr. 
Barth,  and  enticed  him  away  by  splendid  promises. 
This  lad  had  travelled  much,  having  accompanied 
Ibrahim  Pasha's  expedition  to  Syria,  and  another 
expedition  to  Kurdofan ;  and  had  thus  learned  many 
things  useful  to  a  traveller.  \ So  that  the  doctor,  who 
had  hired  him  for  the  whole  journey  to  Timbuctoo 
and  back,  was  a  little  disconcerted  by  the  loss  of  his 
services.  The  governor  did  not  reflect  that  a  man 
who  tricks  one  master  is  quite  ready  to  trick  another, 
when  occasion  offers.  He  mounted  the  young  Arab 
on  a  good  horse,  and  dressed  him  in  a  fine  bernoose, 
that  he  might  wait  upon  him  when  he  was  accom- 
panying the  doctor  out  of  town  in  a  gay  manner. 
At  evening  the  youngster  took  an  opportunity  of 
slipping  away,  with  horse,  dress,  and  accoutrements ; 
and  set  off  for  his  own  country  with  the  spoils; 
leaving  the  emir  to  digest  the  loss  and  affront  as  he 
best  could.  It  doubtless  proved  a  standing  joke 
against  him ;  as  the  Africans  do  not  easily  forget  a 
ludicrous  blunder  perpetrated  by  another ;  especially 
when  connected  with  the  idea  of  being  "  served 
right." 

The  country  now  changes  and  becomes  clear  of 
wood,  except  here  and  there  a  few  large  shady  trees, 
resorted  to  by  women  of  the  country  selling  re- 
freshments. The  villages  are  numerous,  and  the 
road  is  thronged  with  people  of  all  conditions.   This  is 

Q  2 


228 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


a  sign  of  our  approaching  Kano,  the  great  emporium 
of  Howssa.  "  But  I  had  no  sooner  passed  the  gates, 
than  I  felt  grievously  disappointed.  For,  from  the 
flourishing  description  of  it  given  by  the  Arabs,  I 
expected  to  see  a  city  of  surprising  grandeur.  I 
found,  on  the  contrary,  the  houses  nearly  a  quarter  of 
a  mile  from  the  walls,  and  in  many  parts  scattered 
into  detached  groups,  between  large  stagnant  pools 
of  water.  I  might  have  spared  all  the  pains  I  had 
taken  with  my  toilet  (having  dressed  in  an  elegant 
naval  uniform,  with  all  its  equipments) ;  for  not  an 
individual  turned  his  head  round  to  gaze  at  me ;  but 
all  intent  on  their  own  business,  allowed  me  to  pass 
by  without  notice  or  remark." 

As  the  town  is  none  of  the  cleanest,  it  is  happily 
provided  by  nature  with  one  of  her  own  scaven- 
gers. This  circumstance  introduces  us  to  the  vul- 
ture, a  large,  ugly,  filthy  bird  which  frequents  most 
towns  in  tropical  climates,  especially  those  of  the 
east.  We  have  met  with  it  in  previous  parts  of  our 
journey:  but  now  it  becomes  very  common,  and  is 
often  found  in  large  numbers.  However  ungainly 
this  vulture  may  be  in  its  appearance  and  habits, 
it  is  a  great  blessing  to  the  natives,  who  respect  its 
useful  services,  and  are  careful  not  to  destroy  any  of 
the  species.  As  the  white  ant  clears  the  country  of 
rotting  timber ;  so  the  vulture  devours  every  kind  of 
animal  refuse  which  it  can  find  in  the  towns.  It 
sits  perched  on  walls  near  the  market  and  other 
frequented  places ;  and  no  sooner  does  its  keen  eye 
see  any  kind  of  garbage  fall  on  the  ground,  than  it 


KAN0  —  A  LARGE  MARKET. 


229 


instantly  pounces  upon  it,  and  claims  it  for  its  own. 
It  devours  all  dead  animals  that  may  lie  about  the 
fields  where  wild  beasts  do  not  venture  to  come, 
and  the  bodies  of  slaves,  which  are  never  buried.  In 
some  places,  as  in  Ashantee,  it  saves  the  country  from 
a  pestilence  by  ridding  it  of  the  corpses  of  the  victims 
of  a  bloody  superstition. 

Kano  contains  from  thirty  to  forty  thousand  in- 
habitants, more  than  half  of  whom  are  slaves ;  besides 
a  great  many  visitors  from  every  quarter  of  the 
compass.  It  is  about  fifteen  miles  in  circumference, 
and  is  surrounded  with  a  high  clay  wall  and  double 
ditch.  Its  fifteen  gates  are  of  wood,  covered  with 
sheet  iron,  and  furnished  with  guard-houses.  Only 
a  fourth  of  the  enclosed  ground  is  occupied  with 
houses ;  the  rest  consists  of  fields  and  gardens.  The 
governor's  residence  is  like  a  walled  village,  including 
a  large  space  with  a  mosque  and  several  towers. 
The  market  is  very  large  and  well  regulated,  having 
separate  quarters  and  booths  set  apart  for  the  sale  of 
different  articles ;  which  embrace  all  kinds  of  live 
stock,  vegetables,  and  other  provisions,  fruits,  and 
many  descriptions  of  merchandise.  Amongst  the  lat- 
ter are  mentioned  sword  blades,  knives,  and  scissors ; 
writing  paper,  armlets  and  bracelets  of  brass  and 
silver,  pewter  rings,  and  other  trinkets;  beads  of 
amber,  coral,  and  glass ;  silks ;  turban  shawls,  tobes, 
and  other  dresses ;  coarse  woollen  cloths  and  calicoes ; 
Moorish  and  other  gaudy  dresses ;  Egyptian  linen, 
checked  or  striped  with  gold ;  crude  antimony,  tin*, 
iron,  &c.  &c.  Captain  Clapperton  bought  here  an 
Q  3 


230 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME, 


English  green  cotton  umbrella,  for  three  Spanish 
dollars. 

A  custom  prevails  in  this  market  of  the  seller 
returning  to  the  buyer  a  discount  of  two  per  cent, 
on  the  purchase  money,  "  by  way  of  blessing :  "  that 
is,  in  plain  language  a  "  luck -penny."  The  sheik  of 
the  market  regulates  the  prices  of  all  the  wares,  for 
which  he  is  entitled  to  a  small  commission  on  every 
sale,  amounting  to  something  more  than  a  half  per 
cent.  Bands  of  musicians  are  stationed  at  some  of 
the  booths,  to  attract  customers. 

The  butchers  of  the  market  are  said  to  practise  all 
manner  of  tricks  with  their  meat ;  and  even  to  stick 
sheep's  wool  on  a  leg  of  goat's  flesh,  to  make  it  pass 
for  mutton.  Near  the  shambles  are  cook-shops  in 
the  open  air ;  consisting  of  a  fire,  before  which  a 
large  number  of  small  bits  of  fat  and  lean  meat  are 
roasting  on  wooden  skewers.  These  tit-bits  are 
scarcely  larger  than  a  penny-piece ;  and  when  cooked, 
are  placed  on  a  mat,  from  which  the  guests  are 
helped. 

The  slave-market  is  held  in  two  long  sheds,  one  for 
males,  the  other  for  females ;  where  they  are  seated 
in  rows,  and  gaudily  decked  out  for  sale.  They  are 
inspected  by  buyers  with  as  much  scrutiny  as  any 
cattle  in  England ;  the  tongue,  teeth,  eyes,  and  limbs 
being  carefully  examined.  When  purchased,  the 
trappings  with  which  they  were  adorned  are  sent 
back  to  ornament  others  :  and  if  any  defect  be  found 
in  them,  they  can  be  returned  within  three  days. 

"■At  seven  in  the  morning,  I  waited  on  the 


CONVERSATION  WITH  A  GOVERNOR.  231 

governor.  He  informed  me  that  the  sultan  had  sent 
a  messenger  express,  with  orders  to  have  me  con- 
ducted to  his  capital,  and  to  supply  me  with  every- 
thing necessary  for  my  journey.  He  now  begged 
me  to  state  what  I  stood  in  need  of.  I  assured  him 
that  the  King  of  England,  my  master,  had  liberally 
provided  for  all  my  wants ;  but  that  I  felt  profoundly 
grateful  for  the  kind  offers  of  the  sultan,  and  had 
only  to  crave  from  him  the  favour  of  being  attended 
by  one  of  his  people  as  a  guide.  He  instantly  called 
a  fair-complexioned  Felatta,  and  asked  me  if  I  liked 
him.     I  accepted  him  with  thanks,  and  took  leave. 

I  afterwards  went  by  invitation  to  visit  the  G  overnor 
of  Hadyja,  who  was  here  on  his  return  from  Sockatu, 
and  lived  in  the  house  of  the  wan-bey.  I  found  this 
Governor  of  Hadyja  a  black  man,  about  fifty  years  of 
age,  sitting  among  his  own  people  at  the  upper  end  of 
the  room,  which  is  usually  a  little  raised,  and  is 
reserved  in  this  country  for  the  master  of  the  house 
and  visitors  of  high  rank.  He  was  well  acquainted 
with  my  travelling  name ;  for  the  moment  I  entered, 
he  said,  laughing,  "  How  do  you  do,  Abdallah  ?  Will 
you  come  and  see  me  at  Hadyja  on  your  return  ?  " 

I  answered,  "  Grod  willing,"  with  due  Moslem 
solemnity. 

"  You  are  a  Christian,  Abdallah  ?  " 

«  Yes." 

"  And  what  are  you  come  to  see  ?  " 

"  The  country." 

"  What  do  you  think  of  it  ?  " 

"  It  is  a  fine  country,  but  very  sickly." 

Q  4 


232 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


At  this  he  smiled,  and  again  asked, 
S€  Would  you  Christians  allow  us  to  come  and  see 
your  country  ?  " 
"  Certainly." 

w  Would  you  force  us  to  become  Christians  ?  " 

"  By  no  means :  we  never  meddle  with  a  man's 
religion." 

"  What !    And  do  you  ever  pray  ?" 

u  Sometimes :  our  religion  commands  us  to  pray 
always :  but  we  pray  in  secret,  and  not  in  public, 
except  on  Sundays." 

One  of  his  people  abruptly  asked  what  a  Christian 
was  ? 

"Why  a  Kafir"  (infidel),  rejoined  the  governor. 
66  Where  is  your  Jew  servant?  You  ought  to  let 
me  see  him." 

"  Excuse  me ;  he  is  averse  to  it ;  and  I  never  allow 
my  servants  to  be  molested  for  religious  opinions." 

"  Well,  Abdallah,  thou  art  a  man  of  understand- 
ing, and  must  come  and  see  me  at  Hadyja  " 

I  then  retired,  and  the  Arabs  afterwards  told  me 
that  he  was  a  perfect  savage,  and  sometimes  put  a 
merchant  to  death  for  the  sake  of  his  goods.  But 
this  account,  if  true,  is  less  to  be  wondered  at,  from 
the  notorious  villany  of  some  of  them. 

The  women  of  this  country  are  not  satisfied  with 
their  natural  beauty,  but  they  have  recourse  to  art 
to  heighten  their  charms.  For  this  purpose  they  dye 
their  hair  blue,  as  well  as  their  hands,  feet,  legs,  and 
eyebrows.  The  paint  is  made  by  decomposing  an 
old  indigo-dyed  garment.    They  then  mix  a  little  of 


KANO  —  WHINING  OF  A  BRIDE, 


233 


it  with  water  in  a  shell  and  operate  on  themselves, 
holding  a  feather  in  one  hand,  and  a  looking-glass 
in  the  other.  Both  men  and  women  colour  their  lips 
and  teeth  with  the  flowers  of  the  tobacco  plant  and 
another  tree.  The  juice  of  these  flowers  gives  them 
a  blood-red  appearance,  which  is  highly  esteemed. 

You  have  admired  the  politeness  of  a  Frenchman  : 
but  the  Negroes  of  Kano  are  not  far  behind  him  in 
urbanity  of  manners.  See,  one  of  them  is  addressing 
a  friend  whom  he  has  met !  He  lays  one  hand  on  his 
breast,  and  making  a  low  bow  enquires,  66  How  do 
you  do  ?  I  hope  you  are  well.  How  have  you 
passed  the  heat  of  the  day  ?  " 

A  bride  pretends  to  great  bashfulness ;  which  is  a 
mere  sham.  When  she  is  being  conducted  to  the 
house  of  her  husband,  attended  by  friends  and  slaves 
carrying  her  dower,  she  whines  all  the  way,  saying, 
"  Oh,  my  head !  my  head !  Oh !  dear  me !  my 
head  !  "  Yet  the  husband  has  generally  known  his 
wife  some  time  before  this  formal  marriage  takes 
place.  Besides,  both  parties  have  their  hands  and 
feet  dyed,  during  three  days  before  the  marriage  ce- 
remony is  performed ;  when  the  bride  attends  the 
bridegroom  to  apply  his  henna  plaisters  with  her  own 
hand.  Yet  she  whimpers  when  she  is  publicly 
going  to  him  !  So  truly  does  it  happen  everywhere  ; 
"  The  more  politeness  the  less  simplicity." 

On  the  eastern  side  of  a  mount  in  this  town  there 
is  a  hole  in  the  rock,  said  to  be  the  foot-print  of  the 
camel  on  which  Mahomet  rode  to  heaven.  On 
asking  the  Negro  who  pointed  out  this  sacred  spot, 


234 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


"if  the  Prophet's  camel  had  only  one  leg,"  he 
replied  "  Oh  !  God  did  it."  This  ends  all  controversy 
on  such  points  of  faith. 

Jugglery  appears  to  be  common  here,  as  well  as 
in  India,  and  other  countries  of  the  east.  The 
performers,  who  are  probably  Arabs  from  Barbary, 
carry  about  snakes  in  a  bag,  and  make  them  dance 
to  the  sound  of  a  little  drum ;  and  play  other  tricks 


with  them.  These  snakes  are  very  venemous,  and 
often  exceed  six  feet  in  length.  But  the  poisonous 
fangs  are  extracted ;  and  the  juggler  is  also  furnished 
with  a  roll  of  cloth  wound  round  his  right  arm,  to 
protect  him  from  harm,  in  case  the  animal  should 
become  too  exasperated  and  try  to  bite. 

Kano  is  celebrated  for  its  dyed  cloth.  The  whole 
of  the  processes  are  performed  here.  The  cotton  is 
grown,  spun,  wove,  and  dyed  in  indigo.  This  shows 
how  abundantly  Central  Africa  could  furnish  Eng- 
land with  some  of  the  articles  that  it  much  needs. 


ARAB  JUGGLER. 


KAN0 —  COTTON  AND  INDIGO. 


235 


If  a  free  commercial  intercourse  could  be  opened  up 
with  these  parts  of  the  country,  cotton,  indigo  and 
rice  might  be  obtained  in  any  quantity  that  could 
be  desired.  They  are  raised  by  the  Negroes  with 
little  trouble,  for  their  own  use  and  native  trade; 
and  therefore  they  could  be  grown  for  foreign 
markets.    Some  native  shirts  are  really  handsome. 


THE  "GUINEA-FOWL"  SHIRT. 

The  foot-soldiers  of  this  country  are  generally 
armed  with  bows  and  arrows;  the  cavalry  with 
swords,  shields  and  spears.  Captain  Clapperton 
mentions  it  as  a  singular  fact  that  these  men  were 
equipped  with  the   identical  swords  which  once 


236 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


belonged  to  the  knights  of  Malta.  They  had  been 
sent  from  Malta  to  Tripoli,  and  thence  brought 
across  the  desert  to  be  sold  to  the  Negroes  of  Central 
Africa.    Such  are  the  changes  of  human  things. 

Going  eastward  toward  Kooka  we  may  either  pass 
through  Gummel  and  other  considerable  towns,  along 
Dr.  Barth's  route ;  or  we  may  go  more  to  the  south, 
by  Murmur  and  Katagoom  with  Captain  Clapperton. 
Let  us  adopt  the  latter ;  as  it  leads  us  to  the  last 
earthly  resting-place  of  the  gallant  traveller's  com- 
panion, Dr.  Oudney.  A  little  on  this  side  of  Kano, 
whilst  the  captain  was  resting  under  the  shade  of  a 
tree,  being  oppressed  with  ague,  he  was  accosted 
"with  infinite  archness  and  grace"  by  a  pretty 
Felatta  girl,  going  to  market  with  milk  and  butter, 
neat  and  spruce  in  her  attire  as  a  Cheshire  dairy- 
maid. "  She  said  I  was  of  her  own  nation  :  and  after 
much  amusing  small  talk,  I  pressed  her,  in  jest,  to 
accompany  me  on  my  journey;  while  she  parried 
my  solicitations  with  roguish  glee,  by  referring  me 
to  her  father  and  mother.  I  don't  know  how  it 
happened,  but  her  presence  seemed  to  dispel  the 
effects  of  the  ague."  The  traveller  adds  that  the 
making  of  such  butter  as  ours  is  confined  in  Africa 
to  the  Felattas ;  and  that  it  is  both  clean  and  ex- 
cellent. 

The  people  of  this  country  are  very  eager  for 
charms,  and  pester  every  learned  stranger  to  write 
for  them  some  prayer  which  will  preserve  them  from 
evil.  Captain  Clapperton  says,  that  in  a  town  on 
the  other  side  of  Kano,  he  was  much  troubled  with 


DISLIKE  OF  A  WHITE  SKIN. 


237 


importunities  for  such  safies.  His  washerwoman 
positively  insisted  upon  being  paid  with  a  charm, 
which  would  have  the  effect  of  causing  people  to 
buy  earthenware  from  her ;  and  no  reasonings  would 
persuade  her  to  the  contrary,  or  make  her  believe 
that  it  was  beyond  human  power  to  grant  such  a 
spell.  When  people  are  so  superstitious,  no  wonder 
that  they  are  easily  duped. 

Three  of  the  governor's  wives  visited  the  traveller, 
and  after  examining  his  skin  with  much  attention, 
observed,  with  real  looks  of  compassion,  that  it  was 
a  thousand  pities  he  was  not  black,  for  then  he  would 
have  been  good-looking !  He  asked  one  of  them,  a 
buxom  lass  of  fifteen,  if  she  would  have  him  for  a 
husband,  provided  he  could  obtain  the  governor's 
consent.  She  immediately  began  to  whimper,  and 
on  being  urged  to  assign  the  reason,  said,  that  she 
did  not  know  what  she  could  do  with  his  white  legs. 
The  ladies  were  attended  by  an  old  woman  and  two 
young  slaves,  and  while  with  him  were  very  merry. 

These  women  only  spoke  the  sentiment  which  is 
entertained  by  most  of  the  Negroes,  and  especially 
the  Negresses  of  interior  Africa  north  of  the  Equa- 
tor. They  really  do  think  a  white  skin  to  be  a 
defect.  It  does  not  suit  their  taste ;  it  has  a  ca- 
daverous appearance;  they  prefer  the  dark  or 
copper-coloured.  And  perhaps  they  are  not  far 
wrong  in  having  this  preference,  if  we  consider  how 
soon  a  European  skin  loses  all  its  beauty  in  trox  'cal 
Africa,  and  becomes  of  a  dead  sallow  hue,  without 
life  or  expression ;  while  the  dark  skin  shines  and 


238 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


glistens  with  the  fat  underneath.  The  flat  nose  is 
another  thing. 

We  now  arrive  at  Murmur,  a  small  town,  about  a 
day's  journey  from  Katagoom.  Dr,  Oudney,  who  was 
united  in  the  expedition  with  Major  Denham  and 
Captain  Clapperton,  was  in  company  with  the  latter 
at  the  time  of  his  falling  a  victim  to  the  African 
climate.  He  had  been  unwell  and  was  still  very 
weak,  when  he  was  attacked  with  ague  in  the  Bedee 
country.  He  then  felt  that  it  was  all  over  with  him ; 
"  I  once  hoped  to  conduct  the  mission  to  a  successful 
termination,  but  that  hope  has  vanished :"  and  he  gave 
directions  about  his  papers  after  his  decease.  He 
rallied,  however,  so  as  to  be  able  to  see  the  Governor 
of  Katagoom,  and  to  prescribe  for  the  sick  of  that 
town,  who  visited  him  in  great  numbers.  Many  men 
and  women  also  came  for  remedies  against  impotency 
and  apprehended  calamities;  supposing  that  the 
medicines  of  the  white  doctor  could  ward  off  every 
imaginable  ill  of  life.  "  The  women  were  particu- 
larly fanciful  in  these  matters ;  and  were  frequently 
importunate  to  receive  medicines  that  would  preserve 
the  affections  of  their  gallants,  ensure  them  husbands, 
or  what  was  highly  criminal,  effect  the  death  of  some 
favoured  rival." 

After  this,  Dr.  Oudney  was  seized  with  a  diarrhoea, 
which  greatly  weakened  him.  His  cough  also  con- 
tinued (he  was  in  a  consumption)  and  he  suffered 
from  inflammation,  for  which  he  was  cupped  by  a 
native  in  the  manner  we  have  before  described. 
Unable  to  ride  on  horseback,  he  was  carried  on  a 


MURMUR  —  DEATH  OF  DR.  OUDNEY.  239 


litter  placed  on  a  camel's  back :  till  they  reached 
Murmur ,  where  they  were  obliged  to  stop.  Next 
morning  he  drank  a  cup  of  coffee  and  desired  to 
proceed;  "but  before  he  could  be  lifted  on  the 
camel,  I  observed  the  ghastliness  of  death  on  his 
countenance,  and  had  him  immediately  replaced  in 
the  tent.  I  sat  down  by  his  side,  and  with  unspeakable 
grief  witnessed  his  last  breath,  which  was  without  a 
struggle  or  a  groan."  He  was  buried  under  an  old 
mimosa  tree,  a  little  outside  of  the  town. 

Dr.  Oudney  died  at  the  age  of  thirty-two,  "a  man  of 
unassuming  deportment,  pleasing  manners,  steadfast 
perseverance,  and  undaunted  enterprise :  whilst  his 
mind  was  fraught  at  once  with  knowledge,  virtue, 
and  religion."  His  surviving  companion  felt  some- 
thing like  that  which  Mungo  Park  experienced  when 
he  lost  Mr.  Anderson  at  Sansanding :  "  I  shall  only 
observe,  that  no  event  which  took  place  during  the 
journey,  ever  threw  the  smallest  gloom  over  my 
mind,  till  I  laid  Mr.  Anderson  in  the  grave.  I  then 
felt  myself,  as  if  left  a  second  time  lonely  and 
friendless  amidst  the  wilds  of  Africa."  Honour  to 
the  memory  of  these  brave  men !  We  must  not 
let  them  pass  away  without  a  notice. 

Let  us  now  enter  Katagoom,  which  lies  in 
12°17'11"  north  latitude  and  11°  east  longitude.  The 
town  is  of  a  square  shape,  with  a  gate  in  each  side, 
defended  by  platforms.  It  has  a  double  wall,  each 
twenty  feet  high ;  and  three  ditches,  each  fifteen  feet 
deep  and  twenty  feet  wide.  The  best  houses  are  of 
the  Turkish  form  already  described,  some  of  them 


240 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


having  two  stories.  The  inhabitants  are  estimated 
at  from  seven  to  eight  thousand.  The  governor's 
residence  occupies  a  large  enclosure  in  the  centre  of 
the  city.  Let  us  suppose  ourselves  to  have  been  of 
Clapperton  and  Oudney's  party  when  they  were  in- 
troduced to  him ;  and  the  following  would  be  our 
description  of  the  interview. 

He  was  sitting  without  any  ceremony  or  armed 
men,  on  a  low  bank  of  earth  covered  with  a  rude 
canopy.  Only  three  old  men  were  in  his  company. 
He  shook  hands  and  desired  us  to  sit  by  his  side. 
The  modesty  of  etiquette  induced  us  not  to  accept 
this  high  honour ;  but  to  sit  on  the  floor  before  him, 
along  with  his  counsellors.  He  offered  us  some 
Groora  nuts,  and  we  presented  the  articles  which  we 
had  prepared  for  his  Highness.  In  this  case  our 
present  consisted  of  a  tea-tray,  ten  yards  of  red  silk, 
an  Indian  palempore  or  bed  coverlet,  a  piece  of  white 
linen  cloth  with  gold  stripes,  a  pound  of  cinnamon, 
and  the  same  quantity  of  cloves.  He  was  very  much 
pleased  with  the  articles,  especially  with  the  tray, 
when  its  use  was  explained  to  him.  He  asked  if  we 
wanted  slaves  or  anything  else;  for  all  that  he 
had  or  could  procure  was  at  our  disposal.  When 
answered  in  the  negative,  he  again  inquired,  "  What, 
then,  do  you  want  ?  "  When  informed  that  we  only 
desired  his  friendship,  with  permission  to  collect  the 
flowers  and  plants  of  his  country,  and  to  see  its  rivers, 
he  exclaimed:  "Wonderful!  You  do  not  want 
slaves ;  you  do  not  want  horses ;  you  do  not  want 
money ;  but  wish  only  to  see  the  world  !    You  must 


GOVERNOR  OF  KATAGOOM. 


241 


go  to  the  Sultan  Bello,  who  is  a  learned  and  pious 
man,  and  will  be  glad  to  see  men  who  have  seen  so 
much.  You  shall  have  all,  and  see  all  that  is  in 
my  province ;  and  I  am  sure  my  master  will  grant 
everything  you  wish."  He  then  came  down  from 
his  seat,  sat  by  our  side,  and  shook  hands  with 
us :  —  which  is  here  a  sign  of  great  respect  from  one 
grandee  to  another. 

After  this,  the  governor  paid  the  travellers  several 
friendly  visits,  and  was  visited  by  them  in  return. 
He  desired  to  see  and  know  the  use  of  their  astro- 
nomical and  other  instruments,  and  had  them  ex- 
plained to  his  cadi  or  judge,  and  to  the  chief  people. 
He  showed  them  his  palace,  which  was  a  very 
respectable  building;  and  introduced  them  to  his 
favourite  wife,  a  jolly  and  good-looking  Negress.  He 
begged  a  small  supply  of  English  powder,  which  he 
saw  in  a  box ;  and  then  attended  the  captain  to  see 
him  fire  at  a  target.  "  I  fired  twice,  and  happened 
to  hit  the  mark  both  times,  at  a  distance  of  sixty  or 
seventy  yards;  when  he  called  out,  'The  Lord 
preserve  me  from  devils.'  Yet  in  token  of  his 
approbation,  he  threw  over  my  shoulders  with  his 
own  hands  a  very  handsome  tobe.  The  cadi  had 
made  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  was  an  intelligent 
man,  and  acquainted  with  Arabic  literature." 

The  Africans  believe  in  omens,  as  well  as  other 
people.  A  servant,  in  rising  to  receive  the  Groora 
nuts  presented  by  the  governor's  orders,  overturned 
a  pot  of  honey  which  was  also  a  gift,  without 
breaking  it;  though  the  honey  was  spilled.  This 

R 


242 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


was  considered  a  most  propitious  circumstance  by 
his  Excellency,  who  ordered  some  poor  people  to  be 
called  in  to  lick  up  the  honey.  No  sooner  said  than 
done.  A  number  ran  in,  fell  down  on  their  knees, 
and  amidst  a  good  deal  of  wrangling  soon  made  an 
end  of  the  sweet. 

Everything  is  large  in  Africa.  A  rat,  or  bandicoot, 
was  caught  in  Katagoom,  measuring  two  feet  seven 
inches  from  the  nose  to  the  top  of  the  tail.  It  was 
of  a  light  grey  colour,  with  black  tail  and  round 
head,  covered  over  with  long  hairs.  Vermin  of  such 
a  size  must  be  very  destructive;  and  we  should 
rather  they  were  caught  by  natives  than  by  our- 
selves. 

Before  reaching  Bornu,  we  must  pass  through  the 
Bedee  country ;  which  lies  between  the  two  kingdoms 
of  Howssa  and  Bornu.  The  Bedees  speak  the 
Bornuese  dialect  and  acknowledge  a  certain  sort  of 
dependence  on  the  Sultan ;  but  they  are  really  under 
their  own  government,  if  such  it  may  be  called. 
They  have  never  received  the  tenets  of  Mahomet- 
anism;  so  that  they  are  called  infidels  by  their 
neighbours,  and  are  treated  as  outlaws  whom  any 
one  may  kill  or  enslave.  Their  country  is  full  of 
dense  forests  and  morasses,  which  make  it  difficult 
for  an  enemy  to  penetrate;  though  it  is  being 
encroached  upon  from  either  side.  It  forms  a  kind 
of  neutral  territory,  separating  two  powerful  king- 
doms from  each  other,  and  doubtless  preventing 
many  wars  between  people  who  cannot  be  amicable. 
The  Bedees  are  much  more  rude  and  simple  than 


BEDEE. 


243 


their  neighbours,  who  have  received  many  arts  of 
civilisation  from  the  Moors.  They  are  said  to  be 
very  fond  of  dog-flesh,  and  they  fatten  these  animals 
for  the  butcher. 

The  Mahometans  accuse  the  Bedees  of  having  no 
religion,  which  appears  to  be  true  in  so  far  as  out- 
ward forms  are  concerned.  Yet  they  seem  to  live 
under  the  impression,  or  at  least  the  sense,  of  a 
supreme  power;  for  when  they  kill  any  beast  for 
food,  they  hold  it  up  to  heaven,  in  acknowledgment 
of  the  bounty  of  an  "  unknown  Grod."  It  is  neces- 
sary to  be  very  cautious  in  receiving  what  a  Moslem 
says  about  other  people's  religion.  They  have  no 
idea  of  any  other  godliness  than  that  which  consists 
in  formal  prostrations,  fastings,  and  pilgrimages. 
They  smile  at  the  idea  of  a  Christian  praying  in 
private,  which  they  regard  as  a  mere  subterfuge  or 
equivocation ;  and  they  call  us  Kafirs  or  infidels,  as 
well  as  the  Pagan  Negroes.  When  they  know  of  a 
Christian  who  carries  about  his  "  book  "  and  reads 
it,  and  when  they  have  watched  him  (which  they 
do)  and  seen  that  he  really  does  perform  private 
devotions,  they  entertain  a  different  opinion  of  him. 
We  know  this  by  experience.  When  we  have  shown 
them  our  "  book  "  in  the  shape  of  an  Arabic  Bible, 
they  have  looked  at  it  with  veneration,  and  have  heard 
us  read  out  of  it  and  explain  some  passages,  often 
exclaiming  "  Wonderful !  "  Shereefs  and  learned 
Moslems  (not  Moors)  have  conversed  with  us  about 
religion,  and  have  gladly  received  a  Psalter,  or  other 
portion  of  the  Scriptures  in  Arabic.  But  when  a 
R  2 


244 


THE  AFKICANS  AT  HOME. 


man  makes  no  profession  of  religion,  either  because 
he  has  none,  or  because  he  conceals  it  from  motives 
of  policy,  Africans  of  all  kinds  regard  him  as  an 
infidel.  Boldness  and  consistency  in  one's  faith  is 
honoured  both  by  Pagans  and  Moslems. 

It  was  at  a  dilapidated  town,  called  Ngurutuwa,  a 
little  north  of  the  route  which  we  are  pursuing 
towards  the  capital  of  Bornu,  that  Mr.  Eichardson 
died.  He  was  associated  with  Dr.  Barth  and  Mr. 
Overweg  in  their  researches  through  these  parts  of 
Africa,  and  was  actively  pursuing  the  objects  of  the 
expedition  of  which  he  had  the  principal  charge, 
when  he  sank  under  the  effects  of  the  climate.  He 
was  an  energetic  man,  and  had  made  the  friendship 
of  some  of  the  native  princes.  He  separated  from 
his  companion  at  Katsena,  that  they  might  pursue 
different  routes  to  Kooka  (or  Kukuwa) ;  and,  though 
suffering  from  bodily  indisposition,  was  pressing 
forwards  to  the  capital,  where  he  hoped  to  rest  and 
recruit  a  little.  He  reached  this  obscure  place  one 
evening,  quite  exhausted,  and  breathed  his  last,  all 
alone,  early  next  morning.  His  grave  was  made  by 
his  servants  under  a  wide -spreading  tree  in  the 
vicinity,  where  it  was  visited  by  his  companion  a  few 
days  afterwards. 

Your  hardihood  would  now  be  tried  in  passing 
through  dismal  swamps,  beside  large  lakes,  and 
through  arid  wastes,  exposed  to  many  vicissitudes  of 
the  atmosphere,  and  to  dangers  from  roving  bandits. 
Yet  here  is  a  beautiful  tree,  called  the  kooka.  It  is 
very  tall  and  erect,  and  is  sometimes  twenty-five 


KOOKA  AND  GOORJEE  TREES. 


215 


feet  in  circumference.  The  trunk  and  branches 
taper  off  to  a  point ;  the  wood  is  porous  and  spongy ; 
the  bark  is  copper-coloured,  soft,  and  covered  with 
a  gummy  exudation.  Its  leaves  are  small,  growing 
in  clusters  from  twigs ;  its  flowers  are  large  and  white, 
something  like  the  garden  lily.  The  fruit  is  larger 
than  a  cocoa-nut,  having  a  hard  shell,  containing 
some  powdery  matter  and  seeds ;  its  dark  green 
changing  to  brown  as  it  ripens.  "  The  tree,  whether 
bare  of  its  leaves,  in  flower,  or  in  full  bearing,  has  a 
singularly  grotesque  naked  appearance ;  and  with  its 
fruit  dangling  from  the  boughs  like  eastern  purses, 
might,  in  the  imagination  of  some  eastern  story- 
teller, well  embellish  an  enchanted  garden  of  the 
Grenius  of  the  Lamp."  The  dried  leaves,  being 
glutinous,  are  used  by  the  natives  in  making  sauces, 
and  are  eaten  boiled  with  dried  meat.  They  are  also 
used  to  fatten  cattle.  The  mealy  part  of  the  fruit  is 
pleasant,  and  put  in  water  makes  a  cooling  acid 
beverage. 

Another  tree  peculiar  to  this  region  is  the  goorjee, 
which  resembles  a  stunted  oak.  It  has  a  beautiful 
dark  red  flower,  not  unlike  a  tulip,  which  is  used 
to  give  a  red  tinge  to  the  mouth  and  teeth,  and  to 
season  some  kinds  of  food. 

The  Sultan  of  Bornu  was  described  by  Major 
Denham  as  a  mere  puppet,  possessed  of  no  authority, 
a  kind  of  state  prisoner.  He  resides  at  Birni,  which 
we  pass  through  on  our  way  to  the  real  capital 
where  the  sheik  lives.  Birni  is  a  walled  town, 
containing  some  ten  thousand  inhabitants,  but  with- 

R  3 


246 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


out  any  splendour.  An  interview  with  the  sovereign 
is  thus  described  by  Major  Denham. 

We  were  first  conducted  to  the  gate  of  the  Sultan's 
mud  edifice,  where  a  few  of  the  court  were  assembled 
to  receive  us ;  and  one,  a  sort  of  chamberlain,  habited 
in  eight  or  ten  tobes  or  shirts  of  different  colours, 
the  outside  one  of  fine  white  tufted  silk  of  the  manu- 
facture of  Soodan.  In  his  hand  he  carried  an 
immense  staff,  like  a  drum -major's  baton,  and  on 
his  head  he  bore  a  turban  exceeding  in  size  anything 
of  the  kind  we  had  before  seen.  This  was,  however, 
but  a  trifling  one  to  those  we  were  destined  to  behold 
at  the  audience  on  the  following  morning.  The 
Sultan  shortly  after  sent  word  that  by  sunrise  the 
next  morning  he  would  receive  us.  In  the  evening, 
a  most  plentiful,  if  not  delicate,  repast  was  brought 
to  us,  consisting  of  seventy  dishes,  each  of  which 
would  have  dined  half  a  dozen  persons  with  moderate 
appetites.  The  Sultan  himself  sent  ten,  his  wives 
thirty,  and  his  mother  thirty ;  and  for  fear  the 
English  should  not  eat  like  the  Bornuese,  a  slave  or 
two  was  loaded  with  live  fowls  for  our  dinner.  The 
meats  consisted  of  mutton  and  poultry,  and  were 
baked,  boiled,  and  stewed. 

Soon  after  daylight  we  were  summoned  to  attend 
the  Sultan  of  Bornu.  He  received  us  in  an  open 
space  in  front  of  the  royal  residence.  We  were  kept 
at  a  considerable  distance  while  his  people  approached 
to  within  about  a  hundred  yards,  and  passed  by  him 
on  horseback ;  then,  dismounting  and  prostrating 
themselves  before  him,  they  took  their  places  on  the 


SULTAN  OF  BIRNI. 


247 


ground  in  front,  but  with  their  backs  to  the  royal 
person,  which  is  the  custom  of  the  country.  He  was 
seated  in  a  sort  of  cage  of  cane  or  wood,  near  the 
door  of  his  garden,  on  a  seat  which  at  the  distance 
appeared  to  be  covered  with  silk  or  satin ;  and 
looked  through  the  railing  upon  the  assembly  before 
him,  who  formed  a  sort  of  semicircle  extending  from 
his  seat  to  nearly  where  we  were  waiting.  Nothing 
could  be  more  absurd  and  grotesque  than  some,  nay 
all,  of  the  figures  who  formed  this  court. 

Large  bodies  and  large  heads  are  indispensable 
for  persons  who  serve  the  court  of  Bornu ;  and  those 
who  unfortunately  possess  not  the  former  by  nature, 
or  on  whom  lustiness  will  not  be  forced  by  cramming, 
make  up  the  deficiency  of  real  protuberance  by  an 
immense  wadding,  which,  as  they  sit  on  the  horse, 
gives  the  belly  the  curious  appearance  of  hanging 
over  the  pummel  of  the  saddle.  The  eight,  ten,  or 
twelve  shirts  of  different  colours,  that  they  wear  one 
over  the  other,  help  a  little  to  increase  this  greatness 
of  person.  The  head  is  enveloped  in  folds  of  muslin 
or  linen  of  various  colours,  though  mostly  white,  so 
as  to  deform  it  as  much  as  possible ;  and  those 
turbans  which  seemed  to  have  been  most  studiously 
arranged,  had  the  effect  of  making  the  head  appear 
completely  on  one  side.  Besides  this,  their  persons 
are  hung  all  over  with  charms,  enclosed  in  little  red 
leather  parcels  strung  together ;  the  horse,  also, 
has  amulets  fastened  round  his  neck,  on  parts  of  his 
head,  and  about  the  saddle.  A  little  to  our  left,  and 
nearly  in  front  of  the  Sultan,  was  an  extempore  de- 

B  4 


248 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


claimer,  shouting  forth  the  praises  of  his  master,  and 
his  illustrious  pedigree.  Near  him,  was  one  who  bore 
a  long  wooden  frumfrum,  on  which  he  ever  and 
anon  blew  a  blast,  loud  and  unmusical. 

Such,  it  appears,  was  the  state  ceremony  adopted 
by  the  former  negro  kings,  and  which  the  vizier 
wishes  the  Sultan  to  continue,  in  order  to  amuse  him 
and  his  courtiers,  and  to  please  the  people,  that  the 
power  may  continue  in  his  own  hand.  An  ugly 
black  eunuch  called  for  the  presents,  which  were 
carried  unopened  to  the  royal  presence.  But  the 
visitors  could  only  get  a  faint  glimpse  of  the  Sultan, 
through  the  lattice-work  of  his  pavilion  or  cage; 
which  sufficed,  however,  to  show  that  his  turban  was 
larger  than  that  of  any  of  his  subjects,  and  that 
his  face  from  the  nose  downward  was  completely 
covered. 

Angornu,  the  ancient  royal  residence,  is  a  much 
larger  place  than  Birni,  and  has  a  very  large 
market,  sometimes  attended  by  a  hundred  thousand 
persons.  Linen  is  described  as  being  here  so  cheap 
that  most  of  the  men  have  a  shirt  and  pair  of  trow- 
sers.  Some  beggars  endeavoured  to  attract  the  pity 
of  charitable  persons,  by  holding  the  remnants  of 
trowsers  in  one  hand,  and  lifting  up  their  shirt  with 
the  other,  crying  out  in  a  doleful  voice,  "  But 
breeches,  there  are  none !  But  breeches,  there  are 
none  !  "  The  only  persons  armed  near  the  Sultan's 
person,  were  some  hundreds  of  Negroes  in  blue 
tobes,  who  were  outside  the  court  circle.  Each  of 
these  carried  an  immense  club  with  a  large  nob,  a 


ANGOItNU. 


249 


bow  and  arrows  slung  over  his  back,  and  a  short 
dagger.  When  a  chief  is  riding,  a  footman  runs 
behind,  carrying  four  spears.  There  are  many 
strangers  in  Angornu,  principally  traders  from  dif- 
ferent countries. 


250 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


CHAP.  XI. 

Bornu. — Dashing  Entrance  into  Kooka. — Interviews  with  the  Sheik. 
— Mode  of  Life. — Looseness  of  Manners. — Two  guilty  Girls. — 
Market. — Shifts  for  Money. — A  Lion  for  sale. — Houses. — Penal 
Decisions. — Kockets  and  Musical  Box. — Quack  Doctors. — Strange 
Presents. — Poor  Barca  Grana. — Mandara. — Its  Troops. — Sultan  in 
State.  — Men  and  Women.  — Beauties.  — Fight  with  a  Panther.  — 
Battle  with  the  Felattas. — Disastrous  Flight. — The  Shuwas. — The 
Marghi. — New  Mode  of  Duelling. — Substitutes  for  Dress. — 
Kaiiuri  people.  —  Pullo  Country.  —  Meeting  of  the  Kivers.  — 
Adamawa. — Yola  and  its  People. 

When  a  large  caravan  enters  Kooka  (or  Kukuwa)  it 
is  received  with  much  state  and  ceremony.  The 
Bornuese  love  on  these  occasions  to  make  a  display 
of  military  power,  not  only  for  vanity's  sake,  but  also 
to  intimidate  the  Arabs,  who  form  the  usual  escort 
of  the  caravan.  The  latter  have  a  great  contempt 
for  the  prowess  of  Negroes,  which  often  consists  more 
in  vaunting  than  in  actual  valour.  Here,  then,  are 
several  thousand  Bornuese  horsemen  drawn  up  in 
regular  order,  waiting  for  the  approach  of  their 
friendly  visitors.  As  soon  as  they  see  them,  a  loud 
shout  is  given,  followed  by  a  blast  from  their  rude 
horns ;  and  they  dash  forward,  as  if  making  a  charge 
in  battle,  till  they  come  within  a  few  feet  of  the 


ENTERING  KOOKA. 


251 


strangers.  Then  wheeling  round,  with  great  expert- 
ness,  they  form  one  large  cavalcade,  shaking  their 
spears  over  their  heads,  and  crying  out  "  Blessing ! 
blessing!  sons  of  your  country!  welcome,  sons  of 
your  country ! " 

Conspicuous  amongst  these  horsemen  are  the 
sheik's  body-guard,  clothed  in  coats  of  mail  com- 
posed of  iron  chain,  and  wearing  a  similar  cap  as  a 
kind  of  helmet.  Their  horses'  heads  also  are  pro- 
tected against  the  thrust  of  a  spear  by  plates  of 
metal,  which  cover  all  except  the  eyes.  The  chiefs 
of  the  escort  alone  enter  the  gates,  and  pass  along  a 
broad  street,  through  a  line  of  spearmen,  to  the 
sheik's  residence.  His  general  now  directs  the 
strangers  to  be  admitted,  and  they  pass,  one  by  one, 
up  a  staircase,  where  they  are  brought  to  a  stand  by 
the  crossed  spears  of  Negro  soldiers.  Permission  of 
entrance  is  given,  and  the  sheik  is  found  sitting  on 
a  carpet,  in  a  dark  room,  dressed  in  a  blue  tobe  and 
a  turban.  Two  Negroes  are  on  each  side  of  him 
armed  with  pistols,  and  a  brace  of  these  weapons  lie 
on  the  carpet  by  his  side.  Fire-arms  are  also 
suspended  on  the  walls  of  the  chamber. 

When  the  Europeans  had  been  thus  introduced  to 
his  highness,  he  inquired  the  object  of  their  coming. 
On  receiving  their  reply,  he  bade  them  welcome. 
He  said  that  he  would  further  their  object,  that  he 
had  ordered  huts  to  be  built  for  their  accommodation, 
and  that  when  they  had  recovered  from  the  fatigue 
of  their  journey,  he  would  be  happy  to  converse 
with  them. 


252 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


Next  day  they  proceeded  to  the  palace  with  their 
presents,  and  had  to  go  through  a  good  deal  of 
ceremony ;  which  contrasted  strongly  with  the  plain- 
ness of  the  sheik's  personal  appearance.  There  were 
passages  lined  with  sitting  attendants,  who  forcibly 
prevented  the  strangers  from  advancing  too  quickly, 
by  holding  their  legs  and  feet,  from  which  they  had 
abstracted  the  slippers.  The  visitors  were  seated  on 
clean  sand,  laid  on  each  side  of  an  earthen  bank 
covered  with  a  carpet,  on  which  the  sheik  reclined. 
He  expressed  his  pleasure  with  some  of  the  presents, 
and  his  satisfaction  at  knowing  that  he  had  been 
heard  of  in  England  ;  intimating  to  his  counsellors 
that  this  was  in  consequence  of  their  having  defeated 
the  Begharmis.  The  general  who  had  conducted 
this  successful  expedition,  happening  to  be  present, 
inquired  if  the  Sultan  of  England  had  heard  of  him 
also :  and  being  answered  in  the  affirmative,  replied, 
u  Ah  !  then  your  king  must  be  a  great  man  !  "  A 
sentiment  which  was  re-echoed  from  all  sides. 

Major  Denham  observes,  that  besides  occasional 
presents  of  bullocks,  camel-loads  of  wheat  and  rice, 
leathern  skins  of  butter,  jars  of  honey,  and  honey  in 
the  comb,  —  five  or  six  wooden  bowls  were  sent  to 
them,  every  morning  and  evening,  containing  rice 
with  meat,  and  paste  made  of  barley-flour,  savoury 
but  very  greasy.  Sweets  made  of  curds  and  honey 
were  also  given;  a  camel-load  of  fish,  bream  and 
mullet,  was  thrown  down  before  their  huts,  on  the 
second  morning  after  their  arrival,  and  lest  this 
should  not  suffice,  another  was  sent  in  the  evening. 


KOOKA  —  SHEIK  OMAR. 


253 


Dr.  Barth  describes  the  Sheik  Omar,  who  was  ruler 
of  Bornu  when  he  visited  it,  as  a  benevolent  and 
cheerful  man,  simply  dressed,  reclining  on  a  carpeted 
divan  at  the  back  of  an  airy  hall,  the  clay  walls  of 
which  were  neatly  polished.  He  was  frank  in  his 
manners  and  free  in  his  conversation.  The  vizier  at 
this  time  was  Hadj  Beshir,  who  was  soon  afterwards 
put  to  death,  leaving  seventy-three  sons,  besides 
daughters ;  for  he  kept  a  harem  of  more  than  three 
hundred  female  slaves. 

We  have  perhaps  more  information  about  Kooka 
than  about  any  other  town  of  Interior  Africa.  This 
results  from  its  central  situation.  All  European 
travellers,  proceeding  from  the  north  into  the  interior 
of  the  continent,  must  pass  through  Bornu,  as  it 
has  the  desert  routes  on  the  north  side,  and  is 
flanked  by  Lake  Chad  on  the  east.  It  is,  doubtless, 
the  most  important  kingdom  of  Central  Africa  to 
foreigners  who  travel  overland.  It  may  also  prove 
the  easiest  way  into  the  interior  by  water,  up  the 
river  Shary  into  the  lake.  Could  a  highway  of 
peaceful  communication  be  made  up  the  navigable 
part  of  the  Niger,  and  from  it  across  to  the  Lake 
Chad,  through  this  populous  and  partly  civilised 
district  of  Africa,  great  results  might  be  expected. 
These  people  already  desire  the  luxuries  and  manu- 
factures of  more  advanced  nations,  and  try  to  imi- 
tate what  they  see  in  strangers  superior  to  them- 
selves. They  pride  themselves  upon  possessing 
and  wearing  articles  of  foreign  material,  and  they 
have  a  considerable  love  of  trading.  Their  princes 
m 


254  THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 

generally  desire  communication  with  more  polished 
countries. 

In  Kooka,  there  are  three  principal  tribes  of  in- 
habitants, the  Bornuese,  the  Shuwas,  and  the  Kanem- 


KANEMBOO  SPEARMAN. 


boes.  The  first  are  the  proper  natives  of  the  country, 
being  Negroes,  with  large  mouths,  flat  noses,  and  beau- 
tiful teeth.  They  are  courteous,  good-natured,  and 
timid.  But  the  Shuwas  are  Arabs,  having  all  the  worst 
qualities  of  that  people,  being  treacherous,  proud, 
cunning.  They  are  the  chief  breeders  of  cattle,  and 
speak  a  good  Arabic  dialect.  The  natives  are  very 
simple  in  their  manner  of  life ;  they  grow  a  kind  of 
mullet,  which  forms  the  staple  diet  of  the  common 
people.  It  is  eaten  raw,  parched,  or  boiled  as  rice. 
When  made  into  flour,  and  mixed  with  fat  and 
honey,  it  is  regarded  as  a  luxury.  Eice,  onions, 
and  beans  are  also  used.  Bread  is  only  eaten  by  the 
rich. 

The  Bornuese  are  Moslems,  and  are  rigid  in  per- 


KOOKA  —  THE  WOMEN. 


255 


forming  the  five  daily  prayers  and  ablutions.  They 
seldom  have  more  than  two  or  three  wives,  and  the 
poorer  people  are  obliged  to  be  satisfied  with  one. 
But  the  rich  have  harems  of  slaves.  The  women  are 
not  good-looking,  and  disfigure  themselves  still  more 
by  their  tattooing,  having  twenty  cuts  on  each  side  of 
the  face,  one  cut  on  the  forehead,  six  on  each  arm, 
and  more  on  other  parts  of  the  body.  They  cover 
their  head  and  face,  and  kneel  when  they  address 
the  male  sex ;  they  approach  their  husbands  on  their 
knees,  and  enter  his  bed  at  the  foot. 

The  morals  of  the  people  are  described  by  Major 
Denham  as  very  loose,  though  the  sheik  was  en- 
deavouring to  reform  them.  A  husband  can  divorce 
his  wife  when  he  pleases,  by  returning  her  dower ; 
and  the  lady  can  also  demand  her  freedom  under 
certain  circumstances.  In  such  a  state  of  things, 
purity  of  morals  is  impossible,  and  the  people  were 
generally  opposed  to  the  reformations  attempted  by 
their  ruler.  In  his  zeal  he  seized  two  unfortunate 
girls  and  ordered  them  to  be  hanged.  They  were 
both  under  seventeen  years  of  age,  and  the  severity 
of  the  sentence  raised  the  commiseration  of  all  the 
people.  Efforts  were  made  to  turn  the  sheik  from 
his  purpose,  but  he  persevered  in  his  resolve,  until  a 
Mahometan  doctor  declared  that  such  a  punishment 
would  itself  be  a  sin,  since  there  was  no  authority 
for  it  in  the  Koran ;  that  the  law  of  the  prophet 
prescribed  a  mark  of  disgrace,  not  death,  for  such 
offences;  and  that  the  purposed  execution  would 
be  visited  on  the  land  by  the  vengeance  of  Heaven. 


256 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


The  sheik  was  finally  obliged  to  relent,  but  ordered 
the  girls  to  have  their  heads  publicly  shaved,  which 
is  a  mark  of  infamy. 

What  is  that  man  doing,  looking  for  something 
over  the  door  of  his  wife's  apartment  ?  He  wishes 
to  enter,  but  must  take  care  that  one  of  his  wife's 
friends  has  not  hid  a  shoe  there ;  for  if  he  should 
pass  under  her  slipper,  his  head  has  been  under  her 
foot,  and  she  will  be  master  of  the  house.  Thus  the 
game  of  "  who  shall  be  uppermost "  is  constantly 
going  on,  notwithstanding  the  depressed  condition 
of  the  female  sex. 

If  you  wish  to  make  any  common  purchases  in 
Kooka,  you  will  find  a  small  market  every  afternoon. 
But  here  is  a  large  one,  or  kind  of  fair,  held  once  a 
week  !  This  is  a  grand  affair,  attended  by  twelve  or 
fifteen  thousand  persons,  and  furnished  with  all  kinds 
of  commodities,  arranged  in  order  in  separate  places. 
What  a  variety  of  dress  and  figure  is  exhibited  by 
this  motley  assembly  of  Negroes  and  Arabs,  drawn 
from  many  different  countries  and  tribes !  It  is  a 
picturesque  and  interesting  spectacle  to  see  the 
people  only.  What  a  variety  of  merchandise  for 
sale !  Here  is  the  place  for  buying  materials  for  a 
tent  or  dwelling ;  mats  of  all  kinds,  poles  and  stakes, 
and  frameworks.  Next,  there  are  oxen  for  slaughter 
or  burden,  ox  and  camel  bags,  camels  themselves, 
and  horses.  These  are  ranged  round  the  sides  of  the 
market.  In  the  interior,  you  would  find  dealers  in 
native  and  foreign  merchandise.  Of  the  former,  are 
cloths,  leather  work,  kola  nuts,  salt,  natron,  copper, 


MARKET  OF  KOOKA. 


257 


silver,  slaves.  Of  European  goods  are  calicoes,  cam- 
brics, coarse  silks,  woollens,  cloths,  beads,  sugar, 
paper,  needles,  sword-blades,  muskets,  razors,  &c. 
The  Arabs  sell  dresses,  shawls,  spices,  frankincense, 
&c.  So  that  everything  which  you  could  desire  for 
consumption  or  use  in  Africa  may  be  bought  at  this 
weekly  bazaar. 

Each  merchant  squats  down  where  he  pleases  in 
the  open  space  of  the  market.  Brokers  and  retail 
dealers  have  stalls,  which  they  erect  in  any  place 
that  they  fancy.  The  motley  scene  is  enlivened  with 
the  barber's  whistle,  the  fun  of  the  professional  story- 
teller, the  amusements  afforded  by  the  serpent-tamer 
and  conjurer.  Cakes,  sweetmeats,  nuts,  boiled  beans, 
dry  dates,  sour  milk  and  water,  are  offered  as  refresh- 
ments to  the  exhausted  market  goers.  There  is  a 
difficulty  in  the  way  of  completing  your  purchases, 
which  is  a  most  harassing  and  tedious  business. 
What  money  must  you  give  ?  Cowries  or  kurdi 
have  of  late  become  the  chief  currency ;  but  a 
novice  will  not  relish  the  trouble  connected  with 
them.  These  little  shells  are  not  fastened  together 
in  strings  of  a  hundred  each,  as  on  the  Grold  Coast ; 
but  they  must  be  counted  one  by  one.  No  person 
will  take  even  a  takrufa,  or  rush  sack  containing 
20,000  shells,  without  first  seeing  that  he  has  re- 
ceived the  entire  number.  Practice  makes  perfect, 
and  the  natives  become  very  expert  in  counting 
cowries ;  but  it  is  a  herculean  task  for  a  foreigner  to 
count  out  500,000  of  them,  which  a  merchant  has 
sometimes  to  do.  A  pound  sterling  is  equal  to  about 
s 


258 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


12,000  cowries;  consequently,  fifty  of  them  go  to  a 
penny.  As  100,000  are  reckoned  a  load  for  a  camel, 
twelve  camels  would  be  required  to  carry  100?.  in 
cowries. 

But  people  are  not  obliged  to  take  cowries  in 
payment.  Few  farmers  will  do  so.  Here  a  new 
difficulty  arises.  You  wish  to  buy  corn  for  your 
horse,  and  you  have  only  the  substantial  dollar  in 
your  pocket.  What  are  you  to  do  ?  You  must  first 
buy  cowries;  then  sell  the  cowries  for  shirts;  and 
with  a  shirt  you  can  buy  corn,  and  with  no  other 
medium  of  exchange.  Throughout  this  district,  and 
away  southward,  a  shirt  is  money.  The  country 
people  will  seldom  take  anything  else  in  return 
for  their  goods;  except  that  trifling  articles  may 
sometimes  be  bought  for  beads  or  needles.  A  tra- 
veller was  so  hard  pressed  in  passing  through  one  of 
these  rural  districts,  that  he  was  obliged  to  take 
his  servant's  shirt  from  his  back,  to  buy  a  little 
corn,  for  the  peasants  would  not  take  his  dollars  or 
cowries. 

Amongst  other  articles  offered  for  sale  was  a 
young  lion.  "  He  walked  about  with  great  uncon- 
cern, confined  merely  by  a  small  rope  round  his 
neck  held  by  his  keeper,  who  had  caught  him  when 
he  was  not  two  months  old,  and  having  had  him  for 
a  period  of  three  months,  now  wished  to  part  with 
him.  He  was  about  the  size  of  a  donkey-colt,  with 
very  large  limbs ;  and  the  people  seemed  to  go  very 
close  to  him  without  much  alarm ;  notwithstanding, 
he  struck  with  his  foot  the  leg  of  one  man  who  stood 


A  LION  FOR  SALE. 


259 


in  his  way,  and  made  the  blood  flow  copiously. 
They  opened  the  ring  which  was  formed  round  the 
noble  animal  as  I  approached,  and  coming  within 
two  or  three  yards  of  him,  he  fixed  his  eye  upon  me 
in  a  way  that  excited  sensations  I  cannot  describe, 
from  which  I  was  awakened  by  the  fellow  calling  me 
to  come  nearer,  at  the  same  time  laying  his  hand  on 
the  animal's  back.  A  moment's  recollection  con- 
vinced me  that  there  could  be  no  more  danger 
nearer  than  where  I  was,  and  I  stepped  up  boldly 
beside  the  Negro ;  I  believe  I  should  have  laid  my 
hand  upon  the  lion  next  moment,  but  after  looking 
carelessly  at  me,  he  brushed  past  my  legs,  broke  the 
ring,  and  pulled  his  conductor  away  with  him,  over- 
turning several  who  stood  before  him,  and  bounded 
off  to  another  part  where  there  were  fewer  people," — 
as  he  did  not  like  company. 

The  best  houses  in  Kooka  are  good  and  spacious 
edifices,  consisting  of  several  court-yards  and  apart- 
ments, with  an  inner  court  leading  to  parts  of  the 
dwelling  reserved  for  women.  Each  wife  has  a 
square  space  for  herself,  in  which  is  a  handsome  hut. 
There  is  often  an  upper  story,  or  rather  some  upper 
chambers  like  turrets  on  the  roof,  appropriated  to 
the  use  of  the  owner  of  the  mansion.  The  walls 
are  made  of  reddish  clay,  smooth  and  polished,  and 
ornamented  in  different  ways.  The  domestic  animals 
have  a  court-yard  near  the  entrance  allotted  to  their 
use.  These  dwellings  exhibit  a  good  deal  of  taste 
and  refinement  in  their  construction,  and  show  what 
Negroes  can  and  will  do,  when  they  have  a  model 

6  2 


260 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


set  before  them,  and  sufficient  means  to  execute  a 
copy. 

Some  judicial  proceedings  of  the  Sheik  El  Kanemy 
may  tend  to  exhibit  the  manners  and  ways  of  this 
people.  A  freeman  had  caught  the  slave  of  another 
man  along  with  his  wife.  The  sheik  commanded  the 
guilty  parties  to  be  hanged  together.  The  owner  of 
the  slave  objected  to  this  decision,  alleging  that  the 
woman  had  been  always  trying  to  seduce  his  slave ; 
and  that  therefore  if  he  were  hanged  through  the 
woman's  fault,  her  husband  ought  to  give  him  the 
value  of  a  slave,  as  he  was  a  poor  man.  The  other 
dissented  from  this  proposition.  The  sheik  ex- 
claimed, "  Ah !  how  often  is  man  driven  to  destruc- 
tion by  woman ;  yet  of  all  his  happiness  she  is  the 
root  or  the  branch ! "  He  himself  paid  the  poor 
man  for  the  slave,  and  the  sentence  was  executed 
according  to  the  judgment  pronounced. 

Another  circumstance  caused  no  little  stir  amongst 
the  women  of  Kooka.  Some  complaints  were  made 
that  during  the  absence  of  the  army  on  a  grand  ex- 
pedition, the  females  had  been  seen  too  often  in  the 
streets,  and  with  their  faces  uncovered.  Of  course 
"  when  the  cat  is  away,  the  mice  play."  But  some 
reporters  had  been  left  behind.  Their  husbands 
also,  who  had  not  heard  their  voices  for  some  time, 
complained  on  their  return,  that  the  fair  sex  had 
acquired  a  habit  of  loud  talking,;  and  therefore 
inferred  that  during  their  absence  they  had  been 
too  free  in  the  use  of  their  tongue.  In  consequence, 
the  women  were  summoned  before  the  sheik,  who 


SHUWA  AND  MARGHAY  LADS. 


INCIDENTS  IN  KOOKA. 


261 


severely  lectured  them ;  giving  strict  admonitions  to 
the  single  ladies  about  propriety  of  conduct,  and 
ordering  the  matrons  who  had  slaves  not  to  go  out 
of  their  house  or  receive  visitors  at  home. 

A  quarrel  took  place  one  evening,  when  a  Shuwa 
stabbed  an  Arab,  who  died  of  his  wounds.  The 
brother  of  him  that  was  slain  demanded  the  vengeance 
of  blood.  The  Shuwa  proved  that  he  had  thrice 
commanded  the  man  to  go  from  his  door,  "  if  he  had 
any  faith  in  the  prophet,"  but  that  he  refused,  and 
continued  to  molest  him,  till  his  anger  was  aroused, 
and  he  stabbed  him  several  times.  The  judge  in 
this  case  had  decided  that  after  so  solemn  a  warning 
the  deceased  ought  to  have  gone  away ;  that  his 
refusing  to  do  so  was  a  sign  he  had  no  faith ;  and 
that  his  obstinacy  was  the  cause  of  his  own  death- 
An  appeal  was  made  to  the  sheik,  who  acknowledged 
that  the  Book  orders  "an  eye  for  an  eye,  a  tooth 
for  a  tooth,  and  life  for  life ; "  but  suggested  the 
propriety  of  the  pursuer's  taking  a  fine  instead  of 
blood.  But  the  vindictive  Arab  demanded  justice, 
and  the  sheik  said  that  his  enemy  was  legally  in  his 
hands.  On  hearing  which  decision  he  took  the 
Shuwa  outside  the  walls,  and  beat  out  his  brains 
with  a  club.  This  affair  created  much  sensation  in 
the  town. 

It  may  be  imagined  what  effect  an  exhibition  of 
rockets  would  have  upon  a  people  who  had  never 
seen  fireworks.  When  one  was  sent  over  the  town, 
it  caused  a  panic  and  universal  scream.  A  musical 
box  called  forth  exclamations  of  wild  astonishment. 

s  3 


262 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


The  sheik  himself  cried  out  "Wonderful!  wonderful !" 
Then  covering  his  face  with  his  hands,  he  listened 
with  rapture  to  a  plaintive  air  which  it  played.  But 
a  man  near  him,  having  interrupted  his  happy  trance 
by  a  loud  exclamation,  he  gave  him  a  blow  that 
made  all  the  company  tremble.  He  swore  that  such 
an  instrument  would  be  cheap  at  a  thousand  dollars. 
The  box  was  afterwards  presented  to  him,  and  he 
studied  it  till  he  understood  the  stops. 

Quack  doctors  are  found  in  this  as  well  as  in 
other  regions.  A  charm  is  written,  and  some  herbs 
are  applied  to  the  stomach  or  other  part  of  the  body, 
so  that  imagination  effects  most  of  the  cure.  The 
natives  are  surprised  at  the  potency  of  European 
medicines ;  having  no  idea  that  a  little  powder  could 
produce  such  influences  on  the  human  frame.  Prac- 
tical experience,  however,  of  a  good  dose  changes 
their  unbelief  into  admiration,  and  elicits  the  usual 
cry  of  u  wonderful !  wonderful !  " 

On  the  annual  festival  held  in  commemoration  of 
Abraham's  offering  up  Isaac,  the  rich  people  give 
away  garments  to  their  followers.  The  sheik  El 
Kanemy  gave  away  more  than  a  thousand  tobes,  and 
as  many  bullocks  and  sheep.  He  was  a  noble  and 
generous  man,  though  subject  to  those  bursts  of 
passion  from  which  an  autocrat  is  seldom  free. 
Major  Denham  mentions  an  occurrence  that  took 
place  whilst  he  was  in  Kooka,  which  illustrates  the 
disposition  of  that  prince.  His  favourite  general, 
Barca  Gana,  who  was  also  governor  of  six  large 
districts,  fell  into  sad  trouble.    The  sheik  had  inad- 


KOOKA — VICISSITUDES  OF  LIFE. 


263 


vertently  sent  him  a  horse  which  had  been  intended 
as  a  present  for  another  person,  and  the  general 
was  requested  to  return  it.  He  was  so  offended 
at  this  procedure  that  he  instantly  sent  back  all  the 
horses  which  the  sheik  had  given  him,  saying,  that 
in  future  he  would  ride  his  own  beasts  or  else  walk. 
His  master  forthwith  sent  for  him,  reproached  him 
for  his  ingratitude,  had  him  stripped  in  his  pre- 
sence and  a  leathern  girdle  put  round  his  loins, 
and  ordered  him  to  be  sold  to  the  Tibbu  merchants, 
for  he  was  still  a  slave. 

The  disgraced  favourite  fell  on  his  knees,  acknow- 
ledged his  punishment  to  be  just,  and  begged  that 
his  wives  and  children  might  be  provided  for  by  the 
royal  bounty.  Next  day,  the  chief  eunuchs  and 
officers  fell  down  before  the  sheik  and  asked  for 
Barca's  pardon.  The  culprit  came  in  at  this  moment 
to  take  leave,  when  the  sheik  threw  himself  back  on 
his  carpet,  burst  into  tears,  and  allowed  the  wretch 
to  embrace  his  knees.  Then,  calling  them  all  his 
children,  he  pardoned  the  penitent.  In  the  evening 
there  was  a  general  rejoicing,  and  Barca  Grana 
dressed  in  new  robes  rode  round  the  camp,  followed 
by  the  chief  officers.  He  had  had  a  narrow  escape, 
and  would  doubtless  profit  by  the  lesson  which  he 
then  learned.  The  vicissitudes  of  life  under  an 
eastern  despot  are  often  very  striking. 

The  people  applauded  this  act  of  clemency  in  the 
sheik,  but  they  did  not  approve  of  all  his  doings, 
which  were  sometimes  very  harsh  and  arbitrary.  He 
had  no  mercy  in  exacting  the  keeping  of  the  Khama- 

S  4 


264 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


iians  with  the  strictest  fasting.  It  is  well  known  that 
Mahometans  fast  during  this  month  from  sunrise  to 
sunset ;  but  this  abstinence  is  usually  limited  to 
eating.  The  sheik  applied  it  also  to  drinking,  and 
to  every  act  of  gratification ;  so  that  if  a  man  was 
caught  suffering  his  thirst  to  get  the  better  of  him, 
or  visiting  his  wives,  during  the  day,  he  was  sen- 
tenced to  receive  four  hundred  stripes  with  the 
horrible  coorbash.  Now  the  heat  in  Kooka  was 
excessive,  and  the  people  fainted  for  want  of  water. 
Many  went  down  to  a  well  and  had  buckets  of  water 
thrown  over  them,  as  the  only  means  of  allaying 
their  sufferings.  No  wonder  they  grumbled  at  the 
stern  edict. 

One  unfortunate  man  was  caught  asleep,  and  the 
wife  of  another  man  stretched  by  his  side.  Being 
at  once  presumed  to  be  guilty  of  breaking  the 
Ehamadan,  the  man  was  sentenced  to  receive  four 
hundred  lashes,  and  the  woman  two  hundred.  The 
informer  received  her  dress  and  ornaments,  which 
were  instantly  stripped  off.  Her  head  was  shaved, 
and  she  was  suspended  by  a  cloth  round  her  middle, 
when  a  powerful  Negro  inflicted  the  penalty.  She 
was  carried  home  senseless.  The  man  was  taken  up 
in  a  similar  way,  and  obliged  to  kiss  his  instrument 
of  torture.  They  strike  on  the  back,  but  the  end  of 
the  thong  has  a  knob  which  winds  round  to  the 
breast  or  stomach,  and  usually  renders  the  brutal 
punishment  fatal.  This  poor  creature  emitted  blood 
from  his  throat  and  bowels  after  receiving  half  the 
number  of  strokes,  and  died  soon  after  they  were 


KOOKA  —  SEVERITY  OF  THE  SIIEIK.  265 

completed.  One  hundred  stripes  with  a  milder 
weapon  were  inflicted  on  a  rogue  who  stole  and  sold 
ten  camels ;  theft  being  reckoned  by  the  sheik  a  less 
heinous  crime  than  breaking  the  Ehamadan.  So  do 
others,  besides  the  ancient  Pharisees,  "  strain  at 
a  gnat  and  swallow  a  camel." 

Another  act  of  cruelty  rendered  the  ruler  of  Kooka 
still  more  odious  to  his  people.  He  was  always 
severe  against  the  failings  of  the  female  sex,  and  one 
day  he  sent  out  ,his  emissaries  to  collect  women  of  a 
bad  reputation.  Five  of  these  unfortunates  were 
sentenced  to  be  hanged  in  the  market-place,  and 
four  to  be  flogged.  Of  the  latter,  two  expired  under 
the  lash.  The  former  had  their  heads  shaved,  and 
were  dragged  round  the  market  with  a  rope  round 
their  necks ;  they  were  then  strangled,  and  their 
bodies  thrown  into  a  hole.  This  severe  proceeding 
roused  the  anger  of  the  whole  population  of  the 
town  against  the  sheik.  More  than  a  hundred 
families  quitted  the  place  to  go  and  live  in  other 
towns  where  such  rigour  did  not  exist  ;  saying,  that 
it  was  impossible  to  exist  in  Kooka  under  such 
tyranny,  and  where  malicious  spies  might  easily 
procure  their  doom  to  an  ignominious  death.  The 
rest  of  the  women  expressed  their  abhorrence  in  an 
unmistakeable  way.  For  it  is  common  to  welcome 
the  Aid,  the  principal  Moslem  festival,  held  in 
honour  of  Isaac's  deliverance,  in  a  very  lively  and 
gorgeous  manner.  But  on  this  occasion  the  sheik 
received  no  presents,  and  his  running  footmen 
obtained  no  new  dresses.    The  women  who  were 


266 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


wont  to  array  themselves  in  their  best  attire,  and 
standing  at  their  doors  scream  out  a  welcome  to  him 
as  he  passed,  omitted  doing  so  ;  and  the  joyous 
festival  went  off  in  gloom  and  disgrace. 

South  of  Kooka  is  the  Mandara  country,  the  sultan 
of  which  entered  into  alliance  with  the  Sheik  of 
Bornu,  for  their  mutual  defence  against  the  Felattas, 
who  had  encroached  upon  the  pagan  territories  from 
the  west.  Mandara  itself  was  with  difficulty  rescued 
from  their  grasp.  The  sultan  became  Mahometan, 
and  built  a  new  capital,  called  Mora,  in  a  strong 
situation  encompassed  by  hills.  On  the  surround- 
ing heights  there  are  some  wild  tribes  of  pagans, 
called  Musgo,  who  form  a  kind  of  slave-preserve  for 
Bornu  and  Mandara.  Whenever  slaves  are  wanted, 
an  expedition  is  sent  against  them ;  and  if  they  do  not 
buy  a  respite  by  a  present  of  slaves  and  horses,  they 
know  what  will  be  the  consequence  to  themselves. 
In  order  to  procure  this  present,  they  must  make 
war  on  other  tribes  in  their  vicinity ;  and  thus  a  de- 
populating warfare  is  constantly  going  on. 

Here  is  a  splendid  cavalcade,  consisting  of  many 
hundreds  of  horsemen,  well  mounted,  dressed  in  fine 
tobes  of  different  colours,  blue,  scarlet,  and  striped ; 
and  in  the  midst  of  them,  a  small  company  clothed 
in  striped  silk,  their  saddles  and  horses  adorned  with 
skins  of  the  leopard  and  tiger-cat !  They  are  pre- 
ceded by  men  with  instruments  of  music  resembling 
trumpets  and  clarionets.  They  are  the  cavalry  and 
the  body-guard  of  the  Sultan  of  Mandara,  who  keeps 
up  an  appearance  of  state  that  would  not  be  expected 


PEOPLE  OF  MANDAEA. 


267 


in  this  outlandish  region.  If  you  pay  him  a  visit, 
etiquette  requires  that  you  ride  up  to  the  place  of 
interview  at  full  gallop ;  though  in  so  doing,  you 
would  probably  ride  over  some  persons  in  the  way. 
But  you  must  stop  for  nothing.  Dismounting  at  the 
palace  gate,  your  slippers  are  pulled  off  by  attending 
servants,  and  entering  the  court,  you  find  his 
majesty  seated  on  a  divan  covered  with  a  handsome 
carpet  and  silk  pillows,  surrounded  by  his  eunuchs 
and  nobles  dressed  in  silk  and  coloured  cotton.  The 
principal  men  are  in  front,  having  their  backs  turned 
to  the  sultan.  A  native  grandee,  going  to  be  pre- 
sented or  to  deliver  a  message  to  the  prince,  sits  in 
front  of  the  eunuchs,  with  his  back  to  the  throne  and 
his  eyes  on  the  ground,  and  clapping  his  hands 
utters  such  expressions  as  these :  "  May  you  live  for 
ever !  God  send  you  a  happy  old  age  !  Blessing  ! 
blessing ! " 

The  men  and  women  of  Mandara  are  better  look- 
ing than  the  Bornuese,  not  having  so  much  of  the 
flattened  features.  The  ladies  are  highly  esteemed 
for  beauty  in  Kooka,  and  slaves  from  this  province 
fetch  a  high  price.  Their  hands  and  feet  are  small, 
and  they  have  a  considerable  protuberance  behind ; 
qualities  much  prized  by  those  who  keep  harems. 
In  their  own  mountainous  region,  they  trouble  them- 
selves with  little  clothing,  and  often  dispense  with  it 
altogether.  The  Mandarese  chiefly  live  on  vegetables ; 
and  their  most  esteemed  dish  is  made  of  paste,  mixed 
with  hot  fat,  pepper,  and  onions. 

The  hills  of  this  district  produce  iron,  which  is 


268 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


manufactured  in  a  rude  way  by  native  blacksmiths. 
They  also  abound  in  wild  beasts,  especially  those  of 
the  panther  and  leopard  species.  These  animals  watch 
for  their  prey  with  great  cunning,  often  waiting  a 
long  time  for  human  beings,  till  some  one  has  left 
his  company  and  can  be  attacked  alone ;  on  whom 
they  spring  from  behind.  They  seldom  make  an 
assault  where  resistance  may  be  anticipated,  but  are 
ferocious  enough  when  they  are  wounded.  Listen 
to  this  account  of  a  fight  with  a  large  panther  !  It 
had  killed  a  Negro  on  the  road,  and  was  sucking  his 
blood,  when  a  company  of  horsemen  came  up.  A 
Shuwa  immediately  sent  his  spear  through  the  neck 
of  the  beast,  which  rolling  over  broke  the  weapon 
and  bounded  off  with  half  of  it  in  its  body.  Another 
man  thrust  a  second  spear  through  its  loins,  on 
which  it  turned  with  a  strange  howl  to  spring  upon 
the  pursuer.  At  this  moment  an  Arab  shot  it 
through  the  head,  and  it  fell  dead.  It  measured 
eight  feet  two  inches  from  the  nose  to  the  end  of 
the  tail,  and  was  of  a  yellow  colour,  beautifully 
spotted. 

The  company  of  Arabs,  with  whom  Major  Denham 
and  his  friends  had  traversed  the  desert  from  Tri- 
poli, had  been  very  anxious  for  a  razzia  of  some 
kind,  in  order  to  obtain  booty  in  slaves  before  re- 
turning home.  They  had  begged  the  Sheik  of 
Bornu  to  allow  them  to  make  a  forage  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Mandara.  He,  nothing  loth,  agreed  ;  but 
really  with  a  different  object  from  theirs.  He 
thought  he   might  use  them   advantageously  to 


AN  EXPEDITION. 


269 


humble  the  Felattas,  as  the  Arabs  priding  them- 
selves on  their  guns  despised  Negroes  armed  only 
with  bows  and  spears.  Accordingly,  Barca  Grana 
was  sent  with  three  thousand  horse,  in  company  of 
Boo  Khaloom  and  eighty  Arabs.  Major  Denham,  by 
much  entreaty,  obtained  permission  to  accompany 
this  expedition. 

When  they  reached  Mandara  they  wished  to  attack 
the  Musgoese,  from  whom  they  would  doubtless 
have  obtained  a  large  booty.  These  people  wear  no 
clothes  except  a  leathern  girdle.  They  are  armed 
with  a  spear,  a  shield  of  wicker  work,  and  a  small 
weapon  which  they  throw  with  considerable  dex- 
terity. But  when  attacked  by  a  large  body  of  troops, 
they  are  obliged  to  fly  behind  the  broad  rivers, 
where  the  enemy  cannot  follow  them  for  want  of 
canoes.  In  these  razzias  the  men  are  generally 
butchered,  the  women  and  children  carried  off,  and 
the  granaries  plundered  or  burned.  They  pay 
tribute  and  make  peace-offerings  in  slaves. 

The  Sultan  of  Mandara  did  not  wish  to  let  the 
Arabs  enter  the  Musgo  country,  which  he  desired  to 
keep  as  a  slave-preserve  for  himself.  So  he  joined 
some  of  his  own  troops  with  the  army  of  Bornu,  and 
sent  them  against  the  Felattas,  who  would  probably 
make  a  stout  resistance.  The  sheik  and  sultan 
appear  to  have  had  the  same  object  in  view  to 
humble  their  old  enemy,  and  to  give  their  boasting- 
friends  the  Arabs  some  serious  work  to  do.  In  the 
latter  part  of  the  scheme  they  succeeded.  Boo 
Khaloom  and  his  men  rushed  on  a  strongly  en- 


270 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


trenched  town  of  Felattas,  under  a  shower  of  poisoned 
arrows,  to  take  it  by  storm.  A  desperate  fight 
ensued,  and  the  Arabs  were  kept  at  bay.  Barca 
Gana  and  about  a  hundred  of  his  spearmen  hastened 
to  their  assistance,  but  the  rest  of  the  united  forces 
of  Bornu  and  Mandara  kept  out  of  bow-shot,  coolly 
looking  at  the  fight.  The  Felattas  seeing  this, 
pressed  their  foes  valiantly,  and  their  horsemen 
coming  up  charged  them  in  turn.  Only  the  most 
desperate  valour  saved  the  little  company  of  assailants 
from  utter  destruction,  for  all  their  friends  took  to 
flight,  headed  by  the  Sultan  of  Mandara.  This  prince 
was  ready  to  share  the  spoil  if  the  town  had  been 
captured,  and  quite  as  ready  to  run  away  in  case  of 
failure.  He  had  no  desire  to  expose  himself  or  his 
men  to  the  shot  of  a  single  arrow. 

Barca  Gana,  who  had  brought  down  eight  men  with 
his  own  spears,  had  three  horses  shot  under  him, 
two  of  which  died  immediately,  being  wounded  by 
poisoned  arrows.  The  retreat  was  a  desperate  affair, 
as  no  help  was  afforded  to  the  defeated  band  by 
their  own  army,  which  had  scampered  off.  Boo 
Khaloom  died  of  a  wound  which  he  had  received  in 
his  foot  from  a  poisoned  shaft.  Forty-five  of  the 
Arabs  perished,  and  most  of  the  rest  were  wounded, 
so  that  more  died  afterwards.  Their  bodies  became 
instantly  swollen  and  black,  like  that  of  their  chief, 
whose  corpse  was  saved  from  being  dishonoured  by 
the  enemy.  The  wounded  horses,  also,  as  soon  as 
they  drunk  water  at  a  stream  which  they  crossed, 
dropped  and  died ;  whilst  blood  gushed  from  their 


DISASTROUS  RETREAT. 


271 


mouth,  nostrils,  and  ears.  The  baggage  was  left  in 
the  hands  of  the  victors. 

Major  Denham,  who  had  gallantly  joined  in  the 
melee,  had  several  narrow  escapes  for  his  life.  He 
was  assailed  by  the  pursuers,  whom  he  beat  off,  when 
his  horse  fell  with  him.  He  was  then  wounded  and 
stripped  naked,  and  the  plunderers  began  to  quarrel 
about  his  clothes,  when  he  crept  under  the  belly  of 
a  horse  and  darted  off  into  a  wood.  Again  pursued 
he  made  for  a  stream,  and  was  letting  himself  dowfi 
the  precipitous  bank  by  means  of  a  tree,  when  a 
large  serpent  darting  at  him  so  petrified  him  with 
horror,  that  he  let  go  the  branch  and  fell  into  the 
water.  This  saved  his  life  from  both  enemies, 
revived  him,  and  gave  him  strength  to  swim  across. 
Reaching  the  two  defeated  chiefs  and  six  Arabs 
pursued  by  Felattas,  he  was  taken  up  on  horseback 
by  the  shiek's  Negro,  Maramy,  amidst  a  shower  of 
arrows.  Soon  the  pursuit  cooled,  as  the  enemy  were 
intent  upon  the  baggage  which  was  left  with  them, 
and  Boo  Khaloom  ordered  an  Arab  to  throw  a 
bornouse  over  the  major's  back,  which  was  suffering 
dreadfully  from  the  sun.  This  was  shortly  before 
the  warrior  dropped  from  his  horse  and  expired. 
Crossing  a  stream,  the  major  fell  down  exhausted  on 
the  other  side  and  swooned.  Maramy  again  helped 
him  on  his  horse  and  conducted  him  to  Mora.  After 
riding  forty-five  miles  on  the  bare  back  of  a  lean 
horse,  in  a  state  of  nudity,  the  gallant  officer  was 
more  dead  than  alive.  He  got  a  shirt  from  one 
man  on  promise  of  repaying  him  with  a  new  one. 


272 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


The  deposed  Sultan  of  Angornu,  living  at  Mora  in 
a  leathern  tent,  commiserated  the  Englishman,  and 
offered  him  his  own  trowsers,  which  he  took  off  for 
that  purpose.  When  these  were  refused,  the  prince 
in  poverty  shed  tears  because  he  had  no  others  to 
give.  Then  calling  a  slave,  he  stripped  him  of  his 
drawers,  which  he  put  on  himself,  and  gave  his  own 
to  the  stranger.  They  were  now  accepted,  and 
Mai  Meegamy  (be  his  name  honoured !)  became  the 
major's  friend  till  he  left  the  country. 

The  Sultan  of  Mandara,  who  had  behaved  so 
shamefully  in  running  away  from  the  fight,  refused 
any  help  to  his  friends,  even  in  his  own  capital, 
and  would  not  give  the  famishing  Arabs  a  handful 
of  corn.  He  even  kept  their  deceased  chiefs  clothes 
and  horse-trappings.  But  he  began  to  prepare  for 
defence,  as  he  expected  the  Felattas  would  soon  pay 
him  a  visit ;  and  his  allies,  as  they  left  Mora,  were 
charitable  enough  to  wish  them  all  success  against 
such  a  cowardly  knave  and  traitor.  It  was,  how- 
ever, quite  just  that  an  expedition  whose  very  object 
was  the  plunder  of  innocent  Negroes,  should  signally 
fail.  The  defeated  party  had  to  endure  much  suffer- 
ing before  reaching  Kooka,  as  they  had  little  to  eat 
on  the  road. 

The  sheik  tried  to  console  his  guest  and  general 
for  their  defeat,  and  helped  to  repair  their  personal 
losses  out  of  his  own  purse.  He  laid  the  whole  blame 
upon  the  Mandara  people,  and  assured  the  Major, 
that  if  he  would  accompany  him  in  a  projected  ex- 
pedition against  Mungo,  he  would  see  how  his  people 


THE  SHUWAS  AND  MARGHI. 


273 


could  fight,  when  he  was  with  them.  The  gallant 
officer,  nothing  daunted  by  past  reverses,  expressed 
his  willingness  to  go,  at  which  the  sheik  was  much 
pleased. 

Another  route  southward  from  Kooka  lies  a  little 
to  the  west  of  that  which  we  have  just  pursued,  and 
leads  us  to  Adamawa,  which  appears  to  be  the  limits 
of  Mahometanism  and  civilisation  in  the  interior  of 
Africa,  north  of  the  equator.  It  leads  through  the 
fertile  province  of  Grhamdergu,  inhabited  by  Shuwas, 
some  of  whom  we  have  already  met  with ;  a  small, 
slender,  light-coloured  people,  of  considerable  in- 
dustry and  activity.  We  have  had  a  specimen  of 
this  tribe  in  Barca  Grana,  who  was  taken  as  a  slave 
when  young ;  and  having  gained  the  favour  of  the 
Sheik  of  Bornu,  was  raised  to  the  highest  posts  of 
honour  in  the  kingdom,  though  still  a  slave.  But 
Barca  was  of  a  strong  herculean  frame  of  body, 
which,  with  undaunted  courage,  gave  him  great 
superiority  amongst  a  people  who  fight  with  spears. 
The  country  here  is  low,  flat,  and  marshy ;  and  wild 
hogs  abound  in  the  woods.  The  inhabitants  are 
poor,  with  little  of  the  civilisation  of  life. 

After  the  Shuwas  you  would  find  the  Marghi,  a 
pagan  tribe,  and  almost  savage.  The  men  wear  beads 
and  iron  rings  on  their  wrists  and  ankles,  and  some- 
times an  iron  chain  round  their  waist.  They  have  no 
covering  except  the  funo  or  apron  about  their  loins. 
It  is  a  fertile  country,  abounding  in  corn,  with  nume- 
rous small  towns  and  villages.  These  people  have  a 
novel  and  singular  way  of  settling  disputes  amongst 

T 


274 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


themselves.  Instead  of  boxing  or  shooting  each  other, 
or  fighting  with  sword  or  spear,  like  inhabitants  of 
more  civilized  countries,  they  leave  the  trouble  and 
danger  of  a  conflict  to  their  cocks,  who  are  naturally 
provided  with  weapons  for  this  purpose.  The  two 
litigants  repair  to  a  holy  rock,  each  carrying  a  cock, 
to  whom  he  entrusts  his  honour  and  interests.  These 
feathered  animals  are  then  set  against  each  other, 
and  the  owner  of  the  winning  bird  gains  the  cause 
against  his  adversary.  Both  par- 
ties are  satisfied  with  the  issue  of 
the  encounter,  supposing  it  to  be 
decided  by  a  supernatural  power 
to  which  man  must  submit. 

Proceeding  southward,  through  a 
mountainous  region  infested  with 
bandits,  we  should  arrive  amongst 
the  Kanuri  people.  They  gene- 
rally go  naked,  except  having  a 
narrow  strip  of  leather  about  their 
loins  5  but  this  is  often  deemed 
unnecessary.  The  men  are  tall,  of  fine  form,  and 
of  various  shades  of  colour,  from  the  glossy  black 
to  a  light  copper  hue. 

Travelling  in  these  districts,  you  would  require  to 
practice  a  good  deal  of  abstinence,  and  be  satisfied 
with  a  little  of  very  simple  fare.  Your  principal 
food  would  be  the  fruit  of  the  toso  tree,  or  the 
Bassia  Parkii,  and  an  esculent  root  called  katakirre. 
The  latter  is  about  the  size  of  a  potato,  its  pulp  re- 
sembling a  radish,  but  softer,  more  succulent,  and 


COVERED  GRANARY. 


PULLO  AND  BATTA  PEOPLE. 


275 


more  nutritious.  It  has  a  milky  juice  which  forms 
a  grateful  restorative  in  this  parched  land.  The 
plant  grows  with  a  single  blade  about  ten  inches  in 
height,  but  the  root  is  often  a  foot  or  eighteen  inches 
beneath  the  surface.  It  is  one  of  nature's  merciful 
provisions  for  man  in  a  thirsty  region. 

The  Pullo  country  lies  to  the  southward,  consisting 
of  a  mountainous  and  rugged  wilderness,  until  you 
reach  a  large  plain  intersected  by  important  rivers. 
Here  the  Benuwy  and  the  Faro  meet.  The  latter  is 
about  six  hundred  feet  in  width,  and  two  feet  deep, 
flowing  with  a  strong  current.  The  Benuwy  is  half 
a  mile  broad,  with  a  deep  and  powerful  stream, 
which  flows  westward  to  join  the  Niger,  and  is  called 
by  Europeans  the  Chadda  or  Tsadda.  This  will 
probably  be  found  a  good  channel  for  navigation, 
when  the  time  for  Africa's  civilisation  shall  arrive. 

Crossing  this  noble  river  and  ascending  the  Bagella 
mountains,  generally  enveloped  in  clouds,  we  see  the 
hamlets  of  the  Batta  people  perched  on  the  tops  of 
hills.  When  the  waters  are  out,  this  mountain 
appears  like  an  island  in  a  huge  lake.  The  wild 
natives  keep  to  their  hilly  eminences  for  defence 
against  the  encroaching  power  of  the  Foolbe  or 
Felattas.  In  their  manner  of  life  they  seem  to  re- 
semble the  Musgo  (who  dwell  a  little  eastward) 
and  other  Negroes  of  mountainous  districts. 

Yola  is  the  capital  of  Adamawa  or  Fumbina, 
much  of  which  has  been  subjected  by  the  Ma- 
hometans.  The  town  is  about  three  miles  in  circuit, 
and  may  contain  12,000  inhabitants.    The  houses 
T  2 


276 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


consist  of  clay  huts  built  in  courts  of  the  same 
material.  Adamawa  only  exports  slaves  and  ivory ; 
the  former  of  which  find  their  way  to  the  Niger  and 
foreign  climes.  There  are  whole  villages  of  slaves, 
who  cultivate  corn  for  their  owners.  The  soil  is 
fertile.  The  woods  abound  with  the  elephant  and 
rhinoceros.  The  wild  bull  and  ayu,  an  animal  some- 
what like  the  seal,  are  also  found  in  the  district.  In 
return  for  their  ivory  and  slaves,  the  inhabitants 
import  cloths,  calicoes,  beads,  and  salt.  The  neigh- 
bouring people  are  Battas.  We  believe  that  no 
foreigner  has  entered  Yola.  Dr.  Barth  who  pene- 
trated thus  far,  through  many  difficulties  and  dangers, 
was  positively  forbidden  to  enter  the  town.  As  the 
natives  have  suffered  so  much  from  the  encroach- 
ments of  the  Foolbe,  they  are  naturally  jealous  of 
strangers,  especially  of  those  who  professedly  come  to 
see  their  country. 


LAKE  CHAD. 


277 


CHAP.  XII. 

Lake  Chad. — Its  Inhabitants.  —  Catching  and  cooking  Fish. — Ele- 
phants.—  Monsters. — Burwha. — Woodi. — Lari. — Death  of  Mr. 
Overweg. — Wild  Guides  and  Bobbers.  — Elephant  Hunt. — Angala. 
— Death  of  Ensign  Toole. — Battle  with  the  Baghirmis.  —  Showy 
on  the  Shary. — Giraffes. — The  Shuwas. — Conversations  with  them. 
— Nude  Skippers. — Up  the  Kiver  to  Loggun. — Polite  Keception. 
—  A  Bundle  of  Clothes.  —  Mercantile  Sultan. — Whispering. — 
Lady  Thieves. — Family  Poison  wanted.  —  Mosquitoes. 

It  is  now  time  to  take  a  survey  of  the  Lake  Chad, 
which  covers  a  surface  of  many  thousands  of  square 
miles  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Kooka.  This 
large  expanse  of  water  has  been  an  object  of  great 
interest  to  foreigners,  though  it  is  not  so  to  the  people 
of  the  land.  It  is  in  fact  of  no  use  to  any  one,  save 
to  the  wild  people  who  inhabit  the  islands  with 
which  it  is  studded.  At  some  future  period,  it  may 
be  an  important  part  of  African  geography,  and  one 
of  the  most  delightful  spots  of  its  central  regions. 

The  Biddomas,  who  dwell  in  the  isles  of  this  lake, 
are  one  of  the  wildest  and  most  savage  tribes  of  men. 
They  have  large  mouths,  a  sunken  eye,  and  flat 
features :  their  look  is  morose  and  repugnant,  and  their 

T  3 


278 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


neck  long.  The  men  let  their  hair  grow,  and  plait 
and  twist  it  into  knots.  In  early  years  they  collect 
beads  and  other  ornaments,  which  they  wear  round 
their  necks,  but  which  are  given  to  their  wives  on 
marriage.  They  go  about  armed  with  a  spear ;  but 
when  they  visit  the  shores,  are  shy  and  reserved  in 
their  manners.  They  seldom  come  to  the  mainland 
except  when  they  want  to  get  or  steal  something ;  for 
they  are  confirmed  and  adept  robbers.  They  traverse 
the  lake  in  canoes  which  they  manage  with  great  ex- 
pertness;  and  keep  the  entire  navigation  in  their 
own  hands.  Hence  it  is  impossible  to  attack  them 
in  their  homes,  to  which  they  quickly  convey  all 
stolen  property. 

The  banks  of  the  lake  are  generally  swampy,  the 
soil  consisting  of  black  mud,  in  which  rushes  and 
reeds  grow  luxuriantly.  Wild  fowl  are  abundant  on 
the  margin,  and  the  waters  teem  with  excellent  fish. 
Do  you  ask  what  those  people  are  about  in  the  water, 
women  and  children  encircling  the  shore  in  a  kind 
of  single  file  ?  Watch  them,  and  you  will  see  that 
they  are  driving  a  quantity  of  the  finny  tribe  before 
them  into  the  shallows,  where  the  frightened  fish  are 
easily  caught  by  the  hand,  or  even  leap  ashore,  in 
a  vain  attempt  to  escape  from  their  pursuers.  Now 
a  fire  is  made :  and  a  stick  being  run  through  the 
mouth  into  the  belly  of  each  fish,  it  is  stuck  into  the 
ground  close  to  the  clear  flame.  The  roasting  fish 
can  be  turned  by  the  tail,  so  that  both  sides  are 
cooked ;  and  the  repast  which  they  afford  is  far  from 
despicable.  They  resemble  mullets.  A  great  quantity 


ENVIRONS  OF  THE  LAKE. 


279 


are  caught  with  nets  in  the  Yeo,  which  flows  into 
the  lake  a  little  north  of  Kooka,  and  being  dried, 
are  sold  in  all  towns  of  the  vicinity. 

Continuing  to  pass  northward,  along  the  western 
side  of  the  lake,  we  traverse  a  district  full  of  wild 
beasts,  and  reach  the  town  of  Burwha.  This  is  a 
frontier  town  of  five  or  six  thousand  inhabitants, 
which  has  a  high  wall  and  dry  ditch,  and  is  otherwise 
defended  in  order  to  keep  off  the  Tuarick  Arabs 
who  infest  the  deserts.  In  proceeding  farther,  we 
enter  a  forest  of  acacias  and  underwood,  a  favourite 
haunt  of  elephants  and  other  monsters ;  and  in 
which  is  Woodi,  the  little  capital  of  this  district, 
governed  by  a  sheik.  Stay!  there  is  a  snake  of 
no  ordinary  size !  It  is  like  a  coluber,  of  horrid 
appearance,  not  less  than  eighteen  feet  long.  If 
you  kill  it  you  will  find  in  its  belly  several  pounds 
of  fat,  which  the  natives  esteem  highly  as  a  specific 
for  the  diseases  of  cattle. 

At  the  north-western  corner  of  the  lake  is  Lari,  a 
small  town  standing  on  an  eminence.  Its  dwelling 
huts  are  built  of  rushes,  round  and  conical ;  with  a 
mat  hung  up  at  the  only  aperture,  which  serves  for 
door,  window,  and  chimney.  A  screen  of  mats  is  used 
to  divide  the  little  house,  when  part  is  allotted  to 
the  women. 

In  this  vicinity,  are  a  number  of  petty  villages, 
inhabited  by  the  Kanembo,  consisting  of  a  cluster  of 
huts  erected  under  the  shade  of  a  tree.  The  men 
wear  only  the  funo,  and  a  singular  head-piece, 
being  a  cap  with  a  red  bandage  and  a  crown  of 

T  4 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


2S0 


bristling  reeds.  They  are  adorned  with  a  necklace 
of  white  beads,  and  with  several  greegrees  or  charms. 


KANEMBO  CHIEF  AND  MAN. 

They  carry  a  spear,  shield,  and  javelins;  and  when 
mustered  by  their  chiefs,  form  an  essential  part  of 


DEATH  OF  MR.  0VERWEG. 


2S1 


the  army  of  Bornu.  A  great  many  of  the  Kanembo 
live  in  Kooka,  constituting  one  element  of  its  popu- 
lation ;  but  their  rude  manners  do  not  appear  to  be 
much  altered  by  living  in  the  capital. 

It  was  in  a  pretty  hamlet  of  the  above  description, 
called  Maduwarrie,  that  Mr.  Overweg  breathed  his 
last.  This  zealous  traveller  is  probably  the  only 
European  who  ever  visited  the  islands  of  the  lake : 
and  he  would  have  had  some  curious  information  to 
give  about  its  wild  inhabitants,  if  he  had  survived. 
His  health  had  suffered  from  the  humid  climate  in 
which  he  was  pursuing  his  discoveries ;  and  one  day, 
whilst  shooting  in  the  marshes,  he  was  seized  with 
cold,  followed  by  a  fever,  under  which  he  rapidly 
sunk.  He  left  no  regular  journal  or  papers  that 
were  of  any  use ;  only  a  number  of  scraps,  which  he 
had  intended  to  form  into  a  diary ;  but  which  were 
unintelligible  to  any  body  but  himself. 

Should  you  wish  to  survey  the  northern  side  of 
the  lake,  you  must  have  an  escort  of  Arabs.  The 
country  is  very  wild,  forming  the^  southern  border  of 
the  desert ;  and  is  inhabited  by  a  few  tribes  of  its 
roving  inhabitants.  They  once  held  the  extensive 
government  of  Kanem ;  but  made  themselves  so 
obnoxious  to  the  neighbours  by  their  predatory 
habits,  that  a  combination  was  formed  against  them, 
by  which  a  great  part  of  them  were  cut  off.  They 
now  have  only  a  few  temporary  settlements,  ready 
to  be  abandoned  at  the  first  alarm  of  a  foe. 

The  whole  country  is  over-run  with  large  and 
small  bands  of  robbers.    Your  own  escort  would 


232 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


prove  as  great  plunderers  as  any  from  whom  they 
could  protect  you ;  so  that  you  would  find  yourself 
to  be  really  associated  with  lawless  bandits,  and 
wrould  have  to  brave  the  consequences  of  their  fight- 
ing with  the  natives.  The  distracted  state  of  the 
country  cannot  be  surpassed.  Every  one's  hand  seems 
to  be  against  his  neighbour ;  and  the  differing  tribes 
plunder  one  another  whenever  opportunity  occurs, 
living  in  a  constant  state  of  alarm.  On  this  account 
you  could  not  reach  the  east  of  the  lake  by  passing 
along  its  northern  border  ;  which  would  otherwise 
be  the  best  route. 

Therefore  we  must  start  again  from  Kooka.  To 
travel  close  by  the  lake  would  be  almost  impossible, 
from  the  marshy  character  of  its  shores,  the  in- 
numerable hosts  of  mosquitoes  which  frequent  the 
margin,  and  the  wild  beasts  which  we  have  already 
mentioned.  How  little  the  elephants  care  for  man, 
may  be  gathered  from  a  hunt  perpetrated  by  Major 
Denham  and  some  of  the  sheik's  people.  Finding 
three  large  elephants  grazing  near  the  water,  the 
hunting  party  prepared  for  action.  The  footmen 
were  ordered  to  remain  behind,  and  four  horsemen 
approached  the  game.  At  first  the  creatures  did  not 
seem  to  care  for  their  hunters,  or  the  wild  cries  which 
they  uttered ;  but  afterwards  they  gave  a  loud  roar 
that  shook  the  forest,  and  moved  slowly  off,  the 
largest  keeping  in  the  rear.  He  was  intercepted,  and 
a  spear  was  thrown,  which  struck  him  under  the 
tail.  He  only  gave  a  roar,  and  lifting  his  proboscis 
discharged  a  volley  of  sand  that  nearly  blinded  the 


LAKE  CHAD  —  ELEPHANT  HUNT. 


283 


horsemen.  He  turned  towards  the  place  where  the 
footmen  were  stationed,  who  all  scampered  off  as  fast 
as  possible ;  and  the  major's  servant  was  so  frightened 
that  he  did  not  recover  the  shock  that  day.  The  noble 
beast  went  onward  at  a  clumsy  rolling  walk,  which 
kept  the  horses  at  a  short  gallop.  The  last  of  two 
balls  which  struck  him  gave  him  a  moment's  uneasi- 
ness ;  a  spear  flew  off  from  his  tough  hide ;  and  the 
hunters  wisely  left  him  to  himself. 

Eight  elephants  now  appeared,  doubtless  sum- 
moned by  those  which  had  been  annoyed,  and  came 
towards  the  hunting  party,  who  thought  it  prudent  to 
drive  them  away.  But  the  creatures  allowed  the  men 
to  approach  them  closely  before  they  would  even  turn 
their  backs;  not  caring  for  the  spears  that  were 
thrown  at  them,  and  only  frightened  at  flashes  from 
the  guns.  Throwing  out  a  great  quantity  of  sand, 
they  majestically  retreated.  A  number  of  birds, 
somewhat  like  thrushes,  were  perched  on  their  backs, 
said  to  be  very  useful  to  the  elephant  in  picking  off 
vermin  from  those  parts  of  his  body  which  he 
cannot  reach.  It  is  a  wonder  that  the  huntsmen 
were  not  all  killed;  since,  though  the  elephant  is 
comparatively  harmless,  he  often  becomes  infuriated 
when  attacked,  and  blinding  his  pursuer  with  sand, 
seizes  and  crushes  him  to  death. 

Passing  through  Angornu,  which  we  have  already 
described,  we  coast  the  lake  to  Angala,  a  town  si- 
tuated near  its  most  southerly  point,  where  it  is 
formed  into  a  kind  of  gulf.  Angala  is  the  capital  of 
an  ancient  government  subject  to  Bornu:  and  Fl 


234 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


Kanemy  had  married  the  daughter  of  its  sultan. 
She  was  now  divorced  from  him,  and  lived  near  her 
father,  who  had  built  a  house  for  her  occupancy,  and 
furnished  her  with  a  large  establishment. 

"She  was  a  very  handsome,  beautifully  formed 
Negress,  of  about  thirty-five,  and  had  imbibed  much 
of  that  softness  of  manner,  which  is  so  extremely 
prepossessing  in  the  sheik.  Seated  on  an  earthen 
throne,  covered  with  a  Turkey  carpet,  and  surrounded 
by  twenty  of  her  favourite  slaves,  all  dressed  alike, 
in  fine  white  shirts,  which  reached  to  their  feet ;  their 
necks,  ears,  and  noses  thickly  ornamented  with  coral ; 
she  held  her  audience  with  very  considerable  grace. 
Four  eunuchs  guarded  the  entrance;  and  a  Negro 
dwarf,  who  measured  three  feet  all  but  an  inch,  the 
keeper  of  her  keys,  sat  before  her  with  the  insignia 
of  office  on  his  shoulder,  and  richly  dressed  in  Soudan 
tobes.  This  little  person  afforded  us  a  subject  of 
conversation,  and  much  laughter. 

"Miram  inquired  whether  we  had  such  little 
fellows  in  my  country ;  and  wThen  I  answered  in  the 
affirmative,  she  said,  CA h  gieb !  what  are  they  good 
for  ?  do  they  ever  have  children  ? '  I  answered, 6  Yes  ! 
that  we  had  instances  of  their  being  fathers  to  tall 
and  proper  men  ? '  '  Oh  !  wonderful ! '  she  replied ; 
( I  thought  so :  they  must  be  better  than  this  dog  of 
mine ;  for  I  have  given  him  eight  of  my  youngest 
and  handsomest  slaves,  but  it  is  all  to  no  purpose.' 
The  wretch,  and  an  ugly  wretch  he  was,  shook  his 
large  head,  and  slobbered  copiously  from  his  exten- 


ANGALA  —  ENSIGN  TOOLE. 


285 


sive  mouth,  at  this  flattering  proof  of  his  mistress's 
partiality." 

Shortly  after  this,  on  their  return  from  Loggun,  a 
gallant  young  Englishman  died  at  Angala.  He  was 
ensign  in  a  regiment  stationed  at  Malta;  and  had 
readily  volunteered  to  join  Major  Denham  at  Kooka, 
when  it  was  found  expedient  to  send  help  to  the 
mission.  He  made  an  extraordinary  journey  across 
the  desert,  and  proceeded  with  his  companion  along 
the  south  of  the  lake.  But  his  constitution  began 
to  give  way,  and  he  became  so  seriously  ill  that  the 
major  hastened  with  him  to  Angala,  where  they  had 
been  hospitably  received,  and  where  every  atten- 
tion was  paid  to  the  dying  officer.  He  rallied  for 
two  days;  then  a  cold  shivering  came  upon  him; 
nature  was  exhausted,  and  he  expired  without  a  groan, 
aged  twenty-two.  As  the  sun  was  sinking,  his  body 
was  interred  in  a  deep  grave,  under  a  clump  of 
blooming  mimosas,  north-west  of  the  town,  and  a 
large  pile  of  thorns  and  of  the  prickly  tulloh  were 
placed  over,  to  protect  it  from  being  disturbed  by 
hyaenas. 

Mr.  Toole's  death  was  perhaps  hastened  by  the 
rapid  manner  in  which  they  had  to  travel  from 
Loggun,  which  was  threatened  by  the  Baghirmis, 
and  by  the  want  of  proper  provisions  on  the  way. 
The  Sheik  of  Bornu  came  with  an  army,  hastily 
gathered,  to  repel  these  invaders;  and  the  hostile 
forces  met  near  Angala.  The  enemy,  who  were  in 
great  strength,  came  forward  boldly  and  offered 


2S6 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


battle;  which  the  sheik  declined,  as  he  could  not 
get  into  so  favourable  a  position  for  fighting  as  he 
desired.  The  alarm  at  Angala  and  Angornu  was 
great ;  as  the  departure  of  a  kafila  for  Soudan  had 
deprived  the  sheik  of  thirty  Arabs,  his  best  warriors. 

The  Baghirmis  seeing  his  hesitancy  to  fight,  and 
attributing  it  to  fear,  now  ventured  to  attack  him  in 
the  plain  near  which  he  had  encamped.  He  disposed 
his  few  Arabs  and  forty  Musgo  musketeers  on  his 
flanks ;  and  hoisting  his  green  flag  in  the  centre, 
moved  forward  in  the  midst  of  his  Kanembo  spear- 
men. Two  guns  were  in  front,  which  had  been 
mounted  by  Mr.  Hillman,  a  carpenter  connected  with 
the  British  mission.  The  Baghirmis  came  forward  in 
a  solid  mass,  five  thousand  strong,  with  two  hundred 
chiefs  at  their  head,  and  made  directly  for  the  centre 
where  the  standard  of  the  prophet  was  unfurled.  The 
artillery  drove  them  back.  Then  they  fell  on  Barca 
Grana's  flank  with  so  much  impetuosity,  that  all  but 
himself  and  a  chosen  band  gave  way.  Here  Ma- 
ramy,  Denham's  friend  and  preserver  in  the  fight 
with  the  Felattas,  fell  by  the  thrust  of  a  spear, 
whilst  he  was  drawing  his  own  from  the  body  of  a 
chief  whom  he  had  killed.  The  Bornuese  horse  and 
Arabs  now  closed  upon  the  Baghirmis,  who  fled. 
Only  one  of  their  two  hundred  chiefs  is  said  to  have 
escaped.  Seven  sons  of  the  sultan  were  among  the 
slain,  and  seventeen  hundred  men  of  less  note.  Num- 
bers were  killed  by  the  villagers  in  their  flight ;  and 
many  were  drowned  in  a  stream  which  they  attempted 
to  cross,  pressed  by  Kanembo  spears. 


THE  SHABY. 


All  the  people  praised  **  the  guns,  the  guns,  which 
made  the  dogs  skip."  The  sheik,  afraid  that  too 
much  might  be  made  of  the  guns,  said,  that  truly 
the  guns  were  wonderful,  but  that  he  lifted  up  his 
hands  in  prayer,  and  from  that  moment  the  victory 
was  decided.  The  booty  gained  by  the  conquerors 
was  considerable;  four  hundred  and  eighty  horses, 
two  hundred  women,  two  eunuchs,  and  the  baggage 
of  the  princes.  Fifty  of  the  women,  belonging  to 
the  sultan's  sons,  were  choice  females  of  great  beauty, 
and  were  given  up  to  the  sheik.  Besides  these,  a 
crowd  of  slaves  were  taken,  and  sold  in  the  Kooka 
market  for  two  or  three  bullocks  a-piece. 

Going  eastward,  we  reach  Showy  on  the  Shary. 
This  is  a  fine  river,  about  half  a  mile  wide  at  this 
place,  and  flows  gently  into  the  Chad,  at  the  rate  of 
two  or  three  miles  an  hour.  In  the  centre  of  the 
stream,  opposite  the  town,  is  a  beautiful  island.  A 
sail  down  the  river  presents  some  exquisite  scenery, 
from  the  variety  and  richness  of  the  foliage  which 
lines  the  banks.  The  trees  are  hung  all  over  with 
creeping  plants  of  various  colours;  which,  by  the 
long  windings  of  the  stream,  are  displayed  to  great 
advantage.  About  a  dozen  miles  from  the  lake  is 
another  island,  uninhabited,  but  abounding  in  game 
of  various  kinds,  and  with  centipedes,  scorpions,  and 
porcupines.  Crocodiles,  hippopotami,  and  buffaloes 
swarm  about  the  river.  Near  its  mouth  are  other 
small  islands  covered  with  reeds  and  bamboos ;  and 
the  banks  here  are  very  marshy,  swarming  with 
mosquitoes  and  other  noxious  insects.    The  nearest 


288 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


island  of  the  Biddomas  to  this  part  of  the  lake  is 
said  to  be  a  three  days'  voyage  for  a  canoe. 

Giraffes  abound  in  this  district.  On  being  chased, 
they  move  away  awkwardly,  from  being  so  low  be- 
hind, seeming  to  drag  the  hinder  legs  after  them : 
they  are  not  swift. 


GIRAFFE. 


The  chief  inhabitants  of  this  country  are  a  tribe  of 
Shuwas,  more  simple  and  unsophisticated  than  those 
of  the  west.  The  men  have  fine  large  features  with 
much  expression  of  countenance,  and  a  long  bushy 
beard.  They  do  not  live  in  towns,  but  in  tents  of 
dressed  hides  and  huts  of  rushes,  subsisting  chiefly 
on  the  milk  of  their  camels  and  cows.  Their  camps 
are  circular,  with  two  entrances,  by  which  to  drive 
in  and  out  their  cattle.    They  despise  the  Negro 


SIIUWA  ARABS. 


289 


nations  around  them,  though  they  are  necessarily 
subject,  in  the  way  of  tribute,  to  the  king  in  whose 
territory  they  reside. 

Major  Denham  expresses  himself  as  greatly  pleased 
with  the  simple  manners  of  these  Shuwa  Arabs. 
They  salute  a  stranger  by  clapping  their  hands 
gently,  and  then  extending  the  palms  towards  him, 
exclaiming,  "Are  you  well  and  happy?"  One  of 
their  chiefs,  a  patriarchal  man,  looked  at  the  Euro- 
pean for  some  time  with  great  earnestness,  and  at 
last  said,  "  What  brought  you  here?  They  say  your 
country  is  a  moon  from  Tripoli?" 

"  To  see  by  whom  the  country  is  inhabited,  and 
whether  it  has  lakes  and  rivers  and  mountains  like 
our  own." 

"Ami  have  you  been  three  years  from  your  home  ? 
Are  not  your  eyes  dimmed  with  straining  to  the  north, 
where  all  your  thoughts  must  ever  be  ?  Oh,  you  are 
men,  men,  indeed  !  Why  if  my  eyes  do  not  see  the 
wife  and  children  of  my  heart  for  ten  days,  when  they 
should  be  closed  with  sleep  they  are  flowing  with 
tears." 

He  asked  if  it  was  true  that  the  dollar  came  out  of 
the  earth  ?  And  upon  having  the  matter  explained  to 
him,  said,  "  You  are  not  Jews  ?  " 

"No." 

"  Christians,  then  ?  " 
"  Even  so." 

"  I  have  read  of  you :  you  are  better  than  Jews. 
Are  Jews  white,  like  you  ?  " 

"  No ;  rather  more  like  yourself ;  very  dark." 
u 


290 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  IIOME. 


"  Eeallj.  Why,  are  they  not  quite  white  ?  They 
are  a  bad  people." 

On  taking  leave,  he  took  my  hand  and  said,  "  I 
see  you  are  a  sultan.  I  never  saw  any  body  like 
you.  The  sight  of  you  is  as  pleasing  to  my  eyes  as 
your  words  are  to  my  ear.  My  heart  says  you  are 
my  friend.  May  you  die  at  your  own  tents,  and  in 
the  arms  of  your  wives  and  family." 

"  Amen." 

There  is  something  romantic  in  the  language  and 
manners  of  these  Shuwas,  who  seem  to  be  imbued 
with  the  poetic  spirit  of  the  east.  A  girl  sits  down 
by  your  tent,  covering  her  face,  but  leaving  her 
bosom  bare ;  "A  happy  day  to  you  !  your  friend  has 
brought  you  milk.  You  gave  her  something  so 
handsome  yesterday,  she  has  not  forgotten  it.  Oh  ! 
how  her  eyes  ache  to  see  all  you  have  got  in  that 
wooden  house !  (pointing  to  a  trunk.)  We  have  no 
fears  now :  we  know  you  are  good :  and  our  eyes 
which  before  could  not  look  on  you,  now  search  after 
you  always.  They  bade  us  beware  of  you,  at  first, 
for  you  were  bad,  very  bad  :  but  we  know  better  now. 
How  it  pains  us  that  you  are  so  white !  " 

Aisha,  the  daughter  of  a  chief  comes  to  revisit  the 
stranger,  two  days  after  the  fight,  and  with  weeping 
eyes  says,  "  A  happy  day  to  my  friend  !  What  can 
he  think  of  Aisha's  not  having  seen  him  for  two 
days?  But  what  could  she  do?  Eight  of  her 
father's  house  fell  beneath  the  spears  of  Amanook ! 
She  was  obliged  to  stay  and  mourn  over  them ;  but 
she  mourned  more  in  her  heart  that  she  saw  not  her 


A  SHUWA  GIRL. 


291 


friend  !  Still  they  deserved  her  tears,  for  they  were 
brave  and  beloved.  But  then  the  whole  camp  would 
have  wept  for  them,  and  the  stranger  was  alone,  and 
had  nobody  to  bring  him  milk : —  no,  no,  she  was 
wrong.  Last  night  she  would  have  come,  and  had 
passed  the  barrier :  she  feared  nothing  but  giving  pain 
to  him  she  thought  of,  —  but  she  knew  not  herself. 
The  hyaenas  howled ;  they  came  near  her :  her  heart 
was  small,  and  she  turned  back  !  " 

Being  pressed  to  enter  the  tent,  the  girl  gets 
frightened,  and  exclaims,  "  Wait  here !  sit  down 
here  on  the  sand !  Aisha  is  now  frightened  at  her 
friend !  What  does  he  ask  her  to  do  ?  Would  he 
see  her  beaten  with  leather  thongs  till  she  bleeds  ? 
Would  he  have  her  brother's  dagger  red  with  her 
blood  —  the  blood  of  her  heart,  which  now  beats  so 
strong,  and  bids  it  go  to  him  it  beats  for,  while  her 
head  tells  her  to  fear  ?  Aisha's  heart  is  weaker  than 
her  head :  her  eyes  have  seen  her  stranger  friend, 
and  have  seen  none  like  him  !  " 

If  this  be  not  making  love,  what  is  ?  A  present 
being  offered,  with  an  admonition  to  return  to  the 
camp ;  she  replies,  "I  go  ;  for  it  is  now  day.  What, 
take  pretty  things  from  her  friend  now,  when  she 
knows  his  eyes  have  no  pleasure  in  her !  No  —  No  ! 
She  now  leaves  him :  but  when  night  comes,  and  all 
her  house  will  be  singing  over  the  dead,  then  Aisha 
will  have  no  fears  —  she  will  leave  the  tent :  but  her 
stranger  must  come  with  his  gun,  and  protect  her  from 
the  hyaenas."  Poor  daughter  of  the  desert !  We  fear 
u  2 


292 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


she  had  lost  her  heart  for  a  stranger,  in  a  way  that 
might  form  the  subject  of  an  interesting  romance. 

We  have  said  that  the  colour  and  religion  of  a 
Christian  are  great  scarecrows  for  the  people  of  Africa. 
And  this  not  only  with  the  Negroes.  The  Shuwa 
girl  pitied  the  white  man's  skin.  Three  wives  of 
Shuwa  chiefs  are  passing  by  the  door  of  the  stran- 
ger's dwelling  in  the  city ;  and  after  some  consul- 
tation, they  venture  to  approach  him.  The  eldest 
begins : 

"  What  do  you  here  ?  You  do  not  buy  or  sell  ? 
Is  it  true  that  you  have  no  female  slaves  ?  No  one 
to  shampoo  you  after  a  south  wind  ?  " 

"  Quite  true :  for  I  am  a  stranger,  and  far  from 
home  and  alone." 

"  You  are  a  kafir,  (infidel,)  Khaled  :  and  it  is  you 
Christians,  with  the  blue  eyes  like  the  hyaena,  that 
eat  the  blacks,  whenever  you  can  get  them  far  enough 
away  from  their  own  country." 

"  Grod  deliver  me  from  his  evil  glance,"  said  a  girl, 
u  is  that  true  ?  Why  they  have  been  here  now  for 
some  time,  and  don't  seem  very  savage !  Would  it 
not  be  better  to  give  him  a  wife  or  two ;  teach  him 
to  pray,  like  a  Mussulman,  and  never  let  him  return 
among  his  own  filthy  race  ?  " 

66  Grod  forbid,"  says  the  old  woman,  who  begins  to 
reason  with  her  youthful  and  more  merciful  com- 
panion; and  then  cries  out,  "What  infatuation  is 
this?  Why,  I  tell  you  again  and  again,  he  is  an 
uncircumcised  kafir  !  neither  washes,  nor  prays  !  eats 
pork  !  and  will  go  to  hell !  " 


THE  FEOFLE  OF  LOGGTJN. 


293 


"  Oh,  oli !  the  Lord  preserve  us  from  the  infernal 
devil !  "    And  screaming  aloud,  they  all  run  off. 

The  people  of  Showy  are  indolent  and  mirthful. 
The  men  do  little  but  lounge  about  during  the  day. 
At  night  they  fish  in  the  river;  and  spend  the  other 
hours  of  darkness. in  dancing  to  the  sound  of  a  drum. 
The  women  sit  near,  with  covered  faces,  and  scream 
their  approbation.  But  what  is  this  merry  party, 
amusing  themselves  near  the  river  with  a  long  skip- 
ping rope  ?  They  are  black  figures,  unincumbered 
with  any  drapery  but  what  nature  has  given  them  : 
fine  figures  too ;  and  they  perform  the  jumping  and 
skipping  very  well.  Gentle  reader  !  they  are  young 
ladies  of  good  size ;  who  appear  to  be  quite  unso- 
phisticated about  the  decorum  of  dress,  and  to  see  no 
necessity  for  covering  their  form  from  the  eye  even  of 
a  stranger.  Let  them  romp  away !  And  may  they 
never  know  the  shame  of  evil !  When  they  marry 
they  must  wear  veils. 

Passing  up  the  Shary,  through  difficult  morasses 
and  forests,  and  across  tributary  streams,  we  shall 
find  our  way  to  Loggun,  the  capital  of  a  small  king- 
dom. Its  western  gate  leads  to  the  principal  street, 
which  is  very  wide  and  has  dwellings  on  each  side, 
built  with  much  regularity.  The  people  come  out 
to  see  us ;  and  presently  an  officer  from  the  palace 
advances,  bending  very  low,  and  joining  his  hands. 
The  slaves  who  attend  him  bow  still  lower.  He  has 
come  from  the  sultan  to  give  us  a  welcome,  and  now 
precedes  us  to  the  huts  appointed  for  our  resting 
place.    As  we  pass  along  the  street,  every  party  that 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


we  see  advance  and  salute  us  in  a  similar  manner. 
The  accommodation  afforded  us  is  good. 

You  are  going  to  visit  the  sultan.  Take  your  pre- 
sent with  you.  Ten  huge  Negroes,  of  high  rank,  bare 
headed,  and  carrying  large  clubs,  come  and  precede 
you  to  the  palace.  Passing  through  some  dark  rooms, 
you  reach  a  large  square  court,  where  many  persons 
are  assembled,  all  seated  on  the  ground.  In  the 
middle  is  a  vacant  space ;  and  you  are  desired  to  sit 
down  there.  Two  slaves  fan  the  air  through  a  lattice 
work,  behind  which  the  sultan  is  concealed.  On  a 
given  signal,  the  screen  is  removed,  and  you  see  a 
living  creature  on  a  carpet,  wrapped  in  silk  tobes, 
and  having  the  head  so  enveloped  in  shawls  that 
only  his  eyes  are  visible.  That  bundle  of  clothes  is 
the  sultan  of  Loggun.  Before  this  bundle  all  the 
court  fall  prostrate,  and  pour  sand  on  their  heads ; 
whilst  eight  funfrums  and  horns  give  an  inharmonious 
salute. 

His  majesty  whispers  a  welcome.  For  it  is  not  good 
manners  to  speak  loud  in  Loggun.  You  can  scarcely 
hear  the  gentlemen's  voices,  when  they  address  you. 
u  Do  you  wish  to  buy  some  handsome  female  slaves  ?  " 
asks  his  majesty,  who  seems  to  have  a  mercantile  turn 
of  mind ;  "  for  if  you  do,  you  need  go  no  farther  :  I 
have  some  hundreds,  and  will  sell  them  to  you  as 
cheap  as  any  one." 

If  you  go  into  the  houses  of  the  Loggunese,  you  will 
find  many  of  them  busy  at  the  loom.  The  women 
are  more  industrious  than  the  men,  and  their  cotton 
cloth  is  of  superior  quality,  especially  on  account  of  a 


L0GGUN  —  INQUISITIVE  LADIES.  295 

fine  glaze  which  they  know  how  to  impart  to  their  in- 
digo-dyed manufacture.  They  are  handsomer,  have 
a  better  carriage  than  the  Bornuese,  and  are  more 
intelligent.  This  last  qualification  is  employed  for 
evil  purposes  as  well  as  good.  "  To  give  them  their 
due,  they  are  the  cleverest,  and  the  most  immoral  race 
I  had  met  with  in  the  black  country."  This  expres- 
sion paints  a  strong  character  in  a  few  words :  but 
seems  to  be  not  far  from  the  truth.  Take  the  fol- 
lowing little  scene  as  a  sample. 

"  The  ladies  of  the  principal  persons  in  the  country 
visited  me,  accompanied  by  one  or  more  female 


LADIES  OF  LOGGUX. 


slaves.  They  examined  everything,  even  to  the 
pockets  of  my  trowsers.  And  more  inquisitive 
ladies  I  never  saw  in  any  country.  They  begged' for 
everything ;  and  nearly  all  attempted  to  steal  some- 
thing :  when  found  out,  they  only  laughed  heartily, 
clapped  their  hands  together,  and  exclaimed,  6  Why, 
how  sharp  he  is  !    Only  think,  why  he  caught  us  !  "' 

U  4 


296 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


The  modesty  of  these  ladies  was  on  a  par  with  their 
honesty. 

But  here  is  something  that  is  new  in  Negroland,  a 
piece  of  money  or  current  coin  !  It  is  not,  indeed,  of 
gold  or  of  silver,  or  of  the  usual  round  shape.  It  is 
composed  of  thin  plates  of  iron,  in  the  form  of  a 
horse-shoe ;.  which  are  made  up  into  parcels  of  ten 
or  twelve,  according  to  the  weight;  and  thirty  of 
these  parcels  are  equal  to  a  dollar.  Still,  this  coin 
is  subject  to  fluctuations  in  value,  in  order  to  suit 
the  sultan's  convenience.  Every  week,  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  Wednesday  market,  a  public  pro- 
clamation is  made,  declaring  the  value  of  the  coin 
for  that  day  and  week.  When  the  sultan  expects  to 
receive  tribute  or  duty,  he  announces  the  currency 
"  below  par : "  and  when  he  is  about  to  make  pur- 
chases, he  always  raises  the  value  of  the  coin.  There 
are  speculators  here  in  this  stock,  as  in  European 
countries ;  and  they  have  "  bulls  "  and  "  bears  "  in 
Negroland,  as  well  as  in  the  London  Exchange  or 
Paris  Bourse. 

We  should  scarcely  like  to  live  in  Loggun.  There 
are  two  principal  annoyances,  thieves  and  insects. 
To  the  former  we  have  already  adverted  in  the  case 
of  the  ladies ;  and  the  gentlemen  do  not  seem  to  fall 
far  behind.  When  one  of  the  sultans  wanted  a  pre- 
sent equal  in  value  to  what  had  been  given  to  his 
rival,  and  the  stranger  rather  demurred  to  this  im- 
position; he  was  informed  that  the  sultan's  slaves 
were  the  most  expert  thieves  in  the  world,  and  that 
if  their  master  gave  the  word  "Forage,"  no  walls 


INCONVENIENCES  IN  LOGGUN. 


297 


could  keep  them  out  This  was  a  hint  which  could 
not  be  neglected.  But  who  were  these  rival  sove- 
reigns ?  They  were  father  and  sen,  mutually  hating 
each  other,  and  each  placed  at  the  head  of  a  political 
party.  Their  love  and  piety  may  be  gathered  from  this 
circumstance,  that  they  both  applied  secretly  to  the 
foreigner  for  a  "  poison  which  would  not  lie  :  "  and 
the  son  sent  three  young  female  slaves  as  a  bribe. 
Expressing  abhorrence  of  such  proceedings,  "  I  had 
the  satisfaction  of  hearing  myself,  and  all  my  coun- 
trymen, pronounced  fools  a  hundred  times  over." 

The  country  of  Loggun  swarms  with  mosquitoes 
and  other  noxious  insects.  This  might  be  expected 
from  its  situation,  amid  the  woody  marshes  of  a  river 
in  a  tropical  climate.  The  wonder  is  that  any  town 
should  be  built  in  such  a  situation.  For  the  resi- 
dents themselves  are  so  troubled  with  mosquitoes, 
that  they  often  require  to  fill  their  huts  with  dense 
smoke  from  wood  fires,  to  get  a  little  respite  during 
the  hours  of  sleep.  Young  chickens  are  sometimes 
destroyed  before  they  are  properly  fledged,  by  the 
stings  of  mosquitoes :  and  a  chief  asserted  that  he 
had  lost  two  children,  who  were  literally  stung  to 
death  by  these  venomous  insects.  Strangers  can 
scarcely  endure  to  remain  in  the  place  at  some  sea- 
sons of  the  year.  The  malaria  proceeding  from  large 
stagnant  pools  which  abound  in  the  district,  is  almost 
as  fatal  in  producing  fevers,  as  the  insects  are  sure  to 
cause  restlessness.  The  capital  is  rather  better  situ- 
ated in  this  respect  than  some  other  towns ;  but  it  is 
bad  enough. 


298 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


CHAP.  XIII. 

Our  Situation. — A  new  Region,  Baghirmi. — Legions  of  Worms. — 
Army  of  black  Ants.  — Massena. — The  Palace.  —  Sultan. — Tribute 
in  Slaves. — Triumphal  Procession  and  Captives. — Waday. — Wara. 

—  Caravans  to  Darfur. —  Nubian  Slaves.  —  Cobbe.  —  Sharpers. — 
The  Sultan. — Sennaar.  —  The  King's  Cut-throat. — Garb. — Harem. 

—  Strange  Notion  of  Beauty.  — Change  of  Government. — Berbers. 

—  Female  Decoys. — Nubian  Desert. — The  Simoom.  —  Catastrophe. 

—  Abyssinia.  —  Gondar.  —  The  former  King. — His  Grandeur. — 
The  People.  —  Eating  a  live  Bullock. — About  the  Town.  —  "Was 
Nebuchadnezzar  a  Saint?" — A  monkish  King. — How  to  fill  the 
Exchequer. — "For  my  Life." — Credulity  of  a  Lady. — Squabbling. 

—  The  Source  of  the  Nile. — Late  Revolution. 

After  these  excursions  about  the  Lake  Chad,  we 
must  proceed  eastward.  But  before  entering  a  new 
kingdom,  and  in  some  respects  a  new  country,  let  us 
pause  for  a  moment,  to  consider  our  position,  and 
the  ground  which  we  have  traversed. 

We  have  passed  through  a  vast  extent  of  in- 
habited country  from  the  western  coast  of  Africa, 
all  more  or  less  civilized.  The  semi-civilization  of 
Senegambia  merges  into  a  higher  type  of  refinement 
when  we  reach  the  Niger ;  and  this  continues  along 
a  line  of  midland  towns,  lying  within  a  narrow  belt 
of  latitude,  until  we  reach  Kooka,  and  the  Lake 


A  GLANCE  AT  THE  COUNTRY. 


299 


Chad.  This  improvement  in  arts  and  manners  (we 
cannot  say  morals,  except  as  to  freedom  from  drun- 
kenness), is  owing  to  the  presence  and  influence  of 
the  Moors  and  Mahometanism.  We  have  looked  at 
the  Moors  and  Arabs  in  their  own  desert  homes,  to 
the  north  of  this  belt;  and  we  have  found  them 
harsh,  wild,  and  cruel ;  inferior  to  the  central  Negroes 
who  have  embraced  Islamism,  and  who  traffic  with 
Barbary.  Glancing  at  the  south  of  this  belt  of 
towns,  we  have  seen  the  pagan  tribes  merge  gradually 
into  barbarism  ;  a  fact  which  was  strongly  marked  in 
our  voyage  down  the  Niger,  and  in  our  excursions 
to  Mandara  and  Adamava. 

Lake  Chad,  again,  is  inhabited  in  its  islands  by 
the  wildest  savages.  Its  northern  border  is  over-run 
by  Arabs,  who  also  belong  to  the  little  desert.  On 
the  southern  border,  as  we  leave  Bornu,  we  return 
towards  barbarism ;  with  a  partial  exception  in 
Loggun  and  one  or  two  towns  on  the  caravan-route 
to  the  East. 

To  the  south  of  this  latitude,  is  a  vast  territory 
little  explored,  consisting  of  more  than  twenty  de- 
grees of  latitude,  and  as  many  of  longitude.  Wan- 
dering tribes  of  Arabs  rove  in  the  north  parts  of 
this  region :  and  the  pagan  natives  are  in  a  state  of 
utter  savagism. 

East  of  the  Shary  is  an  immense  country,  princi- 
pally desert.  Tibbu  Arabs  dwell  in  the  northern 
half,  until  it  becomes  utterly  uninhabitable.  Pagan 
savages  live  in  the  fruitful  parts  of  the  south  But 
we   can  find  a  passage  through  it  traversed  by 


300 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


caravans,  to  Darfur  and  Nubia,  and  thence  to  Egypt 
or  Arabia. 

We  now  cross  the  Logon,  a  river  not  so  wide  but 
more  rapid  than  the  Shary.  Its  water  is  beautifully 
clear,  and  not  a  ripple  disturbs  its  surface.  Here  is 
the  richness  and  silence  of  nature.  A  crocodile  slides 
into  the  stream  as  you  approach  :  and  a  hippopotamus, 
which  has  been  feeding  on  the  grass,  plunges  into 
the  water.  Again,  all  is  quiet :  till  you  hear  the 
leaping  of  fish,  or  the  screeching  of  a  hawk  overhead. 
We  have  now  passed  the  boundary  which  separated 
us  from  east  Negroland  and  are  in  the  country  of 
Baghirmi.  The  first  portion  of  this  territory  is  fer- 
tile because  near  the  river.  Herds  of  cattle  range 
through  the  swampy  meadows,  or  wade  in  the 
water :  the  maraboo  stands  "  like  an  old  man,  its 
head  between  its  shoulders : "  the  pelican,  the  white 
ibis,  and  the  azure-coloured  dedegame  are  seeking 
their  prey ;  ducks  of  many  species  skim  the  surface 
of  the  water :  and  countless  birds  of  bright  plumage, 
of  many  kinds  and  sizes,  sport  in  the  air.  A  few 
hamlets  of  men  peep  through  the  trees. 

But  Dr.  Barth  found  that  the  heart  of  man  was  far 
from  being  in  unison  with  this  rich  and  peaceful 
panorama  of  nature.  When  he  arrived  on  the  east 
side  of  the  river,  the  Sultan  of  Baghirmi  was  absent 
on  a  warlike  expedition;  and  the  mind  of  the 
governor  was  so  poisoned  with  suspicions  through 
the  report  of  some  Arab  travellers  who  had  preceded 
the  European,  that  the  latter  was  forbidden  to 
advance  into  the  country.     He  was  bandied  about 


BAGHIRMI  WORMS  AND  ANTS. 


301 


from  village  to  village  near  the  river,  and  at  last 
made  a  close  prisoner,  till  permission  was  given  to  go 
to  the  capital. 

The  country  had,  indeed,  suffered  much  from 
enemies.    After  many  successful  conflicts  with  the 


encroaching  Felattas,  it  had  succumbed  to  its  eastern 
neighbour,  the  Sultan  of  Waday,  who  plundered  it  of 
its  wealth,  carried  off  many  of  its  people,  and  made 
it  tributary.  In  addition,  it  was  now  suffering  from 
drought,  and  the  ravages  of  worms  and  insects.  Two 
or  three  sorts  of  worms  abound  in  millions,  and 
consume  much  of  the  produce  of  the  people's  labour ; 
who  get  their  revenge  by  feasting  upon  the  invaders 
themselves  when  they  have  become  large  and  fat. 
As  to  white  and  black  ants,  they  are  like  one  of  the 
plagues  of  Egypt :  for  it  seems  almost  impossible  to 


LANCER  OF  BAGHIRMI. 


302 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


preserve  anything  from  their  ravages.  An  assault  by 
an  army  of  the  large  black  ant  is  thus  described. 
"  In  a  thick  uninterrupted  line  about  an  inch  broad, 
they  one  morning  came  suddenly  marching  over  the 
wall  of  my  court-yard ;  and  entering  the  hall  which 
formed  my  residence  by  day  and  night,  they  made 
straight  for  my  storeroom :  but  unfortunately,  my 
couch  being  in  their  way,  they  attacked  my  own 
person  most  fiercely,  and  soon  obliged  me  to  decamp. 
We  then  fell  upon  them,  killing  those  that  were 
straggling  about  and  foraging,  and  burning  the  chief 
body  of  the  army  as  it  came  marching  along,  the 
path.  But  fresh  legions  came  up,  and  it  took  us  at 
least  two  hours,  before  we  could  fairly  break  the 
lines  and  put  the  remainder  of  the  enemy  to  flight." 

Yet  these  ants  have  their  use.  They  cleanse  the 
huts  of  the  negroes^  by  devouring  refuse,  and  killing 
all  kinds  of  vermin,  not  excepting  mice.  The  stores 
of  corn  which  they  lay  up  for  future  use  are  sought  out 
and  plundered  by  the  poor  people.  Different  species 
of  the  ant  tribe,  black,  red,  and  white,  fight  with  and 
devour  one  another ;  so  that  their  intestine  wars  tend 
to  keep  down  their  numbers. 

We  are  now  prepared  to  look  at  Massena,  the 
capital  of  Baghirmi.  It  has  a  ruinous  appearance  : 
indeed  the  walls  are  in  such  a  condition,  that  the 
gates  appear  to  be  only  of  nominal  use.  The  houses 
are  of  clay,  thatched  with  grass,  and  of  frail  con- 
struction :  so  that  they  do  not  seem  to  be  proof  against 
a  violent  storm.  You  may  go  to  market  any  day 
during  some  hours  of  the  morning  and  afternoon ; 


MASSENA  —  SCENES  IN  THE  PALACE.  303 

and  you  will  find  a  pretty  good  supply  of  onions, 
beans,  groundnuts,  milk,  and  red  pepper ;  with  a  few 
sheep  and  cattle.  Beads  from  Europe  are  brought 
here  in  large  quantities,  and  are  retailed  in  the 
adjacent  petty  states. 

Here  is  the  palace,  —  a  large  rectangular  court, 
having  other  courts  within  it,  some  of  which  are  full 
of  huts.  As  the  sultan  is  said  to  have  between  three 
and  four  hundred  wives,  each  of  whom  has  her  own 
nest,  constructed  after  her  own  taste ;  the  agglom- 
eration of  these  dwellings  would  present  a  singular 
appearance  to  a  traveller,  if  he  could  gain  admission 
into  the  women's  quarter  of  the  royal  residence.  And 
we  can  imagine  the  fright  which  must  ensue  from 
the  fall  of  some  of  these  frail  tenements  during  a 
storm  ; — an  accident  which  sometimes  happens,  fill- 
ing the  royal  precincts  with  an  uproarious  noise  of  fe- 
male voices,  as  if  an  enemy  were  storming  the  town. 

Here,  as  at  Loggun,  a  stranger  must  address  the 
king  seated  behind  a  screen,  so  that  his  august 
features  are  not  visible.  It  seems  a  very  unsatis- 
factory mode  of  presentation ;  but  etiquette  must  be 
preserved  in  every  place.  After  receiving  your 
presents,  the  sultan  would  probably  offer  in  return  a 
handsome  female  slave ;  as  this  is  the  most  valuable 
commodity  in  these  regions.  If  she  be  refused,  he 
would  send  you  a  number  of  shirts,  which  you  could 
dispose  of  in  the  market.  The  tribute  which  the 
sultan  pays  to  the  King  of  Waday,  every  third  year, 
consists  of  a  hundred  male  slaves,  thirty  handsome 
female  slaves,  a  hundred  horses,  and  a  thousand 


304 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


shirts :  with  ten  female  slaves,  four  horses,  and  forty 
shirts  to  the  inspector  of  the  province.  In  order  to 
pay  this  demand,  and  also  to  satisfy  the  Sheik  of 
Bornu,  he  levies  a  similar  impost  on  a  number  of 
pagan  tribes  whom  he  has  subjugated.  Thus,  slaves 
form  the  larger  currency,  and  shirts  the  small  currency 
of  the  kingdom  !  All  foreign  supplies  come  through 
Waday  or  Bornu ;  the  desert  to  the  north  being  too 
difficult  for  caravans  to  cross. 

Baghirmi  is  nominally  Mahometan.  Between  two 
and  three  hundred  years  ago  Abdallah  introduced 
Islamism,  and  extended  the  bounds  of  the  kingdom. 
Yet,  though  mosques  are  reared  and  the  forms  of 
Mahometan  worship  are  kept  up,  the  hearts  and 
manners  of  the  natives  have  not  yet  been  converted. 
The  language  is  similar  to  that  of  Kooka.  The 
marriage  tie  is  held  in  a  very  loose  way ;  divorces  are 
easily  made ;  and  some  of  the  people  contract  matches 
merely  for  a  limited  period. 

The  sultan  is  returning  in  triumph  after  a  campaign 
against  some  pagan  tribes !  His  procession  exhibits 
the  characteristics  of  barbaric  pomp  and  pride.  The 
lieutenant-governor  rides  first,  surrounded  by  a  troop 
of  horsemen.  Next  comes  the  barma,  behind  whom 
a  long  spear  of  peculiar  figure  is  borne,  connected 
with  some  religious  superstition.  The  commander- 
in-chief  follows ;  and  immediately  behind  him,  the 
sultan,  on  a  grey  charger,  dressed  in  a  war-cloth. 
He  is  covered  with  a  yellow  bernoose,  and  is  shaded 
by  two  umbrellas,  one  green  and  the  other  yellow, 
held  over  him  by  slaves.     Six  slaves  having  their 


BAGHIRMI  —  ROYAL  PROCESSION.  305 

right  arms  clad  with  iron,  fan  his  majesty  with 
ostrich  feathers  fastened  on  poles.  Five  chiefs  and 
other  princes  ride  beside  him.  Some  are  clothed  in 
bernooses,  some  in  black  shirts,  and  some  in  blue ; 
their  hands  are  generally  uncovered.  After  this 
motley  group  is  the  war-camel,  on  which  a  drummer 
is  mounted,  beating  two  kettle  drums,  fastened  one 
on  each  side  of  the  animal.  Near  him  are  three 
mounted  musicians. 

The  next  part  of  the  procession  includes  a  long 
line  of  the  sultan's  favourite  concubines  on  horseback 
dressed  in  black,  each  having  a  slave  on  either  side. 
The  baggage  camels  follow ;  and  the  infantry  bring 
up  the  rear.  When  the  monarch  enters  the  town, 
after  some  days  spent  in  the  camp,  the  principal 
captives  are  led  in  triumph  in  the  procession,  and 
are  then  subject  to  the  insults  of  the  harem :  after 
which  they  are  made  eunuchs  or  put  to  death. 

As  Baghirmi  is  chiefly  a  flat  country  intersected  by 
streams,  it  is  rich  in  natural  productions.  The  soil 
is  partly  lime,  partly  sand.  The  people  chiefly  live 
on  Negro  millet  (pennisetum) :  but  also  grow  sor- 
ghum and  beans  (sesamum)  with  some  ground  nuts, 
water-melons,  and  onions.  They  eat  grasses,  as  the 
Poa  Abyssinia,  and  the  leaves  of  certain  trees  which 
are  nutritious.  Eice  is  here  a  wild  plant.  The 
natives  rear  a  little  cotton  and  indigo  for  their  own 
use :  and  they  have  fine  trees,  the  tamarind,  palm, 
monkey-bread,  and  sycamore.  The  whole  popula- 
tion has  been  reckoned  at  a  million  and  a  half,  of 
whom  many  are  slaves.    They  have  few  fire-arms  or 

x 


306 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


bows,  but  chiefly  use  the  spear  and  a  kind  of  hand- 
bill. 

We  should  have  no  disposition  to  pass  through  the 
wilds  of  Africa  east  of  Baghirmi.  Native  traders 
and  pilgrims  perform  that  long  journey  in  caravans; 
and  according  to  their  account,  are  subject  to  many 
hardships  on  the  road.     Still,  it  is  nothing  like 


SYCAMORE  TREE. 


crossing  either  the  Great  or  Little  Desert  of  the 
north.  For  here  are  fertile  spots  and  oases  at  no 
great  distance  from  one  another,  where  water  and 
shelter  may  be  had,  and  provisions  may  be  obtained 
from  wandering  Arabs. 


JOUBNEY  TO  DARFUH. 


307 


The  first  country  is  Waday,  of  which  the  capital 
used  to  be  Wara :  but  a  late  sultan  changed  it  for 
security  to  Abeshr,  situated  in  a  desert  place,  in  the 
tribe  of  the  Kelingen.  It  is  a  wild,  straggling 
kingdom,  nominally  extending  from  15°  to  23°  of 
east  longitude.  The  country  is  mostly  level,  inter- 
spersed with  barren  mountains;  and  the  northern 
portions  are  very  desert.  A  caravan  proceeds  at  the 
rate  of  about  ten  miles  a  day;  and  its  journey  to 
Darfur  has  been  thus  described  by  pilgrims.  From 
Wara,  you  travel  over  rocky  hills  and  a  wide 
wilderness  for  seven  days,  when  you  will  reach 
Doomta,  a  frontier  town  of  Darfur.  Your  next 
march  of  eight  days  lies  through  Waday  Bareh,  a 
thickly  peopled  valley,  to  Kebkabiyeh  a  good  town 
of  the  Jellaba,  with  clay  houses  and  a  market. 
About  eight  days  more  would  bring  you  to  the 
capital  of  Darfur,  the  route  to  which  is  partly 
through  a  wilderness  inhabited  by  the  Jellaba. 

Where  the  people  of  this  region  are  not  Arabs, 
they  are  Negroes  of  the  complete  Negro  type,  living 
in  the  simplest  and  rudest  forms  of  life :  yet  not  so 
much  savage,  as  uncivilized.  It  is  chiefly  from  the 
neighbouring  districts,  that  those  slaves  are  procured 
whom  the  traveller  on  the  Nile  has  seen  brought 
down  the  river  in  cargoes  to  Egypt  for  sale.  They 
are  short  in  stature,  dumpy,  flat-nosed,  thick-lipped, 
woolly-headed,  black  as  a  coal,  almost  naked,  with 
little  thought  and  little  care. 

Cobbe  is  generally  called  the  capital  of  Darfur, 
though  the  king  usually  resides  a  little  way  off.  But 
x  2 


303 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


native  and  foreign  merchants  have  their  residence  in 
this  town,  and  with  their  numerous  slaves  form 
the  bulk  of  its  inhabitants.  The  whole  population 
is  about  six  thousand.  They  have  a  mosque,  and 
profess  to  be  Mussulmen.  But  come !  take  a  peep 
within  one  of  these  mud  walls,  which  inclose  some 
mud  huts ;  and  you  may  see  men  and  women  sitting 
over  their  cups  of  booza,  a  fermented  liquor  made 
from  dhoora  like  that  drunk  by  Negroes  of  the  west. 
Nor  do  the  men  limit  themselves  to  the  number  of 
wives  prescribed  by  the  Koran;  but  indulge  in 
polygamy  to  the  extent  of  their  means. 

If  you  had  goods  to  dispose  of  in  Cobbe,  you 
would  require  all  your  wit,  and  even  more,  to  save 
yourself  from  being  fleeced.  There  being  no  circu- 
lating medium,  trade  is  conducted  b}^  barter,  in  which 
a  practised  native  will  always  get  the  advantage  of  a 
stranger.  Nor  would  your  property  be  safe  at  any 
time  out  of  your  sight.  Indeed,  the  character  of  the 
people  is  wholly  bad,  being  roguish  and  licentious 
in  the  extreme. 

Suppose  we  were  admitted,  with  Mr.  Browne,  to 
an  audience  of  the  sultan.  We  find  him  seated  on 
what  must  be  called  a  throne,  a  bank  spread  with 
small  Turkey  carpets,  and  covered  with  a  canopy  of 
foreign  light  stuffs.  Behind  him,  is  a  file  of  guards 
armed  with  spear  and  shield,  each  having  a  black 
ostrich  feather  in  his  cap.  Some  chief  men  sit  on 
either  side  of  the  throne,  at  a  little  distance :  whilst 
a  crowd  of  spectators  and  petitioners  fill  the  space  in 
fi  ont.  A  trumpeter  of  the  king's  praises  stands  on 
his  left  hand,  ever  and  anon  reminding  the  people, 


THE  KING  OF  DARFUR. 


309 


lest  they  should  forget,  that  he  is  a  person  not  to  be 
despised:  €e  See  the  buffalo,  the  offspring  of  a  buffalo ! 
a  bull  of  bulls  !  the  elephant  of  superior  strength  !  the 
powerful  sultan  Abd-el-rach-man-el-rashid ! "  So 
that  physical  strength,  not  wisdom  or  goodness,  is 
the  great  boast  of  a  Darfurian  monarch ! 

His  majesty  is  a  merchant  on  his  own  account, 
speculating  in  goods  brought  by  the  caravans.  These 
are  sometimes  large,  numbering  two  thousand  camels ; 
for  Cobbe  is  on  the  line  of  route  between  the  interior 
of  Africa  and  all  eastern  places,  as  Sennaar  and 
Abyssinia,  Nubia  and  Egypt,  and  Mecca  by  Suakem 
and  Jidda.  It  has  therefore  its  full  share  of  traffic, 
on  which  it  principally  depends. 

The  king  is  also  a  nominal  husbandman ;  for  when 
the  annual  rains  introduce  the  sowing  season,  he  goes 
out  into  the  field  with  his  attendants,  and  with  his 
royal  hand  makes  the  first  holes  in  the  ground. 
Millet  is  chiefly  grown ;  which  being  made  into  flour 
and  boiled  is  eaten  with  milk,  or  with  the  juice  of  a 
bitter  herb.  Melons,  gourds,  Cayenne  pepper,  to- 
bacco, and  a  little  wheat  are  also  raised.  The  tama- 
rind, palm,  and  sycamore  trees  grow  in  favourable 
situations.  All  the  wild  beasts  which  we  have  met 
with  in  the  interior  infest  the  thinly  peopled  plains 
of  Darfur,  and  prowl  about  the  villages,  to  make  a 
prey  of  the  cattle,  of  which  the  people  have  abund- 
ance    Gold  and  copper  are  found  in  this  region. 

It  is  a  toilsome  journey  of  more  than  four  hundred 
miles,  through  a  barren  district,  from  Cobbe  to 
Sennaar  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile ;  but  when  this  is 
x  3 


310 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


achieved,  the  great  span  of  Africa  has  been  nearly 
traversed.  The  town  of  Sennaar  depends  on  trade, 
and  is  therefore  better  built  and  more  refined  than 
other  places  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  houses  are 
made  of  clay  mixed  with  straw.  The  best  have  two 
stories  and  a  flat  roof,  and  the  floors  are  carpeted. 
The  climate  is  unhealthy,  though  the  soil  is  fertile. 
The  horses  and  cattle  are  very  fine.  A  nominal 
Mahometanism  prevails. 

One  of  the  most  singular  institutions  of  this  country 
in  former  times  was  the  frail  tenure  of  royal  power. 
The  king  appeared  to  be  a  mere  puppet  set  up  to 
amuse  the  people,  but  entirely  controlled  by  the 
officers  of  the  court.  A  council  of  these  dignitaries 
could  decree  that  it  was  no  longer  for  the  public 
good  that  the  reigning  sovereign  should  continue  to 
exist ;  on  which,  he  was  put  to  death  by  an  officer 
who  lived  with  him,  as  master  of  his  household,  and 
a  relation  of  his  family.  This  officer  did  not  consider 
his  bloody  function  to  be  at  all  derogatory  to  his 
dignity,  nor  even  to  interfere  with  his  friendship  for 
the  royal  personage.  When  the  time  had  come  for 
the  monarch  to  die,  it  was  better  that  his  throat  should 
be  decently  cut  by  a  friend  in  his  own  palace,  than 
that  he  should  be  murdered  by  a  mob  or  an  as- 
sassin. So  also  with  all  the  princes  except  the  eldest 
who  ascended  the  throne.  The  public  advantage 
demanded  their  death ;  and  it  was  well  for  it  to  take 
place  in  a  decent  and  orderly  manner.  Princesses 
were  of  no  estimation  in  Sennaar,  and  were  not 
regarded  with  more  respect  than  private  women :  so 


NUBIA  —  ROYAL  LADIES. 


.311 


that  when  their  father  was  killed,  they  were  very 
badly  off,  if  not  previously  married. 

A  long  shirt  of  blue  cloth  is  the  usual  clothing  of 
the  people  both  men  and  women ;  the  men  sometimes 
gird  it  round  their  waist  with  a  sash.  They  always 
go  barefooted  in  the  house. 

If  you  professed  to  be  a  medical  man  you  might, 
like  Mr  Bruce,  have  obtained  an  interview  with  the 
royal  ladies.  He  was  first  introduced  into  a  large 
apartment  full  of  black  women  without  apparel,  ex- 
cepting a  narrow  piece  of  cotton  round  their  waists. 
One  of  these  ladies  in  waiting  led  him  into  another 
chamber  better  lighted  than  the  former.  Here,  on  a 
bench  covered  with  cloth  were  seated  some  of  the 
king's  wives,  clothed  in  the  blue  shirt  above  men- 
tioned. But  they  also  wore  jewels  of  gold,  large 
rings  passed  through  the  under  lip,  the  ears,  and  the 
nose ;  with  chains  round  the  neck,  the  wrists,  and 
ankles.  Their  features  were  quite  distorted  by  these 
cumbrous  ornaments,  which  pulled  the  lip  and  ears 
out  of  shape  and  place.  The  most  loved  of  these 
queens  was  in  bulk  like  an  elephant.  There  was  not 
a  vestige  of  real  civilization  in  the  regal  pomp  of 
Sennaar.    It  is  well  done  away  with. 

A  great  change  has  come  over  the  government  of 
Nubia  and  its  adjacencies,  since  Mehemet  Ali  took 
possession  of  it,  and  made  it  a  pashalic.  The  pasha 
is  in  rank  next  to  the  viceroy  of  Egypt  himself,  and 
has  his  seat  of  government  in  Khartum  on  the  Blue 
Eiver,  a  little  before  it  joins  the  White  River. 
Sennaar  now  receives  an  Egyptian  garrison  of  four 

X  4 


312 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


or  five  hundred  disciplined  troops:  so  that  the 
wondrous  accounts  of  Burckhardt  and  others  about  it 
are  antiquarian.  Yet  it  is  a  pity  that  those  accounts 
should  be  wholly  forgotten;  as  they  show  some 
curiosities  of  human  nature,  when  left  to  its  own 
vagaries. 


SOUAXIN  CHIEF,  EASTERN  NUBIA. 


At  a  great  bend  of  the  Nile,  a  little  below  Shendy, 
which  used  to  be  a  great  slave-mart,  we  fall  in  with 
a  fine  race  of  men  called  Berbers.    This  name  is 


NUBIA   BERBERS. 


313 


sometimes  given  to  any  Nubian:  but  it  properly 
belongs  to  a  small  district  consisting  of  a  few  villages 
inhabited  by  Arabs  of  the  tribe  of  Meyrefal.  A  tall, 
slender,  handsome  set  of  people,  are  these  Berbers ; 
of  dark  colour ;  showing  nothing  of  the  Negro  shape 
or  countenance,  except  a  little  thickness  of  the  upper 
lip.  Their  hair  is  bushy,  not  woolly ;  and  they  have 
a  beard  under  the  chin.  They  blacken  their  eyes,  to 
make  them  of-a-piece  with  the  rest  of  their  ap- 
pearance. Young  girls  wear  only  a  leathern  girdle, 
a  custom  which  prevails  in  extensive  districts .  of 
Africa ;  the  other  natives  have  shirts  or  tunics. 

These  Berbers  are  a  gay,  frolicsome,  and  trea- 
cherous people;  combining  the  fun  of  the  Negro 
with  the  cunning  of  the  Arab.  They  have  been  spoken 
of  as  full  of  all  wickedness :  but  are  probably  not 
worse  than  other  denizens  of  these  regions,  though 
their  Arab  astuteness  renders  them  more  clever  in 
sin.  A  Berber  makes  a  good  travelling  servant,  if 
you  pay  him  well,  and  trust  him  as  far  as  you  see 
him  :  and  you  would  not  place  more  confidence  than 
this  in  the  usual  run  of  Africans.  In  the  enclosure 
of  their  dwelling-place,  most  Berbers  have  two 
apartments  for  the  family,  a  third  for  a  storehouse, 
another  for  strangers,  and  a  fifth  for  public  women. 
The  latter  are  accommodated  for  a  season  in  dif- 
ferent families,  and  so  change  about  for  the  public 
convenience.  The  inner  court  of  the  house  is  a  place 
for  cattle  and  fodder.  The  furniture  is  like  that 
found  in  the  dwellings  of  Negroes  or  Arabs.  It 
consists  of  a  few  necessary  utensils,  and  a  wooden 


314 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


frame  covered  with  reeds  or  strips  of  ox-leather, 
over  which  a  carpet  is  thrown,  to  serve  as  a  sofa  by 
day  and  a  bed  by  night. 

The  wily  Berbers  are  said  to  trick  strangers  by 
means  of  the  public  women  lodging  in  their  houses. 
These  females  serve  for  decoys.  When  a  luckless 
wight  has  been  seduced  by  one  of  them,  the  master 
of  the  house  pretends  that  a  relative  of  his  own  has 
been  dishonoured,  makes  a  great  fuss  about  the  mat- 
ter, and  finally  lets  the  stranger  off  on  payment  of 
supposed  damages.  This  decoying  is  more  easily 
effected  by  means  of  their  drinking  parties,  in  which 
they  furnish  large  quantities  of  booza,  until  most  of 
the  guests  are  intoxicated. 

The  route  through  the  Nubian  desert  to  Eygpt  is 
not  so  bad  as  most  of  those  we  have  described. 
Stations  and  wells  are  more  frequent  in  these  parts : 
so  that,  with  proper  precautions,  the  journey  may  be 
made  without  much  difficulty  or  suffering.  But  Arab 
guides  sometimes  wilfully  deceive  travellers,  and 
lead  them  out  of  the  right  way,  that  they  may  make 
a  gain  of  them,  or  plunder  their  effects  in  case  of 
their  perishing  from  want.  The  Simoom  prevails 
here,  like  the  whirlwinds  of  sand  we  have  already 
mentioned.  When  overtaken  by  this  blast,  the  Arabs 
kneel  down  and  wrap  their  faces  in  their  cloak  : 
whilst  their  camels  turn  round  and  hold  down  their 
heads.  The  great  fear  is  not  of  being  poisoned,  as 
Europeans  commonly  think,  but  of  being  stifled  by 
the  sand. 

But  melancholy  accidents  sometimes  happen  in 


THE  NUBIAN  DESERT  —  CATASTROPHE.  315 

this  desert;  as  may  be  seen  from  the  following 
account  furnished  by  an  Arabian  merchant  who  was 
travelling  in  a  caravan.  Their  guide  left  the  proper 
track  in  order  to  avoid  a  notorious  robber  who 
infested  the  district,  and  in  doing  so  lost  his  way. 
The  calamitous  result  was  given  in  words  to  the 
following  effect. 

When  we  had  performed  five  days'  journey  in  the 
mountains,  our  stock  of  water  was  exhausted ;  and  we 
did  not  yet  know  where  we  were  in  the  wide  desert. 
We  determined  therefore  to  go  towards  the  setting- 
sun,  hoping  thus  to  reach  some  part  of  the  Nile. 
No  relief  appeared ;  and  during  a  march  of  two  days 
without  water,  one  merchant  and  fifteen  slaves  sunk 
down  exhausted  and  died.  Another  feeling  that  he 
could  not  hold  out  much  longer,  and  hoping  that  his 
camels  might  find  the  road  to  water  better  than  men 
could,  had  himself  tied  on  one  of  his  beasts,  and  let 
them  take  their  own  way ;  but  we  never  heard  more 
of  them,  and  they  doubtless  perished.  After  another 
day's  journey,  we  came  in  sight  of  a  mountain  which 
some  of  us  knew,  but  neither  we  nor  our  camels 
could  travel  farther.  We  laid  ourselves  under  a  rock 
to  obtain  a  little  shelter  from  the  sun,  and  sent  two  of 
our  strongest  servants  and  camels  to  go  and  search  for 
water.    Our  existence  depended  upon  their  success. 

The  two  men  pushed  forwards,  but  before  they 
reached  the  mountain  where  they  hoped  to  find 
a  well,  one  of  them  succumbed  and  fell  from  his 
camel.  Unable  to  speak,  he  waved  his  hand  for  his 
companion  to  leave  him  to  his  fate,  and  to  hasten 


316 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


onward.  The  other  knew  the  country  well,  having 
frequently  passed  that  way ;  but  his  eyesight  failed 
from  thirst,  and  he  lost  the  road.  Exhausted,  he  sat 
down  under  a  tree,  and  tied  the  beast  to  one  of  its 
branches.  The  camel  smelled  water  at  a  distance, 
broke  its  halter,  and  set  off  for  the  spring,  which 
proved  to  be  half  an  hour's  journey  from  the  spot 
where  the  man  lay.  Knowing  the  instinct  of  the 
animal,  and  assured  that  it  was  hastening  to  water, 
he  got  up  and  tried  to  follow  its  steps,  but  soon  fell 
down  and  swooned.  A  Bedouin  from  the  neigh- 
bourhood passing  by,  and  seeing  him  in  this  con- 
dition, threw  some  water  on  his  face  and  revived 
him.  When  he  was  restored,  they  hastened  to  the 
well,  filled  their  skins,  and  returned  to  the  place 
where  we  were  lying.  They  found  us  still  alive, 
though  we  had  given  ourselves  up  to  death.  Water 
quickly  revived  us,  and  after  a  short  time  we  were 
able  to  pursue  our  journey,  and  we  reached  our 
destination  in  safety.  We  gave  the  Bedouin  a  slave 
for  his  trouble  in  saving  our  lives. 

Instead  of  turning  to  the  south  from  Sennaar,  in 
order  to  have  a  peep  at  Nubia,  we  might  have  pro- 
ceeded eastward  with  a  caravan  to  Abyssinia.  As 
this  is  the  only  independent  country  of  native 
Africans  who  have  retained  a  profession  of  Chris- 
tianity, it  may  be  well  to  see  if  their  religion  has 
done  them  any  good,  and  made  them  superior  to 
Mussulmen  and  Pagans.  We  fear,  alas!  that  they 
are  no  better  than  their  neighbours.  Their  religion 
is  a  mere  formalism,  of  which  they  are  very  tena- 


ABYSSINIA  —  CHANGES. 


317 


cious;  it  has  no  vitality  whatever.  Into  the  par- 
ticulars of  their  creed  we  shall  not  enter,  nor  even 
describe  their  ecclesiasticism.  It  much  resemble  the 
Greek  church  in  its  forms,  and  in  its  utter  want  of  re- 
ligious principle.  The  laws  of  Grod  seem  to  be  entirely- 
disregarded,  and  the  morality  enjoined  by  Scrip- 
ture to  be  quite  ignored.  There  are  three  principal 
sects  of  nominal  Christians  bitterly  opposed  to  each 
other,  and  the  country  has  been  torn  by  civil  and 
religious  broils,  which  have  threatened  to  exter- 
minate the  population. 

Even  since  Mr.  Bruce  visited  Abyssinia,  where  he 
was  detained  for  some  years,  it  seems  to  have  lost 
much  of  its  power  and  its  barbaric  splendour.  Yet 
it  has  not  improved  in  simplicity.  In  Grondar,  the 
capital,  haughty  kings  used  to  imitate  many  of  the 
customs  of  the  ancient  Persians,  and  they  possessed 
a  large  degree  of  authority  which  has  passed  away 
with  its  attending  pomp.  Fifty  years  of  civil  wars 
and  constant  broils  with  its  neighbours,  have  greatly 
reduced  the  kingdom,  and  changed  the  customs  of 
royalty. 

Eighty  years  ago !  What  may  not  happen  in 
eighty  years  ?  Even  in  the  fifty  years  which  elapsed 
between  the  visit  of  Bruce  and  that  of  Dr.  (now 
Bishop)  Grobat,  matters  were  greatly  altered,  and  they 
are  now  still  more  changed.  The  grandfather  was 
quite  a  different  personage  from  the  grandson.  It  is 
curious,  and  it  may  be  instructive,  to  observe  the 
contrast.  A  right  royal  despot  was  Mr.  Brace's 
friend  and  detainer.    We  shall  take  a  peep  into 


318 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


that  traveller's  book,  and  give  a  few  cursory  notes 
of  what  was  then  passing  in  Grondar.  The  crown  was 
a  kind  of  helmet,  in  the  form  of  a  mitre,  covering 
the  forehead,  cheeks,  and  neck  of  the  monarch.  Its 
exterior  was  of  gold  and  silver,  of  beautiful  filligree 
work.  The  king  put  it  on  himself,  after  anointing 
his  own  head  with  olive  oil.  He  covered  his  face  in 
giving  audiences  and  on  other  public  occasions,  so 
that  nothing  but  his  eyes  were  seen.  Mystery  in- 
spires feelings  of  homage !  He  never  walked  but  on 
going  into  church,  when  his  guards  possessed  the 
entrances  and  kept  out  all  people,  save  two  officers 
on  whom  he  leaned.  He  rode  on  his  mule  into  his 
palace,  up  stairs,  and  over  his  Persian  carpets,  to  the 
very  foot  of  his  divan.  He  had  six  noblemen  of  the 
bedchamber,  and  many  other  officers  of  state.  It  was 
death  to  sit  on  the  king's  seat.  He  ate  wheaten 
bread  grown  in  a  certain  province  called  the  royal 
province. 

Persons  presented  to  the  king  prostrated  them- 
selves before  him.  They  fell  on  their  knees,  then 
on  the  palms  of  their  hands,  then  stooped  till  their 
forehead  touched  the  ground,  and  they  lay  there  till 
told  to  rise.  This  ceremony  was  mitigated  in  the 
case  of  strangers,  who  were  allowed  to  salute  the 
Abyssinian  monarch  in  the  same  way  as  they  do  their 
own  sovereign.  To  strangers  of  note,  the  king 
allotted  a  village  or  two,  which  furnished  them  with 
supplies  of  food.  He  sent  for  any  woman  he  pleased 
to  have,  and  made  her  his  wife  or  concubine  without 
ceremony.    But  the  chief  wife  alone  was  queen. 


ABYSSINIANS —  EATING  A  LIVE  BULLOCK.  319 

When  he  elected  a  lady  to  this  honour,  the  judge 
pronounced  in  his  presence  and  on  his  behalf,  that 
the  king  has  chosen  his  handmaid  Itaghe;  then  the 
crown  was  placed  on  her  head.  As  there  were  many 
royal  princes,  and  only  one  could  succeed  to  the 
throne,  the  rest  were  sent  to  a  mountain,  where  they 
were  maintained  at  the  public  expense.  The  crown 
was  hereditary,  but  elective  in  the  royal  line ;  so  that 
the  eldest  son  of  the  late  monarch  did  not  neces- 
sarily succeed  his  father.  This  was  in  order  to  save 
the  country  from  an  infant  king. 

The  morals  of  the  palace  were  imitated  by  the 
people.  They  had  no  marriage  form,  and  no  matri- 
monial bond,  but  that  of  consent,  for  as  long  a  time 
as  the  parties  pleased.  The  men  used  not  to  market 
or  carry  bread  or  water,  yet  they  washed  all  clothes, 
even  those  of  the  women.  The  women  were  covered 
from  the  chin  to  the  ground,  it  being  a  disgrace  to 
have  even  their  hands  or  feet  seen  in  public.  Will 
you  keep  this  in  memory,  and  then  receive,  if  you 
can,  this  strange  account  of  a  bacchanalian  revelry, 
which  Mr.  Bruce  describes  as  a  real  occurrence ! 

The  guests  are  assembled  in  a  quiet  hall.  A  living 
bullock  is  bound  and  laid  down  outside  the  door. 
A  slight  incision  is  made  in  its  neck  to  save  the 
letter  of  the  law,  that  its  blood  must  fall  on  the 
ground.  The  skin  is  stripped  from  its  buttock,  and 
thin  pieces  of  flesh  are  cut  out,  without  touching  any 
of  the  great  arteries.  These  are  carried  into  the 
chamber  where  the  guests  are  seated  at  a  table,  one 
gentleman  between  two  ladies.    A  number  of  thin 


320 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


cakes  are  provided  for  every  guest.  Then  each  of 
the  ladies  takes  a  delicate  slice  of  quivering  flesh, 
and  wrapping  it  up  in  a  cake,  thrusts  it  like  a 
cartridge  into  the  mouth  of  the  gentleman  next  to 
her,  on  either  side ;  so  that  each  man  is  served  in 
turn  by  two  ladies.  When  he  is  crammed,  he  per- 
forms the  same  good  office  for  his  fair  companions. 
Then  they  drink  together,  and  give  themselves  up  to 
all  licentiousness  such  as  cannot  be  here  mentioned. 

Oh  !  Mr.  Bruce ;  was  not  this  a  caricature  of  their 
revelries !  bad  indeed,  but  not  so  bad  ?  We  know 
that  in  hot  countries  when  a  killed  animal  is  cold 
and  has  lost  the  blood,  it  becomes  awfully  tough  ;  and 
it  is  a  fact  that  Abyssinians  eat  raw  meat,  especially 
beef  steaks ;  yet  we  are  scarcely  prepared  to  receive 
all  this  account,  as  easily  as  you  represent  the 
Abyssinians  swallowing  cartridges  of  quivering  flesh. 
We  suppose  you  did  not  see  all  this  done  with  your 
own  eyes ;  and  would  you  believe  anything  that  a 
native  said  ? 

A  crowd  of  persons  beset  the  royal  residence  early 
in  the  morning,  crying  for  justice  from  the  king,  to 
whom  they  appeal.  Such  appeals  are  likely  to  be 
often  made  in  a  place  of  such  corruption  as  Grondar. 
Whether  or  not  his  majesty  satisfies  them  all,  when 
he  is  at  leisure  to  attend  to  them,  we  cannot  tell. 
When  there  were  no  real  applicants  for  justice, 
fictitious  ones  used  to  be  hired,  and  they  really  cried 
out  as  if  they  were  groaning  under  oppression  and 
wrong.  The  reason  given  for  this  strange  custom 
was  a  fear  lest  the  king  should  be  melancholy,  from 


GONDAR  —  CHUKCHES. 


321 


feeling  himself  alone.  Justice  appears  to  have  been 
summary  enough,  and  cruel  enough  too.  A  capital 
sentence  was  immediately  executed ;  whether  it  was 
hanging,  crucifying,  flaying,  or  having  the  eyes  torn 
out  and  being  driven  into  the  fields  to  be  devoured 
by  wild  beasts.  Let  the  dogs  eat  the  bodies  of 
criminals ! 

Grondar  itself  is  situated  on  a  hill,  and  contains 
perhaps  10,000  inhabitants,  for  its  population  is 
greatly  reduced.  Its  houses  are  round,  built  of  stone 
and  clay,  and  thatched  in  form  of  a  cone.  The  palace 
is  a  large  square  edifice,  the  ruins  of  one  built  by 
the  Portuguese.  A  few  of  the  rooms  are  still  tenant- 
able,  and  huts  are  erected  beside  them ;  the  whole 
surrounded  by  a  stone  wall  thirty  feet  high.  The 
streets  of  the  town  are  very  narrow,  crooked,  filthy, 
and  often  steep,  as  the  city  lies  upon  a  rising 
ground. 

The  country  is  full  of  churches.  The  kings  have 
built  many:  and  others  have  been  erected  by  rich 
people,  in  the  way  of  atonement  for  their  sins. 
They  are  generally  situated  on  the  top  of  a  hill,  and 
near  a  stream,  to  furnish  water  for  the  usual  ablutions. 
They  are  planted  round  with  a  kind  of  cedar  and  the 
tall  cusso  tree,  which  give  them  a  pretty  appearance. 
They  are  circular  in  form,  thatched,  and  surrounded 
with  a  colonade  supported  by  wooden  pillars.  They 
are  divided  in  the  interior,  to  imitate  the  old  Jewish 
sanctuary.  You  may  enter  barefooted,  that  is,  if  you 
are  'pure;  (which  is  not  the  case  with  many  men:) 
otherwise  you  must  pray  among  the  cedars.  But 

Y 


322 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


when  you  go  in,  take  care  that  your  shoes  be  not 
stolen  by  the  priests  or  monks,  if  they  be  worth 
stealing.  The  walls  are  hung  with  pictures  or  daubs 
of  saints.  There  are  no  images  or  carved  work ;  as 
this  would  be  a  breach  of  the  second  commandment 
of  the  Decalogue,  which  is  not  supposed  to  be  broken 
by  a  worship  of  pictures. 

The  abuna  or  patriarch  is  in  some  respects  a  man 
of  authority,  at  least  in  religious  matters.  If  any 
men  come  to  him  desiring  to  be  made  monks,  he 
gives  the  word  of  command,  and  they  become  monks 
without  any  other  ceremony.  In  the  same  summary 
way  he  makes  priests  and  deacons.  Besides  these 
ecclesiastics,  there  is  a  chief  of  the  monks,  chief 
priests,  and  scribes  or  copyists.  The  monks  live  in 
their  own  houses  built  round  the  church  which  they 
serve.  The  whole  lot  of  ecclesiastics  are,  with  a  few 
exceptions,  very  ignorant  and  very  stupid.  Their 
great  delight  is  to  wrangle  about  useless  or  contro- 
verted points  of  religion.  Poor  Bruce  was  almost 
losing  the  royal  favour  because  he  would  not  decide 
that  Nebuchadnezzar  was  a  saint.  The  ground 
for  this  supposed  saintship  was  the  expression  that 
he  was  God's  f$  servant."  These  wrangles  produce 
incessant  quarrels  and  excommunications,  often  fol- 
lowed by  bloody  broils.  The  people  are  circumcised 
on  the  eighth  day. 

The  importance  of  the  sovereign,  and  along  with 
it  the  lordliness  of  the  male  sex,  seem  to  have  been 
on  the  wane  during  the  last  century  in  Abyssinia. 
Dr.  Grobat  represents  the  grandson  of  the  monarch 


GONDAR —  A  MONKISH  KING. 


323 


who  pleaded  for  the  saintship  of  Nebuchadnezzar, 
(and  whom  he  seems  to  have  striven  to  imitate,)  as 
an  old  man,  living  in  a  plain  way,  in  a  little  circular 
house  built  amid  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  palace. 
Three  large  rooms  and  some  small  ones  which  re- 
mained of  this  noble  structure  were  full  of  dust  and 
filth.  His  majesty  contented  himself  with  one 
chamber,  divided  into  two  parts  by  a  white  curtain. 
But  this  king  was  a  monk,  who  had  exchanged  the 
cowl  for  the  crown  ;  which  was  a  great  pity.  The 
ignorant  king  asked  the  traveller  if  he  had  ever  seen 


ABYSSINIAN  CHIEF. 


anything  like  his  palace  ?  and  was  surprised  to  hear 
that  in  some  parts  of  the  world,  men  could  still  build 
beautiful  houses  of  stone  ! 

Dr.  Gobat  only  gave  the  king  a  copy  of  the  New 
Testament;  which  his  majesty  returned,  saying,  that 
he  had  plenty  of  books  and  would  rather  have  re- 
ceived a  piece  of  cloth,  silk  or  linen ;  that  all  other 
white  travellers  had  given  him  something  as  a  present : 
that  being  a  monk  he  prayed  for  these  generous  souls, 
and  would  do  the  same  for  him,  if  —  Truly  !  Both 
parties  were  wrong.  For  what  need  has  a  monk  of 
silks  and  worldly  luxuries,  when  he  professes  to  be 
y  2 


324 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


dead  to  the  world?  Unless,  indeed,  he  wished  to 
sell  the  present  in  order  to  pay  his  soldiers.  For 
these  poor  wretches  were  driven  to  such  extremity 
by  want  of  food  and  clothes,  that  one  night  they 
pillaged  the  town  on  their  own  account ;  when  Dr. 
Grobat  took  a  military  way  of  defending  his  own 
property.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  be  customary  for 
a  stranger  to  make  a  present  to  the  king,  from  whom 
he  expects  protection  and  help  without  paying  taxes, 
he  ought  to  comply  with  such  a  custom,  and  not 
damage  a  future  visitor  to  the  country.  Though  the 
king  be  a  monk,  and  the  stranger  be  a  missionary, 
yet  let  the  usage  be  kept  up,  if  it  tend '  to  keep  the 
way  open  for  other  travellers.  These  may  not  care 
for  royal  prayers,  but  they  do  care  for  royal  protec- 
tion and  furtherance. 

Well !  we  must  suppose  that  in  going  now  to 
Abyssinia,  we  should  find  it  divested  of  some  of  the 
gilding  given  in  Mr.  Brace's  interesting  and  intelli- 
gent account.  Perhaps,  also,  we  should  not  expect  to 
see  the  eating  of  raw  flesh  from  the  rump  of  a  living 
animal :  and  it  would  be  long  before  a  nice  time  of 
peace  and  quiet  afforded  an  opportunity  for  one  of 
the  old  bacchanalian,  revels.  But  we  should  not  wait 
long  to  witness  some  of  the  dark  features  of  Abys- 
sinian character.  Their  ignorance,  folly,  vice,  and 
quarrelling,  do  not  seem  to  have  been  mended  by 
more  than  half  a  century  of  religious  prostrations 
and  sectarian  j  anglings. 

Dr.  Grobat  tells  us  of  a  little  commotion  that  was 
excited  in  the  town  by  an  act  of  the  royal  monk, 


G0NDAR — REPLENISHING  THE  EXCHEQUER.  325 

whose  coffers  needed  replenishing. — A  thief  was  the 
day  before  yesterday  condemned  to  have  his  right 
hand  and  two  feet  cut  off,  that  so  he  might  not  be 
able  to  steal  any  more.  This  was  taking  a  sure  way 
of  curing  his  thievish  propensities.  As  might  be  ex- 
pected, the  rogue  died  in  the  market-place  where  the 
punishment  was  inflicted.  Moreover,  the  hyenas 
were  not  deterred  from  copying  his  example,  by  a 
fear  of  sharing  the  same  fate ;  for  they  stole  away  his 
dead  body  during  the  night.  This  ought  not  to  have 
been :  since  the  king  had  not  given  permission  for 
such  a  burial  of  the  corpse.  Whose  fault  was  it,  that 
the  felon's  body  was  missing  in  the  morning  ?  Why, 
we  might  foolishly  think  that  it  was  the  hyenas'  fault, 
and  that  the  king  should  punish  them  if  he  could 
catch  them.  No  such  thing:  this  is  not  monkish 
logic.  It  was  the  fault  of  the  people  who  lived  near 
the  market-place,  who  ought  to  have  guarded  the 
corpse  till  their  sovereign  allowed  it  to  be  removed. 
So  yesterday  a  number  of  the  chief  merchants  were 
summoned  to  the  palace,  reproved  for  their  neglect, 
and  fined  in  the  sum  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  dollars. 
They  declined  to  pay,  and  were  forthwith  put  in 
prison.  This  morning,  they  have  made  a  virtue  of 
necessity,  and  the  money  is  forthcoming,  to  help  the 
king's  exchequer.  The  gentlemen  are  released,  and 
their  wives  come  to  thank  the  sovereign  for  his 
leniency  in  letting  them  off  so  cheaply ! 

Opinions  were  divided  on  the  subject  of  whether 
his  majesty  had  done  right  or  wrong  in  this  matter. 
But  there  was  some  old  statute,  or  there  was  said  to 

Y  3 


326 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


be  one,  about  the  propriety  of  guarding  the  bodies 
of  criminals  exposed  in  terror  em:  and  as  Abys- 
sinians  are  so  skilful  in  splitting  hairs  as  to  be  able 
to  make  a  "  saint  "  out  of  a  t€  servant/'  many  contro- 
versialists were  on  the  side  of  the  royal  monk,  and 
thought  that  he  had  law  on  his  side.  He  certainly 
had  "  possession,"  which  is  generally  said  to  consti- 
tute "nine  points  out  of  ten."  His  lordly  grand- 
father would  not  have  adopted  such  a  ruse  to  gain 
the  tenth  point;  but  would  have  got  the  money  at 
once  by  the  royal  law  of  "  might."  And  in  doing  so, 
he  would  not  have  forgotten  the  property  of  a  white 
stranger,  who  had  made  him  no  "present." 

At  Debaree,  south  of  Grondar,  Dr.  Grobat  saw  in  the 
market  a  man  standing  chained  to  a  lad,  begging 
for  money  and  crying  out,  u  For  my  life,  for  my  life !  " 
It  seems  he  had  murdered  another  man  from  motives 
of  revenge,  and  was  sentenced  to  death.  But  this 
punishment  was  commuted  into  a  fine  of  two 
hundred  dollars,  which  he  was  unable  to  pay ;  and  he 
was  trying  to  "  raise  the  wind "  by  begging  in  the 
public  market.  Surely  the  merchants  of  Grondar  were 
unfairly  dealt  with,  if  they  had  to  pay  two  hundred 
and  fifty  dollars  for  not  watching  a  mutilated  corpse, 
whilst  a  deliberate  murderer  is  only  fined  two  hundred- 
Justice  does  not  appear  to  hold  her  balances  rightly 
in  Abyssinia,  even  when  under  the  guardianship  of 
a  monk. 

That  the  wisdom  and  morals  of  the  Abyssinians 
are  not  improved,  may  be  gathered  from  the  following 
incident.    One  day  on  returning  home,  the  visitor 


ABYSSINIAN  IGNOKANCE —  CHANGES.  327 


found  an  elegant  lady,  who  threw  herself  at  his  feet, 
saying,  "  I  have  heard  that  you  know  all  things :  I 
entreat  you  to  assist  me.  I  have  the  means  of  giving 
you  everything  that  you  may  require.  I  have  a  son 
who  has  married  a  woman  by  whom  he  has  had 
children.  Now,  another  woman  has  given  him 
medicine  to  make  him  love  her ;  and  since  that,  he 
is  always  running  after  her,  and  will  never  hear  a 
word  either  of  his  lawful  wife  or  of  his  children.  I 
entreat  you  to  give  me  a  medicine  to  make  him 
return  to  his  wife  and  children." 

Yet  these  people,  who  knew  no  distinction  between 
physics  and  ethics,  would  wrangle  from  morning  till 
night  about  the  inscrutable  nature  of  the  Godhead, 
about  saints,  angels,  and  other  mysteries  of  religion. 

At  the  same  time,  the  whole  country  was  in  a  state 
of  anarchy  and  war:  and  it  seemed  almost  a  pity  that 
the  Abyssinian  Nebuchadnezzar  had  not  left  a  successor 
of  like  spirit  with  himself.  The  better  class  of  natives 
send  their  children  to  convents  to  learn  to  read  and 
repeat  psalms.  But  there  are  no  books  worth  read- 
ing :  and  few  can  write.  Some  male  slaves  are  kept 
to  do  drudge- work :  and  Dr.  Grobat  says  that  men  do 
now  go  to  market  to  buy  provisions,  but  not  cloth. 
When  he  was  in  the  province  of  Tigre,  its  king  was 
defeated  and  taken  by  the  Grallas,  who  beheaded  him 
next  day :  and  the  people  were  several  times  obliged 
to  flee  from  their  dwellings  from  an  approaching  foe. 
A  swarm  of  locusts  also  passed  over,  darkening  the 
sun,  and  committing  the  usual  ravages. 

Within  the  last  few  years,  a  complete  change  has 

Y  4 


328 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


come  over  the  politics  of  Abyssinia  and  its  neigh- 
bourhood. A  young  man  named  Kassai,  of  obscure 
origin,  whose  father  had  been  employed  by  the 
governor  in  the  western  province  of  Kuara,  has  now 
obtained  the  sovereignty.  He  was  a  valiant  soldier 
in  the  army,  and  having  been  recommended  by  his 
general  to  Kas  Ali,  the  latter  seeing  his  ability  gave 
him  his  daughter  in  marriage,  with  an  official  appoint- 
ment under  the  dowager  queen.  Kassai  quarrelled 
with  his  mistress,  defeated  her  army,  and  seized  her 
province  of  Dembea.  Though  at  first  repulsed  by 
Eas  Ali,  he  made  another  attempt,  surprised  his 
camp,  defeated  him  in  a  decisive  battle,  and  became 
master  of  Amhara.  He  subsequently  reduced  Tigre, 
and  had  himself  crowned  "King  of  the  kings  of 
Ethiopia,"  under  the  name  of  Theodorus.  Shoa, 
which  had  become  independent  of  Abyssinia,  was  also 
reduced  to  submission.  But  new  troubles  soon  arose, 
principally  in  Tigre;  and  at  the  close  of  1858  tran- 
quillity was  not  restored.  Theodorus  was  described 
in  1855  as  a  handsome  man,  of  middle  stature,  dark 
brown  complexion,  and  keen  glance  of  the  eye. 
When  Dr.  Krapf  then  visited  him  at  his  camp,  he 
found  that  the  old  cry  for  "justice"  was  still  kept 
up ;  the  petitioners  coming  to  the  king  as  early  as 
two  o'clock  in  the  morning.  He  attended  to  their 
complaints  till  eight.  This  prince  was  courteous  and 
affable  to  Europeans,  whom  he  desired  to  settle  in  his 
country,  in  order  to  advance  the  useful  arts  amongst 
the  people:  and  it  was  the  earnest  wish  of  many 
that  he  might  be  able  to  retain  the  government. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  NILE. 


329 


CHAP.  XIV. 

Source  of  the  Nile.  —  Dangerous  Eoad  to  Shoa. — Ankobar. — 
Strange  Detectives.  —  The  Grallas. — How  to  get  to  Harar. — Its 
Palace  and  Sultan. — Zayla. — Somal  Village. — Flitting  of  a  Camp. 
— Poisoned  Arrows.  —  Use  of  a  black  Skin.  —  Geographical  Infor- 
mation. — Eventful  History  of  Dilbo.  —  Enarea.  —  Gojab.  —  Queen 
Balbi.  —  Doko  Pigmies.  —  Sacrifices.  —  Umgoro. — Uganda.  —  The 
"Wondrous  Kabuja. — The  mighty  Sultan  Suna. — Karawak. — Corpu- 
lent Ladies. — Wotosi  and  Usui. — Lake  Nyanza.  —  Kazeh. — Arab 
Merchants. — Native  Doctor  and  "Witch. — Sad  Travelling. — Imprac- 
ticable Servants  and  Chiefs. — A  petty  Sultan. — Ugogo.  —  Usugara 
Mountains. — Kubero  and  Tamarind  Hills. — The  Savage  "Wadoe. — 
Burying  alive. — The  "Wakhutu.  —  The  "Wazaramo.  —  A  Circsean 
Town.  —  Wanyamwesi.  —  Sorcerers.  —  Lake  Tanganyika.  —  Lake 
Tribes. 

Would  you  wish  to  visit  the  source  of  the  Nile  ? 
We  mean  the  Blue  Kiver,  for  the  origin  of  the  White 
Nile,  which  is  the  more  important  stream,  has  not  yet 
been  discovered.  It  is  hoped  that  this  long-pending 
question  will  soon  be  settled,  as  the  "  whereabouts  " 
of  the  source  has  been  pretty  well  ascertained. 
Still,  travellers  disagree  as  to  the  precise  spot,  and 
as  to  whether  it  issues  as  a  separate  spring  from  the 
mountain,  or  proceeds  from  the  lake  Nyanza.  We 
may  refer  to  this  again. 

But  if  you  would  see  the  source  of  the  Blue  Eiver, 


330 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


you  cannot  do  better  than  follow  the  steps  of  Mr. 
Bruce.  His  accounts  of  the  country  are  now  found 
to  have  been  correct;  and  no  one  has  given  a 
more  true  and  graphic  description  of  the  people, 
in  everything  except  as  to  their  eating  flesh  from 
living  oxen.  A  princess  who  knew  this  eminent 
traveller  was  alive  when  Dr.  Grobat  visited  Grondar ; 
and  she  told  him  that  the  former  sultan,  her  own 
brother,  had  offered  to  Mr.  Bruce  "  who  was  greatly 
respected,"  the  present  of  either  a  good  market,  or 
the  source  of  the  Nile.  If  so,  we  suppose  the 
traveller  chose  the  latter,  but  was  satisfied  with  one 
view  of  his  singular  possession.  Yet  we  must  re- 
member that  much  of  Abyssinian  narrative  is  apo- 
cryphal. 

Starting  northward  from  Grondar,  we  find  the 
large  lake  of  Tsana,  forty-nine  miles  in  length  by 
thirty-five  in  breadth  in  its  extreme  parts.  It  has 
a  few  islands  in  its  bosom,  the  natives  said  "  forty- 
five,"  Mr.  Bruce  thought  about  eleven ;  and  he 
instructs  us  to  believe  them  in  nothing  ! 

On  the  northern  side  of  Lake  Tsana  we  find  the 
town  of  Maitsha.  It  is  singularly  constructed.  For 
example :  one  man  builds  a  hut  at  the  corner  of  a 
field  which  he  occupies,  and  his  relations  build  other 
dwellings  behind  his  in  adjoining  fields ;  and  so  there 
comes  to  be  a  large  clump  of  huts,  back  to  back,  under 
one  large  common  roof.  The  whole  is  surrounded 
with  a  thick  abattis  or  thorny  hedge,  for  the  sake 
of  mutual  protection.  Miatsha  consists  of  these 
clumps  of  dwellings.   Oats  here  grow  wild,  and  reach 


SOURCE  OF  THE  NILE. 


331 


in  height  above  the  head  of  a  rider :  but  this  corn  is 
not  used  by  the  natives ;  and  they  could  not  relish 
Scotch  oatmeal  cakes,  made  according  to  the  receipt 
of  Mr.  Bruce. 

Keeping  near  the  Nile,  which  is  full  of  windings, 
we  should  come  amongst  the  Agows,  a  wild  people, 
who  have  a  great  veneration  for  the  river,  and  will 
not  allow  it  to  be  desecrated.  Messrs.  Bruce  and 
Co.  must  not  ride  across  it,  nor  wash  off  the  dirt 
from  their  clothes  in  the  sacred  water.  The  Agows 
would  rather  carry  their  baggage  over  the  stream. 
Here  is  the  first  cataract,  sixteen  feet  high,  and 
about  sixty  yards  across.  On  the  tops  of  the  neigh- 
bouring hills  or  mountains,  you  would  perceive 
beautiful  plains  of  verdure  and  villages  of  grass. 
Hail  sometimes  falls  on  these  mountain  tops ;  but  no 
snow,  —  a  phenomenon  for  which  the  natives  have 
no  word  in  their  language.  Above  an  almost  im- 
penetrable wood  is  St.  Michael.  Then  on  a  gentle 
rise  is  St.  Michael  Greesh,  where  the  Nile  is  not  four 
yards  broad.  A  little  farther  on,  you  see  the  church 
placed  on  an  eminence,  and  down  the  hill  beyond  it, 
a  verdant  nook. 

"  I  ran  down  the  hill,  towards  the  little  island  of 
green  sods,  which  was  about  two  hundred  yards 
distant.  The  whole  side  of  the  hill  was  thick  grown 
over  with  flowers,  the  large  bulbous  roots  of  which 
appearing  above  the  surface  of  the  ground,  and  their 
skins  coming  off  on  treading  upon  them,  occa- 
sioned me  two  very  severe  falls  before  I  reached  the 
brink  of  the  marsh.    I,  after  this,  came  to  an  island 


332 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


of  green  turf,  which  was  in  the  form  of  an  altar, 
apparently  the  work  of  art :  and  I  stood  in  rapture 
over  the  principal  fountain  which  rises  in  the  middle 
of  it."  This  is  the  source  of  the  Blue  Eiver.  But 
the  White  Eiver,  which  is  regarded  as  the  more 
important  branch  of  the  Nile,  rises  farther  north 
and  west.  The  Blue  source  is  in  11°  N.  lat.,  and 
nearly  37°  E.  long. 

When  Bruce  urged  his  guide  to  drink  several 
toasts  with  water  from  the  fountain,  the  latter  re- 
plied, "  You  must  excuse  me  if  I  refuse  to  drink  any 
more  water.  They  say  these  savages  pray  over  that 
hole  every  morning  to  the  devil ;  and  I  am  afraid  I 
feel  his  horns  in  my  belly  already  from  the  great 
draught  of  that  hellish  water  which  I  drank  first." 
It  was  very  cold.  Yet  he  drank  a  bumper  to  the 
health  of  the  Empress  of  Eussia. 

From  Grondar  we  might  take  an  excursion  south- 
east to  visit  Shoa,  if  not  afraid  of  meeting  the  fate  of 
Dr.  Krapf.  He  tried  to  come  in  the  opposite  direc- 
tion, but  found  the  route  very  difficult  and  dangerous ; 
and  was  finally  plundered  of  everything  and  made 
prisoner  by  a  petty  chief.  He  seems  to  have  had  a 
narrow  escape  with  his  life.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that 
the  "King  of  the  kings  of  Ethiopia"  will  keep  a 
tighter  rein  over  his  vassals  and  governors,  than  was 
done  by  his  weak  predecessors  in  royalty.  If  so, 
travelling  in  Abyssinia  may  become  safe,  —  a  new 
and  excellent  thing  for  the  country.  The  region  is 
altogether  mountainous,  and  the  people  are  very  in- 
subordinate.  If  Theodorus  can  do  for  Abyssinia  what 


SIIOA  —  SINGULAR  DETECTIVES. 


333 


Mehemet  Ali  did  for  Egypt  and  Nubia,  he  will  be  a 
blessing  to  future  generations. 

We  shall  suppose  that  we  have  accomplished 
this  journey,  and  have  reached  Ankobar,  the  capital 
of  Shoa,  situated  in  9°  34'  33"  N.  lat.,  and  39°  35' 
E.  long.,  and  8198  feet  above  the  sea  level.  Shoa 
is  now  again  united  to  Abyssinia,  and  placed  under 
a  governor  instead  of  an  independent  king.  It  may 
be  called  the  Ethiopian  highlands.  It  has  a  rich 
soil,  a  beautiful  climate,  and  contains  iron,  coal, 
and  sulphur.  The  people  are  Christian,  after  the 
Abyssinian  or  Coptic  fashion,  —  which  means  very 
little  that  is  good.  They  disregard  holiness  and 
righteousness  of  life.  They  fast  nearly  nine  months 
out  of  the  twelve, — which  must  be  a  great  saving  to 
the  pocket,  —  but  their  morals  are  very  loose.  The 
late  king  had  five  hundred  wives,  which  is  a  pretty 
good  number  for  a  Christian  king ;  and  most  of  the 
people  who  could  afford  it  kept  concubines  and 
slaves.  Of  course  they  do  not  appeal  to  the  Gospel 
for  allowance  in  either  of  these  practices,  or  in  lying, 
thieving,  or  drunkenness.  They  seem  entirely  to 
ignore  the  precepts  of  the  Bible,  and  only  to  retain 
it  as  a  book  for  disputation.  Dr.  Krapf  tried  to 
settle  in  Ankobar,  and  was  successful  for  a  time ;  but 
was  afterwards  forbidden  to  enter  the  country. 

They  have  a  singular  order  of  "  detectives "  in 
Shoa,  which  does  not  say  much  for  the  march  of 
intellect  amongst  them.  When  the  Lebashi  is  in- 
formed of  a  theft  having  been  perpetrated,  he  gives 
his  servant  a  dose  of  black  meal  and  milk,  after 


334 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


which  he  makes  him  smoke  a  quantity  of  tobacco. 
This  has  the  effect,  or  supposed  effect,  of  putting  the 
lad  into  a  frenzy  :  when  his  master  leads  him  through 
the  streets  by  a  string  tied  round  his  body,  crawling . 
"  on  all  fours,"  and  smelling  about  like  a  crazed 
person  or  a  dog.  By  and  by  he  enters  some  house, 
lies  down  on  a  bed,  and  sleeps  for  a  time.  Then  the 
Lebashi  arouses  him  by  blows,  and  makes  him 
arrest  the  owner  of  the  house,  who  is  regarded  as 
the  thief  without  any  other  evidence,  and  is  obliged 
to  pay  for  the  stolen  article  according  to  its  sworn 
value.  No  wonder  every  one  wishes  to  be  friendly 
with  the  thief-taker,  and  to  use  all  prudent  means 
of  securing  his  favour,  before  he  takes  his  walks 
abroad.  The  King  of  Shoa  believed,  or  pretended  to 
believe,  in  the  magic  powers  of  this  deceiver ! 

All  the  neighbouring  tribes  are  Grallas,  under 
different  names  and  having  different  forms  of  re- 
ligion. There  are  a  few  Christians  amongst  them, 
especially  in  Gurague,  situated  in  about  8°  N.  lat. 
Others  are  Mahometans.  Most  are  pagans,  worship- 
ping the  moon,  some  of  the  stars,  and  the  Wanzay 
tree  under  which  their  kings  are  crowned.  The 
Gallas,  or  as  they  call  themselves  Ormas,  are  a  fine 
race,  with  well-formed  but  savage  countenance, 
chiefly  of  a  dark  brown  colour ;  though  some  are  of  a 
fair  complexion.  Hence  the  young  women  are  much 
sought  after  by  slave-dealers  for  the  Arabian  market. 
They  besmear  their  body  and  garments  with  butter, 
which  sends  forth  an  unpleasant  odour.  In  some 
tribes  the  women  ride  beside  or  behind  their  hus- 


THE  GALLAS  —  HARAR. 


335 


bands ;  as  it  is  considered  degrading  to  go  on  foot. 
The  Southern  Grallas  lead  a  pastoral  and  nomadic 
life.  Their  houses  are  built  on  the  plan  of  the 
African  round  huts.  The  pagan  tribes  worship 
spirits,  and  have  the  usual  magician-doctors  and 
exorcists.  Many  of  them  will  not  eat  fish  or  fowls, 
supposing  the  former  to  be  of  the  serpent,  the  latter 
of  the  vulture  species.  We  shall  not  weary  the 
reader  with  any  of  their  forms  of  foolish  superstition 
or  their  silly  tenets. 

We  should  like  to  take  a  peep  at  the  people  in- 
habiting the  corner  or  eastern  promontory  of  Africa 
below  Shoa,  if  we  could  by  any  means  reach  them. 
The  distance  from  Ankobar  is  not  very  great,  but  we 
should  not  easily  cross  the  deserts  and  mountains 
which  intervene,  through  the  tribes  of  Maidaites  and 
afterwards  the  Somali.  The  wild  nature  of  the  coun- 
try, the  savage  disposition  of  the  people,  the  bigotry 
and  jealousy  of  the  Moslem  chiefs,  form  an  effectual 
barrier  against  our  reaching  them  in  this  way. 

Captain  Burton  did  penetrate  with  considerable 
difficulty  from  the  eastern  coast  of  the  Eed  Sea  to 
Harar,  which  may  be  adduced  as  a  specimen  of  other 
royal  residences  in  this  region.  We  shall  imagine 
ourselves  there. 

The  palace  of  the  Sultan  of  Harar  is  a  long  shed, 
without  windows,  like  a  barn,  made  of  rough  stones 
and  reddish  clay.  It  is  situated  in  a  court-yard. 
Take  off  your  shoes,  and  give  up  your  arms,  before 
approaching  the  royal  presence  !  For  he  is  as  great 
a  man  in  his  own  estimation  as  the  Czar  of  Russia  is 


336 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


in  his.  You  will  be  introduced  to  him  seated  on  a 
raised  bench  called  a  throne,  in  a  dark  room,  the 
walls  of  which  are  whitewashed.  Matchlocks  and 
polished  fetters  hang  upon  the  sides  of  the  chamber. 
The  sultan  wears  a  crimson  robe  edged  with  fur,  and 
a  narrow  turban  of  white  colour.  His  relatives  are  be- 
side him,  having  their  right  arms  bare.  He  salutes 
you  by  snapping  his  thumb  and  finger,  and  asks  the 
usual  question,  w  What  do  you  want  here  ?  "  "  Friend- 
ship and  trade."  A  smile  is  the  answer,  —  which 
is  a  sign  that  your  head  is  safe  on  your  shoulders : 
for  you  are  in  a  lion's  den.  A  motion  of  the  hand  is 
made  for  you  to  retire :  and  a  dinner  is  sent  you,  in 
the  shape  of  a  dish  of  shabty,  consisting  of  cakes 
soaked  in  sour  milk,  seasoned  with  red  pepper  and 
salt.  Eat  and  be  thankful !  and  get  away  as  fast  as 
you  can,  lest  the  despot's  humour  should  change  ! 
He  cares  little  for  human  life. 

The  town  of  Harar  is  about  a  mile  long  and  half 
a  mile  wide,  surrounded  with  an  irregular  wall  of 
rough  stones.  The  streets  are  narrow,  encumbered 
with  heaps  of  rubbish ;  for  the  dustman  does  not  go 
his  rounds.  The  better  houses  are  sheds  of  two 
stories;  the  rest  are  thatched  huts.  The  place  is 
famous  for  mosques  and  tombs  of  Mahometan  saints, 
showing  that  it  was  once  a  large  and  powerful  city. 
The  present  population  may  be  estimated  at  8000 
settled  inhabitants :  but  the  roving  character  of  the 
Bedouins  makes  it  very  fluctuating.  Their  religious 
fanaticism  is  great,  and  their  morals  proportionately 
loose.     The  Somali  say  that  "  Harar  is  a  paradise 


A  SOMALI  TILLAGE. 


337 


inhabited  by  asses."  The  people  wear  the  usual 
tobe  and  sandals ;  to  which  some  add  drawers.  If 
they  abstain  according  to  Moslem  law  from  in- 
toxicating liquors,  they  make  up  for  its  want  by 
chewing  tobacco,  which  is  grown  in  the  district.  So 
also  is  excellent  coffee. 

You  would  reach  Harar  from  Zaylah,  a  pretty 
good  town  on  the  coast,  situated  on  a  jutting  bank 
of  sand,  with  a  half-savage  population,  consisting 
principally  of  Somali.  It  has  had  many  masters, 
and  is  now  said  to  belong  to  the  Sheriff  of  Mocha, 
who  farms  it  to  a  chief  of  the  neighbourhood.  Passing 
into  the  interior,  the  traveller  must  cross  wild  moun- 
tains, desert  and  fertile  plains,  forests  and  rivers. 
The  frequent  visits  of  roving  marauders  and  wild 
beasts,  who  may  be  classed  together,  would  require 
you  to  be  continually  on  the  watch  during  your 
journey.  Encampments  and  villages  would  occa- 
sionally be  met  with. 

We  come  to  a  village.  It  is  a  straggling  concern, 
composed  of  a  disorderly  assemblage  of  mud  huts. 
On  entering  one  of  these  rude  dwellings,  through  an 
aperture  stopped  by  a  moveable  plank,  we  find  an 
apartment  divided  into  three  spaces  by  low  walls  of 
wattled  cane.  One  of  these  is  for  the  men,  another 
for  the  women,  another  for  the  cattle.  The  thatch 
is  jetty  with  smoke,  which  is  seldom  allowed  to 
escape ;  for  smoke  and  dirt  are  enjoyed  by  the  in- 
habitants, who  deem  them  accessory  to  warmth. 
They  are  an  indolent  set  of  people ;  the  men  having 

z 


338 


THE  AFKICANS  AT  HOME. 


little  to  do  besides  tending  their  cattle;  and  the 
domestic  arrangements  of  the  women  not  being  very 
recondite.  They  pound  the  grain  of  holcus  and 
make  it  into  cakes,  which  are  eaten  with  sour  milk, 
or  with  meat  and  broth. 

Let  us  suppose  an  encamped  tribe  to  be  migrating. 
The  master  of  the  ceremonies  shouts  aloud,  66  Fetch 
your  camels  !  Load  your  goods  !  we  march  !  "  The 
whole  process  of  flitting  is  soon  accomplished,  and 
the  heterogeneous  assemblage  moves  forward.  The 
stock  may  probably  consist  of  two  or  three  hundred 
cows,  six  or  seven  thousand  camels,  and  twice  as 
many  sheep  and  goats.  These  are  driven  in  divi- 
sions by  two  hundred  spearmen,  attended  by  boys 
and  large  pariah  dogs.  The  sick  and  weak  of  the 
flock  are  carried  on  camels.  Then  comes  the  furni- 
ture of  the  tents,  cooking  apparatus,  and  extra 
apparel,  packed  on  camels  led  by  young  women. 
The  matrons  follow,  carrying  their  babies  in  shoulder 
lappets  on  their  backs.  The  elder  children  are  also 
used  for  baby  carriers.  The  cavalcade  proceeds  at  a 
slow  pace,  without  much  regard  to  order  or  quiet. 

The  Somali  and  their  neighbours  are  armed  with 
the  spear  and  bow,  and  are  much  afraid  of  fire-arms, 
which  they  call  an  unfair  and  cowardly  weapon,  as 
bullets  make  no  distinction  between  a  brave  man 
and  a  coward.  Some  of  them  used  poisoned  arrows, 
which  we  should  think  to  be  quite  as  cowardly.  This 
poison  is  very  deadly.  It  is  obtained  from  an  ever- 
green resembling  a  bay  tree,  round  in  form,  growing 
to  the  height  of  twenty  feet.    Its  root  is  something 


COUNTRIES  SOUTH  OF  ABYSSINIA. 


339 


like  liquorice,  which  is  macerated,  and  the  poison 
extracted  by  a  particular  process. 

After  these  excursions  to  the  south-eastern  coun- 
tries, we  return  to  Grondar,  that  we  may  take  a 
southerly  route  into  the  tropical  heart  of  Africa.  Not 
that  we  should  like  to  travel  in  this  direction,  until 
we  had  more  confidence  in  the  people  through 
whom  we  must  pass.  For,  contrary  to  the  sup- 
position of  ancient  geographers,  the  equatorial 
regions  are  not  burned  up  with  the  scorching  sun 
so  as  to  be  uninhabitable.  Nature  has  provided  a 
black  skin  for  the  natives  ;  and  by  this  simple  ar- 
rangement, men  like  ourselves,  except  in  colour 
and  mental  ability,  live  and  labour  under  the  rays 
of  a  vertical  sun. 

Can  we  draw  a  bill  of  credit  upon  any  of  these 
natives  ?  Shall  we  believe  the  accounts  which  they 
give  of  their  own  country?  What  confidence  can 
we  place  in  their  testimony  ?  Very  little,  certainly, 
if  their  interests  were  concerned  in  telling  a  lie ;  for 
they  have  no  idea  of  truth  being  a  virtue.  But  in 
ordinary  conversation  they  may  tell  us  pretty  cor- 
rectly what  they  have  seen  and  heard ;  and  if  several 
of  them,  under  different  circumstances,  give  us 
similar  information,  we  may  place  a  general  reliance 
on  their  description  of  men  and  manners.  In  this 
way  only  can  we  fill  up  a  considerable  void  in  our 
map  of  Africa,  and  connect  the  discoveries  of  late 
travellers.  Krapf,  Beke,  Petherick,  Burton,  Speke, 
and  Livingstone  reached  certain  points  of  the 
interior;  and  there  they  received  accounts  from 
z  2 


340  THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 

merchants  and  slaves,  of  countries  beyond  the  range 
of  their  own  personal  adventure,  which  they  have 
published  for  our  edification.  These  accounts  are 
generally  meagre,  but  they  afford  an  outline  of 
parts  of  this  "  undiscovered  "  land.  We  therefore 
take  them  for  what  they  are  worth  ;  trusting  to  the 
general  statement,  but  not  giving  much  credence  to 
minute  details,  especially  those  in  which  the  infor- 
mants themselves  were  concerned.  For  all  these 
people  love  to  make  a  fine  story  about  themselves, 
their  adventures,  and  their  heroism  ! 

Let  us  travel  for  a  few  minutes  in  company  with 
the  tongue  of  Dilbo,  a  native  of  Sabba  in  Grnarea, 
who  served  Dr.  Krapf  in  Ankobar,  by  order  of  the 
King  of  Shoa.  This  man,  according  to  his  own  tale, 
had  some  experience  of  the  countries  south  of 
Abyssinia.  In  his  youth  he  had  accompanied  a  band 
of  slave-hunters  to  Kaffa,  and  thence  to  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  Dokos  (about  whom  we  shall  pre- 
sently speak).  In  turn,  an  attack  was  made  on 
Sabba,  when  he  was  captured  and  sold  at  Agabja  for 
forty  pieces  of  salt,  and  afterwards  at  Gonan  for 
sixty  pieces.  His  price  was  raised  at  Eoggie  to 
eighty  pieces,  and  afterwards  in  Abeju  to  a  hundred. 
At  last  a  Mahometan  gave  silver  for  him  in  Ali- 
wamba,  to  the  amount  of  twelve  dollars ;  and  a  widow 
in  Ankobar  transferred  him  to  herself  for  fourteen. 
At  her  death  he  became  the  property  of  her  brother, 
whose  goods  were  confiscated  by  the  King  of  Shoa, 
who  lent  the  lad  to  Dr.  Krapf.  Such  is  part  of  the 
history  of  a  slave !     What  was  the  remainder  ? 


COUNTRIES  SOUTH  OF  ABYSSINIA.  341 


What  a  volume  poor  Dilbo  might  have  written ! 
What  a  harvest  of  information  he  obtained,  without 
the  trouble  of  sowing  ;  and  the  crop  was  useless  to 
him,  except  to  think  about  in  his  meditative  hours ! 
Let  us  pick  up  a  few  gleanings,  as  we  wish  to 
journey  through  these  countries. 

We  could  go,  if  we  were  native  merchants,  by  a 
caravan  from  Grondar  to  Grnarea ;  and  if  we  were 
willing  to  brave  the  difficulties  and  dangers  of  the 
route  for  "  filthy  lucre's  sake."  Most  of  the  people 
are  Moslems,  and  their  language  is  a  dialect  of 
Gralla.  Coffee  grows  wild,  and  is  so  abundant  that 
the  tree  is  used  for  fuel.  The  wilderness  is  full  of 
wild  beasts,  especially  elephants.  The  king  is  a 
brave  warrior  and  good  ruler,  who,  sitting  on  a 
wooden  throne  covered  with  a  skin,  administers 
"  justice"  to  all  who  come  for  it.  His  capital,  Saka, 
contains  12,000  (?)  people.  There  are  said  to  be 
white  elephants  and  white  buffaloes  in  this  vicinity, 
which  animals  are  held  sacred.  Grnarea  is  a  moun- 
tainous district. 

Proceeding  southward,  we  should  reach  the  river 
Gojob  in  twelve  or  fifteen  days,  and  then  come  to 
Kaffa,  and  its  capital  Suni,  which  is  built  on  a  hill. 
The  houses  are  of  wood,  thatched,  and  mean  com- 
pared with  those  of  Abyssinia.  Queen  Balli  was 
sovereign  when  Dilbo  visited  Kaffa.  This  bold 
woman  had  seized  the  helm  of  government  on  the 
death  of  her  husband,  and  making  her  son  general 
of  the  army,  took  upon  herself  the  management  of 
the  home  department.  She  kept  much  retired ;  but 
z  3 


342 


THE  AFBICANS  AT  HOME. 


when  she  appeared  in  public,  required  due  honour 
to  be  paid  to  her  rank ;  so  that  her  dainty  black  feet 
must  walk  on  cloths  spread  before  her.  The  people 
are  partly  Christian,  of  a  very  degenerate  kind.  The 
men  have  a  place  of  public  resort  which  no  woman 
can  enter,  where  they  spend  the  day  together,  only 
seeing  their  wives  at  night.  A  woman  must  not  eat 
or  drink  with  her  husband,  under  penalty  of  three 
years'  imprisonment.  Yet  this  does  not  seem  to  tally 
with  their  obeying  a  female  monarch,  does  it  ?  The 
country  has  inward  tranquillity,  but  wages  perpetual 
wars  with  its  neighbours. 

Could  we  travel  safely  through  these  jarring 
elements  of  the  human  species,  we  should  next  arrive 
amongst  a  singular  species  of  men,  the  Dokos.  They 
are  a  race  of  pigmies,  only  four  feet  high,  of  a  dark 
olive  colour,  living  in  a  state  of  complete  savagism. 
They  have  no  chiefs,  law,  clothing,  or  houses ;  pur- 
sue no  art,  not  even  that  of  agriculture ;  but  live  on 
fruits,  roots,  mice,  serpents,  ants,  and  wild  honey. 
They  have  thick  protruding  lips,  flat  noses,  and 
small  eyes ;  their  hair,  not  woolly,  is  worn  by  the 
women  over  their  shoulders.  Their  nails  are  allowed 
to  grow  long,  like  the  talons  of  vultures,  in  order  to 
dig  up  ants,  and  tear  in  pieces  the  flesh  of  serpents 
which  they  devour  raw.  The  Dokos  multiply  rapidly, 
but  are  hunted  down  by  all  their  neighbours,  to 
whom  they  offer  no  resistance.  When  captured, 
they  become  docile  and  obedient  slaves,  who  live  on 
a  little,  and  are  therefore  prized  by  the  people  of 
those  countries.    This  account  of  the  Doko  pigmies 


PIGMIES  AND  OTHER  SAVAGES. 


343 


has  been  corroborated  by  evidence  from  other  quar- 
ters ;  and  when  Dr.  Krapf  was  at  Barava,  a  slave  was 
shown  to  him  of  this  description,  said  to  have  been 
brought  from  the  liliputian  race  of  the  interior. 

Somewhere  on  the  left  of  the  route  which  we  have 
taken,  is  the  kingdom  of  Senjero,  where  human 
sacrifices  are  offered  to  the  supposed  deities.  In  an 
olden  time  when  the  seasons  were  so  jumbled  to- 
gether that  the  fruits  would  not  ripen,  the  sorcerers 
ordered  some  children  to  be  slain,  and  their  blood 
poured  on  the  throne  and  on  the  broken  base  of  an 
iron  pillar  which  stood  at  the  entrance  of  the  town, 
and  which  they  commanded  to  be  broken.  The 
seasons  then  became  regular ;  and  in  order  to  keep 
them  right,  certain  families  are  obliged  to  deliver  up 
their  first-born  sons,  who  are  sacrificed  at  an  ap- 
pointed time.  In  imitation  of  these  people,  and 
from  a  crude  superstitious  fear,  the  slave-dealers 
on  leaving  Senjero  throw  a  beautiful  female  slave 
into  the  Lake  Umo. 

It  will  thus  appear  that  the  natives  get  more 
savage  as  we  approach  the  equator.  From  the 
pigmy  Dokos  we  take  a  south-westerly  course,  in 
a  stride  of  about  300  miles,  to  reach  the  tribes  of 
independent  Unyoro,  who  live  in  latitudes  a  little 
north  of  the  equator.  Our  readers  must  really 
excuse  this  summary  way  of  getting  over  a  very  wild 
and  burning  country,  the  inhabitants  of  which  are 
rude  in  the  extreme.  This  is,  in  fact,  all  that  we 
know  about  them  ;  and  we  have  no  desire  for  a  near 
acquaintance,  lest  we  should  be  murdered,  sacri- 

Z  4 


344 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


ficed,  eaten,  enslaved,  or  at  least  stripped  of  every- 
thing and  left  to  starve  in  the  wilderness.  For  the 
same  reason,  we  have  taken  a  circuitous  route,  and 
not  one  directly  south  from  Darfur,  which  would 
have  been  the  shortest  way  into  the  regions  which 
we  shall  now  visit. 

Look  at  these  slaves  brought  from  the  Unyoro ! 
They  are  of  a  dull  black  colour,  with  flattish  heads, 
prominent  eyes,  and  projecting  lower  jaw,  tattooed 
in  large  botches  encircling  the  forehead.  They  will 
tell  you  about  the  land  of  their  birth ;  that  it 
abounds  in  cattle  and  ivory,  and  is  so  hot  that  the 
inhabitants  care  little  about  clothing.  They  think 
that  the  Unyoro  are  a  wide-spread  people,  composing 
a  number  of  independent  tribes,  perhaps  under 
different  names,  living  about  the  northern  parts  of 
the  Lake  Nganza  or  Victoria. 

Passing  through  them,  we  enter  the  powerful 
kingdom  of  LTganda,  ^v;hich  lies  under  the  equator, 
and  has  subdued  the  dependent  Unyoro  who  dwell  on 
its  southern  border.  Let  us  listen  for  a  moment  to 
an  Arab  merchant,  whilst  he  tells  us  of  his  visit  to 
the  capital  of  Uganda  and  its  potent  king.  ts  Kibuja 
is  not  less  than  a  day's  journey  in  length  (!  );  the 
buildings  are  of  cane  and  rattan.  The  sultan's 
palace  is  at  least  a  mile  long ;  and  the  circular  huts, 
neatly  ranged  in  line,  are  surrounded  by  a  strong 
fence  which  has  only  four  gates.  Bells  at  the  several 
entrances  announce  the  approach  of  strangers,  and 
guards  in  hundreds  attend  there  at  all  hours.  The 
harem  contains  3000  souls, — concubines,  slaves,  and 


REPORTS  ABOUT  UGANDA. 


345 


children.  This  palace  has  often  been  burned  down 
by  lightning ;  on  which  occasions  the  warriors  must 
assemble  and  extinguish  the  fire  by  rolling  over  it. 
The  chief  of  Uganda  has  but  two  wants  with  which 
he  troubles  his  visitors,  —  one,  a  medicine  against 
death ;  the  other,  a  charm  to  avert  the  thunderbolt ; 
and  immense  wealth  would  reward  the  man  who 
could  supply  either  of  these  desiderata."  (The  late 
king,  the  mighty  Suna,  was  struck  by  the  shaft  of 
the  destroying  angel  in  1857,  whilst  riding  in  state 
—  that  is,  on  his  minister's  shoulders  —  in  the 
midst  of  his  army.  Custom  compels  the  new  king 
to  live  two  years  in  retirement,  during  which  time 
his  ministers  have  an  opportunity  of  driving  the 
state  coach.) 

"  The  army  of  Uganda  numbers  300,000  men  (!), 
each  of  whom  brings  an  egg  to  the  muster,  and  thus 
something  like  a  reckoning  of  the  people  is  made.  A 
soldier  carries  one  spear,  two  assegais,  a  large  dagger, 
and  a  shield ;  bows  and  swords  being  unknown. 
They  fight  to  the  sound  of  drums,  which  are  beaten 
with  sticks  like  those  of  the  Franks;  should  this 
performance  cease,  all  fly  the  field.  When  the  king 
has  no  foreign  enemies,  or  when  his  exchequer  is 
indecently  low,  he  feigns  a  rebellion,  attacks  one  of 
his  own  provinces,  massacres  the  chief  men,  and  sells 
off  the  peasantry.  Executions  are  frequent,  a  score 
being  often  slain  at  a  time,  to  keep  his  subjects  in 
awe  of  him. 

"  Suna  never  appeared  in  public  without  a  spear. 
His  dress  was  the  national  costume,  a  long  piece  of 


346 


THE  AFKICANS  AT  HOME. 


fine  bark  cloth  extending  from  the  neck  to  the 
ground.  He  was  a  terrible  despot,  boasting  to  the 
Arabs  that  he  was  the  god  of  earth,  as  their  Allah 
was  Lord  of  Heaven.  He  claimed  divine  honours, 
which  his  subjects  readily  paid;  but  was  terribly 
angry  with  the  lightning.  He  shut  up  his  sons, 
numbering  more  than  a  hundred,  in  early  youth,  and 
chained  them  in  separate  dungeons,  where  they  must 
continue  till  death,  if  not  wanted  for  the  throne. 
He  was  awfully  rigorous  in  justice  (?) ;  the  only 
punishments  being  death  and  fines.  He  was  very 
liberal  to  Arab  merchants,  whom  he  encouraged  to 
trade  in  his  capital." 

When  Snay  Ben  Ameer  arrived  with  a  caravan, 
the  sultan  ordered  the  erection  of  as  many  tents  as 
he  might  require,  and  sent  him  large  presents  of 
bullocks  and  grain,  plantains,  and  sugar-canes. 
When  after  a  repose  of  three  or  four  days  he  was 
summoned  to  the  audience  hall,  he  found  2000 
guards  outside  armed  only  with  staves.  Suna  was 
seated  on  a  cushion  of  bark  cloth,  dressed  as  usual ; 
two  spears  were  near  him ;  and  his  favourite  dog,  a 
kind  of  greyhound,  was  by  his  side.  The  ministers 
sat  at  a  distance  of  fifty  paces,  between  the  king  and 
his  guards ;  and  the  principal  women  were  placed 
out  of  sight,  behind  the  visitor's  back.  The  chamber 
was  lit  with  torches.  A  conversation  took  place 
about  Zanzibar  and  the  politics  of  the  whole  country. 
When  tired  of  it,  the  despot  rose  up,  and  the  meeting 
dispersed.  Snay  received  immediately  whatever  he 
wanted ;  and  it  was  intimated  to  the  "  king's  stranger" 


TRIBES  OF  THE  LAKE  NYANZA.  347 

that  he  might  lay  hands  on  whatever  he  pleased, 
animate  or  inanimate.  The  Arab  was  wary  of  in- 
dulging this  prerogative.  When  he  departed  he 
received  a  present  of  provisions  for  the  road,  and  an 
offer  of  two  hundred  guards  to  escort  him.  Bona 
allowed  no  travellers  to  go  north  of  Kibuja,  lest  the 
distinction  conferred  by  their  visit  should  be  shared 
by  inferior  chiefs.  He  had  a  flotilla  on  the  lake 
Nyanza. 

Crossing  the  river  Kitanzure,  which  flows  into  this 
lake,  you  would  enter  Karagwak,  a  hilly  but  fruitful 
district,  with  a  high  range  of  mountains  and  rich 
valleys.  A  tall,  stout  race  of  people  inhabit  these 
highlands,  where  female  beauty  is  (like  amongst  the 
Moors)  chiefly  estimated  by  corpulence.  Both  sexes 
are  clad  with  the  mbugu  or  short  kilt,  here  made 
of  bark  cloth.  Their  villages  of  shabby  round  huts 
are  scattered  over  the  hills.  Though  the  king  has 
a  large  store  of  fine  cloth,  presented  to  him  by 
strangers,  yet  he  prefers  the  free  and  easy  costume 
of  his  subjects;  from  whom  he  distinguishes  himself 
by  a  pair  of  tight  gaiters  made  of  beads,  reaching 
from  below  the  anele  to  the  knee.  His  palace  con- 
sists of  forty  or  fifty  huts  in  a  settlement  by  itself. 
A  pastoral  people,  the  Wotoso,  somewhat  like  the 
Foolas  of  Senegambia,  are  scattered  through  this 
country,  the  southern  frontier  of  which  is  in  about 
2°  4(y  S.  lat.  The  next  people  are  the  Usui,  who 
bear  a  very  bad  name  amongst  travellers. 

All  this  time,  you  have  on  the  east  of  your  route 
the  Lake  Nyanza ;  whilst  on  the  west  are  some 


348 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


unknown  tribes  who  merge  into  the  Uzige  and 
Urundi,  on  the  northern  parts  of  the  lake  Tanganyika. 
These  newly-discovered  lakes  will  require  a  passing 
notice. 

Lake  Nyanza  or  Victoria  must  be  carefully  dis- 
tinguished from  Lake  Nyassi  or  Maravi,  which  lies  a 
considerable  distance  to  the  south.  (Much  geogra- 
phical confusion  has  arisen  from  supposing  them  to 
be  the  same.)  The  southern  point  of  Lake  Nyanza  is 
in  2°  24'  S.  lat. ;  the  middle  of  the  expanse  is  about 
33°  E.  long. ;  and  it  is  3750  feet  above  the  sea  level. 
Its  water  is  very  clear  and  sweet.  There  are  some 
islands  in  its  bosom,  inhabited  by  a  very  savage  and 
naked  race  of  people.  It  has  not  been  ascertained 
how  far  north  it  extends,  but  probably  to  the  second 
or  third  degree  of  N.  lat.  Captain  Burton  judges, 
with  much  reason,  that  it  occupies  a  hollow  in  the 
back  parts  of  the  "Mountains  of  the  Moon,"  and 
that  it  is  separated  by  a  high  ridge  from  the  range 
which  gives  birth  to  the  White  Nile. 

The  ordinary  caravan  route  would  lead  you  from 
the  south  of  Lake  Nyanza,  through  Usukuma,  to 
Kazeh  the  principal  town  of  Unyanyembe.  You 
might  be  surprised  to  find  such  a  thriving  place  in 
the  midst  of  a  savage  region.  But  it  owes  its  pros- 
perity to  Arabs  of  the  tribe  of  Omani,  who  have  made 
it  a  central  depot  of  merchandise  for  this  part  of 
Africa.  Bringing  their  goods  from  the  eastern  coast 
opposite  to  Zanzibar,  they  send  them  from  Unyan- 
yembe to  the  tribes  already  noticed  on  the  north,  to 
the  Lake  Tanganyika  on  the  west,  and  to  a  great  many 


ARABS  OF  UNYANYEMBE. 


349 


tribes  on  the  south,  and  south-west,  including  those 
around  the  Eukwa  water  or  lake,  which  is  situated 
between  6°  and  7°  S.  lat.,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a 
noted  ivory  mart. 

There  is  nothing  here  which  resembles  a  town. 
The  Arabs  live  in  oblong  houses  of  clay  called  tembe, 
built  after  the  fashion  of  those  which  we  have  seen 
in  Central  Africa.  A  verandah  in  front  forms  their 
usual  lounging  place,  whence  a  strong  door  leads  to 
a  vestibule  in  which  visitors  can  be  received :  then  a 
passage  conducts  to  a  court-yard,  where  are  separate 
chambers  for  the  master  and  his  goods,  his  harem 
and  his  slaves.  This  style  of  dwelling  has  been 
adopted  by  a  few  native  chiefs  and  traders  in  the 
eastern  districts.  The  Arab  colonists  of  Unyanyembe 
do  not  exceed  twenty  or  thirty;  they  seem  to  live 
very  comfortably,  and  even  splendidly.  Their  houses 
form  little  castles,  substantial  and  capable  of  defence ; 
their  harems  are  well  filled ;  their  gardens  are  stocked 
with  fruits  and  vegetables ;  they  have  flocks,  herds, 
and  slaves ;  and  they  receive  regular  supplies  of  wheat, 
fine  rice,  fruits,  clothes,  and  whatever  else  they  desire, 
by  their  caravans  from  the  sea  coast.  But  the  climate 
is  prejudicial  to  health. 

A  fine,  enterprising,  independent  set  of  men  are 
these  Arabs  ;  and  the  chief  commerce  of  the  lake  dis- 
tricts is  owing  to  their  presence.  About  half  a  dozen 
of  them  are  stationed  at  Kazeh,  and  others  in  adjoining 
places ;  the  Negroes  dwelling  in  clusters  of  hovels  in 
their  vicinity.  They  received  the  European  travellers 
with  great  urbanity,  and  aided  them  in  pursuing  their 


350 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME, 


discoveries.  Here  your  can  recruit  your  stock  of 
African  currency,  which  consists  of  beads,  cloth,  and 
wire  ;  and  along  with  ammunition  you  may  procure 
various  comforts,  including  spices  and  drugs.  The 
Wanyamwezi  of  this  region  are  the  principal  porters 
of  the  merchandise  of  the  caravans ;  as  no  adequate 


beasts  of  burden  have  been  reared  to  traverse  a 
country  so  diversified  in  its  scenery  and  climate. 

If  you  should  be  taken  ill  here,  which  is  very  likely 
to  happen  in  the  rainy  season,  a  doctor  will  be 
strongly  recommended.  He  tries  the  cautery,  coat- 
ings of  powdered  ginger,  and  similar  counter-irritants. 
Should  his  art  fail,  he  insists  that  you  are  poisoned, 
and  that  you  ought  to  see  a  mganga  or  witch,  cele- 
brated for  the  cures  which  she  has  performed.  The 
old  hag  makes  her  appearance.  She  is  covered  with 
wrinkles,  "  with  a  greasy  skin,  black  as  soot,  set  off 


A  MNYAMWEZI. 


A  MHEHA. 


A  WITCH  DOCTOR. 


35  i 


by  a  mass  of  tin-coloured  pigtails ;  her  arms  adorned 
with  copper  bangles,  like  manacles ;  and  the  impli- 
ments  of  her  craft,  as  usual,  a  girdle  of  small  gourds, 
dyed  red-black  with  oil  and  use."  She  first  demands 
and  receives  her  fee;  and  then  proceeds  to  search 
the  mouth,  and  to  inquire  about  poison.  This  ques- 
tion is  perhaps  a  proof  that  deadly  herbs  are  used 
in  the  country.  Taking  a  powder  from  one  of  her 
gourds,  and  mixing  it  with  water,  she  administers  it 
like  snuff,  so  as  to  cause  a  violent  sneezing.  She 
hails  this  sign  with  shouts  of  joy,  then  rubs  the  head 
with  another  powder,  and  retires  promising  a  cure. 
But  her  propensities  for  intoxicating  drink,  which  the 
fee  enables  her  to  indulge,  prevent  her  returning  on 
the  morrow  to  see  her  patient. 

Before  visiting  the  other  lake,  which  lies  to  the 
west  and  reaches  nearly  to  the  centre  of  the  conti- 
nent, we  had  better  glance  at  the  people  who  live 
between  Kazeh  and  the  eastern  coast.  It  is  a  cara- 
van route,  with  stations  and  villages  at  no  great 
distance  from  each  other ;  so  that  there  is  little  fear 
of  starvation  from  hunger  or  thirst,  to  the  person 
that  is  supplied  with  the  money  which  "  answereth 
to  all  things."  Nor  will  an  armed  party  be  in  much 
fear  of  robbers.  Still,  no  one  who  reads  the  volumes 
of  Captain  Burton's  travels,  will  wish  to  take  this 
journey.  The  inconveniences  and  annoyances  which 
a  traveller  must  endure  are  most  oppressive,  and 
almost  insufferable.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether 
the  men  or  asses  are  most  difficult  to  manage.  The 
latter  are  only  half  tamed,  and  are  most  unruly 


352 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


animals,  kicking,  plunging,  falling  down,  straying, 
and  never  going  above  two  miles  an  hour,  unless  a 
stick  is  constantly  applied  by  a  person  behind.  By 
their  misdemeanours  you  might  sustain  bruises  on 
your  body,  loss  of  property,  and  be  sometimes  obliged 
to  carry  your  own  pack. 

All  the  natives,  escort,  guides,  carriers,  slaves,  and 
villagers,  are  as  bad  as  bad  can  be ;  idle,  cowardly, 
thievish,  full  of  every  kind  of  trick  and  deception. 
Your  own  hired  people  are  insubordinate,  quarrelsome, 
and  ready  to  desert  at  a  moment's  notice.  They  stop 
when  they  please,  hurry  on  when  you  wish  them  to 
go  slow,  and  creep  when  you  want  them  to  hasten, 
always  grumbling,  and  getting  drunk  whenever  they 
can.  The  climate  of  this  eastern  region  is  oppressive, 
and  subject  to  great  alternations  of  heat  and  cold,  fog 
and  sunshine,  fair-weather  and  teeming  rains.  The 
tzetse  appear  here,  and  are  not  so  respectful  to  men 
and  asses  as  in  the  districts  traversed  by  Dr.  Living- 
stone ;  for  they  are  very  annoying  to  both  species, 
though  their  bite  is  not  fatal  to  them. 

Proceeding  eastward,  you  would  first  pass  through 
a  series  of  low  jungles  and  desert  plains  inhabited 
principally  by  Wayamwesi.  Black-mail  is  exacted  by 
the  chief  of  every  place  through  which  you  pass ;  and 
it  often  requires  a  considerable  time  to  settle  the  tax 
that  must  be  paid.  One  of  these  petty  "  sultans" 
may  be  described  as  a  sample  of  the  rest:  a  tall, 
large-limbed,  angular  man,  with  a  black  and  wrinkled 
skin ;  the  grease  and  oil  which  drop  from  his  pig- 
tails imparting  their  unctuosity  to  the  whole  of 


TRIBES  OF  THE  LAKE  DISTRICT. 


353 


his  body.  A  cloth  round  his  loins,  and  a  tobe 
thrown  over  his  shoulders,  partially  cover  his  gaunt 
limbs;  whilst  a  portion  of  his  legs  and  ankles 
are  concealed  with  a  deep  ornament  of  brass  and 
copper  wire,  and  his  sandals  are  decorated  with  discs 
of  white  shells. 

The  Wagogo  next  attract  your  attention,  in  the 
table-land  of  Ugogo ;  a  tribe  of  Negroes  who  seem  to 
have  mixed  much  with  the  Arab  race,  being  greatly 
superior  to  their  neighbours  in  physical  appearance 
and  attention  to  dress.  Most  of  them  have  fine 
forms,  and  some  of  their  females  are  handsome  in  a 
high  degree.  Similar  remarks  may  be  made  on  the 
Wahumba,  who  live  to  the  north  of  the  Wagogo. 

Ascending  the  Usagara  mountains,  you  come 
amongst  the  Wasagara,  a  set  of  short,  black,  beard- 
less men ;  their  only  covering  being  a  goat-skin  apron 
slung  over  one  shoulder.  Their  sultan  is  described 
as  a  little,  grizzled  old  man,  with  wide  mouth,  a 
drunkard's  eyes,  a  very  thin  beard,  wearing  long 
and  straggling  hair.  His  dress  differed  little  from 
that  of  the  sultan  of  Eubuga,  but  he  wore  a  number 
of  necklaces.  Thus  within  a  short  distance,  we  find 
three  contiguous  tribes  wholly  differing  in  their 
physiological  appearance ! 

Here  the  African  sycamores  abound.  The  branches 
of  this  splendid  tree  extend  more  than  a  hundred 
feet,  and  with  th'eir  thick  foliage  form  a  most  agree- 
able shade  from  a  vertical  sun.  The  fruit  is  a  miser- 
able fig,  or  rindy  berry,  eaten  for  want  of  other  food. 
There  are  two  species,  one  having  a  larger  and  thicker 


354 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


leaf  than  the  other,  and  a  loftier  trunk  or  set  of 
trunks. 

The  Eubero  range  of  mountains,  5700  feet  above 
the  sea  level,  now  crosses  the  traveller's  route,  and  he 
must  scramble  as  he  best  can  through  its  difficult 
passes,  intersected  by  numerous  streams  and  deep 
gorges.  In  some  parts  of  the  "Tamarind"  hills,  Cap- 
tain Burton  and  his  party  saw  a  great  many  skeletons 
lying  about,  the  remains  of  porters  and  slaves  who 
had  perished  from  fatigue  and  the  small-pox,  which 
was  committing  frightful  ravages  amongst  the  natives. 
The  climate  of  these  islands  is  clear,  balmy,  and  re- 
freshing ;  so  that  in  coming  from  the  coast,  you  here 
first  meet  with  the  trees,  beasts,  and  birds  that  pre- 
vail in  the  interior  of  Africa.  For  between  these 
hills  and  the  coast,  the  ground  is  low  and  covered 
with  marshy  jungles,  over  which  rain  or  thick  mist 
generally  hangs. 

The  inhabitants  of  this  steamy  district  are  very 
degraded.  The  Wadoe,  relics  of  a  powerful  tribe, 
are  said  to  drink  out  of  rough  skulls.  Their  chiefs 
are  buried  with  their  bead  ornaments  in  a  sitting 
posture,  and  so  that  their  forefinger  may  project 
above  ground.  Each  is  accompanied  in  his  grave  by 
a  male  and  female  slave,  who  are  buried  alive  with 
their  master's  corpse,  that  they  may  wait  upon  him 
in  the  future  state.  The  woman  is  seated  on  a  little 
stool,  supporting  his  head  on  her  lap;  the  man  is 
furnished  with  a  bill-hook,  to  procure  fuel  for  his 
lord  in  the  other  world !  The  Wakhutu  are  very  mean 
in  their  physical  appearance,  in  their  worldly  circum- 


TRIBES  OF  THE  LAKE  DISTRICT. 


355 


stances,  and  in  their  moral  character.  They  live  in 
wretched  huts,  on  dwarf  cones  of  land  which  rise 
above  the  swamps.  The  vegetation  of  these  marshes 
is  so  rank  that  grass  grows  upwards  of  twelve  feet, 
and  has  stalks  nearly  as  thick  as  a  man's  finger. 
These  are  famous  lurking-places  for  runaway  slaves 
and  rogues ;  and  the  traveller  has  often  to  fight  his 
way,  as  through  a  dense  screen,  receiving  from  time 
to  time  a  severe  blow  from  the  recoil  of  the  reeds,  or 
a  painful  thrust  from  a  broken  stump  inclined  to- 
wards him.  This  is  therefore  a  laborious,  oppressive, 
and  dangerous  part  of  the  journey. 

The  Wazaramo,  next  to  the  Arabs  of  the  coast,  have 
gained  no  advantage  by  their  slight  contact  with  a 
species  of  civilisation.  They  wear,  as  the  peculiar 
badge  or  ornament  of  their  tribe,  a  variegated  collar 
of  beads.  They  mat  their  hair  into  a  number  of 
forms  with  a  pomatum  of  clay  and  oil;  and  their 
ordinary  apparel  is  the  loin  cloth.  They  are  impe- 
tuous, noisy,  and  impracticable ;  delighting  only  in 
revelry  and  drunkenness ;  having  no  religion  but  a 
few  "  customs  "  or  superstitions  of  a  fanciful  nature. 

A  much  shorter  road  to  Lake  Nyanza  than  that 
adopted  by  Captain  Burton  might  be  found  from  the 
coast :  but  the  lawless  character  of  the  people  pre- 
vents it  being  followed.  Both  Messrs.  Eebmann  and 
Krapf  endeavoured  to  reach  the  interior  from  Mombaz ; 
the  former  by  way  of  Jaggar,  the  latter  by  way  of 
Kikayu.  But  they  were  obliged  to  abandon  their 
enterprise,  after  being  plundered  of  their  effects,  and 
exposed  to  great  hardships,  and  Dr.  Krapf  especially 

A  A  2 


3j6 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


to  much  danger.  Their  accounts  of  the  impractica- 
bility of  the  chiefs  and  people,  and  the  bad  conduct 
of  their  own  "  porters/'  differ  little  from  those  which 
we  have  already  given. 

Most  people  would  find  more  comfort  in  reading 
our  description  of  the  route  from  Kazeh  to  the  coast, 


AFBICAN  STANDING  POSITION. 


which  is  far  from  being  exaggerated,  than  in  perform- 
ing so  laborious  a  pilgrimage.  We  can  say  little 
better  of  a  journey  westward.  However,  it  must  be 
pursued,  at  least  in  the  pages  of  this  volume.  You 
are  therefore  to  suppose  yourself  back  at  Kazeh,  due 
south  of  Lake  Nyanza,  to  traverse  the  district  which 


THE  LAND  OF  THE  MOON. 


357 


lies  between  you  and  Lake  Tanganyika,  by  a  westerly 
route. 

The  tribes  through  which  you  must  now  pass  are 
similar  to  those  already  mentioned ;  only,  there  are 
small  settlements  of  Arab  merchants  on  the  way, 
which  greatly  facilitates  the  transit  of  a  caravan. 
The  most  important  of  these  little  colonies  is  at 
Msene,  among  the  Wasumbah,  who  live  in  clusters 
of  thatched  huts,  surrounded  with  stockades  and 
moats  for  the  purpose  of  defence.  Their  chief  or 
sultan,  savage  in  his  appearance  and  dress,  rules  with 
a  tight  hand,  and  claims  the  most  abject  submission 
from  his  people,  who  never  approach  him  but  on 
their  knees  and  with  clapping  of  hands.  The  cur- 
rency is  in  porcelain  beads,  the  favourite  colour  of 
which  is  constantly  changing  by  the  freaks  of  fashion. 
This  place  is  so  exceedingly  debauched  in  morals, 
that  it  is  a  kind  of  Circaean  rendezvous  for  the  most 
dissolute  negroes  of  the  district;  and  makes  most 
caravans  lose  some  of  their  porters,  who  are  tempted 
to  desert,  that  they  may  indulge  for  a  season  in 
boisterous  revelry. 

The  whole  of  the  region  between  and  about  the 
two  lakes  is  called  the  u  land  of  the  moon,"  and  is  a 
garden  of  intertropical  Africa ;  being  pretty  thickly 
set  with  small  villages,  and  abounding  in  luxuriant 
vegetation.  The  ground  is  flat,  but  intersected  with 
low  conical  or  tabular  hills.  It  is  very  productive  of 
fevers  and  influenzas,  which  are  as  much  dreaded  here 
as  in  England ;  since  the  bodily  constitution  of  the 
people  is  radically  weak,  and  cannot  bear  up  against 


358 


THE  AFEICANS  AT  HOME. 


fierce  distempers.  These  Wanyamwezi  are  of  a  dark 
sepia  colour,  tall,  and  stoutly  built,  with  crispy  hair, 
and  thin  short  beards.  Certain  tattoo  marks  dis- 
tinguish their  different  tribes  or  clans  from  each 
other.  Their  usual  dress  is  a  kilt  of  cloth  or  soft 
leather.  Their  favourite  ornaments  are  beads,  rings 
of  brass,  and  coils  of  copper  or  iron  wire.  Wives  are 
purchased,  and  polygamy  is  the  order  of  the  day 
with  those  who  can  afford  it.  The  sickness  of  a  chief 
often  causes  the  death  of  many  persons.  It  is  as- 
cribed to  magic,  and  a  mganga  or  sorcerer  is  sum- 
moned to  find  out  the  culprit.  This  he  does  by 
inspecting  the  inside  of  a  mystic  fowl,  which  has 
been  killed  and  split  into  two  parts.  Blackness 
or  blemish  about  the  wing  is  supposed  to  denote 
treachery  in  "children  or  kinsmen ;  in  the  backbone 
it  convicts  mother  and  grandmother ;  in  the  tail  it 
accuses  the  wives,  and  in  the  thighs  the  concubines ; 
in  the  shanks  or  feet  it  condemns  the  common  slaves. 
When  a  class  has  thus  been  fixed  upon  as  criminals, 
its  members  are  collected  by  the  mganga,  who 
throws  up  another  drugged  hen,  and  singles  out  the 
individual  on  whom  it  alights.  Confession  of  guilt 
is  extorted  by  torture,  and  instant  death  is  the 
punishment.  Men  are  speared,  clubbed,  beheaded, 
or  have  their  head  crushed ;  women  are  impaled.  If 
the  chief  be  long  of  recovering  or  dying,  many  vic- 
tims are  sacrificed ;  since  the  "  custom  "  is  continued 
until  some  issue  of  his  disease  takes  place.  When 
his  disorder  is  the  debility  of  intemperance  and  age, 
many  precede  him  into  the  other  world ;  for  in  one 


LAKE  TANGANYIKA. 


359 


house  no  less  than  eighteen  persons,  male  and  female, 
have  been  sacrificed  to  this  horrid  delusion, 

Proceeding  through  jungle  and  swamps,  you  would 
reach  Ujiji  on  the  borders  of  the  Lake  Tanganyika, 
the  great  slave  mart  of  these  regions.  The  Wajiji 
and  other  neighbouring  tribes  do  not  materially  differ 
from  those  which  we  have  passed  through.  The  lake 
is  1850  feet  above  the  sea  level,  about  250  miles  in 
length,  and  has  an  average  breadth  of  twenty  miles. 
Would  you  like  to  navigate  this  inland  sea  ?  Then 
you  must  sail  in  a  rude  canoe  formed  of  a  hollowed 
trunk,  and  propelled  by  paddles;  creeping  along  dreary 
shores,  which  are  skirted  by  miserable  hamlets.  Your 
savage  crew  howl,  yell,  and  make  an  incessant  noise 
with  horns  and  tom-toms ;  an  uncouth  and  ungovern- 
able race  of  savages,  who  stop  to  smoke,  eat,  or 
wrangle,  whenever  they  please.  When  going  from 
Ujiji  to  the  northern  extremity  of  the  lake,  in  order 
to  avoid  its  inhospitable  coasts,  natives  generally 
cross  over  opposite  the  island  Ubwari,  "a  long, 
narrow  lump  of  rock,  twenty  to  twenty-five  geo- 
graphical miles  long,  by  four  or  five  of  extreme 
breadth,  with  a  high  longitudinal  spine,  like  a  hog's 
back."  Some  parts  are  cultivated  by  its  wild  inhabi- 
tants, who  are  much  feared  by  dwellers  on  the  main- 
land. At  the  top  of  the  lake  is  Uvira,  a  depot  for 
young  slaves,  ivory,  bark-cloth,  grain,  and  iron  ware, 
which  are  cheap  here. 

The  Uzige  live  north  of  the  lake,  and  to  the  west 
of  them  are  the  Wavira;  south  of  whom  are  the 
Wubembe  cannibals,  and  the  Wagomu  highlanders, 

A  A  4 


360 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


who  supply  trees  for  the  large  canoes.  The  Waguhha 
possess  the  islands  in  the  southern  part  of  the  lake ; 
and  through  their  country  is  the  route  to  Uruvwa, 
at  a  distance  of  nine  long  stages,  where  the  coast- 
trade  terminates.  Fifteen  marches  farther  south 
would  bring  a  traveller  to  Usenda,  the  capital  of  the 
chief  Kazembe.  Such  are  the  accounts  given  by 
Arab  traders  of  a  region  hitherto  untrod  by  Euro- 
peans. 


COUNTRIES  ABOUT  THE  EQUATOR.  361 


CHAP.  XV. 

Countries  about  the  Equator. — Cannibals. — Gorillas. — Matiamvo. — 
Despotism. — Katema. — Some  Words  about  the  King. — Kawawa. 
— Tricks  of  the  Chiboque. — Nudity. — Etiquette. -—Superstitious 
Fears.  —  Cabango.  — Women. — "  A  fine  Funeral." — Employments. 
— A  naked  Amazon.  —  Shinte  and  his  Town.  —  Keception  of  Dr. 
Livingstone. — Manioc  Root. — Blood  Relationships. — Animal  Life. 
—  Libonta. — Linyanti.  —  Heavy  Ornaments. — Female  Beauty. — 
The  Looking- Glass. — Royal  Wives  and  Widows. — Game. — Dances. 
— The  Batoka. — Singular  Customs.  —  Other  Tribes. — Cazembe.  — 
Living  "according  to  Nature." — Estimate  of  their  Character. — 
Marshes. — Tsetse.  —  Black  Soldier  Ant. — Bushmen. — Desert  of 
Kalahari.  —  The  Bakalahari. — Summary.  —  Civilisation  and  Com- 
merce.— Geographical  view  of  Central  Africa. 

As  Lake  Nyanza  lies  about  the  equator,  and  the 
western  side  of  Lake  Tanganyika  is  nearly  in  the 
longitudinal  centre  of  Africa,  the  eastern  half  of  its 
central  regions  have  been  pretty  well  accounted  for 
by  recent  discoveries.  But  what  is  contained  in  the 
western  half?  Here  some  vacancies  in  the  map 
remain  to  be  filled  up.  But  a  little  insight  into  a 
portion  of  this  space  has  been  given  us  (whilst  this 
volume  has  been  in  the  press)  by  Monsieur  Du 
Chaillu,  who  penetrated  from  the  western  coast  to  a 
distance  of  about  400  miles,  between  2°  north  and 
2°  south  latitude.    From  his  account  we  learn  that 


362 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


the  coast  range  of  mountains  has  other  mountains 
behind  it ;  and,  especially,  that  a  little  south  of  the 
equator,  a  high  range  runs  inward  for  several  hundred 
miles,  extending  beyond  14°  east  longitude.  This 
hilly  region  is  intersected  by  rivers,  the  courses  of 
which  are  not  fully  described.  Most  of  this  country 
consists  of  vast  forests,  inhabited  by  hostile  tribes,  who 
wage  incessant  war  with  each  other,  and  with  wild 
beasts  and  venomous  reptiles  which  seem  to  claim 
possession  of  the  soil.  The  people  are  very  rude 
and  demoralised,  given  to  witchcraft  and  similar 
superstitions. 

Some  of  the  innermost  tribes  visited  by  Du  Chaillu, 
and  others  lying  beyond  his  field  of  enterprise,  are 
addicted  to  cannibalism,  feasting  on  the  bodies  of 
enemies  though  not  of  friends.  Hence  it  appears 
that  the  Africans  living  about  the  equator  are  un- 
usually degraded ;  and  this  is  probably  the  case 
through  the  whole  breadth  of  the  continent. 

Certain  localities  of  this  district  are  infested  with 
gorillas.  This  singular  animal,  of  the  monkey  family, 
approaches  nearer  to  the  human  species  in  its  form 
and  habits  than  the  chimpanzee,  ourang-outang,  or 
any  other  creature  with  which  we  are  acquainted ; 
but  it  strikingly  differs  in  the  formation  of  the  brain. 
A  full-grown  gorilla  is  at  least  six  feet  high,  very 
muscular  and  strong,  far  surpassing  the  strength  of 
a  man ;  so  that  it  can  break  a  tree  of  three  or  four 
inches  diameter  with  the  greatest  ease.  Its  bones 
are  large  and  thick,  its  arms  long,  its  chest  ample,  its 
legs  strong.    It  is  covered  with  hair,  which  is  longer 


TIIE  GORILLA.  363 


in  the  female  than  in  the  male ;  and  has  no  tail 
It  lives  in  caves,  and  feeds  on  vegetable  produce,  not 


GOBULLA. 


eating  flesh  of  any  description.  Its  innate  savage- 
ness  is  visible  in  its  ferocious  looks,  especially  in  its 


364 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


large  and  deep  eye-balls ;  and  it  cannot  be  tamed. 
The  gorillas  destroy  all  other  animals  in  the  vicinity 
of  their  habitat,  refusing  to  have  friendly  intercourse 
with  any  other  creature.  Woe  to  the  luckless 
hunter  who  misses  his  aim,  or  fails  to  disable  a 
gorilla  which  he  is  pursuing ;  for  it  would  instantly 
pounce  upon  him,  wrench  his  musket  from  his 
hands,  and  beat  out  his  brains  with  his  own  weapon. 
Yet  this  creature  is  so  devoid  of  everything  like 
"  common  sense,"  that  although  it  enjoys  warming 
itself  by  a  fire  left  by  the  negroes,  it  never  thinks  of 
adding  fuel  to  keep  it  burning. 

As  the  localities  in  which  it  resides  are  very 
limited,  the  species  will  probably  become  extinct,  as 
soon  as  man  there  becomes  more  civilised. 

If  we  were  to  visit  the  innermost  of  the  Fan  and 
other  cannibals,  such  as  the  Osheba  and  Mashobo 
(which  we  have  no  desire  of  doing) ;  a  stride  of  400 
or  500  miles  would  bring  us  somewhere  in  the 
country  of  Matiamvo ;  which  we  might  have  reached 
by  a  similar  stride  from  the  south  of  Lake  Tangan- 
yika. This  distance,  or  even  a  shorter  one  from 
Uruvwa  (if  the  Arabs'  account  be  correct),  separates 
the  tribes  described  by  Captain  Burton  from  those 
described  by  Dr.  Livingstone,  as  the  last-mentioned 
traveller  passed  through  a  country  adjoining  that  of 
Matiamvo,  and  fell  in  with  people  who  had  been 
there. 

Matiamvo  is  the  hereditary  title  of  the  king,  who 
is  lord-paramount  of  the  Balonda,  and  his  capital 
seems  to  bear  the  name  of  its  ruler.    His  predecessor 


KING  MATIAMVO. 


365 


in  the  sovereignty,  who  died  early  in  1854,  was  a 
mad  prince.  He  would  sometimes  take  a  run 
through  the  town  with  his  sword,  and  decapitate  all 
whom  he  met,  until  he  had  made  a  heap  of  human 
heads.  If  he  took  a  fancy  to  anything  which  be- 
longed to  a  stranger,  he  would  order  a  whole  village 
to  be  sold  in  order  to  obtain  his  desire.  When  a 
slave-trader  visited  him,  he  took  possession  of  all  his 
goods;  and  after  a  week  or  two  sent  some  men 
to  seize  upon  a  village,  murder  the  chief,  and  take 
away  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants  for  slaves,  with 
whom  the  trader  was  paid.  Half-caste  slave-dealers 
used  therefore  to  resort  to  his  town,  as  a  good  place 
for  their  unhallowed  trade. 

In  the  northern  parts  of  Loanda  the  bloody  custom 
of  Guinea  prevails,  in  sacrificing  a  number  of  the 
chief's  servants  at  his  death,  in  order  to  accompany 
him  into  another  world.  Amongst  the  southern 
tribes  of  the  Balonda,  this  inhuman  practice  does 
not  exist.  The  Kanyika  and  Kanyoka  live  north  of 
the  Balonda,  but  Matiamvo  does  not  allow  any 
white  person  to  visit  them,  as  his  chief  supplies  of 
ivory  are  drawn  from  their  country ;  so  that  he  re- 
tains a  monopoly  of  this  article.  Ivory  and  slaves 
are  his  principal  exports ;  for  which  he  receives 
calico,  gunpowder,  salt,  beads,  and  coarse  earthen- 
ware. The  present  sovereign  is  more  mild  and  just 
in  his  government  than  his  predecessor:  still,  his 
power  is  absolute. 

Let  us  look  at  the  abode  of  Katema,  a  Balonda 
chief,  whose  town  lies  in  lat.  11°  35'  49"  S.,  and 


366 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


long.  22°  27'  E.  It  is  a  straggling  village  of  huts, 
rather  than  a  town.  Dr.  Livingstone  had  a  formal 
presentation  to  Katema.  He  found  him  sitting  on 
a  sort  of  throne,  with  about  three  hundred  men 
seated  on  the  ground  around ;  and  thirty  women, 
who  were  said  to  be  his  wives,  close  behind  him. 
The  main  body  of  the  people  were  squatting  in  a 
semicircle,  at  a  distance  of  fifty  yards.  Each  party 
had  its  own  head  man  stationed  at  a  little  distance 
in  front ;  who,  when  beckoned  by  the  chief,  came 
forward  as  his  counsellors.  Intemese  then  related 
the  stranger's  history;  and  Katema  placed  sixteen 
large  baskets  of  meal  before  him,  half  a  dozen  fowls, 
and  a  dozen  eggs  ;  expressing  his  regret  that  he  had 
slept  hungry,  as  he  did  not  wish  any  stranger  to 
suffer  want  in  his  town.  He  added :  "  Go  home, 
and  cook  and  eat,  and  you  will  then  be  in  a  fit  state 
to  speak  to  me,  at  an  audience  I  will  give  you  to- 
morrow." 

This  very  considerate  conduct  was  exhibited  by  a 
tall  man,  about  forty  years  old,  clad  in  a  brown 
coat  with  a  golden  band  down  the  sleeves,  and 
wearing  a  helmet  of  beads  and  feathers.  He  carried 
a  large  tail  made  of  the  caudal  extremities  of  gnus, 
having  charms  attached  to  it,  which  he  waved  in 
front  of  himself,  during  the  audience.  He  was  in  a 
good  humour  and  laughed  much. 

Next  day  he  addressed  his  guests  in  the  following 
speech :  "  I  am  the  great  Moene  (lord)  Katema,  the 
fellow  of  Matiamvo.  There  is  no  one  in  this  country 
equal  to  Matiamvo  and  me.    I  have  always  lived 


KING  KATEMA. 


367 


here,  and  my  forefathers  too.  There  is  the  house 
in  which  my  forefathers  lived.  You  found  no  human 
skulls  near  the  place  where  you  are  encamped.  I 
never  killed  any  of  the  traders ;  they  all  come  to 
me.  I  am  the  great  Moene  Katema  of  whom  you 
have  heard." 


KATEMA  ON  THE  SHOULDERS  OF  HIS  MINISTER. 

Upon  being  asked  what  he  would  like  to  be 
brought  for  him  from  Loanda,  he  prudently  said 
that  anything  from  the  white  people  would  be  accep- 
table, and  he  would  receive  anything  thankfully ;  but 
the  coat  which  he  then  wore  was  old,  and  he  would 


36S 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


like  another.  He  was  pleased  with  the  idea  of 
milking  cows,  which  was  a  new  thing  to  him.  He 
had  a  herd  of  about  thirty  fine  animals ;  but  they 
were  quite  wild;  and  when  one  was  wanted  for 
slaughter,  it  had  to  be  shot  like  a  buffalo.  Katema 
furnished  guides. 

Dr.  Livingstone,  on  revisiting  this  chief  after  his 
journey  to  the  coast,  gave  him  a  cloak  of  red  baize 
ornamented  with  gold  tinsel,  a  cotton  robe,  beads, 
an  iron  spoon,  and  a  small  tin  of  gunpowder :  when 
he  was  greatly  pleased  with  his  present.  On  de- 
parting, he  mounted  on  the  shoulders  of  his  spokes- 
man, as  the  most  dignified  mode  of  retiring.  The 
latter  was  a  slender  man ;  whereas  the  chief  was  six 
feet  high,  and  stout  in  proportion :  so  that  it  was 
only  custom  which  enabled  the  bearer  to  sustain 
his  load. 

Kawawa  was  another  important  chief  in  this  dis- 
trict. His  village,  a  little  north-west  of  Katema, 
consisted  of  forty  or  fifty  straggling  huts;  but  he 
had  a  ferry  over  the  Kasai,  by  means  of  which  he 
extorted  a  heavy  tribute  from  all  who  could  afford 
to  pay.  The  imposition  which  is  thus  practised 
upon  traders  by  all  the  tribes  near  the  western  coast, 
is  a  great  barrier  to  the  exchange  of  merchandise : 
but  the  natives  are  unable  or  unwilling  to  see  the 
evils  of  their  short-sighted  policy.  The  Chiboque 
demand  payment  from  every  one  who  passes  through 
their  country.  This  baneful  custom  has  doubtless 
arisen  through  the  slave-trade ;  since  the  slave- 
dealers  are  quite  at  the  mercy  of  the  chiefs  of  the 


TRICKS  OF  THE  CHIBOQUE. 


369 


district,  and  are  glad  to  pay  any  price  for  protection 
or  liberty  of  transit.  Kawawa,  who  was  otherwise 
a  kindly  man,  no  sooner  heard  that  Dr.  Livingstone's 
party  had  been  fleeced  of  an  ox  by  the  Chiboque, 
than  he  came  forward  with  larger  demands  for  him- 
self. A  fight  seemed  inevitable ;  as  the  chief  de- 
manded one  of  the  party  as  a  slave,  besides  a  gun 
and  other  things.  These  were  peremptorily  refused : 
and  the  travellers  prepared  to  force  their  way.  Then 
Kawawa  allowed  them  to  go  as  far  as  the  river, 
ordering  the  ferryman  not  to  let  them  cross;  and 
the  canoes  were  removed.  But  one  of  the  party 
perceived  where  a  canoe  was  hidden  amongst  the 
reeds :  so  that  they  borrowed  it  during  the  night, 
and  crossed  in  peace,  leaving  a  few  beads  for  the 
ferryman.  The  Doctor  expected  that  Kawawa  would 
some  day  lose  his  head  by  the  order  of  Matiamvo,  for 
his  extortionate  conduct  towards  traders.  Doubt- 
less this  would  be  the  case  as  soon  as  the  king  heard 
of  his  proceedings,  which  tended  to  impoverish  the 
country  by  keeping  trade  from  the  interior. 

Here  is  a  trick  of  the  Chiboque !  One  of  them 
drops  a  knife  near  the  ford  of  a  river.  Though  the 
travellers  have  been  forewarned,  yet  a  Negro  cannot 
resist  the  temptation  of  picking  it  up  and  putting 
it  in  his  basket.  The  owner  of  the  knife  has  been 
watching,  and  waits  till  all  but  the  heads  of  the 
party  have  crossed  the  stream.  He  then  comes  and 
demands  his  property ;  and  when  it  is  given  up, 
requires  a  fine  for  the  theft  as  it  is  called.  There 
is  no  remedy  but  to  give  him  what  he  asks.    For  it  is 

B  B 


370  THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 

customary  that  the  finder  of  anything  should  show  it  to 
his  chief,  and  offer  it  to  him ;  so  that  the  latter  may 
restore  it  to  the  owner  if  sought  for.  When  prac- 
tising this  deception,  the  Chiboque  took  care  to  keep 
on  their  own  side  of  the  stream :  and  u  it  was 
but  rarely  we  could  get  a  headman  so  witless  as 
to  cross  a  river  with  us,  and  remain  on  the  op- 
posite bank  in  a  convenient  position  to  be  seized 
as  a  hostage,  in  case  of  my  being  caught." 

On  another  occasion,  when  as  large  a  present  was 
not  given  to  the  chief  as  he  desired,  he  surrounded 
the  encampment  with  armed  men,  determined  to 
plunder  it  of  everything.  When  expostulated  with, 
he  said  that  one  of  the  party  had,  in  spitting  near 
the  fire,  allowed  a  small  quantity  of  saliva  to  fall  on 
the  leg  of  one  of  his  men;  and  this  " guilt "  must  be 
washed  away  by  the  fine  of  a  man,  an  ox,  or  a  gun. 
The  person  accused  of  this  great  offence  acknowledged 
that  he  had  accidentally  let  a  little  saliva  fall  as 
described,  but  that  he  had  given  the  Chiboque  a 
piece  of  meat  just  before  it  happened,  and  had 
wiped  it  off  immediately.  To  save  disputes,  the 
Doctor  gave  the  injured  man  a  shirt,  with  which 
he  was  not  satisfied.  A  few  beads  were  added :  but 
as  usual,  the  more  that  was  given  the  higher  their 
demands  rose. 

The  travelling  party  were  really  more  than  a  match 
for  their  assailants ;  and  the  chiefs  of  the  latter  had 
incautiously  come  and  seated  themselves  beside  the 
Doctor,  by  whose  party  they  were  surrounded :  so  that 
in  case  of  an  affray,  they  would  have  become  the  first 


TRICKS  OF  TOE  CIIIBOQUE.  371 

victims.  Finding  that  they  could  not  succeed  by- 
force,  the  natives  tried  a  ruse.  They  said,  "You 
come  among  us  in  a  new  way,  and  say  you  are  quite 
friendly  ;  how  can  we  know  it,  unless  you  give  us  some 
of  your  food,  and  you  take  some  of  ours  ?  If  you 
give  us  an  ox,  we  will  give  you  whatever  you  may 
wish,  and  then  we  shall  be  friends?"  This  was 
agreed  to.  An  ox  was  presented,  and  food  demanded 
in  return.    In  the  evening,  the  chief  sent  a  very  small 


WOMAN  OF  CONGO. 


basket  of  meal,  and  two  or  three  pounds  of  the  flesh 
of  the  slaughtered  ox !  The  travellers  could  not  help 
laughing  at  being  so  easily  duped. 

B  B  2 


372 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


All  the  tribes  bordering  upon  the  Portuguese  settle- 
ments on  the  coasts  of  Lower  Guinea  appear  to  be  thus 
extortionate  to  strangers,  so  as  greatly  to  hinder 
friendly  and  commercial  intercourse  with  the  interior. 
Otherwise,  the  inhabitants  of  Congo  and  its  neighbour- 
hood are  far  from  being  an  uninteresting  people,  and 
are  by  no  means  devoid  of  intelligence.  This  is 
manifest  from  the  conduct  and  character  of  those  who 
are  included  within  the  bounds  of  the  Portuguese 
government. 

The  Balonda  men  wear  a  girdle  round  their  loins, 
to  which  a  small  apron  of  soft  skin  is  attached  both 
in  front  and  behind.  The  women  have  nothing  that 
can  be  called  clothing.  Yet  the  girls,  indifferent  to 
their  own  nudity,  laughed  at  the  Makololo  men  who 
had  no  back  apron. 

Strange  to  say,  these  naked  barbarians  are  very 
punctilious  in  some  of  their  manners:  but  this 
probably  arises  from  superstitious  fears.  If  their 
own  fire  goes  out,  they  will  not  light  it  from  a 
neighbour's.  "They  gave  us  food,  but  would  not 
partake  of  it  when  we  had  cooked  it ;  nor  would  they 
eat  their  food  in  our  presence.  When  it  wTas  cooked, 
they  retired  into  a  wood  and  eat  their  porridge ;  then 
all  stood  up  and  clapped  their  hands,  and  praised 
Intemese  (their  chief)  for  it."  An  old  man,  who  had 
been  the  companion  of  Matiamvo,  was  asked  to  sit 
down  on  the  grass  beside  the  traveller  whom  he  was 
visiting.  He  refused  with  scorn,  saying:  "He  had 
never  sat  on  the  ground  during  the  late  chiefs  reign, 
and  he  was  not  going  to  degrade  himself  now."  Yet 


THE  BALONDA. 


373 


he  accepted  a  seat  on  a  half-burned  log.  He  would 
not  touch  some  cooked  meat  that  was  offered  him, 
but  would  take  it  at  home. 

The  Balonda  seem  afraid  to  remain  in  a  spot  which 
has  been  visited  by  death.  They  remove  from  the 
place;  so  that  permanent  villages  are  impossible. 
If  they  return  to  the  locality,  it  is  to  pray  to  the 
deceased  or  present  an  offering.  In  the  dark  recesses 
of  the  forests,  you  might  find  human  faces  carved  in 
the  bark  of  trees,  after  the  manner  of  the  ancient 
Egyptian  monuments ;  whilst  offerings  of  small  pieces 
of  manioc-root  or  ears  of  maize  are  placed  on  the 
branches.  Heaps  of  sticks  are  also  made,  after  the 
manner  of  cairns,  added  to  by  every  passenger. 

Cabango,  the  most  northerly  village  that  has  been 
visited  in  this  region,  lies  in  9°  31'  S.  lat.  and  20°  31' 
E.  long.  It  consists  of  about  two  hundred  huts,  and 
ten  or  twelve  square  houses  made  of  poles  and  grass, 
which  belong  to  half-caste  Portuguese  traders.  Infor- 
mation was  here  obtained  that  the  town  of  Matiamvo 
lies  about  a  hundred  and  thirty  miles  E.N.E.  Some 
people  from  Mai  described  it  as  thirty-two  days' 
journey,  or  about  two  hundred  and  twenty  miles 
N.N.W.  of  Cabango ;  which  would  place  it  in  about 
5°  45'  S.  lat.  They  mentioned  another  town,  Luba, 
belonging  to  an  independent  chief,  as  eight  days' 
farther,  or  in  4°  50'  S.  lat.  These  visitors  were  as 
uncivilised  as  the  Balonda,  clothed  in  a  kind  of  cloth 
made  from  the  inner  bark  of  a  tree.  Their  chiefs  do 
not  admit  strangers  or  fire-arms  into  their  country. 

The  Balonda  women  are  good-humoured,  spending 

B  B  3 


374 


THE  AFKICANS  AT  HOME. 


their  time  in  everlasting  talk,  funeral  ceremonies, 
and  marriages.  They  spoil  their  looks  by  inserting 
pieces  of  reed  into  the  cartilage  of  the  nose.  A 
funeral  occupies  four  days  of  dancing,  wailing,  and 
feasting.    Gruns  are  fired  by  day,  and  drums  beaten 


by  night :  and  all  the  relatives,  dressed  in  fantastic 
caps,  keep  up  the  ceremonies  with  a  spirit  propor- 
tionate to  the  amount  of  beer  and  beef  provided. 
When  this  provision  is  large,  the  remark  is  made, 
"  What  a  fine  funeral  it  was  !  "  A  figure  of  feathers 
and  beads  is  paraded  about  on  this  occasion.  There 
is  a  general  belief  throughout  this  part  of  Africa,  that 
the  souls  of  the  departed  mingle  with  the  living,  and 
partake  in  some  way  of  the  food  which  is  offered  to 
them.  Sacrifices  of  goats  and  fowls  are  also  made  to 
evil  spirits,  in  order  to  appease  them,  when  people  are 
sick.  When  a  man  kills  another,  a  sacrifice  is  made 
to  lay  his  ghost. 


LONDA  LADIES*  MODE  OF  WEARING  HAIR. 


VARIETIES  OF  COLOUR. 


375 


The  natives  are  not  all  quite  black,  but  many 
incline  to  bronze,  and  others  are  much  lighter. 
Heat  alone  does  not  produce  a  deep  black,  but  heat 
with  moisture.  iC  Wherever  we  find  people  who  have 
continued  for  ages  in  a  hot,  humid  district,  they  are 
deep  black ;  but  to  this  apparent  law  there  are 
exceptions,  caused  by  the  migrations  of  both  tribes  and 
individuals.  The  Makololo,  for  instance,  among  the 
tribes  of  the  humid  central  basin,  appear  of  a  sickly 
sallow  hue.  The  Batoka,  who  live  in  an  elevated 
region,  are,  when  seen  in  company  with  the  Batoka 
of  the  rivers,  so  much  lighter  in  colour,  that  they 
might  be  taken  for  another  tribe ;  but  their  language, 
and  the  marked  custom  of  knocking  out  the  upper 
front  teeth,  leave  no  room  for  doubt  that  they  are 
one  people." 

Amongst  the  inhabitants  of  Katema  there  is  a  love 
for  singing-birds.  They  keep  a  kind  of  canary  in 
cages  because  of  the  sweetness  of  their  song.  They 
have  also  tame  pigeons.  Singing-birds  abound  in 
some  of  the  woods,  and  make  a  merry  noise  in  the 
morning  and  evening.  This  forms  a  contrast  with 
the  northern  tropic.  Some  sing  as  loudly  as  our 
thrushes,  and  the  king-hunter  {Halcyon  Senegalensis) 
makes  a  clear  whirring  sound,  like  that  of  a  whistle 
with  a  pea  in  it. 

The  Balonda  are  fond  of  agriculture :  but  immense 
districts  of  fine  land  are  lying  waste;  and  the  very 
herbage  is  not  eaten  up  by  the  wild  cattle.  They 
also  catch  fish,  with  which  their  rivers  abound,  in  a 
variety  of  ways, — with  nets,  weirs,  spears,  snares,  and 

B  B  4 


376 


THE  AFKICANS  AT  HOME. 


the  bruised  leaves  of  a  shrub  which  "poison"  the 
finny  tribe. 

Before  leaving  these  Balonda,  let  us  pay  a  visit  to 
Shinte,  a  noted  chief,  dwelling  near  the  Leeba,  a  little 
south  of  the  district  which  we  have  now  described. 
Dr.  Livingstone  was  accompanied  to  this  town  by  a 
niece  of  the  chief  s,  a  tall  Amazonian  lady,  named 
Manenko.  This  Amazon  was  a  regular  termagant, 
would  have  everything  done  her  own  way,  and 
thought  she  could  do  anything.  She  was  an  accom- 
plished scold  and  orator,  and  not  only  managed  her 
own  husband  and  people,  but  made  the  Doctor's 
party,  and  the  Doctor  himself,  obey.  Putting  her 
hand  on  his  shoulder,  when  he  was  resolved  to  go . 
contrary  to  her  will,  she  said,  with  a  motherly  look, 
"  Now,  my  little  man,  just  do  as  the  rest  have  done." 
She  marched  forward  with  the  party,  accompanied  by 
her  husband  and  drummer.  The  former  was  merely 
a  convenient  companion ;  the  latter  thumped  on  his 
instrument  till  rain  compelled  him  to  desist.  Ma- 
nenko walked  on,  in  the  pouring  rain,  at  a  pace  that 
few  of  the  men  could  keep  up  with.  When  asked 
why  she  did  not  put  on  clothes  (for  she  did  not 
trouble  herself  with  any  garment)  during  the  rain ; 
she  said  that  it  was  not  proper  for  a  chief  to  appear 
effeminate.  The  people  all  declared,  "  Manenko  is  a 
soldier." 

This  Amazon,  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
country,  sent  forward  a  message  to  her  uncle  that  they 
were  coming.  She  even  went  to  a  village  to  beg  corn 
for  her  guest,  ground  it  for  him  with  her  own  hands, 


SHINTE  RECEIVES  THE  TRAVELLERS.  377 

and  brought  it  with  an  air  which  said,  "  I  know  how 
to  manage,  don't  I  ?  "  Shinte  despatched  a  messenger 
to  bid  the  party  welcome,  accompanying  his  message 
with  two  large  baskets  of  manioc  and  six  dried  fishes. 

Shinte's  town  is  embowered  in  bananas  and  other 
trees  with  large  leaves.  The  streets  are  straight;  the 
huts  have  square  walls  with  round  roofs,  erected  in 
courts  surrounded  with  leafy  fences.  In  some  of  the 
courts,  tobacco  is  planted,  or  sugar  cane,  and  bananas. 
Trees  of  the  Ficus  Indica  afford  a  grateful  shade  to 
the  inmates.  Some  of  the  people  are  very  dark  in 
colour,  some  are  lighter ;  some  have  the  Negro  thick 
lips,  elongated  head,  and  flat  nose ;  but  others  have 
well-shaped  heads,  and  good-looking  faces. 

The  chief  received  his  guests,  sitting  under  a  banian 
tree,  on  a  kind  of  throne  covered  with  a.  leopard's  skin. 
He  was  clothed  in  a  kilt  of  scarlet  baize  edged  with 
green,  and  a  checked  jacket.  Strings  of  large  beads 
were  suspended  round  his  neck,  and  his  limbs  were 
adorned  with  bracelets  and  armlets  of  copper  and  iron. 
On  his  head  was  a  helmet  of  beads  neatly  woven 
together,  and  crowned  with  a  great  bunch  of  goose 
feathers.  Close  to  him  sat  three  lads  with  large 
sheaves  of  arrows  over  their  shoulders.  Behind  him 
sat  about  a  hundred  women  clothed  in  red  baize;  his 
chief  wife  being  in  front,  wearing  a  curious  red  cap. 
The  different  sections  of  the  tribe  came  forward,  the 
headman  of  each  making  obeisance  by  rubbing  his 
chest  and  arms  with  ashes.  Then  followed  caperings, 
speech -making,  clapping  of  hands  by  the  ladies,  music, 
&c.    In  the  interludes  of  nine  speeches,  the  ladies 


378  THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 

sang  plaintive  ditties.  Then  Shinte  rose,  and  so  did 
all  the  people.  "When  a  speech  is  approved  of,  this 
is  signified  by  clapping  of  hands,  in  which  the  chief 
joins. 

Manioc  is  here  regarded  as  the  staff  of  life.  It  is 
easily  cultivated.  Beds  are  formed,  in  which  pieces 
of  the  manioc  are  planted,  four  feet  apart.  Beans  or 
ground-nuts  may  be  sown  between  the  rows:  and 
when  these  are  reaped,  the  ground  is  cleared  of  weeds. 
In  about  a  year  the  roots  are  fit  for  food ;  the  time 
varying  with  the  character  of  the  soil.  The  plant  is 
esteemed  good  for  three  years.  When  a  root  is  taken 
up,  a  piece  of  the  upper  stalk  is  usually  put  into  the 
hole,  and  thus  a  fresh  crop  is  provided  for.  It  grows 
to  the  height  of  six  feet.  The  roots  are  three  or  four 
inches  in  diameter,  and  from  twelve  to  eighteen 
inches  in  length.  The  leaves  also  are  cooked  as  a 
vegetable.  It  is  cultivated  in  all  the  valleys  by  the 
people  of  the  villages,  which  generally  consist  of 
twenty  or  thirty  huts. 

Blood  relationships  are  formed  by  chiefs  and  people. 
These  are  friendships  of  the  most  binding  character, 
literally  cemented  with  blood.  Two  chiefs  clasp  each 
other's  hands,  in  which  small  incisions  are  made.  A 
little  blood  is  taken  from  them  and  from  similar  cuts 
on  the  stomach,  and  in  the  right  cheek  or  forehead, 
by  means  of  a  stalk  of  grass.  The  blood  from  each 
person  is  put  into  a  pot  of  beer,  and  drunk  by  his 
neighbour.  During  the  process,  sentences  are  uttered 
by  their  friends,  who  beat  the  ground  with  short 


TIIE  ZAMBESI. 


379 


clubs.  These  blood-allies  are  bound  not  only  to  keep 
the  peace  themselves,  but  to  warn  the  other  party  of 
any  impending  danger.  The  most  valuable  things 
which  they  possess  are  mutually  exchanged  as  pre- 
sents. Amongst  the  common  people,  the  blood-tie  is 
more  easily  formed:  since  a  little  blood  squirting 
from  an  artery,  whilst  Dr.  Livingstone  performed  an 
operation  upon  a  woman's  arm,  constituted  him  her 
blood-relation.  She  considered  herself  bound  to  cook 
victuals  for  him  any  time  that  he  might  pass  that 
way.  Had  he  sooner  known  this  custom,  his  lancet 
might  perhaps  have  been  of  some  service  during  his 
wanderings. 

Sailing  down  the  Leeba,  we  arrive  at  the  place 
where  it  joins  the  Leeambye  or  Zambesi,  nearly  in 
14°  S.  lat.  The  chief  of  the  Barotse  lives  five  days' 
journey  east  of  this  junction.  The  country  here  is 
overflowed  during  one  part  of  the  year ;  but  it  teems 
with  animal  life,  and  might  as  easily  support  millions 
of  men  as  it  now  does  thousands.  Flocks  of  green 
pigeons  are  here  met  with ;  and  many  other  inter- 
esting species  of  the  feathered  tribe.  Here  is  the 
beautiful  trogon,  with  bright  scarlet  breast  and  black 
back,  uttering  a  peculiar  note  like  that  said  to  have 
been  uttered  by  Memnon,  which  resembled  the  tuning 
of  a  lyre.  In  the  quiet  districts  of  the  river,  we  find 
the  ibis  religiosa,  large  flocks  of  the  white  pelican, 
clouds  of  a  black  shell-eating  bird,  plovers,  snipes, 
curlews  and  herons,  ardetta,  scissor-bills,  spoonbills, 
the  flamingo,  the  Numidian  and  other  cranes,  gulls, 


380 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


the  wading  avoset,  the  jparraAfricana,  &c.  &c.  Some 
of  these  birds  are  singularly  beautiful ;  others  are  very 
curious  in  their  structure  and  habits. 

Fish  are  so  numerous,  that  when  the  waters 
retire  all  the  people  are  engaged  in  catching,  cutting 
up,  and  drying  the  mullets  that  have  been  left  on 
the  soil.  The  hippopotamus  and  other  large  animals 
also  abound ;  with  immense  numbers  of  insects. 
Indeed,  the  valley  teems  with  animal  life. 

Lower  down,  Lebonta  is  the  frontier  town  of  the 
Makololo,  built  on  a  mound,  like  other  villages  in  the 
valley.  Lebonta  belongs  to  two  wives  of  Sebituane. 
Farther  down,  we  come  to  the  junction  of  the  Chobe 
with  the  Zambesi,  in  about  17J°  of  S.  lat.  and  25  J° 
of  E.  long.  A  little  way  up  the  Chobe  is  Linyanti, 
the  capital  of  the  Makololo.  King  Sekeletu  was  the 
warm  friend  of  Dr.  Livingstone,  furthered  all  the 
objects  of  his  undertaking  to  the  utmost  of  his  ability, 
and  generously  supplied  his  wants. 

Linyanti  contains  about  7000  people.  It  is  built 
in  the  midst  of  rivers  and  marshes,  for  the  sake  of 
security ;  but  this  renders  it  unhealthy.  The  people 
are  of  a  light-brownish  yellow  colour,  and  have  a 
sickly  hue  compared  with  their  olive-tinted  neigh- 
bours. The  Makololo  ladies  have  the  hue  of  the 
half-caste:  and  in  opposition  to  the  judgment  of  the 
Negroes  of  the  north,  they  associate  fairness  of  skin 
with  beauty.  They  drink  large  quantities  of  booza, 
which  is  considered  nutritious,  and  calculated  to  give 
that  plumpness  of  form  which  is  highly  esteemed. 
They  cut  their  woolly  hair  quite  short,  and  anoint 


MAK0L0L0  LADIES. 


381 


themselves  plentifully  with  butter,  to  make  their  skin 
shine.  Their  dress  is  a  simple  kilt  of  soft  hide, 
reaching  to  the  knees.  They  have  also  a  skin-mantle 
for  full  dress ;  and  ornament  themselves  with  armlets 
and  anklets  of  brass  and  ivory,  so  thick  and  heavy  as 
often  to  blister  the  skin.  But  these  things  are  fashion- 
able !  Necklaces  are  also  used.  Beads  of  light  green 
and  pink  being  the  most  esteemed,  such  colours  are 
of  high  price. 

These  women  have  much  better  ideas  of  beauty 
and  comeliness  than  their  northern  sisters  in  Bornu 
and  its  vicinity.  The  latter  like  the  flat  nose,  thick 
lips,  crisp  hair,  and  black  colour,  which  themselves 
possess.  But  the  Makololo  ladies  prefer  not  only  a 
light  colour,  but  a  proper  symmetry  of  features. 
"  They  came  frequently  and  asked  for  the  looking- 
glass;  and  the  remarks  they  made — while  I  was  en- 
gaged in  reading,  and  apparently  not  attending  to 
them — on  first  seeing  themselves  therein,  were  amus- 
ingly ridiculous.  '  Is  that  me  V  'What  a  big  mouth 
I  have?5  'My  ears  are  as  big  as  pumpkin-leaves.'  tfI 
have  no  chin  at  all.'  CI  would  have  been  pretty,  but 
am  spoiled  by  these  high  cheek-bones.'  f  See,  how 
my  head  shoots  up  in  the  middle ! ' "  They  laughed 
loud  at  their  own  criticisms  and  jokes  upon  them- 
selves. A  man,  also,  came  alone  "to  have  a  quiet 
gaze  at  his  own  features  once  when  he  thought  I  was 
asleep.  After  twisting  his  mouth  about  in  various 
directions,  he  remarked  to  himself,  6  People  say  I  am 
ugly,  and  how  very  ugly  I  am  indeed  ! '  "  The  natives 
are  sharp  enough  in  perceiving  the  defects  of  others, 


382 


TIIE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


and  giving  nicknames  accordingly :  now  they  had  an 
opportunity  for  the  first  time  of  seeing  themselves. 

Sekeletu  was  in  1853  a  young  man,  about 
eighteen  years  old,  of  the  dark  yellow  colour  of  which 
the  Makololo  are  so  proud,  and  about  five  feet  seven 
inches  in  height.  According  to  the  custom  of  the 
tribe,  he  became  possessor  of  his  father's  wives  at  his 
death  ;  and  he  took  two  of  them :  the  rest  were  given 
to  influential  chiefs.  But  the  principal  wife  or 
queen  passed  to  the  late  king's  younger  brother ; 
according  to  a  custom  prevailing  among  the  ancient 
Jews.  However  many  wives  the  king  may  have,  there 
is  one  who  enjoys  the  title  and  position  of  queen; 
whose  hut  is  called  the  great  house;  and  whose 
children  inherit  the  chieftainship.  If  she  dies,  another 
is  chosen  in  her  place. 

On  this  occasion,  the  royal  widows  became  so  soon 
reconciled  to  their  new  lot,  that  the  people  made  a 
song,  to  the  intent  that  only  the  men  felt  the  loss  of 
their  father  Sebituane ;  for  the  women  were  so  soon 
supplied  with  new  husbands,  that  their  hearts  had  not 
time  to  become  sore  with  grief.  A  very  pretty  com- 
pliment to  their  highnesses ! 

When  Dr.  Livingstone  travelled  with  Manenko  and 
other  chiefs,  the  inhabitants  used  to  lend  them  the 
roofs  of  their  huts,  which  are  circular,  and  can  be 
taken  off  at  pleasure.  The  owners  lifted  them  off, 
and  brought  them  to  the  place  where  the  travellers 
wished  to  lodge.-  Being  propped  up  with  stakes,  they 
formed  a  sufficient  shelter  for  the  night.  The 
numbers  of  large  kind  of  game  here  are  prodigious. 


MAKOLOLO  DANCES. 


333 


The  lions  are  as  big  as  donkeys;  and  their  manes 
make  them  look  larger.  Eighty-one  buffaloes  passed 
slowly  in  file  before  the  traveller's  fire  one  evening, 
within  gunshot.  Herds  of  splendid  elands  stood  within 
two  hundred  yards  of  the  party,  without  exhibiting 
any  fear  of  them.  In  most  districts  of  the  Zambesi, 
antelopes  and  smaller  game  are  in  profuse  abundance; 
so  that  no  sportsman  need  want  food. 

We  must  leave  the  Makololo,  with  a  description  of 
one  of  their  dances.  Their  excitement  is  generally 
shown  and  worked  off  in  dancing  and  singing.  In 
the  dance,  the  men  stand  nearly  naked  in  a  circle, 
holding  clubs  or  small  battle-axes.  Each  roars  at  the 
loudest  pitch  of  his  voice  ;  whilst  they  simultaneously 
lift  one  leg,  stamp  twice  with  it  heavily,  and  lifting 
the  other,  give  one  stamp  with  it.  They  also  throw 
their  arms  and  head  about  in  all  directions.  The 
noise  is  tremendous,  and  the  clouds  of  dust  which  rise 
from  their  feet  fill  the  air.  "  If  the  scene  were  wit- 
nessed in  a  lunatic  asylum,  it  would  be  nothing  out 
of  the  way,  and  quite  appropriate  even,  as  a  means  of 
letting  off  the  excessive  excitement  of  the  brain :  but 
here  grey-headed  men  joined  in  the  performance  with 
as  much  zest  as  others  whose  youth  might  be  an 
excuse  for  making  the  perspiration  stream  off  their 
bodies  with  the  exertion."  The  women  stand  by, 
clapping  their  hands ;  but  occasionally  one  advances 
into  the  circle  composed  of  a  hundred  men,  makes  a 
few  movements,  and  then  retires.  Poor  things  !  they 
do  not  like  to  be  left  altogether  out  of  the  fun.  It  is 
too  bad  !    On  the  Doctor's  intimating  that  the  dance 


384 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


was  hard  work ;  Sekeletu's  father-in-law  admitted  the 
fact,  but  said,  "It  is  very  nice,  and  Sekeletu  will 
give  us  an  ox  for  dancing  for  him." 

The  Batoka,  who  live  to  the  east  of  the  Makololo, 
do  not  differ  much  from  them  in  manners.  In  a 
way  contrary  to  the  Balonda,  the  women  are  better 
dressed,  whilst  the  men  go  about  quite  naked,  without 
the  smallest  sense  of  shame.  Their  mode  of  saluta- 
tion is  to  throw  themselves  on  their  back  and  roll  on 
the  ground,  slapping  the  outside  of  their  thighs,  in 
token  of  a  welcome.  Even  the  big  chief  Monze 
rolled  in  this  manner  before  his  visitor,  to  the  un- 
speakable disgust  of  the  latter. 

This  tribe  have  the  singular  custom  of  knocking 
out  their  upper  front  teeth ;  the  want  of  which  gives 
them  an  uncouth  appearance,  and  makes  their  laugh 
hideous.  This  folly  has  become  a  standing  jest  for 
the  Makololo.  The  women  of  the  Maravi,  farther 
eastward,  pierce  the  upper  lip,  and  gradually  enlarge 
the  orifice  until  they  can  insert  a  shell.  The  lip  then 
appears  drawn  out  beyond  the  perpendicular  of  the 
nose,  and  gives  them  a  moist  ungainly  aspect.  There 
is  no  accounting  for  fashion!  Sekwelu  remarked, 
"  These  women  want  to  make  their  mouths  like  those 
of  ducks." 

The  Metabele,  rivals  of  the  Makololo,  who  live 
farther  east,  on  the  south  of  the  Zambesi,  do  not 
differ  greatly  in  their  manners  and  customs  from  their 
western  neighbours;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of 
other  tribes  dwelling  nearer  to  the  Portuguese  settle- 
ments.   All  these  people,  it  may  be  remarked,  are 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  NATIVES. 


385 


addicted  to  smoking  a  narcotic  weed,  which  produces 
effects  like  the  opium-eating  of  China ;  and  which  is 
capable  of  exciting  them  to  a  state  of  frenzy,  when 
they  partake  of  it  largely,  as  they  generally  do  before 
going  into  battle. 

North  of  the  Zambesi  is  a  hilly  and  well-watered 
country,  inhabited  by  the  Basenga  and  Babisa  or 
Movisa,  who  are  much  mixed  up  with  Balonda  and 
neighbouring  tribes.  Beyond  them  is  Cazembe, 
which  we  have  already  mentioned  as  lying  to  the 
south  of  the  lake  district.  Its  capital,  Lucenda,  is 
described  by  Silvo  Porto  as  a  large  town,  with  wide 
streets  and  spacious  markets ;  having  in  the  centre  a 
royal  palace  containing  a  harem  of  570  women.  The 
government  is  most  despotic,  the  laws  are  written  in 
blood,  and  human  sacrifices  are  frequent. 

Silvo  Porto's  account  of  these  people  shows  that 
they  resemble  the  tribes  described  by  Livingstone 
and  Burton.  They  are  barbarous,  indolent,  and 
vicious,  though  sometimes  hospitable.  They  seem  to 
know  no  distinctions  of  virtue  and  vice,  and  never  to 
think  of  right  and  wrong,  except  in  reference  to 
present  consequences  from  a  breach  of  their  own 
customs.  Though  their  life  is  spent  in  so  simple  a 
way,  "  according  to  nature,"  without  the  prevalence  of 
artificial  wants  and  luxuries ;  and  though  their  land 
teems  with  abundance,  so  as  to  supply  all  their  need 
with  a  small  degree  of  labour ;  they  are  far  from 
enjoying  happiness  and  ease. 

Our  readers  must  not  suppose  that  a  "  state  of 
jiature  "  is  a  "  state  of  bliss,"  according  to  the  theory 
c  c 


386 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


of  some  modern  philosophers.  One  who  went  amongst 
the  Africans  for  their  good,  whose  patience  and  good 
nature  have  seldom  been  exceeded,  who  taught  them 
many  useful  things,  and  who  was  ready  to  make  all 
allowances  for  the  ignorance  and  rudeness  of  bar- 
barian life,  sums  up  his  account  of  them  in  these 
mournful  words: — "Though  all,  including  the  chief, 
were  as  kind  and  attentive  to  me  as  possible;  and 
there  was  no  want  of  food  (oxen  being  slaughtered 
daily,  sometimes  ten  at  a  time,  more  than  sufficient 
for  the  wants  of  all),  yet  to  endure  the  dancing,  roar- 
ing, and  singing,  the  jesting,  anecdotes,  grumbling, 
quarrelling,  and  murdering,  of  these  children  of 
nature,  seemed  more  like  a  severe  penance  than 
anything  I  had  before  met  with  in  the  course  of  my 
missionary  duties.  I  took  thence  a  more  intense 
disgust  at  heathenism  than  I  had  before,  and  formed 
a  greatly  elevated  opinion  of  the  latent  effects  of 
missions  in  the  south,  among  tribes  which  are  re- 
ported to  have  been  as  savage  as  the  Makololo." 

Dr.  Livingstone  does  not,  in  this  category  of  their 
vices,  mention  slave-dealing,  kidnapping,  treachery, 
lying,  drunkenness,  plundering,  want  of  natural 
affection,  cruelty,  and  the  other  evils  which  proceed 
from  polygamy  and  slavery.  Captain  Burton's  ac- 
count of  the  natives  of  the  east  is  rather  worse  than 
Dr.  Livingstone's;  for  his  attendants  evinced  no 
respect,  gratitude,  or  submission  to  his  authority,  such 
as  the  doctor  experienced.  According  to  the  captain, 
these  people  live  in  rudeness  and  vice,  without  a 
single  redeeming  quality ;  striving  only  to  gratify  the 


MAESHES  OF  UNYANTI —  TSETSE. 


387 


lowest  propensities  of  their  nature,  in  common  with 
the  wild  beasts  of  the  desert.  Dr.  Krapf 's  testimony 
is  of  the  same  character. 

We  have  said  that  Linyanti  is  situated  in  the 
midst  of  rivers  and  marshes,  for  the  sake  of  security. 
It  is  indeed  almost  unapproachable  from  some  quar- 
ters. The  banks  of  the  streams  are  mostly  marsh 
land,  covered  with  thick  grass  and  reeds  six  or  eight 
feet  high.  There  is  also  a  serrated  grass  which  at 
certain  angles  cuts  like  a  razor,  and  clumps  of  pa- 
pyrus, like  miniature  palms,  an  inch  and  a  half  in 
diameter.  The  climbing  convolvolus,  with  stalks  as 
strong  as  whip-cord,  binds  all  these  reeds  and  grasses 
into  a  thick  mass.  The  islands  and  dry  places  are 
beset  with  brambles. 

In  penetrating  to  the  south,  the  land  is  found  to  be 


THE  TSETSE. 


flat  and  marshy,  as  far  as  the  lake  Ngami ;  after  which 
it  soon  becomes  desert.    A  great  annoyance  in  these 

CC  2 


388 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  IIOME. 


districts  is  the  tsetse,  or  Glossina  morsitans,  an 
insect  which  attacks  cattle,  horses,  and  dogs ;  but  does 
not  here  afflict  men  or  wild  beasts.  A  whole  team 
of  oxen  are  sometimes  destroyed  by  them ;  and  the 
traveller  may  be  left  helpless  with  his  caravan.  The 
tsetse  live  in  defined  localities,  one  bank  of  a  river 
being  infested  with  them,  whilst  the  opposite  bank 
may  be  free.  They  inject  a  subtle  poison  with  their 
sting,  from  which  a  slight  irritation  soon  follows, 
though  not  so  much  as  that  produced  by  the  gad-fly. 
But  in  a  few  days,  the  bitten  animal  is  affected  as  if  it 
had  an  influenza ;  emaciation  ensues,  with  a  flac- 
cidity  of  the  muscles,  and  sometimes  with  blindness 
and  staggering;  and  at  last,  purging  or  atrophy 
causes  death,  in  spite  of  every  remedy  that  can  be 
applied.  Dissection  shows  that  the  blood  has  been 
vitiated.  A  singular  circumstance  is  that  calves  are 
not  affected  by  the  tsetse  so  long  as  they  are 
sucking ;  although  dogs  fed  on  milk  perish  like  the 
cattle. 

In  a  former  place  we  have  mentioned  the  white 
ant,  which  also  abounds  in  these  southern  latitudes, 
and  raises  the  mound  of  its  dwelling  to  a  height  of 
thirty  feet,  on  the  top  of  which  trees  sometimes 
grow.  It  has  also  its  notable  enemy,  the  black 
soldier  ant,  which  is  met  with  in  these  districts. 
They  are  about  half  an  inch  in  length,  and  march 
three  or  four  abreast.  They  follow  their  leaders 
which,  like  officers,  guide  their  troops,  but  bear  no 
burdens.  If  you  throw  a  little  earth  or  water  on 
their  path,  they  lose  their  way,  as  they  seem  to  follow 


BLACK  SOLDIER  ANT. 


389 


by  a  kind  of  scent.  They  will  not  cross  over  the 
obstacle  however  small,  but  will  wheel  round  till  they 
recover  their  track.  The  white  ants  are  greatly 
afraid  of  them.  The  black  leaders  hold  their  victims 
one  by  one,  inflicting  a  sting  which  makes  them 
insensible,  and  then  toss  them  to  one  side,  where 
they  are  seized  and  carried  off  by  the  troopers.  They 
do  not  enslave  the  white  ants,  as  some  have  thought, 
but  they  eat  them ;  as  may  be  seen  by  a  little  heap 
of  hard  heads  and  legs  near  the  barracks  of  the 
soldier  ants.  Were  it  not  for  this  relentless  foe, 
the  white  ants  would  over-run  the  country. 

Southward,  we  pass  by  large  salt-pans,  and  finally 


inside  of  A  bushman's  hut. 


arrive  amongst  the  Bushmen.  Families  of  these  men 
are  found  in  marshy  districts,  where  they  are  tall  of 
stature  and  dark  in  colour.  But  the  Bushmen  of  the 
Kalahari  are  short  and  of  a  light  yellow  complexion, 
c  c  3 


390 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


They  roam  about  this  desert  region,  living  in  rude 
huts  of  hasty  construction,  and  subsisting  principally 
upon  the  game  which  they  take  in  hunting.  They 
never  cultivate  the  soil,  nor  rear  any  animals  except 
dogs  ;  but  their  women  gather  roots  and  other  fruits 
of  natural  growth. 

Without  such  vegetables,  the  Bushmen  could 
scarcely  subsist;  for  being  esculent,  they  furnish 
them  with  drink  as  well  as  meat.  The  greater  portion 
of  this  desert  is  very  arid ;  so  that  during  part  of  the 
year  the  grass  will  crumble  into  powder  in  your  hand. 
There  is  such  a  sameness  in  the  clumps  of  bushes 
which  grow  here,  that  it  requires  a  well  practised  eye  to 
distinguish  them,  so  as  to  recognise  the  locality,  and 
be  sure  of  travelling  in  the  right  direction.  But 
these  children  of  the  soil  know  everything  that  be- 
longs to  it,  and  can  detect  the  slightest  difference  in 
the  appearance  of  a  tree.  Through  long  practice  in 
hunting,  they  are  so  well  acquainted  with  the  habits 
of  the  wild  beasts,  that  they  can  follow  and  track  them 
out  in  their  migrations. 

In  passing  through  this  dreary  country,  you  are 
often  at  a  loss  for  water :  but  your  Bushman  guides 
will  tell  you  where  to  dig  in  the  sand,  and  you  will 
soon  obtain  a  small  supply.  They  will  also'  point 
out  plants  from  which  you  may  obtain  refreshing 
moisture.  Here  is  a  small  stalk  with  linear  leaves ! 
If  you  dig  down  a  foot  or  foot  and  a  half,  you  will  find 
a  tuber  as  large  as  a  child's  head,  filled  with  fluid 
like  a  young  turnip.  Another  creeper  has  several 
roots  of  still  larger  size  ranged  in  the  circumference 


BUSHMEN. 


391 


of  a  circle  about  a  yard  from  the  stem.  The  natives 
strike  the  ground  with  stones,  and  know  by  the 
peculiar  sound  when  tubers  are  to  be  found  below. 
The  water-melon,  Cucumis  caffer,  abounds  in  some 
places,  and  is  eagerly  devoured,  not  only  by  man,  but 
by  all  kinds  of  wild  beasts. 

The  savage  manner  in  which  the  Bushmen  live, 
like  mere  animals  preying  upon  their  fellows,  seems 


BUSHWOMAN  AND  CHILD. 


to  have  produced  an  unsightly  degradation  of  their 
physical  system.  This  is  increased  by  the  heat  and 
thirst  of  the  desert  in  which  they  rove.    Their  body 


.392  THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 

is  small,  lean,  shrivelled  up, — ungainly  specimens  of 
human  nature,  of  all  the  prerogatives  of  which  they 
might  seem  to  be  destitute.  Other  creatures  besides 
man  possess  cunning  and  sagacity  in  hunting  and 
foraging,  to  which  all  the  Bushman's  faculties  of  body 
and  mind  are  now  limited.  But  his  use  of  poisoned 
arrows,  his  quickness  in  deception,  and  the  knowledge 
which  he  possesses  of  the  habits  of  other  animals, 
display  a  power  of  intelligence  which  might  be  ex- 
ercised on  the  useful  arts  of  life. 


BAKALAHARI  WOMEN  DRAWING  WATER. 


BAKALAHARI. 


393 


The  Bakalahari  share  the  desert  with  Bushmen ; 
but  they  live  here  as  exiles  rather  than  aborigines. 
They  practise  agriculture  and  rear  domestic  animals. 
They  are  a  timid  race,  have  thin  limbs,  and  large 
protruding  abdomens.  For  safety's  sake  they  often 
choose  their  residence  at  a  distance  from  water ;  and 
hide  their  supplies  by  filling  up  the  pits,  and  even 
making  a  fire  over  them.  The  women  draw  the  water 
with  long  reeds,  by  means  of  suction.  An  enemy 
coming  to  one  of  their  villages,  can  find  no  water ; 
but  it  will  be  speedily  supplied  to  a  friend.  Whole 
bands  of  their  enemies  have  been  lost  or  led  astray 
in  this  thirsty  region,  and  have  perished  from 
drought. 

The  desert  has  thus  proved  a  place  of  refuge  to 
many  tribes  when  over-run  by  powerful  foes,  who 
have  vainly  endeavoured  to  pursue  them  here,  or 
have  done  so  to  their  own  destruction.  We  need 
scarcely  say  that  the  Bakalahari  are  as  untutored  as 
the  Bushmen,  that  is,  as  wholly  as  human  nature  can 
be. 

Our  journey  terminates  here.  The  next  people 
are  the  Bechuanas  and  other  tribes  known  to  the 
Cape  colonists,  and  amongst  whom  Christian  missions 
have  been  planted.  We  have  run  over  the  vast 
interior  of  Africa,  through  its  utmost  breadth  in 
north  latitude,  and  through  its  length  from  Barbary 
to  the  neighbourhood  of  Cape  colony.  We  have 
seen  the  Moors  and  Arabs,  both  located  and  wan- 
dering, following  customs  which  never  change,  and 
animated  by  dispositions  inherent  in  their  race.  We 


394 


TOE  AFRICANS  AT  nOME. 


have  viewed  the  more  pliable  Negro,  the  proper 
inhabitant  of  these  regions,  under  a  great  variety  of 
forms,  colours,  conditions,  and  circumstances;  semi- 
civilised,  savage,  Mahometan,  pagan ;  wealthy  and 
poor,  master  and  slave,  in  power  and  under  subjec- 
tion ;  holding  commerce  with  other  nations,  dwelling 
by  themselves,  and  in  the  desert. 

All  these  people  are  capable  of  civilisation,  per- 
haps not  of  the  highest  type,  but  at  least  of  a  re- 
spectable form.  It  must  be  a  Christian  civilisation. 
Mahometanism  has  injured  their  tempers  where  it- 
has  improved  their  manners ;  and  it  has  not  bene- 
fited their  morals.  So,  an  increase  of  wealth  in 
their  pagan  state  has  only  increased  their  folly, 
cruelty,  and  other  enormities.  They  need  a  civi- 
lisation which  shall  repress  their  vices,  humanise 
their  dispositions,  and  prove  a  bond  of  peace  and 
amity.  Then  their  facilities  for  improvement  and 
happiness  would  be  immense.  Their  teeming  soil 
would  support  many  times  its  present  occupants, 
furnishing  them  with  the  richest  fruits  of  nature, 
and  producing  the  most  valuable  articles  of  com- 
merce. Cotton,  indigo,  coffee,  sugar,  rice,  vegetable 
oils,  spices,  farinaceous  roots,  and  tropical  fruits, 
could  be  grown  to  almost  any  extent  that  might  be 
desired.  The  present  exports  of  gold,  ivory,  bees- 
wax, hides,  dyes,  and  valuable  timber,  might  be 
immensely  increased.  Then  their  imports  would 
be  on  a  similar  scale  of  magnitude ;  for  they  gene- 
rally desire  foreign  goods.  The  christianisation  of 
Africa  would  enrich  the  mercantile  countries  of 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  NILE. 


395 


Europe,  and  greatly  add  to  or  cheapen  some  of  their 
luxuries. 


Since  the  foregoing  pages  were  written,  the  long- 
vexed  question  about  the  source  of  the  White  Nile 
has  been  settled  by  the  return  of  Captains  Speke  and 
Grant  from  their  voyage  of  discovery.  These  heroic 
travellers  have  passed  through  the  few  degrees  of 
latitude  about  the  Equator  which  had  been  unex- 
plored by  European  adventurers,  and  have  traced 
the  White  Nile  down  from  its  source  in  Lake  Nyanza 
to  its  well-known  junction  with  the  Blue  Kiver, 
which  we  have  already  described. 

Our  kind  readers  will,  therefore,  have  one  more 
journey  to  make  with  us  before  concluding  their  Afri- 
can travels.  And,  in  order  to  prevent  the  necessity 
of  going  over  again  the  same  ground,  we  shall  com- 
mence at  Kazeh,  mentioned  on  pages  348  and  356. 
This  is  a  central  station,  to  which  the  caravan  route 
from  the  coast  is  sometimes  safe,  but  often  both 
difficult  and  dangerous  through  the  broils  of  those 
tribes  who  inhabit  the  district.  We  shall,  therefore, 
suppose  that  you  have,  like  Captains  Speke  and  Grant, 
sent  your  supplies  to  Kazeh,  or  procured  them  from 
the  Arab  merchants  who  reside  there.  You  are  here 
in  5°  S.  lat,,  and  about  33°  30'  E.  long.  It  is  not 
practicable  to  travel  along  the  eastern  side  of  Lake 
Nyanza,  on  account  of  the  inhospitable  character  of 
the  Masai,  who  are  disunited  among  themselves,  and 
hostile  to  all  strangers.  So  the  explorer  must  now 
take  the  western  route. 

*cc6 


396 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


Your  luggage  is  carried  by  a  number  of  unruly 
porters,  and  you  are  attended  by  a  body  of  armed 
retainers.  In  this  way,  you  pass  as  best  you  can 
through  the  Wanyamesi,  who  live  in  scattered  tribes 
and  families,  every  man  doing  what  is  right  in  his 
own  eyes.  It  is  a  matter  of  custom  or  principle  with 
them  to  fleece  every  stranger  to  the  uttermost,  con- 
sistently with  not  stopping  the  caravan  trade ;  so  that 
travellers  must  be  prepared  to  assert  their  own  rights, 
or  to  submit  to  gross  extortions.  Amongst  the  Wan- 
yamesi  and  neighbouring  countries  there  are  found 
families  and  settlements  of  a  pastoral  people,  called 
Wahuma,  (or  Wotosi)  of  a  superior  type  to  the 
Negro,  and  probably  offshoots  of  the  Grallas  of  Abys- 
sinia. A  noted  chieftain  of  this  race  now  rules  a 
small  country  called  Uzinli  (the  Usui),  north-west  of 
Kazeh,  which  has  become  a  haunt  of  robbers,  to  the 
great  terror  of  Arab  traders.  This  is  the  more  to  be 
regretted,  as  Uzinli  lies  at  the  south  and  south-west 
of  the  Lake  Nyanza. 

Escaping  from  these  freebooters,  and  continuing 
in  the  same  direction,  you  arrive  in  the  kingdom  of 
Karagweh,  or  Karagwak,  the  capital  of  which  lies 
about  250  miles  from  Kazeh,  and  70  miles  from  the 
west  border  of  the  Lake.  The  king  of  Karagweh,  to 
whom  we  have  before  referred,  kept  up  some  appear- 
ance of  state  before  the  gallant  captains,  and  behaved 
to  them  in  a  liberal  and  gentlemanly  manner.  His 
people  are  thriving,  rich  in  cattle,  and  strictly  go- 
verned. Kumaniha,  if  still  alive,  would  furnish  you 
with  an  escort  and  letter  of  introduction  to  the  king 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  NILE. 


397 


of  Uganda,  whose  territory  lies  on  the  north-west 
of  the  Lake. 

Lake  Nyanza  is  200  miles  long,  in  shape  something 
like  a  boy's  top,  flat  on  the  head,  and  with  a  peg  in  the 
narrow  part.  The  end  of  the  peg  is  in  2°  30'  S.  lat., 
and  33°  30'  E.  long.  The  broad  top  lies  a  little  north 
of  the  Equator ;  and  from  its  centre,  the  Nile  issues 
in  a  stream  150  yards  broad,  jumping  down  a  cascade 
12  feet  in  height.  This  is  the  principal  river;  but 
several  smaller  outlets  from  the  Lake  soon  join  it  in  its 
course  southwards,  and  tend  to  swell  its  waters.  Leav- 
ing these  for  the  present,  you  may  be  tempted  to  ask, 
Whence  does  the  Lake  get  its  supply  of  water  to  feed 
the  Nile,  and  why  does  the  supply  vary  at  different 
seasons  of  the  year,  so  as  to  cause  the  rise  and  fall  of 
the  Egyptian  river  ?  In  reply  to  such  queries,  we  say 
that  at  some  distance  from  the  west  side  of  the  Lake 
there  is  an  elevated  region  of  conical  hills — of  which 
Fumbiro  is  the  highest  —  with  large  basins  or  lakes, 
which  receive  the  drain-water  from  the  hills  in  which 
they  are  embosomed,  and  form  an  immense  watershed 
for  the  supply  of  Afric's  mighty  rivers.  Thus  the 
principal  feeder  of  the  Lake  is  the  Eiver  Kitanguleh, 
which  flows  into  the  middle  of  the  western  side  of 
the  Nyanza  in  a  deep  stream  80  yards  across,  running 
at  the  rate  of  four  miles  an  hour.  The  Kitanguleh 
drains  the  waters  of  several  mountain  lakes  before  it 
enters  the  Nyanza ;  and  it  might  be  called  the  real 
source  of  the  Nile. 

This  watershed  probably  also  supplies  a  river  which 
flows  to  the  south  and  feeds  Lake  Tanganyika,  and 
ultimately  gives  rise  to  the  Shireh. 


39S 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


This  upland  district,  though  lying  under  the  Equa- 
tor, is  not  a  torrid  zone,  but,  on  the  contrary,  may  be 
regarded  as  a  moist  district.  Taking  the  average  of 
the  year,  some  rain  falls  on  two  days  out  of  three ;  but 
only  a  sufficient  quantity  to  be  measured  by  the  gauge 
falls  on  one  day  out  of  two.  The  whole  amount  of 
annual  rainfall  was  found  to  be  49  inches ;  and  though 
the  river  beds  were  sometimes  overflowed  by  sudden 
storms,  yet  there  was  no  appearance  of  the  Great  Lake 
being  much  affected  by  such  occurrences,  or  its  level 
altered  at  any  particular  season  of  the  year.  But  the 
rainy  and  dry  seasons  are  clearly  defined  a  few  degrees 
north  of  the  Equator ;  and  it  is  chiefly  to  the  lower 
feeders  and  the  Blue  Eiver  that  we  must  attribute 
the  periodical  rise  and  fall  of  the  Nile. 

A  long  narrow  lake,  called  Baringa,  joined  to  Lake 
Nyanza  by  a  narrow  strait,  sends  forth  the  Eiver  Asua, 
which  joins  the  Nile  in  about  3°  N.  lat.,  and  another 
large  lake,  though  called  the  "  Little  Luta  Nzigeh," 
adds  to  its  waters,  which  flow  through  the  southern 
end  of  this  lake.  But  before  tracing  the  course  of  the 
Nile  itself,  we  must  take  a  peep  at  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Lake  region,  and  especially  at  the  mighty  king  of 
Uganda.  For,  though  we  have  already  visited  this 
sovereign  in  company  with  an  Arab  trader  (see  page 
344),  we  may  again  look  at  him  when  visited  by  a 
British  officer. 

Captain  Speke  had  prepared  a  handsome  present, 
and  went  in  his  best  array  with  all  his  retainers,  to 
visit  king  Mtessa :  but  upon  being  desired  to  sit  down 
on  the  ground  along  with  some  Negro  chiefs,  and 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  NILE. 


399 


await  his  Majesty's  arrival,  he  refused  to  do  so,  and 
went  away  in  anger.  This  brought  a  number  of 
messengers,  coming  in  breathless  haste,  and  implor- 
ing him  to  return,  for  "the  king  was  dying  to  see 
him,  and  would  not  touch  food  until  he  had  done 
so  ; "  desiring  the  captain  also  to  bring  his  chair  and 
sit  at  ease  with  the  king.  In  consequence,  he  sent  a 
message  stating  his  grievances,  but  also  saying  that 
he  would  return  to  the  palace. 

"  Thereupon  messengers,  dressed  with  abrus-tur- 
bans  and  painted  cow-skins,  went  to  announce  my 
arrival.  Cows,  dogs,  goats,  and  men  were  led  about 
by  strings ;  a  band  of  music  then  marched  past,  and, 
finally,  I  was  asked  to  approach.  The  palace-houses 
are  large  circular  hay-stacks,  all  built  in  lines  across 
the  brow  of  a  hill,  and  partitioned  off  with  red  screens. 
It  was  in  one  of  the  palaces  in  the  third  line  where 
he  was  sitting,  dressed  in  an  mbugi,  with  a  bit  of  the 
same  stuff  for  a  handkerchief,  that  I  first  saw  him. 
He  had  a  brass  ring  on  every  finger,  a  ridge  of  hair 
from  stem  to  stern  of  his  head,  and  other  head  orna- 
ments. His  throne  was  a  small  chibutra  covered  with 
red  joko,  and  he  held  a  white  dog  tied  by  a  string. 
Besides  this,  there  were  within  the  palace  many  of  his 
elders ;  and  outside,  forming  three  lines  of  a  square, 
and  fronting  himself,  squatted  several  lines  of  men." 

Little  conversation  passed  at  this  interview.  The 
king  stared  at  the  traveller,  and  asked,  "  Have  you 
seen  me  ?  "  To  this  inquiry  a  simple  "  Yes  "  was  first 
given ;  but  when  this  reply  seemed  unsatisfactory, 
and  the  question  was  repeated,  the  gallant  captain 


400 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


guessed  that  a  compliment  to  his  Majesty's  person 
was  expected,  and  he  accordingly  gave  one  in  good 
style,  "  Oh,  yes  !  indeed  ;  you  are  very  beautiful — as 
refulgent  as  the  sun.  Your  hair  is  like  the  wool  of  a 
black  sheep,  and  your  legs,  when  you  walk,  move  as 
gracefully  as  a  lion's."  He  then  took  a  gold  ring  off 
his  own  finger  and  put  it  on  that  of  his  Majesty,  as  a 
pledge  of  friendship.  The  presents  were  next  given ; 
after  which  the  king  sent  to  the  travellers  six  pots  of 
food,  which  were  next  day  followed  by  twenty  cows 
and  ten  goats.  But  it  was  shooting,  shooting,  shoot- 
ing, in  which  Mtessa  delighted,  and  which  he  was 
never  weary  of  seeing  and  practising.  He  ordered 
men  to  shoot  cows,  and  gave  them  the  carcases ;  and 
when  Captain  Speke  shot  distant  animals  and  birds  on 
the  wing,  the  king  and  his  attending  wives  and  people 
clapped  their  hands  and  danced  for  joy.  At  length 
the  king  himself  became  a  sportsman. 

The  present  ruler  of  Uganda  is  as  great  a  despot  as 
king  Suna  of  whom  we  have  formerly  spoken  (pages 
344,  345).  The  etiquette  of  the  court  is  strictly  laid 
down,  and  any  infraction  of  its  rules  is  punished  with 
death.  The  pages  are  obliged  to  run  upon  every 
errand ;  if  they  are  found  walking,  they  are  imme- 
diately killed.  Indeed,  the  public  executioners  have 
plenty  of  work ;  as  it  seems  an  established  usage  that 
blood  should  be  shed  every  day.  The  king  requires 
the  most  servile  homage  from  his  subjects  :  for  a  man 
who  brings  a  present,  or  who  is  ordered  to  receive  a 
whipping,  must  return  thanks  for  the  favour,  flounder- 
ing flat  on  the  ground,  and  whining  like  a  happy  dog. 
Levees  are  held  on  most  days,  when  all  public  bnsi- 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  NILE. 


401 


ness  is  transacted.  We  have  mentioned  the  enormous 
extent  of  the  king's  harem ;  in  consequence  of  which 
he  generally  has  a  numerous  family.  The  sons  are 
well  taken  care  of:  but  when  their  father  dies,  the 
most  promising  youth  is  elected  king,  and  all  the  rest 
are  put  to  death,  except  two,  who  are  reserved  to 
supply  the  contingency  of  a  failure  of  issue  from  the 
sovereign.  Mtessa  occasionally  yachts  on  the  Lake, 
where  he  keeps  a  fleet  of  canoes.  He  is  also  inclined 
to  magic,  the  interpretation  of  dreams,  religious  cere- 
monies, and  occasional  pilgrimages,  when  he  drags 
his  wives  after  him.  Under  a  civilized  government, 
Uganda  might  be  a  most  happy  country,  as  it  is  a 
perfect  garden,  where  almost  any  vegetable  will  grow, 
with  a  perpetual  luxuriance  that  is  truly  marvellous. 

Passing  south  to  Unyoro,  you  would  come  into  a 
country  in  all  respects  inferior  to  .Uganda — inferior 
in  soil,  culture,  government,  manners,  dress,  and  the 
physical  character  of  the  inhabitants.  If  you  should 
happily  get  through  this  inhospitable  region,  you 
would  arrive  amongst  the  wild,  savage,  quarrelsome 
tribes  who  dwell  about  the  upper  parts  of  the  Nile. 

The  Nile  is  the  longest  river  in  the  world,  being 
2,380  miles  in  a  direct  line  from  Lake  Nyanza  to  the 
Mediterranean ;  but,  with  its  principal  bends,  it  is  more 
than  3,000  miles  long.  At  its  source,  it  is  3,500  feet 
above  the  sea ;  and  it  runs  down  in  a  pretty  straight 
line  till  it  reaches  2°  N.  lat.,  when  it  makes  a  great 
bend  westward  to  the  lowest  part  of  Lake  Luta  Nzigeh. 
It  then  returns  eastward,  the  cord  of  the  bend  being 
70  miles  in  length.  At  this  place,  in  3°  10'  37"  N. 
lat.,  the  river  is  1,000  feet  below  its  source ;  and  it  im- 


402 


THE  AFRICANS  AT  HOME. 


mediately  receives  the  waters  of  the  large  Eiver  Assua, 
flowing  from  Lake  Baringa.  Here  Captains  Speke 
and  Grant  found  a  Turkish  ivory  station,  where  they 
were  kindly  received  by  the  Turks,  in  whose  company 
they  travelled  to  Grondokoro,  a  well-known  town  on 
the  river,  up  to  which  a  small  steamboat  now  plies. 
A  little  above  this  latitude,  the  navigation  is  inter- 
rupted by  rocks  and  rapids.  At  Khartoom,  a  town 
situated  at  the  junction  of  the  White  and  Blue  Eivers, 
the  Nile  has  descended  2,400  feet,  and  has  1,450 
miles  to  travel  (in  a  direct  line)  to  the  sea. 

From  the  foregoing  sketches  it  will  be  seen  that 
the  vast  centre  of  Africa  consists  of  immense  plains, 
watered  by  large  rivers  and  lakes,  with  an  occasional 
hill  or  ridge  of  low  mountains.  The  level  country  has 
a  rich  soil,  now  mostly  covered  with  large  forests,  but 
interspersed  with  portions  of  desert  land.  On  either 
side  of  this  immense  region,  between  it  and  the  coast, 
are  ridges  of  mountains,  highest  on  the  eastern  side 
of  the  Continent,  some  of  which  ranges  are  known  to 
abound  in  coal  and  valuable  minerals. 

What  will  be  the  future  of  Africa,  when  its  rivers 
and  lakes  shall  be  covered  with  steamboats,  and  its 
rich  plains  intersected  by  railways — when  the  labours 
of  the  engineer  and  the  agriculturist  shall  have  rid  it 
of  pestilential  miasmata — when  its  fruitful  soil  shall 
support  a  teeming  population,  and  largely  supply  that 
tropical  produce  which  Europe  desires  to  import  ? 


PRINTED  BY  SPOTTISWOODE  AND  CO.,  NEW-STIiEEX  SQUAKE,  LONDON 


BOUND  BY 
LONDON 


