Welleslev  College 
Library 


+  ej  lacuna  + 


EDITH 
BUTLER 
FOOL 


This  book-plate  was  designed  in  1909 

by  Edith  Butler  Pool 

(Class  of  1896)  for  her  library. 

It  seems  appropriate 

that  it  should  be  used  to  mark  the  books 

purchased  for  the 

Department  of  English  Literature 

through  her  memorial  bequest 


i 


o 


1 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

Boston  Library  Consortium  Member  Libraries 


http://www.archive.org/details/americanfolksongOOgree 


merican 

oiKsonos 
of  Protest 


John  Green  way 


Philadelphia 

University  of  Pennsylvania  Press 

1953 


Copyright  1953 

University  of  Pennsylvania  Press 

Manufactured  in  the 

United  States  of  America 

Published  in  Great  Britain 

India,  and  Pakistan 

by  Geoffrey  Cumberlege 

Oxford  University  Press 

London,  Bombay,  and  Karachi 


28413 


Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number  53—6929 


TO    RUTH 


Preface 


The  songs  of  the  working  people  have  always  been  their 
sharpest  statement,  and  the  one  statement  that  cannot  be 
destroyed.  You  can  burn  books,  buy  newspapers,  you  can 
guard  against  handbills  and  pamphlets,  but  you  cannot  pre- 
vent singing. 

For  some  reason  it  has  always  been  lightly  thought  that 
singing  people  are  happy  people.  Nothing  could  be  more 
untrue.  The  greatest  and  most  enduring  songs  are  wrung 
from  unhappy  people— the  spirituals  of  the  slaves  which  say 
in  effect— "It  is  hopeless  here,  maybe  in  heaven  it  will  be 
better." 

Songs  are  the  statement  of  a  people.  You  can  learn  more 
about  people  by  listening  to  their  songs  than  any  other  way, 
for  into  the  songs  go  all  the  hopes  and  hurts,  the  angers,  fears, 
the  wants  and  aspirations. 

—John  Steinbeck. 

From  the  earliest  periods  of  American  history  the 
oppressed  people  forming  the  broad  base  of  the  social  and  eco- 
nomic pyramid  have  been  singing  of  their  discontent.  What  they 
have  said  has  not  always  been  pleasant,  but  it  has  always  been 
worth  listening  to,  if  only  as  the  expression  of  a  people  whose 
pride  and  expectation  of  a  better  life  have  traditionally  been  con- 
sidered attributes  of  the  American  nation.  Yet  the  more  literate 
persons  to  whom  the  songs  of  protest  have  frequently  been  directed 
have  stopped  their  ears,  allowing  many  worth-while  and  often 
noble  songs  to  vanish  with  the  memories  of  the  folk  who  made 
them. 


The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  stimulate  the  inception  of  a 
corrective  movement  which  will  consider,  evaluate,  and  preserve 
those  songs  still  remaining  to  us.  It  is,  therefore,  an  introduction 
rather  than  a  scientific  analysis,  an  impressionistic  panorama  rather 
than  a  blueprint.  While  it  has  been  impossible  to  achieve  com- 
pleteness in  a  work  designed  to  open  a  previously  unexploited 
vein  of  American  folk  culture,  I  am  confident  that  the  picture  of 
our  singing  protest  presented  by  the  songs,  stories,  and  descriptions 
that  I  have  selected  as  representative  of  thousands  of  others  neces- 
sarily omitted  is  not  an  inaccurate  one. 

For  those  good  things  which  readers  may  find  in  this  study  I 
am  indebted  to  many  people.  To  Professor  MacEdward  Leach, 
who  persuaded  me  to  abandon  my  share  of  those  inhibitions  which 
have  denied  these  songs  the  scholarly  consideration  they  have 
deserved,  and  who  supervised  the  work  with  a  faith  in  its  value 
transcending  my  own,  I  am  especially  grateful.  My  gratitude  is 
due  also  to  University  of  Pennsylvania  professors  Matthias  Shaaber, 
Sculley  Bradley,  Edgar  Potts,  and  Wallace  E.  Davies,  who  read 
the  manuscript  and  offered  suggestions  for  its  improvement;  to 
Pete  Seeger,  Dr.  Charles  Seeger,  Dr.  Wayland  Hand,  Lawrence 
Gellert,  Irwin  Silber,  Dr.  Philip  S.  Foner,  Alan  Lomax,  and  Dr. 
Herbert  Halpert,  who  led  me  to  much  material  I  might  otherwise 
have  overlooked;  to  Moses  Asch,  for  allowing  me  to  quote  freely 
from  his  copyright  holdings  of  recorded  material;  to  the  gracious 
and  ever-patient  library  workers,  particularly  those  at  Brown  Uni- 
versity and  the  American  Antiquarian  Society,  who  made  available 
to  me  numerous  broadsides  and  songsters  from  the  early  years  of 
our  nation;  and  most  of  all,  to  Aunt  Molly  Jackson,  Woody 
Guthrie,  Harry  McClintock,  Joe  Glazer,  and  the  hundreds  of 
nameless  composers  who  wrote  this  book,  and  whom  I  served  in 
the  office  of  a  sometimes  presumptuous  amanuensis.  And  of  course 
to  my  wife,  who  ministered  with  unflagging  good  humor  to  a  bear 
in  the  house  during  the  composition  of  this  book. 


Contents 


PAGE 

introduction     1 

The  Position  of  Songs  of  Protest  in  Folk  Literature  — 
The  Genesis  of  the  Protest  Folksongs  —  The  Structure  of 
the  Modern  Protest  Song 

1 .  An  Historical  Survey 21 

The  Aristocracy  and  Limited  Tenure  of  Office  —  Impris- 
onment for  Debt  —  Dissolution  of  the  Landed  Aristoc- 
racy (New  York  Anti-Rent  War,  Dorr  Rebellion)  —  The 
Movement  for  a  Shorter  Working  Day  —  The  Irish 
Immigrant  —  The  Knights  of  Labor  —  The  General 
Strike  — The  Single  Tax  Movement  — The  Freight  Han- 
dlers' Strike  —  The  Pullman  Strike  —  The  People's  Party 

—  Coxey's  Army  —  Hard  Times  —  The  Urge  to  Com- 
placency 

2.  Negro  Songs  of  Protest 67 

The  Social  Background  —  The  Spirituals  —  Secular  Songs 

—  The  Songs:  White  Abolitionists  —  Negro  Abolition- 
ists —  Slavery  Days  —  Underground  Railroad  —  Jubilee 
Songs,  Negro  —  Jubilee  Songs,  White  Ventriloquism  — 
Disillusion  — Chain  Gang  Songs  — The  New  "Bad  Man" 
Ballads 

3.  The  Songs  of  the  Textile  Workers 121 

The  Marion  Strike  —  The  Gastonia  Strike  —  Miscellane- 
ous Textile  Songs 


4.  The  Songs  of  the  Miners 1 47 

The  Ludlow  Massacre  — The  1913  Massacre  — The 
Davidson-Wilder  Strike  —  Miscellaneous  Songs  from  the 
Coal  Fields 

5.  The  Migratory  Workers 173 

The  Making  of  a  Movement:  The  Wobblies  — The 
Making  of  a  Legend:  Joe  Hill  —  The  Making  of  a  Folk- 
song: "Hallelujah,  I'm  a  Bum"  —  The  Migrants 

6.  Songs  of  the  Farmers 209 

7.  A  Labor  Miscellany 225 

The  Automobile  Workers  —  The  Steel  Workers  —  Sea- 
men and  Longshoremen  —  The  Lumber  Workers 

8.  The  Song-Makers 243 

Ella  May  Wiggins  —  Aunt  Molly  Jackson  —  Woody 
Guthrie  —  Joe  Glazer 


Appendix    311 

Songs  of  Social  and  Economic  Protest  on  Records 

Bibliography 329 

List  of  Composers 339 

List  of  Songs  and  Ballads 341 

Index    345 

Musical  transcriptions  by  Edmund  F.  Soule 


Introduction 


The  position  of  songs  of  protest 
in  folk  literature 


When  the  lowborn  ballad  maker  composed  his  lyrical 
descriptions  of  lords  and  ladies  in  the  dazzling  splendor  of  their 
rich  red  velvet  robes  and  silken  kirtles  and  habiliments  worth  a 
hundred  pounds,  did  he  ever  look  down  upon  his  own  coarse 
garments?  Did  his  wife  ever  look  at  her  own  red  rough  hands  as 
she  sang  about  the  lily-white  fingers  of  her  mistress?  When  the 
varlet  polished  the  knight's  sollerets,  did  he  ever  think  about 
their  weight  on  his  back?  After  the  groom  had  put  away  the  golden 
saddle  and  led  to  its  stall  his  master's  berry-brown  steed,  did  he 
ever  look  at  his  own  bed  in  the  straw  and  reflect  upon  the  similar- 
ity of  the  beast's  estate  and  his  own?  If  we  are  to  judge  by  the 
English  and  Scottish  ballads  that  have  come  down  to  us,  these 
inequalities  never  occurred  to  the  medieval  peasantry;  they  ac- 


2  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

cepted  the  kicks,  curses,  and  deprivations  of  their  station  in  abject 
servility,  and  sang  only  in  admiration  of  the  heaven-appointed 
aristocracy.  But  folksong  cannot  be  dissociated  from  sociology; 
and  the  social  history  of  the  Middle  Ages  proves  that  the  common 
man  was  aware  of  the  injustice  of  aristocratic  oppression,  that  he 
revolted  against  it  and,  furthermore,  that  he  sang  against  it.  On 
June  14,  1381,  the  peasant  army  that  Wat  Tyler  led  against 
London  buoyed  its  determination  with  the  couplet 

When  Adam  delved  and  Eve  span 
Who  was  then  the  gentleman? 

which  is  congeneric  to  the  refrains  that  nearly  six  centuries  later 
are  being  sung  on  picket  lines.  There  are  other  modern  ana- 
logues that  support  the  inference  that  there  was  considerable  vocal 
protest  against  social  and  economic  inequalities  in  the  folk  ex- 
pression of  the  Middle  Ages.  The  medieval  folk  who,  in  their 
desperate  need  for  militant  champions,  adopted  and  idealized 
such  a  dubious  altruist  as  Robin  Hood,  established  a  tradition 
that  their  distant  posterity  continue  with  ballads  about  Jesse 
James,  Pretty  Boy  Floyd,  Matthew  Kimes,  and  other  criminals 
whose  only  identity  with  the  cause  of  the  oppressed  was  their 
temporarily  succcessful  flouting  of  laws  the  poor  often  found  dis- 
criminatory. Present-day  subversive  political  organizations  have 
ancient  analogues  in  the  medieval  witch  cults  that  in  all  probabil- 
ity were  seeking  objectives  beyond  the  dissolution  of  the  Church, 
and  which  had  songs  full  of  potential  symbolism.1  And  John  Ball's 
exhortations  to  his  followers  to  persist  in  "one-head"  are  only 
linguistically  different  from  the  appeals  of  modern  labor  leaders 
who  reiterate  the  necessity  for  union. 

The  traditional  ballads  provide  evidence  to  show  that  they 
arose  from  an  area  of  social  enlightenment  sufficiently  well  de- 
veloped to  have  produced  songs  of  more  overt  protest  than  those 
extant;  "Glasgerion,"  "The  Golden  Vanity,"  "Lord  Delamere," 
"Botany  Bay,"  "Van  Diemen's  Land,"  "The  Cold  Coast  of  Green- 
land," and  many  similar  pieces  are  pregnant  with  social  signifi- 
cance that  could  not  conceivably  have  escaped  the  consciousness  of 
their  singers.  But  except  for  these  hints  of  social  consciousness 

1  Cf.  "The  Cutty  Wren,"  p.  110,  in  which  the  wren  is  possibly  a  symbol  of  the 
people  under  feudal  tyranny. 


Introduction  *  3 

and  some  possible  symbolic  protest  deeply  imbedded  in  the  tradi- 
tional songs  and  ballads,  and  a  few  scattered  manuscripts  of  pieces 
like  "The  Song  of  the  Husbandman,"  nothing  remains  of  the 
songs  of  protest  that  must  have  been  produced  by  the  social  up- 
heaval resulting  from  the  decline  of  the  feudal  aristocracy  and 
the  rise  of  merchant  capitalism,  two  movements  that  ground  the 
working  class  between  them.  Unquestionably  these  songs  dis- 
appeared for  the  same  reasons  that  the  body  of  song  represented 
by  the  selections  in  this  collection  will  not  survive. 

The  first  of  these  reasons  is  that  man  has  been  blessed  with  a 
potential  of  happiness  that  enables  him  not  only  to  keep  going 
under  apparently  intolerable  present  circumstances,  but  to  forget 
the  bitterness  of  past  trials.  Things  never  look  so  bad  in  retro- 
spect, and  the  songs  that  were  sung  in  anguish  are  likely  to  sound 
humiliating  in  time  of  serenity.  Songs  of  protest  also  are  usually 
spontaneous  outbursts  of  resentment,  composed  without  the  care- 
ful artistry  that  is  a  requisite  of  songs  that  become  traditional. 
And  doubtless  some  songs  of  protest  have  been  let  die  by  early 
scholars  who  were  likely  to  be  less  tolerant  toward  songs  of  social 
unrest  than  are  modern  collectors;  protest  songs  are  unpleasant 
and  disturbing,  and  some  feel  that  they  and  the  conditions  they 
reflect  will  go  away  if  no  attention  is  paid  to  them.  But  they  cannot 
be  ignored  by  anyone  who  realizes  that  folksongs  are  the  reflec- 
tion of  people's  thinking,  and  as  such  are  affected  by  times  and 
circumstances,  cultural  development,  and  changing  environment. 
The  poor  we  have  always  with  us,  and  the  discontent  of  the  poor 
also,  but  the  protest  of  the  poor  so  rarely  disturbs  the  tranquillity 
of  social  relationships  over  a  long  period  of  time  that  popular 
histories,  concerned  as  they  are  largely  with  catastrophic  events, 
are  likely  to  underemphasize  such  constants  as  the  discontent  of 
the  lower  classes.  This  is  one  reason  society  again  and  again  has 
felt  that  the  flaws  in  the  structure  were  at  last  widening  into 
cracks,  and  that  the  world  was  going  to  ruin.  It  is  easy  to  feel  in 
such  circumstances  that  a  rash  of  protest  song  among  the  dis- 
contented is  an  abnormal  phenomenon,  unprecedented  in  ages 
past,  and  therefore  possibly  caused  by  the  infiltration  of  guileful 
men  who  use  folk  expression  to  further  their  own  insidious  ends. 
The  contemporary  body  of  songs  of  discontent,  which  will  have 


4  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

vanished  by  the  time  the  next  generation  composes  its  expressions 
of  protest,  prompted  one  writer  to  observe  that 

.  .  .  there  seems  ...  to  be  a  new  movement,  a  kind  of  ground  swell, 
inspired  by  David-like  motives:  "everyone  in  distress,  everyone  that 
was  in  debt,  and  everyone  that  was  discontented,  gathered  themselves 
unto  him,  and  he  became  a  captain  over  them."  Those  that  have  a 
complaint  are  being  brought  together  under  the  guise  of  an  interest 
in  the  several  folk  arts,  as  being  the  folk,  who  banded  together  and 
uttering  their  lamentations  can  change  our  social  picture.  The  truest 
values  of  folklore,  which  are  entertainment  for  the  participants,  or 
as  the  materials  for  cultural  studies  by  the  scholar,  are  completely 
lost  or  perverted.2 

It  will  generally  be  agreed  that  entertainment  is  the  great  con- 
stant in  the  production  of  folksay,  but  there  are  variables  also 
operative  in  the  process.  To  understand  the  people  who  produce 
folksongs,  and  thereby  to  understand  the  songs  themselves,  it  is 
essential  to  consider  all  the  songs  that  emanate  from  them,  the 
disturbing  as  well  as  the  complacent,  those  that  carry  a  message 
as  well  as  those  written  simply  for  diversion.  To  conclude  that 
the  need  for  entertainment  is  the  only  force  that  inspires  the 
composition  of  folksong  is  to  hold  a  very  unworthy  opinion  of 
the  folk. 

Many  songs  of  protest  have  been  and  are  being  lost  because  of 
the  insufficiency  of  a  definition.  The  226  of  these  songs  now 
reproduced  in  full  or  in  fragment  in  this  collection  have  been 
selected  from  more  than  two  thousand  similar  pieces  of  American 
origin.  What  part  of  the  extant  songs  of  protest  is  represented  by 
these  two  thousand  is  difficult  to  estimate;  possibly  one-third, 
possibly  one-tenth.  Every  day  of  even  desultory  search  turns  up 
a  few  more.  What  percentage  they  represent  of  the  songs  that 
have  been  lost  is  impossible  even  to  guess.  There  can  be  no  ques- 
tion that  many  thousands  of  songs  of  social  and  economic  protest 
have  existed,  and  do  exist,  but  except  for  parenthetical  mention 
no  cognizance  has  been  taken  of  them  by  the  scholars  who  collect 
and  codify  productions  of  the  folk  and  of  the  conscious  artist. 
Every  song,  poem,  or  piece  of  prose  must  be  classified  either  as 
folk  or  conscious  art,  but  these  songs  are  in  the  position  of  an 

2  Thelma  G.  James,  "Folklore  and  Propaganda,"  Journal  of  American  Folklore, 
vol.  61  (1948),  p.  311. 


Introduction  *  5 

illegitimate  child,  unrecognized  and  unwanted  by  either  group. 
They  are  not  literature,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term;  indeed, 
few  could  be  considered  even  infra-literary.  There  is  no  quarrel 
therefore  with  literary  historians  who  fail  to  class  them  with  pro- 
ductions of  conscious  art.  But  since  they  emanate  from  the  same 
people  who  have  written  and  sung  and  preserved  ballads  like 
"Young  Charlotte"  and  "The  Little  Mohea,"  it  is  not  preposterous 
to  group  them  with  folksong;  yet  only  a  handful  have  appeared 
in  recognized  collections.  When  uncounted  thousands  of  songs 
current  among  the  folk  are  permitted  to  vanish  because  they  do 
not  qualify  under  the  terms  of  a  definition,  it  is  time  to  question 
the  usefulness  of  that  definition. 

Folklorists  do  not  agree  on  what  constitutes  folksong  (and  that 
in  itself  casts  doubt  on  the  validity  of  traditional  definitions), 
but  most  attempts  to  arrive  at  a  definition  embody  the  criteria 
of  these  examples: 

Folk  song  is  a  body  of  song  in  the  possession  of  the  people,  passed 
on  by  word  of  mouth  from  singer  to  singer,  not  learned  from  books  or 
from  print.3 

.  .  .  the  term  "folk"  may  not  justly  be  applied  to  a  song  unless  that 
song  shows  evidence  of  having  been  subjected  to  the  processes  of  oral 
tradition  for  a  reasonable  period  of  time.  The  appearance  of  a  song 
in  different  versions  or  variants,  textual  or  musical,  in  the  absence  of 
any  suspicion  of  self-conscious  altering  or  tampering  would  generally  be 
accepted  as  pretty  conclusive  proof  that  a  song  is  a  genuine  folk-song.4 

Genuine  folk  songs  are  not  static,  but  are  in  a  state  of  flux;  they 
have  been  handed  down  through  a  fair  period  of  time,  and  all  sense 
of  their  authorship  and  origin  has  been  lost.5 

A  conflate  definition  of  folksong  to  which  most  authorities 
would  subscribe  would  contain  as  essentials  the  following  quali- 
fications: that  the  song  have  lost  its  identity  as  a  consciously 
composed  piece;  that  it  have  undergone  verbal  changes  during 
oral  transmission;  and  that  it  have  been  sung  for  an  appreciable 
period  of  time,  let  us  say  two  generations.  This  would  be  a  defini- 

3  Robert  Winslow  Gordon,  Folk  Songs  of  America,  New  York,  1938,  p.  3. 

4  Arthur  Kyle  Davis,  Traditional  Ballads  of  Virginia,  Cambridge,  1929,  p.  xxii. 

5  Louise  Pound,  American  Ballads  and  Songs,  New  York,  1922,  p.  xiii. 


6  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

tion  of  considerable  liberality,  for  earlier  definitions  were  even 
more  restrictive.  For  example,  as  late  as  1915  John  Lomax  wrote: 

Have  we  any  American  ballads?  Let  us  frankly  confess  that,  accord- 
ing to  the  definitions  of  the  best  critics  of  the  ballad,  we  have  none 
at  all.6 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  demonstrate  the  inadequacy  of  a  defini- 
tion that  would  deny  America  any  native  folk  ballads,  but  the 
inadequacy  of  the  more  generally  accepted  definitions  is  less 
obvious,  though  scholars  are  continually  aware  of  it.  For  instance, 
Mellinger  Henry,  finding  a  number  of  pieces  current  among  the 
Southern  mountain  folk  that  did  not  meet  the  requirements 
imposed  by  traditional  definitions  of  folksong,  discarded  the  term 
altogether  and  titled  his  collection  Songs  Sung  in  the  Southern 
Appalachians.7 

Early  in  the  process  of  assembling  this  study,  the  obstacle  of 
definition  had  to  be  faced,  since  one  or  more  of  the  criteria 
of  traditional  interpretations  of  folksong  disqualified  most  of  the 
songs  chosen  as  illustrations.  Songs  of  protest  are  by  their  very 
nature  ephemeral;  most  are  occasional  songs  that  lose  their  mean- 
ing when  the  events  for  which  they  were  composed  are  forgotten, 
or  displaced  by  greater  crises.  Since  many  are  parodies  of  well- 
known  popular  songs  or  adaptations  of  familiar  folk  melodies, 
they  forfeited  another  attribute  of  traditional  songs—at  least  one 
widely  known  identifying  tune.  Except  for  the  very  simple  ones 
("We  Shall  Not  Be  Moved")  and  the  very  best  ones  ("Union 
Maid")  they  are  likely  to  become  forgotten  quickly  because  it  is 
easier  to  set  to  the  basic  tune  new  words  more  relevant  to  imme- 
diate issues  and  circumstances  than  it  is  to  remember  the  old. 
And  the  songs  cannot  lose  their  sense  of  authorship,  because  they 
rarely  outlive  their  composers. 

Expediency— in  this  case,  avoidance  of  contention— recom- 
mended abandoning  the  term  "folk"  in  identifying  the  status  of 
these  songs.  But  evading  so  fundamental  a  question  is  both  im- 
practicable and  pusillanimous.  If  there  is  a  choice  to  be  made 
between  rejecting  a  definition  which  excludes  so  great  a  body  of 
material  and  rejecting  the  songs,  there  can  be  no  hesitation  in 

6  "Some  Types  of  American  Folk  Song,"  Journal  of  Ameiican  Folklore,  vol.  28 

(1915).  P-  i- 
i  London,  1934. 


Introduction  *  7 

deciding  which  must  go.  But  rejecting  an  established  definition 
simply  because  it  will  not  work  with  a  particular  class  of  song  is 
indefensible;  the  definition  must  be  demonstrably  fallacious.  The 
mere  fact  that  it  does  exclude  so  many  songs  proceeding  from 
the  folk  is  sufficient  reason  for  questioning  its  validity,  but  there 
are  other  reasons  for  considering  it  insufficient.  The  requirement 
of  persistence— that  a  song  must  be  sung  by  the  folk  for  a  "reason- 
able" or  "fair"  period  of  time— is  a  gauge  of  popularity,  not  of 
authenticity.  It  excludes  from  folksong  nearly  all  Negro  secular 
songs,  which  are  so  slight  that  they  have  no  more  chance  than  a 
scrap  of  conversation  to  become  traditional.  A  song  may  become 
traditional  by  remaining  popular  among  the  folk  for  a  number 
of  years,  but  its  status  as  a  folksong  in  most  cases  was  determined 
the  day  it  was  composed.  The  folk  may  receive  a  popular  song 
composed  by  a  conscious  artist  and  take  possession  of  it,  and  thus 
it  may  become  a  folksong  by  adoption.  "The  Kentucky  Miners' 
Dreadful  Fight"  became  a  folksong  the  moment  Aunt  Molly 
Jackson  scribbled  it  on  a  piece  of  paper;8  "Barbara  Allen"  was 
not  a  folksong  until  the  folk  had  worn  off  its  music-hall  veneer. 
The  requirement  of  transmissional  changes  is  hardly  more  con- 
vincing than  that  of  persistence.  Many  if  not  most  of  the  changes 
that  a  folksong  undergoes  as  it  is  passed  from  one  singer  to  an- 
other are  the  result  of  imperfect  hearing.  If  a  thoughtless  singer 
reproduces  "pipe  in  his  jaw"  as  the  senseless  "pips  in  his  paw" 
or  "the  strong  darts  of  Cupid"  as  "streamlets  dark  acoople,"9 
should  his  carelessness  be  accepted— even  required— as  a  hallmark 
of  genuine  folksong?  By  this  reasoning  Shakespeare  was  on  his 
way  to  becoming  a  folk  artist  the  afternoon  the  pirates  first  spirited 
out  of  the  Globe  those  stol'n  and  surreptitious  texts  that  Heminges 
and  Condell  complained  about.  Like  the  qualification  of  oral 
transmission,  the  requirement  of  transmissional  changes  is  valid 
only  as  a  proof  that  the  folk  have  taken  possession  of  a  song;  it 
should  not  be  considered  as  a  criterion  in  itself. 

A  new  definition  must  be  made  which  will  include  evanescent 
Negro  songs,  hillbilly  songs  like  Jimmie  Rodgers'  blue  yodels 
which  the  folk  have  accepted,  sentimental  pieces  like  "The  Fatal 

8  If  the  folk  are  in  complete  possession  of  a  song,  the  mere  fact  that  it  is  written 
down  does  not  revoke  its  authenticity. 

9  Emelyn  Elizabeth  Gardner  and  Geraldine  Jencks  Chickering,  Ballads  and  Songs 
of  Southern  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor,  1939,  p.  22  f. 


8  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Wedding,"10  and  songs  of  social  and  economic  protest.  It  must 
be  a  definition  of  greater  flexibility  than  traditional  interpreta- 
tions of  "folk,"  yet  rigid  enough  to  distinguish  folksong  from 
material  on  the  lowest  level  of  conscious  art,  like  popular  song. 
It  must  be  built  on  the  solid  base  that  folksongs  are  songs  of  the 
folk;  its  qualifications  should  be  seen  as  nothing  more  than  tests 
by  which  full  folk  possession  can  be  determined.  "This  is  what  a 
folk  song  realy  is  the  folks  composes  there  own  songs  about  there 
own  lifes  an  there  home  folks  that  live  around  them,"  writes 
Aunt  Molly  Jackson,  cutting  ruthlessly  away  the  pedantry  that 
has  confused  most  learned  definitions.  There  is  little  that  can  be 
added  to  Aunt  Molly's  definition  of  folksong  except  a  clarification 
of  terms.  "The  folks  composes":  if  an  individual  is  the  sole  author 
of  a  folksong  he  must  speak  not  for  himself  but  for  the  folk  com- 
munity as  a  whole,  and  in  the  folk  idiom;  he  must  not  introduce 
ideas  or  concepts  that  are  uncommon,  nor  may  he  indelibly  im- 
press his  own  individuality  upon  the  song.  His  function  is  not 
that  of  a  consciously  creative  artist,  but  that  of  a  spokesman  for 
the  community,  an  amanuensis  for  the  illiterate,  or,  to  put  it  more 
precisely,  for  the  inarticulate.  It  is  impersonality  of  authorship, 
not  anonymity  of  authorship,  that  is  a  requisite  of  genuine  folk- 
song. "There  own  songs":  the  songs  must  be  in  the  possession  of 
the  folk,  communally  owned,  so  that  any  member  of  the  folk  may 
feel  that  they  are  his  to  change  if  he  wishes;  they  should  not  be 
alien  to  the  degree  that  the  folk  singer  hesitates  to  change  a  word 
or  a  phrase  that  needs  alteration;  they  should  be  so  completely 
of  the  folk  that  any  singer  may  convince  himself  that  he  is  their 
author.11  "About  there  own  lifes  and  there  home  folks  that  live 
around  them":  the  folksong  should  be  concerned  with  the  inter- 
ests of  the  folk,  whatever  they  may  be.  In  the  songs  with  which 
this  book  is  occupied,  the  interests  are  social,  economic,  occupa- 
tional; their  cliches  are  those  of  distressful  bread  rather  than 
sumptuous  habiliments.  The  interests  of  the  folk  are,  within  their 
own   universe,   infinite;    and   collectors   must   assiduously   guard 

10  Most  collectors  cannot  overcome  their  sophisticated  repugnance  to  sentimen- 
tality, but  if  the  folk  have  not  yet  purged  their  newer  songs  of  mawkish  sympathy 
for  ravished  working  girls,  abandoned  wives,  and  frozen  match  girls,  it  is  not  within 
the  authority  of  collectors  to  impose  such  enlightenment  upon  them. 

11  Most  collectors  have  had  the  amusing  experience  of  meeting  a  singer  who 
vehemently  claims  authorship  of  a  song  that  was  popular  years  before  his  birth. 


Introduction  *  9 

against  disqualifying  any  because  of  preconceived  personal  judg- 
ments. If  a  folk  composer  wishes  to  make  an  imitative  ballad 
about  kings  and  queens  and  lords  and  ladies  whom  neither  he 
nor  his  great-great-great-grandfather  ever  saw,  he  is  free  to  do  so; 
if  he  wishes  to  write  a  blues  about  a  mean  mistreatin'  railroad 
daddy  (about  whom  he  has  much  more  business  writing),  he  is 
free  to  do  so;  but  he  may  not  write  about  esoteric  or  advanced 
concepts  that  the  folk  community  as  a  whole  is  not  familiar  with. 
When  the  college  boy  changed  the  nonsense  refrain  of  "Sweet 
Betsy  from  Pike"  from  "hoodie  dang  fol  de  di  do,  hoodie  dang 
fol  de  day,"  to  "Sing  tangent  cotangent  cosecant  cosine,"  he  made 
an  adaptation  outside  the  folk  domain.  A  folksong,  therefore,  is 
a  song  concerned  with  the  interests  of  the  folk,  and  in  the  com- 
plete possession  of  the  folk.  All  other  qualifications,  such  as  the 
requirement  of  transmissional  changes,  are  to  be  considered  only 
as  helpful  tests  in  establishing  either  or  both  of  the  basic  condi- 
tions of  the  definition.12 

But  who  are  the  folk?  is  the  inevitable  question.  Some  writers 
contend  that  we  no  longer  have  a  folk,  but  what  really  is  meant 
is  that  their  definition  of  "folk,"  like  their  definition  of  "folk- 
song," is  invalid.  "Folk"  in  our  culture  is  an  economic  term;  when 
the  milkmaid  put  down  her  pail  and  went  down  the  river  to  the 
cotton  mill,  she  did  not  necessarily  cease  to  be  a  member  of  the 
folk.  It  is  true  that  the  infiltration  of  the  radio,  the  automobile, 
television,  and  other  blessings  of  modern  civilization  into  former 
cultural  pockets  is  educating  the  old  agricultural  folk  out  of  exist- 
ence, but  a  new  folk,  the  industrial  community,  is  taking  its  place. 
The  modern  folk  is  most  often  the  unskilled  worker,  less  often 
the  skilled  worker  in  industrial  occupations.  He  is  the  CIO  worker, 
not  the  AFL  worker,  who  is  labor's  aristocrat.  This  new  folk  com- 
munity is  a  precarious  one,  liable  to  be  educated  out  of  the  folk 
culture  almost  overnight,  but  it  is  the  only  folk  we  have,  and 
should  be  respected  as  such.  The  mine  community  as  a  whole  is 
still  folk;  the  textile  community  similarly;  part  of  the  farm  com- 

12  This  definition  excludes  from  folksong  many  pieces  included  in  this  collection, 
such  as  most  of  the  broadsides,  the  more  turgid  IWW  songs,  the  productions  of 
People's  Songs  composers,  and  songs  of  the  more  cultured  unions.  But  since  most 
of  these  are  on  the  periphery  of  folksong,  there  is  a  possibility  that  some  of  them 
may  yet  be  taken  over  by  the  folk.  They  are  of  interest  also  in  establishing  that 
amorphous  line  that  separates  folk  material  from  conscious  art. 


10  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

munity  is  still  folk;  the  seaman  has  almost  left  the  folk  culture. 
Individuals  in  these  communities  may  have  acquired  sufficient 
acculturation  to  take  them  out  of  the  folk,  but  their  enlighten- 
ment has  so  far  not  leavened  the  entire  group.  If  we  do  not  accept 
people  like  Aunt  Molly  Jackson,  Ella  May  Wiggins,  and  Woody 
Guthrie  as  the  folk,  then  we  have  no  folk,  and  we  have  no  living 
folksong. 

The  genesis  of  the  protest  folksongs 

These  are  the  struggle  songs  of  the  people.  They  are 
outbursts  of  bitterness,  of  hatred  for  the  oppressor,  of  determina- 
tion to  endure  hardships  together  and  to  fight  for  a  better  life. 
Whether  they  are  ballads  composed  and  sung  by  an  individual, 
or  rousing  songs  improvised  on  the  picket  line,  they  are  imbued 
with  the  feeling  of  communality,  or  togetherness.  They  are  songs 
of  unity,  and  therefore  most  are  songs  of  the  union.  To  under- 
stand the  area  of  protest  out  of  which  they  grew,  they  should  be 
read  and  sung  with  a  history  of  organized  labor  open  beside  them, 
preferably  a  history  which  shows  that  American  unionism  was 
idealistic  as  well  as  practical,  that  it  was  class  conscious  as  well  as 
job  conscious,  for  economic  protest  is  often  synonymous  with 
social  protest.  From  the  time  of  America's  first  strike— that  of  the 
Philadelphia  journeymen  printers  in  1786— unions  have  fought 
not  only  for  better  wages  but  also  for  an  improvement  in  the 
social  status  of  their  members.  The  introductory  material  which 
prefaces  each  group  of  songs  in  this  collection  is  an  integral  part 
of  the  songs  themselves,  for  it  represents  the  area  of  protest  which 
produced  them,  the  conditions  without  which  the  songs  would  not 
have  been  made.  Necessarily  the  groups  are  not  closely  coherent, 
for  they  are  selections  merely,  representatives  of  a  continuous 
utterance  of  protest.  To  perceive  the  continuity  of  American  social 
and  economic  protest,  one  should  bring  to  these  songs  a  thorough 
familiarity  with  the  social  evolution  of  the  United  States,  and 
particularly  of  the  labor  movement. 

In  his  Coal  Dust  on  the  Fiddle,  George  Korson  advances  the 
thesis  that  in  the  bituminous  industry  the  production  of  song 
paralleled  the  fortunes  of  the  union.13  In  times  of  hardship,  he 

13  Philadelphia,  1943,  p.  285. 


Introduction  *   11 

contends,  there  is  little  activity  among  the  balladeers;  a  feeling  of 
apathy  and  depression  settles  on  the  bards,  and  they  cease  singing. 
This  generalization  may  be  true  of  labor  minstrelsy  as  a  whole, 
but  it  is  not  true  of  the  struggle  songs.  Unions  most  prolific  in 
songs  and  ballads  of  protest  are  those  which  are  fighting  for  exist- 
ence; tranquillity  in  the  organization  brings  a  corresponding 
lull  in  songs  of  discontent.  The  American  Federation  of  Labor,  a 
traditionally  peaceful  union,  is  virtually  barren  in  songs  which 
mark  its  path  in  the  progress  of  unionism;  on  the  other  hand,  the 
Industrial  Workers  of  the  World— the  Wobblies— whose  active 
life  was  comparatively  short  but  turbulent,  have  contributed  many 
songs  to  the  history  of  militant  labor  organization.  But  even  in 
the  militant  unions  there  is  little  singing  except  in  time  of  con- 
flict. Meetings  normally  are  perfunctory,  and  if  any  singing  is 
done  it  stops  with  adjournment,  unless  the  last  tune  sung  was  a 
particularly  catchy  one.  Walter  Sassaman,  regional  director  of  the 
United  Automobile  Workers,  an  organization  which  has  produced 
more  songs  in  its  comparatively  brief  existence  than  any  other 
industrial  union,  said,  "You  have  no  idea  of  what  meetings  in 
our  locals  are  like.  Generally  the  men  discuss  shop  news;  every 
once  in  a  while  there  are  local  issues  to  talk  about— and  that's  the 
whole  meeting.  Most  locals  do  not  have  even  a  phonograph  to 
play  records  on."14  But  on  the  picket  line  the  UAW  has  sung,  in 
addition  to  the  general  union  songs,  nearly  fifty  vigorous  songs 
of  their  own  composition. 

The  evidence  of  outside  influence,  frequently  of  persons  of 
some  education  if  not  sophistication,  upon  the  folk-song  makers 
has  antagonized  many  folklorists  who  have  had  to  make  a  decision 
about  the  authenticity  of  modern  songs  of  protest.  That  there  has 
been  some  influence  is  undoubted;  that  it  has  been  necessary  is 
at  least  probable.  As  Oscar  Wilde  said,  "Misery  and  poverty  are 
so  absolutely  degrading  and  exercise  such  a  paralyzing  effect  over 
the  nature  of  men  that  no  class  is  ever  really  conscious  of  its  own 
suffering.  They  have  to  be  told  of  it  by  other  people,  and  they 
often  entirely  disbelieve  them."  Most  of  the  composers  of  these 
songs  whose  identity  we  know  have  been  stimulated  in  their  pro- 
test by  some  orienting  influence.  Aunt  Molly  Jackson  got  her 
social  enlightenment  not  only  from  her  "hard  tough  struggles" 

14  Quoted  in  People's  Songs,  April,  1946,  p.  5. 


12  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

but  from  her  father,  a  preacher  and  union  organizer.  The  Bible 
pointed  up  the  inequalities  of  modern  American  society  to  John 
Handcox,  another  preacher  and  one  of  the  most  prolific  composers 
among  the  Negro  sharecroppers.  Woody  Guthrie  gives  us  a  first- 
hand account  of  his  introduction  to  the  larger  perspective  of 
social  injustice: 

They  [two  Oklahoma  organizers]  made  me  see  why  I  had  to  keep 
going  around  and  around  with  my  guitar  making  up  songs  and  singing. 
I  never  did  know  that  the  human  race  was  this  big  before.  I  never 
did  really  know  that  the  fight  had  been  going  on  so  long  and  so  bad. 
I  never  had  been  able  to  look  out  over  and  across  the  slum  section 
nor  a  sharecropper  farm  and  connect  it  up  with  the  owner  and  the 
landlord  and  the  guards  and  the  police  and  the  dicks  and  the  bulls 
and  the  vigilante  men  with  their  black  sedans  and  their  sawed-off 
shotguns.15 

The  degree  of  outside  influence  can  be  estimated  by  reference 
to  the  object  of  protest.  If  it  is  the  immediate  purveyor  of  injus- 
tice, the  Negro  prisoner's  captain  or  the  miner's  gun  thug,  there 
has  been  little  outside  stimulation;  if  the  song  contains  lines  like 
"I  hate  the  capitalist  system,"  as  one  does,  there  is  a  radical  in 
the  woodpile.  But  the  injection  of  social  enlightenment  does  not 
lift  the  singer  out  of  the  folk;  an  awareness  of  the  degradation  of 
one's  environment  is  not  culture.  A  textile  worker  can  be  hungry 
and  know  why  without  being  educated.  Agitators  and  organizers 
do  no  more  than  stimulate  protest  that  has  been  simmering  in- 
articulately in  the  singer. 

The  structure  of  the  modern 
protest  song16 

Making  a  union  song  in  the  rural  South  is  a  simple 
process  of  taking  a  gospel  hymn,  changing  "I"  to  "We"  and  "God" 
to  "CIO."17  Orthodox  clergymen  may  deplore  the  practice  as  a 
sign  of  modern  degeneracy,  and  musicologists  may  interpret  it  as 

!5  American  Folksong,  New  York,  1947,  p.  5. 

is  The  generalizations  in  this  section  do  not  always  apply  to  Negro  songs. 

17  The  union  in  the  Southern  folk  community  has  become  a  sort  of  extension  of 
the  Church.  Joe  Glazer,  a  textile  union  organizer  and  composer,  recalls  a  Georgia 
strike  in  which  a  picket  line  stand  was  called  the  "ministers'  post"  because  there 
were  four  ministers  on  it. 


Swingin'  on  a  scab  *   13 

an  indication  of  immaturity  in  the  union  singing  movement,18 
but  labor  has  used  established  songs  from  the  earliest  times  to 
carry  its  protest,  and  in  so  doing  continues  in  a  tradition  that  is 
as  old  as  English  folksong  itself.  William  of  Malmesbury,  writ- 
ing in  the  early  twelfth  century,  tells  of  his  ancient  predecessor, 
Aldhelm,  standing  beside  a  bridge,  singing  secular  ditties  until 
he  had  gained  the  attention  of  passers-by,  when  he  gradually  began 
to  introduce  religious  ideas  into  his  songs.  Twelve  hundred  years 
later  Jack  Walsh,  who  had  never  heard  of  Aldhelm  or  his  biog- 
rapher, posted  his  Wobbly  band  beside  a  highway  and  sang  reli- 
gious songs  until  he  had  gained  the  attention  of  passers-by,  when 
he  gradually  began  to  introduce  secular  ideas  into  his  songs. 

Early  American  broadside  collections  abound  with  topical 
parodies  of  "Yankee  Doodle";  the  songster  era  shows  a  gradual 
widening  of  selection,  with  catchy  tunes  like  that  of  "Villikins 
and  His  Dinah"  predominating;  in  the  modern  period  there  is 
scarcely  a  folk  or  popular  tune  that  has  not  been  used  as  the  base 
of  a  union  song.  Some  are  simple;  a  very  effective  picket-line 
vehicle  of  opprobrium  was  made  by  substituting  "scabs"  for 
"worms"  in  the  children's  favorite  scare-chant: 

The  scabs  crawl  in 

The  scabs  crawl  out 

The  scabs  crawl  under  and  all  about, 

repeated  to  distraction.  Some  are  complicated,  like  this  parody 
of  a  popular  song,  heard  during  the  motion  picture  workers' 
strike  in  Hollywood  in  1948: 

swingin'  on  a  scab 

A  scab  is  an  animal  that  walks  on  his  knees; 
He  sniffs  every  time  the  bosses  sneeze. 
His  back  is  brawny  but  his  brain  is  weak, 
He's  just  plain  stupid  with  a  yellow  streak. 
But  if  you  don't  care  whose  back  it  is  you  stab, 
Go  right  ahead  and  be  a  scab. 

refrain:  Are  you  gonna  stick  on  the  line 

Till  we  force  the  bosses  to  sign? 

is  An  early  critic  of  labor's  songs  of  protest  observed,  "The  significant  thing  about 

such  of  these  'songs  of  discontent'  as  are  of  native  origin  is  that  they  are  nearly  all 

parodies  [of  gospel  hymns].  American  labor  is  just  beginning  to  express  itself."— 

Harry  F.  Ward,  "Songs  of  Discontent."  Methodist  Review,  September,  1913,  p.  726. 


14  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

This  is  your  fight,  brother,  and  mine, 
would  you  rather  be  a  goon? 


A  goon  is  an  animal  that's  terribly  shy; 
He  can't  stand  to  look  you  in  the  eye. 
He  rides  to  work  on  the  cops'  coattails 
And  wears  brass  knuckles  to  protect  his  Jiails. 
But  if  your  head  is  like  the  hole  in  a  spittoon, 
Go  right  ahead  and  be  a  goon. 

— or  would  you  rather  be  a  stool? 

A  stool  is  an  animal  with  long  hairy  ears; 
He  runs  back  with  everything  he  hears. 
He's  no  bargain  though  he  can  be  bought, 
And  though  he's  slippery  he  still  gets  caught. 
But  if  your  brain's  like  the  rear  end  of  a  mule, 
Go  right  ahead  and  be  a  stool. 

And  so  on.  But  parodies  of  popular  tunes  are  usually  written  by 
composers  of  some  sophistication,  and  the  impression  they  make 
on  the  workers  who  sing  them  is  one  of  amused  appreciation  for 
the  cleverness  of  the  writer.  The  element  of  protest  is  secondary, 
if  it  is  present  at  all.  The  genuine  songs  of  protest  which  borrow 
melodies  are  written  to  the  tunes  of  folksongs.  Possibly  because 
of  the  influence  of  the  folk  tune  the  protest  song  of  unquestioned 
authenticity  is  written  in  the  ballad  stanza,  riming  abcb.19  There 
are  other  striking  signs  of  antiquity  in  the  songs  originating  in 
rural  areas.  Meter  is  prevailingly  accentual,  and  there  is  common 
use  of  anacrusis,  though  sometimes  these  initial  extrametrical 
syllables  exceed  the  norm  of  two.  In  Aunt  Molly  Jackson's  "Poor 
Miners'  Farewell,"  for  example,  the  normal  line  reads, 

They  leave  their  dear  wives  and  little  ones  too, 
But  one  abnormal  line  reads, 

They  leave  their  wives  and  children  to  be  thrown 
out  on  the  street. 

This  anacrusistic  material  is  sung  usually  on  a  rising  tone  which 
builds  up  to  the  normal  first  melodic  accent. 

19  Negro  protest  songs,  like  the  Negro  work  songs,  are  usually  in  the  short  ballad 
stanza  or  long  couplet  form. 


Introduction  *   15 

The  Anglo-Saxon  gleeman  must  have  chanted  Beowulf  in  much 
the  same  manner  that  the  modern  folk  and  hillbilly  singer  chants 
the  talking  blues,  a  rhythmical  form  which  has  been  the  basis  for 
a  great  number  of  songs  of  discontent.  Basically  the  stanza  consists 
of  a  quatrain  with  four-accent  lines,  riming  aabb,  prevailingly 
iambic,  which  are  chanted  with  exaggerated  2/4  rhythm  to  guitar 
chordings.  An  essential  appendage  to  each  stanza  is  an  irregular 
passage  of  spoken  phrases,  incoherent  and  laconic.  These  may 
consist  of  from  one  to  as  many  as  a  dozen  phrases  clarifying  the 
preceding  stanza  and  stating  the  singer's  personal  reaction  to  the 
thought  it  contains. 

chanted:  Most  men  don't  talk  what's  eating  their  minds 

About  the  different  ways  of  dying  down  here  in  the  mines; 

But  every  morning  we  walk  along  and  joke 

About  mines  caving  in  and  the  dust  and  the  smoke — 

spoken:  — One  little  wild  spark  of  fire  blowing  us  sky  high  and 
crooked — One  little  spark  blowing  us  cross-eyed  and  crazy 
— Up  to  shake  hands  with  all  of  the  Lord's  little  angels. 

Less  often  the  stanza  may  be  rimed  abab: 

/  swung  onto  my  old  guitar; 
Train  come  a-rumblin'  down  the  track; 
I  got  shoved  into  the  wrong  damn  car 
With  three  grass  widows  on  my  back. 
— Two  of  them  loo  kin'  for  home  relief 
— Other  one  just  investigatin' '. 

Although  some  folk  composers  maintain  that  the  words  are 
made  up  first  and  then  fitted  to  a  tune,  the  reverse  process  is 
more  usual.  Often  the  resemblance  is  so  close  that  the  original 
is  easily  perceptible  through  a  number  of  adaptations.  Typical  ex- 
amples of  this  pervasive  original  are  the  self-commiserative  songs 
derived  from  the  popular  nineteenth  century  sacred  song,  "Life 
is  Like  a  Mountain  Railroad": 

Life  is  like  a  mountain  railroad 
With  an  engineer  that's  brave; 
He  must  make  the  run  successful 
From  the  cradle  to  the  grave. 


16  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Round  the  bend,  and  through  the  tunnel, 
Never  falter,  never  fail; 
Keep  your  hand  upon  the  throttle, 
And  your  eye  upon  the  rail. 

chorus:  Blessed  Saviour,  thou  wilt  guide  us 
Till  we  reach  that  blissful  shore, 
Where  the  angels  wait  to  join  us 
In  their  peace  forevermore. 

Early  in  the  present  century  the  bituminous  miners  were  singing: 

A  miner's  life  is  like  a  sailor's 
'Board  a  ship  to  cross  the  wave; 
Every  day  his  life's  in  danger, 
Still  he  ventures  being  brave. 
Watch  the  rocks,  they're  falling  daily, 
Careless  miners  always  fail; 
Keep  your  hand  upon  the  dollar, 
And  your  eye  upon  the  scales* 

Meanwhile,  the  textile  workers  were  polygenetically  adapting 
the  hymn  to  their  own  purposes: 

A  weaver's  life  is  like  an  engine, 
Coming  'round  the  mountain  steep; 
We've  had  our  ups  and  downs  a-plenty 
And  at  night  we  cannot  sleep; 
Very  often  flag  your  firer 
When  his  head  is  bending  low; 
You  may  think  that  he  is  loafing, 
But  he's  doing  all  he  knows. 

chorus:  Soon  we'll  end  this  life  of  weaving, 
Soon  we'll  reach  a  better  shore, 
Where  we'll  rest  from  filling  batteries, 
We  won't  have  to  weave  no  more. 

Picket-line  songs  from  the  South  are  likely  to  be  zippered 
adaptations  of  repetitive  gospel  hymns.  The  basic  stanza  line  of 
"Roll  the  Chariot  on"  is  "If  the  Devil  gets  in  the  way  we'll  roll 
it  over  him."  Taken  over  by  the  picket-line  marchers,  the  "chariot" 

*  A  reference  to  the  operators'  frequent  practice  of  underweighing  the  miners' 
coal  cars  before  the  unions  succeeded  in  appointing  a  union  checkweighman  to 
relieve  the  miners  of  the  necessity  of  keeping  their  "eye  upon  the  scales." 


Introduction  *   17 

becomes  "union"  and  the  "Devil,"  logically  and  metrically,  be- 
comes the  boss,  whatever  his  surname  might  be.  There  are  scores 
of  these  zippered  hymns  that  have  attained  some  stability,  of 
which  the  most  popular  are  "Roll  the  Union  on"  and  "We  Shall 
Not  Be  Moved."  For  years  the  only  adaptation  of  the  latter  was 
in  the  first  line: 

Baldwin  is  a  stinker, 

We  shall  not  be  moved; 

Baldwin  is  a  stinker, 

We  shall  not  be  moved. 

Just  like  a  tree  that's  planted  by  the  water, 

We  shall  not  be  moved. 

But  recently  the  adaptation  has  become  complete: 

Baldwin  is  a  stinker, 

He  should  be  removed; 

Baldwin  is  a  stinker, 

He  should  be  removed. 

Just  like  a  fly  that's  sticking  in  the  butter, 

He  should  be  removed. 

"We  Shall  Not  Be  Moved"  may  be  used  as  an  illustration  of 
another  type  of  song— the  song-ballad.  Basically  a  song,  it  tells  a 
story  by  the  accumulation  of  key  stanza  lines: 

Frank  Keeny  is  our  leader, 
We  shall  not  be  moved, 

etc. 
Mr.  Lucas  has  his  scabs  and  thugs  .  .  . 
Keeny  got  our  houses  bonded  .  .  . 

Unfortunately  it  has  not  been  possible  to  include  in  this  book 
examples  of  a  large  class  of  protest  songs,  some  of  which  are 
unapproached  for  bitterness,  anger,  vehemence,  and  sincerity, 
because  they  are  unprintable.  The  conditions  that  lead  to  protest 
are  never  pleasant,  and  the  reactions  to  such  conditions  are  in 
kind.  On  the  propriety  of  cursing  to  express  protest,  Woody 
Guthrie  reflects: 

The  prophets  cussed  and  they  raved  plenty,  because  they  was  out 
there  in  the  hills  and  hollers  yelling  and  echoing  the  Real  Voice  of 


18  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

the  Real  People,  the  poor  working  class,  and  the  farmers,  and  the 
down  and  out.  They  tell  me  down  in  Oklahoma  that  the  Indian  lan- 
guage ain't  got  no  cuss  words  in  it.  Well,  wait  till  they  get  a  little 
hungrier  and  raggedier.  They'll  work  up  some. 

Some  of  these  unprintable  songs  are  concentrated  venom.  One 
apostrophe  to  a  boss  begins: 

You  low-life20  trifling  bastard, 
You  low-life  thieving  snitch; 
You  selfish,  greedy,  bastardly  thief, 
You  God-damned  son  of  a  bitch. 

And  that's  about  as  far  as  it  can  be  carried. 

Somewhat  less  offensive  are  the  songs  which  substitute  non- 
sense words  for  words  that  are  not  generally  used  in  polite  com- 
pany. The  bawdy  version  of  "The  Derby  Ram"  is  familiar  to 
most  people  conversant  with  folksong;  this  too  has  been  taken 
up  by  the  composers  of  protest  songs: 

When  I  went  down  to  Frankfort  town 

Many  workers  I  did  pass; 

'Twas  there  I  saw  the  Governor 

And  I  kicked  him  in  the  Hocus  Pocus  Sonny  Bocus. 

If  you  don't  believe  me 

And  if  you  think  I  lie, 

Just  go  down  to  Frankfort  town 

And  you'll  do  the  same  as  I. 

Except  for  the  exclusion  of  certain  offensive  words,  editing  in 
this  work  has  been  limited  to  the  correction  of  obvious  misspell- 
ings, and  to  the  arrangement  in  stanzaic  form  of  some  pieces 
which  appeared  in  manuscript  written  as  prose.  In  selecting  from 
the  two  thousand  English-language  songs  that  formed  the  basis  of 
this  collection,  I  have  sought  first  to  choose  songs  typical  of  their 
immediate  area  of  protest;  when  a  further  choice  had  to  be  made, 
I  indulged  in  the  exercise  of  literary  evaluation,  although  to  de- 
mand literary  worth  of  folksongs  is  to  deny  them  one  characteristic 
of  folk  material— unsophistication.  There  are  many  inarticulate 
poets  among  the  folk,  but  few  are  mute  Miltons;  to  look  for  work 

20  "Low-life"  is  a  euphemism  substituted  for  the  original  adjectives. 


Introduction   *   19 

on  the  Miltonic  level  in  folksong  is  to  bring  it  to  the  level  of 
conscious  art. 

The  temptation  exerted  upon  every  editor  of  folk  material,  to 
"fix  up"  corrupt  lines  and  limping  meter  and  to  complete  frag- 
mentary songs,  I  have  resisted  by  keeping  before  me  Aunt  Molly 
Jackson's  criticism  of  folklorists  she  has  known: 

The  reason  most  of  thease  calectors  of  folk  songs  changes  an  re- 
aranges  the  songs  is  bacouse  they  colect  a  verce  or  2  of  a  song  then 
they  try  to  compose  something  to  add  an  what  they  compose  there 
selfs  is  not  true  and  it  Just  dont  make  sense. 


1.  An  historical  survey 


Our  songs  are  singing  history 


A  history  of  America,  vivid,  dramatic,  and  personal, 
could  be  written  with  the  songs  of  its  people.  Much  of  this  history 
would  be  fittingly  exultant,  even  glorious,  in  celebration  of  the 
birth  of  a  nation  founded  on  ideals  of  personal  freedom;  but 
much  also  would  be  pitched  to  a  mournful  tone,  for  the  birth 
of  American  democracy  was  an  agonizing  travail  for  many  people 
at  the  bottom  of  the  economic  and  social  pyramid.  To  write  such 
a  history  would  be  a  worthy  undertaking  for  a  scholar  with  the 
ability  and  temerity  to  attempt  it;  certainly  it  is  a  task  beyond 
the  comprehension  of  this  study.  The  songs  in  this  chapter  and  the 
incidents  that  produced  them  are  samplings  of  the  rich  material 
that  awaits  further  exploration;  tney  are  illustrations  of  but  a 
few  of  the  crises  that  the  American  people  faced  with  the  support 
of  humble  song. 


22  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

None  of  the  songs  in  this  section  makes  any  pretension  to  litera- 
ture, and  few  could  under  the  most  liberal  definition  be  considered 
as  folksong.  Most  are  broadsides,  a  category  of  literary  marginalia 
that  has  been  held  in  small  esteem  by  scholars.  One  authority 
unequivocally  called  them  "rubbish,"1  and  in  a  literary  sense  they 
are  perhaps  deserving  of  the  oblivion  from  which  they  have  been 
briefly  resurrected,  but  they  are  valuable  as  evidence  of  an  aware- 
ness of  oppression  among  the  people  that  must  have  been  expressed 
in  songs  now  lost.  If  we  may  judge  by  the  analogy  of  contemporary 
folksongs  which  form  the  basis  of  succeeding  chapters,  there  must 
have  been  a  rich  body  of  nontraditional  folk  protest  material  from 
the  early  periods  of  American  history,  but  these  meritless  broad- 
sides and  hundreds  like  them  are  all  that  remain. 

The  aristocracy  and  limited 
tenure  of  office 

Upon  the  shoulders  of  the  framers  of  the  Constitution 
fell  the  responsibility  of  putting  it  into  effect;  but  many  of  these 
men,  belonging  to  the  upper  classes,  were  distrustful  of  the  com- 
mon people  and  feared  that  the  document  they  had  chosen  to 
guide  the  new  nation  was  too  dangerously  democratic.  In  those 
days  of  uncertainty  the  wealthy  merchants  and  the  old  colonial 
aristocracy  sought  methods  of  perpetuating  their  ascendency;  con- 
sequently their  party,  the  Federalists,  aroused  opposition  among 
the  less  privileged  classes,  and  though  they  held  power  during 
Washington's  two  administrations,  the  Federalists  felt  more  and 
more  the  surging  power  of  the  people  against  them. 

The  French  Revolution  gave  impetus  to  the  fight  against  in- 
trenched aristocracy,  and  when  Washington  retired  after  his  second 
term  as  president,  the  Republicans  (as  the  Anti-Federalists  now 
called  themselves)  unstoppered  their  criticism  and  rebellion,  con- 
fined before  by  their  love  and  respect  for  Washington,  and  made 
John  Adams'  term  of  office  a  stormy  one.  Finally  the  Alien  and 
Sedition  Acts,  enacted  by  the  Federalists  as  a  weapon  against  the 
Republicans,  provided  the  new  party  with  a  political  issue  in  the 
presidency  campaign  of  1800.  Unanimously  they  chose  Thomas 

1  George  Lyman  Kittredge,  English  and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  Boston  and  New 
York,  1904,  p.  xxviii. 


Every  man   his  own   politician   *  23 

Jefferson,  the  advocate  of  the  common  man,  to  be  their  candidate, 
and  thus  gave  the  United  States  one  of  its  greatest  presidents. 

The  composer  of  the  following  song  must  have  rejoiced  in  the 
overthrow  of  the  party  whose  spokesman,  Alexander  Hamilton, 
arguing  in  favor  of  a  life  term  for  senators  during  the  Constitu- 
tional Convention,  exclaimed,  "All  communities  divide  them- 
selves into  the  few  and  the  many.  The  first  are  rich  and  well-born 
and  the  other  the  mass  of  the  people  who  seldom  judge  or  deter- 
mine right."2  But  the  people  had  something  else  to  say. 

EVERY  MAN  HIS  OWN  POLITICIAN 

Let  every  man  of  Adam's  line 

In  social  contact  freely  join 

To  extirpate  monarchic  power, 

That  kings  may  plague  the  earth  no  more. 

As  pow'r  results  from  you  alone, 
Ne'er  trust  it  on  a  single  throne, 
Kings  oft  betray  their  sacred  trust, 
And  crush  their  subjects  in  the  dust. 

Nor  yet  confide  in  men  of  show, 
Aristocrats  reduce  you  low; 
Nobles,  at  best,  are  fickle  things, 
And  oft,  far  worse  than  cruel  kings. 

Nobles  combine  in  secret  fraud, 
(Tho  in  pretence  for  public  good) 
To  frame  a  law  the  most  unjust, 
And  sink  the  people  down  to  dust. 

When  laws  are  fram'd,  the  poor  must  lie, 
Distrest  beneath  the  nobles'  eye; 
Unpity'd  there,  to  waste  their  breath, 
In  fruitless  prayers  'till  free'd  by  death. 

A  year  is  long  enough  to  prove 
A  servant's  wisdom,  faith  and  love. 
Release  him  from  temptation  then 
And  change  the  post  to  other  men. 

Now  is  the  prime  important  hour 
The  people  may  improve  their  pow'r, 
To  stop  aristocratic  force, 
And  walk  in  reason's  peaceful  course. 
2  Charles  A.  and  Mary  R.  Beard,  The  Rise  of  American  Civilization,  New  York, 
1945,  Vol.  I,  p.  353. 


24  '  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Choose  all  your  servants  once  a  year, 
With  strict  reserve  and  nicest  care, 
And  if  they  once  abuse  their  place, 
Reward  them  with  deserv'd  disgrace. 


—Broadside  in  American  Antiquarian  Society, 
Worcester,  Massachusetts,  ca.  1801. 


Imprisonment  for  debt 

An  integral  phase  of  the  crusade  against  the  establish- 
ment of  a  native  aristocracy  was  the  struggle  of  the  working  people 
to  keep  from  being  forced  down  into  an  American  lower  class. 
Economic  servitude  in  the  sweatshops  created  by  the  new  factory 
system  was  leading  inevitably  to  social  enslavement  as  the  workers, 
laboring  for  existence  wages,  began  to  sink  from  poverty  into 
pauperism.  But  not  only  economic  forces  were  crushing  the  work- 
ing class  into  a  separate  social  estate;  judicial  pressure  was  also 
exerted  upon  them.  In  1830  five  out  of  every  six  prisoners  in 
New  England  and  the  Middle  States  jails  were  debtors,  most  of 
whom  owed  less  than  $20.  Clearly,  the  law  providing  imprison- 
ment for  debt  was  a  law  of  the  poor,  and  was  consequently  an 
instrument  for  their  debasement. 

In  1817  Martin  Van  Buren,  responding  to  the  pressure  from 
labor  leaders  who  had  made  the  grievance  of  debt  imprisonment 
the  principal  issue  in  their  pleas  for  reform,  introduced  in  the 
New  York  legislature  the  first  bill  for  complete  repeal  of  the  law. 
Five  years  later  Colonel  Richard  M.  Johnson,  himself  a  former 
debtor,  introduced  a  similar  bill  in  the  United  States  Senate,  and 
persistently  introduced  it  every  year  till  in  1832,  with  the  support 
of  President  Jackson,  the  abolition  of  imprisonment  for  debt  in 
federal  courts  became  law.  The  states  quickly  followed  the  lead 
of  the  government,  and  in  a  decade  the  working  man  was  free  of 
this  humiliating  debtors'  law. 

Johnson's  part  in  their  liberation  was  remembered  by  the  labor- 
ing people.  In  1830  he  was  widely  supported  for  president  in  the 
forthcoming  election  by  those  who  felt  that  Jackson  had  so  far 
shown  no  particular  concern  for  labor,  and  in  1836  he  was  elected 
vice-president  in  Van  Buren's  administration. 

In  1815  freedom  from  this  class  law  was  still  beyond  the  vision 
of  one  unfortunate  whose  note  had  been  bought  by  a  professional 


The  charles  town  land  shark  •  25 

creditor.  Languishing  in  the  Salem  jail,  he  poured  out  his  viru- 
lence against  the  "Shark."  Few  broadsides  retain  so  well  the  bitter 
protest  of  this  138-year-old  lament,  which  is  interesting  also  for  the 
slang  it  contains— "hush  money"  for  a  bribe,  and  "jug"  for  a  jail. 


THE  CHARLES  TOWN  LAND  SHARK 

The  Charles  Town  Shark  my  Note  he  bought, 
For  to  make  money  as  he  thought; 
The  debt  must  lose,  the  cost  must  pay, 
Unless  the  Shark  must  run  away. 

He's  like  the  Shark,  amazing  fierce, 
Such  land  Sharks  may  they  be  more  scarce, 
A  greater  Shark  may  catch  him  too, 
Then  he  will  have  what  is  his  due. 

Like  the  great  Shark,  seeks  to  devour 
All  that  may  fall  within  his  power, 
Austere,  morose,  and  Savage  too, 
All  you  who  know,  is  this  not  true? 

His  pay  but  once  that  will  not  do, 
He  wants  it  twice,  they  say  'tis  true; 
A  viler  wretch  can  there  be  found, 
If  you  search  the  world  around? 

He  likes  hush  money,  as  they  say, 
Give  him  enough  and  he  will  stay, 
For  a  small  sum  he  will  not  wait, 
Because  his  avarice  is  too  great. 

He's  avaricious  as  the  grave, 
In  that  a  portion  he  will  have, 
I  think  no  one  will  sigh  or  mourn 
When  to  the  grave  this  Shark  is  borne. 

His  unjust  gain  his  soul  will  haunt, 
No  pleasure  to  him  will  it  grant; 
His  guilty  conscience  will  it  sting, 
Down  to  the  grave  Death  will  him  bring. 

On  Negro  Hill  they  say  he  goes, 
Why  is  that  for  you  may  suppose. 
Why  doth  this  Shark  these  Blacks  disgrace 
A  Blacker  mind  a  frowning  face. 


26  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

'Tis  said  he  once  was  very  sick, 
In  consequence  of  a  bad  trick. 
A  certain  Nurse  of  him  took  care, 
And  she  let  out  the  whole  affair. 

He  boasts  he's  rich — most  wretched  too, 

What  is  there  bad  he  will  not  do? 

A  vagabond  I  think  he'll  be 

The  day  will  come  when  you  shall  see. 

In  human  misery  he  delights, 
He  scarcely  barks  before  he  bites; 
I  sought  compassion,  none  could  find, 
Because  there  was  none  in  his  mind. 

In  dirty  business  he  is  seen, 
His  conduct  is  amazing  mean, 
His  wickedness  to  be  portray' 'd, 
Volumes  before  you  must  be  laid. 

To  gratify  his  wicked  mind, 
Many  in  jail  have  been  confin'd, 
Vile  wretched  Shark,  must  pine  away, 
His  debts  must  lose,  the  cost  must  pay. 

Despised  by  all,  where  he  is  known, 
Compassion  he  has  never  shown. 
I  hope  the  Shark  will  leave  no  seed, 
For  of  Land  Sharks  there  is  no  need. 

Rejoice,  poor  man,  this  Shark  must  die, 
And  be  as  poor  as  you  or  I; 
He  lives  despis'd,  his  name  shall  stink, 
And  into  the  lasting  contempt  sink. 

I'm  not  discouraged  nor  dismay 'd, 
Although  a  Prisoner  I  was  made; 
My  mind  is  tranquil  and  serene, 
Though  in  the  limits  I  am  seen. 

He  said  in  jail  I  ought  to  stay, 
Until  my  flesh  did  rot  away; 
The  Laws  thro'  mercy  are  more  just, 
The  Shark  to  me  has  done  his  worst. 

No  other  business  does  he  doe, 
Than  to  buy  notes  and  people  sue; 
Both  men  and  women  share  the  same, 
Ah1  Wretched  Shark!  Where  is  his  shame. 


An  historical  survey  *  27 

//  the  Coat  the  Shark  doth  suit, 
And  that  it  will,  none  doth  dispute, 
Then  he  may  wear  it  if  he  will, 
At  home  or  upon  Negro  Hill. 

Composed  on  board  the  "Salem  Jug," 
If  once  lock'd  in  'twill  hold  you  snug; 
'Twill  hold  you  fast  till  time  shall  say, 
Now  let  the  Prisoner  go  his  way. 

—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection, 
Brown  University.  1815. 

Dissolution  of  the  landed  aristocracy 

The  manifest  destiny  of  the  United  States  as  a  symbol 
of  democratic  ideals  is  due  to  a  fortuitous  coincidence— the  occur- 
rence of  the  American  Revolution  in  a  brief  period  when  the 
entire  civilized  world  was  imbued  to  a  degree  never  before  or 
since  paralleled  with  an  interest  in  personal  freedom  and  the 
nobility  of  the  common  man.  But  the  excesses  of  the  French 
Revolution  (which  displaced  the  American  rebellion  as  the  great 
representation  of  democratic  principles)  convinced  many  liberals 
that  the  investment  of  government  in  hereditary  aristocrats  had 
been  indeed  divinely  inspired,  and  world  opinion  turned  again 
toward  the  right.  In  America  the  trend  was  noticeable;  sentiment 
among  many  prominent  people  favored  the  establishment  of  a 
titled  nobility,  though  most  conceded  the  inexpediency  of  endan- 
gering the  new  nation  by  seeking  to  legalize  such  an  aristocracy. 
The  people  who  would  have  formed  this  projected  American 
upper  class,  however,  almost  managed  to  perpetuate  their  ascend- 
ancy by  control  over  the  land  through  which  the  franchise  had 
been  traditionally  limited;  but  little  by  little  the  crusaders  against 
the  restrictions  imposed  by  landholders  began  to  realize  the  ideals 
for  which  the  Revolution  was  fought. 

The  emergence  of  American  democracy  was  not  a  continuous 
process,  but  a  series  of  localized  movements,  impelled  by  oppressed 
groups  who  saw  their  own  situation  incompatible  with  the  prin- 
ciples of  democracy.  And  as  always,  when  discontent  was  crystal- 
lized into  action,  songs  of  protest  began  to  emanate  from  the 
people.  Two  such  struggles  to  realize  the  innate  rights  of  man 
were  the  Dorr  Rebellion  and  the  New  York  Anti-Rent  War. 


28  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

The  anti-rent  war 

No  event  in  American  history  illustrates  more  vividly 
the  amazing  stubbornness  with  which  aristocracy  in  the  United 
States  died  than  the  New  York  rent  war  that  flared  with  inter- 
mittent violence  through  nearly  forty  years  of  the  mid-nineteenth 
century.  The  oppression  that  the  Down-Renters  fought  against 
was  not  merely  the  superficial  ill-treatment  that  is  usually  asso- 
ciated with  the  landlord-tenant  relationship,  but  feudalism— 
feudalism  with  all  its  medieval  ramifications,  devoid  only  of  its 
traditional  nomenclature.  It  is  even  more  significant  that  the 
issue  was  never  completely  resolved,  for  "Today  some  upstate 
farmers  still  pay  in  cash  the  equivalent  of  the  old  reservations  of 
wheat,  fowls,  and  a  day's  service."3 

The  foundations  of  American  feudalism  were  laid  in  1639  when 
Kiliaen  Van  Rensselaer,  a  shrewd  Dutch  merchant,  privateer, 
and  speculator,  obtained  from  the  Dutch  West  India  Company  a 
charter  giving  him  not  only  possession  of  large  tracts  of  land  in 
southeastern  New  York,  but  also  baronial  titles,  authority  to  exer- 
cise full  governmental  control,  and  power  to  require  fealty  from 
the  colonists  in  the  form  of  labor  and  military  servitude.  When 
the  Dutch  possessions  in  the  New  World  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
British,  the  patroon  system  was  changed  very  little  beyond  the 
Anglicization  of  titles  and  the  extension  of  the  landed  aristocracy 
through  additional  millions  of  acres  in  the  Hudson  River  area. 
Even  the  American  Revolution  failed  to  disturb  the  serenity  of 
the  patroons'  control  beyond  the  deprivation  of  their  baronial 
titles  and  a  few  of  the  privileges  pertaining  thereto. 

The  most  important  provisions  of  the  colonial  charter  were  per- 
petuated in  a  bill  of  sale  drawn  up  for  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer  III 
by  his  brother-in-law,  Alexander  Hamilton.  This  contract,  which 
became  a  model  for  other  patroon  leases,  was  only  nominally 
a  bill  of  sale,  since  it  sold  not  the  land  but  only  its  agricultural 
usufruct,  reserving  wood,  mineral,  and  water  rights,  and  privilege 
of  free  entry  to  the  patroon.  The  "purchaser"  (who  had  been 
enticed  into  settling  the  land  by  a  seven-year  free  occupation) 
paid  a  yearly  rent  of  a  dozen  bushels  of  wheat,  several  fowls,  and 
a  day's  labor  with  horse  and  cart;  and,  furthermore,  had  to  assume 

3  Henry  Christman,  Tin  Horns  and  Calico,  New  York,  1945,  p.  30. 


An  historical  survey  *  29 

all  legal  obligations  such  as  taxes  and  road  building.  He  was 
discouraged  from  selling  the  lease  by  a  clause  giving  the  landlord 
a  transaction  fee  of  one-quarter  of  the  purchase  price. 

Despite  these  intolerable  restrictions,  there  was  little  protest  on 
the  part  of  the  tenants,  since  Rensselaer  recognized  the  precarious- 
ness  of  his  legal  position  and  hesitated  to  jeopardize  his  ownership 
by  forcing  collection  of  unpaid  rents.  His  heirs  were  not  endowed 
with  similar  wisdom,  however,  and  after  Stephen's  death  in  1839 
they  began  to  dun  recalcitrant  tenants  for  the  back  rents.  They 
met  with  immediate  and  violent  opposition.  The  farmers  dressed 
in  outlandish  costumes  to  prevent  identification,  painted  their 
faces,  gave  themselves  Indian  names,  and  resisted  almost  every  ex- 
pedition of  sheriff's  deputies  into  the  farm  countries  with  violence. 

The  history  of  the  next  decade  recounts  a  gradual  extension  of 
the  passive  rebellion  through  southern  New  York,  and  the  emer- 
gence of  educated  leadership  in  the  persons  of  such  men  as  George 
Evans,  Lawrence  Van  Deusen,  Dr.  Smith  Boughton,  and  Thomas 
Devyr,  who  directed  the  protest  into  political  channels.  The  con- 
troversy reached  its  zenith  in  the  fall  of  1845  when  the  "American 
Jeffreys,"  Judge  Amasa  Parker,  engineered  wholesale  imprison- 
ments of  Anti-Rent  leaders.  The  jails  overflowed  into  log  stockades, 
built  especially  to  accommodate  anticipated  convictions  of  Down- 
Renters.  Public  opinion,  outraged  by  the  injustice  of  the  convic- 
tions and  the  exceptionally  severe  sentences  meted  out  by  Parker, 
suddenly  turned  so  sharply  in  favor  of  the  Down-Renters  that  in 
1845  Governor  Silas  Wright,  who  had  been  an  implacable  foe  of 
the  Anti-Rent  forces,  was  coerced  into  directing  the  state  legis- 
lature to  end  the  leasehold  system.  In  the  same  year  a  new  state 
constitution  was  framed  which  presented  the  issue  of  new  feudal 
leases  and  relaxed  the  worst  provisions  of  the  existing  contracts. 
With  this  partial  victory  the  solidarity  of  the  Anti-Renters  began 
to  crumble  and  the  tenants  were  lured  into  allowing  their  cause  to 
become  a  political  football  which  was  promptly  kicked  to  pieces 
between  the  Whigs  and  the  Democrats.  Although  most  of  the 
landlords  had  capitulated  after  1850,  a  few  of  the  more  obstinate 
ones  sought  refuge  in  the  traditional  bastions  of  reaction— the 
courts— and  found  there  sufficient  legal  technicalities  to  keep  the 
lease  system  alive,  if  not  kicking.  Sale  of  the  properties  to  specu- 
lators who  were  more  experienced  in  ruthlessness  than  the  decadent 


30  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

aristocrats  carried  the  war  on  a  much  smaller  scale  into  the  1880's. 

The  three  decades  and  more  of  violence  produced  a  store  of 
songs  and  ballads  rich  in  quantity,  if  not  in  literary  quality,  which 
have  been  preserved  in  contemporary  newspapers,  journals,  broad- 
sides, and  the  memory  of  old  farmers  who  remember  the  struggles 
and  songs  of  their  parents. 

"THE  END  OF  BIG  BILL  SNYDER,"  the  most  popular  of  the 
Anti-Rent  songs  sung  throughout  the  period  of  violence,  was 
written  by  a  sympathizer  named  S.  H.  Foster,  and  celebrates  the 
discomfiture  of  Bill  Bill  Snyder,  a  universally  despised  deputy 
sheriff  who  was  imported  by  the  landholders  in  1841  to  serve 
writs.  While  on  one  such  foray  into  the  hills  he  was  captured  by 
a  band  of  "Indians"  and  soundly  thrashed.  In  recording  Snyder's 
death  the  song  is  faithful  to  poetic  rather  than  factual  truth. 

THE  END  OF   BIG  BILL  SNYDER 

(Tune:  "Old  Dan  Tucker") 

The  moon  was  shining  silver  bright; 
The  sheriff  came  in  the  dead  of  night; 
High  on  a  hill  sat  an  Indian  true, 
And  on  his  horn,  this  blast  he  blew — 

refrain:  Keep  out  of  the  way — big  Bill  Snyder — 

We'll  tar  your  coat  and  feather  your  hide,  Sir! 

The  Indians  gathered  at  the  sound, 
Bill  cocked  his  pistol — looked  around — 
Their  painted  faces,  by  the  moon, 
He  saw,  and  heard  that  same  old  tune — 

Says  Bill,  "This  music's  not  so  sweet 

As  I  have  heard — /  think  my  feet 

Had  better  be  used;"  and  he  started  to  run, 

But  the  tin  horn  still  kept  sounding  on, 

"Legs!  do  your  duty  now,"  says  Bill, 
"There's  a  thousand  Indians  on  the  hill — 
When  they  catch  tories  they  tar  their  coats, 
And  feather  their  hides,  and  I  hear  the  notes" — 

And  he  thought  that  he  heard  the  sound  of  a  gun, 
And  he  cried,  in  his  fright,  "Oh!  my  race  is  run! 
Better  had  it  been,  had  I  never  been  born, 
Than  to  come  within  the  sound  of  that  tin  horn;" 


An  historical  survey  *  31 

And  the  news  flew  around,  and  gained  belief, 
That  Bill  was  murdered  by  an  Indian  chief; 
And  no  one  mourned  that  Bill  was  slain, 
But  the  horn  sounded  on,  again  and  again — 

Next  day  the  body  of  Bill  was  found, 
His  writs  were  scattered  on  the  ground, 
And  by  his  side  a  jug  of  rum, 
Told  how  he  to  his  end  had  come. 

—From  a  handbill  by  S.  H.  Foster  in  Henry  Christman, 
Tins  Horns  and  Calico,  New  York,  1945,  p.  326. 

The  Dorr  rebellion 

One  of  the  last  strongholds  of  the  limited  franchise  was 
Rhode  Island,  where  a  small  group  of  hereditary  landholders 
exercised  almost  a  feudal  control  over  the  state  under  an  old 
charter  issued  by  Charles  II  in  1663.  This  colonial  charter,  which 
represented  the  state's  constitution  through  the  first  half  of  the 
nineteenth  century,  vested  the  sole  right  of  government  in  the 
original  grantees,  who  extended  the  franchise  over  the  years  to 
other  owners  of  landed  estates.  By  1 840  this  antiquated  system  had 
denied  the  right  to  participation  in  civil  government  to  more  than 
half  the  adult  male  population  of  Rhode  Island,  and  even  the 
small  electorate  remaining  was  so  controlled  by  the  residents  of 
the  older  communities  that  it  was  possible  for  the  civil  life  of  the 
state  to  be  determined  by  about  one-tenth  of  its  population. 

From  the  last  years  of  the  eighteenth  century  progressive  groups 
had  fought  through  legislative  channels  for  a  new  charter,  but  the 
government  officials,  representing  exclusively  the  interests  of  the 
landholders,  ignored  their  efforts.  Finally,  extended-suffrage  agi- 
tators decided  that  only  direct,  extra-legal  action  could  remedy 
the  intolerable  situation,  and  in  1840  the  Rhode  Island  Suffrage 
Association  was  formed,  projecting  itself  into  a  "People's  Party," 
which  in  1842  elected  its  own  legislature,  with  Thomas  Wilson 
Dorr  as  governor. 

Like  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt,  Dorr  (1805-54)  was  a  patrician 
who  cast  his  lot  with  the  plebeians.  His  father  was  a  prosperous 
manufacturer,  and  his  family  was  firmly  established  in  the  higher 
stratum  of  Rhode  Island  society.  Again  like  Roosevelt,  Dorr 
graduated  from  Harvard  and  practiced  law  until  his  election  to 


32  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

the  state  legislature.  Nominally  a  Whig,  Dorr  soon  allied  himself 
with  the  Democrats. 

His  election  by  the  People's  Party  was  met  with  resolute  opposi- 
tion by  Samuel  W.  King,  the  landholders'  governor-elect.  Fortified 
by  federal  benediction,  King  declared  martial  law,  imprisoned 
under  his  notorious  "Algerine"  edict  large  numbers  of  Dorr's 
followers,  branded  Dorr  a  traitor,  and  offered  a  large  reward  for 
his  apprehension.  After  the  defection  of  many  of  his  intimidated 
supporters,  Dorr  surrendered  to  the  landholders'  government, 
was  convicted  of  treason,  and  was  sentenced  to  life  imprisonment 
on  June  27,  1844. 

But  public  opinion  was  seething,  and  Dorr's  release  was  forced 
the  following  year.  The  surrender  of  the  government  on  the 
charter  issue  followed,  and  a  constitutional  charter,  granting  the 
people  a  practical  suffrage  law,  was  instituted.  Dorr's  civil  rights 
were  restored  in  1851,  but  the  year  he  spent  in  prison  had  broken 
his  health,  and  he  died  in  retirement  in  1854. 

The  facetious  "Rhode  Island  Algerines'  Appeal  to  John  Davis," 
ostensibly  issuing  from  King's  followers  but  in  reality  written  by 
the  suffragists,  anticipated  that  Governor  John  Davis  of  Massa- 
chusetts would  support  Governor  King's  requisition  to  return 
Dorr  should  he  flee  to  Massachusetts.  The  suffragists  had  the  satis- 
faction of  seeing  Davis  turned  out  of  office  at  the  next  election  in 
favor  of  Governor  Morton,  who  upheld  the  principles  on  which 
the  People's  Party  was  founded.  The  contemptuous  term  "Alger- 
ine" derived  from  the  Algerian  pirates,  whose  enslavement  of 
Americans  early  in  the  century  had  made  them  the  object  of 
national  despite. 

RHODE  ISLAND  ALGERINES'  APPEAL  TO  JOHN  DAVIS 

(Tune:  "Tippecanoe" ) 

Prepare  your  forces,  honest  John — 
Each  man  his  sabre  draw, 
For  oh!  we  fear  a  third  attack 
Of  Thomas  W.  Dorr. 

refrain:  O  dear!  that  dreadful  Dorr! 
The  traitor,  Thomas  Dorr — 
We  fear  he'll  take  Rhode  Island  yet, 
In  spite  of  "Martial  Law." 


An  historical  survey  •  33 

Another  thing  we  greatly  fear, 
From  what  we've  heard  and  saw — 
That  certain  States  would  lend  their  aid 
To  help  T.  W.  Dorr. 

John  Tyler  too,  once  promised  troops 
To  help  us  through  the  war; 
But  now  we  fear  if  called  upon, 
He'd  prove  a  friend  to  Dorr. 

Should  Congress  strictly  scan  our  claims 
We  fear  they'd  find  a  flaw 
That  would  displace  our  government, 
And  yield  the  reins  to  Dorr. 

We'll  own  to  you  deeds  have  been  done 
Licensed  by  "martial  law" 
That  would  have  hung  the  followers 
Of  Thomas  W.  Dorr. 

We've  tried  by  art  and  stratagem 
To  rule  with  "order  and  law" 
Yet  there  are  those  who  boldly  talk 
About  their  Governor  Dorr. 

The  ladies  too,  have  swelled  his  ranks 
And  threatened  swords  to  draw, 
They'll  curse  the  Charterists  to  the  face 
For  what  they've  done  to  Dorr. 

Clambakes  and  meetings  they  appoint 
Regardless  of  the  law 
And  resolutions  boldly  pass 
To  favor  Thomas  Dorr. 

Though  Algerines  have  threaten' d  them 
Inflictions  of  the  law, 
They  do  not  fear  the  cannon's  mouth 
When  advocating  Dorr. 

Read  o'er  our  troubles,  honest  John 
And  some  conclusion  draw 
Pray  tell  us  what  we  have  to  fear 
From  women,  clams,  and  Dorr. 

—Broadside  in  the  Harris  Collection, 
Brown  University. 

"Landholders'  Victory"   chronicles  one  of  the  clashes  which 
ensued  between  forces  of  the  rival  governors,  Dorr  and  King. 


34  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

landholders'  victory 

Brave  suffrage  men,  assist  while  I  sing 

The  signal  victory  of  Rhode  Island's  King: 

No  earthly  record  can  be  found  to  tell 

How  many  fled*  who  might  have  staid  and  fell! 

On  Tuesday  night5  the  Charter  leaders  saw 
Mysterious  movements  made  by  Gov.  Dorr; 
Their  cheeks  turned  pale,  their  breathing  shorter  grew 
To  hear  what  King  and  burgess  meant  to  do. 

They  looked,  then  listened  and  began  to  quiver, 
A  steamboat  went  like  lightning  down  the  river 
To  gather  troops  to  aid  their  righteous  fight, 
In  killing  men  who  asked  for  equal  rights! 

The  Mayor's  call  for  help  was  quick  obeyed, 
The  boys  aside  their  bats  and  yard-sticks  laid; 
And  to  the  place  appointed  quickly  run, 
Tickled,  like  other  boys,  to  bear  a  gun. 

The  boat  returned  and  brought  the  promised  aid, 
Each  one  appeared,  for  battle  all  arrayed; 
When  a  dead  pause  ensued,  they  stood  aghast, 
And  found  their  hired  courage  failing  fast. 

They  knew  the  suffrage  men  would  never  yield, 
Though  they  might  be  induced  to  quit  the  field; 
Therefore  they  said,  "Perhaps  it  may  be  wise, 
To  make  them  think  we  wish  to  compromise." 

No  sooner  said  than  done.  Up  heralds  went, 

To  tell  the  people  if  they'd  be  content, 

And  each  one  to  his  home  in  peace  retire, 

That  King  would  grant  them  all  that  they  require. 

Three  cheers  for  King  were  given,  long  and  loud, 
And  peace  and  quiet  reigned  throughout  the  crowd; 
The  suffrage  men  dispersed,  with  feelings  kind, 
Till  twenty  men,  perhaps,  were  left  behind. 

When  lo,  the  false  deceptive  Charter  band, 
Whose  only  merit  is  a  bank  of  sand, 
With  impudence  unparalleled,  in  face  of  heaven, 
Marched  up  and  broke  the  promise  they  had  given! 

4  Landholders'  Party. 

5  May  17,  1842. 


An  historical  survey  ■  35 

But  here  an  honest,  fearless  few  they  found, 
Who  meant  to  hold  possession  of  the  ground, 
Though  troops  and  beardless,  brainless  striplings  too, 
Appeared  thrice  in  front  and  back  review. 

These  20  suffrage  men  they  dare  not  face, 
Though  told  that  Gov.  Dorr  had  quit  the  place 
But  stood  a  moment  trembling  near  the  plain, 
And  then  retraced  their  footsteps  back  again. 

When  these  important  movements  all  were  done, 
A  memorable  victory  they  had  won; 
Low  falsehood  had  been  used  for  to  deceive 
And  thus  the  suffrage  men  induced  to  leave. 

Ye  charter  men,  your  valor  should  be  told, 

And  written  down  in  characters  of  gold; 

The  guns  not  fire,  the  blood  you  did  not  spill, 

Should  cause  the  pilgrim  State  to  blush  for  Bunker  Hill. 

Such  sights  on  battle-ground  before  were  never  seen; 
There,  trembling,  stood,  wise  Daniel's  Billy  Green, 
While  Charter  men  and  leaders,  by  the  score, 
Sneaked  to  their  homes  and  sought  the  ground  no  more. 

Say,  reader,  dost  thou  know  these  sages  wise, 
Whose  deeds  the  Journal  lauds  up  to  the  skies 
Many  (let  it  be  told  to  their  disgrace) 
Possess  no  ground  for  their  last  resting  place! 

Others  there  are,  landholders  to  the  bone, 
They  keep  the  land  of  others  as  their  own, 
The  Bankrupt  law  enables  such  great  men 
To  creep  out  through  a  hole  and  start  again. 

These  are  the  men  who  love  to  rule  the  State 
And  have  their  laws  decide  the  poor  man's  fate; 
Yes,  and  would  have  the  poor  their  offerings  bring, 
And  pour  them  in  the  lap  of  Sammy  King. 

But  this  can  never  be.  Spirits  have  risen 
Fired  by  the  memory  of  their  sires  in  heaven 
They  ask  their  rights,  'tis  all  the  boon  they  crave 
Determined  not  to  be  the  rich  man's  slave. 

—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 

After  the  suppression  of  the  rebellion  and  the  flight  of  Dorr, 
the  levity  disappeared  from  the  Chartists'  songs. 


36  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

SUFFRAGE  PLEDGE 

Here  on  this  sacred  spot, 
United  heart  and  hand, 
We  pledge  to  liberty, 
A  consecrated  band. 

Too  long,  alas!  we've  bow'd 
Beneath  a  tyrant's  laws; 
The  voice  of  justice  cries — 
Maintain  your  righteous  cause. 

Although  our  chosen  guide 
Is  exiled  from  his  home, 
The  day  approaches  near, 
When  he'll  no  longer  roam. 

That  glorious  morn  will  break, 
When  freedom's  sun  shall  rise, 
And  roll  in  majesty 
Through  bright,  unclouded  skies. 

The  anthems  of  the  free 
On  every  breeze  shall  float, 
And  ransomed  prisoners  join 
To  swell  the  joyful  note. 

The  aged  and  the  young 
Their  thankful  offerings  bring, 
And  chant  the  requiem  o'er 
The  usurped  power  of  King. 

Hail!  happy  day;  thrice  hail! 
Farewell  to  "martial  law"; 
The  conquering  hero  comes! 
Hail!  Thomas  Wilson  Dorr. 


—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection, 
Brown  University. 


The  movement  for  a  shorter  working  day 

Agitation  against  the  traditional  sunup-to-sundown 
working  day  began  in  1791,  when  Philadelphia  carpenters  struck 
for  shorter  hours.  During  the  decade  of  1825-35  the  movement  for 
a  ten-hour  day  spread  like  fire  through  labor's  ranks  and  resulted 


Six  to  six  •  37 

in  numerous  strikes.  The  mechanics  and  artisans,  who  were  well 
organized  in  trade  unions,  first  succeeded  in  gaining  the  ten-hour 
day,  but  for  the  textile  operatives  and  other  industrial  workers, 
the  working  day  remained  twelve  hours  or  more.  As  late  as  1929 
one  of  the  bloodiest  clashes  in  labor  history,  the  textile  strike  at 
Marion,  North  Carolina,  grew  out  of  workers'  demands  for  a 
reduction  of  the  twelve-hour,  twenty-minute  shift. 

Following  the  Civil  War,  labor  began  campaigning  for  an 
eight-hour  day.  Foremost  in  the  battle  was  Ira  Steward,  Boston 
machinist  and  union  leader,  who  organized  the  Grand  Eight  Hour 
League  of  Massachusetts.  Eagerly  following  his  example,  similar 
leagues  sprang  up  all  over  the  country.  The  national  government 
and  six  states  were  induced  to  make  eight  hours  the  legal  working 
day,  but  since  such  laws  were  subject  to  the  restrictions  imposed 
by  "yellow  dog"  contracts  which  forced  workers  to  relinquish  their 
rights,  the  victory  proved  hollow.  Faced  by  this  obstacle  the  move- 
ment lost  its  support,  and  labor  fell  back  once  again  on  strikes  to 
exact  the  eight-hour  day.  Eventually  the  states  adopted  unrestricted 
maximum-hour  laws,  and  in  1930  the  Federal  Government  ap- 
proved comparable  legislation. 

six  to  six6 
(Tune:  "Adam  and  Eve") 

In  days  now  gone  the  working  men  begun,  sires, 

To  work  with  the  sun,  and  keep  on  till  he  was  done,  sires, 

The  bosses  were  as  bad  as  the  overseers  of  blackees, 

Because  they  wished  the  working  men  to  be  no  more  than  lackies. 

The  niggers  have  their  tasks,  and  when  done  they  may  spree  it, 

But  the  Jers  they  were  asked  to  stick  to  work  as  long  as  they  could 

see  it. 
The  blackees  they  had  friends  of  all  varieties; 
But  the  workies  made  themselves  their  own  abolition  societies 
O  dear!  oh  dear!  why  didn't  they  fix 
The  hours  of  labor  from  SIX  to  SIX. 

Old  Time,  as  on  his  swift  wing,  he  ranges 
Brings  round  about  as  many  great  changes. 

6  A  ten-hour  day  with  one  hour  off  for  breakfast  and  one  hour  off  for  dinner. 


38  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Houses  are  built  high,  and  church  steeples  higher, 
And  patent  chests  invented  that  get  colder  in  the  fire; 
Pills  are  manufactured  that  cure  all  diseases; 
Rocking  chairs  in  which  the  sitter  at  his  ease  is; 
Monied  corporations,  and  institutions  old,  sires, 
The  people  discover  are  not  good  as  gold,  sires, 
As  a  notion  new,  the  workies  thought  they'd  fix, 
The  hours  of  labor  from  SIX  to  SIX/ 

By  this  the  bosses  were  all  made  to  stare,  sires, 

And  to  a  man,  each  one  did  declare,  sires, 

The  measure  was  violent — wicked — agrarian; 

But  they  only  said  this  'cause  the  measure  was  a  rare  'un, 

Meetings  were  held  in  old  Independence  square,  sires, 

'Twas  the  second  declaration  that  had  been  made  there,  sires, 

And  while  the  Bosses  were  coming  to  their  senses, 

Six  to  six  was  painted  and  chalked  on  all  the  fences! 

0  dear,  oh  dear,  we  had  to  fix, 

The  hours  of  labor  from  SIX  to  SIX. 

—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University 


JAMES  BROWN 

(Tune:  "John  Brown's  Body") 

James  Brown's  body  toils  along  the  rocky  road, 
James  Brown's  body  bends  beneath  a  crushing  load, 
James  Brown's  body  feels  the  point  of  hunger's  goad, 
His  soul  cries  out  for  help. 

refrain:  Come,  O  bearer  of  Glad  Tidings, 
Bringing  joy  from  out  her  hidings, 
Come,  O  bearer  of  Glad  Tidings, 
O  come,  O  come,  Eight  Hours! 

James  Brown's  wife  is  worn  and  pale  with  many  cares, 
James  Brown's  wife  so  weak  can  scarce  get  up  the  stairs, 
James  Brown's  wife  is  dying  'neath  the  load  she  bears, 
Her  soul  cries  out  for  help. 

James  Brown's  children  go  a-shivering  in  the  cold, 
James  Brown's  children  young,  with  work  are  growing  old, 
James  Brown's  lambs  are  torn  by  wolves  outside  the  fold, 
0,  save,  0,  save  the  lambs! 


An   historical  survey  *  39 

James  Brown  feels  oppression's  iron  within  his  breast, 
James  Brown  broods  and  ponders,  he  is  not  at  rest. 
James  Brown  swears  he  will  with  wrong  and  power  contest, 
His  own  right  arm  shall  help. 

James  Brown  may  sometime  become  a  desp'rate  man, 
James  Brown  may  sometime  go  join  the  tramper's  clan, 
James  Brown  then  may  say,  "I'll  do  the  worst  I  can," 
Oh,  blame  not  him  alone. 

James  Brown  hears  the  call,  his  soul  is  up  in  arms, 
James  Brown  grasps  the  shield,  his  soul  with  ardor  warms, 
James  Brown  marches  forth  to  fight  the  thickening  harms, 
Now  dauntless,  strong  and  free. 

—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection, 
Brown  University.  By  E.  R.  Place. 


THE    IRISH    IMMIGRANT 

Hardships  in  Europe  sent  streams  of  miserable  people 
to  the  United  States  in  search  of  a  better  life,  but  often  what  they 
found  was  the  same  misery  Americanized. 

Until  the  potato  blight  spread  to  Germany  and  the  political 
pogroms  that  followed  the  abortive  mid-nineteenth  century  revo- 
lutions blasted  the  German  lower  classes,  the  bulk  of  American 
immigration  came  from  Ireland.  That  unfortunate  land  suffered 
many  oppressions  from  man  and  nature.  In  i7g8  a  revolution  was 
brutally  suppressed,  and  after  the  Napoleonic  Wars  the  collapse 
of  British  wheat  prices  resulted  in  the  eviction  of  thousands  of 
Irish  peasants,  but  the  worst  blow  was  the  potato  famine  of  1846. 
People  died  like  flies  in  Ireland;  "travelers  along  the  highways 
reported  that  unburied  dead  lay  where  they  fell,  with  their  mouths 
stained  green  by  weeds  and  thistles  eaten  for  nourishment  in  their 
last  extremity."7  Over  half  the  working  class  of  Ireland  streamed 
into  America,  forming  the  largest  national  group  among  the 
4,300,000  immigrants  who  arrived  between  1840  and  i860. 

When  these  waves  of  unhappy  people  crashed  in  upon  the 
shores  of  the  United  States,  they  piled  up  into  a  surging,  be- 

7  Charles  A.  and  Mary  Beard,  The  Rise  of  American  Civilization,  New  York,  1945, 
I,  641. 


40  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

wildered  mass,  whose  only  common  emotion  was  no  longer  aspira- 
tion but  fear.  Desperate  for  survival,  they  fought  like  beasts  with 
each  other  for  man-killing  jobs  at  wages  as  low  as  fifty  cents  a  day. 
They  were  reckoned  as  the  earth's  expendables  by  employers,  and 
in  the  South  were  assigned  to  labor  too  dangerous  or  debilitating 
for  the  slaves.  As  a  cotton  transport  master  explained  to  a  passenger 
who  inquired  why  there  were  so  many  Irish  roustabouts,  "The 
niggers  are  worth  too  much  to  be  risked  here.  If  the  paddies 
are  knocked  overboard  or  get  their  backs  broken,  nobody  loses 
anything."8 

American  native  labor  was  at  first  violently  antipathetic  to 
these  ignorant  peasants  who,  unaccustomed  to  a  decent  standard 
of  living,  eagerly  accepted  what  pittance  employers  deigned  to 
throw  them  and  thus  threatened  to  demolish  the  wage  scales  that 
had  been  built  up  through  years  of  painful  struggle  by  American 
workers.  Craft  unions  never  accepted  the  immigrants,  but  more 
enlightened  workers  and  their  leaders  eventually  recognized  that 
the  Irish  responded  heartily  to  union  agitation,  just  as  the  Slavs 
were  to  do  fifty  years  later  in  the  coal  fields,  and  became  the  most 
militant  unionists.  Unscrupulous  employers  found  that  the  Frank- 
enstein's monster  they  had  nurtured  while  it  aided  them  against 
native  labor  was  now  turning  against  them.  "When  they  receive 
employment,"  complained  one  disgruntled  capitalist,  "are  they 
not  the  first  to  insist  on  higher  wages  [and]  to  strike?"9 

Employers  began  to  discriminate  against  Irish  laborers,  and  the 
"No  Irish  Need  Apply"  notation  which  accompanied  many  job 
advertisements  became  the  source  of  bitter  resentment  among  the 
Irish.  Dozens  of  broadsides  incorporating  the  phrase  were  printed, 
expressing  all  gradations  of  protest.  Some  indignantly  recited  the 
accomplishment  of  Irishmen: 

They  insult  an  Irishman  and  think  nought  of  what  they  say; 
They'll  call  him  green,  an  Irish  bull,  it  happens  every  day. 
Now  to  these  folks  I  say  a  word,  to  sing  a  song  I'll  try, 
And  answer  to  these  dirty  words,  "No  Irish  Need  Apply." 
So  if  you'll  give  attention,  I'll  sing  my  song  to  you, 
And  the  subject  of  my  song  shall  be,  What  Irish  Boys  Can  Do. 

8  Ulrich  B.  Phillips,  American  Negro  Slavery,  New  York,  1918,  p.  302. 

9  Jesse  Chickering,  Immigration  into  the  United  States,  Boston,  1848,  p.  64. 


No  irish   need  apply  *  41 

Others    chronicled    the    traditional    Irish    retaliation    against 
oppression: 


NO  IRISH  NEED  APPLY 


I'm  a  decent  boy  just  landed 

From  the  town  of  Bally  fad; 

I  want  a  situation,  yes, 

And  want  it  very  bad. 

I  have  seen  employment  advertised, 

"It's  just  the  thing,"  says  I, 

But  the  dirty  spalpeen  ended  with 

"No  Irish  Need  Apply." 

"Whoa,"  says  I,  "that's  an  insult, 
But  to  get  the  place  I'll  try," 
So  I  went  to  see  the  blackguard 
With  his  "No  Irish  Need  Apply" 
Some  do  count  it  a  misfortune 
To  be  christened  Pat  or  Dan, 
But  to  me  it  is  an  honor 
To  be  born  an  Irishman. 

I  started  out  to  find  the  house, 
I  got  it  mighty  soon; 
There  I  found  the  old  chap  seated, 
He  was  reading  the  Tribune. 


42  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

/  told  him  what  I  came  for, 
When  he  in  a  rage  did  fly, 
"No/"  he  says,  "You  are  a  Paddy, 
And  no  Irish  need  apply." 

Then  I  gets  my  dander  rising 
And  I'd  like  to  black  his  eye 
To  tell  an  Irish  gentleman 
"No  Irish  Need  Apply." 
Some  do  count  it  a  misfortune 
To  be  christened  Pat  or  Dan, 
But  to  me  it  is  an  honor 
To  be  born  an  Irishman. 

I  couldn't  stand  it  longer 
So  a  hold  of  him  I  took, 
And  gave  him  such  a  welting 
As  he'd  get  at  Donnybrook. 
He  hollered  "Milia  murther," 
And  to  get  away  did  try, 
And  swore  he'd  never  write  again 
"No  Irish  Need  Apply." 

Well,  he  made  a  big  apology, 

I  told  him  then  goodbye, 

Saying,  "When  next  you  want  a  beating, 

Write  'No  Irish  Need  Apply'" 

Some  do  count  it  a  misfortune 

To  be  christened  Pat  or  Dan, 

But  to  me  it  is  an  honor 

To  be  born  an  Irishman. 

—Collected  by  Pete  Seeger. 

Much  of  the  surplus  labor  among  the  Eastern  Irish  immigrants 
was  siphoned  off  into  Western  railroad  building. 

PAT  WORKS  ON  THE  RAILWAY 

In  eighteen  hundred  and  forty-one 
I  put  me  corduroy  breeches  on, 
I  put  me  corduroy  breeches  on, 
To  work  upon  the  railway. 

refrain  :  Fi-li-me-oo-re-oo-re-ay, 
Fi-li-me-oo-re-oo-re-ay, 
Fi-li-me-oo-re-oo-re-ay, 
To  work  upon  the  railway. 


The  farriers'  song  •  43 


In  eighteen  hundred  and  forty-two 

I  left  the  old  world  for  the  new; 

Bad  cess  to  the  luck  that  brought  me  through, 

To  work  upon  the  railway. 

Our  contractor's  name  it  was  Tom  King, 
He  kept  a  store  to  rob  the  men; 
A  Yankee  clerk  with  ink  and  pen 
To  cheat  Pat  on  the  railway. 


THE  TARRIERS    SONG 


mi  m$  i  M 


0   *  *  4  <» — m  «  m  m  • 


J  .1  t  V  h  j 


« — # 


WZ^ZM 


r  r  P.r  r  if*     cs 


1 


-&- 


0 


Every  morning  at  seven  o'clock 
There's  twenty  tarriers  working  at  the  rock. 
And  the  boss  comes  along,  and  he  says,  "Kape  still, 
And  come  down  heavy  on  the  cast-iron  drill." 

refrain:  And  drill,  ye  tarriers,  drill, 
Drill,  ye  tarriers,  drill! 
It's  work  all  day  for  the  sugar  in  your  tay, 
Down  behind  the  railway. 
And  drill  ye  tarriers,  drill, 
And  blast!  And  fire! 


44  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Now  our  new  foreman  was  Jean  McCann, 
By  God,  he  was  a  blame  mean  man; 
Last  week  a  premature  blast  went  off, 
And  a  mile  in  the  air  went  big  Jim  Goff. 

Next  time  payday  comes  around 

Jim  Goff  a  dollar  short  was  found; 

When  he  asked  "What  for?"  Came  this  reply, 

"Yer  docked  for  the  time  you  was  up  in  the  sky." 

The  knights  of  labor 

The  most  incredible  organization  in  the  history  of 
the  American  labor  movement  was  also  the  first  great  union,  the 
Noble  and  Holy  Order  of  the  Knights  of  Labor,  or,  as  it  was 
known  officially  during  its  first  ten  years,  the  *****.  From  a 
meeting  of  nine  somewhat  fatuous  garment  cutters  in  1869  it 
grew  in  two  decades  to  an  organization  of  more  than  700,000 
members. 

The  founder  of  the  Knights  of  Labor  and  the  creator  of  its 
guiding  principles  was  a  tailor  named  Uriah  Stephens.  As  a  mem- 
ber of  the  abortive  Garment  Cutters  Association  which  had  been 
organized  in  Philadelphia  in  1862,  Stephens  became  convinced 
that  the  first  essential  for  a  successful  labor  union  was  absolute 
secrecy,  and  in  setting  up  his  own  little  union  he  modeled  it  after 
ritualistic  fraternal  organizations.  He  was  elected  its  presiding 
officer,  or  Master  Workman,  and  the  other  organizers  divided 
among  them  the  grandiloquent  titles  of  Venerable  Sage,  Worthy 
Foreman,  and  Unknown  Knight,  as  well  as  more  mundane 
appellations  like  Recording  Secretary,  Financial  Secretary,  and 
Treasurer.  New  members  were  admitted  by  invitation  only,  and 
subjected  to  a  fraternalistic  initiation  before  being  told  the  name 
of  the  union  or  its  purposes. 

Stephens  was  surrounded  by  an  adolescent  fringe  and  was  him- 
self some  distance  from  the  attainment  of  intellectual  maturity, 
but  he  had  a  vision— the  foundation  of  a  new  social  order  based 
on  cooperation,  which  would  first  encompass  the  world's  laborers 
and  then  spread  out  to  include  everyone.  There  were  to  be  no 
barriers  of  race,  creed,  or  skill  in  this  first  One  Big  Union;  every- 
one who  at  any  time  had  worked  for  wages  could  become  a 


An  historical  survey  *  45 

member.  This  broad  requirement  technically  permitted  capitalists 
to  join,  and  indeed  the  Knights  of  Labor  were  not  averse  to  draw- 
ing membership  from  the  manufacturing  class.  The  Knights  held 
that  there  was  no  antipathy  between  labor  and  capital,  and  in  a 
social  system  built  on  cooperation  both  could  thrive. 

Stephens  believed  that  the  aims  of  the  union  could  be  achieved 
only  through  the  exercise  of  three  principles:  secrecy,  education, 
and  cooperation.  Secrecy  and  the  elaborate  ritualism  which  at- 
tended it  were  necessary  to  prevent  the  infiltration  of  employers' 
spies  and  other  ill-wishers,  but  eventually  it  had  to  be  discarded 
because  the  opposition  of  the  Catholic  Church  to  secret  societies 
kept  many  sympathetic  workers  from  joining  the  association. 

The  other  precepts  were  nebulous.  Education  was  a  laudable 
goal  to  be  striven  for,  but  education  in  what,  and  how  it  was  to 
be  administered,  was  never  clearly  explained.  The  fundamental 
principle  of  the  Order— cooperation— was  similarly  ill  denned. 
Both  Stephens  and  Terence  V.  Powderly,  who  succeeded  him  as 
Grand  Master  Workman  in  1879,  spoke  of  the  new  social  order 
and  its  achievement  in  such  idealistic  generalities  that  the  organ- 
izers felt  free  to  promise  prospective  members  anything.  When 
the  promises  were  not  fulfilled,  many  disillusioned  members 
dropped  out. 

The  chief  source  of  contention  between  the  militant  worker 
and  the  Knights  of  Labor  was  its  attitude  toward  immediate  in- 
dustrial relations.  Strikes  were  discouraged,  not  because  of  any 
benevolence  on  the  part  of  the  Knights  of  Labor  leaders,  but 
because  they  were  not  considered  an  efficient  means  of  achieving 
the  end  for  which  the  organization  was  founded— the  establish- 
ment of  a  kind  of  socialistic  commonwealth  in  the  United  States 
in  which  the  wage  system  and  other  blights  of  capitalism  would 
be  abolished.  No  practical  substitute  for  strikes  was  offered.  Polit- 
ical activity  was  recommended  as  a  substitute  for  direct  clashes 
with  employers,  but  despite  support  of  liberal  candidates,  the 
Knights  of  Labor's  participation  in  politics  was  half-hearted. 

Aside  from  its  uncertain  way  of  action,  the  chief  weakness  of 
the  Knights  of  Labor  was  its  heterogeneity.  All  workers  sympa- 
thetic to  the  purposes  of  the  union  were  welcomed  into  the  fold, 
regardless  of  the  nature  of  their  trade  or  profession,  or  whether 


46  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

they  had  any  skill  at  all,  and  in  time  the  organization  resembled 
less  a  labor  union  than  a  social  fraternity.  Of  course  the  idea 
behind  this  cutting-through  of  trade  distinctions  was  the  basis  on 
which  the  industrial  union,  now  recognized  as  the  most  powerful 
combination  of  labor,  was  to  be  founded,  but  in  1880  this  idea 
was  palpably  impracticable.  Other  barriers  than  trade  distinctions 
prevented  the  stable  organization  of  the  unskilled  worker.  Differ- 
ences of  race,  religion,  and  language  had  to  be  overcome  before 
unionization  could  take  place.  Labor  had  to  creep  before  it  could 
walk,  and  had  to  pass  through  the  phase  of  horizontal  organiza- 
tion before  it  could  achieve  vertical  organization.  And  guiding 
labor  along  this  tortuous  path  of  development  required  a  sensible 
plan  of  action  and  sensible  leaders  to  carry  it  through.  The  Knights 
of  Labor  had  neither  a  sensible  plan  nor  sensible  leaders.  Powderly, 
the  inheritor  of  Stephens'  precepts,  and  the  union's  head  through 
its  period  of  greatest  expansion,  once  remarked  that  he  believed 
temperance  was  the  main  issue  in  the  liberation  of  the  workingman. 

During  the  entire  life  of  the  Knights  of  Labor  its  leaders  con- 
demned strikes,  but  at  the  same  time  found  themselves  forced  to 
support  strikes  which  arose  through  their  inability  to  control 
impetuous  branch  leaders.  The  collapse  of  the  Knights  of  Labor 
grew  directly  from  such  a  local  dispute  which  began  on  Jay  Gould's 
Wabash  line  in  1885.  Through  the  militancy  of  the  local  Knights 
of  Labor  assembly  the  strike  spread  rapidly  through  the  entire 
Southwest  system  until  Jay  Gould,  unprepared  to  combat  the 
stoppage,  assented  to  the  workers'  demands. 

This  victory  resulted  in  an  immediate  upsurge  in  the  Knights 
of  Labor's  prestige,  and  tens  of  thousands  of  workers  swarmed  to 
join  the  powerful  champion  of  labor.  But  during  the  year  Gould 
built  up  strength,  baited  the  Knights  of  Labor  into  another  strike 
in  1886,  and  crushed  the  uprising,  breaking  the  back  of  the 
Knights  of  Labor  in  the  process.  Another  unfortunate  strike  in 
the  Chicago  stockyards  in  the  same  year  sealed  the  downfall  of  the 
organization.  By  1893  the  membership  had  fallen  from  the  peak 
of  700,000  to  7,500,  and  even  this  remnant  soon  drifted  away. 

The  general  assembly  of  the  Knights  of  Labor  "always  ceased 
its  labors"  at  the  close  of  each  session  by  singing  "If  We  Will, 
We  Can  Be  Free." 


If  we  will,  we  can  be  free  •  47 

IF  WE  WILL,  WE  CAN  BE  FREE 

Base  oppressors,  cease  your  slumbers, 

Listen  to  a  people's  cry, 

Hark!  uncounted,  countless  numbers 

Swell  the  peal  of  agony; 

Lo  from  Labor's  sons  and  daughters, 

In  the  depths  of  misery 

Like  the  rush  of  many  waters, 

Comes  the  cry  "We  will  be  free!" 

Comes  the  cry  "We  will  be  free!" 

By  our  own,  our  children's  charter, 

By  the  fire  within  our  veins, 

By  each  truth-attesting  martyr, 

By  our  own  tears,  our  groans,  our  pains, 

By  our  rights,  by  Nature  given, 

By  the  laws  of  liberty, 

We  declare  before  high  heaven 

That  we  must,  we  will  be  free, 

That  we  must,  we  will  be  free. 

Tyrants  quail!  the  dawn  is  breaking, 
Dawn  of  freedom's  glorious  day, 
Despots  on  their  thrones  are  shaking, 
Iron  hands  are  giving  way — 
Kingcraft,  statecraft,  base  oppression, 
Cannot  bear  our  scrutiny — 
We  have  learned  the  startling  lesson, 
If  we  will,  we  can  be  free, 
If  we  will,  we  can  be  free. 

Winds  and  waves  the  tidings  carry; 
Electra  in  your  fiery  ear, 
Winged  by  lightning,  do  not  tarry, 
Bear  the  news  to  lands  afar; 
Bid  them  tell  the  thrilling  story 
Louder  than  the  thunder's  glee 
That  a  people  ripe  for  glory, 
Are  determined  to  be  free, 
Are  determined  to  be  free. 

—Elizabeth  Balch,  "Songs  for  Labor,"  The  Survey, 
Vol.  31  (January  3,  1914),  p.  411. 

KNIGHTS  OF  LABOR 

I'll  sing  of  an  order  that  lately  has  done 
Some  wonderful  things  in  our  land; 
Together  they  pull  and  great  battles  have  won 
A  popular  hard  working  band. 


48  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Their  numbers  are  legion,  great  strength  they  possess, 
They  strike  good  and  strong  for  their  rights; 
From  the  North  to  the  South,  from  the  East  to  the  West, 
God  speed  each  assembly  of  Knights. 

refrain:  Then  conquer  we  must, 
Our  cause  it  is  just, 
What  power  the  uplifted  hand; 
Let  each  Labor  Knight 
Be  brave  in  the  fight, 
Remember,  united  we  stand. 

They  ask  nothing  wrong,  you  plainly  can  see, 

All  that  they  demand  is  but  fair; 

A  lesson  they'll  teach,  with  me  you'll  agree, 

And  every  purse-proud  millionaire. 

Fair  wages  they  want,  fair  wages  they'll  get, 

Good  tempered  they  wage  all  their  fights; 

Success  to  the  cause,  may  the  sun  never  set 

On  each  brave  assembly  of  Knights. 

Then  fight  on  undaunted,  you  brave  working  men, 

Down  the  vampires  who  oppress  the  poor; 

You  use  noble  weapons,  the  tongue  and  the  pen, 

Successful  you'll  be,  I  am  sure. 

With  hope  for  your  watchword  and  truth  for  your  shield, 

Prosperity  for  your  pathway  lights, 

Then  let  labor  make  proud  capital  yield, 

God  speed  each  assembly  of  Knights. 

—Broadside  in  American  Antiquarian  Society. 
NOBLE  KNIGHTS  OF  LABOR 

In  the  year  of  '69  they  commenced  to  fall  in  line, 

The  great  Knights,  the  noble  Knights  of  Labor, 

Now  in  numbers  mighty  strong,  gaining  fast  they  march  along, 

The  great  Knights,  the  noble  Knights  of  Labor. 

They  are  men  of  brains  and  will,  education,  pluck  and  skill, 

And  in  time  they'll  change  the  workingman's  situation. 

East  and  West,  where'er  we  go,  from  the  North  to  Mexico, 

They're  as  thick  as  flies,  and  soon  they'll  rule  the  Nation. 

refrain:  Oh,  the  great  Knights,  the  noble  Knights  of  Labor, 
The  true  Knights,  the  honest  Knights  of  Labor, 
Like  the  good  old  Knights  of  old,  they  cannot  be 

bought  or  sold, 
The  great  Knights,  the  noble  Knights  of  Labor. 

—Broadside  in  American  Antiquarian  Society. 


The  general  strike  •  49 

The  general  strike 

A  general  strike  of  the  extent  imagined  by  the  com- 
poser of  this  song  never  happened,  but  a  series  of  general  strikes 
of  lesser  compass  broke  out  in  the  two  decades  following  the  Civil 
War.  The  depression  of  the  1870's  heightened  the  violence  as 
wages  were  cut.  The  workers  received  no  consideration  for  their 
plight,  and  the  noted  clergyman  and  orator,  Henry  Ward  Beecher, 
summed  up  this  attitude  in  his  statement: 

God  intended  the  great  to  be  great  and  the  little  to  be  little.  .  .  . 
I  do  not  say  that  a  dollar  a  day  is  enough  to  support  a  working  man. 
But  it  is  enough  to  support  a  man!  Not  enough  to  support  a  man 
and  five  children  if  a  man  insists  on  smoking  and  drinking  beer.  .  .  . 
But  the  man  who  cannot  live  on  bread  and  water  is  not  fit  to  live. 

THE  GENERAL  STRIKE 

The  labor  sensation  spread  fast  over  this  nation, 
While  men  in  high  station  do  just  as  they  like; 
They'll  find  out  their  mistake  when  it  will  be  too  late, 
When  they  see  the  results  of  a  general  strike. 
The  butchers,  the  whalers,  the  tinkers,  the  tailors, 
Mechanics  and  sailors  will  surely  agree, 
To  strike  and  stand  still,  let  the  rich  run  the  mill, 
While  I  sing  of  the  sights  that  I  fancy  we'll  see. 

refrain:  We'll  see  Italians  knocked  sprawling, 

Policemen  help  calling,  capital  crawling  from 

labor's  attack; 
We'll  see  washwomen  giving  blarney  to  the 

famed  Denis  Kearney,10 
For  hanging  the  Chinamen  up  by  the  neck. 

We'll  see  men  and  women  run  through  the  streets  screaming 

At  the  sight  of  each  other  all  naked  and  bare; 

We'll  see  Henry  Ward  Beecher  the  Plymouth  Church  preacher, 

Giving  up  his  fine  robes  for  the  fair  sex  to  wear. 

We  will  see  men  of  fashion  get  into  a  passion, 

At  their  coachmen  and  footmen  doing  fust  as  they  like; 

You  will  see  Kate  O'Connor  with  a  women's  rights'  banner, 

Leading  our  working  girls  into  the  strike. 

*  *  * 

(Three  more  stanzas  in  this  vein) 

—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 

10  Denis  Kearney,  an  unscrupulous  opportunist  who  was  repudiated  by  discerning- 
labor  organizations,  founded  a  spurious  union  in  California  in  1878  whose  chief 
purpose  was  to  fight  Chinese  immigration. 


50  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

The  single  tax  movement 

From  the  time  when  the  worker  first  became  articulate, 
his  struggle  for  a  better  life  has  been  based  on  the  thesis  that  an 
individual  has  the  right  to  the  fruits  of  his  labor.  What  else 
accrued  to  him  through  forces  over  which  he  had  no  direct  con- 
trol, such  as  the  augmentation  of  land  values  through  the  move- 
ment of  population,  he  was  content  to  accept  as  the  gift  of  a 
beneficent  God.  To  Henry  George  this  philosophy  contained  the 
fallacy  on  which  poverty  was  founded.  As  a  journalist  in  San 
Francisco  during  the  booming  seventies,  he  watched  the  structure 
of  civilization  and  its  attendant  wealth  growing  about  him,  yet  in 
its  shadow  he  saw  poverty  becoming  conversely  more  widespread 
and  more  degrading.  Like  the  Wobblies,  who  were  later  to  de- 
clare, "For  every  dollar  the  parasite  has  and  didn't  work  for, 
there's  a  slave  who  worked  for  a  dollar  he  didn't  get,"  George 
was  convinced  that  there  was  an  inescapable  ratio  between  vast 
wealth  and  abysmal  poverty,  and  he  determined  to  trace  the 
devious  line  of  relationship  between  the  two.  In  1879  he  pub- 
lished the  results  of  his  analysis  in  an  impassioned  treatise  entitled 
Progress  and  Poverty. 

In  Progress  and  Poverty  George  came  independently  to  a  con- 
clusion which  had  been  probed  earlier  by  men  like  Thomas  Paine 
and  John  Stuart  Mill,  that  land  is  the  basic  factor  in  the  equation. 
It  was  for  George  a  comparatively  easy  decision  to  arrive  at,  for 
the  West  was  being  founded  on  land  speculation  rather  than  the 
exploitation  of  land  for  mineral  resources.  Absentee  speculators 
invested  in  vast  areas  of  cheap,  undeveloped  land  which  they 
knew,  either  by  shrewdly  anticipating  the  movement  of  popula- 
tion or  by  directing  the  movement  by  influencing  the  extension 
of  railroad  lines,  would  expand  in  value.  The  unearned  profits 
thus  derived  could  be  plowed  back  into  more  land.  George  con- 
cluded from  his  observations  that 

In  allowing  one  man  to  own  the  land  on  which  and  from  which 
other  men  live,  we  have  made  them  his  bondsmen  in  a  degree  which 
increases  as  material  progress  goes  on.  .  .  .  It  is  this  that  turns  the 
blessings  of  material  progress  into  a  curse.  .  .  .  Civilization  so  based 
cannot  continue. 


Mary's  little  lot  •  51 

His  solution  was  extraordinarily  direct.  The  value  that  land 
derives  from  society  should  accrue  to  society;  since  "Private  prop- 
erty in  land  has  no  warrant  in  justice,"  it  should  be  abol- 
lished.  He  was  willing  to  allow  landholders  to  retain  the  fiction  of 
ownership,  but  economic  rent  of  the  land— that  difference  between 
buying  price  (initial  outlay  and  cost  of  improvements)  and  sell- 
ing price— was  to  be  considered  surplus  income  to  which  the 
landholder  was  not  entitled.  George  argued  that  a  tax  on  this 
economic  rent  would  be  sufficient  to  maintain  all  functions  of 
government,  and  that  taxes  upon  the  products  of  labor  would  not 
be  necessary.  From  this  contention  the  movement  received  the 
name  "single  tax." 

Henry  George's  plan  was  impracticable,  despite  the  soundness 
of  the  principle  behind  it,  but  it  offered  a  possibility  for  social 
reform  that  instantly  captured  the  imagination  of  the  thousands 
who  felt  themselves  unable  to  cope  with  the  existing  system.  This 
inarticulate  mass  of  people  found  in  Progress  and  Poverty  a  bril- 
liant expression  of  what  they  had  not  been  able  to  put  into  words, 
and  in  twenty-five  years  Progress  and  Poverty  went  through  more 
than  a  hundred  editions.  George's  eloquent  condemnation  of  the 
land  monopolists  left  little  for  the  people  to  say,  but  a  few  amateur 
composers  tried  to  show  the  relation  of  progress  to  poverty  in  a 
less  abstract  way. 

mary's  little  lot 

Mary  had  a  little  lot, 

The  soil  was  very  poor; 

But  still  she  kept  it  all  the  same 

And  struggled  to  get  more. 

She  kept  the  lot  until  one  day 
The  people  settled  down; 
And  where  the  wilderness  had  been 
Grew  up  a  thriving  town. 

Then  Mary  rented  out  her  lot 
(She  would  not  sell,  you  know), 
And  waited  patiently  about 
For  prices  still  to  grow. 

They  grew,  as  population  came, 
And  Mary  raised  the  rent; 
With  common  food  and  raiment  now 
She  could  not  be  content. 


52  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

She  built  her  up  a  mansion  fine 
Had  bric-a-brac  galore; 
And  every  time  the  prices  rose, 
She  raised  the  rent  some  more. 

"What  makes  the  lot  keep  Mary  so?" 
The  starving  people  cry; 
"Why,  Mary  keeps  the  lot,  you  know," 
The  wealthy  would  reply. 

And  so  each  one  of  you  might  be 
Wealthy,  refined,  and  wise, 
If  you  had  only  hogged  some  land 
And  held  it  for  the  rise. 

—From  WPA  Collections,  Library  of  Congress 
Archive  of  American  Folk  Song. 

The  freight  handlers'  strike 

In  the  summer  of  1882  the  unorganized  freight  han- 
dlers of  the  New  York  Central  &  Hudson  River  and  the  New  York 
Lake  Erie  &  Western  railroads  struck  for  an  increase  of  pay  from 
17  cents  to  20  cents  an  hour.  Freight  rates  for  merchandise  moving 
West  had  recently  advanced,  so  the  public  sympathized  with  the 
strikers'  cause.  At  first  railroad  officials— Gould,  Vanderbilt,  and 
Field— brought  in  inexperienced  strikebreakers  who  were  unable 
to  keep  freight  from  piling  up,  and  the  shippers  appealed  to  the 
courts  to  compel  the  railroads  to  keep  the  freight  moving.  Later 
the  railroads  hired  experienced  strikebreakers,  freight  began  to 
move  westward,  and  the  strike  was  broken. 

THE  FREIGHT  HANDLERS'  STRIKE 

(Tune:  "Rambling  Rake  of  Poverty") 

It  was  at  Cooper's  Institute,  Jack  Burke  and  I  chanced  to  meet; 
It's  years  since  last  we  parted,  leaving  school  on  Hudson  Street. 
He  introduced  me  to  his  friends,  the  Doyles,  the  O's,  the  Macs, 
And  the  subject  of  the  evening  was  about  the  railroad  strike. 

refrain:  We're  on  the  strike  and  we  won't  go  back, 
Our  claims  are  just  and  right; 
Trade  unions  and  the  public  press 
Will  help  us  with  all  their  might. 


An   historical  survey  *  53 

There's  Field,  Jay  Gould,  and  Vanderbilt,  their  millions  they  did  save 
By  paying  starvation  wages  and  working  men  like  slaves; 
They  hum  round  honest  labor  as  the  bee  does  round  the  flower, 
And  suck  the  sweetness  of  your  toil  for  17  cents  an  hour. 

They  advertised  in  English,  French,  Irish,  and  Dutch, 

They  got  a  sample  of  all  nations  to  work  in  place  of  us; 

They  marched  them  to  the  depot  and  told  them  not  to  fear, 

And  to  shake  their  courage  up  in  them,  they  gave  them  lager  beer. 

The  lager  beer  and  sandwiches  with  them  did  not  agree; 
In  place  of  handling  merchandise  they  all  got  on  the  spree. 
The  Russian  Jews  soon  spread  the  news  about  their  jolly  times, 
And  all  the  bums  from  Baxter  Street  rushed  for  the  railroad  lines. 

The  Italians  made  themselves  at  home  and  soon  began  to  call 
For  William  H.,  the  railroad  king,  to  pass  the  beer  along; 
Jay  Gould  was  making  sandwiches  and  Field  began  to  cry 
Because  he  couldn't  snatch  the  man  that  blew  up  his  English  spy. 

Those  mean  monopolizers  had  the  cheek  to  take  the  stand 
And  ask  to  get  protection  from  the  honest  working  man 
Who  tries  to  sell  his  labor  in  a  manly  upright  way, 
And  will  not  handle  railroad  freight  for  less  than  two  a  day. 

Does  the  devil  makes  those  fools  believe  that  they  are  smart  and 

clever — 
Does  he  tell  them  wealth  will  bring  them  health  and  make  them  live 

for  ever; 
Does  he  lead  them  from  their  gambling  dens  and  to  some  shady  bower, 
To  make  them  fix  a  workman's  pay  at  17  cents  an  hour? 

—From  broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 
THE    PULLMAN    STRIKE 

The  bitter  labor  disputes  of  the  seventies  and  eighties 
were  founded  on  very  solid  grievances.  The  tremendous  prosperity 
that  was  indicated  by  the  expansion  of  American  industry  after 
the  Civil  War  was  not  passed  on  to  the  workers  whose  efforts 
helped  create  it;  in  fact,  real  wages  actually  declined.  This  situa- 
tion could  lead  nowhere  but  to  organized  industrial  revolt,  whose 
portents  were  everywhere  visible. 

The  capitalists  recognized  these  warning  signs,  but  attempted 
to  circumvent  the  inevitable  consequences  of  their  policies  by  the 
most  extreme  methods  short  of  raising  wages.  The  most  fantastic 
of  these  experiments  toward  achieving  artificial  stability  in  indus- 


54  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

trial  relations  was  the  paternalistic  venture  of  resourceful,  cunning, 
ruthless,  and  unlovable  George  Mortimer  Pullman,  founder  and 
president  of  the  Pullman  Palace  Car  Company. 

Pullman's  invention  and  development  of  the  sleeping  car  and 
his  destruction  of  competition  built  up  the  company's  original 
capitalization  of  $10,000,000  to  a  worth  of  $62,000,000  in  twenty- 
five  years,  affording  him  sufficient  funds  to  execute  his  schemes. 
He  moved  the  Pullman  shops  from  Elmira,  Detroit,  St.  Louis, 
and  Wilmington  to  one  gigantic  factory  near  Chicago  as  the  first 
step  in  his  plan;  next  he  built  a  truly  beautiful  city  in  the  middle 
of  four  thousand  company-owned  acres  on  the  open  prairie  twelve 
miles  south  of  Chicago.  The  town,  with  its  houses,  streets,  and 
public  buildings,  was  planned  by  outstanding  architects  and  land- 
scape engineers,  and  was  built  of  the  best  materials,  nearly  all 
of  which,  incidentally,  were  manufactured  by  the  company.  All 
utilities,  including  gas,  were  also  company-built  and  company- 
maintained.  And  all  was  for  his  workers. 

At  the  peak  of  its  prosperity  before  the  panic  of  1893  the  town 
provided,  in  1800  buildings,  shelter  for  12,500  people.  Fine  pub- 
lic buildings  had  been  erected,  including  a  very  well-appointed 
library,  a  beautiful  theatre,  and  a  magnificent  edifice  called  the 
Green  Stone  Church.  The  homes  were  roomy,  well  designed,  and 
provided  with  the  most  modern  conveniences.  As  a  company  press 
agent  stated,  Pullman  was  "a  town  in  a  word,  where  all  that  is 
ugly  and  discordant  and  demoralizing  is  eliminated  and  all  that 
which  inspires  self-respect  is  generously  provided."  Unspoken  but 
implied  was  the  conclusion  that  George  M.  Pullman  was  the  very 
embodiment  of  beneficence,  a  selfless  philanthropist. 

But  there  were  shadows  in  Pullman's  aureola.  The  model  town 
had  been  constructed  for  other  purposes  than  to  create  a  contented 
and  docile  force  of  employees;  it  was  also  a  business  proposition 
built  to  return  a  profit  of  6  per  cent.  Besides  the  utilities  which 
returned  a  6  per  cent  profit,  there  was  a  steam-heat  plant  return- 
ing 6  per  cent;  a  huge  dairy  farm  returning  6  per  cent;  ice  houses, 
lumberyards,  hotel,  livery  stables,  the  church,  the  bank,  and  the 
library,  all  designed  to  return  6  per  cent.  Even  the  town's  sewage 
was  used  as  fertilizer  for  the  company  truck  farm,  and  the  result- 
ing vegetables  sold  in  Chicago.  Thus  George  Mortimer  Pullman 
squeezed  the  last  6  per  cent  out  of  his  employees. 


An  historical  survey  *  55 

There  were  even  less  admirable  features  about  Pullman.  Neither 
houses  nor  land  could  be  purchased;  leases  could  be  terminated 
in  ten  days;  no  improvements  or  adaptations  could  be  made  on 
company  property;  plays  at  the  theatre  were  censored;  "undesir- 
able" orators  were  excluded  from  its  stage;  pernicious  influences 
like  liquor  were  prohibited;  and  the  government  of  the  town  was 
completely  in  the  hands  of  Pullman  through  the  town  agent.  For 
these  services  and  disservices,  Pullman's  employees  (who  were 
coerced  into  living  in  Pullman)  paid  exorbitant  rents,  often  25 
per  cent  higher  than  in  adjoining  communities,  and  even  more 
exorbitant  utility  rates  (gas  was  almost  twice  as  expensive  as  in 
Chicago).  The  Green  Stone  Church  went  unused  for  several  years 
because  of  the  $3,600  rent  demanded.  Clergymen  resented  Pull- 
man's restriction  of  religious  freedom.  Father  John  Waldron,  the 
local  Catholic  priest,  who  was  forced  to  resign  his  pastorate,  de- 
nounced Pullman  as  a  "capitalistic  czar;  a  man  who  ruled,  crushed, 
and  oppressed  by  the  force  of  money." 

The  financial  panic  of  1893  occasioned  a  drastic  retrenchment 
in  Pullman  activities.  The  wholesale  dismissals  cut  the  town's 
population  to  eight  thousand,  and  the  wages  of  those  workers  still 
retained  were  cut  by  as  much  as  40  per  cent.  But  while  Pullman's 
right  hand  slashed  wages,  his  left  continued  to  collect  the  high 
rents  without  reduction.  In  defiance  of  law,  rent  was  withheld 
from  salaries,  and  one  employee  framed  a  weekly  pay  check  of 
two  cents. 

In  May  of  1894  the  employees  asked  Pullman  to  consider  their 
grievances,  but  he  unequivocally  refused  to  talk  about  wages  or 
rents,  and  promptly  fired  three  members  of  the  grievance  com- 
mittee. Meanwhile  the  American  Railway  Union,  founded  by 
Eugene  V.  Debs  in  1893  but  already  claiming  a  membership  of 
150,000,  had  been  unionizing  Pullman  employees.  Debs  applied 
to  Pullman  for  arbitration,  but  Pullman's  paternalism  forbade 
him  to  allow  the  corruption  of  his  employees  by  unions,  and  the 
ARU's  appeals  were  ignored.  Against  his  own  better  judgment, 
Debs  risked  the  life  of  his  union  in  a  strike  of  Pullman  workers 
on  June  21,  1894,  but  warned  the  men  to  conduct  a  peaceable 
campaign.  As  the  strike  spread,  the  railroad  association  forced 
the  workers'  hand  by  importing  Canadian  strikebreakers,  and  by 
pleading  danger  of  violence  had  3,400  special  deputies  appointed 


56  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

to  keep  the  trains  rolling.  Their  next  effective  move  was  their 
appeal  to  President  Cleveland  to  safeguard  the  mails.  Cleveland, 
against  Governor  Altgeld's  protest,  promptly  dispatched  four  com- 
panies of  infantry  to  Chicago.  But  the  most  successful  coup  per- 
petrated by  the  railroads  was  their  application  for  a  blanket 
injunction  from  the  Federal  District  Court  against  the  strike.  The 
injunction  was  granted,  and  when  it  was  ignored  by  Debs  he  was 
imprisoned.  Deprived  of  leadership,  the  strikers  capitulated  and 
returned  to  work,  only  to  find  that  union  members  had  been 
blacklisted  by  the  General  Managers  Association.  Never  again  was 
a  known  ARU  member  to  find  work  on  an  American  railway. 

This  most  important  of  strikes  had  ominous  aftermaths.  There- 
after the  practice  of  government  by  injunction  became  widespread 
in  labor  disputes;  and  Debs's  imprisonment  resulted  in  his  espousal 
of  Socialism,  which  in  turn  led  to  the  formation  of  the  IWW, 
which  in  turn  led  to  the  birth  of  American  Communism.11 

THE  PULLMAN  STRIKE 

(Tune:  "The  Widow's  Plea  For  Her  Son") 

Near  the  City  of  Chicago,  where  riot  holds  full  sway, 

The  workingmen  of  Pullman  are  battling  for  fair  play; 

But  the  Boss  he  would  not  listen  to  the  workingmen 's  appeal, 

And  scorned  their  mute  advances,  no  sympathy  did  feel. 

The  railroad  men  refused  to  move  even  a  single  car, 

Till  suddenly  from  Washington  they  heard  the  White  House  Czar 

Proclaim  them  all  lawbreakers,  and  then  in  mournful  tone 

To  their  countrymen  they  sent  their  cry  with  sad  and  dismal  moan: 

refrain:  Remember  we  are  workmen,  and  we  want  honest  pay, 
And  gentlemen,  remember,  we  work  hard  day  by  day; 
Let  Pullman  remember,  too,  no  matter  where  he  roams, 
We  built  up  his  capital,  and  we're  pleading  for  our  homes. 

The  troops  are  ordered  from  the  East  and  from  the  Western  shore, 
The  firebrands  of  anarchy  are  brought  to  every  door; 
Honest  workmen  repudiate  the  work  of  thugs  and  tramps, 
And  think  it  is  an  outrage  to  be  reckoned  with  these  scamps. 
Arbitration  is  what  they  asked,  but  the  Boss  he  quick  refused, 
"Your  fight  is  with  the  railroads,"  was  the  answer  they  perused; 
But  Pullman  will  regret  the  day  he  gave  this  harsh  reply; 
And  workingmen  throughout  the  land  will  heed  our  pleading  cry. 

—"The  Pullman  Strike  Songster"  in 
Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 
11  Ralph  Chaplin,  Wobbly,  Chicago,  1948,  p.  14 


A.  R.  U.  •  57 

A.R.U. 

Been  on  the  hummer  since  ninety-four, 

Last  job  I  had  was  on  the  Lake  Shore. 

Lost  my  office  in  the  A.R.U., 

And  I  won't  get  it  back  till  nineteen-two. 

And  I'm  still  on  the  hog  train  flagging  my  meals, 

Riding  the  brake  beams  close  to  the  wheels. 

—Carl  Sandburg,  The  American  Songbag,  New  York, 
Harcourt,  Brace,  and  Co.,  1927,  p.  191. 

The  people's  party 

The  Populist  movement  of  the  last  quarter  of  the  nine- 
teenth century  was  only  by  necessity  a  political  movement,  and 
in  a  way  it  was  actually  anti-political,  for  it  sought  to  combat  the 
forces  of  plunder  that  had  been  fostered  by  the  two  major  parties. 
Idealistically,  it  was  an  uprising  of  the  common  people  to  recover 
the  political  control  that  had  passed  into  the  hands  of  urban 
capitalists.  In  the  South  this  exploitation  manifested  itself  in  the 
expanding  tobacco  trust  which  controlled  the  tobacco  growers  of 
Virginia  and  North  Carolina,  and  in  the  usurious  system  of  mer- 
chant capitalism  that  enmeshed  the  land-poor  farmers.  In  the 
Midwest  analogous  complaints  beset  the  farmer  in  the  form  of 
the  currency  question.  The  powerful  minority  whose  wealth  was 
based  on  financial  speculation  and  industrial  expansion  favored 
the  gold  standard;  the  midwestern  farmer,  heavily  in  debt  for  his 
newly  acquired  lands,  stood  to  lose  through  the  continued  appre- 
ciation of  the  dollar. 

In  all  sections  a  principal  grievance  was  the  railroads.  Far  from 
being  the  unqualified  blessing  commonly  supposed,  the  railroad 
to  the  farmer  was  the  embodiment  of  the  forces  of  greed,  a  vicious 
process  of  creating  dependency  and  then  exploiting  it.  When  the 
railroads  probed  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  West,  the  farmers 
could  no  longer  independently  haul  their  grain  by  horse  and 
wagon;  they  were  forced  to  ship  by  rail.  The  railroads,  virtually 
unregulated,  then  adjusted  their  rates  by  what  the  traffic  would 
bear.  Increasingly  the  middleman  drove  his  wedge  deeper  and 
deeper  between  the  farmer  and  consumer,  and  engorged  profit 
from  both  ends  of  the  process  of  food  supply.  The  situation, 
aggravated   by   other   factors,   soon   became    intolerable   for   the 


58  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

farmers,  and  spontaneous  protest  groups  sprang  up  all  over  the 
country.  The  forerunners  of  the  People's  Party  tried  to  dissociate 
their  agitation  from  mere  political  activity.  As  one  such  group 
pledged  in  1873,  "The  organization,  when  consummated,  shall  not, 
so  far  as  in  our  power  to  prevent,  ever  deteriorate  into  a  political 
party."  But  the  leaders  of  these  organizations  soon  recognized  that 
the  only  practical  way  to  effect  social  or  economic  reform  was 
through  the  legislatures,  and  this  meant  the  building  of  political 
power  strong  enough  to  force  through  laws  favorable  to  agrarian 
interests.  The  culmination  of  these  groups,  social,  educational, 
and  political,  which  spread  like  a  network  over  rural  America, 
was  the  People's  Party,  founded  in  1892. 

To  strengthen  its  cause  the  Populists  solicited  the  adherence 
of  labor,  and  in  their  platforms  denounced  the  oppressors  of  labor 
who  denied  the  workingman  the  right  to  organize  and  by  ruthless 
practices  endeavored  to  keep  him  in  economic  slavery.  The  Knights 
of  Labor  offered  their  support,  but  the  AFL  was  reluctant  to 
endorse  the  middle-class  issues  of  "employing  farmers." 

After  six  years  of  influential  activity,  the  People's  Party  dis- 
integrated. The  basic  reason  for  its  collapse  was  its  instability;  at 
no  time  were  the  various  factions  which  made  it  up  in  complete 
solidarity  concerning  the  nation's  problems,  and  very  often  there 
was  open  dissension,  with  one  faction  dickering  with  the  Republi- 
cans while  another  courted  the  Democrats.  In  1896,  the  year  which 
marked  the  collapse  of  the  People's  Party  as  a  practical  force  in 
national  politics,  the  Populists  were  forced  into  supporting  for 
vice-president  Arthur  M.  Sewell,  a  bank  president  and  railway 
director. 

But  other  weaknesses  assured  the  downfall  of  the  People's  Party; 
its  espousal  of  labor's  cause  was  only  rhetorical,  a  fact  that  many 
labor  leaders  soon  perceived;  race  hatred  weakened  a  large  faction 
of  the  Southern  branch,  and  condemnation  of  unrestricted  immi- 
gration deprived  the  party  of  the  support  of  millions.  The  party's 
choice  of  leaders  was  also  unfortunate.  The  spokesman  for  the 
Populists,  the  influential  framer  of  many  of  their  principles,  and 
at  one  time  their  candidate  for  the  presidency,  was  Ignatius 
Donnelly,  a  man  of  dubious  intellectual  stability  known  to  Shake- 
spearean scholars  as  the  author  of  The  Great  Cryptogram,  a  monu- 
ment of  misguided  ingenuity. 


People's  party  song  •  59 

While  the  People's  Party  was  a  prominent  force  in  American 
politics,  its  militant  defense  of  the  principle  that  wealth  belonged 
to  those  who  produced  it  was  commemorated  by  a  body  of  song 
unequaled  by  parties  whose  purposes  were  fundamentally  political. 

people's  party  song 

What  portentous  sounds  are  these, 

That  are  borne  upon  the  breeze? 

What  means  this  agitation  deep  and  grand? 

Whence  comes  this  discontent? 

Why  are  parties  torn  and  rent 

That  before  in  solid  phalanx  used  to  stand? 

refrain:  Hark!  See  the  people  are  advancing, 
In  solid  columns  to  the  fight; 
We  will  let  the  bosses  see 
We're  determined  to  be  free, 
And  for  bullets  we'll  use  ballots  in  the  fight. 

Let  the  demagogue  and  knave 

Storm  and  bluster,  fret  and  rave, 

And  assail  with  filth  our  leader's  honored  name. 

All  that  malice  can  devise 

Of  scurrility  and  lies, 

Only  adds  a  brighter  luster  to  his  fame. 

Then  arise,  ye  workingmen, 

In  support  of  gallant  Ben12 

Who  is  trying  to  unravel  right  from  wrong. 

Don't  be  lured  by  party  pride, 

Tell  the  bosses,  "Stand  Aside!" 

And  swell  up  your  ranks  at  least  three  million  strong.13 

—From  broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 
THE  WORKINGMEN 'S  ARMY 

(Tune:  "Marching  Through  Georgia") 

When  rebel  shot  and  rebel  shell  burst  open  Sumter's  wall, 
When  honest  Abraham  Lincoln's  voice  aroused  the  people  all, 
General  Butler  was  the  first  who  answered  Lincoln's  call, 
To  lead  on  the  great  Union  army. 

12  General  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  presidential  candidate  on   the  Greenback-Labor 
and  Anti-Monopoly  ticket  in  1884. 
is  Butler  received  130,000  votes. 


60  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

refrain:  Hurrah,  hurrah,  hurrah  for  liberty! 

Hurrah,  hurrah,  we  workingmen  are  free! 

We've  burst  the  bonds  of  party  like  those  of  slavery, 

And  joined  the  great  workingmen 's  army. 

And  there's  now  another  army,  fighting  for  another  cause. 
Striving  to  get  fair  and  just  and  equitable  laws; 
And  Butler,  tried  and  true,  is  now  again,  as  then  he  was, 
Commanding  the  workingmen' 's  army. 

He'll  push  aside  from  power  and  place,  with  strong,  avenging  hand, 
The  sordid  politician  who  would  desecrate  the  land; 
He'll  burst  the  rings,  and  make  this  nation  pure  and  free  and  grand, 
With  his  brave,  fearless,  workingmen' s  army. 

—From  broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 


A  HAYSEED  LIKE  ME 

/  was  once  a  tool  of  oppression 
And  as  green  as  a  sucker  could  be; 
And  monopolies  banded  together 
To  beat  a  poor  bum  like  me. 

The  railroads  and  party  bosses 

Together  did  sweetly  agree; 

And  they  thought  there  would  be  little  trouble 

In  working  a  hayseed  like  me. 

But  now  I've  roused  up  a  little 
And  their  greed  and  corruption  I  see; 
And  the  ticket  we  vote  next  November 
Will  be  made  up  of  hayseeds  like  me. 

—Anna  Rochester,  The  Populist  Movement  in 
the  United  States,  New  York,  1943,  p.  2. 


KEEP  STEADY 

Come  now,  boys,  keep  steady,  the  day  is  at  hand 

When  every  true  patriot  all  through  the  land 

Will  go  to  the  polls,  and  their  suffrages  throw, 

And  strike  at  oppression  one  desperate  blow. 

The  people  have  been  humbugged  now  long  enough 

Befooled  and  cajoled  by  nonsensical  stuff 

But  their  temper  is  up,  and  they're  ugly  clean  through, 

On  the  fourth  of  November,  you'll  see  what  they'll  do. 


The  people's  rally  cry  •  61 

refrain:  Keep  sober  and  steady,  and  mind  what  you're  at; 

Don't  be  turned  from  your  purpose  by  this  one  or  that; 
Our  motives  are  pure,  and  our  motto  is  grand; 
Self -protection's  the  war-cry  all  over  the  land. 


—From  broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 
THE  PEOPLE'S  RALLY  CRY 

(Tune:  "Battle  Cry  of  Freedom" ) 

We  will  rally  round  the  flag,  boys,  we'll  rally  till  we  gain 
For  every  workingman  his  freedom; 

We  will  rally  from  the  workshop,  from  city,  hill,  and  plain, 
To  give  the  workingman  his  freedom. 

refrain:  Our  Union,  forever!  Press  on,  boys,  press  on! 

We'll  down  with  the  money,  and  up  with  the  man; 
While  we  rally  round  the  flag,  boys,  and  rally  till  we  gain 
For  every  workingman  his  freedom. 

We  are  joining  hands  to  conquer  the  wrongs  that  gall  us  sore, 
That  all  may  work  and  live  in  freedom; 
And  we'll  fill  the  Union  up  with  a  million  votes  or  more 
To  give  the  workingman  his  freedom. 

We  will  welcome  to  our  numbers  all  who  are  true  and  brave, 
Who'll  give  to  toil  the  fullest  freedom; 

Right  to  all  that's  earned  by  labor,  t'unchain  the  wages  slave 
And  raise  him  up  to  manhood's  freedom. 

So  we're  forming  everywhere — North  and  South,  and  East  and  West 
To  give  the  slave  of  wage  his  freedom; 

And  we'll  hurl  the  Idol  GOLD  from  the  land  we  love  the  best 
And  give  to  every  soul  his  freedom. 

Coxey's  army 

Few  of  the  Populist  leaders  recognized  that  the  wheels 
which  carried  our  economy  were  moving  in  a  continuous  cycle  of 
expansion,  prosperity,  crisis,  depression,  and  recovery,  and  fewer 
still  saw  that  at  the  same  time  the  entire  machine  was  rolling 
smoothly  down  hill.  So  when  the  financial  crisis  of  1893  moved 
into  the  paralyzing  depression  of  1894,  the  normalcy  of  the  situa- 
tion was  not  perceived;  and  it  was  thought  that  only  drastic  action 
would  save  the  country.  The  Populists  therefore  planned  and 


62  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

sponsored  an  army  of  protest— the  "Commonweal  Army"— which 
gathered  recruits  in  various  parts  of  the  country  in  1894  for  a 
march  on  Washington.  The  only  division  which  actually  reached 
its  objective  was  a  force  of  five  thousand  men  led  from  Massillon, 
Ohio,  by  a  wealthy  Ohio  Populist,  "General"  Jacob  Sechler  Coxey. 
He  brought  with  him  a  speech  which  he  planned  to  deliver  in 
support  of  a  $500,000,000  federal  works  project  bill  for  unemploy- 
ment relief  introduced  by  Senator  Peffer  of  Kansas. 

President  Cleveland's  administration,  more  familiar  with  the 
apparent  vagaries  of  the  American  economic  system  than  the  naive 
Populists,  ignored  the  proposals  and  took  notice  of  the  Army  only 
to  have  its  leaders  arrested  for  treading  on  the  Capitol  grass.  On 
the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  his  march  on  Washington,  Coxey  de- 
livered from  the  Capitol  steps  the  address  he  had  prepared  for 
May  1,  1894. 

ON  TO  WASHINGTON 

(Tune:  "John  Brown's  Body") 

We're  headed  straight  for  Washington  with  leaders  brave  and  true, 
The  foremost  men,  the  mighty  men,  who  fight  the  Wall  Street  crew; 
They  lead  the  People's  Army  forth,  injustice  to  undo, 
And  truth  goes  marching  on. 

refrain:  Glory,  glory,  hallelujah! 
Glory,  glory,  hallelujah! 
Glory,  glory,  hallelujah! 
And  truth  goes  marching  on. 

—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 
COXEY  ARMY 

(Tune:  "Marching  Through  Georgia") 

Bring  the  good  old  bugle,  boys,  we  want  to  tell  in  song 
The  Coxey  Army's  marching  from  the  town  of  Massillon; 
Soon  they'll  meet  old  Grover,  a  good  four  million  strong 
Marching  in  the  Coxey  Army. 

refrain:  Hurrah!  Hurrah!  We  want  the  jubilee! 

Hurrah!  Hurrah!  Hard  working  men  are  we! 

We  only  want  a  chance  to  live  in  this  land  of  the  free 

Marching  in  the  Coxey  Army. 


The  national  grass  plot  -  63 

Cozey  is  our  leader,  from  the  state  of  Ohio, 
When  we  get  to  Washington,  he'll  let  the  legislators  know 
That  we  are  all  working  men,  and  not  tramps  "on  the  go," 
Marching  in  the  Coxey  Army. 

—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 


THE  NATIONAL  GRASS  PLOT 

(Tune:  "Star  Spangled  Banner") 

O  say,  can  you  see,  by  the  dawn's  early  light, 

That  grass  plot  so  dear  to  the  hearts  of  us  all? 

Is  it  green  yet  and  fair,  in  well-nurtured  plight, 

Unpolluted  by  the  Coxeyites'  hated  foot-fall? 

Midst  the  yells  of  police,  and  swish  of  clubs  through  the  air, 

We  could  hardly  tell  if  our  grass  was  still  there. 

But  the  green  growing  grass  doth  in  triumph  yet  wave, 

And  the  gallant  police  with  their  buttons  of  brass 

Will  sure  make  the  Coxeyites  keep  off  the  grass. 

—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 

Hard  times 

Depression  years  tend  not  only  to  paralyze  industry, 
but  also  to  induce  debility  in  the  people  who  live  through  them. 
But  the  people  have  staffs  to  support  them  in  time  of  crisis;  one 
of  these  is  song.  When  hard  times  come,  songs  become  more  plain- 
tive, but  even  this  expression  acts  as  a  catharsis  for  the  singer,  and 
purges  him  of  despondency.  Songs  of  protest  are  rarely  despair 
songs;  there  is  always  that  feeling  of  anger  that  eventually  leads 
the  singer  and  the  cause  for  which  he  is  fighting  out  of  the  darkness. 
All  depressions  produced  songs  of  lament,  and  songs  of  laughter 
in  the  depths  of  misery;  the  depression  of  1932  brought  forth 
scores  of  songs  with  titles  like  "CWA  Blues,"  "Workin'  for  the 
PWA,"  "Depression  Blues,"  "Unemployment  Stomp,"  "One  Dime 
Blues,"  "Don't  Take  Away  My  PWA,"  "CCC  Blues,"  "NRA 
Blues,"  and  "Welfare  Blues";  but  the  most  famous  perhaps  is 
"Beans,  Bacon,  and  Gravy."  There  are  at  least  three  well-docu- 
mented claims  for  the  authorship  of  this  song,  but  all  that  can 
be  said  with  certainty  of  its  origin  is  that  it  was  born  of  hard  times. 


64  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

BEANS,  BACON,  AND  GRAVY 


^m 


^ 


ujwjija 


iv 


--& 


±ji 


■++i 


£8^fffi 


■*= — K — g--,     «^    it— g  - 


J  J.     -J- J- 


■  !'<« 


i  lo-       gat: 


JTOJ'JbiiMJj^ 


ywtn 


m 


m  4  m 


F 


I  was  born  long  ago,  in  1894, 

And  I've  seen  many  a  panic,  I  will  own; 

I've  been  hungry,  I've  been  cold, 

And  now  I'm  growing  old, 

But  the  worst  I've  seen  is  1932. 

refrain:  Oh,  those  beans,  bacon,  and  gravy, 
They  almost  drive  me  crazy, 
I  eat  them  till  I  see  them  in  my  dreams, 

In  my  dreams; 
When  I  wake  up  in  the  morning, 
And  another  day  is  dawning, 
Yes,  I  know  I'll  have  another  mess  of  beans. 

We  congregate  each  morning 

At  the  county  barn  at  dawning, 

And  everyone  is  happy,  so  it  seems; 

But  when  our  work  is  done 

We  fde  in  one  by  one, 

And  thank  the  Lord  for  one  more  mess  of  beans. 

We  have  Hooverized  on  butter, 

For  milk  we've  only  water, 

And  I  haven't  seen  a  steak  in  many  a  day; 

As  for  pies,  cakes,  and  jellies, 

We  substitute  sow-bellies, 

For  which  we  work  the  county  road  each  day. 


Six  feet  of  earth  •  65 

//  there  ever  comes  a  time 

When  I  have  more  than  a  dime 

They  will  have  to  put  me  under  lock  and  key; 

For  they've  had  me  broke  so  long 

I  can  only  sing  this  song, 

Of  the  workers  and  their  misery. 

The  urge  to  complacency 

Many  semireligious  songs  perpetuate  the  beatitude 
"Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,"  which  modern  protestors  against  the  inequalities  of 
wealth  reject  so  vociferously.  The  phrase  "Six  feet  of  earth  makes 
us  all  of  one  size"  is  a  popular  one  among  these  songs  of  terrestrial 
complacency.  The  following  broadside  is  a  nineteenth-century 
expression  of  the  theme;  a  late  example  is  the  rural  jukebox 
favorite  "They  Can  Only  Fill  One  Grave,"  composed  by  Roy 
Acuff,  popular  hillbilly  entertainer  and  unsuccessful  candidate 
for  the  governorship  of  Tennessee. 

SIX  FEET  OF  EARTH 

/  will  sing  you  a  song  of  this  world  and  its  ways, 

And  of  the  many  strange  people  we  meet, 

From  the  rich  man  who  rolls  in  his  carriage  and  four, 

To  the  poor  starving  man  on  the  street. 

There  is  many  a  man,  in  tatters  and  rags, 

We  should  never  attempt  to  despise, 

For  think  of  the  adage  and  remember,  kind  friends, 

That  six  feet  of  earth  makes  us  all  of  one  size. 

There  is  the  rich  man  with  thousands  to  spare  if  he  choose, 

Though  he  haughtily  holds  up  his  head, 

And  he  thinks  he's  above  the  mechanic  who  toils, 

And  is  honestly  earning  his  bread; 

Though  his  gold  and  his  jewels  he  can't  take  away, 

To  that  land  up  above  when  he  dies, 

For  death  levels  all  and  conclusively  shows, 

That  six  feet  of  earth  makes  us  all  of  one  size. 

There  is  many  a  coat  that  is  tattered  and  torn, 

Yet  covers  a  brave  manly  heart, 

But  although  he's  not  dressed  like  his  neighbor  in  silk, 

Society  keeps  them  apart. 

On  one  fortune  smiles,  while  on  the  other  it  frowns, 


66  ■  American  folksongs  of  protest 

No  matter  what  venture  he  tries, 

But  death  calls  them  to  the  grave  in  the  end, 

And  six  feet  of  earth  makes  them  all  of  one  size. 

*         *         * 

—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 


2.  Negro  songs  of  protest 


Look  down  dot  lonesome  road! 

Look  down! 

De  way  are  dark  an'  col' 

Dey  makes  me  weep,  dey  makes  me  moan, 

All  cause  my  love  are  sold. 


The  social  background 

"A  nigger  sings  about  two  things— what  he  eats  and 
his  woman."1  Euphemistically  rephrased  and  with  some  extension 
of  definite  bounds  made  to  include  spirituals,  this  critical  dictum 
of  a  Southern  plantation  overseer  represents  the  opinion  of  most 
people  today  in  regard  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  Negro  folksong. 
Even  scholars  who  believe  that  there  are  other  motivations  for  the 
composition  of  folksong  than  the  satisfaction  of  the  need  for  enter- 
tainment and  diversion,  are  not  agreed  on  explanations  for  the 
comparative  paucity  of  songs  embodying  protest  and  discontent 
from  an  ethnic  group  whose  history  in  America  for  the  past  three 
hundred  years  has  been  a  story  of  almost  continuous  oppression 

1  John  A.  Lomax,  "Self-Pity  in  Negro  Folk  Songs,"  The  Nation,  vol.  105  (August  9, 
1917),  p.  141. 

67 


68  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

by  the  dominant  majority.  Hundreds  of  abolitionist  songs  ex- 
pressing all  gradations  of  protest  from  empty  rhetoric  to  bitterness 
have  been  preserved  from  a  group  to  whom  slavery  was  at  worst 
a  vicarious  grievance,  but  from  the  Negro  himself  very  few  songs 
other  than  his  spirituals  remain.  Opinions  differ  as  to  how  much 
expression  of  hatred,  revenge,  and  protest  is  to  be  found  in  the 
spirituals.  One  scholar  said  of  these,  "Nowhere  in  these  songs  can 
we  trace  any  suggestion  of  hatred  or  revenge,  two  qualities  usually 
developed  under  slavery."2  Other  observers,  like  Sterling  Brown 
and  John  Lovell,  Jr.,  are  convinced  that  the  spirituals  are  symbolic 
expressions  of  conscious  protest;  some,  represented  by  Lawrence 
Gellert,  believe  that  the  Negro  has  concealed  his  songs  of  discon- 
tent from  white  listeners  whom  he  distrusts;  a  few,  like  Alan 
Lomax,  maintain  that  all  Negro  song  is  protest— not  the  superficial 
"You-hurt-me-I-hate-you-I-fight-you"  sort  of  thing,  but  a  deeper, 
more  profound  manifestation  of  discontent  whose  meaning  is 
often  hidden  from  the  singer  himself,  so  that  it  becomes  almost 
subconscious.  And  of  course  there  remains  on  the  other  hand  a 
considerable  body  of  opinion  which  holds  that  there  is  very  little 
genuine  protest  in  Negro  song— spirituals  and  secular  pieces— 
except  that  which  has  been  stimulated  by  the  catalytic  agent  of 
white  agitation. 

On  the  basis  of  the  insufficient  evidence  that  remains  from  the 
early  periods  of  American  Negro  history,  it  is  probably  impossible 
to  find  where  in  this  morass  of  conflicting  theories  the  truth  lies. 
The  best  that  may  be  hoped  for  is  a  syncretism  of  the  more  logical 
contentions;  but  even  this  goal  may  not  be  achieved  without  a 
reexamination  of  the  acculturation  of  the  Negro  during  slavery 
times.  There  can  be  no  social  or  economic  protest  without  aware- 
ness of  imposed  oppression;  sometimes  this  awareness  comes  from 
without,  sometimes— and  this  process  is  much  slower— it  grows 
spontaneously  out  of  innate  understanding.  Whether  the  Negro 
under  slavery  had  attained  the  level  of  cultural  orientation  neces- 
sary before  protest  can  become  articulate  must  be  determined 
before  the  search  for  songs  of  protest  can  be  justified.  Traditionally 
it  has  been  supposed  that  the  enslaved  Negro  was  congenitally 
submissive,  and  therefore  he  willingly  accepted  economic  security 

2  Wilson  R.   Howe,  "The   Negro   and   His  Songs,"  Southern    Workman,  vol.   51 
(August,  1922),  p.  382. 


Negro  songs  of  protest  *  69 

and  paternalistic  solicitude  in  exchange  for  personal  liberty.  Too 
often,  however,  the  statement  of  this  belief  emanates  from  authors 
who  tacitly  concur  with  the  Southerner  who  told  Lawrence  Gellert, 
"Niggers  are  a  happy  and  contented  lot.  Find  me  one  that  ain't 
and  I'll  give  you  a  ten-dollar  bill,  suh.  Worth  it  to  string  up  the 
biggity  black  so-and-so."  Life  among  the  magnolias  was  for  the 
slave  far  from  being  an  idyllic  existence.  Economic  security  was 
assured  only  to  the  best  workers  (whose  skill,  strength,  and  willing- 
ness increased  the  expected  optimum  work-production  unit  and 
conversely  decreased  the  food  and  clothing  allotment  for  the 
weaker  hands,  women,  and  children);  for  the  others,  bare  sub- 
sistence was  often  so  uncertain  that  extra-legal  appropriation  of 
food  and  clothing— "taking"  to  the  slaves,  "stealing"  to  the  masters 
—became  so  general  that  it  was  considered  by  the  slaveholders  to 
be  a  racial  trait  of  the  Negro.  When  Mr.  Bones  answered  "Nobody 
in  here  but  us  chickens,  boss,"  his  joke  had  for  many  in  his  au- 
dience social  implications  too  deep  for  laughter. 

OV  massa's  chicken 
Live  in  the  tree; 
Chicken  never  roost 
Too  high  fo'  me. 

Went  out  strollin' 
See  what  I  can  see; 
Chicken  never  roost 
Too  high  fo'  me.3 

With  every  fluctuation  in  the  national  or  international  business 
index,  the  suffering  of  the  Negro  slave  increased.  In  time  of  de- 
pression or  panic  he  was  the  first  to  feel  deprivation;  in  time  of 
prosperity  his  productivity  was  forced  higher  so  that  the  master 
could  take  advantage  of  favorable  business  conditions.  The  oft- 
repeated  statement  that  it  was  economically  unwise  for  the  slave- 
holder to  mistreat  his  slaves  just  as  it  would  be  economically 
unwise  for  him  to  destroy  farm  equipment  or  mistreat  domestic 
animals  appeals  only  to  superficial  logic,  for  the  analogy  is  invalid. 
The  slave  was  neither  a  plow  nor  a  mule;  he  was  a  rational  being, 
and  like  his  fellow  intelligent  human  beings,  he  was  in  a  state 
of  constant  dissatisfaction  with  his  immediate  condition.   Kind 

3  Howard  W.  Odum  and  Guy  B.  Johnson,  Negro  Workaday  Songs,  Chapel  Hill, 
!929- 


70  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

treatment  by  his  master  would  progressively  raise  the  standard  of 
his  expectation  until  eventually  the  structure  of  the  Southern 
social  system  would  be  undermined;  consequently  the  preservation 
of  the  slavocracy  depended  on  the  slaveholders'  ability  to  keep  the 
slaves'  expected  share  of  the  common  good— the  Carlyleian  Com- 
mon Denominator— as  small  as  possible.  In  still  another  way  the 
difference  between  the  Negro  and  the  mule  made  deliberate  mis- 
treatment an  expediency:  Punishment  by  deprivation  or  curtail- 
ment of  food  or  clothing  allotments,  separation  of  families,  and 
unusual  corporal  punishment  became  for  the  slaves  direct  incen- 
tives for  increased  production  and  more  abject  obedience;  a  mule 
similarly  treated  would  not  react.  The  psychological  effects  of 
frustrating  the  natural  rebelliousness  of  the  human  animal  by 
systematized  cruelty  were  of  no  concern  to  the  slaveholder. 

The  fact  that  the  Negro,  in  many  cases,  responded  as  expected 
has  been  interpreted  as  proof  of  submissiveness  as  a  Negro  racial 
characteristic.  This  belief  is  supported  also  by  the  fact  that  the 
Negro,  rather  than  the  Indian,  became  the  American  slave.4  But 
what  has  been  taken  for  submissiveness  might  have  been  an  intelli- 
gence more  highly  developed  than  the  Indian's;  intelligence  to 
understand  that  a  tree  must  bend  in  a  gale,  or  break.  The  Indian 
refused  to  bend,  and  thereby  nearly  succeeded  in  exterminating 
himself.  The  West  African  Negro  at  the  time  of  his  exploitation 
had  attained  a  relatively  high  degree  of  civilization,  and  was  too 
far  advanced  culturally  to  accept  without  complaint  enslavement 
as  his  divinely  ordained  status  among  men. 

The  necessity  of  keeping  the  incipient  rebelliousness  of  a  sub- 
jugated intelligent  people  under  constant  control  was  recognized 
by  the  slavocrats,  who,  blind  as  they  may  have  been  to  the  inherent 
rights  of  man,  were  not  blind  to  economic  and  social  expediency. 
Free  assembly  and  communication  among  slaves,  which  would 
have  led  to  the  exchange  of  ideas  and  dissemination  of  the  seeds 
of  revolt,  above  all  else  had  to  be  prevented,  and  so  a  number  of 
regulations  were  instituted  which  made  the  slave  a  prisoner  on 
his  master's  plantation.  Not  only  was  he  forbidden  to  buy  or  sell 
without  his  master's  permission,  to  carry  arms,  to  vote,  or  to  testify 

4  Early  attempts  to  enslave  the  Indian  failed  because  of  his  total  lack  of  submis- 
siveness. Not  only  did  the  Indian  prefer  to  die  rather  than  work  in  slavery,  but  he 
frequently  escaped,  and  unlike  the  escaped  Negro,  returned  in  strength  to  kill  his 
former  master. 


Negro  songs  of  protest  *  71 

in  any  case  involving  a  white  man,  but  he  was  not  allowed  to 
meet  with  his  fellow  slaves  unless  a  white  man  were  present. 
Movement  beyond  plantation  limits  without  a  pass,  signed  by  his 
master,  stating  the  slave's  reason  for  being  abroad  and  the  time 
when  he  had  to  return,  guaranteed  for  the  offending  slave  a  lash- 
ing from  the  armed  bands  of  patrollers  who  rode  circuit  regularly 
throughout  the  South.  These  prohibitions  and  others  were  ex- 
tended to  curtail  the  activities  of  free  Negroes  (who  were  a  con- 
stant source  of  uneasiness  to  the  slavocrats),  and  had  provisions 
also  to  punish  whites  who  were  in  any  way  responsible  for  incite- 
ment to  unrest  among  the  slaves.5  In  1852  Louisiana  passed  a 
law  stating: 

Whosoever  shall  write,  print,  publish,  or  distribute  any  thing  hav- 
ing a  tendency  to  produce  discontent  among  the  free  coloured  popula- 
tion of  the  state,  shall,  upon  conviction,  be  sentenced  to  imprisonment 
at  hard  labor  for  life,  or  suffer  death,  at  the  discretion  of  the  court.6 

"Incitement"  was  capable  of  the  widest  interpretation:  to  teach 
a  slave  to  read  and  write,  for  example,  in  many  parts  of  the  South 
visited  the  betrayer  of  his  class  with  severe  punishment.7  Even 
religion,  which  the  slaveholders  encouraged  for  its  efficacy  in  sub- 
limating protest  and  discontent,  was  censored;  preachers  were 
enjoined  to  deliver  but  one  text,  Be  obedient,  and  to  relate  it  to 
temporal  life  by  illustrating  the  godliness  of  loyalty  to  the  master. 

Not  only  sublimation  of  protest  was  consciously  striven  for  by 
the  slaveholders,  but  misdirection  of  protest  also.  The  discontent 
of  the  slaves,  which  simmered  ominously  despite  the  many  con- 
trols set  upon  it  by  the  masters,  was  turned  in  upon  itself  by  the 
building  up  of  an  artificial  caste  system  in  which  domestic  workers 
(invariably  the  most  tractable  of  the  slaves)  were  favored  with 
better  food,  clothing,  and  shelter,  and  placed  in  semiofficial  as- 

5  The  general  laws,  regulations,  and  restrictions  cited  here  are  a  conflation  of 
slave  laws,  which  varied  from  state  to  state.  In  some  states  no  provisions  were  made 
prohibiting  some  phases  of  slave  activity,  but  usually  local  ordinances  made  up  the 
lack.  In  any  case,  it  is  certain  that  "The  dominant  race  in  the  South  depended 
more  upon  expediency  than  upon  fine-spun  legal  enactments  in  their  dealings  with 
the  inferior."— H.  M.  Henry,  The  Police  Control  of  the  Slave  in  South  Carolina, 
Emory,  Va.,  1914,  p.  134. 

6  George  M.  Stroud,  A  Sketch  of  the  Laws  Relating  to  Slavery  in  the  Several  States 
of  the  United  States  of  America,  Philadelphia,  1856,  p.  249. 

7  Slave  narratives  offer  evidence  that  persons  who  taught  reading  to  Negroes  were 
in  danger  of  losing  their  lives.  E.g.,  see  B.  A.  Botkin,  Lay  My  Burden  Down,  Chicago, 
1945.  P-  50- 


72  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

cendency  over  the  common  (and  less  pliant)  field  workers.  A 
further  hint  of  the  instability  of  slavery  is  evident  in  the  fact  that 
the  slavocrats  went  so  far  as  to  channel  the  slaves'  discontent 
against  other  whites— poor  whites,  to  be  sure,  but  whites  neverthe- 
less. It  was  more  than  mere  economic  expediency  that  drew  recruits 
for  the  hated  "paterollers"  from  the  poor  whites,  or  "white  trash," 
as  many  of  this  class  are  known  even  today  by  the  Negroes.  This 
particular  channel  of  protest  misdirection  was  eminently  success- 
ful; Negro  folklore  and  folksong  abound  with  expressions  like 

Little  nigger  baby,  black  face  an'  shinin'  eye, 

Jes'  as  good  as  de  po'  white  trash  in  de  sweet  bye  an'  bye. 

It  is  perhaps  indicative  of  the  number  of  protest  songs  that 
have  been  lost  through  white  suppression  that  there  is  a  consid- 
erable stock  of  Negro  songs  still  current  directing  insult  against 
the  poor  white,  songs  that  were  more  likely  to  have  been  tolerated 
than  proscribed  by  the  slavocrats.  Throughout  the  South  at  the 
present  time  considerate  Negroes  will  not  sing  "Oh,  My  God, 
Them  'Taters"  in  the  presence  of  poor  whites  for  fear  of  hurting 
their  feelings: 

"oh,  my  god,  them  'taters" 


rrrJirj-    irrrJirj- 


wm 


J   J 


-•" — m- 


~^~ 


Negro  songs  of  protest  *  73 

Paw  didn't  raise  no  corn  this  year; 
Paw  didn't  raise  no  'maters; 
Had  bad  luck  with  the  cabbage  crop, 
But  Oh,  my  God!  them  'taters! 

Sixty  cent  pertaters! 

Nigh  six-bit  pertaters! 

Had  bad  luck  with  the  cabbage  crop, 

But  Oh,  my  God!  them  'taters! 

The  significance  of  this  song,  not  immediately  apparent,  is  that 
the  Negro,  though  frequently  in  a  worse  economic  plight,  could 
ridicule  the  poor  white  who  had  to  pour  his  energies  into  a  worn- 
out  farm  which  could  produce  nothing  but  potatoes.8  The  hy- 
pocrisy of  the  poor  whites,  who  expressed  contempt  for  the  Negro 
while  pursuing  his  women,  is  reflected  in  song  also: 

Lookin'  for  my  wife  this  mornin' 
Where  do  you  think  I  found  her? 
Down  in  the  middle  of  the  cotton  field 
With  the  white  boys  all  around  her. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Negro  ante-bellum  South  was 
never  without  unrest,  not  all  of  which  could  be  sublimated  into 
religion  or  misdirected  into  internecine  class  hatred  and  despite 
for  outcasts  of  the  dominant  race.  Of  the  numerous  outlets  for 
the  great  body  of  residual  discontent  the  most  overt  were  sabotage, 
escape,  and  revolt,  all  of  which  required  a  higher  degree  of  under- 
standing than  is  necessary  for  the  singing  of  songs  of  protest. 
Sabotage  was  extremely  common,  and  manifested  itself  in  various 
ways,  from  simple  hoe-breaking  to  self-mutilation,  infanticide,  and 
suicide.9  No  accurate  figures  exist  to  show  how  many  slaves  suc- 
ceeded in  escaping,  but  certainly  the  number  exceeded  one  hun- 

8  Concerning  Negro  songs  of  ridicule,  Professor  Guy  B.  Johnson  suggests  the  pos- 
sibility of  tangential  development  of  American  Negro  protest  songs  from  a  carry-over 
of  African  songs  of  ridicule,  which  had  attained  a  definite  pattern  in  native  folk 
culture.  There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  unquestionable  survival  of  this  genre  in 
Negro  songs  of  protest,  however. 

9  A  folk-memory  of  slavery  sabotage  was  discovered  by  Lawrence  Gellert  a  few 
years  ago  in  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Seeing  two  large  Negro  boys  handling  a  third  rather 
roughly,  he  intervened,  only  to  be  told  by  the  boy  on  the  bottom,  "That's  all  right, 
mister,  we's  jes'  playin'  'spoilin'  de  'gyptians."  "Despoiling  the  Egyptians"  was  slave- 
lingo  for  destroying  the  masters'  property. 


74  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

dred  thousand.  Herbert  Aptheker,  in  his  Negro  Slave  Revolts  in 
the  United  States,  records  more  than  250  reported  slave  insurrec- 
tions, some  of  which  attained  astounding  magnitude.  Gabriel's 
Conspiracy  in  1800,  for  example,  involved,  according  to  one 
observer,  an  estimated  fifty  thousand  slaves.  Some  historians  have 
disparaged  the  Negro  slave  revolts  because  they  were  in  most  cases 
minor  and  in  all  cases  unsuccessful.  But  the  amazing  thing  about 
these  revolts,  in  view  of  the  restrictions  imposed  on  the  slaves  by 
the  masters,  is  not  that  they  occurred  extensively,  but  that  they  oc- 
curred at  all.  One  wonders  how  the  awareness  of  oppression,  which 
is  prerequisite  to  this  kind  of  violent  protest,  became  so  wide- 
spread. There  is  no  question  that  the  restrictions  and  mistreatments 
inflicted  by  the  slaveholders  did  much  to  engender  active  unrest 
where  only  passive  discontent  existed,  but  it  is  equally  certain 
that  agitation  came  from  outside— from  Southern  white  antislavists, 
from  the  quarter-million  free  Negroes  in  the  South,  from  Northern 
abolitionists,  white  and  Negro.10 

Despite  this  evidence  of  seething  unrest,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed 
that  all  the  slaves  were  in  a  state  of  incipient  revolt.  Just  as  the 
labor  force  of  the  United  States  today  abounds  in  "scissorbills,"11 
so  the  ante-bellum  South  abounded  in  what  the  discrimination- 
conscious  Negro  derisively  calls  "handkerchief-heads."12  Published 
slave  narratives  show  that  there  was  at  least  as  much  complacency 
as  discontent  among  the  slaves.13  And  it  should  be  remembered 
that  almost  every  slave  revolt  was  suppressed  through  the  aid  of 
a  treacherous  slave  who  betrayed  his  fellows.  Perhaps  the  slave 
culture  in  the  early  part  of  the  nineteenth  century  could  be  com- 
pared to  fourteenth-century  England,  with  part  of  the  population 
consciously  or  unconsciously  resigned  to  hardship  and  misery  on 
earth  as  a  trial  to  prove  their  worthiness  for  heaven,  and  a  smaller, 
more  militant  group,  better  oriented  to  the  wider  aspects  of  human 
relationships,  disseminating  the  revolutionary  ideas  of  Piers  Plow- 
man and  the  Lollards.  No  all-inclusive  generalizations  can  be  made 

10  More  than  a  score  of  Negro  journals  and  papers  were  published  before  the 
Emancipation  Proclamation. 

n  Complacent  workers  who  refuse  to  join  the  union,  or  who  become  "popsickle 
men,"  members  of  company  unions. 

12  Negroes  obsequious  to  whites. 

13  See  B.  A.  Botkin,  Lay  My  Burden  Down;  Bernard  Robb,  Welcum  Hinges; 
Orland  Kay  Armstrong,  Old  Massa's  People. 


Negro  songs  of  protest  *  75 

concerning  the  extent  of  unrest  among  the  slaves;  all  that  can  be 
advanced  with  any  confidence  is  a  theory  of  acculturation  which 
finds  the  ante-bellum  Negro  protest  movement  neither  invariable 
nor  continuous,  but  only  representative  of  the  controlling  ma- 
jority. With  the  exceptions  that  this  conclusion  implies  in  mind, 
it  may  safely  be  concluded  that  the  prevailing  reaction  to  slavery 
among  the  Negroes  was  one  of  discontent,  unrest,  and  protest. 

Where  then  are  the  songs  that  in  other  cultures,  and  in  other 
phases  of  our  culture,  chronicle  the  discontent  of  the  oppressed 
group?  Such  violent  upheavals  as  the  slave  revolts  should  have 
produced  many  songs  and  ballads,14  yet  next  to  nothing  remains. 
The  song  about  Nat  Turner,  unlike  the  other  songs  in  this  study, 
is  not  a  typical  representative  of  a  large  group,  but  is  virtually 
anomalous. 

The  spirituals 

The  most  obvious  place  to  begin  searching  for  Negro 
songs  of  protest  is  in  the  spirituals,  the  largest  and  most  stable 
body  of  Negro  song  preserved  from  slavery  days;  but  of  the  ap- 
proximately one  thousand  spirituals  extant,  only  a  handful— and 
these  from  the  Civil  War  period— contain  any  unequivocal  overt 
protest  against  the  system  of  slavery  or  the  oppressors  who  ad- 
ministered it. 

It  has  been  mentioned  that  some  students  of  Negro  folksong 
maintain  that  the  spirituals  were  full  of  deliberately  hidden  double 
meanings,  consciously  inserted  by  their  composers,  and  recognized 
by  all  the  Negroes  who  sang  them.  This  theory  was  first  advanced 
by  Sterling  Brown15  who  buttressed  his  arguments  with  quotations 
from  the  writings  of  Frederick  Douglass  and  Harriet  Tubman  who, 
it  should  be  noted,  were  hardly  typical  slaves.  John  Lovell,  Jr.,  has 
been  perhaps  the  most  outspoken  proponent  of  this  interpretation 
of  the  spiritual,  and  has  offered  the  best  evidence  to  support  it, 
though  his  arguments  are  not  always  impregnable.  Few  readers, 
for  instance,  will  see  in  "nearly  every  spiritual"  the  three  leitmotifs 
which  he  finds  there:  "the  Negro's  obsession  for  freedom,  .  .  .  the 
slaves'  desire  for  justice  in  the  judgment  upon  his  betrayers  which 

14  Although  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  Negro  talent  for  folksong  composition 
lies  in  other  directions  than  the  ballad. 

15  Sterling  Brown,  The  Negro  Poetry  and  Drama,  Washington,  1937. 


76  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

some  might  call  revenge,"  and  "the  slaves'  tactic  of  battle,  the 
strategy  by  which  he  expected  to  gain  an  eminent  future." 16  Lovell 
offers  this  as  a  typical  interpretation  of  a  spiritual,  in  this  case, 
"I  Got  Shoes": 

"When  I  get  to  heav'm"  means  when  I  get  free.  It  is  a  Walt  Whitman 
"I,"  meaning  any  slave,  present  or  future.  If  I  personally  don't,  my 
children  or  grandchildren  or  my  friend  on  the  other  side  of  the  planta- 
tion will.  What  a  glorious  sigh  these  people  breathed  when  one  of 
their  group  slipped  through  to  freedom!  What  a  tragic  intensity  they 
felt  when  one  was  shot  down  trying  to  escape!  So,  the  group  speaks 
in  the  group  way,  all  for  one,  one  for  all.  "When  I  get  to  heav'm, 
gonna  put  on  my  shoes,"  that  means  he  has  talents,  abilities,  programs 
manufactured,  ready  to  wear.  On  Douglass'  plantation  the  slaves 
bossed,  directed,  charted  everything— horse-shoeing,  cart-mending,  plow- 
repairing,  coopering,  grinding,  weaving,  "all  completely  done  by 
slaves."  But  he  has  much  finer  shoes  than  that  which  he  has  no  choice 
to  wear.  He  does  not  mean  that  he  will  outgrow  work,  but  simply  that 
he  will  make  his  work  count  for  something,  which  slavery  prevents. 
When  he  gets  a  chance,  he  says,  he  is  going  to  "shout  all  over  God's 
heav'm"— make  every  section  of  his  community  feel  his  power.  He 
knows  he  can  do  it.17 

This  is  certainly  a  plausible  interpretation  of  the  spiritual,  un- 
deniably stimulating,  and  just  possibly  valid,  but  there  is  a  good 
deal  of  speciousness  in  it  too.  The  first  sentence  is  plain  enough  in 
significance— "When  I  get  to  heav'm"  means  when  I  get  free— and 
not  too  difficult  to  apprehend.  But  to  continue  probing  for  hidden 
meanings  like  this  excerpt  was  utterly  beyond  the  capacity  of 
most  slaves.  To  comprehend  such  symbolism  as  is  contained  in 
the  last  four  sentences  of  Lovell's  interpretation  even  after  the 
meaning  had  been  explained  would  impute  to  the  slave  an  under- 
standing of  literary  symbolism  possessed  by  few  people  today 
who  are  trained  to  recognize  such  buried  meanings.  It  makes  of 
Uncle  Tom  an  enigmatist  as  skillful  as  Dylan  Thomas.  If  Lovell's 
conclusions  are  accepted,  a  theme  of  symbolic  protest  could  be 
found  in  every  spiritual,  but  too  many  spirituals  and  Negro  re- 
ligious songs  are  transparent  conflations  of  biblical  text  and  tem- 
poral application  to  make  this  theory  tenable.  Even  the  story  of 

16  John  Lovell,  Jr.,  "The  Social  Implications  of  the  Negro  Spiritual,"  Journal  of 
Negro  Education,  vol.  8  (October,  1939),  p.  640. 
n  Ibid.,  p.  641. 


Negro  songs  of  protest  •  77 

Dives  and  Lazarus— made  to  order  for  social  implication— ends 
with  this  stanza: 

Now  sinners  I  have  sung  to  you 
This  awful  dreadful  story; 
Believe,  believe,  this  record  true, 
And  strive  to  get  to  glory. 
Tormenting  Divers  warns  us  all 
And  Jesus  now  is  calling. 
Oh!  hasten  to  the  gospel  call 
And  thus  be  save  from  ruin.ls 

Of  course  the  white  influence  in  this  song  is  obvious,  but  as 
Pullen  Jackson  has  conclusively  shown,  the  Negro  spiritual,  instead 
of  being  purely  of  Negro  origin  as  formerly  believed,  is  a  selective 
adaptation  of  white  spirituals,  which  in  turn  derive  from  earlier 
and  more  conscious  religious  art.  Since  this  adaptation  seems  in 
most  cases  to  have  consisted  mainly  of  simplification  of  rime— 

//  you  get  there  before  I  do 

You  may  tell  them  I  am  coming 

of  the  white  spiritual  becomes  in  the  Negro  adaptation, 

//  you  get  there  before  I  do 

Tell  all  my  friends  I'm  coming  too 

the  fact  of  their  white  origin  would  preclude  the  possibility  of 
any  extensive  and  deliberate  imbedding  of  symbolic  meaning. 

But  it  is  just  as  rash  to  conclude  that  there  is  no  symbolism  in 
the  spirituals  as  to  state  that  they  are  all  symbolic.  The  spirituals 
were  all  things  to  all  men;  of  three  Negroes  singing  "I  Got  Shoes," 
one  Negro  might  interpret  the  shoes  as  his  latent  abilities,  mordant 
in  a  slave  society;  another  might  see  himself  literally  strolling 
through  heaven  in  golden  footwear;  for  the  third  singer  the  word 
"shoes"  might  not  arouse  any  image  in  the  extensional  world 
whatever.  As  observers  from  a  distance  of  a  century  or  more,  we 
are  in  no  position  to  make  arbitrary  interpretations;  we  are  just 
as  likely,  from  this  distance,  to  be  as  wrong  as  the  Northerner  who 

ig  Reprinted   by   permission   of   Dodd,    Mead,   &   Co.,    from   More   Mellows,    by 
R.  Emmet  Kennedy,  copyright  1931  by  R.  Emmet  Kennedy. 


78  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

without  any  knowledge  of  the  economic  condition  the  song  reflects, 
tries  to  find  the  hidden  implication  in  "Oh  my  God  Them  'Taters." 
In  favor  of  the  theory  of  hidden  meaning  in  the  spirituals,  it 
must  be  said  that  the  Southern  slavocrats  thought  that  some  of 
them  at  least  carried  a  message  which  had  to  be  suppressed.  Of 
the  evidently  innocuous  spiritual  "We  Shall  Be  Free"  (also  titled 
"My  Father,  How  Long?")  Thomas  Higginson,  one  of  the  early 
collectors  of  spirituals,  wrote: 

For  singing  this  the  negroes  had  been  put  in  jail  in  Georgetown, 
S.  C.  at  the  outbreak  of  the  Rebellion.  "We'll  soon  be  free"  was  too 
dangerous  an  assertion,  and  though  the  chant  was  an  old  one,  it  was 
no  doubt  sung  with  redoubled  emphasis  during  the  new  events.  "De 
Lord  will  call  us  home"  was  evidently  thought  to  be  a  symbolic  verse; 
for,  as  a  little  drummer  boy  explained  it  to  me,  showing  all  his  white 
teeth  as  he  sat  in  the  moonlight  by  the  door  of  my  tent,  "Dey  tink 
de  Lord  mean  for  say  de  Yankees."19 

Even  this  statement  cannot  be  taken  unreservedly  as  evidence 
of  conscious  symbolism,  for  Allen,  commenting  on  the  same  spir- 
itual and  the  significance  which  its  words  had  for  the  citizens  of 
Georgetown,  says,  "In  this  case  the  suspicion  was  unfounded."20 
The  whites  in  this  case  may  have  been  frightened  by  a  phantom, 
like  the  army  censors  who  in  the  last  war  prohibited  the  mailing 
of  chess-game  moves  because  they  thought  that  the  apparently 
esoteric  symbols  were  secret  messages  of  a  spy  ring. 

Nevertheless  it  is  probable  that  the  Negroes  at  the  time  of  the 
Civil  War,  when  freedom  at  last  seemed  to  be  within  the  range 
of  hope,  reexamined  the  old  spirituals  and  songs  with  a  view  to 
finding  symbolic  application  behind  words  that  probably  had  only 
their  obvious  meaning  when  first  written.  In  any  event,  it  is  safer 
to  conclude  that  symbolism,  where  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  early 
spirituals,  is  ex  post  facto.  The  composition  of  spirituals  in  which 
the  symbolism  is  obvious,  or  in  which  the  protest  becomes  explicit, 
can  usually  be  attributed  to  the  Civil  War  era  when  manumission 
was  imminent,  and  the  slaves  were  therefore  less  fearful  of  intimi- 

19  Thomas  Wentworth  Higginson,  "Negro  Spirituals,"  Atlantic  Monthly,  vol.   19 
(June,  1867),  p.  691. 

20  William  Francis  Allen,  Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  New  York,  1867. 


Negro  songs  of  protest  *  79 

dation.  In  his  note  to  "Many  Thousands  Go"  ("No  More  Auction 
Block  for  Me")  Allen  says: 

A  song  to  which  the  rebellion  had  actually  given  rise.  This  was 
composed  by  nobody  knows  whom— though  it  was  the  most  recent 
doubtless  of  all  the  spirituals— and  had  been  sung  in  secret  to  avoid 
detection.  It  is  certainly  plaintive  enough.  The  peck  of  corn  and  pint 
of  salt  were  slavery's  rations. 

Many  spirituals  suggest  themselves  as  likely  vehicles  for  sym- 
bolism: "Go  Down,  Moses,"  and  "The  Lord  Delivered  Daniel," 
among  the  better-known  examples;  among  the  less  familiar  are  a 
number  of  spirituals  like  "Good  News,  Member,"  which  may  well 
have  been  used  to  report  the  success  of  an  escaped  slave's  flight 
via  the  Underground  Railroad: 

Good  news,  member,  good  news,  member; 
Don't  you  mind  what  Satan  say. 
Good  news,  member,  good  news,  member — 
/  heard  from  heaven  today. 

My  brudder  have  a  seat  and  I  am  glad, 
My  brudder  have  a  seat  and  I  am  glad, 
Good  news,  member,  good  news. 

My  Hawley  have  a  home  in  Paradise, 
My  Hawley  have  a  home  in  Paradise, 
Good  news,  member,  good  news. 

Similarly,  the  hope  to  escape  might  be  understood  by  spirituals 
of  which  "I  Want  to  Join  the  Band"  and  "Oh,  Brothers,  Don't  Get 
Weary"  are  typical: 

What  is  that  up  yonder  I  see? 
Two  little  angels  comin'  a'ter  me. 
I  want  to  join  the  band, 
I  want  to  join  the  band, 
I  want  to  join  the  band. 

Oh,  brothers,  don't  get  weary, 
Oh,  brothers,  don't  get  weary, 
Oh,  brothers,  don't  get  weary, 
We're  waiting  for  the  Lord. 


80  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

We'll  land  on  Canaan's  shore, 
We'll  land  on  Canaan's  shore, 
We'll  land  on  Canaan's  shore, 
We'll  rest  forever  more.21 

Though  there  may  be  some  question  concerning  the  extent  of 
symbolism  in  the  spirituals,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  sug- 
gestiveness  of  the  words  and  mood  was  limited  only  by  the  imagi- 
nation and  emotional  receptivity  of  the  listener.  "Run  to  Jesus" 
impresses  the  modern  white  reader  as  having  no  special  distinc- 
tion either  in  words  or  feeling,  yet  it  was  the  song  which  first 
suggested  to  Frederick  Douglass  the  thought  of  escaping  from 
slavery.22 

The  question  whether  the  spirituals  were  pregnant  with  sug- 
gestiveness  of  symbolism  is  actually  too  slight  an  aspect  of  the 
function  of  the  spiritual  as  an  outlet  for  Negro  sorrow  and  dis- 
content to  warrant  the  attention  that  has  been  given  it.  The  real 
value  of  the  spiritual  as  a  vehicle  for  emotional  relief  lay  in  its 
mood  and  tone  rather  than  in  its  words.  Du  Bois  calls  them  the 
Sorrow  Songs:  "They  are  the  music  of  an  unhappy  people,  of  the 
children  of  disappointment;  they  tell  of  death  and  suffering  and 
unvoiced  longing  toward  a  truer  world,  of  misty  wanderings  and 
hidden  ways."  23 

Significantly,  the  dominant  tone  of  the  music  is  sorrow,  with 
overtones  of  hope;  in  such  a  setting,  the  words  mean  little.  The 
lyrics  of  "I'm  Troubled  in  Mind"  are  in  a  biblical  way  adequate 
for  the  situation,  but  the  tremendous  empathic  response  which 
the  contributor  of  this  spiritual  said  it  evoked  doubtless  was 
elicited  by  the  music.24 

21  There  are  a  number  of  Going-to-Canaan  songs  and  spirituals  (see  end  of  this 
chapter  for  one  which  has  crossed  the  line  into  white  hillbilly  song).  Brown  and 
Lovell  interpret  Canaan  as  meaning  Canada,  but  until  the  Act  of  1850  which  con- 
solidated and  enforced  the  fugitive  slave  laws,  the  goal  of  the  Negro  was  the  other 
side  of  the  Ohio.  Canada  was  utterly  beyond  the  comprehension  of  the  majority 
of  escaped  slaves.  In  his  History  of  the  Underground  Railroad  in  Chester  and  the 
Neighboring  Counties  of  Pennsylvania,  R.  C.  Smedley  observes,  "The  idea  prevailed 
to  a  considerable  extent  among  the  slaves  that  when  they  crossed  the  Susquehanna 
they  were  on  free  ground,  and  were  safe"  (p.  48). 

22  J.  B.  T.  Marsh,  The  Story  of  the  Jubilee  Singers,  Boston,  1880,  p.  188. 

23  W.  E.  B.  Du  Bois,  The  Souls  of  Black  Folk,  Chicago,  1924,  p.  253. 

24  It  has  been  suggested  that  improvised  religious  songs  such  as  the  ring  shouts 
have  been  vehicles  for  protest.  But  for  the  ring  shout,  at  least,  there  does  not  seem 
to  be  any  possibility  of  secular  protest  finding  a  way  into  the  frenzied  religious 
fervor.  The  Negro  in  the  throes  of  a  ring  shout  is  not  thinking  of  temporal  woes. 


Walk  in  Joe  •  81 

Secular  songs 

Very  few  Negro  secular  songs  of  protest  have  been  pre- 
served from  before  the  Civil  War,  certainly  too  few  to  justify  any 
generalizations  except  those  which  may  be  based  on  songs  of 
later  origin  which  seem  to  derive  from  similar  ancestry.  It  is  not 
surprising  that  ante-bellum  secular  protest  songs— which  must  have 
existed  in  appreciable  number— have  vanished.  The  traditional 
ephemerality  of  Negro  secular  song,  the  restricted  communication 
among  the  slaves  (and  the  expediency  of  utilizing  the  few  oppor- 
tunities of  communication  for  messages  of  more  importance),  the 
severity  of  punishment  should  any  Negro  be  caught  singing  songs 
objectionable  to  the  whites,  the  inability  of  most  slaves  to  read 
and  write— all  combined  to  obviate  the  possibility  of  these  songs 
being  disseminated  to  an  extent  in  ante-bellum  days  sufficient  for 
them  to  have  become  traditional.  That  some  songs  of  protest 
existed  in  the  pre-Civil  War  era  is  indicated  by  the  imbedded— 
petrified— protest  found  in  many  of  the  minstrel  songs  which, 
though  debasements,  derived  ultimately  from  Negro  secular  songs. 

WALK  IN   JOE 

Black  my  boots  in  de  kitchen 

Sebenty-five  cents  to  de  quarter, 

Black  'em  wid  Day  &  Martin,  make  'em  shine, 

an'  dot  for  sartin 
Massa  sue  me  for  de  treason,  'kase  he  couldn't 

dat's  de  reason. 

Walk  in  Joe,  walk  in  Joe, 

Walk  in  Joe,  now  I'll  be  your  friend,  John; 

A  long  way  to  go  and  no  money  for  to  spend. 

Sheep's  meat  is  too  good  for  colored  people; 
Sheep's  meat  is  too  good  for  niggers; 
When  I  went  into  de  house,  no  one  dor  'cept  a  mouse 
Sittin'  by  de  fireplace,  dor  was  a  rat  eatin'  grease. 

—Broadside  in  Library  of  Congress. 

NIGGER  BE  A  NIGGER 

Nigger  be  a  nigger  whatever  you  do; 

Ties  red  rag  round  de  toe  of  his  shoe, 

Jerk  his  vest  on  over  his  coat, 

Snatch  his  britches  up  round  his  throat. 

God  make  a  nigger,  make  'im  in  de  night; 

Make  'im  in  a  hurry  an'  forgot  to  paint  'im  white. 


82  '  American  folksongs  of  protest 

The  process  of  imbedding  Negro  protest  into  blackface  min- 
strel ridicule  is  seen  in  the  two  versions  of  a  song  whose  refrain, 
beginning  with  "Oh,  it's  hard  to  be  a  nigger,"  is  the  nucleus 
around  which  a  ring  of  maverick  stanzas  revolve.  The  first  is 
obviously  far  from  the  original,  but  still  further  from  the  second, 
a  minstrel  song  become  a  children's  rime  (submitted  by  a  Penn- 
sylvania white  informant): 

White  man  goes  to  college, 
Nigger  goes  to  fiel'; 
White  man  learns  to  read  an'  write, 
Nigger  learns  to  steal. 

refrain:  Oh,  it's  hard  to  be  a  nigger! 
Oh,  it's  hard  to  be  a  nigger! 
'Cause  a  nigger  don't  get  no  show. 

I  went  walking  one  fine  day; 

I  met  Mis'  Chickie  upon  my  way. 

Oh,  her  tail  was  long  and  her  feathers  were  blue — 

Caw,  caw,  Missis  Chickie,  Vm  on  to  you. 

refrain:  Oh,  it's  hard  to  be  a  niggie,  niggie,  niggie; 
Oh,  it's  hard  to  be — 
And  you  can't  get  your  money  when  it's  due. 

The  decade  immediately  following  the  Civil  War  made  many 
contributions  to  the  Negro  songbag,  but  most  of  these  are 
lamentably  the  product  of  white  ventriloquism.  I  have  included 
a  few  as  illustrations  of  the  type  because,  though  most  are  pal- 
pably far  from  the  folk,  some  have  had  their  bar  sinister  obscured 
if  not  removed  by  their  subsequent  adoption  by  more  cultured 
Negro  singers.  More  authenticity  may  be  detected  in  songs  like 
"Slavery  Chain  Done  Broke  at  Last,"  and  "You  Are  Free." 

Another  large  class  of  early  Negro  secular  songs  of  discontent 
was  undoubtedly  metamorphosed  into  the  blues,  a  category  of 
Negro  expression  so  well  known  that  little  illustration  or  dis- 
cussion is  necessary  here.  Richard  Wright's  definition  of  the  blues, 
however,  is  worth  recording: 

The  form  of  the  blues  is  simple  and  direct;  there  is  usually  one 
line  that  repeats  and  rimes,  followed  by  a  longer  line  that  rimes  with 


Negro  songs  of  protest  *  83 

the  preceding  two  and  expresses  a  judgment,  clarification,  or  resolu- 
tion, as 

/  woke  up  this  morning,  rain  water  in  my  bed; 
I  woke  up  this  morning,  rain  water  in  my  bed; 
You  know  my  roof  is  leaking,  Lord,  leaking  on  my  head. 

The  form  of  the  blues  can  be  expressed  figuratively:  A  man  encounters 
a  strange  object;  he  walks  around  it  twice,  noting  all  of  its  features, 
then  he  renders  a  statement  as  to  its  meaning  and  relationship  to  him.25 

The  years  following  emancipation  may  best  be  described  as  the 
era  of  disillusionment— the  time  when  the  Negro  discovered  that 
freedom  meant  a  continuance  of  the  old  restrictions  but  now  car- 
ried on  beyond  the  law,  with  a  cessation  only  of  such  security  as 
the  master  had  afforded  him— and  as  such  may  be  extended  to  the 
present  day.  It  is  a  period  teeming  in  productiveness  of  songs  of 
protest,  but  how  many  of  the  extant  songs  derive  from  the  post- 
bellum  years  is  impossible  to  tell.  There  are  no  internal  evidence, 
allusions,  or  written  texts  to  determine  the  date  of  composition 
by;  virtually  the  only  guide  available  for  establishing  the  age  of 
a  Negro  song  is  to  see  how  widespread  certain  phrases  were  at  the 
time  of  collection.  Fragments  like 

Nigger  and  white  man 
Play  in'  seven-up; 
Nigger  win  de  money, 
Skeered  to  pick  it  up. 

Aught  for  aught 
And  jigger  for  jigger; 
All  for  de  white  man, 
Nothin'  for  de  nigger. 

Went  down  to  (N) 
Never  been  there  before; 
White  folk  on  the  feather  bed, 
Nigger  on  the  jloor. 

Nigger  plow  de  cotton, 
Nigger  pick  it  out; 
White  man  pockets  money, 
Niggers  does  without. 

25  From  "Notes  on  Jim  Crow  Blues,"  the  preface  to  Keynote  album  107,  Southern 
Exposure.  Copyright  Mercury  Records  Corp.  Used  by  permission. 


84  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

are  found  everywhere  in  the  South.  Some  have  crept  into  white 
hillbilly  music.26  The  antiquity  of  these  phrases  is  established  not 
only  by  their  wide  diffusion,  but  also  by  the  sometimes  intangible 
insincerity  of  the  context  in  which  they  are  found,  so  that  what- 
ever genuine  protest  the  fragment  once  had  has  been  lost,  leaving 
only  a  shell  of  rhetorical  protest: 

Niggers  get  the  turpentine, 

Niggers  pick  it  out; 

White  man  pockets  the  money, 

Niggers  does  without. 

White  man  thinks  he's  smart, 

Niggers  knows  he's  dumb; 

White  man  sits  and  thinks, 

Us  niggers  eats  and  drinks. 

Come  now  and  do  your  number, 

Don't  do  de  big  apple,  but  do  de  cucumber.2'' 

Even  the  last  two  lines  of  the  refrain  of  "Me  and  My  Captain," 
title  song  of  Lawrence  Gellert's  collection  of  chain-gang  songs, 
seem  to  have  been  preserved  for  the  felicity  of  phrase  rather  than 
for  the  sincerity  of  protest: 

Me  and  my  captain 
We  don't  agree; 
He  don't  know 
'Cause  he  don't  ask  me. 

He  don't  know, 
He  don't  know  my  mind; 
When  he  see  me  laughing 
Just  to  keep  from  crying. 

26  If  the  Negro  borrowed  his  religious  song  from  the  white  man,  as  the  consensus 
of  recent  scholarship  indicates,  the  debt  was  more  than  repaid  by  his  contribution  of 
much  secular  song  to  the  white  man.  Jimmie  Rodgers,  the  man  who  put  the  yodel 
into  hillbilly  song  and  whom  the  rural  South  knows  perhaps  better  than  any  other 
singer,  rode  to  the  top  of  the  Victor  Record  Company's  popularity  list  in  the  early 
1930's  with  a  repertoire  made  up  almost  entirely  of  conflate  fragments  of  Negro 
song.  Constantly  his  compositions  are  collected  by  folklorists  and  accepted  as  genuine 
folksong— which  of  course  is  as  it  should  be.  See  Vance  Randolph's  Ozark  Folksongs, 
vol.  IV,  for  "The  Soldier's  Sweetheart";  Mellinger  Henry's  Songs  Sung  in  the  South- 
ern Appalachians  for  Blue  Yodel  No.  1  (listed  as  "T  for  Texas,"  p.  71);  MacEdward 
Leach  and  Horace  P.  Beck,  "Songs  from  Rappahannock  County,  Virginia,"  JAFL, 
vol.  63,  p.  280,  for  Blue  Yodel  No.  8  (listed  as  "Mule  Skinner  Blues"). 

27  Collected  from  Negro  workers  at  a  turpentine  still  near  Bristow,  Florida. 


Negro  songs  of  protest  *  85 

Protest,  to  be  genuine,  must  have  a  hint  at  least  of  bitterness 
in  it;  any  feeling  of  good-naturedness  (not  humor)  drains  all  the 
meaning  from  a  song  of  nominal  protest  and  leaves  only  words. 

The  ephemerality  of  Negro  secular  song,  the  prevailing  slight- 
ness  of  content,  the  ease  with  which  expression  is  uttered,  the 
flexibility  of  form,  the  absence  of  stanza  continuity,  the  sim- 
plicity of  statement,  the  lack  of  originality,  the  undoubted  fact 
that  much  of  it  is  communally  composed— in  short,  nearly  every 
characteristic  of  Negro  song  foredooms  it  to  quick  oblivion.  That 
is  why,  although  cooperative  Negro  informants  seem  to  be  bot- 
tomless wells  of  song,  few  songs,  as  such,  have  become  traditional. 
The  bulk  of  Negro  song  consists  of  perhaps  a  few  hundred  phrases 
which  have  long  since  become  mavericks;  after  these  basic  stanzas 
have  been  deleted  what  is  left  is  seldom  on  a  higher  literary  plane 
than  mere  conversation— often  not  as  high— and  has  as  little  chance 
of  being  preserved,  even  by  the  composer.  Particularly  this  is  true 
of  chain-gang  songs.  A  new  prisoner  was  usually  not  allowed  to 
talk,  so  he  put  his  story  into  the  song  the  gang  happened  to  be 
singing: 

Little  boy,  little  boy, 
How  did  you  get  so  long? 

Oh  my  Lord,  believe  I'll  go  to  rolling; 

Oh  my  Lord,  believe  I'll  go  to  rolling; 

Oh  my  Lord. 

They  accused  me  of  murder, 
I  ain't  harmed  a  thing. 
Oh  my  Lord  .... 

Little  Willie,  little  Willie, 
Where  did  you  come  from? 
Oh  my  Lord  .... 

/  came  from  Houston, 
The  murderers'  home. 
Oh  my  Lord  .... 

And  so  on. 

The  largest  group  of  Negro  secular  songs  other  than  the  blues 
(a  category  daily  getting  further  and  further  from  the  folk)  is 
work  songs,  which  in  turn  are  comprised— so  far  as  collected  songs 
are  concerned— of  chain-gang  songs.  Chain-gang  songs  form  the 


86  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

bulk  of  Lawrence  Gellert's  published  collection,  and  an  imposing 
percentage  of  his  unpublished  collection  of  two  thousand  Negro 
songs  of  protest— a  number  which  he  resolves  into  about  150  basic 
song  patterns.  The  theme  is  nearly  always  the  same— complaint 
against  the  callousness  and  brutality  of  the  captain  or  walker,  the 
weight  of  the  hammer,  the  wretchedness  of  living  conditions.  The 
same  themes,  with  but  slight  variations  growing  out  of  the  nominal 
freedom  of  the  Negro  imprisoned  only  by  the  economic  and  social 
strictures  of  the  South,  appear  in  the  remainder  of  Gellert's  songs 
which  were  collected  on  plantations,  sharecroppers'  farms,  and 
lumber  and  turpentine  work  camps. 

Gellert's  finds  have  been  questioned  by  other  collectors,  who 
have  been  unable  to  duplicate  them.  A  few  only  are  to  be  found 
in  Odum  and  Johnson's  studies,  and  a  few  more  in  unpublished 
recordings  in  the  Library  of  Congress  Archive  of  American  Folk 
Song,  but  for  the  majority  Gellert  seems  to  have  been  uniquely 
successful  as  a  song  catcher. 

He  attributes  this  success  to  the  unparalleled  intimacy  which 
he  as  a  white  collector  attained  with  his  informants.  A  collector, 
he  says,  who  lives  for  weeks  with  the  Negro,  sleeping  on  "dirty 
floor  pallets  in  miserable  ghetto  hovels"  and  sharing  their  pitiable 
fare,  is  likely  to  be  far  more  successful  in  eliciting  songs  of  protest 
than  one  who  approaches  his  Negro  informants  through  a  white 
guard  who  summons  them  by  bawling  "Line  up,  niggers,  and 
sing  for  the  white  gentleman." 

The  last  two  decades  have  seen  a  great  production  of  songs  of 
discontent,  written  by  Negro  "composers"  of  all  cultural  levels. 
The  best  of  these,  judging  from  an  aspect  of  sincerity  and  genuine 
folk  content,  are  those  emanating  from  Negro  sharecroppers, 
miners,  textile  workers,  and  other  manual  laborers  of  the  less 
desirable  trades.  Evaluated  as  literature,  few  reach  so  high  a  level 
of  accomplishment  as  Strange  Fruit.  As  in  many  labor  songs,  the 
line  that  divides  conscious  art  from  folksay  is  often  obfuscated, 
and  consequently  identification  of  folk  material  is  difficult.  Many 
of  the  late  songs  are  manifestly  products  of  political  agitation— a 
perfectly  valid  and  perhaps  even  laudable  purpose  in  song  writ- 
ing, but  one  which  raises  again  the  obstacle  of  cultural  orienta- 
tion to  folk  acceptance. 


Get  off  the  track  •  87 

White   abolitionists 

The  Hutchinsons,  probably  America's  most  famous 
singing  family,  toured  through  the  country  for  twenty  years  dur- 
ing the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  singing  what  were 
then  topical  songs.  They  allied  themselves  with  reform  movements 
of  "every  kind,  sight,  and  smell,"  as  Woody  Guthrie  would  say. 
Some  of  these  movements  were  undeniably  twaddle,  but  their 
abolitionist  activities  made  up  for  the  other  idealistic  but  abortive 
causes  with  which  they  were  affiliated.  Establishing  a  precedent 
for  many  of  the  songs  being  written  today  on  topical  subjects, 
they  borrowed  folk  tunes  for  their  propaganda. 

GET   OFF   THE   TRACK 

(Tune:  "Old  Dan  Tucker''') 

Ho  the  car  Emancipation, 
Rides  majestic  thro'  our  Nation 
Bearing  on  its  train  the  story, 
Liberty,  a  Nation's  glory. 

refrain:  Roll  it  along,  roll  it  along, 

Roll  it  along  through  the  Nation; 
Roll  it  along  through  the  Nation, 
Freedom's  Car,  Emancipation. 

Men  of  various  predilections, 
Frightened,  run  in  all  directions, 
Merchants,  Editors,  Physicians, 
Lawyers,  Priests,  and  Politicians. 

Get  out  the  way,  every  station, 
Clear  the  track,  Emancipation. 
Roll  it  along  thro'  the  Nation, 
Freedom's  Car,  Emancipation. 

With  slight  adaptations,  this  basic  song  was  used  in  the  fight 
for  industrial  emancipation. 

THE  WORKINGMAN'S  TRAIN 

(Tune:  "Old  Dan  Tucker") 

Ho,  the  car  Emancipation 
Leaves,  today,  Industrial  Station, 
Bearing  on  its  train  of  treasures 
Labor's  hopes  in  labor  measures. 


88  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 


refrain:  Get  all  aboard, 
Get  all  aboard, 

Get  all  aboard,  leave  your  plunder, 
Get  off  the  track  or  you'll  fall  under. 

Tracks  of  scheming  politician 
Are  but  railroads  to  perdition; 
Civil  Service  not  our  freight,  sir. 
Banks  and  tariffs,  let  them  wait,  sir. 

Hark  ye,  Dives,  Dick  and  Harry, 
Come  and  view  the  freight  we  carry, 
Blessings  in  all  forms  and  guises, 
Life,  with  all  its  joyful  prizes. 

—From  broadside  in  Harris  Collection, 
Brown  University. 

SLAVES  APPEAL 

Is  there  no  balm  in  christian  lands, 
No  kind  physician  there, 
To  heal  a  broken  heart  and  save 
A  brother  from  despair? 

Is  there  no  love  in  christian  hearts, 
To  pity  griefs  like  mine, 
No  tender  sympathetic  art 
Sweet  mercy  to  enshrine? 

Must  vile  oppression 's  reckless  form 
Still  beat  upon  my  soul, 
No  sun  of  freedom  ever  dawn, 
To  make  my  spirit  whole? 

Just  God,  behold  the  negro's  woe; 
The  white  man's  sins  forgive; 
Open  his  heart  thy  Love  to  Know, 
To  bid  his  brother  live. 

—Broadside,  1834.  Harris  Collection, 
Brown  University. 

MY  COUNTRY 

(Tune:  "America") 

My  country,  'tis  for  thee, 

Dark  land  of  slavery, 

For  thee  I  weep; 

Land  where  the  slave  has  sighed, 

And  where  he  toiled  and  died, 

To  serve  a  tyrant's  pride — 

For  thee  I  weep. 


Run  to  Jesus  *  89 

From  every  mountain  side, 
Upon  the  ocean's  tide, 
They  call  on  thee; 
Amid  thy  rocks  and  rills, 
Thy  woods  and  templed  hills, 
I  hear  a  voice  which  trills — ■ 
Let  all  go  free. 

Our  fathers'  God!  to  thee, 

Author  of  liberty, 

To  thee  we  pray, 

Soon  may  our  land  be  pure, 

Let  freedom's  light  endure, 

And  liberty  secure, 

Beneath  thy  sway. 

—Sung  at  Harmony  Grove,  Framingham, 

Massachusetts,  July  4,  1866. 
—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 

Negro  abolitionists 

Frederick  Douglass,  the  escaped  slave  who,  like  Harriet 
Tubman,  became  a  leading  Negro  abolitionist,  gave  this  song  to 
the  Jubilee  Singers  with  the  comment  that  it  first  suggested  to  him 
the  thought  of  escaping  from  slavery. 


RUN  TO   JESUS 


\\   hU^J 


refrain:  Run  to  Jesus,  shun  the  danger, 

I  don't  expect  to  stay  much  longer  here. 


90  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

He  will  be  our  dearest  friend, 
And  will  help  us  to  the  end. 
I  don't  expect  to  stay  much  longer  here. 

Oh,  I  thought  I  heard  them  say, 

There  were  lions  in  the  way. 

I  don't  expect  to  stay  much  longer  here. 

Many  mansions  there  will  be, 

One  for  you  and  one  for  me. 

I  don't  expect  to  stay  much  longer  here. 

—J.  B.  T.  Marsh,  The  Story  of  the  Jubilee  Singers, 
Boston,  1880,  p.  188. 

Woody  Guthrie  made  this  "Ballad  of  Harriet  Tubman."  So  un- 
erringly does  he  strike  at  the  heart  of  the  matter  in  composing  his 
song-stories,  that  annotations  are  an  impertinence.  It  is  perhaps 
excusable,  however,  to  add  that  Harriet  Tubman,  whom  John 
Brown  called  "the  most  of  a  man,  naturally,  that  I  ever  met  with," 
personally  assisted  over  three  hundred  slaves  to  freedom,  journey- 
ing time  and  time  again  into  the  South  despite  the  danger  to  her 
life.  She  died  on  March  10,  1913,  in  Auburn,  New  York. 

BALLAD  OF   HARRIET  TUBMAN 

(Tune:  "Kansas  Boys") 

I  was  5  years  old  in  Bucktown,  Maryland, 
When  into  slavery  I  was  sent; 
I'll  tell  you  of  the  beatings  and  of  the  fighting 
In  my  93  years  I  spent. 

I  helped  a  field  hand  make  a  run  for  freedom 
When  my  15th  year  was  rolling  around. 
The  guard  he  caught  him  in  a  little  store 
In  a  little  slavery  village  town. 

The  boss  made  a  grab  to  catch  the  field  hand, 
I  jumped  in  and  blocked  the  door; 
The  boss  then  hit  me  with  a  2  pound  iron  scale 
And  I  went  black  down  on  the  floor. 

On  a  bundle  of  rags  in  our  log  cabin 
My  mother  she  minstered  to  my  needs. 
It  was  here  I  swore  I'd  give  my  life  blood 
Just  to  fight  to  turn  my  people  free. 


Negro  songs  of  protest  *  91 

In  '44  I  married  John  Tubman, 

I  loved  him  well  till  '49 

But  he  would  not  come  and  fight  beside  me, 

So  I  left  him  there  behind. 

I  left  Bucktown  with  my  two  brothers 
But  they  got  scared  and  went  back  home. 
I  followed  my  Northern  star  of  freedom 
And  walked  in  the  grass  and  trees  alone. 

I  slept  in  a  bar  loft  and  in  a  haystack, 
I  stayed  with  my  people  in  slavery's  shacks 
They  said  I'd  die  by  the  boss  man's  bullets 
But  I  told  them,  I  can't  turn  back. 

The  sun  was  shining  in  the  early  morning, 
When  I  finally  come  to  my  free  State  Line, 
I  pinched  myself  to  see  if  I  was  dreaming — 
/  just  could  not  believe  my  eyes. 

I  went  back  home  and  got  my  parents 

I  loaded  them  into  a  buckboard  hack; 

We  crossed  6  states  and  other  slaves  followed, 

And  up  to  Canada  we  made  our  tracks. 

One  slave  got  scared  and  tried  to  turn  backward 
And  I  pulled  my  pistol  in  front  of  his  eyes; 
I  said,  get  up  and  walk  to  your  freedom, 
Or  by  this  fireball  you  will  die. 

When  John  Brown  hit  them  at  Harper's  Ferry, 
My  men  were  fighting  right  at  his  side, 
When  John  Brown  swung  upon  his  gallows, 
It  was  then  I  hung  my  head  and  cried. 

Give  the  black  man  guns  and  powder, 
To  Abe  Lincoln  this  I  said. 
You've  just  crippled  the  Snake  of  Slavery 
We've  got  to  fight  to  kill  it  dead! 

When  we  faced  the  guns  of  lightning 
And  the  thunders  broke  our  sleep, 
After  we  faced  the  bloody  rainstorms 
It  was  dead  men  that  we  reaped. 

Yes,  we  faced  the  zigzag  lightning 
But  was  worth  the  price  we  paid; 
When  our  thunder  rumbled  over 
We'd  laid  slavery  in  its  grave. 


92  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Come  and  stand  around  my  deathbed, 
I  will  sing  some  spirit  songs; 
I'm  on  my  way  to  my  greater  Union 
Now  my  93  years  are  gone. 

—Composed  by  AVoody  Guthrie,  September  18,  1944. 

Slavery  days 

On  Sunday,  August  21,  1831,  after  a  series  of  portents 
which  convinced  him  of  the  divine  inspiration  for  his  rebellion, 
Nat  Turner  gathered  a  half-dozen  fellow  slaves  and  set  out  with 
the  zeal  of  John  Brown  to  free  the  South  from  slavery.  Turner  was 
a  man  whose  natural  gifts  gained  him  some  influence  as  a  preacher 
among  the  slaves  of  Southampton  County,  Virginia,  but  whose 
innate  intelligence  was  stultified  by  superstition.  Five  years  before 
his  final  rebellion  he  had  successfully  escaped  from  his  master, 
but  returned  after  a  month  of  freedom  because  he  felt  that  flight 
from  a  lawful  owner  was  irreconcilable  with  his  religion.  The 
ridicule  heaped  upon  him  by  the  other  slaves  stimulated  a  period 
of  reconsideration  which  culminated  in  his  revolt.  Turner  and 
his  five  companions  began  by  killing  their  master  and  his  family, 
and  set  out  toward  the  county  seat,  killing  every  white  they  met. 
When  Turner's  force  (which  had  grown  to  seventy  slaves)  was 
overwhelmed  by  regular  and  volunteer  troops,  about  150  persons, 
of  whom  51  were  white,  had  been  killed.  Turner  himself  eluded 
his  pursuers  for  nine  days,  when  he  was  captured  and  summarily 
hanged.  The  revolt  meant  the  end  of  Southern  abolitionist  socie- 
ties, but  a  more  important  result  was  that  the  slavocracy  never 
again  was  free  of  the  terror  of  incipient  rebellion. 

NAT  TURNER 

You  mought  be  rich  as  cream, 
And  drive  you  a  coach  and  four  horse  team; 
But  you  can't  keep  the  world  from  moving  around, 
And  Nat  Turner  from  the  gaining  ground. 

You  mought  be  reader  and  writer  too, 

And  wiser  than  old  Solomon  the  Jew; 

But  you  can't  keep  the  world  from  moving  around, 

And  Nat  Turner  from  the  gaining  ground. 


Escape  from  slavery  of  henry  box  brown  •  93 

And  your  name  it  mought  be  Caesar  sure, 
And  got  you  cannon  can  shoot  a  mile  or  more; 
But  you  can't  keep  the  world  from  moving  around, 
And  Nat  Turner  from  the  gaining  ground. 

—From  Lawrence  Gellert's  unpublished  collection. 

One  of  the  most  unusual  methods  of  escape  was  employed  in 
1848  by  Henry  Brown,  a  slave  who  had  himself  shipped  in  an 
unmarked  wooden  box,  three  feet  one  inch  long,  two  feet  wide, 
and  two  feet  six  inches  deep,  from  Richmond,  Virginia,  to  Phila- 
delphia by  the  Adams  Express  Company.  His  accomplishment 
caught  the  public  imagination,  and  Henry— thereafter  "Box"— 
Brown  journeyed  through  Northern  cities  recounting  his  escape 
before  large  audiences. 

ESCAPE  FROM  SLAVERY  OF  HENRY  BOX  BROWN 

(Tune:  "Uncle  Ned") 

Here  you  see  a  man  by  the  name  of  Henry  Brown, 
Ran  away  from  the  South  to  the  North; 
Which  he  would  not  have  done  but  they  stole  all  his  rights, 
But  they'll  never  do  the  like  again. 

refrain:  Brown  laid  down  the  shovel  and  the  hoe, 
Down  in  the  box  he  did  go; 
No  more  Slave  work  for  Henry  Box  Brown, 
In  the  box  by  express  he  did  go. 

The  orders  they  were  given  and  the  cars  they  did  start, 

Roll  along — roll  along — roll  along — 

Down  to  the  landing  where  the  steamboat  met, 

To  bear  the  baggage  off  to  the  North. 

When  they  packed  the  baggage  on  they  turned  him  on  his  head, 
There  poor  Brown  liked  to  have  died; 
There  were  passengers  on  board  who  wished  to  set  down, 
And  they  turned  the  box  on  its  side. 

When  they  got  to  the  cars  they  throwed  the  box  off, 
And  down  upon  his  head  he  did  fall, 

Then  he  heard  his  neck  crack,  and  he  thought  he  was  dead, 
But  they  never  throwed  him  off  any  more. 

When  he  got  to  Philadelphia  they  said  he  was  in  port, 
And  Brown  he  began  to  feel  glad, 

And  he  was  taken  on  the  wagon  and  carried  to  the  place, 
And  left  "this  side  up  with  care." 


94  ■  American  folksongs  of  protest 

The  friends  gathered  round  and  asked  if  all  was  right, 
As  down  on  the  box  they  did  rap, 
Brown  answered  them  saying  "yes,  all  is  right," 
And  he  was  then  set  free  from  his  pain. 

—Broadside  in  American  Antiquarian  Society, 
Worcester,  Massachusetts. 

As  hard  and  as  hateful  as  life  on  the  plantation  must  have  been 
for  most  slaves,  it  was  at  least  bearable  in  the  companionship  of 
one's  family  and  friends,  and  immensely  to  bfe  preferred  to  the 
prospect  of  being  sold  to  the  deep  South,  to  the  unknown  region 
of  nameless  horror.  "All  [escaped  slaves]  who  were  interrogated 
as  to  why  they  left  their  homes,  gave  nearly  related  answers.  In 
the  majority  of  cases  it  was  the  fear  of  being  sold  to  go  further 
South.  .  .  .  Being  'sold  to  Georgia'  was  the  terror  of  plantation 
life."  28 

JOHNNY  COME  DOWN  DE  HOLLOW 

Johnny  come  down  de  hollow — 

Oh,  hollow. 
De  nigger  trader  got  he — 

Oh,  hollow. 
De  speculator  bought  me — 

Oh,  hollow. 
Fm  sold  for  silver  dollars — 

Oh,  hollow. 
Boys,  go  catch  de  pony — 

Oh,  hollow. 
Bring  him  round  de  corner — 

Oh,  hollow. 
Fm  goin'  way  to  Georgia — 

Oh,  hollow. 
Boys,  good-bye  forever — 

Oh,  hollow. 

— H.  M.  Henry,  The  Police  Control  of  the 
Slave  in  South  Carolina,  p.  56. 

HILO!    HILO! 

William  Rino  sold  Henry  Silvers — 

Hilof  Hilof 
Sold  him  to  de  Georgy  trader — 

Hilof  Hilof 
28  R.  C.  Smedley,  History  of  the  Underground  Railroad  ...  ,  p.  270. 


I  am  sold  and  going  to  georgia  *  95 

His  wife  she  cried,  and  children  bawled — 

Hilof  Hilo! 
Sold  him  to  de  Georgy  trader — 

Hilo!  Hilo! 

—J.  D.  Long,  Pictures  of  Slavery, 
Philadelphia,  1857,  p.  198. 


I  AM  SOLD  AND  GOING  TO  GEORGIA 

This  song  is  usually  sung  by  the  chained  gangs  of  slaves  who  are 
on  their  way,  being  driven  from  Maryland,  Virginia,  and  Kentucky, 
to  the  more  southern  states  for  sale.  The  last  line  of  each  verse  is  the 
chorus,  and  gives  a  most  impressive  effect  when  sung— as  it  often  is— 
by  60  or  150  voices  echoing  the  plaintive  grief  of  their  hearts.  This 
last  line  is  intended  as  an  appeal  to  all  who  have  it  in  their  power  to 
aid  in  bringing  about  the  jubilee  of  emancipation. 

-J.  W.  C.  Pennington,  D.D. 

Despite  Dr.  Pennington's  contemporary  affidavit  that  this  is  a 
Negro  song,  most  observers  will  agree  that  its  white  origin  is 
transparent;  but  it  is  worth  including,  if  only  for  Dr.  Penning- 
ton's intriguing  phrase,  "sung  ...  by  60  or  150  voices." 

O!  When  shall  we  poor  souls  be  free? 
When  shall  these  slavery  chains  be  broke? 
I  am  sold  and  going  to  Georgia, 
Will  you  go  along  with  me? 
I  am  sold  and  going  to  Georgia, 
Go  sound  the  jubilee. 

I  left  my  wife  and  child  behind, 
They'll  never  see  my  face  again; 
I  am  sold  and  going  to  Georgia, 
Will  you  go  along  with  me? 
I  am  sold  and  going  to  Georgia, 
Go  sound  the  jubilee. 

I  am  bound  to  yonder  great  rice  swamp, 
Where  my  poor  bones  will  find  a  grave; 
I  am  sold  and  going  to  Georgia, 
Will  you  go  along  with  me? 
I  am  sold  and  going  to  Georgia, 
Go  sound  the  jubilee. 


96  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Farewell,  my  friends,  I  leave  you  all, 
I  am  sold,  but  I  have  done  no  fault; 
I  am  sold  and  going  to  Georgia, 
Will  you  go  along  with  me? 
I  am  sold  and  going  to  Georgia, 
Go  sound  the  jubilee. 

—Library  of  Congress,  Archive  of  American 
Folk  Song,  WPA  Collection. 

JOHNNIE,  WONTCHA  RAMBLE 

/  looked  up  on  the  hill  and  spied  old  Master  ridin'  (2) 

Johnnie,  wontcha  ramble,  hoe,  hoe,  hoe. 

Had  a  bull  whip  in  one  hand,  cowhide  in  the  other,  (2) 

Johnnie,  wontcha  ramble,  hoe,  hoe,  hoe. 

Pocket  full  of  leather  strings  to  tie  your  hands  together,         (2) 
Johnnie,  wontcha  ramble,  hoe,  hoe,  hoe. 

Ole  Mastah,  don't  you  whip  me,  I'll  give  you  half  a  dollar,     (2) 
Johnnie,  wontcha  ramble,  hoe,  hoe,  hoe. 

Oh,  no,  Bully  Boy,  I'd  rather  hear  you  holler.  (2) 

Johnnie,  wontcha  ramble,  hoe,  hoe,  hoe. 

—From  Library  of  Congress,  Archive  of  American  Folk  Song. 
MISSUS  IN  DE  BIG  HOUSE 

Missus  in  de  big  house, 
Mammy  in  de  yard. 
Missus  holdin'  her  white  hands, 
Mammy  workin'  hard. 
Mammy  workin'  hard, 
Mammy  workin'  hard, 
Missus  holdin'  her  white  hands, 
Mammy  workin'  hard. 

01'  morse  ridin'  all  time, 
Niggers  workin'  'roun'. 
Morse  sleepin'  day  time, 
Niggers  diggin'  in  de  grouri '. 
Niggers  diggin'  in  de  groun', 
Niggers  diggin'  in  de  groun', 
Morse  sleepin'  day  time, 
Niggers  diggin'  in  de  grouri '. 

— Odum  and  Johnson,  op.  cit.,  p.  117. 


Nobody  knows  ■  97 


NOBODY    KNOWS 


This  song  was  a  favorite  in  the  Sea  Islands.  Once  when  there  had 
been  a  good  deal  of  ill  feeling  excited  and  trouble  was  apprehended, 
owing  to  the  uncertain  action  of  the  government  in  regard  to  the 
confiscated  lands  on  the  Sea  Islands,  General  Howard  was  called  upon 
to  address  the  colored  people  earnestly.  To  prepare  them  to  listen,  he 
asked  them  to  sing.  Immediately  an  old  woman  on  the  outskirts  of 
the  meeting  began  "Nobody  Knows  the  Trouble  I've  Seen"  and  the 
whole  audience  joined  in.  The  General  was  so  affected  by  the  plaintive 
melody  that  he  found  it  difficult  to  maintain  his  official  dignity. 

— Thos.  P.  C.  Fenner,  "Cabin  and  Plantation  Songs," 
in    Mrs.    M.    F.    Armstrong    and    Helen    Ludlow, 

Hampton  and  Its  Students,  New  York,  1874. 

This  song  was  for  the  Negro  what  "John  Brown's  Body"  was 
for  the  whites. 

Oh,  nobody  knows  de  trouble  I've  seen 
Nobody  knows  but  Jesus. 
Nobody  knows  de  trouble  I've  seen 
Glory  hallelujah. 

Sometimes  I'm  up,  sometimes  I'm  down, 
Oh,  yes,  Lord. 

Sometimes  I'm  almost  to  de  groun', 
Oh,  yes,  Lord. 

Although  you  see  me  goin'  'long  so, 

Oh,  yes,  Lord. 

I  have  my  trials  here  below, 

Oh,  yes,  Lord. 

One  day  when  I  was  walkin'  'long, 
Oh,  yes,  Lord. 

De  el'ment  open'd  an'  Love  came  down, 
Oh,  yes,  Lord. 

I  never  shall  forget  that  day, 
Oh,  yes,  Lord. 

When  Jesus  washed  my  sins  away, 
Oh,  yes,  Lord. 

FATHER  HOW   LONG 

See  note  on  this  song  on  page  78  above. 

My  father  how  long*  (3) 

Poor  sinner  suffer  here? 
*  Mother,  etc. 


98  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 


And  it  won't  be  long  (3) 

Fore  de  Lord  will  call  us  home. 

We'll  soon  be  free  (3) 

De  Lord  will  call  us  home. 

We'll  walk  de  mercy  road  (3) 

Where  pleasure  never  dies. 

We'll  walk  de  golden  streets  (3) 

Of  de  new  Jerusalem. 

My  brudder  do  sing  (3) 

De  praises  of  de  Lord. 

We'll  fight  for  liberty  (3) 

When  de  Lord  will  call  us  home. 

— Thos.  W.  Higginson,  "Negro  Spirituals," 
Atlantic  Monthly,  vol.  19  (June  1867). 


I  M    TROUBLED    IN    MIND 

The  person  who  furnished  this  song  (Mrs.  Brown  of  Nashville,  for- 
merly a  slave)  stated  that  she  first  heard  it  from  her  old  father  when 
she  was  a  child.  After  he  had  been  whipped  he  always  went  and  sat 
upon  a  certain  log  near  his  cabin,  and  with  the  tears  streaming  down 
his  cheeks,  sang  this  song  with  so  much  pathos  that  few  could  listen 
without  weeping  from  sympathy;  and  even  his  cruel  oppressors  were 
not  wholly  unmoved. 

—J.  B.  T.  Marsh,  The  Story  of  the  Jubilee  Singers, 
Boston,  1880,  p.  173. 

This  song  was  in  the  repertoire  of  the  Jubilee  Singers,  a  group 
of  young  Negro  singers  who  in  1871  carried  their  old  spirituals 
through  the  world  hoping  to  raise  $20,000  for  the  impoverished 
school  which  was  to  grow  into  Fisk  University.  Despite  harassing 
discrimination,  the  concert  tour  was  successful  above  all  expec- 
tations, and  the  eight  young  singers  returned  to  their  school  with 
more  than  $100,000. 

I'm  troubled,  I'm  troubled,  I'm  troubled  in  mind, 
If  Jesus  don't  help  me,  I  surely  will  die. 

0  Jesus,  my  Saviour,  on  thee  I'll  depend. 

When  troubles  are  near  me,  you'll  be  my  true  friend. 


The  drinking  gourd   *  99 

When  ladened  with  trouble  and  burdened  with  grief, 
To  Jesus  in  secret  I'll  go  for  relief. 

In  dark  days  of  bondage  to  Jesus  I  prayed, 
To  help  me  to  bear  it,  and  he  gave  me  his  aid. 

Underground  railroad 

A  slave  song  with  undoubted  hidden  meaning  is  "The 
Drinking  Gourd."  It  is  an  audible  map  of  the  local  branch  line  of 
the  Underground  Railroad.  The  "Drinking  Gourd"  is,  of  course, 
the  Big  Dipper— north.  "Peg  foot"  refers  to  an  old  white  man 
with  a  wooden  leg  who  led  the  Negroes  north. 


THE   DRINKING  GOURD 


s 


tfc 


H*-»=* 


V — m   4    V  v\4   ^—Q 


9       9 


WWI4»kulB 


1 


^~*~^~~  1  0  g  9  9  J  - —     y  9-Q 


*  &  4 


9       \^&_g& 


m 


Sfe 


FH 


9^d+$^r9^*J-:n]d*0       j 
tH S  9  9  9 


When  the  sun  comes  back  and  the  first  quail  calls, 
Follow  the  drinking  gourd, 

For  the  old  man  is  waiting  for  to  carry  you  to  freedom 
If  you  follow  the  drinking  gourd. 

refrain:  Follow  the  drinking  gourd, 
Follow  the  drinking  gourd, 
For  the  old  man  is  waiting  for  to  carry 

you  to  freedom 
If  you  follow  the  drinking  gourd. 


100  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

The  river  bank  will  make  a  very  good  road, 
The  dead  trees  show  you  the  way, 
Left  foot,  peg  foot  travelling  on, 
Following  the  drinking  gourd. 

The  river  ends  between  two  hills, 
Follow  the  drinking  gourd. 
There's  another  river  on  the  other  side, 
Follow  the  drinking  gourd. 

Where  the  great  big  river  meets  the  little  river, 
Follow  the  drinking  gourd. 

The  old  man  is  a-waiting  for  to  carry  you  to  freedom, 
If  you  follow  the  drinking  gourd. 

i'm  on  my  way 


m— 9-0 m-  *  • 


m  m  u 


U£-fff 


^ 


fcS 


zm 


♦-# 


A  typical  "going-to-Canaan"  song;  possibly  an  Underground 
Railroad  song.  The  Carter  Family,  famous  white  hillbilly  singers, 
have  made  a  record  of  a  version  of  this  song  utterly  without 
slavery  significance. 

I'm  on  my  way,  and  I  won't  turn  back!  (3) 

I'm  on  my  way,  great  God,  Vm  on  my  way. 

I'm  on  my  way  to  Canaan's  land  (3) 

I'm  on  my  way,  great  God,  I'm  on  my  way. 

I  ask  my  sister  to  come  go  with  me  (3) 

I'm  on  my  way,  great  God,  I'm  on  my  way. 

If  she  says  no,  I'll  go  alone  (3) 

I'm  on  my  way,  great  God,  I'm  on  my  way. 

I  ask  my  boss  to  let  me  go  (3) 

I'm  on  my  way,  great  God,  I'm  on  my  way. 

If  he  says  no,  I'll  go  anyhow  (3) 

I'm  on  my  way,  Great  God,  I'm  on  my  way! 


A-goin'  shout  *   101 
Jubilee  songs— negro 

Compare  "A-goin'  Shout"  with  a  more  literate  version 
"No  More  Mourning"  sung  by  Carl  Sandburg  on  Musicraft  record 
209. 

a-goin'  shout 

Ummmmmmmmph,  Ummmmmmmmph,  heaven  (3) 

Over  thee,  over  thee 

I  got  de  glory  in  my  soul 

And  de  witness  in  my  breast 

I'm  goin'  whar  Jesus  is. 

Ummmmmmmmph,  Ummmmmmmmph,  heaven  (3) 

Over  thee,  over  thee, 

Befo'  I'd  be  a  slave 

I'd  be  buried  in  my  grave 

An'  go  home  to  my  Lawd  and  be  free. 

Ummmmmmmmph,  Ummmmmmmmph,  Ummmmmmmmph     (3) 
Ummmmmmmmph,  Ummmmmmmmph,  prayer  a  movin'  man 

O'  God! 
De  Lawd  has  been  my  dwellin'  place 
I  mought  had  a  been  a  slave 
An'  go  home  to  my  Lawd  and  be  save. 

—Collected  by  Rev.  John  Brown,  from  Petersburg, 
Virginia,  1938.  In  Library  of  Congress,  Archive 
of  American  Folk  Song,  WPA  Collection. 


MANY  THOUSAND  GONE 


No  more  auction  block  for  me, 
No  more,  no  more; 
No  more  auction  block  for  me, 
Many  thousand  gone. 


102  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

No  more  peck  o'  corn  for  me  .  .  . 
No  more  driver's  lash  for  me  .  .  . 
No  more  pint  o'  salt  for  me  .  .  . 
No  more  hundred  lash  for  me  .  .  . 
No  more  mistress'  call  for  me  .  .  . 

SLAVERY  CHAIN 

(Tune:  "Joshua  Fit  de  Battle  of  Jerico") 

refrain:  Slav'ry  chain  done  broke  at  last 
Broke  at  last,  broke  at  last, 
Slavery  chain  done  broke  at  last, 
Goin'  to  stand  up  proud  and  free. 

0  mah  Lord,  how  ah  did  suffer 
In  de  dungeon  and  de  chain 

An'  de  days  I  went  wit'  head  bowed  down, 
An'  my  broken  flesh  an'  pain, 
But  brethren  .  .  . 

1  done  'point  a  mighty  captain 
For  to  marshal  all  my  hosts, 

An'  to  bring  my  bleeding  ones  to  me, 
An'  not  one  shall  be  lost, 
For  brethren  .  .  . 

Now  no  more  weary  travelin' 
Since  mah  brethren  said  to  me, 
"Dere's  no  more  auction  block  for  you, 
For  you  too  shall  be  free," 
For  brethren  .  .  . 

ABE  LINCOLN  FREED  THE  NIGGER 

Abe  Lincoln  freed  the  nigger 

With  the  gun  and  the  trigger; 

And  I  ain't  going  to  get  whipped  any  more. 

I  got  my  ticket, 

Leaving  the  thicket, 

And  Vm  a-heading  for  the  golden  shore! 

— B.  A.  Botkin,  Lay  My  Burden  Down,  p.  223. 


You  are  free  •  103 

YOU  ARE  FREE 

"You  Are  Free"  is  probably  the  most  exuberant  of  all  jubilee 
songs. 

Mammy,  don't  you  cook  no  more, 
You  are  free,  you  are  free! 
Rooster,  don't  you  crow  no  more, 
You  are  free,  you  are  free! 
Old  hen,  don't  you  lay  no  more  eggs, 
You  are  free,  you  are  free! 

— Botkin,  op.  cit. 

Jubilee  songs— white  ventriloquism 
babylon  is  fallen 

Don't  you  see  de  black  clouds  risin'  ober  yonder, 
Whar  de  massa's  ole  plantation  am? 
Neber  you  be  frightened,  dem  is  only  darkeys, 
Come  to  jine  and  fight  for  Uncle  Sam. 

refrain:  Look  out  dar,  we' s  a  gwine  to  shoot! 
Look  out  dar,  don't  you  understand? 
Babylon  is  fallen,  Babylon  is  fallen, 
And  we  is  gwine  to  occupy  the  land. 

Don't  you  see  de  lightnin'  flashin'  in  de  cane  brake, 
Like  as  if  we  gwine  to  hab  a  storm? 
No,  you  is  mistaken,  'tis  de  darkey's  bayonets, 
And  de  buttons  on  dar  uniform. 

Way  up  in  de  corn-field,  whar  you  hear  de  t'under, 
Dot  is  our  ole  forty-pounder  gun; 
When  de  shells  are  missin'  den  we  load  wit'  punkins, 
All  de  same  to  make  de  cowards  run. 

Massa  was  de  Kernel  in  de  rebel  army, 
Eber  sence  he  went  an'  run  away; 
But  his  lubly  darkeys,  dey  has  been  a  watchin' 
An'  dey  take  him  pris'ner  tudder  day. 

We  will  be  de  massa,  he  will  be  de  servant, 
Try  him  how  he  like  it  for  a  spell; 
So  we  crack  de  butt'nutts,  so  we  take  de  Kernel, 
So  de  cannon  carry  back  de  shell. 

—Broadside  in  American  Antiquarian  Society, 
Worcester,  Massachusetts. 


104  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

THE  YEAR  OF  JUBALO 

Has  anybody  seen  my  massa 

With  the  moustache  on  his  face? 

Go  long  the  road  some  time  this  mornin' 

Like  he  gwine  to  leab  de  place. 

refrain:  De  massa  run,  ha!  ha! 
De  darky  stay,  ho!  ho! 

It  must  be  now  dat  de  kingdom  am  a  comin' 
And  de  year  of  jubalo. 

He  seed  a  smoke  way  up  de  ribber 
Where  de  Linkum  gunboats  lay; 
He  took  his  hat  and  he  left  mighty  sudden, 
And  I  speck  dat  he  runned  away. 

He  six  feet  one  way,  two  feet  todder, 
And  he  weigh  three  hundred  pound; 
His  coat  so  big  dat  he  can't  pay  de  tailor, 
An'  it  won't  go  half-way  around. 

De  oberseer  he  gib  us  trubble 

And  he  dribe  us  round  a  spell, 

Den  we  lock  him  up  in  the  smoke  house  cellar, 

Wid  de  key  throwed  in  de  well. 

De  whip  am  lost  and  de  handcuff  broken, 
An'  mass'll  get  him  pay. 

He  old  enough,  big  enough,  ought  to  know  better, 
Dan  to  take  an'  runned  away. 

—Informant:  Merton  Knowles,  WPA  Project  Worker: 
"Heard  it  from  my  mother,  it  was  brought  back  by 
returning  Union  soldiers,  and  became  a  part  of  our 
folklore."  (Indiana)  In  Library  of  Congress,  Archive 
of  American  Folk  Song:. 


OLD  MASSA  HE  COME  DANCIN    OUT 

Old  massa  he  come  dancin'  out 

An'  he  call  de  blackuns  round. 

He  pleased  so  well  dot  he  couldn't  stand 

Wid  both  feet  on  de  ground. 

You,  Pomp  and  Pete  and  Dinah,  too, 
You'll  catch  it  now,  I  swear. 
I'll  whip  you  good  for  mixin'  wid 
De  Yanks  when  dey  was  here. 


Lordy,  turn  your  face  •   105 

Say,  don't  you  hear  dem  '  tiller  y  guns, 
You  niggers,  don't  you  hear? 
Ole  General  Bragg  is  a  mowin'  'em  down, 
Dem  Yankees  ober  here. 

Dar  comes  our  troops  in  crowds  and  crowds, 

I  knows  dat  red  and  gray, 

But  oh!  What  makes  dem  hurry  so 

And  trow  dere  guns  away? 

Ole  massa  now  keep  both  feet  still 
And  stare  with  bofe  his  eyes. 
Till  he  see  de  blue  coats  jest  behind 
Dat  take  him  wid  surprise. 

Ole  massa  busy  wadin'  round 

In  swamps  up  to  his  knees, 

While  Dinah,  Pomp,  and  Pete  dey  look 

As  if  dey  mighty  pleased. 

—Library  of  Congress,  Archive  of  American  Folk 
Song,  WPA  Collection.  Collected  by  Merton 
Knowles  of  Indiana  from  his  mother,  who 
learned  and  sang  the  song  after  the  Civil  War. 

Disillusion 

It  is  a  little-known  fact  that  approximately  two  hundred 
thousand  Negroes  fought  for  the  North  against  their  former  mas- 
ters during  the  Civil  War,  but  usually  their  place  was  behind  the 
man  behind  the  gun.  Their  status  as  soldiers  did  not  change  in 
nearly  a  century.  The  first  song,  which  was  recorded  by  John  Jacob 
Niles  during  the  first  World  War,  is  parallel  in  theme  to  the  fol- 
lowing, which  chronicles  a  complaint  voiced  often  among  Negro 
soldiers  in  the  second  great  conflict. 

LORDY,  TURN  YOUR  FACE 

Black  man  fights  wid  de  shovel  and  de  pick, 
Lordy,  turn  your  face  on  me. 
Never  gits  no  rest  'cause  he  never  gits  sick, 
Lordy,  turn  your  face  on  me. 

lined  de  army  fur  to  git  free  clothes, 
Lordy,  turn  your  face  on  me. 
What  we're  fightin'  'bout,  nobody  knows 
Lordy,  turn  your  face  on  me. 


106  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Never  goin'  to  ride  dot  ocean  no  more, 
Lordy,  turn  your  face  on  me. 
Goin'  to  walk  right  home  to  my  cabin  door 
Lordy,  turn  your  face  on  me. 


—John  Jacob  Niles,  Singing  Soldiers, 
New  York,  Scribners,  1927,  p.  48. 

UNCLE  SAM  SAYS 

Airplanes  flying  cross  the  land  and  sea; 

Everybody  flying  'cept  a  Negro  like  me — 

Uncle  Sam  says,  "Your  place  is  on  the  ground; 

When  I  fly  my  airplanes,  don't  want  no  Negroes  around." 

Same  thing  for  the  Navy,  the  ships  goes  to  sea; 

All  they  got  is  a  mess  boy's  job  for  me — 

Uncle  Sam  says,  "Keep  on  your  apron,  son; 

You  know  I  ain't  gonna  let  you  shoot  my  big  Navy  guns." 

If  you  ask  me,  I  think  democracy's  fine; 
I  mean  democracy  without  a  color  line — 
Uncle  Sam  says,  "We'll  live  the  American  way; 
Let's  get  together,  and  kill  Jim  Crow  today." 

—Words  by  Josh  White  and  Warren  Cuney. 
Keynote  Album  107.  Copyright  Mercury 
Records  Corp.  Used  by  permission. 

I  WENT  TO  ATLANTA 

/  went  to  Atlanta, 
Never  been  there  befo' 
White  folks  eat  de  apple, 
Nigger  wait  fo  co' 

refrain:  Catch  dot  Suth'n 
Grab  dot  train, 
Won't  come  back  no'  mo' 

I  went  to  Charleston, 

Never  been  dere  a-fo' 

White  folks  sleep  on  feather  bed, 

Nigger  on  de  flo' 

I  went  to  Raleigh, 
Never  been  dere  a-fo' 
White  folks  wear  de  fancy  suit, 
Nigger  over-o' 

—Library  of  Congress,  Archive  of  American 
Folk  Song,  unpublished  collection. 


John  henry  *  107 

The  best-known  (and  best)  Negro  ballad,  the  best-known  Negro 
work  song,  the  best  song  of  protest  against  imminent  techno- 
logical unemployment,  "John  Henry"  has  all  the  stature  of  the 
man  whose  memory  it  immortalizes.  Undoubtedly  the  Negro  saw 
John  Henry  as  the  apotheosis  of  his  own  unrealized  potentialities, 
for  here  was  a  Negro  who  beat  the  white  man  at  his  own  game. 
These  stanzas  are  admittedly  too  few  to  be  at  all  representative  of 
the  tremendous  number  of  variations  that  have  been  recorded, 
but  then  John  Henry  was  a  mighty  big  man— too  big  to  fit  com- 
fortably on  one  page. 

JOHN    HENRY 

When  John  Henry  was  'bout  3  days  old 

Sittin'  on  his  mammy's  knee; 

He  gave  a  whoop  and  a  holler  and  a  lonesome  cry — 

Said  that  hammer  be  the  death  of  me, 

That  hammer  be  the  death  of  me. 

Now  John  Henry  said  to  the  Captain  one  day 

A  man  ain't  nothin'  but  a  man; 

Before  I'll  be  bothered  with  an  old  steam  drill 

I'll  die  with  my  hammer  in  my  hand, 

I'll  die  with  my  hammer  in  my  hand. 

When  they  brought  that  new  steam  drill 
They  thought  it  was  mighty  fine; 
John  Henry  made  his  14  feet 
While  the  steam  drill  only  made  9, 
While  the  steam  drill  only  made  9. 

Now  John  Henry  swung  his  hammer  around  his  head, 
He  brought  the  hammer  down  on  the  ground; 
Man  in  Chattanooga  300  miles  away 
Heard  an  awful  rumblin'  sound, 
He  heard  an  awful  rumblin'  sound. 

Now  John  Henry  had  a  pretty  little  wife, 

Name  was  Polly  Ann; 

When  John  Henry  was  a-sick  and  lyin'  in  his  bed 

His  Polly  drove  steel  like  a  man, 

His  Polly  drove  steel  like  a  man. 

When  John  Henry  died  they  hadn't  no  box 

Big  enough  to  hold  his  bones, 

So  they  buried  him  in  a  box  car  deep  in  the  ground, 

And  let  two  mountains  be  his  gravestones, 

And  let  two  mountains  be  his  gravestones. 


108  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Numerous  attempts  to  recolonize  Africa  with  freed  slaves  were 
made  both  before  and  after  the  Civil  War.  All  these  projects  were 
failures,  including  the  one  sponsored  by  the  American  Coloniza- 
tion Society  which  resulted  in  the  founding  of  Liberia,  for  in 
1930  Liberia,  ironically  enough,  was  stigmatized  by  the  League 
of  Nations  for  being  itself  a  slavocracy. 

The  most  pretentious  scheme  in  the  history  of  Africanism  was 
that  of  Marcus  Manasseth  Garvey,  who  carried  on  his  "Back  to 
Africa"  movement  in  a  grandiose  way.  He  organized  an  African 
government,  established  a  nobility,  founded  an  African  Legion, 
Black  Cross  Nurse  society,  and  an  African  Motor  Corps,  and  even 
bought  a  steamship  line  to  transport  the  four  million  persons  who 
joined  his  "nation."  But  his  plan  was  abortive,  and  in  1923  he 
was  imprisoned  for  using  the  mails  to  defraud. 

ARISE   YE    GARVEY    NATION 

Arise,  ye  Garvey  nation,  home  abroad,  go  forth; 

Go  forth  across  the  seven  seas,  proclaim, 

Proclaim  a  future  year  of  freedom 

When  home  across  the  sea  shall  meet  at  home  sweet  home. 

refrain:  On  and  on  swell  the  chorus, 

On  and  on,  Marcus  Garvey,  on  before  us, 

On  and  on  swell  the  chorus, 

Our  Marcus  Garvey,  lead  the  way. 

Glory,  glory,  hear  the  everlasting  song, 

Shout  hosanna  as  we  boldly  march  along. 

Faithful  soldiers,  here  we  know  Marcus  Garvey' 's 

on  before 
Saying,  "We  want  freedom  over  the  world  we  go." 

We  must  have  ships  to  sail  across  the  seven  seas, 
They  must  be  strong  enough  to  stand  the  storms; 
Then  give  material  for  them  to  make  the  ships  for  us, 
That  we  may  sail  across  the  sea  for  home,  sweet  home. 

Legions  arise  protecting  millions  of  your  race, 
Arise,  arise,  be  not  afraid  to  fight; 
Be  strong,  be  brave,  until  you  know  the  victory's  won, 
Be  brave  enough  to  stand  your  ground  where'er  you  go. 


Grey  goose  •   109 

Black  Cross  nurses  prepare  yourselves  for  future  days, 
When  all  shall  march  upon  the  battlefields; 
You  must  be  filled  with  Garvey  spirit  to  win  the  fight, 
The  motor  corps  arise,  take  up  the  wounded,  dead. 

—Composed  by  Bishop  I.  E.  Guinn;  broadside 
in  Brown  Collection,  Brown  University. 

Chain  gang  songs 

"Anvils  laugh  at  broken  hammers."  This  is  the  theme 
of  "Grey  Goose,"  the  story  of  an  indestructible  anserina  who  sym- 
bolizes the  road  prisoner,  whose  worth  was  measured  by  his  ability 
to  "make  his  time."  The  "Grey  Goose,"  which  dates  to  the  period 
immediately  preceding  1914  (the  black  years  of  chain-gang  oppres- 
sion) has  been  found  nowhere  but  in  prison  camps,  yet  it  is  strik- 
ingly analogical  to  the  fourteenth-century  English  "Cutty  Wren," 
in  which  the  wren  symbolizes  the  oppressed  but  indomitable 
peasant.  This  is  a  remarkable  example  of  polygenesis  in  folk  song. 

GREY   GOOSE 

Last  Sunday  morning,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
Last  Sunday  morning,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
My  daddy  went  a-huntin' ,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
My  daddy  went  a-huntin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 
Well,  along  came  a  grey  goose,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
Along  came  a  grey  goose,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 
Well  up  to  his  shoulder,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
It's  up  to  his  shoulder,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 
And  ram  back  the  hammer,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
It's  ram  back  the  hammer,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 
Well,  the  gun  went  off  aboola,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 
The  gun  went  off  aboola,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 
And  down  he  came  a-fallin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
It's  down  he  came  a-fallin11 ,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 
He  was  6  weeks  a-fallin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
He  was  6  weeks  a-fallin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 
He  was  6  weeks  a-haulin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
6  weeks  a-haulin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 
The  wimmen  was  a-twitterin' ,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
The  wimmen  was  a-twitterin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 
Yes,  your  wife  and  my  wife,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
They  all  was  a-twitterin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 
They  gave  a  feather  pickin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 
They  gave  a  feather  pickin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 


110  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

He  was  6  weeks  a-pickin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

6  weeks  a-pickin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

Well,  they  put  him  on  a-cookin ',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

They  put  him  on  a-cookin',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

He  was  6  weeks  a-cookin' ',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

6  weeks  a-cookin' ,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

They  put  him  on  to  parboil,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

They  put  him  on  to  parboil,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

He  was  6  weeks  a-parboilin' ',  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

6  weeks  a-parboilin' ,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

Well,  they  put  him  on  the  table,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

They  put  him  on  the  table,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

The  fork  couldn't  stick  him,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

The  fork  couldn't  stick  him,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

And  the  knife  couldn't  cut  him,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

The  knife  couldn't  cut  him  neither,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

They  throwed  him  in  the  hog  pen,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

They  throwed  him  in  the  hog  pen,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

He  broke  old  Jerry's  jaw  bone,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

Broke  old  Jerry's  jaw  bone,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

So  they  took  him  to  the  sawmill,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

They  took  him  to  the  sawmill,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

He  broke  the  saw's  teeth  out,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

He  broke  the  saw's  teeth  out,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

Well,  the  last  time  I  seed  him,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

The  last  time  I  seed  him,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

He  was  flyin'  over  the  ocean,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

Flyin'  over  the  ocean,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

With  a  long  string  of  goslins,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

A  long  string  of  goslins,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

They  was  all  goin'  quink-quank,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd, 

All  goin'  quink-quank,  Lawd,  Lawd,  Lawd. 

—Unpublished  manuscript  in  the  Library  of 
Congress,  Archive  of  American  Folk  Music. 

THE    CUTTY    WREN 

0  where  are  you  going?  said  Milder  to  Malder, 
0  we  may  not  tell  you,  said  Festle  to  Fose. 
We're  off  to  the  woods,  said  John  the  Red  Nose, 
We're  off  to  the  woods,  said  John  the  Red  Nose. 
What  will  you  do  there?  said  Milder  to  Malder, 
0  we  may  not  tell  you,  said  Festle  to  Fose. 
We'll  shoot  the  Cutty  Wren,  said  John  the  Red  Nose, 
We'll  shoot  the  Cutty  Wren,  said  John  the  Red  Nose. 
How  will  you  shoot  her?  said  Milder  to  Malder, 


Corn  pone  •   111 

0  we  may  not  tell  you,  said  Festle  to  Fose. 

With  bows  and  with  arrows,  said  John  the  Red  Nose, 

With  bows  and  with  arrows,  said  John  the  Red  Nose. 

That  will  not  do,  said  Milder  to  Malder, 

O  what  will  do  then?  said  Festle  to  Fose. 

Big  guns  and  big  cannons,  said,  John  the  Red  Nose, 

Big  guns  and  big  cannons,  said  John  the  Red  Nose. 

How  will  you  bring  her  home?  said  Milder  to  Malder, 

O  we  may  not  tell  you,  said  Festle  to  Fose. 

On  four  strong  men's  shoulders,  said  John  the  Red  Nose, 

On  four  strong  men's  shoulders,  said  John  the  Red  Nose. 

That  will  not  do,  said  Milder  to  Malder, 

O  what  will  do  then?  said  Festle  to  Fose. 

Big  carts  and  big  waggons,  said  John  the  Red  Nose, 

Big  carts  and  big  waggons,  said  John  the  Red  Nose. 

How  will  you  cut  her  up?  said  Milder  to  Malder, 

O  we  may  not  tell  you,  said  Festle  to  Fose. 

With  knives  and  with  forks,  said  John  the  Red  Nose, 

With  knives  and  with  forks,  said  John  the  Red  Nose. 

That  will  not  do,  said  Milder  to  Malder, 

O  what  will  do  then?  said  Festle  to  Fose. 

Big  hatchets  and  cleavers,  said  John  the  Red  Nose, 

Big  hatchets  and  cleavers,  said  John  the  Red  Nose. 

Who'll  get  the  spare  ribs?  said  Milder  to  Malder, 

O  we  may  not  tell  you,  said  Festle  to  Fose. 

We'll  give  it  all  to  the  poor,  said  John  the  Red  Nose, 

We'll  give  it  all  to  the  poor,  said  John  the  Red  Nose. 

—A.  L.  Lloyd,  The  Singing  Englishman,  London,  n.d.,  p.  7. 
CORN    PONE 


Corn  pone,  fat  meat, 

All  I  ever  gets  to  eat 

Better,  better 

Than  I  ever  gets  at  home, 

Far  better  than  I  ever  gets  at  home. 


112  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Cotton  socks,  striped  overall, 

No  Sunday  rags  at  all 

Finer,  finer 

Than  I  ever  gets  at  home, 

Far  better  than  I  ever  gets  at  home. 

Iron  bunk  for  my  bed, 

Straw  beneath  my  head 

Softer,  softer 

Than  the  sort  I  gets  at  home, 

Far  softer  than  I  ever  gets  at  home. 

Heavy  ring  on  my  arm, 

And  my  feet  got  bracelet  Wound, 

Stronger,  stronger 

Than  I  got  to  wear  at  home, 

Far  stronger  than  I  got  to  wear  at  home. 

Baby,  baby,  let  me  be, 

Chain  gang  good  enough  for  me, 

Better,  better 

Than  I  ever  gets  at  home, 

Far  better  than  I  ever  gets  at  home. 

—Lawrence  Gellert:  Me  and  My  Captain 
p.  10,  copyright  1939. 

I'M    SO   DEEP   IN   TROUBLE 

Vm  so  deep  in  trouble, 

White  folks  can't  get  me  straight; 

Stoled  a  hog  and  charge  me  for  murdering  case. 

Carry  me  to  the  courthouse, 

And  give  me  my  trial; 

Got  forty  year  on  hard  rock  pile. 

Wearing  double  shackles, 

From  my  head  right  down  to  my  knees; 

Eating  nothing  'cept  slop  of  corn,  bread  and  peas. 

Went  to  the  walker, 

And  head  Boss  man  too; 

Please,  all  you  big  white  folks,  see  what  you  can  do. 

Say,  all  right,  you  black  man, 

Won't  forget  you  nohow; 

Come  around  to  see  me  'bout  forty  year  from  now. 

—Lawrence  Gellert:  Me  and  My  Captain, 
p.  10,  copyright  1939. 


If  you  catch  me  stealin'  •  113 

IF   YOU    CATCH    ME    STEALIN ' 

//  you  catch  me  stealin' 

Don't  blame  me  none. 

If  you  catch  me  stealin' 

Don't  blame  me  none. 

You  put  a  mark  on  mah  people, 

An'  it  must  be  carried  on. 

Trouble,  trouble,  had  it  all  mah  day. 
Trouble,  trouble,  had  it  all  mah  day. 
An'  it  seem  like  trouble, 
Gonna  follow  me  to  my  grave. 

Can't  pawn  no  diamonds, 
Can't  pawn  no  do' 
Can't  pawn  no  diamonds, 
Can't  pawn  no  do' 
An'  boss  man  told  me, 
Can't  use  me  no  mo'. 

Rather  get  me  a  fob,  like  white  folks  do. 
Rather  get  me  a  fob,  like  white  folks  do. 
Trampin'  'round  all  day, 
Say,  "Nigger,  nothin'  fo'  you." 

Try  one  mo'  time, 

Won't  try  no  mo'. 

Try  one  mo'  time, 

Won't  try  no  mo'. 

Gonna  load  me  a  box  of  balls 

Fo'  my  fohty  foh. 

I'm  tellin'  you,  white  folks,  like  de  Chinaman  tell  de  Jew. 
I'm  tellin'  you,  white  folks,  like  de  Chinaman  tell  de  Jew. 
If  you  care  nothin'  'bout  Nigger, 
Cinch  I  care  nothin'  'bout  you. 

—Lawrence  Gellert,  Negro  Songs  of  Protest, 
New  York,  1936,  copyright  1936. 

ONE  DAY  OLD  AND  NO  DAMN  GOOD 

Hush,  my  babe,  don't  be  forlorn 
'Cause  you  were  lynched  'fore  you  were  born; 
Your  skin  is  black  and  they'd  like  it  understood 
Though  you're  one  day  old  you're  no  damn  good. 


114  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Don't  hush,  my  babe,  you're  right  to  squawk 
Your  skin  will  creep,  'fore  you  can  walk; 
You  live  as  long  as  some  people  think  you  should, 
When  you're  one  day  old  and  no  damn  good. 

Some  day  you  may  be  president 

And  have  a  white  house  for  a  residence, 

So  dry  your  tears,  and  don't  you  frown, 

'Cause  the  whip  and  the  rope  can't  keep  you  down. 

This  nightmare,  babe,  can't  last  the  night. 
We'll  end  it  soon,  both  black  and  white; 
We'll  mark  the  grave,  with  a  rotten  slab  of  wood, 
Signed,  "one  day  old  and  no  damn  good." 

—By  N.  Kalin;  in  People's  Songs  Library,  unpublished 

"I  saw  Jeff  Buckner  lynched  in  Texas  when  I  was  about  eight 
years  old.  I  wrote  this  song  to  express  my  grief  and  my  feeling  of 
helplessness.  ...  It  is  to  be  sung  very  slowly  and  mournfully."— 
Frank  Beddo. 


JEFF  BUCKNER 

They  hanged  Jeff  Buckner  from  a  sycamore  tree, 

And  I  was  there,  and  I  was  there. 

He  went  to  his  death  so  silently, 

And  I  was  there,  but  I  never  said  a  word. 

They  put  him  in  a  wagon  with  a  rope  around  his  neck, 
And  I  was  there,  and  I  was  there. 

They  pulled  away  the  wagon  and  his  neck  it  did  break, 
And  I  was  there,  but  I  never  said  a  word. 

Jeff  Buckner' s  face  was  as  black  as  coal, 
And  I  was  there,  and  I  was  there. 
But  white  as  snow  alongside  of  my  soul, 
For  I  was  there,  but  I  never  said  a  word. 

They  nailed  King  Jesus  to  an  iron-bolted  tree, 
And  I  was  there,  and  you  were  there. 
And  meek  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter  went  he, 
And  we  were  there,  but  we  never  said  a  word. 

—From  People's  Songs  Library. 


The  bourgeois  blues  *   115 

Huddie  Ledbetter— Leadbelly— the  great  Negro  folk  singer 
whom  the  Lomaxes  brought  up  from  the  Deep  South,  where  he 
had  served  several  terms  in  work  farms,  can  be  taken  as  a  typical 
example  of  how  articulate  protest  develops.  In  their  book  Negro 
Folk  Songs  as  Sung  by  Leadbelly  (p.  184)  the  Lomaxes  remark, 
"Note  the  'Farmer  tol'  de  merchant'  stanza  ("Boll  Weevil")  which 
is,  so  far  as  we  can  tell,  the  only  class  conscious  sentiment  in 
Leadbelly's  songbag."  After  he  had  settled  in  New  York  and  had 
become  acquainted  with  people  who  were  protesting  against  racial 
discrimination,  Leadbelly  added  a  number  of  class-conscious  songs 
like  "The  Bourgeois  Blues"  to  his  repertoire. 

THE  BOURGEOIS  BLUES 

Me  and  my  wife  run  all  over  town, 

Every  where 's  we'd  go  people  would  turn  us  down. 

refrain:  Lawd,  in  the  bourgeois  town,  hoo! 
The  bourgeois  town. 
I  got  the  bourgeois  blues, 
Gonna  spread  the  news  all  around. 

Me  and  Margie  we  was  standing  upstairs, 

I  heard  a  white  man  say,  "I  don't  want  no  niggers  up  there." 

Home  of  the  brave,  land  of  the  free, 

I  don't  want  to  be  mistreated  by  no  bourgeoisie. 

Me  and  my  wife  we  went  all  over  town, 
Everywhere  we  go  the  colored  people  turn  us  down. 

White  folks  in  Washington,  they  know  how 
Chuck  a  colored  man  a  nickel  just  to  see  him  bow. 

Tell  all  the  colored  folks,  listen  to  me, 

Don't  try  to  buy  no  home  in  Washington,  D.  C. 

"God  Made  Us  All"  is  one  of  the  recent  but  large  production 
of  calypso  songs  on  topical  matters,  written  by  well-known  West 
Indian  calypsonians  as  Lord  Invader,  Sir  Lancelot,  Macbeth  the 
Great,  and  the  Duke  of  Iron.  The  protest  in  the  calypso  is  undis- 
guised, partly  because  of  the  greater  freedom  from  censorship 
today,  and  partly  because  the  calypso  is  primarily  a  medium  for 
expressing  an  interpretation  of  observed  facts. 


116  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

GOD    MADE    US   ALL 

//  you  are  a  Negro  it  is  plain  to  see 

You  are  bound  to  suffer  misery  and  tyranny. 

If  you  are  a  Negro  it  is  plain  to  see 

You  are  bound  to  suffer  misery  and  tyranny. 

But  we  should  be  race  conscious  and  always  be 

Living  in  unity  and  tranquillity 

For  God  made  us  all,  and  in  him  we  trust, 

Nobody  in  this  world  is  better  than  us. 

Listen  what  I  am  outlining  to  you, 
Negroes  fought  in  World  Wars  One  and  Two. 
Some  lose  their  lives,  others  lose  a  hand, 
We  fought  gallantly  for  United  Nations. 
So  if  we  Negroes  are  good  enough  to  fight, 
I  don't  see  why  we  can't  have  our  equal  right. 
For  God  made  us  all,  and  in  him  we  trust, 
Nobody  in  this  world  is  better  than  us. 

We  ought  to  unite  with  one  another, 
As  the  scripture  say,  to  love  thy  brother; 
If  you  are  a  Jew  or  an  Italian, 
A  Negro  or  a  subject  of  Great  Britain, 
This  is  what  I  want  you  to  realize, 
Six  feet  of  earth  make  us  all  of  one  size. 
For  God  made  us  all,  and  in  him  we  trust, 
Nobody  in  this  world  is  better  than  us. 

I  heard  this  speaking  of  democracy, 

That  is  only  diplomacy  and  hypocrisy, 

It  is  about  time  this  should  be  cut  out, 

The  way  the  Negroes  are  treated  down  South. 

In  my  opinion  it's  a  burning  shame, 

Like  they  want  to  bring  back  slavery  again. 

For  God  made  us  all,  and  in  him  we  trust, 

Nobody  in  this  world  is  better  than  us. 

—By  Rupert  Grant    ("Lord  Invader")  copyright  1946 

The  new  "bad  man"  ballads 

The  victim  of  the  legal  manifestations  of  racial  discrimi- 
nation can  take  what  solace  he  can  find  in  the  certainty  that  he 
will  be  memorialized  in  song.  The  range  of  this  type  of  Negro 
song  is  illustrated  by  the  following  three  ballads.  The  first  is  of 
Negro  origin;  the  other  two  were  composed  by  a  white  man, 


Scottsboro  •  117 

Woody  Guthrie,  but  he  would  be  offended  were  anyone  to  point 
out  the  distinction,  which  is  to  him  somewhat  less  than  academic. 
"Buoy  Bells  for  Trenton"  tells  the  story  of  the  "Trenton  Six," 
whose  fate  at  this  writing  is  still  in  the  process  of  being  determined. 

SCOTTSBORO 

Paper  come  out — Done  strewed  de  news 
Seven  po'  chillun  moan  Deaf  house  blues 
Seven  po'  chillun  moanin'  Deaf  house  blues. 
Seven  nappy  heads  wit'  big  shiny  eye 
All  boun'  in  jail  and  framed  to  die 
All  boun'  in  jail  and  framed  to  die. 

Messin'  white  woman — Snake  lyin'  tale 
Hang  and  burn  and  jail  wit'  no  bail. 
Dot  hang  and  burn  and  jail  wit  no  bail. 
Worse  oV  crime  in  white  folks'  Ian' 
Black  skin  coverin'  po'  workin'  man 
Black  skin  coverin'  po'  workin'  man. 

Judge  and  jury — All  in  de  stan' 
Lawd,  biggety  name  for  same  lynchin'  ban' 
Lawd,  biggety  name  for  same  lynchin'  ban' 
White  folks  and  nigger  in  great  Co't  house 
Like  cat  down  cellar  wit'  nohole  mouse. 
Like  cat  down  cellar  wit'  nohole  mouse. 

—Lawrence  Gellert,  Negro  Songs  of  Protest, 
New  York,   1936,  p.  44. 

THE  FERGUSON  BROTHERS'  KILLING 

Let's  stop  here  and  drink  us  a  hot  cup  of  coffee 

That  Long  Island  bus  was  an  awful  long  ride; 

But  we've  got  to  keep  your  blood  warm,  our  young  brother, 

Charles, 
Because  you've  reenlisted  for  quite  a  long  time. 

You've  been  over  the  ocean  and  won  your  good  record 
A  Private  First  Class  needs  hot  coffee  the  same 
As  Alonzo  or  Joseph  or  just  plain  old  Richard 
We'll  all  drink  a  hot  cup  to  each  brother's  name. 

It's  nice  of  the  Bus  Terminal  to  have  a  good  Tea  Room 
Mr.  Scholakis  is  the  owner,  there's  his  card  on  the  wall. 
Let's  sit  over  here  and  wash  down  our  troubles, 
And  if  you  know  a  tall  story,  my  brother,  tell  them  all. 


118  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

The  waiter  shakes  his  head,  wipes  his  hands  on  his  apron, 
He  says  there's  no  coffee  in  all  that  big  urn; 
In  that  glass  gauge  there  it  looks  like  several  inches, 
It  looks  like  this  Tea  Room's  got  coffee  to  burn. 

We  made  him  a  speech  in  a  quiet  friendly  manner 

We  didn't  want  to  scare  you  ladies  over  there; 

He  calls  for  a  cop  on  his  fone  on  the  sly, 

And  the  cop  come  and  marched  us  out  in  the  night's  air. 

The  cop  said  that  we  had  insulted  the  Joint  man. 
He  made  us  line  up  with  our  faces  to  the  wall; 
We  laughed  to  ourselves  as  we  stood  there  and  listened 
To  the  man  of  law  and  order  putting  in  his  riot  call. 

The  cop  turned  around  and  walked  back  to  young  Charlie 
Kicked  him  in  the  groin  and  then  shot  him  to  the  ground; 
This  same  bullet  went  through  the  brain  of  Alonzo 
And  the  next  bullet  laid  my  brother  Joseph  down. 

My  fourth  brother  Richard  got  hauled  to  the  station 
Bawled  out  and  lectured  by  the  judge  on  his  bench. 
The  judge  said  us  Fergusons  was  looking  for  trouble; 
They  lugged  Richard  off  for  a  hundred  day  stretch. 

This  morning  two  hearses  roll  out  toward  the  graveyard 
One  hearse  had  Alonzo  and  the  other  took  Charles. 
Charles'  wife,  Minnie,  brings  her  three  boy  children 
And  friends  and  relatives  in  some  old  borrowed  cars. 

Nobody  has  told  these  three  little  boys  yet, 
Everybody  rides  crying  and  shaking  their  heads. 
Nobody  knows  quite  how  to  make  these  three  boys  know 
That  Jim  Crow  killed  Alonzo,  that  Charles  too  is  dead. 

The  town  that  we  ride  through  is  not  Rankin,  Mississippi, 
Nor  Bilbo's  Jim  Crow  town  of  Washington,  D.  C. 
But  it's  greater  New  York,  our  most  fair  minded  city 
In  all  this  big  land  here  and  streets  of  the  brave. 

Who'll  tell  these  three  boys  that  their  Daddy  is  gone? 
(He  helped  whip  the  Fascists  and  Nazis  to  death) 
Who'll  tell  these  three  sons  that  Jim  Crow  coffee 
Has  killed  several  thousand  the  same  as  their  dad? 

—Composed  by  Woody  Guthrie,  March  5,  1946. 


Buoy  bells  for  trenton  •   119 

BUOY   BELLS   FOR  TRENTON 

Well,  the  buoy  bells  are  ringing 

I  can  hear  them  on  the  wind 

Ringing  loud  to  bring  the  ships  and  sailors  home. 

They  should  sound  like  bells  of  freedom 

But  they  ring  like  bells  of  death 

For  six  in  Trenton's  death  house  marked  to  die. 

refrain:  Bling,  Blang,  Blong,  I  can  hear  them 
Louder  as  the  stormy  waters  rise; 
Bling,  Blang,  Blong,  you  can  hear  them 
Ringing  for  the  boys  framed  up  to  die. 

I  shipped  thru  these  same  waters 

And  I  heard  these  channel  bells 

Guide  our  ships  to  beat  that  super  race. 

I  sail  home  past  my  warning  bells 

And  find  you  marked  to  die 

Just  for  having  dark  skin  on  your  hands  and  face. 

Now  my  bells  ring  o'er  the  rooftops 

And  they  ring  on  every  tree 

They  take  me  to  that  civil  war  we  fought  to  set  you  free 

If  that  Trenton  Court  can  take  you 

Six  for  one  and  one  a  day, 

The  race  hate  Fascists  are  at  work,  my  bells  are  telling  me. 

Yes,  my  buoy  bells  in  Boston 
Rang  in  blood  that  hateful  night 
When  old  Judge  Thayer  sat 
And  let  Sacco  and  Vanzetti  die; 
He  called  them  Wops  and  radical  rats, 
That  same  old  race  hate 

That  ruled  the  judge  and  jury's  heart  when  your  death 
line  they  signed. 

—Composed  by  Woody  Guthrie,  June  i,  1949. 

One  of  a  number  of  topical  songs  on  the  political  proponents 
of  Jim  Crow  philosophy,  but  unlike  "Listen  Mr.  Bilbo"  and  "The 
Rankin  Tree,"  this  is  of  genuine  folk  origin,  having  been  written 
by  a  Negro  sharecropper.  Of  the  tune  he  says,  "Make  it  up  your- 
self; that's  what  we  all  do."  Note  the  maverick  sixth  stanza,  found 
most  often  toward  the  end  of  "Frankie  and  Albert." 


120  ■  American  folksongs  of  protest 

BALLAD    OF   TALMADGE 

It's  sunny  again  in  Georgia, 

No  finer  breathing  place. 

Since  the  undertaker 

Throwed  dirt  in  Talmadge  face. 

Now  he's  gone,  poor  man,  he's  gone. 

He  split  his  guts  wide  open, 
Wore  his  tonsils  sore 
With  mean  and  hateful  cussin; 
Now  he  can't  cuss  no  more. 
He's  gone,  poor  man,  he's  gone. 

He  promise  when  he  Governor 
Us  colored  good  as  dead. 
Sure  God  I  ain'  agrievin' 
Cause  he  shoo'd  off  hisself  instead. 
He's  gone,  poor  man,  he's  gone. 

I  got  thinkin'  maybe  Jesus 
Done  left  us  in  the  lurch; 
Then  Devil  he  take  Talmadge, 
I  flew  right  back  to  Church. 
He's  gone,  poor  man,  he's  gone. 

He  weren't  so  good  lookin' 
He  don't  dress  him  so  nice, 
But  prettiest  sight  I  ever  see 
When  they  ship  him  home  on  ice. 
He's  gone,  poor  man,  he's  gone. 

Rubber  tire  buggy, 
Soft  down  cushion  hack, 
Drag  him  to  the  cemetery, 
Forget  to  bring  him  back. 
He's  gone,  poor  man,  he's  gone. 

Old  iron  is  iron, 

But  tin  it  never  last; 

So  we  come  to  the  end  of  our  story, 

Cause  that's  all  that  I  has. 

He's  gone,  poor  man,  he's  gone. 

—Collected  by  Lawrence  Gellert. 


3.  The  songs  of  the  textile  workers 


It's  hard  times  in  the  mills,  my  love, 
It's  hard  times  in  the  mills. 


With  the  single  exception  of  the  miners,  no  organized 
labor  group  has  produced  more  songs  of  social  and  economic  pro- 
test than  the  textile  workers.  Their  songs  are  plentiful  from  the 
earliest  period  of  American  labor  history,  and  at  the  present  time 
are  richer  in  sincerity,  quality,  genuine  folk  content,  and  protest, 
than  those  emanating  from  any  other  industry.  Reasons  for  this 
prolificacy  are  not  hard  to  find. 

The  principal  reason  is  an  historical  one,  for  the  American 
factory  system  started  with  the  industrialization  of  yarn-making 
shortly  after  the  Revolution.  British  manufacturers  at  that  time 
had  a  half-century  advantage  over  American  mechanization,  a 
monopoly  they  sought  frantically  to  preserve  by  keeping  machines, 
experience,  and  even  skilled  workers  in  England.  But  this  kind  of 
communicative  blockade  collapses  with  the  emigration  of  one  man 


122  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

who  can  build  a  machine,  and  so  the  history  of  American  indus- 
trialization began  with  the  building  in  1798  of  a  yarn-making  mill 
in  Pawtucket  by  an  immigrant  English  mechanic,  Samuel  Slater, 
who  was  financed  by  American  capitalists.  At  first  the  American 
textile  industry  was  limited  to  the  production  of  yarn  only,  but 
in  1815  all  the  processes  of  cotton-cloth  manufacture  were  mech- 
anized by  Francis  C.  Lowell,  who  had  spent  several  years  in  Eng- 
land studying  methods  of  textile  manufacture.  Following  this  start 
of  American  industry,  textile  plants  spread  rapidly  through  New 
England,  with  sporadic  and  usually  ineffectual  labor  organizations 
trailing  close  behind. 

If  Samuel  Slater  was  the  father  of  the  American  textile  industry, 
he  was  also  the  father  of  the  thoughtless  exploitation  of  its  opera- 
tives that  has  been  the  blight  of  textile  manufacture,  for  his  first 
workers  were  nine  children,  all  under  twelve  years  of  age.  In  1820 
half  of  the  textile  operatives  were  boys  and  girls  of  ten  or  younger, 
who  earned  from  thirty-three  to  sixty-seven  cents  for  a  seventy-five- 
hour  week.  It  must  be  admitted  that  certain  observers  deplored 
the  ill-treatment  of  children  by  mill  owners;  one  group  of  Massa- 
chusetts reformers  "berated  Rhode  Island  mill  owners  for  using 
the  strap  instead  of  sprinkling  water  on  the  children  to  keep  them 
awake  during  their  eleven-  to  fourteen-hour  shifts."1 

The  other  half  of  the  textile  labor  force,  composed  principally 
of  young  women  from  nearby  farms,  possessed  the  understanding 
that  the  children  lacked,  and  therefore  protested  against  the  con- 
ditions in  the  factories— by  organizing  and  striking,  by  going  back 
to  the  farm,  and  by  singing. 

One  of  their  early  songs  expresses  the  feeling  which  predomi- 
nated in  the  mills  during  the  early  decades  of  the  nineteenth 
century. 

THE    LOWELL    FACTORY    GIRL 

When  I  set  out  for  Lowell, 
Some  factory  for  to  find, 
I  left  my  native  country, 
And  all  my  friends  behind. 

refrain:  Then  sing  hit-re-i-re-a-re-o 
Then  sing  hit-re-i-re-a. 

1  Herbert  Harris,  American  Labor,  New  Haven,  1940,  p.  31011. 


The  songs  of  the  textile  workers  •   123 

But  now  I  am  in  Lowell, 
And  summon 'd  by  the  bell, 
I  think  less  of  the  factory 
Than  of  my  native  dell. 

The  factory  bell  begins  to  ring, 
And  we  must  all  obey, 
And  to  our  old  employment  go, 
Or  else  be  turned  away. 

Come  all  ye  weary  factory  girls, 
I'll  have  you  understand, 
I'm  going  to  leave  the  factory 
And  return  to  my  native  land. 

No  more  I'll  put  my  bonnet  on 
And  hasten  to  the  mill, 
While  all  the  girls  are  working  hard, 
Here  I'll  be  lying  still. 

No  more  I'll  lay  my  bobbins  up, 
No  more  I'll  take  them  down; 
No  more  I'll  clean  my  dirty  work, 
For  I'm  going  out  of  town. 

No  more  I'll  take  my  piece  of  soap, 
No  more  I'll  go  to  wash, 
No  more  my  overseer  shall  say, 
"Your  frames  are  stopped  to  doff." 

Come  all  you  little  doffers 

That  work  in  the  Spinning  room; 

Go  wash  your  face  and  comb  your  hair, 

Prepare  to  leave  the  room. 

No  more  I'll  oil  my  picker  rods, 
No  more  I'll  brush  my  loom, 
No  more  I'll  scour  my  dirty  floor 
All  in  the  Weaving  room. 

No  more  I'll  draw  these  threads 
All  through  the  harness  eye; 
No  more  I'll  say  to  my  overseer, 
Oh!  dear  me,  I  shall  die. 

No  more  I'll  get  my  overseer 
To  come  and  fix  my  loom, 
No  more  I'll  say  to  my  overseer 
Can't  I  stay  out  'till  noon? 


124  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Then  since  they've  cut  my  wages  down 
To  nine  shillings  per  week, 
If  I  cannot  better  wages  make, 
Some  other  place  I'll  seek. 

No  more  he'll  find  me  reading, 
No  more  he'll  see  me  sew, 
No  more  he'll  come  to  me  and  say 
"Such  works  I  can't  allow." 

I  do  not  like  my  overseer, 
I  do  not  mean  to  stay, 
I  mean  to  hire  a  Depot-boy 
To  carry  me  away. 

The  Dress-room  girls,  they  needn't  think 
Because  they  higher  go, 
That  they  are  better  than  the  girls 
That  work  in  the  rooms  below. 

The  overseers  they  need  not  think, 
Because  they  higher  stand; 
That  they  are  better  than  the  girls 
That  work  at  their  command. 

'Tis  wonder  how  the  men 
Can  such  machinery  make, 
A  thousand  wheels  together  roll 
Without  the  least  mistake. 

Now  soon  you'll  see  me  married 
To  a  handsome  little  man, 
'Tis  then  I'll  say  to  you  factory  girls, 
Come  and  see  me  when  you  can. 

—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 

I  have  been  unable  to  date  this  song  precisely,  but  the  aged 
condition  of  the  broadside,  together  with  such  internal  evidence 
as  can  be  detected,  place  its  composition  around  the  1830's.  The 
"nine  shilling"  wage  of  which  the  singer  complains  coincides  with 
the  average  weekly  earnings  of  $2.25  paid  to  New  England  cotton- 
factory  operatives  in  1830.  Furthermore,  the  freedom  to  return  to 
the  farm  was  not  generally  possible  after  1840,  when  a  mill- 
dependent  permanent  labor  community  had  begun  to  attach  itself 
to  the  factories.  After  the  panic  of  1837,  which  wiped  out  many  of 


No  more  shall  I  work  in  the  factory  *   125 

the  small  New  England  farmers,  the  refuge  that  the  "Lowell 
factory  girl"  sings  of  had  vanished. 

"The  Lowell  Factory  Girl,"  incidentally,  is  a  folksong  accord- 
ing to  the  narrowest  definitions  of  that  troublesome  term.  Its  com- 
poser is  unknown,  it  has  undergone  oral  transmission,  it  has  spread 
over  a  wide  geographical  area,  and  it  has  been  sung  by  more  than 
two  generations.  In  his  article  "Some  Types  of  American  Folk 
Song"  in  the  Journal  of  American  Folklore  (Vol.  28,  1915)  John 
Lomax  records  a  song  containing  several  identifiable  stanzas  of 
"The  Lowell  Factory  Girl,"  to  which  he  appends  this  note: 

I  heard  [this]  sung  by  a  wandering  singer  plying  her  minstrel  trade 
by  the  roadside  in  Fort  Worth,  during  an  annual  meeting  of  the  Texas 
Cattle  Raisers  Association.  It  is  the  song  of  the  girl  factory  worker, 
and  the  singer  told  me  she  picked  it  up  in  Florida. 

Another  version  collected  more  recently  in  North  Carolina  is 
aptly  titled  "No  More  Shall  I  Work  in  the  Factory." 

NO    MORE   SHALL   I    WORK   IN    THE    FACTORY 

(Tune:  "Ten  Thousand  Miles") 

No  more  shall  I  work  in  the  factory 
To  greasy  up  my  clothes; 
No  more  shall  I  work  in  the  factory 
With  splinters  in  my  toes. 

refrain:  It's  pity  me  my  darling, 
It's  pity  me  I  say 
It's  pity  me  my  darling, 
And  carry  me  away. 

No  more  shall  I  hear  the  bosses  say, 
"Boys,  you'd  better  daulf." 
No  more  shall  I  hear  those  bosses  say, 
"Spinners,  you'd  better  clean  off." 

No  more  shall  I  hear  the  drummer  wheels 

A-r oiling  over  my  head, 

When  factories  are  hard  at  work, 

I'll  be  in  my  bed. 

No  more  shall  I  hear  the  whistle  blow 
To  call  me  up  so  soon; 
No  more  shall  I  hear  the  whistle  blow 
To  call  me  from  my  home. 


126  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

No  more  shall  see  the  super  come, 
All  dressed  up  so  proud; 
For  I  know  I'll  marry  a  country  boy 
Before  the  year  is  out. 

No  more  shall  I  wear  the  old  black  dress, 
Greasy  all  around; 

No  more  shall  I  wear  the  old  black  bonnet 
With  holes  all  in  the  crown. 

—People's  Songs  Library 

The  deprivation  of  the  farm  as  a  refuge  for  mill  workers  who 
were  dissatisfied  with  conditions  impressed  upon  them  the  identity 
of  their  cause  with  that  of  labor  as  a  whole,  and  so  unions  of 
greater  stability  came  into  existence.  Early  in  their  history  these 
organizations  became  articulate,  and  the  owners,  recognizing  the 
danger  of  such  articulateness,  attempted  to  divert  it  into  censored 
factory  magazines.  The  most  famous  of  these  organs  was  the 
Lowell  Offering,  which  received  enthusiastic  commendation  as  an 
expression  of  the  nobility  of  the  American  laborer  from  persons 
who  should  have  known  better,  among  them  Charles  Dickens,  who 
praised  it  in  his  American  Notes.  The  diverted  surge  of  operatives' 
protest  built  up  behind  this  obstacle,  and  in  the  1840's  overflowed 
into  its  own  channels— genuine  mill  workers'  journals  like  The 
Factory  Girl,  the  Factory  Girl's  Album  and  Operative's  Advocate, 
and  The  Voice  of  Industry,  in  which  most  of  the  extant  early  pro- 
test songs  are  preserved. 

The  avidity  of  the  mill  owners  thrived  on  the  ignorance  of  the 
people  from  whom  the  textile  labor  force  has  traditionally  been 
drawn.  In  modern  times  many  textile  mills  moved  to  the  rural 
South  in  order  to  benefit  by  cheap  labor,  a  euphemism  for  ignorant 
labor.2 

2  Even  this  aspect  of  labor  dissatisfaction  has  been  reflected  in  song  (tune:  "London 
Bridge  Is  Falling  Down"): 

Greenberg  Shop  is  moving  South, 
Moving  South,  moving  South, 
Greenberg  Shop  is  moving  South, 
Swell  Employers! 

After  we  slaved  to  make  them  rich, 
Make  them  rich,  make  them  rich, 
After  we  slaved  to  make  them  rich, 
Lousy  employers! 


The  songs  of  the  textile  workers  *   127 

The  mountain  folk  who  constitute  the  American  peasantry  had 
little  opportunity  to  recognize  the  squalor  of  their  existence  as 
long  as  they  remained  isolated  in  cultural  pockets;  but  when  the 
mill  employment  agents  began  enticing  whole  families  from  their 
leisured  and  idle  poverty  (which  at  least  was  ameliorated  by  the 
salubrious  effects  of  rural  life)  to  regimented  and  exploited  poverty 
of  urban  areas  where  an  entirely  new  plane  of  prosperity  could 
be  seen  but  not  shared,  conflict  arose.  The  mill  owners,  as  the 
stories  of  the  Gastonia  and  Marion  strikes  show,  desperately  and 
ruthlessly  tried  to  hamper  this  orientation  by  further  restrictions. 
"Foreign"  organizers,  who  provided  in  a  moment  social  enlight- 
enment that  might  not  appear  for  years  without  outside  stimula- 
tion, were  in  constant  danger  of  being  killed  by  men  of  whom 
Jay  Gould  was  thinking  when  he  said,  "I  can  hire  one  half  of 
the  working  class  to  kill  the  other  half."  The  violent  conflict  re- 
sulting from  these  conditions  inevitably  produced  songs  of  protest. 

Drawing  a  labor  force  from  the  rural  South  assured  the  textile 
industry  still  another  fundamental  source  of  song.  The  cultural 
isolation  of  the  mountain  people  and  its  attendant  restriction  of 
other  sources  of  entertainment  resulted  in  a  strong  tradition  of 
singing  which  not  only  preserved  a  rich  store  of  English  and 
Scottish  ballads  and  songs,  but  facilitated  native  song-making. 
Thus,  while  the  northern  urban  worker  is  likely  to  express  his 
dissatisfaction  with  labor  conditions  by  beating  his  wife,  the 
southern  rural  worker  is  apt  to  sublimate  some  of  his  protest  at 
least  in  singing.  In  an  area  where  four  or  five  guitarists  may  be 
found  in  every  group  of  twenty  persons,  and  where  song  improvisa- 
tion is  an  unremarkable  talent,  topical  songs  are  common.  If  strikes 
or  similar  labor  troubles  arise,  the  topical  songs  become  songs  of 
protest. 

There  are  other  reasons  for  the  abundance  of  protest  songs 
among  the  textile  workers,  less  fundamental  perhaps,  but  still  of 
contributory  importance.  The  location  of  many  textile  mills  in 
mining  areas,  where  a  separate  body  of  protest  song  has  already 
grown  up,  is  one  such  reason.  Another  is  the  nature  of  the  work 
in  the  textile  industry.  The  textile  worker  is  properly  a  machine 
tender  whose  duties  are  mechanical  and  monotonous;  such  work 
has  already  been  conducive  to  singing  simple,  rhythmic,  incon- 


128  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

sequential  songs.3  Fitting  union  words  to  these  songs  is  almost  a 
subconscious  process.  As  the  worker  sings  or  hums  a  well-integrated 
melody,  the  tune  is  acted  upon  by  the  force  uppermost  in  his 
mind— in  many  cases  the  union,  whose  importance  in  the  life  of 
the  textile  worker  is  greatly  underestimated  by  those  whose  lives 
are  fuller.  A  young  woman,  possibly  not  far  from  childhood,  sing- 
ing the  catchy  children's  song,  "I  Love  Little  Willie,"  may  easily 
substitute  "my  union"  for  Willie: 

/  love  my  union,  I  do,  Mama; 

I  love  my  union,  I  do,  ha  ha; 

I  love  my  union,  and  you  can  tell  Pa, 

For  he  will  like  it  you  know. 

It  fights  for  me,  it  does,  Mama; 
It  fights  for  me,  it  does,  ha  ha; 
It  fights  for  me,  and  you  can  tell  Pa, 
For  he  will  like  it  you  know. 

Another  girl,  while  humming  a  tune  before  her  machine,  may  be 
thinking  of  an  inconsistent  statement  made  earlier  in  the  day  by 
her  boss;  imperceptibly  the  thought  affixes  itself  to  the  melody: 

Semaria  says  he  loves  his  girls 

Doo  da,  doo  da; 

He  wants  to  give  them  jewels  and  pearls 

All  the  doo  da  day. 

All  the  doo  da  day, 

All  the  doo  da  day, 

He  wants  to  give  them  jewels  and  pearls 

Instead  of  union  pay. 

A  man  (approximately  half  of  textile  workers  are  men)  can 
quickly  divest  himself  of  an  overpowering  disgust  for  his  job  in 
a  blues,  when  the  materials  for  his  song  are  all  around  him: 

WEAVE    ROOM    BLUES 

Working  in  a  weave  room,  fighting  for  my  life, 
Trying  to  make  a  living,  for  my  kiddies  and  my  wife, 
Some  are  needing  clothing  and  some  are  needing  shoes, 
But  I'm  getting  nothing  but  these  weave  room  blues. 

3  The  modern  urban  industrial  worker  has  this  singing  done  for  him  by  recorded 
musical  programs  "piped"  into  the  factory. 


The  songs  of  the  textile  workers  *   129 

refrain:  I've  got  the  blues,  Vve  got  the  blues, 

I've  got  them  awful  weave-room  blues. 
Vve  got  the  blues,  the  weave  room  blues. 

When  your  loom's  a  slamming,  shackles  bouncing  on  the  floor, 
And  when  you  flag  a  fixer  you  can  see  that  he  is  sore. 
I'm  trying  to  make  a  living  but  I'm  thinking  I  will  lose, 
For  I'm  going  crazy  with  them  weave  room  blues. 

The  harness  eyes  are  breaking  with  the  double  coming  through, 
The  Devil's  in  your  alley  and  he's  coming  after  you. 
Our  hearts  are  aching,  let  us  take  a  little  booze, 
For  we're  going  crazy  with  them  weave  room  blues. 

Slam,  break  out,  makeouts  by  the  score, 

Cloth  all  rolled  back  and  piled  up  on  the  floor. 

The  bats  are  running  into  strings,  they  are  hanging  to  your  shoes, 

I'm  simply  dying  with  them  weave  room  blues. 

But  the  best  songs,  as  always,  are  born  of  conflict.  Strikes  in 
the  Deep  South  before  the  New  Deal  fostered  the  growth  and  con- 
solidation of  powerful  labor  unions  were  not  merely  good-natured 
gambits  offered  by  the  workers  and  accepted  by  the  employers  as 
preludes  to  peaceful  arbitration;  they  were  small-scale  wars  of 
attrition  in  which  the  employer  tried  to  exterminate  not  merely 
the  union,  but  the  men  behind  it.  Two  such  bloody  conflicts  were 
the  Marion  and  Gastonia  strikes  of  1929. 

THE    MARION    STRIKE 

At  the  beginning  of  1929  the  Marion  Manufacturing 
Company  of  Marion,  North  Carolina,  had  assets  of  $1,169,925  and 
was  about  to  pay  a  dividend  of  $11.50  on  each  share  of  common 
stock.  At  the  same  time  it  was  paying  its  seven  hundred  workers 
an  average  of  $  1 1  for  a  seventy-hour  week,  and  some  women  were 
making  less  than  $5.00  weekly. 

In  April  three  young  workers,  hearing  of  a  textile  strike  in 
nearby  Elizabethton,  went  to  see  Alfred  Hoffman,  southern  or- 
ganizer for  the  United  Textile  Workers'  Union  (AFL)  in  that 
city  and  inquired  how  they  might  get  a  union.  He  outlined  plans 
for  them,  and  after  they  had  completed  preliminary  organization, 
took  charge  of  the  situation.  On  July  10  the  new  union  presented 
a  petition  to  R.  W.  Baldwin,  the  mill  president,  asking  a  reduction 
of  the  work  shift  to  ten  hours.  He  refused,  and  on  July  1 1  the 
union  struck. 


130  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

In  September  the  strike  collapsed  for  a  number  of  reasons— the 
hostile  attitude  of  the  conservative  Marion  citizenry,  the  inherent 
weakness  of  the  union,  the  inexperience  of  its  leaders,  and  the 
abandonment  of  the  strike  by  the  AFL  policy  commission.  Before 
its  collapse,  however,  the  union  obtained  certain  concessions  agreed 
to  by  Baldwin  after  their  recommendation  by  a  mediation  board 
led  by  the  personal  representative  of  North  Carolina's  Governor 
Gardner,  himself  the  owner  of  a  textile  mill.  The  settlement 
agreement  provided  for  a  fifty-five-hour  week  with  a  corresponding 
decrease  in  pay,  and  permitted  Baldwin  to  fire  fourteen  of  the 
union  leaders. 

But  after  the  strikers  returned  to  their  jobs  Baldwin  ignored 
even  these  empty  concessions,  and  fired  102  union  members.  Un- 
rest began  again  to  spread  through  the  Marion  plant.  Sensing 
impending  trouble,  Baldwin  returned  from  his  Baltimore  home 
on  October  first  and  told  Sheriff  Oscar  F.  Adkins  to  assemble  his 
deputies— a  recently  recruited  band  of  notorious  local  toughs— and 
protect  the  plant.  The  deputies  entered  the  mill  the  same  day,  and 
during  a  drinking  spree  that  lasted  from  8  p.m.  until  1  a.m.,  goaded 
the  workers,  threatening  to  shoot  them  if  they  dared  leave  their 
jobs.  At  1:30  a  twenty-two-year-old  worker,  his  patience  strained 
to  the  breaking  point,  defied  their  threats,  threw  the  main  power 
switch,  and  ran  through  the  plant,  calling  the  workers  out.  The 
second  strike  was  on. 

Since  the  walk-out  had  been  unplanned,  many  of  the  struck 
workers  remained  outside  the  mill  gates  to  notify  the  day  shift 
when  it  arrived.  As  the  day  workers  appeared,  the  crowd  grew 
and  soon  numbered  250.  Meanwhile  Adkins  and  his  men,  sober- 
ing, began  to  feel  uneasy.  At  7:30  Adkins  panicked  and  fired  a 
tear-gas  charge  into  the  crowd.  A  fifty-seven-year-old  cripple,  John 
Jonas,  attacked  the  sheriff  with  his  cane,  and  was  promptly  shot 
by  one  of  the  deputies.  The  crowd  broke,  trying  to  escape  the 
tear-gas  fumes,  and  the  deputies  fired  at  the  unarmed,  fleeing  men, 
dropping  more  than  a  score.  Six  men  died,  all  shot  in  the  back. 

Interviewed  two  days  later,  Baldwin  told  reporters: 

I  understand  sixty  or  seventy-five  shots  were  fired  in  Wednesday's 
fight.  If  this  is  true,  there  are  thirty  or  thirty-five  of  the  bullets  ac- 
counted for.  I  think  the  officers  are  damned  good  marksmen.  If  I  ever 
organize  an  army  they  can  have  jobs  with  me.  I  read  that  the  death 


The  marion   massacre  •   131 

of  each  soldier  in  the  World  War  consumed  more  than  five  tons  of 
lead.  Here  we  have  less  than  five  pounds  and  these  casualties.  A  good 
average,  I  call  it.4 

On  October  fourth  the  people  of  Marion  held  a  funeral  for 
four  of  their  dead.  They  brought  flowers  from  the  hills  and  deco- 
rated the  caskets.  A  ribbon,  their  union  colors,  linked  the  coffins. 
No  minister  of  the  town  of  Marion  or  of  the  neighboring  towns 
had  come  near  the  dead  or  their  families.  A  stranger  from  another 
state  had  come  to  perform  last  rites.  But  during  the  services  an 
old  mountain  preacher,  Cicero  Queens,  who  stood  among  the 
people,  dropped  to  his  knees  before  the  coffins,  and  prayed: 

O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  here  are  men  in  their  coffins,  blood  of  my 
blood,  bone  of  my  bone.  I  trust,  O  God,  that  these  friends  will  go  to 
a  better  place  than  this  mill  village  or  any  other  place  in  Carolina. 
O  God,  we  know  we  are  not  in  high  society,  but  we  know  Jesus  Christ 
loves  us.  The  poor  people  have  their  rights  too.  For  the  work  we  do 
in  this  world,  is  this  what  we  get  if  we  demand  our  rights?  Jesus 
Christ,  your  son,  O  God,  was  a  working  man.  If  He  were  here  to  pass 
under  these  trees  today,  He  would  see  these  cold  bodies  lying  here 
before  us.  O  God,  mend  the  broken  hearts  of  these  loved  ones  left 
behind.  Dear  God,  do  feed  their  children.  Drive  selfishness  and  cruelty 
out  of  your  world.  May  these  weeping  wives  and  little  children  have 
a  strong  arm  to  lean  on.  Dear  God,  what  would  your  Jesus  do  if  He 
were  to  come  to  Carolina? 

THE    MARION    MASSACRE 

A  story  now  I'll  tell  you 
Of  a  fearful  massacre, 
Which  happened  down  in  Dixie 
On  the  borders  of  the  sea. 

refrain:  There'll  be  no  sorrow  there, 
There'll  be  no  sorrow  there, 
In  heaven  above 
Where  all  is  love, 
There'll  be  no  sorrow  there. 

'Twas  in  Marion,  North  Carolina, 

In  a  little  mountain  town; 

Six  workers  of  the  textile 

In  cold  blood  were  shot  down. 

4  Asheville  Citizen,  October  4,  1929. 


132  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

'Tis  ever  the  same  old  story, 
With  the  laborers  of  our  land, 
They're  ruled  by  mighty  -powers, 
And  riches  they  command. 

It  started  over  money, 
The  world's  most  vain  desire. 
Yet  we  realize  the  laborer 
Is  worthy  of  his  hire. 

These  men  were  only  asking 
Their  rights  and  nothing  more; 
That  their  families  would  not  suffer 
With  a  wolf  at  every  door. 

Why  is  it  over  money, 
These  men  from  friends  must  part? 
A-leaving  home  and  loved  ones, 
With  a  bleeding,  broken  heart? 

But  some  day  they'll  meet  them 
On  that  bright  shore  so  fair, 
And  live  in  peace  forever, 
There'll  be  no  sorrow  there. 


—People's  Songs  Library. 


THE    MARION    STRIKE 


This  song  is  a  remarkable  example  of  economical,  straight- 
forward ballad  making,  free  from  conventional  phraseology. 

(Tune:  "Wreck  of  the  Altoona") 

When  they  had  that  strike  in  North  Carolina 
Up  there  at  the  Marion  mill, 
Somebody  called  for  the  sheriff 
To  come  down  there  on  the  hill. 

The  sheriff  came  down  there  to  the  factory, 

And  brought  all  of  his  men  along, 

And  he  says  to  the  mill  strikers, 

"Now  boys,  you  all  know  this  is  wrong." 

"But  sheriff,  we  just  can't  work  for  nothing, 
For  we've  got  a  family  to  feed. 
And  they've  got  to  pay  us  more  money, 
To  buy  food  and  clothes  that  we  need. 


The  songs  of  the  textile  workers  •   133 

"You've  heard  of  the  stretchout  system, 
A-going  through  this  country  today, 
They  put  us  on  two  men's  jobs, 
And  just  give  us  half  enough  pay. 

"You  know  we  helped  give  you  your  office, 
And  we  helped  to  give  you  your  pay; 
And  you  want  us  to  work  for  nothing, 
That's  why  we  are  down  here  today." 

So  one  word  just  brought  on  another, 
And  the  bullets  they  started  to  flying. 
And  after  the  battle  was  over, 
Six  men  lay  on  the  ground  a-dying. 

Now,  people,  labor  needs  protection, 
We  need  it  badly  today; 
If  we  will  just  get  together, 
Then  they  can't  do  us  that  way. 

Now,  I  hear  the  whistle  blowing, 

I  guess  I'd  better  run  along. 

I  work  in  the  factory, 

That's  why  I  wrote  this  little  song. 

—People's  Songs  Library. 

The  gastonia  strike5 

The  1929  strike  at  the  Loray  mills  in  Gastonia,  North 
Carolina,  began  like  hundreds  of  others  in  the  southern  textile 
industry,  but  ended  as  the  South's  greatest  labor  trial— a  trial  which 
but  for  the  martyrdom  of  a  union  worker  and  the  fact  that  a 
juror  suddenly  went  insane,  might  have  become  another  Sacco- 
Vanzetti  travesty.  The  story  of  the  strike  itself  is  so  usual  that  it 
does  not  need  retelling:  a  mill  community,  exploited,  oppressed, 
discouraged,  and  sullen  in  its  discouragement,  is  aroused  to  action 
by  Northern  organizers— in  this  case,  Communists. 

The  strike  dragged  on  through  the  summer  months,  and  the 
mill  owners  turned  the  strikers  out  of  the  company-owned  houses. 
The  evicted  workers  set  up  a  tent  colony  on  the  edge  of  town.  As 
the  loss  of  the  strike  appeared  imminent,  the  strikers  formed  a 
picket  line  in  defiance  of  an  unconstitutional  local  ordinance  and 
prepared  to  march  to  the  mill  a  mile  away,  where  the  night  shift 

5  See  also  the  story  and  songs  of  Ella  May  Wiggins,  p.  244. 


134  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

still  carried  on  operations.  They  had  gone  only  a  short  distance 
when  a  band  of  deputy  sheriffs  and  police  attacked  them  and  drove 
them  back  to  the  tent  town.  Five  policemen,  two  of  whom  were 
later  indicted  for  drunkenness  while  on  duty,  followed  them, 
threatening  to  "clean  out  the  white  trash."  Without  a  warrant 
(which  gave  the  strikers  a  legal  right  to  resist  them)  the  police 
entered  the  premises  of  the  strikers'  colony  and  blackjacked  a 
union  guard.  One  of  the  officers  then  fired  at  the  strikers'  head- 
quarters, and  answering  shots  killed  O.  F.  Aderholt,  Gastonia 
police  chief. 

Fifteen  men  and  women  were  arrested  and  indicted  for  "con- 
spiracy to  commit  murder,"  for  no  evidence  existed  to  show  that 
any  of  the  fifteen  was  implicated  in  the  actual  shooting.  The  local 
union  leader,  Fred  Beal,  was  not  even  present  at  the  time  of  the 
disturbance;  the  evidence  against  him  consisted  of  "inflammatory" 
excerpts  from  his  speeches. 

The  venire  faced  by  the  indicted  strikers  was  more  prejudiced 
than  the  one  which  convicted  Sacco  and  Vanzetti.  The  area,  except 
for  the  mill  workers  (who  were  largely  excluded  from  jury  service 
because  of  a  qualification  which  disqualified  veniremen  who  were 
not  property  holders)  consisted  mostly  of  fundamentalist  farmers 
and  businessmen  who  lived  in  constant  fear  that  their  properties 
were  threatened  by  the  doctrines  imported  by  the  Northern  or- 
ganizers. Newspapers  in  Charlotte  and  Gastonia  deliberately  in- 
cited the  solid  citizens  to  perpetrate  acts  of  violence  against  the 
strikers.  Nearly  the  only  concession  to  American  ideals  of  justice 
made  by  these  papers  appeared  in  the  Charlotte  News  just  before 
the  opening  of  the  first  trial: 

The  leaders  of  the  National  Textile  Workers'  Union  are  commu- 
nists, and  are  a  menace  to  all  that  we  hold  most  sacred.  They  believe 
in  violence,  arson,  murder.  They  want  to  destroy  our  institutions. 
They  are  undermining  all  morality,  all  religion.  But  nevertheless  they 
must  be  given  a  fair  trial,  although  everyone  knows  that  they  deserve 
to  be  shot  at  sunrise. 

A  few  papers,  however,  preserved  some  measure  of  sanity.  The 
Charlotte  Daily  News  observed  on  July  1, 

Gaston  County  is  desperately  near  the  mood  to  try  a  dozen  or  more 
malcontents  for  murder  and  condemn  them  by  what  they  think  about 


Up  in  old  loray  *   135 

God,  marriage,  and  the  nigger— and  the  history  of  the  world  has  shown 
that  on  the  first  and  last  of  these  subjects  the  human  race,  when  it 
has  tried  to  think,  has  invariably  gone  insane. 

A  change  in  venue  from  inflamed  Gaston ia  to  Charlotte  in 
neighboring  Mecklenburg  County  made  the  outlook  for  the  de- 
fendants somewhat  more  favorable,  but  when  the  first  trial  ended 
with  the  sudden  insanity  of  one  of  the  jurors,  the  reaction  in  the 
strike  area  approached  anarchy.  Mobs  of  hundreds  prowled  the 
countryside,  beating  and  intimidating  union  members,  under  the 
goading  of  the  Gastonia  Gazette.  Finally  Ella  May  Wiggins  was 
murdered,  and  a  flood  of  nation-wide  protest  inundated  the  region. 

By  the  time  the  second  trial  began,  charges  against  eight  of  the 
accused  strikers  were  dropped,  and  the  charge  against  the  others 
was  reduced  to  second-degree  murder,  clearly  demonstrating  the 
weakness  of  the  prosecution's  case.  But  the  inherent  flimsiness  of 
the  accusation  was  compensated  for  by  Solicitor  John  G.  Car- 
penter's zeal.  He  endeavored,  for  example,  to  introduce  before 
the  jury  a  dummy  of  the  dead  police  chief,  dressed  in  his  bloody 
uniform  and  loosely  covered  by  a  shroud;  he  rolled  on  the  floor, 
knelt  as  in  prayer,  and  castigated  the  defendants  as  "fiends  in- 
carnate .  .  .  devils  with  hoofs  and  horns." 

The  intellectual  level  of  the  jury  can  easily  be  gauged  by  the 
fact  that  it  returned  convictions  against  the  seven  men.  Signifi- 
cantly, the  three  Southerners  received  sentences  of  from  five  to 
fifteen  years,  while  the  Northern  agitators,  convicted  on  the  same 
evidence,  were  given  terms  of  from  seventeen  to  twenty  years. 

The  Gastonia  strike  has  been  especially  rich  in  the  production 
of  song;  at  least  eleven  songs  and  ballads  chronicling  the  mill 
troubles  have  found  their  way  out  of  mountain-locked  Gaston 
County. 

UP    IN    OLD    LORAY6 

(Tune:  "On  Top  of  Old  Smoky") 

Up  in  old  Loray, 

Six  stories  high, 

Thai's  where  they  found  us, 

Ready  to  die. 

6  The  Gastonia  Textile  Mills. 


136  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 


refrain:  Go  pull  off  your  aprons, 
Come  join  our  strike. 
Say  "Goodbye,  old  bosses, 
We're  going  on  strike." 

The  bosses  will  starve  you, 

They'll  tell  you  more  lies 

Than  there's  crossties  on  the  railroads. 

Or  stars  in  the  skies. 

The  bosses  will  rob  you, 

They  will  take  half  you  make, 

And  claim  that  you  took  it  up 

In  coupon  books.  ••;  , 

Up  in  old  Loray, 
All  covered  with  lint, 
That's  where  our  shoulders 
Was  crippled  and  bent. 

Up  in  old  Loray, 

All  covered  with  cotton, 

It  will  carry  you  to  your  grave 

And  you  soon  will  be  rotten. 

—From  People's  Songs  Library. 
THE  SPEAKERS  DIDN'T  MIND 

(Tune:  "Wreck  of  the  Old  97") 

On  a  summer  night  as  the  speaking  went  on, 

All  the  strikers  were  satisfied, 

The  thugs  threw  rotten  eggs  at  the  speakers  on  the  stand, 

It  caused  such  a  terrible  fright. 

The  speakers  didn't  mind  that  and  spoke  right  on, 

As  speakers  want  to  do, 

It  wasn't  long  till  the  police  came, 

To  shoot  them  through  and  through. 

On  that  very  same  night  the  mob  came  down 
To  the  union  ground  you  know, 
Searching  high  and  low  for  the  boys  and  men, 
Saying  "Damn  you,  come  on,  let's  go." 

"We'll  take  you  to  jail  and  lock  you  up, 

If  you're  guilty  or  not  we  don't  care; 

Come  git  out  of  these  tents,  you  low  down  dogs, 

Or  we'll  kill  you  all  right  here." 


Let  me  sleep  in  your  tent  tonight,  beal  •   137 

They  arrested  the  men,  left  the  women  alone, 

To  do  the  best  they  can; 

They  tore  down  their  tents,  run  them  out  in  the  woods, 

"If  you  starve  we  don't  give  a  damn." 

Our  poor  little  children  they  had  no  homes, 
They  were  left  in  the  streets  to  roam; 
But  the  W.  I.  R.  put  up  more  tents  and  said, 
"Children,  come  on  back  home." 

Some  of  our  leaders  are  already  free 
Hoping  all  the  rest  will  be  soon, 
And  if  they  do  we'll  yell  with  glee, 
For  the  South  will  be  on  a  boom. 

Fred  Beal  and  Sophie  and  all  the  rest, 
Are  our  best  friends,  we  know; 
For  they  come  to  the  South  to  organize 
When  no  one  else  would  go. 

They've  been  our  friends  and  let's  be  theirs, 
And  help  them  organize, 
We'll  have  more  money  and  better  homes, 
And  live  much  better  lives. 

—People's  Songs  Library.  By  Daisy  MacDonald. 

W.  I.  R.:  Workers'  International  Relief;  Beal:  Fred  Beal,  Northern  organizer  and 
strike  leader;  Sophie:  Sophie  Melvin,  a  beautiful  girl  who  was  one  of  the  original 
fifteen  defendants. 

Another  ventriloquism  song:  The  scabs  who  have  been  evicted 
by  Manville  Jenckes  beg  to  be  forgiven  and  taken  back  into  the 
tent  colony.  The  strikers  admonish  them  for  helping  to  wreck  the 
union  headquarters. 


LET   ME    SLEEP    IN    YOUR   TENT   TONIGHT,    BEAL 

(Tune:  "Let  Me  Sleep  in  Your  Barn  Tonight,  Mister") 

Let  me  sleep  in  your  tent  tonight,  Beal, 
For  it's  cold  lying  out  on  the  ground, 
And  the  cold  wind  is  whistling  around  us, 
And  we  have  no  place  to  lie  down. 

Manville  Jenckes  has  done  us  dirty, 
And  has  set  us  out  on  the  ground, 
We  are  sorry  we  did  not  join  you, 
When  the  rest  walked  out  and  joined. 


138  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Oh  Beal  please  forgive  us, 
And  take  us  into  your  tent; 
We  will  always  stick  to  the  union, 
And  not  scab  on  you  no  more. 

You  have  tore  up  our  hall  and  you  wrecked  it 
And  you've  went  and  threw  out  our  grub, 
Only  God  in  his  heaven, 
Knows  what  you  scabs  done  to  us. 

—By  Odel  Corley  (age  11). 
COME    ON    YOU    SCABS    IF    YOU    WANT   TO    HEAR 

(Tune:  "Casey  Jones") 

Come  on  you  scabs  if  you  want  to  hear, 

The  story  of  a  cruel  millionaire. 

Manville  Jenckes  was  the  millionaire 's  name, 

He  bought  the  law  with  his  money  and  frame  (frame-up) 

But  he  can't  buy  the  union  with  his  money  and  frame. 

Told  Violet  Jones  if  she'd  go  back  to  work 
He'd  buy  her  a  new  Ford  and  pay  her  well  for  her  work; 
They  throwed  rotten  eggs  at  Vera  and  Beal  on  the  stand 
They  caught  the  man  with  the  pistol  in  his  hand, 
Trying  to  shoot  Beal  on  the  speaking  stand. 

ON   A   SUMMER   EVE 

(Tune:  "Wreck  of  the  Old  97") 

On  a  summer  eve  as  the  sun  was  setting 
And  the  wind  blew  soft  and  dry, 
They  locked  up  all  our  union  leaders 
While  tears  stood  in  our  eyes. 

Fred  BeaVs  in  fail  with  many  others, 
Facing  the  electric  chair, 
But  we  are  working  with  the  I.L.D. 
To  set  our  leaders  clear. 

Come  on  fellow  workers  and  join  the  union, 

Also  the  I.L.D. 

Come  help  us  fight  this  great  battle 

And  set  our  leaders  free. 

Come  listen  fellow  workers  about  poor  Ella  May; 
She  lost  her  life  on  the  state  highway. 
She'd  been  to  a  meeting  as  you  all  can  see, 
Doing  her  bit  to  get  our  leaders  free. 


The  mill  has  shut  down  •   139 

She  left  five  children  in  this  world  to  roam, 
But  the  I.L.D.  gave  them  a  brand  new  home. 
So  workers  come  listen  and  you  will  see, 
It  pays  all  workers  to  join  the  I.L.D. 

If  we  love  our  brothers  as  we  all  should  do, 
We'll  join  this  union  help  fight  it  through. 
We  all  know  the  boss  don't  care  if  we  live  or  die, 
He'd  rather  see  us  hang  on  the  gallows  high. 

Our  leaders  in  prison  are  our  greatest  friends. 
But  the  I.L.D.  will  fight  to  the  end. 
Come  on  fellow  workers,  join  the  I.L.D. 
And  do  your  part  to  set  our  leaders  free. 

We  need  them  back  on  the  firing  line, 
To  carry  on  the  work  that  they  left  behind, 
When  they  were  put  in  the  dirty  cell, 
In  the  Gastonia  jail  we  all  know  well. 

—By  Daisy  MacDonald.  In  Margaret  Larkin 
Collection,  People's  Songs  Library. 

Miscellaneous  textile  songs 

The  mill  owners  discovered  early  the  weapon  later 
given  the  name  "lockout"  to  combat  indirectly  the  encroachment 
of  the  unions. 


THE    MILL    HAS    SHUT    DOWN 

"The  mill  has  shut  down!  Good  God,  shut  down!" 

Like  cry  of  flood  or  fire  the  cry 

Runs  swifter  than  lightning  through  the  town. 

"The  mill  has  shut  down!  Good  God,  shut  down!" 

Men  wring  their  hands  and  look  at  the  sky; 

Women  fall  fainting;  like  dead  they  lie. 

At  the  very  best  they  earned  but  bread, 

With  the  mill  shut  down  they'd  better  be  dead. 

Last  year  with  patience  a  lessened  wage 
They  helplessly  took — better  than  none; 
More  children  worked,  at  tenderer  age — 
Even  their  mite  helped  the  lessened  wage. 
The  babies  were  left  at  their  home  alone. 
'Twas  enough  to  break  a  heart  of  stone 
To  see  how  these  people  worked  for  bread! 
With  the  mill  shut  down  they'd  better  be  dead! 


140  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

"The  mill  has  shut  down!  Good  God,  shut  down!" 
It  has  run  at  loss  this  many  a  day. 
Far  worse  than  flood  or  fire  in  the  town 
Will  be  famine,  now  the  mill  has  shut  down. 
But  to  shut  mills  down  is  the  only  way, 
When  they  run  at  a  loss,  the  mill  owners  say. 
God  help  the  hands  to  whom  it  meant  bread! 
With  the  mill  shut  down  they'd  better  be  dead! 

—Broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 


LET  THEM    WEAR   THEIR   WATCHES   FINE 

This  song  was  transcribed  by  Will  Geer,  the  actor,  from  the 
singing  of  a  woman  in  the  mountains  of  West  Virginia.  She  said 
she  had  made  it  up  herself  and  put  it  to  the  tune  of  "Warren 
Harding's  Widow." 

/  lived  in  a  town  away  down  south 

By  the  name  of  Buffalo; 

And  worked  in  the  mill  with  the  rest  of  the  trash 

As  we're  often  called,  you  know. 

You  factory  folks  who  sing  this  rime, 

Will  surely  understand 

The  reason  why  I  love  you  so 

Is  I'm  a  factory  hand. 

While  standing  here  between  my  looms 
You  know  I  lose  no  time 
To  keep  my  shuttles  in  a  whiz 
And  write  this  little  rime. 

We  rise  up  early  in  the  morn 
And  work  all  day  real  hard; 
To  buy  our  little  meat  and  bread 
And  sugar,  tea,  and  lard. 

We  work  from  week  end  to  week  end 
And  never  lose  a  day; 
And  when  that  awful  payday  comes 
We  draw  our  little  pay. 

We  then  go  home  on  payday  night 
And  sit  down  in  a  chair; 
The  merchant  raps  upon  the  door — 
He's  come  to  get  his  share. 


Hard  times  at  little  new  river  *   141 

When  all  our  little  debts  are  paid 
And  nothing  left  behind, 
We  turn  our  pockets  wrong  side  out 
But  not  a  cent  can  we  find. 

We  rise  up  early  in  the  morn 
And  toil  from  soon  to  late; 
We  have  no  time  to  primp  or  fix 
And  dress  right  up  to  date. 

Our  children  they  grow  up  unlearned 
No  time  to  go  to  school; 
Almost  before  they've  learned  to  walk 
They  learn  to  spin  or  spool. 

The  boss  man  jerks  them  round  and  round 

And  whistles  very  keen; 

I'll  tell  you  what,  the  factory  kids 

Are  really  treated  mean. 

The  folks  in  town  who  dress  so  fine 
And  spend  their  money  free 
Will  hardly  look  at  a  factory  hand 
Who  dresses  like  you  and  me. 

As  we  go  walking  down  the  street 
All  wrapped  in  lint  and  strings, 
They  call  us  fools  and  factory  trash 
And  other  low-down  things. 

Well,  let  them  wear  their  watches  fine, 
Their  rings  and  pearly  strings; 
When  the  day  of  judgment  comes 
We'll  make  them  shed  their  pretty  things. 

"Hard  Times  in  Cryderville  Jail"  is  one  of  the  most  popular 
tunes  for  protest  song  adaptations  in  the  South.  Every  Southern 
industry  has  dozens  of  songs  written  to  this  tune. 

HARD   TIMES   AT    LITTLE    NEW    RIVER 

Now  New  River  Mills  is  between  two  hills, 
It's  hard  times  at  the  New  River  Mills. 

refrain:  Hard  times  on  Little  New  River, 
Hard  times,  poor  boy. 

Little  Jimmy  Kelly,  he  thought  he  was  mighty  smart 
He  went  down  and  brought  him  out  a  part. 

—From  Mrs.  Coker,  Townley,  Alabama. 
(For  music,  see  "Hard  Times  in  Colman's  Mines,"  p.  262.) 


142  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

HARD    TIMES    IN    THE    MILL 

Every  morning  at  half-past  four 
You  hear  the  cook's  hop  on  the  floor. 

refrain:  It's  hard  times  in  the  mill,  my  love, 
Hard  times  in  the  mill. 

Every  morning  just  at  five, 
You  gotta  get  up  dead  or  alive. 

Every  morning  right  at  six, 

Don't  that  old  bell  just  make  you  sick? 

The  pulley  got  hot,  the  belt  jumped  off, 
Knocked  Mr.  Guyon's  derby  off. 

Old  Pat  Goble  think's  he's  a  hon 

He  puts  me  in  mind  of  a  doodle  in  the  sun. 

The  section  hand  thinks  he's  a  man, 
And  he  ain't  got  sense  to  pay  off  his  hands. 

They  steal  his  ring,  they  steal  his  knife, 
They  steal  everything  but  his  big  fat  wife. 

My  bobbin's  all  out,  my  ends  all  down 

The  doffer's  in  my  alley  and  I  can't  get  around. 

The  section  hand's  standing  at  the  door 
Ordering  the  sweepers  to  sweep  up  the  floor. 

Every  night  when  I  go  home, 

A  piece  of  cornbread  and  an  old  jaw  bone. 

Ain't  it  enough  to  break  your  heart? 
Hafta  work  all  day  and  at  night  it's  dark. 

(For  music,  see  "Hard  Times  in  Colman's  Mines,"  p.  262.) 

Transcribed  from  the  singing  of  Lessie  Crocker,  worker  in  the 
Columbia,  South  Carolina,  knitting  mills,  and  now  a  member  of 
Local  252  of  her  union.  Of  the  song  she  says,  "This  was  composed 
by  my  mother  and  some  of  the  old  spoolers  in  the  mill  forty 
years  ago." 

The  "Ballad  of  the  Blue  Bell  Jail"  was  composed  by  Blanch 
Kinett,  of  Greensboro,  North  Carolina,  on  February  28,  1939.  The 
"Blue  Bell  Jail"  is  the  Blue  Bell  Garment  Factory. 


Ballad  of  the  blue  bell  jail  •   143 

BALLAD  OF  THE  BLUE  BELL  JAIL 

(Tune:  "Hand  Me  Down  My  Walking  Cane") 

Oh,  come  on  union,  go  my  bail, 

Oh,  come  on  union,  go  my  bail, 

Oh,  come  on  union,  go  my  bail, 

Get  me  out  of  this  Blue  Bell  jail, 

For  all  my  freedom's  taken  away,  taken  away. 

If  we  had  the  sense  of  fools  (3) 

We  wouldn't  set  here  like  a  fool 

All  our  freedom's  taken  away,  taken  away. 

For  we  know  that  a  mule  will  balk  (3) 

Let's  get  busy  with  this  union  talk 

All  our  freedom's  taken  away,  taken  away. 

We  are  worn  and  the  place  is  tough  (3) 

Oh,  my  Lord,  we've  had  enough, 

All  our  freedom's  taken  away,  taken  away. 

This  union  sure  will  do  the  trick  (3) 

It  will  make  the  bosses  sick 
All  our  freedom's  taken  away. 

SHIRT    FACTORY    BLUES 

(Tune:  "Brown's  Ferry  Blues") 

I  wanna  go  home  but  there  ain't  no  use, 
The  union  gals  won't  turn  me  loose, 

refrain:  Lawd,  lawd,  got  them  shirt  factory  blues. 

Litoff  wants  to  work  but  there  ain't  no  use, 
Flips  his  wings  like  an  old  gray  goose. 

They  called  a  strike  and  we  came  out 

He  walked  the  streets  and  we  kept  them  out. 

We  were  down  and  fust  about  out 
When  Charlie  Handy  helped  us  out. 

Sherman  knocked  Chelo  on  the  head, 
Chelo  thought  that  he  was  dead. 

—By  Cleda  Helton  and  James  Pyl, 
LaFollette,  Tennessee. 


144  '  American  folksongs  of  protest 

WINNSBORO  COTTON  MILL  BLUES 


Old  man  Sargent,  sitting  at  the  desk, 
The  damned  old  fool  won't  give  us  no  rest. 
He'd  take  the  nickels  off  a  dead  man's  eyes 
To  buy  a  Coca-Cola  and  an  Eskimo  Pie. 

refrain:  /  got  the  blues,  I  got  the  Winnsboro  Cotton  Mill  Blues; 
Lordy,  Lordy,  spoolin's  hard; 
You  know  and  I  know,  I  don't  have  to  tell, 
You  work  for  Tom  Watson,  got  to  work  like  hell. 
I  got  the  blues,  I  got  the  Winnsboro  Cotton  Mill  Blues. 

When  1  die,  don't  bury  me  at  all, 

Just  hang  me  up  on  the  spool  room  wall; 

Place  a  knotter  in  my  hand, 

So  I  can  spool  in  the  Promised  Land. 

When  I  die,  don't  bury  me  deep, 
Bury  me  down  on  600  street; 
Place  a  bobbin  in  each  hand 
So  I  can  daulf  in  the  Promised  Land. 

—From  People's  Songs  Library. 


Here  we  rest  •   145 

"Here  We  Rest"  was  recorded  at  the  Merrimac  Mill  Village 
in  Huntsville,  Alabama,  during  the  textile  strike  of  1934.  Dean, 
the  strike  leader,  was  killed  during  an  outbreak  of  violence. 

HERE    WE    REST 

(Tune:  "Hallelujah,  I'm  a  Bum") 

We  praise  thee,  0  God, 
For  the  strike  of  the  South, 
And  we  thank  you,  Mr.  Dean 
For  calling  us  out. 

refrain:  Hallelujah,  here  we  rest; 
Hallelujah,  Mr.  Dean; 
Uncle  Sammy,  give  us  a  handout 
'Cause  we're  tired  of  these  beans. 

We  are  standing  on  guard 
Both  night  and  day, 
We  are  doing  our  best 
To  keep  scabs  away. 

We  are  1200  strong 
And  the  strike  still  is  on, 
And  the  scabs  still  are  standing 
But  they  won't  scab  for  long. 

Hallelujah,  we  are  union, 
Hallelujah,  here  we  rest; 
Mrs.  Semour  sends  our  checks  out 
We  are  standing  the  test. 

The  scabs  are  all  sore 
Cause  we  brought  back  Mr.  Dean, 
And  they  swore  to  heaven 
They  would  get  him  again. 

Hallelujah,  we  are  union; 
Hallelujah,  here  we  rest; 
Hallelujah,  come  and  get  him 
We  are  armed  for  the  test. 

We  thank  you  Mr.  Dean, 

Miss  Berry  and  Miss  Dowd, 

For  staying  here  with  us, 

Through  this  strike  you've  called  out. 


4.  Songs  of  the  miners 


We  have  eyes  to  see  like  yours 

Way  down  in  the  deep,  deep  mine; 

But  there's  nothing  to  see  but  the  dreadful  dark 

Where  the  sun  can  never  shine 

On  the  banks  of  the  clammy  coal. 

Our  lamps  cast  a  flickering  light 

At  the  dreary  bottom  of  the  moist  black  hole 

In  the  land  of  the  noonday  night.1 


America's  Hundred  Years'  War  was  fought  in  the  coal 
fields.  Since  1849,  when  an  English  Chartist  named  John  Bates 
formed  in  Pennsylvania's  Schuylkill  County  the  first  American 
miners'  union,  there  have  been  hundreds  of  battles  in  this  continu- 
ous struggle,  and  "battle"  when  used  to  describe  the  contention 
between  the  miners  and  operators  is  not  a  figure  of  speech.  "There's 
blood  on  the  coal  and  blood  on  the  mines,"  one  song  says,  "and 
blood  on  the  mine  owners'  hands."  The  miners  lost  most  of  these 

1  From  the  Amalgamated  Journal,  December  25,  1902. 

George  Korson's  research  among  the  coal  miners  has  been  the  only  work  of  any 
thoroughness  in  the  field  of  labor  protest  song.  Since  this  chapter  is  to  be  read  as 
a  supplement  to  his  studies  (Songs  and  Ballads  of  the  Anthracite  Miner,  New  York, 
1927;  Minstrels  of  the  Mine  Patch,  Philadelphia,  1938;  Coal  Dust  on  the  Fiddle, 
Philadelphia,  1943;  Pennsylvania  Songs  and  Legends,  Philadelphia,  1949)  I  have 
not  included  any  of  these  songs  except  "Mother  Jones"  and  "Miner's  Life." 

See  also  Aunt  Molly  Jackson's  songs. 

147 


148  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

clashes,  as  defeat  and  victory  are  commonly  defined,  but  every 
concession  made  by  the  operators— even  if  it  were  to  spend  three 
months  breaking  a  strike  instead  of  ten  weeks— was  a  step  forward 
toward  complete  unionization;  and  a  lost  strike  always  resulted  in 
the  next  union  being  bigger  and  stronger.  Many  tangible  victories 
were  won:  The  miner  no  longer  has  to  compete  with  convict  labor, 
the  heavily  guarded  mine  patch  and  coal  camp  are  gone,  and  the 
operators'  feudal  control  over  local  and  state  government  is  being 
broken  down.  Most  important,  the  miners  have  their  union  now,  a 
powerful  agency  that  has  carried  the  war  with  the  operators  to 
the  bloodless  plane  of  diplomacy.  "The  boss  won't  listen  when  one 
guy  squawks,  but  he's  got  to  listen  when  the  union  talks."  The 
operators  listen  now,  and  the  miners  have  good  pay  and  sufficient 
food.  "Nobody  starves  to  death  in  Kentucky  now,"  says  Aunt  Molly 
Jackson.  But  it  has  not  been  long  since  people  starved  to  death  in 
Kentucky,  and  were  shot  to  death  in  Kentucky,  and  were  beaten, 
and  blacklisted,  and  exiled  in  Kentucky,  as  in  other  coal  states. 

It  is  shameful  to  say  that  our  folk  music  is  immeasurably  the 
richer  for  this  terrible  strife  suffered  by  the  miners,  but  this  is  a 
fact.  The  songs  and  ballads  which  follow  represent  scarcely  one- 
tenth  of  the  extant  pieces  proceeding  from  incidents  of  violence 
and  bloodshed,  and  an  incalculably  small  part  of  those  that  have 
vanished.  Hundreds  of  strikes  have  marked  the  path  of  the  union's 
march  through  the  coal  fields,  and  each  of  these  conceivably  pro- 
duced from  one  to  perhaps  a  dozen  songs,  depending  on  its  length 
and  bitterness.  I  have  represented  fully  only  two  strikes  in  this 
study— the  Davidson-Wilder  and  the  Gastonia  strikes— and  I  am 
far  from  confident  that  there  were  not  other  songs  commemorating 
these  great  struggles. 

Not  only  the  long  history  of  union  activity  in  the  mine  country, 
but  other  factors  account  for  the  great  body  of  protest  song  among 
the  miners,  which,  incidentally,  is  the  largest  of  any  labor  group. 
The  same  reason  for  the  prolificacy  of  these  songs  among  the 
textile  workers  obtains  for  the  miners  also:  the  rich  tradition  of 
folk  singing  in  the  Southern  mountains,  the  long  cultural  isola- 
tion of  the  people,  the  uncompanionate  nature  of  the  work,  and 
of  course  the  bitter  conflict  with  employers.  In  addition,  the  mine 
community,  which  until  recently  was  a  colony  of  shacks  huddled 
around  the  breaker,  with  a  company  store  and  perhaps  a  ram- 


Songs  of  the  miners  •   149 

shackle  church  the  only  public  buildings,  had  no  diversion  for 
the  miners— no  theatres,  no  movies,  no  radio,  no  television,  and 
often  no  liquor. 

It's  a  long  way  to  Harlan, 
It's  a  long  way  to  Hazard, 
Just  to  git  a  little  booze, 
Just  to  git  a  little  booze. 

What  entertainment  they  had  they  produced  themselves;  and 
singing  is  the  first  of  the  creative  amusements.  Subject  matter  is 
always  drawn  from  that  which  is  uppermost  in  the  singer's  mind, 
and  since  the  miner's  life  revolved  around  the  mine,  his  songs 
were  of  its  relation  to  himself.  Not  always  were  his  lyrics  woeful, 
but  labor  strife  is  a  category  which  takes  an  impressive  place 
among  his  songs. 

The  loneliness  of  his  work2  had  much  to  do  with  making  the 
miner  reflective,  and  therefore  a  questioner  of  his  economic  and 
social  status.  Loneliness  and  monotonous  labor  lead  directly  to 
singing  as  a  diversion  of  encroaching  thought,  and  these  two  forces 
— diversive  singing  and  frustrated  thinking— easily  join  to  form  a 
song  of  discontent.  When  all  of  these  factors  are  considered,  one 
may  ask  not  why  there  are  so  many  songs  of  strife  among  the 
miners,  but  why  there  are  so  few. 

Many  have  been  lost,  unquestionably.  To  an  even  greater  extent 
than  those  of  other  labor  groups,  the  miners'  songs  of  protest  are 
transitory.  Like  the  songs  of  discontented  labor  as  a  whole,  they 
deal  with  specific  incidents  of  interest  only  to  the  persons  involved. 
If  in  the  old  days  a  miner  in  Bell  County  struck  against  his  em- 
ployer, it  was  of  no  great  concern  to  a  miner  over  in  Breathitt 
who  had  his  own  troubles  to  think  about,  and  make  songs  about. 
The  element  of  time  also  exerted  its  influence  on  the  life  expect- 
ancy of  the  miners'  protest  songs.  This  year's  strike  was  likely  to 
be  more  widespread  and  more  serious  than  that  of  two  years  ago, 
and  so  the  song  produced  by  the  latter  was  easily  displaced,  espe- 
cially if,  as  often  happened,  it  was  sung  to  the  same  tune.  Poor 
communication  was  another  factor  peculiar  to  mine  country.  The 
location  of  coal  villages  did  not  follow  natural  lines  of  communi- 

2  The  chief  grievance  of  the  Calumet  strikers  was  the  introduction  of  the  one- 
man  drill  into  the  mines,  an  innovation  that  denied  the  workers  any  companionship 
underground. 


150  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

cation,  as  the  location  of  other  industrial  communities  did,  and 
consequently  roads  were  bad.  The  poverty  of  the  miners  made 
automobiles  hard  to  come  by,  and  because  of  the  poor  roads,  cars 
were  a  bad  investment  anyhow,  even  if  $25  could  somehow  be 
accumulated.  Nor  was  there  any  place  near-by  to  go,  except  other 
mine  villages,  which  differed  only  in  name  and  arrangement  of 
the  shanties. 

The  United  Mine  Workers  Journal,  the  great  instrument  of 
education  and  enlightenment  among  the  miners,  has  disseminated 
many  songs  of  a  wider  appeal,  but  usually  the  tune  was  not  given, 
and  unless  the  reader  was  energetic  and  interested  enough  to  fit 
the  words  to  compatible  folk  tunes,  the  song  never  got  off  the 
printed  page.  The  Journal  has  preserved  more  miners'  protest  and 
strike  songs  than  any  other  agency  during  its  half-century  of  pub- 
lication, but  since  it  is  often  impossible  to  tell  whether  a  printed 
stanza  is  a  poem  or  a  song— or,  if  it  was  a  song,  whether  it  was 
actually  sung— the  most  valuable  source  of  material  remains  the 
collectors  who  go  into  the  coal  fields  and  catch  these  songs  as 
they  pass  by  on  their  way  to  oblivion.  Unfortunately  collectors 
willing  to  share  the  hard  life  of  the  miners,  even  long  enough  to 
dig  out  a  few  nearly  forgotten  songs,  have  been  all  too  rare. 

The  ludlow  massacre 

Woody  Guthrie's  ballad  "The  Ludlow  Massacre"3  re- 
calls the  most  wanton  atrocity  in  the  history  of  American  unionism, 
an  incredible  example  of  the  ferocity  with  which  predatory  coal 
barons  fought  to  maintain  their  feudal  hold  on  the  lands  they 
mined.  In  1913  the  coal  fields  of  southern  Colorado  were  only 
nominally  in  the  United  States.  In  every  practical  sense  they  were 
autonomous  states  in  which  every  function  of  government  was 
controlled  by  the  operators.  Houses,  stores,  churches,  streets,  towns, 
land,  were  company-owned.  Company  guards  policed  the  streets 
and  enforced  the  law  of  the  operators.  Guards  were  stationed  on 
the  outskirts  of  some  towns  to  investigate  the  credentials  of 
strangers  wishing  to  enter.  Miners  leased  only  the  right  of  entry 
to  their  houses,  so  that  the  company  could  prohibit  anyone  it 
pleased  from  visiting  the  occupants.   Miners  were  paid  not  in 

s  There  have  been  other  ballads  made  of  the  Ludlow  massacre,  but  since  they 
lack  the  distinction  of  Guthrie's  version,  I  have  not  included  them. 


Songs  of  the  miners  *   151 

United  States  currency,  but  in  company  scrip,   in  defiance  of 
the  law. 

The  company  controlled  the  life  of  the  community  not  only 
through  its  domination  of  the  economy,  but  also  by  its  usurpation 
of  the  law.  A  federal  grand  jury,  appointed  to  investigate  the  dis- 
pute between  miners  and  operators,  reported  in  December  1913 
that  the  mine  owners  were  in  complete  control  of  southern  Colo- 
rado politics.  Colorado  congressman  Keating,  himself  beyond  the 
power  of  the  operators,  declared: 

Industrial  and  political  conditions  in  Las  Animas  and  Huerfano 
counties  have  for  many  years  been  a  menace  and  a  disgrace  to  our 
state.  For  more  than  ten  years  the  coal  companies  have  owned  every 
official  in  both  counties.  Last  fall  they  lost  the  district  judge  and  dis- 
trict attorney,  but  that  has  been  their  sole  defeat.  Business  men  who 
have  dared  to  protest  have  been  prosecuted  and  in  many  cases  driven 
out.  The  administration  of  law  has  been  a  farce.  As  an  example: 
Hundreds  of  men  have  been  killed  in  the  Southern  Colorado  coal 
mines  during  these  ten  years,  yet  no  coroner's  jury,  except  in  one  case, 
has  returned  a  verdict  holding  the  companies  responsible,  the  blame 
being  placed  on  the  dead  miner.4 

It  is  no  surprise  in  view  of  such  conditions  that  when  the  miners 
struck  on  September  23,  1913,  many  of  their  demands  had  been 
guaranteed  by  law,  among  them  the  right  to  organize;  an  eight-hour 
day;  their  own  checkweighmen;  freedom  to  patronize  any  store, 
boarding  house,  or  doctor  of  their  own  choosing;  enforcement  of 
Colorado  laws.  Their  other  demands  were  scarcely  less  reasonable. 
The  real  point  of  contention,  as  in  the  Calumet  strike,  was  the 
union.  On  this  question  the  owners  were  adamant. 

The  state  governor,  as  Guthrie  implies  in  this  ballad,  was  a 
futile  recourse,  displaying  in  all  his  statements  and  actions  relating 
to  the  strike  a  shameful  timidity  before  the  mine  owners.  For  ex- 
ample, in  the  one  conference  in  which  they  deigned  to  participate, 
the  operators  refused  to  admit  to  the  meeting  any  union  repre- 
sentatives. Governor  Ammons,  presiding,  thus  permitted  them  to 
flout  his  laws  in  his  own  presence. 

The  state  militia  acted  similarly  in  disrespect  of  the  law.  After 
his  illegal  imprisonment  of  Mother  Jones,  a  thousand  women  and 
children  gathered  in  Trinidad  to  protest  against  Adjutant  General 

4  Quoted  in  Survey,  December  30,  1913,  Vol.  31,  p.  321. 


152  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Chase's  conduct.  General  Chase  assembled  a  company  of  soldiers 
and  rode  out  to  meet  the  women.  As  he  approached,  he  fell  off  his 
horse.  Angered  by  the  women's  laughs  and  jeers,  he  ordered  the 
mounted  troops  to  charge;  and  they  did  so,  inflicting  sabre  wounds 
on  four  women  and  a  ten-year-old  boy. 

But  Chase's  greatest  crime  was  one  committed  after  he  and  his 
militia  retired  from  the  coal  fields  in  April  1914,  when  the  strike 
was  in  its  eighth  month.  There  had  been  many  acts  of  violence 
committed  on  both  sides— by  the  Baldwin-Felts  imported  thugs 
who  toured  the  strike  area  in  armored  cars  mounting  machine 
guns,  and  by  the  hard-bitten  miners  who  retaliated  viciously  after 
each  depredation  committed  against  them.  The  operators  had 
turned  the  miners  out  of  the  company-owned  houses,  and  the  dis- 
possessed workers  were  living  in  tent  colonies  in  Walsenburg, 
Trinidad,  and  Ludlow.  Chase  organized  two  companies  of  the 
National  Guard  out  of  the  basest  elements  in  southern  Colorado, 
and  then  left  the  area  at  the  mercy  of  these  irresponsible  gunmen. 

April  20  was  Ludlow's  day  of  horror.  Early  in  the  morning  the 
"Guardsmen"  began  riddling  the  tents  with  fire  from  a  ring  of 
machine  guns  which  they  had  set  up  around  the  colony.  The  fact 
that  such  an  attack  had  been  anticipated  saved  the  lives  of  many 
of  the  miners  and  their  families,  for  they  huddled  in  the  trenches 
which  had  been  dug  under  the  tents.  All  that  day  the  gunmen  fired 
into  the  tents,  and  when  night  fell  and  the  occupants  tried  to  escape 
in  the  darkness,  the  soldiers  set  fire  to  the  tents.  In  the  morning 
the  Ludlow  miners  counted  twenty-four  of  their  people  dead. 

LUDLOW    MASSACRE 


Songs  of  the  miners  *   153 

It  was  early  springtime  when  the  strike  was  on, 
They  drove  us  miners  out  of  doors, 
Out  from  the  houses  that  the  company  owned; 
We  moved  into  tents  up  at  old  Ludlow. 

I  was  worried  bad  about  my  children, 
Soldiers  guarding  the  railroad  bridge; 
Every  once  in  a  while  the  bullets  would  fly, 
Kick  up  gravel  under  my  feet. 

We  were  so  afraid  you  would  kill  our  children, 
We  dug  us  a  cave  that  was  seven  foot  deep, 
Carried  our  young  ones  and  a  pregnant  woman 
Down  inside  the  cave  to  sleep. 

That  very  night  you  soldiers  waited, 
Until  us  miners  was  asleep; 
You  snuck  around  our  little  tent  town, 
Soaked  our  tents  with  your  kerosene. 

You  struck  a  match  and  the  blaze  it  started; 

You  pulled  the  triggers  of  your  gatling  guns; 

I  made  a  run  for  the  children  but  the  fire  wall  stopped  me, 

13  children  died  from  your  guns. 

I  carried  my  blanket  to  a  wire  fence  corner, 
Watched  the  fire  till  the  blaze  died  down; 
I  helped  some  people  grab  their  belongings, 
While  your  bullets  killed  us  all  around. 

I  never  will  forget  the  look  on  the  faces 
Of  the  men  and  women  that  awful  day, 
When  we  stood  around  to  preach  their  funerals 
And  lay  the  corpses  of  the  dead  away. 

We  told  the  Colorado  governor  to  phone  the  President, 
Tell  him  to  call  off  his  National  Guard; 
But  the  National  Guard  belonged  to  the  governer, 
So  he  didn't  try  so  very  hard. 

Our  women  from  Trinidad  they  hauled  some  potatoes 
Up  to  Walsenburg  in  a  little  cart; 
They  sold  their  potatoes  and  brought  some  guns  back 
And  they  put  a  gun  in  every  hand. 

The  state  soldiers  jumped  us  in  the  wire  fence  corner; 
They  did  not  know  that  we  had  these  guns. 
And  the  red-neck  miners  mowed  down  these  troopers, 
You  should  have  seen  those  poor  boys  run. 


154  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

We  took  some  cement  and  walled  the  cave  up, 
Where  you  killed  these  13  children  inside; 
I  said  "God  bless  the  mine  workers'  union" 
And  then  I  hung  my  head  and  cried. 

Mother  Jones  was  the  greatest  of  the  great  women  among  the 
early  mine  union  organizers;  Aunt  Molly  Jackson,  Fannie  Sellins, 
and  Sarah  Ogan  were  as  strong  and  as  fearless  as  she,  but  they 
lacked  the  education  that  enabled  Mother  Jones  to  make  her 
name  famous  as  a  champion  of  the  miners.  She  lived  for  a  hundred 
years,  and  was  an  active  organizer  for  fifty  of  them,  participating  in 
her  last  strike  in  her  eighty-ninth  year. 

Always  at  the  front  in  the  most  serious  troubles  faced  by  her 
"children,"  as  she  called  them,  Mother  Jones  moved  into  Trinidad 
on  January  5,  1913.  She  was  seized  immediately  and  was  put  aboard 
an  outgoing  train.  General  Chase  characteristically  explained  his 
action  in  the  following  statement: 

Mother  Jones  was  met  at  the  train  this  morning  by  a  military  escort 
acting  under  instructions  not  to  permit  her  to  remain  in  this  district. 
The  detail  took  charge  of  Mrs.  Jones  and  her  baggage,  and  she  was 
accompanied  out  of  the  district  under  guard  after  she  had  been  given 
breakfast.  The  step  was  taken  in  accordance  with  my  instructions  to 
preserve  peace  in  the  district.  The  presence  of  Mother  Jones  here  at 
this  time  cannot  be  tolerated.  She  had  planned  to  go  to  the  Ludlow 
tent  colony  of  strikers  to  stop  the  desertion  of  union  members.  If  she 
returns  she  will  be  placed  in  jail  and  held  incommunicado.5 

She  returned. 


MOTHER  JONES 

The  world  today  is  mourning 
The  death  of  Mother  Jones; 
Grief  and  sorrow  hover 
Over  the  miners'  homes; 
This  grand  old  champion  of  labor 
Has  gone  to  a  better  land, 
But  the  hard-working  miners, 
They  miss  her  guiding  hand. 

5  Quoted  in  Survey,  Vol.  31  (February  14,  1913),  p.  614. 


Songs  of  the  miners  *   155 

Through  the  hills  and  over  the  valleys, 

In  every  mining  town, 

Mother  Jones  was  ready  to  help  them — 

She  never  turned  them  down. 

In  front  with  the  striking  miners 

She  always  could  be  found, 

She  fought  for  right  and  justice, 

She  took  a  noble  stand. 

With  a  spirit  strong  and  fearless 
She  hated  that  which  was  wrong; 
She  never  gave  up  fighting 
Until  her  breath  was  gone. 
May  the  workers  all  get  together 
To  carry  out  her  plan, 
And  bring  back  better  conditions 
To  every  laboring  man.6 

The    1913    MASSACRE 

Violence  in  the  mines  is  not  limited  to  the  coal  fields. 
The  men  who  worked  the  Western  metal  mines  were  drawn  from 
the  same  national  stocks  as  the  Eastern  coal  miners— Cornishmen, 
Englishmen,  and  Slavs— and  worked  under  conditions  almost  iden- 
tical with  those  of  their  Eastern  brothers. 

The  bitterest  strike  in  the  upper  Michigan  copper  country  came 
in  1913,  when  the  Western  Federation  of  Miners  endeavored  to 
unionize  the  industry.  There  had  been  considerable  discontent 
among  the  miners  during  the  fifty-year  history  of  the  Michigan 
mines,  but  the  thirty-eight  nationalities  represented  among  the 
miners  were  divided  by  the  usual  frictions  developed  by  national 
heterogeneity  and  provided  no  basis  for  organization.  Only  the 
Finns,  many  of  whom  were  Socialists,  were  articulate,  but  their 
influence  was  not  great  enough  to  unite  the  miners. 

The  Western  Federation  of  Miners  had  a  bad  reputation  among 
operators,  and  the  invasion  of  the  copper  country  by  its  organizers 
was  fiercely  resisted.  When,  early  in  1913,  the  Federation  became 
the  bargaining  agency  for  the  miners,  the  operators  refused  to 
recognize  it;  official  letters  were  returned  unopened,  and  its 
threats  to  pull  the  miners  out  were  ignored.  Within  a  week  after 

6  I  have  included  "Mother  Jones"  here,  though  it  is  in  Korson's  collection,  because 
this  is  a  version  different  enough  to  prove  folk  transmission,  and  because  this  corrects 
the  incoherent  third  line  in  Korson's  version  (Coal  Dust  on  the  Fiddle,  p.  348)  "When 
mankind  has  hovered." 


156  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

the  sixteen  thousand  miners  struck  on  July  23,  1913,  the  owners 
called  in  the  state  militia  force  of  2,700  soldiers  to  guard  strike- 
breakers, and  soon  afterward  began  to  import  labor  detectives 
and  professional  gunmen  from  the  East.  Undoubtedly  much  of 
the  violence  that  ensued  was  caused  by  these  mercenaries,  whose 
jobs  depended  on  their  ability  to  preserve  disorder.  The  W.F.A., 
despite  its  reputation  as  a  dangerous  organization  which  could 
give  as  much  trouble  as  it  took,  made  a  diligent  effort  to  keep 
the  strike  peaceful.  Members  were  cautioned  not  to  drink,  carry- 
ing of  firearms  was  prohibited  on  penalty  of  expulsion  from  the 
union,  and  the  union  complied  with  discriminatory  injunctions 
which  denied  the  miners  their  constitutional  rights.  But  when  the 
W.F.A.  petition  for  an  injunction  against  the  companies'  impor- 
tation of  Waddell-Mahon  gunmen  was  denied,  and  after  two 
miners  were  killed  and  three  wounded  in  an  unprovoked  attack 
by  Waddell-Mahon  detectives  on  a  miner's  home,  the  union  struck 
back,  and  each  murder  or  lesser  act  of  violence  on  the  part  of  the 
company  police  was  answered  with  similar  reprisals  on  a  tooth- 
for-a-tooth  basis. 

Most  of  the  demands  fought  for  by  the  miners  were  either 
palpably  reasonable  or  required  by  law,  as  some  of  the  managers 
freely  admitted,  and  the  operators  were  secretly  willing  to  grant 
them.  But  the  owners  would  consider  no  arguments  for  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  union. 

At  Christmas,  1913,  the  strike  was  in  its  sixth  bitter  month, 
and  feeling  was  tense.  The  Calumet  business  men  had  formed  a 
Citizens'  Alliance,  whose  avowed  purpose  was  to  drive  the  W.F.A. 
out  of  the  copper  country.  Woody  Guthrie  tells  the  story  of  the 
Christmas  tragedy  which  ensued  when  a  man  wearing  a  Citizens' 
Alliance  button  opened  the  door  leading  to  the  second  floor  audi- 
torium where  the  miners  were  holding  their  Christmas  party. 
There  are  some  slight  inaccuracies  resulting  from  Guthrie's  exer- 
cise of  poetic  license:  the  average  daily  wage  for  a  ioi/2  hour  shift 
was  $3.48,  though  some  teen-age  workers  made  as  little  as  $1.25 
daily;  seventy-two  persons  died,  not  seventy-three,  and  some  of 
these  were  adults.  "The  1913  Massacre"  illustrates  another  aspect 
of  Woody  Guthrie's  genius  as  a  folk-ballad  maker,  another  reason 
for  his  ranking  with  the  nameless  composers  of  "Chevy  Chase" 
and  "Lord  Randal."  Like  his  other  ballads,  this  is  clear,  direct, 


1913  massacre  *   157 


and  economical  in  the  classic  tradition,  but  its  best  feature  is  in 
the  approach.  By  making  the  listener  a  participant  in  the  tragedy 
he  achieves  great  dramatic  effect,  and  makes  its  poignancy  a  very 
real  thing.  "I  will  take  you  in  a  door  and  up  a  high  stairs"  gives 
in  one  line  a  good  picture  of  the  place  in  which  the  tragedy 
occurred. 

I913  MASSACRE 


B 


P 


•-# 


h# 


-c 


£ — {& — ffr 


1  i  W&  PE 


m 


pc 


m 


£ 


~& 


-$-   -o- 

Take  a  trip  with  me  in  1913, 

To  Calumet,  Michigan,  in  the  copper  country. 

I  will  take  you  to  a  place  called  Italian  Hall, 

Where  the  miners  are  having  their  big  Christmas  ball. 

I  will  take  you  in  a  door  and  up  a  high  stairs; 
Singing  and  dancing  is  heard  everywhere. 
I  will  let  you  shake  hands  with  the  people  you  see, 
And  watch  the  kids  dance  round  the  big  Christmas  tree. 

You  ask  about  work  and  you  ask  about  pay; 

They  tell  you  they  make  less  than  a  dollar  a  day 

Working  the  copper  claims,  risking  their  lives, 

So  it's  fun  to  spend  Christmas  with  children  and  wives. 

There's  talking  and  laughing  and  songs  in  the  air, 
And  the  spirit  of  Christmas  is  there  everywhere. 
Before  you  know  it  you're  friends  with  us  all, 
And  you're  dancing  around  and  around  in  the  hall. 


158  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Well,  a  little  girl  sits  down  by  the  Christmas  tree  lights 

To  play  the  piano,  so  you  gotta  keep  quiet. 

To  hear  all  this  fun  you  would  not  realize 

That  the  copper  boss  thugmen  are  milling  outside. 

The  copper  boss  thugs  stuck  their  heads  in  the  door; 
One  of  them  yelled  and  he  screamed,  "There's  a  fire!" 
A  lady  she  hollered,  "There's  no  such  a  thing, 
Keep  on  with  your  party,  there's  no  such  a  thing." 

A  few  people  rushed  and  it  was  only  a  few, 

"It's  just  the  thugs  and  the  scabs  fooling  you." 

A  man  grabbed  his  daughter  and  carried  her  down, 

But  the  thugs  held  the  door  and  they  could  not  get  out. 

And  then  others  followed,  a  hundred  or  more, 

But  most  everybody  remained  on  the  floor. 

The  gun  thugs  they  laughed  at  their  murderous  joke, 

While  the  children  were  smothered  on  the  stairs  by  the  door. 

Such  a  terrible  sight  I  never  did  see; 
We  carried  our  children  back  up  to  their  tree. 
The  scabs  outside  still  laughed  at  their  spree, 
And  the  children  that  died  there  were  73. 

The  piano  played  a  slow  funeral  tune; 
And  the  town  was  lit  up  by  a  cold  Christmas  moon. 
The  parents  they  cried  and  the  miners  they  moaned, 
"See  what  your  greed  for  money  has  done." 

THE   DAVIDSON-WILDER   STRIKE 

Dr.  J.  B.  Thompson  tells  how  he  recorded  the  text  of 
the  "Wilder  Blues": 

In  January  or  February  of  1933  I  went  down  to  the  Highlander  Folk 
School  to  help  Myles  Horton  get  his  school  started.  The  whole  school 
had  a  budget  of  $1400  for  the  first  year;  we  nearly  starved,  literally. 
But  that's  another  story. 

One  of  the  first  services  we  performed  was  at  the  lock-out  of  the 
miners  in  a  little  valley  town,  Wilder,  Tennessee.  There  was  nothing 
in  Wilder  but  the  coal  mines,  the  miserable  little  shacks  the  company 
rented  to  the  miners,  the  company  store,  and  one  or  two  sad,  un- 
painted  churches.  The  company  paid  the  miners  in  scrip  instead  of 
money,  so  they  had  to  buy  their  food  and  other  necessities  in  the  com- 
pany store  where  the  prices  were  much  higher  than  at  independent 
stores.  The  company  made  deductions  for  a  bath  house  which  did  not 
exist,  for  doctor's  services  which  seldom  were  available,  for  house  rent, 
etc.,  etc.  The  miners  worked  hard  and  dangerously,  but  sank  deeper 


Songs  of  the  miners  *   159 

and  deeper  into  debt.  They  didn't  have  enough  to  keep  their  children 
alive,  so  finally  they  went  out  on  strike.  They  were  affiliated  with  no 
outside  organization;  they  just  had  a  little  union  of  their  own. 

When  they  struck,  the  company  turned  off  the  electricity  and  took 
the  doors  off  the  houses.  It  was  mid-winter  and  terribly  cold.  But  still 
the  company  could  not  break  the  morale  of  the  union,  which  was  led 
by  a  mountaineer  named  Barney  Graham.  In  desperation  the  com- 
pany dynamited  an  old  decayed  trestle  and  said  the  miners  were 
committing  acts  of  violence,  but  anyone  knew  if  the  miners  wanted 
to  destroy  company  property  they  would  have  blown  up  a  good  bridge. 
But  to  "protect  property"  the  governor  sent  in  the  National  Guard, 
and  in  three  months  spent  more  to  guard  the  mines  than  the  company 
had  paid  to  the  state  in  taxes  for  20  years.  These  young  soldiers  were 
fresh  and  cocky;  they  had  never  had  authority  before;  they  got  drunk, 
they  swaggered,  they  incited  the  strikers.  Then  the  company  brought 
in  strikebreakers— scabs.  We  saw  the  advertisements  the  company  ran  in 
mountain  newspapers  and  circulated  in  handbills.  They  offered  the 
scabs  much  better  wages  than  they  had  paid  the  strikers,  board  and 
room,  guard,  and  "a  woman  at  night."  So  they  got  plenty  of  scabs. 
The  Red  Cross  gave  out  relief  flour  and  food  to  the  scabs  but  not  to 
the  starving  strikers,  for  the  county  chairman  of  the  Red  Cross  was 
the  wife  of  the  operator. 

Myles  discovered  this  situation  and  wrote  letters  which  were  pub- 
lished in  the  state's  leading  newspapers  calling  attention  to  the  plight 
of  the  strikers.  A  little  group  of  Socialists  in  Nashville  gathered  food 
and  clothing  and  a  little  money,  which  Myles  and  I  hauled  over  the 
mountain  roads  into  Wilder  every  Saturday.  I  will  never  forget  the 
long  line  of  gaunt,  haggard,  brave  people  who  lined  up  to  receive 
the  scant  rations  we  handed  out  to  last  them  a  week.  Each  family  got 
a  pound  of  dried  beans,  a  half-pound  of  coffee,  two  tins  of  canned 
milk  (if  they  had  a  baby),  half  a  pound  of  sugar.  These  rations  saved 
many  lives,  but  meanwhile  many  babies  had  died  of  starvation. 

The  company  had  let  it  be  known  that  if  Myles  ever  came  back  he 
would  not  get  out  alive.  But  the  next  Saturday  I  drove  him  back  into 
town  and  we  distributed  the  stuff  again.  We  were  unarmed.  When  we 
went  into  the  company  store  about  a  dozen  scabs  put  their  hands  on 
their  guns,  but  the  strikers  followed  us  around  and  about  two  dozen 
of  them  fingered  their  pistols.  So  we  walked  around  innocently  and 
safely,  like  Ferdinand. 

One  very  cold  Saturday,  after  giving  out  all  our  groceries,  we  went 
into  a  stuffy,  dirty  little  frame  hotel  where  a  poor  meal  was  put  on 
a  long  table,  and  for  fifty  cents  you  could  sit  down  at  the  greasy  table 
and  help  yourself  along  with  anyone  else  who  had  fifty  cents.  While 
I  ate  I  heard  music  and  commotion  in  a  front  room,  a  bed  room.  I 
edged  my  way  in.  A  man,  about  50  or  60  years  old,  wearing  an  old 
black  hat,  and  with  a  two-weeks  beard,  sat  on  the  bed  strumming  his 


160  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

guitar.  As  he  played  he  sang  stanza  after  stanza  of  a  song  he  had  com- 
posed about  the  Wilder  strike.  (The  mines  were  at  Davidson  and 
Wilder.)  Whenever  he  ended  a  particularly  good  stanza,  the  men— 20 
or  more— would  cheer  and  say,  "Uh-huh!"  or  "Amen!"  He  made  some 
new  stanzas  in  my  presence,  but  when  he  saw  me  and  my  city  clothes, 
he  stopped.  I  told  a  union  official  I  would  very  much  like  to  write 
the  song  down.  They  asked  the  bard,  Ed  Davis,  but  he  was  timid  and 
refused.  I  begged  a  bit,  but  it  did  no  good.  So  I  went  outside  and 
got  a  couple  of  dirty  little  kids  who  were  running  around  the  house, 
and  told  them  to  go  in  and  ask  Uncle  Ed  to  sing  it  again.  Ten  minutes 
or  so  later  they  did,  and  it  worked.  I  sat  outside  the  door,  most  of 
the  men  realizing  what  was  happening.  The  kids  begged  him;  he  sang 
it  again  and  I  got  the  chorus  and  some  of  the  stanzas.  Then  I  had 
them  go  in  and  ask  him  again,  and  that's  the  way  we  worked  it;  he 
just  kept  singing  it  for  those  kids  and  the  fellow  strikers  who  sat 
around  cheering  him  and  joining  in  the  chorus.  Finally,  I  got  it  all 
down  and  had  the  tune  well  enough  in  mind  to  go  back  to  the  dining 
table  and  write  it  down.  Then  the  men  told  him  I  had  written  it  down, 
and  to  my  surprise,  he  was  very  much  pleased.  He  had  just  been  too 
self-conscious  to  sing  it  for  me.  Two  weeks  later  we  had  Norman 
Thomas  come  down  to  speak  at  a  mass  meeting.  We  had  Ed  sing  the 
song  again  and  the  audience  cheered  and  ate  it  up.  It  was  their  song; 
it  was  their  life. 

Ed  Davis,  who  wrote  this  song,  could  neither  read  nor  write,  but 
he  sure  could  play  that  guitar. 


THE  WILDER  BLUES 


fc=k 


m 


B 


* 


&—& 


#49^ 


m£i 


-d-»- 


#— # 


v~ WW 


&- 


y 

^        CHORUS 

/*i_ 

1 

i   i 

A, 

f^s 

1 

\  \ 

) 

) 

\ 

L^ii" ) 

1 

I 

)   * 

) 

V3^ 

1 

rf*u    11 

*o 

(ft 

ha 

cj   ~* 

_    # 

w 

—&■       £ 

J 

■    -4$- 

L    • 

^-pe 

P* 

a 

H 


m 


s 


e 


v=5 


5=5 


t 


-T-& 


Songs  of  the  miners  •   161 

Mr.  Shivers  said  if  we'd  block  our  coal 

He'd  run  four  days  a  week. 

And  there's  no  reason  we  shouldn't  run  six, 

We're  loadin'  it  so  darn  cheap. 

It's  the  worst  old  blues  I  ever  had.1 

chorus:  I've  got  the  blues, 

I've  shore-God  got  'em  bad. 

I've  got  the  blues, 

The  worst  I've  ever  had! 

It  must  be  the  blues 

Of  the  Davidson-Wilder  scabs. 

He  discharged  Horace  Hood 

And  told  him  he  had  no  job; 

Then  he  wouldn't  let  Thomas  Shepherd  couple 

Because  he  wouldn't  take  the  other  fellow's  job. 

Mr.  Shivers  he's  an  Alabama  man, 
He  came  to  Tennessee; 
He  put  on  two  of  his  yeller-dog  cuts, 
But  he  failed  to  put  on  three. 

Mr.  Shivers,  he  goes  to  Davidson, 
From  Davidson  on  to  Twin; 
And  then  goes  back  to  Wilder 
And  then  he'd  cut  again. 

Mr.  Shivers  told  Mr.  Boyer, 
He  said,  "I  know  just  what  we'll  do; 
We'll  get  the  names  of  the  union  men 
And  fire  the  whole  durn  crew." 

We  paid  no  attention  to  his  firing, 
And  went  on  just  the  same; 
And  organized  the  holler 
In  L.  L.  Shivers'  name. 

Mr.  Shivers,  he  told  the  committeemen, 
He  said,  "Boys,  I'll  treat  you  right;" 
He  said,  "I  know  you're  good  union  men, 
And  first  class  Camelites."* 

i  Every  stanza  ends  with  this  refrain  line. 

8  Camelite:  Campbellite— a  member  of  a  religious  sect. 


162  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

/  felt  just  like  a  cross-breed 
Between  the  devil  and  a  hog; 
And  that's  about  all  I  could  call  myself 
If  I  sign  that  yeller-dog. 

There's  a  few  things  right  here  in  town 
I  never  did  think  was  right; 
For  a  man  to  be  a  yeller-dog  scab 
And  a  first-class  Camelite. 

There's  a  few  officers  here  in  town 

And  never  let  a  lawbreaker  slip; 

They  carried  their  guns  when  scabbing  begun 

Till  the  hide  come  off  their  hips. 

Phlem  Bolls  organized  the  holler 
About  a  hundred  strong; 
And  stopped  L.  L.  Shivers 
From  putting  the  third  cut  on. 

They  wanted  to  cut  our  doctor 
Because  the  salary  was  too  high; 
And  Shivers  said,  "You  can't  do  that, 
And  there's  no  use  to  try." 

They  met  again  to  hold  it  off 
And  they  voted  it  with  ease; 
They  added  on  fifty  cents  a  month 
And  called  it  hospital  fees. 

Dr.  Collins  grinned  all  over  his  face; 
He  said,  "I  know  just  what  I'll  do; 
Get  a  dollar  and  a  half  off  the  Wilder  scabs 
And  all  of  Davidson  too." 

Mr.  Shivers  got  rid  of  his  nigger, 

And  a  white  man  took  his  place; 

And  if  you  want  me  to  tell  you  what  I  think  of  that, 

It's  a  shame  and  a  damned  disgrace. 

Dick  Stultz  is  for  the  union  men, 
And  Bully  Garret  against  us  all; 
Dick  kicked  Bully  in  the  stomach, 
And  you'd  oughta  heered  Bully  squall. 

Bully  Garret  got  excited, 
And  run  into  Bill  Mack's  store; 
And  that's  just  half  of  what  he  done, 
And  backed  to  Baltimore. 


Little  david  blues  •   163 

Paw  Evans  has  got  a  Hater  patch, 
Away  out  on  the  farm; 
Alek  Sells  guards  that  Hater  patch 
With  a  gun  as  long  as  your  arm. 

I'd  rather  be  a  yeller-dog  scab 
In  a  union  man's  back  yard, 
Than  to  tote  a  gun  for  L.  L.  Shivers, 
And  to  be  a  National  Guard. 

Ed  Davis  was  not  the  only  Davidson-Wilder  bard.  Over  in  the 
twin  city  of  Davidson,  miner  Tom  Lowery  was  composing  his 
blues: 


LITTLE  DAVID  BLUES 


w    W  ' 9-* 9 — ■ 


« * 


FffprJirr  iJ>'^ 


i  J-  <LiJ  W 


-0-' 


Little  Cowell  worked  for  John  Parish 
For  35  cents  a  day; 
He  ate  so  many  cheese  and  crackers 
He  fell  off  a  pound  every  day. 

refrain:  It's  all  night  long, 

From  the  midnight  on. 

Then  he  came  to  Davidson  a-working 
For  Mr.  Hubert  and  E.  W.  too, 
And  Cowell  knows  just  exactly,  boy, 
How  to  deny  you. 


164  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

You  go  in  the  mines  and  find  water 
It's  right  up  to  your  knees; 
You  surely  don't  like  to  work  in  it, 
But  you  don't  do  as  you  please. 

They'll  take  you  by  the  collar 
They'll  mall  you  in  the  face; 
They'll  put  you  in  the  water  hole 
It's  right  up  to  your  waist. 

You  come  out  of  the  office 

After  working  hard  all  day; 

Your  sheriff  dues  and  your  doctor  bill 

You  surely  got  to  pay. 

Men  go  through  the  office 
They  go  through  one  by  one; 
They'll  ask  you  for  two  dollars  in  scrip, 
And  Oh,  gee!  Make  it  one. 

You  get  your  handful  of  scrip, 

And  you  go  right  in  the  store, 

You  find  a  fellow  with  a  black  mustache, 

Writing  it  down  on  the  floor. 

You  ask  for  a  bucket  of  lard 
And  "What's  meat  worth  a  pound?" 
"We  sell  it  to  you  at  any  price, 
'Cause  we're  spizwinkin's  now." 

You  ask  for  a  sack  of  flour, 
And  then  you'll  ask  the  cost. 
It's  a  dollar  and  a  quarter  a  sack 
And  fifty  cents  a  yard  for  cloth. 

I  went  into  the  store  one  day, 
Mr.  Cowell  was  frying  some  steak; 
I  warned  it  would  give  him 
Scab  colic  and  the  bellyache. 

The  strike  dragged  on  through  the  spring;  at  the  end  of  April 
a  Chicago  thug  brought  in  by  the  company  shot  Barney  Graham, 
the  union  leader,  in  the  back.  The  poignant  "Ballad  of  Barney 
Graham"  was  composed  by  Graham's  daughter,  Delia  Mae. 

9  "spizwinker":  scab.  Little  Cowell  was  a  spizwinker. 


The  ballad  of  barney  graham  •   165 

THE  BALLAD  OF  BARNEY  GRAHAM 


^ 


cr        '(j 


£T         "•"    TT~ 


fEEEm 


-G* 


XT* 


On  April  the  thirtieth, 

In  1933, 

Upon  the  streets  of  Wilder 

They  shot  him,  brave  and  free. 

They  shot  my  darling  father, 
He  fell  upon  the  ground; 
'Twas  in  the  back  they  shot  him; 
The  blood  came  streaming  down. 

They  took  the  pistol  handles 
And  beat  him  on  the  head; 
The  hired  gunmen  beat  him 
Till  he  was  cold  and  dead. 


When  he  left  home  that  morning, 
I  thought  he'd  soon  return; 
But  for  my  darling  father 
My  heart  shall  ever  yearn. 

We  carried  him  to  the  graveyard 
And  there  we  lay  him  down; 
To  sleep  in  death  for  many  a  year 
In  the  cold  and  sodden  ground. 

Although  he  left  the  union 
He  tried  so  hard  to  build, 
His  blood  was  spilled  for  justice 
And  justice  guides  us  still. 


166  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

And  still  another  folk  composer  appears  in  this  little  strike  in 
two  little  towns,  a  woman  named  Eleanor  Kellogg. 

MY  CHILDREN  ARE  SEVEN  IN  NUMBER 

(Tune:  "My  Bonnie  Lies  Over  the  Ocean") 

My  children  are  seven  in  number, 

We  have  to  sleep  four  in  a  bed; 

I'm  striking  with  my  fellow  workers, 

To  get  them  more  clothes  and  more  bread. 

REFRAIN  PATTERN: 

Shoes,  shoes,  we're  striking  for  pairs  of  shoes, 
Shoes,  shoes,  we're  striking  for  pairs  of  shoes. 

Pellagra  is  cramping  my  stomach, 

My  wife  is  sick  with  T.B.; 

My  babies  are  starving  for  sweet  milk, 

Oh,  there's  so  much  sickness  for  me. 

Milk,  milk,  we're  striking  for  gallons  of  milk.  .  .  . 

I'm  needing  a  shave  and  a  haircut, 

The  barbers  I  cannot  afford; 

My  wife  cannot  wash  without  soapsuds, 

And  she  had  to  borrow  a  board. 

Soap,  soap,  we're  striking  for  bars  of  soap.  .  .  . 

My  house  is  a  shack  on  the  hillside, 

Its  floors  are  unpainted  and  bare; 

I  haven't  a  screen  to  my  windows, 

And  carbide  cans  do  for  a  chair. 

Homes,  homes,  we're  striking  for  better  homes.  .  .  . 

Oh,  Aid  Truck  go  over  the  mountain, 

Oh,  Aid  Truck  come  back  with  a  load; 

For  we  are  just  getting  a  dollar 

A  few  days  a  month  on  the  road. 

Gas,  gas,  we're  bumming  a  gallon  of  gas.  .  .  . 

They  shot  Barney  Graham  our  leader, 

His  spirit  abides  with  us  still; 

The  spirit  of  strength  for  justice, 

No  bullets  have  the  power  to  kill. 

Barney,  Barney,  we're  thinking  of  you  today.  .  .  . 

Oh,  miners,  go  on  with  the  union, 

Oh,  miners,  go  on  with  the  fight; 

For  we're  in  the  struggle  for  justice 

And  we're  in  the  struggle  for  right. 

Justice,  justice,  we're  striking  for  justice  for  all.  .  .  . 


Miner's  flux  •   167 

Miscellaneous  songs  from  the  coal  fields 

miner's  flux 

They  are  shooting  starving  miners  here, 

And  framing  men  to  jail. 

They  cheat  us  in  the  company  store, 

And  cheat  us  at  the  scale! 

And  the  bosses  spend  a  million  bucks, 

On  jewels  and  on  silk 

While  our  children  die  of  bloody  flux 

Because  they  have  no  milk. 

They  are  clubbing  men  and  women  here, 

Because  they  ask  "more  bread." 

The  bosses'  justice  orders  cops 

And  thugs  to  give  them  lead. 

COME  ALL  YOU  HARDY  MINERS 

Come  all  you  hardy  miners  and  help  us  sing  this  song, 
Sung  by  some  union  men,  four  hundred  thousand  strong. 
With  John  White,  our  general,  we'll  fight  without  a  gun, 
He'll  lead  us  on  to  victory  and  60  cents  a  ton. 

Come  all  you  hardy  miners  and  help  us  sing  this  song; 
On  the  21st  day  of  April  we  struck  for  60  cents  a  ton; 
The  operators  laughed  at  us  and  said  we'd  never  come 
Out  in  one  body  and  demand  that  60  cents  a  ton. 

Come  out,  you  scabs  and  blacklegs  and  join  the  men  like  one; 
Tell  them  that  you're  in  the  fight  for  60  cents  a  ton; 
There  now  in  old  Virginny  they're  scrambling  right  along, 
But  when  we  win  they're  sure  to  try  for  60  cents  a  ton. 

Come  all  you  hardy  miners,  let's  try  to  do  our  best, 

We'll  first  get  old  Virginny,  Kentucky,  and  then  we'll  get  the  rest; 

There's  going  to  be  a  meeting,  right  here  in  this  land; 

When  we  reach  across  the  river  and  take  them  by  the  hand. 

—By  Finlay  "Red  Ore"  Donaldson. 
OUR  CHILDREN  THEY  WERE  SICKLY 

You  didn't  do  no  wrong, 

You  didn't  do  no  crime; 

You  gave  away  your  young  years 

To  slavery  in  the  mines, 

To  slavery  in  the  mines. 


168  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Our  children  they  were  sickly, 
They  had  no  clothes  to  wear; 
Our  little  ones  were  sickly, 
And  no  one  seemed  to  care, 
And  no  one  seemed  to  care. 

"I'll  go  join  the  union,  then," 
These  were  the  words  you  said, 
And  I  knew  they'd  bring  you  to  me 
A-lying  cold  and  dead, 
A-lying  cold  and  dead. 

Go  tell  that  sheriff 

And  his  gunmen  too, 

That  the  reason  my  life  is  broken, 

Is  because  they  murdered  you, 

Is  because  they  murdered  you. 

Sarah  Ogan,  like  her  fiery  sister,  Aunt  Molly  Jackson,  was  a 
union  organizer  and  composer  of  militant  miners'  songs. 

I  AM  A  GIRL  OF  CONSTANT  SORROW 


/  am  a  girl  of  constant  sorrow, 

I've  seen  trouble  all  my  days. 

I  bid  farewell  to  old  Kentucky, 

The  place  where  I  was  born  and  raised. 

My  mother,  how  I  hated  to  leave  her, 
Mother  dear,  she  now  is  dead; 
But  I  had  to  go  and  leave  her, 
So  my  children  could  have  bread. 

Perhaps,  dear  friends,  you  are  a-wondering 
What  the  miners  eat  and  wear; 
This  question  I  will  try  to  answer 
For  I  am  sure  that  it  is  fair. 


Songs  of  the  miners  *   169 

For  breakfast  we  had  bulldog  gravy, 
For  supper  we  had  beans  and  bread. 
The  miners  don't  have  any  dinner, 
And  a  tick  of  straw  they  call  a  bed. 

Well,  our  clothes  are  always  ragged, 
And  our  feet  are  always  bare; 
And  I  know  that  if  there's  a  heaven 
That  we  all  are  going  there. 

Well,  we  call  this  Hell  on  earth,  friends, 
I  must  tell  you  all  good-bye. 
Oh,  I  know  you  all  are  hungry, 
Oh,  my  darling  friends,  don't  cry. 

Harvey  Matt,  formerly  head  of  the  People's  Songs  Music  Center, 
recalls  an  incident  that  occurred  on  the  troopship  which  was  re- 
turning him  and  other  soldiers  from  Germany  in  1946.  While  he 
was  singing  folk  songs  with  a  group  of  other  GI's  in  their  bunks, 
a  chaplain  approached  and  told  the  group  that  he  was  very  much 
opposed  to  folk  music  because  he  was  from  Harlan  County,  Ken- 
tucky, explaining  that  every  time  a  picket  line  would  form  "Some- 
body would  start  singing,  and  by  God,  we'd  have  a  riot." 

Had  the  chaplain  claimed  any  other  county  in  the  United  States 
as  his  home,  this  anecdote  would  be  discarded  as  apocryphal,  for 
clergymen  ordinarily  do  not  use  oaths  in  secular  contexts,  but 
since  he  was  from  Harlan,  the  only  questionable  part  of  the 
story  is  the  mildness  of  his  language.  Undoubtedly  the  last  frontier 
is  Bloody  Harlan;  next  to  the  dependability  of  death  and  taxes, 
nothing  is  more  certain  than  murder  in  Harlan  on  election  day. 

The  most  famous  song  to  come  out  of  the  coal  fields  was 
written  by  Mrs.  Sam  Reece,  the  wife  of  a  Harlan  organizer.  Dur- 
ing the  height  of  the  strike  violence  in  that  county  in  1931,  a 
band  of  deputies  under  High  Sheriff  J.  H.  Blair  broke  into  her 
home,  looking  for  Sam.  After  vainly  ransacking  the  cabin,  the 
deputies  left,  and  Mrs.  Reece  was  able  to  get  warning  to  her 
husband. 

Several  days  later  Mrs.  Reece  tore  off  a  sheet  from  the  wall 
calendar  and  wrote  "Which  Side  Are  You  on?"  to  the  tune  of 
an  old  Baptist  hymn,  "Lay  the  Lily  Low."  Since  then  the  song 
has  spread  throughout  the  United  States,  and  has  undergone 
many  changes.  As  a  coal-mine  song,  the  version  most  common 


170  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

today  retains  only  the  first,  fifth,  and  sixth  stanzas,  substituting 
for  the  others  stanzas  like 


Don't  scab  for  the  bosses, 

Don't  listen  to  their  lies; 

Us  poor  folks  just  ain't  got  a  chance 

Unless  we  organize. 

"Which  Side  Are  You  on?"  has  been  taken  over  by  numerous 
other  groups  who  find  the  simple  stanzas  easily  adaptable  to  all 
situations.  Perhaps  the  most  compatible  is  this  stanza,  sung  in 
the  motion  picture  strike  of  1946.  Compare  this  with  the  fifth 
stanza  of  the  original. 

They  say  in  Culver  City 
There  are  no  neutrals  there; 
You  either  are  a  union  man 
Or  a  scab  for  Louis  B.  Mayer.  - 

Even  the  stanzas  substituted  for  the  originals  during  the  song's 
first  period  of  transmission  have  also  gone  through  the  folk 
process: 

Don't  let  Jack  Tenny  fool  you, 
Don't  listen  to  his  lies; 
We'll  never  get  a  decent  home 
Unless  we  organize.19 


WHICH  SIDE  ARE  YOU   ON? 


i4ijJjjJ^jL^#^ 


-&  -# 


E3 


+-e- 


10  From  a  Sacramento,  California,  housing  protest  meeting. 


0-+ 


*H* 


Songs  of  the  miners  *   171 

Come  all  of  you  good  workers, 
Good  news  to  you  I'll  tell, 
Of  how  the  good  old  union 
Has  come  in  here  to  dwell. 

refrain:  Which  side  are  you  on? 
Which  side  are  you  on? 

We've  started  our  good  battle, 
We  know  we're  sure  to  win, 
Because  we've  got  the  gun  thugs 
A-lookin'  very  thin. 

They  say  they  have  to  guard  us 
To  educate  their  child; 
Their  children  live  in  luxury 
Our  children's  almost  wild. 

With  pistols  and  with  rifles 
They  take  away  our  bread, 
And  if  you  miners  hinted  it 
They'd  sock  you  on  the  head. 

They  say  in  Harlan  County 
There  are  no  neutrals  there; 
You  either  are  a  union  man 
Or  a  thug  for  J.  H.  Blair. 

Oh  workers,  can  you  stand  it? 
Oh  tell  me  how  you  can. 
Will  you  be  a  lousy  scab 
Or  will  you  be  a  man? 

My  daddy  was  a  miner, 
He  is  now  in  the  air  and  sun11 
He'll  be  with  you  fellow  workers 
Until  the  battle's  won. 

Merle  Travis,  one  of  the  better  hillbilly  singers,  prefaces  his 
record  of  his  fine  composition  "Dark  as  a  Dungeon"  with  this 
note: 

I  never  will  forget  one  time  when  I  was  on  a  little  visit  down  home 
in  Ebenezer,  Kentucky,  I  was  talking  to  an  old  man  that  had  knowed 
me  ever  since  the  day  I  was  born  and  a  friend  of  the  family.  He  says, 
"Son,  you  don't  know  how  lucky  you  are  to  have  a  nice  job  like  you 
got  and  don't  have  to  dig  out  a  living  from  under  these  old  hills 
and  hollers  like  me  and  your  pappy  used  to."  When  I  asked  him 

II  Blacklisted  and  without  a  job. 


172  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

why  he  never  had  left  and  tried  some  other  kind  of  work  he  said, 
"Nossir,  you  just  won't  do  that.  If  you  ever  get  this  old  coal  dust  in 
your  blood,  you're  just  going  to  be  a  plain  old  coal  miner  the  rest 
of  your  days."  He  went  on  to  say,  "It's  a  habit-sorta  like  chewin' 
tobacco." 12 

DARK  AS  A  DUNGEON 


£: 


w. 


r  H*j-f " 


w~w 


0-9- 


\3F* 


0 


Come  and  listen,  you  fellers  so  young  and  so  fine 
And  seek  not  your  fortune  in  the  dark  dreary  mine; 
It'll  form  like  a  habit  and  seep  in  your  soul 
Till  the  stream  of  your  blood  is  as  black  as  the  coal. 

refrain:  It's  dark  as  a  dungeon,  and  damp  as  the  dew, 

Where  the  dangers  are  doubled,  and  the  pleasures  are  few; 
Where  the  rain  never  falls  and  the  sun  never  shines, 
It's  dark  as  a  dungeon,  way  down  in  the  mines. 

There's  many  a  man  that  I've  known  in  my  day 
Who  lived  but  to  labor  his  whole  life  away; 
Like  a  fiend  with  his  dope  and  a  drunkard  his  wine 
A  man  will  have  lust  for  the  lure  of  the  mine. 

I  hope  when  I  die  and  the  ages  will  roll 

My  body  will  blacken  and  turn  into  coal; 

Then  I'll  gaze  from  the  door  of  my  heavenly  home 

And  pity  the  miners,  a-diggin'  my  bones. 

12  From  "Folk  Songs  from  the  Hills,"  Capitol  Records  album  AD  50.  Copyright 
1947  American  Music  Co.  Used  by  permission. 


5.  The  migratory  workers 

The  Wobblies,  Hoboes,  and  Migrants 


He  built  the  road, 

With  others  of  his  class  he  built  the  road. 

Now  o'er  it,  many  a  weary  mile,  he  packs  his  load, 

Chasing  a  job,  spurred  on  by  hunger's  goad. 

He  walks  and  walks  and  walks  and  walks 

And  wonders  why  in  Hell  he  built  the  road. 


The  making  of  a  movement:  the  wobblies 

The  Industrial  Workers  of  the  World,  the  revolutionary 
organization  founded  to  destroy  the  forces  of  avarice,  and  the 
"one  big  union"  which  first  made  songs  of  militant  action  out  of 
songs  of  discontent,  ironically  enough  became  a  singing  move- 
ment through  the  mercenary  scheme  of  a  professional  spell- 
binder. 

In  the  fall  of  1906,  a  year  after  its  inception  as  a  combination 
of  such  radical  groups  as  the  Socialist  Labor  Party,  the  Western 
Federation  of  Miners,  and  the  American  Labor  Union,  the 
IWW  went  through  its  first  great  crisis.  A  disagreement  in 
philosophy  between  the  syndicalistic  ("red")  and  the  socialistic 
("yellow")  factions  split  the  union  in  two.  The  red  faction,  com- 

173 


174  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

prised  of  the  few  most  capable  leaders,  settled  in  Chicago,  "fired" 
the  elected  officers,  rewrote  the  constitution,  and,  in  a  word,  took 
the  organization  away  from  the  more  numerous  but  less  talented 
Detroit  group,  who  later  became  known  as  the  Workers  Inter- 
national Industrial  Union.  The  change  in  official  policy  alienated 
the  Western  Federation  of  Miners,  the  largest  and  most  influential 
of  the  affiliated  member  organizations,  and  it  withdrew,  taking 
the  exchequer.  Cut  off  at  the  pockets,  the  nuclear  IWW  began  to 
die,  local  by  local. 

Among  the  locals  which  still  retained  sufficient  funds  to  keep 
afloat  was  the  Spokane  branch,  prosperously  situated  on  the  cross- 
roads of  the  Northwest;  but  it  too  felt  the  pinch  of  hard  times. 
Like  the  other  IWW  locals  it  did  not  have  enough  money  to  con- 
tinue the  salaries  of  experienced  missionaries,  and  organization 
came  to  a  standstill.  At  this  crucial  juncture,  a  professional  orator 
for  the  Socialist  Party,  one  Jack  Walsh,  approached  the  Spokane 
officials  and  submitted  a  plan  which  he  guaranteed  would  bring 
in  many  new  members  at  no  cost  to  the  union.  His  idea  was  to 
introduce  the  methods  of  politics  to  unionism,  to  preach  indus- 
trial revolution  from  the  soapbox,  and  to  recruit  new  members 
for  $2.00  a  head— which,  he  adroitly  demonstrated,  would  cost 
the  IWW  nothing,  since  his  commission  would  come  out  of  the 
initiation  fee  of  $2.50.  Reluctantly,  but  with  little  choice  in  the 
matter,  the  Spokane  local  consented,  and  Walsh  set  up  his  "pitch" 
in  Spokane's  tenderloin  district,  where  the  hoboes,  tramps,  and 
other  ambulant  unemployed  congregated. 

His  idea  was  successful;  large  crowds  gathered  to  watch  this 
unique  labor  organizational  approach,  and  many  somehow  dug 
up  the  $2.50  initiation  fee  despite  the  depression  which  at  that 
time  was  paralyzing  American  industry.  But  the  revolutionary 
philosophy  that  Walsh  was  peddling  conflicted  with  the  principles 
of  religious  complacency  being  preached  simultaneously  up  the 
street  by  the  Salvation  Army  and  the  Volunteers  of  America,  and 
these  two  bands  marched  down,  surrounded  Walsh,  and  proceeded 
to  drown  him  in  a  cacophony  of  cornets  and  tambourines.  Walsh, 
however,  was  equal  to  the  crisis,  and  retired  only  long  enough  to 
organize  a  brass  band  of  his  own,  in  which  Mac  McClintock 
played  an  E-flat  baritone  horn  and  a  giant  lumberjack  beat,  as 


The  migratory  workers  •   175 

McClintock  recalls,  the  "b'jeezuz"  out  of  a  bass  drum.  Walsh's 
band  learned  four  tunes  and  hammered  away  at  these  over  and 
over  until  the  evangelists  capitulated. 

Instead  of  abandoning  his  noise-making  aggregation  with  the 
achievement  of  his  purpose,  as  a  less  alert  man  might  have  done, 
Walsh  saw  in  it  possibilities  of  its  development  into  another  money- 
making  machine.  At  that  time  a  popular  feature  of  burlesque 
shows  was  a  take-off  on  the  Salvation  Army,  whose  recently  intro- 
duced street-corner  evangelism  was  in  a  precarious  stage  of  its 
career.  Not  yet  accepted  by  the  unfortunates  whom  the  Salvation 
Army  tried  to  salvage,  and  vigorously  denounced  by  more  stable 
and  dignified  religious  purveyors,  it  was  a  large  and  immobile 
target  for  ridicule.  A  troupe  of  burlesque  comedians,  dressed  in 
garish  uniforms  caricaturing  the  evangelical  military  and  carry- 
ing the  popular  Salvation  Army  musical  instruments,  would  march 
on  the  stage  to  the  booming  of  a  bass  drum  and  the  rattle  of 
tambourines,  and  line  up  before  the  audience.  In  turn  each  in- 
strumentalist would  "testify"  with  a  quatrain  of  risque  doggerel 
such  as 

Oh  I  courted  a  gal  with  a  wooden  leg; 
With  her  I  used  to  linger. 
The  way  I  knew  she  had  a  wooden  leg, 
I  ran  a  splinter  in  my  finger. 

"Then,"  Mac  McClintock  remembers,  "they  did  a  walk-around 
while  one  performer  brayed  the  tune  on  a  cornet  or  trombone, 
another  banged  the  bass  drum,  and  the  rest  swatted  and  jangled 
their  tambos  until  they  were  in  position  for  the  next  solo  verse." 
It  occurred  to  Walsh  that  this  satirical  mimicry  of  the  singing 
evangelists  might  be  extended  to  further  IWW  doctrines,  and 
incidentally  stimulate  the  flow  of  the  $2.00  initiation  fees.  Luckily 
for  his  idea,  his  group  included  McClintock,  already  known  in 
hobo  circles  as  the  composer  of  "Hallelujah,  I'm  a  Bum,"  "The 
Big  Rock  Candy  Mountain,"  and  the  "Bum  Song,"  and  Richard 
Brazier,  a  gifted  parodist  who  was  to  become  one  of  the  IWW's 
most  prolific  composers.  To  McClintock's  "Hallelujah,  I'm  a 
Bum,"  the  band  added  a  parody  of  another  gospel  hymn,  "When 
the  Roll  is  Called  up  Yonder,"  and  parodies  of  the  popular  Sal- 


176  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

vation  Army  secular  nickel-getters,  "Where  the  Silvery  Colorado 
Wends  Its  Way"  and  "Where  is  My  Wandering  Boy  Tonight?": 

Where  is  my  wandering  boy  tonight, 

The  boy  of  his  mother's  pride? 

He's  counting  the  ties  with  his  bed  on  his  back 

Or  else  he  is  bumming  a  ride. 

Oh,  where  is  my  wandering  boy  tonight? 
Oh,  where  is  my  wandering  boy  tonight? 
He's  at  the  head  of  an  overland  train — 
That's  where  your  boy  is  tonight. 

The  four  songs  were  printed  in  a  10  c  leaflet  which  grew  into 
the  famous  Little  Red  Song  Book,  the  Wobblies'  Bible,  which 
is  now  in  its  twenty-eighth  edition. 

When  the  point  of  diminishing  returns  was  reached  in  Spokane, 
Walsh  led  his  band  through  the  Northwest  coastal  towns  on  an 
exceptionally  remunerative  tour.  But  "fattening  hogs  ain't  in 
luck,"  as  Walsh  was  soon  to  discover.  The  Seattle  local,  one  of 
the  most  influential  western  branches  of  the  IWW,  had  never 
approved  Walsh's  street-corner  organizing  because  such  methods 
were  to  be  identified  with  the  tactics  of  political  action,  which 
the  IWW  policy  makers  had  condemned  as  a  perpetuation  of  the 
capitalistic  system.  Furthermore,  the  IWW  locals  realized  that 
they  had  been  taken  by  the  shrewd  Walsh,  and  complained  that 
few  of  his  recruits  had  ever  paid  more  than  the  first  month's  dues. 
Walsh  replied  that  he  had  contracted  only  to  bring  the  members 
in,  not  to  keep  them.1  His  contention  was  ignored,  the  IWW  took 
back  its  instruments  and  uniforms,  and  Walsh  was  fired. 

But  his  idea  had  taken  root,  and  before  long  street  singing  and 
organization  became  the  principal  activity  of  the  struggling 
Pacific  locals.  The  national  policy  board  bestowed  its  benediction 
on  topical  singing  as  a  weapon  of  revolt,  and  Walsh's  four-page 
leaflet  grew  larger  year  by  year. 

Perhaps  the  greatest  importance  of  the  "little  red  song  book"  2 

i  The  principal  reason  for  the  supplanting  of  the  IWW  by  other  industrial 
unions  was  this  inability  to  hold  its  members.  Its  organizers  succeeded  easily  enough 
in  convincing  migrant  workers  that  the  capitalistic  system  was  an  evil  excrescence 
of  greed,  but  they  offered  no  constructive  plan  for  the  future  other  than  abstract 
and  bombastic  exhortations  for  the  workers  to  "cast  off  [their]  chains." 

2  Its  title  through  the  years  has  been  IWW  Songs:  To  Fan  the  Flames  of  Discontent. 


The  migratory  workers  *   177 

was  its  function  as  a  vehicle  for  the  IWW  Preamble.  "He  who 
travels  lightest,  travels  fastest,"  the  Wobblies  believed,  so  their 
movement,  great  as  were  its  conceptions  of  a  new  world  order, 
was  founded  on  no  elaborate  constitution,  no  pretentious,  orotund 
manifesto,  no  Das  Kapital,  but  on  a  simple  one-page  statement: 

THE  PREAMBLE 

Of  the  Industrial  Workers  of  the  World 
The  working  class  and  the  employing  class  have  nothing  in  common. 
There  can  be  no  peace  so  long  as  hunger  and  want  are  found  among 
millions  of  working  people  and  the  few,  who  make  up  the  employing 
class,  have  all  the  good  things  of  life. 

Between  these  two  classes  a  struggle  must  go  on  until  the  workers 
of  the  world  organize  as  a  class,  take  possession  of  the  earth  and  the 
machinery  of  production,  and  abolish  the  wage  system. 

We  find  that  the  centering  of  management  of  the  industries  into 
fewer  and  fewer  hands  makes  the  trade  unions  unable  to  cope  with 
the  ever-growing  power  of  the  employing  class.  The  trade  unions 
foster  a  state  of  affairs  which  allows  one  set  of  workers  to  be  pitted 
against  another  set  of  workers  in  the  same  industry,  thereby  helping 
defeat  one  another  in  wage  wars.  Moreover,  the  trade  unions  aid  the 
employing  class  to  mislead  the  workers  into  the  belief  that  the  working 
class  have  interests  in  common  with  their  employers. 

These  conditions  can  be  changed  and  the  interest  of  the  working 
class  upheld  only  by  an  organization  formed  in  such  a  way  that  all  its 
members  in  any  one  industry,  or  in  all  industries  if  necessary,  cease 
work  whenever  a  strike  or  lockout  is  in  any  department  thereof,  thus 
making  an  injury  to  one  an  injury  to  all. 

Instead  of  the  conservative  motto,  "A  fair  day's  wage  for  a  fair  day's 
work,"  we  must  inscribe  on  our  banner  the  revolutionary  watchword, 
"Abolition  of  the  wage  system." 

It  is  the  historic  mission  of  the  working  class  to  do  away  with 
capitalism.  The  army  of  production  must  be  organized,  not  only  for 
the  every-day  struggle  with  capitalists,  but  also  to  carry  on  production 
when  capitalism  shall  have  been  overthrown.  By  organizing  indus- 
trially we  are  forming  the  structure  of  the  new  society  within  the  shell 
of  the  old. 

These  were  catastrophic  ideas,  and  upon  them  was  founded 
not  only  their  philosophy,  but  their  songs  also,  each  of  which 
was  designed  to  illustrate  and  dramatize  some  phase  of  the 
struggle.  Ideas  this  big,  however,  are  apt  to  lead  literary  versifica- 


178  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

tion  into  bombast  and  heavy  rhetoric— precisely  what  happened 
to  the  I  WW  songs  which  attempted  to  versify  the  Preamble: 

The  workers  of  the  world  are  now  awaking; 
The  earth  is  shaking  with  their  mighty  tread. 
The  master  class  in  fear  now  is  quaking, 
The  sword  of  Damocles  hangs  o'er  their  head. 
The  toilers  in  one  union  are  uniting, 
To  overthrow  their  cruel  master's  reign. 
In  One  Big  Union  now  they  all  are  fighting, 
The  product  of  their  labor  to  retain. 

To  the  "blanket  stiffs"  and  "jockers"  who  comprised  the  mem- 
bership of  the  early  IWW,  words  like  these  were  impressive,  but 
no  more  within  their  comprehension  than  the  Salute  to  the  Flag 
is  to  the  first-grade  pupil  who  recites  it  after  his  teacher.  And 
when  members  of  this  social  stratum  attempt  to  imitate  these 
high-sounding  phrases,  the  result  is  likely  to  be  absurd.  There  is 
something  ridiculous,  for  example,  in  attempting  to  fit  to  the 
tune  of  "Wabash  Cannonball"  stanzas  like  this: 

Hail!  ye  brave  Industrial  Workers, 
Vanguard  of  the  coming  day, 
When  labor's  hosts  shall  cease  to  oblige 
And  shall  dash  their  chains  away. 
How  the  masters  dread  you,  hate  you, 
Their  uncompromising  foe; 
For  they  see  in  you  a  menace, 
Threatening  soon  their  overthrow. 

The  only  excuse  that  can  be  offered  for  such  an  unnatural 
misalliance  is  that  it  was  made  deliberately,  in  accordance  with 
the  formula  that  guided  all  the  IWW  song  making:  Take  a  tune 
known  intimately  by  the  most  unmusical  of  the  migrants,  and 
fit  to  it  revolutionary  words— and  the  more  bloodthirsty  the  words, 
the  better. 

The  Wobbly  composers  sinned  in  the  other  extreme  also;  some 
of  their  songs  are  the  worst  doggerel  that  has  ever  got  into  print: 

In  the  prison  cell  we  sit 

Are  we  broken-hearted — nit — ■ 

We're  as  happy  and  as  cheerful  as  can  be; 

For  we  know  that  every  Wob 

Will  be  busy  on  the  job, 

Till  they  swing  the  prison  doors  and  set  us  free. 


The  migratory  workers  •   179 

But  what  is  left  of  the  IWW  songbook  after  these  defects  are 
considered  makes  it  the  first  great  collection  of  labor  songs  ever 
assembled  for  utilitarian  purposes— indeed,  few  collections  since 
the  publication  of  the  first  "little  red  songbook"  equal  it.  In  it 
first  appeared  the  greatest  American  labor  song,  "Solidarity  For- 
ever," and  such  worthy  songs  of  lesser  stature  as  "The  Workers' 
Funeral  Hymn"  and  "The  Red  Flag."  Historically,  it  is  of  first 
importance  as  a  record  of  a  conscious  effort  to  carry  economic 
and  social  discontent  to  the  singing  stage,  which  some  writers 
believe  is  a  necessary  precedent  to  action.  In  the  field  of  folksong 
scholarship,  the  IWW  songbook  is  significant  for  its  preservation 
of  original  compositions  which  potentially  are  folk  material. 
Some  observers  might  page  through  the  Wobbly  book  and  con- 
demn the  entire  collection  as  either  bombast  or  doggerel,  neither 
of  which  can  conceivably  get  into  the  stream  of  folklore,  but  such 
arbitrary  judgments  are  always  rash.  The  Wobblies'  "Where  the 
Fraser  River  Flows"  has  little  to  recommend  it,  for  example.  It 
is  not  the  worst  of  the  IWW  parodies,  certainly,  but  neither  does 
it  have  any  of  those  qualifications  that  seem  to  be  prerequisites  for 
admission  to  the  highly  selective  folk  tradition: 

Fellow  workers  pay  attention  to  what  I'm  going  to  mention, 
For  it  is  the  clear  contention  of  the  workers  of  the  world; 
That  we  should  all  be  ready,  true-hearted,  brave  and  steady, 
To  rally  round  the  standard  when  the  Red  Flag  is  unfurled. 

refrain:  Where  the  Fraser  river  flows,  each  fellow  worker  knows, 
They  have  bullied  and  oppressed  us,  but  still  our  Union 

grows. 
And  we're  going  to  find  a  way,  boys,  for  shorter  hours 

and  better  pay,  boys, 
And  we're  going  to  win  the  day,  boys,  where  the  river 

Fraser  flows. 

But  then  Aunt  Molly  Jackson  submits  as  her  own  composition  a 
song  containing  these  stanzas: 

Fellow  workers,  pay  attention 
To  what  Vm  going  to  mention; 
Now  this  is  the  intention 
Of  the  workers  of  the  world. 


180  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

To  march  in  under  our  union  banner, 
To  sing  and  shout  our  slogan, 
And  build  one  powerful  union 
For  the  workers  of  the  world. 

We  are  going  to  find  a  way,  boys, 
To  shorter  hours  and  better  pay,  boys, 
Yes,  we  are  learning  the  way,  boys, 
As  lots  of  bosses  know.3 

The  bulk  of  the  songs  contained  in  the  IWW  songbook  are 
parodies  of  gospel  hymns  and  sentimental  songs  which  have 
firmly  established  themselves  in  American  esteem,  such  as  "Just 
Before  the  Battle,  Mother,"  "Love  Me  and  the  World  Is  Mine," 
and  "That  Tumble  Down  Shack  in  Athlone."  But  no  recognized 
composition,  whatever  its  original  nature,  was  safe  from  parody 
when  the  Wobbly  song  maker  was  hunting  for  a  tune  to  fit  a  set 
of  lyrics.  Thus  "Onward  Christian  Soldiers"  becomes  "Onward, 
One  Big  Union";  "Marching  Through  Georgia"  becomes  "Paint 
'er  Red";4  "Barcarolle"  becomes  "Farewell  Frank";  "The  Tore- 
ador Song"  becomes  "We  Come";  and  even  "Lillibullero,"  the 
seventeenth-century  incendiary  song  that  was  said  to  have  caused 
the  loss  of  three  kingdoms,  turns  up  as  "Workers  of  the  World." 

From  a  literary  aspect,  the  most  consistently  good  songs  emanat- 
ing from  the  Wobbly  composers  are  the  elegies  written  for  their 
fallen  comrades.  The  pretentiousness  which  results  in  bombast, 
the  iconoclasm  which  results  in  compositions  of  poor  taste,  and 
the  hack  work  which  results  in  doggerel  are  rarely  found  in  the 
elegies.  The  imminence  of  violent  death  which  hung  over  all 
the  Wobblies  when  most  of  these  songs  were  written  was  brought 
close  to  them  when  they  commemorated  the  victim  of  a  lynching 
mob  or  vengeful  justice,  and  consequently  purged  their  songs 
of  insincerity  and  questionable  humor. 

In  spite  of  its  defects,  which  are  many,  the  many  fine  features 
of  the  "little  red  songbook"  firmly  establish  it  as  a  landmark  in 
the  history  of  singing  labor. 

3  The  direction  of  borrowing  in  this  transmission  is  clearly  determined  in  other 
stanzas  of  Aunt  Molly's  song  by  her  use  of  certain  words,  not  usually  in  her  vocabu- 
lary, present  in  the  Wobbly  song. 

4  Attributed  to  Ralph  Chaplin  in  the  IWW  songbooks,  but  Chaplin  in  his  auto- 
biography, Wobbly,  shifts  the  responsibility  for  this  embarrassing  composition  to 
an  obscure  song  writer.  "Paint  'er  Red"  was  one  of  the  Wobblies'  great  songs. 


Solidarity  forever  *   181 

Unquestionably  the  greatest  song  yet  produced  by  American 
labor  is  "Solidarity  Forever,"  written  to  the  tune  of  "John  Brown's 
Body"  by  Ralph  Chaplin.  Chaplin  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the 
early  Chicago  faction  of  the  IWW  and  right-hand  man  to  Big  Bill 
Haywood,  but  soon  after  his  release  from  prison  in  1923  he  under- 
went that  change  of  heart  experienced  by  so  many  youthful  radi- 
cals. He  has  lived  to  hear  "Solidarity  Forever"  used  against  him. 

SOLIDARITY  FOREVER 

When  the  union's  inspiration  through  the  workers'  blood  shall  run, 
There  can  be  no  power  greater  anywhere  beneath  the  sun. 
Yet  what  force  on  earth  is  weaker  than  the  feeble  strength  of  one? 
But  the  union  makes  us  strong. 

Solidarity  forever! 
Solidarity  forever! 
Solidarity  forever! 
For  the  union  makes  us  strong. 

Is  there  aught  we  hold  in  common  with  the  greedy  parasite 
Who  would  lash  us  into  serfdom  and  would  crush  us  with  his  might? 
Is  there  anything  left  for  us  but  to  organize  and  fight? 
For  the  union  makes  us  strong. 

It  is  we  who  plowed  the  prairies;  built  the  cities  where  they  trade; 
Dug  the  mines  and  built  the  workshops;  endless  miles  of  railroad  laid. 
Now  we  stand,  outcast  and  starving,  'mid  the  wonders  we  have  made; 
But  the  union  makes  us  strong. 

All  the  world  that's  owned  by  idle  drones,  is  ours  and  ours  alone. 
We  have  laid  the  wide  foundations;  built  it  skyward  stone  by  stone. 
It  is  ours,  not  to  slave  in,  but  to  master  and  to  own, 
While  the  union  makes  us  strong. 

They  have  taken  untold  millions  that  they  never  toiled  to  earn. 
But  without  our  brain  and  muscle  not  a  single  wheel  can  turn. 
We  can  break  their  haughty  power;  gain  our  freedom  while  we  learn 
That  the  union  makes  us  strong. 

In  our  hands  is  placed  a  power  greater  than  their  hoarded  gold; 
Greater  than  the  might  of  armies,  magnified  a  thousand-fold. 
We  can  bring  to  birth  the  new  world  from  the  ashes  of  the  old, 
For  the  union  makes  us  strong. 

Some  of  the  turgid  rhetoric  of  the  latter  stanzas  of  "Solidarity 
Forever"  has  been  burned  out  in  the  alembic  of  folk  transmission. 


182  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

The  pattern  of  the  usual  adaptation  is  a  retention  of  the  first 
stanza  and  chorus,  intact,  and  a  complete  discarding  of  the  sub- 
sequent stanzas  for  improvised  stanzas  less  pretentious  and  more 
relevant  to  the  situation  at  hand: 

The  men  all  stick  together  and  the  boys  are  fighting  fine; 
The  women  and  the  girls  are  all  right  on  the  picket  line. 
No  scabs,  no  threats  can  stop  us  as  we  all  march  out  on  time, 
For  the  union  makes  us  strong. 

From  a  strike  at  the  Safeway  Stores  in  West  Oakland,  California, 
to  force  the  management  to  hire  Negro  clerks,  comes  this  variant: 

Safeway  thinks  America  is  only  for  one  race; 

To  earn  a  living,  white  must  be  the  color  of  your  face. 

But  we  believe  in  democracy  for  everyone 

So  we'll  picket  till  our  job  is  done. 

Surprisingly  enough,  there  were  lady  Wobs  among  the  members 
of  this  toughest  of  all  unions,  and  some  of  them,  like  Katie  Phar 
and  Elizabeth  Gurley  Flynn,  attained  prominence  in  the  leader- 
ship. This  song  was  composed  in  prison  by  Vera  Moller,  another 
member  of  this  Amazonian  band. 

WE  MADE  GOOD  WOBS  OUT  THERE 

(Tune:  "Auld  Lang  Syne") 

Though  we  be  shut  out  from  the  world 
Here  worn  and  battle-scarred, 
Our  names  shall  live  where  men  walk  free 
On  many  a  small  red  card. 

So  let  us  take  fresh  hope,  my  friend, 
We  cannot  feel  despair. 
Whate'er  may  be  our  lot  in  here, 
We  made  good  Wobs  out  there. 

When  we  were  out  we  did  our  bit 

To  hasten  Freedom's  dawn. 

They  can't  take  back  the  seeds  we  spread, 

The  truths  we  passed  along. 

'Tis  joy  to  know  we  struck  a  blow 
To  break  the  master's  sway, 
And  those  we  lined  up  take  the  work 
And  carry  on  today. 


Dump  the  bosses  off  your  back  -   183 

Though  we  be  shut  out  from  the  world, 
And  days  are  long  and  hard, 
They  can't  erase  the  names  we  wrote 
On  many  a  small  red  card. 

So  let  us  take  fresh  hope,  my  friend, 
Above  our  prison  fare, 
Whate'er  may  be  our  lot  in  here, 
We  made  good  Wobs  out  there. 

"Dump  the  Bosses  off  Your  Back"  is  a  selection,  taken  at  random, 
from  the  many  gospel  hymn  parodies  in  the  Little  Red  Song  Book. 

DUMP  THE  BOSSES  OFF  YOUR  BACK 

(Tune:  "Take  It  to  the  Lord  in  Prayer") 

Are  you  poor,  forlorn,  and  hungry, 
Are  there  lots  of  things  you  lack? 
Is  your  life  made  up  of  misery? 
Then  dump  the  bosses  off  your  back. 

Are  your  clothes  all  patched  and  tattered, 
Are  you  living  in  a  shack? 
Would  you  have  your  troubles  scattered? 
Then  dump  the  bosses  off  your  back. 

Are  you  almost  split  asunder? 
Loaded  like  a  long-eared  jack? 
Boob — why  don't  you  buck  like  thunder 
And  dump  the  bosses  off  your  back? 

All  the  agonies  you  suffer 
You  can  end  with  one  good  whack. 
Stiffen  up,  you  orn'ry  duffer, 
And  dump  the  bosses  off  your  back. 

One  of  the  most  successful  organizing  drives  of  the  IWW  was 
among  the  lumber  and  sawmill  workers  of  the  Northwest.  After 
the  AFL  twice  failed  in  attempting  to  establish  a  union,  the 
Wobblies  succeeded,  but  at  the  cost  of  the  usual  number  of  their 
shock  troops.  The  most  violent  struggle  took  place  at  Everett, 
Washington,  in  the  summer  of  1916,  after  a  long  strike  was  about 
to  collapse  because  of  repeated  beatings  of  strikers  by  police. 
August  19  saw  the  police  begin  an  offensive  designed  to  clear  out 
the  remaining  pickets,  but  when  the  story  of  the  beatings  got 
abroad  more  Wobbly  expendables  moved  into  Everett.  A  strong 


184  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

force  of  police  overwhelmed  them  also.  Faithful  to  the  principle 
of  "one  big  union,"  the  IWW  gathered  a  force  large  enough  to 
contend  with  the  police,  loaded  two  steamers  full  of  men,  and 
sailed  from  Seattle  to  Everett.  But  the  police  had  been  warned  of 
the  attempted  invasion,  and  before  the  ships  could  dock  they 
swept  the  decks  with  gunfire.  Five  Wobblies  were  killed  and 
thirty-one  were  wounded,  but  they  fought  back,  and  when  the 
battle  ended,  there  were  two  dead  and  fourteen  wounded  among 
the  deputies. 

EVERETT,  NOVEMBER  FIFTH 

".  .  .  and  then  the  fellow  worker  died,  singing  'Hold  the  Fort'  .  .  ." 

Out  of  the  dark  they  came;  out  of  the  night 

Of  poverty  and  injury  and  woe — 

With  flaming  hope,  their  vision  thrilled  to  light — 

Song  on  their  lips,  and  every  heart  aglow; 

They  came,  that  none  should  trample  labor's  right 
To  speak,  and  voice  her  centuries  of  pain. 
Bare  hands  against  the  masters'  armed  might! 
A  dream  to  match  the  tolls  of  sordid  gain! 

refrain:  Song  on  his  lips,  he  came; 
Song  on  his  lips,  he  went; 
This  be  the  token  we  bear  of  him — 
Soldier  of  Discontent. 

And  then  the  decks  went  red;  and  the  grey  sea 
Was  written  crimsonly  with  ebbing  life. 
The  barricade  spewed  shots  and  mockery 
And  curses,  and  the  drunken  lust  of  strife. 

Yet,  the  mad  chorus  from  that  devil's  host, 
Yea,  all  the  tumult  of  that  butcher  throng, 
Compound  of  bullets,  booze,  and  coward  boast, 
Could  not  outshriek  one  dying  worker's  song! 

At  the  height  of  the  recent  Flying  Saucer  furor,  a  letter  to  the 
editor  of  a  Philadelphia  newspaper  ventured  the  explanation, 
"They're  pieplates— left  over  from  the  pie  in  the  sky  we  were 
promised  years  ago."  Possibly  many  of  the  younger  generation 
missed  the  implication,  but  the  older  readers  recalled  Joe  Hill's 
most  famous  song. 


The  preacher  and  the  slave  •   185 

One  evening  late  in  1910  Joe  Hill  walked  into  the  Portland, 
Oregon,  IWW  hall  with  a  song  he  had  written  to  the  tune  of  the 
popular  Salvation  Army  gospel  hymn,  "In  the  Sweet  Bye  and  Bye." 
He  gave  it  to  the  secretary  of  the  local,  George  Reese,  who  handed 
it  to  Mac  McClintock,  the  local's  "busker,"  or  tramp  entertainer. 
Mac  sang  it  to  the  men  idling  in  the  hall,  and  the  tremendous 
applause  that  greeted  its  rendition  convinced  Reese  that  they  had 
something.  He  and  McClintock  revised  the  song,  and  printed  it 
in  their  little  song  leaflet  which  two  years  later  was  adopted  by 
the  IWW  as  the  official  songbook  of  the  union.  Hill  was  invited 
to  join  the  Wobblies,  and  so  began  his  fabulous  career. 

THE  PREACHER  AND  THE  SLAVE 

Long-haired  preachers  come  out  every  night 
Try  to  tell  you  what's  wrong  and  what's  right; 
But  when  asked  about  something  to  eat, 
They  will  answer  with  voices  so  sweet: 

refrain:  You  will  eat,  bye  and  bye 

In  that  glorious  land  above  the  sky  (way  up  high) 

Work  and  pray,  live  on  hay, 

You'll  get  pie  in  the  sky  when  you  die  (that's  no  lie). 

And  the  starvation  army  they  play, 
And  they  sing  and  they  clap  and  they  pray, 
Till  they  get  all  your  coin  on  the  drum, 
Then  they  tell  you  when  you're  on  the  bum: 

If  you  fight  hard  for  children  and  wife — 
Try  to  get  something  good  in  this  life — ■ 
You're  a  sinner  and  bad  man,  they  tell, 
When  you  die  you  will  sure  go  to  hell. 

Workingmen  of  all  countries,  unite, 

Side  by  side  for  freedom  we'll  fight; 

When  the  world  and  its  wealth  we  have  gained 

To  the  grafters  we'll  sing  this  refrain: 

You  will  eat,  bye  and  bye, 

When  you've  learned  how  to  cook  and  to  fry; 

Chop  some  wood,  'twill  do  you  good, 

And  you'll  eat  in  the  sweet  bye  and  bye. 

Among  labor  unions  Hill's  version  of  "Casey  Jones"  has  become 
more  popular  than  the  original  railroad  ballad.  It  is  one  of  the 


186  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

few  songs  that  no  labor  song  anthologist  would  dare  leave  out. 
According  to  popular  history,  it  was  composed  for  a  Southern 
Pacific  strike  in  1910,  but  company  records  and  newspapers  show 
no  evidence  of  a  strike  of  the  magnitude  described  in  Hill's  story 
of  the  song's  composition  having  taken  place  in  that  year.  Harry 
McClintock  says  it  was  written  for  the  "Harriman  strike  of  1911." 

CASEY  JONES,  THE  UNION  SCAB 

The  workers  on  the  S.P.  line  to  strike  sent  out  a  call; 

But  Casey  Jones,  the  engineer,  he  wouldn't  strike  at  all. 

His  boiler  it  was  leaking,  and  its  drivers  on  the  bum, 

And  his  engine  and  its  bearings,  they  were  all  out  of  plumb. 

refrain:  Casey  Jones  kept  his  junk  pile  running; 
Casey  Jones  was  working  double  time; 
Casey  Jones  got  a  wooden  medal 
For  being  good  and  faithful  on  the  S.P.  line. 

The  workers  said  to  Casey,  "Won't  you  help  us  win  this  strike?" 
But  Casey  said,  "Let  me  alone,  you'd  better  take  a  hike." 
Then  Casey's  wheezy  engine  ran  right  off  the  worn-out  track, 
And  Casey  hit  the  river  with  an  awful  crack. 

Casey  Jones  hit  the  river  bottom; 
Casey  Jones  broke  his  bloomin'  spine; 
Casey  Jones  was  an  Angelino 
He  took  a  trip  to  heaven  on  the  S.P.  line. 

When  Casey  Jones  got  up  to  heaven  to  the  Pearly  Gate, 
He  said,  "I'm  Casey  Jones,  the  guy  that  pulled  the  S.P.  freight." 
"You're  just  the  man,"  said  Peter,  "Our  musicians  went  on  strike; 
You  can  get  a  job  a-scabbing  any  time  you  like." 

Casey  Jones  got  a  job  in  heaven; 
Casey  Jones  was  doing  mighty  fine; 
Casey  Jones  went  scabbing  on  the  angels 
Just  like  he  did  to  workers  on  the  S.P.  line. 

The  angels  got  together,  and  they  said  it  wasn't  fair, 
For  Casey  Jones  to  go  around  a-scabbing  everywhere. 
The  Angels'  Union  Number  23,  they  sure  was  there, 
And  they  promptly  fired  Casey  down  the  Golden  Stair. 

Casey  Jones  went  to  Hell  a-flying. 

"Casey  Jones,"  the  Devil  said,  "Oh  fine! 

Casey  Jones,  get  busy  shoveling  sulphur — 

That's  what  you  get  for  scabbing  on  the  S.P.  line." 


Workers  of  the  world,  awaken  *   187 

A  version  of  Joe  Hill's  "Casey  Jones,"  collected  by  Duncan 
Emrich  among  the  western  miners,  records  an  exercise  of  one  of 
the  Wobblies'  chief  weapons,  sabotage: 

The  workers  got  together,  they  said  it  wasn't  fair 
For  Casey  to  go  around  in  his  cabin  everywhere. 
Someone  put  a  bunch  of  railroad  ties  across  the  track, 
And  Casey  hit  the  river  with  an  awful  crack} 

After  hearing  a  similar  stanza  sung  by  a  group  of  Wobblies  in 
1913,  Harry  F.  Ward  was  impressed  by  the  vociferous  applause 
that  greeted  the  lines  telling  of  the  workers'  revenge.  He  continues, 

Still  another  ballad  tells  gleefully  how  the  cheated  laborer  buys  a 
piece  of  gaspipe  to  lie  in  wait  for  the  employment  shark  who  has 
robbed  him.  This  is  partly  the  naive  revelation  by  simple  folk  of  that 
terrible  disregard  for  human  life  which  is  one  of  the  outstanding  facts 
of  our  industrial  process.  More  than  that,  we  have  here  the  voice  of 
men  with  whom  life  is  rarely  safe  .  .  .  men  for  whose  lives  society  has 
scant  respect  may  be  expected  to  reciprocate  the  feeling  and  make  it 
concrete.  "We  care  no  more  for  your  food  supply  in  time  of  strike 
than  you  cared  for  ours  in  ordinary  times,"  was  what  the  English 
strikers  told  remonstrant  England  after  they  had  tied  up  transporta- 
tion. These  men  whom  the  I.W.W.  is  organizing  have  less  restraint.6 

"Workers  of  the  World,  Awaken!"  is  probably  Joe  Hill's  best 
serious  song.  It  is  one  of  the  long  tradition  of  compositions  written 
in  jail. 

WORKERS  OF  THE  WORLD,   AWAKEN  ! 

Workers  of  the  world,  awaken! 

Break  your  chains,  demand  your  rights. 

All  the  wealth  you  make  is  taken 

By  exploiting  parasites. 

Shall  you  kneel  in  deep  submission 

From  your  cradles  to  your  graves? 

Is  the  height  of  your  ambition 

To  be  good  and  willing  slaves? 

5  "Songs  of  the  Western  Miners,"  California  Folklore  Quarterly,  Vol.  1  (1942), 
p.  216. 

6  "Songs  of  Discontent,"  Methodist  Review,  September,  1913,  p.  728. 


188  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

refrain:  Arise,  ye  prisoners  of  starvation! 
Fight  for  your  emancipation; 
Arise,  ye  slaves  of  every  nation 
In  one  union  grand. 
Our  little  ones  for  bread  are  crying, 
And  millions  are  from  hunger  dying; 
The  end  the  means  is  justifying, 
'Tis  the  final  stand. 

If  the  workers  take  a  notion, 
They  can  stop  all  speeding  trains; 
Every  ship  upon  the  ocean 
They  can  tie  with  mighty  chains; 
Every  wheel  in  the  creation, 
Every  mine  and  every  mill, 
Fleets  and  armies  of  the  nation 
Will  at  their  command  stand  still. 

Join  the  union,  fellow  workers, 
Men  and  women,  side  by  side; 
We  will  crush  the  greedy  shirkers 
Like  a  sweeping,  surging  tide. 
For  united  we  are  standing, 
But  divided  we  will  fall; 
Let  this  be  our  understanding — 
"All  for  one  and  one  for  all." 

Workers  of  the  world,  awaken! 
Rise  in  all  your  splendid  might; 
Take  the  wealth  that  you  are  making, 
It  belongs  to  you  by  right. 
No  one  will  for  bread  be  crying, 
We'll  have  freedom,  love,  and  health 
When  the  grand  red  flag  is  flying 
In  the  Workers'  Commonwealth. 

The  making  of  a  legend:  joe  hill 

The  first  saint  in  the  martyrology  of  labor  is  Joe  Hill. 
Of  the  scores  of  men  who  have  willingly  given  their  lives  to  ad- 
vance the  cause  of  American  labor,  none  remotely  approaches 
Joe  Hill's  position  in  popular  estimation.  He  has  become  not  only 
the  idol  of  a  moribund  union,  but  the  apotheosis  of  militant  labor, 
a  modern  Wat  Tyler— but  of  the  little  that  is  known  of  him, 
nothing  is  more  certain  than  his  unworthiness  of  the  honor  lav- 
ished upon  his  memory. 


The  migratory  workers  •   189 

Joe  Hillstrom  was  responsible  for  his  own  beatification.  The 
entire  legend  that  has  grown  up  around  him  derives  from  his  con- 
duct after  his  arrest  for  the  murder  of  a  Salt  Lake  City  grocer— 
an  astounding  display  of  incredible  self-detachment,  apparent 
eagerness  to  die  a  martyr's  death,  and  an  almost  unparalleled  flair 
for  self-dramatization.  Taciturn,  eremitic,  and  mysterious  in  his 
movements  before  his  arrest,  Hillstrom  suddenly  began  to  act  as 
if  he  were  playing  the  part  of  the  quixotic  hero  of  a  fantastic 
melodrama— he  refused  to  divulge,  on  the  grounds  of  chivalry, 
the  name  of  a  woman  allegedly  implicated  in  his  shooting;  he 
refused  to  testify  in  his  own  defense;  he  refused  to  permit  the 
IWW  to  hire  lawyers  to  defend  him;  he  fired  his  two  defense 
attorneys  in  a  sensational  courtroom  outburst;  he  rejected  an  un- 
official offer  of  clemency;  he  wrote  in  his  death  cell  poignant 
letters,  poems,  and  songs  full  of  the  phrases  that  in  such  circum- 
stances easily  lend  themselves  to  immortality;  and  he  climaxed 
this  unbelievable  show  of  bravado  by  shouting  to  the  firing  squad 
the  orders  which  executed  him. 

Before  his  indictment  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  1914  virtually  noth- 
ing was  known  of  Joe  Hillstrom;  much  of  what  has  been  learned 
since  his  execution  has  been  based  on  hearsay,  and  extremely 
questionable  hearsay  at  that.  The  popular  biographical  sketch  of 
Hill  which  prefaces  the  various  literary  memorials  dedicated  to 
him— records,  magazines,  songs— varies  only  in  the  arrangement 
of  words,  and  is  always  a  paraphrase  of  idealized  hearsay.  A  typical 
example  is  the  preface  to  a  recent  recording  of  Alfred  Hayes'  and 
Earl  Robinson's  great  ballad,  "Joe  Hill": 

Joe  Hill  was  a  migratory  worker  and  labor  organizer  who  composed 
songs  which  captured  the  stirring  militant  spirit  of  men  on  the  picket 
line.  Like  many  of  his  fellow  organizers,  Hill  was  convicted  of  murder 
on  trumped-up  charges.  He  was  shot  on  November  nineteenth,  1915. 
His  last  words  were,  "Don't  mourn  for  me;  organize." 

—Michael  Loring,  Theme  Record  T-100. 

Even  Ralph  Chaplin,  the  number  two  man  in  the  IWW  during 
its  period  of  greatest  activity,  confessed,  "I  never  set  eyes  on  Joe 
Hill  alive.  .  .  .  All  I  know  was  that  his  full  name  was  Joseph 
Hillstrom,  that  he  lived  in  California,  worked  on  odd  jobs,  and 


190  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

wrote  poems  or  drew  pictures  in  his  spare  time."7  Chaplin  assem- 
bled the  only  biographical  information  about  Hillstrom  collected 
before  his  execution,  a  few  notes  on  which  everything  written  on 
Hillstrom  since  then,  with  the  exception  of  Wallace  Stegner's 
recent  investigations,  has  been  based.  Yet  Chaplin's  source  was  a 
drunken  sailor  whom  he  met  in  a  Cleveland  saloon.  In  his  auto- 
biography Chaplin  tells  the  story  of  this  encounter. 

It  was  at  Cleveland  in  the  little  saloon  where  we  used  to  stop  for 
beer  and  sandwiches  after  taking  Solidarity  over  to  the  post  office.  It 
was  close  to  midnight.  We  had  loaded  the  heavy  bags  on  our  backs  to 
beat  the  deadline.  An  I.W.W.  lake  seaman  tapped  me  on  the  shoulder 
as  I  was  leaving  and  asked  me  if  I  wanted  to  get  the  full  story  of  Joe 
Hill's  life.  "Joes  cousin  is  here,"  he  said.  "His  name  is  John  Holland. 
Buy  him  a  drink,  and  he'll  tell  all."  I  was  at  once  skeptical  and 
delighted— scarcely  willing  to  believe  that  such  good  luck  could  be 
possible. 

John  Holland  turned  out  to  be  a  deeply-bronzed  and  somewhat 
inebriated  deep-sea  sailor  whose  blue  eyes  and  blond  air  contrasted 
strikingly  with  his  complexion.  He  had  a  true  mariner's  taciturnity, 
plus  a  classic  Swedish  accent.  Word  by  word  and  drink  by  drink,  I  got 
the  story  out  of  him  and  wrote  it  down  in  my  notebook.  Incomplete 
as  they  are,  these  notes  have  served  as  the  basis  for  every  article  ever 
published  about  Joe  Hill.  In  fact,  I  believe  they  represent  all  that  is 
known  about  his  background. 

Joe  Hill  was  twenty  years  old  in  1902  when  he  arrived  in  this  coun- 
try. He  had  a  common  school  education  and  a  fair  knowledge  of 
English  which  he  had  picked  up  at  the  Y.M.C.A.  in  his  home  town, 
Jevla,  Westerjutland.  Joe  continued  his  education  by  reading  while 
working  as  a  seaman  on  freighters  plying  between  Gothenburg  and 
England.  He  left  Sweden  when  his  mother  died 

In  New  York  City,  Joe  Hill  worked  for  a  couple  of  weeks  as  a  porter 
in  a  Bowery  saloon,  then  at  any  kind  of  odd  job  he  could  find.  At  the 
end  of  a  year  he  and  his  cousin  shoved  off  for  Chicago  via  the  boxcar 
route.  They  wanted  to  go  to  the  West  Coast.  Joe  Hill  remained  in 
Chicago  two  months  and  managed  to  save  up  twenty  dollars  for  a  road 
stake.  His  cousin  had  gone  on  to  California.  The  boys  met  at  San 
Pedro,  where  they  lived  for  three  years,  alternating  their  time  between 
longshoring  and  working  freight  steamers  on  the  Honolulu  run.  Asso- 
ciation with  migratory  workers  at  sea  and  ashore  attracted  Joe  Hill 
to  the  I.W.W.  He  joined  the  organization  in  San  Pedro  and  never 
transferred. 

7  Ralph  Chaplin,  Wobbly,  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1938,  p.  184. 


The  migratory  workers  •   191 

He  could  play  almost  any  kind  of  musical  instrument  and  delighted 
in  improvising  satirical  parodies  of  well-known  songs.  At  the  Mission 
Church,  331  Beacon  Street,  San  Pedro,  he  struck  up  a  friendship  with 
Mr.  Macon,  the  director.  There  was  a  piano  in  the  mission,  where 
Joe  Hill,  between  jobs,  would  sit  by  the  hour  picking  out  the  words 
for  his  parodies  line  by  line,  to  the  amusement  of  his  fellow  maritime 
workers.  He  would  polish  up  the  verses  at  night  and  eventually  assem- 
ble them  into  songs. 

Everybody  around  the  mission  marveled  at  Joe  Hill's  untiring  in- 
dustry. He  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  "harmless  man"  as  well  as 
notably  unselfish.  Frequently  he  would  give  away  "his  last  rice."  He 
never  had  a  steady  girl,  always  protesting  that  he  was  "too  busy." 
His  cousin,  more  typical  of  the  maritime  trade,  urged  him  repeatedly, 
"Come  on  Joe,  and  have  a  good  time."  Joe  never  went.  John  Holland 
would  find  him  late  at  night  scribbling  verse,  "twisting  the  hair  on 
his  forehead  with  his  finger  as  he  figured  out  the  rhymes."  Joe  Hill 
never  smoked  or  drank.  He  was  fond  of  Chinese  dishes,  which  he 
prepared  with  great  skill.  It  was  said  of  him  that  he  could  "eat  with 
chopsticks  like  a  native." 

It  was  during  the  great  strike  on  the  Southern  Pacific  Railroad  in 
1910  that  Joe  Hill  first  gained  fame  as  a  rebel  songwriter.  "Casey  Jones, 
the  Union  Scab"  was  printed  on  cards  and  sold  for  strike  relief  in 
every  West  Coast  city.  Joe  Hill  could  never  understand  why  his  paro- 
dies became  so  popular.  He  was  greatly  surprised  to  find  himself  in 
the  limelight  and  his  roughneck  songs  famous  through  the  world.  It 
was  Joe  Hill,  more  than  any  other  songwriter,  who  made  the  I.W.W. 
a  singing  organization. 

That  this  fragmentary  biography,  based  on  the  testimony  of  an 
unreliable  informant  whose  alleged  relationship  with  Hill  was 
unsubstantiated  and  who  if  he  were  indeed  Hill's  cousin  would 
have  been  biased  in  his  favor,  should  have  been  accepted  as  not 
only  the  truth  but  the  whole  truth  is  incredible.  Yet  not  until 
Wallace  Stegner  began  his  research  on  the  Hill  legend  was  there 
any  serious  effort  made  to  find  out  more  about  this  mysterious 
champion  of  labor.  Stegner  reexamined  the  court  records  and 
other  documents  pertaining  to  Hill's  trial,  searched  through  con- 
temporary newspapers,  and  interviewed  old  Wobblies  who  remem- 
bered Hill.  His  conclusions,  briefly,  are  that  Hill's  activities  during 
his  four  years  as  a  Wobbly  are  vague;  that  he  was  not  a  misogynist 
as  Holland  maintained,  but  on  the  contrary  was  continually  in 
trouble  because  of  women;  that,  far  from  being  an  expert  instru- 


192  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

mentalist,  he  could  not  learn  to  play  the  guitar;  that  the  record 
of  Hill's  strike  activities  is  questionable  if  not  erroneous;  that 
although  Hill  was  always  well  dressed,  he  had  no  visible  means 
of  support;  that  it  was  the  general  impression  among  old  time 
Wobblies  that  Hill  was  a  crook;  that  Hill  was  probably  guilty 
of  the  murder  for  which  he  was  convicted. 

Probably  no  Wobbly  knew  Joe  Hill  better  than  Harry  McClin- 
tock.  McClintock  was  present  when  Joe  Hill  brought  his  first 
composition,  the  now-famous  "Preacher  and  the  Slave,"  into  the 
I  WW  hall  at  Portland,  and  later,  as  a  resident  of  Hill's  home  port 
and  as  a  leader  in  the  early  Wobbly  singing  movement,  cultivated 
as  close  an  acquaintance  with  him  as  anyone  who  has  so  far  been 
found  by  researchers.  McClintock  told  me  that  Stegner's  bio- 
graphical novel,  The  Preacher  and  the  Slave,  is  the  most  accurate 
work,  with  certain  qualifications,  yet  done  on  the  Hill  legend.  He 
remembers  Hill  as  a  quiet  man  with  a  deadly  equanimity  that 
frightened  even  the  hardened  Wobblies.  He  was  thought  to  be  a 
robber,  but  looked  more  like  a  gambler  in  his  conservative  navy 
blue  suit  and  black  tie— "a  real-life  Raffles,"  Mac  calls  him— and  if 
he  were  a  criminal,  Mac  continues,  "he  robbed  from  the  robbers." 
He  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  dangerous  character,  yet  to 
McClintock's  knowledge,  no  one  ever  saw  him  get  into  a  fight. 
He  was  known  to  the  police  before  he  joined  the  IWW,  and 
though  his  only  jail  sentence  came  as  a  result  of  his  organizational 
activities,  he  was  picked  up  in  1910  in  connection  with  a  streetcar 
holdup.  He  proved,  however,  that  he  had  been  in  Hilo  while  the 
robbery  was  being  committed. 

His  intimate  acquaintances,  if  he  had  any,  were  apparently 
drawn  from  outside  the  IWW,  and  his  movements  were  frequently 
not  known  to  die  union  leaders.  In  1911  he  apparently  was  in 
Mexico  serving  with  the  "International  Brigade,"  and  possibly 
was  shot  in  the  leg  at  the  abortive  action  at  Tijuana.  Though  he 
had  no  visible  income  sufficient  to  account  for  his  impeccable 
dress,  Hill  was  not  entirely  without  visible  means  of  support,  for, 
according  to  McClintock,  he  was  at  least  nominally  employed  as 
a  seaman,  and  shipped  out  of  San  Pedro  on  offshore  vessels,  usually 
to  Hawaii.  Since  he  traveled  under  an  alias  and  with  false  Nor- 
wegian seaman's  papers,  it  is  probable  that  many  of  his  mysterious 
disappearances  could  be  accounted  for  legitimately.  McClintock 


The  migratory  workers  •   193 

confirms  Stegner's  refutation  of  Holland's  claim  that  Hill  was  an 
expert  instrumentalist,  for  he  tried  several  times  to  teach  Hill 
the  guitar,  but  with  no  success.  Hill  could,  however,  pick  tunes 
out  on  the  piano. 

Hill's  real  connection  with  the  IWW  remains  in  mystery.  As 
Stegner's  investigations  show,  most  of  the  strikes  in  which  Hill 
was  allegedly  an  organizer  either  did  not  exist,  or  Hill's  presence 
at  them  was  not  proved.  The  IWW  did  not  send  him  to  Utah  as 
an  organizer,  and  though  his  presence  in  that  State  was  supposedly 
accounted  for  by  his  efforts  to  promote  a  strike  in  Bingham  Can- 
yon, there  is  no  evidence  extant  to  show  that  he  was  connected 
with  any  agitation  there,  and  the  strike  itself  never  materialized. 
In  an  open  letter  maintaining  his  innocence  written  after  his  con- 
viction, Hill  claimed  to  have  been  working  in  the  near-by  Park 
City  mines,  but  he  was  unemployed  at  the  time  of  his  arrest.  It  is 
probable,  though,  in  view  of  the  intense  IWW  activity  in  the 
Utah  copper  mines  in  1913,  that  Hill  had  some  connection  with 
the  movement  there. 

Since  Hill's  conviction  is  the  most  important  single  fact  relat- 
ing to  his  life,  a  summary  of  the  evidence  on  which  it  was  based 
may  be  worth  inclusion  here. 

At  approximately  10:30  P.M.  on  January  10,  1914,  two  armed 
men,  masked  in  bandannas,  walked  into  the  store  of  J.  G.  Morrison, 
a  prominent  Salt  Lake  City  grocer,  and  confronted  him  and  his 
two  sons.  One  of  the  men  shouted,  "We've  got  you  now,"  and 
opened  fire.  Morrison  fell,  the  youngest  son,  Merlin,  fled  into  a 
rear  room,  and  the  other  son,  Irving,  took  his  father's  pistol  and 
fired  once  before  being  shot  down  by  the  men.  Neighbors  who 
saw  the  men  run  from  the  store  said  that  one  of  them  clutched 
his  chest  and  exclaimed,  "Oh  God,  I'm  shot."  About  two  hours 
later  Joe  Hill  walked  into  the  office  of  a  doctor  two  and  a  half 
miles  away  from  Morrison's  store  bleeding  profusely  from  a  bullet 
wound  in  his  left  lung.  As  the  doctor  took  off  Hill's  coat,  a  shoulder 
holster  fell  from  Hill's  clothes;  the  doctor  saw  it  contained  a  pistol. 
Hill  said  that  he  had  been  shot  in  a  fight  over  a  woman,  admitted 
partial  responsibility  for  the  fray,  and  asked  the  doctor  to  keep 
the  affair  quiet  so  that  the  woman's  reputation  would  not  be 
jeopardized. 

That  is  the  extent  of  the  evidence  on  which  Hill  was  convicted. 


194  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

It  is  extremely  damaging  circumstantial  evidence,  undeniably; 
but  all  the  other  details  appertaining  to  the  shooting  of  Morrison 
seem  to  indicate  that  Hill  was  innocent.  Witnesses  described 
Morrison's  assailants  as  being  several  inches  shorter  than  Hill's 
six  feet;  Merlin  Morrison  refused  to  identify  Hill  as  his  father's 
slayer;  no  blood  other  than  the  dead  men's  was  found  in  the  store 
(though  the  police  maintained  that  they  discovered  expectorated 
blood  in  the  alley);  though  the  bullet  which  wounded  Hill  passed 
completely  through  his  body,  no  bullet  was  found  in  the  store, 
and  furthermore,  the  prosecution  never  established  that  Morrison's 
pistol  had  been  fired;  Morrison  was  shot  with  a  .38  caliber  pistol, 
and  according  to  Hill,  his  own  pistol,  which  he  threw  away  after 
leaving  the  doctor,  was  a  .30  caliber  Luger.  The  doctor  saw  only 
the  handle  of  Hill's  pistol  and  could  not  describe  either  its  caliber 
or  appearance.  The  evidence  that  was  not  introduced  at  the  trial 
also  tended  to  exonerate  Hill.  The  clerk  from  whom  he  said  he 
purchased  his  Luger  sent  a  telegram  to  Salt  Lake  City  confirming 
that  someone  bought  a  Luger  from  him  at  the  time  Hill  said  he 
bought  the  pistol.  Morrison  had  several  enemies  of  whom  he  was 
mortally  afraid;  these  men,  he  had  told  a  reporter  before  he  was 
shot,  had  attempted  to  kill  him  in  September  1913.  The  reporter 
was  not  allowed  to  submit  this  evidence.  A  Wobbly  named  William 
Busby  made  a  statement  to  the  Seattle  police  that  he  had  been 
with  Hill  the  night  Morrison  was  shot,  and  had  while  in  Salt 
Lake  City  before  Hill's  trial  inadvertently  mentioned  that  he 
could  prove  Hill's  innocence  in  the  presence  of  a  detective.  He 
was  arrested  and  imprisoned  until  the  end  of  Hill's  trial,  when 
he  was  told  to  get  out  of  the  state.  The  police  chief  wired  this 
information  to  Utah's  Governor  Spry,  but  Spry  not  only  ignored 
the  implication  that  Hill  had  been  framed,  but  threatened  to 
prosecute  Busby.  It  is  significant  that  this  threat  was  not  carried 
out,  nor  was  any  effort  made  by  the  Utah  authorities  to  disprove 
Busby's  charge. 

The  attitude  of  the  court  during  Hill's  trial  was  extremely 
hostile,  and  this  hostility  extended  to  Hill's  own  attorneys  whom 
he  discharged  after  shouting  out  in  the  courtroom,  "I  have  three 
prosecutors  here,  and  I  intend  to  get  rid  of  two  of  them."  No 
motive  for  the  murder  was  shown.  No  cognizance  was  taken  of 
the  fact  that  a  man  with  Hill's  serious  chest  wound  could  not  have 


The  migratory  workers  •   195 

managed  to  stay  on  his  feet  for  two  hours  and  to  have  made  his 
way  two  and  a  half  miles  to  the  doctor's  office.  After  Hill's  con- 
viction a  worldwide  flood  of  protest  poured  into  Utah.  Prominent 
persons,  among  them  the  Swedish  consul  and  President  Wilson 
(who  sent  two  telegrams  to  Governor  Spry),  interceded  for  Hill, 
but  in  spite  of  these  appeals  and  the  inherent  flimsiness  of  the 
evidence  on  which  Hill  had  been  convicted,  he  was  executed  by 
a  firing  squad  on  November  15,  1919.  His  last  words  were  not 
"Don't  mourn  for  me;  organize!"  but  "Yes,  aim!  Let  her  go!  Fire!" 
The  more  dramatic  quotation  appeared  in  a  letter  which  Hill 
sent  from  his  death  cell  to  Big  Bill  Haywood: 

Goodbye,  Bill:  I  die  like  a  true  rebel.  Don't  waste  any  time  mourn- 
ing—organize! It  is  a  hundred  miles  from  here  to  Wyoming.  Could  you 
arrange  to  have  my  body  hauled  to  the  state  line  to  be  buried?  I  don't 
want  to  be  found  dead  in  Utah.  Joe  Hill. 

This  was  not  the  only  dramatic  statement  to  come  from  Hill's 
death  cell.  He  composed  songs  and  poems  which  were  later  printed 
in  the  I  WW  songbook.  One  of  these  is  his  famous  "Last  Will" 
which  he  printed  in  a  steady  hand  on  the  night  before  his  death:8 

My  will  is  easy  to  decide, 

For  there  is  nothing  to  divide. 

My  kin  don't  need  to  fuss  and  moan, — 

"Moss  does  not  cling  to  a  rolling  stone." 

My  body?  Ah,  if  I  could  choose, 

I  would  to  ashes  it  reduce, 

And  let  the  merry  breezes  blow 

My  dust  to  where  some  flowers  grow. 

Perhaps  some  fading  flower  then 

Would  come  to  life  and  bloom  again. 

This  is  my  last  and  final  will, 

Good  luck  to  all  of  you, 

Joe  Hill. 

Joe  Hill's  body  was  brought  to  Chicago,  where  an  enormous 
crowd  waited  to  pay  its  homage.  The  auditorium  where  the  funeral 
services  were  held  was  jammed  with  a  throng  which  overflowed 
into  the  streets,  until  an  estimated  thirty  thousand  people  were 

8  Unlike  the  many  "written  on  the  eve  of  his  execution"  poems  actually  composed 
several  days  later  by  a  poor  poet  trying  to  make  an  honest  penny,  this  death-watch 
poem  is  genuine. 


T96  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

there.  After  the  ceremonies  in  the  auditorium,  the  funeral  pro- 
cession marched  a  mile,  through  streets  crowded  with  mourners, 
to  the  train  which  carried  his  body  to  the  cemetery.  There,  in 
accordance  with  his  "Last  Will,"  Joe  Hill  was  cremated  and  his 
ashes  put  into  thirty  envelopes,  which  were  then  sent  to  all  parts 
of  the  world.  One  envelope  was  retained  by  the  IWW  in  Chicago 
and  was  seized  by  the  Department  of  Justice  in  1918  during  its 
raids  for  evidence  preceding  the  trials  which  broke  the  back  of  the 
Wobbly  movement.  Thus,  as  Wallace  Stegner  puts  it,  "Although 
97  percent  of  Joe  Hill's  mortal  remains  are  somewhere  free  and 
fecund  in  the  earth,  three  percent  are  still  in  the  hands  of  the  cops." 

Whether  or  not  Hill  was  actually  guilty  of  the  murder  of 
Morrison,  there  can  be  no  question  that  his  conviction  came  as  a 
result  of  his  connection  with  the  IWW.  Probably  no  organization 
in  America  was  so  feared  and  hated  as  the  IWW  before  and  dur- 
ing the  First  World  War,  and  the  degree  of  fear  and  hatred  which 
it  enkindled  in  the  copper-mine  operators  amounted  almost  to 
insanity.  Nearly  every  labor  dispute  in  which  it  engaged  ended 
in  bloody  violence,  and  always  most  of  the  blood  was  lost  by  the 
Wobblies.  When  a  migrant  signed  his  little  red  membership  card, 
he  simultaneously  signed  a  death  warrant  that  might  be  picked 
up  at  any  time;  and  this  fact,  curiously  enough,  was  recognized 
by  the  Wobblies  themselves,  who  seemed  to  be  imbued  with  the 
spirit  of  martyrdom  that  Joe  Hill  exemplified  during  and  after 
his  trial.  After  the  shameful  trials  conducted  by  the  Department 
of  Justice  against  the  Wobbly  leaders  during  the  First  World  War, 
several  of  the  top  men  in  the  organization  jumped  bail  and  fled 
to  Russia.  Of  those  who  remained  to  serve  their  sentences,  many 
refused  to  ally  themselves  with  communism  because  they  felt  that 
the  communists  too  were  a  "bunch  of  politicians."  The  whole 
movement,  in  fact,  could  be  summed  up  as  a  screaming  banzai 
charge  at  capitalism. 

As  Joe  Hill's  reputation  as  a  labor  hero  appears  somewhat  tar- 
nished under  scrutiny,  so  does  his  reputation  as  a  composer  of 
"songs  which  captured  the  militant  spirit  of  men  on  the  picket 
line"  appear  less  refulgent  in  the  light  of  critical  examination. 
It  is  unfortunate  that  his  position  at  the  top  of  the  IWW  martyrs 
(of  whom  there  were  many  more  genuine  than  he)  has  required 
the  editors  of  the  "little  red  song  book"  to  include  so  many  of  his 


The  migratory  workers  *   197 

songs,  for  on  the  whole  their  quality  detracts  from  the  worth  of 
a  book  which  occupies  a  position  of  honor  among  collections  of 
songs  of  protest.  Only  two  of  the  score  of  songs  attributed  to  him, 
"The  Preacher  and  the  Slave,"  and  "Casey  Jones,  the  Union  Scab," 
have  any  permanent  value.  Both  of  these  have  attained  the  status 
of  genuine  folksong,  the  latter,  for  example,  having  been  collected 
by  folklorist  Duncan  Emrich  in  the  Virginia  City,  Nevada,  mines 
in  a  version  somewhat  different  from  that  composed  by  Hill.  Two 
or  three,  like  "The  Rebel  Girl"  which  Joe  Hill  considered  his  best 
song,  and  "Workers  of  the  World,  Awaken,"  despite  a  tendency 
to  slip  into  the  unfortunate  fustian  that  is  the  one  great  defect  of 
the  Wobblies'  serious  songs,  are  quite  good;  it  is  a  pity  that  there 
are  not  more  of  this  quality.  But  most,  in  a  literary  sense,  are 
contemptible.  It  is  very  difficult,  for  example,  to  say  anything  favor- 
able about  a  song  that  begins,  as  does  "The  Tramp,"  with 

//  you  all  will  shut  your  trap 
I  will  tell  you  'bout  a  chap 

or  which  has  a  refrain  like 

Oh,  Mr.  Block,  you  were  born  by  mistake 

You  take  the  cake 

You  make  me  ache. 

Tie  a  rock  on  your  block  and  then  jump  in  the  lake, 

Kindly  do  that  for  Liberty's  sake. 

or 

Scissor  Bill,  he  is  a  little  dippy 

Scissor  Bill,  he  has  a  funny  face 

Scissor  Bill,  he  should  drown  in  Mississippi 

He  is  the  missing  link  that  Darwin  tried  to  trace. 

But  "Preacher  and  the  Slave"   is  a  classic,  and  nearly  good 
enough  to  expiate  all  of  Joe  Hill's  sins  as  a  man  and  as  a  composer. 

The  making  of  a  folksong: 
"hallelujah,  i'm  a  bum" 

A  half-century  ago,  while  rattling  through  the  Midwest 
in  a  boxcar,  a  young  "busker"9  composed  an  impious  parody  on 

9  busker:   tramp  entertainer  hobo:  migratory  worker 

jocker:  experienced  tramp  tramp:  professional  unemployed 

preshun:  apprentice  tramp 


198  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

a  gospel  hymn  he  had  once  sung  as  a  boy  soprano  in  his  church 
choir.  The  first  tentative  refrain  ran, 

Hallelulia,  on  the  bum  bum, 
Hallelulia,  bum  again; 
Hallelulia,  give  us  a  handout 
To  revive  us  again. 

He  liked  the  song,  and  so  did  the  tramps  to  whom  he  sang  it 
for  pennies  or  a  share  of  a  handout,  and  in  the  years  that  followed 
he  improvised  stanzas,  some  of  which  became  permanent,  and 
broadcast  the  song  through  the  country  from  boxcars,  saloons,  and 
jungles.  He  lent  the  song  to  the  people.  Thirty  years  later  he  tried 
to  get  it  back,  but  discovered  the  folk  were  a  very  tenacious 
bunch  of  people. 

Harry  McClintock  first  realized  that  he  had  lost  ownership  of 
the  song  in  1926,  shortly  after  he  had  recorded  "Hallelujah,  I'm 
a  Bum"  and  "The  Bum  Song  (No.  1)"  for  the  Victor  Record  Com- 
pany. When  he  learned  that  sixteen  New  York  music  publishers 
had  printed  sheet  music  of  the  song  and  that  many  more  were 
turning  out  broadsides,  he  charged  the  pirates  with  infringement 
of  copyright,  but  found  that  his  claim  of  ownership  had  been 
challenged.  At  that  time  he  had  a  radio  program  on  San  Francisco's 
Station  KFRC,  and  he  broadcast  an  appeal  for  those  who  still  had 
copies  of  broadsides  he  had  sold  in  1906  to  lend  them  to  sub- 
stantiate his  claim.  Several  of  these  were  returned  to  him,  and 
also  two  copies  of  the  first  IWW  songsheet  which  had  been  pub- 
lished in  1907.  With  this  evidence  he  established  his  authorship 
to  the  satisfaction  of  the  legal  authorities,  had  the  pirates  sup- 
pressed, and  settled  down  to  enjoy  the  royalties. 

In  1932,  while  reading  George  Milburn's  Hobo's  Hornbook,  he 
found  that  the  folk  had  got  hold  of  his  song  again,  but  this  time 
their  grip  was  strengthened  by  an  even  more  acquisitive  group, 
the  folklorists.  Milburn  had  printed  two  versions  of  "Hallelulia" 
and  had  appended  to  them  this  note: 

It  is  hardly  safe  to  classify  the  following  widely-sung  ballad  as  a 
Wobbly  song.  There  is  some  dispute  as  to  its  origin.  Budd  L.  McKillips, 
who  has  himself  written  some  first  rate  hobo  poetry,  has  given  me 
the  following  notes  on  "Hallelujah,  Bum  Again's"  history:  "A  member 


The  migratory  workers  •  199 

of  the  I.W.W.  is  credited  with  having  written  the  words  to  'Hallelujah, 
I'm  a  Bum.'  The  question  of  authorship  isn't  worth  an  argument,  but 
if  anybody  will  take  the  trouble  to  do  some  investigating,  he  will  find 
that  'Hallelujah,  I'm  a  Bum'  was  a  lilting,  carefree  song  at  least  eight 
years  before  the  I.W.W.  came  squalling  into  the  world.  .  .  .  The  song 
was  found  scribbled  on  the  wall  of  a  Kansas  City  jail  cell  where  an 
old  hobo,  known  as  'One-Finger  Ellis,'  had  spent  the  night,  recovering 
from  an  overdose  of  rotgut  whiskey." 

—George  Milburn,  Hobo's  Hornbook, 
New  York,  1930,  p.  97. 

Aside  from  such  quodlibetical  questions  as  which  Kansas  City 
Ellis  was  in,  what  connection  he  had  with  the  scribbled  text  (wit- 
ness, informant,  or  scribbler?)  the  date  of  "One-Finger's"  repose 
in  the  sneezer,  and  the  method  whereby  McKillips  came  into 
possession  of  this  hazy  information,  McClintock  raises  the  objec- 
tion that  the  testimony  does  not  obviate  the  authenticity  of  his 
authorship.  Against  Milburn's  attribution  of  the  song  to  the  pro- 
lific Anon  which  has  been  accepted  by  all  subsequent  editors  of 
"Hallelujah,  I'm  a  Bum,"  Mac  McClintock  offered  his  version  of 
its  origin,  which  has  at  least  the  virtue  of  being  first-hand  and 
coherent: 

As  a  kid  I  was  a  boy  soprano  in  a  church  choir  in  my  home  town, 
Knoxville,  Tennessee.  My  voice  started  changing  when  I  was  thirteen 
and  by  the  time  I  ran  away  with  a  circus,  which  was  in  the  following 
year,  I  had  almost  conquered  the  adolescent  squeaks  and  could  give 
with  the  baritone  or  low  tenor. 

The  Gentry  Brothers'  Dog  and  Pony  Show  played  its  last  date  of 
the  season  on  a  muddy  lot  in  Anniston,  Alabama,  in  1896,  paid  off 
its  help,  which  was  unusual  with  a  circus  of  that  period,  and  headed 
for  winter  quarters.  I  was  a  "road  kid"  and  strictly  on  my  own. 

Some  forty  or  fifty  canvasmen  and  razorbacks  had  been  paid  off  in 
Anniston.  About  half  of  them  grabbed  the  first  rattler  out  of  town; 
the  rest  found  a  hobo  jungle  on  the  edge  of  town  and  went  into  camp. 
Corn  whiskey  of  the  "white  lightning"  variety  could  be  bought  for 
forty  or  fifty  cents  per  quart;  and  the  boys  gave  it  quite  a  play.  I  had 
never  tasted  anything  stronger  than  a  sip  of  beer  before,  and  my  first— 
and  last— swallow  of  corn  squeezin's  was  plenty.  Even  a  kid  could  see 
Trouble  coming,  so  I  latched  onto  a  west  bound  freight  and  so  missed 
the  battle  when  the  Anniston  police  raided  the  jungles,  beat  the 
b'jeezuz  out  of  the  boozers  and  tossed  them  all  into  the  clink.  I  also 
missed  the  roundup  of  the  other  gang;  there  were  too  many  of  them 


200  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

in  one  bunch  and  they  were  summarily  hauled  off  the  train  at  some 
other  town  and  probably  made  the  chain  gang.  I  had  learned  my  first 
valuable  lesson— from  then  on  I  traveled  alone.  I  was  only  a  kid  and 
looked  even  younger  than  I  was.  So  the  brakemen  on  the  trains  and 
the  coppers  in  the  towns  ignored  me  and  let  me  go  my  way  unmolested. 

Eating,  regularly  and  well,  was  no  trouble  at  all.  I  had  only  to 
choose  a  house,  massage  the  back  door  with  my  knuckles,  and  a  feed 
would  be  forthcoming.  Mostly  it  would  be  a  matronly  colored  woman 
who  answered  my  knock  and  seldom  did  one  of  them  fail  to  seat  me 
at  the  kitchen  table  and  shake  up  a  hot  meal  for  me.  Sometimes  I  got 
a  "handout"  of  cold  victuals,  wrapped  in  newspaper,  but  when  that 
happened  there  would  be  enough  to  feed  two  or  three  men. 

It  was  in  New  Orleans  that  I  found  that  singing  in  saloons  could 
be  profitable.  There  were  plenty  of  grog  shops  in  the  Paris  of  America; 
Bourbon  Street,  for  instance,  was  just  about  nothing  else  but.  Musicians 
worked  for  whatever  the  customers  tossed  into  the  kitty  and  any  joint 
that  didn't  have  a  band  had  at  least  a  piano  and  a  Negro  to  play  it. 
One  night  I  walked  into  a  "can  joint,"  a  species  of  saloon  that  has 
long  been  extinct.  There  was  a  bar,  but  most  customers,  coming  in 
parties,  were  seated  at  tables.  Glasses  were  provided  and  the  beer  was 
served  in  tin  containers  holding  a  gallon— at  two  bits  per  can.  A  bunch 
of  Limey  sailors  were  having  a  bit  of  a  singsong  and  I  ventured  to 
join  in  one  of  the  choruses.  I  was  immediately  invited  to  grab  a  glass 
and  sit  in. 

Somehow  I  dropped  the  information  that  I  had  hoboed  into  New 
Orleans  and  expected  to  resume  my  wanderings  as  soon  as  the  weather 
got  warmer.  Their  interest  was  flattering  and  I  am  afraid  that  I  loaded 
them  with  some  pretty  tall  tales  about  hobo  life.  They  kept  dropping 
coins  into  my  pockets  at  odd  intervals  and  I  woke  up  next  morning 
with  nearly  four  bucks  in  small  change.  So  when  I  hit  the  road  again 
I  was  no  longer  a  moocher  of  poke-outs  at  back  doors;  well,  anyway, 
not  exclusively.  In  a  strange  town  I  searched  for  sounds  of  "revelry 
by  night"  and  there  were  few  saloon  crowds  that  would  refuse  to  listen 
to  a  kid  who  wanted  to  sing. 

But  my  new  trade  of  singing  for  my  supper  brought  new  dangers, 
on  the  road  and  in  the  jungles.  Most  of  the  vagrants  were  mechanics 
or  laborers,  uprooted  and  set  adrift  by  hard  times,  and  they  were 
decent  men.  All  any  of  them  needed  for  respectable  citizenship  was 
a  shave,  a  clean  shirt,  and  a  job.  But  there  were  others,  "blowed-in-the- 
glass-stiffs,"  who  boasted  that  they  had  never  worked  and  never  would, 
who  soaked  themselves  in  booze  when  they  could  get  it  and  who  were 
always  out  to  snare  a  kid  to  do  their  begging  and  pander  to  their 
perversions.  The  luckless  punk  who  fell  into  the  clutches  of  one  of 


The  migratory  workers  •  201 

these  gents  was  treated  with  unbelievable  brutality,  and  I  wanted  no 
part  of  such  a  life.  As  a  "producer"  I  was  a  shining  mark;  a  kid  who 
could  not  only  beg  handouts  but  who  could  bring  in  money  for  alcohol 
was  a  valuable  piece  of  property  for  any  jocker  who  could  snare  him. 
The  decent  hoboes  were  protective  as  long  as  they  were  around,  but 
there  were  times  when  I  fought  like  a  wildcat  or  ran  like  a  deer  to 
preserve  my  independence  and  my  virginity.  I  whittled  my  way  out 
of  two  or  three  jams  with  a  big  barlow  knife,  and  on  one  occasion  I 
jumped  into  the  darkness  from  a  boxcar  door— from  a  train  that  must 
have  been  doing  better  than  thirty  miles  per  hour.  I  lay  in  the  ditch 
where  I  landed  until  picked  up  by  a  section  gang  next  morning.  They 
took  me  to  a  private  hospital  and  the  Doc  found  contusions,  concus- 
sion, a  fractured  collarbone  and  several  cracked  ribs.  That  was  in 
Girard,  Kansas,  and  those  big  hearted  folks  kept  me  around  until  my 
bones  had  knit  and  I  was  as  good  as  new. 

My  wanderings  that  year  covered  most  of  the  Middle  West;  I  got 
as  far  west  at  Pueblo,  visited  St.  Louis  and  Chicago,  and  landed  in 
Cincinnati  late  in  the  fall.  Somewhere  along  the  line  I  was  humming 
the  old  gospel  hymn  "Revive  Us  Again,"  and  I  put  new  words  to  it 
and  called  it  "Hallelulia,  on  the  Bum." 

/  went  to  a  bar  and  I  asked  for  a  drink 

He  gave  me  a  glass  and  said  "There  is  the  sink" 

Hallelulia,  on  the  bum  bum  .  .  . 

Rejoice  and  be  glad,  for  the  springtime  has  come; 
We  can  throw  down  our  shovels  and  go  on  the  bum. 

There  were  only  two  or  three  verses  at  first  but  new  ones  practically 
wrote  themselves.  The  jungle  stiffs  liked  the  song  and  so  did  the 
saloon  audiences,  most  of  whom  had  hit  the  road  at  one  time  or  an- 
other, and  the  rollicking,  devil-may-care  lilt  of  the  thing  appealed  to 
them.  Occasionally  the  name  of  a  popular  local  beer  was  used  in  the 
chorus.  Instead  of  "Hallelulia  give  us  a  handout,"  it  became  "Halle- 
lulia give  us  a  Pilsener." 

The  Spanish  American  War  came  along  in  the  spring  of  1898  and 
one  of  the  biggest  training  camps  in  the  United  States  was  set  up  in 
Chicamauga  Park,  near  Chattanooga,  Tennessee.  I  was  too  young  and 
too  skinny  to  get  into  the  Army  but  I  did  establish  a  newspaper  route 
and  built  it  up  until  I  had  to  cover  it  on  horseback.  More  than  80,000 
men  were  encamped  there  that  summer  and  there  were  literally  hun- 
dreds of  kids  hustling  newspapers.  By  that  time  I  had  acquired  a  five- 
string  banjo  and  learned  to  plunk  a  few  chords  as  accompaniment 
to  my  songs.  There  were  no  USO  units  in  those  days,  no  movies,  and 
no  radio.  No  one  ever  thought  of  asking  the  stage  folk,  proverbially 


202  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

generous  in  such  matters,  to  give  the  boys  in  camp  a  tumble.  Whatever 
entertainment  there  was  came  right  out  of  the  ranks  or  was  provided 
by  guys  like  myself. 

"Hallelulia,  on  the  Bum"  became  a  popular  camp  song.  Verses  in 
dispraise  of  unpopular  officers  were  catchy  and  easy  to  write. 

Our  own  Captain  Jones,  he  sure  likes  to  strut 
All  Captain  Jones  needs  is  a  kick  in  the  butt. 

Hallelulia  he's  a  bum  bum, 

Hallelulia  sing  it  again; 

Hallelulia,  give  him  a  kickout  (dishonorable  discharge) 

Send  him  back  home  again. 

There  were  lots  more  verses,  mostly  unprintable,  and  only  a  few  were 
contributed  by  me.  The  soldiers  sang  about  the  grub,  the  mosquitoes, 
the  pay  (thirteen  dollars  a  month),  the  moonshine  corn,  the  provost 
guard  in  Chattanooga  and  any  other  topic  that  suggested  itself. 

After  the  war  the  soldiers  carried  the  song  back  to  their  widely 
scattered  home  towns,  and  the  song  rapidly  was  assumed  into  the 
great  songbag  of  the  people.  Mac  McClintock,  being  only  an  indi- 
vidual, had  lost  his  identity  with  the  song.  Later,  when  he  joined 
the  burgeoning  IWW  as  one  of  its  first  singers,  "Hallelujah,  I'm 
a  Bum"  became  its  unofficial  anthem,  and  McClintock's  claim  of 
authorship  was  met  with  considerable  incredulousness.  As  the 
years  pass,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  Mac  has  found  some  compensa- 
tion, real  and  psychic,  in  the  realization  that  he  has  written  a 
durable  song  which  he  has  lost  to  tradition,  for  the  folk  have  a  firm 
hold  on  it  now,  and  they  are  not  going  to  give  it  back  to  him.10 

The  hobo  song  as  folk  material  is  a  rich  territory,  but  one  that 
has  veen  virtually  untouched.  The  only  important  study  done  in 
the  field  is  that  of  Milburn,  but  since  his  book  lost  money  for  its 
publisher,  it  is  unlikely  that  any  future  ambitious  investigation 
will  be  made— commercially  at  least. 

The  songs  produced  by  the  hobo  possess  a  unity  unapproached 
by  other  cultural  areas  in  American  folk  music.  All  hobo  songs 
treat  of  the  same  subject— life  on  the  road.  Of  course  there  are 
various  phases  which  show  a  surface  differentiation— songs  of  the 
handout,  the  train,  the  "town  clown  and  harness  bull"  for  ex- 
ample—but basically  they  are  one.  And  all  of  them,  with  only  a 

!*  Several  protest  songs  have  been  made  up  to  the  tune  of  "Hallelujah,  I'm  a 
Bum,"  e.g.,  "Hallelujah,  I'm  a  Travelin'  "  and  "Hallelujah,  I'm  a  Ku  Klux." 


The  migratory  workers  *  203 

few  exceptions,  are  expressions  of  sublimated  protest.11  The  stage 
of  conscious  complaint  had  been  by-passed.  It  is  a  subject  that  will 
reward  deep  probing. 

Some  indication  of  what  a  competent  investigator  may  turn  up 
in  the  matter  of  buried  significance  of  the  conscious  sort  is  in 
"The  Big  Rock  Candy  Mountains,"  a  song  that  has  been  accepted 
for  decades  into  the  bosoms  of  American  families  as  a  delightful 
fantasy,  a  child's  dream  of  heaven,  a  song  to  be  printed  in  gay 
colors  on  the  nursery  wall.  But  George  Milburn  has  shown  the 
distasteful  significance  of  this  apparently  innocent  song: 

"The  Big  Rock  Candy  Mountains,"  a  tramp  song,  provides  some 
excellent  samples  of  tramp  fantasy.  In  many  small  cities  and  villages 
the  children  of  poor  whites  use  the  railroad  yards  as  their  playgrounds. 
From  these  urchins  the  jockers  sometimes  recruit  their  preshuns,  and 
to  entice  them  they  tell  them  roseate  tales  of  tramp  life.  These  fabrica- 
tions are  known  as  ghost  stories.  To  the  Home  Guards,  "The  Big 
Rock  Candy  Mountains"  may  appear  a  nonsense  song,  but  to  all  pied 
pipers  in  on  the  know  it  is  an  amusing  exaggeration  of  the  ghost  stories 
used  in  recruiting  kids. 

Mac  McClintock  claims  also  the  authorship  of  this  song,  and 
in  addition  to  virtually  the  same  substantiation  advanced  to  sup- 
port his  authorship  of  "Hallelujah,  I'm  a  Bum,"  he  offers  his 
original  version  of  the  song,  which,  despite  the  necessary  expurga- 
tion, retains  enough  of  the  original  significance  to  certify  its  preced- 
ence over  versions  now  current  on  family  radio  programs: 

One  summer  day  in  the  month  of  May 

A  jocker  he  came  hiking. 

He  came  to  a  tree  and  "Ah,"  says  he, 

"This  is  just  to  my  liking." 

In  the  very  same  month  on  the  very  same  day 

A  Hoosier  boy  came  hiking. 

Said  the  bum  to  the  son,  "Oh  will  you  come 

To  the  Big  Rock  Candy  Mountains?" 

refrain:  I'll  show  you  the  bees  in  the  cigarette  trees, 
And  the  soda  water  fountain 

And  the  lemonade  springs  where  the  blue  bird  sings. 

In  the  Big  Rock  Candy  Mountains. 

11  The  largest  number  of  exceptions  is  that  comprising  the  I  WW  parodies,  which 

represent  the  product  of  an  external  agitation  stirring  up  the  great  sedimentary 

protest  which   lay  heavy   beneath    the   surface   layer   of   good-natured   complaints 

against  uncharitable  housewives,  brutal  railroad  police,  and  the  general  hell  of  it  all. 


204  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

So  they  started  away  on  the  very  same  day, 

The  bum  and  the  kid  together, 

To  romp  and  to  rove  in  the  cigarette  grove 

In  the  land  of  the  sunny  weather. 

They  danced  and  they  hiked  for  many  a  day, 

The  mile  posts  they  were  counting; 

But  they  never  arrived  at  the  lemonade  tide 

Or  the  Big  Rock  Candy  Mountains. 

The  punk  rolled  up  his  big  blue  eyes 

And  said  to  the  jocker,  "Sandy, 

I've  hiked  and  hiked  and  wandered  too, 

But  I  ain't  seen  any  candy. 

Vve  hiked  and  hiked  till  my  feet  are  sore 

I'll  be  God  damned  if  I  hike  any  more 

To  be     ******** 

In  the  Big  Rock  Candy  Mountains." 

The  migrants 

Since  the  Dust  Bowl  days  a  new  type  of  homeless  un- 
employed has  come  into  existence  on  a  wide  scale,  and  no  longer 
can  all  migratory  workers  be  called  hoboes.  When  the  Joads  piled 
their  pitiful  belongings  into  their  ancient  truck  and  headed  west, 
they  created  a  social  class  heretofore  unknown— the  American 
nomad.  The  Second  World  War  and  its  resultant  false  prosperity 
and  the  planting  of  broomcorn  in  the  Dust  Bowl  have  not  cor- 
rected the  conditions  that  produced  the  Okies,  nor  have  the  Okies 
gone  back  to  the  Middle  West  with  the  profits  of  their  labors  in 
war  plants.12  An  hour's  drive  from  Los  Angeles  into  the  rich  San 
Joaquin  Valley  will  take  the  observer  several  centuries  back 
through  civilization.  He  will  see  entire  families  (except  for  the 
smallest  babies  who  lie  between  the  rows  in  the  merciless  Cali- 
fornia sun)  grubbing  at  weeds  among  the  potatoes  or  at  excess 
cotton  shoots  in  fields  on  the  other  side  of  the  highway  with  their 
fingers  or  crude  implements,  like  twelfth-century  peasants. 

The  substantial  citizens  of  Fresno,  and  Bakersfield,  and  Visalia, 
and  Tulare  want  to  help  them,  of  course,  but  "What  are  you 

12  The  migrants  are  not  all  Dust  Bowl  refugees,  nor  is  abused  Nature  the  only 
force  driving  once  independent  farmers  into  the  migrant  stream.  The  big  corpora- 
tion-type farms,  timber  companies,  and  other  combinative  exploiters  of  the  land 
share  responsibility  with  the  Dust  Bowl  for  the  estimated  2i/£  million  homeless  crop 
gatherers  in  America  today. 


So  long,  it's  been  good  to  know  you  *  205 

going  to  do  with  them?  As  soon  as  they  get  their  wages  they  go 
spend  it  all  on  liquor  and  then  sit  in  their  shacks  drinking  and 
playing  that  dreadful  hillbilly  music  of  theirs  till  the  booze  is  all 
gone  and  then  they  go  out  in  the  fields  again.  What  are  you  going 
to  do  with  them?" 

It  is  incredible  to  see  how  fast  futility  can  be  ground  into  a 
people  and  their  fine  impulses  so  completely  frustrated  that  they 
no  longer  think  of  looking  for  a  way  out.  These  victims  of  human 
erosion  have  even  acquired  a  grim  sense  of  humor  based  on  de- 
spair. Down  in  Los  Angeles  they  gather  in  Pershing  Square  and 
sing  of  the  hilarious  disappointment  awaiting  their  kinfolk  who 
have  yet  to  come  west  to  the  Golden  State: 

Hey,  Okie,  if  you  see  Arkie, 

Tell  'im  Tex  has  got  a  job  for  'im 

Out  in  Californie — 

Pickin'  up  gold — 

All  he  needs  is  a  shovel. 

Woody  Guthrie,  the  voice  of  the  migrants,  caught  the  terrible 
humor  of  it  long  ago: 


SO  LONG,  IT  S  BEEN  GOOD  TO  KNOW  YOU 


^=5 


5=5 


B 


\  b  \  1     \ 


REFRAIN 


206  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

I've  sung  this  song  but  I'll  sing  it  again 
Of  the  place  that  I  lived  on  the  wild  windy  plain 
In  the  month  called  April,  the  county  called  Clay, 
Here's  what  all  of  the  people  there  say — 

refrain:  So  long,  it's  been  good  to  know  you 
So  long,  it's  been  good  to  know  you 
So  long,  it's  been  good  to  know  you 
This  dusty  old  dust  is  a-gittin'  my  home, 
And  I've  got  to  be  drifting  along. 

A  dust  storm  it  hit  and  it  hit  like  thunder 
It  dusted  us  over,  it  dusted  us  under, 
It  blocked  out  the  traffic,  it  blocked  out  the  sun 
And  straight  for  home  all  the  people  did  run, 

singing — 

The  sweethearts  they  set  in  the  dark  and  sparked, 
They  hugged  and  kissed  in  that  dusty  old  dark, 
They  sighed  and  cried,  and  hugged  and  kissed, 
Instead  of  marriage  they  talked  like  this, 

"Honey — 

The  telephone  rang  and  it  jumped  off  the  wall, 
And  that  was  the  preacher  a-making  his  call 
He  said,  "Kind  friend,  this  might  be  the  end, 
You  got  your  last  chance  at  salvation  from  sin — 

The  churches  was  jammed,  the  churches  was  packed, 
That  dusty  old  dust  storm  Mowed  so  black 
That  the  preacher  could  not  read  a  word  of  his  text, 
So  he  folded  his  specks,  and  he  took  up  collection, 

said — 

While  directing  the  filming  of  The  Grapes  of  Wrath  John  Ford 
needed  background  music  for  a  group  scene.  He  asked  the  Okies 
whom  he  had  recruited  as  character  extras  to  sing  something  that 
was  known  to  every  Okie,  Arkie,  and  Mizoo.  Without  hesitation, 
they  began  singing  "Goin'  Down  the  Road  Feelin'  Bad."13 

goin'  down  the  road  feelin'  bad 

I'm  goin'  down  this  road  feelin'  bad; 

I'm  goin'  down  this  road  feelin'  bad; 

I'm  goin'  down  this  road  feelin'  bad,  Lord  God, 

'Cause  I  ain't  goin'  be  treated  thisaway. 

13  See  the  section  on  Woody  Guthrie  for  additional  migrant  songs. 


Two  hoboes  *  207 

My  kids  need  three  meals  a  day; 

My  kids  need  three  meals  a  day; 

My  kids  need  three  meals  a  day,  Lord  God, 

And  I  ain't  goin'  be  treated  thisaway. 

I'm  goin'  where  the  climate  suits  my  clothes; 

Fm  goin'  where  the  climate  suits  my  clothes; 

I'm  goin'  where  the  climate  suits  my  clothes,  Lord  God, 

And  I  ain't  goin'  be  treated  thisaway. 

These  two-dollar  shoes  hurt  my  feet; 

These  two-dollar  shoes  hurt  my  feet; 

These  two-dollar  shoes  hurt  my  feet,  Lord  God, 

And  I  ain't  goin'  be  treated  thisaway. 

To  quote  Lawrence  Gellert,  in  Me  and  My  Captain, 

The  migratory  Negro  "just  a-lookin'  for  work"  suffers  most.  A  "vag." 
No  white  folks  to  intercede  for  him.  He  falls  as  easily  as  small  change 
into  the  pocket  of  the  Constable.  This  dignitary  collects  no  fixed 
salary,  but  one  computed  on  the  number  of  arrests  made.  Then  County 
and  State  mete  out  justice,  each  according  to  its  needs.  A  sliding  scale 
of  "costs"  is  added  to  the  usual  sentence.  It  is  based  on  the  law  of 
supply  and  demand  for  convict  labor.14 


TWO  HOBOES 

Railroad  look  so  pretty, 
Box  car  on  the  track. 
Here  come  two  hoboes, 
Grip  sack  on  their  back. 

refrain:  Oh,  babes, 

Oh,  no-home  babes. 

One  is  my  brother, 
'Nother  my  brother-in-law, 
Hike  all  the  way  from  N'Orleans 
Back  to  Arkansas. 

Back  where  you  ought  to  be 
Instead  of  being  at  home; 
Instead  of  being  at  home,  babes, 
You're  on  the  road  like  me. 

14  Copyright  1936,  Lawrence  Gellert.  Page  2. 


208  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Clothes  are  all  torn  to  pieces, 
Shoes  are  all  worn  out, 
Rolling  'round  an  unfriendly  world, 
Always  roaming  about. 

Where  you  gwine,  you  hoboes? 
Where  you  gwine  to  stay? 
Chain  gang  link  is  waiting — 
Can't  make  your  getaway. 


6.  Songs  of  the  farmers 


It's  a  hard, 

It's  a  hard, 

It's  a  hard  on  we  poor  farmers, 

It's  a  hard. 


So  far  as  his  songs  indicate,  the  land-owning  American 
farmer  has  been  a  good  deal  less  "embattled"  than  the  history  of 
articulate  discontent  in  other  fields  of  labor  would  lead  us  to 
expect.  He  has  produced  more  songs  (judging  by  the  number  of 
farmers'  songbooks)  than  any  other  laborer,  and  has  suffered  more 
from  predatory  exploitation  than  any  other  laborer,  but  the  num- 
ber of  songs  of  social  and  economic  protest  that  he  has  written 
is  negligible. 

Perhaps  this  is  because  the  farmer  has  rarely  thought  of  him- 
self as  a  laborer.  Certainly  he  has  never  identified  himself,  on  a 
scale  large  enough  to  produce  any  tangible  results,  with  the  cause 
of  labor  as  a  whole.  If  he  has  been  aware  of  any  class  distinctions 

1  See  also  Migrants. 

209 


210  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

in  American  society,  it  has  not  been  apparent  that  he  saw  himself 
as  belonging  to  the  same  stratum  as  that  of  the  worker  who  labored 
for  a  regular  wage  under  a  visible  employer.  He  has  traditionally 
been  the  rugged  individualist,  nurturing  the  illusion  of  his  inde- 
pendence, and  organizing  with  other  farmers  only  to  realize  limited 
objectives.  It  is  true  that  the  farmer  was  prominent  in  the  strug- 
gles which  led  to  the  emergence  of  American  democracy  in  the 
early  part  of  the  nineteenth  century,  but  it  must  be  remembered 
that  agriculture  at  that  time  dominated  the  economy  of  the  United 
States,  and  most  of  the  population  lived  in  rural  areas.  The  farmer 
had  not  yet  begun  to  think  of  himself  as  a  farmer— he  was  still 
the  people. 

These  two  characteristics  of  the  farmer's  economic  philosophy— 
his  reluctance  to  identify  himself  as  a  member  of  the  working 
class  and  to  unite  in  a  strong,  permanent  union  with  other  farmers 
—are  facets  of  a  more  fundamental  defect:  his  inability  to  see  his 
problems  in  their  larger  significance,  a  defect  which  foredoomed 
all  the  nineteenth-century  attempts  to  make  himself  a  political 
force.  There  have  been  persistent  attempts  of  farm  leaders  of 
broader  vision  to  ally  the  farmer  with  labor  as  a  whole,  but  such 
combinations  collapsed  quickly  because  of  the  basic  instability  of 
the  alliance.  The  farmers  made  demands  which  affected  their  own 
temporary  welfare  only,  and  thus  alienated  labor,  which  felt  that 
any  party  which  took  no  interest  in  the  welfare  of  any  laboring 
group  forfeited  the  support  of  all  workers. 

The  People's  Party,  founded  in  1892  as  the  culmination  of  a 
quarter-century  of  farmers'  protest  against  their  exploitation  by 
the  railroads,  was  such  a  failure.  The  deterioration  of  the  parties 
which  preceded  it— the  Greenback,  Greenback-Labor,  and  the 
Alliances— impressed  upon  some  of  its  leaders  the  necessity  of 
gaining  the  support  of  labor  to  realize  its  end,  but  the  funda- 
mental weaknesses  of  the  farmer  as  an  organizer  could  not  be 
overcome.  Strong  factions  of  the  Southern  branch  of  the  party 
opposed  Negro  participation;  other  elements  of  the  party  collab- 
orated with  the  Republicans,  and  still  others  declared  for  fusion 
with  the  Democrats. 

Labor,  whose  aid  the  party  solicited,  was  given  no  active  support 
in  return,  except  resolutions  of  "sympathy"  for  its  objectives.  In 


The  harvest  war  song  *  211 

the  face  of  such  disunity  and  confusion  of  purpose,  the  collapse 
of  the  People's  Party  was  inevitable.2 

The  relation  of  the  farmer  and  the  wage  worker  has  never  been 
one  of  close  association;  and,  more  often  than  not,  it  has  been  one 
of  mutual  toleration  if  not  downright  antipathy.3  The  latter  ani- 
mosity is  reflected  in  a  number  of  labor  songs.  Pat  Brennan,  a 
Wobbly  migratory  worker,  versified  a  common  discontent  among 
the  crop  pickers. 

THE  HARVEST  WAR  SONG 

(Tune:  uTipperary"  ) 

We  are  coming  home,  John  Farmer,  we  are  coming  back  to  stay. 

For  nigh  on  fifty  years  or  more,  we've  gathered  up  your  hay. 

We  have  slept  out  in  your  hay  fields,  we  have  heard  your  morning 

shouts; 
We've  heard  you  wondering  where  in  Hell's  them  pesky  go-abouts. 

refrain:  It's  a  long  way,  now  understand  me;  it's  a  long  way  to  town; 
It's  a  long  way  across  the  prairie,  and  to  hell  with  Farmer 

John. 
Here  goes  for  better  wages,  and  the  hours  must  come  down 
For  we're  out  for  a  winter's  stake  this  summer,  and  we 
want  no  scabs  around. 

You've  paid  the  going  wages,  that's  what's  kept  us  on  the  bum; 
You  say  you've  done  your  duty,  you  chin-whiskered  son-of-a-gun; 
We  have  sent  your  kids  to  college,  but  still  you  rave  and  shout, 
And  call  us  tramps  and  hoboes,  and  pesky  go-abouts. 

But  now  the  wintry  winds  are  a-shaking  our  poor  frames 
And  the  long-drawn  days  of  hunger  try  to  drive  us  bo's  insane. 
It  is  driving  us  to  action — we  are  organized  today, 
Us  pesky  tramps  and  hoboes  are  coming  back  to  stay. 

The  farmer's  traditional  aloofness  is  probably  the  chief  reason 
for  his  reluctance  to  sing  about  his  misfortunes.  A  Mid- Western 

2  This  characteristic  disunity  was  responsible  for  the  impotence  of  the  New  York 
Anti-Rent  Association,  which  denounced  an  affiliation  with  agrarianism  or  the  Free 
Soil  movement.  Thomas  Devyr,  the  greatest  of  the  Anti-Rent  leaders,  was  repudi- 
ated because  of  his  efforts  to  identify  the  local  problem  with  those  of  a  larger 
significance.  He  later  saw  his  warnings  fulfilled  when  the  Anti-Rent  party  wisped 
away  like  a  summer  cloud. 

3  The  textile  workers  have  never  forgotten  that  it  was  a  farmer  jury  that  con- 
victed their  leaders  in  the  Aderholt  case. 


212  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

observer,  puzzled  by  the  scarcity  of  songs  of  discontent  in  that 
area  during  the  Depression,  concluded: 

The  chances  are  that  the  depression— in  the  Corn  Belt  at  least- 
will  run  its  course  without  having  got  itself  into  song.  ...  As  for  sing- 
ing, neither  religion  nor  rocky  times  seem  to  fetch  any  music  out  of 
him  (the  farmer). 

— Lowry  Charles  Wimberly,  "Hard  Times  Singing," 
American  Mercury,  June,  1934,  p.  197. 

But  the  independent  farmer  is  not  utterly  inarticulate  about 
hard  times;  he  has  written  a  few  songs  of  discontent  during  his 
long  years  of  tilling  a  soil  that  was  not  always  amenable.  The 
better  songs  in  this  category  turn  the  lash  of  his  anger  against  the 
inanimate  land  and  the  people  foolish  enough  to  farm  it.  The 
various  "Arkansas  Travelers"  are  well-known  examples.  A  less 
familiar  variant  of  this  type  which  dates  from  the  latter  part  of 
the  nineteenth  century  carries  the  protest  over  to  Kansas: 

IN  KANSAS 

They  chaw  tobacco  thin 

In  Kansas. 

They  chaw  tobacco  thin 

In  Kansas. 

They  chaw  tobacco  thin 

And  they  spit  it  on  their  chin 

And  they  lap  it  up  agin 

In  Kansas. 

Oh  they  churn  the  butter  well 

In  Kansas. 

Oh  they  churn  the  butter  well 

In  Kansas. 

Oh  they  churn  the  butter  well 

And  the  buttermilk  they  sell 

And  they  git  lean  as  hell 

In  Kansas. 

Oh  potatoes  they  grow  small 

In  Kansas. 

Oh  potatoes  they  grow  small 

In  Kansas. 

Oh  potatoes  they  grow  small 

And  they  dig  'em  in  the  fall 

And  they  eat  'em  hides  and  all 

In  Kansas. 


The  farmer  is  the  man  *  213 

Oh  they  say  that  drink's  a  sin 

In  Kansas. 

Oh  they  say  that  drink's  a  sin 

In  Kansas. 

Oh  they  say  that  drink's  a  sin 

So  they  guzzle  all  they  kin 

And  they  throw  it  up  agin 

In  Kansas. 

Come  all  who  want  to  roam 

In  Kansas. 

Come  all  who  want  to  roam 

In  Kansas. 

Come  all  who  want  to  roam 

And  seek  yourself  a  home 

And  be  happy  with  your  doom 

In  Kansas. 

When  the  farmer  protests  against  a  less  immediate  enemy,  he 
is  likely  to  exhibit  the  self-interest  which  estranges  him  from  the 
cause  of  labor  as  a  whole,  and  weakens  his  songs. 

He  has  produced  a  flood  of  songs  on  the  theme,  "the  farmer  is 
the  man  that  feeds  them  all."  One  of  the  more  successful  songs 
in  this  vein  dates  from  the  post-Civil- War  era: 

THE  FARMER  IS  THE   MAN 

When  the  lawyer  hangs  around  while  the  butcher  cuts  a  pound, 
Oh,  the  farmer  is  the  man  who  feeds  them  all. 
If  you'll  only  look  and  see,  I  think  you  will  agree 
That  the  farmer  is  the  man  who  feeds  them  all. 

refrain:  The  farmer  is  the  man,  the  farmer  is  the  man, 
hives  on  credit  till  the  fall; 
Then  they  take  him  by  the  hand,  and  they  lead  him 

from  the  land, 
And  the  middleman's  the  one  who  gets  it  all. 

When  the  lawyer  hangs  around  while  the  butcher  cuts  a  pound, 
Oh,  the  farmer  is  the  man  who  feeds  them  all, 
And  the  preacher  and  the  cook  go  a-strolling  by  the  brook, 
Oh,  the  farmer  is  the  man  who  feeds  them  all. 

refrain:  The  farmer  is  the  man,  the  farmer  is  the  man, 
Lives  on  credit  till  the  fall; 

With  the  int'rest  rate  so  high,  it's  a  wonder  he  don't  die, 
For  the  mortgage  man's  the  one  who  gets  it  all. 


214  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Farmers'  union  songs  are  usually  the  least  successful  of  all.  Often 
they  are  rhetorically  saccharine: 

Work  on,  0  Farmers'  Union! 
For  thy  mission  is  divine 
Never  vessel  plough'd  life's  ocean 
With  more  royal  work  than  thine. 

Then  let  us  be  right  loyal 
To  our  leaders  brave  and  true 
Never  doubting  that  their  wisdom 
Will  lead  us  safely  through. 

Thousands  rise  to  call  thee  blessed 
Will  you  help  them  as  they  sing? 
Oh,  the  grand  old  Farmers'  Union 
And  the  happiness  it  brings. 

— etc. 

Or  they  are  distressingly  simple: 

Work  together  for  each  other, 
Onward  we  go 

Onward  we  go,  work  together 
Onward  we  go,  for  each  other 
Onward  we  go,  work  together 
Onward  we  go. 

Not  many  farmers'  songs  are  like  this  one,  sung  during  the  1939 
milk  strike  in  New  York: 

MISTER  FARMER 


^\ 


i-iUi^U 


5=5 


-&- 


•=* 


«-«l 


w 


■-• 9- 


P 


=^= 


^  Jli   4ii1 


■m — #- 


Songs  of  the  farmers  *  215 

Mister  Farmer,  Mister  Farmer,  come  go  along  with  me, 
Mister  Farmer,  Mister  Farmer,  come  go  along  with  me, 
Come  hitch  up  with  the  Milk  Trust  and  we'll  keep  the  system  free. 

So  they  followed  the  Milk  Trust  stooges,  and  what  did  they  find? 
So  they  followed  the  Milk  Trust  stooges,  and  what  did  they  find? 
Nothing  in  their  pockets  and  a  knife  from  behind. 

Classification,  classification,  you'll  be  the  death  of  me; 
Classification,  classification,  you'll  be  the  death  of  me; 
I  never  can  figure  what  my  milk  check's  gonna  be. 

Mr.  Borden,  Mr.  Sheffield,  you've  treated  us  unfair; 
Mr.  Borden,  Mr.  Sheffield,  you've  treated  us  unfair; 
Now  our  barns  are  unpainted  and  our  cupboards  are  bare. 

Well,  some  began  to  grumble  and  some  began  to  moan, 
Well,  some  began  to  grumble  and  some  began  to  moan, 
Up  came  the  mortgage  men  and  took  away  their  homes. 

Come  all  you  dairy  farmers  and  listen  to  me 
Come  all  you  dairy  farmers  and  listen  to  me 
Don't  trust  the  Milk  Trust  or  you'll  stay  in  poverty. 

Any  survey  of  farmers'  songs  must  lead  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  independent  farmer  has  produced  very  little  of  value  in  the 
way  of  songs  of  protest.  However,  the  farmer  who  has  had  the 
illusion  of  independence  crushed  out  of  him  by  the  loss  of  his  land 
or  who  works  the  farm  of  another  man— the  migrant,  the  share- 
cropper, the  tenant  farmer,  and  the  prison  worker— is  an  entirely 
different  type  of  worker.  His  songs  are  full  of  bitter  protest  which, 
ironically  enough,  shows  him  to  have  a  better  developed  sense  of 
social  consciousness  and  economic  orientation  than  his  more  pros- 
perous and  better  educated  fellow  farmer. 

Sharecroppers  and  tenant  farmers,  as  we  know  them  today,  came 
into  existence  just  after  the  Civil  War.  The  plantation  owners, 
deprived  of  their  slave  labor  and  impoverished  by  the  war,  des- 
perately tried  to  hold  on  to  their  land  by  giving  it  out  on  shares 
or  for  a  specified  rental  to  the  poor  whites  or  freed  slaves.  Some 
land  they  were  forced  by  circumstances  to  sell,  and  much  of  this 
fell  into  the  hands  of  merchants  and  speculative  landowners  who 
became  a  new  economic  class  in  the  South,  and  who  likewise 
rented  out  their  farms. 

The  plight  of  these  hired  Southern  farmers  has  always  been 


216  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

pitiful.  There  seems  to  be  no  corrective  for  their  circumstances 
other  than  large-scale  combinative  farming,  which  unfortunately 
drives  many  of  them  into  the  widening  stream  of  homeless 
migrants. 

The  following  songs  of  the  penurious  Southern  farmer,  the 
tenant  and  the  sharecropper,  are  representative  of  a  large  body 
of  similar  pieces. 

DOWN  ON  ROBERTS'  FARM 

Come  ladies  and  gentlemen,  listen  to  my  song 

I'll  sing  it  to  you  now  but  you  might  think  it  wrong; 

It  might  make  you  mad,  but  I  mean  no  harm; 

Just  about  the  renters  on  Roberts'  farm. 

It's  hard  times  in  the  country,  out  on  Roberts'  farm. 

You  move  out  to  Mr.  Roberts'  farm, 

Plant  a  big  crop  o'  cotton  and  a  little  crop  o'  corn, 

He'll  come  round  to  plan  and  to  plot, 

Till  he  gets  a  chattel  mortgage  on  everything  you  got. 

It's  hard  times  in  the  country,  down  on  Roberts'  farm. 

Yonder  comes  Paul  Roberts  with  a  flattering  mouth; 
He  moves  you  to  the  country  in  a  little  log  house. 
You  got  no  window  but  the  cracks  in  the  wall; 
He'll  work  you  all  summer  and  rob  you  in  the  fall. 
It's  hard  times  in  the  country,  down  on  Roberts'  farm. 

I  moved  down  to  Mr.  Roberts'  farm, 

I  worked  on  a  dairy,  I  worked  on  a  farm. 

I  milked  old  Brindle  and  she  had  one  horn, 

It's  hell  to  be  a  renter  on  Roberts'  farm. 

It's  hard  times  in  the  country,  down  on  Roberts'  farm. 

You  go  to  the  field  and  you  work  all  day, 

Till  way  after  dark,  and  you  get  no  pay; 

Just  a  little  piece  of  meat  and  a  little  turn  of  corn, 

It's  hell  to  be  a  renter  on  Roberts'  farm, 

It's  hard  times  in  the  country,  down  on  Roberts'  farm. 

Roberts'  renters,  they'll  go  down  town 

With  their  hands  in  their  pockets,  and  their  head  hung  down. 

We'll  go  in  the  store,  and  the  merchant  will  say, 

"Your  mortgage  is  due  and  I'm  a  lookin'  for  my  pay." 

It's  hard  times  in  the  country,  down  on  Roberts'  farm. 


These  old  Cumberland  mountain  farms  *  217 

/  went  down  to  my  pocket  with  a  trembling  hand, 

"I  can't  pay  you  all  but  I'll  do  what  I  can." 

The  merchant  jumped  to  the  telephone  call: 

"I'm  going  to  put  you  in  jail  if  you  don't  pay  it  all." 

It's  hard  times  in  the  country,  down  on  Roberts'  farm. 

Mr.  Paul  Roberts  with  a  big  Overland! 

He's  a  little  tough  luck,  you  don't  give  a  damn. 

He'll  run  you  in  the  mud  like  a  train  on  the  track; 

He'll  haul  you  to  the  mountains  but  he  won't  bring  you  back. 

It's  hard  times  in  the  country,  down  on  Roberts'  farm. 

—As  sung  by  Bascom  Lunsford,  who  learned  it  from 
Claude  Reeves  of  Little  River,  Transylvania  County, 
North  Carolina,  who  wrote  the  song  from  personal 
experience,  ca.  1935 


THESE  OLD  CUMBERLAND  MOUNTAIN  FARMS 

It's  hard  to  be  bound  down  in  prison, 

But  it's  worse  on  these  Cumberland  Mountain  farms; 

Ruther  be  in  some  old  penitentiary, 

Or  up  in  old  iron  Tennessee. 

How  wearily  I've  climbed  them  old  mountains 
Through  the  rain  and  the  sleet  and  the  snow; 
Tip  yo'  hat  when  you  meet  Mr.  Ridges, 
Bow  yo'  head  when  you  meet  Mr.  Ross. 

Young  Warner  he  run  a  commissary, 
Mister,  you  bet  he  was  a  thief; 
He  sold  apples  at  fifty  cents  a  dozen, 
And  potatoes  at  fifty  cents  apiece. 

When  the  Coffee  County  boys  came  to  the  mountain 

They  expected  to  get  a  lot  to  eat; 

But  when  they  called  them  in  to  dinner, 

They  got  salmon,  corn  dodgers,  and  meat. 

It's  seventy  miles  to  Chattanooga, 

It's  a  hundred  and  twenty  to  Basell; 

It's  a  thousand  miles  from  here  to  civilization, 

But  it's  only  a  few  steps  from  here  to  hell. 

Young  people,  you've  heard  all  my  story, 
And  I  hope  you  don't  think  it  all  wrong; 
If  you  doubt  the  words  I  have  told  you, 
See  Red  Campbell,  for  he  composed  this  song. 

—From  People's  Songs  Library. 


218  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

"There  Are  Mean  Things  Happening  in  This  Land"  was  com- 
posed by  John  Handcox,  Negro  organizer,  sharecropper,  and  song- 
writer for  the  Southern  Tenant  Farmers'  Union  during  its  early 
days.  Of  his  composition  Handcox  says: 

When  the  planters  in  East  Arkansas  saw  that  the  people  were  join- 
ing the  union  they  told  them  to  git  off  the  land.  They  didn't  wait  for 
some  of  them  to  git— they  threw  them  off.  It  was  a  cold  winter.  The 
hungry  people  had  no  place  to  go.  When  they  held  union  meetings 
the  laws  clubbed  them  till  they  lay  like  dead  on  the  ground.  It  didn't 
make  no  difference  if  they  was  men  or  women.  They  killed  some  union 
members  and  threw  some  others  in  jail.  This  was  in  the  winter,  in  1936. 

In  the  spring,  at  cotton  chopping  time,  it  didn't  make  much  differ- 
ence if  we  was  working  or  not— our  young  ones  was  still  hungry.  So 
we  began  to  talk  about  a  strike.  Most  of  us  was  workin'  from  sun  up 
to  sun  down  and  making  less  than  70  cents  a  day.  We  wanted  $1.50  a 
day  for  ten  hours'  work.  We  made  handbills  and  posters  and  signs 
telling  what  we  wanted,  and  plastered  them  up  all  over  the  place. 
There  was  about  4000  altogether  who  said  they  would  go  out  on  strike. 

The  planters  got  scared.  The  laws  arrested  every  man  they  could 
get  ahold  of  and  took  them  back  to  work  at  the  point  of  guns.  They 
beat  up  men  and  women,  and  they  shot  some,  and  tried  to  scare  us. 
They  ran  a  lot  of  folks  out.  But  they  couldn't  break  the  strike.  We 
had  marches.  We  all  lined  up,  sometimes  more  than  a  hundred  of  us 
on  a  line,  and  marched  through  the  plantations,  cross  country.  In  lots 
of  places  where  we  marched  the  choppers  stopped  work  and  went  on 
strike  with  us.  At  one  plantation  the  scabs  they  had  brought  from  other 
places  dropped  their  hoes  and  run  like  rabbits  for  cover  when  they 
saw  us  comin'. 

As  we  were  marching,  we  were  asking,  like  somebody  asked  in  the 
Bible,  "What  you  mean  that  you  crush  my  people  and  grind  the  face 
of  the  poor?" 

THERE  ARE  MEAN   THINGS  HAPPENING  IN  THIS  LAND 

On  the  18  th  day  of  May 

The  union  called  a  strike, 

But  the  planters  and  the  bosses 

Throwed  the  people  out  of  their  shacks. 

refrain:  There  are  mean  things  happening  in  this  land, 
There  are  mean  things  happening  in  this  land, 
But  the  union's  going  on,  and  the  union's 

growing  strong, 
There  are  mean  things  happening  in  this  land. 


Raggedy  raggedy  *  219 

The  planters  throwed  the  people  off  the  land, 
Where  many  years  they  spent, 
And  in  the  hard  cold  winter, 
They  had  to  live  in  tents. 

The  planters  throwed  the  people  out, 
Without  a  bite  to  eat; 
They  cursed  them  and  they  kicked  them, 
And  some  with  axe-handles  beat. 

The  people  got  tired  of  working  for  nothing, 
And  that  from  sun  to  sun; 
But  the  planters  forced  them  out  to  work 
At  the  point  of  guns. 

—People's  Songs  Library. 

Alan  Lomax  says  "Raggedy  Raggedy"  had  a  tremendous  emo- 
tional effect  on  the  sharecroppers  to  whom  John  Handcox,  the 
composer,  sang  it. 


RAGGEDY  RAGGEDY 

Raggedy  raggedy  are  we  (oh  Lawdy), 
Just  as  raggedy  as  raggedy  can  be; 
We  don't  get  nothing  for  our  labor — 
So  raggedy,  raggedy  are  we. 

So  hungry,  hungry  are  we, 
Just  as  hungry  as  hungry  can  be; 
We  don't  get  nothing  for  our  labor — 
So  hungry,  hungry  are  we. 

So  homeless,  homeless  are  we, 
Just  as  homeless  as  homeless  can  be; 
We  don't  get  nothing  for  our  labor, 
So  homeless,  homeless  are  we. 

So  landless,  landless  are  we. 
Just  as  landless  as  landless  can  be; 
We  don't  get  nothing  for  our  labor, 
So  landless,  landless  are  we. 

So  cowless,  cowless  are  we, 

Just  as  cowless  as  cowless  can  be; 

The  planters  don't  'low  us  to  raise  them 

So  cowless,  cowless  are  we. 


220  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

So  hogless,  hogless  are  we, 

Just  as  hogless  as  hogless  can  be; 

The  planters  don't  'low  us  to  raise  them, 

So  hogless,  hogless  are  we. 

So  cornless,  cornless  are  we, 
Just  as  cornless  as  cornless  can  be; 
The  planters  don't  'low  us  to  raise  'em, 
So  cornless,  cornless  are  we. 

So  pitiful,  pitiful  are  we, 
Just  as  pitiful  as  pitiful  can  be; 
We  don't  get  nothing  for  our  labor, 
So  pitiful,  pitiful  are  we. 

—People's  Songs  Library.  Recorded  by 
Grace  Blackstone  at  Highlander  Folk 
School,  Monteagle,  Tennessee. 

John  Handcox  tells  the  ?+r\y  of  "The  Man  Frank  Weems": 

On  the  eighth  day  of  Jun^  we  had  another  march.  Jim  Reese  was 
leadin'  it,  and  Frank  Weems,  one  of  the  Negro  farm  hands,  was  walkin' 
along  next  to  him.  We  was  singin'  union  songs  when  a  fellow  come 
up  and  says  the  planters  was  comin'.  Frank  Weems  and  Jim  Reese 
said,  "Keep  marchin'  boys,  you  ain't  breakin'  no  law." 

Pretty  soon  a  bunch  of  planters  and  riders  and  town  bums  ride  up 
to  us  in  their  automobiles.  We  stay  in  line,  lookin'  at  them,  wonderin' 
what  they're  a-goin'  to  do.  When  they  git  out  of  their  automobiles  we 
see  they  all  got  guns  and  baseball  bats.  We  don't  say  anything.  "Where 
you  goin'?"  one  of  'em  says.  "Down  the  road,"  says  Jim.  Then  they 
begin  sluggin'  us  with  those  guns  and  bats.  A  lot  of  men  run  for  their 
lives.  A  lot  of  us  fall  down  and  can't  git  up  again.  Then  pretty  soon 
they  git  back  in  their  automobiles  an'  ride  away. 

Jim  Reese,  he  lays  there  on  the  road  for  maybe  four  hours.  Then  he 
looks  around  and  he  sees  Frank  Weems  layin'  there  beside  him.  He 
looks  bad.  "Are  you  all  right,  Frank?"  he  asks.  But  Frank  Weems 
doesn't  answer  him.  Then  Jim  gits  worried  and  gits  to  go  for  help. 
When  he  comes  back  Frank  Weems  is  gone.  No  man  in  Earle  ever 
saw  Frank  Weems  again.  We  keep  askin'  "Where  is  Frank  Weems?" 
We  keep  askin'  is  he  in  the  swamp  or  in  Blackfish  Lake  or  rottin'  in  a 
ditch  somewhere?  We  keep  askin'  it.  Where  is  Frank  Weems? 

In  April,  1937,  Frank  Weems  appeared.  He  went  to  the  Workers' 
Defense  League  in  Chicago  and  told  his  story.  When  he  had  regained 
consciousness  he  had  dragged  himself  into  a  ditch  and  rested.  He  then 
spent  a  week  in  a  hobo  jungle  and  from  there  made  his  way  to  the 
North. 


The  man  frank  weems  *  221 

THE  MAN   FRANK  WEEMS 

He  was  a  poor  sharecropper 

Worked  hard  every  day 

To  make  an  honest  living 

And  his  multiplied  accounts  to  pay. 

refrain:  Now  I  want  somebody  to  tell  me,  tell  me, 
And  tell  me  right; 
Yes  I  want  somebody  to  tell  me 
Where  is  the  man  Frank  Weems. 

He  was  a  farmer  of  Crittenden  County, 
A  county  just  east  of  Cross, 
Where  they  call  them  out  with  farm  bells 
And  work  under  a  riding  boss. 

Frank  heard  about  the  union, 
Then  he  sought  to  show  its  aims. 
And  when  he  had  well  understood, 
He  sure  did  sign  his  name. 

Vm  sure  he  told  his  companions 
What  a  grand  thing  the  union  would  be; 
And  if  we  gave  it  our  brave  support, 
Some  day  it  would  make  us  free. 

It  was  in  nineteen  hundred  and  thirty  six 

And  on  the  ninth  of  June, 

When  the  STF  union  pulled  a  strike 

That  troubled  the  planters  on  their  thrones. 

The  planters  they  all  became  troubled, 
Not  knowing  what  'twas  all  about; 
But  they  said,  "One  thing  Vm  sure  we  can  do, 
That's  scare  the  niggers  out." 

Frank  Weems  was  one  among  many, 
That  stood  out  true  and  brave; 
Although  he  was  taken  by  cruel  hands, 
Now  he  sleeps  in  an  unknown  grave. 

Sleep  on,  Frank,  if  you  are  sleeping, 

Rest  in  your  unknown  grave, 

Ten  thousand  union  brothers  to  mourn  your  loss 

And  to  give  your  children  bread. 

—Recorded  by  Grace  Blackstone,  at  the 
Highlander  Folk  School,  Monteagle,  Tennessee. 


222  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Samson  Pittman,  a  sharecropper  bard,  tells  how  he  composed 
the  "Cotton  Farmer  Blues": 

This  song  was  composed  in  19  and  27  by  Samson  Pittman  at  the 
condition  of  the  farmer  being  treated  and  at  the  shortness  of  their 
cotton.  I  thought  it  was  very  necessary  to  put  out  a  record  of  these 
things.  I  composed  them  of  the  necessity  of  the  farmers.  It  was  very 
popular  among  everyone  that  heard  it  and  it  became  to  be  a  true  fact 
everywhere  well  known.  Well,  the  town  merchants  laughed  to  think 
of  such  a  song  being  composed. 

COTTON  FARMER  BLUES 

Farmer  went  to  the  merchant 
Just  to  get  his  meat  and  meal 
Farmer  went  to  the  merchant 
Just  to  get  his  meat  and  meal, 
But  the  merchant  told  the  farmer, 
You've  got  boll  weevils  in  your  field. 

You've  got  a  good  cotton  crop 

But  it's  just  shooting  dice 

You've  got  a  good  cotton  crop 

But's  just  shooting  dice 

Now  you  will  work  the  whole  year  round,  buddy, 

Yet  the  cotton  won't  be  no  price. 

Now  you  go  to  the  commissary 

He'll  give  you  plenty  of  meal  and  meat 

Now  you  go  to  the  commissary 

He'll  give  you  plenty  of  meal  and  meat 

(Just  anything  you  want) 
Well,  he'll  give  you  half  a  price  for  your  cotton 
Not  a  doggone  thing  for  your  feed. 

(That's  too  bad,  too  bad) 

Yes,  boys,  if  I  could  get  50  cents  a  day 

And  if  they'd  raise  me  to  a  dollar, 

Yes,  boys,  if  I  could  get  50  cents  a  day 

And  if  they'd  raise  me  to  a  dollar, 

Don't  you  know  Vd  give  that  cotton  crop  away. 

(I  know  these  farmers.  That's  the  reason 
I'm  telling  you  like  I  said,  boys;  now  there 
ain't  but  the  one  thing,  boys,  that  made 
me  begin  to  sing.) 


Roll  the  union  on  •  223 

When  they  mistreat  me  every  time 
It  looks  like  I  got  to  have  another  drink 
Yes  boys,  I'm  going  away  to  stay, 
Because  I  ain't  goin'  to  let  this  merchant 
Try  to  screw  me  this  a-way. 

—Library  of  Congress  Reference  Records. 
Archive  of  American  Folk  Song. 
(For  music,  see  "Little  David  Blues,"  p.  163.) 

Taken  over  by  other  labor  groups,  this  adaptation  of  the  gospel 
hymn,  "Roll  the  Chariot  On,"  has  become  one  of  the  most  widely 
used  picket  line  songs,  rivaling  even  "We  Shall  Not  Be  Moved" 
and  "Solidarity  Forever."  It  is  a  good  example  of  the  "zipper" 
song— one  which  permits  instant  adaptation  to  a  particular  dispute 
by  allowing  the  name  of  an  employer  or  antipathetic  congressman 
to  be  "zipped"  in. 

ROLL  THE  UNION  ON 

refrain:  We're  gonna  roll,  we're  gonna  roll, 
We're  gonna  roll  the  union  on; 
We're  gonna  roll,  we're  gonna  roll, 
We're  gonna  roll  the  union  on. 

If  the  planter's  in  the  way, 
We're  gonna  roll  it  over  him, 
Gonna  roll  it  over  him, 
Gonna  roll  it  over  him, 
Gonna  roll  the  union  on. 

If  the  merchant' s  in  the  way 

If  the  banker's  in  the  way 

If  the  preacher's  in  the  way 

If  Futrell's  in  the  way 

If  Wall  Street's  in  the  way,  etc. 

—People's  Songs  Library.  Taken  from  a  Bulletin 
of  the  original  Southern  Tenants  Farmers 
Union;  made  up  in  1937  by  a  Negro  woman 
in  Little  Rock,  Arkansas,  a  student  in  the 
New  Era  Schools. 


7.  A  labor  miscellany 


Songs  of  the  Automobile  Workers,  Steel  Workers, 
Seamen,  Longshoremen,  and  Lumber  Workers 


//  they  ask  you  what's  my  union, 
It's  the  CIO, 
It's  the  CIO. 


In  labor  these  days  everybody  sings,  from  the  teacher* 
to  the  domestic  worker.  In  the  Southern  hills,  the  aluminum  plant 
strikers  sing  their  ventriloquistic  song  of  ridicule  to  the  plant- 
locked  scabs: 

Send  me  some  beans,  love,  send  them,  by  mail, 
Send  them  in  care  of  Powder  Mill  "jail." 

*  "But  remember,  a  teacher  has  prestige; 

He  can  feed  his  kids  that  old  noblesse  oblige." 

225 


226  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

In  the  city  the  subway  workers  pour  out  their  grief  to  the  mayor: 

It's  hard  times  on  the  subway  lines, 
It's  hard  times,  Little  Flower. 

Even  the  baker,  the  most  sequestrated  of  public  servants,  gets  out 
on  the  picket  line  occasionally  and  exhorts  the  public: 

U  don't  need  a  biscuit, 
Don't  buy  Uneeda! 

With  so  much  singing  being  done,  it  is  impossible  to  represent 
adequately  in  a  survey  of  protest  song  more  than  two  or  three 
occupations  out  of  the  hundreds  that  are  regularly  turning  out 
versified  plaints;  the  few  that  are  represented  must  therefore  stand 
as  examples  of  the  groups  less  prolific.  The  several  labor  groups 
which  follow  are  among  the  most  important  which  spatial  limita- 
tions prevent  treating  in  detail,  yet  there  are  others  which  cannot 
even  be  mentioned.  The  International  Ladies'  Garment  Workers' 
Union,  for  example,  has  at  least  fifty  songs  of  its  own  in  more 
than  a  dozen  songbooks,  yet  not  one  has  been  included  here.  All 
these  songs,  vigorous  in  determination  to  make  the  worker  re- 
spected, prove  that  there  is  growing  in  the  United  States  a  new 
folk  community  that,  as  Woody  Guthrie  says,  is  "bound  for  glory." 

The  automobile  workers 

The  United  Automobile  Workers  CIO  has  been  called 
in  an  apt  description  "the  most  volcanic  union  in  the  country."1 
Its  ebullience  has  been  manifested  in  a  number  of  ways,  and  one 
of  the  most  expressive  has  been  its  songs,  which  exceed  in  number 
those  of  any  other  labor  organization  during  a  comparable  period 
of  time.  The  following  selections  have  been  chosen  almost  at  ran- 
dom from  more  than  fifty  songs  of  some  stability  written  by  union 
members  during  the  last  ten  years. 

The  most  popular  and  most  famous  song  to  proceed  from  the 
International  Union,  United  Automobile,  Aircraft,  and  Agricul- 
tural Implement  Workers  of  America,  to  give  the  UAW  its  full 
name,  is  titled  simply  "UAW-CIO": 

1  John  Gunther,  Inside  U.S.A.,  New  York,  1947,  p.  409. 


Uaw-cio   •  227 


UAW-CIO 


/  was  standing  down  on  Gratiot  Street  one  day 
When  I  thought  I  overheard  a  soldier  say: 
"Every  jeep  in  our  camp  has  that  UAW  stamp, 
And  I'm  UAW  too,  I'm  proud  to  say." 
refrain:  It's  that  UAW-CIO 

Makes  the  army  roll  and  go, 

Turning  out  the  jeeps  and  tanks, 

The  airplanes  every  day; 

It's  that  UAW-CIO 

Makes  the  army  roll  and  go, 

Puts  wheels  on  the  U.S.A. 

I  was  there  when  the  union  came  to  town; 

I  was  there  when  old  Henry  Ford  went  down; 

I  was  standing  by  Gate  Four  when  I  heard  the  people  roar, 

"Ain't  nobody  keeps  us  union  workers  down." 

I  was  there  on  that  cold  December  day 

When  we  heard  about  Pearl  Harbor  far  away; 

I  was  down  at  Cadillac  Square  when  the  union  rallied  there 

To  put  those  plans  for  pleasure  cars  away. 

There'll  be  a  union  label  in  Berlin 
When  the  union  boys  in  uniform  march  in; 
And  rolling  in  the  ranks  there'll  be  UAW  tanks, 
To  roll  Hitler  out  and  roll  the  union  in. 

—Copyright  1942  by  the  Almanac  Singers. 
Used  by  permission. 


228  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

THE  BALLAD  OF  HENRY  FORD 

Across  the  board  sat  Henry  Ford 

And  his  face  was  full  of  woe; 

Oh,  he  bit  his  nails  and  his  face  grew  pale, 

But  he  talked  with  the  CIO. 

refrain:  Oh,  he  talked,  yes,  he  talked, 
Oh,  he  talked  with  the  CIO; 
Though  he  balked,  still  he  talked, 
Oh,  he  talked  with  the  CIO. 

Oh,  the  flivver  king  tried  everything 

To  prevent  a  union  crew; 

He  used  labor  spies,  and  those  trigger  guys, 

And  a  stooge  named  Bennett,"1  too. 

Oh,  the  pay  was  low,  and  you  slaved  for  the  dough, 
'Cause  the  speedup  was  a  crime; 
And  heaven  help  the  man  who  would  go  to  the  can 
Upon  the  bosses'  time. 

Oh,  the  union  guys  tried  to  organize 

And  it  was  an  uphill  fight; 

But  they  did  pull  through,  and  the  union  grew, 

And  a  strike  was  called  one  night. 

Oh,  you  know  the  rest,  Henry  tried  his  best, 

Pitting  black  against  the  white; 

But  when  the  scabs  found  out  what  the  strike  was  about, 

They  walked  out  and  joined  the  fight. 

Old  Henry  felt  he  could  run  his  belt 
Any  damn  way  he  pleased; 
And  he  did  it  too,  till  the  union  grew, 
And  brought  him  to  his  knees. 

Then  he  talked,  yes,  he  talked, 
Oh,  he  talked  with  the  union  men. 
Though  he  balked,  still  he  talked, 
And  by  God,  he'll  do  it  again. 

The  most  effective  songs  of  any  union  are  its  picketline  chants, 
despite  their  extreme  simplicity.  Here  are  two  from  the  UAW 
disputes;  the  first,  "Go  Tell  Young  Henry,"  was  hardly  necessary, 
for  young  Henry  Ford  was  responsible  for  the  death  of  the  old 

2  Harry  Bennett,  head  of  the  Ford  company  police. 


Go  tell  young  henry  *  229 

Ford  system;   the  second  song  carries  the  vituperation  over  to 
General  Motors. 

GO  TELL  YOUNG  HENRY 

(Tune:  "Go  Tell  Aunt  Nancy") 

Go  tell  young  Henry, 
Go  tell  young  Henry, 
Go  tell  young  Henry, 
The  Old  Ford  system's  dead. 

KNUTS  TO  KNUDSEN 

Knuts  to  Knudsen, 
Slush  to  Sloan, 
Bod's  for  Boysen, 
The  union's  our  own! 

The  steel  workers 

The  organization  of  the  steel  workers  in  1936  depended 
in  part  at  least  on  the  successful  battle  waged  on  the  automobile 
industry  by  the  UAW.  Before  John  L.  Lewis  built  his  Steel 
Workers'  Organizing  Committee  into  an  organization  strong 
enough  to  force  Steel  to  recognize  the  union,  the  steel  workers 
had  never  been  able  to  contend  with  their  employers,  despite  the 
realization  of  union  men  that  "we  have  to  organize  steel  before  we 
organize  any  plant  manufacturing  fishhooks."3  There  was  a  great 
need  for  a  workers'  bargaining  agency  in  the  foundries,  for  the 
suffering  of  the  steel  workers  was  as  bitter  as  that  of  the  miners. 
The  only  difference  between  the  steel  town  and  the  mine  patch 
was  that  the  one  was  urban  and  the  other  rural;  the  deprivations 
were  the  same. 

After  the  Homestead  strike  of  1892,  in  which  steel  workers 
routed  with  cannon  and  blazing  oil  an  army  of  Pinkerton  "punks," 
the  steel  companies  ruthlessly  extirpated  the  union  movement. 
Andrew  Carnegie  sanctimoniously  deplored  the  action  of  his  man- 
ager in  inciting  bloodshed,  but  at  the  same  time  gave  full  approval 
to  the  company's  handling  of  the  strike.  The  policies  of  the  steel 
industry  were  the  policies  of  Andrew  Carnegie,  and  the  degrada- 

3  Mary  Heaton  Vorse,  Labor's  New  Millions,  New  York,  1938,  p.  47. 


230  ■  American  folksongs  of  protest 

tion  of  the  steel  worker  for  two  generations  must  be  taken  as  a 
tarnish  on  the  reputation  of  the  most  lavish  of  all  philanthropists. 

THE  BALLAD  OF  JOHN  CATCHINS 

Come  gather  round  and  I  will  sing 

A  song  you'll  know  is  true; 

About  a  brother  working  man, 

A  man  that's  union  through  and  through. 

John  Catchins  is  a  union  man, 

He  joined  on  charter  day; 

He  did  not  like  a  company  town, 

Where  they  used  clacker*  instead  of  pay. 

The  furnace  where  he  made  his  time 
Is  Thomas  mill  in  Birmingham. 
Republic  Steel  they  owned  that  plant, 
And  they're  the  roughest  in  the  land. 

In  thirty-three  the  eagle  came 

He  brought  the  NRA; 

John  Catchins  said,  "Our  time  has  come, 

We'll  organize  this  very  day." 

And  then  they  had  election  day 
To  vote  the  union  straight; 
And  when  the  vote  was  counted  up, 
Republic  got  a  measly  sight. 

Those  rich  men's  hearts  are  harder  still 
Than  steel  made  in  their  mill; 
Republic  would  not  be  content 
To  obey  the  law  of  the  government. 

Tom  Girdler  called  his  board  around 
A  frame-up  for  to  plan; 
"We're  goin'  to  drive  that  union  out, 
And  we  will  use  what  means  we  can." 

They  sent  for  Thomas  Carpenter; 
The  superintendent  scratched  his  head. 
They  gave  him  a  drink  from  a  silver  cup, 
And  this  is  what  he  said: 

"The  man  that's  union  through  and  through 
John  Catchins  is  his  name; 
He  leads  the  men  on  the  picket  line 
And  he's  the  one  we've  got  to  frame. 
*  Clacker:  scrip. 


A  labor  miscellany  *  231 

"When  we  reduce  the  wages  down 
Or  double  up  a  job  or  two, 
Or  when  the  price  of  the  rent  goes  up, 
He  criticizes  me  and  you. 

"He's  taught  his  family  union  ways, 
His  wife  and  children  all; 
He  tells  them  they  must  organize 
Because  divided  they  will  fall. 

"So  he's  the  man  we've  got  to  frame 
No  matter  what  it  will  entail; 
We'll  put  him  surely  underneath 
The  sheriff's  hard  rock  jail. 

"We'll  call  in  that  detective  guy, 
The  one  named  Milt  McDuff; 
We'll  tell  him  what  we're  paying  for, 
And  make  him  do  his  dirty  stuff." 

They  put  John  Catchins  in  the  jail; 
The  lies  that  they  did  tell 
Would  close  the  roads  to  heaven  up 
And  send  their  lousy  souls  to  hell. 

Come  gather  round  us,  brothers  all, 
Together,  let  us  shout: 
"If  we  must  take  that  jailhouse  down, 
We're  goin'  to  get  John  Catchins  out. 

"When  brother  John  is  free  again, 
He'll  have  a  big  surprise; 
We'll  all  be  in  the  CIO 
Republic  Steel  will  organize." 

—Recorded  in  Chicago  from  the  singing 
of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Joe  Gelders. 

The  CIO  had  peacefully  but  dramatically  won  its  fight  for  com- 
pany recognition  from  United  States  Steel  Corporation  in  March 
1937,  but  Little  Steel— Youngstown  Sheet  and  Tube  Company, 
Republic  Steel  Corporation,  and  Inland  Steel  Company— fought 
bitterly  to  keep  the  union  out  of  their  plants,  and  the  biggest  and 
worst  strike  since  1919  was  the  result.  Tom  Girdler  of  Republic 
was  especially  determined  and  bitterly  scourged  United  States 
Steel  for  its  defection;  he  insisted  on  trying  to  keep  the  mill  in 
Chicago  running,  and  this  precipitated  what  became  known  as 


232  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

the  Chicago  or  Memorial  Day  Massacre.  On  May  30,  1937,  some 
fifteen  hundred  strikers  with  wives  and  children  assembled  in  a 
hall  near  the  Republic  mill.  Aroused  by  two  union  organizers, 
about  three  hundred  of  the  crowd  started  for  the  mill  to  protest 
its  continued  operation,  but  some  two  hundred  police  headed  by 
Captain  James  L.  Mooney  charged  the  strikers,  clubbed,  retreated, 
and  charged  again.  Suddenly  a  pistol  shot  rang  out,  and  the  police 
first  shot  into  the  air  and  then  into  the  crowd.  When  the  shooting 
and  clubbing  subsided,  ten  demonstrators  lay  dead  or  dying  and 
78  others  were  treated  for  injuries  in  hospitals  or  jails.  Although 
the  police  alleged  some  of  the  strikers  had  guns,  the  officers  were 
forced  to  admit  that  they  found  no  lethal  weapons  on  the  strikers 
they  arrested,  and  it  is  of  course  significant  that  the  dead  were 
strikers  and  not  police.  Afterwards,  careful  study  of  motion  pic- 
ture films  clearly  revealed  that  the  strikers  had  not  provoked  the 
attack.  Such  wanton  brutality  aroused  the  American  public's  sym- 
pathy for  the  strikers.  The  union  lost  this  battle  but  won  the 
final  contention  four  years  later  when  by  government  intervention 
Little  Steel  was  forced  to  recognize  the  union. 

BALLAD  OF  THE  CHICAGO  STEEL  MASSACRE 

On  dark  Republic's  bloody  ground 
The  thirtieth  day  of  May 
Oh,  brothers,  let  your  voices  sound 
For  them  that  died  that  day. 

The  men  who  make  our  country's  steel, 
The  toilers  of  the  mill, 
They  said,  "Our  union  is  our  strength, 
And  justice  is  our  will." 

"We  will  not  be  Tom  Girdler's  slaves, 

But  freemen  will  we  be." 

Hear  those  voices  from  the  new-made  graves, 

"We  died  to  set  you  free." 

In  ordered  ranks  they  all  marched  down 
To  picket  Girdler's  mill; 
They  did  not  know  that  Girdler's  cops 
Had  orders,  "Shoot  to  kill." 

As  they  marched  on  there  so  peacefully, 
Old  Glory  waving  high, 
Girdler's  gunmen  took  their  deadly  aim, 
And  the  bullets  began  to  fly. 


A  labor  miscellany  *  233 

Oh  that  deep,  deep  red  will  never  fade 
From  Republic's  bloody  ground; 
Oh,  workers  they  will  not  forget 
They  will  sing  this  song  around. 

They  will  not  forget  Tom  Girdler's  name, 
Nor  Girdler's  bloody  hands; 
He  will  be  a  sign  for  tyranny 
In  all  the  world's  broad  lands. 

Men  and  women  of  the  working  class, 
And  you  little  children  too, 
Remember  that  Memorial  Day 
And  the  men  that  died  for  you. 

—Copyright  1939  by  Earl  Robinson. 

Seamen 

Workers  who  engage  in  characteristically  hard  occupa- 
tions by  choice  rather  than  by  necessity  cannot  be  expected  to 
do  much  protesting  against  either  the  occupation  or  the  way  in 
which  it  is  administered.  For  this  reason  as  much  as  any  other, 
the  protest  songs  emanating  from  the  sailors  are  fewer  than  one 
might  expect  from  such  a  large  body  of  song  that  this  ancient 
profession  has  produced.  The  hauling  and  capstan  shanties  that 
comprise  the  greater  part  of  the  sailormen's  songs  had  some  com- 
plaint against  labor  administration  and  social  conditions  in  them, 
but  not  impressively  much.  Despite  the  medieval  labor  relations 
and  brutal  work  that  existed  in  the  marine  until  the  middle  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  the  only  protest  is  something  like  "Leave 
Her,  Johnny." 

/  thought  I  heard  the  old  man  say* 
Leave  her,  Johnny,  leave  her! 
You  can  go  ashore  and  draw  your  pay. 
It's  time  for  us  to  leave  her. 

The  winds  were  foul,  the  work  was  hard, 
From  Liverpool  docks  to  the  Brooklyn  yard. 

She  shipped  it  green  and  made  us  curse, 
The  mate  is  a  devil  and  the  old  man  worse. 

The  winds  were  foul,  the  ship  was  slow, 
The  grub  was  bad,  the  wages  low. 

We'll  sing,  oh,  may  we  never  be 
On  a  hungry  bitch  the  like  of  she. 


234  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

The  foc's'le  songs  were  likely  to  be  the  land  songs  that  had 
undergone  but  a  slight  sea-change;  a  little  protest  in  ballads  like 
"Andrew  Rose,"  but  still  nothing  of  any  overt,  sharp  protest. 

When,  after  the  middle  of  the  century,  steam  replaced  sail,  the 
shanties  died  and  the  sailors'  folksong  lost  its  distinctiveness. 
Modern  songs  sung  by  sailormen  are  hardly  different  from  land 
songs,  and  their  songs  of  protest  are  scarcely  distinguishable  from 
those  of  shore-bound  industrial  workers,  except  that  the  best  ones 
are  unprintable.  The  sailor's  life  is  still  a  hard  life,  and  his  songs 
reflect  that  toughness;  what  we  can  offer  as  typical  of  his  protest 
is  therefore  pitifully  emasculated. 

don't  turn  around 

Don't  let  anybody  turn  you  around, 
Turn  you  around,  turn  you  around; 
Don't  let  anybody  turn  you  around, 
Keep  on  the  union  way. 

I  went  down  to  the  union  hall, 
The  meeting  it  was  begun; 
A  stooge  got  up  to  lead  us  astray, 
But  he  didn't  get  nary  a  one. 

The  AFL  goes  by  water, 

The  CIO  by  land; 

But  when  we  get  to  where  we're  going, 

We'll  shake  each  other  by  the  hand. 

The  NMU  has  traveled  long, 
For  sailors  like  to  roam; 
But  now  we're  going  to  City  Hall, 
We  want  to  bring  our  sailors  home. 

A  folk  memory— little  more  than  that— is  recalled  by  a  few  union 
songs  sung  to  the  tunes  of  almost  forgotten  shanties.  "What  Shall 
We  Do  with  the  Drunken  Sailor"  provides  the  melodic  vehicle 
for  this  strike  song,  "What  Shall  We  Do  for  the  Striking  Seamen?" 

What  shall  we  do  for  the  striking  seamen?  (3) 

Help  them  win  their  battle. 

refrain:  Oho!  and  all  together, 
Oho!  and  all  together, 
Oho!  and  all  together, 
Help  them  win  their  battle. 


Sailing  the  union  way  •  235 

Turn  in  food  for  the  striking  seamen.  .  .  .  (3) 

Share  our  homes  with  the  striking  seamen.  .  .  .  (3) 

Send  a  wire  to  President  Truman.  .  .  .  (3) 

March  on  the  line  for  the  striking  seamen.  .  .  .  (3) 

SAILING  THE  UNION  WAY 

Sailing,  sailing, 

Sailing  the  union  way; 

We're  making  the  trip  in  a  union  ship 

And  we'll  get  union  pay. 

Sailing,  sailing, 
What  do  the  seamen  say? 
Thirty  per  cent  for  food  and  rent 
Or  no  ship  sails  today. 

Sailing,  sailing, 
What  do  the  firemen  shout? 
Thirty  per  cent  for  food  and  rent, 
Or  not  a  ship  goes  out. 

Sailing,  sailing, 

Telling  the  company 

We're  dropping  the  hook  in  a  cozy  nook 

As  long  as  it  may  be. 

Sailing,  sailing, 

Nothing  is  ailing  here. 

We're  sad  as  can  be  for  the  company 

We're  crying  in  our  beer. 

Sailing,  sailing, 
What  does  a  union  prove? 
Thirty  per  cent  for  food  and  rent 
Or  not  a  ship  will  move 

One  indication  of  how  closely  allied  land  industries  have  be- 
come with  the  maritime  trades  is  to  be  found  in  the  songs  of  the 
longshoremen.  Instead  of  turning  to  the  seamen  for  inspiration, 
the  longshoreman  sets  his  songs  of  protest  to  cowboy  melodies;  the 
following  three  songs,  typical  of  what  has  been  emanating  from 
the  longshoremen,  are  in  order  sung  to  the  tunes  of  "Roving 
Gambler,"  "Home  on  the  Range,"  and  "The  Streets  of  Laredo." 
The  first  song,  "Longshoreman's  Strike,"  shows  that  the  trend  is 
not  recent. 


236  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

longshoreman's  strike 

/  am  a  decent  laboring  man  who  works  along  the  shore 
To  keep  the  hungry  wolf  away  from  the  poor  longshoreman's  door; 
I  work  all  day  in  the  broiling  sun  on  ships  that  come  from  sea, 
From  broad  daylight  till  late  at  night  for  the  poor  man's  family. 

refrain:  Give  us  good  pay  for  every  day, 
Thai's  all  we  ask  of  you; 
Our  cause  is  right,  we're  out  on  strike, 
For  the  poor  man's  family. 

The  rich  man's  gilded  carriages  with  horses  swift  and  strong; 
If  a  poor  man  asks  for  a  bite  to  eat  they'll  tell  him  he  is  wrong. 
Go  take  your  shovel  in  your  hand  and  come  and  work  for  me, 
But  die  or  live,  they've  nothing  to  give  to  the  poor  man's  family. 

They  bring  over  their  'talians,  and  Naygurs  from  the  South, 
Thinking  they  can  do  the  work,  take  beans  from  out  our  mouth, 
The  poor  man's  children  they  must  starve,  but  we  will  not  agree, 
To  be  put  down  like  a  worm  in  the  ground  and  starve  our  families. 
—From  broadside  in  Harris  Collection,  Brown  University. 

FRISCO  STRIKE  SAGA 

'Twas  the  month  of  July, 

In  the  hot  sun  we  did  fry, 

On  the  docks  of  old  Frisco  Bay. 

We  were  rolling  our  trucks 

For  a  few  lousy  bucks, 

And  the  bosses  held  out  half  our  pay. 

refrain:  Oh,  hold  that  picket  line, 

We're  fighting  for  our  jobs  and  more  pay; 

For  the  longshoremen's  right, 

To  picket  and  fight, 

And  to  organize  in  our  own  way. 

Then  we  went  to  Fink  Hall 

For  the  strawbosses'  call, 

And  he  gave  us  the  six  months'  run  around; 

And  we  begged  for  a  job 

From  a  pot-bellied  slob 

Who'd  run  us  clear  down  to  the  ground. 

But  the  longshoreman  swore 

He  would  stand  it  no  more, 

And  he  called  to  his  fellow  workingmen; 

And  the  boys  all  heard  him  say 

Under  Section  7  A 

The  bosses  are  gypping  us  again! 


The  ballad  of  bloody  thursday  *  237 

Then  there  came  on  the  scene 

With  his  liver  full  of  spleen 

Joe  Ryan,  big  shot  of  I  LA.4 

And  in  language  so  polite, 

Warned  us,  "Boys,  now  don't  you  fight, 

Just  take  your  troubles  to  the  NRA." 

But  those  stevedores  yelled  "Boo! 

With  scab  herders  we  are  through; 

We'll  see  who's  running  this  here  I  LA. 

Now  we're  out  to  win  this  strike, 

And  your  tactics  we  don't  like, 

The  rank  and  file  have  learned  a  better  way." 

THE  BALLAD  OF  BLOODY  THURSDAY 

As  I  was  a-walking  one  day  down  in  Frisco, 
As  I  was  a-walking  in  Frisco  one  day; 
I  spied  a  longshoreman  all  dressed  in  white  linen 
Dressed  in  white  linen  and  cold  as  the  clay. 

"I  see  by  your  outfit  that  you  are  a  worker" 
These  words  he  did  say  as  I  slowly  passed  by; 
"Sit  down  beside  me  and  hear  my  sad  story, 
For  Vm  shot  in  the  breast  and  I  know  I  must  die. 

"It  was  down  on  the  Front  where  I  worked  on  the  cargoes, 

Worked  on  the  cargoes  ten  hours  a  day; 

I  lost  my  right  fingers  because  of  the  speedup, 

The  speedup  that  killed  many  a  man  in  my  day. 

"With  too  much  of  a  sling  load  on  old  rusty  cable 
The  boss  saved  ten  dollars,  ten  dollars,  I  say; 
That  old  rusty  sling  broke  and  fell  on  my  buddy; 
Ten  lousy  bucks  carried  Jimmie  away. 

"Those  were  the  days  when  the  Boss  owned  the  union, 
We  poor  working  stiffs — we  had  nothing  to  say; 
Ours  was  to  work  and  to  keep  our  big  traps  shut; 
We  stood  in  the  shape-up  for  a  dollar  a  day. 

"But  our  children  were  hungry,  their  clothing  was  tattered; 
It's  then  that  we  workers  began  to  get  wise; 
We  tore  up  our  fink  books  and  listened  to  Bridges, 
Saying,  'Look  at  your  kids,  brother,  let's  organize.' 

4  ILA:  International  Longshoremen's  Association.  Ryan  has  been  doubtfully  com- 
memorated in  several  other  songs  and  ballads. 


238  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

"Strong  and  united  we  went  to  the  bosses 
For  better  conditions  and  a  decent  day's  pay; 
The  bosses  just  laughed — we  all  had  a  meeting, 
That's  why  we're  hitting  the  bricks  here  today. 

"Our  struggles  were  many,  our  struggles  were  bloody, 
We  fought  the  shipowners  with  all  that  we  had; 
With  thousands  of  dollars  they  tempted  our  leaders 
But  our  guys  were  honest — they  couldn't  be  had. 

"It  was  there  on  the  line  that  I  marched  with  my  brothers, 
It  was  there  on  the  line  as  we  proudly  passed  by; 
The  cops  and  the  soldiers  they  brought  up  their  rifles, 
Vm  shot  in  the  breast  and  I  know  I  must  die. 

"Four  hundred  strikers  were  brutually  wounded; 
Four  hundred  workers  and  I  left  there  to  die; 
Remember  the  day,  sir,  to  all  of  your  children, 
This  bloody  Thursday — the  fifth  of  July. 

"Don't  beat  the  drums  slowly,  don't  play  the  pipes  lowly; 
Don't  play  the  dead  march  as  they  carry  me  along; 
There's  wrongs  that  need  righting,  so  keep  right  on  fighting 
And  lift  your  proud  voices  in  proud  union  songs." 

Fight  on  together,  you  organized  workers, 
Fight  on  together,  there's  nothing  to  fear; 
Remember  the  martyrs  of  this  bloody  Thursday, 
Let  nothing  divide  you,  and  victory  is  near. 

—From  People's  Songs  Library. 

The  lumber  workers 

Unlike  the  seamen,  the  lumber  workers  have  managed 
in  spite  of  technological  changes  to  preserve  the  savor  of  the  old 
songs.  Except  for  an  occasional  verse  like,  "Go  strike  your  blow 
for  the  CIO  and  Local  29,"  the  modern  lumberman's  song  might 
be  a  contemporary  of  "The  Little  Brown  Bulls"  or  "The  Jam  at 
Gerry's  Rocks." 

OLD  SAWBUCKS 

Old  Sawbucks  was  a  logger  in  the  mighty  days  of  old; 
His  word  was  law  to  all  the  jacks  and  when  he  yelled  they  jumped. 
The  logs  went  down  the  skidway  at  an  awful  pace,  I'm  told, 
The  jacks  were  straining  every  nerve,  from  morn  to  night  they 
humped. 


The  buzzardaree  •  239 

Full  sixteen  hours  he  drove  them,  for  he  said,  "It's  plain  to  see 

If  they  have  any  idle  time  they  may  begin  to  think; . 

And  the  harder  the  jacks  labor,  the  better  off  I'll  be." 

He  kept  the  men  in  terror;  his  roar  would  scare  them  pink. 

All  night  the  jacks  were  busy,  for  the  bedbugs  and  the  lice 
Kept  every  worker  scratching  all  the  time  he  was  in  bed. 
The  smells  disturbed  his  slumber  and  a  few  stray  rats  and  mice; 
The  only  hope  Jack  had  for  rest  was  after  he  was  dead. 

He  fed  his  men  on  liver  and  a  little  Irish  stew; 

The  pancakes  were  like  rubber  and  the  biscuits  were  like  lead; 

Said  he,  "That  chuck  is  good  enough  for  any  logging  crew; 

And  some  sawdust  in  the  sausage  will  make  filling  for  the  head." 

The  midnight  dining  chamber  was  a  vast  and  grand  affair. 
The  men  ate  in  the  forest  and  the  chuck  froze  on  their  plate. 
The  jacks  were  used  to  all  of  this  and  they  didn't  seem  to  care; 
But  the  union  came  along  and  there's  been  a  change  of  late. 

Bedding  now  is  decent  and  the  jacks  can  get  some  rest; 
Chuck  has  been  improved  a  lot,  it's  really  fit  to  eat. 
We're  going  to  keep  fighting  till  we  finally  get  the  best, 
Of  fruits  and  eggs  and  butter  and  the  choicest  cuts  of  meat. 

Sometimes  you  meet  a  goofy  guy  who  fails  to  do  his  part 
In  the  ever  present  struggle  for  an  ever  rising  wage; 
It  seems  the  ignorant  fellow  simply  doesn't  have  the  heart 
To  aid  his  fellow  workers  in  the  battle  of  the  age. 

A  few  stray  stools  were  with  us  but  we  quickly  got  their  number 
We  high-tailed  all  those  out  of  camps;  we're  rid  of  them  of  late. 
We  found  when  we  examined  them  their  heads  were  made  of  leather 
It's  due  to  the  sawdust  sausage  the  stupid  devils  ate. 

So  let's  battle  on,  my  brothers,  each  one  helping  out  his  neighbor; 
Let's  rid  the  earth  of  parasites  and  all  their  mangy  crew. 
Remember  that  the  future  of  the  world  belongs  to  labor, 
The  battle  is  a  hard  one  and  the  fighters  are  too  few. 

—From  the  North  Star  Lumber  Camp,  Minnesota. 
THE  BUZZARDAREE 

There's  a  buzzardaree  on  the  North  Shore 
With  a  beak  like  a  philagazoo; 
With  small  piggish  eyes  and  a  grin  of  disguise 
When  he  hires  a  man  for  his  crew. 

refrain:  This  ornery  skunk  with  a  head  like  a  monk 
And  a  beak  like  a  philagazoo. 


240  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Now  jacks,  take  a  tip,  if  you  want  to  get  gypped 
Just  work  for  this  Gillagaboo; 
When  it  comes  to  the  payoff  he  always  is  short 
And  will  try  his  bluffing  on  you. 

Then  when  you  show  him  the  time  you  have  kept 
The  wind  blows  through  his  bazoo; 
Not  all  of  you  know  him  but  some  of  you  do, 
For  he's  tried  the  same  trick  on  you. 

Now  while  in  the  land  of  the  cedar  and  spruce 

Above  other  things  I  crave 

To  bury  him  under  a  whatchamacall 

And  place  a  thingumabob  on  his  grave. 

—By  "Pine  Cone."  In  People's  Songs  Library. 


THE  BALLAD  OF  VOIGHT  S  CAMP 

From  Highway  65  it's  quite  a  tramp 

To  Little  Fork  River  to  Ed  Voight's  camp, 

Where  we're  giving  a  lot  of  thought 

To  how  to  improve  the  gyppo's  lot. 

In  his  bunk  our  steward  seems  nice  and  cozy, 

But  when  he  gets  home  things  ain't  so  rosy; 

The  grocery  bill  goes  up  so  high 

When  the  steward  gets  home  it  hits  the  sky; 

Though  the  kids  are  sick,  their  shoes  worn  out, 

You  never  see  those  youngsters  pout. 

They  know  their  dad  has  not  been  shirking, 

For  believe  you,  men,  he's  sure  been  working. 

In  these  woods  it's  work,  not  glory. 

Every  day,  the  same  old  story; 

The  cedar  looks  good,  but  lo!  it's  rotten, 

A  post  from  the  top  is  all  I've  gotten. 

We're  sending  our  steward  to  the  union  meeting, 

And  hope  he'll  remember  to  send  our  greeting. 

We  hope  that  he  won't  be  a  flop; 

We  want  better  pay  when  we  cut  the  crop. 

We  know  that  our  union  would  have  more  power 

If  we'd  all  cut  timber  by  the  hour. 

Let's  give  the  timber  barons  a  taste 

Of  paying  for  their  own  rotten  waste. 


A  labor  miscellany  *  241 

We  say  up  here  at  Little  Fork 

We're  through  delivering  charity  work. 

They  used  to  have  horses  to  do  all  the  dragging, 

But  now  they  use  men,  and  I'm  not  bragging, 

Some  of  those  logs,  I'll  bet  my  socks, 

Would  be  too  heavy  for  Paul  Bunyan's  ox. 

Says  a  pretty  tired  fellow  with  a  sickly  smile, 

"Do  you  think  the  union  is  really  worth  while?" 

Well,  look  at  those  truckers  who  carry  no  book, 

As  you  watch  them  each  morning  more  peaked  they  look. 

We  know  it's  wrong  and  bad  union  manners 

To  load  such  pulp  by  pancake  jammers; 

We  don't  want  the  gyppos  to  take  such  a  beating, 

That's  why  the  union  called  this  meeting. 

Said  the  boss  to  the  steward,  "All  these  new  regulations 

Sure  raise  the  expense  in  the  operations; 

This  crew  believes  in  long  vacations, 

Every  week  end  they  go  see  their  relations. 

A  forty-hour  week,  one  man  in  each  bunk, 

If  this  timber  won't  move  soon,  I'll  be  sunk. 

We're  bucking  the  weather,  no  frost  in  the  bog, 

This  doggone  season's  the  last  I'll  log." 

Says  the  steward  to  the  boss,  "Get  busy,  get  wise 

It's  time  for  you  jobbers  to  organize." 


8.  The  song-makers 


//  anybody  asks  you  who  composed  this  song, 
If  anybody  asks  you  who  composed  this  song, 
Tell  him  'twas  I,  and  I  sing  it  all  day  long. 


Ella  May  Wiggins,  Aunt  Molly  Jackson, 
Woody  Guthrie,  and  Joe  Glazer 


"In  the  ballad,"  wrote  one  of  the  most  distinguished 
American  literary  authorities,  "...  the  author  is  of  no  account. 
He  is  not  even  present.  We  do  not  feel  sure  that  he  ever  existed."1 
When  the  comparatively  few  ballads  that  have  come  down  to 
us  are  put  over  against  the  seven  centuries  and  more  of  English 
folksong-making,  it  is  not  surprising  that  such  a  statement  could 
be  made.  Of  the  305  ballads  in  Francis  Child's  monumental  collec- 
tion, only  one  was  the  work  of  a  known  composer.  But  all  of 

1  Kittredge,  op.  cit.,  p.  xi. 

243 


244  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Child's  ballads,  and  all  of  the  hundreds  that  he  did  not  consider, 
English  and  American,  had  composers  who  lived,  and  worked, 
and  put  into  song  the  stories  their  community  wanted  to  hear. 
As  the  articulate  members  of  the  folk  who  in  the  aggregate  have 
been  credited  with  the  authorship  of  genuine  folksong,  these 
anonymous  people  are  of  the  greatest  interest  to  anyone  who 
wishes  to  understand  the  origin  of  balladry;  but  it  remains  the 
tragic  fact  that  they  are  more  ephemeral  than  the  scraps  of  song 
they  put  together  in  a  moment  of  leisure  taken  from  work  that 
at  the  time  seemed  more  important.  Their  songs  may  live  for 
generations,  even  centuries,  but  they  themselves  have  seldom  had 
even  a  tombstone  to  prove  that  they  walked  the  earth. 

If  we  live  in  an  age  of  declining  balladry,  we  are  compensated 
by  our  opportunity  to  know  the  people  who  compose  folksong. 
The  following  section  is  an  introduction  to  a  small  but  repre- 
sentative group  of  these  unsung  ballad  makers:  a  textile  worker, 
a  miner's  wife,  a  migrant,  and  a  union  song  writer.  The  first  three 
are  unquestionably  members  of  the  folk;  the  fourth  is  a  member  of 
that  peripheral  class  whose  songs,  written  with  conscious  artistry, 
have  again  and  again  been  taken  by  the  folk  as  their  own. 
These  are  the  people  who  have  made  our  folksongs. 


Ella  May  Wiggins 

There  was  nothing  in  Ella  May  Wiggins'  appearance 
to  distinguish  her  from  the  other  women  among  the  five  hundred 
textile  workers  at  the  union  "speakin'  "  as  she  exhorted  them  to 
join  the  union,  just  three  weeks  before  she  was  to  die  with  a  bullet 
in  her  breast.  Small,  brown-haired,  good-featured,  not  yet  thirty, 
in  another  age  and  another  environment  she  would  have  been 
an  attractive  young  woman  just  beginning  life,  but  in  Gastonia, 
North  Carolina,  in  August  1929,  she  was  an  economic  slave,  pre- 
maturely aged,  her  face  pinched  and  wrinkled  by  the  lifetime  of 
undernourishment,  degrading  labor,  and  childbearing  behind  her. 


The  song-makers  *  245 

Those  who  remembered  Ella  May  when  she  was  a  girl  said  she 
had  been  pretty,  doll-like;  but  beauty  is  an  ephemeral  thing  at 
the  level  of  poverty. 

"I  never  made  no  more  than  nine  dollars  a  week,"  she  told  the 
assembled  mill  hands,  "and  you  can't  do  for  a  family  on  such 
money.  I'm  the  mother  of  nine.  Four  died  with  the  whooping 
cough.  I  was  working  nights,  and  I  asked  the  super  to  put  me  on 
days,  so's  I  could  tend  'em  when  they  had  their  bad  spells.  But 
he  wouldn't.  He's  the  sorriest  man  alive,  I  reckon.  So  I  had  to 
quit,  and  then  there  wasn't  no  money  for  medicine,  and  they  just 
died.  I  couldn't  do  for  my  children  any  more  than  you  women 
on  the  money  we  got.  That's  why  I  came  out  for  the  union,  and 
why  we  all  got  to  stand  for  the  union,  so's  we  can  do  better  for 
our  children,  and  they  won't  have  lives  like  we  got."1 

Like  the  other  textile  workers  in  the  Southern  mills,  Ella  May 
came  from  the  American  peasantry.  When  she  was  ten  years  old, 
the  Mays'  farm  in  the  back-country  Great  Smokies  ceased  to  pro- 
duce even  poverty's  staple— "taters"— and  they  moved  down  to  the 
logging  camps  around  Andres,  North  Carolina.  While  her  father 
moved  about,  working  in  the  neighboring  lumber  camps,  Ella 
May  and  her  mother  took  in  washing  for  the  bachelor  loggers, 
scrubbing  the  grimy  clothes  in  wooden  tubs  outside  their  flat-car 
shanty. 

Not  only  physical  nutriment  but  mental  nutriment  was  also 
hard  to  come  by  in  such  an  environment.  Schools  had  little  to 
offer;  terms  often  lasted  only  six  months  a  year,  teachers  were 
few  and  inferior,  classes  were  unmanageably  large,  and  the  igno- 
rance imbedded  by  centuries  of  deprivation  exuded  an  atmos- 
phere hostile  to  learning;  but  Ella  learned  to  read  and  write 
before  marrying  John  Wiggins  at  the  age  of  sixteen.  Her  first 
child  was  born  a  year  later;  before  the  birth  of  her  second  baby 
a  heavy  log  fell  on  her  husband,  crippling  him  for  life,  and  Ella 
inherited  the  responsibility  of  providing  for  the  family. 

The  Wigginses  moved  over  to  cotton  mill  country,  where  Ella 
worked  sixty  hours  a  week  for  ten  years  as  a  spinner— thirty  thou- 
sand hours  of  debilitating  labor,  with  nothing  to  show  at  the 

1  Quoted  in  Margaret  Larkin,  "Ella  May,"  New  Masses,  vol.  5,  no.  6  (November 
1929)- 


246  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

end  but  nine  children.  Sedentary  life  in  the  rural  South  offers 
few  diversions  of  a  wholesome  nature,  and  John  Wiggins  quickly 
became  a  drunkard.  When  he  finally  deserted  his  family,  Ella 
reclaimed  her  maiden  name  and  moved  her  emaciated  brood  to 
Bessemer  City,  taking  a  spinner's  job  in  the  American  Mills. 
Shortly  after  her  arrival  the  National  Textile  Workers'  Union 
organized  the  mill  workers,  and  she  joined  with  enthusiasm,  be- 
coming a  committee  worker.  Her  greatest  value  to  the  union, 
however,  was  her  ability  to  "  'pose"  and  sing  "song  ballets."  As  a 
child  she  had  gained  a  local  reputation  as  a  singer  because  of  her 
clear  voice  and  innate  sense  of  rhythm;  these  talents  she  joined 
to  the  rich  tradition  of  mountain  song  composition  that  she  had 
inherited,  and  made  up  songs  about  the  workers'  plight,  their 
hopes,  and  their  determination  to  remedy  intolerable  conditions. 
But  if  she  had  made  herself  famous  among  the  mill  workers, 
she  had  made  herself  infamous  among  the  operators,  and  she  was 
early  marked  for  reprisal.  Her  death  came  at  the  height  of  the 
appalling  anarchy  which  attended  the  National  Textile  Workers' 
Union  strike  at  Gastonia.2  The  Gastonia  Gazette  had  set  afire  the 
destructive  prejudices  of  the  Southern  fundamentalist  farmers, 
prejudices  that  needed  but  little  additional  ignition  where  Com- 
munists, atheists,  labor  organizers,  and  discontented  workers  com- 
bined to  disrupt  their  complacent  feudalism,  and  by  the  beginning 
of  September  all  semblance  of  law  and  order  had  vanished.  On 
September  9,  immediately  after  the  mistrial  in  the  Aderholt  case 
had  temporarily  saved  the  sixteen  men  accused  of  his  murder,  a 
mob  composed  of  from  three  to  five  hundred  men  surged  through 
the  strike  area  assaulting  union  members,  destroying  union  prop- 
erty, and  gathering  incentive  for  more  effective  measures  for 
extirpating  the  union.  Led  by  a  motorcycle  policeman,  a  horn- 
blowing  cavalcade  of  one  hundred  automobiles  roared  to  the 
Loray  mill  and  raided  the  union  headquarters  to  the  battle  cry 
"We're  all  100%  Americans  and  anybody  that  don't  like  it  can 
go  back  to  Russia.  .  .  .  Long  live  100%  Americanism!"3  Similar 
raids  and  demonstrations  were  carried  on  at  nearby  Bessemer 
City  and  Charlotte. 

2  See  above,  pp.  133-39. 

3  Nell  Battle  Lewis,  "Anarchy  vs.  Communism  in  Gastonia,"  The  Nation,  vol.  129 
(September  25,  1929),  p.  321. 


The  song-makers  *  247 

Conditions  worsened  during  the  next  few  days,  and  it  was  an 
open  secret  that  the  infamous  Committee  of  One  Hundred— the 
"Black  Hundred"— allegedly  sponsored  by  the  owners  of  the  Loray 
mill,  would  prevent  the  mass  meeting  scheduled  for  September 
14  at  Gastonia. 

But  the  strikers  were  not  to  be  deterred  by  threats.  On  the 
afternoon  of  September  14  a  truckload  of  union  members  left 
Bessemer  City  bound  for  the  "speakin' "  grounds  at  South  Gas- 
tonia. Shortly  after  leaving  Bessemer  the  truck  was  halted  by  a 
mob  which  had  stationed  itself  on  the  highways  to  intercept  union 
delegates.  The  truck  was  wrecked,  and  as  the  helpless  and  unarmed 
occupants  spilled  out  on  to  the  highway,  several  shots  were  fired 
by  the  mob,  one  of  which  lodged  in  the  breast  of  Ella  May 
Wiggins,  killing  her  almost  instantly.  Her  fellow  workers  were 
convinced  that  she  had  been  deliberately  singled  out  for  death 
because  of  her  song-making. 

During  the  perfunctory  hearing  (at  which  the  same  grand  jury 
that  earlier  had  indicted  sixteen  men  and  women  for  first-degree 
murder  in  the  death  of  Chief  Aderholt  released  without  an  indict- 
ment men  widely  known  as  members  of  the  mob  that  had  killed 
Ella  May)  L.  C.  Carter,  one  of  Ella  May  Wiggins'  companions, 
testified: 

"A  lot  of  them  in  the  truck  began  jumping  out  and  them  that 
called  themselves  the  law  yelled,  'Halt  them  damn  Russian  Reds,' 
and  they  began  shooting  at  them." 

"Did  you  run?"  the  solicitor  asked. 

"No.  I  don't  come  from  a  sellin-out  country." 

"Folks  where  you  come  from  don't  run?" 

"No,  they  hain't  apt  to."4 

See  the  story  of  the  Gastonia  strike,  above,  p.  133.  "Vera"  is 
Vera  Buch,  who  gave  up  English  teaching  to  organize  the  textile 
workers.  One  of  the  sixteen  originally  held  for  the  killing  of  police 
chief  O.  F.  Aderholt,  she  was  released  after  the  mistrial  which 
ended  the  first  phase  of  the  case.  Manville  Jenckes  was  the  owner 
of  the  Loray  mill,  and  allegedly  was  the  instigator  of  Ella  May 
Wiggins'  murder. 

4  New  York  World,  September  25,  1929. 


248  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

CHIEF  ADERHOLT 


u 


w~9 


^ 


-#■  •'-e1 


-e-' 


tfo  J  J  J  J 1  h  h  1      1           1  1     ))} 

^U   0 — 0    m   w — 4—-L-. _ m-m- 

T                           •  C             __.     .              c . 

V*¥J   m — ■ — ■ — ■ £> ___ 1_ 

>Nf    '      d J  '       J  ^ •— ^-. H 

y 

A 

\ 

ffv\ 

1 

\\Vt 

c 

c 

# 

\3/ 

a 

0 

«* 

rl 

i  -• 

>--• 

L  j* 

• 

-a 

-e-* 

Come  all  of  you  good  people,  and  listen  while  I  tell; 
The  story  of  Chief  Aderholt,  the  man  you  all  knew  well. 
It  was  on  one  Friday  evening,  the  seventh  day  of  June, 
He  went  down  to  the  union  ground  and  met  his  fatal  doom. 

They  locked  up  our  leaders,  they  put  them  into  jail, 
They  shoved  them  into  prison,  refused  to  give  them  bail. 
The  workers  joined  together,  and  this  was  their  reply, 
"We'll  never,  no,  we'll  never,  let  our  leaders  die." 

They  moved  the  trial  to  Charlotte,  got  lawyers  from  every  town; 
Vm  sure  we'll  hear  them  speak  again  upon  the  union  ground. 
While  Vera,  she's  in  prison,  Manville  Jenckes  is  in  pain. 
Come  join  the  Textile  Union,  and  show  them  you  are  game. 

We're  going  to  have  a  union  all  over  the  South, 
Where  we  can  wear  good  clothes,  and  live  in  a  better  house; 
No  we  must  stand  together,  and  to  the  boss  reply, 
"We'll  never,  no,  we'll  never,  let  our  leaders  die." 


—People's  Songs  Library. 


lid  song  •  249 

It  is  difficult  for  residents  of  more  civilized  areas  to  understand 
the  terror  inspired  by  "the  Law"  in  people  among  whom  it  is 
administered  by  deputized  thugs.  "The  Law"  becomes  an  amor- 
phous, omnipresent,  pervasive  oppression  against  which  there  is 
no  defense.  Imagine  then  the  jubilation  that  the  workers  feel  for 
the  champion  who  will  contend  with  this  monster  in  their  behalf! 

Such  a  champion  was  the  International  Labor  Defense,  which 
sent  down  the  most  competent  lawyers  available  to  defend  the 
union  leaders  accused  of  the  Aderholt  murder.  Many  non-union 
members  joined  the  ILD  in  an  expression  of  unbounded  admira- 
tion for  its  working  in  fighting  for  the  underdog. 


i 


ILD  SONG 


^S 


yw 


p§§ 


<aEi 


a 


J.  hH 


« 


35 


P=| 


*~     *»  W 


REFRAIN 


£ 


£ 


N^ 


PP 


P 


hjj'1%    y)|J.  J^kj 


? 


Toiling  on  life's  pilgrim  pathway, 
Wheresoever  you  may  be. 
It  will  help  you,  fellow  workers, 
If  you  will  join  the  ILD. 

refrain:  Come  and  join  the  ILD 
Come  and  join  the  ILD 
It  will  help  to  win  the  victory, 
If  you  will  join  the  ILD. 


250  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

When  the  bosses  cut  your  wages, 
And  you  toil  and  labor  free, 
Come  and  join  the  textile  union, 
Also  join  the  ILD. 

Now  our  leaders  are  in  prison, 
But  I  hope  they'll  soon  be  free. 
Come  and  join  the  textile  union, 
Also  join  the  ILD. 

Now  the  South  is  hedged  in  darkness, 
Though  they  begin  to  see. 
Come  and  join  the  textile  union, 
Also  join  the  ILD. 

—Library  of  Congress,  Archive  of  American  Folksong. 


Cutting  away  all  the  irrelevancies  of  the  story  in  the  manner 
of  the  true  folk  composer,  Ella  May  states  the  basis  of  the  conflict 
which  cost  her  her  life.  Fred  Beal,  the  somewhat  ineffectual  union 
leader,  was  the  "red-headed  bastard"  the  mob  tried  to  lynch  sev- 
eral days  before  Ella  May  was  murdered. 

THE  BIG  FAT  BOSS  AND  THE  WORKERS 

(Tune:  "Polly  Wolly  Doodle") 

The  boss  man  wants  our  labor,  and  money  to  packaway, 
The  workers  wants  a  union  and  the  eight  hour  day. 

The  boss  man  hates  the  workers,  the  workers  hates  the  boss, 
The  bossman  rides  in  a  big  fine  car,  and  the  workers  has  to  walk. 

The  boss  man  sleeps  in  a  big  fine  bed,  and  dreams  of  his  silver  and 

gold, 
The  workers  sleeps  in  an  old  straw  bed  and  shivers  from  the  cold. 

Fred  Beal  he  is  in  prison,  a-sleeping  on  the  floor, 

But  he  will  soon  be  free  again,  and  speak  to  us  some  more. 

The  union  is  growing,  the  ILD  is  strong, 

We're  going  to  show  the  bosses  that  we  have  starved  too  long. 

—People's  Songs  Library. 


All  around  the  jailhouse  *  251 

ALL  AROUND  THE  JAILHOUSE 

All  around  the  jailhouse 
Waiting  for  a  trial; 
One  mile  from  the  union 

hall 
Sleeping  in  the  jail. 
I  walked  up  to  the  policeman 
To  show  him  I  had  no  fear; 
He  said,  "If  you've  got  money 
I'll  see  that  you  don't  stay  here.'" 

"/  haven't  got  a  nickel, 
Not  a  penny  can  I  show." 
"Lock  her  up  in  the  cell,"  he 

said, 
As  he  slammed  the  jailhouse  door. 
He  let  me  out  in  July, 
The  month  I  dearly  love; 
The  wide  open  spaces  all  around 

me, 
The  moon  and  stars  above. 

Everybody  seems  to  want  me, 

Everybody  but  the  scabs. 

I'm  on  my  way  from  the  jail- 
house, 

I'm  going  back  to  the  union  hall. 

Though  my  tent  now  is  empty 

My  heart  is  full  of  joy; 

I'm  a  mile  away  from  the  union 
hall, 

Just  a-waiting  for  a  strike. 

Two  hundred  of  her  fellow  workers  slodged  through  the  mud 
behind  Ella  May's  coffin  the  gray,  rainy  morning  she  was  buried. 
All  along  the  route  other  workers  and  sympathizers  stood  to  honor 
her  as  she  passed.  As  her  body  was  let  down  into  a  ten-dollar 
grave  one  of  her  friends  sang  "The  Mill  Mother's  Lament,"  her 
most  beautiul  song. 

THE  MILL  MOTHER'S  LAMENT 

We  leave  our  homes  in  the  morning, 
We  kiss  our  children  good  bye 
While  we  slave  for  the  bosses 
Our  children  scream  and  cry. 


252  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

And  when  we  draw  our  money 
Our  grocery  bills  to  pay, 
Not  a  cent  to  spend  for  clothing, 
Not  a  cent  to  lay  away. 

And  on  that  very  evening, 
Our  little  son  will  say: 
"I  need  some  shoes,  Mother, 
And  so  does  sister  May." 

How  it  grieves  the  heart  of  a  mother, 
You  everyone  must  know, 
But  we  can't  buy  for  our  children 
Our  wages  are  too  low. 

It  is  for  our  little  children, 
That  seem  to  us  so  dear, 
But  for  us  nor  them,  dear  workers, 
The  bosses  do  not  care. 

But  understand,  all  workers, 
Our  union  they  do  fear; 
Let's  stand  together,  workers, 
And  have  a  union  here. 


-People's  Songs  Library. 


Aunt  Molly  Jackson 

"Since  I  was  a  little  girl  I  have  composed  songs  and 
sung  them  to  pass  my  sorrows  away.  Some  people  think  my  stories 
are  too  sad  to  be  true  and  other  folks  say  they  are  not  interested 
in  the  songs  I  write  because  they  are  so  sorrowful  they  cannot  be 
true.  But  I  have  never  written  one  word  that  has  not  been  the 
truth,  and  I  believe  I  have  had  more  troubles  than  any  other  poor 
woman  who  has  ever  been  born." 

Aunt  Molly,  as  she  says,  has  had  a  hard  cross  to  bear:  her  mother 
died  of  tuberculosis;  her  father  was  blinded  in  a  coal  mine;  her 
brother  was  killed  in  a  coal  mine;  her  husband  was  killed  in  a 
coal  mine;  her  son  was  killed  in  a  coal  mine;  her  sister's  child 
starved  to  death;  another  brother  was  blinded;  and  she  herself 
was  crippled  in  a  bus  accident.  But  there  were  many  other  women 
who  mourned  fathers,  husbands,  sons,  and  brothers  among  the 


The  song-makers  *  253 

seventy  thousand  men  killed  in  the  coal  mines  during  Aunt  Molly's 
adulthood  in  Kentucky,  and  many  other  women  saw  children 
starve  to  death.  Aunt  Molly  is  exceptional  only  because  she  was 
articulate,  and  she  was  articulate  because  the  seeds  of  social  con- 
sciousness disseminated  by  her  father  found  fertile  ground  in  her 
physical  strength  and  fierce  pugnacity— characteristics  strong  in 
her  today.  She  is  seventy-three  now  (she  has  looked  that  old  for  ten 
years),  stone  gray,  and  crippled,  but  a  certain  "smart  alax"  of  a 
folklorist  still  has  cause  to  fear  her  sharp  eyes  and  powerful 
worker's  hands  for  "messing  up"  her  songs  in  transcription. 

Aunt  Molly's  combativeness  and  strength  came  from  a  long  line 
of  hardy  pioneer  stock.  Her  mother's  people— the  Robinsons— 
and  her  father's  family— the  Garlands— had  been  in  Clay  County 
for  seven  generations.  Aunt  Molly  speaks  with  pride  of  the  re- 
sourcefulness of  her  Scottish  and  Irish  ancestors: 

They  cut  down  trees  and  built  their  own  log  cabins;  they  cleared 
their  own  land;  they  built  their  own  fences  and  split  their  own  rails; 
they  built  their  own  church  houses  and  their  own  schools  out  of 
logs;  they  raised  their  own  corn  that  fattened  their  own  hogs;  they 
caught  possums  and  coons  with  their  own  dogs;  they  owned  the  stuff 
that  they  all  worked  and  raised— I  still  say  them  were  the  good  old  days. 

I  can  still  remember  the  old  armchair  I  used  to  set  in  and  watch 
my  grandmother  card  and  spin.  I  can  remember  when  we  had  sheep 
by  the  hundreds;  sheep  by  the  hundreds  on  my  grandmother's  farm, 
sheep  that  gave  blankets  that  kept  us  all  warm;  they  knit  socks  and 
stockings  to  put  on  our  feet;  in  fact  they  raised  all  we  wore  and  all  we 
eat,  till  the  coal  operators  began  to  swindle  and  cheat.5 

She  is  proud  too  of  the  miscegenation  of  her  intrepid  great- 
grandfather, who  stole  her  great-grandmother,  a  full-blooded 
Indian,  from  a  Cherokee  chief  and  brought  her  from  Oklahoma 
to  Clay  County,  where  he  married  her.  In  her  ballad  about  Frank 
Little,  a  martyred  IWW  organizer,  Aunt  Molly  says, 

Frank  Little  was  an  Indian 

A  brave  Cherokee; 

He  had  the  same  fighting  blood  in  him 

That  I  have  in  me. 

5  Something  of  the  ease  with  which  Aunt  Molly  composes  her  songs  can  be  seen 
in  her  conversations  and  correspondence,  which  lapse  almost  effortlessly  into  ballad 
metre  if  they  are  sustained  beyond  a  few  sentences. 


254  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Like  most  mountain  folk  in  the  last  century,  her  parents  mar- 
ried young.  At  the  time  of  her  marriage  to  seventeen-year-old 
Oliver  Perry  Garland,  Deborah  Robinson  was  fifteen,  but  they 
had  already  attained  a  maturity  that  most  urban  people  never 
reach.  At  sixteen  Oliver  Garland  built  a  log  cabin  in  anticipation 
of  his  marriage,  while  working  his  own  farm,  and  at  nineteen  he 
was  ordained  a  Baptist  minister,  a  profession  he  was  to  exer- 
cise Saturdays  and  Sundays  for  forty-four  years  until  death  at 
sixty-three.  In  1880,  when  she  was  sixteen,  Deborah  bore  Mary 
Magdalene  Garland,  who  was  to  become  the  famous  Aunt  Molly 
Jackson. 

When  she  was  three  years  old  her  father  sold  his  farm  and 
moved  to  adjoining  Laurel  County,  where  he  opened  a  general 
store,  selling  groceries,  dry  goods,  and  meat  on  credit  to  the  miners 
until  he  "went  broke"  two  years  later.  Like  other  unfortunates 
before  him,  his  failure  at  individual  enterprise  forced  him  down 
into  the  mines,  and  for  the  rest  of  his  active  life  he  mined  coal 
six  days  a  week,  preached  one  sermon  on  Saturdays  and  two  on 
Sundays,  and  at  night  organized  the  miners.  "My  dad  was  a  strong 
union  man  and  a  good  minister,"  Aunt  Molly  says,  "so  he  taught 
me  to  be  a  strong  union  woman."  From  the  age  of  five  she  accom- 
panied her  father  to  union  meetings,  led  picket  lines,  carried 
messages,  and  helped  "teach  uniting"  to  the  miners.  "Just  before 
he  died  my  father  asked  me  to  carry  on  after  he  was  gone,  so  if 
I  live  to  be  one  hundred  I  will  teach  unity  all  of  my  days— one 
for  all  and  all  for  one." 

At  the  age  of  four,  Aunt  Molly  composed  her  first  song,  inspired 
by  her  mother's  reading  of  the  Bible. 

My  friends  and  relations,  listen  if  you  will; 
The  Bible  plainly  tells  us  we  shall  not  kill. 

If  you  love  your  neighbor,  he  will  love  you; 

Do  unto  others  what  you  want  them  to  do  to  you. 

If  I  love  you,  and  you  love  me, 
Oh,  how  happy  we  all  would  be! 

But  if  I  hit  you  and  you  will  fall, 
Then  you  won't  answer  me  when  I  call, 


The  song-makers  *  255 

Because  you  will  be  so  mad  at  me 

You  will  not  want  to  play  under  my  walnut  tree. 

So  I  want  to  be  good  to  you  so  you  will  be  good  to  me, 
Then  we  can  all  be  happy — don't  you  see? 

This  walnut  tree  I  was  singing  about  was  a  big  white  walnut  tree 
that  was  in  our  front  yard.  I  still  remember  what  my  mother  done 
for  me  for  my  reward.  She  made  me  a  doll  house  out  of  a  big  dry 
goods  box  and  then  she  took  corn  stalks  and  made  me  two  doll  beds. 
She  made  two  oat  straw  pillows  to  put  under  my  dolls'  heads;  then  she 
made  me  two  bed  ticks  and  filled  them  up  with  soft  silk  weeds.  She  said 
she  had  done  this  for  my  good  deed— for  composing  a  song  that  was 
good  advice  to  others— and  she  often  sung  my  song  to  other  mothers. 

Her  mother  died  when  Aunt  Molly  was  six,  leaving  four  chil- 
dren. As  Deborah  had  predicted  just  before  her  death,  Oliver 
married  again  within  a  year— eleven  months,  to  be  precise— to  a 
woman  who  was  to  bear  him  eleven  more  children.  As  Aunt  Molly 
remarks  in  one  of  her  songs, 

These  Lost  Creek  miners 
Claim  they  love  their  wives  so  dear 
That  they  can't  keep  from  giving  them 
A  baby  or  two  every  year. 

My  stepmother's  first  baby  was  born  before  she  and  my  daddy  had 
been  married  a  year,  and  then  eleven  months  later  her  second  baby 
came  along.  Now  I  had  two  babies  to  nurse  and  I  had  to  chop  wood 
and  carry  water  from  Farmer  Nelson's  well.  My  own  dear  mother's 
brother  told  me  that  I  would  grow  up  to  be  a  fool  if  my  stepmother 
kept  me  home  to  work  all  the  time  and  would  not  let  me  go  to  school. 
But  I  went  to  school  for  three  months  after  my  mother  died  and  I 
learned  to  read  and  write. 

What  her  uncle  said  made  a  frightening  impression  on  her, 
and  she  vowed  that  she  would  not  "grow  up  to  be  a  fool,"  and  so 
she  studied  her  books  while  rocking  the  babies  to  sleep. 

Aunt  Molly's  first  jail  sentence  came  at  the  age  of  ten. 

I  was  visiting  my  Granddad  Garland  who  lived  on  a  farm  in  Clay 
County.  I  played  a  Christmas  joke  on  a  family  of  children  by  the 
name  of  Lewis  without  meaning  any  harm,  but  I  was  framed  up  by 


256  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

some  meddlesome  spies,  and  they  had  me  indicted  for  a  disguise.  My 
Granddad  took  me  away,  and  three  weeks  later  when  I  came  back  to 
Clay  County  the  deputy  sheriff  arrested  me.  Then  I  wrote  a  song 
which  tells  the  true  story: 

MR.  CUNDIFF,  WON'T  YOU  TURN  ME  LOOSE? 


The  day  before  Christmas  I  had  some  fun; 

I  went  up  to  Bill  Lewis's  and  made  the  children  run. 

refrain:  Mister  Cundiff,  won't  you  turn  me  loose? 

The  next  Monday  morning  old  Bill  Lewis  took  out  a  writ; 
When  I  found  it  out,  the  wind  I  sure  did  split. 

It  was  just  three  weeks  till  I  came  back  to  Clay, 
Old  Alphus  Cotton  arrested  me  the  very  next  day. 

Then  I  thought  my  case  would  be  light, 
For  Cotton  took  me  before  Judge  Wright. 

Judge  Wright  told  me  I  had  done  wrong 
For  blacking  my  face  and  putting  breeches  on. 

He  listened  to  me  till  I  told  my  tale, 

Then  he  gave  me  ten  days  in  Mister  Cundiff's  fail. 

When  they  put  me  in  fail  they  thought  I  was  a  fool; 
They  didn't  even  give  me  as  much  as  a  stool. 

But  the  jailer's  wife,  she  treated  me  kind 
Because  she  thought  I  had  no  mind. 

Now,  what  she  thought  I  did  not  care; 
I  knew  I  was  as  smart  as  her. 

I  meant  no  harm,  the  only  thing  I  done 

Was  to  black  my  face  and  take  grand-dad' s  big  old  rifle  gun. 

And  play  like  I  was  a  little  black  boy 
I  was  just  having  a  little  fun. 


The  song-makers  *  257 

But  Judge  Wright  told  me  I  had  done  wrong 
For  blacking  my  face  and  putting  breeches  on. 

The  jailer  told  me  I  had  turned  pale 
When  the  judge  told  him  to  put  me  in  jail. 

But  there's  no  use  to  cry  and  snub 

While  I  am  eating  old  Mister  Cundiff  s  grub. 

Though  very  much  better  I  would  do 

If  old  Cundiff  would  furnish  me  some  'backer  to  chew. 

But  I  am  healthy,  young,  and  stout, 

And  if  I  can't  get  any  'backer  I  can  do  without. 

Mister  Cundiff,  if  you  will  open  up  your  jailhouse  door, 
I  will  not  put  my  grand-dad 's  breeches  on  no  more. 

Now  your  old  hymn  book  lies  on  your  shelf; 
If  you  want  any  more  song,  sing  it  yourself. 

All  the  folks  in  Clay  County  thought  the  judge  had  treated  me  all 
wrong,  so  when  they  came  in  town  they  would  come  over  to  the  jail 
and  hear  me  sing  my  song.  Some  would  give  me  money  and  some  of 
them  would  give  me  big  plugs  of  Cup  Greenville6  'backer  (in  them 
days  everybody's  children  chewed  "  'backer,"  as  they  called  it).  So  I 
stayed  in  jail  ten  days  till  my  kinfolks  paid  my  $25  fine,  but  I  come 
out  with  $38  in  money  and  27  plugs  of  Cup  Greenville. 

Aunt  Molly  was  to  have  many  more  experiences  with  a  Law 
that  sent  ten-year-old  children  to  jail. 

At  fourteen  she  married  Jim  Stewart,  a  young  coal  miner. 
Before  she  was  seventeen  she  had  borne  him  two  sons,  and  had 
completed  a  course  of  training  as  a  registered  nurse  and  midwife. 
At  eighteen  she  began  a  practice  in  a  Clay  County  hospital  that 
was  to  last  ten  years,  following  which  she  set  up  her  own  "head- 
quarters" in  Harlan  County,  out  of  which  she  worked  until  she 
had  her  crippling  accident  in  1932.  In  thirty-four  years  as  a  nurse 
and  midwife  she  delivered  884  babies— babies  who  were  to  grow 
up  to  live  on  "lentil  beans  and  corn  bread,  and  live  in  log  cabins 
full  of  cracks  so  big  you  could  throw  big  cats  and  dogs  through." 

Jim  Stewart's  susceptible  constitution  began  to  fail  under  the 
hard  life  in  the  mines,  and  in  1912  he  and  Aunt  Molly  went  to 
Florida  in  an  effort  to  recover  his  health.  During  the  winter  they 

6  "We  called  it  Cup  Greenville  because  there  was  a  tincup-like  on  every  plug." 


258  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

spent  in  Pomona  Aunt  Molly  had  her  first  contact  with  racial 
discrimination. 


I  found  out  how  the  colored  race  is  treated  in  the  deep  South. 
Three  or  four  days  after  I  was  in  Pomona  I  went  to  the  post  office. 
I  saw  an  old  colored  man  coming  on  the  same  side  of  the  street  and 
when  he  saw  me  he  crossed  over  to  the  other  side.  I  said,  "How  do 
you  do,"  and  he  said,  "What  are  you  trying  to  do  to  me,  have  me 
lynched?"  and  he  acted  like  he  was  afraid  of  me,  so  I  asked  a  rich 
white  lady  if  the  colored  folks  in  Florida  thought  they  was  too  good 
to  speak  to  poor  white  folks,  and  she  told  me  a  colored  man  could  be 
lynched  for  speaking  to  a  white  woman. 

One  morning  I  went  to  a  big  wholesale  company  store  and  a  little 
Negro  boy  came  in  to  sweep  the  floor  and  his  white  boss  began  to 
curse  him  for  a  black  son  of  a  B.  Then  he  kicked  the  boy  in  the  back 
and  knocked  him  down  on  his  face  and  broke  his  nose,  and  the  blood 
poured  out  of  that  child's  nose  and  the  boss  kept  kicking  him,  and 
I  called  him  a  low-down  dog.  I  told  him  if  I  had  a  pistol  I  would 
blow  his  stinking  brains  all  over  the  floor.  He  ran  to  the  phone  and 
called  the  police.  "Come  out  here  and  arrest  a  white  woman  for  taking 
sides  with  the  niggers,"  he  said,  so  I  ran  out  the  back  way  and  ran 
home  before  they  caught  me.  The  little  Negro  boy  could  not  have 
been  more  than  ten  years  old. 

A  rock  fall  killed  Jim  Stewart  after  he  had  been  married  to 
Aunt  Molly  twenty-three  years.  During  those  years  other  coal-mine 
tragedies  had  struck  her  family.  A  piece  of  slate  had  fallen  on  her 
father's  head  and  had  destroyed  his  optic  nerves;  a  huge  boulder 
crushed  the  life  out  of  her  brother,  Richard  Garland;  a  rock  and 
slate  slide  killed  her  son.  In  one  family  three  men  died  in  an 
industry  which  paid  them  barely  enough  to  keep  alive,  and  some- 
times not  that  much.  "I  still  hear  hungry  children  cry,"  Aunt 
Molly  remembers.  "I  held  them  in  my  arms  and  saw  them  die 
with  the  diseases  of  poverty— T.B.,  pellagra,  and  the  bloody  flux. 
I  saw  my  own  sister's  little  fourteen-month-old  baby  girl  starve  to 
death  for  milk  while  the  coal  operators  was  riding  around  in  fine 
cars  with  their  wives  and  children  all  dressed  up  in  diamonds  and 
silks,  paid  for  by  the  blood  and  sweat  of  the  coal  miners.  Oh,  how 
can  I  forgive  when  I  can  never  forget?" 

For  forty-seven  years,  from  the  age  of  five  until  her  exile  from 
the  mine  country  in  1931,  she  was  the  life  and  spirit  of  the  Ken- 
tucky miners,  not  only  as  a  nurse  and  midwife,  but  as  a  union 


The  song-makers  *  259 

organizer.  These  forty-seven  years  saw  a  great  many  troubles, 
tragedies,  struggles,  and  victories,  all  of  which  she  chronicled  in 
song,  so  that  the  other  miners  and  miners'  wives  would  neither 
forgive  nor  forget.  In  the  black  days  of  the  Kentucky  miners  dur- 
ing the  first  years  of  the  Depression,  Aunt  Molly  carried  on  a  bitter 
struggle  against  the  operators,  undaunted  by  the  sight  of  her 
fellow  organizers  being  shot  down  in  cold  blood.  "I  have  often 
wondered  why  they  have  not  killed  me— they  have  beat  me  and 
tear-gassed  me  and  had  me  thrown  in  jail.  Ah  yes,  they  tried  to 
get  rid  of  me  but  somehow  they  failed." 

In  1931  her  second  husband,  a  miner  named  Bill  Jackson,  di- 
vorced her  to  free  himself  from  reprisals  made  against  her  because 
of  her  union  activities,7  and  shortly  afterward  she  was  forced  to 
leave  the  state  together  with  other  blacklisted  organizers.  But  her 
oppressor  succeeded  only  in  making  epidemic  a  protest  which  had 
been  endemic.  She  toured  thirty-eight  states  singing  the  troubles 
of  the  miners,  and  begging  funds  for  their  relief. 

Her  first  appeal  outside  Kentucky  was  made  in  New  York's 
Coliseum  before  an  estimated  twenty-one  thousand  people.  To 
introduce  herself  to  the  throng,  Aunt  Molly  composed  this  song: 

/  was  born  and  raised  in  old  Kentucky; 
Molly  Jackson  is  my  name. 
I  came  up  here  to  New  York  city, 
And  I'm  truly  glad  I  came. 

I  am  soliciting  for  the  poor  Kentucky  miners, 
For  their  children  and  their  wives, 
Because  the  miners  are  all  blacklisted 
I  am  compelled  to  save  their  lives. 

The  miners  in  Bell  and  Harlan  counties  organized  a  union; 

This  is  all  the  poor  coal  miners  done, 

Because  the  coal  operators  cut  down  their  wages 

To  33  cents  and  less  a  ton. 

All  this  summer  we  have  had  to  listen 
To  our  hungry  children's  cries; 
Through  the  hot  part  of  the  summer 
Our  little  babies  died  like  flies. 

While  the  coal  operators  and  their  wives 
All  went  dressed  in  jewels  and  silk, 
The  poor  coal  miners'  babies 
Starved  to  death  for  bread  and  milk. 
7  See  the  fourth  stanza  of  "I  Am  a  Union  Woman." 


260  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Now  I  appeal  to  you  in  tender  mercy 
To  give  us  all  you  have  to  give, 
Because  I  love  my  people  dearly 
And  I  want  them  all  to  live. 

I  collected  hatfuls  of  bills  that  night,  and  my  youngest  brother,  Jim 
Garland,  pulled  off  his  two  socks  and  filled  them  full  of  silver,  and 
next  morning  we  sent  over  $900  to  the  starving  miners  and  their 
families.  The  songs  that  I  composed  of  the  true  conditions  of  the 
miners  in  Kentucky  in  1931  and  1932  helped  me  to  collect  thousands 
of  dollars  that  saved  hundreds  of  lives  and  helped  them  to  build  the 
strong  coal  miners'  union  that  they  have  today. 

At  the  end  of  1932,  while  making  appeals  in  Ohio,  she  was 
seriously  injured  when  the  bus  in  which  she  was  riding  turned 
over.  She  instituted  a  damage  suit  against  the  Toledo  Silver  Ex- 
press  Company,  but  while  the  case  crawled  through  the  courts, 
the  company  went  bankrupt.  Then,  like  many  a  folk  ballad-maker 
before  her,  she  eked  out  a  living  composing  songs,  until  she  mar- 
ried her  present  husband,  Gustavos  Stamos.8 

Outside  the  mine  country  she  found  the  forces  of  oppression 
just  as  strong  as  they  were  in  Kentucky.  When  she  came  to  live 
in  New  York  in  1936  she  carried  over  her  fighting  philosophy  of 
"one  for  all  and  all  for  one"  to  the  unemployed  industrial  workers, 
gaining  a  new  reputation  thereby.  While  applying  for  home  relief 
herself  in  1941,  she  was  asked  for  her  birth  certificate.  In  the  argu- 
ment that  followed  Aunt  Molly's  expressed  indignation  that  she 
had  to  have  a  birth  certificate  before  being  eligible  to  eat,  the 
clerk  said  to  her,  "You  talk  like  a  radical.  I  believe  you  are  a  red." 

"This  is  what  a  young  American  learned  girl  said  to  me  in  this 
land  of  the  free.  Oh,  how  foolish  some  people  can  be!  You  see, 
we  did  not  have  any  births  registered  till  1912— a  man  just  came 
around  taking  names;  then  we  knew  we  was  borned,  but  we  didn't 
know  when."9 

Crippled  now  and  nearly  destitute,  Aunt  Molly  fears  that  such 

8  Properly,  Aunt  Molly's  surname  is  now  Stamos,  but  since  the  miners  still  remem- 
ber her  as  Aunt  Molly  Jackson,  I  have  elected  to  call  her  by  that  name. 

9  Reticence  was  never  one  of  Aunt  Molly's  virtues.  When  she  arrived  in  New  York 
in  1936  it  was  Christmas  time,  and  the  utility  companies  would  not  make  installa- 
tions. Typically  militant,  she  marched  down  to  the  electric  company  and  gave  them 
what  for.  "Just  because  Jesus  Christ  was  born  nineteen  hundred  and  thirty-six 
years  ago  I  can't  get  no  electric  today?" 


The  song-makers  *  261 

thoughtless  accusations  will  jeopardize  her  precarious  living.  She 
is  most  concerned  about  the  palpable  Communist  ideology  taken 
on  by  some  of  her  songs  that  have  undergone  considerable  folk 
transmission  and  alteration.  For  example,  the  second  stanza  of 
"The  Murder  of  Harry  Simms"  as  it  was  written  by  Aunt  Molly  is 

Harry  Simms  was  a  pal  of  mine, 
We  labored  side  by  side, 
Expecting  to  be  shot  on  sight 
Or  taken  for  a  ride 
By  some  life-stealing  gun  thug 
That  roams  from  town  to  town 
To  shoot  and  kill  our  union  men 
Wherever  they  may  be  found. 

When  it  came  back  to  Aunt  Molly  years  later  it  had  become 

Harry  Simms  was  a  pal  of  mine, 
We  labored  side  by  side, 
Expecting  to  be  shot  on  sight 
Or  taken  for  a  ride 
By  the  dirty  capitalist  gun  thugs 
That  roam  from  town  to  town, 
Shooting  and  killing  our  Comrades 
Wherever  they  may  be  found. 

and  the  song  itself  had  grown  another  concluding  stanza: 

Comrades,  we  must  vow  today, 

This  one  thing  we  must  do; 

We  must  organize  the  miners, 

In  the  dear  old  NMU; 

And  get  a  million  volunteers 

Into  the  YCL 

And  sink  this  rotten  system 

In  the  deepest  pits  of  hell. 

She  becomes  annoyed  at  any  gratuitous  changes  in  her  songs; 
when  the  changes  imply  a  foreign  source  for  her  independent 
thinking,  she  becomes  incensed. 

I've  been  framed  up  and  accused  of  being  a  Red  when  I  did  not 
understand  what  they  meant.  I  never  heard  tell  of  a  Communist  until 
after  I  left  Kentucky— then  I  had  passed  fifty— but  they  called  me  a 


262  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Red.  I  got  all  of  my  progressive  ideas  from  my  hard  tough  struggles, 
and  nowhere  else. 

Some  of  these  hard  tough  struggles  are  told  in  the  following 
songs.  Wherever  possible,  I  have  let  Aunt  Molly  make  her  own 
introductions.10 

HARD  TIMES  IN  COLMAN's  MINES 

"This  is  a  song  I  composed  in  19  and  10  at  a  mining  company  in 
Bell  County,  Kentucky,  when  I  was  trying  to  get  the  miners  to  come 
out  on  strike  for  eight  hours  and  better  pay,  and  for  decent  homes  to 
live  in.  I  would  sing  this  song  and  then  I  would  make  a  long  speech, 
and  this  way  I  organized  that  group  of  miners  while  they  was  in  my 
reach.  Colman  was  the  name  of  the  coal  operator.  He  was  working 
over  400  men  in  this  way  in  19  and  10.  This  song  will  tell  you  the 
awful  condition  the  miners  was  in." 


fc 


]  J   J  j  J-      J'   J 
L>   -4-4- 


m—m- 


1'JJiJj  j  Jmjjpi 


0— 0 


l  J      1  J       J 1  1    1    1 1  , 

0 >-*     4 — 4  ■   J_. 


Come  out  on  strike,  boys,  it's  all  you  can  do; 
Old  Colman  gets  rich  making  slaves  out  of  you. 

refrain:  It's  a  hard  time  in  Colman' s  mines, 
A  hard  time  we  know. 

Take  my  advice,  boys,  I'll  tell  you  what  to  do, 
If  you  will  stand  by  me,  I'll  see  you  through. 

You  get  up  in  the  morning,  all  you  got  to  eat 
Is  corn  bread  and  water  gravy  without  any  meat. 
lf>  Aunt  Molly  Jackson  has  recorded  204  songs  for  the  Library  of  Congress  Archive 

of  American  Folk  Song,  many  of  which  are  available,  though  at  a  prohibitive  cost. 

However,  her  recording  of  "The  Little  Dove"  and  "Ten  Thousand  Miles"  may  be 

had  at  a  reasonable  price. 


Poor  miner's  farewell  *  263 

We're  cold  and  hungry,  no  shoes  on  our  feet, 
Corn  bread  and  wild  greens  is  all  we  got  to  eat. 

The  best  we  got  to  live  in  is  small  one-room  shacks, 
Kin  throw  your  dogs  and  cats  through  the  cracks. 

When  you're  asked  about  moving,  all  you  can  say, 
"We're  so  poor  and  hungry,  we  can't  get  away." 

Unite  and  stick  together,  boys,  it's  all  that  can  be  done, 
Throw  down  your  tools,  walk  out  in  the  sun. 

If  we  all  get  together,  one  for  all  and  all  for  one, 
We  can  put  these  hard  times  on  the  run. 

So  come  out  on  strike,  boys,  it's  all  you  can  do, 
Old  Colman  gets  rich  making  fools  out  of  you. 

poor  miner's  farewell 

"I  composed  this  song  one  day  while  I  was  walking  along  thinking 
of  how  soon  a  coal  miner  is  forgotten  after  he  is  dead.  The  day  I  com- 
posed this  song  I  never  will  forget;  it  was  about  three  weeks  after  my 
own  dear  brother  was  killed.  I  found  my  brother's  three  oldest  children 
out  on  the  street.  They  told  me  they  had  been  over  to  a  store  to  try 
to  get  some  food.  They  said,  'We  are  out  of  money,  and  we  have  been 
all  over  town  trying  to  get  some  groceries  on  time,  but  everyone  has 
turned  us  down.'  Then  my  brother's  little  blue-eyed  boy  looked  up 
at  me  so  sweet  and  said  to  me,  'Aunt  Molly,  will  you  get  us  some  food 
to  eat?'  So  I  walked  along  back  home  that  evening,  feeling  so  sad, 
and  thinking  of  my  brother's  dear  children  left  without  a  dad.  So  I 
composed  this  song." 

They  leave  their  dear  wives  and  little  ones  too, 
To  earn  them  a  living  as  miners  all  do; 
Poor  hard-working  miners,  their  troubles  are  great 
So  often  while  mining  they  meet  their  sad  fate. 

refrain:  Only  a  miner  killed  under  the  ground, 
Only  a  miner  and  one  more  is  found; 
Killed  by  some  accident,  there's  no  one  can  tell 
Your  mining's  all  over,  poor  miner,  farewell. 

Poor  orphaned  children,  thrown  out  on  the  street 
Ragged  and  hungry,  with  nothing  to  eat. 
Their  mothers  are  jobless  and  their  fathers  are  dead; 
Poor  fatherless  children,  left  a-crying  for  bread. 

When  I'm  in  Kentucky  so  often  I  meet 

Poor  coal  miners'  children  out  on  the  street. 

"How  are  you  doing?"  to  them  I  said. 

"We're  hungry,  Aunt  Molly,  we're  begging  for  bread." 


264  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

T-BONE  SLIM 

This  is  the  story  of  T-Bone  Slim.11  He  told  me  how  he  got  put  in 
jail  for  a  year  and  a  day.  He  said  he  had  tried  to  get  a  job  for  two 
months,  and  had  been  picked  up  as  a  vagrant  different  times  till  he 
had  become  desperate.  He  had  not  eat  a  bite  in  two  days,  he  said,  and 
it  had  been  ten  weeks  since  he  had  lain  in  a  bed.  He  was  so  cold 
and  hungry  he  said  he  was  desperate.  When  he  saw  this  old  "big  shot," 
as  he  called  him,  he  just  knocked  the  big  shot  down,  and  took  his  suit 
of  clothes,  watch,  money  and  all.  Just  as  he  was  taking  off  the  old 
man's  shoes  he  saw  some  men  coming  and  he  ran  off  with  the  fine  suit 
on  and  a  high  top  hat,  and  when  they  saw  him  with  his  old  ragged 
shoes  and  that  high  silk  hat  and  that  fine  suit  of  clothes,  they  grabbed 
him  and  pulled  him  before  the  judge.  He  said  when  they  turned  him 
out  he  did  not  have  a  cent  and  he  could  not  get  a  job  for  food  and 
rent.  He  said  he  did  not  want  to  steal  and  rob;  he  said  he  began  to 
wonder  how  he  could  find  a  job.  He  said  he  was  almost  out  of  his  mind 
when  he  went  down  on  the  water  front  and  joined  the  seamen's  picket 
line.  I  was  leading  the  picket  line  and  I  met  him  there.  In  the  seamen's 
union  hall  he  told  me  this  story.  I  remembered  it  all,  and  a  few  days 
later  I  composed  this  song.  Old  T-Bone  Slim  got  sunk  in  a  ship  when 
World  World  II  come  along.  He  was  a  good  union  seaman,  but  he  is 
dead  and  gone.12 

As  I  went  walking  down  Peacock  Street, 
No  clothes  on  my  back,  no  shoes  on  my  feet, 
I  was  hungry  and  cold,  it  was  late  in  the  fall, 
I  knocked  down  some  old  big  shot,  took  his  clothes,  money, 
and  all. 

refrain:  Oh,  tell  me  how  long  must  I  wait  for  a  job? 

I  don't  like  to  steal,  I  don't  like  to  have  to  rob. 

When  I  took  everything  this  old  big  shot  had, 
They  called  me  a  robber,  yes,  they  called  me  bad. 
They  called  me  a  robber,  yes,  they  called  me  bad, 
Because  misery  and  starvation  drove  me  mad. 

They  locked  me  up  for  a  year  and  a  day 
For  taking  that  old  big  shot's  money  away. 
Now  they  turned  me  out  about  an  hour  ago 
To  walk  the  streets  in  the  rain  and  the  snow. 

11  T-Bone  Slim  was  the  famous  I  WW  columnist  who  coined  the  term  "Brisbanal- 
ity."  He  was  the  author  of  the  great  IWW  song,  "The  Popular  Wobbly,"  and  others. 

12  Note  the  rime  slipping  into  Aunt  Molly's  prose. 


My  disgusted  blues  *  265 

No  clothes  on  my  back,  no  shoes  on  my  feet; 
Now  a  man  can't  live  just  walkin'  the  street. 
I'd  no  money  for  room  rent,  no  place  to  sleep; 
Now  a  man  can't  live  just  walkin'  the  street. 

Now  a  man  can't  live  with  no  food  to  eat, 

I'll  be  sorry  to  my  heart  if  I  have  to  repeat. 

If  I  knocked  down  some  old  big  shot,  and  took  all  his  kale, 

Then  they'll  put  me  back  in  that  lousy  jail. 

MY  DISGUSTED  BLUES 

This  is  one  of  my  blues.  I  made  this  up  in  19  and  41,  when  I  was 
out  of  a  job  and  out  of  cash,  just  leading  a  picket  line  for  them  un- 
employed friends  of  mine.  Just  think  of  your  Aunt  Molly  Jackson, 
with  great  satisfaction,  leading  a  picket  line  full  of  sorrow  and  pity,  in 
19  and  41,  in  New  York  city. 

I  get  up  every  morning 
Feeling  so  disgusted  and  blue, 
Because  I  have  no  money 
And  I  can't  get  no  work  to  do. 

refrain:  Trouble,  trouble,  is  all  I  ever  see 

Because  I  met  so  many  people  that  tries  to  make 

a  slave  out  of  me. 
Trouble,  trouble,  I  worry  all  day  long 
Because  everything  I  do  something  goes  on  wrong. 

When  you  have  a  lot  of  money 
You  have  a  lot  of  friends  come  around; 
But  when  you  are  broke  and  disgusted 
Not  one  friend  can  be  found. 

Yes,  trouble  and  disappointments 

Is  all  I  ever  find; 

I  believe  that  trouble  and  disappointments 

Will  destroy  my  worried  mind. 

LONESOME   JAILHOUSE  BLUES 

It  originated  from  a  bunch  of  'em  a-gettin'  mad  at  me  because  I  took 
part  in  a  strike,  and  they  framed  me  and  had  me  put  in  jail.  This  was 
in  Clay  County,  three  miles  above  Manchester,  up  on  Horse  Creek. 
This  happened  in  '31.  I  picked  the  melody  and  then  composed  the 
words  to  fit  the  melody. 

Listen,  friends  and  workers, 

I  have  some  very  sad  news; 

Your  Aunt  Molly's  locked  up  in  prison 

With  the  lonesome  jailhouse  blues. 


266  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

You  may  find  some  one  will  tell  you 
The  jailhouse  blues  ain't  bad; 
They're  the  worst  kind  of  blues 
Your  Aunt  Molly  ever  had. 

I  joined  the  miner's  union, 
That  made  them  mad  at  me. 
Now  I  am  locked  up  in  prison 
Just  as  lonesome  as  I  can  be. 

I  am  locked  up  in  prison 
Walking  on  the  concrete  floor. 
When  I  leave  here  this  time, 
I  don't  want  to  be  here  no  more. 

Because  I  joined  the  union 

They  framed  up  a  lot  of  lies  on  me; 

They  had  me  put  in  prison 

I  am  just  as  lonesome  as  I  can  be. 

I  am  locked  up  in  prison, 
Just  as  lonesome  as  I  can  be; 
I  want  you  to  write  me  a  letter 
To  the  dear  old  ILD. 

Tell  them  that  I  am  in  prison 
Then  they  will  know  what  to  do. 
The  bosses  had  me  put  in  jail 
For  joining  the  NMU. 

This  NMU  means  union 

Many  thousand  strong; 

And  if  you  will  come  and  join  us 

We  will  teach  you  right  from  wrong. 

HUNGRY  RAGGED  BLUES 

On  the  seventh  day  of  May,  19  and  30,  during  the  strike,  the  miners 
built  a  soup  kitchen  out  of  slabs  over  in  a  meadow.  When  it  was  fin- 
ished I  told  all  of  the  wives  to  bring  everything  we  had  from  our 
mining  shacks  and  put  it  all  together,  and  go  around  and  collect  vege- 
tables from  the  farmers  to  make  soup  as  long  as  the  farmers  had  any- 
thing to  give.  By  the  middle  of  October  we  was  desperate;  we  did 
not  see  how  we  was  going  to  live.  For  two  or  three  days  we  did  not 
have  anything  to  make  soup  out  of.  On  the  17th  morning  in  October 
my  sister's  little  girl  waked  me  up  early.  She  had  15  little  ragged 
children  and  she  was  taking  them  around  to  the  soup  kitchen  to  try 
to  get  them  a  bowl  of  soup.  She  told  me  some  of  them  children  had 


The  song-makers  •  267 

not  eat  anything  in  two  days.  It  was  a  cold  rainy  morning;  the  little 
children  was  all  bare-looted,  and  the  blood  was  running  out  of  the 
tops  of  their  little  feet  and  dripping  down  between  their  little  toes 
onto  the  ground.  You  could  track  them  to  the  soup  kitchen  by  the 
blood.  After  they  had  passed  by  I  just  set  down  by  the  table  and  began 
to  wonder  what  to  try  to  do  next.  Then  I  began  to  sing  out  my  blues 
to  express  my  feeling.  This  song  comes  from  the  heart  and  not  just 
from  the  point  of  a  pen. 


3 


^Sl 


3=3 


3 


S83 


3 


K 


>JJJJjiiJJppAJij,a 


hi     hi  K  N  K  M 


m* 


9— 0—0—0— m 


f 


I'm  sad  and  weary,  I  got  those  hungry  ragged  blues; 
I'm  sad  and  weary,  I  got  those  hungry  ragged  blues; 
Not  a  penny  in  my  pocket  to  buy  one  thing  I  need  to  use. 

I  woke  up  this  morning  with  the  worst  blues  I  ever  had  in  my  life; 
I  woke  up  this  morning  with  the  worst  blues  I  ever  had  in  my  life; 
Not  a  bite  to  cook  for  breakfast,  poor  coal  miner's  wife. 

When  my  husband  works  in  the  coal  mine  he  loads  a  car  most 

every  trip; 
When  my  husband  works  in  the  coal  mine  he  loads  a  car  most 

every  trip; 
Then  he  goes  to  the  office  that  evening  and  gets  denied  his  scrip. 

Just  because  it  took  all  he  made  that  day  to  pay  his  mine  expense; 
Just  because  it  took  all  he  made  that  day  to  pay  his  mine  expense; 
A  man  that'll  work  for  coalite  and  carbide  ain't  got  a  lick  of  sense. 

All  the  women  in  the  coal  camp  are  sitting  with  bowed-down  heads; 
All  the  women  in  the  coal  camp  are  sitting  with  bowed-down  heads; 
Ragged  and  barefooted  and  their  children  a-crying  for  bread. 


268  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

This  mining  town  I  live  in  is  a  dead  and  lonely  place; 
This  mining  town  I  live  in  is  a  dead  and  lonely  place; 
Where  pity  and  starvation  are  pictured  on  every  face. 

Oh,  don't  go  under  that  mountain  with  the  slate  a-hanging  over 

your  head; 
Oh,  don't  go  under  that  mountain  with  the  slate  a-hanging  over 

your  head; 
And  work  for  just  coalite  and  carbide  and  your  children  a-crying 

for  bread. 

Oh,  listen,  friends  and  workers,  please  take  a  friend's  advice; 
Oh,  listen,  friends  and  workers,  please  take  a  friend's  advice; 
Don't  load  no  more,  don't  pull  no  more,  till  you  get  a  living  price. 

FARE  YE  WELL,  OLD  ELY  BRANCH 

Old  Hughes,  the  coal  operator  up  at  Ely  Branch,  had  been  expect- 
ing a  strike  for  two  weeks'  back  pay,  so  he  didn't  order  nothing  for 
the  commissary.  There  was  nothing  left  but  dried  beef  and  canned 
tomatoes.  Now  my  husband  liked  a  lot  to  eat,  and  since  you  can't  buy 
food  nowhere  else  excepting  at  the  commissary,  he  decided  we  got  to 
leave.  He  was  a  machinist  and  was  missed  more  than  any  other  one 
of  the  men.  Also  we  had  just  moved  into  our  first  new  house.  It  was 
all  nice  and  wallpapered  up,  and  golly,  I  felt  sorry  to  leave.  So  I  com- 
posed this  piece  and  went  down  and  dropped  it  by  the  spring  where 
all  the  women  had  to  go  to  get  water,  so  that  it  would  get  around 
without  no  one  knowing  who  wrote  it.  But  Mrs.  Burrow,  she  saw  me, 
and  said,  "What's  that  you  dropping  down?  A  love  letter?"  So  I  showed 
it  to  her  and  told  her,  "Don't  you  say  nothing  about  who  wrote  it." 
But  Jack  Welsh's  wife,  she  knew  my  handwriting  'cause  I'd  writ  some 
letters  for  her,  and  pretty  soon  to  my  house  come  John  Yager,  the 
bookkeeper  down  at  the  store.  He  says,  "I'll  give  you  $5.00  if  you 
make  up  a  tune  to  that."  So  I  sat  right  down  and  sang  out  a  tune 
right  off.  Later,  after  we  moved,  old  Hughes  met  me  and  said,  "You 
didn't  do  me  no  harm  by  that  song.  I  printed  it  up  and  made  fifty 
dollars  selling  copies  at  twenty  cents  apiece  to  the  men." 

(Tune:  "Old  Joe  Clark") 

Fare  ye  well,  old  Ely  Branch, 

Fare  ye  well,  I  say; 

Vm  tired  of  living  on  dried  beef  and  tomatoes 

And  Vm  a-goin'  away. 

When  we  had  a  strike  in  Ely  this  spring 
These  words  old  Hughes  did  say: 
"Come  along  boys,  go  back  to  work, 
We'll  give  you  the  two  weeks'  pay." 


I  am   a   union  woman  •  269 

When  they  put  on  their  mining  clothes 
Hard  work  again  they  tried, 
And  when  old  pay  day  rolled  around 
They  found  old  Hughes  had  lied. 

When  Hughes  thinks  his  mines  was  going  to  stop, 
A  sight  to  see  him  frown; 
There's  gas  enough  in  old  Hughes 
To  blow  these  mountains  down. 

Oh,  take  your  children  out  of  Ely  Branch 

Before  they  cry  for  bread; 

For  when  old  Hughes'  debts  are  paid, 

He  won't  be  worth  a  thread. 

i 

Hughes  claims  he  owns  more  mines  than  these; 
He  says  he's  got  money  to  lend. 
And  when  old  pay  day  rolls  around 
He  can't  pay  off  his  men. 

I'd  rather  be  in  Pineville  jail 
With  my  back  all  covered  with  lice, 
Than  to  be  here  in  old  Hughes'  coal  mines 
Digging  coal  at  Hughes'  price. 

I  think  John  Yager's  a  very  nice  man 

He's  the  same  old  John  every  day; 

But  a  man  can't  live  on  dried  beef  and  tomatoes, 

So  I'm  a  goin'  away. 

Fare  ye  well,  old  Ely  Branch, 

Fare  ye  well,  I  say; 

Fm  tired  of  living  on  dried  beef  and  tomatoes 

And  I'm  a-goin'  away. 

I  AM  A  UNION  WOMAN 

When  I  was  organizing  the  miners  around  Bell  and  Harlan  counties 
in  19  and  31  I  sang  this  song.  I  used  it  in  my  organizational  work; 
I  always  sang  this  song  before  giving  my  speech. 

(For  music,  see  "Which  Side  Are  You  on?"  p.  170.) 

/  am  a  union  woman, 

As  brave  as  I  can  be; 

I  do  not  like  the  bosses, 

And  the  bosses  don't  like  me. 

refrain:  Join  the  NMU, 

Come  join  the  NMU. 


270  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

/  was  raised  in  old  Kentucky, 
In  Kentucky  horned  and  bred; 
And  when  I  joined  the  union 
They  called  me  a  Rooshian  Red. 

When  my  husband  asked  the  boss  for  a  job 
These  is  the  words  he  said: 
"Bill  Jackson,  I  can't  work  you  sir, 
Your  wife's  a  Rooshian  Red." 

This  is  the  worst  time  on  earth 
That  I  have  ever  saw; 
To  get  shot  down  by  gun  thugs 
And  framed  up  by  the  law. 

If  you  want  to  join  a  union 
As  strong  as  one  can  be, 
Join  the  dear  old  NMU 
And  come  along  with  me. 

We  are  many  thousand  strong 
And  I  am  glad  to  say, 
We  are  getting  stronger 
And  stronger  every  day. 

The  bosses  ride  fine  horses 
While  we  walk  in  the  mud; 
Their  banner  is  a  dollar  sign 
While  ours  is  striped  with  blood. 

EAST  OHIO  MINERS'  STRIKE 

This  was  composed  in  19  and  32  to  explain  what  condition  the 
miners  was  in  at  that  time,  to  make  an  appeal  for  money. 

Come  all  you  fellow  workers, 

Listen  to  what  I  have  to  say. 

The  East  Ohio  miners 

They're  standing  on  the  picket  line  today. 

They're  fighting  starvation  wage  cuts; 
Listen  to  what  the  operators  done: 
They  cut  the  poor  miner's  wages  down 
To  twenty-three  cents  a  ton. 

Then  the  miners  told  them 
Just  what  they  aimed  to  do. 
"We'll  fight  starvation  wage  cuts 
By  joining  the  NMU." 


The  song-makers  *  271 

The  NMU  is  a  miners'  union; 
They're  fighting  hand,  in  hand 
Against  starvation  wage  cuts. 
"Bread  and  freedom  is  our  demand." 

Oh,  these  operators'  wives, 
They  wear  their  diamond  rings; 
The  miners'  wives  and  children 
They  wear  just  any  old  thing. 
Yes,  we  wear  just  any  old  thing. 

While  the  miners  are  striking 
They're  struggling  hand  in  hand; 
It  is  our  duty,  fellow  workers, 
To  help  them  all  we  can. 

Their  children  are  all  hungry, 
And  oh!  How  sad  I  feel. 
Will  you  help  us,  fellow  workers, 
And  hear  our  loud  appeal? 

THE  DEATH  OF  HARRY  SIMMS 

My  brother  Jim  was  the  district  organizer  in  19  and  31  when  Harry 
Simms  was  sent  to  Bell  County  to  help  him  with  the  miners'  union. 
Harry  Simms  was  staying  at  Jim's  house,  and  when  he  left  the  house 
at  5:00  the  morning  he  was  killed,  he  told  Jim,  "It's  my  job  to  lead 
the  miners  to  Pineville,  and  gun  thugs  or  no  gun  thugs,  I'm  going. 
If  they  pop  me  off,  don't  waste  no  time  grieving  after  me,  keep  right 
on  going.  We'll  win."  You  see,  Jim  told  him  that  the  Brush  Creek 
coal  operators  had  offered  any  gun  thug  one  thousand  dollars  to  kill 
Jim  or  Harry  Simms.  So  he  met  this  gun  thug  on  the  railroad  track, 
and  the  thug  shot  him  in  the  stomach.  They  took  him  and  another 
union  man  who  was  with  him  to  town,  and  put  the  other  fellow  into 
jail.  They  left  Harry  Simms  sitting  on  a  rock  in  front  of  the  town 
hospital  with  a  bullet  in  his  stomach.  He  sat  there  on  the  rock  an  hour 
or  more  with  his  hands  on  his  stomach,  bleeding  to  death.  He  was 
sitting  there  because  the  hospital  wouldn't  take  him  in  till  somebody 
guaranteed  to  pay  his  bill.  After  awhile  a  man  said  he  would  pay  the 
bill,  so  they  took  Harry  in,  but  it  was  too  late. 

The  gun  thug  got  away  and  hid  in  the  caves  for  six  months,  and 
one  night  he  started  to  cross  the  road  and  someone  shot  him  six  times 
with  a  Colt  .45  pistol  all  around  his  heart,  then  whoever  it  was  shot 
him,  cut  off  his  head  and  throwed  it  on  the  other  side  of  the  road. 

Harry  Simms  was  shot,  as  Aunt  Molly  tells,  on  his  way  to  Pine- 
ville. His  mission  was  to  lead  the  Brush  Creek  miners  to  the  town, 
where  they  were  to  collect  five  truckloads  of  food  and  clothing 


272  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

sent  to  them  from  outside  the  state.  Feeling  ran  high  in  Bell 
County  during  the  trial  of  the  two  implicated  gun  thugs.  When 
they  were  summarily  acquitted,  they  had  to  be  taken  out  of  the 
area  under  the  protection  of  over  a  thousand  troopers  and  special 
police. 


SEI 


g§ 


£^ 


^HP-# 


-# 


FbJJJJlJ^    JlpJrrlcl     J  « 


w 


-& 


-e-1 


i 


f 


-# 


Come  and  listen  to  my  story, 
Come  and  listen  to  my  song. 
I'll  tell  you  of  a  hero 
That  is  now  dead  and  gone; 
I'll  tell  you  of  a  young  boy, 
His  age  it  was  nineteen; 
He  was  the  bravest  union  man 
That  ever  I  have  seen. 

Harry  Simms  was  a  pal  of  mine, 
We  labored  side  by  side, 
Expecting  to  be  shot  on  sight 
Or  taken  for  a  ride 
By  some  life-stealing  gun  thug 
That  roams  from  town  to  town 
To  shoot  and  kill  our  union  men 
Where  e'er  they  may  be  found. 


The  song-makers  ■  273 

Harry  Simms  and  I  was  parted 

At  five  o'clock  that  day. 

"Be  careful,  my  dear  brother" 

To  Harry  I  did  say. 

"Now  I  must  do  my  duty" 

Was  his  reply  to  me; 

"If  I  get  killed  by  gun  thugs 

Don't  grieve  after  me." 

Harry  Simms  was  walking  up  the  track 

That  bright  sunshiny  day. 

He  was  a  youth  of  courage, 

His  steps  was  light  and  gay; 

He  did  not  know  the  gun  thugs 

Was  hiding  on  the  way 

To  kill  our  brave  young  hero 

That  bright  sunshiny  day. 

Harry  Simms  was  killed  on  Brush  Creek 

In  nineteen  thirty-two; 

He  organized  the  miners 

Into  the  NMU; 

He  gave  his  life  in  struggle 

'Twos  all  that  he  could  do; 

He  died  for  the  union, 

He  died  for  me  and  you. 

The  thugs  can  kill  our  leaders 
And  cause  us  to  shed  tears, 
But  they  cannot  kill  our  spirit 
If  they  try  a  million  years. 
We  have  learned  our  lesson 
Now  we  all  realize 
A  union  struggle  must  go  on 
Till  we  are  organized. 

DREADFUL  MEMORIES 

In  19  and  31  the  Kentucky  coal  miners  was  asked  to  dig  coal  for  33 
cents  a  ton  and  they  had  to  pay  the  company  for  the  carbide  to  make 
a  light  and  coalite  to  shock  the  coal.  And  they  had  to  pay  for  their 
picks  and  augers  to  be  sharpened— the  coal  company  took  one  dollar 
from  each  man's  wages  every  month  for  having  their  picks  and  augers 
sharpened.  And  each  man  paid  two  dollars  a  month  for  a  company 
doctor  even  if  he  did  not  have  to  call  the  doctor  once.  All  we  had  to 
make  a  light  in  our  shacks  was  kerosene  lamps,  and  after  the  miners 
was  blacklisted  for  joining  the  union  March  5,  1931,  the  company 
doctor  refused  to  come  to  any  one  of  the  coal  miner's  families  unless 


274  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

he  was  paid  in  advance.  So  I  had  to  nurse  all  the  little  children  till 
the  last  breath  left  them,  and  all  the  light  I  had  was  a  string  in  a  can 
lid  with  a  little  bacon  grease  in  it.  Kerosene  was  five  cents  a  quart, 
and  I  could  not  get  five  cents.  Thirty-seven  babies  died  in  my  arms 
in  the  last  three  months  of  1931.  Their  little  stomach  busted  open; 
they  was  mortified  inside.  Oh,  what  an  awful  way  for  a  baby  to  die. 
Not  a  thing  to  give  our  babies  to  eat  but  the  strong  soup  from  soup 
beans,  and  that  took  the  lining  from  their  little  stomachs,  so  that  they 
bled  inside  and  mortified,  and  died.  And  died  so  hard  that  before  we 
got  help  from  other  states  my  nerves  was  so  stirred  up  for  four  years 
afterward  by  the  memory  of  them  babies  suffering  and  dying  in  my 
arms,  and  me  sitting  by  their  little  dead  bodies  three  or  four  hours 
before  daylight  in  the  dark  to  keep  some  hungry  dog  or  cat  from  eat- 
ing up  their  little  dead  bodies.  Then  four  years  later  I  still  had  such 
sad  memories  of  these  babies  that  I  wrote  this  song. 


I  J'J'j.ir  r-^ip 


to.  j'i'M  m  ir  V^i 


Dreadful  memories!  How  they  linger; 
How  they  pain  my  precious  soul. 
Little  children,  sick  and  hungry, 
Sick  and  hungry,  weak  and  cold. 

Little  children,  cold  and  hungry, 
Without  any  food  at  all  to  eat. 
They  had  no  clothes  to  put  on  their  bodies; 
They  had  no  shoes  to  put  on  their  feet. 

refrain:  Dreadful  memories!  How  they  linger; 
How  they  fill  my  heart  with  pain. 
Oh,  how  hard  I've  tried  to  forget  them 
But  I  find  it  all  in  vain. 

I  can't  forget  them,  little  babies, 
With  golden  hair  as  soft  as  silk; 
Slowly  dying  from  starvation, 
Their  parents  could  not  give  them  milk. 


The  song-makers  *  275 

/  can't  forget  them,  coal  miners'  children, 
That  starved  to  death  without  one  drop  of  milk, 
While  the  coal  operators  and  their  wives  and  children 
Were  all  dressed  in  jewels  and  silk. 

Dreadful  memories!  How  they  haunt  me 
As  the  lonely  moments  fly. 
Oh,  how  them  little  babies  suffered! 
I  saw  them  starve  to  death  and  die. 


Woody  Guthrie 

They  just  dont  make  em  no  honerier  than  me.  It  looks  like  Im  a 
doing  everything  I  can  to  make  a  hobo  out  of  me.  I  get  good  chances 
to  get  on  the  radio  and  make  a  little  money  and  get  a  start  up  the 
old  ladder,  but  then  that  honery  streak  comes  out  and  I  ruin  the  whole 
thing.  I  kick  myself  in  the  britches  pretty  hard  some  times.  You  dont 
hate  me  any  worse  than  I  do.  You  dont  bawl  me  out  any  more  than 
I  do.  Oh  well,  dam  it  all  anyhow,  I  never  really  set  my  head  on  a 
being  a  public  figure.  Its  all  what  you  mean  when  you  say  success. 
Most  of  the  time  success  ain't  much  fun.  Lots  of  times  it  takes  a  lot 
of  posing  and  pretending. 

In  these  words,  scribbled  in  a  moment  of  depression 
on  the  back  of  the  manuscript  of  his  "Jailhouse  Blues,"  Woody 
Guthrie  tries  to  explain  why  he  is  a  failure.  "Everybody  tells  me 
how  good  I  am,"  he  says,  "but  I  can't  make  a  living  for  my  wife 
and  kids."  This  general  praise  of  which  Guthrie  speaks  has  come 
not  only  from  workers  who  have  been  inspired  by  his  union  songs 
or  from  dilettantes  who  find  his  unusual  method  of  delivery  for 
the  moment  quaint,  but  from  eminent  folklorists  and  musicol- 
ogists as  well.  The  Library  of  Congress  called  him  "our  best 
contemporary  ballad  composer"13;  Alan  Lomax  goes  further  to 
say  Guthrie  is  "the  best  folk  ballad  composer  whose  identity  has 
ever  been  known";  Elie  Siegmeister  calls  him  a  "rusty-voiced 
Homer."14 

Guthrie's  self-recrimination  is  not,  as  he  believes  it  is,  an  ex- 

13  Prefatory  notes  to  Guthrie's  recording  of  "The  Gypsy  Davy,"  in  the  Archive  of 
American  Folk  Song  Album  I. 

14  Elie  Siegmeister,  A  Treasury  of  American  Folk  Song,  New  York,  1943. 


276  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

planation  for  his  failure— as  the  world  defines  failure;  his  "honeri- 
ness"  is  an  effect  rather  than  a  cause,  an  expression  of  frustration 
born  of  many  injuries,  physical  and  psychological.  His  tragic 
boyhood;  his  inability  to  understand  why  his  fight  against  the 
oppression  of  the  poor  by  the  rich  should  make  him  the  object 
of  official  surveillance;  his  childhood  companions'  accusation  that 
his  birth  had  driven  his  mother  insane;  the  death  of  his  sister 
through  fire  and  the  repetition  of  the  tragedy  years  later  when 
his  little  daughter  was  burned  to  death;  the  shocking  discovery 
that  his  children  by  a  former  marriage  had  grown  to  represent 
the  racial  bigotry  he  had  dedicated  his  life  against— all  these  and 
many  more  psychological  traumata  left  deep  scars  of  which  his 
extreme  self-consciousness— in  itself  fatal  to  a  public  entertainer- 
is  only  the  most  obvious. 

Nor  can  this  "honeriness,"  even  in  the  superficial  significance 
given  to  it  by  Guthrie,  be  condemned  as  reprehensible,  for  it 
consists  of  his  shyness  acting  upon  an  innate,  inexpressed  integrity 
which  prevents  him  from  pandering,  as  some  of  his  old  com- 
panions have  done,  to  "what  the  public  wants."  So  disillusioned 
has  he  become  through  the  defections  of  these  friends  that  he  uses 
even  the  term  "folk  music"  with  noticeable  hesitation,  explaining 
that  he  usually  hears  the  words  from  the  mouths  of  "silk-stocking 
balladeers."  His  definition  of  "silk-stocking  balladeers"  moves  on 
the  borders  of  the  unquotable,  but  in  its  expurgated  essence,  it 
describes  those  inferior  tenors  whom  competition  in  the  popular 
field  has  driven  into  swank  night  clubs  and  parlors  of  society 
matrons,  where  they  pass  off  forgotten  Scottish  ballads  and  watered- 
down  versions  of  lusty  frontier  songs  as  living  folk  music. 

"I  won't  say  that  my  guitar  playing  or  singing  is  anything  fancy 
on  a  stick,"  Guthrie  once  wrote.  "I'd  rather  sound  like  the  cab 
drivers  cursing  at  each  other,  like  the  longshoremen  yelling,  like 
the  cowhands  whooping  and  the  lone  wolf  barking— like  anything 
in  this  big  green  universe  than  to  sound  slick,  smooth-tongued, 
oily-lipped." 

Too  many  of  the  "good  chances  to  get  on  the  radio"  which 
he  has  been  offered  are  like  his  audition  in  Rockefeller  Center's 
Rainbow  Room,  where  the  "shrimps  are  boiled  in  Standard  Oil." 

"They  offered  me  a  job  at  $75  a  week,"  Guthrie  relates.  "That 
was  about  $70  more  than  I'd  ever  got  for  regular  singing  before, 


The  song-makers  •  277 

so  I  said  to  myself,  'Boy,  you  got  you  a  job.'  But  when  they  tried 
to  rig  me  up  in  whiskers  and  a  hillbilly  clown  suit,  I  ducked  into 
the  elevator  and  rode  the  65  stories  back  down  to  the  U.S.A. 
Made  up  a  song  about  it  as  I  was  going  down,  went, 

Never  comirC  back  to  this  man's  town  again; 
Never  comin'  back  to  this  man's  town  again; 
Ain't  never  comin'  back  to  this  man's  town  again, 
Singin'  "Hey,  hey,  hey,  hey." 

Like  all  the  composers  of  the  better  songs  of  protest,  Guthrie 
has  had  a  life  of  almost  continuous  hardship.  Only  the  earliest 
years,  spent  in  Okemah,  Oklahoma,  where  he  was  born  in  1912, 
were  in  any  measure  happy.  Before  the  first  World  War  Okemah 
was,  as  Guthrie  puts  it,  the  "singingest,  dancingest,  walkingest, 
talkingest,  laughingest,  yellingest,  preachingest,  cryingest,  drink- 
ingest,  gamblingest,  fist-fightingest,  shootingest,  bleedingest,  gun-, 
club-,  and  razor-carryingest  of  the  oil  boom  towns."  Ominously, 
it  was  also  in  the  heart  of  what  was  later  to  become  the  Dust  Bowl. 
There  young  Guthrie  sold  newspapers,  danced  street  jigs,  and 
sang  for  pennies  the  traditional  songs  that  were  the  heritage  of 
the  old  Indian  territory  residents. 

His  father  was  the  embodied  spirit  of  the  oil  boom.  A  big, 
lusty,  expansive  Texan,  a  trained  pugilist  and  professional  guitar- 
ist, Charles  Edward  Guthrie  could  have  made  an  adequate  living 
at  a  number  of  trades,  but  chose  instead  to  live  by  his  wits.  Seeing 
the  opportunities  open  to  the  intrepid  in  land  speculation,  he 
plunged  into  the  oil  and  money  rush,  dragging  his  wife  Nora, 
and  his  children  Roy,  Woody,  and  Clara  behind  him.  There  was 
time  for  relaxation  in  the  Guthrie  household  only  at  night,  when 
the  children  gathered  around  the  fire  and  listened  to  their  Aunt 
Lottie,  her  nose  stuffed  with  "nerve  tightener,"  sing  the  old  songs. 

Perhaps  it  was  this  frantic  pace  that  first  unsettled  his  mother's 
reason,  but  after  their  new  six-room  house  burned  down  and  her 
husband  lost  "a  farm  a  day  for  thirty  days"  in  the  collapse  of  the 
land  boom,  her  spells  of  violent  insanity  became  more  frequent. 
When  little  Clara  was  burned  to  death  in  an  oil-stove  explosion, 
the  family  disintegrated.  Nora  was  sent  to  the  Norman  State 
Asylum,  and  Charles,  the  last  vestige  of  his  spirit  burned  out  of 


278  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

him  in  a  third  house  fire,  went  back  to  Texas  to  be  taken  care 
of  by  his  sister. 

So  Woody  went  into  his  teens  a  virtual  orphan.  His  last  few 
years  as  a  child  were  spent  finding  bare  and  unwholesome  subsist- 
ence as  a  "junkie,"  shoe-shine  boy,  spittoon  cleaner,  and  bus  boy. 
At  sixteen  he  took  the  road  to  the  South,  working  where  work 
was  to  be  found,  and  singing  and  playing  his  harmonica  for  nickels 
when  there  was  no  work  to  do. 

In  Pampa,  Texas,  he  met  his  uncle  Jeff,  an  itinerant  musician, 
who  gave  him  his  first  guitar  and  a  semi-professional  job  in  his 
band  as  a  sit-in  guitarist.  Between  dances  Woody  learned  to  play 
the  mandolin  and  fiddle. 

After  several  years  of  barnstorming  through  the  South,  Guthrie 
married  a  girl  named  Mary  Jennings,  and  "lived  in  the  ricketiest 
of  the  oil  town  shacks  long  enough  to  have  no  clothes,  no  money, 
no  groceries,  and  two  children."15 

The  years  between  Guthrie's  marriage  and  the  War  can  be  re- 
duced to  a  simple  pattern,  endlessly  repeated:  Unable  to  find 
steady  work  where  he  settled  his  little  family,  he  would  trek  off 
alone  to  new  hunting  grounds,  accumulate  enough  money  to  send 
for  his  wife  and  children,  and  gradually  slip  back  into  poverty 
again.  His  first  absence  from  his  wife  took  him  to  Los  Angeles, 
where  he  got  a  job  singing  more  or  less  regularly  on  Station 
KFVD.  He  augmented  the  small  salary  with  quick  trips  through 
the  state,  singing  for  migratory  workers,  and  incidentally  acquir- 
ing a.  hatred  for  the  injustice  which  had  spawned  their  pitiful 
economic  status.  When  he  had  amassed  enough  money,  he  sent 
for  his  family.  Eventually  severing  his  relations  with  KFVD, 
Guthrie  gravitated  more  and  more  toward  singing  for  labor 
groups,  until  his  savings,  sustained  only  by  irregular  contributions 
from  the  migrants  and  other  workers  in  a  similar  state  of  insol- 
vency, ran  out.  The  family,  now  grown  to  five,  piled  into  an  old 
car  and  set  out  across  the  two  thousand  miles  of  desert  to  their 
shack  in  Texas,  where  Woody  deposited  his  wife  and  children 
and  set  out  alone  for  New  York  with  $35  in  his  pocket  borrowed 
from  his  brother  Roy. 

15  Both  girls,  named  Sue  and  Teeny.  In  his  first  published  record  in  the  Library 
of  Congress  albums  (AAFS  2A)  Guthrie  can  be  heard  interrupting  his  song  to 
whisper  "Hello,  Sue"  to  his  little  daughter. 


The  song-makers  •  279 

In  New  York  he  stayed  for  a  while  with  Will  Geer16  and  then 
moved  to  the  Bowery.  Alan  Lomax  discovered  him,  took  him  to 
Washington,  and  recorded  all  the  songs  he  "could  remember  on 
a  pint  of  pretty  cheap  whiskey."  He  made  two  albums  of  Dust 
Bowl  ballads  for  Victor  Records,  saw  The  Grapes  of  Wrath,  met 
Pete  Seeger,  a  former  Harvard  student  turned  folk  singer,  and  set 
off  with  him  through  the  Middle  West.  Eventually  he  found  him- 
self back  in  New  York  and  for  the  moment  a  successful  purveyor 
of  folk  songs  on  several  big  radio  shows.  He  sent  for  his  family 
again,  but  soon  after  their  arrival  he  became  disgusted  with  the 
"whole  sissified  and  nervous  rules  of  censorship  on  all  of  my  songs 
and  ballads,"  and,  like  the  Joads,  loaded  his  family  in  a  car  and 
set  out  once  more  for  California.  He  was  given  a  job  by  the 
Bonneville  Power  Administration  to  work  along  with  the  great 
dam  builders  and  chronicle  their  achievement  in  song;  this  he  did, 
writing  and  recording  twenty-six  ballads  which  now  repose  in  the 
Oregon  Department  of  the  Interior.  He  also  acquired  a  hatred  for 
the  monopolistic  cupidity  of  the  private  power  owners,  which, 
like  his  contempt  for  the  citrus  barons,  was  reflected  in  his  com- 
positions. And  then  back  to  New  York,  and  back  to  California, 
and  back  to  New  York,  until  his  marriage  cracked  under  the 
peripatetic  strain. 

In  1943  his  name  appeared  somewhat  incongruously  as  the 
author  of  a  book  which  its  publishers,  E.  P.  Dutton  and  Company, 
described  as  "an  autobiography  written  in  the  national  idiom  with 
a  sort  of  national  grasp  .  .  .  perhaps  the  strongest  picture  yet 
written  of  America's  will  to  win."  Condensed  from  a  Thomas 
Wolfeian  spate  of  a  million  words  to  428  pages,  but  still  retaining 
words  that  were  sometimes  not  words,  redundances  which  were 
woven  into  surprisingly  effective  English,  extravagantly  pictur- 
esque phrases  typical  of  the  new  Heroic  Age  of  which  he  sings, 
Bound  for  Glory  was  a  powerful  but  distressing  book— powerful 
in  its  picture  of  the  millions  of  little  people  whom  Guthrie  saw 
making  the  America  that  was  "bound  for  glory,"  but  conversely 
depressing  in  its  recounting  of  the  injustices  and  oppression  that 
made  their  task  so  difficult. 

After  he  and  Mary  had  been  divorced,  Woody  took  a  job  in 

16  Before  attaining  success  as  an  actor,  Will  Geer  had  toured  the  Western  migrant 
camps  with  Guthrie,  singing  for  the  Okies,  Arkies,  and  Mizoos. 


280  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

the  Merchant  Marine,  shipping  out  with  Cisco  Houston,  a  guitar 
player  who  came  from  a  town  in  California  "so  small  that  'Come 
Again'  was  painted  on  the  back  of  the  'Welcome'  sign."  Their 
first  ship  was  torpedoed  off  the  coast  of  Sicily,  but  staggered  into 
Bizerte,  where  he  and  Houston  caught  an  empty  Liberty  ship 
back  to  the  United  States.  They  immediately  shipped  out  again 
for  Africa. 

Back  in  the  United  States  after  this  trip,  Guthrie  met  Moses 
Asch,  son  of  Sholem  Asch  and  the  man  largely  responsible  for  the 
current  renascence  of  folk  music  on  records.  Asch  recorded  120  of 
Guthrie's  songs,  and  published  his  second  book,  a  forty-eight-page 
collection  of  reminiscences  and  son^s,  entitled  American  Folk 
Song. 

Upon  his  return  to  the  United  States  after  a  second  torpedoing, 
Guthrie  was  drafted  into  the  army,  which  sent  him  West  again, 
through  Texas  to  Las  Vegas  (pronounced  "Lost  Wages"  by 
Guthrie),  where  he  was  given  a  dependency  discharge,  having 
by  that  time  acquired  another  wife  and  daughter. 

Once  more  in  New  York,  Guthrie  became  associated  with  the 
Almanac  Singers,  and  through  them  with  People's  Songs,  an 
organization  in  which  his  individuality  was  quickly  submerged. 
Before  any  harm  was  done  to  his  style,  however,  People's  Songs 
began  to  use  for  its  purposes  union  and  topical  songs  on  a  much 
higher  level  of  conscious  art  than  the  nearly  pure  folk  material 
that  Guthrie  was  producing,  and  he  gradually  dissociated  himself 
from  the  group.  At  the  present  time  Guthrie's  home  is  officially 
in  Beach  Haven,  New  York,  but  his  actual  whereabouts  cannot 
be  stated  with  any  assurance.  The  last  time  I  visited  his  home  his 
wife  told  me  that  several  months  before  he  had  gone  down  to 
the  corner  store  for  a  newspaper,  and  that  was  the  last  she  heard 
of  him  for  three  weeks,  when  he  sent  her  a  letter  from  California. 

When  I  first  visited  Guthrie  in  1946  he  was  living  in  a  crowded 
apartment  in  Coney  Island  with  his  wife  and  four-year-old  daugh- 
ter, Cathy  Ann,17  whom  he  nicknamed  "Stackabones."  I  found  him, 
a  little  weather-worn  man  with  incredibly  bushy,  wiry  hair,  sitting 
before  a  typewriter  in  a  hollowed-out  space  in  the  middle  of  a 
tiny  room  filled  with  guitars,  fiddles,  harmonicas,  mandolins,  tam- 
bourines, children's  toys,  record  albums,  books,  pictures,  and  scat- 

1  ^  Cathy  Ann  was  the  child  who  later  died  in  an  electrical  fire. 


The  song-makers  *  281 

tered  manuscripts.  Remembering  his  musical  declaration  that  he 
was  "never  comin'  back  to  this  man's  town  again,"  I  asked  him 
why  he  had  changed  his  mind  about  this  city  of  "rich  men, 
preachers,  and  slaves." 

"Everything's  moved  to  the  city,"  he  answered  with  a  great 
sweep  of  his  arm,  and  speaking  to  the  world.  "Big  business 
brought  the  workers,  the  workers  brought  the  music,  and  the 
music  brought  me." 

I  asked  if  he  agreed  with  a  more  famous  contemporary  who 
said  that  folksongs  were  gaining  popularity  in  the  cities  because 
city  people  Avere  bored  with  screen  glamour  and  soap  operas,  and 
wanted  instead  "something  real." 

He  did  not.  "The  unions  started  the  boom,"  he  insisted.  "The 
workers  wanted  to  sing  about  their  fight,  but  they  couldn't  borrow 
popular  tunes  because  the  money  men  who  own  the  big  monopoly 
on  music  would  sock  them  with  the  copyright  laws.  They  had  to 
go  where  they  should  have  gone  in  the  first  place— to  the  old  songs 
made  by  workers  years  ago  in  the  woods  and  on  the  plains  and 
on  the  oceans." 

He  pushed  a  two-inch  thick  book  of  bound  typewriter  paper 
toward  me.  "Look,"  he  said,  "there's  more  than  three  hundred 
songs  I've  written,  most  of  them  to  the  old  tunes.  You  won't  hear 
the  night  club  orgasm  gals  singing  these  songs,  but  I've  sung  them 
on  picket  lines,  in  union  halls,  in  foc's'les,  in  river-bottom  peach 
camps— everywhere— and  I've  never  once  seen  them  fail.  Folks 
sweat  under  the  collar,  throw  their  coats  in  the  corner,  stamp  their 
feet,  clap,  and  sing  these  songs.  Our  songs  are  singing  history." 

Since  that  meeting,  Guthrie  has  been  exceptionally  prolific  in 
song  writing,  and  probably  his  stack  of  compositions  now  is  three 
or  four  times  as  thick.  The  most  important  reason  for  this  sudden 
increase  in  production  is  that  since  his  more  or  less  permanent 
settlement  in  New  York  Guthrie's  sources  have  changed  from  liv- 
ing to  literary  material.  In  his  earlier  days— in  the  days  when  the 
Dust  Bowl  ballads  and  his  famous  strike  and  picket-line  songs 
were  written,  his  compositions  were  spontaneously  generated  to 
relieve  an  expanding  feeling  of  protest;  the  inspiration  came  from 
within.  Today  his  songs  are  likely  to  be  perfunctory  versified 
paraphrases  of  newspaper  accounts  of  injustices  perpetrated  on 


282   °  American  folksongs  of  protest 

individuals  or  groups  with  whom  he  has  no  personal  acquaintance. 
The  inspiration  and  feeling  of  protest  are  still  there  in  sufficient 
quantity  to  lift  his  compositions  well  above  the  level  of  the  average 
contemporary  labor-protest  song,  but  both  suffer  through  diffu- 
sion, and  the  "dissociation  of  sensibility"  which  inevitably  results 
from  the  utilization  of  secondary  sources  is  everywhere  evident. 
This  does  not  mean  that  Guthrie  no  longer  writes  songs  that 
approach  the  quality  of  "Pretty  Boy  Floyd"  and  "Tom  Joad,"  but 
merely  that  the  percentage  of  songs  of  first  quality  is  smaller. 
Everything  is  grist  for  Guthrie's  mill  now.  Some  months  ago,  when 
the  newspapers  reported  a  corollary  of  Einstein's  theory  which 
seemed  to  indicate  that  it  was  impossible  to  determine  the  direc- 
tion of  a  body's  movement,  Guthrie  translated  its  meaning  to 
him  in  a  song  whose  refrain  was, 

Well  I  can't  go  east  or  west, 
And  I  can't  go  up  or  down, 
And  I  can't  go  north  or  south, 
But  I  can  still  go  round  and  round. 

Not  all  of  Guthrie's  compositions  are  songs  of  overt  protest.  Of 
an  estimated  thousand  songs  in  his  manuscript  collection,  I  found 
only  about  140  whose  basic  theme  was  one  of  protest;  the  re- 
mainder fell  into  conventional  folksong  categories— love,  humor, 
crime,  ballads  of  disaster,  tragedies,  and  war,  non-protest  labor 
songs,  and  even  nursery  songs. 

Many  of  these  attain  the  quality  of  the  best  of  his  protest  songs, 
but  since  their  themes  lie  outside  the  scope  of  this  work,  their 
examination  must  await  another  study.  It  may,  however,  be  men- 
tioned as  an  illustration  of  the  inherent  quality  of  his  work,  that 
many  of  these  less  controversial  songs  have  had  extraordinary 
success  in  view  of  the  fact  that  songs  of  nearly  pure  folk  origin 
are  denied  the  usual  channels  of  commercial  distribution.  His 
"Oklahoma  Hills"  made  a  small  fortune  for  his  cousin,  a  cowboy 
singer  to  whom  its  composition  was  erroneously  attributed;  his 
"Philadelphia  Lawyer,"  a  humorous  ballad  of  first  quality,  attained 
an  astounding  popularity  on  the  West  Coast  during  the  latter  part 
of  1949;  his  "So  Long,  It's  Been  Good  to  Know  You"  in  a  version 


The  song-makers  *  283 

lamentably  divested  of  all   its  earlier   significance,   is  currently 
among  the  sheet  music  and  record  best  sellers.18 

The  "Philadelphia  Lawyer,"  in  the  economical  way  in  which 
the  substitution  of  an  occasional  line  produces  a  completely  differ- 
ent story  in  a  completely  different  mood,  is  a  fine  example  of 
Guthrie's  skill  at  the  sort  of  adaptation  that  has  characterized  folk 
composition.  Taking  the  sentimental  ballad  "The  Jealous  Lover," 
and  discarding  the  tragic  theme,  Guthrie  makes  of  an  undistin- 
guished story  of  unhappy  love  a  distinguished  story  of  irrespon- 
sible love  and  its  consequences,  while  incidentally  ridiculing  a 
profession  for  which  he  has  only  despite. 

Way  out  in  Reno,  Nevada, 
Where  romances  bloom  and  fade, 
A  great  Philadelphia  lawyer 
Fell  in  love  with  a  Hollywood  maid. 

"Your  face  is  so  lovely  and  pretty, 
Your  form  so  fair  and  divine; 
Come  with  me  to  the  big  city, 
And  leave  this  wild  cowboy  behind.'''' 

Wild  Bill  was  a  gun-toting  cowboy; 
Six  notches  were  carved  on  his  gun. 
All  the  boys  around  Reno,  Nevada, 
Left  Wild  Bill's  sweetheart  alone. 

One  night  when  Bill  was  returning 
Out  from  the  desert  so  cold, 
He  dreamed  of  his  Hollywood  sweetheart, 
Whose  love  was  as  lasting  as  gold. 

As  he  drew  near  to  her  window, 
Two  shadows  he  saw  on  the  shade; 
'Twas  the  great  Philadelphia  lawyer, 
Making  love  to  his  Hollywood  maid. 

is  It  is  a  source  of  constant  distress  to  Guthrie's  friends  that  the  profits  from  these 
songs  have  gone  to  other  persons.  Like  the  IWW,  which  never  copyrighted  their 
songbooks,  Guthrie  in  spite  of  his  complaint  that  his  songs  have  never  made  him 
any  money,  seems  content  to  let  them  fall  into  the  public  domain.  During  the 
height  of  the  "Philadelphia  Lawyer's"  popularity,  George  Wilhelm,  a  West  Coast 
radio  announcer,  took  it  upon  himself  to  institute  a  suit  for  infringement  of  copy- 
right in  Guthrie's  name,  but  dropped  the  action  when  Guthrie  exhibited  no  interest 
in  the  proceedings. 


284  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

The  night  was  as  still  as  the  desert, 
With  the  moon  hanging  high  overhead. 
He  listened  awhile  to  the  lawyer, 
He  could  hear  every  word  that  he  said. 

"Come,  love,  and  we  will  wander 
Down  where  the  lights  are  so  bright. 
Vll  win  you  a  divorce  from  your  husband 
And  we  can  get  married  tonight." 

Tonight  in  old  Pennsylvania 
Beneath  the  whispering  pines 
There's  one  less  Philadelphia  lawyer 
In  old  Philadelphia  tonight. 

In  songs  of  more  serious  intent  such  heavy  dependence  on  tra- 
ditional material  has  greatly  impaired  the  quality  of  Guthrie's 
songs.  "Gotta  Get  to  Boston"  is  representative  of  perhaps  a  score 
of  songs  in  which  the  incompatible  combination  of  dissimilar 
origins  obviates  the  effect  which  Guthrie  tries  to  achieve.  "Root 
Hog  or  Die,"  of  which  this  is  but  a  slight  adaptation,  is  hardly 
the  kind  of  song  one  would  associate  in  theme  with  the  Sacco- 
Vanzetti  tragedy. 

Train  wheels  can  roll  me 

Cushions  can  ride; 

Ships  on  the  oceans, 

Planes  in  the  skies; 

Storms  they  can  come,  love, 

Flood  waters  rise, 

But  I  gotta  get  to  Boston 

Or  two  men  will  die. 

Root  hog  or  die,  friend, 

Root  hog  or  die; 

I  gotta  get  to  Boston 

Root  hog  or  die. 

Sacco  and  Vanzetti  die  at  sundown  tonight 

So  I  gotta  get  to  Boston 

Root  hog  or  die. 

But  Guthrie's  use  of  tangible19  folk  material  is  rarely  so  heavy 
handed.  Usually  his  borrowing  extends  only  to  the  utilization, 

19  By  this  qualification  I  exclude  the  technique,  style,  and  mood  of  American  folk- 
song, the  characteristics  of  Guthrie's  compositions  which  inextricably  bind  him 
with  the  folk. 


The  song-makers  *  285 

with  little  adaptation,  of  the  tunes  of  traditional  folk  songs.  A 
common  notation  on  his  manuscripts  is  something  like  "This 
goes  good  to  the  tune  of  'Blue  Eyes'  with  a  little  of  'Wildwood 
Flower'  mixed  in."  Unlike  most  writers  of  union  songs  and  topical 
parodies,  Guthrie  never  uses  the  tune  of  a  popular  song  for  his 
compositions. 

This  characteristic  folk  purity  of  his  tunes  can  be  extended  not 
only  to  his  compositions  as  a  whole,  but  to  his  personality  also. 
Despite  his  intermittent  residence  in  New  York,  the  economic 
and  social  orientation  he  has  gained  through  acquaintance  with 
college-educated  organizers  and  political  workers,  and  the  vora- 
cious reading  of  heavy  books,  Guthrie  has  retained  unspoiled  his 
folk  origins.  Dr.  Charles  Seeger,  in  determining-  Guthrie's  cultural 
evolution,  says  that  he  has  not  yet  attained  cb.20  But  with  the  most 
sincere  deference  to  Dr.  Seeger's  profound  knowledge,  I  submit 
that  Guthrie  has  remained  consistently  close  to  /,  making  only 
sporadic  and  temporary  excursions  to  the  borders  of  hb. 

In  the  matter  of  accompaniment  Guthrie  has  gone  further  to 
the  right.  Those  familiar  with  the  music  of  the  Carter  family,  the 
most  respected  of  hillbilly  singing  groups,  can  detect  vestigial 
traces  of  Maybelle  Carter's  "picking"  in  Guthrie's  guitar  style.21 
When,  after  Guthrie  made  his  first  coast-to-coast  radio  appearance 
he  received  a  grimy  postcard  from  West  Virginia  signed  "The 
Carters"  and  saying  "You're  doing  fine,  boy,"  he  proudly  acknowl- 
edged his  debt.  Guthrie  deplores  the  practice  of  "folk  singers" 
learning  the  guitar  either  from  books  or  under  the  guidance  of  a 
professional  teacher. 

I  can't  play  any  chord  by  looking  at  any  book  and  never  could.  .  .  . 
I'll  bet  you  the  chording  books  that  Leadbelly  has  used  in  his  greening 
and  grey  years  wouldn't  make  a  pile  big  enough  for  you  to  find  on 
your  floor.  Leadbelly  learnt  how  to  play  the  guitar  the  same  way  that 

20  In  a  review  of  several  commercial  albums  of  American  folksongs  QAFL  vol.  31) 
Dr.  Seeger  set  up  a  very  useful  formula  by  which  the  relative  authenticity  of  "folk 
singers"  can  be  evaluated:  /  —  hb  —  cb  —  c,  in  which  /  ==  folk,  hb  =  hillbilly, 
cb  =  citybilly,  c  =  concert.  Most  folk  singers  move  from  /  to  c,  sometimes  with  such 
rapidity  that  their  integrity  is  quickly  lost  in  the  process;  a  very  few,  among  whom 
is  Dr.  Seeger's  son  Pete,  move  in  the  opposite  direction. 

21  As  indeed  her  influence  can  be  detected  also  in  Leadbellv.  a  supposedly  pure 
folk  singer;  compare  the  Carter  family's  "Worried  Man  Blues"  (Victor  27497)  and 
Leadbelly's  "Poor  Howard"  (Musicraft  225)  for  similarity  in  guitar  style. 


286  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

I  did,  by  "ear,"  by  "touch,"  by  "feel,"  by  "bluff,"  by  "gessin,"  by 
"fakin,"  and  by  a  great  crave  and  drive  to  keep  on  playing. 

If  I'm  sort  of  lazing  it  around,  I  leave  out  a  few  of  the  extrays.  If 
I'm  scattering  wild  oats  for  my  goats,  I  lay  in  a  few  more  just  to  keep 
my  string  finger  oily  and  limber.  If  I  play  with  one  other  instrument, 
I  do  this  way.  If  it's  two  others,  I  play  some  other  way.  If  it's  at  a 
sixteen  guitar  hoot,  I  am  forced  by  the  laws  of  nature  and  averages, 
to  naturally  find  some  17th  lost  part  nobody  else  is  using  and  tickle 
around  with  that.  .  .  . 

I've  pounded  out  "Ida  Red,"  "Old  Joe  Clark,"  "Old  Judge  Parker 
Take  Your  Shackles  Offa  Me,"  for  as  high  as  thirty  or  forty  minutes 
with  no  more  than  two  chords,  D  to  A,  D  to  A,  and  D  to  A  ten  blue 
jillion  times  through  a  square  dance.  Lots  of  the  old  fullblood  fiddlers 
will  toss  you  down  off  from  his  platform  if  you  go  to  getting  too  fancy 
with  your  chording.22 

Some  idea  of  the  inspired  carelessness  which  above  all  else  is 
responsible  for  his  nearly  original  guitar  style  is  evident  in  this 
reply  to  my  request  for  information  concerning  the  chords  used 
in  several  of  his  records: 

I  only  used  straight  C  chord  all  the  way  down  the  line  on  the 
"Buffalo  Skinners,"  just  CCCC  CCCCC  and  right  down  to 
Birmingham  and  then  on  down  to  Jacksboro  and  then  out  past  El  Paso 
and  then  on  up  into  New  Mexico.  CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCC 
picking  finger  style. 

On  "Sally  Don't  You  Grieve"  it  was  E  natural  A  natural,  with  no 
sevenths  that  I  know  of.  Maybe  so.  Could  of  been.  Works  either  way. 
You  get  down  your  gitbox  and  try  it  and  you  will  see. 

You  are  right  about  the  "Song  of  the  Gypsy  Dave"  but  I  used  no 
sevenths  here  that  I  especially  knew  about.  Maybe  I  don't  know  when 
I  do  use  a  seventh.  I  learned  all  I  know  by  watching  and  never  could 
tell  you  what  the  letter  and  the  number  was  anyhow.  You  try  it  several 
ways  and  let  your  fingers  just  sort  of  feel  the  way  they  want  to  go  and 
follow  them  and  you  will  usually  come  across  something  that  was 
better  than  you  thought. 

This  lack  of  system  precludes  his  playing  the  same  song  the 
same  way  twice,  but  rarely  can  a  listener  say  with  any  assurance 
that  the  second  repetition  was  better  than  the  first,  or  vice  versa. 
Supreme  ease  is  the  most  characteristic  feature  of  his  playing;  his 

22  From  a  letter  printed  in  People's  Songs,  September  1948,  p.  6. 


The  song-makers  *  287 

fingers  seem  to  run  uncontrolled  over  the  frets,  eliciting  subtle 
effects  of  which  he  seems  not  to  be  aware.  Watching  him,  one  has 
the  impression  that  he  could  take  his  guitar  by  the  neck,  shake  it, 
and  the  chords  and  runs  would  fall  out  in  abject  obedience  to 
his  mastery. 

In  the  matter  of  language  and  imagery  Guthrie's  style,  when 
not  obviously  adapted  from  an  existing  song  or  lifted  consciously 
from  the  great  body  of  folk  idiom,  is  unique;  I  have  not  been 
able  to  detect  any  influences  such  as  are  to  be  found  in  his  guitar 
playing.  He  is  a  logophile,  but  his  hypnosis  with  words  does  not 
manifest  itself,  as  it  does  with  others  who  have  this  affliction,  in 
polysyllables.  Guthrie  rarely  strays  far  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  word- 
hoard,  but  the  curious  associations  which  he  finds  between  simple 
terms  lead  him  into  fantastic  flights  of  imagery.  Metrical  restric- 
tions fetter  these  flights  in  his  songs,  but  in  his  prose  they  are 
completely  unrestrained.  In  reply  to  a  somewhat  ill-considered 
criticism  of  the  psychology  he  uses  to  convey  his  political  philos- 
ophy, Guthrie  wrote  me: 

I  fall  on  the  rim  of  my  table  of  grief  and  cry  because  you  have 
ripped  aside  the  cloudy  blanket  of  my  soul  and  shown  me  that  I  am 
too  far  to  the  left  of  the  center,  too  radical  in  my  political  views, 
and,  sad  to  tell,  too  unpleasant  even  in  my  class  relationships.  No,  it 
is  not  my  class  relationships  but  my  outlook  upon  them  that  deals 
the  cinders  in  the  stew.  Well,  how  else  could  I  view  our  class  relation- 
ships? Is  there  a  friendlier  way?  Maybe  there  is.  I  will  ask  my  wife  or 
my  baby  or  somebody  when  they  come  back.  But  the  baby  is  asleep 
tonight  and  the  wife  is  prancing  somewhere  out  West  and  I  am  here 
in  my  kitchen  all  by  myself.  Since  nobody  else  but  me  is  here  I  cannot 
take  any  fast  action  on  my  outlooks  about  the  class  relations.  I  think 
that  I  will  listen  in  at  my  daughter's  door  and  see  if  she  is  asleep,  then 
if  she  is  and  so  are  all  of  my  neighbors,  I  am  going  to  set  in  quiet 
study  and  deep  thought  for  one  whole  hour  and  vision  every  picture 
and  sight  and  smell  of  pleasant  nature  that  I  can  in  regard  to  class 
relationships. 

His  diction  is  filled  with  picturesque  expressions  which  we,  who 
can  merely  write  grammatical  correctness,  may  envy:  Of  a  broken 
watch:  "It  ticks  like  hell  but  won't  keep  time."  Of  a  small  boy: 
"He  ain't  old  enough  to  be  of  any  age."  Of  an  obvious  fact  which 
an  obtuse  person  cannot  apprehend:   "A  blind  man  could  feel 


288  '  American  folksongs  of  protest 

that  with  a  stick."  Of  Missouri  mosquitoes:  "So  thick  you  couldn't 
stir  'em  with  a  stick."  Of  a  little  man  battling  furiously  against 
overwhelming  opposition:  "He  was  fightin'  like  a  bee  in  under  a 
horse's  tail."  Of  despair:  "I  been  troubled  so  long  I  forgot  how 
to  worry."  Of  incomprehension:  "All  I  know  is  I  add  up  all  I 
know  and  I  still  don't  know." 

A  characteristic  of  Guthrie's  songs  not  possible  to  detect  in 
examinations  of  the  texts  is  their  extreme  speed  of  composition. 
This  fact  was  indelibly  impressed  on  me  several  years  ago  in  an 
incident  memorable  for  a  coincidence  which  would  pale  the  most 
egregious  of  Thomas  Hardy's  into  insignificance.  I  had  booked 
air  passage  from  Torrance,  California,  to  Philadelphia,  Pennsyl- 
vania, and  after  boarding  the  plane,  found  in  the  adjoining  seat 
Woody  Guthrie,  whom  I  had  met  only  once  before,  and  then 
some  three  thousand  miles  away.  While  we  were  flying  across 
Oklahoma  next  day,  I  prodded  Guthrie  awake  and  pointed  below 
to  Oklahoma,  covered  by  an  unbroken  bank  of  clouds.  "There's 
your  old  home,"  I  said.  He  looked  soberly  at  the  clouds  for  a 
moment  and  then  asked  me  if  I  had  a  pen.  I  handed  him  a  par- 
ticularly fluid  ball-pointer  and  in  a  matter  of  seconds  he  had 
written  a  song  beginning  "I  want  to  lay  my  head  tonight  on  a 
bed  of  Oklahoma  clouds."  Amazed,  I  asked,  "Do  you  always  write 
a  song  that  fast?"  "No,"  he  drawled  in  his  expansive,  impersonal 
way,  "only  when  I  got  a  good  pen." 

One  could  recite  endless  anecdotes  illustrating  Guthrie's  color- 
ful personality,  but  in  so  doing  one  might  easily  lose  sight  of  his 
real  importance  as  a  man  and  as  a  symbol,  aspects  of  Guthrie's 
character  which  John  Steinbeck,  himself  a  chronicler  of  the  Ameri- 
can nomads,  expressed  in  a  preface  to  Guthrie's  first  Asch  record 
album: 

Woody  is  just  Woody.  Thousands  of  people  do  not  know  he  had 
any  other  name.  He  is  just  a  voice  and  a  guitar.  He  sings  the  songs 
of  a  people  and  I  suspect  that  he  is,  in  a  way,  that  people.  Harsh 
voiced  and  nasal,  his  guitar  hanging  like  a  tire  iron  on  a  rusty  rim, 
there  is  nothing  sweet  about  Woody,  and  there  is  nothing  sweet  about 
the  songs  he  sings.  But  there  is  something  more  important  for  those 
who  will  listen.  There  is  the  will  of  a  people  to  endure  and  fight 
against  oppression.  I  think  we  call  this  the  American  spirit. 


Tom  joad  •  289 

But  Woody  Guthrie  sees  himself  in  a  less  imposing  way;  he 
says  merely,  "Let  me  be  known  as  the  man  who  told  you  some- 
thing you  already  know." 

Guthrie  composed  this  fine  ballad  after  seeing  the  motion  pic- 
ture version  of  John  Steinbeck's  The  Grapes  of  Wrath.  "I  wrote 
this  song,"  he  says,  "because  the  people  back  in  Oklahoma  haven't 
got  two  bucks  to  buy  the  book,  or  even  thirty-five  cents  to  see  the 
movie,  but  the  song  will  get  back  to  them  and  tell  them  what 
Preacher  Casy  said." 

TOM  JOAD 


Tom  Joad  got  out  of  the  old  McAlester  pen; 
There  he  got  his  parole. 

After  four  long  years  on  a  man-killing  charge 
Tom  Joad  come  walking  down  the  road,  (poor  boy) 
Tom  Joad  come  walking  down  the  road. 

Tom  Joad,  he  met  a  truck-driving  man; 

There  he  caught  him  a  ride. 

He  said,  "I  just  got  loose  from  McAlester  pen 

On  a  charge  called  homicide,  (killirt) 

A  charge  called  homicide." 

That  truck  rolled  away  in  a  cloud  of  dust; 
Tom,  he  turned  his  face  toward  home. 
He  met  Preacher  Casy  and  they  had  a  little  drink, 
And  he  found  that  his  family,  they  was  gone, 
He  found  that  his  family,  they  was  gone. 


290  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

He  found  his  mother's  old-fashioned  shoe, 
He  found  his  daddy's  hat; 
And  he  found  little  Muley  and  Muley  said, 
"They've  been  tractored  out  by  the  cats, 
They've  been  tractored  out  by  the  cats." 

Tom  load  walked  down  to  the  neighbor's  farm; 
Found  his  family; 

They  took  Preacher  Casy  and  they  loaded  in  a  car, 
And  his  mother  said,  "We've  got  to  get  away," 
His  mother  said,  "We've  got  to  get  away." 

Now  the  twelve  of  the  loads  made  a  mighty  heavy  load, 

And  Grandpa  load  did  cry; 

He  picked  up  a  handfulla  land  in  his  hand, 

Said,  "I'll  stay  with  the  farm  till  I  die; 

Yes,  I'll  stay  with  the  farm  till  I  die." 

They  fed  him  short-ribs,  and  coffee,  and  soothing  syrup, 

But  Grandpa  load  did  die. 

They  buried  Grandpa  load  by  the  side  of  the  road; 

Grandma  on  the  California  side, 

They  buried  Grandma  on  the  California  side. 

Well,  they  come  to  a  mountain  and  they  looked  to  the  West, 
And  it  looked  like  the  Promised  Land. 
That  bright  green  valley  with  the  river  running  through, 
There  was  work  for  every  single  hand,  (they  thought) 
There  was  work  for  every  single  hand. 

The  loads  rolled  away  to  a  jungle  camp, 
There  they  cooked  a  stew. 
All  the  hungry  little  kids  in  the  jungle  camp 
Said,  "We'd  like  to  have  some  too;" 
Said,  "We'd  like  to  have  some  too." 

Ma  load  she  says,  "Go  get  you  a  stick, 

And  come  and  get  some  stew; 

But,  mind  you  children,  you're  a  gonna  have  to  wait, 

Till  my  men  folks  gets  through, 

Till  my  men  folks  gets  through." 

Well,  a  dep'ty  sheriff  fired  loose  at  a  man, 

Shot  a  woman  in  the  back. 

Before  he  could  take  his  aim  again 

Preacher  Casy  dropped  him  in  his  tracks,  (poor  boy) 

Preacher  Casy  dropped  him  in  his  tracks. 


The  song-makers  *  291 

They  handcuffed  Casy  and  they  took  him  to  jail, 
But  then  he  got  away; 

And  he  met  Tom  load  by  the  old  river  bridge, 
And  these  few  words  he  did  say,  (poor  boy) 
These  few  words  he  did  say: 

"Well,  I  preached  for  the  Lord  a  mighty  long  time; 
Preached  about  the  rich  and  the  poor. 
Us  workin'  folks  is  got  to  get  together, 
Cause  we  ain't  got  a  chance  anymore; 
We  ain't  got  a  chance  anymore." 

The  vigilantes  come  and  Tom  and  Casy  run 

To  the  bridge  where  the  water  run  down, 

But  a  vigilante  thug  hit  Casy  with  a  club. 

They  laid  Preacher  Casy  on  the  ground,  (poor  Casy) 

They  laid  Preacher  Casy  on  the  ground. 

Tom  Joad  he  grabbed  that  deputy's  club, 

Hit  him  over  the  head. 

Tom  Joad  took  flight  in  the  dark  rainy  night 

With  a  deputy  and  a  preacher  laying  dead,  (two  men) 

A  deputy  and  a  preacher  laying  dead. 

Tom  Joad  run  back  where  his  mother  was  asleep, 

He  woke  her  up  out  of  bed, 

And  he  kissed  goodbye  to  the  mother  that  he  loved, 

Said  what  Preacher  Casy  said,  (Tom  Joad) 

He  said  what  Preacher  Casy  said. 

"All  the  world  might  be  justa  one  big  soul; 
Well,  it  looks  thataway  to  me; 
Everywhere  that  you  look  in  the  day  or  night, 
That's  where  Vm  a-gonna  be,  (Maw) 
That's  where  Vm  a-gonna  be." 

"Wherever  little  children  are  hungry  and  crying, 

Wherever  people  ain't  free, 

Wherever  men  are  fighting  for  their  rights 

That's  where  Vm  a-gonna  be,  (Maw) 

That's  where  I'm  a-gonna  be." 

COULEE  DAM 

I  saw  the  Columbia  River  and  the  big  Grand  Coulee  Dam  from 
just  about  every  cliff,  mountain,  tree,  post,  and  every  other  angle 
from  which  it  can  be  seen.  I  made  up  26  songs  about  the  Columbia 
and  about  the  dam  and  about  the  men,  and  these  songs  were  recorded 
by  the  Department  of  Interior,  Bonneville  Power  Administration,  Port- 


292  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

land,  Oregon.  The  records  were  played  at  all  sorts  and  sizes  of  meet- 
ings where  the  people  bought  bonds  to  bring  the  power  lines  over 
the  fields  and  hills  to  their  own  little  places. 

But  there  were  reactionary  congressmen  in  back  of  the  people  that 
owned  those  little  private  dams  and  power  houses  out  there,  that  didn't 
want  to  see  the  Grand  Coulee  built,  because  it  would  make  electricity 
dirt  cheap  and  cut  down  on  their  profits.  (They  fought  to  try  to  keep 
the  TVA  out  of  the  State  of  Tennessee,  too.)  They  can  always  think 
up  a  million  nice  good  excellent  reasons  why  it  is  better  for  you  to 
go  ragged  and  hungry  and  down  and  out  and  even  in  the  dark,  as 
long  as  it  makes  them  a  profit.  But  lots  of  people  made  speeches  on 
both  sides.  Movie  stars  flew  up  in  big  airplanes  and  told  the  folks 
how  nice  it  was  not  to  have  no  electricity,  and  not  to  have  no  Coulee 
Dam  at  all.  But  we  made  speeches  on  our  side,  and  we  played  the 
records  over  the  loud  speakers  there  in  those  little  towns,  and  the 
people  shelled  out  the  money  and  bought  the  bonds  and  brought 
the  electricity  over  the  hill  to  milk  the  cows,  shoe  the  old  mare,  light 
up  the  saloon,  the  chili  joint  window,  the  ladies'  dresses  and  hats  in 
windows,  the  schools  and  the  churches  along  the  way,  to  run  the  fac- 
tories turning  out  manganese,  chrome,  bauxite,  aluminum,  steel,  and 
flying  fortresses  by  the  hundreds  to  bomb  the  Japs  out  of  this  war  with. 
That's  how  things  get  done.  Just  people  doing  it.  People  can  get  more 
done  that  way  than  anybody  else  I  ever  seen,  and  I'm  a  man  that's 
seen  a  lot  of  them. 

—Record  Prefaces  "Woody  Guthrie"  Album,  Asch  347. 

(Tune:  "Wabash  Cannonball") 

Well  the  world  has  seven  wonders, 
So  the  travelers  always  tell; 
Some  gardens  and  some  towers, 
I  guess  you  know  them  well. 
But  now  the  greatest  wonder, 
Is  in  Uncle  Sam's  fair  land; 
It's  that  King  Columbia  River, 
And  the  Big  Grand  Coulee  Dam. 

She  heads  up  the  Canadian  Rockies, 
Where  the  rippling  waters  glide; 
Comes  a-rumbling  down  the  canyon, 
To  meet  that  salty  tide, 
Of  the  wide  Pacific  Ocean, 
Where  the  sun  sets  in  the  west; 
And  the  Big  Grand  Coulee  country, 
In  the  land  I  love  the  best. 


Pastures  of  plenty  •  293 

In  the  misty  crystal  glitter 

Of  that  wild  and  windward  spray, 

Men  have  fought  the  pounding  waters, 

And  met  a  watery  grave. 

Well  she  tore  their  boats  to  splinters, 

But  she  gave  men  dreams  to  dream; 

Of  the  day  the  Coulee  Dam 

Would  cross  that  wild  and  wasted  stream. 

Uncle  Sam  took  up  the  challenge 

In  the  year  of  thirty-three, 

For  the  farmers  and  the  factory, 

And  all  of  you  and  me. 

He  said  Roll  along,  Columbia, 

You  can  ramble  to  the  sea; 

But  River,  while  you're  rambling, 

You  can  do  some  work  for  me. 

Now  in  Washington  and  Oregon, 
You  hear  the  factories  hum; 
Making  chrome  and  making  manganese 
And  light  aluminum. 
And  there  roars  a  Flying  Fortress, 
Now  to  fight  for  Uncle  Sam; 
Spawned  upon  the  King  Columbia 
By  the  Big  Grand  Coulee  Dam. 

In  the  misty  crystal  glitter 

Of  that  wild  and  windward  spray; 

Men  have  fought  the  pounding  waters, 

And  met  a  watery  grave. 

Well  she  tore  their  boats  to  splinters, 

But  she  gave  men  dreams  to  dream; 

Of  the  day  the  Coulee  Dam 

Would  cross  that  wild  and  wasted  stream. 

Another  of  Guthrie's  songs  about  the  migrant  workers: 

PASTURES   OF  PLENTY 

It's  a  mighty  hard  row  that  my  poor  hands  has  hoed 
And  my  poor  feet  has  traveled  a  hot  dusty  road 
Out  of  your  dustbowl  and  westward  we  rolled, 
Lord,  your  desert  is  hot  and  your  mountains  are  cold. 

I  work  in  your  orchards  of  peaches  and  prunes, 

And  I  sleep  on  the  ground  'neath  the  light  of  your  moon. 

On  the  edge  of  your  city  you'll  see  us  and  then 

We  come  with  the  dust  and  we  go  with  the  wind. 


294  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

California,  Arizona,  I  make  all  your  crops, 

Then  it's  north  up  to  Oregon  to  gather  your  hops; 

Dig  beets  from  your  ground,  cut  the  grapes  from  your  vine 

To  set  on  your  table  your  light  sparkling  wine. 

Green  Pastures  of  Plenty  from  dry  desert  ground, 
From  the  Grand  Coulee  Dam  where  the  waters  run  down; 
Every  state  in  this  union  us  migrants  has  been 
We'll  work  in  your  fight  and  we'll  fight  till  we  win. 

It's  always  we  ramble,  that  river  and  I, 
All  along  your  green  valley  I'll  work  till  I  die; 
My  land  I'll  defend  with  my  life  if  needs  be, 
'Cause  my  Pastures  of  Plenty  must  always  be  free. 

Guthrie's  sympathy  for  the  migratory  worker  is  international. 
In  this  ballad  he  tells  of  the  death  of  twenty-eight  Mexican  mi- 
grant deportees  in  an  airplane  crash  near  Coalinga,  California, 
on  January  28,  1948. 

PLANE  WRECK  AT  LOS  GATOS 

The  crops  are  all  in  and  the  peaches  are  rottening 
The  oranges  are  piled  in  their  creosote  dumps; 
You're  flying  them  back  to  the  Mexico  border 
To  pay  all  their  money  to  wade  back  again. 

refrain:  Goodbye  to  my  luan,  Goodbye  Rosalita; 
Adios  muy  amigo,  Jesus  and  Marie, 
You  won't  have  a  name  when  you  ride  the  big  airplane 
All  they  will  call  you  will  be  deportees. 

My  father's  own  father  he  waded  that  river; 
They  took  all  the  money  he  made  in  his  life; 
My  brothers  and  sisters  come  working  the  fruit  trees 
And  they  rode  the  truck  till  they  took  down  and  died. 

Some  of  us  are  illegal  and  some  are  not  wanted, 
Our  work  contract's  out  and  we  have  to  move  on; 
Six  hundred  miles  to  that  Mexico  border, 
They  chase  us  like  outlaws,  like  rustlers,  like  thieves. 

We  died  in  your  hills,  we  died  in  your  deserts, 
We  died  in  your  valleys  and  died  on  your  plains; 
We  died  neath  your  trees  and  we  died  in  your  bushes, 
Both  sides  of  this  river  we  died  just  the  same. 


Dead  from  the  dust  •  295 

The  sky  plane  caught  fire  over  Los  Gatos  Canyon, 
A  fireball  of  lightning  and  shook  all  our  hills. 
Who  are  all  these  friends  all  scattered  like  dry  leaves? 
The  radio  says  they  are  just  deportees. 

Is  this  the  best  way  we  can  grow  our  big  orchards? 
Is  this  the  best  way  we  can  grow  our  good  fruit? 
To  fall  like  dry  leaves  to  rot  on  my  top  soil 
And  be  called  by  no  name  except  deportees? 

—Composed  February  3,  1948. 
DEAD  FROM  THE  DUST 

Next  to  the  migratory  crop  pickers,  the  miner  has  been  the 
worker  closest  to  Guthrie's  heart,  perhaps  because  there  were  lead, 
zinc,  and  soft  coal  mines  within  twenty  miles  of  his  birthplace. 

My  kinfolks  and  friends  that  hold  the  brass  handle, 
As  we  stand  round  her  grave  I  see  tears  in  your  eyes. 
My  mother's  cold  clay  is  wrapped  in  this  pine  box — 
She  is  dead  from  the  dust  that  blows  from  the  mine. 

One  short  year  ago  we  carried  my  father 

To  lower  him  down  and  to  weep  and  to  cry; 

These  mountains  he  loved  and  he  dug  in  the  slate  rock; 

He  was  wrecked  by  the  dust  that  blows  from  the  mine. 

Four  small  graves  you  see,  you  helped  me  to  dig  them, 
To  hold  my  two  sisters  and  brothers  knee  high; 
Two  lived  a  few  years  to  cough  blood  on  the  pillow, 
Two  dead  at  birth  from  the  dust  of  the  mine. 

I  can't  stand  here  now  around  these  cold  grave  mounds; 
I've  prayed  and  Vve  cried  till  my  tears  have  run  dry. 
I've  got  to  go  ask  that  coal  operator 
Why  he  lets  my  folks  die  from  that  dust  from  his  mine. 

When  that  policeman  sees  me  he'll  think  that  I'm  crazy, 
Running  wild  down  the  street  with  fire  in  my  eyes. 
No,  that  trooper  won't  know  about  my  folks  in  this  grave  hill 
Killed  by  that  dust  that  blows  from  the  mine. 

You  can  build  a  machine  for  a  few  silver  dollars 
That  would  clean  all  this  dust  as  it  flies  in  the  skies; 
I'd  rather  dig  coal  than  to  stand  digging  grave  holes 
For  my  people  choked  dead  from  that  dust  of  the  mines. 


296  ■  American  folksongs  of  protest 

//  the  dicks  cut  me  down  on  my  way  to  his  office, 
My  good  union  sistren  and  brethren,  don't  cry; 
Make  him  put  you  to  work  and  build  that  big  cleaner 
So  you  will  not  die,  choked  by  dust  from  the  mines. 

—Composed  September  21,  1949. 

In  interpreting  the  character  of  the  notorious  Oklahoma  bad 
man  as  that  of  a  modern  Robin  Hood,  Guthrie  merely  versifies 
the  opinion  of  Floyd  which  may  still  be  heard  around  McAlester 
today.  John  Steinbeck,  in  The  Grapes  of  Wrath  (Chapter  8)  re- 
flects this  view  in  the  words  of  indomitable  Ma  Joad: 

"I  knowed  Purty  Boy  Floyd.  I  knowed  his  ma.  They  was  good  folks. 
He  was  full  a  hell,  sure,  like  a  good  boy  oughta  be."  She  paused  and 
then  her  words  poured  out.  "I  don'  know  all  like  this— but  I  know  it. 
He  done  a  little  bad  thing  a'  they  hurt  'im,  caught  'im  an'  hurt  him 
so  he  was  mad,  an'  the  nex'  bad  thing  he  done  was  mad,  an'  they 
hurt  'im  again.  An'  purty  soon  he  was  mean-mad.  They  shot  at  him 
like  a  varmint,  an'  he  shot  back,  an'  then  they  run  him  like  a  coyote, 
an'  him  a-snappin'  an'  a-snarlin',  mean  as  a  lobo.  An'  he  was  mad.  He 
wasn't  no  boy  or  no  man  no  more,  he  was  jus'  a  walkin'  chunk  a 
mean-mad.  But  the  folks  that  knowed  him  didn't  hurt  'im.  He  wasn' 
mad  at  them.  .  .  ." 

PRETTY  BOY  FLOYD 


P 


mm 


ipi 


r  *•  — ■ m 


y-m 


*    d    *  d 


i 


ra 


5=5 


•-♦ 


//  you'll  gather  Wound  me,  children, 
A  story  I  will  tell 
Of  Pretty  Boy  Floyd,  an  outlaw, 
Oklahoma  knew  him  well. 

It  was  in  the  town  of  Shawnee, 
It  was  Saturday  afternoon; 
His  wife  beside  him  in  his  wagon, 
As  into  town  they  rode. 


The  song-makers  •  297 


There  a  deputy  sheriff  approached  him 
In  a  manner  rather  rude, 
Using  vulgar  words  of  language, 
And  his  wife  she  overheard. 

Pretty  Boy  grabbed  a  log  chain, 
And  the  deputy  grabbed  a  gun; 
And  in  the  fight  that  followed, 
He  laid  that  deputy  down. 

He  took  to  the  trees  and  timbers 
And  he  lived  a  life  of  shame; 
Every  crime  in  Oklahoma 
Was  added  to  his  name. 

Yes,  he  took  to  the  trees  and  timbers 
On  that  Canadian  River's  shore; 
And  Pretty  Boy  found  a  welcome 
At  a  many  a  farmer's  door. 

There's  a  many  a  starving  farmer 
The  same  old  story  told, 
How  this  outlaw  paid  their  mortgage 
And  saved  their  little  home. 

Others  tell  you  'bout  a  stranger 
That  come  to  beg  a  meal, 
And  underneath  his  napkin 
Left  a  thousand  dollar  bill. 

It  was  in  Oklahoma  City, 

It  was  on  a  Christmas  Day, 

There  come  a  whole  car  load  of  groceries 

With  a  letter  that  did  say: 

"You  say  that  I'm  an  outlaw, 
You  say  that  I'm  a  thief; 
Here's  a  Christmas  dinner 
For  the  families  on  relief." 

Now  as  through  this  world  I  ramble, 
I  see  lots  of  funny  men; 
Some  will  rob  you  with  a  six  gun, 
And  some  with  a  fountain  pen. 

But  as  through  your  life  you  travel, 
As  through  your  life  you  roam, 
You  won't  never  see  an  outlaw 
Drive  a  family  from  their  home. 


298  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

ain't  got  no  home  in  this  world  anymore 

A  slight  adaptation  of  the  sentimental-sacred  song,  "Heaven 
Will  Be  My  Home." 

/  ain't  got  no  home, 

I'm  just  a-roaming  round; 

Just  a  wandering  worker, 

I  go  from  town  to  town. 

The  police  make  it  hard 

Wherever  I  go, 

And  I  ain't  got  no  home  in  this  world  anymore. 

My  brothers  and  my  sisters 

Are  stranded  on  this  road — 

It's  a  hot  and  dusty  road 

That  a  million  feet  have  trod — 

Rich  man  took  my  home 

And  drove  me  from  my  door, 

And  I  ain't  got  no  home  in  this  world  anymore. 

Was  a-f arming  on  the  shares, 

And  always  I  was  poor, 

My  crops  I  lay 

Into  the  banker's  store, 

My  wife  took  down  and  died, 

Upon  the  cabin  floor, 

And  I  ain't  got  no  home  in  this  world  anymore. 

Now  as  I  look  around, 

It's  very  plain  to  see 

This  world  is  such  a  great 

And  funny  place  to  be, 

The  gambling  man  is  rich, 

The  working  man  is  poor; 

And  I  ain't  got  no  home  in  this  world  anymore. 

THE   MOUND   OF   YOUR  GRAVE 

Guthrie  composed  this  song  after  reading  in  a  life  of  Abraham 
Lincoln  that  the  President  used  to  visit  the  grave  of  Ann  Rutledge 
alone. 

I'm  down  on  my  knees  in  this  dark  stormy  midnight, 
Down  on  my  knees  in  this  cold  windy  rain; 
I  walked  half  the  night  and  I've  come  to  your  graveside, 
To  cry  on  your  breast,  yes,  to  weep  on  your  grave. 


The  song-makers  •  299 

refrain:  The  ground  it  doth  moan  and  the  earth  it's  a  trembling; 
Our  trees  and  our  flowers  they  dance  in  our  winds; 
The  flowers  they  whine,  and  the  wild  wind  is  whistling 
As  I  kiss  this  ground  on  the  mound  of  your  grave. 

Well,  what  brings  me  here?  I  know  you  are  asking. 
I  know  they  did  watch  down  this  trail  I  have  come; 
Fve  come  several  trips  on  bright  nights  of  moonlight, 
And  other  nights  come  in  the  rains  and  the  storms. 

I've  wrastled  with  dogs,  Fve  wrastled  my  handaxe, 
I  jostled  rail  fences,  Fve  tumbled  with  men. 
Fm  strongest  of  men,  but  Fm  the  weakest  of  weaklings, 
As  I  walk  through  this  rain  to  fall  down  on  your  grave. 

I  rafted  my  raft  down  that  big  Mississippi, 
It  was  barrels  of  molasses  to  old  New  Orleans; 
When  I  saw  those  slaves  sold,  I  felt  just  as  weak,  Ann, 
As  I  feel  tonight  here,  down  by  your  grave. 

Your  letters  Fve  brought,  they're  here  in  my  pocket, 
I  hear  all  your  words  blowing  down  'mongst  my  trees; 
I  hope  your  sweet  words  will  guide  all  my  works,  Ann, 
As  you  guided  me  down  to  weep  on  your  grave. 

I  must  rise  up  and  go,  my  people  are  calling, 
They'll  see  all  this  mud  on  my  face  and  my  hands; 
When  questions  they  ask  me,  Fll  come  for  my  answers 
And  fall  down  again  on  this  mound  of  your  grave. 

UNION  MAID 

While  he  and  Pete  Seeger  were  singing  for  a  union  meeting  in 
Oklahoma  City  in  1940,  Guthrie  was  impressed  by  the  number 
of  women  who  accompanied  the  men.  The  next  morning  Pete 
Seeger  found  stuck  in  the  typewriter  the  words  to  this  most  famous 
of  Guthrie's  union  songs.  This  is  one  of  the  few  topical  parodies 
which  have  threatened  to  displace  the  original  songs  whose  tunes 
they  borrowed.  I  have  seen  at  least  a  half-dozen  union  songs  written 
to  the  tune  of  "Redwing,"  but  all  of  them  have  the  notation, 
"Sung  to  the  tune  of  Union  Maid." 

There  are  many  stories  about  the  effectiveness  of  the  "Union 
Maid."  During  a  strike  in  a  small  Philadelphia  factory  in  1946  a 
member  of  the  union  was  arrested  for  alleged  violence  on  the 
picket  line.  After  his  acquittal,  the  members  of  his  union  marched 
out  of  the  courtroom  singing,  "Oh,  you  can't  scare  me,  I'm  stick- 


300  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

ing  to  the  union."  After  the  strike  was  won,  a  diner  across  the 
street  changed  its  name  to  "The  Union  Maid  Restaurant." 

Perhaps  no  incident  can  attest  more  strongly  to  the  popularity 
of  the  "Union  Maid"  than  that  which  occurred  during  Senator 
Robert  Taft's  1947  meet-the-people  tour.  Several  passengers  who 
recognized  him  on  the  train  began  singing  the  "Union  Maid." 
In  a  rather  strained  and  obvious  effort  to  demonstrate  his  close 
ties  with  the  people,  Taft  joined  in  the  chorus.  As  Shaemas  O'Sheel 
remarked  later,  "Can't  say  it  did  much  good,  though." 

(Tune:  "Redwing") 

There  once  was  a  union  maid, 

She  never  was  afraid 

Of  goons  and  ginks  and  company  finks 

And  the  deputy  sheriffs  that  made  the  raids; 

She  went  to  the  union  hall 

When  a  meeting  it  was  called, 

And  when  the  legion  boys  come  'round, 

She  always  stood  her  ground. 

refrain:  O,  you  can't  scare  me, 

I'm  stickin'  to  the  union, 
I'm  stickin'  to  the  union, 
I'm  stickin'  to  the  union, 
O,  you  can't  scare  me, 
I'm  stickin'  to  the  union, 
I'm  stickin'  to  the  union, 
Till  the  day  I  die. 

This  union  maid  was  wise 

To  the  tricks  of  company  spies; 

She  couldn't  be  fooled  by  a  company  stool, 

She'd  always  organize  the  guys. 

She'd  always  get  her  way 

When  she  asked  for  better  pay; 

She'd  show  her  card  to  the  company  guard 

And  this  is  what  she'd  say: 

Now  you  gals  who  want  to  be  free 

Just  take  a  little  tip  from  me; 

Get  you  a  man  who's  a  union  man 

And  fight  together  for  liberty. 

Married  life  ain't  hard 

When  you  got  a  union  card; 

And  a  union  man  leads  a  happy  life 

When  he's  got  a  union  wife. 


Jesus  Christ  •  301 

JESUS  CHRIST 

"I  wrote  this  song  looking  out  of  a  rooming  house  window  in 
New  York  City  in  the  winter  of  1940.  I  saw  how  the  poor  folks 
lived,  and  then  I  saw  how  the  rich  folks  lived,  and  the  poor  folks 
down  and  out  and  cold  and  hungry,  and  the  rich  ones  out  drink- 
ing good  whiskey  and  celebrating  and  wasting  handfuls  of  money 
at  gambling  and  women,  and  I  got  to  thinking  about  what  Jesus 
said,  and  what  if  He  was  to  walk  into  New  York  City  and  preach 
like  He  used  to.  They'd  lock  Him  back  in  jail  as  sure  as  you're 
reading  this.  Even  as  you've  done  it  unto  the  least  of  these  little 
ones,  you  have  done  it  unto  me.' " 

(Tune:  "Jesse  James") 

Jesus  Christ  was  a  man  that  travelled  through  the  land, 
A  carpenter  true  and  brave; 

He  said  to  the  Rich,  "Give  your  goods  to  the  poor," 
So  they  laid  Jesus  Christ  in  his  grave. 

refrain:  Yes,  Jesus  was  a  man,  a  carpenter  by  hand, 
A  carpenter  true  and  brave; 
And  a  dirty  little  coward  called  Judas  Iscariot 
Has  laid  Jesus  Christ  in  His  grave. 

The  people  of  the  land  took  Jesus  by  the  hand, 
They  followed  him  far  and  wide; 
"I  come  not  to  bring  you  peace  but  a  sword," 
So  they  killed  Jesus  Christ  on  the  sly. 

He  went  to  the  sick  and  he  went  to  the  poor, 
He  went  to  the  hungry  and  the  lame; 
He  said  that  the  poor  would  win  this  world, 
So  they  laid  Jesus  Christ  in  his  grave. 

One  day  Jesus  stopped  at  a  rich  man's  door, 
"What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?" 
"You  must  sell  your  goods  and  give  it  to  the  poor." 
So  they  laid  Jesus  Christ  in  his  grave. 

They  nailed  him  there  to  die  on  a  cross  in  the  sky, 
In  the  lightning  and  thunder  and  rain; 
And  Judas  Iscariot  he  committed  suicide 
When  they  laid  Jesus  Christ  in  his  grave. 


302  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

When  the  love  of  the  poor  shall  turn  into  hate, 
When  the  patience  of  the  workers  gives  away, 
"Twould  be  better  for  you  rich  if  you'd  never  been  born, 
For  you  laid  Jesus  Christ  in  his  grave." 

This  song  was  written  in  New  York  City, 

Of  rich  men,  preachers  and  slaves; 

If  Jesus  was  to  preach  like  he  preached  in  Galilee, 

They  would  lay  Jesus  Christ  in  his  grave. 


Joe  Glazer 

Joe  Glazer  is  a  particularly  talented  representative  of  a 
group  of  composers  who  are  contributing  heavily  to  union  song 
collections  today.  These  men  (almost  all  of  whom  are  union  edu- 
cational directors)  are  either  professional  song  writers  or  experi- 
enced amateurs  who  have  not  quite  reached  that  elevated  status 
of  conscious  artistry.  They  are  of  course  not  writers  of  folksongs 
(though  a  few  of  them  entertain  that  pretension)  nor  is  there  any 
evidence  that  they  have  been  received  by  the  folk,  but  their  songs 
are  of  such  numerical  importance  in  the  contemporary  union 
singing  movement  with  which  this  study  is  so  largely  concerned 
that  parenthetical  mention  at  least  should  be  made  of  them  here. 

Glazer  is  not  one  of  the  most  prolific  of  these  writers,  for  he  has 
composed  only  about  a  dozen  union  songs,  but  he  is  one  of  the 
best.  His  recently  published  album  of  union  records23  is  perhaps 
the  best  of  its  kind.  The  quality  of  these  songs,  their  arrangements, 
and  their  rendition,  is  high  enough  to  warrant  their  presence  in 
the  record  cabinet  of,  say,  a  coal  operator.  In  other  words,  they 
are  of  genuine  worth  purely  as  a  source  of  entertainment. 

A  native  of  metropolitan  New  York,  Glazer  himself  could  not 
by  any  extension  of  definitive  limits  be  classed  as  a  member  of 
the  "folk."  His  closest  association  with  folk  music  before  being 
drawn  into  union  activity  was  an  abashed  partiality  for  cowboy 
and  hillbilly  music  of  the  more  debased  sort,  an  imperfection  of 
his  musical  appreciativeness  which  he  purged  himself  of  while 
attending  Brooklyn  College.  As  an  undergraduate  he  wrote  a 

23  Eight  New  Songs  for  Labor,  CIO  Department  of  Education  and  Research  Album. 


The  song-makers  *  303 

number  of  college  shows  which  featured  novelty  songs  of  an 
amateur  and  semi-professional  nature.  After  graduation  he  tried 
to  write  songs  professionally  and,  though  he  succeeded  in  getting 
one  song  published— a  hot  novelty  number  entitled  "Yogi  Yogi" 
which  was  subsequently  performed  with  unbounded  applause  by 
one  of  the  leading  swing  bands— he  gave  up  this  precarious  voca- 
tion for  a  less  glamorous  but  more  substantial  employment  as  an 
educational  director  for  the  Textile  Workers  Union  of  America. 

During  his  seven  years  with  TWUA  he  composed  a  few  songs 
which  more  or  less  regularly  appear  in  new  union  songbooks,  but 
as  he  sees  it,  his  most  important  accomplishment  was  his  pioneering 
work  in  the  field  of  union  group  singing.  Appalled  by  the  dullness 
and  apathy  that  characterized  most  nonmilitant  union  meetings,  he 
felt  that  only  a  strong  group-singing  program,  relentlessly  ad- 
ministered, would  preserve  in  time  of  industrial  peace  that  soli- 
darity of  purpose  and  warm  camaraderie  which  seem  spontaneously 
to  appear  during  strikes  and  similar  manifestations  of  labor  unrest. 
His  success  with  his  program  has  led  other  union  educational  di- 
rectors to  adopt  his  ideas. 

His  association  with  the  textile  union  and  other  labor  groups 
has  given  Joe  Glazer  many  opportunities  to  observe  the  workers 
as  singers  and  composers.  He  has  articulated  a  few  of  these  im- 
pressions into  generalizations  which,  since  they  coincide  with  my 
own  observations,  may  be  stated  here: 

1 .  99  per  cent  of  American  industrial  workers  do  not  sing  labor 
protest  songs  except  during  strikes. 

2.  Rural  workers  are  by  far  the  most  productive  in  the  matter 
of  union  songs  and  songs  of  social  and  economic  protest. 

3.  Most  songs  of  this  nature  come  from  the  rural  South. 

4.  Labor  protest  songs,  except  the  very  simple  and  the  very 
good  ones,  have  no  chance  to  become  traditional  (for  the  reasons 
enumerated  in  the  introduction  to  this  study). 

The  question  "How  were  these  songs  made?"  hopefully  but 
vainly  asked  of  all  informants  by  all  collectors  interested  in  for- 
mulating useful  theories  on  the  origin  of  folksong,  demonstrated 
its  usual  sterility  when  submitted  to  Joe  Glazer.  Despite  his  high 
degree  of  literateness,  the  answers  were  different  for  most  of  his 
songs,  and  for  all  were  discouragingly  vague.  The  only  defensible 


304  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

generalization  which  could  be  extracted  from  his  various  methods 
of  composition  was  that  a  song  starts  with  an  idea. 

The  idea  for  "The  Mill  Was  Made  of  Marble"  allegedly  derived 
from  a  verbose  and  declamatory  poem  of  the  same  title  which  ap- 
peared "about  three  years  ago"  in  the  journal  Textile  Labor,  but 
when  Glazer  checked  back  for  copyright  clearance,  the  editor  of 
Textile  Labor  could  find  no  poem  by  that  title  in  his  files.  At 
any  rate,  the  phrase  "the  mill  was  made  of  marble"  impinged  on 
his  consciousness  at  some  time  and  from  some  source,  and  later, 
after  a  period  of  mental  gestation,  reappeared  as  the  idea  for  a 
song  on  the  theme  of  a  heavenly  textile  mill.  It  remained  suspended 
in  this  stage  of  evolution  for  about  a  year  until  he  mentioned  the 
idea  to  (Margaret)  Pat  Knight  at  a  Textile  Education  School  ses- 
sion. Together  they  worked  out  the  refrain  and  a  tentative  melody. 
With  something  tangible  now  to  build  upon,  Glazer  added  lines, 
couplets,  and  stanzas  to  the  nucleus,  and  revised  the  tune  to  fit 
the  new  words.  When  he  had  the  song  completed,  he  submitted  it 
to  Pat  Knight  for  her  ideas  on  final  polishing,  but  she  told  him, 
"This  is  not  the  song  we  worked  on  together." 


THE   MILL  WAS   MADE   OF   MARBLE 


FF^F 


i 


P 


£ 


-01 


m 


-&-' 


^0- 


I  dreamed  that  I  had  died 
And  gone  to  my  reward; 
A  job  in  heaven's  textile  plant, 
On  a  golden  boulevard. 


The  song -makers  •  305 

refrain:  Where  the  mill  was  made  of  marble 
The  machines  were  made  out  of  gold, 
Where  nobody  ever  got  tired, 
And  nobody  ever  grew  old. 

The  mill  was  built  in  a  garden 
No  dust  or  lint  could  be  found; 
The  air  was  so  fresh  and  so  fragrant, 
With  flowers  and  trees  all  around. 

It  was  quiet  and  peaceful  in  heaven, 
There  was  no  clatter  or  boom; 
You  could  hear  the  most  beautiful  music, 
As  you  worked  at  the  spindle  or  loom. 

There  was  no  unemployment  in  heaven, 
WTe  worked  steady  all  through  the  year; 
We  always  had  food  for  the  children, 
We  never  were  haunted  by  fear. 

When  I  woke  from  this  dream  about  heaven, 
I  knew  that  there  never  could  be 
A  mill  like  that  one  down  below  here  on  earth 
For  workers  like  you  and  like  me. 

The  inspired  title  and  retrain  line,  "Too  old  to  work  and  too 
young  to  die,"  which  distinguishes  the  song  Glazer  wrote  for  the 
United  Auto  Workers'  pension  fight,  is  regrettably  not  his  own.  He 
confesses,  "This  line  and— except  for  the  meter-induced  repeti- 
tion—the whole  refrain,  comes  from  Walter  Reuther's  pension 
speech;  and  the  first  stanza  fell  naturally  out  of  the  refrain."  After 
adapting  Reuther's  lines  to  fit  the  meter  and  rime  of  a  rough 
melody,  Glazer  found  that  his  inspiration  had  died,  or  rather, 
that  it  had  gone  into  a  dormant  state,  where  it  reposed  for  six 
months.  Just  before  the  Chrysler  strike  in  1950  he  talked  the  in- 
cipient song  over  with  several  other  union  leaders  and,  working 
together  under  his  general  direction,  these  recruits  produced  the 
other  three  stanzas.  The  lack  of  unity  and  coherence  which  identi- 
fies communally  produced  song  is  evident  in  the  almost  perfect 
interchangeability  of  the  rimed  couplets  in  the  second  and  third 
stanzas.  Only  in  the  first  stanza,  which  Glazer  wrote  alone,  and  in 
the  final  stanza,  which  achieves  continuity  through  its  thematic 
recapitulation,  is  there  any  clear  logical  dependence  between  the 
four  lines  of  the  quatrain. 


306  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Recognizing  the  strong  overtones  of  the  ubiquitous  "Villikins 
and  His  Dinah"  in  the  music  of  the  latter  part  of  the  stanzas,  I 
commended  him  on  his  adaptation.  But  he  denied  any  knowledge 
of  "Villikins  and  His  Dinah."  "Do  you  know  'Sweet  Betsy  from 
Pike?"  I  asked  him.  He  said  he  didn't  know  that  either,  but  when 
I  sang  a  stanza  or  two  of  "Sweet  Betsy"  for  him,  he  admitted  having 
heard  it  somewhere  before.  With  admirable  objectivity,  he  agreed 
that  there  may  have  been  some  subconscious  borrowing  of  this 
once-heard  tune  when  he  made  up  the  music  for  "Too  Old  to 
Work." 

TOO    OLD   TO    WORK 

You  work  in  the  factory  all  of  your  life, 

Try  to  provide  for  your  kids  and  your  wife; 

When  you  get  too  old  to  produce  anymore 

They  hand  you  your  hat  and  they  show  you  the  door. 

refrain:  Too  old  to  work,  too  old  to  work, 

When  you're  too  old  to  work  and  you're  too  young  to  die; 

Who  will  take  care  of  you?  How'll  you  get  by? 

When  you're  too  old  to  work  and  you're  too  young  to  die? 

You  don't  ask  for  favors  when  your  life  is  through, 
You've  got  a  right  to  what's  coming  to  you; 
Your  boss  gets  a  pension  when  he  is  too  old, 
You  helped  him  retire — you're  out  in  the  cold. 

They  put  horses  to  pasture,  they  feed  them  on  hay, 
Even  machines  get  retired  some  day; 
The  bosses  get  pensions  when  their  days  are  through, 
Fat  pensions  for  them,  brother,  nothing  for  you. 

There's  no  easy  answer,  there's  no  easy  cure; 
Dreaming  won't  change  it,  that's  one  thing  for  sure; 
But  fighting  together  we'll  get  there  some  day, 
And  when  we  have  won  you  will  no  longer  say  .  .  . 

"That's  All"  is  simply  a  union  parody,  like  hundreds  of  others, 
of  a  semi-religious  Negro  song— in  this  case  one  popularized  by 
the  gospel  singer,  Sister  Rosetta  Tharpe.  Glazer  said  that  this  is 
largely  the  product  of  group  collaboration. 


That's  all  •  307 

that's  all 

refrain:  That's  all  (that's  all,  that's  all) 

I  tell  you  that's  all  (that's  all,  that's  all) 
You  got  to  be  a  union  member,  I  tell  you — 
that's  all  (that's  all,  that's  all) 

You  can  go  to  college,  you  can  go  to  school 

But  if  you  ain't  a  union  man  you're  just  an  educated  fool. 

They're  working  you  so  hard  that  you're  about  to  drop,  ■ 
You  straighten  out  the  boss  with  a  union  shop. 

If  your  congressman  won't  listen  to  what  you  have  to  say 
Just  tell  him  you'll  remember  on  election  day. 

"I  Ain't  No  Stranger  Now,"  and  "Shine  on  Me"  are  simplified 
adaptations  of  sacred  songs  which  Glazer  first  heard  sung  by 
Negroes.  The  idea  for  the  adaptation  of  both  of  these  songs  came 
from  a  group  of  textile  workers  whom  he  met  at  a  North  Carolina 
CIO  union  school  in  1947. 

1  ain't  no  stranger  now 

refrain:  /  ain't  (no  I  ain't)  no  stranger  now  (no  I  ain't) 
I  ain't  (no  I  ain't)  no  stranger  now  (no  I  ain't) 
Since  I've  been  introduced  to  the  CIO 
I  ain't  no  stranger  now. 

Run  scab  (run  to  the  boss)  and  hide  your  face  (run  to  the  boss) 
Run  scab  (run  to  the  boss)  and  hide  your  face  (run  to  the  boss) 
Won't  you  run  to  the  boss  and  hide  your  face 
I  ain't  no  stranger  now. 

I'm  a  union  man  (I  feel  so  good)  in  a  union  town  (I  feel  so  good) 
I'm  a  union  man  (I  feel  so  good)  in  a  union  town  (I  feel  so  good) 
I'm  a  union  man  in  a  union  town 
I  ain't  no  stranger  now. 

Brother,  sign  (put  your  name  down  here)  a  card  today  (put  your 

name  down  here) 
Brother,  sign  (put  your  name  down  here)  a  card  today  (put  your 

name  down  here) 
Won't  you  come  and  sign  a  card  today 
You'll  be  no  stranger  now. 


308  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

SHINE    ON    ME 

refrain:  Shine  on  me,  shine  on  me, 

Let  the  light  of  the  union — shine  on  me 

Shine  on  me,  shine  on  me, 

Let  the  light  of  the  union — shine  on  me. 

Once  I  had  no  union  but  now  Vve  got  one 

Since  I  joined  the  union  I've  got  the  blues  on  the  run. 

No  starvation  wages,  no  more  misery 

Since  the  light  of  the  union  has  shined  on  me. 

"Humblin'  Back,"  a  pleasingly  facile  parody  on  "St.  James  In- 
firmary," depends  like  "Too  Old  to  Work"  on  an  inspired  thematic 
line,  and  again  the  line  is  regrettably  not  original.  In  this  case 
it  comes  from  a  North  Carolina  organizer  named  Draper  Wood, 
who  believed  in  consolidating  his  advances  before  he  made  them. 
"Don't  get  yourself  out  on  a  limb,"  he  frequently  advised,  "  'cause 
you'll  have  to  come  a-humblin'  back."  The  rest  of  the  song,  Glazer 
says,  was  written  with  great  deliberation  and  at  one  sitting. 

humblin'  back 
(Tune:  "St.  James  Infirmary"  with  variations) 

I  was  working  in  a  plant  way  down  in  Georgia 

Conditions  were  bad  that's  a  fact. 

When  I  tried  to  do  something  about  it 

I  always  came  a-humblin1  back. 

I  went  fishin'  with  the  foreman  on  Sunday 

I  thought  I  had  the  inside  track; 

But  he  forgot  me  early  on  Monday 

And  I  had  to  come  a-humblin'  back. 

refrain:  Humblin'  (humblin') 
Humblin'  (humblin ') 

I  had  to  come  a-humblin'  back  (that  mornin') 
Humblin1  (humblin') 
Humblin'  (humbling 
I  had  to  come  a-humblin1  back. 

They  asked  me  to  join  up  with  the  union; 

I  said,  "Nothin'  doin'  here,  Mac." 

The  union  man  said  "Brother,  you'll  be  sorry; 

Someday  you'll  come  a-humblin'  back." 

So  I  went  to  the  boss  one  mornin' 

Just  to  try  to  get  a  little  more  jack; 

But  he  was  very  dis-encouragin' 

And  I  had  to  come  a-humblin'  back. 


Monkey  ward  can't  make  a  monkey  out  of  me  •  309 

Now  things  was  getting  rough  way  down  in  Georgia 

I  was  feelin'  like  a  sad,  sad,  sack. 

I  was  gettin'  mighty  tired  and  weary 

Cause  I  always  came  a-humblin'  back. 

So  I  talked  to  the  boys  all  around  me; 

I  talked  to  Joe,  I  talked  to  Pete,  I  talked  to  Zack; 

And  we  joined  up,  yes  we  joined  up  with  the  union, 

So  we'd  never  come  a-humblin'  back. 

Now  things  are  lookin'  up  way  down  in  Georgia 
We're  rollin'  on  the  union  track; 
You  can  do  it  like  we  did  it  in  Georgia 
And  you'll  never  come  a-humblin'  back. 

"And  this  was  a  song  that  wrote  itself,"  says  Glazer,  after  he  hit 
upon  the  pun,  S-L-Avery.  The  song  derives  of  course  from  the 
Montgomery  Ward  strike  famous  in  photographic  history  for  the 
picture  of  S.  L.  Avery,  Montgomery  Ward's  president,  being  carried 
out  of  the  building  by  two  soldiers. 

MONKEY  WARD24  CAN'T  MAKE  A  MONKEY  OUT  OF  ME 

Monkey  Ward  can't  make  a  monkey  out  of  me; 

The  union  will  protect  me  from  S-L- Avery; 

I'm  not  a  slave  and  I  won't  behave 

Just  like  a  chimpanzee — 

Monkey  Ward  can't  make  a  monkey  out  of  me. 

Now  if  he  breaks  the  union,  here's  how  it's  gonna  be, 

You'll  be  just  like  a  monkey  a-climbing  in  a  tree. 

You'll  jump  around  and  kiss  the  ground 

For  Sewell  Avery — 

Monkey  Ward  can't  make  a  monkey  out  of  me. 

refrain:  Get  wise!  Organize! 

It's  your  only  chance  for  real  democracy. 

Get  wise!  Organize! 

Will  you  be  a  man  or  a  monkey? 

We're  gonna  make  a  monkey  out  of  Sewell  Avery; 

We'll  feed  him  on  bananas  and  we'll  stick  him  in  a  tree; 

We'll  twist  his  tail  around  a  nail 

And  then  we'll  shout  with  glee — 

Monkey  Ward  can't  make  a  monkey  out  of  me. 

"But  Montgomery  Ward  won  the  strike  and  broke  the  union," 
adds  Glazer,  "and  we  sang  'Monkey  Ward  has  made  a  monkey  out 
of  us.'  " 

24  Monkey  Ward:  Montgomery  Ward. 


IX 


Songs  of  Social  and  Economic  Protest  on  Records 

Ain't  It  Hard  to  Be  a  Right  Black  Nigger?  James    (Iron  Head) 

Baker,  Central  state  farm,  Sugarland,  Tex.  Library  of  Congress, 

Archive  of  American  Folk  Song*  202  Bi,  617  B2,  721  Bi  and  B2. 
Ain't  This  a  Mean  World  to  Live  in?  Four  unidentified  Negroes, 

Belle  Glade,  Fla.  L  of  C,  AAFS  374  B. 
Ain't  Workin'  Song.  Charley  Campbell,  State  docks,   Mobile,  Ala. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  1336  B2. 
All  Out  and  Down.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  Melotone  0314. 
Atomic  Energy.  Sir  Lancelot.  Charter  102. 
Bad  Housing  Blues.  Josh  White.   Keynote  album   107   ("Southern 

Exposure"). 
Ball  and  Chain  Blues.  Unidentified  Negro  convict,  State  peninten- 

tiary,  Nashville,  Tenn.  L  of  C,  AAFS  178  A2. 
Ballad  of  F.D.R.  Tom  Glazer  and  group.  Asch  album  200. 
Beans,  Bacon,  and  Gravy.   Gladys,  Matilda,  and  Juanita  Crouch, 

St.  Louis,  Mo.  L  of  C,  AAFS  SR  43. 
The  Beggar  Drew  Nigh.  Mrs.  Vera  Kilgore,  Highlander  Folk  School, 

Monteagle,  Tenn.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2938  B4. 
Ben  Butler.  Mrs.  A.  G.  Griffin,  Newberry,  Fla.  L  of  C,  AAFS  955  A4. 
Big  Rock  Candy  Mountains.  Harry  (Mac)  McClintock.  Victor  21704. 
Blowin'  Down  this  Road.  Woody  Guthrie.  Victor  album  P  27  ("Dust 

Bowl  Ballads"). 
Boss  Man,  I  Ain't  Workin'  for  You.  Victoria  Wilson,  New  Bight,  Cat 

Island,  Bahamas.  L  of  C,  AAFS  413  Ai. 

*  Hereafter  abbreviated  L  of  C,  AAFS 

3" 


312  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Bound  for  Canaan.  Ed  Griffin  and  the  Sacred  Harp  Singers,  Meridian, 

Miss.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3040  Ai. 
Bourgeois  Blues.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  Musicraft  227;  L  of  C, 

AAFS  2502  B2. 
Bread  and  Roses.  I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  Two. 
Buffalo  Skinners.  Woody  Guthrie.  Disc  album  360  ("Struggle"). 
C.C.C.  Blues. 

Washboard  Sam.  Bluebird  B  7993. 

Unidentified  group  of  boys,  Brawley,  Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3561  Bi. 

Jimmy  Collins,  Brawley,  Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3563  A2. 

Clay  Begley,  Middlefork,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1454  A3. 
Can't  Help  from  Cryin'  Sometimes.  Josh  White.  Perfect  0285. 
Captain,  Captain,  Don't  You  See?  Charley  Jones,  Eatonville,  Fla. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  363  B2. 
Cap'n,  Did  You  Hear?  James  Hale  and  George  James,  Atmore  state 

prison  farm,  Atmore,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS  943  B2. 
Cap'n,  Did  You  Hear  'bout?  Ed  Cobb,  Livingston,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

1330  Ai. 
Captain  Got  a  Long  Chain.  George  Goram,  Culpeper,  Va.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  733  B2. 
Captain,  I  Am  Gettin'  Tired.  Willis  Carter  and  group,  State  docks, 

Mobile,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1336  A2. 
Cap'n,  I  Heard  What  You  Said.  George  James,  Atmore  state  prison 

farm,  Atmore,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS  943  A3. 
Casey  Jones  (The  Union  Scab).  Tom  Glazer.  "Favorite  American 

Union  Songs"  album,  CIO  Dept.  of  Education  and  Research. 
Chain  Around  My  Leg.  Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3415  B2. 
Chain  Gang.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jack  Bryant,  Firebaugh  FSA  camp,  Fire- 

baugh,  Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS  4148  Bi. 
Chain  Gang  Blues. 

James  Hale,  Atmore  state  prison  farm,  Atmore,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

934  Bi. 

Kokoma  Arnold.  Decca  7069. 
Chain   Gang   Boun'.   Josh   White.   Columbia   album   C-22    ("Chain 

Gang"). 
Chain  Gang  Song. 

Vernon  Dalhart.  Brunswick  2911. 

Leroy  Ramsay,  Frederica,  Ga.  L  of  C,  AAFS  338  Ai,  339  A  and  B. 
CIO  Union  Song.  Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2534  B. 
Citizen  CIO.  Tom  Glazer,  Josh  White.  Asch  album  349  ("Songs  of 

Citizen  CIO"). 
Cloak  Makers'  Union.  Gladys,  Matilda,  and  Juanita  Crouch.  St.  Louis, 

Mo.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3197  A2. 
Coal  and  Coke  Line.  Addison  Boserman,  Tygart  Valley  Homesteads, 

Elkins,  W.  Va.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2571  Bi. 


Appendix  •  313 

Coal  Creek  Troubles.  Jilson  Setters,  Ashland,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1017 

A. 
Coal  Miner's  Blues.  Carter  family.  Decca  46086. 
The  Coal  Miner's  Child.  Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2575 

A  and  B. 
Come  All  You  Coal  Miners.  Sarah  Ogan.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1944  A. 
Come  All  You  Hardy  Miners.  Findlay  Donaldson,  Pineville,  Ky. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  1985  A 1 
Corn  Bread  Tough.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  Disc  album  745 

("Work  Songs  of  the  U.S.A."). 
Cotton  Farmer  Blues.  Sampson  Pittman,  Detroit,   Mich.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  2479  B. 
Cotton  Mill  Blues.  Lester  the  Highwayman.  Decca.  5559. 
Cotton  Mill  Colic.  Joe  Sharp,  Wash.,  D.C.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1629  ^2. 
Cotton  Patch  Blues.  Tommy  McClennan.  Bluebird  8408. 
Cotton  Pickin'  Blues.  Robert  Restway.  Bluebird  9036. 
Coolee  (Coulee)  Dam.  Woody  Guthrie.  Asch  album  347  ("Woody 

Guthrie"). 
Crossbones  Scully  (T-Bone  Slim).  Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

2539  B  and  2556  A. 
Cryin'  Who?  Cryin'  You.  Josh  White.  Columbia  album  C-22  ("Chain 

Gang  Songs"). 
CWA  Blues.  Walter  Roland.  Melotone  13103  and  Perfect  0293. 
Dark  as  a  Dungeon.  Merle  Travis.  Capitol  album  AD-50  ("Folk  Songs 

of  the  Hills"). 
Death  of  Harry  Simms.  Pete  Seeger.  Charter  C-45. 
Death  of  John  Henry. 

Wilby  Toomey.  Silvertone  6005. 

Uncle  Dave  Macon.  Brunswick  album  B  1024  ("Listen  to  Our 

Story"). 
Defense  Blues.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly),  Brownie  McGhee,  Pops 

Foster,  and  Willie  the  Lion  Smith.  Disc  5085. 
Defense  Factory  Blues.  Josh  White.  Keynote  album  107  ("Southern 

Exposure"). 
Depression  Blues.  Tampa  Red.  Vocalion  1656. 
Dickman  Song.  Gladys,  Matilda,  and  Juanita  Crouch,  St.  Louis,  Mo. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  43  B3  and  SR  44  Bi. 
Didn't  Know  I  Had  to  Bow  so  Low.  James  Washington  and  group, 

Reid  state  farm,  Boykin,  S.C.  L  of  C,  AAFS  706  A2. 
The  Dishonest  Miller. 

Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2553  B. 

Bascom  Lamar  Lunsford.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1786  B2. 
Do  Re  Mi.  Woody  Guthrie.  Victor  album  P-27  ("Dust  Bowl  Ballads," 

vol.  I). 


314  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

The  Dodger  Song. 

Almanac  Singers.  General  5018. 

Mrs.  Emma  Dusenbury,  Mena,  Ark.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3230  B2. 
A  Dollar  Ain't  a  Dollar  Anymore. 

Priority  Ramblers.  L  of  C,  AAFS  7054  Ai. 

Union  Boys.  Asch  album  346  ("Songs  for  Victory"). 
Don't  Take  Away  My  PWA.  Jimmie  Gordon.  Decca  7230. 
Down  in  a  Coal  Mine.  Morgan  Jones.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1438. 
Down  the  Street  We  Hold  Our  Demonstration.  Alice  and  Johnny, 

St.  Louis,  Mo.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3195  Ai. 
Dressmakers'  Victory  Song.  I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  One. 
Drill,   Ye   Tarriers,   Drill.    Earl   Robinson.    Keynote   album    132 

("Americana").  L  of  C,  AAFS  1627  Ai. 
Dust  Bowl  Refugees.  Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3418  Bi,  3422  A. 
Dust  Pneumonia  Song.  Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3420  A2. 
Dusty  Old  Dust.  Woody  Guthrie.  Victor  album  P-28  ("Dust  Bowl 

Ballads,"  vol.  2). 
The  Dying  Hobo.  Kelly  Harrell.  Victor  20527. 
East  Brookfield  Woolen  Mill.  Elmer  Barton,  Quebec,  Vt.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  3697  B2. 
East  Ohio  Miners'  Strike.  Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1940  B. 
Empty  Pocket  Blues.  Bill  Atkins.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1922  A. 
Fare  You  Well  Old  Elie  (Ely)  Branch.  Aunt  Molly  Jackson,  L  of 

C,  AAFS  1939  B. 
Farmin'  Man  Blues.  Luscious  Curtin,  Natchez,  Miss.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

4004  Ai. 
Fifty  Years  Ago.  Dick  Wright.  "Sing  a  Labor  Song"  album,  Main 

Street  Records. 
Fight  for  Union  Recognition.  Bert  and  Ruby  Rains,  Bakersfield, 

Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS  4141  A2. 
Franklin  Roosevelt.  Jilson  Setters,  Ashland,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1010 

Bi. 
Freedom  Blues.  Earl  Robinson.  Alco  album  A2. 

Freedom  Road.  Josh  White.  Asch  album  349  ("Songs  of  Citizen  CIO"). 
Frisco  Strike  Saga.  Ethel  Peterson  and  students  of  Bryn  Mawr  Labor 

College,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pa.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1771  A  and  Bi. 
The  Gallis  Pole.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  Musicraft  227. 
Get  Thee  Behind  Me.  Almanac  Singers.  Keynote  album  106  ("Talking 

Union"). 
Give  Me  Back  My  Job  Again.  Jim  Garland.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1946  B. 
Go  Down  Moses. 

Hampton  Institute  Quartet.  Victor  album  P-78. 

Hall  Johnson  choir.  Victor  4553. 

Southern  Male  Quartet.  Columbia  8479. 

Tuskegee  Quartet.  Victor  20518. 


Appendix  *  315 

Go  Down  Moses— Continued 

Edna  Thomas.  Columbia  1606  D. 

Kenneth  Spencer.  Sonora  album  MS-478. 

Carl  Sandburg.  Decca  album  A-356. 

Marian  Anderson.  Victor  1799. 

The  Jubilaires.  King  4167. 

Paul  Robeson.  Columbia  album  M-610. 
God  Made  Us  All.  Lord  Invader.  Disc  5080. 
Goin'  Down  the  Road  Feelin'  Bad. 

Tom  Glazer.  "Favorite  American  Union  Songs,"  CIO  Dept.  of 

Education  and  Research  album. 

Ray  Melton,  Galax,  Va.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1347  A2. 

Hobart  Ricker,  Wash.,  D.C.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3903  B5. 

Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3418  Ai. 

Warde  H.  Ford,  Central  Valley,  Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS  4206  A2. 

Gussie  Ward  Stone,  Arvin  FSA  camp,  Arvin,  Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

4103  Bi. 

Bascom  Lamar  Lunsford.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1805  Bi. 

Ollie  Crownover  and  group,  Brawley  migratory  camp,  Brawley, 

Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3562  B2. 

Rex  and  James  Hardie,  Shafter,  Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3566  Ai. 
Goin'  Home,  Boys.  Josh  White.  Columbia  album  C-22  ("Chain  Gang 

Songs"). 
Goin'  to  Roll  the  Union  on.  See  Roll  the  Union  on. 
Gray  Goose. 

Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly)  and  Golden  Gate  Quartet.  Victor 

album  P-50.  ("Midnight  Special"). 

Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly),  Woody  Guthrie,  Cisco  Houston. 

Disc  album  726  ("Midnight  Special"). 

Earl  Robinson.  Timely  501. 

Alan  Lomax.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1617  A. 

Augustus  (Track  Horse)  Haggerty  and  group  of  Negro  convicts, 

state  penitenitary,  Huntsville,  Tex.  L  of  C,  AAFS  223  A2  and 

1937  A- 

Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  L  of  C,  AAFS  155  B. 

James  (Iron  Head)  Baker  and  group  of  Negro  convicts,  Central 

state  farm,  Sugarland,  Tex.  L  of  C,  AAFS  205  A3. 

Washington  (Lightnin').  Darrington  state  farm,  Sandy  Point,  Tex. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  182  A. 
Great  Day.  Joe  Glazer.  "Eight  New  Songs  for  Labor,"  CIO  Dept.  of 

Education  and  Research  album. 
Great  Day.  Michael  Loring.  Progressive  Party  record. 
The  Great  Dust  Storm.  Woody  Guthrie.  Victor  album  P-28  ("Dust 

Bowl  Ballads,"  vol.  2) 


316  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Hallelujah,  I'm  a  Bum.  Harry  (Mac)  McClintock.  Bluebird  B  11083, 

Victor  21343. 
Hallelujah,  I'm  a  Travelin'.  Pete  Seeger.  Charter  C-45. 
Ham  and  Eggs. 

Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly)  and  Golden  Gate  Quartet.  Victor 

album  P-50  ("Midnight  Special"). 

Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly),  Woody  Guthrie,  Cisco  Houston. 

Disc  album  726  ("Midnight  Special"). 
Hard  Times. 

Crockett  Ward,  Galax,  Va.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1363  Ai. 

Liberty  High  School  quartet,  near  Newton,  Tex.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

2653  B3. 

Mrs.  Pete  Steele,  Hamilton,  Ohio.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1711  A. 

Roland  Franklin,  O.  B.  Duncan,  and  Frank  Brown,  San  Antonio, 

Tex.  L  of  C,  AAFS  669  Ai  and  A2. 

Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3412  Ai. 

Mrs.  Minnie  Floyd.  Murrell's  Inlet,  S.C.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2719  A. 
Hard  Times  Blues.  Josh  White.   Musicraft  album  N-3   ("Harlem 

Blues"),  and  Keynote  album  107  ("Southern  Exposure"). 
Hard  Times  in  Colman's  Mines.  Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

2532  and  2535  A. 
Hard  Times  in  Foxridge  Mines.  Jim  Garland.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1950  A2. 
Hard  Times  in  Kansas.  George  Vinton  Graham,  San  Jose,  Cal.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  3375  B3. 
Hard  Times  in  these  Mines.  Finlay  (Red  Ore)  Donaldson.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  1985  A2  and  Bi 
Hard  Times,  Po'  Boy.  Gant  family,  Austin,  Tex.  L  of  C,  AAFS  70  A3. 
Hard  Traveling.  Woody  Guthrie.  Disc  album  610  ("Ballads  from  the 

Dust  Bowl"). 
Harlan  Jail.  Unidentified  union  organizer.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1529  A3 

and  Bi. 
Henry  Ford  Blues.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  L  of  C,  AAFS  143  B. 
High  Price  Blues.  Brownie  McGhee.  Encore  record. 
Highrojaram.  Katharine  Trusty,  Paintsville,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1936  Ai. 
The  Highway  Hobo.  Noel  Westbrook,  Shafter  FSA  camp,  Shatter,  Cal. 

Lof  C,  AAFS  4112  B. 
Highway  66.  Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3422  B2  and  3423  Ai. 
Hobo  Bill's  Last  Ride.  Jimmie  Rodgers.  Victor  22421. 
Hobo,  You  Can't  Ride  This  Train.  Louis  Armstrong.  Bluebird  6501. 
Hobo's  Lullaby.  Woody  Guthrie.  Stinson  716. 
Hold  On. 

Priority  Ramblers.  L  of  C.  AAFS  7054  Bi. 

Union  Boys.  Asch  album  346  ("Songs  for  Victory"). 


Appendix  •  317 

Hold  the  Fort. 

Tom  Glazer.  "Favorite  American  Union  Songs,"  CIO  Department 

of  Education  and  Research  album. 

I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  Two. 

Union  Boys.  Asch  album  346  ("Songs  for  Victory"). 
Horace  Greeley.  Earl  Robinson.  Timely  501. 
The  House  I  Live  In. 

Earl  Robinson.  Keynote  album  132  ("Americana"). 

Josh  White.  Stinson  album  348  ("Songs  by  Josh  White"). 
House  Rent  Blues.  Clarence  Williams.  Okeh  8171. 
Humblin'  Back.  Joe  Glazer.  "Eight  New  Songs  for  Labor,"  CIO  Depart- 
ment of  Education  and  Research  album. 
Hungry  Disgusted  Blues.  Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2538  A. 
I  Ain't  Got  No  Home  in  This  World  Anymore.  Woody  Guthrie.  Vic- 
tor 26624. 
I  Ain't  Gonna  Be  Treated  Thisaway.  Gilbert  Fike,  Little  Rock,  Ark. 

LofC,  AAFS  3187  A2. 
I  Ain't  No  Stranger  Now.  Joe  Glazer.  "Eight  New  Songs  for  Labor," 

CIO  Dept.  of  Education  and  Research  album. 
I  am  a  Girl  of  Constant  Sorrow.  Sarah  Ogan.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1945  A. 
I'm  A  Lookin'  For  a  Home.  Hootenanny  Singers.  Asch  album  370 

("Roll  the  Union  on"). 
I'm  All  Out  and  Down.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  L  of  C,  AAFS 

144  A. 
I'm  Goin'  to  Organize,  Baby  Mine.  Sarah  Ogan.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1952 

A2  and  Bi. 
I'm  on  my  Way  to  Canaan's  Land.  Carter  family.  Bluebird  8167. 
I  Asked  my  Captain  What  Time  of  Day.  Ed  Jones,  Greenville,  Miss. 

LofC,  AAFS  3092  Bi. 
I'm  Worried  Now  and  I  Won't  be  Worried  Long. 

Tom  Bell,  Livingston,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS  4067  Ai. 

Mrs.  Lucile  Henson,  San  Antonio,  Tex.  L  of  C,  AAFS  541  Bi,  B2. 
I  Belong  to  the  Union  Band.  Sally  Nelson,  Riviera,  Fla.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

3381  A2. 
I  Don't  Want  Your  Millions,  Mister.  Tilman  Cadle,  Middlesboro, 

Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1401  Ai 
I've  Got  a  Ballot.  Michael  Loring.  Progressive  party  record. 
I  Got  Shoes.  Edna  Thomas.  Columbia  1863-D. 
I've  Just  Come  Down  From  the  White  Folks'  House.  Mrs.  George 

White,  Saline,  Tex.  L  of  C,  AAFS  923  A2. 
I  Just  Can't  Feel  at  Home  in  This  World  Any  More.  Group  of 

Negro  men  and  women,  Cockrus,  Miss.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3009  Bi. 
I.L.G.W.U.  Anthem.  I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  One. 
If  You  Ain't  Got  the  Do  Re  Mi.  Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

3421  Bi. 


318  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

In  My  Heart.  John  Handcox.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3237  B2. 

In  the  Land  of  Peace  and  Plenty.  Gladys,  Matilda,  and  Juanita 

Crouch,  St.  Louis,  Mo.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3197  B2. 
In  Washinton.  Priority  Ramblers.  L  of  C,  AAFS  7054  B3. 
Internationale.  I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  One. 
It's  a  Cruel  World  For  Me.  Floyd  Tilman.  Columbia  20360. 
Jefferson  and  Liberty. 

Earl  Robinson,  Keynote  album  132  ('Americana"). 

American   Ballad   Singers.    Bost   album   ES-i    ("Songs   of   Early 

America"). 
Jerry. 

Josh  White.  Columbia  album  C-22  ("Chain  Gang  Songs"). 

Stinson  album  358  ("Folk  Songs"). 
Jesus  Christ.  Woody  Guthrie.  Asch  album  347  ("Woody  Guthrie"). 
Jim  Crow. 

Josh  White.  Decca  album  A-611  ("Ballads  and  Blues"). 

Josh  White  and  the  Union  Boys.  Asch  album  346  ("Songs  for  Vic- 
tory"). 

California  Labor  School  Chorus.  CLS  record. 
Jim  Crow  Train.  Josh  White.  Keynote  album   107  ("Southern  Ex- 
posure"). 
Joe  Hill. 

Earl  Robinson.  General  G-30. 

Paul  Robeson.  Columbia  M  534. 

Michael  Loring.  Theme  T-100. 
John  Henry. 

Salty  Holmes  and  his  Brown  County  Boys.  Decca  46116. 

Riley  Puckett.  Columbia  14031. 

Richard  Dyer-Bennett.  Asch  461-3. 

Earl  Robinson.  Timely  8. 

Spencer  Trio.  Decca  63779. 

Gid  Tanner  and  his  Skillet  Lickers.  Columbia  15019  and  15142. 

Henry  Thomas.  Vocalion  1094. 

J.  E.  Mainer's  Mountaineers.  Bluebird  6629. 

Earl  Johnson.  Okeh  45101. 

Dixieland  Jazz  Group.  Victor  27545. 

Wilby  Toomey.  Silvertone  6005. 

Bob  and  Joe  Shelton.  Decca  5173. 

Paul  Robeson.  Columbia  M-610  ("Spirituals"). 

Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  Disc  734,  L  of  C,  AAFS  2503  B  and 

2504  A. 

Josh  White.  Keynote  K  125  and  Decca  A  447. 

Merle  Travis.  Capitol  48000. 

John  Jacob  Niles.  Victor  2051. 

J.  E.  Mainer.  King  550. 


Appendix  •  319 

John  Henry— Continued 

Tom  Scott.  Signature  album  S-5  ("Sing  of  America"). 
Bernard  Steffen  and  Charles  Pollock,  Wash.,  D.  C.  L  of  C,  AAFS 
3304  Bi. 

Farmer  Collett,  Middlefork,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1429  A2  and  Bi. 
Gabriel  Brown,  Eatonville,  Fla.  L  of  C,  AAFS  355  A  and  B. 
John  Davis,  Frederica,  Ga.  L  of  C,  AAFS  313  Ai. 
M.  Asher,  Hyden,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1519  A2. 
Mrs.  Winnie  Prater,  Salyersville,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1593  A3  and  Bi. 
Paul,  Wade,  and  Vernon  Miles,  Canton,  Ohio.  L  of  C,  AAFS  4075  B2. 
Pete  Steele,  Hamilton,  Ohio.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1711  A2. 
Chester  Allen,  Scottsboro,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2943  A2  and  Bi. 
Arthur  Bell,  Cumins  state  farm,  Gould,  Ark.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2668  Bi. 
Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2551  Ai. 
Austin  Harmon,  Maryville,  Tenn.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2916  B2  and  2917 
Ai. 

Bascom  Lamar  Lunsford.  Leicester,  N.  C.  L.  of  C,  AAFS  3617  Bi. 
Bill  Atkins,  Pineville,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1989  Bi. 
Booker  T.  Sapps,  R  .G.  Matthews,  and  Willy  Flowers,  Belle  Glade, 
Fla.  L  of  C,  AAFS  371 B 

Charles  Griffin,  Kilby  prison,  Montgomery,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS  238  A. 
Charley  Jones,  Eatonville,  Fla.  L  of  C,  AAFS  365  B2. 
Dr.  Chapman  J.  Milling,  Columbia,  S.  C.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3789  B. 
Fields  Ward  and  Dr.  W.  P.  Davis,  with  Bogtrotters'  Band,  Galax, 
Va.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1362  B. 

Fields  Ward,  Galax,  Va.  L  of  C,  AAFS  4085  Ai. 
George  Roark,  Pineville,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1997  A. 
Group  of  Negro  convicts,  state  penitentiary,  Parchman,  Miss.  L  of 
C,  AAFS  1865  A2. 

Group  of  Negro  convicts,  state  prison  farm,  Oakley,  Miss.  L  of  C, 
AAFS  1867  Bi. 

Group  of  Negro  convicts,  work  house,  Memphis,  Tenn.  L  of  C, 
AAFS  174  B3. 

Gus  Harper  and  group,  state  penitentiary,  Parchman,  Miss.  L  of  C, 
AAFS  883  B3. 

Harold  B.  Hazelhurst,  Jacksonville,  Fla.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3143  A2. 
Hettie  Godfrey,  Livingston,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS  4049  B5. 
J.  M.  Mullins,  Salyersville,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1595  Ai. 
J.  Owens,  state  penitentiary,  Richmond,  Va.  L  of  C,  AAFS  730  A. 
Jim  Henry,  state  penitentiary,  Parchman,  Miss.  L  of  C,  AAFS  743  A 1 . 
Joe  Brown,  state  farm,  Raiford,  Fla.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2710  B. 
Joe  Edwards,  state  penitentiary,  Parchman,  Miss.  L  of  C,  AAFS  743 
A2. 

John  Henry  Jackson  and  Norman  Smith,  state  penitentiary,  Parch- 
man, Miss.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3088  A2  and  Bi. 


320  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

John  Henry— Continued 

Jonesie  Mack,  Nick  Robinson,  and  James  Mack,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  1047  A2. 

Julius  Clemens,  state  farm,  Raiford,  Fla.  L  of  C,  AAFS  689  A. 

Mrs.  Vera  Kilgore,  Highlander  Folk  School,  Monteagle,  Tenn.  L  of 

C,  AAFS  2939  Ai. 

Unidentified  Negro  convict,  state  penitentiary,  Parchman,  Miss. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  1864  B3. 

Reese  Crenshaw,  state  prison  farm,  Milledgeville,  Ga.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

259  A2. 

Richard  Amerson,  Livingston,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1305  B2  and  4045 

A2  and  Bi. 

Samson  Pittman,  Detroit,  Mich.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2479  A. 

Skyline  Farms  group,  Washington,  D.  C.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1629  A. 

Thomas  Anderson,  New  York.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3636  A2  and  B. 

Uncle  Alec  Dunford,  Galax,  Va.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1363  A3. 

Veral  Hall,  Livingston,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1320  A2. 
John  Henry  Was  a  Very  Small  Boy.  Thomas  Anderson,  New  York. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  3635  B2. 
John  J.  Curtis*  Andrew  Rada,  Shenandoah,  Pa.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1435. 
Johnny,  Won't  You  Ramble.  Group  of  Negro  convicts,  Darrington 

state  farm,  Sandy  Point,  Tex.  L  of  C,  AAFS  190  Ai. 
Join  the  CIO.  Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1939  Ai. 
Join  the  Union  Tonight.  John  Handcox.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3237  Bi. 
Kentucky  Miners'  Dreadful  Fate  (Fight).  Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of 

C,  AAFS  1940  A  and  1941  B. 
Labor  Day.  Dick  Wright.  "Sing  a  Labor  Song"  album,  Main  Street 

Records. 
Leave  Her,  Johnny.  Bluebird  B-511;  album  BC-8  ("Songs  under  the 

Sails"). 
Leave  Her,  Johnny,  Leave  Her.  Captain  Richard  Maitland,  Sailors' 

Snug  Harbor,  Staten  Island,  N.  Y.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2533  B2. 
Let's  All  Shed  a  Tear  for  the  Bosses.  Dick  Wright.  "Sing  a  Labor 

Song"  album,  Main  Street  Records. 
Let's  Jine  Up.  Ruby  Rains,  Bakersfield,  Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS  4141. 
Lift  Every  Voice  and  Sing  (Negro  National  Anthem).  California  Labor 

School  Chorus.  CLS  record 
Listen,  Mr.  Bilbo.  Hootenanny  Singers.  Asch  album  370. 
Little  Man  on  a  Fence.  Josh  White.  Stinson  622. 
Lost  John. 

Bascom  Lamar  Lunsford.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1801  A3. 

Harry  Green  and  group,  state  penitentiary,  Parchman,  Miss.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  885  Bi. 

Woody  Guthrie  and  Sonny  Terry.  Disc  album  360  ("Struggle"). 


Appendix  •  321 

Lonesome  Jailhouse  Blues. 

Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2535  B. 

Mary  Davis,  Manchester,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1490  Ai. 
Loveless  C.C.C.  Tommy  Rhoades,  Visalia  FSA  camp,  Visalia,  Cal. 

LofC,  AAFS  4130  Bi. 
Ludlow  Massacre.  Woody  Guthrie.  Disc  album  360  ("Struggle"). 
Me  Johnny  Mitchell  Man.  Jerry  Byrne,  Buck  Run,  Pa.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

1432. 
Midnight  Special. 

Frank  Jordan  and  group  of  Negro  convicts,  state  penitentiary, 

Parchman,  Miss. 

Gus  Harper  and  group,  state  penitentiary,  Parchman,  Miss.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  885  A3. 

Gant  family,  Austin,  Tex.  L  of  C,  AAFS  647  A. 

Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly),  Angola  state  prison  farm,  Angola, 

La.  L  of  C,  AAFS  124  A  and  133  A. 

Jesse  Bradley,  state  penitentiary,  Huntsville,  Tex.  L  of  C,  AAFS  218. 

Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3410  Ai. 

Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly)  and  Golden  Gate  Quartet.  Victor 

album  P-50  ("Midnight  Special"). 

Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly),  Woody  Guthrie,  and  Cisco  Houston. 

Disc  album  726  ("Midnight  Special"). 
The  Mill  Was  Made  of  Marble.  Joe  Glazer.  "Eight  New  Songs  for 

Labor,"  CIO  Dept.  of  Education  and  Research  album. 
The  Miner's  Complaint.  Mrs.  Frost  Woodhull,  San  Antonio,  Tex.  L  of 

C,  AAFS  596  Bi. 
Miner's  Farewell.  Findlay  Donaldson,  Pineville,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

1985  B2. 
Mr.  Cundiff  (Turn  Me  Loose).  Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

2541  B,  2542  A  and  B,  and  2543  A. 
The  Murder  of  Harry  Simms.  Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

1941  A. 
My  New  Found  Land.  Woody  Guthrie.  Disc  album  610  ("Ballads  from 

the  Dust  Bowl"). 
New  York  Town.  Woody  Guthrie.  Asch  album  347  ("Woody  Guthrie"). 
1913  Massacre.  Woody  Guthrie.  Disc  album  360  ("Struggle"). 
Ninety-One.  I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  Two. 
No  Depression  in  Heaven.  Buster  Hunt,  Yuba  City  FSA  camp,  Yuba 

City,  Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS  4156  B. 
No  Dough  Blues.  Blind  Blake.  Paramount  12723. 
No  Home  for  the  Poor.  Mrs.  Howard,  Tempe,  Ariz.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

3567  A. 
No  Irish  Need  Apply.  Pete  Seeger.  Charter  RC  1. 
No  Ku  Klux  Out  Tonight.  Bascom  Lamar  Lunsford.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

1822  B2. 


322  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

No  More  Auction  Block  for  Me.  California  Labor  School  Chorus, 

CLS  record. 
No  More  Blues.  Josh  White.  Asch  album  349  ("Citizen  CIO"). 
No  More  Mourning.  Carl  Sandburg.  Musicraft  album  209  ("American 

Songbag"). 
No  Restricted  Signs.   Golden  Gate  Quartet.  Columbia  album   145 

("Golden  Gate  Spirituals"). 
Nobody  Knows  de  Trouble  I've  Seen. 

Huddie  and  Martha  Ledbetter.  L  of  C,  AAFS  2503  Ai. 

Edna  Thomas,  Columbia  1863-D. 

Dorothy  Maynor.  Victor  album  M-879  ("Negro  Spirituals"). 

Mildred  Bailey.  Columbia  35348. 

Hampton  Institute  Quartet.  Victor  27473. 

Robert  Merrill.  Victor  10-1427. 
NRA  Blues.  Billy  Cox  and  Cliff  Hobbs.  Perfect  13090. 
Nutpickers'  Song.  Gladys,  Matilda,  and  Juanita  Crouch,  St.  Louis,  Mo. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  SR  43. 
NYA  Blues.  Pauline,  Fanine  and  Don  Reda  Lewis,  West  Liberty,  Ky. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  1562  B2 
Oh,  You  Miners,  Don't  Go  to  Raleigh.  Group  of  Negro  convicts,  state 

prison  camp,  Boone,  N.  C.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3993  Bi. 
Old  Man.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  Disc  album  735  ("Work  Songs 

of  the  U.S.A."). 
The  Old  Miner's  Refrain.  Daniel  Walsh,  Centralia,  Pa.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

1734- 
On  a  Monday.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  Asch  343-3. 
On  a  Picket  Line.  Dick  Wright.  "Sing  a  Labor  Song"  album,  Main 

Street  Records. 
On  Johnny  Mitchell's  Train.  Jerry  Byrne,  Buck  Run,  Pa.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  1433. 
On  the  Picket  Line.  Tom  Glazer.  "Favorite  American  Union  Songs" 

album,  CIO  Dept.  of  Education  and  Research. 
One  Dime  Blues.  Blind  Lemon  Jefferson.  Paramount  12518. 
OPA  Blues.  Ocie  Stockard.  King  456. 
Overtime  Pay.  Priority  Ramblers,  Washington,  D.  C.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

7054  B4. 
Papa  Don't  Raise  No  Cotton,  No  Corn.  Gertrude  Thurston  and 

group,  New  Bight,  Cat  Island,  Bahamas.  L  of  C,  AAFS  388  B2. 
The  Passion  of  Sacco  and  Vanzetti.  Woody  Guthrie.  Disc  album  40. 
Pastures  of  Plenty.  Woody  Guthrie.  Disc  album  610  ("Ballads  from 

the  Dust  Bowl"). 
Pat  Works  on  the  Railway. 

Pete  Seeger,  Charity  Bailey.  Disc.  604. 

American  Ballad  Singers.  Victor  album  P-41    ("American  Folk 

Songs"). 


Appendix  •  323 

Pay  Day  at  Coal  Creek.  Pete  Steele.  L  of  C,  AAFS  4. 

Picket  Line.  I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  One. 

Picket  Line  Songs.  Jefferson  Chorus.  Union  album  100. 

Pie  in  the  Sky.  Gladys,  Matilda,  and  Juanita  Crouch,  St.  Louis,  Mo. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  SR  43  A3  and  A5. 
A  Pin  for  Your  Lapel.  Dick  Wright.  "Sing  a  Labor  Song"  album,  Main 

Street  Records. 
Please,  Mr.  Boss.  I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  Two. 
Poor  Little  Ragged  Child.  Vergil  Bowman,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  1689  Ai. 
Poor  Miner.  Blaine  Stubblefield,  Washington,  D.  C.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

1848  B. 
Po'  Prisoner  Blues.  Johnnie  Myer,  state  penitentiary,  Raleigh,  N.  C. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  269  A3. 
Pretty  Boy  Floyd.  Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3412  B4  and  3413  A; 

Disc  album  360  ("Struggle"). 
Prison  Bound.  Josh  White.  Musicraft  album  N-3  ("Harlem  Blues"). 
The  Prisoners'  Call.  Aunt  Molly  Jackson.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1942  B. 
Prisoner  Girl  Blues.  Negro  woman  prisoner,  old  state  penitentiary, 

Wetumpka,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AAFS  225  B2. 
Project  Highway.  Sonny  Boy  Williamson.  Bluebird  7302. 
Put  it  on  the  Ground.  Hootenanny  Singers.  Asch  album  370  ("Roll 

the  Union  On"). 
Raggedy,  Raggedy.  John  Handcox.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3237  Ai. 
Ramblin'  Blues.  Woody  Guthrie.  Disc  album  610  ("Ballads  from  the 

Dust  Bowl"). 
Red  Cross  Store.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  L  of  C,  AAFS  138  B. 

Pete  Harris,  Richmond,  Va.  L  of  C,  AAFS  78  B2. 
Red  Cross  Store  Blues.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  Bluebird  8709. 
Roll  Out  the  Pickets.  Ruby  Rains,  Bakersfield,  Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

4140  Bi. 
Roll  the  Union  On. 

Gladys,  Matilda,  and  Juanita  Crouch,  St.  Louis,  Mo.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

SR  65  A2. 

John  Handcox,  Brinkley,  Ark.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3237  A2. 

Hootenanny  Singers.  Asch  album  370  ("Roll  the  Union  On"). 

Tom  Glazer.  "Favorite  American  Union  Sings"  album,  CIO  Dept. 

of  Education  and  Research. 
Runaway  Negro.  Group  of  Negro  convicts,  Cumins  state  farm,  Gould, 

Ark.  L  of  C,  AAFS  244  B2. 
Salisbury  Mills.  Mort  Montonyea,  Sloatsburg,  N.  Y.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

3662  A2. 
Same  Boat,  Brother.  Earl  Robinson.  Alco  album  A2. 
The  Same  Old  Merry-Go-Round.  Michael  Loring.  Progessive  party 

record. 


324  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Scottsboro  Boys.  Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  L  of  C,  AAFS  2502  Ai. 
Shine  On  Me.  Joe  Glazer.  "Eight  New  Songs  for  Labor"  album,  CIO 

Dept.  of  Education  and  Research. 
Shorty  George. 

Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  L  of  C,  AAFS  149  B  and  150  A. 

James  (Iron  Head)  Baker,  Central  state  farm,  Sugarland,  Tex.  L  of 

C  210  B  and  202  A2. 

Smith  Cason,  Clemens  state  farm,  Brazoria,  Tex.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

2598  Ai. 
Silicosis  Is  Killin'  Me.  Pinewood  Tom  (Josh  White).  Perfect  6-05-51. 
Sixteen  Tons.  Merle  Travis,  Capitol  album  AD-50  ("Folk  Songs  of  the 

Hills"). 
Slavery  Days.  Fields  Ward  and  Bogtrotters  Band,  Galax,  Va.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  1 356  Ai. 
So  Long,  It's  Been  Good  to  Know  You.  Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

3410  B2. 
Social  Workers  Talking  Blues.  Asch  album  349  ("Songs  of  Citizen 

CIO"). 
Solidarity  Forever. 

Tom  Glazer.  "Favorite  American  Union  Songs"  album.  CIO  Dept. 

of  Education  and  Research. 

I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  One. 

Burl  Ives  and  the  Union  Boys.  Stinson  662. 
Some  Other  World.  Floyd  Tilman.  Columbia  20026. 
Song  of  316.  I.L.G.W.U.  Francis  Wertz,  Bryn  Mawr  Labor  College, 
Song  of  the  Neckwear  Workers.  I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  Two. 
Song  of  316.  I.L.G.W.U.  Francis  Wertz,  Bryn  Mawr  Labor  College, 

Bryn  Mawr,  Pa.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1771  B2. 
Soup  Song.  I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  One. 
Southern  Exposure.  Josh  White.  Keynote  album  K-107  ("Southern 

Exposure"). 
Starvation  Blues.  Big  Bill  Broonzy.  Broadway  5072. 
State  Farm  Blues. 

Claude  Cryder,  Bloomington,  Ind.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1721  B3. 

Henry  Williams,  Kilby  prison,  Montgomery,  Ala.  L  of  C,  AFFS 

235  B2. 
Strange  Fruit.  Josh  White.  Keynote  album  K-125  ("Strange  Fruit"). 

Decca  album  A-447  ("Ballads  and  Blues"). 
Strike  at  Harriman,  Tennessee.  Herschel  Philips.  L  of  C,  AAFS  SR  22. 
The  Striking  Miners.  Henry  Garrett,  Crossville,  Tenn.  L  of  C,  AAFS 

3175  Ai. 
Subcontractor's  Song.  Henry  Truvillion,  Burkesville,  Tex.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  3985  A3. 
Swing  Low,  Sweet  Ild.  Gladys  Matilda,  and  Juanita  Crouch,  St.  Louis, 

Mo.  L  of  C,  AAFS  SR  44. 


Appendix  *  325 

Take  This  Hammer. 

Huddie  Ledbetter  (Leadbelly).  Disc  album  735  ("Work  Songs  of 

the  U.S.A."). 

Clifton  Wright  and  group  of  Negro  convicts,  state  penitentiary, 

Richmand,  Va.  L  of  C,  AAFS  726  Bi. 
Talking  Atomic  Blues  (Old  Man  Atom). 

Bob  Hill.  Jubilee  4005. 

Ozzi  Waters.  Coral  64050. 

Sam  Hinton.  ABC  230. 
Talking  Columbia  Blues.  Woody  Guthrie.  Disc  album  610  ("Ballads 

from  the  Dust  Bowl") 
Talking  Dust  Bowl  Blues.  Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3411  A2 

and  Bi. 
Talking  Sailor.  Woody  Guthrie.  Asch  album  347  ("Woody  Guthrie"). 
Talking  Union.   Almanac  Singers.   Keynote    album    106   ("Talking 

Union"). 
That  Old  Feelin'.  Sarah  Ogan.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1945  B2. 
That's  All.  Joe  Glazer.  "Eight  New  Songs  for  Labor"  album,  CIO 

Dept.  of  Education  and  Research. 
That's  All.  Merle  Travis.  Capitol  album  AD-50  ("Folk  Songs  of  the 

Hills"). 
There  Is  Mean  Things  Happening  in  This  Land.  John  Handcox. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  3238. 
They  Can  Only  Fill  One  Grave.  Roy  Acuff.  Columbia  37943. 
They  Laid  Jesus  Christ  in  His  Grave  (Jesus  Christ).  Woody  Guthrie. 

L  of  C,  AAFS  3413  B2  and  3414  Ai. 
This  Old  World.  Hootenanny  Singers.  Asch  album  370  ("Roll  the 

Union  On"). 
Those  Agonizing  Cruel  Slavery  Days.  Elisha  Cox,  San  Angelo,  Tex. 

Lof  C,  AAFS  547  Bi. 
Tom  Joad.  Woody  Guthrie.  Victor  album  P-27  ("Dust  Bowl  Ballads"). 
Too  Old  to  Work.  Joe  Glazer.  "Eight  New  Songs  for  Labor"  album, 

CIO  Dept.  of  Education  and  Research. 
Tramp  on  the  Street.  Cumberland  Mountain  Folks.  Columbia  20187. 

Bill  Carlisle.  King  697. 
Trouble.  Josh  White.  Columbia  album  C-22  ("Chain  Gang  Songs"). 

Stinson-Asch  album  358  ("Folk  Songs"). 
UAW-CIO.  Union  Boys.  Asch  album  346  ("Songs   for  Victory"). 
Uncle  Sam  Says.  Josh  White.  Keynote  album  107  ("Southern  Expo- 
sure"). 
Unemployment  Compensation  Blues.  Boots  Cassetta.  Charter  RC-i. 
Union  Burying  Ground.  Woody  Guthrie.  Disc  album  360  ("Struggle"). 
Union  Maid. 

Woody  Guthrie  and  the  Almanac  Singers.  Keynote  album  K-106 

("Talking  Union") 


326  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Union  Maid—  Continued 

Jefferson  Chorus.  Union  301-4. 

Tom  Glazer.  "Favorite  American  Union  Songs"  album,  CIO  Dept. 

of  Education  and  Research. 
Union  Man.  Andrew  Morgan,  Tamaqua,  Pa.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1436. 
Union  Train. 

Almanac  Singers.  Keynote  album  K-106  ("Talking  Union"). 

Tom  Glazer.  "Favorite  American  Union  Songs"  album,  CIO  Dept. 

of  Education  and  Research. 
Uprising  of  the  Twenty  Thousand.  I.L.G.W.U.  Record  Number  Two. 
Vigilante  Man.  Woody  Guthrie.  Victor  album  P-28  ("Dust  Bowl  Bal- 
lads," Vol.  II). 
Walk  in  Peace.  Sir  Lancelot.  Charter  RC-102. 
Way  Down  in  Old  St.  Francis  Bottom.  Agnes  Cunningham,  Tucson, 

Ariz.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3559  Ai,  2,  and  3. 
We  Are  Building  a  Strong  Union.  Tom  Glazer.  "Favorite  American 

Union  Songs"  album,  CIO  Dept.  of  Education  and  Research. 
We've  Got  a  Plan.  Tom  Glazer.  Asch  album  349  ("Songs  of  Citizen 

CIO"). 
We  Shall  Not  Be  Moved. 

Alice  and  Johnnie,  St.  Louis,  Mo.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3195  Bi. 

Katharine  Trusty,  Paintsville,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1396  B2. 

The  Union  Boys.  Asch  album  346  ("Songs  for  Victory"). 

Tom  Glazer.  "Favorite  American  Union  Songs"  album,  CIO  Dept. 

of  Education  and  Research. 
We  Will  Overcome.  Joe  Glazer.  "Eight  New  Songs  for  Labor"  album, 

CIO  Dept.  of  Education  and  Research. 
We'd  Rather  Not  Be  On  Relief.  Lester  Hunter,  Shafter  migratory 

camp,  Shafter,  Cal.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3567  B. 
Weave  Room  Blues.  Dixon  Brothers.  Bluebird  B  6441. 
Welcome  the  Traveler  Home.  Jim  Garland.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1947  A. 
Welfare  Blues.  Speckled  Red.  Bluebird  8069. 
Welfare  Supervisor's  Chant.  Gladys,  Matilda,  and  Juanita  Crouch, 

St.  Louis,  Mo.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3196  Ai. 
When  the  Curfew  Blows.  Woody  Guthrie.  Disc  album  610  ("Ballads 

from  the  Dust  Bowl"). 
Which  Side  Are  You  On? 

Jim  Garland.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1951  Bi. 

Tilman  Cadle,  Middlesboro,  Ky.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1402  A2. 

Tom  Glazer.  "Favorite  American  Union  Songs"  album,  CIO  Dept. 

of  Education  and  Research. 
White  Folks  in  de  College.  P.  H.  Thomas,  Jacksonville,  Fla.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  3525  A2. 
The  White  Slave.  Jim  Garland.  L  of  C,  AAFS  1953  Ai. 
Winnsboro  Cotton  Mill  Blues.  Pete  Seeger.  Charter  C-45. 


Appendix  *  327 

Workin'  for  the  PWA.  Dave  Alexander.  Decca  7307. 
Workin*  on  the  Project.  Peatie  Wheatstraw.  Decca  7311. 
Workingman's  Blues.  Brownie  McChee.  Columbia  30027,  Okeh  6698. 
Worried  Man  Blues. 

Carter  family.  Victor  27497. 

Sonny  Terry.  Capitol  A-40043. 

Curley  Reeves,  Brawley  migratory  camp,  Brawley,  Cal.  L  of  C, 

AAFS  3326  Bi. 

Woody  Guthrie.  L  of  C,  AAFS  3416  Bi. 
WPA  Blues.  Big  Bill  Broonzy.  Perfect  6-08-61. 
You  See  Me  Laughin'  Just  to  Keep  from  Cryin'.  James  (Iron  Head) 

Baker.  L  of  C,  AAFS  719  Ai. 


Bibliography 


Textual  Material:  Books 

Adamic,  Louis,  Dynamite,  New  York,  Viking  Press,  1931. 

Anderson,  Nels,  The  Hobo,  Chicago,  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1923. 

Aptheker,  Herbert,  Negro  Slave  Revolts  in  the  United  States  1 526-1860, 
New  York,  International  Publishers,  1939. 

Essays  in  the  History  of  the  American  Negro,  New  York,  Inter- 
national Publishers,  1945. 

Archive  of  American  Folk  Song,  Library  of  Congress,  Checklist  of  Songs 
in  the  English  Language  Recorded  Prior  to  August,  1939,  Wash- 
ington, D.  C,  1942. 

Beard,  Charles  A.  and  Mary  R.,  The  Rise  of  American  Civilization, 
New  York,  Macmillan,  1945. 

Botkin,  Benjamin  A.,  Lay  My  Burden  Down:  A  Folk  History  of  Slavery, 
Chicago,  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1945. 

Brink,  Carol,  Harps  in  the  Wind,  New  York,  Macmillan,  1947. 

Brown,  Sterling,  The  Negro  Poetry  and  Drama,  Washington,  Associates 
in  Negro  Folk  Education,  1937  (Bronze  Booklet  No.  7). 

Burleigh,  Harry  Thacker,  Negro  Folk  Songs,  New  York,  G.  Ricordi  & 
Co.,  1921. 

Carter,  Dyson,  Sin  and  Science,  New  York,  Heck,  Cattell  Publishing 
Co.,  1946. 

Cayton,  Horace  R.,  and  Mitchell,  George  S.,  Black  Workers  and  the 
New  Unions,  Chapel  Hill,  University  of  North  Carolina  Press, 

1939- 
Chaplin,  Ralph,  Wobbly,  Chicago,  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1948 

Chappell,  Louis  W.,  John  Henry,  A  Folklore  Stuay,  Jena,  Germany. 

Walter  Biedermann,  1933. 

329 


330  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Chickering,  Jesse,  Immigration  into  the  United  States,  Boston,  1848. 
Christman,  Henry,  Tin  Horns  and  Calico,  New  York,  Henry  Holt,  1945. 
Clark,  John  B.,  Populism  in  Alabama  (Ph.D.  thesis),  Auburn,  Ala., 

Auburn  Printing  Co.,  1927. 
Commons,  John  R.  and  associates,  History  of  Labour  in  the  United 

States,  4  vols.,  New  York,  Macmillan,  1918-1935. 
Davis,   Arthur   Kyle,    Traditional   Ballads   of    Virginia,   Cambridge, 

Harvard  University  Press,  1929. 
Donald,  Henderson  H.,  The  Negro  Freedman,  New  York,  Henry  Schu- 

man,  1952. 
Douglass,  Frederick,  My  Bondage  and  My  Freedom,  New  York  and 

Auburn,  Miller,  Orton,  and  Mulligan,  1855. 
Drewry,  William  Sidney,  Slave  Insurrections  in   Virginia  1830-1865, 

Washington,  Neale  Co.,  1900. 
Du  Bois,  William  Edward  Burghardt,  The  Souls  of  Black  Folk,  Chicago, 

A.  C.  McClurg  &  Co.,  1903. 
Dulles,  Foster  Rhea,  Labor  in  America,  New  York,  T.  Y.  Crowell,  1949. 
Ellis,  David  Maldwyn,  Landlords  and  Farmers  in  the  Hudson-Mohawk 

Region,  Ithaca,  New  York,  Cornell  University  Press,  1946. 
Foner,  Philip  S.,  History  of  the  Labor  Movement  in  the  United  States, 

New  York,  International  Publishers,  1947. 
Fountain,  Clayton  W.,  Union  Guy,  New  York,  Viking  Press,  1949. 
Fox,  D.  R.,  Decline  of  Aristocracy  in  the  Politics  of  New  York,  New 

York,  Columbia  University  Press,  1919. 
Gardner,  Emelyn  Elizabeth,  and  Chickering,  Geraldine  Jencks,  Ballads 

and  Songs  of  Southern  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor,  University  of  Mich- 
igan Press,  1939. 
George,  Henry,  Progress  and  Poverty,  New  York,  Doubleday,  1899. 
Gordon,  Robert  Winslow,  Folk  Songs  of  America,  New  York,  National 

Service  Bureau,  1938. 
Guthrie,  Woody,  Bound  for  Glory,  New  York,  E.  P.  Dutton,   1943. 

American  Folk  Song,  New  York,  Disc  Recording  Co.,  1947. 
Harris,  Herbert,  American  Labor,  New  Haven,  Yale  University  Press, 

1940. 
Henry,  H.  M.,  The  Police  Control  of  the  Slave  in  South  Carolina 

(Ph.D.  thesis),  Vanderbilt  University,  Emory,  Va.,  1914. 
Henry,  Mellinger  Edward,  Songs  Sung  in  the  Southern  Appalachians, 

London,  Mitre  Press,  1934. 
Hicks,  John  Donald,  The  Populist  Revolt,  Minneapolis,  University  of 

Minnesota  Press,  1931. 
Jackson,  George  Pullen,  White  Spirituals  in  the  Southern  Uplands, 

Chapel  Hill,  University  of  North  Carolina  Press,  1933. 

White  and  Negro  Spirituals,  New  York,  J.  J.  Augustin,  1943. 
Johnson,  Guy  B.,  John  Henry:  Tracking  Down  a  Negro  Legend,  Chapel 

Hill,  University  of  North  Carolina  Press,  1929. 


Bibliography  •  331 

Johnson,  James  Weldon,  and  Rosamund  J.,  The  Root  of  American 

Negro  Spirituals,  New  York,  Viking  Press,  1937. 
Jordan,  Philip,  Singing  Yankees,  Minneapolis,  University  of  Minnesota 

Press,  1946. 
King,  Dan,  Life  and  Times  of  Thomas  Wilson  Dorr,  Boston,  King, 

1859- 

Korson,  George,  Songs  and  Ballads  of  the  Anthracite  Miner,  New  York, 
Grafton,  1927. 

Minstrels  of  the  Mine  Patch,  Philadelphia,  University  of  Pennsyl- 
vania Press,  1938. 

Coal  Dust  on  the  Fiddle,  Philadelphia,  University  of  Pennsylvania 
Press,  1943. 

Krehbiel,  Henry  Edward,  Afro-American  Folk  Song,  New  York,  G. 
Schirmer,  ca.  1914. 

Lindsey,  Almont,  The  Pullman  Strike,  Chicago,  University  of  Chicago 
Press,  1942. 

Lloyd,  A.  L.,  The  Singing  Englishman,  London,  Workers'  Music  Asso- 
ciation, n.  d. 

Lloyd,  Arthur  Young,  The  Slavery  Controversy,  1831-1860,  Chapel  Hill, 
University  of  North  Carolina  Press,  1939. 

Locke,  Alain  LeRoy,  The  Negro  and  His  Music,  Washington,  D.  C, 
Associates  in  Negro  Folk  Education,  1930. 

Lomax,  Alan,  List  of  American  Folk  Songs  on  Commercial  Records, 
Committee  of  the  Conference  on  Inter-American  Relations  in  the 
Field  of  Music,  William  Berrien,  chairman,  Washington,  D.  C, 
Department  of  State,  1940. 

Lomax,  Alan,  and  Cowell,  Sidney  Robertson,  American  Folk  Songs  and 
Folk  Lore,  A  Regional  Bibliography,  New  York,  Progressive  Edu- 
cation Association,  1942. 

Long,  John  Dixon,  Pictures  of  Slavery  in  Church  and  State,  Philadel- 
phia, Long,  1857. 

MacDonald,  Lois,  Southern  Mill  Hills  (Ph.D.  thesis,  New  York  Univer- 
sity), New  York,  Hillman,  1928. 

McMurry,  Donald  Le  Crone,  Coxey's  Army,  Boston,  Little,  Brown,  & 
Co.,  1929. 

Marsh,  J.  B.  T.,  The  Story  of  the  Jubilee  Singers,  Boston,  Houghton, 
1880. 

Milburn,  George,  The  Hobo's  Hornbook,  New  York,  Ives,  Washburn, 

1930. 
Mowry,  A.  M.,  The  Dorr  War,  Providence,  Preston,  1901. 
Odum,  Howard  W.,  and  Johnson,  Guy  B.,  The  Negro  and  His  Songs, 

Chapel  Hill,  University  of  North  Carolina  Press,  1925. 

Negro  Workaday  Songs,  Chapel  Hill,  University  of  North  Carolina 

Press,  1926. 
Ottley,  Roi,  Black  Odyssey,  New  York,  Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  1948. 


332  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Philips,  Ulrich  B.,  American  Negro  Slavery,  New  York,  Appleton,  1918. 

Pound,  Louise,  American  Ballads  and  Songs,  New  York,  Scribner's, 
1922. 

Rochester,  Anna,  The  Populist  Movement  in  the  United  States,  New 
York,  International  Publishers,  1943. 

Siebert,  William  H.,  The  Underground  Railroad  from  Slavery  to  Free- 
dom, New  York,  Macmillan,  1898. 

Smedley,  R.  C,  History  of  the  Underground  Railroad  in  Chester  and 
Neighboring  Pennsylvania  Counties,  Lancaster,  Pa.,  Hiestand, 
1883. 

Stegner,  Wallace,  The  Preacher  and  the  Slave,  Boston,  Houghton,  1950. 

Stroud,  George  M.,  A  Sketch  of  the  Laws  Relating  to  Slavery  in  the 
Several  States  of  the  United  States  of  America,  Philadelphia,  Henry 
Longstreth,  1856. 

Talley,  Thomas  W.,  Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  New  York,  Macmillan,  1922. 

Thomas,  Jean,  Ballad  Makin'  in  the  Mountains  of  Kentucky,  New 
York,  Henry  Holt,  1939. 

Thurman,  Howard,  Deep  River,  An  Interpretation  of  the  Negro  Spirit- 
uals, Oakland,  California,  Mills  College,  Eucalyptus  Press,  1946. 

Vorse,  Mary  Heaton,  Strike!  A  Novel  of  Gastonia,  New  York,  H.  Live- 
right,  1930. 
Labor's  New  Millions,  New  York,  Modern  Age  Books,  Inc.,  1938. 

White,  Newman  I.,  American  Negro  Folk  Songs,  Cambridge,  Harvard 
University  Press,  1928. 

Woodson,  Carter  C,  The  Mind  of  the  Negro  as  Reflected  in  Letters 
Written  During  he  Crisis,  1800-1860,  Washington,  D.  C,  Associa- 
tion for  the  Study  of  Negro  Life  and  History,  1926. 
The  Negro  in  Our  History,  Washington,  D.  C,  Associated  Pub- 
lishers, 1945. 

Work,  John  Wesley,  Folk  Songs  of  the  American  Negro,  Nashville,  Ten- 
nessee, Fisk  University  Press,  1915. 

Zahler,  Helene  Sara,  Eastern  Workingmen  and  National  Land  Policy, 
1829-1862  (Ph.D.  thesis,  Columbia  University),  New  York,  Colum- 
bia University  Press,  1941. 


Textual  Material:  Periodicals 

Balch,  Elizabeth,  "Songs  for  Labor,"  Survey,  vol.  31  (Jan.  3,  1914),  pp. 

408-412. 
"Ballads  of  Mine  Regions  Depict  Life  of  the  Workers,"  New  York 

World,  Sept.  11,  1927. 
Brown,  J.  M.,  "Songs  of  the  Slave,"  Lippincott's  Magazine,  vol.  2  (1868), 

pp.  617-623. 


Bibliography  *  333 

Cade,  John  B.,  "Out  of  the  Mouths  of  Ex-Slaves,"  Journal  of  Negro 

History,  July,  1935,  pp.  294-339. 
Dolph,  Edward  Arthur,  "Ballads  that  Have  Influenced  Ballots,"  New 

York  Times  Magazine,  October  16,  1932,  p.  19. 
Emerich,  Duncan,  "Songs  of  the  Western  Miners,"  California  Folklore 

Quarterly,  July,  1942,  vol.  1,  p.  216. 
Fleming,  Walter  Lynwood,  "Historic  Attempts  to  Deport  the  Negro," 

Journal  of  American  History,  vol.  4,  p.  198. 
Hand,  Wayland  D.,  "The  Folklore,  Customs,  and  Traditions  of  the 

Butte  Miner,"  California  Folklore  Quarterly,  vol.  5  (April,  1946), 

PP-  1-25;  i53"l89- 
Higginson,  Thomas  W.,  "Negro  Spirituals,"  Atlantic  Monthly,  vol.  19 

(June,  1867),  pp.  685-794. 
James,  Thelma,  "Folklore  and  Propaganda,"  Journal  of  American 

Folklore,  vol.  61  (1948)^.311. 
Larkin,  Margaret,  "Ella  May's  Songs,"  The  Nation,  vol.  129  (October  9, 

1929).  P- 382- 

"Ella  May  Wiggins,"  New  Masses,  vol.  5  (November,  1929),  No.  6. 

Lewis,  Nell  Battle,  "Anarchy  vs.  Communism  in  Gastonia,"  The  Na- 
tion, vol.  129  (September  25,  1929),  p.  320  ff. 

Lindsey,  Almont,  "Paternalism  and  the  Pullman  Strike,"  American 
Historical  Review,  vol.  44  (January,  1939),  pp.  272-289. 

Lomax,  John  A.,  "Self-Pity  in  Negro  Folk  Songs,"  The  Nation,  vol.  105 
(August  9,  1917),  pp.  141-145. 

"Some  Types  of  American  Folk  Song,"  Journal  of  American  Folk- 
lore, vol.  28  (1915),  pp.  1-17. 

Lovell,  John,  Jr.,  "The  Social  Significance  of  the  Negro  Spiritual," 
Journal  of  Negro  Education,  vol.  8  (October,  1939),  pp.  634-643. 

Milburn,  George,  "Poesy  in  the  Jungles,"  American  Mercury,  vol.  20 
(May,  1930),  pp.  80-86. 

People's  Songs,  New  York,  People's  Songs,  Inc.,  February,  1946— Febru- 
ary, 1949. 

Sing  Out!  New  York,  People's  Artists,  Inc.,  May,  1950—. 

Stegner,  Wallace,  "Joe  Hill,  the  Wobblies'  Troubadour,"  New  Repub- 
lic, vol.  118  (January,  1948),  pp.  20-24  and  38-39.  See  also  corre- 
spondence in  vols.  118  and  119  relating  to  Stegner's  article. 

Todd,  Charles,  and  Sonkin,  Robert,  "Ballads  of  the  Okies,"  New  York 
Times  Magazine,  November  17,  1940. 

United  Mine  Workers'  Journal,  1891—. 

Ward,  Harry  F.,  "Songs  of  Discontent,"  Methodist  Review,  September, 

1913- 
"Which  Side  Are  You  on?"  Daily  Worker,  June  4,  1941. 
White,  James  Cameron,  "The  Story  of  the  Negro  Spiritual,  'Nobody 

Knows  de  Trouble  I've  Seen,'  "  Musical  Observer,  vol.  23  (1924), 

No.  6. 


334  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Wimberly,  Lowry  Charles,  "Hard  Times  Singing,"  American  Mercury, 
vol.  31  (June,  1934),  p.  197  ff. 


Songbooks  and  Song  Collections  Containing  Songs  of  Social  and 
Economic  Protest. 

Albertson,  Ralph,  Fellowship  Songs,  Westwood,  Mass.,  Ariel  Press, 

1906. 
Allen,  William  Francis,  Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  New  York, 

1867;  republished  in  1929  by  Smith. 
Amalgamated  Song  Book,  New  York,  Amalgamated  Clothing  Workers 

of  America,  CIO,  ca.  1948. 
Balch,  Elizabeth,  "Songs  for  Labor,"  Survey,  vol.  31  (January  3,  1914), 

pp.  408-412. 
Barton,  William  Eleazar,  Old  Plantation  Hymns,  Boston,  Samson,  1899. 
Beck,  Earl  Clifton,  Songs  of  the  Michigan  Lumberjacks,  Ann  Arbor, 

University  of  Michigan  Press,  1941. 
Brown,  J.  M.,  "Songs  of  the  Slave,"  Lippincott's  Magazine,  vol.  2  (1868), 

pp.  617-623. 
Burleigh,  Harry  Thacker,  Negro  Folk  Songs,  New  York,  G.  Ricardo, 

1921. 
CIO  Cong  Book,  Washington,  D.  C,  CIO  Department  of  Education  and 

Research,  ca.  1949. 
Calkins,  Alta  May,  Cooperative  Recreation  Songs,  New  York,  n.  d. 
Child,  Francis  James,  The  English  and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  5  vols., 

Boston  and  New  York,  Houghton,  Mifflin  and  Co.,  1882-1898. 
Christman,  Henry,  Tin  Horns  and  Calico,  New  York,  Henry  Holt, 

1945- 
Colcord,  Joanna  C,  Songs  of  American  Sailormen,  New  York,  W.  W. 

Norton,  1938. 
Commonwealth  Labor  Hymnal,  Mena,  Ark.,  Commonwealth  College, 

1938- 
Commonwealth  Labor  Songs,  Mena,  Ark.,  Commonwealth  College, 

1938. 
Dixie  Union  Songs,  Atlanta,  Ga.,  I.  L.  G.  W.  U.,  n.  d. 
Dobie,  Frank,  Follow  De  Drinkin'  Gourd,  Publications,  Texas  Folklore 

Society,  vol.  7,  1928. 
Donn,  Holies  Elizabeth,  58  Spirituals  for  Choral  Use,  Boston,  Birchard 

and  Co.,  n.  d. 
Duganne,  Augustine  J.,  The  Poetical  Works  of  Augustine  Duganne, 

Philadelphia,  Parry  and  McMillan,  1855. 
Eckstorm,  Fannie  Hardy,  and  Smyth,  Mary  Winslow,  Minstrelsy  of 

Maine,  Boston,  Houghton,  Mifflin,  1927. 
Eight  Union  Songs  of  the  Almanacs,  New  York,  New  Theatre  League, 

1941. 


Bibliography  •  335 

Emerich,  Duncan,  "Songs  of  the  Western  Miners,"  California  Folklore 

Quarterly,  vol.  1  (July,  1942),  p.  216. 
Everybody  Sings,  New  York,  Education  Department,  I.  L.  G.  W.  U., 

*947- 
Farmers'  Alliance  Songs  of  the  1890's,  Lincoln,  Neb.,  Federal  Writers' 

Project,  n.d. 
Favorite  Songs  of  the  Farmers'  Union,  Jamestown,  Farmers'  Union 

Cooperative  Education  Service,  n.  d. 
Fenner,  Thomas,  Cabin  and  Plantation  Songs,  in  Armstrong,  Mrs. 

M.  F.,  and  Ludlow,  Helen,  Hampton  and  Its  Students,  New  York, 

Putnam,  1874. 
Fitch,  Thomas,  Ballads  of  Western  Miners  and  Others,  New  York, 

Cochrane  Publishing  Co.,  1910. 
Foner,  Philip  S.,  History  of  the  Labor  Movement  in  the  United  States, 

New  York,  International  Publishers,  1947. 
Gardner,  Emelyn  Elizabeth,  and  Chickering,  Geraldine  Jencks,  Ballads 

and  Songs  of  Southern  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor,  University  of  Michi- 
gan Press,  1939. 
Gellert,  Lawrence,  Negro  Songs  of  Protest,  Carl  Fischer,  Inc.,  New 

York,  1936. 

Me  and  My  Captain,  New  York,  Hours  Press,  1939. 
Gibson,   George  Howard,  Armageddon:   The  Songs  of  the   World's 

Workers  Who  Go  Forth  to  Battle  with  the  Kings  and  Captains 

and  Mighty  Men,  Lincoln,  Neb.,  and  London,  England,  Wealth 

Makers'  Publishing  Co.,  1895. 
Gray,  Roland  Palmer,  Songs  and  Ballads  of  the  Maine  Lumberjacks, 

Cambridge,  Harvard  University  Press,  1924. 
Guthrie,  Woody,  American  Folk  Song,  New  York,  Disc  Recording  Co., 

1947- 

Higginson,  Thomas  W.,  "Negro  Spirituals,"  Atlantic  Monthly,  vol.  19 
(June,  1867),  pp.  685-794. 

Hille,  Waldemar,  The  People's  Song  Book,  New  York,  Boni  and  Gaer, 
1948. 

Horton,  Zilphia,  Labor  Songs,  Atlanta,  Ga.,  T.  W.  U.  A.,  Southeastern 
Regional  Office,  1939. 

/.  W.  W.  Songs.  Songs  of  the  Workers  (To  Fan  the  Flames  of  Discon- 
tent), Chicago,  I.  W.  W.  Publishing  Co.,  1st  to  28th  edition. 

Jackson,  George  Pullen,  Spiritual  Folk  Songs  of  Early  America,  New 
York,  J.  J.  Augustine,  1937. 

White  Spirituals  in  the  Southern  Uplands,  Chapel  Hill,  Univer- 
sity of  North  Carolina  Press,  1943. 

Kennedy,  R.  Emmet,  Mellows,  New  York,  Boni,  1925. 
More  Mellows,  New  York,  Dodd,  Mead,  &  Co.,  1931. 

Kolb,  Sylvia  and  John,  Frankie  and  Johnnie,  A   Treasury  of  Folk 
Songs,  New  York,  Bantam  Books,  1948. 


336  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Korson,  George,  Songs  and  Ballads  of  the  Anthracite  Miner,  New  York, 
Grafton,  1927. 

The  Miner  Sings,  New  York,  J.  Fischer  &  Bros.,  1936. 
Minstrels  of  the  Mine  Patch,  Philadelphia,  University  of  Pennsyl- 
vania Press,  1938. 

Coal  Dust  on  the  Fiddle,  Philadelphia,  University  of  Pennsylvania 
Press,  1943. 

Labor  Sings,  New  York,  I.  L.  G.  W.  U.  Combined  Locals,  1940. 

Labor  Songs  for  All  Occasions,  Madison,  University  of  Wisconsin  Song- 
books  for  Summer  Sessions,  1938,  1940. 

Larkin,  Margaret,  "Ella  May's  Songs,"  The  Nation,  vol.  129  (October  9, 

!929)>P-382. 
Lawrence,  B.  M.,  Labor  Songster;  National  Greenback  Labor  Songster, 

New  York,  1878. 
Leavitt,  Burton  E.,  Songs  of  Protest,  Putnam,  Conn.,  Leavitt,  1906. 
Let  the  People  Sing,  Madison,  University  of  Wisconsin  Summer  School 

for  Workers,  1941. 
Let's  Sing,  New  York,  Educational  Department,  I.  L.  G.  W.  U.,  n.  d. 
Lincoln,  Jairus,  Anti-Slavery  Melodies,  Hingham,  Mass.,  E.  B.  Gill, 

1843. 
Look  Away,  50  Negro  Folk  Songs,  Delaware,  Ohio,  Cooperative  Recre- 
ation Service,  n.  d. 
Lomax,  John  A.,  "Self-Pity  in  Negro  Folk-Songs,"  The  Nation,  vol.  105 

(August  9,  1917),  pp.  141-145. 
Lomax,  John  A.,  and  Alan,  American  Ballads  and  Folk  Songs,  New 

York,  Macmillan,  1934. 

Negro  Folk  Songs  as  Sung  by  Leadbelly,  New  York,  Macmillan, 

1936. 

Our  Singing  Country,  New  York,  Macmillan,  1941. 

Folk  Song,  U.  S.  A.,  New  York,  Duer,  Sloan,  &  Pierce,  1947. 

March  and  Sing,  New  York,  American  Music  League,  1937. 

Marsh,  J.  B.  T.,  The  Story  of  the  Jubilee  Singers,  Boston,  Houghton, 
1880. 

Milburn,  George,  The  Hobo's  Hornbook,  New  York,  Ives,  Washburn, 
1930. 

Nebraska  Farmers'  Alliance  Songs  of  the  1890's,  Federal  Writers'  Proj- 
ect, Nebraska  Folklore  Pamphlets  Nos.  18  and  19,  1939. 

Neece,  A.  C,  The  Union  Songster,  Sunset,  Texas,  Neece,  1923. 

Niles,  John  Jacob,  Singing  Soldiers,  New  York,  Scribner's,  1927. 

Odum,  Howard  W.,  and  Johnson,  Guy  B.,  The  Negro  and  His  Songs, 
Chapel  Hill,  University  of  North  Carolina  Press,  1925. 
Negro  Workaday  Songs,  Chapel  Hill,  University  of  North  Carolina 
Press,  1926. 

People's  Songs,  New  York,  People's  Songs,  Inc.,  February,  1946— Febru- 
ary, 1949. 


Bibliography  •  337 

A  People's  Songs  Wordbook,  New  York,  People's  Songs,  Inc.,  1947. 

Randolph,  Vance,  and  Shoemaker,  Floyd  C,  Ozark  Folksongs,  vol.  4, 
Columbia,  The  State  Historical  Society  of  Missouri,  1950. 

Rebel  Song  Book,  New  York,  Rand  School  Press,  1935. 

Red  Song  Book,  New  York,  Workers'  Library  Publishers,  1932. 

Sandburg,  Carl,  The  American  Songbag,  New  York,  Harcourt,  Brace, 
1927. 

Sargent,  Helen  Child,  and  Kittredge,  George  Lyman,  English  and  Scot- 
tish Popular  Ballads,  Boston,  New  York,  Houghton,  Mifflin,  1904. 

School  for  Workers'  Songs,  Madison,  University  of  Wisconsin  School 
for  Workers,  1945. 

Siegmeister,  Elie,  and  Downes,  Olin,  A  Treasury  of  American  Song, 
New  York,  Knopf,  1943. 

Siegmeister,  Elie,  Work  and  Sing,  New  York,  W.  R.  Scott,  1944. 

Sing  a  Labor  Song,  New  York,  Gerald  Marks  Music,  Inc.,  1950. 

Sing  Along  the  Way,  New  York,  Womans  Press,  ca.  1948. 

Sing  Amalgamated,  New  York,  Amalgamated  Clothing  Workers  of 
America,  1944. 

Sing  Out!  New  York,  People's  Artists,  Inc.,  May,  1950—. 

Sing,  Sing,  Sing,  Allentown,  Pa.,  I.  L.  G.  W.  U.  Cotton  Garment  Depart- 
ment, 1946. 

Sing  While  You  Fight,  New  York,  Recreation  Department,  Wholesale 
and  Warehouse  Employees  Local  65,  n.  d. 

Singing  Farmers,  Chicago,  National  Farmers'  Union,  1947. 

Song  Book,  Seattle,  Pacific  Coast  School  for  Workers,  1938. 

Song  Book  of  the  I.  L.  G.  W.  U.,  Los  Angeles,  Educational  Department, 
I.  L.  G.  W.  U.,  n.  d. 

Songs  for  America,  New  York,  Workers'  Library  Publishers,  n.  d. 

Songs  for  Labor,  Denver,  Colo.,  Research  and  Educational  Department, 
Oil  Workers  International  Union,  CIO,  n.  d. 

Songs  for  Southern  Workers,  Lexington,  Ky.,  Kentucky  Workers'  Alli- 
ance, 1937. 

Songs  of  the  People,  New  York,  Workers'  Library  Publishers,  1937. 

Songs  of  the  Southern  Summer  School,  Asheville,  N.  C,  1940. 

Songs  of  the  Southern  Summer  School  for  Workers,  Asheville,  N.  C, 
1940. 

Songs  of  Workers,  New  York,  Workers'  Educational  Division,  Adult 
Educational  Department,  W.  P.  A.,  1938. 

Songs  Our  Union  Sings,  New  York,  Junior  Guards  of  Local  362, 
I.  L.  G.  W.  U.,  n.  d. 

Songs  Our  Union  Taught  Us,  New  York,  Educational  Department, 
I.  L.  G.  W.  U.,  n.  d. 

Station  I.  L.  G.  W.  U.  Calling  All  Union  Songsters,  New  York, 
I.  L.  G.  W.  U.,  n.  d. 

Talley,  Thomas  W.,  Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  New  York,  Macmillan,  1922. 


338  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 

Thomas,  Jean,  Ballad  Makin'  in  the  Mountains  of  Kentucky,  New 

York,  Henry  Holt,  1939. 
UA  W-CIO  Sings,  Detroit,  Mich.,  UAW-CIO  Educational  Department, 

1943- 
Union  Songs,  Atlanta,  Ga.,  Dressmakers'  Union,  I.  L.  G.  W.  U.,  n.  d. 

United  Mine  Workers'  Journal,  1891—. 

White,  Clarence  Cameron,  40  Negro  Spirituals,  Philadelphia,  Theo. 

Presser,  1927. 
White,  Newman  I.,  American  Negro  Folk  Songs,  Cambridge,  Harvard 

University  Press,  1928. 
Wimberly,  Lowry  Charles,  "Hard  Times  Singing,"  American  Mercury, 

vol.  31  (June,  1934),  p.  197  ff. 
Workers'  Song  Book,  Numbers  I  and  II,  New  York,  Workers'  Music 

League,  1935. 


List  of  Composers 


Brennan,  Pat,  211 

Corley,  Odel,  138 
Crocker,  Lessie,  142 

Davis,  Ed,  160,  163 

Donaldson,  Finlay  "Red  Ore,"  167 

Foster,  S.  H.,  30,  31 

Gelders,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Joe,  231 
Glazer,  Joe,  izn,  302-9 
Graham,  Delia  Mae,  164 
Grant,  Rupert  ("Lord  Invader"),  116 
Guinn,  Bishop  I.  E.,  109 
Guthrie,  Woody,  10,  11,  17,  18,  87,  90,  92, 
117-19,  150,  156,  205,  206,  226,  275-302 

Handcox,  John,  11,  220 
Helton,  Cleda,  143 
Hill,  Joe,  184,  185,  187-97 
Hutchinson  family,  87 

Jackson,  Aunt  Molly,  7,  8,  10,  11,  14,  19, 
14771,  148,  154,  168,  179,  i8on,  252-75 


Kalin,  N.,  114 
Kellogg,  Eleanor,  166 
Kinett,  Blanch,  142 
Knight,  (Margaret)  Pat,  304 

Leadbelly  (Huddie  Ledbetter),  115,  285 
Lowery,  Tom,  163 

MacDonald,  Daisy,  139 
McClintock,  Harry   (Mac),  174,  175,  185, 
186,  192,  198-203 

Ogan,  Sarah,  154,  168 

Pittman,  Samson,  221 
Pyl,  James,  143 

Reece,  Mrs.  Sam,  169 
Robinson,  Earl,  189,  232 
Rodgers,  Jimmie,  7,  84 

Wiggins,  Ella  May,   10,   1337?,   135,   138, 
245-52 


339 


List  of  Songs  and  Ballads 

An  asterisk  before  a  title  indicates  that  the  song  or  ballad  appears  with  music. 


A-Goin'   Shout    (No    More   Mournin'), 

101 
A.R.U.,  57 
Ain't    Got   No    Home   in   This   World 

Anymore,  298 
All  Around  the  Jailhouse,  251 
Arise,  Ye  Garvey  Nation,  108 
Aunt  Molly's  Appeal,  259 
Aunt  Molly's  Bible  Song,  254 

Babylon  Is  Fallen,  103 
*Ballad  of  Barney  Graham,  The,  165 
Ballad  of  Bloody  Thursday,  The,  237 
Ballad  of  Harriet  Tubman,  90 
Ballad  of  Henry  Ford,  The,  228 
Ballad  of  John  Catchins,  The,  230 
Ballad  of  Talmadge,  120 
Ballad  of  the  Blue  Bell  Jail,  143 
Ballad  of  the  Chicago  Steel  Massacre, 

232 
Ballad  of  Voight's  Camp,  The,  240 

*  Beans,  Bacon,  and  Gravy,  64 

Big  Fat  Boss  and  the  Workers,  The,  250 
Big  Rock  Candy  Mountains,  The,  203 
Bourgeois  Blues,  The,  115 
Buoy  Bells  for  Trenton,  119 
Buzzardaree,  The,  239 

California  Prison  Song,  The,  178 
Casey  Jones,  the  Union  Scab,  186 
Charles  Town  Land  Shark,  The,  25 
Chicken  Never  Roost  Too  High  for  Me, 

69 

*  Chief  Aderholt,  248 

Come  All  You  Hardy  Miners,  167 


Come  on  Scabs  if  You  Want  to  Hear, 

138 
*Corn  Pone,  111 
Cotton  Farmer  Blues,  222 
Coulee  Dam,  291 
Coxey  Army,  62 
Cutty  Wren,  The,  110 

*Dark  as  a  Dungeon,  172 

Dead  from  the  Dust,  295 
*Death  of  Harry  Simms,  The,  271 

Dives  and  Lazarus,  77 

Don't  Turn  Around,  234 

Down  on  Roberts'  Farm,  216 
*Dreadful  Memories,  273 
♦Drinking  Gourd,  The,  99 

Dump  the  Bosses  Off  Your  Back,  1S3 

East  Ohio  Miners'  Strike,  270 
End  of  Bill  Snyder,  The,  30 
Escape  from  Slavery  of  Henry  Box 

Brown,  93 
Everett,  November  Fifth,  184 
Every  Man  His  Own  Politician,  23 

Fare  Ye  Well  Old  Ely  Branch,  268 

Farmer  Is  the  Man,  The,  213 

Father  How  Long,  97 

Fellow  Workers  Pay  Attention,  179 

Ferguson  Brothers  Killing,  The,  117 

Frank  Little   (frag.),  253 

Frankfort  Town,  18 

Freight  Handlers'  Strike,  The,  52 

Frisco  Strike  Saga,  236 


341 


342  •  American  folksongs  of  protest 


General  Strike,  The,  49 

Get  Off  the  Track,  87 

Go  Tell  Young  Henry,  229 

God  Made  Us  All,  116 

Goin'  Down  the  Road  Feelin'  Bad,  206 

Good  News  Member,  79 

Greenberg  Shop  Is  Moving  South,  126 

Grey  Goose,  109 

Guthrie  on  Relativity  (frag.),  282 

Hallelulia,  I'm  a  Bum,  198 

Hard  Times  at  Little  New  River,  141 
♦Hard  Times  in  Colman's  Mines,  262 

Hard  Times  in  the  Mill,  142 

Harvest  War  Song,  The,  2 11 

Hayseed  Like  Me,  A,  60 

Here  We  Rest,  145 

Hey,  Okie   (frag.),  205 

Hilo!  Hilo!,  94 

Humblin'  Back,  308 
♦Hungry  Ragged  Blues,  266 

I  Ain't  No  Stranger  Now,  307 
*I  Am  a  Girl  of  Constant  Sorrow,  168 

I  Am  a  Union  Woman,  269 

I  Am  Sold  and  Going  to  Georgia,  95 
*I  L  D  Song,  249 

I  Love  My  Union,  128 

I  Want  to  Join  the  Union,  79 

I  Went  to  Atlanta,  106 

If  We  Will,  We  Can  Be  Free,  47 

If  You  Catch  Me  Stealin',  113 
*I'm  on  My  Way,  100 

I'm  So  Deep  in  Trouble,  112 

I'm  Troubled  in  Mind,  98 

In  Kansas,  212 

Industrial  Workers  of  the  World,  The, 
178 

It's  Hard  to  Be  a  Nigger,  82 

James  Brown,  38 

Jeff  Buckner,  114 

Jesus  Christ,  301 

Joe  Hill's  Last  Will,  195 

John  Henry,  107 

Johnnie,  Won'tcha  Ramble,  96 

Johnny  Come  Down  de  Hollow,  94 

Keep  Steady,  60 
Knights  of  Labor,  47 
Knuts  to  Knudsen,  229 

Land  of  the  Noonday  Night,  147 
Landholders'  Victory,  34 
Leave  Her,  Johnny,  233 


Let  Me  Sleep  in  Your  Tent  Tonight, 

Beal,  137 
Let  Them  Wear  Their  Watches  Fine, 

140 
Life  Is  Like  a  Mountain  Railroad,  15 
Little  Boy,  Little  Boy,  85 

♦Little  David  Blues,  163 
Little  Nigger  Baby  (frag.),  72 
Lonesome  Jailhouse  Blues,  265 
Longshoreman's  Strike,  236 
Look  Down  dat  Lonesome  Road,  67 
Lookin'  for  My  Wife  This  Mornin',  73 
Lordy,  Turn  Your  Face,  105 
Lost  Creek  Miners,  The  (frag.),  255 
Lowell  Factory  Girl,  The,  122 

*Ludlow  Massacre,  152 

Man  Frank  Weems,  The,  221 
*Many  Thousand  Gone,  101 

Marion  Massacre,  The,  131 

Marion  Strike,  The,  132 

Mary's  Little  Lot,  51 

Me  and  My  Captain,  84 

Mill  Has  Shut  Down,  The,  139 

Mill  Mother's  Lament,  The,  251 
*Mill  Was  Made  of  Marble,  The,  304 

Miner's  Flux,  167 

Miner's  Life  Is  Like  a  Sailor's,  A,  16 

Missus  in  de  Big  House,  96 
♦Mister  Farmer,  214 

Monkey  Ward  Can't  Make  a  Monkey 
out  of  Me,  309 

Mother  Jones,  154 

Mound  of  Your  Grave,  The,  298 

Mr.  Block   (frag.),  197 
*Mr.    Cundiff,    Won't    You    Turn    Me 
Loose?,  256 

My  Children  Are  Seven  in  Number,  166 

My  Country,  88 

My  Disgusted  Blues,  265 

Nat  Turner,  92 

National  Grass  Plot,  63 

Nigger  and  White  Man,  83 

Nigger  Be  a  Nigger,  81 

Niggers  Get  the  Turpentine,  84 
♦Nineteen  Thirteen  Massacre,  157 
♦No  Irish  Need  Apply,  41 

No  More  Shall  I  Work  in  the  Factory, 
125 

Noble  Knights  of  Labor,  48 

Nobody  Knows,  97 

Oh  Brothers,  Don't  Get  Weary,  79 
♦Oh  My  God  Them  'Taters,  72 


List  of   Songs   and    Ballads  *  343 


Old  Massa  He  Come  Dancin'  Out,  104 

Old  Sawbucks,  238 

On  a  Summer  Eve,  138 

On  to  Washington,  62 

One  Day  Old  and  No  Damn  Good,  113 

Onward  We  Go,  214 

Our  Children  They  Were  Sickly,  167 

Pastures  of  Plenty,  293 
Pat  Works  on  the  Railway,  42 
People's  Party  Song,  59 
People's  Rally  Cry,  6i 
Philadelphia  Lawyer,  The,  283 
Plane  Wreck  at  Los  Gatos,  294 
Poor  Miner's  Farewell,  263 
Preacher  and  the  Slave,  The,  185 
*Pretty  Boy  Floyd,  296 
Pullman  Strike,  The,  56 

Raggedy  Raggedy,  219 

Rhode  Island  Algerines'  Appeal  to  John 

Davis,  32 
Roll  the  Union  on,  223 
Root  Hog  or  Die,  284 
*Run  to  Jesus,  89 

Sailing  the  Union  Way,  235 
Scabs  Crawl  in,  The,  13 
Scissor  Bill  (frag.),  197 
Scottsboro,  117 

Semaria  Says  He  Loves  His  Girls,  128 
Shine  on  Me,  308 
Shirt  Factory  Blues,  143 
Six  Feet  of  Earth,  65 
Six  to  Six,  37 
Slavery  Chain,  102 
Slaves  Appeal,  88 
*So  Long,  It's  Been  Good  to  Know  You, 

205 
Solidarity  Forever,  181 
Speakers  Didn't  Mind,  The,  136 
Suffrage  Pledge,  36 
Swingin'  on  a  Scab,  13 


T-Bone  Slim,  264 

Talking  Hobo   (frag.),  15 

Talking  Miner   (frag.),  15 
*Tarriers'  Song,  The,  43 

That's  All,  307 

There  Are  Mean  Things  Happening  in 
Our  Land,  218 

These     Old     Cumberland     Mountain 

Farms,  217 
*Tom  Joad,  289 

Too  Old  To  Work,  306 

Two  Hoboes,  207 

♦UAW-CIO,  227 

Uncle  Sam  Says,  106 
Union  Maid,  299 
Up  in  Old  Loray,  135 

Walk  in  Joe,  81 

We  Made  Good  Wobs  Out  There,  182 
We  Shall  Not  Be  Moved,  17 
Weave  Room  Blues,  128 
Weaver's  Life  Is  Like  an  Engine,  A,  16 
What  Irish  Boys  Can  Do  (frag.),  40 
What  Shall  We  Do  for  the  Striking  Sea- 
men?, 234 
Where  Is  My  Wandering  Boy  Tonight?, 

176 
Where  the  Fraser  River  Flows,  179 

♦Which  Side  Are  You  on?,  170 

♦Wilder  Blues,  The,  160 

*Winnsboro  Cotton  Mill  Blues,  144 
Work  on,  O  Farmers'  Union,  214 
Workers  of  the  World  Are  Now  Awak- 
ing, The,  178 
Workers  of  the  World,  AwakenI,  187 
Workingman's  Train,  The,  87 
Workingmen's  Army,  The,  59 

Year  of  Jubalo,  The,  104 

You  Are  Free,  103 

You  Low  Life  Trifling  Bastard,  18 


Index 


Adams,  John,  22 

Aderholt,  O.  F.,  134,  211,  246-49 

Adkins,  Oscar  F.,  130 

Alien  and  Sedition  Acts,  22 

Allen,  William  Francis,  78-79 

Almanac  Singers,  227,  288.  See  also  Peo- 
ple's Songs 

Altgeld,  John  P„  56 

American  Antiquarian  Society,  48,  94, 
103 

American  Federation  of  Labor  (AFL), 
9,  11,  58,  183,  234 

American  Folk  Song,  280 

American  Labor  Union,  173 

American  Railway  Union,  55,  57 

Ammons,  Governor,  151 

Anti-Rent  War,  27,  28-31,  211 

Aptheker,  Herbert,  74 

Archive  of  American  Folk  Song,  Library 
of  Congress,  52,  81,  86,  96,  101,  104-6, 
110,  223,  250,  262,  275,  278 

Aristocracy  and  Limited  Tenure  of 
Office,  22-24 

Asch,  Moses,  280,  288,  292 

Avery,  Sewell  L.,  309 

Bad  Man  Ballads,  116-20 

Balch,  Elizabeth,  47 

Baldwin,  R,  W.,  129,  130 

Baldwin-Felts  Detective  Agency,  152 

Ball,  John,  2 

Bates,  John,  147 

Beal,  Fred,  134,  136,  138,  250 

Beard,  Charles  A.  and  Mary  R.,  23,  39 

Beddo,  Frank,  114 

Beecher,  Henry  Ward,  49 

Bennett,  Harry,  228 


Blackstone,  Grace,  220,  221 

Blair,  Sheriff  J.  H.,  169,  171 

Boughton,  Smith,  29 

Bound  for  Glory,  279 

Botkin,  Benjamin  A.,  71,  74,  102,  103 

Brazier,  Richard,  176 

Bridges,  Harry,  237 

Brown,  Henry  Box,  93 

Brown,  Rev.  John,  101 

Brown,  John,  90,  92 

Brown,  Sterling,  68,  75,  76,  80 

Buch,  Vera,  247 

Busby,  William,  194 

Butler,  Benjamin  F.,  59-60 

Calumet,  Michigan,  Strike,  149,  151,  155- 

58 
Carnegie,  Andrew,  229 
Carpenter,  John  G.,  135 
Carter,  L.  C,  247 
Carter  family,  100,  285 
Chaplin,  Ralph,  56,  i8on,  181,  189,  190 
Charles  II,  31 
Chase,  Adjutant  General  John,  151,  152, 

154 
Chicago  Massacre   (1937),  231,  232 
Chickering,  Jesse,  40 
Child,  Francis  James,  243 
Christman,  Henry,  28,  31 
Cleveland,  Grover,  56,  62 
Congress     of     Industrial     Organizations 

(CIO),  9,  12,  231,  234,  238,  302,  307. 

See  also  affiliated  unions 
Coxey,    Jacob    Sechler,    and    the    Coxey 

Army,  61-63 

Davidson-Wilder  strike,  148,  158-66 


345 


346  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 


Davis,  Arthur  Kyle,  5 

Davis,  Governor  John,  32 

Debs,  Eugene  V.,  55,  56 

Depression  songs,  63-65 

Devyr,  Thomas,  29,  211 

Dissolution  of  the  Landed  Aristocracy, 

27-36 
Donnelly,  Ignatius,  58 
Dorr  Rebellion,  27,  31-36 
Dorr,  Thomas  Wilson,  31-36 
Douglass,  Frederick,  75,  80,  89 
Du  Bois,  W.  E.  B.,  80 

Ellis,  "One-Finger,"  199 

Emrich,  Duncan,  187,  197 

Evans,  George,  29 

Everett   (Washington)   strike,   1916,   183- 


Farmers,  9,  10,  57,  58,  209-23.  See  also 

Sharecroppers 
Federalists,  22 

Flynn,  Elizabeth  Gurley,  182 
Ford,  Henry,  228,  229 
Ford,  John, 206 
Freight  Handlers'  strike  of  1882,  52,  53 

Gabriel's  Conspiracy,  74 

Gardner,  Emelyn  Elizabeth,  and  Chicker- 

ing,  Geraldine  Jencks,  7 
Garland  family;  see  Aunt  Molly  Jackson 

in  list  of  composers 
Garvey,  Marcus,  108 
Gastonia  textile  strike,  127,  133-39,  148, 

244-5 1 
Geer,  Will,  140,  279 
Gellert,  Lawrence,  68,  69,  73,  84,  86,  93, 

112,  113,  117,  120,  207 
Genesis  of  Protest  Folksongs,  10-12 
George,  Henry,  50,  51 
Girdler,  Tom,  230-33 
Gordon,  Robert  Winslow,  5 
Gould,  Jay,  46,  52,  53,  127 
Graham,  Barney,  159,  164-66 
Grapes  of  Wrath,  The,  206,  279,  289,  296 

Hamilton,  Alexander,  23,  28 

Harris  Collection,  Brown  University,  27, 

33>  35.  36>  38>  39'  49.  53.  56>  6o"63>  66, 

88,  89,  124,  140,  236 
Harris,  Herbert,  i22n 
Hayes,  Alfred,  189 
Haywood,  Bill,  181,  195 
Henry,  H.  M.,  71,  94 
Henry,  Mellinger,  6 
Higginson,  Thomas,  78 


Highlander  Folk  School,  158,  220,  221 
Hoffman,  Alfred,  129 
Holland,  John,  190,  191,  193 
Homestead  steel  strike,  1892,  229,  230 
Horton,  Myles,  158,  159 
Houston,  Cisco,  280 
Howe,  Wilson  R.,  68 

Imprisonment  for  Debt,  24-27 

Industrial  Workers  of  the  World  (IWW), 
gn,  11,  13,  50,  56,  173-99,  2°2>  2°3>  211> 
253, 264, 283 

International  Labor  Defense,  138,  139, 
249,  250,  266 

International  Ladies'  Garment  Workers 
Union,  226 

International  Longshoremen's  Associa- 
tion, 237 

Irish  Immigrant,  The,  39-44 

Jackson,  Andrew,  24 

Jackson,  Bill,  259,  270 

Jackson,  George  Pullen,  77 

James,  Thelma,  4 

Jefferson,  Thomas,  22,  23 

Jenckes,  Manville,  137,  138,  247,  248 

Johnson,  Guy  B.,  69,  73,  86,  96 

Johnson,  Col.  Richard  M.,  24 

Jonas,  John,  130 

Jones,  Mother,  147,  151,  154,  155 

Jones,  Violet,  138 

Jubilee  Songs,  101-5 

Kearney,  Denis,  49 
Keating,  Congressman,  151 
Kennedy,  R.  Emmet,  77 
King,  Samuel  W.,  32-36 
Kittredge,  George  Lyman,  22,  243 
Knights  of  Labor,  44-48,  58 
Knowles,  Merton,  104,  105 
Korson,  George,  10,  147,  155 

Larkin,  Margaret,  245 

Lewis,  John  L.,  229 

Lincoln,  Abraham,  298,  299 

Little,  Frank,  253 

Little  Red  Song  Book,  176-88 

Little  Steel,  231.  See  also  Republic  Steel 

Lloyd,  A.  L.,  111 

Lomax,  Alan,  68,  115,  219,  275,  279 

Lomax,  John,  6,  67,  115,  125 

Long,  J.  D.,  95 

Longshoremen,  235-38 

Loray  Mill:  see  Gastonia 

Loring,  Michael,  189 

Lovell,  John  Jr.,  68,  75,  80 

Lowell,  Francis  C,  122 


Index  •  347 


Ludlow  Massacre,  150-55 
Lumber  Workers,  238-42 

Malmesbury,  William  of,  13 

Marion  (N.  C.)  textile  strike,  127,  129-33 

Marsh,  J.  B.  T.,  8on,  90,  98 

Matt,  Harvey,  169 

Mayer,  Louis  B.,  170 

McKillips,  Budd  L.,  198,  199 

Melvin,  Sophie,  137 

Migrant  Songs,  204-8,  215-23,  275-302 

Milburn,  George,  198,  199,  202,  203 

Mill,  John  Stuart,  50 

Mine  Workers,  9,  10,  15,  16,  40,  86,  147- 

72,  212,  244,  245,  296 
Moller,  Vera,  182 
Mooney,  Captain  James  L.,  232 
Morrison,  J.  W.,  193,  194,  196 
Morton,  Governor,  32 
Motion  Picture  Workers,  13,  170 
Movement  for  a  Shorter  Working  Day, 

36-39 

National  Maritime  Union,  234 
National  Miners  Union,  261,  266,  269-71, 

273 

National  Textile  Workers'  Union,  246 

Niles,  John  Jacob,  105,  106 

Nineteen  Thirteen  Massacre;  see  Calu- 
met 

O'Connor,  Kate,  49 

Odum,  Howard  W.,  69,  86,  96 

O'Sheel,  Shaemas,  300 

Paine,  Thomas,  50 

Parker,  Judge  Amasa,  29,  286 

Pennington,  J.  W.  C,  95 

People's  Songs,  gn,  11,  114,  126,  132,  133, 
i36'  J37»  *39>  !44»  !%  219.  220,  223, 
238,  240,  248,  250,  252,  280,  286 

Phar,  Katie,  152 

Phillips,  Ulrich  B.,  40 

Populist  Movement  (People's  Party),  57- 
63,  210,  211 

Pound,  Louise,  5 

Powderly,  Terence  V.,  45,  46 

Pullman,  George  M.,  54-58 

Pullman  Strike,  53-57 

Queens,  Cicero,  131 

Reese,  George,  185 
Republic  Steel,  230-32 
Reuther,  Walter,  305 


Rhode  Island  Suffrage  Association,  31 
Rochester,  Anna,  60 
Roosevelt,  Franklin  D.,  31 
Rutledge,  Ann,  298,  299 
Ryan,  Joe,  237 

Sacco  and  Vanzetti,  119,  133,  134,  284 

Salvation  Army,  174,  175 

Sandburg,  Carl,  57,  101 

Sassaman,  Walter,  11 

Seamen,  10,  233-38,  264 

Seeger,  Dr.  Charles,  285 

Seeger,  Pete,  42,  28571,  299 

Sellins,  Fanny,  154 

Sewell,  Arthur  M.,  58 

Sharecroppers,  11,  86,  215-23 

Shivers,  L.  L.,  161-63 

Siegmeister,  Elie,  275 

Simm,  Harry,  261,  271,  272 

Single  Tax  Movement,  50-52 

Slavery  songs,  92-104 

Smedley,  R.  C,  8on,  94 

Snyder,  Big  Bill,  30,  31 

Socialist  Labor  Party,  173 

Songs  of  Disillusion,  104-9 

Southern  Tenant  Farmers'   Union,   218, 

221,  223 
Spirituals,  75-80 
Spry,  Governor,  194,  195 
Stamos,  Gustavos,  260 
Steel  Workers,  229-33 
Stegner,  Wallace,  190,  191,  193 
Steinbeck,  John,  288,  296 
Stephens,  Uriah,  44-46 
Steward,  Ira,  37 
Stewart,  Jim,  257,  258 
Stroud,  George  M.,  71 
Structure  of  the  Modern  Protest  Song, 

12-19 

Taft,  Robert,  300 

Talking  Blues,  15 

Tenny,  John,  170 

Textile  Labor,  304 

Textile  Workers,  9,  12,  16,  37,  86,  121-46, 

148,  211,  244-52,  302-9 
Textile  periodicals,  126 
Tharpe,  Sister  Rosetta,  306 
Thomas,  Norman,  160 
Thompson,  Dr.  J.  B.,  158-60 
Travis,  Merle,  171-72 
Truman,  Harry  S.,  235 
Tubman,  Harriet,  75,  89,  90-92 
Turner,  Nat,  75,  92 
Tyler,  John,  33 
Tyler,  Wat,  2,  188 


348  *  American  folksongs  of  protest 


United    Automobile    Workers     (UAW- 

CIO),  ii,  226-29,  305 
United  Mine  Workers,  150 
United  Mine  Workers  Journal,  150 
United   Textile  Workers  Union    (AFL), 

129.  3°3 

Van  Buren,  Martin,  24 
Van  Deusen,  Lawrence,  29 
Van  Rensselaer,  Kiliaen,  28,  29 
Van  Rensselaer,  Stephen,  III,  28,  29 
Volunteers  of  America,  174 

Waddell-Mahon  detective  agency,  156 
Waldron,  Father  John,  55 
Walsh,  Jack,  13,  174-76 
Ward,  Harry  F.,  1372,  187 


Washington,  George,  22 

Weems,  Frank,  220-21 

Western  Federation  of  Miners,  155,  156, 

173.  174 
Wilde,  Oscar,  11 
Wilhelm,  George,  283 
Wilson,  Woodrow,  195 
Wimberly,  Lowry  Charles,  212 
Workers'  Defense  League,  220 
Workers  International  Industrial  Union, 

174 
Wright,  Richard,  82,  83 
Wright,  Governor  Silas,  29 

Young  Communist  League,  261 

"Zipper"  songs,  16,  223 


DATE  DUE 

r  ^ 

R 

DE 

C  I  &  2003 

\j  \  I 

BETEJn 

jOJ|      ^ 

\s 

HAY   1  o   1| 

10 

JftNBj ; 

wn 

CAYLORO 

PRINTED  IN  US./ 

78M9G85 


CLAPP 


r      3  5002  00398  3157 

Greenway,  John. 

American  folksongs  of  protest. 


Music  ML  3551  .  G7 

Greenway,  John. 

American  folksongs  of 
protest 


