f":^: 

^ 


o')(..iUr/Jc 


/9°'1 


^  THE-PROPERTy-OF:; 


I'LESTER-DOUGLAS^t 


4  ♦  ♦♦  t  ♦  »♦*  ♦^^  ♦♦I 


THE  ADVERTISEMENTS  OF 
THE  SPECTATOR 


Numb.  CCCLXXXIU 


The  SPECTATOR 


Crimlnibus  debent  Hortos- 


Juv. 


Taefdcyy  May   20.      1711. 


AS  I  was  fitting  in  my  Chamber,  and 
thinking  on  a  Subject  for  my  next  Spe- 
StaXor^  I  heard  two  or  three  irregular 
Bounces  ar  my  Landlady's  Door,  and  up- 
on the  opening  of  it  a  loud  chearful  Voice  enqui- 
ring whether  the  Philofopher  was  at  Home.  The 
Child  who  went  to  the  Door  anfwered  very  Inno- 
cently that  he  did  not  Lodge  there.  1  immedlacely 
recollefted  that  it  was  m  J  good  Friend  Sir  Roger's 
Voice;  and  that  1  had  promifed  him  to  go  with  him 
on  the  Water  lo  Spring -Garden^  in  cafe  it  proved  a 
Rood  Evening.  The  Knight  put  me  in  mind  of  my 
rromifefroi-n  the  bottom  of  theStair  Cafe,  but  told 
me  that  if  I  was  Speculating  he  wou'd  ftay  below 
till  I  had  done.  Upon  my  coming  down  I  found 
all  the  Children  of  the  Family  got  about  my  old 
Friend,  and  my  Landlady  her  felP,  who  is  a  nota- 
ble prating  Goffip,  engaged  in  a  Conference  with 
him,  being  mightily  pleafed  with  his  frroaking  her 
littleBoy  upon  theHead,  and  bidding  himbeagood 
Child  and  mind  his  Book. 

We  were  no  fooner  come  to  the  Temple  Stairs, 
but  we  were  furrounded  with  a  Crowd  of  Water- 
men offeringus  their  re fpeftive  Services.  Sir  Ro; 
GER,  after  having  looked  about  him  very  attentively, 
fpied  one  with  a  Wooden  Leg,  and  immediately 
gave  him  Orders  to  gee  his  Boatready.  As  we  were 
walking  towards  it,  Tott  ?nuji  know^  fays  Sir  Ro- 
ger,/ never  make  ufe  of  any  Body  to  Row  me  that 
"pj  not  either  lofi  a-Leg  or  an  Arm.  I  uiov^d  rather 
bate  him  a.  few  Strokes  of  bii  Oar.,  than  not  Employ 
Oil  honeft  Ji/fait  that  has  been  wounded  in  vhe  (Queen's 
Service.  If  /  -wai  a  Lord,  or  a.  Bijhop^  and  kept  a, 
Barge ^  I  wou'd,  not  put  a.  Fellow  in  my  JJvery  that 
l>adnot  a.  IVooden  Leg. 

My  old  Friend,  after  having  feated  himfelf,  and 
trimmed  theBoat  with  hisCoachman,  who,  being  a 
very  fobcr  Man,  always  ferves  for  Ballaft  on  thefe 
Occafions,we  made  thebeftof  our  vi sy  for  Fox- hall. 
Sir  Roc  ER.  obliged  the  Waterman  to  give  us  the 
Hiftory  of  his  Right  Leg  and  hearing  that  heliad  left  it 
in  Bantry  Buy,  with  many  Particulars  which  paffed  in 
thit  glorious  A&ion,  the  Knight  in  the  Triumph  of 


his  Heart  made feveralRefledVions  on  theGreatnefs 
of  the  Britjp  Nabon ;  as,  that  one  Enghpman  cou'd 
beat  ihr^e  Froichmen;  that  we  cou'd  never  be  m  Dan- 
ger of  Popery  fo  long  as  We  took.care  of  our  Fleet- 
that  th&Thamej  was  the  nobleft  Rivenn  Europe  ■  that 
London-ind^evia^  i  greater  Piece  of  Work  Than  any 
of  the  Seven  Wonders  of  the  World,  with  many  o- 
ther  honeft  Prejudices  that  naturally  cleave  to  the 
Heart  of  a  true  Engl>Jhman. 

After  fome  {hort  Paufe,  the  old  Knight  turnine 
about  his  Head  twice  or  thrice,  to  take  a  Survey  of 
this  great  Metropolis,  bid  me  obferve  how  thick 
the  City  was  fet  with  Churches,  and  that  there  was 
fcarceafingle  SteepUonth\&RdeTempU-bar.  J rnoft 
Htathenijh  Sight\  fays  Sir  Roger:  ThereisnoRe- 
hgion  ax.  thit  EndoftheTown.  The  Fifty  veiv  Churches 
VJillvtry  much  nundthtProfpeet;  but  Church-Work 
iijlowy  Churcb-iiiork  is Jlew\ 

I  do  not  remember  that  I  have  any  where  menti- 
oned, in  Sir  Roger's  CharadJer,  his  CuUom  of 
Saluting  every  Body  that  pafles  by  him.  With  a 
Good-morrow,  or  a  Good-night.  This  the  Old- 
Man  does  out  oftheOverflowingsof  his  Humanity 
tho'  at  the  fame  time  it  renders  him  fo  popular  a- 
mong  all  bis  Country  Neighbours,  that  it  is  thought 
to  have  gone  a  good  way  in  making  him  once  or 
twice  Knight  oTthe  Shire.  He  cannot  forbear  this 
Exercife  of  Benevolence  even  in  Town,  when  he 
meets  with  any  one  in  his  Morning  or  Evening 
Walk.  It  broke  from  him  to  feveral  Boats  that 
paffed  by  us  upon  the  Water;  but  to  the  Knight's 
great  Surprife,  as  he  gave  the  Good-night  to  two 
or  threeyonng  Fellows  a  little  before  our  Landing 
one  of  them,  inftead  of  returning  the  Civility,  asked 
us  what  Queer  old  Putt  we  had  in  the  Boat  :  and 
whether  he  was  not  afhamed  to  go  a  Wenching  at 
his  Years  \  with  a  great  deal  of  the  like  Thamej- 
Ribaldry.  Sir  Roger  fecmed  a  little  fhocked at  firft 
but  at  length  aflTuming  a  Face  of  MagiAracy,  told 
us,  that  if  he  ■were  a.  Middlefex  Jujiice,  be  would 
makejuch  (^cgrantj  know  that  MerMajeJly'sSubh&s 
were  no  more  to  be  abuftd  by  Water  than  by  Land 

We 


Drawing  from  a  Photograph  of  an  Original  Sheet  of  the  Spectator 


VVe  were  now  Arrived  at  Spring  Garden,  which 
is  exQuificely  pleafant  at  this  time  of  Year-  When 
I  conrideredlheFragrancyof  the  Walks  and  Bowers 
with  tiie  Choirs  of  Birds  that  fungupon  the  Trees, 
and  the  loofe  Tribe  of  People  that  walked  under  their 
Shades,  I  could  not  out  look  upon  the  place  as  a 
kind  0^  Mahomttan  Paradife.  Sir  Roger  told 
Hje,  it  put  him  in  mind  of  a  little  Coppice  by  his 
Houfe  in  the  Country,  which  his  Chaplain  ufed  to 
call  an  Aviary  of  Nightingales.  Tou  muji  under- 
fiand^  fays  the  Knie,ht,  chere  is  nochittg  in  tbelVorld 
that  pleafes  a  Man  in  Lovefo  much  of  your  Night- 
ingale. Ah,  Mr.  S  P  E  C  T  A  T  O  R  .'  7Ae  many  Moon- 
lightNightitbat  [have,  walhedby  myjelfy  andtbought 
onthe  Widow  by  the  Mufick  of  the.  Ni^hungaksl  He 
here  fetched  a  deep  Sigh,  and  was  falling  into  a 
fit  of  mufing-,  when  a  Mafque,  who  came  behind 
him,  gave  him  a  gentle  Tap  upon  the  Shoulder, 
and  asked  him  if  he  would  drink  a  Bottle  of  Mead 
with  her;  but  the  Knight  being  ftartled  at  fo  un-' 
expefted  a  Familiarity^  and  difpleafed  to  be  inter- 
rupted in  his  Thoughts  of  the  Widow,  told  her 
She  was  a  wantoK  Baggage,  and  bid  her  go  about 
her  Bufinefs. 

We  concludedourWalk  with  a  Glafsof  Burion- 
Ale,  and  aflice  of  Hunj  Beef.  When  we  had  done 
eating  our  felves,  the  Knight  called  a  Waiter  to 
him,  and  bid  bim  carry  the  Remainder  to  a  Water- 
man that  had  but  one  Leg  1  perceived  the  Fel- 
low Oared  upon  him  at  the  Oddnefs  of  the  Mef- 
fage,  and  was  going  to  be  faucy;  upon  which  I 
ratified  the  Knight's  Commands  with  a  Peremtory 
Look. 

As  we  Were  going  oat  of  the  Garden,  my  old 
Friend  thinking  himfelf  obliged,  as  a  Member  of 
the  Quorum,  to  animadvert  upon  the  Morals  of  the 
Place,  told  the  Miftrefs  of  the  Houfe,  who  fat  at 
the  Bar,  That  he  fhould  be  a  better  Cuftomer  to 
her  Garden,  if  there  were  more  Nightingales,  and 
fewer  Strumpets. 

ApyERTISEMENTS. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  Knight. 

At  the  Defire  of  lev  era!  Perfons  of  Quality. 

By  Her  Majefty'^  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-LanCj  this  prefent 
Tuefdiy,  ttie  zoth  Day  of  May,  will  be  prsrenteda  Play  cali'd, 
Oroonolso.  The  Part  of  OTOonoko  by  Mr.  Booth,  The  Widow  Lack- 
it  by  Mrs.  Knight  And  all  riie  other  Parts  to  the  beft  Advantage.  To 
which  will  beaddtdaFarce  cili'd  iheWalki-ngStitut,  or  theDtvilin 
the  WineCeller.  With  Dancing  by  Mrs  Sandow.  By  herMajefty's  Com- 
mand no  Perfons  are  lo  be  admituA  behind  the  Scenes.  Note,  That 
the  Tickets  given  out  for  the  Careltfs  Husband,  vuill  be  taken  at  this 
Play. 

Never  Performed  but  once. 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Mar]\et,  to 
.  morrow  being  W9dnefda>  th^  2.1 1\  oF  May,  will  be  prefented  an 
Englifh  Opera  call'd  Calypfo  and  Telemichus.  Boxes  88.  Pitys. 
f'^ft  Gallery  is.6d.  Upper  Gallery  i  l.  6 d.  Boxesupon  the  5tage 
half  a  Guinea,  the  two  Benches  in  the  Pltra'il'cL  inatihe.  Price  ot  the 
BoAtes.  To  begin  exactly  at  5ix.  By  Her  Majefly's  Command,  No 
Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  tiie  Scenes. 

This  Opera  is  fold  by  F.  Sanger,  at  the  Midile-Temple  Gale  in 
Flecldreet.    Price  One  Shillings. 


For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.   Morphy. 
At  Mr.  Mayor's  at    the  corner  of  HeTnminesrow 

next  to  the  Free  School  in  CafHe  ftreet  near  the  Mufe,  to  morrow  be 
ing-theitft  Inftant,  will  be  performed  an  e.)(traord;nary  ConfortoF 
Mufick  by  the  beftMaftersj  and  in  which  Mr.  Morphy  will  perform 
feveral  Entertainments  on  his  Silver  ftring'd  Harp,  on  which  n*  has 
had  the  Honour  to  play  before  the  prefent  Emperor  and  (he  King  of 
Portugal  Tickets  are  to  be  hadatMr.  Morphy's Lodgings  at  Mr  n- 
nions  in  King-ftreet,  St.  James's;  and  at  St.  James's  and  the5mvrna 
Coffet-houfesat  5t.  James'j ;  the  Britifh,  and  Yoong  Man's  at  Charino 
Crofs;  the  Tilt-yard  at  Whitehall;  at  Tom's  and  Will's  in  Covent 
Oaiden,  at  j  s.  each.  N.  B.  Several  of  the  Matters  at  theOperadoing 
Mr.Morphy  the  favour  to  perform  In  hisConfort,  it  will  begin  exactly 
at  dye,  and  end  in  time  for  Perfonsof  Quality  to  go  there. 

This  Day  is  Publi  fhed, 
Mifcellaneous  Poems  and  Tranflations.    By  feveral 

Hands,  printed  for  Bernard  Lintott,  at  the  Crofs  Keys  belwecn  the 
two  Temple  Gates  in  Flee /Ireet.  Where  may  be  had  Dr  T.llyj 
Sermons;  and  Madam  Daclers  Homer.  Printed  on  an  Elziver  Let- 
ter, and  i6  Copper  Plates,  done  by  the  bett  Gravers,  from  the  dc- 
hgns  of  Compel. 

For  Sale  by  the  Candle^ 
To  Morrow  being  Wednefday  the  2ift  Inftant,  at 
Garraway's  Coflfee-houfein  Exchange  Alley, precifelji at  loa-Clockin 
thePorenoon,  (only  oneHogfheadinaLot)  jj-Hogfheads  of  newFrench 
Clarets,  vii.  Marg.ujf,  Obrion,  and  other  of  the  beft  Growths,  deep 
Bright,  ftrong  and  frefh,  neat,  and  not  one  Hogthead  fold  out,  Im- 
fomi  by  Mcfr.eurs  Tourton  and  Guiguer,  by  a  Swedift^  Ship  the 
Crown'dMary,  being  the  fecondand  laft  5bip  arrived  from  Bourdeauy 
direftly,  now  lying  in  a  Vault  under  the  Hoofe  of  Sir  William  Hum- 
phrys  in  Mincing-lane  in  Fenchurch  /heet.  To  be  feen  and  tided 
this  Day  from  8  to  i,  and  from  2  to  6,  and  tomorrow  'till  the  time 
of  Sale.  Note,  The  Buyers  are  defired  to  appear  punaually  at  the 
Hour  appolnud,  the  Sale  being  to  be  complealed  withoutadjoorning. 

A  Large  Brick  Houfe,  with  a  Tarrafs  andBack-door 

into  3t-  James's  Park,  wrlth  good.  Vaults,  and  all  other  Offices  under 
Ground,  now  in  the  Tenor  of  the  Honourable  Robert  Benfon,  Efq. 
the  laft  Houfe  in  Queen  ftreet,  on  the  KightHand,  is  to  be  fold.  In- 
quire at  Mr.  Sayu£s,  at  the  Golden  Still  in  Pye  Comer  near  Weft- 
rmithfield. 

Mr.  John  Warter,  who  formerly  taught  theCourt 

Hand  in  the  Qocenls  Bench  Office  in  the  Inner  Temple,  nowcontinuej 
to  Teach  the  fame  in  a  very  cxa&  manner,  foiLS  the  Scholar  io  three 
Weeks  time /hall  be  fit  for  Bufmefs  (his  conftanl  Attendance  being 
only  defired)  at  his  Chambers  three  pair  of  Stairs,  over  Pfothanetary 
Barret's  Office  in  the  Temple  Walks  at  all  Hours  of  theDay.  He  alfo 
exemplifies  Recoveries,  &c. 

Dropt  by  a  Servant  out  of  a  Parcel  on  Monday  che 

ijth  Inftant  in  the  Morning,  going  from  Mark-lane  to  ChicK-lane 
nerr  SmithBeld,  or  from  thence  to  Devonfhirc-ftreet  near  Red-Lyon- 
5<)uare,  or  from  thence  to  the  New  Exchange  in  the  Strand,  two 
pieces  of  Lace  about  an  Inch  broad,  conlainingSory  YardsinaPiece: 
Whoever  brings  the  fame  to  Charles  Li  III  e's^  the  corner  of  Beauford 
Buildings  in  the  Strand,  fViall  receive  one  Guinea  reward. 

Lofton  Sunday  the  nth  Inftant,  in  or  nearSt. 
John's  Church  in  Hackney,  iwp  Gold  Watch-Cafes;  if  the  fame  are 
brought  to  Daniel  Delander  in  Devorcax  Court  by  the  Middle  Temple, 
Watchmaker,  without  any  Qyenions  to  be  asked  theyfhall  receive  7 
Guineas  reward  for  each,  or  if  either  of  them  proportionable.  N.  B. 
There  is  a  new  Invention  by  the  faid  Daniel  Delander  of  a  Spring, 
which  is  very  neatly  fixed  to  the  infide  of  the  Cafe,  wfiich  prevents 
the  Cafe  to  be  either  loft  or  (loin 

Verdier's  Hummums  is  in  Belton-ftreet_,  at  the 

end  of  Brownlow- ftreet  nearDrury-lane  ;  where  Perfons  may  private- 
ly be  Sweated,  Bathed  or  Cupped  with  the  fame  Innrument  he  him- 
felf firft  Invented,  and  exceeds  all  otheri,  and  is  ufed  no  where  elfe 
but  at  the  faid  Widow  Verdier's,  tho'  feveral  have  and  do  ftillendea- 
vour  to  Counterfeit  iht  fame.  All  Perfons  who  defiretobe  Cupped  at 
their  own  Houfes,  fhall  be  carefully  attended  by  her  Partner  (aGerman) 
Daniel  Hahn,  who  haspradllfed  it  thefe  many  Years  paft,  not  as  ills  ma- 
liciouftyreportedthe  Houfe  is  left  off. 

A  Child  oF  mine,  reduced  under  extream  Suffer- 
ings and  Dangers,  by  the  Violent  breeding  of  his  Teeth.  Received 
Immediate  help  only  by  Rubbing  his  Gums  with  a  Remedy  1  had  of 
Mr.  Perronet  Surgeon  in  Dyot  fheet,  Bloomsbury,  whereupon  he 
Cut  feveral  Teeth,  with  abudance  of  Eafe  and  Safety.  Wim.fj  my 
Hand.  Abraham  Pope,  in  White  Lion  Court,  FleetOreet,  Goldfmilh 
This  Remedy  is  Soldatzs.  6d.  per  Vial,  by  the  Author  aforesaid.  Mr. 
Alcraft,  at  the  Blue  Coat  Bay,  againft  the  Royal  Exchange.  Cornhill, 
by  Mr.  Walkins,  Tobacconift,  againfl  the  Market  in  King  rtreet. 
We  tmmfter,  and  by  Mr.  Llllie,  Perfumer,  at  the  Comer  of  B.auford 
Buildings  in  the  Strand. 


"^  c^.^^-o^/J"''"*  ^"^'ifr-  ^w'-^'  ''  ^'^^'I^olph'n  in  Little-Britain  5  and 

irV'^r    r\v;      T?^"^''''^  where   Advertifements  are   taken  in; 

as  alfo  by    QharUs  Lilhe,  Perfumer,   at  the  Corner  of  Beauford-Buildin^sh 

the  Jtrana.  ^      . 


[^5x^ 


vent 

OF 


The  SPECTATOR 


Being  a  ftudy  of  the  Literature,  Hiftory  and 
Manners  of  Queen  Anne's  England  as  they 
are  refledled  therein,  as  well  as  an  illuftration 
of  the  Origins  of  the  Art  of  Advertifing. 

With  Appendix  of  reprefentativeAdvertifements 
now  for  the  firft  time  reprinted,  and  an  Intro- 
dudory  Note  by  George  Lyman  Kittredge. 

By  Lawrence  Lewis 


TOUT  BIEN  v-<  Val   OU  ILIEN 


Bofton  £ff  New  York 

HOUGHTON   MIFFLIN    COMPANY 

1909 


COPYRIGHT,  1909,  BY   LAWRENCE  LEWIS 
ALL  RIGHTS   RESERVED 

Published  June  iqog 


It  is  my  Cuflom  in  a  Dearth  of  News  to  enter- 
tain my  felf  with  thofe  Colledions  of  Advertife- 
ments  that  appear  at  the  End  of  all  our  publick 
Prints.  Thefe  I  confider  as  Accounts  of  News 
from  the  little  World,  in  the  fame  Manner  that 
the  foregoing  Parts  of  the  Paper  are  from  the 
great.  If  in  one  we  hear  that  a  Sovereign  Prince  is 
fled  from  his  Capital  City,  in  the  other  we  hear 
of  a  Tradefman  who  hath  fhut  up  his  Shop  and 
run  away.  If  in  one  we  find  the  Vidory  of  a 
General,  in  the  other  we  fee  the  Defertion  of  a 
private  Soldier.  I  muft  confefs,  I  have  a  certain 
Weaknefs  in  my  Temper,  that  is  often  very  much 
affeded  by  thefe  little  Domeftick  Occurrences,  and 
have  frequently  been  caught  with  Tears  in  my 
Eyes  over  a  melancholy  Advertifement. 

But  to  coniider  this  Subject  in  its  moft  ri- 
diculous Lights,  Advertifements  are  of  great  Ufe 
to  the  Vulgar:  Firfl  of  all,  as  they  are  Inilru- 
ments  of  Ambition.  A  Man  that  is  by  no  Means 
big  enough  for  the  Gazette^  may  eafily  creep  into 
the  Advertifements,  by  which  Means  we  often  fee 
an  Apothecary  in  the  fame  Paper  of  News  with 
a  Plenipotentiary,  or  a  Running-Footman  with 
an  AmbafTador.  An  Advertifement  from  Piccadilly 
goes  down  to  Poflerity  with  an  article  from  Ma- 

[V] 


drid ;  and  John  Bartlett  of  Goodmari  s-Fields  is 
celebrated  in  the  same  Paper  with  the  Emperor 
of  Germany,  Thus  the  Fable  tells  us,  That  the 
Wren  mounted  as  high  as  the  Eagle,  by  getting 
upon  his  Back. 

A  Second  Ufe  which  this  Sort  of  Writings 
have  been  turned  to  of  late  Years,  has  been  the 
Management  of  Controverfy,  infomuch  that  above 
half  the  Advertifements  one  meets  with  now-a- 
Days  are  purely  Polemical.  The  Inventors  of 
Strops  for  Razors  have  written  againft  one  another 
this  Way  for  feveral  Years,  and  that  with  great 
Bitternefs;  as  the  whole  Argument  ^r^  a.nd  con  in 
the  Cafe  of  the  Morning-Gowns  is  ftill  carried  on 
after  the  fame  Manner.  I  need  not  mention  the 
feveral  Proprietors  o£Dr./^nderfon's  Pills;  nor  take 
Notice  of  the  many  Satyrical  Works  of  this  Nature 
so  frequently  publifhed  by  Dr.  Clark,  who  has  had 
the  Confidence  to  advertize  upon  that  learned 
Knight,  my  very  worthy  Friend,  Sir  JVilliam  Read: 
But  I  fhall  not  interpofe  in  their  Quarrel ;  Sir 
William  can  give  him  his  own  in  Advertifements, 
that,  in  the  Judgment  of  the  Impartial,  are  as  well 
penned  as  the  Doctor's.  —  Addison  in  'Tatler, 
No.  224,  "From  Tuesday,  September  12,  to 
Thursday,  September  14,  1710." 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE 

THE  eighteenth  century  seems  pretty- 
recent  to  most  of  us,  but  in  many 
ways  it  is  almost  or  quite  as  remote 
as  the  middle  ages.  It  is  the  modernity  of 
the  language  that  deceives  us,  perhaps, — 
though  even  that  is  more  apparent  than  real. 
At  any  rate,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  a 
knight  in  armor  would  strike  one  of  our  con- 
temporaries as  a  more  familiar  object  than  a 
member  of  the  Macaroni  Club,  which,  as 
Horace  Walpole  wrote  in  1764,  was  "  com- 
posed of  all  the  travelled  young  men  who 
wear  long  curls  and  spying-glasses."  And 
I  am  sure  that  Chaucer  would  feel  more 
at  home  than  Addison  in  the  London  or 
the  Paris  or  the  New  York  of  the  present 
day. 

Yet,  remote  as  the  life  of  the  eighteenth 

century  really  is,  there  is  no  difficulty  in 

reconstructing  it  by  study,  if  we  mingle  a 

little  imagination  with  our   midnight  oil. 

[vii] 


Introductory  Note 

And  such  study  is  a  pure  delight,  because  it 
is  so  easy,  and  because  the  temper  of  the 
times  we  are  investigating  keeps  us  from 
getting  excited,  and  makes  us  feel  like  but- 
terflies of  knowledge. 

Minor  Antiquities  are  always  interesting. 
We  can  get  better  acquainted  with  them 
than  with  the  big  things  of  old,  and  famil- 
iarity does  not  breed  contempt  except  in 
people  who  are  more  or  less  contemptible 
themselves. 

For  all  these  reasons  —  and  several  others, 
which  it  is  not  worth  while  to  excogitate 
—  I  am  especially  grateful  to  Mr.  Lewis 
for  writing  this  little  book. 

What  can  be  more  enlightening  than  a 
lot  of  advertisements  ?  The  very  word  sug- 
gests the  intimate  connection  which  exists 
between  their  subject  matter  and  the  human 
nature  upon  which  they  were  designed  to  act. 
An  advertisement  is  a  notification y  and  we  do 
not  notify  a  man  of  what  he  does  not  care 
to  hear  about.  Such  a  collection  as  our 
fortunate  author  has  made  transports  us,  his 
readers,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  into 
[  viii  ] 


Introductory  Note 

the  homes  and  haunts  of  our  ancestors.  It 
brings  us  into  the  closest  possible  contact 
with  their  daily  life.  Literary  men  may 
write  for  posterity ;  but  the  advertiser  must 
trade  upon  the  present.  He  does  not  buy 
his  goods  for  investment.  He  must  turn  over 
his  stock  rapidly,  or  face  the  Bankruptcy 
Court. 

Selden  was  a  very  wise  and  learned  man 
—  far  too  sagacious  to  be  a  breaker  of  pro- 
verbs. And  he  never  uttered  anything  wiser 
than  his  little  sermon  on  the  adage  about 
straws  in  the  wind :  "  Tho'  some  make 
slight  of  Libelsy  yet  you  may  see  by  them 
how  the  wind  sits :  As  take  a  straw  and 
throw  it  up  into  the  Air,  you  shall  see  by 
that  which  way  the  Wind  is,  which  you 
shall  not  do  by  casting  up  a  Stone.  More 
solid  things  do  not  shew  the  Complexion 
of  the  times  so  well,  as  Ballads  and  Libels.'' 
For  libels  read  advertisements^  and  you  have 
a  motto  for  this  book. 

And  so  I  congratulate  our  author  on  his 
luck  in  turning  over  the  original  numbers  of 
the  **  Spectator,''  and  on  the  skill  with  which 
[ix] 


Introductory  Note 

he  has  utilized  his  happy  chance.  My  func- 
tion is  merely  to  make  his  bow  for  him, 
since  he  is  far  too  modest  to  make  it  for 
himself. 

G.  L.  KiTTREDGE. 


CONTENTS 

Introduction  i 

I.  History,  Literature,  AND  Manners       5 

11.  The  "Spectator"  considered  as  a 

Periodical  55 

III.  The  Various  Forms  of  Advertise- 

ments 77 

IV.  Publishers'  Ethics  in  Queen  Anne's 

Day  121 

Appendix.  —  Specimen  Advertisements  out  of 
//^d*  "  Spectator."  '  129 


Wanted 

131 

Houses  to  Let 

132 

For  Sale 

Real  Estate 

134 

Horses 

134 

Vehicles 

135 

Miscellaneous  Articles 

136 

*  The  specimen  advertisementi  are 
are  considered  m  II,  HI  of  the  text. 

arranged  m  the 

same  order 

in  which  they 

[ 

xi] 

Contents 


Auctions 

139 

Lost  or  Stolen 

145 

Watches 

145 

SnufF-boxes 

146 

Dogs 

147 

Lace 

148 

Jewels 

148 

Miscellaneous 

149 

Found  or  Stopped 

150 

Rewards  Offered 

Criminals 

151 

Runaways  and  Deserters 

153 

Lace,  Fabrics,  and  Clothing 

154 

Tea,  Cocoa,  Chocolate,  SnufF 

158 

Wines 

160 

Publications 

Showing  the  Manners  of  the  Times 

164 

Literature  (other  than  Dramas) 

167 

Dramas 

170 

Translations 

171 

Travels,  Voyages,  and  Geography 

175 

Law  Books 

180 

Reports  of  Trials 

183 

Political  Publications 

185 

Religious  Publications 

197 

Treatises 

200 

Miscellaneous  Publications 

207 

[xii] 

Contents 


Instruction 

Boarding-Schools 

214 

Dancing-Schools 

215 

Instruction  in  Languages 

216 

Miscellaneous  Instruction 
Amusements 

217 

Plays 

218 

Operas 

247 

«  Consorts  " 

250 

Powell's  Puppet  Shows 

254 

Water-Works  at  Winstanly's  Water 

Theatre 

256 

Moving  Pictures 

258 

Miscellaneous  Amusements 

260 

Insurance  Associations 

262 

Lotteries 

265 

Swindling  Schemes 

268 

Quacks 

271 

Nostrums 

276 

Cosmeticks  and  Other  Toilet  Articles 

288 

Personal 

294 

Miscellaneous 

296 

THE    ADVERTISEMENTS 

OF 

The  Spectator 


INTRODUCTION 

GRAFFITI,  scratched  on  stucco  walls, 
or  scrawled  by  idlers  in  red  chalk 
upon  pillars  in  Pompeii,  that  New- 
port of  the  Flavian  Emperors,  are  said  to 
afford  more  vivid  side  glimpses  of  the  inti- 
mate, everyday  life  of  the  early  empire  than 
do  the  histories  of  Tacitus.  He  dealt  much 
with  wars,  with  the  conspicuous  public  acts 
of  Rome's  great  men,  little  with  that  which 
was  equally  significant,  although,  to  contem- 
poraries, doubtless  trivial,  —  provincial  poli- 
tics, afternoon  amusements  at  the  circus,  and 
the  humdrum  life  of  the  marketplace  and 
of  the  atrium.  Most  of  us,  furthermore, 
would  probably  agree  with  the  frequently 
quoted  statement,  attributed  to  the  classical 
scholar  Richard  Porson,  that  a  single  Athen- 
[  I  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

ian  newspaper  would  be  as  valuable  as  all  the 
commentaries  on  Aristophanes. 

To  one  who,  though  not  a  miser  of  old 
books,  nor  a  scholar,  is  yet  reasonably  famil- 
iar with  the  essays  of  Steele  and  Addison  and 
is  interested  in  the  history,  life,  and  letters  of 
Queen  Anne's  England,  the  advertisements 
are  the  most  significant  of  the  distinctive 
features  of  a  first  edition  of  the  *^  Spectator." 
As  one  turns  these  half  sheets,  —  which,  as 
a  correspondent  said  of  the  "  Tatler,*'  (i) 
were  of  **  Tobacco  Paper  ''  and  printed  "  in 
Scurvy  Letter,"  but,  after  two  centuries,  are 
now  little  more  faded  than  many  a  twenty- 
year-old  file  of  a  modern  newspaper, —  and 
as  one  notes  the  advertisements  printed  at  the 
end  of  contributions  from  the  most  renowned 
wits  of  the  day,  many  allusions,  before 
obscure  or  absolutely  meaningless,  become 
clear.  The  advertisements,  furthermore, 
fully  explain  many  casual  references  in  other 
writings  of  the  time ;  they  contain  consid- 
erable matter  worthy  of  careful  study  by  his- 
torians of  literature  and  politics;  they  fur- 

(l)    Tatler,  No.   1 60. 

[2] 


The  Spectator 

nish  much  valuable  material  for  students  of 
the  manners  and  customs  of  the  so-called 
"Augustan  Age."  Moreover,  they  richly 
reward  even  cursory  examination  by  editors 
and  publishers  who  are  interested  in  the 
"  Spectator,"  not  merely  as  a  collection  of 
essays,  but  as  the  most  representative  peri- 
odical of  the  time.  Among  the  first  issued 
daily,  it  affords  significant  evidence  of  the 
rapid  development  of  forms  of  advertise- 
ments with  which  we  are  familiar,  and  of 
relations  between  the  editorial  and  business 
departments. 

In  this  little  book,  I  purpose,  first,  to  sug- 
gest how  much  the  advertisements  tell  of 
the  literature,  history,  and  manners  of  Queen 
Anne's  London;  second,  to  emphasize  the 
fact  that  the  "  Spectator  "  was,  not  merely 
a  series  of  essays,  as  we  are  prone  to  think  of 
it  now,  but  a  daily  periodical,  subject  to  busi- 
ness conditions ;  third,  to  show  that  adver- 
tising, within  eight  years  after  the  establish- 
ment of  the  first  successful  daily  publication, 
had  begun  to  crystallize  into  the  forms  with 
which  we  are  now  familiar ;  and,  finally,  to 

[3] 


The  Advertifements  of 

point  out,  for  the  comfort  of  optimists,  evi- 
dence that  the  standards  of  ethics  followed 
by  the  great  proportion  of  editors  to-day  are 
higher  than  those  recognized  by  the  pub- 
lishers of  the  most  representative  publica- 
tion of  Queen  Anne's  time.  In  the  com- 
pass of  one  small  volume,  I  cannot  hope  to 
do  more  than  make  a  general  survey.  To 
special  students  I  leave  the  pleasant  and 
profitable  task  of  exhausting  the  various  por- 
tions of  a  rich  mine  of  information  which, 
I  submit,  has  heretofore  been  neglected, 
except  by  the  most  casual  seekers  after  the 
quaint  and  curious. 


"The  Spectator 


HISTORY,  LITERATURE,  AND 

MANNERS 

IT  is  doubtful  if  in  any  other  collection 
of  essays  is  to  be  found  a  more  happy 
and  uniform  combination  of  the  quali- 
ties which  appeal  to  all  ages  with  a  surpris- 
ing "timeliness"  in  relation  to  events  of  the 
passing  hour  than  in  the  "Spectator/'  Yet, 
because  of  this  timeliness,  the  writers  natur- 
ally took  much  for  granted. 

When  all  the  town  was  talking  of  Powell's 
puppet  show  "in the  Little  Piazza  of  Covent 
Garden,  with  variety  of  Surprising  Scenes 
and  Machines,"  it  was  unnecessary  for  Steele, 
in  No.  14,  to  explain  the  pungent  satire 
on  the  silliness  of  the  age  concealed  in 
the  letter  purporting  to  have  been  written 
by  the  under  sexton  of  Saint  Paul's,  who 
complained  that  his  congregation  took  the 
warning  of  his  bell  to  flock  to  the  Puppet 

[5] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

Show.  Nor  was  there  any  need  for  explan- 
ation of  the  other  letter  in  the  same  number 
in  which  Powell's  "opera''  was  compared 
with  Nicolini's,  to  the  advantage  of  Powell's. 
When  read  in  connection  with  later  adver- 
tisements, we  get  an  idea  of  the  extent  of 
Steele's  contempt  for  Italian  opera,  because 
it  is  clear  to  us,  without  footnotes  explaining 
the  nature  of  the  trivial  exhibition,  that,  with 
the  tolling  for  vespers,  toasts  and  beaux,  as 
well  as  ** citizens"  and  their  wives,  went, 
not  to  say  prayers,  but  to  hear  the  "  divert- 
ing Dialogue  between  Signior  Punchanella 
and  Madamoiselle  Sousabella  Pignatella, 
and  other  Diversions  too  long  to  insert 
here." 

All  Londoners  understood  at  once  what 
was  referred  to  by  the  writer  of  the  letter 
in  No.  271,  who  offered  to  wait  upon 
Mr.  Spectator  *'in  the  Dusk  of  the  Even- 
ing, with  his  Show  upon  his  Back,  which  he 
carried  about  with  him  in  a  Box,  as  only 
consisting  of  a  Man,  a  Woman,  and  an  Horse." 
This  rather  fantastic  letter  is  explained  in 
later  reprints  of  the  essays  by  a  note  which  is 

[6] 


T^he  Spectator 


not  needed  by  those  who  see  the  first  edi- 
tion. These  papers,  we  know,  were  read, 
even  **in  the  fens  of  Lincolnshire  or  the 
more  distant  wilds  of  Perthshire,''  (i)  by- 
country  gentlemen  who  gathered  on  Sun- 
days or  on  post-days  for  the  purpose.  Yet 
even  to  such  of  these  as  had  never  been  in 
London,  it  was  clear,  as  it  may  be  to  us, 
from  current  advertisements,  that  people  of 
fashion,  in  order  to  gratify  the  insatiable 
craving  for  the  unusual  of  any  sort  which 
was  especially  characteristic  of  the  age,  were 
going  in  crowds  "  Just  over-against  the  Muse 
Gate  at  Charing-cross  [to  see] .  .  .  these  Rari- 
ties following,  viz.  a  little  Man  3  Foot  high, 
and  32  Years  of  Age,  strait  and  proportion- 
able every  way,  ...  his  Wife,  . . .  not  3  Foot 
high,  and  30  years  of  Age,  who  diverts  the 
Company  by  her  extraordinary  Dancing, 
.  .  .  Likewise  their  little  Horse,  2  Foot 
odd  Inches  high,  which  performs  several 
wonderful  Actions  by  the  word  of  Com- 

(i)  See  Henry  Morley's  Introduction  (pp.  xx  and  xxi)  to 
his  one-volume  edition  of  The  Spectator y  published  by  George 
Routledge  &  Sons  as  part  of  the  *<  Standard  Library.*' 

[7] 


The  Advertifements  of 

mand,  being  so  small  that  it's  kept  in  a 
Box/'  (i) 

Besides  explaining  many  allusions  in  the 
main  essays,  the  advertisements  in  the  "  Spec- 
tator" make  clear  passing  remarks  in  such 
contemporary  writings  as  the  "  Journal  to 
Stella."  In  the  *' Spectator"  for  November 
26  (2)  and  for  December  3,  171 1,  (3)  for 
example,  are  advertised  the  first  and  third 
of  the  six  editions  of  Swift's  pamphlet  in 
which  the  terrible  Doctor  exposed  the  true 
character  of  Captain-General  Marlborough 
and  "The  Conduct  of  the  Allies  and  the 
late  Ministry,  in  beginning  and  carrying  on 
the  [then]  present  War."  As  we  might 
expect  from  our  own  experience  with  those 
who  have  been  detected  and  charged  with 
plundering  the  public,  there  was  a  chorus 
of  denials.  In  his  "Journal  to  Stella"  for 
December  4,  171 1,  Swift  wrote:  "They 
have  sold  off  about  half  the  third  edition 
and  answers  are  coming  out."  In  the  next 
day's  "  Spectator"  was  the  following  adver- 
tisement: — 

(i)  No.  247.  (2)  No.  232.  (3)  No.  238. 

[8] 


"The  Spectator 

This  Day  is  publifh'd. 


Remarks  on  a  falfe,  fcandalous,  and  feditious 
Libel,  entituled  the  Condu6t  of  the  Allies  and  the  late 
Miniftry,  &c.  Printed  for  A.  Baldwin  near  the  Oxford 
Arms  in  Warwick-lane,  (i) 

December  6,  Swift  wrote:  "A  sixpenny 
answer  is  come  out,  good  for  nothing,  but 
guessing  me,  among  others,  for  the  author." 
In  the  same  day's  edition  was  this  notice:  — 

To  Morrow  will  be  Publifh'd, 

The  Allies  and  the  late  Miniftry  defended 
againft  France,  and  the  Friends  of  France,  in  Anfwer  to 
a  late  Pamphlet,  Intitled,  The  Conduct  of  the  Allies : 
In  which  Anfwer  will  be  fully  ftiewn  the  many  Fallities 
of  that  Writer  in  point  of  Argument,  and  his  grofs  Mif- 
reprefentations  of  Fa£ts,  and  that  there  is  no  Neceility 
for  an  111  Peace.  Printed  for  A.  Baldwin  in  Warwick- 
Lane.  (2) 

January  31,  171 2,  by  which  time  his  au- 
thorship of  "  The  Conduct  of  the  Allies  " 
was  rather  generally  known,  Swift  said  to 
Stella :  "  A  poem  is  come  out  to-day  inscribed 
to  me,  by  way  of  a  flirt ;  for  it  is  a  Whiggish 
poem,  and  good  for  nothing.  They  plagued 
me  with  it  in  the  court  of  requests."  In 
(i)  No.  240.  (2)  No.  241. 

[9] 


"The  Adverttfements  of 

that  morning's    **  Spectator  "  (i)   was    the 
announcement :  — 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

When  the  Cat 's  away,  the  Mice  may  Play.  A 
Fable  humbly  infcribed  to  Dr.  Swift,  pr.  2^. 

Scores  of  such  examples  might  be  given. 
Indeed,  a  most  excellent  set  of  clear  notes 
to  the  *' Journal"  and  to  other  contemporary 
writings  might  be  made  up  solely  of  extracts 
from  advertisements  out  of  the  "Spectator.'' 
Here  and  there  in  books  on  the  Queen 
Anne  period,  one  finds  quotations  from  the 
advertising  sections  of  newspapers  like  the 
"Courant"  and  the  "Postboy,"  but  almost 
none  from  those  of  the  "Spectator."  Only 
the  extreme  rarity  of  complete  collections 
of  the  original  sheets  can  explain  this  failure 
of  writers  of  literary  and  political  histories 
to  study  these  advertisements  systematically. 
The  "Spectator"  first  appeared  Thursday, 
March  i,  171 1,  and  was  continued  daily, 
except  Sundays,  until  Saturday,  December  6, 
171 2.  The  555  numbers  issued  in  this  pe- 

(i)   No.  289. 
[  10] 


The  Spectator 


riod  make  up  the  "first  series."  Addison, 
without  any  assistance  from  Steele,  published 
on  Mondays,  Wednesdays,  and  Fridays,  be- 
tween June  1 8,  1 7 14,  and  December  20, 
1 714,  the  eighty  numbers  which  compose 
"Volume  VIII*'  or  the  "second  series."  Of 
the  first  555  numbers,  there  are  a  number  of 
complete  files ;  but  files,  even  incomplete, 
of  the  last  eighty  numbers  are  more  rare. 
There  are  comparatively  few  complete  sets 
of  all  6  3  5  numbers.  Among  the  best  known 
are  that  in  the  Advocates'  Library  in  Edin- 
burgh, one  in  the  private  library  of  Robert 
Hoe  of  New  York,  and  the  set,  once  Ed- 
mond  Malone's,  which  was  acquired  in  the 
autumn  of  1906  by  the  Harvard  College 
Library.  Even  the  British  Museum  lacked 
eighteen  numbers  of  having  a  complete  col- 
lection at  the  time  of  the  publication  of  the 
last  catalogue. 

Thackeray,  while  preparing  his  course 
of  lectures  on  "  English  Humourists  of  the 
Eighteenth  Century,"  steeped  himself  so 
thoroughly  in  all  available  material  relating 
to  the  life  and  letters  of  the  time  of  Queen 
[  II  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

Anne  that  he  was  presently  able  to  compass 
such  a  splendid  literary  anachronism  as 
"Henry  Esmond."  And  we  know  that  he 
possessed  nearly  two  hundred  original  "Spec- 
tators." Yet  even  in  the  "delightful  paper 
(i)  which  pretends  to  be  No.  341  of  the 
*  Spectator'  for  All  Fool's  Day,  171 2,"  — 
although  borrowing  for  Colonel  Esmond 
"not  only  Steele's  voice,  but  his  very  trick 
of  speech,"  Thackeray  commits  a  curious 
minor  blunder,  which  it  is  strange  that  any 
one  familiar  with  the  first  edition  could  have 
been  guilty  of.  As  Austin  Dobson  has  pointed 
out,  (2)  "although  this  pseudo-Spectator  is 
stated  to  have  been  printed  *  exactly  as  those 
famous  journals' were  printed  .  .  .  Mr.  Es- 
mond, to  his  very  apposite  Latin  epigraph, 
unluckily  appended  an  English  translation, — 
a  concession  to  the  country  gentlemen  from 
which  Addison  and  Steele  deliberately  ab- 
stained" in  the  original  papers,  but  which 
was  made  in  later  reprints  of  the  essays. 

( 1 )  Henry  Esmond,  Book  iii,  chap.  iii. 

(2)  Introduction  to  Macmillan  Company's  (1905)  edition  of 
Henry  Esmond,  p.  xxviii. 

[  12] 


"The  Spectator 


Thackeray  apparently  is  not  alone  in  his 
inattention  to  the  first  edition.  John  Ash- 
ton,  who  compiled  his  "  Social  Life  in  the 
Reign  of  Queen  Anne'*  entirely  from  orig- 
inal sources,  makes  but  very  few  references 
to  advertisements  in  the  "  Spectator,"  al- 
though he  frequently  refers  to  those  in  less 
representative  periodicals.  If  students  will 
examine  all  the  original  sheets,  they  will  find 
in  the  "Spectator''  advertisements  many  in- 
teresting book  notices,  some  of  which  furnish 
conclusive  evidence  on  such  points  in  lit- 
erary history  as  the  day  of  first  publication 
of  pieces  of  literature  about  which  there  has 
been  considerable  controversy. 

The  "Spectator''  was,  above  all  other  pe- 
riodicals, read  carefully  by  cultivated  people; 
and,  consequently,  one  is  not  surprised  to  find 
among  its  advertisements  very  many  such 
notices  as  the  following:  — 

This  Day  is  publifli'd. 

An  ESSAY  on  criticism.  Printed  for  W.  Lewis 
in  RufTel  Street,  Covent-Garden;  and  fold  by  W.  Tay- 
lor, at  the  Ship  in  Pater  Nofter-Row ;  T.  Osborn,  in 
Grays-Inn  near  the  Walks;  J.  Graves,  in  St.  James's- 

[  13] 


The  Advertifements  of 

ftreet ;  and  J.  Morphew,  near  Stationers-Hall.  Price 
I..  (I) 

From  John  Dennis  —  whom  Pope  had  re- 
ferred to  contemptuously  in  line  270  of  the 
"  Essay ''  and  on  whom  he  later  wreaked  such 
terrible  vengeance,  incidentally  immortal- 
izing him  in  "The  Dunciad" —  this  anony- 
mous first  edition  provoked  what  is  adver- 
tised as  follows :  — 

Just  Publifh'd, 

Reflections  Critical  and  Satyrical,  upon  a  late 
Rhapfody  call'd,  An  EfTay  on  Criticifm.  By  Mr.  Dennis. 
Printed  for  B.  Lintott,and  Sold  by  A.  Baldwin  in  War- 
wick-Lane, Mr.  Graves  in  St.  James's-ftreet,  Mr. 
Friend  in  Weftminfter  Hall,  Mrs.  Bond  at  Chairing- 
Crofs,  Mr.  Taylor  at  the  Ship  in  Paternofter-Row,  and  by 
Mr.  Phillips  againft  the  Royal  Exchange.    Price  bd.  (2) 

It  has  been  a  favorite  question  for  discus- 
sion, in  what  form  was  first  published  the 
story  of  Alexander  Selkirk,  or  Selcraig.  At 
his  own  request,  Selkirk  had  been  put  ashore, 
in  October,  1704,  on  the  island  of  Juan 
Fernandez  in  the  South  Pacific,  where  he 
lived  alone  for  fifty-two  months  until  he  was 

(i)  No.  65,  Tuesday,  May  15,  171 1. 
(2)  No.  104,  Friday,  June  29,  171 1. 

[  14] 


"The  Spectator 


rescued  by  an  English  privateering  expedi- 
tion. It  will  be  recalled  that  the  experiences 
of  Selkirk,  besides  being  made  the  basis  for 
"Robinson  Crusoe,"  which  Defoe  published 
in  171 9,  had  been  recounted  by  Steele  in 
"The  Englishman''  for  December  1-3, 
171 3.  His  *'Life  and  Adventures"  were 
published  by  John  Howell  in  1829.  And 
Cowper  made  him  the  subject  of  the  well- 
known  poem  beginning,  — 

I  am  monarch  of  all  I  survey, 
My  right  there  is  none  to  dispute. 

It  has  been  generally  supposed,  however,  that 
the  first  printed  narrative  of  Selkirk's  adven- 
tures was  a  little  book  which  was  advertised 
in  "  Spectator"  No.  412,  for  Monday,  June 
23,  171 2,  as  follows:  — 

On  Thurfday  next  will  be  Publifhed, 

A  Cruifing  Voyage  round  the  World,  firft  to  the 
South  Seas,  thence  to  the  Eaft-Indies,  and  homewards 
by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Begun  in  1708,  and  finifhed 
in  171 1.  Containing  a  Journal  of  all  the  remarkable 
Tranfa£tions,  particularly  of  the  taking  of  Puna  and 
Guiaquil,  of  the  Acapulco  Ship,  and  other  Prizes.  A 
more  particular  Account  of  Alexander  Selkirk's  living 

[  15  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

alone  four  Years  and  four  Months  in  an  Ifland,  than  has 
hitherto  been  given.  Alfo  a  brief  Difcription  of  feveral 
Countries  in  our  Courfe  noted  for  Trade,  efpecially  in 
the  South  Sea.  Together  with  a  Table  of  every  Days 
run  crofs  that  great  Ocean  from  California  to  the  Ifland 
Guam  in  the  Eaft  Indies.  Alfo  Maps  of  all  the  Coafts 
of  South  America  for  6000  Miles,  taken  from  the  beft 
Spanifti  Manufcript  Draughts.  And  an  Introduction  re- 
lating to  the  South  Sea  Trade.  By  Capt.  Woodes  Rogers 
Commander  in  chief  of  the  Expedition  with  the  fliips 
Duke  and  Dutchefs  of  Briftol.  Printed  for  A.  Bell  and  Ber- 
nard Lintott,  and  fold  by  Mr.  Horn,  Mr.  Parker,  and  Mr. 
Philips  by  the  Exchange,  Mr.  Mount  on  Tower-hill,  and 
Mr.  Tracey  on  London-bridge.    Price  bound  6j.  (i) 

The  former  account  hinted  at  in  this  ad- 
vertisement was  mentioned  by  Howell,  but 
has  not,  I  believe,  been  generally  recognized 
as  having  preceded  Rogers's  book.  Almost 
three  months  before  the  publication  of  the 
log  by  the  commander-in-chief.  Captain 
Woodes  Rogers,  his  subordinate.  Captain 
Edward  Cooke,  who  was  second  captain 
aboard  the  Dutchess,  had  printed  what,  I 

( I )  See  also  introduction  to  Robinson  Crusoe,  and  Appendix 
(pp.  329-340)  in  vol.  in,  "Works  of  Defoe/'  edited  by  Dr. 
G.  H.  Maynadier  (Thomas  Y.  Crowell  &  Company,  New 
York,  1903),  in  which  are  reprinted  Rogers's  and  Steele's 
accounts  of  Selkirk. 

[  16] 


"The  Spectator 


venture  to  say,  was  the  first  authoritative 
account  of  Selkirk.  The  notice  of  this  book 
in  "Spectator''  No.  337,  for  March  27, 
171 2,  vi^as  as  follows:  — 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 
A  Voyage  to  the  South  Sea,  and  round  the 
World,  performed  in  the  Ships  Duke  and  Dutchefs  of 
Briftol,  inthe  years  1708,  1709,  17 10  and  171 1.  Con- 
taining a  Journal  of  all  memorable  Tranfad:ions  during 
the  faid  Voyage ;  the  Winds,  Currents  and  Variation  of 
the  Compafs;  the  taking  of  the  Towns  of  Puna  and 
Guayaquil,  and  feveral  Prizes,  one  of  which  is  a  rich  Aca- 
pulco  Ship.  A  Defcription  of  the  American  Coafts,  from 
Tierra  del  Fuego  in  the  South,  to  California  in  the  North, 
(from  the  Coafting  Pilot,  a  Spanifh  Manufcript.)  An 
Hiftorical  Account  of  all  thofe  Countries  from  the  beft 
Authors.  With  a  new  Map  and  Defcription  of  the  mighty 
River  of  the  Amazons.  Wherein  an  Account  is  given  of 
Mr.  Alexander  Selkirk,  his  Manner  of  living  and  taming 
some  wild  Beafts  during  the  four  Years  and  four  Months 
he  lived  upon  the  uninhabited  Ifland  of  Juan  Fernandes, 
Illuftrated  with  Cuts  and  Maps :  By  Captain  Edward 
Cooke.  Printed  for  B.  Lintott  and  R.  Gofling  in  Fleet- 
ftreet,  A.  Bettefworth  on  London-bridge,  and  W.  Innys 
in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard,  (i) 

From  the  advertisements,  it  appears  that 

( I )  No.  337,  March  27,  1 7 1 2.  *'  Vol.  2d  and  last,  being  a 
Continuation  *'  of  the  above  was  advertised  in  No.  404  for  June 
13,  1712. 

[   17] 


The  Advertifements  of 

this  privateering  cruise  ( i )  appealed  strongly 
to  the  popular  imagination,  and,  at  the  time, 
was  probably  more  celebrated  than  any  other 
naval  exploit  of  Queen  Anne's  reign  except 
the  Vigo  expedition.  An  advertisement,  not 
in  the  "Spectator,"  announced  that  at  El- 
ford's  Coffee  House  vs^as  "  to  be  seen  and  read 
Gratis,  the  Journal  of  the  famous  Voyage  of 
the  Duke  and  Dutchess  Privateer  of  Bristol, 
that  took  the  rich  Aquiapulca  Ship  con- 
taining many  remarkable  Transactions.  Also 
an  Account  of  a  Man  living  alone  4  Years 
and  4  Months  in  the  Island  of  John  Fer- 
nando, which  they  brought  with  them.'*  (2) 
Public  disposition  of  part  of  the  booty 
was  advertised  as  follows  :  — 

For  SALE  by  the  CANDLE. 

On  Wednefday  the  25th  Inftant,  at  the  Ma- 
rine CofFee-houfe  in  Birchin-lane  in  Cornhil,  viz.  Hair 
Camlets,  Thrown  Silk,  Sewing  Silk,  Ribbons,  Musk, 

( 1 )  Robert  C.  Leslie  wrote  an  entertaining  book  about  this 
expedition  (viz.,  Life  Aboard  a  British  Privateer  in  the  time  of 
Queen  Anne.  Chapman  &  Hall,  London,  1889),  based  on 
Rogers's  Cruising  Voyage. 

(2)  Quoted  in  John  Ashton's  Social  Life  in  the  Reign  of 
Queen  Anne  (London,  1882,2  vols. ),  vol.  i,  chap,  xviii,  p.  220. 

[  18] 


"The  Spectator 


old  Iron,  Pepper,  China  Ware,  Lace,  &c.  (being  part  of 
the  Goods  taken  in  the  South  Sea  by  the  Duke  and 
Dutchefs,  private  Ships  of  War  belonging  to  Briftol.) 
Particular  Allotments  will  be  timely  printed  and  affixed 
on  the  Royal  Exchange.   Sam.  Proctor,  Broker,  (i) 

So  great  was  the  interest  in  these  "South  Sea 
Ships''  that  at  least  one  other  "sale  by  inch 
of  candle," — a  peculiar  method  of  auction 
common  at  the  time,  (2) —  announced  pre- 
viously for  the  same  day,  was  postponed.  (3) 
This  record  of  plunder  taken  from  the 
Spaniards  is  not  all  that  the  advertisements 
tell  of  the  campaigns  carried  on  under  let- 
ters of  marque,  an  important  minor  phase 
of  the  War  of  the  Spanish  Succession  which 
has  been  neglected  by  historians.  The  French 
also  were  sufferers,  as  a  number  of  notices 
similar  to  the  following  show:  — 

For  Sale  by  the  Candle. 

On  Wednesday  the  9th  Inftant,  at  4  a  Clock 
in  the  Afternoon,  at  Lloyd's  CofFee-houfe  in  Lombard- 

(i)  No.  407,  June  17,  171 2.  For  advertisements  of  the  sale 
of  other  parts  of  the  booty,  see  No.  456,  August  13,  1 7 1 2,  and 
No.  472,  September  i,  1712. 

(2)  Explained  in  John  Ashton*s  Social  Life  in  the  Reign  of 
^een  Anne,  vol.  i,  p.  225. 

(3)  No.  415. 

[   19] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

ftreet,  26  Puncheons  of  excellent  Bourdeaux  and  Coniacq 
Brandy,  neat,  full  Proof,  and  of  a  true  Flavour ;  taken 
from  the  French  by  a  Guernzey  Privateer,  and  condemned 
Prize  in  the  High  Court  of  Admiralty,  newly  landed,  and 
to  be  put  up  one  Cask  in  a  Lot :  Lying  in  a  Cellar  in  Samers- 
Key  Gateway  by  Billingfgate,  and  are  to  be  feen  and 
tafted  this  Day  and  to  Morrow,  from  8  to  i ,  and  from  2 
till  7,  and  all  Wednesday  till  the  Time  of  Sale.  Catalogues 
to  be  had  at  the  Cellar  and  at  the  Place  of  Sale,  (i) 

Nor  did  the  English  commerce  escape  en- 
tirely, as  Swift  testifies  (2)  in  his  "Journal." 
In  the  "  Spectator ''  for  March  14,  1 7 1 2,  the 
famous  wine  merchants  "Brooke  and  Hil- 
lier  give  Notice,  that  they  have  now  on  the 
Road  from  Bristol  an  entire  Cargo  of  the 
Johns  Galley,  (consisting  of  140  Pipes  of 
new  natural  Oporto  Wines,  Red  and  White) 
which  is  the  only  Ship  except  one  more 
that  has  escaped  the  Enemy  this  Year, 
loaden  with  those  sort  of  Wines,"  etc.  (3) 

( I )  No.  424,  Monday,  July  7,  1 7 1  2. 

(  2  )  Swift  refers  in  the  Journal  to  StelUy  Letter  1 3  (January  7, 
1 7 1 1 ),  to  the '  *  loss  of  several  Virginia  ships. ' '  He  also  speaks,  in 
Letter  1 8  (March  23,  1 7 1 1 ) ,  in  Letter  1 9  (March  24,  1 7 1 1 ) ,  and 
in  Letter  2  2  (  May  6,  1 7 1 1 ) ,  of  the  capture  of  two  Irish  packets. 

(3)  No.  326.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  same  Spec- 
tator was  the  following:  "Just  published,  Brooke  and  Hillier. 
A  Satyr.   Price  3^/.    Sold  by  J.  Baker  in  Pater-noster-row.  *  * 

[20] 


"The  Spectator 


Besides  these  numerous  records  of  irregu- 
lar warfare,  there  are  many  other  advertise- 
ments interesting  because  of  their  bearing 
upon  the  history  of  the  time.  A  large  num- 
ber, naturally,  have  to  do  with  John  Church- 
ill, who,  not  very  long  before,  had  won  his 
dukedom  of  Marlborough.  While  Swift  was 
thundering  in  the  "Examiner''  against  the 
peculations  and  intrigues  of  the  victor  of 
Blenheim,  Ramillies,  Oudenarde,  and  Mal- 
plaquet;  and  was  complaining  (i)  of  the 
enormous  expenditure  of  public  funds  on 
the  Captain  General's  splendid  mansion 
then  being  built  at  Woodstock  in  Oxford- 
shire, which  had  already  cost  the  nation 
;^20o,ooo,  and  "not  yet  near  finished," 
the  following  appeared  in  the  "Specta- 
tor": (2) 

With  Her  Majefty's  Royal  Privilege  and  Li- 
cence, there  is  now  Printing  an  exa(5t  Defcription  of  the 
Palace  of  Blenheim  in  Oxfordfhire,  in  a  large  Folio.  II- 
luftrated  with  the  Plans,  Elevations,  Se6tions  and  Per- 
spedives.  Engraven  by  the  beft  Hands  on  Copper  Plates ; 
several  of  which  being  already  finlfhed,  are  juft  Publifhed 

(i)  Examiner,  No.  i6,  November  23,  17 10. 
(2)  No.  15,  Saturday,  March  i^'    171 1. 

[21  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

in  diftinft  Sheets  by  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakfpear's  Head 
over  againft  Catharine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

Not  long  before  Marlborough's  dismissal, 
which  was  followed  in  the  autumn  of  171 2 
by  his  retirement  into  temporary  exile,  the 
two  following  appeared:  — 

Juft  Publifh'd, 

The  D.  of  M h's  Vindication,  in  An- 

fwer  to  a  Pamphlet  lately  publifti'd,  call'd  (Bouchain,  or 
a  Dialogue  between  the  Medley  and  the  Examiner.) 
Sold  by  J.  Morphew  near  Stationer's  Hall.    Price  ^d.  (i) 

This  Day  is  publifh'd. 

Three  Articles  of  the  grand  Alliance;  with 
the  late  Preliminaries  of  Peace,  in  the  year  1709.  And 
an  Account  of  the  feveral  Succefles  gain'd  by  the  Duke 
of  Marlborough  fince  that  Time.  Price  ^d.  The  Intereft 
of  Europe,  with  Respedl  to  Peace  and  War :  Wherein 
is  confidered,  I.  Whether  it  be  fafe  for  the  Allies  to  make 
a  Peace  in  this  Conje6lure.  H.  Upon  what  conditions 
a  lafting  Peace  may  be  expe6ted.  IH.  The  Means  for 
obtaining  fuch  Conditions.  Price  i^d.  Both  fold  by  S. 
Popping  in  Pater-nofter-row.  (2) 

(i)  No.  180,  September  26,  171 1.  Swift,  in  Journal  to 
Stella^  Letter  33  (November  3,  171 1),  says  that  this  reply  to  a 
plea  for  the  Duke  was  '*by  a  woman,"  whom  he  afterwards 
identifies  as  Mrs.  Manley,  author  of  The  New  Atlantis,  who 
wrote  several  other  political  pamphlets  under  Swift's  direction. 

(2)  No.  194,  October  12,  171 1. 

[  22] 


"The  Spectator 


As  was  to  be  expected,  however,  syco- 
phants awaited  the  subsequent  triumph  of 
the  Whigs  and  return  of  the  Duke  before 
publishing  such  encomiums  as :  — 

Verfes  written  to  the  Duke  of  Marlborough 
upon  his  leaving  England.  Now  firft  Printed,  and  re- 
commended to  Sir  Anthony  Crabtree,  who  is  beft  able 
to  fupply  what  is  wanting  in  them.  Printed  for  R.  Bur- 
leigh in  Amen-Corner.  (i) 

The  second  of  Swift's  great  pamphlets 
that  did  so  much  to  bring  about  the  Peace 
of  Utrecht  was  announced  as  follows  :  — 

Next  Week  will  be  pubHfh'd, 

Some  Remarks  on  the  Barrier-Treaty  between 
Her  Majefty  and  the  States  General ;  by  the  Author  of 
the  Conduct  of  the  Allies.  To  which  are  added,  The 
faid  Barrier-Treaty  at  length ;  Part  of  the  Counter  Pro- 
jects ;  the  Sentiments  of  Prince  Eugene  and  Count  Zin- 
zendorf  upon  the  faid  Treaty ;  and  a  Reprefentation  of 
the  Englifli  Merchants  at  Bruges.  Printed  for  John  Mor- 
phew  at  Stationer's  Hall.  (2) 

A  year  after  Swift  had  retired  to  his  Dean- 
ery of  Saint  Patrick's,  in  Dublin,  and  five  or 
six  weeks  after  the  return  of  the  Whigs  at  the 

(i)  Vol.  vni.  No.  625,  November  26,  17 14. 
(2)  No.  304,  February  18,  1712. 

[23  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

time  of  the  death  of  Anne  and  the  accession 
of  George,  was  printed  the  following  notice, 
which  shows  the  satirical  or  libelous  charac- 
ter of  the  attacks  of  par  tizan  pamphleteers: — 

This   Day  is  publifhed,  (being   the  laft 

Part)  the  fecond  Edition  of, 

A  farther  Hue  and  Cry  after  Dr.  Sw t ;  con- 

fifting  of  fome  curious  Pieces,  Publifhed  from  the  Origi- 
nal Manufcripts,  by  Timothy  Brocade  of  Putney  Efq ; 
late  Author  of  the  Examiner,  viz.   I.  A  Genuine  Epiftle 

from  M wP rat  Paris,  to  Dr.  Sw  -  -  t  at 

Windfor,  fome  time  before  the  Peace.  II.  A  Letter  to  Sir 
Patrick  Lawles,  late  the  Pretender's  Nuncio.  III.  An  Ode 
to  the  Pretender,  written  by  feveral  Hands  in  Green- 
wich Park.  IV.  Earl  Mortimer's  Fall,  a  Fragment.  All 
found  in  the  Doctor's  Chamber  fince  his  Departure. 
Printed  for  J.  Roberts  in  Warwick-Lane.   Pr.  (:»d.  (i) 

The  bitterness  of  the  struggle  between  po- 
litical parties  is  further  suggested  by  two 
advertisements  printed  close  together  in  one 
edition:  (2) 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

A    fecond    Part    of    the   Caveat   agalnft   the 
Whigs,  in  a  fhort  Hiftorical  View  of  their  Tranfa6tions ; 

(i)  Vol.  vm,  No.  592,  **Fryday,"  September  10,  1714. 
(2)  No.  251,  December  18,  171 1. 

[24] 


The  Spectator 


wherein  are  difcovered  their  many  Attempts  and  Con- 
trivances againft  the  Eftablifhed  Government,  both  in 
Church  and  State,  fince  the  Reftoration  of  King  Charles 
2d.  With  a  Preface  to  both  Parts.  Sold  by  J.  Morphew 
near  Stationer' s-Hall,  price  is.  Where  is  to  be  had  the 
fecond  Edition  of  the  iirft  Part. 

This  Day  is  Publifh'd 

Tory  Partiality  deteded:  or  a  True  State  of 
the  Pole  and  Scrutiny  of  Broad-ftreet  Ward,  on  the 
Election  of  an  Alderman  in  the  room  of  Sir  Jofeph 
Wolf  deceaf 'd ;  Begun  Sept.  13  and  continued  by  fev- 
eral  Neceffary  and  unavoidable  Adjournments  to  the  27th 
of  October  follow^ing :  Before  Sir  Gilbert  Heathcot  Kt. 
late  Lord  Mayor  of  the  City  of  London.  Printed  for  J. 
Baker  at  the  Black-Boy  in  Pater-nofter-Row.  Price  3^^. 

Another  notice  which  enforces  the  same 
point  was  printed  almost  a  year  later. 

Who  Plot  beft;  the  Whigs  or  the  Tories. 
Being  a  brief  Account  of  all  the  Plots  that  have  hap- 
pened within  thefe  Thirty  Years,  viz  Three  Tory  Plots. 
the  Popifh,  the  Abdication,  the  Affailination.  Five  Whig 
Plots,  the  Prefbyterian,  the  Pinns,  the  Puppets,  the  Mo- 
hocks, the  Band-Box.  In  a  Letter  to  Mr.  Fergufon. 
Printed  for  A.  Baldvirin,  near  the  Oxford  Arms  in  War- 
wick-Lane. Price  \d.  (i) 

How  bitterly  religious  controversy  still 
raged,  is  shown  by  notices  of  two  pamphlets 

(i)  No.  548,  November  28,  171 2. 

[25  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

from  champions  of  the  Church  of  England 
—  one  directed  against  the  Roman  Catholics, 
the  other  against  the  ** dissenters/ 'or  "non- 
conforming'" Protestants :  — 

This  Day  is  Publifhed  a  Neat  Elziver 

Edition  of 

Dean  Sherlock's  Prefervative  agalnft  Popery 
in  two  Parts.  The  firft  being  fome  plain  Dire6lions  how 
to  difpute  with  Romifli  Priefts.  The  Second  fhewing 
how  contrary  Popery  is  to  the  true  Ends  of  the  Chriftian 
Religion.  Both  fitted  for  the  Inftru(Slion  of  unlearned 
Proteftants.  Printed  for  D.  Brown,  J.  Walthoe,  J. 
Nicholfon,  B.  Tooke,  J.Pemberton  and  T.  Ward. . . .  (i) 

Juft  publifh'd, 

A  Sermon  Preach'd  at  Patrixbourne,  near 
Canterbury;  proving  that  DifTenters  are  impofd  upon  by 
their  Teachers,  and  that  they  ought  to  conform  to  the 
Church  of  England,  as  by  Law  eftablifh'd.  With  a  Pref- 
ace to  fhew  their  Miftake,  about  the  A<Sl  of  Exemption, 
and  that  they  can  have  no  Claim  to  that  Indulgence, 
without  certain  Conditions  therein  mention'd.  By  J. 
Bowtell,  B.  D.  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College  in  Cam- 
bridge. Printed  for  R.  Knaplock  at  the  Biftiop's-Head 
in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard.   Price  3^.  (2) 

The  dissenters,  however,  were  not  without 

(i)  Vol.  vni,  No.  589,  September  3,  17 14. 
(2)  No.  6,  March  7,  171 1. 

[26] 


The  Spectator 


their  own  pamphleteer  champions,  as  the 
following  shows :  — 

The  charge  of  Schifm  againft  the  DifTenters, 
DIfcharg'd ;  in  Reply  to  a  Tra6l  of  the  Reverend  Mr. 
Norris  on  this  Subject ;  wherein  the  Extent  of  the  Toler- 
ation-A6t  is  confider'd,  and  it 's  prov'd  that  by  Virtue  of 
it,  the  Diflenters  are  no  longer  Offenders  againft  Human 
Laws  by  their  Separation,  and  that  they  are  not  guilty  of 
Schifm  by  Virtue  of  any  Law  of  God.  By  S.  Brown, 
MInifter  of  Portfmouth.  Printed  for  J.  Lawrence,  at  the 
Angel  in  the  Poultrey.  (i) 

Then  here  is  an  echo  of  one  of  the  famous 
sermons  by  Sacheverell,  the  ill-advised  pros- 
ecution of  whom  therefor  was  turned  to  such 
good  account  by  the  Tories  to  help  over- 
throw the  Whig  government : — 

Juft  publifh'd. 

Remarks  upon  a  Sermon  preached  by  Dr. 
Henry  Sacheverell,  at  the  Aflizes  held  at  Derby,  Auguft 
15,  1709.  In  a  Letter  to  himfelf.  Sold  by  A.  Baldwin 
at  the  Oxford-Arms  in  Warwick  Lane.  (2) 

An  interesting  series  of  advertisements  has 
to  do  with  the  death  of  Queen  Anne  and 

(i)  No.  4,  March  5,  171 1. 
(2)  No.  42,  April  18,  171 1. 

[27] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

the  accession  of  George  I,  August  i,  171 4. 
"  The  Mausoleum,  a  Poem,  sacred  to  the 
Memory  of  her  late  Majesty  Queen  Anne, 
by  Mr.  Theobald,"  (i)  was  so  popular  as  to 
warrant  a  second  edition.  Young,  afterwards 
author  of  "  Night  Thoughts,"  marked  the 
occasion  by :  — 

A  Poem  on  the  Late  Queen's  Death,  and  His 
Majefty's  Acceflion  to  the  Throne.  Infcribed  to  Jofeph 
Addifon,  Efq.  Secretary  to  their  Excellencies  the  Lords 
Juftices.  By  Edward  Young,  Fellow  of  All-Souls  Col- 
lege, Oxon.  Printed  for  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over  againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand.  (2) 

How  ludicrously  fulsome  were  some  of 
these  productions  concerning  a  monarch  — 
whose  character.  Green  (3)  says,  "as  nearly 
approached  insignificance  as  it  is  possible  for 
human  character  to  approach  it";  whose 
temper  was  that  of  a  "  gentleman  usher"  ; 
whose  "  one  care  was  to  get  money  for  his 
favourites  and  himself"  ;  and  whose  chief 

(i)  Vol.  vin.  No.  582,  August  18,  17 14,  and  thereafter. 

(2)  Vol.  VIII,  No.  595,  September  17,  17 14. 

(3)  ].  R.  Green,  A  Short  History  of  the  English  People, 
chap.  IX,  sec.  x. 

[28] 


"The  Spectator 

public  virtue  was  that  he  "  frankly  accepted 
the  irksome  position  of  a  constitutional 
king"  —  is  shown  by  "A  Poem  on  the 
Accession  of  His  Majesty  King  George, 
Inscribed  to  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Marl- 
borough," which  is  entitled  "Augustus."  ( i) 
A  suggestion  of  the  amusing  ignorance  of 
the  people  in  general  concerning  the  person- 
ality of  the  rather  contemptible  princeling, 
who  had  been  sent  for  overseas  in  order 
"to  serve  the  nation's  turn"  as  figurehead 
of  the  government,  is  furnished  by  this  ad- 
vertisement :  — 

This  Day  is  publifhed. 

An  Account  of  the  Courts  of  Pruffia  and 
Hanover :  Sent  to  a  Minifter  of  State  in  Holland.  In 
which  are  contained  the  CharacSters  of  the  Elector  of 
Hanover,  now  King  of  England ;  the  Electoral  Prince, 
Duke  of  Cambridge,  and  others  of  that  illuftrious  Fam- 
ily. To  which  are  added.  The  Ordinances  and  Statutes 
of  the  Royal  Academy  ere61:ed  by  the  King  of  Pruilia  at 
Berlin.  And  the  Declaration  of  the  Elector  Palatine  in 
favour  of  his  Proteftant  Subje6i:s.  All  three  publifh'd 
by  Mr.  Toland.  Sold  by  J.  Roberts  in  Warwick-Lane, 
J.  Harrifon  at  the  Royal-Exchange,  A.  Dodd  without 

(i)  Vol.  VIII,  No.  590,  September  6,  1714. 

[29] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

Temple-Bar,  and  J.  Graves  in  St.  James's  Street.   Price 
in  Sheep  ^s.  in  Calf  2j.  6^.  (i) 

In  view  of  their  almost  total  lack  of  in- 
formation concerning  the  new  king,  it  was 
no  wonder  there  was  considerable  curiosity 
at  least  to  see  him,  —  a  feeling  which  is 
indicated  by  two  notices :  — 

Any  Perfon,  who  has  a  Mind  to  fee  the  King 
make  his  Publick  Entry,  may  have  a  Seat  at  the  Sign  of 
the  Ham,  up  one  Pair  of  Stairs  over  againft  the  New- 
Exchange  in  the  Strand,  where  a  particular  Accomo- 
dation will  be  provided.  (2) 

The  Golden  Lion  in  Cheapfide,  by  Mercers 
Chappel,  is  commodioufly  fitted  with  Benches,  and  is  to 
be  Let  either  entire.  Balcony  and  Dining  Room  fepa- 
rate,  or  otherwife  in  fingle  Places  to  Gentlemen  and 
Ladies  who  are  minded  to  fee  the  Royal  Entrance  of  His 
Majefty.  Inquire  at  the  Anchor  in  Friday-ftreet  near 
Cheapfide.  N.  B.  Here  Ladies  won't  be  difcommoded 
with  the  ill  Conveniency  of  being  confin'd  to  their 
Places,  as  they  muft  in  publick  Stands  ;  nor  may  they 
fear  the  Night's  Approach  ere  the  Cavalcade  be  past.  (3) 

We  are  reminded  by  the  following  of  the 
almost  indecent  haste,  with  which  after  the 

(i)  Vol.  vni.  No.  578,  August  9,  17 14. 

(2)  Vol.  VIII,  No.  587,  August  30,  1 7 14. 

(3)  Vol.  VIII,  No.  595,  September  17,  17 14. 

[30] 


"The  Spectator 

death  of  Queen  Anne,  this  sorry  successor  to 
the  great  Edwards,  Henrys,  and  Williams 
formally  assumed  their  regalia  :  — 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

The  Second  Edition  of  an  Exadl  Account  of 
the  Form  and  Ceremony  of  His  Majefty's  Coronation, 
as  it  was  folemnly  perform'd  in  the  Collegiate  Church  at 
Weftminfter,  on  Wednefday  the  20th  of  this  Inftant 
October,  price  5^.  Sold  by  J.  Baker  in  Pater-noster- 
row.   .   .   .  (i) 

These  advertisements  are  interesting, 
moreover,  for  other  reasons  than  the  ex- 
planation they  aiford  of  oblique  allusions  in 
the  literature  of  the  time  ;  they  are  valuable 
for  more  than  the  light  they  throw  upon  ob- 
scure details  of  literary  and  political  history. 

When  supplemented  by  the  advertise- 
ments, the  main  essays  give  a  much  clearer 
notion  of  what  sort  of  place  was  London, 
early  those  foggy  mornings,  when  the 
"  Sheets-ful  of  Thoughts  for  the  Benefit  of 
Contemporaries  "  were  sent  by  Sam  Buck- 
ley, the  printer,  "  at  the  Dolphin  in  Little 
Britain,"  around  to  "A.  Baldwin  in  War- 

(i)  Vol.  VIII,  No.  612,  October  27,  1714. 

[  31  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

wick-Lane"  and  to  "Charles  Lillie,  Per- 
fumer, at  the  Corner  of  Beauford-Buildings 
in  the  Strand/'  where  they  were  sold.  From 
the  quaintly  worded  notices  of  mercers, 
snuff-dealers,  lotteries,  quacks,  booksellers 
—  of  all  who  catered  to  the  world  of  fash- 
ion, we  can  reconstruct  many  of  the  details 
of  scenes  later  in  the  day,  when,  lounging  in 
their  morning  gowns,  scholars  at  the  Grecian 
and  wits  at  Will's  Coffee  House  tried  to 
"smoak"  the  author  of  that  morning's  essay. 
Then,  nearer  noon,  after  a  night  at  the 
Duchess  of  Hamilton's  ( i )  **  drum  "  or  Her 
Grace  of  Shrewsbury's  (2)  "  rout,"  we  can 
fancy  Lady  Jane  Hyde,  (3)  Lady  Betty 
Harley,  (4)  Lady  Betty  Butler,  (5)  Miss 
Forester,  (6)  or  some  other  of  the  "top 
toasts  "  or  other  of  Her  Majesty's  maids  of 
honor,  signalizing  her  awakening  by  three 

(i)  Journal  to  Stella y  Letters  35,  40,  44,  46,  52,  55,  56, 
58,  59,  61. 

(2)  Ibid,  Letters  27,  31,  38,  44,  52,  56. 

(3)  Ibid,  Letter  26. 

(4)  Ibid.  Letters  56  and  57. 

(5)  Ibid.  Letters  3,  7,  17,  25,  58.   Lady  Betty  Butler  was 
daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Ormond. 

(6)  Journal  to  Stella,  Letters  27  and  31. 

[32] 


"The  Spectator 


tugs  at  the  bell  rope  and  as  many  raps  with 
a  slipper  on  the  floor.  Woe  to  the  little 
negro  —  in  Turkish  costume  and  with  a 
silver  collar,  bearing  his  mistress's  name, 
riveted  about  his  neck  —  if,  with  the  rolls 
and  the  "  dishes  ''  of  tea  or  chocolate,  he 
failed  to  bring,  as  an  indispensable  "  Part  of 
the  Tea  Equipage,"  (i)  that  day's  "Spec- 
tator." We  can  imagine  milady  sipping  her 
Bohea  or  her  "  Chocolate  made  from  the  best 
Cracco  Nuts,"  (2)  and  her  exclamations  as 
she  read  —  under  what  to  her  doubtless  were 
the  thin  disguises  of  "Sempronia,"  "Flavia," 
or  " Florinda,"  of  " Cynthio "  or  " Lionel" — 
of  the  follies  of  some  members  of  the  fashion- 
able world.  We  may  see  her  pouting  pret- 
tily at  "The  Exercise  of  the  Fan"  (3)  or 
smiling  —  let  us  hope  blushing  a  little  also 
— at  the  letters  concerning  escapades  at  Tun- 
bridge  (4)  of  "  Rachel  Shoestring,"  "  Sarah 
Trice,"  and  "Alice  Bluegarter." 

(i)  Nos.  10,  246,  and  488. 

(2)  No.  170. 

(3)  No.  102. 

(4)  Nos.  492  and 496.   See  also  advertisement  in  No.  515: 
"  The  Tunbridge- Miscellany,  consisting  of  Poems,  Letters,  &c. 

[  33  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

We  may  be  reasonably  certain,  moreover, 
that  she  did  not  overlook  the  advertise- 
ments of  "fresh  and  clean  Parcels  of  Silk 
Gowns  '' ;  of  "excellent  Curiosities  for  pre- 
serving the  Face  ...  in  present  Beauty  "  and 
other  "  cosmatichs  "  ;  of  "  great  penny- 
worths''  in  "Macklyn  and  Brussels  Lace," 
in  "Hooped  Petticoats/'  in  "extraordinary 
fine  Bohee  Tea.''  Let  us  be  so  rude  as  to  peep 
over  her  paper  now  and  see  what  it  is  that 
so  especially  amuses  her.  Ah,  here  it  is:  — 

The  higheft  Compounded  Spirit  of  Lavender: 
The  moft  Glorious  (if  the  Expreilion  may  be  us'd)  En- 
livening Scent  and  Flavour  that  can  poflibly  be:  In  Va- 
pours, fick  Fits,  Faintings,  &c.  fineft  too,  or  dropt  upon 
a  bit  of  Loaf-Sugar,  and  eaten  or  diffblv'd  in  Wine, 
Coffee,  Tea,  or  what  Liquor  you  pleafe,  so  charms  the 
Spirits,  delights  the  Guft,  and  gives  fuch  Airs  to  the 
Countenance,  as  are  not  to  be  imagin'd  but  by  thofe  that 
have  try'd  it.  The  meaneft  Sort  of  the  thing  is  admir'd 
by  moft  Gentlemen  and  Ladies,  but  this  far  more,  as  by 
far  it  exceeds  it,  to  the  gaining  among  all  a  more  than 
common  Efteem.  Is  fold  only  (in  neat  Flint  Bottles  fit 
for  the  Pocket)  at  31.  6^.  each,  at  the  Golden-Key  in 
Warton's-Court,  near  Holborn-Bars.  (i) 

Panegyrical  and  Satyrical ;  Written  at  the  Wells  this  Summer; 
With  a  particular  Account  of  the  swinging  Ladies.** 
(i)  No.  486,  and  in  many  other  numbers. 

[  34] 


"The  Spectator 

Addison  himself  had  previously  (i)  com- 
mented upon  the  ** Ciceronian  Manner"  of 
this.  Although,  with  him,  we  cannot  fail 
to  ''recommend"  the  ''several  Flowers  in 
which  this  Spirit  of  Lavender  is  wrapped  up 
('ifthe  Expression  may  be  us'd'j";  (2)  we  can- 
not but  regret  the  inevitable  conclusion  that 
fashionable  ladies  read  and  secretly  acted  upon 
advertisements  similar  to  the  following  — 
inevitable  because  the  frequency  with  which 
such  notices  appeared  in  the  "Spectator"  is 
a  sure  sign  they  were  "getting  results":  — 

The  famous  Bavarian  Red  Liquor: 

Which  gives  fuch  a  delightful  blufhing  Colour 
to  the  Cheeks  of  thofe  that  are  White  or  Pale,  that  it  is 
not  to  be  diftinguifhed  from  a  natural  fine  Complexion, 
nor  perceived  to  be  artificial  by  the  nearefl:  Friend.  Is 
nothing  of  Paint,  or  in  the  leaft  hurtful,  but  good  in 
many  Cafes  to  be  taken  inwardly.  It  renders  the  Face 
delightfully  handfome  and  beautiful  ;  is  not  subject  to  be 
rubb'd  off  like  Paint,  therefore  cannot  be  difcovered  by 
the  nearell:  Friend.  It  is  certainly  the  bell:  Beautiher  in 
the  World.  Is  fold  only  at  Mr.  Payn's  Toyshop,  at  the 
Angel  and  Crown  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard  near  Cheap- 
side,  at  3/.  6^.  a  Bottle,  with  Directions.  (3) 

(i)   Tatlc'r,  No.  224.  (2)   Tatler,  No.  224. 

(3)  No.  124,  and  in  manv  other  numbers. 

[■35  ] 


T'he  Advertifements  of 

By  the  same  reasoning,  from  the  persistent 
advertising  of  many  remedies  for  what  the 
writer  of  a  letter  (i)  in  the  "Spectator" 
characterizes  as  *'this  fashionable  reigning 
Distemper/'  we  may  conclude  that  the 
novelists  and  essayists  of  the  Eighteenth 
Century  were  not  exaggerating  when  they 
afflicted  their  heroines  with  frequent  at- 
tacks of  *'the  Vapours/'  "  A  Treatise  of  the 
Hypochondriack  and  Hysterick  Passions, 
vulgarly  call'd  the  Hypo  in  Men  and  Va- 
pours in  Women"  was  advertised  (2)  as 
well  as  many  nostrums,  of  which  the  fol- 
lowing is  a  typical  notice :  — 

The  Vapours  in  Women  infallibly  Cured  in 
an  Inftant,  fo  as  never  to  return  again,  by  an  admirable 
Chymical  Secret,  a  few  drops  of  which  takes  off  a  Fit  in 
a  Moment,  difpels  Sadness,  clears  the  Head,  takes  away 
all  Swimming,  Giddinefs,  Dimnefs  of  Sight,  Flufhings  in 
the  Face,  &c.  to  a  Miracle,  and  moft  certainly  prevents 
the  Vapours  returning  again  ;  for  by  Rooting  out  the  very 
Caufe  it  perfe6tly  Cures  as  Hundreds  have  experienced  : 
It  alfo  ftrengthens  the  Stomach  and  Bowels,  and  caufes 
Liveliness  and  fettled  Health.  Is  fold  only  at  Mrs. 
Osborn's,  Toy-fhop,  at    the  Rofe   and  Crown  under 

(i)  No.  216.  (2)  No.  52. 

[36] 


T'he  Spectator 


St.  Dunftan's  Church   in   Fleet-ftreet,  at    is.  6d,  the 
Bottle,  with  directions,  (i) 

Now,  assuming  our  time  is  our  own  to 
kill  in  a  manner  approved  for  young  men 
about  town,  let  us  "take  the  air''  after  our 
call  upon  milady  —  a  not  unprecedented 
call,  by  the  way.  For,  on  the  authority  of 
Addison  (2)  and  other  writers,  if  it  was  not 
usual  in  the  age  of  the  ** Spectator"  for  a 
gentlewoman  to  see  men  before  she  was  out 
of  bed,  it  had  been  very  common  but  a  few 
years  before;  and,  throughout  the  eight- 
eenth century,  all  "ladies  of  quality," 
while  making  their  toilet,  (3)  received 
friends. 

We  have  made  our  conges^  then,  and 
have  tiptoed  out  of  doors  with  the  minc- 
ing gait  affected  by  gentlemen  of  quality. 
Now  we  begin  to  work  our  way  slowly 
through  the  narrow,  foul-smelling  streets, 
rutty  and  puddly,  with  only  a  row  of  stone 

(i)  No.  120,  and  often  thereafter. 

(2)  See  essay  in  No.  45. 

(3)  See  the  fourth  picture  of  Hogarth's  series,  "Marriage 
a-la-Mode,"  and  numerous  references  in  writers  of  the  *«  Augus- 
tan **  and  Georgian  periods ;  e.g..  Journal  to  Stella,  Letter  44. 

[37] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

posts  to  separate  pedestrians  from  the  crowd 
of  chairs,  coaches,  "leather  bodied  Chari- 
ots," drays,  —  streets  resonant  with  the  oaths 
of  chairmen  and  carters,  with  the  cries  of 
seventy-four  or  more(i)  different  kinds  of 
itinerant  tradesmen;  streets  overhung  with 
hundreds  of  creaking  signs  representing, 
"  blue  Boars,  black  Swans,  and  red  Lions ; 
not  to  mention  flying  Pigs,  and  Hogs  in 
Armour,  with  many  other  Creatures  more 
extraordinary  than  any  in  the  Desarts  of 
Africk''  [2)  On  foot  if  we  will;  splashed 
with  mud  from  the  **  kennel,"  yielding  the 
coveted  place  next  the  wall  to  "  serving- 
wenches  "  and  poor  gentlewomen  with 
pinned-up  petticoats,  and  disputing  for  it 
with  apprentices  and  gorgeous  swaggering 
guardsmen,  with  beaux  in  red-heeled  shoes, 
with  tradesmen  and  pickpockets;  or  in  a 
coach  or  chair  if  we  would  keep  our  clothes 

(i)  See  advertisement  in  No.  308  :  **  A  Set  of  the  Cries  of 
London  ...  by  the  famous  M.  Laroon.'*  See  also  letter  in 
No.  251  on  street  cries  in  London.  Swift  refers  to  these  cries 
in  the  Journal  to  Stella,  Letters  22,  54,  and  56.  See  also 
Thackeray,  The  Four  Georges,  "  George  the  First." 

(2)  See  essay  in  No.  28. 

[38] 


The  Spectator 


immaculate  —  we  go  to  Saint  James's  Park 
to  saunter  up  and  down  the  Mall.  Or, 
maybe,  we  wish  to  go  to  a  coffee-house  to 
see  if  our  numbers  are  among  those  posted  as 
having  drawn  prizes  in  one  of  the  lotteries, 
or  to  read  the  latest  newsletter  from  the 
Continent.  Or,  perhaps,  we  are  sufficiently 
interested  in  some  of  the  editions  of  the 
"  Works  of  Mr.  Congreve,''  of  ''  Mr.  John 
Milton,''  or  of  *^  Mr.  Dryden,"  'Sprinted 
with  a  neat  Elziver  Letter  in  small  Pocket 
Volumes,"  to  stop  at  some  of  the  book- 
sellers, such  as  "  Jacob  Tonson  at  Shake- 
spear's  head  over-against  Catherine-street  in 
the  Strand,"  *'  Bernard  Lintott  at  the  Cross 
Keys  between  the  two  Temple  Gates  in 
Fleetstreet,"  **J.  Morphew  near  Stationer's 
Hall,"  "  Owen  Lloyd  near  the  Church  in 
the  Temple,"  "  T.  Osborn  in  Grays-Inn 
near  the  Walks,"  or  "  W.  Taylor  at  the  Ship 
in  Pater-Noster  Row."  Or  we  may  wish  to 
attend  a  sale  of  what  is  advertised  as  "  An 
extraordinary  Collection  of  Original  Paint- 
ings by  the  most  eminent  Masters,  viz.  Ra- 
phael, Titiano,  Correggio,  Guido  Reni  .  .  . 
[39] 


T^he  Advertifements  of 

Vandyke,"  (i)  or  an  auction  of  the  personal 
effects  of  some  late  gentleman  "  by  Order  of 
his  Executioners ''  (2)  — for  these  sales,  held 
usually  between  the  hours  of  nine  and  one,  are 
largely  attended  even  by  those  who  have  no 
intention  of  buying.  Or  we  may  go  to  buy  a 
pair  of  silk  stockings,  or  a  Steinkirk,  or,  at 
any  rate,  to  ogle  the  pretty  shop-girls  in  the 
"New  Exchange."  (3)  Here,  doubtless. 
Swift  bought  for  "Mrs."  Johnson  and  Mrs. 
Dingley  the  contents  of  that  famous  box,  spec- 
ulations upon  the  miscarriage  of  which  occu- 
pied so  much  space  in  his  "Journal"  of  let- 
ters. Sometime  between  two  and  four,  we  go 
to  dinner,  at  a  friend's  house,  at  Pontack's  (4) 
or  at  some  "ordinary,"  where  we  eat  and 
drink  heavily  for  an  hour  or  more. 

( I  )  Nos.  378  and  67  and  BudgelPs  "  Postscript  '*  in  No.  67 
concerning  this  sale.  See  also  Swift's  Journal  to  Stella ,  Letter 
61  (March  6,  171 3),  for  comments  on  a  similar  sale. 

(2)  See  advertisement  in  Spectator y  No.  409. 

(3)  No.  304:  *'The  Petition  of  the  New  Exchange  con- 
cerning the  Acts  of  Buying  and  Selling,  and  particularly  valuing 
Goods  by  the  Complexion  of  the  Seller,  will  be  considered  on 
another  occasion." 

(4)  For  references  to  **Pontack*s"  see  Journal  to  Stella^ 
Letters  28,  31,  35,  59,  62,  etc. 

[40] 


"The  Spectator 


The  early  evening  we  may  dawdle  away 
at  a  coiFee-house,  "settling  the  Characters  of 
my  Lord  Rochester  and  Boileau,"  ( i )  "  fin- 
ishing the  Merits  of  several  Dramatick  Writ- 
ers/' or  "  making  an  End  of  the  Nature 
of  True  Sublime."  Or  we  may  attend  "A 
Course  of  Experiments  in  order  to  demon- 
strate the  Laws  of  the  Gravitations  of  Fluids/ ' 
and  the  working  of  other  physical  forces,  by 
"Mr.  Era.  Hauksbee,  Sen.  E.  R.  S./'  (2)  or 
"A  compleat  Course  of  Chimistry,  consisting 
of  above  100  Operations  —  at  the  Laboratory 
of  M.  Edw.  Bright,  Chymist."(3) 

If  the  season  and  weather  are  propitious, 
we  may  prefer,  in  the  late  afternoon  or  early 
evening,  to  put  on  a  coat,  like  Dr.  Swift's,  of 
"  light  camlet,  faced  with  red  velvet  and  sil- 
ver buttons,"  and  go  riding  in  Hyde  Park  or 
a  few  miles  into  the  country.  In  "  the  Ring," 
or  between  fields  and  hedgerows,  we  shall 
probably  see  at  least  one  of  the  more  ener- 

( i)  The  quotation  is  from  Steele's  burlesque  advertisement  in 
No.  87,  in  which  he  satirizes  the  discussions  of  the  would-be 
critics  of  the  coffee-houses. 

(2)  No.  275  and  elsewhere. 

(3)  No.  256. 

[41  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

getic  of  the  reigning  "  toasts ''  dressed  "  like  a 
man  "  ( i )  in  " an  Equestrian  Habit ''  perhaps 
of"  Blue  Camlet,  well  laced  with  Silver,  be- 
ing a  Coat,  Wastecoat,  Petticoat,  Hatt  and 
Feather."  ( 2)  If  the  rogue  knows  us,  she  will, 
perhaps,  as  she  rides  by,  "  fly  in  the  Face  of 
Justice,  pull  oflF  her  Hat  .  .  .  with  the  Mein 
and  Air  of  a  young  Officer,  saying  at  the 

same  Time,  *  your  Servant  Mr. '  "  (s) 

If  our  tastes  run  in  that  direction  we  may, 
on  the  other  hand,  go  at  five  or  six  o'clock 
to  "Punch's  Theatre,"  (4)  already  men- 
tioned, or  to  continuous  performances  of 
what  were  called  "moving   Pictures,"  (5) 

( I  )  See  Swift's  references  to  this  fashion  in  Journal  to  Stelhy 
Letters  27  and  42.  Hughes  in  a  letter  in  Spectator ,  No.  104, 
and  Addison  in  the  essay  in  No.  435,  severely  criticise  the  fash- 
ion. Steele  referred  to  it  in  the  burlesque  advertisement  in  Spec- 
tator, No.  485. 

(2)  See  advertisement  in  Spectator,  No.  79,  oiFering  for  sale 
a  "  Compleat  Riding  Suit  for  a  Lady." 

(3)  See  Steele's  advertisement  in  Spectator,  No.  485,  in 
which,  burlesquing  the  language  of  offers  of  rewards  for  the  ap- 
prehension of  criminals,  he  asks  for  the  capture  of  a  fair  offender 
of  this  sort. 

(4)  No.  302;  letters  in  Nos.  14  and  372;  also  Journal  to 
Stella,  htittr  11   (December  13,  1710). 

(5)  References  to  these  so-called  **  moving  pictures"   are 

[42] 


"The  Spectator 

such  as  "  Mr.  Penkethman's  Wonderful  In- 
vention, caird  the  Pantheon :  Or,  the  Temple 
of  the  Heathen-gods,  the  Work  of  several 
Years  and  great  Expence .  .  .  the  Figures  [of] 
which  are  above  i  oo,  and  move  their  Heads, 
Legs,  Arms,  and  Fingers,  so  exactly  to  what 
they  perform.  .  .that  it  justly  deserves  to 
be  esteem'd  the  greatest  Wonder  of  the 
Age."  (i)  Or  we  may  marvel  at  "The  Lest 
Man  and  Hors  in  the  World"  already  men- 
tioned (2);  or  at  "An  Entertainment  by  Mr. 
Clinch  of  Barnet,  who  imitates  the  Flute, 
Double  Curtel,  the  Organ  with  3  Voices, 
the  Horn,  Huntsman,  and  Pack  of  Hounds, 
the  Sham-Doctor,  the  Old  Woman,  the 
Drunken-Man,  the  Bells:  All  Instruments 
are  performed  by  his  natural  Voice."  (3) 
"  At  the  Duke  of  Marlborough's  Head  in 
Fleet-street,  in  the  great  Room,  is  to  be  seen 
the  famous  Posture-Master  of  Europe,  who 
. . .  extends  his  Body  into  all  deform'd  Shapes; 
makes  his  Hip  and  Shoulder  Bones  meet  to- 
made  in  Tatler,  No.  129,  and  in  Spectator,  No.  31,  also  in 
Journal  to  Stella,  Letter  62  (March  27,  17 13). 

(i)  Advertisement  No.  43,  and  reference  in  Essay  No.  31. 

(2)   No.  247.  (3)    No.  533. 

[43   ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

gether; .  .  .  stands  upon  one  Leg,  and  extends 
the  other  in  a  perpendicular  Line  half  a  Yard 
above  his  Head.  .  .  .  Likewise  a  Child  of 
about  9  Years  of  Age,  that  shews  such  Pos- 
tures as  never  was  seen  performed  by  one  of 
his  Age.  Also  the  famous  English  Artist, 
who  .  .  .  takes  an  empty  Bag,  which  after 
being  turn'd,  trod,  and  stampt  on,  produces 
some  Hundreds  of  Eggs,  and  at  last  a  living 
Hen,"  (i)  and  other  marvels  "too  tedious 
to  mention." 

Or  we  may  attend  "  The  famous  Water- 
Theatre  of  the  late  ingenious  Mr.  Win- 
stanly,"  which  is  "at  the  lower  End  of 
Pickadilly,  and  is  known  by  the  Wind-mill 
on  the  Top  of  it."  Here  are  "the  greatest 
Curiosities  in  Water-works,  the  like  was 
never  performed  by  any .  .  .  with  several  new 
Additions,  as  three  Stages,  Sea  Gods  and 
Goddesses,  Nymphs,  Mermaids  and  Satires, 
all  of  them  playing  of  Water  as  suitable,  and 
some  Fire  mingling  with  the  Water,  and 
Sea  Triumphs  round  the  Barrel  that  plays  so 
many  Liquors;  all  which  is  taken  away  after 
(i)No.  246. 
[44] 


The  Spectator 


it  hath  perform'd  its  Part,  and  the  Barrel  is 
broken  in  Pieces  before  the  Spectators/'  (i) 

If  it  is  a  warm  season,  we  may  follow  Sir 
Roger  de  Coverley's  example  (2)  and,  em- 
barking at  the  Temple  Stairs,  with  the  old 
sailor  who  lost  a  leg  at  La  Hogue,  or  with 
some  other  of  the  Thames  boatmen,  go  to 
Spring  Garden  (afterwards  called  Vauxhall), 
where,  amidst  the  "  Walks  and  Bowers 
with  .  .  .  Choirs  of  Birds  that  sing  upon  the 
Trees  and  the  loose  Tribe  of  People  that 
walk  under  their  Shades"  (2)  we  may  spend 
the  evening. 

If  we  are  fond  of  music,  we  shall  have 
several  opportunities,  during  the  season  be- 
tween December  and  May, to  attend  ''Con- 
sorts," of  which  the  following  is  a  typical 
notice :  — 

For  the  Entertainment  of  his  Highness 
Prince  Eugene  of  Savoy,  at  Stationer's- 
Hall, 

On  Monday  next,  being  the  21ft  Inftant,  will 
be  performed  a  Confort  of  Vocal  and  Inftrumental  Mu- 

( 1 )  No.  96.  See  also  reference  in  letter  in  Spectator y  No.  1 68. 

(2)  See  essay  in  No.  383,  for  Tuesday,  May  20,  17 12. 

[45  ] 


T^he  Advertifements  of 

fick  to  begin  at  6  a  Clock.  Tickets  are  to  be  had  at 
Charles  Lillie's,  a  Perfumer,  at  the  Corner  of  Beauford 
Buildings  in  the  Strand,  and  at  Mr.  Manfhip's,  at  the 
Temple  Tavern  in  Fleetftreet,  at  51.  each.  No  Perfon 
to  be  admitted  without  Tickets.  N.  B.  The  Tickets 
delivered  for  the  i8th.  Inftant  at  the  Golden  Balls  in 
Hart-ftreet  will  be  taken  for  the  Entertainment,  (i) 

Then  there  are  frequent  performances 
at  the  Queen's  Theatre,  built  in  1 704  espe- 
cially to  provide  a  place  for  the  performance 
of  the  Italian  Opera,  just  coming  into  vogue. 
Here  is  the  announcement  of  a  performance 
in  which  Nicolini,  the  most  famous  tenor 
of  Queen  Anne's  day,  sang  the  leading 
part :  — 

At  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market, 
to  Morrow  being  Wednefday,  the  nth  Day  of  June, 
Signior  Chevaleri  Nicolini  Grimaldi  will  take  his  leave 
of  England,  in  the  laft  Italian  Opera  call'd  Hercules. 
Boxes  8j.  Pit.  5J.  Firft  Gallery  ^s.  6d.  Upper  Gallery 
ij.  6d.  Boxes  upon  the  Stage  half  a  Guinea.  To  begin 
exactly  at  Seven.  By  Her  Majefty's  Command,  no  Per- 
fons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes.  (2) 

(i)  No.  279,  for  January  19,  1712. 

(2)  No.  401,  for  Tuesday,  June  10,  1712.  See  advertise- 
ment of  another  of  these  "  leavetaking*'  performances  in  Spec- 
tatoryNo.  405,  for  June  14,  17 12.  It  will  be  recalled  that 
Mr.  Spectator  had  satirized,  in  Nos.  13,  14,  18,  22,  29,  31, 

[46] 


'The  Spectator 


A 


Whatever  we  do  on  other  evenings,  we 
shall  certainly  spend  one  at  the  famous 
theatre  which,  in  spite  of  rivals  of  all  sorts, 
remains  the  principal  place  of  amusement. 
Here  are  typical  notices :  — 

At  the  Delire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians, 

T  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this 
prefent  Tuefday,  the  15th  Day  of  January,  will 
be  prefented  the  laft  RevivM  Play  call'd,  The  Tem- 
peft ;  or  The  Inchanted  Ifland.  As  it  was  altered  from 
Shakefpear  by  Sir  Will.  D'avenant,  and  the  late  Mr. 
Dryden,  Poets  Laureat.  With  new  Scenes,  Machines, 
and  all  the  Original  Decorations  proper  to  the  Play.  By 
her  Majefty's  Command  no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted 
behind  the  Scenes,  (i) 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians, 

T  the  Theatre  Royal    in  Drury-Lane  this 
prefent  Tuefday,  the  i8th  Day  of  December,  will 
be  prefented  a  Comedy  calPd,  The  Tender  Husband 

and  314,  and  in  a  burlesque  advertisement  in  No.  14,  Italian 
opera  in  general,  and  especially  the  absurd  feat,  performed  by 
Nicolini  in  the  role  of  Hydaspes,  of  strangling  the  player  lion. 
Yet,  at  the  time  of  these  «*  farewell"  performances,  Addison  in 
No.  405,  for  June  14,  17 12,  took  occasion  to  make  amends  by 
complimenting  handsomely  this  Nicolini  —  who  gave  a  series  of 
leavetaking  performances. 

(i)  No.  275,  for  January  15,  171 2. 

[47] 


A 


"The  Advertifements  of 

or  the  Accomplifti'd  Fools.  For  the  Entertainment  of 
the  New  Toafts,  and  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality.  The 
part  of  Biddy  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Sir  Harry  Gubbin  by 
Mr.  Bullock,  Mr.  Tipkin  by  Mr.  Norris,  Mr.  Cleri- 
mont  by  Mr.  Mills,  Capt.  Clerimont  by  Mr.  Wilks, 
Humphrey  Gubbin  by  Mr.  Penkethman,  Mr.  Pounce 
by  Mr.  Pack,  Mrs.  Clerimont  by  Mrs.  Bradfhaw,  the 
Aunt  by  Mrs.  Powell.  To  which  (at  the  Defire  of  fev- 
eral Perfons  of  Quality)  will  be  added,  a  Farce  of  one 
Aa  only,call'd  The  Country  Wake.  The  Part  of  Hob 
by  Mr.  Dogget,  Sir  Thomas  Tefty  by  Mr.  Bullock, 
Friendly  by  Mr.  Pack,  Flora  by  Mrs.  Santlow.  (i) 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 
For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  Johnfon. 

By  Her  Majefliy's  Company  of  Comedians. 

A  T  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this 
-^  -^  prefent  Thurfday,  will  be  prefented  a  Comedy, 
called.  The  Funeral ;  or  Grief  A-la-mode.  Written  by 
Captain  Steele.  The  part  of  Lord  Brumpton  to  be  per- 
form'd  by  Mr.  Keene,  Lord  Hardy  by  Mr.  Cibber,  Mr. 
Campley  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Mr.  Trufty  by  Mr.  Mills, 
Mr.  Sable  by  Mr.  Johnfon,  Puzzle  by  Mr.  Eftcourt, 
Trim  by  Mr.  Penkethman,  Lady  Brumpton  by  Mrs. 
Rogers,  Lady  Harriot  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Lady  Sharlot  by 
Mrs.  Porter,  Madam  de  Pingle  by  Mrs.  Bicknell,  Fardin- 
gale  by  Mr.  Norris,  Kate  Match-lock  by  Mr.  Bullock. 
And  to  Morrow  will  be  presented  a  Comedy  callM,  The 
Carelefs  Hufband,  for  the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  Bicknell. 

(i)  No.  251,  for  December  18,  171 1. 

[48] 


The  Spectator 


This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catherine  ftreet  in  the  Strand,  (i) 

From  six  or  seven  until  ten  or  thereabouts 
— making  our  seats  in  the  pit,  in  a  box  under 
the  first  gallery,  or  on  the  stage,  merely  points 
of  departure  —  we  move  about  the  play- 
house. When  Mrs.  Oldfield  or  Mr.  Wilks 
is  before  us,  perhaps  we  give  attention :  but, 
if  we  follow  the  highest  fashion,  we  spend 
more  time  taking  snuff  with  great  periwigs 
and  stars;  in  ridiculing  the  actors  and  the 
"poet'';  in  confounding  as  "clumsy  awk- 
ward fellows"  the  box-keepers,  and  the 
candle  snuffer  who  busies  himself  with  the 
lights;  and  in  buying  fruit,  and  exchanging 
risque  witticisms  with  the  pert,  pretty,  or- 
ange girls.  From  these  we  go  directly  to  the 
carefully  painted,  powdered,  and  patched 
young  ladies  of  quality,  who  reply  to  our 
studiously  impudent  or  ardent  speeches  with 
languishing  glances,  and  with  such  irrele- 
vant questions  as  whether  we  do  not  think 

Miss  B is  a  "dowd"  or  has  a  "squint"; 

whether  we  do  not  agree  that   the  "Sayl- 

(i)  No.  49,  for  April  26,  171 1. 

[49] 


T'he  Advertifements  of 

or's  Jig"  and  the  "Dance  of  Four  Scara- 
mouches," (i)  sometimes  introduced  be- 
tween the  acts,  are  more  entertaining  than 
"those  dull  speeches  of  Colley  Gibber";  or 
whether,  on  the  whole,  we  do  not  prefer 
Mrs.  Santlow,  the  dancer,  to  Mrs.  Oldfield. 
We  wait,  perhaps,  until  some  beauty  al- 
lows us  the  honor  of  handing  her  to  the 
door  and  into  her  scarlet -lined  chair. 
Otherwise,  whether  the  performance  be  over 
or  not,  we  go  about  ten  o'clock  to  "Tom's 
or  Will's  coffee-houses,  near  adjoining,  where 
there  is  'Picket'  playing,  and  the  best  of 
Conversation  till  Midnight."  (2)  Or  we  may 
be  invited  to  some  of  the  great  houses  in 
Soho  Square  to  play  at  basset  or  ombre.  Or 
we  may  join  a  party  of  sad  young  dogs 
whose  wanderings,  after  the  theatre,  are 
suggested  by  an  advertisement:  — 

Loft  on  Thurfday  laft  the  3d  Inftant,  or  left 
in  a  Hackney  Coach  that  took  up  Company  at  Drury- 
Lane  Play-House  and  fet  them  down  at  the  three  Tuns 
in   Shandois-ftreet,   and    from   thence  to  Leaden  hall- 

(i)   See  advertisement  in  No.  392. 

(2)  John  Macky's  Journey  through  England  (written  1714, 
published  1722), 

[  50] 


T'he  Spectator 


ftreet,  from  thence  to  Park-ftreet  St.  James's,  a  green 
emerod  Ring,  enclofed  with  8  Diamonds  and  14  Sparks 
round  the  Hoop,  and  ingraved  in  the  Infide  an  H, 
crowned  with  an  Earl's  Coronet.  If  the  faid  Coach- 
man, or  any  other  Perfon,  will  bring  it  to  Mr.  Charles 
Lillie's  the  Corner  of  Beaufort  Buildings,  they  fhall 
receive  2  Guineas  Reward;  or  if  offered  to  be  fold  or 
pawned  you  are  defired  to  flop  it,  and  the  Reward 
abovefaid  fhall  be  paid,  (i) 

Then  there  is  the  notorious  masquerade, 
which  was  resorted  to  not  only  by  ladies 
and  gentlemen  of  quality,  but  also  by  those 
of  the  purlieus  of  Covent-Garden.  We  have 
all  read  Mr.  Spectator's  satirical  papers  (2) 
on  this,  and  his  burlesque  advertisement 
of  the  ^'eminent  Italian  Chirurgeon  arrived 
from  the  Carnaval  at  Venice,''  who  holds 
forth  "within  two  Doors  of  the  Masquer- 
ade," and  who  "draws  Teeth  without  pull- 
ing off  your  Mask."  (3)  But,  if  we  have 
not  been  laughed  into  shame,  we  may  at- 
tend what  is  thus  advertised: — 

At  the  Requefl  of  feveral  Foreigners  lately 
arrived,  The  Mafquerade  in  Old  Spring  Garden,  Char- 

(i)   No.  268,  for  Monday,  January  7,  17 12, 

(2)  Nos.  8  and  14. 

(3)  No.  22. 

[SI  ] 


T^he  Advertifements  of 

ing  Crofs,  will  be  this  prefent  Tuefday,  being  the  Firft 
Day  of  May.  Note,  That  upon  this  Occafion  a  Gentle- 
man is  pleafed  to  give  for  the  Diverfion  of  the  Mafquers, 
an  Entertainment  of  Mufick,  both  Vocal  and  Inftru- 
mental,  by  fome  of  the  beft  Mafters  in  London  :  This 
Entertainment  will  begin  exadly  at  Ten  a  Clock. 
Tickets  may  be  had  at  Mr.  Thurmonds's  in  King's 
Court,  Ruflel-ftreet,  Covent-Garden,  and  at  the  Houfe 
in  Spring  Garden ;  price  Half  a  Guinea.  No  perfon 
whatfoever  to  be  admitted  Unmafk'd  or  Arm'd."  (i) 

Probably  sometime  between  "twelve  a 
clock"  and  dawn,  in  a  coach  or  chair  if 
we  are  prudent  and  have  not  lost  all  our 
money  "at  play,"  or  at  least  with  a  servant 
or  link-boy,  whose  flambeau  makes  our  way 
through  the  dim,  wretched  streets  a  little  less 
difficult  and  dangerous,  we  go  to  our  lodg- 
ings, thinking  ourselves  fortunate  indeed  if 
we  escape  muddy  clothes  or  barked  shins  (2) 
and  the  scarcely  less  nearly  omnipresent 
dangers  from  highwaymen  and  Mohocks. 

An  interesting  city  is  this  we  see,  more 
clearly  aided  by  these  advertisements,  —  an 
interesting  and,  in  some  aspects,  a  picturesque 
age ;  yet  different  in  character  of  detail  from 

(i)  No.  53. 

(2)  Journal  to  Stella,  Letter  i8  (March  13,  171 1). 

[52] 


"The  Spectator 

that  drawn  for  us  in  pretty  "Eighteenth 
Century  Vignettes'*  and  in  recent  expur- 
gated historical  novels.  Indeed,  the  London 
of  Queen  Anne,  as  shown  by  present-day 
idealizers,  has  for  us  much  the  same  illusion 
as  persons  in  the  stage  box  at  Drury  Lane 
doubtless  had  for  a  country  boy  in  the  upper 
gallery.  We  cannot  at  this  distance  detect, 
in  the  soft  candlelight,  the  dirt  under  the 
fine  lady's  powder  and  patches,  the  snuff  on 
her  upper  lip,  or  the  rouge  smeared  from 
eyes  to  chin.  We  do  not  even  surmise  that 
she  "squints."  We  cannot  hear  her  vapid 
or  even  profane  remarks,  delivered  with  what 
seems  such  a  charming,  high-bred  smile  to 
the  gentleman  who  looks  so  grand,  so  dis- 
tinguished, in  his  great  powdered  periwig, 
his  neckcloth  of  Mechlin  lace,  and  his  coat 
glittering  with  embroidery  and  stars.  We 
cannot  note  that  his  Steinkirk  is  "  snuff  be- 
grimed,'' that  his  gold  embroidery  is  slightly 
frayed,  that  his  hands  are  not  as  clean  as  they 
should  be,  that  his  eyes  are  dulled  by  dissi- 
pation, that  he  reeks  with  wine.  We  do  not 
know  he  paid  for  his  stars  perhaps  by  the 
[53] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

sale  of  places  in  Church  and  State,  by  treach- 
ery to  friends,  by  cruelty,  by  betrayals  of 
public  trust.  We  do  not  guess  that  physi- 
cally, mentally,  and  morally  he  is  corrupt. 
So,  if  only  to  make  us  more  content  with 
our  own  age,  which,  for  all  its  faults,  is  on 
the  average  ever  so  much  a  better  one  in 
which  to  live,  it  is  well  occasionally  to  see 
this  place  and  yonder  people  near  at  hand, 
in  the  merciless  sunlight  of  contemporary 
evidence. 


The  Spectator 


II 


THE  SPECTATOR  CONSIDERED  AS 
A  PERIODICAL 

BECAUSE  we  know  it  so  much  better  as 
a  series  of  essays,  we  are  prone  to 
forget  that  the  "Spectator"  was  pri- 
marily a  periodical,  and  subject  to  business 
conditions.  In  order  to  be  continued,  it  must 
make  money  for  its  publishers.  For  a  time 
at  least,  the  "Spectator '*  probably  was  as 
successful  in  a  business  as  in  a  literary  way. 
At  first  three  thousand  copies  were  printed 
daily.  ( i )  Although  we  may  certainly  ques- 
tion Mr.  T.  S.  Perry's  assertion  that  this 
"rapidly  grew  to  20,000  and  sometimes  to 
30,000,"  (2)  it  is  possible  that  especially 
popular  numbers  required  editions  approxi- 
mating these  rather  extravagant  figures.  Al- 
though it  is  not  even  likely  that  the  "  Spec- 

(i)  See  essay  in  No.  lo,  for  March  12,  171 1. 
(2)  T.  S.  Perry,  English  Literature  in  the  Eighteenth  Cen- 
tury»   No  authorities  are  given  for  this  statement. 

[  55  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

tator''  ever  had  a  regular  **  daily  circulation 
of  not  less  than  14,000  copies/'  (i)  Macau- 
lay's  statement  that  it  ''  had  risen  to  near 
four  thousand  when  the  stamp  tax  was  im- 
posed/'(2)  seems  reasonable.  The  propor- 
tion of  readers  to  each  copy  of  a  periodical 
was  undoubtedly  greater  then  than  now.  In- 
deed, when  we  consider  the  manner  in  which 
each  of  these  "half-sheets"  —  printed  in 
two  columns  on  both  sides  —  was  passed 
about  at  coffee-houses  and  among  groups 
of  friends  in  London,  in  provincial  towns,  in 
various  other  parts  of  Great  Britain  and  Ire- 
land, and  even  among  officers  of  the  armies 
in  Flanders,  (3)  it  is  easy  to  credit  Mr.  Spec- 

(  I  )  The  Earl  of  Carnarvon,  '*  The  First  of  March,  1 7 1 1/' 
in  National  Review^  vol.  i,  p.  40,  at  p.  44.  See  also  George 
A.  Aitken's  Life  of  Richard  Steele y  vol.  i,  p.  320,  note  i. 

(2)  Macaulay,  Essa^  on  Addison. 

(  3  )  Note,  in  Swift's  letters,  references  to  the  Spectator  and  to 
the  Tatler  as  periodicals  which  Stella  and  her  friends  in  Ireland 
were  likely  to  see  more  or  less  regularly.  See  also  advertisement 
in  the  Spectator ^  No.  223,  for  November  15,  1 7 1 1 :  **  The  Spec- 
tator Inspected,  or  a  Letter  to  the  Spectator  from  an  Officer  of 
the  Army  in  Flanders,  touching  the  use  of  French  Terms,  in  Re- 
lations from  the  Army:  Occasioned  by  the  Spectator  of  the  8  th 
of  September  1 7 1 1 .  Written  by  the  Author  of  the  Spy  upon 
the  Spectator." 

[  56] 


"The  Spectator 

tator's  boast  ( i )  that  the  average  copy  was 
read  by  a  score  of  "  Disciples."  On  this  basis, 
we  may  estimate  that,  by  the  summer  of 
171 2,  the  number  of  readers  of  the  *^  Spec- 
tator "  had  grown  to  approximately  eighty 
thousand,  which  probably  included  nearly 
all  the  witty,  the  wealthy,  and  the  fashion- 
able, and  many  of  the  well-to-do,  in  Eng- 
land, Scotland,  and  Ireland. 

Nor  were  those  who  catered  to  these 
classes  slow  to  appreciate  the  peculiar  advan- 
tages of  the  "Spectator"  as  a  means  for 
calling  attention  to  what  they  had  for  sale. 
The  change  in  the  character  of  the  adver- 
tisements; their  steady  increase  in  number 
and  variety  during  sixteen  months  and  until 
the  imposition  of  the  newspaper  taxes ;  and 
their  steady  decline  thereafter,  are,  from  a 
publisher's  standpoint,  among  the  most 
striking  features  of  a  collection  of  the  orig- 
inal sheets. 

Shrewd  and  rather  learned  Sam.  Buckley, 
a  former  bookseller,  who  was  editing  and 
printing  the  "Courant"  and  the  **  Monthly 

(i)  See  essay  in  No.  10,  for  March  12,  171 1. 

[57] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

Register,"  was  the  printer  of  the  "  Specta- 
tor." It  was  he,  doubtless,  who,  merely  to 
make  a  showing,  filled  the  space  after 
Steele's  introductory  essay  in  No.  i  with 
eight  advertisements.  None  of  these  look 
like  paid  notices,  and  all  are  of  books  which, 
perhaps,  Buckley  or  his  friends  had  printed, 
and,  it  is  safe  to  surmise,  were  selling  slowly. 
Here  is  the  list  of  titles:  — 

"Anthropologia  Nova;  or  A  New  Sys- 
tem of  Anatomy";  ''Political  Arithmatick; 
or,  a  Discourse  concerning  the  Extent  and 
Value  of  Lands,  People,  Buildings ...  to  every 
Country  in  general  "  ;  "  Perspective  Made 
Easie :  Or,  The  Art  of  Representing  all 
manner  of  Objects  as  they  appear  to  the 
Eye";  "The  Compleat  Geographer";  "An 
Essay  towards  the  Probable  Solution  of  this 
Question,  Where  those  Birds  do  probably 
make  their  Recess  and  Abode,  which  are 
absent  from  our  Climate  at  some  certain 
Times  and  Seasons  of  the  Year";  "The 
Original  and  Institution  of  Civil  Govern- 
ment Discussed";  "The  Works  of  the  Right 
Reverend  and  Learned  Ezekiel  Hopkins, 
[58] 


T'he  Spectator 


late  Lord  Bishop  of  London-Derry  in  Ire- 
land .  .  .  containing,  I.  The  Vanity  of  the 
World,"  etc.;  "A  Collection  of  Debates, 
Reports,  Orders  and  Resolutions  of  the 
House  of  Commons." 

We  can  fancy  the  wits  at  the  coffee- 
houses yawning,  and  milady  in  Soho  Square, 
after  her  first  dish  of  chocolate,  dozing  off 
again  over  the  dull  notices  of  duller  books 
and  sermons. 

As  the  circulation  of  the  "Spectator"  in- 
creased among  "the  quality,"  the  example 
of  the  booksellers  was  followed,  first  by  the 
mercers  and  haberdashers,  then  by  the  deal- 
ers in  snuffs  and  wines  and  teas,  by  quacks 
and  sellers  of  cosmetics  and  nostrums  for 
every  human  ill,  and,  finally,  by  the  mana- 
gers of  places  of  amusement.  The  "  fine  silk 
Gowns"  and  "hooped  Petticoats"  crowded 
in  beside  sermons  on  "  The  Vanity  of  the 
World";  "Cargoes  of  Wines"  were  "laid 
down  hard  by  "  "  an  Exposition  of  the  Church 
Catechism"  by  some  "Right  Reverend  Fa- 
ther in  God";  offers  of  rewards  for  the 
recovery  of  the  lost  dogs,  watches,  and  snuff 
[  59] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

boxes  of  London  appeared  beside  specula- 
tions on  the  lost  tribes  of  Israel.  Here  are 
extracts  from  the  dozen  advertisements 
printed  in  No.  444  for  Wednesday,  July  30, 
1712,  when  the  "Spectator''  was  at  the 
high  tide  of  business  success  :  — 

"Not  acted  these  Ten  Years.  By  Her 
Majesty's  Company  of  Comedians.  At  the 
Theatre-Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  .  .  .  will  be 
reviv'd  a  Comedy  call'd.  The  Guardian"; 
"  Florinda,  the  Letter,  you  was  desirous  to 
know,  was  received";  "  Is  continued  to  be 
sold,  the  remaining  Part  of  Twenty  Hogs- 
heads of  neat  French  Brandy";  "Notwith- 
standing the  Insinuations  of  some,  that 
Richard  Standfast,  Bookseller,  would  not 
attend  the  Gentlemen  and  Ladies  this  Sum- 
mer at  Tunbridge- Wells  . . .  These  is  there- 
fore to  give  Notice,  that  his  Shop  is  now 
opened,"  etc.;  "A  House  to  be  Lett  in  Bos- 
vill-Court  .  .  .";  "Notice  is  hereby  given. 
That  several  Books  and  Papers  writ  by  Sir 
Humphry  Mackworth  relating  to  the  Mine- 
Adventure  .  .  .  have  been  lately  publish'd," 
etc.;  "  Dutch  Alliances:  Or,  a  plain  Proof 
[60] 


T'he  Spectator 

of  their  Observance  of  Treaties,"  etc.; 
"Whereas  one  William  Cowpland  has,  by- 
several  Advertisements,  pretended  himself 
to  be  the  only  Person  that  knows  how  to 
make  the  English  Barrelled  White  Soap: 
To  prevent  the  Publick  therefore  from  be- 
ing imposed  on  by  such  groundless  Pre- 
tences, this  is  to  give  Notice,*'  etc. ;  "  The 
most  acute  and  violent  Tooth-ach,  instantly 
Cured  by  a  liquid  Remedy,  prepared  without 
Mercury ..."  etc. ;  "  The  most  incomparable 
Composition  in  the  World  of  Necklaces  for 
Children's  Teeth,  which  for  causing  them 
to  cut  and  breed  free  and  easy,  without  the 
least  manner  of  Pain,  it  has  not  its  equal  in 
the  Universe  ";  "An  Infallible  Cure  for  the 
Stone  and  Gravel  .  .  . ";  "The  most  Noble 
Volatile  SmelHng-Bottle  in  the  World,"  etc. 
Nearly  every  one  of  these  was  an  excel- 
lent target  for  the  wits  at  Will's,  who  prided 
themselves  upon  their  ability  to  shoot,  off- 
hand but  unerringly,  a  mot  at  anything 
under  the  sun.  Poor  "  Florinda  "  —  poor 
Mr.  Standfast  and  Mr.  Cowpland :  doubtless 
by  noon  that  Wednesday  they  bristled  with 
[6i  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

"  shafts  of  ridicule  " !  ( i )  Every  one  of  these 
advertisements,  moreover,  looks  as  if  it  had 
been  paid  for.  Now  that  Mr.  Spectator  had 
so  many  and  so  varied  advertising  patrons, 
he  was  no  longer,  even  in  the  dull  summer 
season,  obliged,  in  order  to  make  a  showing, 
to  fill  his  advertising  columns  with  unre- 
munerative  notices  of  the  most  tiresome  of 
honest  Sam  Buckley's  books. 

On  August  1,1712,  however,  certain  por- 
tions of  an  Act  of  Parliament  (2)  went  into 
effect.  Among  these  were  provisions  for  a 
tax  on  each  printed  half-sheet  of ''  one  Half- 
penny Sterling,"  and,  on  ** every  Advertise- 
ment to  be  contained  in  .  .  .  any  .  .  .  printed 
Paper  . . .  made  publick  weekly,  or  oftener,  [a 
tax]  .  . .  of  twelve  Pence  Sterling.''  Accord- 
ingly, beginning  with  the  edition  for  Satur- 
day, August    2,  171 2  (No.  447),  (3)  each 

(i)  That  the  advertisements  were  favorite  targets  for  witti- 
cisms, we  know  from  Tatlery  No.  224,  for  September  12-14, 
1710  ;  from  Spectator ,  No.  547,  for  November  27,  1712  ;  and 
from  the  burlesque  advertisements  —  all  following  essays  by  Steele 
— printed  in  the  5'/^r/^/^r/^.^.,Nos.  14,  22,87, 187,  272,485. 

(2)  Act  of  June  10,  171 2  (10  Annae,  c.  19,  ci.) 

(3)  We  know,  by  implication  from  a  statement  in  Johnson's 

[62] 


l^he  Spectator 


copy  of  the  "  Spectator"  has  upon  it,  in  ink 
now  at  least  the  color  of  old  rose,  a  well-cut 
half-penny  stamp,  which  is  so  artistic  in  de- 
sign and  often  so  clear  in  impression  that  we 
cannot  but  agree  with  Swift:  ^'Methinks  it 
is  worth  a  half-penny,  the  stamping  it."  (i) 
From  Swift's  exulting  tone  in  referring 
to  the  passing  of  "  Grub  Street,"  and  from 
a  number  of  former  remarks  in  the  "  Jour- 
nal," (2)  it  is  indeed  clear  that  the  purpose 

Addison  (see  footnote  2,  page  64  infra'),  that  the  Spectators 
were  usually  printed  the  day  before  or  early  in  the  evening  before 
they  were  to  be  circulated.  This  will  account  for  the  fact  that  the 
edition  for  August  i,  171 2,  was  not  on  stamped  paper,  because 
it  was  printed  doubtless  on  July  31,  the  day  before  the  Act  went 
into  eiFect. 

(i)  Journal  to  Stella,  Letter  51  (August  7,  17 12):  "Do 
you  know  that  Grub  Street  is  dead  and  gone  last  week  ?  No  more 
ghosts  or  murders  now  for  love  or  money.  I  plied  it  pretty  close 
the  last  fortnight,  and  published  at  least  seven  penny  papers  of  my 
own,  besides  some  of  other  people's :  but  now  every  single  half- 
sheet  pays  a  half-penny  to  the  Queen.  The  Observator  is  fallen  ; 
the  Medleys  are  jumbled  together  with  the  Flying  Post ;  the 
Examiner  is  deadly  sick  ;  the  Spectator  keeps  up,  and  doubles 
its  price  ;  I  know  not  how  long  it  will  hold.  Have  you  seen  the 
red  stamp  the  papers  are  marked  with  ?  Methinks  it  is  worth  a 
half-penny,  the  stamping  it." 

(2)  Journal  to  Stella:  Letter  No.  39  (January  17,  171 2); 
Letter  No.  42,  (February  26,  1712);  Letter  No.  50  (July 
19,  1712). 

[63   ] 


T'he  Advertifements  of 

of  the  Tory  government  in  these  particular 
provisions  of  the  revenue  act  was  not  so  much 
to  raise  money  to  pay  for  the  costly  war  in 
Flanders  as  to  curb  the  power  of  the  press. 
*'  The  *  Spectator  '  keeps  up,  and  doubles  its 
price,"  Swift  wrote ;  but  added  ominously, 
*' I  know  not  how  long  it  will  hold."(i) 
In  spite  of  Addison's  debonair  announce- 
ment of  a  purpose  to  continue,  in  spite  of 
subsequent  boasts  of  large  circulation  and 
popularity  —  often  signs  of  decay  in  a  pe- 
riodical —  the  advertisements  show  that 
these  "taxes  on  knowledge"  accomplished 
their  purpose  by  killing,  not  only  hordes 
of  Grub  Street  publications,  but  also  the 
"Spectator."  (2) 

(i)  See  footnote  i,  page  63. 

(  2  )  That  the  Tory  government  had  looked  v^nth  disfavor  on 
the  Spectator  is  suggested  by  Swift's  statement,  in  Letter  49  of 
the  Journal  to  Stella  (July  i,  1712):  '*  Steele  has  been  mighty 
impertinent  of  late  in  his  Spectators.''^  Austin  Dobson  says, 
*«  What  these  impertinences  w^ere  is  now  obscure."  There  is  no 
question,  however,  that  one  of  them  was  No.  384,  for  May 
21,  1 71 2,  which  Steele  prefaced,  not  with  the  usual  Latin  or 
Greek  verses,  but  with  a  quotation  from  the  Post-Boy  of  the 
day  before.  After  referring  unfavorably  to  the  quotation  from  the 
Post- Boy y  and  adding,  *'  I  think  every  Man  in  England  concerned 
to  support  the  Succession ' '  of  the  House  of  Hanover,  Steele 

[64] 


"The  Spectator 


Macaulay  remarked,  in  his  plausible,  off- 
hand fashion :  "  It  was  probably  felt  that  the 
shortfaced  gentleman  and  his  club  had  been 
long  enough  before  the  town/'  (i)     Later 

quotes,  in  full  and  with  approval,  the  preface  to  a  then  recently 
published  collection  of  sermons  by  Dr.  William  Fleetwood,  Lord 
Bishop  of  Asaph.  In  this  preface.  Dr.  Fleetwood  had  indirectly 
commended  the  conduct  of  the  alhes  and  of  Marlborough,  which 
the  Tory  government  was  doing  everything  possible  to  bring  into 
disrepute,  and  otherwise  expressed  such  strong  Whiggish  senti- 
ments that  the  House  of  Commons  had  condemned  the  book. 
Steele,  however,  gave  the  preface  very  wide  circulation  by  this 
editorial  ruse,  and  by  not  printing  until  midnight  so  that  the  gov- 
ernment might  have  no  opportunity  to  suppress  the  edition.  (See 
Dr.  Johnson's  life  of  Addison,  and  footnote  in  London  edition 
of  1820,  vol.  X,  p.  84,  of  Johnson's  Works,  printed  for  G. 
Walker  et  al. ,  edited  by  Arthur  Murphy,  Esq. )  Austin  Dobson 
(in  the  same  place  where  his  other  remark  occurs,  /.  e,,  Richard 
Steele,  \n  the  ''English  Worthies  "  series  —  published  by  Long- 
mans, Green  &  Co.,  London,  1888  —  at  p.  144)  says :  **  Why 
the  Spectator  was  brought  to  an  end  in  the  face  of  the  '  Partiality 
of  the  Town '  is  difficult  to  understand,  and  is  nowhere  very 
satisfactorily  explained.'*  To  one  who  examines  the  original 
sheets  and  notes  the  falling  off  in  advertising,  it  is  clear  the  Spec- 
tator was  given  up  because  it  had  ceased  to  be  a  profitable  busi- 
ness venture. 

(i)  This  statement  of  Macaulay  in  the  Essay  on  Addison, 
implying  that  people  were  tiring  of  the  '*  shortfaced  gentleman," 
seems  to  have  some  basis  in  a  remark,  made  over  a  year  before 
the  discontinuance  of  the  Spectator,  in  Letter  33  (November  2, 
171 1 )  of  the  Journal  to  Stella  :  "  The  Spectators  are  Hkewise 
printing  in  a  larger  and  a  smaller  volume,  so  I  believe  they  are 

[65  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

he  implies  that  Addison  was  anxious  to  be 
free  of  his  share  of  responsibility  for  keep- 
ing Mr.  Spectator  in  good  society,  in  order 
to  have  the  opportunity  of  introducing 
"Cato''  at  the  theatre.  But,  unlike  gentle- 
men of  the  highest  quality,  who,  like  Swift, 
thought  it  beneath  their  dignity  to  accept 
money  from  the  booksellers,  Addison  and 
Steele  were  then  living  largely  by  the  sale 
and  by  the  incidental  returns  from  their 
writings.  Furthermore,  even  such  an  excel- 
lent critic  as  Pope — who  later  wrote  the 
prologue — advised  Addison  to  print,  but 
not  to  run  the  risk  of  probable  failure  by 
attempting  to  put  "Cato"  on  the  stage. 
Both  Whigs  and  Tories,  however,  professing 
to  find  in  the  pompous  tragedy  much  that 
supported  their  own  policies,  crowded  the 
performances.  Although  Addison  asked 
for  nothing  from  the  management  of  the 
theatre,  by  this  play  he  made  secure  his  po- 

going  to  leave  them  off,  and  indeed  people  grow  weary  of  them, 
though  they  are  often  prettily  written."  But  the  advertising, 
which  may  be  relied  upon  as  an  accurate  index  to  the  prosperity 
and  popularity  of  the  publication,  continued  to  increase  in 
volume  and  variety  until  the  imposition  of  the  taxes. 

[66] 


"The  Spectator 


litical  fortune  with  the  Whigs.  It  is  scarcely 
too  much  to  assert  that,  although  "Cato" 
ran  a  month  at  Drury  Lane,  its  success  was 
due  rather  to  political  conditions  of  the 
moment  than  to  real  dramatic  merits.  Pos- 
terity, whatever  be  its  verdict  in  regard  to 
"Cato"  as  literature,  has  certainly  sustained 
Pope  in  his  opinion  that  it  is  not  an  "acting 
play."  It  is  not  probable,  then,  that  the  cool 
and  calculating  Addison  would  have  given 
up  an  interest  in  a  certainty  for  what  was 
at  best  an  uncertainty,  or  for  a  chance  in  the 
lottery  of  politics.  Had  the  "Spectator" 
continued,  after  the  stamp  and  advertise- 
ment taxes  went  into  effect,  to  be  as  suc- 
cessful a  business  venture  as  it  had  been 
before,  it  is  likely  Addison  would  have  con- 
tinued to  help  Steele  in  keeping  "the  short- 
faced  gentleman  and  his  club  "  much  longer 
"  before  the  town." 

Even  those  who  have  seen  that  the  dis- 
continuance of  the  "  Spectator,"  December 
6,  1 7 1 2,  was  "  due  to  the  act  of  Parliament," 
have  not  made  it  clear  just  how  this  came 
about.  They  have  focussed  their  attention 
1^7  1 


"The  Advertifements  of 

on  the  stamp  tax;  and,  apparently,  have 
scarcely  noticed  what  struck  the  hardest 
blow. 

Then  as  now,  advertisements  and  not  sub- 
scriptions or  sales  of  single  copies,  furnished 
the  greater  part  of  the  revenue  of  a  periodi- 
cal. As  early  as  1668,  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir) 
Roger  L' Estrange  had  commenced  the 
publication  of  the  "  Mercury,  or  Advertise- 
ments Concerning  Trade.''  For  a  time,  a 
thousand  copies  of  each  edition  of  "  The 
City  Mercury,"  founded  in  1 672,  were  circu- 
lated gratuitously  for  the  sake  of  the  greater 
amount  of  money  the  publisher,  Thomas 
Howkins,  was  thereby  enabled  to  get  from 
the  paid  notices,  (i)  From  March  i,  171 1, 
to  August  I,  171 2,  the  number  of  advertise- 
ments in  the  "  Spectator  "  had  grown  steadily 
from  month  to  month,  with  only  the  normal 
falling  off  during  the  summer,  when  people 
of  means  left  London  for  the  country  or  for 
the  Continent.  The  new  taxes  cut  in  two 
directions.  The  requirement  that  each  copy 

(i)  Henry  Sampson,  History  of  Advertisings  p.  78  (London, 

1874). 

[68  ] 


T^he  Spectator 

should  bear  a  half-penny  stamp,  causing  the 
doubling  of  the  price  of  the  "Spectator'' 
to  two  pence,  reduced  somewhat  the  num- 
ber of  subscribers  (i),  so  that  the  periodical 
became  less  valuable  as  an  advertising  me- 
dium. The  tax  of  a  shilling  on  each  notice 
—  whether  it  was  of  two  or  of  twenty  lines, 
whether  of  a  poor  dancing  master  or  of  a  rich 
wine  merchant  —  was  even  more  prompt 
in  making  any  publication  not  subsidized  by 
the  government  unprofitable. 

This  desired  result  was,  indeed,  almost 
immediate.  In  the  edition  for  July  31,  1 7 1 2, 
the  number  of  advertisements  was  ten  as 
against  five  the  same  day  the  year  before. 
On  August  2,  1 71 2,  the  number  dropped  to 

(i)In  No.  555,  the  last  number  of  the  "first  series/* 
Steele  said  :  "  The  Tax  on  each  half  Sheet  has  brought  into 
the  Stamp- Office  one  Week  with  another  above  20/.  arising 
from  this  single  paper,  notwithstanding  it  at  first  reduced  it  to 
less  than  half  the  number  that  was  usually  Printed  before  this 
Tax  was  laid."  If  we  are  to  understand  that  by  "one  Week 
with  another"  Steele  meant  '*  on  the  average  each  week,"  it 
is  a  simple  matter  of  arithmetic  that  the  average  circulation, 
after  the  Stamp  Tax  was  imposed,  dwindled  from  three  thou- 
sand to  four  thousand  daily  (if  we  accept  Macaulay's  estimate), 
to  only  something  over  ninety-six  hundred  per  week  or  some- 
thing over  sixteen  hundred  a  day. 

[69] 


T^f  AJz'trt'[U'mt?its  of 

t  vo  If  2r:-"  :  :h-rr  in  171 1.  In  esch  of  the 
ten  cii::    r      ::.:::ri lately  preceding  August 

2,  :  -:  :.  the  ave:  _r  number  of  advertise- 
ments '  ;^  r:rH:  - :  -:  even  tenths,  as  against 
2n  :ive-  _r  :  :  i::  li.e  corresponding  edi- 
i: . :  :  :::  :  "  :  :  The  average  number  in  the 
ten  editions  ir-:::.rn:2te]v  following  the  im- 
position of  the  :„  :  :  :  .ree  and  one  half 
as  against  four  and  one  fifth  for  the  same 
days  the  previous  year.  Well  might  Swift 
and  the  other  friends  of  the  government 
chuckle;  for,  as  week  foUowed  week,  it  be- 
came more  and  more  evident  that  the  end 
of  the  "Spectator"  was  near.  September  9, 
171 2,  there  were  no  advertisements —  a  de- 
ficiency that  had  not  occurred  since  the 
second  number.  Even  in  the  seventeen  Sat- 
urday editions  between  January  5  and  May 

3,  1 71 2,  in  which  Addison's  criticisms  of 
"Paradise  Lost"  had  been  printed,  and  in 
several  of  which,  to  provide  additional  space, 
the  length  of  the  type  page  had  been  in- 
creased, the  size  of  type  reduced,  and  the 
bulk  of  advertising  carried  over  to  the  Mon- 
day editions,  there  had  never  been  less  than 

[70] 


T'he  Spectator 


one  or  two  paid  notices.  During  October 
and  November,  business  doubtless  revived, 
as  usual,  after  the  summer  dulness.  Yet  the 
average  number  of  advertisemejits  printed 
each  day  for  these  months  of  1712  was  only 
five  and  four  fifths  and  six  and  three  tenths 
as  compared  with  nine  and  nine  and  one  half 
in  1 7 1 1 .  In  the  six  editions  of  December, 
1712,  just  before  the  suspension  of  publica- 
tion, the  average  number  of  advertisements 
was  five  and  one  third  as  compared  with  ten 
and  one  sixth  during  December,  1 7 1 1 . 

Nor  do  these  figures  alone  tell  the  whole 
story.  For  a  time,  immediately  after  the 
act  went  into  effect,  the  average  length 
of  advertisements  seems  to  have  increased 
slightly — as  if  those  who  were  taxed,  the 
same  for  a  short  notice  as  for  a  long  one, 
were  disposed,  even  at  an  increased  charge 
for  space,  to  get  the  worth  of  the  shillings 
paid  the  Queen.  Although  the  advertising 
columns  of  this  first  series  did  not  lose 
entirely  their  representative  character,  and 
although  the  notices  of  books,  of  the  thea- 
tres, of  charlatan  doctors  and  of  their  reme- 
[  71  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

dies  fell  off  very  little,  the  number  of  trades- 
men's notices,  and  the  like  of  what  are 
now  known  as  "classified  ads,'*  diminished 
perceptibly. 

Of  Addison's  revival  in  1714,  Macaulay 
said  in  his  extreme  fashion:  *'The  eighth 
volume  of  the  *  Spectator'  contains,  perhaps, 
the  finest  essays  ...  in  the  English  lan- 
guage." Whether  or  not  we  agree,  we  can- 
not overlook  the  evidence  that  this  second 
series  had  not,  as  a  periodical,  the  success 
the  first  had  enjoyed,  even  after  the  impo- 
sition of  the  taxes. 

Although  issued  but  three  times  a  week, 
instead  of  daily,  and  for  six  months  only, 
these  eighty  numbers  show  that  Addison 
frequently  took  refuge,  as  Steele  had  never 
done,  in  deep  margins,  wide  spaces  between 
paragraphs,  and  other  expedients  of  editors  at 
their  wits'  end  to  find  enough  suitable  matter. 

Macaulay,  judging  only  by  the  literary 
qualities  of  their  contributions,  speaks  of 
the  superiority  of  "Addison  without  Steele" 
to  "  Steele  without  Addison."  He  tells  "  how 
entirely"  the  "Tatler"  and  the  first  series 
[  72  ] 


"The  Spectator 


of  the  "Spectator"  "owed  their  Immense 
success"  to  the  genius  of  Addison.  The  fact 
remains,  however,  that  Steele  was  the  editor 
of  both;  Addison  the  most  brilliant  of  the 
contributors,  (i)  To  Steele  fell  the  heavy- 
burden  of  seeing  to  it  that  each  number 
came  out  on  time;  of  providing  for  all  sorts 
of  vexatious  emergencies:  to  Addison  the 
pleasant  task  of  the  favored  contributor, 
whose  writings  were  always  welcomed,  but 
never  relentlessly  demanded  at  a  certain  im- 
mutable hour.  Addison,  during  the  life  of 
the  first  series,  doubtless  wrote  at  his  leisure, 
or  when  he  felt  like  writing ;  Steele  carried 
constantly  a  responsibility  the  irksomeness 
of  which  no  one  who  has  not  edited  a  daily- 
can  appreciate.  We  can  imagine  Steele  com- 
ing late  from  the  "Devil"  tavern  and  find- 

( I )  This  was  entirely  clear  to  contemporaries,  and  probably 
remained  so  until  the  "great  special  pleader"  took  his  brief  for 
Addison  against  Steele.  See  Journal  to  Stella,  Letter  1 8  (March 
i6,  171 1),  Letter  19  (March  24,  171 1 ),  Letter  21  (April  28, 
171 1 ),  Letter  49  (July  i,  1712).  Steele's  well-known  state- 
ment is  almost  pathetic:  <'I  fared  like  a  distressed  Prince  who 
calls  in  a  powerful  Neighbour  to  his  Aid  ;  I  was  undone  by 
my  Auxiliary ;  when  I  had  once  called  him  in,  I  could  not  sub- 
sist without  Dependence  on  him.** 

[73  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

ing  at  Sam  Buckley's,  not  the  promised 
manuscript,  but  a  polite  note  from  some 
contributor  regretting  he  must  have  another 
day  for  revision  of  his  "paper/'  We  can 
fancy  poor  Dick,  while  the  printer  waited, 
dashing  off  something  which,  in  spite  of  its 
spontaneity,  of  its  "frankness  and  geni- 
ality," of  its  warm-hearted  generosity  and 
sympathy  for  human  weakness  and  frailty, 
Macaulay  criticises  unmercifully  for  not 
being,  in  all  respects,  up  to  the  standard  of 
Addison's  cold,  carefully  polished  essays. 
Yet,  in  the  face  of  all  difficulties  and  dis- 
couragements, Steele  issued  the  "Tatler" 
three  times  a  week  for  twenty  and  one  half 
months,  and  then  the  "Spectator"  every 
day,  except  Sundays,  for  twenty-one  months 
more.  He  made  possible  the  publication  of 
Addison's  essays.  He  secured  and  retained 
as  contributors  some  of  the  most  brilliant 
writers  of  the  time,  —  not  the  least  difficult 
part  of  an  editor's  duty,  —  and  he  never 
resorted  to  mere  printer's  expedients  to  "fill 
up  space."  In  this  light,  the  half  contempt- 
ible "poor  Dick"  of  Macaulay  and  Thack- 
[74] 


The  Spectator 

eray  is  seen  to  have  been  in  fact  a  man  who 
commanded  considerable  respect,  and  who, 
for  all  his  roistering,  was  of  wide  resource 
and  strong  will.  Certainly  Steele  may  be 
said  to  have  been  one  of  the  greatest  of 
English  editors  of  periodicals;  the  same  can 
scarcely  be  said  of  Addison. 

As  a  business  project,  furthermore,  Addi- 
son's revival  does  not  seem  to  have  ap- 
proached the  success  of  the  original  series. 
The  greater  scarcity  of  these  last  eighty 
numbers  would  seem  to  indicate  a  smaller 
circulation:  for,  if  we  accept  Macaulay's 
judgment  that  the  essays  in  Volume  viii 
are  superior  as  literary  productions,  it  would 
seem  that  such  copies  as  were  circulated 
would  have  been  more  carefully  preserved. 
The  smaller  number  and  less  varied  charac- 
ter of  the  advertisements  would  seem,  also, 
to  indicate  that,  as  an  advertising  medium, 
the  second  series  was  considered  less  val- 
uable than  the  first,  even  after  the  taxes 
were  imposed.  The  average  number  of  paid 
notices  was  only  two  and  four  fifths  for  each 
edition,  and  of  these  a  large  proportion 
[75  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

were  of  quacks,  of  nostrums,  of  cosmetics, 
of  dull  books.  With  some  noteworthy  ex- 
ceptions, the  advertisements  in  the  second 
series  do  not  have  the  representative  di- 
versity characteristic  of  those  in  the  first 
series  or  in  any  modern  periodical  that  is 
"a  business  success."  Whether  Buckley  and 
Tonson,  or  Steele  and  Addison,  were  the 
business  managers,  it  is  clear  that  Steele's 
first  series  of  the  "Spectator,"  even  after 
the  imposition  of  the  taxes,  was  from  a  pub- 
lisher's standpoint  more  successful  than 
Addison's  revival. 


T'he  Spectator 


III 

THE  VARIOUS    FORMS   OF   ADVER- 
TISEMENTS 


A 


LTHOUGH  far  from  the  first  English 
publication  containing  advertise- 
ments, (i)  and  not  even  the  first 


(i)  As  has  been  pointed  out  by  William  Stead,  Jr.,  in  his 
Art  of  Advertisingy  William  Caxton  printed  a  *'pubKsher's 
notice  "  in  one  of  his  books  long  before  periodicals  were  evolved. 
On  May  23,  1622,  Nicholas  Bourne  and  Thomas  Archer,  Lon- 
don booksellers,  published  The  Weekeky  Newes  from  Italy, 
Germanie,  ^c.y  the  first  periodical  nev^spaper  printed  in  Eng- 
land. **  No  advertisements  appeared  in  its  pages,  nor  in  those 
of  any  of  its  numerous  imitators.  Publishers'  announcements 
there  were,  but  these  cannot  be  strictly  considered  as  Press  adver- 
tisements ' '  in  the  now  accepted  sense.  For  instance,  in  the  third 
issue,  dated  August  23,  1622,  of  a  paper  entitled  The  Certain 
Newes  of  the  Present  Week,  the  announcement  was  made  that 
former  issues  were  still  on  sale.  The  earliest  advertisement,  in 
an  English  periodical,  of  something  other  than  the  periodical  itself 
seems  to  have  been  published,  April,  1647,  in  No.  13  oi  Per- 
fect Occurrences  of  Every  Date  journall  in  Parliament ,  and 
other  Moderate  Intelligence.  It  ran  as  follows  :  '*  A  Book  ap- 
plauded by  the  Clergy  of  England,  called  The  Divine  Right  of 
Church  Government,  Collected  by  sundry  eminent  Ministers  in 
the  Citie  of  London  ;  Corrected  and  augmented  in  many  places. 


"The  Advertifements  of 

issued  daily,  (i)  and  although  not  a  news- 
paper in  the  strict  sense,  but  more  of  a 
critical  and  satirical  review  or  magazine,  the 
"Spectator''  affords  significant  evidence  of 
the  development  of  advertising  and  the  atti- 
tude of  publishers  toward  advertisers. 

Even  so  early,  the  notices  were  beginning 
to  crystallize  into  the  various  forms  with 
which  we  are  now  familiar  in  daily  and,  to 
a  lesser  extent,  in  weekly  and  monthly  peri- 
odicals. There  were  the  thoroughly  repu- 
table—  "classified,"  as  we  now  call  them, 
and  "miscellaneous  ads,'*  as  well  as  notices 
of  dry  goods  and  notions,  of  foods  and  wines 
and  snuffs,  of  publications  and  courses  of 
instruction.  There  were  also  advertisements 
of  what  was  questionable  or  quite  disrepu- 

with  a  briefe  Reply  to  certain  ^eries  against  the  Ministery  of 
England ;  Is  printed  and  published  for  Joseph  Huns  cot  and 
George  Caherty  and  are  to  be  sold  at  the  Stationers'  Hall,  and 
at  the  Golden  Fleece  in  the  Old  Change."  See  article  on 
**  Advertisement,"  by  H.  R.  Haxton,  in  The  New  Volumes 
of  the  Encyclopcedia  Britannica.    (London,  1902.) 

( I )  The  first  English  periodical  issued  daily  was  a  London 
newspaper  called  The  Postboy,  which  first  appeared  in  1695  on 
four  consecutive  days,  but  thereafter  only  three  times  a  week. 
Sam  Buckley's  Courant  —  established  March  11,  1703 — was 
the  first  successful  daily  in  the  English-speaking  world. 

[78] 


T'he  Spectator 

table  in  character  —  of  associations  pro- 
fessedly for  various  sorts  of  insurance,  of 
schemes  for  doubling  one's  money  in  a  few 
months,  of  quacks  and  of  various  kinds  of 
proprietary  preparations,  as  well  as  a  num- 
ber of  examples  of  the  recently  notorious 
"personals."  It  may  be  worth  while  to 
glance  at  each  of  these  classes. 

Except  in  the  rare  instances  where  a  few 
words,  or  an  entire  notice,  are  set  in  Italics  ( i ), 
all  advertisements  were  uniform  in  style. 
The  first  line  —  and,  in  the  case  of  some 
book  and  theatrical  notices,  a  prelimin- 
ary line  or  two  also  —  was  printed  in  the 
same  size  as  the  main  essays ;  the  remainder 
of  the  notice  in  slightly  smaller  type.  With 
two  exceptions,  (2)  no  illustrations  or  de- 
vices of  any  kind  were  printed  in  the  "  Spec- 
tator."  Except  for  the   notices    of   Drury 

(  I )  Each  of  the  burlesque  advertisements  also  was  set  in 
Italics  and  was  preceded  by  a  separate  heading  "Advertise- 
ment" ;  e.  g.f  Nos.  14,  22,  87,  187,  272,  485. 

(2)  The  same  cut  of  a  coat  of  arms  was  printed  in  an  ad- 
vertisement of  '*  Holman's  Ink  "  in  No.  330,  which  is  repeated 
from  time  to  time,  and  in  a  notice  in  No.  377  of  a  "May- 
Feast,"  which  the  same  Holman  was  about  to  give  for  "pro- 
moters and  sellers'*  of  his  ink. 

[79] 


The  Advertifements  of 

Lane  and  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay- 
market,  which  nearly  always  were  placed 
immediately  after  the  word  "advertise- 
ments'' heading  the  column,  apparently 
no  attempt  was  made  at  arrangement  or 
classification. 

For  convenience'  sake,  however,  I  have 
referred  to  such  small  notices  as  "Wanted," 
"To  Let,"  "Lost,"  and  "Found"  by  their 
present  technical  name,  "classified  ads." 
Just  as  these  are  now  regarded  by  experts 
on  advertising  as  almost  infallible  indexes 
to  the  circulation  and  general  business  suc- 
cess of  a  modern  daily,  so  we  have  seen  that 
they  appear  to  have  fluctuated  with  the 
business  prosperity  of  the  "Spectator."  Al- 
though longer  and  more  quaint  in  wording, 
practically  all  the  forms  of  these  "  classified 
ads"  found  in  present-day  newspapers  ap- 
peared in  Steele's  daily. 

Here  are  examples  of  "  Help  Wanted  " :  — 

A  fober  Coachman  who  underftands  his  Bufi- 
nefs  and  can  be  well  recommended,  may  hear  of  a  Place 
at  the  Ball  Inn  in  Holborn.  (i) 

(i)  No.  219. 

[80] 


The  Spectator 


If  any  Englifh  Gentleman  who  has  already 
Travelled,  and  is  qualified  by  Learning  and  Languages 
to  be  Governor  to  a  young  Gentleman,  and  willing  to 
go  Abroad  with  him  on  good  Terms,  let  him  give  No- 
tice thereof  to  Mr.  Biggs  at  the  Old  Turn  Stile  Coffee- 
houfe  in  High-Holborn,  in  order  to  treat  thereupon,  (i) 

Here  of  "  Positions  Wanted  " :  — 

If  any  Perfon  has  Occafion  for  a  well-accom- 
phfh'd  young  Gentleman  either  for  a  Clerk,  or  Book- 
keeper for  a  Merchant,  or  any  other  Perfon,  enquire  at 
the  Canifter  in  Tuttle-ftreet,  next  Door  to  Tuttle-ftreet- 
Court  in  Weftminfter.  (2) 

A  Frenchman  who  fpeaks  Englifh  and  Latin, 
and  can  give  a  very  good  Account  of  himfelf,  is  willing 
to  ferve  as  a  Valet  de  Chambre.  Inquire  at  the  Chand- 
ler's Shop  over  againft  the  Apothecary's,  the  lower  End 
of  St.  Alban's-ftreet  near  the  Pall  Mall.  (3) 

Here,  however,  is  a  "Want  Ad'*  such   as 
we  do  not  see  nowadays :  — 

Any  Gentleman  that  has  a  Place  for  Life, 
whereof  he  is  willing  to  difpofe,  about  the  Value  of  1000/. 
or  1 200/.  may  hear  of  a  Chapman  enquiring  at  John's  Cof- 
fee-houfe  in  Milk-ftreet,  or  the  Printer  of  this  Paper.  N.  B. 
The  Perfon  that  would  purchafe  was  bred  to  the  Law.  (4) 

The  following  would  now  go  in  the  col- 
umn headed  "Wanted  —  Real  Estate'' :  — 

(1)  No.  347.  (3)  No.  312. 

(2)  No.  443.  (4)  Vol.  vni.  No.  582. 

[8i  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

If  fuch  Perfon  as  would  Lett  a  Houfe  in  the 
Country,  no  further  than  about  7  Miles  from  London  in  a 
good  Road,  and  good  Air,  4  Rooms  on  a  Floor  with  proper 
Conveniencies;  and  fome  Acres  of  Land  for  Grafingto 
it,  will  leave  a  Difcription  of  it  at  Ned's  CofFee-houfe 
near  the  Bank  for  Mr.  Norris,  if  liked,  he  will  hear  of  a 
Cuftomer.  (i) 

Nowadays  these  four  would  go  in  the 
"To  Let''   column:  — 

About  12  little  miles  from  London  in  the  Road 
to  St.  Albans,  near  a  Market  Town,  the  whole,  or  part 
of  a  Gentleman's  Seat,  pleafantly  fituated  upon  an  Afcent 
and  delightful  Profpe6l,  in  an  excellent  Air,  with  the 
Gardens,  Orchards  and  feveral  hundred  Wall  and  other 
Fruit  Trees,  of  the  choiceft  and  beft  in  England, 
Kitchen  Gardens,  Fifhponds  well  ftored.  Green  Walks 
one  above  another.  Summer  Houfes,  Coach  Houfes;  large 
Stables,  Stage  Coaches  fitting  down  at  the  Door  to  and 
from  London  every  Day,  and  every  thing  as  convenient 
as  can  be  defired,  is  to  be  Lett  at  Lady  Day  next  on 
reafonable  Terms,  with  or  without  50  Acres  of  Land. 
Enquire  of  Mr.  Crouch,  Bookfeller,  at  the  Bell  in  the 
Poultry,  and  you  may  know  further.  It  is  fo  delightful 
and  convenient,  that  whoever  once  lives  in  it  will  hardly 
leave  it.  (2) 

Heyden  in  Eflex,  near  Walden  and  Royfton, 
the  Seat  of  Sir  Peter  Soame,  Bart.  Deceafed,  fituate  on 
a  gentle  Hill,  with  a  very  large  and  pleafant  Profpedt, 

(i)  No.  386.  (2)  No.  319. 

[82] 


l^he  Spectator 


fair  Gardens,  Canals,  Fifh-Ponds,  Dove  Coate,  and  all 
forts  of  Offices  without  Door,  Woods  of  large  Timber, 
and  where  is  all  Game  in  great  plenty,  even  to  the 
Buftard  and  Pheafant,  is  to  be  Lett  furnifhed  or  un- 
furnifhed  for  i6  Years.  Enquire  at  Mr.  Chuts  in  Bartly- 
ftreet,  Piccadilly,  or  at  Mr,  Cooper's  at  the  Blue  Boar  in 
Holborn.  (i) 

Just  as  these  two  give  an  idea  of  the  char- 
acter of  country  seats,  the  following  give 
details  of  houses  of  the  real  "  Queen  Anne '' 
style,  one  in  the  suburbs  and  one  in  a  very 
fashionable  part  of  London.  It  is  note- 
worthy, moreover,  that  part  of  the  head- 
ing with  which  we  are  now  familiar  was 
supplied :  — 

To  be  Let,  a  very  handfom  new  built  Brick 
Houfe  in  Hoxton  near  London,  3  Rooms  on  a  Floor, 
befides  Kitchin,  Pantry,  Brewhoufe,  with  2  Coppers  and 
a  Ceftern,  all  the  Rooms  well  Wainfcotted,  Marble 
Hearths,  and  Chimney-pieces,  all  the  Windows  Safh'd, 
Japan  Locks  and  Keys  to  the  Doors,  the  Houfe  flat  at 
the  Top,  with  Rails  and  Bannifters,  an  handsom  Court 
Yard,  and  all  other  things  fuitable  for  a  Gentlemans 
Family.  Inquire  of  Henry  Ford  Carpenter,  in  Juen- 
ftreet  near  Alderfgate-ftreet,  or  Nathaniel  Meade  Efq ; 
at  his  Chambers  in  Brick  Court,  Middle  Temple.  (2) 

(i)  No.  313.  (2)  No.  499. 

[83] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

TO    BE    LETT 

Newburg  Houfe  in  St.  James's  Park,  next 
Door  but  one  to  my  Lady  Oxford's,  having  two  Balls 
at  the  Gate,  and  Iron  Rails  before  the  Door,  fix  Rooms 
on  a  Floor  befides  Clofets,  with  new  fine  Furniture. 
Enquire  at  the  Houfe  aforefaid.  (i) 

Another  series  of  advertisements  would 
now  be  classified  under  *^  For  Sale.''  Here 
is  a  house  in  the  same  quarter  of  the  town 
where  we  made  our  morning  call:  — 

TO    BE    SOLD, 

A  Houfe  in  Soho-Square,  four  Rooms  of  a 
Floor,  with  Clofets,  Coach-houfe,  Stables,  Laindry.  The 
Gentleman  who  has  the  difpofal  of  it  may  be  heard  of 
at  Mr.  Lillie's  the  Corner  of  Beaufort  Buildings.  (2) 

And  here  is  a  country  estate :  — 

An  Eftate  of  about  three  hundred  Pounds  per 
Annum,  lying  in  the  Weft  Riding  of  the  County  of 
York  to  be  fold.  Enquire  of  Mr.  William  Walker  at 
his  Chambers  in  the  Inner-Temple-Lane.  (3) 

Then  there  was  "A  Parcel  of  Manuscript 
Sermons  of  a  learned  and  Eminent  Divine, 
deceased,  (never  out  of  the  Executors  Hands,) 
to  be  disposed  of" ;  (4)  and  "The  next  Pre- 

(i)  No.  207.  (3)  No.  204. 

(2)  No.  163.  (4)  No.  259. 

[84] 


The  Spectator 

sentation  of  two  Rectories,  the  one  200/. 
per  Ann,  the  other  100/.  per  Ann.  situate 
in  the  better  part  of  Dorsetshire  ...  to  be 
Sold  .  .  .  the  present  Incumbants  .  .  .  up- 
wards of  60.''  (i)  "A  Compleat  Riding  Suit 
for  a  Lady "(2)  is  also  offered  to  be  sold; 
and  horses  of  all  sorts,  *'some  of  which  are 
very  fit  for  Officers'';  (3)  and  vehicles  of 
several  kinds,  such  as:  "A  new  Sedan  Chair, 
never  us'd  but  twice,  Lin'd  with  the  finest 
Scarlet  Cloth,  and  very  Handsomly  set 
off";  (4)  "A  very  good  Leather  Body 
Charriot  fit  for  Travelling,  with  a  new  set 
of  Wheels,  and  a  blue  Cloth  Lining,  and 
good  pair  of  Harness";  (5)  "A  Fashion- 
able new  Coach,  and  a  four  Wheeled 
Chaise";  (6)  and  "a  very  good  Earl's 
Coach,  with  the  Harness  of  six  Horses,  all 
as  good  as  new,  to  be  sold  a  very  great 
Pennyworth:  To  be  seen  at  the  Dolphin  in 
Dean  street  near  Soho-Square."  (7) 

(i)  No.  395. 

(2)  No.  79. 

(3)  Nos.  172,  226,  382,  529. 

(4)  No.  219.  (6)  No.  81. 

(5)  No.  392.  (7)  No.  241. 

[85  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

There  are  numerous  advertisements  of 
auctions.  "At  the  Cabinet  on  Ludgate-hill 
still  remains  to  be  sold  off,  at  very  low  Rates, 
the  following  Goods  of  Mr.  Tho.  Pistor 
lately  deceased,  all  to  be  disposed  of  by  Lady- 
day  next '* ;  ( I )  "  The  Household  Goods  and 
Lining  belonging  to  John  Kellond  Esq, 
Deceased,  [are]  to  be  sold  by  Auction  '' ;  (2) 
"  The  Agents  for  the  Captors  give  Notice, 
That  they  will  put  up  to  Sale  .  .  .  the 
Cargo  of  the  Ship  Staden  of  Stockholm, 
lying  at  Portsmouth,  condemned  as  Prize 
by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Lords  of  Ap- 
peals"; (3)  "On  Friday  next,  ...  at  9  a 
Clock  in  the  Forenoon  .  .  .  the  entire  Cargo 
of  the  Prize  St.  Ann,  taken  by  a  Guernzey 
Privateer ''  will  be  "  For  Sale  by  the 
Candle";  (4)  and  "A  curious  Collection 
of  Italian  Paintings  (by  Giacomo  and 
Leandro  Bassan,  Schiavone,  Tintoret,  Spag- 
nolet,  Nicola,  and  Caspar  Poussin;   Claude 

(i)  No.  18.  For  other  notices  of  auctions  see  pages  i8,  19, 
39,  40,  above. 

(2)  No.  409. 

(3)  No.  544. 

(4)  No.  114. 

l%6^ 


l^he  Spectator 


Lorain,  Salvator  Rosa,  Fran.  Bolognese, 
Mola,  the  Borgognon,  Luca  Jordano,  Bour- 
don, and  the  Maltese ;  as  also  by  Reubens 
and  Vandyck,  the  Velvet  Brueghel,  Holben, 
Brouwer,  Berchem,  Schalken,  Teniers,  &c.) 
lately  brought  from  beyond  Sea:  Will  be 
sold  by  Auction." (i) 

"  Found  "  or  "  Stopped  "  advertisements 
are  few. 

Whereas  a  Cane  was  fome  time  fince  left  at 
Steel's  CofFee-houfe  in  Bread-ftreet  by  a  Perfon  un- 
known. The  Owner  defcribing  it,  and  paying  the 
Charge  of  this  Advertifement  may  have  it  again.  (2) 

Stopt  on  Friday  the  8  th  Inftant,  six  Dia- 
monds fet  in  Silver,  suppofed  to  be  part  of  a  Rofe  for 
the  Neck,  offer'd  to  be  difposed  of  by  a  Foot  Boy  in 
a  blew  Wafte-Coat,  about  feventeen  or  eighteen  years 
of  Age.  Whoever  defcribes  the  Marks,  and  pays  the 
Charges  to  John  Payne  at  the  Black-fpread  Eagle  in 
Ludgate  Street,  may  have  them  again.  (3) 

By  far  the  largest  number  of  any  one 
sort  of  "classified  ads"  are,  however,  those 
concerning   articles  "Lost"   or   "Stolen." 

(i)  No.  64,  for  Monday,  May  14,  171 1,  and  Budgeirs 
"  Postscript"  in  No.  67  referring  to  this  advertisement. 
(2)  No.  338.  (3)  No.  93. 

[  87] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

Watches  and  the  gold  watch  cases  which 
were  then  made  separate  from  the  works, 
were  most  frequently  sought.  Here  is  an 
offer  of  reward  for  a  lost  article,  in  the  usual 
form,  which  ends  with  an  ingenious  adver- 
tisement of  a  tradesman,  which  was  perhaps 
the  sole  purpose  of  the  entire  notice :  — 

Loft  from  a  Lady*s  Side  going  out  of  Trinity 
Chappel  the  25h  of  November,  a  Gold  Cafe  of  a  re- 
peating Watch  chaced  and  peerc'd  on  the  fides,  with  a 
Cypher,  J.  A.  chaf  M  on  the  Bottom.  If  the  Perfon,  who 
found  it,  will  bring  it  to  Daniel  Delander,  Watch-maker 
in  Devereux  Court,  fhall  have  five  Guineas  reward  and 
no  Queftions  ask'd.  N.  B.  There  is  a  new  Invention 
by  the  faid  D.  Delander  of  a  Spring,  which  is  very 
neatly  fixed  to  the  Outfide,  and  will  prevent  the  Cafes 
being  loft  or  ftoln.  This  Spring  is  to  be  fixed  to  all 
manner  of  Watch  Cases,  (i) 

Many  and  all  sorts  of  snuff  boxes  seem 
to  have  been  lost.  The  following  are  typi- 
cal :  — 

Whereas  a  Tortoiffhell  Snuff  Box  fluded  with 
Gold,  with  a  Rimm  round  the  Lid,  and  a  Joynt  of  the 
fame,  was  loft  in  or  about  the  Houfe  of  Lords,  on  Fri- 
day the  7th  Inftant,  Whoever  will  bring  the  fame  to 
Mr.  Wright  Goldfmith  at  the  Golden  Cup  over-againft 

(i)   No.  239. 
[88] 


"The  Spectator 


Tom's  CofFee-houfe,  in  Ruflel  ftreet  Covent  Garden, 
(hall  immediately  receive  2  Guineas  Reward  and  no 
Queftions  Ask'd.  (i) 

Supposed  to  be  drop'd  on  Sunday  the  23  d  In- 
ftant  in  St.  James's  Park,  a  Silver  oval  Snuff-box,  the 
upper  Lid  gilt ;  with  the  Pi<3:ure  of  a  Flora  on  the  In- 
fide,  and  a  Coat  of  Arms  on  the  Bottom  of  It,  viz.,  a 
Lion  rampant  ingrail'd  and  3  Dolphins  double,  with  a 
Lion  paflant  upon  a  Ducal  Cap  for  the  Creft,  and  a 
Motto  underneath,  viz  Tout  gour  Preft.  Whoever  will 
bring  it  to  Mr.  Eliot  at  St.  James's  Coffee-houfe,  or  to 
Mrs.  Fenwike  at  the  Britifh  Coffee-houfe  over-againft 
Suffolk-ftreet,  fhall  have  half  a  Guinea  Reward  and  no 
Queftions  ask'd;  if  offer'd  to  be  pawn'd  or  fold  pray 
ftop  it,  and  give  Notice  to  either  of  the  above-mentioned 
Places,  and  you  fhall  have  the  fame  Reward.  (2) 

Dogs,  (3)  pieces  of  lace,  (4)  pocket  books, 
(5)  jewels  and  precious  stones  (6)  —  all 
seem  to  have  frequently  become  separated 
from  their  owners.  The  following  is  the 
offer  of  the  largest  reward  made  in  the 
"Spectator"  for  the  return  of  a  lost  ar- 
ticle :  — 

(i)  No.  245.  (2)  No.  180. 

(3)  Nos.  41,  180,  and  other  numbers. 

(4)  Nos.  216,  271,  and  other  numbers. 

(5)  No.  251  and  other  numbers. 

(6)  Nos.  140,  414,  and  other  numbers. 

[89] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

Loft  (which  is  fupposed  to  be  dropt  upon  the 
Road  betwixt  London  and  Richmond  about  two  Months 
ago,  in  a  fmall  Deal  Box,  wrapt  up  in  Cotton)  a  pair  of 
fingle  Stone  FofTet  Diamond  Ear-Rings,  and  fingle 
Stone  Drapps  to  them,  the  top  Stone  round  and  fpread, 
about  4  or  5  Grains  apeice.  If  offered  to  be  Sold, 
Pawned  or  Valu'd,  ftop  them  and  the  Party,  and  give 
Notice  to  Mr.  James  Seamer,  Goldfmith  in  Fleetftreet, 
and  you  fhall  have  lo  Guineas  Reward.  If  already 
bought,  your  Mony  again  with  Content,  (i) 

It  is  easier  to  guess  his  condition  at  the 
time,  than  to  understand  how,  under  any 
circumstances  short  of  utter  stupefaction,  a 
gentleman  could  lose  what  is  thus  advertised 
for:  — 

Loft  or  ftolen  in  or  near  Covent-Garden  a 
new  plain  Silver  Sword,  with  a  dropt  Hilt  polifhM,  the 
Workman's  Mark  W.  L.  on  the  Pummel,  with  a  Con- 
ingfmark  Blade  and  Scabbard,  with  a  Silver  guilt  Handle 
fmall  Wier,  and  Single  Wier  Buttons.  Whoever  gives 
Notice  of  it,  fo  as  it  may  be  had  again,  to  Mr.  Tipping 
Sword  Cutler  in  Exchange-Alley  near  Birchin-Lane, 
fhall  have  a  Guinea  Reward  and  no  Queftions  ask'd  ;  and 
if  already  bought,  their  Money  again  with  Content.  (2) 

These  numerous  "losses"  suggest  pick- 
pockets. The  number  of  dishonest  servants, 

(i)  No.  140.  (2)  No.  292. 

[90] 


The  Spectator 


highwaymen,  and  burglars  is  indicated  by 
the  rewards  for  the  capture  of  such  crimi- 
nals. The  following  is  the  most  liberal  offer 
of  the  kind:  — 

Charles  Guill,  a  Guernfey  Man,  fpeaks  French 
well,  aged  about  35  or  40  Years,  a  Tall  Lean  Raw- 
bon'd  Broad-ftioulder'd  Man,  of  a  Pale  Lean  Vifage, 
and  very  thin  JawM,  fomewhat  of  a  frowning  down- 
look'd  Countenance,  inclined  to  ftooping  in  his  Walk; 
fomewhat  hefitating  in  his  Speech,  wearing  a  grey  Cloth 
Suit,  with  filver  frofted  Buttons,  and  a  light  tyed  up 
Wig,  formerly  ufed  the  Sea,  fince  lived  with  Mr.  Snell 
the  Writing-Mafter,  and  fince  that,  for  thefe  2  Years, 
has  belonged  to  the  Bank  of  England,  from  whofe  Ser- 
vice he  withdrew  himfelf  on  Saturday  laft  the  3d  In- 
flant,  with  feveral  Exchequer-Bills  and  Bank-Notes. 
Whoever  ftiall  apprehend  him,  fo  as  he  may  be  fecured, 
(hall  thereupon  receive  from  Mr.  Thomas  Madockes, 
Cafhier  of  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Sum  of  One  hun- 
dred Pounds,  (i) 

Other  advertisements  are  for  the  appre- 
hension of  deserting  soldiers  and  apprentices. 
Here  is  an  offer  of  a  reward  for  the  detec- 
tion of  a  different  sort  of  offender,  who,  it 
is  certainly  to  be  hoped,  was  properly  pun- 
ished, even  though  all  the  others  escaped :  — 

(i)  No.  370. 
[91] 


The  Advertifements  of 

Whereas  an  Advertifement  was  on  the  29th  of 
September  put  up  on  Mr.  Goodlad's  back  Garden-door 
at  Mile-End  (concerning  a  Lady  who  lodges  in  the  faid 
Houfe :)  This  is  to  give  Notice,  that  whoever  fhall  dif- 
cover  to  the  faid  Mr.  Goodlad  (at  his  Houfe  aforefaid, 
or  at  the  Hare  in  Fen-Church  Street)  the  Perfon  who 
put  up  the  faid  Advertifement,  fhall  receive  two  Guineas 
Reward,  (i) 

As  in  modern  dailies  advertisements  of 
dry  goods  stores  occupy  a  large  proportion 
of  space,  so  in  the  "Spectator''  did  the  no- 
tices of  mercers  and  of  dealers  in  laces.  In- 
deed, one  of  the  features  of  the  advertising 
section  was  "the  whole  Argument  pro  and 
con  in  the  Case  of  the  *  Morning-Gowns,'  " 
which,  as  Addison  remarked  (2)  and  the 
following  show,  was  carried  on  for  "several 
Years,  and  that  with  great  Bitterness  " :  — 

The  Number  of  Silk  Gowns  that  are  weekly 
fold  at  Mrs.  Rogers's  in  Exchange-Ally  (though  not 
much  above  a  Month  fince  fhe  has  undertaken  it)  makes 
it  very  evident  that  her  Gowns  are  very  cheap  as  well  as 
the  niceft  Fancies ;  for  flie  doth  not  heap  a  great  deal 
of  Rubbifh  together,  but  choofes  the  moft  proper  Silks 

(1)  No.  499. 

(2)  See  Addison's  paper  on  Advertisements  in  Tatler,  No. 
224. 

[923 


The  Spectator 


and  fuitable  Linings  :  And  for  the  future  will  keep  fuch 
Choice,  that  all  Perfons  of  Quality  and  others  may  be 
furnifh'd  with  Variety  of  Fancies  and  all  Sizes.  Note, 
There  will  be  a  Parcel  of  new  Venetian  Gowns  made 
up,  to  be  feen  next  Wednefday.  (i) 

Gown  Warehoufe,  at  Baker's  CofFee-houfe  In 
Exchange-Alley.  Gowns  for  Men  and  Women  are  ftill 
continued  to  be  fold  by  the  fame  Perfon  who  firft  took 
the  Warehoufe,  (and  is  not  Removed  as  is  falfly  and 
maKcioufly  publifli'd  in  the  News-Papers)  Where  frefh 
Parcels  of  choice  Gowns  of  all  forts  are  daily  made  up, 
brought  in,  and  expos'd  to  Sale.  No  Warehoufe  in  Lon- 
don have  half  the  quantity,  value,  nor  variety  of  Gowns; 
neither  can  they  pretend  to  Sell  at  fo  low  Rates.  Thefe 
are  to  certify  that  Henry  Brigh  (who  doth  affirm  that  he 
was  the  firft  that  fold  Gowns  in  Baker's  CofFee-houfe) 
was  only  a  few  Weeks  Journeyman  in  the  fald  Ware- 
houfe, and  never  Mafter;  as  Mrs.  Baker  and  her  fer- 
vants  will  juftify.  (2) 

Gowns  of  all  Sorts  newly  made  up,  and  fuitably 
lined,  to  be  Sold  at  the  Hood  and  Scarf  over  againft 
Will's  CofFee-houfe  in  Cornhill ;  there  are  brocaded 
Gowns  of  6  Guineas  to  Thread  Sattins  of  371.  price. 
Ladies  may  be  furnifhed  with  Sattin  and  Perfian  Quilted 
Coats  of  the  beft  Work,  and  hoop'd  Petticoats,  made 
by  the  D.  of  Montague's  Mantua  Maker,  which  if  the 
Ladies  will  try,  they  will  never  buy  the  Prepofterous 
things  that  are  made  about  Town.  The  loweft  Price  is 
fet  on  each.  (3) 

(i)  No.  10.  (2)  No.  132.  (3)  No.  137. 

[93] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

Although  smoking  was  not  uncommon, 
possibly  "The  Counterblast  to  Tobacco  "  by- 
James  I  had  had  the  effect  of  making  it 
unfashionable.  At  any  rate,  there  were  no 
advertisements  of  smoking  tobacco  in  the 
"  Spectator ''  ;  although  tobacco  in  the 
form  of  "Plain  Spanish  Snuff,  Right  and 
Fine,  in  Tin  Pots,  at  5J-.  per  Pound;  Fine 
Brazil  Snuff  at  3^.  an  Ounce,  40J-.  per  Pound; 
also  fresh  Lisbon  Snuff  and  other  Snuffs  "  ( i ) 
was  extensively  advertised.  There  are  also 
notices  of  "  Chocolate  made  of  the  best  Cracco 
and  Martineco  Nuts,  an  equal  Quantity  of 
each,  2J'.  td,  per  Pound'';  (2)  of  "a  Parcel 
of  extraordinary  fine  BoheeTea  to  be  sold  at 
26 J-.  per  pound'*;  (3)  of  "  Green  Tea  loj*.  a 
Pound,  equal  in  goodness  with  most  Green 
Tea  sold  at  13  or  14^.  a  Pound";  (4)  and  of 
all  kinds  of  wines  and  spirits  at  extremely 
low  prices. 

Notices  of  publishers,  the  first  form  to  de- 
velop, occupied  a  greater  amount  of  space 

(i)  No.  10,  and  other  notices. 

(2)  No.  170,  and  other  notices. 

(3)  No.  28.  (4)  No.  257. 

[94] 


T^he  Spectator 


in  the  "Spectator"  than  any  other  class  of 
advertisements.  This  was  essentially  the  age 
of  controversy  by  pamphlets,  scores  of 
which  were  announced,  (i)  Dull  books, 
and  treatises  on  every  subject  known  to  the 
time — booksellers'  catalogues  and  almanacs; 
works  on  the  law  and  on  religion  and  on 
morals;  translations,  the  latest  play,  —  suc- 
cessful for  the  moment  at  Drury  Lane  but 
now  forgotten,  —  and  contributions  to  litera- 
ture that  we  cannot  forget, —  all  were  ad- 
vertised. In  addition  to  those  already  quoted 
above,  two  only  need  be  reproduced  here  :  — 

The  Works  of  Mr.  Francis  Beaumont  and  Mr. 
John  Fletcher,  in  7  Volls.  8vo.  adorn'd  with  Cutts.  Plu- 
tarch's Lives  in  5  Volls.  tranflated  by  feveral  hands.  Sen- 
eca's Moralstranflated  by  Sir  RogerTEftrange.  The  Satyrs 
of  Decimus  Junius  Juvenalis,  &c.  tranflated  into  Englifh 
Verfe  by  Mr.  Dryden  and  feveral  other  eminent  Hands. 
The  Works  of  Mr.  Congreve  in  3  Volls.  confifting  of 
his  Plays  and  Poems.  Poems  on  feveral  Occafions  writ- 
ten by  Mr.  Prior.  Paradife  loft,  a  Poem,  in  12  Books, 
by  Mr.  John  Milton.  The  Chriftian  Hero,  written  by  Mr. 
Steele.  N.  B.  The  three  laft  are  printed  with  a  neat 
Elziver  Letter   in   fmall  Pocket  Volumes  :   All   printed 

(i)  A  few  of  the  notices  of  pamphlets  on  political  subjects 
have  been  referred  to  above,  pages  22-27. 

[95  ] 


The  Advertifements  of 

for   Jacob    Tonfon    at    Shakefpear's  head  over-againft 
Catherine-street  in  the  Strand,  (i) 

Advertifement  to  the  Subfcribers  for  Mr. 
Pope's  Homer. 

Whereas  it  was  propofed  that  the  Firft  Volume 
of  this  Tranflation  ihould  be  publifhed  by  the  begin- 
ning of  May  next,  This  is  to  give  Notice,  that  the 
Undertaker  intends  it  fhall  be  delivered  Two  Months 
fooner  than  the  Time  promifed.  Whoever  therefore  is 
willing  to  fubfcribe  for  the  faid  Book,  is  defired  to  caufe 
the  firft  Subfcription  (which  is  two  Guineas)  to  be  paid 
to  Mr.  B.  Lintott  at  the  Crofs  Keys  between  the 
Temple  Gates  in  Fleet-ftreet,  and  to  recieve  from  him 
Receipts  for  the  fame  before  the  End  of  January  next ; 
at  which  Time  the  Subfcription  will  be  fhut  up.  All 
Perfons  may  be  affured  that  no  Books  will  be  printed 
in  the  fame  large  Volume,  with  the  fame  Ornaments  of 
Graving,  or  upon  Royal  Paper,  except  juft  the  Number 
that  fhall  be  then  subfcribed  for.  (2) 

(1)  No.  173. 

(2)  Vol.  vni.  No.  631,  for  Friday,  Dec.  10,  17 14.  It 
is  noteworthy  that  in  No.  403  for  June  12,  17 12,  is  an  an- 
nouncement of  *'The  third  Vol.  of  the  Iliad  of  Homer, 
w^ith  Notes  by  Madam  Dacier,  done  from  the  French  by  Mr. 
Brome  of  St.  John's  Colledge  in  Cambridge,  and  by  him  com- 
pared with  the  Greek.**  This  is  doubtless  the  Broome  who 
*«  swept  the  way  *'  for  Pope.  It  is  known  that  Broome,  before 
his  work  with  Pope,  was  associated  with  an  earlier  translation  of 
the  Iliad  into  prose.   Doubtless  this  is  it. 

[96] 


"The  Spectator 

Besides  the  lectures  and  demonstrations 
of  experiments  in  physics  and  chemistry 
already  referred  to,  other  forms  of  instruc- 
tion are  announced  :  "  Every  Wednesday,  at 
half  an  Hour  after  Six  in  the  Evening,  at 
the  Blue  Coat  Coffee-house  .  .  .  the  French 
Tongue  is  taught  Gratis  publickly,  by  a 
French  Gentleman;  who  teaches  the  said 
Language,  Greek,  Latin,  and  English  to 
Gentlemen,  Ladies  and  others,  at  their 
Habitations  or  elsewhere."  (i)  Notice  was 
also  given  "  to  all  Promoters  of  the  Holy 
Worship,  and  to  all  Lovers  of  the  Italian 
Tongue,  that . . .  in  Oxendon  Chapel .  . .  near 
the  Hay  Market  [in  which  was  the  Queen's 
Theatre  where  the  Italian  opera  was  pro- 
duced] there  [would]  be  Divine  Service  in 
the  Italian  Tongue  . ,  .  every  Sunday  . . .  with 
an  Italian  Sermon  preached  by  Mr.  Casotti, 
Italian  Minister"  who  was  also  prepared  to 
give  instruction  "in  the  same  Language." (2) 
"  Mr.  Fert  Dancing-Master  .  .  .  [who]  like- 
wise .  .  .  plays  very  well  on  the  violin  "  was 
prepared  to  teach  either  at  "  his  School  in 

(i)  No.  240.  (2)  No.  235. 

[97] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

Compton  street  Soho,  over  against  St.  Ann's 
Church  Back-door"  or  "at  the  George  in 
Finch-lane  Threadneedle-street,  near  the 
Royal-Exchange"  or  "abroad";  (i)  "Mr. 
John  Warter,  who  formerly  taught  the 
Court  Hand  in  the  Queen's  Bench  Office  in 
the  Inner  Temple,  now  continues  to  Teach 
the  same  in  a  very  exact  manner,  so  as  the 
Scholar  in  three  Weeks  time  shall  be  fit  for 
Business."  (2)  Notice  was  also  given  that 
"  At  Woodford  in  Essex,  upon  Epping- 
Forest,  is  kept  a  Boarding-School  for  young 
Gentlewomen";  (3)  and  that  "Near  the 
Windmill  in  Hampstead  is  a  good  Boarding- 
School;  where  young  Gentlewomen  may 
be  boarded,  and  taught  English,  French, 
Dancing,  Musick,  and  all  sorts  of  Needle- 
work." (4) 

Advertisements  of  amusements  of  various 
sorts — a  very  large  class  —  have  already 
been  spoken  of.  Although  in  Addison's 
second  series  there  were  no  theatrical  no- 
tices, in  the  first  series,  beginning  with  No. 

(1)  No.  52.  (3)  No.  473. 

(2)  No.  377.  (4)  No.  28. 

[98] 


T^he  Spectator 


40,  for  April  16,  171 1,  every  performance  at 
Drury  Lane,  and  apparently  every  one  at  the 
Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Haymarket  also,  was 
announced  in  the  "Spectator."  (i)  It  was 
doubtless  Steele's  influence  at  the  "Theatre 
Royal,"  of  which  he  was  later  patentee,  that 
secured  these.  Indeed,  in  No.  490  for  Mon- 
day, September  22,  171 2,  is  the  following: 
"N.  B.  Advertisements  for  Plays  will  (for 
the  future)  be  inserted  only  in  the  Spectator, 
and  not  in  the  Daily-Courant  as  usual."  Stu- 
dents of  the  stage  may  find  in  these  adver- 
tisements, besides  much  other  interesting 
incidental  information,  full  casts  of  a  large 
proportion  of  the  plays  presented  at  Lon- 
don's leading  theatre  during  the  twenty 
months  from  the  middle  of  April,  1 7 1 1 ,  to 
the  ist  of  December,  171 2. 

Miscellaneous  advertisements  were  nu- 
merous. "Signior  Nicola  Dorigny  (lately 
arrived  from  Rome)"  made  "Proposals  for 

( I )  Some  of  the  performances  at  Drury  Lane  announced  in 
these  advertisements  are  not  included  even  in  John  Genest's 
ten-volume  compilation.  Some  Account  of  the  English  Stage  from 
the  Restoration  in  1660  to  1830.      (Bath,  1832.) 

[99] 


The  Advertifements  of 

Graving  and  Printing  the  Gallery  of  Raphael 
at  Hampton-court'*;  (i)  a  maker  of  "all 
Sorts  of  Repeating  Jewel  Watches  (and 
others)'*  announced  the  removal  of  his 
shop;  (2)  and 

Edward  Evans  at  the  4  Coffins  over-againft 
Summerfet-Houfe  in  the  Strand,  having  difpofed  of  all 
his  old  Stock  of  Goods  to  the  New  Company  at  the 
lower-end  of  the  Hay-Market,  hath  bought  in  a  new 
Stock;  where  any  Perfon  of  Quality  or  others  may  be 
furnifhed  with  all  Things  necefsary  for  Funerals  and 
fet  Mourning,  as  ufual,  two  shillings  in  the  pound 
cheaper  then  by  any  other.  (3) 

Inventors  and  patentees  advertised  "a  new 
sort  of  Lights,  consisting  of  one  entire 
Globular  Glass,  which  will  cast  a  true,  clear, 
strong  and  uniform  Light,  without  glaring  or 
any  dark  Shadow  .  .  .  Useful  in  Halls,  Stair- 
Cases  and  any  .  .  .  Publick  Places  "  ;  (4)  and 
"  certain  Steel  Springs .  . .  for  the  Ease  of  Per- 
sons Riding  in  Chaises,  &c/'  (5) ;  as  well  as 

Four  new  Sorts  of  curious  Perfpective-Glafles, 
convenient  to  take  a  View  of  others,  though  for  a  great 

(i)  No.  205.  (3)  No.  186. 

(2)  Vol.  VIII,  No.  603.  (4)  No.  91. 

(5)  No.  99. 
[   100  ] 


The  Spectator 


while  or  very  often,  yet  modeftly,  without  any  imperti- 
nent Staring;  no  other  Perfons  being  able  to  difcover 
who  is  lookM  at,  even  if  they  had  got  thefe  new  Glafles  ; 
for  one  may  thereby  look  towards  his  right  or  left 
Hand,  when  others  suppofe  him  to  look  forwards;  or 
he  may  look  forwards  or  backwards,  when  they  suppofe 
him  to  look  towards  his  right  or  left  Hand.  Thefe  Per- 
fpfective-Glaffes  are  commodious  and  fhort,  like  ordi- 
nary Opera-Glafles,  and  make  things  to  appear  clearer, 
nearer  and  bigger,  though  they  be  twice  or  thrice  as  far 
diftant,  than  the  naked  Eye,  (of  fhort-fighted  People  as 
well  as  of  them  that  have  a  good  Sight)  requires,  to  fee 
very  diftin6tly.  Propofals  at  large  for  their  Sale  by  Sub- 
fcription  may  be  had  at  Mr.  Dillon's,  next  Door  to  the 
White-Hart  in  Long-Acre,  (i) 

"A  Committee  of  the  Commissioners,  for 
Building  50  New  Churches,''  to  which  Sir 
Roger  de  Coverley  referred,  (2)  gave  notice 
in  No.  549  for  Saturday,  November  29, 
171 2,  that  they  were  to  "Meet  every  Mon- 
day, at  4  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon,  at  their 
Chambers  No.  6  in  Searles  Court,  in  Lin- 
coln's Inn;  Where  all  Persons  that  have 
any  thing  to  Offer  relating  to  that  Affair, 
may  apply  to  them."  The  following  show 

(i)  No.  102. 

(2)  See  essay  in  No.  383  for  Tuesday,  May  20,  1712. 

[  loi] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

further  the  variety  of  these  miscellaneous 
notices,  and  afford  little  glimpses  of  every- 
day life :  — 

In  George-ftreet  in  York  Buildings  in  the 
Strand,  the  third  Houfe  on  the  Right  Hand,  Number  3 
being  over  the  Door,  may  be  had  Mony  lent  upon  Plate 
and  Jewels,  at  reafonable  Rates,  (i) 

A  Coach  and  fix  able  Horses  will  be  at  the 
one  Bell  in  the  Strand  to  Morrow  being  Tuefday  the 
lOth  of  this  Inftant  June,  bound  for  Exon,  Plymouth,  or 
Falmouth,  where  all  Persons  shall  be  kindly  ufed.  (2) 

Whereas  it  hath  been  malicioufly  reported, 
that  Mr.  Benj.  Ferrers,  Face  Painter,  who  is  Deaf  and 
Dumb,  hath  left  off  Painting;  this  is  to  inform  the  Pub- 
lick,  that  he  doth  ftill  continue  his  Profeflion  of  Paint- 
ing, and  that  the  faid  Report  is  villanous  and  falfe.  N.  B. 
He  lives  in  Duke  ftreet,  York  Buildings.  (3) 

Whereas  about  44  Years  ago  there  was  one 

Mr, Cook  a  Merchant  in  the  City  of  London,  if 

he  is  now  living,  he  is  defired  (or  if  dead,  his  Executor) 
to  come  to  Mr.  Timothy  Goodwin  Bookfeller  in  Fleet- 
Street,  who  will  inform  him  of  a  certain  Matter  for  his 
Advantage.  (4) 

Steele  and  Addison  evidently  were  favored, 
as  editors  of  country  weeklies  are  still,  with 

(i)  No.  365.  (2)  No.  400. 

(3)  No.  251.  (4)  No.  530. 

[  102  ] 


T^he  Spectator 

other  than  literary  contributions  from  their 
admirers,  for  in  No.  156,  for  Wednesday, 
August  29,  171 1,  was  the  following  "Ad- 
vertisement" :  — 

Mr,  Spectator  gives  his  moft  humble  Service  to  Mr. 
R.  M.  of  Chippenham  in  Wilts,  and  hath  received  the 
Patridges. 

On  the  line  between  the  reputable  and 
disreputable,  were  the  associations  for  in- 
surance —  some  of  them  mere  swindling 
schemes  —  of  which  this  is  a  typical  no- 
tice :  — 

The  Office  of  Aflurance  upon  the  Lives  of 
Perfons  healthful  between  the  Ages  of  Ten  and  five  and 
fifty  Years,  by  Claims  of  5^.  3^.  and  2s.  and  by  Monthly 
and  Quarterly  Dividends,  at  the  Mitre  in  St.  James's 
Market,  having  met  with  all  Suitable  Encouragement, 
from  fuch  Perfons  who  have  heard  thereof,  and  in  its 
Nature  tending  wholly  to  the  benefit  of  the  Publick ;  the 
Proprietors  (who  are  Men  of  Credit  and  Subftance)  give 
Notice,  that  Attendance  is  duly  given  at  the  Mitre  above- 
faid,  to  receive  all  fuch  Entries  which  Ihall  be  approved 
of,  according  to  the  Conftitution  of  the  faid  Society. 
3000/.  Security  is  already  given  by  the  Treafurer,  and 
Propofals  at  the  Office  Gratis,  (i) 

Of  the  same  doubtful  character  were  the 

(i)  No.  97. 
[   103  ] 


T^he  Advertifements  of 

numerous  projects;  (i)  of  which  the  fol- 
lowing concern  one  of  the  most  reputable, 
at  least  in  original  conception,  and  yet  the 
most  notorious :  — 

This  Day  is  publifh'd, 

f^f  A  View  of  the  Coaft,  Countries,  and  Iflands 
within  the  Limits  of  the  South-Sea  Company,  Contain- 
ing an  Account  of  the  Difcoveries,  Settlements,  Pro- 
grefs,  and  prefent  State :  Together  with  the  Bays,  Ports, 
Harbours,  Rivers,  &c.  The  various  Winds  and  Sound- 
ings ;  the  Produ6t,  People,  Manufa6lures,  Trade  and 
Riches  of  the  feveral  Places,  from  the  River  Aranoca  to 
Terra  del  Fuego,  and  from  thence  through  the  South- 
Sea  to  the  fartheft  Bounds  of  the  late  KQi  of  Parlia- 
ment. To  which  is  added  an  Account  of  the  former 
Proje6ls  in  England  for  a  Settlement,  and  the  Accom- 
plifhment  of  the  laft  in  the  eftabliftiing  the  New  Com- 
pany ;  with  some  ufeful  Obfervations  on  the  feveral 
Voyages  that  have  been  hitherto  publifh'd.  The  whole 
collected  from  the  beft  Authors,  as  well  Manufcripts  as 
printed.  A  Lift  of  the  Commiflioner's  Names;  with  a 
general  Map,  and  particular  Draughts  of  the  moft  im- 

( I )  It  was  not  unfitting,  in  this  period  of  gambling  and  of 
the  blowing  of  the  "  South  Sea  Bubble,"  that  "  Her  Majesty's 
Company  of  Comedians  *'  should  announce  for  October  22, 
171 1,  **a  Comedy  calPd  the  Volunteers,  or  the  Stock-job- 
bers. Written  by  the  ingenious  Mr.Shadwell,  late  Poet  Laureat.** 
See  advertisement  in  Spectator ,  No.  202,  for  Monday,  October 
22,  1711. 

[   104  ] 


The  Spectator 


portant  Places.  By  Herman  Moll,  Geographer.  Price 
bound  in  Sheep  3/.  6^.  in  Calf  \s.  Printed  for  John 
Morphew  near  Stationer's  Hall,  (i) 

The  Subfcribers  of  1000/.  or  upwards,  to  the 
South-Sea  Company,  are  defir'd  to  meet  at  the  Swan 
Tavern  in  Cornhill  on  Thurfday  the  13th  Inftant  at  4 
in  the  Afternoon.  (2) 

Here  is  one  of  several  notices  of  a  com- 
pany scarcely  less  notorious,  although  it 
proved  more  profitable  to  its  stockholders :  — 

The  Governour  and  Company  of  Adventurers 
of  England  trading  into  Hudfon's-Bay  give  Notice,  That 
they  having  divided  the  Sum  of  1977/.  I2J.  6^.  pur- 
fuant  to  their  Propofals  for  enlarging  Marriage  Portions 
amongft  fuch  who  were  married  before  the  24th  of  June 
laft ;  and  that  the  fecond  Dividend  on  Marriages  will 
be  made  the  ift  of  January  next  unto  fuch  who  fhall 
be  married  before  the  23d  of  December  next,  purfuant 
to  the  faid  Propofal.  They  alfo  give  further  Notice,  That 
a  Dividend  will  be  made  on  the  6th  of  October  next, 
purfuant  to  their  Propofal,  for  enabling  Apprentices  to 
fet  up  their  Trades,  unto  fuch  whofe  Contrail  or  Inden- 
ture expire  on  or  before  the  26th  of  this  Inftant  Sep- 
tember. Note,  That  if  the  Proof  of  each  Claim  be  not 
made  and  lodged  in  the  Office  10  Days  or  more  before 

(i)  Advertisement  in  Spectator,  No.  130,  for  Monday,  July 
30, 1711. 

(2)  No.  168,  for  Wednesday,  September  12,  171 1. 

[  105  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

the  faid  Dividend,  or  if  the  quarterly  Money  due  on  the 
25th  of  March  and  24th  of  June  laft  be  not  paid  on 
or  before  the  24th  of  this  inftant  September,  the  Per- 
fon  or  Perfons  fo  neglecting  will  be  then  abfolutely  ex- 
cluded, (i) 

Notices  of  the  government  lotteries,  and, 
after  the  accession  of  George  I,  of  the 
"Dutch  Lottery''  also,  were  scattered 
through  the  advertising  section.  Coffee- 
houses announced  (2)  that  lists  of  winning 
numbers  were  **  to  be  seen  constantly  every 
Half  Hour,  or  sooner"  during  the  draw- 
ings, or  that  "all  Persons  concerned  .  ,  . 
may  have  the  Numbers  of  their  Tickets 
Registered"  so  that  "Immediate  Notice" 
might  be  "sent  them  whether  Blank  or 
Prize,  either  in  Town  or  Country,  by  the 
next  Post,  at  bd.  per  Ticket."  There  were 
also  numerous  notices  of  private  lotteries,  or 
raffles,  for  such  things  as  "  a  Parcel  of  rich 
Jewels."  (3) 

From  these  the  step  was  short  to  out  and 
out  swindles,  some  very  like  some  schemes 

(i)  No.  164,  for  Friday,  September  7,  171 1. 

(2)  Nos.  132,  181,  184,  498,  etc. 

(3)  No.  88. 

[   106] 


"The  Spectator 


advertised  nowadays.  There  were  "Books 
for  the  Sale  of  Gloves";  (i)  and  "Books 
for  the  Sale  of  Numbers,  which  have  met 
with  very  good  Success  and  Encourage- 
ment; proposing  Cent,  per  Cent.  Advan- 
tage in  a  Return  of  no  longer  Time  than  4 
Weeks  for  the  first  hundred  Numbers,  and 
none  will  stay  longer  than  6  Weeks  from 
the  Time  of  their  Entrance  before  they  re- 
ceive the  proposed  Advantage'';  (2)  and 
"Books  for  improving  small  Sums  of 
Money."  (3)  Here  is  an  advertisement 
which  suggests  how  the  swindle  was 
worked :  — 

By  the  Original  Company  of  generous  Con- 
tributors for  fettling  a  Fund  for  improving  Money  and 
relieving  the  Poor,  at  the  Golden-Lyon  and  7  Stars 
in  Denmark-Court  over-againft  Beauford-Buildings  in 
the  Strand,  this  Notice  is  given,  That  many  of  the 
Subfcribers  being  in  Arrear  great  fums  of  Money,  to 
the  difabling  the  Manager  for  making  of  Payments  to 
others  as  they  become  due  :  And  the  Manager  having 
referved  to  himfelf  (as  appears  by  the  nth  Article  of 
the  faid  Propofals  dated  Febr.  7,  17 12)  the  liberty  of 
adding,  altering,  or  amending  any  part  of  the  Propofals 

(i)  No.  331.  (2)  No.  322. 

(3)  Nos.   316,  338,  341,  and  elsewhere. 

[  107  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

which  may  be  found  at  any  time  prejudicial  to  the  faid 
Company  of  Contributors  ;  he  cannot  pay  (without  pre- 
judice to  the  faid  Company)  any  Money  due  from  this 
Day  being  the  9th  of  May,  till  thofe  People  that  are  in 
Arrear  pay  their  Arrears  off,  of  which  frefh  Notice  fliall 
be  given ;  and  that  in  Cafe  thofe  Arrears  are  not  paid  in 
20  Days  after  this  Notice,  not  only  thofe  Perfons  will 
lofe  all  the  Money  they  have  already  paid,  as  by  the 
Articles,  but  alfo  other  Subfcribers  will  fall  fhort  of  their 
Profit.  This  has  given  an  Umbrage  to  fome  People  to 
think  amifs  of  the  faid  Company,  who  have  endeavoured 
to  difcourage  the  new  Books  juft  opened  to  great  advan- 
tages, (Propofals  of  which  may  be  had  Gratis  at  the 
Place  aforefaid)  yet  they  go  on  very  succefsfully,  so  that 
there  are  great  Subfcriptions,  and  by  the  People  of  the 
beft  Rank,  as  may  befeen  by  the  faid  Books,  (i) 

As  early  as  1710,  an  act  (2)  had  been 
passed  for  the  suppression  of  these  swindling 
schemes  ;  but,  for  some  reason,  it  had  proved 
ineffectual.  Finally,  Parliament  enacted  (3) 
that  whoever,  after  June  24,  171 2,  should 
"erect,  set  up,  or  keep  any  Office  or  Place, 
for  making  Insurances  on  Marriages,  Births, 

(i)  No.  376,  for  Monday,  May  12,  171 2. 

(2)  9  Annae,  c.  6,  §§  Ivi,  Ivii,  Iviii.  See  The  Statutes  at 
Large  J  vol.  iv,  pp.  413-414  (London,  mdcclxxxvi). 

(3)  10  Annae  c.  26,  §§  cix,  ex.  See  The  Statutes  at  Large^ 
vol.  IV,  pp.  572-573. 

[   108] 


T^he  Spectator 


Christnings,  or  Service,  ...  or  any  other 
Office  or  Place,  under  the  Denominations  of 
Sales  of  Gloves,  of  Fans,  of  Cards,  of  Num- 
bers, of  the  Queen's  Picture,  for  the  Im- 
provement of  Small  Sums  of  Money  .... 
[etc.]  shall  forfeit,  for  every  such  Offence,'' 
the  sum  of  ;^5oo.  The  printing  or  publica- 
tion of  advertisements  of  such  schemes  was 
made  punishable  by  a  fine  of  ^^loo  for  each 
offence.  The  follov^ing,  printed  only  four 
days  after  the  Act  v^ent  into  effect,  hints  at 
a  kind  of  promptness,  energy,  and  efficiency 
in  prosecution  which  might  well  be  fol- 
lowed by  American  attorneys-general  of 
to-day :  — 

Whereas  the  Propofal  called  the  Multiplica- 
tion-Table is  under  an  Information  from  the  Attorney- 
General,  in  Humble  Submiilion  and  Duty  to  Her 
Majefty  the  faid  Undertaking  is  laid  down,  and  Attend- 
ance is  this  Day  given  at  the  laft  House  on  the  left 
Hand  in  Ship-yard  in  Bartholomew-Lane  in  order  to 
repay  fuch  Sums  as  have  been  paid  into  the  faid  Table 
without  Deduction,  (i) 

(i)  No.  417,  for  Saturday,  June  28,  1712.   This  "  Multi- 
pKcation  Table'*  was  Steele's  own  scheme.   After  the  essay, 
by  Addison,  in  the    original  paper.  No.  413,   for  Tuesday, 
[   109  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

Nor  were  these  notices  of  swindling 
schemes  the  only  ones  Mr.  Spectator  printed 
of  which  he  might  well  have  been  ashamed. 
Notices  of  quacks  and  their  nostrums  evi- 
dently furnished  a  very  considerable  propor- 
tion of  the  revenue  of  the  "  Spectator." 

The  most  noted  charlatan  of  the  age 
was  Sir  William  Read,  who  was  actually 
knighted  by  Queen  Anne  for  an  operation 
performed  upon  her  eyes.  Here  is  one  of 
his  notices :  — 


June  24,  1 71 2,  was  printed  a  letter  signed  by  Steele  calling 
special  attention  to  the  "  Multiplication  Table. '  *  This  letter 
was  not  reprinted  in  the  first  collected  edition  of  the  essays, 
but  has  been  included  in  several  subsequent  editions,  notably  that 
by  George  A.  Aitken  (Longmans,  Green  &  Co. ,  London  and 
New  York,  1898).  G.  Gregory  Smith  also  reprints  the  letter 
in  a  note  (vol.  vi,  p.  290)  in  his  edition  (J.  M.  Dent  &  Co., 
London,  1898,  and  a  reprint  in  four  volumes  in  **  Everyman's 
Library").  After  quoting  the  advertisement  of  the  **  Multipli- 
cation Table,"  Mr.  Aitken  says  :  **An  Act  against  illicit  lot- 
teries came  into  operation  on  June  24,  the  very  day  on  which 
Steele's  letter  appeared  in  the  Spectator.  Swift,  writing  on  July  i, 
says  [to  Stella] ,  *  Steele  was  arrested  the  other  day  for  making 
a  lottery  directly  against  an  Act  of  Parliament.  He  is  now  under 
prosecution,  but  they  think  it  will  be  dropped  out  of  pity.' 
Probably  this  story  of  an  arrest  was  based  on  a  false  report; 
Steele  wrote  to  his  wife  on  June  28  that  all  was  safe  and  well." 

[  no] 


"The  Spectator 


Sir  William  Read,  principal  Ocullft,  having 
been  lately  fent  for  to  attend  feveral  Patients  in  Norfolk 
and  Suffolk,  is,  at  their  Requeft,  for  the  Publick  Good, 
obliged  to  publifh  the  Succefs  he  met  with  in  the  follow- 
ing Cures  perform'd  by  him  there,  viz.  the  Lady  Yollop, 
aged  70,  Couch'd  of  a  Cataract,  and  reftor'd  to  Sight ; 
Mr.  Carter,  an  Attorney,  aged  75,  reftor'd  to  perfect 
Sight ;  Capt.  Medhurft  in  Suffolk,  aged  60,  recovered  to 
his  Sight ;  Mr.  Burlingham  near  Norwich  at  64, 
brought  to  perfect  Sight ;  Mrs.  Catherine  and  Mrs. 
Alice  Nufon  were  both  brought  to  Sight  in  an  Inftant, 
one  being  1 7,  and  the  other  23  Years  old,  tho'  born  blind 
with  Catarafts;  Col.  Crofts  at  Badly  Hall,  Suffolk, 
Couch'd  and  reftor'd  to  good  Sight  of  both  Eyes  at  70 
Years  old.  N.  B.  Sir  William  Read  being  now  in  Town, 
is  to  be  advifed  with  at  his  Houfe  in  Durham-yard  in 
the  Strand,  London,  (i) 

There  were  also  surgeons  who  were  "  to 
be  advised  with  "  and  who  "  cutt "  for  **  the 
Stone,  Gravel,  and  all  Distempers  incident  to 
human  Bodies";  (2)  "an  experienced  Oper- 

(i)  No.  502.  See  also  advertisement  in  No.  21.  Swift  re- 
ferred to  Read  in  the  Journal  to  Stella ^  Letter  20,  for  April  1 1, 
171 1 :  **  Henley  would  fain  engage  me  to  go  with  Steele  and 
Rowe,  etc.,  to  an  invitation  at  Sir  William  Read's.  Surely  you 
have  heard  of  him.  He  has  been  a  mountebank,  and  is  the 
Queen's  oculist ;  he  makes  admirable  punch,  and  treats  you  in 
gold  vessels." 

(2)  No.  352. 

[Ill] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

ator,  .  .  .  who  cures  the  Pains  of  the  Head, 
and  that  inveterate  Pain  of  the  Tooth-Ach, 
without  drawing  them,  by  bleeding  in  the 
Mouth  three  or  four  Ounces  at  a  Time,  as 
there  is  Occasion";  (i)  as  well  as  a  number 
whose  notices  are  of  such  character  that 
they  cannot  be  reprinted  here.  The  follow- 
ing is  typical  of  the  still  more  extravagant : 

Dodor  Cairns,  Graduate,  challenges  all  the 
graduate  Do6lors  in  Great  Britain  to  difcourfe  with  him 
of  the  Nature  of  Metals,  of  their  Medicinal  Virtues,  and 
of  the  Univerfal  Medicine ;  and  until  he  finds  one  fitter 
for  the  Title,  he  declares  himfelf  Profeflbr  of  occult 
Philofophy  and  Alchimy;  and  every  Thurfday  at  4  a 
Clock,  in  his  Chamber,  he  will  make  a  Difcourfe  of  the 
greateft  Secrets  in  Nature :  Therefore  he  invites,  and 
experts,  the  moft  learned  Audience  in  the  Kingdom  ; 
and  promifes  a  Difcourfe  not  only  fuitable  to  their  Titles, 
and  his,  but  alfo  to  the  higheft  Attainments  of  humane 
Underftanding.  Doctor  Cairns  lives  the  next  Door  but 
one  to  the  Riding-houfe  in  Berwick-ftreet,  near  Marl- 
borough-ftreet.  Each  Man  pays  Half  a  Crown.  (2) 

Advertisements  of  quack  remedies  were 
even  more  numerous.  Besides  other  sure 
specifics  for  the  "  vapours,''  there  were  the 
"Famous  Drops  for  Hypocondriack  Mel- 

(i)No.  202.  (2)  Vol.  vni.  No.  603. 

[  112] 


The  Spectator 


ancolly''  guaranteed  to  "attenuate  all  viscous 
tenacious  Humours  (which.  .  .confuse  the 
Mind,  and  cause  the  deepest  Melancholly, 
with  direful  Views  and  black  Reflections) 
comforting  the  Brain  and  Nerves,  compos- 
ing the  hurried  Thoughts,  and  introducing 
bright  lively  Ideas  and  pleasant  Briskness, 
instead  of  dismal  Apprehensions  and  dark 
Incumbrance  of  the  Soul,  setting  the  Intel- 
lectuals at  Liberty  to  act  with  Courage,  Se- 
renity and  steady  Cheerfulness,  and  causing 
a  visible  diffusive  Joy  to  reign  in  the  Room 
of  uneasy  Doubts,  Fears,  &c/'  (i)  Here  is  a 
testimonial  from  a  grateful  father  :  — 

This  is  to  certify,  That  my  Child  being  almoft 
reduced  to  the  very  Grave  from  the  extream  Agony  he 
underwent  by  Its  violent  Breeding  of  Teeth,  was  thro' 
God's  Goodnefs  reftored  to  perfect  Eafe  and  Safety, 
upon  the  ufe  of  that  truly  Noble  Medicine,  prepared  for 
thofe  Cafes,  by  Mr.  Perronet  Surgeon  in  Dyot-ftreet  near 
Bloomfbury.  Witnefs  my  Hand,  S.  Warburton,  Raifor- 
maker  in  Grays-Inn-Paffage  by  Red  Lyon-Square.  This 
Medicine  is  fold  at  2i.  bd.  the  Vial,  by  the  Author  afore- 
faid,  Mr.  Alcraft  at  the  Blew-Coat  Boy  againft  the 
Royal  Exchange,  Cornhil,  and  by  Mr.  Watkins  Tobaco- 
nift  against  the  Market,  in  King-ftreet  Weftminfter.  (2) 
(i)  No.  54.  (2)  No.  141. 

[  113  ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

The  following  contains  one  of  those  bits  of 
exciting  fiction  with  which  nowadays  "  pa- 
tent medicine"  advertisements  are  often  en- 
livened :  — 

R.  Stoughton,  Apothecary,  in  Southwak,  hav- 
ing fome  Time  fince,  by  Order  of  a  Merchant,  fent  50 
Dozen  of  his  Cordial  Elixir  to  Sweden,  has  lately  re- 
ceived Advice,  that  Numbers  of  People  finding  it  a  great 
Preferver  of  Health,  drink  it  every  Morning :  And  fur- 
ther to  afTure  it  is  fo,  hath  a  Certificate  from  thence, 
That  (to  the  Perfon's  beft  Knowledge  and  Obfervation) 
not  one  who  took  it  hath  had  the  Difeafe ;  and  many 
are  of  Opinion  it  hath  been  of  great  Ufe  in  flopping 
the  Progrefs  of  it.  He  hath  alfo  a  Certificate  from  on 
board  a  Ship  at  Jamaica,  That  after  6  or  7  of  the  Men 
died  in  24  Hours  of  a  malignant  Diftemper,  the  Captain 
himfelf  (fearing  he  fliould  lofe  all  his  Men)  gave  the  reft, 
who  were  seiz'd,  plentifully  of  this  Elixir  (which  for 
many  Years  he  took  with  him)  and  by  God's  Bleffingon 
it  faved  every  Man  after.  He  is  not  only  willing,  but 
defirous  this  may  be  publifh'd  for  the  Good  of  others. 
Few  now  will  go  to  Sea  or  travel  without  it.  The  Cer- 
tificates themfelves  any  Gentleman  may  fee  if  they  pleafe. 
j|^°*  Another  large  Box  is  juft  now  ordered  again  for 
Sweden,  (i) 

Not  only  did  Mr.  Spectator  publish  these 
advertisements  of  quacks  and  nostrums,  but 

(i)No.  130. 
[  114] 


"The  Spectator 

he  was  inconsistent.  No.  444,  for  Wednesday, 
July  30,  1712,  calls  these  "quack  Doctors" 
"  Imposters  and  Murderers,"  ( i )  and  No.  572 
(Volume  viii)  renews  the  attack.  Yet,  both 
before  and  after  each  of  these,  were  adver- 
tisements in  which  charlatans  made  the  most 
extravagant  claims,  and  others  in  which  evi- 
dently inefficacious  or  even  harmful  nostrums 
were    recommended  for  *' every  distemper 

(l)  In  No.  444  Steele  wrote  among  other  things  :  *«It  gives 
me  much  Despair  in  the  Design  of  reforming  the  World  by  my 
Speculations,  when  I  find  there  always  arise,  from  one  Genera- 
tion to  another,  successive  Cheats  and  Bubbles,  as  naturally  as 
Beasts  of  Prey,  and  those  which  are  to  be  their  Food.  There  is 
hardly  a  Man  in  the  World,  one  would  think,  so  ignorant,  as 
not  to  know  that  the  ordinary  quack  Doctors,  who  publish  their 
great  Abilides  in  litde  brown  Billets,  distributed  to  all  who  pass 
by,  are  to  a  Man  Imposters  and  Murderers  ;  yet  such  is  the 
Credulity  of  the  Vulgar,  and  the  Impudence  of  these  Professors, 
that  the  Affair  still  goes  on,  and  new  Promises  of,  what  was 
never  done  before  are  made  every  Day.  What  aggravates  the 
Jest  is,  that  even  this  Promise  has  been  made  as  long  as  the  Mem- 
ory of  Man  can  trace  it,  and  yet  nothing  performed,  and  yet 
still  prevails.''  etc.  It  might  be  urged  that  Steele  was  attacking 
here,  not  the  quacks  who  adverdsed  in  his  periodical,  but  those 
who  did  not,  or  that  he  was  merely  engaging  in  that  warfare 
against  handbill  advertisements  which  newspaper  publishers  have 
carried  on  down  to  the  present.  In  that  case,  his  inconsistency 
would  be  all  the  more  glaring,  because  of  the  implied  endorse- 
ment of  the  arrant  frauds  which  filled  his  advertising  columns. 

[  115  ] 


T^he  Advertifements  of 

incident  to  human  bodies."  In  No.  472,  fur- 
thermore, are  puffs  for  Sir  William  Read 
and  Dr.  Grant,  both  men  of  little  education, 
who  practiced  the  methods  common  among 
such  "specialists"  to-day.  Indeed,  if  the 
"Spectator  "  were  being  published  to-day,  it 
would  afford  a  conspicuous  target  for  those 
who  recently  have  performed  a  public  ser- 
vice by  attacking  periodicals  which — in  their 
attitude  toward  advertisements  of  swindling 
schemes,  of  dangerous  quacks  and  of  their 
cure-alls,  show  a  marked  variance  between 
editorial  protestations  and  business  policy. 

Although  what  are  now  commonly  called 
"beauty  doctors,"  and  their  proprietary  pre- 
parations, impose  upon  the  amusing  vanity 
of  the  well-to-do  rather  than  upon  the  misery 
of  the  poor  and  ignorant,  because  of  the  ex- 
travagance of  their  claims,  one  naturally 
classifies  them  with  the  half-criminal  quacks, 
and  their  nostrums.  Here  is  the  notice  of 
one  of  the  comparatively  harmless  class  :  — 

The  Gentlewoman  who  liv'd  20  Years  in 
Raquet-Court,  and  7  Years  in  Crane-Court,  Fleet- 
ftreet,  and  has  ferved  moft  of  the  Quality  in  England, 

[  116] 


i 


"The  Spectator 


Scotland  and  Ireland,  alfo  the  Eaft  and  Weft  Indies, 
with  the  moft  excellent  Curiofities  for  preferving  the 
Face,  Hands  and  Teeth,  in  prefent  Beauty ;  for  colour- 
ing red  or  grey  Hair  to  a  lovely  brown  or  black,  a  Cof- 
matick  that  certainly  takes  away  the  Spots  and  Marks 
remaining  after  the  Small-Pox,  with  many  other  rare 
Secrets  in  Phyfick,  is  now  removed  to  her  own  Houfe 
the  upper  End  of  Wine-Office-Court  in  Gough  Square 
next  Door  to  the  Sun-dial  on  the  Left  hand,  where  you 
may  be  furnifhed  with  all  things  as  formerly,  and  all 
prepared  with  her  own  Hand.  She  is  to  be  fpoken 
with  every  Day  from  9  to  12,  and  from  2  till  8  at 
Night (I) 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  adver- 
tisements of  "  Cosmeticks  "  :  — 

The  famous  Italian  Water,  for  Dying  Red  and 
Grey  Hairs  of  the  Head  and  Eye-Brows  into  a  lafting 
Brown  or  Black ;  at  i,  2  ;  or  4s.  the  Bottle,  with  printed 
Dire6tions  for  the  Ufe  of  it.  To  be  had  at  Mrs.  Han- 
nam's  Toy-Shop,  at  the  Sign  of  the  Three  Angels  near 
the  Half-Moon  Tavern  in  Cheapfide.  (2) 

A  moft  incomparable  Pafte  for  the  Hands,  far 
exceeding  any  thing  ever  yet  in  Print :  It  makes  them 
delicately  white,  fleeke  and  plump ;  fortifies  them  againft 
the  scorching  Heat  of  the  Fire  or  Sun,  and  Sharpnefs 
of  the  Wind.  A  Hand  cannot  be  fo  fpoiPd  but  the  Ufe 
of  it  will  recover  them.  Sold  only  at  Mr.  Allcraft's,  Toy- 

(i)  No.  344.  (2)  Vol.  vm.  No.  634. 

[  117] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

fhop,  over-againft  the  Royal-Exchange,  at  15.  6^/.  a  Pot, 
with  Dire6tions  :  Where  is  fold  the  excellent  German 
Powder  for  the  Scurvy  in  the  Gums  and  Teeth,  which 
by  only  fcouring  them  every  Morning,  whitens  and  faf- 
tens  the  Teeth  to  a  Miracle,  at  if.  a  Seale.  (i) 

An  Excellent  Secret  to  take  away  Warts ;  being 
a  Noble  Mineral  Tincture,  which  fafely  and  without 
trouble  takes  away  the  largeft  and  moft  ugly  Warts 
from  the  Hands,  or  other  parts  of  the  Body,  fo  as  never 
to  return  again,  rendring  the  Places  on  which  they 
grew,  as  fmooth  and  fair  as  if  no  fuch  Excrefcence  had 
ever  been.  It's  a  ftupendous  Medicine,  and  takes  away 
Warts  very  foon,  and  with  the  greateft  fafety,  certainty 
and  eafe  imaginable.  Is  fold  only  at  Mr.  Allcraft's,  a 
Toy-fhop,  at  the  Blue-Coat-Boy  againft  the  Royal-Ex- 
change, Cornhill,  at  is.  6d.  a  Bottle,  (containing  enough 
to  take  away  50  Warts)  with  directions.  (2) 

If  published  at  the  present  time,  the 
"Spectator"  would  probably  be  liable  to  a 
heavy  fine  or  to  exclusion  from  the  United 
States  mails,  if  not  because  of  the  wording 
and  character  of  many  of  the  notices,  cer- 
tainly because  of  such  "  personal  advertise- 
ments ''  as,  two  or  three  years  ago,  brought 
one  of  the  large  New  York  dailies  to  grief. 
Here  are  two  of  this  class  which  probably 

(I)  No.  48.  (2)  No.  162. 

[  118] 


"The  Spectator 


related  to  an  innocent,  although  clandestine, 
love  affair :  — 

Florinda,  Diredlions  were  fent,  as  you  ordered 
them,  and  the  Perfon  is  much  concern'd  at  their  Mifcar- 
riage,  not  knowing  the  Reafon  thereof;  but  aflures  you 
'tis  not  what  you  suggeft,  and  doubts  not  but  you  will 
fuddenly  hear  of  them  by  the  Way  you  first  proposed,  (i) 

Florinday  the  Letter, you  was  defirous  to  know, 
was  received.  (2) 

Here  are  three  of  rather  more  doubtful 
character :  — 

A  Perfon  in  a  white  Cloth  Suit,  laced  with 
Silver,  who  handed  two  Ladies  out  of  the  Box  in  the 
Gallery  of  the  Play-houfe  in  Drury-lane,  on  Wednefday 
laft,  is  defired  to  come  this  Day,  without  fail,  to  the 
Abby  Church  in  Weftminfter,  betwixt  3  and  4  in  the 
Afternoon.  (3) 

A  Letter  dated  the  nth  of  this  Inftant  March 
dire6ted  to  one  in  London,  is  come  to  Hand,  in  which 
the  Writer  of  it  defired  that  Notice  might  be  given  of 
the  Receipt  of  it  in  the  Spe6tator;  and  therefore  it  is 
here  inferted,  as  alfo  that  the  Perfon  who  wrote  it  will  be 
received,  if  he  fhall  repair  to  the  Dwelling-Houfe  where 
it  was  directed.  (4) 

(i)  No.  437,  for  Tuesday,  July  22,  171 2. 

(2)  No.  444,  for  Wednesday,  July  30,  17 12. 

(3)  No.  297.  (4)  No.  325. 

[  119] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

If  the  Gentleman  that  fent  a  Letter  to  Alderf- 
gate  CofFe-houfe  on  Friday  the  2d  Inftant,  will  come 
to  the  Perfon  it  was  directed  to,  't  will  be  taken  very 
kindly,  (i) 

Did  the  following  lead  to  a  liaison  after 
the  masquerade,  or  to  a  duel  by  torch-light 
in  St.  James'  Park? 

Whereas  a  Letter  dated  Friday  Noon,  figned 
A.  B.  directed  to  a  Gentleman  in  the  City,  defiring  a 
Place  of  Meeting  j  the  Perfon  defired  will  meet  the  faid 
A.  B.  at  the  Bell  Tavern  in  King-ftreet,  Weftminfter, 
at  2  a  Clock  this  prefent  Monday.  Enquire  for  No.  2.  (2) 

From    this  rapid  survey  of  the  various 

forms  of  advertisements  in  the  "  Spectator," 

we  see  that   they   covered  practically  the 

same    subject   matter   as   do   those   in   our 

modern  journals  and  magazines. 

(i)  No.  376. 

(2)  No.  94.  For  other  similar  advertisements,  see  Specta- 
tor ^  Nos.  191,  277,  and  560  (vol.  viii). 


The  Spectator 


IV 


PUBLISHERS'   ETHICS   IN  QUEEN 

ANNE'S   DAY 

TO  those  who  suffer  from  the  unplea- 
sant delusion  that  editors  and  pub- 
lishers of  some  few  modern  news- 
papers and  magazines  have  a  lower  standard 
of  ethics  than  did  their  predecessors,  the  evi- 
dence in  the  original  sheets  of  the  relations 
between  the  business  and  editorial  depart- 
ments of  the  "  Spectator ' '  should  be  comfort- 
ing. 

Here  was  a  periodical  which  boasted  its 
purpose  was  to  help  "  reform  the  World/'  ( i ) 
to  "set  up  the  Immoral  Man  as  the  Object 
of  Derision/'  and  to  form  "  a  new  Weapon 
against  Vice  and  Irreligion/'  (2)  Yet,  as  we 
have  already  seen,  almost  side  by  side  with 
essays  on  honesty  and  "square  dealing''  were 
advertisements  of  the  most  brazen  and  cruel 

(I)  No.  444.  (2)  No.  445. 

[    121] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

swindling  schemes ;  beside  appeals  for  clean 
thoughts  and  continence  were  notices  of 
prurient  books,  of  such  a  place  of  common 
assignation  as  the  notorious  masquerade,  and 
"personals"  that  probably  had  to  do  with 
duels  or  liaisons.  While  the  "editorial  de- 
partment *'  was  inveighing  against  charlatan 
doctors  who  rode  in  gilt  coaches  and  dined 
from  gold  plate,  (i)  the  *' business  depart- 
ment" was  printing  scores  of  their  advertise- 
ments, and  was  accepting  large  sums  of  the 
money  such  "  imposters ' '  extorted  from  those 
they  "  tortured"  and  "murdered."  We  can- 
not but  see  that  consciousness  of  a  higher 
responsibility  which  most  editors  now  feel 
for  matter,  not  only  in  the  "  editorial"  and 
"news,"  but  also  in  the  "advertising"  col- 
umns, is  something  peculiar  to  a  better  age 
than  that  of  Queen  Anne. 

Unlike  editors  of  the  highest  class  publi- 
cations to-day,  Mr.  Spectator,  furthermore, 
did  not  consider  it  beneath  him  to  introduce 
into  his  "speculations"  puffs  for  his  adver- 
tisers. Some  of  these  were  frank,  and  did 

(i)  Supra,  p.  115,  note  i. 
[    122   ] 


"The  Spectator 


credit  to  his  generosity;  as  when,  in  order 
to  promote  benefits  for  deserving  players  at 
Drury  Lane,he  filled  considerable  space  with 
praises  of  "the  Romp,"  the  "girlish''  Mrs. 
Bicknell,  ( i )  and  of  Mrs.  Porter,  who  was 
"on  her  Recovery  from  a  severe  Feaver"; 
(2)  or  when,  in  somewhat  less  open  manner, 
he  devoted  all  of  one  paper  (3)  and  part  of 
another  (4)  to  extolling  the  Cartoons  of 
Raphael  at  Hampden  Court,  engravings  of 
which,  as  advertised,  (5)  Signior  Nicola  Dor- 
rigny  of  Rome  was  preparing  to  publish  by 
subscription.  Although  it  would  not  be  done 
to-day,  there  was  nothing  particularly  blame- 
worthy in  the  following  prefatory  note  to 
Number  554:  "I  am  obliged  for  the  follow- 
ing Essay  .  .  .  to  the  Ingenious  Author  (6) 
of  a  Poem  just  Published,  Entitled  An  Ode 

( i)  Advertisement  and  essay  in  No.  370,  for  Monday,  May 
5*  1712. 

(2)  Advertisement  and  letter  from  *'a  Prude"  in  Spectator, 
No.  364,  for  Monday,  April  28,  1712. 

(3)  No.  226. 

(4)  No.  244. 

(5)  No.  205. 

(6)  The  poem  referred  to,  by  J.  Hughes,  was  being  adver- 
tised in  the  Spectator  at  the  time. 

[    123    ] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

to  the  Creator  of  the  World,  occasioned  by 
the  Fragments  of  Orpheus."  Although  we 
should  all  rejoice  that  Addison,  for  whatever 
reason,  wrote  his  series  of  seventeen  critiques 
on  "  Paradise  Lost,"  a  present-day  writer  of 
"  exposures"  would  find  much  to  support  an 
inference  that  they  were  printed  with  the  ul- 
terior motive  of  promoting  the  sale  of  Ton- 
son's  edition  of  Milton's  epic,  in  which  the 
public  had  taken  but  languid  interest.  To  a 
modern  writer  of  "exposures,"  it  would 
doubtless  seem  at  least  suspicious  that  so  long 
as  the  Italian  operas  were  not  paying  for  space 
in  the  "Spectator,"  the  essayists  found  diffi- 
culty in  expressing  their  contempt  for  these 
performances ;  ( i )  but,  when  Nicolini  adver- 
tised his  "farewells,"  Addison  wrote  of  the 
Italian  singer  a  most  complimentary  notice, 
almost  grotesquely  inconsistent  with  the 
former  lampoons.  It  is  hard  to  see  bowmen 
of  the  cultivated  taste  of  Steele  and  Addison 
could  have  found  in  Powell's  trivial  puppet 
show  (2)  sufficient  merit  to  warrant  thecom- 

(i)  Supra,  p.  46,  note  2. 
(2)  Supra,  p.  42,  note  4. 
[   124  ] 


T^he  Spectator 


mendatory  references  to  it,  unless  we  admit 
their  judgment  was  distorted  by  the  fact  that 
Powell  was  a  very  good  customer  of  the  space 
they  had  to  sell.  "  Charles  Lillie,  Perfumer, 
at  the  Corner  of  Beauford-Buildings  in  the 
Strand"  was  certainly  given  more  attention 
in  the  essays  ( i )  than  he  deserved  in  any  other 
way  than  by  acting  in  Westminster  as  agent 
for  the  "Spectator''  and  by  inserting  a  con- 
siderable number  of  paid  notices  of  his  own. 
Only  the  most  obscure  "country  weekly" 
would  nowadays  print  such  a  fulsome  letter 
concerning  a  rich  advertiser  as  did  Steele 
in  No.  362  of  the  great  wine  merchants 
Brooke  and  Hellier.  Whatever  may  be  said, 
however,  of  any  of  the  other  editorial  refer- 
ences to  advertisers,  the  absurd  praises  of  the 
quacks  Read  and  Grant  in  No.  472  are  not 
only  inconsistent  with  the  essays,  but  are 
absolutely  inexcusable.  If  we  reason  as  do 
our    present-day    investigators  of   business 

(i)  See  Lillie's  letter  in  No.  i6,  and  puff  in  No.  358  for 
him  and  for  a  print  published  by  him,  of  "a  large  Pavement  of 
rich  Mosaick  Work  of  the  Ancient  Romans''  discovered  **  by 
an  Husbandman  at  Stimsfield  near  Woodstock  in  Oxfordshire," 
advertised  in  No.  351  and  afterwards. 

[  125] 


"The  Advertifements  of 

methods,  it  is  plain  the  editorial  was  woefully 
subservient  to  the  business  department  of 
the  "Spectator/' 

When  examined  in  this  perhaps  hyper- 
critical fashion,  the  most  representative  and 
"highly  moral  daily"  of  two  centuries  ago 
is  found  to  be  considerably  below  the  stand- 
ards of  ethics  recognized  by  publishers  of 
to-day. 

We  have  seen  that  advertisements  in  the 
"Spectator''  throw  many  side-lights  on  Eng- 
lish history,  literature,  and  manners  early 
in  the  eighteenth  century.  They  show,  also, 
that  the  most  representative  daily  periodical 
of  two  centuries  ago  was  subject  to  much  the 
same  business  exigencies  as  are  newspapers 
and  magazines  of  the  present.  For  the  early 
numbers,  the  publishers  seem  to  have  been 
unable  to  secure  any  advertisements  except 
those  of  books,  and,  consequently,  doubtless 
lost  money  for  a  time.  As  the  circulation 
grew  among  people  of  wealth  and  fashion, 
the  number  and  diversity  of  the  paid  notices 
increased  proportionately,  so  that,  for  at  least 
[  126] 


T'he  Spectator 


a  year,  the  "Spectator"  probably  paid  well. 
Then,  as  a  result  of  heavy  taxes  imposed  by 
a  hostile  government  on  each  copy  and  each 
advertisement,  the  circulation  decreased,  and, 
more  serious  still,  the  advertising  also,  in  con- 
sequence of  which  the  "  Spectator  "  became 
a  less  profitable,  if  not  a  losing,  business  ven- 
ture. Steele  presently  suspended  publication 
of  his  daily,  not  out  of  mere  whim,  not  merely 
because  Addison,his  chief  contributor,  wished 
to  devote  himself  to  other  work,  but  be- 
cause the  "Spectator ''was no  longer  making 
money.  Nevertheless,  it  is  clear  that  however 
incapable  Steele  was  as  manager  of  his  private 
affairs,  and  however  inferior  he  may  have  been 
as  a  finished  writer,  he  proved  himself  a  more 
efficient  managing  editor  of  the  first  series 
than  did  Addison  of  the  second.  Although  the 
"Spectator"  appeared  only  eight  years  after 
the  establishment  of  the  first  successful  Eng- 
lish daily,  we  have  seen  that  it  included  nearly 
all  the  forms  of  paid  notices  with  which  we  are 
familiar.  Although  none  of  these  advertise- 
ments were  set  in  "display"  type,  and  only 
two  were  "adorned  with  cuts,"  they  were 
[  127  ] 


"The  Spectator 

numerous  and  varied.  Besides  those  for  re- 
putable purposes,  there  were  some  for  such 
questionable,  perhaps  even  disreputable  ends, 
that  they  would  probably  render  the  "  Specta- 
tor,'' if  it  were  being  published  nowadays, 
liable  to  criminal  prosecution  or  to  exclusion 
from  the  United  States  mails.  The  evidence, 
moreover,  of  occasional  subservience  of  the 
editorial  to  the  business  department  of  the 
"  Spectator  "  shows  further  that  the  ethical 
standard  of  editors  and  publishers  of  repre- 
sentative periodicals  is  higher  in  America 
to-day  than  it  was  in  England  during  the 
reign  of  Queen  Anne. 


APPENDIX 


APPENDIX 

SPECIMEN   ADVERTISEMENTS    OUT    OF 
THE   SPECTATOR 


WANTED 

A  fober  Coachman  who  underftands  his  Bufinefs  and 
can  be  well  recommended,  may  hear  of  a  Place  at  the  Bali 

Inn  in  Holborn.  ^^^  ^^^      Saturday,  November  lo,  171 1. 

If  any  Englifli  Gentleman  who  has  already  Travelled, 
and  is  qualified  by  Learning  and  Languages  to  be  Gov- 
ernor to  a  young  Gentleman,  and  willing  to  go  Abroad 
with  him  on  good  Terms,  let  him  give  Notice  thereof  to 
Mr.  Biggs  at  the  Old  Turn  Stile  Coffee-houfe,  in  High- 
Holborn,  in  order  to  treat  thereupon. 

No.  347.      Tuesday,  April  8,  171 2. 

Any  Gentlewoman  or  two  that  would  be  boarded  at 
a  creditable  Place  in  Weftminfter,  at  a  reafonable  rate, 
may  enquire  at  Mr.  Lee's  a  Fiftimonger,  at  the  Sign  of 
the  Dolphin  near  Hungerford  Market  in  the  Strand,    c 

No.  427,      Thursday,  July  10,  1712. 

Enquiry  is  made  for  a  little  Houfe,  Stable,  Out- 
Houfes,  Garden,  &c.  with  about  a  hundred  Acres,  or 
more,  of  Enclofure  lying  to  it ;   any  where  within  a 

[  131  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Days  Journey  of  London ;  pretty  near  a  good  Market, 
and  in  a  Healthful  Air.  Any  who  has  fuch  a  Tenement 
to  let  for  3  Years,  to  be  entered  upon  between  this  and 
Chriftmas,  is  defired  to  fend  an  Account  of  the  Rent 
and  other  Particulars ;  directed  to  Mr.  Delroe,  to  be  left 
at  the  Temple  CofFee-houfe  by  St.  Dunftan's  church, 

in  Fleet  ftreet.  ^o.  554.     Friday,  December  5,  1712. 

HOUSES  TO  LET 

At  Sutton  in  Surrey,  on  the  Edge  of  Banfted-Downes, 
is  to  be  Lett  a  very  commodious  Houfe  of  5  Rooms 
on  a  Floor,  with  a  good  Garden  well  planted  with  Fruit- 
Trees,  a  Stable  and  Brewhoufe,  &c.  Inquire  in  Sut- 
ton, at  the  furtheft  Houfe  but  one  on  the  Right  Hand 
going  to  the  Downes ;  or  at  the  Printer's  of  this  Paper. 

No.  10.      Monday,  March  12,  171 1. 

A  large  Houfe,  with  a  Dove-houfe,  Stables,  and  all  other 
Conveniences ;  a  very  fine  Garden,  with  a  Wildernefs, 
Green-houfe,  and  fine  Greens ;  a  large  Canal  running 
almoft  round  it  fupplied  from  a  Trout  River  :  Being  the 
Seat  of  the  late  Mr.  Garth  at  Mourden  in  Surry,  7  miles 
from  London.  To  be  lett  by  Leafe.  Enquire  at  Mr. 
Stones  in  great  St.  Hellens. 

No.  14.      Friday,  March  i6,  171 1. 

A  large  pleafant  Houfe  at  Peckham  to  be  Lett,  (or  the 
Leafe  of  1 3  Years  to  be  fold)  with  a  Coach-houfe,  Sta- 
bles, Out-Offices,  large  Gardens,  and  Court-yard  walled 
in,  well  planted  and  adorn'd  with  Statues  and  Greens, 
and  well  watered,  with  10  Acres  of  Pafture  adjoyning, 
[  132  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

in  a  fine  Air,  feated  on  a  Gravel.    Enquire  of  Mr.  War- 
ner a  Goldfmith  without  Temple-bar  or  at  the  Red  Cow 

at  Peckham.  j^o   ^^      Monday,  March  26,  171 1. 

In  Dean-ftreet  Sohoe  is  a  very  good  Houfe  to  be  Lett, 
with  a  very  good  Garden,  at  Midfummer  or  Michael- 
mafs;  with  Coach-houfe  and  Stables,  or  without.  In- 
quire at  Robin's  CofFee-houfe  near  St.  Anne's  Church. 

No.  92.     Friday,  June  15,  171 1. 

A  Houfe  and  Shop,  fitted  up  with  Counter  and 
Shelves  proper  for  a  Milliner,  or  any  other  Trade,  at 
1 61.  a  Year ;  it  is  convenient  for  Lodgers,  enclos'd  with 
Shutters  to  Lock  up,  and  a  Door  to  the  Garden  to  go 
backward :  It  ftands  well  for  any  Trade.  Alfo  another 
Houfe  proper  for  a  private  Family,  or  a  Gentleman  of 
the  Cuftom-houfe,  Victualling,  or  Navy-Office,  fituate 
in  Goodman's-Fields,  at  ill.  per  Ann.  Alfo  another 
Houfe  in  the  Country,  about  Two  Miles  off,  in  a  good 
Air,  and  about  5I.  per  Ann.  Inquire  at  John's  CofFee- 
houfe  in  Sweeting' s-Alley,  near  the  Exchange. 

No.  372.     Wednesday,  May  7,  17 12. 

To  be  Let, 

In  Devonfliire  Square  near  Bifhop's-Gate,  a  very 
good  Brick-Houfe  of  3  Rooms  on  a  Floor,  with  a  good 
Hall,  very  good  light  and  dark  Clofets,  Convenient 
Offices  below  Stairs,  a  good  Yard,  Vault  and  Cellar  for 
private  Ufe,  and  a  very  good  Ware-Houfe  and  Cellar 
for  Merchandize,  the  whole  Houfe  well  Safhed  and 
Wainfcotted.  Enquire  at  the  Houfe  being  the  fourth 
[  133  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Door  on  the  Right-Hand  from  the  Entrance  into  the 
Square,  the  Front  frefli  Painted. 

No.  536.     Friday,  November  14,  171a. 


REAL  ESTATE 

To  be  Sold,  the  Manors  of  Southcave  and  Flaxfleet 
in  Southcave,  in  the  Eaft-Riding  of  York,  amounting 
to  upwards  of  400I.  per  Annum.  Enquire  of  Mr.  John 
Greenwood,  Attorney  in  Wood-ftreet  London,  or  Mr. 
Fran.  Langley  in  York. 

No.  355.     Thursday,  April  17,  1712. 

A  Large  Brick  Houfe,  with  a  Tarrafs  and  Back-door 
into  St.  James*s  Park,  with  good  Vaults,  and  all  other 
Offices  under  Ground,  now  in  the  Tenor  of  the  Hon- 
ourable Robert  Benfon,  Efq ;  the  laft  Houfe  in  Queen- 
ftreet,  on  the  Right  Hand,  is  to  be  fold.  Inquire  at  Mr. 
Sayues,  at  the  Golden  Still  in  Pye  Corner  near  Weft- 
fmithfield.  No.  383.     Tuesday,  May  ao,  171a. 

HORSES  FOR  SALE 
TO  BE  SOLD 

A  fine  Gelding  that  has  all  his  Paces,  14  Hands  high 
and  7  Years  old,  at  the  Swan  and  Portcullis  in  Lambeth 

Parilh.  jjo^  ,^2^     Monday,  September  17,  171 1. 

At  the  Griffin  in  Long-lane  is  a  Stable  of  very  fine 
frefti  Horfes  to  be  fold,  fome  of  which  are  very  fit  for 

Officers.  j^o,  j^2,6.      Monday,  November  19,  1711. 

[  134] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

At  the  Rofe  in  Knight's-Bridge,  Stands  a  very  fine 
ftrong  Stone  Horfe  newly  come  to  Town.  To  be  Sold. 

No.  382.     Monday,  May  19,  171 2. 

A  Gelding  fit  for  a  Portmantle,  as  alfo  a  Saddle 
Mare  to  be  Sold.  Inquire  at  Warwick  Stables  by  Gray's- 

No.  529.      Thursday,  November  6,  1 71 2. 

VEHICLES  FOR  SALE 

A  Fafhionable  new  Coach,  and  a  four  Wheeled 
Chaife,  to  be  Sold  a  great  Pennyworth  together  or  afun- 
der,  at  the  Queen's  Arms  Inn  in  Crutched-Friars. 

No.  81,      Saturday,  June  2,  171 1. 

A  new  Sedan  Chair,  never  us'd  but  twice,  Lin'd  with 
the  fineft  Scarlet  Cloth,  and  very  Handfomly  fet  off.  To 
be  Sold  a  Pennyworth.  Enquire  of  Mr.  Mofs  an  Apothe- 
cary, in  Catherine  street  Covent  Garden. 

No.  219.      Saturday,  November  10,  17 1 1. 

There  is  a  very  good  Earl's  Coach,  with  the  Harnefs 
of  fix  Horfes,  all  as  good  as  new,  to  be  fold  a  very  great 
Pennyworth  :  To  be  feen  at  the  Dolphin  in  Dean  ftreet 
near  Soho-Square. 

No.  241.     Thursday,  December  6,  1711. 

A  Genteel  Chariot  fit  for  Town  or  Country,  to  be  fold, 
very  little  the  worfe  for  wear,  with  a  Pair  of  new  Wheels, 
all  very  faftiionable  and  neat  Work,  now  ftanding  at 
the  Horfe  and  Trumpet  in  Crouchet-Fryars  near  Aldgate. 

No.  370.      Monday,  May  5,  1712. 

[  135] 


specimen  Advertifements 

A  Glafs  Chariot,  light  and  fit  for  Travelling,  in  good 
repair,  is  to  be  fold  at  a  reafonable  Price.  Inquire  at  Searfs 
Coffee-houfe  in  Lincoln's  Inn,  or  at  England's  Tavern 
by  Cupitts  Garden  where  it  ftands. 

No.  370.     Monday,  May  5,  1 71 2. 


A  very  good  Leather  Body  Charriot  fit  for  Travelling, 
with  a  new  fet  of  Wheels,  and  a  blue  Cloth  Lining, 
and  good  pair  of  Harnefs.  To  be  fold  a  Pennyworth. 
Inquire  at  Mr.  Jacob's  a  Coach-maker  in  Camamel 
ftreet.  ,t  r-  j      »yr 

No.   392.      Friday,  May  30,  1 712. 

MISCELLANEOUS    ARTICLES 

At  the  Cabinet  on  Ludgate-hill  ftill  remains  to  be  fold 
off,  at  very  low  Rates,  the  following  Goods  of  Mr.  Tho. 
Piftor,  lately  deceas'd,  being  all  to  be  difpos'd  of  by  Lady 
day  next,  viz.  3  fine  japan'd  Cabinets  and  i  Walnut, 
I  Walnut  Scrutore  and  i  India,  i  Wainfcot  Desk  and 
Book-cafe  on  Drawers,  i  japan'd  Tortoife-fhell  Defk 
and  I  black,  i  black  Plate-cafe  and  3  fine  Prince-wood 
ftrong  Boxes,  i  fine  inlaid  Copper  fram'd  large  Glafs 
Table  and  Stands,  i  right  India  japan'd  Glafs  Table  and 
Stands,  i  white  japan'd  Glafs  and  Table,  i  neat  Pair  of 
Peer  Glafles,  i  very  fine  GlalT  fram'd  Peer  GlafT  and 
feveral  other  GlalFes,  3  Chimney  and  some  japan'd  Swing- 
Glaifes  and  Suits  of  Boxes,  one  Walnut  fram'd  large 
Glafs  Corner  Cupboard,  2  red  Tea-Tables,  fome  Wall- 
ftands  and  Scrowles,  and  feveral  Walnut,  black,  and 
japan'd  Chamber-Tables,  &c. 

No.  18.     Wednesday,  March  21,  171 1. 

[  136] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

To  be  difpofed  of,  at  a  very  reafonable  Rate,  a  Com- 
pleat  Riding  Suit  for  a  Lady,  of  Blue  Camlet,  well 
laced  with  Silver,  being  a  Coat,  Wastecoat,  Petticoat, 
Hatt  and  Feather,  never  worn  but  twice ;  to  be  feen  at 
Mr.   Harford's  at  the  Acorn  in  York-flreet,  Covent- 

garden.  ^^    ^^^     Thursday,  May  31,  1711. 

To  be  difpofed  of  a  most  Excellent  Harpficord,  made 
by  the  famous  Sig.  Gieronimo  Senti,  at  Pefare  in  Italy ; 
having  two  Extraordinary  fine  Keys  of  Ivory,  feveral 
Stops  and  Alterations  :  Befides  the  two  Principals,  and 
one  06lave,  or  the  Spinnet,  which  may  be  plaid  fep- 
arately,  or  together,  imitating  exactly  the  Theorba,  and 
moft  Curioufly  the  Archi-Lute,  worth  any  Body's  hear- 
ing ;  in  fuch  a  manner  Preferv'd  as  if  made  this  Day. 
To  be  feen  and  tryed  every  Day,  in  St.  James's  Street 
over-against  the  Pump,  next  to  the  Swan,  at  the  Green 

No.  loi.     Tuesday,  June  26,  1711. 

This  Day  and  every  Day  this  Week  continues  the 
Sale  of  the  Colle6i:ion  of  moft  of  the  valuable  Law- 
Books,  feveral  large  Paper,  and  many  with  written  Ref- 
erences by  a  good  Hand,  and  Manufcripts ;  alfo  moft 
of  the  Works  of  an  Eminent  Englifh  Author,  which 
with  many  more  not  in  the  printed  Catalogues,  (written 
Catalogues  whereof  are  at  the  Place  of  Sale,)  will  begin 
to  be  fold  by  Retail  very  Reafonable,  (the  fair  way  of 
the  Price  being  put  in  each  Book)  at  the  Coffee  houfe 
going  into  Palfgrave  head  Court  without  Temple-Bar, 
on  Monday  the  22d  Inftant,  at  nine  in  the  Morning, 
[  137  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

and  continue  till  5  in  the  Evening,  that  and  every  Day 
that  Week.  N.  B.  Alfo  feveral  Hundred  more,  Folio's 
at  IS  6d.  4to's  at  6d.  and  4d.  8vo's,  &c.  at  6d.  4d.  3d. 
and  2d.  each,  with  many  choice  Pamphlets  very  Cheap. 
Catalogues  are  to  be  had  at  Mr.  Stroke's  at  the  Golden 
Key  near  Charing-Crofs,  Mr.  Mear's  at  the  Lamb  with- 
out Temple-Bar,  Mr.  Strahan's  at  the  Golden  Ball  in 
Cornhill,  and  at  the  Place  of  Sale. 

No.  205.     Thursday,  October  25,  171 1. 

At  Captain  Parker's  Warehoufe,  in  Merchant-Tay- 
lor's-Hall  in  Threadneedle-ftreet,  near  the  Royal-Ex- 
change, are  expofed  to  Sale,  a  Parcel  of  Turkey  Car- 
pets, juft  arrived  by  the  Fleet  from  Turkey,  viz.  Twelve 
fine  Mofchet  Carpets  proper  for  Ladies  Chambers  or 
Drefling-Rooms,  and  Ninety  two  Pike  Carpets,  fome 
fit  to  cover  Drawing-Rooms  and  Chambers,  others  of  a 
fmaller  Size  to  put  under  Beds  and  Tables,  in  Dining- 
Rooms  and  Parlors,  or  by  the  Chimneys  to  fit  on ; 
being  more  commodious  than  Mats  or  painted  Sale- 
Cloth,  as  well  as  cheaper,  by  reafon  they  will  laft  20 
Years,  and  every  time  they  are  waflied  or  fcoured  look 
as  well  as  new.  Every  Carpet  is  fold  apart,  with  the 
Number,  Length,  Breadth,  and  Price  noted  on  each 
Carpet.  To  be  feen  at  the  forementioned  Place  every 
Day,  from  9  till  4  a  Clock,  till  all  are  fold. 

No.  236.      Friday,  November  30,  1 71 1. 

A  Parcel  of  Manufcript  Sermons  of  a  learned  and 
Eminent  Divine,  deceafed,  (never  out  of  the  Executors 
Hands,)  to  be  difpofed  of.   Enquire  at  Mr.  L'Hunts  at 
[   138  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

the  Blew  Perriwig  upon  the  paved  Stones  in  St.  Mar- 
tins Lane  near  Charing  Crofs. 

No.  259.      Thursday,  December  27,  1711. 

At  the  Maft-Makers  Yard,  the  late  Jofeph  Wray's 
deceafed,  on  Wapping-Wall  near  King  James's  Stairs, 
is  a  confiderable  Parcel  of  Mafts,  &c.  very  good,  to  be 
difpofed  of  either  Wholefale  or  Retale,  a  good  Penny- 
u^orth  :  Likewife  the  Yard  is  to  be  Lett,  vt^ith  a  con- 
veniant  Houfe  near  the  fame,  at  reafonable  Terms. 

No.  388.      Monday,  May  26,  1712. 

The  next  Prefentation  of  two  Re6lories,  the  one  200I. 
per  Ann,  the  other  lool.  per  Ann.  fituate  in  the  better 
part  of  Dorfetftiire,  are  to  be  Sold,  the  prefent  Incum- 
bants  are  upwards  of  60.  Enquire  of  Mr.  Small  Sur- 
geon, in  Villars-ftreet,  York  Buildings. 

No,  395.      Tuesday,  June  3,  1712. 

AUCTIONS 

A  curious  Colle6tion  of  Italian  Paintings  (by  Giocomo 
and  Leandro  BafTan,  Schiavone,  Tintoret,  Spagnolet, 
Nicola  and  Gafpar  Pouflin,  Claude  Lorain,  Salvator 
Rofa,  Fran.  Bolognefe,  Mola,  the  Borgognon,  Luca 
Jordano,  Bourdon,  and  the  Maltefe ;  as  alfo  by  Rubens 
and  Vandyck,  the  Velvet  Brueghel,  Holben,  Brouwer, 
Berchem,  Schalken,  Teniers,  &c)  lately  brought  from 
beyond  Sea,  will  be  Sold  by  Auction  on  Friday  the  i8th 
Inftant,  at  the  three  Chairs,  the  corner  Houfe  of  the  Lit- 
tle Piazza,  Covent  Garden,  where  Catalogues  may  be  had, 
and  the  Pidures  view'd  *till  the  time  of  Sale. 

No.  67.     Thursday,  May  17,  1711. 
[    139   ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

For  Sale  by  the  Candle 

On  Friday  next,  the  1 3th  Inftant,  at  Lloyd's  CofFee- 
houfe  in  Lombard  ftreet,  at  9  a  Clock  in  the  Forenoon 
(only  I  Cask  in  a  Lot)  the  entire  Cargo  of  the  Prize 
St.  Ann,  taken  by  a  Guernzey  Privateer ;  conlifting  of 
between  80  and  90  Hogfheads  of  new  Cahorse  Wine 
and  other  new  French  Clarets,  and  4  Hhds  of  new 
Prize  French  White- Wine,  of  the  beft  Growths,  and 
of  this  laft  Vintage  :  Now  landing  at  Buttolph- Wharf 
between  London-bridge  and  Billingfgate.  The  faid  new 
Clarets  to  be  feen  and  tailed  in  Cellars  or  Warehoufes 
to  Day  and  to  Morrow,  from  6  a  Clock  to  i,  and 
from  2  to  7.  (Note,  The  Buyers  are  defired  to  ap- 
pear punctually  at  the  Hour  appointed,  viz  9  a  clock 
in  the  Forenoon  next  Friday.)  To  be  fold  by  Tho. 
Tomkins,  Broker,  in  Seething-lane  in  Tower-ftreet. 

No.  114.      Wednesday,  July  ii,  171 1. 

The  Right  Honourable  the  late  Lord  Brooks's  Houfe- 
hold-Goods,  in,  and  belonging  to  his  Lordfhip's  Houfe 
in  Twickenham  near  Brentford,  in  the  County  of  Mid- 
dlefex ;  confifting  of  fine  Beds  and  Bedding,  Indian 
Cabinets,  Looking-Glafles,  Marble  Tables,  Chairs, 
Tapiftry  Hangings,  fine  old  China- Ware,  Linnen,  Pict- 
ures, Pewter,  Brafs,  and  all  forts  of  Kitchin-Ware, 
will  be  fold  by  Audion  at  the  faid  Houfe  on  Monday 
the  3d  of  September  next.  The  Goods,  &c.  to  be  feen  to 
Morrow,  and  Saturday  before  the  Sale.  The  Sale  to  begin 
at  Ten  in  the  Morning,  and  to  continue  till  all  are  fold. 

No.  157.     Thxirsday,  August  30,  1 71 1. 
[    140    ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

To  be  Sold  by  Auction  this  Day  at  a  Houfe  the  cor- 
ner of  Duke-ftreet  in  Great-RufTel-Street,  Bloomsbury, 
over-againft  Montague  houfe,  all  forts  of  Houfhold 
Goods,  feveral  fine  large  Peer  and  Chimney  Glaffes  and 
Sconces,  a  very  fine  right  India  Cabinet,  fome  Plate, 
Gold  Watches,  fine  large  Pieces  of  China,  and  fmall 
India  and  Turkey,  and  Vigo  Carpets,  and  other  curi- 
ous things,  one  Perfian  Carpet  with  Gold  and  Silver 
Grounds,  2  Cafes  of  Bottles  of  right  Burgamot ;  a  par- 
cel of  very  fine  curious  Paintings  of  the  beft  Mafters ; 
2  very  fine  large  Pieces  done  at  Rome.  The  Goods  to 
be  feen  this  Morning  before  the  Sale,  which  begins  at 
10  a  Clock,  being  the  Goods  of  a  Gentleman  lately 
Deceafed.  N.  B.  Catalogues  could  not  be  got  ready, 
which  occafioned  the  Sale  to  be  put  ofF  as  above. 

No.  301.     Thursday,  February  14,  1712. 

On  Thurfday  the  27th  of  this  Inftant  March,  will  be 
Sold  by  Auction,  the  Houfhold  Goods  of  Godfrey 
Woodward,  Efq;  himfelf  and  Lady  being  lately  De- 
ceas'd  ;  with  fome  Country  Goods  of  his.  To  be  feen 
this  Day  and  to  Morrow,  at  his  Dwelling  Houfe  in 
Red-Lion-ftreet,  next  Door  to  the  Golden  Lamp  near 
Ormond  ftreet.  A  frefh  Cloth  Bed,  and  other  Beds  and 
Bedding,  Peer  Glafles,  and  Chimney  GlafTes,  with  Cab- 
inets, and  Scrutores,  with  Nine  fine  Red  Morocco  leather 
Chairs,  and  a  Dreffing  Chair,  and  Pi6i:ures  and  fome 
China  and  Japan.  Note,  The  Sale  to  begin  exa6lly  at 
One  a  Clock.  Note,  The  Houfe  with  Coach-Houfe  and 
Stables  is  to  be  Lett;  and  an  Organ  made  by  the 
FamM    Mr.    Smith,    proper  for   a    Chappel    or   fmall 

[  141  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Church,  and  a  frefh  Coach,  with  a  Chariot  and  Chaife, 
and  a  pair  of  Horfes  to  be  Sold.  Catalogues  to  be  had 
at  the  faid  Houfe. 

No.  335.     Tuesday,  March  25,  17 12. 

On  Tuefday  next  will  begin  to  be  Sold  by  Au£lion 
in  the  inner  Walk  of  Exeter  Exchange  in  the  Strand,  a 
fmall  but  curious  parcel  of  Spanifh,  Italian  and  French 
Books,  being  part  of  the  Library  of  Sir  William  Temple, 
Bart,  with  feveral  Claflicks  Printed  by  Old  Elzevir,  & 
cum  Notis  Variorum.  Alfo  a  choice  Collection  of  Orig- 
inal Prints,  confifting  of  the  Roman  Statues  and  other 
Antiquities.  Catalogues  may  be  had  gratis  at  the  Place 
of  Sale,  of  W.  Taylor  at  the  Ship  in  Pater-nofter  row, 
J.  Round  in  Exchange-alley  Cornhill,  J.  Harding  at 
the  Poft  house  in  St.  Martin's-lane  and  C.  King  in 
Weftminfter-hall.  N.  B.  Hiftoria  de  las  Indias  Occi- 
dentals per  Hezzera,  Mad.  1601.  is  in  three  Vols, 
compleat,  tho'  the  Catalogue  mentions  but  two  Vols. 

No.  367.      Thursday,  May  i,  1712. 

On  Thurfday  the  5th  of  June  next,  will  be  expos'd 
to  Sale  by  Inch  of  Candle,  a  Parcel  of  the  beft  Batavia 
Arrack,  Bohea  and  Green  Tea,  China  Plates,  &c.  by 
the  Oley  Frigate.  Papers  of  the  Sale  will  be  deliver'd 
at  the  Out  Ropers  Office,  and  will  be  fhewn  from  Mon- 
day the  2d  of  June,  till  the  Day  of  Sale. 

No.  382.      Monday,  May  19,  17 12. 

The  Houfehold  Goods  and  Lining  belonging  to  John 
Kellond  Efq,  Deceafed,  to  be  Sold  by  Audion,  at  his 
Houfe  in  Bond-ftreet,  St.  James's,  on  Thurfday  the 
[  142  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

26th  of  this  Inftant  June,  by  Order  of  his  Executioners, 
the  Goods  to  be  feen  on  Monday,  Tuefday  and  Wednef- 
day  before  the  Sale.  ^^  ^^^     ^^^^^^^^  j^^^  ^^^  ^^^^ 

On  Wednefday  the  3d  of  September  171 2.  will  be 
expos'd  to  Sale  at  the  Marine  CofFee-houfe  in  Burchin 
Lane,  Corn  hill,  London,  the  feveral  Goods  following, 
being  part  of  the  Goods  taken  in  the  South-Seas  by  the 
Duke  and  Dutchefs,  private  Ships  of  War  belonging  to 
Briftol,  and  their  Prize  the  Bacheler,  viz.  Musk,  Pep- 
per, White  and  Brown  Callicoes  of  feveral  Sorts,  Dimi- 
ties, Diapers,  Gurraes,  Humhums,  Sannots,  Long-Cloth, 
Tanjebs,  Coflaes,  and  other  Muflins  :  And  at  the  fame 
Sale  will  be  likewife  fold  the  remaining  Part  of  the 
European  and  other  Goods  brought  home  on  Board  the 
faid  Ships,  confifting  of  feveral  Sorts  of  Goods,  viz. 
Sifters  and  other  Threads,  wrought  Incles,  Thread-Lace 
of  divers  Sorts,  Sewing-Silk,  and  other  Haberdafhery- 
Wares,  Bees- Wax,  Steel,  Iron,  and  feveral  Drugs,  &c. 
of  which  particular  Alotments  will  be  timely  difpers'd, 
and  affixM  on  the  Royal  Exchange.   Samuel  Prodtor, 

•  ,  No.  456.     Wednesday,  August  13,  1712. 

To  be  Sold  by  AUCTION 

On  Wednefday  the  22d  Inftant,  the  Houftiold-Goods 
of  Charles  Dives,  Efq ;  at  his  Houfe  at  Hammerfmith, 
adjoining  to  the  Water-fide,  confifting  of  rich  Damask 
and  fine  Cloth  Beds,  Window  Curtains,  Tapeftry  Hang- 
ings, Peer-Glafles,  Chimney-Glafles,  India  Screens,  with 
an  India  Cheft,  and  fine  Cabinet,  fine  blue  and  white 

[  143] 


specimen  Advertifements 

China,  and  other  fine  China,  a  large  Marble  Beaufet 
with  a  Marble  Ciftern  and  a  Marble  flab  Table,  all  forts 
of  Kitchin  Goods,  large  Coppers,  Brewing  VefTels,  with 
feveral  other  Goods  and  Pictures.  The  Houfe  and  Gar- 
dens to  be  fold.  The  Goods,  &c.  to  be  feen  on  Friday, 
Saturday,  Monday  and  Tuefday  before  the  Sale;  Cata- 
logues to  be  had  at  the  Houfe  gratis.  The  Sale  to  begin 
at  10  a  clock  in  the  Morning  precifely. 

No.  510.     Wednesday,  October  15,  1712. 

The  Agents  for  the  Captors  give  Notice,  That  they 
will  put  up  to  Sale,  on  Thurfday  the  3d  of  December, 
1 71 2,  at  the  Marine  CofFee-houfe  in  Birchin-lane,  at  3 
a  Clock,  the  remaining  Part  of  the  Cargo  of  the  Ship 
Staden  of  Stockholm,  lying  at  Portfmouth,  condemned 
as  Prize  by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Lords  of  Appeals, 
confilting  of  410  Bags  of  Spanifli  Wooll,  21  Casks 
Cocheneel ;  29  Skins,  &c.  8  Casks  Silvefter,  9  Chefts 
Indigo,  410  Barrels  Raifins,  6  Pipes  Pickle-Lemons,  2 
Bales  Spanifh  Cordevants,  and  feveral  Pots  and  Casks 
of  damaged  Olives.  The  Samples  of  the  faid  Woolls, 
Cocheneel,  Indigoes,  &c.  are  to  be  feen  at  Sam.  Proctor's, 
Broker,  in  St.  Martins-lane  Cannon-ftreet,  where  Cata- 
logues may  be  had,  and  at  the  faid  Marine  CofFee-houfe. 
Sam.  Pro6lor,  Broker. 

No.  544.     Monday,  November  24,  171 2. 

To  be  fold  by  Audlion. 

An    extraordinary    Collection    of   Pictures,    with    a 
monthly  Clock  and  Spinnet,  at  Mr.  Copeland's  Houfe 
in  Manchefter-Court  in  Channel-Row  near  New  Palace 
[  144  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Yard,  Weftminfter,  on  Wednefday  next  the  23d  In- 
ftant,  beginning  exa6lly  at  1 1  a  Clock  Forenoon.  The 
Pi6l:ures,  &c.  to  be  view'd  this  Day,  to  Morrow,  and 
until  the  Hour  of  Sale.  Catalogues  to  be  had  this  Day 
at  Mr.  Cooper's  at  the  Three  Pidgeons  in  Half  Moon 
Street  in  the  Strand,  and  at  the  Place  of  Sale.  Note, 
This  is  no  artificial  Sale,  neither  will  any  indirect  Prac- 
tices be  committed.  The  Houfe  being  then  to  be  quit- 
ted, and  to  be  lett. 

Vol.  viii,  No.  557.   From  Friday,  June  1 8,  to  Monday,  June  ai,  1714. 

LOST  OR  STOLEN 

Watches 

Loft  or  Miflaid,  a  Gold  Watch,  with  a  Shagreen- 
Cafe,  whereupon  is  a  Cypher  intermingled  Letters  S  D 
M,  and  the  Plate  Enammell'd  with  Adonis  and  Venus, 
with  a  Cupid  who  points  the  Hour  with  the  Arrow,  and 
has  feveral  Motions.  Whoever  brings  the  fame  to  Mr. 
Charles  Chales,  a  Banker,  at  the  Vine  in  Lombard- 
ftreet,  ftiall  have  3  Guineas  Reward,  and  no  Queftions 
askM 

No.  115.     Thursday,  July  12,  171 1. 

Loft  on  Sunday  the  25th  Inftant,  between  the  Mall 
in  St.  James's  Park,  and  the  Spring  Garden  Gate,  a  large 
out-fide  Cafe  of  a  Gold  Watch,  fomewhat  bruifed  about 
the  Spring,  and  in  the  infide  a  piece  of  red  Gold-beaters 
Paper ;  whoever  brings  it  to  Charles  Lillies  at  the  cor- 
ner of  Beaufort  Buildings  in  the  Strand,  fhall  receive 
two  Guineas  reward,  and  have  no  Queftions  afked. 

No.  391.     Thursday,  May  29,  1712. 

[  I4S  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Loft  yefterday,  by  a  Lady  in  a  Velvet  Furbelow  Scarf, 
a  Watch  the  outward  Cafe  Gold,  the  inner  Bath  Mettle, 
the  Chain  of  the  fame,  a  Silver  Key.  Whoever  brings 
it  to  Michael  Howel  at  the  Griffin  in  Sheerlane,  Temple- 
Bar,  fhall  have  a  Guinea  Reward. 

No.  33.      Saturday,  April  7,  171 1. 

SnufF-boxes 

Loft  on  Wednefday  the  4th  Inftant,  about  Noon, 
between  Hampftead  and  Highgate,  a  Rich  Gold  Chaft 
Scollop-ftiell  SnufFBox,  fuppofed  to  be  dropt  about  Cane 
Wood  or  between  Hampftead  and  London.  Whoever 
hath  taken  it  up,  and  ftiall  fend  it  or  bring  it,  either  to 
Mr.  White's  Chocolate  Houfe  in  St.  James's  Street,  or 
to  Mr.  Adam's  Goldfmith  at  the  Black  horfe  in  the 
Strand,  fliall  Receive  fix  Guineas  Reward  ;  or  if  offered 
to  be  pawned  or  fold  you  are  defired  to  ftop  it,  and  to 
fend  notice  of  it  to  either  of  the  above-faid  Places,  and 
you  ftiall  receive  the  fame  Reward. 

No.  109.      Thursday,  July  5,  1711. 

Left  in  a  Hackney-Coach  06lober  15th,  by  a  Gentle- 
woman, a  Tortoife  ftiell  Snuff-box  inlaid  with  Silver  and 
Mother  of  Pearl,  two  twifted  Dolphins  engrav'd  on  it : 
The  Gentlewoman  was  taken  up  next  Door  to  the 
Hummums  in  Charles  Street  Covent  Garden.  If  the 
Perfon  that  found  it  will  bring  it  to  the  place  where  ftie 
took  Coach,  ftiall  have  Ten  Shillings  Reward. 

No.  519.     Saturday,  October  25,  171a. 

Loft  laft  Monday  the  4th  Inftant,  betwixt  St.  Paul's 
Church  and  the  New  Exchange,  a  Silver  Snuff-Box, 

[  146] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

with  a  PicSture  on  the  Outfide  of  the  Lid,  being  a  naked 
Woman,  and  a  Man  in  a  Red  Coat  hugging  her.  Who- 
ever brings  it  to  Mr.  Button's  CofFee-houfe  in  Ruffel- 
ftreet  near  Covent-Garden,  fhall  have  Half  a  Guinea 
Reward,  and  no  Queftions  afk'd. 

Vol.  vui,  No.  603.     Wednesday,  October  6,  17 14. 

Loft  betwixt  Hampftead  and  London,  or  left  at  the 
lower  Flask  in  Hampfted,  an  Ivory  SnuiF-Box  with  a 
filver  Rim  and  Hinge,  a  naked  Venus  leaning  on  a 
Fountain,  with  a  blue  Vail,  and  a  naked  Cupid  holding 
a  Rofe  in  his  Hand  over  the  Middle  of  the  Vail  painted 
on  the  inner  Side  of  the  Lid.  Whoever  brings  it  to 
Young  Man's  CofFee-houfe  Charing-Crofs,  fhall  have 
Half  a  Guinea  Reward,  and  no  Queftions  afk'd :  And 
if  ofFer'd  to  be  pawn'd  or  fold  you  are  defired  to  ftop  it, 
and  on  Notice  given  fhall  receive  the  Reward  aforefaid. 

No.  68.      Friday,  May  18,  1711. 

Dogs 

A  brown  and  white  Italian  Greyhound  Dog,  with  a 
white  fnip  upon  his  Nofe,  and  his  two  hinder  Feet  white. 
Loft  in  Lincolns-Inn  Fields,  or  between  that  and 
Bloomsbury  Square,  on  Wednefday  the  nth  Inftant 
at  Night ;  whoever  brings  him  to  the  George  Inn  in 
Holborn  fhall  receive  los.  reward. 

No.  41.     Tuesday,  April  17,  171 1. 

Loft  on  Wednefday  about  1 2  a  Clock  at  Noon  from 
the  Groom-Porter's  Houfe  in  Scotland-yard  at  White- 
hall, a  little  Moufe-colour  Greyhound  Bitch  with  a  white 
Tip  on  her  Tail,  fome  White  under  her  Throat,  and 

[  147] 


specimen  Advertifements 

her  Ears  ftanding  upright.  Whoever  fhall  bring  her  to 
the   Groom-Porter's  aforefaid  fhall   have    lO  Shillings 

Reward.  No.  i8o.      Wednesday,  September  26,  171 1, 

Lace 

Loft  on  Thurfday  laft  between  King-ftreet,  Covent 
Garden,  and  old  Round-Court  or  from  thence  to  Salis- 
bury-Street in  the  Strand,  about  four  Yards  and  a  Quar- 
ter of  wafh*d  loop'd  Lace,  without  Basket-work,  Pinner 
broad.  Whoever  brings  it  to  Mr.  Charles  Lillie,  a  Per- 
fumer, the  Corner  of  Beauford-Buildings  in  the  Strand, 
fhall  have  20s.  Reward;  or  if  fold  or  pawned  their 
Money  again  and  no  Queftions  afk'd. 

No.  216.      Wednesday,  November  7,  171 1. 

A  Parcel  with  four  Pieces  of  Macklyn  Lace  in  a  blue 
Paper,  was  left  in  a  Hackney  Coach  coming  from 
Leicefterfields  to  Mrs.  Cowley's  at  the  Golden  Wheat- 
fheaf  in  Southampton  ftreet  near  Covent-Garden  ;  Who- 
ever brings  the  faid  parcel  to  Mrs.  Cowley's  aforefaid, 
fhall  receive  a  Reward  of  5  Guineas,  and  proportionable 

for  any  part.  ^^    ^^^       Thursday,  January  lo,  1712. 

Jewels 

Loft  or  Dropt,  in  or  near  Mr.  Edward  Smith's  Houfe, 
at  Iver  near  Uxbridge,  fome  time  laft  Week,  a  Neck- 
lace of  2  Rows  of  Oriental  Pearls,  about  Sixty  or  Seventy 
Pearls  in  each  Row,  the  Pearls  are  of  a  midling  Size 
and  very  even.  If  offered  to  be  fold  or  pawn'd,  pray 
ftop  it  and  the  Party,  and  give  Notice  to  Mr.  James 

[  148] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Puckle,  a  Notary  Publick  in  Popes  head  Alley  in  Corn- 
hill,  fo  as  it  may  be  had  again,  and  you  fhall  have  5 
Guineas  for  your  Trouble;  or  if  the  Perfon  that  has  it 
will  bring  or  fend  it  to  the  fame  place  he  (hall  have  the 
fame  Reward,  and  no  Queftions  afkM. 

No.  414.      Wednesday,  June  25,  1712. 

Miscellaneous 

Whereas  a  Violin  was  left  in  a  Hackney-Coach  that 
took  up  a  Fare  at  the  Stage  Gate  of  the  Hay-Market  on 
Saturday  the  8th  Inftant  at  Night,  and  fet  them  down 
in  BofTwell-Court  near  Lincoln's-Inn.  Whoever  will 
bring  it  to  Mr.  Pepufch's  Houfe  in  Boflwell  Court  fhall 
receive  20s.  or  if  the  Coachman  will  bring  Word  where 
it  is,  fold  or  pawn'd,  he  fhall  be  rewarded  for  his  Pains. 

No.  248.      Friday,  December  14,  1 71 1. 

Lofl  a  Pocket  Book,  wherein,  among  other  Notes,  is 
a  Blank  Ticket  in  the  1500000  Lottery  for  the  Year 
171 1.  No.  85  m  786.  If  ofFer'd  to  be  Sold,  pray  give 
Notice  at  Braxton's  Coffee-houfe  in  Henrietta-ftreet 
near  Covent  Garden,  and  if  recovered,  the  Bearer  fhall 
receive  half  a  Guinea  reward  without  any  further  en- 
quiry. All  payments  are  flopt. 

No.  251.     Tuesday,  December  i8,  171 1. 

Whereas  a  Letter-Cafe  was  lofl  on  Thurfday  the  loth 
Inflant,  near  Chairing-Croff,  Goode  Square,  or  Stretten- 
Street,  fome  time  that  Afternoon,  wherein  was  five  Ex- 
chequer Bills,  Numb.  24805,  25584,  29780,  30816, 
each  for  25I.  and  19 191,  or  21059,  or  one  of  the  two 
[  149  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

laft  Numbers  for  a  Bill  of  50I.  and  alfo  one  Note  under 
the  Hand  of  Mr.  Cambell  for  15I.  payable  at  Demand, 
with  feveral  other  Notes  and  Receipts,  on  Accompt  of 
David  Lance.  Whoever  fhall  bring  the  faid  Letter-Cafe 
vi^ith  the  faid  Bills  and  Receipts  to  Mr.  Pyne  at  his 
CofFee-houfe  at  Scotland-yard  Gate,  fhall  receive  of  him 
10  Guineas  Reward,  Payment  of  every  one  of  them 

being  ftopt.  ^o.  274.     Monday,  January  14,  171 2. 

Loft  Yefterday  the  15th  Inftant,  between  11  and  12 
a  Clock,  between  the  Banquiting  houfe  and  Whitehall 
Gate,  the  following  Tickets  in  the  Lottery  171 1.  viz. 
No.  41222,  41223,  41224,  41226,  41227,  41229, 
41230.  Which  if  brought  to  Mr.  Tho.  Shettleworth  at 
Jonathan's  Coffee-houfe  in  Change  Ally,  (hall  have  los. 
Reward.  They  are  of  no  Ufe  but  to  the  Owner,  a  Stop 
being  put  to  the  Payment  of  them. 

No.  380.     Friday,  May  16,  17 12. 

Stole  laft  Night  from  Charles  Lillie's  Shop  at  the 
Corner  of  Beauford-Buildings  in  the  Strand,  a  Copper 
Jar,  which  holds  about  10  Gallons,  with  about  5  Gal- 
lons of  Orange  Flower-water  in  it.  If  fuch  Jar,  either 
with  or  without  the  Water,  be  offerM  to  Sale,  you  are 
defired  to  stop  it,  and  give  Notice  to  Mr.  Lillie,  who 
on  recovery  of  it,  promifes  half  a  Guinea  reward. 

No.  293.     Tuesday,  February  5,  171a. 

FOUND  OR  STOPPED 

Whereas  a  Cane  was  fome  time  fince  left  at  Steel's 
Coffee-houfe  in  Bread-ftreet  by  a  Perfon  unknown.  The 

[  150] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Owner  defcribing  it,  and  paying  the  Charge  of  this  Ad- 
vertifement,  may  have  it  again. 

No.  338.     Friday,  March  28,  1712. 

Whereas  about  1 8  Months  ago  there  was  a  parcel  of 
Gloves  left  at  the  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of  Stairs's 
in  Arlington-ftreet ;  if  any  Perfon  name  the  Quantities 
and  Colours,  paying  the  Charges,  may  enquire  of  Mr. 
Breeman  Upholfterer  next  Door  to  the  One  Tun  Tav- 
ern in  the  Strand,  and  they  may  have  them  again. 

No.  395.      Tuesday,  June  3,  1712. 

Stopped  a  Silver  Spoon,  fuppofed  to  be  ftolen.  The 
Perfon  that  owns  the  fame,  defcribing  the  Marks,  and 
paying  the  Charges  of  this  Advertifement,  may  have  it 
again  of  Mr.  Delander  Watchmaker,  at  the  Dial  with- 
out Temple-bar.  Nq.  ^^^^     Tuesday,  November  25,  17 12. 

CRIMINALS 

Whereas  the  Houfe  of  John  Smith,  Efq ;  of  Beau- 
fort Buildings  in  the  Strand,  was  broke  open  on  Friday 
Morning  the  2d  of  this  Inftant  November,  between  the 
Hours  of  3  and  4  of  the  Clock,  and  one  of  his  Servants 
Shot  by  a  Perfon  concerned  in  the  faid  Burglary ;  thefe 
are  to  give  Notice,  that  whoever  ftiall  apprehend  or  dif- 
cover  one  or  more  of  the  faid  Burglars,  fo  that  he  or  they 
may  be  brought  to  Juftice  for  the  fame,  fhall  receive, 
upon  the  Conviction  of  any  of  the  faid  Burglars,  over 
and  above  the  40I.  allowed  by  Kdi  of  Parliament,  the 
Sum  of  50I.  to  be  paid  by  the  faid  John  Smith,  Esq.  N.  B. 
By  the  A6t  of  the  fifth  of  Queen  Ann,  any  Perfon  con- 
cerned in  the  breaking  open  Houfes,  who  fhall  difcover 

[  isi  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

two  or  more  of  his  Accomplices,  upon  their  Convidlion 
is  Intituled  to  the  Reward  of  40I.  given  by  that  A61, 

and  to  his  Pardon.  ^o.  213.      Saturday,  November  3,1711. 

Whereas  on  Saturday  May  lo,  171 2.  about  Eleven 
of  the  Clock  at  Night,  between  Columbton  and  Brad- 
nich  in  Devon,  Robert  Bathe,  the  Bath  Carrier,  was 
robbed,  and  had  a  Portmanteau  Trunk  broke  open,  and 
the  following  things  taken  out,  a  Gold  repeating  Watch, 
the  Cafe  finely  Engraved,  and  pierced  with  a  Gold 
Chain  and  Gold  Hook  ;  a  Triangular  Cornifh  Diamond, 
with  a  Coat  of  Arms  cut  on  one  fide,  a  Cheveron  be- 
tween 3  Partridges,  another  Coat  on  the  fame  fide,  a 
Cheveron  and  a  Label  with  3  Points,  a  third  Coat  a 
Mule  Paflant  fet  in  a  Gold  Frame ;  a  Silver  Knife, 
Fork  and  Spoon,  a  fmall  Silver  Porringer,  a  fmall  Silver 
Cup  in  the  fhape  of  a  Boat  with  a  foot,  a  Ruby  Ring  of 
fix  Diamonds,  a  Turky  Ring  of  two  Diamonds,  two 
Necklaces  of  Pearl,  one  of  three,  the  other  of  four  rows, 
a  Gold  Thimble,  a  Gold  wrought  Purfe,  a  pair  of  green 
Stone  Ear  rings,  a  Cornelian  Ring,  a  gilt  Twitzer  Cafe, 
with  a  little  Border,  a  Turky  Handkerchief  Scarlet, 
Gold  and  Silver,  8  Cambrick  Handkerchiefs,  3  markt 
E.  G.  5  markt  A.  G.  one  blue  and  Silver  wrought 
Handkerchief,  3  Cambrick  ones  markt  with  P.  If  any 
one  will  difcover  the  aforefaid  Goods,  fo  as  they  may  be 
had  again,  to  Mr.  Twining  at  his  CofFee-houfe  in  Dev- 
ereux  Court  without  Temple-bar,  Mr.  Philip  Bifhop 
Bookfeller  in  Exeter,  or  Mr.  Yorbury  in  Bath,  fhall 
receive  10  Guineas  reward,  or  proportionately  for  any 

P^rt*  No.  381.      Saturday,  May  17,  171 2. 

[  152  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Leave  Barlow,  Servant  to  Captain  Jofiah  Clifton  of 
great  Yarmouth,  went  away  from  his  faid  Mafter  on  the 
1 8th  of  this  Inftant,  with  a  confiderable  Sum  of  Money, 
and  a  dark  brown  Mare  about  1 3  hands  and  a  half  high, 
the  Hair  chaffed  off  of  her  Sides,  and  a  Scar  on  her  off 
Shoulder  before.  He  is  about  45  Years  of  Age,  of  a 
middle  Stature,  pretty  Fat,  full  Faced,  of  a  fwarthy  Com- 
plexion, and  Pox-Broken,  wears  a  dark  brown  Wigg, 
and  a  grey  Coat  let  out  on  the  Sides.  He  was  feen  com- 
ing to  London,  and  'tis  thought  is  defigned  for  Ire- 
land. Whoever  fecures  him  and  give  Notice  to  Mr. 
Charles  Lovell,  at  No.  5.  in  Bur-ftreet,  by  the  Herma- 
tage  near  the  Tower,  or  to  his  Mafter  aforefaid,  fhall 
have  5I.  Reward  and  reafonable  Charges. 

No.  388.      Monday,  May  26,  1712. 


RUNAWAYS  AND  DESERTERS 

Deferted  the  27th  Inftant  from  Captain  Bollington, 
of  Sir  Robert  Rich's  Regiment,  John  Fitz  Patrick,  aged 
25  years,  five  foot  fix  Inches  high,  lufty  and  large  lim'd, 
frefh  Complexion,  ftiort  curl'd  Hair  of  a  dark  brown 
colour,  clothed  in  a  dark  double-breafted  Frize  Coat, 
lined  with  blue,  and  a  light  coloured  Cloth  Wastecoat 
and  Britches,  he  is  fuppos'd  to  be  gone  to  Holly-head, 
in  order  to  imbark  for  Ireland,  he  being  a  Native  of  that 
Country  :  Whoever  fecures  him  and  gives  notice  to  the 
faid  Captain  at  Young-Man's  CofFee-houfe  at  Charing 
CrofT,  fhall  have  two  Guineas  Reward,  or  if  he  will  re- 
turn in  ten  Days  he  fhall  be  pardoned. 

No.  25.     Thursday,  March  29,  1711. 

[  153  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

An  Apprentice  left  his  Bufinefs  Monday-Noon,  and 
wrote  a  Letter  to  his  Mafter  dated  i6  October ;  if  he  '11 
return  he  (hall  find  all  fitting  Encouragement  from  his 
Father  and  Mother. 

No.  198.      Wednesday,  October  17,  1711. 

Went  from  his  Mafter,  July  31.  a  Boy  about  15  Years 
old,  in  a  Drab  Coat  with  Loops,  dark  Cinnamon  Drug- 
get Waftcoat,  Serge-denim  Breeches  near  the  fame 
Colour,  light  gray  Hofe,  pale  Complexion,  black  Hair, 
and  fpeaks  French ;  fuppofed  to  be  with  two  Accom- 
plices a  little  bigger  than  himfelf,  one  of  'em  in  a  White 
Coat,  the  other  a  dark  Cinnamon,  and  crooked  Knees, 
(as  it  was  advertifed  in  the  Courant  and  Evening  Poft  the 
5th  Inftant) ;  but  now  fuppofed  to  have  a  third,  in  a 
new  Cinnamon  Coloured  Suit,  and  well  drefled,  fome- 
thing  taller  than  the  reft.  Whoever  fecures  this  Boy 
aforefaid,  and  either  brings  him,  or  gives  Notice  of  him, 
to  Mr.  William  Hafkell  in  Bazinghall-ftreet,  ftiall  be 
very  well  rewarded  j  or,  if  he  will  return  to  his  faid  Maf- 
ter, he  fhall  be  kindly  received. 

Vol.  vm,  No.  577.     Friday,  August  6,  1714. 

LACE, 

FABRICS, 

AND 

CLOTHING 

There  being  a  frefti  and  clean  Parcel  of  Silk  Gowns 
lately  laid  in  at  Mrs.  Attaway's  in  Devereaux  Court,  in 
the  Paffage  from  the  Temple  to  Eflex-buildings ;  this  is 
[  154] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

to  inform  all  Gentlemen  and  Ladies,  that  they  may  be 
furnished  at  a  cheaper  Rate  than  ordinary;  the  Silks 
being  bought  up  of  Perfons  that  have  left  ofF  Trade,  and 
the  Price  fet  upon  each  Gown,  whereby  any  Perfon  may 
be  fatisfied  that  they  have  them  worth  their  Money.  Note, 
There  are  Calamancoe  Gowns  lin'd  with.Sattinets  and 
Poplins,  large  Size  at  30s.  midling  at  28s.  apiece. 

No.  18.      Wednesday,  March  21,  171 1. 

Whereas  it  hath  been  reported  that  Carew  Reynell, 
Mercer,  at  the  Black-a-Moors  Head  in  Bedford  Street 
Covent  Garden,  intended  to  leave  of  his  Trade,  this  is 
therefore  to  fatisfie  all  Perfons  whom  it  may  concern, 
that  the  faid  Report  is  utterly  falfe  and  groundlefs,  and 
that  the  faid  Carew  Reynell  hath  no  fuch  intention,  but 
continues  at  the  aforefaid  Shop  together  with  his  Part- 
ners, Triftram  Huddlefton,  Ifaac  Spiltimber  and  Samuel 
Wrexham,  the  faid  Triftram  Huddleston  and  Samuel 
Wrexham  being  removed  from  the  Wheat-Sheaf  in  Bed- 
ford Street  to  the  Black-a-Moors  Head,  viz.  where  there 
is  the  greateft  variety  of  new  Silks  of  all  kinds  and  forts, 
from  the  higheft  to  the  loweft  price,  to  be  fold  at  rea- 
sonable rates.  No.  37.     Thursday,  April  12,  171 1. 

To  be  Sold,  at  a  lower  Rate  than  ordinary,  at  the 
Queen's  Head  joining  to  the  Church  Gate  in  Bedford- 
ftreet,  Covent-Garden,  all  forts  of  Druggets,  Hair  and 
Worfted  Camlets,  Sagathies,  Duroys,  Shagreens,  Shal- 
loons, Durants,  Padua  Serges,  Shags,  Serge  de  Nifms, 
Calamancoes,  and  all  other  Goods  fit  for  Mens  Apparel. 
The  Perfons  who  now  keep  the  Shop  defigning  to  leave 

[  15s  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

off  the  Trade ;  and  the  Houfe  and  Shop  to  be  let  at 

Michaelmas  next.  ^o.  68.      Friday,  May  1 8,  1 71 1. 

All  Sorts  of  Sattin  and  Perfian  Quilted  Cooats,  alfo 
Canvafs  Hooped  Petticoats,  made  by  the  D.  of  Monta- 
gue's Mantua-maker.  To  be  Sold  at  the  Gown  (hop  at 
the  Sign  of  the  Hood  and  Scarf  over-againft  Wills  Coffee- 
houfe  in  Cornhill,  where  Gentlemen  and  Ladies  may  be 
fitted  with  great  Variety  of  the  Niceft  Silk  Gowns  of 
All  Prices,  and  at  very  low  rates. 

No.  165.      Saturday,  September  8,  171 1. 

Jane  Watkins  and  Sarah  Reeves,  that  makes  all  Sorts 
of  Petticoats,  Stays,  Jumps,  boned  Waftcoats,  Canvas 
Coats,  and  the  new-fafhioned  quilted  Petticoats  ready 
made,  are  removed  from  Drury  lane  to  the  Golden  Spire 
in  Lyle-ftreet,  Leicefter-Fields. 

No.  192.     Wednesday,  October  10,  171 1. 

At  the  Lace-Chamber  on  Ludgate-Hill,  kept  by  Mary 
Parfons,  is  a  great  Quantity  of  Flander's  Lace,  lately 
come  over,  to  be  fold  off  at  great  Pennyworths  by  Whole- 
fale  or  Retail.  She  bought  them  there  her  felf. 

No.  200.     Friday,  October  19,  17 1 1. 

At  the  Indian  Man  in  Ruffel-Street  in  Covent-Gar- 
den,  up  one  pair  of  Stairs,  is  to  be  Sold  at  Reafonable 
Rates  all  forts  of  fine  Macklin  and  Bruffels  Lace,  fine 
fhort  Aprons,  Scarfes,  rich  Handkerchiefs,  &c. 

No.  249.     Saturday,  December  15,  171 1. 

Whereas  John  Prince,  John  Sadler,  and  William  Jod- 
rell,  Mercers,  at  the  Black  Lyon  in  Kingftreet  Covent 

[  156  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Garden,  have  refolved  to  leave  off  the  Mercers  Trade, 
Thefe  are  to  give  Notice,  That  at  the  faid  Shop  are  to 
be  sold  at  very  low  Prices,  all  Sorts  of  the  neweft  Faihion 
Gold  and  Silver  Silks,  and  Attlafles,  Flowered  and  plain 
Velvets,  Silk  Brocades,  flowered  and  plain  Sattins,  Dam- 
asks, Watered  Tabbies,  Farendines  and  Mohairs,  Sha- 
greens, Sarfnets,  Perfians,  Silk  Night  Gowns,  Thread  Sat- 
tins, Poplins,  Norwich  Crapes,  Silk  and  other  Druggets, 
Hair  and  Worfted  Camblets,  Hair  Shags  and  Shaloons. 

No.  411.     Saturday,  June  21,  1 71 2. 

At  the  Lace-Chamber  on  Ludgate-Hill,  kept  by  Mary 
Parfons,  is  lately  come  over  great  Quantities  of  Flanders 
Lace,  as  Bruflels  Lace,  and  Macklins,  and  whole  Lace 
Heads,  with  great  Variety  of  the  neweft  Fafhion  Pat- 
terns. She  buying  them  in  Flanders  her  self,  will  Sell 
great  Pennyworths, 

No.  501.      Saturday,  October  4,  171 2. 

At  the  old  Warehoufe,  is  just  now  made  up  a  frelh 
Parcel  of  Morning-Gowns  for  Men  and  Women  of  Bro- 
cades, rich  Damafks,  Sattens,  Callicoes  and  Stuffs,  with 
very  fuitable  Linings ;  and  will  be  fold  much  cheaper 
than  the  Shops  can  afford,  the  Goods  being  bought  of 
People  that  broke.  Several  pretend  to  fell  under  the  fame 
Notion,  but  the  greateft  Choice  and  beft  Pennyworths 
is  at  the  golden  Sugar-Loaf  right  againft  the  Horfe  at 
Charing-Crofs,  with  the  neweft  fort  of  Canvis  and 
Quilted  Petticoats. 

No.  510.      Wednesday,  October  15,  171 2. 

At  the  Star  and  two  Rowls  of  Silk  in  St.  Martins  le 
Grand,  the  firft  Silk  Shop  on  the  right  Hand  going  down 

C  157  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

St.  Martins  from  Newgate-ftreet,  is  fold  all  Sorts  of  the 
beft  black  Silks,  white  Sarcenets,  and  Perfions,  likewife 
coloured  Mantuas  and  colour'd  Perfions,  either  by  whole- 
fale  or  retale,  very  great  Pennyworths,  and  furbelow'd 
Scarfs  and  Aprons  ready  made.  Note,  The  Shop  is  a  new 

^  J  ^  *  No.  514.     Monday,  October  20,  1712. 

A  large  Parcel  of  fine  Muflins,  to  be  fold  by  the  fingle 
Piece,  at  Merchant  Taylors  Hall  in  Thread-needle- 
ftreet.  Attendance  will  be  given  from  nine  in  the  Morn- 
ing till  fix  in  the  Evening,  till  all  are  fold.  Note,  they  will 
be  fold  very  cheap. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  585.     Wednesday,  August  25,  1714. 

TEA, 

COCOA, 

CHOCOLATE, 

SNUFF 

Plain  Spanlfh  SnufF 

Right  and  Fine,  in  Tin  Pots,  at  5s.  per  Pound.  Fine 
Brazil  SnufF  at  3s.  an  Ounce,  40s.  per  Pound  ;  alfo  frefh 
Lifbon  Snuff  and  other  Snuffs.  To  be  fold  by  Mr.  Francis 
Zouch,  in  Thames-ftreet,  at  the  corner  of  Garlick-Hill, 
near  Queen-hith,  by  Wholefale  or  Retail.  ^^  Note, 
Garlick-hill  is  at  the  bottom  of  Bow-lane,  Cheapside. 

No.  10.      Monday,  March  12,  17 11. 

There  is  a  Parcel  of  extraordinary  fine  Bohee  Tea  to 
be  fold  at  26s.  per  Pound,  at  the  Sign  of  the  Barber's 

[  158] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Pole  next  Door  to  the  Brafier's  Shop  in  Southampton 
Street  in  the  Strand.  N.B.  The  fame  is  to  be  fold  from  lo 
to  12  in  the  Morning,  and  from  2  to  4  in  the  Afternoon. 

No.  28.     Monday,  April  2,  171 1. 

The  Duty  on  Cocoa  Nuts  being  made  double  what 
it  was  by  the  laft  Parliament,  Cocoa  Nutts  are  confid- 
erably  advanced,  Mr.  Fary  gives  Notice  that  he  fhall  fell 
Chocolate  at  his  ufual  Rates,  'till  September  next,  viz. 
Chocolate  made  of  the  beft  Craco  Nutts  3s.  a  pound, 
Craco  and  Martinico  2s.  6d.  Chocolate  with  Sugar  2od. 
and  fine  green  Tea,  tho'  far  exceeding  any  Tea  of  the 
two  laft  Sales,  for  the  common  Price.  Sold  at  the  Bell 
in  Grace-Church-ftreet  near  Grace-Church,  Druggifts. 

No.  129.      Saturday,  July  28,  1 71 1. 

Chocolate  made  of  the  beft  Cracco  and  Martineco 
Nuts,  an  equal  Quantity  of  each,  2s.  6d.  per  Pound  ;  all 
Cracco  Nut  3s.  per  Pound.  Sold  by  Rob.  Fary  Drug- 
gift  in  Grace  church-ftreet ;  where  Chocolate-Makers 
may  be  furnifti'd  with  all  forts  of  Coaco  Nuts. 

No.  170.     Friday,  September  14,  1 711. 

Green  Tea  los.  a  Pound,  equal  in  goodnefs  with  moft 
Green  Tea  fold  at  13  or  14s.  a  Pound,  Chocolate  made 
of  Cracco  Nuts  only  3s.  a  Pound,  Chocolate  made  of 
Cracco  and  Martineco  2s.  6d.  a  Pound.  To  a  quantity 
good  Allowance.  Sold  by  Robert  Fary,  Druggift  in  Grace- 
church-ftreet ;  where  Cracco  and  Martineco  Cocoa  Nutts 
may  be  had,  no  place  cheaper,  and  the  choiceft  Green 
Tea  in  England. 

No.  257.     December  25,  17 11. 

[  IS9  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

WINES 

Wines  to  be  fold  by  Retail. 

To  Morrow  next,  the  4th  Inftant,  will  be  fold  excel- 
lent Red  and  White  Port;  and  Red  and  White  Lisbon, 
being  neat  Wines  as  they  come  from  the  Grape,  of  the 
beft  Growth  in  Portugal.  To  be  fold  by  the  Importer 
in  a  Vault  in  Brabant  Court  in  Philpot-Lane,  viz.  Red 
and  White  Port  at  5s.  per  Gallon,  or  14I  perHhd.  Red 
and  White  Lifbon  at  5s.  6d.  per  Gallon,  or  16I.  per 
Hhd.  Attendance  will  be  given  every  Day. 

No.  186.     Wednesday,  October  3,  171 1. 

At  the  Green  Man  and  Still  in  Grace-Church-Street, 
for  the  Accommodation  of  Gentlemen  in  Town  and 
Country,  is  fold  a  rare  Compofition  with  which  at  a  Min- 
ute's Notice  may  be  made  a  Bowl  of  the  cleareft  and 
beft  Punch  as  can  be  drank,  only  by  adding  to  it  the  like 
Quantity  of  Spring- Water  :  This  Compofition  is  of  the 
beft  French  Brandy,  Battava-Arrack,  Juice  of  the  fineft 
Lemons,  beft  double  refined  Loaf-Sugar,  of  each  an  equal 
proportion,  to  anfwer  the  like  Quantity  of  Spring- Water  : 
This  is  only  to  fave  Gentlemen  trouble  in  preparing  it. 
It  may  be  drank  in  kind  :  It  is  a  noble  Cordial,  and  will 
never  decay,  but  be  the  better  for  keeping.  Price  but  3s. 
a  Quart. 

No.  242.     Friday,  December  7,  1711. 

This  is  to  give  Notice,  That  Mr.  Eftcourt  has  chofen 
and  laid  in  to  the  Bumper  Tavern  in  James's-ftreet, 
Covent  Garden,  (which  will  be  opened  on  Tuefday  the 
firft  of  January  with  the  beft  Accommodation)  neat  nat- 

[  160] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

ural  Wines,  frefh  and  in  Perfection ;  being  bought  of 
Brooke  and  Hellier,  by  whom  the  faid  Tavern  will  from 
Time  to  Time  be  fupplied  with  the  beft  Growths  that 
fhall  be  imported ;  to  be  fold  by  Wholefale  as  well  as 
retail  with  the  utmoft  Fidelity  by  his  old  Servant  trufty 
Anthony,  who  has  fo  often  adorned  both  the  Theatres 
in  England  and  Ireland ;  and  as  he  is  a  Perfon  altogether 
unknowing  in  the  Wine  Trade,  it  cannot  be  doubted 
but  that  he  will  deliver  the  Wine  in  the  fame  natural 
Purity  that  he  receives  it  from  the  faid  Merchants  :  And 
on  thefe  Affurances  he  hopes  that  all  his  Friends  and 
Acquaintance  will  become  his  Cuftomers,  defiring  a 
Continuance  of  their  Favours  no  longer  than  they  fliall 
find  themfelves  well  ferved.  Note,  The  beft  Growths 
of  France  will  alfo  conftantly  be  fold  at  the  abovefaid 

Tavern.  No.  260.      Friday,  December  28,   171 1. 

Brooke  and  Hillier  give  Notice,  that  they  have  now 
on  the  Road  from  Briftol  an  entire  Cargo  of  the  Johns 
Galley,  (confifting  of  140  Pipes  of  new  natural  Oporto 
Wines ;  Red  and  White)  which  is  the  only  Ship  except 
one  more  that  has  efcaped  the  Enemy  this  Year,  loaden 
with  thofe  fort  of  Wines ;  which  however  fhall  be  fold 
in  all  their  Taverns  and  Cellars  at  the  fame  Prices  as 
formerly,  viz.  at  i8d.  per  Quart,  or  17I.  per  Hhd.  with- 
out Doors,  and  2od.  per  Quart  within  Doors. 

No.  326.     Friday,  March  14,  1712. 

Brooke  and  Hellier  having  efFeClually  difcovered  and 

prevented  the  Abufes  in  the  Portugal  Wine-Trade,  by 

retaling  the  Wines  of  their  own  importstion,  and  being 

defirous  to  do  the  fame  in  the  Florence  Wine-Trade ; 

[  i6i  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

in  which,  the  corrupt  Practices  afFe6i:  the  Wines  before 
Importation  as  well  as  afterwards,  hereby  give  Notice, 
That  they  have  fettled  a  Correfpondence  with  one  of 
the  principal  Proprietors  of  the  beft  Chianti  Vineyards, 
in  order  to  be  conftantly  fupplied  with  true  Florence 
Wine  of  the  beft  Quality ;  as  a  Specimen  whereof,  they 
have  juft  landed  a  Cargo  of  the  faid  Wines,  without 
any  of  the  ufual  Mixtures  fo  commonly  pra^lifed  at 
Leghorne ;  and  which  caufes  much  more  Wine  to  come 
hither  under  the  Name  of  Florence,  than  is  the  natural 
Produ6t  of  the  Place.  The  above  faid  Wine  is  fold  at 
all  their  Taverns  and  Cellars,  at  2s.  6d.  per  Quart,  9s. 
per  lingle  Gallon,  and  after  the  Rate  of  8  s.  per  Gallon 
for  no  lefs  Quantity  than  30  Gallons. 

Note,  Their  New-Ports  juft  landed,  being  the  only 
New-Ports  in  Merchants  Hands,  and  above  one  Half 
of  all  that  is  in  London,  will  begin  to  be  fold,  at  the  old 
Prices,  the  12th  Inftant,  at  all  their  Taverns  and  Cellars  ; 
but  their  natural  Rota  Tent  is  fold  only  under  St.  James's 
Market-houfe  at  3s.  6d.  per  Quart,  without  any  Abate- 
ment for  a  larger  Quantity. 

No.  346.     Monday,  April  7,  17 12. 

This  is  to  give  Notice,  That  Brooke  and  Hellier  have 
not  all  the  New-Port  Wines  this  Year,  nor  above  one 
half,  the  Vintners  having  bought  130  Pipes  of  Mr. 
Thomas  Barlow  and  others,  and  which  are  all  natural, 
and  ftiall  remain  Genuine,  on  which  all  Gentlemen  and 
others  may  depend.  Note,  Altho'  Brooke  and  Hellier 
have  aflerted  in  feveral  Papers,  that  they  had  140  Pipes 
of  New-Oporto  Wines  coming  from  Briftol,  it  now  ap- 
[    163    ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

pears,  fince  their  landing,  that  they  have  only  133  Pipes 
I  Hhd.  of  the  faid  Wines,  which  fhews  plainly  how  little 
what  they  fay  is  to  be  credited. 

No.  346,     Monday,  April  7,  1 7 12. 

Noble  CANARY 

In  a  Vault  under  Lewis's  Coffee-houfe,  over-againft 
Cecil-ftreet  in  the  Strand,  is  now  to  be  fold  a  choice 
Parcel  of  Canary  that  is  perfedtly  fine  and  fit  for  Bottling, 
at  7s.  6d.  per  Gallon,  or  2s.  per  Quart. 

No.  546.     Wednesday,  November  26,  171 2. 

John  Hellier,  Merchant,  (formerly  in  Partnerfhip  with 
Tho.  Brooke)  continues  to  fell  neat  Wines  of  his  own 
Importation  in  their  natural  Purity,  as  formerly,  in  a 
Vault  under  St.  James's  Market ;  Red  and  White  Port 
Wines,  at  is.  6d.  per  Quart;  Canary,  2s.  per  Quart; 
White  Anadia,  at  2od.  per  Quart,  or  6s.  6d.  per  Gal- 
lon ;  Mountain,  Carcavalla,  and  Rhenifh  Wines,  at  2s. 
per  Quart,  or  7s.  6d.  per  Gallon ;  French  Wine,  at  2s. 
3d.  per  Quart,  and  the  beft  Sorts  at  2s.  6d.  and  3s.  per 
Quart,  or  3s.  and  3s.  6d.  per  Flafk ;  beft  Malmfey  Mo- 
dera,  at  2s.  6d.  per  Quart ;  and  new  Chianti  Florence 
in  Cask,  at  2s.  per  Quart,  or  7s.  per  Gallon,  and  in 
Chefts,  at  4I.  each  or  2s.  3d.  per  Flalk,  of  40  Flafks 
to  the  Cheft.  N.  B.  To  prevent  any  Impofitions  of 
any  Kind  by  Gentlemens  Servants  miftaking  the  Vault, 
(which  hath  fometimes  happened)  printed  Receipts  will 
be  given  for  Money  received  there.  Note,  there  is  good 
Accomodation  for  Drinking  there.  Said  neat  Wines  are 
alfo  fold  at  Oakley's  CofFee-houfe  in  Newgate-Market. 

Vol.  viii,  No.  584.     Monday,  August  23,  1714. 

[  ^(>i  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

PUBLICATIONS 

SHOWING  THE  MANNERS  OF  THE  TIMES 

This  Day  is  Publifli'd, 

The  Rates  of  Hackney-Coaches  and  Chairs,  Settled 
(purfuant  to  Act  of  Parliament)  by  the  Commiflioners 
authorized  and  appointed  for  Licencing  and  Regulating 
Hackney-Coaches  and  Chairs  :  And  Printed  by  their 
Order,  by  Sam.  Buckley  for  Edward  Caftle,  and  Sold 
by  A.  Baldwin  in  Warwick-Lane.   Price  2d. 

No.   183.      Saturday,  September  29,  17 1 1. 

This  Day  is  Publifh'd, 

A  Vindication  of  the  Reverend  Mr.  William  Richard- 
fon,  from  the  Afperfions  caft  upon  him  by  Ellenor  Kirk, 
a  common  Proftitute,  and  in  two  Libels  intituled,  The 
Goat  in  Sheeps  Cloathing,  and  the  Preaching  Weather- 
cock. In  which  Vindication  the  many  Wrongs  that  have 
been  done  to  Mr.  Richardfon  are  fairly  Dete6led,  and 
his  Accufers  are  moft  juftly  cenfur'd.  In  a  Letter  to  Dr. 
Calamy  a  Diflenting  Minifter.  To  which  is  added  a  Re- 
lation of  the  great  Honours  that  was  lately  done  to  Mr. 
Richardfon  at  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  Where  (at  the 
Requeft  of  the  Vice  Chancellour,)  he  Preach'd  a  moft 
excellent  Sermon  to  that  Univerfity.  To  be  Sold  by  J. 
Baker,  in  Pater-Nofter  Row.   Price  6d. 

No.  488.      Friday,  September  19,  17 12. 

This  Day  is  publifh'd. 
The  Farthingale  revivM,  or  More  Work  for  a  Cooper : 
A  Panegyrick  on  the  late,  but  moft  admirable  Invention 

[  164] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

of  the  Hoop-Petticoat.  Written  at  the  Bath.  Sileat  Mi- 
racula  Memphis.  Sold  by  J.  Baker  in  Pater-nofter-Row. 
Where  may  be  had  the  Hiftory  of  AddrefTes,  Part  II, 
particularly  of  fuch  as  have  been  prefented  fince  the  Im- 
peachment of  Dr.  Sacheverel. 

No.  ii8.      Monday,  July  1 6,  1711. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

The  Court  and  City  Vagaries,  being  fome  late  (and 
real)  Intreagues  of  feveral  Gentlemen  and  Ladies.  Writ- 
ten by  one  of  the  fair  Sex,  price  6d.  Sold  by  J.  Baker 
in  Pater-nofter-row ;  where  may  be  had  the  Impartial 
View  of  the  two  late  Parliaments,  and  the  laft  Seflion, 
with  the  Irregularities  of  the  Convocation  from  their 
Original  to  this  time,  &c. 

No.  255.      Saturday,  December  22,  1711. 

Lately  publifli'd, 

Court  and  City  Vagaries,  being  fome  late  Intrigues 
of  feveral  Gentlemen  and  Ladies.  Pr.  6d.  An  Expofi- 
tion  of  that  difficult  Phrafe,  A  good  Peace.  Pr.  6d.  An 
Eflay  on  the  South  Sea  Trade.   Pr.  6d.  The  Ballance 

of  Europe.   Pr.  6d.  Eleven  Opinions  about  Mr.  H y. 

Pr.  IS.  iEsop  at  the  Oaober  Club.  Pr.  6d.  High- 
Church  Aphorifms.  Pr.  6d.  The  Conference  ;  or  Gregg's 
Ghoft.    Pr.  6d.    All  fold  by  J.  Baker  in  Pater-Nofter 

•  No.  274.      Monday,  January  14,  1712. 

A  Set  of  the  Cries  of  London,  conlifting  of  74  Prints, 
taken  ofFfrom  fo  many  Copper  Plates  curioufly  engraved, 
each  drawn  after  the  Life.  By  the  famous  M.  Laroon. 

[  165  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Printed  and  fold  by  Henry  Overton,  at  the  White  Horfe 
without  Newgate.  Price  los. 

No.  308.     Friday,  February  22,  1712. 

This  Day  is  Publifh'd  the  following  Books,  viz. 

I.  The  Tunbridge-Miscellany,  confifting  of  Poems, 
Letters,  &c.  Panegyrical  and  Satyrical ;  Written  at  the 
Wells  this  Summer :  With  a  particular  Account  of  the 
Twinging  Ladies.  Pr.  6d.  IL  Paftora,  or,  The  Coy  Shep- 
herdefs ;  on  Englifh  Opera,  as  it  was  feveral  times  per- 
form'd  by  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Richmond's  Servants 
at  Tunbridge  Wells  this  Summer.  Written  by  A.  Alton, 
Comedian.  Price  6d.  IIL  The  Life  of  Mr.  John  Locke, 
written  by  an  intimate  Friend.  Price  is.  IV.  Monf.de 
Clerk's  Life.  Pr.  is.  6d.  V.  The  Life  of  Dr.  Walter 
Curll,  Bp.  of  Winchefter;  Lord  Almoner  to  K.  Charles  L 
Pr.  IS.  VL  The  Carpenter  of  Oxford,  or.  The  Miller's 
Tale,  from  Chaucer,  Price  is.  All  fold  by  E.  Curll  at 
the  Dial  and  Bible  againft  St.  Dunftan's  Church  in  Fleet- 

Itreet.  jjq    ^j^^     Tuesday,  October  21,  1712. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

The  Works  of  Mr.  Nathaniel  Lee,  colleded  in  Two 
Vol.  Price  14s.  The  Works  of  Mr.  Wycherly, collected 
into  One  Vol.  Price  6s.  The  Lovers  Secretary,  or.  The 
Adventures  of  Lindamira,  a  Lady  of  Quality,  giving  an 
Account  of  her  Amours  and  Intreagues  from  Fifteen 
Years  to  Fifty.  Pr.  2s.  6d.  Incognita,  or,  Love  and  Duty 
reconcil'd,  a  Novel,  by  Mr.  Congreve  Price  is.  6d. 
Cocker's  Decimal  Arithmetick,  the  Fourth  Edit  corrected. 
Pr.  3s.  6d.  Printed  for  Richard  Wellington  at  the  Dol- 
[  166  j 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

phin  and  Crown  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard,  where  is  fold 

all  Sorts  of  Plays.  No.  516.     Wednesday,  October  22,  17 12. 

This  Day  is  Publiilied  in  a  neat  Pocket-Volume, 
printed  with  Elzevir  Letter  and  a  beautiful 
Frontifpiece,  the  Third  Edition,  with  large 
Additions,  of  feveral  Original  Poems,  of 

New  Mifcellany  Poems,  with  Five  Love-Letters  from 
a  Nun  to  a  Cavalier,  done  in  Verfe,  Price  is.  6d.  A 
Catalogue  of  all  the  Plays  ever  yet  printed  in  the  Eng- 
lifli  Tongue,  with  the  Author's  Name  againft  each  Play 
alphabetically;  digefted,  and  continued  down  to  this 
Time,  Price  6d.  She  wou'd  and  fhe  wou'd  not,  or,  The 
kind  Impoftor,  by  Mr.  Cibber,  Price  I2d.  All  Printed 
for  W.  Mears  at  the  Lamb  without  Temple-Barr  :  Of 
whom  may  be  had  Variety  of  good  Plays  very  cheap. 

Vol.  viii,  No.  563.     Monday,  July  5,  1 7 14. 

On  Saturday  next  will  be  publifhed 
A  Book,  (formerly  fo  often  mentioned  in  the  Spect- 
ator) intituled.  The  Ladies  Library.  Written  by  a  Lady. 
Publifhed  by  Mr.  Steele.  Confifting  of  general  Rules  for 
Condu6t  in  all  the  Circumftances  of  the  Life  of  Women. 
Printed  for  Jacob  Tonfon,  at  Shakefpear's  Head,  over- 
againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  603.    Wednesday,  October  6,  1 71 4. 

LITERATURE 

(other    THAN    dramas) 

This  day  is  Publifh'd,  and  Printed  very  Corredlly 
with  a  neat  Elzever  Letter  for  the  Pocket  j  Poems  on 

[  167] 


specimen  Advertifements 

feveral  Occafions,  written  by  Mr.  Prior.  Printed  for 
Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's  Head  over-againft  Catha- 
rine-ftreet  in  the  Strand,     t.,     ,  „     o  .   j      t 

No.  105.      Saturday,  June  30,  171 1. 

An  Eflay  concerning  Humane  Underftanding :  In  4 
Books.  Written  by  John  Locke,  Gent.  The  6th  Edi- 
tion with  large  Additions,  in  2  Vol.  Printed  for  A.  and 
J.  Churchill  at  the  Black  Swan  in  Pater-nofter-row. 

No.  16,      Monday,  March  19,  1711. 

Juft  Publlfhed,  and  Printed  very  Corredly,  with 
neat  Elzever  Letter,  in  i2mo.  for  the  Pocket, 
Paradife  Loft,  a  Poem  in  twelve  Books,  written  by 
Mr.  John  Milton.  The  Ninth  Edition,  adorn'd  with 
Sculptures.  Printed  for  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over  againft  Catherine  Street  in  the  Strand. 

No.  29.     Tuesday,  April  3,  171 1. 

This  Day  is  publifh'd. 
An  ESSAY  on  CRITICISM.  Printed  for  W.  Lewis 
in  Ruflel  ftreet,  Covent  Garden  ;  and  Sold  by  W.  Tay- 
lor, at  the  Ship  in  Pater-Nofter-Row ;  T.  Osborn,  in 
Grays-Inn  near  the  Walks ;  J.  Graves,  in  St.  James's- 
ftreet ;  and  J.  Morphew,  near  Stationers-Hall.   Price  is. 

No.  65.     Tuesday,  May  15,  171 1. 

Lately  Publifhed, 

An  ESSAY  upon  CRITICISM. 

Si  quid  novifti  reftius  iftis,  Candidus  imperii;  fi  non, 
his  utere  mecum.  Horat. 

Printed  for  W.  Lewis  in  Ruflel  ftreet,  Covent  Gar- 
den ;  and  fold  by  J.  Morphew  near  Stationer's-Hall. 

No.  263.     Tuesday,  January  i,  17 12. 

[  168  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Juft  Publifh'd, 

*^*  Nereides ;  or,  Sea  Eclogues  :  Infcrib'd  to  Mr. 
Congreve.  Printed  for  E.  Sanger  at  the  Poft-houfe  at 
the  Middle-Temple-Gate  in  Fleet-ftreet :  Where  may 
be  had  the  Life  of  Mr.  Tho.  Betterten,  the  late  Emi- 
nent Tragedian  ;  and  the  Works  of  Monfieur  Boileau  : 
Made  Englifh  from  the  Paris  Edition.  To  which  is  pre- 
fixed his  Life,  written  to  Jofeph  Addifon,  Efq  ;  and  fome 
Account  of  the  Tranflation  :  By  N.  Row,  Efq  ;  Adorn'd 

with  Cuts.  No.  336.      Wednesday,  March  26,  17 12. 

Juft  PubliftiM, 
The  Chriftian  Hero,  or  no  Principles  but  thofe  of  Re- 
ligion fufficient  to  make  a  Great  Man.  Written  by  Mr. 
Steel.  The  6th  Edition.  i2mo.  The  Works  of  Mr. 
Thomas  Otway,  containing  his  Plays,  Poems  and  Love 
Letters,  in  2  Vols.  i2mo.  Both  Printed  on  a  neat  Elzevir 
Letter,  for  J.  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's  Head  over-againft 
Catherine  Street  in  the  Strand. 

No.  517.     Thursday,  October  23,  17 12. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed,  the  Second  Edition  of 

The  Shepherd's  Week  in  Six  Paftorals,  by  Mr.  Gay ; 
to  which  is  added,  an  alphabetical  Catalogue  of  Names, 
Plants,  Flowers,  Fruits,  Birds,  Beafts,  Infects,  and  other 
material  Things  mentioned  by  this  Author.  Sold  by  W. 
Taylor  at  the  Ship  in  Pater-nofter-Row,  price  is.  Where 
may  be  had,  the  Seventh  Edition  of  Dr.  Garth's  Difpen- 
fary,  with  feveral  Defcriptions  and  Epifodes  never  before 
Printed,  alfo  a  Cut  to  each  Canto,  price  is.  6d.  A  Key 

[  169] 


specimen  Advertifements 

to  the  Difpenfary,  containing  explanatory  Notes  for  the 
better  Underftanding  of  the  Author,  price  6d. 

Vol.  viii,  No.  579.     Wednesday,  August  1 1,  1714. 

The  Firft  and  Second  Volumes  of  the  Speftator  in 
8vo  are  now  ready  to  be  delivered  to  the  Subfcribers,  by 
J.  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's  Head  over-againft  Catherine- 

ftreet  in  the  Strand.  No.  269.     Tuesday,  January  8,  1712. 

Juft  Publifh'd, 
A  very  neat  Pocket  Edition  of  the  3d  and  4th  Vol- 
umes of  the  Spectator  in  12°.  To  which  is  added  a 
compleat  Index  to  the  whole  4  Volumes.  Printed  for  S. 
Buckley  at  the  Dolphin  in  Little  Britain,  and  J.  Ton- 
fon at  Shakefpear's   Head  over-againft  Catherine-ftreet 

m  the  Strand.  ^o.  537.     Saturday,  November  15,  1712. 

Juft  Publiftied, 
A  neat  Pocket  Edition  of  the  3d  and  4th  Vols,  of 
Spectators,  with  an  Index  to  the  whole  4  Vols.  Tatlers 
in  4  Vols.  The  Funeral,  Tender  Husband  and  Lying 
Lovers,  Comedies  written  by  Mr.  Steele,  Prior's  Poems, 
Milton's  Paradife  Loft,  Hudibrafs,  and  the  Chriftian 
Hero,  by  Mr.  Steele,  the  laft  Edition.  Printed,  and  Sold 
by  Owen  Lloyd  near  the  Church  in  the  Temple.  N.  B. 
All  are  printed  with  an  Elzever  Letter,  and  in  a  fmall 

Pocket  Volume.  No.  541.     Thursday,  November  20,  1712. 

DRAMAS 

The  laft  new  Comedy,  call'd.  The  Wife's  Relief;  or, 
the  Huft)and's  Cure.  By  Mr.  Charles  Johnfon.  Printed 
[  170  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

for  Jacob  Tonfon   at  Shakefpears    Head   over  againft 
Katherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  274.     Monday,  January  14,  1712. 

Juft  Publifhed,  the  2d  Edition  of. 
The  Diftreft  Mother.  A  Tragedy.  As  it  is  adled  at  the 
Theatre  Royal  in  Drury  Lane  by  Her  Majefty's  Servants. 
Written  by  Mr.  Philips.  Printed  for  S.  Buckley  at  the 
Dolphin  in  Little-Britain,  and  J.  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No    388.     Monday,  May  26,  17 1 2. 

Juft  Publiflied,  neatly  Printed  with  an  Elziver 
Letter  and  Cuts, 
Abra-Mule ;  or,  Love  and  Empire,  a  Tragedy,  price 
IS.  Alfo,  She  wou'd  and  She  wou'd  not;  or,  the  Kind 
Impoftor,  A  Comedy,  by  Mr.  Cibber,  price  is.  Printed 
for  W.  Mears  at  the  Lamb,  and  J.  Brown  at  the  Black 
Swan  without  Temple-Bar,  and  J.  Woodward  at  the 
Inner-Temple  Gate.  Where  may  be  had,  Cofmography 
in  4  Books,  containing  the  Chorography  and  Hiftory 
of  the  whole  World,  and  all  the  Principal  Kingdoms, 
Provinces,  Seas,  and  the  Ifles  thereof,  by  P.  Heylin  D.D. 
Improved  with  an  Hiftorical  Continuation  to  the  prefent 
Times,  by  E.  Bohun,  Efq ;  with  a  large  and  more  ac- 
curate Index  than  was  in  any  of  the  former  Editions, 
and  5  new  Mapps. 

Vol.  viii.  No,  587.     Monday,  August  30,  1 714. 

TRANSLATIONS 

iEfop  Naturalized :  Being  a  Colle6lion  of  Fables  from 
-^fop,  Locman,  &c.  The  3d  Edition  with  the  Addi- 

[  171  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

tion  of  above  50  new  Fables,  8vo.   Printed  for  D.  Mid- 
winter at  the  three  Crowns  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard. 

No.  22.     Monday,  March  26,  17 11. 

Le  Diable  Boiteux,  or  the  Devil  upon  two  Sticks, 
tranflated  from  the  laft  Edition  at  Paris,  with  feveral 
Additions.  The  Second  Edition  Corrected.  Printed  for 
Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's  Head  over-againft  Catha- 
rine-ftreet  in  the  Strand,     ^o.  119.    Tuesday,  July  17,  171 1. 

Fontenelle's  Dialogues  of  the  Dead,  in  Three  Parts. 
I.  Dialogues  of  the  Ancients ;  II.  The  Ancients  with 
the  Moderns ;  III.  The  Moderns.  Tranflated  from  the 
French  by  Mr.  John  Hughes.  With  a  Reply  to  fome 
Remarks  in  a  Critique,  call'd  the  Judgment  of  Pluto, 
&c.  and  two  original  Dialogues.  Printed  for  Jacob  Ton- 
fon at  Shakefpear's  Head  againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the 

Otrand.  ■  j^o.   160.      Monday,  September  3,  1711. 

A  new  Edition  of  Horace,  by  the  Reverend  Dr.  Bent- 
ley,  in  2  Vol.  Quarto,  of  the  fineft  and  largeft  Paper,  the 
whole  impreflion  the  fame,  will  be  publifhed  on  Tuef- 
day  the  22d  Inftant,  at  Mr.  Mortlock's  in  St.  Paul's 
Church-yard,  and  Mr.  Bateman's  in  Pater-Nofter  Row. 
Price,  as  fet  by  Mr.  Vice-Chancellor  at  Cambridge,  One 

Pound  in  Quires.  No.  278.      Friday,  January  18,  1712. 

Adverteifment. 

To  prevent  the  Abufe  of  the  Prefs  and  the  Encreafe  of 
infipid  Authors,there  are  now  publifhed  the  Works  of  that 
wife  Critick  Dionyfius  Longinus ;  or,  A  Treatife  con- 

[  172  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

cerning  the  Sovereign  PerfeSiion  of  Writing:  Faithfully 
tranflated  from  the  Greek  by  Mr.  Welfted.  Printed  for 
Sam.  Brifcoe,  and  fold  by  John  Graves  next  White's 
Chocolate-houfe  in  St.  James  's-ftreet,  and  Own  Lloyd 
near  the  Church  in  the  Temple. 

No.  372.     Wednesday,  May  7,  1712. 

On  Thurfday  will  be  Publifhed, 
Cornelius  Nepos  ;  or,  The  Lives  of  Illuftrious  Men  : 
Tranflated  from  the  Latin  by  Mr.  Broome  of  St.  John's 
College  in  Cambridge,  and  printed  finely  on  a  Dutch 
Elziver  Letter,  for  Bernard  Lintott  between  the  two 
Temple-Gates,  by  whom  in  a  few  Days  will  be  publifhed, 
A  new  Tranflation  of  Quintus  Curtius  into  Englifh ; 
alfo,  An  Abridgment  of  Du  Pin's  Ecclefiaftical  Hiftory, 
tranflated  from  the  French  Edition  printed  at  Paris. 

No,  474.     Wednesday,  September  3,  1 7 12. 

Propofals  for  printing  the  Memoirs  of  Philip  de  Co- 
mines  :  Containing  the  Hiftory  of  Louis  X  and  Charles 
VIII  of  France,  and  of  Charles  the  Bold,  Duke  of  Bur- 
gundy ;  to  which  Princes  he  was  Secretary :  As  alfo  the 
Hiftory  of  Edward  IV  and  Henry  VII  of  England;  in- 
cluding that  of  Europe  for  almoft  Half  the  15th  Cen- 
tury :  With  feveral  original  Treaties,  Contracts,  Wills, 
Notes,  and  Obfervations ;  and  laftly,  the  fecret  Hiftory 
of  Louis  XI,  out  of  a  Book  called  The  fcandalous 
Chronicle ;  and  the  Life  of  the  Author  prefixed  to  the 
Whole,  with  Notes  upon  it  by  the  famous  Sleidan. 
Faithfully  tranflated  from  the  late  Edition  of  Monfieur 
Godefroy,  Hiftoriographer  Royal  of  France.  To  which 
will  be  added  Remarks  on  all  the  Occurrences  relating 
[  173  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

to  England.  By  Mrs.  Uvedale.  Is  now  in  the  Prefs,  and 
almoft  finifhed,  in  order  to  deliver  to  the  Subfcribers  at 
Michaelmas  next.  All  Gentlemen  that  are  willing  to  en- 
courage fo  excellent  a  Work,  arc  defired  to  fend  in  their 
Subfcriptions  by  the  i8th  of  this  Month,  after  which 
Time  no  Subfcriptions  will  be  taken.  Propofals  may  be 
had,  and  Subfcriptions  taken  in,  by  J.  Phillips,  at  the 
black  Bvll  over-againft  the  Royal  Exchange  in  Cornhill. 
The  whole  Work  confift  of  75  Sheets,  in  2  Vol.  8vo  at 
los.  in  Quires,  5s.  down,  and  5s.  on  Delivery.  Thofe 
that  fubfcribe  for  6,  fhall  have  a  7th  gratis.  There  will 
be  but  a  fmall  Number  left,  and  will  be  kept  punctually 
afterwards  at  12s.  6d  in  Sheets.  At  the  fame  Place  may 
be  feen  i  Vol  of  this  Work  printed. 

No.  474.     Wednesday,  September  3,  1 7 12, 

This  Day  is  publiflied,  in  a  neat  Pocket  Volume, 

The  Thoufand  and  One  Days  Perfian  Tales.  Tranf- 
lated  from  the  French  by  Mr.  Philips.  Printed  for  Jacob 
Tonfon  at  Shakefpear*s-Head  againft  Catherine-ftreet  in 
the  Strand:  Where  may  be  had,  Paftorals,  and  Diftrcft 
Mother,  written  by  the  fame  Author. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  564.      Wednesday,  July  7,  1 7 14. 

There  is  now  in  the  Prefs,  and  in  a  very  fhort 

Time  will  be  Publifhed, 
The  remaining  Part  of  the  Thoufand,  and  one  Days 
Perfian  Tales.  Tranflated  from  the  French  by  Mr. 
Philips,  Author  of  the  Paftorals  and  Diftreft  Mother. 
Printed  for  J.  Tonfon,  at  Shakefpear's  Head  againft 
Catherine  Street  in  the  Strand. 

Vol.  viu,  No.  568.     Friday,  July  16,  1714. 

[  174] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

On  Saturday  next  will  be  Publifhed, 

Perfian  Tales,  Vol.  2.  Tranflated  from  the  French  by- 
Mr.  Philips,  Author  of  the  Paftorals  and  Diftreft  Mother. 
Printed  for  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's-Head  over- 
againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand.  Where  may  be 
had  the  firft  Vol. 

N.  B.  To  prevent  Gentlemen's  being  miftaken,  who 
have  already  bought  the  firft  Vol.  this  is  to  inform  them, 
that  the  Edition  of  the  Perfian  and  Turkifti  Tales,  which 
is  this  Day  Publifhed  in  two  Vols,  is  not  tranflated  by 
the  Same  Hand,  but  by  an  Unknown  Hand. 

Vol.  vm,  No.  582.      Wednesday,  August  i8,  1 7 14. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

The  2d  Vol.  of  Mr.  Philips's  Tranflation  of  the 
Thoufand  and  One  Days  Perfian  Tale.  Printed  for  Jacob 
Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's  Head  againft  Catherine-ftreet  in 
the  Strand.  N.  B.  The  3d  Vol.  which  compleats  the 
whole,  is  in  the  Prefs,  and  will  be  publiftied  in  a  very 
ftiort  time. 

Vol.  viii,  No.  585.     Wednesday,  August  25,  1714. 


TRAVELS,  VOYAGES, 

AND  GEOGRAPHY 

The  Ingenious  and  Diverting  Letters  of  the  Lady's 
.  .  .  Travels  into  Spain :  Defcribing  the  Devotions, 
Nunneries,  Humour,  Cuftoms,  Laws,  Militia,  Trade, 
Diet,  and  Recreations  of  that  People.  The  yth  Edition 

[  17s  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

with  Additions.  Printed  for  S.  Crouch,  at  the  Corner  of 
Pope's-head-AUey  in  Cornhill. 

No.  30.      Wednesday,  April  4,  171 1. 

Letters  to  a  Nobleman,  from  a  Gentleman  travelling 
through  Holland,  Flanders  and  France  :  With  a  Defcrip- 
tion  of  moft  of  the  Towns  lately  recovered  from  the 
French  in  Flonders ;  as  alfo  of  the  Courts  of  Verfailles 
and  St.  Germains.  Printed  for  D.  Midwinter  at  the  3 
Crowns  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard. 

No.  112.      Monday,  July  9,  1711. 

A  new  and  accurate  Defcription  of  the  Coaft  of 
Guinea,  divided  into  the  Gold,  Slave,  and  the  Ivory 
Coafts :  Containing  a  Geographical,  Political  and  Nat- 
ural Hiftory  of  all  the  Kingdoms  and  Countries  therein  ; 
with  a  particular  Account  of  all  the  Settlements  upon 
that  Coaft  :  With  a  Map  and  feveral  Cutts.  Printed  for 
D.  Midwinter  at  the  three  Crowns  in  St.  Paul's  Church- 

y^^"'  No.  98.      Friday,  June  22,   1711. 

Juft  Publifh'd, 

An  Account  of  the  firft  Voyages  and  Difcoveries  made 
by  the  Spaniards  in  America,  with  their  unparallel'd 
Cruelty  on  the  Indians,  in  deftroying  above  40  Millions 
of  People.  Written  by  Bartholomew  de  las  Cafas,  Bifhop 
of  Chiapa,  a  Spaniard,  who  was  Eye-witnefs  of  their  Cruel- 
ties ;  and  tranflated  by  Mr.  Stennett.  Illuftrated  with 
Cutts,  Price  3s.  6d.  The  Hiftory  of  Flanders,  from  its 
firft  Eftabliftiment  as  a  Sovereignty,  to  the  Death  of  the 
laft  King  of  Spain.  With  a  general  Survey  and  exa£i: 
Map  of  the  Country,  done  by  Mr.  Moll,  which  Exhibits 

[  176  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

the  Seat  of  War  in  thofe  Parts.  Price  4s.   Both  fold  by 
J.  Darby  in  Bartholomew-Clofe. 

No.  143.     Tuesday,  August  14,  171 1. 

On  Thurfday  will  be  publiih*d, 
An  Eflay  on  the  Trade  to  the  South  Seas,  with  an 
Enquiry  into  three  great  Articles  of  that  Trade :  ift. 
How  far  it  is  practicable,  and  may  be  carried  on ;  2d. 
How  far  it  is  impracticable,  and  not  to  be  carried  on ; 
3dly,  What  Relation  the  Trade  to  the  South  Seas  and 
the  reft  of  the  publick  Funds  and  Stocks  have  to  one 
and  another.  By  the  Author  of  the  Review.  Price  6d. 
Sold  by  J.  Baker  in  Pater-nofter  Row ;  where  may  be 
the  Eleven  Opinions  about  Mr.  H  . . .  ly.   Price  is. 

No.   162.      Wednesday,  September  5,  1 71 1. 

Juft  Publifh'd, 
An  Account  of  the  Trade  in  India  :  Containing  Rules 
for  good  Government  in  Trade,  Price  Courants,  and 
Tables;  With  Defcriptions  of  Fort  St.  George,  Acheen, 
Malacca,  Condore,  Canton,  Anjungo,  Mufkar,  Gom- 
broon, Surat,  Goa,  Carwar,  Telichery,  Panola,  Calicut, 
the  Cape  of  Good-Hope,  and  St.  Helena ;  their  Inhab- 
itants, Customs,  Religion,  Government,  Animals,  Fruits, 
&c.  To  which  is  added.  An  Account  of  the  Manage- 
ment of  the  Dutch  in  their  Affairs  in  India.  By  Charles 
Lockyer.  Printed  for  the  Author,  and  fold  by  Samuel 
Crouch,  at  the  Corner  of  Pope's-Head-Alley  in  Cornhill. 

No.  218.     Friday,  November  9,  171 1. 

A  New  Voyage  round  the  World ;  defcribing  the  Ifth- 
mus  of  America,  the   Bay  of  Campeachy,  &c.    The 
Streights  of  Magellan,  the  PafTage  by  Terra  del  Fuego, 
[  177  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

the  South-Sea  Coaft  of  Chili,  Peru,  Mexico,  and  Calli- 
formia.  The  Ladrones,  the  Philipine  and  Eaft-India 
Iflands,  &c.  A  Defcription  of  Tunquin  in  the  Eaft-In- 
dies,  of  the  Trade- Winds,  Breezes,  Storms,  Seafons  of 
the  Year,  Tides,  Currents  of  the  Torrid  Zone  through- 
out the  World.  As  alfo  a  Voyage  to  New-Holland, 
wherein  are  defcribed  feveral  Parts  of  that  Continent,  and 
of  the  Adjacent  Iflands,  &c.  A  Defcription  of  the  Coaft 
of  New-Guinea,  their  Soil,  Rivers,  Harbours,  Plants, 
Fruits,  Animals,  and  Inhabitants,  their  Cuftoms,  Re- 
ligion, Government,  Trade,  &c.  Illuftrated  with  feveral 
Mapps  and  Draughts.  In  4  Vol.  ByCapt.  Wm.  Dampier. 
Printed  for  James  Knapton  at  the  Crown  in  St.  Paul's 

Church-yard.  No.  100.     Monday,  June  25,  171 1. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 
A  Voyage  to  the  South  Sea,  and  round  the  World, 
performed  in  the  Ships  Duke  and  Dutchefs  of  Briftol, 
in  the  years  1708,  1709,  1710  and  171 1.  Containing 
a  Journal  of  all  memorable  Tranfactions  during  the  faid 
Voyage ;  the  Winds,  Currents  and  Variation  of  the  Com- 
pafs  ;  the  taking  of  the  Towns  of  Puna  and  Guayaquil, 
and  feveral  Prizes,  one  of  which  is  a  rich  Acapulco  Ship. 
A  Defcription  of  the  American  Coafts,  from  Tierra  del 
Fuego  in  the  South,  to  California  in  the  North,  (from 
the  Coafting  Pilot,  a  Spanifh  Manufcript.)  An  Hiftori- 
cal  Account  of  all  thofe  Countries  from  the  beft  Authors. 
With  a  new  Map  and  Defcription  of  the  mighty  River 
of  the  Amazons.  Wherein  an  Account  is  given  of  Mr. 
Alexander  Selkirk,  his  Manner  of  living  and  taming  fome 
wild  Beafts  during  the  four  Years  and  four  Months  he 

[  178] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

lived  upon  the  uninhabited  Ifland  of  Juan  Fernandes. 
Illuftrated  with  Cuts  and  Maps  :  By  Captain  Edward 
Cooke.  Printed  for  B.  Lintott  and  R.  Gofling  in  Fleet- 
ftreet,  A.  Bettefworth  on  London-bridge,  and  W.  Innys 
in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard. 

No.  337.      Thursday,  March  27,  1 7 12. 

To  Morrow  will  be  publifti'd, 

A  Voyage  to  the  South  Sea  and  round  the  World,  per- 
formed in  the  Year  1708,  1709,  1 710,  and  1 711,  by  the 
Ships  Duke  and  Dutchefs  of  Briftol;  being  a  Continu- 
ation of  the  Voyage  from  Californio,  through  India,  and 
North  about  into  England.  The  Defcription  of  all  the 
American  Coafts  along  the  South  Sea,  with  above  300 
Bearings  of  the  Land,  the  principal  Harbours,  and  3  large 
Charts,  all  taken  from  the  Spanifh  original  Draughts 
never  before  printed  ;  with  a  Table  of  the  Latitudes  and 
Longitudes  of  all  Places  from  California  to  the  Streights 
of  Magellan  :  To  which  is  prefixed  an  Introduction ; 
wherein,  befides  other  material  Particulars,  is  an  Account 
of  the  Cargoe  of  the  Acapulco  Prize,  of  the  Commodi- 
ties the  Weft  Indies  are  furnifh'd  with  by  Way  of  Trade 
from  the  feveral  Parts  of  Europe,  and  what  Returns  come 
from  thence.  Vol.  2d  and  laft ;  by  Capt.  Edw.  Cooke. 
Printed  for  B.  Lintot  and  R.  Gofling  in  Fleet-ftreet,  A. 
Bettefworth  on  London  Bridge,  and  W.  Innys  in  St. 
Paul's  Church-yard;  of  whom  may  be  had  the  i  ft  Vol. 

No.  404.     Friday,  June  13,  1712. 

On  Thurfday  will  be  Publiftied, 
A  Cruifing  Voyage  round  the  World,  firft  to  the  South 
[  179  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Seas,  thence  to  the  Eaft-Indies,  and  homewards  by  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Begun  in  1708,  and  finiftied  in 
1 7 1 1 .  Containing  a  Journal  of  all  the  remarkable  Tranf- 
adlions,  particularly  of  the  taking  of  Puna  and  Guiaquil, 
of  the  Acapulco  Ship  and  other  Prizes.  A  more  par- 
ticular Account  of  Alexander  Selkirk's  living  alone  four 
Years  and  four  Months  in  an  Ifland,  than  has  hitherto 
been  given.  Alfo  a  brief  Difcription  of  feveral  Countries 
in  one  Courfe  noted  for  Trade,  efpecially  in  the  South 
Sea.  Together  with  a  Table  of  every  Days  run  crofs  that 
great  Ocean  from  California  to  the  Ifland  Guam  in  the 
Eaft  Indies.  Alfo  Maps  of  all  the  Coafts  of  South  America 
for  6000  Miles,  taken  from  the  beft  Spanifh  Manufcript 
Draughts.  And  an  Introduction  relating  to  the  South  Sea 
Trade.  By  Capt.  Woodes  Rogers  Commander  in  chief 
of  the  Expedition  with  the  Ships  Duke  and  Dutchefsof 
Briftol.  Printed  for  A.  Bell  and  Bernard  Lintott,  and 
fold  by  Mr.  Horn,  Mr.  Parker,  and  Mr.  Philips  by  the 
Exchange,  Mr.  Mount  on  Tower-hill,  and  Mr.  Tracey 
on  London-bridge.   Price  bound  6s. 

No.  412.      Monday,  June  23,  1 7 12. 

LAW  BOOKS 

On  Saturday  will  be  PublifhM, 

The  Compleat  Court-keeper  or  Land  Steward's  AlEft- 
ant,  containing  an  exa6t  Account  of  the  Nature  and 
Practice  of  keeping  Courts  Leet,  Courts  Barons,  and 
Courts  of  Survey,  with  the  charge  to  the  Juries,  and  the 
Forms  of  Entring  thofe  Courts  in  the  Minute  Books, 
and  in  the  Court  Rolls,  with  great  variety  of  Prefent- 

[  180] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

ments,  Amerciaments,  Eftreets,  Copies  of  Court  Roll  for 
Life,  and  in  Fee,  Grants,  Surrenders,  Admittances,  Ly- 
cences.  Forfeitures,  and  all  other  Proceedings  of  that 
Nature.  To  which  are  annex'd,  feveral  Precedents  of 
Survey  of  Manors,  Stewards  Accounts,  Fees,  &c.  The 
whole  being  the  compleateft  Method  of  Court-keeping 
yet  extant.  Printed  for  Bernard  Lintott  between  the  two 
Temple  Gates  ;  and  Thomas  Ward,  in  the  Inner  Tem- 
ple Lane.    Price  6s.  No.  457.     Thursday,  August  14,  1 71 2. 

The  Clerk's  Tutor  in  Chancery  giving  time  Dire6l- 
ions  by  Authentick  Precedents,  how  to  draw  Affidavits, 
Petitions,  Interlocutory  Orders,  Reports  before  Mafters, 
Bills,  Anfwers,  Pleas  or  Demurrers,  and  Appeals  in  Par- 
liament. Alfo  a  new  Colle6lion  of  Special  Writs  from 
the  Dockets,  fign*d  by  the  prefent  Lord  Keeper  of  the 
Great  Seal ;  with  fuch  Procefs,  Proceedings,  and  other 
Inftruments  relating  to  Pra6tice,  as  are  now  in  ufe  in 
that  High  and  Honourable  Court.  To  which  is  prefixed 
an  Introduction,  with  many  excellent  Cafes  lately  Ad- 
judged, illuftrating  the  Pra£tice  of  that  Court,  and  feveral 
Orders  made  for  the  regulating  the  fame.  The  3d  Edi- 
tion with  large  Additions.  Printed  for  George  and  Henry 
Mortlock,  at  the  Phoenix  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard. 

No.  98.      Friday,  June  22,  171 1. 

This  Day  is  PublifhM, 

An  Abridgment  of  the  Firfl  Part  of  my  Ld.  Coke's 
Inflitutes;  with  fome  Additions  explaining  many  of  the 
difficult  Cafes,  and  fhewing  in  what  Points  the  Law  has 
been  altered  by  late  Refolutions  and  Adls  of  Parliament. 

[  181  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

In  large  i2mo.    To  be  fold  by  John  Walthoe  in  the 
Middle-Temple  Cloyfters.   Price  4s. 

No.  123.     Saturday,  July  21,  1711. 

Juft  Publifti^d, 

The  Infant's  Lawyer :  Or,  the  Law  (Ancient  and 
Modern)  relating  to  Infants.  Setting  forth  their  Privi- 
ledges ;  their  feveral  Ages  for  divers  Purpofes ;  Guar- 
dians and  Prochein  amy,  as  to  Suits  and  Defences  by 
them ;  A6lions  brought  by  and  againft  them,  with  the 
manner  of  Declarations  and  Pleadings ;  Fines  and  Re- 
coveries, and  other  Matters  of  Record  fufFered  or  ac- 
knowledged by  them,  how  reverfable  ;  Conveyances  and 
Specialties,  how  bound  by  them  or  not ;  Contracts,  Prom- 
ifes,  &c.  Alfo  treating  of  Infant-Executors,  Adminiftra- 
tor  durante  minori  i^tate ;  A6lions  and  Suits  brought 
by  them  and  againft  them,  with  the  manner  of  Declar- 
ing and  Pleading.  Likewife,  of  Devifes  by  and  to  In- 
fants, Apprentices,  Cuftom  of  London,  and  Pleadings, 
Orphans,  Tryals  of  Infancy,  Portions  and  Legacies,  and 
Refolutions  and  Decrees  at  Common  Law  and  Chancery 
concerning  the  fame.  With  an  Appendix,  of  the  Forms 
of  Declarations  and  Pleading  concerning  Infants.  The 
Second  Edition  :  With  many  Additions  of  late  adjudged 
Cafes  in  Common  Law  and  Chancery ;  and  the  Expli- 
cation of  all  the  late  Statutes  relating  to  Infants.  Printed 
for  St-John  Baker,  at  Thavies-Inn-Gate  in  Holborn. 

No.  430.      Monday,  July  14,  1 712. 

This  Day  is  Publifh'd, 
The  Second  Volume  of  the  Accompliih'd  Conveyancer, 
containing  great  Variety  of  Precedents  of  fpecial  Grants, 

[  182] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Aflignments,  Mortgages  and  all  forts  of  Securities,  &c. 
under  the  following  Heads,  viz.  Special  Gifts,  Grants, 
Common  Leafe  and  Releafe,  Affignments  of  Bonds, 
Statutes,  Judgments,  &c.  And  alfo  of  Leafes  for  years 
and  for  Lives,  Affignments  to  attend  the  Fee,  and  to 
attend  Mortgages.  Mortgages  of  Perfonal  Eftates,  and 
alfo  of  Leafes,  and  Lands  for  Years,  Life,  and  in  Fee, 
Affignments  of  fuch  Mortgages,  Collateral  Securities 
againft  Incumbrances  Defeafances,  Declarations  of 
Truft,  Revocations  and  new  Declarations,  Appointments, 
Renunciations,  Difclaimers  Surrenders,  Releafes  of 
Equity  of  Redemption,  Bills  in  Chancery,  to  foreclofe 
the  Equity  on  Mortgages,  &c.  By  Giles  Jacob  Gent. 
Printed  for  Bernard  Lintott,  between  the  Temple  Gates. 
Where  the  Firft  Volume  may  be  had. 

Vol.  viii,  No.  6 1 8.     Wednesday,  November  lo,  171 4. 

REPORTS  OF  TRIALS 

Juft  publiih'd  from  an  original  Manufcript, 

The  Case  of  Infufficiency  discuffd:  Being  the  Pro- 
ceedings at  large  touching  the  Divorce  between  the 
Lady  Frances  Howard,  and  Robert  Earl  of  EfTex,  upon 
a  Bill  of  Complaint  exhibited  by  the  Countefs  againft  the 
Earl,  after  8  Years  Marriage,  for  Impotency,  as  it  was 
heard  before  a  Court  of  Delegates  authorized  under  the 
King's  Broad  Seal,  Anno  161 3;  with  the  Arguments 
on  both  Sides ;  alfo  that  learned  Speech  of  Dr.  Geo. 
Abbot,  Archbifhop  of  Canterbury,  againft  the  Countefs, 
and  the  King's  Anfwer  thereunto.  Sold  by  J.  Morphew 
near  Stationer's  Hall,  and  E.  Curll  at  the  Dial  and  Bible 

[  183  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

againft  St.  Dunftan's  Church  in  Fleetftreet ;  Price  is. 
Where  may  be  had  the  Satyr  of  Petronius  Arbiter,  adorn*d 
with  30  curious  Cuts  pleafantly  reprefenting  the  lafcivious 
Intrigues  of  Nero's  Court.  Printed  on  an  Elzevir  Letter 
in  a  neat  Pocket  Volume.  Price  2s.  or  2s.  6d. 

No.  192.      Wednesday,  October  10,  17 1 1. 

Jufl  Publifhed,  the  2d  Edition  of, 

The  Tryal  and  Proceedings  at  large  againft  Jane  Wen- 
ham  of  Walkerne  in  Hertfordfhire,  for  Sorcery  and 
Witchcraft,  at  the  Aflizes  at  Hertford,  before  Mr.  Juf- 
tice  Powell ;  where  (he  was  found  guilty,  and  received 
Sentenceof  Death  for  the  fame  March  4,  1711-12.  Alfo 
the  neat  Pocket  Edition  of  Petronius  Arbiter,  on  an  El- 
ziver  Letter,  adorned  with  Cuts.  Price  2s.  or  2s.  6d. 
Both  printed  for  E.  Curll  at  the  Dial  and  Bible  againft 
St.  Dunftan's-Church,  Fleet-ftreet. 

No.  340.     Monday,  March  31,  1712. 

This  Day  is  Publifti'd, 

A  full  Confutation  of  Witchcraft.  More  particularly 
of  the  Depofitions  againft  Jane  Wenham  lately  Con- 
demned for  a  Witch  at  Hertford,  in  which  the  Modern 
Notions  of  Witches  are  Overthrown,  and  the  ill  Confe- 
quences  of  fuch  Doftrines  are  expos'd.  In  a  Letter  from 
a  Phyfician  in  Hertfordftiire  to  his  Friend  in  London. 
Price  6d.  Sold  by  J.  Baker  in  Pater-Nofter-Row ;  where 
may  be  had  the  Impoflibility  of  Witchcraft  by  another 
Author.    Price  6d.  No.  368.     Friday,  May  2,  171a. 

With  the  Approbation  of  the  Honourable  Mr.  Juftice 
Powell,  The  Hertfordftiire  Witchcraft  Detected,  being 

[  184] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

on  Examination  of  a  Book,  intituled,  a  Full  and  Impar- 
tial Account  of  the  Difcovery  of  Sorcery  and  Witchcraft 
pra<3:is'd  by  Jane  Wenham  of  Walkerne  upon  the  Bodies 
of  Anne  Thorne,  Anne  Street,  &c.  Wherein  the  whole 
Proceedings  are  fet  in  a  true  Light.  Printed  for  John 
Pemberton  at  the  Golden-Buck  againft  St.  Dunftan*s 
Church,  Fleet-ftreet.  Price  is. 

No.  432.     Wednesday,  July  16,  1 71 2. 

POLITICAL    PUBLICATIONS 

Juft  Publifh'd, 

The  Comparifon  :  Or,  Accounts  on  Both  Sides  fairly 
ftated;  in  a  View  of  the  Management  of  the  War  in 
Spain,  under  the  refpedlive  Commands  of  the  Earls  of 
Peterborough  and  Gallway.  Occafion'd  by  fome  late  En- 
quiries in  the  Houfe  of  Peers,  With  their  Lordfhips  Pro- 
ceedings thereupon.  Printed  by  J.  Murphew  near  Station- 
er*s-Hall.  Price  6d.  Where  may  be  had  Kennet's  Sermon 
in  Englifti,  with  Remarks.  Price  4d.  and  an  Answer  to 
his  Gentleman-like  Treatment  of  the  Tranflator.  Price 

3^'  No.  8.     Friday,  March  9,  17 il. 

This  Day  is  Publifh'd, 

A  Poem  to  the  Right  Honourable  Mr.  Harley,  wounded 
by  Guifcard.  Printed  for  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catherine  ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  35.     Tuesday,  April  10,  171 1. 

This  Day  is  Publifh'd, 
A  true  Narrative  of  what  pafs'd  at  the  Examination 
of  the  Marquis  de  Guifcard,  at  the  Cockpit,  the  8th  of 
[i8S] 


specimen  Advertifements 

March,  1711  :  His  {tabbing  Mr.  Harley,  and  other  Pre- 
cedent ;  and  fubfequent  Fa6ls  relating  to  the  Life  of  the 
faid  Guifcard.  Printed  for  John  Morphew  near  Station- 
er's-Hall,  Price  6d.  no.  40.   Monday,  AprU  16, 1711. 

Juft  Publiih'd, 

A  full  Anfwer  to  the  Depofitions,  and  to  all  other  the 
Pretences  and  Arguments  whatfoever,  concerning  the 
Birth  of  the  Pretended  Prince  of  Wales :  The  Intrigue 
thereof  detected.  The  whole  Defign  being  fet  forth,  with 
the  Way  and  Manner  of  doing  it.  Whereunto  is  annexed, 
a  Map  or  Survey,  engraven  on  Copper,  of  St.  James's  Pal- 
ace and  the  Convent  there ;  defcribing  the  Place  wherein 
it  is  fuppos'd  the  true  Mother  was  delivered;  with  the 
particular  Doors  and  Paffages  thro*  which  the  Child 
was  convey'd  to  the  Queen's  Bed-Chamber.  Sold  by  S. 
Popping  at  the  Raven  in  Pater-nofter-row.  Price  6d. 

No.  42.     Wednesday,  April  i8,   171 1. 

This  Day  is  publifh*d. 
The  fecret  Hiftory  of  the  06lober  Club :  From  its 
Original  to  this  time.   By  a  Member.  Printed  in  the  Year, 
1 7 1 1,  and  sold  by  John  Baker  at  the  Black  Boy  in  Pater- 
Nofter-Row.  Price  is» 

No.  45.      Saturday,  April  21,  1711. 

Juft  Publifh'd, 

The  Reafons  which  induc'd  Her  Majefty  to  create  the 
Right  Honourable  Robert  Harley,  Efq  ;  a  Peer  of  Great 
Britain  j  in  which  is  inferted  the  Preamble  to  his  Patent 
in  Latin  and  Englifh,  the  Latin  written  by  the  Reverend 

[  186] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Dr.  Freind. The  Account  at  large  of  Mr.  Thorn- 

hill's  Tryal,  indiaed  for  the  Murder  of  Sir  Cholmlely 
Deering,  Bart.  Price  2d.  Both  printed  for  E.  Curll  at 
the  Dial  and  Bible,  and  R.  Gofling  at  the  Mitre  in  Fleet- 
ftreet,  and  fold  by  J.  Morphew  near  Stationer' s-Hall. 

No.  82.      Monday,  June  4,  1711 

Juft  Publifh'd, 

Opinion  and  Matter  of  Fa6l ;  or  a  feafonable  Caution 
to  the  prefent  Convocation.  Price  6d.  A  Letter  of  Con- 
gratulation to  the  reverend  Mr.  Daniel  Burgefs,upon  Oc- 
cafion  of  the  late  villainous  Attempt  of  Aflaffination  upon 
the  Right  Honourable  Mr.  Harley.  Price  2d.  Both  printed 
for  A.  Baldwin  near  the  Oxford  Arms  in  Warwick  lane. 

No.  98.      Friday,  June  22,  171 1. 

Juft  Publifti'd, 

The  Scotch  Medal  decipher'd,and  the  new  Hereditary- 
Right  Men  difplay'd:  Or,  fome  Remarks  on  the  late 
Proceedings  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates  at  Edinburgh, 
upon  receiving  the  Pretender's  Medal.  With  the  faid 
Proceedings  prefix'd.  Sold  by  S.  Popping  in  Pater-nofter- 
Row:  Where  may  be  had.  Reflexions  on  Dr.  Sachev- 
erel's  Speech  at  the  Bar  of  the  Houfe  of  Lords,  Paragraph 
by  Paragraph  :  In  which  the  Charge  of  the  Commons 
againft  him  is  made  good,  by  Extracts  out  of  moft  of  his 
Books.  To  which  are  added  feveral  Declarations,  Let- 
ters, &c.  written  at  the  Revolution,  which  are  now  re- 
commended to  all  fuch  as  feem  to  have  forgot  there  ever 
was  fuch  a  Time. 

No.  143.     Tuesday,  August  14,  171 1. 

[  187] 


specimen  Advertifements 

To  Morrow  will  be  Publifhed, 
The  Conduft  of  the  Allies  and  the  late  Miniftry,  in 
beginning  and  carrying  on  the  prefent  War.   Printed  for 
John  Morhpew  near  Stationer's-Hall. 

No.  232.      Monday,  November  26,  171 1. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed,  the  third  Edition  of 

The  Condu6i:  of  the  Allies  and  the  late  Miniftry,  in 
beginning  and  carrying  on  the  prefent  War.  Printed  for 
John  Morhpew  near  Stationer' s-Hall. 

No.  238.     Monday,  December  3,  171 1. 

This  Day  is  publiih'd. 

Remarks  on  a  falfe,  fcandalous,  and  feditious  Libel, 
entituled  the  Condudl  of  the  Allies  and  the  late  Miniftry, 
&c.  Printed  for  A.  Baldwin  near  the  Oxford  Arms  in 
Warwick-lane. 

No.  240.      Wednesday,  December  5,  17I1. 

To  Morrow  will  be  Publiih'd, 

The  Allies  and  the  late  Miniftry  defended  againft 
France,  and  the  Friends  of  France,  in  Anfwer  to  a  late 
Pamphlet,  Intitled,  the  Condu6t  of  the  Allies  :  In  which 
Anfwer  will  be  fully  fhewn  the  many  Falfities  of  that 
Writer  in  point  of  Argument,  and  his  grofs  Mifreprefen- 
tations  of  Fa^ts,  and  that  there  is  no  Neceility  for  an  111 
Peace.  Printed  for  A.  Baldwin  in  Warwick-Lane. 

No.  241.     Thursday,  December  6,  171 1. 

Letters  and  Negotiations  of  the  Count  D'Eftrades 
Ambaffador  from  Lewis  the  Fourteenth  to  the  States 

[  188  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

General  of  the  United  Provinces  of  the  Low  Countries : 
From  the  Year  1663  to  the  Year  1669.  Confifting 
chiefly  of  Original  Letters  and  Inftruftions  from  the 
French  King  and  his  Minifters,  to  the  faid  Count :  with 
his  Anfwers.  Wherein  are  feveral  fecret  Tranfa£tions 
between  the  Courts  of  England  and  France  during  that 
time.  Tranflated  by  Several  Hands.  In  Three  Volumes. 
Printed  for  D.  Brown,  J.  Tonfon,  A.  and  J.  Churchil, 
J.  Knapton,  R.  Knaplock,  G.  Strahan,  E.  Sanger,  and 
J.  Pemberton. 

No.  259.     Thursday,  December  27,  17 n. 

Juft  Publiflied, 

The  Charge  of  God  to  Jofhua  :  In  a  Sermon  preached 
before  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  at  Avens 
le  Sec,  Sept.  9,  1711.  Being  the  Day  of  Thankfgiving 
for  pafling  the  Lines  and  taking  Bouchain.  The  2d  Edi- 
tion. By  Francis  Hare  D.  D.  Chaplain  General  of  her 
Majefty's  Forces  in  the  Low  Countries.  Printed  for  J. 
Baker  in  Pater-Nofter-Row.  Price  2d. 

No,  261.     Saturday,  December  29,  1 71 1. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

On  a  Broad  Sheet,  curioufly  engraven  on  Copper, 
The  March  of  the  Chevalier  de  St.  George  :  or  an  Ac- 
count of  the  Mock  Proceilion  of  burning  the  Pope  and 
the  Pretender,  intended  to  be  performed  on  the  17th 
of  November  171 1.  being  the  Anniverfary  of  Queen 
Ehzabeth  of  glorious  Memory.  Sold  by  J.  Baker  in 
Pater-nofter-row.  Price  6d. 

No.  273.     Saturday,  January  12,  1712. 

[  189] 


specimen  Advertifements 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

When  the  Cat 's  away,  the  Mice  may  play.  A  Fable 
humbly  infcribed  to  Dr.  Swift,  pr.  2d.  Our  Anceftors 
as  Wife  as  We :  Or,  Ancient  Precedents  for  Modern 
Fads,  pr.  6d.  Cymbalum  Mundi,  or  Satyrical  Dialogues 
upon  feveral  Subjects,  by  Bonaventure  des  Perriers,  Valet 
de  Chambre  to  Margaret  de  Valois,  Queen  of  Navarre. 
Tranflated  into  Englifh,  pr.  is.  All  Printed  for  A.  Bald- 
win in  Warwick-lane.  Where  may  be  had  a  Vindication 
of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough. 

No.  289.      Thursday,  January  31,  1712. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

Arguments  relating  to  a  Reftraint  upon  the  Prefs, 
fully  and  fairly  handled,  in  a  Letter  to  a  Bencher  from 
a  young  Gentleman  of  the  Temple,  with  Propofals 
humbly  ofFered  to  the  Confideration  of  both  Houfes  of 
Parliament.  Printed  for  R.  and  J.  Bonwicke  at  the  Red 
Lion  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard. 

No.  289.      Thursday,  January  31,  1712. 

Juft  Publifhed,  the  2d  Edition  of, 

John  Bull  in  his  Senfes :  Being  the  Second  Part  of  Law 
is  a  Bottomlefs  Pit.  Printed  from  a  Manufcript  found 
in  the  Cabinet  of  the  famous  Sir  Humphrey  Polefworth. 
Printed  for  J.  Morphew  near  Stationer's-Hall.  Price  3d. 
Where  may  be  had  the  Firft  Part  of.  Law  is  a  Bottomlefs 
Pit ;  exemplified  in  the  Cafe  of  the  Lord  Strutt,  John  Bull, 
Nicholas  Frog,  and  Lewis  Baboon ;  who  fpent  all  they 

had  in  a  Law-Suit.  No.  336.   Wednesday,  March  26,  1712. 

[  190  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

The  Breach  of  Publick  Faith  Exemplify^ :  Or,  the 
Contra6l  of  Marriage  between  Louis  XIV.  of  France, 
and  the  moft  Serene  Infanta  of  Spain,  eldeft  Daughter 
of  the  Catholick  King  :  Concluded  the  7th  of  Nov.  1659. 
Together  with  the  French  King's  Power  to  Cardinal 
Mazarine,  to  treat  of  the  faid  Marriage.  His  Ratification 
of  the  faid  Treaty.  His  Mandate  to  the  Parliament  of 
Paris,  to  enregifter  his  Contradt  of  Marriage.  The  Ex- 
tradi  of  the  Records  of  Parliament.  And  the  folemn  Oath 
taken  by  that  Prince  for  the  Obfervation  of  the  faid  Con- 
tract. Printed  for  A.  Baldwin  near  the  Oxford-Arms  in 
Warwick-Lane.  Price  3d. 

No.  388.      Monday,  May  26,  1712. 

Juft  Publifhed,  A  Second  Edition  of, 

FourSermons:  I.  OntheDeathof  Queen  Mary,  1694. 

II.  On  the  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucefter  1700. 

III.  On  the  Death  of  King  William  1701.  IV.  On  the 
Queen's  Acceflion  to  the  Throne  in  1 703.  With  a  large 
Preface.  By  William  Lord  Bifhop  of  St.  Afaph.  Printed 
for  Charles  Harper  at  the  Flower-de-luce  over  againft  St. 
Dunftan's  Church  in  Fleetftreet. 

No.  393.      Saturday,  May  31,  1712. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

Prince  Eugene  not  the  Man  you  took  him  for  ;  Or,  a 
Merry  Tale  of  a  Modern  Hero,  Pr.  6d.  Abel  Roper's 
Annals,  containing  the  fecret  and  open  Advances  towards 
a  Peace  ;  with  proper  Refledtions  and  Animadverfions  on 
the  Refra£torinefs  of  fome  of  the  Allies,  Pr.  is.  The 
Hiftory  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Mandarins  and  Pro- 

[  191  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

atins  of  the  Britomartian  Empire  at  their  laft  General 
Diet,  &c.  Pr.  IS.  The  Hiftory  of  Prince  Mirabel,  in 
3  Parts :  A  Justification  of  the  Dutch,  &c.  Pr.  6d.  A 
Search  after  Dutch  Honefty,  Pr.  6d.  Sold  by  J.  Baker  in 
Pater-Nofter-Row,  and  B.  Berington  near  Eflex  ftreet- 

^^^*  No.  471.      Saturday,  August  30,  1712. 

This  Day  Is  Publifh'd, 

The  French  King  Vindicated,  being  a  full  Anfwer  to 
all  the  Refleilions  caft  upon  him,  during  the  Courfe  of 
his  long  and  Glorious  Reign.  Sold  by  J.  Baker,  at  the 
Black  Boy  in  Pater-nofter  Row.   pr.  is. 

No.  517.     Thursday,  October  23,  1712. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

A  Poem  to  his  Excellency  the  Lord  Privy-Seal,  on  the 
Profpea  of  PEACE.  By  Mr.  Tickell.  Printed  for  J. 
Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's-Head,  over  againft   Catherine- 

ftreet  in  the  Strand.  No.  521.      Tuesday,  October  28,  1712. 

This  Day  is  Publiih'd, 

The  Lord  Mohun's  Vindication  :  Printed  for  A.  Dodd, 
at  the  Peacock  without  Temple-Bar.   Price  2d. 

No.  553.      Thursday,  December  4,  171 2. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

The  French  Faith,  reprefented  in  the  Prefent  State  of 
Dunkirk.  A  Letter  to  the  Examiner,  in  Defence  of  Mr. 

S le.  Printed  and  Sold  byFerd.  Burleigh  in  Amen- 

Corner.   17 14.  Price  6d. 

Vol.  vni,  No,  562.     Friday,  July  2,  1714. 
[    192    ] 


Out  of  the  spectator 

This  Day  is  Publiihed, 

A  Vindication  of  the  Earl  of  Nottinghani  from  the 
vile  Imputations  and  malicious  Slanders  which  have  been 
caft  upon  him  in  fome  late  Pamphlets.  Printed  for  J. 
Roberts  near  the  Oxford-Arms  in  Warwick-Lane.  Price 

One  Shilling.  Vol.  vm,  No.  562.     Friday,  July  2,  1714. 

Yefterday  was  Publiflied, 

Memoirs  concerning  the  Affairs  of  Scotland,  from 
Queen  Anne's  Acceflion  to  the  Throne,  to  the  Com- 
mencement of  the  Union  of  Scotland  and  England,  in 
May,  1707.  With  an  Account  of  the  Origine  and  Pro- 
grefs  of  the  defigned  invafion  from  France,  in  March, 
1708,  and  fome  fhort  Refle6lions  on  the  antient  State  of 
Scotland.  To  which  is  prefixed  an  Introdu61:ion,  Ihew- 
ing  the  Reafons  of  publifhing  the  faid  Memoirs  at  this 
Juncture.  Sold  by  J.  Baker,  at  the  Black-Boy  in  Pater- 
nofter-Row;  and  by  the  Bookfellers  of  London  and  Weft- 
minfter. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  586.     Friday,  August  27,  1714. 

Juft  Publiflied, 

A  Poem,  entituled,  A  Letter  from  Mr.  Jacob  Bicker- 
ftafF,  Nephew  to  Ifaac  BickerftafF  Efq  ;  occafioned  by 
the  Death  of  Queen  Anne,  to  a  Gentleman  in  Holland. 
Printed  for  S.  Popping,  at  the  Black  Raven  in  Pater- 
Nofter-Row;  and  fold  by  the  Bookfellers  of  London 
and  Weftminfter.  Price  3d. 

Vol.  vin.  No.  586.     Friday,  August  27,  1714. 
[    193    ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

An  Epiftle  to  the  Right  Honourable  Charles  Lord 
Halifax,  one  of  the  Lords  Juftices  appointed  by  his 
Majefty.  Written  by  Mr.  Philips.  Printed  for  Jacob 
Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's  Head  over-againft  Catherine- 
ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  589.      Friday,  September  3,  1 7 14. 

Yefterday  was  Publifhed, 

The  5th  Ode  of  the  4th  Book  of  Horace  imi- 
tated, and  infcribed  to  the  King.  Printed  for  W.  Hinch- 
lifFe  at  Dryden's  Head  under  the  Royal  Exchange, 
price  3d. 

Vol.  viii,  No.  589.     Friday,  September  3,  1714, 

To  Morrow  will  be  Publifhed, 

Auguftus  :  A  Poem  on  the  Acceflion  of  His  Majefty 
King  George,  InfcribM  to  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Marl- 
borough. By  P.  Turner,  of  Trinity  Colledge,  Cambridge. 
Sold  by  Ferd.  Burleigh,  in  Amen-Corner.   Pr.  6d. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  590.      Monday,  September  6,  1714. 

This  Day  is  PublifliM,     * 

A  Letter  fhewing  how  to  reconcile  the  Churches  of 
England  and  Rome,  by  introducing  the  Pretender;  Found 
among  the  Papers  of  an  Irifti  Popifh  Prieft,  who  was 
apprehended  upon  the  late  Proclamation  to  difarm  Pap- 
ifts,  &c.  in  Ireland.  And  in  a  few  Days  will  be  Pub- 
lifhed  a  Colleftion  of  feveral  Paftages  out  of  the  Exam- 
iners, Poft-Boys,  and  Pamphlets  that  Relate  to  the  Houfe 
[  194  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

of  Hanover.  Both  Sold  by  J.  Roberts  in  Warwick  Lane, 
where  may  be  had  a  Hue  and  Cry,  &c. 

Vol.  vin,  No.  594.     Wednesday,  September  15,  1714. 

Laft  Monday  was  Publiflied, 
A  Poem  on  the  Arrival  of  the  King.   Prefented  to  His 
Majefty  and  His  Royal  Highnefs  the  Prince  at  Green- 
wich.  By  W.  Wilkins.  Sold  by  J.  Morphew  near  Sta- 
tioners-hall.  Pr.  6d. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  597.     Wednesday,  September  22,  17 14. 

In  a  few  Days  will  be  publifh'd, 

An  Ode  :  Humbly  infcrib'd  to  the  King.  OccafionM 
by  His  Majefty's  moft  aufpicious  Succeflion  and  Arrival : 
Written  in  the  Stanza  and  Meafure  of  Spencer.  By  Mr. 
Croxall.   Printed  for  Ferd.  Burleigh  in  Amen-Corner. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  597.     Wednesday,  September  22,  17 14. 

This  Day  will  be  publifhed,  in  Latin  and  Englifh, 
Oratio  in  Sereniflimi  Regis  Georgii  adventum  apud 
villam  Virri(Stem,  tradita  a  Jofepho  Browne,  L.L.  M.D. 
Or,  An  Oration  upon  the  happy  Arrival  of  the  King, 
delivered  to  him  at  Greenwich.  Printed  for  D.  Brown, 
W.  Mears,  and  J.  Brown,  and  fold  by  J.  Roberts  in 
Warwick-lane.  Price  6d. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  598.     Fryday,  September  24,  17 14. 

This  Day  is  publifhed. 

The  Prologue  at  the  opening  of  the  Theatre  Royal 
in  Drury  lane  the  Day  after  His  Majefty's  publick  Entry  ; 
fpoken    by  Mr.  Wilks.  Printed  for  Jacob  Tonfon  at 

[  19s  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Shakefpear's  Head  againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

"nee  2d.  Vol.  vui,  No.  598.      Fryday,  September  24,  1714. 

This  Day  is  Publiih'd, 
A  Letter  to  Mr.  Addifon,  on  the  King's  Acceffion  to 
the  Throne.   By  Mr.  Eufden.  Printed  for  Jacob  Ton- 
fon  at  Shakefpear's  Head  over-againft  Catherine-ftreet  in 

the  otrand.  Vol.  vm,  No.  606.     Wednesday,  October  13,  17 14. 

This  Day  is  publifhed, 
Mr.  Steele's  Apology  for  himfelf  and  his  Writings ; 
occafioned  by  his  Expulfion  from  the  Houfe  of  Com- 
mons.    Fabula    quanta    fui  ?    Hor.    London:   Printed; 
and  fold  by  R.  Burleigh,  in  Amen-Corner. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  610.     Fryday,  October  22,  1714. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

The  Good  Man's  Refuge  in  Diftrefs,  and  the  Right 
Way  to  fecure  and  perpetuate  the  Bleflings  of  our  prefent 
Eftabliftiment.  Delivered  in  two  Sermons  at  the  Savoy, 
the  former  Auguft  8,  17 14,  on  Occafion  of  the  Death 
of  Queen  Anne;  the  latter  October  3  following,  on 
the  happy  Arrival  of  King  George.  By  Richard  Synge 
of  the  Savoy.  Publifhed  at  the  Requeft  of  feveral  of 
the  Auditors,  and  in  hope  to  remove  fome  Prejudices 
which  fome  others  have  too  haftily  taken  up  againft 
them.  Printed  for  J.  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's  Head  over- 
againft  Catherine  ftreet  in  the  Strand.  Price  Four 
Pence. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  613.     Friday,  October  29,  1714. 

[  196] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Juft  Publifhed, 

The  Law  of  Elections ;  being  an  Abftra6l  of  all  the 
Statutes  now  in  Force  relating  to  the  Election  of  Mem- 
bers to  ferve  in  the  Houfe  of  Commons.  In  three  Sect- 
ions, viz.  The  Duties  of  the  Ele6lors,  the  Elected  and 
the  Officers  Returning.  The  Second  Edition  Continued 
to  the  End  of  the  laft  Seffions  of  Parliament.  Printed 
for  J.  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's  Head  over-againft  Cath- 
erine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  617.     Monday,  November  8,  1714. 

RELIGIOUS  PUBLICATIONS 

(controversial  and  otherwise) 

Juft  Publifh'd, 

The  Impiety  and  Folly  of  refitting  lawful  Governours 
by  Force  or  Arms,  demonftrated  in  a  Sermon  Preach'd  on 
January  30th  laft,  by  Luke  Milbourne  a  Presbyter  of  the 
Church  of  England.  Price  6d.  Likewife  three  Sermons 
Preach'd  at  Sto^ton  in  the  County  of  Salop  by  Alex- 
ander Scot,  M.  A.  Publifti'd  to  Vindicate  them  from  the 
Mifreprefentations  they  have  met  with.  Price  6d.  Printed 
for  G.  Sawbridge  in  Little-Britain,  and  Sold  by  J.  Mor- 
phew  near  Stationer's  Hall. 

No.  6.     Wednesday.  March  7,  171 1. 

The  Hiftory  of  Refiftance,  as  pracSlis'd  by  the  Church 
of  England  :  In  which  't  is  prov'd,  from  moft  Authentick 
Records,  That  in  every  Reign  fince  the  Reformation  of 
Religion,  the  faid  Church  hath  Aided  and  Allifted,  Jufti- 
fied  and  Approved  of,  fuch  Subjects  as  have  Defended 

[  197  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

themfelves  againft  the  Oppreflions  of  their  Tyrannical, 
tho'  Natural  Princes.  By  John  Wethers,  Entred  ac- 
cording to  Act  of  Parliament.  Printed  for  J.  Robinfon 
in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard,  and  Sold  by  A.  Baldwin  near 
the  Oxford-Arms  in  Warwick-lane.   Price  3d. 

No.  9.      Saturday,  March  lO,  1 71 1. 

An  Expofition  of  the  Church  Catechifm  ;  for  the  Ufe 
of  the  Diocefe  of  Sarum.  By  the  Right  Reverend  Father 
in  God  Gilbert  Lord  Bifhop  of  Sarum.  Printed  for  John 
Churchill  at  the  black  Swan  in  Pater-nofter  row. 

No.  16.      Monday,  March  19,  1 71 1. 

Juft  publifh'd 

A  Sermon  Preach*d  at  Patrixbourne,  near  Canterbury; 
proving  that  Diflenters  are  impoPd  upon  by  their  Teach- 
ers, and  that  they  ought  to  conform  to  the  Church  of 
England,  as  by  Law  eftablifh'd.  With  a  Preface  to  fhew 
their  Miftake,  about  the  A61  of  Exemption,  and  that  they 
can  have  no  Claim  to  that  Indulgence,  without  certain 
Conditions  therein  mentioned.  By  J.  Bowtell,  B.D.  Fel- 
low of  St.  John's  College  in  Cambridge.  Printed  for  R. 
Knaplock  at  the  Bifhop's  Head  in  St.  Paul's  Church  yard. 

Price  3d.  No.  18.    Wednesday,  March  21,  1711. 

Juft  publifti^d. 

Remarks  upon  a  Sermon  preach'd  by  Dr.  Henry  Sache- 
verell,  at  the  Aflizes  held  at  Derby,  Auguft  15,  1709. 
In  a  Letter  to  himfelf.  Sold  by  A.  Baldwin  at  the  Oxford- 
Arms  in  Warwick  Lane. 

No.  42.     Wednesday,  April  1 8,  17 1 1. 

[  198] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

This  Day  is  Publifli'd, 

The  Do6trine  of  Original  Sin,  as  it  was  always  held 
in  the  Catholick  Church,  and  particularly  in  the  Church 
of  England,  Afferted  and  Vindicated  from  the  Exceptions 
and  Cavils  of  the  Reverend  Dr.  Daniel  Whitby.  By 
Jonath.  Edwards,  D.D.  and  Principal  of  Jefus  College 
in  Oxon.  Oxford,  Printed  at  the  Theatre  for  Henry 
Clements,  and  are  to  be  Sold  by  Henry  Clements  Book- 
feller  at  the  Half  Moon  in  St.  Paul's  Church  Yard. 

No.  165.      Saturday,  Septembers,  1711. 

Contemplations  Moral  and  Divine  :  By  Sir  Matthew 
Hale,  Knight,  late  Lord  Chief  Juftice  of  England,  8vo. 
Sermons  on  feveral  Occalions :  By  Geo.  Stanhope,  D.D. 
and  Dean  of  Canterbury.  Both  printed  for  D.  Mid- 
winter at  the  3  Crowns  in  St.  PauFs  Church-yard. 

No,  21  a.      Friday,   November  2,  1711. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

Penitential  Meditations  of  a  Soul  touched  with  Re- 
morfe  for  having  a  long  time  recited  the  Lord's  Prayer 
without  due  Attention  and  Refle6lion;  written  in  French, 
and  Tranflated  by  W.  S.  Corre6led  by  Jofeph  Trapp, 
A.M.  Fellow  of  Wadham  College  in  Oxford,  and  Poetical 
Profeflbr  in  the  faid  Univerfity.  The  Second  Edition. 
Printed  for  Bernard  Lintott,  and  Sold  by  John  Harding 
on  the  Paved  Stones  in  St.  Martin's-lane ;  Jofhua  Lin- 
tott in  New  ftreet  by  St.  Martins-lane,  and  John  Mor- 
phew  near  Stationer's  Hall.  Where  may  be  had  his  Pre- 
le6tiones  Poeticae,  and  Madam  Dacier's  Homer,  Englifh, 

with  Cuts.  No.  293.     Tuesday,  February  5,  1712. 

[    199   ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Juft  Publiflied, 

A  Review  of  the  Lutheran  Principles,  fhewing  how 
they  differ  from  the  Church  of  England,-  and  that  Baron 
Puffendorf  s  EfTay  for  Uniting  Proteftants  was  not  de- 
figned  to  procure  a  Union  between  the  Lutherans  and  the 
Church  of  England,  as  is  infinuated  in  the  Title  to  the 
late  Edition  of  that  Book.  In  a  Letter  to  a  Friend.  By 
Tho.  Brett  L.L.D.  Redor  of  Bettefhanger  in  Kent. 
Printed  for  Henry  Clements  at  the  Half-Moon  in  St. 
Paul's  Chuch-Yard. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  609.     Wednesday,  October  20,  1 714. 

Juft  Publifhed, 

A  Letter  to  the  Author  of  the  Hiftory  of  the  Lutheran 
Church,  from  a  Country  School-Boy.  "  Out  of  the 
"  Mouth  of  very  Babes  and  Sucklings  haft  thou  ordained 
"  Strength,  becaufe  of  thine  Enemies  ;  that  thou  mighteft 
"  ftill  the  Enemy  and  the  Avenger  Pfal.  8  ver.  2.  Printed 
for  John  Morphew  near  Stationer's  Hall. 

Vol    VIII,  No.  620.     Monday,  November  15,  1714. 

TREATISES 

Juft  Publifti'd, 

M.  Ozanam's  Introduction  to  the  Mathematicks  ;  or, 
His  Algebra :  Wherein  the  Rudiments  of  that  moft  ufeful 
Science  are  made  plain  to  a  mean  Capacity.  Done  out 
of  French.  Printed  for  R.  Sare  at  Gray's-Inn-Gate  in 
Holborn. 

No.  10.     Monday,  March  12,  17 11. 
[    2CX)   ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Juft  publifh'd, 
The  Art  of  Englifti  Poetry,  containing,  I.  Rules  for 
making  Verfes,  —  II.  A  Colle6i:ion  of  the  moft  natural, 
agreeable,  and  fublime  Thoughts,  viz.  AUufions,  Similes, 
Defcriptions  and  Characters  of  Perfons  and  Things  that 
are  to  be  found  in  the  beft  Englifh  Poets.  III.  A  Diction- 
ary of  Rhymes.  By  Edward  Byfshe,  Gent.  The  Fourth 
Edition,  8vo.  Printed  for  Sam.  Buckley,  at  the  Dolphin 
in  Little-Britain,  and  Sold  by  the  Bookfellers. 

No.  12.      Wednesday,  March  14,  17 1 1. 

Juft  publijQi'd  the  2d  Edition  of, 

The  Original  and  Inftitution  of  Civil  Government 
Difcufs'd,  viz.  I.  An  Examination  of  the  Patriarchal 
Scheme  of  Government.  II.  A  Defence  of  Mr.  Hook- 
er's Judgment,  &c.  againft  the  Objections  of  feveral  late 
Writers.  To  which  is  added,  A  large  Anfwer  to  Dr.  F. 
Atterbury's  Charge  of  Rebellion :  In  which  the  Subftance 
of  his  late  Latin  Sermon  is  produced,  and  fully  Exam- 
ined. By  Benj.  Hoodly,  M.A.  Reftor  of  St.  Peter's  poor. 
The  2d  Edition.  Printed  for  J.  Knapton  at  the  Crown 
in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard :  Where  may  be  had  Mr. 
Hoadly's  Meafures  of  Submillion  the  3d  Edition,  and  his 
Defence  of  Epifcopal  Ordination,  in  8vo. 

No.  17.     Tuesday,  March  20,  1711. 

Juft  PubliftiM, 
Mr.  J.  Gadbury's  Aftrological  Seaman  ;  directing  Mer- 
chants, Mariners,  Captains  of  Ships,  Gunners,  &c.   How, 
by  God's  Blefling,  they  may  efcape  divers  Dangers  which 
commonly  happen  in  the  Ocean  :   With  a  Diary  of  the 
[  201  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Weather  for  21  Years,  and  his  Obfervations  thereon; 
being  a  Book  of  general  Ufe  as  well  as  Curiofity.  Price 
bound  3s.  6d.  Printed  for  G.  Sawbridge  in  Little-Britain ; 
Where  may  be  had  Sir  W.  Read's  Treatife  of  the  Eyes, 
very  proper  for  Families.  Price  bound  2s.  6d. 

No.  26.     Friday,  March  30,  171 1. 

Juft  publilh'd, 

A  Treatife  of  the  Hypochondriack  and  Hyfterick 
Paffions,  vulgarly  call'd  the  HYPO  in  Men  and  VA- 
POURS in  Women;  in  which  the  Symptoms,  Caufes 
and  Cure  of  thofe  Difeafes  are  fet  forth  after  a  Method 
entirely  new.  The  whole  interfpers'd  with  inftru6bive 
Difcourfes  on  the  real  Art  of  Phyfick  it  felf,  and  enter- 
taining Remarks  on  the  Modern  Practice  of  PHYSI- 
CIANS and  APOTHECARIES  :  Very  ufeful  to  all 
that  have  the  Misfortune  to  ftand  in  need  of  either.  In 
3  Dialogues.  By  B.  De  Mandeville,  M.D.  Printed  and 
fold  by  D.  Leach  in  Elliot's  Court  in  the  Little  Old- 
Baily,  W.  Taylor  at  the  Ship  in  Pater-nofter-row, 
J.  Woodward  in  Scalding-Alley,  Stocks  Market,  and 
A.  Bettefworth  on  London-Bridge.  Price  bound  in  Calf 
3s.  6d. 

No.  52.      Monday,  April  30,  1 71 1. 

Medicinal  Experiments  :  Or,  a  Collection  of  Choice 
and  Safe  Remedies  for  the  moft  Part  Simple,  and  eafily 
prepared  :  Very  ufeful  in  Families,  and  fitted  for  the  Ser- 
vice of  Country  People.  By  the  Honourable  R.  Boyle, 
Efq  ;  late  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society.  In  Three  Parts. 
Containing  above  500  Choice  Receipts.  The  Fifth  Edi- 
[   202   ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

tion  Corre6ted.     Printed  for  W.  Innys,  at  the  Prince's 
Arms  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard. 

No.  1 8 8.     Friday,  October  5,  171 1. 

A  Courfe  of  Chirurgical  Operations,  demonftrated  in 
the  Royal  Garden  at  Paris ;  by  Monfieur  Dionis,  chief 
Chirurgeon  to  the  late  Dauphinefs,  and  to  the  prefent 
Dutchefs  of  Burgundy.  Tranflated  from  the  Paris  Edi- 
tion. Printed  for  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's  Head 
againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  188.     Friday,  October  5,  171 1. 

To  Morrow  will  be  publifhed, 
The  Engliih  Grammar  :  Or,  An  EfTay  on  the  Art  of 
Grammar :  Applied  to  and  exemplified  in  the  Englifh 
Tongue.  By  Michael  Maittaire.  Printed  for  Henry 
Glements  at  the  Half-Moon  in  St.  Paul's  Church- 
yard. 

No.  210,     Wednesday,  October  31,  171 1. 

The  Compleat  Gamefter ;  or,  Inftrudlions  how  to  play 
at  all  Manner  of  ufual  and  moft  gentile  Games,  either  on 
Cards,  Dice,  Billiards,  Trucks,  Bowls,  or  Chefs  ;  alfo  the 
Arts  and  Mifteries  of  Riding,  Racing,  Archery,  and  Cock- 
fighting.  To  which  is  added  the  Game  at  Baflet,  with  a 
Difcourfe  of  Gaming  in  general,  the  Description  of  a 
Gaming  Ordinary,  and  the  Character  of  a  Gamefter; 
with  a  Song  on  the  Game  at  Piquet.  All  regulated  by  the 
moft  experienc'd  Mafters.  Printed  for  Charles  Brome,  at 
the  Gun  at  the  Weft  End  of  St.  Paul's  Church.  Price 

^^*  "^'  No.  248.     Friday,  December  14,  171 1. 

[   203    ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Sure  and  certain  Methods  of  attaining  a  long  and 
healthful  Life  :  With  Means  for  correcting  a  bad  Con- 
ftitution,  &c.  Written  originally  in  Italian  by  Lewis 
Cornaro,  a  noble  Venetian,  when  he  was  near  an  hun- 
dred Years  of  Age.  The  2d  Edition.  Printed  forD.  Mid- 
winter at  the  three  Crowns  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard. 

No.  270.     Wednesday,  January  9,  1712. 

This  Day  is  Publifh^d, 

A  Grammar  of  the  Englifh  Tongue,  with  Notes,  giv- 
ing the  Grounds  and  Reafon  of  Grammar  in  General. 
To  which  are  now  added.  The  Arts  of  Poetry,  Rhetoric, 
Logic,  &c.  making  a  compleat  Syftem  of  an  Englifh 
Education.  For  the  ufe  of  the  Schools  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland.  The  Second  Edition,  with  Improvements. 
Printed  for  John  Brightland ;  and  Sold  by  the  Bookfell- 

erS  of  London,  &C.  No.  293.     Tuesday,  February  5,  1712. 

Lately  publifh'd, 

The  London  new  Method  and  Art  of  teaching  Chil- 
dren to  Spell  and  Read;  fo  as  they  may,  without  the 
Help  of  any  other  Books,  read  the  Bible  in  lefs  than  12 
Months.  Note,  This  way  of  Teaching  is  approved  by 
moft  School-Mafters  as  the  beft.  Price  bound  6d.  with 
great  Allowance  to  thofe  who  fell  or  give  hem  to  Schools, 
&c.  Printed  for  E.  Parker  at  the  Bible  and  Crown  in 
Lombard-ftreet  near  Stocks  Market. 

No.  316.     Monday,  March  3,  17 12. 

The  Retir'd  Gard'ner,  or.  Dialogues  between  a  Gen- 
tleman and  a  Gardiner :  Containing  the  Methods  of  Mak- 
[  204  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

ing,  Ordering  and  Improving  a  Fruit  and  Kitchin-Garden, 
together  with  the  Manner  of  Planting  and  Cultivating 
Flowers,  Plants,  Shrubs,  and  Under-Shrubs,  neceffary 
for  the  Adorning  of  Gardens,  &c.  In  which  is  explained, 
the  Art  of  Making  and  Difpofing  of  Parterres,  Arbours 
of  Greens,  Wood- Works,  Arches,  Columns,  and  other 
Pieces  and  Compartments  ufually  found  in  the  moft  Beau- 
tiful Gardens  of  Country-Seats.  The  whole  enrich'd  with 
Variety  of  Figures,  being  a  Tranflation  from  the  Sieur 
Louis  Liger.  To  which  is  added,  a  Defcription  and  Plan 
of  Count  Tallard's  Garden  at  Nottingham.  The  whole 
Revised,  with  feveral  Alterations  and  Additions,  which 
render  it  proper  for  our  Englifh  Culture,  By  George 
London,  and  Henry  Wife.  Printed  for  Jacob  Tonfon  at 
Sakefpear's   Head  over  againft   Catherine-ftreet  in  the 

otrand.  No.  420.     Wednesday,  July  2,  17 12. 

An  Account  of  the  Sepulchres  of  the  Antients,  and  a 
Defcription  of  their  Monuments  from  the  Creation  of 
the  World  to  the  building  of  the  Pyramids,  and  thence 
to  the  Deftru6lion  of  Jerufalem,  in  2  Parts,  the  firft 
comprehending  thofe  that  are  in  Afia,  and  the  2d  thofe 
in  Africa ;  with  a  Continuation,  comprehending  fome  in 
both  thefe  Continents  and  in  Europe  :  The  whole  con- 
taining feveral  Geographical  andHiftorical  Remarks  upon 
the  Places  and  Perfons  in  thofe  Countries  and  Times. 
By  J.  M.  Gregory,  L.L.D.  Sold  by  J.  Barnes  in  the 
Pall-Mall,  G.  Strahan  in  Cornhill,  W.  Taylor  at  the 
Ship  in  Pater  Nofter-Row,  and  E.  Curll  at  the  Dial 
and  Bible  againft  St.  Dunftan's  Church  in  Fleetftreet : 
Where  may  be  had  Mr.  Otway's  Works  in  2  neat 
[  205  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Pocket  Volumes,  Price  6s.  and  Mr.  Rowe's  Callipedia, 
Pr.  4s. 

No.  429.     Saturday,  July  12,  1712. 

The  Theory  and  Pradlice  of  Gardening  :  Wherein  is 
fully  handled  all  that  relates  to  fine  Gardens,  commonly 
called  Pleafure-Gardens,  as  Parterres,  Groves,  Bowling- 
Greens,  &c.  containing  divers  Plans  and  general  Dif- 
pofitions  of  Gardens  ;  new  Defigns  of  Parterres,  Groves, 
GrafT-Plots,  Mazes,  Banqueting- Rooms,  Galleries,  Por- 
tico's, and  Summer-Houfes  of  Arbor- Work  j  TerrafTes, 
Stairs,  Fountains,  Cafcades,  and  the  like  Ornaments,  of 
Ufe  in  the  Decoration  and  Embellifhment  of  Gardens. 
Wirh  the  Manner  of  laying  out  the  Ground,  cutting  the 
TerrafTes,  and  of  Drawing  and  Executing  all  forts  of 
Defigns  according  to  the  Principles  of  Geometry.  The 
Method  of  Planting,  and  Raifing,  in  little  time,  all  the 
Plants  requifite  in  fine  Gardens.  Alfo  that  of  difcover- 
ing  Water,  conveying  it  into  Gardens,  and  of  making 
Bafons  and  Fountains  for  the  fame.  Together  with  Re- 
marks and  general  Rules  in  all  that  concerns  the  Art  of 
Gardening.  Done  from  the  French  Original,  printed  at 
Paris,  Anno  1709.  By  John  James  of  Greenwich.  Printed 
for  Bernard  Lintott  between  the  two  Temple  Gates, 
Charles  King  in  Weftminfter-Hall,  and  Maurice  Atkins 
in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard. 

No.  518.     Friday,  October  24,  1 71 2. 

This  Week  will  be  Publiihed, 

A  new  Method  for  Difcovery  of  the  Longitude  both 
hy  Sea  and  Land.    By  W.  Whifton,  M.A.  fometime 
[  206  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Profeflbr  of  Mathematicks  in  the  Univerfity  of  Cam- 
bridge, and  H.  Ditton,  Mafter  of  the  New  Mathematick 
School  in  Chrift's  Hofpital,  London.  Which  Method  has 
been  fo  far  approved  by  this  prefent  Parliament,  that  they 
have  pafled  an  A61,  ordering  20,oool.  Reward  for  fuch 
a  Difcovery.  Printed  for  John  Phillips  at  the  Black  Bull 
in  Cornhill.  Price  One  Shilling. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  566.     Monday,  July  12,  1714. 

MISCELLANEOUS    PUBLICATIONS 

Juft  Publifh'd  the  2d  Edition  of, 

A  Survey  of  the  Microcofm ;  or.  The  Anatomy  of  the 
Bodies  of  Man  and  Woman ;  wherein  the  Skin,  Veins, 
Arteries,  Nerves,  Mufcles,  Vifcera,  Bones  and  Liga- 
ments thereof  are  accurately  delineated,  and  fo  difpos'd 
by  Pafting,  as  that  all  the  Parts  of  the  Bodies,  both 
Internal  and  External,  are  exactly  reprefented  in  their 
proper  Site.  By  Michael  Spaher,  and  Corre6led  by  Dr. 
Havers.  The  2d  Edition.  Pr.  los.  Printed  for  D.  Mid- 
winter at  the  3  Crawns  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard. 

No.  7.  Thursday,  March  8,  171 1. 

Juft  Publifli'd, 

The  Monthly  Weather-Paper.  Being  fome  Barofcopi- 
cal  Difcoveries  from  what  Part  or  Parts  of  the  Compafs 
the  Wind  will  be  likely  to  blow ;  with  what  other  Sorts 
and  Alterations  of  the  Weather  may  be  expelled  every 
Day  and  Night  in  March  1 7 1  o- 1 1 .  Printed  for  A.  Bald- 
win near  the  Oxford-Arms  in  Warwick-Lane. 

No.  12.    Wednesday,  March  14,  1711. 
[    207   ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

New  Mufick.  Juft  publifli'd. 

Six  Sonatas  for  a  Flute  and  a  thorough  Bafs.  Com- 
posed by  Mr.  Gaillard.  Sold  by  Peter  Dunoyer,  Book  and 
Map-Seller,  at  the  Sign  of  Erafmus's  Head  near  the  Foun- 
tain Tavern  in  the  Strand ;  Price  5s.  In  the  faid  Shop 
you  may  have  the  new  Maps  of  Flanders,  in  21  Sheets, 
neatly  engrav'd.  no  14.  Friday,  March  16,  1711. 

Reflections  on  Ridicule ;  or,  what  it  is  that  makes  a 
Man  ridiculous,  and  the  Means  to  avoid  it :  Wherein  are 
reprefented,  the  different  Manners  and  Charad:ers  of  Per- 
sons of  the  prefent  Age  :  In  2  Vol.  8vo.  Printed  for  D. 
Midwinter  at  the  three  Crowns  in  St.  Paul's  Church- 
yard. No.  20.    Friday,  March  23,  171 1. 

The  Duty  of  Servants  :  Containing,  I.  Their  Prepara- 
tions for,  and  Choice  of  a  Service.  II.  Their  Duty  in  Ser- 
vice :  Together  with  Prayers  fuited  to  each  Duty.  All 
which  may  be  accommodated  likewife,  for  the  moft  Part 
to  Apprentices.  To  which  is  added,  A  Difcourfe  of  the 
Sacrament,  fuited  peculiarly  to  Servants:  Proper  to  be  read 
in  Charity-Schools.  The  3d  Edition,  by  Dr.  Lucas. 
Printed  for  William  Innys  at  the  Prince's  Arms  in  St. 

Paul's  Church-yard.  No.  64.  Monday,  May  14,  1711. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 

An  Hiftorical  Geography  of  the  Old  Teftament, 
in  three  Volumes.  Vol.  II.  Being  a  Geographical  and 
Hiftorical  Account  of  the  Books  of  Exodus,  Leviticus, 
Numbers,  Deuteronomy,  Jofhua,  Judges  and  Ruth,  very 

[208] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

ufeful  for  underftanding  the  Hiftory  of  the  faid  Books. 
To  which  End  it  is  Illuftratedwith  Maps,  and  there  are 
added  Chronological  Tables.  There  are  alfo  feveral 
Texts  occafionally  Explained,  and  the  prefent  Corrupt 
Reading  of  others,  particularly  Deut.  lo.  6,  7.  and  Exod. 
12.  40.  Corrected.  There  are  likewife  several  Curiofi- 
ties.  Natural  and  Artificial,  taken  notice  of,  and  repre- 
fented  by  Copper  Cuts.  By  Edward  Wells,  D.D.  Redor 
of  Cotesbach  in  Leicefterfhire.  Printed  for  James  Knap- 
ton,  at  the  Crown  in  St.  Paul's  Church- Yard. 

No.  129.  Saturday,  July  28,  1711. 

Whereas  a  fcandalous  and  foolifh  Paper  was  Yefterday 
cried  about  the  Streets,  and  fold  for  Dr.  Upton's  Funeral 
Sermnon ;  This  is  to  certify  that  it  is  a  Forgery  and  Falf- 
hood,  and  that  the  only  true  ones,  with  this  Title  [A 
Funeral  Sermon  upon  the  fudden  and  much  lamented 
Death  of  Dr.  Francis  Upton,  who  died  Sept.  4.  171 1. 
Preach'd  at  Black-Fryars,  by  Samuel  Wright,]  are  this 
Day  publifhed  and  fold  by  John  Clark  at  the  Bible  and 
Crown  in  the  Old  Change.  Price  6d.  the  larger  fort,  and 

3d.  the  lefler.  No^  ig^    Friday,  September  28,  1711. 

Juft  Publifli'd, 

The  Spectator  InfpecSled,  or  a  Letter  to  the  Spectator 
from  an  Officer  of  the  Army  in  Flanders,  touching  the 
ufe  of  French  Terms,  in  Relations  from  the  Army  ;  Oc- 
cafioned  by  the  Spectator  of  the  8th  of  September  171 1. 
Written  by  the  Author  of  the  Spy  upon  the  Spectator. 

No.  223.    Thursday,  November  15,  171 1. 
[   209   ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Juft  publifhed. 

The  Generous  Rivals,  or  Love  Triumphant,  a  Novel. 
Printed  for  Tho.  Home  under  the  Royal-Exchange, 
Hen.  Clements  at  the  Half-Moon  in  St.  Paul's  Church- 
yard, Ch.  King  in  Weftminfter-hall,  J.  Pemberton  at  the 
Buck  in  Fleet-ftreet,  and  J.  Morphew  near  Stationer's 

■"^^^*  No.  278.     Friday,  January  18,  1712. 

Laft  Tuefday  was  Publifhed, 

The  new  Englifh  PafTepied,  Mr.  Siris's  New  Dance 
for  the  Year  1 7 1 2.  The  Book  is  fold  by  Mr.  Siris,  Au- 
thor of  the  Art  of  Dancing  demonftrated  by  Chara6lers 
and  Figures  &c.  at  his  Houfe,  at  the  Blue  Flower  Pot 
at  the  upper  End  of  St.  Martins-Land,  and  J.  Walfh 
at  the  Harp  and  Hautboy  in  Catherine  ftreet,  price  2s.  6d. 

No.  291.     Saturday,  February  2,  17 12. 

Juft  publifhed, 
Brooks  and  Hillier.  A  Satyr.  Price  3d.  Sold  by  J. 
Baker  in  Pater-nofter-row :  Where  may  be  had,  The 
Highland  Vifions  ;  or,  the  Scots  new  Prophecy,  declar- 
ing in  12  Vifions  what  ftrange  things  fhall  come  to  pafs 
in  the  Year  171 2.  Price  2d.  and  the  Scots  Reprefenta- 
tion  to  her  Majefty.    Price  2d. 

No.  326.     Friday,  March  14,  1712. 

J||^=^  Whereas  about  nine  Weeks  fince  there  was 
accidentally  difcovered  by  an  Hufbandman  at  Stimsfield 
near  Woodftock  in  Oxfordfhire,  (a  large  Pavement  of 
rich  Mofaick  Work  of  the  Ancient  Romans,  which  is 
adorn'd  with  feveral  Figures  alluding  to  Mirth  and  Con- 
cord, in  particular  that  of  Bacchus  feated  on  a  Panther.) 
[  210  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

This  is  to  give  Notice,  that  an  exa6l  Delineation  of  the 
fame  is  Engraven  and  Imprinted  on  a  large  Elephant 
Sheet  of  Paper  j  which  are  to  be  Sold  at  Mr.  Charles 
Lillie's,  Perfumer,  at  the  corner  of  Beauford  Buildings 
in  the  Strand,  at  is.  N.B.  There  are  to  be  had  at  the 
fame  place  at  one  Guinea  each  on  a  fuperfine  Atlas  Paper, 
fome  painted  with  the  fame  variety  of  Colours  that  the 
faid  Pavement  is  beautified  with  ;  this  Piece  of  Antiquity 
is  efteemed  by  the  Learned  to  be  the  moft  confiderable 
ever  found  in  Britain.         no.  351.    Saturday,  April  12,  1712. 

KING  HENRY  VIII'S  PRIMER,  fet  forth  by  His 
Majefty  and  his  Clergy  to  be  taught,  learned,  and  read ; 
and  no  other  to  be  ufed  throughout  all  his  Dominions.  Im- 
printed at  London  by  Richard  Grafton,  Printer  to  the 
Prince's  Grace,  the  XVIIth  Day  of  Auguft,  MDXLVI. 
Reprinted  without  any  Alteration,  and  fold  by  E.  Sparkes, 
Bookbinder,  againft  the  Dial  in  Fetter-Lane  near  Fleet- 
street.    Price  2S.  No.  386.     Friday,  May  23,  1712. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Masters,  the  Dance  calFd 
Amable-Vanquer,  is  writ  in  the  new  Chara6ler,  from 
Mr.  Feuillet.  By  Richard  Shirley  Dancing  Matter,  and 
fold  only  at  his  Houfe  the  Corner  of  Newport  Street  the 
upper  End  of  St.  Martins-Lane. 

No.  511.     Thursday,  October  16,  1712. 

Whereas  there  hath  been  lately  publifhed  a  certain 
legendary  Story  of  an  unknown  Theodofius  concerning 
the  Priefthood  of  Chrift,  tranflated  out  of  Suidas  under 
the  Title  of  J  very  ancient^  authentick^  and  remarkable 
Teftimony  concerning  our  bleffed  Lord  and  Saviour  Jefus 

[211  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Chrift ;  which  the  Tranflator  hath  taken  the  Liberty  not 
only  to  dedicate  to  me,  but  to  ufe  my  Name  in  the  Title 
Page,  thereby  giving  Occafion  to  think  I  countenance  the 
Authority  of  that  Teftimony  :  Now  thefe  are  to  certify, 
That  the  Perfon  who  publifhed  that  Pamphlet  is  alto- 
gether a  Stranger  to  me;  and  that  I  was  no  ways  ac- 
quainted with  his  Defign  till  I  faw  it  in  Print ;  for  though 
the  Paflage  produced  may  appear  remarkable,  yet  I  can- 
not think  the  Teftimony  either  ancient  or  authentick. 
Nov,  ^,  iyi2,  Rob.  Nelfon, 

No.  528.     Wednesday,  November  5,  17 12. 

Juft  Publifhed,  printed  with  an  Elzevir  Letter,  in 
a  neat  Pocket  Volume,  the  yth  Edition  of, 
The  Difpenfary :  A  Poem.  In  fix  Canto's.  With  feveral 
Defcriptions  and  Epifodes,  never  before  printed.  To  this 
Edition  is  added  a  Cut  to  each  Canto,  defigned  and  engraved 
by  the  beft  Hands.  Printed  for  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shake- 
fpear's  Head  over-againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

Price    IS.   6d.  yoi   y„j^  Nq,  ^^g,      Friday, June  18,  17 14. 

For  the  Information  of  Gentlemen  and  Promotion  of 
Trade  among  Bookfellers,  there  is  this  Day  publifhed, 
The  Monthly  Catalogue  of  all  Books,  Sermons  and 
Pamphlets  which  were  publifhed  in  the  Months  of  May 
and  June  laft,  the  Name  of  the  Printer  and  Price  being 
to  each  Book.  Printed  for  Bernard  Lintott  between  the 
two  Temple-Gates.  Price  3d.  each  Month.  To  be  con- 
tinued Monthly.  Vol.  vm,  No.  569.     Monday,  July  19,  1714. 

This  Day  is  Publifhed, 
The   Monthly   Catalogue   of  Books,  Sermons,  and 
[  212  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Pamphlets,  publiflied   in  Auguft.  Alio  Catalogues   for 
May,  June  and  July,  price  3d.  each 

Vol.  viii,  No.  589.     Friday,  September  3,  1714. 

Lately  Publifhed,  Printed  on  an  Elziver  Letter, 
in  a  neat  Pocket  Volume,  {with  a  very  curious 
Frontifpiece  reprefenting  her  doing  Penance  in 
St,  PaulV  Cathedral), 

The  Third  Edition  of, 
The  Life  and  Character  of  Jane  Shore,  collected  from 
our  heft  Hiftorians,  chiefly  from  the  Writings  of  Sir 
Thomas  More,  who  was  her  Cotemporary,  and  Per- 
fonally  knew  her.  Humbly  offered  to  the  Readers  and 
Spectators  of  her  Tragedy  written  by  N.  Rowe.  Infcrib'd 
to  Mrs.  Oldfield.  Sold  by  W.  Lewis  in  Covent-Garden, 
J.  Brown  and  W.  Mears  without  Temple-Bar,  W.  Tay- 
lor in  Pater-nofter-Row,  D.  Jackfon  in  Cheapfide,  R. 
Smith  and  R.  Parker  under  the  Royal-Exchange,  J. 
Morphew  near  Stationer's  Hall,  and  A.  Dodd  without 
Temple-Bar.    [Price  Six  Pence.] 

Vol.  vm,  No.  583.     Friday,  August  20,  1714. 

Juft  Publifhed,  in  a  neat  Pocket  Volume,  dedi- 
cated to  the  Countefs  of  Exeter, 
Mrs.  Barker's  new  entertaining  Romance,  call'd  Ex- 
ilius,  or.  The  banifh'd  Roman ;  written  after  the  Man- 
ner of  Telemachus,  for  the  Inftruftion  of  fome  young 
Ladies  of  Quality :  Containing  the  following  Hiftories ; 
I.  The  conftant  Lovers;  or  Clelia  and  Marcellus.   2. 
The  Reward  of  Virtue,  or  the  Adventures  of  Clarinthia 
and  Lyfander.    3.  The  lucky  Efcape,  or  the  Fate  of 
[  213  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Ifmenus.  4.  The  beauteous  Captive,  or  Clodius  and 
Scipiana.  5.  Pifo,  or  the  lewd  Courtier.  6.  The  happy 
Reclufe,  or  the  Charms  of  Retirement.  7.  The  Tranffor- 
mation,  or  the  Amours  of  Cordiala.  8.  The  fair  Widow, 
or  falfe  Friend.  To  which  is  added.  The  Scene  of  Plea- 
fure;  being  the  Defcription  of  a  compleat  Garden.  Printed 
for  E.  Curll  at  the  Dial  and  Bible  againft  St.  Dunftan's 
Church  in  Fleetftreet,  and  J.  Roberts  in  Warwick-lane. 

rrice  3s.  Vol.  vm,  No.  598.     Fryday,  September  24,  1714. 

A  fmall  Pocket  Book  of  the  Arms  of  all  the  Lords, 
Spiritual  and  Temporal ;  whereby  you  may  readily  know 
any  Nobleman's  Coach.  Sold  by  A.  Lea  and  R.  Glyme, 
Globe  and  Mathematical  Inftrument  Makers;  at  the 
Atlas  and  Hercules  in  Cheapfide,  the  Corner  of  Friday 

itreet.  Vol.  vm,  No.  608.    Monday,  October  18,  1714. 

Juft  publifhed,  in  a  neat  Pocket-Volume, 

The  Prince's  Cabala :  Or,  Myfteries  of  State.  Written 
by  King  James  L  and  fome  Noblemen  in  his  Reign,  and 
in  Queen  Elizabeth's.  With  Socrates's  Difcourfe  to  a  Gre- 
cian Prince,  on  Kingly  Government,  tranflated  from  the 
Greek.  Printed  for  R.  Smith  and  G.  Strahan  at  the  Royal 
Exchange,  J.  Brown  without  Temple-Bar,  J.  Graves 
next  White's  Chocolate-Houfe  in  St.  James's-ftreet ; 
and  fold  by  R.  Burleigh  in  Amen-Corner.   Pr.  2s.  6d. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  614.     Monday,  November  i,  1714. 

BOARDING-SCHOOLS 

Near  the  Windmill  in  Hampftead  is  a  good  Boarding- 
School ;  where  young  Gentlewomen  may  be  boarded,  and 
[  214  ] 


I 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

taught  Englifh,  French,  Dancing,  Mufick,  and  all  Sorts 

of  Needle-work.  No.  28.      Monday,  April  a,  1711. 

At  Woodford  in  Eflex,  upon  Epping-Foreft,  is  kept  a 
Boarding-School  for  young  Gentlewomen,  by  JAMES 
GREENWOOD,  Author  of  the  Effay  towards  a  Pradi- 
cal  Englifh  Grammar,  defcribing  the  Genius  and  Nature 
of  the  Englifh  Tongue,  giving  likewife  a  rational  and  plain 
Account  of  Grammar  in  general,  with  a  familiar  Explana- 
tion of  its  Terms.  Sold  by  S.  Keeble,  J.  Lawrence,  H. 
and  J.  Bonwick,  J.  Bowyer,  and  H.  Halfey. 

No.  473-     Tuesday,  September  2,  1712. 

DANCING-SCHOOLS 

Mr.  Fert  Dancing-Mafler,  who  keeps  his  School  in 
Compton  flreet  Soho,  over  againfl  St.  Ann's  Church 
Back-door,  where  he  teaches  on  Mondays,  Wednefdays 
and  Fridays ;  gives  Notice  to  the  Publick,  That  at  the 
Defire  of  feveral  Gentlemen  in  the  City,  he  teaches 
on  Tuefdays  and  Thurfdays  at  the  George  in  Finch- 
lane  Threadneedle-flreet, near  the  Royal-Exchange:  He 
likewife  teaches  abroad ;  and  plays  very  well  on  the 
Violin, 

No.  52.      Monday,  April  30,  1711. 

Whereas  Mr.  Fert,  French  Dancing-Mafler,  who  has 
lately  taken  the  great  Dancing  Room  at  the  corner 
of  Thrift  ftreet  Soho,  Teaches  there  every  Monday, 
Wednefday,  and  Friday ;  If  any  Ladies  or  Gentlemen 
defire  to  be  Taught  at  their  own  Houfes,  fend  to  him  he 

will  Wait  upon  them.        No.  265.     Thursday,  January  3,  171 2. 
[215    ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

To  all  Ladies  and  Gentlemen  that  are  Lovers  of  Mu- 
lick  and  Dancing.  This  is  to  give  Notice,  that  on  Expla- 
nation of  the  Grounds  of  Dancing,  and  a  Sett  of  new 
Courants,  Minuets,  Rigadoons,  &c.  All  Compos'd  by 
Mr.  Fert,  are  to  be  fhow'd  and  perform'd  by  him,  at 
his  Dancing  Room  in  Pater's- Yard  at  the  upper  end  of 
Caftle-ftreet  near  Leicefter  Fields,  Mondays,  Wednes- 
days and  Fridays,  from  five  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon  till 
ten ;  where  all  the  new  Dances  are  taught,  and  if  re- 
quired, at  Perfon  of  Quality's  Houfes. 

No.  543.      Saturday,  November  42,  1712. 

Anth.  Fert,  Dancing-Mafter,  who  has  the  moft  eafie 
Manner  of  teaching  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  and  has  lately 
compofed  a  new  Dance,  is  willing  to  teach  at  private 
Houfes  at  one  Guinea  per  Month,  or  in  any  Boarding- 
School  at  reafonable  Rates.  Enquire  for  him  at  the  fol- 
lowing Places,  viz.  Mr.  Fraigneau's,  a  Confectioner,  at 
the  Orange-Tree  in  the  Pell-mell,  or  at  Mr.  Loquet's 
Mafter  of  Languages  in  Lamb-Alley  Abchurchlane  over 

againft  Pontac's.       vol.  viii,  No.  613.     Friday,  October  29,  1714. 

INSTRUCTION    IN    LANGUAGES 

This  is  to  give  Notice  to  all  Promoters  of  the  Holy 
Worfhip,  and  to  all  the  Lovers  of  the  Italian  Tongue, 
that  on  Sunday  next,  being  the  2d  of  December,  at  5  in 
the  Afternoon,  in  Oxendon  Chapel  in  Oxendon-ftreet 
near  the  Hay  Market,  there  will  be  Divine  Service  in  the 
Italian  Tongue,  and  will  continue  every  Sunday  at  the 
abovefaid  Hour,  with  an  Italian  Sermon  preached  by 
Mr.  Cafotti,  Italian  Minifter,  Author  of  a  new  Method 
[216] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

of  teaching  the  Italian  Tongue  to  Ladies,  &c.  *  :}:  * 
Note,  if  any  Lady,  or  Gentleman,  defires  to  be  inftru6led 
in  the  fame  Language,  they  need  only  fend  a  Note  for 
Mr.  Cafotti  at  Mr.  Roberts's  at  the  Queen's-Head  in 

Litchfield  ftreet,  Soho.    No.  235.    Thursday,  November29, 1711. 

Every  Wednefday,  at  half  an  Hour  after  Six  in  the 
Evening,  at  the  Blue-Coat  CofFee-houfe  in  Swithins 
Alley  near  the  Royal-Exchange,  the  French  Tongue  is 
taught  Gratis  publickly,  by  a  French  Gentleman  ;  w^ho 
teaches  the  faid  Language,  Greek,  Latin  and  Engliih  to 
Gentlemen,  Ladies  and  others,  at  their  Habitations  or 
elfev^^here.  Enquire  at  the  abovefaid  CofFee-houfe,  at  Mr. 
Arnold's  Writing  Mafler  in  Barbican,  or  at  Duglafs's 
CofFee-houfe  in  St.  Martin's  Lane  in  the  Fields. 

No.  240.     Wednesday,  December  5,  171 1. 

MISCELLANEOUS  INSTRUCTION 

A  Courfe  of  Experiments  in  order  to  demonflrate  the 
Laws  of  the  Gravitations  of  Fluids.  The  various  Pro- 
perties of  the  Air  in  relation  to  its  Weight,  Spring,  Necef- 
fity  of  its  Prefence  in  the  Confervation  of  Life,  and  Pro- 
duction of  Flame  and  Sound.  Together  with  feveral  new 
Experiments  touching  Light  and  Elefbricity  produceable 
on  the  Attrition  of  Bodies.  Experiments  concerning  the 
different  Refra6):ion  of  a  Ray  of  Light  pafling  thro'  dif- 
ferent Fluids.  Experiments  fhewing  the  EfFe6t  of  Vici- 
ated  Air  on  the  Lives  of  Animals.  Experiments  touching 
the  Tranfparency  of  feveral  Bodies  in  the  Dark  under  the 
Circumftances  of  a  Vacuum  and  Attrition,  fuch  as  Sul- 
phur, Sealing- Wax  and  Pitch.  The  Nature  of  Vifion  ex- 
[  217  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

plained;  and  the  various  Properties  of  Optick-GlafTes 
demonftrated.  Will  begin  at  Mr.  Fra.  Hauksbee's,  Sen. 
F.R.S.  in  Hind-Court,  Fleet-ftreet,  on  Monday  the  2ift 
Inftant;  where  Subfcriptions  are  taken  in,  and  printed 
Accounts  more  at  large  given.  He  being  the  only  Per- 
fon  to  v^^hom  the  late  Improvements  are  owing.  N.  B. 
There  will  be  Lectures  explaining  the  feveral  Heads. 

No.  275,     Tuesday,  January  15,  1712. 

Mr.  John  Warter,  who  formerly  taught  the  Court 
Hand  in  the  Queen's  Bench  Office  in  the  Inner  Temple, 
now  continues  to  Teach  the  fame  in  a  very  exadt  manner, 
fo  as  the  Scholar  in  three  Weeks  time  fhall  be  fit  for 
Bufinefs  (his  conftant  Attendance  being  only  defired)  at 
his  Chambers  three  pair  of  Stairs,  over  Prothonotary  Bar- 
ret's Office  in  the  Temple  Walks  at  all  Hours  of  the 
Day.   He  alfo  exemplifies  Recoveries,  &c. 

No.  377.     Tuesday,  May  13,  17 12. 

At  the  Hand  and  Pen  in  Bartlet's-Buildings  overagainft 
Hatton-Garden  in  Holborn,  are  taught  Writing  in  all  the 
Hands  of  Great  Britain,  Arithmetick,  Fraftions  Vulgar 
and  Decimal,  and  Merchants-Accompts,  by  James  Har- 
bottle.  Youth  boarded,  and  Perfons  taught  abroad. 

No.  410.      Friday,  June  20,  1712. 

PLAYS 

For  the  Benefit  of  the  Author. 
By  Her  Majefly's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Monday,  being  the  1 6th  of  April,  will  be  prefented, 
a  new  Comedy,  call'd  Injur'd  Love;  or,  the  Lady's  Sat- 
isfaction.   The  principal  Parts  to  be  perform'd  by  Mr. 

[218] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Wilks,  Mr.  Gibber,  Mr.  Mills,  Mr.  Dogget,  Mr.  John- 
fon,  Mr.  Penkethman,  Mr.  Bullock,  Mr.  Norris,  Mrs. 
Oldfield,  Mrs.  Bradfhaw,  Mrs.  Santlow,  Mrs.  Knight, 
and  Mrs.  Bicknell. 

N.  B.  Advertifements  for  Plays  will  be  continued, 
from  time  to  time,  in  this  Paper. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon,  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over  againft  Catharine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  40.      Monday,  April  16,  1 71 1. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  Powell. 
By  her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Tuefday  being  the  1 7th  of  April,  will  be  prefented 
a  Play  call'd  the  Indian  Emperor,  or  the  Conqueft  of 
Mexico  by  the  Spaniards.  The  part  of  Cortez  by  Mr. 
Powel,  Montezuma  Mr.  Keene,  Odwar  Mr.  Mills, 
Guyomar  Mr.  Booth,  Almeria  Mrs.  Knight,  Alibech 
Mrs.  Porter,  Cydaria  Mrs.  Santlow. 

N.  B.  Advertifement  for  Plays  will  be  continued,  from 
time  to  time,  in  this  Paper. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catherine  ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  41.     Tuesday,  April  17,  1711. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  Porter. 
By  her  Majefl:y's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Thurfday  being  the  19th  of  April,  will  be  prefented 
[  219  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

2.  Comedy  call'd,  Loves  laft  Shift ;  or,  the  Fool  in 
Fafliion.  The  part  of  Sir  Novelty  by  Mr.  Gibber,  Sir 
Wm.  Wifewou'd  Mr.  Johnfon,  Lovelefs  Mr.  Wilks, 
Worthy  Mr.  Mills,  Snap  Mr.  Penkethman,  Sly  Mr. 
Bullock,  Amanda  Mrs.  Porter,  NarcifTa  Mrs.  Oldfield, 
Hillaria  Mrs.  Bicknell.  And  to  Morrow  will  be  pre- 
fented  a  Comedy  call'd.  The  Man  of  Mode;  or,  Sir 
Fopling  Flutter :  For  the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  Rogers. 

No.  43.      Thursday,  April  19,  1711. 


At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Perfons  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  PENKETHMAN. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Monday,  being  the  23d  of  April,  will  be  prefented 

a  Comedy  callM,  The  Amorous  Widow ;  or,  the  Wan- 
ton Wife.  The  Part  of  the  Wanton  Wife  by  Mrs.  Old- 
field,  Barnaby  Brittle  by  Mr.  Dogget,  Lovemore,  Mr. 
Wilks;  Cunningham,  Mr.  Mills;  Sir  Peter  Pride,  Mr. 
Johnfon ;  Merryman,  Mr.  Penkethman ;  Clodpole, 
Mr.  Bullock ;  Jeffrey,  Mr.  Pack  :  Lady  Laycock,  Mrs. 
Powell ;  Lady  Pride,  Mrs.  Willis ;  Philadelphia,  Mrs. 
Porter  ;  Damaris,  Mrs.  Bicknell ;  Prudence,  Mrs.  Saun- 
ders. With  an  Epilogue  fpoken  by  Mr.  Penkethman  rid- 
ing on  an  Afs. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon,  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over  againft  Catharine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  46.      Monday,  April  23,  17 1 1. 
[    220   ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  Booth. 
At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 
By  her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Tuefday,  will  be  prefented  the  Tragedy  of  Othello, 
the  Moor  of  Venice.  The  part  of  Othello  to  be  per- 
formed by  Mr.  Booth,  Caffio  by  Mr.  Powel,  Jago  by 
Mr.  Cibber,  Brabantio  Mr.  Keene,  Roderigo  by  Mr. 
Bowen,  Defdemona  by  Mrs.  Bradfhaw,  Emilia  by  Mrs. 
Saunders  :  And  all  the  other  Parts  to  the  beft  Advantage. 

No.  47-     Tuesday,  April  24,  171 1. 

By  her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-lane  this  prefent 
Saturday,  will  be  prefented  the  true  and  ancient 
Hiftory  of  King  Lear.  The  part  of  King  Lear  to  be 
perform'd  by  Mr.  Powell,  Edgar  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Gloucef- 
ter  by  Mr.  Cibber,  Edmund  by  Mr.  Mills,  Kent  by  Mr. 
Keene,  Gentleman-Ufher  by  Mr.  Penkethman,  and  Cor- 
delia by  Mrs.  Rogers.  And  on  Monday  next  (at  the 
Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality)  will  be  prefented  a 
Comedy,  call'd.  The  Committee,  or.  The  Faithful  Irifh- 
Man,  for  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  Norris. 

No.  51.      Saturday,  April  28,  171 1. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  KEENE. 
By  Her  Majefliy's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  to  Morrow 
being  Thurfday,  the  3d  of  May,  will  be  prefented. 
The  Tragedy  of  Hamlet  Prince  of  Denmark  :  Written 
[  221   ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

by  the  immortal  Shakefpear.  The  Part  of  Hamlet  to  be 
performed  by  Mr.  Wilks,  the  King  Mr.  Keene,  Horatio 
Mr.  Mills,  Laertes  Mr.  Powel,  the  Ghoft  Mr.  Booth, 
the  Fop  Mr.  Bowen,  Grave-Digger  Mr.  Johnfon,  the 
Queen  Mrs.  Knight ;  and  the  Part  of  Ophelia  by  Mrs. 
Bradfhaw. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon,  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catharine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  54.     Wednesday,  May  2,  171 1. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Perfons  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  Bullock. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-lane,  this  prefent 
Tuefday,  the  8th  of  May,  will  be  prefented  a  Play, 
called.  King  Henry  the  Fourth,  with  the  Humours  of 
Sir  John  FalftafF.  The  part  of  Falftaff  to  be  performed 
by  Mr.  Eftcourt,  Hotfpur  by  Mr.  Booth,  the  King  by 
Mr.  Keene,  Prince  of  Wales  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Dowglas  by 
Mr.  Mills,  Sir  Richard  Vernon  Mr.  Bullock  Jun.  i 
Carrier  by  Mr.  Johnfon,  2  Carrier  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Fran- 
cis by  Mr.  Norris,  and  the  part  of  Kate,  Hotfpur's  Wife, 
by  Mrs.  Bradfhaw.  To  which  will  be  added,  a  Farce, 
call'd.  The  Walking  Statue ;  or,  the  Devil  in  the  Wine 
Cellar. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  59.      Tuesday,  May  8,  1711. 
[    222    ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Perfons  of  Quality. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Monday,  being  the  14th  of  May,  will  be  prefented 
a  Play  call'd.  The  Unhappy  Favourite  ;  or.  The  Earl  of 
Effex.  The  Part  of  Eflex  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Southampton 
Mr.  Mills,  Burleigh  Mr.  Keene,the  Queen  Mrs.  Knight, 
Rutland  Mrs.  Rogers,  Nottingham  Mrs.  Porter.  And  to 
Morrow  being  Tuefday,  will  be  prefented  a  Comedy 
call'd.  The  Fortune-Hunters  ;  or.  Two  Fools  well  met. 
For  the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  Saunders  and  Mrs.  Cox. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon,  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catharine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  64.      Monday,  May  14,  171 1. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  Saunders  and  Mrs.  Cox. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Tuefday,  the  15th  of  May,  will  be  prefented  a 
Comedy,  called.  The  Fortune-Hunters  ;  or.  Two  Fools 
well  met.  The  part  of  Young  Wealthy  to  be  perform'd 
by  Mr.  Wilks,  Maria  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Sir  William 
Wealthy  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Tom  Wealthy  by  Mills,  Mr. 
Spruce  by  Mr.  Norris,  Mr.  Shamtown  by  Mr.  Pack, 
Littlegad  by  Mr.  Bowman,  Lady  Sly  by  Mrs.  Powell, 
Sophia  by  Mrs.  Cox,  Mrs.  Spruce  by  Mrs.  Bicknell. 
And  on  Thurfday  next  will  be  prefented  a  Comedy  called, 
The  Scornful  Lady :  Written  by  Beaumont  and  Fletcher. 
For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  BickerftafF. 
[  223  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  65.     Tuesday,  May  15,  171 1. 

At  the  Deiire  of  feveral  Perfons  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  BickerftafF. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-lane,  this  prefent 
Thurfday,  the  i  yth  of  May,  will  be  prefented  a 
Comedy,  called.  The  Scornful  Lady  ;  Written  by  Beau- 
mont and  Fletcher.  The  part  of  the  Scornful  Lady  to  be 
performed  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Lovelefs  by  Mr.  Wilks, 
Younglefs  by  Mr.  Mills,  Welford  by  Mr.  BickerftafF, 
More-craft  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Roger  by  Mr.  Cibber,  Poet 
by  Mr.  Norris,  Martha  by  Mrs.  Bicknell,  Abigail  by 
Mrs.  Willis,  Savil  by  Mr.  Dogget.  To  which  will  be 
added  a  Farce,  called,  A  Bickerftaff's  Burying,  or.  Work 
for  the  Upholders. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  67.      Thursday,  May  17,  1711. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  Thurmond. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Monday,  being  the  2ift  of  May,  will  be  prefented 
a  Play  call'd.  The  Libertine  deftroy'd.  The  Part  of  Don 
John  by  Mr.  Mills,  Jacomo  Mr.  Johnfon,  Antonio  Mr. 
Thurmond,  Lopez  Mr.  BickerftafF,  Francifco  Mr.  Keene, 
[  224  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Leonora  Mrs.  Knight,  Maria  Mrs.  Porter,  06lavia  Mifs 
Sherburn,  Flavia  Mifs  Willis,  the  Shepherds  Mr.  Norris, 
Mr.  Leigh,  Mr.  Pack,  and  Mr.  Burkhead.  With  all  the 
Original  Decorations  proper  to  the  Play.  And  a  Dance 
by  a  Dutch  Skipper  and  his  Wife.  And  to  Morrow  will 
be  reviv'd  a  Comedy  (not  a6led  thefe  3  Years)  call'd, 
The  Squire  of  Alfatia.  For  the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  Powell 
and  Mr.  Crofs. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon,  at  Shakfpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catharine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  70.     Monday,  May  21,  1711. 


Not  Aded  thefe  Three  Years. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Perfons  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  Powell  and  Mr.  Crofs. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-lane,  this  prefent 
Tuesday,  the  2 2d  of  May,  will  be  prefented  a 
Comedy,  called.  The  Squire  of  Alfatia  :  Written  by  the 
late  Ingenious  Mr.  Shadwell.  The  part  of  the  Squire  to 
be  perform'd  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Sir  William  Belfond  by 
Mr.  Penkethman,  Young  Belfond  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Sir 
Edward  Belfond  by  Mr.  Keene,  Trueman  by  Mr.  Mills, 
Cheatly  by  Mr.  BickerftafF,  Shamwell  by  Mr.  Bullock, 
Jun.  Lolpeop  by  Mr.  Crofs,  Scrapeall  by  Mr.  Norris, 
Ifabella  by  Mrs.  Rogers,  Terefa  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Mrs. 
Termagent  by  Mrs.  Knight,  Lucy  by  Mifs  Sherburn, 
Ruth  by  Mrs.  Powell ;  with  Dancing  by  Mrs.  Bicknell. 

No.  71.     Tuesday,  May  22,  171 1. 

[  22s  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday  being  the  22d  of  June,  will  be  prefented, 
a  Play  call'd,  Timon  of  Athens ;  or,  the  Man-hater. 
The  Part  of  Timon  to  be  performed  by  Mr.  Powell,  Al- 
cibiades  Mr.  Booth,  Apemantus  Mr.  Mills,  NX\m%  Mr. 
Johnfon,  Pheax  Mr.  Bullock,  Ifander  Mr.  Leigh,  Poet 
Mr.  Norris,  Evandra  Mrs.  Knight,  MelHfTa  Mrs.  Brad- 
fhaw.  N.  B.  The  Company  will  continue  a6ling  every 
Tuefday  and  Friday  during  this  Summer  Seafon. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon,  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catharine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  98.      Friday,  June  22,  171 1. 

By  Her  Majefly's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  6th  of  July,  will  be  prefented  a 
Play  caird  Oroonoko.  The  Part  of  Oroonoko  by  Mr. 
Booth,  Aboan  by  Mr.  Powell,  Blandford  by  Mr.  Hus- 
band, Governour  by  Mr.  Thurmond,  Capt.  Driver  by  Mr. 
Johnfon,  Stanmore  by  Mr.  Bullock  Jun.  Daniel  by  Mr. 
Pack,  Immoinda  by  Mrs.  Rogers,  Widow  by  Mrs.  Knight, 
Weldon  by  Mrs.  Bradfhaw,  Lucy  by  Mifs  Sherbon. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon,  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catharine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  no.     Friday,  July  6,  171 1. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  on  Tuefday 
next  being  the  i  oth  day  of  July,  will  be  prefented 
a  Comedy  Call'd  The  Taming  of  a  Shrew,  or  Sawney 
[  226  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

the  Scot.  The  Part  of  Lord  Beaufoy  by  Mr.  Keen, 
Woodall  Mr.  Johnfon,  Petruchio  Mr.  Powell,  Geraldo 
Mr.  Husband,  Winlove  Mr.  BickerftafF,  Tranio  Mr.  Bul- 
lock Jun.  Sir  Lyonel  Winlove  Mr.  Crofs,  Jamy  Mr.  Nor- 
ris,  Sawney  Mr.  Bullock  Sen.  Margaret  Mrs.  Bradfhaw. 

No.  III.      Saturday,  July  7,  1 7 1 1 . 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  1 3th  of  July,  will  be  prefented  a 
Comedy  call'd  the  Gamefter.  The  Part  of  the  Gamefter 
to  be  perform'd  by  Mr.  Mills,  Lovewell  by  Mr.  Booth, 
Sir  Tho.  Valere  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Dorante  by  Mr.  Nor- 
ris.  Count  Cogdie  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Junior,  Marquis  of 
Hazard  by  Mr.  Burkhead,  He6lor  by  Mr.  Pack;  Lady 
Wealthy  Mrs.  Porter,  Angelica  Mrs.  Bradfhaw,  Mrs. 
Security  by  Mrs.  Willis,  Favourite  by  Mrs.  Mills.  To 
which  will  be  added  a  fhort  Farce  of  one  A6t  only, 
call'd.  The  Walking  Statue,  or  the  Devil  in  the  Wine- 
Cellar,  jfo,  116.     Friday,  July  13,  1711. 

For  the  Benefit  of  the  Principal  Adors. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury  Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  3d  Day  of  Auguft,  will  be  pre- 
fented A  Comedy  call'd  the  Lancafhire  Witches.  Care- 
fully Revis'd.  With  all  the  Original  Decorations  of 
Scenes,  Witche's  Songs  and  Dances,  proper  for  the  Oc- 
cafion.  The  Principal  Parts  to  be  perform'd  by  Mr. 
Mills,  Mr.  Booth,  Mr.  Johnfon,  Mr.  Bullock  Sen.  Mr. 
Norris,  Mr.  Pack,  Mr.  Bullock  Jun.  Mr.  Elrington, 
[  227  ] 


specimen  Advert  if ements 

Mrs.    Powel,    Mrs.   Bradfhaw,    Mrs.    Cox.     And    the 
Witches  by  Mr.  Burkhead,  Mr.  Ryan,  Mrs.  Mills,  and 

Mrs.  Willis.  j;o_  J24.     Friday,  August  3,  1711. 

Never  Adled  before 
By  her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury  Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday  being  the  17th  Day  of  Auguft,  will  be 
prefented,  A  new  Comedy  call'd  the  City  Ramble,  or  A 
Play-houfe  Wedding.  The  principal  Parts  to  be  Per- 
formed by  Mr.  Mills,  Mr.  Booth,  Mr.  Johnfon,  Mr. 
Bullock,  Mr.  Norris,  Mr.  Pack,  Mr.  Bullock  Jun.  Mr. 
Elrington,  Mr.  Burkhead,  Mr.  Ryan,  Mrs.  Rogers,  Mrs. 
Bradfhaw,  Mrs.  Knight,  Mrs.  Willis,  and  Mifs  Sherbon. 

No.  146.      Friday,  August  17,  171 1. 

At  the  Defire  of  fome  Perfons  of  Quality. 
By  Her  Majefly's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  on  Friday 
next,  being  Bartholomew-day,  will  be  revived  a 
Comedy  call'd,  Bartholomew-Fair.  Written  by  the  fa- 
mous Ben.  Johnfon. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's 
Head,  over  againft  Katherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.   150.      Wednesday,  August  22,  171 1. 

Never  aded  there  before. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  on  Friday  next, 
being  the  31ft  of  Auguft,  will  be  reviv'd,  a  Com- 
edy call'd,  Love  's  a  Jeft.  The  Part  of  Railmore  by  Mr. 
[  228  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Mills,  Lovewell  Mr.  Elrington,  Airy  Mr.  Bowman,  Sir 
Topewell  Clownifh  Mr.  Johnfon,  Squire  Ill-bred  Mr. 
Bullock,  Sir  Tho.  Gaymood  Mr.  Crofs,  Sam.  Gaymood 
Mr.  Pack,  Plot  Mr.  Norris,  Humphry  Doddipole  Mr. 
Burkhead,  Frankly  Mr.  Bullock  Jun.  Lady  Single  Mrs. 
Porter,  Francelia  Mrs.  Bradfhaw,  Chriftina  Mifs  Willis, 
Kitty  Mifs  Sherborn,  Dol  Hoyden  Mrs.  Willis.  This 
being  the  laft  time  of  acting  till  Winter. 

No.  156.      Wednesday,  August  29,  1711, 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Thurfday  being  the  27th  of  this  Inftant  Septem- 
ber, will  be  prefented  a  Comedy  called  Love  for  Love. 
The  Part  of  Ben.  by  Mr.  Doggett,  Sir  Sampfon  Legend 
by  Mr.  Eftcourt,  Valentine  Mr.  Wilks,  Scandal  Mr. 
Booth,  Tattle  Mr.  Cibber,  Forefight  Mr.  Johnfon,  Trap- 
land  Mr.  Norris,  Jeremy  Mr.  Bowen,  Angelica  Mrs. 
Oldfield,  Mrs.  Forefight  Mrs.  Rogers,  Mrs.  Frail  Mrs. 
Porter,  Mifs  Prue  Mrs.  Santlow,  Nurfe  Mrs.  Willis. 

No.  181.     Thursday,  September  27,  1711. 

Not  Aded  thefe  Ten  Years. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Saturday  being  the  29th  of  September,  will  be  pre- 
fented a  Comedy  called  Madam  Fickle,  or  the  witty  Falfe 
one.  The  Part  of  Toby  by  Mr.  Doggett,  Zechiel  Mr. 
Pack,  Lord  Bellamore  Mr.  Powel,  Manly  Mr.  Booth, 
Sir  Arthur  Old-Love  Mr.  Norris,  Captain  Tilbury  Mr. 
Bullock,  Old  JoUyman  Mr.  Johnfon,  Young  Jollyman 
[  229  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Mr.  Bullock,  Jun.  Madam  Fickle  Mrs.  Bradfliaw,  Con- 
ftantia  Mrs.  Porter,  Arbella  Mifs  Sherbon,  Silvia  Mifs 

^l^^^S*  No.  183.      Saturday,  September  29,  1711. 

By  Her  Majefty*s  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Thurfday  being  the  4th  of  O6lober,  will  be  pre- 
fented  a  Comedy  called,  Love  makes  a  Man  :  Or,  The 
Fop's  Fortune.  The  Part  of  Don  Lewis  alias  Tefty  per- 
formed by  Mr.  Penkethman,  Carlos  by  Mr.  Wilks, 
Clodio  alias  Difmal  Mr.  Cibber,  Don  Antonio  Mr.  Bul- 
lock, Don  Duart  Mr.  Elrington,  Sancho  Mr.  Norris, 
Angelina  Mrs.  Bradfhaw,  Dona  Lovifa  Mrs.  Rogers, 
Dona  Terefa  Mrs.  Porter. 

No.  187.     Thursday,  October  4,  171 1. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Tuefday,  being  the  9th  of  06lober,  will  be  pre- 
fented  a  Play  call'd  The  Spanifh  Fryar,  or  The  Double 
Difcovery.  The  part  of  the  Fryar  by  Mr.  Eflcourt,  Lo- 
renzo by  Mr.  Wilks,  Gomez  by  Mr.  Norris,  Elvira  by 
Mrs.  Oldfield,  Torrifmond  by  Mr.  Powell,  Bertran  by 
Mr.  Mills,  Raymond  by  Mr.  Bowman,  Pedro  by  Mr. 
Pack,  the  Queen  by  Mrs.  Knight. 

No.  191.     Tuesday,  October  9,  1711. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Wednefday,  being  the  loth  of  October,  will  be 
prefented  a  Comedy  call'd  the  Stratagem.  The  Part  of 
Aimwell  by  Mr.  Mills,  Archer  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Sullen  by 
[  230  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Mr.  Keene,  Bonniface  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Forgard  by  Mr. 
Bowen,  Gibbet  by  Mr.  Gibber,  Scrub  by  Mr.  Norris ; 
Mrs.  Sullen  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Dorinda  by  Mrs.  Brad- 
fhaw,  Cherry  Bonniface  by  Mrs.  Bicknell. 

No.  192.     Wednesday,  October  10,  171 1. 

Not  A6led  but  once  thefe  Fifteen  Years. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Monday,  being  the  15th  of  October,  will  be  be 
reviv'd  a  Play  call'd,  Philafter;  or.  Love  lies  a  bleeding. 
The  Part  of  Philafter  by  Mr.  Wilks,  the  King  by  Mr. 
Keene,  Pharamond  Prince  of  Spain  by  Mr.  Cibber,  Lord 
Dion  by  Mr.  Mills,  Cleremont  by  Mr.  Bullock  Jun. 
Trafiline  by  Mr.  Elrington,  Arethufa  by  Mrs.  Porter, 
Bellario  by  Mifs  Sherbon,  an  old  Captain  by  Mr.  Bul- 
lock Sen.  the  Citizens  by  Mr.  Leigh,  Mr.  Norris,  Mr. 
Pack,  Mr.  Burkhead.  To  which  will  be  added  a  Farce 
of  one  A6t  only,  call'd.  The  Country- Wake  :  The  Part 
of  Hob  by  Mr.  Dogget. 

No.  196.     Monday,  October  15,  1711. 

By  Her  Majefly's  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Saturday,  being  the  20th  of  0(3:ober,  will  be  pre- 
fented  the  Tragedy  of  Mackbeth.  With  all  the  Decora- 
tions proper  to  the  Play,  and  all  the  Principal  Parts  new 
dreffed.  The  Part  of  Mackbeth  by  Mr.  Mills,  MacdufF 
by  Mr.  Wilks,  the  King  by  Mr.  Keene,  Banquo  by  Mr. 
Powell,  Lenox  by  Mr.  Booth,  Seyton  by  Mr.  Elrington, 
Hecate  by  Mr.  Johnfon,  three  Witches  by  Mr.  Dogget, 
[  231  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Mr.   Penkethman,  and  Mr.   Bullock,  Lady   Mackbeth 
by  Mrs.  Knight,  Lady  Macduff  by  Mrs.  Porter. 

No.  201.      Saturday,  October  20,  1711. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Monday,  the  22d  of  October,  will  be  prefented 
a  Comedy  call'd  the  Volunteers,  or  the  Stock-jobbers. 
Written  by  the  ingenious  Mr.  Shadwell,  late  Poet  Lau- 
reat.  The  Part  of  Sir  Nicholas  Dainty,  a  Volunteer,  to 
be  perform'd  by  Mr.  Pack,  and  the  Part  of  old  Col. 
Hackwell,  a  Stock  Jobber,  by  Mr.  Norris,  General 
Blunt  by  Mr.  Cross,  Col.  Hackwell,  Jun.  by  Mr.  Booth, 
Welford  by  Mr.  Mills,  Nickum  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Jun. 
Hop  by  Mr.  Burkhead,  Terefia  by  Mrs.  Saunders,  Eu- 
genia by  Mrs.  Bradfhaw,  Clara  by  Mrs.  Porter,  Wini- 
fred by  Mifs  Willis,  Mrs.  Hackwell  by  Mrs.  Powell, 
and  the  Part  of  Sir  Timothy  Caftril  by  Mr.  Bullock. 

No.  202.    Monday,  October  22,  171 1. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  26th  Day  of  October,  will  be 
prefented  a  Comedy  call'd.  The  Rehearfal.  Written  by 
the  late  Duke  of  Buckingham.  The  Part  of  Bayes  by 
Mr.  Eftcourt,  Johnfon  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Smith  by  Mr. 
Mills,  Pretyman  by  Mr.  Powell,  Volfcius  by  Mr.  Cibber, 
the  two  Kings  of  Brentford  by  Mr.  Bullock  and  Mr. 
Bowen,  Gendeman-Ufher  by  Mr.  Penkethman,  Phyfi- 
cian  by  Mr.  Crofs,  Tom  Thimble  by  Mr.  Dogget, 
Fifher-man  by  Mr.  Johnfon,  Pallas  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Hey- 

Ho  !  by  Mr.  Norris.  ^o.  206.     Friday,  October  26,  1711. 

[  232  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Perfons  of  Quality. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Thurfday,  being  the  ift  of  November,  will  be  pre- 
fented  a  Comedy  called  The  Silent  Woman.  Written  by 
the  famous  Ben.  Johnfon.  The  Part  of  the  Silent  Woman 
by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Morofle  by  Mr.  Johnfon,  True-wit  by 
Mr.  Wilks,  Clerimont  by  Mr.  Mills,  Sir  Amorous  La-fool 
by  Mr.  Bullock,  Dauphine  Eugene  by  Mr.  Booth,  Sir 
John  Daw  by  Mr.  Cibber,  Cutbeard  by  Mr.  Norris, 
Tom  Otter  by  Mr.  Eftcourt,  Lady  Haughty  by  Mrs. 
Saunders,  Dol  Mavis  by  Mrs.  Bicknell,  Mrs.  Otter  by 

Mrs.  Powell.  No.  211.     Thursday,  November  i,  171 1. 

By  Her  Majefly's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  2d  of  November,  will  be  pre- 
fented,  A  Comedy  called.  The  Relapfe;  or, Virtue  in  Dan- 
ger. The  Part  of  Lord  Foppington  by  Mr.  Cibber,  Love- 
lefs  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Worthy  by  Mr.  Mills,  Sir  Tunbelly 
Clumfy  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Coupler  by  Mr.  Johnfon,  Ser- 
ringe  by  Mr.  Norris,  Lory  by  Mr.  Penkethman ; 
Amanda  by  Mrs.  Rogers,  Berinthia  by  Mrs.  Oldfield, 
Mifs  Hoyden  by  Mrs.  Bicknell. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's- 
Head,  over  againft  Katherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  212.     Friday,  November  2,  17 11. 


A 


By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

T  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  9th  Day  of  November,  will  be 
[  233  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

prefented  a  Comedy  call'd,  She  WouM  if  fhe  Cou'd. 
Written  by  Sir  George  Etheridge.  The  Part  of  Sir  Oliver 
Cockwood  to  be  performed  by  Mr.  Dogget,  Sir  Joflin 
Jolly  by  Mr.  Eftcourt,  Court-all  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Free- 
man by  Mr.  Mills,  Rake-Hell  by  Mr.  BickerftafF,  Lady 
Cockwood  by  Mrs.  Knight,  Ariana  by  Mrs.  Porter, 
Gatty  by  Mrs.  Santlow,  Sentry  by  Mrs.  Saunders. 

No.  218.      Friday,  November  9,  171 1. 

Never  aded  but  thrice. 
By  Her  Majefly's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  i6th  of  November,  will  be  pre- 
fented a  new  Comedy  call'd,  The  Wife's  Relief;  or, 
The  Hufband's  Cure.  And  by  her  Majefty's  Command 
no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  224.      Friday,  November  16,  1 71 1. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Monday,  being  the  26th  of  November,  will  be 
prefented,  a  Comedy  call'd.  Sir  Courtly  Nice;  or,  It 
cannot  be.  The  Part  of  Sir  Courtly  by  Mr.  Cibber, 
Surly  by  Keene,  Lord  Belguard  by  Mr.  Mills,  Hothead 
by  Mr.  Bullock  Sen.  Teftimony  by  Mr.  Johnfon,  Crack 
by  Mr.  Penkethman,  Farewell  by  Mr.  Bullock  Jun. 
Leonora  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Violante  by  Mrs.  Bicknel, 
the  Aunt  by  Mrs.  Powell. 

No.  232.     Monday,  November  26,  1711. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  to  Morrow 
being  Thurfday  the  29th  of  November,  will  be 
[  234  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

prefented  a  Comedy  call'd,  The  Man  of  Mode,  or  Sir 
Fopling  Flutter.  Written  by  Sir  George  Etheridge.  The 
Part  of  Sir  Fopling  by  Mr.  Gibber,  Dorimant  by  Mr. 
Wilks,  Medley  by  Mr.  Mills,  old  Bell-air  by  Mr.  Pen- 
kethman,  young  Bell-air  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Jun.  Shooe- 
maker  by  Mr.  Bowen,  Loveit  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Belinda 
by  Mrs.  Rogers,  Harriot  by  Mrs.  Santlow,  Emilia  by 

Mrs.  Porter.  No.  234.      Wednesday,  November  28,  171 1. 

Aded  but  once  thefe  Five  Years 
By  Her  Majefly's  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Tuefday,  being  the  4th  Day  of  December,  will  be 
reviv'd  a  Play  called,  Vertue  Betray'd ;  or,  Anna-Bullen. 
The  Part  of  Anna-Bullen  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  King  Harry 
the  8th  by  Mr.  Powel,  Cardinal  Woolfey  by  Mr.  Cibber, 
Northumberland  by  Mr.  Keene,  Piercy  by  Mr.  Wilks, 
Rochford  by  Mr.  Mills,  Lady  Diana  Talbot  by  Mrs. 
Rogers,  Lady  Eliz.  Blunt  by  Mrs.  Porter,  Young  Prin- 
cefs  Elizabeth  by  Mifs  Smith.  By  her  Majefty's  Com- 
mand no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  239.     Tuesday,  December  4,  1711. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  7th  Day  of  December,  will  be 
prefented  a  Play  call'd  Aurenge-Zebe,  or  the  Great  Mo- 
gul. The  Part  of  the  Emperor  by  Mr.  Keene,  Aurenge- 
Zebe  by  Mr.  Powell,  Morat  by  Mr.  Booth,  Arimant  by 
Mr.  Boman,  Nourmahal  by  Mrs.  Knight,  Indamora  by 
[  235  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Mrs.  Rogers,  Melefinda  by  Mrs.  Porter.  No  Perfons  to 
be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  242.      Friday,  December  7,  1711. 


By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Saturday,  the  8th  Day  of  December,  will  be  pre- 
fented  a  Comedy  called  The  Alchymift.  Written  by  the 
famous  Ben.  Johnfon.  The  part  of  Subtle  by  Mr.  Cib- 
ber.  Face  by  Mr.  Powel,  Sir  Epicure  Mammon  by  Mr. 
Eftcourt,  Surly  by  Mr.  Mills,  Angry  Boy  by  Mr.  Bul- 
lock, Ananias  by  Mr.  Johnfon,  Tribulation  by  Mr.  Pack, 
Abel  Drugger  by  Mr.  Pinkethman,  Dapper  by  Mr. 
Norris,  Dol  by  Mrs.  Saunders,  Widow  by  Mrs.  Cox. 

No.  243.      Saturday,  December  8,  1711. 

Aded  but  once  thefe  five  Years. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians, 
T  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 


A 


Saturday,  the  15th  Day  of  December,  will  be  re- 
viv'd  a  Play  caird,Mithridates  King  of  Pontus.  The  part 
of  Mithridates  by  Mr.  Mills,  Ziphares  by  Mr.  Wilks, 
Pharnaces  by  Mr.  Powell,  Archilaus  by  Mr.  Bowman, 
Aquilius  by  Mr.  Booth,  Semandra  by  Mrs.  Oldfield, 
Monima  by  Mifs  Sherbon.  To  which  (at  the  Defire  of 
feveral  Ladies  of  Quality)  will  be  added,  a  Farce  of  one 
Aa  only,  call'd.  The  Country  Wake.  The  Part  of  Hob 
by  Mr.  Dogget,  Sir  Thomas  Tefty  by  Mr.  Bullock, 
Friendly  by  Mr.  Pack,  Flora  by  Mrs.  Santlow. 

No.  249.      Saturday,  December  15,  1711. 

[  236  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-I^ane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  2ift  of  December,  will  be  pre- 
fented  a  Comedy  call'd,  The  FeignM  Innocence ;  or.  Sir 
Martin  Marrall.  The  Part  of  Sir  Martin  by  Mr.  Bullock, 
Warner  by  Mr.  Powell  j  and  all  the  other  Parts  to  the 
beft  Advantage.  To  which  will  be  added,  a  Farce  of  two 
A£ls  only,  call'd,  The  School-Boy;  or.  The  comical 
Rivals.  The  Part  of  the  School-Boy  by  Mr.  Cibber, 
Major  Rakifh  by  Mr.  Penkethman,  young  Rakifh  by  Mr. 

Mills.  No.  254.      Friday,  December  21,  171 1. 

At  the  Requeft  of  feveral  Perfons  of  Quality. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  28th  Day  of  December,  will  be 
prefented  a  Play  call'd.  The  Libertine  deftroy'd.  The 
Part  of  Don  John  by  Mr.  Mills,  Jacomo  by  Mr.  John- 
fon,  Don  Antonio  by  Mr.  Powell,  Don  Lopez  by  Mr. 
Booth,  Don  Francifco  by  Mr.  Keene,  Leonora  by  Mrs. 
Knight,  Maria  by  Mrs.  Porter,  Clara  by  Mifs  Willis, 
Flavia  by  Mifs  Sherborn. 

No.  260.      Friday,  December  28,  17 1 1, 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Monday,  being  the  3 1 ft  of  December,  will  be  pre- 
fented a  Comedy  call'd  the  Northern  Lafs,  or  the  Neft 
of  Fools.  The  Part  of  the  Northern  Lafs  by  Mrs.  Bick- 
nell,  Sir  Philip  Lucklefs  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Tridewell  by 
[  237  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Mr.  Mills,  Sir  Paul  Squelch  by  Mr.  Johnfon,  Bulfinch 
by  Mr.  Eftcourt,  Widgin  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Captain  An- 
vil by  Mr.  Spillar,  Nonfenfe  by  Mr.  Norris,  Howd'ee 
by  Mr.  Gibber,  Beavis  by  Mr.  Bickerftaff,  Pate  by  Mr. 
Bullock,  Jun.  Widow  Fitchow  by  Mrs.  Knight. 

No.  262.     Monday,  December  31,  1711. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 
By  Her  Majefty*s  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Thurfday,  the  3d  Day  of  January,  will  be  pre- 
fented  a  Comedy  call'd.  The  Carelefs  Hufband.  The 
part  of  Lord  Foppington  by  Mr.  Cibber,  Lord  Morelove 
by  Mr.  Mills,  Sir  Charles  Eafy  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Lady 
Betty  Modifh  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Lady  Grave-airs  by 
Mrs.  Rogers,  Lady  Eafy  by  Mrs.  Knight,  Edgin  by  Mrs. 

rSlCKnell.  No.  265.     Thursday,  January  3,  1712. 

Never  Adled  before. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Saturday,  the  19th  Day  of  January,  will  be  pre- 
fented  a  New  Comedy  call'd  The  Perplexed  Lovers.  By 
her  Majefty's  Command  no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted 

behind  the  Scenes.  No.  279.      Saturday,  January  19,  1712. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  25th  Day   of  January,  will  be 
reviv'd  a  Comedy  calFd,  The  Royal  Merchant  j  or.  Beg- 

[  238  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

gar's  Bufh.  Written  by  Beaumont  and  Fletcher.  And 
to  Morrow,  being  Saturday  (at  the  Defire  of  feveral  La- 
dies of  Quality)  will  be  prefented  a  Play  callM  Philafter, 
or  Love  lies  a  bleeding. 

No.  284.     Friday,  January  25,  17 12. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  to  Morow 
being  Thurfday  the  24th  of  April,  will  be  prefented 
the  Tragedy  of  Julius  Caefar,  with  the  Death  of  Brutus 
and  Caflius.  Written  by  Shakefpear.  All  the  Parts  dif- 
pos'd  to  the  beft  Advantage.  By  Her  Majefty's  Com- 
mand no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 
And  on  Friday  next,  at  the  defire  of  feveral  Lady  of 
Quality,  will  be  prefented  the  Tragedy  of  Hamlet  Prince 
of  Denmark,  for  the  benefit  of  Mr.  Booth. 

No.  360.     Wednesday,  April  23,  17 1 2. 

Not  Ac5led  this  Seafon. 
At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Perfons  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  Johnfon. 
By  Her  Majefl:y*s  Company  of  Comedians, 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Tuefday,  the  29th  Day  of  April,  will  be  prefented. 
That  Celebrated  Comedy  callM,  Volpone  :  Or,  the  Fox. 
Written  by  the  Famous  Ben.  Johnfon.  The  part  of  the 
Fox  by  Mr.  Powell,  Mofca  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Old  Cor- 
baccio  by  Mr.  Johnfon.  And  all  the  other  Parts  to  the 
beft  Advantage.  With  Entertainments  of  Dancing  proper 
to  the  Play,  by  Mr.  Prince,  Mrs.  Bicknell,  and  others. 
[  239  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

By  her  Majefty's  Command  no  Perfons  are  to  be  ad- 
mitted behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  365.      Tuesday,  April  29,  1712. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  Bradshaw. 
At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Monday  being  the  I2th  of  May,  will  be  reviv'd, 
The  Hiftory  and  Fall  of  Caius  Marius.  Written  by 
Shakefpear,  and  alter'd  by  the  late  Mr.  Otway.  The 
Part  of  old  Marius  by  Mr.  Powell,  young  Marius  Mr. 
Booth,  and  Lavinia  Mrs.  Bradftiaw.  By  Her  Majefty's 
Command  no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  be-  the 
Scenes.  And  to  Morrow  being  Tuefday,  will  be  pre- 
fented  a  Comedy  call'd.  The  Old  Batchelor :  With  the 
Farce  of  the  Stage-Coach.  For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  Bul- 
lock. 

This  Play  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's- 
Head,  over  againft  Katherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  376.      Monday,  May  12,  1712. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  Corey,  and  Mr.  Birkhead. 

By  Her  Majefl:y's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Friday,  being  the  30th  of  May,  will  be  Prefented, 
a  Comedy  call'd,  The  Funeral  ;  or.  Grief  A-la  mode. 
With  variety  of  Dancing  between  the  A61 :  particularly 
the   celebrated   Dance  of  Four  Scaramouch's  by  Mr. 
[  240  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Prince,  Mr.  L'Abbre,  Jun.  Mr.  Sandham,  and  Mr.  Birk- 
head  :  A  Dutch  Skipper  by  Mr.  Sandham  :  A  Saylor's 
Jig  by  a  Gentleman  for  his  Diverfion,  and  alfo  a  Dia- 
logue fung  by  Mr.  Pack  and  Mr.  Burkhead.  By  Her 
Majefty's  Command  no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  be- 
hind the  Scenes.  No.  392.   Friday,  May  30,  171a. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Perfons  of  Quality. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  POWELL. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre-Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Monday,  being  the  2d  of  June,  will  be  Revived, 
The  Tragedy  of  Oedipus  King  of  Thebes.  The  part  of 
Oedipus  by  Mr.  Powell,  Adraftus  Mr.  Booth,  Creon 
Mr.  Keene,  Hamon  Mr.  Mills,  Terefias  Mr.  Boman, 
the  Citizens  Mr.  Penkethman,  Mr.  Norris,  Mr.  Bullock, 
Mr.  Pack,  and  Mr.  Leigh,  Jocafta  Mrs.  Knights,  Euri- 
dice  Mrs.  Bradfhaw.  By  Her  Majefty's  Command  no 
Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  394.     Monday,  June  2,  17 12. 

For  the  Benefit  of  Mr.  Caftelman. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Ladies  of  Quality. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  to  Morrow 
being  Thurfday,  the  I2th  Day  of  June,  will  be 
prefented  a  Comedy  call'd  the  comical  Revenge,  or  Love 
in  a  Tub.  The  Part  of  Sir  Fred.  Frolick  by  Mr.  Wilks, 
Sir  Nick.  Cully  by  Mr.  Dogget,  Palmer  by  Mr.  Eft- 
court.  With  feveral  Entertainments  of  Dancing,  viz 
[  241   ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Blouza  Bella  by  Mr.  Prince  and  Mrs.  Bicknell,  the  Dutch 
Skipper  by  Mr.  Thurmond  and  Mrs.  Bicknell,  the  Mill- 
er's Dance  by  Mr.  Prince  and  Mr.  Leigh,  and  the  orig- 
inal Dance  by  8  Linkmen.  Being  the  laft  Time  of  the 
Company's  adting  this  Seafon. 

No.  402.     Wednesday,  June  11,  1712. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre-Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Tuefday  being  the  15th  of  July,  will  be  revived 
a  Comedy  call'd.  The  City  Politicks,  written  by  Mr. 
Crown.  The  Part  of  the  Podefta  to  be  performed  by 
Mr.  Bullock,  Florio  by  Mr.  Powel,  Artall  by  Mr.  Booth, 
Dr.  Panchy  by  Mr.  Crofs,  Craffy  by  Mr.  Pack,  Brick- 
layer by  Mr.  Penkethman,  Rofara  by  Mrs.  Bradfhaw, 
Lucinda  by  Mifs  Willis.  By  Her  Majefty's  Command 
no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  431.     Tuesday,  July  15,  1712. 

By  her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Friday  being  the  15th  Inftant,  will  be  prefented 
the  laft  Reviv'd  Comedy  call'd  the  London  Cuckolds. 
Ramble  by  Mr.  Mills,  Townly  Mr.  Husband,  Doodle 
Mr.  Johnfon,  Wifeacre  Mr.  Bullock,  Dafhwell  Mr. 
Bowen,  Loveday  Mr.  Bullock  Jun.  Arabella  Mrs.  Brad- 
fhaw, Peggy  Mifs  Willis.  With  the  laft  new  Morris 
Dance,  by  Mr.  Norris,  and  others.  By  Her  Majefty's 
Command,  no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  the 

Scenes.  j^o^  ^^^g^    Friday,  August  15,  171a. 

[    242    ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

By  Her  Majefly's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  to  Morrow 
being  Tuefday,  the  23d  of  September,  will  be  pre- 
fented  a  Comedy,  call'd,  The  Chances,  as  it  was  alter'd 
by  the  late  Duke  of  Buckingham,  The  Part  of  Don  John 
by  Mr.  Wilks,  Don  Frederick  Mr.  Mills,  Don  Antonio 
Mr.  Pinkethman,  Anthony  Mr.  Norris,  Conftantia  Mrs. 
Oldfield.  To  which  will  be  added  a  Farce,  call'd.  The 
Country- Wake :  The  Part  of  Hob  by  Mr.  Dogget, 
Friendly  Mr.  Pack,  Sir  Tho.  Tefty  Mr.  Bullock,  Flora 
Mrs.  Santlow. 

N.B.  Advertifements  for  Plays  will  (for  the  future) 
be  inferted  only  in  the  Spectator,  and  not  in  the  Daily- 

Courant  as  ufual.  ^0.  490.      Monday,  September  22,  171 2. 

By  Her  Majefhy's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre-Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Tuefday,  being  the  30th  of  September,  will  be 
prefented  a  Comedy,  call'd.  The  Recruiting  Officer. 
The  Part  of  Capt.  Plume  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Serjeant  Kite 
by  Mr.  Pack,  Juftice  Ballance  by  Mr.  Keene,  Worthy  by 
Mr.  Mills,  Capt.  Brazen  by  Mr.Cibber,Two  Recruits  by 
Mr.  Norris  and  Mr.  Bullock  jun.  Melinda  by  Mrs.  Rog- 
ers, Silvia  by  Mrs.  Bicknell ;  Rofe  by  Mifs  Younger.  By 
Her  Majefty's  Command  no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted 
behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  497.     Tuesday,  September  30,  1 71 2. 

By  her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Thurfday,  being  the  2d  of  06lober,  will  be  pre- 
fented a  Comedy  call'd.  Rule  a  Wife  and  have  a  Wife, 
[  243  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Written  by  Beaumont  and  Fletcher.  The  part  of  Leon 
by  Mr.  Powel,  the  Copper  Captain  by  Mr.  Wilks,  Efti- 
fania  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Cacafogo  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Mar- 
garetta  by  Mrs.  Knight,  Altea  by  Mrs.  Bicknell,  Old 
Woman  Mr.  Norris.  To  which  will  be  added  a  Farce 
of  one  A61  only,  call'd  the  Country  Wake.  The  part  of 
Hob  by  Mr.  Dogget.  By  Her  Majefty's  Command  no 
Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  499.     Thursday,  October  2,  17 12. 

By  her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Friday  being  the  loth  Day  of  October,  will  be  pre- 
fented  a  Comedy  call'd,  The  Old  Batchelor.  The  Part 
of  Fondlewife  by  Mr.  Dogget,  Sir  Jofeph  Witoll  Mr. 
Bullock,  Bellmour  Mr.  Wilks,  Vainlove  Mr.  Booth, 
Heartwell  Mr.  Keen,  Sharper  Mr.  Mills,  Captain  Bluff 
Mr.  Johnfon,  Setter  Mr.  Norris ;  Belinda  Mrs.  Rogers, 
Araminta  Mrs.  Bradfhaw,  Laetitia  Mrs.  Knight,  Lucy 
Mrs.  Saunders.  And  to  Morrow  (at  the  Defire  of  feveral 
Perfons  of  Quality)  will  be  prefented  a  Play  call'd  The 
Humorous  Lieutenant.  By  Her  Majefty's  Command  no 
Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  506.      Friday,  October  10,  1 71 2. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Wednefday,  being  the  15th  of  Odlober,  will  be 
prefented  a  Comedy  call'd  Epfom  Wells.  The  Part  of 
Juftice  Clodpate  by  Mr.  Johnfon,  Frible  by  Mr.  Pin- 
kethman.  Brisket  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Sen.  Kick  by  Mr. 
Pack,  CufFby  Mr.  Burkhead,  Bevil  by  Mr.  Mills,  Woodly 
[  244  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

by  Mr.  Bowman,  Rains  by  Mr.  Bullock,  Jun.  Mrs. 
Woodly  by  Mrs.  Knight,  Carolina  by  Mrs.  Bradfhaw, 
Lucia  by  Mrs.  Porter,  Mrs.  Bisket  by  Mrs.  Saunders. 
By  Her  Majefty's  Command  no  Perfons  are  to  be  ad- 
mitted behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  510.     Wednesday,  October  15,  1712. 

By  Her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane,  this  prefent 
Wednefday,  being  the  22d  of  06lober,  will  be 
prefented  a  Comedy  call'd,  The  Conftant  Couple,  or,  A 
Trip  to  the  Jubilee.  The  Part  of  Sir  Harry  Wildair  by 
Mr.  Wilks,  Lady  Lurewell  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  Cold- 
Standard  by  Mr.  Mills,  Alderman  Smugler  by  Mr.  John- 
fon,  Clincher  Sen.  by  Mr.  Pinkethman,  Young  Clincher 
by  Mr.  Bullock,  Vizard  by  Mr.  Husband,  Dicky  by  Mr. 
Norris,  Lady  Darling  by  Mrs.  Powell,  Angelica  by  Mrs. 
Bradftiaw.  And  to  Morrow  will  be  prefented,  The  True 
and  Ancient  Hiftory  of  King  Lear,  and  his  Three  Daugh- 
ters. By  Her  Majefty's  Command  no  Perfons  are  to  be 
admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  516.      Wednesday,  October  22,  171 2. 

By  her  Majefty's  Company  of  Comedians. 

AT  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-Lane  this  prefent 
Friday  being  the  31ft  Day  of  Odtober,  will  be 
prefented  a  Comedy  call'd  the  Pilgrim.  The  Part  of 
Alphonfo  by  Mr.  Johnfon,  the  Pilgrim  by  Mr.  Bullock 
jun.  Roderigo  by  Mr.  Mills,  Mad  Englifhman  by  Mr. 
Cibber,  Mad  Welfh-man  by  Mr.  Norris,  Mad  Taylor  by 
Mr.  Penkethman,  Mad  Parfon  by  Mr.  Pack,  Alinda  by 
Miss  Willis,  Juletia  Mrs.  Bicknell.  To  which  will  be 
[  24s  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

added  the  Country-Wake.  By  Her  Majefty's  Command 
no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  524.     Friday,  October  31,  17 12. 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Perfons  of  Quality. 
For  the  Benefit  of  Young  Boman. 

AT  the  Theatre,  at  the  Upper  End  of  St.  Martin's- 
Lane :  To  Morrow  being  Friday  the  nth  of 
April  will  be  prefented  a  Play  call'd,  The  Unhappy  Fa- 
vourite:  Or,  The  Earl  of  EfFex.  With  a  New  Prologue. 
And  feveral  Songs  will  be  perform'd  by  Young  Boman, 
who  A6ts  the  Part  of  the  Earl.  And  all  the  other  Parts 
will   be  perform'd  to    the  heft  Advantage.    Beginning 

exactly  at  Six.  ^o.  349.      Thursday,  April  10,  1 712. 

For  the  Benefit  of  young  Boman,  and  young 
Pervil,  who  lately  aded  the  Part  of  Gomez  in 
the  Spanifh  Fryar. 

AT  the  Theatre  the  upper  End  of  St.  Martin's-Lane 
near  Litchfield  Street,  this  prefent  Wednefday, 
being  the  nth  of  June,  will  be  prefented  a  Comedy  call'd 
the  Stratagem.  The  Part  of  Archer  by  young  Pervil, 
Aimwell  by  young  Boman,  Scrub  by  young  Norris,  Sul- 
len by  young  Ray,  Bonniface  by  Mr.  Bullock's  young- 
eft  Son,  Mrs.  Sullen  by  Mifs  Porter,  Cherry  by  Mifs 
Younger,  Dorinda  by  Mifs  Lydell.  Boxes  2s.  6d.  Pit 
IS.  6d.   Gallery  is.   Beginning  exactly  at  6  a  Clock. 

No.  402.     Wednesday,  June  ii,  1712. 

AT  the  Theatre  in  Greenwich,  this  prefent  Satur- 
day, being  the  19th  Inftant,  will  be  prefented  the 
Loves  of  Baldo  and  Media,  after  the  Italian  Manner. 

[  246] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Perform'd  by  Mr.  Leveridge  and  Mrs.  Lindfey.  Inter- 
mixt  with  feveral  Concertos  and  Dances  between  the 
Ad:s ;  particularly,  a  Dance  of  four  Scaramouches,  the 
Dutch  Skipper,  the  Merry  Miller  and  his  Wife,  with 
other  Dancing.  With  a  new  Prologue  fet  to  Mufick, 
and  fung  by  Mr.  Leveridge  and  Mrs.  Lindfey.  The 
Boxes  will  be  laid  open  to  the  Pit  for  this  Day.  The 
price  of  each  Ticket  3s.  Tickets  to  be  had  at  the  Tilt- 
yard  Coffee  houfe,  at  Nando's  within  Temple-bar,  at 
John's  in  Swithin's  Alley  in  Cornhil,  at  Greenwich. 

No.  435.     Saturday,  July  19,  1712. 

OPERAS 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  on 
Wednefday  next,  being  the  23d  of  May,  will  be  pre- 
fented  an  Opera,  called  Clotilda.  Boxes  8s.  Pit  5s.  firft 
Gallery  2s.  6d.  Upper  Gallery  is.  6d.  Boxes  upon  the 
Stage  half  a  Guinea.  And  by  reafon  of  the  hot  Weather, 
the  Water  Scene  will  play  the  beft  part  of  the  Opera. 

Thefe  Plays  are  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over  againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

No.  71.      Tuesday,  May  22,  171 1, 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  this 
prefent  Saturday,  the  17th  Inftant  will  be  per- 
formed an  Opera  called  Almanide.  The  part  of  Al- 
manzor  to  be  performed  by  Mrs.  Barbeir.  The  Boxes  8s. 
Pit  5s.  Firft  Gallery  2s.  6d.  Upper  Gallery  is.  6d.  The 
Boxes  on  the  Stage  half  a  Guinea.  The  two  Benches  in 
the  Pit  to  be  railed  in  at  the  Price  of  the  Boxes.  No 
Perfon  to  be  admitted  without  Tickets.  To  begin  exactly 

^^  "^»  No.  225.      Saturday,  November  17,  1711. 

[   247    ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  this 
prefent  Saturday,  the  23d  of  February,  will  be  per- 
form'd  an  Opera  called  Rinaldo.  And  on  Wednefday 
next,  the  27th  of  February,  will  be  performed  a  new 
Opera  called  Hamlet.  By  Subfcription.  Tickets  and 
Books  will  be  delivered  out  on  Tuefday  and  Wednefday 
next  at  Mrs.  White's  Chocolate-houfe. 

No.  309.      Saturday,  February  23,  1712, 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  this 
prefent  Saturday  being  the  15th  of  March,  will  be 
performed  a  new  Opera  called  Hamlet.  By  Subfcription. 
With  feveral  Entertainments  of  Dancing  by  fix  new 
Dancers.  No  perfon  to  be  admitted  without  Tickets, 
which  will  be  delivered  out  this  Day  at  Mrs.  White's 
Chocolate  houfe.  Firft  Gallery  5s.  Upper  Gallery  2s. 
Boxes  upon  the  Stage  Fifteen  Shillings.  To  begin  ex- 
actly at  fix.  By  her  Majefty's  Command  no  Perfons  are 
to  be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  327.      Saturday,  March  15,  1 712. 

Never  Performed  but  Twice. 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  this 
prefent  Saturday  being  the  lOth  Day  of  May,  will 
be  prefented  a  new  Opera  call'd  Hercules.  The  Boxes 
8s.  Pit  5s.  Firjft  Gallery  2s.  6d.  Upper  Gallery  is.  6d. 
Boxes  upon  the  Stage  Half  a  Guinea.  To  begin  at  half  an 
hour  after  feven,  the  Entertainment  being  ftiort.  By  her 
Majefty's  Command  no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind 

the  Scenes.  No.  375.     Saturday,  May  lo,  1 712. 

[  248] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  to  mor- 
row being  Wednefday,  the  28th  of  May,  will  be 
performed  an  Opera  called  Antiochus.  Being  the  laft  time 
of  performing  it  this  Seafon.  Boxes  8s.  Pit  5s.  Firft 
Gallery  2s.  6d.  Upper  Gallery  is.  6d.  Boxes  upon  the 
Stage  half  a  Guinea.  And  by  reafon  of  the  hot  Weather, 
the  Water-Fall  will  play.  To  begin  exactly  at  fix.  By 
her  Majefty's  Command  no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted 

behind  the  Scenes.  No.  389.     Tuesday,  May  27,  171 2. 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  this 
prefent  Saturday,  being  the  31ft  of  May,  will  be 
performed  an  Opera  called  Hydafpes.  Being  the  laft  time 
of  performing  it  this  Seafon.  Boxes  8s.  Pit  5s.  Firft  Gal- 
lery 2s.  6d.  Upper  Gallery  is.  6d.  Boxes  upon  the  Stage 
half  a  Guinea.  To  begin  exactly  at  fix.  By  her  Majefty's 
Command  no  Perfons  are   to  be  admitted  behind  the 

oCeneS.  j^q    ^^^       Saturday,  May  31,  1712. 

For  the  Benefit  of  the  Box-keepers. 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  to 
Morrow  being  Wednefday,  the  4th  Day  of  June, 
will  be  performed  the  laft  Italian  Opera  call'd  Hercules. 
Boxes  8s.  Pit  5s.  Firft  Gallery  2s.  6d.  Upper  Gallery 
IS.  6d.  Boxes  upon  the  Stage  half  a  Guinea.  Being  the 
laft  time  of  Signor  Cavaliero  Nicolino  Grimaldi's  per- 
forming on    the  Englifli  Stage.     To  begin  exactly  at 

beven.  ^^^  2^^_      Tuesday,  June  3,  1712. 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  this 
prefent  Wednefday,  the  25th  of  June,  will  be  pre- 
fented  an  Englifli  Opera  called  Calypfo  and  Telemachus. 
[  249  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Being  the  laft  time  of  adting  it  this  Seafon.  The  Boxes 
8s.  Pit  5s.  Firft  Gallery  2s.  6d.  Upper  Gallery  is.  6d. 
Boxes  upon  the  Stage  half  a  Guinea.  To  begin  exactly 
at  half  an  Hour  after  Seven.  By  Her  Majefty*s  Com- 
mand, No  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  behind  the  Scenes. 

No.  414.     Wednesday,  June  25,  171 2. 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  to 
Morrow  being  Saturday  the  15th  Day  of  Novem- 
ber, will  be  prefented  an  Opera  call'd  The  Triumph  of 
Love.  Being  a  choice  Collection  of  Mufick  compos'd  by 
Scarlatti,  Bononcini,  Albinoni,  Coxfarini,  Gafperini,  and 
feveral  other  the  moft  Celebrated  Italian  Mafters. 

No.  536.      Friday,  November  14,  17 12. 

Never  Performed  but  once. 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  to 
Morrow  being  Wednefday  the  26th  of  November, 
will  be  prefented  a  New  Opera  call'd,  The  Faithful 
Shepherd,  Compofed  by  Mr.  Hendel.  The  Parts  to  be 
performed  by  Signior  Cavaliero  Valeriano  Pellegrini, 
Signior  Valentino  Urbani,  Signora  Pilotti  Schiavonetii, 
Signora  Margaretta  de  L'Epine,  Mrs.  Barbier,  and  Mr. 
Leveridge.  Boxes  8s.  Pit.  5s.  Gallery  2s.  6d.  Boxes  upon 
the  Stage  Half  a  Guinea.  To  begin  exactly  at  Six  a 
Clock.  No  Perfon  to  ftand  upon  the  Stage. 

No.  545.      Tuesday,  November  25,  171 2. 

CONSORTS 

At  the  Defire  of  Several  Perfons  of  Quality. 
For  the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  Lindfey. 

THIS  prefent  Friday  being  the  23d  of  March,  at  the 
great  Room  in  York-buildings,  will  be  perform 'd  a 
[  250  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Confort  of  Vocal  and  Inftrumental  Mufick,  by  the  beft 
Mailers.  To  begin  exactly  at  Seven. 

No.  20.     Friday,  March  23,  17 11. 

An  Entertainment  of  Mufick,  confifting  of  a  Poem, 
called,  the  Paflion  of  Sapho :  Written  by  Mr.  Harifon. 
And  the  Feaft  of  Alexander  :  Written  by  Mr.  Dry  den ; 
as  they  are  fet  to  Mufick  by  Mr.  Thomas  Clayton  (Au- 
thor of  Arfinoe)  will  be  performed  at  his  Houfe  in  York- 
Buildings,  to  Morrow  the  29th  Inftant :  Beginning  at  8 
in  the  Evening.  Tickets,  at  5s.  each,  may  be  had  at 
Mr.  Charles  Lillies,  the  Corner  of  Beauford-Buildings, 
and  at  Mr.  Elliot's  at  St.  James's  CofFee-houfe.  No 
Money  received,  or  Tickets  given  out  at  the  Houfe. 

This  Poem  is  fold  by  Jacob  Tonfon,  at  Shakefpear's 
Head  over-againft  Catherine-ftreet  in  the  Strand. 

Any  yiafter  or  Compofer^  who  has  any  Piece  of  Mu- 
fick which  he  defires  to  bring  in  Publick^  may  have  the 
same  performed  at  Mr.  Clayton's  by  his  Performers  ;  and 
be  rewarded  in  the  Manner  as  the  Authors  of  Plays  have 
Benefit  Nights  at  the  Play-houfe.  The  Letter  fubfcribed 
A,  A,  May  the  25,  is  received. 

No.  76.      Monday,  May  28,  171 1. 

In  the  Great  Room  at  Richmond- Wells : 

THIS  prefent  Saturday,  being  the  2ift  day  of  July, 
will  be  perform'd  an  extraordinary  Confort  of  Vocal 
and  Inftrumental  Mufick.  The  Vocal  Parts  to  be  per- 
form'd by  Mr.  Leveridge,  Mr.  Teno,  Mr.  Lawrence, 
Mr.  Rainton,  and  a  Girl,  a  Scholar  of  Mr.  Teno's, 
[251  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

N.B.  This  Confort  is  Undertaken  by  Mr.  Teno,  and 
Mr.  Cuthbert.  Tickets  are  deliver'd  at  the  Wells,  at 
Half  a  Crown  each.  Beginning  exactly  at  Six  of  the 
Clock.  Note,  The  Tide  will  lerve  to  come  back  the 
fame  E\ening. 

No.   123.      Saturday,  JuIt  21,  1711. 

A  Conibrt  of  vocal  and  inftrumental  Muiick  is  to  be 
performed  at  Mr.  Fearnly's  in  Bread-ftreet,  Cheapfide, 
this  Day,  beginning  exactly  at  6  in  the  Evening,  Note. 
There  will  be  a  panicular  Performance  on  the  Arch  and 
French  Lute  by  an  Italian  Mafter,  with  Singing  by  the 
fame.  Tickets  to  be  had  at  Mr.  Hares,  Mufical  Inftru- 
ment  Maker  near  the  Roval  Exchange,  Cornhill  \  at  the 
7  Stars  in  Princefs-ftreet,  Leicefter-fields,  and  at  the 
Place  of  Performance,  at  2s  6d.  per  Ticket. 

No    216.     Wednesday,  November  7,  171 1. 

AT  the  Queen's  Theatre  in  the  Hav-Market,  this 
prefent  Saturdav,  being  the  2  id  of  March,  will  be 
prefented  the  Entertainment  of  Mufick  which  was  per- 
formed before  her  Majefty  on  her  Birth  Day.  To  which 
will  be  added,  the  famous  Scene  of  Thomvris,  com- 
pos'd  bv  Signor  Scarlatti,  and  Sung  by  Signor  Cavalliero 
Nicolino  Grimaldi,  for  his  Benefit.  With  feveral  Enter- 
tainments of  Dancing  by  Mrs.  Santlow,  and  voung  Mr. 
Camille,  compofed  by  Mr.  Ifaack.  Boxes  and  Pit  to  be 
put  together,  and  no  Body  to  be  admitted  without  Tickets, 
which  will  be  delivered  out  at  the  Theatre,  at  Mrs. 
White's  Chocolate-houfe,  and  at  St.  James's  CofFee- 
houle,  at  half  a  Guinea  each,  the  Firil  Gallery  2s.  6d. 

[  252] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Upper  Gallery  is.  6d.  To  begin  exactly  at  fix.  By  her 
Majefty's  Command  no  Perfons  are  to  be  admitted  be- 
hind the  Scenes.  And  on  Tuefday  next  the  25th  Inftant, 
will  be  performed  Hydafpes,  the  Part  of  Darius  to  be 
performed  by  Signor  Benedittani  Baldafari,  newly  arriv'd. 

No.  333.      Saturday,  March  22,  17 12. 


The  Confort  of  Mufick  which  was  to  have  been  for 
the  Benefit  of  Mrs.  Hemmins  the  14th  of  December  laft 
being  put  off  by  the  Indifpofition  of  one  of  the  Perform- 
ers, will  be  performed  in  York  Buildings  on  Friday  next, 
being  the  i8th  Inftant.  Note,  That  the  Tickets  of  the 
14th  of  December  laft  to  continue,  and  are  to  be  had 
at  St.  James's  Coffee-houfe  in  St.  James's  ftreet,  at  Mr. 
Charles  Lillie's  in  the  Strand  by  Beauford  Buildings,  at 
Tom's  Coffee-houfe  in  Ruffel-ftreet  in  Covent  Garden, 
at  Nando's  Coffee-houfe  near  Temple-bar,  at  Squire's 
Coffee-houfe  near  Grays  Inn  in  Holborn,  at  the  Ham- 
burgh Coffee-houfe  in  Birchin-lane  in  Cornhil,  and  at 
John's  Coffee-houfe  in  Swethin's  Ally  near  the  Royal 
Exchange. 

No.  275.     Tuesday,  January  15,  17 12. 

Whereas  the  Mufick  in  the  Opera  of  Dioclefian  was 
defign'd  to  have  been  performed  at  Stationer's  Hall  to 
morrow,  being  the  9th  Inftant,  (for  the  Benefit  of  Mr. 
Smith  and  Mr.  Cuthbert)  fome  of  the  Performers  being 
indifpofed,  it  is  obliged  to  be  deferr'd  for  fome  time. 
Notice  will  be  given  in  this  Paper  and  the  Courant  a 
Week  before,  when  the  Performance  ftiall  be. 

No.  347.     Tuesday,  April  8,  1712. 
[    253    ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

POWELL'S 

PUPPET  SHOWS 

At  Punch's  Theatre  in  the  Little  Piazza,  Covent- 
Garden,  to  Day  and  to  Morrow,  being  the  i8th  and 
19th  of  this  inftant  February,  will  be  prefented  an  Opera 
call'd.  King  Bladud  the  Founder  of  the  Bath  :  The  Fig- 
ures being  in  the  Drefs  of  the  ancient  Britains,  with  the 
Walks,  Groves,  and  the  Reprefentation  of  the  King's 
Bath  and  new  Pump  houfe :  The  Figures  of  Gentlemen, 
Ladies  and  Guides,  all  moving  in  real  Water.  Begin- 
ning exa6tly  at  6  a  Clock.  Boxes  2s.  Pit  is.  Note,  No 
Perfons  with  Masks  are  to  be  admitted. 

No.  304.      Monday,  February  i8,  1712. 


AT  Punch's  Theatre  in  the  Little-Piazza,  Covent- 
Garden,  this  prefent  Monday  the  ift  of  December, 
and  to  Morrow  being  Tuefday  the  2d,  will  be  performed  an 
Opera  called.  The  Falfe  Triumph  j  or.  The  Deftrudlion 
of  Troy.  All  the  Greeks  are  exa6lly  dreft  after  the  an- 
cient manner  of  that  Country,  and  the  Trojans  the  fame. 
At  Paris's  Triumph  the  Stage  is  beautified  with  Trophies, 
the  Side-Scenes  reprefenting  Elephants  with  Caftles, 
in  which  are  Syrians  holding  forth  fplendid  Banners, 
and  Indians  on  Horfeback,  bearing  of  Trophies.  The 
Part  of  Jupiter  to  be  perform'd  by  Signior  Punchanello, 
who,  in  a  Chariot  drawn  by  an  Eagle,  defcends  and 
fings  to  Paris  :  With  a  Profpe6l  of  the  City  of  Troy 
in  Flames.  Beginning  at  Six  a  Clock.  No  Perfons  to 
be  admitted  with  Masks  or  Riding-Hoods  j  Nor  no 
[  254  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Money  to  be  returned  after  the  Curtain  is  drawn  up. 
Boxes  2s.  Pit  IS. 

No.  550.     Monday,  December  I,  1712. 

By  SUBSCRIPTION, 

At  Punch's  Theatre  in  the  Little  Piazza,  Covent- 
Garden,  this  prefent  Thurfday,  the  7th  Inftant,  will  be 
a6ted  an  Opera  called  Orpheus  and  Erudice.  Illuftrated 
with  variety  of  Scenes  and  Machines  after  the  Italian 
manner.  With  the  much  entertaining  Diverfion  of  Signior 
Punchanella  encountring  a  Lyon  in  the  Amphitheatre. 
Note,  No  Entrance  without  Tickets,  the  Boxes  being 
laid  open  to  the  Pit  at  2s.  6d.  each  Ticket,  to  be  taken 
out  at  the  Door  of  the  faid  Theatre  this  Morning ;  the 
Opera  beginning  exa6tly  at  12  at  Noon.  Note  alfo,  the 
fame  will  again  be  performed  at  6  in  the  Evening  at  is. 
the  Pit,  and  2s.  the  Boxes,  the  ufual  Prices. 

No.  295.     Thursday,  February  7,  1712. 

At  Punch's  Theatre,  in  the  Little  Piazza,  Covent- 
Garden,  to  Day  and  to  Morrow,  the  15th  and  i6th  of 
this  inftant  February,  will  be  prefented  an  Opera  call'd. 
The  State  of  Innocence,  or  the  Fall  of  Man.  With  Va- 
riety of  furprizing  Scenes  and  Machines,  particularly  the 
Scene  of  Paradife  in  its  primitive  Station,  with  Birds, 
Beafts,  and  all  its  ancient  Inhabitants  :  The  Subtilty  of 
the  Serpent  in  betraying  Adam  and  Eve ;  a  diverting 
Dialogue  between  Signior  Punchanella  and  Madamoifelle 
Soufabella  Pignatella,  and  other  Diverfions  too  long  to 
infert  here.  Beginning  exactly  at  6  a  Clock.  No  Perfons 
to  be  admitted  with  Masks  or  Riding  Hoods,  nor  no 

[  25s  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Money  to  be  returned  after  the  Curtain  is  up.   Boxes  2s. 

■•^^^   ■'-^'  No.  302.     Friday,  February  15,  1712. 


At  Punch's  Theatre  Covent-Garden,  this  pefent 
Thurfday,  the  6th  of  March,  will  be  prefented  the  laft 
Subfcription  Opera  called  the  Beauteous  Sacrifice,  where 
Punch  performs  the  part  of  Captain.  All  the  Figures 
being  new,  and  likewife  their  DrefTes  agreeable  to  their 
Characters.  With  a  new  piece  of  Machinery  after  the 
Britifh  manner,  contrived  and  juft  finifhed  by  Powell, 
which  reprefents  a  Paradife  wonderfully  furprifing.  At  the 
breaking  of  the  Clouds  rifes  feveral  Triumphal  Arches 
which  forms  feveral  moft  agreeable  Profped:s ;  beautified 
by  her  moft  Serene  Majefty  of  Great  Britain  in  her  Royal 
Robes,  attended  by  her  Peers  and  Officers  of  State,  under 
their  Feet  are  reprefented  the  Trophies  taken  from  the 
French  and  Bavarians  by  her  Majefty's  Arms  this  War. 
Beginning  at  five  and  feven  a-Clock.   Boxes  2s.  6d.   Pit 

IS.  Od.  No,  319.      Thursday,  March  6,  171 2. 

WATER-WORKS  AT 
WINSTANLY'S 

WATER  THEATRE 

The  famous  Water-Theatre  of  the  late  ingenious  Mr. 
Winftanly  is  open'd,  and  will  continue  to  be  fhewn  for 
one  Month,  and  no  longer  this  Summer.  There  is  the 
greateft  Curiofities  in  Water-works,  the  like  was  never 
performed  by  any.  It  is  fhewn  every  Evening  at  6  a  Clock 
for  the  Benefit  of  his  Widow,  with  feveral  new  Additions, 

[256] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

as  three  new  Stages,  Sea  Gods  and  GoddefTes,  Nymphs, 
Mermaids  and  Satires,  all  of  them  playing  of  Water  as 
fuitable,  and  fome  Fire  mingling  with  the  Water,  and  Sea 
Triumphs  round  the  Barrel  that  plays  fo  many  Liquors ; 
all  which  is  taken  away  after  it  hath  perform'd  its  Part, 
and  the  Barrel  is  broken  in  Pieces  before  the  Spectators. 
It  is  at  the  lower  End  of  Pickadilly,  and  is  known  by  the 
Wind-mill  on  the  Top  of  it. 

No.  96.     Wednesday,  June  20,  1711. 


THE  Famous  Water-Theatre  of  the  late  Ingenious 
Mr.  Winftanly,  will  continue  to  be  fhown  for  6 
Days  every  Evening  at  5  a-Clock,  there  is  the  greateft 
Curiofities  in  Water- Works,  the  like  was  never  perform'd 
before  by  any;  and  this  prefent  Night  will  be  added  a  Gar- 
land of  Wheat  playing  of  Water  in  a  curious  manner,  and 
feveral  other  new  things  fuitable  to  the  Seafon ;  and  Bac- 
chus fqueezing  the  purple  Juice  out  of  the  Grapes  ;  there 
is  alfo  the  Artificial  Barrel  that  entertains  the  Spectators 
with  feven  forts  of  Liquors  both  hot  and  cold ;  there  will 
be  fhown  the  Sea  Gods  and  GoddelTes,  Nymphs,  Mer- 
maids and  Satires,  playing  of  Water,  and  Fire  mingling 
with  the  Water,  and  two  flying  Boys  with  a  flaming 
Torch,  playing  of  Water  out  of  the  burning  Flame.  It 
is  at  the  lower  end  of  Pickadilly  near  Hide  Park,  and  is 
known  by  the  Wind-Mill  on  the  Top  of  it.  When  this 
is  left  of  Showing,  his  fam'd  Houfe  at  Littleberry  in  Efl^ex 
will  be  opened,  and  fhown  in  greater  perfection  than  ever, 
and  both  are  Shown  for  the  Benefit  of  his  Widow,  and 

in  her  PoflefTlon.  No.  451.     Thursday,  August  7,  1712. 

[  257  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

The  famous  Water  Theatre  of  the  late  ingenious  Mr. 
Winftanly  will  be  open'd  this  Eafter  Monday,  being  the 
fecond  Day  of  April ;  and  will  be  fhown  for  fix  Days 
during  the  Holyday  Week,  at  5  a  Clock  in  the  Evening 
for  the  Benefit  of  his  Widow.  With  feveral  new  Addi- 
tions never  fhown  before.  It  is  at  the  lower  End  of  Picka- 
dilly,  and  is  known  by  the  Wind-mill  on  the  Top  of  it. 
Boxes  2s.  6d.  Pit  is.  6d.  firfl  Gallery  is.  upper  Gal- 
lery 6d.  No.  28.     Monday,  April  2,  171 1. 


AT  the  famous  Water-Theatre  of  the  late  Ingenious 
Mr.  Winftanly,  on  Thurfday  the  17th  of  July,  will 
be  an  Entertainment  of  feveral  Sorts  of  Wine  and  Bef- 
quits  given  to  the  Company  in  the  Pit  and  Boxes,  all  com- 
ing out  of  the  famous  Barrel  j  and  agreeable  to  the  hot 
Weather,  there  fhall  be  German  Spaw  Water  to  drink, 
with  the  Wind  drawn  out  of  feveral  Cocks,  and  new  River 
Water  playing  out  of  the  Top  at  the  fame  Time ;  and 
then  the  Barrel  fhall  be  broke  in  Pieces.  There  is  alfo 
CofFee  and  Tea,  and  the  fame  things  as  at  other  Times. 
Boxes  that  Night  3s  Pit  2s.  6d.  the  Galleries  at  the 
ufual  Prices,  firfl  Gallery  is.  6d.  upper  Gallery  6d.  And 
this  prefent  Wednefday  will  be  feveral  new  things  never 

fhewn  before.  Nq^  ^^^^      Wednesday,  July  i6,  1712. 

MOVING  PICTURES 

At  the  Duke  of  Marlborough's  Head  in  Fleetflreet, 
is  now  to  be  feen  a  new  Invented  Machine,  compofed 
of  five  curious  Pictures,  with  moving  Figures,  reprefent- 

[  258  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

ing  the  Hiftory  of  the  Heathen  Gods,  which  move  as 
Artificially  as  if  Living :  the  like  not  feen  before  in  Eu- 
rope. The  whole  contains  near  an  hundred  Figures, 
befides  Ships,  Beafts,  Fifli,  Fowl  and  other  Embellifh- 
ments,  fome  near  a  Foot  in  height ;  all  which  have  their 
refpe6live  and  peculiar  Motions,  their  very  Heads,  Legs 
and  Arms,  Hands  and  Fingers,  Artificially  moving  to 
what  they  perform,  and  fetting  one  Foot  before  another 
like  Living  Creatures,  in  fuch  a  manner  that  nothing  but 
Nature  it  felf  can  excel  it.  It  will  continue  to  be  feen 
every  Day  from  lo  in  the  Morning  'till  lO  at  Night.  The 
Prices  is.  6d.  and  the  loweft  6d. 

No.  i8i.     Thursday,  September  27,  1711. 

Mr.  Penkethman's  Wonderful  Invention,  call'd  the 
Pantheon  :  Or,  the  Temple  of  the  Heathen-gods.  The 
Work  of  feveral  Years,  and  great  Expence,  is  now  per- 
fected ;  being  a  mofi:  furprizing  and  Magnificent  Machine, 
confifting  of  5  feveral  curious  Pi6tures  ;  the  Painting  and 
Contrivance  whereof  is  beyond  Expreilion  Admirable. 
The  Figures,  which  are  above  lOO,  and  move  their 
Heads,  Legs,  Arms  and  Fingers,  fo  exactly  to  what  they 
perform,  and  fetting  one  Foot  before  another,  like  living 
Creatures,  that  it  juftly  deferves  to  be  efteem'd  the  greateft 
Wonder  of  the  Age.  To  be  feen  from  lo  in  the  Morn- 
ing till  10  at  Night,  in  the  Little  Piazza's  Covent-Gar- 
den,  in  the  fame  Houfe  where  Punch's  Opera  is.  Price 
IS.  6d.  IS.  and  the  loweft  6d. 

No.  43 .     Thursday,  April  19,  1 7 1 1 . 


[  259  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

MISCELLANEOUS    AMUSEMENTS 

At  the  Defire  of  feveral  Gentlemen  and  Ladles. 

AT  the  Rifing  Sun  in  Wych-Street  near  Temple-Bar, 
on  Wednefday  next,  being  the  5th  of  this  Inftant, 
will  be  a  Mafquerade ;  each  Perfon  to  pay  half  a  Crown 
at  entrance.   Beginning  exactly  at  5  a  Clock. 

No.  239.      Tuesday,  December  4,  1711. 

At  the  Duke  of  Marlborough's  Head  in  Fleet-ftreet, 
in  the  great  Room,  is  to  be  feen  the  famous  Pofture- 
Mafter  of  Europe,  who  far  exceeds  the  deceafed  Pofture 
Mafters  Clarke  and  Higgins  :  He  extends  his  Body  into 
all  deform'd  Shapes  ;  makes  his  Hip  and  Shoulder  Bones 
meet  together ;  lays  his  Head  upon  the  Ground,  and 
turns  his  Body  round  twice  or  thrice,  without  ftirring 
his  Face  from  the  Place ;  ftands  upon  one  Leg,  and 
extends  the  other  in  a  perpendicular  Line  half  a  Yard 
above  his  Head ;  and  extends  his  Body  from  a  Table, 
with  his  Head  a  Foot  below  his  Heels,  having  nothing 
to  balance  his  Body  but  his  Feet :  With  feveral  other 
Poftures  too  tedious  to  mention.  Likewife  a  Child  of 
about  9  Years  of  Age,  that  fhews  such  Poftures  as  never 
was  feen  performed  by  one  of  his  Age.  Alfo  the  famous 
Englifh  Artift,  who  turns  his  Balls  into  living  Birds  ; 
and  takes  an  empty  Bag,  which  after  being  turn'd,  trod, 
and  ftampt  on,  produces  fome  Hundreds  of  Eggs,  and 
at  laft  a  living  Hen.  Side-Boxes  2s.  Pit  is.  To  be  per- 
form'd  at  6  a  clock  every  Evening. 

No.  246.     Wednesday,  December  12,  171 1. 

Juft  over-againft  the  Mufe  Gate  at  Charing-crofs  is 
[  260  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

to  be  feen  thefe  Rarities  following,  viz.  a  little  Man  3 
Foot  high,  and  32  Years  of  Age,  ftrait  and  proportion- 
able every  way.  The  next  is  his  Wife,  a  little  Woman, 
not  3  Foot  high,  and  30  Years  of  Age,  who  diverts  the 
Company  by  her  extraordinary  Dancing,  and  is  now  big 
with  Child,  being  the  leaft  Woman  that  ever  was  with 
Child  in  Europe :  Likewife  their  little  Horfe,  2  Foot 
odd  Inches  high,  which  performs  feveral  wonderful  Act- 
ions by  the  word  of  Command,  being  fo  fmall  that  it 's 
kept  in  a  Box.  Next  is  that  wonderful  Female  Creature 
having  a  Head  like  a  Hog;  A  Satyr  from  the  Coaft  of 
Brazil,  having  a  Head  like  a  Child,  and  of  fuch  a  won- 
derful Shape  that  the  like  was  never  feen  in  England  be- 
fore ;  with  a  great  many  Arrange  and  wonderful  Crea- 
tures, which  are  too  tedious  to  be  mentioned  here.  And 
is  to  be  feen  from  9  in  the  Morning  'till  9  at  Night, 
where  due  Attendance  ihall  be  given. 

No.  247.     Thursday,  December  13,  171 1. 

The  firft  Week  in  June  will  be  fought  a  Cock-Match 
at  Gisbrough  in  Cleavland,  Yorkfliire,  by  the  Cleavland 
Gentlemen  on  one  Side  and  Mr.  Ramfden  on  the  other, 
for  10  Guineas  a  Battle  and  one  Hundred  Guineas  the 
Maine.  They  weigh  on  Monday  the  2d  of  June,  and 
begin  to  fight  on  Tuefday  in  the  Afternoon,  and  con- 
tinue fighting  the  Wednefday  and  Thurfday  following. 

No.  378,     Wednesday,  May  14,  1712. 

This  is  to  give  Notice,  That  Hampfted-Fair  is  to  be 
kept  upon  the  lower  Flask-Tavern  Walks  on  Friday 
the  I  ft  of  Auguft,  and  holds  4  Days. 

No.  443.     Tuesday,  July  29,  1712. 

[261  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

^HEREAS  there  has  been  a  falfe  Report,  That  Mr. 
David  Cornwall,  who  performs  the  Dexterity  on  the 
Cards,  the  Hen  and  Egg-Bag,  and  the  Pofture-Mafter, 
were  dead  ;  this  is  to  certify  all  Perfons,  That  they  will 
perform,  as  ufual,  during  the  Time  of  Southwark-Fair, 
within  Two  Doors  of  St.  George's  Church ;  and  then 
they  go  for  Holland. 

No.  474.     Wednesday,  September  3,  1712, 

^HEREAS  there  has  been  a  falfe  Report,  That  Mr. 
David  Cornwall,  who  performs  the  Dexterity  on  the 
Cards,  the  Hen  and  Egg-Bag,  and  the  Pofture  Mafter, 
were  dead ;  this  is  to  certify  all  Perfons,  That  they  will 
perform,  as  ufual,  during  the  Time  of  Southwark  Fair, 
within  Two  Doors  of  St.  George's  Church ;  and  then 
they  go  for  Holland.   Note,  The  Fair  began  to  Day. 

No.  478.      Monday,  September  8,  17 12. 

AN  Entertainment  by  Mr.  CLINCH  of  BARNET, 
who  imitates  the  Flute,  Double  Curtel,  the  Organ 
with  3  Voices,  the  Horn,  Huntfman  and  Pack  of 
Hounds,  the  Sham-Dod:or,  the  Old  Woman,  the  Drunk- 
en-Man, the  Bells :  All  Inftruments  are  performed  by  his 
natural  Voice.  To  which  is  added  an  EfTex  Song  by 
Mr.  Clinch  himfelf.  To  be  feen  this  prefent  Evening 
at  7  a  Clock,  at  the  Queen's-Arms  Tavern  on  Ludgate- 
Hill.  Price  is. 

No.  533.     Tuesday,  November  11,  1712. 

INSURANCE   ASSOCIATIONS 

The  following  Propofals  are  offered  to  all  fuch  as  are 
defirous  to  make  Provifion  for  themfelves  and  their  Chil- 
dren, &c.  and  are  calculated  for  the  Eafe  and  Benefit  of 
[  262  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

all  Perfons  concerned  therein ;  being  founded  on  fuch 
a  Bafis  as  cannot  fail  of  procuring  their  Increafe,  and  ren- 
der them  laftingand  beneficial:  The  Charge  of  Entrance 
being  fmall,  and  Contribution  of  every  Perfon  what  they 
beft  approve  of,  w^ithout  any  further  Charge  or  Incum- 
brance. The  Terms  being  eafy  and  the  Advantage  plain, 
needs  little  Recommendation.  The  great  Ufe  it  may  be 
of  tovt^ards  a  Provifion  for  thofe  that  are  or  may  be  in 
Want,  will  be  a  fufficient  Inducement  to  all  Perfons  to 
give  them  Incouragement. 

Annual  Propofals  to  Parents  for  the  Provifion  of  them- 
felves  and  their  Children,  &c.  Wherein  the  Contribu- 
tion of  every  Perfon  is  to  be  what  they  beft  approve 
of;  and  by  renewing  their  Subfcription  only  once  in  2 
Years,  cannot  fail  of  fecuring  to  themfelves  or  Nominees 
a  fufficient  Provifion. 

Annual  Propofals  to  Shopkeepers  and  Tradefmen,  &c. 
For  a  Provifion  on  Lofs  by  Fire,  and  for  Relief  of  decayed 
Tradefmen,  &c.  Wherein  every  Contributor,  by  paying 
6s.  annually,  becomes  intitled  to  receive  the  Value  of 
lool.  Lofs  suftained  by  Fire;  and  if  no  Lofs  by  Fire  hap- 
pen, then  fuch  Contributor,  being  by  Decay  of  Trade 
or  other  Misfortune  brought  to  Penury  and  Want,  to  be 
relieved  out  of  the  Joynt-Stock  of  this  Society. 

Propofals  to  Merchants  and  Owners  of  Ships,  &c. 
For  a  Provifion  for  fuch  whofe  Ships  or  Effects  are  loft 
at  Sea,  or  taken  by  the  Enemy. 

Attendance  is  given  at  Bourn's  CofFee-houfe  in  Finch- 
lane,  Cornhill,  from  lO  to  12,  and  from  2  till  4,  where 
Propofals  are  to  be  had. 

No.  54.     Wednesday,  May  2,  171 1, 

[  263  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

This  is  to  give  Notice  to  all  Perfons  concerned  in 
carrying  on  the  Contribution  on  the  Lives  of  Men, 
Women,  and  Children,  at  the  Office  in  Ironmonger- 
lane,  for  fecuring  againft  loffes  happening  by  the  Death 
of  Friends  or  others.  That  on  Michaelmas-day  next  ten 
Directors  will  be  chofen  for  Management  of  the  faid 
Contribution  for  this  Year  enfuing ;  and  all  the  Contribu- 
tors are  defired  to  meet  for  that  Purpofe  at  the  faid 
Office  at  Three  of  the  Clock  in  the  Afternoon. 

No.  182.     Friday,  September  28,  1711. 

In  pursuance  of  the  Articles  for  Eftablifhing  a  Mu- 
tual Contribution  for  enlarging  Provifions  for  Children, 
at  the  Office  in  Ironmonger  Lane,  a  Dividend  of  the 
faid  Contribution  has  been  paid  to  the  feveral  Contribu- 
tors; All  Perfons  concerned  are  defired  to  take  Notice, 
that  they  make  their  Re-entrys  on  the  Lives  of  New 
born,  and  young  Children,  and  alfo  pay  the  Second 
Monthly  Payment  with  their  Quarteridge  on  Births  (due 
at  Michaelmas  laft)  on  or  before  the  24th  of  this  Inftant, 
or  you  '11  be  excluded  all  Benefit  of  the  faid  Society. 
N.  B.  a  Dividend  on  Young  Children  will  be  made  at 
Chriftmas  next,  and  daily  Attendance  given  at  the  Office 
for  difpatching  the  Affairs  of  the  faid  Contribution. 

No.  225.      Saturday,  November  17,  1711. 

From  the  Office  in  Ironmonger  Lane. 

In  Purfuance  of  the  Articles,  for  Eftablifhing  a  mutual 
Contribution,  for  Enlarging  Provifions  for  young  Chil- 
dren, defraying  the  Charge  of  New  born  Children,  and 
raifing  Advantages  for  faithful  Servantr ;  The  Dividend 

[  264] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

for  the  faid  Offices,  for  Lady  Day  laft  being  due,  and  the 
Books  of  the  fame  being  near  made  up  and  adjufted,  all 
Claimants  are  defired  to  take  Notice,  that  on  Monday, 
the  24th  Day  of  this  Inftant  April,  the  fevaral  Shares 
thereof  will  begin  to  be  Paid,  and  diftributed  unto,  and 
among  them,  and  fo  Continue  until  all  are  paid. 

No.  349.     Thursday,  April  10,  1712. 

LOTTERIES 

An  exaft  Account  of  all  the  Numbers  now  drawing 
(at  Guild-hall)  in  the  two  Million  Adventure,  with  the 
Advance  of  Principal  and  other  Premiums,  as  they  arife 
in  their  feveral  ClafTes ;  To  be  feen  conftantly  every 
Half  Hour,  or  fooner,  at  Mr.  Lloyd's  CofFee-houfe  in 
Lombard  ftreet,  Cole's  CofFee-houfe  in  Birchin-lane, 
Old  Tom's  CofFee-houfe  in  the  fame  Lane,  Jonathan's 
CofFee-houfe  in  Exchange  Ally,  Grigsby's  CofFee-houfe 
in  Thread-needle-ftreet,  the  Crown  CofFee-houfe  and 
Guild-hall  CofFee  houfe  ie  King-flreet  near  Guild-hall: 
And  are  to  be  feen  conftantly  every  two  Hours,  or  fooner, 
at  the  Rainbow  CofFee-houfe  the  lower  End  of  St.  Mar- 
tin's-lane,  Mr.  Diggery's  CofFee-houfe  at  the  7  Dials, 
Squires  CofFee-houfe  in  Fuller's  Rents,  the  Hanover 
CofFee-houfe  the  Corner  of  SufFolk-flreet  near  the  Hay- 
market,  and  Mrs.  Fitzgearrald's  CofFee-houfe  near  Story's 
PalFage  by  St.  James's  Park,  Child's  CofFee-houfe  in  St. 
Paul's  Church-yard,  and  Tom's  CofFee-houfe  in  Dev- 
ereaux  Court;  from  Guild  hall  CofFee-houfe  may  be 
furnifhed  the  fame  :  As  alfo  the  Blanks  and  Prizes  of  th 
150000I.  Lottery  when  drawing. 

No.  132.      Wednesday,  August  I,  171 1. 

[26s  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

At  Sam's  CofFee-houfe  in  Ludgate-ftreet,  during  the 
Time  of  drawing  the  Million  and  Half  Lottery  will  be 
kept  a  moft  corre6i:  Numerical  Table  (tho'  not  examined 
by  a  celebrated  Mathematician,  as  is  latey  fet  forth  by 
fome  ignorant  Upftarts,  to  give  Credit  to  their  Undertak- 
ing) when  all  Perfons  may  know  whether  their  Tickets 
are  Benefits  or  Blanks,  every  half  hour,  paying  for  every 
Benefit  2s.  6d.  and,  if  a  Blank,  nothing.  All  Gentlemen 
may  have  their  Tickets  regifter'd  very  reafonably,  and 
Advice  fent  them  of  their  Fortune  to  the  Place  where 
they  fhall  dire6l  us  to  fend  them,  immediately  after 
drawn.  N.  B.  At  the  faid  CofFee-houfe  is  lately  im- 
ported, a  Parcel  of  fine  Barcelona  Snuff,  where  all  Gen- 
tlemen and  Ladies  may  be  furnifh'd  with  Brazile,  plain 
Spanifh,  and  Havana,  &c.  frefh  and  good,  at  reafonable 
Rates :  Encouragement  to  thofe  that  fell  again. 

No.  18 1.      Thursday,  September  27,  171 1. 

At  Child's  CofFee-houfe  at  the  Weft  End  of  St.  Paul's 
Church-yard,  during  the  Time  of  drawing  the  Million 
and  Half  Lottery,  may  be  feen  every  Hour  the  Prizes 
gratis. 

No.  184.      Monday,  October  i,  171 1. 

This  Day  is  Publifh'd, 

Propofals  for  a  Lottery  of  Three  Millions  (Redeem-^ 
able  by  Parliament)  containing  likewife  a  Parallel  View 
of  all  the  prefent  Lotteries;  exemplified  with  proper 
Tables  exactly  calculated,  and  readily  fhewing  at  In- 
spection their  true  Value,  at  Six,  Seven,  Eight,  Nine 
and  Ten  per  Cent,  per  Ann.  Compound  Intereft  for  32 
[  266  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Years.  With  an  Appendix,  concerning  the  Nature  and 
Ufefulnefs  of  Lotteries  for  railing  Supplies  of  Mony  for 
the  Publick  Occafions.  Printed  by  Andrew  Bell,  at  the 
Crofs  Keys  and  Bible  in  Cornhill.  Price  6d.  Where  is 
to  be  had  an  exa6t  Table  of  the  Courfe  of  Payment  in 
the  laft  Lottery.  Price,  6d. 

No.  277.     Thursday,  January  17,  1712. 

At  Mr.  Bradfhaw's,  at  the  Blackmore's-Head,  fronting 
Ivy-Lane  in  Pater-nofter-Row,  all  Perfons  concern'd  in 
the  Two  prefent  Lotteries  may  have  the  Numbers  of 
their  Tickets  Regifter'd  as  foon  as  any  of  their  Tickets 
are  drawn.  Immediate  Notice  fhall  be  fent  them  whether 
Blank  or  Prize,  either  in  Town  or  Country,  by  the  next 
PofI:,  at  6d.  per  Ticket.  At  the  fame  Place  will  be  kept 
a  Numerical  Book  of  both  Lotteries,  by  which  all  Per- 
fons may  be  fatisfied  every  Minute  whether  their  Tickets 
be  drawn  Blanks  or  Prizes. 

No.  498.     Wednesday,  October  i,  17 12. 

The  Printed  Lifts  of  the  Prizes  drawn  in  the  Dutch 
Lottery,  are  taken  in  regularly  as  they  come  over  to  Eng- 
land, at  Stephen's  or  the  Penfilvania  Coffee-houfe  in 
Birchin-Lane ;  where  all  Perfons  concerned  in  the  faid 
Lottery  may  compare  their  Numbers  in  a  Moment,  with- 
out any  Trouble. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  603.     Wednesday,  October  6,  1714. 

Whereas  the  following  Numbers  in  the  Dutch  Lot- 
tery are  come  up  Prizes  of  confiderable  Value,  viz.  [fol- 
low 27  numbers]  with  a  great  many  other  Numbers  of 
Value  not  here  mentioned,  which  all  Perfons  that  are 
poffefsM  of  them  may  have  an  Account  what  Value  each 

[267] 


specimen  Advertifements 

or  any  of  them  are,  at  Mr.  Carter's  Office  at  the  Wooll- 
pack  in  Kingftreet  by  Guildhall :  And  let  him  that  pre- 
tends to  fo  early  an  Account  above  all  other  Offices 
whatfoever,  render  an  Account  thereof  if  he  can,  and 
then  let  the  Town  judge  the  Difference  of  his  Office 
and  mine,  and  fpeak  as  they  find. 

Vol.  vm,  No.  615.     Wednesday,  November  3,  1714. 

At  the  Half  Moon  in  St.  Martin's-Lane,  a  little  above 
the  Church,  is  kept  Exa6t  Numerical  Books  for  both  the 
Claffes  and  Ten  Pound  Lotteries,  with  a  Regifter,  all 
perfectly  adapted  to  the  giving  Juft  and  Frefti  Accounts 

every  Hour.  No.  500.     Friday,  October  3,  1712. 

At  the  Indian  Man  in  Ruffel-Street,  Covent-Garden, 
is  a  Parcel  of  rich  Jewels,  viz.  a  Brilliant  Diamond  String 
and  Crofs,  Ear  Rings,  Rings,  Buckles,  Pendants,  and  alfo 
fine  Lace,  rich  Silks,  Muflins,  and  other  valuable  Goods, 
to  be  difpos'd  of  at  reafonable  Rates,  the  whole  amount- 
ing to  675I.  which,  for  the  Encouragement  of  Buyers, 
will  be  divided  into  360  Shares,  the  biggeft  whereof  is 
lool.  Value,  and  the  leaft  los.  Any  one  of  thefe  may  be 
purchafed  for  the  little  Sum  of  Half  a  Crown,  as  may 
be  known  more  at  large  at  the  Place  of  Sale,  where  At- 
tendance will  be  given  till  all  the  Goods  be  fold.  It  being 
near  full, 'tis  propos'd  to  divide  the  Shares  on  the  12th 

of  July  next.  No.  88.     Monday,  June  II,  1711. 

SWINDLING  SCHEMES 

This  is  to  give  Notice,  That  the  Quarterly  Contribu- 
tion for  the  Benefit  of  faithful  Servants,  being  continued 
[  268  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

at  the  Office  in  Ironmonger-lane  in  the  Method  origin- 
ally propofed.  All  Payments  thereof  are  to  be  made  at 
the  Times  appointed,  under  the  Forfeitures  in  the  Pro- 
pofals  mentioned.  Which  Method  has  hitherto  had  very 
good  Effects ;  for  the  Benefits  arifing  thereby  not  being 
to  be  received  without  a  dutiful  Behaviour  in  the  Ser- 
vants, and  a  good  Character  from  their  Mafters,  has  fre- 
quently occafioned  a  ftridler  Obfervance  of  the  Servant's 
Duty,  and  incited  them  to  a  more  earneft  Endeavour  to 
deferve  that  Character  on  which  they  have  fuch  Depend- 
ance.  N.  B.  One  whole  Year's  faithful  Service  in  one 
Place,  gives  a  Title  to  a  Claim. 

No.  124.     Monday,  July  23,  171 1. 

On  Monday  March  the  3d,  1711-12,  over-againft 
the  Sieve  in  the  Little  Minneries  near  Aldgate,  will  be 
opened  there  Books  on  a  Sale  of  Numbers,  for  improv- 
ing fmall  Sums  of  Money,  in  a  Method  intirely  new,  and 
much  feperiour  to  any  yet  propofed,  and  a  great  Advan- 
tage to  the  early  Subfcriber;  where  conftant  Attendance 
will  be  given  and  Propofals  had  gratis. 

No.  316.     Monday,  March  3,  17 12. 

On  Tuefday  March  the  4th,  171  i-i  2,  will  be  open'd 
three  Books  for  improving  fmall  Sums  of  Money,  at  the 
Sign  of  the  Pyed-Bull  in  Maiden-lane,  Covent-Garden, 
where  Propofals  may  be  had  gratis. 

No.  316.     Monday,  March  3,  17 12. 

At  the  Crown  in  Wine-Office-Court  the  2d  Door  on 
the  Left-hand  from  Fleet-ftreet,  on  Saturday  the  9th 
of  February  laft  were  opened  3  Books  for  the  Sale  of 
Numbers,  which  have  met  with  very  good  Succefs  and 

[  269  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Encouragement ;  propofing  Cent,  per  Cent.  Advantage 
in  a  Return  of  no  longer  Time  than  4  Weeks  for  the 
firft  hundred  Numbers,  and  none  will  ftay  longer  than 
6  Weeks  from  the  Time  of  their  Entrance  before  they 
receive  the  propofed  Advantage.  Attendance  is  given 
daily  from  9  to  12,  and  from  2  till  6. 

No.  322.      Monday,  March  lo,  171 2. 

At  the  Bell  in  Henrietta-ftreet,  Covent-Garden,  March 
the  4th,  was  opened  three  Books  for  the  Sale  of  GLOVES, 
which  have  met  with  very  good  Succefs  and  Encourage- 
ment, propofing  Cent,  per  Cent.  Advantage,  in  return 
of  no  longer  time  than  a  Month  for  the  firft  hundred 
Pair,  and  none  will  ftay  longer  than  fix  Weeks  from 
the  time  of  their  Entrance,  before  they  receive  the  pro- 
pos'd  Advantage.  Attendance  is  given  at  the  Place  afore- 
faid  from  9  to  12,  and  from  2  to  6,  Holidays  excepted. 

No.  331.     Thursday,  March  20,  1 7 12. 

At  Mr.  England's  a  Powder  Shop  over  againft  the 
Bull  and  Gate  Inn  near  Little  Turn  Stile  in  High  Hol- 
born,  is  kept  an  Office  on  the  Lives  of  pregnant  Women 
and  their  Children,  to  the  great  Satisfaction  and  Advan- 
tage of  all  that  are  concerned  therein  :  Out  of  which 
the  Perfons  claiming  have  received  near  loool.  fince  De- 
cember laft,  very  few  having  received  lefs  than  at  the 
Rate  of  between  2  and  300I.  per  Cent  in  the  Year  clear 
Profit,  and  none  under  lool.  for  every  100  in  the  Year, 
over  all  above  all  Loftes,  as  can  be  plainly  made  appear. 
At  the  fame  Place,  on  the  21ft  of  this  Inftant  March, 
at  the  Requeft  of  Subfcribers,  was  opened  a  new  Book 
of  the  like  Nature  in  3  Divifions,  wherein  no  Perfon 
[  270  J 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

will  pay  any  thing  (except  Entrance  Money)  for  6  Weeks 
after  the  Date  of  their  Admittance.  Note,  All  Perfons 
always  receive  their  Money  a  Fortnight  after  their  Claim 

IS  made.  No.  334.     Monday,  March  24,  17 12. 

At  the  Sign  of  the  Golden  Head  in  Channel-Row  in 
Weftminfter,  on  Wednefday  the  26th  of  this  Inftant 
March,  was  opened  an  Office  for  improving  of  Money  ; 
wherein  the  early  Purchafers  will  receive  great  Advan- 
tages.  Propofals  at  large  may  be  had  gratis  at  the  Office 

aforefaid.  No.  338.     Friday,  March  28,  17 12. 

QUACKS 

Thefe  are  to  certifie  whom  it  doth  or  may  concern, 
that  Elizabeth  Milfris,  born  in  Nightingale  Lane,  in  the 
Parifh  of  St.  John  of  Wapping,  was  under  the  Misfor- 
tune of  Blindnefs  in  that  dangerous  Manner,  that  her 
Sight  was  defpaired  of,  'till  we  recommended  her  by  our 
Certificate  to  Sir  William  Read,  her  Majefty's  Principal 
Occulift  in  Durham  Yard  in  the  Strand,  London ;  and 
by  Sir  William's  Directions  to  the  Lady  Read,  who,  as 
by  him  inftru6led  to  cure  all  curable  Diftempers  inci- 
dent to  the  Eyes,  has  by  the  ufe  of  proper  Medicines 
reftored  the  faid  Elizabeth  Milfris  to  fight. 

The  which  is  attefted  by  us  this  17th  Day  of  March, 
1710-11. 

Thomas  Cooper,  Curate  of  St.  John  of  Wapping. 
John  Wilfon,  Church  Warden. 
Ja.  Jackfon,  Conftable. 

No.  21.     Saturday,  March  24,  17 ii. 
[   271    ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Concerning  the  Small-Pox. 

R.  Stoughton,  Apothecary,  at  the  Unicorn  in  South- 
wark,  having  about  Chriftmas  laft  publifhed  in  the  Poft- 
man,  Tatler  and  Courant,  a  long  Advertifement  of  his 
large  Experience  and  great  Succefs  in  curing  the  Small- 
Pox,  even  of  the  worft  Kind  and  Circumftances,  having 
had  a  Reputation  for  it  almoft  30  Years,  and  can  fay, 
that  not  3  in  ^o  mifcarry  under  his  Hands ;  doth  now 
contra6t  it,  and  only  repeats.  That  he  thinks  he  has  at- 
tain'd  to  as  great  a  Certainty  therein  (and  the  Meafles, 
which  are  near  of  Kin)  as  hath  been  acquired  in  curing 
any  one  Difeafe,  (an  intermitting  Fever  with  the  Bark 
only  excepted)  which  he  conceives  may  at  this  Time, 
when  the  Small-Pox  fo  prevails,  and  is  fo  mortal,  juftify 
his  Publication,  being  prefled  by  feveral  fo  to  do,  and 
hopes  it  may  be  for  the  Good  of  many.  He  has  had 
many  Patients  fince  his  laft  Publication,  and  but  one  of 
all  dy'd.  He  hath  alfo  Certificates  from  above  20  in  a 
fmall  Time  cured,  and  of  the  worft  Sort.  What  is  here 
offered  is  Truth  and  Matter  of  Fa6l ;  and  he  will,  if  de- 
fired,  go  with  any  one  to  the  Perfons  themfelves  who 
have  been  cured,  many  of  whom  are  People  of  Value 
and  Figure.  'Tis  by  a  correal  Management,  more  than 
a  great  deal  of  Phyfick,  by  which  alfo  the  Face  and  Eyes 
are  much  fecured;  tho'  one  Secret  he  has,  (obtained  only 
by  Experience,  and  which  few  or  none  know  befides)  that 
when  they  fuddenly  ftrike  in,  very  rarely  fails  of  raifing 
them  again  in  few  Hours,  when  many  other  things,  and 
proper  too,  have  not  anfwered.  He  does  not  defire,  nor 
aim  at,  the  fupplanting  any  Phyfician  or  Apothecary 
[  272  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

concerned  ;  but  gives  his  aflifting  Advice  if  defired,  and 
in  fuch  a  Way  not  difhonourable  or  injurious  to  either. 

No.  64.     Monday,  May  14,  xyii. 

An  Experienced  Operator^  remov'd  from  St.  Luke 
without  Temple-Bar,  to  the  next  Door  to  the  Talbot- 
Inn,  near  Surrry-Street,  in  the  Strand,  who  cures  the 
Pains  of  the  Head,  and  that  inveterate  Pain  of  the  Tooth- 
Ach,  without  drawing  them,  by  bleeding  in  the  Mouth 
three  or  four  Ounces  at  a  Time,  as  there  is  Occafion. 
It  cures  the  Scurvy  of  the  Mouth  and  Gums,  which  rots 
the  Teeth,  and  breeds  Ulcers,  Cankers,  Cancers,  Quin- 
fies,  and  Swellings  in  the  Cheeks  and  Throat.  It  takes 
away  Dizzinefs  in  the  Head,  Dimnefs  of  the  Sight, 
Pimples,  Blotches,  and  Rednefs  of  the  Face,  by  taking 
away  the  Scorbutick  Blood,  with  ufing  the  Gargles ; 
draws  off  the  Rheum,  eafes  the  Pain,  tho'  never  fo 
great,  cures  the  Sorenefs  of  the  Mouth,  takes  away  all 
Swellings  of  the  Face,  and  makes  the  Breath  pleafant : 
If  the  Teeth  are  black,  you  may  have  a  pleafant  Water 
and  Powder  that  will  make  them  white ;  and  if  loofe,  it 
will  prevent  their  coming  out,  and  for  ever  cures  the 
Tooth-ach. 

The  faid  Operator  cups  with  an  Engine,  without  Fire, 
fcarcely  to  be  felt ;  and  is  to  be  fpoken  with  at  feafonable 
Hours,  except  on  Wednefdays  and  Saturdays. 

No.  202.     Monday,  October  22,  1711. 

Verdier's   Hummums   is   in  Belton-ftreet,  the  End 
of  Brownlow-ftreet ;  where  Perfons  may  be  privately 
fweated,  bathed  and  cupped,  with  the  fame  Inftrument 
[  273  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

he  himfelf  firft  invented,  and  is  ufed  no  where  elfe  but 
at  the  faid  Verdier's  Houfe,  and  exceeds  all  others,  tho' 
feveral  have  and  do  ftill  endeavour  to  counterfeit  the 
fame.  All  Perfons  w^ho  defire  to  be  cupped  at  their  ow^n 
Houfes,  fhall  be  carefully  attended  by  his  SuccefTor  (a 
German)  Daniel  Hahn,  v^^ho  has  pra6lifed  it  thefe  many 
Years  paft.  Note,  It  is  falfely  reported  that  the  Houfe 

IS  left  ofr.  No^  204.      Monday,  February  18,  1712. 

Thefe  are  to  give  Notice,  That  at  the  Glafs-Lanthorn 
in  Plough- Yard  in  Gray's-Inn-Lane,  ftill  lives  Sufanna 
Kirleus,  the  Daughter  of  that  Eminent  Do6tor  Tho. 
Kirleus,  (who  was  a  Sworn  Phyfician  to  K.  Charles  II, 
&c.)  who  with  his  famous  Pills  and  Drink  cures  the 
fecret  Difeafe,  and  all  Ulcers,  Sores,  Swellings,  Kings 
Evil,  Scabs,  Itch,  Scurfs,  Scurveys,  and  Leprofies,  though 
never  fo  great,  without  hindering  Bufinefs,  or  the  Ufe 
of  Mercury,  which  deftroys  many ;  and  cures  any  who 
fend  their  Grief  and  Age  without  feeing  them,  having  had 
above  20  Years  Experience  in  the  Doctor's  Life  time. 
The  Drink  is  3s.  the  Quart,  the  Pills  is.  the  Box.  She 
gives  her  Advice  in  Diftempers,  to  all  that  write  or  come 
to  her,  gratis,  and  deals  with  all  Perfons  according  to  their 

Abilities.  No.  331.     Thursday,  March  20,  17 1 2. 

Whereas  it  has,  and  ftill  is,  induftrioufly  Reported 
by  fome  Pretender  to  that  difficult  Operation  for  cutting 
for  the  Stone,  that  Dr.  Greenfield,  who  is  a  College 
Phyfician,  is  dead,  which  is  abfolutely  Falfe,  he  being 
now  alive  and  well,  and  ftill  succefsfully  Performs  that 
Operation,  which  if  defired  will  be  teftified  for  Truth  by 
3  Perfons  which  he  has  Cutt  within  thefe  3  Months,  who 
[  274  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

are  well  Cured  :  He  now  Lives  at  the  Golden-Wheat- 
Sheaf  in  the  Old-Bayly,  where  he  is  to  be  advifed  with  for 
the  Stone,  Gravel,  and  all  Diftempers  incident  to  human 
Bodies,  and  will  attend  at  their  Houfes  when  defired. 

No.  352.      Monday,  April  14,  17 12. 

Dr.  Maynwaringe  undertakes  the  Curing  of  fuch  des- 
perate and  moft  difficult  Difeafes,  wherein  fome  very 
able  and  long-experienc'd  Phyficians  and  Surgeons  in 
Hofpitals  and  great  Cities  have  failed  in  the  Attempt. 
Other  Men  very  learned  and  famed  for  Pra6tice  refufe 
fuch  Bufinefs,  wherein  they  have  no  Hope  of  Perform- 
ance with  Credit ;  fuch  as  thefe  :  Internal  Apoftems, 
Ulcers,  Fiftula's,  Cancers,  Confumptive  Waitings,  Ex- 
ternal Cancerous  Tumors,  or  Ulcers  cancerated.  Scrofu- 
lous Tumors,  called  King's-Evil,  Rheumatifm,Gout,  and 
fuch  like,  feeming  incurable  to  others,  he  receives  into 
his  Care  for  Cure,  and  is  fuccefsful  by  means  extraordi- 
nary. At  the  Moor's  Head  (for  Diftinction)  in  Baldwin's- 
Garden,  by  Grays-Inn.    .^        .:     irr  j     j      t  i 

^     J  J  No.  426.      Wednesday,  July  9,  1712. 

Thomas  Fern  Chyrurgeon,  who  has  cur'd  feveral 
Hundreds  of  the  King's  Evil,  and  all  kind  of  Leprous 
as  well  as  Scrofulous  Humours,  for  above  Twenty  Years, 
Lives  in  Grange  Court  near  Lincolns  Inn.  His  Treatife 
of  the  Evil  is  Sold  by  D.  Brown,  at  the  Black  Swan 
without  Temple  Barr;  G.  Strahan,  at  the  Golden  Ball 
in  Cornhill  ;  and  at  the  Author's  Houfe,  pr.  is.  6d. 
Bound.  IS.  Stitcht.  Where  may  be  had  Mr.  Morrices 
Mifcellanies,  with  his  Effay  on  the  Poets,  Dedicated  to 
the  Duke  of  Buckingham. 

No,  542.      Friday,  November  21,  1712. 
[    275    ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Robert  Norris  at  the  Peftle  and  Mortar  on  Snow-Hill, 
having  been  many  Years  fuccefsful  in  the  Cure  of  Luna- 
ticks,  is  removed  to  the  Peftle  and  Mortar  near  the  Mid- 
dle of  Hatton-Garden;  where  he  hatha  very  convenient 
large  Houfe  and  Garden,  airy,  and  fit  to  receive  Perfons 
of  the  beft  Rank  of  either  Sex,  with  fuitable  Attendance. 
Any  Perfons  applying  themfelves  as  above,  may  there  be 
fatisfied,  that  the  Cure  fhall  be  induftrioufly  endeavoured 
(and  by  God's  Blefling  effected)  on  reafonable  Terms. 
And  likewife  thofe  incurable  boarded. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  602.      Monday,  October  4,  17 14. 


NOSTRUMS 

One  of  the  moft  fovereign  Things  in  the  whole  Com- 
pafs  of  Phyfick,  to  preferve  from  Infedlion  by  corrupt 
Air  or  contagious  Difeafes,  and  to  keep  the  Body  in  a 
good  State  of  Health  and  Vigour,  &c.  is  Stoughton's 
great  Cordial  Elixir,  (as  hath  been  always  particularly 
mention'd  in  the  Bills  with  it,  and  as  appears  by  a  Cer- 
tificate from  the  Weft-Indies,  manifeftly  faving  the  Lives 
of  many ;  and  another  very  lately  from  Sweden,  where 
great  Numbers  drink  it,  and  not  one  who  took  it  (to  the 
Perfon's  beft  Knowledge  and  Obfervation)  has  had  the 
Difeafe.  'Tis  to  be  taken  in  a  Morning  as  they  dired:,  or 
once  more  in  a  Day  with  the  Addition  (for  this  purpofe 
only)  of  a  few  Drops  of  Lemmon-Juice  or  Sevil-Orange. 
This  Elixir  is  famous  throughout  Europe  ;  and  drank  by 
moft  Gentlemen  in  their  Wine  as  a  Bitter  inftead  of 
Wormwood,  which  dulls  the  Brain  and  deftroys  the 
Sight :  This  makes  the  beft  Purl  in   Beer  or  Ale,  Purl 

[  276] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Royal  in  Sack,  and  the  bitter  Draught  in  a  Minute.  I  can 
fay  no  more  here,  but  refer  to  the  Bills  with  it.  'Tis 
now  drank  by  moft  of  the  Officers  in  the  Army,  and  taken 
to  Sea  by  many  Commanders 5  and  great  Quantities  have 
been  fent  lately  to  Holland,  Ireland,  Sweden,  and  Mos- 
cow, Scotland,  Newcaftle,  &c.  Prepared  only  by  R. 
Stoughton,  Apothecary,  at  the  Unicorn  in  Southwark, 
who  hath  fet  it  forth  almoft  thefe  20  Years ;  and  is  now 
fold  at  fome  one  Bookfeller's,  Shopkeeper's,  or  CofFee- 
houfe  in  moft  Cities  and  great  Towns  in  Europe.  Price 

IS.  each  Bottle.  No,  ^4.      Wednesday,  May  a,  171 1. 


Famous  Drops  for  Hypocondriack  Melancholly: 
Which  efFeitually  cure  on  the  Spot,  by  rectifying  the 
Stomach  and  Blood,  cleaning  them  from  all  Impurities, 
and  giving  a  new  Turn  to  their  Ferment,  attenuating 
all  vifcous  tenacious  Humours  (which  make  the  Head 
heavy,  clog  the  Spirits,  confufe  the  Mind,  and  caufe  the 
deepeft  Melancholly  with  direful  Views  and  black  Re- 
flections) comforting  the  Brain  and  Nerves,  compofing 
the  hurried  Thoughts,  and  introducing  bright  lively  Ideas 
and  pleafant  Brifknefs,  inftead  of  difmal  Apprehenfions 
and  dark  Incumbrance  of  the  Soul,  fetting  the  Intellect- 
uals at  Liberty  to  aCt  with  Courage,  Serenity  and  fteady 
Chearfulnefs,  and  caufing  a  vifible  difFulive  Joy  to  reign 
in  the  Room  of  uneafy  Doubts,  Fears,  &c.  for  which  it 
may  be  truly  efteem'd  infallible.  Price  3s.  6d.  a  Bottle, 
with  Directions.  Sold  only  at  Mr.  Bell's  Bookfeller  at 
the  Crofs-Keys  and  Bible  in  Cornhill  near  the  Royal- 
Exchange.  No.  54.  Wednesday,  May  2,  1711. 
[    27^    ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Lofs  of  Memory  or  Forgetfulnefs,  certainly  Cured,  By 
a  grateful  Electuary  peculiarly  adapted  for  that  end ;  it 
ftrikes  at  the  Prime  Caufe  (which  few  apprehend)  of  For- 
getfulnefs,  makes  the  Head  clear  and  eafie,  the  Spirits 
free,  a6tive  and  undifturbed;  corroborates  and  revives 
all  the  noble  Faculties  of  the  Soul,  fuch  as  Thought, 
Judgment,  Apprehenfion,  Reafon  and  Memory;  which 
laft  in  particular  it  fo  ftrengthens,  as  to  render  that  Fac- 
ulty exceeding  quick  and  good  beyond  imagination; 
thereby  enabling  thofe  whofe  Memory  was  before  almoft 
totally  loft,  to  remember  the  Minuteft  Circumftance  of 
their  Affairs,  &c.  to  a  wonder.  Price  2s.  6d.  a  Pot.  Sold 
only  at  Mr.  Payne's  at  the  Angel  and  Crown  in  St.  Paul's 
Church  Yard  near  Cheapfide  with  Diredlions. 

No,  105,      Saturday,  June  30,  1711. 

An  Admirable  Confect,  which  affiiredly  Cures  Stut- 
tering or  Stammering  in  Children  or  grown  Perfons,  tho' 
never  fo  bad,  caufing  them  to  fpeak  diftin6t  and  free, 
without  any  trouble  or  difficulty ;  it  remedies  all  manner 
of  Impediments  in  the  Speech,  or  diforders  of  the  Voice 
of  any  kind,  proceeding  from  what  Caufe  foever,  render- 
ing thofe  Perfons  capable  of  fpeaking  eafily,  free,  and  with 
a  clear  Voice,  who  before  were  not  able  to  utter  a  Sen- 
tence without  Hefitation  ;  its  ftupendous  Effects,  in  fo 
quickly  and  infallibly  curing  Stuttering,  Stammering  and 
all  diforders  of  the  Voice  and  difficulty  in  delivery  of  the 
Speech  are  really  Wonderful.  Price  2s.  6d.  a  Pot,  with 
Diredions.  Sold  only  at  Mr.  Ofborn's  Toyftiop  at  the 
Rofeand  Crown  under  St.  Dunftan's  church,  Fleetftreet. 

No.  122.     Friday,  July  20,  1711. 

[  278  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

An  afTured  Cure  for  Leannefs  ;  which  proceeds  from 
a  Caufe  that  few  know,  but  eafily  removM  by  an  un- 
parallel'd  Specifick  Tincture,  which  fortifies  the  Stomach, 
purifies  the  Blood,  takes  off  Fretfulncfs  in  the  Mind, 
occafions  reft  and  eafy  Sleep,  and  as  certainly  difpofes 
and  caufes  the  Body  to  thrive  and  become  plump  and 
flefhy,  if  no  manifeft  Diftemper  afflicts  the  Patient,  as 
Water  will  quench  Fire ;  'tis  alfo  the  beft  Remedy  in 
Nature  for  all  Chronick  Difeafes  that  take  their  Rife 
from  a  bad  Digeftion  in  the  Stomach,  which  this  Spe- 
cifick, Tincture  Infallibly  rectifies  and  thereby  Cures. 
It  is  pleafant  to  tafte,  and  is  fold  only  at  Mr.  Payn's 
Toy-fhop  at  the  Angel  and  Crown  in  St.  Paul's  Church- 
yard near  Cheapfide.  Price  3s.  6d.  a  Bottle  with  Di- 
rections. No.  125.     Tuesday,  July  24,  171 1. 

Angelick  Snuff:  The  moft  noble  Compofition  in  the 
World,  removing  all  manner  of  Diforders  of  the  Head 
and  Brain,  eafing  the  moft  excruciating  Pain  in  a  Mo- 
ment ;  taking  away  all  Swimming  or  Giddinefs  proceed- 
ing from  Vapours,  &c.  alfo  Drowfinefs,  Sleepinefs  and 
other  Lethargick  Effects,  perfectly  curing  Deafnefs  to 
Admiration,  and  all  Humours  or  Sorenefs  in  the  Eyes, 
&c.  ftrengthning  them  when  weak,  certainly  cures  Ca- 
tarrhs, or  Defluxions  of  Rheum,  and  remedies  the  Tooth- 
ach  inftantly  ;  is  excellently  beneficial  in  Apopleilick 
Fits  and  Falling  Sicknefs,  and  affuredly  prevents  thofe 
Diftempers ;  corroborates  the  Brain,  comforts  the  Nerves, 
and  revives  the  Spirits.  Its  admirable  Efficacy  in  all  the 
above  mention'd  Difeafes  has  been  experienced  above  a 
Thoufand  times,  and  very  juftly  caufes  it  to  be  efteem'd 
[  279  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

the  moft  beneficial  SnufF  in  the  World,  being  good 
for  all  forts  of  Perfons.  Price  is.  a  Paper,  with  Di- 
re(Slions.  Sold  only  at  Mr.  Payn's  Toyfhop  at  the  An- 
gel and  Crown  in  St.  Paul's  Churchyard  near  Cheap- 

"^^*  No.  136.     Monday,  August  6,  1711. 

An  Incomparable  pleafant  Tindlure  to  reftore  the 
Senfe  of  Smelling,  tho'  loft  for  many  Years.  A  few 
Drops  of  which  being  fnufPd  up  the  Nofe,  infallibly 
Cures  thofe  who  have  loft  their  Smell,  let  it  proceed 
from  what  Caufe  foever ;  it  admirably  opens  all  manner 
of  Obftru6lions  of  the  Olfadlory,  or  Smelling  Nerves, 
comforts  and  ftrengthens  the  Head  and  Brain,  and 
revives  the  Smelling  Faculty  to  a  Miracle,  effectually 
removing  whatever  is  the  Caufe  of  the  Diforder  of  that 
Senfe,  and  perfecSlly  Cures,  fo  as  to  caufe  the  Perfon  to 
fmell  as  quick  and  well,  as  any  in  the  World.  Price 
2s.  6d.  a  Bottle.  Sold  only  at  Mr.  Payne's  Toyfhop  at 
the  Angel  and  Crown  in  St.  Paul's  Church  Yard  near 
Cheapfide,  with  Dire6lions. 

No.  141.     Saturday,  August  11,  17 11. 

Do6i:or  Coleburfs  moft  famous  Elixir,  and  Salt  of 
Lemmons,  which  have  efFe6ted  fuch  furprizing  Cures  in 
all  Diftempers,  that  the  Endeavours  of  Counterfeits  are 
baffled  and  afhamed ;  are  ftill  fold  in  vaft  Quantities  by 
Mr.  Lawrence  Green  at  the  green  Pofts  in  Dean-ftreet 
in  Fetter-lane,  and  no  where  elfe  in  Great-Britain,  where 
the  fame  may  be  had  Wholefale  with  Allowance,  or 
Retail ;  with  Direction  for  Travellers  and  others,  at  the 
ufual  Prizes,  viz.  The  Elixir  at  2s.  per  ouz.  Bottle,  half 
[  280  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Bottle  at  IS.  Salt  of  Lemmons  2s.  6d.  per  ouz.  Bottle, 
half  Bottle  is.  3d.  N.  B.  Each  Paper  of  Dire6tions  is 
ftamped  to  prevent  Counterfeits,  or  ignorant  Pretenders. 

No.  156.     Wednesday,  August  29,  1711. 

Confumptions  of  all  forts  radically  Cured  by  a  famous 
Elixir  peculiarly  invented  for  that  Difeafe ;  its  wonder- 
ful Efficacy  fufficiently  explodes  the  Erronious  Opinion, 
that  Confumptions  are  incurable,  fince  it  abfolutely  re- 
trieves the  Patient,  though  reduced  to  a  meer  Skelleton  ; 
quickly  takes  off  all  the  Symptoms,  as  Cough,  Hoarfe- 
nefs,  Wheal! ng,  fhortnefs  of  Breath,  Pain  or  Weight  in 
the  Breaft,  fpitting  of  Blood,  forenefs  of  the  Stomach, 
Throat  or  Wind-pipe ;  alfo  Catarrhs  or  Defluxions  of 
iharp  Rhume,  and  all  Ptilical  and  Afthmatick  AfFedts, 
He(Stick  Feaver,  &c.  perfectly  cures  all  internal  Ulcers, 
reftores  all  inward  Waitings,  Weaknefs  and  decay  of 
Nature,  being  Balfamic  and  Strengthning  beyond  Com- 
parifon ;  it  afluredly  eradicates  the  firft  Principle,  or  caufe 
of  Confumptions,  re6lifying  the  Diforders  of  Stomach 
and  firft  PalTages,  creating  an  Appetite,  procuring  a  good 
Digeftion,  reducing  the  vicious  Ferment  of  the  Blood 
and  Juices,  correcting  the  Acrid  Salts  that  erode  the 
Lungs,  Certainly  healing  Ulcers  therein,  and  infallibly 
curing  all  forts  of  Confumptions,  tho'  never  fo  bad,  in 
a  very  fhort  time  to  a  Miracle.  Price  3s.  6d.  a  Bottle 
with  Directions.  Sold  only  at  Mr.  Osborn's  Toyfhop 
at  the  Rofe  and  Crown  under  St.  Dunftan's  Church,  in 

rieetltreet.  No.  200.     Friday,  October  19,  17 ii. 

Hungary  Water,  right  and  fine,  large  half  Pint  (Flint) 
Bottles,  Sold  for  I5d.  per  Bottle  at  Mr.  Strahan's,  Book- 

[281  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

feller  over  againft  the  Royal  Exchange  in  Cornhil,  Young 
Man's  CofFee-houfe  at  Charing-crofs,  Mitchel's  CofFee- 
houfe  in  Crutchet  Fryar's,  and  no  where  elfe  in  Town. 
Thofe  that  want  quantities  to  fend  in  the  Country,  or 
beyond  Sea,  may  be  fupplied  at  Mr.  Strahan's  aforefaid, 
and  have  great  Encouragement.  Note,  It  is  the  fame  fort 
by  which  Ifabella  Queen  of  Hungary  fo  long  preferved 
her  Life  and  Health,  fhe  always  poured  a  fmall  quantity 
in  the  Water  (he  waftied  her  Hands  and  Face  withal, 
which  wonderfully  refrefhed  the  Spirits,  comforted  the 
Nerves,  and  preferved  Beauty ;  fhe  ufed  it  with  great 
Succefs  in  old  Pains  and  Rheumatifm,  by  rubbing  the 
Part  by  the  Fire,  and  before  all  things  commends  it  for 
Pains  in  the  Head,  and  for  the  Vapours  being  fmelled  to, 
for  a  cold  Stomach,  and  to  help  Digeftion,  nothing  bet- 
ter than  a  little  in  a  Draught  of  Ale  in  the  Morning.  It 
ought  to  be  ufed  by  all  Barbers  to  wafti  Gentlemens 
Heads  and  Faces  after  Shaving,  I  mean  to  pour  a  little 
in  the  Water ;  and  by  Bagnio-keepers,  who  ftiould  pour 
fome  of  thefe  Bottles  over  the  Gentlemen  and  Ladies 
when  they  come  out  of  the  Bath. 

No.  209.     Tuesday,  October  30,  1711. 

The  moft  excellent  Chymical  Balfam,  which  infolli- 
bly  cures  the  Gout  or  any  rheumatick  Pains,  though  the 
moft  exquifite  and  fharp  that  were  ever  felt.  This  moft 
noble  Balfam  has  been  long  made  ufe  of  private  in  Fami- 
lies, who  having  found  the  Benefit,  think  it  a  Crime  it 
fhould  not  be  publifhed,  that  all  who  are  afflicted  may 
partake  of  fo  great  a  Good.  It  cures  all  green  Wounds 
and  running  Sores.  Sold  only  at  the  Widow  Gardner's 

[  282  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Tnbacconift  in  Little  Britain,  and  Mr.  Lawrence's  Toy- 
fliop  at  the  Corner  of  Bucklers-Bury,  at  2s.  6d.  the  Pot 

with  Dire6lionS.  No.  254.     Friday,  December  21,  1711. 

DafFy's  Elixir  Salutis,  a  moft  pleafant  and  fuccefsful 
Cordial  Drink  approved  by  the  moft  eminent  Phyficians 
to  Cure  moft  Chronical  Diftempers  incident  to  Human 
Bodies,  as  the  Gout,  Stone,  Cholick,  Dropfie,  and  all 
Scorbuticks  as  many  Lords,  and  other  honourable  Per- 
fons  have  experienced ;  the  Price  whereof  is  but  2s.  the 
half  Pint  Bottle,  the  half  Bottle  at  is.  with  Directions 
at  large,  Sold  at  Mr.  Green's  at  the  two  Green  Pofts  in 
Deanftreet,  Fetter-lane.   Good  Allowance  by  Wholefale, 

^^*  No.  287.      Tuesday,  January  29,  171 2. 

DafFy's  famous  Elixir  Salutis,  Prepared  by  Catherine 
Daffy,  the  Fineft  now  expos'd  to  Sale,  prepar'd  from  the 
beft  Druggs,  and  the  Original  Receipt,  which  my  Father 
Mr.  Thomas  Daffy,  having  experienc'd  the  Virtues  of  it, 
imparted  to  his  Kinfman  Mr.  Anthony  Daffy,  who  pub- 
lifti'd  the  fame  to  his  own  great  Advantage.  This  very 
Original  Receipt  is  now  in  my  pofleflion,  left  me  by  my 
Father  under  his  own  Hand.  My  Brother  Mr.  Daniel 
Daffy,  late  Apothecary  in  Nottingham,  made  this  Elixir 
from  the  fame  Receipt,  and  Sold  it  there  during  his  Life. 
Thofe,  who  know  me,  will  believe  me,  and  thofe  who 
do  not,  may  be  convinc'd  I  am  no  Counterfeit,  by  the 
Colour,  Taft,  Smell,  and  juft  Operation  of  my  Elixir. 
Sold  at  the  Hand  and  Pen  in  Maiden  Lane,  Covent- 
Garden,  London ;  and  many  other  Places  in  Town  and 

Country.  No.  355.     Thursday,  April  17,  1712. 

[    283    ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Whereas  the  Viper  has  been  a  Medicine  approvM  by 
the  Phyficians  of  all  Nations  ;  there  is  now  prepar'd  the 
Volatil  Spirit  Compound  of  it,  a  Preparation  altogether 
new,  not  only  exceeding  all  Volatiles  and  Cordials  what- 
foever,  but  all  the  Preparations  of  the  Viper  it  felf,  being 
the  Receipt  of  a  late  eminent  Phyfician,  and  prepared 
only  by  a  Relation.  It  is  the  moft  Sovereign  Remedy 
againft  all  Faintings,  Swoonings,  Lownefs  of  Spirits, 
Vapours,  &c.  As  alfo  in  all  ill  Habits  of  Body,  or  Dis- 
orders proceeding  from  Intemperance,  Eating  of  Fruit, 
Drinking  of  bad  Wine,  or  any  other  poyfonous  or  crude 
Liquors,  and  is  good  to  carry  off  the  ill  EfFedls  or  Re- 
mains of  the  Bark  of  Jefuits  Powder.  Sold  only  at  the 
following  Coffee-houfes,  viz.  John's  in  Swithin*s  alley 
near  the  Royal  Exchange,  Nando's  in  Fleetftreet,  and 
at  St.  James's  in  St.  James's-ftreet,  at  5s.  per  Bottle. 

No.  375,     Saturday,  May  lo,  171 2. 


JATROPOTON,  or  a  moft  grateful  and  wholefome 
Corrective  of  all  noxious  Aigre  :  too  fharp  and  flat  Drink, 
viz.  Wines,  Beers,  Cyders,  &c.  by  a  few  Drops  of  Liquor 
in  an  Inftant ;  the  Drink  retaining  its  full  Tafte,  Vertue, 
and  Colour,  except  that  it  renders  all  fuch  too  fharp  and 
flat  Drink  fofter  and  brifker  to  any  Degree  requir'd.  It 
makes  all  too  thin,  {harp,  raking,  tartareous  Wines  to  the 
Palate  richer,  as  well  as  more  wholefome.  All  Rhenifh 
Wines  (for  Inftance)  without  the  Clary  Flavour,  feem 
converted  in  perfe6l  Burgundy.  In  Wines  mix'd  with 
Water  it  has  the  full  EfFe6t  of  the  German  Spaws,  and 
is  very  proper  to  drink  upon   the  mineral  Waters.    If 

[  284  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Wines,  &c.  are  on  the  Fret  or  Foul,  it  ftays  the  Fret, 
and  fines  them  down  very  foon.  Good  or  bad  Waters 
for  ordinary  Ufes  are  by  it  diftinguifh'd  in  a  Moment, 
if  bad  it  becomes  very  cloudy,  if  good  it  remains  almoft 
clear.  The  Truth  of  thefe  Fa6ts  any  one  may  eafily  de- 
monftrate  to  himfelf,  without  farther  Directions.  This 
Liquor  is  an  occult  Alcali,  that  is,  to  tafte,  perfectly 
faline ;  in  Operation  powerfully  alcalious,  whereby  it  is 
qualify'd  to  penetrate  and  pafs  deep  into  the  Digeftions, 
and  muft  of  Neceility  abfort  and  dulcify  all  no6tious 
Acids,  and  diffolve  all  preternatural  Coagulations  there ; 
as  in  a  Glafs  Viol,  with  a  gentle  Heat,  it  will  diflblve 
and  dulcify  the  ftrongeft  hard  Cheefe,  &c.  Thus  it  in- 
fallibly and  prefently  takes  off  all  fuperfluous  Acidities 
of  the  Stomach,  Spleen,  Reins,  and  Bowels,  caufing  the 
Heart  burn.  Stomach  Pains,  Flatus's,  Cholicks,  Difficul- 
ties of  Urine,  and  prevents  many  other  ill  EfFe6ls  from 
the  fame  Caufes.  It  inftantly  qualifies  for  Digeftion  the 
Remains  of  a  late  Debauch  or  Surfeit.  The  Dofe  for 
Cure  from  40  to  80  Drops,  or  more,  in  an  ordinary 
Glafs  of  any  ufual  Drink  (Wines  the  beft)  with  no  other 
fenfible  Operation  than  of  copious  Eructations,  Sweat, 
and  Urine.  The  Dofe  for  ordinary  Ufe  3  or  4  Drops, 
or  more,  as  every  one  likes.  It  is  an  approv'd  excellent 
Menstruum  for  the  Extra6tion  of  Chymical  Tinctures, 
Any  one  may  have  the  Salt  in  Forma  Sicca,  (which 
makes  all  fermented  Liquors  drink  ftronger)  or  a  farther 
Account  of  it,  on  Notice  directed  as  below.  To  be  fold 
at  the  Rate  of  is.  the  two  Ounce  Bottle,  with  printed 
Directions,  by  Mr.  Walford,  at  John's  Coffee  houfe  in 
Birchin-Lane  near  the  Royal  Exchange,  London.   Note, 

[285  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Such  a  Bottle  will  be  fuiRcient  to  corre6l  many  Gallons 
of  Drink. 

No.  404.      Friday,  June  13,  171 2. 

Inftant  Cure  for  Difeafes  of  the  Nerves,  whether  Pal- 
fical,  Convulfive,  Trembling,  Contractions,  Relaxations, 
Weaknefs,  Numbnefs,  Coldnefs,or  the  like ;  by  a  Cephal- 
ick  Tincture,  whofe  EfFe6ts  are  really  wonderful,  not  to 
be  believ'd,  but  by  thofe  that  have  taken  it ;  be  the  Dis- 
eafe  from  whatever  Caufe,  or  feated  in  any  particular 
part,  as  Head,  Back,  Limbs,  or  Whole  Body.  To  be  had 
for  3s.  6d.  the  Bottle  with  Dire6lions,  at  the  Golden 
Key  in  Warton's  Court  near  Holborn-Bars. 

No.  492.     Wednesday,  September  24,  1 712. 

Celebrated  Vapour  Tin6lure,  so  defervedly  famous 
for  curing  Vapours,  Melancholy,  Hyppo,  Dizzinefs,  or 
Flufhings  in  the  Face,  Heart-burning  and  the  ill  Effects 
of  SnufFs.  The  many  thoufand  Inftances  of  Cures  in 
thefe  Difeafes,  in  fo  fliort  a  Time  by  fo  fmall  a  Quan- 
tity, and  fo  pleafant  a  Medicine,  occafions  fuch  a  great 
Demand,  for  the  Conveniency  of  each  part  of  London, 
'tis  continued  to  be  Sold  from  Deard's  under  St.  Dun- 
ftan's  Church,  and  at  the  Hat  and  Star  in  St.  Paul's 
Church-yard,  Toy-fhops,  and  Mrs.  Dupuy  a  Millener  in 
Pali-Mall,  for  half  a  Crown  each  Bottle,  and  Direftions. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  568.      Friday,  July  16,  1714. 

The  Wonderful  and  Never-failing  Remedy  againft 

thofe  poyfonous  Vermin  the  Bugs,  which  kills  them  in  a 

Moment,  and  they  never  breed  any  more  where  this  has 

been   ufed,  in   Beadfteads,   Houfes   or  Shipping.     The 

[  286  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Bottle  and  Pot,  with  printed  Dire6lions,  Price  3s.  To 
prevent  Counterfeits,  they  are  fealed  with  my  Coat  of 
Arms ;  the  Flying  Swan,  and  Crown  about  the  Neck, 
To  be  fold  at  the  Black  Raven,  a  Milliner's  Shop,  at  the 
Foot  of  Crums  hill,  Greenwich;  at  Mr.  Barnwell's, 
Fruiterer,  over-againft  Grefliam-College  in  Bifhopfgate- 
ftreet ;  and  at  Mr.  Drapentier's,  Engraver,  in  George- 
ftreet,  over-againft  the  Blue-Anchor  in  Forfter-Lane  ; 
where  you  may  be  fatisfied  of  its  Virtue. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  584.     Monday,  August  23,  17 14. 

Cephalic  Tindlure, 

So  long  celebrated  for  curing  Convuliions,  Apoplexies, 
Pallies,  Head-Pains,  Vapours,  and  all  Nervous  Diftem- 
pers.  Infants  Fits  inftantly,  tho'  hereditarily  mortal  to 
whole  Families  before,  as  was  experienced  by  Mr.  Lane's 
Child  at  the  Wool-pack  in  Cannon-ftreet,  and  two  Chil- 
dren of  'Squire  Brace's  in  Weftminfter,  and  other  num- 
berlefs  Teftimonies.  It  is  of  admirable  Ufe  to  refine  the 
blood  to  a  due  Circulation,  to  free  it  from  ftagnation  and 
fudden  Death,  fit  for  hard  Drinkers  and  thofe  that  ufe 
little  Exercife.  It  is  fold  in  5  Shilling  and  Half-Crown 
Bottles,  with  a  Book  of  its  Virtues  and  Directions,  from 
Markham's  under  St.  Dunftan's  Church,  and  Allcrofts 
in  Corn-hill,  Toyfhops,  and  no  where  elfe. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  588.      Wednesday,  September  i,  1714. 

For  all  Indifpofitions  of  the  Stomach  and  Impurities 
of  the  Blood ;  for  the  Scurvy,  and  all  its  Attendants  ;  to 
create  an  Appetite,  and  help  Digeftion ;  to  prevent  In- 
fection from  contagious  Air  or  Difeafes  ;  and  to  keep  the 

[  287  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Body  in  a  due  State  of  Health  and  Vigour,  &c.  Dr. 
Stoughton's  great  Cordial  Elixir  excells  any  one  Prepa- 
ration in  the  World.  'Tis  now  famous  throughout  Eu- 
rope ;  and  is  fold  in  moft  Cities  and  great  Towns  thereof, 
and  taken  to  Sea  by  moft  that  go :  And  being  fuch  a 
pleafant  and  agreeable  Bitter,  moft  Gentlemen  drink  it 
in  Wine,  Ladies  in  Tea,  &c.  And  is  of  fuch  Ufe  to 
perfect  the  DIgeftion  2  or  3  Hours  after  Dinner,  and 
create  a  frefli  Appetite,  fupprefs  Vapours,  and  raife  the 
Spirits  when  dull  and  low,  that  few  Ladies  drink  Tea  in 
an  Afternoon  without  thefe  Drops  in  it,  8  or  10  whereof, 
dropt  upon  the  Sugar  firft,  to  each  Dlfti,  is  enough.  Pre- 
pared only  by  him  at  his  Houfe  in  Bartholomew-lane, 
near  the  Royal-Exchange,  London,  he  having  Her  late 
Majefty's  moft  gracious  Letters  Patents  for  the  fole  mak- 
ing thereof.  'Tis  fo  great  a  cleanfer  of  the  Blood  and 
expeller  of  Wind,  that  Hundreds  have  been  cured  of 
Agues  and  Cholicks  by  this  Elixir  only,  taken  as  the 
Bills  direct,  being  in  French,  Dutch  and  Spanifti,  as  well 
as  Englifh  :  And  'tis  defired  they  may  be  carefully  read 
over  and  obferved. 

Vol.  VIII,  No,  596.      Monday,  September  20,  1714. 

COSMETICKS 

AND 

OTHER 

TOILET   ARTICLES 

The  famous  Spanifti  Blacking  for  Gentlemen's  Shoes, 
that  ever  was  Invented  or  Ufed  ;  it  making  them  always 
[  288  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

look  like  New,  Never  Daubs  the  Hands  in  putting  on,  or 
Soils  the  Stockings  in  wearing;  neither  has  it  the  ordi- 
nary Glofs  of  German-Balls,  or  the  intolerable  noifome 
ftink  of  Size,  but  of  is  an  agreeable  Scent.  It  indeed 
makes  the  Shoes  look  extreamly  Neat  and  mightily  pre- 
ferves  the  Leather :  All  that  ufe  it  Admire  it,  and  thofe 
that  once  try  it,  will  never  ufe  any  thing  elfe.  Sold  for 
IS.  6d.  the  Pot,  with  Directions,  (which  will  laft  3  or  4 
Months)  only  at  Mr.  John  Hannam's,  a  Toyfhop,  at  the 
3  Angels  near  Fofter-Lane  in  Cheapfide. 

No.  108.     Wednesday,  July  4,  171 1. 

The  Delightful  Chymical  Liquor,  for  the  Breath, 
Teeth,  and  Gums.  Which  in  a  Moment  makes  the  moft 
Naufeous  Breath  Smell  delicately  Fine  and  Charming, 
and  in  a  very  little  time  infallibly  Cures,  fo  that  an  of- 
fenfive  Breath  will  not  return ;  It  certainly  makes  the 
blackeft  and  moft  foul  Teeth  perfectly  White,  clean  and 
Beautiful  to  a  Miracle ;  cures  the  Scurvy  in  the  Gums, 
tho'  never  fo  inveterate,  making  the  Flefh  grow  again, 
when  almoft  Eaten  away,  and  infallibly,  faftens  loofe 
Teeth  to  Admiration,  even  in  Old  People,  who  fo  often 
falfly  think  their  Age  to  be  the  Occalion  :  In  fhort,  for 
delightfully  Perfuming,  and  quickly  curing  an  Ill-fcented 
Breath,  for  prefently  making  the  blackeft  Teeth  moft 
excellently  White,  certainly  fattening  them  when  Loofe, 
efFediually  preferving  them  from  Rotting  or  Decaying, 
and  affuredly  curing  the  Scurvy  in  the  Gums,  it  has  not 
its  Equal  in  the  Univerfe,  as  Abundance  of  the  Nobility 
and  Gentry  throughout  the  Kingdom  have  Experienced. 
Is  Sold  at  Mr.  Payn's  a  Toy-Shop  at  the  Angel  and 

[  289] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Crown  in  St.  Paul's  Church- Yard,  near  Cheap-fide  at 
2s.  6d.  a  Bottle  with  Directions. 

No.  155.     Tuesday,  August  28,  1711. 

Incomparable  Perfuming  Drops  for  Handkerchiefs, 
and  all  other  Linnen  Cloths,  Gloves,  &c.  being  the 
moft  Excellent  for  that  purpofe  in  the  Univerfe,  for  they 
Stain  nothing  that  is  perfumed  with  'em,  any  more  than 
fair  Water,  but  are  the  moft  Dele6table,  Fragrant  and 
Oderiferous  Perfume  in  Nature,  and  good  againft  all 
Difeafes  of  the  Head  and  Brain  :  By  their  delicious  Smell, 
they  Comfort,  Revive  and  Refrefh  all  the  Senfes,  Nat- 
ural, Vital  and  Animal,  enliven  the  Spirits,  chear  the 
Heart,  and  drive  away  Melancholy  :  They  alfo  Perfume 
Rooms,  Beds,  Prefles,  Drawers,  Boxes,  &c.  making  them 
fmell  furprizingly  Fine  and  Odoriferous.  They  perfume 
the  Hands  excellently,  are  an  extraordinary  Scent  for 
the  Pocket ;  and,  in  fhort,  are  fo  exceeding  Pleafant 
and  Delightful,  fo  admirably  Curious  and  Delicate,  and 
of  fuch  general  Ufe,  that  nothing  in  the  World  can  com- 
pare with  'em.  Sold  only  at  Mr.  Payn's  Toyfhop  at  the 
Angel  and  Crown  in  St.  Paul's  Church  yard  near  Cheap- 
fide,  at  2s.  6d.  a  Bottle  with  Direilions. 

No.  271.      Thursday,    January  10,  17 12. 

The  Royal  Chymical  Wafti-Ball  for  the  Hands  and 
face,  ahove  thefe  8  Tears  largely  experienc'd  and  highly 
recommended  by  all  that  ufe  them,  and  that  for  making 
the  Skin  fo  delicately  foft  and  fmooth,  as  not  to  be  par- 
alell'd  by  either  Wafh,  Powder,  Cofmetick,  &c.  it  being 
indeed  a  real  Beautifier  of  the  Skin,  by  taking  off  all  De- 
formities, as  Tetters,  Ring-worms,  Morphew,  Sun-burn, 
[  290  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Scurf,  Pimples,  Pits  or  Rednefs  of  the  Small-pox,  keep- 
ing it  of  a  lafting  and  extream  Whitenefs,  it  foon  alters 
red  or  rough  Hands ;  and  is  admirable  in  Shaving  the 
Head,  which  not  only  gives  a  more  exquifite  fharpnefs 
to  the  Razor,  but  fo  comforts  the  Brain  and  Nerves,  as 
to  prevent  catching  Cold  ;  and  is  of  a  grateful  and  plea- 
fant  Scent,  without  the  leaft  Grain  of  Mercury.  Is  fold 
only  by  Mrs.  Lambert,  Glover,  the  corner  of  Pope's- 
Head-Alley  againft  the  Royal  Exchange,  and  at  Mr. 
Giles's,  Millener,  next  Hercules  Pillars  Alley  by  the 
Temple,  and  no  where  elfe  in  London  by  Retail,  price 
IS.  each.  N.  B.  For  the  Conveniency  of  all  Country 
Gentry,  &c.  any  Shopkeeper  in  any  County,  City  or 
great  Town,  where  thefe  Balls  are  not  already  Sold,  may 
(on  Notice  given  to  Mr.  Lambert  as  above)  have  them 
to  fell  again  with  good  Allowance  to  the  Dozen. 

No.  390.     Wednesday,  May  28,  17 12. 

The  Gentlewoman  who  liv'd  20  Years  in  Racquet- 
Court,  and  7  Years  in  Crane-Court  in  Fleetftreet,  and  has 
ferved  moft  of  the  Quality  in  England,  Scotland  and  Ire- 
land, alfo  the  Eaft  and  Weft  Indies,  with  the  moft  excel- 
lent Curiofities  for  preferving  the  Face,  Hands  and  Teeth, 
in  prefent  Beauty ;  for  colouring  red  or  grey  Hair  to  a 
lovely  brown  or  black,  a  Cofmatick  that  certainly  takes 
away  the  Spots  and  Marks  remaining  after  the  Small-Pox, 
with  many  other  rare  Secrets  in  Phyftck,  is  now  removed 
to  her  own  Houfe  the  upper  end  of  Wine  Office  Court  in 
GoughSquare,next  Doorto  the  Sun  dial  on  the  Left-hand, 
where  you  may  be  furnifhed  with  all  things  as  formerly, 
and  all  prepared  with  her  own  Hand :  She  is  to  be  fpoken 
[  291  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

with  every  Day  from  9  to  12,  and  from  2  till  8  at  Night. 
She  has  a  Houfe  in  Lawrence-ftreet  near  the  Church 
in  Chelfea,  to  be  Lett  or  fold,  of  4  Rooms,  and  2  large 
DreiHng-rooms  on  a  Floor;  with  a  Garden  in  good  Order, 
well  planted  with  Wall-fruit  and  Greens,  and  other  Fruit- 
trees  ;  a  good  Kitchen,  Wafh-houfe  and  Brew-houfe,  and 
all  other  Offices  fit  for  a  Family.  Enquire  at  Mrs.  Mad- 
dox's  over  againft  the  Crofs-Keys  in  Chelfea,  or  at  her 
Houfe  in  Wine-Office-Court  as  above  directed. 

No.  499.     Thursday,  October  2,  17 12. 

The  Incomparable  Powder  for  cleaning  the  Teeth, 
which  has  given  fo  great  Satisfaction  to  moft  of  the  No- 
bility and  Gentry  in  England.  Sold  only  at  Mr.  Halfey's, 
Bookfeller,  at  the  Plow  and  Harrow  near  the  Royal  Ex- 
change Cornhill ;  and  at  Mr.  Markham's  Toyfhop  at 
the  7  Stars  under  St.  Dunftan's  Church,  Fleetftreet.  It 
at  once  ufing  makes  the  Teeth  as  white  as  Ivory,  tho' 
never  fo  Black  or  Yellow,  and  effedlually  preferves  them 
from  Rotting  or  Decaying,  continuing  them  Sound  to 
exceeding  Old  Age.  It  wonderfully  cures  the  Scurvy  in 
the  Gums,  prevents  Rheum  or  Deflu6lion,  kills  Worms 
at  the  Roots  of  the  Teeth,  and  thereby  hinders  the 
Tooth-Ach.  It  admirably  faftens  loofe  Teeth,  being  a 
neat  cleanly  Medicine,  of  a  pleafant  and  grateful  Scent. 
Price  IS.  the  Box.  At  the  fame  Place  is  fold,  the  highly 
efteem'd  Lip  falve  for  Ladies,  &c.  of  a  charming  Scent. 

Price    IS.  the  Box.  No.  506.      Friday,  October  10,  1712. 

The  great  Reputation  of  the  Englifh  Barrel  Soap  has 
gained  amongft  the  Quality  and  Gentry,  is  a  fufficient 
Teftification  of  its  Excellency,  it  being  everyway  as  good 
[  292  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

as  the  beft  Crown  Soap,  goes  as  far,  keeps  much  better 
and  longer,  is  fweeter  in  fmell,  and  makes  the  fineft 
Linnen  clear  and  white  to  Admiration,  certainly  preferv- 
ing  its  ftrength,  and  keeping  it  from  turning  Yellow,  and 
for  fcowring  of  Silks,  Wool  or  Woollens,  no  Soap  ex- 
ceeds it ;  the  Secret  of  making  it,  is  known  to  none  but 
Wm.  Cowpland,  Soapmaker,  at  the  3  Pidgeons  and 
Crown  in  the  Old  Bailey,  near  Ludgate,  where  it  is 
made  and  Sold,  and  no  where  elfe,  therefore  beware  of 
being  impos'd  upon  by  Ignorant  Pretenders,  pr.  for  ready 
Money  (fince  the  Tax  upon  all  Soap  Commenced)  3I. 
I2S.  a  Barrel ;  the  fmallefl:  VefTel  is  half  a  Firkin  which 
contains  32  pounds  Neat,  pr.  9s.  being  but  about  3  pence 
Farthing  a  pound. 

No.  547.     Thursday,  November  27,  171 2. 

Whereas  one  William  Cowpland  has,  by  feveral  Ad- 
vertifcments,  pretended  himfelf  to  be  the  only  Perfon  that 
knows  how  to  make  the  Englifli  Barrell'd  White  Soap  : 
To  prevent  the  Publick  therefore  from  being  impofed 
on  by  fuch  groundlcfs  Pretences,  this  is  to  give  Notice, 
That  Thomas  Vincent,  at  the  Three  Doves  in  Marrow- 
bone ftreet,  at  the  Upper-End  of  St.  James's  Hay-Mar- 
ket, made  that  Soap  for  feveral  Years  before  ever  the  faid 
Cowpland  pretended  to  any  Knowledge  of  that  Trade ; 
and  that  he  now  makes  and  fells  the  very  beft  Barrell'd 
Soap,  that  is,  for  ready  Money  3I.  12s.  per  Barrel;  the 
smalleft  Cask  is  Haifa  Firken,  which  contains  32  Pound 
Neat,  at  9s.  And  likewife  extraordinary  good  hard  Cake- 
Soap  for  Wafh-Balls,  or  other  Ufes,  and  feveral  other 
Sorts  of  Soap,  at  reafonable  Rates. 

No.  443.      Tuesday,  July  29,  1712. 
[   293    ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

The  beft  Barbadoes  Cittron  Water,  to  be  fold  at  John's 
CofFee-houfe  in  Birchin-lane. 

Vol.  vin,  No.  608.       Monday,  October  18,  1714. 


The  famous  Italian  Water,  for  Dying  Red  and  Grey 
Hairs  of  the  Head  and  Eye-Brows  into  a  lafting  Brown 
or  Black;  at  i,  2;  or  4s.  the  Bottle,  with  printed  Di- 
re6lions  for  the  Ufe  of  it.  To  be  had  at  Mrs.  Hannam's 
Toy-Shop,  at  the  Sign  of  the  Three  Angels  near  the 
Half-Moon  Tavern  in  Cheapfide. 

Vol.  vm,  No.  634.     Friday,  December  17,  1 714. 

PERSONAL 

Whereas  A.  B.  received  a  Letter  from  C.  D.  heearn- 
eftly  defires  he  would  come  to  Town  on  Thurfday  next, 
and  that  he  will  fend  a  Friend  to  A.  B.  who  promifes  he 
will  give  full  Satisfaction  with  all  Aflurance  to  C.  D's 

own  defire.  No.  191.     Tuesday,  October  9,  1711. 

Whereas  a  Letter  was  directed  to  the  Mafter  of  the 
Theatre  in  the  Hay-Market,  Dated  November  2,  171 1. 
Subfcribed  G.  Newton.  The  Perfon  in  the  faid  Letter 
mentioned  defires  the  faid  G.  Newton  to  meet  him  before 
the  faid  Mafter  in  Hatton-Garden  on  Tuefday  next  at 
Nine  a  Clock  in  the  Morning,  as  he  hopes  to  be  believed. 

No.  219.     Saturday,  November  lo,  1711. 

A  Penny-Poft  Letter,  dated  the   15th  Inftant,  and 
figned  G.  S.  is  come  to  the  Hands  of  the  Perfon  to  whom 
it  was  directed.   If  the  Gentleman,  who  wrote  the  faid 
[  294  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Letter,  will  by  a  Line  in  Writing,  or  otherwife,  let  the 
Perfon  to  whom  it  was  dire&d  know  where  he  may  fee 
him,  he  doubts  not  but  to  give  him  full  Satisfaction  as 
to  the  Contents  of  his  faid  Letter. 

No.  277.     Thursday,  January  17,  17 12. 


The  Ladies  that  call'd  at  Mr.  Charles  Lillie's  at  the 
Corner  of  Beauford  Buildings,  in  a  Hackney  Coach  on 
Wednefday  Night,  the  6th  of  this  Inftant,  about  10 
a  Clock,  are  defired  to  let  him  know  where  to  dircdt 
to  them,  he  being  now  able  to  give  a  particular  account 
of  what  they  enquired  after. 

No.  305.     Tuesday,  February  19,  17 12. 

Whereas  two  Letters,  one  dated  Thurfday  Morning 
and  the  other  Wednefday  Night,  are  come  to  Hand  from 
a  Perfon  who  on  Wednefday  the  20th  of  February  in  the 
Morning  went  away  from  the  Houfe  in  London  where 
he  lived,  and  on  faid  Day  took  his  Leave  of  one  who  was 
to  go  to  Cambridge;  This  may  certify,  that  if  the  Writer 
of  the  faid  Letters  will  return  to  the  Houfe  from  whence 
he  went,  he  fhall  find  Reception  if  he  returns  immedi- 
ately. 

No.  314.     Friday,  February  29,  17 1 2. 

The  Letter  A.  B.  dated  the  24th  of  June,  17 14,  is 
come  to  Hand,  and  the  Perfon  defires  a  farther  Corre- 
fpondence,  and  would  be  glad  to  know  who  is  fo  induf- 
trious  to  ferve  'em,  and  upon  Word  and  Honour  {hall  be 
kept  a  Secret,  and  A.  B.  always  efteem'd  a  Friend. 

Vol.  vni,  No.  560.     Monday,  June  28,  1 7 14. 
[    295    ] 


Specimen  Advertifements 

MISCELLANEOUS 

WHereas  Her  Majefty  hath  been  Gracioufly  pleas'd 
to  grant  her  Royal  Letters  Patents  unto  Mr. 
Michael  Cole,  for  the  fole  Ufe  of  his  Invention  of  a  new 
fort  of  Lights,  confifting  of  one  entire  Globular  Glafs, 
which  will  caft  a  true,  clear,  ftrong  and  uniform  Light, 
without  glaring  or  any  dark  Shadow,  and  which  by  Ex- 
perience hath  been  found  to  be  very  Ufeeul  and  Orna- 
mental in  Churches,  Halls,  Stair-Cafes,  Streets,  and  any 
other  Publick  Places.  Thefe  are  to  give  Notice  to  all  Per- 
fons  defirous  to  be  Accommodated  with  the  fame,  that 
they  can  be  afforded  and  maintained  at  one  third  part  of 
the  Charge  of  other  Lights  heretofore  us'd,  and  that  the 
Patentee  or  his  Agents  may  be  heard  of,  or  fpoken  with 
at  Mr.  Peter  Smith's  a  Merchant  in  New  Court  in 
Swithin's  Lane  near  Lumbard  Street. 

No.  91.      Thursday,  June  14,   171 1. 

To  all  that  ufe  Chaifes. 

WHereas  Her  Majefty  has  been  Gracioufly  pleas'd 
lately  to  grant  her  Letters  Patents  to  Henry  Mill, 
Gent,  for  the  fole  Ufe  and  Benefit  of  Making  and  Vend- 
ing certain  Steel  Springs,  by  him  Invented  for  the  Eafe 
of  Perfons  Riding  in  Chaifes,  &c.  Thefe  are  to  advertife, 
that  the  fame  do  efFe6lually  perform  the  End  defign'd, 
by  preventing  all  Jolts  over  Kennels  or  Rugged  Ways  ; 
and  are  to  be  difpos'd  of  at  the  3  Golden  Chairs  the 
Corner  of  the  Piazza,  Covent  Garden,  as  likewife  at 
the  Coach-Makers  in  London  and  Weftminfter,  at  40s. 
per  Pair,  which  Expence   is  abundantly  made  up,  by 

[296] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

caufing  the  Chaifes  to  laft  much  longer.  The  Springs  will 
be  no  Burthen  to  the  Horfe  being  but  14  Pound  Weight, 
and  tho'  fo  Light  and  cheap,  may  be  made  ufe  of  many- 
Years  without  Repair.  Attendance  is  given  from  10  to 

12  every  Morning.  No.  99.      Saturday,  June  23,  lyii. 

All  Gentlemen  and  others,  that  are  Lovers  of  good 
Prints,  may  have  the  true  Originals,  after  the  greateft 
Mafters,  as  Raphael,  Michael  Angelo,  Reuben,  Le  Brun, 
Julii  Romano  of  many  forts,  as  large  Scripture  Stories 
out  of  the  Old  and  New  Teftament ;  all  forts  of  Altar- 
Pieces,  Fram'd  and  Unfram'd;  the  large  and  fmall 
Battels  of  Alexander  :  With  many  more  too  long  to  be 
incerted,  proper  for  Furnifhing  Rooms,  Stair-Cafes,  and 
Clofets ;  Sold  at  reafonable  Rates,  by  J.  Smith  at  the 
Picture  Shop  in  Exeter  Change  in  the  Strand,  at  the 
Weft-end  within.   With  Allowance  to  them  that   Sell 

agam.  jjq_  jq^_      Saturday,  June  30,  171 1. 

Whereas  Colonel  Hen.  Hawker  dy'd  about  two 
Months  fince  indebted  to  his  Nephew  Colonel  Peter 
Hawker,  now  a  Prifoner  in  Spain,  in  a  Confiderable 
Sum  of  Mony ;  and  it  being  apprehended  by  Elizabeth 
Hawker,  the  Wife  of  the  faid  Peter  Hawker,  that  the 
faid  Peter  Hawker  has  lately  remitted  to  the  faid  Hen. 
Hawker,  fince  his  death,  feveral  Bills  of  Exchange : 
This  is  to  defire  all  Merchants  and  others,  not  to  pay 
any  Bills  of  Exchange  drawn  upon  them  payable  to  the 
faid  Henry  Hawker,  upon  the  account  of  the  faid  Peter 
Hawker,  to  any  Perfon  whatever,  but  to  give  Notice  to 
the  faid  Elizabeth  Hawker  at  Mr.  Harrifon's,  a  Woollen 
[  297  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

Draper,  at  the  Golden  Angel  in  Bedford  Street  in  Covent 
Garden,  for  which  they  fhall  be  well  Gratified. 

No.  117.     Saturday,  July  14,  171 1. 

Propofals  for  Graving  and  Printing  the  Gallery  of 
Raphael  at  Hampton-court. 
It  being  univerfally  allowed  that  the  Cartones  in  the 
faid  Gallery  are  the  moft  valuable  Set  of  portable  Pict- 
ures in  the  World,  and  her  Majefty  having  been  gra- 
cioufly  pleafed  to  grant  her  Royal  Licence  to  Signior  Ni- 
cola Dorigny  (lately  arrived  from  Rome)  for  Copying  and 
Graving  the  fame  :  The  faid  Signior  Dorigny  propofeth 
as  follows.  I.  That  the  faid  Work  fhall  confift  of  eight 
Plates,  viz.  one  after  each  of  the  Seven  Cartones  :  And 
one  as  a  Frontifpiece  to  the  whole,  containing  the  Dedi- 
cation, with  proper  Ornaments.  2.  That  every  Plate  fhall 
be  about  19  Inches  high,  four  of  them  about  30  Inches 
long,  and  the  other  four  about  25  Inches,  in  proportion 
to  their  refpe6live  Originals  ;  and  all  of  them  Printed  upon 
the  largeft  and  very  befl  Paper.  3.  That  the  Subfcribers 
fhall  pay  no  more  than  four  Guineas  for  a  Set  ;  whereof 
one  Guinea  to  be  paid  in  Hand,  and  the  remainder  upon 
the  Delivery  of  the  faid  Work  compleat.  4.  The  faid 
Signior  Dorigny  doth  oblige  himfelf  never  to  fell  them  to 
any  Perfon,  that  is  not  a  Subfcriber,  under  five  Guineas. 
By  the  modeft  Price  fet  upon  this  Work,  it  is  hoped, 
that  all  Lovers  of  Art  will  be  fatisfied,  that  the  Under- 
taker aims  at  Reputation  rather  than  Profit  by  it :  Since 
the  Prints  of  the  Battles,  &c.  of  Alexander,  after  LeBrun 
(tho*  but  five  in  number,  and  the  Original  Paintings  much 
inferior  to  thofe  of  Raphael)  are  frequently  fold  for  20 

[  298] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

Guineas.  How  well  qualified  the  faid  Signior  Dorigny  is 
to  perform  his  Part,  is  moft  humbly  fubmitted  to  the 
Judgment  of  thofe  of  the  Nobility  and  Gentry  of  this 
Nation,  who  having  feen  the  things  that  he  has  done 
(for  20  Years  paft)  after  Raphael,  and  other  the  moft 
celebrated  Matters  in  Rome,  have  invited  him  hither, 
and  are  pleafed  to  encourage  him  in  this  noble  Under- 
taking. Subfcriptions  are  taken  by  Signior  Dorigny,  at 
the  Golden  Head  in  the  Little  Piazza,  Covent  Garden ; 
at  St.  James's  Coffee-houfe  in  St.  James's-ftreet  j  Young 
Man's  CofFee-houfe  at  Charing-Crofs  :  Mr.  Cooper's,  a 
Printfeller,  at  the  Three  Pidgeons  in  Half-moon-ftreet 
over  againft  the  ,New  Exchange  in  the  Strand ;  Mr. 
Charles  Lillie,  a  Perfumer,  at  the  corner  of  Beauford 
Buildings  in  the  Strand ;  Mr.  Charles  Mather,  a  Toy- 
fhop  near  Temple  Bar;  Mr.  Dighton's,  her  Majefty's 
Perfumer,  at  the  City  of  Saville  over  againft  the  Inner- 
Temple-Gate,  and  at  Mr.  Penkethman's,  a  Toy-ftiop, 
oppofite  to  Garraway's  CofFee-houfe  in  Exchange-Alley. 

No.  205.      Thursday,  October  25,  17H. 

Playing  Cards  of  all  Sorts, 
Being  a  Collection  of  Bert,  Whifk,  Baftet,  Picquet, 
Ombre,  and  ordinary  Cards,  bought  before  the  Duty  of 
6d.  a  Pack  was  laid  on.  To  be  fold  by  John  ClifF,  Sta- 
tioner, in  Queen-ftreet,  Cheapfide,  London  ;  where  any 
Gentleman,  Merchant,  or  others,  may  have  any  Quan- 
tity at  the  loweft  Rates. 

No.  252.     Wednesday,  December  19,  1711. 

Air-Pumps,  or  Engines  for  exhaufting  the  Air  from 
proper  VefTels,  with  all  their  Appurtenances ;  whereby 
[  299  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

the  various  Properties  and  Ufes  of  that  Fluid  in  which 
we  live  and  move  are  difcovered  and  demonftrated  by 
undeniable  Experiments.  Engines  for  the  Compreflion 
of  the  Air;  Syringes  and  Blow-pipes,  with  Valves  for 
Anatomical  Injections ;  Hydroftatical  Ballances  for  ex- 
amining the  fpecifick  Gravity  of  Fluids  and  Solids  ;  the 
Engine  and  Glaffes  for  the  new  and  moft  approved  Way  of 
cupping  without  Fire  ;  Scarrificators,  which  at  once  make 
either  lo,  13,  or  16  Incifions.  All  the  above-mention'd 
Inftruments,  according  to  their  lateft  and  beft  Improve- 
ments, are  made  and  fold  by  Francis  Haukfbee,  Jun.  in 
Crane-Court  near  Fetter-Lane  in  Fleet-Street,  London : 
Where  may  alfo  be  had  gratis,  Propofals  for  a  Courfe  of 
Hydroftatical,  Pneumatical,  Magnetical,  and  Optical  Ex- 
periments ;  to  be  perform'd  by  him  and  Mr.  Humphry 
Ditton  at  the  Place  before-mention'd.  Note,  This  Courfe 
to  begin  on  Monday  the  14th  of  this  Inftant. 

No.  268.      Monday,  January  7,  1712. 

The  Effigies  of  the  late  Lord  Chief  Juftice  Hales, 
with  his  Sum  of  Religion  and  Chara6ler :  Engraved  on 
a  Copper-Plate.  Formerly  fold  for  is.  now  for  6d.  Like- 
wife  the  7  Cartons  of  Raphael  Urbin,  with  the  Title 
Cut  done  in  Metzotinto  from  the  Gallery  of  Hampton 
Court.  Formerly  fold  for  20s.  now  for  15s.  by  Edw. 
Cooper  at  the  3  Pidgeons  in  Bedford  ftreet. 

No.  270.      Wednesday,  January  9,  1 7 12. 

Tim.  Brandreth  removed  from  Ludgate-ftreet  near 

St.  Paul's  to  the  Archimedes  and  Globe  the  Corner  of 

Exchange-Alley    over-againft    the   Royal-Exchange   in 

Cornhill,  maketh  with  the  greateft  Accuracy  true  Sped- 

[  300  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

acles,  Reading-Glafles,  Telefcopes,  Microfcopes,  and 
all  other  Optick-GlaiTes ;  all  forts  of  curious  Toys  in 
Gold,  Silver,  &c.  Globes  of  20,  16,  12,  9  and  3  Inches 
Diameter.  A  new  Sett  of  Two  Sheet  Maps,  Plates,  Sea- 
Books  and  Charts ;  with  all  forts  of  Mathematical  In- 
ftruments  for  Sea  or  Land  :  All  which  will  be  fold  at 

moderate  Prices.  No.  274.     Monday,  January  14,  1712. 

At  Mr.  Penkethman's  Toy-fhop  over-againft  Garra- 
way's  CofFee-houfe  in  Exchange  Alley,  are  to  be  fold, 
at  three  Guineas  a  Set  (19  Prints  in  a  Set)  the  curious 
Prints  of  Signior  N.  Dorigny,  lately  come  from  Italy  : 
Done  from  the  Paintings  of  the  famous  Raphael  Urbin, 
and  others  the  moft  celebrated  Matters  at  Rome.  Alfo, 
at  the  fame  Place,  are  Subfcriptions  taken  for  the  Car- 
tons at  Hampton-Court,  to  be  done  by  the  Same  Hand. 

No.  292.     Monday,  February  4,  1712. 

Holman's  London  Ink  Powder  for  Records.  Moft 
Excellent  for  all  Perfons  to  make  their  Writing-ink  as 
Black  and  as  Strong  as  they  pleafe.  Each  6d.  Paper 
makes  a  Pint  or  Pint  and  half  of  the  beft,  and  a  Quart 
for  common  Writing  or  Marking  Ink,  only  by  often 
fliaking  or  ftirring  it  in  fo  much  Rain  or  River  Water ; 
and  it  amends  all  Weak  and  Pale  Ink,  and  is  beft  for 
Carriage  by  Sea  or  Land.  'Tis  fold  by  moft  Stationers, 
Bookfellers,  and  Haberdafhers  in  and  about  London, 
and  by  Shop  keepers  in  the  chiefeft  Cities  and  Towns  in 
England.  And  that  none  may  be  Impofed  on  by  falfe 
Pretenders,  Cheats  or  Counterfeits,  this  only  has  been 
approved  on  for  many  Years  in  moft  Parts  of  the  World  ; 
and  a  Patent  granted  under  the  Great  Seal  of  England, 
[  301  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

to  Charles  Holman  in  Red-Lyon-Street  in  Southwark, 
for  the  making  the  fame,  he  being  the  firft  Inventor 
and  Publifher  thereof.  Each  Paper  is  fealed  with  the  above 
Coat  of  Arms/  and  a  Bill  of  Directions  given  with  the 
fame.  Note,  This  is  the  fame  that  has  been  fo  often  Pub- 
lifhed  in  the  London  Gazette. 

No.  330.      Wednesday,  March  19,  17 12. 

At  Mr.  Penkethman's  Toy-Shop  over-againft  Gar- 
way's  CofFee-Houfe  in  Exchange-Ally,  are  to  be  fold,  at 
3  Guineas  a  fet  (19  Prints  in  a  fet)  the  curious  Prints 
of  Signior  N.  Dorigny,  lately  come  from  Italy.  Done 
from  the  Paintings  of  the  famous  Raphael  Vrbin,  and 
others  the  moft  celebrated  Mailers  at  Rome,  alfo  at  the 
fame  place,  are  Subfcriptions  taken  for  the  Cartons  at 
Hampton-Court,  to  be  done  by  the  fame  Hand,  alfo  the 
Gallery  of  Luxingburg  is  Sold  at  the  fame  Place. 

No.  346.      Monday,  April  7,  17 12. 

Hampstead-Wells. 
Thefe  are  to  acquaint  all  Perfons  that  have  occafion 
to  drink  Hampftead  mineral  Waters,  that  the  faid  Wells 
will  be  opened  on  Monday  next  being  the  I2th  of  this 
Inftant  May :  With  very  good  Mufick  for  Dancing ;  and 
will  continue  every  Monday  during  the  Seafon. 

No.  374.     Friday,  May  9,  1 71 2. 

All  Stationers,  Bookfellers  and  Haberdafhers,  in  and 
about  London,  that  are  Promoters  and  Sellers  of  Hol- 
man's  London  Ink  Powder  for  Records,  are  defired  to 
fend  in  their  Names,  in  order  to  have  a  printed  Ticket 

^  A  cut  of  a  coat  of  arms  was  printed  at  the  upper  left-hand  corner  of  the 
advertisement  and  that  of  Holman's  "May  Feast,"  infra.  These  are  the 
only  advertisements  in  the  Spectator  that  include  cuts  or  devices  of  any  sort. 

[    302    ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

to  go  to  his  May  Feaft  the  29th  of  this  prefent  May, 
in  remembrance  of  that  Joyful  and  Happy  Day  of  Di- 
vine Providence  in  reftoring  to  this  Kingdom  the  Royal 
Family ;  from  whom  we  now  enjoy  all  our  Bleflings, 
under  the  Happy  Reign  of  our  Gracious  and  Royal 
Queen  ANNE,  whom  God  grant  long  to  live  and  reign 
in  Peace  and  Plenty.  Tickets  may  be  had,  in  a  few 
Days,  by  the  Stationers  of  London,  to  go  to  Charles 
Holman's  May  Feaft  in  a  Barge  or  Barges,  with  a  Con- 
fort  of  Mafters  of  Mufick,  to  Richmond,  to  enjoy  a  fuit- 
able  Entertainment  on  the  Coft  and  Charge  of  the  faid 
Charles  Holman,  to  fo  Honourable  and  Loyal  a  Com- 
pany :  So  God  fave  our  Royal  Queen  ANNE.  Amen. 

No.  377.     Tuesday,  May  13,  1712. 

Croft  Wells.  Thefe  are  to  give  Notice,  that  the  Cold 
Sulphur  Bathing  Well  at  Croft  in  Richmondfhire  in  the 
County  of  York,  is  newly  fitted  and  repaired;  where  by 
Bathing  in  the  Sulphur  Bath,  and  Drinking  the  Sulphur 
Water;  and  alfo  the  Vitriol  and  Niter  Water  adjacent 
thereto,  miraculoufly  Cures  all  thefe  feveral  Maladies, 
viz.  the  Cold  Palfie,  White  Leprofie,  Ulcers  and  Scroph- 
ulous  Tumours,  Nervous  Pains,  Deadnefs  in  the  Limbs, 
Cramps,  Scurvey,  Jaundice,  Rickets,  Timpanies,  Lofs  of 
Hearing,  Blindnefs,  Stone  and  Gravel  in  the  Reins,  Blad- 
der and  Bowels,  Strangury,  Bloody  Flux,  Surfeits,  Crapu- 
la's  and  Afthma's,  Vapours,  Hyfterick  and  Hypocondri- 
ack.  Gouty  Pains,  fwell'd  Legs  after  Fevers,  Venereal 
Maladies,  opens  all  Obftruftions,  helps  Conception,  and 
caufes  Chearfulnefs.  And  convenient  Lodgings  and  En- 
tertainment may  be  had  in  the  Town  of  Croft,  and  adja- 
[  303  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

cent  Towns,  and  all  Poor  Indigent  Perfons  may  have 
the  benefit  of  thefe  Waters  without  paying  any  thing  for 
the  fame,  having  Certificates  under  the  Hands  of  the 
Minifter  and  Overfeers  of  the  Poor  of  the  Parifh  where 
they  live.  All  the  abovefaid  Cures  are  ready  to  be  At- 
tefted  and  Vouched.  no.  393.    Saturday,  May  31,  1712. 

The  Famous  Original  Venetian  Straps,  neatly  fixM 
on  Boards,  now  brought  to  the  higheft  Perfection,  fo  as 
vaftly  to  exceed  all  others,  and  for  polifhing  and  fetting 
Razors,  Penknives,  Lancets,  &c.  are  not  to  be  paralleled, 
being  much  more  durable  and  fmooth,  never  growing 
rough  by  ufing,  but  fetting  Razors,  &c.  with  greater  Fine- 
nefs  and  Exaftnefs  than  any  other  fort  poffible  can.  Price 
IS.  each.  Alfo  the  moft  excellent  Venetian  Mettal  Board 
of  the  fame  Bignefs,  for  fharping  all  forts  of  Knives  im- 
mediately, and  without  Trouble  to  Admiration,  tho*  the 
Edge  be  never  fo  thick  or  notched.  Price  is.  with  Di- 
rections for  both  ;  are  fold  only  at  Mr.  Allcrafts,  a  Toy- 
fhop,  at  the  Blue  Coat-Boy,  againft  the  Royal-Exchange 
in  Cornhill,  Mr.  Paifton's  a  Stationer,  at  the  May-Pole 
in  the  Strand,  and  at  Mr.  Cooper's,  a  Toy-fhop,  the 
Corner  of  Charles-Court,  near  York-Buildings  in  the 

btrand.  No.  394.     Monday,  June  2,  17 12. 

At  the  two  gilt  Flower-Pots,  near  May-Fair,  are  made 
and  fold  cheaper  than  at  any  other  Place  in  England,  Stat- 
ues or  Figures  as  big  or  bigger  than  the  Life,  all  caft 
hollow,  which  are  more  durable  than  thofe  which  are 
caft  with  a  Core,  as  many  Perfons  of  Quality  have  ex- 
perienced. Likewife  Urns,  Flower-Pots,  &c.  for  Orna- 
[  304  ] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

ments  on  Tops  of  Houfes,  Piers  of  Gates,  Walls,  Grafs- 
Plats,  &c.  finely  decorated  and  adorn'd.  Any  Device  for 
Coats  of  Arms  j  all  Manner  of  Beafts,  Birds,  Fifhes  and 
Fowls,  are  there  made. 

No.  404.      Friday,  June  13,  1712. 

HAMPSTEAD. 

Whereas  there  is  a  great  many  Perfons  whofe  Bufinefs  it 
is  to  fell  Mineral  Waters,  by  whom  great  Abufes,  Cheats, 
and  Defrauds  have  been  committed,  and  is  daily  fo,  by  fell- 
ing one  Water  for  another  ;  Therefore  this  is  to  acquaint 
all  Perfons  that  have  Occafion  to  drink  Hampftead  Min- 
eral Waters,  that  it  is  brought  frefh  from  the  faid  Wells 
every  Morning,  to  Mr.  Adams  Glafs-Sellar  by  Holborn- 
Bars,  Mfr.  CrifTet  at  the  Sugar-Loaf  by  the  Horfe  at 
Charing-Crofs,  Nando's  CofFee-houfe  at  Temple-Bar, 
Sam's  Coffee-houfe  by  Ludgate,  North's  Coffee-houfe 
in  King-ftreet  by  Guildhall,  and  Mrs.  Wood's  at  the 
Salmon  in  Stox-Market,  and  no  where  elfe  in  London  ; 
and  if  any  Perfon  have  or  fhould  be  cheated  by  faife 
Waters  inftead  of  Hampftead,  if  the  Perfon  fo  cheated 
will  make  Oath  of  it,  the  Mafter  of  the  faid  Wells  will 
indi(5l:  the  OiFender  for  a  Cheat. 

No.  410.      Friday,  June  20,  171 2. 

Whereas  there  is  good  Reafon  to  believe,  that  Tho. 
Crofs,  late  of  Clerkenwell-clofe  in  the  County  of  Middle- 
fex,  Efq;  Deceafed,  did  fome  time  fince  make  a  Will, 
and  that  the  fame  was  left  in  the  Hands  of  the  Perfon  im- 
ployed  in  the  making  thereof.  If  any  fuch  there  be,  the 
Perfon  concerned  therein  is  defired  to  give  Notice  there- 

[305  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

of,  at  his  late  dwelling  Houfe  in  Clarkenwell-clofe  afore- 
faid,  and  for  his  Trouble,  he  (hall  be  gratefully  rewarded. 

No.  411.      Saturday,  June  il,  1712. 

New  Helps  for  pur-blind,  (hort-fighted,  old,  decayed 
and  weak  Eyes  of  Perfons,  who  find  no  fufficient  Relief 
in  the  Ufe  of  common  Optick  Glafles,  are  to  be  had  at 
Mr.  Lengerken's.  next  Door  to  the  White  Hart,  about 
the  Middle  of  Long  acre ;  being  confiderable  Improve- 
ments of  Reading,  Country-Profpeft,  and  Opera-Glafles, 
fo  contriv'd  as  to  fit  every  particular  Eye  and  Diftance, 
either  by  Day  or  Candle-light.  The  fmalleft  Size  of 
them  may  conveniently  ferve  for  the  Head  of  a  Cane, 
or  Button  of  a  Fan.  Some  make  the  Obje6ts  appear 
fmaller  and  more  diftind:,  others  nearer  and  bigger ;  and 
the  new  Squinting  Glafles  ferve  to  take  a  Side-view  of 
any  Perfon,  as  you  feem  to  look  a  different  Way,  with- 
out Sufpicion  of  Staring.  Such  as  live  in  the  Country 
need  but  give  an  Account  of  their  Age,  how  long  their 
Eyes  have  been  defective,  what  they  want  in  ufing  com- 
mon Glaffes,  and  the  greateft  Diftance  they  can  read 
fmall  Print  at.  Phyfical  Advice  in  Defe6ls  of  the  Sight 
and  Hearing  is  to  be  had  Gratis  at  the  fame  Place  from 

4  to  6  at  Night.  No.  455.     Tuesday,  August  12,  1712. 

The  Court  of  Affiftants  of  the  Corporation  for  mak- 
ing hollow  Sword-Blades  in  England,  do  hereby  give 
Notice,  That  a  general  Court  of  the  Members  of  the 
faid  Corporation  will  be  held  at  their  Houfe  in  Birchen- 
Lane,  London,  on  Thurfday  the  25th  Inftant,  at  10  of 
the  Clock  in  the  Forenoon,  on  fpecial  Affairs  ;  And  that 
the  faid  Court  of  Affiftants  will  fit  at  their  faid  Houfe 
[  306] 


Out  of  the  Spectator 

on  Wednefday  the  8th  of  October  next  from  lo  to  12 
of  the  Clock  in  the  Forenoon,  and  from  3  to  5  of  the 
Clock  in  the  Afternoon,  to  receive  the  Votes  of  the 
Members  of  the  faid  Corporation  for  Ele6lion  of  a  Gov- 
ernour  and  Deputy-Governour  for  the  Year  enfuing  : 
And  that  they  will  fit  on  Thurfday  the  9th  Day  of  Octo- 
ber next  at  the  fame  Place  and  Hours,  to  receive  the 
Votes  of  the  Members  for  Ele6tion  of  Afliftants  of  the 
faid  Corporation  for  the  Year  enfuing.  The  Scrutiny  on 
fuch  Elections  will  be  made  the  Evening  of  the  Day 
of  each  Election  ;  and  that  in  order  to  the  making  out 
Lifts  of  the  Members,  and  Warrants  for  a  Dividend,  the 
Transfer-Books  of  the  faid  Corporation  will  be  (hut 
from  and  after  Saturday  the  27th  Inftant  till  Friday  the 
loth  of  October  next.  Printed  Lifts  of  the  Members 
of  the  faid  Corporation  will  be  delivered  at  the  faid  Cor- 
poration's Houfe  on  and  after  Wednefday  the  ift  of 
06lober  next,  and  alfo  Warrants  for  the  faid  Dividend 
on  Friday  the  lOth  of  the  fame  Month. 

No.  492,      Wednesday,  September  24,  171 2. 

Playing  Catds  of  all  Sorts  ;  to  be  fold  at  the  old  Card 
Warehoufe,  at  the  Upper  end  of  Ironmonger  Lane,  near 
Cheapfide;  by  Wholefale  or  Retaile  at  reafonable  Rates, 
with  Allowance  to  thofe  who  take  Quantities,  being 
feal'd  and  ftamped  according  to  the  late  A6t  of  Parlia- 
ment. Attendance  is  given  from  9  to  12,  and  from  2 

^^  "•  No.  519.      Saturday,  October  25,  1712. 

Notice  is  hereby  given,  that  a  Committee  of  the  Com- 
miflioners,  for  Building  50  New  Churches,  &c.  Meet 

[  307  ] 


specimen  Advertifements 

every  Monday,  at  4  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon,  at  their 
Chambers  No.  6.  in  Searles  Court,  in  Lincolns  Inn ; 
Where  all  Perlbns  that  have  anything  to  Offer  relating 
to  that  Affair,  may  apply  to  them. 

No.  549.      Saturday,  November  29,  171 2. 

Any  Perfon,  who  has  a  Mind  to  fee  the  King  make 
his  Publick  Entry,  may  have  a  Seat  at  the  Sign  of 
the  Ham,  up  one  Pair  of  Stairs  over  againft  the  New- 
Exchange  in  the  Strand,  where  a  particular  Accomoda- 
tion will  be  provided. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  587.      Monday,  August  30,  1714. 

George  Etherington,  Watch-maker;  is  removed  from 
the  Dial  in  Fleet-ftreet  to  the  Dial  over-againft  the  new 
Church  in  the  Strand,  London  ;  where  all  Sorts  of  Re- 
peating Jewel  Watches  (and  others)  are  made  and  fold. 

Vol.  VIII,  No.  603.      Wednesday,  October  6,  1714. 

Mr.  Van  Nofl-'s  Colledion  of  Marble  and  Leaden 
Figures,  Buffo's,  noble  Vafes,  Marble  Tables,  and 
Chimney  Pieces  ;  will  be  fold  by  Au6):ion  at  his  late 
dwelling  Houfe  in  Hide  Park  Road  ;  this  prefent  Thurs- 
day the  17th  Inftant.  The  Sale  will  begin  exactly  at 
Four  of  the  Clock  in  the  Afternoon,  and  Catalogues 
had  Gratis  at  the  Place  above  mention'd. 

No.  355.      Thursday,  April  17,  17 12. 


CAMBRIDGE   .  MASSACHUSETTS 

U    .    S    .    A 


W-  I 


