AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE 

MUSIC 


FREDERICK-  R-BURTON 


U..I 


ft\U; Urvij) 


\  Cthntiit  itf 

lUrllrjsIrn   I       s  |J    (Tnllriir. 


«§ 


Pttrclfnseb  from 
dl|r  IWsfWu  jfrutfr. 


Date  Due 

t          ..    r-J 

NOV    i  0 

965 

MAY  2  ° 

J99* 

Library  E>ur«nu    Cat.  no.  1137 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


TETi-:r..\iii:rxi>rxG 


AMERICAN   PRIMITIVE 

MUSIC 

WITH  ESPECIAL  ATTENTION   TO  THE 

SONGS  OF  THE  OJIBWAYS 


BY 

FREDERICK  R.  BURTON 

Composer  of  "Hiawatha,"'  "Legend  of  Sleepy  Hollow,"  etc.; 
Author  of  "Strongheart,"'    "Redcloud  of  the  Lakes,"  etc, 


NEW  YORK 
MOFFAT,  YARD  AND  COMPANY 

1909 


-    :    .    :  - 
j.-.izi;.;".:-:  :-.    -  ::z 


ACKXOWTEDGMZXT 

Tie  :; :_  _  -     -est:    _  ?. 

tie   ::_":::_  :    :.    ~  nine  n~e   re-en  ::;    greater  than  tfc   gc    :: 

- : .-. ..  r      :  _".:i:    _  : .  -.  : "   :  ■       :      :  I  » 

to  magnify  my  en:  unduly  if  I  _ 

11  r  '  —:.  ie .:  :  t  :     :ie  n   ".-.  :n.i     _     :  -  hid)  Ibis  1       k  is  a 
record.     I  trei  -  -     :  - 

almost  or  wholly  unknown  to  me  in  all  p  i    -  — 

intr     -"  I  _  -  :    ■_  - 

H     .     .  _      r        i  .  *     -      . .  -T     "      -  .-.  r  ,  -  -     ... 

it  is  s  that  I  count  as  a  -  _ 

men  and  women,  I  cannot  let  the  occasion  pass  withe  ::      5]   vial 
i  of  appreciation  for  Mr.  Richi:  I  (  ;»se 

sted  encouragement  at  a  critical 
must  have  been  abandoned.     I  can  wish  no 

-     than  to  rind  i  im. 

F.  K.  B. 
X       York,  September.  1909. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

Part  I. 

PAGE 

Chapter  I.  A  general  survey  of  the  field  of  American  Indian  music,  with  a 
summary  of  the  work  done  by  previous  investigators.  Point  of  view  of 
this  work:     The  utility  of  the  material  for  the  purposes  of  art   ....        1 

Chapter  II.  Scales  —  A  discussion  of  the  quarter-tone  question  in  the  light  of 
Mr.  Benjamin  Ives  Gilman's  researches  —  Most  Indians  sing  the  true 
Greek  intervals  —  Scales  deducihle   from  Ojibway  songs 20 

Chapter  III.  Rhythm  —  An  examination  of  the  phenomena  of  so-called  con- 
flicting rhythms  —  Ethnologists  in  error  when  they  assert  that  Indians 
have  developed  rhythm  further  than  have  civilized  races 44 

Chapter   IV.     Half-breed  music  —  The  influence  of  civilization  on   Indian  music 

shown   by  analysis  of   Iroquois  songs 67 

Chapter  V.  Structure  and  means  —  The  Indian's  instrumental  outfit  —  Quality 
and  range  of  Indian  voices  —  The  evolution  of  formal  melody  which 
reaches  its  perfection  in  the  songs  of  the  Ojibways 78 

Chapter  VI.  .Music  from  the  Ojibway  point  of  view  —  One  word  for  music 
and  poetry  —  Music  not  regarded  as  an  art,  but  as  a  thing  of  daily  use  and 
necessity  —  Conception  of  absolute  music  shown  in  the  survival  of  word- 
less songs 106 

Chapter  VII.     Music  in  Ojibway  daily  life  —  Various  incidents  narrated  to  show 

how  music  enters  into  every  phase  of  Indian  activity  —  Pagan  ideals   .      .   124 

Chapter  VIII.     Ojibway  verse  —  Its  compactness  —  Subordination  to  melody  — 

Difficulties   in   the   way  of  the  translator 145 

Chapter  IX.     Art  value  of  Indian  songs  —  An  appeal  for  consideration  of  our 

primitive  themes  as  a  basis  for  a  distinctive  style  in  American  musical  art  177 

Chapter  X.  Ojibway  songs  and  their  stories  —  A  collection  of  Ojibway  songs 
notated  by  the  author,  each  melody  accompanied  by  the  story  or  attend- 
ant circumstances- necessary  to  a  full  comprehension  of  its  significance  .      .  200 

Part  II. 

A  collection  of  twenty-eight  Ojibway  songs  for  single  voice  with  piano- 
forte  accompaniment   and   English   words;    and    four  songs  arranged   for 

mixed  quartette 285 

Detailed    index 


PART  I 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


CHAPTER  I 
GENERAL  SURVEY 

THE  matter  contained  herein  was  obtained,  first,  by 
personal  research  while  living  with  the  Ojibways  in 
the  region  north  of  Lakes  Huron  and  Superior:  second, 
during  employment  as  musical  expert  in  the  ethnological  de- 
partments of  the  American  Museum  of  Xatural  History.  Xew 
York,  and  the  Field  Columbian  Museum,  Chicago;  third,  by 
incidental  contact  with  Iroquois  and  Indians  of  other  tribes, 
and,  fourth,  by  reading  the  writings  of  other  investigators.  Bv 
far  the  greater  part  of  these  pages  is  a  record  of  my  own 
discoveries  and  observations,  and  originally  it  was  my  intention 
to  limit  the  book  to  a  consideration  of  what  may  be  regarded 
as  my  especial  field  of  work,  the  music  of  the  Ojibways:  but 
the  whole  significance  of  Ojibway  music  cannot  be  appreciated 
without  attention  to  and  comparison  with  the  music  of  other 
Indian  peoples,  and  I  have,  therefore,  undertaken  a  brief 
resume  of  the  general  subject.  I  felt  that  I  could  do  this 
with  some  degree  of  confidence  owing  to  my  unusual  oppor- 
tunities for  studving  Indian  music  and  the  several  vears 
during  which  I  have  given  the  best  of  my  time  and  thought 
to  the  work.     Moreover,  the  general  subject  has  begun  to 

1 


2  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

arouse  widespread  interest,  and,  as  infinitely  more  remains 
to  be  done  than  has  yet  been  done,  it  has  seemed  to  me  that 
a  survey  of  the  whole  field,  coupled  with  a  record  of  my 
individual  research,  might  be  stimulative  to  a  comprehensive 
organization  of  effort  for  the  preservation  of  our  primitive 
music  while  it  yet  lingers  in  the  memory  of  Indian  singers. 

If  my  research  contributes  in  any  slight  degree  to  the  science 
of  ethnology,  such  result  should  be  regarded  as  its  by-product, 
for  this  book  is  the  work  of  a  musician  whose  astonished  atten- 
tion was  attracted  to  the  subject  by  hearing  a  party  of  O jib- 
ways  sing  a  rarely  beautiful  song,  and  who  followed  that  "lead" 
in  the  hope,  well  founded  as  it  proved,  of  discovering  a  type 
of  genuine  and  useful  folksong  indigenous  to  his  native  soil. 
That  Indian  songs  may  be  useful  to  civilization,  that  is,  that 
they  have  great  art  value,  I  thoroughly  believe,  and  I  should  be 
lacking  in  the  courage  of  my  convictions  if  I  did  not  make 
such  demonstration  of  my  belief  as  lies  in  my  power.  To  this 
end,  in  addition  to  a  discussion  of  scales,  rhythm,  form,  and 
other  technical  and  non- technical  matters  kindred  to  the  sub- 
ject, I  have  selected  twenty-eight  songs  from  my  collection, 
adapted  to  them  English  verse  suggested  by  the  Indian  orig- 
inals, and  provided  them  with  pianoforte  accompaniments. 
Some  of  the  songs  I  have  also  arranged  for  unaccompanied 
mixed  quartette.  All  these  will  be  found  in  the  book  in  addi- 
tion to  notations  of  the  entire  collection  of  melodies  which  it 
Mas  my  good  fortune  to  find. 

The  foregoing  paragraph  needs  an  apparent  qualification, 
for  the   disavowal   of   any   ethnological   significance   may   be 


GENERAL  SURVEY  3 

hastily  interpreted  as  an  expression  of  contempt  for  scientific 
principles  and  method.  On  the  contrary,  although  artistic 
enthusiasm  inspired  the  work  of  which  the  hook  is  a  result,  the 
spirit,  if  not  the  method,  was  that  of  the  scientist  who  permits 
no  preconceptions  or  desires  to  blind  him  to  facts.  The  crude 
and  ugly  in  Indian  music  has  been  set  down  as  faithfully  as 
the  beautiful,  and  every  possible  effort  has  been  made  to  record 
an  exact  expression  of  the  Indian's  musical  thought. 

There  is  a  science  of  music  as  well  as  a  science  of  ethnology; 
and  the  science  of  music  is  twofold.  The  subject  may  be 
regarded  from  its  material,  or  acoustical  side  alone,,  or  from 
the  side  that  is  usually  expressed  by  the  phrase  "musical 
theory."  The  latter  has  to  do  with  the  structure  of  the  art; 
it  concerns  itself  not  with  the  number  of  vibrations  to  an 
interval,  but  with  the  artistic  relations  of  intervals.  It  is  ana- 
lytical of  the  aesthetic  content  of  the  art,  and  it  is  with  that 
phase  of  the  matter  that  I  have  to  do  more  than  with  any  other. 
As  will  be  observed  later,  the  acoustical  side  of  primitive  music 
cannot  be  ignored  even  by  one  who  applies  himself  mainly  to 
the  aesthetic,  and  I  shall  feel  free  to  dissent  from  the  conclu- 
sions of  some  of  our  ethnological  investigators  who  have  ven- 
tured to  write  on  the  subject  of  Indian  songs. 

THE  FIELD. 

To  the  white  man  generally  it  is  still  matter  for  surprise 
that  there  should  be  any  field  whatever  for  serious  study  in 
Indian  music.  The  facts  are,  indeed,  amazing.  Archaeolo- 
gists  recognize  on  the  North  American  continent  north  of 


4  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

Mexico  fifty-eight  distinct  ethnic  families  of  aborigines.  All 
these  in  the  popular  view  are  supposed  to  speak  dialectic  varia- 
tions of  the  same  language,  but  in  reality  each  language  of 
the  fifty-eight  is  more  distinct  from  every  other  than  English 
is  from  German.  There  are  common  roots  in  English  and 
German,  to  say  nothing  of  common  words  that  differ 
merely  in  spelling,  or  slightly  in  pronunciation.  The  fifty- 
eight  Indian  languages  are  not  linked  together  by  the  pres- 
ence of  common  roots.  The  relations  between  English  and 
German  might,  for  the  purpose  of  illustration,  be  likened 
to  that  between  Ojibway  and  Abenaki.  The  languages  of 
these  peoples  abound  in  common  roots,  and  ethnically  they 
are  the  same  people,  that  is,  Algonquin,  and  their  languages 
at  base  are  the  same;  yet  no  Abenaki  could  understand  an 
Ojibway,  or  vice  versa,  without  special  study  of  the  other's 
tongue.  The  habitat  of  the  Abenaki  was  and  still  is  in  the 
east,  where  Maine  and  New  Brunswick  now  are;  the  Ojibways 
live  north,  west,  and  northwest  of  Lakes  Huron  and  Superior. 
Between  them  in  the  old  days  were,  among  other  Indian  peo- 
ples, the  Iroquois,  and  contiguous  to  the  Ojibways  on  the  west 
dwelt  the  Sioux.  There  is  no  common  root  in  the  Ojibway 
(Algonquin),  Iroquois  and  Sioux  languages;  and  this  remark- 
able dissimilarity  applies  equally  to  the  rest  of  the  fifty-eight 
families.  Powell  summarizes  the  matter  thus  (Seventh  An- 
nual Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology)  :  "It  is  believed 
that  the  families  of  languages  can  not  have  sprung  from  a 
conmion  source;  they  are  as  distinct  from  one  another  in  their 


GEXERAL  SURVEY  .5 

vocabularies  and  apparently  in  their  origin  as  from  the  Aryan 
or  the  Scythian  families." 

Here,  then,  is  a  field  for  musical  inquiry  of  abundant  ampli- 
tude and  complexity  if  only  it  be  known  that  these  fifty-eight 
different  peoples  practise  the  art  of  music  to  any  noteworthy 
degree.  Of  that  there  is  no  lack  of  evidence.  Sufficient  data 
have  been  uncovered  by  travellers  and  investigators  of  various 
kinds  to  warrant  the  assertion  that  music  is  not  only  an  im- 
portant but  an  essential  feature  of  Indian  life.  Some  of 
these  fifty-eight  peoples  have  already  disappeared  from  the 
face  of  the  earth,  but.  so  general  is  the  use  of  music  among 
those  that  remain,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  when  all  were  in 
existence  there  was  no  exception  in  their  devotion  to  music 
of  a  kind.  Concerning  those  that  are  still  available  for  study, 
it  is  known  that  music  enters  more  intimately  into  their  lives 
than  it  does  into  the  lives  of  any  white  nation.  I  shall  go 
into  this  matter  in  some  detail  in  speaking  of  music  in  Ojibway 
daily  life,  the  observations  in  the  chapter  under  that  head 
applying  very  generally  to  all  Indian  peoples.  For  the  present 
it  will  suffice  to  state  that  music  is  no  mere  diversion  from 
the  Indian  point  of  view;  it  is  not  separated  from  ordinary 
experience  by  being  classed  as  an  art.  but  is  a  feature  of  daily, 
homelv  use  and  necessitv.  The  Indian  has  a  song  for  everv- 
thing — his  gods,  his  friends  and  his  enemies,  the  animals  he 
hunts,  the  maiden  he  wooes,  the  forest  that  sighs  around  him 
and  the  lake  that  glistens  before  him.  the  fire  in  his  teepee, 
the  whiskey  that  excites  him,  the  babe  in  the  cradle,  his  gar- 


6  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

merits,  from  picturesque  headgear  to  shabby  moccasins — every 
conceivable  thing  in  which  he  has  an  interest  becomes  the  sub- 
ject of  a  song.  His  prayers  are  couched  in  song,  and  no 
ceremony,  public  or  private,  tribal  or  individual,  sacred,  mys- 
tical or  secular,  is  complete  without  the  music  designed  ex- 
pressly for  it  and  treasured  in  most  instances  from  unknown 
antiquity.  The  Indian  boy  learns  the  legendary  history  of 
his  nation  coincidentally  with  its  songs,  and  the  vocally  gifted 
youngsters  are  carefully  taught  by  the  old  men  and  women 
to  the  end  that  no  song  of  the  tribe  or  family  shall  be  forgotten. 
I  believe  it  to  be  true  that  among  no  people,  the  world  over, 
is  music  so  loved  and  so  generally  used  as  among  the  North 
American  Indians. 

THE  INVESTIGATORS. 

Occasional  allusions  to  Indian  music  in  the  works  of  trav- 
ellers and  historians  are  of  little  value  to  the  student.  In 
the  main  they  are  the  expressions  of  persons  who  have  no 
special  knowledge  of  music,  and  are  restricted  to  descriptions 
of  songs  that  sounded  uncouth  and  barbaric  to  the  narrator. 
Here  and  there  in  the  miscellany  of  history,  travel,  and  eth- 
nological research,  may  be  found  what  purport  to  be  nota- 
tions of  Indian  songs.  Some  of  them  may  be  correct,  but 
if  all  were  correct,  and  all  notations  published  previous  to 
1881  were  gathered  together  in  one  volume,  they  would  not 
make  a  total  sufficient  to  justify  generalizations,  or  give  any 
certain  impression  with  regard  to  the  subject.  It  is  remark- 
able that  everything  else  pertaining  to  Indians  had  been  the 


GENERAL  SURVEY  7 

subject  of  special  study  at  the  date  mentioned.  Not  that 
everything  discoverable  had  been  discovered,  but  that  every 
other  phase  of  Indian  activity,  mental  and  physical,  had 
been  investigated  and  the  results  turned  out  in  numerous  vol- 
umes, and  that  music  had  not  been  considered  even  cursorily, 
is  true.  It  is  still  more  remarkable  that  the  first  serious  effort 
to  learn  and  state  the  truth  with  regard  to  Indian  music  should 
have  been  made  by  a  German,  and  his  report  published  in 
Europe  in  the  German  language.  His  essay,  of  nearly  one 
hundred  pages,  and  with  notations  of  several  score  songs,  is 
always  honored  with  mention  in  bibliographies  of  the  subject, 
but  I  fear  that  few  American  students  have  read  it.  I  myself 
did  not  read  it  until  this  book  was  almost  ready  for  the  press. 

Theodore  Baker  was  a  student  of  music  at  Leipzig  Uni- 
versity. He  elected  to  take  the  music  of  the  North  American 
Indians  as  the  subject  of  his  thesis  for  his  doctor's  degree, 
and  he  came  to  this  country  in  the  summer  of  1880  to  gather 
his  material  at  first  hand.  His  time  and  means  were  limited, 
and  the  whole  field  of  his  personal  research  included  only 
the  Seneca  reservation  in  New  York,  and  the  government  school 
for  Indians  then  recently  established  at  Carlisle,  Pennsylvania. 
What  he  accomplished  under  such  circumstances  has  aroused 
my  keen  regret,  first,  that  his  essay  was  not  published  in 
English,  so  to  reach  American  readers  readily  and  stimulate 
further  research  at  that  period,  and,  second,  that  he  could  not 
have  given  his  whole  life  to  the  work.  So  far  as  Dr.  Baker 
went  he  was  thorough,  as  would  be  expected  of  a  German 
student ;  he  fell  into  quick  sympathy  with  the  Indians,  a  matter 


8  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

that  is  a  sine  qua  non  in  work  of  this  kind,  his  mind  was 
free  from  preconceived  notions,  and  his  conclusions  were 
astonishingly  sound.  He  was  anything  but  dogmatic  in  the 
assertion  of  his  conclusions,  and  yet  most  of  what  he  stated 
tentatively  after  study  of  his  few  score  songs,  may  now  be 
set  down  as  established  facts  and  principles  after  observation 
of  the  immensely  greater  quantity  of  material  at  the  command 
of  the  student.  By  reason,  doubtless,  of  the  publication  of 
his  essay  in  Germany,  his  work  had  little  if  any  influence 
in  stimulating  further  research.  Several  years  passed  before 
any  other  contribution  was  made  to  the  subject,  and  then 
came  Miss  Alice  C.  Fletcher's  monograph  on  Omaha  songs, 
supplemented  by  various  magazine  articles  and  her  later  book, 
"The  Indian  in  Song  and  Story,"  as  well  as  her  article,  "The 
Hako,  a  Pawnee  Ceremony,"  included  in  the  twenty-second 
report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology.  The  monograph  men- 
tioned was  published  among  the  Archaeological  and  Ethno- 
logical Papers  of  the  Peabody  Museum,  Cambridge,  Mass., 
in  1893. 

While  Dr.  Baker's  work,  published  in  1881,  has  priority 
in  point  of  time,  Miss  Fletcher's  marks  the  real  beginning 
of  serious  attention  to  the  subject.  She  is  the  holder  of  a 
fellowship  in  the  Peabody  Museum,  Harvard  University, 
founded  by  Mrs.  Mary  Copley  Thaw  for  the  study  of 
American  Archaeology.  In  pursuance  of  her  special  work, 
which  was  not  music,  she  had  gone  among  the  Omahas. 
While  there  she  fell  ill  and  for  many  months  lay  helpless 
in  a  teepee  attended  by  Indian  men  and  women.     Thev  did 


GENERAL  SURVEY  9 

everything  in  their  power  for  her  comfort  and  recovery.  The 
medicine  men  sang  their  magic  songs  to  charm  away  her 
illness,  the  mothers  crooned  to  their  babies  within  her  hearing, 
old  men  and  women  sang  for  her  entertainment.  So  perforce 
she  heard  many  songs  many  times  over,  and  the  more  she 
heard  them  the  more  they  pleased  her  until  at  last  she  came 
to  something  like  the  Indian's  point  of  view  with  regard  to 
them,  and  perceived  in  them  an  aesthetic  value  that  she  had 
not  thitherto  suspected.  Her  own  account  of  this  transition 
from  the  unappreciative  attitude  of  civilization  to  sympathetic 
understanding  of  the  primitive  music  is  so  illuminating  to 
the  whole  subject,  that  I  venture  to  quote  the  following 
from  her  monograph: 

"I  well  remember  my  first  experience  in  listening  to  Indian 
music.  Although  from  habit  as  a  student  I  had  endeavored 
to  divest  myself  of  preconceived  ideas,  and  to  rise  above 
prejudice  and  distaste,  I  found  it  difficult  to  penetrate 
beneath  the  noise  and  hear  what  the  people  were  trying  to 
express.  I  think  I  may  safely  say  that  I  heard  little  or 
nothing  of  Indian  music  the  first  three  or  four  times  that 
I  attended  dances  or  festivals,  beyond  a  screaming  downward 
movement  that  was  gashed  and  torn  by  the  vehemently  beaten 
drum.  The  sound  was  distressing,  and  my  interest  in  this 
music  was  not  aroused  until  I  perceived  that  this  distress 
was  peculiarly  my  own,  everyone  else  was  so  enjoying  himself 
(I  was  the  only  one  of  my  race  present)  that  I  felt  sure  some- 
thing was  eluding  my  ears;  it  was  not  rational  that  human 
beings  should  scream  for  hours,  looking  and  acting  as  did 


10  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

these  Indians  before  me,  and  the  sounds  they  made  not  mean 
something  more  than  mere  noise.  I  therefore  began  to  listen 
below  this  noise,  much  as  one  must  listen  to  the  phonograph, 
ignoring  the  sound  of  the  machinery  before  the  registered 
tones  of  the  voice  are  caught.  My  efforts  in  listening  below 
the  noise  were  rewarded  by  my  hearing  the  music,  and  I 
discovered  that  there  was  in  these  Indian  songs  matter  worth 
study  and  record. 

"My  first  studies  were  crude  and  full  of  difficulties, 
difficulties  that  I  afterward  learned  were  bred  of  preconceived 
ideas,  the  influence  of  generally  accepted  theories  concerning 
'savage'  music.  The  tones,  the  scales,  the  rhythms,  the 
melodies  that  I  heard,  which  after  months  of  work  stood  out 
more  and  more  clearly  as  indisputable  facts,  lay  athwart  these 
theories  and  could  not  be  made  to  coincide  with  them.  For 
a  considerable  time  I  was  more  inclined  to  distrust  my  ears 
than  my  theories,  but*  when  I  strove  to  find  facts  that  would 
agree  with  these  theories  I  met  only  failure.  Meanwhile  the 
Indians  sang  on,  and  I  faithfully  noted  their  songs,  studying 
their  character,  and  their  relation  to  Indian  life  and  ceremonial. 
During  these  investigations  I  was  stricken  with  a  severe 
illness  and  lay  for  months  ministered  to  in  part  by  Indian 
friends.  While  I  was  thus  shut  in  from  the  rest  of  the  world, 
with  the  Indians  coming  and  going  about  me  in  their  affec- 
tionate solicitude,  they  would  often  at  my  request  sing  for  me. 
They  sang  softly  because  I  was  weak,  and  there  was  no  drum, 
and  then  it  was  that  the  distraction  of  noise  and  confusion  of 
theories  were  dispelled,  and  the  sweetness,  the  beauty   and 


GENERAL  SURVEY  II 

meaning  of  these  songs  were  revealed  to  me.  As  I  grew 
stronger  I  was  taught  them,  and  sang  them  with  my  Indian 
friends,  and  when  I  was  able  to  be  carried  about,  my  returning 
health  was  celebrated  by  the  exemplification  of  the  'Wawan' 
ceremony  with  its  music." 

In  the  preparation  of  her  monograph  Miss  Fletcher  obtained 
the  assistance  of  the  late  John  Comfort  Fillmore,  an  ac- 
complished musician,  who  not  only  harmonized  the  tunes  she 
had  collected  but  contributed  some  interesting  observations  of 
a  theoretical  nature  with  regard  to  a  possible  subconscious 
harmonic  basis  for  Indian  melody.  The  publication  of  this 
pamphlet  came  at  a  rather  opportune  time.  It  was  nearly 
coincident  with  the  sojourn  of  Dr.  Dvorak  in  America  and 
the  jiroduction  of  his  "New  World"  symphony,  over  which 
there  was  a  considerable  controversy  among  musicians,  and 
no  end  of  misconception.  It  was  rather  generally  understood 
that  Dvorak  had  based  his  beautiful  work  on  the  plantation  and 
other  melodies  indigenous  to  our  soil,  and  that  he  sought 
thus  to  give  American  composers  an  object  lesson  in  the  writing 
of  music  that  should  have  a  distinctively  national  flavor.  The 
facts  are  that  a  fragment  of  one  plantation  melody  appears 
as  a  theme  in  the  symphony,  that  the  rest  of  it  is  as  Bohemian 
as  anything  in  Dvorak's  long  list  of  works,  and  that  the  dis- 
tinguished visitor  had  no  faint  shadow  of  the  intention  credited 
to  him. 

With  all  its  misstatements  the  controversy  was  of  value 
in  that  it  aroused  composers,  critics  and  others  to  some  degree 
of  interest  in  native  American  music.     The  main  question  con- 


12  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

cerned  the  possibility  of  music  in  this  country  that  should 
not  be  a  more  or  less  pale  reflex  of  German  and  other  European 
models,  but  that  should  be  distinctively  American,  and  speak 
for  our  country  as  our  poetry  and  prose  had  spoken  for 
generations.  There  was  little  dispute  over  the  assumption 
that  such  a  music,  whether  desirable  or  not,  must  be  based 
upon  something  analogous  to  the  folksongs  of  European 
countries ;  and,  as  folksong  depends  upon  an  illiterate  peasantry, 
and  the  United  States  has  no  such  class  among  its  people,  the 
conclusion  was  inevitable  that  the  source  of  thematic  material 
must  be  sought  either  among  the  plantation  negroes,  or  among 
the  'Indians.  It  was  natural,  therefore,  that  Miss  Fletcher's 
monograph  should  come  in  for  much  study,  and  there  were 
not  lacking  instances  of  attempts  to  make  use  of  the  melodic 
material  contained  in  it.  The  most  conspicuous  work,  the 
origin  of  which  may  be  traced  to  the  discussion  of  nationalism 
in  music,  was  MacDowell's  "Indian  Suite."  Its  thematic 
material  was  taken  in  part  at  least  from  Indian  songs,  and 
the  work  has  its  permanent  place  in  the  repertories  of  the 
world's  best  orchestras;  but  Mr.  MacDowell  was  apparent- 
ly content  to  make  no  further  effort  in  this  direction.  It 
might  indeed  be  safe  to  assume  that  he  was  discontented  with 
the  results  of  his  single  trial,  probably  feeling  that  his  in- 
dividual musical  nature  was  not  in  sufficient  sympathy  with 
the  melodic  expression  of  the  Indians  to  justify  him  in  weaving 
their  strains  into  his  own  pattern. 

The  influence  of  Miss  Fletcher's  monograph  threatened  not 
to    outlive    the    controversy    with    regard    to    nationalism    in 


GENERAL  SURVEY  13 

music.  She  was,  and  still  is,  an  enthusiastic,  tireless  champion 
of  what  appealed  to  her  as  a  cause ;  that  is,  she  wrote,  and  spoke, 
and  pleaded  without  ceasing  for  the  recognition  of  Indian 
music  as  something  worthy  of  study  and  that  affectionate 
appreciation  in  which  white  people  hold  the  music  of  civilization. 
There  were  reasons,  to  be  noted  later,  why  most  musicians  failed 
to  be  convinced  by  her  arguments,  or  attracted  by  the  melodic 
material  she  uncovered,  and  presumably  there  was  some  sort 
of  reason  why  the  government  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  and 
the  several  great  museums  of  the  country  did  not  institute 
organized,  competent  and  systematic  research  in  the  immense 
field  to  which  she  had  drawn  attention.  Whatever  were  the 
reasons  for  the  neglect  of  Indian  music  on  the  part  of  those 
whose  life  work  it  was  to  study  American  primitive  man,  the 
fact  is  that  for  years  Miss  Fletcher  pleaded  apparently  in 
vain — apparently,  because  the  time  came  when  some  of  the 
younger  musicians  began  to  take  the  subject  seriously,  and 
because  improvements  in  the  phonograph  made  it  practicable 
for  the  museums  to  give  some  incidental  attention  to  music 
when  they  sent  out  their  expeditions  for  field  work.  By  this 
latter  means  a  vast  amount  of  material  has  been  gathered  of 
which  only  a  small  fraction  has  yet  been  made  available  in  print- 
ed form.  Travellers  and  investigators  who  have  gone  among 
the  Indians  have  been  encouraged  to  include  phonographs  in 
their  outfits  and  to  induce  Indians  to  sing  into  them.  The 
records  thus  obtained  are  stored  in  the  several  museums,  and 
some  of  them  have  been  reduced  to  notes  for  the  purpose  of 
giving  completeness  to  articles  on  ceremonies  in  which  music 


14  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

figured;  but  I  am  not  aware  that  any  institution  has  ever  set 
a  musician  to  work  on  the  records  with  a  view  to  making  a 
comprehensive  study  of  the  subject,  or  of  putting  in  intelligible 
form  such  of  the  material  as  has  aesthetic  value.  The  collec- 
tion of  records  is,  however,  a  gratifying  step — not  quite  in 
the  right  direction,  but  something  rather  better  than  the  abso- 
lute neglect  of  the  subject  previous  to  Miss  Fletcher's  time. 

The  next  specific  effort  to  discover  what  there  might  be  in 
Indian  music  was,  I  think,  my  own,  begun  in  1901,  eight  years 
after  the  publication  of  Miss  Fletcher's  monograph  and  incited 
by  causes  quite  apart  from  it.  About  the  same  time  Miss 
Natalie  Curtis  began  her  remarkable  studies  among  the  Hopis 
and  other  Indians  of  the  Southwest.  She  has  put  a  great 
number  of  aboriginal  songs  into  permanent  form,  and  has  so 
extended  her  observations  as  to  include  in  her  chief  pub- 
lished work,  "The  Indians'  Book"  (Harper's),  representative 
melodies  of  eighteen  tribes.  She  does  not  take  up  questions  of 
theory  in  her  book,  and  she  does  not  harmonize  the  songs,  but 
her  work  is  of  great  value  to  the  student,  especially  in  the  side 
lights  it  throws  on  the  attitude  of  the  Indians  themselves  toward 
music.  Another  musician  to  undertake  the  gathering  of 
material  at  first  hand  was  Mr.  Arthur  Farwell,  whose  research 
was  given  to  the  Indians  in  southern  California.  He  had 
previously  been  an  enthusiastic  exponent  of  Miss  Fletcher's 
ideas,  having  published  pianoforte  arrangements  of  several 
of  the  tunes  in  her  monograph,  some  of  them  retaining  the 
Indian  melody  in  its  naked  simplicity,  others  being  thematic 


GENERAL  SURVEY  15 

developments  of  the  material  worked  out  with  excellent  taste 
and  skill. 

During  all  this  period,  that  is,  since  about  1882,  the  Hemen- 
way  Southwestern  Expedition  was  at  work  among  the  Zunis, 
Hopis,  and  other  pueblo  Indians,  and  before  the  conclusion 
of  that  great  undertaking  music  came  in  for  its  proper  share 
of  attention.  The  musical  study  was  mainly  in  the  hands  of 
Mr.  Benjamin  Ives  Gilman,  whose  methods  and  conclusions 
will  be  considered  in  some  detail  in  the  pages  that  follow. 
Dr.  Franz  Boas,  now  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural 
History,  New  York,  an  ethnologist  with  more  than  a 
superficial  knowledge  of  music,  has  contributed  notations  and 
discussions  of  Esquimo  and  Kwakiutl  songs  to  the  Bureau  of 
Ethnology  and  the  United  States  Museum  reports.  There 
have  been,  besides  those  named,  various  writers  who  have  made 
brief  excursions  into  the  Indian  country  and  brought  back 
tunes,  many  in  the  aggregate,  which  have  embellished  magazine 
and  newspaper  articles,  and  so  contributed  a  share  to  general 
knowledge  of  the  subject. 

Finally,  the  bulletins  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  and 
various  publications  under  the  auspices  of  the  Carnegie  Insti- 
tution, of  Washington,  contain  incidental  allusions  to  music, 
sometimes  with  notations  of  songs  used  in  religious  ceremonies, 
accompanied  by  more  or  less  comment  on  the  part  of  the 
notators.  All  these  contributions  to  the  subject  are  fragmen- 
tary, and  so  scattered  in  papers  whose  main  theme  is  not 
music,  that  they  are  of  little  help  to  any  who  would  take  up 


16  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

the  study  of  our  primitive  music  seriously.  Adequate  study  of 
it  can  be  done  only  when  music  is  the  chief  thing  to  be  con- 
sidered, and  not  the  incident. 

THE  POINT   OF  VIEW. 

My  work  has  brought  me  to  pleasant  personal  acquaintance 
with  most  of  those  who  have  investigated  Indian  music,  as  well 
as  with  very  many  who,  while  not  musicians  or  investigators, 
have  had  intimate  contact  with  Indians  and  have  found 
much  that  is  admirable  in  their  songs.  It  has  appeared  from 
numerous  conversations  that  my  point  of  view  with  regard  to 
the  subject  differs  somewhat  from  that  of  the  others,  and  as, 
presumably,  that  difference  extends  beyond  the  bounds  of  my 
personal  acquaintance,  it  seems  advisable  at  this  time  to  indicate 
it  briefly. 

I  have  maintained  since  early  in  my  experience  with  the 
Ojibways  that  their  music  surpasses  that  of  all  other  Indians 
yet  known;  that  they  have  raised  native  American  music  to  a 
higher  plane  than  that  attained  by  any  other  of  our  aborigines; 
and  while  I  am  not  aware  that  anybody  has  disputed  my 
assertion,  I  have  frequently  been  besought  by  friends  of  other 
tribes  to  hear,  for  example,  the  Hopis,  or  the  Arapahoes,  or  the 
Omahas  sing,  the  inference  being  that,  if  I  heard  the  singing 
of  these  Indians  as  I  have  heard  the  singing  of  the  Ojibways, 
I  might  qualify  if  not  reverse  my  estimate.  I  should  have 
been  glad  during  the  past  nine  years  if  circumstances  had  been 
such  that  I  could  have  listened  to  the  singing  of  the  Sioux  on 
the  plains,  or  of  the  Hopis  in  the  pueblos ;  but  the  mere  hearing 


GENERAL  SURVEY  17 

them,  no  matter  how  well  they  sang,  would  not  have  tended 
in  the  least  degree  to  modify  my  conviction;  for  it  is  the  thing 
sung  that  interests  me,  and  not  the  manner  of  singing  it;  and 
the  thing  sung  has  been  available  to  me  in  the  notations  of 
Miss  Fletcher,  Miss  Curtis,  and  others. 

Again  and  again  it  has  come  to  my  attention  that  few  persons 
make  clear  distinction  between  performance  and  composition. 
Even  men  and  women  who  have  had  the  advantage  of  some 
degree  of  instruction  in  music  are  often  misled  by  the  excellence 
of  a  performance  into  overestimate  of  the  music  performed. 
Caruso  could  make  a  cheap,  common-place  song  interesting. 
So  could  Tetebahhunduug,  an  Ojibway  singer  whose  tenor 
voice  is  of  the  most  appealing  timbre,  and  whose  untaught 
vocal  method  is  well  nigh  perfection.  Not  all  Ojibway  songs 
are  beautiful.  Some  of  them  when  reduced  to  notes,  as  may 
be  seen  in  the  chapter  on  "Ojibway  Songs  and  Their  Stories," 
are  barren  of  aesthetic  value.  One  of  the  most  barren  of 
Ojibway  songs  is  in  Tetebahbundung's  repertory,  so  to  speak, 
and  I  have  heard  him  sing  it  many  times  to  white  audiences. 
Often  have  I  seen  sympathetic  listeners  wipe  away  tears  at  the 
end  of  the  song ;  often  have  listeners  asked  me  with  some  degree 
of  indignation  why  I  did  not  include  that  song  in  my 
harmonized  versions.  The  answer  may  readily  be  found  by 
turning  to  the  song  I  am  so  frankly  berating.  It  is  No.  17(a) 
in  the  chapter  named.  It  was  the  man's  voice  that  brought  the 
tears,  his  native  art  as  a  singer  that  made  the  inquirers 
imagine  they  had  heard  something  of  value  in  itself. 

I  have  a  comparatively  languid  interest  in  the  person  who 


18  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

sits  at  the  pianoforte,  or  plays  the  violin,  or  sings.  My  at- 
tention is  centred  always  on  that  creation  of  the  imagination 
which  has  given  the  performer  his  excuse  for  activity. 
It  is  the  composition  that  survives  and  is  of  consequence,  not 
the  performance  of  it,  or  the  performer.  Schubert's  songs 
have  outlived  three  or  four  generations  of  singers,  and  will 
outlive  many  more.  Those  songs  of  the  Ojibways  that  are 
beautiful  will  continue  to  give  their  benign  service  to  the  world 
long  after  the  present  singers  are  silent.  So,  then,  no  Indian 
song,  no  matter  how  alluring  it  may  be  when  heard  in  its 
native  surroundings,  can  appeal  to  me  as  having  artistic  value 
unless  it  proves  when  reduced  to  notes  to  be  capable  of  stirring 
the  emotions  under  other  circumstances.  That  is  the  test  of 
beauty,  of  aesthetic,  or  art  value.  The  printed  notes,  read  by 
an  entire  stranger  to  Indian  life,  must  reveal  to  him  a  beauty 
inherent  in  themselves,  else  the  song  fails.  When  the  music  of 
any  people  can  be  transferred  from  its  place  of  origin  to  any 
other  place  in  the  world  and  there  stir  the  emotions  of  strangers 
without  the  adventitious  aid  of  preconceived  romantic  interest, 
then  that  music  is  of  permanent  value;  and  the  measure  of  its 
value  can  be  taken  only  after  a  lapse  of  many  years  from  the 
time  of  its  transplanting. 

My  attitude  years  ago  toward  the  Omaha  songs  collected 
by  Miss  Fletcher  was  doubtless  that  of  many  another  musician 
who  examined  them.  Most  of  them  repelled  me  by  their 
manifest  crudity.  I  saw  and  felt  the  rudiments  of  form  in 
some  of  them,  but  they  impressed  me  as  incomplete  and  dull. 
considered  as  tunes,  and  wholly  barren  of  suggestion.     I  was 


GENERAL  SURVEY  19 

eager  to  find  thematic  material  in  them  and  could  not  do  so. 
My  eagerness  may  he  fully  appreciated  when  I  explain  that  I 
was  then  at  work  on  the  composition  of  "Hiawatha,"  and  that 
I  wished  to  give  the  music  a  distinctively  American  color  if  I 
could.  The  best  I  could  do  was  to  use  a  Kwakiutl  song  as  a 
theme  for  the  Dance  of  Paupukkeewis  in  which  I  aimed  frankly 
not  at  beauty  but  at  something  bizarre  and  barbaric.  So.  when 
I  heard  Ojibways  sing.  I  was  won  to  admiration  of  their  songs 
from  prejudice  against  them.  It  was  the  exquisite  unity-with- 
variety  in  the  song  I  call  "'My  Bark  Canoe,"  that  opened  my 
mind  to  the  possibility  of  real  and  useful  beauty  in  our 
primitive  music:  and  from  that  time  to  this  I  have  not  found  on 
phonographic  records,  or  in  the  songs  published  by  other  inves- 
tigators, any  music  that  compares  favorably  with  that  of  the 
Ojibways  in  structure  and  aesthetic  value. 

It  must  be  clear,  then,  that  my  point  of  view  is  not  that  of 
the  ethnologist,  for  I  would  not  have  taken  the  trouble  to  collect 
and  record  Ojibway  songs  if  they  had  appealed  to  me  merely 
as  curiosities  in  human  expression:  and  that  it  is  not  the  point 
of  view  of  a  friend  of  the  Indian.  I  hasten  to  add  that  my 
studies  have  made  me  a  friend  of  the  Indian,  and  I  shall  be 
disappointed  if  my  contribution  to  knowledge  of  them  does 
not  have  its  share,  however  slight,  in  awakening  a  more  human 
interest  in  them  on  the  part  of  whites,  and  a  better  under- 
standing of  them  as  men  and  women:  but  that  is  apart  from  the 
present  purpose  in  which  I  pose  merely  as  the  musician. 
observing  certain  phenomena  in  a  critical  spirit,  seeking,  if  you 
will,  to  gain  some  good  from  the  Indians  for  my  own  people 
rather  than,  primarily,  to  do  the  Indians  a  service. 


CHAPTER  II 
SCALES 

WHOEVER   undertakes  to   give  information  con- 
cerning Indian  music  is  met  at  the  outset  by  an 
inquiry  that  has  often  taken  this  form  when  ad- 
dressed to  me:     Do  Indians  use  the  quarter-tone? 

The  quarter-tone  is  a  loose  expression  for  a  division  of  the 
octave  into  more  and,  therefore,  smaller  intervals  than  are 
recognized  in  the  chromatic  scale.  It  is  well  known  that  certain 
Oriental  peoples  recognize  and  adjust  their  voices  to  minute 
intervals  that  are  in  some  instances  less,  and  in  some  instances 
greater  than  one  quarter  of  what  we  call  a  full  tone,  or  whole 
step,  or  interval  of  the  second.  The  music  of  such  peoples  is 
insusceptible  of  harmonic  relations,  and  it  cannot  be  expressed 
in  terms  of  our  five-line  staff.  If  the  Indians  employ  such 
subdivisions  of  the  semitone,  that  is,  if  their  scale  is  adiatonic, 
the  main  question  concerning  the  serviceability  of  their  melodies 
to  art  is  answered  at  once  in  the  negative.  Civilization,  in  its 
present  stage  of  musical  advancement,  cannot  make  use  of 
motives  insusceptible  of  harmonic  treatment  and  inexpressible 
in  the  present  scheme  of  notation.  The  question,  therefore,  is 
of  vital  importance,  and  it  deserves  to  be  met  without  prejudice, 
witli  an  eye  single  to  the  truth.  Its  bearing  on  the  integrity,  or 
aboriginality  of  the  Ojibway  songs  that  I  have  adapted  to  the 

20. 


SCALES  21 

uses  of  civilization  will  be  appreciated  best  by  indicating  tbe 
attitude  of  most  inquirers.  They  are  good  enough  to  take  for 
granted  the  intellectual  honesty  of  the  notator,  and  also  to  credit 
him  with  a  considerable  degree  of  talent  in  the  composition  of 
music ;  for  they  suggest,  when  he  sets  forth  a  coherent,  beautiful 
Indian  melody,  that  he  has  unwittingly  written  into  it  a  finish 
that  really  is  not  there;  that,  being  a  musician  trained  in  the 
diatonic  scale,  he  has  instinctively,  nay,  unavoidably  chosen  the 
nearest  diatonic  interval  to  express  what,  in  the  Indian's  sing- 
ing, was  adiatonic;  that  he  has  been  misguided  by  his  esthetic 
sense  into  correcting  the  Indian's  false  (adiatonic)  intonation, 
and  that  he  has,  therefore,  presented  a  garbled  report  of  the 
Indian  song. 

One  of  the  fairest  statements  of  this  attitude  that  I  have 
seen  is  to  be  found  in  a  monograph  issued  by  the  Smithsonian 
Institution,  "Contributions  to  the  History  of  Musical  Scales," 
by  Charles  Kasson  Wead,  of  Washington,  D.  C.  Discussing 
stringed  instruments,  he  says: 

"All  musicians  know  that  this  number  of  notes,  twelve,  is 
found  confusingly  great  for  ordinary  playing,  and  know  the 
principles  by  which  the  player  selects  certain  notes  for  any 
tune.  But  this  multiplicity  of  notes  has  an  important  bear- 
ing on  all  studies  on  nonharmonic  music  made  by  harmonic 
musicians.  For  every  sound  within  the  compass  of  the  instru- 
ment comes  very  near  to  some  one  of  the  twelve  notes  and  may 
readily  be  represented  thereby,  owing  to  the  difficulty  the 
hearer  has  in  estimating  deviations  from  the  familiar  series 
and  in  noting  them  down.     The  results  of  this  approximation 


22  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

are  to  mask  all  deviations  from  the  twelve-tone  piano  scale, 
whether  intentionally  or  accidentally  made,  and  to  make  it  ap- 
pear to  musicians  that  nearly  all  the  music  in  the  world  is  per- 
formed substantially  in  our  scale." 

LIABILITY    TO    ERROR. 

I  have  considered  this  matter  with  all  the  candor  that  lies 
in  me.  My  answer,  so  far  as  the  Ojibways  are  concerned, 
will  appear  in  due  course.  With  regard  to  the  music  of  other 
tribes  I  conceive  it  to  be  incumbent  on  me,  after  examining 
the  evidence,  to  lay  before  the  reader  a  digest  of  it  with  such 
conclusions  as  have  been  expressed  by  other  investigators. 

Everybody  who  has  undertaken  to  reduce  Indian  songs  to 
notes,  whether  from  phonographic  records  or  from  the  lips  of 
singers,  confesses  frankly  to  the  bewildering  difficulty  of  the 
task.  There  is  much  vagueness  in  the  Indian's  frequent  slur- 
ring from  one  tone  to  another,  the  intervals  are  often,  to  say 
the  least,  unexpected,  their  scale  relationship  hard  to  determine 
until  long  familiarity  with  both  style  of  songs  and  performance 
enables  one  to  listen  in  much  the  same  spirit  with  which  the 
song  is  sung.  These  difficulties  are  heightened  when  notating 
from  phonographic  records  by  the  foreign  noises  which  accom- 
pany the  operation  of  the  machine,  and,  when  taking  from 
the  singer's  lips,  by  the  clamorous  thudding  of  the  drum,  with- 
out which  the  Indian  usually  declines  to  sing.  There  is,  there- 
fore, abundant  room  for  error,  and,  in  instances  where  the 
singing  was  probably  out  of  tune,  that  is,  from  our  conception 
of  scale  relations,  it  is  undoubtedly  the  tendency  of  the  civilized 


SCALES  23 

musician  to  correct  the  apparent  error  by  writing  the  chro- 
matic or  diatonic  note  that  lies  nearest  to  the  one  doubtfully 
intoned. 

It  is  this  tendency  that  leads  most  writers  who  speculate 
concerning  the  origin  and  nature  of  music  to  discard  as  evi- 
dence all  notations  of  primitive  music,  holding  that  the  notes 
on  our  staff  that  purport  to  represent  the  primitive  song  can 
be  but  approximate  statements  of  the  facts.  Thus  discredited 
by  those  who  pose  as  authorities  in  matters  scientific,  the  mu- 
sician who  has  toiled  hard  to  grasp  and  retain  primitive  song 
finds  himself  in  a  position  of  peculiar  embarrassment.  He 
cannot  well  assert  that  his  sense  of  hearing  is  so  acute  that 
he  can  infallibly  detect  deviations  from  diatonic  pitch  to  the 
extent  of  an  eighth,  or  less,  of  a  tone,  and  if  the  man  of  science 
asserts  that  such  deviation  is  accomplished  at  will  on  the  part 
of  the  aborigine  according  to  a  eoncej)tion  of  scale  relationship 
of  which  the  civilized  musician  is  ignorant,  he  must  be  a  bold 
investigator  who  would  insist  that  his  notations  were  absolutely 
correct.  If  he  replies  that  this  is  the  tune  as  he  heard  it,  the 
man  of  science  tells  him  that,  because  he  is  civilized  and  a 
"harmonic  musician,"  he  has  not  been  able  to  hear  correctly: 
that  certain  tones  sung  by  the  aborigine  inevitably  escaped 
him ;  and  that  what  he  put  down  in  notes  may  be  beautiful  but 
is  not  what  the  aborigine  sang. 

There  is  a  good  deal  to  be  said,  nevertheless,  on  the  mu- 
sician's side  of  the  controversy,  for  such  the  discussion  really 
is,  and  that  be  is  by  no  means  defenceless  has  been  proved  to 
my  satisfaction  by  the  latest  and  most  striking  statement  from 


24  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

the  purely  scientific  point  of  view.  In  all  that  follows,  the 
dual  nature  of  musical  science  should  be  borne  in  mind.  The 
composer  who  is  so  far  advanced  in  the  science  of  musical 
structure  that  he  thinks  in  counterpoint  and  dreams  fugues, 
need  know  nothing  whatever  of  acoustics.  It  is  no  concern  of 
his  whether  the  A  has  490  vibrations,  or  49000.  His  work  is 
securely  grounded  whether  or  not  he  is  aware  that  in  true  pitch 
relations  certain  full  steps  in  the  scale  are  larger  than  others. 
His  science  is  based  on  matters  of  which  usually  the  physicist 
is  blandly  ignorant,  and  he  is  entitled  by  his  knowledge  of 
such  fundamental  matters  to  doubt  the  validity  of  the  physi- 
cist's conclusions  when  the  physicist  presumes,  as  he  often  does, 
to  invade  the  province  of  musical  aesthetics. 

THE  ACOUSTICAL  TEST. 

Now  it  happens  that  one  who  is  as  competent  to  discuss 
music  in  one  scientific  aspect  as  the  other,  Mr.  Benjamin  Ives 
Gilman,  has  studied  certain  Indian  songs  from  the  acoustical 
viewpoint  and,  by  resort  to  a  modern  mechanical  device,  has 
come  to  a  close  understanding  of  the  exact  intervals  used,  and, 
further,  has  invented  a  method  by  which  very  minute  deviations 
from  diatonic  pitch  may  be  graphically  expressed.  Mr.  Gil- 
man's  book,  Hopi  Songs  [Houghton  and  Mifflin,  1908]  is  not 
only  the  most  recent  publication  with  regard  to  Indian  music, 
but  the  most  valuable  in  that  it  points  the  way  to  answering 
the  vexatious  quarter-tone  question,  although,  as  will  be  indi- 
cated, he  has  not  yet  answered  it  convincingly  even  with  respect 
to  the  precise  Indians  whose  music  was  the  subject  of  his  ob- 


SCALES  25 

servation.  I  may  add  here  that  his  method  points  the  way 
to  something  of  more  importance  to  art  than  the  determination 
of  anything  connected  with  primitive  song.  We  may  discover 
through  it  a  great  deal  about  the  relation  of  tones  in  the  music 
of  civilization  that  is  not  now  suspected.  Through  it  even  may 
come  such  a  reconstruction  of  musical  theory  as  to  make  the 
compositions  of  Richard  Straus  appear  to  conform  to  sound 
canons  of  art. 

Mr.  Oilman  was  connected  with  the  Hemenway  Southwest- 
ern Expedition  which  had  to  do  with  the  Zunis,  Hopis,  and 
other  Pueblo  Indians.  This  scientific  expedition,  to  the  credit 
of  its  founder  and  members  be  it  said,  did  not  neglect  music 
as  a  feature  of  Indian  life  worthy  of  special  inquiry,  and  Mr. 
Gilman,  a  profound  student  of  music,  devoted  himself  to  an 
examination  of  Zuni  and  Ilopi  songs  from  the  acoustical  point 
of  view.  In  a  paper  contributed  to  the  Hemenway  archaeolog- 
ical reports  published  some  years  before  "Hopi  Songs,"  he 
expressed  the  conclusion  that  the  Zunis  have  no  sense  of  scale 
relations : 

"What  we  have  in  these  melodies  is  the  musical  growths 
out  of  which  scales  are  elaborated,  and  not  compositions  under- 
taken in  conformity  to  norms  of  interval  order  already  fixed 
in  the  consciousness  of  the  singers.  In  this  archaic  stage  of 
the  art,  scales  are  not  formed  but  forming." 

Mr.  Gilman  proceeded  along  this  line  in  examining  Hopi 
songs,  and  undertook  to  test  the  accuracy  of  the  notations  he 
had  made  in  the  terms  of  the  staff  by  ascertaining  the  exact 
pitch  of  every  tone  in  every  song.     He  first  reduced  the  songs 


26  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

to  notes  on  the  standard  staff,  relying  only  on  his  sense  of 
hearing',  thus  following,  of  course,  the  procedure  of  other  in- 
vestigators. The  songs  were  recorded  on  phonographic  cyl- 
inders, and  his  next  step  was  to  establish  beyond  reasonable 
doubt  the  faithfulness  of  the  phonograph  as  a  reproducer  of 
its  contents.  This  required  a  long  series  of  experiments,  and, 
when  he  was  satisfied  of  the  phonograph's  integrity,  a  much 
longer  and  more  arduous  series  followed  in  connection  with  an 
instrument  designed  to  register  the  exact  pitch  of  a  sound  to 
the  hundredth  part  of  a  semitone. 

Without  going  into  the  details  of  the  operation,  which  Mr. 
Gilman  describes  fully  in  his  book,  it  must  be  evident  at  once 
that  the  question  of  the  quarter-tone  would  be  answered  une- 
quivocally in  the  case  of  every  song  subjected  to  this  method 
of  inquiry.  For  the  sake  of  convenience  in  expressing  the  re- 
sults graphically,  by  means  of  an  amplification  of  the  five- 
line  staff,  Mr.  Gilman  restricted  his  considerations  of  deviation 
from  diatonic  intervals  to  the  one-fourteenth  part  of  a  tone. 
That  is,  his  scheme  of  notation  provides  for  a  graphic  repre- 
sentation of  fourteen  different  degrees  of  pitch  between,  for 
example,  A  and  B,  which,  it  must  be  admitted,  is  variety  enough 
for  the  present  inquiry. 

Working  out  his  songs  by  this  method,  he  found  that  the 
phonograph  caught  and  reproduced  some  sounds  that  he  had 
failed  to  hear,  and  that  many  of  the  intervals  as  expressed  in 
his  own  standard  staff  notations  were  radically  incorrect.  In 
other  words,  when  depending  on  his  unaided  sense  of  hearing 
he  believed  he  heard,  or  made  himself  believe  he  heard,  tones 


SCALES  27 

on,  for  example,  G,  which  in  reality  were  some  fourteenths  of 
a  tone  above  or  below  that  pitch.  The  melodic  line  of  the  song 
touched  here  and  there  notes  of  the  diatonic  scale,  but  for  the 
greater  part  it  wandered  with  astonishingly  irregular  approach 
to  regularity  among  intervals  that  were  adiatonic,  that  is,  be- 
tween the  pitches  represented  by  two  successive  chromatic  steps. 
The  inference  seemed  to  be  inevitable  that  the  singer  sought 
and  touched  these  intermediate  intervals  by  conscious  effort, 
and  that,  therefore,  any  expression  of  his  song  in  the  terms 
of  the  standard  staff  would  be  misleading. 

Taking  the  results  of  this  study  in  bulk,  it  would  seem  at 
first  glance  that  Mr.  Oilman  had  established  the  adiatonic  char- 
acter of  Hopi  music  beyond  question;  and  inasmuch  as  Miss 
Curtis,  who  approached  the  music  of  the  same  people  from 
the  other  viewpoint,  and  notated  a  great  number  of  their  songs 
in  which  she  found  exquisite  beauty,  also  found  qualities  that 
defied  her  ability  to  express  graphically,  it  will  be  well  to  see 
what  she  says.  She  does  not  enter  upon  theoretical  discussion, 
or  mention  the  quarter-tone  question  directly,  but  the  following 
paragraph  appears  in  her  introduction  to  the  pages  in  "The 
Indians'  Book"  devoted  to  the  Hopis: 

"To  seize  on  paper  the  spirit  of  Hopi  music  is  a  task  as 
impossible  as  to  put  on  canvas  the  shimmer  and  glare  of  the 
desert.  Hopi  music  is  born  of  its  environment.  The  wind 
sweeping  among  the  crags  and  whirling  down  the  trail  has 
carved  upon  the  rocks  in  curious  fashion  the  record  of  its  pres- 
ence. Its  echo  is  heard  in  the  song  of  the  Hopis  yodelling 
through  the  desert  solitudes.     There,  in  that  wide  land,  under 


28  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

the  blaze  of  the  Arizona  sun.  amid  the  shifting  color  of  the 
tinted  sands  and  the  purple-blue  of  the  sharp-shadowed  rocks, 
must  the  songs  be  heard  to  be  heard  truly." 

If  I  interpret  this  paragraph  aright  it  is  an  admission  on 
the  part  of  Miss  Curtis  that  Hopi  songs  fail  under  the  test 
outlined  in  '"The  Point  of  View,"  Chapter  I;  that  is,  they  will 
not,  when  transplanted,  stir  the  emotions  of  men  to  any  degree 
comparable  to  their  performance  in  their  native  surroundings. 
To  persons  who  have  heard  them  there  the  notations  may  revive 
the  mood  they  then  induced,  but  if  others  cannot  "hear  them 
truly"  when  sung  from  the  printed  notes,  then  their  limita- 
tions in  serviceability  to  musical  art  are  very  sharply  drawn. 

EXAMINATION    OF    THE    ACOUSTICAL    TEST. 

I  would  not  appear  to  disparage  either  the  accuracy  of  Mr. 
Gilman's  results,  or  the  worthiness  of  his  method,  and  yet  I 
must  raise  a  question  or  two  concerning  them.  On  his  evidence 
and  that  of  Miss  Curtis,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  Hopis 
habitually  sing  intervals  that  defy  statement  in  the  terms  of 
our  staff,  but  Mr.  Gilman's  patient  labors  have  not  yet  proved 
so  much.  There  are  seventeen  songs  in  his  collection  to  which 
he  applied  the  acoustical  test,  a  rather  small  number  on  which 
to  base  conclusions  with  regard  to  the  music  of  a  people. 
It  is  clear  from  an  examination  of  his  notations  that  the  singers 
either  did  not  utilize  the  minute  subdivisions  of  the  intervals 
with  any  consciousness  of  system,  or  that  they  were  incapable 
of  directing  their  voices  with  certainty  to  the  intervals  they 
desired.     In  other  words,  if  the  Hopis  sing  according  to  an 


i~    -  ■  -    -■  -~~r-rn .  tLe  singers  __  zi  Mj      -   tear  L  - 

* 

-  - 
- 

1 

-     ' 


I        "  "      "  _ 

-      -         " 

2 
2 

i 

_  _ 

_ 


30  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

erately  long  piece  without  accompaniment,  plume  themselves 
proudly  if  they  come  to  the  end  precisely  in  tune. 

Now  let  us  suppose  that  the  music  of  civilization  had  no 
scheme  of  notation,  and  that  the  only  evidence  of  its  character 
available  to,  say,  an  investigator  from  Mars,  consisted  in  pho- 
nographic  records  of  choruses  that  flatted,  opera  tenors  who 
sharped,  and  soloists  generally,  with  their  multitude  of 
sins.  Suppose  the  erudite  Martian  subjected  his  records  to 
a  specially  tuned  harmonical  and  notated  the  exact  pitch  of 
every  tone  in  every  piece.  Would  he  not  be  likely  to  conclude 
that  Earth's  choruses  had  an  amazing  conception  of  pitch  re- 
lations in  that  they  were  able  to  descend  from  a  given  tone 
by  minute  gradations,  sometimes  only  one  one-hundredth  of 
a  semitone,  to  a  point  fifty  or  more  hundredths  below  the  start- 
ing point?  The  argument  to  this  conclusion  would  be  invin- 
cible, for  he  would  observe  that,  although  the  chorus  was 
divided  into  separate  choirs,  each  with  its  own  harmonic  part, 
all  descended  together,  the  sopranos  arriving  at  as  relatively 
low  a  finish  as  the  basses;  and,  therefore,  these  singers,  one 
and  all,  must  have  proceeded  upon  a  well-established  system, 
which  proved  clearly,  to  say  the  least,  a  conception  of  adiatonic 
intervals.  Then  suppose  the  Martian  wrote  a  treatise  to  that 
effect,  who  could  controvert  it:'  What  damage  suit  against 
him  in  behalf  of  Earth's  slandered  art  wovdd  lie? 

The  foregoing  is  intended  merely  to  be  suggestive.  Seri- 
ously, I  should  be  glad  if  some  physicist  would  test  the  singing 
of  civilization  according  to  Mr.  Oilman's  method  and  record 
the  results  on  the  Gilman  staff.     It  is  a  fact  that  the  singer 


SCALES  31 

who  maintains  absolutely  true  pitch  is  rare;  nevertheless  our 
music  is  based  on  the  diatonic  scale,  and  he  is  a  rarely  bad 
singer  whose  false  intonation  can  deceive  a  well-equipped 
musical  theorist  as  to  the  melodic  contour  of  his  song.  Mr. 
Gilman's  experiments  lead  me  to  wonder  if  the  line  of  a  song, 
so  to  speak,  that  is,  a  graphic  representation  of  the  exact  pitch 
touched  from  tone  to  tone,  might  not  properly  be  likened  to 
the  edge  of  a  sharp  razor.  Under  a  powerful  microscope  the 
razor  edge  proves  to  be  an  irregular  line,  worse  than  a  worn- 
out  saw,  marked  by  ragged  indentations  and  extensions,  utterly 
unlike  the  straight,  even  line  that  it  appears  to  be  to  the  naked 
eye.  The  microscope  undoubtedly  tells  the  truth  and  yet  the 
razor  cuts.  It  would  not  be  surprising  if  a  graphic  repre- 
sentation of  a  good  singer's  performance  proved  that  he  avoided 
the  diatonic  intervals  by  a  few  hundredths  of  a  tone  here  and 
there,  thus  projecting  a  "line"  for  the  melody  as  uttered  by 
him  that  would  be  misleading  to  one  who  regarded  music 
merely  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  physicist.  If  this  should 
prove  to  be  the  case,  the  singing  of  civilized  persons  would 
be  only  approximately  correct,  and  the  staff  notation  of  their 
performances  would  not  be  an  accurate  representation  of  what 
they  do. 

THE   INTERPRETATIVE   METHOD. 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  most  choruses  do  fall  from  pitch 
unless  sustained  by  instruments  of  fixed  intonation,  and  the 
further  fact  that  highly  trained  singers  do  on  occasion,  and 
in  some  distinguished  instances,  habitually  avoid  the  key,  there 


32  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

is  no  need  to  take  my  suggested  parallelism  between  the  melodic 
line  and  the  razor  edge  as  a  bit  of  harmless  fantasy.  I  believe 
that  an  application  of  the  Gilman  method  to  civilized  singing 
would  necessitate  the  use  of  the  Gilman  staff  to  record  the 
exact  performance;  but  the  stability  of  the  art  of  music  would 
be  undisturbed  thereby.  The  aesthetic  value  of  the  song  rep- 
resented by  the  notes  would  be  undiminished.  It  might  be  well, 
and,  indeed,  very  exact,  to  say  that  the  notes  penned  by  the 
composer  represent  an  ideal  to  the  expression  of  which  man 
bends  his  vocal  efforts  without  always,  or  perhaps  often,  attain- 
ing accuracy.  It  does  not  follow  and  nobody  would  suggest 
that  composers  should  cease  to  express  their  ideals  in  the  rigid 
terms  of  the  staff,  or  that  we  should  try  to  conform  our  scheme 
of  notation  in  accordance  with  the  imperfections  of  the  human 
voice. 

"In  this  archaic  stage  of  the  art,  scales  are  not  formed  but 
forming,"  says  Mr.  Gilman,  which,  I  think,  is  the  same  as  say- 
ing that  the  Zunis  are  groping  for  a  satisfactory  system  of 
interval  relations.  This  is  precisely  my  feeling  with  regard 
to  Indian  music  generally,  although  I  believe  that  some  tribes, 
among  them  the  Ojibways,  have  groped  their  way  out  of  the 
confusion  of  adiatonic  music.  Here  is  primitive  man,  con- 
scious of  the  beauty  of  modulated  sound,  stirred  by  the  tune- 
fulness of  tones  uttered,  one  after  another,  at  different  pitch. 
With  no  knowledge  of  acoustics,  with  no  instrument  of  the 
string  type  to  suggest  to  him  the  nature  of  vibrations,  he 
gropes  vocally  for  such  tone  relations  as  shall  satisfy  him. 
Now  it  is  certain  that  anions'  the  meagre  contributions  which 


SCALES  33 

Nature  has  made  to  the  art  of  music,  one  of  her  gifts  was  the 
relation  of  tones  in  the  scale  as  discovered  by  Aristoxenos  six 
centuries  before  the  Christian  era.  It  took  the  white  race  un- 
known centuries  to  find  so  much  of  certainty  and  stability  in 
the  science  of  music.  Sixteen  centuries  after  Aristoxenos  the 
white  race  was  still  groping  for  its  next  step  forward.  It  had 
not  even  then  settled  upon  what  we  now  call  the  major  scale 
as  the  basis  for  its  musical  art;  it  was  even  then  only  beginning 
in  a  crude  way  to  experiment  with  harmony. 

We  whites,  then,  have  come  to  rest  on  the  intervals  of  the 
diatonic  scale  only  in  modern  times.  The  Indian  is  still  grop- 
ing— for  what?  Some  difficult,  unnatural  scale  such  as  the 
comparatively  sophisticated  peoples  of  the  Orient  have  suc- 
ceeded in  mastering  to  a  very  limited  degree?  Unlikely.  It 
seems  to  me  that  they  are  groping  for  the  Greek  intervals,  and 
that  if  they  could  fully  express  their  melodic  aspirations  they 
would  utter  melodies  as  susceptible  of  representation  on  the 
staff  as  are  the  melodies  Qf  civilization.  It  is  worth  while  to 
discover  that  the  Pueblo  Indian  does  not  sing  in  our  scale;  it 
is  admirable  to  invent  a  method  of  indicating  to  the  one-four- 
teenth of  a  tone  just  what  he  does  sing,  but  let  no  details  of 
that  material  kind  forefend  the  champion  of  that  other  science 
of  music  from  discovering  and  interpreting  the  beauty  of 
Indian  song  in  such  terms  as  the  standard  staff  makes  avail- 
able to  him.  We  may  not  thereby  get  a  faithful  reproduction 
of  Indian  song;  for  the  purposes  of  art  we  do  not  want  it.  We 
want  what  there  is  that  is  lovely  and  suggestive  in  it;  we  would 
approximate  to  its  spontaneity,  if  it  has  any,  to  its  simplicity, 


34  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

if  that  be  its  general  character;  we  would  be  drawn  by  it  closer 
to  nature  to  the  end  that  our  music  eventually  should  be  the 
expression  of  subconscious  sympathy  with  our  country,  and 
not  a  laborious  effort  to  square  our  original  thought  to  Eu- 
ropean models. 

This  is  no  fantastic  dream;  neither  is  it  in  conflict  with  any 
science.  The  ethnologist,  naturally,  will  have  none  of  it,  and 
properly,  for  it  is  his  business  to  store  up  obvious  facts,  but  he 
cannot  object  to  this  other  work,  this  search  for  the  facts  that 
are  not  obvious,  this  research  for  the  spirit  of  things,  the  results 
of  which  tend  to  enliven  as  well  as  inform  a  people.  The  two 
kinds  of  work  may  go  hand  in  hand.  The  properly  equipped 
musician  may  not  only  set  down  the  bald  facts  of  the  Indian's 
imperfect  musical  utterance,  and  thus  contribute  to  exact 
knowledge,  but  he  may  apply  his  knowledge  and  perception 
as  an  artist  to  correct  their  utterances,  expand  them  even,  and 
so  dress  them  with  the  devices  of  civilization  that  they  become 
capable  of  a  wider  influence  than#is  possible  when  they  are 
preserved  merely  in  their  primitive  form. 

It  is  this  double  work  that  I  have  tried  to  do — the  presenta- 
tion of  exact  record  of  Indian  song,  and  the  interpretation  of  it 
in  terms  of  music  as  understood  by  civilization.  I  shall  have 
occasion  again  to  discuss  the  interpretative  method  briefly  in 
relation  to  Ojibway  songs,  where  more  enters  than  a  consid- 
eration of  scales  and  intervals.  The  foregoing  excursion  was 
induced  by  what  seems  to  me  the  incompleteness  of  Mr.  Gil- 
man's  examination  of  Pueblo  Indian  music.  It  goes  far 
enough  to  confuse  the  general  subject,  for  the  extraordinary 


SCALES  35 

care  bestowed  upon  seventeen  Hopi  songs,  added  to  his  paper 
on  Zuni  songs,  gives  an  appearance  of  great  weight  to  his 
"belief  that  aboriginal  American  music  is  a  type  apart,  whose 
essential  remoteness  from  the  music  of  Europe  and  Asia  may 
be  symbolized,  as  it  doubtless  was  conditioned,  by  the  physical 
isolation  of  the  Americas." 

It  is  gravely  to  be  doubted  whether  Mr.  Gilman  expressed 
exactly  what  he  meant  to  say  in  this  sentence  found  on  the 
first  page  of  "Hopi  Songs."  It  is  not,  to  be  sure,  the  asser- 
tion of  a  scientifically  established  fact,  but,  viewed  in  the  light 
of  the  author's  distinction  and  his  painstaking  work,  the  in- 
ference is  likely  to  be  drawn  that  the  music  of  all  North  Amer- 
ican Indian  peoples  is  structurally  similar  to  that  of  the  Pueblo 
tribes.  Presumably  Mr.  Gilman  would  not  justify  such  an 
inference  from  an  examination  of  a  few  Zuni  and  Hopi  songs. 
Granting,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  Pueblo  Indian  music 
is  adiatonic  and  "a  type  apart  .  .  .  from  the  music  of  Eu- 
rope," it  does  not  follow  that  the  music  of  a  single  one  of  the 
more  than  fifty  other  ethnic  families  is  of  the  same  character. 
The  fact  is  that,  judged  by  such  tests  as  musicians  usually  em- 
ploy, the  songs  of  the  Ojibways  are  diatonic,  and  a  considerable 
part  of  the  songs  of  other  plains  and  forest  Indians  are  unmis- 
takably expressed  according  to  a  scheme  of  intervals  recog- 
nized by  civilization. 

THE   MUSICAL  TEST. 

Presumably  every  musician  who  has  notated  Indian  songs 
has  undertaken  in  one  way  or  another  to  test  the  accuracy  of 


36  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

his  notations.  Dr.  Baker's  method  consisted  of  singing  his 
notated  songs  to  and  with  the  Indians  from  whose  lips  he  had 
taken  them.  His  conclusion  was  that  the  Indians  whom  he 
heard,  sang  according  to  the  intervals  established  by  Aris- 
toxenos.  It  may  be  worth  noting  that  I  expressed  this  conclu- 
sion with  regard  to  the  Ojibways  in  a  paper  written  some  years 
before  I  had  read  Dr.  Baker's  essay,  my  phraseology  being 
close  enough  to  that  of  Dr.  Baker  to  pass  for  a  translation 
of  it.  Miss  Fletcher  and  Miss  Curtis  pursued  much  the  same 
method,  and  Mr.  Fillmore,  Miss  Fletcher's  associate,  conducted 
some  interesting  experiments  at  the  pianoforte,  the  Indian 
singers  listening  to  his  harmonized  arrangements  of  their 
songs.  Miss  Curtis's  indirect  evidence  as  to  the  adiatonic  na- 
ture of  Hopi  songs  has  been  quoted.  Miss  Fletcher  makes  but 
casual  allusion  to  the  subject,  but  she  says  [Omaha  Mono- 
graph, page  11],  "The  Indian's  management  of  the  voice, 
which  is  similiar  in  singing  and  in  speaking,  make  Indian  music 
seem  to  be  out  of  tune  to  our  ears  conventionally  trained  to 
distinguish  between  the  singing  and  the  speaking  tone  of 
voice.  Although  the  Indians  have  no  fixed  pitch,  yet,  given 
a  starting  note,  graduated  intervals  are  observed ;  not  that  any 
Indian  can  sing  a  scale,  but  he  repeats  his  songs  without  any 
material  variation." 

Mr.  Fillmore  and  Miss  Fletcher  both  observed  that  grace 
notes  in  several  songs  "were  struck  by  the  Indians  about  a 
quarter  of  a  tone  above  pitch."  The  essential  tones  of  the 
melodies,  however,  appealed  to  them  as  in  tune  and  were  so 


SCALES  :J7 

notated.  In  one  case,  Mr.  Fillmore  observed  that  the  second 
part  of  a  song  was  sung  in  a  key  a  semitone  lower  than  the 
first  part.  There  was  an  upward  skip  of  an  octave  and  the 
singers  fell  short  of  it.  They  proceeded,  however,  from  their 
false  start  and  sang  the  second  part  relatively  like  the  first; 
but  when  Mr.  Fillmore  played  the  song  to  them  on  the  piano- 
forte and  carried  through  the  second  part,  as  they  had  sung 
it,  in  a  lower  key,  his  Indian  listeners  were  displeased.  He 
had  made  a  mistake.  When  he  played  the  piece  throughout 
in  the  same  key,  they  were  satisfied. 

I  have  been  at  some  pains  to  present  all  the  evidence  there 
is  of  adiatonic  singing  by  Indians,  and  it  should  be  added  that 
the  writings  of  Dr.  Franz  Boas  concerning  certain  Indian 
peoples  on  the  north  Pacific  coast  indicate  that  deviation  from 
diatonic  intervals  prevails  among  them.  Against  this  evidence 
must  be  set  not  only  my  own  observations,  but  the  presump- 
tion that  so  appreciative  a  musician  and  so  distinguished  an 
archaeologist  as  Miss  Fletcher  would  not  have  persisted  in  no- 
tating  the  songs  of  the  Omahas,  Dakotas,  Pawnees,  and  other 
tribes,  on  the  standard  staff  if  she  had  not  been  convinced  that 
the  notes  penned  were  a  correct  statement  of  the  musical  facts. 
Further,  aside  from  her  confession  of  doubt  about  Hopi  music, 
Miss  Curtis  has  complained  of  no  difficulty  with  regard  to 
the  interval  relations  of  the  hundreds  of  songs  notated  by  her. 
She  is  a  thorough  musician,  and  her  sense  of  hearing  is  ex- 
traordinarily fine.  It  is  preposterous  to  suppose  that  she 
would  continue  to  reduce  the   songs  of  tribe  after  tribe  to 


38  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

notes  of  the  standard  staff  if  there  were  such  deviations  from 
the  standard  intervals  as  to  make  those  songs  "a  type  apart 
from  the  music  of  Europe." 

It  might  be  fair  to  say,  then,  that  from  our  present  knowl- 
edge there  are  three  general  kinds  of  primitive  music  on  the 
continent  north  of  Mexico:  that  of  the  Pueblo  Indians,  that 
of  the  north  Pacific  coast,  and  that  of  the  Indians  of  the  plains 
and  forests.  A  complete  investigation  of  the  subject,  which, 
I  fear,  will  never  be  made,  might  reduce  or  add  to  this  classi- 
fication. The  Indians  of  the  forests  and  plains  far  outnumber 
the  other  two  classes  together  (there  are  upwards  of  30,000 
Ojibways  alone)  and  as  a  great  part  of  their  music  is  diatonic, 
the  proper  conclusion  seems  to  be  that,  generally  speaking, 
the  North  American  aborigines  developed  music  to  a  stage 
where  the  so-called  true  intervals  prevailed. 

My  own  method  of  testing  notations  was  that  of  the  other 
musicians.  The  unfamiliar  nature  of  the  work  led  me  at  first 
into  many  errors,  some  of  which  were  ludicrous  in  the  light  of 
further  experience,  but  I  was  far  more  hampered  in  determin- 
ing rhythm  than  intervals.  During  one  summer  that  I  passed 
in  Ojibway  land  I  had  a  pianoforte  in  my  cabin,  and  I  often 
had  the  Indians  sing  their  songs  to  my  accompaniments  on 
the  instrument.  This  in  addition  to  singing  with  and  to 
them  without  accompaniment.  All  musicians  know  that  the 
pianoforte  scale  is  a  compromise;  that  our  harmonic  music  is 
possible  only  by  tuning  our  intervals  so  that  every  key  is  slightly 
out  of  tune;  and  no  musician  need  be  told  that  anybody  who 
sings  according  to  the  Greek  intervals  can  and  does  uncon- 


SCALES  39 

sciously  adjust  his  voice  to  the  tempered  scale  when  there  is  a 
harmonic  accompaniment.  It  was  thus  with  the  Ojibways. 
If  singing  out  of  tune  had  proved  to  be  universal  among 
them,  I  should  have  suspected  that  their  apprehension  of  in- 
tervals was  different  from  ours;  hut  there  are  Ojibways,  like 
Tetebahbundung,  who  sing  in  tune.  I  have  often  accom- 
panied him  on  the  pianoforte,  and  never  has  there  been  the 
slightest  sense  of  disagreement  between  his  voice  and  the  pitch 
of  the  instrument.  He  is  a  full  blood  and  uneducated;  he  is 
exceptionally  fond  of  music,  but  I  never  heard  him  sing  other 
than  Indian  songs  which,  he  tells  me,  he  learned  from  older 
Indians,  most  of  them  from  a  great-uncle  still  living  on  the 
north  shore  of  Lake  Superior,  but  too  feeble  to  sing  now. 

Tetebahbundung  is  by  no  means  the  only  Ojibway  who  sings 
always  in  tune,  but  there  are  others  who  sing  persistently  false. 
If  these  latter  constituted  a  large  class,  and  if  their  deviations 
from  pitch  were  committed  according  to  a  recognizable  sys- 
tem, we  could  admit  the  argument  that  they  represented  the 
true  Indian  manner,  and  that  men  like  Tetebahbundung  either 
were  exceptions,  or  that  unconsciously  they  had  adapted  their 
intervals  to  our  scale  after  having  had  some  contact  with  the 
music  of  civilization;  but  they  are  not  a  larger  class,  relatively 
speaking,  than  the  palefaces  who  annoy  chorus  conductors  by 
a  tendency  to  flat;  and  their  deviations  from  pitch  are  not 
consistent.  That  is,  these  singers  seldom  or  never  depart  from 
the  apparent  pitch  at  the  same  place,  or  to  the  same  degree. 
Moreover,  a  faulty  singer  will  seldom  err  twice  in  just  the 
same  Avav  in  a  song.     Again  and  again  I  have  noticed  that 


40  AMERICAN   PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

an  Ojibway  who  appeared  to  reach  unsuccessfully  for  a  major 
tlnrd.  for  example,  the  first  time  he  sang  a  song  through, 
■would  hit  it  right  the  second  time,  and  fail  to  get  some  other 
interval  in  tune  that  he  had  sung  correctly  the  first  time.  Fi- 
nally, in  the  majority  of  Ojibway  songs,  the  intonation,  from 
our  point  of  view,  is  correct  throughout:  and  the  same  song 
may  be  intolerably  out  of  time  by  one  singer  and  perfectly 
in  tune  by  another.  I  must  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  faulty 
intonation  of  the  Ojibway  is  an  individual  error  and  not  a 
racial  peculiarity. 

OJIBWAY    SCA1XS. 

I:  is  proper  to  speak  of  scales  in  connection  with  Ojibway 
music,  because  scales  are  deduced  from  and  do  not  precede 
the  development  of  melody.  The  Ojibway  is  not  conscious 
of  scale  relationship:  he  would  not  understand  the  nature  of 
a  scale  if  it  were  explained  to  him.  Music  to  him  is  not  a 
:ice,  so  far  as  conscious  knowledge  goes.  He  knows  noth- 
ing of  acoustics,  he  has  no  instrument  of  the  string  type.  He 
has  gone  far,  as  will  be  seen  later,  in  the  development  of  pure, 
formal  melody,  his  progress  in  this  direction  being  due  not 
to  knowledge,  but  taste.  No  Ojibway,  so  far  as  I  know,  has 
ever  undertaken  to  analyze  the  art  of  which  he  is  so  remark- 
able an  exponent:  none  has  ever  advanced  the  crudest  begin- 
ning of  a  theory  of  music:  yet  he  has  come  to  an  apprehension 
and  appreciation  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  melodic 
structure,  and  so  fashioned  his  songs  that  they  conform  to  the 
canons  of  civilized  art.     In  his  centuries  of  groping  for  satis- 


S    ALES 

-  -       -  -    -      . 

_ 

i ! 

S 

our- 

-  ]  "    "     -    :      " 

g  that  these  ]  -  ~ 

:   -    -  -  the  oi 

-  it  is  in  i 

"     si 

_    ■  _  i 

"         -  -         - : 

a  " 

iz .'.   '.  -   ~zjl!~  ;::_:_.  «~i_-::.    _e.      it   .:   is   i   rale,   De~erthe  -_  — 

_    \ 
-    _ 

■         _  •  • 

-   -  -      -   ■ 

~  - 

-  -  -  -    . 

I     ■      • 
it  as        -  -      _       "   -.  :    ..  _  •  - 


42  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

mi,  re,  do.  I  have  written  the  scale  downward  because  it 
will  be  convenient  in  making  comparisons  to  follow  the  general 
Indian  tendency  to  downward  steps.  The  Ojibway  scale 
begins  and  ends  with  sol,  so  that  it  would  syllabize  thus: 
sol,  mi,  re,  do,  la,  sol.  That  there  is  a  vital  distinction  in  this 
order  of  intervals  hardly  needs  asserting,  and  if  there  be  any 
doubt,  it  will  be  resolved  by  analysis  of  the  songs.  Note, 
for  examples,  "My  Bark  Canoe,"  "Winter,"  "The  Naked 
Bear,"  "Morning  Star."  This  may  be  regarded  as  the  major 
scale  in  Ojibway  music,  the  songs  comprised  in  it  being  bright 
in  character  (from  our  point  of  view)  and  harmonizing 
inevitably  in  the  major  mode.  Corresponding  to  it  is  a  minor 
scale,  also  pentatonic,  which  reads  downward  as  follows:  mi, 
re,  do,  la,  sol,  mi.  In  this  scale  the  final  note  of  the  song  is 
more  often  la  than  mi,  which  gives  it  a  semblance  to  our  melodic 
minor,  the  seventh  (sol)  in  the  Ojibway  scale  never  being 
sharped.  Examples  are  "Parting,"  "The  Coward,"  "The 
Lucky  Trapper,"  and  so  forth. 

Each  of  these  scales  is  developed  by  the  addition  of  one  tone 
which  brings  about  a  scale  relationship  closely  analogous  to 
the  ancient  hexachord.  The  Ojibway  hexatonic  major  scale 
reads  thus:  sol,  mi,  re,  do,  si,  la,  sol;  and  the  hexatonic  minor: 
mi,  re,  do,  si,  la,  sol,  mi.  Examples,  major — "A  Song  of 
Absence  and  Longing,"  minor — "Lonely,"  "In  the  Forest." 

There  are  also  Ojibway  songs  that  appear  to  be  based  upon 
the  diatonic  major  scale  of  civilization,  notably  "Her  Shadow," 
a  remarkable  example  of  spontaneous,  spirited  melody  that 
comes  to  a  normal  conclusion  on  do.    This  song  is  noteworthy 


SCALES 


43 


also  as  an  example  of  the  variety  that  may  be  attained  with  a 
very  limited  number  of  diatonic  tones.  Examination  of  the 
song-  will  show  that  only  four  scale  intervals  are  employed — 
do,  re,  mi  and  sol.  Following  is  a  comparative  view  of  the  sev- 
eral scales  referred  to,  grouped  under  signature  of  one  sharp 
for  convenience  in  writing: 


Major 


STANDARD    SCALES 

Minor  (melodic) 


^m 


=t=i 


:i— r-r-| 
*   *   . 


* — » 


±=t 


•   0 


-»    • 


Penta  tonic 


The  Hexaclinnl 


g 


Pentatonic  Major 


OJIBWAY    SCALES 

Pentatonic  Minor 

— . 1 1 r- 


1 


' 


Hexatonic  Major 


Hexatonic  Minor 


mm 


w^=tm 


^ 


CHAPTER  III 
RHYTHM 

IN  the  spring  of  1904  I  examined  a  large  number  of 
Pawnee  songs  for  Dr.  George  A.  Dorsey,  curator  of 
the  Department  of  Ethnology,  Field  Columbian  Mu- 
seum, Chicago,  who  was  preparing  a  work  on  the  religion  of 
the  Pawnees  under  the  auspices  of  the  Carnegie  Institution, 
of  Washington,  D.  C.  The  report  I  made  of  my  observations 
covered  some  of  the  ground  that  is  to  be  considered  here,  and 
I  have  incorporated  in  the  pages  that  follow  such  portions  of 
that  report  as  bear  on  the  topic. 

By  far  the  most  difficult  subject  in  a  study  of  Indian  music 
is  its  rhythmic  structure.  We  meet  here  phenomena  that 
appear  to  be  in  defiance  of  ordinary  human  intelligence; 
we  seem  at  times  to  be  confronted  with  the  unaccountable, 
even  with  the  impossible.  The  phenomena  are  so  bewildering 
that  scholars  otherwise  sane  have  been  led  to  declare  not  only 
that  the  primitive  red  man  has  developed  rhythm  to  a  plane 
higher  than  that  attained  by  civilization,  but  that  he  has  a 
conception  of  rhythm  wholly  at  variance  with  ours. 

When  this  latter  observation  was  first  brought  to  my  at- 
tention I  was  so  staggered  by  it  that  a  long  time  passed  before 
I  recovered.  It  had  been  uttered  by  a  scholar  of  world-wide 
repute  and  in  a  tone  of  finality  that  banished  dispute  from 

44 


RHYTHM  45 

his  presence.  What  had  led  to  the  oracular  deliverance  were 
some  remarks  I  ventured  to  the  effect  that  the  puzzling 
phenomena  of  Indian  rhythm  indicated  not  the  red  man's 
superiority  in  this  regard,  but  on  the  contrary  his  inferiority; 
that  he  had,  instead  of  a  higher  sense  of  accentual  relations, 
a  lower;  and  that  his  disturbing  performances  in  so-called 
irregular  and  conflicting  rhythms  were  but  manifestations  of 
a  helpless  groping  for  the  truth  which,  rhythmically  speaking, 
is  order,  and  regularity,  and  simplicity. 

In  the  outer  darkness  to  which  I  found  myself  and  my 
heretical  ideas  condemned,  I  came  to  something  upon  which 
I  could  take  firm  hold  when  I  realized  that  if  the  Indian's 
conception  of  rhythm  were  different  from  ours,  it  would  be 
vain  to  discuss  the  matter  because  our  musical  symbols  are 
incapable  of  expressing  any  conception  of  rhythm  other  than 
our  own.  We  should  have  to  content  ourselves  with  admitting 
that  the  Indian  had  acquired  perceptions  of  rhythmic  relation- 
ships that  are  beyond  our  ken,  and  make  imperfect  effort  to 
show  the  nature  of  his  advancement  by  pointing  to  the  general 
belief  that  he  drums  in  one  rhythm  and  sings  in  another. 

On  the  heels  of  this  thought  came  the  query:  Can  there 
be  more  than  one  conception  of  light?  Yes;  as  many  as  there 
are  blind  men;  but  besides  all  these  there  is  exactly  one  pos- 
sible for  those  who  see.  Rhythm  is  a  fact,  not  a  hypothesis. 
It  is  patent  to  those  who  are  capable  of  perceiving  it,  and 
it  underlies  not  only  life  itself  but  all  forms  of  art.  That  a 
universal  fact  should  be  imperfectly  grasped  by  most  persons 
the  world  over,  that  it  should  have  been  recognized  in  music 


46  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

at  a  late  period  in  the  evolution  of  the  art,  that  no  adequate 
treatise  on  the  subject  has  yet  been  written,  are  matters  that 
suggest  a  volume  of  philosophical  speculation.  For  the 
present  it  will  be  proper  to  consider  merely  a  few  elementary 
propositions  pertinent  to  Indian  music. 

RHYTHMIC    PHENOMENA. 

Let  us  see,  first,  what  is  the  nature  of  the  phenomena  that 
lead  observers  to  different  conclusions;  second,  let  us  come  to  a 
common  understanding  of  rhythm;  and,  third,  let  us  see  what 
actually  happens  in  Indian  music  so  far  as  that  can  be  made 
known  through  my  studies. 

The  prime  purpose  of  the  drum  in  music  is  to  mark  the 
rhythm.  It  has  been  observed  repeatedly  that  the  Indian's  voice 
has  little  or  no  regard  for  the  rhythm  strenuously  established  by 
his  drum.  Travellers  have  often  brought  home  accounts  of 
Indian  music,  and  embellished  their  accounts  with  examples 
in  our  notation,  that  told  of  a  drum  beat  steadily  in  4-4,  for 
example,  and  the  accompanying  song  in  3-4.  I  am  so  far 
from  discrediting  any  report  of  this  kind  that  I  will  say  at 
once  that  I  have  heard  Indian  music  wherein  the  conflict  be- 
tween drum  and  voice  was  much  more  marked  than  is  the  case 
between  3-4  and  4-4.  What  I  shall  object  to,  with  even  then 
no  disparagement  of  the  notator's  sincerity  or  ability  intended, 
is  the  use,  actual  or  implied,  of  the  word  "steadily."  The 
presentation  of  an  example  in  printed  notes,  with  no  qualifying 
explanation,  implies  that  the  relation  between  drum  and  voice 
expressed  in  the  printed  measures  was  maintained  indefinitely, 


RHYTHM 


47 


or  for  as  long  as  the  performance  lasted.  This  I  gravely 
doubt,  and  the  reason  for  the  doubt  lies  in  my  own  experience 
as  an  investigator,  and  the  discovery  of  errors  on  my  own  part 
early  in  my  work. 

Perhaps  I  cannot  quote  a  better  example  of  conflicting 
rhythms  than  the  Indian  song  that  formed  the  basis  of  my 
first  attempt  to  utilize  the  music  of  the  red  man  for  the  pur- 
poses of  art.  At  that  time  I  had  heard  few  Indians  sing, 
and  knew  Indian  music  oidy  through  the  writings  of  other 
investigators.  Two  measures  will  do  to  represent  the  rhythmic 
scheme : 


Voice 


T 


Drum 


S       X 


s 


3 


i^ 


This  scheme,  four  beats  in  the  voice  part  against  six  in  the 
drum,  with  the  confusing  omission  of  the  first  of  every  three, 
continued  for  seven  measures,  which  was  the  extent  of  the  song 
f  as  printed,  and  the  implication  naturally  was  that  the  Indian, 
repeating  his  song  ad  infinitum,  held  firmly  to  that  all  but 
tinthinkable  relationship  to  the  end.  Maybe  he  did.  I  ven- 
tured to  develop  the  theme,  giving  the  fantastic  drum  beat 
to  the  tympanist,  and  have  found  that  by  strenuous  endeavor 
on  the  part  of  the  conductor,  chorus  and  orchestra  can  be  held 
to  the  scheme  for  the  two  minutes  during  which  it  is  maintained. 
The  piece  referred  to  is  "The  Dance  of  Paupukkeewis"  in 


48  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

my  cantata,  "Hiawatha,"  composed  long  before  the  origin 
of  the  Indian  play  of  the  same  name,  and  long  before  I  had 
heard  Ojibways  sing.  The  theme  is  a  Kwakiutl  song.  It 
may  be  of  interest  to  know  that  circumstances  have  led  to  the 
performance  of  the  piece  before  many  Indians  of  various 
tribes,  all  of  whom  become  greatly  excited  when  they  hear 
it,  recognizing  doubtless  the  native  character  of  the  theme,  and 
stirred  by  the  incessant  thudding  of  the  drum. 

I  cannot  help  suspecting  that  if  the  original  notator  had 
counted  time  during  the  Indian  performance  for  the  same 
period,  he  would  have  found  lapses  in  the  voice  part  analogous 
to  those  described  in  the  Pawnee  song  discussed  below. 

Other  phenomena  that  have  puzzled  investigators  are  con- 
cerned with  the  distribution  of  accents  without  reference  to 
the  drum,  that  is,  in  unaccompanied  singing.  It  sometimes 
happens  that  two  strong  pulses  will  occur  without  a  weak  pulse 
intervening.  The  execution  of  such  an  effect  by  a  civilized 
singer  is  almost  impossible,  and,  when  accomplished,  is  gro- 
tesque in  the  extreme.  Not  so  puzzling  as  this,  but  still  foreign 
to  our  manner,  are  the  numerous  abrupt  changes  from  one 
rhythmic  scheme  to  another,  as  the  injection  of  a  5-4  measure 
into  a  series  of  3-4,  or  vice  versa. 

THE  NATURE  OF  RHYTHM. 

So  much  for  the  nature  of  the  phenomena.  An  attempt 
will  be  made  presently  to  reconcile  them  with  our  "conception 
of  rhythm,"  but  preliminarily  it  is  necessary  to  arrive  at  an 


RHYTHM  49 

understanding  of  rhythm  which  Frederick  Corder,  Esq.,  writing 
in  Grove's  Dictionary,  calls  a  "many  sided  term,"  and  defines 
as  "the  systematic  grouping  of  notes  with  regard  to  duration." 
Later  in  the  same  article,  he  says:  "Rhythm,  considered  as 
the  orderly  arrangement  of  groups  of  accents  .  .  .  natu- 
rally came  into  existence  only  after  the  invention  of  time  and 
the  bar  lines."  Here  we  have  two  definitions  by  the  same 
writer.  They  do  not  necessarily  conflict,  but  they  are  not  in 
absolute  agreement,  and  I  think  the  general  understanding 
with  regard  to  musical  rhythm  is  that  it  applies  to  the  orderly 
arrangement  of  accents.  But  that  rhythm,  the  universal  fact, 
was  not  recognized  as  a  factor  in  music  until  something  else 
had  happened,  is  deeply  significant. 

Here  are  two  quotations  from  the  Standard  Dictionary 
definitions  of  rhythm:  "Movement  characterized  by  regular, 
measured,  or  harmonious  recurrence  of  stress,  or  impulse,  beat, 
sound,  accent,  or  motion;"  "The  musical  property  dependent 
on  the  regular  succession  of  accents  or  tone  impulses."  Other 
dictionaries  that  I  have  consulted  agree  with  the  Standard  in 
making  accent  the  basis  of  rhythm,  and  all  regard  orderliness, 
regularity,  or  recognizable  system,  as  essential  to  it.  Duration 
has  much  to  do  with  the  matter,  but  duration  alone,  without 
accent,  would  not  establish  rhythm;  and  duration  may  enter 
either  to  conceal  one  or  more  accents,  or  to  introduce  a  number 
of  secondary  accents.  For  example,  suppose  a  piece  that 
consists  rhythmically  of  a  regular  recurrence  of  four  pulses, 
the  first  strongly  accented  the  third  a  little  less  strongly,  and 
the  others  without  perceptible  accent ;  that  is,  a  piece  that  would 


50 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


naturally  have  the  time  signature  -1-4*.  Fill  a  measure  with  a 
whole  note  and  the  accent  on  the  third  beat  disappears;  break 
the  measure  into  eight  equal  parts,  and  not  only  does  the  accent 
on  the  third  beat  remain,  but  there  are  introduced  secondary 
accents  to  mark  the  relationship  between  the  eighth  notes  com- 
prising each  group  of  two. 


— 1        1 

=4= 

1 

s            4 
> 

=t 

* 

> 

— \— 

— J- 

s 

> 

-  1    1 

— * — * — *- 

> 

H 

—*- 

* 

— m — # — 
> 

>  i 

=t 

=J- 

==T= 

4      a 

> 
1         i 

a1 

4 

i      1 

> 



The  diagram  of  notes  is  but  a  suggestion  of  the  well-nigh 
infinite  variety  that  may  be  attained  in  a  rhythmical  scheme 
of  the  simplest  character.  In  Indian,  as  in  civilized  music,  we 
find  that  the  duration  of  notes  representing  the  voice  part 
often  differs  from  the  notes  that  represent  the  accompanying 
instrument,  be  it  drum,  or  pianoforte;  but  in  civilized  music 
the  notes  of  the  accompaniment,  be  they  few  or  many,  are  in 


RHYTHM  51 

an  orderly  proportion  with  regard  to  duration  to  those  of 
the  voice;  in  Indian  music  there  is  often  no  possibility  of 
orderly  proportion,  so  that  there  appears  to  be,  and  often  is 
for  a  limited  period,  a  concurrence  of  rhythmic  schemes  that 
are  in  violent  conflict.  If  this  conflict  could  be  maintained  with 
perfect  steadiness  in  each  part,  voice  and  accompaniment,  in- 
definitely, it  would  be  incontestable  that  the  Indian  is  capable 
of  conceiving  unrelated  rhythms  at  the  same  time.  It  is  im- 
possible for  me  to  prove  that  this  is  not  the  case,  for  I  have 
studied  but  a  fraction  of  all  the  Indian  music  that  exists;  but 
close  observation  of  the  music  of  several  tribes  leads  me  to 
infer  that  the  appearance  of  sustaining  unrelated  rhythms 
coincidently  is  appearance  only  and  not  fact. 

POSSIBLE  CONFLICTING  RHYTHMS. 

The  phenomena  that  justify  this  inference  are  similar  in 
general  character  to  those  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  scales, 
the  Indian's  own  deviations  from  his  scheme  in  the  course  of 
several  repetitions  of  a  song.  Let  us  observe  in  approaching 
this  part  of  the  discussion — the  third  in  the  plan  outlined  above 
— that  not  all  civilized  singers  are  gifted  with  a  clear  perception 
of  rhythm.  The  average  chorus  must  be  reminded  frequently 
that  bar  lines  in  written  music  are  drawn  as  a  guide  to  time 
and  accent,  and  that  the  first  note  in  every  measure  deserves 
a  special  stress.  In  other  words,  the  rhythmic  structure  of 
familiar  music  often  fails  to  manifest  itself  in  the  work  of  the 
chorus,  the  reason  being  that  the  singers  are  not  conscious  that 


52  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

there  is  such  a  thing  as  rhythm.  Again,  solo  singers,  left  to 
their  own  sweet  wills,  delighting  perhaps  in  the  sound  of  their 
own  voices,  are  prone  to  dwell  unduly  on  some  tones  and  give 
scant  attention  to  others  until  melodic  contour  is  all  but 
destroyed  and  rhythm  is  lost  utterly.  It  will  do  no  harm  to 
remember  these  things  when  we  come  to  glance  at  what  the 
Indian  does. 

More  essential  still  to  a  sane  view  of  the  subject  is  it  to 
remember  that  from  the  days  of  the  earliest  measured  music 
until  the  present,  educated  composers  have  been  capable  of 
sustaining  conflicting  rhythms  in  the  imagination,  and  edu- 
cated singers  and  instrumentalists  have  been  capable  of 
executing  them.  It  requires  a  certain  effort  of  the  will  to 
conceive  of  two  rhythms  at  the  same  time,  a  greater  effort  to 
execute  them;  and  to  both  it  is  essential  that  there  should  be 
some  definite  proportion  between  the  pulses  of  the  rhythms  if 
they  are  to  be  sustained  beyond  a  few  pulses  of  either,  the 
tendency  of  each  being  to  force  the  other  into  correspondence 
with  itself.  For  example,  every  pianist  has  to  learn  to  play 
double  rhythm  with  one  hand  against  triple  rhythm  with  the 
other.  There  may  be  three  notes  for  one  hand  and  four  for  the 
other,  but  the  time  given  to  the  group  of  four  is  the  same  as  that 
given  to  the  group  of  three,  so  that  at  regular  intervals  there 
is  a  coincidence  of  pulse  that  enables  the  performer  to  take  a 
fresh  start.  We  will  now  analyze  an  Indian  song  in  which 
there  is  no  coincidence  of  pulse  between  drum  and  voice,  and 
no  conceivable  proportion  between  the  drum  beats  and  the 
natural  accents  of  the  vocal  part.     It  is  a  Pawnee  song  about 


RHYTHM  53 

a  boy  who  was  turned  into  an  eagle,  one  of  the  series  I  reduced 
to  notes  for  Dr.  Dorsey  from  phonographic  cylinders.  That 
series  was  remarkably  fruitful  in  examples  of  rhythmic  oddities, 
and  "The  Boy  Turned  to  Eagle"  was  the  most  striking  of  all 
in  its  coincidence  of  unrelated  rhythms.  For  the  sake  of 
throwing  all  possible  light  on  the  subject  I  shall  venture  to 
detail  the  process  by  which  the  song  was  reduced  to  notes. 


EXAMINATION  OF  A  CONFLICT. 

There  are  several  repetitions  of  the  song  on  the  cylinder 
from  which  I  took  it,  and  no  two  are  exactly  alike,  rhythmically 
speaking,  in  the  vocal  part,  but  the  drum  remains  perfectly 
steady  throughout.  In  recording  music  of  this  type,  my  at- 
tention is  given  first  to  the  drum  in  the  hope  that  it  will  be 
found  to  be  rhythmically  proportionate  to  the  voice;  for,  if 
such  proves  to  be  the  case,  the  time  value  of  the  voice  notes 
is  immediately  established.  Perceiving,  in  this  instance,  that 
the  rhythms  were  dissimilar,  I  ignored  the  drum  until  I  had  set 
down  an  outline  of  the  melody.  This  was  not  difficult,  so 
far  as  pitch  was  concerned,  for  the  singer's  intonation  was  true, 
but  the  matter  of  establishing  the  time  value  was  distressing. 
I  was  not  disturbed  by  the  drum,  considerable  experience  in  this 
manner  of  work  enabling  me  to  forget  its  presence ;  it  was  the 
fact  that  the  singer  not  only  distributed  his  accents  according 
to  no  recognizable  plan,  but  broke  up  measures  that  should  have 
corresponded  with  each  other  in  a  way  that  no  arrangement 


54 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


of  dots  and  stems  could  express.  Moreover,  in  the  repetitions 
lie  frequently  mutilated  measures  that  previously  he  had  con- 
structed with  firmness  and  regularity. 

Eventually  I  had  on  paper,  as  a  result  of  observing  all  the 
repetitions,  the  notes  that  may  be  seen  in  (a) ,  of  the  following.' 
The  accents  are  indicated  by  the  sign  >  over  the  various 
notes.  This,  in  a  way,  was  striking  an  average  to  obtain  a 
correct  statement  of  the  song,  and  the  division  of  the  piece  into 
measures  followed  readily.  It  may  be  seen  in  that  form 
under  (b)  and  I  hazard  the  opinion  that  if  the  Indian  had 
sung  without  the  drum,  he  would  have  sung  according  to 
that  scheme.     But  it  must  be  understood  that  in  no  instance 

(a)  >  >  >  >  > 


M 


mt 


iiii 


i   i   i 


m 


#  * 


fH 


(b) 


mm 


^ 


i   i   i 


?? 


4-f 


m 


-  «> 


^^ 


1 — i — r 


fe^ 


^*-^-n 


>^-^ 

. 

1 •— - 

j*    1  4= 

• * *-*— 

1— 

1 — 

— » — 

1 1 

0          J    - 

— in — | 1 1 1 1 1 — 4 — 

-f- 

RHYTHM 


5.5 


jl *_ 


(d)- 


-v — h 


d    • 


m 


^ 


tr 


did  he  sing  the  whole  in  that  way.  What  he  did  do  was 
to  present  every  measure  at  least  once  in  the  way  indicated. 
From  the  viewpoint  of  detail,  therefore,  I  have  not  "fixed  up" 
the  Indian's  work  for  him.  Taken  as  a  whole,  the  piece  as 
expressed   in    (b)    is   at   least   comprehensible    and    perfectly 


56  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

singable.  It  ought  to  end  three  measures  before  it  does,  but 
the  prolongation  of  the  real  finish  in  nowise  affects  the  con- 
sideration of  rhythm. 

My  next  effort  was  to  set  down  the  drum  strokes  just  where 
they  occurred  beneath  the  voice  part.  It  was  impossible.  One 
measure  could  be  done,  but  not  another.  After  much  fussing 
over  the  task,  I  made  the  arrangement  shown  in  (c)  which 
indicates  approximately  where  the  drum  beats  fell  in  relation 
to  the  voice.  To  the  eye  they  appear  to  have  fallen  irregu- 
larly, but  that  is  an  illusion.  The  strokes  were  as  steady  as 
a  metronome,  and  at  only  one  spot  in  any  of  the  repetitions  was 
there  exact  coincidence  with  the  voice,  (d)  in  (c). 

Now,  the  voice  part  in  (c)  not  only  shows  where  the  accents 
of  the  song  would  logically  fall,  but  where  they  did  fall,  and  it 
is  also  a  correct  presentation  of  the  Indian's  rhythmic  scheme 
in  the  terms  of  our  notation.  Counting  the  beats,  we  find  that 
there  are  48  in  the  voice  part  (omitting  the  initial  note  which, 
according  to  the  custom  of  writing  music,  is  supplied  in  the 
last  note  previous  to  the  repeat  sign)  and  there  are  35  in  the 
drum  part.  If  only  there  had  been  36!  There  then  would 
have  been  a  proportion — four  to  three — which  would  have 
brought  about  either  regularly  occasional  coincidence  of  pulses, 
or  a  regular  distribution  of  them  which  would  have  enabled 
a  strong-willed  singer  to  sustain  the  rhythm  of  the  song.  But 
no  end  of  counting  would  make  any  more,  or  less,  than  35 
strokes. 

I  think  no  human  being  could  drum  and  sing  this  piece  and 
keep  both  rhythms  intact.     The  Indian  certainly  did  not.     It 


RHYTHM 


57 


would  take  pages  to  put  into  notes  my  attempts  to  express 
the  variants  of  those  measures  in  which  a  dotted  quarter  note 
occurs  as  the  logical  symbol.  I  found  that  what  the  Indian 
actually  sang  could  not  be  written  without  some  mechanical 
device  to  measure  the  length  of  each  tone  in  the  minutest 
subdivisions  known  to  the  printer's  outfit.  In  fact,  a  little 
figuring  of  an  arithmetical  problem  will  show  that  it  would 
be  impossible.     I  believe  the  one-hundred-and-twenty-eighth 

note  J  is  sometimes  used,  but  there  is  no  perfect  mathematical 
relation  between  48  and  35  in  128.  For  example,  the  Indian 
had  great  difficulty  with  the  fifth  measure.  On  one  occasion 
he  managed  to  sing  what  is  written  at  that  point,  but  at  other 

times  it  was  neither  J'JJ,  nor  J  J  J.  nor  J  J  J.     The  difficulty  of 

indicating  what  he  did  might  be  evaded  by  this  device  :JJJ; 
but  that  is  merely  a  confession  that  the  phrase  is  incommen- 


surable, and  this  device:  JJ_Jj3  i/*>  or  something  like  it,  would 
still  fail  because  48  and  .'35  and  128  have  no  common  factor. 


THE  INDIAN  S  PERSISTENCE  IN  ERROR. 

I  could  multiply  examples  from  my  note  books,  but  this  one 
is  sufficient  for  illustration.  It  follows  that  in  songs  of  this 
type  it  would  be  misleading  to  draw  bar  lines.  In  the  first 
place,  we  should  be  in  doubt  as  to  whether  the  voice  or  the 
drum  should  be  regarded  as  establishing  the  measure.  In  the 
second  place,  the  Indian  speedily  breaks  his  own  arrangement 
of  accounts  through  sheer  inability  to  maintain  his  scheme. 
I  find  that  the  Indian  usually  keeps  time  when  the  drum  is  in 


58  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

correspondence  with  the  voice,  or  in  no  more  violent  conflict 
than  3-8  against  2-4.  When  the  conflict  is  worse  than  that 
he  never  keeps  his  vocal  measures  in  order.  He  will  start  his 
drum  in  9-8,  for  example,  and  begin  bravely  to  sing  against 
it  in  4-4;  but  after  a  few  measures  of  success  he  breaks  away, 
and  from  then  on  the  value  of  his  notes  can  be  expressed  only 
approximately. 

The  inference  is  inevitable  that  the  Indian  singer's  "con- 
ception of  rhythm"  is  so  exactly  like  ours  that  the  drum  disturbs 
him  and  draws  the  voice  away  from  its  special  movement. 
That  it  is  the  voice  rather  than  the  drum  that  weakens  is  readily 
explainable  through  the  fact  that  melody,  as  distinguished  from 
chanting,  is  a  comparatively  recent  development  of  music. 
The  Indian  has  not  attained  a  high  plane  in  the  invention  of 
music;  his  perception  of  the  melodic  relation  of  tones  is  weak; 
the  definite,  forceful  pulse  of  the  drum,  appealing  directly  to 
his  ear,  overwhelms  the  sense  of  rhythmic  pulse  in  his  imagina- 
tion, thus  bringing  about  a  distortion  of  the  vocal  part  that 
depends  upon  the  imagination  for  its  form  and  character. 

It  is  pertinent  now  to  inquire  why,  if  the  Indian  has  any 
perception  of  rhythmic  relations,  as  is  indicated  by  the  corrected 
version  of  his  melody,  he  permits  himself  to  drum  in  such  a 
way  as  to  obscure  or  destroy  it.  It  seems  to  me  the  answer 
should  be  obvious  to  any  who  know  the  Indian  well  enough 
to  appreciate  the  immense  importance  to  him  of  the  dance. 
For  untold  centuries  the  dance  has  been  his  vehicle  for  the  ex- 
pression of  his  deepest  feelings.  It  is  common  knowledge  that 
the  warriors  of  the  tribe  are  stimulated  by  it  to  undertake  deeds 


RHYTHM  59 

of  desperate  valor;  it  is  not  so  well  known  or  realized,  rather, 
that  the  Indian  dance  is  a  form  of  prayer.  Dance  and  song 
almost  always  go  together;  the  Indian's  prayer  is  couched  in 
song,  and  through  the  dance  that  accompanies  it  he  gives 
his  petitions  and  aspirations  more  obvious  expression  than  could 
be  attained  by  song  alone.  Add  that  the  Indian  is,  up  to  his 
lights,  very  religious,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  he  has  inherited 
tendencies  of  the  most  powerful  kind  which  impel  him  to 
respect  the  drum,  for  upon  that  instrument  the  dance  depends. 
To  drum  is  instinctively  with  him  to  set  the  tempo  and  mark 
the  rhythm  for  a  dance.  Habitually,  then,  nay,  irresistibly 
he  drums  with  steadiness,  according  to  a  set  plan,  varying  the 
stroke  only  when  some  uncommon  feature  of  the  dance  calls 
for  a  change  of  step  or  tempo. 

Slowly,  insensibly  with  him  as  with  the  race  of  whites,  grew 
a  perception  of  beauty  in  melody.  Born  somewhere  within 
the  recesses  of  the  soul,  melody  will  often  fall  within  the  rigid 
rhythmic  lines  marked  by  regularly  recurring  drum  beats,  but 
sometimes  it  leaps  beyond  them  and  demands  a  rhythm  of  its 
own.  The  simple-minded  Indian  could  not  possibly  perceive 
that  his  incessant  double  rhythm,  as  uttered  by  the  drum,  was 
in  conflict  with  the  occasional  demand  of  his  spirit  for  triple 
rhythm  in  his  song.  He  must  have  been  a  self -analyst  equal 
to  civilized  man  if  he  perceived  the  conflict  and  rectified  it 
consciously.  Melody,  therefore,  became  distorted;  it  was  hin- 
dered in  its  normal  development,  struggling  always  to  assert 
its  spontaneous  freedom,  and  always  restrained  by  the  habit 
of  the  drum  which  the  Indian  would  abandon  no  more  readily 


GO  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

than  he  would  abandon  any  other  of  his  numerous  traditions. 
But,  so  great  is  the  inherent  strength  of  melody  that  it  de- 
veloped measurably  in  spite  of  untoward  circumstances,  and, 
among  the  Ojibways  at  least,  overcame  at  last  the  obnoxious, 
disturbing  drum  stroke,  the  Ojibway  himself,  meantime,  being 
blindly,  childishly  unaware  of  what  was  going  on  within  him. 

So  it  appears  that  the  conflict  is  a  radical  one,  as  deep- 
seated  as  life  itself;  a  struggle  between  truth  and  error;  on 
the  one  side,  the  sense  of  beauty  in  tone  which  in  all  races  has 
led  to  the  making  of  some  manner  of  music;  on  the  other, 
traditional  regard  for  the  dance  and  its  obvious  rhythm;  vague 
groping  for  melodic  form  on  the  one  side,  a  familiar,  easily 
comprehended  habit  on  the  other.  The  truth  in  this  conflict 
is  the  artistic  union  of  spontaneity  and  symmetry.  That,  the 
Ojibways  have  obtained.  Among  some  other  tribes  habit  still 
overcomes  spontaneous  melody  to  the  extent  of  warping  it, 
or  keeping  it  confined  in  narrow,  rigid  lines. 

The  foregoing  answer  to  the  query  is  an  attempt  to  reason 
backward  from  knowledge  of  present  conditions.  It  would 
be  simpler,  and  might  be  more  satisfactory,  to  summarize  the 
speculation  in  one  word  which  agrees  with  known  facts,  and 
attribute  the  Indian's  persistence  in  error  to  ignorance.  He 
who  has  never  stepped  outside  civilization  cannot  comprehend 
the  Indian's  devotion  to  his  drum,  but  I  cannot  remember  that 
I  have  met  one  white  man  who  has  lived  with  Indians  who 
will  not  acknowledge  frankly  that  he  learned  to  like  the  instru- 
ment. I  think  I  can  enter  appreciably  into  the  Indian's  inter- 
est in  it.     Perhaps  it  is  the  savage  in  me,  latent  from  long 


RHYTHM  01 

past  ancestry,  that  is  stirred  by  its  resounding  clamor.  But 
while  I  have  no  ancient  superstitions  associated  with  the  instru- 
ment, the  Indian  has,  and  he  is  not  aware  that  the  drum  beat 
is  in  conflict  with  the  scheme  of  accents  he  invents  for  his  song. 
Both,  drum  beat  and  song,  are  ingenuous  expressions  of  his 
natife.  One  is  extremely  primitive,  the  other  comparatively 
advanced,  and,  asflw  still  primitive,  he  clings  to  his  cheerful  ■ 
noise,  understanding  it,  aroused  by  it,  while  his  musical  soul 
toils  darkly  on  toward  an  expression  that  aims  ever  at,  and 
sometimes  attains,  symmetry.  All  of  which  is  to  say  that  he 
drums  as  he  does  because  he  knows  no  better. 

When  I  began  to  study  Indian  music  seriously,  I  did  so 
with  the  conviction,  learned  from  the  writings  of  others,  that 
the  Indian  had  developed  rhythm  more  highly  than  had  the 
white  man.  I  have  come  to  exactly  the  opposite  conclusion 
through  observation  of  many  songs  like  "The  Boy  Turned  to 
Eagle."  It  should  need  no  saying  that  the  highest  develop- 
ment of  rhythm  is  that  which  is  most  orderly;  and  if  no  order 
can  be  recognized  in  a  given  piece  of  music,  it  would  be  fair 
to  speak  of  it  as  without  rhythm.  Better  this  dictum  than 
the  assertion  that  the  Indian  has  accomplished  more  in  this 
held  than  have  all  the  civilized  peoples  in  the  world.  But 
that,  also,  would  be  misleading,  for  it  has  been  shown  that  the 
application  of  rudimentary  principles  of  musical  art  makes 
it  possible  to  discern  and  set  down  the  Indian  conception  of 

« 

melody  even  when  it  is  distorted  by  an  unwitting  attempt  to 
link  it  to  a  complex  rhythmic  scheme  that  is  impossible  of 
execution. 


62  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

RHYTHM  AMONG  THE  OJIBWAYS. 

If  the  Indian  really  had  a  highly  developed  sense  of  rhythm, 
he  would  modify  his  drum  heat  and  bring  it  into  correspond- 
ence with  the  accents  of  his  song.  When,  in  a  preceding 
paragraph  I  spoke  of  the  Indian's  perception  of  the  melodic 
relation  of  tones  as  weak,  I  made  a  mental  reservation  in  favor 
of  the  Ojibways.  These  people  have  a  remarkably  strong 
perception  of  melodic  relations,  and  their  sense  of  rhythm  is 
indicated  by  the  symmetrical  character  of  their  songs.  It  is 
emphasized  by  their  use  of  the  drum  which,  in  the  hands  of  a 
good  Ojibway  singer,  ordinarily  performs  its  proper  musical 
function,  that  of  marking  the  rhythm.  I  have  come  upon 
examples  of  conflicting  rhythms  in  Ojibway  music,  and  in  every 
instance  the  effort  to  sustain  them  resulted  in  a  mutilation  of 
the  scheme,  but,  as  compared  with  other  tribes,  there  was  this 
significant  difference:  the  drum  part  weakened  quite  as  often 
as  did  the  voice.  Time  and  again  I  have  heard  an  Ojibway 
singer  interrupt  the  accompanying  drum  beats  to  bring  the 
accents  into  at  least  temporary  correspondence  with  his  voice. 
The  inference,  of  course,  is  that,  his  perception  of  melodic  re- 
lationships being  keen,  he  was  sensitive  also  to  the  interference 
of  the  drum  accents;  and  that  he  was  highly  enough  developed 
musically  to  seek  to  adjust  his  accompaniment  to  the  scheme 
of  the  song  rather  than  sacrifice  the  melody.  Another  mani- 
festation of  the  singer's  sense  of  discrepancy  might  be  indicated 
by  drum  notes  in  the  following  order : 


*> 

V 

> 

V 

> 

V 

>        > 

V 

> 

V 

1 — 

• 

— *— 

— *— 

— » 

— *— 

— *— 

f  0   0 

i> 

0 

• 

and  so  forth 


RHYTHM  63 

On  all  such  occasions  the  quick  strokes  were  injected  with 
evident  irritation.  Something  was  wrong;  the  singer  hardly 
knew  what  had  happened,  presumably,  and  likely  enough  con- 
demned himself  for  having  forgotten  how  to  drum.  The  fact 
was  that  the  scheme  of  accents  in  his  imagination  was  strong 
enough  to  overcome  the  mechanical,  purposeless  pounding  on 
the  deer  skin. 

It  is  worth  noting  that  instances  of  the  kind  just  described 
were  always  in  connection  with  ceremonial  songs  of  undoubted 
antiquity.  In  the  old  days,  before  the  appreciation  of  this 
people  for  pure  melody  had  fully  developed,  it  is  probable 
that  the  ceremonial  songs  were  as  little  related  to  the  drum  as 
they  are  still  in  other  tribes ;  and  anything  connected  with  tribal 
ceremony  would  be  less  subject  to  change  than,  for  example, 
lyric  songs,  the  expression  of  the  individual.  In  all  Ojibway 
songs  other  than  ceremonial,  I  have  always  heard  the  drum 
beaten  consistently  with  the  vocal  accents. 

It  appears,  then,  that  if  the  discussion  had  been  limited  to 
rhythm  as  expressed  by  the  Ojibways  there  would  have  been 
little  to  say;  but  it  seemed  proper  to  make  comparative  obser- 
vations and  through  the  musical  superiority  of  the  Ojibways 
to  other  tribes  to  dispose  of  the  fallacy  that  the  savage  Indian 
had  outdone  civilized  man  in  grasp  of  rhythm.  As  for  the 
minor  phenomena  referred  to  in  the  foregoing  as  offering 
difficulties  to  the  investigator,  it  is  to  be  said  concerning  the 
distribution  of  accents  in  unaccompanied  singing,  first,  that 
the  Indian,  like  the  white  man,  is  fond  of  the  sound  of  his 
own  voice.     He  enjoys,  as  we  do,  the  effort  of  producing 


64  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

modulated  tones,  and  he  dwells  pleasurably  on  those  tones  that 
are  most  congenial  to  his  throat,  or  on  syllables  that,  from  his 
viewpoint,  are  most  pregnant  with  meaning.  Second,  if  we 
will  but  recognize  that  the  Indian  is  primitive  in  music  as  in 
other  things,  we  will  cease  to  look  for  an  abstruse  conception 
of  rhythm  in  his  songs  and  will  give  our  mind  no  further  con- 
cern with  the  matter. 

The  grouping  of  measures  containing  different  numbers  of 
beats  in  the  same  melody  is  interesting,  but,  so  far  as  the 
Ojibway  songs  are  concerned,  calls  for  little  comment.  Some- 
times it  appears  that  the  injection  of  an  odd  measure  is  due  to 
basing  the  rhythmic  accents  on  the  natural  pronunciation  of 
the  words,  but  quite  as  often  the  words  are  transposed  from 
their  usual  order  for  the  sake  of  the  musical  measure.  I  am 
inclined  to  think  that  these  irregularities  should  be  regarded 
as  manifestations  of  the  groping  for  simplicity  and  directness 
of  expression  which  is  attained  only  in  the  perfectly  balanced 
period.  On  the  other  hand,  as  so  many  of  the  songs  indicate 
a  firm  grasp  of  periodic  structure,  it  may  be  proper  to  look 
upon  them  as  the  normal  expression  of  a  people  who  have  passed 
the  bounds  where  appreciation  of  music  is  confined  to  the  simple 
period.  The  songs  are  here,  and  each  student  may  form  his 
own  conclusions  from  them. 

THE   OJIBWAY    SYSTEM    OF   NUMERALS. 

Before  closing  this  chapter  I  wish  to  direct  attention  and  a 
query  to  one  rhythmic  feature  of  Ojibway  music  that  has  been 


RHYTHM  65 

highly  interesting  and  troublesome  to  me  from  the  beginning: 
the  frequent  occurrence  of  songs  consistently  in  quintuple 
rhythm  throughout.  This  is  by  no  means  unknown  in  civilized 
music,  but  it  is  not  common,  and  it  appeals  to  most  persons  as 
abnormal.  It  has  been  troublesome  to  me  because  of  the  con- 
fusion made  on  my  note  paper  in  the  work  of  recording  it, 
the  five-beat  measures  not  always  appearing  to  be  such  until 
attempts  to  express  them  in  three-  or  four-beat  measures  have 
failed.  So  often  is  this  scheme  of  accents  found  that  it  might 
be  regarded  as  an  idiosyncrasy  of  the  Ojibways,  and  I  have 
wondered  whether  it  may  be  connected  with  their  system  of 
numbers?  They  have  the  decimal  system,  but  examination  of 
their  'numerals  from  one  to  ten  shows  that  it  was  based  upon 
five,  the  suggestion  being  that  in  the  old  days  five  was  the 
greatest  number  the  Ojibway  could  grasp.  He  counts  to  ten 
thus : 


one, 

bayzhig 

ningotwasswe, 

six 

two, 

neezh 

neezhwasswe, 

seven 

three. 

nesswe 

neshwasswe, 

eight 

four, 

newin 

jangwasswe. 

nine 

five, 

nanan 

midwasswe. 

ten. 

The  first  five  Ojibway  numerals  are  independent  words,  the 
second  five,  compounds.  Bayzhig,  one,  in  certain  grammatical 
relations,  becomes  ningo.  It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  the 
words  for  six,  seven  and  eight  are  clearly  compounded  with 
the  words  for  one,  two  and  three,  respectively.     I  cannot  ex- 


66  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

plain  the  formation  of  the  words  for  nine  and  ten,  but  they 
are  clearly  compounds,  also.  That  is,  the  Ojibway  counts  as 
far  as  five  and  then  takes  a  new  start.  After  ten  there  are 
compounds  analogous  to  those  found  in  the  languages  of  all 
peoples  who  use  the  decimal  system.  The  question,  a  curious 
one,  merely  is,  whether  the  Ojibway's  grasp  of  numbers  was 
to  any  degree  responsible  for,  or  connected  with  his  predilec- 
tion for  five-beat  measures  in  his  music? 


CHAPTER  IV 
HALF-BREED  MUSIC 

THE  reader  cannot  have  failed  to  notice  the  vein  of 
controversy  running-  through  the  preceding  chapters. 
It  was  unavoidable,  for  I  could  not  forget  the  re- 
ception accorded  to  my  reports  on  Indian  music  when  first  I 
came  from  the  region  north  of  the  Great  Lakes  and  sang 
the  songs  I  had  heard  there.  There  was  nothing  unkind  in 
the  reception.  On  the  contrary,  the  interest  evinced  was 
plainly  genuine,  and  the  encouragement  of  kind  words  was 
generous.  I  was  given  to  understand,  among  other  things, 
that  I  was  in  a  fair  way  to  contribute  something  of  value  to 
ethnology,  a  view  of  the  matter  that  surprised  while  it  grati- 
fied me,  because,  as  stated  heretofore,  my  aim  was  artistic  and 
not  scientific.  But  when  I  fell  in  the  way  of  men  of  science, 
I  discovered  that  my  notations  were  held  in  doubt;  that  the 
artist  in  me  gave  grounds  for  discrediting  the  results  of  my 
research. 

This  was  quite  right,  although  it  was  hard  to  believe  so  at 
the  time,  for  I  knew  the  care  I  had  taken  to  set  down  the 
melodies  exactly  as  the  Indians  sang  them,  and  in  subsequent 
visits  to  Ojibway  Land  I  took  even  greater  pains  to  collect 
my  material  in  such  form  that,  if  I  erred  unwittingly  in  my 
notations,  anybody  so  inclined  could  detect  the  errors  and  cor- 

67 


68  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

rect  them.  To  this  end  I  went  armed  with  a  gramophone,  and 
had  all  the  songs  I  had  heard  recorded  on  its  cylinders,  and 
these  cylinders  I  deposited  suhsequently  in  the  American  Mu- 
seum of  Natural  History,  New  York. 

But  even  this  was  not  enough.  There  was  still  a  point  of 
difference  between  me  and  the  men  of  science  that  troubled 
me  greatly,  and  that  still  gives  me  food  for  thought.  Satis- 
fied that  my  notations  were  at  least  substantially  correct,  some 
of  my  scientific  friends  made  light  of  the  matter  by  presuming 
that  the  music  of  the  Ojibways  had  been  influenced  by  contact 
with  civilization,  and  was,  therefore,  not  properly  to  be  called 
primitive.  Now,  when  there  is  a  difference  between  a  scientist 
and  a  layman,  the  natural  presumption  is  that  the  scientist  is 
all  right  and  the  layman  all  wrong.  Nevertheless,  I  must 
venture  to  dissent  wholly  from  this  view  of  Ojibway  music. 
From  the  viewpoint  of  art,  music  is  music  wherever  it  is  found. 
A  beautiful  melody  appeals  to  us  whether  it  be  the  compo- 
sition of  a  full-blood  or  a  half-breed.  A  type  of  folksong  that 
is  distinctive  is  no  less  distinctive  because  it  happens  to  be  the 
product  of  a  mixed  race,  or  of  one  that  has  taken  measurable 
steps  toward  civilization.  To  such  observations  as  these,  my 
scientific  friends  have  responded  in  effect  that  there  can  be  no 
possible  objection  to  the  attempt  of  a  musician  to  find  artistic 
material  wherever  he  chooses  to  seek  for  it,  but  that  such  work 
is  none  of  theirs,  as  they  have  to  do  with  the  study  of  actual 
primitive  life;  they  will  welcome  anything  that  throws  light 
on  it.  but  they  cannot  be  expected  to  take  interest  in  phenomena 
that  have  been  modified  by  the  influence  of  civilization. 


HALF-BREED  MUSIC  69 

It  has  been  very  difficult  for  me  to  understand  this,  and  if 
I  misrepresent  the  scientific  attitude  it  is  because  I  state  briefly 
the  substance  of  what  several  ethnologists  have  said  to  me. 
I  can  quite  understand  that  a  student  who  has  set  himself  the 
task  of  discovering  and  informing  the  world  what  was,  for 
example,  the  religious  doctrine  of  the  Ojibways  before  the 
advent  of  Europeans,  should  thrust  aside  as  negligible  and 
untrustworthy  evidence  what  an  Ojibway  born  and  reared  on 
a  reservation  might  tell  him.  Such  an  Ojibway  could  hardly 
fail  to  confuse  the  misty  traditions  of  his  people  with  Bible 
stories  learned  from  missionaries.  I  can  understand  that  men  of 
science  have  not  the  time  to  bestow  on  subjects  other  than  those 
in  which  they  have  chosen  to  specialize.  The  trouble  lies,  as 
I  apprehend  it,  in  the  general  attitude  of  scientific  men,  who 
appear  to  ignore  that  which  is  not  of  undoubted  antiquity,  that 
which  is  not  unmistakably  and  purely  aboriginal.  This  atti- 
tude is  open  to  criticism,  so  far  as  the  study  of  primitive  music 
is  concerned,  on  two  grounds:  first,  that  it  tends  to  obstruct 
the  study  of  primitive  music;  second,  that  it  is  in  itself  un- 
scientific. 

As  to  the  first  criticism,  from  the  time  of  Dr.  Baker  to  the 
present,  it  is  the  unqualified  opinion  of  every  musician  who 
has  sought  to  learn  of  our  primitive  music  at  first  hand  that 
it  is  a  subject  to  which  a-  great  deal  of  attention  and  effort 
should  be  given.  We  who  have  worked  in  the  field  know  the 
immensity  of  it;  we  know  how  comparatively  little  can  be 
accomplished  by  the  sporadic  efforts  of  individuals;  we  know 
something  of  the  material  cost  of  such  work,  and  that  it  cannot 


70  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

and  ought  not  to  be  borne  by  the  enthusiasts  alone.  It  is 
work  that  needs  and  deserves  support,  a  difficult  matter  to 
arrange  under  the  best  of  circumstances.  How  much  more 
difficult  when  men  of  distinction  in  ethnological  science  mani- 
fest indifference!  Those  persons  who  might  take  an  active 
interest  in  the  preservation  of  such  primitive  songs  as  still  may 
be  found,  are  readily  deterred  if  Science  utters  the  disparaging 
remark  that  the  beauties  of  Indian  song  are  merely  the  results 
of  contact  with  civilization.  Let  it  be  admitted  for  the  moment 
that  the  musician's  work  is  not  germane  to  the  general  pursuits 
and  purposes  of  ethnology;  is  it  not  clear  that  an  attitude 
of  reserve,  if  not  of  hostility,  on  the  part  of  men  of  distinction 
is  bound  to  have  a  deterrent  influence  on  those  who  might  other- 
wise be  aroused  to  an  interest  in  the  musical  work  for  its  own 
sake?  I  cannot,  to  mention  but  one  instance,  account  for 
the  persistent  refusal  of  the  Carnegie  Institution  to  aid  and 
sanction  musical  research  on  any  other  ground  than  that,  the 
matter  having  been  referred  to  scientific  men,  a  report  has 
been  made  that  minimized  the  value  of  such  investigation. 

As  to  the  second  point,  is  it  possible  that  there  is  no  room 
in  the  science  of  ethnology  for  the  observation  of  living  phe- 
nomena? We  know  that  there  is.  We  have  only  to  recall 
the  recent  death  of  William  Jones  at  the  hands  of  Philippine 
savages  whose  customs  he  was  studying,  to  know  that  Science 
sacrifices  much  to  learn  what  there  still  is  of  primitive  life  in 
the  world;  but  when  it  comes  to  the  evolution  of  a  primitive 
people  to  or  toward  civilization,  should  Science  turn  aside  her 


HALF-BREED  MUSIC  71 

eyes.'  Holding  the  argument  strictly  to  the  line  of  musical 
inquiry,  it  seems  to  me  that  Science  misses  an  exceptional 
opportunity  of  observing  the  process  of  evolution  when  it  neg- 
lects to  equip  competent  musicians  to  go  among  the  Indians 
and  report  how  these  people  with  their  unformed  or  doubtful 
scales  and  their  faulty  rhythm,  gradually  slough  off  errors, 
gradually  adapt  their  melodies  to  the  canons  of  art,  gradually 
improve  their  mode  of  melodic  expression,  come  to  knowledge 
of  harmony  and,  in  other  ways  recognizable  by  a  musician, 
give  evidence  of  progrt^?.  It  is  a  fine  thing  to  dissect  a  corpse 
for  the  benefit  of  students:  a  finer  thing,  it  seems  to  me,  to 
studv  a  growing  child.  Surelv  there  are  lessons  to  be  learned 
from  a  well  conducted  observation  of  the  progress  of  a  race 
toward  a  higher  plane  of  life.  So  far  as  music  offers  oppor- 
tunity for  such  observation,  and  on  the  Xorth  American  con- 
tinent the  offer  is  of  gigantic  proportions,  Science  has  stub- 
bornly. I  had  almost  said  stupidly,  ignored  it. 

There  is  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  music  of  most  if  not 
all  the  Indian  peoples  on  the  continent  has  been  influenced 
bv  contact  with  civilization,  and  that  the  process  of  change 
s  stiH  going  on:  but  that  does  not  compel  us  to  abandon  the 
term  primitive  in  characterizing  a  system  of  music  the  be- 
ginning and  end  of  which  is  melodv  uttered  bv  the  human  voice. 
It  cannot  make  the  music  anv  less  interesting  to  a  musician: 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  likely  to  be  more  interesting  than  the 
unaffected  primitive  music,  for.  under  the  influence  of  ad- 
vancing knowledge,  the  Indian  will  tend  to  refine  his  utterance 


72  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

and  do  away  with  whatever  is  grotesque,  inartistic  and  useless. 
This  is  precisely  what  has  happened  with  regard  to  the 
Ojibways,  as  I  shall  show  in  subsequent  chapters,  and  the  point 
I  wish  to  make  with  all  emphasis  is  that  it  is  still  Indian  music. 
Xo  white  man  has  taught  the  Indian  to  correct  the  errors  in 
his  music,  no  white  man  has  even  called  the  Indian's  attention 
to  the  errors.  Xo  deliberate  effort  has  been  made  by  anybody, 
Indian  or  white,  to  improve  the  red  man's  music.  Such  change 
as  has  come  about  is  due  to  the  Indian's  own  sense  of  melodic 
beauty.  Having  heard  the  white  man's  periodized  tunes,  he 
has  consciously  or  unconsciously  instituted  comparisons  with 
his  own  music,  and,  as  his  taste  developed,  he  has  lopped  off 
here  and  there  a  conventional  ending,  a  needless  introduction, 
and  omitted  numberless  excrescences  in  the  shape  of  crude 
appoggiaturas  that  deformed  his  native  melody.  The  O jib- 
way  has  done  this  in  considerable  measure,  but  observe,  it  is 
the  Ojibway  who  did  it.  Probably  the  same  could  be  said 
of  the  music  of  the  Sioux,  the  Omahas,  the  Hopis.  It  is  the 
primitive  man  himself  who  effects  the  changes,  and,  in  ad- 
vancing his  art  to  a  higher  plane,  he  does  not  copy  from 
civilization;  he  grafts  no  white-man  tunes  upon  his  native  stock. 
"What  he  does  is  to  improve  and  refine  his  own.  Xo  layman 
could  display  an  unscientific  spirit  more  obviously  than  by  ig- 
noring the  wonderful  opportunity  aiforded  by  our  aborigines 
to  observe  an  art  in  the  process  of  transition;  for  the  Indians, 
advancing  rapidly  toward  civilization,  are  making  strides  in 
generations,  so  far  as  music  is  concerned,  that  the  white  race 
crawled  over  in  centuries. 


HALF-BREED  MUSIC  73 


A   GLANCE    AT    IROQUOIS    MUSIC. 

As  I  deal  with  this  matter  in  some  detail  in  chapters  that 
concern  the  Ojibways  more  especially  than  other  Indians.  I 
will  try  to  indicate  at  this  point  some  of  the  effects  of  civ- 
ilization on  primitive  music.     A  brief  consideration  of  Iroquois 
songs  will  serve  the  purpose.     These  people  have  had  more 
intimate  contact  with  civilization  than  the  Ojibways,  and  they 
are  much  more  sophisticated.     In  fact,  the  Iroquois  are  so  far 
advanced  in  civilization  on  their  reservation  in  Canada  that 
it  is  remarkable  that  they  retain  any  features  of  the  ancient 
life.     They  are  Christianized,  most  of  them  can  read  and  write, 
they  are  nearly  all  skilled  laborers,  they  were  born  and  brought 
up  in  houses,  they  know  more  of  canned  meat  than  of  the 
chase.     Yet  they  still  sing  many  of  their  ancient  songs,  a  proof 
in  itself  of  the  inherent  strength  of  Indian  melody. 

There  are  certain  earmarks  of  civilized  music  that  a  mu- 
sician recognizes  readily.  Among  them  are  tonality:  that  is. 
unmistakable  relationship  of  the  tones  in  the  melody  to  a 
keynote:  and  form,  which  is  the  subdivision  of  the  melody 
into  contrasting  phrases  of  equal  length;  and  the  interval  of 
a  half-step  between  the  keynote  and  the  tone  next  below  it: 
this  interval,  technically  the  major  seventh,  is  represented 
usually  in  primitive  music  the  world  over  by  the  minor,  or  flat 
seventh.  Let  us  now  examine  the  structure  of  a  popular  Iro- 
quois song  called  "The  Mosquito."  I  am  not  conversant  with 
the  Iroquois  language  and  have  never  undertaken  to  set  down 
the  original  words  of  this  song,  but  mv  daughter,  who  has 


74 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


given  me  considerable  assistance  in  my  song-hunting,  patiently 
extracted  the  meaning  from  several  singers,  and  our  Iroquois 
friends  assure  us  that  her  "translation"  is  quite  correct. 


S 


=3=5= 


ffi^^i 


Hear  mos  -  qui  -  to  buz    -     zing,    His     song     is      com  -  ing       near; 


m 


& 


', 


fond     of       gos  -  sip  -  ing,   The     lat  -  est    news  I'll     hear. 

'Skeeter  saw  me  drinking, 
Saw  me  acting  queer — 
Oh !  then  he  went  and  buzzed  a  tale 
Unto  my  sweetheart  dear. 

'Skeeter  made  his  story  strong, 

Made  me  bad  appear, 
So  when  I  went  to  call  on  her, 

She  boxed  me  on  the  ear! 

The  tonality  of  this  quaint  little  song  is  unmistakable,  and 
it  is  as  regular  as  a  square.  There  is  more  than  a  suggestion 
of  civilization  in  the  obvious  modulation  to  the  relative  major 
in  the  closing  the  first  half  of  the  period;  that  is,  the  end  of 
the  second  line.  Traces  of  Indian  characteristics  are  found 
in  the  ornamentation  indicated  by  grace  and  sixteenth  notes, 
and  in  the  flat  seventh.  If  the  grace  notes  were  omitted,  and 
the  seventh  were  sharped,  it  might  well  pass  for  a  product 
of  civilization — not  of  a  high  order,  but  distinctly  non-barbaric. 

What  happens  in  the  singing  of  the  song  by  the  Indians 
is  interesting  and  instructive.     The  old  men  sing  it  as  above 


HALF-BREED  MUSIC  :r> 

notated;  many  of  the  younger  who  have  been  familiar  with 
the  white  man's  ways  since  babyhood,  not  only  omit  the  orna- 
mentations, but,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  song,  sharp  the  seventh. 
The  young  fellows,  for  example,  sing — 


m 


i 


Hear    mos  -  qui    -   to  buz  -    zing, 


lat    -    est       news      I'll        hear. 

When  old  and  young  sing  together  there  is  a  blurring  at 
the  points  where  the  sixteenth  notes  occur,  and  strident  discord 
at  the  next-to-the-last  note,  some  singing  G,  others  G-sharp— 
as  if,  indeed,  a  whole  swarm  of  mosquitoes  were  gossiping. 
It  is  impossible,  of  course,  to  fix  the  time  when  this  song  was 
composed,  but,  while  it  may  be  a  modernized  version  of  an 
ancient  Iroquois  tune,  its  mechanical  regularity  inclines  me  to 
think  it  the  product  of  a  period  subsequent  to  the  advent  of 
the  whites.  In  either  case  it  retains  to-day  certain  charac- 
teristics of  both  civilized  and  uncivilized  music,  and  its  treat- 
ment by  the  younger  generation  indicates  how  native  musical 
art  may  be  influenced  by  contact  with  civilization. 

A  more  interesting  example  of  Iroquois  music  is  the  song 
that  accompanies  their  snake  dance.  The  significant  words 
in  this  song  are  very  few,  meaningless  syllables  being  used 
for  the  most  part.  The  general  sense,  as  I  am  told,  is  an 
invocation  to  the  snake.  Voice  part  and  an  indication  of  the 
drum-  or  rattle-beat  follow. 


76  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

Solo  voice,  slow  Chorus  Solo  Chorus 


left 


^ 


=•" 


£p*? 


Rattle 


J- 


J-* 


Solo 


-*      *«* 


S 


Chorus 

1    ru-^- 


Solo 


rati 


^ 


^t» 


Chorus 


fq=qsi= 


^£ 


-4-4-4- 


%- 


XXX 


q=*: 


fit 


I      X 


I      S 


I      X 


A     Solo  Chorus 


Solo,  faster 


Chorus        Solo 


Chorus  Solo 


Chorus 


Solo 


Chorus 


^S 


^ 


S 


-#-*- 


5C=*= 


-£- 1 


I     i     I 


HALF-BREED  MUSIC  77 

The  barbaric  effect  of  this  song,  when  given  by  a  good 
leader  and  from  a  dozen  to  twenty  strong-lunged  men,  is 
thrilling.  I  have  heard  it  hundreds  of  times  and,  bare  though 
it  seems  on  paper,  I  never  fail  to  be  stirred  by  it.  The  almost 
unbroken  succession  of  two-bar,  or  four-bar  phrases  suggests 
the  influence,  of  civilization  in  polishing  the  ancient  original, 
but  the  modern  Iroquois  has  retained  the  flat  seventh  in  the 
first  part  (to  A),  throughout  which  the  underlying  harmony 
is  obviously  E-minor,  and  the  duality  of  key  so  often  observed 
in  Ojibway  and  other  Indian  music,  as  evidenced  by  the  obvious 
A-minor  harmony  under  the  second  part.  Moreover,  in  per- 
formance the  Indian  characteristic  of  indefinite  repetition  is 
manifested  by  reduplicating  at  will  the  last  four  bars  before 
A,  as  well  as  the  last  bars  of  the  second  half. 

This  is  one  of  the  few  Iroquois  songs  that  I  have  heard  that 
retains  so  much  of  the  ancient  atmosphere.  Most  of  them 
go  much  further  than  "The  Mosquito"  in  the  employment  of 
features  identified  with  the  music  of  civilization.  The  largest 
Iroquois  reservation  is  at  Caughnawaga,  near  Montreal.  To 
anybody  who  might  be  inclined  to  make  a  study  of  Iroquois 
music  at  first  hand  I  would  recommend  as  a  preliminary  work, 
consultation  of  the  Annual  Archaeological  Reports  to  the  Min- 
ister of  Education,  Ontario,  for  1898  and  1899,  and  an  article 
on  the  subject  by  A.  T.  Cringan,  Mus.  B.,  in  the  Report  for 
1902. 


CHAPTER  V 
STRUCTURE  AXD  MEANS 

SOXG  is  the  beginning  and  end  of  Indian  music.  The 
means  to  its  production,  therefore,  are  limited,  with  one 
almost  insignificant  exception,  to  the  human  voice  and 
simple  instruments  of  percussion.  So  far  as  vocal  gifts  are  con- 
cerned there  is  no  essential  difference  between  the  Indians  and 
the  whites.  Their  voices  may  be  classified  in  the  same  way,  that 
is,  there  are  tenors  and  basses  among  the  men,  but  the  great  ma- 
jority are  barytones;  there  are  contraltos  among  the  women,  but 
the  great  majority  are  sopranos.  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that 
the  compass  of  the  average  Indian's  voice  would  be  found 
to  be  greater  by  several  tones  than  the  voice  of  the  average 
white  man.  The  opinion  is  based  partly  on  observation,  partly 
on  logic.  So  far  as  I  know  there  has  been  no  attempt  to  gather 
definite  information  on  this  point.  It  would  be  a  difficult  thing, 
even  if  it  were  worth  while,  to  establish  the  precise  compass 
of  an  Indian's  voice,  for  he  cannot  sing  up  and  down  the  dia- 
tonic scale  to  the  end  of  his  capacity  in  each  direction,  as  a 
wlrite  man  can.  We  can  estimate  his  compass  only  by  his 
songs  and  by  hearing  him  sing  them.  Every  Ojibway  whom  I 
have  heard  had  a  command  of  at  least  two  octaves  without 
recourse  to  the  falsetto.  Under  certain  circumstances,  as  in 
cries  of  joy,  and  in  the  warwhoop,  every  Indian  uses  the  fal- 

78 


STRUCTURE  .VXD  MEANS  79 

setto,  but  it  never  occurs  in  singing  until  the  song  proper 
is  ended,  when  there  often  is  a  coda,  or  flourish,  usually  an 
inarticulate  yell,  an  octave  or  more  in  falsetto  above  the  highest 
tone  of  the  song.  Music  teachers  are  pretty  well  agreed  that 
the  average  civilized  man's  voice  covers  about  an  octave  and 
a  half.  Observation  indicates  the  red  man's  superiority  in  this 
detail,  and  logic  strengthens  the  indication.  For  the  Indian 
sings  much  more  than  the  white  man  does.  As  faculties  grow- 
by  exercise,  it  follows  that  the  Indian  will  naturally  be  able 
to  produce  more  and  bigger  tones  than  can  civilized  man. 

Concerning  quality  of  Indian  voices,  let  me  quote  a  line 
from  one  of  the  very  earliest  books  written  about  our  aborigines. 
William  Wood  visited  the  Plymouth  and  Massachusetts  Bay 
colonies  not  long  after  their  settlement,  and  wrote  an  account 
of  his  observations  under  the  title  "New  England's  Prospect," 
which  was  published  in  London  in  1034.  In  the  course  of  a 
chapter  devoted  to  Indian  women  he  says: 

"Their  musick  is  lullabies  to  quiet  their  children,  who  gen- 
erally are  as  quiet  as  if  they  had  neither  spleene  or  lungs. 
To  hear  one  of  these  Indians  unseene,  a  good  eare  might  easily 
mistake  their  untaught  voyce  for  the  warbling  of  a  well  tuned 
instrument.     Such  command  have  they  of  their  voices." 

My  own  testimony  would  be  that  there  is  nothing  whatever 
in  the  Indian's  voice  to  distinguish  it  from  the  white  man's. 
Much  singing  in  open  air  and  frequent  forcing  of  the  voice 
to  sound  extremely  high  tones,  combine  to  produce  a  rather 
harsh,  generally  nasal  quality  that  is  especially  apparent  in 
the  upper  register,  but  in  the  medium  and  lower  registers  the 


80  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

quality  is  much  more  agreeable;  and  when  the  singing  is  of 
the  quiet  sort  that  goes  on  in  the  tepee  or  wigwam,  the  harsh- 
ness disappears  altogether.  The  nasal  quality  is  much  less 
noticeable  among  the  Ojibways  as  compared  to  the  plains 
Indians.  I  have  heard  many  individual  voices  of  exquisite 
beauty  in  Ojibway  land.  One  of  the  purest,  freshest  sopranos 
I  ever  heard  airywhere  was  the  possession  of  an  ungainly, 
elderly,  almost  repulsive-looking  squaw.  In  this  instance  I 
agree  with  the  observer  of  three  centuries  ago,  above  quoted. 
Her  voice,  herself  unseen,  heard  in  meaningless  vocables  would 
have  seemed  like  a  rarely  sweet  flute.  In  general,  if  differences 
in  language  could  be  ignored,  the  unseen  Indian's  singing 
would  readily  pass  for  a  white  man's. 

INSTRUMENTAL   OUTFIT. 

The  Indian's  meagre  outfit  of  instruments  was  not  designed 
for  the  production  of  music  for  its  own  sake,  but  either  to 
assist  the  voice,  or  to  take  the  place  of  it  in  certain  rare  con- 
tingencies. His  one  important,  essential  instrument  is  the 
drum.  This  is  made  of  a  frame,  or  hoop  of  ash  across  which 
is  stretched  untanned  caribou  or  deer  skin.  Its  size  varies 
from  a  few  inches  to  more  than  two  feet  in  diameter,  and  the 
depth  of  the  frame  varies  also,  the  average  distance  between  the 
skin  surfaces  being  somewhere  from  four  to  six  inches.  It 
is  held  in  the  left  hand  by  a  thong  attached  to  the  frame,  and 
beaten  with  a  short  stick  held  in  the  right.  Among  the  Sioux 
and  other  tribes  the  drum  usually  has  only  one  surface,  and 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS  81 

the  instrument  is  often  as  large  as  a  washtub,  in  which  case 
it  is  set  on  the  ground,  open  side  down,  and  two  or  more  players 
pound  upon  it  at  the  same  time.  Every  Ojibway  drum  that 
I  have  seen  in  actual  use  had  two  surfaces,  each  decorated  with 
crude  designs  in  color,  and  provided  with  the  thong  handle 
so  that  it  might  be  held  free  before  the  singer  while  he  accom- 
panied himself. 

This  instrument  when  well  made  and  played  enthusiastically 
has  extraordinary  force.  One  was  presented  to  me  by  an 
Ojibway  friend,  Wabena  Obetossoway,  with  the  earnest  in- 
junction always  to  warm  it  before  using.  The  Indian  invari- 
ably holds  his  drum  over  a  fire  before  playing  upon  it.  and 
he  is  keenly  distressed  when  the  humidity  of  the  atmosphere 
prevents  the  skin  from  remaining  perfectly  dry.  I  have  my- 
self become  sensitive  to  the  difference  between  the  sound  of 
a  warmed  and  perfectly  dry  drum  and  one  that  has  not  been 
properly  prepared  for  performance.  The  skin  surfaces  absorb 
moisture  from  the  air  and,  in  damp  weather,  respond  to  the 
stick  with  dullness  that  is  the  reverse  of  inspiring.  In  fact, 
the  drum  is  a  good  barometer.  Its  tone  will  foretell  rain  many 
hours  in  advance  of  its  coming. 


AX  EXPERIMENT  IX  ART  WITH  A  DRUM. 

I  had  occasion  to  test  the  power  of  the  drum  in  the  winter 
of  1903  when  some  of  my  Ojibway  friends  were  giving  enter- 
tainments in  New  York.  I  had  written  a  set  of  variations 
on  one  of  their  favorite  songs — "Old  Shoes" — and  conceived 


82  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

what  seemed  to  be  the  happy  notion  of  substituting  the 
aboriginal  instrument,  with  an  Indian  player,  for  the  conven- 
tional tympani;  for  the  Indian's  drum,  though  it  generally 
has  recognizable  pitch,  does  not  enter  into  any  harmonic  rela- 
tion with  his  melody.  In  the  song  as  given  by  the  Indians  in 
their  own  way,  the  drum  is  beaten  in  a  perfectly  regular 
alternation  of  strong  and  weak  strokes,  and  as  in  my  variations 
I  had  not  departed  from  the  original  time  or  tempo,  it  was 
evident,  theoretically,  that  all  the  Indian  drummer  would  have 
to  do  would  be  to  pound  his  instrument  in  his  accustomed 
manner,  the  white  musicians  undertaking  to  follow  him. 

We  rehearsed  the  piece  first  without  the  drum,'  and  when 
the  orchestra  had  "got  the  hang"  of  its  somewhat  disconcerting 
rhythm,  I  sent  for  Tetebahbundung,  about  whose  charming 
personality  and  unusual  musical  gifts  I  shall  speak  later.  I 
explained  to  him  what  we  were  about  to  do  and  told  him  to 
drum  "Old  Shoes"  as  slowly  or  as  fast  as  he  liked,  and  that 
we  would  join  with  him  after  he  had  made  a  start.  The 
orchestra  was  of  the  conventional  symphonic  make-up,  strings, 
wood,  horns  and  brass,  numbering  forty-two  pieces.  Tetebah- 
bundung began  placidly,  and  in  the  first  statement  of  the  theme 
all  went  well.  The  succeeding  variations  naturally  introduced 
more  and  more  complexity  and  increasing  volume  of  sound. 
As  the  volume  increased,  so  did  the  reverberations  of  Tetebah- 
bundung's  drum.  He  was  not  disturbed  in  the  least  by  the 
many  transformations  through  which  the  familiar  song  passed, 
but  he  was  considerably  excited  as  the  shrieking  of  wood  and 
the  blare  of  brass  rose  up  in  waves  to  overwhelm  him,  and  he 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS  83 

increased  the  force  of  his  strokes  concurrently  until,  when  we 
were  about  half  way  through  I  seemed  to  hear  little  more  than 
the  thundering  of  the  drum.  There  was  a  confused  roar 
from  the  band,  but  not  a  shred  of  theme  was  distinguishable. 
We  tried  it  several  times,  Tetebahbundung  patiently  agreeing 
to  hold  himself  in  check,  but  he  was  not  equal  to  the  demands 
of  the  occasion.  His  enthusiasm  got  the  better  of  his  judgment 
every  time  to  the  end  that  the  piece  sounded  like  a  drum  solo 
faintly  accompanied  by  forty-two  instruments  played  at 
random.  We  had  to  give  it  up,  and  when  the  variations  were 
presented  to  the  public,  the  tympanist  marked  the  rhythm  on 
the  comparatively  subdued  bass  drum. 

The  Indian  drum  is  usually  supplemented  by  rattles  of 
various  shapes  and  sizes.  The  commonest  type  consists  of  a 
gourd  partly  filled  with  pebbles  or  shot.  Horns  of  animals 
are  sometimes  used  for  this  purpose,  and  there  are  many 
quaint  contrivances  like  tiny  shallow  drums  provided  with 
wooden  handles.  The  rattle  is  shaken  in  rhythmic  unison  with 
the  drum. 


THE  SO-CALLED  FLUTE  AND  ITS  USE. 

Besides  these  two  instruments  of  percussion  there  is  one 
other,  improperly  called  a  flute,  for  it  is  of  the  flageolet  type. 
It  consists  of  a  straight  cedar  stick,  about  as  long  as  an  ordinary 
flute,  that  has  been  split  in  half,  both  portions  grooved  the 
entire  length,  and  then  glued  together  to  form  a  tube.  One 
end  is  whittled  away  for  a  mouthpiece.     A  few  inches  from  tin's 


84  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

end  the  tube  is  partially  stopped,  and  just  beyond  the  obstruc- 
tion there  is  a  longitudinal  opening  partially  closed  with  a 
wooden  block  fashioned  usually  to  represent  an  animal.  This 
is  slightly  movable  and  is  held  in  place  by  a  thong  wound 
around  the  tube.  Six  finger  holes,  at  approximately  equal 
distances  from  one  another,  are  burned  along  the  length  of 
the  tube,  and  just  at  the  further  end  the  tube  is  encircled 
by  five  holes  to  provide  for  the  freer  emission  of  air.  I 
cannot  find  that  there  is  ever  any  attempt  to  place  the  finger 
holes  scientifically,  and  the  result  is  that  the  instruments  are 
ludicrously  out  of  tune  and  no  two  are  ever  alike  in  funda- 
mental pitch,  or  scale.  The  example  in  my  possession,  which 
I  found  and  bought  after  weeks  of  search,  for  the  instru- 
ment is  rare  among  the  Ojibways,  has  a  soft,  rather  mel- 
ancholy tone  that  would  be  agreeable  if  the  intervals  were 
in  accordance  with  any  recognized  scale.  Its  lowest  tone  is 
approximately  D  in  the  bass  clef. 

So  far  as  I  can  learn  there  is  only  one  use  to  which  the 
flute  is  put.  No  tunes  are  composed  expressly  for  it,  but  it 
always  serves  as  a  substitute  for  a  bashful  lover's  voice.  If 
the  young  man  has  not  the  courage  to  declare  himself  openly 
to  his  sweetheart,  he  hides  himself  in  the  bushes  near  her  family 
teepee  at  sunrise,  knowing  that,  according  to  Indian  domestic 
custom,  she  will  be  the  first  to  rise  and  go  to  the  neighboring 
spring  for  water  preliminary  to  preparation  of  breakfast. 
When  she  appears  he  plays  a  love  song  on  his  flute.  This  is 
his  declaration.  It  must  be  understood  that  words  are  asso- 
ciated in  the  player's  mind  with  the  melody.     The  maiden  may 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS  85 

not  know  what  they  are,  for  the  song  may  have  been  com- 
posed expressly  for  her,  but  she  knows  that  it  is  a  love  song 
and  that  it  comes  from  an  eager  suitor.  In  all  probability  the 
concealed  lover  will  repeat  his  serenade  many  consecutive  morn- 
ings, for  the  maiden's  endeavor  will  be  to  find  out  who  he  is 
before  she  gives  him  any  sign  whatever.  She  will  discover  his 
identity — what  maiden  in  any  nation  or  clime  would  not? — and 
if  she  favors  his  suit  she  will  make  her  feelings  known,  where- 
upon the  lover  will  forego  the  flute  and  join  her  at  the  spring. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  she  disapproves,  she  may  tease  the  hope- 
ful swain  by  giving  no  sign,  thus  compelling  him  to  repeat 
his  serenade  day  after  day  until  discouragement  overcomes  de- 
sire. 

The  flute,  therefore,  does  not  figure  as  a  means  to  instru- 
mental music,  which  was  wholly  unknown  to  the  aboriginal 
Indian,  but  as  a  substitute  for  the  voice;  and  in  the  making 
of  love  songs  care  is  often  taken  that  they  shall  be  capable  of 
reproduction  upon  the  flute.  In  view  of  the  custom  described 
it  is  not  surprising  that  very  many  Indian  love  songs  contain 
references  to  sunrise  and  the  spring,  or  fountain. 

Coming  now  to  consideration  of  the  structure  of  Indian 
music,  I  must  make  perfectly  clear,  what  has  been  implied 
previously,  that  the  aboriginal  Indian  had  no  conception  of 
harmony,  and  that  the  modern  Indian  never  employs  it  in  his 
songs.  There  is,  of  course,  the  relation  of  voices  in  the  octave, 
for  men  and  women  sing  together;  and  now  and  again  there 
is  momentary  harmony  in  certain  ceremonial  songs  where  two 
singers   alternate  in  stating  the  theme.      The  second   some- 


86  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

times  begins  before  the  first  has  finished — after  the  manner 
of  the  stretto  in  contrapuntal  writing — so  that  for  a  measure  or 
so  there  seem  to  be  two  individual  parts;  but  this  is  to  be 
attributed  either  to  accident,  or  the  solemn  enthusiasm  of  the 
singer,  and  not  at  all  to  any  perception  of  harmonic  relation- 
ship. I  have  heard  one  Ojibway  who  undertook  occasionally 
to  add  an  independent  part  to  a  chorus.  He  called  his  effort 
"undertones,"  and  it  consisted  in  singing  the  melody  a  minor 
third  below  the  other  voices.  The  effect  was  barbaric  in  the 
extreme  and  so  disturbing  to  the  other  Indians  that  the  song 
usually  broke  up  in  confusion  when  far  from  the  end,  or  the 
others  changed  their  pitch  and  sang  the  conclusion  in  unison 
with  the  innovator.  It  is  fair  to  presume  that  this  abortive 
attempt  at  part  singing  was  due  to  the  individual's  desire  to 
make  music  in  white-man  fashion. 

PRIMITIVE  CONVENTIONS. 

Study  of  the  music  of  any  primitive  people  has  a  special  value 
in  that  it  brings  us  in  touch  with  the  very  beginnings  of  the 
art;  and  the  music  of  our  North  American  Indians  offers 
unusual  advantages  for  observation  inasmuch  as  it  includes 
several  stages  in  the  process  of  evolution.  We  find  in  it 
perhaps  not  the  rudest  music  of  the  world,  but  a  type  of  song 
wherein  speech  melts  insensibly  into  singing,  so  that  the 
notator  is  puzzled  to  find  where  declamation  ends  and  song 
begins;  and  from  this  crude  suggestion  of  musical  expression 
we  pass  in  review  rudimentary  melodies  wherein  the  art  prin- 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS  87 

ciple  of  form  manifests  itself  only  in  the  slightest  degree,  then 
others  which  betray  clearly  a  groping  after  formal  expression, 
until,  in  the  songs  of  the  Ojibways,  we  come  upon  examples 
of  perfect  tunes,  periodic  in  structure,  aesthetically  interesting, 
in  brief,  a  type  that  marks  the  lust  step  in  purely  melodic 
music.  If  the  Ojibways  had  been  so  situated  that  they  could 
have  proceeded  with  the  development  of  their  music  unin- 
fluenced by  contact  with  civilization,  the  next  step  would  in- 
evitably have  been  harmony.  Whether  this  step  would  have 
been  taken  in  one  or  twenty  centuries  is  matter  for  useless  spec- 
ulation. In  order  to  arrive  at  their  comparative  advancement 
in  music,  the  Ojibways  have  had  to  break  away  from  certain 
traditions  or  conventions  of  the  red  race.  We  are  not  con- 
cerned at  present  with  how  they  came  to  do  so,  or  why  they  are 
musically  superior.  The  fact  is  that,  having  in  mind  the  songs 
of  such  other  tribes  as  are  now  available  for  study,  Indian 
music  is  the  all  but  hopeless  victim  of  conventionality.  It  is 
possible  to  classify  the  songs  according  to  various  categories. 
but  in  so  doing  we  are  guided  by  the  words  rather  than  the 
melodic  structure,  for  though  an  Indian  never  would  mistake  a 
ceremonial  for  a  love  song,  supposing  the  tune  were  sung  to 
meaningless  words,  yet  after  all,  the  songs  melodically  con- 
sidered are  of  pretty  much  the  same  type.  A  great  proportion 
of  them  begin  with  an  introduction  that  is  rudely  analogous  to 
the  recitativo  secco  with  which  the  elder  masters  p receded  their 
arias.  This  introduction  may  be  melodic  in  character,  or  a 
monotone;  it  may  be  brief,  or  as  long  as  the  song  proper  that 
follows;    it    mav   have    words,    or    meaningless    syllables,    or 


88  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

simply  the  vowel  sound  ah.     A  Pawnee  once  sang  for  me  eight 
love  songs  and  every  one  of  them  began  with  the  following: 


* 


1 


1 


Ah! 

The  song  proper  then  started  on  the  fourth  beat  of  the  second 
measure.  iy 

Oftentimes  the  introduction  is  barely  distinguishable  from 
declamation,  and  the  more  earnest  the  singer  the  less  like 
music  is  his  utterance.  The  song  proper,  which  may  consist 
of  no  more  than  one  word,  will  have  at  the  least  a  melodic 
impulse;  that  is,  it  may  be  recognized  as  the  beginning  of  a 
possible  tune,  but  though  there  may  be  repetition,  and  even 
some  sort  of  imitation,  there  is  anything  but  a  logical  develop- 
ment of  the  musical  idea.  On  the  contrary  there  is  a  speedy 
lapse  into  conventional  phrases,  or  fragments  of  phrases, 
leading  generally  to  a  conventional  ending  far  down  in  the 
gamut.  Time  and  again  in  notating  songs  of  this  type  I 
have  had  my  interest  genuinely  stirred  by  the  melodic  impulse 
only  to  come  swiftly  to  a  sense  of  keen  disappointment  because 
the  promise  of  beauty  was  not  fulfilled.  This  is  another  way 
of  saying  that  civilized  man  demands  that  music  shall  be 
not  only  fluent  but  symmetrical.  He  may  not  insist  upon  the 
eight-bar  period,  but  he  does  crave  some  manner  of  propor- 
tion, and  in  this  respect  the  Indian  generally  fails  to  satisfy  him. 

A  less  number  of  songs,  but  still  a  large  proportion,  begin 
without  introduction,  but,  as  in  the  others,  the  melodic  impulse 
is  lost  in  conventional  phrases  almost  as  soon  as  the  listener 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS  89 

becomes  conscious  of  it.  Very  rarely  there  are  found  songs 
that  have  neither  introduction  nor  conventional  ending,  and  in 
these  there  is  the  closest  approximation  to  periodic  structure. 


MONOTONY. 

The  familiar  reproach  of  Indian  music  is  its  monotony,  a 
characterization  that  has  abundant  truth  and  yet  that  is  some- 
what misleading.  Remove  the  drum,  and  listen  patiently,  and 
it  will  be  found  that  no  little  variety  is  infused  into  the  conven- 
tional introductions  and  conclusions.  Let  us  see,  then,  what 
it  is  that  gives  the  appearance  of  monotony.  There  are  the 
conventional  introductions  and  endings,  conventional  in  that 
they  work  over  and  over  a  few  brief  fragments  of  melody  that 
in  themselves  have  little  significance  or  appeal  to  the  sense 
of  beauty  in  tone.  Again  these  same  fragments  reappear  in 
many  of  the  songs  proper,  slightly  expanded  at  times  but 
seldom  so  modified  as  to  come  to  us  with  an  impression  of 
novelty.  There  are  two  groups  of  three  notes  each,  so  similar 
in  form  and  effect  as  to  be  regarded  as  the  same  motive — 
one  a  variation  of  the  other — that  crop  out  in  the  majority  of 
the  songs  of  all  the  tribes  whose  music  I  have  examined. 
These  groups  are: 


They  occur  in  all  parts  of  the  scale,  often  varied  in  the 
relative  time  values  of  the  notes,  but  manifestly  the  same 
melodic  impulse  always;  and,  speaking  of  them  as  one  and  the 


90  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

same,  it  might  properly  be  regarded  as  the  Indian's  leading 
motive.  It  will  be  found  in  most  of  the  Ojibway  songs  pre- 
sented here,  and  it  forms  part  of  the  principle  melodic  idea 
in  "My  Bark  Canoe." 

Proceeding  with  the  discussion  of  monotony,  it  is  evident 
that  a  rather  high  degree  of  constructive  skill  would  be  required 
to  infuse  grateful  individuality  into  tunes  that  harped  well 
nigh  incessantly  on  one  motive.  Further  than  the  points 
enumerated  is  the  fact  that  the  majority  of  Indian  songs  have 
at  least  one  rather  long  passage  of  absolute  monotone,  or 
chant,  and  that  the  prevailing  tendency  is  to  begin  as  high 
as  the  singer  can  sound  a  tone  and  descend  gradually  to  rest 
on  a  tone  an  octave  or  more  below.  I  have  heard  the  Ojibways 
themselves  utilize  conventional  endings  that  compelled  them 
to  whisper  the  final  words  because  the  required  tone  was  below 
the  range  of  their  voices.  This  continual  reaching  for  the 
depths  necessarily  gives  an  impression  of  sameness,  as  if  all 
Indian  songs  were  cut  from  the  same  piece,  or  constructed 
upon  a  rigid  formula,  an  impression  that  is  deepened  by  their 
lack  of  structural  proportion.  It  is  not  enough  to  say  that  form 
is  essential  to  beauty  in  the  art  of  tone,  for  form,  as  the 
musician  understands  the  term,  is  boundless  in  its  variety;  let 
us  say,  rather,  that  civilization  demands  resting  points,  or 
punctuation  in  its  music,  and  that  without  them  the  civilized 
ear  finds  difficulty  in  grasping  a  melody  In  the  early  days 
of  Wagner's  "infinite  melody"  how  many  were  they  who  de- 
cried the  master  because  of  his  monotony!  To  the  uninitiated 
his  music  was  meaningless  noise  because  he  ignored  convention 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS  91 

and  would  not  condescend  to  cast  his  melodies  in  periodic  form. 
The  mind  does  not  perceive  a  melody  as  a  whole  in  the  same  way 
that  the  eye  takes  in  a  statue,  or  a  painting,  at  a  glance,  and  the 
reason  for  this  lies  in  the  fact  that  music  is  not  stationary.  The 
very  essence  of  music  is  motion,  not  merely  in  the  sense  that  it 
depends  upon  vibration,  but  that  it  consists  in  a  succession  of 
tones  that  have  relation  to  one  another  in  the  order  of  their  com- 
ing to  the  ear.  While  we  are  in  the  very  act  of  perceiving  the 
relationship  of  two  tones,  a  third  relationship  is  making,  and  so 
on  to  the  end.  The  possibility  of  making  an  art  out  of  tones 
depends  upon  the  capacity  of  the  mind  to  hold  the  impression 
of  several  succeeding  relationships  as  a  whole,  this  whole  con- 
stituting but  a  fragment  of  an  entire  melody,  or  period.  This 
fragment  may  be  called  a  motive,  or  a  phrase,  and  the  end  of  it 
is  marked  by  a  pause  of  some  kind,  usually  the  sustaining  of  the 
final  tone,  which  thus  becomes  a  new  point  of  departure  for 
the  next  phrase.  If  the  following  phrases  were  wholly  dis- 
similar to  the  first,  the  agreeable  impression  made  by  the  first 
would  not,  could  not  be  retained,  and  at  the  end  of  the  last 
phrase  the  average  person  of  musical  intelligence  would  not 
remember  the  first  phrase  sufficiently  to  reproduce  it.  So  it 
will  be  found  that  in  the  construction  of  those  melodies  that 
appeal  most  strongly,  the  succeeding  phrases  are  modifications 
of  the  first,  the  composer  seeking  to  reinforce  the  initial  im- 
pression until,  when  it  is  securely  fixed,  he  introduces  a  phrase 
in  contrast,  of  entirely  different  relationship;  and  that  con- 
trasting phrase  he  is  at  pains  to  re-introduce  literally,  or  with 
slight  variation,  before  the  melody  as  a  whole  is  complete. 


92  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

Let  no  layman  infer  that  the  composer  is  conscious  of  the 
process  described.  Given  a  sense  of  proportion,  in  other  words 
artistic  feeling,  and  creative  talent,  and  the  entire  tune  sings 
itself  so  far  as  the  composer  is  concerned.  Cold  analysis  sub- 
sequently proves  the  symmetry  of  the  melody  and  indicates 
the  subtle  process  by  which  it  came  to  being. 

Mention  of  Wagner  was  made  for  the  purpose  of  illustra- 
tion, not  to  institute  any  comparison  between  his  marvellous 
creations  and  the  ingenuous  musical  utterances  of  the  Indian, 
but  it  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  man}'  were  they  who  had  to 
listen  repeatedly  to  Wagner's  music  and  study  hard  before 
they  could  receive  it  gratefully.  It  needs  no  saying  now  that 
there  is  ample  deference  to  form  in  Wagner's  compositions. 
We  were  staggered  at  first  by  his  vaulting  genius  which  com- 
pelled us  to  grasp  and  retain  melodic  relationships  grouped  in 
long  successions  of  tones.  The  Indian,  deficient  in  sense  of 
proportion,  neglects  necessary  pauses,  and  rambles  on,  to  our 
perceptions  incoherently,  until  the  end;  and  after  all  my  ob- 
servation of  his  music  I  am  at  considerable  loss  to  understand 
how  he  himself  can  retain  a  permanent  impression  of  his  melo- 
dies— that  is,  how  he  can  remember  them  sufficiently  well  to 
sing  a  given  song  always  in  the  same  way,  which  he  seldom 
fails  to  do. 

STANDARDS   OF    COMPARISON. 

There  is  this  further  to  be  said  before  we  leave  consideration 
of  monotony :  our  own  popular  songs  are  steeped  in  convention. 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS  93 

It  is  impossible  to  survey  the  art  of  any  foreign  people  without 
instituting  comparisons.  We  may  not  be  conscious  of  it.  but 
in  listening  to  the  Indian  we  are  forever  gauging  his  efforts 
by  the  standard  of  our  own.  There  is  nothing  wrong  in  this. 
and  it  is  so  self-evidently  a  necessary  part  of  our  observation 
that  mention  of  it  is  sufficient;  but  we  may  fall  into  error  In- 
setting up  an  unfair  standard.  The  standard  I  try  to  main- 
tain in  my  own  mind  is  sucrcrested  bv  the  term  used  above— 
"popular  songs," — for  the  music  of  an  uneducated  people 
cannot  properly  be  compared  with  the  creations  of  geniuses, 
or  talented  men  who  have  had  every  opportunity  for  the  cul- 
tivation of  their  gifts.  Consider  for  a  moment  the  matter  of 
conventional  endings.  Civilized  composers  have  devised  a  con- 
siderable number  of  endings,  but  they  are  incalculably  few  in 
comparison  with  the  total  output  of  songs:  and  in  our  popular 
songs  of  the  day  the  endings  are  limited  to  a  still  smaller  pro- 
portion. And  how  much  real  variety  is  there  in  the  melodic 
impulse  of  the  annual  avalanche  of  "new"'  songs  i1  It  has  been 
my  painful  duty  on  several  occasions  to  examine  some  dozens 
of  new  songs,  and  the  utter  absence  of  originality,  of  any 
recognizable  departure  from  the  safe,  beaten  track  which  the 
public  is  sujmosed  to  enjoy,  has  been  depressing  in  the  extreme. 
It  has  come  nigh  to  making  me  a  pessimist  so  far  as  our  mu- 
sical possibilities  are  concerned.  I  am  no  prude  in  this  matter. 
I  do  not  despise  popular  songs  but,  on  the  contrary,  try  to  find 
good  in  them.  Sometimes  I  am  rewarded.  In  its  day  I  rather 
like  "Bedelia,"  and  my  blood  stirred  to  the  swing  of  "Annie 
Roonev."     After  this  confession  I  am  sure  I  shall  not  be  mis- 


94  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

understood  when  I  affirm  that  the  white  man's  popular  song 
outdoes  the  Indian's  in  its  appearance  of  construction  according 
to  a  rigid  formula. 

These  things  depend  upon  point  of  view,  that  is,  education 
and  environment.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  Martian  in- 
vestigator suggested  in  a  previous  chapter  would  find  our 
hymns  cast  pretty  much  in  the  same  mould,  and  our  secular 
songs  well  nigh  indistinguishable  one  from  another.  Spec- 
ulation aside,  I  once  sent  two  exceptionally  musical  Ojibways 
to  a  song  recital  in  Carnegie  Hall,  Xew  York.  It  was  given 
by  one  of  our  most  distinguished  vocalists,  and  the  programme 
consisted  in  the  main  of  choice  songs  by  Schubert,  Schumann 
and  Franz.  Business  unhappily  prevented  me  from  going 
with  the  Indians,  but  I  had  a  friend  accompany  them  to  observe 
the  effect.  Poor  fellows!  I  fear  the  experiment  was  rather 
cruel,  but  they  sat  like  statues  throughout  the  performance, 
never  manifesting  by  yawn  or  restlessness  anything  but  the 
most  studious  attention.  They  made  no  comment  to  my  friend 
and  were  extremely  reticent  in  discussing  the  event  with  me. 
When  the  Indian  frees  his  mind,  he  is  the  most  outspoken 
person  in  the  world,  but  he  is  also  most  polite  and  considerate 
of  others'  feelings.  My  friends  were  reluctant  to  tell  me  how 
they  enjoyed  the  treat  I  had  set  before  them,  and  they  would 
not  Jie.  At  length  one  of  them,  urgently  pressed,  said: 
"It  was  undoubtedly  very  fine.  It  was  a  beautiful  hall 
and  the  man  had  a  great  voice.  But  it  seemed  to  us  as  that 
he  sang  the  same  song  over  and  over,  only  that  sometimes  he 


STRUCTURE  AXD  MEANS  95 

made  it  long  and  sometimes  short."  Which  is  to  say  that  the 
Ojibways  were  ineffably  bored  by  the  lack  of  variety  in  Schu- 
bert, Schumann,  and  Franz. 


A  GLIMPSE  AT  AN   EVOLUTIONARY   PROCESS. 

The  Ojibways  to-day  are  musically  in  a  period  of  transition. 
We  cannot  tell  when  the  movement  began,  or  why;  we  can 
only  guess  that  it  was  subsequent  to  the  coming  of  the  white 
race,  but,  in  spite  of  the  neglect  of  music  as  a  suhject  for 
scientific  research,  it  is  possible  to  trace  its  progress  for  sub- 
stantially a  century  and  establish  some  significant  facts.  One 
is  that  the  Ojibways,  in  refining  what  was  and  is  their  own, 
have  not  discarded  anything  that  was  essential  to  a  distinctive 
style.  Their  music  still  stands  the  test  of  analysis  and  is  in- 
dubitably Indian.  What  they  have  discarded  consisted  not 
in  original  melody,  but  in  ineffective  mannerisms.  Many  of 
their  songs  still  have  conventional  endings;  some  of  the  oldest 
singers  still  begin  with  a  conventional  introduction;  the  line 
of  monotone  still  appears  in  the  majority  of  the  songs.  What 
might  be  the  eventual  result  of  the  gradual  change  of  ex- 
pression will  unhappily  never  be  known,  not  because  they  will 
not  continue  to  refine  their  songs,  but  because,  under  the  influ- 
ence of  civilization  they  will  forget  them;  but  that  result  may 
be  inferred  safely  from  what  has  been  accomplished,  and  that 
is  clearly  indicated  in  the  songs  that  accompany  this  volume. 

In  selecting  songs  for  publication  I  have  included  some  that 


96  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

are  distinctly  in  what  may  be  called  the  ancient  Ojibway  style, 
for  example,  the  "Visiting  Song,"  "A  Song  of  Faith,"  and 
others.  They  show  not  only  that  the  Ojibways  had  the  mu- 
sical mannerisms  common  to  other  tribes,  but  that  such  melodic 
impulse  as  was  hidden  in  the  mannerisms  was  superior  in  form 
and  aesthetic  value.  How  progress  has  been  made  toward  a 
more  artistic  expression  may  be  demonstrated  by  an  example 
which  also  illustrates  the  gradual  decay  of  the  native  art 
through  neglect.  For  this  purpose  I  choose  the  song  known 
in  its  English  version  as  "The  Lake  Sheen."  It  is  one  of  the 
most  popular  songs  among  the  Ojibways  themselves,  more 
widely  known,  I  think,  than  "My  Bark  Canoe."  I  may  say 
at  this  point  that  not  all  the  songs  I  have  collected  are  known 
throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  Ojibway  land.  Many 
appear  to  be  known  only  in  special  localities,  but  "The  Lake 
Sheen"  must  be  in  very  general  use  for  I  have  heard  it  from 
a  dozen  different  Indians  representing  as  many  places.  That 
this  is  not  a  modern  song  is  attested  by  the  fact  that  School- 
craft, writing  more  than  sixty  years  ago,  made  a  versified  trans- 
lation of  it.  Its  extended  distribution,  too,  is  suggested  by 
an  episode  in  one  of  Mr.  Stewart  Edward  White's  charming 
stories  where  he  tells  of  an  Indian  girl  singing  a  sweet  song 
and  quotes  a  line, 


'Mahng  o  doogwm  nindenendam." 


When  I  first  heard  the  song,  the  Ojibway  words  and  music 
were  as  follows: 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS 


<>7 


m 


:?  -- 


* 


Mang      o    doog     -    win     nind      en  -   en 


dam. 


nv     wah  ■ 


4      * 


1 


wah     sah     bo  -  ye 


zud. 


guay  -  che-  gizh     - 


ne  -  ne  -  mo 


i 


i 


E££ 


shayn a    -     ny  -  wah  wah  -  sah      bo    -  ye      -         zud 

In  this  form  I  heard  it  many  times  from  men,  women  and 
children.  That  was  early  in  my  acquaintance  with  the  O jib- 
ways,  when  I  understood  not  a  word  of  their  language,  and  I 
had  no  doubt  that  I  had  obtained  the  entire  song.  The  Indian 
of  whom  I  sought  a  translation  spoke  English  very  imper- 
fectly, and  such  words  as  he  could  master  were  all  but  unintel- 
ligible. I  gathered  as  much  as  this:  that  the  text  was  in  the 
first  person,  that  the  singer  was  seeking  for  his  sweetheart, 
and  that  he  was  in  doubt  about  the  significance  of  a  distant 
flash  upon  the  surface  of  the  lake.  It  was  clear  that  he  con- 
nected the  flash  with  his  sweetheart,  and  at  length  I  asked  the 
Indian  if  the  general  meaning  was  this:  "When  I  see  the  flash 
of  the  sun  upon  the  lake  I  think  it  is  my  sweetheart  beckoning 
to  me."  With  politeness  that  I  have  since  found  to  be  un- 
designedly misleading,  he  replied  that  that  was  about  it.  In 
his  attempt  at  interpretation  he  had  used  the  word  *'loon."'  but 
what  he  meant  by  it  he  could  not  make  me  understand.  I  bad 
forgotten  my  Schoolcraft  and  never  dreamed  that  I  was  dab- 
bling in  verse  that  he  had  preserved.  So,  quite  convinced  that  I 
was  on  the  right  track,  I  made  the  verses  that  accompany  the 


98 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


harmonized  version  on  other  pages  of  this  book,  and  to  this  day 
nobody,  Indian  or  white,  has  called  me  to  task  for  misinter- 
pretation. As  I  came  to  some  knowledge  of  the  language, 
I  saw  that  I  was  in  error,  but  then,  as  now,  the  music  was  my 
first  interest,  and  that  was  unmistakably  correct. 

Some  two  years  after  the  first  publication  of  the  song,  the 
Indian  who  had  tried  to  translate  for  me,  announced  a  dis- 
covery. He  had  met  an  aged  Indian  who  told  him  that  he  left 
out  more  than  half  the  song.  From  the  old  man  my  friend 
had  learned  the  entire  song  in  the  following  form : 


■    0    ..     ,  • r- 

-  0 

— 1 — 

n — k- H 

1  /T     "     r 

r 

4     i 

i" 

•>   i    • 

!                   J 

1  vv\    \ 

i 

r 

< 

•  • 

1 \\)    >■    1           i/ 

1     1 

i       ' 

1   i 

d 

Ne  -   ne  -    mo    -    shayn     ne  -  wah  -  ne 


ah,. 


ne  -  nio- 


=t 


4 — &—. &■ 


\ 


shayn  ne  -  wah-ne      -      ah 


Me  -   go  -  be     -     nish  gay  -  ze  -  wah  • 


m 


-<2- 


4- 


4—3- 


bung,. 


me  -  go- be     -     nish  gay- ze- wah     -     bung Kah-ne-wah- 


=t 


}     » 


:? 


----'- 


-rt- 


±A 


l 


—I 1 — 

bung     ne  -  wah  -  bun     -     dan. 


E   -    ge  -  wiz         nin   -   ge     wah  -  shen  ■ 


■  :      -J 


r-f-H-f— *   -  r  i^: 

4- 


WT4=3~- 


= 


n 


i^=fc 


ay,. 


guay  -  che-gizh     -     o      ne  -  ne-mo     -     shayn....         a   -    ny    wah 


m 


3=3=  =3= 


4 


± 


wah     sah       bo  -  ye 


zud. 


Mang    o     doog    -    win    nind    en  -    en 


mt 


■j  * 


m 


4=3-^ 


dam. 


a     -     ny-  wah  wah  -  sah      bo  -   ye 


zud. 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS  99 

The  words  mean:  "I  have  lost  my  sweetheart,  but  I  will 
leave  no  place  unsearched  and  will  find  her  if  it  takes  me  all 
night.  As  day  hreaks  I  think  I  can  see  her  in  the  distance, 
hut  as  I  draw  near  I  find  that  what  I  saw  was  the  flash  of 
a  loon's  wing  on  the  water."  It  will  he  observed  that,  though 
much  of  the  verse  had  been  forgotten,  nothing  melodic  had 
been  lost,  expansion  of  the  song  being  effected  by  literal  repe- 
tition. Inasmuch  as  the  compression  of  the  song  to  the  form 
in  which  I  first  heard  and  notated  it  is  quite  general,  and  not 
the  freak  or  carelessness  of  a  few  individuals,  I  am  inclined 
to  believe  that  the  change  from  the  older  to  the  modern  version 
was  due  to  the  Ojibway's  groping  for  formal,  that  is,  artistic, 
expression.  Musically  the  song  is  far  better  in  the  modern 
version  because  there  are  fewer  repetitions  of  the  leading 
phrase.  It  appears  that  the  Indian  singers  felt  the  tendency 
to  monotony  in  the  older  version,  and  as  they  were  not  educated 
in  music  and  knew  nothing  of  thematic  development,  they 
solved  the  art  problem  by  discarding  some  of  the  repetitions, 
thus  evolving  at  last  a  perfectly  made  tune  that  happens  also 
to  be  exquisitely  beautiful.  This  speculation  as  to  the  reason 
for  the  compression  of  the  song  may  appear  to  be  vain  at  this 
moment:  but  it  will  be  more  convincing  when  we  have  given 
some  consideration  to  the  nature  and  structure  of  Indian  verse. 

Still  another  version  of  "The  Lake  Sheen"  is  necessary  to 
a  complete  view  of  the  process  of  transition.  It  was  sung  to 
me  by  a  very  old  man,  one  who  clings  so  tenaciously  to  the 
ancient  ways  of  his  people  that  the  younger  men  complain 
that  they  cannot  sing  with  him  because  "he  does  not  get  the 


100 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


songs  right."  I  have  heard  his  disturbing  voice  in  choruses 
and  know,  what  perhaps  the  young  men  do  not  realize,  that  he 
is  harking  back  to  his  boyhood  when  shakes,  and  grace  notes, 
defiance  of  measure  and  devotion  to  conventional  phrases  were 
established  features  of  song,  and  when  the  essential  portion 
of  "The  Lake  Sheen"  ran  in  this  way: 


V-^a-^ — • * *-• » m *— 

_a  p       ra,:  |       i*    J   ; 

to=£j L- U_4-k 1       f      U- 

|Jp  4  ]    i — !— j-  -»— | — r^-r—r — 

4_j *  *  j  ■    *     •   \ 

\(\yi  *   •   0   *    \  ^^4~^—\ — •    *    0  -j — *  •  'v    \-^ 

tTp—f—m—    \ *—\~  -j S— j j- 1 4— ; , 1 

|^— \— f— *-  -4-0— *—J i-J S 

—J 4 — 1 1 1 \-             \ 

— *— ' # *^ — •— Hs* — u 

A   SONG   UNINFLUENCED   BY   THE   PROGRESSIVE    MOVEMENT. 

Let  us  now  glance  at  the  structure  of  a  song  in  which  there 
is  no  trace  of  the  influence  of  transition.  It  is  a  "Visiting 
Song,"  a  class  of  which  there  are  many  examples  still  lingering 
in  the  memory  of  the  older  Ojibways.  The  ancient  Indian 
was  greatly  given  to  visiting.  It  was  common  not  only  for  an 
entire  family,  but  an  entire  village  to  pack  up  necessary  uten- 
sils and  tramp  or  paddle  long  distances  to  pass  some  days  with 
friends.  When  the  visitors  came  within  earshot  of  the  homes 
where  hospitality  was  expected  as  ingenuously  as  it  would  be 
extended,  the  leader  of  the  party  lifted  up  his  voice  in  song 
for  the  purpose  of  giving  intimation  that  visitors  were  ap- 
proaching. In  this  instance  he  begins  with  a  long  introduction 
with  meaningless  syllables  in  which  he  states  the  theme,  so 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS  101 

to  speak,  of  the  song  proper,  and  all,  presumably,  join  in  when 
he  comes  to  the  words  that  convey  a  definite  message.  There 
follows  then  a  long,  meaningless  passage  similar  to  the  intro- 
duction. This  leads  to  an  imperfect  conclusion  and  to  recur- 
rence to  the  song  proper  when  the  meaningless  passage  is 
repeated  with  a  perfect  close.  Sometimes,  and  I  think  it  would 
prove  to  be  generally,  if  we  could  get  back  to  the  old  days 
and  observe  the  songs  in  actual  use,  there  is  a  second  recurrence 
to  the  song  proper  before  the  conclusion.  This  would  make 
three  separate  statements  of  the  song,  which  would  be  in  ac- 
cordance with  a  rule  of  Ojibway  music  that  certainly  was 
observed  in  former  times.  Tbe  song  which  I  employ  for  illus- 
tration was  used  in  winter,  when  the  visitors  had  to  tramp 
over  the  snow  and  ice,  and  when  the  prospective  hosts  would 
either  be  snuggled  within  their  dwellings  or  occupied  near  by. 
As  the  Indian  is  inured  to  cold  to  a  degree  that  amazes  the 
paleface,  it  is  quite  presumable  that  the  hosts  would  be  seated 
on  the  ice  and  snow  by  the  wigwam  door,  smoking  their  never 
neglected  pipes.  Under  such  circumstances  the  queer  words 
of  the  song  take  on  a  shadow  of  meaning  to  us.  Their  literal 
significance  is,  "Who  sits  on  the  ice  will  hear  me  singing."  By 
implication  there  is  an  added  significance — "and  know  that  1 
am  coming,  and  you  can  guess  how  many  are  with  me  by  the 
sound  of  our  voices."  It  may  be  that  the  Indian  had  a  subtler 
meaning  in  mind  to  the  effect  that  if  the  hosts  were  indoors 
they  might  not  receive  courteous  warning  of  the  approaching 
party,  but  that  if  any  one  were  sensible  or  lucky  enough  to  be 
without,  he  would  know  all  about  it.     Be  that  as  it  may,  the 


102  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

song  was  a  serious  one  to  the  Indian,  and  no  faint  suspicion 
of  humor  entered  into  his  conception  of  the  situation  or  the 
expression.  As  the  singer  did  not  maintain  a  fixed  time  value 
I  cannot  arrange  the  notes  in  measures,  but  the  accents  are 
indicated  by  the  grouping  of  notes  and  by  the  sign  >. 
I A 1     i B 1 


£Et=£ 


|P 


-m*- 


-I      I      tr-^a 


Hey  -  ah        hey     -     ah  hey  -  ah      hey       hey  -  ah        hey     all  hey  - 


rfS 


ah 


r-ft- 

f                    V      — « 

*v 

Y/~ 

— m — 1 — 1 s m*^, — I P-  — ^ — I — 

r  l     i\       n     '        i    i 

it  \ 

.  S  •  J         p      »*#        *  •     4*    m 

j     j      r    « 

Lvli 

.1) 

w—fh 

hey  -  ah      hey      hey  -   ah       hey  -  ah    hey 

>                                   > 

==-^ m~ : N- 

^0  .  0                  m         j 
■  ah       hey  -  ah      hey  -  ah     hah. 

> 

Mr 

— 0 » 0— — a *— ! — » • g^*-~  1 

— i 1 1 — — * — h y — ' — m—i — #— 

i  g  g  * — r  •  ^  rf^ 

4^ 

V       1          1          \j      v         *>       V       | 
O  -  git    -    ko nem  -  ah  -  dah  •  bit 

—& 9 1 1 gS — '■ 

ma  -  gah-nom  -  dog              hey  - 

V-¥- 

J.i     ,H 1 N P^ A 1 U 

— m—. — * a *— * — m £ — 

nV 

— *  »  '  *  ■  ; — i — j — ? — i — *- 

f          g f 0  ^     f   ■      *" 

LLL> 

W          *        \            i      J       if 

t) 

V                                          ^^          H> 

ah        hey       ah      hey  -  ah     hey  -  ah       ah       hey  -  ah     hey     hey-ah  hey  -  ah 


£=£ 


i 


hey  -  ah   hey  hey  -  ah   hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  notes  grouped  under  A  in  the  intro- 
duction are  a  substantial  statement  of  the  notes  eventually 
used  for  the  song  proper — that  is,  the  fragment  sung  to  in- 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS  103 

telligible  words,  "Ogit  ko  nemadabit  ninganomdog."     What 
follows  under  B  is  a  rude  imitation  of  the  last  part  of  A,  and 
the  rest  of  the  meaningless  passages  might  be  regarded  as 
rudimentary  thematic  development  as  far  as  C,  after  which  the 
notes  comprise  a  conventional  ending.     There  is  manifest  here 
no  high   degree  of  melodic  invention   although  the   leading 
phrase  has  distinctive  character,  that  is,  it  seems  like  the  be- 
ginning of  a  possible  tune;  but  there  is  a  trace  of  form,  a  faint 
perception  of  the  art  principle  of  imitation;  and  the  tonality, 
consistent  throughout,  is  clearly  established  by  the  final  notes. 
Songs  of  this  type  constitute  a  link  that  binds  the  Ojibways 
not  only  to  their  own  past,  but  to  many  other  Indian  peoples. 
It  may  be  said  to  be  the  crude  material  out  of  which  they  have 
developed  their  shorter  and  perfectly  finished  tunes.     When 
that  process  of  development  began  never  can  be  known.     I 
have  tried  in  vain  to  trace  these  tunes  to  their  origin.     Once 
I  thought  I  had  succeeded.     I  was  assured  that  Chief  Shing- 
wauk  composed  both  the  words  and  music  of  the  song  he  sang 
on  the  occasion  of  the  Prince  of  Wales's  visit  to  Canada.     That 
was  only  about  forty  years  back,  and  yet  the  melody,  as  sung 
into  the  gramophone  by  the  chief's  granddaughter,  was  of 
decidedly  ancient  character.     I  inferred  that  the  great  chief 
had  not  been  close  enough  to  civilization  to  acquire  its  musical 
manner,  but  it  was  my  method,  whenever  possible,  to  verify 
the  songs  by  asking  different  Indians  to  sing  them.     When, 
as  was  often  the  case,  an  Indian  declined  to  sing  a  given  song 
on  the  ground  that  he  was  not  sure  he  could  get  it  right,  I 
would  ask  him  to  listen  to  the  phonographic  record  of  it. 


104  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

More  than  once  this  led  to  further  information  of  value.  Some 
weeks  after  the  "Prince  of  Wales"  song  was  recorded  I  was 
working'  with  an  old  Indian,  John  Squaguan,  a  citizen  of 
Michigan,  who  remembered  the  occasion  of  Chief  Shingwauk's 
journey  and  the  song  that  was  made  for  it;  but  Squaguan 
doubted  whether  he  could  recall  all  the  "tones"  of  the  song. 
He  was  sure  he  would  know  it  if  he  heard  it.  I  put  the  cylin- 
der in  the  machine  and  he  listened  with  a  smile  of  delight. 
"Yes,"  he  said,  "that's  it.  It  was  an  old,  old  war  song  that 
our  people  used  when  they  started  out  to  meet  the  enemy. 
Shingwauk  used  the  tune  but  made  new  words  for  it  when 
he  went  to  meet  the  Prince."  The  song  and  further  informa- 
tion about  it  may  be  found  under  Songs  of  Travel  and  Death, 
in  Chapter  X.  It  is  not  in  common  use  at  present,  but  it 
represents  a  large  class  of  tunes  that  have  persisted  after 
the  original  words  were  forgotten.  By  unconscious  selection 
the  Ojibways  have  preserved  many  melodies  that  would  have 
become  extinct  with  the  passing  of  their  ancient  ceremonies. 
An  instance  is  the  "Morning  Star,"  once  a  sacred  song,  but 
now  used  as  a  love  song  to  three  different  sets  of  words  that 
I  know  of,  and  quite  likely  to  a  dozen  more. 

In  discussing  the  structure  of  Ojibway  songs,  I  have  not 
dipped  into  analysis  of  the  melodies  that  I  have  harmonized 
because  they  will  speak  for  themselves  to  any  student  of  theory. 
The  contrasting  and  balancing  phrases  cannot  escape  atten- 
tion, but  it  may  be  well  to  point  out  the  comparatively  rare 
occurrence  of  the  eight-bar  period  which  has  come  to  be  the 
standard  form  of  the  music  of  civilization.      It  occurs,  but 


STRUCTURE  AND  MEANS  105 

rather  more  frequent  is  the  period  of  six  bars,  subdivided  into 
phrases  of  three  bars  each,  and  often  with  a  concluding  phrase 
of  three  bars.  There  is  a  noticeable  tendency,  too,  for  struc- 
ture in  which  five  is  the  unit.  This  sometimes  brings  about 
a  ten-bar  period,  but  instances  of  the  eight-bar  or  four-bar 
period  comprised  of  measures  having  five  beats  each  are  more 
frequent.  The  five-beat  measure  is  substantially  a  three-beat 
followed  by  a  two-beat,  and,  for  the  sake  of  readier  grasp  of 
the  songs  I  have  sometimes  arranged  such  melodies  in  a  regular 
alternation  of  three-  and  two-beat  measures.  It  will  be  ob- 
served, further,  that  in  some  instances,  like  "Hiawatha's  Death 
Song,"  and  "The  Song  of  a  Coward,"  there  is  a  glorious  free- 
dom from  the  restraint  of  regular  bar  lines  that  yet  does  not 
result  in  unsymmetrical  structure. 


CHAPTER  VI 

MUSIC  FROM  THE  OJIBWAY  POINT  OF  VIEW 

THE  Ojibway's  respect  for  music  is  profound.  It  means 
more  to  him  than  it  does  to  us,  for  it  implies  verse  also. 
He  has  no  word  for  poetry.  Whatever  departs  from 
plain  prose  is  nogamon,  song,  which  means  that  his  poetry  is  not 
only  inseparable  but  indistinguishable  from  music.  Even  in  his 
oratory  the  voice  is  modulated  to  a  manner  of  utterance  that 
is  beyond  the  pale  of  declamation,  and  a  long  step  toward 
singing.  Among  all  civilized  peoples  the  art  of  expression 
through  verse  is  one  thing,  and  the  art  of  expression 
through  modulated  tones  is  quite  another,  linked  though  they 
often  are  by  the  deliberate  intent  of  the  composer,  and  always 
associated,  though  they  are,  in  the  popular  mind;  in  the  O jib- 
way  conception  the  two  arts  are  not  merely  linked  inseparably, 
they  are  fused  in  one. 

If  there  is  any  difficulty  in  grasping  this  conception,  let  us 
recall  for  a  moment  the  attitude  of  uneducated  whites  toward 
music.  I  have  often  observed  a  confusion  in  their  minds  with 
regard  to  song  that,  before  my  acquaintance  with  Ojibways, 
was  quite  incomprehensible  to  me.  This  was  once  expressed 
by  an  amazed  inquiry  as  to  how  I  could  make  music  for  words 
written  by  a  man  who  died  years  before  I  was  born.  Some- 
times I  have  hummed  a  tune,  or  sung  it  to  meaningless  syl- 

106 


THE  OJIBWAY  VIEW  OF  MUSIC  107 

lables,  and  asked  the  listener  if  he  knew  it.  On  receiving 
a  negative  answer  I  would  sing  a  line  or  two  with  words,  where- 
upon the  listener's  face  would  lighten.  Yes,  he  knew  that 
song,  and  immediately  would  proceed  to  sing  it  to  a  wholly 
different  tune.  Having  had  his  attention  called  to  the  melodic 
difference,  he  would  appear  to  be  deeply  puzzled,  and  it  would 
take  some  measure  of  patience  to  explain  to  him  that  the  tune 
I  hummed  was  not  the  same  as  the  one  he  sang;  and  at  the 
end  I  have  never  been  sure  that  the  discrimination  was  well 
established  in  his  mind. 

Of  course  I  was  dealing  with  a  low,  or  rather,  undeveloped 
order  of  intelligence,  but  it  is  fairly  clear  to  me  now  that 
the  confusion  was  due  to  a  mental  association  of  words  and 
music  so  firmly  fixed  that  the  music  as  such  made  no  im- 
pression upon  the  man's  mind,  and  was  merely  a  half  unrealized 
vehicle  for  expressing  the  words.  The  contemporary  O jib- 
way  has  taken  one  step  beyond  this,  as  is  evidenced  by  his 
conversion  of  ancient  ceremonial  songs  to  love  and  social  songs; 
but  his  difficulty  in  apprehending  music  as  a  distinct,  separate 
creation,  is  still  apparent.  Time  and  again,  after  I  had  come 
to  intimate  terms  with  the  tribe,  a  man  would  come  to  me 
saying  he  had  thought  of  a  new  song.  My  music  paper  was 
always  at  command  and  the  pencil  sharp.  The  Indian  would 
sing  his  "new"  song  through  only  to  reveal  to  me  a  set  of 
words  that  I  had  not  heard  before,  the  melody  being  substan- 
tially, and  often  exactly  the  same  as  I  had  taken  from  his 
lips  on  a  previous  occasion.  Some  of  the  Indians  could  not 
be  made  to  perceive  that  under  these  circumstances  they  had 


108  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

not  contributed  a  new  song  to  my  collection.  The  tones  might 
be  "very  like,"  yes,  but  the  nogamon  was  different, — and  yet 
nogamon  is  a  form  of  the  verb  that  means  I  sing.  This  was 
brought  out  in  a  most  interesting  way  in  the  course  of  special 
search  for  the  original  of  the  lines  in  "Hiawatha"  beginning, 

"Ewayea,  my  little  owlet." 

I  had  already  heard  and  notated  the  song  from  which  Long- 
fellow derived  the  line, 

"Hush,  the  naked  bear  will  get  thee," 

a  literal  translation  of  which  would  run  thus:  "Hush,  little 
baby,  go  to  sleep:  do  not  cry  or  the  naked  bear  will  eat  you." 
One  after  another  I  tried  the  squaws  who  came  my  way  with 
suggestions  and  direct  inquiries  intended  to  revive  memory  of 
"Ewayea,  my  little  owlet."  They  shook  their  heads.  They 
didn't  know  "ewayea;"  it  was  not  Ojibway,  some  other  lan- 
guage, Sioux,  perhaps,  but  not  Ojibway.  I  may  note  in  pass- 
ing that  the  Sioux  are  traditional  enemies  of  the  Ojibways. 
which  may  account  for  the  presumption  of  the  squaws  that 
this  strange  word  was  of  the  Sioux  tongue;  and  I  have  been 
told  recently  that  the  original  of  Longfellow's  charming 
quatrain  is  actually  to  be  found  in  the  songs  of  the  Sioux. 
I  hope  some  musician  will  hear  and  reduce  it  to  notes  before 
it  is  forgotten. 

Of  course  I  explained  patiently  to  the  Ojibway  squaws 
that  "Ewayea"  meant  nothing  in  any  language,  that  it  was 
merely  a  make-believe  word  like  those  that  abound  in  Ojibway 


THE  OJIBWAY  VIEW  OF  MUSIC  109 

songs  to  fill  up  when  real  words  are  lacking,  but  still  I  made 
no  progress.  Then  1  concentrated  attention  on  owlet.  Did 
they  never  playfully  call  their  papooses  owlets?  or  little  owls? 
They  seemed  to  see  a  grim  humor  in  the  question  but  denied 
knowledge  of  owlet  as  a  term  of  endearment.  So,  reluctantly 
I  was  forced  to  accept  the  dictum  of  a  chief,  who  lent  the 
sanction  of  his  interested  presence  when  I  was  questioning  a 
number  of  squaws  at  one  time,  to  the  effect  that  "we  Ojibways 
do  not  know  owlet,"  but  incidentally  I  had  every  squaw  sing 
every  lullaby  or  cradle  song  she  could  remember.  I  hoped 
yet  to  trace  in  one  or  another  a  suggestion  of  the  quatrain, 
and  failed  not  only  in  this  attempt,  but  also  in  getting  a  new 
song.  Every  single  lullaby  sung  to  me  by  the  Ojibway  squaws 
on  that  occasion  was  but  a  direct  repetition  or  slight  variation, 
so  far  as  the  tune  went,  of  "Hush,  the  naked  bear  will  get  thee." 

SINGING    CONTESTS. 

Whenever  you  come  upon  a  party  of  these  Indians,  be  it  a 
whole  village  on  a  journey,  or  a  scant  half  dozen,  you  may 
be  sure  that  at  least  one  among  them  has  his  drum  with  him. 
Unless  he  is  thoroughly  familiar  with  palefaces  that  chance 
his  way,  he  will  keep  the  instrument  concealed,  but  when  night 
comes  and  the  party  is  secure  from  intrusion,  it  will  be  produced 
from  its  bag  and  long  hours  will  be  rilled  with  music.  The 
drummer  always  sings.  The  others  generally  listen  with  ap- 
parent interest  and  satisfaction.  Now  and  again  they  add  their 
voices  to  the  song,  and  more  rarely  the  drum  passes  from  the 


110  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

first  singer  to  some  other  member  of  the  party,  but  by  no  means 
every  Ojibway  would  presume  to  take  his  turn  at  drumming. 
It  is  not  only  a  skilled  art,  and  not  only  do  the  Indians 
recognize  the  fact  that  some  are  musically  gifted,  and  some 
not,  but  there  enters  also  a  certain  jealousy,  with  which  white 
musicians  are  not  unfamiliar,  to  keep  the  accompanying  in- 
strument in  the  hands  of  one  performer.  I  have  many  a  time 
had  to  repress  my  smiles  at  sight  of  the  offended  dignity  of  an 
Ojibway  musician  when  I  have  loaned  my  own  drum  to  another 
that  I  might  induce  the  latter  to  sing. 

In  olden  days  this  rivalry  in  music  led  to  friendly  contests 
that  lacked  only  pageantry  and  a  judge,  or  jury,  to  be  quite 
analogous  to  the  tournaments  of  song  in  the  times  of  the 
Master  and  Minnesingers  of  Germany.  It  is  likely  that  such 
contests  are  held  to-day  in  the  remotest  wilds  of  Canada,  but 
it  has  never  been  my  good  fortune  to  witness  one.  An  old 
man  told  me  of  a  contest  at  which  he  was  present  when  a 
small  boy.  His  father  was  the  chief  of  the  village,  and  to 
him  came  another  chief  on  a  friendly  visit.  The  second  chief 
brought  a  number  of  his  people  with  him.  In  the  evening 
the  chiefs  sat  by  a  campfire,  the  sub-chiefs,  warriors  and  other 
members  of  the  tribe  being  seated  at  appropriate  distances. 
One  of  the  chiefs  was  a  visitor,  and  some  of  his  people  were  with 
him.  The  host  took  his  drum  and  sang,  all  listening  intently. 
At  the  end  he  passed  the  drum  to  the  visitor  who  sang  in  his 
turn.  After  several  songs  had  been  exchanged,  and  enthusiasm 
had  risen,  the  host  asked  his  guest  if  he  knew  a  certain  song. 
Yes,  and  he  would  like  to  hear  his  host  sing  it,  whereupon  the 


THE  OJIBWAY  VIEW  OF  MUSIC  111 

host  complied  on  condition  that  the  visitor  would  sing  it  after- 
wards. This  was  done,  the  visitor  making  some  changes  on 
the  ground  that  the  host  had  not  sung  the  song  aright.  Then 
followed  a  long  series  of  comparatively  unfamiliar  songs,  each 
taking  his  turn,  correcting  the  other,  singing  hetter  if  he 
could,  while  the  audience  applauded  in  characteristic  fashion, 
the  partisans  of  each  singer  trying  to  out-yell  the  others. 
There  was  much  laughter  as  impromptu  jokes  were  interpo- 
lated in  the  songs,  and  the  contest  ended  only  when  day  broke. 
As  a  rule  the  leading  voice,  as  the  drummer  is  often  called, 
is  respected  only  second  to  the  chief  because,  I  suppose,  he 
is  the  repository  of  so  much  that  the  tribe  venerates,  for  it  is 
certain  that  the  leading  voice  learned  his  songs  from  some 
older  singer  who  was  great  in  his  day.  I  have  observed  an- 
other link  in  this  that  helps  to  bind  us  and  the  red  men  in  a 
common  humanity,  i  e.,  the  singer  of  the  shadowy  past  was  al- 
ways a  great  man,  a  much  better  singer  than  any  who  lives 
to-day. 

PAGAN   IDEAS  AND  IDEALS. 

There  could  be  no  finer  exemplification  of  the  Ojibway's 
respect  for  music  than  the  experience  I  had  in  the  summer 
of  1903  with  a  venerable  pagan.  He  was  a  visitor  to  the  camp 
where  my  actor  friends  were  giving  open  air  performances 
of  their  play,  "Hiawatha,"  his  son-in-law  being  an  inconspic- 
uous member  of  the  company.  One  day  this  actor  came  to 
me. 

"I  thought  mebbe,"  said  he,  very  slowly,  "you  like  to  see 
an  old  gentleman.     She  is  my  wife's  father." 


112  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

Yes,  I  answered,  it  would  give  me  pleasure,  and  the  Indian 
added,  "She  is  a  great  singer,  she  knows  many  old,  old  songs, 
for  she  is  not  a  Christian  like  us." 

He  went  on  to  explain  how  the  old  gentleman — the  Ojibway 
seldom  says  man  or  woman ;  it  is  always  gentleman,  or  lady- 
had  resisted  every  attempt  to  convert  him.  Wearied  with  the 
appeals  of  missionaries  and  the  members  of  his  family  to  for- 
sake his  ancient  religion,  he  had  once  consented  to  he  baptized, 
but  he  had  gone  on  worshiping  Gitche  Manito  and  the  four 
winds  and  never  had  given  any  further  recognition  of  the 
strange  faith. 

"She  was  baptized,"  said  my  friend,  to  "stop  her  wife  from 
too  much  talk." 

At  the  time  of  this  conversation  the  old  gentleman  was  ab- 
sent from  the  camp  picking  berries,  but  in  the  early  evening 
I  called  on  him  at  his  son-in-law's  birch-bark  wigwam.  A 
light  but  severely  persistent  rain  was  falling.  The  women  and 
children  had  gone  inside  and  closed  the  door,  before  which, 
seated  on  stones,  smoking  their  pipes  and  serenely  indifferent 
to  the  downpour,  were  the  actor  and  the  old  gentleman.  Never, 
it  seemed  to  me,  was  the  designation,  gentleman,  more  aptly 
applied.  I  saw  a  man  whose  emaciated  frame,  white  hair  and 
quavering  voice  proclaimed  that  he  had  attained  at  least  the 
span  of  three  score  years  and  ten.  After  the  manner  of  the 
modern  Indian  he  had  allowed  his  sparse  beard  to  grow  so 
that  his  dusky  face  was  framed  in  white.  He  wore  the  most 
ill-fitting,  shabby  garments  I  had  ever  seen  upon  human  being, 
but  his  face  was  a  fine  picture  of  benignity,  and  his  manner 


THE  OJIBWAY  VIEW  OF  MUSIC  113 

dignified  without  affectation,  or  that  somewhat  characteristic 
pomposity  of  the  Indian  that  is  apt  to  provoke  amusement. 
Our  conversation  was  conducted  mainly  by  the  aid  of  his  son- 
in-law  as  interpreter,  for  he  knew  nothing  of  English  and 
I  was  timid  in  Ojibway.  We  talked  first  of  the  play,  which 
interested  him  greatly,  though  he  ventured  to  protest  mildly 
against  Longfellow's  perversions  of  Ojibway  traditions.  "It 
is  not  all  just  as  we  understand  it,"  he  said,  and  added  with 
fine  graciousness,  "hut  it  is  very  hard  for  the  white  man  to 
understand  the  Indian's  thought  and  feelings.  It  does  very 
well,  it  is  very  good." 

In  due  course  I  brought  the  conversation  around  to  music. 
I  had  heard  that  he  was  a  great  singer,  that  he  knew  many 
songs.  He  gravely  acknowledged  the  tribute.  Would  he  let 
me  hear  some,  or  one  of  them?  "Not  on  the  stage,"  he  replied 
quickly,  but  gently,  and  went  on  to  explain  that  the  band  of 
actors  had  their  singer  and  it  might  hurt  his  feelings  if  another 
were  put  in  the  work  beside  him.  Here  was  delicacy  of  feel- 
ing, it  seemed  to  me,  that  might  shame  some  of  our  white 
vocalists,  and  I  promptly  disclaimed  any  intention  of  sub- 
jecting him  or  his  rival  to  comparison.  I  told  him  about  my 
desire  to  learn  the  songs  of  his  people  partly  that  I  might 
inform  the  palefaces  about  them,  and  partly  to  preserve  them; 
and  his  son-in-law  explained  at  length  how  I  had  a  way  of 
making  signs  on  paper  by  means  of  which  I  could  remember 
any  song  I  heard,  and  by  which,  too,  other  persons  who  never 
had  heard  the  songs  could  sing  them. 

The  old  gentleman  nodded  from  time  to  time  and  eventually 


114  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

expressed  approval  of  the  plan.  "It  is  good,"  said  he,  sadly, 
"for  the  young  men  are  forgetting  our  songs."  But  he  mod- 
estly doubted  whether  he  knew  any  songs  that  would  serve  my 
purpose.  I  assured  him  that  I  would  be  glad  to  hear  any 
song  that  pleased  him,  and,  to  stimulate  his  memory,  suggested 
a  hunting  song.  "The  Indians  have  hunting  songs,  have  they 
not?"  I  asked.  He  bowed  gravely  and  replied  that  they  had 
many,  one  at  least  for  every  animal;  he  supposed  he  knew  most 
of  them.  Then  he  relapsed  into  thought  and  I  knew  that 
I  had  gone  as  far  as  could  be  gone  on  that  first  occasion,  for 
the  point  had  been  reached  when  the  Indian  must  be  allowed 
to  commune  with  himself.  He  is  a  remarkable  silent  debater. 
So  we  said  "bozho,"  shook  hands,  and  I  left  him  to  his  thoughts, 
and  tobacco,  and  the  rain.     Next  day  came  his  son-in-law. 

"The  old  gentleman,"  he  began  diffidently,  "she  cannot  sing 
you  a  hunting  song." 

"What's  the  matter?"  I  asked.  "Can't  he  remember  any?" 
1  es. 

I  let  this  answer  stand  for  a  moment  to  call  attention  to 
its  ambiguity.  Apparently  nothing  could  be  more  direct  and 
unmistakable  than  a  plain  yes,  or  no;  but  time  and  again  I 
have  been  momentarily  confused  by  the  Indian's  affirmation. 
Ask  him  a  question  in  the  negative  form  and  invariably  he 
answers,  yes.  Take  a  weatherwise  glance  at  the  clouds  and 
remark,  "It  won't  rain  to-day,  will  it?"  and  the  Indian  reply 
will  be,  yes,  by  which  he  means  that  it  will  not  rain.  Ask  him, 
sympathetically,  "Aren't  you  feeling  well  to-day?"  and  his  yes 
will  mean  that  he  is  feeling  ill.     In  this  instance  the  actor's  yes 


THE  OJIBWAY  VIEW  OF  MUSIC  115 

meant  that  the  old  gentleman  could  remember  as  many  hunt- 
ing1 songs  as  need  be.  There  was  a  different  reason  for  his 
inability,  or  refusal,  rather,  which  came  out  on  further  inquiry. 

"It  is  not  the  right  season,"  explained  the  actor. 

So,  then,  I  had  blundered.  I  did  not  comprehend  fully  the 
meaning  of  "out  of  season,"  as  it  appeared  later,  but  it  was 
clear  that  I  had  erred  in  suggesting  to  the  old  gentleman  that 
he  sing  me  a  hunting  song.  However,  there  was  hope  still, 
for  the  old  gentleman,  with  that  courtesy  that  is  characteristic 
of  the  Indian,  wished  to  return  my  call,  and  an  appointment 
was  made  for  him  to  spend  the  evening  at  my  lodge.  He 
came  and  devoted  the  first  half  hour  to  fluent  speech  explana- 
tory of  his  refusal  to  sing  a  hunting  song.  It  was  apologetic, 
regretful,  the  very  refinement  of  courtesy,  but  firm;  and  this 
was  the  substance  of  it — that  the  hunting  song,  be  it  the  car- 
ibou, the  red  deer,  the  partridge,  or  any  other,  was  a  prayer; 
it  was  sung  only  when  the  hunter  set  forth  to  seek  game; 
and  this  devout  worshiper  of  Gitche  Manito  could  not  profane 
his  ancient  faith  by  singing  such  a  song  for  the  mere  pur- 
poses of  entertainment,  or  to  gratify  commendable  curiosity. 

It  seems  to  me  that  comment  is  unnecessary,  but  I  susrsrest 
to  those  who  despair  of  the  Indian,  and  there  are  many,  includ- 
ing some  missionaries,  that  they  take  this  fine  old  gentleman's 
honest  piety  into  prayerful  consideration.  How  many  pale- 
faces are  there  upon  whom  their  religion  has  taken  such  a  hold 
that  they  would  regard  it  as  profanity  to  sing  a  hymn  to  please 
a  stranger?  Does  not  the  episode  convey  this  further,  prac- 
ticable suggestion :  that  if  we  superior  whites  endeavor  to  make 


116  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

something  of  the  Indian,  it  behooves  us  with  all  our  might 
to  get  within  and  behind  his  point  of  view  to  the  end  that  we 
may  understand  the  material  that  we  try  to  mold  to  our  own 
ideas  and  purposes? 

Needless  to  say  that  I  yielded  the  point  but  I  besought  the' 
good  old  pagan  to  sing  something  for  me.  He  was  reluctant 
still,  and,  at  the  risk  of  another  blunder,  I  suggested  a  love 
song.  The  idea  at  his  age  of  indulging  in  such  sentiment 
was  so  manifestly  amusing  that  again  I  retreated,  and  another 
half  hour  of  speech-making  followed.  I  was  beginning  to 
despair,  though  intimate  contact  with  the  red  man's  method 
of  thought  sustained  me  in  patient  endeavor,  when  at  length 
it  occurred  to  the  old  gentleman  that  he  could,  with  entire  ap- 
propriateness, sing  me  a  visiting  song.  And  this  he  did  with 
much  gusto,  though,  oddly  enough  for  such  a  stickler  as  to 
the  proprieties,  he  sang  me  the  winter  visiting  song  reproduced 
on  one  of  the  foregoing  pages,  forgetful,  perhaps,  as  we  sat 
by  a  blazing  log  fire,  that  it  was  mid-summer. 

The  song  found  its  way  to  paper  in  a  hurry  and  with  a 
sense  of  long  deferred  triumph  on  the  part  of  the  note-taker, 
but  I  was  not  content.  In  the  matter  of  songs  I  was  forever 
wanting  more,  and  on  this  occasion  I  resorted  to  a  daring  ex- 
periment. I  made  a  speech  of  my  own  to  the  effect  that  the 
old  gentleman's  courtesy  demanded  a  return  in  kind,  and  if 
he  would  be  pleased  to  listen  I  would  sing  him  an  Indian  song. 
He  manifested  lively  pleasure  at  the  suggestion,  and  forthwith 
I  sang  two  of  the  Omaha  songs  in  Miss  Fletcher's  collection 
that  I  had  memorized  years  before.     The  language  was  strange 


THE  OJIBWAY  VIEW  OF  MUSIC  117 

to  him,  but  the  downward  progressions,  the  startling  grace 
notes  and  the  exaggerated  portamento  that  I  had  learned  to 
imitate,  evidently  awoke  a  responsive  chord  and  stirred  his 
blood,  for  his  eyes  glowed  with  almost  fierce  joy,  and  the  calm 
benignity  of  his  face  was  transfigured  to  something  well  nigh 
ecstatic.  It  was  a  most  successful  experiment.  Thereafter 
songs  of  love  and  war  came  from  his  trembling  lips  until  it 
was  I  who  had  to  cry  enough  and  bring  the  long  night's  session 
to  a  close. 

The  old  gentleman's  name  is  Innequahung  Shawanibenayse, 
which  the  whites  have  turned  into  John  Shawan.  He  was 
born  somewhere  on  the  north  coast  of  Lake  Superior  and  now 
lives  on  Drummond  Island,  Michigan. 

DISTRUST    VANQUISHED    BY    HARMONY. 

Further  light  on  the  Ojibways'  regard  for  music  may  be 
had  from  their  attitude  toward  me  and  my  self  imposed  work. 
At  first  they  were  distrustful  and  put  every  obstacle  in  my 
way  except  physical  violence.  For  a  long  time  I  could  not 
persuade  man  or  woman  to  sing  for  me  in  private.  Indians 
whom  I  approached  for  this  purpose  developed  sudden  and 
unaccountable  difficulties  with  the  English  language;  or  they 
discovered  sore  throats  a  half  hour  after  a  performance  of  the 
play  in  which  I  had  heard  them  singing:  or  they  were  too  busy. 
When  I  came  upon  them  singing  by  themselves,  they  stopped 
abruptly.  Some  of  them  strolled  away,  the  others  sat  staring 
at  the  ground,  or  out  upon  the  lake.  In  the  course  of  time  I 
had  memorized  a  few  songs,  having  heard  them  daily  in  the 


118  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

play,  and  I  wished  to  verify  my  notes,  for  having  caught  them 
through  the  noise  of  the  drum  I  was  doubtful  as  to  their  entire 
accuracy.  After  nearly  three  weeks  of  persuasion  I  induced 
a  singer  and  an  interpreter  to  spend  an  evening  at  my  lodge 
for  the  purpose  of  going  over  these  few  songs.  The  work 
went  smoothly  enough  for  a  time,  and  then  there  was  rebellion. 
The  singer  made  a  speech  to  the  effect  that  he  would  be  ac- 
counted a  bad  man  by  his  people  if  he  should  give  me  the  songs. 
I  asked  for  a  frank  explanation,  and  there  was  another  speech 
which  the  interpreter  reproduced  substantially  as  follows: 

"Sir,  we  do  not  understand  it.  We  like  you,  but  we  do  not 
understand  what  you  are  doing.  We  ask  what  has  the  white 
man  done  to  us?  He  has  made  us  live  in  reservations,  forbidden 
us  to  hunt  in  the  forests,  taken  away  our  land.  He  has  taken 
from  us  everything  Indian  that  we  possessed  except  our  songs, 
and  now  you  come  and  woidd  take  away  those,  too.  You 
will  have  our  songs  sung  all  over  the  world  where  white  men 
live,  and  when  that  has  been  done  you  will  turn  upon  us,  like 
the  white  men  who  came  before  you,  and  say,  get  out!  I  have 
no  further  use  for  you." 

We  had  a  long  argument.  I  tried  to  show  them  that  I  left 
behind  all  that  I  took  away,  and  that  I  was  trying  to  save 
their  songs  from  being  forgotten.  So  far  as  the  two  men 
who  heard  me  were  concerned,  the  argument  was  convincing, 
but  there  lingered  even  with  them  a  reluctance  to  help  me  to 
certain  songs  because  they  belonged  to  other  persons.  Nearly 
all  the  Indians  of  my  acquaintance  recognize  this  proprietary 
interest  in  songs.     A  has  no  right  to  sing  B's  songs;  B  did 


THE  OJIBWAY  VIEW  OF  MUSIC  119 

not  compose  them,  but  they  came  down  to  him  through  his 
family,  or  from  some  chief  who  taught  him,  and  B  alone  should 
say  whether  they  might  he  given  to  another.  To  this  day 
there  are  some  Ojibways  who  refuse  to  sing  for  me,  still  influ- 
enced apparently  by  that  well  founded  distrust  of  the  paleface 
that  was  voiced  so  frankly  in  my  lodge. 

The  confidence  of  those  Indians  who  were  concerned  in  the 
play  was  won  by  a  rather  hazardous  experiment.  I  made  a 
four-part  arrangement  of  "My  Bark  Canoe"  and  gave  it  to 
a  quartette  of  white  singers  who  chanced  our  way.  This  was 
in  the  afternoon.  In  the  evening  the  Indians  were  called  to- 
gether and  I  told  them  that  I  would  show  them  what  I  was 
doing  with  their  music.  I  said  that  if  they  would  sing  "Cheka- 
bay  tebik"  in  their  way,  my  friends  would  sing  it  in  the  white- 
man  way.  After  characteristic  hesitation  the  Indians  complied. 
The  quartette,  taking  the  pitch  from  the  Indians,  immediately 
repeated  the  song  in  English.  The  excitement  of  the  Indians 
knew  no  bounds.  They  yelled  as  if  they  were  engaged  in  fierce 
combat  and,  surrounding  the  startled  quartette,  demanded  a 
repetition  of  the  piece.  Several  repetitions  were  given  before 
the  Indians  were  satisfied,  and  then  they  crowded  about  me. 
asking  eagerly  if  they  could  learn  to  sing  like  that — meaning 
in  parts. 

My  adoption  into  the  tribe  followed  not  long  after  this  epi- 
sode. They  named  me  Negaunneekahboh,  the  man  in  front, 
the  significance  of  the  name  arising  from  the  fact  that  the 
first  time  this  group  of  Indians  saw  me  I  was  conducting  an 
orchestra. 


120  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

In  answer  to  a  question  that  is  often  asked  I  will  say  that 
the  Ojihways  seem  to  be  very  appreciative  of  the  harmonized 
versions  of  their  songs.  There  was  a  piano  in  the  hotel  near 
the  Indian  playground,  and  the  company  of  actors  would 
gather  at  the  windows  whenever  I  undertook  to  sing  the  songs 
of  the  play  to  visitors.  Often  when  the  music  room  was  de- 
serted one  or  more  of  the  Indians  would  go  in  and  try  to  pick 
out  the  songs  and  find  those  elusive  effects  that  came  from 
striking  more  than  one  key  at  a  time. 

MUSIC    IN    INDIAN    HOMES. 

Many  of  the  more  prosperous  Ojibways  have  parlor  organs 
in  their  cabins  at  the  reservations.  In  some  instances  there  is 
no  one  in  the  family  who  can  play,  but  there  are  children  grow- 
ing up  who  some  day  may  be  taught,  and  the  instrument  is 
provided  for  them.  At  Garden  River,  where  most  of  my  O jib- 
way  friends  live,  there  is  a  music  teacher  from  whom  several 
of  the  younger  Indians  have  learned  to  play  simple  pieces. 
I  have  listened  to  them  with  mixed  feelings.  It  savored  of 
romance  to  call  Tecumseh  Bukwujjinini  in  from  his  hay  field 
and  hear  him,  in  overalls  and  shirt-sleeves,  play  voluntaries. 
He  is  the  organist  in  the  Episcopal  church  at  the  reservation. 
I  grieved  when  he  turned  from  his  church  music  and  played 
the  trivial  stuff  that  had  run  its  brief  period  of  popularity  in 
the  cities  a  few  years  before.  In  default  of  access  to  anything 
better,  he  was  accepting  the  white  man's  trash;  and  the  ex- 
quisite melodies  of  his  own  people  were  not  available  because 


THE  OJIBWAY  VIEW  OF  MUSIC  121 

they  had  not  been  put  into  notes.  In  his  house,  and  in  others, 
I  have  sung  Ojibway  songs  in  the  Ojibway  language  with 
harmonized  accompaniments,  and  the  result  has  always  heen  a 
hurried  gathering  of  such  neighbors  as  were  within  call;  and 
sometimes  the  people  have  overcome  their  shyness  sufficiently 
to  join  with  me  in  singing  their  own  songs.  The  men  and 
women  who  take  part  in  the  Indian  play  may  often  be  found 
of  an  evening  going  over  "My  Bark  Canoe,"  or  "Absence  and 
Longing,"  or  the  "Death  Song,"  and  trying  to  put  in  the 
various  harmonic  parts.  Most  of  these  long  ago  recognizee 
the  value  of  my  work  to  themselves  and  cheerfully  put  them- 
selves out  that  I  might  record  their  unwritten  melodies. 

The  attempt  to  arrive  at  an  understanding  of  the  Ojibway's 
view  of  music  has  been  made  thus  far  by  consideration  of  ob- 
vious evidence.  There  is  possibility  of  more  complete  under- 
standing by  inference  from  the  music  he  has  composed  and 
preserved.  I  call  attention  elsewhere  to  the  fact  that  the  words 
of  some  Ojibway  songs  are  archaic,  so  long  out  of  common 
use,  indeed,  that  the  modern  Ojibway  does  not  know  what  they 
mean.  He  nevertheless  sings  the  songs  with  manifest  satis- 
faction. I  note  also  the  fact  that  I  have  often  heard  Ojibways 
sing  songs  in  which  every  word  was  meaningless,  that  is,  the 
vocables  were  made  up  exclusively  of  nonsense  syllables  which 
are  employed  conventionally  to  piece  out  lines  which  are  too 
short  for  their  respective  tunes.  The  inference  is  inevitable 
that,  in  respect  of  these  songs,  the  Indian  is  appreciative  of 
music  in  precisely  the  way  that  the  cultivated  man  of  civiliza- 
tion is  appreciative  of  it;  that  is,  he  i.s  stirred  by  music  purely 


122  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

and  simply,  without  any  association  of  the  melody  with  tangi- 
ble ideas;  in  other  words,  the  Indian  has  risen  high  enough  to 
appreciate  absolute  music,  a  plane  that  he  might  not  have  been 
expected  to  reach  in  view  of  his  linguistic  failure  to  distinguish 
between  music  and  poetry. 

It  is  the  fact  that  civilized  man  finds  pleasure  in  humming 
or  whistling  melodies  that  linger  in  his  memory  that  makes  the 
Indian's  procedure  especially  striking  and  significant.  We 
take  it  for  granted  that  civilized  man  will  do  just  this,  and 
the  phenomenon  calls  for  no  special  comment  or  analysis.  It 
is  different  with  the  Indian  because  he  has  no  notation  for  the 
preservation  of  his  music.  Words  of  some  sort,  therefore,  are 
essential  to  him  as  pegs  for  his  tunes.  Having  in  mind  his 
generally  backward  condition  in  comparison  with  our  race,  we 
are  inclined  to  infer  that  his  appreciation  of  melody  should  be 
measured  by  his  words,  and  that,  words  lapsed  from  memory, 
the  tune  also  would  disappear.  Presumably  some  of  the  word- 
less songs  I  have  heard  were  originally  composed  to  words  of 
precise  meaning,  but  I  do  not  know  that  to  be  the  fact.  It 
may  be  they  were  the  invention  of  melodies  on  the  part  of 
some  musical  Ojibway  whose  tunes  came  too  fast  for  joining 
them  to  significant  words.  In  either  event,  the  preservation  of 
a  tune  of  this  type  has  been  on  its  own  merits,  so  to  speak; 
the  significant  words  lost,  the  singer  treasures  the  tune  and 
hands  it  down  to  the  next  generation  as  a  thing  of  absolute 
beauty  that  ought  not  to  be  neglected.  Can  we  imagine  civil- 
ized man  going  to  such  pains  to  preserve  his  favorite  tunes  from 
oblivion?     It  is  not,  of  course,  a  conscious  process  on  the  part 


THE  OJIBWAY  VIEW  OF  MUSIC  123 

of  the  Ojibway  singer;  that  is,  I  doubt  if  he  sings  his  word- 
less song  for  the  precise  purpose  of  keeping  it  alive  in  the 
memory  of  himself,  family  and  friends;  he  sings  because  he 
enjoys  the  music,  and  he  is  far  enough  advanced  in  musical 
development  to  be  indifferent  to  the  presence  of  words  in  con- 
nection with  his  art. 

Thus  it  has  often  appeared  to  me  when,  after  hearing  a 
song  given  with  great  vigor  and  earnestness,  I  have  sought 
to  get  the  words  and  have  discovered  that  they  meant  as  little 
to  the  singer  as  they  did  to  me.  From  the  manner  of  the 
singer  one  might  have  supposed  that  he  were  uttering  senti- 
ments of  the  profoundest  import.  In  fact,  his  earnest  man- 
ner was  his  ingenuous  tribute  to  the  beauty  of  modulated  tones, 
to  the  art  that  inspired  him. 


CHAPTER  VII 
MUSIC  IN  OJIBWAY  DAILY  LIFE 

1AM  often  asked  whether  the  Ojihways  have  industrial 
songs.  In  the  general  acceptation  of  the  term,  no;  but 
we  must  take  into  account  the  nature  of  Indian  industries 
before  leaving  the  answer  there.  Before  the  Ojibway  came  in 
touch"  with  civilization  he  had  no  conception  of  factory  life, 
or  of  systematized  labor.  Contrary  to  popular  belief,  he  was 
not  improvident;  he  had  thought  for  the  coming  winter  and 
dried  his  meats  and  laid  in  his  cereals  accordingly.  He  knew 
that  the  birch  tree  yields  its  bark  best  in  the  moon  of  straw- 
berries— late  June — and  he  did  not  neglect  then  the  making 
of  the  canoe  that  might  not  be  needed  till  the  summer  had 
passed.  When  he  chanced  upon  medicinal  roots  he  gathered 
them  against  the  illness  that  happily  might  never  come.  In 
other  words,  he  provided  for  his  simple  needs  with  such  dili- 
gence as  was  necessary,  but  he  was  not  possessed  of  greed 
to  the  end  that  he  must  work  for  more  than  he  needed.  Ac- 
cumulation of  property  was  limited  substantially  to  furs  and 
garments.  Therefore,  the  word  industry,  standing  in  our 
commercial  age  for  systematic  toil;  lay  outside  the  pale  of  his 
experience.  When  he  wanted  anything,  he  hunted  for  it,  or 
made  it.  In  some  things,  the  manufacture  of  canoes,  for  ex- 
ample, the  Ojibway  excels  all  people;  but  canoe-making  could 

124 


MUSIC  IN  OJIBWAY  DAILY  LIFE        125 

not  be  called  an  industry,  for  he  did  not  strip  a  thousand  trees 
in  June  that  he  might  have  stock  for  the  making  of  canoes 
throughout  the  entire  year. 

This  conception  and  manner  of  life  is  not  conducive  to  the 
making  of  industrial  songs.  Man  sings  of  that  which  interests 
him.  His  interest  may  be  aroused  by  religious  aspiration, 
human  love,  the  beauty  of  Nature,  the  excitement  of  conlliet 
against  man  or  beast,  or  the  very  joy  of  idleness;  and  it  may 
also  be  aroused  by  the  force  of  circumstances,  as  when  he  is 
habitually  engaged,  day  after  day,  at  some  manner  of  occupa- 
tion not  in  itself  interesting.  The  sailor,  tugging  away  at 
a  windlass,  finds  in  the  rhythm  of  arduous  exertion  an  in- 
centive to  song,  and  in  the  song  a  stimulus  to  renewed  labor. 
The  Maryland  negro,  "shucking"  oysters  in  a  dismal  cabin, 
relieves  his  pent  up  soul  in  melody  through  sheer  necessity 
for  something  brighter  and  more  wholesome  than  his  environ- 
ment. The  peasant's  foot  on  the  treadle  that  keeps  the  spin- 
ning wheel  a-whirring,  stirs  the  spinner's  soul  to  rhythm,  and 
song  issues  from  the  lips  as  readily  as  breath  itself.  Man 
would  not  be  human  if,  under  such  circumstances,  the  words 
of  his  songs  were  not  suggested,  occasionally  at  least,  by  the 
nature  of  his  toil;  and  thus  industrial  song's  come  into  beinar. 

DEPENDENCE  ON   THE  DRUM. 

There  is  little  analogous  to  this  in  the  Ojibway's  daily  life, 
but  he  does  have  songs  characteristic  of,  or  applicable  to  his 
few  occupations.     He  has  a  multitude  of  hunting  songs,  sec- 


126  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

ular  as  well  as  sacred.  Not  as  many,  but  still  a  great  number, 
are  the  canoe  songs,  that  is,  songs  whose  appropriate  place 
and  time  are  in  the  canoe  while  paddling.  There  are  also  corn 
songs,  which  are  religious  rather  than  industrial,  although  ap- 
plicable to  planting  and  caring  for  the  grain,  and  inasmuch 
as  'tending  the  baby  is  an  occupation  with  the  Ojibway  as  it 
is  among  all  peoples,  there  are  cradle  songs.  Furthermore, 
the  Ojibway  is  so  much  given  to  visiting  that  this  might  almost 
be  regarded  as  an  occupation,  and  there  are  social  songs  and 
songs  of  hospitality  without  number. 

The  modern,  or  reservation  Ojibway,  who  has  learned  some- 
thing of  carpentry  or  agriculture,  does  not  employ  song  at 
his  civilized  labor  as  freely  as  does  the  plantation  negro,  though 
the  tendency  to  sing  while  at  work  is  very  noticeable.  I  have 
often  heard  a  dozen  or  more  men,  busy  with  their  saws  and 
hammers,  burst  into  a  roaring  chorus,  some  one  among  them 
having  started  a  song  alone.  But  work  halts  while  the  song 
is  in  progress,  and  the  diversion  is  not  long  continued.  The 
early  cessation  of  music  under  such  circumstances,  is  to  be 
accounted  for  partly  by  the  fact  that  the  Ojibway  is  a  conscien- 
tious workman,  devoting  himself  to  his  appointed  task  with 
rare  faithfulness;  but  more  by  reason  of  his  own  regard  for 
music  and  his  dependence  upon  the  drum  for  the  expression 
of  it.  When  he  sings  he  is  disposed  to  give  himself  up  to 
song  and  to  that  alone.  He  is  absorbed  at  once  in  his  music 
to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  considerations.  His  dependence 
upon  the  drum  for  entire  satisfaction  is  the  feature  of  his  art 
that  separates  him  most  widely  from  the  musical  manner  of 


MUSIC  IN  OJIBWAY  DAILY  LIFE       127 

civilization.  The  Ojibway  can  sing  without  the  drum,  but  he 
misses  it.  Even  those  who  have  grown  up  in  semi-civilization 
prefer  the  thumping  accompaniment,  and  when  an  Indian 
sings  for  me  without  his  instrument  he  usually  marks  the 
rhythm  by  patting  the  table,  or  his  knee  with  his  hand. 

Perhaps  it  Avill  add  no  interest  to  these  observations  and 
speculations,  but  I  cannot  refrain  at  this  juncture  from  stating 
that  this  part  of  the  book  is  being  written,  and  the  accompany- 
ing music  prepared,  in  Ojibway  land.  Around  me  is  the  wil- 
derness but  recently  and  slightly  broken  by  Canadian  pioneers. 
From  my  cabin  window  I  look  upon  the  western  waters  of 
Lake  Huron  where  Nature  has  outdone  herself  in  loveliness. 
Ojibways  are  my  daily  companions;  I  visit  them  in  their  teepees 
and  log  houses,  and  they  come  of  an  evening  to  smoke  their 
pipes  by  my  fire  and  cudgel  their  brains  to  revive  memory  of 
songs  they  heard  when  they  were  children,  their  interest  in 
my  attempt  to  preserve  their  songs  being  a  mighty  stimulus, 
if  one  were  needed,  to  its  continuance.  So,  what  I  reduce  to 
writing  is  as  near  as  can  be  a  series  of  snap-shot  impressions 
of  daily  occurrences  intensified  and  corroborated  by  their  re- 
duplication of  experiences  in  years  past.  It  was  but  yesterday 
—I  was  discussing  dependence  upon  the  drum— that  I  called 
at  the  Ojibway  dwelling  where  for  convenience  I  store  my 
phonographic  records.  While  I  was  busy  with  them  an  aged 
man  sat  on  the  floor  taking  care  of  his  chubby,  eighteen-months- 
old  grandson,  his  wife  and  daughter  engrossed  at  the  time  in 
preparation  of  dinner.  The  white-haired  old  man  sang  to  the 
baby,  songs  of  war,  of  the  chase,  of  love,  and  cradle  songs ;  and 


128  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

while  he  sang  he  drummed  incessantly  upon  the  floor  with 
a  stick  of  firewood.  Now  and  again  the  soft  treble  of  the 
child's  voice  rippled  across  the  wavering,  uncertain  tones  of  the 
song,  sometimes  in  the  inconsequential  remarks  of  babyhood, 
often  in  faulty  attempts  to  join  in  grand-pa's  singing.  I  wish 
that  whites  who  regard  the  Indian  as  a  stolid  brute  could  look 
in  on  such  a  scene! 


TETEBAHBUNDUNG,       THE    SWEETEST    OF    ALL    SINGERS. 

Let  me  pass  to  another  instance,  almost  as  recent,  .where 
drumming  played  a  part  in  music  necessary  to  the  Indian  but 
at  odd  variance  with  our  conception  and  habit.  I  was  work- 
ing at  the  Garden  River  Reservation  and  set  forth  one  evening 
to  call  upon  Tetebahbundung,  the  finest  Indian  singer  I  have 
heard  anywhere.  Allusion  has  been  made  to  him  before,  and 
several  of  the  best  songs  in  this  collection  were  taken  from 
his  lips.  He  is  about  forty-five  years  old,  a  full-blood  and 
extremely  sensitive  upon  that  point.  It  offends  him  deeply 
when  palefaces  who  hear  his  superb  tenor  voice  and  note  the 
exquisite  grace  with  which  he  sings,  jump  to  the  conclusion 
that  his  superior  gifts  are  due  to  a  strain  of  white  blood. 
"It  is  not  so,"  he  says  quietly;  "I  am  all  Indian." 
Tetebahbundung  usually  appears  in  the  drama,  "Hiawatha," 
as  Chibiabos,  the  sweet  singer,  his  son,  Adamosa,  taking  the 
part  of  Hiawatha,  the  boy.  Longfellow  never  visited  O jib- 
way  land,  and  his  personal  acquaintace  with  Indians  was  very 
limited,  facts  that  impress  us  who  haunt  the  region  as  remark- 


MUSIC  IN  OJIBWAY  DAILY  LIFE        129 

able  tributes  to  his  poetic  imagination,  for  his  lines  reflect  the 
beauty  and  character  of  the  landscape  with  unerring  accuracy; 
and  in  nothing  did  the  prophetic  vision  of  the  poet  arrive  at 
truth  with  more  certainty  than  in  his  delineation  of  Chibiabos. 
This  personage  in  the  poem  might  well  have  been  drawn  from 
Tetebahbundung.  All  the  superlatives  in  Longfellow's  de- 
scription fit  him  as  a  well  made  garment.  His  voice  is  pure 
tenor  with  that  human  quality  that  can  be  suggested  only  by 
the  word  luscious;  it  is  so  powerful  as  to  be  heard  distinctly 
over  a  chorus  of  fifty  men  with  the  drum  banging  fortissimo, 
and  yet,  so  keen  is  the  man's  unwitting  artistic  insight  that 
when  he  sings  in  a  small  room,  like  a  concert  hall,  or  a  parlor, 
nobody  dreams  of  his  power,  for  he  modulates  his  volume  of 
tone  to  the  demands  of  the  place  and  occasion.  Furthermore, 
though  he  never  has  had  other  than  Indian  instruction  and 
knows  nothing  of  written  music,  his  tone  production  is  the 
despair  of  professional  white  tenors  who  have  heard  him,  and 
he  sings  with  such  a  wealth  of  feeling  that  no,  audience  fails 
to  be  stirred  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  his  words  are  meaningless 
to  the  listener,  and  sometimes  to  himself,  for  I  have  heard  him 
repeatedly  sing  entire  songs  that  had  not  one  intelligible  word 
in  them. 

This  tribute  to  the  Ojibway  singer  may  read  like  enthusiastic 
exaggeration,  but  if  so  I  must  be  content,  for  I  know  the  truth 
and  I  am  not  alone  in  my  estimate.  Tetebahbundung  is,  in- 
deed, all  Indian,  with  the  shortcomings  of  his  race,  but  he  is  a 
musician  from  the  ground  up,  and,  as  a  man,  singularly  at- 
tractive; quiet,  unassuming,  absolutely  honest  and  faithful  to 


130  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

his  promises,  gentle  and  affectionate.  His  relations  with  his 
little  son  are  those  of  ideal  parental  and  filial  companionship. 
Altogether  Tetebahbundung  appeals  to  my  heart  with  special 
force,  perhaps  because  he  was  the  last  Indian  to  become  my 
friend.  For  a  long,  long  time  he  held  aloof,  resisting  me  with* 
stubbornness  that  was  the  more  difficult  to  meet  because  it  was 
so  deathly  quiet.  No  need  to  dwell  on  that  now,  for  he  has  be- 
come a  firm  friend  and  one  of  the  most  valuable  collaborators 
in  the  work  of  recording  the  songs  of  his  people. 

I  knew  that  Tetebahbundung  was  at  home  when  I  was  yet 
at  some  distance  from  his  house,  for  I  heard  his  drum.  He 
was  not  pounding  hard,  but  the  night  was  still,  and  the  in- 
strument evidently  had  been  thoroughly  warmed,  for  its  tone 
was  resonant  and  penetrating.  I  paused  at  the  door,  unwill- 
ing to  interrupt,  fearing  to  make  an  ill  timed  intrusion.  He 
was  singing  a  love  song,  and  in  true  Indian  fashion  he  sang  it 
many  times  over  without  stopping.  At  length  the  end  came 
with  disaster,  for  he  beat  with  added  vigor,  and  of  a  sudden 
the  tone  was  dull.  Drumming  and  singing  ceased  abruptly, 
and  I  heard  Tetebahbundung  mutter  a  low  "All!"  Then 
I  knocked.  He  came  slowly,  and  the  open  door  revealed  a 
room  dark  save  for  the  dying  embers  in  the  fireplace,  empty 
save  for  himself. 

"Come  in,"  said  he,  by  way  of  greeting,  and  I  responded 
that  I  had  heard  him  singing.  "Yes,"  he  admitted  ruefully, 
"and  now  my  drum  is  broke.  I  heated  it  too  hot,  I  suppose. 
My  wife  and  boy  she  gone,  visiting.     I  was  lonesome.     So  I 


MUSIC   IX  OJIBWAY  DAILY  LIFE         131 

got  my  drum  and  sang.  Xo  more  song  now,"  and  he  laughed 
a  little. 

Is  comment  necessary?  simply  to  point  out  that  the  white 
musician  under  such  circumstances  might  betake  himself  to  the 
pianoforte  to  ease  his  soul.  Should  the  strings  snap,  he  would 
no  longer  sing,  failing  of  instrumental  support.  To  this  musi- 
cal Indian,  the  tuneless  drum  was  as  the  responsive  keyboard, 
and  without  it  his  diversion  was  unthinkable.  I  asked  him  how 
he  would  manage  now  that  his  drum  was  broken,  and  he  re- 
plied simply  that  he  would  make  another. 

Tetebahbundung  is  an  exception  among  Ojibways  only  in 
that  his  gifts  in  and  love  for  music  are  greater  than  the  aver- 
age. The  men,  it  seems  to  me,  sing  much  more  frequently 
and  more  freely  than  the  women  do.  Gentlemen  who  go  to  the 
Canadian  forests  for  game  return  with  tales  of  the  taciturnity 
of  their  Indian  guides,  and  the  casual  visitor  at  a  Reservation 
finds  little  response  to  his  questions.  If  he  should  speak  of 
songs  he  would  probably  get  no  answer  whatever,  and  might 
go  away  with  the  conviction  that  self  expression  through  music 
is  unknown  to  the  Ojibway.  Such,  certainly,  was  the  case 
with  a  distinguished  gentleman  whose  scientific  studies  have 
taken  him  among  the  Ojibways  of  Canada  for  the  past  forty- 
eight  years.  He  learned  their  language  and,  incidental  to  his 
main  research,  made  a  special  study  of  their  myths  and  tradi- 
tions. Coming  upon  me  in  the  midst  of  my  work  in  the  sum- 
mer of  1904,  he  frankly  expressed  amazement  that  I  found 
anything  to  do. 


132  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

"A  few  years  ago,"  said  he,  "a  wealthy  Bostonian  who  con- 
templated a  season  in  the  wilds  of  Canada  for  his  health 
thought  of  taking  along  a  phonograph  for  the  purpose  of 
recording  Ojibways  songs,  and  he  asked  me  for  'points.'  I 
told  him  that  I  could  give  him  one  that  would  be  of  great  value, 
and  that  was  to  leave  his  phonograph  at  home,  for  the  Ojibways 
had  no  songs.  Of  course  I  had  heard  the  Indians  howling  to 
the  drum  now  and  then,  but  I  never  had  heard  sounds  that  ap- 
pealed to  me  as  music." 

The  gentleman's  amazement  was  equaled  by  my  own  at  this 
revelation,  for,  with  me,  it  is  the  commonest  experience  to  come 
upon  an  Indian  singing  softly  to  himself  as  he  sits  idle  and 
alone  after  the  day's  work.  I  follow  the  unseen  bark  canoe 
across  the  lake  at  night  by  the  melodious  voice  of  the  paddler. 
By  the  campftre — at  their  social  gatherings — beside  the  dead 
■ — wherever  they  are,  alone  or  in  familiar  comj^any,  I  hear  them 
sing.     "Pie  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear!" 

MUSIC    FOR   THE   DEAD. 

It  is  said  that  the  early  missionaries  won  the  attention  of 
the  Ojibways  more  by  hymn  tunes  than  by  exhortation.  This 
is  entirely  credible,  but  I  have  evidence  that  the  Ojibways 
adapted  themselves  to  the  white  man's  melodies  with  no  little 
diffiulty.  My  first  hint  of  this  fact  was  conveyed  to  me 
through  hearing  part  of  a  touching  ceremony  at  a  house  where 
one  lay  dead.  It  was  in  the  Garden  River  Reservation. 
Somewhat  remote  from  what  might  be  called  the  centre  of  the 


MUSIC  IN  OJIBWAY  DAILY  LIFE        133 

long,  straggling  village,  is  a  cabin  where  four  aged  sisters 
lived.  One  was  blind,  another  lame,  the  third  had  been  a  help- 
less paralytic  for  years,  and  the  fourth  was  afflicted  with  the 
feebleness  of  old  age,  if  by  nothing  more  acute.  With  no  as- 
sistance save  that  a  man  hauled  their  winter's  supply  of  wood 
to  their  door,  they  attended  to  their  cow  and  their  acre  of 
vegetables,  splitting  the  wood,  fetching  the  water,  weeding  the 
garden  and  gathering  their  crop.  Two  of  these  women  were 
Episcopalians,  the  others  Roman  Catholics.  Of  the  latter  was 
the  paralytic  who  was  the  first  of  the  four  to  join  the  majority. 
Long  had  glowed  the  embers  of  her  life;  long  they  smouldered 
after  the  darkness  gathered  upon  them.  Her  mind  was  the 
last  to  flicker  and  go  out,  and  while  the  end  delayed,  her  sis- 
ters cheered  her  by  laying  upon  the  table  and  calling  her  at- 
tention to  them,  the  clothes,  the  finery,  the  favorite  articles  that 
would  faithfully  be  placed  in  the  coffin  and  buried  with  her. 
She  died  at  sunrise.  During  the  day  the  kind  offices  of  neigh- 
bors were  administered  in  much  the  same  fashion  as  would  have 
been  the  case  in  a  community  of  whites. 

At  sunset  came  Megissun,  "the  singer"  as  he  is  called,  a 
staunch  Episcopalian  and  older  by  a  long  span  than  she  who 
had  departed.  He  brought  with  him  his  Protestant  hymnal, 
a  collection  of  hymns  translated  into  Ojibway,  but  with  no  note 
of  music  between  the  covers,  and  sat  beside  the  dead.  The 
surviving  sisters  took  their  places  near.  Xo  word  of  greeting 
had  passed,  no  comment  of  any  kind  was  uttered,  no  moan  of 
grief  escaped  the  lips.  Upon  the  table  at  Megissun's  elbow 
was  a  lamp,  and  beside  it  a  saucer  of  lozenges  and  a  plate  of 


134  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

plain  cakes.  Shortly  after  Megissun's  entrance  three  neigh- 
bors, a  man  and  two  women,  drifted  in,  more  silently,  more 
unobtrusively  than  if  they  had  been  autumn  leaves  impelled 
by  an  idle  wind.  By  not  so  much  as  a  nod,  or  a  glance  from 
the  eyes,  did  they  recognize  the  presence  of  the  singer  or  the 
bereaved  sisters.  Megissun  stirred  not,  neither  did  the  mourn- 
ers. Presently  another  silent  figure  blotted  out  the  doorway 
for  an  instant  and  joined  the  expectant  group,  and  then  still 
others,  till  the  narrow  room  was  full.  All  these,  Christians 
every  one,  were  there  to  go  part  way  with  their  friend  upon 
her  long  journey  to  the  land  of  the  hereafter.  In  the  presence 
of  death,  sectarian  differences  were  forgotten,  the  new  faith 
itself  faded  and  fluttered  before  the  persistence  of  ancient 
custom. 

Megissun  did  not  wait  for  the  room  to  fill.  In  his  own  good 
time  he  opened  the  hymnal  and  began  to  sing.  Through 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  first  line  his  wavering  voice  bore  the 
tune  alone;  then  one  and  another  joined  in  unison  and  sang 
the  hymn  through  all  its  slowly  toiling  stanzas  to  the  end. 
A  pause  ensued  while  Megissun  turned  the  pages  of  his  book. 
Presently  he  selected  another  hymn  and  began.  As  before,  the 
assembled  neighbors  joined  as  soon  as  they  recognized  the  tune. 
Now  and  again  a  single  voice  stumbled  over  the  words  of  an 
ill  remembered  line,  but  nobody  was  disturbed  or  abashed 
thereby,  least  of  all  the  person  who  committed  the  error.  While 
yet  the  hymn  was  sounding,  other  neighbors  drifted  in.  Some 
of  them  had  walked  miles  from  the  far  end  of  the  Reservation. 
Silently,  unobtrusively,  recognizing  nobody,  they  found  their 


MUSIC  IN  OJIBWAY  DAILY  LIFE       135 

places.  Between  hymns  the  clatter  of  crickets  beat  noisily 
upon  the  ear,  and  the  sudden  hoot  of  an  owl  shocked  as  might 
profanity  before  the  altar.  There  was  no  uneasy  rustle  of 
garments  or  shuffling  of  feet  to  indicate  that  the  unbidden 
visitors  had  wearied ;  they  seemed  not  to  breathe.  Only  Megis- 
sun  stirred,  and  he  all  but  inaudibly  turned  the  pages  of  his 
oft-thumbed  hymnal. 

Some  time  between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock,  two  of  the  guests 
arose  and,  without  word  or  glance  of  parting,  drifted  out  into 
the  darkness  and  came  not  again  that  night.  By  midnight 
others  had  gone,  but  the  places  of  a  few  were  filled  by  late 
comers.  At  rare  intervals  as  the  night  wore  on  with  its  suc- 
cession of  hymns,  Megissun  relieved  his  throat  with  a  lozenge, 
and  such  guests  as  were  so  minded  sought  the  table  for  a 
piece  of  cake.  When  the  sun  rose,  the  room  was  no  longer 
crowded,  but  a  loyal  handful  of  neighbors  yet  remained  sing- 
ing a  final  hymn  for  the  comfort  of  their  friend  upon  her  jour- 
ney through  the  darkness.  With  the  full  light  of  day  Megis- 
sun closed  his  book  and  went  home,  and  the  others,  with  no 
word  to  him  or  the  sisters,  departed  also. 

THE    CONFLICT   OF    STYLES. 

To  the  wondering  Yankee  who  observed  and  heard  this 
ceremony,  the  musical  interest  lay  in  the  unwitting  perversion 
of  the  tunes  by  Megissun  and  the  older  singers.  So  dominat- 
ing was  Megissun's  voice  that  at  first  I  did  not  realize  that 
some  of  the  others  were  not  keeping  strictly  with  him;  and  at 


136  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

that  time  I  was  hard  put  to  it  to  know  whether  the  tunes 
were  aboriginal,  or  the  product  of  civilization.  The  occasion 
was  well  calculated  to  befog  critical  observation,  but  pres- 
ently, when  the  human  interest  could  be  subordinated,  I  per- 
ceived that  the  fresher,  younger  voices  were  inclined  to  shorten 
the  phrases,  and  that  they  followed,  as  if  with  some  timidity, 
the  shakes,  turns  and  slurs  with  which  Megisssun  crowded 
every  line.  Fixing  attention  upon  what  the  younger  voices 
actually  did,  and  eliminating  as  much  as  possible  those  instants 
when  they  followed  the  leader  with  hesitation,  I  began  to  per- 
ceive the  outlines  of  a  civilized  melody,  and  eventually  recog- 
nized it  as  one  that  is  to  be  found  in  many  hymn  books. 
Regarding  Megissun's  voice  alone,  I  might  have  persuaded 
myself  that  he  was  singing  the  Christian  words  to  an  ancient 
Ojibway  tune,  so  completely  did  he  cover  and  disguise  it  with 
the  mannerisms  I  had  become  familiar  with  as  characteristic 
of  ancient  Ojibway  song.  The  older  people  kept  with  the 
leader  easily,  for  he  harked  them  back  to  childhood  when, 
perhaps,  to  every  one  the  Christian  faith  and  its  music  were 
unknown;  but  the  others,  who  had  learned  their  hymns  from 
the  lips  of  a  white  missionary  while  they  were  young  enough 
to  receive  and  retain  strange  impressions,  found  the  old  leader's 
manner  disconcerting. 

I  can  give  no  more  than  this  indication  of  the  mixed  style  that 
resulted  from  Megissun's  perversion  of  the  civilized  tune,  for 
I  could  not  introduce  a  phonograph  into  the  scene;  I  could 
not  take  notes  in  the  darkness  outside  the  house,  nor  profane 
the  occasion  by  note-taking  within;  and  my  memory  would  have 


MUSIC  IX  OJIBWAY  DAILY  LIFE         137 

been  an  insecure  guide.  But  I  looked  into  the  matter  at  an- 
other time  and,  mainly  through  the  cooperation  of  William 
J.  Shingwauk,  phonographed  several  hymns  sung  in  the  man- 
ner of  a  bygone  age.  This  man.  a  lineal  descendant  of  that 
Shingwauk  who  was  the  greatest  chief  the  Ojibways  ever  had. 
tells  me  that  in  the  early  davs  the  Indians,  finding'  that  thev 
could  not  express  their  emotions  freely  through  the  white  man's 
melody,  either  abandoned  it  altogether  and  adapted  tunes  of 
their  own  to  the  words  of  the  new  faith,  or  deliberately  modi- 
fied the  missionary's  tunes  so  that  there  resulted  what  Shing- 
wauk characterized  with  humorous  gravity  as  "half  breed 
music."'  The  printed  notes  do  not  give  a  satisfactory  repre- 
sentation of  this  mixed  style.  There  is  no  doubt  about  the 
melodic  outline,  but  there  lacks  the  tone  color,  the  infinite 
slurring  and  dragging  that  no  type  can  set  forth  and  no  civil- 
ized singer  reproduce  unless  he  has  heard  the  Indians  many 
times  and  is  good  at  imitation.  Nevertheless.  I  give  one  of  the 
hymns  on  page  233.  partly  because  it  has  a  certain  historical 
interest,  and  in  the  hope  that  the  reader  can  deduce  from  the 
bald  symbols  an  approximate  conception  of  the  older  Indian's 
manner  of  singing. 

DEATH    SONGS. 

This  was  Chief  Bukwujjinini's  favorite  hymn,  and  the  Gar- 
den River  Indians  still  sing  it  occasionally.  Shingwauk. 
grand  nephew  of  the  chief,  and  other  well  informed  Ojibways, 
believe  that  the  tune  is  aboriginal.     "It  is  verv  old."  thev  say, 


138  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

"and  was  made  over  for  this  hymn  by  Chief  Bukwuj  jinini  him- 
self." I  think  they  are  mistaken  in  this.  Up  to  the  present 
I  have  not  been  able  to  identify  the  tune  with  any  in  the  hymn 
books,  but  it  appeals  to  me  as  a  white  man's  tune  made  over 
rather  than  an  Indian's.  Whether  or  no,  it  was  sung  at 
Bukwuj jinini's  bedside  by  the  members  of  his  family  while  he 
lay  dying,  the  incident  illustrating  another  conventional  use 
of  music  among  the  Ojibways,  for  every  Indian  has  his  death 
song,  one  that  he  will  sing  himself,  if  possible,  at  the  very 
moment  of  dissolution;  and  if  voice  fails  him,  his  friends 
sing  it  for  him.  In  the  old  days  the  words  of  death  songs  be- 
fitted the  occasion,  being  expressive  of  courage,  faith,  doubt, 
defiance,  as  the  case  might  be.  I  am  thinking  of  the  non- 
Christian  Indian  when  I  use  the  term  "old  days,"  the  fact  be- 
ing that  the  pagans  of  the  present  adhere  to  the  custom. 
United  States  Army  officers  have  told  me  that  when  it  is  nec- 
essary to  excute  an  Indian,  the  victim  marches  to  his  place 
before  the  firing  squad  singing  his  death  song,  and  that  his 
voice  never  falters  till  the  bullets  stop  it  forever.  The  Chris- 
tianized Ojibway  tends  to  modify  this  striking  custom  as  he 
does  all  else  that  belonged  to  his  ancient  life,  but  not  infre- 
quently he  preserves  the  poetic  atmosphere.  A  good  old  friend 
of  mine  fell  fatally  ill  in  a  foreign  city  far  away  from  his 
home.  Sympathetic  whites  sent  flowers  to  him  in  the  hospital, 
and  these  he  appreciated  with  pathetic  joy — I  fancy  they  sym- 
bolized the  forest  home  that  he  was  never  to  see  again.  Death 
lingered  for  hours  at  the  threshold  after  his  unmistakable 
knock  on  the  door.     The  old  man  knew  the  signs. 


MUSIC  IX  OJIBWAY  DAILY  LIFE        139 

''I  should  like  to  bear  a  song."  he  whispered. 

They  understood,  those  who  stood  around,  and  asked  him 
if  there  were  some  particular  song  he  would  like  to  hear. 

"Gaiigct;  'Chekahbay  tebik  ondandayan' '  he  replied, 
lapsing  into  his  native  tongue:  "Yes;  Throughout  the  night 
I  keep  awake.' : 

These  are  the  first  words  of  the  love  song  to  which  I  have 
given  the  English  title  "My  Bark  Canoe."  Possibly  the  dying 
man.  who  was  one  of  the  most  truly  devout  Christians  it  - 
ever  my  good  fortune  to  know,  imagined  a  symbolism  in  the 
words  appropriate  to  the  occasion.  The  shadows  of  his  long 
night  were  upon  liim  even  then:  the  song  tells  of  a  stream  that 
must  be  crossed  to  gain  the  happiness  desired  by  the  singer. 
Possibly  it  was  associated  with  the  dearest  romance  of  his  youth : 
it  may  have  been  the  song  he  used  with  voice  or  flute  when  he 
went  hopefuly  a-wooing.  "We  can  but  speculate,  but  the 
CTratifvino-  fact  is  that  those  around  the  bedside  knew  of  an 
Ojibway  resident  in  the  city:  that  they  sent  urgent  word  to  him: 
that  he  came,  knew  the  song  and  sans?  it:  and  while  vet  the 
sweet  strains  were  throbbing,  the  old  man  died. 

OLD    HUNDRED    AT    SOCIAL   GATHERINGS. 

There  is  one  of  our  hymn  tunes  that  the  Christianized 
Ojibways  north  of  the  Great  Lakes  have  adopted  without  muti- 
lation and  made  their  own  to  an  extent  that  is  manifested  with 
striking  frequency.  Most  of  us  know  the  tune  as  "Old  Hun- 
dred."    To  the  Ojibway  it  is  the  '"Doxology."  their  words  be- 


140  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

ing  a  translation  of  "Praise  God  from  whom  all  blessings  flow," 
and  so  forth.  My  first  encounter  with  it  in  this  form  was  at 
a  wedding  supper  early  in  my  acquaintance  with  the  Ojibways. 
It  was  not  an  Indian  function,  but  a  social  gathering  organized 
by  Mr.  L.  O.  Armstrong,  friend  and  employer  of  the  bride 
and  groom,  to  which  a  half  a  dozen  whites  and  nearly  a  hun- 
dred Indians  were  invited.  The  wedding,  according  to  the 
Church  of  England  rite,  had  taken  place  in  the  open  air  at  four 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  It  may  throw  a  little  light  on  the 
Indian's  attitude  toward  civilization  if  I  explain  that  the  bride 
and  groom  were  the  "Minnehaha"  and  "Hiawatha"  of  the  In- 
dian play  to  which  reference  has  been  made  heretofore.  Theirs 
was  a  charming  romance  while  it  lasted,  sadly  brief,  for  "Min- 
nehaha" died  within  two  years  after  the  wedding.  Teku- 
megezhik  Shawano,  a  young  man  of  modest  demeanor,  great 
physical  strength  and  handsome  face,  had  been  promoted  from 
the  ranks  to  play  the  principal  part  at  a  time  when  circum- 
stances made  it  advisable  to  reorganize  the  cast,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  Miss  Margaret  Waubunosa  had  been  assigned  to 
the  part  of  "Minnehaha."  Both,  I  think,  were  selected  for 
their  looks,  and  both  justified  the  choice.  It  was  not  suspected 
that  a  real  courtship  was  in  progress  every  day  when  "Hia- 
watha" made  his  visit  to  the  lodge  of  the  "Ancient  Arrow- 
maker"  and  laid  a  deer  at  the  feet  of  "Minnehaha,"  but  the 
revelation  came  when  Shawano  asked  for  a  day  "off"  in  order 
to  get  married.  He  was  persuaded  to  continue  playing  his 
part  even  on  the  day  of  the  wedding,  and  the  Garden  River  mis- 
sionary, Rev.  Frederick  Frost,  journeyed  to  the  playground 


MUSIC  IN  OJIBWAY  DAILY  LIFE        141 

and  officiated  at  the  marriage  ceremony  immediately  after  the 
performance.  Of  course  there  was  a  great  to-do  about  it. 
Hundreds  of  persons,  paleface  and  red,  came  from  great  dis- 
tances to  witness  the  event,  and  it  was  suggested  to  the  bride 
and  groom  that  it  would  add  to  the  general  interest  if  they 
would  keep  on  the  picturesque  costumes  worn  in  the  play. 
This  they  politely  but  firmly  refused  to  do  on  the  ground  that 
it  would  profane  the  new  faith  if  they  should  wear  the  ancient 
costumes  of  their  race  in  one  of  its  most  sacred  ceremonies. 
Aid  all  the  other  members  of  the  Hiawatha  "band,"  as  the 
Indians  call  the  dramatic  company,  coinciding  in  this  view, 
hurried  to  their  teepees  when  the  play  was  over  to  don  the 
hahiliments  of  civilization  before  presuming  to  assist  at  the 
ceremony  in  the  humble  guise  of  spectators. 

In  the  evening,  too,  the  Indians  preferred  to  go  to  the  white 
man's  supper  in  white-man  clothing.  There  was  manifest 
much  of  the  traditional  shyness  of  the  race  at  first,  but  the  ice 
was  broken  b}*  abundance  of  good  food  and  a  succession  of  son<>s 
and  stories  until  all  except  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Shawano  were  quite 
at  ease.  Presently  a  monster  cake  was  brought  in.  Two  men, 
Tetebahbundung  and  Obetossoway,  carried  it  on  their  shoul- 
ders all  around  the  room,  meantime  dancing  as  grotesquely  as 
the  safety  of  their  burden  permitted  and  singing  a  most 
lugubrious  tune  which,  from  the  Ojibway  point  of  view  is  a 
joyous  festal  song,  until  at  length  they  deposited  the  cake  on  the 
table  before  Mrs.  Shawano.  She  was  then  told  that  she  must 
cut  the  cake  so  that  every  person  present  might  have  a  piece,  and 
there  ensued  an  awkward  pause.     All  eyes  were  turned  upon 


142  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

the  bride  who,  doubtless,  never  had  heard  of  this  paleface  cus- 
tom, and  was  painfully  embarrassed.  None  of  the  whites  pres- 
ent saw  just  what  to  do  to  relieve  the  situation,  but  it  was  taken 
in  hand  by  an  aged  Indian  who  stood  up  and,  using  his  native 
tongue,  spoke  substantially  as  follows : 

"My  friends,  this  is  a  very  large  cake  and  it  will  take  some 
time  to  cut  it.  It  is  evident  that  the  bride  fears  she  will  make 
a  slip  of  some  kind  with  so  many  persons  looking  on,  and  it 
is  plain  enough  that  it  will  be  easier  for  her  if  we  give  our 
attention  to  something  else.  Therefore,  I  suggest  that  we  all 
rise  and  sing  the  Doxology.  This  will  take  our  eyes  from 
her  and  it  may  give  her  courage  for  what  she  has  to  do." 

At  once,  but  decorously,  all  the  Indians  stood  up,  and  the 
whites  who  had  not  understood  the  speech  were  first  astonished 
and  then  awed  as  the  solemn  strains  of  "Old  Hundred"  poured 
in  a  majestic  unison  upon  them.  Before  the  end  of  the  first 
line,  the  bride  arose  and  applied  the  knife  to  the  cake,  and  al- 
though her  task  was  not  finished  with  the  hymn,  the  diversion 
had  done  its  appointed  work  and  she  kept  cutting  in  faithful 
observance  of  instructions  until  the  last  possible  slice  had  been 
disposed  of. 

Then,  as  always  in  my  association  with  the  Ojibways,  I 
siezed  every  opportunity  that  gave  promise  of  bringing  a  pre- 
viously unheard  Indian  song  to  light,  and  on  that  occasion, 
when  it  was  time  to  disperse,  I  ventured  to  ask  if  the  Indians 
would  not  bring  the  jollification  to  end  with  a  rousing,  old-time 
chorus.  By  then  all  were  in  fine  spirits.  We  had  had  a  num- 
ber of  love  songs  from  the  Ojibway  men  and  women,  all  given 


.MUSIC  IN  OJIBWAY  DAILY  LIFE         143 

as  solo  performances,  and  most  of  the  whites  present  had  con- 
tributed humorous  songs  or  stories  to  the  entertainment.  Shy- 
ness had  long  since  taken  flight  and  the  room  was  yet  echoing 
with  laughter  when  I  made  my  suggestion.  The  Indians 
listened  to  it  with  customary  respect,  and  such  was  the  atmos- 
where  of  perfect  accord  that  I  actually  stationed  myself  behind 
a  friend  so  that,  unobserved,  I  could  jot  upon  a  scrap  of  music 
paper  such  notes  of  the  forthcoming  novelty  as  I  could.  There 
was  no  apparent  consultation  among  the  Indians.  All  stood 
up  and  looked  at  Tetebahbundung,  for  he  was  their  "leading 
voice"  that  night,  and  it  was  natural  that  they  should  defer 
to  his  choice  of  a  song.  Quite  in  accordance  with  custom  there 
was  a  distinct  pause,  impressive  to  me  in  my  eager  quest  for 
new  melody.  Then  the  singing  began,  and  nearly  every  voice 
was  in  with  the  second  note.  My  own  was  added  at  the  third 
and  my  scrap  of  music  paper  was  hurriedly  pocketed,  for  the 
"rousing,  old-time  chorus"  was  the  Doxology! 

At  the  end  one  of  the  Indians,  who  seemed  to  perceive  that 
I  had  missed  something,  came  to  me  and  said,  "We  always 
close  our  social  meetings  with  the  Doxology."  I  have  had 
many  occasions  since  to  test  the  uniformity  of  the  rule.  One 
was  quite  as  striking  as  the  wedding  supper.  I  had  invited 
about  thirty  Indians  and  a  dozen  whites  to  a  camp  fire  on 
the  island  where  I  lived  during  the  summer.  It  was  about  a 
mile  from  the  mainland.  The  camp  fire  was  purely  a  social 
gathering  where  red  men  and  white  met  on  even  terms.  There 
had  been  songs  and  weird  dances,  light  refreshments  and  much 
tobacco.     The  moon  was  well  up  in  a  cloudless  sky  and  the 


144 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


lake  was  as  smooth  as  glass  when  it  came  time  to  break  up.  A 
lady,  who  had  been  deeply  impressed  by  the  beauty  of  the  O jib- 
way  songs  given  that  evening,  asked  the  Indians  if  they  would 
not  sing  "My  Bark  Canoe"  when  they  paddled  homeward.  I 
said  nothing,  wondering  if  they  would  comply  and  hoping  that 
they  would  do  so.  They  did.  Paddling  slowly,  and  keeping 
their  canoes  well  together,  they  crossed  the  moonlit  water  sing- 
ing that  favorite  song.  We  sat  by  the  dying  fire  and  listened, 
the  strains  fading  perceptibly  as  the  canoes  became  indistin- 
guishable in  the  distance;  but  the  night  was  so  still  that  the 
melody  came  back  to  us  distinctly  long  after  the  flotilla  had 
been  lost  to  sight.  With  characteristic  faithfulness,  the  In- 
dians sang  the  song  over  and  over  again,  and  if  they  tired  of  it 
we  did  not,  though  we  wondered  how  long  they  would  keep  at 
it,  and  if  they  were  standing  on  the  mainland  to  sing  until  our 
fire  should  go  out.  That  they  were  not  on  the  mainland  was 
proved  by  a  minute  of  careful  listening,  for  the  melody  steadily 
grew  fainter;  but  we  knew  to  a  certainty  when  they  reached 
shore,  for  across  the  calm  surface  of  the  lake  came,  as  a  ben- 
ediction and  farewell,  the  Doxology.  The  social  meeting  was 
then,  and  not  till  then,  at  an  end. 


Mah  moo  yuh   wuh  mah   dah  mah  buh.  Wan  -  ge  shuh  wan  dan  -  goo  -  ze  yong; 


^i=3 


m 


Wa    yoo    se    mind  wa  gwiss  se    mind,  Kuh    ya   pah     ne    zid     oo      je   chaug. 


CHAPTER  Vin 
OJIBWAY  VERSE 

I  HAVE  said  as  unequivocally  as  possible  that  the  O jib- 
way  has  not  engrafted  white-man  music  upon  his  own 
stock;  that  under,  or  despite,  the  influence  of  civilization, 
he  has  developed  a  distinctive  folksong,  Indian  in  character  as 
well  as  Indian  in  the  making  of  it.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
observations  of  the  preceding  chapter  at  variance  with  this  as- 
sertion. The  Ojibways  who  first  embraced  Christianity  strug- 
gled with  its  music,  but  unsuccessfully  and  were  overcome 
by  it.  They  attempted  the  grafting  process,  but  eventually 
the  hymn  of  civilization  won  its  victory.  There  lingers  in 
Megissun  and  other  aged  Ojibways  evidence  of  the  struggle 
between  the  two  tonal  systems,  but  the  younger  generation 
have  succumbed,  and  the  songs  of  the  church  when  they  sing 
them  to-day  are  substantially  free  from  the  conflicts  with  a 
past  style.  On  the  other  hand,  what  they  have  retained  of 
their  ancient  music  remains  their  own,  resisting  successfully  the 
tendency  to  mix  the  styles,  and  developing  to  greater  refine- 
ment along  its  own  peculiar  lines.  Nothing  could  be  a  more 
convincing  demonstration  of  the  inherent  strength  of  O  jib  way 
melodies  than  this,  that  they  retain  their  distinctive  character 
in  spite  of  the  overwhelming  influence  of  civilization  which  is 

145 


146  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

steadily  destroying  everything  else  that  marked  the  Indian  as 
an  individual  in  the  human  family. 

Inasmuch  as  we  are  dealing  with  a  musical  system  that  finds 
its  expression  only  in  songs,  it  is  necessary  to  give  attention 
to  the  verse  that  underlies  or  accompanies  them.  I  have  found 
this  an  agreeable  necessity,  for  Indian  verse  is  almost  as  inter- 
esting as  the  music;  not  that  it  is  equally  charming;  on  the 
contrary,  it  often  startles  and  shocks  not  alone  by  its  rugged 
form,  but  by  the  sentiment  it  conveys.  It  must  be  approached 
with  patient  regard  for  the  fact  that  it  is  the  expression  of  a 
primitive  people:  in  a  spirit  that  calmly  seeks  for  facts  and  as 
calmly  accepts  them.  In  nowise,  it  seems  to  me,  could  an 
investigator  profane  his  research  more  than  by  yielding  to  a 
sentimental  or  romantic  disposition  to  read  into  his  subject 
what,  from  the  Indian  viewpoint,  is  not  there;  but  the  same 
disposition  to  look  the  facts  calmly  in  the  face  should  guard 
him  from  accepting  the  apparent  meaning  of  a  song's  words  as 
the  reality.  The  occasion  for  this  warning  will  be  clear  from 
the  illustrative  examples  that  follow. 

COMPACTNESS. 

"What  strikes  the  paleface  first  in  his  consideration  of  O jib- 
way  verse  is  its  extraordinary  compactness.  I  am  assuming 
that  the  observer  has  passed  quickly  over  the  stage,  if  he  ever 
traversed  it,  where  Indian  verse  appealed  to  him  simply  as 
ludicrous,  or  hopelessly  crude.  I  think  my  conclusions  in  this 
matter  would  apply  to  most,  if  not  all  other  Indian  tribes,  but, 


OBJIBWAY  VERSE  147 

for  the  sake  of  safety,  will  limit  my  statements  to  the  Ojibway. 
He  wastes  no  words  in  his  poetry,  and.  being  primitive,  he 
usually  restricts  his  poem  to  the  expression  of  a  single  thought. 
Xow  this  thought  may  frame  itself  in  words  sufficiently  clear 
to  him  and  yet  so  few  that  they  cannot  fill  out  the  melody  to 
which  he  attaches  them — it  will  be  borne  in  mind  that  to  the 
Ojibway  all  verse  is  necessarily  music,  and  we  must  therefore 
keep  the  music  somewhat  in  view  while  discussing  the  verse. 
In  this  dilemma  what  does  he  do?  what  does  the  civilized  com- 
poser do?  He  repeats  words  and  phrases  in  order  to  make 
them  cover  the  entire  melodic  strain.  The  Ojibway  not  only 
does  tliis  but  resorts  to  still  another  device  for  the  completion 
of  his  tune — he  runs  in  syllables  that  have  no  meaning. 

Let  us  recall  for  a  moment  that  one  of  the  stock  jests  of 
the  professional  humorist  is  aimed  at  the  mutilation  of  language 
in  the  setting  of  poetry  to  music.  It  may  be  doubted  if  any 
composer  ever  penned  an  anthem  that  obliged  the  soprano  to 
sing 

""Oh  for  a  man,  oh  for  a  man,  oh  for  a  mansion  in  the  skies," 

but  the  greatest  masters  of  English  song  have  justified  the 
quip  by  constructing  long  arias  from  couplets,  a  process  that 
necessitates  the  repetition  of  words  and  phrases  to  a  highly 
absurd  degree.  Here  are  the  words  of  an  Ojibway  wedding 
song : 

Bayzhig  equayzess  ne  menegonun,  gayget  sennah  negech- 
edaybe-ego. 


148  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

They  mean:  "A  girl  has  been  given  to  me;  yes,  I  am  glad 
that  she  has  been  given  to  me."  That  is  to  say,  "I  am  glad 
because  my  sweetheart's  parents  have  consented  to  our  mar- 
riage." From  our  point  of  view  this  is  the  entire  poem,  but 
the  composer  of  it,  who,  be  it  remembered,  was  of  necessity 
also  the  composer  of  the  music,  was  so  tumultuously  stirred 
by  emotion  over  the  great  event  in  his  life  that  music  was 
awakened  in  him  to  an  unusual  degree,  and  his  tune  could  not 
be  confined  to  a  plain  statement  of  his  joy  and  one  or  two 
repetitions  of  it.  The  paleface  under  the  circumstances  might 
have  amplified  his  original  thought  by  entering  upon  a  glowing 
description  of  his  sweetheart's  beauty  of  face  and  form;  he 
might  have  descanted  upon  her  virtues  and  graces ;  or,  following 
the  immortal  model  set  by  Henry  Cary  in  "Sally  in  Our  Alley," 
he  might  have  narrated  his  present  relations  with  her  and  fore- 
cast the  future.  Not  thus  the  Indian.  That  one  thought  of 
jubilant  satisfaction  was  all  that  his  mind  could  carry  with 
comfort  at  one  time;  so,  bless  him!  with  a  better  sense  of  pro- 
portion than  was  manifested  by  the  English  masters,  having 
sung  his  line  twice,  he  forbears  to  repeat  it  ad  infinitum  and  ad 
nauseam,  but  proceeds  to  the  conclusion  of  his  tune  with 
"Heyahj  heyah,  heyah,"  which  means  nothing  at  all,  not  even 
to  himself. 

Does  this  literary  device  provoke  a  smile?  it  has  never  failed 
to  when  I  have  spoken  of  the  matter  in  conversation,  but  was 
it  not  Shakespeare  who  ended  the  stanzas  of  a  song  with  "Hey 
nonny,  nonny?"  did  not  the  same  poet  piece  out  his  comprehen- 
sible  lines  with   "O,   willow,  willow?"     Is  there   a  world  of 


OBJIBWAY  YERSE  149 

meaning  in  these  words?  Doubtless  as  much  as  in  "Heyah, 
heyah,"  but  no  more.  And  think  of  the  hundreds  of  songs 
to  be  found  in  our  anthologies  that  end  with  fal  lals,  and  equally 
portentous  syllables,  and  count,  if  you  can,  the  English  poems 
that  end  every  alternate  line  with  a  meaningless  "O"  intro- 
duced for  rhythm,  or  rhyme,  or,  at  the  behest  of  the  tune, 
for  the  purposes  of  melody.  It  will  do  no  harm,  brethren,  to 
smile  at  the  Indian,  but  let  us  turn  a  fair  share  of  the  laughter 
upon  ourselves. 


TRANSLATION  AND  INTERPRETATION. 

A  better  example  of  compactness  may  be  found  in  the  fol- 
lowing to  which  I  have  previously  referred  as  the  song  that 
awakened  my  interest  in  Ojibway  music  and  led  me  to  this 
prolonged  investigation.  Short  as  it  is,  the  Indian  does  not 
piece  it  out  with  "heyah."  The  entire  poem  is  here  given  as 
sung  by  the  Indians,  with  the  meaning  of  the  words  under  the 
Ojibway  equivalent: 


Chekahbay 

Throughout 

tebik 
night 

ondandeyan 
I  keep  awake 

chckaybay 
throughout 

tebik 
night 

ondandeyan 
I  keep  awake 

alt  gah  mah-sibi 
upon  a  river 

ondandeyan 
I  keep  awake. 

150  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

I  am  quite  sure  that  this  literal  transfer  of  meanings  from 
one  language  to  another  would  convey  nothing  to  the  English 
paleface  who  knew  nothing  by  direct  contact  of  Indian  life. 
His  poetic  fancy  might  evolve  a  meaning  from  it,  but  it  is 
hardly  likely  that  it  would  be  in  consonance  with  the  Indian's 
meaning.  I  venture  to  take  the  reader  over  the  course  that 
was  necessarily  mine  when  I  undertook  to  translate  the  song. 
At  that  time  I  knew  not  one  Ojibway  word.  The  intelligent 
Indian  whom  I  asked  for  a  translation  slowly  dictated  the  fol- 
lowing: 

"I  am  out  all  night  on  the  river  seeking  for  my  sweetheart." 

This  impressed  me  as  poetic  in  feeling,  but  I  wished  to 
get  closer  to  the  words  themselves  which  I  had  carefully  spelled 
from  dictation  and  written  as  above,  leaving  spaces  beneath  for 
the  English  equivalents.  I  could  see  that  there  were  only  four 
words.  By  dint  of  patient,  detailed  questioning  I  arrived  ap- 
proximately at  the  English  equivalents  above  given.  Then  I 
was  puzzled  and  disturbed. 

"Where  is  the  word  for  sweetheart?"  I  asked. 

"It  is  not  there,"  replied  the  Indian,  tranquilly. 

"Then,"  said  I,  "how  do  you  make  out  that  the  song  means 
T  am  seeking  for  my  sweetheart'?" 

Had  he  been  a  paleface  he  woidd  have  smiled  pityingly  at  my 
lack  of  comprehension,  but,  as  he  had  all  the  traditional  courtesy 
and  dignity  of  his  race,  he  put  my  own  patience  to  the  blush 
by  pointing  to  the  word  "ondandeyan"  which  occurs  three  times. 

"That  mean,"  said  he,  "  T  keep  awake.'  I  get  tired,  yes, 
and  sleepy,  but  I  no  sleep.     I  keep  awake.     That  word  (tebik) 


OBJIEWAY  VERSE  151 

is  night.  Now  you  see.  Why  does  a  man  keep  awake  all 
night  when  he  want  to  sleep?" 

Like  the  true  orator  and  debater,  he  paused  for  reply. 

"Well,"  I  suggested,  half  in  weakness,  and  half  in  deter- 
mination to  make  him  work  out  the  meaning,  "he  might  he 
hunting  for  deer,  or  something  else  to  eat." 

"No,  no!"  he  responded  gravely,  "not  this  time.  See:  I  keep 
awake  all  night  long  on  the  river.  Only  one  reason.  I  go 
to  find  my  sweetheart.  The  word  is  not  there  hut  we  under- 
stand it.  We  know  what  is  meant.  Perhaps  mebbe  her  family 
has  gone  away.  Perhaps  mehhe  she  said  she  would  meet  me 
and  something  happened  so  she  couldn't.  I  don't  know;  but 
we  know  that  the  man  who  made  this  song  was  looking  for 
his  sweetheart,  and  we  do  not  need  the  word  there." 

With  this  bewildering  light  thrown  on  the  subject,  I  retired 
to  my  own  quarters  and  pondered.  It  was  my  eager  desire 
to  make  the  attractive  melody  available  for  paleface  singers. 
To  this  end  it  was  essential  that  there  should  be  singable  verses. 
Observe  the  use  of  the  plural.  One  verse,  or  one  stanza  would 
not  do  for  the  demands  of  civilization.  The  Indian  is  content 
to  sing  his  one  line  over  and  over  again,  but  the  paleface  must 
have  variety  in  his  language  even  in  so  short  a  song  as  this. 
I  confess  that  my  first  impulse  was  to  string  together  some 
rhymed  lines  that  would  fit  the  tune,  and  let  it  go  at  that,  as 
the  easiest  way  out  of  the  difficulty,  but  it  seemed  a  shame  to 
discard  the  suggestion  offered  in  the  Indian  verse,  and  doubly 
wrong  to  put  forth  an  Indian  song  that  should  not  at  least 
reflect  the  Indian  thought ;  but  so  much  was  implied  and  so 


152  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

little  expressed !  And  that  despairing  reflection  was  the  key  to 
the  problem.  So  much  implied!  I  set  myself  to  studying 
how  much  more  might  be  implied  than  the  search  for  a  sweet- 
heart, and  it  occurred  to  me  that  if  an  Ojibway  were  on  the 
river  he  would  necessarily  be  in  his  canoe.  Here  was  promise 
of  singable  results  and  of  the  verbal  repetition  without  which 
no  representation  of  the  original  could  be  regarded  as  satis- 
factory. It  was  with  conscious  excitement  that  I  hurried  to 
my  Indian  friend  and  asked  the  question — would  not  the  sing- 
ing lover  be  in  his  canoe? 

"Of  course,"  said  he,  and  then  a  ghost  of  a  smile  lit  up  his 
dark  features;  "but  you  don't  find  the  word  chemaun  there,  do 
you?"  he  asked. 

Chemaun  means  canoe.  "No,"  I  answered,  "but  it's  under- 
stood, isn't  it?" 

"Yes,"  said  he,  "we  understand  it  so,"  and  he  turned  away 
as  if  that  settled  it,  or  as  if  a  continuance  of  the  conversation 
would  lead  him  to  inquire  sarcastically  if  I  supposed  the  lover 
would  be  swimming  the  river  all  night,  or  balancing  on  a  per- 
ilous, uncomfortable  log? 

It  did  settle  it,  and  before  I  arrived  back  at  my  table  I  was 
humming  the  first  of  the  stanzas  with  which  the  song  has  been 
identified  since  its  publication — 

In  the  still  night,  the  long  hours  through, 

I  guide  my  bark  canoe, 
My  bark  canoe,  my  love,  to  you. 


OBJIBWAY  YEBSE  lc3 

While  the  stars  shine  and  falls  the  dew 

I  seek  my  love  in  hark  canoe, 
In  bark  canoe  I  seek  for  yon. 

It  is  I,  love,  your  lover  true, 

Who  glides  the  stream  in  bark  canoe; 
It  glides  to  you,  my  love,  to  you. 

SUBORDINATION    OF   VERSE   TO   MELODY. 

I  was  slow  in  coming  to  perception  of  what  may  be  called 
a  general  principle  applicable  to  Indian  verse  that  accounts  for 
its  compactness  and  for  certain  negative  characteristics.  To 
summarize  them:  it  is  vague;  it  lacks  form,  that  is,  nothing  is 
there  that  answers  to  rhyme,  there  is  seldom  a  suggestion  even 
of  corresponding  or  contrasting  phrases,  and  it  is  only  by  good 
fortune,  apparently,  that  it  ever  assumes  a  metrical  aspect.  In 
other  words,  it  is  prose,  for  the  most  part,  unembellished  by 
metaphor,  or  any  other  trick  of  the  imagination  with  which 
civilized  poets  enhance  their  expressions.  This  may  occasion 
some  degree  of  astonishment  in  view  of  the  fact  that  all  we 
have  read  of  Indian  oratory  gives  us  the  impression  that  the 
Indian  is  flowery,  indulging  in  metaphor  to  such  an  extent  as 
to  be  ambiguous,  that  he  favors  the  imagination  at  the  expense 
of  perspicuity,  caring  more  for  striking  figures  of  speech  than 
for  an  unmistakable  presentation  of  his  ideas.  This  certainly 
was  characteristic  of  the  Ojibways.  To  refer  to  but  one  au- 
thority, Alexander  Henry,  in  his  Travels  and  Adventures,  1760, 
1776,  more  than  once  alludes  to  his  difficulty  in  following  the 


151  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

speeches  of  chiefs,  even  after  he  had  mastered  their  language, 
because  of  their  excessive  indulgence  in  flowery  figures;  and 
he  says  that  it  was  a  part  of  their  education  to  learn  to  speak 
figuratively.  How  comes  it,  then,  that  imagery  is  conspicuous 
by  its  rarity  in  Indian  verse?  I  think  we  shall  find  that  the 
answer  lies  in  the  subordination  of  verse  to  melody,  the  Indian 
having  no  conception  of  poetry  apart  from  its  association  with 
music.  In  order  to  work  out  this  speculation,  as  well  as  to 
deduce  the  general  principle  referred  to,  I  shall  dip  again  into 
narration,  and  not  unwillingly,  although  one  of  my  stories  con- 
victs me  of  amusing,  error. 

It  was  not  long  after  I  had  begun  my  quest  for  melodies 
that  I  chanced  upon  Tetebahbundung  drumming  and  singing 
for  his  little  son,  Adamosa,  to  dance.  They  were  quite  by 
themselves,  indulging  in  the  diversion  for  its  own  sake  with 
no  thought  of  spectators.  The  boy  threw  himself  into  the 
fantastic  and  difficult  movements  of  the  dance  with  extravagant 
enthusiasm,  and  the  father  applied  himself  to  his  part  almost 
as  seriously  as  if  the  event  signalized  an  important  decision  by 
a  council  of  chiefs — almost,  for  he  was  not  drumming  loudly, 
and  in  his  grave  eyes  glowed  the  light  of  parental  satisfaction. 
By  reason  of  his  comparatively  light  drumming  and  the  clear- 
ness of  his  voice,  I  heard  the  quaint  tune  distinctly  and  it 
caught  my  fancy  at  once.  I  had  no  difficulty  in  notating  it, 
for  by  then  I  had  become  accustomed  to  the  alternation  of 
triple  and  double  rhythm,  and,  moreover,  Tetebahbundung  sang 
it  over  and  over  until  the  boy  stopped  dancing  from  sheer 
exhaustion.     My  next  consideration  was  for  the  words,  and 


OBJIBWAY  VERSE  155 

Tetebahbundung  slowly  dictated  them,   syllable  by  syllable: 

"Mujje  mukesin  awyawyon." 

Three  words,  the  most  compact  poem  discovered  up  to  that 
moment — I  have  since  found  one  that  is  limited  to  one  word. 
I  doubt  whether  anybody  could  imagine  the  intensity  of  my 
eagerness  to  learn  what  thev  meant.  I  was  all  excitement  over 
the  melody,  my  imagination  even  then  leaping  forward  to 
the  use  I  subsequently  made  of  it  in  orchestral  writing:  and  it 
was  so  individual,  so  perfectly  rounded  out.  so  inspiriting,  that 
I  suppose  I  unconsciously  forecast  a  significance  in  the  words 
that  should  be  worthy,  to  say  the  least,  of  the  tune.  At  all 
events  it  was  with  something  like  a  shock  that  I  heard  the  In- 
dian's answer  to  my  inquiry  as  to  the  meaning. 

"I  use  bad  shoes,"  said  he. 

I  had  no  distrust  of  Tetebahbundung' s  intentions,  but  there 
was  abundant  reason  to  doubt  the  accuracy  of  his  translations, 
for  at  that  time  he  knew  little  English  and  his  pronunciation 
was  most  imperfect.  So  I  found  occasion  to  ask  another  Indian 
about  the  words,  and  from  him  received  identically  the  same 
answer.     "I  use  bad  shoes." 

Then,  as  in  the  case  of  "My  Bark  Canoe."  I  withdrew  to 
the  solitude  of  my  own  thoughts.  What  possibly  could  be  im- 
plied that  was  not  expressed  by  these  words  ?  I  asked  myself. 
There  was  no  faint  shadow  of  poetic  suggestion  in  them;  they 
were  simply  funny,  and  I  came  not  unwillingly  at  last  to  that 
acceptation  of  the  song,  for  the  tune  itself  sparkled  as  with 
humor.  So  I  undertook  to  reproduce  the  Indian  humor  in 
English.     This  was  easy  enough,  for  a  grotesque,  or  even  a 


156  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

commonplace  phrase  subjected  to  incessant  iteration  becomes 
irresistibly  laughable,  and  it  was  merely  a  question,  therefore, 
of  conveying  the  literal  meaning  of  the  sentence  in  words  that 
would  fit  the  rhythm. 

Very  well;  the  only  use  to  which  shoes  could  be  put  was  for 
wearing,  and  bad  shoes,  from  my  own  cornful  experience, 
were  those  that  pinched ;  but  it  was  well  nigh  inconceivable  that 
an  Indian  should  pinch  his  toes  in  yielding  moccasins,  and  I 
readily  concluded  that  from  his  point  of  view  the  only  bad 
shoes  would  be  those  that  were  past  repair,  worn  out;  and  so 
a  line  adjusted  itself  quickly  to  the  rhythm  of  the  tune: 

"Worn  out  shoes  I  am  a-wearing." 

I  committed  many  absurdities  that  first  summer  among  the 
Indians,  among  them  being  the  installation  of  a  machine  that 
in  a  bygone  age  had  been  a  pianoforte  in  my  lodge.  To  it 
I  took  my  new  song,  and  in  my  confident  enthusiasm  I  invited 
two  or  three  whites  and  such  Indians  as  were  in  call  to  listen. 
The  whites  responded  to  the  humor  of  the  piece  and  I  was 
vastly  satisfied  with  myself.  Tetebahbundung  was  there  and  I 
asked  him  what  he  thought  of  it,  but  I  am  sure  that  my  question 
was  disingenuous.  Anybody,  red  or  white,  could  have  seen 
that  I  expected  commendation.  Tetebahbundung  politely  gave 
it.  Not  a  hint  did  he  venture  that  I  was  in  total  error.  His 
mental  attitude  doubtless  might  have  been  expressed  thus:  "It 
pleases  him,  it  pleases  his  friends;  who  am  I  that  I  should 
presume  to  instruct  him  in  the  use  of  his  own  language?" 

At  all  events  no  shadow  of  suspicion  crossed  my  mind  that 
I  had  not  made  a  correct  interpretation,  and,  as  the  song  proved 


OBJIBWAY  VERSE  157 

popular  with  all  whites  who  came  my  way,  I  sang  it  many  times, 
eventually  to  a  kindergartner  who  begged  a  copy  of  it  that 
she  might  teach  it  to  her  children.  She  tried  it  on,  found  that 
the  children  tackled  to  it  eagerly,  spoke  to  other  kindergartners 
about  it,  and  before  very  long  I  was  in  receipt  of  urgent  re- 
quests from  various  parts  of  the  country  to  print  the  song. 
I  did  so,  and  "Old  Shoes"  speedily  found  its  way  to  kinder- 
gartens and  primary  schools,  and  even  to  the  concert  platform. 
Meantime  I  continued  to  sing  it  myself  whenever  I  was  in  com- 
pany with  Indians  entertaining  white  audiences,  and  for  a  long 
time  nobody  among  my  Ojibway  friends  said  a  word. 

One  day.  nearly  a  year  after  the  publication  of  the  song, 
Obetossoway  confronted  me.  He  is  the  wittiest  Indian  among 
my  acquaintances,  quick  to  see  and  to  make  a  joke,  but  por- 
tentously solemn  or  dignified  when  he  has  something  of  im- 
portance to  say  to  one  whom  he  regards  as  his  superior.  At 
that  time  I  was  his  employer,  and  I  imagine  that  he  must  have 
nerved  himself  mightily  to  correct  me. 

"Sir,"  said  he,  in  his  most  dignified  manner,  "you  have  got 
that  song  all  wrong.  It  does  not  mean  that  I  am  wearing 
worn  out  shoes  at  all,  sir." 

"Well,"  I  responded,  "I  want  to  be  set  right  if  I  have  made 
a  mistake.     "What  does  it  mean?" 

"It  means  'I  use  bad  shoes,'  sir." 

This  was  almost  annoying.  Obetossoway  speaks  English 
fluently,  and,  with  his  bright  mind,  I  thought  he  should  have 
grasped  my  interpretation  and  not  insist  on  bald  literalness; 
but  I  was  anxious  to  encourage  just  the  kind  of  service  he 


158  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

was  trying  to  perform  for  me,  and  I  went  patiently  into  my 
argument. 

"Worn  out  shoes  are  bad  shoes,  are  they  not?"  I  asked,  and 
he  admitted  that  they  were.  "Well,"  I  proceeded,  "in  English 
we  do  not  speak  of  using  shoes,  but  of  wearing  them.  Don't 
you  understand?" 

"I  do,  sir,"  said  he. 

"Then,  if  I  am  wearing  worn  out  shoes,  I  am  using  bad  shoes. 
Isn't  that  so?" 

"It  is,"  Obetossoway  admitted,  adding  firmly,  "but,  sir,  the 
song  means  T  use  bad  shoes.' ' 

In  weariness  of  spirit,  I  gave  it  up,  silently  abusing  the 
Indian  for  an  unsuspected  blockhead,  and  I  was  so  certain 
of  my  interpretation  that  I  was  disturbed  by  no  doubt  about 
it. 

The  revelation  of  my  error  came  a  few  days  after  the  con- 
versation with  Obetossoway.  At  that  time  the  play  "Hia- 
watha" was  being  performed  daily  in  the  open  air.  I  had 
notated  most  of  the  songs  that  are  introduced  into  the  play 
but  had  not  paid  attention  to  those  that  figure  in  the  gambling 
scene  for  the  very  good  reason  that  I  never  could  hear  them. 
The  drum  is  pounded  incessantly  while  all  the  Indians  dance 
except  tjie  few  who  are  directly  concerned  in  the  game.  Now 
and  again  I  could  hear  the  singer's  voice,  but  never  sufficiently 
to  catch  a  complete  musical  phrase,  and  the  words  were  wholly 
inaudible.  The  fact  that  music  entered  even  into  the  gambling 
of  the  Indians  suggested  that  it  must  have  special  significance 
there;  and  that  was  incentive  enough  for  investigation.      In 


OBJIBWAY  VERSE  159 

order  to  get  some  notion  of  the  song,  or  songs,  I  concealed  my- 
self among  bushes  close  to  the  stage  with  music  paper  on  the 
ground  before  me.  From  this  vantage  I  could  hear  every 
word  and  nearly  every  note.  Imagine  my  bewilderment  when 
the  gambling  began,  to  hear  Tetebahbundung  sing  "3Iu;)je 
mukesin  atcyazvyon!"  But  I  am  not  altogether  blind,  or  deaf, 
or  stupid.  In  a  moment  the  significance  of  the  song  flashed 
upon  me,  for  I  recalled  what  was  visible  from  the  viewpoint 
of  the  audience.  The  Indians  were  playing  what  they  call 
the  "Moccasin  Game."  One  player  hides  a  small  object,  no 
matter  what,  under  one  of  three  or  more  moccasins;  his  op- 
ponent tries  to  select  the  moccasin  that  conceals  the  object. 
That,  in  brief,  is  the  whole  game,  and  it  is  said  to  be  the  origin 
of  that  infamous  swindling  device  known  to  whites  as  the  shell 
game.  But  it  is  picturesque  and  dramatic  as  the  Indians  play 
it.  The  process  of  hiding  is  accompanied  by  a  variety  of  con- 
fusing gestures,  and  it  takes  a  long  time;  and  while  the  first 
player  is  lifting  one  moccasin  after  another,  pretending  to 
hide  the  object,  distracting  his  opponent's  attention  in  every 
possible  way,  the  singer  is  industriously  warbling  "Mujje 
mukesin  avoyawyon" 

Obetossoway  was  right.  Of  course  the  song  means  "I  use 
bad  shoes;"  it  can't  mean  anything  else,  but  what  is  implied  and 
not  expressed  might  be  put  this  way:  "I  am  using  bewitched 
shoes;  they  will  fool  you;  you're  not  smart  enough  to  get  around 
these  wicked  shoes  of  mine."  Worn-out  shoes,  indeed!  O,  the 
superior  discernment  of  the  paleface!  I  felt  some  chagrin 
as  I  lay  there  in  the  bushes  with  my  needless  music  paper 


160  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

before  me,  but  presently  yielded  to  tbe  humor  of  the  event, 
and  at  the  earliest  possible  moment  after  the  performance  I 
sought  out  Obetossoway  and  made  amends  for  my  obstinacy. 

Before  I  left  my  place  of  concealment,  however,  I  had  caught 
another  song.  It  is  a  sequel  to  "Bad  Shoes,"  as  the  first  ought 
to  be  called.  When  the  first  gambler  has  hidden  the  object 
and  sufficiently  confused  his  adversary,  he  sits  back  and  it  is 
the  other's  turn  to  play.  Seldom  is  the  adversary  so  confident 
of  success  that  he  indicates  his  choice  of  moccasins  without 
delay.  He  first  assures  himself  that  there  has  been  no  cheating. 
It  would  be  unfair,  for  example,  if  the  first  gambler  should 
palm  the  object  instead  of  slipping  it  under  one  of  the  mocca- 
sins. So  the  second  gambler  demands  that  the  first  expose  both 
his  hands  and  also  open  his  mouth  to  show  that  the  object  is  not 
there.  When  he  is  satisfied  that  nothing  has  been  done  con- 
trary to  rule,  the  second  gambler  usually  makes  a  feint  of 
picking  out  the  moccasin  that  he  thinks  conceals  the  object. 
This  he  does  by  pretending  to  strike  at  it  with  his  war  club, 
meantime  watching  his  adversary's  eyes  warily  for  any  involun- 
tary sign  of  fear  or  confidence.  This  feint  may  be  repeated 
several  times,  or  for  as  long  as  the  second  gambler  likes,  and 
the  game  does  not  reach  its  final  stage  until  he  actually  strikes 
a  moccasin  with  his  club.  That  moccasin  is  then  turned  over, 
and  if  the  object  is  found  under  it,  the  second  gambler  wins; 
otherwise  he  loses.  The  sequel  to  "Bad  Shoes"  applies  to 
the  play  of  the  second  gambler.  While  he  is  making  up  his 
mind  the  drummer  is  singing — 


OBJIBWAY  VERSE  161 

Gay  get  wahbod  nege  wahbod  gc, 

"Indeed!  I  know  where  it  is,"  which  is  to  say,  "you  can't  fool 
me  with  your  bad  shoes;  I  can  find  the  thing." 

A    SONG    OF    WINTER. 

A  brief  examination  of  one  more  song  will  bring  us  to  the 
principle  underlying  nearly  all  Ojibway  verse  to  which  allusion 
has  been  made.  Early  in  my  association  with  these  Indians  I 
notated  a  song  to  the  following  words: 

Kczhoyah         ishquandayrn         baybogin 
Warm  door  in  winter 

Several  Indians  told  me  that  it  meant  "My  door  is  warm  in 
winter  time,"  which  is  literal  but  not  illuminating.  The  young 
fellows  sang  it  with  great  gusto  at  all  sorts  of  times  and  oc- 
casions, and  not  one  of  them  seemed  to  comprehend  the  diffi- 
culty I  had  in  understanding  them.  I  did  get  an  impression 
that  it  was  in  some  way  a  song  of  hospitality,  but  it  was  not 
until  good  fortune  brought  me  in  touch  with  Shingwauk  that 
I  was  enabled  to  look  at  it  from  the  Indian  point  of  view  and 
grasp  its  full  significance.  I  referred  nearly  all  these  songs 
to  him  after  they  had  been  phonographed.  When  he  had  lis- 
tened to  this  one,  he  said: 

"When  I  was  a  boy  I  often  heard  my  grandfather  tell  the 
story  of  that  song  and  sing  it.     The  story  goes  that  an  Indian 


162  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

hunter  was  overtaken  by  a  furious  snow  storm  that  speedily 
obscured  the  trail  and  made  all  ordinary  landmarks  unrecog- 
nizable. Night  fell  soon  afterwards  and  he  knew  that  he  was 
lost,  but  he  kept  wandering  on,  for  it  was  so  cold  that  if  he 
had  stood  still  he  would  have  frozen  to  death.  When  morning 
came  he  was  more  bewildered  than  ever.  The  snow  still  fell 
and  the  wind  blew  a  gale.  He  was  numb  with  cold  and  faint 
with  hunger,  for  his  stock  of  food  was  exhausted  and  he  stum- 
bled on  no  game.  All  that  day  the  north  wind  blew  and  the 
snow  piled  in  such  deep  drifts  that  he  could  hardly  struggle 
through  them.  When  darkness  came  again  he  was  still  floun- 
dering along,  almost  minded  to  give  it  up,  lie  down  and  sleep 
the  sleep  of  death,  but  in  a  lull  of  the  tempest  he  beard  the  faint 
beating  of  a  drum  a  long  way  off.  This  gave  him  hope,  but 
fear,  too,  for  how  could  he  know  that  it  was  not  the  drum  of 
an  enemy?  Cautiously  he  followed  the  direction  of  the  sound 
which  grew  louder  and  louder  until  at  length  he  discerned  a 
wigwam  from  within  which  it  came.  And  then  he  dis- 
tinguished the  words  that  the  man  within  was  singing — Kezho- 
yah  ishquandaym  baybogin — they  were  Ojibway  words,  and  he 
knew  that  he  had  come  upon  one  who  would  be  a  friend.  So 
he  went  directly  to  the  wigwam,  opened  the  door  and  entered. 
The  man  who  lived  there  stirred  the  fire,  gave  the  visitor 
abundance  of  food  and  kept  him  until  the  storm  abated. 

"Near  the  end  of  the  story,"  Shingwauk  concluded,  "my 
grandfather  would  pause  and  sing  the  song,  though  some- 
times he  did  not  sing  until  the  story  was  finished." 


OBJIBWAY  VERSE  163 

FEW    SONGS    COMPLETE    IN    THEMSELVES. 

From  these  examples,  and  many  others  that  need  not  be 
quoted,  it  appears  that,  with  few  exceptions,  no  Ojibway  song 
is  complete  in  itself.  For  entire  comprehension  it  depends 
upon  something'  external,  a  story,  or  a  ceremony.  The  mocca- 
sin game  may  be  classed  as  a  ceremony,  for,  in  view  of  the 
regular  procedure  of  the  game,  the  songs  that  are  associated 
with  it  become  definitely  significant.  In  the  case  of  the  warm 
door  song,  the  story  presents  to  the  imagination  a  vivid  picture 
of  Winter,  the  sufferings  of  the  lost  hunter  serving  to  set  forth 
the  terrors  and  perils  of  the  season  which  the  man  within  doors 
mocks  triumphantly  in  his  three-word  song.  The  song,  then, 
may  be  regarded  as  a  mnemonic  summary  of  several  thoughts 
and  impressions. 

It  is  not  in  the  manner  of  civilization  to  connect  its  songs 
with  explanatory  stories,  though  our  modern  lecture-recitals 
indicate  that  a  greater  degree  of  appreciation  of  songs  is 
gained  thereby.  Is  it  not  rather  impressive  to  reflect  that 
the  untutored  Ojibway  had  lecture-recitals  centuries  before  he 
knew  the  white  man !  The  custom  of  preluding  every  song 
with  an  explanation  of  the  circumstances  alluded  to  in  the 
text  is  evidently  as  ancient  as  any  Indian  custom  that  survives 
to-day;  a  custom,  be  it  understood,  that  was  not  invented  for 
the  benefit  of  inquisitive  whites,  but  that  was  and  is  maintained 
by  the  Indians  for  themselves. 

But,  aside  from  elegance  of  diction,  and  highly  developed 
form,  and  some  other  superficial  features  perhaps,  the  essen- 


164  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

tial  difference  between  Ojibway  verse  and  the  verse  of  civ- 
ilization is  just  this:  that  our  poetry  is  or  aims  to  he  self 
dependent;  our  songs  are  or  should  be  complete  in  themselves; 
the  Ojibways'  are  consciously  incomplete  statements  of  the 
situation,  feeling,  or  events  which  find  expression  through 
them. 

It  must  be  obvious,  therefore,  that,  in  adapting  these  songs 
to  the  uses  of  civilization,  the  adaptor  confronts  a  problem 
that  is  at  once  nice  and  complex.  He  must  reflect  the  Indian 
thought,  and  a  precisely  literal  translation  would  most  effect- 
ively conceal,  or  at  best  misrepresent  it.  In  words  that  fall 
naturally  in  the  Indian  scheme  of  accents  he  must  convey  not 
only  an  interpretation  of  the  words  actually  employed,  but 
a  sufficiently  complete  statement  of  the  explanatory  story,  or 
the  attendant  situation,  to  make  the  English  song  self  de- 
pendent. 

When  I  came  to  realize  this  principle,  I  saw  at  once  that 
many  songs  that  hitherto  had  seemed  impracticable  of  trans- 
lation, because  of  the  unimaginative  brevity  of  their  texts, 
might  be  turned  to  account  if  the  stories  were  known,  and  I 
began  a  fresh  pursuit  with  stories  in  view.  So,  without  seek- 
ing to  excuse  the  shortcomings  of  the  verse  now  linked  to 
these  melodies,  let  it  be  understood  that,  in  all  cases  where 
not  specifically  stated  otherwise,  the  contents  of  the  verse  have 
been  suggested  by  Indians'  statements  to  me  as  to  what  is 
their  understanding  of  the  song.  In  the  process  by  which  the 
Ojibway  verse  makes  its  way  to  English  there  must  necessarily 
be  taken  on  some  color  of  the  adaptor's   individuality;  and 


OBJIBWAY  VERSE  165 

there  is  no  end  of  liability  to  error.  I  should  rejoice  if  other 
persons  should  interest  themselves  to  the  extent  of  turning  the 
subject  matter  into  verse  more  truly  expressive  of  Indian  life 
and  spirit:  in  fact,  one  thing  only  would  please  me  more  and 
that  would  be  the  harmonization  and  development  of  these 
melodies  by  other  composers. 

Following  is  my  attempt  to  interpret  the  warm  door  song — 


Freeze,  ye  northern  winds! 

Blow,  ye  frosty  blasts! 
Here  within  'tis  warm 

While  the  Winter  lasts. 

Whirl,  ye  driven  snow, 
Heap  in  smothering  drifts! 

Winter  here  lies  low 
Xor  his  cold  hand  lifts. 


In  passing  this  part  of  the  subject  I  will  allude  briefly  to 
another  peculiarity  of  Ojibway  verse  that  has  been  a  trouble- 
some stumbling-block  to  my  work — the  fact  that  many  of 
the  words  in  the  songs  are  archaic.  There  is  doubt  among 
the  most  intelligent  Indians  themselves  as  to  the  meaning  of 
some  of  the  ancient  songs,  for  the  words  have  either  passed 
wholly  out  of  current  use,  or  their  meanings  have  evidently 
been  modified  with  the  lapse  of  years. 


1G6  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

SENTIMENT   AND   INCONGRUITIES. 

Next  to  the  compactness  of  Ojibway  verse  the  feature  that 
most  disconcerts  the  musical  observer  is  the  startling  incon- 
gruity that  is  frequently  manifested  between  the  sentiment 
of  the  text  and  the  character  of  the  melody.  There  is  at  least 
one  Indian,  Tetebahbundung,  who  feels  this.  He  came  to 
me  one  day  saying  that  he  had  remembered  a  new  song,  adding 
at  once,  "But  it  ought  to  be  a  love  song  and  it  isn't."  Then 
he  sang  it,  slowly,  seriously,  his  rich  voice  dwelling  lovingly 
upon  the  appealing  phrases  until  the  non-0  jibway  listener 
must  have  felt  that  here  was  a  song  of  human  tenderness,  the 
cry  of  a  pure  soul  for  affection,  an  expression,  whatever  be 
its  detail,  of  the  very  refinement  of  love.  The  melody  ap- 
pealed to  me  instantly  as  the  gem  of  the  collection,  and  though 
I  have  found  many  beautiful  songs  since  then,  none,  in  my  es- 
timation, surpass  it — but  here  are  the  words: 

Me  ne  nah  gaynahge  ne  nah  keewahshqiiaybe  ah  heeling 
me  ne  quayon,  nah  suh  nah  gahnahway  ne  me  shinozahme 
he  nod  gosh  u  neen. 

"I  don't  suppose  I'll  get  drunk  if  I  take  one  drink;  if  I 
should  get  drunk,  take  care  of  me." 

Comment  seems  unnecessary.  Incongruity  is  the  soid  of 
humor,  and  a  smile  at  this  ill  fitting  combination  is  inevitable, 
but  I  confess  that  my  smile  was  one  of  regret.  I  tried  to 
comfort  myself  with  the  speculation  that  this  was  originally 


OBJIBWAY  YEBSE  167 

what  the  melody  seemed  to  make  it,  a  love  song,  and  that  some 
roistering  scoffer  had  parodied  it;  but  even  if  there  were  any- 
thing in  the  fanciful  theory,  it  would  not  avail,  for  the  O jib- 
ways  of  to-day  accept  the  song  as  it  stands,  finding  in  it  merely 
an  expression  of  humor.  I  have  heard  it  roared  by  men  and 
women,  solo  and  in  chorus,  with  no  trace  of  the  refined  senti- 
ment infused  into  it  by  Tetebahbundung,  save  that  it  was  al- 
ways sung  very  slowly  after  the  usual  Ojibway  manner;  and 
on  one  occasion,  at  a  campfire,  a  clever  six-year-old  boy  aroused 
much  enthusiasm  among  the  Indians  by  singing  it  with  ap- 
propriate action.  He  staggered,  hiccoughed  from  time  to 
time,  dwelt  with  extravagant  emphasis  on  the  word  keewahsh- 
quaybe — drunk — and  at  the  end  of  the  second  repetition  fell 
full  length  to  the  ground. 

A    FANTASTIC    EXPERIMENT. 

It  may  be  noted  that  this  is  an  exception  among  Ojibway 
songs  in  that  it  is  complete  in  itself.  I  could  not  bring  myself 
to  profane  the  exquisite  melody  by  singing  it  to  a  translation 
of  the  Indian  words.  Tetebahbundung  had  said  that  it  ought 
to  be  a  love  song,  and  I  tried  a  fantastic  experiment,  the  in- 
evitable result  of  which  I  was  too  optimistic  to  foresee.  I 
suggested  the  making  of  a  new  set  of  words.  Tetebahbun- 
dung placidly  agreed,  and  we  had  several  solemn  pow-wows 
over  the  matter.  At  length,  with  the  assistance  of  an  educated 
Indian,  Chief  Charles  Obetossoway,  of  Grand  Manitoulin 
Island,  brother  of  the  Obetossoway  to  whom  allusion  has  been 
made,  we  evolved  the  following: 


1G8  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

Uh  pe  mod  dahwankah  maudwazhahzhezvahd  shingwaukug 
me  suh  uh  ne  nemoshayn  ne  dahnadum. 

"When  I  am  in  the  forest  I  hear  rav  sweetheart  sighing- 
through  the  pines." 

Then  the  trouble  began.  The  new  words  do  not  fit  the 
tune,  and  although  Ojibway  syntax  permits  of  all  manner 
of  inversions,  and  the  songs  abound  in  repetitions  of  words 
and  phrases,  the  singer  could  not  make  a  satisfactory  arrange- 
ment. Of  course  it  was  too  much  to  expect  that  he  would  do 
so,  and  the  song  will  remain  a  drinking  song  for  as  long  as 
the  Ojibways  sing  it;  but  for  the  uses  of  civilization  I  have 
ventured  to  expand  the  new  set  of  words  and  call  it  "In  the 
Forest,"  under  which  title  the  song  may  be  found  in  the  col- 
lection. 

INVERSION   OF   SENTIMENT. 

Another  instance  of  incongruity  may  be  found  in  the  song 
I  call  "Waubunosa's  Longing,"  from  the  name  of  the  man 
who  first  sang  it  to  me.  It  is  very  popular  among  the  Ojib- 
ways, and  from  their  point  of  view  it  is  a  song  of  joy.  The 
words,  omitting  meaningless  syllables  and  repetitions,  Kenc- 
mashaynon  dalguishid  nesah  wenahowquazans  me  sul  gay 
gal  pedal  guishing,  mean,  "My  sweetheart  has  returned;  I  am 
glad  hecause  she  has  come  back  to  me."  To  the  ear  of  civili- 
zation the  song  does  not  appeal  as  joyful  when  given  in  the 
Indian's  best  manner ;  on  the  contrary  it  seems  ineffably  mourn- 
ful.    At  the  last  analvsis  this  is  a  matter  of  conventional  asso- 


OBJIBWAY  VEBSE  109 

ciation.  The  melody  in  itself  is  neither  sad,  nor  gay,  the 
listener's  characterization  of  it  depending  upon  its  approxi- 
mation to  the  manner  in  which  he  has  been  accustomed  to 
hear  one  emotion  or  the  other  expressed  through  the  tonal  art. 
The  Indian  is  accustomed  to  express  his  joy  in  musical  terms 
that  we  are  accustomed  to  employ  for  expression  of  sorrow; 
but  that  settles  nothing.  To  him  it  is  a  joyous  song,  and  no 
tinge  of  melancholy  overcasts  his  feelings  when  he  sings  it. 
It  is  impossible  to  force  considerations  of  this  kind  upon  a 
people  who  are  just  as  much  the  slaves  of  tradition  and  conven- 
tion as  are  the  red  men.  Xo  amount  of  philosophical  argu- 
ment will  make  this  melody  appeal  as  joyous  to  the  average 
white  man.  Therefore,  believing  it  to  be  impossible  for  any 
white  singer  to  make  the  song  effective  with  a  translation  of 
the  Ojibway  words,  I  have  inverted  the  sentiment  and  arranged 
words  that  seem  to  accord  better  with  civilization's  sense  of  fit- 
ness. 

Hopelessly  incongruous  are  those  love  songs  that  give  utter- 
ance only  to  carnal  passion.  The  melodies  are  no  less  pure 
than  the  others,  no  less  worthy  to  contribute  to  the  delight 
of  refined  persons;  and,  viewed  philosophically,  there  is  noth- 
ing in  the  words  to  disturb  equanimity.  The  Indian  is  frank 
where  the  white  man  is  reserved;  he  does  not  mask  brute  desire 
under  vague  euphemisms;  he  is  primitive,  and  honest,  and 
speaks  according  to  his  lights.  It  is  only  when  we  approach 
the  words  in  a  spirit  of  sentimentalism,  which  is  a  harsh  way 
of  stating  the  musician's  ingenuous  attitude, — for  this  mu- 
sician, at  all  events,  was  eager  to  find  good,  and  good  only,  in 


170  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

all  phases  of  Ojibway  life  and  art — that  we  experience  a 
certain  pain  that  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  prudery.  It 
amounts  to  this,  and  no  more  than  this:  that  it  is  regrettable 
to  find  so  keen  a  perception  of  beauty  in  one  phase  of  the 
Ojibway's  joint  art,  for  such  his  music-poetry  is,  and  such 
crude  insensibility  to  the  finer  emotions  in  the  other.  There 
need  be  no  pharisaical  contempt  for  the  Indian  in  recognizing 
his  deficiency  in  this  regard.  Let  us  bear  humbly  in  mind 
that  no  inconceivable  span  of  years  separates  us  from  the  time 
when  English  verse  was  open  to  the  same  criticism.  There  is 
nothing  further  to  be  said  on  this  matter  unless  I  need  confess 
that  I  do  not  feel  myself  bound  by  any  consideration  for 
archaeological  exactness  to  translate  verses  that  lie  without  the 
pale  of  civilization's  tolerance. 

Lest  there  be  any  shadow  of  misapprehension,  I  hasten  to 
add  that  lewdness  is  by  no  means  the  prevailing  characteristic 
of  Ojibway  love  verse.  On  the  contrary  a  large  proportion 
of  the  songs  appear  to  me  to  have  been  inspired  by  what  we 
term  romantic  love,  and  my  own  contact  with  the  people  estab- 
lishes beyond  possibility  of  doubt  the  existence  of  romantic 
love  among  them.  From  a  discreet  distance  I  have  watched 
courtships  that  differed  from  our  own  only  as  the  minor  details 
of  Ojibway  daily  life  are  at  variance  with  ours;  and  I  have 
seen  many  instances  of  marital  devotion,  on  the  part  of  men 
as  well  as  women,  that  would  serve  as  high  models  for  any 
people. 

Returning  to  the  discussion  of  verse,  I  would  not  have  it 
understood  that  incongruity  is  universal.     We  must  never  lose 


OBJIBWAY  VERSE  1T1 

sight  of  the  difference  in  point  of  view,  but  in  this  collection 
will  be  found  not  a  few  songs  in  which  the  points  of  view 
appear  to  coincide;  that  is,  the  Indian's  song,  so  far  as  the 
sentiment  behind  the  words  is  concerned,  is  equally  expressive 
to  us  and  to  him.  For  example,  it  seems  to  me  that  "Winter" 
(the  warm-door  song)  is  abundantly  expressive  within  its  nar- 
row limits  of  the  boisterous  season  and  the  exultation  of  the 
man  who  has  a  weather-tight  dwelling  and  a  fire  in  it.  The 
two  lullabies  speak  well  for  mother  love  that,  even  among 
civilized  peoples,  is  usually  voiced  to  brief  phrases  and  mean- 
ingless syllables.  In  "Lonely,"  where  the  English  text  is,  I 
believe,  a  literal  translation  of  the  original,  there  seems  to  me 
to  be  perfect  adjustment  of  sentiment  to  melody. 

LACK   OF  VARIETY. 

As  might  be  expected  there  is  no  great  variety  of  subject 
in  Ojibway  love  verse.  When  it  comes  to  the  last  analysis  is 
there  over  much  variety  in  the  love  verse  of  civilization?  Does 
it  not  generally  take  on  an  appearance  of  variety  from  the 
environment  of  the  poet  I  Xot  to  make  too  much  of  this  com- 
parative observation,  it  is  to  be  admitted  at  once  that  the 
civilized  poet  attains  variety  by  the  manifestation  of  his  indi- 
viduality. With  the  Ojibway,  as,  I  presume,  with  any  prim- 
itive people,  individuality  is  not  highly  developed.  Content 
to  sing  his  one  line  over  and  over,  he  also  is  content  in  the 
making  of  a  new  song  to  paraphrase  what  has  been  sung  before. 
He  does  not  realize  it,  but  I  think  that  it  is  often  the  melody 
and  not  the  words  that  individualizes  his  song  for  him.     Spec- 


172  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

ulation  aside,  there  are  many  Ojibway  love  songs  that  speak 
of  loneliness;  usually  they  purport  to  be  the  wail  of  a  girl 
whose  sweetheart  has  gone  to  war,  or  upon  a  long  journey. 
A  class  apart  might  be  made  of  those  that  tell  of  being  on 
the  way  to  meet  one's  sweetheart;  and  it  appears  that  the 
Ojibway's  sweetheart  was  forever  losing  herself  in  the  forest, 
which  made  it  necessary  for  him  to  tramp,  or  paddle  the 
streams  and  lakes  all  night  long  to  find  her.  According  to  the 
songs  he  usually  found  her,  or  gave  up  the  search,  at  sunrise. 
I  have  tried  to  avoid  reduplication  of  thought  in  the  English 
stanzas,  sometimes  giving  to  a  melody  words  that  were  trans- 
lated from  another  song  of  similar  character.  Where  this 
occurs  a  special  note  is  made  of  the  fact. 

COMPARATIVE   OBSERVATIONS. 

In  Ojibway  music  the  general  lack  of  development,  speak- 
ing technically  for  the  moment,  is  the  chief  mark  of  its  prim- 
itive character;  and  it  is  much  the  same  in  Ojibway  verse. 
Often  is  the  poetic  impulse  plainly  manifest,  and  with  equal 
plainness  the  inability  to  work  it  out.  The  Ojibway  is  more 
gifted  in  music  than  in  poetry;  he  has  wrought  out  a  type 
of  beautiful  melody,  much  of  it  perfect  in  form;  his  verse,  for 
the  most  part,  has  not  emerged  from  the  condition  of  raw 
material.  The  spirit  of  music,  struggling  for  exjiression 
through  his  primitive  soul,  finds  its  way  to  utterance  in  spite 
of  the  words  with  which  he  associates  it.  The  Indian,  like 
the  average  paleface,  is  incapable  of  grasping  the  conception 
of  music  as  a  thing  of  absolute  beauty.     Does  a  melody  sing 


OBJIBWAY  YERSE  173 

in  his  head  and  insist  upon  vocal  utterance,  he  must  forthwith 
invent  a  series  of  words  that  fit  the  rhythmic  scheme  of  the 
tune,  for  thus  alone  can  he  correlate  his  sense  of  pleasure  in 
modulated  sounds  with  his  habitual  regard  of  other  phenomena 
that  appeal  to  him  through  the  material  senses  as  plain,  com- 
prehensible facts.  We  might,  by  strenuous  exercise  of  the 
imagination,  conceive  of  an  Indian  voicing  a  melody  tentatively 
to  meaningless  syllables,  and  wondering  as  to  the  nature  of 
that  tonal  entity  that  comes  from — he  knows  not  where — that 
allures  his  soul,  that  compels  him  to  sing.  He  might  wonder 
at  it  as  a  hermit  who  is  visited  by  angels  in  a  vision.  It  might 
awaken  awe,  as  if  it  were  a  message  from  another  world,  the 
very  holiest  of  holy  speech  of  Gitche  Manitou  himself.  Thrill- 
ing with  the  pure  delight  that  music  alone  of  all  the  arts  and 
things  upon  or  above  the  earth  can  arouse,  he  might  yet  hesitate 
to  link  it  to  words  lest  he  offend  the  manitou  who  sent  it, 
lest  he  misinterpret  the  message  so  subtly  and  convincingly 
spoken  to  his  heart;  and  thus  bowing  in  humility  before  the 
mysterious  presence  manifested  in  new  melody,  he  might  con- 
tent himself  and  the  visiting  impulse  with  a  wordless  song, 
leaving  the  meaning  of  it  to  be  revealed  at  the  manitou's  own 
pleasure. 

The  fact  probably  is  that  no  Indian  ever  went  so  far  as 
this  in  speculation.  His  process  of  composition,  so  far  as 
that  process  can  be  manifested,  is  identically  such  as  I  have 
suggested.  He  does  sing  his  new  melody  to  meaningless  syl- 
lables, tentatively,  correcting  it  here  and  there,  but  meantime 
experimenting  with  words  that  convey  meaning;  and  the  prob- 


174  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

ability  is  that  the  precise  sentiment  of  the  words  finally  ac- 
cepted is  established  by  rhythmic  considerations,  those  that 
fall  readily  into  the  scheme  of  accents  appealing  to  him  as 
the  most  suitable  vehicle  for  the  melody.  And,  aside  from 
dependence  upon  the  scheme  of  accents,  the  character  of  the 
words  that  suggest  themselves  to  him  must  depend  upon  his 
own  character,  his  mode  of  life,  manner  of  thought,  the  exi- 
gency of  his  immediate  situation,  whatever  that  may  be,  and 
not  upon  the  unborn  tune. 

I  am  quite  aware  that  there  is  room  for  speculation  of  a 
contrary  sort  on  this  point;  that  those  who  perceive  a  fixed 
relationship  between  sentiment,  or  emotion,  and  musical  beauty, 
may  assert  that  the  words  actually  chosen  for  the  song  are 
suggested  psychologically  by  the  nature  of  the  melody;  and 
I  am  content  that  speculation  of  this  kind  should  be  carried 
to  the  end  of  the  thinker's  pleasure,  but  it  will  be  well  to 
keep  the  facts  rigidly  in  view.  The  last  fact  of  all  is  that 
the  Indian  words,  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  civilized  observer, 
are  often  at  radical  variance  with  what  would  be  the  civilized 
conception  of  appropriateness  to  the  melody.  Let  us  think 
of  this  with  patience  and  candor,  for  we  are  here  considering 
the  very  beginnings  of  music;  we  gain  here  a  glimpse,  shadowy, 
but  a  glimpse,  of  its  real  relation  to  the  human  mind.  The 
musical  expression  comes;  the  red  man  voices  it;  the  form  is 
melodic,  and  in  all  music  that,  at  last  analysis,  is  the  potent, 
distinguishing  factor;  he  must  give  it  a  name,  place  it  some- 
how in  a  category  that  relates  it  to  other  things  familiar  and 
comprehensible.     Hence,  words ;  hence,  from  his  point  of  view, 


OJIBWAY  VERSE  175 

a  meaning;  hence,  from  his  point  of  view,  the  character  of  the 
composition.  The  words  convey,  it  may  be,  ideas  of  repulsive 
vulgarity,  or  the  driest  commonplaces  of  life,  or  a  rarely  beau- 
tiful aspiration;  it  does  not  matter;  the  melody  is  there,  beauti- 
ful, appealing  to  us  as  abstract  beauty  when  we  hear  it  linked 
to  words  that  fortunately  we  do  not  understand.  Does  not 
this  primitive  method  and  its  results  suggest — if  not  demon- 
strate— that  music  is  not  only  above  and  beyond  all  language, 
but  that  it  is  apart  from  any  definite  emotion?  Observe:  the 
melodically  gifted  Ojibway  gives  it  forth  and  in  his  unreflect- 
ing way  identifies  it  with  joy;  the  paleface,  listening  but  not 
understanding  the  words,  in  an  equallyumreflecting  way  cor- 
relates it  with  something  heard  before  and  identifies  it  with 
sorrow.  How  much  truer  and  more  appreciative  of  musical 
beauty  it  would  be  if  all  of  us  could  regard  the  composition- 
simple  Indian  melody  or  complex  sonata — as  what  it  is:  an 
appeal  through  tone  to  the  very  foundations  of  being,  to  that 
heart  of  the  senses  of  which  joy,  sorrow,  fear,  love,  hate,  and 
the  rest,  are  but  ramifying  manifestations! 

But  the  ingenuous  Indian  does  nothing  in  this  regard  that 
the  paleface  composer  does  not  do.  The  Indian  gives  his  piece 
a  name,  he  undertakes  to  interpret  its  message  to  his  fellows, 
and  with  him  it  is  a  simple  matter,  for  instrumental  music 
is  outside  his  experience.  In  the  music  of  civilization,  dis- 
carding for  the  moment  all  the  songs  and  hymns,  do  we  not 
find  jiieces  named  nocturne,  pastoral,  tragic,  joyous,  melan- 
choly this,  that  and  the  other?  And  when  the  composer  sen- 
sibly refrains  from  attempting  to  limit  the  meaning  of  his 


176  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

message,  there  are  commentators  quick  to  discover  moonlight 
in  a  Beethoven  sonata,  a  ghastly  tale  of  physical  suffering  in 
a  Chopin  prelude,  and,  as  if  this  sort  of  thing  were  not  enough, 
we  have  to-day  a  noisy  prophet  who  presumes  to  dishonor  the 
spirit  of  music  by  giving  us  a  day  out  of  his  own  inconse- 
quential life  in  the  form  of  a  "Domestic  Symphony!"  The 
Indian  can  be  forgiven  the  incongruities  in  his  art,  for  he 
knows  no  better. 


CHAPTER  IX 
INDIAN  SONGS  IN  THEIR  RELATION  TO  ART 

WHEN  we  come  to  discuss  the  relation  of  Indian 
songs  to  art,  we  find  that  there  are  two  distinct 
purposes  which  they  may  serve  if,  on  careful  ex- 
amination, they  seem  fit  for  any  purpose  whatever.  They  may 
be  used,  first,  as  are  the  songs  of  civilization,  for  entertainment 
and  the  gratification  of  musical  taste;  and,  second,  they  may 
furnish  thematic  material  for  (a)  extended  compositions, 
either  instrumental  or  vocal,  and  (b)  incidental  color  in  works 
that  otherwise  are  original  and  conventional. 

HARMONIZATION   OF   INDIAN    MUSIC. 

If  the  songs  are  to  serve  the  first  purpose,  they  must  be 
harmonized.  To  me,  this  has  always  been  self  evident,  and  it 
is  so  obvious  that  I  have  hesitated  to  take  space  here  to  defend 
the  practice;  but  I  have  been  astonished  on  several  occasions 
by  protests  against  it,  as  if  the  harmonization  of  an  Indian 
song  were  some  sort  of  sacrilege,  and  inasmuch  as  there  are 
some  persons  who  do  not  approve  decking  out  Indian  melodies 
with  the  devices  of  civilization,  it  seems  wise  to  go  into  the 
matter  briefly.  As  I  understand  the  objection,  harmony  does 
violence  to  the  Indian  conception  of  music;  it  was  not,  and 
could  not  be  conceived  by  the  Indian,  and  his  musical  output 
is,  therefore,  misrepresented  when  his  songs  are  sung  to  piano- 

177 


178  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

forte  accompaniment,  or  in  harmonic  parts;  and  that  harmony- 
destroys  the  charming  simplicity  of  the  original,  so  that,  "My 
Bark  Canoe,"  for  example,  ceases  to  be  Indian  when  it  has  a 
harmonic  accompaniment. 

I  have  considerable  sentimental  sympathy  with  these  objec- 
tions. I  would  rather,  myself,  hear  an  Ojibway  sing  "My 
Bark  Canoe,"  in  his  simple  way  than  hear  it  with  pianoforte 
accompaniment;  but  that  is  because  I  would  rather  walk  in 
the  sombre  forests,  or  guide  a  canoe  along  the  wilderness  water- 
ways, than  dwell  in  a  city  flat;  and  the  circumstances  of  civ- 
ilization having  compelled  me  to  dwell  in  a  fiat  far  removed 
from  primeval  forest  and  flashing  lake,  I  find  in  the  harmony 
added  to  the  melody  a  factor  for  spiritual  comfort  that  vies 
in  sweetness  with  uncontaminated  Nature  herself.  Not  that 
the  harmonies  recall  the  forest  and  the  lakes;  not  that  they 
suggest  the  atmosphere  of  the  song's  origin,  for  music  does 
nothing  of  that  kind;  it  is  that  the  melody,  when  sung  under 
the  conditions  of  civilization,  demands  the  rounding  out  of  its 
nature  which  is  effected  by  harmony. 

We  are  a  harmonic  people,  we  whites.  We  are  born  with 
appreciation  of  harmony,  we  are  brought  up  in  it,  -and,  con- 
sciously or  unconsciously,  we  always  associate  harmony  with 
the  tunes  we  hear,  whistle,  or  hum.  We  do  not  sing  unadorned 
tunes  for  one  another's  edification  or  entertainment;  in  all  my 
concert-going,  I  recall  but  one  instance  where  a  singer  sang 
without  accompaniment,  and  he  was  a  tenor  of  unusually  ap- 
pealing voice  who  was  responding  to  an  encore.  In  our  hap- 
hazard social  gatherings  we  sometimes  resort  to  music  when 


ART  VALUE  OF  INDIAN  SONGS  179 

there  is  no  instrument  at  command,  but  that  is  because  we 
have  to,  not  because  we  prefer  to.  The  very  idlers  of  the 
streets,  the  jovial  groups  in  a  popular  excursion,  aye,  the  family 
circle  where  refinement  dwells,  never  resort  to  song  but  that 
one  or  more  of  the  singers  attempts  to  piece  out  the  tune  with 
an  alto,  or  tenor,  or  bass  part.  The  plain  fact  is  that  we 
whites  cannot  grasp  the  whole  beauty  of  a  melody  unless  we 
hear  it  with  appropriate  harmony.  Therefore,  if  the  beauty 
of  Indian  song  is  to  be  set  forth  to  civilization,  harmony  must 
be  employed  in  order  to  do  justice  to  the  Indian  composer. 

This  is  to  take  the  objections  rather  too  seriously,  I  fear. 
The  simple  truth  is  that  I  harmonized  the  Ojibway  songs  I 
first  heard  because  I  wanted  to,  which  was  quite  enough  for 
me,  and  that,  if  I  had  not  done  so,  they  would  not  have  been 
heard  at  all  outside  the  forest  and  the  reservations.  Therein 
lies  the  real,  and  whole,  and  unassailable  justification  for  the 
employment  of  harmony.  To  hold  to  a  fixed  example,  if  "My 
Bark  Canoe"  had  been  retained  in  its  original  form,  it  might 
have  been  heard  in  the  cities  of  civilization  by  a  few  who  would 
have  had  the  patience  and  politeness  to  listen  to  me  when  I 
sang  it  in  the  course  of  a  lecture.  That  would  have  been  the 
limit  of  white-man  acquaintance  with  it.  In  its  variously 
harmonized  forms  it  has  been  sung  by  I  dare  not  estimate 
how  many  thousand.  It  is  used  in  many  public  schools;  it 
has  figured  on  many  concert  programmes;  it  has  been  and 
still  is  in  frequent  use  as  a  feature  of  home  entertainment. 
In  these  harmonized  forms  it  has  done  no  injustice  to  the 
Indian;  rather  has  it  exalted  him,  for  it  never  fails  to  cause 


180  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

unbounded  surprise  that  an  Indian  could  have  composed  a 
melody  so  beautiful.  Thus  has  it  served  well  its  first  purpose 
in  art,  and  incidentally  it  has  been  instrumental  in  awakening 
a  sane  human  interest  in  the  Indian,  and  in  inciting  singers 
and  hearers  of  the  melody  to  the  acquisition  of  some  measure 
of  truth  about  him  to  replace  the  ignorance  and  misinformation 
that  fester  in  the  average  white  man's  mind  with  regard  to 
him.  I  believe  that  this  little  song  has  done  more  than  all  my 
writing  and  talking  to  apprise  the  whites  of  the  common  hu- 
manity of  the  red  man,  for  the  melody  is  obviously  the  creation 
of  a  human  being,  and,  presumably,  of  one  with  a  considerable 
gift  of  fine  feeling.  As  our  ordinary  estimate  of  the  Indian 
is  that  he  is  a  dull,  if  dignified,  savage,  such  influence  as  the 
song  has  exerted  toward  a  juster  estimate  is  for  the  good; 
and  so  much,  or  so  little  good,  whatever  it  may  be,  could  not 
have  been  accomplished  if  the  melody  had  been  left  to  the 
occasional  inspection  of  scientists  and  sentimentalists  in  its 
primitive  form. 

NATIONALISM  IN   MUSIC. 

I  have  suggested  that  Indian  songs  cannot  be  held  to  have 
any  relation  to  art  unless,  on  examination,  they  seem  fit  for 
it.  That  I  regard  Ojibway  songs  as  suitable  for  art  purposes 
needs  no  other  demonstration  than  the  fact  that  I  have  given 
myself  the  pleasure  of  harmonizing  a  considerable  number. 
It  would  not  have  been  a  pleasure,  and  I  would  not  have  taken 
the  trouble  to  put  them  in  civilized  dress,  if  they  had  not  ap- 
pealed to  me  as  beautiful.     It  generally  follows  that  songs 


ART  VALUE  OF  INDIAN  SONGS  181 

fit  to  be  sung  by  persons  of  discriminating  taste  are  also  fit 
for  tbe  second  art  purpose  named  in  tbe  foregoing,  i.  e.,  as  tbe 
basis  (a),  or  color  (b),  of  extended  compositions.  Considera- 
tion of  this  phase  of  the  matter  necessarily  brings  up  the 
question  of  nationalism  in  music,  about  which  musicians  are 
not  in  agreement.  There  are  composers  whose  patriotism  is 
not  to  be  questioned  who  are  opposed  to  any  and  every  move- 
ment that  tends  to  foster  the  infusion  of  our  musical  output 
with  a  distinctive  character.  They  maintain  that  music  is 
broader  than  the  boundaries  of  a  nation;  that,  in  its  highest 
development,  it  should  and  does  speak  to  all  peoples  alike; 
that  the  deliberate  selection  of  thematic  material  in  folksongs 
of  any  type  iuqwses  limitations  on  the  creative  spirit  of  the 
composer  and  restricts  that  full  and  free  expression  of  the  in- 
dividual which  is  the  crowning  glory  of  all  creative  work. 

I  am  far  from  being  inclined  to  controvert  this  view,  for  I 
am  in  deep  sympathy  with  it,  but  it  has  other  aspects  than  those 
indicated  above,  and  to  them  1  wish  to  invite  attention.  No 
American  musician  can  visit  Europe  without  suffering  morti- 
fication at  the  estimate  of  our  music  that  is  held  there.  In 
a  German  magazine  devoted  to  music  I  found,  in  a  number 
published  about  seventy  years  ago,  the  tune  "Yankee  Doodle" 
under  the  descriptive  heading,  "Nordamerikanische  Volkslied" 
(North  American  Folksong).  There  was  a  characteristically 
labored  translation  of  the  words  into  German,  and  a  harmonized 
accompaniment,  if  you  please,  supplied  by  a  man  whose  for- 
tune it  was  to  bear  the  name  F.  Schubert.  I  hasten  to  add 
that  the  great  Franz  Schubert  died  several  years  before  the 


182  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

publication  of  the  tune.  The  erudite  editor  appended  a  foot- 
note to  the  music,  the  purport  of  which  was  that  the  song 
was  representative  of  musical  taste  in  America.  Perhaps  he 
was  right,  and  perhaps  he  would  admit,  if  he  were  now  alive, 
that  we  have  made  some  progress  since  then,  although  I  fear 
he  would  hesitate  to  do  so  in  view  of  the  prevailing  contempo- 
rary estimate  of  our  music.  A  recent  German  critic  has  dis- 
covered that  America's  national  expression  in  music  is  found 
in  the  marches  and  two-steps  of  John  Philip  Sousa,  and  our 
enormous  output  of  so-called  "rag-time"  songs.  Germans  gen- 
erally appear  to  agree  with  him,  and  Sousa's  compositions, 
and  many  of  the  musically  vulgar  songs  ground  out  by  writers 
for  vaudeville,  appear  on  German  concert  programmes  as 
American  music. 

In  the  interest  of  a  broad  view  of  the  matter  it  should  be 
noted  that  in  the  higher  musical  circles  of  Germany  respectful 
attention  is  accorded  to  the  works  of  Paine,  Macdowell,  Kelley, 
Bird,  Hadley,  and  other  American  composers,  but  the  fact 
should  also  be  recognized  that  these  men  have  spoken  frankly 
in  the  European  idiom.  With  no  shadow  of  disparagement 
of  their  achievements  intended,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  in 
this  dicussion  that  they  stand  for  the  theory  of  world  music 
as  opposed  to  national,  for  the  highest  and  completest  expres- 
sion of  the  individual  as  against  a  conscious  effort  to  voice  the 
feeling  of  their  people.  World  music  to-day  is  European  music, 
and  those  of  our  serious  composers  who  have  been  well  received 
abroad  have  succeeded  because  their  works  approximated  so 
well  to  the  European  conception  of  what  music  ought  to  bel 


ART  VALUE  OF  INDIAN  SOXGS  183 

The  question  properly  arises,  is  the  world  music  of  the  fu- 
ture always  to  be  European?  In  the  days  of  the  discussion 
that  followed  the  production  of  Dvorak's  "New  World"  sym- 
phony I  came  to  this  understanding  of  my  own  view:  I  longed 
for  an  output  of  music  that  should  somehow  be  distinctively 
American ;  but  I  was  convinced  that  such  a  music  in  our  future 
would  arise  from  the  writings  of  an  over-towering  genius  in 
whose  certain  coming  my  Americanism  made  me  firmly  be- 
lieve. I  still  believe  it.  I  must  believe  that  the  remarkable 
blend  of  many  peoples  that  more  and  more  is  evolving  the 
typical  American  will  one  day  be  distinguished  by  a  composer 
who  will  speak  to  all  the  world  through  a  broader,  better  music 
than  ever  has  or  will  be  made  elsewhere ;  but,  whether  or  not  we 
believe  in  the  coming  of  the  over-towering  genius,  should  we 
not  try  meanwhile  to  impress  our  European  critics  with  a  con- 
viction that  the  native  spirit  of  our  country  is  expressible 
through  a  better  medium  than  Sousa  marches  and  "rag  time" 
songs? 

I  think  there  can  be  no  serious  argument  against  this  very 
general  proposition.  It  certainly  will  not  do  to  assert  that 
America  is  sufficient  unto  itself,  and  that  we  ought  not  to 
concern  ourselves  with  what  Europe  thinks  of  us.  This  atti- 
tude would  do  very  well  if  we  did  not  continue  to  write  on 
European  models  and  ape  European  ideas.  As  soon  as  we 
have  really  broken  away  from  tradition,  done  something'  oritr- 
inal  and  established  a  manner  of  our  own,  it  will  be  time  to 
cry  indifference  to  European  opinion.  Argument  aside,  and 
taking  it  for  granted  that  every  American  musician  would  like 


184  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

to  see  the  musical  output  of  his  country  take  high  rank  in  the 
world  at  large,  let  me  urge  upon  young  composers  a  view  that 
combines  self  interest  and  broad  patriotism.  I  limit  my  ap- 
peal to  the  young  because  their  modes  of  expression  have  not 
become  fixed,  and  because  I  recognize  that  it  is  hopeless  to 
expect  response  from  composers  who  have  seen  as  many  years, 
sav,  as  I  have.  There  is  a  number  of  such  in  this  country 
who  are  writing  beautiful  music,  and  I  hope  every  one  will 
continue  to  do  so  to  the  end  of  a  long  life,  but  I  have  no  hope 
that  any  of  them  could  be  induced  to  venture  from  his  well 
beaten  and  charming  path. 

It  is  a  proper  wish  on  the  part  of  every  composer  that  his 
works  might  come  to  performance  under  dignified  auspices. 
To  that  end  the  American  composer  toils  faithfully  and  gener- 
allv  without  success.  If  we  were  discussing  an  individual 
instance  it  would  be  becoming  and  necessary  to  examine  his 
work  and  seek  scientific  reasons  for  his  failure,  and  we  might, 
of  course,  find  that  his  actual  accomplishments  were  far  below 
his  own  estimates  of  them.  Looking  at  the  situation  broadly, 
however,  we  can  see  one  significant  fact  in  which  may  lie  a 
host  of  reasons  for  the  rare  appearance  of  American  com- 
positions on  our  concert  programmes.  Our  conductors  are, 
with  very  few  exceptions,  imported.  Let  them  come,  as  I 
think  they  do,  with  the  very  friendliest  attitude  toward  Amer- 
ican music  and  its  makers,  they  nevertheless  come  also  with 
their  heads  filled  to  overflowing  "with  the  latest  and,  to  their 
apprehension,  the  best  that  Europe  has  produced;  and,  there- 
fore, they  import  a  great  quantity  of  European  music  which 


ART  VALUE  OF  INDIAN  SONGS  18.5 

must  be  crowded  into  their  programmes.  It  needs  no  saying 
that  they  are  fixed  in  their  admiration  for  European  models, 
and  that,  insensibly  perhaps,  every  manuscript  offered  to  them 
is  measured  by  European  standards. 

Having  come  thus  far  in  the  argument,  the  conclusion  ap- 
pears to  be  so  obvious  that  expression  of  it  may  seem  unneces- 
sary: therefore,  permit  me  to  interject  a  disclaimer.  I  am  not 
about  to  take  the  ground  that  music  should  be  brought  to  per- 
formance merely  because  it  is  American  in  origin.  I  have 
no  patience  whatever  with  that  attitude.  So  long  as  we  persist 
in  writing  according  to  European  models  and  seek  the  im- 
primatur of  European,  or  European-bred  conductors,  we  must 
be  content  to  be  measured  according  to  European  standards. 
The  composer  who  cannot  satisfy  the  critical  taste  of  his  time  as 
manifested  by  the  conductors,  must  be  content  with  the  joy  of 
creative  work  and  with  oblivion  as  its  aftermath.  No,  I  do  not 
raise  the  spoiled-child  cry,  but  I  do  maintain  that  the  study  of 
musical  theory  in  America  to-day  is  so  conducted  as  to  give  the 
rising  generation  of  composers,  say  those  who  are  still  in  the 
universities  and  conservatories,  abundant  skill  in  the  manipula- 
tion of  the  means  of  music  to  enable  them  to  write  acceptably 
for  the  contemporary  concert  platform.  I  believe  the  failure 
of  American  composers  to  make  themselves  felt  to  an  appre- 
ciable degree  is  due  not  to  the  lack  of  attainments  but  to  un- 
happy selection  of  material.  That  material  is  usually,  if  not 
always,  of  their  own  invention,  and  very  dear  to  them,  and  bv 
so  much,  apparently,  they  are  the  more  condemned:  but  it 
comes  back  to  the  fact  that,  writing  with  European  music  as 


186  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

their  model,  with  European  recognition  as,  consciously  or  un- 
consciously, their  ultimate  goal,  they  fail  at  present  to  rise 
higher  than  the  contemporary  and  recently  dead  geniuses  of 
trans-Atlantic  origin.  Americans  who  enter  this  race  will 
surely  continue  to  be  out-distanced  until  they  manage  to  write 
something  that  is  distinctive,  something  that  is  notably  dif- 
ferent from  the  European  output. 

Here,  then,  comes  the  suggestion  that,  in  a  preceding  para- 
graph, I  called  an  appeal.  As  a  patriotic  American,  I  would 
still  call  it  an  appeal,  believing  that  one  end  subserved  would  be 
the  raising  of  the  European  estimate  of  our  musical  advance- 
ment. Merely  as  a  musician  of  many  dreams  and  some  exper- 
ience, let  me  call  it  a  suggestion.  Our  alien  conductors,  with 
all  their  fixed  ideas,  are,  in  this  period,  singularly  open  to  novel- 
ties, to  innovations  in  the  art.  They  hold  skilful  manipula- 
tion of  the  material  as  a  sine  qua  non  of  performance,  but  they 
have  no  prejudice  for  or  against  any  sort  of  thematic  material. 
If  prejudice  exists,  it  must  be  in  favor  of  the  fantastic,  the  out- 
landish, to  judge  from  some  of  the  up-to-date  monstrosities  in 
the  way  of  symphonic  works  that  they  display  to  us.  Now, 
granting  that  our  young  men  have  acquired  skill  in  manipula- 
tion, which  means  intelligent  thematic  development  as  well  as 
orchestration  of  a  high  order,  it  seems  to  me  the  young  com- 
poser would  have  infinitely  more  chance  of  coming  forward  if 
he  would  base  his  work  on  such  distinctive  material  as  is  to  be 
found  in  the  Ojibway  songs  than  he  ever  will  by  courageously 
adhering  to  themes  of  his  own  invention.  It  would  be  silly  to 
prophesy  that  all  or  any  manuscript  thus  based  would  be  ac- 


ART  VALUE  OF  INDIAN  SOXGS  187 

cepted  by  the  conductor  of  the  Boston  Symphony  orchestra,  for 
example,  but  I  am  sure  that  such  manuscripts  would  be  ap- 
proached by  the  distinguished  reader  with  a  considerable  degree 
of  sympathy,  with  a  desire  to  find  them  good  and  well  done. 

FLEXIBILITY    OF    INDIAN    THEMES. 

The  foregoing  is  confessedly  an  appeal  to  individual  selfish- 
ness, with  patriotism  as  a  secondary  thought.  Let  me  turn  now 
to  another  view  of  the  general  subject  and  urge  patriotism  as 
the  prime  impulse  to  a  consciously  directed  policy.  As  I  am 
pleading  for  a  use  of  Indian  songs  as  thematic  material,  I  must 
do  what  I  can  to  prove  that  they  are  susceptible  of  such  use. 
Actual  examples  to  which  the  student  might  be  referred  are 
rare.  If  the3r  were  abundant  I  should  feel  that  there  was  no 
very  good  reason  for  writing  this  book.  The  field  is  but  just 
opened,  and  few  have  yet  ventured  to  cultivate  it. 

In  view  of  the  rather  rigid  formula  upon  which  a  vast  num- 
ber of  Indian  songs  appear  to  have  been  composed,  by  which 
they  seem  so  like  each  other  to  our  ears,  it  might  naturally  be 
supposed  that  they  would  not  yield  readily  to  development,  and 
that  they  would  therefore  hinder  the  composer.  But  it  should 
be  taken  into  account  that  no  sane  musician,  much  as  he  might 
admire  Indian  songs,  would  advocate  building  up  an  art  that 
should  prove  to  be  but  a  refinement  of,  or  elaboration  of  the 
primitive  stock.  The  composer  who  has  once  accepted  a  theme, 
be  it  a  mere  motive  of  one  or  two  measures,  or  an  entire  tune, 
makes  it  his  own  and  does  with  it  thereafter  what  he  pleases. 


188  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

He  is  not  concerned  with  what  the  original  composer  of  the 
theme  would  have  done  in  the  way  of  developing  it;  he  is  not 
restricted  in  his  extension  of  the  material  hy  the  thought  that 
the  Indian  would  not  have  done  thus  or  so;  it  is  no  part  of  his 
business  to  erect  an  art  fabric  that  might  be  called  Indian.  He 
is  concerned  solely  with  the  making  of  good  music  according 
to  his  lights ;  it  is  his  business  to  construct  a  work  that  shall  ac- 
cord with  his  own  conception  of  symmetry,  that  shall  glow  with 
color,  sparkle  with  melody,  and  move  to  such  conclusion  as  the 
inherent  nature  of  the  theme  demands.  In  other  words,  hav- 
ing selected  his  thematic  material,  it  is  his  right,  if  not  his  duty, 
to  forget  its  origin  and  proceed  according  to  the  purely  musical 
demands  of  the  subject,  guided  only  by  his  own  highly  de- 
veloped sensibilities,  and  regardless  of  the  circumstances,  be 
they  romantic,  tragic,  religious,  or  whatever,  that  attended  the 
material  in  its  primitive  state. 

The  only  question,  then,  is  whether  Indian  songs  are  en- 
dowed with  such  extreme  flexibility  as  is  essential  to  their  high- 
est development  as  musical  subjects. 

So  far  as  we  can  judge  from  the  "Indian  Suite,"  Mr.  Mac- 
dowell  encountered  no  serious  difficulties  in  that  regard.  A 
criticism  of  the  work  which  I  have  often  heard  runs  to  the  ef- 
fect that  the  music  is  not  Indian  at  all;  that  the  composer  may 
have  chosen  Indian  material  to  start  with,  but  that  he  quickly 
deserted  it  for  matter  of  his  own  making.  Good!  Why  not? 
Analytical  inspection  will  show  that  the  matter  of  his  own  mak- 
ing was  derived  from  or  suggested  by  the  original  material. 


ART  VALUE  OF  INDIAN  SONGS  189 

Therein  lies  the  triumph  of  the  material,  that,  crude,  imperfect 
though  it  may  have  been,  through  it,  nevertheless,  the  com- 
poser succeeded  in  expressing  his  own  individuality. 

It  may  well  be  that  Mr.  Macdowell  was  not  satisfied  with  his 
experiment.  The  raw  material  available  to  him  was  far  from 
being  as  suggestive  and  interesting  as  much  that  has  been  un- 
covered since.  He  had  not  made  personal  excursions  to  the  In- 
dian country  to  hear  the  songs  and  absorb  the  inspiring  atmos- 
phere attendant  upon  them  there.  His  was  purely  an  academic 
view  of  the  material,  and  his  use  of  it  was  necessarily  objective 
in  character.  The  main  consideration  is,  however,  that  such 
material  as  he  had  was  made  to  serve  his  purposes  in  a  varied 
and  brilliant  composition. 

A  work  that  adheres  more  closely  to  its  thematic  subject  is 
Mr.  Arthur  Farwell's  "Dawn,"  a  romantic  composition  based 
upon  what  has  always  seemed  to  me  the  best  song  in  Miss 
Fletcher's  Omaha  collection.  This  has  been  published  in  piano- 
forte arrangement  and  is,  therefore,  available  to  students. 
They  will  find  it  not  only  a  highly  developed  but  a  remarkably 
attractive  composition.  I  may  add  that,  before  Mr.  Farwell's 
work  was  published,  I  had  experimented  with  the  same  material, 
turning  it  into  rather  a  long  song  for  tenor  voice  with  accom- 
paniment for  flute  and  pianoforte.  It  has  not  been  published, 
and  I  mention  it  merely  to  show  that  two  men  working  at  the 
same  material  have  found  it  sufficiently  flexible  for  their  re- 
spective purposes. 

Both  Mr.  Farwell  and  Mr.  Harvey  Worthington  Loomis 
have  made  several  transcriptions  of  Indian  songs  for  piano- 


190  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

forte,  that  have  been  published  and  are  decidedly  worth  exam- 
ination although  they  do  not  throw  direct  light  on  the  imme- 
diate question — the  susceptibility  of  the  material  to  thematic 
development.  Passing  mention  must  be  made  of  them,  not 
only  to  complete  the  record  as  to  our  primitive  music,  but  for 
this  significant  reason,  also:  they  chose  for  their  pianoforte 
pieces  songs  that  had  so  little  appeal  for  me  that  I  had  dis- 
carded them  as  of  no  artistic  value.  I  was  mistaken.  These 
gentlemen  saw  better  than  I  did.  Theirs  was  the  academic 
view,  as  was  mine  at  the  time  I  cast  the  melodies  aside,  for  I 
I  had  not  then  heard  Ojibways  sing,  and  had  had  no  association 
with  Indians.  This  circumstance  I  regard  as  extremely  sug- 
gestive and  important.  The  harmonies  of  Messrs.  Farwell  and 
Loomis  have  revealed  the  melodies  to  me  so  clearly  that  I  won- 
der now  how  they  failed  to  interest  me  at  first.  The  presump- 
tion is,  therefore,  that  the  entire  primitive  output  is  worth 
studying,  and  that  composers  will  find  in  it  somewhere  a  wealth 
of  suggestion  that  will  pay  them  well  to  discover. 

I  think  the  only  other  experiments  in  the  extension  of  Indian 
themes  have  been  my  own.  The  "Dance  of  Paupukkeewis," 
previously  mentioned,  was  written  years  before  I  had  become 
an  enthusiast  in  our  primitive  music.  For  the  limited  purpose 
it  was  designed  to  serve,  the  Indian  theme  was  decidedly  use- 
ful, and  development  was  spontaneous.  When  the  Indian 
play,  "Hiawatha,"  was  brought  to  the  cities,  in  1903,  I  was  put 
to  the  hurried  necessity  of  writing  considerable  incidental  music 
for  it.  The  several  pieces  included  an  introduction,  or  over- 
ture, with  a  long,  declamatory  song  for  bass  voice,  a  funeral 


ART  VALUE  OF  INDIAN  SONGS  191 

march,  a  set  of  variations  (on  the  song,  "Old  Shoes"),  inter- 
ludes, and  so  forth,  and  a  finale  for  solo  voice,  chorus  and  or- 
chestra. All  of  these  were  developed  from  Ojihway  songs. 
None  of  the  orchestral  pieces  have  been  reduced  to  a  compre- 
hensible pianoforte  version,  and  they  are,  of  course,  unpub- 
lished, but  a  somewhat  compressed  version  of  the  finale  is 
printed  elsewhere  in  this  book.  I  do  not  refer  to  it  as  a  model, 
and  if  the  other  pieces  were  published  I  should  hesitate  to  refer 
to  them.  Mention  is  made  of  them  in  order  that  one  composer, 
at  least,  may  give  the  tribute  of  his  evidence  to  the  inspiring 
quality  of  the  material.  It  proved,  so  far  as  I  was  concerned, 
that  the  Ojihway  songs  developed  themselves,  and  that  the  re- 
sult was  as  coherent  and  spontaneous  as  anything  of  mine  could 
be.  I  must  believe,  therefore,  that  other  composers  would  have 
similar  experience  with  such  material. 

A    CALL   FOE   SACRIFICE. 

Discussion  of  the  flexibility  of  Indian  themes  seemed  to  me 
a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  appeal  to  patriotism.  I  am  stdl 
addressing  myself  to  young  composers.  I  know  their  moods, 
their  exaltation  in  creative  work,  their  exuberance,  their  dreams, 
and  I  think  no  one  can  know  better  than  I  their  firm  belief  in 
individuality,  and  their  fondness  for  matter  of  their  own  mak- 
ing. The  strains  that  sing  spontaneously  in  their  minds  and 
find  their  way  to  paper  are  divinely  beautiful.  They  are  the 
very  voice  of  the  Infinite  speaking  through  a  special  mes- 
senger. I  know,  for  I  have  been  that  messenger.  I  have 
covered  many  pages  of  ruled  paper  with  notes  that  represented 


192  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

such  a  stirring  of  the  blood,  such  aspirations,  such  supreme 
confidence  in  the  future,  such  worshipful  awe,  as  the  non-mu- 
sical mortal  wots  not  of.  I  know  what  rebellion  storms  in  the 
soul  when  the  professor  condemns  a  melody,  or  runs  his  de- 
vastating pencil  through  a  harmonic  progression.  (  For 
"professor"  in  the  outside  world,  read  critics,  conductors  and 
public.)  How  often  have  I  glumly  assented  to  the  profes- 
sor's changes  in  my  manuscript  in  the  classroom,  only  to  re- 
store the  composition  to  its  original  form  in  the  privacy  of  my 
chamber!  My  heaven-directed  way  was  right;  it  could  not  be 
wrong,  because  that  was  the  way  the  music  spontaneously 
came;  the  professor's  way  was  pedantic,  rigidly  correct,  with 
no  regard  for  sentiment.  I  remember  very  well  my  early 
contempt  for  that  process  of  composition  which  deliberately 
sought  folksong  as  thematic  material.  When  I  could  not  in- 
vent my  own  themes,  I  would  not  write.  I  was  not  so  far 
removed  from  my  storm  and  stress  period  when  the  suggestion 
was  first  made  to  me  that  my  music  might  be  joined  to  that  of 
the  Indians  in  their  play.     I  was  offended! 

The  purpose  of  this  heart-to-heart  talk  must  be  obvious.  I 
want  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed  to  realize  that  I  am  in 
hearty  sympathy  with  them,  and  that  I  am  conscious  that  my 
appeal  for  the  employment  of  Indian  themes  is  a  call  for  a 
certain  degree  -of  sacrifice  on  their  part.  In  the  same  spirit  in 
which  I  harked  back  to  my  storm  and  stress  period,  I  urge 
consideration  of  the  fact  that  a  relatively  small  proportion  of 
a  composer's  output  is  as  divinely  beautiful  as  it  seems  to  be  at 
the  time  of  its  creation.     It  was  all  worth  doing,  if  for  no  more 


ART  VALUE  OF  IXDIAX  SOXGS  193 

than  the  compensation  of  the  glorious  moments  when  it  took 
shape;  it  was  worth  doing  in  the  light  of  cold,  after-years 
judgment  in  that  it  strengthened  the  creative  faculty  by  exer- 
cise. The  time  comes  when  the  composer  recognizes  that  self 
criticism  is  quite  as  essential  to  artistic  success  as  fertility  of  in- 
vention, and  he  perceives  that  there  is  no  exercise  of  composi- 
tion better  adapted  to  the  cultivation  of  self  criticism  than  the 
development  of  non-original  themes.  There  truly  is  the  artist 
at  work,  undertaking  to  get  the  best  out  of  a  given  material; 
and  he  finds,  after  some  initial  sense  of  restraint  perhaps,  that 
his  individuality  can  manifest  itself  in  the  shaping  of  work 
from  given  material  quite  as  well  as  in  the  development  of  orig- 
inal themes.  In  behalf,  then,  of  the  desire  to  give  our  music  a 
distinctive  color,  if  not  style,  I  urge  that  the  composer  sacrifice 
the  demands  of  individuality  for  self  expression  and  devote  at- 
tention to  native  material  of  which  the  specimens  in  this  book 
are  but  a  minute  fraction. 

Here  is  proposed  a  definite  policy  to  which  gifts  and  at- 
tainments may  properly  be  directed.  It  might  be  adopted 
from  a  sane  desire  to  see  for  one's  self  what  worth  there  may 
be  in  music  sprung  from  our  soil,  and  it  certainly  should  be 
inspired  by  patriotic  eagerness  that  our  country  should  prove 
to  be  not  behind  others  in  melodic  resources,  but  as  richly  en- 
dowed as  any  land  that  ever  had  boundaries.  Thus  I  believe 
it  to  be,  for,  knowing  that  the  field  I  have  covered  personally 
is  a  very  small  fraction  of  the  whole,  I  am  sure  that  similar 
investigation  among  other  peoples  than  the  Ojibway  would  be 
rewarded  by  an  abundance  of  suggestive  melody  if  not  of  pure 


194  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

song.  The  Ojibway  field  itself  has  been  but  scratched.  Work 
therein  remains  to  be  done  by  somebody  that  would  surely  un- 
cover not  less  than  five  times  the  quantity  of  material  that  I 
have  gathered.  It  may  be  that  this  work  will  continue  to  be 
neglected,  but,  even  so,  there  is  already  in  the  museums  a  great 
quantity  of  material  on  phonographic  records,  and  this  will 
gradually  be  reduced  to  notes.  I  am  sure  the  time  will  come, 
after  living  Indians  no  longer  remember  their  songs,  when 
white  men  will  turn  to  the  phonographic  records  to  learn  what 
was  the  nature  of  the  red  men's  music,  and  that  they  will 
certainly  then  regret  that  such  a  vast  proportion  of  it  should 
have  been  allowed  to  lapse  into  oblivion.  And  when  that 
time  comes  be  sure  that  the  composers  of  the  day  will  take  ac- 
count of  such  native  stock  as  is  available.  It  behooves  the 
present  generation  of  composers,  and  the  next  that  is  to  fol- 
low, to  give  attention  to  this  matter  without  delay. 

THE    VALUE    OF    PLAIN    TUNE. 

There  is  one  final  view  of  the  subject  that  requires  brief  pre- 
sentation. The  art  of  music,  speaking  generally,  has  been 
brought  to  a  condition  of  artificiality  that  is  positively  unwhole- 
some. There  is  need  for  more  direct  utterance,  which  means 
that  pure  melody,  or,  as  I  prefer  to  call  it,  plain  tune,  should  be 
advanced  to  a  higher  plane  than  it  now  occupies  in  composition. 
Our  masters  have  built  a  huge  and  wonderful  fabric  which 
called  for  gigantic  skill  in  the  manipulation  of  the  material. 
The  result  is  impressive  for  its  workmanship;  it  amazes, 
startles,  bewilders,  and  sends  us  homeward  wondering  what  it 


ART  VALUE  OF  IXDIAX  SOXGS  L95 

is  that  we  have  heard.  "We  carry  away  little  but  an  impr  s- 
sion  of  overwhelming  complexity.  The  intellect  admires,  hut 
there  is  seldom  a  single  shred  of  tune  to  take  hold  of  the  af- 
fections. The  sincere  student  of  composition  is  in  real  danger 
from  the  high  development  of  technical  ability  that  is  manifest 
in  contemporaneous  works.  He  feels  that  he  must  perfect  him- 
self in  workmanship,  and  he  knows,  or  ought  to  know,  that  it  is 
the  endless  study  of  a  lifetime.  In  the  striving  for  technical 
finish  he  is  apt  to  overlook  the  fact  that  what  makes  music  vital 
is  melody:  and  if  he  be  not  careful  he  will  come  to  despise,  or 
distrust  the  plain  speech  of  tune  as  something  trivial,  fit  only 
for  the  multitude. 

The  time  is  ripe  for  a  change  that  might  be  regarded  as  a 
reversion  to  an  older  style.  The  best  critics  voice  the  demand 
incessantly  in  their  comments  on  contemporaneous  program- 
mes. It  appears  that  our  present  day  masters  either  dare  not, 
or  cannot  write  a  plain  tune  into  their  works.  Thev  appear  to 
feel  the  necessity  of  proving  their  erudition  by  works  of  be- 
wildering complexity  in  which  the  real,  spontaneous  musical 
thought,  if  there  be  any.  is  deftly  concealed.  This  is  remark- 
able in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  most  highly  esteemed  concert 
work  of  our  time  is  an  example  of  the  older  style.  Apparently 
the  significant  lesson  it  teaches  has  not  been  so  much  as  appre- 
hended by  the  present  generation.  I  allude  to  Dvorak's  "New 
World"  symphony.  Therein  is  manifested  superb  workman- 
ship; the  themes  are  developed  according  to  methods  long  es- 
tablished; no  conceited  innovater  speaks  there:  within  the 
limits  of  classical  form  the  composer  found  the  broadest  room 


196  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

for  the  expression  of  his  individual  genius;  and  he  based  his 
entire  work,  every  movement,  upon  simple,  spontaneous  tunes, 
deriving  abundance  of  suggestion  from  them,  and  never  find- 
ing that  the  plain  melodies  restricted  the  flow  of  his  fancy. 

I  am  glad  that  but  one  native  American  theme  appears  in 
the  work.  A  master  hand  touched  it  and  it  became  trans- 
figured. So  it  would  be  with  the  songs  of  the  Ojibways,  for 
there  is  not  one  tune  in  the  "New  World"  symphony  that  is 
more  beautiful  than  are  many  that  were  created  by  my  fellow- 
tribesmen.  They  await  the  transfiguring  touch  of  a  native 
American,  one  who  knows  his  country  through  acquaintance 
with  its  broad  plains  and  lofty  mountains;  who  loves  the  silent 
rivers  of  its  forests,  and  exults  in  the  roar  of  its  waterfalls ;  who 
has  someAvhat  more  than  magazine  knowledge  of  the  conquer- 
ing pioneer  and  the  subjugated  red  man. 

By  all  means  let  us  have  workmanship,  let  there  be  no  end 
of  striving  for  the  best  that  can  be  accomplished  through  it ;  but 
let  us  be  very  sure  that  the  material  to  which  the  workman  lays 
his  hand  is  worthy. 

It  is  a  proper  objection  that  music  of  permanent  value  can- 
not well  be  constructed  on  material  that  does  not  appeal  to 
either  composer  or  public.  I  am  sometimes  told  that  the  O jib- 
way  songs  seem  strange.  A  Boston  critic  once  wrote  of  them 
as  having  "exotic"  interest.  Their  strangeness  is  no  discredit 
to  their  beauty.  It  is  another  way  of  saying  that  they  are  dis- 
tinctive. It  is  a  common  experience  to  approach  something 
exotic  with  timidity  and  eventually  hug  it  to  the  bosom  as  a  fond 
possession.     Time  is  admittedly  necessary  in  this  matter,  and  a 


ART  VALUE  OF  INDIAN  SONGS  197 

beginning  has  hardly  been  made.  The  point  for  immediate 
consideration  is  this:  here  is  good  music;  should  we  not,  by 
putting  it  forward  in  one  form  and  another,  give  the  public  op- 
portunity to  learn  what  it  is,  and  to  like  it? 

When  all  is  said,  it  will  remain  for  every  composer  to  select 
his  material  according  to  his  own  predilections  and  taste.  I 
do  not  overlook  the  fact  that  Indian  songs  are  not  the  only 
native  material  available.  There  are  American  critics  who  have 
taken  the  "rag-time"  songs  into  serious  account  as  an  expression 
of  the  popular  fancy.  My  opinion  is  that  the  popularity  of 
such  music  is  transient,  merely;  it  is  the  whim  of  the  moment 
and  will  give  way  presently  to  something  else.  Meantime 
I  can  no  more  regard  the  employment  of  "rag-time,"  which 
is  nothing  but  a  mannerism,  as  expressive  of  our  national  spirit 
than  I  could  assert  that  John  Sebastian  Bach's  employment  of 
syncopation,  which  is  the  technical  term  for  rag-time,  was  a 
forecast  of  the  grand  cosmopolitanism  of  my  people.  I  am 
much  more  in  sympathy  with  those  who  would  look  to  the 
plantation  songs  for  distinctive  color,  still  more  with  those  who 
would  approximate  as  closely  as  possible  to  the  beginnings  of 
an  American  folksong  made  for  us  by  Stephen  C.  Foster.  I 
do  not  feel  that  it  is  incumbent  on  me  to  discuss  these  other 
sources  of  melody,  my  province  being  that  of  the  music  that 
is  truly  and  wholly  indigenous  to  our  soil;  and,  in  bringing 
this  part  of  the  book  to  a  close,  I  am  glad  to  add  to  the  record 
of  achievements  in  our  primitive  music  the  fact  that  Mr.  Car- 
los Trover  has  published  several  stirring  songs,  the  material 
for  which  he  found  in  the  music  of  the  Zunis.     These  are  the 


198  AMERICAN   PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

people,  it  will  be  remembered,  whose  musical  advancement  is 
so  slight  that  their  scales  are  regarded  as  in  the  process  of 
forming,  and  whose  intervals  are  apparently  adiatonic.  It  is 
all  the  more  significant,  therefore,  that  an  accomplished 
musician  has  found  in  the  material  the  inspiration  for  good, 
thoroughly  characteristic  music  adapted  to  the  uses  of  civili- 
zation. Another  composer  who  has  experimented  success- 
fully with  Indian  melodies  is  Mr.  Charles  Wakefield  Cad- 
man,  of  Pittsburg,  and  I  am  more  than  delighted  to  record  that 
he  has  undertaken  to  go  personally  into  the  field  for  the  purpose 
of  gathering  material  at  first  hand.  This  is  what  I  wish  could 
be  done  by  all  who  take  interest  in  the  subject.  Academic  con- 
sideration of  the  material  is  good,  but  far  better  is  study  of  it 
in  its  place  of  origin.  There  insensibly  the  composer  must  find 
himself  more  closely  attuned  to  Nature.  To  flee  from  the  ar- 
tificialities of  civilized  life,  and  dwell  for  a  time  among  the 
simple  people  of  the  forests  and  plains,  is  wholesome  in  itself 
and  must  inevitably  react  happily  on  the  composer's  output. 

CONCLUSION. 

The  foregoing  pages  contain  some  facts  and  a  good  many 
opinions.  Facts  are  the  main  thing,  and  what  may  be  regarded 
as  the  report  proper  of  my  research  in  the  field  will  be  found  in 
the  pages  that  follow.  Discussion  of  scales,  rhythm,  verse,  and 
so  forth,  seemed  to  me  necessary  to  a  thorough  understanding  of 
the  songs  themselves.  Let  the  opinions  go;  the  salient  fact  re- 
mains that  there  is  on  this  continent  a  wonderful  fund  of  primi- 
tive music  that  is  rapidly  disappearing  with  the  Indians'  ad- 


ART  VALUE  OF  INDIAN  SONGS  199 

vance  toward  civilization.  It  is  a  fact  that  this  music  deserves 
preservation.  It  is  a  fact  that  it  needs,  and  some  day  such  of 
it  as  has  been  preserved  will  have,  comprehensive  study  on  the 
part  of  a  competent  musician,  or  musicians.  It  is  a  fact  that 
this  generation  bids  fair  to  be  as  remiss  in  the  matter  as  were  the 
generations  that  preceded  it.  There  ought  to  be  organized 
effort  for  the  preservation  and  understanding  of  this  music  if 
for  no  other  purpose  than  to  make  of  it  an  enduring  monu- 
ment to  a  vanishing  race.  So  far  as  the  songs  that  follow  are 
concerned,  the  fact  that  they  were  gathered  for  the  most  part 
in  Canada  is  a  point  of  no  vital  importance.  This  continent 
was  the  Indians'  before  the  palefaces  came  to  it,  the  Ojibways 
live  on  both  sides  of  the  arbitrary  line  that  separates  the  two 
countries,  and  whatever  the  American  Indian  has  to  offer  is  our 
spoil  of  conquest  quite  as  much  as  it  is  Canada's.  If  Canadian 
composers  should  grasp  the  opportunity  to  base  their  art  on 
aboriginal  songs  found  within  their  borders,  and  thus  evolve  a 
music  that  should  speak  distinctively  for  their  country,  so  much 
the  better  for  them  and  so  much  the  worse  for  us. 

With  this  contribution  to  the  subject  I  must  regard  my  own 
work  as  finished.  It  has  been  conducted  in  a  spirit  of  love  and 
enthusiasm,  and  I  leave  it  with  deep  regret.  It  is  work  that 
requires  either  the  possession  of  independent  means,  or  organ- 
ized support,  and  I  have  had  neither.  Hopeful  that  in  the 
not  distant  future  some  person  or  persons  may  undertake  to  con- 
tinue my  especial  work  among  the  Ojibways,  I  hereby  pledge 
myself  to  aid  by  advice  drawn  from  experience,  by  introduc- 
tions to  Indians,  missionaries  and  school  teachers,  and  by  any 
other  means  that  lie  in  my  power. 


CHAPTER  X 
OJIBWAY  SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 

IT  has  been  shown  that  thorough  understanding  of  an  O jib- 
way  song  depends  upon  knowledge  of  the  story,  cere- 
mony, or  special  circumstance  with  which  it  is  associated 
in  the  Indian's  mind.  For  this  reason  it  seems  to  me  that 
it  will  be  most  helpful  to  the  student  to  present  the  melodies  I 
have  collected  in  connection  with  their  stories,  rather  than  com- 
press them  into  a  few  pages  of  printed  music.  All  the  melo- 
dies, therefore,  will  be  found  in  this  chapter,  and  such  as  I  have 
seen  fit  to  harmonize  may  be  seen  also  in  their  civilized  garb  in 
the  second  part  of  the  book. 

For  various  reasons  it  has  not  been  possible  in  every  instance 
to  give  the  Ojibway  words.  Indian  singers  are  as  care- 
less in  the  matter  of  enunciation  as  are  whites.  It  was  seldom 
that  I  could  catch  all  the  words  of  a  song  even  after  several 
repetitions,  and  when  I  asked  that  they  be  dictated  to  me  slowly 
I  found  that  I  was  setting  the  Indian  a  very  difficult  task.  In 
his  dictation  he  would  sometimes  omit  words  that  I  had  plainly 
heard  him  sing,  and  as  frequently  insert  words  that  were  not 
in  the  song  as  sung.  His  spoken  words,  too,  were  often  in  an 
order  that  differed  from  those  that  were  sung,  and  I  cannot  re- 
call one  occasion  where  an  Indian  in  his  dictation  remembered 
to  repeat  words  or  phrases  in  the  exact  order,  or  as  many  times 

200 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES  201 

as  the  repetitions  occurred  in  the  song.  It  might  he  thought, 
and  I  did  think,  that  the  phonograph  would  settle  all  douht 
as  to  the  words,  but  I  found  that  that  remarkable  machine  gives 
back  the  singer's  enunciation  rather  less  distinctly  than  the  orig- 
inal, and  on  some  of  the  cylinders  the  impressions  are  so  faint 
that  it  is  with  difficulty  that  the  melody  itself  can  be  distin- 
guished. In  every  instance  the  songs  in  this  collection  have  been 
referred  to  at  least  one  Indian  besides  the  singer  for  a  state- 
ment as  to  the  words  and  their  meaning.  The  Indians,  listen- 
ing to  the  song  as  reproduced  by  the  machine,  often  distin- 
guishes words  that  are  unintelligible  to  me,  but  sometimes  he 
has  to  confess  to  missing  a  part  of  them.  In  such  cases  he  gives 
me  as  nearly  as  he  can  the  "general  sense"  of  the  song.  Rev. 
Frederick  Frost,  of  Garden  River,  Ontario,  who  has  been  a 
missionary  among  the  Ojibways  for  more  than  thirty  years,  and 
to  whom  several  of  these  songs  were  referred  for  elucidation, 
tells  me  that  many  of  the  words  are  archaic ;  that  is,  not  in  cur- 
rent use,  and  that  the  Indians  themselves  have  forgotten  what 
they  mean. 

Those  who  have  pursued  research  among  Indians  will  un- 
derstand why,  in  some  instances,  I  could  not  venture  to  pur- 
sue elusive  words  doggedly  until  the  original  and  the  correct 
translation  had  been  obtained.  More  than  once  I  had  an  In- 
dian singing  after  weeks  of  patient  waiting;  he  would  become 
interested,  and  if  let  alone,  would  sing  perhaps  a  dozen  songs; 
stop  him  to  make  particular  inquiry  as  to  words,  meaning,  or 
other  details,  and  he  would  almost  certainly  lose  his  enthusiasm 
and  cease  singing  before  he  had  finished  his  list.     So,  anxious 


202  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

in  the  main  for  melodies,  I  let  the  Indian  sing  on,  trusting  to 
the  phonograph,  and  other  Indians  and  missionaries  for  a  dig- 
ging out  of  the  words. 

There  are  a  few  examples  where  I  do  not  care  to  give  either 
the  original  words,  or  a  translation  of  them.  Primitive  ideas 
of  humor  and  love  are  not  always  in  accord  with  modern  re- 
finement, and  I  cannot  see  that  any  good  is  accomplished  by 
making  permanent  record  of  what  the  civilized  Indian  is  slowly 
but  steadily  discarding  as  repugnant  to  his  awakened  sensibili- 
ties. That  he  is  discarding  vulgarity  is  fact,  not  sentimental 
fancy.  Some  evidence  of  it  may  be  found  in  these  songs.  I 
overheard  an  Ojibway  woman  urge  her  husband  not  to  let  Mr. 
Burton  hear  a  certain  song,  because  it  was  a  "bad"  song.  I 
heard  it,  and  the  words  are  untranslatable,  but  the  melody  is 
beautiful.  On  more  than  one  occasion  a  singer,  convinced  that 
I  wanted  him  to  sing  into  the  machine  a  melody  I  had  heard, 
complied  but  mumbled  certain  words  so  incoherently  that  the 
most  learned  Ojibway  could  not  tell  what  they  were.  They 
were  words  that  gave  an  offensive  meaning  to  the  song. 

In  the  translations  that  accompany  the  harmonized  versions  I 
have  tried,  as  heretofore  indicated,  to  set  forth  the  Indian's 
whole  thought,  turning  into  the  English  text  not  only  the  words 
actually  sung,  but  others  to  express  the  attendant  story  or 
circumstances.  I  have  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  many  of 
the  love  songs  express  the  same  thought,  or  deal  with  the  same 
situation,  with  little  variation  in  the  phraseology.  For  this 
reason  I  have  ventured  in  two  or  three  instances  to  take  the 
suggestion  for  English  words  from  a  song  to  which  the  melody 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


203 


does  not  apply.  All  such  liberties  are  acknowledged  in  the 
course  of  the  text  that  follows  where  the  songs  have  been  ar- 
ranged not  in  the  order  in  which  I  found  them,  but  according 
to  classification  with  regard  to  their  subjects  and  purpose.  As 
it  is  the  largest  class  and  melodically  perhaps  the  most  interest- 
ing, I  begin  with 

LOVE  SONGS. 

My  Bark  Canoe.  The  story  of  this  song  has  been  told  in 
Chapter  VIII.  There  is  only  this  further  to  be  said  of  it — that 
I  reduced  it  to  notes  at  a  time  when  the  Indians  were  putting 
all  possible  obstacles  in  my  way.  I  had  to  hear  the  song  from  a 
distance,  and  no  Indian  could  be  persuaded  to  sing  it  to  me  in 
private.  At  that  time  the  melody  sounded  to  me  as  it  is  given  in 
the  harmonized  versions.  Later  when  the  Indians  willingly 
aided  me  in  my  work,  I  noticed  that  at  the  end  of  the  first  4-4 
measure  there  occurred  a  passing  note  over  the  syllable  Jeah. 
The  variation  is  unessential,  and  whether  it  was  there  in  the  be- 
ginning, or  developed  subsequent  to  my  first  hearing  of  the 
song,  I  do  not  know.  As  recorded  by  the  phonograph  words 
and  music  are  as  follows: 


Slow 


Chek-ah   -     bay     te- bik      on   -  dan -day -ahn     Chek-ah  -  bay    te  -  bik      on  ■ 


Bse 


i 


4=3= 


±£ 


dan  -  day  -  ahn  ah    - 


-  niah    si 


bi 


dan  -  day  -  ahn 


Translation:  I  am  out  all  night  on  the  river. 


204 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


Wedding  Song.  The  attendant  circumstances  by  which  this 
song  is  to  be  interpreted  are  suggested  by  the  title.  See  Chap- 
ter VIII.     Words  and  music: 


Fast 


|EfEb=tE 


*= 


Ip 


Bayz  -  hig      e  -  qua  -  zess      ne      me       ne  -  gon  -     un      kay  -  get    sen  -  nah 


■U— U— V- 


neg  -  e  -  che  -  day  -  be   e  -  go  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah 


a£ 


• — *     ./  ■  ' r 

hey-ah   hey  -  ah    hey  -   ah      Bayz -hig   e- qua -zess  ne    me     ne  -  gon  -    un 


r—Q 2 m a 1 

I — "~ — 3 — ~ IV~i 

i 1 — 

i V-i 

1 1 1 

yt — f — — T — f— 

m        m        m        m 

-p \~ 

~? — w — ¥ — T~ 

f             J 

f\\    -\>      j-    1/ — L 

Z *— 

-h 1 h * — 

V 

u/ u U V 1 

L-l 

Lv U V— 

U 

kay  -  get  sen  -  nah     neg  -  e  -  che  -  day  -  be      e  -    go,     hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah     hey  -  ah 


I 


fc£ 


T 


• — i—^r*-* *— ■-• — • — * — *    'V 

hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah 

Translation:     A  girl  has  been  given  to  me;  yes,  I  am  very 
glad  that  she  has  beezi  given  to  me. 


Lonely.  Two  versions  of  this  song  are  on  the  phonographic 
cylinders.  The  first  was  sung  by  a  woman  who  was  so  dread- 
fully embarrassed  that  hardly  a  word  was  intelligible,  and 
the  moment  she  had  finished  she  fled.     Her  son  volunteered  to 


SOXGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


205 


give  me  the  English  of  the  song.  I  copy  here  the  translation 
he  wrote  in  ray  note  book : 

"do  not  worrie  When  you  heair  that  I  am  gon  if  you  go 
away  aginst  my  will  I  will  have  to  go  and  my  jurney  will  be 
to  that  island  for  Out  in  Lake  I  will  be  that  loonsom  loonsom 
loonsom." 

He  explained  that  two  persons  are  supposed  to  be  speaking, 
the  first  a  man  who  announces  that  he  is  going  on  a  journey. 
Then  his  sweetheart  breaks  in  with  a  jirotest,  declaring  that  if 
be  goes  she  will  have  to  follow  to  the  distant  island,  and  crying 
that  she  will  be  lonesome.  Another  Indian  who  heard  the  song 
as  reproduced  by  the  phonograph,  recognized  it  as  one  familiar 
in  his  youth,  but  could  not  distinguish  the  singer's  words.  He 
assured  me,  however,  that  the  meaning,  as  he  remembered,  was 
substantially  such  as  the  singer's  son  had  written.  Some  weeks 
later  a  younger  woman  sang  for  me,  and  one  of  her  songs  was 
melodically  a  variation  of  this  one,  the  words  meaning,  "My 
sweetheart  is  going  away  and  I  shall  be  lonesome,  lonesome, 
lonesome."  Both  melodic  versions  are  given  here,  and  both  are 
used  in  the  harmonized  version  on  other  pages. 

(a)    Very  slow 


0^5^ 


3 


Ef-t 


E^^ 


(h) 


JP^P 


206 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


Her  Shadow.  Original  words  uncertain.  They  tell  of  a 
lover  seeking  his  sweetheart  in  a  canoe ;  he  sees  her  shadow  on 
the  beach  and  says  that  when  he  is  sure  it  is  she  he  will  shout  to 
her  to  await  his  arrival.  After  several  repetitions  of  the  melody 
the  singer  always  concludes  with  a  falsetto  yell.  The  words  are 
pieced  out  with  nonsense  syllables  which,  with  the  yell,  are  re- 
produced in  the  harmonized  version. 

Fast 


$m^-y-t 


-3-*- 


=tnrt 


t-»i-:j&i=£m 


Ayquahnahkog  pe    ah     be  -  dah     goj  -  ing    ke-gah  wah-bah-mah  nah  non  ke 


II 


^3 


=S^ 


mos-hay-non   ne        hey-ah  hey  -  ah     ho    hey-ah        hey  -  ah     ho    hey  -  ah  ho. 


A  Song  of  Absence  and  Longing.  I  notated  and  published 
this  song  before  the  idea  of  making  a  thorough  study  of  O jib- 
way  music  had  taken  hold  of  me.  To  make  it  more  available 
for  white  singers  I  transposed  the  ending  an  octave.  Many 
of  the  Ojibways,  having  heard  the  English  version,  now  use 
the  higher  ending.     The  original  form  follows. 

Slow  _ 


• 


f 


± 


t=t 


Ness-we    ah  -  goon-ay   tah  -  go. 


kah-^een   e-ways-en-e  -  see 


. 


si- 


ne  -   ne  -  mo  -  shayn  kee  mah   jud        az   -   be  gash   kan      dah      mo    miu 

Translation:  For  three  days  I  have   been   hungry;  I   have 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


207 


eaten  nothing.    My  sweetheart  is     absent     and     I     am     very 
sorrowful. 


Morning  Tryst.  Originally  another  lonesome  song.  It  is 
said  to  have  been  composer!  in  the  time  of  the  great  Shingwauk, 
the  occasion  being  the  departure  of  a  warrior  on  the  warpath. 
Another  version  of  the  melody  occurs  on  the  phonographic  cyl- 
inders to  words  of  a  radically  different  character,  unless  we  ad- 
mit that  remorse  over  drunkenness  is  at  last  analysis  the  same 
as  grief  over  the  absence  of  a  loved  one.     The  first  version : 

Slow 


g 


3=& 


Hr-f- 


m=t 


: 


t 


* 


o 


De-nah        ne  -  nah -wen -dum 


O 


ne - nah 


-  nab  • 


wen  -  dum 


4 


O     ne  -  nah  ne  -  nah  -  wen  -  dum        ne    -   ne  -  mo  -  shayn   ai  -  ah  - 


VTT^~ 

-t — *-= 

—f—r- 

-s — <* — 

m 1*- 

"zt 0— = 

— — 1- 

~^- 

hvH — 

— f 

p  i 

\ta — 

— * — b- 

1     , 

— * — *- 

—J— 

■  v  ij  i 

V 

{/ 

1 

A       1               1 

D 

O        ne  -  nah         ne  -  nah  -  wen  -  dum         O         ne  -  nah        ne  -  nah  -  wen  -  dum 


gam  -  ah  -  me     -    koy  -  e  -  ah  -  nin  ne    -    ne  -  mo  -  shayn     ai  -  ah  -  sig. 

Translation:  Oh!  I  am  very  lonesome;  my  sweetheart  is  ab- 
sent. 

Second  version: 


3=S 


jgEfefl 


t7 


t 


1  i       M 


-■s-f—rvr- 


%u — V- 


V&- 


The  Ojibway  words  of  this  version  are  not  quite  clear,  but 


208 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


they  mean :  Listen  to  me ;  I  am  full.     It  is  all  my  own  fault  that 
I  am  drunk. 

In  the  harmonized  version  I  have  departed  from  both  texts 
and  based  the  words  upon  a  type  of  Indian  song  that  is  fre- 
quently to  be  found  among  more  tribes  than  the  Ojibways. 


The  Lake  Sheen.  This  song  was  discussed  at  length  in 
Chapter  V,  where  may  be  found  three  versions  of  its  melody 
and  words.  It  is  also  among  the  harmonized  songs.  The  ver- 
sion generally  heard  to-day  follows: 


m f^  a    r»  ■ 


m 


3=£r— g f 


I 


Mang      o     doog     -     win     nind      en  -    en 


dam. 


a    -     ny     wall  ■ 


f=ff==* 


m=t 


i 


-i 

guay  -  che-  gizh     -     o        ne  -  ne  -  mo 


wah     sah     bo  -  ye 


zud, 


4=t 


m^m$ 


E£ 


shayn. 


-     ny  -  wah  wah  -  sah      bo    -  ye 


zud. 


Waiibunosa's  Longing.  So  called  from  the  name  of  the 
singer.  This  was  sufficiently  discussed  in  Chapter  VIII. 
Following  is  the  phonographic  version  of  melody  and  words : 


SOXGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES 


209 


i 


Slow 


3=£ 


££E3 


± 


Ab  -     yah! iicn  -  e  -  mosh  -  ay  -  non    de  -  gui    -   shid.       Ah  -     yah!. 


£ 


i^f 


s 


§fc^^=t=t 


w-1-* — •— 

nen  -  e  -  mosh  -  ay  -  non    dc  -  guish  -  id,        Ah  -  yah !     nen  -  e  -  mosh  -  ay  -  non     de  - 


zfc^z 


_L3 ^_ 


WEEjL 


± 


guis  -   hid.      Ah -yah!...       nen  -  e  -  mosh-ay-non   de  -  guish  -  id.         Ah -yah!... 


-f*— ff 


; 


•  * 


p^* 


* — • 


-Z5*- 


nes-ah  we-nah-o  -  we- quay-zans.   ah-yah!     ne    sul  gay-gal  ped  -  ah-guish-ing. 


f 


Midnight  Tryst.     Xo  comment  or  explanation  necessary. 

Rather  shir       '""  3  "*"> 


=£ 


f=|=tp= 


m-±-^^ 


-*—»- 


*=4-<&- 


&4=^ 


-3-V 


*—+ 


-v-t»- 


t^ 


-* — r 


Be-jah-kah  nin-de-go    -     bun   nin-de    -     go -bun  nin-de    -   go  -    bun    be-jah- 


*=^: 


3=i= 


I      r*   r* 


-?+- 


m 


~* — r 


¥=S= 


kah     niu-  de-  go  -  bun       a  -  pe  -  tah     ti  -   bi  -  kuk   be  -  jah   -     kah     nin  -  de 


go  -    bun     nin-de  go    -    bun       be-  jah    -     kah      nin-de-go-  bun. 

Translation :  She  has  promised  to  meet  me  at  midnight. 


210 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


Red  Blanket.  Although  I  heard  this  song  early  in  my  ac- 
quaintance with  the  Ojihways  I  did  not  put  it  on  paper  until 
it  had  been  sung  into  the  phonograph;  for  I  had  my  doubt  as 
to  its  origin.  It  is  a  lively  trifle  that  sounds  as  if  it  might  have 
been  culled  from  an  Offenbach  operetta.  But  the  Ojibways, 
men  and  women,  insist  that  it  originated  with  themselves  ages 
ago.  They  get  immense  enjoyment  from  it,  apparently  find- 
ing in  it  a  meaning  that  is  hidden  from  me.  As  a  rule  a  woman 
is  called  on  to  sing  it,  and  she  heightens  the  interest  by  dancing 
while  she  sings.  I  am  told  that  the  bark  referred  to  is  the 
tamarack,  and  that  the  purpose  of  gathering  it  is  to  make  a  fire 
in  the  teepee. 


Fast 


£=fC 


j>  x :  j 


% 


/v 


m 


Ay-quay-quog  nin-gab -de  -  jah   min      ne - ne - mo-shayn  nin-gah-  we  -  je  -  ah 


m 


.  0 


i^j — i=s~- 


V 


mis  -  koo  -  ah     nin  -  gah  -mah-jah  -  od     wah  -  boy  -  on     nin  -  gah-mah  -  je  -  dun. 

Translation:  I  will  go  to  the  edge  of  the  forest  and  gather 
bark  for  mv  sweetheart. 


Waiting:  The  words  as  sung  cannot  be  reproduced  with  cer- 
tainty.    They  were  dictated  as  follows : 

Bejeenug  ningahbedugtceshing  keegee  e  nen  ningahdayah- 
mah  kayaygeen  hay  go  kewenemohkayn. 

Translated:  I'll  be  here  before  long;  don't  get  tired  of  wait- 
ing and  don't  disappoint  me. 


i 


SOXGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES  211 


7        *        I  *        *     X     ,*•-!*    .c       X  =*= 


V 


pi 


fi 


*     "     £-^- 


i      '     *~ 


3! 


# 


Banished.  This  is  a  long  song  for  an  Ojibway.  It  was 
sung  with  such  evident  feeling  as  to  be  deeply  impressive.  I 
tried  to  get  the  words  but  the  singer  dictated  a  few  and  then 
stopped.  The  phonograph  does  not  disclose  the  remainder 
with  any  degree  of  certainty,  but  an  Indian  interpreter  gives 
the  following  as  the  substantial  meaning  of  them  all : 

There  is  a  hill  to  be  climbed,  and  you  must  keep  climbing  if 
you  want  to  get  home.  Take  a  knife  to  defend  yourself.  The 
way  is  long  and  you  will  weary,  but  you  must  keep  going. 

The  song  becomes  clear  in  the  light  of  an  old  custom.  A 
young  man's  parents  exercised  absolute  authority  over  his  mar- 
riage. If  he  brought  to  the  parental  wigwam  a  bride  of  whom 
the  old  people  did  not  approve,  they  refused  to  receive  her,  ami 
he  had  to  send  her  back  whence  she  came.  This  song,  then,  is 
the  heart  broken  lament  of  a  lover  who  brought  home  a  wife 
from  a  distant  village  and  was  compelled  to  send  her  away. 


212  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

Very  slow  A 


i 


4  ?    'r  r~f — t~i^ 


4 


-# =—  — N—     —a        |       =4 


^ 


N        I 


3E 


-* — •- 


*    • 


3 


^ 


:5=sz 


1— r- 


t=F=F 


3rt 


-^  •  I  1   j 


m 


^=3 


■i- 


a 


±=t 


-#—  -t 


^ — *- 


vi-re  Odozvah  Song.  The  Ojibways  of  the  Lake  Superior  re- 
gion refer  to  certain  Indians  who  live  on  or  near  their  reserva- 
tions as  "Dowahs,"  or  "Odowahs."  They  are  presumably  Ot- 
tawas,  a  branch  of  the  Algonquin  stock,  whose  language  few 
Ojibways  understand.  The  man  who  sang  this  said  that  it  was 
an  "Odovvah  love  song,"  and  it  is  therefore  included  among  the 
love  songs  although  nobody  to  whom  it  has  been  submitted  can 
get  any  meaning  from  it. 


i — »  •       *        4  4— 


SOXGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES 


213 


Xo.  31  (b).  This,  and  similar  designations,  refer  to  the 
number  of  the  phonographic  cylinders  whereon  the  song  mav  be 
found.  The  words,  many  times  repeated,  mean:  "I  am  going 
far  away,  my  swetheart." 


Xo.  32  (a).     Untranslatable. 

Lively 


\M-^^- 


~t — * — r 


-• — 0 — » 


Xo.  33  (c).  From  the  spirit  with  which  men  sing  this  the 
listener  might  suppose  it  to  be  a  war  song.  The  words  as  dic- 
tated: Jangzcai/slicquess  ne  daliguahdahmad  go  ne  ningeyah- 
gah  me  ahgo.  Translated:  They  say  I  took  away  another 
man's  sweetheart,  but  this  is  jealous  gossip. 


214  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

Rather  fast  > 


No.  39  (a).     The  only  words  that  are  audible  mean,  "I  can 
see  his  face." 

rail. 


■    Slow 


fegggg=E^=^ 


* *- 


*-* 1" 


=S=H= 


No.  39  (b).  The  words  mean:  "I  don't  see  why  you  disap- 
point me.  I  have  kept  my  promises  to  you,  but  you  have  dis- 
appointed me." 

End 


Moderate 


;l; 


»  ■   0 


IN     i     d- 


IS     Si- 


„.   »  *      • 


=3= 


No.  39  (c).  The  interpreter  surmises  that  this  is  the  utter- 
ance of  a  man  who  has  been  rejected.  He  gives  this  as  the 
meaning:  "I  am  going  to  leave  you;  no  use  in  staying  any 
longer." 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


•15 


Slow 
> 


^1 


^.r    r-r- 


B 


-V fir 


im 


Lgf^%igg^^B 


•    • 


^f^ 


i 


A7o.  4i  faj.     Untranslatable. 


-^nv- 


V 


m 


4  :    4      irr-y 


_L        I 


First  time        Second  time 


I 


i  r 


fa^ESEl 


^         *  .  &- 


i  :    i 


!  r 


First  time      Second 


Falsetto  yells 


A7o.  -£-?  (b).  The  words  as  dictated:  Megowdhbung  chch- 
oyean  asahkomik  chindhdead  mahmoivay  waynezesing  ningah- 
nahdeod  rvenzesing  tiin  bedenwah  nenemoshayn.  Translated: 
"Early  in  the  morning  I  will  take  my  canoe  to  go  and  gather 
the  moss  I  am  asked  to  get,  and  I  will  get  the  best  I  can  mid. 
Afterwards  I  will  bring  it  to  my  sweetheart." 

The  moss  referred  to  is  a  kind  used  by  the  Ojibwavs  for 
wrapping  babies  in. 


216 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


As  fast  as  possible 


m 


m 


Falsetto  yells 


I 


m 


<s> gi—  -•     0     0 


4     0 


+  -d-    -6- 


No.  42  (b).  This  song  is  interesting  as  an  example  of  Indian 
humor.  Early  in  the  summer  of  1904  I  became  acquainted 
with  a  woman  who  was  said  to  be  a  good  singer,  but  I  could 
not  induce  her  to  go  near  the  phonograph,  or  sing  to  me  alone. 
She  put  me  off  with  one  excuse  or  another,  always  good  hu- 
moredly  and  with  so  much  joking  that  we  never  failed  to 
laugh  when  we  met.  Often  she  declared  that  I  never  would 
persuade  her  to  make  a  fool  of  herself  by  singing  into  "that 
thing,"  meaning  the  phonograph.  One  evening  I  joined  a 
social  party  around  a  campfrre.  Songs  were  sung,  stories  told, 
and  there  were  several  general  dances.  At  the  height  of  the 
fun  I  managed  to  bring  her  to  the  centre  and  make  her  dance 
alone.     Then  she  insisted  that  I  should  dance  with  her,  which 


SONGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES  217 

I  did  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  and  much  to  the  amusement  of 
the  crowd.  There  was  no  end  of  fun  over  it,  and  when  I  saw 
her  next  morning  in  the  cabin  where  I  kept  my  phonograph, 
knowing  that  she  would  be  unusually  good  natured,  I  decided 
to  make  another  try  for  a  song.  I  strolled  in  and  the  cus- 
tomary bantering  began.  Bringing  the  talk  around  to  music, 
I  declared  it  to  be  my  conviction  that  Ojibway  women  knew 
only  one  cradle  song,  "The  Naked  Bear."  She  promptly  de- 
nied it,  saying  that  she  knew  another  herself. 

"What  good  does  that  do,"  I  asked,  "when  you  don't  know 
how  to  sing  it?" 

"I  do  know  how,"  she  cried  indignantly.  "I  sang  it  times 
enough  to  all  my  children." 

I  laughed  at  her,  saying  that  what  she  sang  was  "The  Naked 
Bear,"  and  that  she  didn't  know  the  difference.  With  a  con- 
temptuous exclamation  she  ran  to  the  phonograph  and  de- 
manded that  I  set  it  going.  I  complied  with  a  fine  air  of 
indifference  and  she  proceeded  to  sing  the  cradle  song  I  call 
"Sleepy  Time,"  which  will  be  found  in  its  appropriate  place. 
Then  she  said,  "Now  I  will  sing  you  a  song  all  for  yourself," 
and  she  sang  the  following  melody : 


218 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


Rather  slow 


tt 


- 


:St=t 


-p   r   0   0. 


f 


€        • 


3 


»=E=£ 


-*— «- 


-^#- 


^^^g*ES£ 


g* 


^^j 


>f  i 


fc=^ 


-*—*- 


T9— #- 


J=t 


=t=i= 


•— <& >—         •  .  «  .-#- 


-*  s.»    •—*- 


-1 — *- 


Ha± — ^"'      ^j      ||PI ' ^*"    ^j      SLJ 


[a  laugh] 

I  was  not  sufficiently  versed  in  Ojibway  to  follow  it  closely, 
but  when  I  referred  it  later  to  my  interpreter  he  laughed 
heartily.  It  seems  that  the  melody  is  that  of  an  old  time  love 
song,  but  that  the  singer  had  extemporized  words  that  applied 
wholly  to  myself.  It  was  her  joke  on  the  notator,  and  she 
was  much  put  out  when  she  learned  that  I  had  discovered  the 
trick.  I  may  add  here  that  extemporizing  words,  especially 
names  of  persons,  in  songs  to  give  them  an  immediate  appli- 
cation is  not  at  all  uncommon  at  Ojibway  social  gatherings. 


SONGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES 


219 


No.  29  (b).  The  singer  announced  that  this  was  a  love  song, 
hut  the  words  are  indistinguishable  and  no  interpreter  has 
hazarded  a  guess  at  their  meaning. 

Moderate 


I— Z*— r- 


±^,  f    '  k» 


Zj     I       U    I     -1 


=t= 


JS=P 


^elP^^-w-j 


5=i=t 


*—i-0 • 0 


bz*: 


^fe=5 


=3^e& 


^^ 


j>  * 


-*-^r-+ 


I 


Aro.  35  (a).  The  words  are  not  clear  but  the  interpreter 
gathers  that  the  song  is  a  lament  over  the  prolonged  absence 
of  somebody. 


f^S 


^r^~ 


•     d 


•    * 


r-o^  .  , .  _^_gq^_>    i      rr^ ralL       ,     *_„ 

f<®  m M *     *__ '  *     I     J  -h       —  *— » *— 


2Vo.  5J  fftj.     The  words  appear  to  mean  "I  come  from  the 
mountain  with  my  sweetheart." 

Rather  slow  , 


\>  „    p       f 


3~T~r 


£=§= 


1 


-S< =}- 


3F=4 


4— F 


. 


-#- 


' 


::> 


aztut 


1 1- 


* t- 


220  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


SOCIAL    SONGS. 

Under  this  caption  are  included  not  only  songs  that  seem 
to  be  used  only  at  social  gatherings,  but  cradle,  humorous  and 
drinking  songs. 

Parting.  To  me  this  is  a  most  lugubrious  tune,  but  it  rep- 
resents the  Ojibway's  conception  of  a  jovial  song.  It  came 
to  light  under  romantic  circumstances.  While  the  Indian  play, 
"Hiawatha,"  was  running  during  the  summer  of  1902  at 
Desbarats,  Ont.,  Tekumegezhik  Shawano,  who  played  the  title 
role,  was  married  to  Margaret  Waubunosa,  the  Minnehaha 
of  the  cast.  As  the  wedding  day  approached  it  was  suggested 
to  the  Indian  actors  that  they  take  note  of  the  event  by  intro- 
ducing a  festal  song  in  the  scene  known  as  "The  Wedding 
Festivities."  The  word  "festal"  was  not  used  in  conveying 
the  suggestion,  but  pains  were  taken  to  impress  the  Indians 
with  the  fact  that  what  was  wanted  was  such  a  song  as  they 
would  sing  on  a  jolly  occasion.  They  were  asked  if  they  had 
any  song  of  that  character  and  replied  that  they  knew  many; 
they  would  think  it  over  and  select  one.  After  three  days  of 
thinking  it  over  they  announced  that  they  had  decided  on  a 
very  ancient  song  that  was  just  -the  thing  for  the  occasion. 
When  I  heard  it  roared  forth  by  forty  powerful  voices  at  a 
solemn  adagio,  I  thought  there  must  have  been  some  mistake, 
but  when  I  understood  the  words  I  knew  that,  from  the  Indian 
point  of  view,  nothing  could  have  been  more  appropriate. 


0 


Slow 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


221 


S       N- 


:■■',    ' 


£3 


Am  -  bay  -  ge  -  way  -  do che  -  wah  -de  -  bah  -  bun  kee-gah-gee  ■ 


N       N 


> 


'       ' 


X 


£ 


^         ■v 


•        » 


Q^S 


kay         ne  -  me  -  go  -    min ka  -  hen  -  ah         kon  -  e  •    gay  -  anng. 

Translation :  Let  us  go  home  before  daybreak  or  people  will 


find  out  what  we  have  been  doing. 


Winter.     The  story  of  this  song  was  told  in  Chapter  VIII. 

Voice     Slow  Fust 


hb 


tt 


S3 


f=fc=t 


Ke  -  zho  -  yah     'shquan-daym      ke  -  zho  -  yah     'shquan-daym      ke  -  zho 
Drum  ^,  ^m  _ta  _w  _,_  r-         w 


yah 'shquandaym  baybogin  'shquandaym.  Kezho  -    yah     squandaym      ke-zho 


fcfc 


Fast 


feE|E3EE3E£fi=E 


-N-*3- 


yah  'shquan-daym,  bay  -  bo    -     gin  'shquandaym  ke-zlio  -  yah  'shquandaym. 


.  > 


J    *  *—*-&—*-*—*- 


>35=m 


ff 


Translation:  My  door  is  warm  in  winter  time. 


222 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


Forest  Song.  See  Chapter  VIII  for  story  and  revised 
words.  The  tune  is  varied  slightly  by  some  singers,  the 
variants  being  indicated  here  by  small  notes,  the  large  notes 
indicating  the  version  reproduced  by  the  phonograph. 


Slow 


■y 


t£3=e*=£ 


I 


m=± 


— i- 

Me   -    ne       nab     -      gay     nah     -     gay. 


V 


ne  -  nah      kee     -     wash  ■ 


:E 


•S£ 


quay  -  be. 


L  » 
ah  -  be  -  ding     me  -  ne     quay  -  on 


*= 


nah  suh     nah   gah 


Y&f~r 

— r — r — i — j— 

—f-  p  •  r — r — s — r — ^t  ~d— h 

Xwr- — 1— 

-L — | f — J-*- 

J  1 1     n  f    f   v    ^-\-'  w 

nah  -  way      ne      me    shin        o      zah        me     be  -  yod      go      shu        neen. 

Translation:  I  don't  suppose  I'll  get  drunk  if  I  take  one 
drink;  if  I  should  get  drunk,  take  care  of  me. 


Old  Shoes.     Originally  a  gambling  song  but  often  sung 
now  without  reference  to  its  application.     See  Chapter  VIII. 

Rather  fast 


1    Q    ,    -,  -     |S       N * N     r   •     , 

1 w ; 1 

r=(— 

| 

{Ai-i-*—*— j— j— £-— *- 

$— 

g_-g  c_j— g-j;  g- 

# 

hr)  i  -i                                    '        / 

| 

d 

ISIuj  -  je   muk  -  e  -  sin     aw  -  yaw  -  yon   muj  -  je  muk  -  e  -  sin     aw  -  yaw  -  yon 


=t 


5£ 


^3 


.~> 


f" 


muj  -  je   muk  -  e  -  sin       aw  -  yaw  -  yon  muj  -  je  muk  -  e  -  sin      aw  -  yaw  -  yon. 


Translation:  I  use  bad  shoes. 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


223 


Gambling  Sung.  A  sequel  to  the  foregoing,  sung  only  in 
the  course  of  the  moccasin  game  with  direct  application  to  a 
turn  in  the  play.     See  Chapter1  VIII. 


m 


Rather  fast 


m 


\- 


V 


«■ 


Gay  -   get     wall- bah -dod  ne      ge     mah-guk     ge       gay  -  get  wah-bah-dod    ne 


m 


i 


3E=fc 


IE 


ge       man  -  guk      ge       gay  -  get      wall  -  ball  -  dod     ne       ge      mah  -  guk      ge. 

Translation:  Indeed,  I  know  where  it  is. 


In  the  Sugar  Camp.  The  Ojihways  knew  the  delicious 
merits  of  maple  syrup  and  sugar  long  before  the  paleface 
came  to  them.  Alexander  Henry  tells  of  one  April  during 
his  captivity  when  he  and  the  Indians  with  him  had  nothing 
but  maple  sugar  to  eat  during  the  entire  month.  At  this  day 
even  the  civilized  Ojibways  lay  in  a  stock  of  birch  bark  every 
June  to  be  fashioned  into  pans  for  catching  sap  at  the  end 
of  the  following  winter.  It  is  a  season  to  which  they  seem  to 
look  forward  with  great  joy.  At  the  right  time  whole  villages 
move  into  the  forest  and  pitch  camp  among  the  maples.  There 
follow  days  of  toil,  men,  women  and  children  sharing  in  the 
work.  At  length  all  the  sap  is  taken,  much  of  it  already  has 
been  converted  into  sugar,  and  time  begins  to  hang  heavy  on 
idle  hands.  As  evening  comes  on  and  all  are  resting,  the 
young  men  take  empty  pans,  and,  headed  by  a  drummer,  dance 
grotesquely  from  one  family  shelter  to  another,  singing  this 


224 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


song.  They  hold  out  their  pans  for  contributions  of  syrup 
or  sugar,  and  though  their  words  are  not  explicit  their  actions 
say  "give,  or  we  will  take  by  force."  Usually  the  contribu- 
tions are  forthcoming  good  humoredly,  but  when  they  are  not, 
the  young  men  invade  the  shelters  of  the  niggardly,  drive 
out  or  overpower  the  occupants,  and  take  as  much  sugar  as 
they  think  will  teach  the  owners  to  behave  more  hospitably 
in  the  future. 


Fast 

V    r      m       m              <? 

«i      -0—, S — fs , — _- 

— I PN 1 

'■far°A—V — ^ — y    9     1 

-^ "— — J      d   ■ & 

H u * *— - ^ 

J          J   .        fc^ if*- 

U K 0 d — 

'       -w'              f     d    .      ? J 

Ne  -  bayd  -  e  -  nah  -  geen...        ne-bayd-  e- nah  -  geen...         ne-bayd-e-   nah 


fr=N" 


1=^ 


3= 


^3 


-S>— *- 


E£ 


^=J= 


geen...      ne  -  bayd-e-nah  -   geen...      kah-gah-ge-wah  -  we tah -we-se -ne  - 


a: 


^ 


/ 


wug ne-  bayd  -  e  -  nah  -  geen ne  -  bayd  -  e  -  nah   -      geen., 

Translation :  We  look  as  if  we  could  eat. 


A  Drinking  Ductte.  This  was  sung  by  a  man  and  a  woman, 
but  the  result  on  the  phonographic  record  is  far  from  what  was 
designed.  It  is  a  song  with  action,  a  dialogue  with  music. 
The  mechanical  arrangements  destroyed  all  freedom  on  the 
part  of  the  performers  and  embarrassed  them  so  sadly  that 
even  the  musical  phrases  are  undoubtedly  distorted.  It  is  un- 
likely that  anything  of  melodic  value  was  lost,  but  I  should 
need  to  hear  the  duette  several  times  to  make  sure  of  repre- 


SONGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES 


225 


senting  correctly  a  form  of  entertainment  out  of  which  the 
Indians  get  much  pleasure.  In  the  dialogue,  fragments  of 
which  are  spoken  but  most  of  which  is  sung,  it  appears  that 
two  lovers  have  been  drinking  and  that  the  supply  is  exhausted. 
They  lament  this  state  of  things,  and  the  man  interrupts  his 
singing  abruptly  to  exclaim,  "I  wish  I  had  just  one  drink!" 
The  response  is  to  the  effect  that  one  drink  would  not  be 
enough  for  two,  and  after  further  lamentations  over  their  en- 
forced sobriety  they  conclude:  "It  would  do  if  we  had  one 
drink  between  us."  The  following  melody  is  what  the  phono- 
graph reproduces  of  the  attempt  to  give  me  the  duette: 

Moderate 


Realizing  that  the  effort  was  a  failure  from  their  point  of 
view,  the  man  then  sang  the  following,  repeating  most  of  the 
words  that  had  occurred  in  the  dialogue: 


y 


Spokenrwords 


4  I — *~T 


ES 


I 


226 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


Xo.  20  (b) :  This  melody  is  often  sung  in  the  most  spirited 
manner  to  meaningless  syllables  throughout.  It  has  drum 
accompaniment  of  a  regular  character,  the  beats  falling  on  the 
eighth  notes.  As  a  rule  the  song  is  used  for  an  old  time  dance. 
I  am  not  clear  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  few  words  that  some-' 
times  appear  in  the  first  two  measures. 

Rather  fast 


-v — * — F 


'•>    } 


?- 


=t3= 
4- 


r=i=r 


:- 


zt 


Ne  -  mosh-ke-nug     we  -  we  -  se        se  -  ne  -   wug     hey  -  ah    hey  -  ah    hey  -  all 


m 


-f-f-t 


■-F-P-. 


^ 


=t 


-*— N 


»    V   v- 


-S-r 


-*—& 


-73-*-. 


hey-ah  hey-ah       hey  -  ah     hey  -  ah       hey-  ah  hey-  ah  hey-ah  hey  hey-ah   hey. 


Carousal.  Another  song  of  the  empty  drinking  cup.  The 
usual  explanation  given  to  justify  the  odd  words  is  that  a 
party  of  young  men  undertook  to  have  a  drinking  bout,  but 
neglected  to  provide  enough  liquor  to  bring  on  a  satisfactory 
condition  of  inebriety.  Hence,  the  flask  being  empty,  there 
was  nothing  for  it  but  to  go  to  sleep. 

Fast 


^m 


5=4=5: 


=fc=tt 


■5 


XT 


Kah  nin-dah-ne-  bah        se-neen  kah   nin-dah-ne-  bah      se-neen     ke    tah-  go-go  - 


-(=*- 


J 


3 


-JT-* 


^^ 


bah      se-neen. 


bah     gaun-  je     nan-ka  ma  inin    ne  -  quay  aung  kah  nin-dah-ne  • 

Translation:     I  wouldn't  go  to  sleep  if  there  was  anything 
left  to  keep  me  awake. 


SONGS  AM)  THEIR  STORIES 


227 


Visiting  Song.     This  was  discussed  in  Chapter  V. 


I*   = 


^S 


^=g*  f  -fl^£_r  ,  p 


fc£ 


=t=t 


Hey  -  ah        hey     -     ah  hey  -  ah      hey       hey -ah        hey     ah  hey 


^ v \ — |_=q= 


Efe£ 


>-  *  •— — » — • — -•■ 


m 


v« l«- 


L. 


ah         hey    -    ah      hey  -  ah    hey-  ah       ah!      hey  -  ah    hey     hey-ah    hey  -  ah 


^M 


', 


-0 0 •  - 


=i= 


— • *~ 

hey  -ah      hey      hey  -    ah       hey  -  ah    hey  -  ah        hey-ah      hey-ah     hah. 


m 


-*^— •- 


m 


fe£ 


V       i    ■        I       ^ 


t 


et 


O  -  git   -    ko nem  -  ah-dah-bit. 


nin-gah-nom-  dog hey 


^=4  — v      r\     -\ 1 


0=^ 


/ 


ah         hey        ah      hey  -  ah      hey  -  ah       ah       hey  -  ah     hey     hey-ah  hey  -  ah 


i 


!S       IS 


—0 =^—  —0—      —0 0 m -j- 

hey  -  ah      hey     hey  -  ah      hey  -  ah    hey  -  ah     hey  -  ah    hey  -  ah     hey  -  ah. 

Translation:  Who  sits  on  the  ice  can  hear  me  singing. 


228 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


The  Naked  Bear.     It  is  this  song  from  which  Longfellow 
(through  Schoolcraft)    derived  the  line  in  "Hiawatha," 

"Hush!  the  Naked  Bear  will  get  thee." 
It  is  explained  in  the  glossary  that  is  appended  to  most  editions 
of  the  poem,  that  the  Naked  Bear  is  a  mythical  creature  in- 
vented by  Indian  mothers  to  frighten  their  children  into  good 
behavior.  The  full  text  of  the  song  shows  that  the  screech  owl 
was  used  in  the  same  way.     See  Chapter  VI. 

Rather  slow 


Egl 


i^W 


J=f=^ 


. 


Bz^: 


Kay-  goo-  mo  -  we  -  kayn    a  -  bi  -  no    -    gees    wahbskkee    muk  -  wah   kee- 


^ 


W 


bi  -  dah-  quo  -  mig        kah     kah  -  be-shees    kos      kos  -  kay  -  be  -  quay  -  ne  -  gen. 

Translation:     Hush,  little  baby,  go  to  sleep;  do  not  cry,  or 
the  naked  bear  will  eat  vou. 


Sleepy  Time.  A  cradle  song  made  up  almost  wholly  of 
meaningless  syllables,  "ayah,  ayah"  and  so  forth.  In  this 
respect  it  resembles  many  a  lullaby  that  may  be  heard  in  civ- 
ilized nurseries,  and  I  may  confess  that  melodically  it  appeals 
to  me  more  strongly  than  any  lullaby  of  paleface  creation 
that  it  has  been  my  fortune  to  hear.  For  the  sake  of  making 
the  little  song  of  possible  use  to  my  own  people  I  have  ventured 
beyond  the  suggestion  of  the  few  Ojibway  words,  and,  taking 
my  cue  from  the  Naked  Bear  and  the  screech  owl,  have  in- 
vented a  spider  to  figure  in  the  harmonized  version. 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


229 


Slow 


m 


=t 


i 


•^*  • — »-, 


~£ 


i- 


^^m 


m 


Kay -goo-  mo  -  we  -  kayn        ney  -  je  -  jahn  -  says        ah    -     niii  -   e  -   bah    ay 


gfeli 


f—0-^-\ 


-#-»-#- 


-;»-»- 


* 


-a — r>r^ 


-v— *- 


-r 


ah  ne  -  ne  -  jah  -  ne  -  zcss  ay  -  ah  ahl   Ay  -  ah  ay  -  ah ay  -  ah 


m 


:>-, 


-I   ; 


•      • 


■v — fr- 


• 


»-■   # 


i=^: 


1 


ay  -  ah    ay  -  ah         ah  -  nin  -  e    -     bah    ne  -  ne  -  jah-ne  -  zess   ay  -  ah      ah! 

Translation:  Don't  cry,  little  one;  go  to  sleep,  baby. 


Firefly.  Tbis  is  a  song  I  hunted  for  in  vain.  Schoolcraft 
heard  it  about  eighty  years  before  my  visits  to  Ojibway  land. 
He  set  down  the  words  and  declared  that  they  were  the  "wild 
improvisations  of  children  in  a  merry  mood."  Schoolcraft 
further  wrote  that  "in  the  hot  summer  evenings,  the  children 
of  the  Chippewa  Algonquins  (Ojibway)  along  the  shores  of 
the  upper  lakes  frequently  assemble  before  their  parents'  lodges 
and  amuse  themselves  by  little  chants  of  various  kinds,  with 
shouts  and  dancing."  That  is,  the  children  began  early  to 
entertain  themselves  after  the  manner  of  their  elders,  and  there 
were  songs  for  children  as  well  as  grown-ups.  The  historian 
was  undoubtedly  mistaken  in  assuming  that  the  words  of  the 
Firefly  song  were  wild  improvisations  of  children.  Had  he 
been  musician  as  well  as  historian,  the  tune  would  have  told 
him  that  the  words  had  been  carefully  arranged  by  somebody 
who  had  rudimentary  poetic  talent.     But  no  matter.     Long- 


230 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


fellow  turned  the  words  to  excellent  advantage  in  "Hiawatha," 
and  I  was  very  desirous  of  coming  upon  the  tune  which  I 
sought  for  in  the  precise  neighborhood  where  Schoolcraft  heard 
it.  I  was  not  successful.  Nobody  thereabout  remembered 
the  song,  but  a  missionary  among  the  Ojibways  of  Minnesota 
heard  it  and  reduced  it  to  notes  which  he  sent  to  Dr.  Baker 
while  the  latter  was  preparing  his  essay.  Dr.  Baker  included 
it  in  his  publication,  and,  with  his  permission,  I  include  it 
here,  also,  for  I  think  any  collection  of  Ojibway  songs  would 
be  incomplete  without  it. 


:;- 


. 


SE^E 


Wah  -  wall  -  tay    -   see        wah  -  wall  -  tay   -  see 


Bg=JEE£_-J U~^~l  I         »8    1       l   '  i — rt       U   '  I       '  £ 


shin 


tsi       bwo      ne  -  bau-ne    .  we 


gaun      be      e -  gaun       e 


iNp 


*^m 


.  > 


^ 


* — ■—* — ■ — 

wah-  wah  -  tay  -  see      wah-  wah  -  tay  -  see      was      sa  -  koon        ain  -  je  -  gun. 


Translation:  Flitting  white-fire-insect,  give  me  light  before 
I  go  to  bed.  Light  me  when  I  go  to  sleep  with  your  bright 
candle. 


Confession.  This  endless  song  is  immensely  popular  with 
the  Ojibways.  I  have  heard  children  sing  it  by  the  hour,  but 
its  main  use  is  in  social  gatherings  when  some  singer,  usually 
a  woman,  sings  it  with  a  different  proper  name  in  each  repeti- 


SONGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES 


231 


tion,  and  with  gestures  to  give  unmistakable  point  to  the 
words.  The  words  here  given  are  for  a  man  to  sing.  Ken- 
namahshaynon  Quakahbahnokwes  means,  "You're  my  sweet- 
heart, Quakahbahnokwes,"  the  latter  word  being  a  girl's  name. 
A  woman,  singing  it,  would  use  a  man's  name,  and  Ojibway 
women  arouse  much  laughter  by  pointing  to  one  man  after 
another  and  calling  his  real  name,  or  identifying  him  by  some 
phrase  the  application  of  which  is  understood  by  all  listeners. 
During  a  series  of  entertainments  I  gave  with  Indians  in 
eastern  cities  I  had  a  young  woman  sing  the  song  and  made 
a  point  by  following  it  with  a  translation,  accompanying  it  with 
gestures  like  her  own.  For  the  purposes  of  the  entertainment 
my  translation  ran,  "My  sweetheart  sits  just  over  yonder." 
On  one  occasion  the  young  woman  staggered  me  and  convulsed 
the  Ojibways  on  the  platform  behind  her  by  concluding  the 
song  with  a  gesture  toward  a  man  in  the  front  row  and  singing 
the  equivalent  of  "My  sweetheart  is  that  bald-headed  man!" 


Fast 


3 


S 


Ke 


nub    -   mah  -  shay        non       Quak    -    ah   -    bah    -    no 


ques 


f: 


£ 


3= 


^ 


ken 


nah 


mah  -  shay    -    non       Quah    -    ah    -    bah 


ques. 


The  Forest  Choir.  It  is  with  deep  regret  that  I  find  myself 
unable  to  set  the  Ojibway  words  of  this  song  under  their  cor- 
responding notes.     One  of  the  oldest  Indians  of  my  acquaint- 


232 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


ance  sang  it.  His  name  is  Sagachewiose,  but  he  is  generally 
known  by  the  easier,  less  impressive  name  of  Clark.  For  a 
long  time  he  was  averse  to  singing  for  me,  but  at  length, 
persuaded  by  his  wife,  who  has  been  the  Nokomis  of  the  Indian 
play  from  the  beginning,  he  sat  down  before  the  phonograph 
and  in  a  businesslike  way  delivered  sixteen  songs  to  its  cylin- 
ders. Of  course  there  was  no  stopping  him  till  he  had  done, 
and  at  the  end  I  could  get  no  assistance  from  him  in  the  trans- 
lations, for  it  is  with  difficulty  that  he  sustains  the  simplest 
conversation  in  English.  Some  of  the  Ojibway  words  are  per- 
fectly distinct,  others  are  hopelessly  blurred,  but  Shingwauk, 
who  remembers  the  song  from  his  boyhood,  tells  me  that  it  is 
an  address  partly  to  the  singer's  human  friends,  and  partly  to 
the  birds  of  the  forest.  According  to  Shingwauk,  "Listen 
friends,"  the  singer  says,  "our  neighbors,  the  birds,  are  sing- 
ing. Pleasant  are  the  sounds.  Let  us  sing  with  them." 
Then,  speaking  to  the  birds,  "Listen  friends;  you  will  enjoy 
the  sounds  we  make." 


4 


> 


Shu 


^ 


y^j=? 


;/ 


' 


i=*= 


4==F 


*  *   \-\ 


±=$=± 


-•--& 


«    c 


± 


-^-b 


p=^ 


=p — * 


-*     0     » 


-Z5H 


:g£ 


^m 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES  233 

No.  26  (a).  The  words  mean:  "What  are  you  looking 
around  here  for?  I  never  had  a  call  from  you  before.  I  be- 
lieve you  are  coming  to  court  one  of  my  daughters." 


g 


\y-, — i — j 0-0-0-0-0 o— „ •-•-*-* — 0  j    i     u 


No.  17  (a).  To  the  eye  this  song  seems  to  be  barren  of 
melody,  and,  reproduced  upon  the  pianoforte,  it  is  undeniably 
dry  and  monotonous;  but,  as  sung  by  Tetebahbundung,  it  is 
decidedly  impressive.  The  man's  rich  voice  sounds  to  better 
advantage  in  this  song  than  in  any  other.  All  whites  who 
hear  him  sing  it  are  charmed,  and  they  usually  ask  for  a  repeti- 
tion. The  charm  is  undoubtedly  due  to  the  quality  of  Tete- 
bahbundung's  voice  and  the  appearance  of  deep  feeling  that 
he  manifests  in  all  his  vocal  work.  It  is  the  feeling  of  the 
artist,  merely;  the  natural  emotion  of  one  who  loves  music 
and  exults  in  the  beauty  of  his  own  tones.  I  am  hazarding  no 
sentimental  guess  here,  for  the  song  is  calculated  to  arouse 
only  laughter  or  disgust  on  the  part  of  those  who  understand 
it,  according  to  their  respective  conceptions  of  humor.  It  is 
a  ballad,  and  the  story  it  tells  is  vulgar  to  the  last  degree. 
There  is  especial  interest  to  the  musician  in  its  ending  brilliantly 
on  a  long  sustained  high  note,  contrary  to  the  Indian  custom 
of  ending  in  the  depths. 


234  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

Slow  o 


(Z «- 


-*-=--* 


¥z 


«_-__#_=_«_ 


m 


-*-*- 


p^t- 


-&  & 


?  # 


m 


•  •  *  *: 


-v  •• — *    .  » 


-*— f= P— *- 


^ 


Tir^-fs- 


toJ L-— mbmJ— 


=t=t 


2Vo.  2P  f^j.     A  drinking  song.     The  words  mean:  "I  don't 
think  I  ought  to  be  drunk;  I  didn't  drink  enough;  I  had  only 


one  glass." 


Rather  fast 


^m 


3=t  " 


-£* 


•    » 


S 


^■^ 


SONGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES  235 


SACRED    SONGS. 

Civilized  man  divides  his  songs  into  two  great  categories 
which  are  readilv  distinguishable:  sacred  and  secular.  In  <?en- 
eral,  the  sacred  song  has  to  do  with  the  church.  The  line 
cannot  be  drawn  in  exactly  the  same  way  when  Indian  songs 
are  under  discussion.  Any  that  had  to  do  with  religious  cer- 
emonies should  undoubtedly  be  classed  as  sacred;  but  we  have 
seen  that,  from  the  Indian's  point  of  view,  certain  other  songs 
were  equally  sacred.  In  this  group,  therefore,  I  include  not 
only  ceremonial  songs  and  prayers,  but  such  hunting  songs  as 
appear  to  have  been  used  as  prayers  in  the  old  days.  There 
are  other  songs  of  animals  that  may  have  been  regarded  as 
sacred,  and  which  even  to-day  serve  for  general  dances,  but 
as  their  character  is  obviously  open  to  doubt,  they  will  be  found 
classified  by  themselves. 


236 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


A  Song  of  Faith.  This  song  and  the  one  that  follows  were 
sung  by  the  good  pagan,  Inniquahung,  of  whom  some  account 
was  given  in  Chapter  VI. 


w 


Moderate 


ftrr-r-^ 


-4=t 


zfz^c 


Hey  -  ah     hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah       hey        hey  -    ah       ha. 


hey  -  ah  ha 


r_N  j 

0  0 0- 


hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah      ha        hey  -  ah     hey   -    ah 


[ffe^gj5te^E^E|= 


ha        Un  -  je  -   du 
A 


f*   r>   e 


•   *   * 


ma  -  ni  -  to  nin-ga  -  nom  -  dog      hey  -  ah     ha  ?        hey  -  ah   hey  -  ah 


*=t 


01       0- 


*       >       * 


=t=t 


hey  -  ah     ha 


hey 


hey  -  ah     ha       hey  -  ah     hey  -  ah 


m 


-*—?  n  —&- 


; 


hey    -    ah    hey  -  ah      ha        hey  -  ah     hey  -   ah     hey  -  ah       ha      hey  -  ah 


Frt^= 

=i= 

-N — P^ 
i  - 

-! — r^  -^—   ^ 

5  ^ 

H^=\ 

*#— 

— *- — i— 

±=ee^zI $=*£z 

-  /  Js  0 

r ,  1 

hey  -  ah      ha     hey   -   ha,    Un  -  je  -  du. 
St. ^_B___^ 


ma  -  ni  -  to        nin-ga-nom-dog 


■-- 


W^ 


S N- 


h-i—fr 


-A IV 


^^ 


-0 0- 


hey  -   ah    ha  ?         hey    -    ah     hey  -  ah    hey  -  ah     ha        hey  -  ah   ha. 

A — Syllables  and  notes  are  doubtful  here,  and  at  the  corresponding  place — B 

Translation:  Surely  the  spirit  will  hear  my  prayer.     Liter- 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES  237 

ally,  will  hear  me  singing;  but  the  deep  significance  of  the 
verb  nogom,  to  which  attention  was  called  in  a  previous  chapter, 
justifies  the  translation,  prayer  and  song  being  inseparable; 
and,  moreover,  every  Ojibway  to  whom  these  words  have  been 
referred  for  interpretation  has  indicated  in  one  way  or  another 
that  prayer  is  implied. 


The  Omen.  Ojibways  tell  of  a  bird  larger  than  the  largest 
eagle  that  used  to  be  seen  in  their  country.  It  is  possible  that 
they  have  reference  to  some  creature  now  extinct,  but  whatever 
it  was,  its  appearance  under  certain  conditions  was  regarded 
as  an  omen.  For  convenience  the  name  of  the  bird  may  be 
translated  "giant  eagles."  With  that  allowance,  the  song, 
literally  translated,  means,  "While  I  was  crying,  the  giant 
eagles  lit  on  the  sky."  Exactly  what  this  implies  only  an 
Indian  could  say,  and  I  have  found  none  who  will  hazard 
more  than  a  frank  guess.  "Lit  on  the  sky"  probably  is  an 
expression  for  the  poising  of  a  bird  in  mid  air,  apparently 
motionless.  One  Indian  guess  as  to  the  significance  of  the 
song  has  it  that  the  author  was  in  trouble,  either  personal  or 
tribal,  for  he  may  have  been  a  chief  in  doubt  whether  he  should 
lead  his  people  to  war;  that,  in  his  grief,  he  sought  for  an 
omen  to  guide  him  and  found  it  in  the  appearance  of  the  great 
birds.  In  such  case  he  woidd  likely  sing  the  song  to  his  people 
as  a  prelude  to  announcing  what  he  drew  from  the  omen. 
Another  Indian  has  told  me  that  in  the  old  days  this  song  was 
sung  on  the  eve  of  battle,  the  inference  being  that  the  appear- 
ance of  the  birds  was  a  sign  of  victory. 


238 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


Slow 


BrLi 


£ 


S^ 


Mayg  -  wah   mah  -  we     -     od 


ki    -   ne  -  wug     pe  -   boo    -    ne 


~y~pg 


=?£=*= 


-£=-*- 


■# *- 


fr— tr 


*=t 


* 


t=t=tc 


wug     ke  -  zhe-gung        mayg- wah    mah-  we  -  od         ki  -  ne-  wug    pe  -  boo  -  ne  - 


s& 


£ 


t 


t= 


wug     ke  -  zhe-gung,       mayg-wah  mah- we  -  od         ki  -  ne  -  wug  pe  -  boo  -  ne 


:fc=* 


m 


i 


-A Pv- 


-A fV 


'        J        J= 


33 


^ 


o> 


-• 0 • 


A V 


wug      ke- zhe-gung  ki  -  ne-wug    pe  -  boo  -  ne    -    wug    ke  -  zhe-gung. 


A  Song  of  Trust.  No  comment  is  required  upon  the  words 
of  this  song  which,  translated  literally,  give  an  unmistakable 
expression  of  the  singer's  faith;  but  attention  may  be  called 
to  the  fact  that  the  significant  words  are  interrupted  by.  mean- 
ingless syllables.  My  inference  is  that,  crude  though  the  mel- 
ody is,  the  Indian  had  a  definite  conception  of  its  form  to  which 
his  significant  words  could  not  be  adjusted;  therefore,  after 
the  word  manito,  spirit,  he  injects'  ayah  hey  to  fill  out  the 
musical  phrase  and  then  proceeds  with  the  statement  of  his 
creed. 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


239 


i 


Slow 


<  V 


W 


Hey  -  ah       hey  -   ah     hey -ah....      hey  -  ah      hey  -  ah      hey  -  ah      ha         ha 


^ 


-  : 


; 


a. 


■f—r 


^F 


hey  -  ah    hey  -  ah     ah     hey  -  ah      hey  -  ah  hey-  ah   ha   hey   -  ah       hey  -  ah 


J^Sp^l 


3^=3—r^-^m 


hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah   hev  -  ah  ha   hev  -  ah   hev  -  ah   ha. 


IK  I 


* — p — p 


< 


^ 


Kez-he-gung    bay- mo  -  sed        ma  -  ni  -   to      a  -  yah  hey  ke  -  no  -  ah     bah 


-A N- 


=r— f    j  j- 


-* — i- 


i< 


::< 


me-nung    hey  -  ah     hey     hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah   hey  -  ah     hey     hey-  ah  hey     hey 


— v — v — i —  — r- 

hey  -  ah     hey     hey -ah   hey  -  ah     hey- ah    hey-ah     hey    hey -ah  hey- ah    hey. 

Translation:  The  spirit  walking  in  the  sky  takes  care  of  us. 


The  Morning  Star.  Among  the  ceremonies  of  the  ancient 
Ojihways  was  one  that  took  place  at  daybreak  and  is  often 
referred  to  as  the  "Morning  Star."  I  have  not  come  upon 
anybody  who  could  describe  the  ceremony,  but  Mrs.  Sagach- 
ewiose,  who  is  remarkably  well  versed  in  Indian  lore,  and  an 
adept  in  everything  pertaining  to  the  ancient  mode  of  life,  as- 
sures me  that  this  song  was  an  important  feature  of  the  cere- 


240 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


mony,  and  that  the  words  here  given  were  the  ones  used  in  it. 
The  civilized  Ojibways  retain  the  melody  and  sing  all  manner  of 
words  to  it.  The  tune  occurs  several  times  on  my  phono- 
graphic cylinders,  and  no  two  sets  of  words  are  alike. 

Slow  . 


W=] 


E 


-1=2- 


*=5- 


Kezh    -   e  -  guk   -    in        way  -   ash  -   kun   ah      kee 


kezh 


guk- 


J$ 


way     -   ash  -  kun     ah  kee  kezh   -    e  -   guk    -    iu         way  - 


m 


-»—T- 


fc£ 


L 


ash  -  kun     ah     kee  kezh     -     e  -  guk  -  in        way  -  ash  -  kun    ah     kee. 

Translation:  when  it  is  day  the  earth  is  illuminated. 


All  Birds  Follow  Mc.  The  title  is  a  translation  of  the  text 
and  conveys  all  I  know  with  certainty  about  the  song  save 
that  it  is  widely  popular.  Melodically  it  is  interesting  on  ac- 
count of  the  apparent  lack  of  relationship  between  the  main 
part  of  the  song  and  the  ending.  I  have  heard  it  at  least  one 
hundred  times  and  have  wondered  often  what  tonal  instinct 
it  was  that  led  the  singer  unerringly  back  to  the  initial  tone 
after  he  had  come  to  the  end.  Not  only  does  no  singer  ever 
fail  to  hit  the  first  tone  squarely  in  a  repetition,  but  every  singer 
drops  a  count  from  the  fourth  measure,  as  indicated  in  the 
musical  text.  This  appears  to  be  one  of  the  ancient  religious, 
or  mystical  songs,  the  full  significance  of  which  has  been  for- 
gotten. 


SOXGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES 


241 


i 


Rather  fast 


m^^ 


Be 


hey 


go- 


-    *       -4- 

1    Vi  " 

,          p* 

K                  h      I 

1  y  b 

0        -*         0     '*  0 

1 1    \           m 

J         J 

•  r  *  j  i'' 

r>tT       •  . 

u 

-                          *           • 

U1     1/ 

f  / 

ah      hey  -  ah    hey    hey- ah      ha         hey- ah  hey- ah  ha      hey -ah   hey-ah    ha 


1 


V 


5    S 


^3 


hey-ah    hey-ah      ha         hey  -  ah    hey-ah     hey-ah     hey-ah       ha. 


Wabeno  Song  Cycle.  There  are  three  classes  of  mystery 
men  among  the  Ojibways,  of  which  one  is  known  as  the 
Wabeno.  W.  J.  Hoffman,  writing  on  the  "Grand  Medicine 
Society"  of  the  Ojibway,  in  the  seventh  annua]  report  of  the 
Bureau  of  Ethnology,  has  this,  among  other  things,  to  say 
of  the  Wabeno:  "The  term  has  been  explained  by  various 
intelligent  Indians  as  signifying  'Men  of  the  dawn,'  'Eastern 
men,'  etc.  Their  profession  is  not  thoroughly  understood,  and 
their  number  is  so  extremely  limited  that  but  little  informa- 
tion respecting  them  can  be  obtained.  .  .  .  From  personal 
investigation  it  has  been  ascertained  that  a  Wabeno  does  not 
affiliate  with  others  of  his  class  so  as  to  constitute  a  society, 
but  indulges  his  pretensions  individually.  A  Wabeno  is  pi'i- 
marily  prompted  by  dreams  or  visions  which  may  occur  during 
his  youth,  for  which  purpose  he  leaves  his  village  to  fast  for 
an  indefinite  number  of  days.  It  is  positively  affirmed  that 
evil  manitous  favor  his  desires,  and  apart  from  his  general 


242  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

routine  of  furnishing  'hunting  medicine,'  'love  powders,'  etc., 
he  pretends  also  to  practice  medical  magic." 

During  my  last  summer  with  the  Ojihways  I  became  ac- 
quainted with  an  aged  Wabeno  from  whom  I  obtained  this 
cycle  of  songs  and  the  mnemonic  chart  which  is  always  used 
when  they  are  sung.  He  pledged  me  most  solemnly  not  to 
disclose  his  identity,  for  he  was  certain  that  trouble  would 
come  to  him  if  I  should  do  so.  Just  what  the  trouble  might 
be  he  would  not  say,  but  another  well  informed  Indian  with 
whom  I  talked  about  Wabenos  in  general  assured  me,  con- 
trary to  Mr.  Hoffman's  opinion,  that  there  was  a  time  when 
the  Wabenos  were  affiliated  in  a  society  of  some  sort ;  that  their 
incantations  were  profound  secrets;  and  that  betrayal  of  them 
was  punishable  with  death.  I  asked  him  what  would  happen 
if  a  Wabeno  should  give  me  his  hunting  prayers. 

"Well,"  he  replied  gravely,  "there  are  a  few  Wabenos  still 
left  along  Lake  Superior,  and  if  such  a  fact  should  come  to 
their  knowledge  I  think  they  would  find  some  means  of  put- 
ting the  traitor  out  of  the  way." 

There  may  have  been  some  vain  imagining  on  the  part  of 
both  Indians,  possibly  they  sought  to  impress  the  paleface 
inquirer;  but  the  fact  is  sufficiently  established  that  these  are 
peculiarly  "sacred"  songs.  The  man  who  gave  them  to  me 
is  nominally  a  Christian,  but  he  never  sets  out  upon  a  hunt 
without  secretly  saying  these  prayers  to  Nanabozho,  the  mys- 
terious being  about  whom  cluster  all  those  stories  that  Long- 
fellow told  under  the  Iroquois  name,  Hiawatha.  Their 
phraseology  will  not  appeal  to  the  civilized  reader  as  prayerful, 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES  243 

but  it  must  be  taken  into  account  that  the  Ojibway  prayer  com- 
prises more  than  words;  there  is  ceremony  of  some  kind,  usu- 
ally, as  in  this  instance,  a  dance.  Altogether  it  is  a  religious 
service  which,  taken  as  a  whole,  constitutes  a  petition,  and  the 
songs  with  their  few  words  are  but  imperfect  details. 

The  Wabeno,  with  evident  reluctance — it  had  taken  him 
weeks  to  consent — gave  me  a  copy  of  his  "prayer  board."  The 
original  was  probably  drawn  upon  birch  bark,  but  this  was 
scrawled  in  pencil  and  subsequently  burned  with  a  hot  iron  on 
two  thin  cedar  slabs.  The  grotesque  figures  on  the  prayer 
board  do  not  constitute  any  sort  of  musical  notation.  Xo  de- 
vice for  preserving  their  tunes  was  known  to  the  Ojibways, 
charts  of  this  kind  serving  simply  to  remind  the  singer  of  the 
words.  Xo  Indian  could  interpret  this  board  unless  he  were 
himself  a  Wabeno,  and  the  one  I  dealt  with  had  great  difficulty 
in  making  the  matter  clear  to  me.  The  central  figure  in  each 
picture  is  Xanabozho.  Observe  that  he  is  of  gigantic  stature 
as  compared  with  animals  and  human  beings.  Tradition  says 
that  early  in  the  days  of  the  human  race  he  called  all  the 
animals  and  birds  together  and  informed  them  that  thenceforth 
they  must  be  subject  to  men.  I  have  not  been  informed  as  to 
what  Xanabozho  told  his  creatures  in  detail,  but  it  is  fair  to 
presume  that  he  did  not  base  his  edict  on  hostilitv;  for  with 
all  the  Indian's  reputed  savagery,  there  is  deeply  ingrained 
in  him  a  sentimental  regard  for  animals  that  is  manifested  at 
times  oddly,  and  at  times  with  wisdom  that  shames  the  enlight- 
ened paleface.  From  the  Indian's  simple  point  of  view  the 
animal  has  the  same  right  to  life  that  man  has.     It  is  necessary 


244 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES  245 

to  use  the  animal  for  the  subsistence  of  man,  but  the  animal 
is  sacrificed  regretfully  for  this  purpose.  Henry  tells  how 
the  Ojibwavs  of  his  day  offered  a  prayer  of  apology  to  the 
bear  before  going  upon  the  hunt  for  him.  They  had  cere- 
monies to  propitiate  the  spirit  of  certain  animals  slain  by  them. 
The  Ojibway  of  that  time  and  the  present  does  not  hunt  for 
the  mere  pleasure  of  killing.  That  he  will  pursue  his  game 
relentlessly,  resort  to  any  device  to  lure  it  to  ambush,  track  a 
frightened  deer  for  days  over  the  treacherous  crust  and  at  last 
knock  the  exhausted  animal  on  the  head  without  a  qualm  of 
squeamishness,  is  true;  and  it  is  doubtless  equally  true  that 
he  exults  in  overcoming  the  forest  beasts,  big  and  little,  that  the 
death  throbs  of  his  prey  awake  a  responsive  thrill  of  joy  in 
his  breast;  but  the  Ojibway  does  not  kill  more  than  he  needs. 
When  he  has  all  that  he  can  carry  home,  the  slaughter  ceases. 
It  was  not  the  Indian,  and  it  never  would  have  been  the  Indian, 
who  destroyed  the  buffalo.  It  is  not  the  Indian  to-day  who 
threatens  to  exterminate  all  the  beautiful  wild  life  of  the  Cana- 
dian forests. 

But,  to  return  to  the  prayer  board,  Xanabozho  summons  the 
animals  and  birds  by  beating  a  drum  of  the  kettle  type.  An 
indulgent  imagination  will  enable  the  reader  to  identify  many 
of  the  beasts  and  birds  pictured  in  the  upper  half  of  the 
board.  It  will  be  seen,  too,  that  Xanabozho  faces  the  rising 
sun.  In  the  lower  board  are  represented  Xanabozho's  favor- 
ites, the  Wabenos,  to  whom  he  has  given  especial  power  over 
animal  life.  They  are  dancing  while  Xanabozho  leads  with  a 
drum  of  the  usual  type,  the  dance  and  song  being  a  grate- 


246  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

ful  acknowledgment  of  Xanabozho's  benevolence.  As  I  un- 
derstand it,  this  part  of  the  prayer  board  has  direct  reference  to 
the  fifth  song  in  the  cycle. 

Melodically  these  songs  are  of  the  slightest  value.  Owing 
to  the  drum  strokes  by  which  they  were  accompanied  they  are 
rhythmically  distorted,  and  bar  lines  cannot  be  drawn  with 
certainty.  Neither  the  vocal  nor  drum  scheme  of  accents  was 
maintained  rigidly  in  any  of  the  songs.  A  most  interesting 
feature  of  the  performance  was  the  fact  that  no  drum  was  used. 
The  Wabeno  had  instead  a  pair  of  "prayer  sticks,"  pieces  of 
cedar  about  eighteen  inches  long,  slightly  tapering,  whittled 
smooth  and  charred  by  fire  until  they  were  black.  With  these 
in  his  hand  he  sat  before  the  phonograph  and  rapped  them 
together  while  he  sang.  Some  idea  of  their  rhythmic  relation, 
or  lack  of  it,  to  the  song  is  indicated  in  the  music  text.  At 
first  he  sang  from  memory,  but  he  missed  his  words  at  the 
beginning  of  the  third  song  and  had  to  refer  to  the  prayer 
board.  I  was  unable  to  see  how  he  contrived  to  correct  him- 
self from  a  consultation  of  the  chart,  but  he  did  so  and  then 
went  on  steadily  to  the  end. 

The  first  song  is  merely  a  summons:  Wabeno  ondass,  "Come, 
Wabenos." 


SOXGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES 


247 


Voice 


£T 


•     0 


-P — 0- 


tO 


Dkum 


^- — —a— J H"^ » ^ 


<< 


^ — "™p 


-( 1 1 I- 


-I — I — I — - 


3=^^=5 


tt=t 


w- 


#    * 


4    4     4     4     01 — * — V — #- 


4    4    m   4 


ES 


H    I     g- 


*-»- 


I 


( 


A.     From  this  point  time  values  are  approximate.      The  stick-beats  continue  without  appreciable 
accent  to  the  end. 

In  the  second  the  summons  is  made  more  definite:  Wabeno 
ondass  gay  go  keeweewindumon,  "Come,  Wabenos.  I  have 
something  to  teach  you." 


r 


^=2= 


-4-4-1-4- 


-B- 


•-jiiaj— | — ; — lJ *   ^    4   d^   4   *.?-V 


FH=r^ 


The  waved  bar  lines  indicate  the  probably  correct  division  of  the  melody  into  measures.    The  stick- 
beats  cannot  be  counted  at  tirst,  but  there  are  14  in  sectiou  A  and  32  in  B. 


248 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


The  third:  Nimbahbeog  endenukongay  ishkooday,  "I  am 
waiting  for  you  all  by  my  campfire." 

A— 


B 


M"|t 


4=^ 


0 


•  * 


«    • 


'3»    P     P     P  '  P  P  P  P 


> 


gf^ 


?  ?  <g- 


t-*- 


^=^^ 


^ 


1 1 !~ 


~cr 


In  section  A  there  are  24  stick- beats.      At  B  the  sticks  coincide  with  the  voice  for  a  moment  and 
then  are  beaten  fast  again. 

The  fourth:  Nendonayego,  "I   am  looking  for  you  all." 
This  song  is  sung  much  faster  than  the  preceding  three. 

Fast  '-J-*  * 


m 


-: 


r 


■-i — ft- 


-p — p~p^ 


v 


*  __.«. 


*  * .  *  » p  &- 


3=b=e 


n 


-p-p-p—m- 


'-^ESTl 


■  ') 


*     '  »-4- 


B- 


1 


-*—*-*-*-r 


9      S  S  *-r 


The  triplets  are  clearly  defined,  but  time  values  are  approximate  throughout,  At  no  point  can  the 
ratio'of  slick-beats  to  voice  be  established  by  counting.  These  remarks  apply  also  to  the  fifth  song  m 
the  cycle. 

The  fifth:  Nendomogwah  mojegisewod  gahinohmojehi.se- 
wug  anishinabeg,  "Indians  rejoice  over  what  they  have 
learned."  This  was  sung  at  an  exceedingly  rapid  tempo  and 
with  an  appearance,  of  considerable  excitement. 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


249 


Very  fast 


\6 


:> 


=p* 


^£ 


- 


^=r=t=t 


> 

-0—0 — 0-. 


* » 


-0      0        CJ 


^ru^-g 


s 


>    > 


I 


HtfcE 


*        > 


?  J  1    1    ! 


[^    r       \j    ~-  0  d    *    * 


-* >" 


Buffalo  Songs.  The  Indian  who  sang  these  for  me  evi- 
dently believed  that  he  was  making  a  great  concession  and 
contributing  something  of  rare  importance.  It  had  taken  him 
a  long  time  to  decide  that  he  would  do  so,  and  at  the  last  mo- 
ment he  threatened  to  back  out  because  a  young  man  happened 
to  pass  the  house.  "I  don't  want  any  of  the  young  fellows 
to  hear  these,  or  know  that  I  sing  them,"  he  growled.  Assured, 
at  length,  that  no  one  was  in  hearing,  he  sang,  but  refused  to 
dictate  the  words.  Other  Indians  to  whom  the  cylinders  have 
been  submitted  say  that  the  songs  are  prayers.  They  claim 
to  understand  the  general  purport  of  the  songs  but  are  not 
certain  of  all  the  words.  According  to  Indian  interpreters, 
the  first  song  means:  "I  hear  the  tread  of  the  buffalo  in  the 
distance;  I  wait  for  him  in  ambush." 


rfTfT^ 


250 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


The  interpreter  explains  that  this  is  a  prayer  that  the  buffalo 
may  not  smell  the  enemy  and  turn  aside.  Second  song:  "I 
have  found  the  tracks;  all  are  going  around  this  way;  we  will 
go  around,  too,  and  head  them  off." 


fr— p^r~p?=^ 


fr 


^rt-rr-H 


s^s^m 


E^Et 


#_  # 


rr-rtrz 


* — 0-0 — »- 


^ESEfegEg 


W=S=«=F 


f=f: 


i — M— t- 


Third  song:  "I've  followed  him  so  far  that  his  tongue  is 
hanging  out ;  he  will  have  to  go  to  the  river  to  drink,  and  there 
I  will  kill  him." 


n 

> 

0  m         > 

> 

> 

> 

> 

1    V  i 

ft.         f   f 

r  r  m 

1        1        1 

f 

1  /T  ►> 

^ 

v    \   T  0    r-1 

0 

»       m       m 

■     0 

YW 

-,  m      1 — 

— - — •=+-£ — 1 — 

—\ — 

i 

— 1 1 1 — 

-P- 

~~ * — J — 0^ 

V 

\ 

— * F 1 

■•"N — ' — 

— i — 

—J 1 \ — 

4— 

PS 


t^r-^^^^Tg^TH 


*       0 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


251 


Beaver  Songs.  Although  this  interesting  cycle  was  sung 
for  me  without  any  jiretension  of  mystery  or  reluctance,  it  is 
probable  that  in  the  old  days  the  songs  were  regarded  as  pray- 
ers. From  our  point  of  view  the  words  have  a  decidedly  sec- 
ular character.  The  Indian  singer  was  much  wrought  up  as 
he  approached  the  climax,  and  he  finished  with  excitement  that 
was  infectious.  As  the  songs  give  a  coherent  and  rather  vivid 
description  of  a  beaver  hunt,  I  will  treat  them  as  a  whole 
rather  than  separately.  In  the  first  the  singer  is  calm  and  sings 
as  slowly  as  if  the  song  were  a  hymn.  He  says:  "My  fire  is 
burning  bright  before  which  I  am  sitting."  That  is,  he  has 
gone  into  the  forest  for  beaver  and  pitched  camp  near  a  dam. 
He  waits  patiently  and  confidently  for  some  sign  of  his  game. 
The  second  song  tells  us  that  he  has  seen  a  beaver,  but  the  ani- 
mal dived  quickly  and  the  hunter  had  a  glimpse  only  of  his 
tail.  He  philosophically  sits  down  again  and  resumes  his  wait- 
ing. In  the  third,  where  the  words  are  so  blurred  that  they  can- 
not be  set  down  under  the  notes,  he  has  seen  the  beaver  again. 
The  speed  of  the  song  increases,  but  "while  I  was  looking  he 
went  down  and  I  lost  him."  The  last,  very  rapid,  is  a  song  of 
triumph.  "I  got  him  by  the  back  of  the  neck  and  I  threw  him 
into  my  canoe." 

1.  Moderate 


6^- 


-hrf    •    *    0    S    ^ 


3=1" 


m 


N'e  -  mo-bey  -  on      ne  -  mo-bey  -  on      ne  -  mo-bey  -  on ne-mo-bey-on  dah 

*     -     -    ■ =v=Snt 

> zi — •   m  4 


^m 


nah-que-nay  nincl  ish-kod  -  en       e  -  nah  -  se     -    mo  -  be-  yod      ne  -  mo-  bey-  on. 


252 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


2.  Faster 


tt 


§g3=* 


y 


Ay  -  ah      yo       ki  -  ne    may    mo    kay  -   ah       may  ay  -   ah      yo     ki  -  ne 


£ 


3-   •„ 


m 


=1—3— 


may     mo    kay  -   ah     may     zheg    -     wo  -  mo  -  kwah  nind     e   -    ge  -  non  -  day 


ko 


niud 


ge  -   non  -   day 


ge  -  non 


day. 


3.   Slill  faster 


■! 


* 


hP3*  *- 


m 


-bff 


3^ 


=F==P 


t±=^ 


» 


Words  uncertain 


&&: 


4.    Very  fast 


=3=* 


-A— #- 


=f=£ 


^=t= 


Ne  -  nah  -  wod 


nah 


o  -  quay-gon  -  o  -  nmg 


ne  -  nah  -  nod       e  -  nah 


-, 


> 


=t= 


V — 


o-  quay  -  go   -no-  ning      che-maun  nin  -  gah  -  pu  -  ge  -  nah        che-maun 


m 


^^ 


£ 


s  - 


nin-gah-pu -ge  -  nah       ue-nah-wod     e  -  nah     o  -  quay-go  -  no-ning    ne  -  nah-wod. 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES  253 

No.  35  (c).  The  melody  is  the  same  as  No.  35  (  a )  which  was 
given  under  the  love  songs  where  it  appeal's  as  a  lament  over  an 
absent  lover.  Here  the  words  concern  the  ill  luck  of  a  hunter 
who  was  on  the  track  of  game  and  missed  it.  "Let  us  be  more 
careful,"  he  says;  "You  can  see  the  tracks  again." 


SONGS   OF   ANIMALS   AND    BIRDS. 

Here  are  included  songs  about  which  there  is  doubt  whether 
they  ever  had  any  religious  significance. 

Caribou  Dance.  Often  sung  on  social  occasions.  The  cari- 
bou dance  is  an  old  time  religious  ceremony,  a  prayer  for  plenty. 
Caribou  antlers  are  used  by  the  leaders  in  the  dance,  the  signifi- 
cance of  which  is  derived  from  the  fact  that  to  the  Ojibway  the 
caribou  is  the  most  useful  of  animals.  From  it  he  obtains  some 
of  his  food,  he  makes  garments  from  the  skin,  and  he  used  to 
turn  the  antlers  into  household  utensils.  An  Ojibway  proverb 
has  it  that  "there  is  nothing  wasted  about  the  caribou."  When 
Christianized  Ojibways  give  the  caribou  dance,  as  they  often  do 
for  the  entertainment  of  themselves  or  white  visitors,  they  us- 
ually dance  to  this  song;  but  the  words  are  so  frankly  humorous 
that  I  infer  that  the  real  dance  song  was  some  other,  perhaps  the 
caribou  song  designated  No.  27  (c),  the  precise  words  of  which 
I  have  been  unable  to  obtain. 

In  winter  the  caribou  finds  food  in  a  gray  moss  that  grows  on 
the  rocks.  It  appears  to  be  abundant  enough,  and  the  animal 
browses  upon  it  through  the  snow,  but  from  the  words  of  this 


2.34 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


song  the  conclusion  is  inevitable  that  the  moss  is  not  over  nu- 
tritious. 

Moderate 


4 


33=£ 


^ 


^^F 


Kah 


ne'   -    tab 


ne    -     no   -    see 


kah 


ne'  -    tab 


m 


*=? 


ne  -    no  -  see      wah  -  be  -  kuh      mab  -  me    zhey    -    ab 


~~ w — 
min. 


Translation:  I  seldom  grow  fat  eating  this  gray  moss.     Fol- 
lowing is  another  version  of  the  same  song : 


Moderate 

r    y "  o      m            am 

1 

N 

ik 

1 

m 

\V\        2         1                    u          u 

f 

n       J 

Mow — L        £     £ 

* 

« 

— • — 

• 

P^ 

£ 

Ka    -    ne  -  net  -   ab 


no    -    see  kah    -    ne  -  net  -  ah 


fin 


I 


XT"        — » — 1——» ' — — • * »        r 

we      ne  -  no   -   see    wahb'     kuh     me       mab  -  me  zhey  -  ah     min     hey       oh! 


Skunk  Song.  The  characteristic  head  dress  of  the  Ojibway 
consists  in  a  skunk  skin  worn  as  a  fillet  with  two  feathers  at- 
tached over  the  forehead  and  pointing  horizontally  in  opposite 
directions.  I  have  often  heard  this  garment  referred  to  as  a 
cap.  The  skunk  is  taken  in  traps  for  the  sake  of  its  fur,  and 
this  jolly  song  has  to  do  with  the  method  of  taking  the  catch 
home.  For  once  the  singer  does  not  piece  out  his  jubilation 
with  heyah  heyah,  but  repeats  his  two  words  till  the  melody  ends 
and  then  begins  again  with  the  utmost  enthusiasm.     Shekog- 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


:oo 


quean  baydahbahnug,  "I  drag  the  skunks  behind  me,"  means 
that  the  trapper  has  found  his  traps  well  rilled  on  a  winter 
morning.  He  has  occupied  himself  as  long  as  need  be  in 
killing  and  skinning  the  animals.  Then  he  takes  one  skin, 
or  more  if  necessary,  and  makes  a  sled  of  it,  packing  the  other 
skins  upon  it,  attaches  a  thong  to  the  load  and  proceeds  cheer- 
fully homeward  drawing  his  catch  behind  him  and,  theoretically 
at  all  events,  singing  the  song  as  he  goes. 


Fast 


&^^EJEE^^ 


*=£ 


(i 


She  -  kog  que  -  an  bay  -  dah-bah  -  nug  she  -  kog  que-an  bay-  dah-  bah-nug  she  - 

IS 


-b — h k — i — 

-V — i-v •  — *- 


V 


'£ 


kog  que-an  bay  -  dah  -  bah  -  nug   she -kog  que-an   bay  -  dah-  bah-  nug   she- 


A— N- 


•   0       =xq=s=N|v- 


-±. . [Falsetto  yells  before  repeating.] 
kog  quean  baydahbahnug   she-kog  quean  baydahbahnug. 


No.  27  (c).  A  caribou  song:  alluded  to  in  the  foregoing; 
words  uncertain.  The  meaning  is  said  to  be :  "There  he  is,  right 
there!     Let  us  ffo  and  look." 


Moderate 


s^=U=^ 


-W—&- 


fc± 


-*— *- 


=f=> - 


I 


256 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


No.  34  (d).  A  hunting  song  which  the  interpreter  thus 
translates:  "I  shan't  be  gone  long,  and  when  I  come  back  you 
can  help  me  carry  the  meat  home."  The  interpreter  explains 
further  that  the  singer  is  courting,  and  the  meat  is  a  love  token 
by  which  he  hopes  to  gain  his  sweetheart's  favor. 


m 


ii 


T=i= 


m-r-4-t--X-     I         i" 


^=»=? 


m 


«7       *— TT 


^ 


±        # 


The  Witch.  An  old  woman  undertook  a  prolonged  fast. 
In  the  course  of  time  hunger  overcame  her  will  and  she  asked 
for  food.  Her  people  refused  to  give  it  to  her.  For  two  days 
she  pleaded  with  them,  threatening,  if  they  persisted  in  refus- 
ing', to  turn  herself  into  an  owl  and  haunt  them.  At  the  end 
of  the  second  day  she  put  her  dire  threat  into  execution,  flying 
suddenly  in  the  form  of  an  owl  to  a  neighboring  tree  where  she 
perched  and  caused  no  end  of  annoyance  by  incessant  hooting. 


SONGS  AND  THEIR   STORIES 


Slow 

# 

I    ['     -J    1           '        i 

■  •    # 

/k    S 

r          a 

'V 

» 

r          r       » 

LL"\     1     ' 

• 

i 

•              u         r 

.-.                        f 

he^t=^= 

[ fc L_J 

i-4 L' 

i 

J <L J 

Kezh  -  e  -  guk  -  ia     te  -  bi  -  kuk  -  ee ne   bay  -  zhe-  non- 


gay   baybah  ko  ko 


o   mov 


on  bavbab  ko  ko 


Translation :  By  day  and  night  yon  can  hear  my  solemn  voice 


crying  ko!  ko! 


Xo.  36  (c).  Another  owl  song.  The  interpreter  understands 
that  it  is  sung'  by  a  little  boy  to  his  sister.  He  savs  the  words 
mean:  "It  is  getting  dark;  let's  go  home.  See  the  owl  in  the 
way!     We'll  tell  father  and  he  will  come  and  kill  it." 


^E^-^H&f^  ": 


I A   h  r 

■-!-■•          *              ==7-                                  —^ 

~"»           J1*! 

- 

1 

U     ! 

fi, 

\w  J  J  1 

V 

=L^-4H-ki-y- 

V^A*A 

9     ■ 

^     i 

^f=J 

WAR    SONGS. 

T7fe  Bravest.  There  is  only  one  significant  word  in  this 
song:  Ungitchedah.  It  means,  the  bravest  man.  By  impli- 
cation it  convevs  the  utmost  boast  in &•  of  which  any  warrior  could 


258 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


be  capable.  The  Indians  say  that  it  might  be  used  either  as  a 
boast,  in  which  case  it  should  be  interpreted  "I  am  the  bravest 
of  all  men,"  or  as  a  compliment  to  another,  when  the  meaning 
would  be,  "He  is  the  bravest  of  all  men."  In  a  general  way, 
therefore,  it  is  the  laudation  of  a  warrior,  and  the  application 
varies  with  circumstances. 


n  Sloio 


m 


=#=E 


S^ 


-#— ^ 


Un  -  git  -    cbed  -  ah hey    -   ah    hey  -  ah. 

> 


^Eg 


fS 


tx 


5--  r 


-•SB5T 


hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah   ah  ah   hey  -  ah hey  -  -  ah. 


ah 


m 


J=T- 


-*-*- 


^ 


tt 


£ 


t>   i     i 


I 


hey  -   ah  hey-ah     hey -ah...       hey -ah     hey -ah  hey-ah  hey-ah  hey  -  ah  hey. 


Song  of  a  Coward.  A  party  of  warriors  set  forth  to  meet  the 
enemy.  One  of  the  number  sneaked  away  from  the  column  and 
went  back  to  the  place  where  the  women  and  children  were  hid- 
den for  safety.  The  song  is  in  derision  of  him.  An  aged 
woman  tells  me  that  this  is  only  a  fragment  of  the  song.  She 
refers,  of  course,  to  the  words  which  presumably  told  what 
happened  to  the  coward ;  but  she  cannot  remember  the  story  and 
I  have  not  found  anybody  who  can  supply  the  missing  lines. 
The  song  as  here  given  is  often  sung  at  social  gatherings  and 
is  very  stirring  when  given  by  a  large  number  of  men's  voices. 


£ 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 

Rather  fast 


2.5!) 


f      I*      f  =P= 
I      u      U      ?"" 


m 


(• 


« 


i 


^E?E 


Da  -  tua  -  me  -  no      -      wah      dah  -  be     -      dug. 


da  -   ma  -  me  -   no 


^^ 


:.v 


=t= 


wah 


dah   -    be 


nah  -    gad 


qua      wah  -  nun 


^ 


*-^-r 


-&—:- 


^ 


way-ah      we       dah    be    -   mod da-ma- me- no 


wah     dah  -  be  -  dug. 


Translation :  See  him  sitting  there  among  the  women. 


r,  Sole  Survivor.  This  and  the  following  were  sung  by  a  wo- 
man, and  both  are  distinctively  women's  songs.  The  words  as 
reproduced  by  the  phonograph  are  not  clear  and  do  not  seem  to 
agree  wholly  with  the  dictated  version  which  is  as  follows: 

Wesahquodayweinini  ogeetahkobenung  omahmequa  ogeepo- 
zaybenung  chemaunaysing  ogee  kahnjaybenung  chebahmah 
bomoicid:  All  the  men  were  lost;  one  woman  only  was  saved; 
she  was  tied  up  in  a  canoe,  set  adrift,  and  picked  up  by  people 
of  another  tribe. 

Slow 


pig 


t- 


^ 


. 


c-_ 


»    *    m 


i 


ra 


t=t 


-x— p- 


E£ 


£ 


f 


pS 


-»- 


260 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


Apprehension.  Dictated  words:  Pahbahmahdaymowun  we- 
nemoshayn  uoan  nayndoobunejig  koonemahdensahme :  I  am 
crying  about  my  sweetheart  who  is  fighting  the  enemy. 


Slow, 


m^m 


= — p~ 


■v 


£ 


4*- 


ft; 


it- 


3=t 


-* — zr- 


S »-+77 


^=M 


4*- 


W- 


t=t 


^m 


r 


•    •  4        -Tir- 


m 


J  J 1 J  J  .11 


B* 


Small-Legs.  A  hero  song  of  which  both  words  and  music  un- 
dergo variation  with  different  singers.  The  general  character 
of  the  words,  however,  is  always  the  same,  and  they  mean:  "See 
that  man  with  the  small  legs,  the  son  of  Always-flying ;  he  is  the 
best  among  us  for  he  is  the  bravest."  The  version  on  the  phon- 
ograph follows: 

Moderate 


^m 


•=i 


«b 


?E=H 


^£ 


tJ=t 


!=Pt 


5 


1 


^r*- 


A  more  frequent  version   is   the   following  which   I   never 
chanced  to  hear  when  the  phonograph  was  within  reach. 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


261 


S 


p    *    * 


.  > 


1 


7>_ 


I 


*    *  J.     '    *    J- 


Song  of  a  Scout.  The  words  mean:  "I  was  alone  when  I 
found  the  teepee  and  feared  to  attack  lest  they  overpower  me; 
so  I  waited  for  the  others  to  come  to  help  me." 


pi 


Moderate 


BESES 


-& •- 


S^S= 


^m 


Before  the  Battle.  It  is  said  that  this  was  composed  in  the 
time  of  the  great  Shingwauk  when,  under  his  leadership,  the 
Ojibways  joined  the  British  in  quelling  some  local  disturbance. 
The  chief  had  been  making  an  address  to  his  people  after  which 
he  stepped  into  his  canoe  and  sang:  "Kahkeenah  wahweengay 
ne  mozho  kahwah  kahkeenah  wahweengay  anishinahbeg  ne  mo- 
zho  kahwah"  I  bid  farewell  to  all  my  people  as  I  go  forth  to 
battle." 


oao 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


Moderate 
_  > 


M 


*=£ 


se 


^ 


SfexXJIXJg: 


•  •  *  -^ — *— *- 


-1 — ■i > ^ — *n 


0  ■  •  • 


-4 Ml 1— 


an — Lj       ~ 


•  •  *  is*   *  »  0  » 


^ 

4—  —J — *  •  *  *  J .  i-^—s) — J — 1 — 1— 0   *   *   '  •   **J.|-^ — | — U 

No.  5  (b).  The  singer  of  this  song  knew  no  English. 
Neither  from  him  nor  any  other  could  I  get  further  meaning 
from  the  words  than  is  conveyed  in  a  literal  translation. 


16 


« — p- 


i=t 


-* — p — •- 


L>    U    I 


-* — « — p- 


P      •     *r 


-I b— U- 


Nim-bah- bah    me  -  wi-  ne-go       ne  -  me-quah  -  nug...      nin-gah  -  kee  -  way 


g 


* *- 


0     0 


=t=fc= 


~*  •    P     P    P- 


-t 


*=t 


we  -  ne  -  go     hey -ah     hey -ah    hey   -    ah        hey  -  ah     ha      hey ah    ha 


P — 0- 


t — * — V — H— ! ,     V  *J  iJ-* 


3EZSZZJLZT*. 


^ 


5^        =£j 


|T^ 


hey-ah   hey-ah   hey-ah  ha    hey  -  ah     hey  -  ah     ha     hey  -  ah   ha    hey  -  ah    ha 


Translation :  They  are  taking  me  away,  but  my  feathers  will 


bring  me  back  again. 


SOXGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES  263 

SONGS  OF  TRAVEL  AXD  DEATH. 

Inasmuch  as  the  Ojibways  were  great  travellers  in  the  old 
days,  and  no  journey  ever  was  begun  without  an  appropriate 
song;  and  inasmuch  as  every  Indian  is  supposed  to  have  a  deatli 
song  that  he  means  to  sing  and  does  sing  if  possible  at  the  su- 
preme moment,  it  should  follow  that  this  class  would  be  repre- 
sented numerously  in  a  collection.  I  was  surprised  and  disap- 
pointed while  at  work  in  the  field  that  I  did  not  come  upon  more 
examples.  I  was  forever  asking  for  death  songs,  and  when- 
ever it  seemer  possible  to  jog  an  Indian's  memory,  I  suggested 
that  he  sing  a  travellers'  song.  Until  recently  I  was  unable  to 
account  for  the  scant  result  of  this  special  search,  and  I  do 
so  now  only  by  theory,  but  I  believe  the  theory  is  sound. 

My  contact  has  been  in  the  main  necessarily  with  Indians 
more  or  less  civilized.  The  Ojibways  are  still  fond  of  travel, 
but  habituated  now  for  a  generation  or  two  to  the  restraints  of 
reservation  life,  they  have  discarded  the  traveller's  songs  with 
so  much  else  that  pertained  to  the  older  manner.  That  is,  the 
songs  of  this  type  have  been  forgotten.  Furthermore  I  am 
almost  convinced  that  the  traveller's  song  was  usually  a  familiar 
tune  to  which  words  were  extemporized  to  suit  the  occasion. 
In  that  case  it  would  be  small  wonder  that  the  Ojibway  singers 
failed  to  give  me  songs  of  travel,  for,  with  their  keen  sense  of 
appropriateness — which  is  manifested  in  such  a  marked  degree 
by  the  names  they  give  their  children  and  adopted  members  of 
the  tribe — it  would  not  occur  to  them  to  invent  a  set  of  travel 
words  to  a  melody  which  they  were  accustomed  to  singing  to 
words  of  another  character. 


264  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

The  argument  is  much  the  same  with  regard  to  death  songs. 
As  indicated  in  the  foregoing  pages,  the  habit  of  using  a  death 
song  persists  in  a  modified  fashion,  but  the  song  chosen  for  the 
occasion  does  not  appear  always  to  have  a  special  bearing  upon 
the  event,  or  special  application  to  the  dying  man.  So  far  as 
I  can  learn,  the  Indian  who  had  forethought  to  his  last  hour  se- 
lected a  song  that  should  be  his  and  made  words  for  it;  and  it 
is  hardly  supposable  that  such  a  man  would  make  public  his  song 
while  yet  he  felt  that  death  was  afar  off.  It  is  probable,  too, 
that  in  many  instances  the  death  song  was  extemporized,  words 
and  music,  under  the  pressure  of  the  awful  occasion.  Such  a 
song  would  necessarily  perish  with  the  individual  unless  some 
friend  were  near  and  remembered  it.  Army  officers  have  told  me 
of  hearing  death  songs  when  Indians  were  led  to  military  execu- 
tion. From  their  description  it  would  seem  that  the  words 
vaunted  the  victim's  courage,  his  prowess  in  battle,  catalogued 
his  heroic  deeds  and  expressed  savage  confidence  that  in  spite 
of  death  he  would  yet  exult  over  his  enemies;  and  musically 
they  must  have  been  little  more  than  a  highly  dramatic  chant. 
Finding  the  Ojibways  so  much  more  highly  developed  than 
other  Indians  in  most  of  their  songs,  I  had  naturally  hoped  that 
in  the  death  songs,  incited  as  they  would  be  by  circumstances  of 
such  profound  import,  I  should  come  upon  melodies  of  rare 
pathos  and  majesty;  and  I  frankly  confess  my  failure,  although 
the  example  known  as  "Hiawatha's  Death  Song,"  quoted  be- 
low, is  to  my  mind,  the  finest  aboriginal  song  that  has  been  pre- 
served. 

Whatever  may  be  the  merit  of  my  theory,  the  fact  is  that  I 


SONGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES 


265 


have  taken  but  one  death  song  that  was  admitted  to  be  such 
by  the  singers.  And  it  seems  to  me  significant  that  this  song, 
so  far  as  the  words  go,  is  not  at  all  of  the  type  that  would  be 
expected ;  for  it  does  not  boast  of  the  past  or  tell  of  confidence 
in  the  future.  On  the  contrary,  it  expresses  the  gloomiest 
doubt  as  to  what  the  future  has  in  store.  The  Indian  words 
cannot  be  given  exactly,  but,  according  to  an  interpreter  who 
listened  to  the  phonograph,  they  mean:  "I  am  dying,  but  I 
have  my  doubts  as  to  whether  I  shall  go  where  the  good  spirits 
are."     The  melody  follows. 

Slo  ir  v, 


:' 


J?: 


tj 


~) 


iE^33E3E 


Wm 


f 


Prince  of  Wales  Song.  About  forty  years  ago  Edward 
Seventh,  King  of  England,  then  the  Prince  of  Wales,  visited 
Canada.  He  went,  among  other  places,  to  Sarnia,  at.  the 
southern  end  of  Lake  Huron.  At  that  time  the  chief  of  the 
Ojibways  was  the  great  Shingwauk  who  lived  at  Garden 
River,  some  dozen  miles  east  of  Sault  Ste.  Marie.  Shingwauk, 
selected  twenty  warriors  who  sailed  the  length  of  the  lake  with 
him  to  meet  the  Prince.  When  the  party  left  home,  Shing- 
wauk sang  this  song,  and  I  am  told  that  it  was  later  sung  be- 
fore the  Prince  at  Sarnia.  As  indicated  on  a  preceding  page, 
the  tune  was  an  old  war  song  to  which  the  chief  adapted  words 
of  his  own  appropriate  to  the  occasion.     I  heard  the  song  first 


266 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


from  Mrs.  Sagachewiose,  a  granddaughter  of  Shingwauk,  who 
remembers  well  how  she  stood  on  shore  with  all  the  village  and 
watched  the  warriors  set  forth  on  their  journey  I  have  re- 
ferred the  song  to  other  Indians  who  were  alive  at  that  time, 
and  all  remember  it.  Melodically  it  is  of  little  value,  but  its 
historical  interest  makes  it  worth  preserving. 

Moderate  ^  ^  s  ->  ^ 


III 


:£=£ 


^ 


=£=£= 


-N— 


Mali  -  je  -   ah  -  sin      ah  -  be  -  quan        mah  -  je  -  ah  -  sin    ah  -  be  -  quan 


^ 


:{*: 


5BE 


. 


'T> 


r— r 


ruah  -  je  -   ah  -  sin     ah  -  be- quan  me-sum  -ah     we  -  po  -  ze  -  an we  - 

>.  >  >.  >  >  > 


ft) 


^ ^    *  » 


§— j — j- 


m 


ish-ka-wod   ah-gah     o  -  ge  -  mah...         git-che      o 


ge  -  mah  -  qua 


m^ 


m    r 


feS 


o  -  gwis-son 


nin  -  gab  -  be  -  skah  -  be. . . 


m 


0 


=2=J 


nah-be-quod        mah-je  -  ah  -  sin    ah  -  be  -  quan      mah-je  -  ah  -  sin   ah  -  be-quan. 


The  words  in  the  above  are  what  I  hear  from  the  phonograph, 
the  blank  spaces  indicating  that  I  Cannot  distinguish  the  sylla- 
bles. Mrs.  Sagachewiose  dictated  the  words  with  evident  care, 
but  she  did  not  sing  them  in  the  same  order.  The  dictated 
words  and  translation  follow : 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES  267 

Mahjeahsingabequan  mesu  mah  wepozean  wenukwayshkowug 
ogema  kitcheogemahqua  ogwisson  ningabeskahbe  nahbequan- 
ing  bemahsing  nahbequod:  The  ship  sails  away  in  which  I  em- 
bark to  meet  the  chief,  the  great  woman-chief's  son.  I  shall 
return  in  the  ship  when  the  ship  sails  back. 


Hiawatha's  Death  Song.  When  the  Indian  play  was  in  proc- 
ess of  making,  Mr.  L.  O.  Armstrong,  who  originated  it,  had 
the  Indians  sing  many  songs  for  him  and  selected  those  that 
were  used  in  the  first  performance.  Most  of  them,  like  "My 
Bark  Canoe,"  "The  Naked  Bear,"  and  this  one,  have  been  re- 
tained in  the  play  and  probably  will  always  figure  among  its 
charming  features.  The  song  now  to  be  quoted  was  chosen 
as  especially  suitable  for  the  departure  of  the  prophet,  a  scene 
which  was  so  well  managed  when  the  play  was  given  at  Des- 
barats,  Ontario,  that  it  warrants  sufficient  digression  to  describe 
it.  The  play  was  presented  in  the  open  air  on  the  shore  of 
Lake  Huron,  most  of  the  action  taking  place  on  a  tiny  island 
a  few  yards  from  shore.  The  final  scene  began  with  an  address 
by  Hiawatha  to  his  people.  He  bade  them  farewell,  prayed  to 
the  four  winds,  and  stepped  into  his  canoe.  Raising  his  paddle 
in  air  he  said:  "Kabeyaynung"  (westward)  and  immediately 
the  canoe  started  in  a  westerly  direction.  Without  visible 
means  of  propulsion  the  canoe  glided  along  the  gleaming  path 
of  the  setting  sun,  for  the  play  was  given  in  the  afternoon  so 
that  this  scene  came  when  the  water  glowed  as  with  fire.  As 
he  traveled  thus  mysteriously  across  the  lake,  the  Indian  actor 


268  AMERICA]*   PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

sang  this  song,  and  his  fellow  actors,  left  on  the  island  stage, 
shaded  their  eyes  with  their  hands  and  watched  his  progress. 
When  he  had  finished  the  song,  the  people  on  the  island  re- 
peated it  in  resonant  unison.  Then  Hiawatha  sang  it  again,  and 
by  this  time  he  was  so  far  away  that  his  voice  was  perceptibly 
fainter.  The  antiphonal  finale  was  continued  until  the  Indian 
prophet  disappeared  in  the  shadow  of  the  two  small  islands 
nearly  half  a  mile  distant.  It  was  a  wonderfully  poetic,  im- 
pressive scene,  realizing,  in  fair  weather,  Longefellow's  fanciful 
and  glorious  description  of  the  prophet's  departure;  and  the 
emotional  force  of  the  episode  was  strongly  enhanced  by  the 
noble,  dignified  strains  of  this  song. 

It  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  a  death  song,  and  I  am  responsible 
for  its  somewhat  misleading  title.  Long  after  the  play  had  be- 
come established  I  came  to  have  some  share  in  its  development. 
The  song  was  there  and  I  was  deeply  stirred  by  it.  That  it 
should  be  called  "Hiawatha's  Death  Song"  seemed  to  me  a 
matter  of  course,  and  I  so  named  it  when  I  offered  it  for  pub- 
lication among  the  six  songs  from  the  play  with  which  I  sought 
to  learn  whether  others  would  hold  Ojibway  music  in  the  same 
estimation  that  I  did.  It  is  a  matter  of  course  now  that  the 
name  should  stick,  but  after  I  began  to  study  Ojibway  music 
in  earnest  I  found  that  originally  it  was  a  traveller's  song,  and 
that  it  was  always  used  for  the  journey  from  Sault  Sainte 
Marie  rapids  to  the  place  where  Detroit  now  stands.  This,  for 
the  Indian  in  his  rude  Mackinac  boat,  was  a  long  voyage  and 
justified  the  solemnity  of  the  parting  song.     The  Ojibway  word 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES  2G9 

for  Detroit  is  Wahweydhtenung.     Originally,  then,  the  song 
was  as  follows : 

Muh  noo  ne  null  ningamahjah 
Mali  noo  ne  null  ningamahjah 
M  rahweyah  ten  u  rig  ningadejah 
Muh  noo  ne  nah  ningamahjah 
Neen  Wahweydhtenung  ningadejah. 

Do  not  be  anxious;  I  am  going  very  far  away, 
Do  not  be  anxious;  I  am  going  very  far  away : 
To  Detroit  I  am  going. 

Do  not  be  anxious ;  I  am  going  very  far  away : 
I  to  Detroit  am  going. 

The  Indian  actors,  to  adapt  the  song  to  the  purposes  of  the 
play,  left  out  Wjdhweyahtenung  and  inserted  Hiawatha.  I  un- 
derstand that  the  Indian  who  did  the  adapting  incorporated 
more  new  words  than  Hiawatha  in  the  text,  and  I  should  be 
surprised  if  such  were  not  the  case,  for  the  words  as  sung  to- 
day are  not,  grammatically  speaking,  good  Ojibway.  Some 
carelessness  crept  in  with  the  numerous  repetitions  of  the  song 
called  for  in  the  performances  of  the  play  until  the  present 
version  seems  to  be  fixed  unalterably.  The  actors  are  conscious 
of  the  false  syntax,  but,  as  one  of  them  said  to  me,  "What  does 
it  matter?  the  white  people  do  not  know  one  word  from  an- 
other." Inasmuch  as  I  never  have  heard  the  song  in  its  orig- 
inal version,  I  give  here  the  form  which  is  used  in  the  play. 


270 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


Slow 


tt 


IE£ 


t 


i 1 1- 


■ ' i 1— "-+ 

Mah-noo  ne    nah  nin-gah     -     mab  -  jah     mah-noo    ne    nah    nin-gah  -  mah 


$=i- 


jah. 


Hi  -  a  -  wa  -  tha      ne      nin-gah-de  -  jah      mah  -  noo      ne      nah 


Ete 


— *^. — — ^^ — m-m 


nin  -  gah-niah  -  jah     neen    Hi  -  a    -    wa  -  tha     neen    nin  -  gah  -de    -    jah. 


In  the  harmonized  version  will  be  found  an  interpretation  of 
the  words  that  accords  with  the  idea  of  the  scene  in  which  the 
song  is  used.  Many  persons  have  remarked  upon  the  fact 
that  the  melody  is  strongly  suggestive  of  the  music  of  the  Ro- 
man Catholic  church  service.  My  own  first  impression  of  it  was 
that  the  song  had  taken  on  this  color  from  contact  of  the  O jib- 
ways  with  Jesuit  missionaries,  but  I  have  found  no  evidence  to 
support  this  view.  Analysis  shows  that  it  is  Indian  from  be- 
ginning to  end.  Its  ecclesiastical  manner  is  no  more  significant 
of  white-man  influence  than  is  the  "Scotch  snap"  which  occurs 
repeatedly  not  only  in  Ojibway  songs,  but  in  the  songs  of  tribes 
remote  from  them.  It  is  shallow  wisdom  that  would  jump  to 
conclusions  from  such  coincidences  as  these;  and  at  the  last 
analysis  this  song  remains  a  noble  melody,  as  individual  as  any 
in  the  realm  of  music,  that  was  found  among  Indians,  used 
by  them  alone,  utterly  neglected  and  unappreciated  by  whites 
until  a  wandering  enthuiast  had  committed  it  to  print. 


SOXGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


271 


MISCELLANEOUS    AND    UNCERTAIN. 

Vanity.  According  to  some  Indians  this  is  supposed  to  be 
sung  by  a  woman,  but  Shingwauk  interprets  it  as  the  utter- 
ance of  a  vain  man  who  has  arrayed  himself  in  his  best  finery 
and  is  annoyed  by  the  inconsiderate  crowding  of  family  and 
neighbors  to  look  at  him.  It  is  a  popular  song.  I  have  heard 
it  from  many  singers.  There  are  two  songs  to  the  words  on 
the  phonographic  records,  and  the  words  reappear  to  the  tune 
of  the  Morning  Star  song. 

Moderate 


&$- 


O  -    wass'         no  -  watch     shayn  -  gay    -    she  -  noon        o  -  wass' 


|A     | 

Pv 1\ H 1 ^~ 

#   •      *       *^ 

y — v.    f     f     f     0    t 

NfM= 

—J J J • ^-~ 

— f V 

\—v      u—> — 

— - — " — v — f — V — y — v— 

watch  shayn-gay  -  she-noon 


kee  -  mah-meg  -  e-  go-nesh-ka    wah-no-gay- 


i 


i 


5=i 


-0  .     JS 


/ 


s    »v     ?\ 


5^ 


1: 


*^< 


*    * 


nug       ne....        ne-wah-ue       -       nug     o- wass' no-watch  shayn-gay-she  -  noon. 

Translation:  Better  stand  further  off  or  you  will  crush  my 
feathers. 

Another  melodv  to  the  same  words : 


tf^ 

f  >J*  ■ 

-i—m-m-f-if- 

-p^-4- 

— *  H    %  -  r-f- 

*-• — w — 

-H-TSj^ 

^  U    ^   Lj    '- 

First  time 

Second  time 

1 b — 

r-f- 

^ — p 

1    1 

!     -*■*-    i            .      mm 

H 

m- 

*-*  0  •  --"  *— + 
— » 

— 1 4-H \- 

— — 1 — * — 

^=*=£5-±-±f. 

p=$=n 

272  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

Allusion  has  been  made  more  than  once  to  the  survival  of 
melodies  originally  associated  with  ceremonies  now  obsolete,  and 
the  Morning  Star  song  has  been  instanced  as  an  example.  It 
may,  therefore,  be  interesting  to  glance  at  another  set  of  words 
to  that  tune.  The  following  may  be  found  on  phonographic 
record  No.  10  (c)  : 

Nenemoshayn  kahkeekedud,  nekonahsass  ningahnahdin  ko- 
neemahdah  keesenah  nenemoshayn  kahkeekedud:  My  lover 
says  it  may  be  cold  to-night,  so  I'll  get  my  little  blanket. 


My  Big  Lover.  The  words  as  dictated:  Ningitchenenemo- 
shayn  dash  iscid  nindenahbun  ahbetdh  tibikuk  ne  gahgaydal- 
gueshin  nindenahbun  ningitehenencmoshayn:  I  have  told  my 
bier  lover  that  I  will  meet  him  at  midnight. 


Moderate 


Efe=--^_H^Fp^-r   (J?r  I 


■S 


^5— ^»>^-  >  '    — —_ — n 


^^r5=f=r^^ 


No.  13.  Sung  by  a  woman  who  covered  three  quarters  of 
the  cylinder  with  false  starts,  giggling,  and  exclamations  ex- 
pressive of  extreme  embarrassment.  Encouraged  by  another 
woman  who  stood  by  she  at  last  mumbled  the  following  melody 
and  fled,  her  mind  apparently  in  such  disorder  that  she  could 
not  gather  her  wits  sufficiently  to  dictate  the  words  which  are 
almost  wholly  inaudible  on  the  cylinder.     The  woman  who  stood 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


273 


by  said  they  meant:  "My  lover  and  I  are  going  around  drink- 
ing." 


Slow 


-* — 0- 


+—t 


fr— f— ¥■ 


^=^E 


r#r 

— - — 

1  A  n 

* 

•  • 

4       p 

1  f  v 

f 

I         i         r 

f 

-1 

I 

— y* — 

-1 ' 

U 1 ^_j 

H ' 

-i 1 1 j 

g 


'    I    ' 


1 


£3=«T*^ 


tfc 


:f=(t 


£=#= 


P* 


4—* *- 


i=F 


2Vb.  £0  faj.  Sung  to  meaningless  syllables  throughout  and 
often  used  in  this  form  for  dancing.  Shingwauk  says  that 
originally  it  was  a  canoe  song,  the  singer  telling  of  going  to 
meet  somebody,  presumably  a  sweetheart. 


Rather  fast 


u 


1 r 


5=*: 


Z^m 


S 


»; 


274 


AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 


No.  27  (a).  Supposed  to  be  a  Menominee  song,  for  the 
words  are  untelligible  to  Ojibways  and  the  singer  had  lived 
among  the  Menominees. 


No.  29.  (a).  Tbis  is  another  "Odowah,"  or  Ottawa  song. 
The  singer's  interpretation  of  the  words  is  to  the  effect  that  a 
chief's  daughter  had  two  suitors;  before  setting  out  on  the 
warpath  each  of  them  called  and  proposed  to  her;  she  remarks 
upon  the  fact  that  each  of  them  said  identically  the  same  thing, 
and  she  concludes,  "You  can't  believe  what  the  men  say." 


^^ 


~4 — •- 


3= 


=t=t 


E^N=rf=pp&^  J  J_^j-^ 


m 


-4 a 


-• — 4 — m — • 


I  *         :       fc 


-f-p- 


W 


-f — W 


i^=^ 


3tZ^=3= 


'    J    0 


-4 0 


^g=^|zq: 


mm^m 


i^P 


I       i     i 


3=5- 


SONGS  AXD  THEIR  STORIES 


275 


No.  29  (c).  This  was  one  of  a  series  that  I  did  not  venture 
to  interrupt  for  the  purpose  of  making  sure  of  the  words.  An 
Indian  who  stood  hy  when  it  was  sung  told  me  afterward  that 
this  was  the  meaning:  "A  gentleman  calls  to  see  the  daughter; 
the  mother  meets  him,  and  he  says,  'What  are  you  making  eyes 
at  me  for  ?     It  is  your  daughter  I  came  to  see !'  ' 


m 


•s^     '   *•*.  ■ 


^ 


f — r 


W- 


^=P1 


^»^— »- 


No.  30  (a).     Untranslatable. 


IEEE 


=£=*= 


^^ 


m     € 


-- 


4* f F- 


-^ 


0=6^ 


£ 


^5= 


-r^j^^-z3Ermra 


*  Oat  of  tune. 


276  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

No.  34  (a).     Words  indistinguishable. 

Slow 


gf£ 


=t 


~» — r 


£E£3E2EE£eS 


:£ 


=t 


Hi 


S2 


*    *    *  _«!_ 


4=4 


3=^=f=^ 


*^ 


1 


Aro.  34  (b).     Supposed  to  be  a  Menominee  song. 


«=f=F* 


K5 


«   «  # * 


wf-^nrk&l-pT 


Mil        ! .  |-«-^— «-# 


A^o.  34  (c).  An  interpreter  hears  the  following  words  on  the 
cylinder:  Kahwin  nindekayndezin  kdheegowanen;  I  cannot  re- 
member what  was  told  to  me. 


> 

*— ft 


>    *  ^m 

— K*-  - 


-fS— F 


1 f 


Y-*-»~u-. 1 '>-*— »-a  J.I    F=t=n 

ilt«3E^^SEE==^EEtfl 


-*~1 — i- 


*  Out  of  time. 


Ao.  57  (a).  According  to  Shingwauk,  the  singer  says:  "I 
don't  know  what  to  make  of  this  man;  I  used  to  think  well  of 
him,  but  he  disappointed  me." 


SOXGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


277 


m 


^-r 


*       • 


s 


x  j  j  r 


^EE 


^m 


j  *i 


^? 


•-*- 


i 


*  5 


Xo.  57  (b ).  A  man  has  come  to  a  river  and  wishes  to  cross. 
Standing  at  the  edge,  he  sings,  "Come  and  get  me;  I've  no 
way  of  crossing;  come  and  get  me." 


No.  37  (c).  Supposed  to  he  a  woman's  song  accusing  a 
faithless  lover  of  broken  promises.  Shingwauk  thus  translates 
the  words :  "You  are  walking  around  trying  to  remember  what 
you  promised,  but  you  can't  remember." 


mm 


j  J-  r  ■  j  i 


=s=*f 


— ■ — m a d m — a ^- 


1 


278  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

No.  38  (c).     Menominee  song. 


■\- 


LIGHT    ON    A    CONTROVERSY. 

While  I  find  that  most  persons  are  ready  to  accept  these 
songs  as  genuine  products  of  Indian  imagination,  there  are 
those  who  profess  to  discriminate  and  assert  that  some  of  them 
have  undoubtedly  been  affected  by  civilization.  Among  the 
songs  given  in  this  chapter  are  many  so  crude  that  civilization 
balks  at  assuming  any  responsibility  for  them;  and  I  observe 
that  the  only  melodies  believed  to  be  the  result  of  paleface  in- 
fluence are  those  that  are  well  formed  and  beautiful.  That  is, 
civilization  is  quick  to  claim  credit  for  what  is  good  in  Indian 
music,  and  equally  quick  to  disclaim  what  is  crude.  I  do  not 
purpose  to  enter  upon  further  argument  in  the  matter  but  hope 
that  the  two  songs  that  follow  will  throw  some  light  on  it. 

I  have  alluded  to  the  struggle  that  took  place  between  Indian 
and  civilized  music  when  the  Ojibways  were  converted  by  Prot- 
estant missionaries.  The  two  styles  did  not  mix  well  or  perma- 
nently. The  hymn  tune  could  not  be  grafted  on  the  Indian 
stock,  nor  the  Indian  melody  on  the  hymn  tune.  Shingwauk 
has  told  me  that  the  chiefs  tried  to  make  over  the  tunes  taught 
them  by  the  missionaries,  seeking  to  adapt  them  to  the  Indian 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES  279 

manner.  He  and  other  Indians  believe  that  some  of  the  tunes 
still  used  in  the  church  service  are  "half  Indian  and  half  white," 
and  he  sang  several  to  me  as  examples.  I  reproduce  one  as  ac- 
curately as  may  be  from  the  phonograj>hic  record.  (No.  22.) 
The  words  are  a  translation  into  Ojibway  of  the  hymn  begin- 
ning, 

A  charge  to  keep  I  have, 

A  God  to  glorify. 

Our  notation  is  incapable  of  expressing  with  absolute  exact- 
ness the  manner  of  singing  the  hymn.  It  is  so  slow  that  it  seems 
to  be  drawled  rather  than  sung;  time  values  are  disregarded,  and 
the  voice  slurs  up  and  down  from  one  tone  to  another  in  the 
most  extraordinary  fashion.  I  have  tried  to  suggest  the  ex- 
treme portamento  by  a  generous  use  of  slurs  and  small  notes. 

Very  slow 


-IE 


1 v      -z r— —» — *— *^ — '1 *    » — a #— ~, —    ^    d 


Che  uh  no  kee  too  non         noo        say 


S^ 


;- 


«   • 


duh     yah      nun    che   we       ke        tod 


» — m — - — m -3 ^— * — «   -     — *-= =-^=—       =n 


je  chog        ish  peui  ing  we  e  zhod. 


This  may,  or  may  not  have  some  similarity  to  an  ancient 
Ojibway  tune.  With  patience  there  may  be  dug  from  it  a 
melodic  outline  that  certainly  resembles  one  of  our  own  old 
hymn  tunes.     Having  heard   the    version    above    indicated,    I 


280  AMERICAN  PRIMITIVE  MUSIC 

would  not  need  to  be  told  that  such  a  mixture  of  styles  could  not 
survive.  It  has  not.  As  a  rule  the  tunes  of  the  Protestant 
service  are  now  sung  by  the  Ojibways  substantially  as  the  white 
congregations  sing  them,  and  songs  of  purely  Indian  origin, 
concerning  Indian  subjects  and  expressive  of  Indian  thoughts, 
survive  in  their  proper  form,  characteristic  and  distinct  in  type. 

Contrast  this  deliberate  attempt  to  graft  one  style  upon 
another  with  the  following.  I  was  told  by  his  friends  that 
Jacob  .Akwenzs  was  a  good  musician,  and  of  course  I  sought 
him  out.  After  considerable  persuasion  he  sang.  Hardly 
had  he  begun  before  I  knew  that  he  was  not  giving  me  aborig- 
inal material.  The  words  were  Ojibway,  but  the  tune,  poor 
as  it  was,  disclosed  its  foreign  character  at  once.  When  he 
had  finished,  I  asked  him  who  taught  him  the  song. 

"Nobody,"  he  replied,  "I  made  it." 

On  further  inquiry  it  proved  that  he  had  been  to  school  and 
had  worked  somewhere  on  the  eastern  shore  of  Lake  Huron. 
Most  of  his  life  had  been  passed  in  close  contact  with  civili- 
zation, and  he  had  risen  so  high  as  to  play  second  cornet  in  a 
brass  band.  Here,  then,  was  an  example  not  of  what  might 
happen,  but  of  what  had  happened  when  a  musically  inclined 
Ojibway  yielded  to  the  influence  of  white-man  music.  The 
tune  reveals  no  trace  whatever  of  its  Indian  origin.  Instead 
of  a  native  theme  developed  more  or  less  according  to  the 
style  of  civilization,  or  instead  of  the  native  manner  refined 
by  perception  of  form,  there  is  neither  native  theme  nor  man- 
ner. The  tune  is  simply  a  weak  dilution  of  civilized  common- 
place.    The  inference  is  inevitable  that  when  the  two  musical 


SONGS  AND  THEIR  STORIES 


281 


styles  clash,  one  or  other  succumbs  utterly.  The  Ojibway  who 
is  really  influenced  musically  by  civilization  simply  abandons 
his  native  art ;  he  who  feels  the  force  of  his  native  music,  clings 
to  it. 

Akwenzs  made  the  words  of  his  song  as  well  as  the  tune.  It 
is  a  sea  song,  telling  of  a  young  man  who  saw  a  schooner  com- 
ing into  port.  He  asks  his  employer  for  his  "time,"  says  fare- 
well and  sails  awav.     Here  is  the  melodv : 


g 


M= 


m 


ri— i — i 

.    -    w         9 


J    # 


-f-^- 


Firat  time 


m 


r 


P^i 


-v-. 


0      a 


3^ 


J  -    '    Lg 


Second  time 


j   r   * 


-■    J   J   J 


^^ 


PART  II. 

TWENTY-EIGHT    OJTBWAY    SONGS,   HARMON- 
IZED AND  PROVIDED  WITH 
ENGLISH  WORDS. 


283 


The  Ojibway  words  are  spelled  phonetically.  Consonants 
have .  their  normal  English  sounds,  but  g  is  always  hard, 
soft  g  being  represented  by  j.  Singers  are  cautioned  not  to 
give  the  "continental"  pronunciation  to  either  vowels  or  con- 
sonants. M-u-d  in  Ojibway  is  mud,  not  mood.  Broad  a  is 
represented  by  ah;  without  the  h,  pronounce  a  as  in  mate. 
Pronounce  e  as  in  see,  i  as  in  it,  o  as  in  rose,  u  always  as  in 
tub.  The  sound  of  i  in  night  is  represented  by  ai.  Sound 
ay  as  in  say.  The  diphthong  ch  is  soft,  as  in  church;  ng  is 
not  strictly  a  diphthong  in  Ojibway,  both  consonants  being 
pronounced  nearly  as  in  finger.  Exception:  at  the  end  of  a 
word,  ng  sounds  as  in  sing. 


284 


My  Bark  Canoe. 


Adagio.    p 


ty&&J^$=^s£^=t&f=£g=& 


If 


In    the       still night,     the      long  hours  through,   I 

Clw-kah  -   bay      teb-ik        on  -   dan  -  day-uhn         Chekah- 


^gf 


m 


w 


I 


T-++  4-  I-    .T 


i^ 


BBB 


£ 


P 


«8». 


* 


Bl^S 


»J^=W=NFg 


=^P 


f+Zjtr-pEg, 


guide 


mv        bark    ca-noe,         My 


bay    tvb-ik       on    -    dav-duy-nhn        Ah 


bark     ca-noe, My 

gall  -  iiuih  sib  -  i        on 


PWP 


I 


i 


3t 


^ 


m 


rr\        v- 


~&=3Vr=^m 


*=*=frfr+-g-g-li 


P^ 


love,  to  you. 
dun-day-ahn. 


While  the       stars  shine,    and     falls    the  dew, 


seek  my  love       in        bark     ca-noe,  In  bark   ca-noe 


Copyright   MCMIX  by  Frederick  R.  Burton. 


a 


/7\  mf 


^^4^=w#£=^ 


?*=== 


seek    tor  you. 


mm 


a 


-w \.f. 


It     is  I,      love,      vour        lov  -  er  true,         Who 


:fyHf    p  r       J'rU-]l  i         J    18  J',    p  J  .  it  p  11 JTjffl 


glides  the  stream    in        bark  ea-noe,        It        glides  to  you,  _  My      love, to  you. 


P&§ 


m 


m 


s> 


m 


p 


-at 
~PP 


wm. 


i 


^ 


^¥ 


Red  Blanket. 


Allegro 


t-gJ1  J1  J'i^fp  p  JUi  I  J) it  J'  J>-JhlrrJ>-J> 


My    red  blan-ket    I     will   put  on   And   to        the  edge    of    the    for-est  rove, 
Ay-qttuy-qtiogii  hl-gah  da  -juh   initio       ne-ne  >/<o-shu//u  rvm-gah-wi:  -  je  -  uh 


4'^    i 


% 


f 


£ 


^f 


^*=!: 


Fimr 


lg= 


Si 


i-  r,  P  P  J)  J)ip=jmuJ>  J'  i'  J<  Ji  i  J>  J*  J  -■ 


Where  my  knees  I    will     fall     up  -  on    And  pick    up  sticks  for  my      la  -  dy    love.. 
Mia  -koo-ah     nin-gah  -  muh-jah-od  wah-boy -on   nin-gah-  mah-je  -  dun. 


#*=*==* 


^m 


f 


^m 


wi 


5g 


Copyright    MCMIX  by  Frederick  R.  Burton. 


Carousal. 


8 


Allegro,     f 


Ham-mer    on   the  drum, 
Kah    nin-ah-ne-  bah 


pound    it!        Sit- ting  by    the 
se  .  neen,     Kah-nin  -  ah  -  ne-- 


P?3? 


fire, 
bah 


round     it-,       Start      a      live-  ly      song, 
se  -neen,       te    .   tah  -  go  -go  -   bah 


sound       it! 
gaun  -  je 


^P^ 


f=f 


rr 


m 


m 


m 


Hull 


m 


m 


m 


m 


Wj^u    u^bj.ijii^ 


i 


rt 

found    it! 
se  -  neen. 


What  shall  be  the  theme?     found    it!  Gloom-y     is      it,        con 
nan-kahmah^min-ne  quay-aung,  Kah-nin  -ah  -ne    -    bah 


^  J  ^  J  J 


HP 


n 


w?m 


P 


m 


^ 


r 


as 


s 


i 


r 


#p 


^ff 


or  r  f 


n 


iUUULU 


r  ip  u  p 


All  theliqu-or's    gone,  well,        oh!    Let  thethirs-ty  mob 


bel   -    low, 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R. Burton. 


■=fc 


p^ 


r- 


e^ 


•i. 


3=P 


Full    is    ev-'ry  man,  mel     -   low,   Jol-ly    is  the  tight  fel  -  low, 


.f 


m 


^m 


wm 


n 


t=f 


Zlf 


r 


tei^"'7~"1jrt^^ 


-j 


i 


£5 


CJr  t  i' 


juoco  meno  mosso. 


Full  of   fun  the      tight 


fel  -  low.      At  the  empty  flask,        blink-ing, 


J    J    1  J1  B   10 


F^PP 


FP£ 


Eyesaredrow-si    -    ly  wink-ing,  Got   to  go    to     sleep  think- ing 


*feS 


i 


i 


9 


ry 


pg 


f 


w^ 


T=^s: 


© 


*fc3rJr3*'j 


I 


;Hfr^J>'4      'ff 


How  I'd    ra-ther     be  drink-ing;     In   mydreaml'll       be  drink-ing. 

i')=PP  0  m     «,   I  4. 


>N  J  J  J 


2 

lt  r '  r  r 


? 

i 


P^ 


P 


^f 


r 


r 


p 


pp 


m 


^ 


ilrtl 


Waubunosa's  Longing. 


Andante. 


J'   |J>    rBfli 


? 


Long    moons  have  passed  since  she     de  -  part    -    cd 
Ah    -    yah! ne  -  ne  -  mo-shayn-on       de 


m 


^ 


^ 


V- 


m 


5 


W~r- 


from      me,             Long    moons,    Ah!       will       she    come       a    -    gain         to 
guish  -  id,  Ah    -   yah! ne    -    ne   -  mo-  shayn  -  on  de- 


i-J>    I  J'     > 


iE=£ 


i= 


greet      me? 
guish  -  id, 


Wea  -    ry, 

Ah     .    yah! . 


wait       for      her,      my        ab    -    sent 
ne   .     ne  -    mo  -  shayn  -on  de  - 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R.  Burton. 


6 


S> 


^m 


=£ 


r  p  i Jl  f  p  e 


=£ 


Soft     blows    the        south-wind, blows    at       ear   -    ly 
yf/t    -    iy«A/ ne   .    ne  -  mo  -shayn-  on        de 


sweet  -heart. 
guish      id , 


P^ 


^5 


* 


L     Jl    I   J>      J' 


S 


morn  -  ing, 
gnish      id, 


Soft     blows    the        west -wind  with    the      sun       de 
Ah     -    yah!  ne   -    svh    we  -  nah  -   nw  -     e  - 


* 


ii  iji  .<•  '• "  J,  J'  i  j  7  i 


— » ar 

scend - ing 
quay  sans 


Up   -    on     their    breath     I      hear  her  sigh-  ing     for       me. 
Ah  -    yah! ne       svl   gay  -  gel    pe  -  dah -guish  -ing. 


Andante. 


Sleepy  Time. 


» 


W 


Close      your      bright        eyes, 

Kay    -  goo     -    mo      -        we 


kayn 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R. Burton. 


j^tUi  Orr*"  r  i*Q  r~J;' J 


mv 


ba    -    by dear, 

tic    -    jahne  -     sen  _ 


The  spi  -derwith    his    web       is 

Ah       -        nin      .        e         -       hah       ay  ■ 


tf^ 


p^m 


±=* 


m 


n  j. 


igR 


B 


:g=»= 


PP¥ 


PPP 


-4—*- 


here,  He'll 


spin      it  'cross  your  eves,     ba   -  by        dear. 

ne     -      jahn  -   e       -      zess     ay  -  ah         ah! 


i**}  r  I 


*n  sn 


:3E 


S *- 


:nH$-  r  r 


m 


r  iJ  -m  J  i,i  ^ 


#f 


PP 


Ay  -  ah        ay    -     ah _ 

Ay  .  ah       ay    _      ah 


go   sleep,       my       ba   -  by,       go      sleep, 
ay     -     ah        ay  -  nh        ay  -    ah 


t 


>  J     J.J 


P 


i 


I 


^ 


7   I  7    P    7  C 


ff 


f 


#    s 


W^ 


^ 


Pf 


s 


p  p-  p  i  P"  p  r  —p^-f  >J  r 


The     spi -derwith  his     web      is  here,     ba  -  by    dear,      ay   -   ah 
ah  -  nin     -     e       -        hah      ne  -ne  -jahn  -  e   -zess       ay   .  ah 


:J. 


^ 


^ 


3^ 


i 


ah. 
ah. 


8 


Song  to  the  Morning  Star. 

Andante . 


* 


£ 


a 


^ 


_Z= 


P  r   if 


^ 


Through  the     long       night      all 
Kezh    -  e    -  guk     -    in       way 


dark     was      the  sky;      Com 

ash   -    kun     ah  kee       Kezh 


I 


ii 


inig 


f 


*      w 


"if 


y 


±^ 


£ 


£ 


eth        the 
e     -   g">tk 


sun. 


way 


Rid 

ash 


ing       on 


« 


iHH 


high, 
kee, 


f 


-g: 


1 


^ 


m 


Then       it         is 


Kezh   -    e 


nik 


light       all 
in  way 


o 
ash 


ver     the 


^ 


^N 


earth,       All  _ 
kee,       Kezh 


-J^M 


» 


f= 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R. Burton. 


9 


Wedding  Song. 


m& 


Allegro. 


g=^JLJ Hl=g— g— |t 


There's     a       girl    whoso     par  -  ents     have     con 
Bai/  -  zhig     e    -    i/iiiii/  -  zesa     ne       via      ne 


vh-^rn 


mm 

»  9  » 


^=*  V 


I 


/ 


to%^ 


^ 


s 


*^ 


£=fc=fat 


i  i 


)^=i 


e^e 


sent       -     ed,  That       is      why       you 

g'u/t.      -     tin  Kay  -  get      sen  .  nah 


;l 


fa 


see  me       so       con 

ne  -  ge     eke      day  -   be 


§ 


fe@^ 


i^ 


s 


g^£ 


^ 


tent    -    ed 
e       -     g 


*!t 


Hey  -  ah,    hey  -  ah,        key    -     ah,  hey  -  ah,  hey  .ah. 


^m 


pip 


i    H     1 


w 


at 


ju-^i 


^r^ 


Ep 


T 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R. Burton. 


10 


mf  it  .m^ 


Hg^E 


f-^  inr  1 7  gsfes 


hey -ak     hey  -  ah       hey    ■     nk. 


To     my    life  great    hap  -  pi  -  ness  she's 
Buy-zhig    e-  quay  -  zess  ne   me    ne  - 


Mi"  J-j-j 


mm 


Hi  t   r    if  f  f  s  i^ 


u 


g^p^f 


bring  -  ing,       There -fore    I      cant      help     my    joy-ous       sing    -    ing. 
gon    -   uti  Kay  -get    sen  -  nuh      ne-ge-c/ie -day  -  be  e     -     go. 


i  '<f  ■  n 


i 


$ 


$m 


i 


W*^ 


^ 


t>¥  9  g  P=f 


MM   If  J>^ 


Hey  -  ah     hey -ah        hey   -   ah  hey  -  ah   hey -ah         hey -ah    hey- ah 


PS 


J'    J)  J'    J> 


Aey   -    ah  hey  -  ah    hey  -  ah 


«r 

hey  -    ah 


Ji 


!>■¥  i  f      f 


-J — d 


« 


i» 


^ 


P^f 


Jc^TO 


-*-  -#       -* 


11 


Lonely. 


4 


Molto  adagio. 


fes 


r~ii  .1 


* 


r? 


SI 


?jj^  J  J 


I  [  '  /^l 


^M 


'vr^i^t' 


Si 


j  j  .i  j 


* 


//#> 


^^^^^ 


^^ 


Fear     not,     he    say   -  eth. 


Tho'       far        a  -way, 


JHf   J    j 


w 


Pi^i 


is 


i"  n  n-n=n 


n-n  j 


r   cluT  r 


j'jj^i'f    -i 


s 


s 


Thy lov  -  er     stray  -    eth 


At break of      day. 


»     »  m       m      m 


nn j  ; 


f 


? 


tra 


pi 


a/^-^ 


a 


v- 


CJ 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R. Burton. 


la 


^ 


£ 


^ 


£=S 


Go         not,       ray    sweet -heart, 


(I 


*  j  .  r^ 


Vain  -    ly         I     cry; 


f 


$ 


V 


i     1      Jr 


f^F 


T 


m 


J3J3-J. 


£ 


i"    U  r 


* 


I3E3I 


* 


J^JJ  J 


* 


To yon     far     is    -     land 


Yearn  -     ing I     sigh. 


Midnight  Tryst. 

A  Song  of  Elopement. 


18 


And*.?  moderate 


Here      a      -     lone 
Be  -  jah    -   kah 


wait  -  ing     the         hour,  Here  a 

nind  -   e  -    go     -     bun  Nind    -     e 


# 


^ 


iw 


m 


? 


z9'- 


gi 


£ 


! 


_s 


3 


3 


I 


S 


^S 


f^ 


lone_     I              wait     the  bless- ed  hour, 

§■0    -    bun  nind  -  e   -  go -  bun, 


f*j-4 


Wait  -  ing         lone, 
Be  -  jah,   -     kuk 


& 


3 


;- 


^m 


:.et 


f^rrr  r 


s  r   r  r 


^ 


3 


mm 


=P 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R. Burton. 


14 


* 


m 


bless  -  ing     the      hour 
nind  -  e    -go    -    bun 


For      at 

Ap  -    c 


-0 •- 


^m 


mid  -  night    she       will 
tah       ti    -    hi    -    kuk 


,T 


1 


fff 


^ 


W 


^ 


i=± 


^    J     J 


if 


c 


in 


^ 


ZZ' 


jzi 


pi 


join me  here; 

be       -      jah     -      kah, 


Bless 

Nind 


cd 
e 


hour that 

go       -      bun 


f 


^m 


% 


:c- 


-C 


H^r 


r 


r 


r 


S^l 


^f 


^m 


wm 


brings  my  sweet -heart  near! 

nind  -  e    -  go       -  -      bun 


Long   the 
Be   -  jah 


wait, 
kah 


^ 


J  J  J  J   3 


mm 


^§^5 


f 


r~rr 


r 


m 


1W 


% 


m 


1 


3P 


f- 


bless -ed    the      hour!  . 
Tiind-e   -go    -    bun- 


poco  rail. 


War  Song. 


Allegro. 


f* 


w^^ 


8=fe 


fe£ 


* 


Here     the     call       to  war, 

Dn        ma  -  me    -no    -     wah 


war    -     riors 

iluli  be    - 


mm 


i^i 


f=? 


1 


all 
dug 


hear    the   call     to 
da  -   ma  -  me  -  no 


war, 
wah 


war 
duh 


riors 

be    . 


— *" — m — v — w — m — a m m       * 


n    J-      J      J 


1=3 


1 

3 


5 


Ppf^ 


<«,       «: 


rr  rrr 


*  * 


♦  * 


TT^ 


1 


* m 0. 


'>'!, 


f 


Gainst     the 
Nah  ■  god 


foe  -  men    come     to 
e   -  quay    wah  -  nun 


IS 


£m 


^ 


-g-^- 


J  P  H  P 


bat  -  tie, 


Ah',     strike    them 
we       duh   -    be 


down 
dug 


hear  the  call  to 
da  -  ma  -  me  -  no 


i 


i  a  3      =r r 


£4=fc 


4Ljfe %      +      *     + 


c 


ggjif 


E 


i*        "  r5  '  3     3    -■ 

#     w    *■ 
Copyright  MCMIX by  Frederick  R. Burton. 


war,  war-  riors  all.    , 

wah    (/ah  -  bo      -       viod.S 


Forward  to     the 


liH^f  f 


LLisr  r 


-a 


r 


mm 


mf 


T=f 


er 


Ta 


B 


^M^ 


Hf *  i»r 


tTE 


*        l.'l 


S 


fight,  war -riors  all, 


forward  to    the  Flight,  war-  riors 


fe^ 


w 


(Hi  j  fm  i "  ^-4^ 

»  i   S  i    O 0 — # — » — » _^_       j[    -j; 


* 


rr^ 


'>  ub«  f  f  i 


sflTJJ  JTT1 


:R=g 


2 


3** 


^g 


r     « 


§£= 


r  i«*r  r  r 


5 


ill.  Let     the        cow-ardshide  with         women,  yah!    let  them 

i— r^ 


if 


i* 


a 


I 


»   %    s 


iiiiiit    i 


W      T 


^m 


*** 


w 


m 


:2b* 


■9 


^ 


^^F£ 


£Z 


I 


-ox- 


hide 


for-ward  to   the        fight,    war- riors      all. 


fmm 


3X5 


J 


**=» 


TW 


.m 


i 


mf 


3 


^6 


Z=Z^ 


ttg  £ 


f  LI 


^ 


rv- 


17 


Parting. 


pfe 


Andante. 


¥¥¥5 


J-+JJ—jhjE& 


v 


Ali in -ban  -  ge-way-do che -wak    de-bah  -  bun     kce-guh-gt 


IF 


m 


i 


^ 


:gi 


^ 


W 


f 


^r  iQ^fez^  u^ 


^ 


/■«//      ne-me -gv         win  ! ka-hvn-  ah  ko-ne  guy       -     av.it/. 


i 


~ 


p 


m 


rr  =f 


^=f 


r 


^^ 


f 


r-ff    (i  (f— e 


-£- 


3C 


I 


Lot         us     go         home      'tis    near    the         break         o'    the  _    ■    day,  It 


m 


5=3 


W 


r^i 


1— ^-i>^V 


^ 


we  should  be  seen,  what       would         the  peo  -  ph'        say. 


^ 


i 


^=^Q 


^S* 


r=? 


r 


s 


?s*^ 


^ 


Cojiyright  MCMIX  by  Frvderiok  R, Burton 


18 


Doubt:  a  Death  Song. 


Andante. 


frf  f  if-  zf^m 


m 


Dim  is    the   path    be-fore me    ly-ing, 


mm 


m 


tm 


TTT& 


3E 


^r^T 


gggi 


-J  J  J- 


/> 


^ 


f 


~o~ 


few. 


f^r^ 


J-^ 


^ 


r^ii  irr^r  f  r  r  if    i  fg 


^ 


I  know notwhere  it     leads;  Clouds  of  doubt  hang  o'er  me  dy-ing;   I 


■*■*■     * 


gg*i  r      f  \j=e=e=4 


^all  for    guid-ance;  No  friendly     spir-  it    heeds 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R.Burton. 


19 


In  the  Forest. 


Adagio.  p 


Ifa-t^WH  r       p 


m 


In.     the       for        -        est,   lone 


iy. 


i 


M 


m 


M 


Si 


^ 


f= 


;#— 


&£> 


^^ 


Jl 


— » 


ee 


* 


£ 


m 


p  ir    r    r?=^P 


S 


hear  my     sweet  -  heart  sigh  -  ing  through 


,1 


fe± 


^=^ 


the    pines,_ 


O^ 


J— j- 


#» 


$ 


^F 


m 


5 


* 


f= 


^ 


f= 


S 


i 


As    she  gent        -         lv   whis 


pers, 


my    heart  o'er 


^^ 


# 


^ 


» 


P 


"P> 


2 


mm 


£±± 


=znr: 


•s&.  *    «a. 


P 


o 


^ 


f 


^ 


flow  ing,  breafhes  a       sigh  _ 


back 


to      her. 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  B.Rurton 


20 


Winter. 


f^igg 


Andante. 


f 


Rlow,      ye 
K/r   -   zlio 


North 
yah 


ern 
'shqvan 


winds, 
da  y m 


Freeze 

Ki  i'    -     zh  o 


ss 


i* 


Allegro. 


gps^ 


3 


s 


3E3 


frost   -      y  blasts!  Here  with 

yah      'shquan  -  day  in  Kec  -  zho 


in      'tis     warm  while     the 
yah  'shguanrdaym   bay  -  bo  - 


i  to  .n  n 


fe§ 


m 


■# 


si 


* 


Me 


Andante. 


g 


p~ 


^^ 


s 


•   :   J  ^  ^ 


*f— f-? 


win-ter    lasts.    (Whjrl    ye  driv  .   en        sn         H        in   smoth  .'ring 

gin  ahquan-daym) 


k£ 


Allegro. 


W1  liJ     J 


^ 


s 


^ 


drifts!  Win  -  ter  here      lies       low,     Nor   his    cold     hand    lifts! 


Copyright    MCMIX  bi/  Frtdiric/c  R. Burton. 


In  The  Sugar  Camp 


31 


Poco  Allegro.    f 


*  itip  pr  |r"       v  ?  p-  AJ^ 


We  look    as   if  we  . 

Ne-liwy    de-nah         geen 


# 


«^ 


could  taste   of good 
Ne  -  bay    de-nah 


t 


j  j  n  j  j 


££ 


■  =■ 


-#—  #- 


mf 


^ 


^ 


3        3       j 


^g 


* * w — 

staccato  sempre. 


r       p'.j'  ■"■  p  r    ir        p 


^ 


5* 


* 


cheer. 
geen 


Tisstarv-ing   to  be. 

Ne -hay    de-nah,  geen. 


andsug  -  ar    so 
Nc-bay     de-nah 


v\  i  up i  \i  i  m 


^^=* 


^^ 


m 


-i J * 


■* w 


& 


''■  p  p-  p  r   i  r 


p^ 


dear_ 
geen  . 


We  hold    out    the           bowl . 
/•flA.  gah    ge  n-ah  we 


the  bowl     of  bass 
tah  we      ne  -  ne 


i-'j  j  nm  i.i  .i  n ni 


us 


J  I J   I J 


* #- 


-* # 


r        p'  Ji  ^  p  r   ir        p'  ^ j;" p - 


wood . 
wug . 


Oh!     la-  die     it  full. 

jVi?  -  bay     dr  -  nah  geen  , 


J  1  UiH,1 


For  syr  -  up     is 
Ne-bay    de-nah 


mm 


^^ 


m 


^u 


3= 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R,. Burton. 


2» 


t 


^M^-p-f-  if         P— pp^ 


good. 
geen. 


Come!  give    us     a  sup 


of  syr  .  up    or 


^^j— i 


L-LSLL-L 


~# 


f 


s 


mm 


^^= 


*=    -  3 


J 


3= 


w^m 


m 


W^^f 


cake 


Ob-serve    us  dance       up 


our  por-tion  to 


^^rrrP^tT-txrri 


^i 


J 


5 


* 


( 


9=&4  r  ir==p=Eg^ 


take; . 


What  is      it     we  want?_ 


some  syr  -  up,  of 


j-^-j  n  n  j 


r^Hte^ 


lmy-\ J  J J  J  i 


* # 


*      j~ 


# 


^^^l^ZSZ 


mgfjf  ^p^^ 


s= 


r — p^?^ 

course! Give  free  -ly,  or       we 


will  take  it  by      force. 


The  Lucky  Trapper. 


28 


Allegro. 


jn     > 


y-w-jT^-rtL 


P 


Now    gay  -    ly  will    I    dress  my  head, 
She  -  kog .  que  -  an   bay  -  da  h- hah  -  nug 


For 
She- 


p-  PP  p  ppJ-      .'h.*1-  >J' J1  W"    p 


furs    a-bun-danthavel  found; 
kog.que-av  bay-dah-bahwig 


I'll  make      of  one   a    han-  dy  sled 
She  -  kog  -  que-a-n bay-dah-hah-wtg 


frfffWj 


To 
She. 


jp-p  b  pp  p  r-     J'lJ'.JiJ'p  J1  Ji  ,i..     y 


dragthemo'erthewhit-enedground,         To  drag  them  o'er  the  whit-enedground.  V 

kog  -  que.  a  n  bay-da h-  bah  ■  nvg  She  -  kog  -  que  -  an  ba;/-dah  -  bah  -  n  ug  She  - 


inpn^ia^uum^ 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R.  Burton. 


*4 


1   iS    J^    ^ 


^=f. 


kog-  qne-an  bay-dah-bah-nug. 


■  rrtrrrajTi-n71 


v  pin-  pp  P  fur-     p 

It  caught  itsprey,eachclev-ertrap,  It 


* » 


ilJLr  Lfr 


i 


p  p  fl  j..     jt|ji.  jiji  j)  ]>  ^ 


£-£WlP 


P 


caught  its  prey,and  held  it  fast 


Oh!  there  will  be  full  many  a    cap 


To 


i  ^nn  LSI 


F  nn  £Cfr  ^M 


~W* 


i-'^r  '"LrcJ  r    fj 


-h- r^ffi 


P 


jp-ppp   P    p  [■••        JlJiJJip  J'  J>  ,L        < 


wear  whenwinter  moonshavepassed,        To  wearwhenwintermoonshavepassed. 


jf>  j:  j  j  i  3   j*  fiaf*^ 


ar 


in 


^E=E 


»^^ 


**x  r 


;)!  tu  fj  U  ^0 


^m 


35 


A  Song  of  Absence  and  Longing. 


Andante. 


wf 


m 


Sweet  -  heart    mine,      I         im 


iPff 


» 


iahl^  I  1 


TT 


m^ 


plore  you,  Speed     your       com  -  ing        to  me. 


* 


m 


m 


^=^ 


* — # 


got 


■ 


i 


i 


i^ 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  H.  Burton. 


«e 


m 


f        \m 


Three  days     long   have       I  fast 


ed 


;#^# 


$ 


t  9 1 


m^ 


m 


** 


r  m 


p^ 


5 


* 


£ 


2±C 


Since 


my      love      went       a    -      way; 


rntHii'j^j*f 


^p 


3S 

p.  "       ■ 


s 


27 


£ 


F         I   » 


S 


^ 


Hun 


gry         on     -     ly  to 


see 


1 


her.  For 


H^ 


9:»? 


7»ff  ? 


ft    1     jl     T    il- 


^^ 


£* 


r^r 


®&. 


iT 


3 


£ 


her  re      -      turn  I  pray. 


# 


I- 


■J  J  J  J  J  J 


a — a: 


c 


j.  J*  .4 

^  -»-  -m- 


S    S 


y  %  *  J  J  J* 


E 


T 


T- 


*     S8>. 


*  %>. 


28 


#^ 


^ 


3 


Lone,  I       glide  on       the  lake. 


:brtt 


^. 


*  <^ 


^^ 


lis 


y>oto  cresc. 


S&. 


* 


^w 


29 


Her  Shadow. 


Allegro. 


n  i 


! 


j^^lfpT^ 


SA 


rf 


m 


, 


% 


fppf 


ff^ 


s§ 


S 


£^* 


W 


mf 


v — ff-^^?  p  r  P  irry^ 


a 


Out    on  the  lake      my   can-oe      is         glid  -  ing,  Paddle   dip-ping 
Ay -qua-nah-qitog     pe  -  ah    be  -  dah   -      go    jing,Kee-gahwah-bah- 


I 


m 


in  p  p    i  njmTriT 


{- 


TWfj  > 


i 


3E 


!hj    j    ^-ipi-p  r    r   IN 


m 


soft       lest         she  should     take      al-arm        Ah,        hey  -  ah     hey  -    ah 
mah      non        kee     mah      shay    mi   nay        ay  hey  -  ah     hey  -  ah 


¥v'tf  r r r''Lr  i£Uf  ? 


^ 


ppp 


^p 


?=f 


r^ 


4  ^  i  j  J*  J*  J  j  *^H^r+-^4vi^  r  rihf 


ho,  hey-ah  hey- ah       ho,      thus  I    go!        Some-where  a  -  long  shore  she  u 
Ao,  hey-ah  hey-ah       ho,       hey-ah  ho. 


n\i  J  3  J  j 


? 


^S 


^^ 


rpjif^i^flf^ 


t* 


HH 


!*-! 


Copyright MCMIX  by  Frederick  H.  Burton. 


so 


$Au  r  Ey-^nj   j    i'  ji  ip-  p.^_^ 


hid  -  ing  She  is  shy     to      yield        to       love's    al    -    lur  -  ing charm,  Ah, 


jA-i^ff-f-m 


^^ 


^ 


sn 


:r « 


* 


^H^ 


1  J  J1  J  J   J  JiAftfr^J  -        II 


hey-ah     hey-  ah  ho,  hey  -  ah  hey- ah,  love  will     win,   I  know. 


a 


s 


E> 


^S 


1PP 


b^ 


r 


* — * 


r 


SI 


p 


^fe£fe 


^ 


3 


^^ 


J.:.,^-{ 


./I 


There  is   a 


riir     r     ?=*■   J>-  iffi 


s 


E^ 


shad    -     ow        swift    -  ly        steal     -     ing!        Should  it  be  her 


#5^T 


m 


t 


as 


Lu 


^^ 


t    r   br 


s 


£*£ 


E^E^ 


:h 


i>  {v  pr  r  'P 


^^ 


31 


1 


own,        soon  I     will     end       the  race,  Ah    hey-ah  hey      -      ah 


^LLr^n] 


S 


m 


5 


£ 


w 


I 


wm± 


*u=a 


... 


r   LLfr 


i 


a 


F 


f 


j>'u  j  i'jJ  j^Ajia,Nji^as 


H 


ho,  hey  -  ah  hey  -  ah    ho,    I     think  it  is!  Will  she  but  turn,     her  -    self    re- 


jhir    r    ?r  j\  Mi    j    J'^ip-  pr  r 


veal         ing,  I  will     shout        a  -    loud     when     e'er     I      see     herface,Ah! 

r   .  j  n  ..   \~i 


HI 


^W 


^Ji'JJ 


IS 


s 


^ 


il 


±=bL 


PS 


1 


F 


* 


F^^hr 


JiJ  j  k J  lit  Ji. }>W    il 


Isetto. 


hey-ah  hey      -       ah  ho,  hey-ah  hey  -  ah       ho.     There  she  is!    Hal-loo! 


^^ 


ir=f=^ 


EE 


^S 


i* 


I 


tE*EE 


=« 


Err 


32 


Old  Shoes. 


• 


Allegro  moderate 


3 


:$=^=^ 


s 


^"J  -Je       WM  "  ^  -  s'»        ait   -   yaw    -    yon 


^hzi 


O    1       I—— 


PW^ 


^ 


*  i 


y«tit[_[ 


^ 


^ 


J'  ,    J'    Jr^S 


J'  J>    h  jS 


P^£=P 


?=^ 


I 


mu3  "  Je      ww-  "  Ar  -  sin      au  -  yaw     -  yon         muj  -  je      mu  -  ke  -  sin     at 


i        J  IJ>     Jr-J,    Ji     ^      J 


yaw    -     yon  muj   -    je       vin    -  ke   -  sin        an  -  yaw 


yon. 


n 


ft 


w$^-^A=± 


a 


m 


F=M^ 


T 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  B  Burton. 


33 


ferj,  ^  j.  r    ill  J      J     l^y^^^r^l 


Worn  out  shoes    I       am  a -wear     -     ing,        worn  out  shoes    I       am  a- 


m 


J,    j   J,    Jr^fc^ 


^^ 


wear  ing,  worn    out  shoes      I        am  a  -  wear       -       ing, 


te 


/P-j^-jtc 


r      r      r 


=^ 


gg 


i 


^^ 


/7\ 


J'    J>     j> 


^^ 


worn     out    shoes        I  am  a    -    wear 


t 


Allegro. 


Confession. 


;j 


^g 


tj    j^  JH'    '  =^ 


You     are  my  sweet- heart,    you       o   .ver       yon 
Ken  -  nah-mah-xhay  -non      Quay-  kah- bah  -    no 


* 


y»»r  r 


der, 
ques, 


m 

mf 


pp 


55 


=& 


84 


$k=$  p  U    r  iJ    >  J> 


you        are    my  sweet -heart,      you         o  -  ver      yon 
ken   -    nah-mah.shay  -  non        Quay  -  kah-hah  -  no 


73 — 
der, 
que  s. 


I 


i 


m 


mm 


¥ 


wm 


*- 


m 


m 


^m 


=d=* 


J    J    i 


± 


E! 


f^ 


you        are    my  sweet  -  heart,        you         o   -ver    yon    -         -     dor, 


# 


m 


T 


~7~» —   9 


m 


w 


f 


w 


¥ 


±=* 


p  mj  r 


m 


-o — 
der, 


you       are   my    sweet -heart,      you       o  -ver     yon 


* 


fcs 


m 


P? 


PPf 


s 


f=m 


f 


<*— * 


Zasi   <w«^. 


^^ 


£ 


^5 


you        are    my     sweet  -  heart,         you  o    -  ver       yon 


der. 


i-*TTTi 


wm 


p§™ 


m 


w 


w 


¥ 


¥ 


The  Forest  Choir. 

Andte  non  troppo. 


35 


mf 


&m 


-l=r±i< 


r  '  r 


birds,  our    neigh-bors,     sing  -  ing     loud    and       clear! 


Let   us 


=M> 


** 


ss 


IfW 


^r-t 


9-     # 


i 


ff?   tJ 


*^  p  j  j  j 


b* 


^ 


-*  * 


ifeP 


£^^ 


^^? 


join 


our         voi  -  ces       in       their       song. 


{ *i  I L  f  i 


i  {  i  *j 


P 


to^ 


* 


^ 


w     f 


Theirs 


a  song     of     peace,  let  ours  give    them     no 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R. Burton. 


K+-r-i 


es 


r  d   r 


^m 


lo  -  dious   songs     be       -       long; 


37 


The  Lake  Sheen. 


m 


^ 


m 


mj- 


& 


n 


i 


m 


i 


m 


sag 


5E*=i£ 


^^ 


i 


<£».    fov 


* 


i 


• 


a 


SB 


l=3Ek 


m 


tc 


■It. 


<2&. 


?H& 


s>'////j/t.   'Seb. 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  FrederiaJc  R.Burton. 


38 


i 


mf 


g p  p  i*  p  ■  p  p  f  m 


# 


Shim  -  mer  -  ing  sun     up  -  on     the  lake, 

niof/o  kgnfo. 


m 


^m 


IFi 


^p 


WE 


s 


a 


flfo 


li 


pes 


^ 


i    J> 


f 


r — 7 


P  ''    ^  i>''  >'  ^ 


^ 


l       i 


Is  it    my  swecthcirt  beck-'ning     me' 


I 


i^-M-g 


Does     it    not  bid   mv  soul    a         -       wake. 


im   \  \>j  m^ 


39 


& 


Rise  from  its  dreams  and  thit  -  her       flue?. 


.T 


* 


I 


*3t^ 


5"=ff 


fa 


£ 


* 


m 


w 


=^ 


40 


P 


f— {he   i,tp   f-p-p-rcr 


Rip    -   pies  with  sun  -  light  there  at  play, 


j^-Jt  i>F  iajW^j 


S^E 


1 


1  1 


This,     and  no  more    is    what    I         see 


^-      J>p    IftJ  J'    J  J'  III 


c?=^z 


I*  is   my  sweet-heart  beck -'nine;  me 


The  Naked  Bear. 

Andt?  moderate). 


41 


**w> Jl  p  i  it  r  p-t-ri'-^r — =t=±p& 


Kay-goo-mo    -    wek  -  ayn  ah  -  bi  -  no      -     gees 


wahbnhk..r  in  nk  - 


s 


fggg 


m 


T* 


ggg^ 


— -»•  3T 


rr 


I3 


fE^f 


^ 


S 


ps 


r 


8 


te 


p^pp 


m 


•  «' 


n>aA   kee  - gah  -  bi  -  dah -Quo  -  mig 


knh      kah  -  be  -  shees    kos 


\i^i       i 


^ 


I 


^#tjf  j|: 


fUPP 


fejfa^^^T     1>  J'r  iiipp^E^ 


kos-kay-be-quay -ne  -   -  gen 


Hush,  lit  -  tie        babe, go  to  sleep,  lit  -  tie 


m  r       jl  jl  p  i  ii  f •  p  •,  cj  ^ 


Hush -a  -  bye,  ba  -  by,  don't  cry_     I       pray, 


1 l"1"1'  L  i  f  J    h 


^ 


3 


3 


rS^P 


/ 


JE 


ggip 


jig 


Or     the  great  Nak-ed     Bear  will     come    and  take  you    a     -      way. 


m 


m 


3^3 


& 


i 


=* 


fSjr 


¥W- 


$ 


s> 


cXi  r  i' 


i 


r 


t 


Gambling  Song. 


ft    *m 

m 


Allegro. 


£ 


mm 


* 


m& 


Im         the 
Gay    -   get 


man 
wah 


who       can L       find  it,        I 

bah    .  dod      ne      ge  mah  -  guk 


fr*  i  i  i  i 


PPPf 


fPl 


gi=^ 


^ 


* 


^ 


#^M 


know         where     'tis  hid, 

go  guy    -  get         wah 


yes,         I 


do, 


bah    -    dod      ne  ge 


You     cant 
mah  -  guk 


irtr±+-t 


4=i^  i — i 


i   i   1  ^: — 


^s 


a       ■ 


TT       "T 


*        *       *  * 


^  j    J  j  I J    J>— JLJil  j    JH^'lhg  Jli« 


fool       me      no  no,         you    cant fool        mo,     111        bet!  Im     the 

ge       guy  -  get        wah  -     bah -do  I,    nu    ge       mah- guk     ge.  Qay-get 


ti^WP^ 


♦  *  *    *      3      *3  5 

Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R.Burton. 


43 


Morning-  Tryst. 


fl 


Andante. 


I 


^ 


I 


Hero. 
0 


by     the 

nc  -  nah 


gush 

III' 


ing  foun  -  tain, 
nah  -wen  -  dum, 


33F 


m 


rt=±=U 


i 


r 


^t—* 


3E 


f 


a 


W^ 


w 


*1 


-4 — » 


=JT 


'4^=^ 


Wait  I       for 

0  ne  -  nah 


light  of  morn  -   ing; 

ne     -      nah-aen  -   dum 


Eon  now  with 

0  ne  -  nah 


ipH^N 


±-3Hr-i-i 


I 


I 


r~*    j 


:nh=M 


i 


a* 


^ 


1 


=f^F=^f 


3^ 


TT 


^^ 


£ 


pink       the  nioun- tain 
ne     -     Huh- wen  -  dum 


^U^4 


His  crest_ 

ne       -        ne  -  mo 


is  a  -  dorn  -  ing. 

shayn       id  -  uh    -  nig 


$  j    «eHe 

-•-     «E 5- 


f^ 


TT 


1 


;BS 


£M 


XT 


■         K 


^= 


5= 


I 


« S! 


morn,         but   fair  -  er 
we      -      nah -wen-  dum 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R.Bu Hon. 


n  p   it  r     (i  J    J    i a  ,"    ^^ 


She 
0 


m 


who  will 


come  to    meet      me; 

ne      -      nah-wen -  ditm 


Earth  has    no 

i'r       .       mah-me 


m 


n^ 


bit  •  1 1 


^=a 


Se 


i 


F 


r=*=^ 


**==3 


1 


^ 


£=£ 


Pel 


m 


ion    rar    -    er 
yr  -  uk    -    nin 


\ii*l  f  i_j 


Sweet     -    heart come        to    greet    me. 

Mi  ne -mo    -    tihai/n      ai  -  ah    -  Big. 


^ 


I 


f 


Ff^ 


T 


yi  ■!  ■!  '' 


^3 


J-    ^    g 


3~U 


Banished. 


p 


Andante.         mf 


$f  J  ik  r  r  «•  -^ I » 


£2 


Long is    the  road    and  stee-p  the  path-way,dear 


#1 


^ 


M 


4 


m 


m 


fr 


T 


S 


^ 


1 


a  r  T  r    r~ 


5— s; 


5a». 


^ 


%    r     J'    J    r    J     |  lg 


^ 


heart,  That 


e'er        must   keep     us        a 


part; 


May 


^ 


^ 


i 


i 


*=#= 


* 


¥ 


r  u 


S 


« 


^g 


pTj.  J7^ 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R. Burton. 


r 


45 


^ 


-i i>— £ 


spir  -  its       give        cour    -    atje      to  thee,         dear         heart,        Fare       thee 


i=t 


2 


P 


^ 


m 


4 


m 


r^ 


* 


m 


3^ 


=fe=fe 


well,    Oh,     fare     -       well! 


My   ej-es  are  blind   -     ed.        m\ 


#iN# 


+— -j- 


i 


i 


f 


1. 


^ 


?r 


J 


*  j  rm 


^^ 


=5= 


ten. 


r 


** 


^  J  hi  r    r    r   if        J^i* 


*==& 


ijrief        I    can-  not        tell, God  grant  thee   His      care 


in      the 


± 


■■  J    J    J 


3 


^=if 


f 


1?-^- 


**  ,;  *r   ti 


i 


j_j. 


i 


^s 


i 


gg^ 


f^ 


T 


fe 


^N 


*  j  i»r 


P¥ 


s 


depths  of    de  -  spair!  Good    -  bye,  then, dear  heart,      fare 


^^ 


^ 


thee  well! 


m 


P^^ 


f8^ 


S 


^ 


•r  rr^r r  ^ 


^ 


4 


lO: 


"Sib. 


* 


r 


46 


The  Beaver  Hunt. 

Originally  a  cycle  of  four  songs. 
Andte  tranquillo. 


•»*--- 


*feg 


r  i  i  f  [■■__i-»  f  I  r»'^^s 


f^fff 


?T 


2? 


Si 


ife= 


j» 


^ 


m 


^ 


?     • 


£ 


m^k 


Be  -  side    my  camp     -    fire's     flar  -  imr  Ht;ht,  Here 

Ne  -  mo  -  be  -  yon  ne    -    mo  -be      -   '  yon,  Ne  - 


^ 


E* 


^=m 


?m 


j- 


mm 


±^m 


m^f 


r  r  rrr 


** 


m 


^ 


*t 


will        I         pass     the      nightV- 

mo  -    be   -    yon  


the     gloom  -  y       night.      Not 

■ne    -  mo    -     be    -   y>n        dull 


f* 


i  £  i 


f  *  f  r 


as 


s 


m 


m 


*h 


^ 


P^E 


,r  r  r 


£ 


*t 


» 


far  -    a  -  way     my      longed  for 
na/i  -  one -nay    nind     ish  -  Jco 


prey 
den 


Is       hid 


s 


f    I     8 


:i 


W 


# # 


y»i'»  r  r  f1 


^  j  rh 


i- 


^^ 


£ 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R. Burton. 


47 


^ 


^ 


till     the   day. 
/«o  -  be  -  yod 


111       wait     the    day. 
ne     -   mo  -   lie  -  yon. 


r*  J  j  j.      j 


fl 


d    fl     * 


*t^frr* 


^fe 


- 


P        a=zz 


5F 


^^ 


f^ 


r  J  rv 


Pi 


Allegro. 


ife^^ 


\t 


HA 


*T^ 


# 


Agitato. 


*~v 


While   I 
Ay -ah 


ite 


F*^ 


iU.7i7r|,i|,!^ffJ££^ 


isfeps 


sa 


J'  i  .'■  »■  i  m^ 


do/.e,  like    a    flash  There  comes  a 
yo      k  i  -  ne  -may     mo     kay  -  ah 


iP§— FHR 


step      and    a    grunt    and    a    splash     and 
may     ay  -ah    yo       ki  -  /?«   //*<7y       wto 


y*f  t    f  f  f 


« £ 


N#^# 


f^HN^^  h  1 1  -  i;  _  ^y^~rQ 


out       I       dash; 
kay  -  ah      may 


I     shoot    and 
zhe  -  wo  -  mok 


m  F  .f  E...J  =fj= 


miss       hut      tis 


no    won    -  der, 
fe  -  non  ■    day. 


*-* 


48 


ftl-fcjji  Mr-frnr^^ 


I 


on-Iy  see    his    tail      go        un  -  der,    tail    go    un-der. 
ko    nind  e    -    gr  -    non-day     e  -  ge-  non-day. 


Tempo  Primo. 


m 


i= 


i 


-s 


£ 


p^ 


1»P 


P3 


/CV 


ii 


Un, 


SF 


J: 


^ 


All?  molto 


•&  Where    now    is  my  skill?        Ay    -    ah!  I       shot   a    -    gain,     shot    to      kill, 


*  Some  of  the  Ojihway  words  in  this  section  cannot  be  distinguished  on  the  phonograph  record. 
These  are  clear:  aynahbeyon  keenundaygogee  menon,  meaning"While  I  was  looking  he  went 
down  again]' 


49 


innm 


m^ 


m^m. 


Tookcare-ful  aim    while  he    stood  still,    Where         now      is  my  skill?      Ay  . 


I 


3^#5 


art#5 


^ 


U- 


=g 


95= 


3=E 


W 


f 


j'j    J'  >>j   i*  >1  .h^=|-^^ 


nA/      Where    is    my  skill? 


Down    he        went     in   -  to     the  wet. 


#J^nnne=hh p r  MP  +r~^J 


down  he  went    in  -  to       the       wet        Ay .  ah!      Ill  get  him   yet,     see    fl     dont 


^  •      »       0      *      m    — » 


t^-ri-U 


^m 


p* 


»v" 


P^^fr^-^ 


111    get  him  yet,     get    him  yet! 


rr-i  ; 


ftfl 


■0+ 1 0- 

While    I     watched,   up     he 

Ne  -  nah  -  wnd         e  .  nah 


-yjr. 


Wf 


ff 


i 


b ■   m 


tnf  * 


m 


S 


a=± 


i 


* 


ff    ff    ir     v-w 


7~t~r^^f 


rose      from      out 


the  drink.      While       I  watched, 

ning  Ne    -    nah    -      mod 


up 
e 


he 
nah 


^      J>     J'     J' 


P— (i— f     ^-^=p=p 


rose      and      gave      a 
o     -    quay  -  go     -    no 


wink;     Then       I  shot       him       in  the 

ning         che  -  maun       nin   -    ga  -   pit    -    ge 


.^^w 


:S 


m 


■P-  $- 


a=i 


PPH 


. Vlf 


51 


=£ 


head,       Pad- died     to     him  found  him       dead.     While    I       watched,    up      he 
nah         chv-maun  nin-gah-pu .-  ge     -     nah         ne  -nah  -    wod         e    -   uak 


m 


m 


n  /7TJ 


5 


f 


T 


2 ~%r 


y»  fFtz 


t 3t 


J5T 


.XT 


^=J)  J>  1 J    J  -JH^  *  Wl^ 


rose  from  out    the       drink,  gave    a       wink.^ 
0- quay -go  -  no  -  fling      ne    .  nah-  wod.) 


ha!     ha!       ha!     ha!   ha!     ha! 


f 


ffl 


jrn/n 


» 


* 


0  t-  f- 


w 


3= 


i*  i  *t  p  |J'>  jW'  ip  F  ^p^^^ 


ha!         Now  there's  noth-ing  else  to  do    But  take  him     home   in    my      ca 


*=f> 


■srn 


m^m 


m 


■m • 


t — r 


*r=T 


»!/" 


I?'     [M     [J 


S 


P^ 


m 


ff 


z^m 


-m^^m^ 


noe!        Ha!     ha'        ha!    ha!    ha!     ha!      ha! 


52 


. 


Hiawatha's  Death  Song. 


§ 


Andt?  maestoso. 


Muh-noo  ne-nah  nin-ga    -    viah     -   jah,     Muh-noo  ne-nah 


tlU-y  p   J3-.I     Ji  Ji     1 1  J    J    J   Jife 


nin-ga- mah  -jah;     Hi  -    a 


4^*  j     j  jjtf 


«'a  -  <Aa,    we,  nin-ga-dn  -  jah. 

m 


-» *  * 


s 


E 


i 


Tj   j    J  J 


H 


I8 


1 


?* 


3   3 


^ 


p      J'    J      J       J       1   J^^^ 


Muh-noo     no  -  nah         nin-ga.mah-jah,  men,     Hi  -   a  -  wa  -   tha,     neen, 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick   R.Burton. 


/* / 


53 


^^jrnrj— rp-^-ra  f  r  r  r  p  p  ur    .^ 


nin-gn-dc  -  jah. 


Mourn  ve   not    o'er  my   do  -    part    -     ure, 


£^f44^J4£g 


is 


** 


3=;  i  «p 


^^ 


3S 


s 


rrr 


*  3= 


/_ 


^Pf 


^^^ 


«  • 


^^ 


m       m 


Mourn  ye       not;     I  go     up  -  on     a    jour-ney,        I,      Hi-  a  -  wa  -  tha, 


^    J     J    J 
— 1  \>>    t   \ 


m 


PFPi 


r^ 


i 


/ 


m 


m 


mm 


% 


il 


i^ 


jA  j  jijijij  j  iJ  r  r  J  if^Tni-t 


soon  will  have  de-part  -ed.    Mourn    ye     not;    my       jour-ney  is    e  -  ter  -  nal. 


ite 


i    t$=^§ 


m 


wm 


r— 


gg^ 


I 


#F 


i 


» — ■• 


*^   *    ^ 


* 


^;-fi- 


S 


3=T=f*=fr?=3F3^    j    HjMI 


*  « 


I         Hi  -  a  -  wa  -  tha>    soon  will  have  gonefor-ev    -    er.  - 


m 


rm 


r> 


M 


m 


W~i 


si 


=± 


i 


* 


hU 


k 


5       :* 


54 


// 


Soprano . 


Alto. 


Tenor. 


Bass. 


mnp^ 


My  Bark  Canoe. 

Quartette,  unaccompanied. 

k 


mm 


3 


tt=   -       rl         ~      I  4-  |     |        m1- 
In  the      still  night,    the         long  hours  through,!  guide_   my 


trf'^ 


m 


teMigJ  J-  J1 11  it  J^ 


.T 


In  the      still  night,    the         long  hours  through,  I  guide_   my 


i^ 


hflplitr  f  til  p-  p   J    J  I'ilp^g 


In  the      still  night,    the         long  hours  through,  I  guide_  my 


toy  nf  r  Ml  r  n   r    r  g^H* 

i  Inthe      still  night,    the         long  hours  through,  I  guide      mi 


A 


WFTi   J   iiiJ*.  »T1ZuJUl]_j-& 


ca-noe, M\ 


bark    ea  -  noe,     Mv  bark   <*a-noe, 


gfPjP 


V  love,  to   you.  While  the 


I  it  J'  J..     J)  I  rtHt-r-^ 


£ 


W 


^ 


bark    ca  -  noe,     Mv  bark  ca  .  noe,  My 


love,  to^  you. While  the 


&#jji  Ji  ,1    n»Jt  p  r^-n  up-  J"?  (t  ii 


bark    ca  -  noe,    My 


bark  ca  -  noe, Mv 


g^ 


love,  to    vou. While  the 


9  -i  r  up- ;r  ;  up-p r  *  P 

:a  -  noe,    Mv  bark   da -noe,         Mv  love,  to    vou.While  th 


TT 


bnrk    ca  -  noe,    My 


love,  to    you.While  the 


A 


fe^  r    p  U  p-  ^  J     J   H(r^ 


^s 


stars  shine,      and 


falls    the    dew,  I 


seek     mv     love       in 


7T 


£33 


§ii 


^^ 


\ 


m       m 


stars  shine,      and  falls    the    dew,  I 


seek    my    love       in 


SAto=£^^a=#-  p  J    J=re^  ^  J-  ^ 


stars  shine,      and  falls    the    dew,  I 


Jek    mv     love      in 


wif  r  p  ^ 


a 


^ 


*^ 


stars  shine,     and  (alls     the   dew,  I  seek     mv    love       in 

Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R. Burton. 


55 


p\yj  jTTj  Ha .''  t  Q'.  p  u  n?  rM  a 


bark   ca-nue,      In  bark    ca-noe,_       I 


sock   for  you.      It      is 


1^  >  ji  j    a  I  rl  Jl  J..     Ji  1 1  J'.  j^^JMi 


bark   ca-noe,       In  bark    ca  -  noe  I 


seek   for  you.       It      is 


^fe£^&=£^'i  p  rJ*.  p  1 1  pn  r[)  p 


a 


bark  ca-noe,       In  bark    ca-noe,_       I 


»£^ 


S 


seek  for  you.       It      is 

v  r. 


irk    ca-noe,         T  seek  for  you.       It      is 


w 


p 


bark  ca-noe,       In  bark    ca-noe, 


s 


w 


^^ 


iLM-r 


i 


psip 


j2 


I,       love,      your  lov  -  er    true,     Who  glides    the  stream   in 


m 


m 


Ut-±H!r±-^-  I «  ,li    ,Ht-^ 


I,      love,      your  lov  -   er    true,     Who  glides    the  stream   in 


bfeiir   r    Migpgf 


g^=±±=^ 


S 
i 


ZZfc 


I.       love,      your  lov   -  er    true,     Who  glides    the  stream   in 


^^~^—f-\i  p-  a  r    r  wM  r'  M 


tM ' 

:r    true,     W 


I,      love,      your  lov  -  e 


ho  glides   the  stream  in 


p&^k 


P 


rit   P  J_Jrjr-t4  Ji  Ji  j    II 


bark     ca-  noe,        It 
P 


glides     to    you,_      My  love,   to      you. 


m  a  }A  s  1 1  y  Ji  j..    J*  ii  a  ji  j   i 


te 


bark     ca-noe,        It 
P 


glides     to    you.         My  love,    to      you. 


Ql   "J—H-J-   p  r^i'.-f^l^-^^l 


bark     ca  -  noe,        It 


glides     to     you,_      My  love,    to      you. 


it^Ul  p  ,|     p=44f    p  f-   -ytt  p-   p-1-^ 


bark     ca  -  noe,        It  glides     to     you,  My  love,    to     you. 


56 


A  Song  of  Absence  and  Longing. 


Andante. 

J  ft  it     ™f 


Soprano. 


Alto. 


Tenor . 


Dass. 


liar   r  ir  r  i 


? 


i 


Sweet- heart     mine,    I        im    .    plore  you,        Haste      vour 


^ 


Sweet- heart     mine,     I       im    -    plore  you.       Haste       your 

mf 


Vny   r  iJ  J  ,J  i  r  i  r  ir  W 


s 


Sweet-heart     mine,     I       im     -    plore  you,        Haste       vour 


^^ 


^P 


Sweet- heart    mine,     I       im    -     plore  you,       Haste       your 


§ 


r  ^  j  u. 


^ 


*==» 


com  -   ing       to  me,. 


All        the        day   long     be    -    fore 


^ 


U 


^ 


I 


com  -  ing       to  me,. 


All       the        day    long     be    -    fore 


^ 


r  i  r  r  r 


* 


:  a 


com  -  ing      to  me,     to  me        All       the        day    long    be    -    fore 


m 


^ 


»r  .r   r   ir      i  r 


*\ 


com  -   ing       to  me, 


All       the        day    long     be    -    fore 


J 


F^£ 


pf7\        mf 


J   r  i  r    r 


=a 


you      My       lone    heart      longs        to  be. 


# 


7>0         w/ 


Three     days 


^^ 


m 


s * 


you      My       lone 


— o~r- 

heart 


ih,.l     J    | -I 


longs     to           be         Three     days 
-PQ         mf 


^M 


you      My       lone 


heart 


m 


longs      to  be         Three     days 

7>Q         mf 


*p-       lip  7~ '  r"  '-^^ 


you       My       lone  heart  longs      to  be         Three     days 

Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  B. Burton. 


57 


m 


tt  r  r  -J 


r  if   r  rf—pF^d 


long  have    I  fast        -        ed ,       Since      my      love  went    a     -    way,. 


*»J    J    J     Ir-J 


t±^ 


^ 


ff 


long  have    I  fast      -         ed,       Since      my      love  went    a    -     way, 


long  have    I  fast       -         ed,       Since      my       love  went    a    -     way, went  a 


^P^ 


£ 


Hun    -   gry         on  -    ly      to  see  her,       For 


Pn 


J  J  J    'J.    '  i    J 


Hun   -     gry         on  •    ly      to  see  her,        For 


gry 


^^ 


za. 


Hun 


on  -    ly       to 


.'*'l  \\    J    J 


see 


her,        For 


way, 


Hun    -     gry  on  -    ly       to  see  her,        For 


J 


jFffPP 


f      I  * 


^ 


P^ 


~T0 

her       re 


turn       I  pray. 


Lone     in       for  .est,    I 


t 


«    U    '    J 


m 


*=£ 


^&s- 


— s 

her       re 


turn       I  pray 


I. one     in       for.  est,     I 


fc 


r  "r  ir  r  u 


T? 


her        re   -      turn       I  pray. 


Lone     in       for- est,     I 


Si 


» 


r  r  u  -j 


her       re    -     turn       I  prny,      I       pray 


Lone     in       for.est,     I 


6S 

L1  *,-*- 


m 


p 


pp 


call 


her, 


Lone,    I     glide   on  the       lake,. 


m 


rr~J-iT«j  j"^ 


i  j  i-u 


g  • 


Lone,    I      glide  on  the    lake,  on  the       lake,_ 


call 


her. 


m 

call 


mm 


^m 


her. 


Lone,   I      glide   on  the        lake, 


Fear_ 


j-itrrrj;!.)  nr_=^r  r  irrr 

—      her, Lone,    I     elide  on  the        lake, — 


on  the        lake,- 


'i 


S 


^ 


f 


wm 


Fear  -    ing  what  may   be    -  fall  her,  My       long  .    ing   heart       will 


* 


1 


i  i       '    J        J       '^ 


« * 


~* 9~ 

Fear  -    ing  what  may    he  -  fall 


her,  My      long  -   ing   heart       will 


4  *"Tr  r  ^ 


^ 


^ 


« 


ing  what  may    be  -    fall  her,  My      long-   ing    heart  will 


S 


rTiTt^ 


Fear  -    ing  what  may    he  -    fall,     be  -   fall  her,    My      long-  ing    heart       will 


&H  j, a 


± 


ppo 


wm 


m 


break, 


m 


My     heart        will      break. 

ppr> 


jjUJ  j 


Mv     heart        will       break 

_, ,    ppr> 


break ,  My  long 


ing 


life 


^ 


break, 


1  K,,.-.l.  M.r  1 


My  heart        will       break. 

pp  r> 


P=3^ 


break,  My  long 


ing  heart 


will       break. 


51) 


The   Lake  Sheen. 


J  Art   UJL 


Soprano. 


Alto. 


Tenor. 


Bass 


y^rr^w^  (i  g  mf    u  j 


Sliim-mer-ing  sun     up  -  on    the  lake. 

mf 


OTii  FmrpfT,  jrr;rn 'TTj^p 


Shim-mer-ing  sun    up  -  on      up      -        on —  the         lake 

mf 


Shim-mer-ing  sun    up  -  on    the  lake . 

mf  —  —         - — -^=zT 


wnr  p  f-hhhh"  t  i  ;i  c  j  p  ig^i 


'  Shim-mer-ing  sun     up-   on      up       .        on —   the  lnke  _ 

m.f  or  esc. 


i^4f#rnr^=3^^ 


^^ 


Is      it    my        sweet-heart  beck -ning 


Does      it    not 
mf  r.resc. 


p-jy  Ji  b  Ift  jv^n>  i>  IIS  j>  JJTJT&  JTJ1 


«J ' — — — • ■ "r    *'•   V  _ 

Is       it     my        sweet-heart  heck -nine         heck-  on-ing       me        Does      it    not 
P  K  _  mf  r.resc. 


I 


P   P  P    I  ftp   p    p    p    llip 


^ 


r 


^ 


*^ 


:t 


Ts      it     my         sweet-heart  heck-'ning  heck- on-ing       me        Does      it    not 

mf  r.resc. 


%m 


J>  mf    r.resc. 


Is      it     my  sweet-heartbeck-'ning         heck-  on-ing        me       Does      it    not 


J1  J*  li'r: 


J'   Jin    IH  J1  i1  J^ 


Spp 


£ 


i^ 


P 


s 


hid     mv  soul    a       -       wake 


Rise  from  its  dreams  and  thith-er 


#  A  J>  i,J'  AJilS^m 


mnm 


hid    mv  soul    a     -     wake     a  .  wake  Rise 


and  thith-er 


iLX^-pJii^— JF l!F   1  ft -PM3 


bid    my  soul    a      -       wake 


Rise 


and  thith-  er 


vm  g  r  ff  i!!^P-^ip 


AJMLft 


bid    mv  soul    a     -     wake     a  -  wake    a    -    Rise. 


and  thith-  er 


Copyright  MCMIX  hy  Frederick  R.  Burton. 


60 

J 


I 


i 


flee?. 


If  pP   IA p   p  (i  P  lil r       iJ- 

Rip  -  plos  with         sun -light  there  at  play 


ilJ    >  I  i    I  J»  JtJi  iajwJ>  n  usi 


»     '  d 


thith   -    er       flee?     Rip  -  pies  with  sun-light  there  at  play     at        play- 


# 


ji  r  p  i  r~  ip'-ff-iapTT-F  lj|r     t  'p 


thith   -   er       flee?    Rip-pleswith         sun-light  there  at  play. 

<0 


h-nir   in  ir  pp  iftp  g  ^p  mrj-p  ifi 


thith  -   er       flee?    Rip -pies  with         sun.  light  there  at  play—  at        play 


J1- Ji,  ImJ'J' JiJ'lllJ-      I  J.  lp-pplftp   p  J'J 


This  and  no       more  is  what   I  see 


But    I  will     dream  that  o'er  the 
creac. 


This  and  no  more 


** 


is       what  see      But    I  will         dream  _      that 

creac. 


J' i  J-  ib'm  mm 


rprfrt  r   p  p  ^ 


P"pP  laP   P  P^ 


This  and  no  more is       what    I         see      But    I  will     dream  that  o'er  the 

creac. 


v-Vpp  ifttfr    y  mr  jii  j- 1 rr-  p  p  iftr-     t 


This  and  no  more_  is       what    I        see      But    I  will     dream  that 


J 


(<      |J.     |  Ji.Jl,  uJi  J'  J.  J'  |HJ. j>  ' 


bay, 


It      is  my        sweet-heartbeck-'ning  me. 


p$m 


H.U  J>   A  Ji  lil 


fe 


If1? 


f 


o'er    the     bay,  Tis  my        sweet-heartbeck-'ning      beck-on-ing      me. 


fl£:     IT'    l"r     P  Iftp  P  P  ''P  li'p'  ^1  J^ 

bay, Tis         my        sweet-heartbeck-'ning      beck-  on-ing     me. 


mr  p  ir>flir      ff.i>  j>  p  P  hip-  >>ij.  i 


o'er    the       bay,       -Tis 


my  sweet-heart      beck-on-ing      me. 


9-*f- 


Hiawatha's  Death  Song. 

Finale  to   Hiawatha,    The   Indian  Play. 
Andante  maestoso. 


61 


£=^ 


rrr  r  Hnf     r 


»--; 


Mourn     ye      not       o'er      my     de     -      part 


i 


u 


m 


m 


wm 


W-^ 


s; 


*=* 


^-^U4-4 


-0 * 


yinitr   r  r  r  i  p  p  p  p 


rj  p  r  r 


Mourn       ye      not;     I         go    up  -  on   a   jour  -  ney,        I,      Hi  -  a   -  wa  -  tha, 


*fc 


9 


H*** 


m 


¥F¥t 


-*■     # 


si 


i 


-*■  z± 


!>:  ¥  r  o  m 


r  r  r  r  ip  p^pr  me 


soon  will  have  de-part  -  ed.  Mourn    ye    not;     my    jour-ney  is   e  -  ter-nnl 


*t 


*** 


m 


i 


rt 


'Mm 


33=3=3==: 

♦       5     5* 


5 


•Hi'tr  m  i*  r  r  up  p  h  J    |j  ' 


I        Hi  -  a  -wa-tha,  soon  will  have  gone  for-ev 


i¥ij j  in 


m^E 


i 


s 


a: 


Copyright  MCMIX  by  Frederick  R.  Burton. 


62 


#ttl 


Pi 


f 


r  r  r  n 

Fare   thee    well,  then,   Hi  -  a 
f 


ISC 


f 


wa    -     tha! 


Mr  r 


^ 


Fare  thee  well,    Oh". 
f, 


m 


-f— r-r  p  f^-: 


*     w 


41 


Fare  thee   well,  then,  Hi  -  a 
f 


wa    -      tha! 


Ste 


?=E 


Fare   thee  well,    Oh! 


r-  nr    r  ir  r^ 


i"=iT 


? 


Far    thee    well,  then,   Hi  -  a 
f 


wa     -     tha! 


^M  rrr  ifaf^ 


Fare  thee  well,    Oh! 
f 


r^F^ 


Fare  thee    well,  then,  Hi  -  a      -      wa    -      tha!        Fare    thee  well,    Oh! 


m  i  t±n 


mm 


i 


r     .  - 


■^i  j  f  f  pF&f^j 


f 


TTT* 


.V 


w/" 


y  p  j  J  J~  J  1 J    J    J^zLiTXJi"^^ 


4* 


fare  thee  well  for  -  ev  .  er!    Sinks  the     sun,    our 

mf 


prophet  go -eth     on -ward. 


F=fr^j^^J      J     J.     J     I^MhJhJ^ 


41 


fare  thee  well  for- ev  -  eri    Sinks    the     sun,    our 


pro-phet  go-eth     on-ward. 


•prt-j 


r  ^~s=E=E=gli 


^p 


s* 


fare  thee  well  for  -  ev  .  er!    Sinks    the     sun,    our 

™f 


pro-phet  go-eth    on-ward. 


s 


rxzpj^ 


1 


a^idtj^ 


M 


r 


,7 

faretheewell  for  -  ev  -   er!    Sinks    the     sun,    our      pro-phet  go-eth     on-ward. 


l; 


m=^R 


m 


lll»lli   J1J  J 


mf 


T  i     ?  * 


~+  i   i  ^ 


*   *-    * 


i^fi 


#  * 


«3 


£ 


mf 


PP^f 


J'MJ  J   lit  J  JiJiJ   J    J    H 


# 


*£ 


Fare  thee  well, May  stars  shine  on  thy  jour-ney,  0,    Hi-a  -wa-tha,  through 


r^7  r  J  UW'J'Jui  l<i«Lb^ 


Fare  theewell,  May  stars  shine  on  thy  jour-ney.  0,    Hi-a  -  wa-tha,  through 

mf 


¥J  r  r  J  if  p  pp  J  J  ikJ  Jil'J  J  J   11 


Fare  thee  well,  May  stars  shine  on  thy  jour.ney,  0,  Hi-  a  -wa-tha,  through 

mf 


&*t  r  r  r  j  ^  :<  j>f  r  r  it  r  pttt~^tt- 


Fare  theewell,  May  stars  shine  on  thy  jour-ney,  0,  Hi-a  -wa-tha.  through 


53Lif  E  jiT^gtJ  kj  Jlj-jzHt 


*     9 


J 


*t 


muujj 


^ 


r  ir  gp 


shad-ows     ev  -  er-last-ing. 


He 


Fare   thee     well,  Hi-a-wa 


*jr^H>j>ii'~    r  r-^1^ 


jyt 


^ 


shadows     ev  -  er-last-ing. 


Fare  thee     well,  Hi-a-wa 


r  r  ir  pp  r 


wm 


gasp 


shad  -   ows;   Fare  thee  well, Hi-a-wa       tha!     fare  thee 


faf-fi^ — if — r=p 


shad    -      ows;      Fare  thee  well,  Hi-a-wa        -         tha!  fare     thee 


tf 


m 


x        ,1,1    — _-_  J  L 


fg#f 


i 


r 

MP 


— : — ir 


64 

>     A 


il 


r      r    r 


^    a  ^  J'  .s 


tha!  fare        thee         well!    may  stars  shine  on  thy  jour-  ney!    fare 


il 


~i~r^-j 


W^=E 


s 


F         P 


tha!  fare         thee  well!    may  stars  shine  on  thy  jour- ney!   fare 


P?'<   i  t,  ''J;i'i 


f^P 


well,  may  stars  shine  on  thy    jour-  ney.    Fare 


well,  fare 


v-v1  r  r  n  |!  n  i  r  r  f       ig 


well,  may  stars  shine  on  thy    jour -ney.    Fare 


well,  fare 


^     '      ~ 


■     J     J   J| 


rjp 


* 


^=s 


fffH    £? 


Sf2^ 


gg 


i 


^ 


a      ^ 


i 


=  : 


y= 


g 


™y 


^^^ 


r   r    pf  r  ir^^ 


jtf 


well!      Sinks the     sun 

mf 


our      pro    -    phet  go  -  eth        on  -ward, 


^ 


^ 


s 


ee 


mm 


well!      Sinks the     sun_ our      pro   -     phet  go  -  eth        on  -  ward. 

M  i     r 


£ 


rr^r  ir  "r  r    't    ir  r  f 


well,      Sinks the     sun our      pro    -     phet  go   -   eth        on  -  ward, 

ff. 


WTT 


r  r  ir  ?  ir  tt  ill 


*t 


well. 


Mourn     ye       not  o'er  my  de  -part       -         ure; 


f  lul    f 


S 


r«f  i    *r 


go-eth_  on -ward,    on 


ward 


fare    -well 


-M= 


rr  ir     p  r 


on        -        ward ,      on 


ward . 


yiji^r  r  r  irr  ?  p  r  r  ir  r  77 


Mourn  ye      not,  I         go  up -on  a    jour  -  ney.       fare-well    then  for   -   ev  -  er 


fc 


m 


«t  «j  i 


s 


*=t 


pp^ 


m<; 


m    m    m    m- 


mk 


^^ 


ut 


wy 


^ 


^^ 


Sinks  the      sun,ourpro-phetgo-eth 


* 


j  'j  ;  jjrjj 


* 


Sinks  the      sun,ourpro-phet go-eth 
w/1  


JTXi  JiJ-J 


Sinks  the      sun, our  pro  -phot  go-eth 


WtprT^Y-^1  p  M  i  ,   .  J-^rJ-j-ji-^-JrJn 


Mourn  ye      not;  my  jour-ney  is     e    .    ter-nal, Sinks  the      sun,  our  pro -phet  go-eth 


**= 


.?>/> 


^^F 


^fTO 


yitfir 


=£: 


#^f 


*i-r 


j  j  ^   r 


66 

J 


u 


c/'fsr. 


ii   J.J.I  J   J  JW'H* 


i^ 


on-ward.  Hi  -  a    -   wa  -  tha, 


Hi  -  a    -    wa  -  tha, 


fare  thee 


♦ 


** 


^ 


jj    iJU   j  ii'N   J 


^>=3 


It 
on -ward.   Hi .  a    .    wa  -  tha, 


m 


Hi  -  a    -    wa  -  tha, 
cresc 


fare  thee 


tr-jrr-j 


p  f  r  r      ||J-^_ii|J  »^^ 


on -ward.   Hi  -  a 


wa  -  tha, 


fare 


well  for  -  ev  -  er 


M  '  ' ! '  J>-"r  QJ  TW 


on  -   ward. 


U^ 


Hi  -  a  -  wa  -  tha, 


fare  thee  well,  then, 


-fat 


Tin'      r  I'  f 

Hi  -  a   -  wa     -      tha  fare   the> 


r- 


well,        then, 


4t 


^3 


^ 


well,       then, 


M 


Hi-  -  a  -  wa      -       tha 


fare  thee 


=m 


r    r    'r     g  ?^^ 


fare  -   well  for  -  ev      -      er 


Hi  -  a  -  wa      -    tha 


^  J     -h  -N; 


rrr    r 


fare  -   well  for  -  ev 


er 


Hi  -  a  -  wa      -     tha 


tt? 


/fl  *  *j£ 


* 


well,  then, 


Hi  -  a     -  wa    -       tha 


Hi  -  a- 


am 


^ 


m 


well,  then, 


Hi  -   a    -    wa     -       tha 


Hi  -  a 


*** 


r    i»r     r 


fare       -      well    for  -  ev      -      er  fare     -        well 

ff 


*  7T~  ..        ,.  ....  .,  Tf  .  11.  _      <■__»   - 


N  fare       -      well    for  -  e'er        fare  thee    well,  Hi   -  a    -wa     -     tha,  fare- 


*  r       lt( 


xm      r. 


wa       -       tha 


fare  thee  well 


# 


fefaf 


^^ 


1''     j'   lit 


wa     -        tha 


fare  thee   well 


f*h    »im-^-iE 


Hi  -  a    -  wa      -    tha  fare 


THTTfr    c 


well 


Hi   -  a   -  wa    -       tha 


P 


e 


a 


flLrJJJcur 


ik*= 


^ 


;g 


gg     FH 


5a. 


* 


^         l^r 


68 


4* 


f 


rf*nr~TT 


* 


TT~ 


^ 


fare      well  for  -  ev     -       er 

mf 


3E 


m 


fare 


well 


w$ 


m 


*s 


well 

f 
o 


fare         well    for  -  ev     -      er 


o 


fare 


♦ 


m 


well 


Fpr.fJ3^P|tf: 


5x 


i 


«t 


Hi    _     *     _     ,.,.,  a.  ,■-  ...     .  .. 


Hi  -   a 


wa       -      tha 


fare    thee  well,  then,  for- 


pnni 


m 


wm 


fare  thee  well 


wt 


for 
f 


ev      -       er 


fare  thee 


m 


WF& 


=£ 


Hi    -  a      -     wa     -      tha 


fare   thee 


3** 


fare 


i 


?: 


JH& 


ff 


«9 


deeregc. 


XE 


* 


^- 


er 


—  — -,_ 


v      s 


fare 


-•^ — » 


-0^ — 0- 


well  Hi  -    a   -  wi 


i 


=4; 


tha.  fare    -    well 
ff 


*       * 


¥ 


m 


^=p 


well  Hi  -   a  -  wa 


tha.   fare        well 


ff 


^=^ 


i>       / 


well 


Hi  -  a  -    wa     -     Ob    tut 


6  e.i  h* 

ftT> 


-»♦ 


^ ^ 


0"  0 


VfFS 


§ 


5  fag         m 


IT 


*       »  S        s 


70 


& 


i 


fare 


well! 


**= 


~o ^& 

wa         .         tha! 


*f  r  J>  J    -1 


f 


ev.er,  fare -well! 


W£ 


r  r  r  r  im 


3E 


PP 


well 


Mourn    ye      not;    my       jour  -  ney       is      e    -  ter  -  nal. 


U 


s 


P 


r     p  p  ■'' 


* 


M 


Fare        thee        well,         Hi  -    a 


wa 


tha 


*  ■ 


PP 


P 


4* 


Fare         thee         well, 
f 


Hi  -    a     -     wa 


tha 


S^^ 


F P-P- 


Fare         thee        well,  Hi  -   a 


wa 


tha 


£ 


ut    r    r    7  f  if 


Fare         thee         well,  Hi  -   a 

^y-^n-rnj^- 


wa 


tha 


i".' j  f  ,  r  r 


^ 


imp- 


fcfctf 


7i 


m 


^^ 


A 


Oh,  fare  thee  well  for  -  ev  er! 


U- 


Fare         thee  well, 


S 


=£ 


^^ 


P^ 


*  g 


Fare         thee         well,  Oh,  fare  thee  well  for-  ev     -       er! 


PP 


^^ 


^^ 


^^ 


Fare        thee  well.  Oh,  fare  thee  well  for  -  ev      -       er! 


m$£ 


ff-g-fl-TT 


Fare        thee  well,  Oh,  fare   theewell  for-  ev     -       er! 


5S 


i^flf 


\mf 


<^^ 


p  p  p  p  r 


Sinks 


the  sun,         our  pro-phet  go  -  eth    on    -     ward. 


|il 


ji  j>  j>  j>  j 


^ 


4* 


Sinks 


the  sun,        our  pro-phet  go  -  eth     on    -     ward . 


r     ip  p  M 


« 


Sinks 


the  sun,        our  pro-phet  go  -  eth     on    -     ward. 


JLP   P   PX 


*\ 


Sinks         the  sun,         our  pro-phet  go  -  eth     on    -     ward. 


p 


¥ 


"irt  i      y- 


fare  thee     well 


fare 


* 


I* 


i.  J>  i       '  J 


^ 


thee 


fare  thee    well . 


fare 


P 


thee 


J.Jj     u 


^ 


^ 


-mm 


fare  thee    well 


fare 


thee 


* 


I* 


4*= 


well 


73 


¥ 


? 


*t 


well 


m 


well 


TF 


well 


m 


i  ii  'j' 


m 


fare  thee      well. 


fare  thee      well 


At 


U    «u  U' 


fare  thee     well. 


& 


wi *~ — zK 

fare  thee     well. 


si 


3 


J  J .  j  i 


ITTI  jm  jm 


ceiido. 


^=xsr 


Jy"  *    "  6 


^ 


s 


* 
^ 


s 


GENERAL  INDEX 

Abbreviations:  ph.,  phonographic  record;  H.v.,  harmonized  version.     The 
page  references  are  to  Parts  I  and  II  respectively. 

Absence  and  Longing,  a  song  of,  Ojibway:  I,  42;  ph.  206;  H.v.,  single 

voice,  II,  26,  quartette,  57. 
Akwenz,  Jacob,  Ojibway  musician:  I,  280-281. 
All  Birds  Follow  Me,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  240-241. 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History:  I,  1,  15,  68. 
Apprehension,   Ojibway   song:   ph.    I,   260. 
Aristoxenos:   I,  33,  36. 
Armstrong,  L.  O.:  I,  140,  267- 
Art  Value  of  Indian  Songs:  I,  2;  18,  and  Chapter  IX,  178-200. 

Baker,  Dr.  Theodore:  I,  7-8;  36,  69,  228. 

Banished.  Ojibway  song:  ph.   I,   211-212;   H.v.   II,  45. 

Bark  Canoe,  My:  Ojibway  song:  I,  19,  42,  90,  96,  119,  121,  139,  1H; 
account  of  the  translation,  149-153;  allusion  to  in  argument  for  har- 
monization, 178-179,  267;  ph.  203;  H.v.,  single  voice,  II,  2;  quar- 
tette, II,  55. 

Beaver  Songs,  Ojibway:  ph.  I,  251-252. 

Before  the  Battle,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  261-262. 

Bird,  Arthur:  I,  182. 

Boas,  Dr.  Franz:  I,  15,  37. 

Boy  Turned  to  Eagle,  The:  a  Pawnee  song  used  to  illustrate  the  discussion 
of  conflicting  rhythms,  I,  52-57,  61. 

Bravest,  The,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  257-258. 

Buffalo  Songs,  Ojibway:  ph.  I,  249-250. 

Bukwujjinini,  Tecumseh:  I,  120. 

Bureau  of  Ethnology:  I,  13,  15,  241. 

Cadman,  Charles  Wakefield:  I,  198. 

Caribou,  Ojibway  dance  songs:  ph.  I,  253-254-255. 


GENERAL  INDEX 

Carnegie  Institution:  I,  15,  44,  70. 

Carousal,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  226;  H.v.  II,  4. 

Caruso:  I,  17. 

Cary,  Henry:  I,  148. 

Caughnawaga,  Iroquois  reservation:  I,  77. 

Chibiabos:  I,  129. 

Confession,  Ojibway  song:  ph.   I,  230-231;   H.v.   II,  34. 

Corder,  Frederick:  I,  49- 

Coward,  Song  of  a,  Ojibway:  I,  42,  105;  ph.  258-259;  H.v.  II,  16. 

Cringan,  A.  T.:  I,  77. 

Curtis,  Miss  Natalie:  I,  14,  17,  27,  28,  36,  37. 

Dakotas:  I,  37. 

Dance  of  Paupukkeewis:  I,  19,  47. 

Dance:  significance,  I,  58-59. 

Death  Songs:  I,  137-139-     See  also  pp.  132-137,  and  "  Hiawatha's  Death 

Song,"  263-270. 
Desbarats,  place  where  the  Indian  play  was  first  given:  I,  220,  267. 
Detroit:   I,  268. 

Dorsey,  Dr.  George  A.:  I,  44,  53. 
Doubt,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  26a;  H.v.  II,  19- 
Doxology:  use  at  Ojibway  social   gatherings,  I,   139-144. 
Drinking  Duette,  Ojibway:  ph.  I,  224-225. 
Drum:  I,  22,  46,  80,  109-110,  125-127,  130-131. 
Dvorak:  I,  11,  183,  195,  196. 

Esquimo:  I,  15. 

Faith,  A  song  of,  Ojibway:  ph.  I,  236. 

Farwell,  Arthur:  I,  14,  189,  190. 

Field  Columbian  Museum:  I,  1,  44. 

Field  of  Research:  I,  3-6. 

Fillmore,  John  Comfort:  I,  11,  36,  37. 

Firefly,  Ojibway  song:  from  Dr.  Baker's  collection,  I,  229-230. 

Flageolet:  I,  83-86. 

Fletcher,  Miss  Alice  C:  I,  8-11,  17,  18,  36,  37,  116,  189. 

Flute:  I,  83-86. 


GENERAL  INDEX 

Forest  Choir,  the,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  231-232;  H.v.,  II,  36. 

Forest,   In   the,   Ojibway   song:    I,   42;   story   of   the    original   words    and 

attempt  to  substitute  another  text,  166-168;  ph.  222;  H.v.  II,  20. 
Form:  see  ch.  1,  particularly  pp.  86-89,  90-91,  104-105. 
Foster,  Stephen  C:  I,  197. 
Frost,  Rev.  Frederick:  I,  140,  201. 

Gambling:  description  of  scene  for  "  Hiawatha,"  the  Indian  play,  I,  158— 

161. 
Gambling  Song,  Ojibway:  ph.  I,  223;  H.v.  II.  43. 

Garden   River,  Ojibway  reservation:  I,   120,   128,   132,   140,  201,  265. 
Gilman,  Benjamin  Ives:  I,  15,  24-35. 
Greek  Intervals:  I,  33,  38. 
Grove's  Dictionary  of  Music:  I,  49. 

Hadley,  Henry:  I,  182. 

Harmonization  of  Indian  songs:  I,  177-181. 

Harmony:   I,  85;  confidence  of  the  Ojibways  won  by  it,  117-120;  native 

attempts  at,  121. 
Hemenway  Southwestern  Expedition:  I,   15,  25. 
Henry,  Alexander:  I,  153,  223,  245. 
Her  Shadow,  Ojibway  song:  I,  41;  ph.  206;  H.v.  II,  30. 
Hiawatha:   cantata,   I,   19,   48,   190. 
Hiawatha,   Indian  play:   I,   111,   113,   128,   140,    158-159,    190,   220,  229, 

267-268. 
Hiawatha's  Death  Song,  Ojibway:  I,  105,  121;  ph.  270;  its  use  in  the 

Indian  play,  267-270;  H.v.,  single  voice,  II,  53;  quartette,  II,  62. 
Hoffman,  W.  J.:   I,  241-242. 
Hopis:  I,  15,  16,  24,  25,  27-29,  35,  72. 
Hunting  Songs:  I,  114-115,  125,  245,  249-252. 

Industries  and  industrial  songs,  Ojibway:  I,  124-127. 

Inniquahung,  Shawanibenayse,  pagan  Ojibway  singer:  I,   111—117,  236. 

Instruments:  I,  80-86. 

Intervals:  see  Scales,  P.   I,  Ch.  2.     Ojibway  intervals,  41-43. 

In  the  Forest:  see  Forest. 

Investigators:  I,  6—16. 


GENERAL  INDEX 

Iroquois:  I,  1,  73-77. 

Jones,  William:  I,  70. 

Kelley,  Edger  Stillman:  I,  182. 
Kwakiutl:  I,  15,  19,  47,   18. 

Lake  Sheen,  The,  Ojibway  song:     I,  96-100;  ph.  208;  H.v.,  single  voice, 

II,   38;   quartette,   II,  60. 
Languages:  fifty-eight  ethnic   families  of  aborigines,  I,  4. 
Lecture-Recitals  among  Ojibways:  I,  163. 
Lonely,  Ojibway  song:  I,  42;  170;  ph.  204-205;  H.v.,  II,  12. 
Longfellow:  search  for  originals  mentioned  in  his  "Song  of  Hiawatha." 

I,   108,  229—230;  use  of  Ojibway  traditions,   113;  his  characterization 

of  persons  and  country,  12S-129;  242,  268. 
Loomis,   Harvey  Worthington:  I,   189,   190. 
Lucky  Trapper,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  254-255;  H.v.,  II,  24. 

Macdowell,  Edward:  I,  12,  182,  188,  189. 

Megissun,  Ojibway   singer:    I,    133-136. 

Menominee  songs:  ph.  I,  274,  276,  278. 

Midnight  Tryst,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  209;  H.v.,  II,  14. 

Minnehaha,  personage  in  the  Indian  play:  I,   140,  220. 

Missionaries:  270,  278-279-     See  also  Frost. 

Monotony  of  Indian  music:  89-92- 

Morning  Star,  song  to  the  Ojibway:  I,  42,  104.  271;  ph.  239-240. 

Morning  Tryst,  Ojibway  song:  I,  41  ;  ph.  207;  H.v.  II,  14. 

Mosquito,  The,  Iroquois  song,  I,  73-75,  77- 

My  Bark  Canoe:  see  Bark  Canoe. 

My  Big  Lover,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  272. 

Naked  Bear,  The,  Ojibway  song:  I,  42,  108,  217,  267;  ph.  228;  H.v.  II,  42. 

Nanabozho,  chief  figure  in  Ojibway  mythology:   I,  242-246. 

Nationalism  in  Music:  I,  11-12;  180-187- 

New  World  Symphony:  see  Dvorak. 

Nokomis,  personage  in  the  Indian  play:   I,  232,  266. 

Nonsense  Words  in  Indian  verse:  I,  147—148. 


GENERAL  INDEX 

Numerals,  Ojibway,  system  of:  I,  61—66. 

Obetossoway,  Chief  Charles:  I,  167- 
Obetossoway,  Wabena:   I,   81,   111,   157-160. 
Odoivah   songs:  ph.   I,  212,  274. 

Old  Hundred:  use  at  Ojibway  social  gatherings,  I.   139—144. 
Old  Shoes,  Ojibway  song:   I,  81;  how  it  was  found  and  incorrectly  trans- 
lated,  155-160;    191;  ph.  222;   H.v.   II,  33. 
Omahas:  I,  8,  16.  18,  37.  72.   116. 
Omen,  the,  Ojibway  song:  ph.   237-238. 

Paine,  John  Knowles:  I,   182. 

Parting,  Ojibway  song:  I,  42;  ph.  220-221;  H.v.   II,  18. 

Pawnees:   I,  37.  11.  ."'2-57,  88. 

Pentatonie:   I,  41—43. 

Phonograph,  and  phonographic  records:  I,  10,  22,  26,  68,  103,  194,  201- 
275. 

Pitch:  general  discussion  under  Scales,  P.  I,  Ch.  2. 

Powell:  I,  4. 

Point  of  View:  I,  16-19.  33,  31. 
'Prayer  Board:  illustration,  I,  241;   interpretation,  213-249- 

Prayer  Sticks:  I,  216. 

Prince   of   Wales:   visit   to   Canada,  and   the   song   composed    for  the   oc- 
casion,  I,   103;   ph.   265-266. 

Proprietary  Rights  in  songs:  I.  IIS. 

Protestant  Church  Service:  question  of  its  influence  on  Ojibway  songs, 
I,  278-280. 

Quarter-Tone:  I,  20,  26-40. 

Rattles:  I,  83. 

Red  Blanket,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  210;  H.v.  II,  3. 
Rhythm:  P.  I,  Ch.  3,  41-66. 

Roman  Catholic  Church  Service:  question  of  its  influence  on  Ojibway 
songs,  I,  270. 

Sagachewiose,  Ojibway  singer,  I,  232. 


GENERAL  INDEX 

Sally  in  Our  Alley:  I,  148. 

Sarnia:   I,  265. 

Sault  Ste.  Marie:  I,  265,  '268. 

Scales:  I,  20—13;  Ojibway  scales,  40-43. 

Schoolcraft:   I,  96,  97,  229-230. 

Schubert:   I,   181. 

Science  of  Music:  its  double  nature,  and  its  relation  to  ethnology,  I,  3,  24. 

Scotch  Snap:  I,  270. 

Scout,  Song  of  a,  Ojibway:  ph.  I,  261. 

Shawan,  John:  I,  117. 

Shawano,  Tekumegezhik,  the  "Hiawatha"  of  the  Indian  play:  I,  140- 

143;  220. 
Shingwauk,  Ojibway  chief:  I,   103,  207,  265. 

Shingwauk,  William  J.:  I,  137,  161-162,  232,  271,  276,  277,  278. 
Singing  Contests:  I,  109-111. 
Sioux:  I,  72,  80,   108. 

Skunk  Song,  Ojibway:  ph.  I,  254-255;  H.v.  II,  24. 

Sleepy  Time.  Ojibway  song:  how  found,  I,  217;  ph.  I.  228-229;  H.v.  II,  7- 
Small-Legs,  Ojibway  song:  ph.   I,  260-261. 
Smithsonian  Institution:  I,  21. 
Snake  Dance,  Iroquois  song:  I,  75-77. 
Sole  Survivor,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  259. 

Song  Cycles,  Ojibway:  I,  241   (Wabeno),  249  (Buffalo),  251   (Beaver). 
Sousa,  John  Philip:  I,  182,  183. 
Squaguan,  John:  I,  104. 
Structure  of  Indian  songs:  I,  85-106. 
Sugar  Camp,  In  the,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  223-224;  H.v.,  II,  22. 

Tetebahbundung,  Ojibway  singer:  frontispiece;  I,   17,  39,  82,   128-131, 

141,   143,   154-156,   167,  233. 
Thaw,  Mrs.  Mary  Copley:  I,  8. 
Tonality:  I,  41,  74,  103. 
Translation:  I,  149-172,  202-203. 
Travel,  Ojibway  songs  of:  I,  263-270. 
Troyer,  Carlos:  I,  197. 
Trust,  a  song  of,  Ojibway:  ph.  I,  238-239. 


GENERAL  INDEX 

Vanity,  Ojibway  song:  ph.  I,  271. 

Variety  and  lack  of  it  in  Ojibway  songs:  I,  5-6,  171-173,  202-203. 

Verse,  Ojibway:  I,  115-177;  its  compactness,  1-16-153;  subordination  of 
verse  to  melody,  153—165;  verse  a  mnemonic  summary,  163;  senti- 
ment and  incongruities,  166-172;  inversion  of  sentiment,  168-172; 
lack  of  variety,   171-173   and   202-203. 

Visiting  Song,  Ojibway:  I,  95,   100-103,   116;  ph.  227. 

Voices,  Indian:  quality,  compass,  and  so  forth,  I,  78,  79,  80. 

Vulgarity  in  Ojibway  songs:  I,  166-171,  202. 

Wabenos,  Ojibway  mystery  men:  I,  241-249-     Song  cycle,  the  same. 
Waiting.  Ojibway  song:  ph.   I,  210-211. 

War  Song,  Ojibway:  II,   16.     Other  Ojibway  war  songs,  I,  257-262. 
Waubcnosa's  Longing,  Ojibway  song:  story,  I,  168;  ph.  208;  H.v.  II,  6. 
Wedding  Song,  Ojibway:  I,  147-149;  ph.  204;  H.v.  II,  10. 
Winter,  Song  of,  Ojibway:  I,  42;  story  of  the  song,  l6l-l62;  versifica- 
tion, 165;  171;  ph.  221;  H.v.  II,  21. 
Witch,  the,  Ojibway  song:  ph.   I,  256-257. 
Wood,  William:   I,  79. 

Zunis:  I,  15,  25,  32,  35,  107. 


DATE  DUE 

107 

GAYIORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

784.71  m 


3  5002  02035  2311 

Burton,  Frederick  Russell 

American  primitive  music     with  especial 


ML    3557     . B9 

Burton,     Frederick    Russell, 
1861-1909. 

American    primitive    music 


BILLINGS  NALL 


.> 


V 


A> 


* 


<?       J> 


# 


<? 


'■v 


J* 


p>- 


<y 


