LIBRARY  OF 
WELLESLEY  COLLEGE 


Purchased  From 

the  Permanent  Library  Fund, 

Established  by 


Eben  Norton  Horsford 


I-Z>(>1\ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

Boston  Library  Consortium  Member  Libraries 


http://www.archive.org/details/americansymphonyOOmuel 


The  American  Symphony  Orchestra 


John  H.  Mueller 

The  American 
Symphony  Orchestra 

A  Social  History  of  Musical  Taste 


Indiana  University  Press 

Bloomington 

1951 


JUL  7 

J.00 


COPYRIGHT,    1 95 1,   BY    INDIANA   UNIVERSITY   PRESS 
MANUFACTURED   IN   THE  UNITED   STATES   OF   AMERICA 


Preface 


This  is  a  history  of  what  has  been  termed  the  "monumenta 
orchestra"  in  America.  It  is,  of  course,  not  a  complete  history  of 
music  in  America;  it  is  not  even  an  exhaustive  history  of  the  American 
symphony  orchestra.  To  do  justice  to  the  intermediate  orchestras,  as 
well  as  the  numerous  small  civic  orchestras  which  make  music  pri- 
marily for  their  own  enjoyment  and  only  secondarily  as  a  professional 
activity,  to  render  a  report  on  radio  performances,  the  circulation  of 
recordings,  and  to  evaluate  the  importance  of  orchestral  music  in 
American  universities  during  the  last  several  decades,  a  truly  encyclo- 
pedic treatment  would  be  required.  The  present  account  traces  the 
growth  of  the  symphony  orchestra  to  its  roots  in  European  tradi- 
tions, recounts  the  crises  which  it  has  overcome,  the  musical  reper- 
toires with  which  it  has  regaled  its  audiences  during  the  past  century, 
the  social  setting  in  which  it  has  had  its  being,  and  finally  offers  a 
discussion  of  the  elusive  problems  of  aesthetic  taste  in  terms  of  which 
the  historical  trends  can  be  understood  and  evaluated. 

This  volume  was  about  fifteen  years  in  the  making.  It  could  not 
have  been  accomplished  without  the  cooperation  of  many  persons  in 
strategic  positions.  The  managers  of  the  orchestras  have  assisted  in 
various  significant  ways  in  supplying  repertoires  and  programs,  and 
patiently  replying  to  interview  questions  of  sundry  types.  The  New 
York  Public  Library,  the  Newberry  Library  of  Chicago,  Indiana 
University  Music  Library,  the  public  libraries  of  San  Francisco, 
Boston,  Indianapolis,  Cincinnati,  and  other  cities  have  cooperated  in 
making  available  their  files  and  facilities.  Members  of  the  orchestras, 
critics,  and  other  musicians,  have  given  valuable  assistance  in  recon- 
structing the  histories  of  their  orchestras,  and  retired  members  have 
supplied  the  reminiscences  and  cues  which  are  responsible  for  any 
lively  interest  which  this  history  may  possess. 


vi  Preface 

Students  who  have  been  members  of  the  author's  classes  have  con- 
tributed more  to  the  evolution  of  the  aesthetic  thought  portrayed  in 
this  volume  than  they  will  ever  realize.  Furthermore,  it  is  not  as  a 
mere  conventional  gesture,  but  as  a  genuine  recognition  of  indebted- 
ness that  I  add  this  inadequate  expression  of  appreciation  of  the  aid  of 
my  wife,  Kate  Hevner  Mueller,  who  is  a  student  and  author  in  the 
field  of  psychological  aesthetics  in  her  own  right.  The  intelligent 
preparation  of  statistical  materials,  the  meaningful  interpretation  of 
cold  figures,  and  the  critical  reading  of  the  text,  make  her  a  real 
participant  in  this  work. 

The  collation  of  the  individual  histories  of  the  orchestras  has 
entailed  a  scrutiny  of  numberless  facts  and  critical  judgments  in  which 
it  would  be  impossible  to  avoid  critical  errors  and  disputed  emphases. 
The  author  would,  of  course,  be  grateful  for  corrections  of  any  sig- 
nificant errors  discovered  by  specialized  readers.  Since  the  prepara- 
tions of  this  history  of  orchestral  repertoires  of  the  major  orchestras 
required  a  complete  card  catalogue  of  every  piece  played  in  the 
subscription  series  from  their  opening  concerts  to  the  season  1949-50, 
the  author  would  be  glad  to  continue  to  answer  inquiries  on  the  per- 
formance history  of  specific  compositions  of  those  orchestras  that 
have  not  published  their  own  cumulated  repertoire. 

The  Graduate  School  of  Indiana  University  has  liberally  sub- 
sidized this  project  with  funds  for  travel,  clerical  assistance,  and  for 
the  purchase  of  the  necessary  books  and  materials. 

Although  a  skeleton  monograph  on  the  History  of  Musical  Taste, 
published  in  1942,  constituted  the  point  of  departure  of  the  present 
work,  this  work  is  entirely  new  in  its  scope  and  general  function. 

Finally,  in  the  production  of  the  book,  the  editor  of  the  Indiana 
University  Press,  Edith  Greenburg,  must  be  credited  with  many  of 
the  qualities  of  the  text  which  derive  from  meticulous  reading  of  the 
manuscript  and  a  patient  discussion  of  the  problems  of  publication. 

Indiana  University  John  h.  mueller 

July,  1951 


Contents 


INTRODUCTION 

Tastes  Can  Be  Accounted  For  3 

History  of  Music  as  Performance  7 

2 

Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  14 

GROWTH  OF  THE  CONCERT  SYSTEM  1 4 
BACKGROUND    OF    THE    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA    IN    THE 

UNITED  STATES  2  I 
SOME  FORERUNNERS   OF   THE   AMERICAN   SYMPHONY 

ORCHESTRA  3 1 

3 

Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  36 

THE  NEW  YORK  PHILHARMONIC-SYMPHONY  SOCIETY  (  1 842  )  37 

THE  NEW  YORK  SYMPHONY  SOCIETY  (1878)  69 

THE  BOSTON  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA   (l88l)  78 

THE  CHICAGO  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA  (1891)  IOI 

THE  CINCINNATI  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA  (1895)  I  I  3 

THE  PHILADELPHIA  ORCHESTRA   (1900)  122 

THE  MINNEAPOLIS  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA   (1903)  I  36 

THE  ST.  LOUIS  SYMPHONY  SOCIETY    (1907)  1 44 

THE  SAN  FRANCISCO  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA  (  191 1  )  I  50 

THE  CLEVELAND  ORCHESTRA   (  1 9 1  8  )  1 6 1 

THE  LOS  ANGELES  PHILHARMONIC  ORCHESTRA   (1919)  165 

THE  PITTSBURGH  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA  1 74 

THE  DETROIT  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA  1 75 

vii 


viii  Contents 

THE  BALTIMORE  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA  I J  6 

THE  ROCHESTER  PHILHARMONIC  ORCHESTRA  IJJ 

THE  INDIANAPOLIS  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA  IJJ 

WASHINGTON,  D.  C:  THE  NATIONAL  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA  1 79 

4 

Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  182 

THE  SIX  MOST  PRE-EMINENT  COMPOSERS  183 

Ludwig  Van  Beethoven  •  Johannes  Brahms  •  Richard 
Wagner  •  Peter  Ilich  Tchaikowsky  •  Wolfgang  Amadeus 
Mozart  •  Johann  Sebastian  Bach 

COMPOSERS  WITH  LOW  AND  STABLE  TRENDS  2IO 

Franz  Joseph  Haydn  •  George  Frederick  Handel  •  Karl 
Maria  Von  Weber  •  Christoph  Willibald  Gluck 

COMPOSERS  IN  THE  ASCENDING  PHASE  2  I  5 

Richard  Strauss  •  Jan  Sibelius  •  Cesar  Franck  •  Igor 
Stravinsky  •  Claude  Debussy  •  Anton  Bruckner  •  Sergei 
Rachmaninoff  •  Dmitri  Shostakovitch  •  Gustav  Mahler  • 
Sergei  Prokofieff  •  Arnold  Schoenberg  •  Aaron  Copland  • 
Ralph  Vaughan  Williams  •  Paul  Hindemith  •  Darius  Mil- 
haud  •  Bela  Bartok  •  William  Schuman  •  William  Walton  • 
Charles  Ives 

COMPOSERS   IN  THE   DESCENDING   PHASE  234 

Robert  Schumann  •  Franz  Schubert  •  Hector  Berlioz  •  Franz 
Liszt  •  Felix  Mendelssohn  •  Anton  Rubinstein 

COMPOSERS  WITH  FULL  LIFE  CYCLES  24 1 

Antonin  Dvorak  •  Camille  Saint-Saens  •  Edvard  Grieg  • 
Bedrich  Smetana  •  Edward  Alexander  MacDowell  •  Nicolas 
Rimsky-Korsakoff  •  Edward  Elgar  •  Vincent  d'Indy  • 
Alexander  Glazounoff  •  Alexander  Scriabin  •  Ottorino 
Respighi  •  Ernest  Bloch  •  Manuel  De  Falla  •  Roy  Harris 

THE  FORGOTTEN  NAMES  25O 

S 

National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  253 

AUSTRO-GERM  AN  Y  258 

FRANCE  26l 


Contents  ix 

RUSSIA-SOVIET  UNION  262 

ITALY  263 

GREAT  BRITAIN  264 

LATIN  AMERICA  264 

UNITED  STATES  265 

6 

The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  286 

THE    FUNCTION    OF    THE    ORCHESTRA    IN    COMMUNITY    AND 

NATION  286 

SEATING  PLANS  298 

THE   CONDUCTOR  3IO 

MANAGEMENT  AND  UNION  328 

The  Musicians'  Union 

THE  AUDIENCE  AND  ITS  FOLKWAYS  352 

THE  PROGRAM  360 

THE  CONCERT  SERIES                                                                    ,  37 1 

THE  STANDARD  REPERTOIRE  375 

7 

Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  380 

Notes  406 

Index  42 1 


Illustrations 


68 


An  English  Concert  in  the  1 840's  facing    2  2 

The  New  York  Academy  of  Music  facing  23 
Tenure  of  Permanent  Conductors,  Eleven  American 

Symphony  Orchestras,  1 840-1950  48,  49 

First  Program  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic  Society  facing  54 
Walter  Damrosch  and  the  New  York  Symphony 

Orchestra  facing  55 
Popularity  Pyramids,  American  Symphony  Orchestras, 

1925-35 

Arturo  Toscanini  facing    86 

A  Reunion  in  Boston:  Pierre  Monteux,  Serge  Kousse- 

vitzky,  and  Charles  Munch  facing  87 
Dodworth's    Musical    Festival    Programme,    February 

20th,  1852  facing  102 
The  Chicago  Symphony  Orchestra  about  1 898              following  102 

Theodore  Thomas  facing  103 

The  First  Cincinnati  May  Festival  facing  1 1 8 

Dimitri  Mitropoulos  facing  119 

Popularity  Pyramid,  Ten  American  Orchestras,  1945-50  188 
A  Century  of  the  Philharmonic-Symphony  Society  of 

New  York  206 
Composers' Life  Cycles:  Ascending  Phase,  1 880-1950  216 
Composers'  Life  Cycles:  Ascending  Phase,  1900-50  227 
Composers'  Life  Cycles:  Descending  Phase,  1 875-1 950  235 
Composers:  Full  Life  Cycles,  1 875-1950  244 
Nationalities  in  Repertoire,  1 875-1950  259 
Theodore  Thomas'  American  Night,  1876  275 
Popularity  Pyramid,  American  Composers  by  Percent- 
age of  All  American  Music  1925-50  277 


XI 


xii  Illustrations 

Contemporary  Composers,  1925-50  280 
Contemporary  Composers  in  Repertoire,  1925-45  282 
Musical  Fund  Society  Orchestra  of  Philadelphia  about  1845  299 
Leipzig  Gewandhaus  Orchestra  Seating  Plan,  1835  301 
London  Philharmonic  Society  Seating  Plan,  1846  302 
Boston  Symphony  Orchestra  Seating  Plan,  1881  302 
Louis  Antoine  Jullien  Conducting  a  Promenade  Con- 
cert in  London,  1849  304 
Philadelphia  Orchestra  Seating  Plan,  1950  306 
Stokowski's  "Upside-Down"  Orchestra  Seating  Plan  308 
Leopold  Stokowski  facing  310 
Stokowski  Conducting  the  Philadelphia  Orchestra  in  an 

experimental  seating  arrangement  facing  310 
Two  Sketches  of  the  Gewandhaus  Orchestra,  Leipzig, 

about  1840  facing  311 
Symphony  Society  of  New  York,  Prospectus  During 

the  "Plutocratic  Epoch"  332,  333 

A  Jullien  Concert  in  1843  facing  342 

Save  the  Orchestra— Philadelphia,  1919  facing  343 


INTRODUCTION 


Tastes  Can  Be  Accounted  For 


A  concert  performance  is  never  insulated  from  the  milieu  in  which 
it  has  its  being.  It  cannot  function  without  a  set  of  congenial  circum- 
stances—a social  soil— which  permit  its  existence  and  determine  its 
content.  The  sources  of  its  economic  support,  the  traditional  cultural 
values,  the  expectations  of  the  audiences,  the  pedagogical  institutions 
which  propagate  the  art,  the  political  climate,  the  technology  which 
produced  the  instruments,  the  lure  of  competitive  alternative  pleas- 
ures, are  only  a  few  of  the  miscellany  of  factors  that  mold  the  con- 
cert system  into  a  reflection  of  themselves.  No  one  can  hazard  a 
responsible  opinion  on  trends  without  adequate  consideration  of 
these,  and  other,  determining  conditions. 

These  convictions  would  seem  to  run  counter  to  the  popular 
cliche,  that  "there  is  no  accounting  for  taste."  Wholly  aside  from 
the  disputed  translation  of  that  frayed  Latin  proverb,  it  is  the 
assumption  of  the  present  work  that  tastes  can  be  accounted  for.  In 
fact,  scholars  have  for  some  time  thrown  considerable  light  on  their 
formation.  The  discouraging  doctrine  that  aesthetic  taste  is  a  mys- 
tical and  elusive  gift  has  been  challenged  by  researches  in  the  social 
function  of  the  arts  and  in  the  social  determinants  of  style.  In  recent 
years  there  has  been  an  increasing  degree  of  cross-fertilization  be- 
tween the  arts  on  the  one  hand  and  the  social  and  psychological  dis- 
ciplines on  the  other.  The  present  work  was  planned  in  the  spirit  of 
this  expanding  trend. 

Its  contribution  is  in  terms  of  an  analysis  and  survey  of  the  public 
life  of  orchestral  compositions  as  performed  in  American  symphony 
orchestras,  with  the  intention  of  tracing  their  fluctuations  and  iden- 
tifying, as  far  as  possible  in  such  a  survey,  some  of  the  factors  that 
condition  these  fluctuations.  This  is  a  particularly  appropriate  mo- 
ment to  undertake  such  a  task.  The  American  symphony  orchestra 

3 


4  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

has  been  in  existence  about  a  century— a  period  long  enough  to  un- 
cover trends  and  to  yield  historical  perspective.  In  this  sense,  the 
study  is  a  contribution  to  musical  Americana. 

Since  the  symphony  orchestra  is  anchored  to  our  social  institu- 
tions and  to  the  principles  of  human  nature  that  supply  it  with  its 
vital  energy,  an  understanding  of  symphonic  trends  is  dependent 
upon  a  certain  familiarity  with  the  larger  social  practices.  Hence,  in 
addition  to  the  profiles  of  the  individual  orchestras,  extended  consid- 
eration must  be  given  to  the  ancestry  of  the  American  orchestra  in 
European  cultures,  to  the  American  economic  system  in  which  the 
orchestra  has  matured,  to  the  class  structure  of  the  audience  and  its 
behavior,  and  finally  to  the  social  psychology  of  taste  formation  as  it 
is  rooted  in  human  nature. 

This  work  is  not  an  encyclopedia  of  symphonic  affairs.  Many 
phases  of  orchestral  life  are  touched  but  lightly  when  not  essential 
to  the  main  stream  of  thought.  Thus,  radio  and  records  l  as  vehicles 
for  the  dissemination  of  orchestral  music  comprise  such  an  extended 
field  that  they  are  mentioned  only  in  passing.  Although  the  destinies 
of  "live"  music  and  mechanical  reproduction  are  interwoven,  it  is 
improbable  that  their  respective  taste  trends  coincide.  The  respective 
locales  in  which  they  are  enjoyed,  the  population  segments  which 
they  serve,  the  occasions  and  circumstances  attending  their  enjoy- 
ment, the  financial  transactions  involved  in  the  purchase  of  the 
musical  services— all  constitute  powerful  forces  which  differentiate 
their  operating  conditions. 

However,  radio  and  recordings  cannot  very  well  by-pass  the 
symphony  orchestra,  which  is  the  very  source  of  their  documents. 
The  orchestras  cannot  record  what  they  do  not  play,  and  they  do 
not  play  what  they  do  not  perform  in  public.  However,  when  once 
the  musical  document  is  made,  it  embarks  on  a  life  of  its  own  over 
the  record  bars,  in  the  homes,  and  in  the  radio  studio,  from  which 
it  flows  into  an  immense  market  that  is  not  bounded  by  the  limited 
geography  of  the  local  orchestra. 

Actual  musical  performances  are,  of  course,  ephemeral  and  can 
only  be  recaptured  by  means  of  historical  documents.  In  this  respect 
they  differ  from  architecture,  literature,  and  other  forms  of  material 
human  achievement.  Although  it  is  difficult  to  recoup  the  public 


Tastes  Can  Be  Accounted  For  5 

appreciation  that  accompanied  them,  effective  efforts  to  comprehend 
their  significance  can  be  made  by  resurrecting  contemporary  critical 
comment.  Musical  programs  can  similarly  be  reconstructed,  which 
permit  the  re-creation  of  past  musical  epochs  for  fresh  study  and  for 
the  analysis  of  the  aesthetic  attitudes  that  supported  them. 

A  few  musicologists  have,  in  that  manner,  uncovered  certain 
periods  in  early  American  musical  history.  O.  G.  Sonneck  2  has  re- 
produced the  colonial  period,  while  Earle  Johnson  3  has  reviewed  in 
great  detail  the  early  musical  history  of  Boston  from  1800  to  1825. 
The  present  work  represents  a  continuation  of  these  efforts.  Pro- 
grams have  been  itemized,  contemporary  critical  comments  have 
been  exhumed,  and  news  reports  have  been  examined.  It  is  hoped 
that  the  work  of  students  who  follow  a  century  hence  will  thus  be 
greatly  facilitated  by  permitting  them  to  recall  more  adequately  the 
musical  experiences  of  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries. 

More  specifically,  this  study  should  be  useful  to  persons  of  vari- 
ous interests:  (1)  to  historians,  musicologists,  and  annotators  who 
follow  the  popularity  trends  of  composers  and  compositions;  (2)  to 
aestheticians  and  critics  who  can  profit  by  the  analysis  of  the  fluctu- 
ations in  taste  that  are  discussed  too  frequently  with  more  ecstasy 
than  insight  into  the  social  and  psychological  orbits  within  which 
these  fluctuations  occur;  (3)  to  the  academic  fraternity,  for  whom  it 
should  serve  as  welcome  collateral  in  hitherto  unplowed  fields  of 
musical  taste,  empirical  aesthetics,  and  general  musical  Americana  as 
the  academic  curtain  between  the  conservatory  of  music  and  the 
liberal  arts  is  gradually  lifted;  (4)  to  social  scientists  who  are  intent 
on  dissecting  the  body  politic  in  order  to  understand  the  principles 
of  social  change  in  the  various  categories  of  culture;  and  finally,  (5) 
to  the  large  audience  of  laymen  who  have  been  introduced  by  radio, 
recordings,  and  concert,  to  the  composer  and  his  music— a  privilege 
formerly  reserved  for  a  small  and  select  class  propitiously  located  in 
culture  centers.  In  being  guided  through  the  life  history  of  orchestral 
societies,  and  through  the  maze  of  aesthetic  trends,  the  cultivated 
listener  should  arrive  at  a  new  comprehension  of  the  problems  of 
the  symphony  orchestras  and  their  programs. 

The  student,  as  well  as  the  general  lover  of  symphonic  music, 


6  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

will  be  able  to  find  in  this  work  a  discussion  of  the  following,  and 
other,  questions: 

Why  do  conductors  almost  universally  choose  programs  "over  the  heads" 

of  the  audience?   Was  this  true  in  the  days  of  Bach,  Mozart  and 

Haydn? 
Since  when,  and  why,  are  composers  composing  for  the  future  rather 

than  for  the  current  audience? 
What  is  happening  to  Beethoven,  Wagner,  Tschaikowsky  and  other 

composers  in  respect  to  the  volume  of  their  music  performed  in  the 

symphonic  repertoire? 
Is  it  true  that  great  composers  of  the  past  eras  were  not  appreciated  in 

their  day? 
Can  musical  taste  be  accounted  for?  Can  future  tastes  be  predicted? 
What  is  the  history  of  the  methods  of  economic  support  of  the  American 

orchestras? 
To  what  extent  is  the  American  composer  performed  in  the  symphony 

orchestra?   Is  he  successfully  competing  with  foreign  composers  of 

comparable  age? 
What  are  the  different  schools  of  conducting?  What  is  the  history  of  the 

seating  of  the  orchestra? 
What  was  the  nature  of  the  programs  played  a  century  ago? 
Why  did  the  United  States  produce  early  sculptors,  painters,  and  authors 

of  international  renown,  but  not  musicians? 
Is  there  such  a  thing  as  "national"  music?  If  not,  why  do  so  many  people 

think  so?  Why  do  other  countries  have  "national"  music,  but  not  the 

United  States? 
When  was  the  first  musicians'  strike  in  an  American  symphony  orches- 
tra? What  were  the  circumstances? 
Do  cities  differ  in  their  repertoires?  To  what  extent? 
What  are  some  of  the  principles  of  program-building? 
Who  are  the  forgotten  masters  of  the  past? 
Is  there  a  basic,  standard  repertoire?  How  rapid  is  the  turnover  in  the 

repertoire? 
How  influential  is  the  conductor  in  the  determination  of  the  repertoires? 
What  can  one  learn  of  the  "qualities"  that  determine  the  survival  of  a 

composition?  What  other  factors  contribute  to  survival? 
What  is  the  probability  of  another  "Beethoven"  who  will  dominate  the 
repertoire  for  a  century? 


I 

History  of  Music  as  Performance 


In  1838  Robert  Schumann  wrote  in  his  Neue  Zeitschrift  fur  Musik 
(Leipzig): 

In  order  to  judge  the  spirit  and  taste  which  predominates  in  our  subscrip- 
tion concerts,  we  need  only  to  observe  the  choice  of  pieces  performed 
and  the  masters  preferred  here.  And,  as  is  but  right,  we  find  Mozart's 
name  oftenest  (17  times),  then  Beethoven  (15  times),  7  numbers  by 
Weber,  5  by  Haydn,  from  3  to  5  by  Cherubini,  Spohr,  Mendelssohn,  and 
Rossini;  Handel,  Bach,  Vogler,  Cimarosa,  Mehul,  Onslow,  Moscheles 
were  each  heard  twice;  Naumann,  Salieri,  Righini,  Fesca,  Hummel,  Spon- 
tini,  Marschner,  and  others  played  but  once.1 

Perhaps  this  is  an  oversimplified  depiction  of  the  taste  of  the 
Leipzig  audience  during  the  period  of  Mendelssohn's  conductorship 
of  the  Gewandhaus  orchestra.  Certainly  it  is  only  a  tiny  fragment 
dredged  from  the  flow  of  musical  history.  But  it  is  a  pertinent  re- 
minder that,  whatever  may  be  the  professed  aesthetic  ideologies  of 
composers,  or  their  pretensions  to  pure  self-expression,  it  is,  after  all, 
public  performance  that  constitutes  the  life  of  music  and  is  the  con- 
summation devoutly  wished  by  every  creator  of  music. 

Conventional  music  history,  however,  assigns  greater  emphasis  to 
the  chronology  of  compositions,  their  classification  into  schools  and 
styles,  the  formative  factors  in  their  creation,  and  the  biographies  of 
their  creators.  It  is  upon  these  areas  that  most  scholarly  research  has 
been  bestowed.  There  has  been  some  interest,  to  be  sure,  in  the  prac- 
tical musical  life  of  the  past  as  it  pertains  to  the  social  institution  of 
the  concert  and  the  taste  of  its  audience.  Research  into  the  concert 
life  of  the  American  colonies  and  of  the  various  communities  in  our 
early  national  history,  has  revivified  our  past  and  has  portrayed  the 
embryonic  beginnings  from  which  our  own  concert  practices  have 
evolved.  Similar  historical  services  have  been  rendered  by  Hanslick, 

7 


8  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Schumann,  Burney,  and  others  2  in  acquainting  us  with  the  concert 
life  of  Vienna,  Leipzig,  London,  Berlin,  and  other  European  centers, 
while  snatches  of  such  materials  are  found  in  innumerable  other 
works. 

It  is  therefore  apparent  that  there  are  several  equally  valid  ap- 
proaches to  the  study  of  the  history  of  music.  The  first  is  the  evo- 
lutionary or  developmental  approach,  which  considers  musical  forms 
in  their  historical  continuity.  By  this  conventional  method  we  dis- 
cover, for  example,  the  traces  of  Gluck,  Weber,  and  Berlioz  in 
Wagner,  certain  of  whose  characteristics  find  later  reincarnation  in 
Richard  Strauss.  It  delineates  the  features  of  Beethoven  that  were 
inherited  from  Haydn  and  Mozart,  who,  in  turn,  recognized  their 
own  indebtedness  to  the  experimenter,  Karl  Philipp  Emanuel  Bach. 
In  this  sense  every  work  of  art  is  but  a  culmination,  or  end-product, 
of  a  long  series  of  antecedents,  plus  the  new  and  individual  incre- 
ment, just  as  a  scientific  invention,  such  as  the  electric  light,  is  but 
the  culmination  of  many  successive  inventive  increments  cumulated 
throughout  the  history  of  physical  science. 

But  there  is  more  than  mere  lineal  continuity  and  descent,  a  kind 
of  ancestral  heredity,  to  a  work  of  art.  This  historical  dimension  is 
supplemented  by  a  lateral  relation,  a  sociological  background,  which 
relates  the  composer  and  his  work  to  his  own  environment.  For  no 
composition  escapes  the  imprint  of  its  contemporary  surroundings. 
It  reflects  the  currently  available  instruments  and  their  technological 
characteristics,  the  contemporary  organization  of  society,  the  source 
of  its  economic  sustenance,  its  political  and  social  standards,  all 
vaguely  lumped  together  bv  certain  mystically-minded  authors  as 
the  "spirit  of  the  age."  A  musical  composition,  therefore,  not  only 
contains  many  nonaesthetic  ingredients,  but  is  to  a  great  extent 
molded  by  them. 

The  two  foregoing  broad  approaches  are  primarily  concerned 
with  the  analysis  of  the  production  of  the  work  of  art.  But,  as  al- 
ready implied,  the  history  of  music  is  incomplete  and  sterile  without 
its  fulfillment  in  the  patronage  of  the  audience.  It  is  the  consumer 
of  the  work  of  art  who  expresses  his  preferences  and  thereby  deter- 
mines the  very  survival  of  the  created  work.  This  aspect  of  music 
history  is  a  third  dimension  that  reflects  the  mutual  relation  between 


History  of  Music  as  Performance  9 

the  composer  and  his  audience,  and  their  respective  roles  in  the 
process  of  taste  formation,  together  with  the  function  of  the  smaller 
specialized  groups  of  patrons,  conductors,  performers,  critics,  and 
connoisseurs  who  serve  as  mediators,  without  whom  the  inert  printed 
notes  would  have  no  vital  existence  at  all.  The  history  of  music  from 
this  point  of  view  has  been  singularly  neglected  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that,  because  of  the  nature  of  its  milieu,  the  very  form  and  logic  of 
music  grows  out  of  its  performance  history. 

The  mechanism  of  the  consumption  of  music  and  of  the  other 
arts,  such  as  dance  and  drama,  that  also  require  a  personal  interpreter, 
differs  significantly  from  the  consumption  of  the  literary  works  on 
deposit  in  libraries  and  of  the  visual  arts  on  display  in  the  museums. 
The  latter  works  of  art  are  directly  available  to  the  consumer.  But 
not  even  the  most  expert  score  reader  can  absorb  in  his  own  imagina- 
tion, from  the  symbols  on  the  printed  page,  the  experience  and 
pleasure  of  a  performance,  nor  was  it  ever  so  intended.  The  absence 
of  the  performer,  who  recreates  the  work  in  the  salon  or  on  the  con- 
cert stage,  condemns  the  published  work  to  eternal  silence. 

Although  recorded  music  and  radio  broadcasts  have  greatly  ex- 
panded the  opportunity  for  such  intermediary  service,  they  have 
only  modified,  not  eliminated  the  performance  link  between  creator 
and  consumer.  For  this  technological  centralization  is  a  power  that 
may  cut  both  ways.  A  radio  chain,  for  example,  which  had  previ- 
ously been  hospitable  to  serious  music  may  suddenly  adopt  a  policy 
of  restriction,  and  thereby  raise  an  untraversable  barrier  where  pre- 
viously had  existed  a  generous  outlet. 

Thus,  the  translation  from  inanimate  symbols  to  aural  perform- 
ance has  become  a  highly  technical  and  elaborately  institutionalized 
system,  deeply  immersed  in  our  social  and  economic  order.  The  act 
of  performance  is  hedged  about  by  a  network  of  forces  that  consti- 
tute a  complex  filter  through  which  must  pass  the  musical  repertoire. 

There  was  a  time  when  this  gap  between  the  fund  of  potential 
repertoire  and  the  actually  performed  music  was  relatively  neg- 
ligible. In  former  times  music-in-performance  was  essentially  con- 
temporary music.  Such  a  situation  is  reduced  to  its  lowest  terms  in 
nonliterate  society,  where  all  known  music  is  performed  at  appropri- 
ate times,  and  is  of  such  elementary  and  unspecialized  character  that 


IO  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

nearly  every  man  is  a  potential  musical  executant.  Without  a  system 
of  recorded  notation,  music  could  not  repose  unperformed  and  still 
survive,  but  had  to  be  personally  passed  on  from  generation  to  gen- 
eration. Even  as  late  as  two  centuries  ago,  music  was  usually  com- 
posed to  order,  or  was  written  with  good  prospects  for  production, 
usually  by,  or  under  the  direction  of,  the  composer  himself.  If,  at 
times,  the  public  was  indifferent  to  these  offerings— as  it  was  to  a 
magnificent  extent  in  the  case  of  Sebastian  Bach— it  is  still  true  that 
the  composer  intended  that  the  audience  be  pleased  at  the  first— and 
often  the  only— hearing  of  his  work.  Therefore,  before  the  opening 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  a  knowledge  of  available  music  of  a  given 
period  would  afford  fairly  reliable  evidence  of  the  taste  of  that  pe- 
riod. Consequently,  Percy  Scholes  could  determine,  with  reasonable 
approximation,  the  character  of  British  musical  taste  in  the  1760's 
simply  by  analyzing  the  musical  catalogues  of  the  time.3  Like  the 
popular  music  of  today,  it  was  composed  for  the  moment.  The  bold 
presumption  of  composing  for  posterity  was  an  invention  of  nine- 
teenth-century romanticism. 

The  spread  of  the  techniques  of  music  engraving  in  the  eight- 
eenth century,  which  facilitated  the  preservation  of  old  scores,  to- 
gether with  a  multitude  of  other  technological  and  social  factors, 
permitted  the  injection  of  the  now  familiar  discrepancy  or  "lag"  be- 
tween the  audience  taste  of  the  day  and  the  current  style  of  compo- 
sition that  must  compete  with  the  past  accumulations.  Consequently, 
the  volume  of  "latent"  music  on  the  library  shelves  is  today  much 
greater  than  can  ever  possibly  be  played.  Not  only  the  cumulated 
past  repertoires,  constantly  augmented  by  musical  archeologists, 
but  also  the  currently  composed  works,  constitute  a  reservoir  from 
which  only  a  very  limited  number  can  ever  possibly  see  the  light 
of  production.  This  circumstance  imposes  upon  the  performers  the 
necessity— or  privilege— of  choice  from  a  wide  latitude  of  musical 
forms  and  styles,  extending  over  nearly  three  centuries,  and  disrupts 
the  erstwhile  more  or  less  simple  and  direct  relation  between  the 
composer  and  the  consumer  public  that  prevailed  in  the  days  of 
Bach,  Haydn,  and  Mozart.  This  momentous  shift,  and  the  social 
forces  that  produced  it,  raise  issues  in  public  appreciation  and  sug- 
gest inquiries  into  the  conditions  that  determine  the  resultant  rep- 
ertoire choices. 


History  of  Music  as  Performance  1 1 

The  history  of  the  American  symphony  orchestra,  which  has 
been  a  central  feature  of  American  musical  life  for  nearly  a  cen- 
tury, has  not  yet  been  written.  There  exist  only  a  few  accounts  of 
specific  symphony  associations  in  several  cities,  usually  characterized 
by  polite  anecdotal  details  rather  than  by  a  more  fundamental  and 
generalized  perspective.  Furthermore,  valuable  as  are  the  cumulated 
repertoires  published  by  several  of  these  orchestras,  their  alphabetical 
array  of  composers  is  not  a  compilation  from  which  trends  can  be 
discerned. 

For  practical  reasons,  this  study  of  American  symphony  orches- 
tras is  limited  to  those  major  orchestras  whose  history  is  of  sufficient 
length— arbitrarily  set  at  a  minimum  of  twenty-five  years— to  display 
a  trend.  Again,  in  the  interest  of  homogeneity,  the  popular  and  other 
miscellaneous  concerts  have  been  segregated  from  the  subscription 
series. 

The  orchestras,  whose  repertoires  have  been  tabulated  from  the 
respective  dates  of  their  founding  to  1950,  are,  in  the  order  of  age 
as  follows: 

The  New  York  Philharmonic  Society  1842 

The  New  York  Symphony  Society  1878 
(merged  with  the  above  as  The  New  York 

Philharmonic-Symphony  Society  in  1928) 

The  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra  1881 

The  Chicago  Symphony  Orchestra  1891 

The  Cincinnati  Symphony  Orchestra  1894 

(season  began  January  1895) 

The  Philadelphia  Orchestra  1900 

The  Minneapolis  Symphony  Orchestra  1903 

The  St.  Louis  Symphony  Orchestra  1907 

The  San  Francisco  Symphony  Orchestra  191 1 

The  Cleveland  Orchestra  191 8 

The  Philharmonic  Orchestra  of  Los  Angeles  1919 

On  the  basis  of  the  classified  repertoires  of  these  orchestras,  of 
the  hundreds  of  composers— old  and  modern,  eminent  and  obscure, 
native  and  foreign— and  of  the  thousands  of  compositions,  durable 
and  ephemeral,  trend  lines  can  be  plotted  and  fluctuations  in  taste 
can  be  measured  which  then  yield  a  perspective  of  a  social  history 
of  music. 


12  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

To  some  critics  and  aestheticians  the  changing  repertoire  is  no 
great  enigma.  It  is  to  them  essentially  a  weeding  out  process  of  the 
inferior  compositions  that  seep  into  the  repertoire  through  the  fal- 
libilities of  human  judgment— while  the  more  inspired  works,  which 
are  fit  to  survive,  will  inevitably  be  selected  by  the  "judgment  of 
time."  According  to  these  critics,  the  intangibility  of  musical  values 
and  the  poverty  of  our  aesthetic  vocabulary  may  render  it  impos- 
sible to  describe  those  qualities  which  have  survival  value,  but  the 
fitness  of  certain  works  to  survive  is  amply  testified  by  the  simple 
and  obvious  fact  that  they  do  survive.  Even  after  a  period  of  qui- 
escence, it  is  alleged,  the  greatest  music  will  rise  again  to  claim  its 
place  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  are  qualified  to  judge. 

Now,  such  an  "explanation"  of  the  survival  of  the  fit  is  as  tauto- 
logical in  music  as  it  would  be  in  biology.  The  explanation  is  clearly 
a  case  of  circular  reasoning,  in  which  survival  is  first  explained  by 
"fitness,"  and  fitness  is  then  explained  by  the  fact  of  survival.  It  is 
an  ex  post  facto  judgment  that  does  not  uncover  the  mechanism, 
nor  the  specific  traits,  which  are  involved  in  the  durability  of  a 
piece  of  music. 

It  must  therefore  be  observed  that  "survival"  is  not  a  simple  abso- 
lute fact.  It  is  attached  to  time  and  space,  and  its  existence  em- 
braces a  whole  range  of  gradations  from  the  infrequently  performed 
Geminiani  to  the  almost  annual  occurrence  of  a  Beethoven  sym- 
phony—both of  which  may  be  said  to  have  survived.  Examination 
will  reveal  that  the  same  compositions  do  not  survive  with  the  same 
durability,  nor  to  uniform  degree  in  different  areas,  and  that  the  in- 
tensity of  their  appreciation  varies  by  time  and  place.  Hence  it  is 
evident  that  the  fluctuations  in  popularity  would  have  been  different 
under  correspondingly  different  circumstances.  The  quality  of  music 
is,  therefore,  not  an  intrinsic  trait  that  alone  makes  for  survival,  but 
it  is  rather  to  be  defined  in  terms  of  the  social  environment  to  which 
it  caters.  The  dictum  that  "good  music  survives"  inverts  the  logical 
process  and  thereby  begs  the  question.  Instead  of  good  music  sur- 
viving, we  must  put  the  horse  back  again  before  the  cart  by  assum- 
ing that  the  music  that  survives  (by  right  of  certain  determining 
conditions)  is  then  called  "good." 

The  general  procedure  of  measurement  consisted  in  reducing  the 


History  of  Music  as  Performance  1 3 

repertoire  of  the  individual  composers  and  of  the  national  groups 
to  quantitative  terms  by  calculating  their  respective  percentages  of 
the  total  repertoire;  and  tracing  this  volume  for  individual,  or  groups 
of,  composers  in  the  history  of  each  orchestra  alone,  and  in  the  com- 
posite of  all  orchestras  considered  here.  The  latter  would  yield  a 
national  trend,  as  a  contemporary  and  continuous  reflection  of 
American  taste. 

Because  of  the  tremendous  range  in  playing  time  between  the 
least  of  the  preludes  or  overtures  and  the  longest  of  the  symphonies, 
mere  frequency  of  appearance  cannot  fairly  be  taken  as  a  measure  of 
the  composer's  representation.  In  view  of  the  inflexible  limits  of  pro- 
gram time,  the  volume  of  Beethoven,  for  example,  is  more  appropri- 
ately measured  in  terms  of  the  total  playing  time  devoted  to  the 
composer,  rather  than  mere  frequency  of  performance. 

Precision  in  playing  time  is,  of  course,  difficult  and,  in  a  sense, 
impossible  to  determine  because  of  the  variations  induced  by  a  num- 
ber of  different  factors.4  Various  conceptions  of  the  same  work  by 
conductors  of  differing  temperaments  will  yield  appreciable  differ- 
ences in  timing.  Different  editions,  or  revisions,  of  the  same  work 
incur  changes  in  playing  time  of  some  compositions.  Cuts  by  indi- 
vidual conductors,  diverse  policies  on  observing  "repeats,"  especially 
in  the  classic  symphonies,  produce  discrepancies  with  the  standard 
timings  recorded  in  reference  works.  Incomplete  performances  of 
suites  and  the  elastic  "excerpts"  are  always  sources  of  confusion. 
But  in  the  end,  none  of  these  variations,  interesting  and  important 
as  they  are  from  the  interpretive  point  of  view,  is  of  sufficient  mag- 
nitude to  make  impossible  the  determination  of  an  average  length, 
or  to  invalidate  the  conclusions  that  may  be  drawn  from  the  findings. 

The  ranks  and  weights  here  advanced  are,  of  course,  not  designed 
to  determine  the  presumable  "quality"  of  these  works  of  musical  art. 
The  concept  of  "quality,"  in  the  commonly  accepted  connotation 
of  the  term,  has  here  no  meaning  whatsoever.  This  is  merely  an  ob- 
jective story  of  the  history  of  musical  choices  over  a  period  of  a  cen- 
tury, with  the  view  to  adding  to  our  knowledge  of  the  subtle  and 
evasive  problems  of  musical  taste. 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American 
Symphony  Orchestra 

Growth  of  the  Concert  System 

Access  to  the  public  concert  is  today  not  a  class  privilege  but  rather 
a  purchasable  right  limited  only  by  the  ability  and  willingness  to  pay 
the  price  of  admission.  This  is  one  of  the  symptoms  of  the  rise  of 
the  middle  class  and  the  growth  of  urban  economy.  It  marked  the 
invention  of  the  box  office,  with  its  manifold  social  implications.  A 
corollary  to  this  economic  transition  was,  of  course,  the  atrophy  of 
the  feudal  system,  which,  by  a  policy  of  personal  employment  and 
patronage,  had  nourished  the  institution  of  closed,  private  musicales 
in  court  and  castle.  This  system  had  provided  a  livelihood  for  an 
innumerable  host  of  Kapellmeister,  instrumentalists,  and  singers, 
whose  services  were  ordinarily  restricted  to  the  orbit  of  courtly 
circles  defined  by  the  prince,  and  whose  productions  were  normally 
the  property  of  their  employer  or  patron.  Johann  Sebastian  Bach  in 
Weimar  and  Cothen,  his  son,  Philipp  Emanuel,  at  the  court  of  Fred- 
erick the  Great  at  Potsdam,  and  Franz  Joseph  Haydn  at  Esterhaz, 
were  illustrations  of  this  type  of  feudal  "servitude."  If  Mozart  suf- 
fered from  the  lack  of  such  a  satisfactory  and  congenial  appointment 
during  most  of  his  professional  career,  it  was  not  because  he  did  not 
seek  one  most  fervently.  Without  this  attachment  he  was,  by  the 
standards  of  the  day,  virtually  an  unemployed  musician,  dependent 
on  the  irregular  commissions  that  came  his  way,  which  were  insuffi- 
cient to  lift  him  from  the  poverty  that  plagued  him  throughout  his 
life. 

Roughly  parallel  to  this  decline  of  feudalism  was  the  waning 

wealth,  prestige,  and  consequent  patronage  of  the  church  in  both 

Protestant  and  Catholic  centers,  as  it  faced  the  growing  competition 

of  the  secular  institutions.  The  Church  had  been  for  centuries  a 

14 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  15 

steady  consumer  of  the  arts  and  an  employer  of  artists.  Like  the 
murals  of  Michelangelo  in  the  Sistine  Chapel,  some  of  the  most  mag- 
nificent creations  of  Bach  and  Mozart,  to  say  nothing  of  earlier  com- 
posers such  as  Palestrina,  had  been  produced  under  strictly  religious 
auspices,  and  these  works  were  therefore  bound  to  share  the  adverse 
destiny  of  their  ecclesiastical  sponsors.  Their  consequent  passing  into 
relative  oblivion  was  often  the  result,  not  of  any  artistic  insuffi- 
ciency, but  of  the  secularization  of  public  interest.  If,  in  spite  of  this 
new  channeling  of  public  activity,  any  have  survived,  it  is  only 
within  the  framework  of  the  institutions  of  the  new  civil  life.  Thus 
the  pious  Bach,  were  he  to  return  to  us  today,  would,  after  recov- 
ering from  his  astonishment  at  seeing  his  music  performed  at  all, 
probably  be  scandalized  to  witness  the  routine  annual  revival  of  the 
St.  Matthew  Passion,  conducted  by  Catholic,  Jew,  or  unbeliever,  for 
the  aesthetic  edification  of  a  miscellaneous  population  in  Carnegie 
Hall  for  an  admission  fee  of  $3.60,  federal  tax  included.  This  Passion, 
like  the  several  hundred  religious  cantatas,  was  conceived  as  an  in- 
tegral and  inseparable  portion  of  the  Divine  service.  Today  the 
church  is  no  longer  the  magnificent  employer  of  creative  artists, 
whose  inspiration  serves  the  populace  both  socially  and  aesthetically. 
Creative  artists  are  now  drawing  their  sustenance  from  a  more  pro- 
fane source,  and  this  is  visibly  reflected  in  the  character  of  their 
works,  the  occasions  for  which  they  are  produced,  the  mechanism 
of  remuneration  which  sustains  them,  and  the  repertoire  which 
finally  emerges  from  them. 

The  chronological  line  of  demarcation  between  the  dissolution 
of  feudalism  and  the  germination  of  the  new  commercial  order  with 
its  public  concerts  cannot,  of  course,  be  precisely  drawn,  first,  be- 
cause all  historical  transitions  are  gradual,  and  second,  because  these 
transitions  did  not  occur  simultaneously  in  all  countries.  It  is  com- 
monly asserted  that  the  earliest  public  concert  took  place  in  London 
in  1673,  although  Venice,  as  a  very  prosperous  mercantile  republic, 
was  conspicuous  for  its  public  opera  houses  nearly  half  a  century 
earlier.  Other  cities  on  the  world's  commercial  highways  similarly 
evolved  the  pattern  of  public  concerts.  In  Paris  were  the  extremely 
significant  and  prophetic  Concerts  Spirituels,  founded  by  Philidor  in 
1725,  which  became  the  model  for  similar  series  in  Vienna  (1771), 


l6  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Berlin  (1783),  and  other  centers.  St.  Petersburg  organized  its  Phil- 
harmonic Society  in  1802. 

The  industrial  revolution,  the  emergence  of  private  enterprise 
and  an  urban  economy  encouraged  the  public  concert  in  England, 
while  on  the  continent  such  ventures  generally  still  remained  in  the 
private  hands  of  royalty,  nobility,  and  clergy  within  the  walls  of 
court  and  castle.  By  way  of  exception,  Hamburg,  undamaged  in  the 
Thirty  Years'  War,  profited  from  its  favorable  geographical  loca- 
tion and  was  rich,  commercial,  and  secular-minded.  As  early  as  1 704 
Handel's  Almira  was  produced  there  and  had  a  run  of  seven  weeks, 
a  great  success  for  that  day,  or  any  other  day  for  that  matter.  By 
171 1  Rinaldo,  his  first  opera  in  England,  enjoyed  sold-out  houses  in 
London.  From  1748  to  1840  the  Oxford  Music  Room,1  to  mention 
only  one  of  several  public  enterprises,  presented  a  series  of  weekly 
subscription  concerts  of  choral  and  instrumental  music,  both  solo 
and  ensemble  with  a  permanent  orchestra  of  sixteen  to  twenty  play- 
ers, the  conventional  complement  of  that  day.  After  1800  the  em- 
phasis on  oratorio  diminished  in  favor  of  the  instrumental  works  of 
Mozart,  Haydn,  Beethoven,  and  other  contemporaries.  But  not  all 
the  records  of  these  series  have  been  preserved  for  us  in  musical  lore 
as  have  the  brief  subscription  series  of  the  Salomon-Haydn  concerts 
in  London  (1791-95),  or  the  Leipzig  Gewandhaus  series,  which 
began  so  modestly  in  1743,  established  itself  in  the  old  Gewandhaus 
in  1 78 1,  and  flowered  into  one  of  the  most  brilliant  orchestral  series 
in  Europe. 

As  compared  to  Europe,  the  American  colonies  were  provided 
with  almost  none  of  these  ingredients  for  a  rich  musical  life.  Private 
court  orchestras  and  opera,  the  remnants  of  which  stimulated  the 
rising  bourgeoisie  of  Europe  to  similar  projects,  had  of  course  never 
existed  in  the  Western  world.  There  were  no  sophisticated  institu- 
tions, no  imperial  courts  like  Vienna,  no  prodigal  noblemen,  no  pros- 
perous crossroads  of  commerce  like  Hamburg,  Leipzig,  and  Venice, 
in  the  raw  and  hardy  pioneer  environment.  There  was  no  Catholic 
Church  with  sumptuous  baroque  traditions,  nor  a  Protestant  parish 
to  employ  a  Bach.  Finally,  there  was  no  reservoir  of  trained  per- 
sonnel in  the  musical  arts,  no  orphan  school  for  choir  boys  from 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  17 

which  might  have  graduated  so  many  adult  practitioners,  no  archi- 
tectural conveniences  for  concerted  music  that  could  compare  with 
the  spacious  homes  of  the  nobility  or  the  public  theatres  in  the  large 
urban  centers  of  Europe.  Austere  American  Protestant  churches,  in 
which  frequently  even  the  organ  was  tabu,  took  the  place  of  the 
elaborate  ritualistic  musical  ceremonies  of  continental  traditions.  Mu- 
sical instruments,  every  last  ounce  and  inch  of  them,  had  to  be  im- 
ported in  cargo  space  that  was  not  always  ample  and  certainly  not 
cheap. 

The  very  ideology  of  many  colonists  was  totally  incompatible 
with  the  aristocratic  public  cultivation  of  the  secular  arts.  While  the 
New  England  Puritans  were  engaged  in  such  rudimentary  musical 
disputations,  as  whether  the  Bible  sanctioned  the  reading  or  the  sing- 
ing of  the  psalms,  and  the  organ  in  King's  Chapel  was  threateningly 
characterized  as  an  "infernal  box  of  whistles  with  the  devil  inside," 
Bach  and  Handel  were  composing  their  masterpieces  for  church  and 
concert  stage.  While  Boston's  "tanner-composer"  William  Billings 
( 1 746-1 800)  was  composing  his  "fugueing  pieces"  and  compiling  the 
Psalm  Singer,  Haydn  and  Mozart  were  laying  the  foundation  for  the 
modern  symphony,  and  Beethoven  was  beginning  his  sensational 
career  as  pianist  and  composer  in  glittering  Vienna,  the  literal  hub 
of  the  musical  world. 

Few  of  the  early  patriots  could  see  as  clearly  as  John  Adams  that 
several  generations  of  effort  would  be  required  to  realize  the  new 
country's  cultural  potential.  In  1780,  he  wrote  to  his  wife  from  Paris: 

I  could  fill  volumes  with  descriptions  of  temples  and  palaces,  paintings, 
sculpture,  tapestry,  porcelain,  etc.,  if  I  could  have  the  time,  but  I  could 
not  do  this  without  neglecting  my  duty.  My  duty  is  to  study  the  science 
of  government  that  my  sons  may  have  the  liberty  to  study  mathematics 
and  science.  My  sons  ought  to  study  geography,  navigation,  commerce, 
and  agriculture  in  order  to  give  their  children  a  right  to  study  philos- 
ophy, painting,  poetry,  music,  architecture,  sculpture,  tapestry,  and  por- 
celain.2 

In  contrast  to  the  state  of  music,  the  achievements  of  the  new 
world  in  the  realm  of  the  other  arts  and  sciences,  after  all,  were  not 
so  rudimentary.  In  painting,  Copley,  Peale,  West,  Trumbull,  and 
Gilbert  Stuart  had  permanently  enriched  their  field  before  the  nine- 


l8  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

teenth  century  was  well  begun.  In  sculpture,  Thomas  Crawford, 
Horatio  Greenough,  and  Hiram  Powers  had  achieved  an  interna- 
tional reputation  before  the  middle  of  the  century.3  At  a  time  when 
the  New  York  Philharmonic  was  still  in  its  incubation  period,  the 
New  England  school  of  literature  had  attained  early  and  respected 
maturity,  not  only  at  home  but  abroad. 

Possible  reasons  for  the  precocity  of  these  favored  arts  may  be 
gleaned  from  an  examination  of  their  content,  their  social  functions, 
and  antecedent  background.  The  early  painters  and  sculptors  cele- 
brated the  heroics  of  the  new  nation,  a  task  which  abstract  tonal 
combinations  were  able  to  do  less  picturesquely.  Further,  these  arts 
could  be  cultivated  on  an  individual  basis  by  individual  patrons, 
while  music  derives  most  of  its  aesthetic  sustenance  from  collective 
cultivation.  Skills  in  painting  and  literature  could  and  did  easily  mi- 
grate (West,  Hiram  Powers,  and  Horatio  Greenough  spent  part  of 
their  professional  life  in  Europe),  but  the  whole  constellation  of  in- 
stitutions that  had  brought  European  music  to  such  an  exalted  state 
of  efflorescence  was  lacking  in  the  United  States.  In  Europe,  the 
feudal  state  had  bowed  to  the  inevitable  and  relinquished  its  protec- 
tive authority  over  the  Muses,  but  its  material  and  cultural  heritage 
had  been  readily  adopted  by  its  new  patrons  and  continued  to  flour- 
ish with  almost  no  interruption.  It  was  a  heritage  far  too  indigenous 
to  be  uprooted  successfully  and  to  transport  across  the  seas  to  thrive 
in  the  new  and  different  soil  of  America. 

Musical  beginnings  in  America  were  therefore  bound  to  be  rudi- 
mentary, but  perhaps  no  more  so  than  could  be  expected  from  the 
size  of  the  population,  the  social  opportunities,  facilities  for  travel 
and  communication,  and  above  all,  from  the  absence  of  the  tradition 
and  technical  accoutrements  of  the  hundreds  of  courts  that  dotted 
the  continent  of  Europe.  Late  colonial  America  could  exhibit  four 
centers  of  commerce  and  culture,  which  were,  in  order  of  popula- 
tion, Quaker  Philadelphia,  commercial  New  York,  Puritan  Boston, 
and  prosperous  Charleston.  Until  about  1750  Boston  had  been  the 
most  populous  town,  then  numbering  about  15,000  inhabitants,  while 
Charleston,  the  gateway  to  the  rich  agricultural  south,  with  a  popu- 
lation of  only  8,000  enjoyed  an  importance  out  of  proportion  to  its 
census  returns. 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  19 

In  Boston,  New  York,  and  Charleston,  the  evidence  of  concert 
life,  of  a  sort,  extends  as  far  back  as  1731-33.  Since  records,  princi- 
pally newspaper  articles,  are  both  sparse  and  ambiguous,  there  is 
some  ground  for  speculation  that  the  earliest  newspaper  accounts  do 
not  necessarily  coincide  with  actual  historical  beginnings.  Philadel- 
phia, however,  in  spite  of  the  fairly  complete  files  of  newspapers 
since  17 19,  does  not  yield  evidence  of  public  concerts  until  1757.  So 
late  an  entry  of  the  Quaker  City  into  public  music  seems  "doubtful, 
not  to  say  incredible"  to  the  most  authoritative  student  of  colonial 
concert  life,4  although  it  is  freely  granted  that  in  "Philadelphia  espe- 
cially the  Quakers  were  more  inclined  to  reject  worldly  amusements 
than  the  southerners,  or  even  the  Puritans."  Whether  such  doubts 
are  justified  will  probably  remain  forever  unknown,  but  after  the 
1750's,  the  city  of  "brotherly  love"  entered  a  period  of  unprece- 
dented expansion  and  prosperity  that,  within  ten  years,  placed  her  at 
the  forefront  of  colonial  communities,  well  in  advance  of  Boston, 
and  even  ahead  of  New  York,  with  whom  she  had  been  in  virtual 
tie.5  It  is  no  doubt  quite  safe  to  accept  this  extraordinary  growth  as 
an  index  to  other  social  changes,  which  would  include  at  least  a  par- 
tial relaxation  of  her  traditional  austerity— a  reputation  the  city  has 
to  this  day  not  been  able  to  shake  off. 

The  concert  "season"  of  two  centuries  ago  was  only  an  em- 
bryonic precursor  of  modern  practices.  Although  various  seasons 
may  have  been  remarkable  for  individual  achievements  (a  very  ab- 
breviated version  of  Handel's  Messiah  was  given  in  New  York,  Jan- 
uary 1770,  about  a  year  before  its  introduction  into  Germany),  most 
of  the  concerts  consisted  of  what  are  now  deprecatingly  referred  to 
as  "tutti-frutti"  programs,  an  admixture  of  vocal  and  instrumental 
solo  and  ensemble  numbers.  In  contrast  to  the  present  taste,  the  con- 
cert programs  of  the  pioneer  period  evince  a  heterogeneity  in  type 
and  quality  that  seems  shocking  to  the  modern  ear.  Sentimental  and 
even  ribald  ditties  are  found  mated  with  serious  Haydn  symphonies. 
The  popular  Battle  of  Prague  of  Kotzwara,  one  of  the  many  battle 
pieces  of  the  convulsed  Napoleonic  period,  appears  in  all  sorts  of 
instrumental  permutations  and  undoubtedly  served  as  an  exciting 
compensation  for  the  more  "cerebral"  overtures  of  Gluck  and  sym- 
phonies of  Christian  Bach.  Perhaps  if  one  recalls  that  Beethoven's 


20  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

own  forgotten  Battle  Symphony  was  launched  in  1813  by  the 
composer  himself  on  the  same  program  with  his  new  Seventh  Sym- 
phony, this  sense  of  incongruity  may  be  discounted  as  an  aesthetic 
idiosyncrasy  of  our  own  time. 

Orchestral  numbers  were  usually  pushed  out  to  the  beginning 
and  the  end  of  the  programs  to  frame  the  more  glamorous  solo  of- 
ferings. It  required  a  full  century  for  the  various  orchestral  forms 
to  differentiate  themselves  into  independent  status,  eligible  to  stand 
alone  in  their  own  behalf.  With  Paganini,  Liszt,  and  Clara  Schumann, 
solo  recitals  assumed  an  assured  position,  but  orchestral  concerts,  in 
spite  of  the  jealous  efforts  of  a  Nikisch,  Muck,  or  a  Koussevitzky, 
have  not  even  today  altogether  achieved  a  complete  "solo"  standing. 
In  most  cities  the  visiting  star  performers  are  still  an  essential  part 
of  a  concert,  who  more  than  pay  their  way  at  the  box  office. 

All  in  all,  however,  the  repertoire  of  these  provincial  days  does 
not  suffer  too  much  by  comparison  with  that  of  aristocratic  Europe. 
The  symphonies  of  Haydn,  Stamitz,  the  "London"  Bach,  Pleyel,  and 
Gyrowetz,  would  constitute  good  ballast  for  any  concert  season  in 
much  more  recent  years.  Nor  were  local  composers  lacking.  Alex- 
ander Reinagle  (1 756-1 809)  of  Philadelphia  and  New  York,  Francis 
Hopkinson  ( 1737- 1 791),  song  composer  and  statesman,  and  William 
Billings  ( 1 746-1 800),  composer  and  compiler,  were  given,  as  some 
Americans  are  today,  at  least  a  courtesy  appearance  on  the  program. 

Although  some  of  the  early  concerts  were  given  in  series  of  sev- 
eral weeks  to  a  season  in  duration,  most  of  the  concerts  were  offered 
as  single  enterprises.  After  1800,  with  more  abundant  facilities,  mu- 
sical amateurs  as  well  as  professionals  began  to  organize  more  perma- 
nent bodies  to  enjoy  at  regular  intervals  the  exhilaration  of  musical 
participation  and  to  share  these  accomplishments  with  friends  or 
the  general  public.  The  Handel  and  Haydn  Society  of  Boston  was 
founded  in  1 8 1 5  for  the  purpose  of  "cultivation  and  improving  a  cor- 
rect taste  in  the  performances  of  sacred  music."  Its  offer  of  a  commis- 
sion to  Beethoven  for  an  oratorio  in  1823  testifies  to  an  early  affinity 
for  serious  music.  Gottlieb  Graupner  sparked  the  organization  of  an 
instrumental  group,  the  Philharmonic  Orchestra,  in  18 10,  which  per- 
sisted for  about  fifteen  years.  The  Harvard  Musical  Association 
(1837),  which  itself  had  fissioned  from  a  previous  society  founded 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  21 

in  1808,  was  a  forerunner  to  the  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra. 
In  New  York,  the  Euterpian  Society  (1 800-1 850),  similarly  offered 
public  performances  that  fostered  a  salubrious  musical  climate  in 
which  their  descendents  could  flourish. 


Background  of  the  Symphony  Orchestra  in  the  United  States 

In  December,  1909,  just  after  he  had  assumed  the  direction  of  the 
New  York  Philharmonic  Society,  Gustav  Mahler  wrote  to  his  pro- 
tege and  friend  Bruno  Walter  in  Vienna,  "Mein  Orchester  hier  is 
das  richtige  Amerikanische  Orchester,  talentlos  and  phlegmatisch"  6 
Although  on  another  occasion  he  enthusiastically  characterized  the 
Boston  orchestra  as  uersten  Ranges,"  the  derogatory  reference  to  his 
own  musicians  approximates  more  nearly  the  typical  judgment  of 
Europeans  on  the  condition  of  music  in  the  United  States  before  and 
at  the  turn  of  the  century.  This  evaluation  of  American  art  was,  to 
be  sure,  not  wrapped  up  in  a  phrase  so  cruelly  laconic  as  the  usual 
reference  to  England  as  Das  Land  ohne  Musik,  but  that  was  merely 
because  the  more  modest  pretensions  of  the  United  States  made  such 
a  formulation  almost  irrelevant.  Both  before  Mahler,  and  many  years 
after  him,  it  was  claimed  in  Europe  and  freely  admitted  by  word  and 
action  in  this  country,  that  any  merit  to  which  American  musical 
life  might  lay  claim  was  largely  attributable  to  the  migration  of  men 
and  ideas  from  across  the  seas.  It  holds  true  in  cultural  as  well  as  in 
military  matters  that  weaker  countries  are  invaded  by  the  stronger. 
The  long  history  of  music  in  America  is  a  saga  of  growth  from 
the  early  embryonic  dependence  on  the  rich  cumulation  of  Euro- 
pean culture  to  the  present  era,  which  manifests  an  admirable  degree 
of  maturity,  independence,  and  self-respect.  To  be  sure,  it  has  been 
only  during  the  most  recent  decades  that  even  this  partial  emancipa- 
tion from  European  tutelage  has  been  effected.  But  there  has  been 
a  discernible  and  inexorable  trend  toward  independence,  which  has 
gained  acceleration  from  every  political  crisis  in  Europe  during  the 
last  150  years.  Not  only  have  these  crises  expelled  from  her  midst 
some  of  the  most  energetic  exponents  of  the  arts;  but,  likewise,  in 
more  recent  periods,  they  have  left  her  fatigued  and  harassed  with 
an   ever   diminishing   potency   for   further   accomplishment.    The 


22  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

French  Revolution,  the  revolutions  of  1 848,  and  World  Wars  I  and 
II  are  only  the  major  and  more  obvious  disturbances  highlighting  a 
continuous  period  of  political  and  economic  restlessness,  which  pro- 
pelled in  a  steady  stream  of  unprecedented  volume  the  more  volatile 
population  in  all  the  arts  and  crafts  from  their  disorganized  home- 
lands into  the  fresh  opportunities  of  a  pioneer  country.  To  this  "push" 
from  inside  Europe  one  must  add  the  "pull"  of  the  fantastic  eco- 
nomic expansion  of  the  new  world  where  dollars  flowed  like  the 
"milk  and  honey"  of  old  and  promised  fabulous  rewards  for  every 
effort  from  coal  mining  to  concertizing.  This  was  a  positive  attrac- 
tion for  all  who  were  either  stifled  by  the  monarchic  atmosphere 
and  other  restraints,  or  crowded  out  by  the  saturated  economic 
market  of  the  old  country.  According  to  the  Viennese  critic,  Eduard 
Hanslick,  who  never  fumbled  a  chance  for  a  sarcastic  jab,  "America 
was  truly  the  promised  land,  if  not  of  music,  at  least  of  the  mu- 
sician." 7 

To  obtain,  for  the  purposes  of  objective  history,  an  honest  and 
balanced  perspective  of  the  actual  material  rewards  of  this  migration 
—a  perspective  which  of  course  many  a  nervously  optimistic  immi- 
grant never  achieved— it  is  obviously  necessary  to  set  off  against  the 
spectacular  rewards  of  a  Jenny  Lind  (nearly  $175,000  net  in  two 
seasons),  of  an  Anton  Rubinstein,  a  Paderewski,  and  a  score  of  other 
luminaries,  the  insolvent  integrity  of  a  Theodore  Thomas  and  the 
frustrated  dignity  of  a  Leopold  Damrosch.  Both  of  them  held  val- 
iantly to  the  course  without  a  Barnum  to  embellish  their  paths, 
setting  the  pattern  for  innumerable  but  nameless  teachers,  per- 
formers, and  chorus  masters  whose  modest  and  collective  efforts  laid 
the  foundation  for  whatever  indigenous  musical  culture  has  since 
been  erected.  But  by  and  large  they  were  all  well  recompensed,  for 
there  was  established  in  the  New  World  a  musical  standard  which 
not  only  competed  very  successfully  with  the  Old  World  in  mone- 
tary considerations,  but  eventually  equalled  and  often  surpassed  it  in 
professional  excellence,  so  that  by  the  time  of  World  War  I  there 
remained  very  few  masters— performers,  teachers,  and  conductors— 
who  could  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  share  its  prospects  for  a  brief 
or  lengthy  period. 

The  most  conspicuous  single  phenomenon  in  the  evolution  of  this 


AN  ENGLISH  CONCERT  IN  THE  1 840's 

Until  about  1850,  the  conductor  customarily  faced  the  audience.  (The 
Bemnann  Archive) 


THE  NEW  YORK  ACADEMY  OF  MUSIC, 
FOURTEENTH  STREET  AND  IRVING  PLACE 

The  home  of  the  best  music  in  New  York  for  many  years,  until  the 
Metropolitan  Opera  House  was  built.  (The  Bettmann  Archive) 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  23 

nineteenth-century  American  musical  romance  was  the  rise  of  the 
symphony  orchestra.  Although  built  on  the  German  model,  and  al- 
though its  basic  repertoire  has  always  been  and  still  is  largely  Teu- 
tonic, it  is  nevertheless  more  peculiarly  typical  of  America  than  is 
any  other  phase  of  serious  music;  and,  similarly,  there  is  no  country 
in  the  world  in  which  the  symphony  orchestra  carries  more  prestige 
than  in  the  United  States.  In  no  other  country  in  the  world  has  the 
symphony  orchestra  won  the  priority  in  status  accorded  it  in  the 
United  States. 

If  this  claim  seems  inflated,  one  must  be  reminded  that  even  in 
Germany,  its  ancestral  home,  the  orchestra  assumed  a  rank  second 
to  opera,  while  in  the  United  States  the  opera  furnished  only  peri- 
odic competition  to  the  orchestra.  With  few  possible  exceptions, 
such  as  the  Leipzig  Gewandhaus  orchestra,  the  Meiningen  orchestra 
under  Biilow,  and  the  Berlin  Philharmonic  under  Nikisch  and  Furt- 
wangler,  most  of  the  orchestras  of  central  Europe,  including  the 
celebrated  Vienna  Philharmonic,  were  appendages  to  the  opera, 
gained  their  livelihood  from  the  opera,  and  could  not  compete  with 
the  opera  in  general  patronage.  That  these  conditions  prevailed  in 
early,  as  well  as  later  days,  is  attested  by  Ottmar  Schreiber,  the  his- 
torian of  German  orchestras,  who  explains  the  inferior  position  of 
the  Munich  orchestra  in  1803  by  the  fact  that  the  regular  opera  per- 
formances were  the  center  of  interest,  which  precluded  the  possi- 
bility of  even  a  good  orchestra  attaining  a  high  status  in  its  own 
right.  Later  (1822-23),  the  Leipzig  orchestra  claims  the  "peculiar 
and  unique  virtue"  of  cultivating  symphonic  music  as  such,  since  in 
nearly  every  other  orchestra  it  is  considered  secondary  to  other 
types  of  performances.8  At  the  time  of  the  launching  of  the  Boston 
orchestra  in  1881,  it  was  proudly  declared  by  Boston  rhapsodists 
with  approximate  accuracy  that 

in  Germany,  no  unsubventioned  orchestra  can  maintain  itself  without 
offering  the  public  the  additional  attractions  of  lager  beer  and  tobacco. 
A  symphony  orchestra  pure  and  simple  does  not  exist  in  all  Europe.  That 
is  to  say,  that  in  no  city  in  Germany,  Italy,  France  or  Russia  is  there  an 
orchestra  which  is  made  up  of  players  whose  only  business  it  is  to  per- 
form such  music  as  is  to  be  found  on  programmes  of  symphony  con- 
certs. .  .  .  This  sounds  sweeping.  .  .  .  Bilse,  supported  by  liquor,  plays 


24  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

every  day.  But  the  orchestra  is  artistic  bait  merely.  .  .  .  All  other  or- 
chestras are  recruited  from  the  opera.9 

Even  though  German  opera,  from  Mozart  to  Wagner,  stressed 
the  symphonic  element  as  a  copartner  of  the  other  arts,  in  contrast 
to  the  Italian  opera,  which  subordinated  the  orchestra  in  the  role  of 
accompaniment  to  the  vocal  stars,  such  an  emphasis  was  still  far 
from  according  the  solo  orchestra  a  position  of  comparable  dignity. 

An  examination  of  conductors'  careers  further  underscores  this 
division  of  public  interest  between  orchestra  and  opera.  From  the 
latter  part  of  the  century  down  to  the  present  day  almost  all  noted 
German  conductors,  many  of  whom  subsequently  sought  fame  in 
the  United  States,  were,  during  their  German  careers,  opera  con- 
ductors first  and  orchestra  leaders  secondarily.  Among  these  were 
Richter,  Seidl,  Gericke,  Muck,  Mahler,  Reiner,  Fritz  Busch,  and 
Bruno  Walter.  Even  Biilow,  Nikisch,  Furtwangler,  and  Weingart- 
ner,  all  of  whom  are  associated  by  the  American  observer  with  the 
orchestra,  shared  their  German  professional  life  with  the  opera.  No- 
where except  in  the  United  States  do  we  find  that  almost  lifelong, 
exclusive,  and  single-minded  devotion  to  the  orchestra  that  was  per- 
mitted to  Theodore  Thomas,  Stock,  Stokowski,  Goossens,  Stransky, 
Ormandy,  Koussevitzky,  Mitropoulos,  Golschmann,  and  a  host  of 
other  conductors  of  the  American  symphony  orchestras  that  have 
mushroomed  "in  the  provinces"  since  the  opening  of  this  century. 
Others,  like  Walter  Damrosch  (very  briefly),  Seidl,  Toscanini, 
Mahler,  Hertz,  Leinsdorf,  Monteux,  and  Szell,  gave  their  first  serv- 
ices to  the  only  opera  company  in  the  United  States  that  survived 
to  accumulate  a  history  of  dignified  length  and  achievement.  The 
continued  growth  of  their  reputations,  however,  proceeded  not  from 
the  Metropolitan  Opera  Association,  but  from  their  consecration  to 
their  respective  orchestras. 

If  the  German  orchestra  had  to  content  itself  with  sharing  both 
prestige  and  conductors  with  the  opera,  this  was  all  the  more  the 
case  with  the  French  orchestras  and  decidedly  so  in  Italy,  the  tradi- 
tional home  of  the  opera  itself.  Habeneck,  today  remembered  as  the 
founder  of  the  Societe  des  Concerts  du  Conservatoire  in  1828,  and 
who  "taught"  Wagner  how  to  conduct  Beethoven's  Ninth,  was  in 
his  day  best  known  as  the  conductor  of  the  Paris  Opera— a  post  to 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  25 

which  Berlioz  aspired,  for  it  was  "the  only  place  where  a  French 
composer  of  that  day  could  hope  to  find  real  fame  and  fortune."  10 
The  French  interest  in  instrumental  music,  kindled  by  Habeneck 
and  rekindled  by  Berlioz,  Saint-Saens,  and  Cesar  Franck,  did  not 
burst  forth  into  a  warm  flame  until  the  latter  part  of  the  century. 
Franck  insisted  on  the  dignity  of  chamber  music  and  orchestral 
composition,  but  was  hampered  by  the  fact  that  the  symphony  was 
associated  with  the  Germans  who  had  ignominiously  defeated  the 
French  (1871),  a  humiliation  that  solidified  their  musical  sentiments 
by  converting  them  into  a  patriotic  issue. 

In  Italy,  during  the  nineteenth  century,  there  was  almost  no  in- 
dependent cultivation  of  the  orchestra,  though  every  town  of  any 
pretensions  supported  one  or  more  opera  houses.  Thereby  was  cre- 
ated that  prodigious  demand  for  new  operas,  the  setting  in  which 
Rossini,  Bellini,  and  Donizetti  spawned  their  numerous  musical 
progeny  and  Verdi  rose  to  the  pinnacle  as  the  "grand  old  man  of 
music."  It  was  Italian  opera  that  inundated  all  Europe  as  far  north 
as  London  and  St.  Petersburg,  and  left,  like  a  receding  glacier,  the 
legacy  of  the  Italian  musical  vocabulary,  which  has  now  become  a 
sort  of  lingua  franca  for  migratory  conductors  and  musicians. 

Even  England,  which  boasts  the  oldest  symphonic  body  in  ex- 
istence—the London  Philharmonic  was  founded  in  181 3— could  not 
show  us  an  example  of  an  orchestra  competing  successfully  with 
the  Royal  Opera  of  Covent  Garden  for  length  of  season  and  inter- 
national eminence.  The  venerable  "Phil,"  whose  history  is  studded 
with  the  most  brilliant  composers  and  conductors,  never  played 
more  than  six  to  ten  concerts  a  season  until  the  1930's.  Though  Sir 
Henry  Wood  achieved  great  popularity  for  the  Promenade  concerts 
in  Queen's  Hall,  established  in  1895,  and  Hans  Richter  and  Halle 
regaled  London  and  Manchester  with  authoritative  concerts  for 
thirty  years,  Sir  Thomas  Beecham,  the  most  scintillating  of  British 
conductors,  has  u  divided  both  his  allegiance  and  his  personal  for- 
tune between  his  operatic  ventures  and  his  orchestral  exploits. 

Circumstances  and  situations  such  as  these  are  in  sharp  contrast 
to  the  almost  monopolistic  orchestra  of  the  American  scene  and 
confirm  the  claim  that  the  symphony  orchestra  has  found  in  Amer- 
ica its  most  congenial  home.  But  previous  to  the  emergence  of  the 


26  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

American  symphony  orchestra,  which  dates  roughly  from  the  mid- 
dle of  the  nineteenth  century,  America,  like  Europe,  generally  ac- 
corded greater  prestige  to  vocal  and  dramatic  music. 

When  Wagner  declared  that  Beethoven's  Choral  Symphony 
evidenced  the  exhaustion  of  the  expressive  potentialities  of  instru- 
mental or  "absolute"  music,  he  was  of  course  guilty  of  an  egregious 
miscalculation  of  the  trend.  But  what  was  more  significant,  he  was 
merely  echoing  a  sentiment  that  had  not  only  been  repeatedly  for- 
mulated, but  had  never  really  lost  currency.  From  Rousseau,  through 
Gluck,  Weber,  and  Wagner,  the  inseparability  of  music  and  poetry 
had  been  proclaimed.12  Even  the  popularity  of  absolute  music 
achieved  by  Haydn  in  England,  the  fame  of  the  Mannheim  orches- 
tra, or  the  eminence  of  Beethoven— all  of  which  loom  large  in  the 
light  of  subsequent  music  history— could  not  shake  the  accumulated 
vocal  traditions  of  Handel  and  of  the  Italian  opera.  The  literal  en- 
gulfment  of  all  Europe  in  Italian  vocal  music  during  the  early  nine- 
teenth century  greatly  embittered  the  declining  years  of  the  instru- 
mentally  minded  Beethoven. 

In  France,  according  to  Berlioz,  instrumental  music  had  indeed 
been  regarded  as  "respectable,  but  distinctly  inferior  .  .  .  Haydn 
and  Mozart  had  achieved  all  that  could  be  looked  for  in  that  direc- 
tion." 13  When  Habeneck  first  introduced  well-disciplined  perform- 
ances of  the  sturdy  Beethoven  symphonies  to  the  puzzled  French, 
who  had  a  sweet  tooth  for  Italian  vocal  monody  but  no  appetite  for 
the  heavy  German  symphonies,  he  was  himself  definitely  cultivating 
a  sideline.  In  a  word,  the  general  musical  public,  which  was  habitu- 
ated to  instrumental  music  as  an  expressive  accompaniment  to  vocal 
themes,  could  not  quickly  accustom  themselves  to  an  autonomous 
and  complex  instrumental  medium.  An  orchestra  without  a  voice  was 
like  a  pedestal  without  a  statue.  It  had  been  suggested  that,  if  in- 
strumental music  could  emulate,  or  simulate,  the  voice,  it  could  per- 
haps justify  an  independent  existence.  Therefore,  K.  P.  E.  Bach  en- 
deavored to  compose  in  as  vocal  a  manner  as  possible.  Charles  Burney, 
a  follower  of  French  Encyclopedist  thought,  declared  that 

of  musical  tones  the  most  grateful  are  such  as  are  produced  by  the  vocal 
organs.  And  next  to  singing,  the  most  pleasing  kinds  are  those  which 
approach  the  nearest  to  vocal,  such  as  can  be  sustained,  swelled  and 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  27 

diminished  at  pleasure.  Of  these  the  first  in  rank  are  such  as  the  most 
excellent  performers  produce  from  the  violin,  flute,  and  hautbois.14 

When  such  convictions  become  well  established  in  the  uncon- 
scious experience  of  a  people,  theorists  will  rationalize  an  explana- 
tion for  what  everybody  already  accepts.  Thus  the  English  Busby 
in  his  Dictionary  avers  that 

The  music  of  the  voice,  when  good,  is  universally  acknowledged  to  be 
infinitely  superior  in  its  effect  to  that  of  any  instrument,  for  the  tone  is 
not  only  more  natural,  and  therefore  gratifying  in  itself,  but  with  the 
union  of  sense  with  sound,  by  means  of  the  words,  the  mind  is  enter- 
tained while  the  ear  is  delighted.  .  .  .  Instrumental  music  is  very  inferior 
in  its  powers  to  vocal,  yet  it  claims  an  honorable  prerogative  in  having 
contributed  so  materially  to  the  advancement  of  the  vocal.15 

There  was  some  appreciation,  however,  for  the  fact  that  instru- 
mental music  was  at  least  beginning  to  challenge  this  superiority, 
and  that  Germany  was,  of  course,  the  leader  in  this  development. 
Burney  very  early  advanced  the  opinion  that 

though  Italy  has  carried  vocal  music  to  a  perfection  unknown  in  any 
other  country,  much  of  the  present  excellence  of  instrumental  music  is 
owing  to  the  natives  of  Germany,  as  wind  and  keyed  instruments  have 
never  perhaps  in  any  age  or  country  been  brought  to  a  greater  degree 
of  refinement,  either  in  construction  or  in  use  than  by  the  modern  Ger- 


Except  for  a  few  such  rudimentary  stirrings,  the  story  in  the 
United  States  after  1800  follows  faithfully  the  European  tradition. 
The  pioneer  period  was  safely  past  and  the  singing  societies  were 
gathering  force.  Even  such  organizations  as  the  New  York  Philhar- 
monic Society,  founded  in  1842  for  the  express  purpose  of  cultivat- 
ing the  neglected  instrumental  field,  garnished  its  programs  liberally 
with  vocal  solos.  That  they  dared  not  forsake  the  vocal  art  is  evi- 
dent from  a  complaint  voiced  in  the  Sixth  Annual  Report  for  that 
society:  "We  are  living  in  a  community  where  considerable  preju- 
dice exists  unfavorable  particularly  to  instrumental  music." 

As  late  as  188 1,  Theodore  Thomas,  frustrated  temporarily  in  his 
mission  to  establish  orchestral  music  on  a  firm  foundation,  confessed 
that  "although  the  contrary  has  been  asserted,  I  think  that  it  is  in 


28  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

the  vocal  direction,  and  not  in  the  instrumental,  that  the  present 
development  of  the  art  lies.  .  .  .  Singing  .  .  .  appeals  to  every- 
one." 17  A  similarly  discouraged  pronouncement  (1895)  is  occa- 
sioned by  the  inhospitable  reception  of  the  orchestral  strivings  of 
the  St.  Louis  Choral-Symphony  Society: 

It  is  a  well  known  fact  that  instrumental  concerts,  i.e.  symphony  concerts, 
are  as  a  rule  not  well  patronized.  ...  As  soon  as  it  is  known  that  only 
'mysterious'  symphonies  and  'learned'  overtures  are  offered,  they  take  it 
for  granted  that  such  concerts  are  not  intended  for  them.  Here  is  where 
so  many  program  dictators  make  a  serious  mistake.  Why  not  compro- 
mise? Must  people  be  converted  in  one  season?  18 

Psychologically  the  reason  for  the  allegiance  enjoyed  by  vocal 
music  is  not  remote.  Vocal  music  in  song,  oratorio,  or  opera  be- 
tokens dramatic  action;  it  involves  personalities  and  plots;  there  is 
"always  something  going  on."  On  the  other  hand,  abstract  tonal 
patterns  do  not  ordinarily  revive  personal  experiences,  do  not  deal 
with  or  solve  life's  problems.  It  is  only  after  an  adequate  fund  of 
tonal  experiences  has  been  accumulated  that  these  tonal  patterns 
awaken  a  meaningful  reaction.  That  many  instrumental  composers 
have  themselves  supplemented  their  tonal  creations  with  a  "pro- 
gram" testifies  to  this.  That  program  music  is  usually  ranked  low  in 
the  hierarchy  of  musical  values  is  partially  a  result  of  the  wounded 
pride  of  the  instrumental  purist  for  whom  instrumental  music  is 
entirely  self-sufficient,  noble,  and  sublime,  and  who  sees  the  literary 
element  as  an  intrusion  that  corrupts  the  integrity  of  the  tonal 
structure. 

Again,  much  of  the  homage  tendered  vocal  music  was  derived 
from  the  enthusiastic  amateur  participants  in  choral  societies.  Enor- 
mously less  training  and  preparation  were  required  for  the  chorus 
than  for  participation  in  instrumental  ensembles.  Some  of  the  choral 
organizations,  which  always  gratified  social  as  well  as  musical  aspira- 
tions, achieved  a  long  and  honorable  history:  the  Handel  and  Haydn 
Society  of  Boston,  the  Liederkranz  of  New  York,  which  later 
merged  with  the  Arion  Society,  the  Apollo  Club  of  Chicago,  the 
Choral-Symphony  Society  of  St.  Louis,  to  say  nothing  of  the  veri- 
table rash  of  Mannerchors  in  scores  of  cities,  large  and  small,  wher- 
ever there  existed  a  minimum  German  settlement.  From  1849  to  the 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  29 

period  of  World  War  I  the  choral  groups  banded  together  in  peri- 
odic regional  and  national  festivals.  But  when  these  voluntary,  ama- 
teur organizations  were  forced  to  compete  with  the  diverse  modern 
attractions  that  levy  their  claims  on  leisure  time,  even  the  strongest 
organizations  perished,  and  only  a  few  now  remain  as  interesting 
relics  of  the  golden  age  of  song.  In  the  history  of  the  symphony 
orchestra,  however,  they  have  served  a  useful  purpose,  not  only  in 
the  cultivation  of  musical  taste  in  general,  but  also  in  their  frequent 
collaboration  with  instrumental  groups  for  presenting  the  master- 
pieces of  Mass  and  Oratorio.  This  collaboration  in  some  cases  in- 
spired the  formation  of  the  very  instrumental  orchestras  that  were 
destined  to  displace  them. 

This  shift  from  popular  participation  to  professionalism  set  the 
stage  for  the  numerous  orchestras  founded  since  the  close  of  the  last 
century.  It  drove  a  fatal  wedge  between  the  lay  audience,  which 
during  the  choral  days  had  shuttled  rather  easily  back  and  forth 
across  the  footlights,  and  the  highly  trained  orchestral  body  from 
which  they  were  now  barred.  The  chasm  widened  with  the  increas- 
ing preoccupation,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the  audience  in  its  own  per- 
sonal interests,  and  the  increasing  finesse  of  professional  execution 
of  the  orchestral  bodies  on  the  other.  To  bridge  this  gap  with  a 
mutually  acceptable  repertoire,  constructed  on  a  common  ground 
of  aesthetic  tastes  and  interests,  it  would  be  necessary,  either  for  the 
unprofessional  lay  audience  to  reach  forth  to  attain  the  maturity  of 
the  orchestra,  or  for  the  orchestras  to  condescend  to  the  level  of  the 
audience  which  they  left  behind.  It  cannot  be  said  that  this  problem 
has  even  yet  been  solved. 

The  ascent  of  instrumental  music  to  its  present  exalted  position 
required  a  century  or  more  of  growth  and  development  from  the 
epoch  when  a  "symphony"  was  a  mere  instrumental  fragment  within 
an  extended  vocal  composition,  to  the  time  when  it  had  grown  in 
dimensions  and  assumed  an  emancipated  position.  As  in  the  case  of 
every  other  shift  in  important  social  values,  whether  political,  eco- 
nomic, or  aesthetic,  this  canonization  of  instrumental  music  in  gen- 
eral, and  the  symphony  in  particular,  constituted  a  slow  evolution 
in  aesthetic  values,  and  had  to  be  ideologically  defended  and  ration- 
alized. 


30  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

This  defense  appeared  in  the  revival  of  Neo-Platonism  in  the 
romantic  philosophies  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Since  Kant,  and 
more  particularly  since  Hegel,  the  fine  arts  were  coupled  with  reli- 
gion and  philosophy  as  the  human  version  of  the  Infinite,  which  only 
the  properly  gifted  genius  could  to  a  certain  extent  fathom.  This 
supernatural  realm  was  the  antithesis  of  the  material  world— accord- 
ing to  the  familiar  division  of  Plato,  of  Christianity,  and  other  cosmic 
philosophies— which  was  the  concern  of  science.  Scientific  "truths," 
conditioned  as  they  are  by  the  limitations  of  human  reasoning  and 
observation,  were  changeable,  unstable,  and  constantly  subject  to 
correction.  Aesthetic  and  religious  truths  were,  however,  ultimate 
and  therefore  of  a  higher  order.  Any  industrious  person,  according 
to  Kant,  could  become  a  scientist;  but  only  an  inspired  person  could 
be  an  artist  and  a  prophet.  Since  the  artist  and  philosopher  dealt  in 
eternal  verities  while  the  ordinary  people  were  concerned  with  the 
mutable  physical  world,  the  inspiration  of  the  artist,  logically,  be- 
came a  higher  law  than  the  taste  and  appreciation  of  the  mundane 
consumer.  Of  all  the  arts,  music  was  often  held  to  be  the  most  re- 
moved from  the  material  universe,  although  Kant  accorded  this  high 
position  to  poetry.  According  to  Schopenhauer,  music  was  pure 
spirit.  Even  architecture,  when  it  escapes  material  limitations,  is 
"frozen  music,"  if  Schelling  is  to  be  believed. 

Music  was  not,  therefore,  mere  entertainment  and  pleasure,  as 
Burney  and  the  eighteenth  century  had  "mistakenly"  surmised. 
Music,  pure  and  instrumental,  had  a  social  mission,  and  its  practi- 
tioners were  gripped  with  the  Messianic  impulse  to  bring  its  finest 
examples  to  the  people.  Theodore  Thomas  epitomized  the  guiding 
philosophy  of  the  nineteenth  century: 

A  symphony  orchestra  shows  the  culture  of  a  community  .  .  .  the  man 
who  does  not  understand  Beethoven  and  has  not  been  under  his  spell  has 
not  lived  half  his  life.  The  masterworks  of  .  .  .  instrumental  music  are 
the  language  of  the  soul  and  express  more  than  those  of  any  other  art. 
Light  music,  "popular"  so  called,  is  the  sensual  side  of  the  art  and  has 
more  or  less  the  devil  in  it.19 

It  was  because  instrumental  music  was  considered  the  least  sensu- 
ous, the  least  descriptive  and  mundane  of  all  the  arts,  that  it  could 
never  appeal  to  the  masses  as  does  vocal  and  "popular"  music.  That 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  31 

the  symphony,  which  is  only  one  of  the  many  instrumental  forms, 
should  have  won  this  position  of  honor  and  be  sanctified  as  the  ulti- 
mate fulfillment  of  musical  expression  is  unquestionably  owing  to 
the  influence  of  the  nine  symphonies  of  Beethoven.  His  deifica- 
tion by  Schumann,  Mendelssohn,  and  other  romanticists  followed 
within  two  decades  after  his  death.  Psychologically,  furthermore,  a 
symphony  was  a  complete  unit,  as  Berlioz,  too,  had  emphasized; 
while  overtures  and  other  forms  were  short  and  fragmentary.  By 
1840,  Schumann  already  referred  as  a  matter  of  course  to  the  sym- 
phony as  the  "highest  style  of  instrumental  music";  20  by  1864,  Theo- 
dore Thomas  was  announcing  "symphonic  soirees";  and  in  1878, 
Leopold  Damrosch  for  the  first  time  incorporated  the  term  in  the 
name  of  an  orchestra— a  practice  that  has  been  all  but  uniformly 
followed  by  the  other  American  orchestras  founded  since  that  time. 
Instrumental  music  had  indeed  "arrived,"  and  the  "symphony" 
orchestra  was  the  most  perfect  vehicle  for  its  promulgation. 

Some  Forerunners  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra 

The  modern  American  symphony  orchestras,  which  display  so 
many  similarities  in  their  professional  and  economic  organization, 
are  obviously  a  culmination  of  a  long  series  of  experimental  progeni- 
tors. Out  of  this  struggle  for  mere  survival,  as  well  as  the  lure  of 
professional  excellence,  there  has  evolved  a  form  of  symphonic 
organization  that  appears  to  have  adapted  itself  moderately  well  to 
our  current  social  order;  but  which  will,  by  the  same  token,  un- 
doubtedly undergo  further  developmental  mutations  in  the  future. 
In  comparison  with  European  music,  the  beginnings  of  the 
American  orchestra  were,  as  already  indicated,  pathetically  meagre. 
For  in  this  country  there  were  no  luxurious  courts  and  castles  which 
could  sustain  a  Haydn,  nor  a  landed  nobility  which  could  pension  a 
Beethoven,  nor  yet  the  rich  tradition  in  which  whole  nations  take 
pride,  and  are  thereby  automatically  impelled  to  nurture  the  arts 
and  set  standards  for  emulation.  Still  awaited  in  the  United  States 
were  the  counterparts  of  their  European  forebears:  the  philan- 
thropic amateurs  who  were  to  deliver  such  a  decisive  impetus  to  the 
development  of  music  a  half  century  laterv  and  the  financiers  and 


j2  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

captains  of  industry  who  would  seize  upon  the  symphony  orchestra 
to  proclaim  their  civic  pride. 

Without  such  royal  or  industrial  patronage,  the  early  American 
(as  well  as  English)  orchestras  were  thrown  upon  their  own  re- 
sources. The  Graupner  "orchestra,"  of  Boston,  the  earliest  essay  in 
"permanent"  orchestral  organization,  today  would  hardly  merit  the 
name.  A  German  who  had  migrated  to  London  and  played  under 
Haydn  in  1791-92,  Gottlieb  Graupner  subsequently  emigrated  to 
Charleston  and  finally  settled  in  Boston  where,  as  teacher  of  oboe, 
flute,  and  violin  and  as  proprietor  of  a  publishing  house,  he  estab- 
lished himself  as  the  musical  factotum  in  that  city  of  25,000  inhab- 
itants. Not  only  did  he  inspire  the  founding  of  the  Handel  and 
Haydn  Society,  but  he  also  gathered  together  a  dozen  musicians  to 
play  the  symphonies  of  Gyrowetz  and  Haydn,  and  to  study  such 
other  scores  as  were  available  in  the  incipiently  cultured  Boston  of 
that  day.  His  enterprise  has  gained  for  him  from  some  historians  the 
hackneyed  but  appreciative  title  of  "father  of  the  American  Or- 
chestra." 

Every  other  city  also  sprouted  its  musical  organizations,  even 
though  the  cultural  soil  might  have  been  more  stony  than  that  of 
the  precocious  East.  Philadelphia,  Cincinnati,  St.  Louis,  San  Fran- 
cisco, and  other  communities,  as  they  attained  a  modicum  of  wealth 
and  leisure,  and  attracted  German  and  French  immigrants,  cultivated 
the  Muses.  If  the  beginnings  were  usually  modest,  casual,  and 
ephemeral,  they  still  were  harbingers  of  greater  things  to  come. 

At  mid-century,  there  appeared  from  across  the  waters  a  source 
of  energy  that  fertilized  the  American  symphonic  movement  and 
accelerated  its  maturation.  In  1848,  as  a  precipitation  from  the  Ger- 
man revolution  of  that  year,  a  score  of  impecunious  but  competent 
musicians  banded  themselves  together  for  a  concert  tour  of  America. 
Having  gained  their  initial  and  greatest  success  in  Boston,  this  Ger- 
mania  Orchestra  responded  to  a  demand  from  cities  as  far  west  as 
St.  Louis,  played  the  Beethoven  symphonies  together  with  an  assort- 
ment of  more  or  less  serious  music,  and  inculcated  for  the  first  time 
some  appreciation  for  reasonably  dexterous  performance  of  the 
classics.  The  members  of  this  group,  however,  soon  became  aware 
of  the  melancholy  truth  that  traveling  orchestras,  then  as  now,  were 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  33 

not  necessarily  profitable  enterprises.  At  their  dissolution  in  1854, 
they  scattered  from  Boston  to  Chicago,  thereby  continuing  the  work 
of  fructifying  American  musical  culture  to  its  everlasting  benefit. 
One  of  these  members,  Carl  Bergmann,  cellist  and  conductor,  soon 
became  the  conductor  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic.  Bergmann 
was  an  ardent  disciple  of  Wagner  and  Liszt,  and  according  to  Theo- 
dore Thomas,  with  whom  he  was  associated  for  many  years,  he  was 
"the  first  man  in  this  country  who  gave  proper  rendering  of  Bee- 
thoven .  .  .  and  the  first  real  conductor  to  give  us  an  insight  of  our 
great  composers."  21 

More  sensational,  but  less  durable  in  influence,  was  the  French 
conductor,  Louis  Antoine  Jullien,  showman  extraordinary,  who 
brought  his  orchestra  of  European  artists,  including  many  of  the 
most  prominent  instrumentalists,  to  the  United  States  in  1853-54. 
This  orchestra  was  augmented  by  an  American  contingent  to  one 
hundred  players,  with  whom  he  presented  nightly  concerts  in  New 
York  for  a  period  of  two  months.  After  nine  months  sojourn,  dur- 
ing which  he  conducted  two  hundred  concerts  and  toured  the  coun- 
try from  Boston  to  New  Orleans,  the  irrepressible  Jullien  instituted 
the  first  of  America's  "jumbo"  concerts— later  to  take  the  name  of 
"festival"— in  New  York  in  June,  1854.  This  "Grand  Musical  Con- 
gress," which  was  made  up  of  1,500  instrumentalists  and  sixteen 
choral  societies,  performed  selections  from  the  great  oratorios  as 
well  as  symphonic  numbers.  The  less  sophisticated  of  the  20,000 
members  of  the  audience  satiated  their  appetite  on  this  occasion  with 
one  of  the  Jullienesque  "descriptive  pieces,"  specially  written  for  the 
occasion,  the  Fireman's  Quadrille. 

Jullien  may  have  been  a  musical  demagogue,  for  he  was  never 
unmindful  of  the  psychological  effect  of  such  extramusical  trap- 
pings, the  jewelled  baton  and  spotless  white  gloves  for  a  Beethoven 
rendition,  or  the  frenetic  gestures  for  his  many  quadrilles.  But  he  was 
definitely  not  a  humbug,  as  was  alleged  by  some  snobbish  observers. 
He  received  extravagant  notices,  even  in  the  best  press,  for  his  seri- 
ous achievements:  "His  fiddles  all  bowed  together  ...  he  was 
painstaking  and  energetic  in  rehearsals  ...  he  attained  a  pianissimo, 
while  the  New  York  Philharmonic  could  not  even  achieve  a  piano, 
much  less  a  pianissimo"  He  explored  the  means  of  reaching  the 


■tA  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

masses,  which  the  austere  New  York  Philharmonic  never  dreamed 
of  and  the  dignified  Germania  barely  attempted.  While  crude  meg- 
alomania never  again  reached  such  heights,  it  was  by  no  means  in- 
conspicuous in  the  monster  festivals  of  Damrosch,  Thomas,  or 
Patrick  Gilmore  the  bandmaster,  while  the  personal  career  of  the 
virtuoso  conductor  down  to  the  present  day  is  never  quite  devoid  of 
a  subtle  touch  of  it,  intent  on  sending  the  music  on  its  way  more 
effectively. 

In  the  local  contingent  of  the  Jullien  orchestra  was  an  eighteen- 
year-old  violinist,  Theodore  Thomas,  who  absorbed  his  first  impres- 
sions of  disciplined  rehearsals,  and  who  was  to  continue  the  sowing 
so  that  a  later  generation  might  reap.  Theodore  Thomas  was  the 
first  modern  conductor  to  fulfill  completely  the  promise  of  sym- 
phonic ideals.  During  the  middle  years  of  his  pioneering  career,  this 
indomitable  spirit  launched,  or  participated  in,  three  distinct  experi- 
ments in  symphonic  organization,  the  third  of  which  was  destined 
to  become  the  standard  one.  The  Thomas  biography  is  the  evolu- 
tionary history  of  the  American  symphony  orchestra. 

As  his  first  venture,  in  1863,  he  founded  his  own  organization, 
a  permanent  and  fully  employed  body  of  men,  presented  in  popular 
concerts  in  the  famous  Central  Park  Garden,  Seventh  Avenue  near 
Fifty-eighth  Street,  and  in  serious  concerts  in  Steinway  Hall  on 
Fourteenth  Street.  It  was  this  well-disciplined  band,  held  together 
with  minor  interruptions  for  about  twenty-five  years  with  modest 
material  assistance  from  William  Steinway  and  other  friends,  that 
imparted  the  first  genuine  and  substantial  impetus  to  the  establish- 
ment of  sound  symphonic  standards  outside  New  York  City.  Essen- 
tially it  was  the  product  of  Thomas'  own  financial  and  artistic 
responsibility,  whose  exciting  history  of  alternating  frustration  and 
success  has  been  repeatedly  told.22  Although  it  has  been  averred  that 
the  New  York  Philharmonic  stimulated  the  organization  of  orches- 
tras in  other  cities  of  the  United  States,  23  this  is  an  overstatement. 
It  was  the  migratory  Thomas,  with  the  Thomas  orchestra,  that 
whetted  the  appetite  for  disciplined  performance  in  Boston,  Phila- 
delphia, Cincinnati,  and  Chicago. 

After  a  second  undertaking— the  direction  of  the  New  York 
Philharmonic  Society  (1879-91),  Thomas  finally  achieved  the  ful- 


Social  Evolution  of  the  American  Symphony  Orchestra  35 

fillment  of  his  dream  in  the  Chicago  Orchestra  (1891 )  supported  by 
philanthropic  subsidy.  (See  profiles  of  the  Chicago  and  New  York 
orchestras.) 

This,  Thomas'  third  type  of  organizational  experiment,  bears 
pointed  testimony  to  the  tenacity  of  his  purpose  and  the  eminence 
of  his  ideals.  Even  this  persistence  would  have  availed  little  had  it 
not  been  supported  by  resolute  philanthropic  forces,  whose  patience 
was  fortified  by  the  powerful  stimulant  of  civic  pride  and  the  fierce 
determination  of  a  frontier  city  to  crash  the  company  of  the  culti- 
vated East. 

In  addition  to  the  cooperative  system  of  the  New  York  Philhar- 
monic and  the  private  enterprise  of  Theodore  Thomas,  there  ap- 
peared a  variation  of  the  philanthropic  systems  of  administration 
that  is  today  practically  obsolete.  This  was  the  personal  philanthropy 
practiced  by  such  persons  as  Edward  Bok  in  Philadelphia,  William 
Clark  in  Los  Angeles,  Clarence  Mackay,  and  H.  H.  Flagler  in  New 
York,  but  which  attained  its  consummate  perfection  in  the  Boston 
Orchestra,  the  creation  of  Henry  Higginson,  the  Boston  financier. 
The  first  orchestra  to  profit  from  an  almost  unlimited  philanthropy, 
it  was  modelled  on  the  court  troupes  of  Europe,  and  was  estab- 
lished, owned,  and  administered  by  one  man  who  looked  upon  and 
treated  his  musicians  as  his  salaried  employees.  It  differed  from  its 
European  prototype,  however,  in  two  significant  respects.  First,  it 
was  in  no  sense  functionally  a  private  orchestra  but  was  adminis- 
tered solely  in  the  interest  of  public  performance;  second,  it  was 
dominated  by  an  aesthetic  idealism  which  entrusted  the  musical 
director  with  complete  and  autonomous  jurisdiction,  unrestrained 
by  any  economic,  political,  or  personal  consideration.  Never  has  the 
theory  of  "artistic  supremacy"  been  more  perfectly  implemented. 
It  set  the  pattern  of  things  to  come.  If  detailed  features  have  been 
altered,  the  general  principle  of  philanthropic  support,  which  per- 
mits a  certain  autonomy  to  an  aesthetic  standard,  is  now  well  ac- 
cepted in  orchestral  administration. 

The  story  of  this  long  and  gradual  evolution  is  best  told  in  the 
histories  of  the  individual  major  orchestras. 


3 

Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras 


The  ideal  toward  which  American  orchestral  history  has  been  mov- 
ing is  the  "permanent"  orchestra.  The  permanent  orchestra  may  be 
identified  by  the  following  traits:  (i)  exclusively  professional  mem- 
bership; (2)  full  season  contracts;  (3)  the  orchestra  as  principal  em- 
ployment of  its  members;  (4)  all  other  employment  (e.g.  teaching, 
concert,  etc.)  compatible  with  priority  of  orchestral  requirements; 
(5)  regular  and  adequate  rehearsals;  (6)  financial  base  sufficient  to 
insure  the  above  conditions.  The  obvious  intent  of  these  conditions 
is  to  provide  continuity  of  organization,  without  which  high  artistic 
standards  are  impossible. 

This  description  represents,  of  course,  an  ideal  which  may  not  be 
completely  attained.  American  orchestras  range  from  the  Boston 
orchestra,  which  is  held  intact  practically  throughout  the  year,  to 
the  small  community  orchestra  made  up  virtually  of  amateurs  who 
present  several  concerts  per  season. 

In  1900,  there  were  only  four  established  orchestras  closely  ap- 
proximating "permanency":  Boston,  Chicago,  Cincinnati,  and  Pitts- 
burgh. Six  others  fulfilled  the  requirements  less  completely.  They 
were  Philadelphia,  which  was  founded  in  November,  1900;  the 
New  York  Symphony,  which  was  then  temporarily  suspended,  but 
was  revived  in  1903;  the  St.  Louis  Choral-Symphony,  which  had 
had  a  continuous  existence  since  1880  but  shared  the  repertoire  with 
a  choral  society;  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  founded  in  1842,  but 
whose  members  did  not  give  priority  to  the  orchestra.  San  Fran- 
cisco, which  had  experienced  a  certain  success  under  Fritz  Scheel 
until  1899,  was  now  stumbling  along  experimentally,  and  Los  An- 
geles, which  founded  its  symphony  orchestra  in  1897  and  had  won 
some  philanthropic  aid  in  1899,  complete  a  list  of  ten  orchestras  at 
the  opening  of  the  century. 
36 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  37 

The  half  century  witnessed  a  general  proliferation  of  symphonic 
orchestras,  so  that  even  small  communities  felt  pressed  to  emulate 
the  fashion.  Major  orchestras,  with  budgets  exceeding  $100,000, 
number  over  twenty;  of  minor  orchestras,  with  smaller  budgets,  in 
which  the  membership  is  predominantly  professional,  there  are  sev- 
eral score;  community  orchestras,  which  testify  to  the  grass-roots 
interest  in  concerted  music,  number  six  hundred,  according  to  the 
American  Symphony  Orchestra  League.  Many  cities  have  more  re- 
cently founded  orchestras  which  have  attained  professional  dimen- 
sions: Denver,  New  Orleans,  Buffalo,  Kansas  City,  Houston,  San 
Antonio;  while  others  have  suffered  serious  breaks  in  their  continu- 
ity: Pittsburgh,  Dallas,  Seattle,  and  Portland,  Oregon.  Their  basic 
problems,  however,  do  not  differ  from  those  whose  histories  are  here 
fully  recounted. 

In  the  history  of  American  music  there  have  been  many  orchestras 
which  are  not  classifiable  in  the  customary  civic  categories.  Most  of 
these  orchestras  were  in  New  York.  The  Russian  Symphony,  under 
Modest  Altschuler,  was  organized  in  1904;  between  19 14  and  19 19, 
this  orchestra  brought  celebrated  soloists  and  played  a  progressive 
repertoire.  In  the  1 940^,  with  the  blessing  of  the  picturesque  Mayor 
LaGuardia,  the  City  Center  orchestra  under  Leopold  Stokowski  and 
Leonard  Bernstein  purveyed  music  at  popular  prices.  The  radio 
chains  likewise  entered  the  active  lists.  While  CBS  had  long  fea- 
tured the  New  York  Philharmonic,  NBC  organized  its  own  orches- 
tra in  1937  for  Toscanini,  who  usually  functioned  during  about  half 
the  season.  All  these  orchestras  are,  however,  ancillary  to  the  local 
orchestras  distributed  throughout  the  country.  Often  playing  several 
times  per  week  to  their  local  audiences,  they  constitute  the  essential 
framework  of  American  symphonic  life. 

The  New  York  Philharmonic-Symphony  Society  (1842) 

The  New  York  Philharmonic  Society,  America's  first  and  oldest 
extant  professional  orchestra  organized  exclusively  for  concert  pur- 
poses, made  its  initial  appearance  December  7,  1842,  in  the  Apollo 
Rooms  (capacity  500),  410  Broadway,  a  few  doors  below  Canal 
Street.1 


38  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Such  a  terse  chronological  statement  hardly  does  justice  to  the 
functional  beginnings  of  orchestral  history  in  the  United  States,  and 
contributes  little  to  the  understanding  of  the  social  forces  that  called 
it  into  being  and  fostered  its  survival.  Substantially,  its  history  em- 
braces that  of  the  symphonic  orchestra  movement  in  the  United 
States,  modified  to  some  extent,  of  course,  by  the  conditions  peculiar 
to  its  local  habitat. 

New  York,  which  during  the  pre-Revolutionary  days  had  ranked 
third  to  Boston  and  Philadelphia  in  size  and  cultural  importance,  was 
soon  to  outstrip  its  two  rivals.  With  the  opening  of  the  Erie  Canal 
in  1825,  New  York  was  assured  supremacy  as  the  first  port  of  Amer- 
ica. Doubling  its  population  during  this  decade,  it  was  by  1840  a 
thriving  and  cosmopolitan  commercial  city  of  about  400,000  while 
Boston  and  Philadelphia  were  now  left  far  behind  with  only  about 
one-fourth  of  that  population.  All  forms  of  entertainment  were  in  a 
nourishing  state.  Opera  and  theatre  began  to  supply  a  fine  backlog 
of  musicians  and  audiences  for  all  types  of  musical  projects,  although 
before  1830  the  city  had  suffered  from  a  serious  scarcity  of  instru- 
mental artists. 

Besides  being  supplied  with  adequate,  if  not  abundant,  talent, 
New  York  could  show  evidence  that  interest  in  instrumental  and 
orchestral  music  was  "in  the  air."  The  theatre  had  nursed  along  the 
small  auxiliary  orchestras  which  were  now  seeking  emancipation  and 
craved  an  opportunity  to  make  music  on  their  own  account.  A  sump- 
tuous repertoire  lay  ready.  Haydn  and  Mozart  had  a  long-established 
fame.  Beethoven  and  Schubert  had  been  dead  about  fifteen  years; 
A4endelssohn  and  Spohr  were  at  the  height  of  their  careers,  while 
Wagner  and  Liszt  were  on  the  threshold  of  theirs. 

England,  France,  Germany,  and  Austria,  from  which  the  New 
World  received  its  inspiration,  had  already  developed  models  to  be 
emulated.  The  Philharmonic  Society  of  London  was  founded  in  18 13 
with  the  avowed  intent  to  "rekindle  in  the  public  mind  that  taste  for 
excellence  in  instrumental  music  which  has  so  long  remained  in  a 
latent  state";  2  Habeneck  had  founded,  in  1828,  the  Societe  des  Con- 
certs du  Conservatoire  for  the  express  purpose  of  performing  the 
Beethoven  symphonies;  the  Leipzig  Gewandhaus  concerts,  which 
were  destined  to  assume  the  highest  dignity  in  the  orchestral  field  in 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  39 

all  Germany,  extended  back  to  1781;  and,  finally,  the  orchestra  of 
the  Vienna  Royal  Opera  under  Otto  Nicolai,  composer  of  the  still 
performed  Merry  Wives  of  Windsor,  branched  off  on  its  own  ac- 
count in  November,  1842,  to  present  to  the  Viennese  musical  public 
"for  the  first  time  the  symphonic  masterpieces  performed  by  a  well- 
trained  orchestra,  with  verve  and  technical  perfection  under  the 
direction  of  a  young,  energetic  conductor,"  3  and  thus  anticipated 
the  inaugural  concert  of  the  New  York  society  by  only  a  few  weeks. 

The  tardy  developments  in  New  York  and  Vienna  issued  from 
quite  dissimilar  circumstances.  Although  Vienna  was  the  ancestral 
home  of  the  symphony,  it  was  the  opera  that  enjoyed  priority  in  the 
patronage  of  the  nobility  and  cultivated  bourgeoisie.  Even  today, 
the  Vienna  Philharmonic  is  nothing  more  than  the  opera  orchestra 
which  undertakes  to  offer  a  half  dozen  concerts  per  season  on  its 
own  responsibility.  It  was  an  offshoot  from  the  opera  in  a  musically 
mature  community.  In  New  York,  on  the  other  hand,  the  symphony 
orchestra  was  itself  an  original  phenomenon  in  a  musically  imma- 
ture community,  which  during  much  of  its  life  maintained  itself 
against  all  other  competing  forms  of  serious  musical  entertainment. 

The  occasion  which  precipitated  the  organization  of  an  ensemble 
of  professional  musicians  was  a  memorial  benefit  concert  for  the 
surviving  family  of  Daniel  Schlesinger,  a  respected  musician,  who 
had  died  in  1838.  The  whole  musical  fraternity  seems  to  have  co- 
operated in  the  formation  of  an  "orchestra  of  unprecedented 
strength"  which  embraced  "all  the  musical  talent  of  this  city,  the 
managers  of  the  theatres  and  W.  Niblo,  Esq.  having  kindly  allowed 
their  most  distinguished  performers  to  place  themselves  at  the  dis- 
posal of  the  committee."  4  The  Overture  to  Der  Freischutz,  and  the 
Finale  to  the  Symphony  No.  2  of  Beethoven,  as  played  by  sixty  pro- 
fessionals, made  a  stupendous  impression  upon  the  audience  of  2,000 
persons.  That  "no  such  orchestra  had  ever  before  been  heard  in 
New  York,  and  no  such  effect  ever  before  produced,"  is  quite  com- 
prehensible when  it  is  recalled  that,  in  leaner  days  (1828),  the  Eroica 
had  been  performed  as  a  septet.  Although  it  was  an  undoubted 
achievement  for  that  period,  the  modern  concept  of  an  orchestra  as 
a  thoroughly  disciplined  body  had  not  yet  touched  their  imagina- 
tion, for  even  forty  years  later  R.  Osgood  Mason  could  reminisce: 


40  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

The  performance  was  a  success  in  various  ways  .  .  .  but  what  is  germane 
to  the  present  subject,  it  demonstrated  the  fact  that  classical  and  even 
difficult  music  could  be  performed  by  a  large  number  of  New  York 
musicians  from  various  organizations  without  frequent  rehearsals.5 

Many  years  were  destined  to  pass  before  the  relinquishment  of  this 
comforting  and  complacent  illusion. 

This  musical  feast  created  the  taste  for  a  permanent  fare,  but  it 
was  not  until  April,  1842,  that  the  Society  was  organized,  and  not 
until  December  7  that  it  was  prepared  for  its  first  appearance.  The 
new  group  assumed  the  name  of  its  English  prototype  by  calling 
itself  the  "Philharmonic"  Society,  a  Greek  derivative  consonant  with 
its  high  purpose  of  cultivating  one  of  the  principal  arts.  It  was  then 
a  designation  commonly  used,  before  the  "Symphony"  had  usurped 
the  place  of  prestige. 

Like  many  of  its  European  prototypes,6  the  New  York  orchestra 
was  a  "cooperative"  or  communistic  body.  The  net  income  at  the 
close  of  the  season  was  distributed  equally  among  all  the  active 
members  from  percussion  to  concertmaster.  Only  the  conductor 
and  the  librarian,  elected  by  popular  vote,  received  salaries  accord- 
ing to  contract.  It  was  also  a  self-governing  group,  in  which  new 
members  were  admitted  only  by  the  vote  of  the  old.  These  circum- 
stances are  all  of  vital  importance  in  the  explanation  of  some  of  the 
dilemmas  of  the  orchestra  in  its  subsequent  history.  Well  adapted  as 
it  was  to  its  own  times,  it  led  a  quiet  and  profitable  existence  for 
many  years,  but,  like  all  the  cooperative  and  Utopian  societies  in  the 
social  and  economic  fields  which  sprang  up  in  those  decades,  it  could 
not  endure  the  white  heat  of  the  fiercely  competitive  world  into 
which  it  was  ultimately  propelled.  Eventually,  it  too  succumbed  to 
the  inevitable. 

From  the  standpoint  of  its  internal  musical  organization,  its  ap- 
proximately sixty  members  represented  a  phenomenal  achievement. 
For  some  decades  such  a  number  was  to  be  assumed  satisfactory,  and 
even  in  the  present  century  many  reputable  conductors— Thomas, 
Damrosch,  OberhofFer— who  spread  the  gospel  of  good  orchestral 
ensemble  with  their  traveling  orchestras,  knew  how  to  be  content 
with  less.  However,  the  internal  balance  left  much  to  be  desired  in 
terms  of  present-day  standards.  Instrumentation  was  top-heavy  with 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  41 

an  easily  understandable  excess  of  violins  (twenty-two)  to  only  four 
cellos.7  The  Society  had  to  depend  on  the  actual  availability  as 
well  as  the  willingness  of  the  musicians  to  participate  in  the  public 
concerts. 

The  new  orchestra  by  no  means  represented  the  principal  activ- 
ity of  its  members.  The  monthly  concert  was  anticipated  as  a  pleas- 
ant relief  from  more  remunerative  occupational  duties,  and  the 
rehearsal  periods  were  cluttered  up  with  routine  business  matters, 
from  which  members  could  absent  themselves  with  relative  im- 
punity. In  his  Fifth  Annual  Report,  the  secretary  bemoans  the  fact 
that  while 

the  number  of  Violin,  Viola  and  Cello  performers  among  the  members 
...  is  quite  sufficient  for  our  concerts;  but  still  for  various  reasons  we 
have  not  had  the  proper  number  of  either  of  these  instruments  at  one 
concert  during  the  season. 

In  the  Eleventh  Annual  Report  he  continues  to  complain  of  a  con- 
dition that  remained  to  plague  the  cooperative  orchestras  for  dec- 
ades to  come: 

We  need  many  more  from  whom  we  can  at  any  moment  fill  a  vacancy 
at  a  rehearsal  or  concert,  so  that  whenever  we  meet  we  are  sure  of  a  full 
orchestra,  and  that,  too,  of  our  members. 

For  a  long  time  the  Society  seemed  to  many  a  player  at  best  a  pleas- 
ant luxury  and  at  worst  a  dubious  venture,  not  worthy  of  causing 
interruption  in  his  regular  employment.  Still  distant  was  the  time 
when  a  well-established  orchestra,  with  adequate  financial  induce- 
ments, could  import  on  almost  immediate  notice  a  needed  woodwind 
from  Paris  or  a  string  player  from  Vienna  to  perfect  its  balance  in 
personnel. 

The  conductor  of  1842— if  we  may  call  him  such— had  just  grad- 
uated from  the  player's  stand.  As  a  profession  of  independent  dig- 
nity, conducting  was  still  in  a  primitive  state,  for  Berlioz  was  still  to 
write  his  chapter  (1856)  and  Wagner  his  brochure  (1869)  on  this 
metier.  During  the  first  New  York  season  of  three  concerts,  six  dif- 
ferent conductors  officiated,  selected  according  to  qualifications 
upon  which  we  can  only  speculate,  but  probably  to  keep  every 
eligible  candidate  happy.  Certainly  they  could  not  have  been  much 


42  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

more  than  Taktschlager,  a  kind  of  first  among  equals  who  were 
bound  together  by  ties  of  friendship  rather  than  the  thongs  of  stern 
discipline. 

If  these  first  flights  did  not  reach  great  artistic  heights,  they  were 
at  least  impelled  by  a  lofty  purpose  which  many  of  the  fashionable 
audiences  seemed  to  reciprocate.  In  the  prospectus  of  the  twenty- 
ninth  season  (1870-71),  it  is  reported  that 

inasmuch  as  the  compositions  of  that  class  can  seldom  be  fully  appre- 
ciated when  heard  but  once,  the  Society  has  for  many  years  made  the 
rehearsals  preceding  each  concert  open  to  the  public. 

But  then,  as  now,  there  were  those  who  had  no  inclination  to  soar  to 
the  heights  of  abstraction,  who  came  to  be  entertained,  not  to  wor- 
ship. It  was  thus  with  great  reluctance  that  the  orchestra  swerved 
from  its  original  determination  to  cultivate  the  music  which  these 
instrumentalists  loved. 

.  .  .  vocal  music  has  been  introduced  only  to  satisfy  the  demands  of 
those  .  .  .  who  would  not  without  it  have  been  persuaded  to  contribute 
their  support.  .  .  .  We  are  living  in  a  community  where  considerable 
prejudice  exists  unfavorable  to  music  in  its  highest  state  of  cultivation, 
more  particularly  to  instrumental  music  and  to  some  musical  instru- 
ments. ...  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  science  of  music  ...  is 
not  a  human  invention,  but  of  Divine  appointment.  ...  Therefore,  it 
should  be  cultivated  equally  with  all  our  other  faculties,  and  its  pursuit 
is  as  useful  and  necessary  ...  as  that  of  the  other  arts  and  sciences. 

The  apostles  of  instrumental  music  bewailed  the  public  defection 
toward  the  false  gods  of  vocalism;  and,  in  the  same  Sixth  Annual 
Report,  deplored: 

.  .  .  "Italian  opera  competes  tragically  with  the  Philharmonic." 

But  even  purely  instrumental  music  was  given  programmatic 
interpretations.  To  render  abstract  music  more  comprehensible  in 
the  absence  of  "words,  action,  and  scenery,"  the  music  annotator  of 
the  day  often  invented  a  literary  accompaniment,  one  of  the  earliest 
functions  of  what  we  now  know  as  program  notes.  It  is  easy  in  our 
day  to  be  condescending  toward  those  who  lived  in  the  age  of  "the 
Dying  Poet,"  and  it  might  seem  naive  and  childish  when  the  Eroica, 
in  the  second  Philharmonic  season,  is  described  as  a  "portrayal  of 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  43 

the  workings  of  that  extraordinary  man's  mind.  .  .  .  The  winding 
up  of  this  movement  [the  Funeral  March]  represents  the  faltering 
step  of  the  last  gazers  into  the  grave,  and  the  listener  hears  the  tears 
fall  on  the  coffin  ere  the  funeral  volley  is  fired."  8  It  is  hardly  fair  to 
make  our  tastes  and  aesthetic  ideologies  retroactive,  unless  we  accord 
the  right  of  future  critics  to  prepare  analogous  obituaries  for  us. 
In  the  mid-nineteenth  century  theorists  were  burning  with  romantic 
ardor;  they  believed  thoroughly  in  the  merger  of  all  the  arts: 
literary,  musical,  and  graphic— a  tenet  that  found  ultimate  realization 
in  the  Wagnerian  music-dramas.  The  present  post-romantic  sophisti- 
cation, having  repudiated  this  dogma  for  a  stark  neoclassicism,  is 
hardly  competent  to  sit  in  judgment  over  such  an  age. 

In  spite  of  early  discouragements,  the  Philharmonic  Society 
flourished  quite  beyond  the  dreams  of  its  early  visionaries.  It  not 
only  supplied  a  sturdy  education  in  serious  music  to  those  who 
desired  it  but,  according  to  the  Sixth  Annual  Report,  soon  began  to 
appeal  to  the  fashionable  elite  who  found  in  the  concerts  an  outlet 
for  their  desire  for  a  symbol  of  exclusiveness,  or  who  "recognized 
the  duty  of  patronizing  the  fine  arts  with  liberal  appropriations  from 
their  affluence."  By  1856  "opera-cloaks  could  be  seen  in  the  audi- 
ence." The  Society  was  now  ready  to  move  from  Niblo's  Theatre, 
at  Broadway  and  Prince  in  lower  Manhattan,  to  the  fashionable 
Academy  of  Music,  at  Fourteenth  and  Irving  Place,  where  it  re- 
mained with  minor  interruptions  until  it  moved  still  farther  uptown 
to  the  Metropolitan  Opera  House  in  1886. 

The  alliance  of  the  social  aristocracy  with  the  promulgation  of 
great  music,  which  was  to  prove  so  fertile  in  later  years,  took  tenta- 
tive beginnings  in  the  election,  for  the  first  time  in  its  history,  of  a 
nonplaying  associate  member  as  president.  Dr.  R.  Ogden  Doremus, 
professor  of  chemistry  at  New  York  University,  who  had  been 
associate  member  for  twenty  years,  was  elevated  to  this  post  in  1867 
after  exacting  two  promises:  that  the  orchestra  be  increased  to  one 
hundred  men,  and  that  it  engage  prominent  soloists.  Up  to  this  time 
many  of  the  soloists  had  been  local  musicians  who  served  gratis  for 
the  public  distinction  such  an  association  conferred  upon  them. 
The  orchestra  concerts  were  almost  immediately  converted  into  a 
principal  feature  of  the  social  season,  to  the  great  pecuniary  benefit 


44  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

of  the  organization.  In  addition  to  the  musical  people  and  the  fash- 
ionable set,  the  Society  also  attracted  considerable  patronage  from 
those  whose  religious  beliefs  forbade  their  attendance  at  the  opera 
and  the  theatre. 

But,  by  no  means  all  the  best  people  harbored  such  pious  aver- 
sions to  theatre  and  opera.  Consequently,  the  Philharmonic  was 
not  to  be  the  only  pet  of  society.  New  York  was  a  fantastically 
expanding  field.  The  city  had  grown  from  400,000  in  1840  to  one 
and  one-half  million  in  1870  and  two  million  in  1880.  The  Philhar- 
monic was  not  keeping  pace.  Many  factors,  both  internal  and  ex- 
ternal to  the  Society,  contributed  to  the  stunting  of  its  growth  and 
ultimately  to  its  very  marked  decline  by  the  end  of  the  century. 
Beginning  about  1880,  New  York,  with  its  fabulous  wealth,  was 
entering  into  its  "golden  age"  of  the  opera.  The  old  aristocracy  at 
the  Academy  of  Music,  as  well  as  the  newly  rich  "Wall  Street 
upstarts"  who  had  built  the  Metropolitan  Opera  House  (opened 
October,  1883),  had  generated  an  appetite  for  the  distingue  which 
the  old  Philharmonic  could  never  satisfy.  The  glamour  of  the  prima 
donnas  furnished  a  more  exciting  and  socially  exclusive  hobby  than 
a  plodding  orchestra  playing  the  intellectual  Beethoven  symphonies. 

Other  orchestras  likewise  entered  the  competitive  lists.  Discour- 
aged with  the  desultory,  sparse  rehearsals  and  the  absenteeism  of  the 
cooperative  Philharmonic,  Theodore  Thomas,  a  leading  member 
of  that  orchestra  since  1854,  surging  with  implacable  ambition  and 
musical  idealism,  had  organized  his  own  orchestra.  He  employed  his 
men  full  time,  inculcated  a  furious  discipline  in  his  ensemble,  and 
infused  imagination  and  variety  into  the  repertoire,  all  of  which 
quickly  outdistanced  the  loosely  knit  Philharmonic,  which  Dzvighfs 
Journal  of  Music  had  labeled  "antiquated  and  old-fogyish"  as  early 
as  1864.  The  lure  of  full  emplovment  and  the  prestige  of  member- 
ship in  the  Thomas  orchestra  attracted  from  the  Philharmonic  many 
of  its  important  players. 

Leopold  Damrosch,  one  of  the  first  mature  musicians  of  note  to 
settle  in  the  United  States,  likewise  provided  a  counterattraction 
with  the  establishment  of  the  Symphony  Society  in  1878.  Warm- 
hearted and  genial,  carrying  the  prestige  of  friendship  with  Wagner, 
Biilow,  and  Liszt,  Dr.  Damrosch  succeeded  in  enlisting  the  coopera- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  45 

tion  of  certain  elements  of  fashionable  New  York  which  neither  the 
cold  dignity  of  Theodore  Thomas  nor  the  uninspired  Philharmonic 
could  thaw.  In  fact,  Damrosch  was  given  a  one -year  turn  (1876-77) 
at  the  moribund  Philharmonic.  The  editor  of  the  Steinway  Hall 
Programme  Notes 

was  glad  to  learn  that  the  Philharmonic  has  been  reorganized,  non-com- 
petent members  weeded  out  .  .  .  engaged  a  thoroughly  capable  and  con- 
scientious conductor  in  Dr.  Leopold  Damrosch  who,  it  is  hoped,  will  put 
a  little  fresh  vim  into  the  Society. 

These  hostile  forces  were  closing  in  on  this  venerable  group  and 
threatening  it  with  annihilation. 

In  despair,  the  Philharmonic  turned  to  Thomas,  counting  on  the 
asset  of  his  popularity  with  the  New  York  public.  He  was  elected 
in  1877,  dropped  out  one  year  while  engaged  in  the  Cincinnati  epi- 
sode described  later,  and  then  was  re-elected,  polling  54  votes  to  9 
for  Damrosch  and  6  for  Neuendorff,  the  interim  incumbent  who 
had  defeated  Dr.  Damrosch  the  preceding  year,  46  to  29.  When,  in 
1 89 1,  Thomas  was  called  to  Chicago,  Anton  Seidl,  the  Metropolitan 
Opera  conductor  and  "dean"  of  New  York  musicians  at  the  time, 
became  his  logical  successor  and,  like  Thomas,  played  to  crowded 
houses.  The  concerts  were  almost  at  once  (November,  1892)  trans- 
ferred to  the  newly  built  Music  Hall  (later  "Carnegie  Hall")  from 
the  Metropolitan  Opera  House,  where  they  had  been  housed  since 
1886  but  which  Theodore  Thomas  and  other  musicians  considered 
too  large,  and  the  recesses  of  the  stage  too  ruinous,  for  fine  musical 
effect.9  It  was  a  profitable,  if  not  brilliant  period. 

The  lustre  of  the  Philharmonic  was  nevertheless  blemished  by  the 
fact  that  it  carried  within  its  own  organization  the  seeds  of  its  dis- 
integration. After  Thomas  and  Seidl  had  ushered  in  a  period  of 
hitherto  unachieved  prosperity,  thereby  postponing  for  a  couple  of 
decades  the  inevitable  reckoning,  the  orchestra  reverted  to  a  period 
of  drowsy  torpor  which  even  the  occasional  flash  of  inspired  con- 
ducting could  not  shake  off.  Thomas  and  Seidl,  both  of  whom  had 
built  up  a  loyal  following,  definitely  marked  the  end  of  the  period 
of  efflorescence  when  seats  had  been  at  a  premium  and  reasonable 
artistic  integrity  had  been  maintained.  After  the  sudden  death  of 


46  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Seidl  in  1898,  Emil  Paur,  late  of  Boston,  was  elected  with  fifty-five 
votes  against  five  for  Walter  Damrosch.  But  patronage  declined, 
and  the  orchestra  now  seemed  to  have  no  other  interest  than  to 
maintain  itself,  its  form  of  government,  its  stodgy  repertoire,  and 
its  complacent  pace  of  existence."  For  these  and  other  reasons  it 
came  about  that,  at  the  close  of  the  century,  when  Boston  and  Chi- 
cago possessed  virile  orchestras  of  almost  world  renown,  the  New 
York  Philharmonic,  composed  of  musicians  some  of  whom  were 
superannuated,  many  of  them  tired,  was  an  orchestra  with  no  mark 
of  distinction  excepting  its  chronological  seniority.  This  orchestra 
was  not  much  more  than  a  hobby  of  its  members,  an  amiable  diver- 
sion, a  source  of  pin  money,  rather  than  an  essential  organization 
enlisting  the  primary  energies  and  loyalties  of  its  players,  and  ac- 
tively fostering  the  progress  of  the  art. 

For  decades  it  had  presented  only  six  concerts  per  season,  in 
addition  to  public  rehearsals,  which  were  increased  to  eight  in 
1897-98.  If  Theodore  Thomas  and  his  permanent  orchestra  had 
stimulated  Boston  to  put  aside  its  obsolete  system,  it  was  now  the 
Boston  orchestra,  invading  New  York  annually,  which  pointed  up 
the  anachronism  of  the  cooperative  Philharmonic.  Without  financial 
subsidy,  and  the  quality  of  its  performances  constantly  subject  to 
odious  comparison  with  the  Boston  orchestra,  it  was  eking  out  a 
threadbare  existence,  at  the  point  of  death  from  sheer  inanition.  No 
first-rate  conductor  could  be  attracted  under  such  hopeless 
conditions. 

But  it  would  not  be  fair  to  conclude  that  this  was  willful  stub- 
bornness and  sheer  inertia.  Two  dominant  forces  were  operating  to 
buttress  the  status  quo:  (1)  the  strength  of  the  obsolete  system  of 
the  cooperative  organization,  and  ( 2 )  the  aloofness  of  wealth,  whose 
indispensability  was  demonstrated  in  the  experience  of  other  cities. 

Paradoxically  enough,  it  was  the  very  weakness  of  the  organiza- 
tion that  constituted  its  strength.  If  the  orchestra  did  not  yield  much 
in  financial  and  aesthetic  returns,  it  was  also  true  that  not  much  was 
expected  from  it.  With  such  a  flexible  foundation,  it  could  absorb 
,  all  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune  without  collapsing.  The  members, 
who  controlled  its  destiny  by  their  votes,  opposed  change  for  a 
variety  of  personal  motives.  Some  feared  replacement,  others  re- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  $7 

sented  disciplined  rehearsals,  and  all  were  beset  by  the  uncertainties 
of  the  proposed  new  order.  They  were  essentially  a  group  of  demo- 
cratically self-employed  musicians  who  saw  no  reason  why  anyone 
should  interfere  with  their  enterprise  as  long  as  they  were  content 
to  maintain  it.  As  for  fashion  and  wealth,  it  was  preoccupied  with 
the  opera,  which  was  still  in  its  Augustan  age,  and  had  not  yet  devel- 
oped solicitude  for  the  orchestra  and  its  affairs.  When  neither  play- 
ers nor  civic  leaders  sensed  a  strong  need  for  change,  the  mechanical 
law  of  inertia  prevailed. 

At  this  time,  however,  certain  philanthropic  elements  were  mov- 
ing to  capture  the  Society  with  a  view  to  its  reorganization.  Andrew 
Carnegie  had  accepted  the  presidency  in  1901,  and  his  friend  Walter 
Damrosch,  who  had  relinquished  his  post  in  the  Symphony  Society 
and  was  always  good  for  a  half  dozen  votes  in  the  annual  Philhar- 
monic elections,  was  finally  elected  conductor  for  1902-03.  This 
aroused  hopes  of  financial  relief  from  that  segment  of  society  in  the 
city  that  had  always  been  cordial  to  him. 

One  would  suppose  that  an  orchestra  would  seize  with  alacrity 
any  opportunity  of  greater  financial  security.  However,  gifts  come 
high,  and  conditions  attached  to  such  financial  assistance  were  still 
considered  prohibitive  by  the  membership  of  the  not  quite  lifeless 
Philharmonic.  During  that  season,  Carnegie  and  other  friends  had 
established  a  fund  of  $25,000  for  four  years,  which  was  pledged  to 
the  Philharmonic  under  the  stipulation  that  the  Society  would: 

( 1 )  admit  to  the  fifteen-member  governing  board  seven  members  repre- 
senting the  contributors 

( 2 )  make  certain  radical  changes  in  personnel 

(3)  increase  the  number  of  concerts  and  rehearsals 

This  was  correctly  interpreted  by  the  organization  as  an  attempt 
to  destroy  the  fundamental  democratic  system  of  control,  and  alleg- 
edly designed  to  place  the  incumbent  as  permanent  conductor  dur- 
ing the  life  of  the  proposed  agreement.  The  offer  was  therefore 
rejected.  When  the  dust  had  settled,  and  the  outline  of  future  events 
became  clear,  Damrosch  superfluously  announced  his  noncandidacy 
for  re-election  and  proceeded  to  mobilize  the  forces  for  the  resump- 
tion of  the  concerts  of  his  own  Symphony  Society. 


1840 


1850 


1860 


1870 


1880 


1890 


1900 


1910 


1920 


1930 


1940 


1950 


NEW  YORK 
PHILHARMONIC 


HILL.T1MM,  LODER 
AND0THERS,'4-2 


EISFELD.BERGMANN 
AND  OTHERS,  '49 


8ERGMANN.  65 


L.DAMROSCH/76 
THOMAS/77 
NEUENDORF. '78 
THOMAS,  '79 


PAUR/98 

W.  DAMROSCH/02 
GUESTS, '03 

SAFONOFF,  '06 

MAHLER,  '09 
STRANSKY,  'II 


STRANSKY  AND 
GUESTS,'2I 


TOSCANINI- 
MENGELBERG, '27 

TOSCANINI,  '30 


8ARBIROUI,'36 


GUESTS, '41 
RODZINSKI,  '43 

GUESTS,  '4-7 
STOKOWSKI- 
MITROP0UL0S.49 
MITROPOULOS/50 


NEW  YORK 
SYMPHONY 


L.DAMROSCH'78 


W.DAMR0SCH,'8S 


SUSPENDED, '98 
W.DAMROSCH/03 


MERGED  WITH  MY 
PHILHARMONIC/28 


BOSTON 


HENSCHEL/81 

GERICKE,  '84 

NIKISCH/89 
PAUR,  '93 

GERJCKE,'98 


MUCK, '06 
FIEDLER/08 


MUCK,  12 


RABAUD.'IB 
MONTEUX,  19 


KOUSSEVITZKy'24 


CHICAGO 


THOMAS, '91 


STOCK  '05 


DEFAUW,  '43 

RODZINSKI, '47 
GUESTS,  '48 

KUBELIK/50 


CINCINNATI 


VAN  DER  SUICKFN, 


SUSPENDED/07 
ST0K0WSKI/09 
KUNWALD,'|2 

VSAyE,'l8 
REINER,  "22 


G00SSENS/3I 


JOHNSON,  '47 


PHILADELPHIA 


SCHEEL,  1900 

POHL1G,  '07 
ST0K0WSKI/I2 


ORMANDY,  '36 


** 


Tenure  of  Permanent  Conductors 

ELEVEN    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRAS 

1840-1950 


MINNEAPOLIS 


OBERHOFFER.'03 


GUESTS, '22 
VER8RUGGHEH'23 


ORMANDY/31 

GUESTS,  '36 
MITROPOUIOS/37 


DORATI,  '49 


ST.  LOUIS 


ZACH,  '07 


GANZ/21 

GUESTS, '27 
G01SCHMANW,'3I 


1900 


SAN  FRANCISCO 


HADLEY,  'II 
HERTZ, '15 


CAMERON  AND 
GUESTS,  '30 


SUSPENDED,  '3* 
MONTEUX/35 


CLEVELAND 


SOKOlOFF.'l8 


RODZINSKI,'33 


LE1NSDORF/43 
GUESTS,  '44 
SZELL,'46 


LOS  ANGELES 


ROTHWEH.,'19 

SCHNEEVOIGT.77 
RODZINSKI/29 

KLEMPERER,'33 

GUESTS,'39 
WAUENSTEIN/43 


1910 


1920 


1930 


1940 


1950 


49 


50  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

The  aroused  Philharmonic,  in  an  heroic  effort  to  reinvigorate  its 
ebbing  strength,  resorted  to  a  galaxy  of  guest  conductors.  Aided  by 
contributions  from  John  D.  Rockefeller  and  others,  some  of  the  most 
eminent  conductors  of  France,  England,  Germany,  and  Russia  were 
invited:  Colonne,  Henry  Wood,  Weingartner,  Safonoff,  Richard 
Strauss,  Mengelberg,  and  several  lesser  lights.  Theodore  Thomas, 
of  Chicago,  who  had  still  retained  some  loyal  friends— as  well  as 
enemies— in  New  York  after  ten  years  of  absence,  was  to  have  con- 
ducted the  last  concert  of  the  season  of  1904-05,  and  only  death 
intervened  in  the  plans  for  his  grand  homecoming. 

The  public  was  thrilled  with  the  relay  race  of  conductors  who 
passed  the  baton  from  one  to  the  other.  The  first  season  was  success- 
ful beyond  the  most  sanguine  hopes,  and  it  was  Vassily  Safonoff,  a 
more  or  less  obscure  Russian,  who  stunned  the  audience  with  his 
Slavic  renditions  of  the  well-known  Russian  works.  But  after  the 
third  year  of  guest  conductors,  appetites  were  again  jaded,  and 
Safonoff,  who  had  appeared  with  great  success  in  all  three  years,  was 
elected  permanent  conductor  with  a  three-year  contract  at  $20,000 
per  year.  In  the  end,  he  too  failed  to  maintain  his  grip  on  the  audi- 
ence. When  the  stunned  audience  awoke— the  thrill  was  gone!  The 
daringly  garish  interpretation  of  his  fellow-Russian  composers  by 
this  musical  Tartar  turned  out  to  be  an  impossible  mannerism, 
aberrant  and  irresponsible,  when  applied  to  the  general  repertoire. 
Eschewing  the  baton,  he  employed  a  fistic  style  of  direction,  vehe- 
ment and  theatrical,  which  called  for  rude  contrasts  and  extravagant 
rhythms  and  tempi. 

After  three  years,  in  1908-09,  at  long  last,  the  members  of  the 
orchestra  could  not  fail  to  see  that  the  cooperative  machinery,  which 
had  rumbled  along  for  sixty-seven  years,  was  creaking  toward  its 
final  breakdown.  It  simply  could  not  rise  to  modern  demands,  and 
was  artistically  and  financially  ruinous.  Harassed  by  the  memory  of 
past  futilities,  and  frightened  by  future  prospects  of  the  reorganiza- 
tion of  the  competitive  Symphony  Society  under  Walter  Damrosch, 
the  Philharmonic  was  ready  to  capitulate.  It  was,  in  a  way,  a  pathetic 
denouement  to  an  originally  worthy,  but  now  archaic,  principle; 
for  such  is  the  irony  of  "progress,"  and  so  far  had  the  world  moved, 
that  a  group  of  likeminded  friends,  democratically  banded  together 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  51 

as  a  private  enterprise  in  the  service  of  their  art,  content  with  a 
modest  pecuniary  reward,  was  not  permitted  by  a  sophisticated 
society  to  persevere,  but  was  now  compelled  to  submit  to  the  dic- 
tates of  efficiency  and  discipline  to  fulfill  its  manifest  destiny.  Like 
many  another  private  enterprise,  it  was  taken  over  by  society  as  soon 
as  it  was  affected  with  the  public  interest. 

Under  the  aggressive  sponsorship  of  Mrs.  George  R.  Sheldon, 
wife  of  a  banker  and  Republican  chairman  of  New  York  City,  a 
guarantee  of  $90,000  for  three  years  was  raised  among  the  "best 
families"  of  the  city,  which  included  such  names  as  J.  P.  Morgan, 
Andrew  Carnegie,  and  Joseph  Pulitzer.  The  conditions  of  surrender 
were  similar  to  the  terms  rejected  six  years  previously: 

(1)  abandonment  of  the  cooperative  plan  by  which  the  members  con- 
trolled the  policy  and  elected  the  conductors 

( 2 )  establishment  of  an  outside  board  of  control,  on  which  the  orchestra 
was,  however,  to  be  represented 

(3)  retirement   of   the   superannuated   members,    and   the   addition   of 
younger  members 

(4)  expansion  of  the  season's  activities 

(5)  replacement  of  Safonoff  by  Gustav  Mahler,  with  absolute  power 
over  membership  and  musical  affairs 

All  members  handed  in  their  resignation,  subject  to  the  acceptance 
of  the  new  musical  director. 

Gustav  Mahler,  composer  of  symphonies  and  opera  conductor, 
who  had  spent  ten  years  at  the  Royal  Opera  of  Vienna  and  since 
1907  had  been  with  the  Metropolitan  Opera,  assumed  the  direction 
of  this  new  venture  with  the  highest  hopes.  He  had  not  been  en- 
tirely happy  in  Vienna.  Being  both  a  Jew  and  a  very  egocentric 
personality,  his  difficulties  of  adjustment  were  insuperable.  Anti- 
Semitism  in  Austria  was  at  that  time  more  severe  than  in  Germany. 
What  aggravated  the  situation  still  more  was  that  the  greatest  anti- 
Semite  of  them  all,  Dr.  Karl  Lueger,  was  Mayor  of  Vienna  co- 
incident with  the  tenure  of  Mahler  at  the  Opera.  His  conversion  to 
Catholicism  was  slight  protection  in  such  a  case.  He  finally  writes, 
July  17,  1907:  "Ich  gehe  nach  Amerika,  iveil  ich  das  Gesindel  nicht 
mehr  aushalten  kann." 

But  he  could  expect  great  things  from  America,  its  tolerance  and 


52  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

its  unlimited  resources— so  he  thought— and  was  highly  encouraged 
by  the  initial  enthusiasm  of  the  orchestra  officials.  He  therefore 
drew  his  plans  in  the  grand  manner.  For  the  first  time  in  the  history 
of  the  orchestra  it  was  to  emerge  from  the  dull  routine  of  a  short 
series  of  pairs.  To  the  augmented  subscription  series,  he  added  a 
Beethoven  cycle,  a  historical  cycle,  Sunday  concerts,  and  a  tour. 

But  this  first  experiment  in  cooperation  between  conductor  and 
lay  board  was  doomed  to  disappointment  on  both  sides.  It  was  a 
stormy  regime.  Mahler,  who  in  his  artistically  successful  career  had 
hardened  himself  to  obstacles,  and  had  at  times  defied  royalty  itself, 
was  not  likely  to  err  on  the  side  of  diffidence  when  dealing  with  a 
group  of  social  leaders  of  New  York  who  "failed"  in  their  compre- 
hension of  the  principle  of  artistic  supremacy.  Unreceptive  to  inter- 
ference, or  even  active  criticism,  he  received  a  full  measure  of  both. 
The  ladies'  committee  entered  where  the  Hapsburg  Emperor  himself 
had  feared  to  tread.  They,  who  laid  down  the  cash  for  the  project, 
took  an  unexpectedly  personal  interest  in  the  new  orchestra  and 
entertained  decided  notions  on  matters  of  programs  and  soloists. 
According  to  Frau  Mahler,  the  ladies  ordered  him  about  like  a 
puppet— him,  to  whom  royalty  itself  did  not  dictate.  He  ran  afoul  of 
critics  such  as  Krehbiel,  who  should  have  known  better,  for  doing 
what  all  conductors  did  then  and  now— editing  the  scores  and  modi- 
fying instrumentation. 

Nor  was  the  general  competitive  musical  setting  auspicious.  The 
Metropolitan  Opera  was  then  enjoying  one  of  the  most  brilliant 
periods  in  its  history.  Gatti-Casazza  had  assumed  the  headship  and 
imported  Toscanini  as  principal  conductor.  Among  their  stars  were 
the  glamorous  Caruso,  Farrar,  Nordica,  Homer,  Gadski,  Sembrich, 
and  Melba.  Another  opera  company,  of  brief  existence,  was  the 
Hammerstein  company,  which  crashed  the  orbit  of  the  Metropolitan 
like  a  comet  with  Tetrazzini,  Mary  Garden,  and  John  McCormack. 
As  if  that  were  not  enough,  a  popular,  preseason,  Italian  opera  com- 
pany held  forth  at  the  Academy  of  Music  and  siphoned  off  some 
of  the  city's  musical  enthusiasm.  Between  1880  and  19 10,  New  York 
was  very  fertile  in  the  creation  of  new  millionaires,  some  of  whose 
metamorphosed  mansions  still  speckle  uptown  Manhattan.  This  new 
wealth  sought  its  social  dividends  in  opera. 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  53 

As  for  the  orchestra,  which  had  recently  slipped  out  of  the  pro- 
tective cocoon  of  the  cooperative  system,  and  had  eased  through 
three  years  of  guest  conducting,  it  was  hardly  ready  for  Mahler's 
savage  prosecution  of  musical  ideals  and  the  continuous  discipline 
of  a  leader  of  thorough  experience  and  an  abundance  of  self- 
confidence.  Neither  did  his  almost  pathologically  irritable  tempera- 
ment and  blunt  speech  alleviate  the  tense  situation.  The  final 
melancholy  fact  was  that  the  attendance  "failed  to  meet  expecta- 
tions." The  spring  of  191 1,  the  time  of  Mahler's  retirement  and  death, 
therefore  found  the  long-suffering  Philharmonic  exhausted  after  its 
first  brush  with  big-time  company,  and  its  vitality  at  its  lowest  ebb. 
It  "was  drifting  toward  extinction,  but  was  revived  by  one  of  those 
strokes  of  fortune  that  almost  every  organization  requires  occasion- 
ally, and  of  which  the  New  York  Philharmonic  has  enjoyed  its  quota. 

This  stroke  of  good  fortune  consisted  in  a  bequest  of  almost 
$1,000,000  from  the  estate  of  Joseph  Pulitzer,  owner  and  editor  of 
the  New  York  World,  who  had  died  in  1 9 1 1 .  The  stipulations  set 
forth  in  this— one  of  his  many  well-known  benevolences— were  as 
follows: 

(1)  establishment  of  a  permanent  orchestra 

(2)  a  list  of  1,000  contributing  members 

(3)  low  rates  of  admission 

(4)  less  esoteric  programs  and  "not  too  severely  classical,"  with  prefer- 
ence for  his  favorites  Wagner,  Beethoven,  and  Liszt 

Within  a  few  months,  the  conditions  of  the  will  were  fulfilled  and 
the  court  was  petitioned  to  implement  the  bequest. 

At  this  juncture,  in  its  search  for  a  conductor,  the  board  turned 
to  a  relatively  unknown  young  man.  Having  tried  previously  a  ma- 
ture musician  of  established  eminence,  and  found  him  a  partial,  if 
not  complete,  failure,  they  now  imported  a  relatively  untried  Kapell- 
meister, the  thirty-nine-year-old  Joseph  Stransky  from  Germany. 
He  turned  out  to  be  more  than  amenable  to  the  stipulation  of  the 
Pulitzer  bequest  to  lighten  the  programs.  A  person  of  affable  de- 
meanor and  a  good  administrator,  he  enjoyed  a  large  personal  fol- 
lowing. Given  the  benefit  of  more  rehearsals  than  any  previous 
conductor  in  the  history  of  the  orchestra,  he  was  credited  with  being 
a  good  drill  master  even  by  those  critics  who  did  not  impute  to  him 


54  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

more  profound  musical  talents.  There  is  no  question  of  his  unique 
service  to  his  organization  in  reviving  the  old,  and  generating  new, 
public  interest  in  orchestral  music.  If  higher  criticism  condemned 
him  for  pandering  to  the  public  taste  by  playing  an  excess  of  Dvorak, 
Liszt,  and  Wagner,  it  was  exactly  that  policy  which  reflected  itself 
favorably  in  the  box  office.  While  Aldrich  of  the  Times  soon  began 
to  lament  the  fact  that  the  Philharmonic  audience  no  longer  included 
the  passionate  few  of  "the  cultivated,  the  most  exacting  among  the 
city's  music  lovers,"  the  concerts  were  selling  standing  room.  If  he 
was  not  the  "greatest  conductor  in  the  world"  as  some  of  his  follow- 
ers naively  contended,  there  is  still  no  doubt  that  he  earned  his 
$30,000  salary  by  contributing  a  service  that  was  vitally  needed  at 
that  particular  moment.  The  seventy-fifth  anniversary  (19 16-17) 
was  less  a  pleasurable  and  triumphant  celebration  than  an  occasion 
for  serious  stock-taking  of  future  prospects  of  the  orchestra,  and  an 
evaluation  and  assessment  of  the  widely  divergent  views  on  the 
conductor. 

The  Philharmonic  could  not  escape  odious  comparison  with  its 
sister  orchestras.  The  Philadelphia  orchestra,  with  its  sensational 
young  conductor,  Leopold  Stokowski,  carried  the  competition  into 
home  territory  and  was  beginning  to  electrify  New  York  audiences. 
Boston  and  Chicago  had  previously  attained  national  and  interna- 
tional prominence,  and  New  York,  responding  to  these  rival  pres- 
sures, could  not  hold  back.  In  the  meantime,  New  York  had  also 
absorbed  the  lesson  taught  it  by  the  experience  of  Boston,  Philadel- 
phia, and  Chicago,  that  no  orchestra  could  attain  the  now  generally 
established  musical  standards  without  adequate  financial  subsidies. 

At  this  very  time  (1920)  there  were  three  subsidized  orchestras 
in  New  York:  The  New  York  Philharmonic,  which  had  enjoyed  an 
inadequate  subsidy  since  1909;  the  New  York  Symphony  under 
Walter  Damrosch,  which  had  been  supported  by  Henry  Harkness 
Flagler  since  19 14;  and  the  National  Symphony,  whose  financial 
sponsors  were  Clarence  Mackay,  president  of  the  Postal  Telegraph 
Company,  and  Adolph  Lewisohn,  copper  magnate.  The  last-named 
orchestra  was  founded  in  the  spring  of  19 19  with  the  rather  Gertrude 
Stein-like  title  of  "New  Symphony  Orchestra  of  the  Musicians'  New 
Orchestra  Society,"  with  thirty-five-year-old  Edgar  Varese,  a  mod- 


Irs 


.< 


y  i 


:i 


^ 

V 


>7/ 


PHILHARMONIC  SOCIETY. 


85  part  n. 


?%■'<  MADAME  OTTO  ANJ)  MB.  <  ,  B.  HORN 


>C: 


C» 


ft  \*X 

I ;  Apollo  Rooms,  7th  Drr.  1842.  V; .; 

*>  >  iij  j. 

if*  PART  L  M|i 

g|  iiKwi)  M*unto>\    i\  V  Minor.  Benito  V|sk.  [■€$#, 

& 


a  /  \iu)AMt:  oT.ro,  ffe* 


/  *<•■* 


p-K       QiiNTKTTi:  in  D  Minor.     -     .  >.     .     -•  -    -     Hommk}..        vM 


thr.uriRK    io  Onr.Kox.  .........     Wkhkk.         fr<ae 

Pi  "  W'^ 

*§$'        l>u  n — from  Annum.  ........     TWsim.         /•<** 

w\              •  tec 


>>:.-«• 


<  iS  ;  &*KNA,    /JlWM    JutMw.     .-■'»■-..''.•*        lljECTMOVF.N.  .    ;'£*>* 

ff-gW  '                                                           MK.  C    K.  MORN  2f£g» 

4  P^  fif* 

*SN  Aria  Kha>  tn  \~~fs»m  Htimwt  tout '  Constant  in.         Mi»/.A«r.  te»* 

•ZV  MAOAMK  OTTO.  tcS 

3  :i: 


\; 


:4*»         Nih  (himiiu.  i\   I).  -  *     K\i.i.i»nnA          ftcf* 


73  J 


c : 


♦5'  llif  Vera!  NHttir  will  hr  ilirrrled  h\  Mr.  Tiitiw,  f$£. 

^*«**«    *«*''   *     *•"  "   ****    *    ."{*..*,      -.j,,,  n    !•,,„,.,,  (if  J '    -■        ,  !    -    i  '© 

^4  prm?  from  £&e  original  of  the  very  first  program  of  the  New  York  Yhilharmonic 
concert,  December  7,  1842.  Note  the  mixture  of  symphonic  works,  operatic  arias, 
and  chamber  music,  assisted  by  three  vocal  solos.  In  those  days,  the  music  was 
more  important  than  the  conductor,  whose  name  was  omitted  from  the  program. 
The  Beethoven  Symphony  was  conducted  by  U.  C.  Hill  (violinist);  the  Overture 
to  Oberon,  by  D.  G.  Etienne  (piano  or  horn);  and  the  Kalliwoda  Overture  by 
H.  C.  Timm  (piano  or  trombone).  During  the  vocal  solos,  the  orchestra  was 
directed  by  Mr.  Timm.  (Courtesy  New  York  Fhilhar?nonic -Symphony  Society) 


:m\ 


WALTER  DAMROSCH  AND  THE  NEW  YORK  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA 

Next  to  Theodore  Thomas,  Walter  Damrosch  was  the  most  traveled  con- 
ductor. Between  1885  and  1928,  he  covered  the  United  States  with  orches- 
tra and  opera.  Here,  he  and  his  orchestra  are  leaving  Pennsylvania  Station, 
about  192$.  The  bearded  figure  in  the  foreground  is  the  famous  -flutist, 
Georges  Barrere.  (Culver  Service) 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  55 

ern  composer  recently  arrived  from  France,  as  conductor.  Varese, 
however,  conducted  only  one  concert  and  was  followed  briefly  by 
Artur  Bodansky,  who  had  been  associated  with  the  Metropolitan 
Opera.  In  the  fall  of  1920,  its  ambitious  guarantors  secured  William 
Mengelberg,  who  had  not  only  had  a  brilliant  career  at  the  Concert- 
gebouw  in  Amsterdam,  but  who  raised  the  pitch  of  excitement  of 
the  concert  patrons  in  New  York  to  a  height  never  before  experi- 
enced. That  Mengelberg  could  realize  his  genius  was,  of  course,  the 
result  of  the  generosity  of  the  philanthropists  who  gave  him  the 
green  light  on  expensive  rehearsals  and  high  salary  scales— which 
was  also  the  rock  upon  which  his  orchestra  was  destined  to  be 
wrecked.  New  York  was  only  now  learning  the  hard  way  that 
rehearsals,  at  union  rates,  constitute  one  of  the  "concealed"  items  in 
the  budget  of  a  competent  orchestra.  It  was  a  magnificent  season, 
the  Mengelberg  season  of  1920-21,  as  long  as  it  lasted.  But  it  was  too 
costly  to  endure.  The  significant  features  of  this  experience  were, 
however,  first  that  New  York  was  taking  an  interest  in  orchestral 
music  and  showering  it  with  the  attention  that  had  hitherto  been 
bestowed  only  upon  the  opera,  and  secondly  that  standards  of  excel- 
lence, long  since  established  in  other  cities,  were  finally  being 
courted  in  New  York. 

Since  the  dispersion  of  the  financial  and  musical  resources  over 
three  large  orchestras  was  disastrous,  the  solution  obviously  indicated 
their  amalgamation. 

With  the  avowed  ambition  of  making  the  oldest  symphony 
orchestra  also  the  finest  in  the  world,  it  absorbed  Mengelberg's 
National  Symphony  Orchestra.  Stransky,  who  had  proven  his  great 
box  office  appeal,  was  retained  for  the  first  half  of  that  season;  Men- 
gelberg, who  had  earned  the  respect  of  the  critics  and  philanthro- 
pists, took  over  the  second  half.  Arthur  Judson,  manager  of  the 
Philadelphia  orchestra,  was  appointed  manager. 

The  major  competitor  of  the  Philharmonic  had  long  been  the 
New  York  Symphony  Society,  founded  in  1878  by  Leopold  Dam- 
rosch  and  enduring  for  almost  fifty  years,  with  only  periodic  inter- 
ruptions, under  Walter  Damrosch.  Much  of  its  strength  lay  in  the 
personal  following  of  the  Damrosch  family,  thereby  dividing  musical 
New  York  into  two  factions,  both  socially  and  financially.  Many 


$6  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

patrons  had  furthermore  come  to  enjoy  the  Damrosch  offerings, 
which,  in  the  later  years,  were  much  richer  in  novelties  than  those 
of  the  more  conservative  Philharmonic.  Musically,  however,  it 
could  never  challenge  its  senior  rival.  Now  that  Walter  Damrosch 
had  reached  the  age  of  retirement,  and  both  organizations  were  beset 
with  financial  worries,  and  the  Symphony  Society  had  gratified 
normal  sentiment  by  rounding  out  the  half-century,  the  stage  was 
set  for  the  consolidation  of  forces  that  had  been  proposed  as  early 
as  19 io.10  The  merger  was  announced  in  February,  1928.  Both 
Mackay,  who  had  come  to  the  Philharmonic  board  from  the  National 
Symphony,  and  Flagler,  who  had  spent  over  $1,000,000  on  the 
New  York  Symphony  during  the  preceding  decade,  were  included 
in  the  reorganized  board,  thereby  effecting  an  important  consolida- 
tion of  financial  forces. 

There  were  those  who  genuinely  regretted  the  demise  of  the 
Symphony  Society  because  they  feared  that  the  new  orchestra 
would  present  a  less  enterprising  repertoire  than  had  Mr.  Damrosch, 
that  concerts  would  be  less  frequent,  and  that  not  all  patrons  could 
be  accommodated  in  the  telescoped  schedule.  Some  even  bluntly 
asserted  that  it  was  motivated  primarily  by  the  desire  of  the  "impov- 
erished millionaires"  to  get  out  from  under.  The  merger  was  svmbol- 
ized  in  the  union  of  the  names,  the  Philharmonic-Symphony  Society, 
and  Arturo  Toscanini,  the  conductor  of  the  hour,  was  entrusted  with 
the  selection  of  the  personnel,  twenty  of  whom  were  to  be  drawn 
from  the  Damrosch  group.11 

Toscanini  had  already  stirred  his  audiences  during  his  tenure  at 
the  Metropolitan  Opera,  1908-15.  He  was  known  for  his  inflexible 
discipline,  his  unappeasable  frenzy  for  technical  perfection,  his  score- 
less conducting,  and  his  implacable  demand  that  prima  donnas,  who 
had  been  traditionally  considered  a  law  unto  themselves,  be  sub- 
servient to  the  conductor.  Added  to  his  phenomenal  control  of  the 
score  was  an  equally  phenomenal  repertoire  of  invectives  hurled 
against  his  musicians,  probably  evident  enough  to  the  custodian  who 
swept  up  the  broken  batons,  but  entirely  unsuspected  bv  those  mem- 
bers of  the  audience  who  melted  under  the  spell  of  the  translucent 
perfection  of  the  performance.  Although  Toscanini's  experience  had 
been  almost  exclusively  operatic,  he  had  conducted  some  concerts  in 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  57 

Italy,12  and  the  Metropolitan  orchestra  in  a  few  concerts  in  April, 
191 3.  During  the  postwar  season  of  1920-21  he  had  also  visited  the 
United  States  with  a  handpicked  La  Scala  orchestra  in  a  goodwill  tour 
of  over  forty  concerts,  from  New  York  to  Omaha.  Suffused  with  all 
the  trappings  and  sentiments  of  patriotic  ardor,  the  occasion  thrilled 
the  old  subscribers  of  the  Metropolitan  Opera  who  cherished  mem- 
ories of  a  decade  and  more  ago.  Most  patrons  readily  overlooked  the 
scattered  comments,  floated  by  a  few  critics  when  they  had  taken  their 
second  wind,  that  his  orchestra  was  technically  inferior,  and,  in  fact, 
that  the  maestro  had  really  not  proven  himself  a  symphonic  conductor 
at  all. 

Toscanini  made  his  debut  with  the  New  York  Philharmonic  as 
guest  conductor  on  January  14,  1926— as  had  been  announced  more 
than  a  year  previously— and  made  his  last  appearance  on  April  29,  1936. 
During  these  ten  years,  while  serving  either  as  guest  or  permanent  con- 
ductor—never for  a  period  longer  than  about  half  a  season,  often 
less— he  evoked  a  frenzied  adulation  almost  more  characteristic  of  a 
sports  stadium  than  of  the  dignified  halls  of  a  symphony  concert.  With 
crowds  jamming  the  entrance  way  and  cheers  and  exclamations  from 
the  audience,  he,  who  had  suppressed  all  grandstand  play  on  the  part 
of  the  operatic  prima  donnas,  now  became  himself  the  supreme  star 
featured  above  the  orchestra.  During  the  last  season,  the  management, 
loath  to  lose  the  benefits  accruing  from  this  high-salaried  (estimated  at 
$100,000  for  ten  weeks)13  sensation,  added  fifty  cents  to  the  price  of 
the  single  ticket,  which  it  guaranteed  to  refund  on  the  "nonappear- 
ance of  the  conductor  scheduled  for  this  concert." 

What  was  the  secret  of  the  fantastic  and  unprecedented  grip  of  this 
virtuoso  conductor  on  the  emotions  of  the  public?  It  would  be  too 
naively  simple  to  answer  that  it  was  exclusively  musical,  for  every 
discerning  conductor  and  manager  knows  better,  and  every  critic 
can  cite  conductors  of  high  scholarship  who  do  not  obtain  compa- 
rable deserts  in  adulation. 

No  pat  answer  is  forthcoming,  not  only  because  the  capture  of 
public  acclaim  is  a  complex  achievement,  but  also  because  not  all 
elements  of  an  impression  ever  rise  into  consciousness.  Consequently, 
not  all  observers  would  agree  on  the  diagnosis  of  his  magnetism. 
An  academic  listing  culled  from  contemporary  critical  commentary 


58  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

includes  both  aesthetic  and  nonaesthetic  ingredients:  (1)  absolute 
finesse  and  vigor  in  rendition  to  the  last  detail,  and  razor-sharp  pre- 
cision achieved  by  no  previous  conductors;  (2)  noncontroversial,  un- 
complicated, almost  reactionary  repertoire,  consisting  of  Beethoven, 
Wagner,  Brahms,  some  Mendelssohn,  and  a  liberal  condiment  of 
tuneful  Italian  overtures  rendered  with  the  aforementioned  exquisite 
precision;  (3)  absence  of  distorted  and  individualistic  readings  that 
would  draw  critical  fire,  but  rather  fidelity  to  the  "intentions  of  the 
composer,"  and  a  characteristic  forthright  performance  without 
"crude  rubatos"  resorted  to  by  "romantic  showmen";  (4)  colorful 
personality,  tales  about  phenomenal  memory,  the  inexorable  de- 
mands upon  his  musicians,  his  driving  discipline,  his  temperamental 
explosions,  which  date  back  to  the  "Met"  days;  (5)  his  open  defiance 
of  the  dictators  Mussolini  and  Hitler,14  which  endeared  him  to  a 
large  element  of  the  New  York  population  and  visibly  affected  at- 
tendance at  concerts  at  a  time  when  both  psychological  satiety  and 
the  depression  presaged  a  lull  in  patronage. 

It  is  clear  that  this  conductor  had  something  for  everybody,  in- 
cluding even  the  nonmusical,  a  kind  of  omnibus  appeal  that  is  neces- 
sary for  those  who  would  attain  popular  success.  But  public  acclaim 
was  not  without  its  discordant  notes  in  press  and  corridor  gossip. 
Some  critics  observed  that  there  was  less  emphasis  on  tone  and  more 
on  structure;  less  on  poetry,  more  on  meticulous  cultivation  of  tech- 
nique. To  the  modernist,  his  repertoire  was  utterly  conventional, 
threadbare,  and  unenterprising.  Some  deplored  his  neglect  of  the 
American  composer.  To  others,  the  virtue  of  meticulous  clarity  and 
the  chiseled,  metallic  contours  became  a  passionate  fault  which  in- 
hibited the  flexibility  and  mellowness  of  style  so  essential  to  genuine- 
ly satisfying  performance.  His  vigorous  execution  often  became  so 
strident  that  the  pastel  shades  of  gentler  moods  were  entirely  oblit- 
erated; his  tempi  were  often  hurried  when  restraint  was  called  for. 
As  for  his  temper  tantrums,  and  his  famous  hour-long  sulks  in  the 
Green  Room,  it  was  not  clear  to  the  commentators  whether  they 
were  the  manifestations  of  a  divine  frenzy  of  a  supreme  artist,  a 
dramatic  hoax  to  "get  results,"  or  whether  they  derived  from  a 
strange  sense  of  showmanship. 

However,  such  scattered  criticisms  never  attained  sufficient  mo- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  59 

mentum  to  precipitate  ugly  and  cacophonous  public  controversy— 
as  was  the  misfortune  of  almost  every  other  conductor  of  compa- 
rable stature:  Nikisch,  Theodore  Thomas,  or  Stokowski.  He  was 
never  torn  between  social  factions,  a  kind  of  struggle  which  New 
York  had  by  this  time  outgrown.  On  the  contrary,  there  was  an 
extraordinary  unanimity  of  acclaim— rare  for  a  public  figure.  After 
sitting  through  a  half  dozen  seasons  of  such  uniformly  noncontro- 
versial  performances,  a  critic  might  well  have  worried  where  his 
next  adjective  was  coming  from! 

Nevertheless,  it  is  interesting  to  speculate  how  Toscanini  would 
have  endured  if,  like  Theodore  Thomas,  Frederick  Stock,  Stokow- 
ski, Koussevitzky,  Monteux,  and  others  with  long  tenures,  he  had 
had  to  risk  boring  his  audiences  by  conducting  concert  after  con- 
cert, year  in  and  year  out,  with  only  minor  midseason  vacations, 
with  a  variegated  repertoire,  without  "playing  it  safe"  with  stand- 
ard works  that  are  "sure  to  please."  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  Tosca- 
nini decade  was  for  the  new  Philharmonic-Symphony  Society  a 
golden  age  during  which  it  savored  to  the  full  the  novel  and  exhila- 
rating experience  of  flirting  with  greatness. 

But  even  Toscanini  could  not  escape  the  symptoms  of  economic 
adversity  of  the  depression  years.  In  the  fall  of  1934,  there  were 
rumors  of  still  another  merger— this  time  with  the  Metropolitan 
Opera.15  Both  organizations  were  suffering  the  economic  afflictions 
of  the  threadbare  'thirties,  and  Gatti-Casazza  had  announced  his  re- 
tirement at  the  close  of  the  1934-35  season.  The  plan,  however,  never 
jelled.  Two  obvious  objections  were  that  it  would  have  meant  the 
dismissal  of  the  "Met"  orchestra,  and  that  the  Philharmonic  orches- 
tra could  not  possibly  have  acquitted  itself  well  in  both  capacities. 
Although  such  collaboration  is  rather  general  in  Europe  where  the 
symphonic  season  is  shorter,  the  long  and  arduous  orchestra  schedule 
in  symphony-minded  United  States  made  such  a  project  impractical. 
Consulted  on  this  desperate  depression-born  project,  the  Maestro 
advised  against  it,  and  it  was  definitely  abandoned  almost  before  it 
emerged  from  the  rumor  stage. 

Toscanini  conducted  his  last  Philharmonic  concert  April  29,  1936, 
amid  a  riot  of  public  frenzy.  It  was  generally,  but  mistakenly,  as- 
sumed to  be  the  end  of  his  American  career.16  The  farewell  concert, 


(SO  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

which  was  not  in  the  subscription  series,  packed  Carnegie  Hall,  and 
a  thousand  persons  waited  in  line  for  standing  room  to  which  only 
140  were  admitted.  Tickets  had  gone  on  sale  at  $10  top  and  $200  a 
box,  in  one  final  fantastic  splurge.  Amounted  police  and  fifty  foot 
patrols  kept  order.  This  episode  is  indicative  of  the  incredible  public 
ado  that  the  orchestra  and  Toscanini  had  aroused.  After  the  concert, 
he  proceeded  almost  immediately  to  Palestine  to  conduct  the  newly 
organized  Israel  Philharmonic  at  the  instigation  of  Bronislaw  Huber- 
mann,  the  eminent  violinist. 

No  specific  reason  was  publicly  advanced  for  the  retirement  of 
Toscanini,  except  that  he  wished  to  be  "free,"  that  he  was  tired, 
and  was  of  an  age  to  retire  anyway.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  "con- 
fidentially" asserted  in  the  press  that  it  was  not  entirely  a  secret  that 
his  resignation  was  the  result  of  dissatisfaction  on  both  sides,  that  the 
Maestro  made  demands  as  to  salary,  rehearsals,  programs  that 
seemed  excessive— all  of  which  was  "officially"  denied  with  equal 
facility,  with  the  public  as  usual  a  perplexed  bystander.  It  seems  cer- 
tain that  management  strove,  for  both  artistic  and  commercial 
reasons,  to  retain  the  conductor. 

There  was  no  unanimous  appraisal  of  his  long-run  worth.  That 
he  had  a  favorable  effect  on  public  interest  was  an  unquestioned 
corollary  to  his  unprecedented  drawing  power.  However,  the  Tos- 
canini cult  produced  possible  harm  in  the  prominence  accorded  the 
"star"  conductor.  His  very  popularity  was  a  liability  in  that,  both 
in  the  eyes  of  the  public  and  in  the  esteem  of  the  orchestra,  he 
dwarfed  every  conductor  who  had  to  fill  out  his  unfinished  sea- 
sons. The  rehearsal  experiences  of  these  "guest-of-the-month"  con- 
ductors, and  the  untenanted  seats  in  the  auditorium,  confirmed  the 
folk  wisdom  that  no  orchestra  can  serve  two  masters.  So  obvious  was 
the  demoralization  of  both  orchestra  and  audience  that  some  critics 
actually  declared  Toscanini's  departure  not  a  catastrophe  but  a  bless- 
ing in  disguise  if  the  orchestra  management  were  only  wise  enough 
to  learn  its  lesson.  The  choice  of  his  successor  was  therefore  a  critical 
one. 

In  February,  1936,  two  weeks  after  the  publication  of  Toscanini's 
retirement,  it  was  announced  that  Wilhelm  Furtwangler,  Europe's 
most  eligible  conductor,  would  assume  the  baton  the  following  year. 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  61 

Then  fifty  years  old,  conductor  of  Europe's  two  most  noted  orches- 
tras in  Berlin  and  Leipzig,  he  was  not  unknown  in  New  York  where 
he  had  done  a  turn  during  the  seasons  1924-27.  His  urgent  desire  to 
return  to  America  was  common  knowledge.  Furtwangler,  however, 
had  been  embarrassingly  involved  in  the  Nazi  regime  which,  since 
1933,  had  aroused  hatred,  revulsion,  and  fear  in  the  rest  of  the  world. 
Although  he  had  publicly  espoused  the  case  of  Hindemith  against 
the  Nazis  and  had  dramatically  resigned  his  post  in  Berlin  as  a  protest 
against  their  creeping  control  of  things  musical,  his  skirts  did  not 
seem  sufficiently  clean  to  appease  the  smoldering  anti-Nazi  sentiment 
in  New  York,  which  was  about  ready  to  burst  into  flame.  To  a  cer- 
tain extent,  Furtwangler  had  patched  up  his  differences  with  Hitler 
on  the  professed  principle  of  the  separation  of  art  and  politics,  and 
had  conducted  only  "as  guest"  in  Berlin  since  the  spring  of  1935.  But 
to  clinch  his  embarrassment,  the  German  government  calculatingly 
heralded  Furtwangler's  "reinstatement"  on  the  very  evening  of  the 
New  York  announcement.  Unable  to  ignore  the  powerful,  but  by 
no  means  unanimous  protests,  the  Philharmonic,  after  an  exchange 
of  communication  with  Furtwangler,  accepted  his  resignation  be- 
cause "political  controversy  [is]  disagreeable  to  me."  17 

The  position  was  again  vacant.  On  the  chance  of  securing  a  "find" 
who  might  be  on  the  rise,  the  board's  choice  fell  on  a  thirty-seven- 
year-old  Englishman  of  Italian  extraction,  John  Barbirolli,  who  had 
achieved  precocious  success  in  England  both  with  opera  and  orches- 
tra. To  be  catapulted  into  such  a  position— successor  to  Toscanini 
and  substitute  for  Furtwangler— was  a  fate  not  to  be  wished  on  one's 
worst  enemy.  Not  only  would  the  new  incumbent  be  vulnerable  to 
comparison  with  his  immediate  predecessor,  but  he  would  necessar- 
ily expose  his  relative  inexperience  to  his  own  orchestra.  A  steady 
grind  of  concerts  is  a  physical  and  intellectual  burden  that  is  abso- 
lutely unknown  to  the  European  conductor.  After  the  first  year  Bar- 
birolli was  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  of  the  entire  season,  with 
only  a  short  midwinter  holiday.  The  added  fact  that  the  depression 
had  brought  a  decline  in  patronage,  which  had  been  felt  even  during 
the  Toscanini  regime,  probably  added  its  harassing  and  dishearten- 
ing effects  on  the  new  incumbent.  The  task  proved  an  insuperable 


6l  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

one,  and  Barbirolli  ultimately  returned  to  England,  with  a  few  voices 
still  proclaiming  that  he  had  been  the  victim  of  a  raw  deal. 

The  centennial  year,  1941-42,  was  memorialized  by  a  bevy  of 
nine  guest  conductors  for  short  turns  on  the  rostrum.  It  was  a  feast 
for  the  sensation  seeker,  and  a  field  day  for  the  critics,  who  seized  the 
unusual  opportunity  to  assess  the  relative  merits  of  conductors  con- 
trolling exactly  the  same  material.  The  podium  was,  however,  again 
untenanted. 

Artur  Rodzinski,  formerly  assistant  conductor  in  Philadelphia, 
who  had  acquired  a  reputation  in  Los  Angeles  and  Cleveland  for 
whipping  orchestras  into  disciplined  shape,  and  had  "guested"  for 
some  weeks  during  Barbirolli's  very  first  season  (1936-37),  received 
the  new  call,  which  carried  the  title  of  Musical  Director,  a  status 
which  presumably  conferred  more  authoritative  responsibility  than 
the  title  of  mere  "conductor."  Hired  for  the  purpose  of  renovating 
an  orchestra  with  which  he  was  already  somewhat  familiar,  he  sig- 
nalized his  entry  upon  his  new  duties  by  dismissing,  before  the  first 
rehearsal,  fourteen  men,  including  the  concertmaster  and  a  half 
dozen  other  first-desk  men.  Reasons  were  never  made  public,  but 
surmises  were  plentiful.  After  an  excited  skirmish  with  the  union,  a 
compromise  was  reached  by  the  reinstatement  of  five  members. 

The  rebuilding  proceeded  apparently  to  the  entire  satisfaction  of 
critics  and  public.  All  the  more  severe  was  the  shock  when,  in  mid- 
season  of  1 946-47  during  negotiations  for  a  new  contract,  Rodzinski 
submitted  his  resignation  embellished  with  accusations  against  man- 
agement of  crass  invasion  of  the  province  of  conductorial  respon- 
sibilities. Management  shrewdly  refrained  from  participating  in  the 
public  recriminations,  but  its  rebuttal  consisted  in  an  immediate 
release  from  his  contract,  while  the  press  reviewed  the  general  phi- 
losophy of  the  division  of  powers,  managerial  and  artistic,  and 
bemoaned  this  new  "evidence"  of  the  subjection  of  art  to  material 
considerations.  Before  discharging  his  parting  salvo,  Rodzinski  had 
in  his  pocket  an  offer  from  Chicago  where  another  "repair  job"  was 
supposedly  in  order.  Thither  he  betook  himself  in  1947. 

In  search  of  a  successor,  the  New  York  management  again  pon- 
dered the  possibilities  of  dividing  its  heavy  annual  schedule  between 
two  co-conductors,  as  had  been  done  in  the  days  of  Toscanini  and 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  63 

Mengelberg.  The  success  of  such  a  dual  arrangement  was,  of  course, 
difficult  to  assure.  It  is  a  real  question  whether  it  "worked"  in  the 
twenties  and  thirties.  Mitropoulos  and  Stokowski  shared  the  podium 
for  one  year  (1949-50),  but  the  following  year  the  Minneapolis  con- 
ductor was  given  full  appointment  as  conductor-in-chief. 

The  fall  of  1950  was  marked  by  a  very  radical  departure  in  con- 
cert policy,  namely  the  appearance  of  the  orchestra  on  the  stage  of 
the  Roxy  motion  picture  theatre  for  a  four-a-day  concert  during  a 
two-week  period.  Apparently  conceived  by  Spyros  Skouras,  who 
was  a  member  of  both  the  Symphony  board  and  the  Roxy  manage- 
ment, this  engagement  was  a  reply  to  the  pleas  of  the  orchestra  per- 
sonnel for  a  longer  season,  and  to  the  desire  of  the  Philharmonic  to 
gain  new  friends.  The  orchestra  for  this  occasion  was  no  streamlined 
"pop"  compromise,  but  included  the  complete  roster  from  concert- 
master  to  percussion,  Mitropoulos  conducting. 

Editorial  opinion  was  not  unanimous  on  this  break  with  tradition. 
The  symphony  orchestra  had  struggled  for  a  century  to  attain  an 
exclusive  status,  and  had  laboriously  trained  the  audience  to  sit  in 
silence  during  a  full-length  concert.  It  was  therefore  natural  that 
many  should  regret  the  decision  to  accept  the  role  of  sideshow  to 
a  motion  picture,  however  discriminatingly  that  picture  might  have 
been  selected.  It  recalls  the  scandal  caused  by  Richard  Strauss  in 
1904  by  conducting  a  symphony  concert  in  the  auditorium  of 
Wanamaker's  department  store.  On  the  other  hand,  the  proponents 
of  the  venture  view  it  as  a  method  of  bringing  good  music  to  that 
part  of  the  populace  that  would  not  dream  of  coming  to  it.  To  them 
it  is  a  clue  to  the  "solution  of  the  symphony  problem."  The  readiness 
of  the  New  York  Philharmonic-Symphony  to  embrace  on  a  small 
scale  an  opportunity  to  humanize  the  concert  repertoire,  may  some 
day  be  considered  the  turning  point  in  the  history  of  the  orchestra. 

REPERTOIRE  A  century  of  uninterrupted  orchestral  pro- 
grams of  the  New  York  Philharmonic  affords  an  extraordinary 
view  of  changes  in  musical  taste.  No  other  orchestra  in  America 
covers  so  long  a  span,  but  it  is  exceeded  by  the  London  Philhar- 
monic, the  Gewandhaus  of  Leipzig,  the  Societe  des  Concerts  of 
Paris,  and  equalled  by  the  Philharmonic  of  Vienna,  except  that  the 


64  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

last-named  suffered  several  dark  seasons.  What  the  European  orches- 
tras gain  in  antiquity,  however,  they  more  than  lose  in  the  sparse 
number  of  concerts,  the  low  volume  of  repertoire,  and  the  hetero- 
geneity of  orchestral  offerings.  The  American  repertoire,  especially 
in  later  decades,  is  mixed  with  less  nonorchestral  "chaff."  As  a  con- 
sequence, the  New  York  Philharmonic  repertoire  remains  a  unique 
phenomenon  in  the  annals  of  world  music.  In  depicting  the  life  spans 
of  composers  in  a  greater  variety  of  stages,  and  unfolding  a  complete 
turnover  in  certain  styles  of  composition,  such  a  hundred-year  rec- 
ord discloses,  in  conjunction  with  the  leaner  records  of  other  cities, 
the  principles  underlying  the  shifts  in  taste,  which  a  snapshot  ob- 
servation would  never  disclose. 

At  the  time  of  founding  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic  Society, 
Beethoven  was  supreme  in  solitary  glory,  although  he  has  since  that 
time  shared  his  exalted  status  with  Wagner,  Brahms,  and  Tschaikow- 
sky  in  various  orchestras.  In  the  first  three  years,  his  compositions 
occupied  forty  per  cent  of  the  repertoire,  and  were  represented  on 
nearly  every  program.  Mendelssohn,  a  star  of  lesser  magnitude,  was 
also  at  the  peak  of  his  eminence,  but  faded  perceptibly  after  his 
death  (1847). 

Several  now  totally  forgotten  composers  were  then  still  popular: 
Kalliwoda  (1801-66),  a  German  symphonist;  Lindpaintner  (1791— 
1856),  a  conductor  and  much  respected  composer  of  operas,  sym- 
phonies, and  overtures;  Hummel  (177 8- 1837),  whose  chamber  music 
and  brilliant  piano  concertos  competed  favorably  with  those  of  Bee- 
thoven in  his  day.  Though  never  considered  of  first  magnitude,  they 
had  not  yet  lost  their  places  on  the  boards. 

After  its  birth  and  infancy  in  Germany,  the  new  romantic  school 
was  not  long  in  shaking  itself  loose  from  the  old  anchorage.  Though 
Beethoven  was  still  revered  as  the  father  of  romanticism,  the  more 
dramatic  innovators,  Wagner  and  Liszt,  pushed  forward  aggressive- 
ly and  soon  established  a  cult  of  their  own.  In  New  York,  these 
names  appeared  on  the  program  almost  as  soon  as  they  did  in  Eu- 
rope. Bergmann  introduced  Wagner  in  the  early  fifties  and  Liszt  a 
few  years  later,  to  the  dismay  of  the  conservative  members  of  the 
audience. 

With  the  election  of  Theodore  Thomas  (1877)  to  the  leadership 


Profiles  of  Major  Avierican  Orchestras  65 

of  the  Philharmonic,  a  new  era  was  inaugurated.  Without  minimiz- 
ing the  services  of  Eisfeld  and  Bergmann,  the  first  more  or  less  reg- 
ular conductors  of  the  Society,  it  is  still  true  that  Thomas  was  the 
first  American  symphonic  conductor  in  the  modern  disciplined 
sense.  He  embarked  on  a  still  more  expanded  repertoire  and  intro- 
duced many  "first  times"  to  the  American  audiences.  Though  he  has 
gone  down  in  history  for  his  militant  sponsorship  of  Wagner,  this 
aspect  of  his  regime  has  been  exaggerated  because  anything  pertain- 
ing to  that  controversial  public  figure  engraved  itself  on  public  at- 
tention. Thomas  embraced  all  other  new  figures  as  well— Richard 
Strauss,  Dvorak,  Tschaikowsky,  and  the  resurrected  Bach.  He  culti- 
vated Beethoven  in  the  traditional  fashion,  up  to  about  twenty  per 
cent  of  the  repertoire,  while  Liszt,  Schubert,  Schumann,  Berlioz, 
Rubinstein,  and  Mendelssohn,  and  a  host  of  miscellaneous  composers, 
made  regular  appearances  with  a  range  of  two  to  seven  per  cent.  A 
cold,  quantitative  calculation  indicates  that  there  has  probably  never 
been  a  conductor  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic  who  has  displayed 
a  less  distorted  taste  or  presented  a  more  balanced  and  eclectic  series 
of  programs. 

A  shift  in  soloist  policy  was  introduced  about  1870.  Since  its  in- 
ception, the  Philharmonic  had  always  considered  that  it  conferred 
an  honor  upon  its  soloists,  which  the  latter  were  happy  to  recipro- 
cate with  performances  rendered  gratis.  Many  of  these  were  un- 
doubtedly the  result  of  mild  intrigue  and  marginal  negotiation.  The 
fact  that  many  of  these  soloists  were  hardly  likely  to  add  splendor 
to  the  reputation  of  the  orchestra,  or  even  to  themselves,  had  been  a 
matter  of  public  and  critical  comments.  During  the  last  quarter  of 
the  century,  however,  the  glamour  soloist  emerged.  Though  the 
traveling  virtuosos  were  not  as  abundant  as  today,  such  international 
artists  as  Anton  Rubinstein,  Wieniawski,  Wilhelmj,  Julia  Rive,  Re- 
menyi,  Georg  Henschel,  Emil  Fischer,  and  Lilli  Lehmann  trickled  in- 
to the  programs,  beginning  about  1875. 

With  the  departure  of  Theodore  Thomas  for  Chicago  (1891)  to 
found  a  new  orchestra,  Anton  Seidl,  coming  from  the  Metropolitan 
Opera,  introduced  innovations  of  a  different  sort.  He  had  come  to 
the  United  States  almost  direct  from  the  Wagner  household,  where 
he  had  worked  and  studied  with  the  master  himself.  If,  after  Berg- 


66  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

mann,  Thomas,  and  Damrosch  it  was  no  longer  necessary  to  intro- 
duce Wagner  to  the  American  audience,  the  new  conductor  was 
nevertheless  able  to  import  a  new  style  of  conducting.  The  romantic 
school  of  Wagner  and  Biilow  charged  the  conductor  with  the  re- 
sponsibility of  personal  interpretation  and  expression,  and  Seidl 
flavored  even  the  classics  with  flexible  tempi  and  unconventional 
nuances;  in  short,  he  startled  the  sophisticates  with  the  "Wagneriza- 
tion"  of  the  classics. 

Quite  in  keeping  with  these  personal  predilections,  he  doubled  the 
incidence  of  Wagner's  compositions  from  four  to  eight  per  cent  of 
the  repertoire,  and  that  of  Liszt  from  two  to  four.  As  would  seem 
right  to  a  Wagnerite,  Brahms  was  reduced  from  about  six  per  cent 
in  the  previous  five-year  period,  to  three  during  the  Seidl  tenure. 
Haydn,  Mozart,  Schubert,  and  Schumann  suffered  analogously. 
Beethoven  declined  a  bit,  but  was  beyond  much  tampering.  The 
most  violent  skew  was  the  growth  of  Dvorak  from  four  to  twelve 
per  cent,  that  derived  from  totally  different  circumstances.  Dvorak 
was  resident  in  New  York  from  1892  to  1895  as  head  of  the  Amer- 
ican Conservatory.  Seidl  premiered  the  New  World  Symphony, 
December  15,  1893,  and  presented  other  compositions  in  deference 
to  the  distinguished  visitor  and  to  the  undoubted  delight  of  the  pub- 
lic. 

After  the  short  regime  of  Emil  Paur  and  the  bevy  of  guest  conduc- 
tors corralled  for  the  purpose  of  infusing  vitality  into  the  moribund 
organization,  Safonoff  electrified  the  public  with  his  bombastic  inter- 
pretation of  Tschaikowsky's  Fathetique.  In  a  few  years  it  was  per- 
ceived that  he  had  hardly  been  successful  at  anything  else.  The  Russian 
composers  occupied  almost  one-third  of  the  repertoire.  Tschai- 
kowsky,  alone,  carried  off  about  twenty  per  cent  of  the  total,  while 
Glinka,  Rimsky-Korsakoff,  Rubinstein,  Glazounoff,  and  Scriabin,  the 
last  named  a  former  pupil  of  Safonoff,  bring  up  the  rest  of  the  Sla- 
vonic family.  Brahms  declined  to  the  vanishing  point;  only  Bee- 
thoven was  sufficiently  immune  to  maintain  his  approximate  position, 
though  exceeded  by  Tschaikowsky  for  the  first  time  in  the  career  of 
either  of  them. 

The  advent  of  Mahler  (1909)  marked  an  expansion  in  program- 
ming as  well  as  financial  administration.  By  adding  to  the  regular 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  6j 

pairs  a  Beethoven  cycle  and  an  historical  cycle,  the  programs  were 
given  an  educational  tone;  and  the  supplemental  Sunday  afternoon 
series,  which  since  1930  have  been  broadcast  by  CBS,  compensated 
for  this  trend  by  expanding  the  audience  to  the  less  mature  groups. 
The  addition  of  a  tour  to  the  aforementioned  innovations  indicated 
the  serious  purposes  and  exalted  ambitions  of  Gustav  Mahler  for  this 
orchestra  which  he,  himself,  was  not  permitted  to  exploit  fully.  The 
building  of  an  audience  was  left  to  his  successor,  Josef  Stransky,  a 
conductor  of  lesser  capacities,  but  infinitely  more  adaptable  in  the 
implementation  of  his  plans. 

Stransky  opened  the  season  of  1911-12  in  the  spirit  of  Mr.  Pulit- 
zer's bequest,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  provision  that  his  favorite 
composers  be  given  a  hearing.  Beethoven,  Wagner,  and  Liszt,  who 
had  long  ago  survived  their  controversial  period,  were  accorded  most 
generous  hearings.  He  featured  other  favorites— Tschaikowsky  (nine 
per  cent);  Dvorak,  his  Czech  compatriot  (five  per  cent);  and  Rich- 
ard Strauss  (five  per  cent).  The  orchestra  prospered  financially.  For 
the  first  time  since  the  days  of  Thomas  and  Seidl,  they  experienced 
the  luxury  and  thrill  of  sold-out  houses.  But  if  there  is  an  incongru- 
ity between  material  prosperity  and  aesthetic  progress,  here  was  an 
illustration  of  it;  and  the  more  sophisticated  members  of  the  audience 
and  critical  fraternity  clamored  for  a  change. 

Since  1923,  when  Stransky  relinquished  the  post,  nearly  all  of  the 
world's  great  conductors  have  occupied  the  podium  for  a  shorter  or 
longer  period.  None,  however,  persisted  through  so  long  a  period, 
nor  lifted  the  public  to  such  a  pitch  of  frenzy  as  did  Toscanini.  The 
analysis  of  his  repertoire,  compared  to  the  composite  repertoire  of 
the  ten  other  orchestras  for  the  same  period,  gives  evidence  of  the 
degree  of  his  conservatism,  which  indeed  the  conductor  himself  had 
always  acknowledged.  By  his  own  declaration,  he  wished  to  "come 
nearer  the  truth  of  Haydn  and  Beethoven"  and  leave  to  younger 
men  the  responsibility  to  promote  new  music.18  Beethoven  consti- 
tuted nearly  a  quarter  of  the  repertoire,  as  against  half  that  amount 
for  the  national  average.  His  meager  American  repertoire  comprised 
only  the  following  items:  Hanson,  Symphony  No.  2;  Ernest  Schil- 
ling, Impressions  of  an  Artist's  Life,  for  piano  and  orchestra  (com- 
poser at  the  piano);  Bernard  Wagenaar,  Symphony  No.  2;  Hans 


20 


18- 


16 


14- • 


12 


10 


8' 


BEETHOVEN 


BRAHMS 


ALL  ITALIAN 


WAGNER 


STRAUSS 


DEBUSSY 
RESPIGHI     FRANCK 
MOZART   BRUCKNER    HAYDN    BACH 
MENDELSSOHN      SCHUBERT 
SCHUMANN    SIBEUUS 

ALL  AMERICAN 
SAINT-SAENS    STRAVINSKY 
BERLIOZ  PIZZETTI  TSCHAIKOWSKY  ROSSINI 
ELGAR  VEROI  VIVALDI  MARTUCCI  ROUSSEL 
RAVEL  CASTELNUOVO-TEDESCO  SH0STAKOVIICH 
SCHELLING    TOMMASINI  DESABATA     WEBER 
GLUCK  MOUSSORGSKY   ANO  42  OTHERS 


Popularity  Pyramids 

AMERICAN   SYMPHONY 
ORCHESTRAS 

1925-35 


BEETHOVEN 
BRAHMS 


ALL  AMERICAN 

WAGNER 
TSCHAIKOWSKY 

STRAUSS 

ALL  ITALIAN 

MOZART 

BACH 


STRAVINSKY     SIBELIUS 
SCHUMANN  SCHUBERT  RIMSKY-KORSAKOFF 
DEBUSSY    RAVEL  RACHMANINOFF  FRANCK 
RESPIGHI   DVORAK   HAYDN   MENDELSSOHN 
BLOCH       LISZT      MAHLER        BRUCKNER 

HANDEL     SAINT-SAENS 

PROKOFIEFF  GLAZOUNOFF  WEBER    ELGAR 

SCRIABIN       DE  FALLA      VAUGHAN  WILLIAMS 

D'lNDy  GOLDMARK  SCHOENBERG  KODALY 

AND  SEVERAL  HUNDRED  OTHERS 


Toscanini  in  New  York 
Philharmonic-  Symphony 


Ten    other 
orchestras 


The  well-known  conservatism  of  Toscanini  is  indicated  by  the  high 
proportion  of  Beethoven,  the  large  amount  of  Italian  music,  and  the 
meager  place  given  American  composers. 


68 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  69 

Wetzler,  Symphonic  Dance,  Basque  Venus;  and  Abram  Chasins, 
Flirtation  in  a  Chinese  Garden  and  Parade.  The  Chasins  and  Wagen- 
aar  compositions  were  world  premieres.  On  his  European  tour  in 
the  spring  of  1930,  he  played  no  American  compositions.  The  most 
notorious  novelty  of  his  career  was  the  first  American  concert  per- 
formance of  Ravel's  Bolero,  November  14,  1929,  which  he  allegedly 
played  about  one-third  faster  than  indicated  by  the  composer.19  Tos- 
canini's  detractors,  however,  seized  on  his  warped  proportion  of 
Italian  music,  which  comprised  a  list  of  twenty-two  assorted  com- 
posers, including  repeated  performance  of  seven  of  Rossini's  over- 
tures, and  the  revival  of  other  and  lesser  known  compatriots.  (As 
conductor  of  the  NBC  orchestra,  he  somewhat  liberalized  his  reper- 
toire, and  on  November  2,  1942,  actually  played  an  American  pro- 
gram consisting  of  the  works  of  Loeffler,  Creston,  Gould,  and 
Gershwin.) 

After  Toscanini's  departure,  the  German  and  Italian  composi- 
tions very  quickly  resumed  their  accustomed  levels.  Barbirolli,  how- 
ever, consonant  with  his  English  heritage,  showed  some  favoritism 
for  his  countrymen:  Elgar,  Purcell,  and  several  minor  writers;  while 
the  American  contingent  increased  a  trifle,  principally  because  the 
Toscanini  level  had  been  so  depressed. 

The  New  York  Symphony  Society  ( i8j8) 

The  history  of  the  New  York  Symphony  Society  is  practically 
coincident  with  the  professional  life  of  the  Damrosches— Leopold, 
the  father,  and  Walter,  the  son.  At  the  time  of  his  arrival  in  New 
York  in  1871,  the  elder  Damrosch  found  the  musical  affairs  of  the 
city  dominated  by  the  "benevolent  despot,"  Theodore  Thomas,  who 
naturally  looked  upon  the  newcomer  as  a  rival.  We  have  his  son's 
testimony  for  the  subsequently  oft-repeated  anecdote  that  the  forty- 
three-year-old  Thomas,  after  being  introduced  to  the  newcomer, 
only  three  years  his  senior,  expressed  the  threat:  "I  hear,  Dr.  Dam- 
rosch [Damrosch  was  an  M.D.],  that  you  are  a  very  fine  musician, 
but  I  want  to  tell  you  one  thing:  whoever  crosses  my  path,  I 
crush."  20  Whether  or  not  it  is  true  that  the  adherents  of  these  no- 
table men  felt  the  rivalry  more  strongly  than  did  the  principals  them- 


70  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

selves,  it  is  true  that  the  conflict  in  the  New  York  arena  never  did 
end  in  a  clear-cut  victory  for  either  one.  While  Thomas  dominated 
the  orchestral  field  as  long  as  he  remained  in  New  York,  he  was  fi- 
nally obliged  to  leave  the  city  because  his  economic  position  was 
untenable  in  terms  of  his  demands.  On  the  other  hand,  Leopold 
Damrosch  secured  a  good  foothold  in  opera,  gained  the  support  of 
highly  influential  families,  all  of  which  redounded  to  the  long-term 
benefit  of  his  son,  and  assured  the  periodic  financial  security  of  his 
orchestra,  while  the  New  York  Philharmonic  was  eking  out  an  ex- 
istence on  its  accumulated  prestige. 

Leopold  Damrosch  was  a  violinist,  who  had  played  under  Liszt 
in  Weimar  and  had  acquired  some  conductorial  experience  in  Bres- 
lau  before  emigrating  to  the  United  States  at  the  invitation  of  the 
Arion  Mannergesangverein  of  New  York.  Of  course,  this  position 
with  the  Arion  society  was  never  meant  to  occupy  the  full  time  of 
such  an  energetic  and  schooled  musician.  Damrosch'  major  oppor- 
tunity came  with  the  retirement  and  death  of  Carl  Bergmann,  who 
had  been  head  of  the  Philharmonic.  To  Damrosch  fell  the  task  of 
resuscitating  the  flagging  public  interest  in  the  Philharmonic.  He 
failed  and  the  dividends  of  the  season  1876-77  sagged  to  the  lowest 
point  in  history.  His  son,  Walter,  a  lad  of  fourteen,  played  second 
violin  in  the  orchestra  "just  for  the  experience."  Some  have  declared 
that  his  first  failure  was  due  to  circumstances  beyond  the  control  of 
the  conductor— but  the  stigma  had  its  effect,  for  when  Thomas,  who 
had  succeeded  Damrosch  as  conductor  of  the  Philharmonic,  departed 
for  Cincinnati,  the  Society  elected  not  Damrosch  but  Adolph  Neu- 
endorff,  who  had  been  conducting  German  opera  in  New  York  for 
some  years.  The  vote  of  forty-six  to  only  twenty-nine  for  Damrosch 
may  not  have  been  a  too  disgraceful  defeat  since  a  shift  of  nine  of 
the  seventy-five  votes  would  have  upset  these  results.  But  it  definite- 
ly ended  for  two  decades  the  threat  of  the  Damrosch  faction  to 
capture  the  Philharmonic,  a  venture  which  was  not  again  to  be 
attempted  until  1902  when  the  son,  Walter,  was  involved.  In  both 
instances,  they  responded  to  the  rebuff  by  establishing  their  own 
orchestras. 

With  the  election  of  Theodore  Thomas  to  the  headship  of  the 
Philharmonic  in  the  fall  of  1877,  which  was  to  end  the  hostilities 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  71 

between  the  Thomas  private  orchestra  and  the  Philharmonic,  Dam- 
rosch  collected  an  orchestra  of  his  own  from  the  supply  of  musi- 
cians remaining  after  Mr.  Thomas  had  selected  the  best.  With  this 
orchestra  Damrosch  offered  a  series  of  symphonic  matinees  during 
the  season  of  1877-78.  With  Thomas  safely  (it  was  thought)  en- 
sconced in  Cincinnati  the  following  year,  the  opportunity  seemed 
propitious  to  move  into  the  vacancy  left  by  the  popular  leader,  and 
this,  by  inevitable  Damrosch  logic,  led  to  the  founding  of  the  New 
York  Symphony  Society.  According  to  its  minutes  of  October  22, 
1878,  the  Society  was  founded  "to  assure  the  continuance  of  con- 
certs threatened  by  the  departure  of  Theodore  Thomas  to  Cincin- 
nati." Steinway  Hall  on  Fourteenth  Street  was  secured  for  the  dates 
which  had  been  held  for  the  Thomas  orchestra,  and  it  was  offered 
rent-free  by  Henry  Steinway.  With  the  unexpected  return  of 
Thomas,  Damrosch  and  his  Symphony  Society  moved  to  the  Acad- 
emy of  Music,  which  also  housed  the  Philharmonic,  now  destined  to 
be  its  rival,  potential  or  actual,  for  the  next  fifty  years. 

As  early  as  1883-84,  the  minutes  of  the  Society  report  informal 
discussion  on  plans  for  a  Hall  of  Music  adequate  for  the  purposes  of 
a  symphony  orchestra,  a  plan  which  was  later  to  be  fulfilled  by  An- 
drew Carnegie,  who  joined  the  Symphony  Society  board  in  1886 
and  was  elevated  to  its  presidency  in  1 888.- In  later  years  he  was  to 
be  joined  by  other  equally  impressive  families:  Rockefeller,  Morgan, 
Roosevelt,  Gould,  and  Vanderbilt. 

The  enlistment  of  such  an  array  of  wealth  for  the  new  society  in 
a  brief  five  years  was  an  achievement  the  like  of  which  Thomas 
never  attained  in  New  York.  It  has  been  ascribed  in  large  part  to  its 
leader's  personal  characteristics.  Leopold  Damrosch  had  always  car- 
ried the  prestige  of  European  training  and  was  a  friend  of  its  most 
noted  musical  representatives,  Liszt,  Biilow,  and  Wagner.  Later  he 
conducted  a  successful  Festival  of  Music,  as  well  as  a  season  of  Ger- 
man Opera  at  the  Metropolitan  Opera  House,  which  had  been  built 
by  the  rising  generation  of  wealth,  some  of  whose  names  overlapped 
with  the  previously  cited  Symphony  Board.  He  was  personally  af- 
fable, a  cultured  conversationalist,  and  an  enthusiastic  romanticist. 
But  his  conducting  never  attained  the  finish  of  Theodore  Thomas: 


72  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

his  beat  was  less  distinct,  and  he  never  had  access  to  the  best  players. 
He  was  reputed  to  be  at  his  best  in  Berlioz  and  Wagner. 

"His  nervous  manner  is  quite  suited  to  the  nervous  vigor  of  these  com- 
posers. One  is  not  annoyed  by  the  windmill  flourishes  of  his  arms  or  the 
wild  waving  of  his  hair  when  there  is  so  much  wind  and  wildness  in  the 
music  which  he  conducts."  21 

Thus  he  differed  from  Thomas  in  sponsoring  the  "flexible  line"  of 
the  Liszt-Wagner-Nikisch  school— a  line  which  classicists,  such  as 
Thomas,  deprecated  as  exaggeration  and  distortion. 

His  son,  Walter,  married  well  (a  daughter  of  James  G.  Blaine) 
and  always  had  relatively  free  entree  to  fashionable  society.  Indeed, 
the  young  Walter  is  credited  with  being  responsible  for  inducing 
Carnegie  to  invest  some  of  his  wealth  to  further  the  interests  of 
music  by  building  Carnegie  Hall.  Walter's  enemies  often  referred 
sarcastically  to  his  alliance  with  millionaires  as  the  chief  explanation 
of  his  musical  success. 

Upon  the  passing  of  the  elder  Damrosch  in  1885,  Walter  assumed 
the  responsibilities  of  the  orchestra  and  Anton  Seidl  was  secured 
from  Germany  to  direct  the  German  opera.  The  twenty-three- 
year-old  son  had  inherited  many  of  the  personality  traits  that  facili- 
tated the  successes  of  his  father.  He,  too,  was  affable  and  gregarious, 
charming  and  witty,  and  "had  a  way"  with  society;  but  he  was  never 
able  to  achieve  recognition  as  an  outstanding  conductor.  In  fact,  the 
contemporary  critical  press  periodically  loosed  upon  him  some  of  the 
most  vitriolic  slander  in  the  history  of  American  criticism,  more  akin 
to  the  style  of  Hanslick  in  his  bigoted  moments  than  what  might  be 
expected  from  tempered  "objective"  American  reporting.  In  retro- 
spect they  seem  so  sadistic  and  abusive  that  they  leave  one  with 
more  respect  for  the  victim  than  for  the  guardians  of  art.  But  rival 
claims  were  at  stake.  Newspapers  and  vested  interests  of  various 
types,  the  prestige  of  social  cliques,  personal  reputations— all  had  a 
share  in  the  fate  of  musical  personalities.  Polite  criticism,  much  less 
objective  and  scholarly  evaluation,  could  not  thrive  in  the  no  man's 
land  between  such  contending  forces. 

The  Symphony  Society  pursued  a  checkered  and  clearly  oppor- 
tunistic career.  Not  onlv  were  concerts  suspended  between  1898  and 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  73 

1903,  but  the  orchestra  was  organized  along  different  lines  at  dif- 
ferent times.  In  the  early  years  (1 878-1905)  the  number  of  concerts 
usually  numbered  only  six  pairs,  the  maintenance  fund  was  relatively 
small,  and  the  orchestral  activity  made  only  a  small  demand  upon  the 
musicians.  After  Theodore  Thomas  had  finally  and  permanently 
left  New  York  for  Chicago  (1891),  Damrosch,  with  the  aid  of  Car- 
negie, Vanderbilt,  Rockefeller,  Morgan,  and  others,  strengthened  the 
orchestra  by  importing  Adolf  Brodsky  as  concertmaster  and  Anton 
Hekking  as  cellist,  and  establishing  daily  rehearsals.  It  prominently 
advertised  itself  as  the  "only  permanent  orchestra  in  New  York." 
Unfortunately,  the  guarantee  fund  expired  after  a  few  years  and  in 
1898  the  concerts  were  abandoned. 

In  1902,  a  group  of  philanthropists  extended  an  offer  to  the  co- 
operative Philharmonic  orchestra  designed  to  reorganize  its  system 
and  presumably  to  turn  the  baton  over  to  Walter  Damrosch  who 
had  conducted  it  in  the  season  1902-03.  When  the  offer  was  rejected, 
this  group  of  patrons  aided  Damrosch  in  reorganizing  the  New  York 
Symphony  Orchestra.  The  orchestra  passed  through  a  series  of  re- 
organizations (in  1903  and  in  1907)  by  which  the  principal  members 
were  eventually  placed  on  a  fixed  season  salary— establishing  it  to  all 
intents  as  the  characteristic  "permanent  orchestra"  of  the  time.  In 
19 14,  Henry  Harkness  Flagler,  millionaire  oil  magnate,  who  with 
other  donors  had  already  carried  a  large  portion  of  the  financial  bur- 
den, now  determined  to  assume  the  complete  responsibility  up  to  a 
maximum  guarantee  of  $100,000  per  year. 

It  was  in  the  subsequent  period  that  Walter  reached  the  pinnacle 
of  his  entire  career.  The  number  of  concerts  increased  to  as  many  as 
forty  or  more  on  the  regular  subscription  series.  He  toured  the 
country,  emulating  the  barnstorming  activities  of  Theodore  Thomas 
of  several  decades  previously.  The  orchestra  was  available  for  hire- 
as  was  the  custom  then  with  the  best  symphony  orchestras  in  Europe 
—for  accompaniment  to  solo  recitalists,  and  for  any  type  of  public 
occasion.  His  concerts  were  presented  in  Aeolian  Hall  (on  Forty-sec- 
ond Street,  between  Fifth  and  Sixth  Avenues),  in  Carnegie  Hall,  as 
well  as  in  the  large  auditorium  of  Mecca  Temple  (later  the  City 
Center). 

He  led  an  exceedingly  busy  life  here  and  abroad.  In  1920,  now 


74  THE    AMERICAN    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

sponsored  by  his  friend  Flagler  to  the  extent  of  $250,000,  the  New 
York  Symphony  of  about  ninety  members  toured  the  major  Euro- 
pean cities  of  our  country's  late  political  allies,  where  he  was  openly 
envied  for  his  fabulous  private  support. 

His  lectures  on  musical  topics  were  always  popular  with  certain 
segments  of  society.  He  imported  distinguished  musicians  for  his  or- 
chestra, introduced  many  conductors  as  his  guests  to  American  audi- 
ences, and  offered  a  repertoire  which  was  much  more  imaginative 
and  progressive  than  that  of  the  antiquated  Philharmonic.  It  is  no 
detraction  to  suggest  that  the  foreign  guest  conductors— Albert 
Coates,  Bruno  Walter,  Klemperer,  Goossens,  Golschmann— were  de- 
signed as  counterattractions  to  Mengelberg,  who  was  then  mesmer- 
izing the  enlightened  audience  of  the  rival  Philharmonic. 

Whatever  one  may  say  of  his  musicianship,  his  casual  and  easy- 
going procedures  as  conductor,  his  limited  comprehension  of  certain 
masterpieces,  his  lackadaisical  rehearsals,  or  awkward  beat,  Damrosch 
nevertheless  ranks  next  to  Thomas  in  his  permanent  contributions  to 
the  cause  of  music  in  America  during  its  pioneer  and  immature  period. 
He  toured  almost  as  much  as  did  Thomas,  he— more  than  Thomas- 
was  instrumental  in  mobilizing  wealth  to  his  support.  He  was  an  edu- 
cator, lecturer,  and  impresario  outside  the  concert  hall,  a  field  in 
which  Thomas  was  exceedingly  awkward.  iMoreover,  he  conducted 
and  toured  successfully  with  opera  troupes,  an  area  which  Thomas 
did  not  cultivate  except  for  his  disastrous  fling  with  the  American 
Opera  Company. 

Although  critics  jibed  at  his  propensity  for  didactic  remarks  on 
his  concert  novelties,  there  is  no  question  that  these  contributed 
much  toward  keeping  the  audience  in  good  humor,  creating  in  many 
patrons  an  attitude  of  friendly  experimentalism  toward  novelties  that 
the  austere  and  authoritative  take-it-or-leave-it  attitude  of  the  dis- 
ciplined Thomas  had  never  achieved.  To  Europeans— whose  lan- 
guages he  spoke— he  was  the  "dean"  of  American  conductors  and 
was  honored  accordingly.  He  was  one  of  the  leading  spirits  in  the 
establishment  of  the  American  conservatory  at  Fontainebleau, 
opened  in  1921,  which  became  the  training  center  for  scores  of 
Americans.  It  attracted  many  of  the  most  successful  American  com- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  75 

posers,  who  received  their  theoretical  training  from  Mile.  Nadia 
Boulanger,  to  the  great  enrichment  of  American  creative  music. 

By  1927,  many  factors  conspired  to  prepare  Damrosch  for  re- 
tirement from  active  orchestral  duties.  The  competition  between  the 
"second-best"  Symphony  Orchestra  and  the  Philharmonic,  which 
had  recently  waxed  in  prestige,  was  becoming  more  and  more  costly, 
however  salutary  it  might  have  been  for  the  advancement  of  music. 
The  merger  of  these  orchestras,  to  conserve  the  prestige  and  tradi- 
tions of  both,  was  a  constantly  recurring  rumor,  and  it  was  certain 
that  Damrosch,  now  sixty-five  years  of  age  and  with  a  less  than 
unanimous  estimate  of  his  genius,  could  not  hope  to  head  the  new 
body,  especially  in  view  of  the  sensational  accomplishments  of  Tos- 
canini  and  Mengelberg  with  the  reconstructed  Philharmonic. 

But  he  still  deserved  some  homage.  In  March,  1927,  a  grand  cere- 
monial concert  was  instituted  in  his  honor,  in  which  both  the  Phil- 
harmonic and  the  Symphony  Orchestra  participated,  under  the 
direction  of  Fritz  Busch  and  Furtwangler,  respectively  the  guests  of 
the  two  orchestras.  In  reply  to  the  remarks  of  Ossip  Gabrilowitsch, 
who  presented  to  the  guest  of  honor  a  silver  smoking  set  on  behalf 
of  the  conductor  colleagues  of  the  nation,  Damrosch  acknowledged 
that  he  was  tired  of  the  labor  and  routine  of  a  permanent  conductor 
—he  would  henceforth  be  a  guest  conductor  and  "let  the  other  fel- 
low do  the  rehearsing."  22 

Though  the  orchestra  continued  its  existence  another  year  to  fill 
out  the  half  century,  the  plans  for  the  merger  went  on  apace.  The 
exhilarating  period  of  competition  between  Thomas  and  Damrosch 
was  long  past;  the  subsequent  benefits  of  that  competition  between 
the  rivals  had  been  harvested  abundantly.  But  competition  can  also 
be  wasteful  and  expensive,  and  the  fruits  of  this  competition  had  at 
last  become  too  costly. 

After  one  more  year  of  concerts,  presided  over  by  nine  guests, 
including  Damrosch,  the  orchestra  ended  its  fifty-year  existence  in 
a  nominal  merger  with  its  great  rival,  in  which  only  a  small  quota  of 
personnel  was  actually  absorbed,  leaving  the  great  majority  to  re- 
enter the  crowded  labor  market.  Mr.  Damrosch  continued  his  pro- 
fessional activity  by  becoming  the  musical  consultant  of  the  National 
Broadcasting  Company,  and  for  some  years  conducted  its  children's 


j6  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

symphonic  hour.  Then  he  went  into  quiet  retirement.  He  died  De- 
cember 23,  1950. 

REPERTOIRE  The  Symphony  orchestra,  playing  side 
by  side  with  the  New  York  Philharmonic  during  its  entire  career, 
catered  to  a  different  audience  and  displayed  many  symptomatic 
differences  from  its  neighbor.  The  New  York  Symphony  took  its 
competitive  status  much  more  seriously  and  therefore  was  more  en- 
terprising in  its  repertoire  than  was  its  venerable  rival. 

Walter  Damrosch  gave  the  Germans  a  cold  shoulder,  but 
warmed  up  to  the  French— exactly  the  reverse  of  the  policy  of  the 
Philharmonic.  Though  his  own  personal  background  was  German, 
he  had  shown,  even  before  World  War  I,  a  fashionable  affinity  for 
the  less  hackneyed  Gallic  composers,  Franck,  Ravel,  Debussy, 
d'Indy,  Berlioz,  some  of  whom  he  cultivated  earlier  and  more  gen- 
erously than  did  his  unimaginative  rival.  During  the  war,  he  was  as 
French  as  was  Boston  with  Rabaud  and  Monteux.  He  also  espoused 
Rachmaninoff  and  Scriabin  more  liberally  than  any  other  orchestra. 
Nor  were  the  English  neglected,  with  Elgar  a  special  favorite. 

There  was  something  of  the  showman  and  exhibitionist  in  Dam- 
rosch—not  the  brash  and  vulgar  brand,  but  rather  calculated,  piquant, 
sly,  and  humorous.  In  the  twenties  he  offered  to  the  public,  which 
always  loves  a  contest,  several  annual  concerts  of  "A4odern  Music- 
Pleasant  and  Unpleasant"  in  which  Honegger,  Milhaud,  Copland, 
and  others  could  compete  in  the  "open  market"  with  the  traditional 
masters.  In  1909,  he  boldly  presented  a  double-header— the  Ninth 
Symphony  performed  twice  in  one  evening  with  fifteen  minutes  in- 
termission as  Biilow  had  done  in  Berlin  in  1889.  The  "quartet"  con- 
sisted of  sixteen  voices,  stationed  on  a  raised  platform  in  the  midst 
of  the  orchestra.  It  is  reported  that  many  of  the  audience  remained 
for  both  performances. 

At  the  time  when  jazz  was  a  category  of  marginal  respectability 
from  the  other  side  of  the  railroad  tracks,  but  had  started  to  influ- 
ence the  French  moderns  and  to  infiltrate  the  musical  journals,  Dam- 
rosch commissioned  George  Gershwin  to  compose  a  piano  concerto, 
which  he  produced  during  the  season  1925-26.  Taking  this  flyer  in 
what  had  been  shortly  before  a  risque  area,  Damrosch  suggested  that 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  77 

the  "musicians,  in  their  attitude  toward  jazz,  were  behaving  like  the 
cat  hovering  around  a  saucer  of  hot  milk,  waiting  for  it  to  cool."  He 
introduced  other  miscellaneous  novelties  without  too  much  offense 
or  complaint:  Sibelius,  Bloch,  Bruckner,  Schoenberg— always  with 
tactful  stage  remarks;  and  it  was  under  his  auspices  that  many  sub- 
sequently prominent  conductors  made  their  American  debut:  Wal- 
ter, Klemperer,  Coates,  and  Golschmann. 

In  the  fifty-year  history  of  the  Symphony  Society  about  seventy- 
five  compositions  appeared  on  the  program  "for  the  first  time  in 
America,"  and  an  equally  large  number  were  described  as  "new," 
which  in  many  cases  meant  a  world  premiere.  In  his  first  ten  years, 
Leopold  Damrosch  presented  more  than  a  dozen  new  works,  in- 
cluding Dvorak's  Slavonic  Rhapsodies  and  new  things  of  Berlioz, 
Raff,  and  Rubinstein.  Besides  Gershwin,  Walter  offered  new  works 
of  the  Americans  Copland,  Taylor,  Dubensky,  Hanson,  Hadley, 
Hill,  and  a  half  dozen  others.  The  "first"  for  Sibelius  was  Tapiola 
and  for  Rachmaninoff,  the  Third  Piano  Concerto.  Tschaikowsky's 
Pathetique  received  its  American  premiere  March  16,  1894.  There 
were  also  many  "firsts"  for  the  British:  Hoists'  Egdon  Heath,  sev- 
eral from  Elgar,  Bantock,  Vaughan  Williams,  and  Goossens.  Strauss, 
although  on  the  average  conspicuously  low  in  the  Society's  favor, 
had  two  "firsts":  Macbeth  and  the  Prelude  to  Act  II  of  Guntram. 

If  unfriendly  observers  have  met  these  innovations  in  caustic 
manner,  at  the  time  of  the  merger,  many  concert  patrons  feared  that 
they  were  on  the  threshold  of  a  less  exciting  if  not  a  positively  dull 
season.  Damrosch  was  in  many  ways  a  prototype  of  Stokowski,  much 
more  subtle  and  genial,  but  arousing  in  many  of  his  followers  the 
same  anxious  expectancy  and  stimulating  satisfaction. 

Though  proclaiming  his  Americanism,  his  contribution  to  Amer- 
ican music  was  modest  when  compared  to  that  of  Chicago  and  Bos- 
ton. It  should  be  recalled,  however,  that  the  American  musical  lobby 
was  then  not  as  strong  as  it  was  later.  Since  there  were  then  far 
fewer  American  composers,  it  was  not  the  accepted,  much  less  the 
required,  policy  to  gratify  their  urge  for  public  performances.  How- 
ever, when  in  1920  Damrosch  led  the  first  "conducted  tour"  of  an 
American  orchestra  abroad,  he  was  accompanied  by  John  Powell, 


jS  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

American  pianist,  and  Albert  Spalding,  American  violinist— a  consid- 
erate gesture  which  Toscanini  did  not  emulate  in  1930,  when  he 
toured  Europe  with  the  Philharmonic-Symphony  without  a  single 
page  of  American  music  in  his  library. 

The  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra  ( 1881 ) 

In  the  spring  of  1881,  Boston  was  startled  at  the  casual  omnipotence 
lurking  in  the  announcement  of  Henry  L.  Higginson  entitled  "In  re 
the  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra."  The  Boston  financier  therein 
proclaimed  his  resolve  "to  hire  an  orchestra  of  sixty  men  and  a 
conductor,  paying  them  all  by  the  year"  and  anticipating  a  "deficit 
of  $50,000,  for  which  $1,000,000  would  be  needed  in  principal," 
which  principal  he  of  course  intended  to  provide.23 

Whether  he  then  realized  it  or  not,  by  this  action  Mr.  Higginson 
had  set  the  general  pattern  of  financial  support  of  all  first-class 
orchestras  for  the  next  half  a  century.  Not  until  an  orchestra  was 
granted  the  benefit  of  adequate  private  aid  to  supplement  the  insuf- 
ficiencies of  the  box  office,  could  it  achieve  the  highest  standard  of 
artistic  excellence.  In  this  sense,  the  Boston  orchestra  was  the  pioneer 
"permanent"  orchestra  in  the  United  States,  founded  at  a  time  when 
the  newly  rich  of  New  York  were  about  to  build  the  Metropolitan 
Opera  House,  and  the  Handel  and  Haydn  Society  of  Boston  had 
reached  maturity  in  vocal  music.  Without  detracting  from  the  bril- 
liance of  the  innovation,  still  such  innovations  do  not  come  "out 
of  the  blue."  There  is  a  law  of  continuity  in  social  affairs,  as  in  evolu- 
tionary biology,  to  which  all  events  conform.  What,  then,  was  the 
social  climate  which  was  so  propitious  for  the  new  venture? 

Boston  had  never  been  without  its  music.  The  early  influence  of 
Gottlieb  Graupner,  who  is  generally  credited  with  founding  Amer- 
ica's first  serious  orchestra,  cannot  well  be  overestimated.  Having 
played  under  Haydn  in  the  Salomon  orchestra  of  London  (1790-91 ), 
this  versatile  musician  and  publisher  brought  to  America  a  taste  for 
the  current  continental  repertoire  and,  what  is  more  important, 
implemented  it.  His  Philo-Harmonic  orchestra  of  fifteen  to  twentv 
members  was  as  rudimentary  as  the  cultural  frontier  that  nourished 
it.  But  it  cooperated  with  the  Handel  and  Haydn  Society,  presented 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  79 

concerts  in  annual  series  between  18 10  (?)  and  1824,  and  was  in  its 
way,  a  permanent  orchestra  with  a  permanent  conductor. 

Various  orchestras  followed,  which  the  pedantic  historian  could 
enumerate,  of  which  the  more  important  were  the  Musical  Fund 
Society  (1847-55),  the  Philharmonic  orchestra  (1855-63),  and  the 
Harvard  iMusical  Association,  founded  in  1837  for  the  general  ad- 
vancement of  music,  but  more  directly  responsible  for  the  orchestral 
series  of  1865-81. 

The  Musical  Fund  Society,  composed  of  about  sixty  musicians, 
was  devoted  to  the  higher  type  of  symphonies  and  overtures.  Ac- 
cording to  Divighfs  Journal  (1852),  "a  band  much  larger  would 
fall  into  the  modern  monster  category."  The  Philharmonic  suc- 
cumbed to  the  distractions  of  the  Civil  War.  After  hostilities  had 
ceased,  the  Harvard  alumni  undertook  the  responsibility  for  the 
concerts  which  were  to  "appeal  to  persons  of  taste,"  and  finally 
withdrew  when  Higginson  organized  his  orchestra. 

Outside  orchestras  also  exerted  their  impact  on  the  taste  and 
ideals  of  the  Boston  public.  Besides  the  immigrant  Germania  orches- 
tra, which  made  Boston  its  adopted  home  while  touring  the  country 
between  1848  and  1854,  the  most  sensational  jolt  to  local  mediocrity 
was  the  Theodore  Thomas  Orchestra  of  New  York,  which  made 
its  maiden  appearance  in  Boston  in  1869.  While  the  critic  was  lament- 
ing over  the  local  Association  concert  that  "a  dozen  members  were 
absent  from  the  concert"  because  of  "other  duties,"  he  could  glow- 
ingly describe  the  Thomas  concert  which  manifested  "such  pure  and 
brilliant  intonation,  perfect  ensemble  and  tone  color,  such  sure  attack 
and  vital  unity  in  violins,  all  bowing  alike."  24  When  things  were 
looking  drearv  in  Boston,  the  Thomas  orchestra  exerted  a  quicken- 
ing effect  upon  the  orchestra  of  the  Harvard  Musical  Association. 
Carl  Zerrahn,  the  conductor,  even  imitated  Thomas'  seating  order, 
by  grouping  the  cellos  together  in  a  solid  body  in  middle  front,  the 
basses  behind  them,  and  the  wind  band— raised  in  two  long  rows 
above— in  the  extreme  rear.  But  within  a  short  time,  the  energy  of 
this  fillip  was  dissipated,  and  musical  affairs  were  again  at  low  ebb. 
Anticipating  the  new  era  in  orchestral  finance,  the  editor  of  the  new 
Boston  Musical  Herald,  in  its  maiden  issue,  Januarv,  1880,  had  al- 
ready wistfully  opined: 


80  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Considering  the  great  value  of  the  existence  of  a  permanent  (musical) 
organization  to  the  city,  would  it  not  be  well  for  wealthy  and  public- 
spirited  friends  of  music  to  assure  its  continued  success  by  the  establish- 
ment of  a  guarantee  fund,  similar  to  that  of  the  Handel  and  Haydn  So- 
ciety for  its  triennial  festivals? 

Higginson,  who  had  been  a  music  student  in  Vienna,  was  well 
aware  what  a  paternalistic  government  could  accomplish.  However, 
in  this  country,  according  to  his  creed,  this  function  should  devolve 
upon  paternalistic  capitalism,  through  the  efforts  of  those  who  had 
been  financially  successful.  His  new  administrative  arrangement 
made  the  orchestra  member  a  full-time  employee,  engaged  for  the 
purpose  of  creating  music,  which  would  then  be  resold  to  the  public, 
of  course  at  considerable  loss,  by  the  philanthropically-minded  em- 
ployer. Although  this  was  modestly  considered  an  experimental 
undertaking,  it  is  remarkable  how  little  the  continuing  organization 
of  the  orchestra,  sustained  by  Higginson  for  thirty-seven  years, 
deviated  from  the  formula  outlined  in  the  prospectus  which  had 
issued  in  the  spring  of  1881,  Minerva-like,  in  full  perfection  from 
his  fertile  brain.  The  principal  provisions  were: 

(1)  conductor  and  musicians  to  be  engaged  at  a  contractual  season 
salary 

(2)  virtually  full-time  seasonal  employment  of  the  musicians  and  the 
restriction  of  their  outside  engagements  to  those  which  are  com- 
patible with  the  priority  of  the  orchestra 

(3)  low  admission  prices 

(4)  full  season  of  weekly  concerts 

(5)  permanent  orchestra,  for  an  indefinite  period  in  the  future 

(6)  music  of  the  highest  type 

(7)  conductor  to  be  solely  responsible  for  the  artistic  direction  of  the 
concerts 

Pathbreaking  as  was  this  economic  solution,  the  musical  ideals 
of  the  community  had  been  more  or  less  well  established  by  a  com- 
bination of  forces.  The  programs  of  the  Harvard  Musical  Association 
were  of  high  order  though  execution  was  deficient  as  compared  to 
Theodore  Thomas'  models  of  disciplined  performance.  John  S. 
Dwight,  who  founded  his  Journal  in  1852,  had  waged  critical  battles 
for  Bach,  Mozart,  and  the  classical  composers,  and  was  passionately 
interested  in  the  elevation  of  taste.  The  city  had  genteel  traditions 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  81 

to  uphold,  and  was  moreover  a  metropolis  of  more  than  400,000, 
with  a  homogeneity  of  population  in  sharp  contrast  to  polyglot  New 
York.  Further,  the  primacy  of  Boston  culture  was  at  stake.  D wight, 
in  his  Journal  of  September,  1880,  lamented:  "We  have  a  Hall,  an 
Organ,  and  an  Art  Museum.  Now  we  want  an  orchestra.  .  .  .  We 
are  falling  behind  New  York.  We  will  become  provincial  without 
it!"  The  audience  was  therefore  willing  and  expectant,  and  from 
the  very  first  concert  enthusiastic.  Some  had  feared  that  the  "com- 
paratively low  price  of  admissions  would  give  the  audience  a 
'lyceum'  cast,  but  such  proved  not  the  case.  The  assemblage  at  the 
first  concerts  was  one  representative  of  our  foremost  patrons  of 
music  and  such  as  an  oratorio,  an  Italian  opera,  or  a  Thomas  concert 
could  attract."  25  It  is  therefore  evident  that  Higginson  supplied 
merely  the  keystone— a  favorable  economic  ideology  and  the  re- 
sources—to a  structure  that  was  all  but  complete. 

The  conductor  entrusted  with  the  launching  of  this  new  enter- 
prise was  the  thirty-one-year-old,  currently  popular  German  bari- 
tone and  composer,  Georg  Henschel,  whose  appointment  had  been 
occasioned  by  his  temporary  presence  in  Boston.  He  had,  for  the 
moment  at  least,  produced  a  sensation  by  his  energetic  conducting 
of  his  own  Overture  with  the  orchestra  of  the  Harvard  Musical 
Association,  and  it  was  he  who  was  invited  by  Higginson  to  form 
the  new  orchestra,  at  a  salary  of  $10,000  per  season. 

As  might  have  been— and  was— expected,  the  sudden  catapulting 
of  a  young,  untried,  foreign  artist  into  such  a  position  of  prominence 
evoked  bitter  complaints  from  the  displaced  and  aggrieved  old  guard 
that  had  been  so  loyal  to  Zerrahn,  Listemann,  and  other  local  con- 
ductors "who  have  devoted  their  lives  to  Boston  music  and  now 
find  themselves  without  orchestras."  By  no  means  an  experienced 
and  "routined"  conductor,  this  vocalist  was  heavily  burdened  not 
only  with  the  acquisition  of  a  new  accomplishment,  but  also  with  the 
problems  of  public  relations.  The  critical  press,  annoyed  at  the  adu- 
lation received  by  the  "fair-haired"  novitiate,  found  it  comforting 
to  remind  the  new  order:  "We  have  had  other  conductors  in  Boston, 
and  good  ones."  The  Home  Journal  editorialized:  "While  we  hail 
the  new  star,  let  us  not  forget  the  others  who  have  brightened  our 
musical  horizon  for  many  years." 


82  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

The  benevolent  intention  of  marketing  music  at  a  loss  brought 
in  its  train  the  criticism  that  the  cut-rate  system  was  undercutting 
the  unsubsidized  concert  activities,  thereby  giving  the  public  false 
norms  of  the  financial  value  of  musical  services.  But  the  near  monop- 
oly in  musical  affairs  that  wealth  and  skill  conferred  upon  the  new 
orchestra  was  partly  mitigated  by  Higginson's  considerate  policy  of 
employing  almost  exclusively  local  musicians  in  order  to  avoid  of- 
fense to  those  who  had  labored  unselfishly  for  years  in  the  unpro- 
ductive vineyard.  In  the  relentless  pursuit  of  perfection  by  both 
management  and  conductors,  such  delicate  gestures  of  sentiment 
were  soon  to  become  an  obsolete  virtue.  The  lesson  was  soon  learned 
that,  if  it  was  to  achieve,  an  orchestra  could  never  be  local,  excepting 
in  name;  for,  like  a  baseball  team,  which  similarly  evokes  its  due 
share  of  civic  enthusiasm,  it  was  bound  to  seek  its  players  in  the 
open  market,  without  regard  to  regional  sentiment. 

Henschel's  inexperience,  his  unconventional  tempi  in  some  of 
the  classics,  his  vigorous,  bombastic,  "drum-major  flourish,"  the 
constitution  of  some  of  his  programs,  and  the  inability  of  the  band 
to  submit  itself  to  an  authoritative  beat— all  drew  forth  major  critical 
assaults.  The  musicians  were  frequently  preoccupied  with  many 
other  musical  functions  of  a  less  noble  sort,  they  played  under  other 
conductors,  and  the  priority  of  the  new  orchestra  could  not  be  en- 
forced. All  members  from  percussion  to  concertmaster  were  paid 
alike:  six  dollars  per  concert,  and  three  dollars  per  rehearsal,  of 
which  there  were  three.  As  gratifying  as  was  Henschel's  initial 
success  during  his  three  years'  tenure,  it  was  evident  that  the  orches- 
tra had  not  been  much  more  than  a  loose  and  easy-going  aggregation. 
Higginson  demanded  more. 

When  Viennese  Wilhelm  Gericke,  Henschel's  successor,  replaced 
concertmaster  Listemann  with  twenty-year-old  Franz  Kneisel  of 
Bucharest  and  Berlin,  and  added  to  his  ensemble  almost  a  score  of 
other  European  importations,  there  was  no  doubt  among  the  jolted 
players  and  patrons  that  a  new  order  was  established,  not  only  in 
the  matter  of  personnel  but  also,  as  they  were  soon  to  discover,  in 
methods  of  work  and  discipline.  Prophetically  enough,  the  editor 
of  the  American  Musician  advanced  his  considered  opinion  that  "the 
Gericke  firings  would  not  have  happened  if  the  musicians  had  been 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  83 

unionized  as  they  are  in  New  York."  Gericke  culled  out  the  dead- 
wood  which,  either  because  of  technical  deterioration,  superannua- 
tion, or  personal  insubordination,  became  an  impediment  to  the  real- 
ization of  his  artistic  ideals.  Contractual  provisions  were  tightened. 
Nonattendance  and  tardiness  were  subject  to  "liquidated  damages, 
non-arrival  of  steam  or  horse  cars  not  excusing  delay  in  arrival."  To 
make  possible  longer  seasons  and  more  enticing  contracts  for  those 
who  were  to  come  from  afar  to  cast  their  professional  lot  in  a  new 
home,  tours  as  far  west  as  St.  Louis  were  undertaken,  and  spring 
Promenade  series  were  introduced. 

To  him  who  succeeds,  much  is  forgiven.  The  success  of  the 
orchestra  in  Philadelphia  and  in  New  York,  as  well  as  at  home,  was 
unequivocal.  If  Gericke's  style  of  conducting  was  cold  and  without 
dramatic  force,  the  playing  was  for  the  first  time  precise  and  well 
coached.  Gericke  had  "made"  the  orchestra,  but  it  had  been  a  hard 
pull.  He  had  to  establish  a  personal  discipline  to  which  Americans 
were  not  accustomed;  and  the  patrons  sometimes  literally  walked  out 
on  his  severely  classic  programs.  He  had  conscientiously  subjected 
himself  to  the  most  grueling  duties,  and  he  suffered  unceasingly  from 
the  pangs  of  homesickness.  When  he  had  arrived  in  Boston,  "his 
English  lasted  about  fifteen  seconds"  and  continued  as  a  handicap 
in  making  friendships  here.  He  was  ready  for  a  rest,  and  could  not 
be  induced  to  remain  longer  than  five  years.  He  departed  from  "cool 
and  cultured  Boston,"  according  to  L.  C.  Elson,  "amid  floral  tributes 
and  gyrations  of  hats  and  handkerchiefs"  and  an  auf  wiedersehn. 

The  pattern  of  turning  to  Europe,  that  almost  inexhaustible  arse- 
nal of  musical  talent,  was  now  firmly  set,  and  this  time  (1889)  Hig- 
ginson  enticed  to  his  organization  the  First  Conductor  of  the 
Leipzig  Opera,  Arthur  Nikisch,  then  thirty-four  years  old,  but 
already  a  mature  conductor  of  more  than  ten  years'  experience. 
Nikisch  was  an  adherent  of  the  Liszt- Wagner-Billow  school  of  con- 
ducting which  deliberately  set  itself  off  from  the  metronomic  and 
brittle  Mendelssohnian  tradition  established  at  the  Gewandhaus. 
Gericke,  the  technician,  was  now  to  be  replaced  by  Nikisch,  the 
poet,  who  would  enliven  the  strong  and  well-articulated  skeleton  of 
Gericke's  making  with  the  flesh  and  blood  of  full  romantic  vividness. 

Contemporary  critical  reports  leave  us  a  rather  accurate  portrayal 


84  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

of  this  exotic  figure,  the  first  conductor  in  America  to  display  the 
major  symptoms  of  the  "prima-donna."  A  man  of  distinguished 
appearance  enhanced  by  sartorial  elegance  and  a  well-trimmed  beard, 
he  slowly  bestrode  the  stage,  his  black  forelock  vibrating  over  his 
forehead.  To  many  visual-minded  auditors  he  was  undoubtedly  a 
great  conductor  even  before  he  had  raised  his  baton.  His  conducting 
from  memory,  daringly  novel  in  that  day;  and  the  pulsating  rhythms 
of  his  flashing  white  cuffs,  and  other  personal  idiosyncrasies,  so 
different  from  the  ramrod  dignity  of  his  predecessor,  inevitably  drew 
upon  his  head  the  epithet  of  "poseur."  By  his  ability  to  get  himself 
talked  about,  he  may  have  been  among  the  first,  but  certainly  not 
the  last,  to  be  accused  of  diverting  public  interest  from  the  music 
to  the  conductor  thereof. 

But  Nikisch  also  commanded  compensating  nonvirtuoso  traits 
which  contributed  much  to  his  success.  He  never  lost  his  temper; 
he  was  gently  persuasive  rather  than  dictatorial  with  his  men  and 
was  loved  and  respected  by  them.  His  gestures,  although  emphatic, 
were  restrained  and  consciously  interpretative  rather  than  effusive. 
Finally,  he  lacked  that  passion  for  precision  of  rendition  and  driving 
discipline  which  often  harasses  the  players  to  the  limits  of  their 
endurance. 

But  such  a  man  could  not  expect  to  avoid  controversy.  There 
were  many  who  warned  that  the  spit  and  polish  of  the  old  Gericke 
machine  was  going  to  ruin.  One  lesser  known  critic,  distinguished 
for  his  uninhibited  language,  pronounced  the  new  conductor  down- 
right incompetent.  Nikisch  soon  divided  the  city  into  two  factions, 
those  who  missed  the  predictable  fidelity  which  Gericke  had  culti- 
vated for  them,  and  those  who  revelled  in  the  fire  and  drama  and 
spontaneity  of  his  successor. 

Classicists  described  him  as  given  to  erratic  tempi,  uncontrolled 
rubatos,  extremes  in  slow  and  rapid  rhythms,  exaggerated  pianissimos 
and  bombastic  outbursts  of  mere  sound  and  fury.  He  was  at  the  same 
time  subtly  poetic  and  frankly  bizarre,  he  modernized  the  classics, 
and  "denuded  Beethoven  of  all  dignity."  In  his  first  season  he  caused 
a  sensation  by  slowly  declaiming  the  opening  measures  of  Beetho- 
ven's Fifth,  and  picking  up  the  tempo  on  the  sixth  measure.26 

In  the  Schumann  Spring  Symphony,  as  one  critic  averred: 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  85 

the  sparkling  violin  passages  are  so  heavily  weighted  by  Nikisch  with 
minute  nuances  in  the  form  of  frequent  ritartandos  and  unexpected  ac- 
cents, that  the  flow  of  these  rippling  figures  is  completely  arrested,  and 
they  nearly  lose  their  sparkle. 

Again: 

the  opening  movement  of  the  Freischiitz  overture  was  taken  at  so  slow  a 
pace  that  the  rhythm  suffered  and  the  quartet  of  horns  sustained  their 
tones  with  difficulty,  or  in  other  words,  the  melos  did  not  come  out.27 

Philip  Hale,  the  most  influential  critic  in  Boston,  bemoaned  the 

undue  passion  in  comparatively  passionless  melody.  It  is  seldom  .  .  . 
under  Mr.  Nikisch,  that  you  have  any  theme  given  in  frank  simplicity; 
that  a  piano  is  observed  strictly  for  more  than  two  or  three  consecutive 
measures.  Thus  in  a  symphony  of  Mozart  or  Haydn,  there  is  almost  con- 
stant overstress  .  .  .  there  is  the  absence  of  repose  demanded  by  the 
spirit  of  the  work.28 

Later,  at  the  Gewandhaus,  the  Leipzig  critics  echoed  similar 
sentiments,  commenting  on  the  "new  tempi"  and  the  "prominence 
given  certain  instruments  when  Nikisch  conducts."  He  "drags  cer- 
tain passages  in  order  to  work  up  to  greater  climaxes."  29  He  was 
also  considered  a  master  of  the  powerful  climax.  A  Berlin  critic 
reported  that  he  took  the  four  measures  of  the  well-known  C  major 
entrance  of  the  Finale  of  Beethoven's  Fifth  in  a  tearing  crescendo 
from  pp  to  fff,  the  effect  of  which  was  inexpressible  in  words.30 

It  is,  however,  quite  understandable  that  some  should  enjoy  as  a 
thrill  what  to  a  staid  and  composed  temperament  would  be  a  shock. 
Krehbiel,  of  New  York,  who  heard  Nikisch  only  periodically,  in 
contrast  to  such  resident  critics  as  Philip  Hale,  asserted  that  Nikisch 
was  of  "the  type  that  put  an  end  to  the  music-box  style  of  interpre- 
tation," who  "with  the  utmost  freedom  in  time  changes,  yet  in  a 
general  way  adheres  to  the  normal  unit  of  measure."  31  One  Boston 
critic  admitted  that  the 

slow  tempo  at  which  he  took  the  opening  measures  of  Fingafs  Cave 
Overture  was  an  innovation,  but  as  it  was  in  entire  harmony  with  his 
conception  of  the  work  he  was  certainly  warranted  in  interpreting  it 
according  to  his  idea  instead  of  blindly  following  the  traditional  read- 
ings.32 


86  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

His  constant  endeavor  was  to  invent  a  new  twist  to  an  old  phrase, 
and  "never  played  a  piece  twice  alike."  The  superb  orchestra  was 
trained  to  follow  his  every  momentary  impulse  with  the  hope  that 
"things  would  click"  in  public.  Sometimes  they  did  not! 

Although  there  are  many  pitfalls  in  retroactive  judgments,  and 
although  it  is  difficult  to  recreate  the  norms  against  which  such  con- 
temporary criticisms  were  written,  such  concrete  descriptions  of  the 
conductor's  interpretation  are  a  rather  clear  indication  of  the  early 
romantic  interpretative  styles  employed  by  Liszt  and  Wagner,  and 
for  which  the  classicist  Weingartner  so  severely  criticized  Bulow.33 
Nikisch  was  representative  of  a  period  which  is  today  obsolete. 
While  personal  readings  still  are  common,  the  range  between  the 
Mendelssohnian  time-beating  and  whimsical  "Biilowisms"  has  been 
very  much  narrowed.  Individual  deviations  have  become  much  more 
subtle— an  inevitable  outgrowth  of  the  very  gradual  but  definite 
development  of  audience  familiarity  with  orchestral  repertoire,  with 
which  drastic  liberties  cannot  be  taken  with  impunity.  The  Wagner 
school,  which  searched  out  and  emphasized  the  melos  in  contradis- 
tinction to  mere  rhythmic  performance,  produced  and  even  encour- 
aged great  license  with  the  dynamics  of  the  written  score.  Its 
extreme  sponsors  evolved  a  kind  of  fluoroscopic  school  of  interpre- 
tative conducting,  in  which  all  the  intimate  inner  details  of  the  score 
were  revealed  with  clinical  clarity.  As  a  Leipzig  critic  remarked  in 
1908:  "Those  who  wish  to  hear  the  click  of  the  metronome  do  not 
like  to  listen  to  Nikisch'  Beethoven."  34  It  was  an  era  of  Sturm  und 
Drang  which  was  later  to  be  transformed  into  a  period  of  mastery 
and  restraint.  It  is  a  significant  chapter  in  the  styles  of  conducting 
as  well  as  in  the  history  of  aesthetic  theory. 

Speaking  broadly,  neither  party  in  the  Boston  situation  was 
happy,  and  Nikisch  departed  abruptly  before  his  five-year  contract 
expired,  leaving  behind  him  the  two  contending  camps  of  adherents 
and  adversaries.  His  last  Boston  concert  provoked  a  hysterical  ova- 
tion to  which  he  responded  in  a  short  speech  of  gratitude  and  apol- 
ogy. Whether  the  critics  drove  him  from  Boston,  as  his  friends 
assert;  or  whether  he  had  contractual  disputes  with  Mr.  Higginson, 
as  contended  by  others;  or  whether,  as  Pfohl,35  his  German  biogra- 
pher, avers,  he  was  fatigued  from  railroad  travel  and  unendurablv 


ARTURO  TOSCANINI 

As  conductor  of  the  Metropolitan  Opera,  the  New  York  Philharmonic- 
Symphony,  and  the  NBC  Symphony  Orchestra  Arturo  Toscanini  is 
commonly  regarded  as  having  attained  the  greatest  heights  in  conduc- 
torial  perfection.  (NBC  Photo) 


A  REUNION  IN  BOSTON,    1 95  I 

Left  to  right:  Pierre  Monteux  (San  Francisco  Symphony);  the  late 
Serge  Koussevitzky  (of  the  Boston  Symphony),  and  Charles  Munch 
(who  had  just  succeeded  him  in  Boston).  (Lenscraft  Photos.  Courtesy 
of  George  E.  Judd,  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra) 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  87 

impatient  with  the  half-baked  culture  in  the  United  States— all  this 
is  immaterial  since  such  eventualities  usually  have  multiple  causes.  In 
any  case,  he  returned  to  Europe  to  enjoy  a  career  of  triumph  and 
adulation  of  a  magnitude  attained  by  few.  He  held  simultaneously 
the  conductorship  of  the  two  finest  orchestras  in  Germany,  the  Ber- 
lin Philharmonic  and  the  Leipzig  Gewandhaus,  and  served  fre- 
quently as  guest  conductor  at  home  and  abroad,  thereby  achieving 
the  picturesque  sobriquet  of  "conductor-on-wheels." 

In  191 2,  after  several  years  of  persistent  rumors  that  he  would 
return  to  Boston,  he  visited  this  country  for  a  triumphal  tour  with 
the  London  Symphony  Orchestra.  In  several  concerts  in  New  York, 
the  houses  were  generally  completely  sold  out.  The  first  night, 
Monday,  April  8,  however,  showed  many  of  the  boxes  unoccupied. 
Some  interpreted  this  as  spite  work  of  the  old  buccaneering  days; 
others  saw  it  as  a  boycott  of  Brahms,  who  was  on  the  program.  The 
real  reason  was,  however,  that  the  first  concert  conflicted  with  the 
"fashion  night"  at  the  "Met,"  whose  patrons  amply  filled  the  seats  of 
the  remaining  Nikisch  appearances.  The  New  York  critics,  who 
always  had  a  good  word  for  the  unrestrained  romanticist  in  his 
Boston  days,  again  exhausted  their  expletives.  But  in  Boston,  Sym- 
phony Hall  was  not  full,  and  Philip  Hale,  who  now  observed  con- 
siderable mellowing  in  Nikisch'  conductorial  style,  still  entertained 
lingering  doubts  about  it  "as  a  steady  diet." 

After  Boston's  failure  to  induce  Gericke  to  return,  and  after 
Theodore  Thomas,  then  in  Chicago,  and  Hans  Richter,  probably  the 
most  celebrated  conductor  in  Europe  at  that  moment,  had  declined, 
the  choice  as  Nikisch'  successor  in  1893  was  Emil  Paur.  He  was  like- 
wise "on  the  romantic  side,"  although  he  lacked  the  polish  and  per- 
sonal magnetism  of  his  predecessor.  Intensely  devoted  to  his  art, 
he  was  less  gregarious,  refusing  to  be  the  social  lion  and  roar  for 
his  money. 

After  five  years  of  Paur's  service,  Boston  turned  again  to  the 
Viennese  classicist  for  whom  Higginson,  himself  a  conservative,  had 
never  quite  lost  his  attachment.  Gericke  remained  for  seven  years. 
But  the  audience  was  no  longer  the  same.  After  having  been  exposed 
to  Nikisch  and  Paur,  it  listened  to  the  old  "efficiency"  with  new  ears. 
It  was  not  long  before  the  critics  found  that  "he  had  grown  cold," 


88  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

that  "he  repressed  the  instruments."  A  dangerous  apathy  began  to 
settle  over  the  audiences.  By  1903,  one  reviewer  observed  that  the 
icy  Gericke  was  "ceasing  to  draw."  Although  publicly  Higginson 
maintained  a  fine  standard  of  correctness  toward  Gericke  by  assur- 
ing him  that  he  could  remain  in  Boston,  privately  he  was  more  than 
happy  to  see  him  depart.  Philip  Hale  cites  Higginson's  personal  com- 
munication in  attesting  to  the  points  of  friction  between  the  conduc- 
tor and  the  philanthropist.  One  of  these  was  Gericke's  refusal  to 
accept  guest  conductors  with  whom  Higginson  had  hoped  to  recoup 
some  of  the  growing  deficits.  The  possessive  Gericke,  on  his  part, 
feared  deterioration  of  the  orchestra  in  the  hands  of  strange  con- 
ductors.30 

With  the  new  century,  the  time  was  propitious  to  strike  a  more 
modern  note.  Boston  had  achieved  a  high  reputation  and  earned  the 
full  praises  of  the  few  foreign  conductors  who  had  been  permitted 
to  preside  on  the  podium.  The  orchestra  was  installed  in  a  new  home, 
Symphony  Hall,  of  excellent  acoustics,  which  was  built  in  1900.  If, 
as  many  people  complained,  it  monopolized  the  musical  scene,  and 
the  usual  miscellany  of  concerts  and  recitals  were  neglected,  it  was 
equally  true  that  the  drawing  power  of  the  orchestra  alone  called 
attention  to  the  city  as  a  musical  center  and  in  its  own  right  attracted 
students  and  achieved  prestige.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that 
the  ambitious  community  should  seek  what  it  had  never  before 
obtained:  a  ranking  conductor,  who  had  already  "arrived."  Nikisch 
himself  now  amply  fulfilled  such  qualifications,  and  there  were  the 
aforesaid  persistent  rumors  of  his  return.  However,  the  final  choice 
was  Dr.  Karl  Muck,  Conductor  of  the  Royal  Opera  in  Berlin  and 
distinguished  Wagner  interpreter,  who  served  brilliantly  in  Boston 
from  1906  to  1 9 14,  with  a  four-year  interlude  filled  by  Max  Fiedler. 

Like  Nikisch,  Muck  was  undemonstrative  and  economical  in 
gesture  on  the  podium;  but  unlike  his  great  compatriot,  Muck  was 
"ever  faithful  to  the  composer,"  and  was  pre-eminently  the  type  of 
conductor  who  does  most  of  his  work  behind  the  scenes  and  during 
the  rehearsal.  He  was  essentially  scholarly,  and  again  unlike  Nikisch, 
Dr.  Muck,  though  some  considered  him  uninspired,  nevertheless 
enjoyed  the  united  approval  and  general  enthusiasm  of  the  Boston 
patrons  and  management.  The  story  of  his  departure  is  interesting 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  89 

and  important,  since  it  demonstrates  that  even  in  Boston,  where 
music  was  cultivated  in  an  ivory  tower  and  protected  from  the 
chilly  winds  of  the  competitive  world,  it  could  not  remain  "above 
the  battle." 

War  was  declared  on  Germany  by  the  United  States  on  April  6, 
19 1 7,  after  a  slow  but  steady  accretion  of  anti-German  sentiment 
following  the  sinking  of  the  Lusitania  in  the  spring  of  1915.  How- 
ever, America  was  hesitant  in  manifesting  these  hostile  feelings  in 
the  concert  hall,  and  for  a  number  of  reasons:  she  was  proud  of  her 
tolerance  and  individual  freedom,  and  was  self-consciously  broad- 
minded;  not  everybody  was  at  first  convinced  of  the  wisdom  of 
American  entry  into  the  war;  German  music  constituted  the  central 
core  of  American  repertoires,  and  it  was  inconceivable  that  it  should 
be  curtailed;  and  finally  the  philosophy  of  the  neutrality  of  art  was 
deep-seated  in  the  aesthetic  thinking  of  the  era.  Philip  Hale,  some 
weeks  after  the  declaration  of  war,  feelingly  epitomized  these  senti- 
ments: "Men  of  various  nationalities  and  various  sympathies,  united 
in  the  purpose  of  maintaining  the  high  reputation  of  the  Boston 
Symphony  orchestra,  knew  in  rehearsals  and  concerts  only  one 
country,  the  great  Republic  of  Art."  37 

The  cruel  fact,  however,  was  incontrovertible:  America  was  in- 
volved in  a  serious  war.  The  dramatic  story  of  this  conductor-friend 
of  the  Kaiser,  which  was  a  blend  of  "spy  scare,"  of  superpatriotism, 
of  sudden  "dislike"  of  German  music,  and  of  obstinate  bungling  of 
public  relations,  has  been  related  many  times.38 

Very  briefly,  the  facts  seem  to  be  as  follows:  After  some  months 
of  sniping  at  Dr.  Muck  and  rumors,  beginning  at  least  as  early  as 
February,  19 16,  that  Muck  was  disloyal  and  even  supplied  informa- 
tion to  the  enemy,  the  patriotic  groups  of  Providence,  R.  I.,  where 
the  orchestra  was  to  appear  in  November,  1917,  determined  to  make 
an  issue  of  his  patriotism  by  demanding  that  he  conduct  the  Star- 
Spangled  Banner.  Higginson,  never  a  person  to  be  intimidated,  re- 
fused to  consider  the  request,  which  turned  out  to  be  an  ineffable 
blunder  for  which  Muck  was  innocently  accused.  However,  in  sub- 
sequent concerts,  the  national  anthem  was  played,  both  in  Boston 
and  other  cities,  and  this  particular  crisis  had  apparently  blown  over. 
Though  the  January  and  February   (191 8)   visits  to  Philadelphia 


9°  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

found  "many  boxes  were  vacant,"  and  some  critics  complained  of 
Muck's  "torpid  rendition  of  the  Star-Spangled  Banner,"  and  though 
he  had  run  into  violent  patriotic  opposition  in  New  York,  it  still 
came  as  a  surprise  when,  in  March,  191 8,  almost  a  year  after  the 
declaration  of  war,  Dr.  Muck  was  suddenly  arrested  and  interned, 
for  reasons  never  officially  made  public.  It  was  informally  alleged 
that  the  charges  were  of  a  personal  nature,  irrelevant  to  the  prose- 
cution of  the  war,  but  that  he  had  preferred  to  accept  political  ar- 
rest to  the  prosecution  of  the  "genuine"  charge.  After  the  armistice 
he  returned  to  his  native  Germany  where  he  pursued  a  long  and  suc- 
cessful career,  and  died  in  1940  at  the  venerable  age  of  eighty  years. 

More  was  implied  in  the  event,  however,  than  a  mere  routine 
shift  in  conductors;  for  the  momentous  social  and  artistic  changes 
trailing  Muck's  departure  constituted  a  veritable  crisis  in  Boston,  and 
indeed  throughout  America.  Mr.  Higginson,  the  sole  source  of 
security  for  thirty-seven  years,  was  now  old,  and  his  finances  so 
shaken  that  at  his  death  (19 19)  it  had  become  impossible  for  him  to 
provide  for  any  endowment  of  the  orchestra,  with  the  exception, 
of  course,  of  his  music  library.  Mr.  E.  B.  Dane  donned  Higginson's 
mantle  and  served  as  the  "good  angel"  to  save  the  orchestra  for  sev- 
eral years.  But  the  best  evidence  that  a  financial  reorganization  was 
imminent  came  in  the  fall  of  1923  with  the  revelation  that  the  aver- 
age annual  deficit  since  Higginson's  retirement  had  been  about 
$100,000  and  now  exceeded  the  capacity  of  the  philanthropists  to 
overcome.  Like  other  cities,  Boston  would  have  to  devise  a  plan  for 
a  broader  base  of  support.  At  that  time  her  list  of  three  hundred 
guarantors  for  the  current  season  was  published,  and  with  it  a  gen- 
eral plea  for  all  citizens  to  join  in  the  cause! 

Another  symptom  of  the  new  era  was  the  shift  of  artistic  orienta- 
tion from  Germany  to  France.  Of  course,  there  had  always  been 
French  music  and  French  musicians,  usually  in  the  woodwind  sec- 
tion, although  it  was  German  music  which  had  evoked  the  sympa- 
thy of  the  Boston  orchestra  as  well  as  that  of  every  other  orchestra 
in  the  United  States.  During  and  immediately  after  the  war,  it  was 
obviously  impossible  to  look  for  Muck's  successor  in  the  accustomed 
places.  Although  sentimental  leanings  were  strong  toward  France, 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  91 

Sir  Henry  Wood,  Rachmaninoff,  and  Toscanini  were  approached. 
Rachmaninoff  declined  (for  the  second  time  since  191 2)  and  nego- 
tiations with  Toscanini  collapsed  before  they  could  be  terminated 
one  way  or  the  other.  After  a  year's  visit  by  Henri  Rabaud,  the 
trustees  selected  Pierre  Monteux  who  had  behind  him  varied  experi- 
ence with  opera,  ballet,  and  orchestra,  and  who  was  destined  to  serve 
the  orchestra  during  the  most  critical  postwar  period  of  19 10-25. 

The  most  severe  shock  resulting  from  the  impact  of  the  chang- 
ing postwar  world  was  the  musicians'  strike  of  1920,  which  grew 
out  of  the  issue  of  unionization.  Seen  in  present-day  perspective,  it 
was  inevitable  that  the  Boston  orchestra,  like  every  other  enterprise, 
would  sooner  or  later  encounter  the  issues  of  management  and  labor 
relations.  The  scale  of  wages  of  the  rank  and  file  in  the  orchestra  was 
admittedly  not  so  favorable  as  formerly.  The  musicians,  however, 
had  accepted  as  compensation  the  prestige  of  membership  in  the 
most  noted  orchestra  in  the  country.  But  the  postwar  rise  in 
cost  of  living  was  now  beginning  to  overtake  the  musicians,  and 
they  accordingly  submitted  a  request  for  wage  readjustments.  Sup- 
ported by  the  local  musicians'  union  in  these  demands,  they  were 
only  following  the  accepted  labor  practices.  Boston,  conservative 
and  isolated,  was  merely  grappling  with  a  question  already  settled 
in  other  communities. 

The  union  had  a  strong  bargaining  position.  Musicians  were 
scarce,  not  only  because  the  European  supply  was  largely  cut  off, 
but  also  because  of  increasing  demands  for  musicians  in  the  new 
symphony  orchestras  then  being  founded  in  the  western  cities,  and 
the  new  symphonic  ensembles  installed  in  the  palatial  motion  picture 
theatres.  Consonant  with  the  principles  firmly  enunciated  by  Mr. 
Higginson  many  times  before,  the  present  board  refused  to  bargain 
collectively,  i.e.,  to  recognize  the  union.  Harassed  by  deficits,  it  fur- 
ther declined  to  consider  the  needed  wage  increases.  The  concert- 
master,  Frederic  Fradkin,  sympathized  with  the  reform  and  joined 
the  union.  As  a  direct  outcome  of  this  gesture,  the  conductor  and  the 
concertmaster  engaged  in  an  altercation  backstage  previous  to  a 
concert  on  March  5,  1920.  The  concertmaster  retaliated  during  the 
concert  by  refusing  to  rise  with  the  orchestra  in  acknowledgment 
of  the  applause,  which  the  conductor  desired  to  share  with  his  men. 


92  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

On  his  dismissal  for  insubordination,  thirty-six  musicians  failed  to 
appear  for  the  Saturday  evening  concert. 

This  was  not  the  first  "strike"  in  the  history  of  the  major  orches- 
tras—Walter Damrosch  had  suffered  a  brief  walkout  in  1893— and,  of 
course,  it  was  by  no  means  the  first  labor  dispute  in  musical  circles— 
but  it  was  by  all  odds  the  most  disastrous  to  the  orchestra  and  costly 
to  the  men  involved.  Although  Boston,  alone  of  all  the  orchestras, 
was  not  unionized,  there  were  still  in  the  country  a  sufficiently  large 
number  of  open-shop  industries  to  create  an  understandable  expecta- 
tion that  the  Boston  orchestra  might  remain  indefinitely  an  exception 
to  the  general  rule.  The  strike  was  broken,  but  the  orchestra  lost 
one-third  of  its  personnel,  mostly  in  the  German  strings,  and  Mon- 
teux  was  faced  with  a  task,  similar  to  that  of  Gericke  forty  years 
previously,  of  building  an  orchestra  almost  anew  and  in  an  atmos- 
phere of  bitter  hostility.  The  consensus  of  opinion  is  that  he  suc- 
ceeded quite  as  well  as  his  illustrious  forebear.  But  if  he  had  led  the 
orchestra  out  of  the  wilderness,  he  was  not  permitted  to  lead  it  into 
the  promised  land.  Monteux  had  gained  the  admiration  of  many 
people  in  Boston,  but  his  New  York  critics  and  audiences  remained 
cool  toward  his  undemonstrative  manner  and  his  French  programs. 

The  harvesting  of  the  fruits  of  the  arduous  spade-work  and  the 
establishment  of  the  Boston  orchestra  on  a  new  level  of  brilliance 
was  to  be  reserved  for  Serge  Koussevitzky,  the  Russian  virtuoso  on 
the  bass  viol.  Koussevitzky  had  had  a  varied  career,  not  only  as 
soloist  in  the  music  centers  of  Europe  (he  had  been  announced  for 
tours  in  the  United  States  although  he  had  never  carried  out  the 
projects),  but  also  as  conductor  and  publisher  in  enterprises  which 
his  personal  means  handsomely  supported.  Known  to  the  American 
musical  press  many  years  before  the  Russian  revolution,  Kussewitzki 
(as  the  name  was  spelled  before  the  adoption  of  the  French  orthog- 
raphy) was  by  191 7  considered  the  most  famous  conductor  of  his 
native  land,  and  was  accordingly  elected  to  head  the  Russian  "Or- 
chestra of  the  State."  Political  events,  however,  prevented  the  actual 
realization  of  this  plan  and  in  1920  he  left  the  Soviet  Union,  settling 
in  France  where  his  Concerts  Koussevitzky  attracted  immediate 
attention.  His  nationality,  his  political  severance  from  the  "despised" 
Soviets,  his  personal  bearing,  and,  of  course,  the  advance  critical 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  93 

notices  of  his  concert  activities— all  made  him  the  logical  candidate 
for  a  community  in  which  the  world-renowned  orchestra  was  the 
center  of  musical  and  social  life. 

During  the  period  of  its  grievous  collapse,  the  Boston  orchestra 
had  suffered  in  national  prestige  while  Stokowski  was  bewitching 
his  public  in  Philadelphia  and  New  York.  Koussevitzky  was  to  re- 
capture its  old  glory,  and  re-establish  the  rivalry  between  Boston 
and  Philadelphia,  annually  fought  out  in  the  arena  of  Carnegie  Hall. 

It  could  not  be  expected  that  there  would  be  unanimity  on  his 
interpretations  of  the  classics  and  on  his  choice  of  modern  works. 
Although  some  felt  the  magnetism  of  his  interpretations,  others 
decried  his  exaggerations  in  tempo  and  romantic  leanings.  "When 
slow  movements  are  played  slower,  Koussevitzky  will  play  them" 
ran  the  parody  on  the  popular  automobile  ad.  However,  before 
many  seasons  of  his  American  career  had  elapsed,  Koussevitzky  was, 
by  common  consent,  included  in  the  trinity  of  America's  Great  with 
Stokowski  and  Toscanini.  His  regime  in  Boston  reached  a  new  high 
in  personal  adulation,  and  before  its  close  he  had  become  a  "living 
legend,"  one  of  the  many  outward  symbols  of  which  are  the  four 
honorary  doctorates  conferred  upon  him  by  as  many  different  uni- 
versities, and  several  biographies  both  reverential  and  critical.39 

It  was  during  his  tenure,  beginning  in  1924,  that  the  dead  hand 
of  the  past  relaxed  its  hold  and  the  union  question  was  finally  settled. 
For  Higginson,  unionization  had  been  a  menace  to  the  vital  principle 
of  artistic  supremacy  which  alone  could  permit  the  prosecution  of 
musical  ideals,  unhampered  by  rules  and  regulations  of  the  union 
order.  The  philanthropist  had  repeatedly  threatened  to  abandon  the 
orchestra  on  that  issue.  But  the  Boston  orchestra  had  long  ceased  to 
be  a  personal  enterprise— an  elongated  shadow  of  its  owner  and 
benefactor.  Even  its  exceptional  musical  excellence  could  no  longer 
justify  its  exemption  from  the  ordinary  process  of  collective  nego- 
tiation which  had  become  standard  practice  in  orchestral  and  indus- 
trial contracts. 

Evolutionary  changes  in  our  economic  order  were  conspiring  to 
render  untenable  the  privileged  position  of  the  Boston  orchestra. 
With  the  union  in  full  control  over  broadcasting  and  recording, 
which  had  become  indispensable  sources  of  revenue;  with  the  cur- 


94  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

rent  custom  of  guest  conductors  and  soloists;  and  with  the  appear- 
ances of  the  orchestra  on  its  tour,  it  was  relatively  easy  by  means 
of  the  boycott  for  the  union  to  engage  in  a  pincer  movement  that 
made  ultimate  surrender  the  only  alternative  to  annihilation.  Simply 
stated,  it  was  impossible  for  a  nonunion  orchestra  to  live  in  a  union- 
ized world.  When,  finally,  James  Caesar  Petrillo  succeeded  to  the 
headship  of  the  Federation  of  Musicians  in  1940,  he  menacingly 
announced  a  fight  to  the  finish.  Capitulation  was  only  a  question  of 
time  and  appropriate  circumstance.  Bruno  Walter  and  Chavez  were 
forbidden  by  Petrillo  to  appear  as  guests;  Howard  Hanson  had  to 
cancel  his  engagement  to  direct  his  own  symphony;  Zimbalist,  Szi- 
geti,  and  Serkin  could  not  accept  invitations  to  perform  with  the 
orchestra.  Financially,  too,  the  orchestra  was  very  vulnerable.  Defi- 
cits were  growing;  concert  halls  were  threatened  with  blacklisting 
for  harboring  the  orchestra  on  tour;  radio  and  recording  were 
banned.  Finally,  after  extended  negotiations  and  some  minor  conces- 
sions on  the  part  of  the  union,  agreements  were  signed  in  December, 
1942. 

Another  important  venture  during  the  Koussevitzky  regime  was 
the  inauguration  of  the  Berkshire  Festival  and  its  attendant  func- 
tions. The  devastation  of  Europe  had  thrown  America  upon  its  own 
resources  in  summer  entertainment,  in  the  training  of  orchestral 
musicians  and  conductors  and  in  their  continuous  employment.  The 
associated  enterprises  of  the  Berkshire  Music  Center  at  Tanglewood 
helped  to  satisfy  these  demands  by  instituting  a  series  of  festival  con- 
certs, establishing  a  school  for  players,  conductors,  and  composers, 
and  incidentally  rounding  the  year's  contract  for  the  members  of 
the  orchestra. 

Amid  the  flurry  of  his  seventy-fifth  birthday  anniversary,  his 
twenty-fifth  in  the  United  States,  Koussevitzky  announced  his  re- 
tirement, retaining  however  some  participation  in  the  Berkshire 
enterprise.  Rumors  had  been  persistent  for  some  years  that  Mitrop- 
oulos,  whose  American  debut  he  had  sponsored,  would  inherit  his 
mantle.  Instead,  to  the  surprise  of  many,  it  reposed  in  1950  on  the 
shoulders  of  Charles  Munch,  a  French  Alsatian,  who  had  been  an 
active  conductor  in  Paris  for  twenty  years,  and  had  more  recently 
visited  the  States  with  the  Orchestre  National  of  Paris. 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  95 

Koussevitzky's  farewell  was  a  civic  occasion  and  eulogies  were 
extravagant.  He  was  "the  greatest  all-round  conductor  of  the  day." 
He  not  only  performed  his  concerts,  and  "never  walked  out"  as  did 
other  conductors  at  times,  but  he  also  stimulated  the  creative  minds 
of  the  time;  he  was  a  musical  benefactor,  and  "as  a  citizen  of  Boston, 
lived  an  irreproachable  private  life."  40  His  friends  established  an 
anniversary  fund  for  the  benefit  of  the  orchestra  so  that,  as  the  cele- 
brant noted  in  a  letter,  the  orchestra  "to  which  I  have  devoted  my 
best  efforts  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  shall  never  flounder  or  fail 
through  lack  of  adequate  financial  support."  Koussevitzky  died  on 
June  4,  195 1. 

REPERTOIRE  Three  different  features  characterize  the 
Boston  repertoire  and  distinguish  it  from  those  of  all  other  orches- 
tras in  this  country.  First  of  all:  Boston  has  been  the  most  conspicu- 
ous and  consistent  proponent  of  American  music.  Although  there 
has  been  some  inevitable  fluctuation  in  the  intensity  of  this  zeal,  the 
cultivation  of  American  music  seemed  to  be  little  affected  by  the 
turnover  in  conductors,  by  passing  historical  circumstance,  or 
economic  conditions  of  the  orchestra.  Whether  it  was  the  three  per 
cent  under  Henschel  and  Gericke  in  the  eighties,  or  the  ten  to  twelve 
per  cent  under  Koussevitzky  in  recent  decades— the  quotas  almost 
always  exceeded  those  of  every  other  orchestra.  Only  during  World 
War  I,  when  Chicago  and  St.  Louis  were  affected  by  political  con- 
siderations, did  an  ephemeral  rival  in  Americanism  intrude. 

If  the  reasons  for  this  nativistic  enthusiasm  do  not  lie  in  passing 
circumstance,  they  must  be  sought  in  the  abiding  conditions  of  that 
region.  New  England  in  general  and  Boston  in  particular  have  always 
been  imbued  with  old  American  attitudes,  and  it  was  there  that 
American  arts  flowered.  Early  American  literature,  painting,  and 
architecture,  as  well  as  music,  had  their  life  and  being  in  New  Eng- 
land and  not  in  polyglot  New  York.  Most  of  the  prominent  early 
composers— Foote,  Chadwick,  William  Mason,  Converse,  MacDow- 
ell,  Paine,  Mrs.  Beach— spent  part  or  all  of  their  musical  careers  in 
and  around  that  city.  Harvard  University,  in  nearby  Cambridge, 
established  the  first  chair  of  music  in  1875,  and  through  its  students 
and  graduates  set  the  tone  for  musical  activities.  The  New  England 


g6  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Conservatory  of  Music,  founded  in  1867,  and  the  Boston  Conserva- 
tory were  among  the  first  of  their  kind  in  the  United  States.  The 
Boston  publishers  Oliver  Ditson  and  especially  Arthur  P.  Schmidt 
recognized  and  encouraged  American  composers  by  publishing  their 
works. 

Changing  taste,  the  normal  decline  of  interest  in  older  composers, 
and  the  termination  of  individual  careers,  have,  however,  caused  a 
complete  mutation  in  the  character  and  personnel  of  the  American 
list.  The  original  New  England  portfolio  of  compositions  presented 
by  Henschel  and  Gericke  has  been  displaced  by  a  broadly  national 
group  that  encompasses  not  only  the  native-born  from  various  parts 
of  the  country  (Harris,  Hanson,  Copland,  Barber,  Carpenter,  etc.) 
but  also  Americans  by  adoption  (Berezowsky,  Loeffler,  Bloch).  The 
flavor  and  concept  of  American  music  has  also  been  modified.  For- 
merly dominated  by  German  models,  it  now  carries  the  imprint  of 
French  instruction.  To  the  ever-present  motive  of  loyalty  to  native 
composers  has  consequently  been  added,  in  the  case  of  contempo- 
rary music,  the  interest  in  modernism.  The  length  of  his  tenure  and 
his  zeal  for  the  music  of  his  adopted  country  enabled  Koussevitzky 
to  contribute  more  substantially  to  the  recognition  of  American 
composers  than  any  other  conductor.  His  abundant  and  discriminat- 
ing selection  of  American  works  has  been  memorialized  on  frequent 
occasions. 

A  second  persistent  trait  of  the  Boston  repertoire  has  been  the 
scanty  attention  to  Wagner.  In  the  early  days,  during  the  first  burst 
of  American  enthusiasm,  it  was  well  below  the  average,  and  since 
the  beginning  of  the  century  Boston  has  presented  only  one-third  to 
one-half  of  the  national  average.  The  passion  for  Wagner,  grown 
to  a  flame  in  the  heat  of  controversy  by  Bergmann,  Thomas,  Dam- 
rosch,  and  Seidl  in  New  York  and  Chicago,  never  exceeded  a  sim- 
mer in  Boston.  However,  similar  effects  are  often  attributable  to 
diverse  causes.  Boston's  early  conductors,  Lieder-singer  Henschel 
and  the  Viennese  Gericke,  could  hardly  have  been  expected  to  carry 
the  torch  for  the  German  revolutionary.  Henschel  was  an  intimate 
friend  of  Brahms.  Though  by  profession  a  singer,  he  was  not  an 
operatic  performer  who  might  have  been  instilled  with  fervor  for 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  97 

the  new  school.  Gericke,  who  occupied  the  podium  in  two  install- 
ments for  a  total  of  thirteen  years,  was  a  stern  classicist,  molded  in 
bourgeois  Vienna  where  the  anti- Wagnerian  Hanslick  had  presided 
over  the  taste  of  that  conservative  city.  The  critical  atmosphere  of 
Boston  was  to  some  extent  a  duplicate  of  that  of  Vienna.  Higginson, 
who  had  received  his  musical  training  in  the  Imperial  city,  was  him- 
self an  aesthetic  conservative,  as  was  John  S.  Dwight,  editor  of  the 
recently  defunct  Dwighfs  Journal  of  Music.  Both  were  outspoken 
anti-Wagnerian  critics  of  influence.  In  commenting  on  an  early 
Thomas  program  in  Boston  (1869),  Dwight  reacted  as  follows:  "The 
Tannhauser  Overture  led  off.  .  .  .  Never  did  we  hear  it  so  well 
played— Never  did  we  enjoy  the  work  so  little." 

On  one  occasion,  Georg  Henschel  had  protested  against 
Dwight's  antagonistic  attitude  toward  Wagner.  In  reply,  Dwight 
wrote  a  letter  of  explanation  and  apology  which  allows  us  to  recon- 
struct the  era  (he  was  opposed  to  all  moderns,  including  Chadwick! ) 
and  the  state  of  mind  of  those  who  found  Wagner  so  intolerable. 

Your  informant  must  have  wholly  misunderstood  my  half  playful  and 
(I  admit)  quite  extravagant  remark.  I  have  not  and  could  not  have  had 
the  slightest  wish  to  prevent  your  making  a  memorial  concert  of  Wagner 
music,  and  I  should  be  the  last  man  in  the  world  to  vote  for  any  pro- 
hibitory committee  or  board  of  censorship.  You  have  the  right  to  make 
your  own  program  according  to  your  own  feeling  of  the  occasion,  and 
I  admired  the  earnestness  and  energy  with  which  you  set  about  it.  What 
I  said  (either  to,  or  in  the  hearing  of,  Mr.  Dannreuther)  had  no  reference 
to  this  concert  or  this  orchestra,  but  was  in  continuance  of  some  conver- 
sation ...  in  which  I  expressed  the  depressing  effect  which  so  much 
of  the  more  modern  ambitious  modern  music  had  upon  my  mind— so 
many  big  words,  which  by  their  enormous  orchestration,  crowded  har- 
monies, sheer  intensity  of  sound,  and  restless  swarming  motion  without 
progress,  seem  to  seek  to  carry  the  listeners  by  storm,  by  a  roaring  whirl- 
wind of  sound,  instead  of  going  to  the  heart  by  the  simpler  and  divine 
way  of  the  still  small  voice.  And  then  it  occurred  to  me  that  it  might 
even  justify  a  high  court— a  world's  court  of  censorship— composed  of  the 
greatest,  clearing  the  musical  atmosphere  of  many  heavy  clouds  and  of 
much  murky  musical  malaria.  It  was  a  sudden  freak  of  thought,  and  of 
course  an  utterly  impractical  extravaganza.  But  when  I  meet  a  red-hot 
Wagnerite,  I  am  sometimes  tempted  in  a  humorous  way  to  say  the  worst 
I  can  upon  the  other  side.41 


98  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

In  justice  to  the  memory  of  these  two  Boston  citizens,  however,  it 
must  be  added  that  Higginson  never  abused  his  power  by  exerting 
pressure  on  conductors  or  public  to  enforce  his  private  predilec- 
tions, and  that  Dwight  liberally  opened  his  Journal  to  educational 
and  critical  articles  on  the  new  musical  trends— a  magnanimous 
example  of  objective  journalism  worthy  of  emulation  today. 

It  could  plausibly  have  been  anticipated  that  Karl  Muck  would 
reverse  the  Wagner  trend.  When  he  arrived  in  Boston,  he  had 
already  attained  secure  prestige  as  a  Wagner  interpreter  in  Bayreuth 
itself.  Furthermore,  Wagner  was  by  then  a  universally  accepted 
composer  whose  orchestral  innovations  had  already  been  succeeded 
by  still  newer  trends.  However,  Muck  brought  with  him  a  distaste, 
common  among  exponents  of  the  Wagner  music-drama,  for  tearing 
the  Wagner  fragments  bleeding  from  the  context.  To  be  sure,  Wag- 
ner himself  did  so  in  the  interest  of  certain  public  contingencies,  as 
did  Muck  and  other  disciples.  But  the  conductors'  disinclination  to 
torture  the  supposedly  integrated  unit  by  forcibly  extracting  from 
it  sketchy  morsels  was  not  conducive  to  a  liberal  proportion  of 
Wagner  in  the  orchestral  repertoire. 

The  third  characteristic  of  the  Boston  repertoire  is  its  tendency 
toward  "progressivism."  Not  that  such  impulses  touched  every  one 
of  its  distinguished  conductors.  Gericke  never  did  cross  the  musical 
threshold  of  late-nineteenth  century  "modernism."  Muck,  though 
more  hospitable  and  eclectic,  nevertheless  was  not  particularly  enam- 
ored of  contemporary  trends.  Nikisch  displayed,  of  course,  ample 
signs  of  romanticism.  But  it  was  with  Koussevitzky  that  a  new  era 
of  aggressive  modernism  set  in.  In  fact,  the  reputation  of  his  liberal 
predilections  had  preceded  his  arrival  in  Boston,  with  the  result  that 
his  advent  was  contemplated  with  such  dread  by  a  number  of  im- 
portant subscribers  as  to  cause  anxiety  in  management  circles.  As  in 
the  case  of  Seidl  (New  York)  and  Nikisch,  his  unconventional  inter- 
pretation of  the  standard  classics  was  received  with  lifted  aesthetic 
eyebrows. 

The  conductors,  as  usual,  impressed  their  individual  stamp  on 
local  conditions,  as  far  as  those  conditions  either  permitted  or  en- 
couraged. When  Henschel  inaugurated  the  concert  series,  he  was 
not  a  seasoned  conductor— perhaps  not  a  conductor  at  all!— with 


Profiles  of  Major  America?!  Orchestras  99 

definite  traditions  and  preformed  policies.  He  was  not  averse  to 
musical  titbits  which  could  be  instantly  enjoyed  by  the  audience, 
and  generally  designed  his  program  with  appetizing  desserts  at  the 
end.  Some  of  these  pleasant  numbers  have  vanished  into  the  first 
stage  of  oblivion— the  popular  programs— and  some  have  been  almost 
entirely  forgotten:  the  overtures  of  Auber,  Boieldieu,  Cherubini, 
Gade,  Nicolai,  several  of  Mendelssohn,  and  the  symphonies  of  Raff 
and  Gade,  while  certain  other  compositions  of  Mendelssohn,  Schu- 
bert, and  Saint-Saens  sound  a  little  too  obvious  to  present-day  ears. 

On  the  strenuous  side,  it  was  the  controversial  Brahms,  friend 
and  counselor  of  Henschel,  with  whom  he  exercised  his  audiences. 
It  is  difficult  for  present  listeners  to  realize  how  austere  and  enig- 
matic, how  protracted  and  discontinuous  these  abstract  tonal  crea- 
tions sounded  in  an  age  when  the  programmatic  Raff,  the  melodious 
Schubert,  and  the  straightforward  Beethoven  were  the  regular  fare. 
With  his  eight  per  cent  devoted  to  Brahms,  Henschel  was  greatly  in 
advance  of  the  New  York  orchestras  who  were  playing  only  two  to 
five  per  cent.  Under  such  conditions,  the  leave-taking  of  the  audi- 
ence between  the  Brahms  symphonic  movements  assumes  added 
plausibility. 

For  rigidity  of  discipline,  however,  it  was  Gericke  who  was  the 
real  molder  of  the  orchestra,  both  in  the  realm  of  cultivated  taste 
and  in  personal  administration  of  the  orchestra.  He  lopped  off  the 
frills  and  concentrated  on  rigorous  symphonic  literature.  The  com- 
plaints of  the  audience,  martyrs  to  aesthetic  standards,  got  scant 
attention  from  one  who  had  a  mission  to  fulfill.  L.  C.  Elson,  the 
Boston  reviewer,  deplored  the  "rut  of  Haydn,  Mozart,  Beethoven, 
and  Brahms  to  which  Gericke  clung  with  Viennese  persistence."  42 
The  repertoire  was  anchored  to  the  Austro-German  traditions  which 
accounted  for  nearly  eighty  per  cent  of  it.  The  Gericke  programs 
therefore  lacked  the  sprightliness  to  which  Henschel  had  previously 
accustomed  the  ears  of  the  patrons,  who  reminisced  nostalgically, 
"Henschel  may  not  have  been  as  good  a  conductor,  but  he  is  cer- 
tainly a  better  program  maker."  43  To  Gericke,  a  mixture  of  such 
styles  was  a  desecration,  and  thus  it  was  that  the  segregated  popular 
programs  were  instituted  to  assume  the  responsibility  of  the  lighter 
fare. 


IOO  THE    AMERICAN    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

Max  Fiedler  and  Emil  Paur,  cultivating  less  artistic  ruthlessness, 
offered  a  pleasant  interlude  for  certain  segments  of  the  audience 
by  alleviating  the  severity  of  the  programs.  Especially  indulgent, 
Fiedler  was  very  willing  to  unbend  with  Wagner  excerpts;  but 
physically  he  retained  the  stiff  German  rigidity,  taking  his  bow  by 
bending  double  exactly  in  the  middle,  straightening  out,  throwing 
shoulders  back,  with  a  military  click  of  his  heels. 

The  programs  of  the  French  incumbents  Rabaud  and  Monteux 
were  clearly  products  of  the  international  crisis.  The  repertoire  of 
1918-24  was  not  the  reflection  of  the  conductors,  but  rather  both 
the  conductors  and  programs  were  the  reflection  of  the  anti-German 
and  pro-Ally  political  and  social  climate  of  the  day.  While  the  Ger- 
man classics  still  bulked  large,  they  had  been  severely  curbed,  and 
the  French,  swept  up  by  the  political  tempest,  rose  to  an  unprece- 
dented height  of  one-fourth  of  the  repertoire,  featuring  some  com- 
posers, like  Saint-Saens,  who  never  again  would  be  rewarded  so 
generously  with  the  favor  of  serious  taste.  Monteux,  to  be  sure,  had 
already  startled  his  audiences  with  Stravinsky's  Sacre  du  Printemps, 
but  he  was  limited  by  time  and  circumstance  in  fully  unfolding  his 
liberal  propensities. 

During  his  twenty-five-year  regime,  Koussevitzky  had  ample 
opportunity  to  acquire,  and  in  turn  to  abandon,  various  affections. 
In  his  early  tenure,  the  mystical  Scriabin  was  his  compositeur  de 
resistance,  of  whom  he  had  more  recently  tired.  Sibelius,  Prokofieff, 
and  Shostakovitch  rate  consistently  high,  and  the  latter  two  help  to 
swell  the  Russian  contingent  to  a  new  height  of  almost  one-fourth  of 
the  total  Boston  repertoire.  In  the  postwar  period,  both  Sibelius  and 
Shostakovitch  slumped  heavily,  although  for  obviously  different 
reasons. 

Many  composers  and  compositions  were  given  experimental 
hearings  and  later  dropped.  Koussevitzky  was  most  articulate  in 
his  policy  that  symphony  concerts  must  not  only  entertain  and 
elevate  the  public,  and  familiarize  it  with  current  trends  in  compo- 
sition, but  also  serve  as  a  training  school  for  a  selected  group  of 
contemporary  composers,  who  might  hear  their  works  performed 
and  profit  by  the  experience.  Since  the  orchestra  is  an  expensive 
instrument,  it  can  be  used  for  such  experiments  only  when  assured 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  101 

of  reasonable  financial  security,  an  understanding  audience,  tradi- 
tions of  artistic  supremacy,  and  a  conductor  of  discernment.  Kous- 
sevitzky,  with  all  his  modernism,  never  strained  this  tolerance  by 
indulging  in  the  capricious  excesses  of  Stokowski,  but  was  neverthe- 
less perpetually  in  the  vanguard  of  current  musical  trends. 

The  Chicago  Symphony  Orchestra  (1891) 

Unlike  the  Eastern  cities,  Chicago  was,  in  the  period  of  the  eighties, 
not  a  city  of  great  cultural  traditions.  It  was  rather  a  vibrant  and 
odorous  industrial  town,  famous  for  its  Armour  and  Swift  stock- 
yards, its  Pullman  sleepers  and  McCormick  reapers,  and  thus  per- 
formed much  of  the  dirty  work  for  the  growing  nation.  But  the 
captains  of  these  industries,  having  attained  wealth  and  leisure,  were 
apparently  now  determined  to  emulate  the  patterns  of  the  East  by 
embellishing  the  crasser  aspects  of  life  with  the  veneer  and  polish 
of  the  polite  arts. 

From  the  standpoint  of  mere  census  enumeration  Chicago  with 
its  million  population  in  1890  was  large  enough  to  support  an  or- 
chestra; but  its  musical  experience  was  almost  entirely  limited  to  the 
traveling  orchestras,  opera  troupes,  and  concert  artists  that  toured 
the  West.  In  1890  Chicago  was  merely  an  aspirant  to  rather  than  a 
participant  in  "culture." 

Theodore  Thomas  44  himself  had  paved  the  way  for  the  Chicago 
orchestra— a  service  which  he  had  also  rendered  to  the  orchestras 
in  Boston,  Philadelphia,  Cincinnati,  St.  Louis,  and  other  cities. 
Wherever  he  went  with  his  traveling  troupe,  he  thrilled  audiences 
with  the  discipline  and  precision  of  his  performance,  an  accomplish- 
ment made  possible  only  because  he  had  a  permanent  body  of  men 
who  considered  the  orchestra  their  chief  and  specialized  employ- 
ment. After  the  failure  of  both  Carl  Bergmann  and  Henry  Ahner, 
former  members  of  the  old  Germania  orchestra,  to  organize  local 
orchestras,  Hans  Balatka,  in  i860,  enjoyed  the  first  real  but  transient 
success.  His  group  aroused  some  enthusiasm  for  a  period  of  about  six 
vears,  then  gradually  disappeared  from  the  scene  after  Thomas  had 
made  his  first  of  many  Chicago  appearances  in  1869.  It  was  obvious 
to  all  that  he  hopelessly  outclassed  the  local  contingent.  His  playing 


102  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

of  Traumerei,  strings  muted,  pp,  in  contrast  to  Balatka's  "straight" 
reading  was  one  of  the  sensations  of  that  early  season.  Even  the  most 
untutored  of  his  listeners  could  understand  the  difference.  During 
the  next  two  decades  he  paid  many  visits  to  the  city,  regaled  his  fol- 
lowers with  nine  seasons  of  summer  night  concerts  at  popular  prices, 
and  thereby  practically  killed  off  all  indigenous  efforts. 

But  by  the  end  of  that  time,  the  now  fifty-three-year-old  mi- 
gratory Thomas  had  become  a  tired  man.  His  yearning  for  a  perma- 
nent orchestra,  on  the  order  of  that  of  Major  Higginson  of  Boston, 
had  never  been  gratified.  Instead,  he  had  been  stalked  by  repeated 
financial  and  personal  failures:  the  Philadelphia  Centennial  concerts, 
the  Cincinnati  Musical  College,  the  American  Opera  Company— each 
of  which  would  make  a  story  in  itself.  Minor  adversities  had  deep- 
ened his  depression:  The  House  of  Steinway,  which  had  generously 
supported  him  for  years,  was  now  also  tired,  and  financial  aid,  which 
had  been  forthcoming  from  other  friends,  was  inadequate;  his  age 
rendered  it  impossible  to  endure,  much  less  enjoy,  the  tours  that  he 
had  undertaken  philosophically  for  twenty  years;  and  finally  his 
own  personal  temperament  was  far  from  adaptable.  As  he  matured, 
he  found  it  less  possible  to  maintain  even  a  semblance  of  the  graceful 
cooperation  essential  to  success  in  public  undertakings. 

If  one  wished  to  prolong  the  melancholy  recital  of  mishaps  and 
the  overwhelming  weight  of  circumstance  that  can  shape  destiny, 
one  might  continue.  After  the  collapse  of  the  American  Opera  Com- 
pany (1885-87),  which  had  toured  the  United  States  with  opera  in 
English,  Thomas  did  attempt  a  comeback  and  returned  to  concert 
work  in  New  York.  But  his  absence  had  shaken  his  former  grip.  The 
New  York  audience  had  gone  opera-mad;  Seidl  had  captivated  New 
York;  Boston  had  entered  the  field  with  its  own  fine  orchestra  and 
was  competing  with  New  York,  thereby  closing  that  profitable  out- 
let for  Thomas;  and  finally,  interstate  transportation  rules  had  been 
tightened  so  that  traveling  troupes  were  no  longer  eligible  for  the 
reduced  fares  that  had  previously  made  touring  profitable. 

It  was  at  this  juncture,  in  1889,  that  Charles  Norman  Fay,  a  Chi- 
cago friend,  had  broached  to  him  the  possibility  of  coming  to 
Chicago  if  guarantees  could  be  raised  for  a  permanent  orchestra 


During  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury, the  band  concert  was 
a  popular  form  of  musical 
entertainment.  Mr.  Har- 
vey B.  Dodworth  was  the 
first  of  the  eminent  line  of 
band  directors  in  Amer- 
ica which  included  Patrick 
Gilmore  and  John  Philip 
Sousa.  The  "band"  concert 
included  symphonic  and 
operatic  numbers, and  con- 
stituted an  important  stage 
in  the  development  of 
American  musical  taste. 
Mr.  Dodworth  was  a  vio- 
linist in  the  New  York 
Philhar?nonic  orchestra, 
and  his  programs  can 
hardly  be  distinguished 
from  those  of  the  Philhar- 
monic. The  youthful  The- 
odore Thomas  was  fea- 
tured in  the  programs  as 
violin  soloist,  probably 
with  piano  accompani- 
ment. 


^sp 


mffwcfrff  i  \  t  .  1 

SsL  U  sMbwJtii  Jul  v 

FESTIVAL!!' 

AT 

On  Friday  Evening,  February  W&h  1*8% 

Oa  which  occasion,  ia  atMrtiea  to  rtwir  SapeA  Sana  of 

5©  PERFORMERS 

They  w»l  be  assisted  by  the  Wtowing  Eaiii8»t  Artktt, 

£Kr8.  jLanr a  JL*  Jones, 
Mr.  Henry  Sqai res, 

- ,  The  Amcrie**  Teasr. 

Mr.  €reorge  F.  Bristow, 

Herr  Kiefer, 


1.  ®r<md  Military  Ortrtur*. hy ..Felix  Mendhefcwi  BartaoMy, 

First  time  in  America.     Bod  worth's  F«U  Band. 

2,  *  JV<o*  da  mi  Weep."  Poetry  by  J-  H.  Wainwright— Mssic  from 

the  Opera  of"  Rip  Ym  Winkle."  Mr.  Sqaires. G.  F.  Bristow 

»*«'*'  JKrnaw"  tntvUami," — Coroetino  Sola.  Mr,  Ail^aDodworta. ._-..-.  Verdi 
i.  **  ffsiaef  bg  Chmce."  Mrs  L,  A.  Jones. . 

6,  Corm  Bautlio  Solo.  Herr  Kiefer, 

«S.  iSefo  Coscer/tW.  Mr.  Sedgwick,  ft     4» 

»».  «* The  Bmdit  Qmefattep,"  From  Ercani — ..„.. — ...«.»».«,— -.TFertlr 

Arranged  for  the  Cornet  Band  by  1>.  L.  Downsajt. 

PAST  It, 
I,  Grand  Polka,  <♦  BihjuH  tfa  Coitetrf.'*  Full  Band.   Composed  ex- 
pre*aSy  for  thlseccasioa  by..-..— ,..«.-,»-...—  .«si...»-.-ThoaM»  I 
.tL  **  Us  •Kter  »fLm*.M — Corset  Band  ftccoJspaoimeBi. 

Mr.  B,  Squires, ...*, ,;. W.  Y.  WaWace 

a,  Ptetin  Sate — Tat-ma  &  Varratkms  from  Otelfo.  Mast,  Thenm»„-W.  Ernst 

J.  <*  &iorao  d'Ororo" — Duet  from  Semi  raroide,    — .».« Rossini 

A.  &  H.  B.  Dodworth,  Cornet  Band  accompaniment. 
|sf  5fib  X>aw»  it  httakmg  o'er  «j"— Corset  Oblig  ate....- —  G.  F.  Bristow 

Mrs.  L»  A.Jones.  " 
8.  •*  Tr^frmn  Mrma"  Messrs.  AHee.  H  B   &  C.  R.  Dodworth— .BelHai 

7.  UritlU  Quicksiep.  H,  B.  Dodworth. 

Doors  open  at  7  o'clock,  Concert  to  commence  at  8  ©'Hock. 

TICKETS...........   SO  CENTS, 

To  be  had  &J  ail  the  principal  Muw  stores,  at  No.  483  Broadway,  and  at  the 

door  on  the  Erosing5©?  the  Concert. 
Us  P««.**o  Forte  wed  en  ifcts  eceaswa  «r  /r*m  tte  mons/arrorf  of  fF.  H«fi  4/  &m 




■  J 


THE  EARLIEST  AVAILABLE  PICTURE  OF  THE  CHICAGO  SYMPHONY  ORCHESTRA  —  ABOUT  1 898. 

Theodore  Tho?nas  is  shown  conducting  the  orchestra  in  the  auditorium.  (Courtesy 
of  the  Chicago  Symphony  Orchestra) 


THEODORE  THOMAS 

Theodore  Thomas  may  be  called  the  "father  of  the  permanent  orches- 
tra." He  founded  his  own  full-time  orchestra  in  1863,  purveyed  the 
finest  music  in  New  York  and  on  tour  as  far  west  as  San  Francisco,  and 
excited  an  interest  in  symphonic  orchestras  in  the  major  cities  of  the 
United  States.  (Culver  Service) 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  103 

Thomas'  quickened  spirit  replied  with  his  oft-quoted  retort:  "I 
would  go  to  Hell  if  they  gave  me  a  permanent  orchestra." 

In  retrospect,  Chicago  seems  to  have  been  somewhat  less  than 
ready  for  such  a  metropolitan  venture.  Thousand-dollar  pledges,  by 
fifty  persons,  for  only  three  years,  was  not  big  money  even  in  those 
days  and  did  not  betoken  complete  appreciation  of  the  responsibili- 
ties of  the  venture.  After  this  short  pump  priming,  its  backers  ex- 
pected the  orchestra  to  be  self-supporting  and  even  profitable  as  the 
Thomas  summer  concerts  had  been  for  ten  years.  But  there  were  no 
suburbs  where  extra  concerts  could  be  given  to  alleviate  deficits;  al- 
though there  was  some  intense  musical  interest  in  Chicago,  there 
was  no  ready  audience  of  sufficient  dimensions  in  size  and  taste,  as 
there  had  been  in  Boston,  whose  patronage  would  insure  success.  In 
sum,  it  was  an  uncomfortably  small  margin  of  safety  to  cover  the 
unknown  hazards  of  possible  cooling  of  interest,  or  to  offset  a  de- 
cline in  financial  competence  of  guarantors,  and  it  was  a  long  gam- 
ble that  necessary  additional  sponsors  could  be  found. 

All  these  and  many  other  impediments  were  actually  encoun- 
tered and  eventually  overcome.  But  at  the  moment,  there  was  an 
element  of  strength  and  confidence  in  the  original  list  of  guarantors 
who,  in  addition  to  Fay,  a  business  executive,  included  the  most 
noted  industrial  and  commercial  names  of  old  Chicago:  Pullman, 
Armour,  Marshall  Field,  Ryerson,  McCormick,  Potter,  Blackstone, 
Wacker,  Sprague,  and  many  others. 

Nor  was  Chicago  rich  in  the  requisite  professional  resources 
from  which  to  build  an  orchestra.  The  city  actually  engaged  not 
only  a  conductor,  but  an  entire  orchestra,  for  Thomas  imported 
about  sixty  men  from  New  York  as  the  nucleus  for  the  new  group, 
to  be  supplemented  by  only  about  twenty-four  chosen  from  the  local 
supply— a  circumstance  which  caused  some  disturbance  in  union 
ranks  for  a  time.  In  one  respect,  however,  Chicago  was  well 
equipped,  so  they  thought:  the  new  Auditorium,  designed  by  the 
celebrated  Louis  Sullivan,  built  primarily  to  house  the  opera,  had 
been  dedicated  in  1889  and  possessed  fine  acoustics  and  a  seating  ca- 
pacity of  4,800. 

Thus  Theodore  Thomas  in  1891  founded  the  first  orchestra  still 
surviving  in  the  Middle  West,  but  during  the  first  ten  years  its  sur- 


104  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

vival  was  many  times  in  doubt.  Discouragements  "came  not  single 
spies  but  in  battalions":  the  programs  were  more  erudite  than  the 
patrons  who  had  enjoyed  the  annual  light  summer  series  had  been 
led  to  expect;  during  the  first  eleven  seasons  the  annual  deficits  aver- 
aged $33,000,  which  the  guarantors  were  never  quite  able  to  liqui- 
date; the  post-Fair  depression  had  caused  a  miscalculation  of  returns; 
some  of  the  original  patrons  gradually  faded  from  the  picture,  and 
new  ones  had  to  be  recruited.  Finally,  Chicago  was  learning  what 
everyone  already  knew  in  the  East:  Mr.  Thomas  was  a  difficult  per- 
sonality who  made  no  concessions  to  the  press  and  very  few  to  the 
public. 

Nevertheless,  Thomas  could  not  be  tempted  to  Boston,  where 
he  was  tendered  the  conductorship  in  1893,  just  as  he  could  not  be 
diverted  from  his  adopted  country  by  an  offer  from  the  London 
Philharmonic  in  1880.  However,  as  the  deficits  gradually  declined, 
the  talk  of  abandoning  the  project  was  no  longer  heard.  Chicago 
began  to  notice  its  new  decor  and  to  compare  itself  with  Boston  and 
Leipzig,  the  only  other  cities  where  subscription  pairs  were  heard 
in  excess  of  the  number  (twenty)  offered  in  the  metropolis  of  the 
West.  In  five  years,  Thomas  was  ready  to  display  his  achievement 
before  his  old  New  York  audience.  He  had  retained  many  friends  in 
the  East,  who  presented  him  with  a  baroque  silver  bowl,  on  which 
were  engraved  the  profiles  of  Thomas  together  with  the  masters 
whom  he  had  interpreted:  Beethoven,  Wagner,  Brahms,  and  Berlioz. 

To  Thomas  one  of  the  most  serious  obstacles  to  the  development 
of  the  Chicago  orchestra  was  the  Auditorium.  It  was  simply  too 
large.  Since  it  could  almost  never  be  filled,  the  empty  seats  were  de- 
pressing. Since  patrons  "could  always  get  a  seat,"  very  few  felt  the 
necessity  of  purchasing  season  tickets.  Its  gigantic  spaces  required  a 
volume  of  music  which  could  be  drawn  only  from  a  much  larger 
group.  But  players  cost  money,  which  was  not  available.  The  audi- 
ence was  too  far  from  the  orchestra  to  achieve  rapport.  Rentals 
were  high.  Rehearsals  often  had  to  be  held  in  other  buildings.  Every- 
thing was  wrong.  These  torments,  together  with  the  merciless  news- 
paper criticisms  and  the  uncongenial  climate,  caused  his  position  to 
become  so  unbearable  that  in  1899  he  declared  his  determination  to 
resign.  The  trustees  likewise  were  becoming  fatigued  and  concluded 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  105 

that  they  could  not  continue  indefinitely  the  annual  payments  of 
$30,000  or  more  to  support  an  orchestra.  They  saw  clearly  the  only 
two  alternatives:  either  abandon  the  orchestra  or  put  it  on  a  firm 
and  permanent  financial  foundation.  Was  Thomas  about  to  hatch  an- 
other magnificent  failure? 

It  was  at  this  crisis  that  a  truly  farsighted  solution  was  achieved. 
The  trustees  resolved  to  endow  the  orchestra  by  building  a  perma- 
nent home  which  would  be  a  source  of  income  and  security.  A  pub- 
lic campaign  for  subscriptions  was  instituted  which  netted  pledges 
ranging  from  ten  cents  to  $25,000.  The  orchestra's  present  home, 
capacity  about  2,500  persons,  was  completed  and  ready  for  dedica- 
tion in  December,  1904. 

Officially  everyone  was  pleased  and  enthusiastic  with  the  new 
music  hall.  Thomas,  who  remembered  the  cavernous  old  Auditorium, 
was  quoted  as  approving:  "We  are  now  in  the  same  room  as  the 
audience."  45 

Privately,  however,  there  were  many  criticisms,  for  the  stage  was 
shallow  and  the  acoustics  seemed  inferior  to  the  Auditorium.  Both 
of  these  defects  resulted  from  last-minute  modifications  of  archi- 
tectural details,  occasioned  by  an  event  of  such  seriousness  that  any 
protest  against  them  could  not  then  have  been  entertained.  The 
Iroquois  Theatre  fire  of  December  30,  1903,  in  which  602  persons 
had  perished,  so  shocked  the  community  that  drastic  enforcement  of 
new  fire  laws  took  precedence  over  every  other  aesthetic,  architec- 
tural, or  acoustical  consideration.  In  any  case,  there  was  much  dis- 
cussion of  what  "might  have  been"  and,  whatever  the  truth  of  these 
speculations,  it  is  perfectly  plausible  to  understand  that,  for  Thomas' 
Chicago  audiences,  acoustical  habituation  to  the  smaller  hall  was 
more  difficult  than  had  been  anticipated.  However,  it  is  probably  too 
much  to  agree  with  the  somewhat  exaggerated  feeling  of  one  of  the 
members  of  the  orchestra  ("my  own  instrument  never  did  sound 
right  in  the  new  surroundings")  that  it  was  "grief  and  disappoint- 
ment in  the  new  Hall  which  shortened  the  life  of  Thomas." 

Actually,  Mr.  Thomas  did  not  survive  the  first  concert  in  Or- 
chestra Hall  by  more  than  a  few  weeks.  His  passing  (January,  1905) 
was  an  occasion  of  world-wide  mourning,  and  in  the  press  of  the 
day  there  was  a  remarkable  volume  of  reminiscences  on  the  qualities 


106  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

of  the  man  who  had  given  such  a  firm  foundation  to  music  in  the 
United  States.46 

Musically,  Thomas  was  a  self-made  man  who  had  "learned  with 
his  public."  He  acquired  his  repertoire  and  his  skill,  and  even  his  style 
of  conducting,  in  public,  and  in  thus  fashioning  himself,  he  was  in- 
dispensably aided  by  his  temperament.  He  was  a  man  of  iron  will, 
with  an  inflexible  determination  to  have  things  his  own  way.  He 
could  never  compromise  with  charlatanism  and  was  content  with 
only  the  best  possible  musical  product.  In  his  conducting  he  took 
infinite  pains  to  create  effects;  he  was  a  conscientious,  even  severe, 
disciplinarian,  but  never  cruel  or  abusive  to  his  men.  Some  of  his 
men  recall  even  today  his  solicitude  for  their  personal  comfort,  their 
financial  and  family  affairs. 

He  was  not  a  Karl  Muck,  thoroughly  schooled  in  all  the  details 
of  orchestral  technique,  much  less  a  Nikisch  or  a  Seidl  who  revelled 
in  personal  interpretation.  He  was  rather  a  conservative,  ever  "faith- 
ful to  the  score."  His  claim  to  be  the  only  conductor  who  executed 
the  Bach  embellishments  according  to  traditional  specifications  was 
typical.  There  were  many  who  admired  the  elegance  and  fidelity  of 
Thomas,  but  also  those  critics,  like  Henry  Krehbiel,  for  whom 
"polish  was  not  enough"  and  who  preferred  the  flexible  individual- 
istic readings  of  Herr  Seidl.47  Thomas  was  frugal  in  gesture  and  con- 
ducted with  a  beat  that  the  audience  could  follow  as  easily  as  could 
the  men  in  the  orchestra.  He  had  a  "good  back." 

Although  he  gave  his  heart  to  the  classics,  it  cannot  be  said  that 
he  avoided  "modern"  works.  He  sponsored  Wagner  from  the  very 
first  concert  of  his  career  (1862)  and  in  1899  introduced  Strauss' 
Heldenleben  to  America.  In  those  days  such  an  achievement  was 
much  more  of  a  technical  and  aesthetic  triumph  than  a  correspond- 
ing innovation  would  be  today,  and  for  two  reasons:  most  orchestras 
and  conductors  were  not  so  firmly  established  as  to  permit  such 
liberties  with  the  audience,  and  the  technical  competence  of  the  mu- 
sicians was  far  below  the  standards  achieved  by  the  specialists  of  to- 
day. As  one  former  Thomas  musician  expressed  it,  "the  average 
music  school  orchestra  today  has  a  better  bassoonist  than  we  had  in 
our  professional  orchestra  fifty  years  ago."  Thomas  could  not  have 
dreamed  of  Stokowski's  boast,  made  thirty  years  later,  that  every 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  107 

man  in  the  first  violin  section  was  competent  to  act  as  concertmaster. 
The  5/4  rhythm  in  the  Tschaikowsky  Pathetique  was  a  major  tech- 
nical hurdle,  as  difficult  to  negotiate,  for  the  orchestra  as  a  whole,  as 
are  the  intricate  rhythms  of  a  Stravinsky  score  today.  The  story  is 
told  that,  in  order  to  absorb  the  feeling  of  the  complexities  of  the 
5 -beat  measure,  Mr.  Thomas— who  usually  spoke  German  to  the 
overwhelmingly  Teutonic  membership— recommended  that  the  fa- 
miliar phrase,  "Ein  Glass  Bier  fur  mich,"  exactly  one  measure  in 
length,  be  repeated  silently  by  the  thirsty  musicians  while  practicing 
the  movement. 

Thomas  died  at  the  height  of  his  career,  the  very  moment  when 
his  life  ambition,  a  permanent  orchestra  permanently  housed,  ma- 
terialized. In  recognition  of  his  achievement,  the  trustees  renamed 
the  Chicago  Orchestra  the  "Theodore  Thomas  Orchestra,"  so  that 
its  founder  might  be  forever  identified  with  that  body.  Upon  later 
reconsideration,  however,  this  commendable  gesture  was  found  to 
be  more  sentimental  than  practicable.  The  name  of  Theodore 
Thomas,  for  a  living  and  growing  city  orchestra,  was  too  personal 
an  association  to  carry  the  same  significance  to  a  new  generation  as 
it  had  to  the  past.  The  orchestra  was,  after  all,  a  civic  enterprise, 
supported  by  the  citizens  of  Chicago  who  were  to  reap  any  prestige 
or  advertising  value  which  it  might  yield.  There  was  likewise  the 
distinct  possibility  that  another  orchestra  might  assume  a  title  using 
the  name  of  the  city,  to  the  detriment  of  the  older  and  legitimate 
organization.  Hence,  the  present  name  was  adopted  in  February, 
191 3,  in  which  the  reference  to  Theodore  Thomas  is  perpetuated  in 
the  subtitle:  "Founded  by  Theodore  Thomas." 

Since  Thomas  died  in  midseason,  it  was  obviously  necessary  to 
replace  him  immediately.  The  provisional  choice  fell  upon  a  mem- 
ber of  the  viola  section,  the  thirty-two-year-old  Frederick  Stock, 
who  had  served  Thomas  as  assistant  conductor  for  some  time.  Al- 
though Chicago  emulated  the  Boston  system  of  searching  in  Europe 
for  worthy  leaders,  the  appointment  of  Stock  became  permanent 
when  Mottl,  Weingartner,  and  Richter,  among  the  most  noted  Euro- 
pean conductors,  had  been  considered.  The  youthful  Stock,  who 
had  been  a  fellow-student  in  Cologne  of  Mengelberg  and  of  Felix 
Borowski,  the  Chicago  composer,  pedagogue,  and  critic,  was  in  fact 


108  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

much  better  prepared,  academically,  than  was  Thomas.  In  contrast 
to  the  literal  Thomas,  he  continued  to  shock  many  of  his  men  by  his 
liberal  excisions  and  editings  of  the  scores,  though  for  some  years  he 
was  still  a  virtual  apprentice  in  the  art  of  practical  conducting.  How- 
ever, he  was  recognized  as  a  musical  scholar,  maintained  fine  diplo- 
matic relations  with  the  public,  and  elicited  a  firm  loyalty  from  his 
men,  who  quite  understandably  preferred  him  to  some  more  mature 
stranger  who  might  have  been  imported  to  "reorganize"  the  or- 
chestra. 

Stock's  long  regime  was  momentarily  interrupted  by  the  events 
associated  with  the  first  World  War.  He  might  easily  have  become  a 
victim  of  war  hysteria,  but  he  extricated  himself  by  prompt  and  dis- 
creet action.  He  had  applied  for  American  citizenship  shortly  after 
his  arrival  in  1 895  but,  in  the  manner  characteristic  of  those  peaceful 
and  complacent  days,  had  allowed  it  to  lapse  without  applying  for 
the  final  papers.  By  voluntarily  retiring  "for  the  duration"  until  his 
papers  could  be  put  in  order,  he  appeased  the  patriots  and  avoided 
nationalistic  demonstrations  which  might  have  irreparably  inflamed 
public  opinion  against  him.  In  the  interim  Eric  DeLamarter,  a  Chi- 
cago composer  and  organist,  was  appointed  assistant  conductor, 
aided  by  a  number  of  distinguished  guest  conductors. 

As  in  the  case  of  Muck  in  Boston  and  Kunwald  in  Cincinnati,  it 
required  over  a  year  for  hostile  attitudes  to  come  to  a  head  against 
the  prominent  aliens.  Although  war  had  been  declared  by  the  United 
States  against  Germany  in  April,  19 17,  it  was  not  until  August,  19 18 
—three  months  before  the  armistice— that  Stock  retired,  to  be  wel- 
comed back  with  cheers,  telegraphic  felicitations,  and  floral  tributes 
six  months  later.  Three  members  of  the  orchestra,  who  had  also  been 
"retired"  or  "dismissed,"  shared  in  the  amnesty  and  were  reinstated. 
During  his  absence,  the  now  naturalized  conductor  committed  his 
sentiments  to  writing  by  composing  the  March  and  Hymn  to  De- 
mocracy to  celebrate  his  return  to  the  podium. 

World  War  I  had  brought  home  to  the  United  States  full  realiza- 
tion of  its  past  dependence  upon  foreign  countries  for  the  skilled 
members  of  its  musical  forces.  In  order  to  assure  its  supply  of  rou- 
tined musicians,  the  Chicago  orchestra  organized  an  apprentice  en- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  109 

semble,  the  Chicago  Civic  Orchestra,  for  the  training  of  young  mu- 
sicians. The  first  conductors  were  Mr.  Stock,  himself,  DeLamarter, 
and  George  Dasch,  members  of  the  Chicago  orchestra.  This  organ- 
ization presents  periodic  concerts  of  the  standard  repertoire,  and  its 
alumni  have  been  sought  by  the  major  orchestras  of  the  country. 
The  almost  immediate  effect  upon  the  Chicago  orchestra  was  to  im- 
prove its  own  personnel  by  retiring  more  promptly  the  superannu- 
ated members  and  replacing  those  less  prepared  with  the  best  candi- 
dates from  the  ranks  of  the  undergraduate  orchestra.  At  about  the 
same  time,  a  similar  organization  was  founded  in  New  York:  the 
American  Orchestral  Association,  whose  title  was  later  (1930) 
changed  to  the  National  Orchestral  Association. 

In  the  postwar  twenties  the  Chicago  orchestra  was  symptomati- 
cally  threatened  with  dissolution  because  of  difficulties  now  com- 
monly referred  to  as  "union  troubles."  These  so-called  union  troubles 
do  not  grow  out  of  casual  and  capricious  circumstances,  but  have 
deep  roots  in  the  social  and  economic  soil  of  the  era.  With  the  cessa- 
tion of  the  flow  of  European  supply,  good  musicians  were  becoming 
scarce,  and  competition  for  them  was  increasing.  After  the  first 
World  War,  the  cost  of  living  turned  sharply  upward;  motion  pic- 
tures, during  that  expansive  period,  began  to  hire  orchestras  of  sym- 
phonic proportions,  and  new  orchestras  were  being  established  in 
western  cities  which  formerly  possessed  only  a  small  amateur  group 
or  none  at  all.  All  these  factors  pointed  toward  a  campaign  for  im- 
portant revisions  in  players'  contracts,  which  management,  largely 
dominated  by  philanthropists,  naturally  was  loath  to  grant.  In  1923, 
1928,  and  again  in  1932  during  the  great  depression,  management, 
always  harassed  by  deficit  bookkeeping,  repeatedly  released  alarming 
publicity  indicating  an  impasse  in  negotiations,  which  were,  how- 
ever, as  many  times  resumed  when  "both  sides  compromised."  In 
1928  the  Chicago  players  had  actually  been  notified  that  they  were 
"free  to  seek  employment  elsewhere,"  and  in  1932  they  likewise  re- 
ceived their  "discharge  notices"  when  James  C.  Petrillo  (then  presi- 
dent of  the  Chicago  local),  and  the  orchestral  management  delayed 
in  reaching  an  agreement.  Although  it  is  inconceivable  at  present 
that  the  orchestra  should  thus  have  been  disbanded,  musicians  today 


IIO  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

give  testimony  to  their  feeling  of  insecurity  during  that  postwar 
transition  period. 

Long,  continuous  tenures  with  a  single  organization  are  as  rare 
among  orchestral  leaders  as  they  are  among  baseball  managers  and 
football  coaches,  for  the  problems  of  maintaining  public  acclaim  are 
analogous.  Stock's  career  was  closed  only  by  his  death  in  the  fall 
of  1942,  after  nearly  thirty-eight  years  of  service,  which  is  a  record 
second  only  to  Walter  Damrosch's  interrupted  forty-three  years' 
association  with  the  New  York  Symphony  Society.  Mr.  Stock  was 
never  a  sensational  or  colorful  figure;  he  had  no  national  reputation 
for  stylistic  or  distinctive  readings.  He  was  rather  a  scholarly,  relia- 
ble, and  substantial  interpreter  admired  by  his  audiences  and  re- 
spected by  his  men. 

After  an  interim  of  guest  conductors,  Desire  Defauw,  a  Belgian 
conductor,  was  appointed  in  1943.  During  his  four-year  term,  he 
was  remorselessly  harassed  by  various  critics,  both  for  his  programs 
and  his  alleged  deficiencies.  In  1947  he  was  succeeded  by  Artur 
Rodzinski,  whose  resignation-dismissal  in  New  York  had  made  head- 
lines. Known  as  the  "builder  of  orchestras,"  Rodzinski  was  hailed  by 
the  aforesaid  critics  of  the  previous  regime  as  a  good  omen  for  the 
resuscitation  of  the  "rundown"  orchestra,  only  to  suffer  a  similarly 
violent  ejection  in  Chicago  in  midseason  after  demonstrations  of  in- 
dependence which  the  management  would  not  endure.  After  two 
seasons  of  guests,  Rafael  Kubelik,  the  scion  of  the  late  Czech  vio- 
linist, was  appointed  to  assume  his  duties  in  the  fall  of  1950. 

REPERTOIRE  Of  all  the  orchestras  in  the  United  States, 
the  Chicago  orchestra  presents  a  repertoire  which  is  one  of  the  most 
diverse  in  character  and  catholic  in  taste.  It  neither  rides  inordinate 
hobbies  nor  displays  any  conspicuously  unusual  phobias.  Its  two 
conductors  during  its  first  half-century  have  never  been  blatantly 
"progressive"  nor  have  they  lagged  noticeably  in  the  recognition  of 
newer  trends. 

Some  reasons  for  this  condition  are  apparent.  For  nearly  thirty- 
years,  since  his  first  full  series  of  concerts  initiated  in  Irving  Hall, 
New  York,  October  24,  1863,  Thomas  conducted  seasonal  series  for 
all  types  of  occasions  and  for  all  levels  of  audience  comprehension 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  1 1 1 

without  serious  deviation  or  interruption.  At  the  time  he  mounted 
the  podium  in  Chicago  on  October  17,  1891,  he  had  behind  him  a 
broader  disciplined  experience,  and  was  intimately  familiar  with  a 
more  extended  repertoire,  than  any  European  conductor  of  com- 
parable prestige  ever  accumulates  in  a  lifetime.  Then,  as  now,  the 
schedule  of  the  average  American  symphony  orchestra,  playing  a 
season  of  twenty  or  more  regular  subscription  concerts,  gives  the 
conductor  a  heavier  and  more  relentless  schedule  than  the  prima 
donna  conductors  of  foreign  training  and  prestige  ever  encounter 
in  Europe.  If  therefore,  a  broad,  substantial,  unspecialized  repertoire 
was  to  be  offered,  no  man,  here  or  abroad,  was  better  qualified  than 
was  Theodore  Thomas. 

As  for  the  Chicago  audiences,  they  had  no  fashionable  traditions 
for  the  exotic  and  no  urge  for  the  dernier  cri  in  artistic  creativeness. 
In  fact,  in  the  early  days,  it  is  probable  that  they  were  below  the 
average  of  the  Eastern  cities  in  respect  to  aesthetic  sophistication  and 
curiosity.  Chicago  was  merely  a  prosperous  Midwest  city  which 
sought  enjoyment  in  good  music,  and  considered  an  orchestra  as 
standard  equipment  in  a  city  of  its  size  and  pretensions.  Since  there 
were  no  radios  or  records,  a  large  majority  of  the  potential  audience 
of  the  Thomas  concerts  had  had  little  opportunity  to  get  acquainted 
with  serious  repertoires,  except  those  offered  by  itinerant  orchestras, 
of  which  the  Thomas  private  orchestra  had  been  an  illustrious  example. 

In  1 89 1,  when  he  moved  to  Chicago,  Thomas  was  almost  at  the 
peak  of  his  ambitious  career  and  had  built  a  reputation  as  a  con- 
ductor who  never  compromised  willingly  with  his  audiences.  His 
frank  interspersal  of  his  repertoire,  especially  during  the  first  several 
years,  with  a  number  of  popular  programs  which  were  condescend- 
ingly offered  for  the  delectation  of  the  audience  is  evidence  of  his 
own  appraisal  of  its  level  of  sophistication.  He  did  not  find  in  Chi- 
cago an  atmosphere  in  which  energetic  prosecution  of  experimental 
music  would  thrive. 

But  from  Thomas  a  moderate  list  of  selected  novelties  could  al- 
ways be  expected.  Since  neither  Thomas  nor  Stock  supported  one- 
sided or  distorted  tastes,  one  looks  in  vain  for  a  Henschel  and  his 
personal  affinity  for  Brahms;  a  Viennese  Gericke  who  allots  eighty 
per  cent  of  his  repertoire  to  the  conservative  Austro-German  com- 


112  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

posers;  a  Koussevitzky  and  his  Sibelius;  a  Toscanini  and  his  Beetho- 
ven; even  less  a  Stokowski  with  his  early  uninhibited  explorations  in 
cacophony. 

The  standard  repertoire  appears  in  national  proportions.  For  the 
period  of  the  nineties,  Beethoven  is  perhaps  a  little  low,  with  twelve 
to  fifteen  per  cent,  and  Brahms,  with  five  to  six  per  cent.  Known  as 
a  friend  of  the  neo-German  school,  Thomas  momentarily  gave  vent 
to  his  early  enthusiasm  by  raising  Wagner  to  the  dizzy  heights  of 
fifteen  per  cent,  which  is  a  high  proportion  for  any  composer  with 
the  exception  of  Beethoven.  However,  he  quickly  deflated  the  Ger- 
man titan  to  a  more  normal  nine  per  cent  before  the  end  of  the 
century.  After  having  introduced  Richard  Strauss  to  America  with 
the  world  premiere  of  the  Symphony  in  F  Minor,  December  13, 
1884,  he  also  performed  the  American  premiere  of  Till  Eulenspie gel, 
Ein  Heldenleben,  and  several  lesser  numbers. 

Next  to  Boston,  Chicago  is  generally  cited  as  a  champion  of 
American  music.  In  his  day,  however,  Thomas  had  not  only  failed 
to  make  a  reputation  as  a  friend  of  American  music,  but  was  actu- 
ally criticized  for  his  apathy  toward  it.  It  can  be  said  only  that  he 
played  a  moderate  number  of  American  "classics"  (Paine,  Chad- 
wick,  MacDowell,  Converse,  et  al.).  Thomas  simply  affirmed:  "I 
played  all  there  were." 

However,  the  Chicago  orchestra  did  allow  itself  the  luxury  of  a 
few  indulgences  to  offset  the  drab  gray  of  the  "well-balanced" 
repertoire.  Of  these,  the  most  unexpected  was  the  ephemeral  devo- 
tion to  the  Russians  Miaskowsky  and  GlazounofF.  Professor  of  Com- 
position at  Moscow,  Miaskowsky  had  already  attained  a  reputation 
before  the  revolution.  Whether  through  aesthetic  maturation  or 
ideological  expediency,  his  style  grew  more  amenable  to  the  require- 
ments of  the  Soviet  government.  His  fertile  pen  had  produced  the  as- 
tronomical number  of  twenty -six  symphonies  at  his  death  in  1950. 
Philadelphia  was  the  first  to  accord  this  industrious  Russian  an  Amer- 
ican hearing  when  it  played  the  Fifth  Symphony  in  January,  1926. 
Since  that  date  other  conductors  have  sampled  of  the  bountiful 
tonal  array,  but  none  with  the  apparent  appetite  of  Stock,  who  per- 
formed nine  of  the  symphonies.  The  Sixth  must  have  been  consumed 
with  unusual   relish,   for   it   was   given  nine    performances.    The 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  113 

Twenty-first  was  composed  for  the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  the  Chi- 
cago Symphony  Orchestra  and  "dedicated  to  its  illustrious  con- 
ductor." 

Chicago  has  been  second  to  Philadelphia  in  the  presentation  of 
Bach,  and  long  before  Stokowski  developed  his  infatuation  for  him, 
Stock  was  playing  twice  the  national  average.  But  with  both  Bee- 
thoven and  Brahms  Chicago  has  maintained  a  consistently  lower 
place  than  other  orchestras.  D'Indy  was  a  favorite  of  Stock,  although 
in  general  the  French  composers  have  had  scant  attention.  Although 
Chicago  was  one  of  the  earliest  to  introduce  and  favor  Prokofieff, 
for  him,  as  well  as  for  Stravinsky,  there  has  been  no  enthusiasm  in 
the  last  decade.  Shostakovitch  has  never  been  favored,  and  toward 
Sibelius  there  has  been  a  similar  aloofness. 

With  the  passing  of  Stock,  there  disappeared  some  of  the  con- 
spicuous features  of  his  long  tenure.  American  music  declined  pre- 
cipitously; Bach  could  not  maintain  his  relatively  high  position;  and 
Beethoven  ascended,  under  Rodzinski  and  guest  conductors,  to  a  po- 
sition reminiscent  of  the  Thomas  days. 

The  Cincinnati  Symphony  Orchestra  (1895) 

Cincinnati  has  for  many  years  enjoyed  the  reputation  of  being  a  mu- 
sical city.  This  Midwestern  community  with  its  heavy  German 
population,  and  its  then  basic  industries  of  meat  and  malt  liquors, 
gave  Theodore  Thomas  some  of  his  most  hospitable  receptions  and 
instituted  with  his  aid  the  biennial  May  Festivals,  which  continue 
down  to  the  present  day.  The  first  of  these  festivals,  projected  by 
Mr.  Thomas  and  Mrs.  Maria  Nicholas  Longworth,  was  staged  in 
1873,  and  exemplified  Mr.  Thomas'  concentrated  devotion  to  music 
in  general  and  instrumental  music  in  particular.  The  stern  conductor 
insisted  on  two  conditions:  that  the  festival  be  divorced  from  beer, 
which  had  in  previous  saengerfest  years  been  purveyed  in  the 
gigantic  barroom  under  the  mammoth  stage;  and,  the  granting  of 
coordinate  importance  to  instrumental  and  choral  music. 

If  today  this  would  seem  only  a  decent  and  modest  requirement, 
it  was  nothing  short  of  revolutionary  in  1873.  Cincinnati,  like  any 
other  American  city  with  a  sizable  German  population,  cultivated 


114  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

choral  music.  These  choral  groups,  under  the  name  of  Mannerchor, 
Liedertafel,  Liederkranz,  and  Sangerbund,  were  founded  to  cul- 
tivate conviviality  quite  as  much  as  the  Muses.  It  was  left  to  such 
serious  leaders  as  Thomas  and  Leopold  Damrosch,  however,  to  ele- 
vate them  to  the  dignity  which  they  since  attained.  In  the  earlier 
days  these  festivals  took  on  all  the  airs  of  a  civic  function.  In  1880, 
a  Cincinnati  correspondent  reports: 

There  has  been  a  grand  and  unprecedented  street  cleaning,  and  this  has 
been  followed  by  the  efforts  of  the  decorating  committee  who  have  made 
us  resplendent  with  flags  and  bunting.  We  have  unlimited  company  from 
all  the  neighboring  states  .  .  .  and  we  have  even  more  unlimited  brag. 
...  I  understand  that  today  there  is  scarcely  a  seat  left  for  any  perform- 
ance of  the  week.48 

Today,  most  of  these  organizations  have  succumbed  to  the  pres- 
sures of  competitive  social  attractions  of  the  modern  way  of  life.  A 
century  ago,  however,  the  choral  groups  were  the  nursery  of  mu- 
sical training  and  in  many  instances,  notably  in  Minneapolis  and  St. 
Louis,  were  the  literal  ancestors  of  the  present  instrumental  organ- 
izations. 

Cincinnati  was  among  the  earliest  cities  to  mobilize  substantial 
philanthropic  aid  for  musical  activities.  That  the  effort  proved 
abortive  is  merely  evidence  that  its  citizens  had  not  yet  accumulated 
the  necessary  experience  for  the  organization  of  musical  activities  in 
our  American  culture.  In  1878,  the  College  of  Music  of  Cincinnati 
was  founded  by  a  group  which  included  such  names  as  George 
Ward  Nichols  (chairman),  Springer,  Longworth,  Shillito,  and  a 
score  of  other  financial  and  civic  leaders.  Theodore  Thomas  was 
offered,  and  accepted,  the  headship.  If  Thomas  did  not  dream  that 
this  was  destined  to  be  the  second  of  his  "magnificent  failures,"  his 
intimates  did.  The  single-minded  conductor  had  never  been  distin- 
guished for  his  adeptness  at  administrative  functions  in  a  democratic 
society.  In  fact,  Divighfs  Journal  editorialized  with  a  decorous  touch 
of  understatement:  "Among  the  many  discriminating  friends  whom 
Thomas  made  as  an  orchestral  conductor,  there  were  not  a  few  who 
hesitated  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  his  fitness  for  the  directorship  of 
an  educational  institution."  49  Within  less  than  two  years,  he  was 
back  in  New  York.  The  Thomas-Nichols  imbroglio  produced  a  na- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  115 

tional  sensation.  In  general,  the  musicians  were  supporting  Thomas; 
businessmen  who  knew  that  Thomas  was  receiving  a  salary  of 
$10,000  from  the  College,  plus  other  perquisites,  "could  see  the 
other  side."  One  can  only  speculate  on  the  developments  if  the  Cin- 
cinnati philanthropists  had  recognized  the  principle  of  "artistic  su- 
premacy" and  if  Mr.  Thomas  had  been  possessed  of  a  more  com- 
promising spirit.  Thomas'  subsequent  association  with  Cincinnati 
was  limited  to  the  direction  of  the  Music  Festivals,  which  he  main- 
tained to  the  last— 1904. 

In  mid-century,  Cincinnati  was  one  of  the  terminal  points  of  the 
growing  German  immigration.  From  these  issued  several  local  or- 
chestras which  were  organized  in  1857  and  afterward  under  F.  L. 
Ritter,  and  George  and  Michael  Brand.  The  venture  of  1857  under 
Ritter,  who  is  best  remembered  today  for  his  Music  in  America  and 
other  literary  works,  was  the  short-lived  Philharmonic  Society,  or- 
ganized on  the  cooperative  pattern  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic. 
A  more  pretentious  undertaking  was  that  of  a  Mr.  Hopkins,  who  in 
1865  not  only  organized  an  orchestra  and  choral  society  and  paid 
the  musicians,  but  also  built  a  small  auditorium.  A  much  larger  hall 
was  built  in  1878,  at  the  instance  of  Mr.  Springer,  who  contributed 
$200,000,  matched  from  other  sources.  It  is  the  same  hall  originally 
intended  for  the  music  festivals,  which  is  still  in  use  today  as  the 
home  of  the  Cincinnati  Symphony  Orchestra. 

In  1895,  the  year  of  the  founding  of  the  present  orchestra, 
Michael  Brand  was  the  leader  of  a  small  orchestra  of  about  forty 
men.  It  was  in  that  year  that  a  number  of  women,  including  Mrs. 
William  Howard  Taft,  envisaged  a  plan  for  a  permanent  orchestra, 
subsidized  by  private  benefactions,  and  conducted  by  a  musician  of 
note.  Cincinnati  was  thereby  to  take  its  place  beside  Boston  and  Chi- 
cago, which  had  already  attained  national  recognition.  The  con- 
ductor was  to  be  chosen  from  a  list  of  three  who  were  invited  in  the 
spring  of  1895  to  conduct  three  concerts  each,  with  an  orchestra 
of  forty-eight  men,  largely  recruited  from  the  orchestra  of  the  afore- 
mentioned Mr.  Brand.  Of  the  three  guests— Henry  Schradiek,  Anton 
Seidl,  and  Frank  Van  der  Stucken— Van  der  Stucken  was  proffered 
the  permanent  appointment. 

As  Van  der  Stucken  was  at  that  time  conductor  of  the  Arion 


Il6  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Society  of  New  York,  a  position  which  paid  a  salary  of  $4,000,  as 
well  as  church  organist,  and  conductor  of  free  lance  orchestral  con- 
certs, it  proved  difficult  to  induce  him  to  embark  on  a  new  project 
in  the  West.  However,  the  attractiveness  of  orchestral  prospects,  to- 
gether with  that  of  the  directorship  of  the  College  of  Music,  over- 
came his  hesitation.  With  Van  der  Stucken  as  Dean  of  the  Music 
Faculty,  the  Cincinnati  College  of  Music  was  considered  an  impor- 
tant feeder  for  the  orchestra.  Under  the  changed  circumstances,  Van 
der  Stucken  was  able  to  perform  an  effective  job  where  Theodore 
Thomas,  the  first  incumbent,  had  failed.  The  new  director  estab- 
lished standards  of  discipline  and  artistic  achievement  that  made  it  a 
real  distinction  to  win  a  diploma  from  the  College.  As  a  conductor, 
he  excelled  in  chorus  work.  He  was  a  disciplinarian,  a  picturesque 
gentleman  of  vigorous  and  uninhibited  speech,  though  off  stage  an 
affable  and  convivial  personality. 

In  order  to  strengthen  his  orchestra,  the  new  conductor  imported 
from  New  York  and  elsewhere  the  principal  players,  who  were  put 
on  salary  while  the  local  men  were  paid  by  the  concert.  Such  a 
course  was  not  at  all  unusual,  and  invariably  accompanied  the  found- 
ing of  every  major  orchestra  in  the  nation.  But  the  inevitable  threat 
of  noncooperation  of  local  musicians  was  averted  when  the  success 
of  the  project  became  apparent. 

Van  der  Stucken  is  popularly  referred  to  as  the  first  native-born 
American  conductor  of  a  major  symphony  orchestra.  Born  in  Texas 
(1858),  he  was  taken  to  Antwerp  as  a  child  of  eight  years,  received 
his  musical  training  in  Europe,  and  had  attained  a  certain  distinction 
there  before  returning  to  America  in  1884.  It  could  be  argued,  how- 
ever, that  Walter  Damrosch  and  Theodore  Thomas,  both  of  whom 
arrived  in  this  country  in  childhood  and  received  all  their  training 
in  the  United  States  and  so  exclusively  confined  their  activity  to  this 
country,  were  more  American  than  Van  der  Stucken,  whose  Amer- 
ican activity  was  flanked  by  professional  residence  in  Europe. 

But  the  fiscal  problem  reared  its  ugly  head.  At  the  close  of  the 
season  1906-07,  the  Cincinnati  orchestra  was  disbanded,  the  official 
reason  given  as  "labor  trouble."  Van  der  Stucken  departed  and  ac- 
cepted engagements  in  the  East  as  well  as  in  Europe. 

Since  there  was  no  intention  of  allowing  the  orchestra  to  Ian- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  117 

guish,  the  following  two  years  were  employed  in  fortifying  the 
system  of  financial  guarantees.  By  the  spring  of  1909  pledges  of 
$50,000  per  year  for  five  years  allowed  the  management  to  put  the 
whole  orchestra  on  season  contract,  and  to  engage  a  young  English 
conductor,  twenty-seven-year-old  Leopold  Stokowski,  who  had 
since  1905  been  organist  in  St.  Bartholomew's  Church  in  New  York. 

From  his  subsequent  eminence,  it  is  not  surprising  that  Sto- 
kowski's  incumbency  was  impressive,  even  though  without  benefit 
of  the  podium  trappings  that  he  conjured  up  in  later  years.  Inexperi- 
enced as  a  conductor,  he  was  quite  conventional,  employed  the  score 
and  the  stick.  But  he  was  enthusiastic  and  dynamic,  knew  his  reper- 
toire, and  he  precociously  scolded  his  audience  for  restlessness.  He 
was  democratic,  especially  when  the  orchestra  was  on  tour.  The 
men,  as  well  as  the  management,  genuinely  regretted  his  departure 
after  a  short  three-year  turn.  With  his  contract  still  two  years  to 
run,  he  requested  release,  pleading  "lack  of  cooperation."  Another 
view  of  his  abrupt  departure  saw  an  implied  slight  to  him  in  the  con- 
tinued use  of  outside  orchestras  and  conductors  for  the  May  Fes- 
tival. That  fall,  Stokowski  assumed  direction  of  the  Philadelphia 
Orchestra,  where  he  was  able  to  consummate  his  grandest  ambitions. 

His  successor  was  Dr.  Ernst  Kunwald,  who  had  held  several  posts 
in  Europe,  including  that  of  conductor  of  the  Berlin  Philharmonic 
popular  concerts.  Kunwald  was  a  master  of  detail  and  was  noted  for 
his  fine  memory.  His  regime  was  rudely  interrupted  by  the  war. 
His  status  of  enemy  alien,  together  with  certain  indiscretions  on  his 
part,  led  to  his  arrest  and  ultimate  deportation.  As  in  other  cities, 
hostile  public  sentiment  was,  however,  slow  to  crystallize.  At  first, 
the  public,  especially  that  part  of  the  public  concerned  with  music, 
was  proud  of  its  American  broad-mindedness  and,  steeped  in  sym- 
pathy for  German  culture,  conveniently  distinguished  the  blame- 
worthy German  government  from  its  innocent  people.  In  May,  1917, 
a  month  after  the  American  declaration  of  war,  Kunwald  could 
close  the  season  with  Haydn,  Bach,  and  Beethoven,  and  was  the  re- 
cipient of  a  vote  of  confidence  in  the  form  of  a  floral  offering. 

But  with  the  intensification  of  hostilities,  news  of  battle  casual- 
ties, and  the  mushrooming  of  war  activities,  sentiment  was  bound  to 
take  an  unfavorable  turn.  Kunwald,  who  had  been  dutifully  con- 


Il8  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

ducting  the  national  anthem,  was  now  accused  of  not  acknowledging 
its  applause.  The  Vienna-born  musician  had  never  kept  his  loyalty 
to  Austria  a  secret,  though  he  claimed  always  to  have  acted  "cor- 
rectly." If  reminiscences  of  some  of  his  players  are  to  be  trusted,  he 
expressed,  in  his  remarks  to  his  audience,  his  willingness  to  remain 
in  America  and  build  up  the  "finest  orchestra  in  the  country"  if  the 
public  wished  it,  though  he  frankly  acknowledged  that  "my  heart  is 
with  my  country."  His  first  resignation  was  not  accepted.  Arrested 
in  December,  1917,  he  was  interned  in  Fort  Oglethorpe  (official  ac- 
cusation never  divulged),  from  where  he  was  later  deported.  Guest 
conductors  for  the  remainder  of  the  season  were:  Walter  Rothwell, 
Victor  Herbert,  Henry  Hadley,  Gabrilowitsch,  and  Eugene  Ysaye. 
The  obvious  political  strategy  was  to  turn  to  our  allies  for  the 
next  conductor,  although  many  critics  protested  against  the  appar- 
ent indifference  to  American  candidates.  Ysaye,  the  Belgian  violin 
virtuoso,  who  had  turned  down  the  New  York  Philharmonic  in 
1898  and  now  found  himself  a  refugee  from  his  devastated  native 
country,  was  engaged  at  $25,000  on  a  five-year  contract.  He  was  a 
romantic  figure  of  leonine  proportions  and  imposingly  groomed. 
The  acknowledged  "king"  of  violinists  of  the  pre-Kreisler  age,  he 
played  with  abandon  and  enthralled  those  who  enjoyed  the  free,  un- 
restrained rubato  style.  But  now  his  powers  were  on  the  decline. 
Suffering  from  several  physical  ailments,  his  virtuosity  deserted  him. 
Nor  had  he  kept  abreast  of  current  trends.  He,  who  had  thrilled  his 
audiences  with  the  concertos  of  Vieuxtemps  and  Wieniawski,  found 
that  Stravinsky  "made  me  dizzy;  and  all  modern  music  was  just  that 
much  noise."  50  In  his  conducting  he  became  erratic,  affected  in  man- 
ner, lackadaisical  in  discipline,  and  was  neglectful  of  even  the  sim- 
plest administrative  requirements  in  planning  and   executing  the 
repertoire.  In  1922  after  "differences  with  the  Board,"  he  departed 
for  his  native  country,  where  he  died  in  193 1. 

Wounds  of  war  had  healed  sufficiently  to  allow  a  reversion  to  the 
country  which  before  the  war  was  the  most  reliable  source  of  talent 
—Germany.  The  Cincinnati  post  was  offered  to  Fritz  Reiner,  who 
was  then  conductor  at  the  Royal  Opera  in  Dresden,  after  a  rumored 
rejection  by  Koussevitzky.  Reiner,  then  thirty-four  years  old,  was 


THE  FIRST  CINCINNATI  MAY  FESTIVAL,   I  873, 
THEODORE  THOMAS,  CONDUCTOR 

The  period  of  music  festivals  and  Saengerfeste  ivas  an  epoch  of  expanding 
musical  interests.  Note  the  seating  arrangement  of  the  orchestra,  with  the 
cellos  and  double  basses  in  the  middle.  (From  a  conte?nporary  sketch.  The 
Bettmann  Archive) 


DIMITRI  MITROPOULOS 

A  Greek  contribution  to  American  music,  Mitropoulos  is  shown  con- 
ducting the  New  York  Fhilharmonic-Symphony  Orchestra.  From  1937 
to  1949,  he  directed  the  Minneapolis  Symphony  Orchestra.  (Courtesy 
of  New  York  Fhilharmonic-Symphony  Orchestra) 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  119 

almost  unknown  in  America  although  the  Dresden  Opera  had  car- 
ried him  to  prominence  in  Europe.  He  spoke  English  rather  fluently, 
and  was  obviously  a  thoroughly  schooled  musician. 

Reiner  left  in  193 1  to  accept  a  post  in  the  Curtis  Institute,  Phila- 
delphia, and  was  followed  by  Eugene  Goossens,  one  of  the  most 
versatile  of  present-day  conductors.  He  had  created  a  sensation  in 
England  in  a  brief  career  with  his  own  specially  assembled  group. 
His  enterprising  and  antiromantic  repertoire  included  in  192 1  Stra- 
vinsky's Sucre  du  Printemps,  which  made  a  profound  impression  on 
his  Queen's  Hall  audience,  and  many  other  contemporary  works. 
His  experience  embraced  the  opera,  in  which  he  was  a  protege  of 
Thomas  Beecham,  and  the  ballet,  in  which  he  conducted  the  Diaghi- 
leff  troupe.  Composer  of  over  a  half  hundred  compositions,  his  name 
has  appeared  on  the  programs  of  orchestras  both  in  Europe  and  the 
United  States.  Goossens  was  not  a  glamorous  conductor,  and  lacked 
•  therefore  the  popularity  that  derives  from  a  colorful  personality.  He 
did  his  conducting  "straight"  without  flourish  or  temperament,  and 
he  was  rather  democratic  in  his  relations  both  with  the  public  and 
his  men.  Because  of  his  diversified  experience,  his  repertoire  was 
expanded  to  include  the  ballet  and  the  opera. 

In  1947,  after  sixteen  years  of  association,  both  Mr.  Goossens 
and  Cincinnati  were  reconciled  to  a  change.  When  Goossens  an- 
nounced his  acceptance  of  the  directorship  of  the  orchestra  in  Syd- 
ney, Australia,  there  was  considerable  agitation  to  appoint  the  noted 
Frenchman,  Paul  Paray,  who  would  presumably  have  placed  the 
orchestra  among  the  best  in  the  nation.  But,  if  Paray  ever  had  any 
intention  of  accepting  the  offer,  it  was  not  evident  in  his  prohibitive 
financial  terms. 

The  choice  settled  on  a  young  American,  Thor  Johnson,  then  a 
member  of  the  Juilliard  faculty  in  New  York.  A  product  of  Kousse- 
vitzky's  Tanglewood  school  and  a  student  of  European  teachers,  he 
had  created  a  sufficiently  favorable  impression  in  guest  appearances 
in  Chicago,  Philadelphia,  and  Cincinnati  to  merit  the  offer  of  a  per- 
manent post.  Cincinnati  thereby  became  the  oldest  major  orchestra 
with  an  American  conductor,  with  Detroit  and  Los  Angeles  the 
only  major  orchestras  with  an  American  director  at  that  time. 


120  THE    AMERICAN    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

The  orchestra  has  inherited  fine  auditorium  facilities.  During  its 
first  two  seasons,  the  concerts  were  given  in  Pike's  Opera  House. 
But  from  1896  to  191 1,  the  orchestra  used  the  famous  old  Music 
Hall,  built  in  1878.  With  its  capacity  of  3,600  this  auditorium  proved 
too  large— a  problem  also  encountered  by  Theodore  Thomas  in 
Chicago.  The  hall  could  never  be  filled,  tickets  were  never  at  a 
premium,  and  consequently  morale  was  low.  At  this  time,  Mrs. 
Thomas  J.  Emery  had  undertaken  the  construction  of  an  auditorium 
for  the  Ohio  Mechanics  Institute,  which  proved  easily  adapted  to 
the  needs  of  the  orchestra  from  191 1  to  1936,  when  expanded  needs 
turned  them  again  to  the  historic  Music  Hall. 

The  orchestra  has  accumulated  an  endowment  fund,  heavy  con- 
tributions to  which  were  made  from  the  estates  of  Cora  Dow 
(191 5),  Mrs.  Nicholas  Longworth  (1923),  and  Mrs.  Victoria 
Hoover  (1924).  This  capital  amount  is,  of  course,  far  from  adequate 
to  cancel  the  inevitable  deficits  of  an  active  organization.  Friends  of 
the  orchestra  undertake  to  raise  an  annual  maintenance  fund  to  sup- 
plement the  endowment.  Among  the  most  generous  patrons  of  the 
orchestra  have  been  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Charles  P.  Taft,  who  not  only 
quietly  assumed  the  deficits  of  the  orchestra  during  the  twenties, 
but  likewise  were  the  motivating  force  in  founding  the  Institute  of 
Fine  Arts  for  the  permanent  civic  sponsorship  of  the  arts. 

REPERTOIRE  A  unique  reputation  for  diligent  cultivation 
of  the  American  composer  had  preceded  the  Texas-born  Van  der 
Stucken  when  he  made  his  debut  in  a  guest  program  in  Cincinnati 
in  1895  and  amply  fulfilled  this  promise  with  an  all- American  pro- 
gram of  Chadwick,  Foote,  Victor  Herbert,  Parker,  and  MacDowell. 
He  had  been  enacting  similar  exploits  in  New  York  since  1884,  and 
was  reputed  to  have  been  the  first  to  reverse  the  customary  flow  by 
carrying  to  Europe  a  sample  of  American  creative  music.  He  pre- 
sented an  all-American  program  on  foreign  soil  at  the  Paris  Exposi- 
tion in  1889. 

Away  from  the  Eastern  atmosphere,  where  the  physical  presence 
of  the  American  composers  and  the  nativistic  journalism  exerted 
their  pressure,  his  Americanism  quickly  subsided.  But  he  was  still 
the  aggressive,  enterprising  conductor,  espousing  liberally  the  music 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  1 2 1 

of  Sibelius,  three  per  cent,  and  Strauss,  five  per  cent.  But  his  some- 
what excessive  devotion  to  Liszt  (seven  per  cent)  and  Saint-Saens 
(six  per  cent)  was  not  sufficient  to  avoid  the  accusation  of  mod- 
ernism. 

If  Stokovski  (in  the  then  current  orthography)  had  not  yet 
evinced  the  symptoms  of  his  later  experimentalism,  his  regime  did 
expose  his  romantic  inclinations  by  allowing  Tschaikowsky  (four- 
teen per  cent)  to  dispute  the  traditional  throne  of  Beethoven's  thir- 
teen per  cent.  Brahms  received  the  normal  allowance,  while  Strauss' 
six  per  cent  was  at  that  time  twice  the  national  average.  The  poten- 
tialities of  a  blend  of  these  romantic  propensities  with  the  classic 
Bach  apparently  had  not  yet  occurred  to  the  twenty-eight-year- 
old  conductor. 

Kunwald  was  almost  completely  enclosed  in  the  Austro-German 
orbit,  musically  as  well  as  politically.  Like  Gericke  and  Muck  in 
Boston,  Kunwald  followed  the  broad  and  safe  path  leading  from 
Haydn,  through  Mozart,  Beethoven,  Brahms  and  Schumann,  to 
Wagner  and  Strauss,  and  accumulated  a  total  Teutonic  repertoire, 
for  the  immediate  prewar  years,  of  seventy  per  cent  of  the  entire 
Cincinnati  repertoire.  His  modernism  hardly  extended  beyond 
Strauss,  and  almost  completely  avoided  even  such  "novelties"  as 
Debussy. 

With  Ysaye,  the  French  influence  had  its  day  for  the  first  time, 
and  rose  to  the  unprecedented  total  of  over  twenty  per  cent,  the 
result  of  a  coincidence  of  the  temper  of  the  war  period  and  the 
predilections  of  the  conductor.  Saint-Saens,  d'Indy,  Franck,  and 
Berlioz  prospered,  and  several  of  these  tasted  prominence  for  the 
last  time. 

With  Reiner  and  Goossens  came  the  inevitable  postwar  return 
to  "normalcy."  International  tensions,  which  produced  temporary 
affectations  in  the  taste,  were  eased.  The  French  contingent  was 
deflated  from  a  previous  twenty-two  per  cent  to  nine  per  cent  in 
the  first  five  years  of  the  Central-European  Reiner,  while  the  Austro- 
German  group  recovered  some  of  its  lost  prestige.  But  the  day  of 
the  German-saturated  sophisticates,  dictating  an  unchallenged  Teu- 
tonic program  was  gone  forever.  The  Mucks,  Gerickes,  and  Kun- 
walds  were  not  recalled,  and  the  high  priorities  granted  the  German 


122  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

stalwarts  before  the  war  were  not  to  be  regained.  But  never  has  this 
reaction  been  sufficient  to  dislodge  the  Teutons  from  their  position 
of  dominance. 

Goossens'  impulsion  in  the  British  direction  was  not  unexpected, 
and  from  an  ignominious  two  per  cent  under  the  Teutonic  Reiner, 
the  British  leaped  to  a  respectable  seven  per  cent  within  several  years. 
American  representation  likewise  gained  under  Goossens,  who  had 
spent  an  American  apprenticeship  of  eight  years  as  conductor  of  the 
Rochester  Philharmonic.  By  1945,  for  the  first  time  since  the  days 
of  Van  der  Stucken,  Cincinnati  competed  with  Boston  itself  for  the 
premier  position  in  the  espousal  of  the  American  composers,  among 
whom,  of  course,  Goossens  by  this  time  could  count  himself. 

The  Philadelphia  Orchestra  (1900) 

The  musical  ancestry  of  the  Philadelphia  Orchestra  extends  back 
almost  into  colonial  days.  This  orchestra  did  not  have  the  Minerva- 
like birth  of  the  Boston  or  Chicago  orchestras,  whose  sponsors  called 
into  being  full-fashioned  structures  which  immediately  launched 
distinguished  concert  series.  Neither  can  it  show  the  unbroken,  but 
precarious,  duration  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  whose  almost 
miraculous  survival  concealed  the  fundamental  vicissitudes  that  it 
had  undergone. 

Officially,  the  Philadelphia  Orchestra  appeared  on  the  scene  late, 
after  New  York,  Boston,  Chicago,  and  even  Cincinnati  and  St.  Louis 
all  had  well-established  institutions.  This  lag  is  sometimes  ascribed 
to  the  survival  of  austere  Quaker  traditions  that  frowned  on  the 
pleasures  of  instrumental  music  and  other  pastimes  that  seemed  in- 
compatible with  modest  and  industrious  existence.51  This  theory 
may  seem  to  gain  support  in  the  existence  of  blue  laws  which,  prior 
to  1934,  forbade  Sunday  concerts  (and  baseball)  for  an  admission 
fee;  but  ignores  the  fact  that,  throughout  almost  150  years,  Philadel- 
phia had  been  enjoying  a  continuous  musical  life  quite  commensu- 
rate with  its  size  and  commercial  importance.  It  had  a  well-estab- 
lished opera  series  in  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and 
harbored  musicians  of  some  note  from  its  earliest  days,  among  whom 
were  Reinagle,  Hopkinson,  and  Fry.  The  city  was  included  in  the 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  123 

tours  of  sensational  soloists,  Jenny  Lind,  Sontag,  Patti,  and  of  the 
leading  orchestras,  such  as  the  Theodore  Thomas,  Jullien,  Musard, 
and  Germania  groups.  Manufacturing  and  publishing  were  in  thriv- 
ing condition.  As  early  as  1854,  we  read  in  a  letter  from  a  Philadel- 
phia correspondent: 

Although  this  is  termed  the  Quaker  City,  and  you  know  that  Quakers 
are  opposed  to  music,  yet  so  much  attention  is  paid  to  it,  and  so  much 
interest  is  felt,  that  those  engaged  in  the  pianoforte  business  cannot  get 
instruments  enough  to  satisfy  half  the  demand.  .  .  .  Musical  entertain- 
ments pay  remarkably  well.  Jullien  gave  four  concerts  to  crowded 
houses.52 

While  it  is  true  that  the  Society  of  Friends  discouraged  levity 
and  was  hostile  toward  musical  indulgence,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  by  no  means  were  all  Philadelphians  affiliated  with  that  faith,  and 
that  Quakers  were  characteristically  tolerant  toward  divergent  beliefs. 

The  records  of  public  concerts  in  Philadelphia  begin  as  early  as 
1757  when  a  series  of  programs  was  offered,  admission  one  dollar, 
one  of  which  George  Washington  attended.  James  Bremner,  organ- 
ist, composer,  and  teacher,  settled  in  Philadelphia  in  1763  and  or- 
ganized a  concert  program  in  1765  that  included  a  Stamitz  overture, 
a  Geminiani  concerto,  and  overtures  by  Martini  and  Arne.  In  the 
post-Revolutionary  period  similar  programs  were  instituted  by  John 
Bentley  and  Alexander  Reinagle,  who  included  in  their  repertoire 
the  compositions  of  Corelli,  Mozart,  Haydn,  Stamitz,  and  K.  P.  E. 
Bach.  During  the  period  of  the  Constitutional  Convention,  George 
Washington  again  indicates  by  entries  in  his  diary  his  attendance  at 
the  Reinagle  concert. 

The  most  important  single  local  antecedent  to  the  present  orches- 
tra during  the  first  half  of  the  last  century  was  the  establishment  of 
the  Musical  Fund  Society  in  1820.  Its  origin  dates  back  to  a  concert 
given  in  1 8 1 5  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor,  which  yielded  over  $  1 ,000. 
From  this  success  sprang  the  idea  of  a  series  of  concerts  "for  the 
relief  and  support  of  decayed  musicians  and  their  families  and  the 
cultivation  of  skill  and  diffusion  of  taste  in  music."  53  These  two 
objectives,  formulated  on  similar  English  models,  were  admirably 
pursued  during  the  active  period  of  the  society  from  1820  to  1857, 
and  somewhat  more  sporadically  even  up  to  the  present  time.  This 


124  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

society  enlisted  the  aid  of  the  nonprofessional  but  music-loving 
public,  whose  subscriptions  furnished  a  broad  base  and  a  solid 
foundation  for  the  "Fund"  with  which  to  implement  their  idealistic 
purposes.  Their  auditorium,  Musical  Fund  Hall  at  Eighth  and  Locust 
Streets,  erected  in  1824,  had  a  capacity  of  2,000,  was  available  for 
opera  and  miscellaneous  public  purposes,  and  constituted  an  impor- 
tant source  of  revenue  to  the  society.  However,  during  the  period 
of  unprecedented  economic  prosperity  in  that  city  after  1850,  inter- 
est in  the  Musical  Fund  Orchestra  waned  while  the  more  sumptu- 
ous opera  gained  adherents.  Therefore,  with  the  construction  in 
1855  of  the  Academy  of  Music,  an  auditorium  with  a  capacity  of 
3,000,  the  Musical  Fund  Society  went  into  partial  eclipse. 

The  Academy,  an  appellation  of  prestige  at  the  time,  was  so 
named  after  the  New  York  Academy  of  Music  at  Fourteenth  Street 
and  Irving  Place,  then  the  home  of  both  the  opera  and  the  New 
York  Philharmonic  Orchestra.  The  new  hall  in  Philadelphia  was 
advantageously  located  in  the  then  "quiet"  section  of  the  city  at 
Broad  and  Locust.  This  Renaissance  structure,  which  still  serves  the 
Philadelphia  Orchestra  today,  was  built  on  the  plan  of  La  Scala  in 
Milan,  Italy.  It  is  famous  for  its  excellent  acoustics  and  is  now  the 
oldest  concert  hall  in  the  United  States  in  use  by  a  major  orchestra. 
In  order  to  insure  its  preservation,  a  controlling  block  of  stock  was 
purchased  in  1950  by  the  Orchestral  Association. 

Though  opera  gained  ascendancy,  a  succession  of  ensembles  kept 
an  interest  in  orchestral  music  alive.  The  Germania  Orchestra,  a 
professional  cooperative  organization  similar  to  the  New  York  Phil- 
harmonic, founded  in  1856,  overlapped  with  the  Musical  Fund  Soci- 
ety Orchestra  for  nearly  forty  years— until  1895— and  constituted  a 
kind  of  orchestral  backdrop  for  the  city's  music  activity.  About  half 
of  its  membership  was  later  absorbed  by  the  orchestra  founded  by 
Henry  Gordon  Thunder,  a  Philadelphia  organist  and  composer, 
which  became,  in  turn,  the  nucleus  for  the  present  Philadelphia 
Orchestra,  founded  in  1900. 

However,  these  forerunners  of  the  present  orchestra  were  exclu- 
sively local  affairs  with  no  formal  sponsorship  and  economic  support, 
and  were  artistically  tentative  in  taste  and  technical  compe- 
tence. Until  Theodore  Thomas  was  spirited  to  Chicago,  Philadel- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  125 

phia  had  regularly  enjoyed  its  quota  of  his  concerts.  After  that 
period,  the  New  York  Symphony  under  Damrosch,  and  the  Boston 
Symphony  Orchestra  under  Gericke  and  Nikisch  periodically  satis- 
fied the  cravings  of  the  more  discriminating  tastes  with  five  to  ten 
concerts  per  season.  This  expedient  of  borrowed  plumes  could 
hardly  be  a  matter  of  pride  to  a  city  of  over  a  million  population, 
nor  yield  adequate  aesthetic  gratification  to  the  growing  number  of 
cultivated  amateurs.  A  large  number  of  these  avocational  players 
had,  in  1893,  formed  the  Philadelphia  Symphony  Society,  an  ama- 
teur organization  conducted  by  W.  W.  Gilchrist,  and  it  was  this 
group  which  supplied  the  organizational  spark  though  not,  of  course, 
the  professional  personnel,  that  energized  the  new  movement. 

During  the  summer  of  1899  Fritz  Scheel,  a  German  musician 
recently  from  San  Francisco,  conducted  a  series  of  concerts  at 
Woodside  Park.  In  these  concerts,  as  well  as  subsequent  ones,  Scheel 
created  a  tremendously  favorable  impression.  Here  seemed  to  be  the 
man  and  the  occasion  to  kindle  interest  in  a  permanent  orchestra. 
Mr.  Dunglison,  president  of  the  Musical  Fund  Society,  acting  in 
consonance  with  the  ideals  of  the  society,  called  a  meeting  of  civic 
leaders,  secured  120  guarantors  who  raised  $15,000  to  which  the 
Fund  contributed  $500,  and  announced  the  first  six  concerts  of  the 
Philadelphia  Orchestra  to  begin  November  16,  1900.  Previously, 
Theodore  Thomas  and  Walter  Damrosch  had  had  their  supporters 
for  the  proposed  new  orchestra.  In  fact,  Mrs.  E.  D.  Gillespie,  warm 
friend  and  patron  of  Thomas,  and  President  of  the  Woman's  Com- 
mission of  the  Philadelphia  Centennial,  was  moved  to  boycott  the 
new  project  with  the  failure  of  her  candidate.  Some  progress  had 
also  been  made  toward  inviting  Walter  Damrosch  and  his  New  York 
Symphony  Society  to  transfer  to  Philadelphia,  as  Thomas  had  moved 
to  Chicago.  This  plan  engendered  violent  opposition  and  was  soon 
dropped. 

Scheel,  who  had  been  an  assistant  to  Bulow  in  Germany,  had 
conducted  an  orchestra  at  the  Columbia  Exposition  in  Chicago 
(1893)  and  a  San  Francisco  orchestra  in  1895-99.  He  possessed  an 
extensive  knowledge  of  repertoire,  was  a  good  judge  of  musical 
talent,  achieved  disciplined  command  of  his  men,  and  maintained 
high  standards,  if  not  an  advanced  taste.  Such  qualities,  though 


126  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

admirable,  are  not  of  a  sort  to  insure  wide  public  participation  after 
first  enthusiasms  have  been  dissipated.  Scheel  used  to  remark  that  he 
was  thankful  that  the  conductor  always  turned  his  back  to  the  audi- 
ence so  that  he  could  forget  its  vanishing  size.  In  an  auditorium  with 
a  capacity  of  3,000,  the  orchestra,  during  its  first  years,  frequently 
had  to  content  itself  with  an  audience  of  only  600. 

Although  Dr.  Edward  I.  Keffer,  an  amateur  violinist  and  dentist 
by  profession,  was  the  leading  spirit  at  its  founding,  the  Orchestral 
Association  must  attribute  its  subsequent  stability  to  two  converts 
to  the  cause,  who  had  previously  evinced  no  interest  in  orchestral 
music,  but  became  most  faithful  workers  in  the  vineyard:  Alexan- 
der van  Rensselaer,  its  president  for  thirty-five  years  (1900-35),  and 
Edward  Bok,  editor  of  The  Ladies  Home  Journal,  who  is  generally 
conceded  to  have  "saved"  the  orchestra,  with  an  annual  contribution 
of  $100,000  from  1916  to  1920.  He  joined  the  board  in  191 3-54 

The  Woman's  Committee,  founded  in  1904,  when  the  infant 
orchestra  was  in  financial  straits,  has  also  played  a  major  role  in  the 
social  and  financial  security  of  the  orchestra.  Its  activities  have  for 
years  been  directed  by  Miss  Frances  A.  Wister,  a  member  of  one  of 
Philadelphia's  oldest  families,  who  still  presides  over  the  ritual  of 
presenting,  from  the  stage  of  the  Academy  on  the  last  Friday 
matinee  of  the  season,  the  traditional  gold  watch  to  memorialize  a 
player's  completion  of  twenty-five  years  of  service  to  the  orchestra. 

During  the  first  year  of  its  existence,  the  orchestra  was  still  com- 
posed of  local  musicians,  who  had  joined  the  orchestra  to  supple- 
ment their  professional  income  and  to  gratify  their  higher  taste.  As 
in  every  other  city,  it  was  soon  discovered  that  no  first-class  orches- 
tra could  be  forged  out  of  local  talent.  It  was  necessary  to  tap  a 
wider  market,  which,  in  keeping  with  those  times,  was,  of  course, 
Europe.  For  this  purpose,  Scheel  was  authorized  to  go  abroad  to 
recruit  new  members,  a  move  against  which  the  pathetic  protests  of 
the  local  musicians  were  entirely  impotent.  The  assurance  of  the 
committee  that  "it  would  accept  every  Philadelphia  musician  who 
was  competent"  consoled  only  those  few  who  could  compete  with 
the  available  European  importations.  Many  local  players  were  ruth- 
lessly replaced,  to  the  undoubted  benefit  of  the  artistry  of  the 
orchestra,  but  to  the  great  personal  grief  of  the  less  proficient.  Like 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  127 

the  other  orchestras,  this  one  had  inevitably  floated  helplessly  along 
in  the  stream  of  events.  Initiating  the  laudable  project  of  a  Phila- 
delphia symphony  orchestra,  the  committee  had  announced  its 
belief  that 

with  a  sufficient  number  of  rehearsals,  under  a  capable  director,  our 
home  players  will  be  able  to  render  great  orchestral  compositions  effi- 
ciently and  acceptably. 

But  within  less  than  two  years 

Fritz  Scheel  .  .  .  changed  the  personnel  list  so  it  read  like  the  roster  of 
every  court  orchestra  in  Germany.55 

Unable  to  endure  the  heavy  demands  made  upon  his  varied  serv- 
ices to  the  community,  Scheel  died  in  1907,  and  was  followed  by 
Karl  Pohlig,  who  had  to  his  credit  a  considerable  experience  in 
Germany,  Austria,  and  England,  and  was  brought  to  Philadelphia 
direct  from  Stuttgart.  His  five-year  regime  in  Philadelphia  was  un- 
distinguished—a kind  of  interregnum  between  the  lamented  Scheel 
and  the  dazzling  Stokowski.  Temperamental  friction  hastened  his 
relinquishment  of  his  $12,000  job.  Pohlig  returned  to  Germany  in 
191 2,  received  a  life  appointment  as  General  Musical  Director  of  the 
Court  Opera  in  Braunschweig,  where  he  died  in  1928. 

Scheel  and  Pohlig  survived  several  real  crises,  and  put  the  orches- 
tra on  a  fairly  secure  musical  footing,  but  were  not  able  to  enlist 
great  wealth  in  support  of  the  orchestra.  It  was  left  to  Leopold 
Stokowski  to  exploit  public  support  to  the  limit  and  to  elevate  the 
organization  to  a  place  rivaling  the  best  in  the  world. 

In  Philadelphia,  Stokowski  quickly  succeeded  in  riveting  the 
attention  of  the  public  upon  his  work  by  his  daring  technical  and 
administrative  innovations  and  his  unconventional  programming. 
The  management  was  kept  in  perpetual  nervous  suspense  over  his 
next  demand,  and  his  audience,  in  a  dither  of  curiosity  for  the  next 
surprise.  He  abandoned  score  and  baton;  he  reseated  the  orchestra; 
he  played  incomprehensible  music  and  scolded  the  audience  for  its 
indifference  toward  it.  Experimentally,  he  permitted  the  violinists 
to  bow  independently;  in  1929,  he  passed  around  the  concertmaster 
position  in  alphabetical  order.  He  virtually  compressed  evolutionary 
eras  into  the  span  of  a  few  years. 


128  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

But  he  elicited  loyalty  from  patrons  and  civic  bodies  and  capital- 
ized upon  every  circumstance  to  gain  notoriety  for  himself,  for  the 
orchestra,  and  for  the  community.  His  contemporaries  among  the 
orchestra  personnel,  patrons,  and  associates  still  recount  anecdotes 
of  his  kaleidoscopic  temperament:  his  modesty  and  conceit,  his  gen- 
erosity and  his  cruelty,  his  permanent  reforms  as  well  as  his  experi- 
mental failures,  his  affability  and  his  social  aloofness,  his  wit  and 
sarcasm,  his  "Polish  accent"  and  his  lapses  into  conventional 
English.  Like  so  many  other  colorful  figures,  he  was  an  enigma  in 
that  he  had  his  enthusiasts  as  well  as  his  detractors.  But  whether  he 
is  viewed  as  a  poseur  who  impressed  the  ladies  and  inhibited  the 
critics,  or  a  musician  of  discernment  and  inspiration,  a  charlatan  or 
a  genius,  he  packed  the  house,  and  there  were  until  recently  occa- 
sional voices  who  proclaimed  that  the  orchestra  was  still  traveling 
on  the  prestige  of  his  era. 

One  of  his  early  predilections  was  the  staging  of  monumental 
works,  as  for  example:  Schoenberg's  Gurrelieder,  Stravinsky's  Oedi- 
pus Rex,  and  Prokofieff's  Pas  d'Acier.  The  first  and  most  sensational 
of  these  was  the  Mahler  Symphony  No.  8,  The  Symphony  of  a 
Thousand,  in  the  spring  of  191 6.  Stokowski  had  attended  the  world 
premiere  of  this  symphony  in  Munich  in  19 10,  which  had  given  him 
a  sensation  like  that  of  "the  first  white  man  to  behold  Niagara  Falls." 
Shortly  after  his  arrival  in  Philadelphia,  this  thirty-year-old  con- 
ductor launched  his  plans  for  what  was  then  considered  a  fantastic 
project.  It  required  an  appropriation  of  about  $15,000,  which  the 
board  skeptically  approved.  The  symphony  was  performed  nine 
times  in  Philadelphia,  and  was  transferred  to  New  York  for  a  single 
performance  at  a  cost  to  the  New  York  management  of  $12,000. 
The  nine  Philadelphia  performances  left  $10,000  worth  of  orders 
unfilled,  while  ticket  scalpers  reaped  the  benefits  of  the  short  supply 
—a  thing  almost  incredible  to  contemplate  for  a  symphony  concert! 

The  affair  was  both  sensational  and  musically  notable.  It  brought 
the  professional  elite  to  Philadelphia.  Patrons  gasped  at  the  technical 
and  administrative  virtuosity  of  the  youthful  conductor,  but  were 
less  unanimous  on  the  aesthetic  contribution  of  the  work.  Some 
critics  condemned  it  as  a  circus  performance  of  Kapellmeistermusik, 
sanctioned  by  newspapers  and  promotion-minded  board  members 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  129 

more  bent  on  flamboyant  publicity  than  sincere  advancement  of  a 
noble  cause.  Whether  or  not  such  a  cynical  view  is  justified,  there 
is  no  doubt  that  the  event  catapulted  the  city,  the  orchestra,  and 
the  young  conductor  into  an  intoxicating  position  of  notoriety  from 
which  each  and  all  distilled  the  last  ounce  of  profit.  The  Philadelphia 
Chamber  of  Commerce  was  moved  to  pass  a  resolution  of  commen- 
dation, in  which  it  ventured  the  opinion  that  the  symphony  orches- 
tra "was  a  commercial  asset  to  the  city,  rendering  it  thereby  more 
attractive  to  visitors,  a  better  home  for  its  citizens  and  of  greater 
value  to  the  nation."  5G  The  orchestra  was  lifted  from  its  sixteen- 
year-old  status  of  a  stepchild,  during  which  "the  story  ...  is  one  of 
constant  begging  on  the  part  of  everybody  connected  with  the 
institution,"  57  to  a  position  of  strength  from  which  it  was  able  to 
launch  two  endowment  campaigns  netting  nearly  two  million  dollars 
within  several  years— a  success  sufficient  to  convert  even  a  carping 
critic  to  the  belief  that  the  cause  of  music  had  been  advanced.  As  for 
Mr.  Stokowski,  who  engineered  the  project  and  had  conducted  the 
massive  spectacle  without  a  score,  it  marked  him  as  "the"  conductor 
of  the  decade,  won  him  a  doctorate  from  the  University  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, and  four  years  later,  the  Philadelphia  award  of  $10,000  for 
having  made  the  greatest  contribution  to  civic  affairs.  It  also  precip- 
itated the  recurrent  rumor  that  he  would  probably  soon  "go  to  a 
larger  city"— all  of  which  likewise  redounded  to  the  benefit  of  every 
one  concerned.  That  this  advantage  should  not  slip  away  unexploited 
during  the  crucial  five-year  endowment  campaign,  the  provision  was 
agreed  upon  that  "the  contract  of  the  present  conductor,  Leopold 
Stokowski,  shall  be  extended  to  cover  this  period  of  five  years." 

The  extended  story  of  the  performance  of  the  Mahler  Symphony 
No.  8  testifies  to  a  unique  circumstance:  never  before,  and  probably 
never  since,  has  a  permanent  symphony  orchestra  and  its  activity 
been  so  thoroughly  integrated  with  the  life  of  a  city.  Never  before 
had  there  been  such  a  genius  for  publicity  who  extended  the  func- 
tional boundaries  of  a  concert  so  far  into  nonmusical  realms.  It  was 
a  civic  enterprise  in  which  one  thousand  citizens  cooperated  in  the 
actual  performance,  in  which  commercial  and  cultural  interests 
were  well  mobilized,  and  in  which,  still  more  miraculously,  each 
interest  was  completely  gratified  with  the  results. 


I30  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

The  new  conductor  felt  that  the  desirable  improvements  in 
orchestral  performances,  as  well  as  their  audience  effect,  could  not 
be  achieved  with  the  conventional  disposition  of  the  personnel.  To 
that  end,  Stokowski  instituted  a  number  of  rearrangements  in  the 
seating  of  the  orchestra,  one  of  which  has  been  extensively  copied 
by  other  orchestras:  the  shift  of  the  cellos  to  the  front  right,  a 
position  occupied  traditionally  by  the  second  violins  for  more  than 
seventy-five  years. 

A  more  drastic  transformation,  more  melodramatic  than  valid, 
was  that  of  the  "upside-down"  5S  orchestra,  sprung  upon  the  audience 
in  1939-40,  in  which  the  strings  were  ignominiously  shunted  to  the 
rear  of  the  stage,  and  the  woodwinds,  brass,  and  tympani  moved  to 
the  front.  This  promotion  of  the  winds  was  in  part  a  recognition 
of  their  growing  importance  in  modern  instrumentation;  but  it  was 
likewise  conjectured  that  the  strings,  being  weaker  than  the  winds, 
would  be  reflected  more  effectively  from  the  rear  walls  of  the  shell 
if  they  were  located  nearer  to  that  surface.  This  seating  plan  gained 
no  adherents  whatsoever  and  was  quickly  and  quietly  abandoned. 
But  it  was  an  indication  of  Stokowski's  growing  curiosity  concern- 
ing the  problems  of  acoustics,  electronics,  recording,  and  broadcast- 
ing, which  began  to  be  apparent  some  ten  years  previously  while  he 
was  experimenting  with  the  Bell  Telephone  Company.  In  1932  he 
was  probing  new  types  of  recordings  with  the  Victor  Company  in 
Camden;  in  1933  he  toyed  with  the  transmission  of  sound  by  tele- 
phonic reproduction  projected  into  the  auditorium  "with  undistorted 
sonority  giving  a  concert  from  an  empty  stage."  In  order  to  achieve 
"close  understanding  between  engineer  and  conductor,"  he  at  one 
time  (1933)  placed  the  control  engineer  on  the  stage  directly  in 
front  of  the  podium  instead  of  in  the  sound  booth.59  In  fact,  in  such 
quick  succession  did  those  devices  trickle  from  their  source,  that 
the  Musical  Courier  was  provoked  to  editorialize  in  March,  1933, 
that  "no  musical  season  can  properly  be  called  complete,  apparently, 
until  it  has  been  the  occasion  for  at  least  one  startling  innovation  by 
the  ingenious  Leopold  Stokowski." 

Mindful  that  the  final  test  of  music  is  its  effect  upon  the  ear  of 
the  listener,  Stokowski  undertook  to  reduce  visual  distractions  by 
darkening  the  stage  during  the  performance.  Thus  on  October  19, 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  131 

1926,  the  New  York  audience  found  a  yellow  insert  in  its  program 
book  which  carried  the  following  legend: 

The  conviction  has  been  growing  on  me  that  orchestra  and  conductor 
should  be  unseen,  so  that  on  the  part  of  the  listener  more  attention  will 
go  to  the  ear  and  less  to  the  eye.  The  experiment  of  an  invisible  orches- 
tra is  for  the  moment  impossible— so  I  am  trying  to  reach  a  similar  result 
by  reducing  the  light  to  a  minimum  necessary  for  the  artists  of  the  or- 
chestra to  see  their  music  and  their  conductor.  .  .  .  Music  is  by  its 
nature  remote  from  the  tangible  and  visible  things  of  life.  I  am  hoping 
to  intensify  its  mystery  and  eloquence  and  beauty. 

{signed)  Leopold  Stokowski 

The  stage  was  accordingly  darkened,  each  music  stand  equipped 
with  an  individual  desklight,  and  a  dim  yellow  Pentacostal  spotlight 
floated  down  from  the  ceiling  to  play  directly  on  the  head  of  the 
conductor.  Public  reaction  to  this  starlit  atmosphere  can  be  imagined. 
For  every  critic  who  found  the  new  arrangement  "restful  to  the 
eye,"  two  others  observed  how  it  "brought  into  dazzling  prominence 
his  mass  of  golden-colored  hair,"  but  that  it  "left  the  magnificent 
playing  of  the  orchestra  quite  unaffected." 

There  is  perhaps  some  validity  to  the  notion  that  the  sawings 
and  scrapings  and  other  gymnastic  contortions  of  the  players  and 
conductor  are  merely  so  much  machinery  which  should,  in  the 
interest  of  aesthetic  purity,  be  mercifully  concealed  from  the  audi- 
ence. However,  even  when  music  is  not  associated  with  any  other  art 
or  activity,  there  is  some  psychological  loss  in  transmission  to  the 
sense  organs  through  an  artificial  and  arbitrarily  enforced  segrega- 
tion of  the  senses.  Instead  of  interfering  with  one  another's  reception, 
the  simultaneous  appeal  to  various  sense  departments  more  com- 
monly intensifies  the  stimulus.  The  sense  of  smell  enriches  taste,  the 
eye  reinforces  the  ear,  one  sense  responding  unselfishly  in  the  service 
of  the  other.  While  conflict  and  distraction  are,  of  course,  perfectly 
possible,  a  well-modulated  coordination  of  gestures  of  the  conductor 
and  the  rhythmic  movements  of  the  players  aid  the  listener  in  focus- 
ing his  attention  on  the  music  and  accentuate  the  various  fragments 
and  contrasts  in  the  composition  rather  than  conflict  with  their 
enjoyment.  This  belief,  without  its  academic  trappings  of  psycho- 
logical theory,  seems  to  have  been  naively  sensed  by  audience  and 


132  THE    AMERICAN    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

management  alike,  and  constitutes  one  of  several  reasons  why  this 
interesting  excursion  was  quickly  abandoned. 

Stokowski  is  most  popularly  associated  with  his  batonless  con- 
ducting introduced  in  1930.  Although  Safonoff  had  dispensed  with 
the  baton  thirty  years  previously,  his  manual  technique  had  not 
been  elevated  into  an  art  of  its  own,  and  it  was  to  this  art  that 
Stokowski  gave  its  climactic  development.  His  arms,  wrists,  and 
hands  to  the  very  tips  of  his  fingers  became  interpretive  clues  to 
musicians  and  audiences  alike,  and  his  digital  choreography  became 
itself  the  subject  of  discussion  and  admiration.  The  baton  had  become 
merely  a  "stick,"  a  lifeless  encumbrance,  inadequate  to  transmit  the 
refined  and  delicate  nuances  of  an  inspired  soul. 

Stokowski  was  the  last  of  the  concert-platform  lecturers.  He  was 
rivaled  only  by  Walter  Damrosch,  who  was  already  retiring  from 
such  competition.  Today  chatting  across  the  footlights,  never  exten- 
sively cultivated,  is  a  lost  art.  Stokowski's  own  personal  eccentricities 
were  perhaps  epitomized  for  his  audiences  in  these  podium  talks.  At 
any  rate,  the  audiences  seemed  at  the  moment  to  acquire  personalities 
of  their  own,  too.  They  also  became  eccentric.  They  had  often 
carried  on  conversations,  coughed,  shammed  apathy  and  walked 
out,  and  finally  they  hissed.  And  "Stokie"  rebuked  them  for  hissing. 
The  occasion  was  Schoenberg's  Five  Orchestral  Pieces.  "You  have  a 
right  to  make  such  noises,"  he  told  them,  "we  on  our  part  have  a 
right  to  play  the  things  we  believe  in."  eo  In  the  fall  of  1929  he  told 
the  New  York  audience  that  there  was  a  large  waiting  list  for  the 
Philadelphia  concerts  and  that  the  subscribers  who  did  not  like  the 
programs  might  give  up  their  seats  to  accommodate  others.  He 
would  often  render  didactic  explanations  of  new  works,  as  he  did 
on  the  occasion  of  his  presentation  of  Stravinsky's  Sacre  du  Prin- 
temps,  when  he  urged  the  audience  to  understand  it:  "It  is  not  beau- 
tiful music,  but  expresses  a  state  of  nature."  61  At  times  he  could  be 
entertaining  and  witty.  Thus,  in  the  fall  of  1926,  when  he  was  prom- 
inently mentioned  as  the  conductor  for  the  merger  of  the  Philhar- 
monic and  the"  Symphony  Orchestra  of  New  York,  he  boasted  to 
the  audience,  after  receiving  vociferous  applause  for  a  Bach  program, 
"You  think  they  play  well?  .  .  .  Ah,  you  should  hear  my  two  New 
York  orchestras!"62  It  was  about  the  same  period  that  he  initiated 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  133 

a  referendum  on  whether  to  abolish  applause,  which  to  him  was  "a 
relic  of  the  dark  ages."  "The  strange  beating  of  the  hands  has  no 
meaning,"  he  declared  at  the  concert  of  November  8,  1929. 

Stokowski  was  now  at  his  peak,  and  generally  included  with 
Toscanini,  Koussevitzky,  and  Furtwangler  in  the  quartet  of  the 
world's  greatest  living  conductors.  His  salary  reached  a  reported 
high  of  more  than  $100,000  a  year.63  But  it  was  inevitable  that  such  a 
dynamic  character,  full  of  color  and  showmanship,  would  have  dif- 
ferences with  his  board.  It  is  also  normal  that  after  fourteen  years 
his  fascination  for  the  audience  should  have  been  to  a  certain  extent 
dissipated,  and  the  unity  of  his  Board  of  Directors  should  be  rup- 
tured. After  a  leave  of  absence  (1926-28),  he  gradually  reduced  his 
conducting  load.  From  1936  to  1940,  he  conducted  only  a  few  con- 
certs, in  the  fall  and  spring. 

In  the  fall  of  1936,  Eugene  Ormandy,  then  conductor  at  Minne- 
apolis, was  appointed  co-conductor.  From  the  first  he  undertook 
most  of  the  conducting  and  became  Musical  Director  in  1938.  After 
several  "resignations"  and  reconciliations,  Stokowski  finally  retired 
from  his  position  as  conductor-in-chief,  to  take  effect  at  the  close  of 
the  1935-36  season,  timed  to  synchronize— intentionally  or  not— 
almost  exactly  with  the  resignation  of  Toscanini  from  the  New  York 
Philharmonic-Symphony.  In  perfect  conformity  with  his  flamboyant 
career,  he  closed  the  season  with  a  transcontinental  tour  which  ended 
in  a  triumphant  epilogue  in  Madison  Square  Garden  on  a  Sunday 
evening  in  May,  1936,  where  he  conducted  a  concert  before  12,000 
persons,  only  about  two  weeks  after  Toscanini's  frenzied  farewell  in 
Carnegie  Hall  before  an  audience  one-fourth  that  size. 

With  the  passing  of  Stokowski,  the  orchestra  lost  some  color  in 
the  eyes  of  many  patrons.  But  at  the  same  time,  the  growing  musical 
maturity  of  the  audience  made  such  theatrical  excitement  much  less 
necessary.  Consequently  the  orchestra,  under  Eugene  Ormandy, 
now  settled  into  a  period  of  quiet  dignity  and  reserved  distinction. 

Running  true  to  form,  the  orchestra  suffered  from  persistent 
attacks  of  deficit  budgeting.  Although  it  has  at  times  shown  a  nominal 
surplus,  the  cumulative  losses  outran  the  efforts  of  all  philanthropic 
appeals.  When  the  union,  in  the  fall  of  1948,  demanded  a  higher 
scale,  the  bankrupt  management  threw  the  public  into  a  mild  panic 


134  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

by  officially  announcing  the  abandonment  of  the  concerts.  But,  of 
course,  the  incredible  could  not  happen.  Two  days  later,  the  usual 
"compromise  was  reached."  But  it  was  becoming  only  too  evident 
that  the  symphony  orchestras  of  the  land  were  left  orphans  by  the 
death  of  the  philanthropic  parents  who  had  originally  brought  them 
into  life.  Since  1947,  the  management  had  been  appealing  to  the  city 
fathers  to  adopt  the  child.  Finally,  in  the  fiftieth  year  of  the  orches- 
tra's existence,  the  City  Council  voted  $50,000— a  sum  equal  to  the 
annual  amusement  tax  paid  to  the  city  by  the  orchestra— to  purchase 
four  free  public  concerts  in  Convention  Hall.  These  were  performed 
before  an  average  audience  of  15,000  citizens.  Thus  one  more  city 
has  followed  what  seems  to  be  the  emerging  pattern  of  financial 
relief  of  the  harassed  symphony  orchestras. 

On  the  eve  of  its  semicentennial,  the  orchestra  was  able  to  fulfill 
a  promise  that  it  had  made  to  itself  as  long  ago  as  the  heyday  of  the 
Stokowski  era:  an  excursion  across  the  water.  But  depression  and 
war  had  conspired  to  cheat  it  out  of  a  junket  that  it  amply  deserved. 
Under  the  sponsorship  of  a  British  impresario,  it  finally  embarked 
on  a  tour  of  England  in  the  spring  of  1 949,  during  which  it  regaled 
the  enthusiastic  audiences  of  ten  cities  with  twenty-eight  concerts 
within  a  period  of  about  three  weeks.  This  was  the  fifth  American 
orchestra  to  have  undertaken  such  a  cross-cultural  mission,  the  others 
having  been  the  New  York  Symphony  under  Walter  Damrosch,  in 
1920;  the  New  York  Philharmonic  with  Toscanini  in  1930;  Tosca- 
nini's  NBC  orchestra  and  Stokowski's  Youth  Orchestra  to  South 
America  in  1940.  The  only  blemish  which  marred  the  orchestra's 
visit  in  Britain  is  noted  by  the  British  critic,  Ralph  Hill: 

The  recent  costly  and  badly  organized  adventure  of  bringing  the  Phila- 
delphia orchestra  over  to  England  is  a  good  example  of  the  public's  in- 
ability to  pay  fantastically  high  prices  for  seats,  even  for  an  exceptional 


occasion 


64 


REPERTOIRE  Fritz  Scheel  and  Karl  Pohlig  had  nourished 
the  orchestra  on  the  conventional  Germanic  fare,  alike  in  essentials, 
differing  only  in  such  particulars  as  Pohlig's  downright  idolatry  of 
Wagner,  and  the  somewhat  more  balanced  programs  of  Scheel. 
Pohlig  neglected  Beethoven  in  favor  of  the  more  popular  Wagner 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  135 

and  Tschaikowsky,  and  gave  unusual  weight  to  Goldmark  when  in 
other  cities  he  had  almost  dwindled  to  the  vanishing  point. 

If  ever  a  conductor  injected  his  personality  into  the  repertoire, 
it  was  Leopold  Stokowski.  His  incorrigible  and  restless  experimental- 
ism  often  made  the  Philadelphia  repertoire  a  temporary  shelter  for 
composers  who  appealed  to  the  conductor  as  worthy  of  at  least  one 
venturesome  performance.  It  was  thus  that  Carillo,  the  "microtone" 
specialist,  Varese,  Ornstein,  Brooks,  and  others  received  isolated 
hearings.  This  policy  was,  of  course,  a  bone  of  contention  with  the 
Board  of  Directors,  while  audience  reaction  was  a  mixture  of  excite- 
ment, amusement,  and  resentment.  In  1932  this  "debatable"  music 
was  attached  as  a  trailer  to  the  regular  program,  so  that  the  less  stout- 
hearted members  of  the  audience  could,  if  they  desired,  escape  the 
hazards  of  its  emotional  eddies. 

A  more  permanent  contribution  was  the  conductor's  affection 
for  the  master  of  his  first  instrument:  J.  S.  Bach.  He  arranged  for 
orchestra  several  dozen  titles:  chorale-preludes,  suites,  preludes, 
fugues,  and  miscellaneous  numbers,  treading  in  the  footsteps  of 
Mendelssohn  and  Joachim  in  inaugurating  another  Bach  revival.  The 
propriety  of  making  "gorgeous  tone  poems"  out  of  classic  models 
may  be  a  matter  of  taste  and  aesthetic  philosophy,  but  the  enrich- 
ment in  variety,  scope,  and  volume  of  the  Bach  repertoire,  which 
was  less  well  known  to  orchestral  habitues  than  to  piano  and  organ 
students,  was  a  grateful  pedagogical  service  to  the  general  cause  of 
historical  erudition.  His  all-Bach  program,  with  a  Bach  encore 
(December,  1926),  is  probably  as  unique  in  repertoire  annals  as  are 
the  left-wing  laboratory  compositions  that  caused  so  much  gossip. 
That  Bach,  aided  by  these  arrangements,  should  top  Tschaikowsky, 
Strauss,  and  Mozart,  threaten  Wagner,  and  approach  within  one  or 
two  percentage  points  of  even  Beethoven  and  Brahms  with  enthusi- 
astic acclaim  from  both  audience  and  management,  is  a  worthy  feat. 

Stokowski  seemed  to  have  an  affinity  for  compositions  that  lent 
themselves  to  rich  sonorities  and  pliant  melodic  lines.  Tschaikowsky, 
Rimsky-Korsakoff,  Strauss,  Sibelius,  and  Wagner  all  loomed  large 
in  his  concert  portfolio  at  some  time  or  other.  Philadelphia  led  all 
others  in  the  volume  of  Rimsky-Korsakoff.  But  Stravinsky,  Mias- 
kowsky,  Shostakovitch  and  many  others  he  also  welcomed  with 


I36  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

"first-time"  performances.  The  American  composer,  by  and  large, 
did  not  profit  from  his  explorations,  and  not  even  during  World 
War  I  did  American  music  exceed  a  modest  six  per  cent.  Responsi- 
bility for  this  inhospitality  to  native  composers  throughout  the 
history  of  the  orchestra  probably  derives  from  the  conductor's  dis- 
inclination toward  American  composers  and  from  their  relative 
scarcity  in  Philadelphia  as  compared  to  Boston,  New  York,  and 
Chicago. 

Under  Ormandy  the  breath-taking  experimental  quality  of  the 
repertoire  disappeared.  The  program  structure  became  no  less  virile 
but  more  predictable.  There  were,  of  course,  the  normal  fluctuations 
in  favorites.  Rachmaninoff  had  developed  an  especial  friendship  for 
the  orchestra,  and  his  proportion  in  1935-40,  several  years  before  his 
death,  was  about  three  per  cent,  with  a  slight  increase  since  that 
time.  The  vitality  of  Tschaikowsky  remained,  while  that  of  Strauss, 
Sibelius,  and  Wagner  all  fell  to  previous  levels.  With  the  departure 
of  Stokowski,  Bach  could  not  retain  his  extraordinary  preferment, 
but  was  reduced  by  half,  to  little  more  than  three  per  cent.  The 
Austro-German  group,  never  excessively  high  during  the  preceding 
twenty-five  years,  declined  to  a  still  substantial  fifty  per  cent,  of 
which  thirty  per  cent  is  accounted  for  by  those  bulwarks  of  the 
repertoire,  the  three  B's. 

The  Minneapolis  Symphony  Orchestra  (1903) 

The  Minneapolis  orchestra  began  as  an  adjunct  to  a  choral  society: 
the  "Filharmonix"  Choral  Society  which  was  founded  in  1892  to 
gratify  the  musical  propensities  of  the  Germans  and  Scandinavians. 
In  time,  however,  with  expanded  tastes,  they  felt  the  need  for  reliable 
orchestral  accompaniment,  which  could  be  assured  only  by  a  well- 
organized  permanent  orchestral  body  to  which  members  had  a  cer- 
tain loyalty,  and  to  which  they  were  bound  for  rehearsal  and  concert 
time. 

Emil  Oberhoffer,  German-born  musician,  then  an  organist  in 
Minneapolis  and  conductor  of  the  renamed  Philharmonic  club  since 
1 90 1,  undertook  to  assure  himself  such  an  orchestra  by  enlisting  the 
interest  of  philanthropic  citizens  in  this  more  costly  project.  The  civic 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  137 

leader  in  this  enterprise,  a  man  to  whom  the  musical  community  owes 
its  greatest  debt,  was  Elbert  L.  Carpenter,  lumberman,  amateur  mu- 
sician, and  co-founder  with  Oberhoffer  of  the  new  orchestra.  It  was 
he  who  not  only  contributed  of  his  own  wealth  but,  still  more  sig- 
nificantly, organized  the  business  and  commercial  interests  in  support 
of  a  type  of  project  that  had  already  gained  acceptance  in  the  Eastern 
cities.  Thus  in  1903  the  Minneapolis  Symphony  Orchestra  was  official- 
ly founded,  with  Oberhoffer  as  its  conductor,  a  membership  of  sixty 
men,  and  a  guarantee  fund  of  $10,000  annually  for  three  years. 

But  Minneapolis  was  still  a  relatively  small  city  with  a  population 
only  slightly  exceeding  200,000,  the  smallest  city  in  the  United  States 
to  be  entertaining  such  metropolitan  ambitions  even  when  the  "Twin 
Cities"  are  taken  as  a  unit.  Facilities  were  primitive;  the  orchestra 
could  not  even  find  a  home.  A  wanderer  in  the  city,  it  performed 
its  early  concerts  in  churches  and  other  available  auditoriums.  This 
embarrassing  condition  was  soon  corrected  by  an  unusual  arrange- 
ment with  the  Northwestern  National  Life  Insurance  Company.  In 
exchange  for  $5,000,000  in  life  insurance  to  be  sold  by  the  orchestra 
and  its  workers,  the  insurance  company  agreed  to  erect  on  its  down- 
town property  (Eleventh  and  Nicolett)  an  auditorium  on  the  model 
of  Symphony  Hall  of  Boston,  for  the  benefit  of  the  orchestra,  to  be 
let  at  a  nominal  rental. 

The  orchestra  prospered,  its  guarantees  were  increased,  and  the 
conductor,  who  adapted  the  programs  to  the  gradually  maturing 
tastes  of  its  patrons,  was  popular.  Having  outgrown  its  vocal  begin- 
nings, the  partnership  with  the  choral  organization,  which  had  been 
sharing  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  concert  offerings,  was  dis- 
solved in  1907,  leaving  the  orchestra  as  an  autonomous  body,  spon- 
sored by  the  newly-formed  Minneapolis  Orchestral  Association,  Mr. 
Carpenter  president. 

The  Association  was  characterized  by  aggressive  administration 
in  that  it  not  only  offered  the  regular  subscription  concerts  and  Sun- 
day "pop"  concerts,  but  also  initiated  very  early  (191 3)  a  series  of 
children's  concerts.  These  concerts  are  still  affectionately  remem- 
bered by  the  present  middle-aged  patrons  whose  early  tastes  were 
awakened  by  the  illuminating  explanations  of  Mr.  Oberhoffer,  his 
illustrations  at  the  piano,  and  the  orchestral  fare  of  his  musicians. 


138  THE    AMERICAN    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

Nationally,  the  orchestra  was  most  distinctive  for  its  tours,  which 
were  begun  in  1907  and  confined  principally  to  the  Middle  West 
and  West.  Other  orchestras  have  occasionally  made  more  spectacular 
junkets,  but  the  Minneapolis  orchestra  was  then,  and  is  still  today, 
the  most  consistent  and  the  most  extensive  touring  organization  of 
all  the  orchestras  in  the  country.  Unlike  the  Thomas  "Highway," 
which  hit  only  the  high  spots,  the  Minneapolis  Highway  wove 
through  the  smaller  cities,  the  university  and  college  towns,  at  a  time 
when  fine  orchestral  music  was  to  them  a  real  and  inspiring  novelty. 
It  was  not  yet  the  general  custom  to  travel  with  the  complete  home 
personnel.  With  a  complement  of  fifty  instruments,  about  two- 
thirds  normal  size,  perhaps  the  strings  did  not  always  balance  the 
brasses  in  a  Wagner  excerpt.  But  the  Minneapolis  orchestra,  with 
its  conductor  of  such  dignified  bearing  and  graceful  gestures  as  to 
seem  the  very  epitome  of  musical  genius,  took  his  message  to  the 
grass  roots  quite  as  significantly  as  Theodore  Thomas  had  to  the 
metropolitan  culture  zones  a  half  century  earlier. 

But  there  is  rarelv  a  virtue  without  some  necessity.  The  circum- 
stances which  necessitated  these  magnanimous  feats  of  tourism  were 
somewhat  analogous  to  the  circumstances  surrounding  the  early 

travel  activities  of  Theodore  Thomas— the  need  for  a  long  and  fa- 
ts 

vorable  contract  with  the  musicians.  This  supplement  to  the  home 
schedule  is  the  key  to  the  difference  between  merely  indifferent 
talent  and  paucity  of  rehearsals,  and  competent  musicians  with  ade- 
quate rehearsals.  If  one  adds  to  this  the  natural  inclination  of  the 
local  business  interests,  who  subsidized  the  orchestra  to  advertise 
their  community,  the  motivation  for  orchestral  tours  is  almost  com- 
pletely explained.  In  recent  years  a  derivative  financial  benefit  ac- 
crues to  the  orchestra  in  the  increased  sales  of  recordings,  yielding 
greater  royalties,  as  a  consequence  of  the  creation  of  widespread 
interest  in  the  organization. 

During  its  near  half-century  history  of  existence,  the  Minne- 
apolis orchestra  has  inevitably  experienced  the  same  oscillations  of 
fortune  that  beset  other  communities.  Its  continuance  was  threatened 
in  the  early  twenties  when,  in  response  to  postwar  inflation,  wage 
levels  were  rising  and  had  to  be  met  from  meager  resources.  Another 
serious  crisis  occurred  in  1929,  when  the  very  roof  over  its  head 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  139 

was  sold.  The  Northwestern  National  Life  Insurance  Company, 
having  outgrown  its  quarters,  disposed  of  its  properties,  including 
the  "home"  of  the  orchestra,  to  a  realtor  who  promptly  proceeded 
to  raise  the  nominal  rental  that  the  orchestra  had  been  enjoying  to  a 
prohibitive  figure.  Since  the  cost  of  housing  is  always  a  prominent 
item  in  any  budget,  public  or  private,  this  was  no  minor  dilemma. 
However,  here  as  elsewhere,  adversity  was  turned  to  sweet  uses. 

It  so  happened  that  the  housing  crisis  of  the  orchestra  coincided 
with  the  construction  (1929-30)  of  a  new  auditorium— the  Cyrus 
Northrup  Auditorium  with  a  capacity  of  nearly  5,000— on  the  cam- 
pus of  the  University  of  Minnesota.  The  idea  struck  root  that  the 
orchestra  might  be  housed  in  that  beautiful  hall. 

There  were,  of  course,  legal  complications.  The  university  was  a 
tax-supported  institution  without  authority  to  rent  its  hall  to  a  pri- 
vate enterprise,  or  to  divert  any  of  its  funds  to  such  a  purpose.  There 
were,  however,  some  extenuating  factors.  The  orchestra  was  a  cul- 
tural asset  not  only  to  the  university  and  the  city,  but  to  the  state 
as  well.  Educational  institutions  quite  generally  recognize  such  cul- 
tural obligations  by  setting  up  extracurricular  music  and  lecture 
series,  and  reimbursing  themselves  through  ticket  sales,  without  en- 
cumbering the  regularly  appropriated  academic  funds.  Why  could 
not  the  university,  it  was  asked,  similarly  engage  the  Minneapolis 
Symphony  Orchestra  for  its  total  output?  The  university  could  sell 
the  tickets  and  apply  those  funds  to  the  expenses  of  the  orchestra. 
The  orchestra  would  still  retain  its  autonomy.  The  Minneapolis  Or- 
chestral Association  would  continue  to  manage  the  orchestra,  engage 
personnel,  and  solicit  funds  from  philanthropic  sources  to  cover  the 
customary  deficits. 

This  cooperative  arrangement,  which  was  facilitated  by  certain 
"connections"  between  the  respective  boards,  was  instituted  in  the 
fall  of  1930.  The  manager  of  the  orchestra  today  functions  very 
much  as  does  any  other  department  head  in  his  relations  with  the 
university  administration,  requisitioning  funds,  coordinating  his 
activities  with  the  department  of  convocations  in  order  to  avoid 
conflicts  in  the  engaging  of  soloists,  and  scheduling  the  use  of  the 
auditorium  to  mesh  with  the  many  other  activities  of  the  university. 
Like  any  member  of  the  university  staff,  the  manager  has  even  quali- 


I40  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

fied  for  membership  in  the  campus  club.  In  recognition  of  the  mu- 
tuality of  this  arrangement,  members  of  the  university  are  accorded 
reductions  in  season  concert  tickets  in  a  manner  similar  to  the  reduc- 
tions usually  enjoyed  by  students  and  staff  on  athletic  and  other 
functions. 

This  unique  plan  has  been  of  incalculable  benefit  to  the  orchestra. 
In  fact,  it  is  generally  admitted  by  its  spokesmen  that  the  orchestra 
could  not  have  survived  the  depression  without  this  providential  in- 
tervention. The  large  auditorium  accommodates  in  a  single  sitting  an 
audience  that  in  Chicago,  New  York,  or  Boston  would  require  a  pair 
of  services,  while  the  administrative  offices  of  the  orchestra,  its  li- 
brary, and  its  instrument  room  are  also  available  at  an  economical 
"rental." 

It  solved  still  another  problem— the  rivalry  with  St.  Paul.  That 
city  had  for  some  years  tried  to  lead  a  separate  musical  life.  From 
1908-15  the  St.  Paul  Symphony  Orchestra  was  conducted  by  Walter 
Henry  Rothwell.  After  his  departure,  local  demands  were  satisfied 
by  engaging  the  Minneapolis  orchestra  for  a  series  of  St.  Paul  con- 
certs. The  auditorium  of  the  state  university  was  now,  however, 
neutral  territory,  conveniently  located  for  both  cities,  and  large 
enough  to  absorb  the  St.  Paul  project. 

The  founder-conductor  of  the  Minneapolis  orchestra,  like  so 
many  other  conductors  of  a  half-century  or  more  ago,  was  a  self- 
made  man.  A  precocious  pianist  and  violinist  at  the  age  of  ten,  and  later 
a  student  of  Philipp  in  Paris,  Oberhoffer,  like  them  learned  his 
conducting  "in  public."  His  symphonic  education  virtually  began 
with  his  appointment  to  the  conductorship  of  the  symphony  or- 
chestra. But  he  was  a  diligent  student,  industrious  and  eager  in 
personal  self-development  as  well  as  in  the  administration  of  the 
orchestra.  A  man  of  charm  and  a  certain  aloof  dignity,  aristocratic 
in  bearing  and  demeanor,  extremely  gifted,  he  was  relaxed  in  his  ges- 
tures and  had  a  "good  back."  In  his  interpretations,  he  constantly 
sought  the  melodic  line,  although  he  was  not  too  meticulous  in  sup- 
plementary detail.  If  such  discipline  was  not  within  the  vision  of  the 
conductor,  neither  was  it  within  the  general  competence  of  the  pi- 
oneer orchestra. 

In  Minneapolis,  as  well  as  on  tour,  Oberhoffer  was  an  educator 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  141 

who,  like  the  young  Thomas,  started  very  much  at  the  level  of  the 
audience  and  like  many  another  conductor  of  yesterday  "cut"  the  long 
compositions  judiciously  and  expertly,  adapting  them  to  the  length 
of  the  program  and  to  the  tolerance  of  the  audience.  His  associa- 
tion with  the  orchestra  endured  for  nineteen  years— a  record 
eclipsed  only  by  Walter  Damrosch,  Stock,  Stokowski,  and  Kousse- 
vitzky.  In  1922  Oberhoffer  was  granted  a  year's  leave  of  absence, 
after  which  he  retired. 

After  a  year  of  guest  conductors— Bodanzky,  Coates,  Damrosch, 
Gabrilowitsch,  Verbrugghen,  and  Bruno  Walter— the  Belgian  violin- 
ist Henri  Verbrugghen  was  appointed  in  the  fall  of  1923.  Verbrug- 
ghen was  a  mature  conductor  and  a  veteran  concertmaster  of  both 
French  and  British  orchestras,  with  additional  experience  as  choral 
and  orchestral  conductor  in  England  and  Australia.  Well-schooled  in 
orchestral  routine,  he  introduced  section  rehearsals  and  established  a 
discipline  and  precision  hitherto  unknown  to  that  orchestra.  How- 
ever, as  an  interpreter  he  was  more  conscientious  than  inspired;  his 
classic  pedantry  was  unrelieved  by  vitality  and  warmth,  and  he  failed 
to  exhilarate  his  audiences.  Such  exhilaration  was  to  be  forthcom- 
ing in  his  successor. 

In  the  fall  of  193 1,  after  having  conducted  only  the  initial  con- 
cert of  the  season,  Verbrugghen  retired  because  of  illness.  An 
emergency  call  secured  the  thirty-two-year-old  Eugene  Ormandy. 
Ormandy's  rise  had  been  spectacular.  In  1920  he  had  come  to  New 
York  as  a  violinist  for  a  recital  tour  that  did  not  materialize.  In  des- 
peration he  joined  the  orchestra  at  the  Capitol  Theatre  at  a  time 
when  the  larger  theatres  were  establishing  concert  orchestras  of 
symphonic  caliber.  He  quickly  rose  to  the  position  of  concertmaster 
and  conductor,  was  discovered  by  Arthur  Judson  and  engaged  for 
radio  programs.  After  an  appearance  with  the  Philadelphia  orchestra 
at  Robin  Hood  Dell,  in  the  summer  of  193 1,  he  substituted  for  the 
absent  Toscanini  in  November,  after  which  the  reports  of  his  suc- 
cess filtered  through  the  nation. 

It  was  at  this  moment  that  the  Minneapolis  post  became  vacant. 
Called  as  a  guest,  Ormandy  remained  as  permanent  conductor.  His 
first  appearance  was  dramatic:  he  conducted  without  stand  or  score, 
he  rearranged  the  seating  of  the  orchestra  according  to  the  "Sto- 


142  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

kowski  shift"— cellos  right-front,  and  won  enthusiastic  approbation 
of  his  program.  He  easily  maintained  his  hold  on  the  Minneapolis 
public  for  five  years,  when  he  resigned  rather  suddenly,  succumb- 
ing to  the  irresistible  attraction  of  an  invitation  to  conduct  the  Phil- 
adelphia orchestra,  contact  with  which  he  had  maintained  by  annual 
guest  appearances. 

Very  few  orchestras  are  in  a  position  to  engage  a  mature  and 
well-established  conductor;  but,  like  any  other  enterprise,  they  feel 
themselves  fortunate  when  they  discover  a  prospect  on  the  rise.  This 
time  Minneapolis  and  Boston  joined  in  an  invitation  to  a  guest  con- 
ductor whose  success  in  Europe  left  little  doubt  of  his  future  useful- 
ness. The  Athenian,  Dimitri  Mitropoulos,  made  his  American  debut 
in  Boston  in  1936,  followed  immediately  by  a  guest  appearance  in 
Minneapolis.  Engaged  by  Minneapolis  as  permanent  conductor  in 
1937,  he  remained  with  the  orchestra  until  1949.  A  tall,  sinewy  fig- 
ure, gaunt  and  austere,  he  conducts  without  score  or  baton,  mimick- 
ing the  music  with  vibrating  arms  and  fingers  in  an  almost  choreo- 
graphic tremble.  His  players  testify  to  his  phenomenal  memory,  to 
his  rehearsing  the  most  modern  composition,  as  well  as  infrequently 
used  accompaniments,  without  benefit  of  score.  He  has  maintained 
his  pianistic  skills  and  occasionally  performs  with  his  own  orchestra 
in  the  simultaneous  roles  of  conductor  and  soloist.  For  some  years 
Mitropoulos  had  been  serving  as  guest  conductor  with  the  New 
York  Philharmonic.  During  the  season  of  1948-49,  he  absented  him- 
self for  about  half  a  season,  sharing  with  Stokowski,  as  co-conductor, 
the  responsibilities  in  New  York.  The  permanent  transfer  was  com- 
pleted, and  Mitropoulos  was  succeeded  by  Antal  Dorati,  formerly 
of  Dallas,  as  full  conductor  in  the  fall  of  1949. 

REPERTOIRE  Since  the  Minneapolis  orchestra  had  its 
origins  in  a  choral  society,  the  first  years  of  its  existence  are  weighted 
with  the  choral  performances  of  Messiah,  Haydn's  Creation,  Men- 
delssohn's Elijah,  and  other  oratorios.  However,  after  four  seasons, 
the  chorus  was  abandoned  and  the  repertoire  presented  the  typical 
symphonic  character. 

Although  Oberhoffer  was  of  German  extraction,  his  tenure  is  not 
marked  by  the  near-monopoly  of  the  Austro-Germans  that  charac- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  143 

terized  some  of  the  other  orchestras  of  that  day.  He  was,  after  all, 
not  a  schooled  conductor,  whose  long  training  had  molded  his  tastes 
and  frozen  his  allegiance  in  advance.  During  the  early  decades,  the 
Sunday  popular  concerts  constituted  the  larger  part  of  the  pro- 
grams. The  orchestra  played  to  full  houses  in  the  days  when  the 
motion  picture,  the  radio,  and  the  automobile  had  not  yet  exacted 
their  competitive  toll  from  concert  audiences.  Even  the  subscription 
concerts  did  not  demand  from  the  audience  a  too  sophisticated  taste. 
Oberhoffer  blended  the  solid  fare  of  Brahms  and  Beethoven,  approx- 
imately proportioned  to  the  national  average  of  that  time,  with  rela- 
tively liberal  quantities  of  Tschaikowsky  and  Wagner.  As  a  gesture 
to  regional  national  sentiment,  Scandinavian  composers— Alfven, 
Atterberg,  Svendsen,,  Grieg— were  given  their  day.  These  are  not 
unusual  names,  but  with  the  total  repertoire  much  smaller  than  in 
the  Eastern  orchestras,  they  received  greater  relative  emphasis.  That 
Oberhoffer  was  not  unmindful  of  current  trends  is  attested  by  the 
appearance  of  such  names  as  Sibelius,  Stravinsky,  Rachmaninoff, 
Borodin,  Debussy,  and  Respighi,  then  relatively  new  to  American 
concertgoers. 

Verbrugghen  will  be  remembered  as  a  Beethoven  exponent,  who 
featured  him  to  the  extent  of  sixteen  per  cent,  which  was  heavy 
enough  to  arouse  "vox  pop"  protests  from  the  audience.  There  were 
no  other  symptoms  of  top-heaviness.  He  dropped  Sibelius,  but  en- 
larged the  Handel  contribution  by  the  revival  of  Messiah. 

Ormandy  succeeded  in  glamorizing  the  programs  from  the  very 
first  concert,  when  the  young  unknown  introduced  the  then  novel 
number:  Weinberger's  Polka  and  Fugue  from  Schwanda.  Ravel, 
Rachmaninoff,  Debussy,  Richard  Strauss,  Sibelius  and  other  recent 
composers  were  welcomed  with  greater  hospitality  by  both  con- 
ductor and  the  well-prepared  audience  than  by  his  predecessors,  but 
without  crowding  out  the  classics.  Emulating  the  trends  in  Philadel- 
phia, where  he  was  destined  to  transfer  his  activities,  he  shared  in  the 
Bach  revival  by  offering  in  moderate  quantity  arrangements  by  him- 
self, as  well  as  those  of  Boessenroth  (a  member  of  the  orchestra)  and 
several  other  transcribers.  Today,  however,  in  reminiscing  about 
"Gene,"  none  of  the  experiences  are  remembered  in  Minneapolis 
with  more  relish  than  the  popular  concerts  in  which  a  score  or  more 


144  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

of  Strauss  Wiener-Walzer  were  tossed  off  with  rhythmic  elegance 
unmatched,  in  the  minds  of  the  patrons,  before  or  since. 

The  repertoire  of  Mitropoulos  is  peppered  with  modernistic 
works  that  were  passed  in  review  without  a  second  hearing.  As  in 
the  case  of  Stokowski  in  Philadelphia,  such  performances  often  serve 
a  pedagogical  and  clinical,  rather  than  an  aesthetic  purpose,  and  are 
likely  to  inject  controversy  into  public  reactions.  During  this  period, 
too,  American  music  was  at  its  lowest  ebb  as  measured  in  purely 
quantitative  terms.  However,  by  including  Barber,  Copland,  Block, 
Griffes,  and  Harris— to  mention  only  a  sample— Mitropoulos  has 
given  a  hearing  to  a  group  of  standard  composers  who  amply  satisfy 
the  nativistic  curiosity  of  most  audiences. 

The  St.  Louis  Symphony  Society  ( ipoj) 

Like  all  other  cities,  St.  Louis  has  seen  a  series  of  more  or  less  spo- 
radic musical  organizations  that  have  served  as  forerunners  to  the 
present  orchestra.  Prompted  by  the  twin  motives  of  professional 
livelihood  and  the  cultivation  of  musical  ideals,  players  began  be- 
fore the  middle  of  the  last  century  to  form  musical  ensembles.  The 
first  local  orchestra  approaching  balanced  completeness  was  the 
Polyhymnia,  consisting  of  thirty-five  musicians— about  the  size  of 
the  eighteenth-century  Haydn  orchestra— which  offered  concerts 
from  1845  to  1852.  Their  avowed  purpose  was  "the  cultivation  of 
musical  art  and  the  promotion  of  musical  talent  chiefly  in  the  instru- 
mental branch  of  the  art,  by  common  rehearsals  and  public  per- 
formances." 65 

These  beginnings  were  further  stimulated  by  the  visits  of  the 
excellent  Germania  orchestra,  that  small  group  of  twenty-five  immi- 
grant Germans  who  implanted  the  desire  for  musical  education  in 
the  principal  cities  east  of  the  Mississippi  between  1848  and  1854.  In 
their  first  visit  in  May,  1853,  this  group  of  "instrumental  solo  per- 
formers" rendered  the  Beethoven  Second  Symphony  complete,  the 
first  time  it  had  ever  been  heard  in  St.  Louis.  This  was  followed  a 
year  later  by  a  series  of  five  concerts.  The  Theodore  Thomas  Or- 
chestra of  New  York,  on  its  many  tours  throughout  the  country, 
naturally  included  St.  Louis  on  its  famous  "highway,"  making  its 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  145 

first  appearance  on  its  first  national  tour  (1869)  as  a  "Grand  Concert 
Organization  of  Forty  Eminent  Musicians,  Comprising  all  the  Cele- 
brated Soloists  of  his  Grand  Orchestra."  Thomas  was  destined,  of 
course,  to  make  many  more  appearances  in  the  course  of  the  next 
quarter-century. 

But  local  musicians  were  beginning  to  capitalize  on  the  growing 
musical  interest  of  the  rapidly  expanding  city.  The  most  ambitious 
attempt  at  establishing  a  permanent  musical  organization  occurred  in 
i860  when  the  newly  founded  St.  Louis  Philharmonic  Society  en- 
gaged Eduard  de  Sobolewski,  who  had  previously  held  posts  in 
Koenigsberg,  Prussia,  and  in  Milwaukee,  at  a  contractual  salary  of 
$1,000  per  season.  Sobolewski  (1808-72)  had  been  a  student  of 
Weber  and  Zelter,  and  co-worker  of  Robert  Schumann  on  his 
journal.  Entering  the  United  States  in  1859,  he  was  one  of  the 
thousands  of  professional  German  musicians  to  emigrate  to  this 
country  to  form  the  nucleus  of  a  thriving  American  musical  life. 

The  Philharmonic  Society  was  formed  "to  advance  the  study  and 
to  promote  the  progress  of  music  in  St.  Louis,  and  to  encourage  the 
reunion  and  social  intercourse  of  the  lovers  of  music  in  our  city." 
It  differed  from  previous  organizations  in  that  it  combined  choral 
and  symphonic  units.  Its  monthly  concerts  provided  the  first  oppor- 
tunity for  the  St.  Louis  population  to  hear  the  classics  at  regular  in- 
tervals. The  venture  was  financed  by  subscription  memberships  at 
fifty  dollars  per  season,  and  performing  dues  of  five  dollars  annually. 
In  1950  this  society  was  in  its  ninetieth  season;  as  a  nonprofessional 
body,  it  presents  several  concerts  per  season. 

The  immediate  antecedents  to  the  St.  Louis  Symphony  Orchestra 
are  traceable  to  the  year  1880,  from  which  it  officially  dates  its 
founding.66  On  September  1  of  that  year  Joseph  Otten,  a  Catholic 
organist  and  choral  conductor,  organized  the  St.  Louis  Choral  So- 
ciety, which  presented  one  pair  of  concerts— its  first— in  the  spring 
of  the  next  year.  Its  choral  offerings  were  of  the  highest  type  and 
included  many  of  the  works  that  are  still  standard:  Handel's  Messiah, 
Beethoven's  Mass  in  C,  Gounod's  Redemption,  and  others.  This 
group  also  collaborated  at  times  with  Theodore  Thomas  in  local  fes- 
tival productions.  Beginning  with  1884-85,  Robert  S.  Brookings, 
manufacturer,  merchant,  and  philanthropist,  recently  better  known 


146  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

as  the  benefactor  of  Washington  University  of  St.  Louis  and  the 
Brookings  Institute  of  Washington,  D.  C,  became  president  of  the 
infant  musical  organization  and  established  its  finances  on  such  a  firm 
footing  that  the  concerts  broadened  their  scope  by  interspersing  a 
few  orchestral  numbers  among  their  choral  works. 

Almost  contemporary  with  this  well-managed  choral  group  was 
the  St.  Louis  Musical  Union,  an  orchestra  founded  in  188 1,  which 
had  likewise  been  rather  well  financed.  The  orchestra  numbered 
fifty-four  players  and  presented  an  average  of  six  concerts  per  sea- 
son in  that  city  of  350,000.  It  was  the  merger  of  these  two  organiza- 
tions in  1890,  into  the  St.  Louis  Choral-Symphony  Society,  that  con- 
stituted the  next  step  in  the  direction  of  the  present  organization,  and 
prophetically  assigned  to  the  orchestra  a  place  equal  with  the  chorus. 

This  organization  ran  true  to  form,  however,  in  that  mounting 
deficits  soon  threatened  its  survival.  Mr.  Otten,  who  did  not  relish 
retrenchment,  resigned,  and  his  place  was  taken  by  a  young,  tem- 
peramental musician,  Alfred  Ernst,  imported  from  Germany  in  1894 
to  guide  the  orchestra  of  fifty-two  members.  Ernst  was  an  excellent 
pianist,  a  gifted  musician,  an  aggressive  leader,  but  a  conductor  "by 
the  Grace  of  God."  Contemporary  accounts  charge  him  with  fail- 
ure to  study  the  score  and  depending  on  his  musicians  to  follow  his 
improvisations  of  the  moment.  With  mediocre  material,  sparse  funds, 
and  rehearsals  often  weeks  apart,  there  was  produced  something 
less  than  an  artistic  blend. 

Nevertheless,  the  orchestra  gained  in  flexibility  and  explored  a 
progressive  repertoire,  although  especially  in  the  first  years  of  his 
regime,  the  choral  interests  maintained  a  dominant  position.  Thus, 
in  1900-01,  the  chorus  of  two-hundred  voices  and  the  orchestra  of 
fifty-five,  presented  three  oratorios,  three  symphony  concerts,  two 
mixed  popular  concerts  and  two  artist  concerts.  But  under  Ernst, 
orchestral  music  soon  assumed  new  importance,  and  in  1905-06  he 
introduced  a  series  of  Sunday  "pops"  which  for  years  to  come  were 
eagerly  consumed  by  the  general  population  of  the  city.  However, 
finding  it  difficult  to  adjust  himself  to  American  ways,  Ernst  finally 
returned  to  Germany  at  the  close  of  the  1906-07  season,  to  super- 
vise the  production  of  his  operatic  works.  He  died  of  wounds  as  a 
soldier  in  the  German  army  of  World  War  I. 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  147 

The  drift  toward  a  bona  fide  symphony  orchestra  culminated  in 
1907  when  the  chorus  was  abandoned  and  Max  Zach,  violist  of  the 
Boston  Symphony,  was  engaged  by  the  newly  organized  St.  Louis 
Symphony  Orchestra.  Zach  had  enjoyed  a  distinguished  career  of 
orchestral  playing,  having  been  brought  to  this  country  as  a  twenty- 
two-year-old  lad  by  Gericke  in  1886.  He  later  became  a  member  of 
the  famous  Adamowski  String  Quartet  and  conducted  the  Boston 
"Pops"  from  1887  to  1897. 

In  accordance  with  the  trend  of  the  day,  the  members  of  the  St. 
Louis  orchestra  were  now  placed  on  regular  seasonal  salary,  the 
number  of  concerts  was  gradually  increased,  the  orchestra  enlarged, 
the  repertoire  modernized,  and  tours  instituted.  Zach  also  continued 
the  Sunday  afternoon  "pops"  series.  They  were  given  weekly 
throughout  the  season,  exceeding  the  subscription  pairs  in  number, 
and  constituted  a  genuine  contribution  to  the  incipient  musical  cul- 
ture of  the  community. 

Fortunately,  Zach  could  supply  what  Ernst  lacked— discipline  and 
precision.  He  himself  had  been  tutored  by  the  very  paragon  of  the 
stern  school  of  conducting,  Wilhelm  Gericke  of  Boston.  But,  like 
Gericke,  Zach  lacked  the  romantic  impulse,  the  warmth  and  supple- 
ness, demanded  by  the  romantic  repertoire.  Players  in  his  orchestra 
have  remarked  that  Zach  never  did  succeed  in  catching  the  required 
pliability  of  spirit  to  accompany  faithfully  such  soloists  as  Rachmani- 
noff and  Pablo  Casals,  who  "bothered"  him  with  their  interpretative 
liberties. 

Zach  died  in  midseason,  February,  1921.  Among  the  guest  con- 
ductors who  finished  the  season  was  the  noted  pianist  Rudolph  Ganz, 
subsequently  given  a  permanent  appointment,  after  the  Society  had 
made  an  unsuccessful  bid  for  Fritz  Kreisler. 

Ganz,  who  had  had  little  orchestral  experience,  was  a  convert  to 
that  role.  However,  he  conferred  great  glamour  upon  the  organiza- 
tion, possessed  fine  social  gifts,  and  was  a  personality  of  elegance, 
dignity,  and  refinement.  But  in  general  it  cannot  be  said  that  he 
achieved  extraordinary  success,  except  in  the  children's  concerts.  In 
these  he  was  so  effective  that  his  services  were  for  some  years  in 
great  demand  by  the  New  York  Philharmonic  and  the  San  Francisco 
Symphony  orchestras.  He  resigned  in  1927  and  soon  rejoined  the 


148  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

staff  of  Chicago  Musical  College,  where  he  had  previously  been 
active. 

After  a  frank  attempt  to  revive  a  flagging  public  interest  in  the 
orchestra,  through  a  four-year  policy  of  guest  conductors,  Vladimir 
Golschmann,  a  young  Frenchman  of  Russian  parentage,  was  recom- 
mended by  Damrosch  and  Koussevitzky  as  permanent  conductor. 
He  had  been  known  in  Paris  as  the  "youngest  conductor,"  having 
instituted  the  "Concerts  Golschmann"  in  19 19  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
five.  Like  nearly  all  the  conductors  in  Paris  of  the  postwar  period, 
including  Koussevitzky  and  Monteux,  he  displayed  pronounced  mod- 
ern tendencies. 

With  the  advent  of  Golschmann  in  193 1,  the  Sunday  "pop" 
series,  which  had  for  years  loomed  so  large  in  the  orchestra's  schedule, 
were  dropped,  and  only  an  occasional  popular  concert  substituted. 
This  was  a  result  of  the  ominous  competition  of  other  forms  of  di- 
version which  had  developed  since  the  war:  palatial  moving-picture 
theatres,  radio,  and  other  miscellaneous  forms  of  commercial  enter- 
tainment. In  addition  the  public  had,  of  course,  been  weaned  from 
the  light  fare  of  the  William  Tell  Overture  and  the  Peer  Gynt  Suite, 
and  had  graduated  into  the  subscription  class  where  the  symphony 
no  longer  held  the  terrors  of  earlier  days. 

In  the  fall  of  1934,  the  orchestra  moved  to  its  new  downtown 
home,  the  Kiel  Municipal  Auditorium,  with  a  capacity  of  about 
3,500,  where  it  enjoyed  reduced  rent  in  exchange  for  several  free 
public  concerts.  Its  previous  home,  the  Odeon,  a  smaller  hall  of  about 
2,000  seats,  located  on  midtown  Grand  Avenue,  had  been  destroyed 
by  fire.  The  move  to  the  new  hall  stimulated  subscription  sales  and 
constituted  a  profitable  arrangement. 

The  St.  Louis  Symphony,  like  some  of  the  younger  orchestras, 
has  no  endowment  fund  but  depends  almost  exclusively  on  the  an- 
nual "maintenance  fund"  to  cancel  the  inevitable  deficits.  Con- 
sequently, the  orchestra  has  passed  through  recurrent  financial  crises, 
which  have  earned  for  St.  Louis  the  reputation  of  being  apathetic 
toward  its  musical  organization.  Whether,  in  relation  to  its  resources, 
these  crises  have  been  more  virulent  than  in  other  cities,  could  be 
established  only  by  marshaling  the  details  of  local  circumstances. 
However,  the  orchestra  has  never  been  forced  to  suspend  operations. 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  149 

REPERTOIRE  Although  Max  Zach,  the  first  conductor  of 
the  "new  series,"  as  it  was  then  called,  had  gained  his  orchestral  ex- 
perience in  Boston  under  the  central  European  conductors  loyal  to 
their  native  art,  he  himself  displayed  more  flexible  tastes.  The  two 
poles  of  the  classic  sphere,  Brahms  and  Beethoven,  which  had  served 
for  years  as  the  axis  of  the  Boston  programs,  here  lost  some  of  their 
importance.  Zach's  Beethoven  proportion  of  eight  per  cent,  and 
Brahms'  six  per  cent,  would  be  considered  modest  at  that  time.  In- 
stead, Zach  featured  the  French  (Saint-Saens,  Berlioz,  Franck),  the 
Russians  (Rachmaninoff  and  Tschaikowsky),  as  well  as  Dvorak  and 
Wagner.  Such  a  musical  offering  was  no  doubt  more  suitable  for  an 
orchestra  less  emancipated  from  the  box  office  than  was  Boston,  and 
more  tasty  to  his  St.  Louis  patrons  than  to  the  audiences  in  his  pre- 
vious home. 

If  he  did  not  import  the  austere  programs  from  the  East,  he  did 
carry  in  his  portfolio  the  scores  of  American  composers,  many  of 
them  from  his  old  haunts  in  New  England.  The  names  are  familiar: 
Chadwick,  Converse,  Hill,  Loeffler,  Foote,  MacDowell,  Henry  Had- 
ley,  Strube  (German-born  member  of  the  Boston  orchestra),  David 
Stanley  Smith  (New  Haven),  together  with  a  few  additional  local 
names  in  St.  Louis:  E.  R.  Kroeger,  the  leading  musician  of  the  city, 
and  Samuel  Bollinger.  These  made  up  a  total  of  five  to  ten  per  cent 
of  the  repertoire— a  percentage  similar  to  Boston  itself— during  the 
first  eight  years  of  the  Zach  tenure.  In  19 17,  with  the  necessity  of 
asserting  its  nativistic  faith,  this  city  with  its  huge  German  popula- 
tion, enjoyed  a  repertoire  of  which  twelve  per  cent— the  highest  of 
any  orchestra— was  of  American  origin.  When  the  war  fervor  sub- 
sided, it  was  no  longer  necessary  to  profess  one's  Americanism  in  such 
stilted  proportions.  So,  Rudolph  Ganz,  who  had  ascended  the  po- 
dium in  192 1,  deflated  the  quota  to  a  more  normal  five  per  cent, 
which  in  turn  shriveled  to  an  "all  time  low"  during  four  years  of 
guest  conductors— practically  all  from  foreign  lands. 

The  Parisian  Golschmann  surprisingly  enough  restored  Bee- 
thoven and  Brahms  to  their  wonted  place  of  prestige,  but  as  compen- 
sation he  favored  the  French  during  the  first  five-year  period  to  the 
extent  of  a  high  fourteen  per  cent.  This  enthusiasm  cooled  a  bit  aft- 


I50  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

er  a  period  of  acclimatization  in  this  country,  and  was  replaced  by 
a  corresponding  generosity  to  the  American  composer.  In  both  cases, 
however,  the  composers  selected  were  not  the  stereotyped  members, 
but  rather  the  less  conventional  advance  guard.  Between  1940  and 
1 950,  the  repertoire  carried  a  definitely  experimental  tinge,  with  the 
inevitable  number  of  single  performances.  By  1 945-50,  St.  Louis  was 
playing  a  reasonably  liberal  six  per  cent  of  American  music.  Proko- 
fieff,  Shostakovitch— by  now  less  controversial  figures— also  ranked 
high. 

The  San  Francisco  Symphony  Orchestra  ( 191 1) 

Coexistent  with  the  vigilantes  and  the  lurid  Barbary  Coast,  there 
thrived  in  San  Francisco  at  mid-century  a  musical  life  analogous  to, 
if  more  rudimentary  than,  that  of  the  cultivated  cities  of  the  East. 
After  the  trek  of  the  forty-niners,  this  lusty  village  witnessed  a  sen- 
sational efflorescence  of  culture  which  was  manifest  in  the  building 
of  theatres  and  in  the  consumption  of  elegant  merchandise.  Wealth 
moved  with  great  ostentation.  Clippers  and  steamers  entered  the  har- 
bor laden  with  the  luxuries  of  Europe,  and  departed  with  millions 
in  gold  dust.  In  fact,  it  was  a  common  saying  that  San  Francisco  was 
only  one  ship's  passage  behind  the  latest  Parisian  styles. 

From  the  earliest  days,  the  city  was  visited  by  the  more  intrepid 
itinerant  musicians  who  had  to  sail  "around  the  Horn"  to  reach  this 
gold-infested  American  outpost,  whose  isolation  was  not  finally 
broken  until  the  completion  of  the  first  transcontinental  railroad  in 
1869.  In  1850,  Henri  Herz,  the  French  pianist,  who  had  lost  his  for- 
tune in  a  Paris  piano  factory,  included  San  Francisco  in  a  long  Amer- 
ican tour  designed  to  win  it  back  again.  Contrary  to  a  persistent  San 
Francisco  legend,  Jenny  Lind  did  not  appear  in  California,  although 
two  theatres  were  named  after  her.  However,  Catherine  Hayes,  the 
Irish  songstress  who  was  almost  equally  famous  in  her  day,  was 
toured  to  the  West  Coast  by  Barnum  in  1852.  Taking  the  cue  from 
the  hysterical  worshippers  of  Jenny  Lind  in  New  York,  the  San 
Francisco  fire  department  gave  "Kate"  Hayes  a  scarlet  escort;  and 
it  was  a  $1,165  "top"  tnat  was  paid  tne  twenty-six-year-old  soprano 
from  Limerick  for  the  auctioned  seats,  while  the  "Swedish  Nightin- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  151 

gale"  could  command  a  top  premium  of  only  $650,  obtained  in 
Providence,  Rhode  Island. 

From  1854  onward,  local  ensembles  began  making  their  appear- 
ance in  that  teeming  city  of  40,000.  Beginning  in  that  year,  Rudolph 
Herold,  who  has  been  termed  the  "father"  of  San  Francisco's  or- 
chestral music,  offered  concerts  intermittently  for  over  twenty-five 
years.  In  1880  Louis  Homeier,  aided  by  John  Parrott  (real  estate 
and  banking)  as  patron,  organized  an  orchestra  of  forty  men  which 
had  a  life  of  several  seasons.  In  the  same  decade,  the  young  Gustave 
Hinrichs,  later  associated  with  Theodore  Thomas  in  the  melancholy 
venture  of  the  American  Opera  Company,  established  a  rival  Phil- 
harmonic, which  also  enjoyed  philanthropic  assistance,  and  was  later 
led  by  minor  conductors.  Hinrichs,  after  leaving  San  Francisco, 
gained  some  distinction  as  conductor  of  the  Metropolitan  Opera  at 
the  beginning  of  this  century. 

A  more  serious,  but  hardly  more  enduring  enterprise,  was  that  of 
Fritz  Scheel,  better  remembered  today  as  the  founder  of  the  Phila- 
delphia Orchestra  in  1900.  This  German  conductor  turned  up  in  San 
Francisco  in  1894  to  entertain  the  patrons  of  the  midwinter  fair  with 
the  same  kind  of  repertoire  that  he  had  offered  at  the  Chicago 
World's  Fair  the  previous  year.  He  remained  in  San  Francisco  for 
most  of  the  succeeding  five  years,  offering  variety  concerts  on  the 
German  beer  garden  style,  as  well  as  more  formal  performances  with 
the  Philharmonic,  again  subsidized  by  Parrott.  Leaving  San  Fran- 
cisco in  1899,  he  transferred  to  Woodside  Park,  Philadelphia,  for  a 
summer  series  where  local  sponsors  discovered  him  and  pressed  him 
into  service  to  form  the  Philadelphia  Orchestra,  over  which  he  pre- 
sided with  eminent  success  until  the  year  of  his  death  in  1907. 

By  1 9 10  the  Philharmonic  Orchestra,  in  about  thirty  years  of  in- 
termittent existence,  had  been  led  by  various  conductors  and  was 
aided  financially  by  several  persons  of  wealth.  In  addition,  musical 
taste  had  been  fostered  by  significant,  though  infrequent,  visits  of 
the  two  itinerant  purveyors  of  good  music:  Theodore  Thomas  and 
Walter  Damrosch.  By  the  turn  of  the  century,  the  growth  of  perma- 
nent symphony  orchestras  in  the  Eastern  cities  had  instilled  a  desire 
for  emulation  in  the  rapidly  growing  metropolis  of  the  Pacific  Coast. 
The  occasion  for  its  inception  was  the  disastrous  earthquake  and 


152  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

lire  of  1906.  The  problems  of  reconstruction  caused  civic  leaders  to 
take  stock  of  their  community  needs  and  resources,  and  to  formulate 
appropriate  projects  for  future  fulfillment.  On  this  agenda  was  a 
symphony  orchestra.67 

Immediate  conditions  were,  of  course,  unpropitious.  The  fire  had 
destroyed  all  the  theatres,  including  the  Grand  Opera  House  and  the 
essential  requirements  for  physical  relief  naturally  sidetracked  nearly 
all  of  the  cultural  amenities  of  life.  But  by  1909,  with  the  determi- 
nation to  "foster  music  in  all  its  forms  and  particularly  to  establish  a 
symphony  orchestra,"  the  Musical  Association  of  San  Francisco  was 
organized.  The  Association  matured  slowly.  Not  until  the  fall  of 
191 1  was  it  assured  sufficient  funds  to  enable  the  sponsors  to  an- 
nounce the  actual  establishment  of  a  "permanent  orchestral  body 
along  the  lines  of  those  maintained  by  the  larger  cities  of  Europe 
and  the  East,"  and  to  list  the  first  season's  schedule  of  six  subscrip- 
tion concerts.  Henry  K.  Hadley,  American  conductor  and  compos- 
er, was  called  as  conductor,  and  on  December  8,  191 1,  he  presided 
over  an  orchestra  of  sixty  musicians  at  the  first  concert  in  the  new 
Cort  Theatre— later  known  as  the  Curran— seating  capacity  1,827.  He 
offered  the  following  cautious  program: 


Wagner: 

Prelude  to  Die  Meistersinger 

Tschaikowsky: 

Symphony  No.  6 

—Pause- 

Haydn: 

Theme  and  Variations,  from  Emperor  Quartet 

Liszt: 

Symphonic  Poem,  Les  Preludes 

On  the  face  of  it,  it  seemed  to  the  less  sanguine  observers  that 
this  orchestra  differed  in  no  significant  respect  from  the  numerous 
orchestral  episodes  of  the  abortive  past.  Some  local  critics  rehearsed 
the  failures  of  philanthropy  in  the  orchestras  of  Scheel,  Holmes,  and 
SteindorrT,  and  urged  that  a  "permanent"  orchestra  could  be  secured 
only  through  a  permanent  form  of  financing.  Apparently  they  were 
taking  their  cue  from  the  Chicago  experience,  where  the  orchestra 
patrons  had  become  tired  of  annual  deficits  and  finally  presented  the 
orchestra  with  an  endowment  in  the  form  of  an  auditorium  and  of- 
fice building  which  is,  to  this  very  day,  an  indispensable  source  of 
predictable  income.  The  San  Francisco  musicians  were  not  perma- 
nently employed  by  the  orchestra  but  were  still  dependent  for  their 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  153 

livelihood  on  their  respective  jobs  in  theatres  and  restaurants.  It  was, 
in  short,  still  a  pick-up  orchestra,  the  "same"  orchestra  which  had 
failed  before.  However,  this  orchestra  did  differ  from  previous  em- 
bryonic endeavors  in  that  its  support  was  broad-based  and  did  not 
depend  on  the  whim  of  an  individual  benefactor;  and  the  determina- 
tion of  its  backers  seemed  to  be  more  aggressive,  as  was  evidenced 
in  their  formal  organization,  and  in  the  importation  of  a  conductor 
of  some  note  at  $10,000  per  season. 

The  years  of  infancy  of  this  new  creature  were  attended  by  all 
the  usual  hazards.  In  the  first  place,  basic  financing  did  not  proceed 
with  the  expected  celerity.  Even  at  the  time  of  the  first  concert, 
survival  of  the  orchestra  seemed  by  no  means  assured,  for  it  was 
observed  in  the  prospectus  that  "the  membership  has  now  reached 
300,  but  it  is  earnestly  hoped  that  a  membership  of  500  may  be  ob- 
tained which  would  insure  a  permanent  orchestra  owned  and 
controlled  solely  by  the  association." 

Furthermore,  professional  resources  were  inadequate  and  physi- 
cal facilities  deficient.  For  its  first  concert,  the  orchestra  had  no 
nucleus  of  players,  no  chairs,  no  stands  or  equipment,  and  no  library. 
Musicians  had  been  hastily  recruited  from  cafes,  hotels,  and  theatres, 
while  only  a  few  first-desk  men  could  be  imported  from  New  York. 
Because  of  previous  commitments  by  the  local  musicians  to  their 
employers,  concerts  were  scheduled  on  their  free  afternoons.  Scores 
were  borrowed  from  Seattle,  where  Hadley  had  previously  con- 
ducted, and  from  the  state  university.  Other  scores  were  purchased 
on  credit,  and  through  the  generosity  of  a  well-wisher,  the  library 
of  the  recently  disbanded  Pittsburgh  orchestra  was  acquired  for  a 
nominal  expenditure.  All  these  obstacles:  limited  library,  inadequate 
rehearsals,  the  preoccupation  of  the  men  with  more  remunerative 
tasks  in  hotels,  theatres,  cafes,  dance  halls,  and  cabarets  must  be 
included  in  the  reckoning  of  success  and  failure  of  these  early  enter- 
prises. By  the  third  season  patronage  became  precarious,  and  a 
deficit,  over  and  above  the  guarantees,  became  an  ominous  certainty. 
The  Argonaut  and  the  Pacific  Coast  Musical  Review  were  also  be- 
ginning to  criticize  the  conductor  for  inadequate  study  of  the  scores 
and  for  deficient  temperament  and  magnetism. 

If  it  cannot  be  said  that  Hadley  scored  a  popular  and  critical 


154  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

success  in  music,  the  debonair  conductor,  handsome,  trim  and  "cor- 
seted" of  figure,  was  quite  congenial  to  the  social  group  that  spon- 
sored him.  During  his  sojourn  in  San  Francisco,  he  composed  the 
first  of  his  three  Midsummer  High  Jinks  (191 2)  commissioned  by 
the  famous  Bohemian  Club,  which  had  urged  his  original  appoint- 
ment. As  early  as  1900,  he  had  composed  his  Overture  In  Bohemia 
for  these  same  Bohemians,  which,  however,  was  not  performed  at 
that  time  because  of  his  departure  for  Europe. 

At  this  critical  juncture  in  the  development  of  San  Francisco 
music,  the  city  was  visited  by  the  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra, 
which  had  been  invited  on  the  occasion  of  the  Panama-Pacific 
Exposition  held  there  in  191 5.  This  organization,  under  the  precise 
and  scholarly  German,  Dr.  Karl  Muck,  presented  a  series  of  fourteen 
concerts  in  ten  days,  and  for  the  first  time  awakened  its  Western 
audiences  to  a  realization  of  quality  performance.  Plans  were  pro- 
jected at  once  for  the  improvement  of  the  local  orchestra  and  for 
launching  it  on  a  national  career.  The  orchestra  personnel  was  in- 
creased from  about  sixty-five  to  eighty,  and  Alfred  Hertz,  then  in 
the  city,  was  secured  to  revitalize  their  ambitions. 

The  forty- three-year-old  Hertz  had  enjoyed  a  distinguished 
career.  For  thirteen  years  (1902-15)  he  had  been  conductor  of  Ger- 
man opera  at  the  Metropolitan  Opera  House  where  he  had  staged 
the  first  performance  of  Parsifal  outside  of  Bayreuth  on  December 
24,  1903,  and  had  introduced  Strauss's  Salome,  Rosenkavalier  and 
other  novelties  to  his  American  audience.  He,  too,  had  come  as  guest 
of  the  Exposition  to  conduct  a  Beethoven  Festival  during  German- 
American  week,  at  a  time  when  this  country  was  still  neutral  toward 
the  year-old  war.  His  conducting  created  a  tremendous  impression 
and  it  was  with  the  greatest  enthusiasm  that  he  was  selected  for  the 
renascent  orchestra. 

The  fourteen-year  tenure  of  Mr.  Hertz  was  not  a  tranquil  one. 
He  was  greeted  with  hostile  agitation  because  of  his  German  origin. 
This  was  quieted  bv  his  acquisition  of  citizenship  in  June,  19 17,  made 
possible  by  the  fact  that  he  had  filed  his  first  papers  prior  to  the 
declaration  of  war.  In  the  second  year,  he  suffered  some  competition 
from  other  orchestras  in  that  city  of  half  a  million.  Among  these, 
the  People's  Philharmonic  Orchestra  under  Sokoloff,  supported  by 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  155 

a  patron  of  means,  was  making  a  special  bid  for  the  popular  field.  In 
an  effort  to  strengthen  its  competitive  position,  the  San  Francisco 
Symphony  was  reorganized  in  19 16  on  a  permanent  basis,  its  mem- 
bers were  employed  full  time  and  were,  by  contract  stipulation,  not 
permitted  to  play  in  any  other  orchestra  without  written  consent  of 
the  conductor.  Like  every  other  city,  San  Francisco  had  yet  to  learn 
the  difficult  lesson  that  there  was  never  room  for  two  good  orches- 
tras. Alfred  Hertz  never  knew  a  united  San  Francisco. 

Financial  struggles  are,  of  course,  never  a  novelty.  Warnings 
were  repeatedly  issued  declaring  the  organization  in  danger  of 
collapse.  Invidious  comparisons  with  Los  Angeles,  where  one  opu- 
lent benefactor  was  able  to  accomplish  more  than  four  hundred 
patrons  in  San  Francisco,  were  periodically  drawn.  President  William 
Howard  Taft,  when  breaking  ground  for  the  Fair  in  19 15,  less  than 
ten  years  after  the  quake  disaster,  had  coined  the  rallying  cry:  "San 
Francisco  knows  how."  But  it  was  now  feared  that  this  challenge 
was  destined  to  be  countermanded.  After  fifteen  years,  apathy  and 
friction  reached  the  breaking  point.  Hertz  resigned  in  the  spring  of 
1930  with  the  din  of  a  final  salvo  of  frantic  applause  in  his  harassed 
ears,  but  manfully  expressing  the  hope  that  a  change  of  leadership 
might  revive  the  flagging  public  interest.  He  retained  many  loyal 
followers  and  later  had  the  consolation  of  frequent  guest  appear- 
ances. 

However,  the  landscape  was  by  no  means  all  gray.  Hertz  was  a 
picturesque  figure  known  to  many  a  man  on  the  street  for  his  distinc- 
tive "foxy  grandpa"  visage,  and  had  more  than  succeeded  in  selling 
the  orchestra  to  the  public,  especially  in  the  popular  concerts.  Since 
1922,  these  supplementary  concerts  had  been  bought  by  the  Board 
of  Supervisors  of  the  city  of  San  Francisco  and  presented  in  short 
annual  series,  either  free  or  at  popular  prices  in  the  huge  Civic  Audi- 
torium, capacity  10,000. 

To  be  sure,  there  had  been  detractors,  both  social  and  aesthetic. 
Certain  groups  continued  their  aloofness  from  the  impecunious  and 
sorely  pressed  orchestra,  and  critics  commented  on  the  heavy-handed 
German  style  of  interpretation,  stemming  from  the  conductor's 
predilection  for  Wagnerian  brasses  that  caused  an  unpleasant  rever- 
beration in  the  limited  confines  of  the  Curran  Theatre.  In  their 


I56  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

amiably  franker  moments,  they  referred  to  that  auditorium  as  the 
"boiler  factory."  But,  in  the  end,  there  was  no  question  that  the 
orchestra  had  become  one  of  the  accepted  civic  institutions. 

Previous  dissension  and  the  ravages  of  the  depression  did  not 
make  its  path  a  rosy  one.  Basil  Cameron,  an  English  conductor,  rec- 
ommended by  Grainger  and  Beecham;  Dobrowen,  a  momentary 
flash,  and  many  other  guests  filled  the  interim  of  several  seasons 
with  a  vanishing  personnel.  It  was  beyond  the  point  of  rallying  to  a 
periodic  shot  in  the  arm  by  a  guest  conductor,  however.  The  vitality 
of  the  organization  continued  to  ebb,  and  in  1934-35, tne  funds  being 
completely  exhausted,  the  symphony  concerts  were  entirely  sus- 
pended. Musical  politics  often  run  deep.  Described  as  a  "pawn  of 
competing  social  cliques,"  the  orchestra  was  fast  sliding  toward 
extinction,  if  indeed  it  had  not  already  arrived  there,  when  two  new 
forces  entered  the  scene  to  rescue  the  victim  in  good  Western  melo- 
drama style! 

In  May,  1935,  the  electorate  passed  an  amendment  to  the  city 
charter  exacting  a  half-cent  tax  for  the  benefit  of  the  orchestra.  In 
order  to  circumvent  the  constitutional  prohibition  of  public  moneys 
being  diverted  to  private  purposes,  the  act,  which  yielded  about 
$40,000  provided  for  the  appointment  of  an  Art  Commission  that 
would  "buy"  the  concerts  from  the  symphony  management,  and 
resell  them  at  popular  prices  to  the  public.  This  was  then,  and  still 
is,  an  almost  unique  administrative  invention  for  the  support  of 
symphony  orchestras.  What  forces  moved  the  public  to  vote  taxes 
for  such  a  musical  luxury? 

Through  the  agency  of  the  Board  of  Supervisors  and  one  of  its 
members,  J.  Emmett  Haydn,  the  city  had  actually  been  buying  con- 
certs since  November,  1922,  with  moneys  from  a  general  publicity 
and  welfare  fund,  and  had  thereby  set  a  pattern  that  needed  only  to 
be  modified  in  legal  details.  These  concerts  were  performed  in  the 
Civic  Auditorium  and  were  well  attended.  The  mayor  and  other 
officials  favored  the  measure;  the  musicians'  union,  of  course,  sup- 
ported it  and  enlisted  the  sympathetic  support  of  the  other  crafts. 
Interested  persons,  including  members  of  the  symphony  orchestra, 
carried  on  an  energetic  personal  campaign,  accosting  the  voters  on 
the  streets  and  in  public  conveyances,  in  an  attempt  to  arouse  them 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  157 

to  the  loss  of  prestige  involved  in  the  demise  of  their  great  civic 
asset.  Finally,  since  there  was  no  important  voice  raised  against  the 
proposition,  it  passed  with  a  comfortable  margin. 

Although  the  passage  of  this  measure  injected  a  powerful  ex- 
citant into  the  exhausted  body  of  the  orchestra,  it  alone  would  never 
have  been  sufficient  to  revive  it.  The  new  administrative  board,  re- 
organized to  include  a  social  segment  not  hitherto  adequately  repre- 
sented, was  a  stronger  tonic  toward  its  convalescence.  It  also 
brought,  after  a  short  time,  to  the  headship  of  the  board,  Mrs. 
Leonora  Wood  Armsby,  from  the  "Peninsula,"  who  has  ever  since 
been  the  genius  of  the  governing  body  and  the  organizer  of  the 
community  resources,  and  who,  probably  more  than  any  other  single 
force  in  the  history  of  the  symphony,  is  responsible  for  its  present 
prosperity. 

In  the  meantime,  the  housing  problem  of  the  orchestra  had  also 
been  solved.  For  many  years  it  had  performed  in  the  Curran,  Tivoli, 
and  Capitol  theatres,  all  small  auditoriums  and  often  provided  reluc- 
tantly by  their  owners  because  of  competition  with  more  profitable 
theatrical  lessees.  The  urge  to  secure  an  adequate  and  exclusive  home, 
which  sooner  or  later  besets  the  supporters  of  every  orchestra,  had 
likewise  begun  to  attack  the  local  promoters  in  San  Francisco.  Now, 
however,  the  city  could  boast  of  two  auditoriums.  The  Civic  Audi- 
torium, a  million-dollar  coliseum-like  structure,  had  been  built  for 
the  Panama-Pacific  Exposition  to  accommodate  the  many  conven- 
tions and  assemblages  attracted  to  the  city  on  that  occasion.  After 
the  Fair  this  cavernous  auditorium,  conveniently  located  in  the  Civic 
Center  but  with  acoustics  something  less  than  perfect,  was  be- 
queathed to  the  city.  The  smaller  auditorium,  the  War  Memorial 
Opera  House,  as  its  name  implies,  dedicated  to  the  heroes  of  World 
War  I,  is  also  municipally  owned  (then  the  first  municipally  owned 
Opera  House  in  the  country),  and  seats  3,252.  Likewise  situated  in 
the  Civic  Center,  this  gorgeous  auditorium  famous  for  its  acoustics, 
was  dedicated  in  1932  and  provided  office  space  and  all  necessary 
facilities  for  the  Symphony  Orchestra  and  the  San  Francisco  Opera, 
a  practically  ideal  accommodation.  Truly,  wars  and  depressions  fur- 
nish occasions  for  projects  which  we  cannot  afford  in  times  of  peace 
and  "prosperity"! 


158  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

The  choice  of  the  new  conductor,  Pierre  Monteux,  betokened  an 
especially  determined  bid  for  national,  and  even  international,  status 
for  the  revivified  orchestra.  This  resolve  was  echoed  by  the  new 
conductor  himself  when  he  enunciated  his  objective  "to  restore  the 
San  Francisco  orchestra  to  its  former  place  among  American  ensem- 
bles, to  give  the  public  the  best  of  classics  and  a  suitable  allotment  of 
modern  compositions."  In  his  previous  stewardship  of  the  Boston 
Symphony  Orchestra  (1919-24),  of  the  DiaghilerT  Ballet,  of  the 
Metropolitan  Opera  and  the  Concertgebouw  orchestra  of  Amster- 
dam, and  as  guest  of  nearly  every  major  orchestra  in  the  country,  he 
had  achieved  a  reputation  for  scholarship,  clinical  virtuosity  in  score- 
reading  and  orchestral  technique.  If,  because  of  the  sobriety  of  his 
gestures,  he  lacks  the  glamour  and  demonstrative  appeal  of  some  of 
the  prima  donnas,  he  is  still,  according  to  the  testimony  of  musicians 
throughout  the  country  "a  musician's  conductor,"  and  soloists  attest 
to  his  flexibility  and  understanding.  He  has  gained  general  affection 
by  his  restrained  and  equable  temperament.  His  first  concert  was 
given  in  January,  1936,  with  an  orchestra  of  eighty-six  musicians. 
After  nearly  fifteen  years,  there  is  still  a  veritable  "cult  Monteux" 
and  the  public  is  as  united  as  could  be  humanly  expected.  In  March, 
1945,  the  University  of  California  awarded  him  the  LL.D.  degree. 

To  insure  the  audience  of  the  future,  the  Musical  Association 
established  a  novel  affiliation  with  the  students  of  the  colleges  of  the 
Bay  area.  About  1938,  student  groups  began  to  meet  informally  for 
advance  study  of  symphony  programs.  The  Association  cooperated 
at  first  by  supplying  musicians  to  lead  the  discussions,  and  more 
recently  by  scheduling  a  third  concert,  duplicating  the  regular  pairs, 
to  which  these  forum  members  are  admitted  at  a  special  rate.  Youth 
Concerts,  conducted  formerly  by  Ernest  Schelling  and  more  recently 
by  Rudoph  Ganz,  are  likewise  a  part  of  the  season's  activities. 

But  audiences  alone  will  not  assure  the  perpetuation  of  the 
symphony  orchestras.  This  can  be  done  only  by  financial  supple- 
ments from  other  than  audience  sources.  Although  tax  support  has 
contributed  somewhat  to  its  security,  observers  are  concerned  about 
the  possible  cross  purposes  and  embarrassments  of  divided  sponsor- 
ship of  political  and  private  agents.  There  is  no  question  that  the 
Musical  Association  would  much  prefer  a  direct  subsidy,  to  be 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  159 

applied  according  to  its  own  administrative  discretion,  to  the  in- 
direct method  of  selling  the  services  of  the  orchestra  under  circum- 
stances which  give  it  no  voice  in  the  control. 

A  second  weakness  in  the  San  Francisco  organization  is  the  ab- 
sence of  summer  activity.  Music  is  everywhere  a  highly  seasonal 
industry  and,  like  all  seasonal  industries,  has  often  attempted  to 
straighten  out  and  level  off  the  hazardous  fluctuations  in  employ- 
ment. But  although  some  off-season  attempts  have  been  made,  San 
Francisco  has  no  Ravinia  Park,  Lewisohn  Stadium,  Hollywood  Bowl, 
Robin  Hood  Dell,  Open  Air  Opera,  Boston  "Pops,"  Esplanade, 
Berkshire  concerts,  or  Summer  Opera.  The  continuity  of  employ- 
ment offered  by  such  summer  activities  not  only  extends  the  season 
for  the  musicians  of  the  respective  orchestras,  but  sometimes  actually 
maintains  the  musical  ensemble  intact,  and  eliminates  the  necessity 
for  the  players  to  earn  a  livelihood  by  outside  employment. 
These  prospects  tend  to  attract  and  hold  good  musicians  and  are 
therefore  reflected  in  the  quality  of  the  orchestra  and  its  accomplish- 
ments. The  San  Francisco  Opera,  in  setting  its  schedule  noncompet- 
itively  in  the  early  fall,  does  inestimable  service  to  the  Symphony 
by  employing  a  large  segment  of  symphony  personnel.  Any  cir- 
cumstance which  jeopardized  the  existence  of  the  San  Francisco 
Opera  would  to  that  extent  jeopardize  the  quality  of  the  Symphony 
Orchestra. 

REPERTOIRE  During  the  first  four  years  under  Henry 
Hadley  concerts  were  relatively  infrequent,  the  days  were  trouble- 
some, and  programs  were  largely  determined  by  available  scores  and 
funds.  The  balance  listed  toward  the  romantic  side,  with  Wagner 
and  Tschaikowsky  matching  Brahms  and  Beethoven  with  roughlv 
ten  per  cent  each.  Saint-Saens,  Goldmark,  and  Dvorak,  all  popular 
in  that  day,  were  included,  with  Richard  Strauss  unexpectedly 
neglected.  An  American  composer  himself,  Hadley  nevertheless  paid 
scant  attention  to  his  colleagues,  though  he  performed  about  half  a 
dozen  of  his  own  compositions,  which  is  not,  as  conductors  go, 
considered  unseemly.  In  general,  the  repertoire  was  one  that  was  not 
too  taxing  on  a  fresh  orchestra;  one  that  would  be  appropriate  to 
an  audience  not  too  intent  on  strenuous  edification;  and  one  which 


l6o  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

a  discreet  conductor  would  consider  safe  and  sane  during  the  first 
tottering  steps  of  an  infant  institution. 

Hertz  started  in  the  classic  manner  with  the  staple  Brahms  and 
Beethoven.  While  he  did  not  avoid  Wagner,  he  gave  him  no  undue 
prominence  but  rather  paralleled  his  characteristic  postwar  decline 
in  other  orchestras.  For  the  most  part  he  pursued  the  general  trends, 
drawing  heavily  on  Tchaikowsky,  Dvorak,  and  Strauss,  and  for 
diversity  picked  up  some  of  the  more  contemporary  figures, 
Respighi,  Sibelius,  Debussy,  and  Mahler.  By  no  means  distinguished 
for  an  urge  to  promote  the  Americans,  he  nevertheless  made  a  nom- 
inal gesture  of  recognition  toward  native  composers,  especially  those 
who  were  associated  in  some  manner  with  the  Pacific  Coast:  Ernest 
Bloch,  who  was  director  of  the  San  Francisco  Conservatory  of 
Music,  1925-30;  Albert  Elkus,  professor  of  music  in  various  schools 
and  colleges  of  the  Bay  area;  Frederick  Jacobi,  Stillman  Kelley,  and 
others.  Carpenter,  Eichheim,  Hanson,  and  La  Violette  are  also 
represented. 

With  Monteux,  the  public  was  introduced  to  a  more  sophisti- 
cated inventory,  commensurate  with  the  growth  in  stature  and 
security  of  the  orchestra  and  the  international  eminence  of  the 
conductor.  As  could  be  anticipated,  the  French  at  once  received 
delayed  recognition  with  a  proportion  of  fifteen  to  twenty  per  cent 
in  1935-45,  by  far  tne  highest  in  the  country.  These  comprise  not 
only  the  conventional  Chabrier,  Berlioz,  Chausson,  and  Ravel,  but 
also  the  more  militant  Milhaud,  Tailleferre,  and  Honegger.  Monteux 
displays  the  typical  Gallic  apathy  toward  Sibelius  and  Tschaikow- 
sky.  Stravinsky,  whom  he  virtually  introduced  to  the  world  while 
conductor  of  Diaghileff's  Ballet  Russe,  Hindemith,  Prokofieff, 
Chavez,  Villa-Lobos,  and  Bartok  illustrate  the  conductor's  contem- 
porary outlook.  A  cross-section  of  American  music  is  also  given  its 
day  although,  since  Hertz,  the  American  repertoire  shows  an  almost 
complete  turnover.  In  general,  the  repertoire  is  liberal  and  unhack- 
neyed, but  not  sufficiently  divergent  from  the  general  course  to 
alarm  the  audiences  unduly,  though  periodic  protests  against  "mod- 
ernism" have  been  raised. 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  161 


The  Cleveland  Orchestra  (1918) 

For  many  years,  Cleveland  was  the  beneficiary  of  the  musical 
achievements  of  larger  centers.  Cleveland  was  on  the  Theodore 
Thomas  highway.  Gericke  and  Nikisch  of  Boston  followed,  as  did 
Damrosch  and  the  New  York  Symphony.  Earlier,  Cleveland  had 
entertained  the  Sangerfest  in  1855,  1859,  and  1874,  as  well  as  numer- 
ous miscellaneous  soloists  who  toured  the  country7. 

Tentative  efforts  to  establish  an  indigenous  orchestra  were  made 
at  various  times  by  the  musicians  among  the  German  immigrants 
who  arrived  in  the  city  after  1848.  Most  of  the  organizations  were 
necessarily  so  shortlived  that  a  sample  enumeration  does  them  more 
than  justice.  In  1852,  John  Olker  organized  the  Germania  orchestra 
in  that  city  of  20,000.  The  Caecelian  Orchestra  followed  in  1854; 
the  Cleveland  Philharmonic  in  1881,  and  the  Cleveland  Symphony 
under  Johann  Beck  in  1900. 

Between  1901  and  191 8  a  concert  schedule  was  made  up  of 
programs  presented  by  the  major  American  orchestras  that  included 
Cleveland  in  their  tours.  To  administer  and,  if  necessary,  to  subsi- 
dize the  concert  series  of  visiting  orchestras,  the  Musical  Arts 
Association  was  incorporated  in  1902,  content  for  the  time  with  the 
borrowed  finery  of  other  cities.  In  191 3,  however,  Cleveland  was 
stung  with  envy  when  visited  by  the  orchestra  from  Minneapolis, 
a  city  half  its  size.  With  the  encouragement  of  Mayor  Newton  D. 
Baker  (later  Secretary  of  War  in  the  Wilson  cabinet),  the  Cleveland 
Municipal  Orchestra  was  organized  for  Sunday  concerts  at  popular 
prices  under  the  direction  of  Christian  Tinner.  But  these  lapsed  dur- 
ing the  war. 

In  19 1 8  Mrs.  Adella  Prentiss  Hughes,68  a  Cleveland  musician 
who  has  since  been  gratefully  labeled  "Mother  of  the  Cleveland 
Symphony,"  attended  the  Ohio  Music  Teachers  Convention  in 
Cincinnati  and  heard  a  lecture  by  Nikolai  Sokolofr",  who  was  at  the 
time  conducting  summer  concerts  in  that  city.  Impressed,  she  se- 
cured him  for  a  survey  of  public  school  music  in  her  own  city  that 
fall.  This  was  the  first  of  a  series  of  significant  circumstances  which 
terminated  in  the  founding  of  the  present  orchestra. 


162  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Externally,  the  sequence  of  events  seemed  quite  casual.  As  Pastor 
of  St.  Ann's  Catholic  Church,  the  Reverend  J.  H.  Powers  faced  the 
not  unusual  necessity  of  raising  funds  for  his  parish.  He  himself 
was  an  amateur  musician,  and  proposed  to  Sokoloff  and  to  the 
Musical  Arts  Association  the  organization  of  a  small  orchestra  for 
a  benefit  concert,  with  Father  Powers  (vocalist)  as  soloist.  Fifty- 
seven  men  were  recruited,  and  the  concert  presented  December  1 1 , 
191 8.  So  successful  was  the  venture  that  twenty  concerts  of  various 
types  were  given  in  Cleveland  and  seven  outside  the  city  during 
the  season. 

Sokoloff,  born  in  Russia,  had  been  a  student  at  the  Yale  School 
of  Music,  a  violin  protege  of  Charles  Martin  Loeffler,  and  a  member 
of  the  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra  from  1904  to  1907.  For  three 
years,  beginning  with  1914,  he  conducted  the  San  Francisco  People's 
Philharmonic,  which  attempted  to  supply  the  community  with 
popular-priced  concerts.  In  191 8  he  was  conducting  summer  con- 
certs in  Cincinnati  when  he  was  discovered  by  Mrs.  Hughes. 

The  Cleveland  orchestra  began  typically  as  a  local  band.  The 
musicians,  with  the  exception  of  the  scarce  oboe  and  English  horn 
players,  were  recruited  from  local  theatres,  schools,  and  other 
sources.  The  defunct  Municipal  orchestra  had  left  about  three  hun- 
dred scores  and  miscellaneous  equipment,  which  Mrs.  Hughes 
"picked  up,"  while  Sokoloff  himself  owned  a  small  portfolio  of 
scores.  The  concerts  of  the  first  season  were  presented  in  Gray's 
Armory  (capacity  2,400),  but  in  the  following  year  were  trans- 
ferred to  the  newly  erected  Masonic  Temple,  which  was  only 
slightly  smaller. 

Under  Sokoloff  the  orchestra  participated  in  various  community 
enterprises,  offering  children's  concerts,  sponsoring  contests;  and 
in  1927-28  it  was  joined  by  the  Cleveland  Playhouse,  a  dramatic 
troupe,  for  the  presentation  of  Debussy's  Nuages  et  Fetes  and  other 
numbers.  During  the  season  1921-22  the  orchestra  received  $31,000 
from  the  community  chest,  in  payment  for  concerts  in  community 
centres. 

The  Musical  Arts  Association,  a  nonprofit  corporation,  contin- 
ued to  sponsor  the  concerts,  administer  the  trust  funds,  and  to 
acquire  and  hold  its  property.  To  one  of  the  leading  members  of 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  163 

this  association  the  orchestra  is  indebted  for  its  present  home.  On 
the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  orchestra,  Mr.  J.  L.  Severance,  oil  and 
steel  magnate,  announced  a  gift  of  $1,000,000  for  an  auditorium. 
Western  Reserve  University  offered  the  site.  These  two  gifts  were 
supplemented  by  public  contributions  to  an  endowment  and  main- 
tenance fund.  The  hall  was  dedicated  in  February,  193 1,  and  named 
in  memory  of  Mrs.  Severance  who  had  died  since  the  announcement 
of  the  gift.  Severance  Hall  is  beautifully  designed  and  situated, 
highly  decorative  in  appointment,  but  seating  only  about  1,800 
persons.  It  is  among  the  smallest  auditoriums  in  America  to  house 
a  major  orchestra. 

After  fifteen  years  of  pioneer  service,  SokolofT  announced  his 
retirement,  to  take  effect  at  the  end  of  the  1932-33  season.  In  a  bid 
for  greater  national  recognition,  the  conductorship  was  offered  to 
Artur  Rodzinski,  who  had  come  to  this  country  as  assistant  to 
Stokowski  in  1927  and  was  then  enjoying  a  successful  tenure  in 
Los  Angeles.  He  had  gained  a  reputation  for  his  organizing  talent 
and  succeeded  in  materially  strengthening  the  ensemble.  After  ten 
years  Rodzinski,  who  had  in  the  meantime  won  notoriety  as  Tos- 
canini's  assistant  for  the  training  of  the  new  NBC  orchestra,  gradu- 
ated to  the  Philharmonic-Symphony  of  New  York. 

On  Rodzinski's  resignation,  some  critics  lamented  our  subservi- 
ence to  Europe  and  pleaded  for  an  American  conductor.  However, 
he  was  succeeded  by  Viennese-born  Erich  Leinsdorf,  thirty-one- 
year-old  operatic  maestro,  who  had  created  a  sensation  at  the  Met- 
ropolitan Opera  by  his  appointment  as  full  conductor  to  that 
venerable  institution  at  the  age  of  twenty-six  and  by  his  public 
clashes  with  several  operatic  stars.  Subject  to  the  military  draft,  his 
service  was  brief.  Much  of  his  three-year  regime  was  filled  by  guest 
conductors,  one  of  whom,  George  Szell,  was  appointed  permanent 
conductor  in  1946. 

REPERTOIRE  The  infant  years  of  the  Cleveland  orches- 
tra, which  was  founded  in  the  year  of  the  Armistice,  were  influ- 
enced by  the  strong  feelings  and  sentiments  engendered  during  the 
war.  The  curtailment  of  such  weighty  composers  as  Strauss  and 
Wagner,  adversely  affected  by  current  political  attitudes,  produced 


164  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

a  material  shrinkage  in  the  repertoire's  German  quota.  The  Austro- 
German  proportion  therefore  hovered  well  below  the  fifty  per  cent 
mark  throughout  the  first  decade.  The  old  Russians,  with  Tschai- 
kowsky  and  Rimsky-Korsakoff,  constituted  about  twenty  per  cent 
of  the  program  time,  and  the  French,  also  profiting  from  wartime 
sentiment,  only  slightly  less. 

A  large  fraction  of  its  American  repertoire  was  locally  induced. 
Bloch,  who  was  then  on  the  threshold  of  his  American  career,  was 
at  that  time  a  resident  of  Cleveland,  and  found  a  generous  audience 
in  the  1920's,  but  vanished  under  Szell.  LoefHer,  the  former  teacher 
of  Sokoloff,  had  many  renditions;  Arthur  Shepherd,  assistant  con- 
ductor, and  later  professor  at  Western  Reserve  University;  Henry 
Eichheim,  a  fellow-student  of  the  conductor;  Carleton  Cooley,  a 
member  of  the  orchestra;  Herbert  El  well  and  Beryl  Rubinstein, 
local  composers— together  with  an  occasional  nationally-known 
American— comprised  six  to  eight  per  cent  of  the  Sokoloff 
repertoire. 

This  level  of  American  participation  was  continued  by  his  suc- 
cessor, Artur  Rodzinski,  but  with  increased  national  and  diminished 
local  emphasis.  Though  the  war  hysteria  had  cooled  and  Strauss 
was  again  admitted  into  fellowship,  and  though  the  Bach  transcrip- 
tions prospered  and  the  Mahler  cult  was  born,  the  Germans  did  not 
recapture  the  position  of  lofty  isolation  held  during  the  reign  of 
the  mid-European  conductors.  Rodzinski  and  other  non-Teutons 
were  now  exalting  the  Russians  and  the  French.  Accordingly,  Shos- 
takovich, Rachmaninoff,  and  Stravinsky  were  supplementing  the 
pre-Revolutionary  stand-bys  to  augment  the  Slavic  strength. 

The  Rodzinski  period  was  also  marked  by  the  inclusion  of  opera 
performances  in  the  orchestral  schedule.  Victims  of  the  war  and 
other  untoward  factors,  the  provincial  opera  companies  in  Boston 
and  Chicago  had  succumbed.  Cleveland,  as  well  as  Cincinnati  and 
Philadelphia,  attempted  to  rekindle  the  depression  patronage  for  the 
orchestras,  to  salvage  operatic  literature,  and  possibly  also  to  gratify 
the  professional  passion  of  the  conductors,  by  incorporating  full 
operatic  performances,  as  well  as  opsras  in  concert  form,  in  the 
regular  season's  offerings.  The  Cleveland  project  was  made  possible 
by  the  happy  coincidence  that,  in  191 8,  the  Musical  Association  had 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  165 

acquired  for  a  nominal  sum  the  entire  collection  of  books,  manu- 
scripts, and  scores  comprising  the  library  of  the  bankrupt  Boston 
Opera  Company.  In  five  seasons,  fifteen  standard  operas  were 
staged.  As  in  Philadelphia  and  Cincinnati,  however,  the  opera  has 
now  been  abandoned  and  the  orchestra  has  returned  to  its  basic 
metier. 

The  Los  Angeles  Philharmonic  Orchestra  (1919) 

In  1880  Los  Angeles  was  a  small  outpost  community  of  10,000  in- 
habitants, with  a  salubrious  climate,  but  with  no  consciousness  of 
its  destiny  which  has  since  conferred  on  it  such  notoriety.  However, 
the  appearance  of  the  characteristic  symptoms  of  its  mature  person- 
ality were  not  to  be  delayed.  The  isolated  frontier  town  was  on  the 
eve  of  a  period  of  rapid  growth  on  completion  of  the  first  of  the 
several  railroads  which  made  Los  Angeles  a  transcontinental  ter- 
minal point.  This  all-important  achievement  was,  in  part,  the  work 
of  William  Andrews  Clark,  mining  magnate  and  empire  builder  and 
father  of  William  Andrews  Clark,  Jr.,  who  subsequently  became  the 
founder  and  chief  benefactor  of  the  Los  Angeles  Philharmonic  Or- 
chestra. 

It  was  also  the  eighties  that  witnessed  the  first  musical  stirrings 
under  the  patriarchal  Adolf  Willhartitz,  who  had  already  been  active 
in  St.  Louis  and  who  now  organized  an  amateur  orchestra  of  forty 
and  a  chorus  of  1 20  for  the  production  of  light  opera  and  the  larger 
choral  works.69  The  first  exclusively  orchestral  body  was  not  organ- 
ized until  1893  when  A.  J.  Stamm,  also  a  German,  pieced  together 
an  orchestra  of  thirty-five  professional  musicians.  Lacking  such  in- 
struments as  the  oboe  and  bassoon,  they  still  performed  works  of 
Wagner,  Rossini,  Mendelssohn,  Rubinstein,  and  other  standard  com- 
posers at  their  maiden  concert. 

The  concertmaster  of  this  aggregation  was  young  Harley  Ham- 
ilton, who  lost  no  time  in  organizing  his  own  group,  the  Los  Angeles 
Symphony  Society,  in  1897.  This  orchestra,  destined  for  a  much 
longer  life,  was  at  first  not  much  more  richly  endowed  with  finan- 
ces and  instruments  than  was  its  predecessor.  However,  with  a  little 
aid  from  such  philanthropists  as  he  could  rally  to  his  cause,  and  the 


1 66  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

personal  purchase  of  the  necessary  scores,  Mr.  Hamilton  persevered 
from  the  time  of  the  first  concert,  which  was  given  in  a  converted 
music  hall,  Spring  Street  between  Second  and  Third,  on  February  i, 
1898,  until  he  retired  sixteen  years  later.  During  this  period  he  had 
laid  a  foundation  of  taste  by  introducing  to  Los  Angeles  the  stand- 
ard compositions  of  Brahms,  Dvorak,  Haydn,  and  a  half-hundred 
other  composers. 

About  the  close  of  the  century,  the  most  prominent  hotel  in  Los 
Angeles  was  the  Alexandria,  operated  by  Mr.  Albert  C.  Bilicke.  For 
entertainment  and  dinner  music,  he  had  imported  from  Vienna  Adolf 
Tandler  and  several  other  instrumentalists  who  were  creating  a  very 
favorable  impression  on  some  of  the  most  influential  people  of  the 
city.  Although  there  were  at  least  thirty  candidates  for  the  leader- 
ship of  the  Los  Angeles  Symphony  Orchestra  on  the  retirement  of 
Hamilton  in  191 3,  Mr.  Tandler  secured  the  appointment  at  $3,000 
per  season.  Leaping  from  a  modest  dining  salon  to  a  concert  stage, 
Tandler  was  fairly  sensational.  With  an  orchestra  of  ninety  men,  he 
often  conducted  without  a  score,  instituted  paired  performances  and 
children's  concerts,  and  programmed  many  new  compositions.  Like 
many  other  conductors,  he  had  his  strong  supporters  who  helped  him 
enlist  some  philanthropic  aid,  as  well  as  his  detractors  who  remained 
unimpressed  and  unappreciative  of  his  heroic  attempts  to  simulate  a 
great  orchestra. 

In  the  meantime,  a  significant  new  force  was  arising  in  the  guise 
of  a  "Higginson"  of  the  West:  William  Andrews  Clark,  Jr.  The 
Tandler  orchestra  was  merely  a  cooperative  organization,  which  re- 
lied on  local  musicians  and  suffered  from  all  the  familiar  infirmities 
attendant  upon  those  circumstances.  Mr.  Clark  recognized  these  pro- 
vincial limitations  and  was  determined  to  organize  an  orchestra  on 
the  contemporary  Eastern  pattern  which  would  merit  national  rec- 
ognition. 

Clark  was  the  educated  and  well-traveled  offspring  of  the  afore- 
mentioned empire  builder,  Senator  Clark  of  Montana.  He  was  by 
profession  a  lawyer,  by  avocation  a  violinist,  and  by  inheritance  the 
custodian  of  millions  in  mining  and  railroad  wealth,  fabulously  aug- 
mented by  the  war  prosperity  of  1 914-18.  He  came  by  his  musical 
interests  honestly,  for  he  had  studied  the  violin  in  Paris  and  Los  An- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  167 

geles,  and  had  already  organized  in  Los  Angeles  a  chamber  music 
group  in  which  he  played  his  instrument.  From  New  York  he  had 
brought  reminiscences  of  Anton  Seidl,  a  frequent  guest  in  his  father's 
home,  of  whom  he  often  spoke  almost  in  terms  of  idolatry  to  his 
associates  in  Los  Angeles. 

Los  Angeles  had  meanwhile  become  a  progressive  city  of  over 
half  a  million.  All  signs  therefore  pointed  to  its  entrance  into  the 
national  arena  with  a  more  aggressive  policy  for  the  cultivation  of 
the  arts  as  a  civic  asset.  With  a  growth  of  national  consciousness  it 
seemed  important  to  find  a  nationally  recognized  conductor,  whose 
experience  and  reputation  would  lend  immediate  prestige.  English- 
born  Walter  Henry  Rothwell,  then  a  resident  of  New  York,  had 
conducted  opera  both  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and  had  been 
conductor  of  the  St.  Paul  Symphony  Orchestra  from  1908  until  191 5, 
when  it  was  disbanded.  Rothwell,  therefore,  qualified.  He  was  em- 
powered to  employ  a  concertmaster  and  personnel— a  few  from 
strike-bound  Boston— purchase  the  necessary  scores,  and  make  the 
general  preparations  for  a  symphony  orchestra,  whose  inevitable 
deficits  would  be  personally  guaranteed  by  Mr.  Clark.  The  ninety- 
piece  orchestra  opened  the  series  of  twelve  pairs  on  October  24, 
19 1 9,  in  Trinity  Auditorium. 

The  immediate  effect  of  such  grandiose  planning  on  the  old  Los 
Angeles  Symphony  Orchestra  was  to  induce  practically  all  its  mem- 
bers to  desert  it  and  contract  with  Clark  for  a  place  in  the  new  or- 
ganization. Tandler,  with  some  small  philanthropic  support  from  a 
competitive  social  set  still  available  to  him,  reorganized  his  own 
symphony  in  an  intrepid  endeavor  to  discard  the  cooperative  system 
in  favor  of  annual  financing.  After  only  a  year's  survival,  however, 
friction  developed  with  the  musicians'  union,  which  was  the  occa- 
sion, although  hardly  the  real  cause,  of  its  demise. 

From  all  indications,  Rothwell  was  popular  with  the  public.  This 
former  assistant  to  Gustav  Mahler  in  Hamburg  brought  discipline, 
much  needed  at  the  time,  to  the  new  orchestra.  Not  the  least  signif- 
icant circumstance  in  his  success  was  his  congeniality  with  his 
benefactor.  "They  made  a  good  team."  Mr.  Clark  attended  rehears- 
als and  frequently  sat  among  the  strings  where  Mr.  Rothwell  wel- 
comed his  presence  and  comment. 


l68  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Mr.  Clark's  solicitude  for  the  new  venture  was  paternalistic  and 
all-embracing.  Even  before  the  first  concert  of  the  season  he  raised 
the  minimum  weekly  salary  of  his  first  contracts  from  thirty-five 
dollars  to  fifty  dollars  in  order  to  offset  the  rapidly  rising  (postwar) 
cost  of  living.  To  each  member  of  the  orchestra  he  presented  an  in- 
surance policy  for  the  duration  of  his  employment.  Finding  Trinity 
unsatisfactory,  he  purchased  the  lease  of  Clune's  Auditorium,  later 
known  as  the  Philharmonic  Auditorium,  capacity  about  2,600,  which 
has  since  been  the  leased  home  of  the  orchestra.  He  shared  with  the 
conductor  all  the  musical  and  aesthetic  problems,  and  even  stood 
with  him  on  the  podium  for  the  conventional  photographs.  In  order 
to  lengthen  the  season  for  his  musicians  and  thereby  make  his  con- 
tracts more  enticing  to  Eastern  musicians,  he  encouraged,  and  ma- 
terially assisted  in,  the  establishment  of  the  Hollywood  Bowl  sum- 
mer concerts.70  For  three  five-year  periods,  he  underwrote  the 
deficits  of  the  orchestra,  which  cumulated  to  a  total  of  almost 
$3,000,000. 

But  the  creeping  anxiety  that  a  sole  guarantor  would  eventually 
become  indifferent  or  exhausted  finally  realized  itself  here,  as  it  had 
elsewhere.  Fashions  were  changing.  Instead  of  the  unstable  equilib- 
rium of  the  inverted  pyramid,  the  one  supporting  the  many,  there 
had  long  ago  set  in  a  shift  to  broad-based  support.  Higginson,  the 
American  progenitor  of  the  plutocratic  system,  had  died  in  Boston 
in  19 1 9,  just  as  the  Los  Angeles  Philharmonic  was  being  born.  In 
Philadelphia,  Chicago,  and  other  cities  endowments  or  sustaining 
friends  had  assumed  the  responsibilities  of  the  erstwhile  "owner"  of 
the  orchestra.  As  long  as  "Will"  Clark  was  willing,  Los  Angeles  let 
him  do  it.  But  when  he  died  in  1934,  uncertain  of  the  future  of  the 
orchestra,  he  had  bequeathed  his  extensive  collection  of  scores  to 
the  Los  Angeles  Public  Library,  and  cut  off  without  endowment  the 
child  that  he  had  so  long  nurtured  and  reared. 

Some  months  before  his  unexpected  death  he  had,  in  fact,  an- 
nounced his  definite  and  final  withdrawal  from  the  responsibilities 
that  he  had  periodically  reassumed  with  increasing  reluctance.  This 
had  necessitated  the  reorganization  of  the  board  in  line  with  the 
more  popular  method  of  financing.  The  new  organization,  the 
Southern  California  Symphony  Association,  solicited  subscriptions 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  169 

of  one  dollar  and  up,  and  thus  modestly  set  out  to  take  its  first  un- 
assisted steps  toward  financial  maturity  in  the  fall  of  1934,  in  the 
midst  of  the  great  depression. 

Rothwell  died  suddenly  in  the  spring  of  1927.  Emil  Oberhoffer, 
who  had  conducted  the  Minneapolis  Orchestra  for  nineteen  years 
and  had  appeared  in  the  Hollywood  Bowl,  was  available  to  com- 
plete the  season  in  the  emergency.  However,  for  the  permanent  of- 
fice the  Symphony  board  followed  the  usual  procedure  of  searching 
in  Europe  for  an  available  candidate,  and  imported  Finnish  Georg 
Schneevoigt  who,  however,  remained  for  only  two  seasons.  It  was 
not  a  fortunate  choice.  Schneevoigt  was  lethargic  and  uninspired 
and  never  gained  disciplinary  control  over  his  men.  During  his  sec- 
ond season,  illness  necessitated  the  employment  of  several  guest  con- 
ductors, including  Artur  Rodzinski  then  assistant  conductor  under 
Stokowski  in  Philadelphia.  With  the  resignation  of  Schneevoigt  in 
1929,  Rodzinski  took  over  the  leadership  and  remained  until  the 
spring  of  1933,  when  he  was  released  to  accept  the  call  to  Cleveland. 
This  event  coincided  with  the  retirement  of  Mr.  Clark. 

From  the  standpoint  of  fiscal  management,  as  well  as  conductorial 
opportunities,  the  Philharmonic  was  now  on  the  threshold  of  a  new 
era.  The  rise  to  power  of  the  Nazi  regime  in  January,  1933,  had 
made  the  position  of  many  German  musicians  untenable  at  home. 
Among  the  earliest  of  these  to  forfeit  his  position  was  Otto  Klemp- 
erer,  conductor  of  opera  and  orchestra,  who  had  taken  an  active 
part  in  the  politically  indiscreet  cultivation  of  contemporary  and 
post-Wagnerian  music.  Already  favorably  known  in  the  United 
States  as  guest  conductor,  Klemperer  was  eagerly  sought  in  order  to 
justify  the  faith  of  the  orchestra  in  the  new  popular  management. 
By  standards  both  physical  and  musical,  he  was  by  far  the  most 
impressive  figure  yet  to  occupy  the  post  as  regular  conductor.  Six 
feet-four  inches  tall,  he  dispensed  with  the  platform.  Completely 
unhampered  by  baton,  score,  music  stand,  or  podium,  he  bestrode 
the  stage  and  gripped  the  attention  of  both  musicians  and  audience 
with  the  sweep  of  his  long  arms.  He  was  the  first  musical  director 
of  truly  international  stature  and  general  musical  maturity.  For  six 
seasons  he  was  an  outstanding  popular  success  until  at  last  failing 
health  diminished  his  efficiency. 


170  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

There  followed,  beginning  in  1939,  a  procession  of  guest  conduc- 
tors: Coates,  Stokowski,  Walter,  Wallenstein,  Barbirolli,  and  others, 
until  finally,  among  the  many  candidates,  Alfred  Wallenstein  was 
appointed  to  the  new  leadership.  Born  in  Chicago,  he  had  spent  most 
of  his  youth  in  Los  Angeles,  studied  the  cello  with  Julius  Klengel  in 
Leipzig,  and  had  played  under  Stock  and  Toscanini  before  he  gained 
recognition  as  an  enterprising  conductor  of  a  radio  orchestra. 

The  Philharmonic  orchestra  had  been  in  great  need  of  new  ori- 
entation toward  the  growing  complexities  of  the  city's  organization. 
Under  the  new  regime,  the  number  of  paired  concerts,  which  had 
fallen  to  as  low  as  nine  during  the  guest  period,  was  increased;  new 
financial  resources,  including  the  much  discussed  "racing  fund," 
which  dispenses  its  favors  to  all  meritorious  enterprises,  were  tapped; 
and  a  pension  fund,  initiated  by  a  concert  conducted  by  Toscanini, 
was  established.  The  new  conductor,  to  whom  must  be  given  a  cer- 
tain measure  of  credit  for  the  financial  and  cultural  renaissance 
(which  was  not  achieved  without  some  partisan  conflict  and  revision 
in  managerial  personnel)  is  personally  active  in  integrating  the  or- 
chestra into  the  life  of  the  community..  Although  children's  concerts 
were  no  novelty,  the  children's  series  was  strengthened  by  the  pur- 
chase of  programs  by  the  city  school  system,  and  by  various  peda- 
gogical and  entertainment  features  designed  to  create  an  interested 
juvenile  audience. 

In  addition  to  the  tribulations  that  beset  every  orchestra  and 
never  are  fully  resolved,  the  Los  Angeles  Philharmonic  is  less  for- 
tunate than  most  major  orchestras  in  that  it  has  virtually  no  "home." 
The  Philharmonic  Auditorium  is  hardly  acceptable  as  a  final  solu- 
tion of  the  housing  problem.  Of  its  2,600  seats,  some  hundreds  are 
completely  unsalable  because  the  view  of  the  stage  is  obstructed 
either  by  pillars  or  by  the  awkward  angle  of  vision.  The  constant  use 
of  the  auditorium  for  other  functions  likewise  is  a  perennial  obstacle 
in  the  planning  of  proper  schedules,  both  for  rehearsals  and  public 
concerts.  A  new  home  is  ultimately  envisioned.  On  a  site  already 
selected,  west  of  the  downtown  section,  according  to  the  Greater 
Los  Angeles  Plan,  a  modern  auditorium  will  be  constructed,  which 
will  be  more  accessible  than  is  the  present  building  in  the  heart  of 
the  congested  business  area. 


Profiles  of  Major  A?nerican  Orchestras  171 

The  welfare  of  the  orchestra  is  to  some  extent  influenced  by 
unique  local  conditions.  In  addition  to  the  prestige  of  the  orchestra 
and  the  length  of  the  season,  the  musician  is  attracted  to  Los  Angeles 
by  the  seductive  climate  and  by  the  prospect  of  employment  in  the 
studios  of  motion  picture  and  radio.  Employment  conditions  in  the 
studios  until  recently  have  been  extremely  favorable,  with  shorter 
hours  and  a  higher  scale  of  pay.  In  fact,  many  musicians  who  have 
succeeded  in  securing  posts  in  the  studio  orchestras  are  said  to  cast 
condescending  glances  on  the  hard-working  orchestra  player,  with 
his  strenuous  rehearsal  and  concert  regime,  and  the  lower  rate  of 
compensation.  Consequently,  many  excellent  musicians  are  said  to 
accept  a  chair  in  the  symphony  orchestra  with  one  eye  on  the  main 
chance  in  Hollywood,  with  a  resulting  higher  turnover  in  orchestra 
membership  than  is  healthy  for  continuous  excellence  of  perform- 
ance. The  prosperity  of  the  studios  has  therefore  often  operated  ad- 
versely on  the  fortunes  of  the  orchestra.  Per  contra,  when  there  is 
a  "depression"  in  the  studios,  the  position  of  the  orchestra  is  corre- 
spondingly favored. 

Hollywood  Bowl,  a  natural  amphitheatre  which  now  accommo- 
dates 20,000  persons,  is  also  aligned  with  the  fortunes  of  the  Los 
Angeles  Philharmonic.  For  its  opening  in  the  summer  of  1922,  Alfred 
Hertz,  then  conductor  of  the  San  Francisco  orchestra,  was  willing  to 
grapple  with  the  hazards  of  outdoor  performances,  then  not  so  gen- 
erally accepted  as  now,  which  others  had  spurned.  It  was  thought, 
quite  rightly,  that  music  out  of  doors,  with  ever  so  favorable  acous- 
tics, could  not  transmit  the  fine  nuances  nor  convey  the  subtle  emo- 
tional connotations  to  which  audiences  have  become  accustomed  in 
the  concert  hall.  And  even  if  this  difficulty  were  overcome,  it  was 
thought  doubtful  that  mammoth  audiences  could  be  attracted  to 
serious  concerts. 

It  is  of  course  true  that  throughout  the  United  States  outdoor 
activities  of  every  type  have  been  expanding;  and  musical  activities 
have  shared  in  this  al  fresco  revolution.  The  prospects  of  music  in 
Los  Angeles  have  been  enhanced  by  its  equable  climate  and  its  repu- 
tation as  ideal  vacationland.  According  to  a  boast  of  one  Califor- 
nian,71  the  Lewisohn  Stadium  is  plagued  by  its  fire  engines  and  show- 
ers, Ravinia  Park  by  its  heat  and  mosquitoes;  while  the  rainless  skies, 


172  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

top-coat  temperatures,  and  insect-free  atmosphere  of  Southern  Cali- 
fornia allow  the  completest  enjoyment  of  a  Bowl  concert. 

REPERTOIRE  The  roll  call  of  composers  during  the  first 
years  of  the  Los  Angeles  Philharmonic  presents  no  conspicuous  de- 
viations from  the  general  taste  of  the  other  concert-going  communi- 
ties of  that  time.  Rothwell  evinced  no  disposition  to  specialize,  but 
rather  possessed  the  temperament  of  a  general  practitioner.  The  "old 
reliables,"  Beethoven  and  Brahms,  between  them  accounted  for  thirty 
per  cent  of  the  programs;  Tschaikowsky  competed  with  Wagner, 
each  drawing  off  an  additional  ten  per  cent.  Strauss  (five  per  cent), 
Debussy  (four  per  cent),  Liszt,  Mendelssohn,  Dvorak  and  Saint- 
Saens  pulled  up  next  in  the  ranking  of  the  regulars.  Mahler  was  repre- 
sented, but  Bach  had  not  yet  been  launched  on  his  renaissance  by 
Stokowski,  and  therefore  had  a  barely  discernible  existence.  The 
New  England  Americans  were  given  a  fair  hearing  by  this  English- 
born  conductor  who,  having  been  educated  on  the  continent,  dis- 
played no  vestiges  of  his  British  origins. 

It  was  during  the  brief  incumbency  of  Schneevoigt  that  the  cen- 
tennial of  Schubert's  death  was  commemorated,  which  accounts  for 
his  extraordinary  proportion  of  eight  per  cent.  That  Sibelius  is  not 
given  a  more  favorable  position  by  this  Finnish  conductor  than  his 
five  points  would  indicate  is,  perhaps,  partly  to  be  explained  by  the 
fact  that  guest  conductors  during  Schneevoigt's  illness  showed  dif- 
ferent enthusiasms. 

With  Rodzinski,  the  Austro-German  groups  reach  an  all-time 
low  of  thirty-eight  per  cent,  brought  about  by  the  de-emphasis  of 
Beethoven,  and  the  actual  omission  of  Liszt,  Mendelssohn,  and  other 
dispensable  Germans.  The  French  came  into  their  own  with  Debussy 
and  Franck,  and  the  Russians  expanded  with  Tschaikowsky,  Stra- 
vinsky, Rachmaninoff,  and  the  emergent  Prokofieff.  It  was  Rod- 
zinski's  first  responsible  conductor's  post  in  the  United  States— he 
had  served  as  assistant  conductor  in  Philadelphia— and  he  gave  vent 
to  his  sentiments  by  lifting  the  American  composer  to  a  respectable 
six  per  cent,  exceeded  only  by  Chicago  and  Boston.  It  was  in  Feb- 
ruary, 1933,  that  he  gained  his  American  citizenship,  and  signalized 
the  event  by  playing  his  first  pair  of  concerts  with  an  ail-American 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  173 

program  capped  by  the  Star-Spangled  Bamier,  a  patriotic  note  that  is 
indeed  unusual  in  peacetime. 

Klemperer  had  been  known  in  Germany  for  his  contemporary 
tastes.  These  he  brought  to  this  country  in  1933  and  displayed  in 
his  programming  of  Stravinsky,  Hindemith,  and  Shostakovitch,  the 
latter  then  on  the  threshold  of  his  American  career.  With  Bruno 
Walter,  one  of  his  successors  in  Los  Angeles,  he  shared  the  espousal 
of  Mahler.  Except  for  his  meager  attention  to  American  composers, 
this  German  emigre  cultivated  an  advanced  repertoire.  From  1940, 
however,  in  part  because  of  the  growing  composers'  colony  in  the 
Los  Angeles  area,  American  representation  grew  apace  to  almost  ten 
per  cent,  among  the  highest  in  the  country.  With  so  much  public 
attention  at  that  time  riveted  on  the  Good  Neighbor  policy,  Latin 
American  composers  also  crept  into  view:  Chavez  from  Mexico 
(guest  conductor),  Mignone,  Villa-Lobos  and  Guarnieri  from  Bra- 
zil. Of  these,  Villa-Lobos  was  soon  destined  to  be  heard  in  almost 
all  major  orchestras. 

The  colony  of  composers  in  Southern  California  are  attracted,  of 
course,  by  the  studios,  as  well  as  by  the  climate,  so  salubrious  for 
their  declining  years.  Gershwin  and  Rachmaninoff,  at  the  time  of 
their  passing,  were  living  in  that  area,  and  Gershwin's  death  was 
marked  by  a  special  Gershwin  program  by  the  orchestra.  Wallen- 
stein  has  accorded  the  Americans  an  average,  but  well-selected,  rep- 
resentation with  relatively  little  emphasis  on  "local  debts."  In  fact, 
the  Wallenstein  repertoire  rides  no  hobbies,  but  has  deflated  pre- 
viously exaggerated  proportions,  and  lifted  others  to  more  normal 
statures.  It  presents  a  substantial  and  worthy  assortment  of  standard 
and  modern  works  relatively  devoid  of  questionable  experimentation. 
He  seems  to  plan  his  repertoire  to  "give  something  to  everybody." 


The  distribution  of  symphonic  orchestras  is  much  more  widespread 
than  might  be  inferred  from  the  relatively  short  foregoing  list.  Many 
other  cities  have  flourishing  orchestras  of  shorter  duration,  or  have 
suffered  dark  seasons  which  have  interrupted  significant  develop- 
ments. Because  of  these  gaps  in  their  history  and  the  shifts  from 


1 74  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

impermanent  to  permanent  organization,  the  "legitimate"  date  of 
their  founding  cannot  always  be  determined;  for  some  managements 
have  been  disposed  to  push  back  that  date  as  far  as  possible  for  the 
prestige  which  age  confers.  Because  of  the  brevity  and  discontinuity 
in  their  history,  as  well  as  the  shortness  of  season,  it  is  impractical  to 
analyze  their  repertoires,  which,  in  general,  are  more  standardized 
and  less  experimental  than  those  of  the  well-established  groups. 

The  Pittsburgh  Symphony  Orchestra 

Among  the  oldest  of  these  in-and-outers  is  the  Pittsburgh  orchestra, 
founded  by  the  Art  Society  in  1896.  Andrew  Carnegie  was  listed 
among  the  contributors.  During  the  first  two  years  Frederick 
Archer,  a  local  organist,  was  the  conductor.  In  a  bid  for  wider  ap- 
peal, the  management  sought  out  Victor  Herbert,  already  known  for 
his  light  operas  but  who  had  gathered  considerable  experience  in 
serious  music  as  a  member  of  the  Thomas,  Seidl,  and  the  Metro- 
politan Opera  orchestras  in  New  York.  If  he  built  a  reputation  of 
brusqueness  and  highhandedness  toward  the  men  of  his  orchestra,  he 
awakened  great  public  interest  in  his  programs  and  vivacious  per- 
formances. The  orchestra  of  seventy  men,  safely  financed,  toured 
the  region,  including  New  York.  It  was  to  all  intents  a  "permanent" 
orchestra,  correctly  advertised  as  being  "more  than  New  York  has." 
But  the  call  of  composition  was  too  strong  to  resist,  and  Herbert 
retired  in  1904  to  devote  himself  exclusively  to  his  metier. 

During  the  next  six  years  the  orchestra  was  under  the  baton  of 
Emil  Paur,  late  of  Boston  and  New  York.  But  Paur's  programs  were 
"esoteric,"  the  audience  drifted  away,  and  the  guarantors  became 
discouraged.  In  19 10  the  orchestra  was  dissolved. 

In  the  interval  between  its  collapse  and  its  regeneration  in  1937 
the  city  was  provided  with  symphonic  music  by  casual  orchestras.  In 
that  year  Otto  Klemperer  was  "borrowed"  from  the  Los  Angeles 
orchestra  to  re-establish  it  as  a  major  orchestra.  Pittsburgh  followed 
through  with  determination  by  securing  Fritz  Reiner,  formerly  con- 
ductor in  Cincinnati.  After  having  built  up  the  orchestra  to  ninety 
men  and  the  season  to  twenty-eight  weeks  in  his  ten  years  of  service, 
in  an  economy  move  Reiner  was  threatened  with  curtailment  of 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  x75 

both  personnel  and  season.  Feeling  that  he  could  preserve  his  artistic 
integrity  only  by  resigning,  he  did  so  in  1948  and  the  orchestra  has 
since  been  under  the  baton  of  guests. 

The  Detroit  Symphony  Orchestra 

While  never  of  the  highest  musical  excellence,  the  Detroit  Orchestra 
has  periodically  furnished  exciting  copy  for  musical  news.  The  or- 
chestra had  its  undistinguished  beginning  in  19 14  under  Weston 
Gales,  who  had  successfully  sold  himself  to  the  city  after  an  experi- 
mental concert  the  previous  year.  Its  first  bid  for  entry  into  the  ma- 
jor class,  however,  was  the  appointment  in  191 8  of  the  distinguished 
pianist  Ossip  Gabrilowitsch  as  conductor.  He  reorganized  the  or- 
chestra by  importing  new  musicians,  to  the  usual  distress  of  the  local 
union.  With  his  wide  personal  following,  Gabrilowitsch  lifted  the 
orchestra  to  great  social  heights  and  considerable  musical  excellence. 
After  his  death  in  1935,  he  was  succeeded  by  his  associate  conductor, 
Victor  Kolar,  the  Italian  Franco  Ghione,  and  occasional  guests.  The 
city's  previously  high  interest  could  not  be  maintained,  and  the  or- 
chestra became  inactive  in  1942-43.  The  year  was  bridged,  however, 
by  a  radio  series  under  distinguished  guests,  sponsored  by  a  depart- 
ment store,  and  by  a  chamber  orchestra  under  the  direction  of  Bern- 
hard  Heiden,  a  young  composer  from  Frankfort,  Germany. 

At  this  moment,  a  strong  man  took  command.  A  Berlin-born 
industrial  chemist,  an  amateur  violinist  in  his  own  right,  and  fabulous- 
ly successful  as  an  industrial  chemist,  Henry  H.  Reichhold  assumed 
sole  responsibility  for  the  revived  orchestra.  Having  tasted  of  musical 
philanthropy  on  a  small  scale  by  guaranteeing  the  Heiden  ensemble, 
he  secured  Karl  Krueger,  late  of  Kansas  City,  as  musical  director.  He 
soon  increased  the  personnel  of  the  orchestra  to  no  men,  purchased 
the  Wilson  theatre,  and  undertook  an  aggressive  and  flamboyant 
campaign  that  featured  the  "world's  largest  orchestra."  For  a  short 
period,  Reichhold  had  dreams  of  building  a  musical  empire  inde- 
pendent of  New  York  administrators,  analogous  to  Henry  Ford's 
several  decades  earlier.  Included  in  this  defiant  project,  in  addition 
to  the  orchestra,  were  a  musical  journal,  a  concert  bureau,  radio  and 
records,  and  finally  a  fling  with  the  Carnegie  "pops"  of  New  York. 


176  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Many  forces  contributed  to  the  collapse  of  the  dazzling  six-year 
scheme,  the  success  of  which  would  have  been  welcomed  by  many 
friends.  It  is  idle  to  inquire  whether  the  authoritarian  nature  of  the 
sponsor,  his  imprudent  public  strategy,  the  alleged  shortcomings  of 
the  conductor,  the  barbs  of  the  critics,  or  the  disputes  with  the  or- 
chestra personnel,  contributed  most  to  the  unfortunate  debacle.  In 
1950  Detroit  was  again  without  a  symphony  orchestra. 

The  Baltimore  Symphony  Orchestra 

Baltimore  has  come  to  be  known  as  the  "cradle  of  municipal  music." 
In  1 9 14,  when  the  city  administration  appropriated  $8,000  for  a  mu- 
nicipal band,  it  occurred  to  some  that  a  municipal  orchestra  would 
be  equally  feasible.  Accordingly,  Baltimore  made  history  by  found- 
ing an  orchestra  on  a  municipal  appropriation,  a  method  quite  con- 
trary to  the  philanthropic  origins  in  other  communities.  But,  like  the 
municipal  band,  the  orchestra  was  a  local  affair,  limited  in  length  of 
season  and  artistic  horizon.  The  first  conductor  was  Gustav  Strube, 
formerly  of  the  Boston  orchestra,  and  at  the  time  on  the  faculty  of 
Peabody  Conservatory.  Although  the  city  had  stepped  up  its  appro- 
priations, they  were  never  sufficient  to  guarantee  an  orchestra  of  a 
caliber  worthy  of  the  seventh  city  of  the  United  States.  As  a  result 
of  long-smoldering  difficulties,  the  orchestra  disintegrated  in  1942. 

It  was  during  this  period  that  Peabody  acquired  as  its  new  direc- 
tor Reginald  Stewart,  founder  and  conductor  of  the  Toronto  Phil- 
harmonic Orchestra.  After  the  demise  of  the  Baltimore  orchestra,  he 
submitted  a  plan  for  its  reorganization  which  involved  the  coordina- 
tion of  conservatory  and  orchestral  interests,  and  was  promptly  en- 
trusted with  its  execution.  He  assumed  the  conductorship  of  the  new 
orchestra  at  once.  This  type  of  operation  had  distinguished  prece- 
dent in  Leipzig  exactly  a  century  previously,  when  Felix  Men- 
delssohn was  the  director  of  the  conservatory,  which  he  founded  in 
1843,  and  the  conductor  of  the  Gewandhaus  orchestra  between  1835 
and  1848.  New  members  were  appointed  to  the  Peabody  faculty 
who  would  dovetail  their  services  in  the  schedules  of  the  two  insti- 
tutions. Still  relying  on  the  indispensable  municipal  grant,  the  or- 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  177 

chestra  solicits,  as  do  all  other  orchestras,  the  funds  of  friends  to 
balance  its  budget. 

The  Rochester  Philharmonic  Orchestra 

The  Rochester  Philharmonic  Orchestra  was,  until  1929,  virtually  the 
pit  orchestra  of  the  Eastman  Theatre,  a  motion-picture  house.  Organ- 
ized by  George  Eastman  of  Kodak  fame,  it  presented  the  first  of  its- 
periodic  symphony  concerts  March  28,  1923  under  the  direction  of 
Arthur  Alexander.  But  with  the  double  catastrophe  of  sound  film  and 
the  depression,  the  basic  employment  of  the  orchestra  in  the  theatre 
vanished.  In  this  crisis  the  orchestra  was  taken  over  by  the  Rochester 
Music  Association.  A  permanent  nucleus  of  about  forty-five  players 
constituted  the  Civic  Orchestra,  which  was  supplemented  to  form  a 
complete  complement  for  symphonic  purposes.  Permanent  conduc- 
tors have  been:  Eugene  Goossens  (1924-31),  Jose  Iturbi  (1936-44), 
and  Erich  Leinsdorf  (1947-  );  and  these  have  been  supplemented 
by  an  extensive  and  notable  guest  list. 

A  distinctive  feature  of  the  Rochester  orchestra  is  its  collabora- 
tion with  the  Eastman  School  of  Music,  which  is  an  integral  part  of 
the  University  of  Rochester.  Not  only  are  the  Philharmonic  concerts 
given  on  the  campus,  but  the  orchestra  participates  in  the  American 
Festivals  that  have  been  instituted  by  Howard  Hanson,  director  of 
the  Eastman  School,  for  the  advancement  of  the  American  composer. 

The  Indianapolis  Symphony  Orchestra 

The  city  of  Indianapolis,72  founded  in  182 1,  experienced  during  the 
first  half  century  of  its  existence  a  musical  life  that  was  normal  for 
that  period  and  the  maturity  of  the  community.  Brass  bands,  choral 
groups,  solo  recitals,  and  occasional  instrumental  ensembles  consti- 
tuted the  musical  recreation  of  the  epoch.  After  1850  such  activity 
was  largely  supported  by  the  Germans  who  began  to  arrive  in  large 
numbers  in  various  cities  of  the  United  States.  The  Indianapolis 
Mannerchor  is  only  one  of  the  many  German  enterprises  that  has 
survived. 

Among  these  Germans,  incipient  orchestral  organizations  soon 


178  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

appeared.  In  1871,  stirred  by  the  fate  of  stricken  Chicago,  about 
forty  musicians  banded  together  for  a  charity  concert,  and  continued 
to  give  light  concerts  as  the  Philharmonic  Orchestra.  Karl  Schneider 
made  an  attempt  in  1 896  to  establish  a  series  with  about  sixty  ama- 
teurs and  professionals,  occasionally  importing  aid  from  Cincinnati, 
but  abandoned  it  in  1900.  More  enduring  and  significant  was  the 
project  under  the  direction  of  Alexander  Ernestinoff,  which  pros- 
pered between  1898  and  1914.  Envisaging  the  possibilities  of  popular- 
priced  music,  Edward  Birge,  then  director  of  public  school  music, 
organized  the  People's  Concert  Association  in  1905  for  the  purpose 
of  sponsoring  choral  performances,  recitals,  and  concerts  by  visiting 
major  orchestras  from  Chicago,  Minneapolis,  and  Cincinnati.  His 
scheme  also  embraced  the  indigenous  orchestras  which  were  succes- 
sively conducted  by  Ernestinoff,  Schneider,  and  Ferdinand  Schaefer, 
a  recent  arrival  from  Germany  in  1907. 

The  present  symphony  orchestra  was  founded  in  1929,  when  lo- 
cal musicians  found  themselves  displaced  by  sound-pictures  or  just 
plain  victims  of  the  depression.  In  this  crisis  Schaefer,  a  former  mem- 
ber of  the  Leipzig  Gewandhaus  orchestra,  again  stepped  forth  to 
organize  an  ensemble  which  would  supply  serious  musical  entertain- 
ment, to  preserve  the  musical  skills  endangered  by  enforced  idleness, 
and  to  recoup  their  ebbing  livelihood.  But  nearing  three  score  and 
ten,  Schaefer  had  already  reached  the  customary  retirement  age 
when  he  assembled  his  sixty  musicians  for  the  initial  concert.  If  the 
new  orchestra  was  to  prosper,  the  normal  course  would  call  for  the 
engagement  of  a  younger  conductor.  After  a  visit  as  guest  conduc- 
tor, November  17,  1936,  Fabien  Sevitzky,  nephew  of  Boston's  Kous- 
sevitzky  and  like  him  a  double-bass  virtuoso,  was  engaged.  Sevitzky 
had  come  to  this  country  in  1923  and,  in  deference  to  his  more 
famous  uncle,  had  shortened  his  name  very  early  in  his  American 
career.  The  Indianapolis  personnel  was  enlarged,  the  season  offering 
increased  from  six  single  to  ten  pairs,  season  contracts  became  the 
rule,  and  the  orchestra  was  thus  placed  on  a  permanent  basis.  Like 
his  uncle,  he  dedicated  his  efforts  to  advancing  the  American  cause 
and  for  some  years  attracted  national  attention  by  including  an 
American  composition  on  every  subscription  program. 

The  abandonment  of  the  purely  cooperative  organization,  which 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  179 

involved  shopping  for  talent  in  a  larger  market,  produced  the  same 
anguish  in  Indianapolis  as  it  had  in  every  other  city.  The  fine  senti- 
ments that  had  nurtured  and  solidified  the  depression  orchestra  were 
rudely  shaken  by  efficiency  methods  of  the  new  order.  "Indianapolis 
musicians  have  worked  for  seven  years  and  have  played  rehearsals 
and  concerts  for  as  little  as  three  dollars  a  concert.  Yet  they  have 
now  been  denied  the  just  fruits  of  their  labors."  So  ran  the  petition 
of  protest  circulated  during  Sevitzky's  second  season.  Of  course,  the 
protests  remained  impotent.  In  fact,  the  low  return  was  undoubtedly 
the  best  evidence  of  the  imminent  collapse  of  a  venture  that  could  be 
saved  only  by  the  very  reorganization  which  they  deplored.  In  this 
respect  Indianapolis  was  only  traversing  a  stage  which  New  York, 
Philadelphia,  and  the  rest  had  already  passed  and  long  forgotten. 

The  orchestra  waxed  in  strength  and  maturity,  but  did  not  es- 
cape the  hazards  that  had  befallen  the  older  orchestras.  It  met  its 
deficits,  however,  in  a  relatively  novel  way.  Since  193 1  the  orchestra 
has  been  sponsored  on  a  state-wide  basis  and  is  still  administered  by 
the  Indiana  State  Symphony  Society  which  solicits  funds  in  the 
communities  of  the  state.  It  was  also  one  of  the  first  to  win  a  grant 
of  tax  funds  for  the  outright  purchase  of  concerts  for  public  pres- 
entation. In  1943  the  Indiana  General  Assembly  passed  an  enabling 
act  permitting  the  city  to  appropriate  $50,000  from  the  school  and 
civil  budgets,  this  amount  representing  about  one-fifth  of  the  annual 
orchestra  budget.  These  grants  are  never  approved  without  a  skir- 
mish with  the  "anti-music  lobbv,"  which  does  not  deem  an  orchestra 
an  appropriate  subject  for  public  subvention,  as  well  as  with  those 
civil  departments  that  suffer  inconvenient  cuts  in  their  budgets. 

Washington,  D.  C:  The  National  Symphony  Orchestra 

In  almost  every  country  in  the  world,  the  political  capital  is  at  the 
same  time  the  seat  of  cultural  leadership  of  the  nation.  Paris,  London, 
Vienna,  Berlin,  and  Moscow  are  mature  cities  that  incorporate  all  the 
pursuits  of  a  cosmopolitan  community:  industry,  transportation, 
commerce,  education,  and  the  arts.  But  the  unique  history  of  the 
United  States  has  decreed  another  fate  for  its  own  capital  city.  It  is, 
in  a  sense,   a   synthetic    community,   oriented   almost   exclusively 


l8o  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

around  its  political  functions.  Its  industrial  potential  is  negligible;  its 
commerce  is  restricted  by  its  unfavorable  location;  its  essential  pop- 
ulation is  transient  and  reserves  its  community  pride  for  its  "home 
towns."  It  follows  that,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  fine  libraries  and 
art  galleries,  the  ingredients  for  a  healthy  cultural  life  hardly  exist. 
Some  of  the  libraries  and  museums  that  do  embellish  the  landscape 
are  to  a  large  extent  linked  with  the  political  functions  of  the  city. 

For  some  years  the  city  imported  concerts  from  New  York  and 
other  neighboring  cities.73  When  these  were  curtailed,  Washington 
was  threatened  with  musical  famine.  Faltering  beginnings  toward 
local  sponsorship  had,  indeed,  been  made  as  early  as  1902  when 
Reginald  DeKoven  conducted  sporadic  concerts  under  the  name  of 
the  Washington  Symphony  Orchestra.  Other  conductors  met  with 
equally  ephemeral  success. 

More  serious  efforts  were  made  in  the  spring  of  1930  when  a 
group  of  resident  musicians,  driven  by  depression  circumstances, 
banded  together  for  cooperative  concerts,  and  called  Hans  Kindler 
to  lead  them.  A  Dutch-American  cellist,  Kindler  had  previously  oc- 
cupied the  first  chair  in  the  Philadelphia  orchestra,  had  a  modicum 
of  conducting  experience,  and  had  been  favorably  known  to  Wash- 
ington audiences. 

Although  the  depression  project  was  soon  abandoned,  Kindler 
picked  up  the  challenge  and  made  it  his  personal  responsibility  to  lay 
the  foundation  for  a  permanent  orchestra.  The  National  Symphony 
Orchestra  is  almost  literally  his  own  creation.  It  was  he  who  solicited 
funds,  corralled  the  musicians,  and  took  all  the  initiative  and  respon- 
sibility for  aggressive  action. 

The  founding  of  an  orchestra  is  never  an  easy  task.  Even  before 
the  first  concert  (Nov.  2,  193 1 ),  seven  important  musicians  had  with- 
drawn because  of  schedules  conflicting  with  their  more  secure  and 
remunerative  positions  in  the  pit  of  the  Fox  Theatre.  Promising  play- 
ers were  often  enticed  by  more  favorable  contracts  to  other  cities. 
Since  extra  instruments,  extra  rehearsals,  royalties,  and  rentals  are 
expensive,  programs  had  to  be  cut  to  the  cloth  of  available  materials. 
In  fact,  it  was  not  until  1 946  that  Kindler  felt  safe  in  scheduling  such 
numbers  as  Strauss'  Till  Eulenspiegel  and  Heldenleben. 

Recurrent  disputes  with  the  union  reached  a  climax  in  1939  when 


Profiles  of  Major  American  Orchestras  181 

the  usual  questions  of  imported  musicians,  salary  scales,  and  length 
of  season  proved  insoluble  until  John  Steelman,  Federal  conciliator, 
offered  the  services  of  his  staff  for  negotiation  of  outstanding  differ- 
ences. 

In  1935  the  orchestra  was  organized  on  a  permanent  basis.  Mu- 
sicians were  given  season  contracts,  tours  were  undertaken;  in  1940 
records  were  cut  for  the  Victor  company;  and  the  fame  of  the 
Watergate  concerts,  the  first  of  which  had  played  to  10,000  persons 
in  1935,  grew  apace.  When  finally,  in  1948,  the  Association  had  to 
undertake  a  deficit  campaign  to  wipe  out  an  accumulated  debt  of 
$50,000,  one  could  safely  conclude  that  the  National  Symphony  Or- 
chestra had  "come  of  age"!  Kindler,  however,  was  ready  to  retire  in 
1949,  and  soon  died.  He  was  replaced  by  Howard  Mitchell,  associ- 
ate conductor,  the  present  incumbent. 

The  concert  hall  at  the  disposal  of  the  orchestra  during  the 
twenty  years  of  its  existence  is  a  rented  home.  It  is  not  the  worst-, 
nor  yet  the  best-appointed  concert  hall.  Seating  3,800  persons,  Con- 
stitution Hall  was  designed  primarily  to  house  the  many  conven- 
tions that  crowd  the  national  capital.  Its  stage  facilities  are  only 
moderately  satisfactory;  but  more  important,  the  busy  schedule  of 
the  building  often  conflicts  with  its  use  for  rehearsals  and  other 
functions  related  to  satisfactory  concert  performance.  The  more 
sanguine  friends  of  the  orchestra  hope  for  a  new  home,  which,  to- 
gether with  an  endowment  fund,  would  satisfy  the  ambitions  of  this, 
one  of  the  youngest  of  the  major  orchestras  of  the  country. 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the 
Repertoire 


In  the  history  of  the  orchestral  repertoire,  the  duration  of  the  mu- 
sical life  of  a  composer's  works  presents  about  the  same  diversity  as 
the  duration  of  the  personal  life  of  individuals.  There  is  a  high  early 
mortality,  many  live  an  average  and  uneventful  life,  and  to  only  a 
few  is  granted  a  long  and  venerable  career.  The  life  of  a  composi- 
tion as  well  as  of  a  human  being  is  determined  by  two  factors,  the 
environmental  circumstances  to  which  it  is  subjected  in  the  course 
of  its  existence,  and  the  initial  vitality  of  the  subject  itself.  These 
produce  in  both  cases  a  characteristic  biography  or  life  history.  The 
performance  of  a  composition,  which  is  obviously  the  principal  rea- 
son for  its  existence,  is  the  best  evidence  of  both  its  initial  vitality 
and  of  a  favorable  environment. 

Since  it  is  quite  impossible  to  comprehend  the  multiplicity  of 
details  in  the  performance  records  of  several  scores  of  composers  in- 
dividually, these  composers  are  classified  into  type-groups  made  up 
of  those  whose  careers  approximately  coincide  in  length  of  time  span, 
volume  of  repertoire,  and  historical  pattern  of  popularity.  Although 
aesthetic,  musicological,  and  other  considerations  would  often  dic- 
tate alternative  groupings,  the  historical  analysis  here  contemplated 
is  greatly  facilitated  by  momentarily  ignoring  rival  considerations. 
Accordingly,  beginning  with  1875  when  symphony  orchestras  were 
on  the  eve  of  their  expansionist  period,  most  prominent  composers 
are  grouped  into  six  major  divisions: 

(1)  Six  eminent  composers  who  have  maintained  their  pre-eminence: 
Beethoven,  Brahms,  Wagner,  Tschaikowsky,  Mozart,  and  Bach. 

( 2 )  A  small  group  with  high  traditional  prestige,  who  are  maintaining  a 
low  but  fairly  stable  popularity  without  significant  fluctuations: 
Haydn,  Handel,  Weber,  and  Gluck. 

182 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  183 

(3)  Composers  in  the  ascending  phases  of  their  life  cycles: 

(a)  Apparently  at  or  near  their  peak:    Strauss,   Sibelius,  Franck, 
Stravinsky,  Debussy,  Rachmaninoff  and  Shostakovitch. 

(b)  Recent  composers:    Mahler,  Prokofieff,  Schoenberg,  Copland, 
Vaughan  Williams,  Hindemith,  Milhaud,  Bartok,  and  Walton. 

(4)  Composers  who  once  enjoyed  great  vogue  but  whose  life  cycles 
have  long  been  in  the  descending  phase:  Schumann,  Schubert,  Ber- 
lioz, Liszt,  Mendelssohn,  and  Rubinstein. 

( 5 )  Composers  who  display  a  full  life  cycle  in  various  stages  of  comple- 
tion: Dvorak,  Saint-Saens,  Smetana,  Grieg,  Goldmark,  and  Mac- 
Dowell;  Rimsky-Korsakoff,  Elgar,  d'Indy,  Glazounoff,  and  Scriabh. 
Respighi,  Bloch,  Falla. 

(6)  Composers  who  were  once  quite  prominent  but  are  now  totally  for- 
gotten: Spohr,  Raff,  Kalliwoda,  Lindpaintner,  Gade,  and  Hummel. 


The  Six  Most  Pre-e?ninent  Composers 

LUDWIG  VAN  BEETHOVEN  Beethoven  has  been  the 
dominant  figure  in  the  history  of  orchestral  music  throughout  the 
past  and  present  century.  Analysis  of  the  repertoire  solidly  supports 
the  prestige  of  his  name,  which  has  become  synonymous  with  every- 
thing classic  in  music  in  the  minds  of  both  the  connoisseur  and  the 
untutored  layman.  Although  his  music  introduced  novelties  in  form, 
instrumentation,  and  harmonic  structure  that  startled  some  of  the 
hearers  who  were  accustomed  to  Mozart  and  Haydn,  and  shocked 
those  patrons  in  France  whose  standards  were  measured  in  operatic 
terms,  his  world-wide  eminence  was  never  questioned  even  in  his 
own  lifetime.  He  is  the  clearest  refutation  of  the  cliche,  commonly 
quoted  in  defense  of  modern  trends,  that  "great"  music  requires  a 
long  apprenticeship  on  the  part  of  the  musical  public  before  it  can 
be  appreciated.  The  Handel  and  Haydn  Society  of  Boston,  founded 
in  1 8 1 5,  placed  with  him  an  unfulfilled  commission  for  an  oratorio, 
and  the  London  Philharmonic  purchased  directly  from  Beethoven 
himself  several  overtures  and  the  Ninth  Symphony.  Britain,  grown 
wealthy  in  its  early  industrial  revolution,  was  then  what  America  was 
soon  to  be:  a  country  proud  to  adorn  itself  with  the  borrowed  trap- 
pings of  the  aesthetically  mature  but  less  opulent  continent,  and  to 
pay  fabulously  for  it.  Accordingly  Beethoven,  like  Haydn,  was  in- 
vited to  visit  London  to  conduct  his  Ninth  Symphony  but  was  under- 


184  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

standably  prevented  by  his  afflictions  from  realizing  his  ambition.  In 
America  there  had  been  scattered  performances  of  several  Beethoven 
compositions  since  1817,1  and  by  1842,  only  fifteen  years  after  his 
death,  the  New  York  Philharmonic  Society  testified  to  his  es- 
tablished fame  by  inaugurating  its  first  series  with  what  was  then,  as 
now,  the  world's  most  famous  piece:  Beethoven's  Fifth.  Today  it  is 
still  a  common  practice  to  include  all  nine  symphonies  in  the  season's 
offerings. 

This  resplendent  adulation,  enduring  for  nearly  150  years,  was 
never  anticipated  by  Beethoven  himself,  though  it  could  hardly  be 
said  that  his  temperament  was  marked  by  modesty  or  diffidence.  In 
textbook  homage,  perhaps  Bach  exceeds  him,  but  for  actual  perform- 
ance popularity,  the  case  of  Beethoven  is  unique  in  its  duration,  vol- 
ume, and  general  aesthetic  luster.  His  career  is  not  easily  explained 
short  of  the  eulogistic  but  inarticulate  explanation  that  he  simply 
wrote  "good  music." 

On  the  other  hand,  Beethoven's  margin  of  popularity  over  his 
competitors  in  the  American  repertoire  has  been  constantly  dwin- 
dling. Beginning  with  the  founding  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic 
in  1842,  the  Beethoven  trend  line  may  be  conveniently  divided  into 
two  periods,  with  the  division  point  about  1890.  The  first  period  is 
characterized  by  a  decline  from  the  Olympian  peak  of  over  thirty 
per  cent  of  the  repertoire  in  1 842-45  to  a  position  of  less  than  fifteen 
per  cent;  the  second  period  displays  a  gentler  recession  during  which 
he  at  times  rubs  shoulders  democratically  with  the  rest  of  the  com- 
poser population. 

The  first  high  popularity  and  his  subsequent  sharp  decline  in 
American  orchestras  may  be  ascribed  to  several  factors.  In  this  early 
period  there  was  only  one  orchestra,  the  New  York  Philharmonic, 
later  to  be  joined  by  the  New  York  Symphony  (1878)  and  the  Bos- 
ton orchestra  (1881).  The  New  York  orchestras  usually  performed 
only  four  to  six  pairs  of  concerts  annually,  and  the  rehearsal  periods 
were  extremely  limited.  Repertoires  were  consequently  small  and 
lacked  the  variety  of  today.  Nor  was  this  circumstance  psychologi- 
cally too  inappropriate.  Hearing  less  music  in  those  days,  audiences 
still  had  much  to  learn  from  Beethoven,  who  was  a  relative  novelty 
to  them,  although  to  conductors  he  was  the  very  cornerstone  of  mu- 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  185 

sical  culture.  And  as  the  prolific  Beethoven  had  produced  nine  sym- 
phonies of  greatly  diversified  design,  as  well  as  overtures  and  other 
miscellaneous  works,  it  was  possible  to  maintain  the  necessary  vari- 
ety in  numerous  performances.  During  this  period  Haydn  and  Mo- 
zart, who  had  been  equally  and  even  more  fertile,  but  whose  melodic 
creations  seemed  more  obvious  and  lighthearted,  lost  ground  to  the 
more  dramatic  Beethoven. 

Such  splendid  isolation  could  not,  of  course,  endure.  Musicians 
and  audiences  were  ultimately  satiated,  new  geniuses  appeared  whose 
works  were  pressing  for  recognition,  and  new  conductors— Henschel, 
Nikisch,  Seidl,  Muck,  Safonoff,  Stokowski,  and  Koussevitzky— were 
imported  who  were  disciples  of  new  romantic  cults.  Thus  the  com- 
bined gains  of  Wagner,  Brahms,  and  Tschaikowsky  were  practically 
equivalent  to  the  losses  of  Beethoven  during  the  last  two  decades  of 
the  century. 

These  changes  were  further  accelerated  by  the  new  conditions 
of  orchestral  organization.  Paced  by  Boston  and  philanthropist  Hig- 
ginson,  who  imparted  to  other  communities  their  new  ambitions,  sea- 
sons were  lengthened,  concerts  became  more  numerous,  and  finan- 
cial guarantees  permitted  compensation  for  rehearsals  which  were 
usually  considered  unprofitable,  and  therefore  shunned,  by  cooper- 
ative orchestras.  All  of  these  forces  were  reflected  in  more  experi- 
mental repertoires.  Wagner  became  a  public  issue,  Dvorak  and 
Tschaikowsky  gained  extraordinary  popular  acclaim,  and  Strauss  and 
Brahms  enthusiastic  partisans.  The  new  romanticists  as  well  as  the 
older  Thomas  developed  a  new  musical  conscience  and  proclaimed 
their  duty  to  keep  their  audiences  abreast  of  current  trends. 

Although  Beethoven  was  by  no  means  smothered  in  these  trends, 
his  symphonies  began  to  play  a  different  aesthetic  role  in  the  reper- 
toire. The  battle  for  Beethoven  and  "complete  symphonies"  (rather 
than  excerpts)  had  been  won  and  it  was  now  the  Wagner-Strauss 
axis  which  was  fighting  for  a  place  in  the  sun.  But  tastes  slowly  ac- 
quired are  never  lightly  relinquished.  Beethoven  was  no  longer  on 
the  frontier  of  taste,  but  actually  popular  with  the  larger  public  who 
began  to  enjoy  the  pleasant  relaxation  of  the  familiar.  It  was  his 
adaptability  to  both  roles— the  difficult  and  the  exalted  as  well  as  the 
familiar  and  accepted— that  perpetuated  his  name  among  the  leaders 


l86  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

of  the  repertoire.  Beethoven  is  still  holding  his  own;  only  Brahms, 
whose  music  gained  adherents  after  a  still  greater  struggle,  also  meets 
the  challenge  of  the  dual  role. 

The  stability  of  the  Beethoven  offerings  in  recent  decades  is  at- 
tested by  the  fact  that  he  suffered  no  losses  during  World  War  I, 
when  the  works  of  other  Germans,  including  Wagner,  were  very 
much  reduced  in  the  repertoire;  and  that  there  was  no  significant 
increase  at  the  time  of  the  centenary  of  his  death  (1927).  Naturally 
great  publicity  was  given  this  anniversary.  The  journals  rehearsed 
the  pathetic  love  life  of  the  lonely  bachelor,  published  photographs 
of  a  few  of  his  many  domiciles,  pictured  his  ear  trumpet  and  the 
spoon  from  which  he  took  medicine  during  his  last  illness.  They  re- 
assessed his  place  in  the  history  of  music,  and  exhumed  his  forgotten 
overtures  and  played  practically  all  his  compositions  except  the  Bat- 
tle Symphony ,  which  had  been  ironically  among  his  most  popular 
numbers  during  his  lifetime.  Most  orchestras,  however,  compen- 
sated for  this  orgy  of  Beethoveniana  by  sharply  reducing  their  of- 
ferings the  following  season,  thereby  leaving  the  long-run  trend  un- 
affected. 

During  the  war  against  fascism,  the  prestige  of  the  familiar 
Third  and  Fifth  of  the  liberty-loving  Beethoven  were  hailed  as  the 
very  apotheosis  of  freedom.  Especially  the  Fifth,  whose  terse  theme 
duplicated  the  rhythm  of  the  Morse  code  letter  "V,"  was  frequently 
played  to  revitalize  our  faith  in  victory,  and  subsequently  to  cele- 
brate its  achievement. 

The  Fifth  Symphony  has  for  a  century  been  conventionally  ac- 
cepted as  the  most  famous  symphonic  composition  ever  written.  It 
is  compact  in  structure,  displays  a  dash  of  sentiment  in  the  second 
movement  to  alleviate  the  abrupt  and  strident  opening,  achieves  a 
triumphal,  dramatic,  almost  demagogic  climax,  and  is  of  average 
length— all  of  which  contribute  to  the  explanation  of  its  pre-eminence. 
Its  nearest  competitors  are  the  Seventh  and  the  Third.  The  sharp 
rise  in  national  popularity  of  the  Fifth  after  the  beginning  of  the 
century  is  the  result  of  its  use  by  the  conductors  of  the  younger  or- 
chestras in  converting  the  newer  audiences  to  the  enjoyment  of  their 
symphonic  offerings. 

The  decline  of  the  Ninth,  from  fourth  place  to  a  poor  last  place 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  187 

in  the  course  of  seventy  years,  is  undoubtedly  owing  to  the  decline 
of  choral  music  itself.  In  the  earlier  days  most  cities  boasted  flourish- 
ing amateur  choral  organizations,  which  eagerly  collaborated  with 
instrumental  groups.  But  such  organizations  have  almost  disappeared. 
It  is  possible,  also,  that  the  Ninth  Symphony,  glorified  by  Schu- 
mann and  Wagner,  has  lost  some  of  its  glamour  for  us,  not  only  be- 
cause of  certain  aesthetic  misgivings,  but  also  because  it  must  share 
the  sparse  program  time  allotted  to  choral  music  with  other  works 
of  interest  and  merit. 

The  various  orchestras  manifest  different  degrees  of  allegiance  to 
Beethoven.  Chance  alone  accounts  for  some  of  the  minor  differences. 
Temporary  major  variations  in  conductor  and  audience  tastes  are  not 
however  without  significance.  Verbrugghen  was  known  for  his 
partiality  to  Beethoven;  W.  Damrosch,  Mahler,  and  others  institu- 
ted Beethoven  cycles.  But  no  conductor  of  recent  years  has  deviated 
so  far  from  the  general  trend  as  did  the  conservative  Toscanini  dur- 
ing his  tenure  with  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  where  he  offered 
Beethoven  in  twice  the  volume  of  the  national  average. 

Although  Beethoven's  prime  position  is  quite  independent  of  a 
few  such  passionate  enthusiasts,  it  has  not  remained  unchallenged 
either  by  the  inexorable  rise  of  Brahms— the  composer  of  the 
"Tenth"  symphony— or  by  the  occasional  fanatic  such  as  Safonoff 
with  his  Tschaikowsky,  or  the  enterprising  Thomas  with  his  Wag- 
ner. At  times  Beethoven  has  even  been  conspicuously  avoided.  Chi- 
cago under  Stock  pursued  other  tastes,  and  Stransky,  intent  on  bal- 
ancing the  budget,  tickled  the  popular  palate  by  nudging  Beethoven 
just  a  little  to  one  side  to  allow  more  room  for  Liszt,  Wagner, 
Dvorak,  and  other  more  colorful  favorites.  At  various  times,  and  in 
some  cities,  Beethoven  has  consequently  fallen  below  the  general 
average  of  ten  per  cent  of  the  repertoire  and  been  topped  by  Wag- 
ner, Tschaikowsky,  and  Brahms  for  short  intervals. 

JOHANNES  BRAHMS  The  austere  and  often  ponderous 
Brahms  has  been  gradually  inching  his  way  into  favor,  and  is  today 
the  only  composer  who  is  in  a  position  to  dispute  the  primacy  of 
Beethoven.  Catering  to  the  more  literate  and  thoughtful,  Brahms' 
First  has  been  carried  on  the  crest  of  the  sophisticated  taste  to  the 


PERCENTAGE  IN  TOTAL  REPERTOIRE 

I2f"  

8EETH0VEN 


10 


5" 


2  ' 


BRAHMS 


POPULARITY 
PYRAMID 

TEN  AMERICAN 
ORCHESTRAS 

1945-50 


TSCHAIKOWSW 

MOZART 
STRAUSS 

WAGNER 

MAHLER        SCHUMANN 
BERLIOZ 
BACH    RACHMANINOFF     STRAVINSKY 
MENDELSSOHN      SIBELIUS       SCHUBERT 
DEBUSSY     PROKOFIEFF 
RAVEL  SHOSTAKOVICH    HAYDN 
DVORAK    BRUCKNER 
FRANCK 
BARTOK   RIMSKV -KORSAKOFF 
WALTOM   HINDEMITH     HANDEL  VAUGHAN  WILLIAMS 

COPLAND     LISZT     SAINT-SAENS    RESPIGHI 
KHATCHATOURIAN      HONEGGER    WEBER    MILHAUD 
SCHOENBERG    DEFALLA   BARBER    ELGAR   BRITTEN   D'lNDY 
GERSHWIN    SMETANA    MARTINU    BLOCH     MESSIAEN      W.SCHUMAN 
MlASKOWSKy  GOULD  PISTON  DIAMOND  THOMSON  GLUCK  GLAZOUNOFF  IBERT 
ANTHEIL  THOMPSON  ROSENTHAL  POULENC  CRESTON    HANSON  GRIEG  CASADESUS  TANSMAN. 

AND  MANY  OTHERS 


About  forty  per  cent  of  the  repertoire  of  the  American  orchestras  is 
devoted  to  the  top  half-dozen  composers,  and  about  seventy  per  cent 
of  the  repertoire  is  built  on  the  compositions  of  the  twenty-three  com- 
posers from  Beethoven  to  Franck.  The  remaining  thirty  per  cent  is 
divided  among  several  hundred  composers. 

188 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  189 

kind  of  popular  acclaim  accorded  formerly  only  to  the  symphonies 
of  Beethoven.  At  least  for  the  American  audience,  it  vindicates,  dec- 
ades after  it  was  made,  the  famous  quip  of  Biilow  who  had  dubbed 
it  the  "Tenth." 

Brahms'  ascent  has  been  slow  and  his  acceptance  tentative.  Her- 
alded as  the  exponent  of  the  classic  tradition,  he  ran  counter  to  the 
more  sensational  trends  of  the  Berlioz-Liszt-Wagner-Strauss  circle, 
whose  audacious  instrumentation,  garish  harmonies,  and  dynamic 
rhythms  implemented  the  anecdotal  and  literary  titles  of  their  dra- 
matic masterpieces.  Their  more  extrovert  qualities  catapulted  them 
over  and  beyond  the  sedate,  contemplative,  and  unadorned  Brahms, 
whose  bag  of  svmphonic  tricks  seemed  to  be  limited  to  the  varie- 
gated patterns  of  syncopation,  his  asymmetrical  and  polyrhythmical 
forms,  his  widely  spread  broken  chords,  his  frequently  interrupted 
melodic  lines,  and  his  chronic  evasion  of  the  obvious  progression- 
traits  which  are  responsible  for  the  sense  of  elusiveness  which  many 
auditors  still  experience  when  listening  to  his  symphonic  works. 

The  violent  personal  controversy  churned  up  among  the  follow- 
ers of  Brahms  and  Wagner  in  Germany  did  not  touch  America.  For 
America  was  geographically  remote  and  not  bound  by  the  academic 
and  cultural  traditions  that  gripped  the  European  partisans.  The 
German-American  musicians  who  dominated  the  American  scene 
had  left  their  academic  biases  at  home,  or  had  never  heard  of  them 
in  the  first  place.  Consequently  both  Brahms  and  Wagner  were  wel- 
comed with  equal  enthusiasm  without  the  rival  emotional  overtones 
that  often  characterized  their  reception  in  Berlin,  Leipzig,  and 
Vienna. 

Brahms'  American  orchestral  debut,  with  the  Serenade  No.  2, 
was  made  with  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  February  1,  1862,  Carl 
Bergmann,  conductor.  All  readers  of  program  notes  will  also  recall 
the  famous  clash  in  1877  between  the  elder  Damrosch,  victorious  by 
one  week,  and  Theodore  Thomas,  in  their  race  to  perform  the  pre- 
miere of  Brahms'  First  in  the  United  States.  But  the  most  potent  ini- 
tial force  in  giving  Brahms  an  early  major  position  in  our  repertoire 
was  Georg  Henschel,  the  first  Boston  conductor,  who  was  his  per- 
sonal friend,  and  who  had  frequently  sung  to  the  accompaniment  of 
the  composer  himself.  In  spite  of  the  hostility  of  some  critics  toward 


I90  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

his  prosy  compositions,  the  Boston  conductors,  Gericke,  Nikisch,  and 
Paur,  continued  to  give  Brahms  about  eight  to  ten  per  cent  of  the 
repertoire,  certainly  a  very  high  percentage  for  any  single  composer. 
A  diet  so  laden  with  what  must  have  seemed  to  the  audience  like 
potatoes  without  salt— nourishing  enough  but  tasteless— would  in 
retrospect  legitimize  its  protests  against  the  conductors  who  un- 
wisely served  so  unbalanced  a  ration. 

It  is  amazing  to  observe  in  contemporary  records  the  small  spread 
in  the  relative  popularity  of  the  four  symphonies.  The  First,  Second, 
and  Fourth  cluster  together  rather  closely  and  each  represents  dur- 
ing the  ten-year  period  1940-50  roughly  about  sixteen  per  cent  of 
the  total  Brahms  repertoire.  The  Third  Symphony,  the  Haydn 
Variations,  and  the  Academic  Festival  Overture  follow  in  that  order. 
The  increasing  prominence  of  the  two  piano  concertos  is  at  the  ex- 
pense of  the  diminishing  attractiveness  of  the  old  favorites,  especially 
those  of  Grieg,  Rubinstein,  and  Saint-Saens.  The  smaller  numbers, 
the  Serenades  and  Hungarian  Dances,  have  practically  disappeared 
from  the  serious  repertoire. 

What  sustains  Brahms  in  his  competition  with  Beethoven  is  the 
almost  uniform  strength  of  four  long  symphonies,  while  Beethoven 
over  the  decades  actually  can  offer  only  four  or  five  of  comparable 
popularity:  the  Third,  Fifth,  Seventh,  and  Eighth.  The  piano  con- 
certos compete  very  well  with  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  of  Beethoven, 
while  the  single  violin  concerto  is  among  the  leaders. 

It  is  hardly  evident  that  both  composers  are  being  pressed  to 
maintain  their  historical  advantage  against  the  collective  assault  of 
the  "moderns."  It  is  said  that  the  younger  members  of  the  audience 
have  reached  a  stage  of  surfeit  with  the  thrice  familiar  Brahms  clas- 
sics. Eric  Blom,  prominent  British  critic,  suggested  that  "it  is  almost 
as  old-fashioned  to  enjoy  Brahms  as  to  be  thrilled  by  a  valentine."  2 
Although  that  sentiment  is  by  no  means  absent  in  the  United  States, 
there  are  evidently  many  "old-fashioned"  people  in  our  audiences. 

RICHARD  WAGNER  In  1891  Mark  Twain,  who  had 
joined  the  throng  of  American  intellectuals  at  the  Bayreuth  Festival, 
reported  in  the  New  York  Sun  that 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  191 

in  his  humble  opinion,  the  Wagner  operas  would  be  fine  music  if  the 
singing  could  be  left  out.3 

This  facetious  quip  actually  did  epitomize  the  judgment  of  many  a 
competent  musical  critic,  and  was  pointedly  prophetic  of  the  des- 
tiny of  many  of  Wagner's  synthetic  creations.  Although  Wagner 
entertained  the  theory  that  instrumental  (absolute)  music  had  ex- 
hausted its  intrinsic  potentialities,  and  that  it  could  further  realize 
itself  only  in  an  alliance  with  the  other  arts,  the  irony  of  fate  would 
have  it  that  Wagner  has  gained  his  most  widespread  prestige  with 
symphonic  excerpts  from  his  operas  with  the  "singing  left  out."  His 
music  thereby  outlasted  and  contradicted  the  very  theories  which 
allegedly  formed  it! 

Ever  since  Liszt  declared  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  know  the 
drama  to  appreciate  the  music  of  Tannhauser,  there  have  been  many 
critics  who  have  maintained  by  one  argument  or  another,  that  Wag- 
ner remains  essentially  a  symphonic  composer  with  the  drama  and 
vocal  elements  optional  or  even  superfluous.  In  contradistinction  to 
the  Italian  opera,  which  relegated  the  orchestra  to  a  rhythmic  ac- 
companiment, a  kind  of  tonal  backdrop  against  which  the  vocal  line 
was  conspicuously  featured,  the  Wagnerian  music-drama  elevated 
the  orchestra  to  a  status  coordinate  with  the  drama.  Wagner  took 
his  technical  cues  from  orchestral  composers  and  strengthened  the 
instrumental  resources  by  following  the  most  advanced  models  of 
Berlioz  and  Liszt  in  the  chromatic  melodic  line,  idiomatically  devel- 
oping each  instrument  to  virtuoso  proportions,  featuring  the  brasses, 
and  introducing  polyphonic  complexity. 

Small  wonder,  then,  that  the  orchestral  "accompaniment"  was  to 
traditional  ears  a  loud  and  noisy  intrusion  rather  than  a  reinforce- 
ment of  the  vocal  action;  and  that  the  "endless  melody,"  which  was 
preoccupied  in  furthering  the  dramatic  action,  was  not  recognized 
as  a  melody  at  all,  and  therefore  easily  dispensed  with  by  the  en- 
riched orchestra.  Like  a  symphonic  poem,  it  was  found  that  the 
orchestral  "accompaniment"  could  stand  alone  as  an  autonomous 
composition;  so  that  in  time  it  constituted  a  major  element  in  ev- 
ery repertoire  of  the  symphony  orchestras.  It  is  true  that,  in  opera 
performance,  the  Wagnerian  orchestra  was  hidden  under  cover  of 
the  stage  where  it  was  less  likely  to  obtrude  and  overpower  in  vol- 


192  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

ume  and  interest.  But  this  does  not  in  any  way  weaken  the  aesthetic 
justification,  once  its  symphonic  virtues  had  been  discovered,  for 
lifting  it  from  the  pit  and  granting  it  a  solo  position  on  the  stage 
commensurable  with  its  symphonic  content.  The  dramatic  and  vocal 
personnel  of  the  musical  drama,  like  the  victims  of  the  well-known 
Lord  High  Executioner,  "never  will  be  missed." 

But  operatic  enthusiasts  will  flatly  dispute  the  above  symphon- 
ically  biased  assertions.  Among  these  protestants  would  be  included 
Wagner  himself,  who  repeatedly  refused  permission  to  fragment 
his  works.  "In  this  he  is  right,"  says  his  disciple,  Billow,  in  a  letter  to 
Theodore  Thomas,  "for  what  is  written  for  the  stage,  and  in  Ger- 
many is  performed  there,  the  composer  does  not  wish  to  find  its 
way  to  the  concert  Hall."  4  But  even  the  unbending  Wagner  could 
make  profitable  compromises.  He  himself  conducted  orchestral  ex- 
cerpts in  concert  form  in  Berlin,  Vienna,  and  other  centers  when 
financial  necessity  dictated  and  other  circumstances  made  it  prudent 
to  do  so.  When  Metropolitan  conductor  Anton  Seidl  found  that 
the  busy  American  daily  schedule  did  not  permit  the  staging  of  his 
operas  in  the  uncut  version,  he  unhesitatingly  pruned  them.  While 
still  in  Germany,  Seidl  had  explained  the  necessity  of  this  procedure 
to  the  composer  who,  in  an  exchange  of  telegrams,  gave  his  pointed 
assent  in  the  laconic  order  "Schiessen  Sie  los!"  5 

The  first  performance  of  Wagner  by  the  orchestras  here  under 
review  occurred  April  21,  1855,  when  the  New  York  Philharmonic, 
under  the  direction  of  Carl  Bergmann,  presented  the  Overture  to 
Tannhauser.  This  progressive  conductor,  who  had  immigrated  to 
the  United  States  in  1850,  joined  the  Germania  orchestra  as  cellist, 
and  later  became  its  leader,  had  already  offered  a  taste  of  Wag- 
ner to  an  American  audience.  In  1852  the  Germania  orchestra  had 
performed  the  Finale  from  Tannhauser  in  Boston,  which  the  critic 
for  Divighfs  Journal  (December  4,  1852)  described  as  an  "agree- 
able disappointment;  it  was  less  strange  than  we  had  been  led  to  be- 
lieve." In  December,  1853,  the  same  orchestra  presented  a  "Wagner 
Night"  in  Boston  "to  gratify  the  public  curiosity  about  Wagner." 

With  such  devoted  disciples  as  Bergmann  and  Thomas  in  Amer- 
ica, Wagner  at  once  became  a  fixture  in  the  American  repertoire. 
From  the  first  concert  he  conducted  in  1862,  when  he  gave  the 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  193 

American  premiere  of  the  Overture  to  the  Flying  Dutchman, 
throughout  his  career  on  his  famous  "highway,"  Thomas  made 
Wagner  popular.  As  early  as  1872  he  scheduled  a  "Wagner  Night" 
at  the  Central  Park  Garden  Concerts,  and  the  same  evening  launched 
the  New  York  Wagner-Verein,  which  was  committed  to  the  pro- 
mulgation of  the  cult  and  the  construction  of  the  Bayreuth  Theatre. 

The  first  real  vogue  for  Wagner  appeared  in  the  early  nineties 
when,  amid  an  unprecedented  controversy  in  both  this  country  and 
Germany,  he  forged  ahead  to  claim  an  average  of  ten  per  cent  of 
the  repertoire.  Of  the  four  orchestras  existing  at  that  time  (the  New 
York  Philharmonic,  the  New  York  Symphony,  Boston,  and  Chi- 
cago), the  New  York  Symphony  under  Damrosch  and  the  Chicago 
orchestra  under  Thomas  were  primarily  responsible  for  his  vogue. 
Wagner  remained  at  this  extraordinarily  high  level  of  popularity  for 
several  decades,  in  part  because  of  the  practice  of  feature  concerts 
of  individual  composers,  in  part  because  of  an  occasional  opera  in 
concert  form;  and  because  Wagner's  music  was  available  to  vocal 
soloists  with  orchestral  "accompaniment." 

With  the  upsurge  of  interest  in  Tschaikowsky  and  Brahms,  the 
volume  of  Wagner  was  already  shrinking  before  the  patriotic  on- 
slaughts of  World  War  I  forced  him  into  partial  retirement.  Al- 
though he  returned  when  the  stage  was  again  safe  for  him,  he  never 
fully  recovered.  The  long-time  trend  has  been  unmistakably  down- 
ward (now  at  about  three  per  cent)  toward  a  gradual  "Wagner- 
dammerungP  Such  is  the  fickleness  of  taste  that  the  "music  of  the 
future"  sooner  or  later  becomes  the  music  of  the  past.  Even  so,  the 
actual  frequency  in  appearance  of  his  name  does  not  differ  essen- 
tially from  some  who  outrank  him.  In  playing  time  devoted  to  him, 
his  excerpts  are  usually  shorter  than  the  thirty-to-forty-minute 
symphonies  of  Brahms  and  Beethoven,  which  require  an  allotment  of 
at  least  one-third  of  a  ninety-minute  program. 

Although  the  trends  are  fairly  uniform  in  all  orchestras,  fluctu- 
ations do  of  course  appear  and  may  be  attributed  to  both  personal 
and  social  factors.  One  of  the  most  drastic  of  these  forces  was  the 
first  World  War,  which  swept  the  Metropolitan  Opera  stage  en- 
tirely clear  of  Wagner  music-dramas  and  reduced  the  Wagnerian 
cascade  to  a  mere  trickle  in  the  symphony  programs.  Although 


194  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Wagner  was  not  then  living,  he  was  nevertheless  the  target  of  anti- 
German  sentiment.  The  intensity  of  this  totalitarian  attitude  toward 
the  prosecution  of  the  war  differed  among  the  cities.  It  affected  least 
of  all  the  New  York  Philharmonic  under  Stransky,  an  Austrian- 
Czech,  who  was  periodically  free  from  political  suspicion  and  con- 
tinued to  cultivate  a  repertoire  that  would  bring  tangible  returns  at 
the  box  office.  These  benefits  seemed  not  to  have  been  endangered 
by  orchestral  excerpts  from  Parsifal,  Tannhauser,  Lohengrin,  and 
Die  Walkiire  on  the  last  program  of  the  season  19 17-18  and  the 
Bacchanale  from  Tannhauser  on  the  program  of  December  15,  191 8, 
approximately  one  month  after  the  Armistice.  Whatever  other  fac- 
tors might  have  been  operating,  this  is  at  least  not  inconsistent  with 
the  general  policy,  announced  by  some  conductors,  that  only  the 
music  of  living  Germans  (in  effect  the  music  of  Richard  Strauss) 
would  be  eliminated  during  the  war  period. 

Of  all  the  cities,  Boston  has  remained  most  aloof  from  the  Wag- 
ner cult,  being  consistently  in  the  lowest  rank  throughout  the  history 
of  the  orchestras.  On  the  other  hand,  Stokowski  reveled  in  the 
grandiloquent  phrases  of  the  German  postromanticist  and  pieced 
together  what  was  perhaps  the  most  comprehensive  Wagner  reper- 
toire in  America.  The  non-Teutonic  Rodzinski,  Golschmann,  Mon- 
teux,  Mitropoulos  and  Toscanini,  like  Koussevitzky,  have  paid  only 
token  respect  to  the  music-dramatist,  although  Toscanini,  like  Muck, 
had  gained  distinction  and  acclaim  for  his  direction  of  Wagner's 
music-dramas.  This  is  not  to  imply  that  their  non-Germanic  cultural 
heritage  alone  precludes  the  cultivation  of  the  German  repertoire, 
but  rather  that  most  of  these  conductors  appeared  on  the  scene 
after  the  Wagner  fever  had  waned,  when  the  primitive  excitement 
of  controversy  had  spent  itself,  and  a  certain  aesthetic  satiety  had 
already  set  in.  After  all,  there  were  other  causes  to  be  espoused, 
among  the  French  and  Russian  composers,  which  relegated  Wagner 
to  the  category  of  a  solved  problem.  He  was  still  listened  to  with 
genuine  satisfaction  but  did  not  enjoy  the  extra  patronage  which  has 
its  source  in  unsatisfied  intellectual  curiosity. 

Of  all  the  orchestral  works  of  Wagner,  the  Overture  to  Tann- 
hauser was  one  of  the  earliest  and  the  most  frequently  performed. 
It  is  the  "William  Tell"  of  the  subscription  repertoire.  Almost  every 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  195 

opera  has  supplied  one  or  more  excerpts  that  are  now  standard,  and 
only  a  few  of  the  earlier  works,  originally  and  specifically  written 
for  the  orchestra,  now  survive.  Prominent  among  them  are,  of  course, 
the  Siegfried  Idyll  (actually  an  adaptation  of  opera  material)  and 
the  Faust  Overture.  But  none  has  dropped  as  definitively  to  merited 
oblivion  as  has  the  Centennial  March,  written  at  the  invitation  of 
Theodore  Thomas  for  the  celebration  of  the  birth  of  the  American 
nation— the  Philadelphia  Exposition  of  1876.  This  negotiation  repre- 
sents the  most  intimate  point  of  contact  of  Richard  Wagner  with  the 
American  scene.  A  political  revolutionary  himself  in  his  younger 
days,  who  had  made  inquiries  into  the  possibilities  of  emigrating  to 
the  New  World,  he  gave  some  grounds  for  hope  that  the  occasion 
might  inspire  him.  But  never  has  the  Muse  failed  so  egregiously  to 
heed  the  call  of  a  suppliant  artist.  To  some  aestheticians  it  is  un- 
doubted confirmation  of  the  theory  that  she  cannot  be  bribed,  not 
even  with  $5,000  cash  in  advance.  For  them  it  will  go  down  in  his- 
tory as  the  most  tragic  example  of  the  futility  of  commissioned  mu- 
sic. For  the  disillusioned  Thomas  who  had  fought  the  valiant  fight, 
who  had  hoped  for  another  Tannhduser  March,  or  at  least  a  Kaiser- 
marsch,  which  would  advance  the  causes  of  art  and  freedom,  it  was  a 
bitter  blow.  The  humiliating  story  has  been  repeatedly  told.6  Even 
the  hero-worshipping  Henry  T.  Finck,  the  New  York  critic,  was 
pushed  to  the  limit  in  explaining  Wagner's  failure  and  quotes  the 
composer:  "The  best  thing  about  that  composition  was  the  money  I 
got  for  it."  It  is  now,  of  course,  a  museum  piece  known  only  to  the 
musical  antiquarian.  The  American  idolater  may  find  consolation  in 
the  circumstance  that  the  money  was  applied  to  ease  the  financially 
harassed  artist  and  thus  release  his  energy  for  greater  things.  Rose 
Fay  Thomas  states  that  it  was  applied  on  the  debt  of  the  Bayreuth 
Theatre,  while  Ernest  Newman  avers  that  it  was  used  to  finance  a 
trip  to  Italy— all  of  which  may  reflect  merely  a  problem  of  book- 
keeping. 

The  second  World  War  differed  from  the  first  in  that  none  of 
its  battles  were  fought  on  the  concert  stage.  Although  it  propelled 
Wagner  into  a  still  more  intense  limelight,  it  had  no  appreciable  ef- 
fect on  his  already  diminishing  role  in  the  American  orchestra.  We 
had,  it  appears,  become  accustomed  to  wars,  were  concentrating  all 


196  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

our  efforts  on  that  disagreeable  business,  not  allowing  attitudes  to 
run  riot  into  sentimental  bypaths.  The  recession  in  Wagner's  popu- 
larity was  therefore  no  greater  than  would  normally  be  expected  if 
the  war  had  not  occurred  at  all.  That  is  not  to  say  that  Wagner  was 
not  again  a  subject  of  even  more  heated  controversy.  By  some  he 
was  labeled  the  archvillain  in  German  nationalism  for  supplying  the 
artistic  rationalization  for  the  fantastic  glorification  of  Teutonism 
that  ultimately  culminated  in  totalitarian  Nazi  ideology.7  Wagner's 
granddaughter,  Friedelind,  now  living  in  the  United  States,  en- 
deavored to  clear  him  of  this  historical  taint  of  the  Nazi  spirit.8  But 
this  issue  cannot  be  arbitrated  here. 

PETER  ILICH  TSCHAIKOWSKY  In  his  essay  on  Clas- 
sicism (1850)  the  literary  critic  Sainte-Beuve  proclaimed  an  impor- 
tant psychological  truth  when  he  stated,  "//  n'est  pas  bon  de  paraitre 
trop  vite  .  .  .  classique  a  ses  contemporains;  on  a  grande  chance 
alors  de  ne  pas  rester  tel  pour  la  posteriteP  This  observation  applies 
to  the  fortunes  of  Tschaikowsky  in  the  American  orchestral  reper- 
toire. The  tuneful  symphonist,  with  his  luscious  harmonies  and  ef- 
fortless progressions,  found  ready  comprehension.  Where  Wagner 
aroused  violent  partisanship,  and  Brahms  created  puzzlement  or 
apathy,  Tschaikowsky  kindled  enthusiasm.  In  fact,  decades  ago,  be- 
fore a  significant  decline  could  have  been  noted,  sophisticated  critics 
doubted  his  sticking  powers  because  enjoyment  came  too  easily. 
He  was  the  victim  of  critical  slurs,  and  invidious  comparisons: 
"Brahms  is  better  than  he  sounds,  and  Tschaikowsky  sounds  better 
than  he  is."  It  is  quite  "the  thing"  to  snub  a  composer  whose  music 
is  enjoyed  by  the  multitude. 

Since  the  spring  of  1876,  when  Tschaikowsky  was  introduced 
by  Carl  Bergmann  in  orchestral  form  with  the  Fantasie-Overture, 
Romeo  and  Juliet,  his  rise  was  brilliantly  dramatic.  Within  twenty 
years  he  outpaced  the  pedestrian  Brahms  and  was  competing  with 
Wagner,  having  garnered  eight  per  cent  of  the  composite  repertoire. 
At  times,  this  essentially  European  composer,  with  an  exotic  ad- 
mixture of  Russian  flavors,  outstripped  both  Wagner  and  Beethoven. 
He  appealed  to  the  general  audience  rather  than  to  the  connoisseur, 
and  gave  the  conductors  an  outlet  for  their  most  romantic  effusions. 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  197 

SafonofT,  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  won  his  job  on  the 
strength  of  his  exciting  performance  of  the  Pathetique.  During  his 
several  years  of  tenure  he  filled  an  unprecedented  twenty  per  cent 
of  the  repertoire  with  the  works  of  his  compatriot.  Walter  Dam- 
rosch  and  Stransky  in  New  York;  Stokowski  in  Cincinnati  (fifteen 
per  cent)  and  in  Philadelphia  (ten  per  cent,  1920-25);  and  Fiedler 
in  Boston  were  also  conspicuous  among  their  colleagues  at  one  time 
or  another  for  their  cultivation  of  the  romantic  Russian. 

The  composer's  triumphant  visit  to  the  United  States  in  1891 
was  naturally  both  cause  and  result  of  his  high  popularity.  At  the 
invitation  of  Walter  Damrosch,  who  presided  over  the  dedicatory 
concerts  of  Carnegie  Hall,  he  appeared  as  guest  conductor  on  that 
solemn  occasion,  as  well  as  for  concerts  in  Philadelphia,  Washington, 
and  Baltimore. 

The  New  York  Symphony,  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  and 
the  St.  Louis  Symphony  under  Zach  contributed  palpably  toward 
the  building  up  of  the  peak  of  interest.  After  that  time,  his  decline 
was  rapid,  reaching  its  lowest  ebb  (about  five  per  cent)  in  the  1930's. 
From  this  low  but  still  respectable  position,  however,  a  definite  re- 
covery seems  to  have  been  shaping,  partly  stimulated,  no  doubt,  by 
the  centenary  of  his  birth  (1940).  Whether  this  revival— which  has 
already  given  way  to  a  slight  recession— is  permanent  will  depend 
on  such  factors  as  the  urgency  to  cater  to  popular  taste,  a  possible 
reversal  of  the  derogatory  attitude  of  the  sophisticates  toward  an 
unashamed  enjoyment  of  the  lyrical  genius,  the  fate  of  the  piano 
and  violin  concertos  among  the  soloists,  together  with,  as  always, 
the  competition  of  other  available  music,  old  and  modern. 

Although  a  prolific  composer,  Tschaikowsky's  representation  has 
shaken  down  to  a  rather  stable  remnant  which  will  probably  remain, 
in  spite  of  Sainte-Beuve,  "classique  pour  la  posteriteT  It  includes  the 
following  items:  Symphonies  Five,  Six,  and  Four,  roughly  in  that 
order  according  to  performances  in  recent  years,  the  (First)  piano 
and  violin  concertos,  and  the  concert  overtures  Romeo  and  Juliet 
and  Francesca  da  Rimini. 

His  well-worn  Piano  Concerto  in  B-flat  Minor  is  probably  the  only 
standard  concerto  to  have  had  its  world  premiere  in  America.  Dedi- 
cated to  Biilow,  after  the  composer's  famous  altercation  with  Nich- 


198  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

olas  Rubinstein,  the  copy  reached  him  shortly  before  the  pianist 
was  to  leave  on  his  American  concert  tour.  It  was  first  presented  in 
Boston,  October  25,  1875.  Critical  opinion  was  divided,  although 
the  Finale  was  encored.  It  has  for  years  been  the  most  popular  of 
all  piano  concertos,  in  the  "popular"  sense  of  the  term,  having  been 
abundantly  recorded,  and  its  principal  theme  cribbed  for  both  song 
and  dance.  In  fact,  in  symphonic  circles,  this  concerto,  with  the 
Sixth  Symphony,  has  achieved  the  status  of  a  "warhorse." 

Many  other  items  are  given  periodic  performances,  but  the 
works  with  which  he  gained  his  early  successes— Marche  Slave,  Over- 
ture 1812,  Nutcracker  Suite— have  slipped  out  of  the  subscription 
concerts  to  a  more  popular  level. 

WOLFGANG  AMADEUS  MOZART  In  1800  Mozart, 
Handel,  and  Haydn  were  considered  the  ultimate  in  musical  evolu- 
tion. Their  works  were  abundantly  represented,  together  with  such 
now  forgotten  names  as  Pleyel  and  Gyrowetz,  on  early  American 
programs. 

It  was  the  "tutti  frutti"  nature  of  the  conventional  programs  of 
the  day,  made  up  of  music  of  all  genres,  which  contributed  much 
to  the  attainment  of  Mozart's  exalted  position.  This  circumstance 
tends  to  innate  the  volume  of  the  versatile  composer,  whose  operatic 
arias,  orchestral  numbers,  string  quartets,  and  small  ensembles  mag- 
nified his  "symphonic"  importance.  Since,  however,  Haydn,  Cheru- 
bini,  Rossini,  Beethoven,  as  well  as  the  many  minor  composers,  were 
similarly  prolific,  his  versatility  alone  cannot  account  for  his  great 
popularity  in  these  early  decades. 

A  glance  at  the  London  Philharmonic,9  founded  in  18 13,  will 
permit  us  to  reconstruct  the  era  of  Mozart's  pre-eminence  much 
more  confidently  than  an  analysis  of  American  orchestras  which  had 
no  continuous  series  of  programs  at  that  time.  Occupying  practically 
twenty-five  per  cent  of  the  London  repertoire,  he  contributed  more 
than  any  other  single  composer  during  the  period  of  the  infancy 
of  that  orchestra.  However,  neither  in  his  symphonic  works,  nor  in 
the  operatic  arias,  could  Mozart  withstand  the  competition  of  the 
more  romantic  Beethoven  and  the  more  brilliant  Rossini.  By  1830 
his  star  had  faded  to  mingle  with  those  of  second  magnitude. 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  199 

Thus,  by  the  time  the  New  York  Philharmonic  was  founded, 
the  Mozart  tradition  had  partially  subsided.  Against  Rossini  and 
Beethoven,  he  was  beginning  to  sound  obvious,  and  even  a  little 
trivial.  Later,  when  the  romantic  influence  had  run  its  course,  the 
delicate,  unpretentious  beauties  of  his  music  would  come  as  a  wel- 
come relief  to  the  thicker  orchestration  of  Wagner  and  the  labyrin- 
thian  poly  tonality  of  the  later  Strauss.  Orchestral  conductors,  profit- 
ing by  the  increased  technical  proficiency  of  the  instrumentalists, 
vied  with  one  another  in  etching  the  clear,  crisp  Mozartian  passages, 
which  to  Emperor  Joseph  II  contained  "too  many  notes,"  but  by 
this  time  were  generally  described  as  "made  up  of  not  many  notes, 
but  just  the  right  ones."  Still  later,  Sir  Thomas  Beecham,  Bruno 
Walter,  and  Richard  Strauss  were  to  make  a  specialty  of  Mozart. 

As  might  be  expected,  time  has  dealt  heavily  with  the  six  hundred 
miscellaneous  compositions  of  this  fantastically  fertile  genius.  Never 
writing  "for  the  future,"  Mozart  himself  would  have  been  surprised 
to  find  that  any  of  his  compositions  survived  at  all  150  years  after 
they  were  so  unostentatiously  dashed  off.  In  his  own  day  he  was 
known  primarily  as  a  pianist,  improviser,  and  as  a  composer  of 
operas.  His  instrumental  works  were  almost  exclusively  "occasional" 
works,  written  not  in  spontaneous  self-expression  but  for  the  hard- 
pressed,  urgent,  and  definite  purpose  of  pleasing  his  public,  in  the 
hope— too  often  pathetically  unrealized— of  a  fitting  financial  testi- 
monial. Shadowed  by  the  glamour  of  Beethoven,  Mozart  neverthe- 
less retained  many  admirers  throughout  the  nineteenth  century: 
E.  T.  A.  Hoffmann,  the  conservative  Spohr,  Brahms,  Tschaikowsky, 
and  others  revered  his  later  symphonies.  At  the  close  of  the  century 
Mozart  enjoyed  a  kind  of  mild  renaissance,  which  prompted  the 
usual  archeological  diggings,  with  the  result  that  during  recent 
decades  many  of  the  earlier  symphonies  are  appearing  for  the  first 
time  in  America. 

Previous  to  1900,  the  Mozart  repertoire  in  the  American  orches- 
tras was  divided  principally  between  the  large  number  of  operatic 
arias  and  overtures,  and  the  late  symphonies  in  G  Minor,  C  Major, 
E-flat  Major,  and  D  Major  (Haffiier).  The  diminishing  popularity  of 
vocal  numbers  and  the  corresponding  strengthening  of  the  orchestra 
led  to  their  gradual  abandonment.  In  their  place,  however,  were 


200  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

added  violin  and  piano  concertos,  which  had  hitherto  enjoyed  only- 
sparse  performances,  the  serenades,  and  many  newly  unearthed  sym- 
phonies—all of  which  produced  a  gentle  but  unmistakable  rise  in  the 
Mozart  slope. 

Of  the  forty-one  symphonies,  the  G  Minor  (K  550)  has  been  the 
most  frequently  played  throughout  the  history  of  the  orchestras, 
while  the  C  Major  (Jupiter,  K  551)  runs  a  safe  second.  Several 
others  receive  more  than  periodic  performances:  K  385  in  D  Major 
(Haffner),  K  543  in  E-flat  Major,  K  338  in  C  Major,  K  504  in  D 
Major  (Prague).  In  addition,  the  New  York  Philharmonic  and  the 
Boston  orchestras  have  played  K  201,  K  425,  K  200,  and  K  183, 
making  a  total  of  about  a  dozen  symphonies  that  may  be  said  to  be  in 
the  current  American  repertoires.  In  terms  of  cold  statistics,  this 
may  not  seem  to  be  a  very  impressive  survival  rate.  However,  if  one 
considers  that  about  half  of  the  forty-one  symphonies  were  im- 
mature and  casual  compositions,  certainly  not  worthy  of  symphonic 
designation  in  the  modern  sense  of  that  term,  their  durability  is 
astounding.  Add  to  these  the  overtures  to  half-a-dozen  of  the  operas, 
a  few  serenades  such  as  Eine  Kleine  Nachtmusik,  several  piano  and 
violin  concertos,  and  a  host  of  minor  numbers  that  are  likely  to 
turn  up  almost  any  time,  and  the  result  is  a  composite  six  per  cent 
of  the  current  repertoire,  which  shows  no  signs  of  declining,  at 
present  outpointing  even  Wagner  and  Bach. 

JOHANN  SEBASTIAN  BACH  There  is  often  a  wide  dis- 
crepancy between  the  academic  prestige  of  a  composer  and  his  ac- 
tual cultivation  by  conductors  and  performers.  Mozart,  Haydn, 
and  Bach  are  among  the  most  revered  names  in  music,  but  their 
representation  in  actual  performances  is  often  relatively  meager.  Just 
as  there  are  books  that  everybody  talks  about  but  nobody  reads, 
there  are  composers  that  everybody  reads  about  but  few  listen  to. 
Allowing  for  the  usual  exaggeration  in  such  a  quip,  fame  is  still  a 
blend  of  many  factors,  some  of  them  so  purely  adventitious  that 
they  have  little  relation  to  a  composer's  place  in  the  repertoire. 

Bach  is,  of  course,  supreme  in  the  organ  repertoire,  and  his  clavier 
works  possess  incomparable  aesthetic  and  pedagogical  virtues.  But 
he  is  a  relatively  unknown  figure— grand  but  aloof— to  the  lay  audi- 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  201 

ence.  He  may  be  compared  to  a  retired  executive,  scholar,  or  states- 
man whose  past  services  are  memorialized  on  every  possible  occa- 
sion, but  who  could  not  be  expected  to  participate  very  actively  in 
current  affairs.  Johann  Sebastian  Bach  is  the  "composer  emeritus" 
who  is  today  best  known  by  transcriptions  and  by  his  historical 
influence. 

To  a  musicologist  steeped  in  textbook  lore,  and  to  many  a  prac- 
tical musician,  this  judgment  of  Bach  as  an  antiquarian  will  seem 
harsh.  To  some  aestheticians  with  a  philosophical  bent,  the  music  of 
Bach  epitomizes  the  Eternal  Pattern,  an  ill-defined  concept,  but  one 
that  nevertheless  affords  a  high  degree  of  satisfaction.  For  a  century 
after  his  death  he  commanded  only  esoteric  appreciation,  but  in 
more  recent  decades  he  has  had  a  slightly  more  substantial  following. 

This  Bach  renaissance  is  conventionally  traced  to  the  revival  of 
the  St.  Matthew  Passion,  which  was  performed  under  the  direction 
of  the  twenty-year-old  Mendelssohn  at  the  Singakademie  in  Berlin 
in  March,  1829,  for  the  first  time  since  the  death  of  Bach  and  exactly 
a  century  after  its  premiere  in  the  St.  Thomaskirche  in  Leipzig.  Ac- 
cording to  Eduard  Devrient,  who  sang  Christus  on  that  memorable 
occasion  the  "new  cult  of  Bach  dates  from  March  11,  1829."  10 

Now,  the  sprouting  of  new  aesthetic  tastes  does  not  differ  in  prin- 
ciple from  the  successful  cultivation  of  fine  vegetables.  Remote  as 
they  may  seem,  they  have  this  in  common,  that  neither  can  be  con- 
jured forth  by  the  enthusiasm  of  the  cultivator  alone.  Certain  pre- 
conditions must  obtain  before  the  fervor  of  the  gardener  can 
translate  the  picture  on  the  seed  package  into  the  luscious  salad 
bowl.  There  are  no  gaps  in  history.  Bach's  popularity  did  not  leap 
the  century  but  its  growth  may  be  retraced  in  its  successive  steps. 

Although  the  performance  of  the  St.  Matthew  Passion  delivered 
a  fresh  impulse  to  the  comprehension  of  Bach,  he  had  really  never 
dropped  from  sight.  The  first  issue  of  the  Allgemeine  Musikalische 
Zeitung  (1798),  published  by  Breitkopf  and  Haertel,  carried  a  cop- 
per engraving  of  his  portrait.  In  1800,  in  the  same  influential  journal, 
Bach  was  likened  to  Michelangelo  and  Newton,  while  Mozart,  dead 
seven  years,  was  analogously  coupled  with  Raphael.  In  1803  he  was 
labeled  "the  greatest  contrapuntist  in  the  world"— a  judgment  not 
noticeably  at  variance  with  that  of  the  twentieth  century.  There  was 


202  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

naturally  some  disagreement:  in  a  review  of  some  of  his  works,  a 
critic  declared  that  they  "contradict  the  frequently  expressed  opin- 
ion of  the  unlearned  that  Bach  was  the  greatest  mathematical  music 
master,  but  nothing  more."  As  early  as  1 804— five  years  before  Men- 
delssohn was  born— we  read  in  the  same  journal: 

In  the  musical  world  now  is  the  time  of  the  awakening  of  the  Dead;  and 
fortunately  this  resurrection  includes  only  the  Just.  Seb.  Bach,  Handel 
and  Emanuel  Bach  .  .  .  and  other  great  men  of  the  past  only  ten  years 
ago  considered  among  the  departed,  of  whom  one  spoke  reverentially, 
but  whose  association  we  no  longer  enjoyed. 

Beethoven,  born  only  twenty  years  after  Bach's  death,  had  been 
thoroughly  schooled  in  The  Well  Tempered  Clavier  which  he  in- 
cluded in  his  repertoire  for  the  Viennese  nobility,  and  he  hailed  with 
delight  the  (premature)  announcement  of  a  project  to  publish  Bach 
complete.  Mozart  wrote  to  his  father  in  1782  that  he  was  making  a 
collection  of  the  Bach  fugues.  Since  commercial  publication  was  not 
so  general  as  it  is  today,  the  memory  of  Bach  had  been  kept  green 
by  his  pupils,  who  were  scattered  throughout  Germany,  and  by  his 
sons,  who  used  the  library  which  they  had  inherited.  In  April,  1828, 
one  year  before  revival  of  the  Passion,  Spontini  offered  the  Berlin 
premiere  of  the  Credo  from  the  B  Minor  Mass  at  one  of  his  sym- 
phonic soirees.  The  Thomaskirche  performed  some  of  his  motets 
and  cantatas;  and  manuscript  copies— a  not  unusual  form  of  circula- 
tion in  that  day— of  his  works  enjoyed  a  surprising  circulation  be- 
tween the  time  of  his  death  and  the  "renaissance"  of  1829.11  Indeed, 
a  Leipzig  critic,  his  civic  pride  apparently  piqued  at  the  publicity 
the  Berlin  papers  gave  the  revival  of  the  Passion,  expressed  his  amaze- 
ment at  the  fuss  stirred  up  in  that  northern  city,  for  "Bach  had  never 
been  forgotten  in  Leipzig." 

This  is  not  to  say  that  he  had  gained  great  popularity.  Musical 
style  had  undergone  great  changes.  Bach  had  expressed  himself  in 
a  contrapuntal  idiom  that  was  dving,  while  the  melodic  style  of 
writing  had  been  gaining  adherents  even  during  his  own  lifetime. 
Sociological  factors  conspired  to  accelerate  this  tendency.  The  pub- 
lic theater  was  replacing  the  church  as  a  source  of  musical  delight, 
and  the  rising  bourgeoisie,  with  its  light  secular  tastes,  turned  away 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  203 

from  complicated  polyphony  to  rococo  relaxation.  Protestant  reli- 
gious services  were  themselves  undergoing  important  alterations, 
rendering  the  older  forms  obsolete.  Bach  had  simply  experienced  the 
personal  tragedy  of  outliving  the  style  that  he  himself  had  brought 
to  perfection. 

If  Bach  lost  whatever  popular  audience  he  had  ever  had,  he  gained 
and  retained  professional  adherents.  In  that  sense  Bach  became  the 
musician's  musician.  A  new  concept  of  the  function  of  music,  un- 
known to  Mozart  and  to  the  rococo  period,  was  being  born.  Roch- 
litz  (a  former  pupil  in  the  Thomasschule)  the  progressive  editor  of 
the  Allgemeine  Musikalische  Zeitung,  accordingly  declared  in  1802 
that,  though  Bach  was  not  popular,  he  was  "elevating."  In  keeping 
with  Schiller's  system  of  aesthetics,  which  he  apparently  embraced, 
he  declared  (1803)  that  "Kunst  ist  freilich  ein  Spiel,  aber  nicht 
Spielerei."  (Art  is  indeed  a  form  of  play,  but  not  trivial). 

Mendelssohn  and  Devrient  undertook  the  performance  of  the 
Passion  in  an  effort  to  enlarge  the  public  following  for  the  "half- 
forgotten"  Bach— a  project  in  which  they  were  indispensably  aided 
by  a  constellation  of  social  and  political  forces.  For  the  Bach  revival 
in  Protestant  Prussia  was  as  much  a  religious  and  political  revival  as 
a  musical  renaissance.  Historical  research,  always  an  essential  con- 
comitant to  a  wave  of  nationalism  such  as  inundated  the  Germany 
of  that  day,  had  dug  up  the  German  past  and  featured  Bach  as  one 
of  whom  "all  Germans  should  be  proud."  12  Protestant  zeal,  which 
was  shared  bv  the  Lutheran  Mendelssohn,  had  adopted  Bach  as  the 
father  of  its  musical  heritage.  An  editorial  in  the  Berliner  Allgemeine 
Musik  Zeitung  (1830)  hailed  the  Passion  as  a  counterirritant  to  irre- 
ligion.  It  is  difficult  for  an  American,  who  listens  to  the  oratorios 
and  operas  essentially  as  concert  performances,  to  realize  the  textual 
interest  of  the  European  audience.  Berlioz  was  similarly  astounded  at 
a  performance  of  the  Passion  in  Berlin  (1841): 

One  must  witness  the  respect,  the  attention,  and  the  piety  with  which  a 
German  audience  listens  to  such  a  composition,  to  believe  it.  Everyone 
follows  the  words  of  the  text  with  his  eyes;  not  a  movement  in  the 
house,  not  a  murmur  of  approbation  or  blame,  not  the  least  applause; 
they  are  listening  to  a  sermon,  hearing  the  gospel  sung;  they  are  attend- 
ing not  a  concert,  but  a  divine  service.13 


204  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Thus  Bach  was  not  French,  not  Catholic,  but  German  and  Protes- 
tant! 

There  were  still  other  compelling  factors.  The  growing  popu- 
larity of  the  piano  in  the  homes  of  the  rising  middle  class  naturally- 
enhanced  the  significance  of  the  music  which  served  as  such  ex- 
emplary pedagogical  training  for  that  instrument.  The  increasing 
musical  sophistication  of  musicians  and  public  found  an  intellectual 
challenge  in  the  complexities  of  the  polyphonic  idiom,  so  that  a  Bach 
fugue  now  became  the  apex  of  aesthetic  achievement.  Under  the 
influence  of  literary  musicians  like  Schumann,  and  the  Idealist 
philosophers  like  Hegel,  there  was  finally  established  an  aesthetic 
ideology  that  elevated  music  into  the  moral  sphere,  designated  it  as 
Truth  Incarnate,  which  relieved  it  of  the  eighteenth-century  require- 
ments of  entertainment  and  relaxation.  It  became  a  member  of  the 
triune  epiphenomenon  comprising  Religion,  Philosophy,  and  Art.  It 
was  on  this  philosophical  tide  that  Bach  and  Beethoven  were  lifted 
into  the  secure  harbor  of  prestige  and  deification. 

Even  so,  the  present-day  glorification  of  Bach  has  been  slow  to 
mature.  Friedrich  Zelter,  who  was  the  director  of  the  Berlin  Sing- 
akademie  in  1829— a  "pedagogical  grandson"  through  Kirnberger, 
of  Bach  himself— and  who  had  originally  infected  Mendelssohn  with 
his  own  adoration  for  the  contrapuntist,  had  been  very  doubtful  of 
the  wisdom  of  offering  the  Passion  to  the  general  public.  Devrient 
relates  that 

Felix  and  I  had  frequent  meetings  to  consider  how  the  work  could  be 
shortened.  ...  It  necessarily  contained  much  that  belonged  to  a  former 
age.  .  .  .  Most  of  the  arias  would  have  to  be  omitted  .  .  .  the  part  of 
the  Evangelist  would  have  to  be  shorn  of  all  that  was  not  essential  to  the 
recital  of  the  Passion  .  .  . 

That  some  American  critics  also  should  consider  the  music  of  Bach 
partially  antiquated  is  evidenced  by  the  comment  of  such  a  Bach 
"idolater"  as  the  Boston  annotator  William  Apthorp,  who  com- 
plained in  1894  that  Paur,  the  Boston  conductor,  had  omitted  only 
one  of  the  seven  movements  of  the  Bach  B  Minor  Suite: 

With  all  that  is  great  and  immortal  in  the  master's  works,  there  are  also 
some  things  in  them  which  Time  has  thrown  into  obsolescence,  and 


Life  Spans  of  Co?nposers  in  the  Repertoire  205 

even  the  sincerest  Bach  lover  .  .  .  ought  to  wish  these  things  wholly 
obsolete  and  buried  for  good  and  all.14 

At  that  time  historical  scholarship  had  not  yet  begotten  the  funda- 
mentalism of  the  purist.  On  the  other  hand,  much  more  recently,  the 
completely  evolved  purist  appears  in  Bruno  Walter,  who  does  pub- 
lic penance  for  having  violated  the  integrity  of  these  two-hundred- 
year-old  works. 

I  hereby  confess  that  I  transgressed  in  Munich  against  the  St.  Matthew 
Passion.  For  ten  years  ...  I  performed  Bach's  works  with  cuts.  This 
was  unjustifiable.15 

An  interested  observer  of  this  reversal  in  aesthetic  judgments  can 
only  speculate  on  the  next  shift  in  enthusiasm  that  will  emerge  from 
the  still  greater  erudition  of  subsequent  decades  and  centuries. 

During  the  period  of  obscurity  it  was  Bach's  vocal  works  (motets 
and  cantatas)  and  some  clavier  works  (Inventions  and  Well-Tem- 
pered Clavier)  that  were  kept  alive.  His  instrumental  ensembles, 
which  should  have  been  of  all  his  works  the  most  easily  absorbed  by 
the  new  orchestral  bodies  of  the  nineteenth  century,  were  the  last 
to  be  revived.  The  first  performance  of  Bach  in  modern  orchestral 
version  was  that  of  the  Suite  in  D  (then  still  referred  to  as  "Over- 
ture") given  by  the  Gewandhaus  orchestra  February  15,  1838.  Men- 
delssohn was,  of  course,  the  conductor.  Bach  made  his  orchestral 
debut  in  London  with  the  same  composition,  under  the  same  con- 
*  ductor,  with  the  London  Philharmonic  on  June  24,  1844. 

It  was  not  until  March  6,  1869,  forty  years  after  the  initial  per- 
formance in  Leipzig,  that  the  New  York  Philharmonic  introduced 
the  classic  master  in  orchestral  dress— the  same  suite— to  its  New 
York  audience,  Carl  Bergmann  conducting.  In  the  meantime  Theo- 
dore Thomas  had  already  achieved  the  distinction  of  the  initial 
Bach  orchestral  performance  in  America,  with  the  Esser  arrange- 
ments of  the  Toccata  in  F  (January  7,  1865),  the  Passacaglia  (April 
8,  1865),  and  the  familiar  D  Major  Suite  (October  26,  1867). 
Thomas'  personal  espousal  of  the  new  movement  antedates  even 
these  orchestral  performances.  The  Chaconne  was  in  his  violin  solo 
repertoire  at  least  as  early  as  1858,  and  the  Mason-Thomas  chamber 
concerts  included  arrangements  of  Bach  as  staple  items  from  their 


PERCENTAGE  OF  TOTAL  KEPERTOIRB 


28 
26- 
24- 
'22- 
20- 
18- 
16- 
14 
12- 
10- 
8- 
6- 
4- 


BEETHOVEN 


MENDELSSOHN 


SPOHR 
WEBER 
MOZART 


LINDPAINTNER 

HUMMEL 

KALUWODA 

ROSSINI 

SCHUBERT  DONIZETTI 

VIEUXTEMPS 

HAYDN      MEYERBEER       GADE 

CHERUB1NI   VERDI    SCHUMANN 

AND    OTHERS 


A  Century 

of  the 

Philharmonic  -Symphony 

Society 

of  New  York 


BEETHOVEN 


WAGNER 
DVORAK       TSCHAIKOWSKY 
BRAHMS 


SCHUBERT 
SCHUMANN 

BACH    LISZT 
RUBINSTEIN 

MENDELSSOHN 

GRIEG    CHOPIN   BERLIOZ 

MOZART    BBUCH 

MACDOWELL  GOLDMARK  BORODIN 

GLAZOUNOFF  WEBER   CHERUBINI 

IAL0   SPOHR  GLUCK  AND  OTHERS 


BEETHOVEN 


BRAHMS 


MAHLER     TSCHAIKOWSKY 


SCHUMANN 

STRAUSS     MOZART 

WAGNER 

MENDELSSOHN     BACH 

BRUCKNER    SHOSTAKOVICH 

SIBELIUS  HONEGGER^.FRANCK 

KHATCHATOURIAN  DVORAK  WALTON 

DEBUSSV  PROKOFIEFF  SCHUBERT 

HAYDN  BERLIOZ  AND  MANYOTHERS 


1842-50 


1895-1900 


1945-50 


Although  the  London  Philharmonic  Society,  founded  in  1813,  has  a 
longer  history,  the  New  York  Philharmonic  repertoire  comprises  more 
concerts,  with  a  consequently  fuller  repertoire.  Note  the  decline  of 
Beethoven  in  relative  importance,  the  increase  in  number  of  composers 
in  the  longer  seasons  of  later  years,  and  the  "forgotten"  names  of  the 
early  years. 


206 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  207 

first  season,  in  1855.  The  very  first  appearance  of  Bach  in  any  form 
on  the  New  York  Philharmonic  programs  (December  20,  1862)  was 
a  Prelude  and  Fugue  for  piano  (which  was  not  to  be  considered 
incongruous  with  orchestral  concerts  for  many  years  to  come), 
performed  by  J.  N.  Pattison,  who  had  acquired  his  musical  training 
in  Germany. 

The  tardy  recognition  of  Bach's  orchestral  works  lies  in  the 
circumstance,  among  others,  that  vocal  organizations,  like  Zelter's 
Singakademie,  were  then  more  prevalent,  had  more  prestige,  and 
were  much  more  maturely  developed,  than  was  the  orchestra.  Con- 
sequently, Bach  was  not  yet  "discovered"  as  an  orchestral  composer. 
Nor  were  his  instrumental  works  adapted  even  to  the  instru- 
mental ensembles  which  did  exist.  Orchestral  color  and  instrumenta- 
tion, as  today  conceived,  were  of  course  unstandardized  in  the 
early  eighteenth  century.  Suites  and  concertos  were  usually  custom- 
made  for  the  available  combinations  of  instruments,  many  of  which, 
like  the  high  valveless  trumpet  and  the  viola  d'amore,  are  now  obso- 
lete. As  a  result  all  Bach's  works  had  to  be  edited  and  arranged  in 
terms  of  the  modern  idiom. 

Today,  clavier,  organ,  vocal  and  other  works  have  all  been 
transcribed  freely  for  the  modern  orchestra  by  Bach  enthusiasts, 
and  constitute  a  substantial  portion— probably  seventy-five  per  cent 
—of  the  current  Bach  "orchestral"  repertoire.  Although  some  of 
these  transcriptions  have  had  rather  wide  currency,  most  of  them 
have  been  prepared  by  the  conductor,  or  by  a  member  of  the,  or- 
chestra whose  local  reputation  had  contributed  a  personal  touch  to 
the  vogue  of  that  music.  Such  manipulation  should  not  be  a  new 
experience  for  Bach  works,  for  the  great  composer  himself,  accord- 
ing to  the  exigencies  of  the  day,  frequently  reshuffled  his  own  crea- 
tions and,  at  times,  appropriated  the  themes  of  others.  Zelter 
transcribed  some  of  the  clavier  works  for  string  quartet  and  reno- 
vated others  in  order  to  eradicate  from  the  German  Bach  the 
"French  froth"  and  thereby  lay  bare  the  "true  elegance"  of  the 
master.16 

Although  to  many  scholars  transcriptions  are  a  species  of  aes- 
thetic sin,  Bach  has  been  transcribed— and,  of  course,  edited— ever 
since  he  came  to  the  notice  of  German  conductors.  In  the  early  years 


208  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

of  the  American  repertoire  the  conductors  availed  themselves  of 
transcriptions  made  by  German  musicians,  J.  J.  Abert,  Heinrich 
Esser,  Bachrich,  Raff,  and  Hellmesberger.  Gericke,  Seidl,  and  Mottl, 
conducting  in  the  United  States  for  a  period,  and  Theodore  Thomas 
and  George  Bristow  likewise  adapted  Bach  for  their  own  purposes. 
Today  such  well-known  composers  and  conductors,  representing 
all  leading  nations,  as  Bantock,  Elgar,  Respighi,  Schoenberg,  Pick- 
Mangiagalli,  Siloti,  Tansman,  Honegger,  Weiner,  Mitropoulos,  Bar- 
birolli.  Stock,  Stokowski,  Ormandy,  Boessenroth  (Minneapolis 
Orchestra)  and  Caillet  (Philadelphia  Orchestra),  Goossens,  Sir 
Henry  Wood  ("Paul  Klenovsky")  have  made  Bach  available  in 
modern  tonal  flavors,  have  expanded  his  repertoire  and  nourished 
the  taste  for  his  music. 

Of  all  composers  and  conductors  who  have  added  their  increment 
to  the  orchestral  renaissance  of  the  Leipzig  cantor,  none  has  been  as 
enthusiastic  and  influential  as  Stokowski  during  his  quarter-century 
with  the  Philadelphia  orchestra.  Stokowski  had  begun  his  musical 
career  as  an  organist  in  London,  continued  it  in  the  organ  loft  of  the 
St.  Bartholomew  Church  of  New  York,  and  has  never  relinquished 
his  devotion  to  the  master  of  organ  composition.  He  has  added  about 
two  score  titles  to  the  Bach  heritage.  This  personal  influence  is 
evident  in  the  gradual  rise  of  the  Bach  volume  to  an  unprecedented 
seven  per  cent  during  Stokowski's  tenure  in  Philadelphia,  and  its 
precipitous  decline  after  his  departure.  A  romantic  rather  than  a 
classicist  in  stylistic  predilections,  Stokowski  has  often  been  vehe- 
mently criticized  for  the  vibrant  sensuousness  of  his  transcriptions 
and  for  his  supposed  infidelity  to  the  classic  reserve  of  the  original 
subject. 

This  of  course  strikes  at  the  very  root  of  the  philosophy  of  tran- 
scriptions and  inevitably  raises  a  controversy  whenever  the  old  mas- 
ters are  included  in  the  repertoire.  Historical  erudition  seems  to 
predispose  some  scholars  to  a  museum-like  preservation  of  the 
original  artifact.  Such  a  musico-archeological  exponent  recreates  as 
far  as  possible  the  tonal  balance  of  the  archaic  instrumentation. 
Theodore  Thomas  aspired  to  do  just  that.17  But  to  those  who  know 
how  easily  Handel  and  Bach  transcribed  the  work  of  others,  and 
who  wish  to  incorporate  old  composers  as  living  elements  in  con- 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  209 

temporary  musical  life  by  profiting  from  the  acoustical  and  aesthetic 
developments  of  the  intervening  period,  some  modernization  would 
seem  defensible.  One  may  even  be  permitted  to  question  the  con- 
sistency of  such  critics.  The  St.  Matthew  Passion  was  originally  de- 
signed for  three-dozen  performers,  restricted  instrumentation,  and 
boy  sopranos.  Today  it  is  staged  with  a  hundred-piece  orchestra  and 
a  well-trained  adult  mixed  chorus  of  five-hundred  vocalists.  It  is 
probable  that  this  commonly  accepted  "transcription"  violates  the 
expectations  of  the  original  composer  more  than  does  the  transfer- 
ence of  a  fugue  from  an  organ,  with  its  orchestral  potentialities  in 
its  manifold  registration,  to  the  modern  orchestra  itself.  Perhaps, 
after  all,  it  is  true  that  the  Bach  organ  attains  its  ultimate  realization 
in  the  Stokowski  orchestra.  Stokowski,  like  Zelter  and  Mendelssohn, 
"modernized"  Bach;  and  all  of  them  may  be  at  least  entitled  to  the 
claim  that  their  arrangements  were  popular  and  successful.  Without 
these  transcriptions,  the  great  Passacaglia,  the  Fantasia  and  Fugue  in 
G  Minor,  and  a  dozen  other  significant  works  would  be  an  absolutely 
closed  book  to  a  large  block  of  sincere  music  lovers. 

The  composite  trend  line  for  Sebastian  Bach— which  includes 
the  transcriptions— displays  a  continuous  and  almost  uninterrupted 
rise  from  the  very  occasional  appearances  before  1875  in  the  New 
York  Philharmonic  to  about  3.5  per  cent  of  the  national  repertoire  in 
1930-35.  After  that,  he  receded  to  about  2.3  per  cent  in  1945-50. 
Although  this  trend  is  more  or  less  parallel  in  all  orchestras,  Phila- 
delphia and  Chicago  cultivated  him  most  energetically.  In 
Philadelphia  Bach  achieved  a  peak  of  seven  per  cent  in  1930-35,  a 
quantitative  recognition  otherwise  reserved  for  Wagner  and  the 
symphonists  Brahms  and  Tschaikowsky.  In  retrospect,  a  recession 
would  seem  inevitable  with  the  passing  of  devotees  of  the  stature  of 
Stokowski  and  Stock.  The  celebration  of  the  250th  anniversary  of 
Bach's  birth  (1935)  and  the  bicentennial  of  his  death  (1950)  could 
halt  only  temporarily  his  decline  to  a  good  two  per  cent  of  the  com- 
posite repertoire. 

The  compositions  most  frequently  programmed  are  the  Suites, 
No.  3  and  2,  the  Brandenburg  Concerto  No.  3,  Pastorale  from  the 
Christmas  Oratorio,  a  large  miscellaneous  collection  of  preludes  and 
fugues,  choral  preludes,  and  of  course,  the  St.  Matthew  Passion.  His 


210  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

relatively  short  numbers  are  not  the  stuff  to  create  volume  repertoire 
in  a  symphony  orchestra.  A  statistical  measure  which  is  based  on 
playing  time  may  therefore  not  do  complete  justice  to  the  frequency 
of  his  appearance. 

Composers  with  Low  and  Stable  Trends 

FRANZ  JOSEPH  HAYDN  Of  all  the  standard  composers 
in  the  present  American  repertoire,  the  names  of  Handel  and  Haydn 
appear  earliest  in  the  annals  of  the  American  orchestras.  Of  their 
contemporaries,  Pleyel  (Haydn's  greatest  rival),  Arne,  Gyrowetz, 
Stamitz,  Gossec,  Gretry,  Vanhal,  Kozeluh,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
scores  of  contemporary  composer-performers  who  occupied  a  large 
segment  of  the  colonial  programs— all  have  vanished.  With  Sebastian 
Bach  (whose  name,  of  course,  does  not  appear  in  the  eighteenth-cen- 
tury American  programs),  Handel  and  Haydn  display  a  life  span 
of  longest  duration. 

In  the  eighteenth  century,  colonial  music  was,  in  the  main,  an 
offspring  of  English  musical  life.  The  names  on  the  musical  pro- 
grams, like  the  names  of  cities  and  streets,  were  brought  in  the  bag 
and  baggage  of  immigrants,  the  great  bulk  of  whom  came  from 
England.  It  is  amazing  how  quickly  these  conditions  were  reflected 
in  the  taste  of  this  country.  The  reverence  for  both  Handel  and 
Haydn,  who  ruled  public  taste  in  England  at  the  close  of  that 
century,  is  further  incorporated  in  the  name  of  one  of  America's 
oldest  choral  societies,  founded  in  Boston  in  1815. 

It  was  not  English  music  that  dominated  the  colonies,  but  rather 
English  tastes.  England  was  at  that  time  a  prosperous  industrial  and 
colonial  empire,  whose  wealth  attracted  the  continental  musicians 
very  much  as  does  America's  in  the  twentieth  century.  Like  her 
cotton,  tea,  and  fruits,  most  of  her  composers  and  her  music  were 
importations.  Thus  Haydn's  pardonable  urge  for  economic  security 
overcame  any  disinclination  to  travel  when  he  accepted  Salomon's 
invitations.  It  is  understandable,  therefore,  that  the  continental 
aesthetic  as  well  as  material  produce  arrived  in  America  in  English 
bottoms. 

As  in  England,  the  Haydn  symphonies,  or  "Grand  Overtures"  as 


Life  Spa72S  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  m 

they  were  sometimes  called,  constituted  one  of  the  pillars  of  the 
informal  American  repertoires  which  enjoyed  a  transient  existence 
in  the  theatres,  gardens,  and  salons  of  the  Eastern  colonial  seaboard. 
Most  of  these  symphonies,  which  appeared  as  early  as  1782  in  New 
York  (during  the  British  occupation),  in  1786  in  Philadelphia,  and 
some  years  later  in  Boston  and  Charleston,  are  unidentified  except 
in  a  few  instances  through  their  sobriquets:  La  C basse  (No.  73)  and 
La  Reine  (No.  85).  They  are  representative  of  the  compositions 
that  fostered  Haydn's  reputation  throughout  Europe  and  finally  led 
to  his  triumphant  appearances  in  England  with  the  Salomon  orches- 
tra in  1791-92,  1794-95.  In  the  forty-piece  orchestra  during  Haydn's 
first  visit  was  the  German  oboist,  Gottlieb  Graupner,  who  subse- 
quently emigrated  to  America  and  settled  permanently  in  Boston, 
where  he  was  influential  in  introducing  the  later  symphonies,  espe- 
cially the  Surprise  and  Military. 

Some  fifty  years  later,  when  the  New  York  Philharmonic  society 
was  organized,  the  star  of  Haydn  had  been  dimmed  somewhat  bv 
the  brilliance  of  the  works  of  Beethoven.  While  three  of  the  Bee- 
thoven symphonies  were  performed  during  the  first  Philharmonic 
season  of  three  concerts,  Haydn  had  to  await  the  third  and  ninth 
seasons  for  the  first  two  symphonic  offerings.  This  marks  his 
approximate  pace  down  to  the  present  day,  almost  always  maintain- 
ing a  sure  and  predictable  position,  but  never  crowding  the  leaders. 

More  precisely,  this  trend  shows  a  recession  between  1875  and 
1900,  when  most  of  the  present  orchestras  were  founded,  but  then 
takes  a  definite  upward  turn  which  continues  to  the  present  day.  In 
1926,  the  editor  of  Musical  America  could  state  that  Haydn  was  "no 
longer  a  musical  mummy,"  but  had  now  again  come  to  life. 

This  ascent,  unambiguous  but  by  no  means  dramatic,  roughly 
coincides  with  the  centennial  of  his  death  (1909);  the  observance 
of  the  bicentennial  of  his  birth  (1932);  the  launching  of  a  project 
for  republication  of  his  "complete"  works  (never  completed)  by 
Breitkopf  and  Haertel  (1907),  which  gave  the  symphonies  a  new, 
chronological  numbering;  and  a  growing  archeological  and  scholarly 
interest  in  his  life  and  works.  As  a  result  of  this  historical  interest, 
nearly  a  dozen  of  his  earlier  symphonies  have  been  performed  for 
the  first  time  in  America. 


212  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

No  musician  need,  of  course,  be  reminded  that  these  symphonies 
of  "Papa"  Haydn  are  possessed  of  the  utmost  lucidity  and  elegance, 
that  they  manifest  both  zest  and  charm,  and  an  integrity  absolutely 
unmarred  by  any  affectation,  exaggeration,  or  bombast.  In  all  these 
qualities,  they  speak  directly  to  the  twentieth-century  era.  To  pro- 
ject these  characteristics  requires  the  most  disciplined  effort  of  the 
best  symphonic  ensembles.  From  the  standpoint  of  program  building 
and  audience  appeal,  the  Haydn  works  furnish  scintillating  relief 
from  the  congested  orchestration  of  the  late  romantics,  and  melodic 
relaxation  from  the  modern  percussive  styles. 

The  new  Breitkopf  and  Haertel  catalogue  has  set  the  number  of 
"authentic"  symphonies  at  104,  many  of  the  earlier  ones  being,  of 
course,  in  the  modern  sense  "symphonic"  by  condescension  only. 
Of  the  total,  about  thirty  have  been  performed,  and  about  ten  of 
them  may  be  said  to  be  active  in  the  repertoires  here  under  review. 
The  most  frequently  played  is  the  G  Major  (No.  88),  with  No.  100 
(Military),  101  (Clock),  102  and  104  attaining  considerable  vogue. 
Less  frequent  renditions  are  enjoyed  by  Nos.  92  (Oxford),  94 
(Surprise) ,  95,  97,  and  99.  Among  the  almost  two  score  symphonies 
with  single  appearances  is  found  the  short  "Toy"  symphony,  not 
dignified  by  inclusion  in  the  conventional  numbering.  This  "sym- 
phony" was  performed  by  the  New  York  Philharmonic  under 
Rodzinski,  February,  1945,  in  celebration  of  the  birth  of  his  son- 
testimony  to  the  whimsical  miscellany  of  factors  that  may  determine 
the  ingredients  of  concert  programs. 

GEORGE  FREDERICK  HANDEL  For  more  than  a  cen- 
tury after  his  death  Handel's  prestige  was  limited  to  choral  and 
religious  music.  Just  as  Beethoven  and  his  satellites  dominated  the 
nineteenth  century,  so  Handel,  with  Purcell,  Corelli,  and  Pergolesi, 
swayed  the  taste  of  the  eighteenth.  His  traditions  dominated  English 
musical  life,  and  to  a  certain  extent  that  of  the  continent,  and 
pointedly  influenced  both  Haydn  and  Mendelssohn  in  their  oratorio 
creations. 

His  strictly  instrumental  compositions,  especially  the  Concerti 
Grossi,  could  not  compete  with  the  "grand"  symphonies  of  Haydn, 
Mozart,  and  Beethoven,  which  had  rendered  obsolete  the  preclassical, 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  213 

unstandardized  orchestra.  The  exclusively  orchestral  music,  occa- 
sionally demanded  in  concert  programs  of  the  day  consisted  of  over- 
tures to  his  oratorios.  Then,  as  now,  Handel's  greatest  fame  rested 
on  Messiah  which  was  presented  (incomplete,  seventeen  out  of  fifty- 
seven  numbers)  for  the  first  time  in  America  in  New  York  in  1770 
—one  year  before  its  premiere  in  Germany. 

This  choral  orientation  toward  Handel  still  prevailed  during  the 
first  decades  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  on  whose  programs 
Handel's  name  was  represented  exclusively  by  arias,  until  an  arche- 
ological  interest  uncovered  his  forgotten  works  in  the  same  manner 
as  was  occurring  with  his  contemporary,  Sebastian  Bach.  Although 
it  was  not  until  the  present  century  that  the  instrumental  works 
were  played  with  frequency,  isolated  performances  dot  the  reper- 
toires since  October  21,  1868  when  Thomas  played  the  "celebrated 
music  composed  by  Handel  in  the  year  1749  for  the  Royal  Fire- 
works .  .  .  from  the  original  score  .  .  .  for  the  first  time  in  this 
country"  in  Castle  Garden  on  his  "Handel  Night."  18  The  London 
Philharmonic  played  its  first  Handel  instrumental  selection  in  1872 
—an  Oboe  concerto.  This  was  followed  in  1874  by  a  Concerto  Grosso 
(No.  11).  But  the  Germans,  who  claimed  Handel  as  their  own  and 
restored  the  umlaut,  which  Handel  had  discarded,  were  perhaps 
more  aggressive  in  this  Handel  renaissance  than  were  the  English, 
who  had  really  never  forgotten  him. 

From  Germany  were  brought  his  various  works  in  arrangements 
by  Bachrich,  Mottl,  Kogler,  and  Franz  Wullner,  and  these  were 
played  frequently  in  Boston  and  Chicago;  later  came  the  arrange- 
ments of  Harty,  Beecham,  Sir  Henry  Wood,  and  Elgar.  Of  all 
these,  German  or  British,  the  arrangement  of  the  Water  Music  by 
Hamilton  Harty,  late  conductor  of  the  Halle  orchestra  of  Man- 
chester, is  the  best  known.  As  in  the  case  of  Haydn,  new  composi- 
tions are  being  uncovered.  In  addition  to  the  Water  Music,  the 
Concerti  Grossi  Nos.  5,  6,  10,  and  12  are  frequently  performed,  and 
two  score  other  compositions  occasionally.  The  Messiah  is  today  in- 
frequently included  in  orchestral  series,  but  the  abrupt  rise  in  the 
Handel  composite  curve  in  the  beginning  of  this  century  is  to  be 
explained  by  its  annual  performance  by  the  Minneapolis  orchestra 


214  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

during  its  first  six  seasons.  Handel  has  been  running  a  steady  course 
at  about  the  one  per  cent  level,  and  occasionally  weaving  into  our 
concerts  today,  as  two  centuries  ago,  delightful  episodes  of  refresh- 
ing music. 

KARL  MARIA  VON  WEBER  If  Handel  and  Haydn 
made  their  debuts  on  the  American  platform  in  the  eighteenth  cen- 
tury in  an  English  atmosphere,  that  atmosphere  has  long  since  been 
transformed,  through  the  processes  of  migration,  to  a  German 
domination  of  the  musical  world  in  the  nineteenth.  More  than  Bee- 
thoven or  any  other  composer,  it  was  Weber,  an  ancestor  of  the 
German  opera,  through  whom  Germany  began  to  sense  its  musical 
destiny.  And  if  one  work  must  be  selected  which  epitomizes  this 
transformation,  it  is  Weber's  opera,  Der  Freischiitz,  which  marked 
the  emancipation  of  German  music  from  Italian  rule.  The  dawning 
faith  of  German  nationalism  was  emotionally  nourished  by  these 
operas,  a  social  task  which  Wagner  was  to  carry  on  more  dra- 
matically later  in  the  century. 

Even  without  these  nationalistic  political  overtones,  Weber's 
music  possessed  a  brilliance  that  enthralled  audiences.  During  the 
first  fifteen  years  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  Weber  was  among 
the  leaders,  with  six  to  nine  per  cent  of  the  repertoire,  a  total 
all  the  more  remarkable  because  of  the  brevity  of  the  compositions. 
The  overtures  to  half-a-dozen  operas,  some  chamber  music,  the 
Conzertstuck,  several  arias,  and  later  the  whirling  Invitation  to  the 
Dance,  were  all  frequently  played.  Since  that  time  the  inevitable  de- 
cline has  set  in.  But  the  short,  compact  overtures  to  Der  Freischiitz, 
Oberon,  and  Euryanthe  still  open  many  a  program.  Weingartner, 
Berlioz,  and  Stokowski  have  arranged  the  Invitation  to  the  Dance  to 
startle  the  ear  with  a  flash  of  virtuosity,  but  in  the  present  decade 
this  number  has  practically  disappeared  from  the  more  formal  sub- 
scription series.  The  old-fashioned  Conzertstuck  still  turns  up  at 
intervals.  Weber  probably  will  remain  indefinitely  one  of  the  "im- 
mortals," his  percentage  hovering  modestly  around  one-half  of  one 
per  cent,  which  many  a  modern  composer  would  be  more  than 
proud  to  claim. 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  215 

CHRISTOPH  WILLIBALD  GLUCK    Were  it  not  for  the 

historical  significance  of  Gluck,  his  present  position  in  the  orches- 
tral repertoire  would  scarcely  be  noted.  It  was  he  who  started  the 
chain  reaction  of  romanticism  through  Weber,  Berlioz,  Liszt,  and 
Wagner.  For  us  he  periodically  adds  the  antique  patina  of  a  musical 
heirloom.  Overtures  to  Alceste  and  Iphigenia  in  Aulis  and  excerpts 
from  several  operas,  Mottl's  synthetic  Ballet  Suite,  extracted  from 
various  sources,  and  an  occasional  aria  exhaust  his  present  representa- 
tion. Quantitatively,  this  is  not  impressive,  but  insofar  as  the  well- 
constructed  repertoire  should  recall  for  the  intelligent  listener  the 
significant  landmarks  in  our  traditions,  such  tiny  flashbacks  serve 
an  indispensable  and  pleasant  educational  function. 

Composers  in  the  Ascending  Phase:  Apparently  at  Peak 

RICHARD  STRAUSS  The  late  Richard  Strauss  has  been 
designated  the  greatest  of  recent  composers,  whose  only  possible 
rival  is  the  much  less  versatile  composer  one  year  his  junior,  Sibelius. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  American  repertoire  experience  of  these  two 
contemporaries  which  is  inconsistent  with  such  high  esteem.  Both 
show  a  rapid  ascent  in  popularity  beginning  in  the  1890's;  but 
Strauss  has  maintained  a  leading  position  of  from  four  to  five  per 
cent  of  the  national  repertoire,  except  during  the  hiatus  of  World 
War  I.  Only  recently  has  he  shown  a  slight  decline,  as  the  less 
worthy  of  his  numbers  are  being  dropped  from  the  repertoire. 

Strauss  unloosed  his  garish  symphonic  creations  upon  an  1890 
audience  that  was  still  reeling  from  the  onslaught  of  Wagner.  It 
was  just  beginning  to  relax  to  the  less  strenuous  strains  of  Tschai- 
kowsky  when  the  new  sensation  was  launched.  This  post- Wagnerian 
romantic  never  aroused  the  bitter  controversy  provoked  by  his 
predecessor,  but  he  did  evoke  just  enough  bewilderment,  it  seems, 
to  become  accepted  in  the  orchestral  and  operatic  repertoires  without 
too  much  delay.  If  he  offended  many  aesthetic  tastes,  he  was  also  an 
astute  showman  in  composition,  and  an  exceedingly  calculating 
negotiator.  From  all  sides  one  heard  variations  on  the  theme  that 
"Strauss  makes  money  even  when  his  music  does  not." 

Like  Berlioz,  his  romantic  forebear,  he  often  chose  lawless  and 


2l6  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

PBS  CENT 


LIFE  CYCLES:  Ascending  Phase 

I    1880-1950  ELEVEN  ORCHESTRAS 


1   ' 


STRAUSS 


RACHMANINOFF 

STRAVINSKY 

SIBEUUS 

DEBUSSY 

SHOSTAKOVICH 

BRUCKNER 

FRANCK 


1880   85    90     95   1900  05    10     15    20    25    30    35    40   45     50 


The  rise  of  the  best  known  composers  during  the  past  seventy  years. 
Note  the  decline  of  Richard  Strauss  during  World  War  1.  His  com- 
■  plete  disappearance  from  the  repertoire  in  the  season  1917-18  is  con- 
cealed because  the  plotting  is  done  on  a  jive-year  average. 

picturesque  characters  as  the  principal  subjects  for  many  of  his 
symphonic  poems  and  operas,  and  startled  his  listeners  with  tone 
pictures  of  grotesque  form  and  splashing  color.  Musically,  the  early 
tone  poems  of  "Richard  II"  (another  Bulowquip)  were  an  extrapola- 
tion of  the  trends  begun  by  Wagner  and  Berlioz,  with  complex  but 
enormously  competent  counterpoint,  with  snatches  of  beautiful 
melody,  even  reminiscent  of  the  waltz  king's  coloration  and  dramatic 
content.  There  were  those  who  loved  to  take  a  crack  at  the  deriva- 
tive nature  of  his  work,  who  were  convinced  that  the  old  boys  had 
done  it  better.  Said  they: 

If  it  must  be  Richard— then  let  it  be  Wagner 
If  Strauss  .  .  .  then  Johann. 

But  people  were  rapidly  attuning  their  ears,  and  Strauss  was  ac- 
claimed. 

It  was  not  surprising  that  a  composer,  endowed  with  his  commer- 
cial sagacity,  should  recognize  the  opportunities,  both  aesthetic  and 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  217 

material,  in  a  visit  to  America,  of  which  he  availed  himself  on  two 
occasions.  His  first  visit  occurred  in  the  early  months  of  1904.  Ap- 
pearing together  with  his  wife,  a  singer,  he  conducted  twenty-one 
concerts  with  almost  as  many  orchestras.  Most  of  his  New  York 
appearances  were  with  the  Hans  Wetzler  orchestra,  a  raw  and  un- 
trained group  (temporarily  augmented  to  no)  with  difficult  re- 
hearsal conditions.  He  conducted  the  New  York  Philharmonic  in 
the  final  pair  of  concerts  for  the  season  in  March,  1904.  He  had 
experienced  some  difficulty  in  concluding  an  agreement  with  Bos- 
ton, where  it  has  been  said  by  some  that  his  asking  price  was  too 
high,  and  by  others  that  Gericke  was  averse  to  vacating  the  podium 
for  the  distinguished  guest.  However,  Strauss  finally  did  conduct  its 
Pension  Fund  concert.  As  a  conductor  he  was  described  as  undemon- 
strative, casual,  and  not  in  the  least  picturesque.  A  minor  scandal 
occurred  when  he  accepted  an  engagement  to  appear  with  the  or- 
chestra in  the  Wanamaker  auditorium  in  New  York,  presumably  for 
an  appropriate  consideration.  Both  in  Europe  and  the  United  States, 
it  was  generally  declared  that  he  had  degraded  music  by  playing  in 
the  auditorium  of  a  department  store! 

In  1921—22  he  paid  a  second  visit  to  the  United  States.  World 
War  I,  which  we  entered  in  the  spring  of  191 7,  had  played  havoc  with 
German  music  in  general  and  Strauss  in  particular.  Not  only  the 
sentimental  aversion  of  many  patrons  toward  German  music,  and  the 
disinclination  of  managers  to  risk  public  demonstrations  and  boy- 
cotts, but  the  accumulating  royalties  of  enemy  aliens  argued  the 
prudence  of  a  general  policy  of  excluding  the  music  of  contem- 
porary enemy  composers.  The  result  was  that  Strauss  was  totally 
expunged  from  American  programs  during  the  war  years. 

Strauss  himself  had  shrewdly  endeavored  to  evade  exactly  such 
an  eventuality.  He  had  refrained  from  signing  the  Manifesto  of  Ger- 
man Intellectuals  defending  the  invasion  of  Belgium,  to  which 
ninety-three  Germans  of  international  prominence  had  affixed  their 
signatures.  He  was  presumably  motivated  either  by  the  conviction  of 
the  priority  of  art  over  politics  or,  as  a  colleague  insisted,  he  was 
"too  clever  to  ignore  his  royalties  in  London,  Paris,  Moscow  and 
New  York."  19  In  his  own  country,  he  counselled  tolerance  toward 


2l8  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

enemy  musicians,  excepting  those  who  had  actually  vilified  Ger- 
man Kultur.20 

However,  his  restoration  was  not  long  in  coming.  In  October, 
192 1,  this  erstwhile  enemy  was  officially  received  as  reconciliation 
ambassador  by  Mayor  Hylan  of  New  York  only  a  few  days  after 
the  same  official  had  waved  a  patriotic  welcome  to  General  Foch, 
the  Generalissimo  of  Allied  Forces.  At  his  first  concert  in  Carnegie 
Hall,  America  mixed  politics  and  art  beautifully  by  solemnly  pre- 
senting the  ex-enemy  with  a  large  wreath  beribboned  in  the  Black- 
White-Yellow  of  the  new  German  Republic.  Appearing  in  more 
than  forty  concerts  in  nineteen  cities  as  far  west  as  Kansas  City,  he 
was  elaborately  dined  and  feted  everywhere.  He  complimented  our 
orchestras,  and  demonstrated  the  authoritative  readings  of  his  works. 
Finally,  as  palpable  evidence  of  the  American  appraisal  of  his 
achievements,  he  took  with  him  to  Germany  an  estimated  $50,000. 

As  a  composer,  his  maiden  appearance  on  American  programs 
occurred  in  December,  1884,  when  Theodore  Thomas,  conductor  of 
the  New  York  Philharmonic,  who  had  met  the  youth  in  Munich, 
performed  his  Symphony  in  F  Minor  from  manuscript,  for  its  world 
premiere.  But  Thomas  never  repeated  this  number,  written  in  the 
classic  tradition.  It  was  not  until  he  adopted,  and  adapted,  the  roman- 
tic forms  of  the  symphonic  poem  that  Strauss  found  himself.  His 
present  strength  in  these  concerts  lies  in  Death  and  Transfiguration 
(introduced  by  Seidl,  January  9,  1892),  Till  Eulenspiegel  (by 
Thomas,  November  15,  1895),  and  Don  Juan  (by  Nikisch,  October 
30,  1 891),  the  last-named  an  earlier  work  generally  described  by 
critics  on  the  occasion  of  the  composer's  first  American  visit  as  "the 
most  melodious  and  most  easily  accessible  to  the  audience."  The  fact 
that  these  compositions,  together  with  several  others,  have  endured 
for  more  than  a  half-century  not  only  as  staples  but  as  thoroughly 
stimulating  musical  experiences,  must  justify  ranking  their  com- 
poser among  the  great.  No  recent  or  contemporary  composer  has 
attained  this  rank. 

However,  unlike  Beethoven  and  Wagner,  who  grew  in  stature  in 
their  later  works,  and  unlike  Mendelssohn  and  Schumann,  whose 
works  continued  to  find  favor  with  the  public  even  though  they 
showed  no  significant  development,  the  later  orchestral  works  of 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  219 

Strauss  have  never  enjoyed  the  critical  esteem  bestowed  upon  the 
products  of  his  youth.  The  Alpensymphonie,  the  last  of  the  larger 
symphonic  works,  for  the  premiere  of  which  Stransky,  Stokowski, 
and  Kunwald  contended,  has  had  practically  no  repeats.  In  general 
his  orchestral  style  has  become  more  and  more  onomatopoetic  (as 
in  Symphonia  Domestica),  more  polyphonic  and  polytonal,  with  an 
almost  mechanical  harmonic  and  contrapuntal  complexity,  a  style 
for  which  Johann  Quantz,  the  flutist  of  Frederick  the  Great,  two 
centuries  ago  coined  the  term  "Augenmusik." 

In  addition  to  his  symphonic  works,  some  orchestras,  notably 
Philadelphia  and  Chicago,  have  featured  excerpts  from  his  operas. 
The  Dance  of  the  Seven  Veils  from  Salome,  and  the  Waltzes  from 
Rosenkavalier,  which  were  written  in  the  style  of  his  namesake,  the 
waltz  king,  are  very  popular.  Mitropoulos  presented  a  concert  ver- 
sion of  Elektra  in  1949-50. 

Strauss  has  been  so  commonly  accepted  that  no  conductor  can 
be  said  to  ride  him  fanatically,  or  to  avoid  him  unduly.  Thomas  and 
Stock  in  Chicago,  Kunwald  in  Cincinnati,  Hertz  in  San  Francisco, 
Rodzinski,  Stokowski,  and  Ormandy— these  were  somewhat  con- 
spicuous among  their  respective  contemporaries  for  their  hospitality 
toward  Strauss. 

During  World  War  II  Strauss  suffered  a  decline  because  Ameri- 
can and  Russian  composers  were  catapulted  into  the  political  lime- 
light, rather  than  because  of  his  identification  with  the  enemy 
nations. 

At  home,  in  Germany,  his  Jewish  librettist  and  his  non-Aryan 
daughter-in-law  placed  him  in  an  equivocal  position.  Nevertheless 
he  straddled  the  issue  of  musico-political  integrity  with  characteris- 
tic caution.  As  head  of  the  Musikkammer  he  appeared  to  collaborate 
with  the  new  regime,  but  soon  resigned.  In  June,  1948,  he  was 
cleared  by  a  de-Nazification  board,  after  a  two-year  investigation. 

Although  his  compositions  will  undoubtedly  linger  many  years 
after  his  passing,  he  nevertheless  will  be  remembered  as  the  last  of 
the  German  dynasty  of  musical  titans  which  has  held  sway  in  the 
concert  halls  of  the  world  for  over  a  century.  Strauss  brings  to  a 
sputtering  close  the  Golden  Age  of  Teutonic  music,  an  age  whose 
grandeur  has  not  yet  found  a  new  national  home. 


220  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

JAN  SIBELIUS  There  has  developed  in  America  and  Eng- 
land a  reverence  for  the  creations  of  Sibelius  which  critics  in  Ger- 
many and  France  (and  some  critics  in  this  country)  have  difficulty 
in  comprehending.  During  the  first  few  years  of  this  century,  Theo- 
dore Thomas  and  Van  der  Stucken,  both  unfettered  in  their  taste  and 
with  a  flair  for  musical  reconnaissance,  welcomed  his  presymphonic 
works,  while  the  Second  Symphony  (the  first  one  to  be  imported), 
had  its  first  American  appearance  in  Chicago  on  January  2,  1904. 
From  these  small  beginnings  Sibelius  continued  for  several  decades 
with  a  modest  two  per  cent  of  our  repertoire,  but  in  the  thirties  he 
forged  ahead  to  double  this  figure— not  a  phenomenal,  but  neverthe- 
less a  very  tangible,  growth.  This  most  decisive  rise  in  his  career 
coincides  suggestively  with  the  increasing  interest  in,  and  sympathy 
with,  "gallant  little  Finland,"  which  had  regained  her  independence 
from  Russia  after  World  War  I  and,  alone  among  the  sovereign 
nations  and  allies  of  Europe,  recognized  her  international  obligation 
by  regular  payments  on  her  war  debt  to  the  United  States.  This 
impact  of  politics  upon  aesthetic  taste,  is  nevertheless  difficult  to 
measure  because  of  the  presence  of  other  factors  with  which  it  is 
blended. 

Other  circumstances  also  contrived  to  establish  the  Sibelius 
legend.  For  some  reason,  the  northern  geography  of  his  homeland 
impressed  itself  upon  some  of  the  critics  and  wrapped  his  personality 
in  a  mystery  of  bleak  grandeur  that  allegedly  reflected  itself  in  the 
tonal  flavor  of  his  compositions.  It  furnished  some  very  fine  meta- 
phors, which  commentators  often  find  very  useful  and  which  the 
audience  almost  invariably  takes  to  its  heart.  Actually,  of  course, 
such  geographical  determinism  is  entirely  spurious,  for  Finland,  like 
any  other  inhabited  country,  has  a  variety  of  weather,  and  with 
some  discretion  one  could  match  almost  any  passage  or  movement 
of  the  Second  Symphony  (which  was  the  special  victim  of  this 
logical  fallacy)  with  any  desired  meteorological  phenomenon,  and 
prove  just  about  anything. 

In  1 9 14,  when  Valse  Triste  and  Finlandia  had  attained  a  popular 
success,  Sibelius  visited  America  as  guest  of  the  Norfolk  Festival  in 
Connecticut,  where  he  conducted  several  of  his  works  and  a  new 
symphonic  poem,  The  Ocecmides,  written  for  the  occasion.  In  rec- 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  221 

ognition  of  the  distinguished  guest,  Yale  University  conferred  upon 
him  an  honorary  doctorate. 

Although  all  orchestras  shared  to  some  extent  in  this  popular  rise 
of  the  Finnish  symphonist,  it  was  Koussevitzky  and  Stokowski  who 
were  the  most  energetic  and  consistent  in  their  espousal  of  him. 
Koussevitzky  gave  him  the  "cycle  treatment,"  1932-33,  as  did  Wer- 
ner Janssen  and  his  orchestra  in  Los  Angeles.  These  cycles  con- 
tributed materially  to  the  six  per  cent  level  of  Sibelius  in  that 
five-year  period.  The  cordiality  between  the  Master  and  the  Maestro 
was  reciprocated  in  an  invitation  to  the  Boston  conductor,  whose 
father-in-law  was  then  living  in  Finland,  to  conduct  the  opening 
concert  of  the  Sibelius  Festival  in  Helsingfors  on  the  occasion  of 
the  composer's  seventieth  birthday  (1935).  Stokowski  had  displayed 
evidence  of  his  esteem  when  he  gave  the  American  premiere  of  the 
Fifth  (1921)  and  the  Sixth  and  Seventh  (1926)  symphonies.  Phila- 
delphia continued  cultivation  of  Sibelius  until  1940,  when  general 
enthusiasm  for  him  began  to  subside. 

As  measured  by  the  American  repertoire,  recognition  has  come 
late  to  the  composer  whom  some  have  been  pleased  to  call  the  "Bee- 
thoven of  the  North."  In  1905,  when  Strauss  occupied  one  of  the 
major  positions  in  the  repertoire  with  a  rank  of  four  per  cent, 
Sibelius  was  still  struggling  for  a  tentative  hold  on  the  program  time. 
If  slow  growth  presages  a  longer  life,  Sibelius  should  outlive  his 
German  rival,  who  has  been  touched  by  almost  no  adversity,  except 
those  attendant  upon  political  involvements,  and  who  has  received 
every  material  and  honorific  consideration.  But  such  good  fortune 
is  not  apparent  in  his  national  proportion  of  two  per  cent,  while 
Strauss  enjoys  more  than  twice  that  magnitude.  Sibelius  differs  from 
his  German  colleague  in  another  very  material  respect.  Since  Finland 
was  Russian  territory  at  the  time  when  his  compositions  became 
available,  and  since  America  has  no  copyright  treaty  with  Russia, 
Sibelius  has  no  way  of  collecting  on  his  genius  from  the  country  in 
which  his  compositions  have  been  most  admired. 

The  First,  Second,  and  Fifth  symphonies  have  become  apparent 
fixtures  in  the  American  repertoire,  while  the  Third,  Fourth,  and 
Sixth  are  rarely  played.  One  unique  distinction  must  be  accorded 
Sibelius.  He  is  the  only  twentieth-century  composer  who  has  written 


222  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

an  established  violin  concerto  (1903-05)—  which  was  introduced  to 
America  in  1906  by  Maud  Powell.  In  this  respect  it  shares  a  prestige 
analogous  to  Rachmaninoff's  Second  ( 1901 ),  similarly  the  only  stand- 
ard piano  concerto  born  in  this  century.  Unlike  Richard  Strauss, 
who  continued  to  compose  almost  up  to  his  last  breath,  Sibelius'  pen 
has  been  dry  for  a  quarter  of  a  century.  The  repeated  promise  of  an 
Eighth  Symphony  was  honored  only  in  the  breach.  Although  still 
vigorous  for  his  eighty-five  years,  it  now  appears  that  his  creative 
energy  has  been  exhausted. 

CESAR  FRANCK  Franck  has  long  been  the  leader  of  the 
French  school  of  the  symphony,  if  for  no  other  reason  than  that  his 
Symphony  in  D  Minor  is  the  only  French  symphony  of  unques- 
tioned rank,  except,  of  course,  the  century-old  Fantastic  Symphony 
of  Berlioz.  Comparison  with  those  of  Saint-Saens,  Chausson,  and 
d'Indy  only  emphasizes  this  eminent  isolation.  Although  much  of  the 
work  of  this  fertile  composer  was  mediocre,  he  has  left  two  num- 
bers which  are  still  secure  in  the  repertoire— the  aforesaid  symphony 
and  the  Symphonic  Variations  for  piano  and  orchestra.  The  gradual 
fading  of  a  dozen  other  compositions  probably  indicates  that  his 
present  one  and  one-half  per  cent  represents  the  peak  of  his  popu- 
larity. 

IGOR  STRAVINSKY  With  the  passing  of  Richard  Strauss 
and  the  retirement  of  the  aged  Sibelius,  Stravinsky  remains  the 
"dean"  of  the  celebrated  active  composers.  His  neoclassical  works 
have  influenced,  via  Nadia  Boulanger  and  Fontainebleau,  many  of 
the  modern  American  composers,  and  constitute  the  bulwark  of  his 
current  repertoire.  The  Firebird  and  Petrouchka  suites  are  almost 
as  standard  as  the  Brahms  and  Beethoven  symphonies,  although  the 
sensational  Sacre  du  Printemps  (191 3),  one  of  the  most  revolution- 
ary pieces  of  the  last  decades,  seems  less  able  to  maintain  itself. 
Many  of  his  more  recent  compositions  have  had  single  performances, 
and  as  long  as  new  works  flow  from  his  pen,  Stravinsky  may  con- 
fidently expect  a  hearing  for  them.  However,  none  has  earned  gen- 
eral acceptance  and,  unless  the  standard  few  develop  a  still  stronger 
attraction,  it  seems  probable  that  Stravinsky  has  reached  a  statistical 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  223 

peak.  Monteux,  Koussevitzky,  Stokowski,  Klemperer,  and  Rodzinski 
have  been  among  his  more  fervent  sponsors. 

After  his  first  American  tour  in  1925,  he  often  appeared  as  guest 
conductor,  and  settled  permanently  in  this  country  in  1940.  Shortly 
afterward,  he  filed  his  application  for  citizenship  and  expressed  his 
appreciation  for  that  privilege  in  an  arrangement  of  the  Star-Spangle d 
Banner,  which  customarily  prefaced  the  symphony  programs  in 
those  troublous  times.  In  St.  Louis  he  rehearsed  the  number,  but  the 
musicians  did  not  react  favorably  to  its  unfamiliar  dress.  Only  two 
weeks  after  Pearl  Harbor  it  seemed  unwise  to  tamper  with  people's 
patriotic  emotions,  however  much  the  new  orchestration  "came  from 
the  heart."  It  was,  however,  presented  in  Boston  in  January,  1944, 
and  was  thus  characterized  by  the  Christian  Science  Monitor:  "har- 
monies have  been  acidulated,  note  values  altered,  and  even  the 
melodic  line  reshaped." 

CLAUDE  DEBUSSY  Walter  Damrosch  and  the  New  York 
Symphony  Society  early  bestowed  their  favor  on  Debussy.  During 
the  first  decade  of  this  century,  Damrosch  presented  two  all-Debussy 
programs,  supplemented  by  soloists  and  chorus.  His  was  the  first 
established  orchestra  to  present  the  Nocturnes  in  1905;  and  in  the 
same  year  he  gave  the  first  of  many  performances  of  U  Apres-midi 
d'un  Faune,  which  featured  the  newly  imported  flute  virtuoso 
Georges  Barrere. 

With  these  performances  Debussy  opened  in  the  New  York 
Symphony  with  about  two  per  cent  of  the  repertoire,  and  this  per 
cent  became  stabilized,  as  the  composite  national  average.  Not  even 
during  World  War  I,  when  the  French  repertoire  was  appreciably 
augmented,  did  Debussy  profit  from  its  sympathetic  rise.  The  most 
probable  reason  for  this  was  that  his  moderate  orchestral  output  had 
already  been  fully  exploited.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  century, 
U Apres-midi  d'un  Faune,  Nocturnes,  Images,  and  La  Mer,  which 
constitute  three-fourths  of  his  orchestral  legacy,  together  with  some 
scattered  offerings  of  solos  and  arrangements,  comprise  his  contribu- 
tion to  the  repertoire.  He  represents  a  significant  break  in  the  Ger- 
man front,  both  in  the  style  of  his  orchestration,  which  is  of  open 
texture  rather  than  tonally  overladen,  and  in  national  emphasis. 


224  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

ANTON  BRUCKNER  Bruckner  may  be  said  to  have  de- 
veloped a  cult  without  a  congregation.  Like  Mahler,  he  has  had 
more  prophets  than  followers,  at  least  in  his  American  experience.  A 
Wagner  devotee  from  the  beginning  of  his  career,  Bruckner  was 
fated  to  live  in  anti-Wagner  Vienna.  In  the  early  years— in  the 
seventies— this  pious  personage,  so  devout  that  he  knelt  in  prayer 
backstage  before  every  concert  to  gain  the  strength  which  he  sorely 
needed,  was  so  involved  in  partisanship  that  conductors  hardly  dared 
play  him.  That  he  could  have  had  such  unshakable  faith  in  two 
diametrically  antithetical  characters  as  God  and  Wagner,  for  both 
of  whom  he  suffered  his  quota  of  taunts,  might  seem  astonishing. 
But  this  naive,  simple-minded  peasant  continued  his  heavy  invest- 
ments in  faith  and  devotion,  as  well  as  in  lengthy  improvisational 
scores,  though  neither  paid  him  high  dividends. 

In  Leipzig,  where  his  pupil  Nikisch  presided,  and  in  New  York, 
where  Damrosch  and  Thomas  were  the  reigning  influences,  his 
Wagnerian  leanings  did  not  constitute  such  an  obstacle  as  in  Vienna, 
the  protected  domain  of  the  anti- Wagnerian  critic,  Eduard  Hanslick. 
This  famous  arbiter  of  taste— personifying  the  nineteenth-century 
conception  of  a  critic— would  at  times  dip  his  pen  in  a  blend  of  ink 
and  gall,  and  splatter  it  abusively  on  the  sponsors  of  the  neo-German 
school.  Consequently  Bruckner's  first  real  success  did  not  occur  until 
Arthur  Nikisch  brought  out  his  Seventh  Symphony  in  Leipzig  in 
1884.  The  following  year  Walter  Damrosch  introduced  him  to 
America  with  the  Third  Svmphonv.  Theodore  Thomas  produced  the 
Seventh  in  New  York  in  1886,  and  the  Fourth  in  Chicago  in  1897, 
and  Gericke  the  Fifth  in  1901  in  Boston. 

Bruckner,  of  course,  has  never  been  popular  in  this  country,  but 
rather  the  beneficiary  of  public  curiosity.  Famed  for  his  dexterous 
extemporizations  at  the  organ  console,  he  seems  to  carry  over  this 
leisurely  dawdling  into  his  otherwise  competent  writing.  Stories  are 
told  of  his  complete  absorption  in  his  public  improvisations.  On  one 
occasion  he  consumed  twice  the  allotted  time  so  that  the  organ 
pumpers  went  on  strike  in  fatigued  despair.  His  symphonies  often 
exceed  the  hour,  and  some  one  has  unkindly  observed  that  "in  his 
Adagios  the  grass  grows  between  the  notes."  Hanslick's  verdict  that 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  225 

Bruckner  is  "interesting  in  detail  but  distasteful  in  toto,"  reflects 
the  judgment  of  many  an  American  listener  as  well. 

All  nine  symphonies  carrying  opus  numbers  have  been  performed 
in  the  United  States,  though  no  one  has  ventured  upon  a  cycle  as 
did  his  devotee  Nikisch  of  the  Gewandhaus  orchestra  during  the 
season  1920-21.  Chicago  has  at  some  time  performed  all  his  sym- 
phonies; the  New  York  Philharmonic,  all  but  the  First  and  Third; 
Boston,  all  but  the  First,  Second  and  Sixth,  and  Cincinnati  all  but 
the  First.  The  Seventh,  Eighth,  and  Ninth  are  the  most  frequently 
played,  if  that  adverb  is  appropriate  to  such  occasional  performances, 
and  the  First,  Second,  and  Sixth  the  least.  The  1930's  and  1940's 
witnessed  a  favorable  trend  in  the  curve,  owing  largely  to  the  com- 
ing of  Bruno  Walter,  whose  fidelity  to  both  Bruckner  and  Mahler 
is  well  known,  and  secondarily  to  his  cultivation  by  Koussevitzky  in 
Boston. 

SERGEI  RACHMANINOFF  The  personal  influence  of 
Rachmaninoff  in  the  molding  of  his  own  repertoire  trend  was  enor- 
mous. A  concert  soloist  with  a  facile  romantic  style  of  composition 
and  a  picturesque  and  exploitable  homeliness  of  figure,  he  found  it 
very  easy  to  arouse  public  interest  in  both  himself  and  his  music. 
Twice  he  had  been  offered  the  conductorship  of  the  Boston  Sym- 
phony Orchestra,  and  twice  he  refused  that  musical  crown,  prefer- 
ring to  dedicate  himself  to  composition  and  concertizing.  Character- 
ized by  a  prodigality  of  melody,  his  music  does  not  surprise  the 
listener  with  strange  progressions,  nor  harass  him  with  unresolved 
dissonances.  The  erudite  critic  might  justifiably  recall  the  cases  of 
Raff  and  Spohr  who  became  "classic"  almost  too  soon  to  endure. 
The  Symphony  No.  2  and  the  Piano  Concerto  No.  2  still  hold  their 
own  and  these,  together  with  more  isolated  performances  of  the 
Third  Piano  Concerto,  the  Rhapsodie  on  a  Theme  by  Paganini,  and 
other  compositions,  have  pushed  his  curve  continuously  upward 
since  1904,  when  his  name  first  appeared  in  Boston.  His  death  in 
1943  has  already  affected  the  fortunes  of  his  music  adversely  and 
reduced  slightly  the  2.75  proportion  in  the  repertoire,  which  he  en- 
joyed at  that  time. 


226  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

DMITRI  SHOSTAKOVITCH  If  ever  a  composer  was  pro- 
pelled into  screaming  prominence  by  political  forces,  Shostakovitch 
was  that  composer.  It  all  began  peacefully  enough.  The  First  Sym- 
phony was  given  its  American  premiere  by  the  alert  Stokowski  in 
November,  1928;  the  Fifth  was  given  a  similarly  successful  concert 
audition  ten  years  later,  though  Rodzinski  and  the  NBC  orchestra 
had  anticipated  it  with  a  radio  premiere  a  month  earlier.  During  the 
decade  of  the  thirties,  all  Russian  arts  aroused  an  increasingly  benev- 
olent interest  on  the  part  of  many  American  intellectuals.  In  the  case 
of  Shostakovitch,  this  interest  was  certainly  not  diminished  by  the 
first  of  several  spectacular  repudiations  by  his  government  in  Jan- 
uary, 1936.  By  1940  this  precocious  youth,  through  both  merit  and 
circumstance,  had  earned  the  proportion  of  about  one  per  cent  of 
the  American  repertoire— a  percentage  of  not  inconsiderable  mag- 
nitude for  a  contemporary  composer.  Within  about  five  years, 
animated  by  war  hysteria,  he  composed  the  Sixth,  Seventh,  Eighth, 
and  Ninth  symphonies  which  were  made  available  with  almost  com- 
mercial promptitude. 

It  was  in  the  dramatic  episode  of  the  production  and  presentation 
of  the  Seventh  Symphony  that  the  political  overtones  were  first 
generally  perceived  in  America.  Professedly  written  during  the  siege 
of  Leningrad,  where  the  Muses  spoke  in  thundering  cannonades  and 
during  which  Communist  Russia  inadvertently  became  the  active 
ally  of  capitalist  America  (December  7,  1941),  this  Leningrad  Sym- 
phony became  the  symbol  of  the  binding  tie  between  the  new  and 
strange  political  bedfellows.  Stokowski,  who  was  then  under  contract 
with  NBC,  Rodzinski  of  Cleveland,  and  Koussevitzky  all  vied  for 
the  prize  of  the  first  American  performance.  Actually,  the  National 
Broadcasting  Company  had  already  secured  the  rights  for  Toscanini, 
who  agreed  to  conduct  its  radio  debut  in  July  1942.  Not  since  the 
Metropolitan  Opera  placed  Parsifal  on  the  boards  in  1903  had  there 
been  such  a  buzz  of  anticipation  over  an  American  premiere.  Pho- 
tographed at  Kuibyshev,  then  the  temporary  Soviet  capital,  the 
score  arrived  in  the  United  States  in  the  form  of  one  hundred  feet 
of  microfilm  after  a  journey  which  included  a  flight  to  Teheran, 
auto  transportation  to  Cairo,  and  the  final  leg  by  air  to  New  York. 

Less  than  two  years  later,  the  Eighth  was  given  its  American 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire 


227 


nHCBNT 

3 


LIFE  CYCLES 
Ascending  Phase 


ORCHE 


MAHLER 


RAVEL 
PROKOFIEFF 


BARTOK 

HINDEMITH 
VAUGHAN 

WILLIAMS 
COPLAND 
MILHAUD 
SCH0EN8ERG 
WALTON 

SCHUMAN 


1900      05 


Among  the  more  recent  composers  whose  rise  is  pictured  here  are 
two  Americans:  Aaron  Copland  and  William  Schuman. 


premiere,  on  April  2,  1944,  by  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  Rodzin- 
ski  conducting.  Political  implications  were  again  evident  when  this 
performance  was  prefaced  by  a  grand  eulogy  of  our  Soviet  ally, 
intoned  by  the  Director  of  the  Division  of  Soviet  Supply  of  the 
Foreign  Economic  Administration.  For  the  rights  to  this  premiere 
the  Columbia  Broadcasting  System,  in  this  physically  undamaged 
country,  had  paid  to  Shostakovitch,  by  now  a  highly  publicized  ex- 
firefighter  of  war-ruined  Leningrad,  the  sum  of  $10,000. 

This  unprecedented  enthusiasm  for  Shostakovitch  not  only  re- 
flected a  kind  of  left-wing  taste,  but  was  augmented  by  press  agentry 
on  an  almost  planetary  scale.  It  was  nourished  in  America  by  an 
understandable  sympathy  for  a  ravished  country,  by  the  glamour  of 
the  name  of  the  composer,  and,  ironically  enough,  by  the  normal 
capitalistic  competition  between  two  national  radio  chains  and  the 
Eastern  orchestras.  There  was  not  then,  nor  is  there  today,  a  genuine 
aesthetic  acceptance  of  the  later  symphonies,  and  even  the  First  and 
Fifth  have  been  criticized  for  tonal  overexpansion  and  derivative 
eclecticism. 


228  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Previously  (1942),  a  totalitarian  blend  of  musical  and  political 
interests,  which  is  not  without  some  potency  even  in  a  democracy, 
had  motivated  an  invitation  to  the  composer  to  visit  New  York  to 
conduct  his  Seventh.  Again,  in  1946,  Shostakovitch  and  Prokofieff 
had  an  opportunity  to  decline  a  cordial  invitation  to  appear  as  guest 
conductors  in  Boston;  for  by  this  time  Boston's  own  emigre  con- 
ductor had  reversed  his  earlier  political  proscription  of  Shostakovitch 
and  was  even  evincing  a  special  cordiality  toward  his  music.  After 
having  announced  the  acceptance  of  the  American  invitation,  they 
sent  their  regrets  in  October,  1946  "until  the  conditions  between  the 
two  nations  become  more  settled."  With  the  rapid  deterioration  of 
these  "conditions,"  and  the  cessation  of  the  erstwhile  flow  of  new 
works,  no  search  for  concealed  factors  is  needed  to  explain  the 
headlong  tumble  of  Shostakovitch  in  the  American  repertoire,  from 
which  there  is  obviously  no  immediate  prospect  of  recovery. 

Composers  in  the  Ascending  Phase:  Recent  Group 

GUSTAV  MAHLER  Gustav  Mahler  carried  on  the  tradi- 
tions of  Teutonic  length  with  which  German  composers  have  been 
periodically  afflicted  ever  since  Beethoven  scored  the  fifty-five- 
minute  Eroica.  His  music  is  abnormally  protracted,  it  is  imitative 
and  often  disjointed,  and  sometimes  trite,  and  the  choral  supplements 
tend  to  restrict  performance.  With  all  their  color  and  competent 
orchestration,  his  nine  symphonies  are  certainly  not  strikingly  novel 
and  do  not  stir  up  the  controversies— as  did  Wagner,  Strauss,  and 
Stravinsky— which  inspire  fanatics.  In  fact,  they  have  often  been 
labeled  as  "Kapellmeistermusik"— another  neologism  coined  by 
Biilow  to  describe  the  unoriginal  concoctions  of  the  conductor-com- 
poser who  secures  his  materials  from  the  masterpieces  which  he 
conducts.  Notable  among  Mahler's  disciples,  who  would,  of  course, 
question  such  harsh  judgments,  is  Bruno  Walter  who  has  loyally 
dedicated  himself  to  the  task  of  "uncovering  the  sources  of  exalta- 
tion flowing  from  his  music." 

Das  Lied  von  der  Erde,  which  is  scaled  down  to  more  conven- 
tional proportions,  employing  only  two  solo  voices,  has  won  a  place 
in  the  standard  American  repertoire;  it  has  received  its  quota  of 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  ng 

performances  ever  since  Stokowski  gave  the  American  premiere, 
December,  191 6,  in  Philadelphia.  All  nine  symphonies  have  been 
played  by  the  major  orchestras. 

The  most  sensational  production  of  any  Mahler  symphony  was, 
of  course,  the  performance  under  Stokowski  of  the  Symphony  No. 
8,  Symphony  of  a  Thousand,  in  the  Spring  of  1 9 1 6,  which  propelled 
the  young  conductor  into  national  prominence,  in  spite  of  the  mixed 
aesthetic  feelings  with  which  the  production  was  received.  Frederick 
Stock,  of  Chicago,  followed  with  a  performance  the  following  year; 
the  Cincinnati  May  Festivals  of  193 1  and  1939,  and  the  Hollywood 
Bowl  orchestra,  with  Ormandy,  produced  it  during  the  Summer  of 
1948.  As  conductor  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  Stokowski  re- 
peated it  in  April,  1950.  The  ambitious  task  of  presenting  the  com- 
plete cycle  of  the  Mahler  symphonies  was  undertaken  by  the  Radio 
City  Music  Hall  orchestra,  Erno  Rapee,  conductor,  which  broad- 
cast its  program  on  successive  Sundays  during  the  season  1941-42. 
Because  of  the  prohibitive  length  of  most  of  the  Mahler  composi- 
tions, single  movements  are  not  uncommonly  programmed,  and  long 
movements  are  cut— even  as  Mahler  himself  felt  few  compunctions 
in  altering  the  works  of  any  composer  excepting  Wagner.  The 
curve  of  Mahler  has  been  rising  slightly  and  stands  now  at  two  and 
one-half  per  cent,  with  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  over  which 
Mahler  himself  once  presided,  leading  handsomely  in  the  espousal 
of  his  music.  The  return  of  Bruno  Walter  was,  of  course,  the  most 
forceful  personal  factor  in  this  renewed  interest.  Boston  has  been 
second  to  New  York  in  hospitality  toward  Mahler. 

SERGEI  PROKOFIEFF  ProkofiefT  has  not  been  supported 
by  the  political  ballyhoo  accorded  his  colleague  Shostakovitch,  and 
his  rank  in  the  repertoire  is  consequently  considerably  lower,  with 
the  present  record  at  one  per  cent.  Koussevitzky,  a  friend  in  pre- 
Revolution  days,  has  taken  the  lead  in  championing  this  modern 
Russian,  with  Philadelphia  and  St.  Louis  verv  close  seconds.  During 
several  visits  to  this  country  between  19 18  and  1939,  he  performed 
his  own  piano  concertos  and  conducted  his  symphonic  works.  His 
First  Symphony,  Classical,  is  by  far  the  most  frequently  played,  and 
has  indeed  become  a  "classic."  The  Suite  from  The  Love  of  Three 


23O  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Oranges,  and  the  Scythian  Suite,  have  also  been  given  repeated  hear- 
ings, and  about  twenty  other  numbers  have  been  played.  The 
Children's  Fairy  Tale,  Peter  and  the  Wolf,  is  enjoyed  by  adult 
sophisticates,  but  is  not  to  be  expected  frequently  on  these  subscrip- 
tion programs.  His  performance  rank  does  scant  justice  to  the  repu- 
tation of  the  man  whom  many  critics  denominate  one  of  the  most 
distinguished  composers  in  the  whole  musical  world  today— in  view 
of  which,  the  prognosis  is  excellent. 

ARNOLD  SCHOENBERG  As  in  the  case  of  Prokofieff 
(Classical  Symphony)  and  Hindemith  (Mathis  der  Maler)  and  other 
innovators,  the  most  accepted  composition  of  Schoenberg  is  the 
one  which  does  least  violence  to  current  styles.  Verklarte  Nacht 
(1899),  written  while  he  was  still  under  the  influence  of  Wagner 
and  previous  to  his  deflection  into  "atonal"  bypaths,21  has  been  con- 
sistently performed  while  practically  none  of  a  dozen  other  com- 
positions have  been  played  twice  by  the  same  orchestra.  If  the 
avant-garde  has  hailed  him  as  the  greatest  contemporary  genius, 
their  verdict  is  not  reflected  in  the  active  repertoire.  For  almost 
fifty  years  this  celebrated  musician  and  pedagogue  has  been  more 
written  about  than  played,  and  has  produced  nothing  that  has 
"caught  on."  Whether  his  music  is  a  natural  evolution  from  the 
chromaticism  of  Tristan,  as  is  contended  by  the  Schoenberg  school, 
with  the  public  taste  in  a  deplorable  cultural  lag;  or  whether  the 
composer  was  deceived  by  his  own  clever  contrivance  of  an  aesthetic 
theory  which  is  simply  too  unpsychological  to  gain  adherence,  is 
another  of  those  temporarily  insoluble  questions  which  we  so  glibly 
pass  on  to  a  supposedly  omniscient  posterity  to  decide.  The  moral 
distinction  between  admirable  aesthetic  integrity  and  mere  doctrinaire 
obstinacy  cannot  easily  be  resolved. 

Stokowski  valiantly  espoused  the  cause  of  this  unconventional  Vi- 
ennese by  presenting  at  least  a  half-dozen  of  his  creations  during  the 
1920's.  For  the  performance  of  the  controversial  Five  Orchestral 
Pieces,  the  conductor  received  as  his  reward  a  jumble  of  applause  and 
hisses  from  his  partially  amused  and  partially  offended  audience.  In 
London,  Vienna,  and  Prague  they  were  similarly  greeted. 

In  July,  1 95 1,  Arnold  Schoenberg  died  in  Los  Angeles. 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  231 

AARON  COPLAND  Contrary  to  the  uncompromising 
policy  of  Schoenberg,  Copland  was  somewhat  more  amenable  to 
the  pressures  of  public  taste.  He  has  shifted  styles,  abandoned  the 
brazen  cacophony  of  his  early  experiments,  and  more  recently  dis- 
plays evidence  of  a  search  for  a  congenial  meeting  ground,  some- 
what left-of -center,  with  his  public. 

As  a  twenty-four-year-old  student  of  Nadia  Boulanger— in  fact 
the  very  first  of  a  long  migration  of  Americans  to  Fontainebleau— 
he  made  his  orchestral  debut  with  the  New  York  Symphony,  Wal- 
ter Damrosch,  conductor,  in  a  performance  of  the  Svmphony  for 
Organ  and  Orchestra,  January  11,  1925,  with  Mile.  Boulanger  as 
organist.  It  was  especially  the  dissonant  finale  that  reportedly  moved 
Damrosch  to  the  famous  remark  that  "a  man  who  could  write  such 
music  at  twenty-four  might  some  day  be  capable  of  murder." 

More  important,  of  course,  was  the  second  performance  of  this 
number  a  month  later  under  the  baton  of  Koussevitzky  in  Boston. 
This  was  the  very  first  of  a  long  series  of  services  not  onlv  to 
Copland,  but  also  to  American  music,  by  the  Boston  conductor.  It 
cannot  be  said  that  the  audience  received  these  "barbaric"  and 
"brutal"  cacophonies  in  a  friendly  spirit.  Warren  Story  Smith,  of 
the  Boston  Post,  opined  that  "Copland  not  only  looked  into  his 
heart,  but  also  into  the  score  of  Stravinsky's  Sacre,"  which  had 
caused  such  a  scandalous  riot  in  Paris  in  May,  191 3. 

Since  that  debut,  however,  Copland  has  become  the  most  uni- 
versally performed  American  composer  in  the  serious  repertoire. 
Performances  of  A  Lincoln  Portrait,  Billy  the  Kid,  Quiet  City,  and 
Appalachian  Spring  have  been  rather  widespread,  although  Copland, 
too,  suffers  from  the  affliction  of  single  renditions.  His  overall  na- 
tional average  is  approximately  one  per  cent. 

RALPH  VAUGHAN  WILLIAMS  Vaughan  Williams  is 
one  of  the  few  English  composers  to  have  a  modest  but  secure  place 
in  the  American  repertoire.  The  programmatic  London  Symphony 
and  the  Fantasia  on  a  Theme  by  Thomas  Tallis  were  first  performed 
by  the  New  York  Symphony  under  Damrosch  and  Coates  in  1920 
and  1922  respectively,  and  since  then  have  been  regularly  heard.  His 


232  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

other  compositions  appear  less  frequently,  although  John  Barbirolli 
leaned  rather  heavily  on  him  in  New  York  in  1936-40. 

PAUL  HINDEMITH  Hindemith  came  to  the  attention  of 
the  public  not  only  through  his  compositions  but  also  because  of  his 
promotion  of  the  idea  of  Gebrauchsmusik.  Mindful  of  the  dilemma 
in  which  musicians  found  themselves  by  composing  in  a  social 
vacuum,  without  reference  to  particular  purposes,  he  proposed  that 
music  should  be  frankly  utilitarian  and  thereby  again  close  the  gap 
between  composer  and  consumer  that  was  created  during  the  nine- 
teenth century.  This  constituted  an  admission  of  bankruptcy  of  the 
romantic  theory  of  self-expression,  and  was  a  step  toward  the  rec- 
ognition of  composing  as  a  useful  craft. 

Since  his  name  first  appeared  in  the  season  1924-25  on  the  Phila- 
delphia programs,  about  a  dozen  of  his  compositions  have  been 
performed,  but  none  with  the  frequency  of  his  Mathis  der  Aider, 
one  of  his  later,  though  more  conservative,  works.  With  his  per- 
centage at  less  than  one  per  cent,  future  historians  may  have  occa- 
sion to  comment  on  the  tardiness  with  which  modern  music  is 
absorbed  into  the  standard  repertoire,  for  Hindemith  is  unquestion- 
ably one  of  the  most  respected  of  modern  composers. 

DARIUS  MILHAUD  Milhaud  was  one  of  the  famous  "Six" 
who  sowed  discords  and  reaped  a  whirlwind  of  notoriety  in  Paris 
during  the  riotous  postwar  twenties.  He  had  absorbed  various  trends, 
including  American  jazz  and  the  folk  music  of  Brazil,  where  hec 
had  spent  two  years  (1917-19)  in  the  French  Legation.  Before  1940 
his  performances  were  scattered,  but  since  his  permanent  residence 
in  the  United  States,  practically  all  the  orchestras  have  programmed 
his  compositions,  although  as  yet  almost  none  has  been  repeated. 
The  less  radical  Suite  Provengale  has  been  most  generally  played. 

BELA  BARTOK  Of  a  dozen  compositions  of  this  Hun- 
garian nationalist  that  have  been  included  in  the  American  repertoire, 
none  of  the  strictly  orchestral  numbers  has  any  circulation.  On  the 
other  hand,  certain  soloists  have  espoused  his  piano  and  violin  con- 
certos. A  mild  revival  occurred  at  the  time  of  his  death  in  1945,  in 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  233 

part  motivated  by  sentimental  impulses  of  the  friends  of  the  com- 
poser, who  had  died  penniless  in  New  York.  But  whether,  as  many 
had  hoped,  there  would  develop  a  demand  for  his  nationalistic  crea- 
tions, it  is  too  early  to  predict.  His  Concerto  for  Orchestra,  commis- 
sioned by  Koussevitzky,  is  one  of  about  ten  of  his  compositions  on 
American  programs,  with  the  Hungarian  Ormandy  particularly  hos- 
pitable. 

WILLIAM  SCHUMAN  William  Schuman  owes  his  entry 
into  the  repertoire  largely  to  the  sponsorship  of  Koussevitzky,  who 
has  played  at  least  a  half-dozen  of  his  works.  His  early  American 
Festival  Overture  has  been  the  most  generally  accepted. 

WILLIAM  WALTON  William  Walton,  the  young  Eng- 
lishman, is  generally  considered  the  most  conspicuous  prospect  for 
the  mantle  of  Vaughan  Williams.  He  is  a  fixture  in  the  repertoire, 
and  his  orchestral  compositions  have  enjoyed  repeated  performances 
in  New  York  and  Boston.  A  Suite  from  Fa  fade  (to  poems  by  Edith 
Sitwell),  the  concertos  for  violin  and  viola,  Overture  Portsmouth 
Point,  and  Belshazzafs  Feast  (chorus  and  orchestra)  have  been  per- 
formed by  several  orchestras. 

CHARLES  IVES  Charles  Ives,  the  musical  sage  of  Dan- 
bury,  Connecticut,  would  normally  not  be  counted  in  the  family 
of  active  American  composers  who  have  earned  a  niche  in  the  or- 
chestral repertoire.  But  he  has  been  the  center  of  so  much  discussion 
among  the  musicians  and  critics  of  unconventional  propensities,  that 
his  presence  cannot  be  ignored.  For  six  decades  he  has  been  a  voice 
crying  in  the  wilderness. 

Not  only  has  he  utilized  polytonal  and  multirhythmic  devices 
which  have  by  no  means  yet  become  conventional,  but  his  groping 
for  expression  which  reflects  the  regional  tunes,  the  local  color  of 
church  and  public  square,  marks  him  as  the  first  to  construct  a 
genuine  homespun  New  England  idiom.  Being  a  man  of  independent 
means,  he  personifies  that  "lunatic  fringe"  which  cares  not  for  audi- 
ence, royalties,  or  recognition.  As  a  result  he  has  no  audience,  has 


234  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

received  no  money,  and  gained  no  general  recognition.  But  in  his 
old  age,  he  is  being  sought  out  by  the  new  musical  generation. 

Although  some  of  his  music  has  been  recorded,  he  has  had  exactly 
three  performances  by  the  major  orchestras  of  the  country,  but 
none  by  a  regular  conductor.  Associate  Conductor  Burgin  of  Boston 
(1948)  and  guest  conductor  Slonimsky  in  Los  Angeles  (1933), 
have  played  his  Three  Places  in  New  England;  and  Leonard  Bern- 
stein conducted  the  Second  Symphony  with  the  New  York 
Philharmonic  in  February,  1951.  This  number  turned  out  to  be 
surprisingly  melodious  and  conservative. 

The  Third  Symphony,  composed  in  1904,  revised  in  191 1,  won 
for  the  ailing  composer  the  Pulitzer  Prize  in  1946.  Ives  is  an  asocial 
individualist  who  writes  as  he  pleases;  but  unlike  Schoenberg,  who  has 
likewise  enlisted  the  support  of  the  liberal  group,  Ives  has  never  but- 
tressed his  musical  style  with  a  thoroughgoing  aesthetic  philosophy. 

Composers  in  the  Descending  Phase 

ROBERT  SCHUMANN  In  the  early  years  of  the  New 
York  Philharmonic  Society,  just  after  his  death,  Schumann  enjoyed 
a  vogue  equivalent  to  that  of  Mozart,  and  was  outstripped  only  by 
Beethoven  himself.  Under  Theodore  Thomas  he  sometimes  exceeded 
ten  per  cent  of  the  repertoire,  but  with  the  enrichment  of  the 
repertoire  by  the  later  romantics,  he  yielded  ground.  Today  he 
occupies  about  two  and  one-half  per  cent  of  the  composite  reper- 
toire. 

Though  there  has  been  a  contraction  in  volume,  there  has  been 
no  significant  shift  or  replacement  in  the  representative  works.  The 
four  symphonies,  the  Manfred  Overture  and  the  thoroughly  stand- 
ard Piano  Concerto,  then  as  now,  constitute  the  bulk  of  his  legacy. 
In  the  meager  cello  literature,  his  concerto  perseveres,  while  the 
season  1937-38  witnessed  the  revival  of  the  Violin  Concerto  by 
Yehudi  Menuhin.  Inexpertly  orchestrated,  his  symphonies  have  been 
"retouched"  by  Mahler,  Weingartner,  and  Stock,  whose  versions 
take  advantage  of  orchestral  color  unsuspected  by  the  pianistically 
minded  composer.  In  spite  of  the  technical  shortcomings  in  his  non- 
idiomatic  orchestral  lines,  Schumann  has  survived  because  of  his 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire 


235 


-  SCHUMANN 

H  BERLIOZ 
MENDELSSOHN 
SCHUBERT 


LISZT 
M  RUBINSTEIN 


1875  80    85    90    95  1900  05    10     15    20   25    30    35  40  45     50 


The  old  composers  are  constantly  being  crowded  by  the  new  entrants. 
Hence  many  of  the  famous  names,  while  still  being  played  in  signifi- 
cant proportions,  show  a  decline  in  relative  importance  in  the  reper- 
toire. Liszt  and  Rubinstein  have  neared  the  vanishing  point. 


striking  melodic  motifs,  buoyant  rhythms,  and  vivid  harmonizations, 
which  keep  him  always  well  above  the  level  of  the  commonplace. 


FRANZ  SCHUBERT  Overshadowed  during  his  brief  life- 
time by  Beethoven  and  Rossini,  Schubert,  who  died  at  the  age  of 
thirty-one,  achieved  a  posthumous  renown  in  inverse  proportion  to 
his  early  failures.  Numerous  important  factors  militated  against 
personal  recognition.  In  the  first  place  he  was  not  a  virtuoso  on 
any  instrument,  being  unable  to  do  justice  even  to  some  of  his  own 
compositions.  At  a  time  when  division  of  labor  between  executant 
and  composer  was  not  yet  common,  this  avenue  to  public  attention 
was  closed  to  him.  Although  schooled  in  musical  theory,  his  dra- 
matic training  was  deficient,  and  in  his  early  attempts  to  "sell"  his 
operas,  his  lack  of  knowledge  of  stagecraft  and  his  restricted  range 
of  musical  expression  killed  all  possibility  of  his  being  heard  in  the 
Rossini-mad  Austrian  capital.  For  several  years  of  his  life  he  was 


236  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

buried  in  school  teaching— to  escape  the  worse  fate  of  military  con- 
scription—which siphoned  off  at  least  some  of  his  energies  from 
musical  activities.  Since  public  song  recitals  with  piano  accompani- 
ment were  almost  unknown,  his  most  successful  vehicle  of  expres- 
sion was  limited  to  private  soirees.  Being  pathologically  shy  in 
temperament,  he  was  unable  to  profit  by  even  such  modest  oppor- 
tunities. Finally,  his  short  life  limited  his  chance  for  recognition, 
although  his  last  few  years  were  brightened  by  an  improvement  in 
his  financial  and  personal  fortunes.  Within  a  very  few  years  after 
his  death,  artists  and  publishers  were  picking  up  his  works.  If  he 
had  had  a  normal  life  span  the  believers  in  unrequited  genius  might 
very  well  have  lost  another  test  case. 

The  manuscripts  of  most  of  his  more  important  orchestral  works 
lay  for  years  on  the  dust-laden  shelves  of  friends  and  relatives  until 
favorable  coincidence  brought  them  to  light— all  of  which  testifies 
to  the  dependence  of  fame  on  synchronization  of  merit  and  circum- 
stance. The  story  of  the  recovery  of  the  great  C  Major  Symphony 
ten  years  after  the  composer's  death— he  would  have  been  only  forty- 
one— and  its  first  performance  by  Mendelssohn  and  the  Gewandhaus 
orchestra  in  1839  is  the  hackneyed  stock  in  trade  of  the  program 
annotators.  The  devotion  of  Liszt  in  proclaiming  the  lyric  genius  of 
Schubert  throughout  Europe  by  a  half-hundred  transcriptions  of 
his  Lieder  further  spread  his  fame. 

In  America,  Schubert's  career  was  inaugurated  with  the  rendi- 
tion of  the  C  Major  Symphony  by  the  New  York  Philharmonic  in 
1 85 1  under  Theodore  Eisfeld,  who  had  come  to  America  in  1848. 
For  some  decades  his  proportion  of  the  repertoire  ranged  from  three 
to  six  per  cent,  until  about  the  beginning  of  the  new  century,  when 
the  expansion  of  both  repertoire  and  number  of  concerts  seemed  to 
settle  Schubert  on  a  safe  plateau  of  about  two  per  cent,  which  he 
still  held  in  1950. 

A  change  in  concert  convention,  effected  early  in  this  century, 
which  restricts  soloists  to  numbers  of  orchestral  character,  wiped 
out  the  two  score  Lieder  which  had  previously  enjoyed  occasional 
performances  in  New  York,  Chicago,  and  other  cities  where  vocalists 
were  frequently  featured  in  mixed  programs. 

Only  two  compositions  may  be  said  to  have  a  firmly  established 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  237 

place  in  today's  repertoire— Symphonies  No.  7  and  No.  8.  If  Schu- 
mann had  hailed  the  Seventh  as  a  "masterpiece  of  heavenly  length" 
the  world  has  concurred  in  his  judgment,  but  with  some  reservation 
as  to  the  divine  nature  of  its  dimensions.  At  least  Mendelssohn  in 
1840  and  Mahler  in  19 10  (New  York  Philharmonic)  played  the  fifty- 
minute  symphony  with  cuts.  Most  critics  would  pronounce  its  re- 
dundancy as  emanating  not  from  any  providential  inspiration,  but 
rather  from  the  very  human  foible  of  a  happy  pen  in  the  hand  of  an 
author  who  almost  never  perspired  over  a  revised  manuscript  and 
whose  first  draft  was  usually  his  last.  In  the  American  repertoire  it 
is  played  with  almost  the  same  frequency  as  the  symphonies  of 
Beethoven,  Brahms,  and  the  other  masterpieces  of  hallowed  tradi- 
tion. 

The  Unfinished  Symphony,  more  compact  and  utterly  charming, 
was  first  performed  in  America  by  the  Theodore  Thomas  orchestra 
in  1867.  It  is  now  often  programmed  in  popular  concerts.  In  recent 
years  the  Fifth  in  B-flat,  a  youthful  work  reminiscent  of  Mozart  and 
Haydn,  had  gained  some  hearings,  while  many  other  works  have 
been  given  isolated  or  infrequent  performances.  The  Symphony  in 
E,  of  which  only  a  sketch  exists,  was  orchestrated  by  Weingartner, 
and  was  given  its  American  premiere  by  the  Cleveland  orchestra  in 
the  year  of  the  centennial  of  the  composer's  death,  (November) 
1928. 

In  commemoration  of  this  centennial,  the  Columbia  Phono- 
graph Company  had  announced  a  prize  contest  for  the  "completion" 
of  the  Unfinished  Symphony.  Although  this  work  had  been  "com- 
pleted" once  before  by  one  August  Ludwig,  a  German  critic  and 
composer,  and  was  thus  performed  by  the  Berlin  Philharmonic  in 
1892,  many  connoisseurs  were  not  convinced  that  the  symphony 
required  grafting  of  a  third  movement— to  say  nothing  of  the  im- 
pertinence of  such  a  project  even  if  it  were  desirable.  The  conditions 
of  the  contest  were  therefore  rescinded  in  favor  of  a  more  general 
stipulation  that  compositions  should  be  conceived  as  an  "apotheosis 
of  the  lyrical  genius  of  Schubert."  The  $10,000  prize  was  won  by 
Kurt  Atterburg,  well-known  Swedish  composer,  with  his  Sym- 
phony No.  6,  which  was  performed  in  Paris,  Cologne,  London,  New 


238  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

York,  and  Minneapolis.  The  competition  was  not  without  its  scandal: 
in  February,  1929,  the  Musical  Digest  brought  out  an  article  from 
the  winning  composer's  pen  entitled  "How  I  Fooled  the  Music 
World"  in  which  he  admitted  having  plagiarized,  although  "without 
malicious  intent,"  from  various  composers  for  the  purpose  of  satiriz- 
ing the  would-be  connoisseurs  of  the  celebrant. 

HECTOR  BERLIOZ    Berlioz  had  his  greatest  run  in  the 
New  York   Symphony   Society  under  Leopold  Damrosch,   who 
joined  forces  with  his  own  Oratorio  Society  in  giving  complete  and 
repeated  performances  of  Damnation  of  Faust,  Romeo  and  Juliet, 
as  well  as  the  larger  orchestral  works,  Harold  in  Italy  and  the  Fantas- 
tic Symphony .  A  few  productions  of  such  dimensions  were  quite 
sufficient  to  inflate  the  Berlioz  contingent  to  ten  or  fifteen  per  cent 
of  the  total  offerings  in  1880,  especially  since  his  total  season  em- 
braced only  a  half-dozen  concerts.  As  choral  music  declined  in 
importance  and  new  financial  support  of  the  orchestra  made  in- 
evitable an  expansion  of  the  series  and  consequently  the  repertoire, 
this  arch-romanticist  was  reduced  to  the  more  conservative  propor- 
tions of  about  two  per  cent.  Although  some  of  his  once  famous 
works  are  practically  never  played  today,  others  have  survived  to 
retain  their  places  in  the  approved  library:  Fantastic  Symphony,  the 
popular  Roman  Carnival  Overture,  Harold  in  Italy,  for  viola  and 
orchestra,  excerpts  from  the  Damnation  of  Faust  and  from  Romeo 
and  Juliet.  Historically  he  will  be  remembered  as  the  founder  of  the 
virtuoso  orchestra,  insofar  as  such  pat  cliches  are  permitted,  paving 
the  way  for  Liszt,  Wagner,  and  Strauss.  When  listening  to  the 
Fantastic  Symphony ,  one  would  hardly  suspect  that  it  is  separated 
from  the  Beethoven  Ninth  (1824)  and  the  Schubert  C  Major  (1828) 
by  only  a  few  years  (1830).  Although  the  continuity  in  musical 
heritage  from  Gluck  and  Beethoven  has  been  reverently  acknowl- 
edged by  this  composer,  nevertheless  his  new  twist  in  the  permuta- 
tions of  melodic  bits,  the  organic  structure,  the  dramatic  drive  and 
the  idiomatic  exploitation  of  instruments  and  their  juxtapositions, 
constitute  a  striking  fulfilment  of  the  past  and  a  harbinger  of  the 
future. 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  239 

FRANZ  LISZT  Liszt  can  at  times  be  passionately  melodi- 
ous or  furiously  bombastic.  Both  qualities  will  almost  guarantee  in- 
stant appreciation  and  a  relatively  early  oblivion.  In  the  1860's  Liszt 
was  a  "cause"  to  be  espoused  by  pioneers  such  as  Bergmann  and 
Thomas.  At  the  turn  of  the  century,  when  ears  had  been  attuned  to 
more  garish  instrumentation,  Liszt  was  an  assured  delight  to  any 
audience.  He  was  therefore  much  played  by  Stransky,  and  any  other 
conductor  who  was  committed  to  enjoyable  rather  than  to  challeng- 
ing programs.  Today  the  record  of  all  orchestras  testifies  to  an 
ebbing  interest.  From  five  and  six  per  cent  in  1875,  he  has  subsided  to 
an  average  of  one-half  of  one  per  cent  of  the  1950  repertoire.  A  few 
decades  ago  several  of  his  Hungarian  Rhapsodies  were  frequently 
played,  but  such  transcriptions  are  now  almost  in  ill  repute.  Ten  or  a 
dozen  Symphonic  Poems  and  the  Faust  Symphony  had  repeated 
performances  in  New  York  and  Boston  between  i860  and  1925;  to- 
day only  Les  Preludes  remains,  with  apologetic,  infrequent  rendi- 
tions. The  two  Piano  Concertos,  especially  the  first  in  E-flat,  will 
apparently  guarantee  for  some  time  a  mathematically  discernible 
spot  for  the  arch-virtuoso.  Nevertheless,  historically  his  place  in 
orchestral  composition  is  of  especial  significance;  for,  in  the  evolu- 
tion of  the  Tone  Poem,  he  stands  between  Berlioz  and  Richard 
Strauss,  anticipated  by  the  first,  and  rendered  fairly  obsolete  by  the 
second.  He  has  provoked  the  observation  from  the  ubiquitous  wag, 
who  is  always  ready  to  pounce  with  brilliant  hindsight  on  a  poor 
creature  about  whom  society  has  changed  its  mind,  that  "Liszt's  best 
work  has  been  done  by  Wagner  and  Strauss." 

FELIX  MENDELSSOHN  When  the  orchestral  scene 
opened  in  America,  Mendelssohn  was  at  the  zenith  of  his  career. 
He  had  initiated  the  Bach  revival,  was  a  brilliant  virtuoso  on  piano 
and  organ,  a  favorite  conductor  and  composer  in  London,  and  had 
been  conductor  of  the  Leipzig  Gewandhaus  orchestra  since  1835. 
He  possessed  all  the  qualifications,  both  primary  and  supplementary, 
for  getting  his  things  played:  his  inventions  were  melodious,  he  was 
a  competent  conductor  and  an  educated  and  affable  salon  figure. 

In  the  early  years  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  the  Mendels- 
sohn repertoire  was  sufficiently  extensive  (about  fifteen  per  cent  at 


24O  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

mid-century)  to  provide  at  least  one  title  in  practically  every  season, 
even  in  the  short  series  of  three  or  four  concerts.  The  Third  (Scotch) 
and  Fourth  (Italian)  symphonies,  several  concert  overtures,  the 
two  piano  concertos,  the  violin  concerto  and  the  Midsummer  Night's 
Dream  music  were  all  in  very  active  performance  in  1850.  By  1900 
many  of  these  numbers  had  become  "popular"  and  lost  their  hold 
in  the  subscription  concerts.  In  this  manner,  the  piano  concertos 
were  lost  and  the  overtures  were  sharply  reduced  in  frequency. 
Until  1900  the  now  virtually  extinct  overture,  The  Lovely  Melusine, 
rivaled  the  still  pleasurable  music  of  Midsummer  Night's  Dream  in 
frequency  of  performance  in  New  York,  Chicago,  and  Boston.  Only 
the  Violin  Concerto  has  successfully  resisted  the  normal  aesthetic 
erosion  and  is  still  today  one  of  the  bulwarks  of  the  violinist's 
repertoire.  It  is  not  only  one  of  the  three  or  four  "old  reliables,"  but 
it  is  also  perhaps  the  oldest  of  the  "reliables"  in  point  of  service 
actually  on  the  boards.  Composed  in  1844,  it  was  given  its  first 
American  hearing  in  the  programs  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic, 
November  24,  1849,  while  the  older  Beethoven  concerto  was  of- 
fered for  the  first  time  complete  in  that  series  on  December  21, 
1 86 1,  by  the  recently  arrived  Eduard  Mollenhauer.  Although  in 
chronology  it  is  antedated,  of  course,  by  those  of  Mozart  and  Bee- 
thoven, it  was  actually  launched  in  the  public  domain  about  the  same 
time  as  the  Beethoven  work.  The  latter  had  had  few  significant  per- 
formances in  Europe  until  Joachim  and  Vieuxtemps,  about  the  mid- 
dle of  the  century,  gave  it  its  currency. 

During  the  last  half-century,  the  Mendelssohn  repertoire  has 
been  undergoing  a  general,  and  inevitable  shrinkage.  In  1900  his 
average  stood  between  two  and  three  per  cent,  but  in  the  last  few 
decades  it  has  shriveled  to  half  that  size.  Occasionally  Mendelssohn, 
like  any  other  composer,  enjoys  a  brief  spurt  of  popularity,  perhaps 
only  to  give  way  to  another  composer  for  a  similarly  fleeting  popu- 
lar moment. 

ANTON  RUBINSTEIN  Rubinstein's  pathetic  ambition  to 
become  a  great  composer  extended  even  to  the  neglect  of  his  piano 
technique.  Cheerfully  would  he  have  sacrificed  the  ephemeral  fame 
of  the  concert  artist  for  the  more  enduring  role  of  a  creator.  In  his 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  241 

own  time  he  did  enjoy  the  satisfaction  of  a  certain  prominence  when, 
between  1880  and  1890,  he  occupied  four  per  cent  of  the  repertoire, 
a  rank  equal  to  that  of  Mozart,  Mendelssohn,  and  Schubert.  But 
his  mimicry  of  German  romanticism  was  not  sufficiently  sturdy  to 
endure;  and  his  Ocean  Symphony,  by  far  the  most  popular  of  all 
his  orchestral  works  in  its  day,  critics,  resorting  to  an  easy  pun, 
thought  too  "watery"  and  unsubstantial  for  sustained  musical  fare. 
Conductors  often  took  the  liberty  of  fragmenting  the  hour-long 
work;  but  Paur  played  all  seven  movements  in  Boston,  in  December 
1894,  in  memory  of  the  composer  whose  death  had  just  been 
announced.  The  Piano  Concerto  No.  4,  played  frequently  and,  dur- 
ing the  last  decades,  almost  exclusively  by  his  pupil  Josef  Hofmann, 
is  now  much  more  likely  to  be  performed  by  the  conservatory  gradu- 
ate than  by  the  concert  artist.  There  is,  of  course,  no  guarantee  that 
some  capricious  circumstance  will  not  place  his  name  on  the  pro- 
gram again  for  a  very  occasional  performance,  such  as  the  golden 
anniversary  of  Hofmann's  career,  on  which  occasion  the  Third  Con- 
certo was  sentimentally  exhumed.  But  for  all  practical  purposes  this 
fertile  creator  has  faded  from  view. 

Composers  with  Full  Life  Cycles 

Perhaps  it  requires  a  certain  degree  of  audacity  to  forecast  the  com- 
pletion of  the  life  cycle  of  a  composer,  when  ordinary  experience 
testifies  to  the  resiliency  with  which  suspended  animation  may  spring 
back  into  life.  However,  a  large  group  of  composers  display  that 
characteristic  curve  with  a  center  peak,  trailed  by  a  slope  that  may 
not  necessarily  presage  imminent  oblivion,  but  does  indicate  that 
their  appearances  are  thinning  out. 

There  are  many  factors  which  enter  into  the  determination  of 
the  "completion"  of  the  life  cycle.  In  some  instances,  the  declining 
slope  represents  public  satiety  with  a  once  accepted  master.  But  often 
the  decline  simply  runs  concurrently  with  the  composer's  active, 
professional  life.  His  prominence  may  be  the  result  of  a  genial 
tendency  to  perform  his  compositions  as  they  become  available,  with 
a  certain  experimental  prodigality.  In  the  course  of  time,  the  com- 
poser dies,  this  personal  favoritism  gives  way  to  a  sense  of  critical 


242  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

discrimination,  relatively  few  compositions  survive,  and  the  trend  is 
stabilized  at  a  low  frequency.  Or  his  reputation  may  be  a  derivative 
one,  stemming  primarily  from  his  eminence  as  performer,  conductor, 
teacher,  and  pedagogue,  or  personal  association  with  conductors  who 
are  in  a  strategic  position  to  incorporate  their  interests  in  the  going 
repertoire.  With  the  termination  of  this  preferential  relation,  or 
with  the  death  of  the  composer  or  conductor,  his  compositions  find 
themselves  in  the  open  market  where  they  must  compete  on  their 
supposed  merits  while  the  new  generation  of  composers  presses  for 
recognition. 

ANTONIN  DVORAK  The  trend  line  of  Dvorak  shows 
to  an  uncommon  degree  the  influence  of  personal  factors.  Although 
the  maiden  appearance  of  his  music  in  these  orchestras  occurred  in 
1879-80  when  the  New  York  Symphony  Society  under  the  elder 
Damrosch  played  the  Slavonic  Rhapsody,  No.  2,  it  was  not  until  the 
early  nineties,  after  Dvorak  had  established  himself  in  New  York  as 
Director  of  the  American  Conservatory,  that  his  popularity  rose 
precipitously  to  ten  per  cent  in  the  New  York  Philharmonic— a 
proportion  commonly  reserved  for  the  masters.  That  was  the  decade 
of  the  world  premiere  of  the  New  World  Symphony,  performed 
by  Seidl  with  the  composer  himself  in  attendance  (1893).  It  was 
the  famous  occasion  on  which  the  conductor  revised  the  tempo  of 
the  slow  movement,  substituting  with  the  composer's  approval  a 
slower  tempo,  which  has  since  become  the  well  known  Largo. 

Dvorak's  prestige  diminished  somewhat  after  his  return  to  Europe 
and  his  proportion  of  the  repertoire  took  a  sharp  compensatory  dip 
to  two  per  cent.  After  191 1,  however,  his  compatriot  and  pupil, 
Josef  Stransky  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  renewed  the  public's 
enthusiasm  for  the  piquant  rhythms  and  colorful  instrumental 
palette.  The  other  orchestras,  under  more  remote  control,  rendered 
Dvorak  only  "normal"  acclaim.  There  followed  a  general  and 
parallel  decline  in  all  the  orchestras  until  the  year  1941,  when  the 
centenary  of  his  birth  revived  an  interest  in  him.  Chicago  and  Cleve- 
land, the  largest  Czech  communities  outside  of  Prague,  paced  this 
trend;  Cleveland  and  Cincinnati  are  the  present  leaders. 

The  New  World  Symphony  is,  of  course,  one  of  the  standard 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  243 

symphonies.  In  addition  to  it,  the  Carnival  Overture,  the  Scherzo 
Capriccioso  and  the  Cello  Concerto  comprise  the  core  of  the  cur- 
rent Dvorak  repertoire. 

CAMILLE  SAINT-SAENS  Saint-Saens  seemed  determined 
to  create  a  masterpiece  in  almost  every  conceivable  standard  cate- 
gory of  vocal  and  instrumental  music,  excepting  the  string  quartet. 
He  possessed  a  fantastic  fluency  in  all  idioms.  He  was  a  stylistic 
vagabond  who  roamed  freely  and  without  discomfiture  in  all  musi- 
cal realms.  His  music  is  impeccable  in  technique,  idiomatic  in  ex- 
pression, and  utterly  delightful.  He  wielded  a  "happy"  pen.  Such 
affable  music  has  a  certain  stable  following— it  is  still  periodically 
performed— perhaps  because  no  audience  can  too  long  endure  the 
psychological  strain  of  continuous  cerebral  challenge;  everywhere 
there  are  listeners  who  hope  to  relax  occasionally  in  a  mildly  emo- 
tional jag.  Therein  lies  the  indispensable  programmatic  function  of 
Mendelssohn,  Rimsky-KorsakofT,  and  Saint-Saens. 

Beginning,  of  course,  with  relatively  nothing  in  1875,  Saint-Saens 
climbed  to  a  high  point  of  over  four  per  cent  of  the  repertoire  in 
1900,  lingered  a  few  decades  at  that  respectable  height,  and  then 
descended  simultaneously  in  all  orchestras  again  to  the  vanishing 
point.  He  enjoyed  a  brief  respite  during  World  War  I.  If  Allied 
music  must  be  played,  Saint-Saens  was  perfectly  safe  and  appro- 
priate: a  great  patriot  whose  music  was  delectable  to  many  who  in 
those  times  might  not  easily  absorb  Debussy  and  Ravel.  His  patriotism 
often  led  to  literary  excesses,  as  in  his  call  to  banish  all  German 
music,  not  excepting  Wagner  and  Beethoven.  But  he  was  more  con- 
servative than  patriotic,  for  he  was  unfriendly  even  to  the  liberal 
wing  of  his  own  native  music.  Perhaps  this  octogenarian  was 
under  the  strain  of  political  pressure  when  he  thus  exposed  himself 
as  a  hopeless  reactionary  who  had  outlived  his  time,  and  who  was 
naively  contriving  to  obstruct  the  inevitable. 

He  traveled  widely  in  his  heyday  and  was  equally  scintillating 
as  piano  and  organ  soloist,  as  conductor,  composer,  pamphleteer, 
and  salon  habitue.  In  October,  1906,  he  arrived  in  the  United  States, 
managed  by  the  Knabe  Piano  Company,  and  appeared  as  pianist 


»44  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 


FULL  LIFE  CYCLES 
1875-1950 

ELEVEN    ORCHESTRAS 


DVORAK 


SAINT-SAENS 
,    ..SMETANA 
•4<3RIEG 

GOLDMARK 
MACOOWELL 


1875  80    85    90    95  1900  05    10     15    20    25    30    35    40  45    50 


A  number  of  important  composers  have  "come  and  gone"  during  the 
last  seventy-five  years.  The  approximately  complete  life  cycles  of  sev- 
eral of  these,  indicate  their  disappearance.  Dvorak,  however,  is  still 
quite  active  in  the  repertoire. 

with  the  New  York  Symphony  and  other  orchestras.  In  19 15,  as  a 
goodwill  delegate  from  belligerent  France,  he  visited  the  Panama- 
Pacific  Exposition  in  San  Francisco  to  which  he  had  dedicated  the 
Hymn  to  California,  a  gesture  more  appreciated  for  its  sentiment 
than  for  its  aesthetic  excellence. 

It  is  popular  among  many  aesthetes  of  today  to  speak  contemp- 
tuously of  Saint-Saens.  If  he  epitomized  a  kind  of  musical  mid- 
Victorianism  with  manners  that  were  immaculately  correct  and 
highly  stylized,  this  type  of  musical  experience  is  held  in  great  value 
by  many.  His  Symphony  No.  3,  with  organ,  is  still  played,  as  are 
also  the  Piano  Concertos  No.  2  and  No.  4  and  the  Violin  Concerto 
No.  3.  His  Cello  Concerto  will  probably  never  be  permanently 
abandoned.  His  symphonic  poems,  including  the  Danse  Macabre, 
have  completed  their  popular  run  and  are  resurrected  only  infre- 
quently, like  the  ghost  in  that  eerie  dance,  only  to  fade  away,  at  the 
light  of  a  more  modern  day,  into  the  oblivion  from  which  they 
have  temporarily  emerged. 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  245 

EDVARD  GRIEG  Grieg  has  been  kept  barely  alive  on  the 
subscription  programs  by  his  Piano  Concerto.  Originally  in  the 
standard  repertoire  of  all  pianists,  it  has  been  linked  since  191 5  with 
Percy  Grainger,  who  made  his  American  debut  at  that  time,  and 
who  had  spent  the  summer  of  1907  under  the  composer's  tutelage. 
This  once  popular  work  has  been  appearing  with  diminishing  fre- 
quency on  regular  programs,  and  has  now  joined  the  concertos 
of  Rubinstein  and  Saint-Saens  as  the  warhorses  of  student  recitals. 
A  brief  revival  was  occasioned  by  the  centennial  of  the  composer's 
birth  (1943)  when  several  orchestras  featured  the  number.  His 
suites,  symphonic  dances,  and  other  miniatures,  which  were  pleasant 
enough  in  their  day,  now  appear  in  only  infinitesimal  proportions. 
They  have  always  been,  and  still  are,  standard  items  on  lighter 
programs. 

BEDRICH  SMETANA  Smetana,  the  first  nationalist  Czech 
composer,  is  known  in  this  country  today  primarily  by  the  Overture 
to  The  Bartered  Bride  and  the  Symphonic  Poem,  The  Moldau,  two 
numbers  of  overture  length  which  do  not  accumulate  an  impressive 
volume.  There  is  no  symptom  of  their  disappearance,  and  they  will 
probably  have  periodic  performances  for  some  time.  Stransky 
favored  his  fellow  Czech  with  more  than  one  per  cent  of  his  reper- 
toire, but  today  the  general  average  is  considerably  less  than  half 
that  proportion.  Recently  George  Szell,  who  had  functioned  for 
some  years  in  Prague,  introduced  his  American  audiences  to  a  re- 
vival of  lesser-known  works,  including  his  own  adaptation  of  Smet- 
ana's  first  String  Quartet  for  modern  orchestra. 

EDWARD  ALEXANDER  MACDOWELL  For  half  a 
century  it  has  been  conventional  to  regard  MacDowell  as  the  most 
illustrious  American  composer.  Traditional  judgments  change  with 
reluctance,  especially  since  the  criteria  of  greatness  are  often  nebu- 
lous and  subjective.  If  reasonably  objective  criteria  are  desired,  the 
volume  of  performance  should  partially  serve  that  purpose.  During 
the  decennial  period,  1940-50,  only  two  offerings  of  MacDowell's 
music— in  each  case  the  Piano  Concerto  No.  2— have  appeared  in  the 


246  THE    AMERICAN    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

regular  paired  series  of  the  ten  major  orchestras  under  observation. 
In  Boston,  which  was  more  friendly  to  American  composers 
than  any  other  city,  he  made  his  first  tentative  beginnings  in  1889 
when  the  same  concerto  was  played.  At  the  time  of  his  death,  in 
1904,  he  had  reached  two  per  cent  of  the  repertoire.  Of  all  Mac- 
Dowell's  compositions,  the  Indian  Suite,  the  Suite  in  A  Minor,  and 
especially  the  Second  Concerto  may  be  said  to  have  enjoyed  a  public 
existence  as  measured  by  repeated  performances.  Single  appearances 
have  characterized  a  small  number  of  others.  However,  among  those 
orchestras  which  offer  popular  programs,  the  three  named  above,  as 
well  as  transcriptions  of  several  piano  compositions,  have  had  a 
fair  following. 

NICOLAS  RIMSKY-KORSAKOFF  Rimsky-Korsakoff ,  that 
master  of  kaleidoscopic  instrumental  coloration,  may  now  be  said 
almost  to  have  "descended"  to  the  popular  level.  His  strident  and  viv- 
idly exuberant  style  of  orchestration  has  never  been  either  puzzling  or 
offensive.  Beginning  with  about  one  per  cent  in  1900,  he  is  again 
resting  at  the  same  mathematical  spot  after  fifty  years  of  satisfying 
exhilaration  for  musical  patrons.  He  reached  his  pinnacle  in  the 
early  twenties  with  about  four  per  cent  in  the  Philadelphia  Orches- 
tra under  Stokowski,  but  never  exceeded  a  national  average  of  about 
two  per  cent.  The  insatiable  Stokowski  endeavored  to  enhance  the 
exotic  twang  of  the  Scheherazade  by  means  of  an  experiment  in 
synesthesia.  In  January,  1926,  he  performed  this  oriental  work  with 
Wilfred's  Clavilux,  a  "color  organ"  which  projects  its  technicolor 
of  abstract  forms  on  a  screen  as  "visual  music."  At  least  one  critic 
thought  that  the  music  was  sufficient  unto  itself. 

In  addition  to  that  brilliant  1001  Nights,  the  Spanish  Caprice 
and  the  Russian  Easter  complete  the  standard  repertoire  of  this  most 
competent  and  disciplined,  although  not  most  original,  member  of 
the  Russian  nationalist  "Five."  The  Russian  Easter  has  become  a 
"seasonal"  piece  annually  played  in  this  country  with  naive  dis- 
regard of  the  discrepancy  between  the  Western  and  the  Eastern 
calendars  and  the  differences  in  tonal  modalities  in  the  divergent 
religions. 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  247 

EDWARD  ELGAR  Elgar  signalized  the  advent  of  Eng- 
land, "the  land  without  music,"  into  the  circle  of  creative  countries. 
He  was  the  first  of  a  line  of  modern  British  composers  (Delius, 
Vaughan  Williams,  Walton,  Britten,  and  others)  to  gain  serious 
attention  and  even  prominence  in  foreign  countries,  including  Ger- 
many. This  international  acclaim  was  first  earned  in  1889  by  his 
oratorio,  the  Dream  of  Gero?itius,  and  the  following  year  by  the 
still  highly  esteemed  Enigma  Variations.  His  success  was  soon  re- 
flected in  American  repertoires.  In  1907  he  served  the  New  York 
Symphony  Society  as  guest  conductor  in  a  joint  concert  with  the 
Oratorio  Society.  On  the  occasion  of  this  visit,  Yale  University  con- 
ferred on  him  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Music.  Damrosch  played  a 
dozen  of  his  compositions  during  and  following  World  War  I. 
Stock,  with  the  Chicago  Orchestra,  followed  the  pattern  of  his 
predecessor,  Thomas,  who  had  given  Elgar  several  "first  times"  in 
America,  and  gave  him  two  and  a  half  per  cent  of  the  repertoire. 
The  Minneapolis  Orchestra,  in  1905  and  1906,  presented  the  Dream 
of  Gerontius. 

After  several  decades  of  neglect,  Elgar  recovered  some  lost 
ground  in  the  early  thirties  with  the  appearance  of  British  conduc- 
tors Barbirolli  and  Goossens.  His  death  in  1934  also  added  some 
small  stimulation  to  the  public  consciousness.  His  Introduction  and 
Allegro  for  Strings  and  the  Cockaigne  Overture  have  been  repeat- 
edly performed;  Menuhin  played  his  Violin  Concerto  in  the  late 
forties.  But  were  it  not  for  his  Enigma  Variations,  the  late  musician 
laureate  of  England  would  now  have  vanished  from  the  American 
scene.  In  the  popular  mind  he  will  live  for  some  time  in  the  stately 
march  theme  of  Pomp  and  Circumstance  No.  1 ,  to  which  lyrics 
have  been  added  ("Land  of  Hope  and  Glory"),  thus  making  it 
both  accessible  and  memorable  to  the  masses  and  thereby  insuring 
a  destiny  similar  to  that  of  Sibelius'  majestic  Finlandia. 

VINCENT  D'INDY  As  founder  of  the  Schola  Cantorum 
in  Paris,  d'Indy  wielded  a  great  influence  in  the  more  conservative 
wing  of  French  musical  society.  Already  famous  in  France,  he  en- 
tered the  American  repertoire  in  1899  with  the  still  famous  lstar 
Variations  and  the  Medea  Suite,  played  by  Thomas  and  Gericke. 


248  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

His  music  did  not  flourish,  however,  until  his  visit  to  Boston  and 
New  York  in  the  season,  1905-06.  His  next  rise  occurred  during 
World  War  I  when  French  composers  became  the  beneficiaries  of 
current  patriotic  sentiment.  Although  he  had  been  dropped  in  Boston 
by  Karl  Muck  for  his  cutting  insinuations  on  the  "Germanization 
of  American  music,"  he  was,  of  course,  quickly  restored  by  the 
French  successors  to  the  luckless  German  conductor.  Interest  in  the 
famous  pedagogue  and  composer  mounted  during  his  second  visit, 
1921-22,  when  he  conducted  his  works  in  several  cities.  Although 
his  tour  was  judged  "successful,"  the  austerity  of  his  music  was  far 
from  arousing  the  feverish  excitement  touched  off  by  his  erstwhile 
enemy,  Richard  Strauss,  who  was  touring  the  country  during  the 
selfsame  season. 

The  compositions  which  have  endured  throughout  his  life  cycle 
are  the  lstar  Variations,  the  Symphony  on  a  French  Mountain  Air, 
Symphony  No.  2,  and,  to  lesser  degree,  Wallensteiri's  Camp.  Stock 
in  Chicago  and  the  French  conductors  in  Boston  enlarged  his  reper- 
toire by  the  inclusion  of  his  other  works,  but  none  has  gained  gen- 
eral acceptance.  At  present  his  music  has  almost  vanished  from  the 
repertoire. 

ALEXANDER  GLAZOUNOFF  Glazounoff,  sometimes 
called  the  "Russian  Mendelssohn,"  created  a  sensation  in  the  1880's. 
His  music,  influenced  by  both  the  German  and  Russian  traditions 
of  the  day,  soon  swept  him  into  international  prominence,  with  the 
inevitable  concomitants:  honorary  degrees  from  Oxford  and  Cam- 
bridge and  a  visit  to  the  United  States  (1929).  Both  Chicago  and 
Boston  were  hospitable  to  him  at  the  turn  of  the  century,  but  Stock 
especially  perpetuated  these  sentiments  during  the  next  two  decades 
by  playing  about  twenty-five  of  his  compositions.  After  a  dip  in 
his  popularity,  Albert  Coates,  born  in  Russia  of  English  parentage 
and  with  a  record  of  successful  conducting  there,  contributed  to  an 
American  revival,  especially  as  guest  conductor  of  the  New  York 
Symphony,  1920-23.  Of  his  prolific  output,  his  Violin  Concerto, 
Symphonies  No.  4,  5,  and  6,  the  Symphonic  Poem,  Stenka  Razine, 
have  had  the  most  constant  appeal  in  the  past.  Today  only  the 
Concerto  survives. 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  249 

ALEXANDER  SCRIABIN  Alexander  Scriabin  was  first 
introduced  to  an  American  audience  by  Van  der  Stucken  of  Cin- 
cinnati with  a  performance  of  the  youthful  Reverie  in  1900.  Much 
more  significant,  however,  were  the  American  premieres  by  the 
Russian  Symphony  of  New  York  of  the  First  and  Third  (Divine 
Poem)  Symphonies  in  1907,  and  of  the  Fourth  (Poem  of  Ecstasy) 
in  the  following  year.  The  Third  and  Fourth  achieved  considerable 
vogue  in  the  United  States.  His  last  and  most  pretentious  work, 
Prometheus,  a  Poem  of  Fire,  was  designed  to  effect  a  mystic  union 
of  sound  and  color  and  was  scored  for  orchestra,  chorus,  and  color 
organ.  The  Russian  Symphony  and  the  Philadelphia  Orchestra  each 
gave  it  a  complete  performance.  The  dreamy  theosophical  creations 
of  his  fellow  Russian  also  appealed  to  Koussevitzky  who  early  be- 
friended the  composer,  propagated  his  art,  and  remained  loyal  for 
some  years  after  assuming  his  Boston  post.  More  recently,  however, 
his  enthusiasm  for  Scriabin  definitely  waned,  and  he  publicly  de- 
clared himself  satiated. 

OTTORINO  RESPIGHI  The  peak  of  Respighi's  popular- 
ity coincides  with  his  visits  to  the  United  States  in  the  period 
1925-30.  Of  all  Italians,  none  has  contributed  so  much  toward  the 
advancement  of  orchestral  music  in  his  country  as  has  this  com- 
poser, who  had  succeeded  in  blending  the  classic  ideal  of  form  with 
romantic  freedom  and  colorful  orchestration.  But  the  first  excite- 
ment died  down,  and  many  of  his  dozen  or  more  compositions  were 
given  isolated  performances.  Only  the  Pines  of  Rome,  with  the 
Fountains  of  Rome  as  runner-up,  can  claim  inclusion  in  the  charmed 
circle  of  the  "standard"  repertoire. 

ERNEST  BLOCH  If  one  includes  among  the  Americans 
those  foreign-born  who  have  achieved  a  considerable  portion  of 
their  prestige  while  living  in  this  country,  then  the  Swiss-born 
Ernest  Bloch  has  been  the  most  abundantly  played  of  all  American 
composers.  A  prize-winner  since  19 19,  his  most  publicized  success 
was  the  Musical  America  award  for  his  Rhapsody,  America,  given 
its  world  premiere  by  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  December  20, 
1928,  under  Walter  Damrosch,  guest  conductor.  Although  his  resi- 


25O  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

dence  in  Cleveland  and  San  Francisco  gave  special  local  impetus 
to  performances  of  his  works,  his  compositions  have  appeared  in  all 
the  orchestras.  Among  those  programmed  most  frequently  are  the 
Concerto  Grosso,  Schelomo  (Hebrew  Rhapsody  for  Cello),  Israel 
Symphony  and  Three  Jewish  Foems.  In  1925-30  one  and  one-half 
per  cent  of  the  total  repertoire  was  devoted  to  his  music;  by  1950 
it  had  declined  to  one-third  of  one  per  cent. 

MANUEL  DE  FALLA  The  Philadelphia  and  Boston  or- 
chestras introduced  Manuel  de  Falla  to  their  audiences  during  the 
season  1921-22  in  excerpts  from  the  ballets  El  Amor  Brujo  and  The 
Three-Cornered  Hat,  respectively.  Since  then,  these  selections  have 
continued  to  constitute  the  principal  representation  of  this,  the  most 
distinguished  of  Spanish  composers.  His  other  compositions,  some- 
times found  on  programs— excerpts  from  La  Vida  Breve  and  Nights 
in  the  Gardens  of  Spain— are  hardly  sufficient  to  raise  his  present 
position  to  even  as  much  as  one  percentage  point  of  the  total  reper- 
toire. 

ROY  HARRIS  Ever  since  Koussevitzky  encouraged  him  to 
write  his  first  symphony,  Harris  has  been  productive  in  both  musical 
and  literary  fields.  Like  Aaron  Copland,  his  pupil,  he  has  energeti- 
cally advocated  the  American  cause  and  defended  the  music  pre- 
sumably written  "in  the  spirit  of  the  modern  age."  Koussevitzky 
launched  five  of  his  six  symphonies,  of  which  the  Third  has  had 
by  far  the  most  impressive  career.  In  1943,  when  the  Soviet  Union 
was  linked  with  the  United  States,  Harris  dedicated  the  Fifth  to 
that  temporary  ally;  and  at  the  latter 's  request,  it  was  short-waved 
by  the  NBC  orchestra  to  that  country.  Harris  has  been  played  by 
practically  every  major  orchestra,  but  with  the  reduction  of  the 
flow  of  new  compositions  has  come  the  inevitable  decline. 

The  Forgotten  Names 

The  judgment  of  time  has  been  harsh  on  many  once  favorite 
composers.  Formerly  widely  renowned  not  only  for  their  composi- 
tions, but  for  many  other  significant  contributions  as  educators,  per- 


Life  Spans  of  Composers  in  the  Repertoire  251 

formers  and  conductors,  they  are  now  extinct  specimens,  interesting 
chiefly  as  exemplifying  the  ruthless  processes  of  history.  Some  of 
these  were  not  mere  "morning  glories"  which  flowered  for  the 
moment,  but  had  achieved  substantial  places  in  competition  with 
the  "immortals"  themselves  before  the  ultimate  segregation  had 
begun.  However,  their  compositions  did  not  long  survive  the  days 
of  their  personal  activities;  the  author's  physical  death  was  the  usual 
signal  for  his  disappearance  from  the  repertoire. 

Of  these  buried  names,  Ludwig  Spohr  was  the  most  eminent.  He 
was  considered  the  greatest  musical  personage  of  his  time,  popular 
as  orchestral  conductor  and  violin  soloist,  as  composer  of  operas, 
concertos,  symphonies,  oratorios,  and  chamber  music,  outranking 
even  Beethoven  in  the  eyes  of  some  discerning  critics.  Students 
from  foreign  countries,  including  U.  C.  Hill,  founder  of  the  New 
York  Philharmonic,  sought  him  out  as  teacher,  and  to  every  violin 
pedagogue  he  is  still  known  today  for  his  Violins  chide.  He  enjoyed 
an  extraordinary  vogue  in  London  where,  in  1820,  he  startled  the 
members  of  the  London  Philharmonic,  who  had  invited  him  as  guest, 
with  the  innovation  of  the  baton,  a  conductor's  device  which  had 
been  known  on  the  continent  for  some  time.  With  the  Symphony 
No.  4,  the  Overture  to  Jessonda,  and  the  Violin  Concerto  No.  8, 
together  with  less  popular  works,  he  was  liberally  represented  on 
the  programs  of  the  New  York,  Boston,  and  Chicago  orchestras 
until  the  close  of  the  century.  The  New  York  Philharmonic  Society, 
which  played  him  to  the  extent  of  ten  per  cent,  1850-55,  now  has  a 
collection  of  Spohr  scores,  acquired  a  century  ago,  which  consti- 
tute a  mute  monument  to  his  vanished  fame. 

Joachim  Raff,  the  teacher  of  MacDowell,  was  another  composer 
whose  efforts  met  with  immediate  success.  Of  his  eleven  symphonies, 
No.  3,  Im  Walde,  was  considered  his  most  gratifying  work.  In  1896 
Philip  Hale  still  maintained  that  Raff  was  the  composer  of  one  beau- 
tiful symphony,  Im  Walde  and  in  the  eighties  and  nineties  it  enjoyed 
numerous  performances.  Today  the  Wagnerian  second  movement 
and  its  Mendelssohnian  Scherzo  sound  shallow  and  derivative.  Dur- 
ing the  season  1930-31  it  was  resurrected  by  Toscanini  and  more 
recently  by  the  CBS  orchestra,  but  has  had  no  performances  since. 
The  programmatic  Symphony  No.  5,  Lenore,  was  only  less  fre- 


252  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

quently  presented,  and  its  March  movement  never  failed  to  arouse 
a  popular  audience.  However,  the  appetite  for  melodious  romanti- 
cism, with  unsubtle  programmatic  coloring,  seems  to  have  been 
satiated,  and  Raff  went  out  of  the  repertoire  with  the  passing  of 
that  taste. 

Peter  Lindpaintner  and  Johann  Kalliwoda  are  total  strangers 
today  to  any  but  the  musical  archeologists.  Lindpaintner  was  an 
excellent  conductor,  held  in  highest  esteem  both  in  England  and 
Germany,  and  was  considered  for  the  post  of  the  London  Philhar- 
monic in  1855  when  Wagner  was  invited.  The  overtures  to  some 
of  his  operas  were  recognized  as  those  of  a  disciplined  musician. 
Kalliwoda,  whose  Fifth  Symphony  was  praised  by  Schumann,  who 
further  showed  his  regard  for  Kalliwoda  by  dedicating  to  him  his 
Opus  4,  was  in  Germany  a  somewhat  less  popular  composer,  but 
still  influential  and  respected.  The  first  decade  of  the  New  York 
Philharmonic  coincided  with  the  waning  careers  of  these  two  men, 
and  they  soon  quietly  passed  into  history. 

Because  of  the  scintillating  brilliance  of  the  passage  work  in  his 
piano  concertos,  Septet  and  other  ensembles,  which  were  well 
adapted  to  the  light  action  and  hard  tone  of  the  Viennese  piano,  the 
music  of  J.  Nepomuk  Hummel  was  still  enjoyed  for  many  years 
after  the  piano  construction  had  been  reformed.  During  its  early 
years,  the  New  York  Philharmonic  played  his  music  frequently,  and 
as  late  as  1893  de  Pachmann  performed  the  B  Minor  Concerto  with 
the  New  York  Symphony  Society. 

Never  among  the  leaders,  the  Mendelssohnian  Niels  Gade  still 
had  a  substantial  number  of  performances  during  the  first  thirty 
seasons  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic  and  during  the  first  decade 
of  the  Boston  orchestra.  His  First  and  Fourth  symphonies  and  sev- 
eral of  his  overtures  were  repeatedly  performed. 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral 
Repertoire 


The  aphorism  that  "music  is  a  universal  language"  which  knows  no 
national  boundaries  is  countered  by  the  obvious  fact  that  music 
history  is  peppered  with  references  to  the  "national  idioms"  of 
Spain,  Hungary,  Bohemia,  Norway,  Russia,  and  nearly  every  other 
country  that  has  ever  made  any  contribution  to  that  noble  art. 
There  is  no  question  that  musicians  and  composers,  like  businessmen, 
tourists  or  just  plain  citizens,  often  think  nationally,  cultivate  biases 
in  favor  of  their  own  regions,  and  utilize  the  resources  of  their  own 
land  and  culture  in  their  compositions,  which  then  become  objects 
of  sentiment  not  shared  by  members  of  alien  faiths. 

This  sense  of  nationalism  is  conventionally  thought  to  have 
germinated  during  the  nineteenth  century,  and  in  the  field  of  music 
is  usually  associated  with  the  Romantic  movement.  Like  all  pat 
generalizations,  this  one  can  be  accepted  only  with  reservations. 
However,  especially  on  the  continent,  music  has  tended  to  attach 
itself  to  political  and  literary  ideologies,  and  to  rally  around  the 
center  of  dominance  of  the  national  culture.  This  is  a  kind  of  mild 
totalitarianism  which  a  motley  population  in  a  relatively  traditionless 
country  such  as  the  United  States  may  find  difficult  to  understand 
or  appreciate. 

There  are  many  ways  in  which  these  emerging  national  senti- 
ments are  awakened  and  manifested.  Possibly  the  most  important 
is  the  creation  of  a  Wetlanschauung,  which  is  designed  to  confer 
upon  the  national  group  the  sanction  for  its  separate  existence.  In- 
tellectual and  political  leaders  of  European  peoples  have  mobilized 
regional  legends,  exalted  local  geography  and  language,  and  glorified 
the  heroes  of  war,  history,  and  the  arts.  All  these  ingredients  are 
nebulously  but  inspiringly  amalgamated  into  the  f  olksoul,  or  national 
spirit,  which  endows  national  life  and  all  its  products,  including  the 

253 


254  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

arts,  with  their  native  characteristics,  and  constitutes  a  sharp  focus 
of  national  pride.  Such  concepts  give  the  incipient  nation  a  past 
history,  a  present  status,  and  a  future  destiny,  as  well  as  a  geograph- 
ical and  cultural  boundary  line  which  separates  it  from  neighboring 
groups,  who  are  either  inferior  and  to  be  despised,  hostile  and  to  be 
feared,  or  at  least  different,  from  whom  they  are  to  be  distinguished. 

But  an  abstract  ideology,  powerful  as  it  may  be,  is  not  always  a 
potent  tool  to  gratify  the  national  pride  of  ordinary  people.  Something 
more  tangible  and  easily  grasped  is  required  for  the  bulk  of  the  popu- 
lation. Accordingly,  after  the  old  feudal  aristocracy  had  been  de- 
stroyed, most  European  nations,  large  and  small,  turned  to  the  musical 
forms  of  the  simple  folk,  their  songs  and  dances,  as  well  as  their 
myths  and  legends,  which  were  viewed  as  grass-root  emanations  of 
their  national  spirit.  These  were  then  appropriated  as  the  basic  ele- 
ments of  their  new  art  forms.  Musical  "entomologists"  from  Glinka 
to  Bela  Bartok  beat  the  bushes  of  the  backwoods  for  rare  specimens 
of  peasant  songs,  dissected  them  for  structure,  and  mounted  them 
in  imposing  collections.  These  were  either  presented  "straight"  or 
more  commonly  incorporated  and  absorbed  into  standard  forms  of 
song,  symphony,  and  opera,  on  which  they  bestowed  a  national 
flavor.  Weber's  Der  Freischiitz  was  an  early  product  of  this  move- 
ment. When  Dvorak  came  to  the  United  States  ( 1891 )  to  preside 
for  a  few  years  over  the  American  Conservatory,  he  had  already 
been  so  completely  indoctrinated  in  that  school  of  thought  that  he 
was  ready  to  apply  it  to  polyglot  America.  To  the  great  consterna- 
tion of  certain  American  critics,  he  asserted  that  America,  too,  could 
turn  to  its  "primitive"  peoples— the  Negro— for  its  national  music. 
To  illustrate  the  procedure,  he  composed  a  string  quartet  and  a 
symphony  "in  the  spirit"  of  the  Negro  folktunes  which,  however, 
Americans  have  innocently  enjoyed  ever  since  without  any  refer- 
ence to  their  supposed  derivation. 

Such  musical  ethnology  naturally  turned  up  a  great  repertoire 
of  tunes,  rhythms,  dances,  and  folktales  that,  in  the  minds  of  their 
enthusiastic  devotees,  were  the  incarnation  of  the  folksoul,  which 
constituted  the  presumable  source  from  which  they  originally  de- 
rived. Folksong  is  alleged  to  be  more  spontaneous,  fundamental, 
and  therefore  a  more  valid  and  genuine  expression  of  national  char- 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  255 

acter  than  the  artificial  and  adulterated  high  art  forms  of  civilized 
music. 

Ethnologists  well  know  that  these  national  forms,  although  often 
the  objects  of  intense  loyalty,  differ  from  one  another  not  because 
of  any  inherent  racial  predisposition,  but  because  they  developed 
in  cultural  isolation  in  response  to  innumerable  local  conditions  and 
circumstances.  Because  in  some  instances  their  local  origin  was  more 
apparent  than  real,  they  sometimes  became  the  mistaken  subject  of 
patriotic  fervor— as  in  the  case  of  the  gypsy  tunes  that  Liszt  and 
Brahms  passed  on  in  their  "Hungarian"  rhapsodies  and  dances.  Oc- 
casionally these  aboriginal  motifs  have  had  an  appeal  even  to  other 
nations  as  quaint  and  exotic  themes.  Indeed,  it  has  been  said  that  the 
best  "Spanish"  music  has  been  written  by  Frenchmen:  Debussy, 
Ravel,  Lalo,  Bizet,  Chabrier,  who  did  much  to  popularize  the  Span- 
ish idiom.  Spain  furnished  the  rhythms,  France  the  technical  and 
professional  equipment  to  incorporate  them  into  more  pretentious 
forms. 

In  addition  to  this  primitive  material,  nations  have  also  turned 
to  their  less  remote  literary  and  musical  histories  for  inspiration. 
There  are  numerous  occasions  of  such  reinforcement  of  group  ego. 
Military  defeat  and  oppression,  which  ordinarily  is  productive  of 
deeply  wounded  pride,  commonly  seeks  compensation  in  its  own 
national  traditions.  German  nationalism,  stung  by  the  Napoleonic 
defeats,  contributed  its  bit  to  the  revival  of  Bach;  and  France,  after 
her  defeat  of  1871,  unwrapped  many  of  her  musical  heirlooms 
(Rameau  and  Couperin)  to  reshape  significantly  her  subsequent 
musical  tastes.  Hungary,  Poland,  Bohemia,  and  the  smaller  Euro- 
pean nations  evinced  the  same  preoccupation  with  their  glorious 
past  to  console  them  for  the  inglorious  present. 

A  third  manifestation  of  nationalistic  feeling,  which  influences 
the  repertoire  of  a  nation,  is  the  disposition  toward  loyal  preferen- 
tial cultivation  of  its  own  music,  whatever  its  forms,  to  the  relative 
exclusion  of  foreign  art.  This  type  of  "protective  tariff"  has  been 
practiced  by  all  countries,  including  the  United  States.  The  Russian 
Music  Society,  founded  in  1859  by  Anton  Rubinstein,  the  London 
Philharmonic  Society,  the  French  Societe— all  had  written  commit- 
ments favoring  the  cultivation  of  native  works  and  binding  them  to 


256  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

a  certain  quota  of  performance,  while  conductors  like  Koussevitzky 
have  voluntarily  given  generous  opportunities  to  native  American 
composers  who  would  most  certainly  have  been  ignored  had  they 
carried  foreign  labels.  In  times  of  national  crises  such  sentiments 
are,  of  course,  intensified,  when  "Buy  British,"  and  "Buy  American" 
become  patriotic  slogans  which  apply  to  art  and  ideas,  no  less  than 
to  material  goods. 

This  unfolding  of  the  national  spirit  is  not  to  be  construed  as  a 
succession  of  rational  or  chronological  steps.  Although  a  people  may 
be  maneuvered  into  a  nationalistic  frenzy  by  Hitlerian  calculation, 
more  usually  there  is  a  sincere,  spontaneous,  slowly  ripening  group 
consciousness  of  which  the  aforementioned  elements  are  important 
components. 

Although  there  is  an  abundant  literature  on  the  general  subject 
of  "national"  music,  there  is  certainly  no  clear  consensus  on  how 
the  term  can  be  defined;  for  the  varieties  of  music  produced  within 
the  boundaries  of  a  nation  are  numerous,  to  say  nothing  of  the  diffi- 
culty of  identifying  the  "nation"  itself.  Those  who  view  the  na- 
tional boundaries  as  temporary  historical  solutions  of  physical  strug- 
gles between  peoples  are  more  likely  to  abandon  the  mystical  notion 
of  the  Volksgeist  and  its  musical  emanations,  and  to  turn  in  the 
direction  of  the  simple  and  forthright  declaration  that  French 
music,  for  example,  is  simply  the  music  written  by  composers  resi- 
dent in  France.  A  national  music  idiom,  insofar  as  it  exists,  is  like 
the  national  flag,  language,  or  other  symbols  in  that  it  whips  up 
powerful  sentiments  through  habits  of  association  and  of  planned 
and  persistent  indoctrination.  After  all,  the  sense  of  nationality  does 
not  reside  in  the  germ  plasm,  but  is  an  overlaid  state  of  mind  ac- 
quired, unconsciously  or  consciously,  by  a  kind  of  cultural  osmosis. 
As  cultural  patterns  change  from  time  to  time,  national  music  will 
also  display  varied  patterns,  and  its  classification  into  nationalistic 
pigeon-holes  will  necessarily  give  rise  to  strange  incongruities,  as  in 
the  case  of  Debussy  and  Saint-Saens.  Both  were  intensely  national 
in  sentiment,  but  quite  incompatible  with  each  other  personally  and 
musically.  Truly,  nationalism  is  only  "culture"  deep. 

Such  detached  and  cold  analysis  does  scant  justice  to  the  senti- 
ments which  in  part   determine   the   popularity   of  the   national 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  257 

composers,  but  they  are  among  the  many  nonaesthetic  factors  which 
ultimately  condition  the  taste  of  the  public.  If  the  assumption  is  cor- 
rect that  nationality  factors  do  influence  repertoire  selections,  the 
extent  to  which  they  do  so  may  be  measured  by  identifying  and 
tracing  the  national  sources  of  the  repertoire  and  by  tracing  the 
occasion  and  origins  of  these  influences.  Accordingly,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  split  up,  prismlike,  the  American  repertoire  into  its 
nationalistic  bands  and  measure  the  width  of  each  in  the  musical 
spectrum. 

But  the  difficulty  of  setting  up  "true"  political  boundaries  and 
the  ease  with  which  they  are  crossed  by  the  mobile  musician,  make 
national  classification  of  some  composers  almost  impossible.  The 
simplest  criterion  of  nationality  would  be,  of  course,  birthplace. 
This  criterion  has  the  advantage  of  being  at  least  unambiguous,  for 
it  would  seem  self-evident  that  no  composer  could  have  been  born 
in  two  places  at  the  same  time.  But  this,  too,  turns  out  to  be  an 
oversimplification  that  does  not  reckon  with  vacillating  geographical 
boundaries.  Dvorak  was  either  Bohemian  or  Austrian  according  to 
the  sentiments  consulted.  Everyone  knows  that  Chopin  was  born 
in  Poland,  though  Warsaw  was  then  a  second  capital  of  Russia. 

But  the  real  inadequacy  of  birthplace  as  a  criterion  of  nationality 
is  exposed  by  the  fact  that  most  of  the  important  things  happen  to  a 
person  after  he  has  been  born.  A  rigid  adherence  to  birthplace  would 
ignore  the  remainder  of  the  composer's  life  during  which,  of  course, 
his  compositions  were  conceived.  French  opera  was  founded  by  the 
Italian  Lully;  Cherubini,  Offenbach,  and  Meyerbeer  composed  their 
best  work  in  France;  Clementi  lived  in  England,  and  Spontini  in 
Germany.  Theodore  Thomas  and  Walter  Damrosch  came  to  Amer- 
ica as  children.  Handel  offers  a  genuine  dilemma,  for  he  was  born  in 
Germany,  wrote  his  operas  in  the  Italian  style,  settled  in  England 
at  the  age  of  twenty-seven,  was  naturalized  in  1726,  anglicized  his 
name  by  dropping  the  umlaut  (he  was  less  successful  in  shaking 
off  his  thick  accent),  developed  the  oratorio  into  an  English  classic 
form,  and  was  finally  buried  in  Westminster  Abbey.  Loath  to  aban- 
don such  a  "national"  ornament,  the  Germans  include  him  among 
the  Deutsche  Tonkunstler  with  the  umlaut  restored.  Still  more  con- 


258  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

fusing  is  the  case  of  Frederic  Delius  who  was  born  in  Yorkshire  of 
German  and  Dutch  parentage  (for  many  years  he  called  himself 
"Fritz"),  was  a  wool  salesman  in  Scandinavia,  managed  an  orange 
grove  in  Florida,  studied  in  Leipzig,  paid  a  few  brief  return  visits  to 
his  "native"  England,  spent  forty-five  years  of  his  life  in  France, 
but  was  buried  in  England,  according  to  his  own  last  wish. 

In  general,  unless  there  are  strong  reasons  to  the  contrary,  a 
composer  is  allocated  for  present  purposes  to  the  country  in  which 
he  has  produced  his  major  works,  and  in  whose  culture  he  has  shared 
and  participated.  For  those  reasons  Handel  is  counted  as  British; 
Chopin  as  French;  the  conductors  Theodore  Thomas  and  Walter 
Damrosch,  as  American.  Stravinsky,  Schoenberg  and  others,  who 
migrated  with  mature  reputations  to  the  United  States,  are  assigned 
to  their  respective  European  origins. 

Austro -Germany 

In  peace  as  well  as  in  war,  weaker  countries  are  usually  "invaded" 
by  the  stronger.  Unless  interfered  with  by  political  decree  or  other 
barriers,  the  ordinary  exchange  of  material  and  spiritual  goods  will 
normally  seek  a  competitive  level.  That  simple  generalization  epito- 
mizes the  complete  conquest  of  America  by  Austro-German  music. 
This  dominance  of  Teutonic  music  can  be  ascribed  to  a  com- 
bination of  several  factors.  In  her  early  history,  the  three  hundred 
German  principalities,  competing  with  one  another  in  splendor  by 
aping  the  court  of  Versailles,  cultivated  music  as  one  of  the  prin- 
cipal adornments  of  courtly  life.  They  thereby  decentralized  and 
increased  the  demand  for  skilled  performers  and  composers.  Cath- 
olic and  Protestant  churches  likewise  patronized  the  musical  arts 
and  encouraged  widespread  appreciation.  Most  German  cities  main- 
tained a  small  band  of  Stadtmusikcmten  which  were  called  out  on 
civic  and  festive  occasions,  expanding  their  occupational  opportuni- 
ties. After  1800,  nationalistic  sentiments  further  nourished  competi- 
tion with  Italian  music,  ultimately  reducing  the  latter's  influence 
and  inflating  the  pride  of  the  Germans  in  their  own  musical  achieve- 
ments. These  circumstances  did  not  prevail  to  the  same  degree  in 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire 


259 


80 
70 
60 

50 
40 
30 
20 
10 


Nationalities  m  Repertoire 

ELEVEN    ORCHESTRAS 

1875  -  1950 


s5*- 


>    >° *>&<? —--o—*"        V  AMERICAN 

^g^y  ° o..  ,     .■••<> g-"0/  BRITISH 

^  ^         -^^  CZECH 


AUSTRO- 
GERMAN 


.  RUSSIAN 

vT~7  FRENCH 


—%  SCANDINAVIAN 
ITALIAN 


1875  80    85    90    95  1900  05    10     15    20    25    30    35   40   45    50 

Although  the  dominance  of  German  music  in  the  American  repertoire 
is  well  known,  its  near  monopoly  in  the  early  years  is  not  so  obvious.  It 
still  accounts  for  more  than  half  of  all  the  music  played  today  in  Ameri- 
can orchestras. 


France,  England,  and  Russia,  and  were  therefore  all  the  more  effec- 
tive toward  raising  the  musical  trademark  "Made  in  Germany"  to 
its  high  distinction. 

For  present  purposes,  Austria  and  Germany  have  been  thrown 
together  because  they  represent  a  cultural  entity  that  could  not  be* 
broken  with  impunity.  Beethoven  and  Brahms,  born  in  the  North, 
and  certainly  considered  German  by  everyone  including  themselves, 
passed  practically  their  entire  careers  in  Vienna.  Though  the  Protes- 
tant North  and  the  Catholic  South  are  separable,  there  is  no  such 
distinction  apparent  in  the  national  consciousness  of  the  composers 
themselves,  nor  made  by  the  world  in  general.  One  may  note,  how- 
ever, a  shift  of  musical  supremacy  from  Catholic  Vienna  to  the 
Protestant  North  in  the  course  of  the  century— that  is,  to  Leipzig, 
Berlin,  and  Weimar,  and  the  intermediate  city  of  Munich.  Wagner, 
Mendelssohn,  Schumann,  Liszt,  and  Strauss  represent  the  new  gen- 
eration succeeding  Haydn,  Mozart,  Beethoven,  and  Schubert  of  the 
Vienna  orbit.  The  dying  imperialism  of  Vienna  was  partially  super- 


260  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

seded  by  the  vital  commercialism  of  Leipzig  and  the  royal  setting 
of  Berlin. 

The  pre-eminence  of  German  music  in  the  American  repertoire 
is  hardly  a  revelation  to  even  the  casual  observer,  though  its  over- 
whelming degree  has  probably  not  been  so  obvious.  In  1875,  when 
the  New  York  Philharmonic  was  still  the  only  resident  professional 
orchestra  in  the  country,  German  music  constituted  eighty  per  cent 
of  its  repertoire.  Though  this  proportion  has  declined,  the  German 
repertoire  in  1950  still  equaled  fifty  per  cent  of  the  total  of  all  nation- 
alities. The  disturbances  of  the  two  World  Wars  were  but  ripples 
in  the  general  flow.  Although  the  surface  was  agitated  by  public 
excitement  during  the  first  war,  it  hardly  penetrated  to  the  solid 
depths,  and  therefore  left  the  old  standard  composers  practically 
untouched. 

During  World  War  I,  patriotic  hostility  toward  German  com- 
posers was  slow  to  develop  in  America  because  of  our  phlegmatic 
nationalistic  sentiments  and  the  geographic  remoteness  of  the  war. 
Since  the  American  government  itself  had  distinguished  between 
the  German  people  and  its  rulers,  it  was  at  first  not  quite  clear  what 
German  music  had  to  do  with  the  war  and  its  outcome.  In  fact, 
America,  with  its  traditions  of  freedom,  was  rather  sentimental 
and  self-consciously  proud  of  its  professions  of  tolerance.  In  the 
spring  of  19 17,  shortly  after  the  American  declaration  of  war,  the 
Chicago  orchestra  closed  the  season  with  an  all-German  program 
consisting  of  Beethoven,  Brahms,  Strauss,  and  Wagner,  to  show  the 
"folly  of  banning  German  music  because  we  are  at  war."  *  Another 
critic  averred  that  "intolerance  of  German  music  is,  of  course, 
absurd.  .  .  .  France  bans  Wagner,  Strauss  and  the  moderns,  but 
France  has  been  despoiled  and  she  is  proudly  bitter.  Her  case  is  not 
ours."2  It  was  not  until  January,  19 18,  almost  one  year  after  the 
declaration  of  war,  that  the  Philharmonic  of  New  York  announced 
that  it  would  not  play  contemporary  German  music  (this  was 
directed  principally  against  Richard  Strauss,  who  was  accumulating 
royalties  in  this  country).  The  following  month  Stransky  took  out 
first  citizenship  papers  and  in  March,  1 9 1 8,  presented  an  all- Wagner 
nrogram. 

Anti-German  sentiment  was,  however,  slowly  being  kindled. 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  161 

The  sinking  of  the  Lusitania  in  19 15,  in  which  a  Vanderbilt  youth 
was  among  the  one  hundred  American  casualties  (the  family  was 
active  in  Metropolitan  Opera  support)  aroused  much  indignation. 
With  the  draft,  casualties,  and  atrocity  stories,  a  feeling  of  repug- 
nance toward  things  German  did  eventually  gain  headway.  It  be- 
came not  only  a  question  of  public  sentiment,  but  also  one  of  public 
safety  against  possible  demonstrations  and  disturbances.  Fritz  Kreis- 
ler,  a  wounded  Austrian  soldier,  who  had  been  touring  freely  since 
191 5,  had  been  forbidden  by  local  authorities,  in  the  fall  of  19 17, 
to  appear  in  concerts  in  Pittsburgh  and  St.  Louis  because  of  pos- 
sible incitement  to  riot.  He  thereupon  tactfully  announced  the  can 
cellation  of  all  of  his  contracts. 

Among  our  Allies,  England  likewise  banned  the  playing  of  con- 
temporary German  music,  to  which  the  Germans  flippantly  retorted 
that  they  would  like  to  "retaliate,  were  there  any  British  music  to 
boycott."  Germany,  where  Puccini  was  very  popular,  had  banned 
Italian  opera  since  191 5. 

This  period  witnessed  the  passing  of  the  Teutonic  near-monop- 
oly on  the  position  of  conductor.  The  succession  of  Austro-German 
conductors  had  been  an  illustrious  one.  Henschel,  Gericke,  Nikisch, 
Muck,  Paur,  and  Fiedler  in  Boston;  Scheel  and  Pohlig  in  Philadel- 
phia; Oberhoffer  in  Minneapolis;  Bergmann,  Seidl,  Mahler,  and 
Stransky,  in  New  York;  Stock  in  Chicago;  Kunwald  in  Cincinnati; 
Zach  in  St.  Louis;  and  Hertz  in  San  Francisco  had  all  had  their 
origins  and  training  in  Central  Europe.  But  for  many  reasons,  both 
political  and  cultural,  the  great  tradition  had  finally  been  dissipated, 
and  only  an  isolated  few— Fritz  Reiner,  Bruno  Walter,  and  Otto 
Klemperer— were  subsequently  called  to  delay  the  complete  passing 
of  the  glorious  era. 

France 

Orchestral  music  had  never  reached  the  high  development  in  France 
it  had  attained  in  Central  Europe,  and  French  conductors  before 
World  War  I  are  not  much  more  than  names  even  to  the  informed 
American.  In  instrumental  specialization,  however,  France  had 
achieved  a  reputation  for  its  woodwinds,  and  several  of  them, 


262  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

notably  Georges  Longy  (oboe)  in  Boston  (1898-1925),  and  Georges 
Barrere  (flute)  with  the  New  York  Symphony  (1905-28)  contrib- 
uted greatly  to  American  musical  life  in  performance  and  teaching. 

Aside  from  the  war  period,  French  music  shows  a  stable  twelve 
per  cent  of  the  total  American  repertoire.  In  the  earlier  years,  the 
principal  composers  were  Berlioz  and  Saint-Saens.  As  they  receded, 
Debussy,  Franck,  and  still  later  Ravel  and  numerous  moderns  rose 
to  compensate  for  the  losses  of  the  older  generation. 

For  some  time  before  the  American  entry  into  the  first  World 
War,  France  had  made  an  effort  to  gain  friends  in  this  country.  The 
eighty-year-old  Saint-Saens  paid  a  visit  in  191 5,  and  other  musical 
missions  were  knocking  at  our  doors.  In  1916  a  committee  of  promi- 
nent New  York  financial  leaders,  which  included  Kahn,  Vanderbilt, 
and  Rockefeller,  was  formed  to  encourage  the  propagation  of  French 
music.  With  the  declaration  of  war,  April,  191 7,  that  trend  grew  to 
flood  tide,  climaxing  in  19 18,  when  Andre  Messager  toured  the 
United  States  with  his  celebrated  Conservatoire  orchestra. 

The  orchestras  which  led  the  patriotic  procession  in  the  United 
States  were  the  Boston  Symphony  with  Rabaud  and  Monteux,  the 
New  York  Symphony  with  Walter  Damrosch,  who  had  already 
evinced  a  Francophile  disposition  some  years  previously,  and  Cin- 
cinnati, which,  like  Boston,  had  sacrificed  its  conductor  to  the  war, 
and  had  placed  the  Belgian  Ysaye  on  the  podium. 

The  New  York  Philharmonic  has  been  consistently  timid  in  its 
espousal  of  French  music;  at  the  other  extreme  San  Francisco,  under 
Monteux,  successor  to  Hertz,  has  accorded  the  French  at  least  a 
short  period  of  glory  with  twenty  per  cent  of  the  repertoire  during 
the  first  five  years  of  his  tenure. 

Russia— Soviet  Union 

Beginning  modestly  with  the  prolific  Anton  Rubinstein,  and  later 
with  the  melodious  Tschaikowsky  and  the  sumptuous  Rimsky-Kor- 
sakoff,  the  Russians  have  climbed  to  second  place  in  the  nationality 
competition  in  recent  years,  with  twenty  per  cent  of  the  repertoire. 
This  resulted  from  the  unusual  popularity  of  several  modern  com- 
posers,  Shostakovitch,   Prokofieff,   and   Stravinsky,   together  with 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  263 

smaller  increments  of  Rachmaninoff  and  Miaskowsky.  This  dramatic 
upsurge  was  not  effected  without  a  series  of  political  interventions, 
of  which  Russia  has  been  the  beneficiary. 

Early  in  the  first  World  War,  when  Russia  was  the  ally  of 
Britain  and  France,  any  news  from  that  mysterious  country  was 
good  copy.  More  and  more  reports  on  Russian  music  began  to  seep 
into  the  columns  of  the  American  musical  journals,  and  some  of  our 
symphony  orchestras  were  only  then  discovering  names  which  are 
today  familiar  and  respected.  Borodin,  Glinka,  Moussorgsky,  and  a 
dozen  others  were  accorded  belated  recognition,  and  Glazounoff, 
Scriabin,  Stravinsky,  Miaskowsky  followed.  The  Russian  Revolution 
elicited  considerable  intellectual  sympathy  in  America,  which  re- 
dounded to  the  profit  of  ProkofiefT  and  Shostakovitch  and  was 
climaxed  in  the  almost  hysterical  patriotic  esteem  of  World  War  II. 

Of  all  the  nationalities,  however,  Russia  has  contributed  most 
conspicuously  to  modern  trends.  The  recent  composers,  together 
with  a  backlog  of  Tschaikowsky  and  Rimsky-Korsakoff,  assure  that 
country  for  a  period,  at  least,  a  substantial  representation.  All  or- 
chestras have  shared  in  this  upswing  during  the  war  years,  though 
Boston,  with  Koussevitzky,  has  outrun  them  all,  and  Minneapolis, 
with  Mitropoulos,  has  been  most  indifferent. 

Italy 

The  universal  vogue  of  Italian  musical  terminology  alone  would  be 
sufficient  evidence  of  the  early  dominance  of  Italian  music  in  Eu- 
rope and  America,  analogous  to  the  world-wide  prevalence  of  the 
English  language  in  the  commercial  world.  This  Italian  control  was 
bitterly  resented  by  the  German  nationalists,  who,  as  the  volume  of 
their  own  music  accumulated,  vented  their  protests  by  the  use  of  a 
competitive  German  musical  vocabulary.  This  chauvinistic  prece- 
dent was  not  generally  emulated,  however,  for  the  advantage  of  an 
international  professional  vocabulary  is  obvious,  even  though  it  must 
be  Italian.  It  has  been  the  eager  refuge  of  many  a  guest  conductor 
in  a  foreign  land  for  whom  that  slender  but  expressive  lexicon  was 
the  only  verbal  contact. 

It  was  with  opera,  of  course,  that  Italy  had  conquered  the  world; 


264  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

until  recently,  her  contribution  to  symphonic  literature  has  been 
meager.  As  late  as  1870  the  Beethoven  symphonies  were  unknown 
in  Rome.  Since  Sgambati,  who  produced  his  first  symphony  in  1881 
under  German  influence,  is  usually  credited  with  being  the  first 
Italian  symphonic  composer,  others  have  modeled  after  their  Teu- 
tonic neighbors.  Although  the  emergence  of  Italian  symphonic 
patronage  synchronizes  with  the  careers  of  Respighi,  Casella,  Piz- 
zetti,  Malipiero,  Tommasini,  and  others,  the  revival  of  the  older 
schools— Vivaldi,  Rossini,  Boccherini,  and  Scarlatti— shares  in  the  ris- 
ing national  fortunes  in  America.  Of  those  responsible  for  that 
growth,  none  were  so  energetic  in  promulgating  Italian  tastes  as 
Toscanini  between  1926  and  1936— a  devotion  to  his  countrymen  for 
which  he  has  received  some  censure.  In  recent  decades  many  of  the 
gains  of  Italy's  late  renaissance  have  been  cancelled,  and  she  has  re- 
turned to  the  insignificant  position  she  previously  held. 

Great  Britain 

England,  like  the  United  States,  has  been  an  importer  rather  than  a 
producer  of  music.  Nevertheless,  in  recent  decades  she  has  gained 
a  modest  place  in  the  American  repertoire.  Elgar,  Delius,  Handel, 
Vaughan  Williams,  and  more  recently  William  Walton,  have  been 
responsible  for  her  appreciable  position  in  the  world's  music.  The 
New  York  Philharmonic  and  the  Cincinnati  orchestras  were  for  a 
number  of  years  under  the  direction  of  Barbirolli  and  Goossens, 
British-born  conductors.  In  the  thirties  Barbirolli  accorded  the  Brit- 
ish six  per  cent  of  his  program  time  while  Goossens  gave  them  four 
per  cent.  Philadelphia,  St.  Louis,  and  Minneapolis  trailed  with  a  more 
normal  one  per  cent. 

Latin  America 

Although  economically  and  politically  the  United  States  is  quite 
emancipated  from  its  European  ancestry,  in  cultural  pursuits  her 
line  of  sight  has  always  been,  and  still  is,  over  her  shoulders  Europe- 
ward.  Such  a  psychological  stance  tends  to  exclude  Latin  America 
from  her  vision.  Recently,  however,  orchestral  institutions,  organ- 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  265 

ized  similarly  to  those  in  Anglo-America,  have  arisen  "south  of  the 
border."  This  has  led  to  a  flourishing  musical  life  with  the  attendant 
production  of  composers  and  conductors.  Mindful  of  common  po- 
litical, economic,  and  social  interests  in  this  hemisphere,  the  United 
States  government  has  contributed  its  influence  toward  the  cement- 
ing of  cultural  ties  with  her  southern  neighbors.  In  the  threatening 
days  of  the  1 940's  both  Toscanini  and  his  NBC  orchestra  and  Sto- 
kowski's  Youth  Orchestra  toured  the  Latin  American  countries.  The 
Latin  American  conductors  Eleazor  de  Carvalho  and  Carlos  Chavez 
have  presided  over  various  orchestras  in  the  United  States.  Among 
the  composers,  Villa-Lobos  of  Brazil  is  the  most  noted  and  enjoys  a 
statistically  perceptible  rank  in  the  repertoire.  Others,  principally 
from  Brazil  and  Mexico,  are:  Gomez,  Guarnieri,  Revueltas, 
Mignone,  Pinto,  Siqueira,  Tavares,  Braga  and  Fernandez.  Although 
their  contributions  to  the  United  States  repertoire  may  be  infini- 
tesimal, they  are  comparable  to  the  American  contribution  to  the 
orchestras  of  Europe. 

United  States 

When  a  new  country  does  not  possess  the  means  for  producing  the 
goods  that  satisfy  its  consumer  wants,  it  may  import  these  goods 
from  other  nations.  This  the  United  States  has  done  in  the  case  of 
French  wines,  Irish  linens,  English  china,  Greek  and  Roman  archi- 
tecture, British  political  ideas— and  German  music.  There  is  nothing 
humiliating  in  such  a  course,  nor  is  it  necessarily  a  symptom  of 
national  weakness.  Quite  to  the  contrary,  cultural  exchange  between 
nations  is  a  normal  phenomenon  which  promotes  amicable  relations 
and  contributes  to  the  larger  gratification  of  their  citizens. 

If  such  international  exchange  of  goods  and  services  is  conven- 
tional and  salutary,  it  is  on  the  other  hand  no  less  normal  for  the 
rising  young  industries  themselves  to  enter  the  competition  in  fur- 
nishing such  goods  and  services,  and  to  appeal  to  national  loyalty  to 
support  that  purpose.  During  the  first  half-century  of  the  life  of 
this  country,  this  nativistic  feeling  had  not  yet  been  awakened  in  the 
realm  of  music.  The  colonists  of  the  eastern  seaboard  had  brought 
their  tastes  in  their  bag  and  baggage,  and  had  re-established  them- 


266  THE    AMERICAN    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

selves  here  in  their  accustomed  style  and  manner,  so  far  as  pioneer 
conditions  would  permit.  In  the  concert  halls  of  America,  as  in 
Europe,  Haydn,  Handel,  Mozart,  Pleyel,  Gyrowetz,  Vanhal,  and 
Stamitz  were  the  staples,  later  superseded  or  supplemented  by  Hum- 
mel, Kalliwoda,  Beethoven,  and  a  score  of  others  without  much 
thought  of  interpolating  compositions  by  the  few  American  com- 
posers who  might  have  aspired  to  challenge  their  priority. 

That  the  possibility  of  American  compositions  was  condescend- 
ingly acknowledged  at  the  time  of  the  founding  ( 1 842 )  of  the  New 
York  Philharmonic  Society,  can  be  deduced  from  the  guarded  com- 
mitment in  Article  VII  of  its  by-laws: 

If  any  grand  orchestral  compositions,  such  as  overtures  or  symphonies, 
shall  be  presented  to  the  Society,  they  being  composed  in  this  country,  the 
Society  shall  perform  one  every  season  provided  a  committee  of  five 
appointed  by  the  government  shall  have  approved  and  recommended  the 
composition. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  conception  of  its  function  entertained 
by  the  Philharmonic  Society  was  to  propagate  the  taste  for  the  great 
classics,  and  that  any  contemporary  music  worthy  of  such  high  pur- 
poses was  hardly  likely  to  emerge  on  the  American  frontier. 

The  earliest  recorded  protest,  and  by  far  the  most  vigorous, 
against  the  assumed  supremacy  of  foreign  music  was  voiced  by  the 
composer-critic  William  Henry  Fry  and  the  composer-violinist 
George  Bristow,  in  the  early  1850's.  They  were  the  first  American- 
born  operatic  and  orchestral  composers  of  any  pretension.  Born  in 
New  York  one  year  after  the  arrival  of  his  immigrant  father  from 
England,  Bristow  was  a  leading  member  of  the  New  York  Phil- 
harmonic Society  for  the  first  forty  years  of  its  existence,  and  it 
accorded  him  single  performances  of  three  of  his  symphonies  and 
two  of  his  overtures  at  its  regular  public  concerts.  But  the  Phil- 
harmonic's ninety  per  cent  German  repertoire  elicited  from  Bristow 
a  protest  against  the  "systematized  effort  to  extinguish  American 
music,"  and  he  punctuated  his  conscientious  convictions  by  a  brief 
withdrawal  from  the  society  (1854). 

Neither  Fry,  who  precipitated  the  controversy  in  a  series  of  pub- 
lic addresses,  nor  Bristow,  who  echoed  it,  were  of  a  temperament  to 
belittle  their  own  talents.  Says  Bristow: 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  267 

Who  are  the  men  who  told  you  that  Americans  cannot  write  up  to  the 
standard  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic  Society?  They  are  the  same 
style  of  illuminati  that  in  the  London  Philharmonic,  after  attempting  to 
rehearse  it,  kicked  Beethoven's  C  Minor  Symphony  under  their  desks  and 
pronounced  the  composer  a  fool  or  a  madman.3 

Fry,  composer  of  operas  and  symphonies  which  were  repeatedly 
performed  in  Philadelphia  and  New  York,  was  still  more  frenetic  in 
his  indignant  challenge: 

I  have  no  fear  of  having  my  symphonies  played  side  by  side  with 
Beethoven's.  ...  It  is  just  what  I  ask.  It  has  been  done  here  repeatedly 
and  I  am  satisfied  with  the  result.  ...  If  you  will  cause  a  symphony  of 
mine  in  four  movements  to  be  played  by  the  New  York  Philharmonic 
...  I  will  undertake  to  produce  one  in  from  four  to  six  days,  though 
some  composers  give  four  to  six  months  to  the  task;  and  I  have  no  ob- 
jection to  have  a  symphony  so  performed  sandwiched  between  any  two 
classical  symphonies  played  on  the  same  evening.4 

In  retrospect,  it  has  seemed  to  some  that  these  gestures  were 
merely  a  misguided  and  quixotic  outburst  of  wounded  pride  and 
frustrated  ambition  unworthy  of  a  balanced  personality.  But  it 
would  be  too  much  to  state  that  they  were  exclusively  so.  The 
problem  takes  on  another  hue  when  viewed  in  its  historical  context. 
Fry  and  Bristow  were  the  specialized  manifestation  of  a  compre- 
hensive antiforeign  sentiment  that  made  itself  felt  in  the  arts  as  well 
as  in  the  economic,  political,  and  religious  realms.  They  spoke  not 
only  for  themselves,  but  for  a  large  segment  of  the  native  American 
population,  which  constituted  an  understanding  audience.  It  is 
doubtful  whether  even  such  self-willed  temperaments  as  Fry  and 
Bristow  would  have  sallied  forth  so  vehemently  without  a  bracing 
atmosphere  which  could  invigorate  them  with  self-confidence. 

During  the  period  of  the  early  1850's,  the  United  States  was  in 
the  throes  of  a  violent  nativistic,  anti-alien  movement.  The  rate  of 
immigration  had  greatly  accelerated  in  the  forties  with  the  Irish 
wave  following  their  potato  famine  in  1 846,  and  the  German  wave 
that  began  with  the  disturbances  of  1848  and  endured  through  the 
next  decade  and  beyond.  This  enormous  increase  in  immigration 
alarmed  many  Americans  who  viewed  it  as  a  threat  to  their  demo- 
cratic institutions.  They  feared  the  destruction  of  American  enter- 


THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

prise,  the  substitution  of  European  culture,  and  even  the  control  of 
the  government  by  these  alien  forces.  A  pinpoint  quotation  of  mere 
population  data  will  tend  to  explain  their  unrest.  For  in  1850  New 
York  City,  which  was  the  center  of  the  nativistic  movement,  had  a 
total  population  of  about  500,000,  of  which  241,000  were  foreign- 
born.5  If  one  considers  that  almost  one  hundred  per  cent  of  the 
foreign-born  were  adults,  and  that  about  fifty  per  cent  of  the  native- 
born  were  adults,  it  can  be  calculated  quickly  that  the  foreign-born 
adults  (workers  and  potential  voters)  outnumbered  the  native-born 
adults  roughly  two  to  one!  To  this  must  be  added  their  discrepant 
social  ideologies  and  cultural  traits,  which  were  downright  repulsive 
to  many  native  Americans  to  a  degree  that  is  difficult  to  reconstruct 
in  the  modern  cosmopolitan  age.  All  the  Irish,  and  some  of  the  Ger- 
mans, were  Roman  Catholic,  which  aroused  great  apprehension  in  a 
predominantly  Protestant  country.  The  Germans,  many  of  whom 
were  free-thinkers,  drank  beer,  violated  the  Sabbath,  cultivated  and 
preserved  their  own  language,  newspapers,  and  schools,  maintained 
these  cultural  traits  with  obnoxious  pride,  and  were  alarmingly  suc- 
cessful in  their  infiltration  of  many  occupations,  of  which  music 
was  only  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  instances. 

Here  was  enough  to  offend  every  taste.  Native-born  workers, 
the  professions,  small  business,  and  patriotic  Americans  in  general 
resented  mightily  the  transplantation  of  the  institutions  of  monarchic 
Europe  onto  the  free  soil  of  America.  While  not  lacking  in  a  certain 
respect  for  the  old  world,  aspiring  American  musicians  found  them- 
selves overwhelmed  by  foreign  traditions  that  threatened  to  stifle 
their  own  embryonic  attempts  to  establish  an  indigenous  culture. 
Said  Bristow: 

.  .  .  From  the  commencement  there  has  been  on  the  part  of  the  perform- 
ing members  and  the  direction  of  the  Philharmonic  Society  little  short 
of  a  conspiracy  against  the  art  of  a  country  to  which  they  hav'e  come 
for  a  living;  and  it  is  very  bad  taste  for  men  to  bite  the  hand  that  feeds 
them.  If  all  their  artistic  affections  are  unalterably  German,  let  them 
pack  up  and  go  back  to  Germany,  and  enjoy  the  police  and  the  bayo- 
nets .  .  .  where  an  artist  is  a  serf  to  a  nobleman. 

Although  both  Bristow  and  Fry  were  no  doubt  interested  in  the 
success  of  their  own  compositions,  their  philosophy  ran  somewhat 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  269 

deeper,  to  promulgate  a  national  school.  Bristow,  therefore,  con- 
tinues: 

What  is  the  Philharmonic  Society  in  this  country?  Is  it  to  play  exclusively 
the  works  of  German  masters,  especially  if  they  be  dead?  .  .  .  Or  is  it  to 
stimulate  original  art  on  the  spot? 

America  has  made  the  political  revolution  which  illumines  the  world, 
while  Germany  is  still  beshrowded  with  a  pall  of  feudal  darkness. 

Musicians  were  not  the  only  protestants.  A  similar  sentiment  of 
emancipation  was  expressed  by  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  in  his  famous 
Phi  Beta  Kappa  address,  "The  American  Scholar"  (1837): 

Our  day  of  dependence,  our  long  apprenticeship  to  the  learning  of  other 
lands,  draws  to  a  close.  The  millions  around  us  .  .  .  cannot  always  be 
fed  on  the  sere  remains  of  foreign  harvests. 

And  in  his  essay  on  Self-Reliance  (1841),  he  announces  a  cultural 
declaration  of  independence: 

Our  houses  are  built  with  foreign  taste;  our  shelves  are  garnished  with 
foreign  ornaments;  our  opinions,  our  tastes,  our  faculties  lean  and  follow 
the  Past  and  the  Distant.  .  .  .  And  why  need  we  copy  the  Doric  or  the 
Gothic  model?  Beauty,  convenience,  grandeur  of  thought  .  .  .  are  as 
near  to  us  as  to  any,  and  if  the  American  artist  will  study  with  hope  and 
love  the  length  of  the  day,  the  wants  of  the  people,  the  habit  and  form 
of  the  government,  he  will  create  a  house  in  which  all  these  will  find 
themselves  fitted,  and  taste  and  sentiment  will  find  themselves  satisfied 
also. 

The  rebellion  of  Fry  and  Bristow  could  not,  of  course,  escape 
without  rebuttals.  They  drew  return  fire  not  only  from  the  "gov- 
ernment" of  the  Philharmonic,  but  also,  from  the  universalists  who 
viewed  art,  like  humanity,  as  being  "above  all  Nations."  The  run- 
ning disputations  were  carried  in  the  columns  of  various  publica- 
tions. Richard  Storrs  Willis,  editor  of  the  Musical  World  and  Times, 
took  strong  issue  with  the  nationalistic  conception  of  music:  "This 
is  a  wrong  view  of  art— decidedly  so.  It  is  one-sided  and  contracted. 
Let  us  strive  for  art— universal  art."  He  insisted,  however,  that  Ger- 
many was  the  "land  of  real  music." 

This  period  saw  the  crest  of  the  nativist  movement.  Its  intensity 
was  fated  to  subside  with  the  approach  of  the  great  sectional  conflict 


27O  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

of  1861-64.  Realistically,  of  course,  music  was  one  of  the  "infant 
industries";  but  Bristow,  Fry,  and  their  colleagues,  in  the  very  nature 
of  the  case,  were  not  in  a  position  to  slap  a  protective  tariff  on  the 
competing  importations  as  the  manufacturers  of  material  goods, 
with  the  aid  of  a  friendly  government,  had  successfully  done.  If 
one  concedes  the  legitimacy  of  a  campaign  for  an  American  school, 
Bristow's  diagnosis  was  absolutely  correct.  It  is  interesting,  if  not 
profitable,  to  speculate  whether  the  spark  of  American  national 
music  could  have  been  shielded  by  any  arbitrary  method  from  the 
suffocating  competition  of  European  art,  or  whether  the  disparity 
between  the  merits  of  American  and  German  music  and  the  tech- 
nical superiority  of  German  executants  would  in  any  case  have  been 
sufficient  to  tip  consumer  demand  toward  the  foreign  product. 

American  musical  interests  have,  however,  never  relinquished  the 
militant  nativist  ideology,  though  their  sentiments  are  now  usually 
expressed  in  less  virulent  form.  Recently,  an  American  composer, 
much  more  successful  than  Fry  or  Bristow,  paraphrased  exactly  their 
earlier  lamentation  and  despairingly  inquired:  "What  chance  have 
we  of  producing  an  original  native  school  of  composers?"  and  then 
interjects  the  diplomatic  reservation  that 

I  have  no  quarrel  with  the  masterpieces.  I  think  I  revere  them  and  enjoy 
them  as  well  as  the  next  fellow.  But  when  they  are  used,  unwittingly 
perhaps,  to  stifle  contemporary  effort  in  our  own  country,  then  I  am 
almost  tempted  to  take  the  extreme  view  and  say  that  we  should  be 
better  off  without  them.6 

Another  distinguished  American,  a  member  of  a  celebrated  line  of 
native  musicians  and  pedagogues,  directed  his  barbs  particularly 
against 

the  starvation  diet  in  contemporary  music  .  .  .  the  fashion-enslaved, 
prestige-hypnotized  minds  that  guide  the  rich  and  reactionary  Philhar- 
monic-Symphony ...  so  totally  devoid  of  any  American  loyalty  to 
match  the  Italian  loyalty  (Toscanini)  that  is,  after  all,  rather  likeable  in 
him.7 

Before  attempting  an  estimate  on  how  well  the  American  com- 
poser has  actually  competed  in  the  American  repertoire,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  define  a  few  terms  and  make  a  few  basic  assumptions. 
Reduced  to  question  form: 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  271 

( 1 )  What  is  the  definition  of  American  music,  and  which  com- 
posers should  be  included? 

(2)  What  is  the  norm  of  "fair"  competition  with  European 
composers? 

Whether  there  exists  a  characteristic  American  idiom  and,  if  so, 
what  its  earmarks  may  be,  are  not  problems  to  be  solved  within  the 
scope  of  the  present  study.  However,  the  American  repertoire  has 
been  frequently  affected  by  the  urge  to  develop  a  native  musical 
dialect. 

Of  all  the  traits  which  American  composers  have  explored— 
Negro  tunes,  Indian  folksong,  Puritan  hymns,  and  jazz  rhythms— 
the  last-named  has  gained  the  greatest  notoriety.  Ragtime,  its 
antecedent  manifestation,  had  been  successfully  excluded  from  the 
genteel  arts  for  two  decades.  Until  then  considered  the  aesthetic  pre- 
occupation of  the  proletariat,  it  became,  after  the  first  World  War, 
a  subject  of  controversy  and  even  crashed  the  recondite  pages  of 
the  Musical  Quarterly.  Critics  began  to  inquire  whether,  after  all, 
jazz  might  not  be  capable  of  serious  emotions.  Was  not  America 
overlooking  a  kind  of  musical  resource  whose  significance  Russia 
and  other  European  countries  had  long  ago  discovered  in  their  own 
more  primitive  social  strata? 

From  the  standpoint  of  the  serious  orchestral  repertoire,  the 
high  point  in  the  history  of  jazz  in  this  country  may  be  scored  in 
the  concert  of  Paul  Whiteman's  orchestra  in  Aeolian  Hall,  New 
York,  February,  1924,  when  George  Gershwin,  late  of  Tin-Pan 
Alley,  performed  the  premiere  of  his  Rhapsody  in  Blue.  The  pro- 
gram opened  with  the  Livery  Stable  Blues.  Everybody  of  note  was 
there,  including  Walter  Damrosch,  who  forthwith  commissioned 
the  twenty-six-year-old  artist  to  compose  a  piano  concerto  in  the 
same  genre.  Damrosch  gave  it  a  hearing  in  1925,  as  well  as  the  same 
composer's  An  American  in  Paris  in  1928. 

Nearly  every  serious  conductor  professed  a  polite  interest  in  the 
new  trend  of  "symphonic  jazz."  It  was  the  thing  to  do.  Although 
Gershwin  was  not  invited  to  Boston  until  January,  1932,  when  he 
performed  his  Second  Rhapsody  under  the  baton  of  Koussevitzky, 
all  orchestras  performed  the  Gershwin  items  at  least  once.  But  no 
major  orchestra,  except  Philadelphia,  from  whom  the  world  had 


272  THE    AMERICAN    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

learned  to  expect  an  occasional  bizarre  gesture,  went  so  far  as  to  in- 
vite the  "king  of  jazz,"  Paul  Whiteman,  as  guest  conductor.  In 
November,  1936,  when  much  of  the  flurry  had  already  subsided, 
-Whiteman  and  his  twenty-four-piece  band  merged  with  the  Phila- 
delphia Orchestra  for  the  eighth  subscription  pair  in  which,  of 
course,  the  Rhapsody  in  Blue  was  again  featured. 

The  normal  direction  of  migrant  music  now  for  once  reversed 
itself,  and  jazz  became  an  exportable  item.  Not  only  did  Whiteman 
undertake  a  successful  tour  of  Europe  in  1926,  but  jazz  bands  be- 
came popular  in  England  and  France  during  the  twenties.  Looking 
for  novelty  to  suit  the  mood  of  the  restless  postwar  epoch,  European 
composers  were  intrigued  by  the  pungent  rhythms  and  quickly,  but 
briefly,  absorbed  them  into  their  own  styles.  Auric,  Milhaud,  Stra- 
vinsky, Ravel,  Tansman,  "spiked"  their  music  with  the  new  in- 
toxicating motifs,  while  Krenek  created  a  sensation  in  Germany 
with  the  opera,  Jonny  Spielt  Auf.  A  host  of  Americans  were 
similarly  imbued.  Carpenter,  Copland,  Antheil,  Gruenberg,  Bennett, 
Gould,  and  others  flirted  with  the  new  "national"  idiom. 

But  in  the  perspective  of  1950,  it  turned  out  to  be  a  passing  fad. 
Whether  the  strictures  of  this  idiom  were  too  confining,  whether 
the  strings,  which  are  so  important  in  the  symphonic  band,  were  not 
given  enough  to  do,  whether  it  was  just  plain  fatigue  from  the 
overstimulating  rhythms,  or  whether  jazz  itself  gave  rise  to  newer 
forms  that  made  the  original  inspirations  seem  archaic,  it  is  still  true 
that  interest  soon  played  itself  out. 

If  it  is  difficult  to  characterize  American  music,  it  is  equally  diffi- 
cult to  identify  the  American  composer.  The  native-born  American 
composer  offers  few  dilemmas;  for,  after  a  training  period  in  Eu- 
rope, he  returns  to  America  to  produce  his  most  important  works. 
However,  since  about  1920,  many  foreign-born  composers  have  been 
making  their  home  in  the  United  States.  This  was  a  novel  turn  of 
events  which  could  hardly  have  been  predicted  before  the  collapse 
of  European  economy.  Before  World  War  I,  it  was  well  known 
that  conductors  and  performers  were  attracted  to  these  shores  by 
the  liberal  economic  returns  in  this  rich  and  resourceful  country. 
In  fact,  it  was  the  accepted  practice  to  recruit  orchestral  musicians 
and  to  entice  soloists  and  conductors  with  fabulous  fees,  which 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  273 

were  justified  by  the  public  acclaim  for  the  artists.  It  was,  however, 
not  so  reasonable  to  expect  composers  to  seek  a  home  in  this  coun- 
try where  there  existed  no  mechanism  to  reward  them  in  com- 
parable measure. 

But  composers  behave  very  much  as  do  persons  of  more  humble 
callings:  when  their  environment  threatens  them,  they  assemble 
their  paraphernalia  and  migrate  to  a  safer  place  where  they  may 
ply  their  profession.  Therefore,  after  each  of  the  two  World  Wars 
and  the  intervening  Russian  revolution,  the  general  depression  and 
the  persecution  in  Germany,  emigration  was  greatly  accelerated.  In 
addition  to  the  "push"  from  decayed  Europe,  there  was  the  "pull" 
of  Hollywood,  as  well  as  of  the  music  schools  and  universities  that 
were  prepared  to  employ  these  composers,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
"free  air"  and  other  liberal  inducements  of  democracy. 

Not  all  of  these  adopted  sons  have  the  same  valid  claim  on  the 
formal  American  appellation.  Counted  as  Americans,  for  present 
purposes,  are  only  those  foreign-born  who  have  made  a  substantial 
portion  of  their  contribution  while  living  in  America. 

It  might  at  first  glance  seem  simpler  to  label  as  American  all 
music  composed  in  America.  This  would,  indeed,  be  very  simple  if 
some  composers  did  not  migrate  in  mid-career.  Since,  for  practical 
purposes,  it  is  composers,  not  musical  titles,  which  are  classified,  all 
works  of  a  given  composer  must  go  into  the  same  pigeonhole.  A 
second  solution  would  be  to  count  as  American  all  music  composed 
by  musicians  now  permanently  domiciled  in  the  United  States. 
This  would  result  in  the  classification  of  Stravinsky's  Firebird  Suite 
as  foreign  in  1920,  and  as  American  in  1950.  But  it  does  not  seem 
fair  to  inflate  spuriously  the  "American"  contribution  to  the  reper- 
toire by  a  heavy  listing  of  compositions  that  were  composed  in 
Europe,  attained  prestige  for  their  authors  in  Europe,  and  then  by 
the  happy  accident  of  migration  counted  posthumously  "Ameri- 
can." 8 

For  the  purpose  of  this  tabulation,  therefore,  composers  who 
have  produced  their  major  works  in  Europe,  whose  career  was  well 
established  there,  are  assigned  to  their  native  country:  Hindemith, 
Stravinsky,  Alban  Berg,  Rachmaninoff,  Bartok,  Schoenberg,  and 
others.  Those  born  in  Europe,  but  who  have  migrated  to  this 


274  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

country  young  enough  to  establish  their  careers  in  the  United 
States,  are  called  American.  A  sample  list,  with  ages  of  arrival: 
Berezowsky  (21),  Loeffler  (21),  Wagenaar  (27),  Bloch  (36), 
Fuleihan  (15),  the  conductors  Theodore  Thomas  (10)  and  Walter 
Damrosch  (9).  Composers  like  Tansman,  Prokofieff  and  Dvorak, 
who  spent  only  a  few  years  in  this  country  and  subsequently  re- 
turned to  Europe  to  continue  their  careers  where  they  had  ini- 
tiated them,  are,  of  course,  counted  as  foreign. 

Previous  to  1900,  the  American  contingent  in  the  symphonic 
repertoire  was  small.  In  its  regular  concerts,  the  New  York  Phil- 
harmonic Society  accorded  single  performances  to  Paine  (1890) 
and  Chadwick  (1895)  and  two  to  AiacDowell  (1894,  1897),  in  addi- 
tion to  the  aforementioned  Bristow.  More  hospitable  was  the  Chi- 
cago orchestra  under  Thomas.  This  foreign-born  conductor,  who 
had  acquired  all  his  training  in  America,  extended  commissions  to 
John  Knowles  Paine  on  the  occasion  of  the  Philadelphia  and  Chi- 
cago Expositions,  offered  ail-American  programs  at  these  expositions 
in  1876  and  1893,9  and  performed  diverse  works  of  Paine,  Chadwick, 
MacDowell,  Foote,  Gleason,  H.  W.  Parker,  and  other  Americans 
during  the  regular  seasons  of  the  Chicago  orchestra  beginning  in 
1 89 1.  His  American  programs  at  the  Philadelphia  Centennial,  July, 
1876,  and  the  Chicago  Summer  Concerts  of  August,  1882,  were  the 
first  of  their  kind  by  an  established  American  orchestra. 

The  Texas-born  Van  der  Stucken,  who  had  received  all  his 
training  abroad,  gained  a  reputation  in  the  late  eighties  (1885-87) 
for  his  free-lance  "novelty"  concerts  in  New  York,  among  which 
he  likewise  included  American  programs. 

Boston  was,  of  course,  the  early  musical  capital  of  the  United 
States.  The  pioneer  work  of  Lowell  A4ason  in  the  public  schools  of 
Boston,  the  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra,  the  New  England  Con- 
servatory of  Music,  Harvard  University,  which  established  the  first 
chair  of  music  in  1875— all  were  fertilized  by  a  proud  regional  tradi- 
tion, and  reinforced  one  another  in  producing  an  indigenous  musical 
culture  that  survives  to  the  present  day.  With  its  prewar  Teutonic 
conductors  consecrated  to  the  classics,  Boston  was,  and  still  is,  also 
the  most  enthusiastic  exponent  of  native  works.  To  be  sure,  the 


FORREST  MANSION  GARDEN. 
Corner  of  Broad  and  Master  Streets. 

THEODORE  THOMAS' 

UNRIVALLED 

SUMMER  NIGHTS  CONCERTS 

On  WEDNESDAY  EVENING,  July  19,  1876. 

FIFTY-FOURTH 

SUMMER  NIGHTS  CONCERT. 

AMERICAN  NIGHT. 

When  the  programme  will  consist  of  works  by  American  composers  exclusively. 

SOLOISTS. 

Mr.  ALFRED  H.  PEASE, 

The  young  American  Pianist  and  Composer. 

Messrs.  SCHMITZ,  PIEPER,  KUSTENMACHER,  and  ELLER, 

Horn  Quartette. 


PROGRA.MME. 

PART  I. 

A  SYMPHONIC  POEM— A  Day  in  the  Country  .         .         .         .       W.  H.  Fry. 

A  DAT  IN  TUB  COUNTRY. 

Th»  Symphony  opens  with  an  Adagio  movement,  descriptive  of*  summer  morning.    Hymn 

of  nature,  'he  ri"l3j  can.  "tbe  cock',  ibilll  clarion  and  the  Mholaf  horn."    The  next  la  an 

AUt-ro,  musically  pair  ting  the  festivities  of  the  villagers;  the  lad.  tad  bvale.  In  thi  lr  best 

array  are  about  10  join  tbe  dao.ce      An  An'lante  amornto  describes  the  Joalous  pang,  of  a 

disappointed   .wain.     Then   come   tbe   mail,   dance,  the  rude  and   grotesque  steps  of  tbe 

peasants,  to  tbe  music  of  oboes  and  guitars,  pictured  in  Allegro.    The  sun  is  letting  a.  a 

recruiting  party  arrive.,  the  soldiers  join  tbe  dance,  and  more  rod  o  and  bolsteroa.  tbe  mirth 

a.  lb.  Symphony  conclude,  with  a  Finale  Strttlo. 

CONCERTO  FOR  PIANO  AND  ORCHESTRA-E  flat         .         .    A.  H.  Pease. 

1.  Allegro  con  fuoco.         2.  Andante  con  moto.         3.  Allegro  vivace  alia  Marcia. 

(Mr.  A.  H.  Pease.) 

INTERMISSION. 

PART  II. 

symphony-no.  i j.  k.  Paine. 

1.  Allegro  con  brio.  3.  Adagio. 

2.  Scherzo — Allegro  vivace.  ,  4.  Allegro  vivace. 

INTERMISSION. 
PART  III. 

OVERTURE— Don  Munio ,  Dudley  Buck. 

CONCERTSTUECK— For  orchestra  and  horn  quartette         .        .  Dudley  Buck. 

(Messrs.  Schmitz,  Pieper,  Kuestenmacher,  and  Eller.) 

ALLEMANIA  WALTZES Myron  A.  Ward. 

JAPANESE  GALOP  A.  II   Pease. 

CONCERTS  WILL  COMMENCE  AT  8  O'CLOCK. 
Admission  50  cents;  reserved  seats  25  cents  extra.      Private  boxes  $1  and  $2  extra.     For 

sale  at  Boner's  Music  Store,  1 102  Chestnut  Slreet;  also,  for  sate  at  the  door. 
Strinway  &  Sons'  Pianos  are  used  at  the  Thomas  Concerts.    Warerooms  in  Philadelphia,  at  Charles 

Blasius,  at  1006  Chestnut  Street. 
Mason  &  Hahun's  Organ'  are  also  used  at  these  Concerts.    Warerooms  in  Philadelphia,  at  Gould  & 
Fischbr,  is  10  Chestnut  Street. 

The  Crntbnnial  Inauguration  March,  arranged  for  Piano  by  Thbo.  Thomas,  Is  published  by 
John  Church  &  Co.,  Cincinnati.    For  sale  in  the  Hall. 

Every  Friday  evening  the  Programme  will  contain  an  entire  Symphony. 
For  the  Programmes  of  the  two  following  Concerts  see  pages  4  and  5. 


PENNSYLVANIA  RAILROAD,  route.  TmooflitT«»mwtTH  pmioi 

and  Sleeping  Can  attached,  between  all  principal  Eastern  and  Western  elite*.  O.t.T 
Dikkct  liri  to  TR*  Crktesnial  EXHIBIT;*.*  Baggage  called  for  and  checked  to  des- 
tination, at Hotels  and  Residences  by  UNION  TRANSFER  COMPANY.  Ticket  Offlcee: 
Ho  838  Chestnut  Street;  S.  B.  ear.  Broad  and  Chestnut;  No.  lit  Market  Street;  and 
Depot,  Thirty-second  and  Market  Streets,  Philadelphia. 

FRANK  THOMSON,  J.  N.  ABBRT.  D.  M.  BOTD,  Js. 

General  Manager.  Paaa.  Aft.  Middle  Diet,  1318  Chestnut  81.  Oen'l  Pan.  Aft. 


This  first  all-American  orchestral  program  by  an  established  American 
orchestra  was  played  in  Philadelphia  during  the  Centennial  of  1876. 
Although  the  objective  of  the  American  orchestras  was  to  perform  the 
standard  classics,  Theodore  Thomas  presented  a  number  of  ail-Ameri- 
can progra?ns  in  New  York  and  Chicago. 

215 


276  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

native  New  England  group  of  Paine,  Chadwick,  Foote,  Converse, 
Gilbert,  Whiting,  and  Buck,  many  of  whom  composed  "with  a  Ger- 
man accent,"  has  largely  given  way  to  a  more  modern  national 
representation,  but  the  adventurous  policy  of  the  Boston  orches- 
tra remains. 

Since  1900,  external  circumstance  and  the  growing  maturity  of 
our  own  musical  resources  have  contrived  to  favor  a  general  expan- 
sion of  American  participation  in  the  repertoire.  However,  when 
viewed  in  relation  to  the  total  repertoire,  the  American  contribution 
may  still  seem  somewhat  less  than  impressive.  After  two  world 
wars,  with  the  attendant  inflation  of  national  enthusiasm,  the  propor- 
tion of  American  music  in  the  symphonic  repertoire  of  all  orches- 
tras has  attained  in  1950  less  than  seven  per  cent.  In  the  case  of 
other  nationalities,  even  such  a  percentage  would  allow  several 
composers  to  show  a  significant  position  on  the  popularity  pyramid, 
but  American  patronage  is  so  diffused  among  innumerable  com- 
posers that  almost  no  one  achieves  a  discernible  fraction  of  the 
repertoire. 

In  the  twenty-five-year  period  1925-50  the  names  of  280 
American  composers  appeared  on  the  regular  subscription  programs 
of  the  ten  oldest  major  symphony  orchestras.  Of  these,  136,  or 
fifty  per  cent,  have  been  played  by  only  one  orchestra  each,  while 
only  eighteen  composers,  or  six  per  cent,  have  been  heard  in  nine 
or  ten  orchestras.  It  is  therefore  apparent  that  most  of  the  quota 
of  American  composers  is  consumed  in  purely  token  performances 
of  local  and  regional  interest.  However,  by  volume  of  music,  as 
measured  in  frequency  of  performances  and  length  of  compositions, 
this  top  six  per  cent  of  composers  accounts  for  forty-five  per  cent  of 
all  American  music  played  in  that  period.  These  eighteen  composers 
not  only  appear  in  more  orchestras,  but  are  represented  by  more 
compositions,  and  are  given  repeated  performances.  If  we  arbitrarily 
establish  a  more  liberal  criterion  of  national  prestige  at  a  minimum 
of  seven  out  of  ten  orchestras,  we  may  conclude  that  thirty-four  of 
the  280  American  composers,  or  thirteen  per  cent,  achieved  national 
status  at  some  time  during  the  twenty-five-year  period  under  re- 
view, and  that  they  account  for  sixty  per  cent  of  all  American 
music  performed  in  that  period  by  the  ten  major  orchestras. 


PERCEMT 
20- 


18 


16 


14- 


12- 


10' 


8- 


3" 


2H 


BLOCH 


LOEFFLER 

CARPENTER 
SCHELLING 


SOWER  By 
HANSON 
WETZLER 

STOCK     TAYLOR 
GERSHWIN     CHADWICK 
MASON   HILL    GRUENBERG     EICHHEIM 
SHEPHERD 
DELAMARTER    WHITHORNE 
COPLAND   MERO     HADLEY    GOOSSENS 
CONVERSE  KELLY    MACDOWEIL  STRINGHAM 
POWELL  JACOBI   SALZEDO  HOFMANN  STRONG 
GRAINGER    DUKELSKY   FARWEIL  AND  OTHERS 


Popularity  Pyramid 

AMERICAN  COMPOSERS 
by  percentage  of 
all  American  Music 

TEN    ORCHESTRAS 

1925-50 


COPLAND 


BARBER 


GERSHWIN 


SCHUMAN  BLOCH 

GOULD    PISTON 

THOMSON  DIAMOND 

ANTHEIL   THOMPSON 

CRESTON 

HANSON 

CARPENTER 

DELLOJOlO      SESSIONS 

BERNSTEIN    HARRIS    SHAPERO     MENOTTI 

GRIFFES  FOSS  DELAMARTER  MENNIN  BRANT 

BOROWSKI  ZIMBALIST    LOPATNIKOV  COWEa 

GOOSSENS  HAUSSERMAN  HERRMANN  MOORE 

GILLIS  PERISCHETTI    STILL  ROGERS    V.COLE 

FULEIHAN    BEREZOWSKY  WARD  AND  OTHERS 


1925-30 


1945-50 


The  turnover  in  American  compositions  in  the  repertoire  is  so  rapid 
that  there  is  not  yet  an  established,  standard,  American  repertoire  in  the 
accepted  sense  of  the  term.  The  repertoire  life  of  American  composi- 
tions is  still  very  short.  If  this  continues,  the  ranking  of  American 
composers  will  show  further  violent  changes  in  the  next  decade.  As 
American  are  counted  those  composers  who  were  born  in  America  or 
who  have  done  at  least  a  considerable  portion  of  their  composing  in 
this  country. 

2H 


278  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

The  foreign-born  American  has  made  a  significant  contribution 
to  the  American  portion.  Of  the  American  music  that  has  achieved 
national  recognition,  one-third  was  produced  by  the  foreign-born 
element,  and  two-thirds  by  the  native-born.  Of  the  foreign-born, 
Bloch,  Loeffler,  and  Berezowsky  must  be  credited  with  the  largest 
individual  contributions. 

AMERICAN  COMPOSERS  AND  THEIR  MUSIC  IN  THE 
REPERTOIRE 


Number  of 

Orchestras 

in    Which   American 

Composers  Have   Been 

Heard:  1925- 

-$o 

COMPOSERS 

NUMBER 

PER   CENT 

NO. 

PER   CENT 

ORCHESTRAS 

AMERICAN    MUSIC 

136 

49 

only 

1 

9.O 

45 

16 

only 

2 

7.O 

48 

17 

3  or 

4 

I2.0 

17 

6 

5  or 

6 

1 1.0 

16 

6 

7  or 

8* 

16.0 

18 

6 

9  or 

10* 

45.0 

total         280       100  1 00.0 

*  In  10  orchestras:     Barber,  Bloch,  Carpenter,  Copland,  Diamond,  Gershwin, 

Hanson,  Harris,  Taylor,  Piston 
9  Berezowsky,  Gould,  Griffes,  Loeffler,  Mason,  Schelling,  W. 

Schuman,  Whithorne 
8  Chad  wick,  Creston,  Eichheim,  Goossens,  Gruenberg,  Mac- 

Dowell,  Sowerby,  Still,  Wetzler,  V.  Thomson 
7  Fuleihan,  MacDonald,  Menotti,  R.  Thompson,  Wagenaar 

Although  the  individual  American  composer  is  minuscule  in  pro- 
portion to  the  giants  of  the  repertoire,  the  American  group  may  be 
viewed  as  forming  a  little  kingdom  of  its  own  in  which  a  definite 
hierarchy  quite  naturally  emerges.  It  is  true,  this  ranking  is  not  very 
stable.  The  tendency  to  perform  principally  contemporary  and 
living  American  composers  results  naturally  in  quick  turnover  and 
brief  life  spans.  By  the  time  these  pages  are  read,  their  relative  posi- 
tions may  have  undergone  further  alterations. 

In  their  hospitality  to  American  music,  Boston  and  Chicago  have 
been  the  most  generous.  But  this  statement,  like  every  other  statis- 
tical generalization,  must  be  tempered  by  analysis  and  interpretation. 
If  the  strictly   local   contingent  of  their  American  repertoire  is 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  279 

measured  for  the  quarter  century  1925-50,  nearly  forty  per  cent  of 
the  American  music  performed  by  the  Chicago  orchestra  is  con- 
tributed by  composers  of  the  local  metropolitan  area.  If  more  subtle 
personal  ties  were  considered,  this  percentage  would  probably  be 
increased.  To  be  sure,  some  of  the  Chicago  music  did  enjoy  per- 
formances outside  of  that  city,  but  not  much  of  it;  for  the  Chicago 
contingent  of  American  composers  represented  only  5.7  per  cent 
of  the  total  American  music  played  by  the  remaining  nine  orches- 
tras. The  Chicago  orchestra's  reputation  for  generous  patronage  of 
American  music  is  therefore  to  a  significant  extent— i.e.,  at  least 
forty  per  cent— attributable  to  the  fact  that  Chicago  is  a  rather  im- 
portant musical  center,  with  a  number  of  local  composers. 

Boston  similarly  illustrates  the  fundamentally  regional  definition 
of  Americanism,  though  in  somewhat  lesser  degree.  "Local"  com- 
positions in  Greater  Boston  comprise  thirty  per  cent  of  the  volume 
of  American  music,  while  these  same  "Boston-American"  composi- 
tions constitute  nine  per  cent  of  the  American  music  of  all  other 
orchestras. 

One  may  conclude,  therefore,  that  if  certain  orchestras  seem  to 
be  apathetic  toward  "American"  music,  it  is  at  least  partially  indica- 
tive of  the  lesser  prominence  of  their  cities  as  musical  centers  with- 
out the  opportunity  to  fatten  their  American  averages  on  local 
composers.  That  a  simple  unanalyzed  enumeration  is  inadequate  can 
be  shown  by  the  hypothetical  case  of  an  orchestra  that  apportions,  * 
say,  fifteen  per  cent  of  its  repertoire  to  local  composers,  and  an- 
other orchestra  that  devotes  five  per  cent  of  its  total  repertoire  to 
a  well-screened  nationally  recognized  American  repertoire.  The 
"fifteen  per  cent  orchestra"  would  carry  off  the  prestige  of  being 
the  most  generous  in  the  cultivation  of  "American"  music,  although 
in  the  larger  perspective  this  prestige  would  be  spurious  because 
based  exclusively  on  regional  patronage.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  that  is 
exactly  what  has  occurred.  During  the  decade  of  1935-45  San 
Francisco,  Los  Angeles,  and  Cleveland  topped  Chicago  in  their  cul- 
tivation of  a  well-selected  nationally  American  repertoire,  exclusive 
of  purely  local  patronage. 

The  foregoing  argument  does  not  imply  that  "local"  renditions 


z8o 


THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 


are  necessarily  a  financial  and  musical  waste.  Since  most  reputa- 
tions begin  on  the  local  level,  this  sort  of  experimentation  is  impor- 
tant—to say  nothing  of  the  calculated  benefits  of  such  performances 
to  both  composer  and  orchestral  society.  Furthermore,  man  does 
not  live  by  masterpieces  alone,  and  "lesser"  works,  even  immature 
ones,  furnish  the  critical  perceptive  background  so  necessary  for  the 
appreciation  of  "greater"  works.  It  is  the  nature  of  human  judg- 
ments, and  of  individual  and  national  aesthetic  development,  that 
requires  many  to  be  called  before  the  few  are  chosen. 


PER  CENT  OF  TOTAL  REPERTOIRE 
10 


Contemporary 
Composers 

_     TEN  ORCHESTRAS 
1925-50 


p. — 


■o   ALL  FOREIGN 


1925 


AMERICAN 


30 


35 


40 


45 


50 


The  volume  of  American  music  in  the  repertoire 
of  the  symphony  orchestras  does  not  quite  equal 
the  volume  by  foreign  contemporaries.  • 


As  has  been  stated,  ever  since  the  days  of  Fry  and  Bristow,  con- 
ductors of  American  orchestras,  nearly  all  of  foreign  birth  and  train- 
ing, have  often  been  charged  with  unduly  preferential  treatment  of 
foreign  composers,  and  disloyal,  unjustified  neglect  of  American 
composers.  Does  the  admittedly  small  percentage  of  American  mu- 
sic constitute  unfair  discrimination?  It  is  not  a  simple  matter  to 
appraise  the  justice  of  that  charge.  Obviously,  some  measurable 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  281 

standard  of  comparison  must  be  established  before  the  question  can 
even  be  discussed. 

In  spite  of  an  occasional  argument  to  the  contrary,  one  could 
hardly  claim  the  total  orchestral  repertoire  as  the  monopolistic 
province  of  the  American  composer.  Furthermore,  the  established 
repertoire,  foreign  though  it  be,  has  become  so  firmly  rooted  for 
good  or  ill  in  the  expectations  of  the  audience  that  it  would  imperil 
the  very  musical  institution  itself  to  make  drastic  encroachments 
upon  it. 

There  is,  therefore,  everything  to  be  said  for  a  preliminary 
hypothesis  that  the  American  composer  could  not  assert  the  right 
to  compete  on  equal  terms  with  the  staples  of  Beethoven,  Bach, 
Strauss,  and  Wagner,  and  that  the  volume  of  repertoire  accorded  to 
such  established  masters  should  not  be  used  as  a  criterion  against 
which  the  competitive  success  of  the  American  composer  should  be 
measured.  It  is  rather  with  the  foreign  conteinporary  composer, 
who  is  in  an  analogous  competitive  position,  that  the  comparison 
must  be  made.  Therefore,  in  order  to  exclude  the  inappropriate 
comparison  with  the  standard  classics,  the  more  or  less  arbitrary 
birth  date  of  1 890  was  set  for  the  selection  of  comparable  American 
and  foreign  composers. 

It  requires  some  temerity  to  set  a  norm  for  equitable  treatment 
for  these  two  groups— the  American  and  the  contemporary  foreign 
composers.  How  is  one  to  weigh  such  imponderables  as  the  quality 
of  music,  the  aesthetic  traditions  of  the  audience  which  must  be 
respected,  and  the  national  pride  to  be  indulged?  Should  the  Ameri- 
can quota  be  equal  to,  or  exceed,  the  most  favored  single  nationality? 
Or  should  it  match  all  Europeans  put  together? 

On  the  basis  of  the  50-50  criterion  (i.e.  Americans  equal  all  other 
nationalities  put  together),  it  can  be  stated  that  the  American  com- 
poser competed  rather  unsuccessfully  during  the  twenty-five  years 
from  1925  to  1950.  All  contemporary  music  shared  a  substantial 
growth  during  this  period,  but  foreign  music  enjoyed  a  somewhat 
more  rapid  acceleration  in  patronage.  Of  foreign  contemporaries, 
perhaps  Shostakovitch  and  ProkofiefT,  for  reasons  both  political 
and  aesthetic,  constitute  such  special  cases  that  even  they  may  be 
considered  by  some  as  "unfair"  competition.  If  one  agrees  to  their 


Contemporary  Composers  in  Repertoire 


PER  CENT 


80ST0N    PHILA-  CINCIN-     LOS        CLEVE-  NEWWRK      ST.  SAN     CHICAGO      MIN- 

DELPHIA    NATI      ANGELES    LAND    ,  PHIL-       LOUIS    FRANCISCO  NEAPOLIS 

HARMONIC 


BOSTON    PHILA-    CINCIN-     LOS       CLEVE-  NEW/yORK     ST.  SAN     CHICAGO     MIN- 

DELPHIA     NATI      ANGELES   LAND    H^m  LOUIS   FRANCISCO  NEAPOLIS 

American  composers  were  played  in  an  amount  approximately  equal  to 
all  foreign  contemporaries  combined  if  Prokofieff  and  Shostakovitch 
are  omitted. 


282 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  283 

elimination,  there  is  no  question  that  American  music,  in  all  but  two 
of  the  orchestras,  did  enjoy  a  patronage  as  great  as,  or  greater  than, 
all  other  foreign  contemporaries  put  together,  as  measured  by  pro- 
portion of  total  playing  time. 

The  increase  in  American  music  during  the  decade  1935-45  may 
be  ascribed  to  several  factors,  of  which  war  enthusiasm  is  naturally 
the  first  to  come  to  mind.  Undoubtedly  national  patriotism  directs 
attention  to  all  national  resources,  material  and  nonmaterial,  and 
contributes  to  a  desire  for  self-sufficiency  as  well  as  the  cultivation 
of  national  pride.  There  is,  too,  the  obvious  fact  that  the  American 
composers  were  ten  years  older  in  the  second  decade  and  had  had 
an  opportunity  to  mature  and  develop  their  music.  Again,  Euro- 
pean sources  were  drying  up,  and  therefore  offered  diminished  com- 
petition to  American  works.  Undoubtedly,  the  conductors  who 
were  abandoning  their  European  homes,  were  beginning  to  consider 
America  as  a  more  permanent  abode.  They  were  even  eliminating 
their  European  vacations,  which  in  the  old  days  always  included  a 
"search  for  new  scores"— a  standard  part  of  management's  fall  ad- 
vertising blurb  up  to  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago.  In  short,  orientation 
toward  things  American  was  more  pronounced,  thereby  creating  a 
favorable  psychology  for  the  adoption  of  American  works.  Of 
course,  not  all  orchestras  were  equally  zealous  in  following  this 
trend.  Boston,  as  usual,  was  the  more  enterprising,  while  Chicago 
and  Minneapolis  seemed  to  be  the  least  affected. 

If  there  was  any  hope  that  American  composers  would  finally 
overtake  their  foreign  contemporaries,  such  hope  received  a  jolt  dur- 
ing the  five  postwar  years,  1945-50.  The  statistical  reason  for  this 
condition  can  be  very  simply  attributed  to  the  oft-reiterated  quick 
turnover  in  American  performances,  which  has  its  corollary  in  their 
short  musical  life  spans  and  their  regional  concentration.  Few  Ameri- 
can composers  achieve  national  representation.  More  of  their 
foreign  contemporaries  do.  While  ten  per  cent  of  the  foreign  con- 
temporary composers  born  since  1890,  representing  seventy-five  per 
cent  of  the  foreign  music  played,  appeared  in  nine  or  ten  orchestras, 
only  six  per  cent  of  the  contemporary  Americans,  representing  forty 
per  cent  of  all  American  music  played,  appeared  in  nine  or  ten  or- 
chestras.  A  recital   of   the   names   of   the    contemporary   foreign 


284  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

composers  will  easily  clarify  these  data.  Appearing  in  nine  or  ten 
orchestras  were  the  following  in  order  of  volume:  Shostakovitch, 
ProkofiefF,  Hindemith,  Milhaud,  Honegger,  Tansman,  Walton, 
Khachaturian,  Weinberger,  Ibert,  Britten,  Chavez,  and  Kabalevsky— 
nearly  all  well-authenticated  composers. 

It  is  only  logical  to  expect  that  foreign  composers,  who  are  in- 
cluded in  the  American  repertoire,  would  have  come  to  international 
notice,  thus  assuring  them  wide  representation  in  America.  A  few  of 
them  have  no  doubt  profited  by  their  permanent  migration  to  the 
United  States.  However,  most  of  their  performances  consist  of  their 
older  works  composed  on  the  European  scene.  Most  of  the  "single- 
orchestra"  foreigners  are  either  the  choices  of  guest  conductors  from 
abroad,  or  represent  certain  favorites  of  permanent  conductors  who 
had  close  professional  ties  abroad  previous  to  assumption  of  their 
duties  in  this  country.  This,  of  course,  includes  practically  ninety 
per  cent  of  active  conductors.  There  is  hardly  a  permanent  foreign- 
born  conductor  in  this  country,  from  Toscanini  down  to  the  young- 
est, who  has  not  at  some  time  or  other  provoked  the  critical  jibe, 
"He  plays  the  pieces  of  his  [fill  in  the  nationality]  friends." 

The  "problem"  of  all  contemporary  music  is  not  only  a  problem 
of  nationalism,  the  foreign-born  conductor,  and  the  imponderables 
of  merit  and  quality,  but  also  a  problem  of  "modernism."  The  rela- 
tive force  of  these  factors  cannot  be  readily  estimated  because  they 
are  inseparable:  it  is  almost  impossible  to  play  American  music 
without  at  the  same  time  playing  "modern"  music. 

This  dilemma  of  the  modern  composer  is  not  of  his  own  making, 
but  is  the  product  of  the  social  circumstances  into  which  he  has 
been  born.  As  compared  with  the  composer  of  Mozart's  day,  he  is 
beset  with  many  discouragements.  In  addition  to  normal  competition 
with  one  another,  modern  composers  must  compete  with  a  long  ac- 
cumulation of  hallowed  works  that  are  entrenched  in  prestige;  and 
musical  archeology  is  constantly  adding  to  the  already  glutted  sup- 
ply. Consequently  the  modern  composer  encounters  a  saturated 
market  that  is  inhospitable  to  the  new  entrant,  and  places  on  him  the 
burden  of  aesthetic  proof  for  crashing  the  established  repertoire. 
Instead  of  being  able  to  take  it  for  granted  that  his  music  will  be 
played,  the  young  composer  sees  the  conductors  reaping  special 


National  Sources  of  the  Orchestral  Repertoire  285 

rewards  for  their  enterprising  courage  in  bestowing  their  attention 
upon  him. 

In  these  forbidding  circumstances,  the  American  composer  can- 
not emulate  the  successful  works  of  the  past,  adding  a  slight  incre- 
ment of  individuality  for  pleasing  effect,  as  Bach,  Mozart,  and  even 
Beethoven  and  Wagner  did  at  the  beginning  of  their  careers.  The 
established  masters  are  now  so  familiar  to  the  audience  that  "deriva- 
tive" qualities  are  easily  detected  and  generally  disparaged. 

Finally,  the  romantic  principle  of  composing  for  the  future,  as 
the  old  masters  unintentionally  did,  is  so  well  established  that  com- 
positions too  readily  understood  are  critically  received.  Thus,  the 
assignment  of  writing  nonderivative,  yet  interesting,  music  of  cer- 
tain durability  imposes  a  strain  on  the  modern  composer  that  was 
not  felt  in  1800.  Small  wonder  that  he  often  oversteps  the  bounds 
of  comprehensibility  and  makes  unappreciated  flights  into  the  un- 
known in  a  desperate  effort  at  a  distinctive  contribution. 

The  problem  of  the  historical  shift  from  the  concert  of  1 50  years 
ago  when  nearly  all  music  was  "new,"  to  the  present  time  when 
nearly  all  music  is  "old,"  is  a  larger  sociological  and  psychological 
problem.  A  standard  of  equity  for  new  music  cannot  be  established 
in  a  vacuum,  but  must  be  appraised  in  terms  of  the  economic  status 
of  the  orchestra,  the  social  function  of  the  orchestra,  the  constitu- 
tion of  the  membership  of  the  audience,  and  all  the  other  forces 
which  comprise  life  itself,  in  terms  of  which  the  diverse,  and  often 
incompatible,  wishes  and  desires  seek  satisfaction.  These  are  the 
subjects  of  the  following  chapters. 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways, 
and  Social  Life 


The  Function  of  the  Orchestra  in  Community  and  Nation 

The  symphony  concert  is  not  exclusively,  nor  in  one  sense  prima- 
rily, a  musical  event.  For,  so  complex  and  inseparable  are  human  in- 
terests, that  every  social  occurrence  is  a  blended  experience  of  varied 
and  simultaneous  motives.  A  concert  is  comparable,  perhaps,  to  a 
dinner  party,  where  the  interest  in  food  may  be  subordinated  to 
business  contacts,  social  prestige,  ceremonial  display,  or  mere  con- 
vivial association.  No  hostess  would  be  flattered  to  be  assured  merely 
that  the  food  was  nutritious,  nor  even  that  it  was  tastily  served;  for 
such  an  affair  has  well-accepted  ramifications  into  many  other 
avenues  of  social  intercourse.  A  symphony  concert  is  similarly  a 
pluralistic  event,  which  may  supply  an  outlet  for  fashion,  prestige, 
civic  pride,  heightened  national  consciousness,  as  well  as  musical  de- 
light. It  is  therefore  no  disparagement,  but  a  psychological  and 
sociological  truth,  that  music  is  often  secondary  to  nonmusical  con- 
siderations. 

Since  music,  too,  is  laden  with  these  derivative  functions,  which 
vary  considerably  in  character  and  proportion  from  person  to  per- 
son, the  quality  and  meaning  of  "enjoyment"  of  a  concert  displays 
a  wide  range  of  variation  in  different  epochs.  When,  for  example, 
we  reflect  on  the  strenuous  content  of  our  recent  and  contemporary 
symphony  programs,  the  awe  in  which  the  masterpieces  are  held, 
the  reluctance  with  which  the  audience  pits  its  taste  and  judgment 
against  that  of  the  critic  and  conductor,  and  the  frankly  tentative 
and  reserved  judgments  of  the  critics  themselves,  it  is  difficult  for 
the  modern  patron  to  realize  that  in  the  classic  period,  often  called 
the  "golden  age,"  music  was  generally  considered  a  matter  of  sheer 
pleasure,  a  forthright  delectation  of  the  senses,  without  any  pretense 
286 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  287 

of  satisfactions  of  a  more  edifying  nature.  It  is  quite  evident  from 
Mozart's  letters  that  he  contemplated  very  little  beyond  the  pleasure 
of  the  moment  and. harbored  no  conceit  about  the  sacredness  of  his 
scores.  In  1787  he  writes  of  his  having  attended  a  ball  where 

I  saw  with  the  greatest  pleasure  all  these  people  flying  about  with  such 
delight  to  the  music  of  my  Figaro  transformed  into  quadrilles  and 
waltzes;  for  here  nothing  is  talked  about  but  Figaro,  nothing  played  but 
Figaro,  nothing  whistled  or  sung  but  Figaro,  no  opera  as  crowded  as  Fig- 
aro—very  flattering  to  me  certainly. 

His  solicitous  father  shared  this  desire  for  instantaneous  success, 
counseling  him 

to  imitate  the  natural  and  popular  style  which  everyone  easily  under- 
stands. 

As  if  in  reply  to  this  recipe  for  success,  the  devoted  son  reassures 
his  father  at  the  time  of  the  rehearsals  of  Idomeneo  in  Munich: 

As  for  what  is  called  popular  taste,  do  not  be  uneasy,  for  in  my  opera 
there  is  music  for  every  class,  except  the  long-eared. 

In  speaking  of  his  concertos,  he  almost  apologizes  for  the  esoteric 
passages: 

These  concertos  are  a  happy  medium  between  what  is  too  easy  and  what 
is  too  difficult;  they  are  very  brilliant,  pleasing  to  the  ear,  natural  with- 
out being  vapid.  There  are  passages  here  and  there  from  which  connois- 
seurs alone  can  derive  satisfaction,  but  these  passages  are  written  in  such 
a  way  that  the  less  learned  cannot  fail  to  be  pleased,  though  without 
knowing  why.1 

Charles  Burney,  a  scholar  and  friend  of  artists,  statesmen,  and  mu- 
sicians (including  Handel  and  Haydn),  writing  his  monumental  his- 
tory of  music  during  the  same  period,  voices  the  same  straightfor- 
ward and  mundane  conception,  characteristic  of  the  period  of 
The  Enlightenment: 

Music  is  an  innocent  luxury  unnecessary,  indeed,  to  our  existence,  but  a 
great  improvement  and  gratification  of  the  sense  of  hearing.2 

Although  much  of  Mozart's  music  is  still  played  and  enjoyed 
today,  his  guileless  conception  of  its  function  has  suffered  eclipse, 
for  the  typical  aesthetician  of  the  romantic  nineteenth  century  (de- 


288  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

scended,  however,  from  eighteenth  century  antecedents)  held  in 
scorn  the  theory  that  music  is  made  merely  for  pleasure.  In  fact,  it 
need  not  even  be  beautiful.  In  reviewing  Sibelius'  Second  Sym- 
phony, the  late  Richard  Aldrich,  then  of  the  New  York  Times, 
expressed  that  notion  as  follows: 

There  is  absolutely  nothing  in  this  symphony  that  is  written  to  please  the 
ear  as  many  wish  to  be  pleased.  There  is  much  that  sounds  chaotic  and 
disordered;  but  it  is  evident  to  the  listener  who  can  take  a  larger  measure 
of  it,  that  it  is  all  very  definitely  related,  the  coherent  expression  of  a 
consistent  idea.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  this  Second  Symphony  of 
Sibelius  is  one  of  the  strongest  compositions  in  the  symphonic  form  that 
have  been  heard  in  a  considerable  period.3 

Such  a  sanction  for  what  was  then  cerebral  cacophony  would  have 
been  inconceivable  to  Haydn,  Mozart,  Beethoven,  and  their  con- 
temporaries. Mozart,  Handel,  and  Bach  had  great  difficulty  in  pro- 
ducing music  in  sufficient  volume  and  at  a  rate  to  satisfy  the  honest 
appetite  for  novelty  on  the  part  of  their  audiences,  while  today  a 
novelty  is  something  the  modern  audience  is  expected  to  endure 
for  the  sake  of  possible  habituation  and  future  delight.  To  explain 
this  complete  reversal  in  the  conception  of  the  psychological  func- 
tion of  the  repertoire,  in  the  criterion  of  aesthetic  judgment,  and  in 
the  relation  between  the  artist  and  his  public,  one  must  examine 
the  intervening  period:  the  nineteenth  century  and  its  Romantic 
revolt. 

The  shift  is  largely  attributable  to  the  complete  sociological 
metamorphosis  of  the  audience  and  of  the  social  status  of  the  mu- 
sician. During  the  previous  century,  the  pre-Napoleonic  era,  the 
musician  had  been  an  employee,  who  performed  a  skilled  service 
according  to  contractual  obligations— analogous  to  the  twentieth- 
century  staff  musicians  in  a  radio  or  motion  picture  studio,  allow- 
ing, of  course,  for  the  divergent  requirements  of  the  period  and  the 
much  greater  sense  of  social  stratification  than  now  prevails.  His 
secular  audience  consisted  primarily  of  the  nobility,  many  of  whom 
were  themselves  adequate  performers,  and  who  sometimes  arrogated 
to  themselves  the  privilege  of  joining  the  orchestra.  Some  even 
utilized  their  leisure  moments  for  composing.  In  fact,  as  late  as  1905 
Breitkopf  and  Haertel  published  a  catalogue  of  compositions  by 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  289 

German  royalty,  including  Kaiser  Wilhelm— which  serves  to  recall 
the  piquant  warning  attributed  to  Brahms  that  "one  should  never 
criticize  the  compositions  of  royalty,  for  you  never  know  who  may 
have  written  them." 

Composers  were  craftsmen  who  composed  to  order  and  who, 
like  the  architect,  the  portrait  painter  and  the  cook,  expected  their 
work  to  be  appreciated  forthwith.  It  would  not  have  occurred  to 
Bach,  Mozart,  Haydn,  and  the  other  Kapellmeister  of  the  day  to 
ignore  the  interest  of  the  current  generation  by  writing  Zukunfts- 
musik,  nor  could  they  have  had  the  temerity  to  expect  their  socially 
superior  patrons  to  sit  through  repeated  hearings  of  a  suite  or  sym- 
phony on  the  chance  that  they  or  their  descendents  might  possibly 
enjoy  it  at  some  future  time.  The  liveried  Haydn  admitted  that  he 
experimented,  but  such  experimentation  was  mild  and  inoffensive, 
and  therefore  tolerated  and  even  enjoyed  by  the  prince  whom  he 
was  paid  to  serve. 

By  the  turn  of  the  eighteenth  century,  a  social  and  political 
transformation  had  occurred  with  rather  dramatic  suddenness,  as 
historical  events  go.  In  the  history  of  music  this  consisted  in  the 
catastrophic  bankruptcy,  and  consequent  decline  in  power,  of  the 
musician's  two  richest  employers:  the  church  and  the  court.  To 
gratify  those  who  feel  that  they  must  pinpoint  evolving  historical 
events,  one  may  suggest  that  it  was  the  bombardment  of  Vienna  in 
1 809,  sheltering  at  once  the  aged  Haydn,  the  middle-aged  Beethoven, 
and  the  twelve-year-old  Schubert,  which  actually  and  symbolically 
gave  the  coup  de  grace  to  the  feudal  era  and  marked  the  transition 
from  the  old  order  to  the  new.  The  musician  lost  his  job  and  be- 
came a  free-lance  composer  and  an  itinerant  performer,  with  all  the 
risks  appertaining  thereto. 

His  audience  was  no  longer  the  closed  group  of  cultivated  nobles 
and  their  leisurely  satellites,  before  whom  the  composer  was  hon- 
ored to  display  his  accomplishments.  Instead,  the  nineteenth  century 
performer  now  served  the  emerging  middle-class  audience,  the  third 
estate,  in  a  commercialized  concert  to  which  anyone  had  access  who 
was  able  and  willing  to  pay  the  price  of  admission.  In  this  new 
pecuniary  social  order,  the  bourgeois  audience  was  not  sophisticated, 
nor  well-schooled;  but  it  was  ready  to  be  impressed  by  the  virtuosity 


29O  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

and  the  eccentricities  of  a  Paganini,  a  Liszt,  and  a  host  of  other  vir- 
tuosi who  mushroomed  from  that  soil.  Instead,  therefore,  of  an 
attitude  of  reverence  and  awe  on  the  part  of  the  musician  toward 
his  noble  audience,  it  was  now  the  audience  which  sat  in  bewilder- 
ment before  the  musician.  The  artist,  in  fact,  held  his  audience— his 
new  patrons— in  disdain  for  its  crude  and  undeveloped  aesthetic 
tastes.  In  art  the  customer  was  never  right.  The  mass  of  anonymous 
urbanites,  newly  hatched  under  the  wings  of  the  industrial  revolu- 
tion, issued  from  office  and  shop,  from  banks  and  colleges,  from  the 
professions  and  public  services.  Occupied,  as  they  were,  full  time  in 
gaining  a  livelihood  from  the  new  competitive  world,  they  were  by 
no  means  a  leisure  class,  they  felt  keenly  their  inadequacies  in  the 
arts,  and  acquired  a  veritable  inferiority  complex  in  their  presence. 
They  suffer  from  this  debilitating  affliction  to  this  very  day.  They 
eagerly  emulated  the  standards  of  the  decaying,  but  still  glamorous, 
aristocracy  by  cultivating  and  supporting  the  arts,  and  stood  ready 
to  be  instructed. 

Now,  if  the  audience  generated  by  the  bourgeois  social  revolu- 
tion thus  drew  away  from  the  artist,  the  artist  on  his  part  also  drew 
away  from  the  audience.  Being  no  longer  in  the  immediate  employ 
of  a  master  whom  he  was  being  paid  to  serve,  he  developed  a  sense 
of  autonomy  and  self-expression  in  standards  of  composition  as  well 
as  in  interpretation  and  execution.  The  artist  even  erected  an  ivory 
tower  where  he  could  commune  with  his  aesthetic  conscience  and 
protect  himself  from  any  insinuation  of  being  responsible  to  the 
audience. 

The  evolutionary  development  of  the  musical  arts  abetted  the 
artist  in  his  new  independence.  Orchestral  instruments  were  being 
improved,  orchestras  were  being  enlarged,  and  composition  was  be- 
coming more  difficult  and  esoteric.  Beethoven's  orchestral  scores 
looked  "so  black"  that  they  literally  sounded  the  death-knell  of  the 
amateur  player-cooks  who  had  infested  the  mixed  ensembles 
during  the  courtly  era.  Music  was  now  becoming  a  learned  profes- 
sion which  a  lifetime  was  too  short  to  master.  Art  was  really  long, 
and  time  fleeting.  Liszt  and  Mendelssohn  contributed  enormously 
to  the  enhancement  of  the  prestige  of  the  once  lowly  profession. 
As  a  consequence   of  these  social  and  technical  revolutions,  the 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  291 

artistic  gap  between  audience  and  musician,  which  had  been  negli- 
gible a  generation  or  two  before,  was  now  widening;  and  the  evi- 
dent explanation  was  to  be  sought  not  only  in  musical  terms,  but 
still  more  significantly  in  terms  of  the  social,  economic,  political, 
and  technological  changes  unfolding  during  that  period.  It  is  only 
against  such  a  social  background  that  the  problems  of  the  contem- 
porary "heavy"  repertoire  can  be  comprehended. 

Synchronized  with  these  social  changes,  philosophers,  as  is  their 
wont  and  function,  were  drafting  a  system  of  thought  designed  to 
rationalize  and  buttress  these  overt  historical  trends,  which  were 
rendering  music  incomprehensible  even  to  an  intelligent  audience. 
By  an  evolution  too  complex  to  rehearse  at  this  point,  music  was 
elevated  to  the  most  exalted  position  among  the  arts;  and  in  its  un- 
fettered creativeness,  it  approximated  "pure  spirit,"  universal  and 
absolute  Truth.  Because  of  its  mystical  and  supernatural  character- 
istic, it  possessed  the  power  to  exert  a  spiritual  and  ethical  influence 
upon  its  auditors  superior  to  that  of  any  other  medium.  Such  neo- 
Platonic  doctrines  of  Hegel  and  Schopenhauer  inevitably  placed  the 
great  musician  in  a  position  of  ethical  leadership,  conferred  a  certain 
sacrosanct  validity  on  his  "inspiration,"  and  elevated  him  into  the 
realms  of  near-infallibility.  Music,  the  most  exalted  art,  was  not  only 
a  reflection  of  ultimate  ideas  and  sentiments,  but  was  actually  a 
form  of  thinking  in  tones— an  abstract,  subtle,  and  direct  communi- 
cation superior  to  crude  verbal  symbols,  independent  of  the  physical 
actualities  of  the  world,  and  therefore  a  "universal"  language.  The 
inspiration  of  the  artist  was  thus  of  higher  validity  than  the  un- 
instructed  taste  of  otherwise  intelligent  people.  This  was  the  ideol- 
ogy propagated  by  such  philosophers  as  Schopenhauer,  whose  con- 
cepts dominated  his  disciple,  Richard  Wagner. 

This  dogma  of  artistic  supremacy  was  imported  to  the  United 
States  from  Germany  in  the  baggage  of  musicians  and  conductors, 
and  has  set  the  standards  for  the  musical  repertoire  to  this  very  day. 
Indeed,  in  this  country,  where  vertical  mobility  was  much  more 
rapid  than  in  Europe,  where  class  relations  were  elastic,  where 
wealth  was  easier  to  come  by,  and  the  middle  class  musically  un- 
sophisticated, the  musical  gap  was  probably  still  wider  than  in  the 
old  country.  Precisely  because  of  this,  the  conductors  assumed,  and 


292  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

were  given,  greater  latitude  and  freedom  in  America  than  in  Eu- 
rope. The  programs  in  Boston  and  Chicago  were  much  more  radical 
—or  "progressive"— than  they  ever  were  in  London,  Vienna,  Leipzig, 
and  Berlin,  both  in  relation  to  the  maturity  of  the  audience  and  in 
absolute  terms,  as  far  as  the  latter  can  be  measured. 

The  musical  interpreters,  Bergmann,  Theodore  Thomas,  Gustav 
Mahler,  Gericke,  and  the  rest  pressed  the  last  ounce  of  vindication 
out  of  the  mystical  ideologies  which  upheld  the  didactic  mission 
of  music,  and  translated  this  conviction  into  an  unrelenting  policy, 
in  the  face  of  an  indifferent,  and  even  antagonistic,  public.  It  is 
quite  irrelevant  whether  it  was  Bergmann,  Theodore  Thomas,  or 
Wagner  himself— the  essential  remark  has  been  attributed  to  all 
three— who  replied  to  the  protest,  that  they  "do  not  like  Wagner," 
with  the  determined  resolve:  "Then  we  will  play  him  until  they 
do."  4  The  significant  thing  is  that,  consonant  with  the  Romantic 
philosophy  with  which  they  were  imbued,  such  a  retort  was  symp- 
tomatic of  a  policy  which  nearly  all  symphony  conductors  relent- 
lessly pursued.  If  Theodore  Thomas  seemed  to  be  the  most  fervent 
missionary  of  them  all,  it  was  partly  because,  in  those  days,  there 
was  more  proselytizing  to  be  done.  To  him,  a  symphony  program 
was  a  stern,  humorless  "sermon  in  tones."  The  function  of  a  con- 
cert was  not  relaxation,  but 

what  our  overworked  business  and  professional  men  most  need  in  Amer- 
ica is  an  elevating  mental  reaction  which  is  not  amusement. 

He  was  convinced  that  music  was  a  "powerful  character  building 
force"  which,  "by  its  uplifting  influence"  would  transport  one  to  a 
"higher  plane."  5  The  music  journals  of  the  day  regularly  carried 
long  articles  on  the  beneficent  effect  of  music  on  personal  character 
and  national  welfare.  This  identity  between  Beauty  and  Virtue  was 
an  old  axiom  dating  to  the  Greeks,  who  were  alleged  to  have 
brought  this  union  to  perfection.  It  was,  of  course,  an  abiding  faith 
rather  than  an  empirically  derived  discovery.  But  precisely  because 
it  was  a  mystic  faith,  it  was  more  tenaciously  and  uncritically  ad- 
hered to  than  if  the  generalization  had  been  obtained  from  prolonged 
and  painstaking  empirical  studies  of  human  behavior. 

The  musical  leaders  were  warmly  supported  in  their  ethical  and 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  293 

didactic  mode  of  thought  and  practice  by  critics,  painters,  authors, 
poets,  and  even  psychologists.  Henry  T.  Finck,  critic  and  early 
Wagner  biographer,  knew  of 

no  other  art  that  so  vividly  arouses  the  unselfish  feeling,  the  desire  for 
sympathetic  communion  .  .  .  one  of  the  most  important  moral  functions 
of  music,  that  of  weaning  people  from  low  and  demoralizing  pleasures 
.  .  .  the  best  way  to  eradicate  savage  impulses.  .  .  . 

...  If  such  performances  of  both  sacred  and  secular  music  were  more 
frequent,  we  should  have  less  drunkenness,  less  wife-beating,  less  spend- 
ing of  winter  gains,  less  winter  pauperism.6 

There  seemed  to  be  no  area  of  human  conduct  which  might  not  be 
susceptible  to  aesthetic  influences.  Western  civilization  itself  was 
big  with  possibilities  if  the  aesthetic  front  could  be  maintained  un- 
broken. A  biographer  of  Theodore  Thomas  wrote  in  1927: 

When  before  have  we  been  aware  of  any  such  force  at  work  on  such  a 
scale  among  us?  Suppose  it  [the  symphony  orchestra  program]  to  keep 
on  for  another  generation,  gathering  head.  It  might  produce  in  this 
country  the  greatest  change  ever  known.  .  .  .  Two  generations  of  it 
might  change  the  whole  American  character;  it  might  in  the  end  scourge 
us  of  materialism.  Is  this  fantastic?  Not  if  what  we  believe  about  the 
power  and  the  ethics  of  art  has  any  foundation.7 

Somewhat  more  vague,  but  in  exactly  the  same  vein,  spoke  John  S. 
Dwight,  the  influential  Boston  critic,  musical  editor,  and  New  Eng- 
land transcendentalist,  who  opined  that  "good  music  must  have 
some  intimate  connection  with  the  social  destiny  of  man."  8 

William  James,  the  philosopher-psychologist,  warned  that  musi- 
cal indulgence,  however,  could  be  overdone,  by  lapsing  into  an 
"inert  sentimental  condition"  and  thereby  defeat  the  very  ethical 
purpose  of  the  arts.  He  therefore  advised 

never  to  suffer  one's  self  to  have  an  emotion  at  a  concert  without  ex- 
pressing it  afterward  in  some  active  way.  Let  the  expression  be  the  least 
thing  in  the  world— speaking  genially  to  one's  aunt,  or  giving  up  one's 
seat  in  the  horsecar  if  nothing  more  heroic  offers— but  let  it  not  fail  to 
take  place.9 

Hanslick,  too,  deprecated  the  overzealous  educational  policies  of  the 
conductors.  When,  in  1880,  Biilow  closed  a  Beethoven  cycle  with  a 


294  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

double  performance  of  the  Ninth,  the  famous  critic  deplored  the 
"vigorous  faith  with  which  he  propagated  the  Beethoven  gospel  by 
baptizing  the  converts,  as  it  were,  with  a  fire  hose."  10 

In  the  nineteenth  century,  this  general  exaltation  of  the  arts  drew 
much  of  its  strength  from  the  deficiencies  of  the  industrial  era. 
Social  critics  like  John  Ruskin,  William  Morris,  Walter  Pater  in 
England,  and  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  in  America— each  in  his  own 
way— were  revolted  by  the  misery  and  ugliness  attendant  on  the 
growing  pains  of  the  new  industrialism,  and  had  a  supercilious  scorn 
for  material  science,  which  for  them  was  the  root  of  these  evils. 
Said  Emerson  in  his  Conduct  of  Life: 

Geologies,  chemistries,  astronomies,  seem  to  make  us  wise,  but  they  leave 
us  where  they  found  us.  .  .  .  All  our  science  lacks  the  human  side.  .  .  . 
Science  hates  the  name  of  love  and  moral  purpose.  .  .  .  Beauty  is  the 
form  under  which  the  intellect  prefers  to  study  the  world.  All  high 
Beauty  has  a  moral  element  in  it. 

It  is  not  at  all  obvious,  nor  even  probable,  that  the  industrial 
philanthropists,  who  liquidated  the  deficits  incurred  by  Theodore 
Thomas,  Gericke,  Mahler,  and  Stokowski,  necessarily  shared  these 
mystical  convictions  with  the  crusading  conductors  whom  they 
sponsored.  Some  were  indeed  musical  and  philosophical  dilettantes, 
while  many  of  them  were  downright  metaphysical  illiterates  and 
calculating  businessmen  to  whom  the  ethical  import  of  the  Bee- 
thoven Third  probably  did  not  make  much  sense.  However,  in  the 
meantime,  the  orchestra,  with  its  conductor  and  esoteric  programs, 
had  achieved  a  certain  prestige  and  glamour.  Like  fine  churches, 
public  buildings,  and  parks,  it  soon  became  an  element  in  the  com- 
plete apparatus  of  civic  life  which  focused  not  unwelcome  attention 
upon  the  community,  and  consequently  deserved  support.  Such 
"tycoon"  pride  was  characteristically  expressed  by  the  orator  of  the 
occasion  at  the  dedication  of  Orchestra  Hall,  December  14,  1904: 

Chicago  has  been  the  most  public  spirited  city  in  the  world.  We  are 
proud  of  our  rapid  growth  in  wealth  and  population,  but  we  are  not  sat- 
isfied with  the  merely  industrial  growth  of  our  city— we  demand  some- 
thing more  and  something  better.  We  look  through  the  dust  and  smoke 
of  Chicago  as  she  is,  to  see  the  fair  and  noble  form  of  our  city  as  she 
will  be,  a  center  of  influence,  intellectual  and  artistic  as  well  as  industrial, 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  295 

a  school  for  the  nation,  as  Pericles  declared  Athens  was  the  school  for 
Greece.11 

Intercity  rivalry  was  a  constant  factor  that  stimulated  audience, 
management,  and  conductors.  Even  the  idealistic  Thomas  used  this 
motif  on  his  rebellious  constituents  in  defense  of  his  uncompromis- 
ing stand  on  program  construction: 

The  announcement  of  a  symphony  on  the  program  was  enough  to  keep 
many  people  from  the  concert.  .  .  .  When  fault  was  found  with  the 
severity  of  the  programs  I  would  say:  Do  you  wish  our  program  to  be 
inferior  in  standard  to  those  of  the  Boston  Orchestra?  "No"  was  the 
answer  .  .  ,12 

That  an  orchestra  had  merit  as  an  investment  that  would  re- 
dound to  the  economic  benefit  of  a  city  was  a  frequent  theme.  It 
was  agreed,  however,  that  a  city's  musical  life  serves  as  an  entice- 
ment to  visitors  and  settlers,  and  the  tours  of  the  orchestra  are  con- 
sidered favorable  publicity.  In  one  instance,  the  orchestra  was  de- 
clared to  be  a  force  in  "helping  to  sell  shoes"  for  the  greatest  shoe 
center  in  the  country.13 

There  are  many  who  are  neither  sensitive  to  the  supposed  ethical 
overtones  of  a  symphony,  nor  concerned  with  the  commercial  po- 
tentialities of  a  fine  civic  orchestra,  but  whose  private  social  ambi- 
tions are  gratified  by  indulgence  in  such  an  honorific  enterprise. 
These  impulses  manifest  themselves  in  diverse  ways:  maintenance 
of  boxes  or  other  preferred  locations  in  the  auditorium;  program 
listing  as  patron;  socially  exclusive  erudition  on  matters  artistic;  all 
the  subtle  satisfactions  accruing  from  the  wide  range  of  contact  and 
intimacy  with  a  fashionable  concern,  from  the  occasional  ticket  pur- 
chaser to  the  confidential  relation  with  conductor  and  steering 
members  of  the  board,  with  all  its  invidious  prestige.  The  concert- 
hall  box  has  now  all  but  disappeared  in  the  relentless  democratiza- 
tion of  audience  and  patrons.  But  it  once  reflected  the  highly  prized 
perquisite  of  the  social  elite.  The  private  corridor  and  the  anteroom, 
which  conferred  a  sense  of  aloof  distinction,  translated  the  sym- 
phony and  opera  into  a  social  ritual  more  highly  regarded  than  the 
aesthetic  relaxation  derived  from  the  actual  music,  which,  in  fact, 
was  often  sacrificed. 


296  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Musical  politics  may  run  very  deep,  and  orchestras  have  at  times 
been  a  "football  of  society."  With  motives  something  less  than 
sublime,  various  groups  have  often  rallied  around  rival  conductors, 
thus  literally  splitting  the  resources  of  the  community  to  the  detri- 
ment of  higher  values.  On  occasion,  however,  such  competition  has 
had  its  salutary  moments.  Witness  the  case  of  the  prolonged  feud 
between  the  followers  of  Damrosch  and  Thomas  in  New  York,  dur- 
ing which  two  orchestras  challenged  each  other  for  supremacy.  But 
in  other  less  inspiring  circumstances,  two  orchestras  have  been  sup- 
ported when  nourishment  was  insufficient  for  one.  That  pioneer 
period  has,  in  general,  passed.  Though  factions  will  always  exist, 
funds  are  not  nowadays  so  plentiful  as  to  permit  the  luxury  of  such 
wasteful  competition. 

Since  1893,  when  Walter  Damrosch  first  organized  them,  many 
of  the  responsibilities  for  carrying  on  orchestral  affairs  have  fallen 
to  the  ladies,  whose  efforts  have  proven  indispensable  to  the  sol- 
vency of  the  harassed  orchestral  institution.  Largely  for  the  benefit 
of  the  fashionable  world,  the  matinee  concerts  (usually  Friday 
afternoon)  are  maintained.  Originally  instituted  by  the  New  York 
Philharmonic  as  a  public  rehearsal  which  would  offer  bargain  rates 
to  students,  musicians,  or  others  who  might  wish  to  hear  repeated 
performances,14  these  matinee  programs  have  long  since  graduated 
into  more  or  less  exclusive  afternoon  affairs,  constituting  an  integral 
part  of  the  winter  social  season.  In  Boston  and  Philadelphia,  where 
this  "Friday  Spell"  exerts  its  full  potency,  this  particular  division  of 
the  audience  into  two  segments  has  been  profitable,  for  the  house 
is  sold  out.  However,  in  other  cities,  for  various  reasons,  the  Friday 
patronage,  though  involving  a  similar  principle,  has  for  some  time 
been  hardly  sufficient  in  volume  to  persuade  the  management  that 
the  retention  of  the  traditional  weekday  matinee  was  practicable. 
History  may  be  repeating  itself,  for  the  economic  aristocracy  today, 
analogously  to  the  feudal  aristocracy  of  150  years  ago,  is  declining 
in  power  and  is  relaxing  its  control  over  our  artistic  institutions. 
Musically  this  may  mean  a  popularization  of  the  repertoire  and  a 
significant  alteration  in  the  role  played  by  the  orchestra  in  its  com- 
munity relations. 

There  remains  another  function  of  music  in  general,  and  the 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  297 

orchestra  and  opera  in  particular,  which  has  never  struck  such  deep 
roots  in  the  United  States  as  it  has  in  Europe:  its  contribution  to 
national  solidarity.  The  urge  to  integrate  the  various  aspects  of 
national  life— religion,  politics,  family,  industry,  and  the  arts— is  not 
an  exhibition  of  any  virtue  or  perversity  inherent  in  man  or  nation. 
It  is,  sociologically  speaking,  induced  by  conditions  of  stress,  na- 
tional emergency,  and  tension,  and  does  not  flourish  in  times  of 
peace,  plenty,  and  repose.  If  this  totalitarian  phenomenon  prevailed 
during  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries  in  Europe,  it  is  because 
Europe,  unlike  the  United  States,  experienced  an  abundance  of  ten- 
sion and  relatively  little  repose.  Nations  are  not  "patriotic"  when 
there  is  nothing  to  be  patriotic  about.  Patriotism  is  rather  a  defense 
reaction,  to  protect  the  cherished  values  which  are  threatened,  or 
thought  to  be  threatened.  If  nationalism  became  the  prevailing  idea 
in  the  nineteenth  century,  it  was  not  because  of  the  vague,  spon- 
taneous, and  unconditioned  promptings  of  a  "romantic  impulse," 
but  it  stemmed  rather  from  a  definite  crisis  in  the  affairs  of  nations. 
Prussia  suffered  a  humiliating  defeat  by  Napoleon,  Poland  was  dis- 
membered by  three  powerful  neighbors,  Bohemia  felt  itself  op- 
pressed by  the  Hapsburgs,  Norway  was  uncomfortably  yoked  to 
Sweden,  and  Finland  to  Russia.  Although  some  of  these  culture 
groups  were  not  to  realize  their  nationalistic  yearnings  until  191 8, 
their  internal  cultural  cohesion  was  maintained  throughout  the  pre- 
ceding decades.  This  overwhelming  preoccupation  with  their  cul- 
tural autonomy  is  manifested  in  their  musical  preferences  in  creation 
and  performance,  as  well  as  their  political  policies. 

The  usual  European  conception  of  musical  nationalism  is  that  of 
the  folksong,  in  the  largest  sense,  which  becomes  the  basis  of  the 
more  sophisticated  forms  in  song,  symphony,  and  opera.  This  con- 
ception was,  indeed,  a  critical  symptom  of  the  growing  national 
consciousness,  for  folksongs— the  musical  expression  of  the  in- 
digenous folk— could  be  despised  only  so  long  as  royalty  and  nobility 
set  the  standard  of  taste.  With  that  power  destroyed,  the  center  of 
gravity  of  economic,  political,  and  aesthetic  interests  veered  to  the 
middle  class,  and  to  the  rural  regions  which  had  previously  been 
held  in  serfdom. 

In  addition  to  the  important  folksongs  and  folktunes,  nationalism 


298  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

manifested  itself  symptomatically  in  subject  matter  of  song  and 
opera  (e.g.  Glinka,  Weber);  in  the  use  of  national  dances  (Smetana); 
in  the  revival  of  forgotten  music  and  musicians  from  their  historical 
past  (Rameau,  Bach,  Purcell);  in  the  pressure  to  perform  native  and 
contemporary  works  (Russia,  France,  Germany);  the  purging  of 
foreign  music  and  musicians  (Germany,  United  States  in  World 
War  I);  and  in  the  fabrication  of  an  ideology  which  defines  music 
as  an  emanation  of  the  national  spirit,  or  an  economic  class  (Ger- 
many, Soviet  Union). 

If  the  United  States  has  never  been  infected  with  the  chauvinistic 
virus  as  severely  as  has  Europe,  it  has  at  least  not  escaped  exposure. 
For  the  United  States  is  a  mosaic  of  polyglot  expatriates  who  have 
no  common  and  glorious  past  that  could  be  revived  to  flatter  pro- 
vincial pride.  As  a  nation  almost  without  a  "history"  in  the  vener- 
able sense  of  the  word,  a  nation  that  has  never  experienced  a  serious 
external  crisis,  there  simply  do  not  exist  the  first  essentials  for  a 
good  nationalistic  debauch. 

Two  minor  symptoms  of  nationalism  did  subsequently  put  in 
their  appearance  in  the  United  States:  the  purging  of  German  music 
during  World  War  I,  which  has  been  a  matter  of  apology  ever 
since;  and  the  inauguration  of  a  kind  of  "protective  tariff"  for  Amer- 
ican works.  But  the  wave  of  sentiment  to  "buy  American"  has  never 
reached  a  high  crest  among  the  populace,  and  it  remains  today,  as 
yesterday,  the  expression  of  small  and  interested  pressure  groups. 
It  must  be  said,  therefore,  that  the  orchestral  institutions  and  their 
repertoire  are  not,  in  the  United  States,  a  function  of  national  soli- 
darity. For  the  average  consumer,  they  have  remained  essentially 
"above  the  battle." 

Seating  Plans 

If  we  could  reverse  the  passage  of  time,  transport  ourselves  to  the 
epoch  when  the  oldest  American  orchestra  was  founded,  and  de- 
posit ourselves  on  the  movable  benches  in  the  Apollo  Rooms  for  the 
New  York  Philharmonic  concerts  of  1842,  we  would  witness  a  per- 
formance which  differed  as  much  from  today's  well-disciplined 
execution  as  the  early  practices  in  religion,  government,  housing, 


cms 


*3    o 


8  -Si 


8  55  > 


0  -w 


►Si    <^ 


©  -«s 


-Si 


^►Si 


-S2    . 


•S-S 


-S>     ?S 

0t 
^  8 

•22  ^ 

5  "» 

o  sa 

to  § 

I  a 

hs   8 

■£•«  1 

^3  2?  *» 
S  -Si    k 


8     "S 

£  8 
©    © 

3  55 

l^ 

_  K 
"T3  1i 
<M  -Si 

go 

<j5 

©    *> 

4=0 -Si 

8  ** 

8 


•a 


^    <u 


^> 


+i    © 

8~eo 

,2  ^  is 

•a  «  g 

»>  ►Q     "3 
©    -K.     « 


<b  a 


0    8 

~  © 


3<X>  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

and  costume  differed  from  their  modern  counterparts.  There  would 
appear,  of  course,  many  fundamental  resemblances  to  testify  to  the 
basic  continuity  from  the  order  of  that  day  to  the  present,  but  our 
transfigured  visitor  would  be  more  conscious  of  the  many  mutations, 
through  which  have  evolved  the  present  institutions. 

At  the  inaugural  concert  the  musicians  stood  before  their  desks 
in  the  approved  Leipzig  Gewandhaus  15  manner— a  pattern  well- 
known  in  England  and  the  United  States  too.  A  cartoon  of  about 
1850  pictures  the  Musical  Fund  Orchestra  of  Philadelphia  as  stand- 
ing;16  the  Chicago  Philharmonic,  under  Hans  Balatka,17  in  1869, 
followed  the  same  system;  the  Manchester  (England)  orchestra 
of  1840  is  described  by  Richard  Hoffman,  the  noted  New  York 
pianist  of  the  Philharmonic  days: 

...  I  was  taken  and  was  allowed  to  be  on  the  stage  near  my  father 
whose  chair  I  occupied  while  he  was  playing.  The  English  orchestral 
players  always  stood  while  playing;  they  were  not  allowed  the  privilege 
of  sitting  and  crossing  their  legs  in  the  listless  manner  which  so  often 
offends  the  eye  in  our  modern  performances.18 

The  custom  must  have  lingered  some  time  in  New  York,  for  in  1853 
a  bewildered  critic 

cannot  account  for  the  necessity  of  the  performers  standing.  Aside  from 
being  uncomfortable  to  them,  this  looks  badly  and  impresses  the  specta- 
tors uncomfortably.19 

The  origins  of  this  custom,  which  in  Leipzig  did  not  finally  give 
way  to  general  seating  until  1905,  are  still  obscure.  Hanslick,20  the 
student  of  Viennese  musical  history,  averred  that  it  had  been 
necessitated  by  limited  floor  space,  or  possibly  motivated  by  respect 
for  royalty  who  were  so  frequently  present.  The  "physical"  logic 
of  the  standing  position  would  have  suggested  the  same  practice. 
Players  of  wind  and  string  instruments  (excepting,  of  course,  the 
cello),  enjoy  greater  freedom  of  movement  in  the  standing  position 
than  in  the  cramped  seated  posture.  Accordingly,  after  the  pattern 
set  by  Biilow  of  Meiningen,  where  all  but  the  cellos  stood,  Gericke, 
Nikisch,  and  Paur  in  Boston  and  New  York  at  times  ordered  their 
violins  to  stand,  on  the  allegation  that  they  thereby  enhanced  the 
volume  of  their  tone.21  In  exceptional  cases  even  today,  for  dramatic 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life 


301 


Leipzig  Gewandhaus  Orchestra,  Felix  Mendelssohn, Conductor,  1835 

Mendelssohn  was  the  first  conductor  to  direct  the  Gewandhaus  Orchestra 
with  a  baton  fro?n  the  podium.  The  -players  were  ranged  on  steeply  ter- 
raced risers.  Note  the  central  location  of  the  double  basses  and  cellos 
which,  in  spite  of  the  addition  of  the  time-beater,  helped  set  the  rhythm 
for  the  group.  (Drawn  from  description  in  August  Schmidt,  Musikalische 
Reisemomente  auf  einer  Wanderung  durch  Norddeutschland.  Hamburg; 
1846.) 


reasons  rather  than  for  considerations  of  etiquette  or  physical  con- 
venience, violins  may  still  rise  for  the  rendition  of  such  numbers  as 
Paganini's  Moto  Perpetuo,  which  features  that  instrument.  Gericke 
theatrically  performed  Handel's  Largo  in  Boston  and  New  York 
in  1887,  the  violins  ranged  across  the  stage  in  standing  position. 

As  orchestras  grew  in  size  and  complexity,  the  necessity  for 
coordination  of  the  individual  players  increased  correspondingly. 
Therefore,  in  addition  to  the  desire  for  sheer  comfort,  the  most 
compelling  argument  for  the  seated  position,  which  Hanslick  refers 
to  as  the  "Viennese  style,"  was  the  urgency  for  a  mutually  un- 
obstructed view  of  the  conductor  and  fellow  players.  The  old 
Gewandhaus  orchestra  had  surmounted  the  obstacle  of  the  standing 
position  by  steeply  terraced  risers.22 

The  seating  plan,  which  has  been  fairly  well  standardized  during 
the  last  century,  rests  on  three  major  principles:  (1)  the  relation  of 


302 


THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 


London  Philharmonic  Society,  Michael  Costa,  Conductor,  184-6 

Costa  was  among  the  -first  to  use  a  ground  plan  approximating  the  mod- 
ern styles.  Note,  however,  the  divided  cellos  and  double  basses,  and  the 
location  of  the  principal  cello  and  double  bass  at  the  conductor's  feet. 
This  is  a  survival  of  the  period  when  the  bass  parts  set  the  rhythm  and 
tempo  of  the  playing,  and  took  their  position  next  to  the  conductor, 
who  sat  at  the  clavier.  (Redrawn  from  Reginald  Nettel,  The  Orchestra 
in  England.  London:  Jonathan  Cape,  1946.) 


Boston  Symphony  Orchestra,  Henschel,  Conductor,  1881 

Henschel  followed  the  tradition  of  dividing  the  cellos  and  basses  on  the 
wings  of  the  orchestra  so  that  they  could  be  plainly  heard  by  the  play- 
ers. This  seating  of  the  basses  persisted  in  America  until  about  1900, 
and  was  used  by  Theodore  Thomas  and  Anton  Seidl  in  Chicago  and 
New  York.  (Compiled  and  drawn  from  various  sources.) 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  303 

the  various  choirs  to  one  another  and  to  the  conductor  for  mutual 
visual  and  aural  coordination  and  support;  ( 2 )  acoustical  effect  upon 
the  listener;  and  (3)  the  aesthetic  and  visual  impression  upon  the 
audience.  There  is,  of  course,  no  precise  unanimity  of  opinion  as  to 
which  detailed  pattern  best  promotes  these  ends,  although  the  gen- 
eral plan,  proposed  by  Berlioz  in  his  notable  treatise,  is  still  basic 
today.  That  conductors  were  disposed  to  experiment  drastically 
is  evident  from  a  critical  comment  on  the  disposition  of  instruments 
of  the  New  York  Philharmonic.  In  1853,  the  previously  cited  New 
York  critic  was 

surprised  to  see  the  tenors  (violas)  sent  almost  to  the  top  (highest  riser) 
of  the  orchestra— choked  between  the  brass  and  the  double-basses.  To  our 
thinking,  the  tenors,  from  their  very  character,  must  never  be  separated 
from  the  violins.  .  .  .  The  celli  were  also  scattered  among  the  double- 
basses.  .  .  .  The  celli  must,  like  the  tenors,  form  a  compact  body.  .  .  . 
The  double-basses  ought  to  bring  up  the  rear  of  the  orchestra  and  only 
by  rare  exception  be  placed  in  the  center.23 

Berlioz  in  1856  recommended  the  semicircular  plan,  which  is 
in  universal  use  today.  The  players  are  ranged  in  arcs,  with  the  con- 
ductor stationed  at  the  hub  facing  the  orchestra,  his  back  to  the 
audience.  Instead  of  standing  in  the  midst  of  his  players,  facing  half 
his  orchestra  and  the  audience,  as  did  Jullien  and  many  other  con- 
ductors before  1850,  he  now  stood  aloof,  more  conspicuous  and 
more  responsible.  First  and  second  violins  were  divided  to  his  left 
and  right  respectively,  with  the  violas  deployed  in  the  middle;  wood- 
winds behind  the  first  violins  and  brass  behind  the  violas;  cellos  and 
double  basses  in  a  double  row  in  the  rear,  half  of  them  on  the  right 
wing  and  half  on  the  left;  harp  in  the  foreground  close  to  the  con- 
ductor, and  percussion  in  the  extreme  rear.24  This  approximate 
arrangement  has  been  preserved  for  us  in  a  photograph  of  the  newly 
founded  Boston  orchestra  25  under  Henschel  who,  inexperienced  in 
conducting,  was  probably  happy  to  adopt  the  recommendation  of 
the  most  authoritative  text  on  orchestration  of  that  day.  However, 
the  strangest  detail  of  Henschel's  seating  for  the  first  concert  con- 
sisted in  ranging  the  string  sections  (first  and  second  violins  and 
viola)  in  concentric  semicircles  around  the  podium.  The  first  violins 


J LjUl.  NJiaJEi 


Lewis  Antoine  Jullien  (1812-1860)  was  a  popular  French  conductor  who 
was  active  for  some  years  in  England  and  toured  the  United  States  in 
1853-54.  According  to  the  custom  which  still  prevailed  in  many  orches- 
tras, he  faced  the  audience  while  conducting.  Unfortunately  no  print  of 
an  American  orchestra  exists  depicting  this  style  of  conducting.  Here 
Jullien  conducts  a  Promenade  concert  in  London  in  1849.  The  orchestra 
of  sixty  pieces  which  Jullien  brought  to  America  contained  the  finest 
instrumentalists  available  in  Europe.  (Drawing  by  Richard  Doyle.  Picture 
Post  Library.) 


304 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  305 

occupied  the  first  semicircle,  the  second  violins  the  second  semi- 
circle, and  the  violas,  the  third.  Aside  from  the  eccentricity  of  this 
system,  the  Boston  habitues  seemed  to  be  most  disturbed  by  the 
familiar  faces  peeking  out  of  the  most  unaccustomed  places.  Well- 
known  viola  players  sat  apparently  ready  to  play  first  violin,  and 
some  first  violinists  were  stationed  where  one  had  been  accustomed 
to  look  for  the  seconds.  Since  all  the  strings  were  thus  divided,  the 
complete  orchestra  was  spread  over  the  whole  stage,  the  right  half 
duplicating  the  left  half. 

Even  before  Berlioz  had  formulated  his  plan,  the  seating  of  the 
orchestra  had  already  crystallized  into  recognizable  form.  Costa,  the 
brilliant  disciplinarian  of  the  London  Philharmonic,  introduced  a 
new  ground  plan  as  early  as  1846,26  while  Mendelssohn  in  the  same 
year  was  described  by  another  observer  27  as  having  introduced  in 
the  Gewandhaus  another  system,  in  which  the  strings,  woodwinds, 
and  brass  were  ranged  in  separate  tiers  on  a  series  of  risers. 

It  is  difficult  today  to  understand  the  persistent  tendency  in  all 
these  arrangements  to  divide  the  cellos  and  double  basses,  half  of 
each  on  opposite  wings  of  the  arc.  Henschel,  who  had  discussed 
the  seating  with  his  friend  Brahms,  had  adopted  the  same  pattern 
but  soon  abandoned  it  after  having  evoked  this  criticism,  at  the 
opening  concert,  of  the  "novel  arrangement": 

We  think  it  a  mistake  to  divide  the  cellos  and  the  basses  into  two  bodies, 
separated  by  the  entire  width  of  the  stage.  .  .  .  The  arrangement  of  the 
brasses  at  the  back  of  the  strings  seems  to  be  an  improvement.28 

Wagner,  in  his  letter  of  advance  instruction  to  Heckel  of  Mann- 
heim, December  6,  1871,  similarly  requested  that  the  double  basses 
be  stationed  on  the  left  and  right  wing-front  of  the  orchestra;  Seidl 
employed  this  arrangement  in  New  York,  and  Thomas  during  the 
early  years  of  the  Chicago  orchestra.29  Probably  no  better  explana- 
tion for  the  widespread  practice  of  dispersing  the  basses  has  ever 
been  found  than  the  recommendation  of  Rousseau,  who  advises 
(under  totally  different  circumstances)  that: 

the  instruments  of  each  section,  except  the  basses,  should  be  grouped  to- 
gether in  the  interest  of  unity  and  precision.  The  basses  should  be  de- 


8 

&0 


8 


J3 


o 


3-2 

ISO 

•a  oj 
*>^ 

■a  .g 


bo£ 

8    *» 

"«  i 

CO  ^ 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  307 

ployed  around  the  two  clavecins  and  throughout  the  orchestra,  since  it  is 
the  bass  which  must  control  and  support  all  the  other  parts,  and  every 
performer  must  be  able  to  hear  it  equally  ivell.30  [Author's  Italics.] 

One  does  wonder  why  this  scheme,  understandably  necessary  when 
the  band  was  conducted  from  the  clavier,  held  on  so  tenaciously 
into  the  period  of  the  dominant,  time-beating  conductor. 

Since  about  192 1,  following  the  innovation  of  Sir  Henry  Wood 
and  Stokowski,  some  conductors  have  moved  the  cellos  to  the  right- 
front,  occupying  the  area  vacated  by  the  second  violins,  which  were 
placed  inside  the  first  violins.  This  conspicuous  transfer  is  in  recog- 
nition of  the  important  thematic  values  of  the  cello  voice,  thus  vis- 
ibly dramatized  in  its  new  position.  The  second  violins,  on  their 
part,  are  rendered  somewhat  stronger  than  previously  since  they  are 
now  turned  out  to  the  audience.  On  the  other  hand,  they  sacrifice 
the  antiphonal  emphasis  which  their  separate  location  on  the  op- 
posite side  of  the  podium  permitted  in  certain  types  of  classical 
composition.  A  slight  variation  of  the  above,  in  which  the  violas 
occupy  the  old  front  location  of  the  second  violins,  was  introduced 
by  Goossens  and  Koussevitzky  in  their  respective  orchestras— a  seat- 
ing which  corresponds  to  the  usual  string  quartet  sequence. 

A  more  drastic  permutation  of  instruments,  which  today  is  more 
significant  as  historic  testimony  to  the  capricious  experimentation 
of  the  young  Stokowski 31  than  as  a  lasting  contribution  to  orchestral 
lore,  was  the  reversal  of  the  position  of  strings  and  wind  choirs 
sprung  on  the  audiences  of  Philadelphia,  New  York,  Los  Angeles, 
and  San  Francisco  during  the  season  of  1939-40,  by  its  author,  who 
was  indulging  his  flare  for  acoustics  and  electronics.  Nearly  ten 
years  previously,  the  conductor  of  the  Milwaukee  Symphony  Or- 
chestra 32  had  anticipated  this  reshuffle  on  another  theory— that  the 
prominence  of  the  strings  was  an  anachronism  in  a  period  when 
modern  instrumentation  featured  wind  and  percussion.  These  the- 
oretical demands  were  satisfied  by  placing  the  woodwinds  to  the 
immediate  front-right  and  retaining  the  strings  at  left. 

Stokowski's  "upside-down"  orchestra  not  only  was  not  imitated, 
but  actually  aroused  universal  aversion.  It  offended  the  visual  habits 
of  the  audience,  and  was  deemed  unnecessary  by  musicians  and 
critics,  who  reasoned  that  a  good  conductor  had  at  his  command 


308 


THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 


Leopold  Stokowski's  "Upside -Down"  Orchestra,  1939  — 40 

StokowskPs  "Up  side -Down"  Orchestra  was  an  acoustical  experiment  on 
the  part  of  the  resourceful  conductor  to  strengthen  the  strmgs  by  placing 
them  close  to  the  reflecting  surface  of  the  rear  walls.  This  seating  plan  was 
quickly  abandoned. 

many  less  circuitous  ways  of  attaining  balance.  The  pithy  comment 
that,  in  this  new  order,  the  "front  rows  did  not  keep  busy  enough 
to  put  up  a  good  show"  epitomized  the  public  verdict  with  more 
finality  than  any  esoteric  analysis. 


In  a  "man's  world"  the  symphony  orchestras  were  naturally 
manned  by  men.  But  in  retrospect,  it  is  obvious  that  it  was  only  a 
question  of  time  before  the  feminist  assault  against  the  male  monop- 
oly would  be  made.  Indeed,  music  was  rapidly  being  accepted  as  a 
particularly  congenial  pursuit  for  the  "weaker  sex."  Consequently 
the  orchestra,  like  the  barber  shop,  the  halls  of  Congress,  the  army, 
and  many  another  male  sanctum,  has  experienced  the  infiltration  of 
women.  Although  the  harp  was  the  entering  wedge  with  which 
she  gained  early  entry  into  the  major  orchestras,  other  instruments 
have  subsequently  been  mastered,  so  that  today  very  few  orchestras 
still  consider  the  orchestra  as  man's  exclusive  domain.  As  in  so  many 
other  occupations,  the  process  has  been  accelerated  during  the  last 
two  world  wars  when  large  numbers  of  men  were  diverted  to  more 
strenuous  and  urgent  duties. 

The  issue  of  admitting  women  to  orchestral  posts  had  been  re- 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  309 

peatedly  ventilated  in  the  musical  press,  which  adapted  all  the 
familiar  antifeminist  aphorisms  to  the  special  circumstances.  Al- 
though women  had  been  prominent  as  vocal  and  instrumental  solo- 
ists, and  though  many  all-women  orchestras  performed  successfully, 
there  was  some  resistance  to  mingling  the  sexes  in  the  professional 
orchestras. 

With  a  light  repertoire,  no  travelling  to  do  and  no  arduous  rehearsals, 
they  (all-women  orchestras)  might  make  a  success  as  a  unique  feature  in 
social  engagements. 

So  writes  an  editor  in  1895.  There  would  be  little  prospect  beyond 
that  because  of  her  alleged 

physical  incapacity  to  endure  the  strain  of  four  or  five  hours  a  day  re- 
hearsal, followed  by  the  prolonged  tax  of  public  performance  .  .  .  she 
cannot  endure  the  strain  of  competition  with  men.33 

A  similar  opinion  was  pronounced  as  late  as  1925,  after  women  had 
already  found  a  place  in  some  of  the  more  important  orchestras  of 
the  world.  Sir  Henry  Wood,  conductor  of  the  London  Queen's 
Hall  Orchestra,  claims  to  have  been  the  first  to  admit  women  into 
a  professional  orchestra,34  when  in  191 3  he  "could  not  allow  preju- 
dice to  prevail"  and  accepted  six  women  in  the  string  section.  How- 
ever, his  colleague,  Sir  Thomas  Beecham,  who  never  fumbles  an 
opportunity  to  express  his  sentiments  in  quotable  style,  takes  die- 
hard issue  with  the  trend: 

I  do  not  like,  and  never  will,  the  association  of  men  and  women  in  or- 
chestras and  other  instrumental  combinations.  .  .  .  My  spirit  is  torn  all 
the  time  between  a  natural  inclination  to  let  myself  go  and  the  depressing 
thought  that  I  must  behave  like  a  gentleman.  I  have  been  unable  to  avoid 
noticing  that  the  presence  of  a  half-dozen  goodlooking  women  in  the 
orchestra  is  a  distinctly  distracting  factor.  As  a  member  of  the  orchestra 
once  said  to  me:  "If  she  is  attractive,  I  can't  play  with  her;  if  she  is  not, 
then  I  won't."  35 

Semi-professional  and  amateur  orchestras  have  long  accepted 
women.  However,  it  was  a  matter  of  public  comment  when  Cleve- 
land included  four  women  in  1923.  A  sample  tally  taken  during 
World  War  II  yielded  the  following  counts  of  women  members  in 
the  principal  American  orchestras: 


310  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 


Baltimore 

ii 

Indianapolis 

13 

New  York 

0 

Boston 

o 

Kansas  City 

16 

Philadelphia 

5 

Chicago 

6 

Los  Angeles 

12 

Pittsburgh 

18 

Cincinnati 

5 

Minneapolis 

5 

St.  Louis 

5 

Cleveland 

4 

Washington 

16 

San  Francisco 

8 

Detroit 

4 

New  Orleans 

17 

Seattle 

21 

Houston 

26 

It  is  quite  probable  that  the  much  discussed  scarcity  of  good 
string  players  has  been  alleviated  by  the  admission  of  women  in 
what  was  formerly  man's  exclusive  domain. 

The  Conductor 

In  1842,  the  differentiation  of  the  conductor  from  the  general  mem- 
bership of  the  American  orchestra  had  just  begun.  In  Europe,  on  the 
other  hand,  such  conductors  as  Habeneck  (Paris),  Costa  (London), 
Spohr  (Cassel),  Weber  (Dresden),  and  Mendelssohn  (Leipzig)  had 
already  lifted  this  function  to  a  high  professional  level  before  mid- 
century;  but  since  no  body  of  instrumentalists  comparable  to  such 
orchestras  existed  in  this  country,  the  profession  of  conductor  had 
not  yet  evolved  beyond  the  rudimentary  stages. 

For  the  first  several  years,  the  New  York  Philharmonic  director- 
ship was  "passed  around,"  on  the  early  pattern  of  the  London  Phil- 
harmonic, and  had  all  the  earmarks  of  being  in  part  an  honorific 
rather  than  a  genuinely  functional  post.  In  fact,  its  constitution  pro- 
vided that  the  conductor  should  be  chosen  for  each  concert.  Not 
only  were  no  two  concerts  in  succession  conducted  by  the  same 
person,  but  during  the  first  season  two  or  three  musicians  presided 
in  that  capacity  within  the  same  program.  In  1842,  the  American 
orchestra  was  clearly  at  an  intermediate  stage  where  the  person 
superintending  the  performance  was  no  longer  a  Kapellmeister- 
composer  of  the  eighteenth-century  type,  nor  yet  a  modern  con- 
ductor clothed  with  authority  and  interpretive  rights  which  were 
soon  to  be  his.  This  incipient  conductor  was  then  only  the  "first 
among  equals"  who  devoted  his  energies  exclusively  to  time-beating 
to  achieve  a  minimum  coordination  in  a  common  task.  Before  many 
years  had  elapsed,  both  the  orchestra  and  public  sensed  the  benefits 
of  conductor  discipline,  and  the  selection  of  the  conductor  gradually 


LEOPOLD  STOKOWSKI 

The  most  glamorous  of  American  con- 
ductors, from  1919  to  1936  Stokowski 
kept  the  Philadelphia  audiences  in  a  con- 
stant state  of  excitement  and  expec- 
tancy. He  continued  his  innovations  with 
the  experimental  seating  arrangement  he- 
low,  in  which  the  positions  of  the  strings 
and  wind  choirs  are  reversed.  He  is  shown 
conducting  the  Philadelphia  Orchestra. 
{Courtesy  of  the  Philadelphia  Orchestra 
Association) 


BENDER   PHOTOGRAPH 


Two  sketches  of  the  Gewandhaus  Orchestra,  Leipzig,  about  1840.  The 
members  of  the  famous  orchestra  did  not  take  seats  until  about  1905. 
(The  Bettmann  Archive) 


r: 


f|V^rr 


■Uz**J^ 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  311 

narrowed  down  until  one  man,  Theodore  Eisfeld,  after  having  been 
repeatedly  elected,  was  thereby  transformed  into  a  "permanent" 
conductor  of  the  Philharmonic. 

But  within  the  next  half-century  the  conductor  was  elevated 
from  these  embryological  beginnings  to  a  position  of  dominance 
never  before  known  in  the  history  of  music.  Thereby  was  inaugu- 
rated the  era  of  the  "prima  donna"  or  "virtuoso"  conductor,  who 
welded  the  orchestra  into  his  personal  instrument  and,  equally  sig- 
nificantly, became  an  arbiter  of  taste  in  the  community. 

The  most  powerful  stimulant  to  the  generation  of  this  musical 
executive  proceeded  inevitably  from  the  intrinsic  nature  of  con- 
certed music  itself.  The  requirements  of  coordination  of  an  increas- 
ing number  of  musicians,  some  of  whom  cherish  their  own  aesthetic 
notions  and  are  therefore  "prima  donnas"  in  their  own  right,  would 
almost  predestine  the  emergence  of  a  kind  of  dictator  who  would 
impose  his  single  will  to  guarantee  the  integration  of  the  many. 
With  the  proliferating  complexity  of  the  score,  which  prohibits 
general  familiarity  on  the  part  of  the  rank  and  file  of  the  ensemble, 
the  generalship  of  a  conductor  acquires  both  indispensability  and 
prestige.  It  is  easy  to  understand  how  this  strategic  function  might 
be  inflated,  as  in  any  other  human  relationship,  by  certain  con- 
spicuous personality  traits  which  many  conductors  have  not  been 
loath  to  cultivate  in  both  professional  and  public  relationships.  They 
thereby  converted  the  baton  into  a  wand,  and  the  podium  into  a 
pedestal  enshrouded  in  awe  and  fascination. 

In  the  remote  period  of  orchestral  infancy,  some  of  the  more 
imaginative  musicians  had  already  correctly  sensed  the  needs  of 
more  forthright  control  over  a  disjointed  musical  ensemble.  Thus 
Mozart  wrote  to  his  father,  after  having  observed  the  celebrated 
Mannheim  orchestra  in  action: 

I  wish  you  could  see  the  subordination  that  prevails  there,  the  authority 
that  Cannabich  exercises.  .  .  .  Cannabich,  who  is  the  best  Director  I 
have  ever  seen,  is  both  beloved  and  feared  by  his  subordinates.  .  .  . 
This  can  never  be  the  case  in  Salzburg  unless  the  Prince  will  place  con- 
fidence in  either  you  or  me  and  give  us  full  powers  which  are  indis- 
pensable to  a  conductor  of  music.  ...  In  Salzburg  everyone  is  master- 
so  no  one  is  master.  If  I  were  to  undertake  it,  I  should  insist  upon  exer- 


312  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

cising  entire  authority.  The  Grand  Chamberlain  must  have  nothing  to 
say  as  to  musical  matters,  or  any  point  relating  to  music.36 

There  have  been  conductors,  both  operatic  and  orchestral,  who  had 
actually  achieved  what  Mozart  so  pathetically  desired.  Among  the 
early  conductors,  there  were  a  conspicuous  few  who  possessed  the 
executive  abilities  as  well  as  the  professional  opportunities  to  enforce 
such  discipline.  Lully,  at  the  Court  ci  Louis  XIV,  with  the  aid  of 
his  famous  "baton"  and  an  ambition  which  was  both  shrewd  and 
inflexible,  set  the  standard  and  style  of  French  opera  for  a  century 
and  more;  Habeneck,  the  founder  of  the  Concerts  du  Conservatoire 
(1828),  conducting  from  the  first  violin  part,  with  violin  under  arm 
or  chin,  succeeded,  after  several  seasons  of  rehearsals,  in  disclosing 
for  the  first  time,  according  to  Wagner's  testimony,  the  real  beau- 
ties of  Beethoven's  Ninth;  Michael  Costa,  the  "drill  sergeant"  of  the 
London  Philharmonic  (1848-54),  paraphrased  Mozart's  complaint 
and  anticipated  the  ideology  of  the  whole  fraternity  of  modern 
American  conductors  when  he  declared  his  conviction  "that  no 
orchestra  can  go  well  unless  the  entire  control  is  placed  in  the  hands 
of  him  who  is  the  only  responsible  person  for  the  accurate  per- 
formance." 37 

But  the  tradition  inaugurated  by  such  pioneers  was  a  long  time 
becoming  a  general  convention.  Until  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth 
century  and  later,  with  a  few  exceptions,  discipline  meant  not  much 
more  than  the  mere  synchronizing  of  parts,  and  the  insuring  of  a 
minimum  degree  of  amalgamation  and  unity  by  means  of  sparse 
rehearsals.  That  even  this  elementary  requirement  was  no  mean 
achievement  in  those  days  of  tentative  orchestral  morale,  when 
players  were  often  incompetent,  lazy,  or  even  insolent,  usually  of 
low  social  estate  and  almost  never  well  remunerated,  is  amply  evi- 
dent from  the  charges  itemized  by  Berlioz  in  the  first  important 
modern  treatise  on  instrumentation  and  conducting  (1856): 

.  .  .  players  of  stringed  instruments  rarely  give  themselves  the  trouble 
to  play  a  tremolo;  many  double  bass  players  .  .  .  from  idleness  ...  or 
from  fear  of  difficulties  .  .  .  simplify  their  part;  flute  players  often 
transpose  entire  passages  an  octave  higher  to  gain  ascendancy  over  the 
clarinets  and  oboes.  ...  It  occurs  everywhere  (I  do  not  say  in  some 
orchestras)  .  .  .  that  violinists  do  not  count  their  bars  rest,  and  always 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  313 

from  idleness  rely  on  others  doing  it  .  .  .  scarcely  half  of  them  come 
in  again  at  the  right  moment.38 

Individual  show-offs  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  embellish 
their  parts  for  grandstand  effect  or  from  mischievous  impulses.  Men- 
delssohn, with  all  his  personal  popularity,  prestige,  and  aristocratic 
station,  could  not  bend  the  London  orchestra  entirely  to  his  will 
in  manner  of  performance  and  choice  of  repertoire;  Berlioz  was  not 
able  to  make  his  flutists  in  Stuttgart  stick  to  the  printed  notes,  nor 
to  refrain  from  decorating  their  parts  with  trills  and  ornament.39 
These  conductors  would  all  have  commiserated  with  Hamlet,  who 
admonished  his  players:  "And  let  those  who  play  the  clowns  speak 
no  more  than  is  set  down  for  them." 

To  a  large  extent  such  liberties  derived  from  the  undeveloped 
prestige  of  the  composer  as  much  as  from  the  immature  conception 
of  the  conductor.  This  prestige  and  authority  was  soon  to  ma- 
terialize. 

The  romantic  notion  of  the  function  of  the  conductor  as  tran- 
scending disciplined  time-beating  was  firmly  established  by  Hans 
von  Biilow,  Liszt,  and  Wagner,  the  first  two  as  practicing  conduc- 
tors, and  the  third  as  both  conductor  and  codifier  of  principles. 
Together  they  revolutionized  the  art  of  conducting  by  superposing 
on  the  practiced  mechanical  execution,  which  they  now  demanded 
from  their  players  as  a  matter  of  course,  an  interpretative  flexibility 
which  reinforced  the  conductor's  position.  After  the  appearance  of 
Berlioz'  UArt  du  Chef  cTOrchestre  (1856)  and  Wagner's  brochure 
Uber  das  Dirigieren  (1869),  the  orchestra  was  bound  to  become  a 
unified  instrument,  and  a  vehicle  of  the  conductor's  personal  musi- 
cianship. The  difference  between  these  pioneer  tracts  is  essentially 
that  Wagner  began  where  Berlioz  left  off.  If  Berlioz  emphasized 
technical  proficiencv,  Wagner  took  this  for  granted  and  made  the 
conductor  a  full-fledged  interpreter,  seeking  the  "melos"  in  what- 
ever voice  or  section  it  was  to  be  found.  No  Nikisch  would  have 
risen  from  the  pages  of  Berlioz'  Chef  d'Orchestre.  That  both  Wag- 
ner and  his  audience  recognized  this  shift  toward  romantic  emphasis 
is  clear  from  the  report  of  Amy  Fay,  an  American  music  student 
in  Germany,    who    later    became    the   sister-in-law    of   Theodore 


314  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Thomas.  She  sets  down  her  observations  of  Wagner  conducting  his 
Faust  Overture  in  May,  1871: 

He  didn't  beat  time  simply,  as  most  conductors  do,  but  he  had  all  sorts 
of  little  ways  to  indicate  what  he  wished.  It  was  very  difficult  to  follow 
him,  and  they  had  to  "keep  their  eyes  on  him"  as  B  used  to  say.  He  held 
them  down  during  the  first  part,  so  as  to  give  the  uncertainty  and  spec- 
ulativeness  of  Faust's  character.  Then,  as  Mephistopheles  comes  in,  he 
gradually  let  them  loose  with  a  terrible  crescendo,  and  made  you  feel 
as  if  Hell  suddenly  gaped  at  your  feet.  Then,  when  Gretchen  appeared 
all  was  deliciously  melody  and  sweetness.  .  .  .  The  effect  was  tremen- 
dous. .  .  .  When  he  conducts  he  is  almost  beside  himself  with  excite- 
ment. .  .  .  He  really  seems  to  be  improvising  on  the  orchestra.  .  .  . 
Wagner  controlled  the  orchestra  as  if  it  were  a  single  instrument  and 
he  was  playing  on  it.40 

An  English  critic  made  similar  comments  on  the  individualistic  man- 
ner of  Wagner's  conducting  during  his  one-year  tenure  in  London: 

So  many  quickenings  and  slackenings  of  tempo  we  never  heard  in  a 
Haydn  symphony  before.  .  .  .  Mendelssohn's  Fingal's  Cave  overture 
was  taken  slower  than  necessary  at  the  beginning  and  faster  than  pos- 
sible at  the  end.  It  was  rather  a  zig-zag  of  a  performance,  but  wonder- 
fully vigorous  and  animated. 

Professionally,  Biilow  established  himself  as  the  first  virtuoso 
conductor  when  he  startled  Europe  with  the  brilliant  renditions  of 
the  traveling  Meiningen  orchestra  in  1880-85.  Biilow  had  all  the 
virtues  and  vices  subsequently  associated  with  that  species:  talent  for 
discipline  and  skillful  rehearsing,  conducting  from  memory,  pic- 
turesque histrionic  presence,  personal  readings,  speeches  from  the 
stage,  and  public  idolatry.  Nothing  new  has  been  added  since  that 
day  in  America  excepting,  of  course,  the  element  of  munificent 
emolument.  With  the  establishment  of  the  system  of  guest  conduct- 
ing which  has  flourished  in  Europe  as  well  as  in  the  United  States 
since  about  the  turn  of  the  century,  the  virtuoso  conductor  achieves 
his  highest  pinnacle.  In  fact,  the  interpreter  has  gained  almost  higher 
priority  than  the  music  itself.  We  have  come  a  long  way  from  the 
timid  and  apologetic  interruptions  of  Spohr  who,  in  conducting 
the  London  Philharmonic  in  1820,  reports  that  "I  took  the  liberty, 
when  the  execution  did  not  satisfy  me,  to  stop  and  in  a  very  polite 
but  earnest  manner  to  remark  on  the  manner  of  execution."  41  Com- 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  315 

pare  this  to  the  modern  paragon  of  musicianship,  the  stern  authority 
who  wields  over  his  troupe  the  power  of  hiring  and  firing  as  a  con- 
stant threat  to  the  incompetent  and  a  spur  to  the  indifferent. 

The  enhanced  prestige  of  the  conductor  is  further  reflected  in 
his  position  vis-a-vis  the  orchestra.  Berlioz  had  expressly  mentioned 
that  the  conductor  should  turn  his  back  to  the  audience  and  face 
the  orchestra.  Costa  and  Spohr  had  already  done  so,  but  the  practice 
was  not  yet  universally  accepted.  Devrient,  who  had  shared  with 
Mendelssohn  the  responsibility  of  reviving  the  St.  Matthew  Passion 
in  1829,  described  how  Mendelssohn  took  his  position  between  the 
choruses,  his  back  on  one,  his  eye  on  the  other  and  on  the  orchestra 
"since  it  was  not  proper  at  that  time  to  turn  the  back  to  the  audi- 
ence." 42  Such  a  position  was  still  a  survival  of  the  informal  eighteenth 
century  arrangement  in  which  the  conductor  stood,  or  sat  at  the 
clavier,  in  the  midst  of  his  men  and,  with  bobbing  head  and  stamping 
foot,  somehow  assumed  enough  initiative  to  carry  them  along.  As 
late  as  1843,  a  picture  in  the  London  Illustrated  News  shows  the 
conductor  in  the  midst  of  his  men,  with  baton,  facing  the  audience 
but  actually  out  of  sight  of  some  of  his  own  men.43  Jullien,  who 
visited  America  in  the  fifties,  stood  similarly  in  the  midst  of  his 
players  facing  the  audience.  In  London,  the  "conducting"  was  actu- 
ally shared  between  the  first  violinist  "leader,"  who  set  the  tempo, 
and  the  "conductor"  who  presided  at  the  clavier  with  the  score. 
This  dual  system  was  shaken,  though  not  finally  abolished,  by  Spohr 
in  1820  when  he  assumed  entire  charge  of  the  rehearsal  and  concert, 
and  shocked  the  assemblage  with  the  employment  of  the  baton  to 
keep  time.44  Mendelssohn,  who  took  the  leadership  of  the  Gewand- 
haus  orchestra  in  1835,  followed  the  example  set  by  Spohr  and 
others  in  assuming  personal  direction  of  the  orchestra,  which  had 
previously  been  in  the  hands  of  the  concertmaster;  and  he,  too,  took 
his  position,  baton  in  hand,  in  front  of  the  band. 

Although  the  conductor  had  now  taken  his  position  at  the  head 
of  the  orchestra,  it  was  not  yet  agreed  that  he  should  beat  out  every 
measure.  This  continuous  windmill  of  gyrations  was  judged  to  be 
disturbing  and  offensive  to  the  listener,  and  a  physical  and  aural  bar- 
rier to  the  unhampered  enjoyment  of  the  music.  Devrient  and  Men- 
delssohn, in  preparing  the  Passion  music: 


316  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

had  many  discussions  about  the  best  way  to  conduct.  The  continued 
beating  throughout  the  movement,  that  must  necessarily  become 
mechanical,  vexed  me,  and  does  so  still  [1869].  ...  It  always  seemed 
to  me  that  the  conductor  ought  to  beat  time  only  when  the  difficulty  of 
certain  passages,  or  unsteadiness  of  the  performers,  renders  it  necessary. 
Surely  the  aim  of  every  conductor  should  be  to  influence  without  ob- 
truding himself.  Felix  determined  on  this  occasion  to  show  me  how  this 
could  be  done,  and  he  succeeded  to  perfection.  I  recall  these  circum- 
stances with  peculiar  satisfaction,  as  in  late  years  the  extraordinary  ges- 
ticulations of  the  conductors  have  been  made  a  feature  in  musical  per- 
formances.45 

Devrient  further  refers  with  admiration  to  "the  confidence  with 
which  he  [Mendelssohn]  would  drop  his  baton  during  the  longer 
movements  when  he  knew  they  were  safe."  Richard  Hoffman,  the 
New  York  pianist,  who  as  a  youth  had  attended  the  Birmingham 
Festival  of  1846  at  which  Mendelssohn  conducted,  confirms  this 
laissez-faire  conception  of  the  conductor: 

Mendelssohn  would  seldom  beat  more  than  the  first  sixteen  or  twenty- 
four  bars  of  an  overture  or  movement  of  a  symphony;  he  would  then 
lay  down  his  baton  and  listen,  often  applauding  with  the  audience.  He 
would  take  it  up  again  when  he  wished  a  crescendo  or  rallentando  or 
any  other  effect  not  noted  in  the  parts.46 

Schumann,  early  in  his  career,  actually  found  the  conductor  a 
distraction.  In  1835,  reviewing  a  concert  conducted  by  Mendelssohn 
during  the  first  year  of  his  incumbency  at  the  Gewandhaus,  this 
progressive  critic  declared  that: 

Personally,  I  was  distracted  by  the  baton  in  the  Overture  as  well  as  in 
the  Symphony,  and  I  agreed  with  Florestan  who  was  of  the  opinion  that 
in  the  Symphony  the  orchestra  should  stand  as  a  republic  over  which 
no  higher  authority  was  to  be  recognized.47 

Apparently  Schumann  miscalculated  the  trend  when  he  failed  to 
welcome  this  innovation  and  preferred  the  manner  of  Matthai,  the 
concertmaster,  who  had  previously  led  the  orchestra  from  the  violin 
desk. 

Mendelssohn,  Biilow,  Wagner,  and  Liszt  soon  made  another  ad- 
vance in  that  they  succeeded  in  compelling  adequate  rehearsals  in 
advance  of  public  performance.  To  impose  upon  the  orchestra  or 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  317 

chorus  one's  own  private  interpretation  by  means  of  a  grueling 
series  of  rehearsals  would  have  seemed  impudent  to  all  but  a  few 
aggressive  musical  authoritarians.  But  conditions  were  ripening  for 
such  an  eventuality.  The  orchestral  personnel  was  becoming  more 
numerous,  entrance  cues  less  routine,  and  tonal  balance  more  diffi- 
cult to  maintain.  Rubato  and  other  earmarks  of  romanticism  were 
being  developed  which  not  only  made  coordination  more  and  more 
difficult  but  also  rendered  the  conflicting  individual  improvisational 
inspirations  increasingly  impractical.  Conductors,  given  some  au- 
thority as  a  consequence  of  such  merely  practical  concessions,  were 
emboldened  to  arrogate  to  themselves  still  more.  Even  the  conserva- 
tive Eduard  Hanslick,  who  characterized  "that  insufferable  tempo 
rubato  as  musical  seasickness,"  was  left  not  altogether  unmoved  by 
Wagner's  rendition  of  Beethoven,  on  the  occasion  of  the  latter's 
1872  visit  in  Vienna: 

The  new  element  in  Wagner's  interpretation  of  the  Eroica  consists,  in 
brief,  in  a  frequent  modification  of  the  tempo  within  the  same  move- 
ment. .  .  .  Wagner's  fluctuating  measure,  however,  produces  a  thrilling 
effect  especially  in  the  Finale.  ...  At  other  points,  so  it  seems  to  us, 
Wagner  goes  too  far  with  his  "modifications."  For  example,  when  he 
opens  the  first  movement  in  rapid  tempo,  and  takes  up  the  second 
motiv  (45th  measure)  in  a  strikingly  slower  rhythm,  whereby  the  au- 
ditor is  confused  by  the  shift  from  a  barely  established  tempo,  and  the 
"heroic"  character  of  the  symphony  is  diverted  into  the  sentimental.48 

If  not  all  the  conductors  indulged  in  the  whimsicalities  of  a 
Biilow  or  Wagner,  the  pattern  of  conductorial  supremacy  was 
nevertheless  set  by  the  time  of  the  founding  of  the  Boston  Sym- 
phony, at  which  time  the  scope  of  his  authority  was  still  further 
enlarged  to  include  choice  of  repertoire  and  other  functions  then 
enjoyed  by  few  conductors.  The  continental  conductor  was  usually 
a  member  of  the  court  and  was  by  no  means  emancipated,  as  was 
indicated  in  Brahms'  facetious  reply  to  Henschel  who  had  consulted 
him  on  the  seating  of  his  new  Boston  orchestra: 

Your  experiments  in  regard  to  the  placing  of  the  orchestra  look  very 
good  to  me.  I  should  almost  give  preference  to  the  first  of  the  two 
drawings  on  account  of  the  horns;  the  violas,  however,  seem  to  give 
trouble  up  to  now.  By  far  the  best  feature  in  both  arrangements  is  the 


3 18  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

fact  that  no  committee  will  be  sitting  in  front  of  them.  There  is  not  a 
Kapellmeister  on  the  whole  of  our  continent  who  would  not  envy  you 
for  that.49 

This  evolutionary  culmination,  which  made  of  the  conductor  an 
arbiter  of  taste  and  a  performer  on  the  collective  instrument,  attained 
its  peak  in  America.  Although  it  is  plausibly  argued  that  the  music 
should  have  priority  over  the  conductor,  nevertheless,  it  is  inevitable 
that,  as  the  repertoire  becomes  more  and  more  familiar,  interest 
should  shift  to  the  manner  and  quality  of  presentation.  Instead  of 
an  ever  new  repertoire,  without  rehearsals,  as  in  the  days  of  Mozart 
and  Beethoven,  the  interest  today  lies  in  an  old  repertoire  with  new 
interpreters. 

With  the  inauguration  of  the  era  of  the  virtuoso  conductor,  who 
was  now  not  only  a  metronomic  pace-setter,  but  also  a  subtle  in- 
terpreter of  moods  and  nuances,  the  baton  seemed  to  some  conduc- 
tors to  be  just  an  expressionless  little  wooden  stick.  Wagner  and 
other  romantic  conductors  had  already  resorted  to  eyes,  shoulders, 
and  head  to  communicate  their  subtle  nuances.  Now  the  fingers 
were  likewise  to  be  mobilized,  until  the  conductor  fairly  squirmed 
and  wriggled  with  sentiment  and  emotion.  The  well-worn  cliche,  a 
"musician  to  his  fingertips,"  was  at  long  last  to  be  rendered  in- 
carnate, and  if  the  stick  was  an  encumbrance  to  free  use  of  the 
fingers,  then  the  stick  would  have  to  go.  A  reporter's  impression  of 
Stokowski,  during  the  transitional  period,  was  recorded  in  1928-29, 
when  that  ever-inventive  maestro  was  a  guest  in  Los  Angeles: 

He  carries  his  baton  as  he  comes  in.  .  .  .  Perhaps  the  most  impressive 
part  of  Stokowski  are  his  hands  .  .  .  there  is  not  the  slightest  doubt 
that  every  bit  of  shading  is  transmitted  to  the  players  with  their  aid. 
.  .  .  He  is  a  two-handed  conductor,  for  he  shifts  his  baton  at  will 
from  the  right  to  the  left.  His  fingers  curl  and  extend.  They  close  and 
open.50 

For  Stokowski,  the  baton  had  obviously  become  a  vestigial  organ, 
and  in  the  course  of  normal  evolutionary  processes  soon  disappeared 
altogether. 

More  usual  than  the  dropping  of  the  baton  has  been  the  habit 
of  dispensing  with  the  printed  score.  Ever  since  Biilow  coined  the 
phrase  that  the  conductor  must  "either  have  his  head  in  the  score  or 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  319 

the  score  in  his  head,"  there  has  never  been  a  lack  of  candidates  for 
the  latter  achievement.  Biilow  himself  not  only  conducted  from 
memory  but  his  orchestra  at  times  followed  his  lead  by  playing 
from  memory.  About  1880  Hans  Richter  startled  the  London  audi- 
ence by  conducting  Beethoven  and  Wagner  without  score.  Nikisch 
in  Boston  frequently  dispensed  with  the  score.  Wagner,  of  course, 
conducted  his  own  music  from  memory,  for  which  he  was  criticized 
in  London  in  1855  by  the  uninitiated  public,  who  "detected  lapses 
of  memory,"  as  well  as  "incorrect  tempi  and  phrasings."  With  the 
then  limited  repertoire,  it  was  perhaps  no  great  feat.  In  general, 
however,  scoreless  conducting  has  always  excited  admiration.  Tos- 
canini,  whose  eye  affliction  required  it  and  whose  photographic 
memory  permitted  it,  has  become  a  model  for  those  who  were  not 
so  gifted. 

There  is  no  unanimity  of  opinion  on  the  desirability  of  the 
actual  physical  abandonment  of  the  score  in  public  performance, 
and  many  conductors  very  sensibly  do  not  consider  it  worth  the 
risk  of  tempting  a  capricious  memory,  of  which  any  human  being 
may  be  an  occasional  victim.  Soloists,  especially,  may  feel  uneasy 
if  the  orchestral  score  is  not  available  for  ready  reference  in  an 
emergency,  for  eminent  soloists  have  been  known  to  suffer  lapses 
of  memory  and  had  recourse  to  the  conductor's  score.  The  lapses  of 
conductors  are  usually  not  so  evident  to  the  listeners,  although  a 
bassoonist  who  is  expecting  his  cue  after  a  long  rest  may  suffer  from 
the  unreliable  "showoff."  The  fact  that  a  conductor  has  not  dis- 
carded the  score  does  not,  of  course,  indicate  that  he  does  not  "have 
the  score  in  his  head." 

Some  noted  conductors  have  had  the  propensity  to  lecture  their 
audience  during  the  concert,  although  unfamiliarity  with  the  native 
language  of  the  audience  forever  barred  most  imported  conductors 
from  such  amiable  indulgence  in  America.  The  occasions  for  such 
verbal  embellishments  were  manifold.  Biilow,  creator  of  quips  and 
sarcastic  sallies,  and  dubbed  the  Conzert-Redner  of  the  Meiningen 
orchestra,  was  the  prototype  of  this  batonical  liberty,  and  would 
frequently  blend  his  platform  art  with  disquisitions  on  patriotism  or 
other  congenial  topics.  In  America,  Walter  Damrosch  and  Sto- 
kowski,  both  of  whom  introduced  many  musical  novelties,  possessed 


320  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

the  extrovert  temperament  and  the  linguistic  facility  to  wax  didactic 
in  the  presence  of  any  audience. 

Both  these  conductors  were  at  times  inspirational,  but  often  just 
plain  "folksy."  Stokowski  would  often  generate  a  schoolroom  at- 
mosphere, scolding  his  audience  for  the  foibles  of  harassed  people 
who  had  mistakenly  expected  an  hour  of  aesthetic  relaxation.  Late 
arrivals,  early  departures,  coughing  during  the  rendition  of  a  num- 
ber, or  any  other  evidence  of  apparent  indifference  or  displeasure, 
likewise  elicited  from  the  Philadelphia  leader  rebukes  of  a  kind  not 
to  be  found  in  the  linguistic  repertoire  of  the  more  genial  and 
aristocratic  Damrosch.  Both  conductors,  naturally,  laid  themselves 
open  to  jibes— sometimes  not  too  gentle— of  critics  and  laymen, 
friends  and  foes  alike,  who  did  not  take  kindly  to  the  phenomenon 
of  a  conductor  thus  stepping  out  of  his  prescribed  role.  To  those 
who  were  irked  by  such  a  dual  role,  it  must  be  said  in  condonement 
that  their  remarks  doubtless  rendered  tolerable  compositions  which 
otherwise  would  have  engendered  only  bewilderment  and  hostility. 

The  virtual  disappearance  of  this  conductorial  license  is  the  re- 
sult of  the  loss  of  free  intimacy  between  the  conductor  and  his 
audience;  nor  do  the  large  anonymous  audiences,  on  their  part,  feel 
the  same  personal  interest  in  the  conductor.  Above  all,  the  audience 
of  today  is  more  sophisticated  and  would  even  tend  to  resent  the 
pedagogical  talks  which  were  given  and  accepted  with  such  grace  a 
generation  ago. 

The  ideals  of  orchestral  democracy,  to  which  Schumann  made 
nostalgic  allusion,  were  not  to  retire  before  the  advance  of  the  dic- 
tatorial trend  without  struggle.  In  their  abhorrence  for  all  tradi- 
tional authority  and  their  exaltation  of  personal  liberty  and 
responsibility,  which  flares  so  magnificently  in  the  heat  of  every 
revolution,  the  early  Soviets  resuscitated  the  idea  of  the  old  informal 
ensemble  of  equals,  and  abolished  the  rank  of  conductor  by  dis- 
tributing his  functions,  committeewise,  among  the  membership.  The 
Pervyi  Symfonitchesky  Ansamble  (First  Symphonic  Ensemble)— 
Persymfcms,  for  short— was  organized  in  Moscow  in  February,  1922, 
by  a  group  of  about  ninety  musicians,  some  of  whom  had  been 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  321 

members  of  Koussevitzky's  State  Orchestra  previous  to  his  departure 
from  Russia. 

In  performance  the  ensemble  was  seated  in  concentric  circles, 
the  front,  or  outer  row,  with  its  back  to  the  audience.  The  players 
were  therefore  in  a  position  to  maintain  rapport  by  watching  one 
another,  and  giving  and  receiving  discreet  gestures  of  shoulders  and 
eyes.  Since  overall  coordination  could  not  be  wholly  dispensed  with, 
the  concertmaster  sat  somewhat  elevated  in  the  center,  and  gave  the 
essential  signals.  Each  choir  had  its  leader  who  presided  over  section 
rehearsals  and  who  was  a  delegate  on  the  general  committee  which 
conferred  on  interpretation.  At  the  full  rehearsal,  a  member  of  the 
group  usually  sat  in  the  auditorium  to  judge  the  effects.  The  right 
of  democratic  comment  on  matters  of  interpretation  was  preserved 
by  the  membership.  That  this  could  lead  to  procedures  strange  to 
Western  habits  might  well  be  expected.  Egon  Petri,  who  appeared 
with  the  Moscow  orchestra,  once  related  how  the  double  bass 
player  complained  that  he  could  not  hear  the  left  hand  of  the  soloist, 
and  suggested  that  he  play  a  little  louder.51 

The  quality  of  the  performance  seemed  to  have  met  with  con- 
siderable approval,  though  Glazounoff ,  on  a  visit  to  the  United  States 
in  1929,  reported  that  their  symphonic  performances  were  superior 
to  their  accompaniments  for  soloists.  The  organization  survived  long 
enough,  though  very  precariously,  to  celebrate  its  tenth  anniversary 
in  1932.  Toward  the  end  of  its  career,  it  was  experiencing  increasing 
difficulties  because  of  the  staggered  work  week  and  the  conflicting 
engagements  of  musicians  who  held  other  posts. 

Similar  organizations  were  founded  in  Leningrad,  Kiev,  Leipzig, 
and  other  cities,  while  in  America,  the  American  Symphonic  En- 
semble, "modelled  after  the  Moscow  Fersymfans,"  was  founded  in 
New  York  in  the  fall  of  1928,  with  the  announced  purpose  to 
"heighten  the  musicianship  and  personality  of  each  performer  .  .  . 
and  to  permit  the  listeners  to  focus  attention  on  the  music."  With 
a  change  in  name  to  the  Conductorless  Symphony  Orchestra,  it 
presented  a  diversified  repertoire  including  modern  works  and  ac- 
companiments to  many  soloists.  Like  the  Moscow  organization,  it 
was  built  on  a  profit-sharing  basis,  assigned  interpretive  problems  to 


322  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

a  committee,  and  left  the  coordination  to  the  concertmaster,  Paul 
Stassevitch.  It  survived  two  years. 

The  externals  of  conducting,  which  are  so  dramatically  obvious 
to  the  lay  audience,  recede  in  importance  before  the  principal  func- 
tion of  the  conductor:  the  interpretation  of  the  composition  before 
him.  Essentially,  of  course,  any  performance  should  be  viewed  as  a 
cooperative  enterprise  between  the  composer  (through  the  medium 
of  his  work),  the  performers,  and  the  conductor.  This  leads  to 
obvious  jurisdictional  problems.  When,  in  the  eighteenth  century, 
composer  and  conductor  were  identical,  expression  marks  were  un- 
necessary, infidelity  to  the  score  not  censured— if,  indeed,  it  was 
noticed— and  repeat  performances  were  accompanied  by  consider- 
able license  and  circumstantial  tamperings. 

Today,  with  such  high  specialization  in  both  composing  and  con- 
ducting, conductors  do  not  ordinarily  compose,  and  composers  are 
often  poor  conductors  of  even  their  own  creations.  Consequently 
there  has  arisen  a  kind  of  competitive  cooperation  between  com- 
poser and  conductor  for  the  rights  of  decision  on  controversial 
problems  which  arise  in  the  process  of  transmuting  the  dead  notes 
into  live  performance.  This  issue  is  all  the  more  complex  in  that  the 
older  scores— analogously,  for  example,  to  the  United  States  Con- 
stitution—were written  in  response  to  conditions  some  of  which  no 
longer  obtain.  Present  interpretations  are  therefore  by  no  means 
unambiguous. 

Now,  in  a  manner  of  speaking,  both  the  American  Constitution 
and  the  Beethoven  symphonies  have  "survived";  but  neither  has 
escaped  amendments,  and  there  is  a  range  of  influential  opinion  on 
still  further  editing.  The  interpretation  of  Beethoven,  who  con- 
stantly revised  his  own  manuscript,  raises  many  problems  not  unlike 
the  interpretations  of  the  words  of  Thomas  Jefferson  or  James 
Madison.  There  are  the  fundamentalists  who  ascribe  a  kind  of 
clairvoyance,  an  infallibility,  to  the  founding  fathers,  political  and 
musical,  whose  wisdom  must  be  shielded  from  the  fallible  interpreta- 
tions of  lesser  men.  There  is,  secondly,  the  leftish  opinion,  which  is 
willing  enough  to  take  its  point  of  departure  from  history,  but 
which  will  not  be  ruled  by  its  dead  hand  and  is  intent  upon  adapting 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  323 

the  past  to  the  interests,  needs,  and  pleasures  of  the  present.  This 
latter  conception  of  the  function  of  the  conductor  has  been  formu- 
lated into  a  philosophy.  In  the  words  of  Dr.  Hugo  Goldschmidt,  a 
German  musicologist: 

The  interpreter's  work  is  no  mere  execution,  comparable,  let  us  say,  to 
that  of  the  builder  who  transmutes  the  architect's  plans  into  material 
reality.  His  task  is,  rather,  to  seize  the  vital  conception  of  the  art  work, 
to  blend  it  with  his  own  ego  and  the  views  of  his  period.  .  .  .  His  art- 
istry is  a  product  of  its  mental  culture.  .  .  .  Consequently  we  shall  al- 
ways approach  the  art  productions  of  earlier  times  through  the  me- 
dium of  our  own  spiritual  and  emotional  nature.  .  .  .  We  hear  the 
works  of  the  masters  of  former  centuries  .  .  .  with  other  ears  than  our 
forefathers.  .  .  .  What  we  have  experienced  since  their  time,  this  it  is 
which  sounds  in  those  works  to  our  ears.  .  .  .  Consider  the  history  of 
Handel's  art.  The  eighteenth  century  .  .  .  admired  it  in  the  form  of  ar- 
rangements by  Hiller  and  Mozart.  Our  present  musical  interpretation— 
on  Dr.  Chrysander's  initiative— has  gone  back  to  the  historically  authen- 
ticated form.  .  .  .  But  it  owes  its  success,  not  to  a  recognition  that 
things  must  be  so  because  Handel  would  have  them  so,  but  because  they 
appeal  more  directly  to  our  sense  and  feeling  than  do  the  arrangements 
of  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries.52 

The  founders  of  this  liberal  wing  in  the  realm  of  conducting 
were  Wagner,  Liszt,  and  especially  Biilow.  They  modified  the  in- 
strumentation, tinkered  with  tempo  and  nuances,  and  projected  their 
own  personalities  into  their  renditions.  They  expressed  contempt  for 
the  brittle  metronomic  style  of  conducting,  as  represented  by 
Berlioz  and  Mendelssohn,  who  indulged  in  relatively  little  interpre- 
tive discretion.  Of  this  school  of  free  thought,  the  most  distinguished 
exponent  was  Arthur  Nikisch,  conductor  of  the  Boston  orchestra  in 
the  early  nineties,  who  in  forthright  manner  announced  his  own 
conception  of  the  conductor  as  a  "recreator  of  the  masterpieces 
according  to  my  own  ideas."  By  no  means  a  disciplinarian,  he  in- 
dulged freely  in  almost  capricious  rubato  style.  He  was  never  able 
"to  leave  a  phrase  alone";  he  embellished  the  score  until  it  fairly 
vibrated  with  his  personality.  Popular  in  some  quarters  in  this 
country,  he  created  a  sensation  in  Europe,  in  Berlin  and  Leipzig, 
though  he  caused  many  of  the  judicious  to  grieve.  Today,  this  ex- 
treme libertarianism  has  become  obsolete,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that 


324  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Wagner,  Liszt,  Biilow,  and  Nikisch  would  sound  strange  to  our 
conventional  ears. 

This  strain  of  conductors  has  been  opposed  by  the  more  elegant, 
austere,  and  scholarly  Weingartner,  Thomas,  Muck,  and  Toscanini, 
who  profess  to  withhold  their  own  subjective  impulses  in  favor  of 
the  composer  who,  of  course,  is  "always  right."  Although,  of  course, 
never  literally  adhered  to,  authenticity  of  performance,  rather  than 
personal  taste,  is  for  them  the  criterion  of  acceptability.  The  first 
obligation  of  the  conductor  is  to  seek  diligently  the  composer's 
intention;  the  second,  to  be  faithful  to  it. 

The  innocent  bystander  may  ask:  "What  is  meant  by  the  'in- 
tention' of  the  composer,  and  how  recover  it  from  one  who  has  been 
dead  a  century?"  How  can  we  be  sure  of  his  actual  performance 
manner,  or  the  manner  which  he  would  employ  if  he  were  with  us 
today?  Practically  the  only  clue  to  the  composer's  intentions  are 
the  lifeless  black  symbols  on  the  printed  page,  together  with  frag- 
mentary instructions  and  supplementary  inferences  from  the  evi- 
dences of  the  day.  Because  of  certain  very  obvious  changes  in  the 
size  of  orchestras,  character  and  balance  of  instruments,  area  and 
acoustics  of  concert  halls,  listeners'  habits,  and  innumerable  other 
circumstances,  many  minor  modifications  have  of  necessity  been 
made,  especially  in  the  older  scores,  merely  to  restore  the  conditions 
assumed  by  the  composer.  Beyond  that,  the  "intentions  of  the 
composer"  would  presumably  call  for  the  literal  observance  of  the 
available  score  details,  without  undue  liberties  in  tempo,  nuance, 
cuts,  and  other  specifications. 

It  remains  a  real  question,  however,  whether  such  literalism— in 
the  case  of  Beethoven  for  example— is  actually  more  faithful  to 
what,  at  best,  is  an  awkward  and  incomplete  symbolization  of  the 
creator's  intention,  than  is  the  "free"  fantasy  of  a  Biilow  or  a 
Nikisch.  Indeed  there  is  some  evidence  that  Beethoven,  himself,  was 
not  a  calm  interpreter,  but  rather  indulged  in  exaggerated  extremes 
of  emotional  expression  and  rubato  style  while  performing  before 
the  Viennese  nobility.  Who  can  confidently  assert  that  the  rela- 
tively metronomic  renditions  of  a  Weingartner  or  Toscanini  cor- 
respond more  faithfully  to  the  intentions  of  a  Beethoven  than  the 
quixotic  latitudes  of  rhythm  of  Biilow  or  Arthur  Nikisch? 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  325 

The  veneration  of  the  past  results  from  the  intense  preoccupa- 
tion with  historical  scholarship,  and  thus  the  "return  to  authority" 
—which  may  be  termed  "fundamentalism"— is  a  popular  and  con- 
vincing slogan  met  with  periodically  in  religion,  politics,  art,  and 
other  disciplines  of  life.  The  Bible,  the  American  Constitution,  the 
Communist  Manifesto,  the  capitalistic  doctrines  of  Adam  Smith- 
all  have  been  looked  upon  as  final  authorities,  digressions  from 
which  are  branded  as  reprehensible.  However,  it  is  not  a  simple 
assignment,  this  "return  to  the  past,"  for  its  intentions  are  not  easily 
discerned.  Even  those  who  claim  conformity  to  authority  are  merely 
conforming  to  their  conception  of  that  authority. 

Changes  in  political,  economic,  and  aesthetic  tastes  are  very  com- 
plicated and  cannot  be  set  down  as  mere  willful  or  "mistaken" 
divergence  from  past  hypothetical  norms.  Norms  are  themselves 
the  product  of  innumerable  factors,  the  needs  and  interests  and 
pressures  of  the  epoch,  from  which  they  emerge.  At  a  time  when 
the  tempo  of  a  Beethoven  scherzo  depended  on  the  technical  com- 
petency or  the  lackadaisical  habits  of  an  underpaid  musician,  when 
first  chairs  were  gained  by  seniority,  and  violists  were  recruited 
from  superannuated  and  decrepit  violinists,  the  greatest  needs  felt 
by  a  conductor  and  composer  like  Berlioz  were  discipline,  accuracy, 
ability,  and  determination  to  "stick  to  the  notes."  Only  after  these 
basic  requirements  were  satisfied  could  romanticists  like  Nikisch 
poetize. 

In  the  meantime,  the  audience,  too,  was  educated  to  the  ac- 
cumulated repertoire,  became  familiar  with  the  manner  of  interpre- 
tation, and  habituated  to  certain  styles  of  rendition.  It  thereby 
developed  into  a  pressure  group  on  the  conductor  and  performer. 
Like  the  child  who  knows  the  fairy  tale  from  memory  and  is  dis- 
turbed and  puzzled  by  "errors"  in  the  recital  of  the  plot,  so  the 
informed  audience  is  offended  by  liberties  that  are  too  unexpected. 
One  need  only  read  responsible  criticism  to  learn  that  the  most  noted 
conductors  have  been  charged  with  such  aesthetic  arrogations,  re- 
sulting either  from  inexperience  with  certain  styles  or  from  per- 
sonal caprice.  In  other  words,  with  a  sophisticated  audience— or  at 
least  in  the  face  of  sophisticated  critics— today's  conductor  cannot 
escape  a  kind  of  scholastic  censure  if  he  introduces  interpretative 


326  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

innovations  in  which  he  would  have  been  allowed  to  revel  seventy- 
five  years  ago. 

We  offer  the  hypothesis,  therefore,  that  styles  of  conducting, 
like  political  ideologies,  are  conventions  which  fluctuate  from  period 
to  period  and  group  to  group,  contingent  upon  many  factors:  the 
nature  and  erudition  of  the  audience,  instrumental  competence  of 
players,  psychological  satiety  of  the  listener,  the  level  of  public 
criticism,  the  assumed  function  of  music,  and  the  like.  In  the  better 
sense  of  the  word,  there  are  fashions  in  conducting,  as  sure  as  there 
are  fashions  in  play-acting  and  oratory.  The  floral  designs  in  the 
oratory  of  Daniel  Webster  and  William  Jennings  Bryan  now  seem 
stilted  and  affected,  and  have  been  replaced  by  the  direct,  unpre- 
tentious clipped  style  usually  associated  with  the  British  debate.  The 
impassioned  speech  of  Sarah  Bernhardt,  splitting  the  atmosphere 
with  strident  voice  and  extravagant  gesticulation,  seems  now  ridicu- 
lous rather  than  thrilling. 

The  "return  to  authority,"  evoked  by  the  growth  in  historical 
scholarship,  has  been  further  intensified  by  the  antiquarian  interest 
in  eighteenth-century  instruments.  Harpsichord  recitals,  originally 
designed  for  drawing-room  soirees  of  the  nobility,  are  now  pre- 
sented in  concert  halls  before  a  public  whose  ears  are  attuned  to  the 
Steinway  Grand.  Like  true  believers  in  an  ancient  faith,  we  insist 
on  the  harpsichord  as  an  accompaniment  to  the  recitatives  of  Bach's 
St.  Matthew  Passioji,  without  consciousness  of  the  anachronism  of 
an  orchestra  of  one  hundred  players,  of  modern  instruments,  the 
cavernous  auditorium  and  the  chorus  of  five  hundred  voices,  to  say 
nothing  of  the  modern  ears  of  the  auditors.  William  Apthorp,  Bos- 
ton critic  in  the  mid-nineties,  conjectured: 

the  harpsichord  was  a  noble  instrument  to  the  perception  of  people  who 
had  never  dreamed  of  a  Chickering  or  a  Steinway.  .  .  .  Use  it  in  the 
accompaniment  of  a  great  air  of  Handel,  and  you  introduce  at  once  an 
element  of  quaintness— just  the  one  of  all  others  most  foreign  to  the 
spirit  of  composition.53 

Mozart  and  Bach  wrote  not  only  for  their  instruments,  but  also  for 
their  audience.  The  audience  of  the  eighteenth  century,  with  its 
listening  habits,  its  religious,  political,  and  social  association,  is  be- 
yond recovery,  thereby  making  the  instrumental  renaissance  socio- 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  327 

logically  and  psychologically  incomplete  and  subject  to  grave 
misinterpretation.  Toscanini,  in  performing  the  Haydn  Symphony 
in  G,  once  reduced  the  strings  by  half  in  order  to  recapture  the 
"balance"  of  Haydn's  day.  This  was  no  doubt  interesting  and  in- 
structive, in  a  museum  sense,  but  balance  is  more  than  a  count  of 
instruments  and  is  unsuccessful  unless  many  other  acoustical  and 
technical  matters  are  considered.  Furtwangler,  like  Berlioz,  Nikisch, 
and  other  romantic  conductors,  protests  against  this  scholastic  an- 
tiquarianism.  He  recently  described  his  reactions  to  an  "authentic" 
Berlin  performance  of  the  St.  Matthew  Passion: 

The  impression  created  by  this  most  soulful  masterpiece  was  one  of 
unbelievable  monotony.  I  was  all  the  more  astonished  when,  on  the 
following  day,  I  read  in  the  press  that  we  had  finally  witnessed  a  model 
performance  of  the  Passion.  The  utilization  of  old  instruments,  the  small 
choir  .  .  .  reflected  the  current  scholarship  on  the  original  production 
of  Bach  himself.  .  .  .  Here  was,  to  be  sure,  not  sentimentalizing,  but 
the  true  Bach  had  no  opportunity  to  speak  to  the  hungry  soul.  The 
performance  showed  more  interest  in  historical  fidelity  than  in  expos- 
ing the  fundamental  spirit  of  the  work  for  the  living  audience.54 

It  is  not  to  be  implied  that  such  throwbacks  may  not  produce 
legitimate  aesthetic  pleasures.  It  is  intended  only  to  emphasize  the 
futility  of  the  belief  that  we  are  hearing  Bach  or  Haydn  as  they 
were  intended  to  be  heard,  and  that  we  are  duplicating  the  musical 
experiences  of  their  audience.  There  is  no  true,  unconditioned  per- 
ception. A  mind  conditioned  to  Wagner,  Strauss,  and  Stravinsky  is 
incapable  of  perceiving  a  primitive  orchestra  in  the  manner  of 
Havdn's  audience  of  1791  in  Hanover  Square  Rooms  of  London. 

Perfect  fidelity  to  the  composer's  intention  obviously  does  not 
permit  the  reconstitution  of  only  one  element  (the  orchestra)  with- 
out similarly  reconstituting  the  others.  Since  it  is,  of  course,  impos- 
sible to  reconstitute  the  ears  of  the  modern  audience  by  causing 
them  to  miraculously  forget  all  its  intervening  experiences,  perfect 
fidelity  would  suggest  the  maintenance  of  the  relation  between  the 
orchestra  and  the  ears  which  perceive  it.  This  end  is  best  served  by 
utilizing  the  modern  orchestra,  which  is  matched  to  the  ears  of  the 
audience.  The  aesthetic  pleasure  that  we  sense  in  listening  to  the 
reversions  to  the  past  has  little  resemblance  to  the  pleasures  felt  by 


328  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Haydn's  audience.  To  it,  Haydn  represented  the  comfortable  upper 
limits  of  dissonance.  In  1770,  Burney  suggested  that 

some  of  the  discords  in  modern  music,  unknown  until  this  century,  are 
what  the  ear  can  just  bear.  .  .  .  But  I  am  convinced  that,  provided  the 
ear  at  length  make  amends,  there  are  few  dissonances  too  strong  for  it.55 

The  modern  audience  has,  of  course,  "made  amends,"  and  Haydn 
is  today  far  within  the  limits  of  tolerance.  It  is  clear  that  the  "in- 
tentions of  the  composer"  is  a  far  more  complicated  problem  than 
the  superficial  revival  of  a  few  antique  instruments. 

The  late  Chief  Justice  Charles  Evans  Hughes  once  expressed 
himself  in  an  epic  phrase  on  the  "intentions"  of  the  Constitution. 
He  shocked  the  absolutists  by  declaring  that  the  "Constitution  is 
what  the  judges  say  it  is."  Perhaps  this  is  an  intellectual  problem 
which  transcends  the  field  of  music,  and  is  of  concern  to  all  those 
who  are  faced  with  the  interpretation  of  social  history  in  any  form. 
It  is  therefore  impossible  to  arbitrate  with  finality  between  the  Bee- 
thoven of  Nikisch  and  Toscanini,  or  the  harpsichord  and  Stokowski 
versions  of  Bach.  To  some  critics,  the  staging  of  the  uncut  version 
of  the  Passion  stems  from  misguided  ancestor-worship.56  It  is  not  a 
cynical  belief  in  the  utter  lawlessness  of  human  judgment,  but  rather 
the  recognition  of  period  norms  that  prompts  one  to  paraphrase  the 
statement  of  the  noted  jurist:  "Bach  is  what  the  conductor  says 
he  is." 

Management  and  Union 

The  American  symphony  orchestra,  like  the  genius  in  the  garret, 
has  almost  always  led  a  precarious  hand-to-mouth  existence.  There 
is  not  a  single  orchestra  in  this  country  whose  history  does  not  in- 
clude a  number  of  assorted  financial  crises  which  have  either  threat- 
ened, or  in  some  cases  suspended  its  existence.  It  is  well  known  that 
today  they  all  must  pass  the  hat  and  none  could  endure  without 
some  form  of  philanthropy. 

This  is  not  necessarily  an  accusation  against  our  present  social 
order  and  its  tepid  hospitality  toward  that  high  art.  Perhaps,  in  the 
nature  of  the  case,  symphony  orchestras  cannot  be  expected  to 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  329 

run  the  gantlet  of  our  economic  system,  and  be  obliged  to  pay  their 
own  way.  One's  verdict  on  that  issue  would  depend  on  his  concep- 
tion of  the  social  function  of  the  symphony  orchestra,  and  on  his 
economic  ideology,  which  might  range  all  the  way  from  the  capital- 
ist extreme  of  Higginson,  who  was  prompted  to  "share  his  good 
fortune  with  the  rest  of  society,"  to  official  socialistic  sponsorship 
as  a  public  necessity.  These  policies  of  financial  support  have  all 
gained  a  measure  of  adherence  in  this  country  during  the  one  hun- 
dred years  of  the  existence  of  the  symphony  orchestra,  and  have  all 
been  accorded  a  brief  or  lengthy  trial. 

The  present  financial  structure  of  the  American  symphony  or- 
chestra is  a  culmination  of  a  succession  of  short-term,  and  often 
desperate,  policies  to  recoup  deficits  and  straighten  out  periodic 
emergencies.  Many  times  these  vicissitudes  of  fortune  have  been 
glibly  "explained"  as  the  aftermath  of  economic  depression,  with- 
drawal of  guarantors,  or  human  miscalculation  of  resources  and 
events.  But  these  are  not  truly  isolated  and  chance  dilemmas;  they 
are  the  manifestation  of  fundamental  changes  in  the  social  order  and 
are  the  very  stuff  that  life  is  made  of.  It  is  their  cumulated  potency 
that  turns  the  course  of  affairs. 

American  orchestral  history  brings  to  light  seven  more  or  less 
distinguishable  economic  devices  for  their  support,  which  show  rela- 
tively little  overlap,  excepting  that  the  last  will  be  found  to  permeate 
all  the  others.  These  schemes  are:  (1)  the  cooperative  plan;  (2) 
plutocratic  support  by  one  or  more  guarantors;  (3)  private  enter- 
prise, the  risk  being  carried  by  conductor  or  manager;  (4)  endow- 
ment, accumulated  from  various  sources;  (5)  broad  popular  support 
of  small  donors,  usually  referred  to  as  the  "maintenance  fund"; 
(6)  municipal  or  state  taxation;  and  (7)  self-support  or  pay-as-you- 
go  system. 

The  cooperative  plan  is  a  mutual  organization  whereby  the  risks 
are  distributed  over  the  entire  membership  of  the  orchestra.  The 
membership  forms  a  democratic  or  communistic  body  which  is  com- 
pletely and  solely  responsible  for  its  own  policies  and  their  im- 
plementation. It  elects  qualified  members,  determines  rehearsal  and 
concert  periods,  owns  or  rents  its  library  and  equipment,  selects  its 
own  officers,  engages  conductor  and  soloists,  sets  the  program,  pays 


330  THE    AMERICAN    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

all  incidental  expenses  of  management— and  finally  divides  the  pro- 
ceeds. The  New  York  Philharmonic  Society  carried  on  under  this 
system  for  sixty-seven  years,  from  its  inception  in  1842  to  1909, 
when  it  was  taken  over  by  a  group  of  guarantors.  Much  more  re- 
cently, in  1929,  a  group  of  Indianapolis  instrumentalists  likewise 
organized  a  cooperative  society  when  the  depression  and  sound  pic- 
tures deprived  them  of  their  individual  livelihoods.  This  organiza- 
tion similarly  succumbed  to  philanthropic  support  in  1937. 

The  New  York  Philharmonic  Society  illustrated  all  the  weak- 
nesses of  this  pattern  of  communistic  organization.  Its  very  objec- 
tive contains  the  seeds  of  its  own  destruction.  The  objective  of  such 
an  organization  is  not  primarily  to  provide  the  finest  music  in  the 
most  artistic  manner,  but  rather  to  create  self-employment.  One 
must  admit  that  this  motive  is  both  innocent  and  laudable,  and  much 
can  be  accomplished  in  such  a  society  of  like-minded  colleagues.  But 
for  the  necessary  discipline,  such  an  organization  is  completely  de- 
pendent on  self -discipline;  and  what  Anton  Seidl,  as  the  leader  of 
this  part-time  organization  in  the  late  nineties,  had  to  contend  with 
even  during  its  most  profitable  era  is  intimately  revealed  in  the  con- 
fession of  a  member  of  the  orchestra: 

Nearly  all  the  members  of  the  Philharmonic  play  at  balls  and  dances 
during  the  greater  part  of  the  year.  They  then  get  together  to  play  a 
half  dozen  doubled  up  programs  during  the  year,  rush  through  old 
scores  during  five  hour  rehearsals  preceding  a  concert  and  are  then  ex- 
pected to  plav  their  programs  artistically.  Take  into  additional  considera- 
tion that  some  of  them  never  play  at  all  except  at  the  few  Philharmonic 
concerts,  and  the  tale  of  woe  and  disheartening  anguish  is  soon  told.  .  .  . 
Many  sincere  men  play  incessantly  at  balls,  dances,  dinners,  and  parties 
for  six  weeks  night  after  night  until  early  morn  and  then  after  a  Phil- 
harmonic concert  find  themselves  denominated  in  the  papers  as  great 
artists  after  scratching  through  a  symphony.57 

Sooner  or  later  civic  pride  and  aspiration,  as  well  as  the  growing 
sophistication  of  the  audience,  which  such  a  society  has  itself 
created,  will  inevitably  render  it  obsolete.  An  "outside"  committee 
of  civic-minded  persons  will  take  over,  a  new  conductor  will  be 
"imported."  Amid  injured  feelings,  economic  hardship,  and  pathet- 
ically impotent  protests  of  displaced  members,  the  rejuvenation  of 
the  group  will  proceed  until  an  orchestra  is  fashioned  of  which  "the 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  331 

city  will  be  proud."  That  was  the  monotonous  story,  with  only  the 
slightest  variation,  in  New  York,  Boston,  Philadelphia,  Chicago,  Cin- 
cinnati, Indianapolis,  and  many  other  cities. 

Under  very  exceptional  circumstances,  a  cooperative  orchestra 
has  been  known  to  cultivate  high  excellence.  The  Vienna  Philhar- 
monic, also  founded  in  1842,  noted  before  World  War  I  as  one  of 
the  finest  in  Europe,  was  such  a  body,  which  selected  its  own  con- 
ductors. However,  its  membership  contained  the  pick  of  that  musical 
metropolis,  and  was  practically  identical  with  the  well-trained  per- 
manent orchestra  of  the  Imperial  Opera,  which  was  the  site  of  its 
major  activities.  Like  every  other  cooperative,  it  was  reluctant  to 
spend  much  time  on  rehearsals,  and  it  was  once  reported  that 
Furtwangler  had  not  been  invited  to  conduct  its  concerts  in  the 
late  twenties  because  of  the  severity  of  his  discipline. 

In  order  to  overcome  the  fatal  weakness  of  inadequate  remunera- 
tion, which  in  turn  sets  off  the  chain  reaction  of  missed  perform- 
ances by  its  otherwise  employed  personnel,  inadequate  rehearsal 
time,  retention  of  incompetent  but  loyal  personnel,  irresolute  and 
inoffensive  conducting  by  a  conductor  who  reigns  only  at  the  pleas- 
ure of  his  subjects,  it  is  necessary  to  shift  financial  responsibility 
from  the  players  to  some  one  who  can  assure  adequate  subsistence. 
This  means  the  substitution  of  an  aggressive  management  for  the 
dead-level  drift,  to  the  end  that  the  orchestra  be  the  player's  first 
love  rather  than  a  last  resort. 

This  was  the  aim  of  Theodore  Thomas  when,  in  1863,  he  or- 
ganized his  own  orchestra,  had  daily  rehearsals,  personally  guaran- 
teed wages  and,  in  short,  gave  full  employment  to  the  orchestra, 
which  he  made  his  private  enterprise.  In  order  to  take  up  the  sea- 
sonal slack,  it  became  the  painful  necessity  of  the  orchestra  to  travel 
and  to  organize  tours,  even  during  the  unpleasant  winter  months. 
This  extremely  distasteful  circumstance,  as  well  as  periodic  personal 
financial  losses,  soon  taught  Thomas  that  such  a  "permanent"  or- 
chestra had  no  real  permanence  at  all  and  could  make  no  artistic 
progress.  He  had  forged  an  excellent  instrument,  had  welcomed 
occasional  financial  lifts  from  William  Steinway  and  other  friends 
(in  those  days  the  piano  manufacturers— Steinway,  Knabe,  Weber, 
etc.— actuated  by  business  as  well  as  artistic  motives— were  the  im- 


5y/T)pl?09y  5oeiety  of  jvf^u/  Yor\[. 


Founded  by  OR.  LEOPOLD  DAMROSCH 


FOURTEENTH   SEASON.    1851-1832. 


The  Directors  beg  to  announce  that  during  the  coming  season  the  Society  will  give, 
as  usual,  Six  Afternoon  and  Six  Evening  Concerts  at  MUSIC  HALL,  under  the 
direction  of 

Mr.  Walter.  Damrosch. 

An  annual  guarantee  fund  of  fifty  thousand  dollars  has  been  subscribed  by  the 
following  gentlemen  : 

ANDREW  CARNEGIE.  JOHN  D.  ROCKEFELLER, 

THEO.  A.  HAVEMEYER.  WILLIAM  D.  SLOANE, 

COLLIS  P.  HUNTINGTON.  H.  McK.  TWOMBLY. 

JOHN  S.  KENNEDY.  CORNELIUS  VANDERBILT. 

D.O.MILLS.  GEORGE  W.  VANDERBILT, 

J.  PIERPONT  MORGAN.  WILLIAM  K.  VANDERBILT. 
Dr.  W.  SEWARD  WEBB. 

for  the  purpose  of  making  the  orchestra  of  the  society  a  permanent  organization,  the 
members  of  which  shall  be  engaged  by  the  year,  and  shall  be  constantly  under  the  training 
and  direction  of  the  same  conductor. 

This  generous  support  gives  the  orchestra  a  unique  position  in  New  York,  and  to 
strengthen  it  still  more,  several  eminent  musicians  have  been  added  to  its  membership. 
Special  mention  should  be  made  of  Adolph  Brodsky,  formerly  of  Leipzig,  who  is  engaged 
as  concert  master  and  solo  violinist;  Jules  Conus,  formerly  with  the  Colonne  orchestra 
of  Paris,  as  second  concert  master  and  solo  violinist ;  and  Anton  Hekking,  formerly  with 
the  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra,  as  first  and  solo  violoncellist. 


The  programmes  ■will  include  the  following  works  : 

DEETIIOVEN:  Symphonies  VII  &  VIII.  SCHUBERT    Symphony  in  C. 

BERLIOZ  :  Romeo  and  Juliet.  SGAMBATI :  Symphony  No.  II.  (new). 

BRAHMS  :  Symphony  No.  IV.  TSCHAIKOWSKY  :  Symphony  No.V. 

BRAHMS:  Violin  Concerto.  TSCHAIKOWSKY    "  The  Tempest." 

GOLDMARK  :  Theme  and  Variations.  WAGNER  .  Kaiser  March. 

DVORAK  :  Serenade  for  Strings  in  E.  WAGNER  ;  Siegfried's  Death  and  Funeral  Music. 

The  soloist  for  the  first  concert  will  be  Adolph  Brodsky,  violinist,  his  first  appearance 
in  America.  At  the  second  concert  the  well  known  contralto,  Frau  Marie  Ritter-Goetze, 
will  appear.  The  celebrated  pianist,  Ignace  J.  Paderewski,  has  been  engaged  for  the  third 
concert.     Other  important  engagements  for  the  remaining  concerts  are  pending. 


This  prospectus  appeared  during  the 
"plutocratic  epoch"  of  the  history  of 
the  American  symphony  orchestra. 


332 


Notice 

The  management  has  allotted  the  boxes  in  the  Music  Hall  to  correspond  as  nearly  as  possible  with  the 
location  of  the  boxes  of  last  year's  subscribers  at  the  Metropolitan  Opera  House.  They  are  respectfully  re- 
quested to  call  for  their  tickets  on  Monday,  October  19th,  at  the  ticket  office  of  Music  Hall;  or,  if  they 
prefer,  they  may  remit  the  amount,  and  the  tickets  will  be  forwarded  by  mail. 

Subscribers  of  last  season  to  parquet  and  balcony  will  have  no  difficulty  in  securing  satisfactory  seats 
themselves  in  the  large  auditorium  of  Music  Hall,  every  seat  of  which  commands  an  uninterrupted  view  of 
the  stage.  The  parquet  contains  1,000  chairs,  whereas  that  of  the  Metropolitan  Opera  House  has  accommo- 
dation for  less  than  600.  The  sale  of  seats  for  former  subscribers  will  begin  on  Monday,  October  19th,  at 
nine  o'clock,  and  continue  until  Saturday,  October  24th,  inclusive,  at  the  ticket  office  of  Music  Hall.  The 
general  sale  of  season  tickets  will  commence  on  Tuesday  morning,  October  27th. 


Prices  of  Subscription. 

FOR  SIX  AFTERNOON  CONCERTS. 

Parquet,            -            -            -            ...            -            -  $8.00 

Dress  Circle— First  two  rows,       .....  7.00 

"          "       Other  rows,      ......  6.00 

Boxes,  six  seats,    .......  60.00 

FOR  SIX  EVENING  CONCERTS. 

Parquet                        .......  $9.00 

Dress  Circle— First  two  rows,      .....  8.00 

"          "        Other  rows,     ......  7.00 

Boxes,  six  seats                ......  66.00 

All  Boxes  contain  six  seats.     No  single  seats  in  boxes  will  be  sold. 


The  dates  of  the  Concerts  will  be  as  follows : 

AFTERNOON    CONCERTS. 

At  2  O'clock. 

Friday,  November  13,  1891.         Friday,  January  15,  1892.         Friday,  March  4,  1S92. 
Friday,  December  4,  1891.  Friday,  February  5,  1892.         Friday,  April  1,  1892. 

EVENING    CONCERTS. 

At  8: 1 6  O'clock. 

Saturday,  November  14,  1891!      Saturday,  January  16.  1892.     Saturday,  March  5    1892 
Saturday,  December  5.  1891.  Saturday,  February  6,  1892.     Saturday,  April  2.  1892. 


PROGRAMME  FOR  FIRST  CONCERT. 

SYMPHONY  No.  VII.  in  A. ^//W 

CONCERTO,  for  Violin  with  Orchestra Rr»l,»,c 

"  HAMLET  "  MR"  AD0LPH  UR0DSKY- 

Tstkaikowsky 

Note  the  names  of  the  philanthro- 
pists ivho  guaranteed  the  "perma- 
nency" of  the  orchestra. 


333 


334  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

presarios  and  musical  philanthropists);  but,  after  1881,  he  not  too 
secretly  envied  the  Boston  orchestra  with  its  personally  guaranteed 
philanthropic  security.  The  double  function  of  impresario  and  con- 
ductor was  too  great  a  load  even  for  such  a  strong  back  as  that  of 
Theodore  Thomas. 

The  regime  inaugurated  by  Mr.  Higginson  in  Boston  was  des- 
tined to  be  one  of  the  most  dramatically  significant  experiments  in 
the  whole  history  of  the  American  symphony  orchestra,  for  it  be- 
came the  ideal  pattern  emulated,  or  at  least  envied,  by  all  major 
orchestras  for  several  decades.  This  system  which,  for  want  of  a 
more  elegant  nomenclature  mav  be  called  "plutocratic,"  consists  in 
a  happy  segregation  of  the  artistic  and  financial  functions,  in  that 
one  or  a  few  persons  of  affluence  take  over  the  responsibility  of 
meeting  the  deficits,  which  are  assumed  to  be  temporarily  or  per- 
manently inevitable.  The  conductor  then  assumes  sole  responsibility 
for  all  the  professional  details  including  the  employment  of  a  corps 
of  musicians  whose  major  duty  is  to  the  orchestra  concerts  and  re- 
hearsals. 

Besides  Higginson  and,  later,  E.  B.  Dane  of  Boston,  other  philan- 
thropists who  virtually  signed  a  blank  check  to  the  credit  of  the 
orchestra  for  a  shorter  or  longer  period  were:  H.  H.  Flagler  (oil) 
for  the  New  York  Symphony,  W.  A.  Clark  (mines)  of  Los  Angeles, 
and  Edward  Bok  (publishing)  of  Philadelphia.  There  were  others, 
equally  important,  who  shared  economic  responsibility  in  a  more 
fragmentary  but  still  substantial  degree:  E.  L.  Carpenter  of  Min- 
neapolis, Charles  Norman  Fay  and  others  of  Chicago,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Charles  Phelps  Taft  of  Cincinnati,  Robert  S.  Brookings  of  St.  Louis. 
For  the  ideology  that  motivated  their  philanthropy  we  may  turn 
to  Mr.  Higginson,  who  was  never  pretentious,  yet  certainly  not  in- 
articulate, either  in  private  conference  or  public  ceremony.  Having 
seen  state  subsidies  in  Europe,  he  epitomized  the  American  philos- 
ophy of  paternalistic  capitalism  on  the  occasion  of  the  dedication  of 
Symphony  Hall,  the  new  home  of  his  orchestra,  in  October,  1900: 

It  is  fitting  in  a  Republic  that  the  citizens  and  not  the  Government  in 
any  form  should  do  such  work  and  bear  such  burdens.  To  the  more  for- 
tunate people  of  our  land  belongs  the  privilege  of  providing  the  higher 
branches  of  education  and  art.58 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  335 

Although  this  was  not  the  same  social  conscience  which 
prompted  the  pre-Napoleonic  princes  to  employ  musicians  as  they 
did  their  cooks  and  coachmen,  it  still  provided  comparable  security 
and  stability  in  this  modern  commercial  era. 

History,  however,  in  the  derisive  manner  which  she  so  often 
affects  toward  man's  most  noble  designs,  began  almost  immediately 
to  reveal  cracks  in  this  handsome  edifice.  However  magnificently 
conceived,  a  foundation  consisting  of  one  or  a  few  individuals  turned 
out  to  be  too  narrow  to  provide  a  stable  equilibrium.  Something 
more  predictable  and  reliable— a  broader  base— was  needed  than  the 
periodic  liquidation  of  each  annual  deficit  by  a  capricious  individual. 
Death,  financial  adversity,  or  simple  fatigue  in  the  pursuit  of  what 
was  once  an  exciting  adventure,  constantly  threatened  to  wreck 
the  structure  in  which  the  welfare  of  so  many  persons,  and  so  much 
community  pride,  was  involved.  Some  of  the  early  philanthropists 
and  energetic  promoters  had  been  sustained  by  their  personal  musi- 
cal accomplishments:  Higginson  had  been  a  student  of  piano  in 
Vienna,  Clark  was  a  proficient  violinist,  and  Flagler  a  pianist.  Car- 
penter, Mrs.  Leonora  Wood  Armsby  (San  Francisco),  and  Mrs. 
Adella  Prentiss  Hughes  (Cleveland),  were  schooled  musicians.  But 
other  projects  were  beginning  to  compete  with  music  for  the 
attention  of  potential  donors:  international  peace,  public  libraries, 
medicine,  research,  and  education.  If  that  were  not  enough,  the 
handwriting  on  the  wall,  which  prophesied  the  liquidation  of  their 
huge  personal  fortunes,  could  already  be  deciphered.  The  era  of  buc- 
caneering capitalists,  who  amassed  their  millions  with  no  questions 
asked  and  no  federal  taxes  to  siphon  them  off,  was  soon  to  pass, 
as  had  the  epoch  of  the  proud  nobility.  Then,  as  now,  their  passing 
endangered  the  institutions  which  they  had  founded  and  sustained. 

It  was  now  beginning  to  dawn  on  public-spirited  persons  that, 
instead  of  the  annual  temporary  relief  of  large  direct  gifts,  a  grant 
of  investment  capital,  rooted  in  the  industrial  wealth  of  the  nation, 
would  be  the  source  of  a  more  continuous,  automatic,  and  pre- 
dictable flow  of  benefits.  The  earliest  instance  of  this  new  direction 
was  an  endowment  by  Joseph  Pulitzer  who,  in  191 1,  left,  among 
the  many    other   benevolences   he    created,    a   bequest   of   almost 


336  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

$  i  ,000,000  to  the  New  York  Philharmonic.  In  Cincinnati,  Miss  Cora 
Dow  (191 5)  and  Mrs.  Nicholas  Longworth  (1923)  left  substantial 
bequests,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Charles  Phelps  Taft  contributed 
$  1,000,000  on  condition  that  another  two  and  a  half  millions  be 
raised  as  an  endowment.  In  Chicago  and  Cleveland,  endowments 
took  another,  but  equally  profitable,  form.  A  popular  subscription 
made  it  possible  to  build  and  present  a  "home"  (Orchestra  Hall)  to 
the  Chicago  orchestra,  which,  in  addition,  yields  an  income  of  rents 
which  has  contributed  to  its  financial  stability.  Cleveland,  in  Sever- 
ance Hall,  also  possesses  a  beautiful  auditorium,  the  gift  of  the  late 
J.  L.  Severance,  which  houses  the  offices  of  the  orchestra  as  well. 

But  in  a  changing  world,  endowments  also  have  their  frailties. 
Although  designed  to  cover  future  obligations,  thev  actually  never 
did  so.  The  reasons  are  very  simple:  the  progressive  decline  in  pur- 
chasing value  of  the  dollar  and  the  shrinking  interest  yields,  while 
obligations  of  all  kinds  have  been  expanding  at  a  fantastic  rate. 
Augmentation  of  dwindling  endowment  funds  from  dried-up 
sources  is  obviously  a  vain  hope,  and  outright  gifts  of  large  dimen- 
sion have  long  gone  out  of  fashion  with  a  more  equable  distribution 
of  the  national  income.  As  a  result,  instead  of  a  few  large  gifts,  the 
new  arithmetic  calls  for  a  multitude  of  little  ones. 

There  are  many  variations  to  this  theme,  but  the  tune  is  always 
the  same:  no  principle  of  orchestral  finance  has  today  gained  more 
general  adherence  than  the  principle  of  the  "broad  base."  Individ- 
ual "friends  of  the  orchestra,"  business  houses,  and  local  industries 
who  make  it  a  routine  rule  to  contribute  to  almost  any  worthy 
cause,  are  solicited  for  annual  subscriptions.  This  places  the  orchestra 
in  a  category  not  unlike  the  beneficiaries  of  the  community  chest, 
so  that  even  the  oldest  and  the  finest  orchestras  find  these  handouts 
indispensable  to  a  balanced  budget. 

In  setting  forth  the  cheerless  recital  of  deficit  financing,  one  may 
unintentionally  produce  an  exaggerated  impression  of  the  plight  of 
the  orchestras.  They  obviously  do  enjoy  some  earned  income  of 
their  own.  In  1948  the  Cincinnati  orchestra  rendered  a  public  ac- 
counting to  its  subscribers,  which  may  be  briefly  illustrated  by 
limiting  the  bookkeeping  to  the  best  seats  in  the  house: 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  337 

Cost  of  production,  as  proportionately  allocated  to  best  seat  $7-05 

Admission  charge  $3.60      51% 

Part  of  deficit  made  up  by  endowments  2.04      29 

Part  which  must  be  made  up  by  "friends"  1.41       20 

$7.05     100% 

In  other  words,  the  customer  purchased  f  1.00  worth  of  music  for 
$.51.  Although  any  estimate  of  an  orchestra's  degree  of  self-support 
is  almost  meaningless  without  a  close  analysis  of  its  accounting  sys- 
tem, one  may  still  assert  that  most  orchestras  are  seventy-five  to 
ninety  per  cent  self-supporting  in  terms  of  ticket  sales,  endowments 
and  other  fixed  income.  However,  it  is  this  last  ten  to  twenty  per 
cent,  gifts  by  "sustaining  members,"  that  spells  the  difference  be- 
tween mediocrity  and  excellence.  The  largest  single  earned  income 
is  derived  from  ticket  sales,  supplemented  by  recordings  and  radio 
sponsorship,  which  in  the  last  decade  have  constituted  a  providential 
intervention.  However,  the  last-named  sources  vary  enormously 
from  orchestra  to  orchestra,  for  in  general  it  is  only  the  larger  and 
more  eminent  organizations  that  can  command  such  outlets  in  sig- 
nificant volume.  Nor  can  relief  be  sought  in  increased  admission 
fees,  for  music  differs  from  such  luxuries  as  tobacco  and  liquor  in 
that  its  elastic  patronage  fluctuates  greatly  with  varving  economic 
conditions  and  the  fickleness  of  public  interest. 

A  half-century  ago,  guarantors  had  quietly  assumed,  and  often 
overtly  expressed  the  conviction,  that  symphony  orchestras  would 
and  could  ultimately  stand  on  their  own  feet;  that  after  a  period  of 
pump-priming,  or  through  the  farsighted  provision  of  an  endow- 
ment of  capital  stock,  the  orchestra  would  become  a  self-supporting 
business  enterprise.  It  had  not  yet  dawned  on  them  that  a  deficit  was 
not  an  occasional  and  unfortunate  episode,  but  rather  a  chronic 
affliction.  Instead  of  being  a  "grocery  store"  which,  when  well  man- 
aged, shows  a  balance  between  income  and  outgo,  the  orchestra  was 
rather  to  be  classed  as  an  educational  institution  in  which  the  fees 
can  never  be  raised  to  the  level  of  costs.  Today,  no  one  sees  any 
prospect  that  it  will  ever  be  otherwise. 

Many  musicians  have  deplored  the  fact  that  music  is  a  victim  of 
the  economic  processes,  and  its  values  distorted  by  those  nefarious 
forces.59  But  in  a  manner  of  speaking  the  symphony  orchestra  can- 


338  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

not,  of  course,  escape  the  economic  processes.  As  long  as  the  con- 
ductor receives  his  fee,  the  musicians  their  contractual  salaries,  the 
printer  of  the  scores  his  profits,  the  owner  of  the  hall  his  rentals, 
the  custodian  his  wage,  they  are  all  enmeshed  in  its  pressures.  It  is 
only  a  question  as  to  how  the  costs  will  be  distributed. 

In  a  rigidly  laissez-faire  economy,  those  services  and  industries 
which  do  not  attract  sufficient  support  to  sustain  them,  are  simply 
left  to  perish  unless  they  are  willing  to  adapt  the  quality  and  volume 
of  their  services  to  the  public  demand.  But  insofar  as  any  service 
or  industry  is  affected  with  the  public  interest,  such  service  is  pro- 
tected against  destructive  competition  by  society  in  its  collective 
capacity.  Therefore,  after  all  other  means  of  economic  support  have 
either  failed  or  become  obsolete,  there  remains  finally,  in  default 
of  private  and  voluntary  aid,  recourse  to  public  taxation  for  the 
support  of  what  to  many  citizens  is  a  public  cultural  asset,  and  con- 
sequently a  responsibility  of  the  community.  Libraries,  museums, 
parks  and  zoos  are  educational  undertakings  which  are  a  source  of 
prestige  and  delight  to  the  citizenry,  and  a  symphony  orchestra 
could  appropriately  be  added  to  the  list,  so  the  argument  runs.  A 
few  cities,  notably  Baltimore,  San  Francisco,  St.  Louis,  Indianapolis, 
Philadelphia,  and  a  number  of  smaller  cities  60  have  lent  assistance 
in  a  direct  or  indirect  manner,  in  exchange  for  which  the  orchestra 
often  presents  a  series  of  concerts  either  without  admission  or  at 
popular  prices.  Since  most  of  these  grants  assume  some  service  in 
return,  they  cannot  be  considered  genuine  subsidies,  but  rather 
earned  income.  But  they  all  have  the  same  purpose  and  effect— to 
alleviate  the  struggle  for  existence. 

Subsidies  by  public  taxation  are  still  sufficiently  infrequent  in 
number  and  small  in  value  to  render  the  issue  a  controversial  one 
among  managers  and  public  alike.  Such  a  provision  sometimes  puts 
the  symphony  orchestra  in  competition  with  the  fire  department, 
street  maintenance  departments,  public  hospitals,  grade  schools,  and 
all  other  municipal  undertakings  for  a  share  in  the  tax  resources. 
Taxpayers,  whose  streets  need  repair,  have  at  times  protested  against 
the  public  subsidizing  of  this  "luxury  of  the  leisure  class." 

There  are  likewise  those,  especially  among  the  spokesmen  for 
orchestras  that  can  limp  along  under  the  present  system,  who  have 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  339 

expressed  their  apprehension  that  public  assistance  would,  of  neces- 
sity, be  followed  by  its  shadow,  public  corruption.  Not  only  would 
politicians  ultimately  insist  on  the  right  of  "nominating  the  fourth 
horn,"  but  the  character  of  the  programs  would  deteriorate  to  the 
level  of  the  strongest  pressure  groups.  For  whatever  material  gain 
music  might  thus  achieve,  it  is  feared  she  would  bargain  her  very 
soul,  her  priceless  artistic  virtue. 

It  is  countered  by  the  proponents  of  the  public  system  that, 
while  political  aggression  is  a  melancholy  fact,  it  is  still  true  that  our 
cultural  institutions  have,  by  and  large,  kept  free  of  such  venality, 
and  that  politicians  have  left  them  alone.  Until  recently,  the  accumu- 
lated experience  was  insufficient  to  venture  confident  predictions  on 
the  receptivity  of  the  orchestras  to  public  grants.  It  is,  however, 
difficult  to  believe  that  any  management,  which  now  theoretically 
spurns  such  aid,  would  in  the  end  choose  to  die  a  virtuous  death 
rather  than  compromise  a  bit  of  its  soul  in  exchange  for  material 
survival.  This  view  is  steadily  gaining  converts.61 

In  such  dilemmas,  it  must  be  difficult  for  the  well-wishers  of  the 
present-day  orchestras  to  inhibit  an  anxious  side  glance  at  the  dra- 
matic theatre,  which  is  a  cultural  institution  of  no  less  respectable 
ancestry.  The  theatre  worries  along  without  benefit  of  endowments, 
without  philanthropic  coverage  of  deficits,  without  radio  or  record 
sustenance.  The  theatre  consists  of  a  series  of  small  enterprises,  each 
of  them  entirely  dependent  upon  the  box  office  to  recoup  the  in- 
vestment which  is  usually  furnished  by  a  risk-taker.  Therefore,  it 
tends  to  scale  its  repertoire  (to  the  great  grief  of  many  a  judicious 
author)  to  that  imperious  circumstance.  This  necessity  to  appease 
the  box  office,  according  to  some  playwrights,  has  brought  about 
the  descent  of  the  theatre  from  the  realm  of  art  to  the  level  of 
"show  business,"  with  a  businessman's  criterion  of  success.  It  is  not 
at  all  certain  that  the  hand-to-mouth  existence  of  some  orchestras 
has  not  similarly  resulted  in  a  lighter,  if  not  a  deteriorated  reper- 
toire, as  well  as  in  a  compromising  collaboration  with  glamorous 
soloists  to  insure  the  success  of  "orchestral"  concerts. 

Artistic  supremacy  was  a  logical  goal  in  the  days  of  unfettered 
wealth,  when  fabulous  fortunes  were  lavished  upon  private  picture 
galleries,  private  yachts,  private  orchestras,  and  other  "playthings 


340  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

of  the  rich."  Today,  when  the  "guarantors"  consist  of  thousands 
of  little  men,  from  whom  subsidies  are  coaxed  in  chicken-feed  lots, 
reckless  expenditures  may  not  be  practical.  They  may  desire  a  quid 
pro  quo  in  musical  entertainment  as  well  as  an  increment  of  pres- 
tige. In  most  instances  today  there  is  a  "freedom  within  limits,"  a 
negotiated  freedom  with  mutual  dependence,  in  the  dual  administra- 
tion, the  degree  of  which  varies  from  city  to  city  and  from  year  to 
year.  The  romantic  concept  of  artistic  supremacy,  in  the  old  sense, 
has  given  way  to  practical  coordination.  There  is  thus  an  inevitable 
relation  between  the  economic  security  of  the  orchestra  and  the 
quality  of  the  repertoire.  In  part  to  prevent  the  deterioration  of  the 
repertoire,  and  in  part  to  prevent  wholesale  unemployment  in  a 
skilled  occupation,  the  British  government  subsidizes  directly  or  in- 
directly about  ten  symphony  orchestras.  The  medium  of  distribu- 
tion of  government  funds  is  the  Arts  Council,  which  was  established 
in  1940.62 

From  the  foregoing  analysis,  it  is  clear  that  the  American  sym- 
phony orchestra  has  always  been,  in  the  economic  sense,  a  "parasitic" 
industry— in  no  way  to  be  construed  derogatorily— subsisting  upon 
the  surpluses  earned  by  other  industries  which  are  then  distributed 
through  the  medium  of  open-handed  friends.  It  has  long  been  ob- 
served that  there  are  many  cherished  social  values  which  will  crum- 
ble if  subjected  to  the  rigors  of  the  laws  of  commerce  and  exchange. 
Warnings  have  been  repeatedly  sounded  against  allowing  serious 
music  to  become  enmeshed  in  the  natural  economic  processes  and 
to  become  a  victim  of  their  criteria  of  survival.  On  the  other  hand, 
to  expect  an  existence  outside  the  social  order  may  also  appear  to  be 
a  contradiction  in  terms.  Certain  forms  of  the  arts  have,  perhaps, 
succeeded  in  establishing  a  modus  vivendi  within  the  commercial 
society,  but  not  without  encountering  vital  dilemmas.  Conductors, 
opera  and  orchestra,  have  learned  that  prolonged  financial  embar- 
rassments are  not  conducive  to  a  good  bargaining  position  in  the 
maintenance  of  the  integrity  of  the  repertoire.  Unsold  season  tickets 
are  a  constant  temptation  to  sell  "singles"  with  a  seductive  program. 
But  it  is  a  question  whether  strong  popular  support  would  be  forth- 
coming for  the  financially  weak  aristocratic  taste.  By  a  program  that 
is  too  esoteric,  the  orchestra  may  "aesthetisize"  itself  out  of  the 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  341 

market  and  endanger  its  existence  more  fatally  than  if  it  made  some 
concessions  to  public  taste. 

THE  MUSICIANS'  UNION  At  critical  periods  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  symphony  orchestra,  management  has  often  accusingly 
laid  its  plight  at  the  door  of  the  musicians  who,  because  of  their 
intractable  demands,  were  charged  with  biting  the  hand  that  was 
feeding  them.  The  salaries  of  the  personnel,  which  amount  to  ap- 
proximately half  of  the  operating  expenses,  do  constitute  the  largest 
single  budget  item.63  Under  the  old  cooperative  system,  these  mu- 
sicians had  been  satisfied  with  a  mere  trickle  of  pin  money,  but  as 
the  orchestra  was  transformed  into  a  major  occupation,  they  natu- 
rally endeavored  to  extract  from  it  their  major  livelihood.  Here  was 
a  fertile  field  for  strife  in  which  the  musician  naturally  made  strenu- 
ous attempts  to  strengthen  his  position. 

Another  source  of  friction  was  the  growing  authority  and 
power  of  the  conductor.  Under  the  democratic  cooperative  system, 
he  "ruled"  at  the  pleasure  of  his  subjects.  Under  the  new  regime, 
inaugurated  by  Higginson  and  followed  by  every  other  major  or- 
chestral administration,  the  responsible  conductor  held  the  power 
to  hire,  and  the  threat  to  fire  for  incompetence  or  insubordination, 
over  every  member  of  the  band.  In  general,  the  musicians  have  now 
conceded  this  right  to  the  musical  director  in  the  interest  of  musical 
efficiency,  but  the  struggle  has  at  times  been  a  bitter  one. 

Both  of  these  powers— business  managers  and  musical  directors- 
are,  in  a  manner  of  speaking,  the  musician's  natural  enemies  against 
whom  the  man  in  the  ranks  feels  called  upon  to  consolidate  his 
forces  for  his  own  protection.  Following  the  pattern  set  in  the 
fields  of  industrial  employment,  unionization  became  the  principal 
protective  device  which  he  adopted  to  insure  his  job  and  to  improve 
his  condition.  The  "competitive  cooperation"  which  obtains  be- 
tween these  contending  parties  is  laden  with  many  implications  for 
the  perpetuation  of  the  orchestras,  the  competence  of  the  member- 
ship, the  effective  artistry  of  its  ensemble,  and,  not  too  indirectly,  the 
nature  of  the  repertoire. 

The  origins  of  the  musicians'  union  in  America  may  be  traced  to 
a  small  group  of  German  musicians  in  New  York  who,  in  i860, 


342  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

formed  an  association  jestingly  titled  the  Aschenbrodel  Club,  "for 
the  cultivation  of  the  art  of  music  .  .  .  and  the  relief  of  such  mem- 
bers as  shall  be  unfortunate."  But  before  many  years,  a  more  serious 
atmosphere  prevailed,  and  its  members  incorporated  as  the  Musical 
Mutual  Protective  Union.  Meanwhile  Baltimore,  St.  Louis,  and  other 
cities  established  similar  clubs,  which,  in  1886,  consolidated  as  the 
National  League  of  Musicians.  Somewhat  squeamish  about  consider- 
ing themselves  "laborers,"  the  League  resisted  the  urge  to  affiliate 
with  the  Knights  of  Labor  and  the  American  Federation  of  Labor 
until  1896,  when  a  small  number  of  Western  locals  attended  the 
A.F.  of  L.  convention  in  Indianapolis  and  laid  the  foundation  for 
the  American  Federation  of  Musicians.  The  League  soon  capitulated 
and  all  locals  finally  entered  the  Federation.  Its  first  president  was 
Owen  Miller  of  St.  Louis.  He  was  succeeded  in  1900  by  Joseph  N. 
Weber  of  Cincinnati.  In  1940  the  presidential  choice  was  JH  C. 
Petrillo  of  Chicago. 

The  greatest  source  of  competition  for  orchestra  jobs  in  our 
undeveloped  country  up  to  the  time  of  the  first  World  War  were 
the  finished  players  from  Germany  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  from 
France  and  other  European  countries.  It  was  not  until  the  early 
eighties  that  the  unions  reacted  energetically  to  this  hazard,  pro- 
voked by  the  members  of  the  traveling  bands  and  orchestras,  par- 
ticularly from  Germany,  who  would  often  desert  their  native  or- 
ganization and  seek  work  in  the  American  theatre  and  concert 
orchestras.  On  the  occasion  of  the  World's  Fair  at  Philadelphia 
(1876),  Chicago  (1893),  and  St.  Louis  (1904),  as  well  as  in  ordinary 
years,  hundreds  of  musicians  of  every  grade  entered  this  country 
while  American  musicians  stood  by  powerless  and  unemployed.  In 
order  to  secure  well-trained  talent,  American  conductors  not  only 
abetted  this  policy,  but  actively  recruited  especially  competent 
players  from  Europe  and  imported  them  on  contract  for  the  best 
positions  in  their  orchestras.  To  counteract  this  peril  to  their  secu- 
rity, the  American  unions  at  first  attempted  to  invoke  the  Alien 
Contract  Labor  Law  enacted  by  Congress  in  1885  for  the  primary 
purpose  of  preventing  industrial  employers  from  inducing  immigra- 
tion by  making  contracts  abroad.  Since  the  law,  however,  expressly 
exempted  professional  persons,  it  was  not  immediately  clear  how  the 


A  Jullien  concert  in  1843.  By  this  time  the  differentiation  of  the  con- 
ductor from  the  general  membership  of  the  orchestra  was  well  estab- 
lished in  Europe  but  just  beginning  in  the  United  States.  (Picture  Post 
Library) 


HKimHHMHnNMi "" 


i — t 

I M     — * 


The  American  orchestras  have  been  through  crises  before.  This  is  a 
sample  of  the  civic  interest  in  the  Philadelphia  Orchestra  during  the  1919 
campaign.  (Courtesy  of  the  Philadelphia  Orchestra  Association) 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  343 

musicians'  unions  could  find  relief  in  its  provisions.  As  early  as  1885 
Theodore  Thomas,  who  had  obtained  many  members  for  his  famous 
orchestra  in  Europe,  secured  an  injunction  from  a  Judge  Potter 
against  the  Musical  Mutual  Protective  Union  of  New  York  which 
was  at  that  time  trying  to  prevent  the  Belgian  Felix  Bour,  oboist, 
from  taking  his  place  in  Thomas'  New  York  orchestra.  In  1893,  the 
same  union  dispatched  a  protest  to  President  Cleveland  on  the  in- 
terpretation of  the  law  which  "allowed  bands  and  orchestras  to 
enter  this  country  .  .  .  under  the  flimsy  pretext  of  classing  them 
as  artists."  64  Even  Arthur  Nikisch,  imported  to  conduct  the  Boston 
orchestra  in  1889,  and  the  opera  composer  Mascagni,  who  entered 
this  country  for  a  triumphant  tour  in  1902,  were  challenged,  but 
merely  evoked  the  expected  ruling  that  they  could  legally  enter  to 
"pursue  their  calling."  Taking  no  chance  of  being  intercepted, 
Nikisch  slyly  landed  in  Boston  after  his  arrival  had  been  announced 
for  New  York. 

As  a  deterrent  to  this  foreign  infiltration,  the  union  had  recourse 
to  a  contrivance  of  its  own:  the  "six-months  rule"  concocted  in  1882 
by  the  New  York  local  as  a  countermeasure  against  the  engagement 
of  Schreiner's  German  orchestra  at  Long  Beach.  It  withheld  union 
membership,  and  therefore  employment,  from  a  foreigner  during 
the  first  half-year  of  residence  in  this  country.  However,  when 
candidates  for  particular  vacancies  were  clearly  not  available  in  the 
United  States,  the  union  usually  waived  this  requirement.  Such  was 
the  case  in  1891  when  Walter  Damrosch,  conductor  of  the  New 
York  Symphony  Society,  imported  as  his  concertmaster  the  dis- 
tinguished Russian  violinist,  Adolf  Brodsky.  It  was  this  artist  who 
had  gained  notoriety  for  his  sensational  premiere  in  Vienna  (1882) 
of  the  now  standard  Tschaikowsky  Concerto  and  occasioned  one 
of  the  choicest  examples  of  Hanslick's  vitriolic  style.  Such  a  celebrity 
clearly  merited  the  exemption  accorded  him. 

Although  many  such  instances  of  administrative  tolerance  could 
be  cited,  the  unions  could  just  as  easily  be  aroused  to  drastic  action. 
Two  years  after  the  Brodsky  episode  Damrosch,  perhaps  feeling 
himself  secure,  invited  the  much  less  famous  Danish  cellist,  Anton 
Hegner,  to  take  the  first  chair  in  the  same  orchestra.  On  Sunday 
evening  December  17,  1893,  shortly  after  his  arrival  in  this  country 


344  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

and  without  observing  the  "six-months  rule,"  Hegner  took  his  seat 
on  the  stage— a  signal  for  the  rest  of  the  orchestra  to  walk  off  and 
desert  their  posts.65  Pre-concert  negotiations  having  failed,  the  union 
thus  made  its  reply  in  the  form  of  the  first  strike  in  American  sym- 
phonic history.  The  musicians  had,  of  course,  acted  under  union 
orders.  The  chagrined  Damrosch  could  only  dismiss  the  audience 
with  a  few  tactful  and  dignified  remarks,  of  which  he  was  always  so 
eminently  capable,  and  retire  to  the  conductor's  room. 

This  episode  turned  out  to  be  a  critical  step  in  the  establishment 
of  the  power  of  the  union.  Although  Theodore  Thomas  had  suc- 
cessfully defied  the  union  in  1885  on  the  principle  of  restraint  of 
trade,  Damrosch  had  weakened  his  case  by  previously  recognizing 
the  six-months  rule  in  successfully  requesting  its  suspension  in  the 
Brodsky  case.  This  time,  however,  the  conductor  for  some  reason 
chose  to  ignore  the  rule.  After  some  weeks  of  negotiation,  during 
which  Hegner  had  twice  illegally  appeared  with  the  orchestra,  the 
showdown  was  set  for  the  Sunday  concert  in  question.  The  union 
had  no  choice  but  to  follow  through  with  the  conventional  fines  for 
conductor  and  players:  $20  for  the  first,  and  $10  for  the  second 
offense.  There  followed  several  days  of  uncertainty  before  Dam- 
rosch conceded  defeat  and  paid  the  fine.  The  players,  who  had 
"acted  under  false  assurances  of  the  conductor"  received  remission 
of  their  fines. 

There  was  some  speculation  that  Damrosch  after  all  may  have 
enjoyed  the  last  laugh.  The  strike  automatically  abrogated  all  con- 
tracts, which  he  then  renegotiated  on  more  favorable  terms  to  him- 
self. Some  have  even  insisted  that  the  whole  strategy  of  the  finan- 
cially hard-pressed  conductor  was  diabolically  designed  to  that  very 
end.66 

Again,  in  1905,  the  same  Damrosch  clashed  with  the  union,  and 
the  rebuff  assumed  the  still  characteristic  pattern.  He  was  fined  a 
"nominal"  amount  of  $1,000  by  Joseph  N.  Weber,  president,  for  im- 
porting five  French  musicians  for  his  recently  reorganized  orchestra 
—punitive  action  which  was  sustained  at  the  May,  1906,  convention 
of  the  American  Federation  of  Musicians.  Damrosch  had  proferred 
the  usual  claim  that  America  could  not  supply  his  needs,  while 
Weber  had  charged  that  the  conductor  had  made  no  honest  attempt 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  345 

to  determine  the  availability  of  the  supply  in  this  country.  The 
offending  French  musicians  were,  however,  magnanimously  permit- 
ted to  join  the  union  since  "these  men  came  to  this  country  in  good 
faith  and  were  not  responsible  for  their  embarrassing  predica- 
ment." 67 

On  the  more  fundamental  issue,  the  courts  had  always  ruled  since 
1890  that  musicians  were  "artists"  and  not  laborers,  and  therefore 
not  under  the  protection  of  the  Contract  Labor  Law.  In  1902  Alex- 
ander Bremer,  then  president  of  the  New  York  Musicians  Mutual 
Protective  Union,  directed  another  futile  protest  to  President  Theo- 
dore Roosevelt,  in  which  he  again  insisted  that  musicians  were 
"wage  earners  entitled  to  the  protection  of  the  law  as  were  other 
wage  earners."  68  On  the  same  principle,  in  1927,  Joseph  N.  Weber 
submitted  a  brief  to  the  United  States  Department  of  Labor  anent 
an  imported  orchestra  at  the  Carleton  Hotel,  Washington,  D.  C.69 

The  union  interpretation  really  did  not  seem  too  inconsistent 
with  the  actual  fact.  Many  of  these  musicians,  either  through  in- 
competence or  lack  of  broader  opportunity,  plied  their  music  only 
as  a  part-time  occupation,  and  simultaneously  held  cards  as  cob- 
blers, stove-molders,  saloon  keepers,  and  what-have-you.  In  fact, 
Alexander  Bremer  was  himself  a  minor  official  in  the  New  York  city 
government  and  his  opponent  in  the  election  for  the  presidency  of 
the  M.  M.  P.  U.  in  1897  was  a  boss  carpenter  and  violinist.70  They 
were  a  versatile  lot  in  those  unspecialized  days,  and  their  varied 
talents  undoubtedly  dulled  their  devotion  to  a  single  art  and  facili- 
tated the  spread  of  the  pattern  of  unionization  of  the  "artist"  with 
the  artisan.  Nor  did  those  who  were  fortunate  enough  to  gain  their 
entire  livelihood  in  music  always  scale  the  exalted  heights  of  artistry, 
for  there  is  nothing  necessarily  elevating  or  divinely  inspiring  in 
fiddling,  night  after  night,  in  the  squalid  pits  of  cheap  theatres,  or 
in  scraping  through  the  popular  rounds  and  dance  tunes  of  the  day. 
Such  players  quite  justifiably  felt  themselves  more  akin  to  the  hack 
worker  than  to  the  symphony  artist,  whose  dignity  might  have  in- 
hibited crude  protests. 

But  there  were  some  symphony  players  who  were  conscious 
of  a  higher  tradition,  and  who  often  winced  a  bit  when  "contem- 
plating the  fitness  of  the  Bach  and  Beethoven  interpreters,  hod  car- 


346  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

riers,  bricklayers  and  longshoremen  forming  a  union  to  strengthen 
our  position,  while  architects,  painters,  composers,  actors  and  poets 
live  a  life  of  weary  isolation."  They  feared  that  too  close  an  affinity 
between  symphony  men  and  the  run-of-the-mine  theatre  and  dance 
musicians  would  aid  the  incompetent  in  rising,  to  jeopardize  their 
own  position  and  thereby  depress  the  relative  opportunities  of  the 
better-class  musicians  by  placing  all  on  one  level.71 

When  it  was  not  a  question  of  importations  from  abroad,  the 
local  unions  endeavored  to  protect  their  jobs  from  migrations  from 
other  cities.  Because  of  the  principle  of  local  autonomy  in  the  Fed- 
eration, union  cards  are  not  normally  transferable  from  one  local 
to  another.  Hence  there  is  always  a  union-imposed  barrier  to  free 
migration  which  constitutes  a  vexatious  restraint  to  the  conductor 
or  local  management  in  strengthening  his  orchestra  by  bidding  in 
the  national  market.  Here  too,  however,  amicable  agreements  are 
often  made  for  the  good  of  the  order,  although  strife  and  friction 
were  common,  especially  during  the  period  of  the  founding  of  the 
permanent  orchestras  a  half-century  ago.  When  Theodore  Thomas 
was  engaged  to  organize  the  Chicago  orchestra  in  1891,  he  literally 
transferred  almost  his  entire  New  York  orchestra  of  sixty  men  to 
Chicago  as  the  nucleus  for  the  new  body.  In  retort  to  union  pro- 
tests, Thomas  insisted:  "I  shall  select  my  players  where  I  find  them 
.  .  .  New  York  ...  or  Europe.  ...  If  there  are  good  men  in  Chicago 
I  will  use  them."  72  Van  der  Stucken  in  Cincinnati;  Scheel  in  Phila- 
delphia; Henschel  and  Gericke  in  Boston;  Gabrilowitsch  in  De- 
troit; Rothwell  in  Los  Angeles— all  these  conductors  encountered 
this  normal,  but  impotent,  impulse  on  the  part  of  the  local  musician 
to  protect  his  job  as  it  came  in  conflict  with  the  principle  of  artistic 
supremacy  as  entertained  by  conductor,  civic  committee,  and  guar- 
antors. On  this  front,  too,  the  union  lost  its  battle,  for  the  modern 
orchestra  had  now  reached  a  kind  of  "industrial  stage"  in  which 
musical  efficiency  was  the  controlling  law,  and  generally  had  pri- 
ority over  job  security. 

The  displaced  personnel  of  these  early  orchestras,  and  their  pub- 
lic sympathizers,  of  which  there  were  many,  fought  grimly  and 
sometimes  "split  the  community"  in  their  pathetic  efforts  to  protect 
the  "local  boys."  The  usual  promise  that  "all  competent  musicians 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  347 

will  be  retained,"  was  scant  consolation  to  the  mediocre  majority. 
In  extenuation  of  the  demands  of  the  perfectionist,  most  of  the  local 
orchestras  had  been  mere  "sandlot"  affairs  whose  strength  lay  not 
in  their  musical  ideals,  but  in  social  and  professional  companionship. 
In  the  cooperative  manner,  they  usually  divided  the  modest  "take," 
which  was  never  considered  anything  but  a  pleasant  source  of  extra 
income,  much  less  remunerative,  but  more  exhilarating  than  the 
tedious  theatre  routine  and  humdrum  teaching.  But  now  the  orches- 
tra was  to  be  organized  from  above,  with  the  membership,  and  even 
the  conductor  himself,  put  in  the  role  of  salaried  employees.  At  last, 
the  conductor  could  choose  his  men  rather  than  the  men  the  con- 
ductor. Although  the  union  has  preserved  certain  safeguards  against 
arbitrary  and  exploitive  tactics,  nothing  is  now  more  generally  con- 
ceded than  the  essential  and  responsible  right  of  the  conductor  in 
the  selection  of  personnel. 

With  the  problems  of  basic  employment  settled  in  principle, 
there  is  still  the  whole  area  of  "working  conditions"  and  their  en- 
forcement—including wage  scales,  hours,  and  the  host  of  details— 
which  are,  of  course,  subject  to  continuous  negotiation  between 
union  and  management. 

Although  it  was  not  until  after  World  War  I  that  negotiations 
on  salaries  and  working  conditions  became  momentous,  periodic 
tiffs  between  union  and  orchestral  management  were  not  unknown 
before  that.  Early  in  1904,  while  rehearsing  the  new  and  difficult 
score  of  Symphonia  Domestica  under  Richard  Strauss,  who  was  then 
making  his  first  tour  of  the  United  States,  the  members  of  the 
Wetzler  orchestra  of  New  York  walked  off  the  stage  when  the 
contractual  rehearsal  time  had  expired.  This  episode,  which  some 
have  condemned  as  a  rude  and  inhospitable  gesture  toward  a  dis- 
tinguished foreigner,  incidentally  could  not  have  befallen  anyone 
with  greater  poetic  justice,  for  no  musician  and  composer  had 
achieved  a  more  deserved  reputation  for  calculated  negotiation  with 
musicians  and  publishers  than  the  fabulously  successful  Richard 
Strauss. 

By  1920  the  unions  were  entering  into  a  period  of  increased 
bargaining  power,  and  their  demands  for  revision  of  salary  scales, 
stimulated  by  the  postwar  inflationary  spirals,  threatened  the  very 


348  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

existence  of  some  of  the  major  orchestras.  This  bargaining  power 
was  enhanced  bv  the  relative  scarcity  of  musicians  during  that  post- 
war period.  Not  only  was  the  competitive  European  supply  cut  off 
by  more  stringent  immigration  laws,  but  the  fashion  for  symphony 
orchestras  was  spreading  to  the  Middle  West  and  the  Pacific  Coast 
where  newly  founded,  or  reinvigorated,  organizations  were  bidding 
for  the  limited  supply  of  competent  players.  During  this  period  of 
Coolidge  prosperity  even  moving-picture  theatres  were  adding  pit 
orchestras  of  symphonic  proportions  to  the  sumptuous  decor  of 
their  cinema  palaces.  Clearly,  it  was  a  propitious  time  for  unions 
to  press  their  advantage.  And  this  they  did,  to  the  great  distress 
of  the  philanthropists  whose  economic  surpluses,  once  the  rich  eco- 
nomic topsoil  from  which  the  arts  had  extracted  their  nutriment, 
were  now  being  washed  away  by  the  slow  but  fatal  erosion  of  the 
changing  industrial  climate. 

Whether  or  not  the  contending  parties  fully  realized  the  ruth- 
less drift  of  events  in  which  they  were  helplessly  dragged  along, 
there  is  nothing  in  the  light  of  contemporary  or  subsequent  develop- 
ments which  would  suggest  that  either  side  was  bluffing.  H.  H. 
Flagler,  the  guardian  angel  of  the  New  York  Symphony  Society, 
was  irked  by  the  "continued  attempt  by  hampering  restrictions  and 
purely  commercial  methods  to  destroy  artistic  projects,"  and  warned 
that  "if  the  worse  element  prevails  I  see  but  two  courses  open,  ( 1 ) 
to  give  up  altogether  the  maintenance  of  the  symphony  orchestras, 
or  (2)  to  found  nonunion  orchestras."  73  In  Chicago  in  the  spring 
of  1923,  the  union  threatened  to  strike  "in  the  fall."  These  ominous 
soundings  subsided  only  when  "both  sides  compromised."  This  was 
the  same  orchestral  management  that,  in  1928,  had  already  notified 
the  musicians  that  "they  were  free  to  seek  employment  elsewhere" 
when  the  differences  were  again  patched  up.  Orchestras  had  folded 
up  before.  Cincinnati  was  dark  from  1906  to  1908  when  the  man- 
agement, even  in  those  early  days,  met  with  "labor  troubles." 

As  is  usual  in  a  democracy,  both  sides  appealed  for  aid  and  com- 
fort to  the  public  conscience,  each  presenting  its  own  case  in  the 
best  possible  light  and  that  of  its  opponent  in  the  worst.  The  "ex- 
orbitant and  shortsighted  demands  of  the  union"  were  set  off  against 
the  selfless  generosity  of  the  philanthropists,  whose  benefactions  to 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  349 

society  were  made  difficult,  and  even  impossible,  by  the  aggressive 
and  myopic  "commercial"  motives  of  the  players'  union.  As  for  the 
musician,  he  in  turn  considered  himself  worthy  of  his  hire.  He  had 
a  great  investment  in  his  long  years  of  concentrated  study  and  in  the 
acquisition  and  maintenance  of  a  costly  instrument  and  delicate 
skills.  The  legitimately  expected  return  on  this  investment  was  ren- 
dered precarious  by  the  brevity  of  the  concert  season,  the  un- 
certainty of  the  yearly  contracts,  and  the  postwar  inflation.  All  this 
obviously  argued  a  sympathetic  review  of  the  player's  plight. 

This  clash  between  the  imperious  demands  of  rising  costs  and 
the  dissipation  of  available  philanthropic  resources  assumed  national 
proportions,  and  in  the  minds  of  some  leaders  required  consultation 
on  a  national  scale.  In  February,  1924,  Clarence  H.  Mackay,  who 
had  recently  become  chairman  of  the  board  of  the  New  York 
Philharmonic,  invited  the  patrons  of  about  a  dozen  major  orchestras 
to  New  York  for  the  specific  purpose  of  discussing  the  now  uni- 
versally experienced  mounting  deficits.  Many  of  the  leading  philan- 
thropists were  present:  Van  Rensselaer  (Philadelphia),  Hamill 
(Chicago),  Carpenter  (Minneapolis),  Flagler  (New  York  Sym- 
phony), together  with  Juilliard,  Kahn,  and  Marshall  Field,  of  the 
host  orchestra.  The  managers,  among  whom  were  Judson  (of  New 
York  and  Philadelphia),  Mrs.  Hughes  (Cleveland),  Mrs.  Caroline 
Estes  Smith  (Los  Angeles),  and  others,  joined  in  the  deliberations. 
Some  of  their  plans  to  reduce  deficits  had  no  durable  significance, 
but  the  informal  organization,  expanded  to  meet  developing  needs, 
still  exists  and  is  convoked  annually  for  the  discussion  of  common 
problems. 

There  was  one  orchestra  that  did  not  avail  itself  of  the  oppor- 
tunity to  participate  in  the  council  on  the  pending  crisis.  Boston, 
which  had  operated  the  best  of  all  major  orchestras,  and  the 
only  one  on  the  open-shop  principle,  apparently  felt  no  need  for 
collaboration  and,  in  fact,  might  even  have  pointed  up  the  embarrass- 
ing anachronism  of  its  position  if  it  had  taken  part  in  the  sessions. 
During  all  these  decades,  when  union  and  management  were  learn- 
ing to  live  together  to  promote  their  common  ends,  the  Boston 
orchestra  had  been  able  to  cultivate  a  splendid  isolation  from  the 
inexorable  trends. 


350  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

There  were  several  factors  that  contributed  to  the  amazing  self- 
reliance  of  the  Boston  organization.  First,  the  paternalistic  foresight 
of  its  owner  had  provided  for  a  long  and  profitable  season.  Not  only 
was  the  winter  season  of  twenty-four  pairs  of  concerts  then  the 
longest  of  any  in  the  country,  but  the  famous  "pops,"  founded  in 
1885,  and  the  Esplanade  concerts,  beginning  in  the  late  twenties, 
guaranteed  to  many  a  member  almost  full-year  employment,  and  at 
a  high  wage  scale.  The  Boston  orchestra  never  stopped  playing! 
Dignified  supplementary  income  from  teaching  and  summer  resort 
contracts  was  facilitated  by  the  universally  acknowledged  prestige 
of  the  orchestra.  Consequently  the  musicians  were  somewhat  less 
receptive  to  alarms  of  exploitation  than  they  might  have  been  under 
average  circumstances.  A  large  proportion  had  been  imported  ex- 
pressly for  membership  in  this  orchestra  and  so  felt  a  loyalty  to  it. 

Over  and  above  this  whole  scene,  there  hovered  the  ominously 
possessive  philosophy  of  the  guarantor,  who,  until  191 8,  assumed 
full  personal  responsibility  for  the  economic  security  of  the  orches- 
tra, and  kept  its  membership  dependent  on  the  pleasure  of  owner 
and  conductor.  This  watchfulness  against  any  discontent  must  have 
been  a  powerful  deterrent  to  overt  expression  of  any  latent  restless- 
ness. When,  in  1903,  murmurs  of  revolt  became  audible,  Higginson 
rendered  his  usual  obbligato  in  his  typical  unambiguous  manner:  "No 
one  will  interfere  with  my  orchestra.  If  there  is  interference  I  will 
abolish  it  and  declare  publicly  who  is  at  fault  and  why  it  was 
done."  74  A  much  more  serious  crisis  was  weathered  in  1920  when, 
as  a  result  of  a  strike,  the  orchestral  board  dismissed  the  concert- 
master  and  about  thirty  members  of  the  orchestra  in  a  desperate 
attempt  to  halt  the  inevitable. 

But  finally,  when  the  scepter  had  dropped  from  the  hands  of  the 
ruler,  the  orchestra  lost  its  independence  through  a  series  of  squeeze 
plays  maneuvered  by  Mr.  Petrillo:  his  refusal  to  allow  Bruno  Walter 
and  Carlos  Chavez  to  conduct  the  nonunion  Boston  orchestra;  his 
threat  to  prevent  Koussevitzky  from  accepting  invitations  from 
union  orchestras;  his  threat  to  blacklist  the  auditoriums  where  Bos- 
ton might  appear.  Most  alarming  of  all  was  the  imminent  danger  of 
interference  with  broadcasting  and  recording,  which  would  have 
struck  at  the  very  subsistence  of  the  orchestra.  Finally,  enmeshed 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  351 

in  the  larger  world  of  affairs,  the  management  could  only  capitulate 
in  December,  1942,  after  having  wrung  from  Petrillo  certain  minor 
concessions. 

All  symphony  orchestras  are  now  fully  organized  and,  in  that 
sense,  the  union  "problem"  may  be  written  off  as  "solved."  Harassed 
more  than  ever  by  deficit  financing,  management  still  resents  many 
detailed  restrictions  imposed  on  its  freedom  to  act  in  its  own  inter- 
ests, and  occasionally  accuses  the  musician  of  not  thinking  beyond 
the  tip  of  his  bow.  On  the  other  hand,  any  idealism  which  the  prac- 
titioner of  the  "queen  of  the  arts"  may  have  inherited  from  the 
nineteenth  century,  and  any  professional  enthusiasm  which  formerly 
sustained  him  in  the  old  cooperative  days,  must  now  be  tempered 
by  the  realities  of  the  competitive  age.  Although  the  symphony 
artist  may  at  times  still  feel  the  discomfort  of  being  yoked  with  the 
popular  musician,  they  all  present  as  solid  a  front  as  do  the  members 
of  any  other  union. 

The  economic  welfare  of  orchestra  personnel  has  been  severely 
affected  by  the  technological  revolution  of  the  last  decades.  The 
incessant  fear  of  displacement  by  the  machine  has  gripped  the 
modern  musician  as  it  has  gripped  the  workers  in  every  industry 
since  the  industrial  revolution.  The  close  of  the  last  century  wit- 
nessed the  invention  of  the  phonograph.  In  1926  the  Vitaphone  made 
its  debut  in  New  York  with  Marion  Talley,  Elman,  Zimbalist,  and 
the  New  York  Philharmonic.  Alarmed,  the  American  Federation  of 
Musicians  authorized  a  budget  of  a  million  dollars  in  1930  to  fight 
"canned  music."  In  1933,  the  American  Society  of  Composers  and 
Publishers  published  a  brochure  entitled  The  Murder  of  Music 
which  endeavored  to  prove  that  the  mechanization  of  music  had  had 
an  adverse  effect  on  the  welfare  of  composers  and  performers.  The 
charge,  as  made  by  the  union,  is  simply  that  the  musician  is  in 
danger -of  recording  himself  out  of  business.  This  crisis  calls  for  a 
new  pattern  of  emolument  and  a  new  principle  of  division  of  the 
income  yield  on  musical  recordings. 

The  new  conditions  touch  on  the  symphony  orchestra  in  several 
respects.  Not  only  is  the  orchestra  interested  in  tapping  larger  re- 
turns on  its  recordings— it  has  been  suggested  that  the  orchestra 
itself  enter  into  a  cooperative  business  in  making  and  distributing 


352  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

recordings— but  the  decline  in  live  music  on  the  lower  levels  has 
robbed  the  symphony  member  of  a  large  part  of  his  supplementary 
livelihood  and  discouraged  recruitment  for  the  profession.  The  sym- 
phony orchestra  draws  its  vitality  from  the  broad  base  and  general 
health  and  abundance  of  the  profession  at  large.  The  struggle  for 
survival  in  that  respect  is  as  critical  as  is  the  more  fully  publicized 
financial  problem  of  the  symphony  orchestra. 

The  Audience  and  Its  Folkways 

It  has  always  been  the  professed  intention  of  modern  orchestral 
leaders  and  sponsors  to  appeal,  if  not  to  the  masses,  at  least  to  the 
middle  class  of  limited  financial  resources.  Hence,  popular  prices 
have  played  an  important  role  in  the  policy  of  every  orchestra.  The 
basic  audience  of  the  subscription  concerts  of  symphony  orchestras 
is,  of  course,  a  small  one  compared  to  that  of  the  commercial  enter- 
tainments. A  rough  indication  of  this  ratio  may  be  gathered  from 
the  relative  capacities  of  the  concert  halls  and  the  moving-picture 
theatres.  The  New  York  Philharmonic,  for  example,  estimates  its 
annual  attendance  at  between  250,000  and  300,000  in  that  city  of 
seven  million.  In  order  to  calculate  the  proportion  of  the  New  York 
City  population  which  actually  attends  concerts  more  or  less  regu- 
larly, one  would  necessarily  have  to  eliminate  duplicates,  compute 
suburban  and  out-of-town  patronage,  and  make  many  other  finer 
adjustments.  If  this  were  done,  it  would  be  impossible  to  conclude 
that  more  than  two  per  cent  of  the  eligible  (adult)  population  ha- 
bitually attends  symphony  concerts  during  the  winter  season. 

This  visible  audience  is,  of  course,  significantly  augmented  by  the 
uncounted  listeners  to  radio  and  records,  together  with  patrons  of 
summer  concerts,  which  may  tap  other  strata  of  the  population. 
There  are  no  reliable  estimates  as  to  the  extent  of  this  dissemination 
of  serious  musical  interests.  There  can,  however,  be  no  doubt  that, 
in  spite  of  the  numerical  limits  to  concert  patronage,  there  has  oc- 
curred a  democratization  in  musical  knowledge  and  appreciation  not 
unlike  the  democratization  in  all  other  amenities  of  life.  It  is  char- 
acteristic, especially  of  the  United  States,  that  the  gap  between  the 
privileged  and  the  common  man  has  narrowed  in  every  respect. 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  353 

This  transformation  of  the  character  and  membership  of  the 
concert  audience  during  the  last  1 50  years  has  been  one  of  the  sig- 
nificant features  in  our  concert  life,  for  the  audience  is,  of  course, 
an  essential  ingredient  of  that  life.  From  a  small,  closely  knit  band 
of  aristocrats  and  nobles,  socially  more  or  less  acquainted  with  one 
another,  assembled  periodically  for  a  convivial  gathering  in  which 
the  musical  program  was  only  one  attraction,  the  audience  has  been 
inflated  into  a  large  anonymous  body,  in  which  the  consumption 
of  music  is  the  central  event.  While  the  noble  European  patrons 
looked  down  with  some  condescension  on  the  socially  inferior  mu- 
sician on  the  stage,  the  present  bourgeois  audience  views  the  mu- 
sician with  respect  and  some  awe.  The  parallel  evolution  of  concert 
manners  in  part  reflects  this  increasing  prestige  of  the  orchestra 
and  conductor  vis-a-vis  the  audience,  as  the  latter  has  grown  in 
intellectual  stature  and  in  its  aesthetic  grasp  of  more  complex  musi- 
cal thought.  As  a  result  there  has  been  a  veritable  social  revolution 
in  the  nineteenth  century,  which  is  reflected  in  the  general  maturity 
of  public  decorum. 

The  primitive  crudeness  of  the  early  American  frontier  folk- 
ways has  been  the  subject  of  many  a  supercilious  comment  by 
urbane  European  travelers  for  two  centuries.  That  such  conduct 
should  appear  in  the  presence  of  serious  music,  which  requires 
sophisticated  attention  and  uncommon  concentration,  is  only  to  be 
expected.  Though  many  traveling  virtuosi  noted  the  diminutive 
aesthetic  sense  of  the  American  frontier  public,  it  should  be  remem- 
bered that  the  most  elementary  standards  of  deportment  enforced 
nowadays  in  every  motion  picture  theatre  were  by  no  means  com- 
monplace among  the  aristocrats  of  Europe.  That  Mozart  was  not 
accustomed  to  undivided  attention  from  his  audience  was  evident 
from  a  letter  written  to  his  father  from  Vienna  in  1781: 

I  told  you  about  the  applause  in  the  theatre,  but  I  must  add  that  what 
delighted  and  surprised  me  most  was  the  amazing  silence  while  I  was 
playing.75 

In  the  early  days  of  the  Gewandhaus  concerts,  organized  by  J.  A. 
Hiller  in  1781,  conversation  was  freely  carried  on  during  the  con- 
cert. When  confusion  became  too  unbearable,  quiet  was  restored  by 


354  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

the  presiding  merchant,  who  rapped  for  attention  not  with  a  gavel 
but,  appropriately  enough,  on  the  keys  of  the  piano.76  In  a  letter 
to  his  family  while  conductor  of  the  Leipzig  Gewandhaus  orchestra, 
Mendelssohn  reported  under  date  of  October  6,  1835: 

I  wish  you  could  have  heard  my  Calm  Sea  with  which  the  concert  com- 
menced. Both  in  the  room  and  in  the  orchestra  there  was  a  quiet  so  that 
the  finest  tone  could  be  heard. 

Hanslick  quotes  instances  of  ill-mannered  disturbances  in  various 
European  centers,  including  Berlin  and  Vienna,  "especially  when 
women  were  present."  77  Drawings  of  scenes  in  the  London  orches- 
tral concerts  of  the  forties  reveal  similar  informal  behavior  on  the 
part  of  the  fashionable  patrons.  Perhaps  this  period  of  immaturity 
was  of  longer  duration  in  America,  for  with  us  it  seems  to  have  ex- 
tended almost  to  the  twentieth  century.  Dwight's  Journal  reports 
on  the  Thomas  concerts  in  New  York  in  1875: 

Not  a  week  passes  without  some  scathing  rebuke  from  him  [Thomas] 
to  those  illbred  and  ignorant  people  who  keep  up  a  continued  buzzing 
during  the  performance  of  the  music  to  the  annoyance  of  all  decent 
folk.78 

That  he  must  have  been  harassed  by  the  same  misconduct,  even  in 
his  later  Chicago  days,  can  likewise  be  surmised  from  the  following 
review  of  one  of  his  concerts  in  1896: 

The  chef  d'oeuvre,  of  course,  was  Beethoven's  Eroica,  and  in  this  the 
Thomas  orchestra  was  at  its  best.  It  was  received  and  followed  with  the 
closest  attention  and  there  was  noticeably  less  conversation  than  on 
previous  occasions.  Perhaps  this  may  be  accounted  for  in  the  fact  that 
few  beyond  the  truly  musical  were  present  .  .  .  because  of  bad 
weather.79 

The  New  York  Philharmonic  tried  to  enlist  public  opinion  as  a 
corrective  to  the  disturbances  in  their  audiences.  In  their  annual 
report  of  1857,  they  declare: 

We  must  necessarily  insist  upon  musical  good  manners.  The  inattention 
and  heedless  talking  and  disturbance  of  but  a  limited  number  of  our 
audience  are  proving  a  serious  annoyance  to  our  Philharmonic  perform- 
ances. The  remedy  for  this,  after  all,  lies  rather  with  the  audience  itself 
than  the  society  authorities.  If  each  little  neighborhood  would  take  care 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  355 

of  itself,  and  promptly  frown  down  the  few  chance  disturbers  of  its 
pleasures,  perfect  order  would  soon  be  secured.  We  hope  this  will  be 
done.  In  foreign  audiences  it  is  effectively  done. 

The  Metropolitan  Opera  House  of  New  York,  for  all  its  aristocratic 
patronage,  displayed  no  higher  standard  of  propriety  than  prevailed 
in  orchestral  concerts.  Henry  T.  Finck,  the  noted  New  York  critic, 
relates: 

Many  of  the  stockholders  have  converted  the  anterooms  of  their  boxes 
into  luxurious  parlors  into  which  they  retire  and  talk  if  the  music  bores 
them.  But  unfortunately  there  are  some  black  sheep  among  them  and 
their  invited  guests  who  do  not  make  use  of  this  privilege,  but  give  the 
rest  of  the  audience  the  benefit  of  their  conversational  accomplish- 
ments.80 

Such  improprieties  on  the  part  of  the  boxholders  amounted  to  a 
minor  scandal  for  many  years.  As  late  as  191 5,  Toscanini  stopped 
the  performance  of  Euryanthe  as  a  reprimand  to  the  disturbers  of 
the  peace,  a  remedy  which  Colonel  Robert  Ingersoll,  who  always  sat 
in  the  pit,  had  recommended  to  Seidl  in  a  public  statement  as  early 
as  1890. 

George  Bernard  Shaw,  while  serving  as  critic  in  London  in  the 
nineties,  aptly  analyzed  the  psychology  of  the  chattering  London 
audiences: 

.  .  .  the  extreme  smartness  of  these  functions  leaves  the  audience  entirely 
preoccupied  with  the  thoughts  of  being  immensely  in  it.81 

In  the  mid-twenties,  Stokowski,  Monteux,  and  Koussevitzky  all 
had  trouble  quieting  the  New  York  audience  at  the  beginning  of  the 
concert.  Monteux  would  angrily  rap  the  desk,  while  his  successor, 
Koussevitzky,  would  quietly  fold  his  arms  and  wait.  Some  conjec- 
tured that  these  visiting  orchestras  from  Philadelphia  and  Boston 
attracted  a  similar  "smart  set,"  which  had  not  quite  accommodated 
itself  to  the  restrained  amenities  of  a  symphony  concert. 

Whispering  was  not  the  only  disturbance  in  the  uncouth  days. 
Late  arrivals,  early  departures,  premature  donning  of  wraps  during 
the  last  number,  boisterous  applause  and  demonstrations  (especially 
for  soloists),  coughing,  and  other  evidences  of  unappreciative  rest- 
lessness were  common  vexations  for  orchestra  and  audience  alike. 


356  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Many  conductors  have  been  distressed  over  such  profane  intrusions 
on  occasions  which  were  to  them  devout  and  exalting  experiences. 
Various  methods  have  been  employed  by  them  to  train  their  audi- 
ences and  render  them  "concert-broke."  Biilow,  the  irrepressible 
eccentric,  Walter  Damrosch,  Stokowski,  have  all  been  known  to 
pause  in  mid-concert  to  discourse  on  social  manners.  Lamoureux,  an 
excellent  but  uninhibited  Paris  conductor,  resorted  on  one  occasion 
to  a  more  personal  method  of  bringing  home  to  a  thoughtless  culprit 
the  sin  of  leaving  the  hall  before  the  completion  of  the  concert. 
Stopping  the  orchestra  and  fixing  the  victim  in  his  gaze,  he  followed 
him  with  pointed  baton  until  he  had  safely  disappeared  at  the  exit, 
after  which  the  concert  was  quietly  resumed.82  Even  Frederick 
Stock,  the  very  model  of  tact  and  diplomacy  would  wave  his  hand- 
kerchief when  coughing  got  out  of  hand.  In  19 10  he  once  suddenly 
halted  his  musicians  during  Smetana's  Moldan,  to  allow  the  public 
to  put  on  their  wraps  without  musical  accompaniment. 

Barring  the  doors  to  latecomers  brought  many  protests  from 
patrons  who,  on  their  part,  frequently  complained  of  the  incon- 
siderateness  of  the  conductor  who  performed  long  opening  com- 
positions, thereby  inflicting  unfair  punishment  for  what  was  after  all 
only  a  thoughtless,  or  even  unavoidable,  tardiness.  In  Paris  in  1899 
one  such  tardy  concert-goer,  who  arrived  late  for  a  performance  of 
Tristan  und  Isolde  by  the  Lamoureux  Company,  brought  suit  against 
the  company  for  refusing  to  honor  his  ticket.  The  fact  that  the  first 
act  was  more  than  an  hour  in  length  excited  some  sympathy  for  the 
victim.  However,  the  French  courts  did  not  uphold  the  petition  of 
the  plaintiff.  Recognizing  that  the  ticket  represented  a  bilateral  con- 
tract, the  courts  held  that,  since  the  ticket  carried  a  warning  con- 
cerning the  barring  of  latecomers,  the  plaintiff  could  claim  no 
damages.613  In  Boston,  the  doors  were  not  definitely  closed  to  tardv 
patrons  until  1922. 

Audience  reaction  to  a  performance  has  taken  many  forms. 
Nothing  would  seem  more  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  human 
nature  than  a  spontaneous  expression  of  appreciation  for  the  enjoy- 
ment gained  from  a  concert  well  done.  The  physiological  tension, 
cumulated  during  the  rendition  of  a  number,  may  be  discharged  by 
almost  any  kind  of  overt  manifestation:   stamping  of  feet,  cheers 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  357 

and  calls,  standing  and  waving  of  arms,  and  the  more  restrained 
handclapping.  This  whole  range  of  public  display  of  gratification, 
from  sheer  animal  boisterousness  to  the  most  refined  manual  meth- 
ods, is  found  in  the  history  of  concert  and  other  performances. 
Clapping  of  hands,  with  occasional  cheers,  has  now  remained  the 
only  genteel  manner  in  which  an  audience  may  vent  its  emotions. 

However,  there  are  those  who  have  attempted  to  discourage 
even  this  simple  demonstration  as  a  violation  of  the  solemnity  of 
art.  Untimely  interruptions  of  a  particularly  brilliant  passage  in  a 
vocal  or  instrumental  solo,  once  considered  the  acme  of  flattery,  and 
the  inability  of  an  audience  to  await  the  closing  notes  of  the  orches- 
tral accompaniment  to  a  concerto,  have  become  a  legitimate  griev- 
ance in  England,  America,  and  the  Continent  that  has  long  since 
been  "corrected."  The  growing  tendency  to  consider  a  symphony 
as  one  continuous  number,  which  should  not  be  interrupted  by 
applause,  first  became  a  matter  of  editorial  comment  in  American 
musical  journalism  about  1925.  Some  conductors,  notably  Stokow- 
ski,  Toscanini,  and  Koussevitzky  during  the  thirties,  aroused  con- 
troversy by  their  insistence  on  abolishing  such  interim  applause. 
These  new  manners  have  not  yet  found  complete  acceptance  among 
all  audiences,  and  listeners  are  frequently  beset  by  uncertainty  un- 
less the  gestures  of  the  conductor  at  the  close  of  a  movement  are 
unambiguous.  The  contemporary  public  objection  most  commonly 
heard  is  that  the  uninterrupted  symphony  is  a  pretty  long  endur- 
ance test.  This  is  balanced  by  the  conductor's  claim  that  applause 
breaks  the  spell  and  snaps  the  continuity  of  an  integrated  whole. 

It  should  be  observed  that  intermediary  applause  has  long  been 
deteriorating  into  the  merely  perfunctory.  In  the  nineteenth  century 
individual  movements  were  considered  units  in  themselves,  individ- 
ually applauded  and  individually  encored.  But  in  more  recent  times, 
no  audience  has  considered  the  pause  between  movements  as  any- 
thing more  than  minor  punctuation  marks;  applause  at  this  point 
has  become  a  vestigial  convention  without  much  meaning,  often 
downright  embarrassing  in  its  listlessness.  The  conductors  who  wish 
to  eliminate  it  are  only  pruning  what  has  already  withered  away. 

The  total  abolition  of  all  applause,  proposed  by  the  whimsical 
Stokowski  about  1930,  had  already  been  suggested  150  years  earlier 


358  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

by  his  prototype,  Friedrich  Reichardt,84  conductor  of  the  Concerts 
Spirituels  instituted  in  Berlin  in  1783.  He  requested  his  audience  to 
substitute  bravo  calls  for  the  more  childish  hand-clapping.  If  the 
British-born  Stokowski  was  a  reader  of  the  London  Musical  Times, 
he  undoubtedly  had  noticed  that  similar  suggestions  to  outlaw  the 
"uncouth  and  barbaric  noises"  had  been  made  by  British  critics  in 
the  twenties.  Applause  during  the  oratorios,  a  very  popular  concert 
form  in  that  country,  had  long  offended  the  delicate  sensitivities  of 
religious-minded  folk.  England's  most  noted  critic,  Ernest  Newman, 
averred: 

The  day  will  come  when  audiences  will  not  want  to  applaud  after  each 
movement.  Later  the  day  will  come  when  they  will  not  want  to  applaud 
at  all,  but  will  go  out  in  rapt  silence  after  a  great  performance  of  a  great 
work. 

Another  critic,  more  facetious  than  fastidious,  philosophized: 

If  you  think  of  it,  striking  one  palm  against  the  other  with  a  resounding 
smack  is  a  queer  way  of  expressing  your  delight;  it  suggests  a  monkey 
trick  of  primeval  man.85 

To  which  one  may  be  permitted  to  counterphilosophize  that  there 
is  not  a  single  custom  in  food,  dress,  or  behavior  that  excessive  and 
uninhibited  reflection  cannot  turn  into  the  ridiculous. 

Direct  expression  of  displeasure  is  relatively  rare  among  Ameri- 
can concert  audiences,  for  formal  courtesy  in  public  relations  is 
one  of  the  most  firmly  rooted  folkways  in  a  country  which  proudly 
professes  the  principles  of  social  equality.  This  sense  of  diffident 
politeness  on  the  part  of  the  audience  is  significantly  reinforced, 
however,  by  its  feeling  of  inferiority  and  lack  of  self-confidence 
when  confronted  with  the  necessity  of  making  aesthetic  judgments. 
Hence,  almost  all  music,  even  the  most  cacophonous,  will  generally 
receive  at  least  token  applause. 

European  audiences  and  musicians  have  often  been  much  more 
forthright.  George  Bernard  Shaw  has  described  the  catcalls  from 
the  balcony  at  the  sight  of  a  particularly  execrable  tenor.  The  ex- 
citability of  the  French  audience  at  the  premiere  of  Stravinsky's 
Sacre  is  well-known  to  program  annotators.  None  of  these  instances 
can  rival  the  perils  of  the  Lohengrin  rehearsals  during  the  anti- 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  359 

Wagner  craze  in  Paris,  when  Lamoureux  carried  a  pistol  in  his 
pocket  against  any  possible  eventuality.86 

Occasions  have  been  known,  however,  when  segments  of  Ameri- 
can audiences,  temporarily  acquiring  a  streak  of  bluntness  and  com- 
pletely forgetting  their  manners,  make  their  disapproval  known  in 
the  brusque,  old-fashioned,  continental  manner.  Such  nonconformist 
behavior  could  only  have  been  encountered  by  the  nonconformist, 
Stokowski,  whose  repertoire,  speckled  with  musical  curiosities,  so 
frequently  strained  the  aesthetic  tolerance  of  his  patrons.  In  the 
early  twenties,  Schoenberg's  Five  Pieces  for  Orchestra  touched  off  a 
shower  of  forthright  hisses,  as  it  had  in  London.  The  indignant 
conductor  turned  to  his  audience  and  defensively  pleaded  freedom 
of  expression  for  the  artist.  Those  who  agreed  with  him  applauded; 
those  who  preferred  freedom  of  expression  for  the  audience  made 
known  their  opinions  by  a  contrary  sign.  Having  apparently  en- 
joyed their  first  taste  of  this  new  freedom,  Stokowski's  audience 
during  the  season  1928-29  expressed  similar  dissatisfaction  with 
Villa-Lobos'  Choros  No.  8.  On  this  occasion  the  conductor  invited 
the  disaffected  members  of  the  audience  to  leave  "and  smoke  the 
classic  cigarette."  A  few  years  later,  in  the  fall  of  193 1,  the  audi- 
ence tittered  and  became  audibly  restless  during  the  rendition  of 
Webern's  ultra-modern  Symphonie.  The  offended  conductor 
stopped  the  orchestra  and  left  the  stage,  but  ultimately  returned  to 
repeat  the  number.  Such  isolated  instances  do  not  invalidate  the 
generalization  that  the  typical  American  audience  observes  all  the 
good  manners  of  the  concert  hall.  Stokowski  was,  after  all,  at  that 
time  hardly  a  typical  conductor,  and  any  dereliction  in  observing 
the  proprieties  of  the  occasion  was  probably  more  an  expression  of 
a  sporting  impulse  than  a  breakdown  of  social  decorum. 

The  code  of  deportment  that  has  evolved  in  the  serious  concert 
is  somewhat  relaxed  in  the  "pop"  concert.  Because  of  the  lighter 
repertoire,  which  is  constructed  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  pleasure 
and  relaxation,  enthusiastic  acceptance  of  the  program  is  the  rule. 
In  the  early  days  of  the  Boston  "pops"  a  pleasant  hum  of  chattering 
often  disturbed  the  more  serious  listener  and  a  program  note  some- 
times requested  silence  for  special  solo  numbers.  Today  in  the  Bos- 
ton "pops,"  which  are  the  oldest  series  of  that  genre  in  this  country, 


360  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

general  silence  usually  prevails  during  the  actual  rendition  of  a 
number,  especially  during  solo  renditions,  although  the  conductor 
does  not  usually  find  it  convenient  to  wait  for  the  audience  to  calm 
down  completely  before  raising  his  baton.  He  does  not  rap  for 
attention,  for  under  these  informal  circumstances,  with  the  first-floor 
audience  engaged  in  drinking  and  smoking,  with  waitresses  slither- 
ing through  the  aisles  as  inconspicuously  as  possible,  dead  silence 
would  be  both  unnecessary  and  impossible.  Nevertheless,  the  prin- 
ciple is  definitely  accepted  that  the  public  is  in  reality  an  audience, 
and  that  it  has  its  drinks  with  its  music  rather  than  its  music  with 
its  drinks.  The  Carnegie  "pops,"  instituted  in  1946,  come  a  shade 
closer  to  formal  concert  conditions  since  refreshment  service  during 
the  concert  is  permitted  only  in  the  boxes. 

The  Fro  gram 

"The  Program's  the  Thing"  for  which  the  elaborate  apparatus  of 
the  orchestra  and  its  satellite  institutions  must  justify  their  existence. 
It  is  the  musical  unit  offered  in  the  concert  market  to  the  consumer 
public.  The  repertoire,  which  is  the  aggregate  of  individual  pro- 
grams, is  the  critical  point  of  contact  with  the  auditors  and  the 
ultimate  test  of  their  success. 

Although  each  program  constitutes  a  small  installment  of  the 
repertoire,  each  does  also  possess  a  life  of  its  own  and  is  usually  built 
on  identifiable  principles.  Conductors  are  often  tagged  by  critics 
and  populace  as  "good"  or  "poor"  program  builders,  although  such 
pat  judgments  are  invariably  related  to  the  subjective  standards  of 
the  observer;  and  the  critics  who  launch  them  are  often  inarticulate 
as  to  the  exact  criteria  employed  in  their  formation.  If  there  can  be 
no  universal  standard  for  "good"  program  construction,  there  are, 
nevertheless,  distinguishable  patterns  that  have  been  followed,  and 
perhaps  a  few  basic  principles  that  have  at  various  times  received 
some  acceptance. 

In  former  days,  as  an  inheritance  of  the  presymphonic  period, 
when  orchestral  music  had  not  yet  gained  its  autonomous  status,  the 
prevailing  type  of  program  consisted  of  a  miscellaneous  collation 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  361 

of  numbers  devoid  of  unity  in  the  modern  sense.  The  predominant 
motif  was,  of  course,  variety.  Such  a  conglomeration  was  the  initial 
program  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic  Society  (December,  1842), 
which  consisted  of  the  following  numbers: 


Beethoven 

Symphony  No.  5 

Weber 

Scene  from  Oheron 

Hummel 

Quintet  for  piano  and  strings 

Weber 

Overture  to  Oberon 

Rossini 

Duet  from  Armida 

Beethoven 

Scene  from  Fidelio 

Mozart 

Aria  from  Belmont  and  Constanze 

Kalliwoda 

New  Overture  in  D 

This  juxtaposition  of  chamber  music,  operatic  arias,  and  bona  fide 
orchestral  numbers  was  not  only  usual  for  that  day  even  in  Europe, 
but  fifty  years  later  in  New  York  and  Chicago  such  an  intrepid 
defender  of  the  primacy  of  symphonic  music  as  Theodore  Thomas 
was  still  finding  it  necessary  to  present  a  similar  miscellany,  which 
included  even  unaccompanied  piano  solos.  Although  the  present 
"straight"  orchestral  program  was  already  crystallizing  in  the  minds 
of  the  conductors,  it  was  far  from  being  spontaneously  accepted  by 
the  audiences. 

One  of  the  early  customs,  which  seems  strange  today,  was  the 
fragmentation  of  a  concerto  or  symphony  into  its  component  move- 
ments, which  were  then  interspersed  with  solo  numbers.  The  purist 
of  today  is  conditioned  to  conceive  of  a  symphony  as  a  unified 
whole  to  be  interrupted  not  even  by  applause:  "What  the  composer 
hath  joined  together,  let  not  man  put  asunder."  But  such  dismem- 
berment of  multiple  items  was  rather  common  as  late  as  the  1830's 
in  Europe.87  Chopin  himself  performed  his  Second  Piano  Concerto 
in  Warsaw  at  that  time,  dividing  it  into  two  segments  separated  by 
a  French  horn  solo.  The  span  of  attention  necessary  for  a  long  and 
continuous  musical  exposure  is  a  matter  of  long  habituation.  Audi- 
ences of  that  time  were  accustomed  to  shorter  selections.  It  will  be 
recalled  that  Beethoven  recommended  that  his  Eroica,  playing  some- 
what less  than  an  hour,  be  performed  at  the  beginning  of  a  concert 
before  the  audience  was  too  fatigued  to  endure  it.  By  the  time  of 
the  founding  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic  this  practice  of  frag- 


362  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

mentation  seems  to  have  been  practically  abandoned,  though  in 
1845  and  again  in  1846,  Beethoven  symphonies  were  sectioned  for 
operatic  entremets  in  the  Musical  Fund  concerts  in  Philadelphia.88 

Single  movements  of  concertos  were  still  extracted  at  a  much 
later  date  in  major  orchestral  concerts,  not  only  without  apparently 
causing  offense,  but  actually  with  the  approval  of  Finck,  Hale,  and 
other  top  American  critics,  who  emphasized  the  separability  of 
symphony  and  concerto  movements  in  accordance  with  their  indi- 
vidual merits  and  the  expedience  of  the  program.  In  1894  Philip 
Hale,89  the  scholarly  Boston  critic,  complained  that  a  certain  Bos- 
ton Symphony  concert  was  too  long,  and  suggested  that  "the  second 
and  third  movements  of  the  [Beethoven  Violin]  Concerto  could 
well  have  been  omitted."  About  the  same  time  Cesar  Thomson,  in 
his  appearance  with  the  Boston  orchestra  in  a  New  York  concert, 
actually  did  play  only  the  first  movement  of  the  Bruch  Second  Con- 
certo. The  Finale  of  the  Beethoven  Ninth  has  frequently  been 
dropped,  and  in  March,  1 894,  the  Boston  orchestra  performed  on  its 
regular  concerts  only  Movements  III  and  II,  in  that  order.  Such 
violations  of  the  supposed  sanctity  of  a  symphonic  unit  are  prac- 
ticed today  only  in  "pop"  concerts,  although  excerpts  from  operas 
and  suites,  as  well  as  manifold  other  cuts,  are  executed  without  the 
protest  of  even  the  most  fastidious. 

Conductors  of  the  American  symphony  orchestras  have  always 
conceived  of  themselves  as  educators  rather  than  entertainers.  Any 
differences  among  them  lie  in  the  intensity  with  which  they  have 
felt  dedicated  to  their  mission,  and  the  degree  to  which  they  have 
compromised  with  the  practical  necessity  of  offering  some  relaxa- 
tion to  their  audiences.  Theodore  Thomas,  especially  in  his  pre- 
Chicago  period,  knew  at  times  how  to  effect  such  compromises  and 
won  many  a  patron  with  his  delicate  rendition  of  Traumerei, 
pianissimo,  or  with  a  vibrant  Strauss  waltz.  But  they  knew  also  when 
to  be  obstinate.  With  a  veritable  Messiah  complex,  they  were  deter- 
mined to  preserve  the  integrity  of  Art  and  make  no  Mephistophelian 
compact  with  the  vulgar  appetites  of  the  untutored  masses.  Hen- 
schel,  undertaking  a  grave  responsibility  in  founding  the  new  Bos- 
ton orchestra  and  prompted  by  an  understandable  desire  to  enlist 
the  good  will  of  his  audience,  announced  it  as  his  policy  that  only 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  363 

the  first  half  of  the  program  would  adhere  to  the  elevated  didactic 
principle,  and  that  the  second  half  would  be  devoted  to  lighter 
numbers— Hungarian  dances,  rhapsodies,  overtures— a  kind  of  dessert 
to  top  off  a  nutritious  meal.  While  Henschel  placed  the  symphony 
in  the  middle  of  the  program,  as  the  main  dish,  flanked  on  either 
side  with  the  aperitif  and  sweetmeats,  the  more  severe  Gericke,  not 
wishing  to  break  the  spell,  as  he  himself  explained,  placed  the  sym- 
phony almost  uniformly  at  the  end. 

The  Leipzig  Gewandhaus,  catering  to  an  audience  not  nearly  as 
mature  as  is  popularly  supposed,  pursued  a  similar  policy,  but  for 
slightly  different  reasons.  The  "heavy"  symphony  occupied  the 
latter  half  of  the  program,  which,  like  the  final  blessing  in  the 
church,  some  of  the  less  faithful  by  an  early  departure  might  be 
permitted  to  forego.90  But  in  spite  of  Gericke's  zealous  piety,  the 
Bostonians,  too,  could  occasionally  be  unfaithful,  and  even  scoff 
mildly  at  the  aesthetic  creed  of  their  conductor,  as  is  pointedly 
evidenced  by  the  uninterrupted  procession  that  filed  out  to  the 
music  of  Brahms'  Second  (Jan.  22,  1887).91  They  had  similarly 
walked  out  between  the  movements  of  Brahms'  First,  November 
16,  1885. 

Some  conductors  strive  for  internal  homogeneity  of  the  pro- 
gram. They  have  a  horror  of  disorderly  hodge-podge  thrown  to- 
gether for  mere  contrast  and  hedonistic  surprise.  To  them,  a  pro- 
gram is  knit  together  in  a  consistent  unity,  with  an  integrating  idea, 
very  much  like  the  classification  of  artifacts  in  a  museum.  Such  an 
intellectual  approach  to  program  building  was  entertained  by  Karl 
Muck,  for  example,  who  would  avoid  the  juxtaposition  of  classic 
and  romantic  numbers  as  an  intolerable  incongruity,  while  less 
squeamish  conductors  might  so  join  them  in  the  interest  of  desirable 
variety. 

In  the  late  nineteenth  century  another  form  of  "unity"  was  cul- 
tivated, namely,  the  "genre"  program,  which  integrated  the  items 
on  the  program  around  a  specific  topic  such  as  a  composer,  a  na- 
tionalistic group,  or  a  historical  sequence.  In  the  interest  of  popular 
appeal,  rather  than  a  more  academic  motivation,  Theodore  Thomas 
launched  such  concerts  during  his  summer  night  Garden  Series  in 
New  York  and  Chicago,  and  attracted  the  crowds  with  his  Men- 


364  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

delssohn  nights,  Wagner  nights,  Schubert,  Mozart,  Scandinavian, 
and  English  programs— though  these  were  not  always  topically  en- 
tirely homogeneous.  In  July,  1876,  this  conductor,  who  had  been  at 
times  attacked  for  his  seeming  aversion  to  American  music,  dis- 
creetly included  an  "American  Night"  at  the  Philadelphia  Exposi- 
tion. By  the  twentieth  century  the  genre  program  had  become  a 
common  practice  in  program  design,  of  which  Stokowski  availed 
himself  abundantly,  and  perhaps  uniquely  in  a  Bach  program  with 
a  Bach  encore  (December,  1926).  The  composer  cycle  is  an  ex- 
tension of  this  system  to  encompass  a  series  of  programs. 

Such  unified  programs  did  not  escape  their  critics,  some  of 
whom  contended  that  inferior  items  were  often  included  to  satisfy 
mere  titular  requirements.  At  least  one  American  composer  injected 
a  personal  interpretation  into  what  was  developing  into  a  common 
practice,  and  took  offense  at  the  segregated  treatment  of  his  nation- 
ality. He  said  so  in  a  now  famous  letter  to  Felix  Mottl,  then 
conducting  at  the  Metropolitan  Opera,  who  had  announced  an  ail- 
American  orchestral  program  in  February,  1904: 

I  see  by  the  morning  papers  that  a  so-called  American  composers'  con- 
cert is  advertised  for  tomorrow  evening  at  the  Metropolitan  Opera 
House.  I  have  for  years  taken  a  strong  stand  against  such  affairs  and 
although  I  have  not  seen  the  program,  fearing  that  there  may  be  some- 
thing of  mine  on  it,  I  write  to  protest  most  earnestly  and  strongly 
against  this  lumping  together  of  iVmerican  composers.  Unless  we  are 
worthy  of  being  put  on  programs  with  other  composers  to  stand  or  fall, 
leave  us  alone.  By  giving  such  a  concert  you  tacitly  admit  that  we  are 
too  inferior  to  stand  comparison  with  composers  of  Europe.  If  my  name 
is  on  the  program  and  if  it  is  too  late  to  have  new  programs  printed,  I 
beg  you  to  have  a  line  put  through  the  number,  erasing  it  off  the  pro- 
gram. If  necessary  I  will  pay  the  expense  of  having  it  done.  .  .  . 

{Signed)     Edward  MacDowell 92 

It  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  such  an  unkind  cut  was  in- 
tended by  the  noted  Austrian  visitor.  MacDowell's  resentment  was, 
of  course,  a  comprehensible  reaction  of  a  sensitive  nature,  sharing 
the  prevalent  frustration  produced  by  the  foreign  domination  of 
American  musical  life.  Although  we  harbored  no  illusions  as  to  the 
veneration  for  American  music  on  the  part  of  the  proud  exponents 
of  the  art  in  the  land  of  Beethoven  and  Wagner,  it  must  be  said 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  365 

that  genre  programs  had  already  gained  such  vogue  that  it  was 
probably  intended  as  a  tribute  to  America  to  include  them  at  all. 

Mottl  acquiesced,  and  substituted  the  Rakozcy  March  of  Berlioz! 

Critics  of  this  earlier  era  occasionally  commented  on  mere  tonal 
and  formal  imbalance  of  programs.  Thus  William  Apthorp,  Boston 
critic,  cited  his  own  reaction  during  the  nineties  to  both  key  and 
pitch  relation: 

I  can  remember  an  instance,  not  many  years  ago  at  our  symphony  con- 
certs in  Boston  when  Mozart's  "Batti,  batti"  was  sung  immediately  after 
an  orchestral  piece  in  C  major.  Now,  "Batti,  batti"  is  in  F  major;  and 
no  two  keys  are  more  closely  related  than  F  and  C.  Yet  the  difference 
in  pitch  of  a  fifth  lower  than  the  preceding  piece  somehow  made  the 
poor  "Batti,  batti"— one  of  the  coyest,  brightest  inspirations  Mozart 
ever  put  on  paper— sound  positively  dull  and  heavy.93 

Symptomatic  of  this  type  of  standard,  which  may  seem  strange  to 
modern  post-Romantic  ears  are  the  prescriptions  set  down  by  L.  C. 
Elson,  one  of  Boston's  most  prominent  musical  pedagogues  of  that 
period.  He  enunciated  the  following  canons  of  good  program-build- 
ing for  "classical"  programs:  (1)  contrasts  of  major  and  minor;  (2) 
no  two  successive  works  in  the  same  key;  (3)  no  two  similar  works 
on  the  same  program,  e.g.,  Schubert  and  Mozart;  (4)  avoidance  of 
abrupt  transitions.  He  admitted  that  romantic  programs  almost 
automatically  evaded  these  pitfalls.94 

There  are  countless  more  or  less  external  considerations  which 
circumscribe  the  make-up  of  a  program.  Because  of  the  rhythm  of 
daily  routine  to  which  everyone  is  subjected,  a  certain  predictability 
of  length  is  essential,  while  the  attentive  powers  of  the  audience  set 
certain  psychological  restrictions  on  its  maximum  duration.  The 
early  English  programs  of  the  London  Philharmonic  often  con- 
tained two  symphonies  in  addition  to  minor  works,  a  length  against 
which  Wagner,  to  mention  only  one  conductor,  complained  during 
his  one-year  tenure  in  1855.  Most  orchestras  today  set  an  approxi- 
mate limit  of  about  ninety  minutes  of  playing  time  which,  together 
with  an  intermission,  establishes  a  norm  of  about  one  and  three  quar- 
ter hours  for  the  total  concert.  Within  these  limits  must  be  com- 
pressed selections  of  interest  and  variety;  consequently  any  item  of 
unusual  length,  no  matter  how  meritorious,  is  handicapped  in  com- 


366  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

petition   for   acceptance,    and  particularly    in  radio    presentations 
where  time  limits  must  be  rigidly  enforced. 

The  juxtaposition  of  selections  must  be  controlled  not  only  for 
unity  and  contrast  or  interest,  but  also  in  deference  to  the  physical 
capacity  of  the  players.  Numbers  involving  unusual  endurance  of 
wind  players,  for  example,  are  so  placed  as  to  afford  adequate  relief. 

The  day  of  the  encore  in  the  regular  subscription  concerts  has 
almost  passed,  except  in  the  case  of  an  occasional  soloist.  But  time 
was  when  the  encore  was  a  live  issue  and  conductors  of  serious 
concerts  sometimes  encountered  resistance  in  their  attempt  to  edu- 
cate audiences  away  from  that  survival  of  the  "pop"  concert.  In 
1 896  Theodore  Thomas,  who  was  not  known  for  any  infirmity  of 
purpose,  caused  a  sensation  in  Chicago  by  refusing  to  grant  an 
encore  after  three  minutes  of  boisterous  applause.  In  the  same  year 
the  mild-mannered  Walter  Damrosch,  usually  given  to  condescend- 
ing flattery  rather  than  pedagogic  censure  toward  his  audiences, 
rebuked  his  listeners  for  their  crude  manners  in  drowning  out  with 
continued  applause  the  orchestral  number  which  followed  a  sensa- 
tionally received  piano  concerto  played  by  Joseffy.95  Thomas,  to 
whom  the  encore  was  an  unmitigated  evil,  summarized,  as  succinctly 
as  anyone,  the  conductor's  point  of  view,  when  he  stated  that  en- 
cores- (1)  break  the  predetermined  continuity  and  balance  of  the 
program,  (2)  overextend  its  length,  (3)  tax  the  endurance  of  the 
players,  (4)  cause  restlessness  among  those  members  of  the  audience 
who  differ  with  the  demonstrators,  and  (5)  often  disappoint  the 
audience,  since  repetitions  are  not  necessarily  as  effective  as  first 
renditions.96  Popular  programs,  however,  still  maintain  the  encore 
since  selections  are  shorter  and  most  of  Thomas'  objections  are  less 
relevant.  The,  encore  issue  has  in  recent  times  taken  an  additional 
turn.  Formerly,  it  implied  the  repetition  of  the  encored  item.  Today, 
with  the  acknowledged  gap  between  the  strenuous  program  and  the 
general  audience,  the  customarily  lighter  encore  is  often  eagerly 
anticipated  as  a  relief. 

Above  all  these  aesthetic  policies,  there  hovers  the  shadow  of 
sheer  "public  strategy"  in  program  construction.  This  is  an  impor- 
tant consideration  for  every  orchestra,  though  the  old-fashioned 
philanthropic  orchestra  was  relatively  free  from  these  pressures.  In 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  367 

brief,  it  means  that  in  order  to  gratify  all  segments  of  the  heter- 
ogeneous audience  certain  requirements  must  be  observed:  the  in- 
clusion of  standard  and  familiar  items,  of  "box-office"  numbers,  of 
modern  and  unhackneyed  compositions,  experimental  novelties  to 
satisfy  the  intellectual  patron  and  members  of  a  cult,  some  pieces 
for  light  relief,  and  a  certain  minimum  number  of  regional  repre- 
sentatives. It  is  not  easy  to  reconcile  these  conflicting  demands  with 
one  another,  or  with  the  rules  of  prudent  management.  Deploring 
the  hidden  costs  of  many  experimental  novelties,  an  official  of  a 
Midwest  orchestra  appraised  the  cost  of  a  certain  novelty  at  more 
than  $750,  made  up  of  the  out-of-pocket  expenses  of  rental,  royalty, 
extra  players  and  extra  rehearsal,  together  with  the  loss  of  single 
admissions  "which  we  would  have  had  if  a  sure-fire  number  had 
been  billed." 

The  symphonic  repertoire  has  at  times  been  invaded  by  the  opera 
in  concert  form,  usually  sponsored  by  conductors  whose  career  in- 
cluded operatic  experience.  Overtures  and  operatic  excerpts  have, 
of  course,  long  been  a  program  staple,  and  it  would  seem  only  a 
step  to  extend  these  fragments  into  a  full  length  presentation.  This 
expectation  is  all  the  more  logical  because  the  average  American, 
exposed  for  the  most  part  to  foreign  operas  whose  plots  have  little 
in  common  with  his  cultural  background,  often  ignores  the  libretto 
in  favor  of  the  music.  In  other  words,  to  the  average  American 
patron,  a  nineteenth-century  opera  is  not  much  more  than  a  dramatic 
concert  in  any  case.  The  earliest  of  these  denatured  operatic  per- 
formances was  the  concert  version  of  Parsifal  rendered  by  the 
Oratorio  Society  and  the  Symphony  Society  of  New  York  in  1895 
under  the  leadership  of  Walter  Damrosch,  who  in  1908  presented 
Tschaikowsky's  Eugene  Onegin  in  similar  manner. 

Philadelphia,  Cleveland,  and  Cincinnati,  among  others,  have  pro- 
ceeded a  step  farther  by  presenting  completely  staged  operas,  either 
as  an  integral  part  of  the  regular  series  or  supplementary  to  it.  At 
times  such  performances  have  been  found  too  costly  for  the  orches- 
tral management;  in  other  cases  the  critics  see  in  them  a  violation  of 
the  bounds  of  the  orchestra's  sphere,  if  not  its  competence.  On  the 
other  hand,  they  undoubtedly  serve  a  function  in  that  they  inject 
novelty  into  the  repertoire,  supply  an  outlet  for  the  conductor  who 


368  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

is  trained  in,  and  enamored  of  that  musical  genre,  and  afford  their 
audiences  the  opportunity  to  indulge  a  taste  which  otherwise  might 
remain  ungratified. 

To  many  a  confirmed  symphony  addict,  the  soloist  is  an  intruder 
who  disturbs  the  proper  enjoyment  of  pure  orchestral  music;  but  to 
the  rank  and  file  of  box-office  patrons  the  star  has  always  been  a 
glamorous  attraction  that  compensated  for  many  a  dull  moment  of 
more  abstract  music.  Although  from  the  first  program  of  the  New 
York  Philharmonic,  many  soloists  were  accompanied  by  the  orchestra, 
such  was  by  no  means  the  universal  rule.  As  the  virtuosity  of  the 
orchestra  increased,  however,  it  waxed  in  pride  and  prestige;  it  was 
no  longer  a  chance  ensemble  which  was  content  to  share  in  a 
melange  of  musical  offerings,  but  had  matured  into  an  autonomous 
entity,  well  qualified  to  furnish  in  its  own  right  a  full  evening  of 
inspiration  and  pleasure. 

Not  a  small  factor  in  the  partial  repudiation  of  the  soloist  was 
the  emerging  conception  that  the  conductor  himself  was  the  "solo- 
ist" whose  glamour  might  be  dimmed  by  that  of  a  competitor.  It  is 
still  a  moot  question  whether  the  soloist  is  a  member  pro  tern  of 
the  orchestra  subordinate  to  the  conductor,  or  whether  he  is  a  genu- 
ine soloist  with  the  conductor  reduced  to  the  role  of  the  accom- 
panist. Temperamental  clashes  arising  out  of  this  ambiguity  in  their 
jurisdictions  are,  of  course,  common.  The  more  sensational  features 
of  the  soloist  still  constitute  an  enormous  attraction  to  an  orchestral 
audience  and  are  a  good  investment  on  the  part  of  the  management. 
Generally,  however,  solo  contributions  are  restricted  to  numbers 
which  are  an  integral  element  of  the  symphonic  repertoire.  For  that 
reason  vocalists,  who  in  the  early  days  were  often  featured,  and  just 
as  often  performed  to  piano  accompaniment,  are  much  less  likely 
to  be  engaged  by  some  of  the  orchestras  now  than  formerly,  while 
concertos  are  added  with  more  thought  to  the  requirements  of  the 
balanced  orchestral  repertoire.  Some  conductors,  notably  Toscanini, 
were  notorious  for  the  rarity  of  solo  appearances  on  their  programs. 
In  his  case,  at  least  one  obvious  explanation  is,  of  course,  near  at 
hand:  no  management  would  feel  any  inducement  for  adding  an 
expensive  soloist  to  a  conductor  who  could  fill  the  hall  alone. 

American  patrons  who  suffer  from  an  inferiority  complex  vis-a- 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  369 

vis  Europe  may  be  inclined  to  suspect  a  more  elevated  taste  on  the 
part  of  European  audiences.  But  the  conductors  of  the  Gewandhaus 
orchestra,  Rietz  (1848-60)  and  Reinecke  (1860-95),  also  considered 
themselves  afflicted  with  the  "solo  evil."  To  the  distress  of  the  con- 
ductor, the  soloist  would  often  monopolize  a  concert  by  playing  a 
number  in  both  parts  of  the  program.  This  occurred  in  Boston  and 
Chicago  as  late  as  the  1890's. 

In  accordance  with  the  educational  function  of  the  orchestral 
program,  it  has  been  customary  to  supplement  the  printed  program 
with  "program  notes,"  which  facilitate  its  understanding  and  en- 
hance its  appreciation.  The  present  style  of  analytical  notes  is  the 
culmination  of  an  evolution  which  proceeded  approximately 
through  the  following  stages:  (1)  printed  titles  of  musical  selections, 
(2)  printed  words  of  vocal  selections,  (3)  biographical  data  on  the 
composer  and  other  historical  material,  and  (4)  analytical  notes  pre- 
senting the  formal  structure  of  the  musical  composition.  Scholarly 
fusion  of  the  preceding  rudimentary  beginnings  was  made  as  far 
back  as  1784  when  Reichardt  prepared  notes  for  his  Concerts  Spir- 
ituels  in  Berlin.97  The  New  Philharmonic  Society  of  London,  or- 
ganized as  a  rival  for  the  old  Philharmonic,  added  analytical  notes 
of  scholarly  merit  to  its  programs  in  1852,  while  the  old  Philhar- 
monic instituted  the  practice  in  1869.  The  New  York  Philharmonic 
offered  notes  on  certain  isolated  compositions  during  the  early  years, 
and  by  the  eighties  these  notes  became  more  systematic.  To  modern 
patrons,  these  old  annotations  often  sound  crude  and  embryonic. 
Thus  the  last  movement  of  the  Eroica  (second  concert  of  the  first 
New  York  season)  "is  a  combination  of  French  Revolutionary  airs 
put  together  in  a  manner  that  no  one  save  Beethoven  could  have 
imagined."  The  programmatic  penchant  is  illustrated  in  the  de- 
scription of  the  Dramatic  Overture,  Columbus,  of  George  F. 
Bristow. 

The  Andantino  .  .  .  depicts  the  vessels  of  the  daring  discoverer  rocking 
idly  at  anchor  .  .  .  horns  give  signals  to  depart  .  .  .  tremolo  move- 
ment in  accompaniment  indicates  the  bustle  of  preparation  ...  an 
allegro  agitato  movement  portraying  the  restless  conspiracies  of  the 
enemies  of  Columbus  during  his  protracted  absence  .  .  . 


370  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

During  the  epoch  when  music  still  required  a  literary  crutch  to 
be  comprehended  by  even  the  best  audiences,  the  following  pro- 
gram note  was  typical  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic  programs. 
The  composer  Rubinstein  himself  supplied  the  annotation  for  his 
Piano  Concerto  No.  3  on  the  program  of  November  16,  1889,  Theo- 
dore Thomas,  conductor: 

In  the  first  movement  the  Piano  repeatedly  requests  admittance  in  the 
temple  of  the  Orchestra.  The  Orchestra  takes  the  matter  into  considera- 
tion and  decides  to  test  the  capacities  of  the  Piano.  After  frequent  trials 
and  consultations  the  Orchestra  concludes  that  the  Piano  is  not  worthy 
to  enter  into  the  sanctuary.  ...  In  a  later  movement  the  decision  of  the 
Orchestra  is  again  adverse.  .  .  .  Now  the  Piano  loses  its  temper  and 
challenges  the  Orchestra  to  imitate  what  the  Piano  can  do  and  in  the 
tumult  of  this  attempt  the  concerto  closes. 

Instead  of  the  crassly  pictorial  analysis,  some  annotators  took  a 
more  mystic  trend.  Witness  a  few  exuberant  phrases,  taken  almost 
at  random,  from  Wagner's  analysis  of  Beethoven's  Ninth,  which 
have  at  times  been  lifted  for  American  programs: 

The  first  movement  appears  to  represent  a  nobly  conceived  conflict  be- 
tween the  soul  and  the  power  which  ever  opposes  its  strivings  for  earthly 
happiness.  .  .  .  Here  and  there  we  just  perceive  the  sweet  yet  sorrowful 
smile  of  that  happiness  so  much  desired  which  seems  now  to  invite  us, 
but  the  attainment  of  which  is  prevented  by  our  mighty  and  malicious 
enemy  who  spreads  around  us  his  gloomy  wings.  .  .  .  How  different  is 
the  effect  of  the  opening  strains  of  the  third  movement!  Heavenly  pure 
and  soothing,  they  melt  the  wild  energies  of  the  anxious  and  despairing 
soul  into  soft  and  sorrowful  sensations.  .  .  .  This  is  the  last  attempt  to 
express  by  instrumental  music  alone,  a  certain  finite  and  unalloyed  joy; 
but  the  intractable  element  does  not  seem  fitted  for  such  restrictions: 
like  the  roaring  sea,  it  foams  up,  sinks  down  again,  and  louder  than  ever 
the  loud  chaotic  shriek  of  unsatisfied  passion  assails  our  ears.  A  human 
voice  with  the  clearness  and  distinctness  of  language  is  now  heard  above 
the  tumult  of  the  instruments.  .  .  . 

If  the  first  reaction  of  the  modern  reader  is  characteristically  one 
of  sophisticated  disdain  for  such  flamboyant  romanticism,  he  should 
recall  that  such  picturesque  portrayals  are  well-matched  today  in  the 
descriptions  of  the  tone  poems  of  Richard  Strauss,  even  though 
many  contemporary  listeners  may  wish  to  ignore  the  story  in  order 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  371 

to  apprehend  the  pure  music.  Modern  scholarship,  and  the  accumu- 
lated background  of  the  audiences  who  are  no  longer  listening  to 
the  classics  for  the  first  time,  have  conspired  to  cast  program  notes 
into  different  molds  of  historical  and  musicological  stripe.  Some  of 
these  have  attained  a  certain  distinction  and  permanency  of  value, 
e.g.,  those  of  Philip  Hale,  of  Boston,  and  Krehbiel,  of  New  York, 
and  have  enriched  our  musicological  literature.  This  shift  in  the 
nature  of  program  notes  is  an  obvious  adaptation  to  the  fact  that 
the  current  repertoire  is  predominantly  old  and  familiar,  and  the 
crutch  of  programmatic  and  literary  analysis  is  no  longer  essential 
to  the  audience's  comprehension. 

The  Concert  Series 

Ever  since  the  public  concert  system  has  been  in  existence,  orches- 
tral and  ensemble  concerts  have  been  offered  in  series,  given  at  more 
or  less  regular  intervals  during  the  season  of  the  year.  The  Concerts 
Spirituels  in  Paris,  Berlin,  and  Vienna;  the  London  Philharmonic 
Concerts;  the  Gewandhaus  concerts  of  Leipzig;  the  Societe  des 
Concerts  du  Conservatoire  of  Paris;  tl\e  New  York  Philharmonic, 
and  the  Theodore  Thomas  concerts  in  the  same  city— all  customarily 
purveyed  their  entertainment  in  "subscription  series"  rather  than 
in  single  concerts.  The  reasons  for  such  an  arrangement  arise  from 
the  character  of  the  audience  and,  more  particularly,  from  the  re- 
quirements of  artistic  rendition. 

A  century  and  more  ago,  when  concert  halls  were  smaller,  the 
audience  was  characteristically  a  more  closely  knit  group  than 
today.  It  consisted  of  the  aristocracy  and  wealthy  merchants  who 
were  known  to  each  other  and  associated  in  the  neighboring  boxes, 
broke  bread  and  sipped  their  beverages  together  during  the  inter- 
missions, and  even  carried  on  their  social  intercourse  during  the 
rendition  of  musical  numbers.  A  concert  was  a  social  institution  of 
like-minded  folk  who  periodically  looked  forward  to  gratifying 
their  gregarious  impulses. 

As  for  the  orchestra,  the  subscription  system  is  necessary  to  its 
very  existence.  The  great  investment  in  time,  money,  and  rehearsal 
energy  required  to  build  up  an  ensemble  fit  for  public  appearance 


372  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

by  modern  standards  renders  a  single  performance  downright  pro- 
hibitive. This  proportion  between  overhead  costs  and  concert  sales 
does  not  obtain  in  amateur  organizations,  whose  objective  is  self- 
cultivation  rather  than  public  approval,  nor  among  those  groups 
where  rigorous  artistic  standards  are,  for  any  reason,  not  enforced. 
Hence,  during  the  colonial  days,  the  single  performance  of  con- 
certed groups,  often  instituted  for  an  "occasion,"  was  rather  the 
rule  than  the  exception.  In  the  relentless  evolution  of  things,  how- 
ever, these  casual  aggregations,  with  their  informal  standards,  have 
been  displaced  by  well-equipped  and  rigorously  rehearsed  groups 
for  which  a  continuity  of  existence  is  the  prime  prerequisite.  As  a 
consequence,  the  series  of  subscription  concerts,  most  of  which  are 
given  today  in  weekly  pairs,  has  become  the  backbone  of  sym- 
phonic organization. 

The  number  of  weekly  pairs  varies  from  city  to  city  and  has 
varied  widely  in  the  history  of  the  individual  orchestras,  as  may  be 
gleaned  from  their  respective  histories.  Most  older  orchestras  offer  a 
series  of  from  twenty  to  twenty-eight  weeks  which  includes  shorter 
supplementary  series  of  diverse  nature.  Minneapolis,  of  the  older 
major  orchestras,  is  the  only  one  that  limits  its  subscription  series 
to  single  weekly  concerts,  for  the  very  good  reason— among  others 
—that  the  University  auditorium,  which  is  its  home,  has  almost  twice 
the  average  capacity  of  the  auditoriums  in  other  cities. 

Originally  called  "public  rehearsal,"  the  first  of  the  pairs  of  con- 
certs was  instituted  for  quite  another  purpose  than  it  now  satisfies. 
The  New  York  Philharmonic  Society  opened  its  rehearsal  of  its 
second  annual  series,  as  a  privilege  of  its  associate  membership,  and 
later  invited  the  general  public  at  a  nominal  admission  charge.  For 
most  patrons  the  function  of  this  preview  of  the  program  was  a 
purely  educational  one,  and  they  availed  themselves  of  the  oppor- 
tunity for  repeated  hearings  at  a  time  when  radio  and  recordings 
did  not  exist  to  fulfill  that  desire  much  more  effectively.  In  addi- 
tion to  this  educational  facility,  the  public  rehearsals  which  were 
held  in  the  afternoon  were  advertised  as  especially  appealing  to 
"out-of-town  patrons"  and  to  "unaccompanied  ladies." 

In  Boston  the  "public  rehearsal"  was  planned  by  Mr.  Higginson 
as  a  philanthropic  concession  to  the  less  affluent  population,  but  it 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  373 

did  not  long  remain  so.  By  the  fifth  season,  the  afternoon  concerts 
had  become  so  attractive  to  the  wealthy  class  that  the  admission 
prices  for  the  two  series  were  equalized,  and  by  191 5  the  designa- 
tion of  "public  rehearsal,"  by  now  a  misnomer,  was  formally  abol- 
ished. Today  in  all  cities  the  afternoon  concert  is  a  "society"  event. 
Unfortunately,  in  some  of  the  smaller  cities,  this  public  is  not  now 
sufficiently  numerous  to  maintain  the  solvency  of  matinee  concerts. 
In  view  of  such  unprofitable  luxury,  some  cities,  e.g.,  Cincinnati  and 
St.  Louis,  have  shifted  a  portion  of  the  Friday  matinee  concerts  to 
Sunday  afternoon  in  the  hope  of  enticing  another  audience. 

In  addition  to  the  basic  repertoire  of  the  subscription  concerts, 
the  major  orchestras  offer  supplementary  series  which  for  the  most 
part,  cater  to  special  segments  of  the  population.  One  of  the  oldest 
and  most  firmly  rooted  in  tradition  is  the  Young  People's  and  Chil- 
dren's series.  Based  on  the  reasonable  theory  that  the  children  of 
today  are  the  adults  and  potential  subscribers  of  tomorrow,  they  are 
designed  to  "bend  the  twig"  toward  orchestral  music,  to  nurture 
good  taste,  and  so  to  assure  an  abiding  interest  in  good  music.  To 
heighten  this  appeal,  the  conductors  often  empty  upon  the  platform 
their  bag  of  tricks:  memory  contests,  quizzes,  instrumental  demon- 
strations, dramatic  paradigms,  lantern  slides,  anecdotes  of  famous 
composers,  performance  by  an  occasional  Wunderkind  and  many 
pleasant  variations  on  those  themes.  Extraordinary  success  in  this 
specialty  concert  has  been  achieved  by  Walter  Damrosch,  Ober- 
hoffer,  Stock,  Ganz,  Schelling,  Sokoloff,  Stokowski,  and  Wallen- 
stein.  For  some  years  after  his  retirement  from  the  New  York  Sym- 
phony, Walter  Damrosch,  under  the  auspices  of  NBC,  conducted 
the  weekly  radio  broadcasts  to  the  children  of  the  nation.  Although 
children's  concerts  had  been  tried  before  the  beginning  of  the  cen- 
tury, the  radio  carried  the  familiar  salutation,  "My  dear  children," 
to  many  areas  which  the  major  orchestras  had  never  reached. 

An  intermediary  link  between  the  children's  concerts  and  the 
regular  subscription  series  is  the  "pop"  program.  Purveyed  to  those 
who  may  not  have  the  musical  maturity  for  the  contemplation  of 
masterpieces,  the  "pops"  gratify  the  desire  for  less  strenuous  re- 
laxation. The  line  of  demarcation  between  the  serious  and  the  popu- 
lar is  perhaps  not  easily  drawn  and  certainly  is  never  permanent  or 


374  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

of  universal  applicability.  Beethoven's  Fifth,  the  Lohengrin  Prelude, 
and  innumerable  other  compositions,  which  were  formerly  included 
exclusively  on  "serious"  programs,  are  now  listened  to  without  spe- 
cial exertion.  Thomas,  as  late  as  his  Chicago  days,  included  "popu- 
lar" programs  periodically  in  his  regular  series,  and  these  were  dis- 
tinguished from  the  rest  of  the  programs  primarily  by  the  absence 
of  a  complete  symphony. 

As  the  audiences  became  more  cultivated  and  less  allergic  to 
"symphonies,"  conductors  tended  to  specialize  by  segregating  the 
popular  items  from  the  subscription  series.  Gericke  instituted  this 
reform  in  Boston  in  1885,  and  Theodore  Thomas  for  years  adapted 
his  repertoire  to  his  New  York  audiences  by  catering  to  popular 
interest  and  the  more  sophisticated  taste  in  separate  series.  In  St. 
Louis  and  Minneapolis,  under  Zach  and  Oberhoffer,  the  Sunday 
afternoon  "pops"  usually  overshadowed  the  serious  concerts  in 
patronage  and  frequency,  and  for  some  years  constituted  the  bul- 
wark of  the  season.  Today  popular  concerts  during  the  winter 
months  are  definitely  on  the  wane  and  are  scheduled  only  inter- 
mittently. The  decline  may  be  ascribed  to  three  factors:  (1)  the 
competition  of  other  recreational  opportunities,  such  as  motion 
pictures,  sports,  the  automobile,  all  of  which  have  enjoyed  an  un- 
precedented upswing  during  the  last  decades,  (2)  the  demand  on 
the  part  of  those  who  have  survived  the  "pops"  age  and  have  gradu- 
ated to  the  serious  concerts,  and  (3)  the  availability  of  popular 
music  at  convenient  hours  on  radio  programs. 

Sunday  concerts  have  been  a  fixture  in  most  cities  for  many 
years.  But  there  was  a  time  when  Boston,  New  York,  and  Philadel- 
phia looked  askance  at  such  desecration  of  the  Sabbath.  Although 
Theodore  Thomas,  in  the  sixties,  evaded  the  Blue  Laws  by  an  oc- 
casional "sacred"  concert,  it  was  not  until  1891  when  Walter  Dam- 
rosch  inaugurated  his  Sunday  evening  series  that  the  interpretation 
of  the  laws  was  relaxed.  His  first  offense,  however,  drew  important 
protests,  and  the  embarrassed  board  of  directors  declined  to  stand 
behind  the  conductor.  Nevertheless,  the  concerts  were  soon  re- 
sumed. 

Another  brush  with  the  law  occurred  in  1907,  when  the  Court 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  375 

closed  Carnegie  Hall  on  two  successive  Sundays  in  December.  But 
a  well-placed  remonstrance  reopened  it  immediately.  After  Sunday 
concerts  were  held  as  "private  musicales"  open  to  "members"  only, 
Philadelphia  legalized  public  concerts  in  1934. 

The  Standard  Repertoire 

The  "standard  repertoire"  is  a  concept  which  inevitably  emerges 
from  the  accumulated  experience  of  both  producers  and  audiences 
of  symphony  concerts.  It  comprises  the  music  that  has  survived 
competitive  selection,  and  is  therefore  a  kind  of  social  heritage 
firmly  grounded  in  human  habit.  Like  every  other  social  custom,  it 
is  in  a  constant  state  of  flux  so  that  the  central  core  cannot  always 
be  clearly  demarcated  from  the  new  experimental  fringes,  or  from 
the  obsolescent  remnants  which  are  about  to  be  sloughed  off.  Ab- 
stractly, however,  the  standard  repertoire  can  be  simply  defined. 
Anything  that  is  "standard"  ( 1 )  is  more  or  less  enduring  rather  than 
ephemeral,  (2)  transcends  personal  whims,  (3)  appears  with  more 
or  less  predictable  frequency,  and  (4)  is  approved  by  those  who 
profess  the  standard. 

Realistically,  the  standard  repertoire  should  be  determined  from 
the  records  of  the  actual  programs.  For,  if  the  concept  of  "standard" 
has  any  meaning,  it  surely  carries  the  assumption  that  we  are  abiding 
by  it.  Compositions  which  never  appear,  or  appear  very  irregularly, 
could  not  lay  claim  to  that  term.  To  set  up  contemporary  standards 
we  need  only  agree  on  a  certain  frequency  of  appearance  and  a 
reasonable  period  of  time  which  fairly  represents  the  present  era. 
This  cross-section  of  today,  should  include,  of  course,  today's  im- 
mediate roots  in  the  past  and  a  brief  portent  of  the  future. 

The  statistical  array  of  standard  works,  if  it  is  carefully  com- 
puted, will  reflect  local  color.  New  York  and  Boston  are,  perhaps, 
a  little  more  adventurous  than  smaller  orchestras  in  other  regions. 
Shorter  seasons  will  present  the  standard  repertoire  in  smaller  in- 
stallments, and  their  period  of  observation  will  therefore  have  to 
be  lengthened  if  orchestras  with  long  and  short  seasons  are  com- 
bined. 

To  bear  the  stamp  of  national  standard,  the  compositions  will 


376  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

have  to  appear  in  a  representative  sample  of  all  orchestras,  and  ex- 
tend over  a  period  of  years  sufficient  to  yield  an  adequate  sample 
of  the  repertoires  of  orchestras  with  relatively  short  seasons.  While 
most  of  the  following  standard  works  tabulated  on  that  basis  ap- 
peared with  much  greater  frequency,  the  minimum  frequency  was 
set  at  two  performances  in  at  least  eight  of  the  ten  orchestras  in  the 
period  1940-50  to  allow  for  short  seasons  and  chance  variations.  But 
even  the  marginal  compositions  which  are  heard  in  only  five  or  more 
orchestras  are  of  some  interest. 


COMPOSITIONS    PLAYED    AT    LEAST    TWICE    IN    PERIOD     194O-5O,    IN    EACH    OF 
EIGHT   OR   MORE  ORCHESTRAS:    59   PIECES   OF    1 9   COMPOSERS 

Beethoven:  Symphonies  No.  i,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  and  8;  Overtures,  Leonore 
No.  5,  Egmont,  Coriolanus;  Concerto  for  Piano,  No.  5;  Violin  Con- 
certo. 

Berlioz:  Sy?nphonie  Fantastique;  Overture,  Carnaval  Romain. 

Brahms:  Symphonies  No.  1,  2,  3  and  4;  Overture,  Academic  Festival; 
Variations  on  a  Theme  by  Haydn;  Concertos  for  Piano  No.  1  and  2; 
Concerto  for  Violin. 

Debussy:  UApres-midi  d'un  Faune;  La  Mer;  Iberia. 

Dvorak:  Symphony  No.  5. 

Falla:  Three  Dances  from  The  Three-Corner ed  Hat. 

Franck:  Symphony  in  D  minor. 

Mendelssohn:  Concerto  for  Violin. 

Mozart:  Symphonies  No.  K550,  K385,  and  K551. 

Rachmaninoff:  Concerto  for  Piano  No.  2;  Rhapsody  on  a  Theme  of 
Paganini. 

Ravel:  Daphnis  et  Chloe  (Second  Suite);  La  Valse;  Rhapsodie  Espa- 
gnole. 

Schubert:  Symphony  No.  7. 

Schumann:  Concerto  for  Piano. 

Shostakovitch:  Symphony  No.  5. 

Stravinsky:  Suite  from  The  Fire  Bird. 

Strauss:  Death  and  Transfiguration;  Don  Juan;  Don  Quixote;  Till  Eulen- 
spiegel. 

Tschaikowsky:  Symphonies  No.  4,  5,  and  6;  Concerto  for  Piano  No.  1; 
Concerto  for  Violin;  Overture,  Romeo  and  Juliet. 

Wagner:  Preludes  to  Meister singer,  Lohengrin,  and  Tristan;  Love-Death 
from  Parsifal. 

Weber:  Overtures  to  Der  Freischutz,  Euryanthe,  Oberon. 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  377 

COMPOSITIONS    PLAYED     IN     EACH    OF    FIVE,    SIX,     OR     SEVEN    ORCHESTRAS,     AT 
LEAST  TWICE   IN   PERIOD    IQ4O-5O:    5 1    PIECES   OF   3 1    COMPOSERS 

Bach:  Brandenburg  Concerto  No.  3. 

Beethoven:   Symphonies  No.  2  and  9;  Overture  to  Fidelio;  Concertos 

for  Piano  No.  3  and  4. 
Chausson:  Symphony  in  B-flat. 
Chopin:  Concerto  for  Piano  No.  1. 
Debussy:  Fetes  and  Nuages. 
Dvorak:  Concerto  for  Cello. 
Dukas:  The  Sorcerer's  Apprentice. 
Elgar:  Enigma  Variations. 
Enesco:  Roumanian  Rhapsody,  No.  1. 
Handel:  Water  Music. 
Haydn:  Symphony  No.  88. 
Lalo:  Symphonie  Espagnole  for  Violin. 
Mahler:  Symphony  No.  1. 
Mendelssohn:  Symphonies  No.  3  (Scotch);  No.  4  (Italian);  Midsummer 

Night's  Dream  (Excerpts). 
Moussorgsky:  Pictures  at  an  Exhibition;  Prelude  to  Khovantchina. 
Mozart:  Symphony  K543;  Overture  to  Figaro. 
Prokofieff:  Symphony  No.  5,  Classical  Symphony. 
Rachmaninoff:  Symphony  No.  2;  Concerto  for  Piano  No.  3. 
Ravel:  Bolero;  Alborada  del  Gracioso. 
Respighi:  The  Pines  of  Rome. 
Rimsky-Korsakoff:  Overture,  The  Russian  Easter. 
Schubert:  Symphony  No.  8. 
Schumann:  Symphonies  No.  1,  2,  3,  and  4. 
Shostakovitch:  Symphony  No.  1. 
Sibelius:  Symphonies  No.  2,  5,  and  7. 
Smetana:   Symphonic  Poem,  The  Moldau;  Overture  to  The  Bartered 

Bride. 
Strauss:  Suite  from  Der  Rosenkavalier. 
Stravinsky:  Suite  from  Petrouchka. 
Tschaikowsky:  Francesca  da  Rimini. 

Vaughan  Williams:  Fantasia  on  a  Theme  by  Thomas  Tallis. 
Wagner:    Overture   to    Flying   Dutchman;    Good   Friday    Spell   from 

Parsifal;  Overture  to  Tannhauser;  Siegfried  Idyll. 

The  younger  orchestras  such  as  Los  Angeles  and  San  Francisco, 
in  some  years  of  the  1940-50  decade,  had  only  twelve  to  eighteen 
concerts  as  against  the  twenty-four  or  twenty-eight  of  Boston, 


378  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Chicago,  New  York,  and  Philadelphia.  By  actual  count  of  total 
volume  in  that  decade,  the  most  productive  orchestra  played  exactly 
double  the  volume  of  the  least  productive.  In  so  limited  a  series  of 
subscription  concerts,  an  orchestra  could  hardly  be  expected  to 
cover  all  the  standard  repertoire  twice  in  ten  years.  Hence  the 
required  frequency  has  been  set  generously  low.  The  four  orchestras 
with  the  greatest  volume  of  music  show  a  failure  to  play  only 
eleven  out  of  the  fifty-nine  items  at  least  twice  in  the  ten  years; 
while  the  four  orchestras  with  the  shortest  seasons  total  forty-five 
such  failures. 

Some  familiar  favorites  are  missing  from  these  lists.  Bach  is  al- 
most entirely  absent,  although  a  long  list  of  twenty-six  items  were 
played  repeatedly  in  one,  two,  or  three  orchestras.  The  composer 
is  standard  enough,  but  his  patronage  is  distributed  among  several 
equally  acceptable  numbers.  The  Brandenburg  Concertos  were  al- 
most always  represented  but  the  choices  were  scattered  among 
Numbers  One,  Two  and  Three.  Preludes,  Toccatas,  Fugues,  Suites, 
and  the  Passacaglia  appeared  often,  but  each  orchestra  has  developed 
its  own  favorites  in  these  various  forms.  Haydn  and  Mozart  espe- 
cially are  underrepresented  in  the  first  list  because  of  the  variety  of 
works  presented  by  the  different  orchestras.  Such  a  circumstance 
could  never  occur  with  Cesar  Franck,  who  wrote  but  one  sym- 
phony and  very  few  other  acceptable  works  for  the  orchestra. 

Whether  or  not  there  is  anv  virtue  in  referring  to  these  pieces 
as  "standard,"  there  is  good  evidence  that  they  do  represent  the 
music  to  which  the  subscription  audiences  have  been  most  con- 
stantly exposed  for  the  past  generation.  The  nineteen  composers  on 
the  first  list  account  for  sixtv  per  cent  of  the  total  current  reper- 
toire, and  those  on  the  two  lists  together  more  than  seventy-five 
per  cent  of  it.  The  standard  names  leave  less  than  a  quarter  of  the 
volume  of  present-dav  music  for  the  hundreds  of  other  composers 
of  all  ages  and  countries  who  hope  for  a  hearing,  including,  of 
course,  the  three-hundred  American  composers  who  have  failed 
to  place  a  single  composition  in  this  "standard"  list. 

While  the  itemizing  of  the  standard  numbers  may  seem  to 
some  as  having  only  museum  interest,  the  important  fact  is  that  it 


The  Orchestra,  Concert  Folkways,  and  Social  Life  379 

can  be  done  at  all.  It  can  therefore  be  said  that  the  core  of  the 
orchestral  repertoire  is  quite  beyond  the  discretion  or  control  of 
a  single  individual,  whether  conductor  or  manager.  The  list  repre- 
sents the  power  of  "social  heredity"  absorbed  and  transmitted  by 
musicians  and  audience  in  a  collaborative  enterprise. 


7 

Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed 


A  concert  is  made  up  of  three  indispensable  human  elements:  the 
performer,  the  composer,  and  the  audience— all  embedded  in  a  given 
social  setting.  But  it  is  after  all  for  the  benefit  and  excitation  of  the 
audience  that  the  complicated  and  costly  structure  of  the  symphony 
orchestra  exists.  Its  repertoire  is  subject  to  a  continuing  plebiscite 
of  the  audience;  and  withdrawal  or  diminution  of  its  patronage,  for 
any  one  of  many  possible  reasons,  would  endanger  its  very  existence. 
Therefore  any  realistic  analysis  of  the  repertoire  and  prospects  of 
the  orchestra  must  be  grounded  in  part  in  the  human  nature  of  that 
audience,  and  in  the  conception  of  the  nature  of  beauty  to  which 
the  audience  adheres. 

It  may  seem  embarrassing  to  raise,  and  impertinent  to  attempt 
to  answer,  questions  on  the  nature  of  beauty  which  have  occupied 
the  thought  of  mankind  at  least  since  the  time  of  the  Greeks.  Many 
may,  in  fact,  feel  that  such  questions  are  irrelevant  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  great  music.  But  they  are  implicit  in  history,  and  their 
tentative  solutions  in  every  epoch  are  a  part  of  the  very  process 
of  living.  Man  not  only  acts,  but  he  also  reflects  on  his  actions  in 
order  to  make  them  plausible  to  himself  and  to  his  fellow  man. 

During  the  nineteenth  century,  when  most  of  the  standard 
repertoire  of  today  had  its  beginnings,  the  problems  of  art  and 
beauty  were  considered  the  province  of  philosophy  and  meta- 
physics, in  keeping  with  the  revived  Platonic  theories  which  domi- 
nated the  arts  of  that  romantic  era.  Beauty  was  Truth,  unencum- 
bered by  the  vicissitudes  of  mundane  life.  It  was  a  kind  of  Universal, 
compelling  on  every  perceptive  intelligence.  This  view  still  has  many 
disciples  in  art  pedagogy  and  in  the  critics'  fraternity,  and  explains 
the  passionate  enthusiasm  and  missionary  fervor  with  which  certain 
tastes  are  promulgated,  the  esteem  in  which  the  artist  is  held,  the 
5*0 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  381 

conception  which  some  artists  have  of  their  own  role,  and  the  awe 
of  the  layman  before  a  creative  work. 

However,  with  the  development  of  the  social,  anthropological, 
and  psychological  sciences,1  and  their  analysis  of  the  diverse  primi- 
tive and  modern  art  forms,  the  tremendous  variety  of  equally  valid 
aesthetic  standards  could  not  but  impress  the  conscientious  and  in- 
formed observer.  The  prestige  that  any  given  standard  may  com- 
mand among  its  devotees  takes  on  a  rather  provincial  hue  when 
examined  in  the  light  of  the  myriads  of  others  that  may  be  cher- 
ished with  equal  passion  by  their  own  adherents.  In  this  great 
diversity  of  historically  approved  standards  lies  the  reason  for  the 
supposed  insolubility  of  the  problem  of  beauty.  Furthermore,  new 
beauties  are  constantly  being  invented  and  old  ones  discarded.  The 
solution  is  clearly  not  to  be  found  exclusively  in  the  nature  of  the 
beautiful  objects  themselves,  nor  exclusively  in  the  human  nature 
of  the  subject  who  enjoys  them,  but  in  the  interaction  or  relation 
between  both  elements. 

In  view  of  the  antiquity  of  the  aesthetic  problem,  and  the 
illimitable  variety  of  data  which  might  be  mobilized  for  its  solution, 
one  century  may  seem  a  narrow  base  on  which  to  build  an  edifice 
of  artistic  theory.  But  it  is  quite  adequate  for  a  generalization.  A 
chemical  experiment,  for  example,  is  interpreted  not  only  in  terms 
of  the  immediately  observed  data,  but  also  in  terms  of  all  related 
experiments  in  the  history  of  the  subject.  A  novice,  who  has  no 
knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  subject,  and  is  unable  to  make 
comparative  observations,  could  not  be  expected  to  extract  intelli- 
gent conclusions  from  the  experiment  at  hand.  In  a  similar  vein, 
this  hundred-year  cumulation  of  a  small  segment  of  art  history  is 
the  occasion,  but  by  no  means  the  exclusive  material,  out  of  which 
the  reflections  of  this  chapter  are  fashioned.  To  some  authorities,  the 
taste  of  a  century  may  not  turn  up  striking  mutations.  But  if  taste  can 
change  a  little  in  a  short  time,  it  can  and  does  change  even  more  in 
a  longer  period. 

In  explanation  of  these  fluctuations  in  art  tastes,  it  would  be 
too  simple  and  dogmatic  merely  to  derogate  as  "decadent"  those 
periods  whose  preferences  differed  significantly  from  the  present, 
and  to  exalt  those  "golden"  ages  whose  likings  conformed  to  our 


382  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

own,  only  to  have  the  next  generation  modulate,  or  even  reverse, 
our  judgments.  A  competent  student  of  art  history  will  easily 
demonstrate  how  such  terms  as  Renaissance,  Gothic,  Baroque,  Ro- 
coco, Romantic  and  other  styles  have  some  descriptive  value,  but 
are  actually  "loaded"  abstractions  which  contain  the  retroactive 
judgments  of  another  era,  floated  with  conviction  and  great  con- 
fidence, but  signifying  essentially  a  periodic  re-evaluation  of  taste. 
It  therefore  has  little  meaning  to  state  that,  during  his  eclipse,  critics 
were  "mistaken"  about  Bach,  and  that  his  sons  were  "blind  to  his 
greatness";  that  Brahms  was  long  "undervalued"  and  Raff  and 
Tschaikowsky  "overrated";  or  that  "true"  judgments  cannot  be 
ventured  until  after  repeated  hearings.  The  question  is  not  intended 
to  be  facetious:  Why  should  posterity  always  have  the  last  word? 
Unless  a  given  epoch  exalts  its  own  verdicts  to  a  level  of  infallibility 
—as  it  often  does— it  must  be  acknowledged  that  every  epoch,  every 
age,  is  entitled  to  its  own  standards  of  judgment  in  matters  aesthetic. 
The  invidious  distinctions  so  often  drawn  between  epochs  are  psy- 
chologically and  sociologically  indefensible,  and  derive  from  a  mis- 
conception of  the  nature  of  aesthetic  "truth." 

The  standard  of  "truth"  in  matters  aesthetic  differs  fundamen- 
tally from  that  of  science.  Aesthetic  "truth"  or  appreciation  is  a 
psychologically  terminal  experience,  a  subjective  and  contemplative 
state  of  mind,  in  which  every  percipient  differs  from  every  other 
in  slighter  or  greater  degree  according  to  his  accumulated  experi- 
ence.2 It  is  therefore  essentially  incommunicable  except  to  the  extent 
that  the  subjects'  backgrounds  are  identical.  Since  aesthetic  experi- 
ences are  ends  in  themselves,  and  represent  a  state  of  personal  ful- 
fillment, they  cannot  be  demonstrated  as  truthful  or  false  by  any 
external  tests,  for  they  reach  their  convincing  termination  in  the 
subjective  sense  of  gratification.  Hence,  aesthetic  tastes  cannot  be 
"disputed,"  although  their  derivation  may  be  traced  and  "accounted 
for." 

In  contrast,  scientific  opinion  rests  ultimately  on  a  means-end 
scheme  in  which  efficiency,  or  the  test  of  adequate  means  for  the 
achievement  of  a  given  end,  is  the  criterion  of  "truth."  Since  the 
means  toward  the  attainment  of  a  given  end  are  constantly  subject 
to  improvement,  the  scientific  world  permits  of  progress.  Increased 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  383 

knowledge  of  physiology,  and  the  analysis  of  meteorological  phe- 
nomena represent  improved  means  of  accomplishing  the  socially  ap- 
proved purposes  of  curing  disease  and  predicting  the  weather. 

Since  each  stage  in  the  development  of  science  is  more  efficient 
than  the  preceding,  one  does  not  ordinarily  conceive  of  a  renaissance 
of  the  horse-and-buggy  days.  Revival  of  forgotten  aesthetic  stages 
is,  however,  not  only  possible  but  of  frequent  occurrence.  This 
does  not  argue  the  "higher  truth"  of  the  revived  music,  literature, 
or  the  arts,  but  rather  the  flexibility  and  versatility  of  human  habits. 
However,  this  adaptation  to  older  art  forms  is  never  perfectly  made. 
Modern  man  cannot  view  Greek  sculpture  with  the  eyes  of  a  Greek, 
nor  read  Homer  with  the  Hellenic  mentality,  nor  listen  to  Bach 
with  the  ears  of  the  Leipzig  parishioners.  If  science  is  concerned 
with  efficiency,  it  is,  of  course,  absurd  to  speak  of  Catholic  or  Com- 
munist science.  The  results  of  the  means-end  tests  are  not  de- 
pendent on  one's  ideologies;  in  fact  they  sometimes  contradict  them. 
There  may,  however,  be  Communist  or  Catholic  art  which  speaks 
to  the  cultural  interests  of  those  groups,  and  is  not  easily  inter- 
changeable. 

These  distinctions  have  extremely  important  implications  for  the 
function  of  "experts"  in  the  respective  fields.  In  the  area  of  science 
the  basic  assumption  is  the  possibility,  indeed  the  necessity,  of  ab- 
solute agreement  between  the  experts.  Consequently  the  judgment 
of  the  expert  is  compulsive  on  the  less  experienced  layman.  How- 
ever, the  aesthetic  taste  of  the  art  "expert"  does  not  possess  that 
compulsive  sanction.  Art  tastes  are  subjective  rather  than  objective; 
they  represent  expectations  and  habits  that  arise  from  the  experi- 
ences of  the  subject,  and  exist  in  terms  of  these  experiences.  Al- 
though technical  workmanship,  fidelity  to  tradition,  stylistic  details, 
and  the  like  are  objective  and  subject  to  "expert"  opinion,  these 
should  not  be  confused  with  the  actual  aesthetic  thrill  derived 
therefrom,  which  ultimately  remains  a  subjective  personal  posses- 
sion. Therefore,  according  to  Donald  Tovey,  British  musicologist, 
when  critics  aver  that  "such  and  such  a  classic  ought  to  inspire  us 
with  noble  feelings  because  its  sentiments  are  edifying  and  its  form 
perfect,  we  may  legitimately  argue  that  it  is  useless  to  tell  us  that 


384  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

we  ought  to  feel  this  and  that,  when  as  a  matter  of  fact  we  fee^ 
quite  otherwise."  3 

Since  scientific  "truths"  are  subject  to  the  pragmatic  tests  of 
truth  or  falsity,  scientific  inventions  have  never  engendered  the  mes- 
sianic fervor  which  have  accompanied  artistic  products.  Simply 
because  artistic  convictions  are  not  subject  to  empirical  disproof, 
they  thrive  on,  and  accumulate,  an  authority  which  it  is  heresy  to 
deny.  Hence  scientists,  whose  truths  do  not  depend  on  belief  or 
subjective  conviction  but  on  demonstrable  objective  evidence,  can 
afford  to  be  more  tolerant  than  the  exponents  of  nondemonstrable 
aesthetic  or  moral  "truths."  Intolerance  rests  on  the  psychological 
fact  that  aesthetic  faith  is  not  easily  subject  to  contradiction,  since 
it  is  self-contained  within  the  subjective  life  of  its  interpreter  and 
therefore  engenders  a  sense  of  great  introspective  certainty. 

Changes  in  aesthetic  taste  and  judgment  do  not  emanate  solely 
from  the  dicta  of  aesthetes.  They  do  not  proceed  from  an  exalted 
metaphysical  realm,  whence  they  are  communicated  to  the  chosen 
few  who,  like  the  apostles  of  old,  feel  called  to  share  these  priv- 
ileged communications  with  the  lay  masses.  The  pattern  of  the 
repertoire,  which  constitutes  musical  taste,  changing  by  small  accre- 
tions, is  formed  by  crosscurrents  of  many  major  and  minor  personal 
decisions  and  compromises  made  every  time  the  program  of  a  con- 
cert is  selected  or  an  annual  series  projected.  The  identity  and 
strength  of  these  forces  differ  from  time  to  time  and  from  place 
to  place;  but  they  are  not  capricious  and  whimsical— the  patterns 
are  too  uniform  for  that.  Nor  are  they  automatic  and  preordained: 
the  variations  are  too  obvious  for  that.  One  can  only  conclude  that 
musical  opinions  and  tastes,  like  political  and  economic  preferences, 
are  forged  in  a  matrix  of  social  and  psychological  forces  and,  at 
any  given  time,  represent  a  blend  of  both  traditional  factors  and 
current  experiences.  One  cannot  come  away  from  a  study  of  a 
century  of  musical  tastes  without  being  struck  by  the  perennial 
revision  of  human  judgments,  and  the  conviction  that,  under  differ- 
ent circumstances,  our  tastes  would  have  taken  other  channels  with 
which  we  today  would  have  been  equally  contented.  And,  unless 
human  mentality  reaches  a  saturation  point,  at  which  further  de- 
velopment in  forms,  harmonies  and  rhythms  cannot  be  absorbed  or 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  385 

invented,  society  will  continue  to  revise  its  most  considered  and 
hallowed  judgments  in  the  future,  as  it  so  obviously  has  in  the  past. 
Of  all  the  current  theories  designed  to  explain  changes  in 
aesthetic  tastes,  one  of  the  most  prevalent,  and  also  the  most  sus- 
piciously simple,  is  that  art  is  a  "reflection  of  the  spirit  of  the  age." 
According  to  this  familiar  principle,  the  stream  of  history  is  divided 
into  broad  periods,  each  of  which  is  characterized  by  a  "spirit" 
which  pervades  its  totality  and  which  binds  it  into  a  recognizable 
unit.  There  are  many  versions  of  this  "spirit  of  the  age,"  and  not 
all  exponents  of  this  view  would  necessarily  subscribe  to  the  rather 
comprehensive  formulation  which  avers  that 

Some  very  general  trend  in  the  evolution  of  mankind  controls  all  forms 
of  human  expression  and  all  the  ways  in  which  they  act,  be  they  politics, 
economy,  thought  or  art.4 

But  no  social  scientist  views  society  as  a  homogeneous  entity 
in  which  an  over-all  "spirit"  can  be  identified.  Society  is  enor- 
mously more  complex  than  the  Hegelian  Zeitgeist  seems  to  assume. 
Instead  of  an  integrated  Society  with  a  capital  "S,"  society  is  rather  a 
federation  of  various  and  diverse  groups,  each  with  its  own  interests 
and  tastes,  sometimes  cooperating  with  one  another,  but  quite  fre- 
quently in  mortal  conflict.  This  unitarian  view  of  Society,  which  has 
often  been  so  congenial  to  totalitarian  national  aspirations  as  well,  has 
lost  much  of  its  credibility  in  the  more  thoroughgoing,  empirical 
methods  of  the  twentieth  century.  This  theory  of  an  enveloping 
spirit  has  led  to  positing  spurious  relations  between  music,  architec- 
ture, and  other  phases  of  life  literally  too  numerous  and  too  well- 
known  to  cite.  The  social  approach  to  history  is  inconsistent  with 
the  synoptic  notion  of  rolling  into  one  the  economic,  technological, 
political,  psychological,  and  other  factors  and  labeling  them  with  an 
intangible  "spirit." 

There  is  also  the  semantic  objection,  that  an  explanation  of  an 
event  in  terms  of  the  "spirit"  of  that  event  is  tautological.  To  ex- 
plain rococo  by  the  "spirit"  of  rococo,  baroque  by  the  "spirit"  of 
baroque,  is  to  explain  something  in  terms  of  synonyms,  which  is  no 
explanation  at  all.  This  is  a  grave  methodological  error  that  gives  a 
satisfying  sense  of  certainty  for  the  simple  reason  that  there  is  no 


386  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

possibility  whatever  of  being  contradicted.  One  reads  the  "spirit" 
from  a  few  observed  facts,  and  then  reads  it  right  back  again  into 
the  unresistant  period.  "Spirituous"  liquors  analogously  had  their 
origin  in  similar  verbalisms,  but  today  modern  chemistry  and  physi- 
ology have  found  more  palpable  explanations  for  the  source  of  their 
potency. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  this  synthetic  procedure  is  more  success- 
ful when  applied  to  bygone  periods  than  to  the  present;  living  per- 
sons and  the  readily  recognized  multiplicity  of  circumstances  make 
the  omnibus  phrase  much  less  convincing.  Past  periods  are  more 
likely  to  be  viewed  as  ways  of  action  which  have  survived  in  the 
lore  of  scholars  and  in  the  visible  remnants  of  the  epoch.  The  distant 
perspective,  which  either  magnifies  or  belittles  fragments  of  history 
in  accordance  with  our  present  biases,  and  purges  them  of  incon- 
venient contradictions,  portrays  the  past  in  exaggerated  unity— a 
naivete  of  which  we  are  quickly  disabused  today  by  a  vigorous 
election,  a  war,  a  religious  or  economic  persecution,  and  all  the 
ideological  battles  and  the  myriad  other  ugly  symptoms  of  "man's 
inhumanity  to  man."  For  every  theorist  who  posited  an  integrating 
"spirit,"  there  has  been  another  to  underline  the  equally  obvious 
"lags"  and  the  "contradictions"  in  our  social  order. 

This  is  not  to  say  that  there  are  no  harmonies  or  adaptations 
in  our  social  relations  but  such  an  oversimplified  unity  can  be  con- 
structed only  on  the  basis  of  a  vague  pseudo-psychological  formula. 
It  is  a  seductive  intellectual  enterprise,  this  pinnacling  of  all  knowl- 
edge into  an  integrated  whole;  it  represents  scholarship  run  riot 
propelled  by  a  questionable  philosophy  of  history.  One  must  there- 
fore view  with  regret  the  borrowing  by  musicologists  of  such  terms 
as  "baroque"  from  its  architectural  origins,  and  its  inflation  and 
application  to  a  broad  span  of  geography  and  time,  in  a  manner 
that  cannot  survive  mature  analysis.  One  cannot  but  deplore  the 
defense  of  modern  music  by  its  alleged  conformity  to  the  "modern 
age,"  when  many  more  specific  arguments  are  at  hand. 

Some  exponents  of  contemporary  music,  for  example,  lament  the 
lackadaisical  acceptance  of  the  music  of  the  "court  age"  instead  of 
an  energetic  sponsorship  of  a  type  of  music  more  "consonant  with 
the  machine  age."  But  embarrassing  questions  must  follow  in  the 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  387 

wake  of  this  reasoning.  How  prove  that  the  composer  actually  re- 
flects the  modern  age?  What  are  the  earmarks  of  machine-age 
music?  Is  not  the  audience,  which  enjoys  the  allegedly  anachronistic 
music,  also  a  part  of  "the  age"  and  therefore  entitled  to  reflect  it? 
May  not  the  composer,  who  often  leads  a  sequestered  existence, 
actually  be  less  representative  of  the  significant  forces  and  implica- 
tions of  the  age  than  an  intelligent,  versatile,  mobile  man  of  affairs 
in  the  audience? 

Although  it  has  seemed  to  some  students  that  this  is  the  first  time 
in  musical  history  that  the  compositions  of  "the  past"  have  so  domi- 
nated the  performance  of  the  present,  it  is  by  no  means  a  unique 
phenomenon.  In  fact,  it  is  a  historical  commonplace  that  there  has 
always  been  a  lively  borrowing  and  diffusion  from  other  cultural 
epochs  both  in  technology  and  in  the  arts.  Literature,  painting,  and 
architecture  reveal  a  clear  "ancestor  worship."  Even  the  primitive 
and  folk  arts  have  been  adopted  eagerly  and  without  mental  con- 
flicts by  the  most  sophisticated  cultures.  The  supposed  incongruity 
of  a  capitalistic  society  enjoying  ancient  Greek  art  disturbed  Karl 
Marx,  who  was  also  an  advocate  of  the  theory  of  the  totalistic  so- 
ciety and  therefore  felt  that  he  had  to  reconcile  this  "contradiction." 
This  he  did  by  citing  a  person's  normal  enjoyment  of  an  occasional 
childhood  experience,  which  was  equivalent  to  society's  enjoyment 
of  Greek  culture,  which  represented  the  "social  childhood"  of  our 
culture.5 

The  most  irrefutable  argument  against  the  supposed  incongruity 
between  old  music  and  the  new  times  is  simply  that  pleasure  is 
undebatable.  If  a  mature  twentieth-century  audience  simultaneously 
enjoys  the  baroque  Bach,  the  rococo  Mozart,  the  romantic  Schu- 
mann, the  neo-classical  Brahms,  the  Gallic  Debussy,  the  Teutonic 
Wagner,  the  percussive  Stravinsky,  and  the  eclectic  Shostakovitch, 
who  is  derivative  of  them  all,  how  can  one  assert  that  it  is  enjoy- 
ing them  "by  mistake"  or  that  there  are  ethical  and  psychological  rea- 
sons why  it  should  enjoy  something  else.  It  is  difficult  to  com- 
pose by  fiat,  but  it  is  still  more  difficult  to  enjoy  by  fiat.  Both 
processes  are  accomplished  only  by  a  process  of  conditioning,  in  a 
world  whose  systematic  complexity  we  have  not  yet  completely 
fathomed. 


388  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

We  therefore  cannot  resist  the  conclusion  that  musical  taste  is  a 
system  of  very  specific  tonal  habits,  conditioned  by  the  incessant 
flow  of  experiences  of  the  individual  person  as  a  participating  mem- 
ber of  a  complex  culture  group.  A  great  range  of  experiences  might 
conceivably  contribute  to  the  end-result  of  finding  pleasure  in  many 
given  types  of  music,  much  as  some  trivial  incident  might  influence 
the  degree  of  affection  for  or  aversion  toward  another  person.  In 
order  to  understand  more  fully  how  the  aesthetic  quality  of  a  musi- 
cal composition  is  acquired,  it  will  be  necessary  to  ascertain  its 
psychological  components,  and  to  explore  how  the  standards  of 
beauty  become  established. 

Because  of  the  human  propensity  to  read  into  the  object  what  is 
actually  in  our  heads— "the  elliptical  fallacy"— it  is  often  thought 
that  the  merit  of  a  composition  resides  within  it;  and  once  that  has 
been  established  by  some  kind  of  authority,  there  is  a  certain 
aesthetic  obligation  imposed  on  the  auditor  to  put  himself  en  rapport 
with  the  established  masterpieces,  and  to  attempt  to  "discover"  for 
himself  the  beauties  resident  in  those  works  of  art  that  have  been 
vouchsafed  by  "qualified"  listeners. 

However,  psychologically  and  sociologically  speaking,  this  is  an 
unfortunate  assumption.  Beauty  is  not  a  transcendental  entity  wait- 
ing, perhaps  in  some  outer  sphere,  to  be  incorporated  into  a  com- 
position by  a  sensitive  composer;  nor  is  it  a  quality  resident  in  the 
object,  or  in  the  relationship  between  its  parts,  waiting  to  be  dis- 
covered and  enjoyed  by  an  observer— any  more  than  pain  is  resident 
in  a  red-hot  stove,  or  the  essence  of  patriotism  in  a  multicolored 
flag.  Beauty  in  music  is  not  a  fact  but  rather  a  human  experience, 
a  judgment  that  results  from  the  contact  between  the  particular 
arrangement  of  sounds  and  the  particular  background  of  the  auditor. 
Beauty  "happens"  to  an  object.  If  there  were  no  observer,  there 
would  be  no  beauty;  if  there  are  two  simultaneous  observers,  the 
same  object  could  be— and  usually  is— both  beautiful  and  ugly  simul- 
taneously. Two  or  more  persons,  with  approximately  the  same 
training,  background,  and  fund  of  experiences,  observing  the  same 
object,  would  necessarily  be  in  approximate  agreement  as  to  its 
degree  of  "beauty."  Hence,  the  cultural  agreement  on  many  master- 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  389 

pieces.  Any  object  can  be  beautiful  if  it  is  matched  with  the  appro- 
priate observer  who  has  the  corresponding  accumulation  of  experi- 
ences and  store  of  habits.  Thus  it  is  false  dichotomy  to  segregate 
the  thinking  subject  from  the  object  of  thought.  The  real  issue  does 
not  lie  in  the  segregation  of  the  two,  but  in  the  manner  of  their 
collaboration.6 

When  listening  to  a  musical  composition,  we  therefore  do  not 
hear  only  that  composition,  but  rather  a  blend,  or  fusion,  of  the 
pattern  of  sounds  in  the  immediate  work  plus  the  innumerable 
arrangements  of  tones  that  have  been  stored  up  in  our  own  con- 
sciousness. It  is  against  that  background  that  the  present  experience 
is  selectively  perceived,  defined,  and  evaluated.  According  to  this 
principle  of  selective  perception,  we  do  not  listen  with  our  ears,  but 
with  our  past  experiences:  sometimes  called  in  academic  psychology 
"apperceptive  mass."  Consequently,  there  are  many  things  "out 
there"  which  we  do  not  perceive;  and  there  are  many  things  which 
we  think  we  "perceive"  that  are  not  "out  there,"  but  are  "in  our 
heads."  No  criterion  has  ever  been  established  by  which  a  concrete 
boundary  line  can  be  defined  at  which  the  irreducible  minimum  of 
raw  music  stops  and  the  associative  experiences  of  the  listener  be- 
gin. The  psychoanalytic  schools  of  thought  would  go  far  indeed 
in  extending  the  scope  of  these  associative  experiences. 

But  audition  is  not  only  a  matter  of  passive  receptivity  to  tonal 
stimuli.  It  is  also  a  process  of  fulfillment  or  denial  of  active  expecta- 
tions set  up  bv  the  listener's  past  experiences.  When  the  nineteenth- 
century  audience  first  listened  to  Wagner  with  the  expectations  of 
hearing  Beethoven's  progressions  and  resolutions,  they  felt  a  degree 
of  nervous  frustration  rather  than  aesthetic  delight.  In  that  sense 
it  is  inevitable  that  radically  new  forms  of  tonal  organization  will 
meet  with  delayed  appreciation,  until  new  habits  of  listening  are 
formed.  Every  composer,  depending  on  the  degree  to  which  he 
deviates  from  the  past  formal  habits  of  his  auditors,  must  retrain 
his  audience  in  new  listening  habits  and  expectations  before  aesthetic 
pleasure  can  ensue.  The  successful  composer  thereby  actually  creates 
the  public  that  later  approves  him. 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  a  new  composition  may  bear  suffi- 
cient resemblance  to  the  past— e.g.  the  early  Beethoven  to  Mozart 


390  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

and  Haydn— to  be  readily  assimilable  and  appreciated  by  the  audi- 
ence. Or,  in  the  case  of  the  later  Schoenberg  and  many  other  mod- 
ern composers,  the  style  may  be  so  incongruous  with  current  musi- 
cal habits  that  the  compositions  become  the  subject  of  highly 
cerebral  and  clinical  analysis,  on  another  level  of  enjoyment,  for  the 
specialized  auditor,  devoid  of  any  spontaneous  lay  audience  appeal 
whatever.  A  small  increment  of  novelty  is  essential;  without  it  there 
is  no  interest  to  touch  off  attention  and  stimulate  appreciation.  It 
is  for  that  reason  that  older  compositions,  having  become  too  fa- 
miliar through  repeated  hearings,  are  often  greeted  only  with  apathy 
or  boredom.  From  this  danger  of  satiety,  the  greatest  masterpieces 
are  not  exempt.  Its  onset  will  vary  according  to  the  background 
of  the  auditor,  the  intervals  between  hearings  during  which  one 
may  "forget"  a  part  of  what  has  been  stored  up,  and  the  degree 
of  variety  within  the  composition  itself. 

Such  an  analysis  partially  explains  the  differences  in  the  contours 
of  the  performance  curves  of  Tschaikowsky  and  Brahms.  Tschai- 
kowsky,  a  prolific  composer,  whose  melodic  turns  were  easily 
grasped,  provoked  little  controversy,  and  harvested  quick  popular- 
ity. But  he  has  been  on  the  wane  from  sheer  saccharine  monotony. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  polvrhythmic  and  compact  Brahms,  whose 
name  was  once  the  synonym  for  all  that  is  intellectual  and  esoteric, 
has  only  recently  been  generally  apprehended  after  a  vigorous  cam- 
paign on  the  part  of  conductors.  Nevertheless,  many  can  still  listen 
with  pleasure  to  Tschaikowsky— but  not  nearly  so  often.  Others  can 
no  longer  endure  the  deification  of  Brahms.  The  interest  and  sense 
of  "novelty"  in  Mozart,  Beethoven,  Haydn,  Debussy,  Franck,  and 
the  rest  can  be  maintained  only  by  increasingly  infrequent  repeti- 
tions. The  immortals  can  remain  immortal  only  by  not  insisting  on 
being  too  much  alive.  They  may  be  resuscitated,  or  satiety  may  be 
delayed,  by  an  additional  increment,  such  as  improvement  in  the 
quality  of  the  performance,  slightly  unconventional  interpretations, 
or  such  miscellaneous  strategies  as  omitting  repeats,  and  the  addition 
of  scholarship  and  formal  analysis  to  the  background  of  the  listener, 
thereby  diverting  his  attention  to  hitherto  unnoticed  detail. 

There  is,  then,  after  repeated  hearings,  an  optimum  point  of  ap- 
preciation after  which  the  law  of  diminishing  aesthetic  returns  sets  in, 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  391 

the  attainment  of  which  may  be  accelerated  or  delayed,  but  which 
in  the  long  run  is  psychologically  inevitable.  With  the  introduction 
of  newer  technological  mechanisms  for  the  dissemination  of  tonal 
pleasures— records  and  radio— familiarity  with  these  compositions 
will  be  increased  and  the  approach  of  satiety  hastened.  Under  such 
circumstances  the  repertoire  may  more  quickly  burn  itself  out  than 
in  the  olden  days  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  when  it  was 
literally  impossible  for  even  the  assiduous  concert-patron  to  hear 
Beethoven's  Fifth  more  than  once  every  couple  of  years!  According 
to  this  principle  of  accelerated  culture  change,  it  is  highly  unlikely 
that  there  will  ever  be  another  "Beethoven"  whose  music  will  dom- 
inate the  repertoire  for  over  a  century.  Unless  unforeseen  circum- 
stances intervene,  life  spans  of  composers  will  probably  be  shorter, 
particularly  if  the  democratization  of  the  audience,  with  the  possible 
necessity  of  catering  to  less  esoteric  tastes,  continues  at  its  present 
pace. 

Furthermore,  audiences  have  undoubtedly  undergone  a  tempera- 
mental change.  Their  disinclination  to  endure  a  long  apprenticeship 
to  an  extremely  novel  tonal  structure,  which  could  formerly  be 
overcome  bv  the  zeal  of  such  missionaries  as  Theodore  Thomas, 
does  not  augur  well  for  a  long  life  span  for  a  composer.  Half  of  the 
span  of  Brahms,  for  example,  is  an  investment  in  endurance  on  the 
part  of  the  audience  in  order  that  aesthetic  pleasure  may  be  reaped 
at  the  peak,  which  will  gradually  dissipate  during  the  descending 
half  of  his  musical  life  cycle. 

It  is  not  that  modern  twelve-tone  scale  is  necessarily  beyond  the 
ultimate  comprehension  of  the  average  music  lover.  But  it  is  a  new 
grammar  which  never  comes  easily  no  matter  how  spontaneously 
the  composers  profess  to  compose  in  it.  If  we  cultivated  it  as  assidu- 
ously and  as  long  as  the  American  audience  did  Brahms,  it  would 
probably  fall  into  place,  for  it  is  probably  impossible  for  Man  to 
create  anything  to  which  he  cannot  become  accustomed.  But,  with- 
out intense  motivation  and  without  belief  in  the  infallibility  of- 
the  composer,  a  modern  audience  is  ill-disposed  toward  making  the 
intellectual  investment  in  an  "esperanto"  so  long  as  the  current 
language  serves  its  aesthetic  and  social  purposes. 

There  are  those  who  may  be  offended  at  so  prosaic  a  treatment 


392  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

of  the  arts,  which  suggests  that  good  music  is  ephemeral  and  tran- 
sient, and  subject  to  the  material  vicissitudes  of  life.  They  would 
prefer  to  believe  that  Art  secures  its  sanction  from  a  higher  realm, 
or  that  it  at  least  possesses  some  distinctive  objective  trait  to  give 
it  permanence  and  universality  in  its  appeal  to  the  discerning  audi- 
tor. Such  was  the  fervent  faith  of  Leopold  Damrosch,  Theodore 
Thomas,  Gericke,  and  Muck,  who  laid  the  foundation  of  the  now 
traditional  standards  of  taste.  It  is  the  long  dominance  of  such  a 
figure  as  Beethoven,  more  recently  joined  by  Sebastian  Bach,  which 
appears  to  give  plausibility  to  the  faith  in  a  universal  Beauty.  It  is 
such  phenomena  which  create  the  illusion  of  timeless  beauty  that 
transcends  the  ages,  the  passing  of  which  is  uncomfortable  to  con- 
template. A  well-developed  historical  sense,  however,  will  awaken 
the  realization  that  a  century— or  a  thousand  years— is  but  a  moment 
in  civilization.  Bach  and  Beethoven  are  not  "universal";  they  merely 
have  lasted  a  long  time. 

Such  an  argument  is  not  at  all  nihilistic.  It  does  not  proclaim 
the  nonexistence  of  standards.  For  it  is  an  error  to  suppose  that, 
if  norms  cannot  be  absolute  or  eternal,  there  can  be  no  norms 
at  all.  But  so  intense  is  the  quest  for  certainty  that  the  difference 
between  absolute  and  period  norms  is  often  overlooked.  However, 
it  is  the  only  point  of  view  that  makes  the  incessant  fluctuations  in 
taste  plausible  and  is,  above  all,  consistent  with  the  current  con- 
ceptions of  the  workings  and  nature  of  the  human  mind. 

Detailed  studies  such  as  these  are  therefore  frankly  postulated 
on  the  assumption  that  musical  composition  and  its  enjoyment  is, 
in  the  largest  sense,  an  acquired  craft  of  Man,  circumscribed  by 
the  interacting  physical,  biological,  and  social  circumstances,  and 
subject  to  all  the  psychological  and  sociological  principles  which 
underlie  all  other  human  behavior.  Factual  and  quantitative  studies 
have  their  place  in  any  analysis  of  Man  and  his  works,  as  a  healthy 
counterbalance  to  the  romantic  terminology  which  so  often  sur- 
rounds the  discussion  of  beauty  and  its  production,  endowing  it 
with  a  spiritual  entity  that  modern  empirical  thinking  finds  hard  to 
assimilate.  There  is  much  mvsticism  in  creativity;  but  no  more  than 
in  the  test  tube.  As  self-evident  as  such  a  view  might  be,  it  is  still 
true  that  to  many  persons  it  is  neither  desirable  nor  even  possible 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  393 

to  study  the  processes  of  musical  composition  and  their  social  sur- 
vival. Each  composition,  it  has  been  asserted,  is  a  unique  product  of 
a  creative  imagination,  about  which  generalizations,  by  definition, 
would  be  excluded.  Accordingly,  musical  preferences  are  subjective 
and  personal;  "there  is  no  accounting  for  them." 

Since  no  two  compositions  are  identical,  and  since  pleasure  is 
by  definition  quite  subjective  and  personal,  such  a  view  carries 
superficial  credibility.  But  a  second  glance  at  the  history  of  com- 
position must  convince  an  observer  that  "unique"  is  far  too  extreme 
a  term.  If  a  composition  is  actually  unique,  or  as  it  approximates 
that  description,  it  is  to  that  extent  alien  to  the  stream  of  human 
thought,  its  language  is  not  understood;  it  would  evoke  bewilder- 
ment rather  than  curiosity  and  aesthetic  interest.  The  composer 
who  flouts  the  current  folkways  of  taste,  and  disregards  the  norms 
of  consonance  and  form  prevalent  at  the  time,  incurs  the  same  risks 
of  rejection  as  any  other  innovator  in  the  political,  social  and  eco- 
nomic, religious,  or  linguistic  world.  Not  even  the  greatest  inno- 
vators who  have  survived,  have  been  so  indiscreet.  The  deviant  mod- 
ern composers  who  rationalize  their  frequent  failures  to  capture  the 
approbation  of  public  and  critics  by  the  complacent  cliche  that  "all 
music  was  once  new"  and  that  the  audience  is  "always  about  twenty- 
five  years  in  lag  behind  the  composer"  do  not  take  the  penetrating 
view  of  history  which  would  have  warned  them  that  not  all  good 
music  of  the  past  was  equally  new,  and  that  the  audiences  of 
Haydn,  Mozart,  Beethoven,  and  even  Wagner,  were  not  a  genera- 
tion behind  the  composer.  Haydn,  who  expressed  appreciation  for 
the  tolerance  of  his  benefactor,  experimented  well  within  the  limits 
of  that  tolerance.  The  early  works  of  Beethoven— with  all  the  iso- 
lated points  of  departure  from  tradition  pointed  out  by  contempo- 
rary philistines— bore  a  sufficient  family  resemblance  to  their  musical 
ancestors,  to  which  his  hearers  were  accustomed,  that  his  new 
works  were  anticipated  with  obvious  pleasure.  In  explanation,  it  is 
sometimes  claimed  that  Beethoven  and  Mozart  had  an  "intelligent" 
leisure-class  audience  who  were  educated  in  the  arts.  But  modern 
audiences  also  include  a  large  segment  of  cultivated  and  intelligent 
auditors,  who  are  nevertheless  sufficiently  mystified  by  many  cur- 
rent departures  to  raise  serious  questions. 


394  THE    AMERICAN    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

The  currently  prevailing  myth,  that  great  composers  of  the 
past  were  not  appreciated  in  their  day,  has  its  roots  in  the  fact  that 
the  accepted  manners  of  the  day  are  less  likely  to  be  commented 
upon  in  current  chronicles  than  are  the  departures  therefrom.  If 
this  holds  good  for  aesthetic  criticism,  as  can  be  demonstrated,  one 
can  understand  how  certain  radical  aspects  of  Beethoven,  for  ex- 
ample, received  disproportionate  attention,  and  are  now  exhumed 
and  quoted  while  the  more  conventional  aspects  of  his  compositions 
were  accepted  and  enjoyed  without  much  comment.  To  modernize 
the  illustration,  future  historical  students,  reading  the  torrid  criti- 
cisms of  Franklin  Roosevelt  in  journals  and  periodicals,  will  have 
great  difficulty  in  understanding  how  he  could  have  survived  four 
elections.  News  records  are  simply  not  necessarily  completely  rep- 
resentative of  heterogeneous  public  attitudes. 

Changes  in  musical  taste  cannot  be,  and  actually  have  not  been, 
rushed— as  impatient  conductors  like  Theodore  Thomas  have  been 
exasperatingly  aware.  Even  revolutionary  changes  are  less  rapid 
than  is  usually  implied  in  the  concept,  for  all  these  changes  have 
their  definite  antecedents.  The  fact  that  musical  tastes  change  slowly 
is  consistent  with  the  very  requirements  of  social  life.  Without  a 
certain  degree  of  uniformity  and  continuity  in  norms,  no  pub- 
lishing enterprise,  no  educational  system,  no  critical  standards,  no 
concert  organization— in  fact,  no  common  social  existence  would  be 
possible.  This  fact  confers  on  aesthetic  taste  its  social  nature.  Al- 
though there  is  no  psychological  law  which  would  prevent  the 
development  of  a  perfectly  unique  taste  on  the  part  of  a  hermit-like 
artist,  it  is  a  sociological  impossibility  that  such  a  taste  could  survive 
in  a  social  world.  In  a  collective  world,  only  collective  tastes  can 
qualify  for  survival,  because  the  overhead  in  time,  effort,  and  fi- 
nancial investment  necessary  for  the  implementation  of  a  "taste 
system"  is  so  great  that  only  collective  effort  will  sustain  it. 

Musical  taste  systems  are  further  stabilized  by  having  their  ma- 
terial embodiment  in  huge  financial  investments  in  auditoriums, 
accoutrements  for  professional  training,  pedagogical  institutions, 
printing  of  scores,  manufacture  of  instruments;  and  have  their 
nonmaterial  formulation  in  a  vast  corpus  of  literature,  theory  and 
ideology  which  galvanize  it  into  a  major  institution  resistant  to 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  395 

changes  that  threaten  it  with  extinction.  Under  such  circumstances, 
a  composition  may,  indeed,  possess  an  individuality,  but  its  "unique- 
ness" is  reduced  to  a  mere  variation  of  a  general  norm  which  con- 
stitutes the  basis  of  critical  judgment. 

For  norms  to  exist,  it  is  not  necessary  for  them  to  be  eternal. 
Although  anyone  with  even  a  modicum  of  historical  sense  must 
recognize  the  long-term  inconstancy  of  norms,  nevertheless  they 
are  relatively  stable  over  a  period  of  time,  and  evoke  considerable 
sentimental,  ethical,  and  special-interest  attachments  which  get  cod- 
ified into  legal,  religious,  or  cultural  and  critical  mandates.  This 
holds  for  the  economic  and  political  systems  as  well  as  for  aesthetic 
standards.  In  sociological  language,  these  general  social  norms  are 
called  "folkways."  After  they  have  persisted  for  some  time— as  have 
the  norms  of  family  life,  the  folkways  of  government  and  religion, 
and  the  folkways  of  classic  musical  taste— they  tend  to  sprout  a 
halo  of  uncritical  acceptance,  creating  the  illusion  of  general  and 
absolute  validity  which  condemns  all  deviant  forms  of  behavior  as 
"immoral"  or  "in  poor  taste."  This  predisposition  to  universalize 
the  standards  of  one's  own  culture  is  called,  in  technical  jargon, 
"ethnocentricism." 

Musical  norms  conform  to  these  characteristics  of  social  folk- 
ways. The  norms  are  codified  and  transmitted  from  generation  to 
generation  with  increments  of  change,  but  are  also  subject  to  con- 
siderable sectarian  fervor.  They  are  defended,  not  like  scientific 
truths,  but  rather  by  an  aesthetic  "conscience"  which  may  even 
proselytize  for  what  is  considered  "true"  beauty,  and  declare  J.  S. 
Bach  "universal"  when  he  is  quite  obviously  attached  to  time,  space, 
and  circumstance,  as  is  every  other  mortal,  great  and  small. 

If  the  social  necessity  of  norms  in  general  has  been  demonstrated, 
one  may  still  inquire  how  any  particular  norms,  e.g.,  current  musical 
standards,  arise.  By  far  the  major  portion  of  a  given  musical  taste 
is  culturally  inherited  from  the  past,  as  are  also  the  folkways  in 
religion,  government,  language,  and  other  realms  of  social  affairs. 
Even  scientific  inventions  and  works  of  art  which  are  presumed 
to  be  "new"  consist  of  a  relatively  small  supplement  to  what  has 
already  accumulated  in  the  past.  Ninety  per  cent  of  the  electric 


396  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

light  and  ninety  per  cent  of  Beethoven's  First  Symphony  existed 
before  Edison  and  Beethoven  were  even  born.  In  fact,  so  small  may 
be  this  increment  that  the  transition,  for  example,  between  the 
"London"  Bach  and  Mozart  is  almost  imperceptible  today,  and  the 
Jena  symphony  attributed  to  Beethoven  "could  have  been  written 
by  various  contemporaries."  Beethoven  is  quoted  as  having  told  his 
friend  Ferdinand  Riess  that  "although  I  have  taken  lessons  from 
Haydn,  I  have  learned  nothing  from  him."  Wholly  aside  from  the 
question  of  personal  and  professional  honesty  in  this  comment, 
sociologically  it  is,  of  course,  untenable  that  Beethoven  should  have 
"learned  nothing"  from  Haydn  and  from  all  his  other  numerous 
musical  forebears.  No  artist  is  the  free,  creative  spirit  he  sometimes 
conceives  himself  to  be.  There  obtains  a  "principle  of  continuity" 
in  cultural  as  well  as  biological  heredity  which  suggests  many  dam- 
aging reservations  to  the  "great  man  theory"  which  alleges  that 
"history  is  but  the  lengthened  shadow  of  the  genius."  The  genius  is 
much  more  the  creation  of  history  than  he  is  the  creator  of  it. 
He  is  as  much  the  product  of  previous  ages  as  of  his  own. 

Furthermore,  even  the  new  "creative"  elements  in  music  can 
be  intimately  related  to  the  past  that  links  the  new  with  its  logical 
ancestry.  Such  devices  as  the  multiplication  of  voices,  juxtaposition 
of  old  keys  which  were  formerly  considered  inimical,  omission  of 
modulational  steps  formerly  required,  extension  of  the  vertical  chord 
structure  one  more  interval,  the  abandonment  of  resolutions  of 
dissonant  chords— all  these  formalities  make  "creation"  intellectually 
recognizable  and  comprehensible.  This  is  not  intended  to  detract 
from  the  general  mystery  of  nature  in  general,  or  musical  compo- 
sition in  particular.  But  such  a  formal  catalysis  is  in  effect  the 
grammar  of  music  which,  like  a  language,  is  spoken  with  great 
fervor  and  spontaneity,  but  in  reality  is  the  final  fruition  of  many 
years  of  individual  practice  and  training,  of  frequent  correction, 
and  much  intellectual  planning. 

When  these  social  principles  are  applied  to  the  specific  insti- 
tution of  the  symphony  orchestra  and  its  music,  there  is  still  much 
more  in  the  orchestra  than  meets  the  ear.  Many  of  the  factors  which 
condition  our  tastes  are  quite  external  to  music  itself,  but  neverthe- 
less exert  significant  pressures  on  repertoire  trends. 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  397 

One  of  the  important  factors  limiting  the  performances  of  mu- 
sical works  are  the  inflexible  boundaries  of  the  repertoire;  the  fixed 
number  of  programs  and  the  inevitable  limits  in  playing  time.  Un- 
less the  length  of  the  season  is  increased,  the  adoption  of  a  new 
composition  or  composer  will  inevitably  mean  the  reduction  of 
the  frequency,  or  the  total  abandonment,  of  an  old  one.  Since  music 
cannot  live  without  being  performed,  there  results  a  perennial 
struggle  for  aesthetic  existence  which  is  provisionally  resolved 
every  time  a  program  is  constructed.  Every  composition  will  ulti- 
mately lose  its  rank  in  the  hierarchy  of  aesthetic  survival,  and  every 
work  of  art  may  confidently  look  forward  to  the  probability  of  its 
displacement  by  some  newcomer. 

The  rate  of  this  turnover  is,  of  course,  affected  by  the  rate  of 
production  of  new  compositions,  their  character,  the  virility  of  the 
old  compositions,  and  the  energy  of  the  audience  in  acquiring  new 
tastes.  The  rising  curves  of  Tschaikowsky,  Wagner,  and  Brahms 
approximately  equaled  the  decline  of  Beethoven,  and  new  compo- 
sitions today  are  continuously  edging  one  another  for  entrance  on 
the  lower  levels.  As  compared  to  a  century  ago,  concerts  have  be- 
come more  frequent  and  rehearsal  time  has  been  greatly  extended, 
with  the  consequently  steeper  slope  of  the  learning  curve  of  both 
orchestra  and  audience.  Such  circumstances  are  favorable  to  the 
acceptance  of  new  works,  with  the  result  that  the  repertoire  today 
is  much  more  diversified  than  a  century  ago. 

In  a  strategic  position  to  direct  the  course  of  taste  changes  is,  of 
course,  the  conductor,  whose  prestige  and  authority  seem  to  be 
reflected  in  repertoire  policy.  In  fact,  it  is  a  classic  complaint  that 
the  repertoire  does  not  represent  the  "taste"  of  the  audience,  but 
rather  that  of  the  conductor  who  constructs  the  programs  and 
whose  aesthetic  ideology  determines  his  choices.  With  a  kind  of 
parental  solicitude  he  is  said  to  apportion  the  musical  diet,  not  ac- 
cording to  the  likes  of  the  audience,  but  according  to  what  is 
"good  for  it."  Anyone  familiar  with  the  missionary  career  of  Theo- 
dore Thomas  and  the  pertinacity  of  Gericke,  will  realize  that  many 
a  program  does  anticipate  the  level  to  which  the  conductor  aspires, 
rather  than  the  actual  spontaneous  preferences  of  the  audience. 
For  reasons  that  have  been  set  forth  elsewhere,  such  program  build- 


398  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

ing  was  more  characteristic  of  the  early  twentieth  century  than  of 
the  time  of  Mozart,  Haydn  and  Beethoven. 

However,  there  are  lengths  to  which  even  a  dictator  cannot  go, 
since  there  are  genuine  public  restraints  upon  flouting  social  opinion. 
Therefore,  for  every  severely  classic  Gericke  there  is  an  indulgent 
Max  Fiedler;  and  for  a  stern  Mahler,  there  is  a  popular  Stransky; 
and  even  Theodore  Thomas  interspersed  among  his  symphonies  the 
Strauss  waltzes  and  other  delectable  bits  of  relief.  Even  the  most 
obstinate  conductor  dared  not,  even  if  he  would,  flaunt  his  own 
eccentricities  and  ignore  the  basic  communal  repertoire  that  resides 
in  the  habits  and  expectations  of  the  public. 

The  deterministic  role  of  the  conductor  has  been  grossly  ex- 
aggerated—as have  the  roles  of  all  other  leaders,  political  and  social. 
Regardless  of  who  wields  the  "authority,"  there  is  a  basic  repertoire, 
often  referred  to  facetiously  as  the  "standard  fifty  pieces,"  which  is 
not  fiction  but  reality.7  When  opera-conductor  Seidl,  who  was  inno- 
cent of  the  standard  symphonic  repertoire,  was  injected  into  the 
responsible  position  of  head  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic,  he  lost 
no  time  in  acquiring  the  repertoire  demanded  by  the  musical  mores 
of  the  day.  The  easy  interchange  of  conductors  between  distant 
orchestras— even  internationally— is  both  evidence  and  a  product  of 
this  standardization  of  musical  "parts."  This  cannot  be  said  of  men 
of  the  cloth,  national  officials,  lawyers,  and  pedagogues. 

Where  the  conductor  does  manifest  his  individuality  is  on  the 
periphery  of  the  repertoire,  not  in  its  core.  The  conductor  is  per- 
mitted liberty,  but  not  license.  The  traditional  core  being  taken 
for  granted,  the  conductor  often  indulges  in  tangential  explorations, 
at  which  certain  elements  in  his  heterogeneous  audience  may  take 
offense;  but  which  other  elements  may  applaud.  Like  all  other 
public  servants,  musical  leaders  do  not  meddle  much  with  the  basic 
way  of  life  of  their  time,  although  they  often  attract  dispropor- 
tionate attention  for  the  variety  with  which  it  is  spiced. 

It  should  also  be  remembered  that  a  large  proportion  of  an 
audience  actually  desires  a  program  a  little  above  its  heads.  To  such 
listeners  the  symphony  concert  is  more  than  mere  musical  delight; 
it  is  ritual  and  ceremony  of  which  all  the  social  trappings  and  even 
the  intellectual  affectations  are  a  part.  To  many  patrons,  concerts 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  399 

are  a  fashion  in  which  prestige  of  participation  takes  priority  over 
spontaneous  aesthetic  relaxation.  Concerts  are  often  "bought"  like 
hats— more  for  style  than  beauty.  But  it  is,  nevertheless,  the  taste  of 
that  audience.  There  are  various  types  of  listeners  in  the  heterogene- 
ous audience,  ranging  from  the  lighthearted  to  the  intellectual  and 
studious  extreme  to  whom  every  new  composition  is  a  puzzle  which 
they  delight  in  solving.  It  is  a  semantic  question  whether  this  whole 
range  of  audition  should  be  included  in  the  concept  of  the  aesthetic. 
But  its  diversity  does  go  far  in  explaining  the  variety  of  attitudes 
to  the  items  in  the  repertoire. 

Contemporary  events  usually  leave  visible  traces  on  the  reper- 
toire, which  tend  to  be  as  ephemeral  as  the  events  inciting  them. 
Finland,  in  the  thirties,  was  unique  in  international  annals  in  keeping 
faith  by  repaying  the  installments  on  her  American  war  debts.  For 
the  American  concert  audience,  Sibelius  epitomized  all  that  was 
Finland,  and  their  gratitude  and  curiosity  sought  expression  in  the 
playing  of  his  music,  his  percentage  registering  the  intensity  of 
American  sentiment  for  his  country.  World  War  I,  which  pro- 
pelled the  French  to  unprecedented  heights,  and  tumbled  Strauss 
from  secure  pre-eminence  to  temporary  insignificance,  is  a  long 
story  fully  covered  in  this  history.  It  is  important  to  note,  however, 
that  most  of  these  effects  were  evanescent,  indicating  that  musical 
tastes  are  conditioned  by  more  abiding  factors  than  passing  hysteria, 
however  intense  it  may  seem  at  the  moment. 

The  scientific  and  material  world  has  also  made  its  contribution  to 
the  formation  of  aesthetic  taste,  remote  as  science  and  art  are  popularly 
alleged  to  be.  Certainly,  much  of  the  scientific  activity  is  irrelevant 
to  matters  conventionally  considered  artistic;  however,  in  the  or- 
chestral repertoire  the  science  of  physics  and  acoustics  has  revo- 
lutionized the  repertoire  simply  by  revolutionizing  the  instruments 
on  which  the  repertoires  are  played.  The  old  natural  horns,  with 
their  removable  crooks,  had  become  increasingly  awkward  as  the 
scores  became  more  complex,  demanding  numerous  key  changes 
and  chromatic  passage  work.  The  valves,  of  course,  simplified  the 
execution  of  these  passages  and  made  Wagner  and  Strauss,  to  say 
nothing  of  the  later  moderns,  possible.  The  woodwinds,  the  violin 
(Tourte  bow),  the  piano,  and  all  other  instruments  were  at  various 


400  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

times  the  beneficiaries  of  corresponding  technological  improve- 
ments, with  analogous  evolution  in  the  standards  of  musical  structure 
and  aesthetic  tastes.  It  can  therefore  be  unreservedly  asserted  that 
physical  science  is  an  integral  element  in  the  formation  of  aesthetic 
taste. 

To  these  strictly  musical  applications  of  technology  and  science 
must  be  added  the  equally  important  technical  advances  in  printing, 
architecture,  communication  and  transportation,  without  which 
musical  developments  would  have  remained  sterile.  For,  what  ben- 
efit the  chromatic  creations  of  Wagner  and  Strauss  without  the 
facility  to  print  the  huge  scores,  to  promulgate  them  rapidly  and 
economically  throughout  the  nation  and  beyond  its  borders,  and 
the  acoustical  architectural  setting  to  exploit  them?  It  is  said  that 
the  art  of  printing  made  democracy  possible.  A  similarly  daring 
generalization  may  be  made  about  music;  the  art  of  printing  prob- 
ably exerted  no  less  influence  in  the  creation  and  dissemination  of 
aesthetic  tastes  than  in  the  formation  and  propagation  of  political 
beliefs. 

The  discussion  of  repertoires  ultimately  raises  the  problem  of 
"good"  taste  and  "good"  music.  There  is  no  room  here  for  the 
Olympian  dictum  that  there  are  only  "two  kinds  of  music,  good 
and  bad."  Such  alternatives  do  not  specify  the  concrete  quality  of 
the  music  to  which  these  appellations  are  to  be  applied. 

The  question  of  "what  is  good  music"  is  often  shrugged  off  as 
being  both  impossible  and  unnecessary:  impossible  because  the  inner 
feelings  of  aesthetic  conscience  cannot  be  made  rationally  articu- 
late; and  unnecessary,  because  one  need  only  to  emulate  those 
"qualified"  persons  who  possess  "good"  taste.  However,  the  whole 
foregoing  text  is  a  refutation  of  that  dual  evasion.  If  the  repertoire 
is  the  result  of  individual  choices,  there  should  be  no  objection 
to  an  attempt  to  determine  the  possible  criteria  on  which  these 
choices  are  based. 

The  classification  of  our  innumerable  and  diverse  experiences 
into  the  desirable  and  undesirable,  into  the  good,  which  we  seek 
to  perpetuate,  and  the  bad,  which  we  seek  to  avoid,  is  one  of  the 
most  elementary  human  judgments.  But  it  is  complicated  by  the 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  401 

manifold  use  and  meaning  of  the  concept.  The  concept  of  "good," 
when  applied  to  taste  or  action  of  man,  can  have  only  four  basic 
meanings. 

( 1 )  The  instrumental  or  utilitarian  meaning:  an  action  or  thing 
which  is  good  for  something.  Spinach  may  be  good  as  nutritious 
diet  (but  "I  don't  like  it").  The  study  of  mathematics  may  be  good 
for  your  efficiency,  but  you  may  not  enjoy  the  discipline.  A  Strauss 
waltz  may  have  therapeutic  value  in  hastening  convalescence,  and 
coincidentally  be  quite  thrilling  and  "good"  to  listen  to. 

(2)  Personal  pleasure,  as  an  aesthetic  end  in  itself:  an  article  of 
food  may  be  consumed,  a  piece  of  music  may  be  listened  to,  with 
utter  delight,  without  any  ulterior  thought  of  health  or  prestige 
for  having  listened  to  it.  It  will  earn  from  the  consumer  the  pro- 
nouncement of  "good"  when  he  probably  should  proclaim  more 
accurately,  "I  find  it  good,"  "I  like  it,"  "it  gives  me  pleasure." 
He  may  experience  such  profound  satisfaction  that  it  will  be  diffi- 
cult for  him  to  realize  that  many  another  person  may  experience 
other  and  contrary  reactions.  However,  this  propensity  to  uni- 
versalize and  to  dogmatize  concerning  beliefs  and  tastes  that  are 
intensely  felt  is  a  common  phenomenon  and  results  in  attempts  to 
impose  on  others  our  religious,  political,  and  aesthetic  beliefs 
whether  or  not  they  are  appropriate.  It  emanates  from  a  psycho- 
logical myopia,  which  renders  nothing  more  convincing  than  our 
own  inner  experiences  and  beliefs. 

(3)  Conformity  to  an  established  social  norm:  moral  behavior, 
styles  of  dress,  and  certain  art  forms  are  labeled  "good"  when  they 
conform  to  certain  pre-established  standards  or  norms.  These  norms 
usually  reside  in  certain  authoritarian  sources,  such  as  historical  and 
critical  documents,  in  tradition,  or  in  the  behavior  or  tastes  of  a 
social  class.  Thus,  monogamy  is  undoubtedly  "good,"  though  many 
enjoy  violating  it  at  times.  A  new  hat  may  be  in  "good"  style  pre- 
scribed for  the  season— "that's  what  they  are  wearing"— though  "it 
is  not  becoming  to  me."  The  concert  patron  who  lacks  confidence 
in  his  own  judgment  may  say:  "I  suppose  it  is  good  music,  but  I 
don't  like  it."  These  well-established  technical  and  aesthetic  stand- 
ards, representing  as  they  do  the  composite  judgments  of  large 
groups  over  long  periods  of  time,  carry  the  weighty  sanction  of 


402  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

tradition,  and  are  therefore  considered  more  valid  than  any  indi- 
vidual judgment.  The  individual  does  not  readily  pit  his  momentary 
opinion  against  the  judgment  of  time.  These  norms  are  received 
in  the  social  heritage,  give  great  intellectual  security,  and  deserve 
the  laudatory  title  of  "good."  They  promote  social  solidarity,  per- 
mit predictability,  while  social  customs  undergo  their  slow  changes 
on  the  experimental  growing  edges. 

(4)  Related  to  the  definition  of  the  social  norm,  but  differing 
in  its  sanction,  is  the  criterion  of  Truth  or  Goodness  which  is  pre- 
sumably independent  of  any  human  being's  belief  or  judgment. 
This  metaphysical  notion,  characteristic  of  the  romantic  doctrines 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  posits  a  Truth  which  resides  in  cosmic 
nature,  inherent  in  the  Universe,  which  finally  gains  acceptance 
through  the  agency  of  the  clairvoyant  leaders  who  possess  the 
genius  to  translate  it  into  mundane  objects  of  art.  This  doctrine 
makes  of  the  musician  a  kind  of  priest  who  interprets  by  inspira- 
tional and  intuitive  means,  Truth  and  Beauty.  This  makes  of 
Beauty  an  objective  entity  rather  than  a  subjective  human  judgment. 
When  fervently  believed  in,  it  confers  on  an  artist  and  his  inter- 
preter a  sense  of  self-confidence  attained  by  no  other  means.  It  is 
a  widespread  dogma  which,  though  not  always  articulately  ex- 
plained, lies  at  the  root  of  many  aesthetic  pronouncements  among 
pedagogues  as  well  as  laymen. 

These  familiar  dilemmas  testify  to  the  necessity  of  coming  to 
grips  with  the  semantic  implications  of  our  terms.  If  "good"  music 
is  a  social  norm,  and  "taste,"  which  approves  it,  is  a  more  or  less 
enduring  and  definable  pattern  of  preferences  under  given  con- 
ditions, then  "good  taste"  will  fluctuate  and  be  subject  to  all  the 
laws  of  social  folkways.  This  definition  conforms  to  all  the  ob- 
servations which  have  been  made  throughout  this  work.  But  taste 
is  never  pure.  It  is  a  pluralistic  phenomenon  compounded  of  various 
ingredients  which  consist  not  only  of  spontaneous  pleasure,  but 
also  of  the  overtones  of  fashion  and  prestige  and  technical  erudition 
that  emanate  from  the  leaders.  Conductors,  musicians,  and  other 
members  of  the  elite  make  the  decisions  for  the  public,  very  much 
as  do  the  leaders  in  politics  and  public  opinion.  The  norm  may 
therefore  be  strengthened  by  the  authority  of  a  group  which  prac- 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  403 

tices  it,  by  a  social  ideology  which  sanctions  it,  and  by  the  fervor 
with  which  it  is  promulgated.  On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  weak- 
ened by  competing  groups,  who  are,  for  various  reasons,  opposed  to 
the  conventional  norms,  and  seek  to  replace  the  "embalmed  classics" 
with  a  modern  style. 

Ultimately,  the  established  taste  is  a  grand  cooperative  enter- 
prise between  the  external  physical  object— which  is  neutral— and 
the  audiences  who  endow  it  with  "beauty,"  and  who  have  been 
conditioned  by  their  past  experiences,  their  ethics  and  religion,  the 
physical  environment  and  the  innumerable  factors  which  impinge 
upon  their  lives  and  determine  their  choices.  It  would  be  more 
precise,  therefore,  to  discard  the  "truism"  that  "good  music  sur- 
vives," and  to  substitute  the  more  realistic  view  that  music  which, 
through  various  social,  material,  and  psychological  circumstances 
survives,  and  which  contains  features  that  society  values,  is  adjudged 
and  labeled  aesthetically  "good."  Sometimes  this  judgment  is  held 
in  abeyance  for  years,  while  these  forces  are  doing  their  work. 

The  goodness  or  beauty  of  an  object  is  therefore  a  superimposed 
quality  with  which  an  observer,  according  to  his  system  of  values, 
endows  an  object.  If  he  confers  beauty  on  an  object,  he  also  with- 
draws it  after  it  has  been  conferred,  or  withholds  indefinitely  such 
a  distinction. 

This  system  of  aesthetic  theory,  often  denominated  "subjectiv- 
ism," may  be  variously  criticised,  but  it  appears  to  many  to  be 
most  vulnerable  because  of  its  supposed  nihilism  in  standards.  If 
one  can  never  assert,  so  runs  the  charge,  that  "this  is  beautiful," 
but  is  permitted  to  admit  only  that  "it  is  beautiful  to  me,"  one  must 
conclude  that  every  man  is  his  own  critic,  and  every  criticism  is 
cosmically  as  valid  as  any  other.  This  would,  in  the  end,  lead  to 
rampant  individualism,  a  negation  of  all  standards,  with  the  dis- 
quieting result  that  all  aesthetics  would  flounder  in  a  morass  of 
solipsisms.  If  the  common  denominator  between  all  good  music  is 
only  that  it  is  "thought"  good,  that  "there  is  nothing  good  or  bad 
but  thinking  makes  it  so,"  it  would  necessarily  wipe  out  all  genuine 
distinctions  between  "good"  and  "bad"  and  right  and  wrong, 
thereby  making  all  judgments  meaningless.  It  would  deny  the 
validity  of  a  procedure  which  mankind  has  always  followed. 


404  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  "confusion"  of  voices  which  the  above 
argument  deplores  does,  to  a  certain  extent,  exist.  Historically,  it  is 
simply  true  that  aesthetic  preferences  do  differ,  not  only  between 
epochs  and  between  national  cultures,  but  also  between  classes  and 
groups  in  the  same  society.  There  is  even  a  great  diversity  between 
the  art  objects  that  are  enjoyed  by  a  tolerably  versatile  and  experi- 
enced individual  patron. 

In  spite  of  this,  there  is  no  end  to  the  search  for  objective 
criteria  of  good  music  which  would  be  compelling  on  all  rational 
beings.  In  a  strictly  technical  sense,  there  may  be  moderate  con- 
sensus on  this  question.  Probably  most  musicians  would  agree  on 
certain  standards  of  workmanship,  clean  handling  of  instrumenta- 
tion, and  many  other  processes.  But  fine  workmanship  is  not  inev- 
itably translated  into  an  aesthetic  thrill.  The  sons  of  Sebastian  Bach, 
the  detractors  of  Stokowski's  transcriptions,  the  critics  of  "atonal- 
ism,"  the  auditors  who  hold  themselves  aloof  from  the  flamboyant 
Wagner— all  are  the  final  refutation  of  a  presumed  identity  between 
an  objective  description  of  an  art  object  and  the  thrill  of  the  listener. 
Technically,  such  music  is  "good";  aesthetically  it  is  "bad"  to  many 
listeners. 

Consonant  with  these  changing  conceptions,  the  function  of  the 
musical  critic  has  undergone  a  metamorphosis.  The  days  of  Hans- 
lick  and  Krehbiel  are  past,  when  critics  were  considered  pontifical 
authorities  on  the  elusive  questions  of  beauty  and  ugliness  in  musical 
ethics.  Today,  most  of  them  eschew  the  function  of  keeper  of 
musical  conscience.  They  would  rather  express  their  aesthetic  re- 
actions not  as  final  absolutes— an  infirmity  from  which  they  have 
been  cured— but  as  stimulants  to  public  imagination,  aids  in  appreci- 
ating the  contents  of  the  musical  work.  They  have  become  tech- 
nical specialists  in  the  instruction  of  their  readers.  Like  lawyers, 
they  serve  to  bridge  the  gap  between  the  expanding  complexity 
of  their  field  and  the  preoccupied  layman  who  seeks  guidance 
and  self-assurance  in  an  aesthetic  labyrinth.  This  work  as  liaison 
agents  will  never  be  complete,  for  there  is  no  final  consummation 
in  the  social  process.  Society  is  in  a  constantly  evolving  state  in 


Musical  Taste  and  How  It  Is  Formed  405 

which  the  standards  of  the  true,  the  beautiful,  and  the  just  are  con- 
stantly being  refashioned  in  the  context  of  the  times. 

Today  most  theorists  are  reconciled  to  an  indeterminate  pro- 
longation of  the  unstable  equilibrium  in  social,  aesthetic,  and  other 
relations.  Many  aestheticians  have  sought  for  the  relative  certainty 
of  laboratory  science.  But  the  mutability  of  standards  is  shared  with 
all  other  social  fields  where  social  judgment  is  an  issue.  If  aes- 
theticians feel  the  need,  they  may  seek  consolation  by  stealing  a 
glance  at  the  field  of  law,  where  judgments  of  justice  and  their 
rationalizations  constitute  the  essential  content.  Judge  Benjamin 
Cardozo,  for  some  years  on  the  United  States  Supreme  Court, 
affirmed  his  own  sense  of  insecurity  in  delivering  his  critical 
opinions. 

We  live  in  a  world  of  change.  If  a  body  of  law  were  in  existence 
adequate  for  the  civilization  of  the  day,  it  could  not  meet  the  demands 
of  the  civilization  of  tomorrow.  Society  is  inconstant.  So  long  as  it  is 
inconstant,  and  to  the  extent  of  such  inconstancy,  there  can  be  no 
constancy  in  law.8 

No  legal  scholar  conceives  of  this  admission  of  human  fallibility 
as  undermining  the  validity  of  his  legal  decisions,  or  ruining  the 
usefulness  of  his  profession.  This  is  not  a  helpless  and  futile  sub- 
jectivism. On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  constructive  view  which  renders 
the  fluctuations  of  history  credible  and  makes  peace  with  reality. 


NOTES 


INTRODUCTION 

i  Harold  C.  Schonberg:  "A  Half  Century  of  Orchestral  Recordings," 
Musical  Courier,  December  i,  1945. 

2  E.  G.  Sonneck:  Early  Concert  Life  in  America.  (Leipzig:  Breitkopf 

and  Haertel,  1907.) 

3  H.   Earle  Johnson:    Musical  Interludes  in  Boston.    (New  York: 

Columbia  University  Press,  1943.) 

CHAPTER  ONE 

1  Robert  Schumann:  "A  Retrospective  View  of  Musical  Life  in  Leip- 

zig, Winter,  1837-38";  in  Music  and  Musicians  (translated  by  F. 
Ritter).  (London:  W.  Reeves,  1880)  Vol.  I,  p.  380. 

2  Eduard  Hanslick:  Geschichte  des  Concertwesens  in  Wien.  (Vienna: 

1869.) 
John  H.  Mee:  The  Oldest  Music  Room  in  Europe.  (London:  John 

Lane,  191 1.) 
Myles  Birket  Foster:  The  History  of  the  Philharmonic  Society  of 

London,  1813-1912.  (London:  John  Lane,  1912.) 
Reginald  Nettel:   The  Orchestra  in  England.  (London:  Jonathan 

Cape,  1946.) 
Alfred  Dorffel:   Geschichte  der  Gewandhausconzerte  zu  Leipzig, 

1781-1881.  (Leipzig,  1884.) 
A.  Elwart:  Histoire  de  la  Societe  des  Concerts  du  Conservatoire 

Imperial  de  Musique.  (2d.  ed.;  Paris,  1864.) 
H.  M.  Schletterer:  Johann  Friedrich  Reichhardt,  Sein  Leben  und 

Seine  Musikalische  Thdtigkeit.  (Leipzig,  1879.) 
George  Dyson:  The  Progress  of  Music.  (London:  Oxford  Univer- 
sity Press,  1932.) 

3  Percy  Scholes:  The  Great  Doctor  Burney.  (London:  Oxford  Uni- 

versity Press,  1948),  pp.  1 18-129. 
Ibid.,  The  Mirror  of  Music.  (London:  Novello  &  Co.,  1949),  Vol.  I, 
pp.  144-147. 

4  Some  of  the  sources  of  information  on  playing  time  were  the  fol- 

lowing: 
406 


Notes  407 

Catalogue  of  Edivin  Fleischer  Private  Collection  of  Orchestral 
Music:  Philadelphia  Free  Library,  Philadelphia. 
Encyclopedia  of  Recorded  Music.  (New  York:  Crown  Publish- 
ers, 1948.) 
Claire  Reis:   Composers  in  America.  (New  York:  Macmillan 

Co.,  1947.) 
T.  C.  York:  Hoiv  Long  Do  They  Play?  (London:  Oxford  Uni- 
versity Press,  1929.) 


CHAPTER  TWO 

1  John  H.  Mee:  op.  cit.,  pp.  30-32. 

2  Charles  Francis  Adams  (ed.):  Letters  from  John  Adams,  Addressed 

to  his  Wife.  (Boston:  C.  C.  Little  and  J.  Brown,  1841),  Vol.  II, 
pp.  67-68. 

3  Albert  TenEyk  Gardner:  Yankee  Stonecutters,  the  First  American 

School  of  Sculpture,  1800-1850.  (New  York:  Columbia  University 
Press,  1945.) 
James  Thomas  Flexner:  America's  Old  Masters,  First  Artists  of  the 
Neiv  World.  (New  York:  Viking  Press,  1939.) 

4  Sonneck:  op.  cit.,  p.  6$. 

5  United  States  Bureau  of  Census:  A  Century  of  Population  Growth 

in  the  United  States,  1790-1900.  (Washington,  D.  C,  1909),  p.  12. 

6  Alma  M.  Mahler  (ed.):  Gustav  Mahler  Brief e,  1879-1911.  (Berlin, 

1924.) 

7  Eduard   Hanslick:    Aus  dem   Tagebuch  eines  Musikers.    (Berlin: 

1892),  p.  58. 

8  Ottmar  Schreiber:   Or  Chester  und  Orchesterpraxis  ztuischen  1780 

und  1850.  (Berlin,  1938),  pp.  248-249. 

9  Boston  Musical  Herald,  August,  1881,  p.  189. 

10  Ernest  Newman  (ed.):  Memoirs  of  Hector  Berlioz.  (New  York: 

Alfred  A.  Knopf,  1932),  p.  197. 

11  For  the  stories  of  the  British  orchestras  see: 

Reginald  Nettel:  op.  cit. 

Adam  Carse:  The  Orchestra  from  Beethoven  to  Berlioz.  (Cam- 
bridge: W.  Heffer,  1948.) 
Robert  Elkin:  Royal  Philharmonic.  (London:  Rider  &  Co.,  1946.) 
Robert  Elkin:  Queen's  Hall.  (London:  Rider  &  Co.,  1944.) 

12  Alfred  Oliver:  The  Encyclopedists  as  Critics  of  Music.  (New  York: 

Columbia  University  Press,  1947.) 


408  THE    AMERICAN    SYMPHONY    ORCHESTRA 

1 3  Ernest  Newman:  op.  cit.,  p.  76. 

14  Charles  Burney:  A  General  History  of  Music.  (New  York:  Har- 

court,  Brace  &  Co.,  1935),  Vol.  II,  p.  955. 

15  Thomas  Busby:  A  Complete  Dictionary  of  Music.  (3d  ed.;  London: 

G.  &  W.  B.  Whittaker,  18 19.) 

16  Charles  Burney:  The  Present  State  of  Music  in  Germany.  (London: 

T.  Becket  &  Co.,  1773),  pp.  vi-vii. 

17  George  Upton  (ed.):  Theodore  Thomas.  (Chicago:  A.  C.  McClurg 

&  Co.,  1905),  Vol.  I,  pp.  265  ff. 

18  "Report  of  St.  Louis  Correspondent."  Musical  Courier,  April  3, 

1895,  p.  31. 

19  Upton:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  I,  frontispiece. 

20  Robert  Schumann:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  I,  p.  394. 

21  Musical  Courier,  April  29,  1891.  Address  by  Theodore  Thomas,  on 

his  departure  from  New  York  for  Chicago.  Reports  on  Bergmann 
do  not  always  agree.  See  Upton,  op.  cit.  Vol.  I,  p.  36. 

22  Charles  E.  Russell:  The  American  Orchestra  and  Theodore  Thomas. 

(Garden  City:  Doubleday,  Page  &  Co.,  1927.) 

23  H.  E.  Krehbiel:  The  Philharmonic  Society  of  New  York.  (New 

York:  Novello,  Ewer  &  Co.,  1892),  p.  7. 

CHAPTER  THREE 

i  For  histories  of  the  Philharmonic-Symphony  Society  see: 

James  G.  Huneker:  The  Philharmonic  Society  of  New  York— 

A  Retrospect.  (New  York:  Privately  printed,  191 7.) 
Henry  Krehbiel:    The  Philharmonic  Society   of  New  York. 

(New  York  and  London:  Novello,  Ewer,  1892.) 
John  Erskine:   The  Philharmonic-Symphony  Society  of  New 

York:  Its  First  Hundred  Years.  (New  York:  Macmillan  Co., 

!943-) 

2  Miles  Birket  Foster:  op.  cit.,  p.  4. 

3  Eduard  Hanslick:  Das  Conzertwesen  in  Wien,  pp.  316-317. 

4  John  Erskine:  op.  cit.,  p.  2.  Quoted  by  permission. 

5  R.  Osgood  Mason:  Sketches  and  Impressions,  Musical,  Theatrical 

and  Social.  (New  York  and  London:  G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons,  1887), 
pp.  169-170. 

6  In  Europe  it  was  generally  the  opera  which  was  supported  by  the 

State,  although  some  orchestras  received   small  subventions  at 
times. 


Notes  409 

7  Henry  E.  Krehbiel:  op.  cit.,  p.  41. 

8  Ibid.,  p.  85. 

9  Ethel  Rose  Peyser:   The  House  that  Music  Built— Carnegie  Hall. 

(New  York:  Robert  M.  McBride  &  Co.,  1936.) 

10  Musical  Courier,  August,  1910. 

1 1  For  a  gossipy  but  revealing  account  of  the  old  Symphony  Society, 

see  Winthrop  Sargeant:  Geniuses,  Goddesses  and  People.  (New 
York:  E.  P.  Dutton  &  Co.,  1949),  pp.  63  ff. 

12  Andrea  Delia  Corte:  Toscanini  (translated  into  French  by  A.  Jacque- 

mard).  (Lausanne,  1947.) 

13  "Symphony  Finance,"  Fortune,  March,  1935,  pp.  78  ff. 

14  In  191 6  he  resigned  his  position  in  Italy  because  the  audience  remon- 

strated against  Wagner.  He  was  succeeded  by  Molinari.  In  193 1  he 
was  attacked  by  Fascisti  in  Bologna  and  physically  injured.  On 
April  1,  1933,  his  signature  headed  a  protest  to  Hitler  in  behalf 
of  the  persecuted  musicians.  In  June  he  declined  to  conduct  in 
Bayreuth  because  of  the  "lamentable  events  which  have  wounded 
my  feelings  both  as  man  and  artist." 

15  Musical  Courier,  December  25,  1934. 

16  As  is,  of  course,  known,  Toscanini  returned  to  the  United  States  in 

1937  in  response  to  an  invitation  of  NBC,  which  organized  an 
orchestra  expressly  for  broadcasting  purposes.  There  was  some 
apprehension  that  his  broadcasts  would  interfere  with  the  Phil- 
harmonic series.  In  deference  to  that  fear,  the  NBC  concerts  were 
scheduled  at  first  for  Saturday  nights,  until  distant  cities  with  Sat- 
urday night  subscription  concerts  protested. 

1 7  After  de-Nazification  proceedings,  Furtwangler  was  officially  cleared 

of  collaboration.  For  a  report  of  the  earlier  history  see:  Berta  Geiss- 
mar:  Two  Worlds  of  Music.  (New  York:  Creative  Age  Press, 
1946.) 

18  Musical  Courier,  May  29,  1937. 

19  Madeleine  Goss:  Bolero— The  Life  of  Maurice  Ravel.  (New  York: 

Tudor  Publishing  Co.,  1945.) 
See  also  Howard  Taubmann:  The  Maestro.  (New  York:  Simon  and 
Schuster,  195 1),  pp.  177-178. 

20  Walter  Damrosch:  My  Musical  Life.  (New  York:  Charles  Scribner's 

Sons,  1923),  p.  22. 

21  Musical  Record,  Boston,  April  9,  1881. 

See  also:  Musical  Courier,  May  30,  1894,  p.  32. 


4IO  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Edwin  T.  Rice:  "Personal  Recollections  of  Leopold  Damrosch." 
Musical  Quarterly,  Vol.  28  (1942),  pp.  269-275. 

22  Musical  Courier,  March  24,  1927. 

23  M.  A.  DeWolfe  Howe:  The  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra,  1881- 

1931.  (Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin  Co.,  193 1 ),  p.  16. 

24  Many  of  these  data  are  culled  from  the  pages  of  Dwighfs  Journal  of 

Music. 

25  Musical  Record,  October  29,  1881. 

26  The  "fate"  theme  was  frequently  taken  in  slower  tempo  if  the  state- 

ment of  the  music  critic  of  Watson's  Art  Journal,  March  12,  1870, 
is  to  be  believed. 

27  Musical  Courier,  January  20,  1892  and  October  29,    1902. 
Ibid.,  March  8,  1893. 

28  Musical  Courier,  September  8,  1897. 

29  Musical  Courier,  December  29,  1898  and  April  30,  1902. 

30  Musical  Courier,  January  10,  1900,  p.  5. 

31  H.  E.  Krehbiel:  Review  of  New  York  Seasons,  1889-1890.   (New 

York  and  London:  Novello,  Ewer  &  Co.,  1890),  pp.  61-66. 

32  Musical  Record,  November,  1890. 

33  Felix  Weingartner:  On  Conducting  (translated  by  Ernest  Newman). 

(Leipzig,  1925.) 

34  Musical  Courier,  January  8,  1908. 

35  Ferdinand  Pfohl:  Artur  Nikisch.  (Hamburg,  1925.) 

36  Boston  Herald,  February  17,  1927. 

37  Musical  America,  May  12,  1917. 

38  Walter  Damrosch:  op.  cit.,  pp.  337  ff. 
M.  A.  DeWolfe  Howe:  op.  cit. 

Olga  Samaroff :  An  Americayi  Musician's  Diary.  (New  York:  W.  W. 

Norton  &  Co.,  1939),  pp.  139  ff- 
Irving   Lowens:    "L' Affaire    Muck,    A    Study    in   War    Hysteria, 

191 7-18."  Musicology,  Vol.  I,  No.  3. 
Nicholas  Slonimsky:  Music  Since  1900.  (New  York:  W.  W.  Norton, 

1938.)  Assorted  dates  in  1918. 

39  Hugo  Leichtentritt:  Serge  Koussevitzky:  the  Boston  Symphony  Or- 

chestra and  the  New  American  Music.   (Cambridge:   Harvard 

University  Press,  1946.) 
Arthur  Lourie:  Serge  Koussevitzky  and  His  Epoch  (translated  by 

S.  W.  Pring).  (New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf,  193 1.) 
Moses  Smith:  Koussevitzky.  (New  York:  Allen,  Towne,  and  Heath, 

19470 


Notes  411 

H.  Earle  Johnson:  Symphony  Hall.  (Boston:  Little,  Brown  &  Co., 
1950.) 

40  Boston  Herald,  April  24,  1949. 

41  Quoted  in  Geo.  W.  Cooke:  John  Sullivan  Dwight,  A  Biography. 

(Boston:  Small,  Maynard  Co.,  1898),  p.  227. 

42  North  Philadelphia  Musical  Journal,  December,  1887. 

43  Musical  Record,  July,  1887,  p.  4. 

44  Following  are  the  principal  works  on  the  life  and  work  of  Theodore 

Thomas: 

George  P.  Upton:  Musical  Me?nories.  (Chicago:  A.  C.  McClurg 
&  Co.,  1908.) 

George  P.  Upton  (ed.):  Theodore  Thomas.  2  vols.  (Chicago: 
McClurg,  1905.) 

Rose  Fay  Thomas:  Memoirs  of  Theodore  Thomas.  (New  York: 
Moffat,  Yard  &  Co.,  1911.) 

Charles  E.  Russell:  The  American  Orchestra  and  Theodore 
Thomas.  (Garden  City:  Doubleday,  Page  &  Co.,  1927.) 

Philo  A.  Otis:  The  Chicago  Symphony  Orchestra;  its  Organ- 
ization, Growth  and  Develop?nent.  (Chicago:  Clayton  F. 
Summy,  1924.) 

45  Musical  Courier,  December  21,  1904,  p.  21. 

46  Upton:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  1,  Appendix. 

47  Henry  E.  Krehbiel:  Review  of  New  York  Seaso?is,  1886-87.  (New 

York:  Novello,  Ewer  &  Co.,  1887.) 

48  Boston  Musical  Herald,  June,  1880,  p.  141. 

49  Dwighfs  Journal  of  Music,  February  15,  1879. 

50  Antoine  Ysaye  and  Bertram  Ratcliffe:  Ysaye,  His  Life  and  Work. 

(London:  Heinemann,  1947.) 

51  R.  F.  Eyer:  "America's  Notable  Orchestras."  Musical  America,  Janu- 

ary 24,  1937. 
For  other  histories  of  the  Philadelphia  orchestra  see: 

Robert  A.  Gerson:  Music  in  Philadelphia.  (Philadelphia:  Uni- 
versity of  Pennsylvania,  1940.) 

Frances  A.  Wister:  Twenty-Five  Years  of  the  Philadelphia 
Orchestra,  1900-1925.  (Philadelphia,  1925.) 

R.  L.  F.  McCombs:  The  Philadelphia  Orchestra.  (Philadelphia: 
Philadelphia  Orchestra  Association,  1947.) 

The  Philadelphia  Orchestra,  Fiftieth  Anniversary  Season,  1900- 
1950.  (Philadelphia,  1950.) 


412  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

52  Philadelphia  correspondent  in  Willis  Musical  World  and  Times, 

February  18,  1854. 

53  The  Musical  Fund  Society,  Charter  and  By-Laws.  (Philadelphia, 

1930.) 
L.  C.  Madeira  and  Philip  Goepp:  The  Musical  Fund  Society.  (Phila- 
delphia: J.  B.  Lippincott  Co.,  1896.) 

54  Edward  Bole:  The  Americanization  of  Edward  Bok.  (New  York: 

Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  1924),  Chapter  32. 

55  Philadelphia  Orchestra  Association,  Fiftieth  Anniversary  Season, 

p.  14. 

56  Musical  Courier,  March  30,  1916. 

57  Frances  Wister:  op.  cit. 

58  Philadelphia  Orchestra  Association,  Fiftieth  Anniversary  Season, 

p.  32. 

59  McCombs:  op.  cit. 

Musical  Courier,  March  25,  1933. 

60  Musical  America,  October  25,  1929. 

61  Musical  Courier,  November  8,  1930. 

62  Musical  America,  January  8,  1927. 

63  Fortune  (Magazine),  March,  1935,  pp.  81  ff. 

64  Ralph  Hill  (ed.):  Music  1950.  (Harmondsworth,  Middlesex:  Pen- 

guin Books,  1950),  p.  18. 
6s  See:  Ernst  C.  Krohn:  "The  Development  of  the  Symphony  Orches- 
tra in  St.  Louis:  An  historical  sketch,"  Proceedings,  Music  Teach- 
ers National  Association,  1924. 

66  The  propriety  of  dating  the  founding  of  the  symphony  orchestra  to 

the  date  of  the  founding  of  the  St.  Louis  Choral  Society  (1880)  is 
questionable.  The  orchestral  repertoire  in  the  present  study  dates 
to  1907,  which  some  of  the  early  programs  after  1907  refer  to  as 
the  "new  series." 

67  Leonora  Wood  Armsby:  "The  San  Francisco  Symphony  Orchestra: 

First  Decade."  California  Historical  Society  Quarterly,  Vol.  XXV, 
No.  3,  September,  1946,  pp.  229-254. 

68  Adella  Prentiss  Hughes:  Music  is  My  Life.  (Cleveland:  World  Pub- 

lishing Co.,  1947.) 

69  Caroline  Estes  Smith:  The  Philharmonic  Orchestra  of  Los  Angeles; 

the  First  Decade,  1919-1929.  (Los  Angeles:  Privately  printed,  1930.) 

70  Isabelle  Morse  Jones:  Hollywood  Bowl.  (New  York:  G.  Schirmer, 

!936),  PP-  39  and  67- 

71  Ibid.,  p.  5. 


Notes  413 

72  Martha  F.  Bellinger:  "Music  in  Indianapolis,"  Indiana  Magazine  of 

History,  December,  1945,  pp.  345-364;  March,  1946,  pp.  47-65. 

73  A  Short  History  of  the  National  Symphony  Orchestra.  (Washing- 

ton, D.  C:  Privately  printed,  1949.) 
Hans  Kindler's  Programs  with  the  National  Symphony  Orchestra. 
(Washington,  D.  C:  Privately  printed,  1950.) 

CHAPTER  FOUR 

i  Otto  Kinkeldey:   "Beginning  of  Beethoven  in  America,"  Musical 
Quarterly,  April,  1927,  pp.  217  ff. 

2  Eric  Blom:  A  Musical  Postbag.  (London:  J.  M.  Dent,  1941),  p.  22. 

3  Quoted  in  Musical  Courier,  December  9,  1891. 

4  Quoted  in  Rose  Fay  Thomas,  op.  cit.,  p.  79. 

See  also  Henry  T.  Finck:  Richard  Wagner  and  His  Works.  (New 
York:  Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  1907),  Vol.  I,  pp.  267-268. 

5  Henry  T.  Finck:  Chopin  and  Other  Essays.  (New  York:  Charles 

Scribner's  Sons,  1910),  p.  256. 

6  Charles  Edward  Russell:  op.  cit.,  pp.  98  ff. 
Rose  Fay  Thomas:  op.  cit.,  pp.  111-117. 

Henry  T.  Finck:  Richard  Wagner  and  His  Works.  (New  York: 

Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  1907),  Vol.  II,  p.  509. 
Ernest  Newman:  Life  of  Richard  Wagner.  (New  York:  Alfred  A. 

Knopf,  1941),  Vol.  IV,  pp.  475,  542. 

7  Paul  Henry  Lang:  "Background  Music  for  Mein  Kampf."  Saturday 

Review  of  Literature,  January  20,  1945. 

8  Leon  Stein:  The  Racial  Thinking  of  Richard  Wagner.  (New  York: 

Philosophical  Library,  1950.) 
Friedelind  Wagner  and  Page  Cooper:  Heritage  of  Fire.  (New  York: 
Harper  and  Brothers,  1945),  pp.  xiiff. 

9  John  H.  Mueller  and  Kate   Hevner:    Trends  in  Musical  Taste. 

(Bloomington:  Indiana  University  Publications,  1942),  p.  85. 

10  Eduard  Devrient:  My  Recollections  of  Felix  Mendelssohn  (trans- 

lated by  Natalia  Macfarren).  (London:  R.  Bentley,  1869),  p.  ^6. 

11  Gerhard  Herz:  /.  S.  Bach  im  Zeitalter  des  Rationalismus  und  der 

Friihromantik.  (Leipzig,  1936.) 

12  Friedrich  Blume:  Two  Centuries  of  Bach,  An  Account  of  Changing 

Taste  (translated  by  Stanley  Godman).  (London:  Oxford  Uni- 
versity Press,  1950.) 
N.  Forkel:  Uber  J.  S.  BacWs  Leben,  Kunst  und  Kunstwerke  (trans- 
lated by  C.  S.  Terry).  (London:  1920.) 


414  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

E.  Rebling:  Die  Soziologischen  Grundlagen  der  Stilverwandlung 
der  Musik  in  Deutschland  um  die  mitte  des  18  Jahrhunderts. 
(Saalfeld,  1935.) 

13  Ernest  Newman  (ed.):  Memoirs  of  Hector  Berlioz.  (New  York: 

Alfred  A.  Knopf,  1932),  p.  324. 

14  Musical  Courier,  January  31,  1894,  p.  7. 

15  Bruno  Walter:    Theme  and   Variations.   (New  York:    Alfred  A. 

Knopf,  1946),  p.  227.  (London:  Hamish  Hamilton  Ltd.) 

16  Ludwig  Geiger:  Briefwechsel  zivischen  Goethe  und  "Lelter.  (Leip- 

zig, 1902),  Vol.  II,  Letters  of  April  5,  April  21,  June  9,  1827. 

17  Upton:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  I,  p.  212. 

18  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  107. 

19  Musical  America,  March  17,  191 7. 

20  Ibid.,  November  11,  1916. 

21  The  Schoenberg  school  protests  the  label  of  "atonality,"  but  it  is  still 

the  most  common  designation.  See  Rene  Leibowitz:  Schoenberg 
and  his  School.  (New  York:  Philosophical  Library,  1950),  p.  74. 

CHAPTER  FIVE 

i  Musical  A?nerica,  May  5,  191 7. 

2  Musical  America,  October  27,  1917. 

3  Willis  Musical  World  and  Times,  March  4,  1854. 

See  also:  John  Tasker  Howard:  Our  American  Music.  (New  York: 
Thomas  Y.  Crowell  Co.,  1946.) 

4  Willis  Musical  World  and  Times,  February  18,  1854;  February  19, 

1853. 

5  United  States  Bureau  of  the  Census:  Census  of  1850,  p.  c. 

6  Aaron  Copland:  Our  New  Music.  (New  York:  Whittlesey  House, 

i94i),pp.  132-134. 

7  Daniel  Gregory  Mason:  Tune  in  America.  (New  York:  Alfred  A. 

Knopf,  193 1 ),  pp.  43-45. 
Douglas  Moore:  "The  Cause  of  Native  Music."  Saturday  Review  of 
Literature,  January  25,  1947,  pp.  24  ff. 

8  The  American  Music  Council  classifies  composers  as  native-born; 

foreign-born,  living  in  the  United  States;  and  naturalized  com- 
posers. 

9  Upton:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  II,  pp.  283,  286. 

CHAPTER  SIX 

1  Emily  Anderson  (tr.  and  ed.):  Mozart's  Letters.  (London:  Macmil- 


Notes  415 

Ian  &  Co.,  1938),  Letters  of  January  14,  1878;  November  1,  1777; 
September  26,  1781. 

2  Charles  Burney:  A  General  History  of  Music.  (New  York:  Har- 

court,  Brace  &  Co.,  1935),  Vol.  I,  p.  21. 

3  Richard  Aldrich:  Concert  Life  in  New  York,  1902-23.  (New  York: 

Putnam,  i94i),p.  314. 

4  Upton:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  I,  p.  235. 

H.  T.  Finck:  Richard  Wagner  and  His  Works.  (New  York:  Charles 

Scribner's  Sons,  1907),  Vol.  II,  p.  511. 
R.  Osgood  Mason:  op.  cit.,  pp.  199-200. 
Ernest  Newman:  Richard  Wagner.  (New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf, 

1937),  Vol.  II,  p.  115. 

5  Upton:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  I,  p.  251. 

6  Henry  T.  Finck:  "Music  and  Morals,"  in  Chopin  and  Other  Essays. 

(New  York:  Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  1910),  pp.  143-182. 

7  Charles  E.  Russell:  op.  cit.,  p.  vii. 

8  George  W.  Cooke:  John  Sullivan  Divight.  (Boston:  Small,  Maynard 

Co.,  1898),  pp.  147,  151-152. 
"Introductory  Statements,"  Divighfs  Journal  of  Music,  April  10, 
1852,  Vol.  I,  no.  1. 

9  William  James:  Psychology.  (New  York:  Henry  Holt  &  Co.,  1890), 

Vol.  I,  pp.  i26ff. 

10  Eduard  Hanslick:  Concerte,  Componisten,  und  Virtuosen.  (2.  Aufl., 

Berlin:  1886),  p.  312. 

1 1  Upton:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  I,  p.  289. 

Reginald  Nettel:    The  Orchestra  in  England,   A  Social  History. 
(London:  J.  Cape,  1946),  p.  103. 

12  Upton:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  I,  p.  104. 

13  Remark  attributed  to  Rudolph  Ganz,  conductor  of  the  St.  Louis 

Symphony  Orchestra,  November,  1925. 

14  In  the  prospectus  of  the  New  York  Philharmonic  for  1870-71,  we 

read  significantly:  "Inasmuch  as  compositions  in  that  class  can 
seldom  be  fully  appreciated  when  heard  but  once,  the  society  has, 
for  many  years,  made  the  rehearsals  preceding  each  concert  open 
to  the  public.  Scale  for  admission:  First  Rehearsal  and  Second  Re- 
hearsal, 50  cents;  Third  Rehearsal,  $1.  Regular  Concert,  $2." 

15  E.   Creuzberg:    Die   Gewandhausconzerte   zu   Leipzig,    1781-1931. 

(Leipzig,  1 931),  p.  96. 
Percy  Scholes:  Mirror  of  Music.  (London:  Novello  &  Co.,  1948), 
frontispiece. 


416  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

Adam  Carse:   The  Orchestra  from  Beethoven  to  Berlioz.   (Cam- 
bridge: W.  Heffer,  1948),  p.  161. 

16  Madeira  and  Goepp:  op.  cit.,  p.  144. 

17  Otis:  op.  cit.,  p.  n. 

18  Richard  Hoffman:  Some  Musical  Recollections  of  Fifty  Years.  (New 

York:  Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  1910),  pp.  63-64. 

19  Willis  Musical  World  and  Times,  December  3,  1853. 

20  Eduard  Hanslick:  Geschichte  des  C one ertive sens  in  Wien.  (Vienna, 

1869),  p.  95. 

21  Musical  Courier,  November  23,  1898;  July  30,  1902. 

22  August  Schmidt:  Musikalische  Reisemomente  auf  einer  Wanderung 

durch  Norddeutschland.  (Hamburg,  1846.) 

23  Willis  Musical  World  and  Ti?nes,  December  3,  1853. 

24  Hector  Berlioz:  Treatise  on  Orchestration.  (London,  1856.) 

25  M.  A.  DeWolfe  Howe:  op.  cit.,  p.  32. 

26  Reginald  Nettel:  The  Orchestra  in  England.  (London:   Jonathan 

Cape,  1946),  p.  174. 

27  August  Schmidt:  op.  cit. 

28  Musical  Record,  October  29,  1881. 

29  See  photograph  of  Theodore  Thomas  orchestra  in  Upton,  op.  cit., 

Vol.  II,  p.  82;  and  seating  plan  in  Rose  Fay  Thomas,  op.  cit.,  p.  372. 
H.  E.  Krehbiel:  Hoiv  to  Listen  to  Music.  (New  York:  Charles  Scrib- 
ner's Sons,  10th  ed.  1900),  p.  76. 

30  J.  J.  Rousseau:  Dictionaire  de  Musique,  "Orchestre."  (Paris,  1768.) 

31  For  a  photograph  see:  The  Philadelphia  Orchestra,  Fiftieth  Anni- 

versary. (Philadelphia:  The  Philadelphia  Orchestra  Association, 

i95°)>  P-  32- 

32  Musical  Courier,  January  2,  1932. 

33  Musical  Courier,  July  31,  1895;  September  3,  1925. 

34  Sir  Henry  Wood:  About  Conducting.  (London:  Sylvan  Press,  1945), 

p.  115. 

35  Sir  Thomas  Beecham:  "The  Position  of  Women"  in  Vogue 's  First 

Reader.  (Garden  City  Publishing  Co.:   Halcyon  House,  1944), 
p.  420. 

36  Emily  Anderson:  op.  cit. 

37  Reginald  Nettel:  op.  cit.,  p.  171. 

Robert  Elkin:  The  Royal  Philharmonic,  pp.  43  ff. 

38  Hector  Berlioz:  op.  cit. 

39  Ernest  Newman:  Life  of  Wagner.  (New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf, 

1937),  Vol.  I,  pp.  142-143- 


Notes  417 

40  Amy  Fay:  Music  Study  in  Germany.  (New  York:  Macmillan  Co., 

1909),  pp.  108  ff. 

41  Ludwig  Spohr:  Autobiography.  (London:  Longmans  Green,  1865), 

p.  54. 

42  Eduard  Devrient:  op.  cit.,  p.  59. 

43  Percy  Scholes:  op.  cit.,  frontispiece. 
Adam  Carse:  op.  cit.,  pp.  208,  232. 

44  Spohr:  op.  cit.,  pp.  54-55;  81. 

45  Devrient:  op.  cit.,  pp.  60-61. 

46  Richard  Hoffman:  op.  cit.,  pp.  70-71. 

47  Schumann:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  I,  p.  37. 

48  Eduard  Hanslick:    Concerte,  Componisten  und   Virtuosen,   1870- 

1885.  (2  AufL,  Berlin:  1886),  p.  49. 

49  Georg  Henschel:  Personal  Recollections  of  Johannes  Brahms.  (Bos- 

ton: R.  G.  Badger,  1907),  p.  84. 

50  Caroline  Estes  Smith:  op.  cit.,  pp.  181-182. 

51  Musical  America,  September  3,  1927,  p.  16;  August  30,  1928;  August 

31,  1929;  June  11,  1932. 
Joseph  Szigeti:    With  Strings  Attached.   (New  York:   Alfred  A. 

Knopf,  1947),  p.  81. 
Israel  Nestyeff:  Sergei  Prokofieff.  (New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf, 

1946),  p.  102. 

52  Hugo  Goldschmidt:  Die  Lehre  von  der  Vokalen  Ornamentik  des 

17.  und  18.  Jahrhunderts  bis  in  die  Zeit  Glucks.  (Charlottenburg, 
1907),  p.  156. 

53  William  F.  Apthorp:  By  the  Way.  (Boston:   Copeland  and  Day, 

1898),  Vol.  I,  p.  50. 

54  Wilhelm   Furtwangler:    Gesprdche  iiber  Musik.    (Zurich:    1948), 

pp.  iooff. 
§$  Charles  Burney:  The  Present  State  of  Music  in  France  and  Italy. 
(2d  ed.;  London:  T.  Becket  &  Co.,  1773),  p.  160. 

56  Gerald  Abraham:  This  Modern  Stuff.  (London:  Duckworth,  1946), 

p.  56. 

57  Musical  Courier,  October  7,  1896. 

58  Musical  Courier,  October  17,  1900. 

59  Paul  S.  Carpenter:  Music,  an  Art  and  a  Business.  (Norman:  Univer- 

sity of  Oklahoma  Press,  1950.) 

60  Memorandum  #3,  Symphony  Orchestra  League:  Charleston,  West 

Virginia,  November  30,  1950. 


418  THE    AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

6 1  Arthur  Judson:  "American  Orchestras,"  in  Musical  America,  Feb- 

ruary, 1 95 1,  pp.  8  ff. 

62  The  Arts  Enquiry:  Music,  A  Report  on  Musical  Life  in  England. 

Political  and  Economic  Planning,  London,  1949. 

63  Margaret  Grant  and  H.  S.  Hettinger:  America's  Symphony  Orches- 

tras. (New  York:  W.  W.  Norton  &  Co.,  1940.) 

64  Musical  Courier,  March  15,  1893. 

65  Musical  Courier,  December  20,  1893. 

66  Mrs.  Adolph  Brodsky,  the  wife  of  the  concertmaster,  places  this 

interpretation  on  the  incident.  She  asserts  that  Damrosch  deliber- 
ately maneuvered  the  musicians  into  a  strike  for  the  purpose  of 
voiding  their  contracts,  which  would  then  be  renewed  on  easier 
terms  for  himself.  See  Mrs.  Adolph  Brodsky:  Recollections  of  a 
Russian  Home.  (2d  ed.,  London:  Sherratt  &  Hughes,  1914),  pp. 
187-202. 

67  Musical  Courier,  May  30,  1906. 

68  Musical  Courier,  December  3,  1902. 

69  Musical  Courier,  August  4, 1927. 

70  Musical  Courier,  December  15,  1897. 

71  Musical  Courier,  October  7,  1896. 

72  Otis:  op.  cit.,  p.  30. 

73  Musical  Courier,  May  5, 192 1. 

74  Musical  Courier,  November  4,  1904. 

75  Emily  Anderson:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  1072. 

76  Carl  Krebs:  Meister  des  Takstocks.  (Berlin:  19 19),  p.  53. 

77  Eduard  Hanslick:  Geschichte  des  Concertivesens  in  Wien,  p.  59. 

78  Divighfs  Journal  of  Music,  July  10,  1875. 

79  Musical  Courier,  January  1,  1896. 

80  Henry  T.  Finck:  Chopin  and  Other  Essays,  p.  243. 

81  G.  B.  Shaw:  Music  in  London,  1890  to  1894.  (London:  Constable  & 

Co.,  1932),  Vol.  I,  p.  5. 

82  Related  to  the  author  by  a  former  member  of  the  Lamoureux 

orchestra. 

83  Musical  Courier,  June  20,  1900,  p.  27. 

84  H.  M.  Schletterer:  Johann  Friedrich  Reichhardt:  Sein  Leben  und 

Seine  Th'dtigkeit.  (Leipzig,  1864),  p.  363. 

85  Percy  Scholes:  The  Mirror  of  Music,  1844-1944.  (London:  Novello 

&  Co.,  1947),  Vol.  I,  p.  219. 

86  Musical  Courier,  January  17,  1900. 


Notes  419 

87  Eduard  Hanslick:  Geschichte  des  Conzertivesens  in  Wien,  pp.  152- 

*53- 

88  Madeira  and  Goepp:  op.  cit.,  pp.  66-67. 

89  Musical  Courier,  January  3,  1894,  p.  22. 

90  Creuzburg:  op.  cit.,  p.  107. 

91  Boston  Musical  Herald,  March,  1887,  p.  71. 

92  Musical  Courier,  February  17,  1904. 

93  Apthorp:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  II,  p.  62. 

94  Boston  Musical  Herald,  January,  1 891,  p.  5. 

95  Musical  Courier,  March  4,  1 896. 

96  Upton:  op.  cit.,  Vol.  II,  p.  19. 

97  Hanslick:  op.  cit.,  pp.  55-56. 

CHAPTER  SEVEN 

1  John  H.  Mueller:  "Is  Art  the  Product  of  its  Age?"  Social  Forces, 

March,  1935,  pp.  367-375. 

Idem:  "Theories  of  Aesthetic  Appreciation"  in  Studies  in  Apprecia- 
tion of  Art.  University  of  Oregon  Publications,  Vol.  IV,  no.  6, 
February,  1934. 

Idem:  "Methods  of  Aesthetic  Measurement."  A?nerican  Journal  of 
Sociology,  January,  1946,  pp.  276-282. 

Paul  R.  Farnsworth:  Musical  Taste,  Its  Measurement  and  Cultural 
Nature.  (Stanford:  Stanford  University  Press,  1950.) 

2  Kate  Hevner:  "The  Aesthetic  Experience;  A  Psychological  Descrip- 

tion." Psychological  Review,  May,  1937,  pp.  245-263. 
Max  Schoen:   Psychology  of  Music.   (New  York:   Ronald  Press, 

1940.) 
George  Boas:   A  Primer  for  Critics.   (Baltimore:   Johns  Hopkins 

Press,  1937.) 

3  Donald  Tovey:  The  Main  Stream  of  Music  and  Other  Essays.  (New 

York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1949),  p.  373. 

4  Curt  Sachs:  The  Commonwealth  of  Art.  (New  York:  W.  W.  Nor- 

ton &  Co.,  1946),  p.  326. 

5  Karl  Marx:  "A  Contribution  to  the  Critique  of  Political  Economy." 

Quoted  in:  Karl  Marx  and  Friedrich  Engels:  Literature  and  Art. 
(New  York:  International  Publishers,  1947),  pp.  17-20. 

6  Charles  Lalo:  Esthetique.  (Paris,  1927),  p.  3. 

For  a  brief  critical  summary  of  Lalo's  aesthetic  see: 

Katherine  Gilbert:  Studies  in  Recent  Aesthetic.  (Chapel  Hill: 
University  of  North  Carolina  Press,  1927.) 


420  THE     AMERICAN     SYMPHONY     ORCHESTRA 

John  H.  Mueller:  "The  Folkway  of  Art:  An  Analysis  of  the  Social 
Theories  of  Art."  American  Journal  of  Sociology,  September, 
1938,  pp.  222-238. 

7  Francis  Perkins:  "Favorites  of  25  Years  on  Orchestral  Programs  in 

New  York."  Musical  America,  February,  1950. 

8  Benjamin  Cardozo:  The  Paradoxes  of  Legal  Science.  (New  York: 

Columbia  University  Press,  1928),  pp.  1-2. 


Index 


"absolute"  music,  26,  191 

Adams,  John,  17 

Adamowski  String  Quartet,  147 

Aesthetics;  philosophy  of,  30,  203,  204, 
208,  293,  381;  doctrine  of  artistic 
supremacy,  30,  115;  of  romantic  pe- 
riod, 291;  "subjectivism",  403.  (See 
also  under  Taste) 

Ahner,  Henry,   101 

Alexander,  Arthur,   177 

Alfven,  Hugo,  143 

Allgemeine  Musikalische  Zeitung,  201, 
203 

Altschuler,  Modest,  37 

America:  musical  life  in  colonial,  16, 
17;  other  arts  in  early,  17,  18;  Puri- 
tans, 17;  early  centers  of  culture,  18, 
32;  concert  life  in  Boston,  19,  32; 
concert  life  in  Philadelphia,  19; 
early  programs,  19,  20;  grounded  on 
European  culture,  21;  influx  of  Eu- 
ropean artists,  22;  1 8th  century 
musical  life,  32,  210. 

American  music:  in  repertoire,  69,  95, 
112,  120,  144,  149,  160,  164;  Ameri- 
can Festivals,  177,  250,  259;  nativist 
movement,  266-270;  jazz,  271,  272; 
definition  of,  271,  273. 

American  Orchestral  Association  (see 
National  Orchestral  Association). 

American  Society  of  Composers,  351 

American  Symphony  Orchestra 
League,  36 

Antheil,  George,  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 188 

Apthorp,  William,  204,  326,  365 


Arne,  Thomas,  123,  210 

Atterberg,  Kurt,  143,  237 

Auber,  Daniel,  99 

Audience,  352;  relation  to  artist,  288; 

eighteenth    century,    288,    289,    326; 

nineteenth    century,    289,    290,    353; 

size   of,    352;    deportment   of,    132, 

353-355;  reaction,  356-359. 
Augenmusik,  219 
Auric,  Georges,  272 
Austro-German  music:   in  repertoire, 

67,  99,  112,  121,  136,  149,  172;  reasons 
for  dominance,  258,  259 

Bach,  J.  C.  ("London"),  20 

Bach,  Karl  Philipp  Emanuel,  8,  26,  123 

Bach,  Johann  Sebastian,  7,  15,  17,  65, 

68,  113,  135,  143,  164,  200;  Bach  re- 
vival, 201-204;  transcriptions,  207, 
208;  trend  line,  209;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  135,  188,  206,  209;  St. 
Matthew  Passion,  15,  201,  202,  203, 
209,  327;  Well  Tempered  Clavier, 
202,  205;  Toccata  in  F,  205;  Inven- 
tions, 205;  B  Minor  Mass,  202;  Suite 
in  D,  205;  Passacaglia,  205,  209;  Cha- 
conne,  205;  Fantasia  and  Fugue,  G 
minor,  209;  Suite  No.  2,  209;  Suite 
No.  3,  209;  Brandenburg  concerto, 
No.  5,  209,  377;  Christmas  Oratorio, 
209 

Balatka,  Hans,  101,  300 
Baltimore  Symphony,  176 
Bantock,  Granville,  77,  208 
Barber,  Samuel,  96,  144,  278;  percent- 
age in  repertoire,  188,  277 
421 


*22 


Index 


Barbirolli,  John,  48,  61,  69,  170,  208, 
247,  264 

Barrere,  Georges,  262 

Bartok,  Bela,  160,  232,  273;  percentage 
in  repertoire,  188,  227;  Concerto  for 
Orchestra,  233 

Beach,  Mrs.  H.  H.A.,  95 

Beecham,  Sir  Thomas,  25,  156,  199 

Beethoven,  Ludwig  van,  7,  8,  19,  64, 
66,  68,  113,  135,  143,  149,  154,  160; 
appreciated  in  his  day,  183;  trend 
line,  184;  factors  in  decline,  184,  185; 
stability  of,  186;  cycles,  187,  198; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  64,  65,  67, 
112,  121,  149,  159,  172,  184,  187,  188, 
206;  Symphony  No.  1,  376;  Sym- 
phony No.  2,  39,  144,  377;  Sym- 
phony No.  3,  39,  186,  376; 
Symphony  No.  4,  376;  Symphony 
No.  5,  84,  85,  184,  186,  376;  Sym- 
phony No.  6,  376;  Symphony  No.  7, 
20,  186,  376;  Symphony  No.  8,  376; 
Symphony  No.  9,  183,  186,  187,  377; 
Mass  in  C,  145;  Battle  Symphony, 
20,  186;  Concerto  for  Piano,  No.  5, 
376;  Violin  Concerto,  376;  Over- 
tures, Leonore  No.  5,  Egmont, 
Coriolanus,  3J6;  Fidelio,  377;  Con- 
certos for  Piano,  No.  5  and  4,  377 

Bellini,  Vincenzo,  25 

Bennett,  Robert  Russell,  272 

Bendy,  John,  123 

Berezowski,  Nicholas,  96,  274,  278; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  277 

Berg,  Alban,  273 

Bergmann,  Carl,  33,  48,  64,  101,  189, 
192,  196,  239 

Berkshire  Festival,  94 

Berlin  Philharmonic  orchestra,  23 

Berlioz,  Hector,  8,  25,  26,  41,  68,  76, 
77,  121,  149,  160,  238,  262,  312,  313; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  65,  188, 
206,  235,  238,  Symphonie  Fantas- 
tique,  238,  376;  Damnation  of  Faust, 
238;  Romeo  and  Juliet,  238;  Harold 
in  Italy,  238;  Overture,  Carnaval 
Romain,  238,  376;  Rakozcy  March, 


365;  UArt  du  chef  d'orchestre,  313; 

Treatise  on  conducting,  303,  313 
Bernstein,  Leonard,  37,  234 
Billings,  William,  17,  20;  Psalm  Singer, 

17 

Bilse,  Benjamin,  23,  in 

Birge,  Edward,  178 

Bloch,  Ernest,  68,  77,  96,  144,  160,  164, 
249,  250,  274,  278;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  188,  250,  277;  America, 
249;  Concerto  Grosso,  250;  Schelo- 
mo,  250;  Israel  Symphony ,  250; 
Three  Jewish  Poems,  250 

Boccherini,  Luigi,  264 

Bodansky,  Artur,  55,  141 

Boessenroth,  143,  208 

Boi'eldieu,  Francois,  99 

Bollinger,  Samuel,  149 

Borodin,  Alexander,  143,  263;  percent- 
age in  repertoire,  206 

Borowski,  Felix,  107;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277 

Boston  Symphony  Orchestra,  21,  23, 
78;  founding,  78-80;  under  Hen- 
schel,  81;  Gericke's  reforms,  83;  un- 
der Nikisch,  84-87;  Muck;  88,  89; 
financial  reorganization,  90;  strike, 
91;  Koussevitzky,  92-95;  unioniza- 
tion, 93;  repertoire,  95  ff;  154;  161 

Boulanger,  Nadia,  75,  222,  231 

Bour,  Felix,  343 

Braga,  265 

Brahms,  Johannes,  64,  66,  68,  99,  113, 
121,  135,  143,  160,  187;  trend  line, 
189,  190,  363;  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 6s,  09,  149,  159,  172,  188,  190, 
206;  Serenade  No.  2,  189;  Symphony 
No.  1,  189,  190,  376;  Symphony  No. 
2,  190,  376;  Symphony  No.  5,  190, 
376;  Symphony  No.  4,  Academic 
Festival  Overture,  190,  376;  Varia- 
tions on  a  Theme  by  Haydn,  190, 
376;  Concertos  for  Piano,  No.  1 
and  2,  190,  Violin  Concerto,  190, 
376;  Hungarian  Dances,  190 

Brand,  George,  115 

Brand,  Michael,  115 


Index 


423 


Brant,  Henry,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277 

Bremer,  Alexander,  345 

Bremner,  James,  123 

Bristow,  George,  266,  267,  268,  269; 
Dramatic  Overture,  Columbus,  369 

Britten,  Benjamin,  247,  284;  percent- 
age in  repertoire,  188 

Brodsky,  Adolf,  73,  343 

Brooks,  Ernest,  135 

Bruch,  Max,  percentage  in  repertoire, 
206 

Bruckner,  Anton,  68,  77,  224;  trend 
line,  225;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
188,  206,  216;  Symphonies  No.  1,  2, 
3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  224,  225 

Buck,  Dudley,  276 

Biilow,  Hans  von,  23,  44,  300;  virtuoso 
conductor,  314,  319 

Burney,  Charles,  8,  26,  27,  287,  328 

Busby,  Thomas,  27 

Busch,  Fritz,  24,  75 

Caillet,  208 

Cameron,  Basil,  49,  156 

Cardozo,  Benjamin,  on  mutability  of 
norms,  405 

Carillo,  Julian,  135 

Carpenter,  John  Alden,  96,  160,  278; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  277 

Caruso,  Enrico,  52 

Carvalho,  Eleazor  de,  265 

Casadesus,  Robert,  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 188 

Casals,  Pablo,  147 

Casella,  Alfredo,  264 

Castelnuovo-Tedesco,  Mario,  68 

Chabrier,  Emmanuel,  160 

Chadwick,  George,  95,  112,  120,  149, 
274,  276,  278;  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277 

Chasins,  Abram,  69;  Flirtation  in  a 
Chinese  Garden,  69;  Parade,  69 

Chausson,  Ernest,  160;  Symphony  in 
B  flat,  377 

Chavez,  Carlos,  94,  160,  173,  265,  284 

Cherubini,   Maria   Luigi,   7,   99,    198; 


percentage  in  repertoire,  206 

Chicago  Civic  Orchestra,  109 

Chicago  Symphony  Orchestra,  101, 
founding  of,  101-103;  guarantors, 
103;  early  difficulties,  104,  105;  un- 
der Thomas,  102-107;  under  Stock 
107-110;  union  problem,  109;  Chica- 
go Civic  Orchestra,  109;  repertoire, 
110-113 

Children's  Concerts,  147,  162,  166,  170, 
373;  conductors  of,  373 

Chopin,  Frederic,  361;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  206.  Concerto  for  Piano 
No.  1,  377;  Concerto  for  Piano  No. 
2,  361 

Choral  Societies,  27,  relation  to  sym- 
phony, 29;  114,  187;  Apollo  Club, 
28;  Arion  Society,  28,  70;  Euterpian 
Society,  21;  "Filharmonix"  Choral 
Society,  136;  Handel  and  Haydn 
Society,  20,  28,  77;  Liederkranz,  28; 
Mannerchors,  28;  St.  Louis  Choral- 
Symphony  Society,  28 

Cimarosa,  Domenico,  7 

Cincinnati  College  of  Music,  114,  116 

Cincinnati  Symphony  Orchestra, 
early  history,  113,  114;  founding, 
115;  financial  problems,  116,  117; 
Auditorium,  120;  repertoire,  120-122 

City  Center  Orchestra,  37 

Cleveland  Orchestra,  beginnings,  161; 
Musical  Arts  Association,  161; 
founding,  162;  Severance  Hall,  163; 
conductors,  162,  163;  repertoire,  164 

Coates,  Albert,  74,  77,  141,  170,  248 

Cole,  V.,  percentage  in  repertoire,  277 

Colonne,  Edouard,  50 

Composer:  great,  appreciated  in  his 
day,  183,  236;  problems  of  con- 
temporary composer,  284,  285;  as 
craftsman,  289 

Composers:  life  spans  in  repertoire, 
182  ff.;  most  pre-eminent:  Beetho- 
ven, 183-187;  Brahms,  187-190; 
Wagner,  190-195;  Tschaikowsky, 
196-198;  Mozart,  198-200;  Bach,  200- 
209;  with  stable  popularity:  Haydn, 


424 


Index 


210-212;    Handel,    212-214;    Weber, 
214;  Gluck,  215;  ascending  phases: 
Strauss,    215-219;    Sibelius,    219-222; 
Franck,    222;    Stravinsky,    222-223; 
Debussy,    223;    Bruckner,    224-225; 
Rachmaninoff,    225;    Shostakovitch, 
226-228;  Mahler,  228-229;  Prokofieff, 
229,  230;  Schoenberg,  230;  Copland, 
231;  Vaughan  Williams,   231;  Hin- 
demith,  232;  Milhaud,  232;  Bartok, 
232;    Schuman,    233;    Walton,    233; 
Ives,  233;  descending  phase:   Schu- 
mann, 234;  Shubert,  235-237;  Berlioz, 
237,  238;  Liszt,  239,  240;  Rubinstein, 
240,  241;  full  life  cycle  of:  Dvorak, 
242;    Saint-Saens,    243;    Grieg,    245; 
Smetana,     245;     MacDowell,     245; 
Rimsky-Korsakoff,  246;  Elgar,  247; 
D'Indy,  248;  Glazounoff,  248;  Scria- 
bin,  249;  Respighi,  249;  Bloch,  249; 
Falla,  250;  Harris,  250;  "forgotten": 
64,  250-252.  (See  also  under  name  of 
composer) 
Composing  for  the  future,  10,  285 
Concert,  function  of,  100,  292 
Concertgebouw,  55,  158 
Concert    halls:    N.    Y.    Academy    of 
Music,   43,    71;    Carnegie   Hall,   45, 
197;  Metropolitan  Opera  House,  43; 
Symphony  Hall,  88;  Chicago  Audi- 
torium,   103;    Orchestra    Hall,    105; 
Cincinnati    Music    Hall,    115,    120; 
Philadelphia    Academy    of    Music, 
124;     Northrup     Auditorium,     137; 
Kiel    Municipal    Auditorium,    148; 
War  Aiemorial  Opera  House,   157; 
Severance   Hall,    163;   Philharmonic 
Auditorium,  170;  Constitution  Hall, 
181 
Concert  Series,  371,  necessity  for,  371, 
372;    "public    rehearsal,"    296,    372; 
children's    series,    373;    "pop"    con- 
certs,   359,    373;    decline    of    "pop" 
concerts,  374;  Sunday  concerts,  374 
Concerts  Golschmann,  148 
Concerts  Koussevitzky,  92 
Concerts  Spirituels,  15,  358,  369 


Concert  System,  origins  of,  14;  pat- 
ronage, church  and  noble,  14;  earli- 
est public  concert,  15;  early  series, 
15,  16;  early  American  series,  20 

Conducting:  history  of,  310;  romantic 
school  of,  66,  313,  314,  318;  Liszt- 
Wagner-Bulow-Nikisch  school,  72, 
83,  86,  313;  conservative,  106,  107; 
psychological  effect  of  gestures, 
131;  batonless,  132,  142,  169,  318; 
without  score,  319;  Mendelssohnian 
tradition,  83,  315,   316;  fashions  in, 

325,  326 
Conductor:  virtuoso,  83,  311;  as  plat- 
form lecturer,  132,  319;  function  of, 
313;  as  interpreter,  313,  322;  position 
of,  315;  prestige  of,  315;  increasing 
authority  of,  316;  demand  for  ade- 
quate   rehearsals,     317;    arbiter    of 
taste,  318,  397;  as  recreator,  323;  as 
educator,  362 
Conductorless  orchestra,  320,  321 
Conductors:    operatic,    24;    primarily 
orchestral,  24;  German,  261;  salaries 
of,   57,  81,    115,    118,    127,   133,    145, 

153,  166;  N.  Y.  Philharmonic,  44, 
45,  50,  51,  53,  56,  61,  62,  63;  N.  Y. 
Symphony  Society,  69,  72;  Boston, 
82,  83,  87,  88,  91,  92,  94;  Chicago, 
102,  107;  Cincinnati,  113,  115,  117, 
118,  119;  Philadelphia,  125,  127,  133; 
Minneapolis,  136,  141,  142;  St.  Louis, 
146,    147,    148;    San    Francisco,    152, 

154,  155,  158;  Cleveland,  162,  163; 
Los  Angeles,  167,  169,  170,  172;  De- 
troit, 175;  Baltimore,  176;  Rochester, 
177;  Indianapolis,  178;  Washington, 
D.  C,  180,  181.  (See  also  name  of 
individual  conductor) 

Converse,  Frederick  S.,  95,  112,  149, 
276,  percentage  in  repertoire,  277 

Cooley,  Carleton,  164 

Copland,  Aaron,  76,  77,  96,  231,  278; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  188,  227, 
231,  277.  Symphony  for  Organ  and 
Orchestra,  231;  A  Lincoln  Portrait, 


Index 


425 


231;  Billy  the  Kid,  231;  Quiet  City, 
231;  Appalachian  Spring,  231 

Copley,  John  Singleton,  17 

Corelli,  Arcangelo,  123,  212 

Costa,  Michael,  302,  305,  310,  312 

Cowell,  Henry,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277 

Crawford,  Thomas,  18 

Creston,  Paul,  69,  278;  percentage  in 
repertoire,   188,  277 

Czech  music,  65,  66,  259 

Damrosch,  Leopold,  22,  40,  44,  45,  48, 
55,  69;  competition  with  Thomas, 
71,  189;  romantic  conductor,  72 

Damrosch,  Walter,  24,  47,  48,  55, 
H1'  r5J>  23r>  25°>  263,  271,  273,  319, 
320;  criticism  of,  72;  friend  of  philan- 
thropists, 73;  tours,  73,  74;  contribu- 
tion to  cause  of  music,  74; 
retirement,  75,  77;  showmanship,  76 

Dasch,  George,  108 

Debussy,  Claude,  68,  76,  121,  143,  160, 
223,  262;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
172,  188,  206,  216;  Nuages  et  Fetes, 
162,  377;  Nocturnes,  223;  UApres- 
midi  d'un  Faune,  223,  376;  Iberia, 
223,  376;  La  Met,  zi-t,,  376 

Defauw,  Desire,  48,  no 

DeKoven,  Reginald,  180 

DeLamarter,  Eric,  108,  109;  percent- 
age in  repertoire,  277. 

Dello  Joio,  Norman,  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277 

Delius,  Frederick,  247,  264 

De  Sabata,  Victor,  68 

Detroit  Symphony,  175 

Devrient,  Eduard,  201,  203,  315 

Diaghileff  Ballet,  119,  158,  160 

Diamond,  David,  278;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  188,  277 

D'Indy,  Vincent,  68,  76,  113,  121,  247, 
248;  percentage  in  repertoire,  188; 
lstar,  247;  Medea  state,  -2.4.7;  Sym- 
phony on  a  French  Mountain  Air, 
248;  Symphony  No.  2,  248;  Wallen- 


stein's  Camp,  248 

Dobrowen,  Issay,  156 

Donizetti,  Gaetano,  25;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  206 

Dorati,  Antal,  49;  conductor  Minnea- 
polis Symphony,  142 

Doremus,  R.  Ogden,  43 

Dubensky,  Arcady,  77 

Dukas,  Paul,  377 

Dukelsky,  Vladimir,  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277 

Dvorak,  Antonin,  65,  66,  77,  149,  159, 
160,  242;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
66,  6j,  68,  172,  188,  206,  242,  244; 
Symphony  No.  $,  66,  141,  376;  Sla- 
vonic Rhapsodies,  77,  242;  Scherzo 
Capriccioso,  242;  Carnival  Over- 
ture, 242;  Cello  Concerto,  242,  377 

Dwight,  John  S.,  97,  293 

Dwighfs  Journal  of  Music,  44,  79,  354 

Eichheim,  Henry,  160,  164,  278;  per- 
centage in  repertoire,  277 

Eisfeld,  Theodore,  48,  65,  311 

Elgar,  Sir  Edward,  68,  69,  77,  208,  247, 
264;  percentage  in  repertoire,  188, 
247;  Dream  of  Gerontius,  247; 
Enigma  Variations,  247,  377;  In- 
troduction and  Allegro  for  Strings, 
247;  Violin  Concerto,  247;  Pomp 
and  Circumstance,  247;  Cockaigne 
Overture,  247 

Elkus,  Albert,  160 

Elman,  Mischa,  351 

Elson,  L.  C,  83,  99 

Elwell,  Herbert,  164 

Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo,  269,  294 

Emery,  Mrs.  Thomas  J.,  120 

Enesco,  Georges,  377;  Roumanian 
Rhapsody  No.  1,  377 

Ernestinoff,  Alexander,  178 

Ernst,  Alfred,  146 

Falla,  Manuel  de,  68,  250;  percentage 
in  repertoire,  188,  250;  El  Amor 
brujo,  250;  The  Three-Cornered 
Hat,  250,  276;  La  Vida  breve,  250; 


426 


Index 


Nigbts  in  the  Gardens  of  Spain,  250 

Farrar,  Geraldine,  52 

Farwell,  Arthur,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, -277 

Fay,  Amy,  313 

Fernandez,  265 

Fesca,  Friedrich  Ernst,  7 

Fiedler,  Max,  48,  88,  100 

Financing  of  orchestras:  philanthropic 
support,  35, 47;  pattern  of,  78;  pluto- 
cratic, 35,  166,  334;  private  enter- 
prise, 35,  331;  public  taxation,  134, 
156,  158,  176,  179,  338;  cooperative 
plan,  35,  329,  330,  331,  341;  endow- 
ments, 335,  336;  deficit  financing, 
336,  337;  public  subsidy,  340;  sys- 
tems of,  329.  (See  also  history  of 
each  orchestra) 

Finck,  Henry  T.,  195,  293,  355,  362 

Fischer,  Emil,  65 

Fontainebleau,  American  Conserva- 
tory, 74,  222 

Foote,  Arthur,  95,  120,  149,  274,  276 

Foss,  Lukas,  percentage  in  repertoire, 

277  . 
Fradkin,  Frederic,  91 

Franck,  Cesar,  25,  68,  76,  121,  149,  172, 
222,  262;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
188,  206,  216,  222;  Symphony  in  D 
minor,  222,  376;  Sy?nphonic  Varia- 
tions, 111 

French  music,  76,  100,  112,  121,  147, 
160,  164,  172,  259;  reputation  of 
woodwinds,  261;  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 262 

Fry,  William  Henry,  122,  266,  267, 
268,  269 

Fuleihan,  Anis,  274,  278;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277 

Furtwangler,  Wilhelm,  23,  60,  61,  75, 
327 

Gabrilowitsch,  Ossip,  75,  118,  141,  con- 
ductor Detroit  Symphony,  175 

Gade,  Niels,  99,  252;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  206;  Symphony  No.  1, 
252;  Symphony  No.  4,  151 


Gadski,  Johanna,  52 

Ganz,    Rudolph,    49;    conductor    St. 

Louis  Symphony,  147;  158 
Garden,  Mary,  52 
Gatti-Casazza,  Giulio,  52 
Gebrauchsmusik,  131 
Geminiani,  Francesco,  123 
Gericke,  Wilhelm,  24,  48;  conductor 

of  Boston  Symphony,  82,  87,  99,  189, 

300 
Germania  orchestra,  32,  79,   124,  144, 

192 
German  immigration,   115;  source  of 

competition,  342 
Gershwin,  George,  69,  76,  77,  173,  271, 

278;   percentage  in  repertoire,    188, 

277;  Rhapsody  in  Blue,  271,  272;  An 

American    in    Paris,    271;    Second 

Rhapsody,  271 
Gewandhaus  Orchestra,  7,  16,  23,  38, 

63,  205,  300;  seating  plan,  301 
Ghione,  Franco,  175 
Gilbert,  Henry,  276 
Gilchrist,  W.  W.,  125 
Gillespie,  Mrs.  E.  D.,  125 
Gillis,  Don,  percentage  in  repertoire, 

277 

Glazounoff,  Alexander,  66,  68,  112, 
248,  262;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
188,206;  Violin  Concerto,  248;  Sym- 
phonies No.  4,  5,  6,  248;  Symphonic 
Poem,  Stenka  Razine,  248 

Gleason,  Frederick  Grant,  274 

Glinka,  Michael,  66,  163 

Gluck,  Christoph  Willibald,  8,  19,  26, 
68,  215;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
188,  206,  215;  Alceste,  215;  Iphigenia 
in  Aulis,  215;  Ballet  Suite  (Mottl), 

Goldmark,  Karl,  68,  135,  160;  percent- 
age in  repertoire,  206,  244 

Goldschmidt,  Hugo,  323 

Golschmann,  Vladimir,  24,  48,  74,  77; 
conductor  St.  Louis  Symphony,  148 

Gomez,  265 

Goossens,  Eugene,  24,  48,  74,  77;  con- 
ductor Cincinnati   Symphony,   119; 


Index 


427 


conductor  Rochester  Philharmonic, 

177;    247,    264,    278;    percentage    in 

repertoire,  277 
Gould,  Morton,  69,  278;  percentage  in 

repertoire,  188,  277 
Gounod,    Charles,    145;    Redemption, 

145 

Gossec,  Francois,  210 

Grainger,  Percy,  156,  245;  percentage 
in  repertoire,  277 

Graupner,  Gottlieb,  20,  78,  211;  or- 
chestra of,  20,  32 

Great  Britain,  music  of,  122,  247,  259, 
264 

Greenough,  Horatio,  18 

Gretry,  Andre,  210 

Grieg,  Edvard,  143,  245;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  188,  206,  244;  Peer  Gynt 
Suite,  148;  Piano  Concerto,  245 

Griffes,  Charles  T.,  144,  278;  percent- 
age in  repertoire,  277 

Gruenberg,  Louis,  278;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277 

Guarnieri,  Camargo,  173,  265 

Gyrowetz,  Adalbert,  20,  32,  210 

Habeneck,  Francois,  24,  25,  26,  38, 
310,  312 

Hadley,  Henry  K.,  48,  77,  118,  149; 
conductor  San  Francisco  Sym- 
phony, 152;  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277;  In  Bohemia,  154;  Mid- 
summer High  Jinks,  154 

Hale,  Philip,  85,  87,  251,  362,  371 

Halle,  Sir  Charles,  25 

Hammerstein  Opera  Company,  52 

Hamilton,  Harley,  165 

Handel,  George  Frederick,  7,  16,  17,  19, 
68,212;  choral  works,  213;  transcrip- 
tions, 213;  trend  line,  213,  214,  264; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  188,  214; 
Almira,  16;  Rinaldo,  16;  Messiah,  19, 
142,  143,  145,  212,  213;  Water  Music, 
213,  376;  Concerto  Grosso  No.  11, 

213 
Hanslick,  Eduard,  7,  22,  224,  354 
Hanson,  Howard,  67,  77,  94,  96,  160, 


177,  278;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
188,  277;  Symphony  No.  2,  67 

Harpsichord,  326 

Harris,  Roy,  96,  144,  250,  278;  per- 
centage in  repertoire,  277;  Six  Sym- 
phonies, 250 

Harty,  Hamilton,  213 

Harvard  Musical  Association,  20,  79 

Hausserman,  percentage  in  repertoire, 
277 

Haydn,  Franz  Joseph,  7,  8,  17,  20,  32, 
68,  121,  123,  152,  198,  210;  trend  line, 
211;  percentage  in  repertoire,  188, 
206,  211;  Creation,  142;  Emperor 
Quartet,  152;  Sy?nphonies:  No.  73 
(La  Chasse),  211;  No.  8$  {La 
Reine),  211;  No.  94  (Surprise),  211; 
No.  100  (Military),  211;  No.  88  G 
major,  212,  376;  No.  101  (Clock), 
212;  No.  102,  104,  92,  9$,  97,  99, 
212;  Toy  Symphony,  212 

Haydn,  J.  Emmett,  156 

Hayes,  Catherine,  150 

Hegel,  Georg  Wilhelm,  30,  204 

Hegner,  Anton,  343 

Heiden,  Bernhard,  175 

Hekking,  Anton,  73 

Henschel,  Georg,  48,  65;  conductor  of 
Boston  Symphony,  81,  82;  reper- 
toire of,  98,  99;  189;  302,  303;  Over- 
ture, 81 

Herbert,  Victor,  118,  120,  174 

Herold,  Rudolph,  151 

Herrmann,  Bernard,  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277 

Hertz,  Alfred,  24,  49;  conductor  San 
Francisco  Symphony,  154;  171 

Herz,  Henri,  150 

Hill,  Edward  Burlingame,  77,  149;  per- 
centage in  repertoire,  277 

Hill,  Ralph,  134 

Hill,  Ureli  C,  48,  251 

Hindemith,  Paul,  160,  173,  232,  273, 
284;  percentage  in  repertoire,  188, 
227,  232;  Mathis  der  Mahler,  230,  232 

Hinrichs,  Gustave,  151 

Histories  of  Music,  7 


428 


Index 


History  of  music  as  performance,  8,  9 

Hoffman,  Richard,  300,  316 

Hoffmann,  E.  T.  A.,  199 

Hofmann,  Josef,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277 

Hoist,  Gustav,  77;  Egdon  Heath,  77 

Homeier,  Louis,  151 

Homer,  Louise,  52 

Honegger,  Arthur,  76,  160,  208,  284; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  188,  206 

Hopkinson,  Francis,  20,  122 

Hubermann,  Bronislaw,  60 

Hummel,  Johann  Nepomuk,  7,  64, 
252;  percentage  in  repertoire,  206; 
Septet,  252;  Piano  Concerto  in  B 
minor,  252 

Ibert,  Jacques,  284;  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 188 

Indianapolis  Symphony  Orchestra, 
177-179 

Instrumental  music,  rise  of,  27,  29; 
French  interest  in,  25 

Interpretation:  authentic,  324,  327;  "in- 
tent of  composer,"  323,  324,  327 

Israel  Philharmonic,  60 

Italian  music,  69,  259,  263,  264 

Iturbi,  Jose,  conductor  Rochester  Phil- 
harmonic, 177 

Ives,  Charles,  233;  Three  Places  in 
New  England,  234;  Symphonies  No. 
2  and  3,  234 

Jacobi,  Frederick,  160;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277 

James,  William,  293 

Janssen,  Werner,  221 

Jazz,  77,  232,  271;  influence  on  Euro- 
pean composers,  272 

Johnson,  H.  Earle,  5 

Johnson,  Thor,  48;  conductor  Cincin- 
nati Symphony,  119 

Judson,  Arthur,  55,  349 

Jullien,  Louis  Antoine,  33 

Jullien  orchestra,  33,  123 

Kabalevsky,  Dmitri,  284 

Kalliwoda,  Johann,  64,  252;  percent- 


age in  repertoire,  206;  Fifth  Sym- 
phony, 252 

Kant,  Immanuel,  30 

Kapellmeister,  14,  53,  310 

Kapellmeistermusik,   128,  228 

Keffer,  Edward  I.,  126 

Kelley,  Edgar  Stillman,  160;  percent- 
age in  repertoire,  277 

Khachaturian,  Aram,  284;  percentage 
in  repertoire,  188,  206 

Kindler,  Hans,  conductor  National 
Symphony,  180 

Klemperer,  Otto,  49,  74,  77,  conductor 
Los  Angeles  Philharmonic,  169,  173; 

174 
Kneisel,  Franz,  82 
Kodaly,  Zoltan,  68 
Kolar,  Victor,  175 
Kotzwara,  Franz,  19;  Battle  of  Prague, 

'9 

Koussevitzky,  Serge,  20,  24,  48,  221, 
226,  249,  250,  271;  conductor  Boston 
Symphony,  92;  European  career,  92; 
criticism  of,  93;  Berkshire  Festival, 
94;  farewell  to  Boston,  95;  on  func- 
tion of  symphony  concerts,  100 

Kozeluh,  Leopold,  210 

Krehbiel,  Henry  Edward,  52,  85,  106, 

37/ 
Kreisler,  Fritz,  261 

Krenek,  Ernest,  272;  Jonny  spielt  auf, 
272 

Kroeger,  E.  R.,  149 

Krueger,  Karl,  175 

Kubelik,  Rafael,  48,  no 

Kunwald,  Ernst,  48;  conductor  Cin- 
cinnati Symphony,  117 

Lalo,  Victor  Antoine  Edouard,  per- 
centage in  repertoire,  206;  Sym- 
phonie  Espagnole,  ijj 

Lamoureux,  Charles,  356 

Latin  American  music,  173,  264,  265 

La  Violette,  Wesley,  160 

Lehmann,  Lilli,  65 

Leinsdorf,    Eric,    24,    49;    conductor 


Index 


429 


Cleveland  Orchestra,  163;  conductor 
Rochester  Philharmonic,  177 

Lind,  Jenny,  22,  123,  150 

Lindpaintner,  Peter  Joseph  von,  64, 
252;  percentage  in  repertoire,  206 

Listemann,  Bernhard,  82 

Liszt,  Franz,  20,  44,  64,  68,  152,  239; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  65,  66,  67, 
121,  172,  188,  206,  235,  239;  Les  Pre- 
ludes, 152;  Hungarian  Rhapsodies, 
239;  Faust  Symphony,  239;  Piano 
Concertos  No.  1  and  2,  239 

Loder,  48 

Loeffler,  Charles  Martin,  69,  96,  149, 
162,  164,  274,  278;  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 277 

London  Philharmonic,  25,  63;  with 
Nikisch,  87;  198 

Longy,  Georges,  262 

Lopatnikov,  Nicolai,  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277 

Los  Angeles  Philharmonic  Orchestra, 
forerunners,  165;  Los  Angeles  Sym- 
phony Society,  165;  founding  of, 
167;  philanthropic  support,  168; 
Hollywood  Bowl  concerts,  168; 
Auditorium,  170;  competition  with 
Hollywood,  171;  repertoire,  172,  173 

Lully,  Jean  Baptiste,  312 

MacDonald,  Harl,  278 

MacDowell,  Edward,  95,  112,  120,  149, 
245,  246,  251,  274,  278,  364;  percent- 
age in  repertoire,  206,  244,  246,  277; 
Piano  Concerto  No.  2,  245,  246;  In- 
dian Suite,  246;  Suite  in  A  minor, 
246 

Mahler,  Gustav,  21,  24,  48;  conductor 
N.  Y.  Philharmonic,  5 1 ;  difficulties  in 
his  regime,  52;  66,  68,  128,  160,  164, 
172,  173,  227,  228;  trend  line,  229; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  188,  206, 
229;  Symphony  No.  8,  128,  129,  229; 
Das  Lied  von  der  Erde,  228;  Sym- 
phony No.  1,  377 

Malipiero,  G.  Francesco,  264 

Manifesto  of  German  Intellectuals,  217 


Mannheim  orchestra,  26 

Marschner,  Heinrich  August,  7 

Martini,  Giovanni  Battista,  123 

Martinu,  Bohuslav,  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 188 

Martucci,  Giuseppe,  68 

Mason,  Lowell,  274 

Mason,  Daniel  Gregory,  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277;  278 

Mason,  R.  Osgood,  39 

Mason,  William,  95 

Matinee  concerts,  origin  of,  296 

McCormack,  John,  52 

Mehul,  Etienne  Nicolas,  7 

Meiningen  orchestra,  23,  300,  314 

Melba,  Nellie,  52 

melos,  85,  86,  313 

Mendelssohn,  Felix,  7,  64,  68,  83,  09; 
Bach  revival,  201,  205,  239,  240,  301, 
305,  310,  313,  354;  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 65,  172,  188,  206,  235,  239, 
240;  Elijah,  142;  FingaVs  Cave  Over- 
ture, 85,  314;  Symphony  No.  5,  239, 
377;  Symphony  No.  4,  239,  377; 
Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  239, 
377;  Concerto  for  Violin,  239,  376; 
Lovely  Melusine,  239 

Alengelberg,  Willem,  48,  50,  55,  74,  107 

Mennin,  Peter,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277 

Menotti,  Gian  Carlo,  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277,  278 

Menuhin,  Yehudi,  234,  247 

Mero,  Yolanda,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277 

Messager,  Andre,  262 

Messiaen,  Olivier,  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 188 

Metropolitan  Opera,  52 

Meyerbeer,  Giacomo,  percentage  in 
repertoire,  206 

Miaskowsky,  Nicolas,  112,  135,  263; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  188;  Fifth 
Symphony,  112;  Sixth  Symphony, 
112;  Symphony  No.  21,  113 

Mignone,  Francisco,  173,  265 

Milhaud,  Darius,  76,  160,  232,  272,  284; 


43° 


Index 


percentage  in  repertoire,  188,  227; 
Suite  Provengale,  232 

Miller,  Owen,  342 

Minneapolis  Symphony  Orchestra, 
founding  of,  136;  Auditorium,  137; 
Minneapolis  Orchestral  Association, 
137;  children's  concerts,  "highway", 
138;  relation  with  University,  139; 
financial  arrangement,  139;  Sunday 
popular  concerts,  143;  repertoire,  142 

Mitchell,  Howard,  conductor  Na- 
tional Symphony,  181 

Mitropoulos,  Dimitri,  24^  48,  49,  63, 
208;  conductor  Minneapolis  Sym- 
phony, 142,  143 

Monteux,  Pierre,  24,  48,  49,  262;  con- 
ductor Boston  Symphony,  91,  100; 
conductor  San  Francisco  Symphony, 
158;  repertoire  of,  160 

Moore,  Douglas,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277 

Morris,  William,  294 

Moscheles,  Ignaz,  7 

Mottl,  Felix,  107,  364 

Moussorgsky,  Modest,  68,  263;  Pic- 
tures at  an  Exhibition,  377;  Prelude 
to  Khovantchina,  377 

Mozart,  Wolfgang  A.,  7,  8,  15,  17,  68, 
121,  123,  135;  trend  line,  109,  200; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  188,  198, 
200,  206;  Symphonies:  G  minor  (K 
550),  199,  200,  376;  C  major  (K 
5j/),  199,  200,  376;  E  flat  major 
(K  543),  199,  200,  376;  D  major  (K 
3#5),  199,  200,  376;  C  major  (K  338), 
200;  D  major  (K  504),  200;  K  201, 
200;  K  42$,  200;  K  200,  200;  K 
1  S3,  200;  Eine  kleine  Nachtmusik, 
200;  Overtures  to  the  operas,  200; 
Serenades,  200,  Piano  concertos, 
200;  Violin  concertos,  200;  Ido- 
meneo,  287 

Muck,  Karl,  20,  24,  48;  with  Boston 
Symphony,  88,  89;  154 

Munch,  Charles,  48;  conductor  Bos- 
ton Symphony,  94 

Munich  orchestra,  23 


Musard,  Orchestra,  123 

Music:  Social  history  of,  8;  function 
of,  30,  286,  292,  297 

Music  history  as  performance,  9 

Musical  Courier,  130 

Musical  forms,  historical  continuity 
of,  8,  238 

Musicians'  Union,  Boston  strike,  91; 
Chicago  problem,  109;  Washington 
problem,  180,  sources  of  friction, 
341;  origins  of,  341,  342;  Am.  Fed. 
of  Musicians,  342;  Alien  Contract 
Labor  Law,  342;  Musical  Mutual 
Protective  Union,  343;  "six-months" 
rule,  343;  strike,  against  Damrosch, 
344;  local  autonomy,  346;  regula- 
tions, 347;  increased  power,  348; 
Boston  open  shop,  349;  strike  and 
unionization  of  Boston,  350;  record- 
ings and  radio,  351 

Nationalism,  203,  214,  253;  folkmusic, 
254;  influence  in  repertoire,  253,  255, 
257;    definition   of,    256;   American 
nativist  movement,   266-270 
National   Orchestral  Association,    109 
National  Symphony  Orchestra  (Wash- 
ington, D.  C.),  179-181 
National   Symphony   of  New   York: 
54,  55;  merger  with  N.  Y.  Philhar- 
monic, 55 
Naumann,  Johann  Gottlieb,  7 
Neuendorff,  Adolph,  45,  48,  70 
Neue  Zeitschrift  fur  Musik,  Der,  7 
New  York  Philharmonic  Society,  21, 
27;  founding  of,  37-42;  cooperative 
organization,     40;     instrumentation, 
40;   vocal    music   in,   42;   program- 
matic interpretations,  42;  social  sup- 
port,  43;    competition   with   opera, 
44,  52;  competition  of  Thomas  or- 
chestra, 44;  decline,  45,  46;  attempt 
at  reorganization,  47;  guest  conduc- 
tors, 50;  abandonment  of  coopera- 
tive organization,  51;  endowments, 
53;   revival   of   public   interest,    54; 
merger   with    National    Symphony 


Index 


43 1 


and  Symphony  Society,  56;  initial 
program    (1842),   361 

New  York  Philharmonic-Symphony 
Society,  56;  Centennial  year,  62; 
guest  conductors,  63;  in  Roxy  thea- 
tre, 63;  soloist  policy,  65;  analysis  of 
repertoire,  63-68;  303,  351 

New  York  Symphony  Society,  44,  54, 
69-77,  as  competitor  of  Philhar- 
monic, 55;  merger  with  Philhar- 
monic, 56;  founding  of,  71;  tours, 
73,  74,   161;  repertoire,  76,  77 

Nichols,  George  Ward,  114 

Nicolai,  Otto,  39,  99;  Merry  Wives  of 
Windsor,  39 

Nikisch,  Arthur,  20,  23,  48,  conductor 
Boston  Symphony,  83-86;  European 
career,  87;  189,  224,  225,  300,  319,  323 

Nordica,  Lillian,  52 

norm  of  "fair"  competition,  271 

Oberhoffer,  Emil,  40,  49,  136,  169;  con- 
ductor of  Minneapolis  Symphony, 
140,  143 

Onslow,  George,  7 

Opera,  prestige  in  Europe,  24,  25,  26 

Orchestra:  quality  of  American,  21; 
shares  prestige  with  opera  in  Eu- 
rope, 23;  function  of,  286;  criteria 
of  "permanent"  orchestra,  36;  "per- 
manent," 73,  80;  civic  asset,  294,  295; 
as  fashionable  event,  295;  financial 
structure  of  (see  Financing  of  Or- 
chesta) 

Orchestral  Compositions:  titles  of  (see 
Composers);  playing  time  of,  13, 
365;  quality  of,  13 

Orchestras:  see  name  of  orchestra  (as 
Boston  Symphony,  etc.);  major  or- 
chestras, 11,  37;  minor  orchestras, 
37;  community  orchestras,  37 

Orchestre  National  of  Paris,  94 
Ormandy,   Eugene,    24,    48,    49,    208; 
Musical    Director    of    Philadelphia 
Orchestra,  133;  conductor  of  Minne- 
apolis Symphony,  141,  142,  143 
Ornstein,  Leo,  135 


Otten,  Joseph,  145 
Oxford  Music  Room,   16 


Paderewski,  Ignace  Jan,  22 
Paganini,  Niccolo,  20,  300;  Moto  Per- 

petuo,  300 
Paine,  John  Knowles,  95,  112,  274,  276 
Palestrina,   15 
Paray,  Paul,  119 
Parker,  Horatio  W.,  120,  274 
Pater,  Walter,  294 
Patti,  Adelina,  123 

Paur,  Emil,  46,  48,  66;  conductor  Bos- 
ton Symphony,  87,  100;  conductor 
Pittsburgh  Symphony,  174,  189,  241, 
300 
Peale,  Charles  Sprague,  17 
People's  Philharmonic  Orchestra,   154 
Pergolesi,  Giovanni  Battista,  212 
Persichetti,    Vincent,    percentage    in 

repertoire,  277 
Petri,  Egon,  321 

Petrillo,  James  C,  94,  108,  342,  351 
Philadelphia    Orchestra,    54;    Quaker 
traditions,    122;    Musical   Fund    So- 
ciety, 123;  Academy  of  Music,  124; 
founding,    124;    Philadelphia    Sym- 
phony Society,  125;  Orchestral  As- 
sociation, 125;  Woman's  Committee, 
125;  protests  against  European  per- 
sonnel, 126;  tax  support,  134;  tours, 
134;  analysis  of  repertoire,   134-136 
Philharmonic  Society  of  London,  38 
Philanthropists,   35,  47,   103,    113,   335, 
349;  Mrs.  Leonora  Wood  Armsby, 
157,  335;  Edward  Bok,  35,  126,  334; 
Robert  S.  Brookings,  145,  334;  An- 
drew Carnegie,  47,  51,  71,  73,   174; 
Elbert  L.  Carpenter,   137,  334,  335, 
349;  William  A.  Clark,  35,  165;  Wil- 
liam Andrews  Clark,  Jr.,   165,   166, 
167,  168,  334,  335;  E.  B.  Dane,  90, 
334;  Cora  Dow,  335;  George  East- 
man, 177;  Charles  Norman  Fay,  102, 
334;  Marshall  Field,  102,  349;  H.  H. 
Flagler,    35,    54,    56,    73,    334,    349; 
Hamill,  349;  Henry  Higginson,  35, 
78,  80, 90,  334;  Mrs.  Victoria  Hoover, 


432 


Index 


120;  Mrs.  Adella  Prentiss  Hughes, 
161,  335,  349;  A.  D.  Juilliard,  349; 
Otto  Kahn,  349;  A.  Lewisohn,  54; 
Mrs.  Maria  Nicholas  Longworth, 
113,  120,  335;  Clarence  Mackay,  35, 
54,  56;  J.  P.  Morgan,  51,  71,  73;  Jo- 
seph Pulitzer,  51,  53,  67,  335;  H.  H. 
Reichhold,  175;  John  D.  Rockefeller, 
50,  71,  73;  J.  L.  Severance,  336;  Mrs. 
George  R.  Sheldon,  51;  Mrs.  Caro- 
line Estes  Smith,  349;  Henry  Stein- 
way,  71;  William  Steinway,  34;  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Charles  P.  Taft,  334,  335; 
Mrs.  William  Howard  Taft,  115; 
W.  K.  Vanderbilt,  71,  73;  Alexander 
van  Rensselaer,  126,  349;  Frances  A. 
Wister,  1 26 
Philidor,  Andre,  15 
Pick-Mangiagalli,  Riccardo,  208 
Pinto,  265 

Piston,  Walter,  278;  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 188,  277 
Pittsburgh  Symphony  Orchestra,   174 
Pizzetti,   Ildebrando,   68,   264 
Pleyel,  Ignaz,  20,  210 
Pohlig,  Karl,  48;  conductor  Philadel- 
phia Orchestra,  127;   134 
Poulenc,  Francis,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 188 
Powell,  John,  77;  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 277 
Powell,  Maud,  222 
Powers,  Hiram,  18 

Program:  360;  "tutti-frutti,"  19,  198; 
choral,  109,  236;  cycles,  67,  221,  224, 
229;  principles  of,  360;  variety  in, 
361;  fragmentation  of  symphony, 
361;  position  of  symphony  in,  363; 
"genre,"  68,  120,  135,  363,  364;  all- 
American,  364;  protest  against  all- 
American,  364;  key-relations  in,  365; 
limiting  factors,  365;  encores,  366; 
"box-office"  numbers,  367;  opera  in 
concert  form,  367;  soloists,  368; 
American  premieres,  77,  136 
Program  notes,  history  of,  369;  types 

of,  369,  370,  371 
Prokofieff,    Serge,    68,    100,    113,    128, 


150,  160,  172,  229,  262,  263,  284;  per- 
centage in  repertoire,  188,  206,  229; 
Pas  d'acier,  128;  Classical  Sym- 
phony, 229,  377;  Symphony  No.  $, 
377;  Love  of  Three  Oranges,  229; 
Scythian  Suite,  230;  Peter  and  the 
Wolf,  230 

Promenade  Concerts,  25 

Purcell,  Henry,  69,  212 

Rabaud,  Henri,  48,  262;  with  Boston 

Symphony,  91,  100 
Rachmaninoff,  Serge,  68,  76,  77,  136, 

H3,  !47>  H9>  l64>  i7*i  x73>  273;  per- 
centage in  repertoire,  188,  216,  225; 
Piano  Concerto  No.  2,  225,  376; 
Piano  Concerto  No.  3,  77,  225,  263, 
377;  Symphony  No.  2,  225,  377; 
Rhapsody  on  a  Theme  by  Paganini, 

"5>  376 

Radio,  relation  to  orchestra,  4;  union, 
351;  NBC  orchestra,  37* 

Raff,  Joseph  Joachim,  77,  99,  251;  Im 
Walde,  251;  Symphony  No.  5,  251 

Rapee,  Erno,  229 

Ravel,  Maurice,  68,  69,  76,  143,  160, 
262,  272;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
188,  227;  Bolero,  69,  377;  Daphnis  et 
Chloe,  376;  La  Valse,  376;  Rhapsodic 
Espagnole,  376;  Alborada  del  Gra- 
cioso,  377 

Recordings,  relation  to  orchestra,  4; 
union,  351 

Reichardt,  Friedrich,  358,  369 

Reinagle,  Alexander,  20,   122,  123 

Reiner,  Fritz,  24,  48;  conductor  Cin- 
cinnati Symphony,  118;  conductor 
Pittsburgh  Symphony,  174 

Remenyi,  Edouard,  65 

Repertoire:  analysis  of  (see  names  of 
individual  orchestras) ;  composer's 
percentage  in,  (see  composer's 
name;  see  also  repertoire  of  each 
orchestra);  reservoir  of,  10;  as  basis 
for  measure,  11,  13;  changing,  12; 
survival  of,  12;  American  compared 
with  European,  20;  basically  Ger- 
man,  23;   opera   in,    164;   effect  of 


Index 


433 


World  War  I  on  (see  World  War 
I);  balanced,  65,  in,  143,  172,  173; 
"experimental,"  135,  144;  geographi- 
cal factors  in,  220,  279;  personal  fac- 
tors in,  225,  229,  279;  social  factors 
in,  220,  225,  229,  279;  social  factors  in, 
220,  225,  226,  241;  nationalities  in, 
259  ff.  (see  also  under  each  nation- 
ality); American  composer  in,  274- 
278;  American  percentage  in,  276; 
contemporary  American  composers 
in,  280,  282;  contemporary  foreign 
composers  in,  280,  282;  competition 
of  American  and  foreign  compos- 
ers, 281;  popularization  of,  296;  defi- 
nition of  "standard,"  375;  standard 
list  of,  376,  377 

Respighi,  Ottorino,  68,  143,  160,  208, 
249,  264;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
188;  Fines  of  Rome,  249,  377;  Foun- 
tains of  Rome,  249 

Revueltas,  S.,  265 

Richter,  Hans,  24,  25,  87,  107,  319 

Righini,  Vincenzo,  7 

Rimsky-Korsakoff,  Nicholas,  66,  68, 
135,  164,  246,  262;  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 135,  188,  246;  Spanish  Ca- 
price, 246;  Russian  Easter  Overture, 
246,  377;  Scheherazade,  246 

Ritter,  F.  L.,  115;  Music  in  America, 

"5 

Rive,  Julia,  65 

Rochester  Philharmonic,   177 

Rodzinski,  Artur,  48,  49,  226;  builder  of 
orchestras,  62;  conductor  Chicago 
Symphony,  no;  conductor  Cleve- 
land, 163,  164;  conductor  Los  An- 
geles, 169 

Rogers,  Bernard,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277 

Rosenthal,  Manuel,  percentage  in  rep- 
ertoire, 188 

Rossini,  Gioacchino,  7,  25,  68,  198, 
264;  percentage  in  repertoire,  206; 
William  Tell  Overture,  148 

Rothwell,  Walter,  49,  118,  140;  con- 
ductor Los  Angeles  Philharmonic, 
167,  168,  172 


Rousseau,  Jean  Jacques,  26,  305 

Roussel,   Albert,  68 

Royal  Opera  of  Covent  Garden,  25 

Rubinstein,  Anton,  22,  65,  66,  77,  240, 
241,  262,  369;  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 65,  206,  235,  241;  Ocean  Sym- 
phony, 241;  Piano  Concerto  No.  5, 
241,  369;  Piano  Concerto  No.  4,  241 

Rubinstein,  Beryl,  164 

Ruskin,  John,  294 

Russian  Symphony,  37,  249 

Russo-Soviet  Union,  music  of,  66,  100, 
121,  149,  164,  172,  259,  262,  263;  per- 
centage in  repertoire,  262 

Safonoff,  Vassily,  48,  50,  66 
St.  Louis  Philharmonic  Society,  145 
St.    Louis    Symphony    Society,    144; 
forerunners  to,   144,   145;  origin  in 
St.  Louis  Choral  Society,   145;  St. 
Louis  Musical  Union,  146;  organiza- 
tion as   St.  Louis  Symphony,   146; 
Sunday  "pops,"  146,  147;  children's 
concerts,    147;    Municipal    Audito- 
rium, 148;  financial  support  of,  148; 
repertoire,  149,  150. 
St.  Paul  Symphony  Orchestra,  140 
St.   Petersburg   Philharmonic   Society 

of,  15 
Saint-Saens,  Camille,   25,  68,  09,   100, 
121,  160,  172,  243,  244,  262;  percent- 
age in  repertoire,  121,  149,  188,  243; 
Symphony  No.  3,  244;  Cello  con- 
certo,   244;    Violin   Concerto,    244; 
Piano  Concerto  No.  2,  244;  Piano 
Concerto  No.  4,  244;  Danse  Maca- 
bre, Hymn  to  California,  244 
Sainte-Beuve,  Charles  Augustin,  106 
Salieri,  Antonio,  7 
Salomon-Haydn  concerts,  16,  211 
Salzedo,  Carlos,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277 
San  Francisco  Symphony,  150;  found- 
ing,  152;  financing,   152;  early  ob- 
stacles,  153;  popular  concerts,   155; 
municipal    tax,    156;    revitalization, 
157;    War    Memorial,    157;    forum, 
158;   Youth   concerts,   158;  lack  of 


434 


Index 

159;     repertoire, 


summer    activity 
159,  160 

Scandinavian  music,  143,  359 

Scarlatti,  Domenico,  264 

Schaefer*  Ferdinand,  178 

Scheel,  Fritz,  36,  48,  125,  134,  151 

Schelling,  Ernest,  67,  68,  158,  278;  per- 
centage in  repertoire,  277;  Impres- 
sions of  an  Artist's  Life,  6y 

Schneevoigt,  Georg,  49;  conductor 
Los  Angeles  Philharmonic,  169,  172 

Schneider,  Karl,  178 

Schoenberg,  Arnold,  68,  77,  128,  132, 
208,  230,  273;  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 188,  227;  Five  Orchestral 
Pieces,  132,  230,  359;  Gurrelieder, 
128;  Verklarte  Nacht,  230 

Scholes,  Percy,  10 

Schopenhauer,  Arthur,  30 

Schradiek,  Henry,  115 

Schreiber,  Ottmar,  23 

Schubert,  Franz,  68,  99;  Centennial, 
172,  235;  trend  line,  236;  percentage 
in  repertoire,  65,  172,  188,  206,  235, 
236;  Symphony  in  C  major,  236; 
Symphony  No.  7,  237,  376;  Sym- 
phony No.  8,  237,  377;  Symphony 
No.  5,  237;  Symphony  in  E,  237 

Schuman,  William,  233,  278;  percent- 
age in  repertoire,  188,  227,  277; 
American  Festival  Overture,  233 

Schumann,  Clara,  20 

Schumann,  Robert,  7,  8,  68,  121,  145, 
204,  234,  252,  316;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  65,  188,  206,  234,  235; 
Trdumerei,  102;  Manfred  Overture, 
234;  Concerto  for  Piano,  234,  276; 
Violin  Concerto,  234;  Symphonies 
No.  1,  84,  377;  No.  2,  3,  4,  377 
Scriabin,  Alexander,  66,  68,  76,  100, 
249,  263;  Reverie,  249;  Symphony 
No.  1,  249;  Symphony  No.  3,  249; 
Symphony  No.  4,  249;  Prometheus, 
a  Poem  of  Fire,  249 
Seating  Plan:  298  ff.;  performers 
standing,  300;  seated,  301;  Leipzig 
Gewandhaus,  301;  principles  of, 
301,  303;  early  N.  Y.  Philharmonic, 


303;  London  Philharmonic,  302,  305; 
Berlioz  plan  basic,  303;  Boston  Sym- 
phony, 302;  division  of  celli  and 
basses,  305;  Stokowski  reforms,  130, 
307;  position  of  celli,  307 

Seidl,  Anton,  24,  45,  48,  65,  115 

Sembrich,  Marcella,  52 

Serkin,  Rudolph,  94 

Sevitzky,  Fabien,  conductor  Indianap- 
olis Symphony,  178 

Sgambati,  Giovanni,  264 

Shapero,  H.  S.  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277 

Shaw,  George  Bernard,  355,  358 

Shepherd,  Arthur,  164;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277 

Shostakovitch,    Dmitri,    68,    100,    113, 

135,  150,  164,  173,  226,  227;  trend 
line,  228,  262,  263,  284;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  206,  216;  Symphony  No. 
1,  226,  377;  Symphony  No.  5,  226, 
376;  Symphonies  No.  6,  7,  8,  9,  226 

Sibelius,  Jan,  68,  77,  100,  113,  121,  135, 

136,  143,  160,  172;  trend  line,  220, 
221;  American  visit,  220;  violin  con- 
certo, 222;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
121,  188,  206,  216,  221;  Tapiola,  77; 
Symphony  No.  2,  220,  377;  Valse 
Triste,  220;  Finlandia,  220;  The 
Oceanides,  220;  Symphony  No.  5, 
221,  377;  Symphony  No.  7,  377 

Siloti,  Alexander,  208 

Siqueira,  265 

Slonimsky,  N.,  234 

Smetana,  Bedfich,  245;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  188,  244,  245;  The  Bar- 
tered Bride,  245,  377;  The  Moldau, 
245,  356,  377;  First  String  Quartet, 

245 

Smith,  David  Stanley,   149 

Sobolewski,  Eduard  de,  145 

Societe  des  Concerts  du  Conserva- 
toire, 24,  38,  63 

Sokoloff,  Nicolai,  49,  154,  161;  con- 
ductor   Cleveland    Orchestra,    162, 

163 
Sonneck,  Oscar  G.,  5 


Index 


435 


Sontag,  Henrietta,  123 

Sowerby,  Leo,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277,  278 

Spalding,  Albert,  77 

Spohr,  Ludwig,  7,  251,  310,  314;  per- 
centage in  repertoire,  206,  251;  Vio- 
linschule,  251;  Symphony  No.  4, 
251;  Jessonda,  251;  Violin  Concerto 
No.  8,  251 

Spontini,  Gasparo  Luigi,  7 

Stamitz,  Johann,  20,  123,  210 

Stamm,  A.  J.,  165 

Stewart,  Reginald,  176 

Still,  William  Grant,  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277;  278 

Stock,  Frederick,  24,  48;  conductor 
Chicago  Orchestra,  107-110;  208; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  277; 
March  and  Hymn  to  De?nocracy, 
108 

Stokowski,  Leopold,  24,  37,  48,  54, 
63;  conductor  Cincinnati,  117;  as  in- 
novator, 127,  130;  personality,  128; 
conductor  Philadelphia  Orchestra, 
127;  genius  for  publicity,  129;  sal- 
ary, 132;  Bach  transcriptions,  135, 
208;  experimental  repertoire,  135; 
170,  221,  226,  307,  319,  320 

Stransky,  Josef,  24,  48;  conductor  of 
N.  Y.  Philharmonic,  53,  54,  55;  66, 

I94>  239>  245>  l6° 

Strauss,  Johann,  144;  Wiener-Walzer, 
144 

Strauss,  Richard,  8,  50,  63,  65,  68,  77, 
106,  112,  121,  135,  136,  143,  164,  199, 
215,  216;  visit  to  America,  217,  218, 
219,  260;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
67,  121,  172,  188,  206,  215,  216;  Mac- 
beth, jj;  Guntram,  77;  Ein  Helden- 
leben,  106,  180;  Till  Eulenspiegel, 
112,  180,  218,  376;  Symphony  in  F 
?ninor,  112,  218;  Salome,  154,  219; 
Der  Rosenkavalier,  154,  219,  377; 
Death  and  Transfiguration,  218, 
376;  Don  ]uan,  218,  376;  Alpensym- 
phonie,  219;  Don  Quixote,  376; 
Symphonia  Domestica,  219;  Elektra, 
219 


Stravinsky,  Igor,  68,  100,  113,  118,  119, 
128,  132,  135,  143,  160,  164,  172,  173, 
222,  262,  263,  272,  273;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  188,  216,  222;  Sacre  du 
Printemps,  100,  118,  132,  227;  The 
Fire  Bird,  222,  376;  Petrouchka,  222, 
377;  Oedipus  Rex,  128 

Stringham,  Edwin,  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277 

Strong,  George,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 277 

Strube,  Gustav,  149,  176 

Stuart,  Gilbert,  17 

Summer  Concerts,  141,  159,  171,  350 

Svendsen,  Johan,  143 

Symphony:  significance  as  musical 
form,  29;  aesthetic  philosophy  of, 
30;  reasons  for  ascendancy,  31 

Symphony  Orchestra:  priority  of  in 
America,  23;  as  symbol  of  culture, 
30;  rise  in  America,  31-35;  "sym- 
phonic soirees,"  3 1 ;  forms  of  organi- 
zation, 35,  40  (see  also  under  history 
of  each  orchestra) 

Szell,  Georg,  24,  49;  conductor  Cleve- 
land Orchestra,  163,  245 

Szigeti,  Joseph,  94 

Tailleferre,  Germaine,  160 

Taktschlager,  42 

Talley,  Marion,  351 

Tandler,  Adolf,  166 

Tansman,  Alexandre,  208,  272,  284; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  188 

Taste:  factors  in  formation  of,  3,  9, 
29>  397?  398;  in  Leipzig,  7;  character 
of  before  1800,  10;  church  factor, 
14,  202;  changing  63,  96,  202,  203, 
384,  394;  popular,  287;  concept  of 
beauty,  380;  variety  of,  381;  art  vs. 
science,  382;  critics'  influence,  383; 
beauty  as  experience,  384,  388,  389; 
"spirit  of  the  age,"  8;  meaning  of, 
387;  criticism  of  "spirit  of  the  age" 
concept,  385,  386;  specific  tonal 
habits,  388;  satiety  of,  390;  conduc- 
tor as  missionary  of,  391;  norms  of, 
392;  a  folkway,  392,  393;  aesthetic 


436 


Index 


taste,  social  nature  of,  394;  stability 
of  norms,  395;  cultural  inheritance, 
395,  396;  conductor's  influence  on, 
397,  398;  and  Technology,  399,  400; 
meanings  of  "good"  taste,  400,  401; 
good  taste  a  social  norm,  402;  con- 
ditioning of,  403 
Taste  trends,  4,  national  trend,  13; 
political  factors,  203,  220,  225,  243, 
289,  290;  geographical  factors,  220; 
personal  factors,  193,  225,  229,  242; 
social  factors,  10,  193,  202,  204,  211, 

220,  289,  290;  trend  lines,  184,  187, 
193,  196,  199,  209,  211,  213,  214,  215, 

221,  222,  223,  225,  228,229,  231,  234, 
236,  238,  239,  240,  241,  242,  243,  248 

Tavares,  265 

Taylor,  Deems,  77,  278;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  277 

Tetrazzini,  Luisa,  52 

Thomas,  Theodore,  22,  24,  27; 
founded  Thomas  orchestra,  34;  first 
modern  American  conductor,  34, 
40,  6$;  Director  N.  Y.  Philhar- 
monic, 45,  50,  87;  conductor  Chica- 
go Orchestra,  102;  failures,  102; 
personality,  104,  114;  progressive 
repertoire,  106;  Cincinnati  Music 
Festivals,  113;  151,  239,  273 

Thomas  Orchestra,  competitor  of 
N.  Y.  Philharmonic,  44;  model  for 
other  orchestras,  79;  "highway"  101, 
125,  138,  144,  161,  193;  seating  ar- 
rangement, 79 

Thompson,  Randall,  percentage  in 
repertoire,  188,  277,  278 

Thomson,  Virgil,  percentage  in  reper- 
toire, 188,  277,  278 

Thunder,  Henry  Gordon,  124 

Timm,  Henry  C,  48 

Tommasini,  Vincenzo,  68,  264 

Toscanini,  Arturo,  24,  37,  48,  con- 
ductor Metropolitan  opera,  52; 
traits  of,  $6;  debut  with  N.  Y.  Phil- 
harmonic, 57;  appeal,  57,  58;  reper- 
toire of,  58;  farewell  concert,  59,  60; 
67,  226 

Tovey,  Donald,  383 


Transcriptions:  of  Bach,  135,  205,  208; 
aesthetic  philosophy  of,  135,  208 

Trumbull,  John,  17 

Tschaikowsky,  Peter  Ilich,  64,  65,  68, 
77,  107,  121,  135,  136,  143,  149,  152, 
160,  164,  188,  196,  262,  263;  visit  to 
America,  197;  trend  line,  197;  pre- 
miere in  U.  S.,  197;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  66,  67,  121,  136,  172,  188, 
106,  197,  206;  Symphony  No.  4,  197, 
376;  Symphony  No.  5,  197,  376; 
Symphony  No.  6,  66,  77,  107,  152, 
197,  376;  Concerto  for  Piano  No.  1, 
197,  376;  Concerto  for  Violin,  197, 
376;  Romeo  and  Juliet,  196,  197,  376; 
Francesca  da  Rimini,  197,  377; 
Marche  Slave,  198;  Nutcracker 
Suite,  198;  Overture  1812,  198;  Eu- 
gene Onegin,  367 

Vaughan  Williams,  Ralph,  68,  77,  231, 
247,  269;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
188,  227;  London  Symphony,  231; 
Fantasia  on  a  Theme  by  Thomas 
Tallis,  231,  377 

Verbrugghen,  Henri,  49;  conductor 
Minneapolis  Symphony,  141 

Van  der  Stucken,  Frank,  48;  con- 
ductor Cincinnati  Symphony,  115, 
116;  Americanism  of,  120,  249 

Vanhal,  Jan,  210 

Varese,  Edgar,  54,  135 

Verdi,  Giuseppe,  25,  68;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  206 

Vienna  Philharmonic,  23,  63,  331 

Vienna  Royal  Opera  Orchestra,  39 

Vieuxtemps,  Henri,  118;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  206 

Villa-Lobos,  Heitor,  160,  173,  265; 
Choros  No.  8,  359 

Vivaldi,  Antonio,  68,  264 

Vocal  music,  early  prestige  of,  26; 
persistence  of,  26,  27,  28 

Vogler,  Georg  Joseph,  7 

Wagenaar,     Bernard,     67,     274,     278; 

Symphony  No.  2,  67 
Wagner,  Richard,  8,  26,  41,  44,  64,  6$, 


Index 


437 


68;  in  Boston,  96,  97,  104,  121,  135, 
143,  149,  152,  160,  190;  anti- Wagner, 
192;  essentially  symphonic  com- 
poser, 191;  first  American  perform- 
ances, 192,  193;  trend  line,  193; 
romanticism  of,  194;  percentage  in 
repertoire,  66,  67,  112,  136,  159,  172, 
188,  193,  206;  Die  Meister singer,  152, 
376;  Parsifal,  154,  194,  377;  Tann- 
hduser,  192,  194,  377;  Flying  Dutch- 
man, 193,  377;  Die  Walkure,  194; 
Siegfried  Idyll,  195,  377;  Tristan, 
230,  356,  376;  Faust  Overture,  195; 
Centennial  March,  195;  JJber  das 
Dirigieren,  313 

Wallenstein,  Alfred,  49,  conductor 
Los  Angeles  Philharmonic,  170,  173 

Walter,  Bruno,  24,  74,  77,  94,  141,  169, 
199,  205 

Walton,  William,  233,  247,  264,  284; 
percentage  in  repertoire,  188,  206, 
277;  Fagade,  233;  Portsmouth  Point, 
233;  Belshazzar's  Feast,  233 

Ward,  R.,   percentage   in  repertoire, 

277 

Weber,  Joseph  N.,  342 

Weber,  Karl  Maria  von,  7,  8,  26,  68, 
214,  310;  percentage  in  repertoire, 
188,  206,  214;  Der  Freischiitz,  39, 
214,  376;  Conzertstiick,  214;  Invita- 
tion to  the  Dance,  214;  Oberon,  214, 
376;  Euryanthe,  214,  376 

Webern,  Anton  von,  359;  Symphonie, 
359 


Weinberger,      Jaromir,       143,      284; 

Schwanda,  143 
Weiner,  Lazar,  208 
Weingartner,  Felix,  50,  107 
Weltanschauung,  253 
West,  Benjamin,  17 
Wetzler,  Hans,  69,  278;  percentage  in 

repertoire,  277;  Basque  Venus,  69 
Whiteman,  Paul,  271,  272 
Whithorne,   Emerson,   percentage   in 

repertoire,  277;  278 
Whiting,  Thomas,  276 
Wieniawski,  Henri,  6$,  118 
Wilhelmj,  August,  65 
Willhartitz,  Adolf,  165 
Willis,  Richard  Storrs,  269 
Women   as   orchestra  members,   309, 

310 
Wood,  Sir  Henry,  25,  50,  208,  307,  309 
World  War  I,  89,  100,  108,  154,  163, 

186,  193,  194,  215,  243,  248,  260,  261 


Youth  Orchestra,  134 
Ysaye,   Eugene,   48;    conductor   Cin- 
cinnati Symphony,  118,  262 


Zach,   Max,  49;  conductor  St.  Louis 

Symphony,  147 
Zelter,  Friederich,  204,  207 
Zerrahn,  Carl,  79 
Zimbalist,    Efrem,   94,   percentage   in 

repertoire,  277;  351 


DATE  DUE 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

WELLESLEY  COLLEGE  LIBRARY 


3  5002  03224  1031 


Music  ML  200  . M8 

Mueller,  John  Henry,  1395 

The  American  symphony 
orchestra 


