SP 


ill 


■I  

1' 


LIBRARY  OF 
WELLESLEY  COLLEGE 


PRESENTED  BY 


BULLETINS 

OF  THE 

State  Geological  and  Natural  History 
Survey  of  Connecticut. 


1.  First  Biennial  Report  of  the  Commissioners  of  the 
State  Geological  and  Natural  History  Survey,  1903- 1904. 

2.  A  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Protozoa  of  the  Fresh 
Waters  of  Connecticut;  by  Herbert  William  Conn. 

3.  A  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Hymeniales  of  Connecti- 
cut ;  by  Edward  Albert  White. 

4.  The  Clays  and  Clay  Industries  of  Connecticut;  by 
Gerald  Francis  Loughlin. 

5.  The  Ustilagineae,  or  Smuts,  of  Connecticut ;  by  George 
Perkins  Clinton. 

6.  Manual  of  the  Geology  of  Connecticut;  by  William 
North  Rice  and  Herbert  Ernest  Gregory. 

7.  Preliminary  Geological  Map  of  Connecticut;  by  Her- 
bert Ernest  Gregory  and  Henry  Hollister  Robinson. 

8.  Bibliography  of  Connecticut  Geology;  by  Herbert 
Ernest  Gregory. 

9.  Second  Biennial  Report  of  the  Commissioners  of  the 
State  Geological  and  Natural  History  Survey,  1905-1906. 

10.  A  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Algae  of  the  Fresh  Waters 
of  Connecticut  by  Herbert  William  Conn  and  Lucia  Wash- 
burn (Hazen)  Webster. 

11.  The  Bryophytes  of  Connecticut;  by  Alexander  William 
Evans  and  George  Elwood  Nichols. 

Bulletins  1  and  9  are  merely  administrative  reports,  con- 
taining no  scientific  matter.  The  other  bulletins  may  be  classi- 
fied as  follows : 

Geology:  Bulletins  4,  6,  7,  8. 

Botany:  Bulletins  3,  5,  10,  II. 

Zoology :  Bulletin  2. 

These  bulletins  are  sold  and  otherwise  distributed  by  the 
State  Librarian.  The  prices  "are  as  follows:  No.  1,  $0.05  ;  No. 
2,  .35;  No.  3,  .40;  No.  4,  .30;  No.  5,  .15;  No.  6,  .50;  No. 
7,  .60* ;  No.  8,  .20;  No.  9,  .05 ;  No.  10,  .35 ;  No.  11,  .30. 

Bulletins  1-5  have  been  collected  and  bound  as  Volume  I. 
The  price  of  this  volume  is  $1.50.    Other  volumes  will  follow. 

It  is  intended  to  follow  a  liberal  policy  in  gratuitously  dis- 
tributing these  publications  to  public  libraries,  colleges,  and 
scientific  institutions,  and  to  scientific  men,  teachers,  and  others 
who  require  particular  bulletins  for  their  work,  especially  to 
those  who  are  citizens  of  Connecticut. 

Applications  or  inquiries  should  be  addressed  to 

George  S.  Godard, 

State  Librarian, 

Hartford,  Conn. 


0  If  map  is  mounted  as  a  wall  map,  and  sent  by  express,  $1.60. 


JSbiaie  of  CSLoroiecticul 

PUBLIC  DOCUMENT  No.  47 


State  Geological  and  Natural 
History  Survey 

COMMISSIONERS 

ROLLIN  S.  WOODRUFF,  Governor  of  Connecticut  {Chairman) 

Arthur  Twining  Hadley,  President  of  Yale  University 

Bradford  Paul  Raymond,  President  of  Wesleyan  University 

Flavel  Sweeten  Luther,  President  of  Trinity  College  (Secretary) 

RUFUS  WHITTAKER  Stimson,  President  of  Connecticut  Agricultural  College 

SUPERINTENDENT 
William  North  Rice 


Bulletin  No.  10 


Hartford 

Printed  for  the  State  Geological  and  Natural  History  Survey 
1908 


A  PRELIMINARY  REPORT 


THE  ALGJE  OF  THE  FRESH  WATERS 
OF  CONNECTICUT 


By 

HERBERT  WILLIAM  CONN,  Ph.D., 

Professor  of  Biology  in  Wesleyan  University 
AND 

LUCIA  WASHBURN  (HAZEN)  WEBSTER,  M.S. 


« 


Hartford 

Printed  for  the  State  Geological  and  Natural  History  Survey 
1908 


A  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Algae  of  the  Fresh 
Waters  of  Connecticut. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  present  report  is  designed  to  accompany  the  previous 
report  upon  the  Fresh-water  Protozoa,  Bulletin  No.  2  of  this 
Survey.  Like  that  report,  it  is  not  claimed  to  be  complete, 
nor  by  any  means  to  contain  all  of  our  Algae.  But,  the  work 
having  covered  considerable  parts  of  four  years,  it  is  thought 
that  it  will  be  found  to  contain  most  of  the  common  Algae  in 
this  state,  and  will  therefore  be  useful  as  a  guide  to  students  of 
the  microscopy  of  our  waters.  To  wait  until  all  omissions 
could  be  filled  would  clearly  postpone  unduly  the  publication 
of  any  report.  For  these  reasons  this  preliminary  report  is 
issued  at  the  present  time. 

Work  upon  the  Algae  is  scattered  somewhat  widely  in  books 
and  in  journals.  We  have  found  most  valuable,  The  British 
Fresh-water  Algce,  by  West.  Wolle's  Fresh-water  Algce  of 
the  United  States,  and  his  similar  work  on  the  Desmids,  have 
also  been  found  extremely  useful.  The  magnificent  work  of 
Engler  and  Prantl  has  been  found  of  great  value,  as  has  also 
Die  Mikroskopische  PHanzenwelt  des  Siisswassers  by  Kirchner, 
and  the  Analytical  Keys  of  Genera  and  Species  of  the  Fresh- 
zvater  Algce  by  Stokes.  The  most  useful  publication  upon  a 
single  group  has  been  that  of  Hazen  —  The  Ulotrichacece  and 
Chcetophoraceee,  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Torrey  Botanical  Club, 
XXII,  1902. 

The  key  that  we  have  adopted  in  this  Bulletin  is  based  upon 
that  given  by  West.  We  have  used  this  because  in  our  experi- 
ence it  has  been  found  to  be  the  most  practical  and  useful. 
We  have,  however,  modified  it  in  several  respects  to  make  it 
correspond  to  the  key  used  in  the  Bulletin  on  the  Protozoa. 
As  so  modified,  we  think  it  will  be  found  very  easy  of  use  for 
microscopists  who  are  beginning  the  study  of  the  Algae. 


6  CONNECTICUT   GEOL.    AND   NAT.    HIST.   SURVEY.  [Bull. 


We  have  adopted  the  plan  used  in  the  Bulletin  on  the  Pro- 
tozoa of  indicating  by  a  *  in  the  analytical  keys  the  genera  that 
have  been  found  in  our  waters.  In  a  number  of  cases  the 
genera  thus  indicated  have  not  yet  been  found  by  ourselves, 
although  known  to  occur  in  Connecticut.  We  have  given  de- 
scriptions of  all  the  genera  likely  to  be  found  in  this  vicinity, 
whether  already  known  to  occur  in  Connecticut  or  not. 

So  far  as  possible  we  have  determined  the  species  of  the 
forms  studied  and  figured.  While  there  is  considerable  varia- 
tion among  the  individuals  of  the  same  species  of  Algae,  it  is 
less  than  among  the  Protozoa,  and  it  is  less  difficult  to  deter- 
mine species.  In  most  cases  there  has  been  little  difficulty 
in  affixing  specific  as  well  as  generic  names  to  the  Algae  found. 
In  some  genera  the  determination  of  species  is  nearly  im- 
possible without  the  whole  life  history  of  the  specimen  under 
consideration.  In  the  genus  Spirogyra,  for  instance,  the 
species  are  determined  with  certainty  only  when  one  has  the 
zygospores  for  study.  The  ordinary  student  of  Algae  is  seldom 
so  fortunate  as  to  have  the  zygospores,  and  must  in  these 
cases  make  his  determination  from  other  characters.  We  have, 
therefore,  in  these  cases  determined  the  species  as  well  as 
possible  from  the  general  structure  of  the  plant,  thinking  this 
to  be  more  practical  than  to  rely  upon  the  more  rarely  seen 
zygospores. 

The  figures  have  all  been  drawn  from  nature,  and  all  from 
specimens  found  by  ourselves  in  our  waters.  A  majority  of 
them  have  come  from  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Middletown. 
Collections  have  been  made  from  other  parts  of  the  state,  but 
these  other  localities  have  not  yet  yielded  many  forms  not 
represented  in  this  immediate  vicinity.  The  Algae  have  not 
been  to  a  very  large  extent  obtained  from  city  reservoirs,  since 
these  localities  are  not  very  profuse  in  this  kind  of  life.  Road- 
side pools,  ditches  by  railroads,  swamps,  stagnant  pools,  etc., 
have  been  more  prolific  sources  of  Algae. 

The  late  Isaac  Holden  made  during  his  life  large  collec- 
tions of  Algae  in  the  state.  The  largest  number  of  the  types 
that  he  collected  were  marine,  but  he  also  made  quite  exten- 
sive collections  of  the  fresh-water  forms.  A  list  of  the  species 
identified  by  him  in  this  state  has  been  recently  published  by 


No.  io.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG^E. 


7 


F.  S.  Collins  (Phycological  Notes  of  Isaac  H olden,  in  Rhodora, 
vol.  7,  p.  222,  1905).  Since  he  identified  quite  a  number  of 
species  that  we  have  not  found,  we  have,  for  the  purpose  of 
making  this  report  as  complete  as  possible,  included  in  this 
list  all  the  species  reported  by  him  which  we  have  not  ourselves 
identified.  These  have  been  appended  to  our  own  list,  and 
are  distinguished  by  being  inclosed  in  square  brackets  [  ]. 
We  have  not  given  any  figures  of  his  species,  however,  all  of 
the  species  figured  having  been  personally  found  by  ourselves. 
In  a  few  cases  we  have  noted  the  collection  of  certain  species 
in  this  state  by  Hazen  and  by  Setchell.  No  other  extensive 
collections  of  Algae  are  known  to  us  as  having  been  made  in 
the  state. 

The  figures  of  plates  I  to  XXXI  were  drawn  by  Mrs. 
Webster,  except  figures  5,  8,  8a,  10,  28,  31,  45,  47,  49,  54,  54a, 
55,  57,  59,  65,  72,  72a,  73,  77,  77a,  102,  125,  and  147.  These 
together  with  the  figures  of  Plates  XXXII  to  XLIV 
were  drawn  by  Prof.  Conn.  Acknowledgment  is  also  made  to 
H.  J.  Conn  from  whose  work  and  sketches  many  of  the  figures 
of  Plates  XXXII  to  XLIV  have  been  drawn. 


THE  ALG/E. 


The  Algje  are  flowerless  chlorophyll-bearing  water  plants. 
Although  sometimes  called  seaweeds,  they  are  not  confined 
to.  salt  water,  but  are  found  in  every  body  of  fresh  water,  on 
damp  stones  and  soil,  and  on  the  trunks  of  trees.  They  are, 
however,  all  true  water  plants,  for  the  few  that  live  out  of 
water  can  flourish  only  in  the  presence  of  abundant  moisture. 

The  Algae  show  the  widest  variety  in  form,  size,  and 
structure.  They  may  be  unicellular  or  multicellular ;  they  may 
be  solitary,  or  gathered  into  larger  or  smaller  families;  they 
may  grow  in  all  directions  to  form  a  spherical  thallus,  or  into 
plates  only  one  cell  thick,  or  into  branched  or  unbranched 
filaments.  When  multicellular,  all  the  cells  may  be  alike,  or 
there  may  be  a  differentiation  of  cells,  apical  and  root  cells, 
vegetative  and  sexual  cells  being  found.  The  filamentous 
thallus  may  present  the  appearance  of  a  highly  developed  plant, 
as  in  the  Rhodophyceae  or  Characeae,  or  may  be  a  single 
simple  thread,  as  in  the  Zygnemaceae. 

The  coloring  matter  of  the  Algae,  either  diffused  throughout 
the  cell  wall,  or  aggregated  in  special  bodies  called  chloroplasts, 
is  predominantly  green ;  but  there  is  hardly  any  color  known 
which  cannot  be  found  in  these  plants,  the  colors  running  from* 
orange  and  red  to  purple  and  black.  Their  size  differs  as 
greatly  as  their  color;  some  are  so  small  as  to  test  the  best 
microscopes,  while  others  stretch  two  hundred  feet  from  their 
marine  beds. 

The  Algae  multiply  both  by  the  sexual  and  the  asexual 
method.  The  asexual  method  is  universal,  the  sexual  is  more 
uncommon.  They  reproduce  asexually  in  three  ways: — I, 
By  simple  division  of  the  mother-cell.  In  the  multicellular 
forms  a  small  fragment  or  a  branch  may  separate  from  the 
mother  plant  to  form  a  new  one.  2,  By  means  of  spores, 
which  are  formed  from  the  contents  of  the  vegetative  cells,  and 
which  have  each  a  cell  wall,  and  may  or  may  not  be  motile.  3, 


FRESH-WATER  ALGJE. 


9 


By  swarm  spores,  which  lack  cell  walls  and  are  always  motile, 
usually  provided  with  cilia.  The  sexual  reproduction  is  of  two 
kinds : —  I,  Conjugation,  or  the  union  of  two  similar  or  nearly 
similar  cells  called  isogamous  gametes.  These  may  be  either 
motile  cells,  as  in  Ulothrix,  or  cells  of  the  thallus,  as  in  the 
Conjugate.  They  join  themselves  together,  and  their  con- 
tents fuse  to  form  a  new  cell,  a  zygote,  which,  after  a  short 
period  of  rest,  develops  into  a  new  plant.  2,  Sex  union  proper, 
or  the  union  of  two  entirely  different  cells,  one  of  which,  the 
male  or  sperm,  is  many  times  smaller  than  the  other,  the 
female  or  egg — heterogamous  gametes.  This  occurs,  for  ex- 
ample, in  Chara. 

The  Algae  are  found  from  the  Arctic  zone  to  the  Equator, 
and  no  genus  is  confined  to  a  single  latitude.  We  should 
sadly  miss  these  plants  if  they  were  all  destroyed.  They  do 
much  to  purify  the  atmosphere,  are  used  to  a  considerable  ex- 
tent in  medicine,  provide  food  for  fishes  and  for  men,  fodder 
for  cattle,  and  fertilization  for  the  ground. 

The  Algae  are  divided  into  classes  as  follows : — 

CLASS  I.  CYANOPHYCE.E  ( Schizophycese,  Myxophy- 
ceae,  or  Blue-green  Algae).  Containing  a  blue  coloring  matter 
(phycocyanin).  Mostly  in  fresh  water,  and  simple  in  structure. 

CLASS  II.  BACILLARIEiE  (Diatomaceae).  Containing 
a  brown  coloring  matter  (diatomin).  Universal  both  in  fresh 
and  salt  water. 

CLASS  III.  HETEROKONTJE  (Yellow-green  Algae). 
Containing  a  large  amount  of  a  yellow  pigment  (xanthophyll) . 
The  stored  product  of  assimilation  is  a  fatty  substance.  Found 
in  fresh  water. 

CLASS  IV.  CHLOROPHYCE^  (Green  Algae).  Con- 
taining only  the  green  coloring  matter  known  as  chlorophyll. 
The  product  of  assimilation  is  starch.  Very  largely  fresh- 
water plants. 

CLASS  V.  CHARACE^E.  Having  a  stem  with  nodes 
and  internodes.    Sexual  reproduction. 

CLASS  VI.  PH^EOPHYCE^E  (Brown  Algae).  Con- 
taining a  brown  coloring  matter,  known  as  phycophaein. 
Mostly  marine. 


10  CONNECTICUT   GEOL.   AND    NAT.    HIST.   SURVEY.  [Bull. 

CLASS  VII.  RHODOPHYCEyE  (Red  Algae).  Con- 
taining a  reddish  coloring  matter  known  as  phycoerythrin. 
Mostly  marine. 

In  the  study  of  the  fresh-water  Algae  we  are  concerned 
chiefly  with'  the  first  five  of  these  classes,  the  other  two  being 
practically  confined  to  salt  water,  although  a  few  of  them,  as 
noted  at  the  end  of  this  report,  are  inhabitants  of  fresh  water. 

CLASS  I.  CYANOPHYCE^. 
( Myxophyceae,  Schizophyceae,  or  Blue-green  Algae). 

The  class  Cyanophyceae  is  unquestionably  the  lowest  class 
of  the  Algae,  many  of  the  species  resembling  the  Bacteria. 
Their  most  conspicuous  characteristic  is  the  manner  in  which 
the  greater  number  of  the  genera  grow  in  gelatinous  masses 
or  strata.  They  are  largely  filamentous,  though  some  are 
unicellular.  Some  of  them  grow  wherever  there  is  moisture, 
as  on  wet  rocks,  stones,  and  trunks  of  trees.  Some  of  the 
filamentous  genera  form  thick,  felt-like  coverings  upon  moist 
earth  and  stones.  Many  of  the  Cyanophyceae  are  provided 
with  heterocysts,  which  are  cells  of  lighter  color  and  often  of 
greater  size  than  the  other  cells  of  the  filament.  The  hetero- 
cysts are  almost  always  solitary  on  the  filaments,  and  their 
use  is  not  known. 

The  unicellular  and  simple  colonial  genera  multiply  princi- 
pally by  repeated  cell-division,  which  may  occur  in  every  direc- 
tion or  in  certain  directions  only.  Asexual  reproduction  of 
the  large  forms  takes  place  in  a  variety  of  ways.  In  some 
families  certain  vegetative  cells  enlarge  and  form  spores ;  in 
others  the  contents  of  the  cells  divide  into  a  number  of  small 
spores.  The  Hormogoneae  reproduce  by  hormogones.  These 
are  short  filaments  arising  from  the  mother  plant,  which  break 
away  and  form  new  plants.    Sexual  reproduction  is  unknown. 

Some  of  the  Cyanophyceae  unite  with  Fungi  to  form 
Lichens,  in  which  case  they  lose  much  of  their  distinctive 
character. 

A  few  of  the  Cyanophyceae,  of  the  family  Oscillatoriaceae, 
are  distinguished  for  their  power  of  spontaneous  movement, 
which  is  generally  slow,  oscillating  or  gliding.    Many  of  this 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG/E. 


II 


family  have  a  disagreeable  odor,  giving  rise  to  unpleasant 
odors  and  tastes  in  drinking-water. 
There  are  two  orders,  as  follows : — 

Order  I.  COCCOGONE/E.  Plants  unicellular  or  colonial, 
not  truly  filamentous  ;  commonly  embedded  in  a  gelatinous  ma- 
trix, more  rarely  free-floating. 

Order  II.  HORMOGONE^E.  Plants  filamentous  ;  filaments 
single  or  branched,  generally  consisting  of  one  or  more  rows 
of  cells  within  a  sheath,  attached  to  a  substratum,  or  free- 
floating. 

ORDER  I.  coccogone;e. 

The  Coccogoneae,  the  lowest  form  of  the  Algae,  are 
unicellular  or  colonial.  The  colonies  vary  much  in  size  and 
shape,  and  the  cells,  which  are  of  various  forms,  are  disposed 
in  a  variety  of  ways  in  the  usually  hyaline  and  structureless 
envelope.  Multiplication  is  usually  by  simple  cell  division. 
Rounded  asexual  spores  have  been  found  in  some  species, 
formed  inside  the  wall  of  the  mother-cell. 

FAMILY  I.  CHROOCOCCACE^. 

This  family  is  composed  of  unicellular  forms  of  Algae  which 
divide  and  form  daughter-cells ;  often  many  generations  are 
involved  in  one  mucilaginous  envelope.  The  envelope  varies 
from  firm  and  lamellose  to  hyaline  and  diffluent.  The  cells 
often  contain  red,  orange,  or  violet  pigments.  The  members 
of  this  family  have  been  thought  to  be  stages  of  filamentous 
Algae,  and  Wolle  so  regarded  them ;  but  more  recent  algologists 
give  them  a  distinct  place  of  their  own. 

Key  to  Genera. 

1.  Cell  division  in  only  one  direction   2 

Cell  division  in  two  directions  at  right  angles,  form- 
ing plate-shaped  or  irregular  masses  .  .Merismopedia* 

Cell  division  alternate  in  the  three  directions  of  space  4 

2.  Cells  with  thin  membrane,  without  a  gelatinous  or 

mucous  envelope,  single  or  hanging  together  in 
thick  rows  Synechococcus 


12  CONNECTICUT   GEOL.   AND   NAT.   HIST.   SURVEY.  [Bull. 


Cells  with  thick,  swollen  membranes,  which  merge 
into  one  another  and  lie  in  a  gelatinous  or  mucous 
bed    3 

3.  The  thick  membrane  remains  present  through  several 

generations,  so  that  the  cells  are  enclosed  in  several 

membranes ;  cells  elongated  Gloeothece 

Cell  membranes  fused  into  a  structureless  jelly  in 
which  the  cells  are  arranged  without  order;  cells 
slightly  longer  than  broad  Aphanothece 

4.  Cells  at  the  periphery  of  spherical  colonies   5 

Cells  densely  aggregated  in  spherical,  elongated,  or 

clathrate  colonies   Microcystis* 

Colonies  without  definite  form   6 

5.  Cells  spherical,  closely  and  regularly  arranged  around 

a  hollow  sphere   Ccelosphcerium* 

Cells  peripheric,  sparsely  scattered  Gomphosphceria 

6.  Cells  enclosed  in  a  thick  membrane  Glceocapsa* 

Cells  not  enclosed   7 

7.  Cells  with  thick,  gelatinous,  fusing  membranes .... 

Aphanocapsa* 
Cells  single  or  in  small  groups,  with  membranes 
which  do  not  fuse  Chrodcocais* 

Description  of  Genera. 

Merismopedia  Meyen. —  Cells  spherical,  or,  at  time  of 
division,  oblong.  Their  regular  method  of  division  produces 
groups  of  4,  8,  16,  32,  64,  or  128  cells,  associated  in  a  single 
stratum,  making  a  flat,  freely  floating,  square  thallus. 

M.  glauca  (Ehrb.)  Nag.,  Fig.  3. 

M.  convoluta  Breb.,  Fig.  4. 

Synechococcus  Nag. —  Cells  cylindrical  or  oblong,  found 
singly  or  in  series  of  two  or  more ;  cell  wall  thin. 

Gloeothece  Nag. —  Cells  oblong  or  cylindrical,  with 
rounded  ends.  The  cells  divide  into  two  nearly  spherical 
daughter-cells.  The  colorless  gelatinous  tegument  may  con- 
tain one  or  often  more  cells,  and  this  tegument  may,  in  turn, 
be  included  in  a  larger  tegument  with  a  family. 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG^E. 


13 


Aphanothece  Nag. —  Very  like  Gloeothece,  with  cells 
longer  than  broad;  but  the  teguments  are  confluent,  forming 
a  firm  gelatinous  body  which  encloses  the  cells. 

Microcystis     Kiitz.   (Polycystis    Kiitz. ;  Clathrocystis 

Henfrey). —  Numerous  small  cells  gathered  into  globular,  ob- 
long or  irregular  families,  each  with  a  thin  tegument,  usually 
single  but  sometimes  associated  with  other  families,  and  all  en- 
closed in  a  common  tegument.  The  cells  divide  alternately  in 
three  directions. 

M.  ceruginosa  (Kiitz.)  (?),  Figs.  9,  90.  Sometimes  very 
abundant  in  reservoirs  and  giving  an  unpleasant  taste  to  the 
water.    Frequently  thus  associated  with  Anabcena. 

Coelosphaerium  Nag. —  Thallus  hollow,  spherical,  with 
numerous  small  spherical  cells  in  families,  or  scattered  at  the 
periphery,  embedded  in  a  gelatinous  stratum.  Multiplication 
takes  place  by  means  of  enlarged  cells  which  escape  and  form 
daughter-cells,  or  by  constriction  and  division  of  the  mother- 
cells. 

C.  Kuetzingianum    Nag.,  Fig.  7.  . 

Gomphosphaeria  Kiitz. —  A  globose,  free,  floating  thallus, 
composed  of  wedge-shaped  cells,  in  pairs,  associated  in  radi- 
ating families  at  the  periphery  of  a  solid  gelatinous  sphere,  and 
furnished  with  a  tegument.  The  cells  divide  alternately  in 
three  directions.  * 

Gloeocapsa  Kiitz. —  Cells  blue-green,  steel-blue,  reddish, 
yellowish,  etc.,  spherical  or  oblong,  with  a  wide,  bladder-shaped 
integument.  The  cells  divide  into  two  daughter-cells,  each 
furnished  with  a  tegument  and  both  surrounded  by  the  tegu- 
ment of  the  mother-cell.  The  cell  membrane  is  very  thick, 
often  lamellated,  and  the  strata  frequently  separate;  either 
colorless  or  colored. 

G.arenaria  (Rab.)  (?),  Figs.  8,  8a.  The  specific  distinc- 
tions in  thisfgenus  are  very  uncertain. 

[G.  violacea  (Chorda)  Rab.] 

Aphanocapsa  Nag. —  Cells  spherical,  with  a  thick,  soft 
tegument;  cell  division  as  in  Gloeocapsa,  but  individual  coats 
not  evident  around  the  cell. 


14  CONNECTICUT   GEOL.    AND   NAT.    HIST.   SURVEY.  [Bull. 


A.  Grevillei  (Hass.)  Rab.,  Fig.  10.  Masses  of  this  jelly- 
like plant  frequently  reach  2mm.  in  diameter. 

Chroococcus  Nag. —  Blue-green  cells,  spherical,  or  an- 
gular from  mutual  pressure,  gathered  into  small  families  with- 
out a  distinct  tegument.  The  cells,  which  are  less  numerous  and 
more  simple  than  in  Glococapsa,  divide  alternately  in  three 
directions. 

C.  cohccr ens  (Breb.)Nag.,  Fig.  210. 

FAMILY  II.  CHAM^SIPHONIACE^E. 

Not  represented  in  the  United  States. 

ORDER  II.  HORMOGONES. 

This  order  contains  all  the  filamentous  Myxophyceae. 
The  filaments  usually  consist  of  a  single  row  of  naked  or 
sheathed  cells,  but  in  some  genera  there  are  two  or  more  rows 
in  a  single  sheath.  Heterocysts  are  abundant  in  some  of  the 
genera.  The  filaments  are  often  branched  or  provided  with  a 
false  branch  system  due  to  the  growth  of  a  number  of  filaments 
in  close  apposition  at  the  base.  Asexual  reproduction  is. by 
hormogones  or,  more  rarely,  by  spores.  The  filaments  or 
trichomes  are  usually  cylindrical  with  blunt  or  narrowed  ex- 
tremities, but  some  genera  show  a  gradual  attenuation,  either 
from  the  base  to  the  apex,  or  from  the  centre  toward  each  end. 

This  order  includes  two  sub-orders. 

Sub-order  i.  TRICHOPHOREyE.  Trichomes  conspicu- 
ously attenuated  towards  one  or  both  extremities,  which  are 
generally  hairy. 

Sub-order  11.  PSILONEMATEyE.  Trichomes  cylindrical, 
though  sometimes  narrowed  at  the  extremities. 

SUB-ORDER  I.  TRICHOPHOREyE. 

A  small  gr.oup  with  the  filaments  always  attenuated,  either 
toward  one  end  or  from  the  middle  to  both  extremities,  and 
always  sheathed.  Some  genera  are  provided  with  *heterocysts. 
There  is  an  asexual  reproduction  by  means  of  hormogones,  *but 
in  Glceotrichia  the  basal  cells  next  the  heterocysts  develop 
spores.  The  threads  frequently  show  hair-like  projections 
from  their  sides. 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG.E. 


15 


FAMILY  I.  R1VULARIACEJE. 

Abundant  in  mountainous  regions,  found  principally  on 
dripping  rocks,  in  streams  and  waterfalls,  or  on  the  shores  of 
rocky  lakes.  Our  collections  not  having  included  such  locali- 
ties, this  family  is  not  represented  in  our  figures.  The  fila- 
ments are  all  attenuated  from  a  long  base  to  a  hair-like  end. 
One  or  two  heterocysts  are  usually  located  at  the  base.  The 
sheath  is  yellow  or  yellowish-brown,  gelatinous,  tubular,  and 
often  thoroughly  lamellated.  Asexual  reproduction  by  hormo- 
gones,  and  in  Glocotrichia  and  Calothrix  asexual  spores  arise 
near  the  basal  heterocysts. 

Key  to  Genera. 

1.  Without  heterocysts  Amphithrix* 

With  heterocysts   2 

2.  Filaments   without   gelatinous   integument,  simple, 

growing  in  branched  or  unbranched  tufts,  or  some- 
times singly  Calothrix* 

Filaments  without  gelatinous  integument,  branched, 
several  branches  in  a  common  sheath  Diehothrix* 

Filaments  with  a  gelatinous  integument,  forming  a 
gelatinous  or  mucous  covering   3 

3.  Filaments  radially  disposed ;    thallus  spherical  or 

hemispherical  in  shape   4 

Filaments  not  radiating;  thallus  plain,  cushion- 
shaped  Isactis 

4.  Spores  present;    single-celled  or  with  heterocysts; 

colonies  free,  floating   .Gloeotrichiar 

Spores  lacking;  colonies  attached  Rivularia* 

Description  of  Genera. 

Amphithrix  Kutz. —  The  filaments  form  a  thin  expanded 
stratum  of  a  purple  or  violet  color,  which  consists  of  two 
layers.  The  inferior  layer  is  composed  of  densely  intricate 
filaments,  or  of  minute  radiately  disposed  series  of  cells;  the 
superior  layer  of  simple  erect  filaments  closely  packed  and  at- 
tenuated. 

[A.  janthina    (Mont.)  Born,  and  Flah.] 


1 6  CONNECTICUT   GEOL.   AND   NAT.    HIST.   SURVEY.  [Bull. 

Calothrix   Ag.  (Mastigonema    Schwabe;  Mastigothrix 

Kiitz.,  in  part). —  Filaments  growing  in  tufts  or  soft  masses, 
rather  rigid,  straight  and  spuriously  branched.  The  branches 
are  younger  filaments  glued  at  their  bases  and  part  of  their 
length  to  the  parent  stem;  the  apex  is  delicately  hair-like. 
Heterocysts  are  normally  present  and  are  usually  at  the  base 
of  the  branches. 

[C.  Braunii  Born,  and  Flah. ;  C.  fusca  (Kiitz.)  Born,  and 
Flah. ;  C.  parietina  (Nag.)  Thur.] 

Dichothrix  Zanard.  Filaments  more  or  less  dichotom- 
ously  branched;  several  trichomes  with  their  sheaths  enclosed 
within  an  outer  common  sheath.  Heterocysts  basal,  or  inter- 
calary, or  absent  in  one  species. 

[D.  gypsophila  (Kiitz.)  Born,  and  Flah.;  D.  Hosfordii 
(Wolle)  Born,  and  Flah.;  D.  Orisiniana  (Kiitz.)  Born,  and 
Flah.] 

Isactis  Thur.  The  filaments  are  erect  and  parallel,  at- 
tached at  the  base.  They  are  glued  together  by  a  more  or  less 
firm  mucilage,  and  are  often  encrusted  with  lime,  forming  flat 
strata. 

Gloeotrichia  J.  Ag.  The  filaments,  with  spores  in  the 
lower  part,  are  radiate,  sometimes  spuriously  branched,  each 
enclosed  in  a  distinct,  broad  sheath,  which  is  often  furrowed 
at  the  base  and  transversely  folded.  All  the  filaments  are 
enclosed  in  a  more  or  less  spherical  jelly. 

G.  Pisutn    (Ag.)  Thur.,  Fig.  214. 

Rivularia  (Roth.)  Ag.  (Zonotrichia  J.  Ag. ;  Limnactis 
Kiitz. ;  Schizosiphon  Kiitz.,  in  part). 

Filaments  radiating,  with  basal  heterocysts,  but  no  spores. 
A  more  or  less  firm  mucilage  binds  the  filaments  into  a  hemi- 
spherical or  bladder-like,  well-defined  thallus.  One  species  of 
Rivularia  has  been  found  in  our  studies,  but  no  figure  of  it  is 
given  in  this  report. 

FAMILY  II.  CAMPTOTRICHACE^E. 

Not  found  in  the  United  States. 


No.  io.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG^. 


17 


SUB-ORDER  II.  PSILONEMATE^E. 

This  sub-order  contains  the  greater  part  of  the  Hormo- 
gonese.  The  filaments,  with  or  without  a  sheath,  are  cylindri- 
cal, sometimes  showing  globular  swellings.  The  sheath  may 
be  very  thin,  hyaline  and  gelatinous,  or  tough  and  lamellose. 
The  apical  cell,  or  sometimes  that  and  the  sub-apical  cell,  are 
occasionally  attenuated,  or  the  filaments  may  end  obtusely. 

Key  to  Families. 

1.  Filaments  showing  true  branching  stigonemace^e 

Filaments    showing   false    branching;  heterocysts 

present  scytonemace^: 

Filaments  usually  simple,  without  branching;  where 
they  show  false  branching  they  are  without  hetero- 
cysts   2 

2.  Filaments  nearly  straight;  heterocysts  absent  

OSCILLATORIACE^ 

Filaments  tortuous;   heterocysts  present  

NOSTOCACE^E 

FAMILY  I.  OSCILLATORIACE^. 

The  distinguishing  feature  of  this  family,  which  is  the 
largest  one  of  the  Psilonematese,  is  the  absence  of  heterocysts. 
The  trichomes  are  a  single  and  regular  row  of  cells,  although 
occasionally  false  branching  is  seen.  Sometimes  the  cells  are 
so  closely  joined  that  the  whole  seems  a  perfectly  homogeneous 
cylinder ;  but  at  other  times  there  are  constrictions  at  the  ends 
of  the  cells.  Apical  cell  sometimes  attenuated.  The  filaments 
are  nearly  always  in  sheaths  of  various  character,  which  some- 
times enclose  more  than  one  filament.  Some  of  the  genera 
show  gliding  or  rotary  motion.  They  occur  in  great  profusion, 
submerged  in  ponds  and  ditches,  or  form  scums  upon  their 
surface. 

There  are  two  sub-families,  as  follows :  — 
Sub-family  I.    lyngbye;e.    Only  one  trichome   in  a 
sheath. 

Sub-family  II.  vaginarie^e.  Several  trichomes  in  one 
sheath  which  is  often  branched. 


1 8  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


SUB-FAMILY  I.  LYNGBYE^E. 

In  this  sub-family  there  is  never  more  than  one  trichome 
in  a  sheath,  and  the  sheath  may  be  thick  or  thin,  or  even 
wanting.  In  some  genera  the  trichomes  are  twisted.  The 
cells  may  be  of  varying  thickness  and  length,  but  usually  the 
thicker  the  trichome  the  shorter  the  cell.  Oscillatoria,  Phor- 
midium,  and  Spirulina  exhibit  a  rotary  or  gliding  motion. 


Key  to  Genera. 

1.  Trichomes  consisting  of  many  cells   2 

Trichomes  consisting  of  one  cell,  spirally  twisted.  . .  . 

Spirulina* 

2.  Filaments  simple,  or  falsely  branched;  sheaths  firm;  ' 

apices  of  filament  straight   3 

Filaments  simple ;  sheaths  thin,  always  hyaline, 
mucous,  and  more  or  less  readily  fusing  together; 
apices  of  trichomes  straight;  oscillating  or  rotary 
motion  evident   4 

3.  Filaments  free,  or  forming  felt-like  masses;  pseudo- 

branches  present,  often  in  pairs  Plectonema* 

Filaments  forming  erect  tufts;  pseudo-branches  often- 
present  and  solitary  Symploca 

Filaments  free  and  unbranched ;  free-floating,  or 
forming  a  matted  stratum  Lyngbya* 

4.  Filaments  more  or  less  agglutinated  by  their  mucous 

sheaths ;  cells  of  filaments  often  slightly  separated 

by  a  thin  mucous  layer.  Phormidium* 

Filaments  destitute  of  sheaths ;  free,  straight  or  with 

curved  extremities  Oscillatoria* 

Filaments  destitute  of  sheaths ;  twisted  into  a  regular 

spi  ral   A  rthrospira* 


Description  of  Genera. 

Spirulina  Turp. —  Filaments  unicellular,  more  or  less 
motile,  spirally  twisted,  usually  surrounded  by  a  colorless, 
somewhat  liquid  mucilage. 

S.  tenuissima   Kiitz.,  Fig.  291. 


No.  io.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALGvE. 


19 


Plectonema  Thur. —  Filaments  branched,  singly  or  in 
pairs,  quite  irregular,  each  filament  enclosed  in  a  separate 
sheath  ;  cell  contents  deep  blue-green. 

[P.  Wollei  Farlow.] 

Symploca  Kiitz. —  Filaments  simple  or  showing  mere  be- 
ginnings of  branches;  in  a  more  or  less  distinct  sheath,  rising 
from  a  prostrate  base ;  glued  together  into  anastomosing  or 
erect,  wick-like  clusters. 

Lyngbya  Ag.  (Leibleinia  Endlicher;  Leptothrix  Kiitz., 
in  part;  Spirocoleus  Mobius,  in  part). — "  Single  filaments  en- 
closed in  distinct  sheaths,  either  unbranched  or  with  a  sug- 
gestion of  branching  where  the  filaments  break  out  of  the 
sheaths.    Often  forming  a  membranous  stratum. 

L.sp.  (?),Fig.  13. 

[L.  ochracea    (Kiitz.)  Thur.] 

Phormidium  Kiitz.  ( Hyphceothrix  Kiitz.,  in  part ;  Lep- 
tothrix Kiitz.,  in  part). —  A  genus  between  Lyngbya  and 
Oscillatoria.  Filaments  simple,  clothed  with  a  thin,  hyaline 
sheath.  Sheaths  often  become  fused,  and  the  trichomes  are 
sometimes  so  numerous  as  to  form  mats  on  damp  ground, 
stones,  etc.  The  cells  are  sometimes  constricted  at  the  ends, 
and  the  apical  cell  may  be  attenuated  or  even  thickened. 

[P.  Corium  (Ag.)  Gomont ;  P.  favosum  (Bory)  Gomont ; 
P.  Retzii  (Ag.)  Gomont;  P.  uncinatum   (Ag.)  Gomont.] 

Oscillatoria  Vaucher  (Oscillaria  Bosc). —  Filaments 
straight  or  slightly  curved ;  only  in  very  young  specimens  are 
they  coiled;  simple,  without  a  sheath;  mostly  bright  blue- 
green,  sometimes  changing  to  violet  or  steel-blue.  When  in 
good  condition,  more  or  less  motile,  and  involved  in  a  thin 
mucilage.  Found  in  all  sorts  of  wet  places,  sometimes  even  on 
damp  ground  and  in  hot  springs. 

O.  subtilissima   Kiitz.,  Fig.  1. 

O.  czrugineo-ccerulea   Kiitz.,  Fig.  2. 

O.  chalybea   Mertens,  Fig.  14. 

O.  amphibia    Ag.,  Fig.  15. 

O.  limosa  Ag.,  Fig.  5. 

O.  per  car  sa   Kiitz.,  Fig.  6. 

[O.  princeps  Yauch. ;  O.  splendida  Grev. ;  O.  tenuis 
Ag.] 


20  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.   AND  NAT.   HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


Arthrospira  Stiz. —  Filaments  cylindrical,  commonly  de- 
void of  a  sheath,  and  twisted  into  a  regular  spiral.  The  latter 
character  is  the  only  distinction  from  Oscillatoria. 

A.  Gomontiana  Setchell. —  We  have  not  found  this  species, 
but  Setchell  has  mentioned  it  as  occurring  in  Bridgeport. 

SUB-FAMILY  II.  VAGINARIE^ 

Blue-green  Algae,  which  lack  heterocysts,  and  are  distin- 
guished by  having  one  or  more  trichomes  in  the  same  sheath. 
This  sheath  is  often  branched,  may  be  lamellose  and  colored, 
or  mucous  and  uncolored. 

Description  of  Genera. 

Microcoleus  Desm.  ( Cthonoblastus  Kiitz.). —  Trichomes 
like  Lyngbya,  except  that  two  or  more  are  often  enclosed  in 
one  sheath,  which  is  at  first  closed  at  the  end,  and  later  breaks 
open,  sometimes  dividing  into  shreds.  The  sheath  is  colorless, 
not  lamellose,  large,  seldom  indistinct. 

Schizothrix  Kiitz.  (Inactis  Kiitz. ;  Hyphaeothrix  Kiitz., 
in  part). —  Sheaths  firm,  lamellose,  hyaline  or  colored,  and 
containing  few  or  many  trichomes. 

[S.  lardacea  (Cesati)  Gomont;  ^.  coriacea  (Kiitz.) 
Gomont.] 

FAMILY  II.  NOSTOCACE^E. 

Cells  spherical  or  oval,  arranged  in  simple  chains,  or, 
rarely,  with  spurious  branches.  The  chain  is  imbedded  in  a 
more  or  less  copious  jelly.  Some  genera  are  provided  with 
spores  and  heterocysts.  The  heterocysts  are  yellow,  straw- 
colored,  or  nearly  colorless,  and  are  situated  at  the  end  of  the 
chain,  or  between  two  vegetative  cells.  Their  function  is  un- 
known. The  dark  green,  granular  spores  divide  after  a  period 
of  rest,  and  then  germinate.    Many  are  terrestrial. 

Key  to  Genera. 

I.    Filaments   contorted,   within   a  definite  gelatinous 

tegument   Nostoc* 

Filaments  more  or  less  straight,  free  or  in  a  formless 
slimy  mass,  not  inclosed  in  a  tegument   2 


No.  10.] 


FRESH- WATER  ALGJE. 


21 


2.  Heterocysts  terminal,  and  spores  contiguous  with 

them  ;  spores  long  and  cylindrical . . .  Cylindrospermum* 
Heterocysts  not  terminal   3 

3.  Filaments  aggregated  without  order  Anabcena* 

Filaments  aggregated  in  bundles  of  plate-like  masses 

Aphanizomenon 

Description  of  Genera. 

Aphanizomenon  Morren. —  Trichomes  a  little  attenuated 
towards  the  apex,  glued  together  parallelly  in  dense  fascicles. 
Cells  nearly  cylindrical,  light  blue  or  nearly  colorless,  and 
slightly  granular.  Thallus  somewhat  membranaceous,  free- 
swimming,  blue-green,  or  light  pure  blue,  or  at  length  olive; 
spores  solitary,  smooth,  cylindrical,  elongated,  round  at  the 
ends,  pale  blue  or  olive. 

Nostoc  Vauch. —  Filaments  necklace-shaped,  enclosed  in 
a  more  or  less  distinct  gelatinous  envelope.  The  cells  are 
spherical  or  elliptical,  and  more  or  less  closely  connected,  with 
heterocysts  rarely  terminal.  The  filaments  are  clustered  to 
form  thalli,  usually  surrounded  by  a  membrane,  which  is  some- 
times colorless,  sometimes  dark  blue-green,  dark  brown,  light 
yellow,  or,  most  often,  olivaceous. 

N.  minutissimus  Kiitz.  (  ?),  Fig.  211. 

N.  sp.  (?),  Fig.  18. 

N.  rupestre  Kiitz.,  Figs.  16,  17. 

N.  comminutnm  Kiitz.,  Fig.  19. 

[TV.  commune  Vauch. ;  N.  microscopicum  Carm. ;  N.  par- 
melioides  Kiitz. ;  N.  pruni forme  Ag.] 

Cylindrospermum  Kiitz. —  Filaments  sheathless,  single  or 
glued  together  in  an  indefinite  gelatinous  stratum ;  occasionally 
a  number  enclosed  in  a  tegument.  Cells  spherical,  oblong, 
elliptical,  or  compressed.  Heterocysts  single,  on  the  ends  of 
the  filaments;  spores  next  the  heterocysts  very  long  and 
cylindrical. 

[C.  ma  jus  Kiitz.] 

Anabasna  Bory  ( Sphaerozyga  Ag. ;  Trichormus  Allman  ; 
Dolichospermum  Thwaites) . —  Filaments  similar  to  those  of 
Nostoc,  only  nearly  straight;  rarely  provided  with  a  sheath; 


22  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


clustered  in  gelatinous  masses,  or  single.    Cells  spherical  or 
nearly  so,  some  of  them  changing  into  brownish  elongated 
spores,  which  are  solitary,  or  one  on  either  side  of  a  heterocyst, 
or,  rarely,  in  a  short  series.    Heterocysts  not  terminal. 
A.  gigantea  Wood,  Fig.  n. 

A.  Flos-aqua   Kiitz,  or  circinalis  (Rab.)  Kirch.,  Fig.  12. 
[A.  oscillarioides  Bory.] 

Anabcena  is  very  common  in  reservoirs,  and  sometimes  in 
combination  with  Microcystis  is  so  abundant  as  to  give  the 
water  a  very  bad  taste  and  smell,  and  a  distinct  color.  It  is 
one  of  the  most  troublesome  Algae  in  our  city  reservoirs. 

FAMILY  III.  SCYTONEMACE^E. 

This  family  is  known  by  its  method  of  branching.  Each 
filament  is  enclosed  in  a  sheath  of  uniform  thickness,  and  at 
intervals  penetrates  this  sheath  to  form  long,  flexuose  branches 
which  are  provided  with  their  own  sheaths.  The  filaments  are 
cylindrical,  but  thickened  toward  the  growing  end,  and  con- 
tain heterocysts.  The  sheath  may  be  colorless,  or  yellow,  or 
brown.  Reproduction  is  usually  by  hormogones,  though  in 
some  species  spores  are  produced. 

Key  to  Genera. 

Branches  in  pairs,  rising  between  the  heterocysts 

Scytonema* 

Branches  single,  rising  in  the  region  of  the  heterocysts 

Toiypotkrix* 

Description  of  Genera. 

Scytonema  Ag.  (Petalonema  Berkeley;  Schizosiphon 
Kiitz.,  in  part ;  Symphyosiphon  Kiitz.,  in  part ;  Athrosiphon 

Kiitz.). —  Each  filament  enclosed  in  a  sheath ;  branches  in  pairs 
produced  by  a  fold  of  the  filament,  which  breaks  through  the 
sheath  between  the  heterocysts.  The  heterocysts  are  scattered 
irregularly  throughout  the  filament.  The  filaments  produce  in- 
terwoven mats  of  larger  or  smaller  size.  The  sheath  is  lamel- 
lose,  and  yellow  or  brown  in  color,  generally  of  an  even  thick- 
ness, but  occasionally  the  margins  are  irregular. 

[S.  crispum  (Ag.)  Bornet;  5\  Hofmanni  Ag. ;  5\  myoch- 


No.  io.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALGvE. 


23 


thous  (Dillw.)  Ag. ;  S.Hgiiratum  Ag. ;  S.  ocellatum  (Dillw.) 
Thur.] 

Tolypothrix  Kiitz.  (Hassallia  Berkeley).  —  Filaments 
branched,  with  a  distinct  sheath.  The  branches  usually  ap- 
pear where  heterocysts  occur,  the  trichome  breaking-  through 
the  sheath  just  below  the  heterocyst  and  continuing  its  growth. 
The  sheaths  are  thinner  than  in  Scytonema.  The  heterocysts 
are  sometimes  two,  three,  or  four  in  a  row. 

[7".  lanata  (Desv.)  Wartmann.] 

FAMILY  IV.  STIGONEMACEiE. 

The  cells  of  this  family  are  arranged  in  a  single  row  or  in 
several  irregular  rows,  in  a  strong,  thick  sheath,  which  is 
brown  and  very  uneven.  The  filaments  are  branched,  and 
grow  by  repeated  division  of  the  cells  near  the  apex.  The 
heterocysts  are  never  terminal,  and  they  are  placed  in  a  lateral 
position  when  there  is  more  than  one  filament  in  a  sheath. 

Key  to  Genera. 

Normal  reproduction  by  means  of  hormogones,  de- 
veloped on  the  extremities  of  the  branches . .  Stigonema* 
Normal  reproduction  by  spores  Hapalosiphon 

Description  of  Genera. 

Stigonema  Ag.  (Sirosiphon  Kiitz.). —  Cells  of  the  fila- 
ments in  one,  two,  or  many  rows,  owing  to  the  lateral  division ; 
the  older  filaments  often  having  as  many  as  ten  series,  while 
the  younger  have  only  one  or  two.  The  cells  are  surrounded 
by  a  membrane  which  is  always  distinct,  but  especially  so  in 
the  older  filaments.  The  sheath  is  large,  irregular,  and  usually 
brown  or  golden  yellow.  The  generally  short,  thick  branches 
are  irregularly  disposed.  Found  mostly  on  damp  or  wet  rocks, 
but  sometimes  free-floating  in  lakes  or  ponds. 

[S.  mamillosum  Ag. ;  S.minutum  (Ag.)  Hass. ;  S.  panni- 
forme  (Ag.)  Born,  and  Flah.] 

Hapalosiphon  Nag. —  Filaments  attached  or  floating ; 
olive-green,  blue-green,  or,  when  older,  bright  or  dark  brown. 
The  branches  rise  singly  at  right  angles  to  the  prostrate  stem, 


24  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 

and  sometimes  bear  secondary  branches.  The  cells  are  granu- 
late, and  grow  in  a  single  series,  rarely  in  two;  they  are 
distinct  or,  sometimes,  continuous.  Heterocysts  are  frequent. 
The  sheaths  of  the  branches,  usually  colorless,  are  always 
thinner  than  those  of  the  primary  filaments.  Spores  are 
formed  from  the  ordinary  vegetative  cells.  The  plants  grow 
in  fresh  and  salt  waters. 

CLASS  II.    BACILLARIEtE  (DIATOMACE^E). 

We  have,  as  yet,  given  no  attention  to  the  Diatoms,  and 
they  are,  therefore,  omitted  from  this  report. 

CLASS  III.  HETEROKONTJE. 

The  Algae  of  this  class  are  unicellular,  multicellular,  or 
colonial,  appearing  as  rounded  single  cells,  filaments,  or  large 
colonies.  The  cell  walls  are  usually  very  thick,  and  contain 
many  chromatophores  of  a  yellow-green  color,  without  pyre- 
noids  or  starch.  The  ordinary  asexual  reproduction  is  by 
means  of  zoogonidia,  which  are  pear-shaped  bodies  furnished 
with  one  long  and  one  short  cilium.  Non-motile  spores  are 
also  sometimes  found  with  thick  walls. 

Sexual  reproduction  takes  place  by  fusion  of  two  similar 
motile  gametes  which  probably  resemble  the  zoogonidia  in 
having  two  cilia.  Since  these  gametes  are  alike  they  are  said 
to  be  isogamous.   This  class  contains  only  a  single  order. 

ORDER  CONFERVALES. 

The  various  forms  are  divided  into  two  families,  as 

follows :  — 

Family  i.    botrydiace^e.    Plant  body  large,  globose. 
Family  ii.    tribonemace^e.    Plant  body  unicellular  or 
filamentous. 

FAMILY  I.  BOTRYDIACE-iE. 

Each  plant  is  globose,  attached  by  rhizoids  to  the  damp 
earth ;  the  chromatophores  are  numerous  and  the  reproduction 
varied.  This  family  contains  only  one  genus,  which  we  have 
not  yet  found  in  Connecticut. 


No.  io.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG.E. 


25 


Botrydium  Wall. —  Small,  non-cellular,  green,  globose 
plants,  with  colorless,  much  divided  roots,  descending  into  the 
moist  earth,  upon  the  surface  of  which  this  Alga  lives.  The 
zoogonidia  are  small,  ovoid,  and  provided  with  a  long  cilium. 
If  the  plant  becomes  submerged,  the  whole  may  turn  into  a 
zoogonidiangium,  and  the  zoogonidia  escape  through  an  open- 
ing in  the  apex.  Non-motile  spores  are  often  produced  in 
great  numbers  in  the  rhizoids.  If  the  plant  becomes  too  dry, 
the  green  portion  migrates  into  the  rhizoids,  and  a  number  of 
spores  are  produced. 

FAMILY  II.  TRIBONEMACE^E. 

Plants  unicellular  or  filamentous;  cells  spherical,  cylindri- 
cal, or  elongated,  often  united  to  form  filaments,  and  spirally 
coiled*  The  cell  wall  is  always  firm,  and  usually  thick. 
Asexual  reproduction  by  zoogonidia.  Aplanospores  occur  in 
Tribonema.  Sexual  reproduction  by  isogamous  (i.  e.,  similar) 
gametes. 

Key  to  Genera. 

1.  Plants  unicellular   2 

Plants  filamentous,  cell  wall  firm,  splitting  into  H- 

shaped  pieces  Tribonema* 

2.  Cells  globose,  aggregated  in  mucilaginous  colonies 

Chlorobotrys 

Cells  elongate,  usually  shortly  stipitate  and  often 
spirally  coiled  Ophioeytium* 

Description  of  Genera. 

Tribonema  Derbes  and  Solier  (Conferva,  as  used  by 
Lagerheim).  Filaments  composed  of  cylindrical  cells,  covered 
with  a  thick  cell  wall  which  frequently  breaks  up  into  H-shaped 
pieces.  The  cells  each  contain  one  or  two  nuclei  and  several 
chromatophores.  Asexual  reproduction  by  zoogonidia  with 
two  unequal  cilia,  and  by  non-motile  spores  which  escape  from 
the  broken  filaments.  Sexual  reproduction  by  isogamous 
gametes,  one  of  which  comes  to  rest  and  rounds  off  before 
another  conjugates  with  it. 

This  genus  covers  many  of  those  forms  previously  called 
Conferva,  a  name  that  is  now  given  up.    Hazen  places  it  with 


26  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 

the  Ulotrichaceae,  but  we  follow  West  in  placing  it  here  be- 
cause of  its  yellowish-brown  color.  The  plants  are  abundant 
in  all  waters. 

T.  bombycinum  (Ag.)  Derbes  and  Sol.,  Fig.  48. 

T.  minus  (Wille)  Haz.,  Fig.  21. 

Chlorobotrys  .  Bohlin. —  Plants  are  formed  of  solitary 
globose  cells,  or  of  2,  4,  8,  or  16  cells  associated  in  a  family. 
Each  family  has  surrounding  it  an  ample  hyaline  mucous  tegu- 
ment. The  cell  walls  are  thick  and  smooth.  Six  to  thirty 
parietal  chromatophores  are  disposed  on  the  wall  of  each  cell. 
Sometimes  a  red  pigment  spot  appears  in  each  cell. 

Multiplication  by  cell  division,  at  first  in  two  directions, 
afterwards  in  three. 

Ophiocytium  Nag.  (inclus.  Sciadium  A.  Br.).  —  Cells 
cylindrical,  variously  curved,  attenuated  at  one  end  into  a  thin, 
short  stem;  sometimes  both  ends  rounded,  with  or  without  a 
spine.  Propagation  by  non-motile  spores  or  zoogonidia,  which 
are  formed  by  division  of  the  cell  contents.  The  cell  wall  has 
a  lid  fitted  to  the  apex  of  a  long  tube.  In  the  attached  species 
the  zoogonidia  come  to  rest  on  the  rim  of  the  empty  cell  and 
develop  into  full-grown  cells.  A  repetition  of  this  process  gives 
a  curious  branched  appearance. 

O.  parvulum  (Perty)  A.  Br.,  Fig.  20.  The  two  different 
sizes  are,  perhaps,  two  species.  None  of  our  specimens  showed 
the  terminal  spine. 

CLASS  IV.  CHLOROPHYCE^E. 

This  class  contains  all  the  green  Algae  and  numbers  more 
species  than  all  the  other  classes  of  Algae  together.  The  forms 
are  very  diverse  in  size  and  structure,  and  include  unicellular, 
filamentous,  and  colonial  plants,  some  furnished  with  rhizoids, 
others  with  hairs,  and  some"  with  spines.  Cell  division  usually 
takes  place  in  all  the  cells  of  a  thallus,  but  occasionally  there 
is  a  growing  point.  Both  sexual  and  asexual  reproduction  are 
found  in  most  of  the  families  of  the  Chlorophyceae.  This  class 
flourishes  most  abundantly  in  fresh  water,  though  many  are 
marine,  and  members  of  it  are  to  be  found  in  every  damp  or  wet 
situation. 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG^E. 


27 


The  class  may  conveniently  be  divided  into  orders,  as  in- 
dicated by  the  following  key :  — 

Key  to  Orders. 

1.  Thallus  coenocytic  (t.  e.,  non-cellular  but  with  many 

nuclei)   SIPHONALES 

Thallus  filamentous  and  septate,  or  unicellular,  or 
expanded    2 

2.  Thallus  filamentous,  though  filaments  may  unite  in  a 

plane.    In  the  Conjugatae  some  are  unicellular  and 

not  filamentous   3 

Thallus  expanded,  membranous  ULVALES 

Thallus  neither  expanded  nor  filamentous  

PROTOCOCCALES 

3.  Cell  division  by  intercalation  of  new  cells  producing 

transverse  striation   (EDOGONIALES 

Cell  division  of  ordinary  type   4 

4.  Filaments  attenuated  and  commonly  ending  in  a 

bristle   CH^ETOPHORALES 

Filaments  not  ending  in  a  bristle   5 

5.  Chloroplasts  single,  substellate,  with  one  pyrenoid. 

Filaments  may  fuse  in  a  plane  SCHIZOGONIALES 

Chloroplasts  single,  reticulated  or  band-shaped,  with- 
out pyrenoids  MICROSPORALES 

Chloroplasts  numerous,  parietal,  each  with  a  pyre- 
noid  CLADOPHORALES 

Chloroplasts  single  or  several,  large  and  of  some 
definite  shape,  with  pyrenoids.  The  entire  contents 
of  two  cells  unite  to  form  a  single  zygote .  .  CONJUGATE 

ORDER  I.  PROTOCOCCALES. 

Single-celled  green  Algae,  without  terminal  growth  or 
branches,  and  without  vegetative  generation  of  cells;  either 
single  or  in  flocks  or  families.  Sometimes  the  cells  of  the 
families  indefinitely  increase  in  number,  and  form  daughter- 
families.  At  other  times  there  is  a  definite  number  associated 
together  to  form  colonies  called  ccenobia.  Even  when  ap- 
parently closely  united,  each  cell  has  the  power  of  reproduction, 
and  therefore  the  plants  are  essentially  unicellular. 


28  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


The  order  is  a  very  large  one,  and  contains  an  immense 
variety  of  forms  which  can  hardly  admit  of  a  general  descrip- 
tion. The  order  is  divided  into  eight  families,  the  following 
six  of  which  are  known  in  the  United  States : — 

Key  to  Families. 

1.  Unicellular,  or  of  a  definite  number  of  ciliated  motile 

Cells   VOLVOCACEyE 

Cells  not  ciliated  or  motile   2 

2.  Cells  formed  in  flat  plates  or  in  a  network  

HYDRODICTYACE^ 

Cells  not  in  a  plate  or  a  network   •  3 

3.  Unicellular  and  solitary;  cell  with  differentiation  of 

base  and  apex  ch araciace^: 

Cells  without  differentiation  of  base  and  apex   4 

4.  Unicellular  and  globular,  or  consisting  of  short,  few- 

celled  filaments  (not  truly  filamentous)  ;  firm  cell 
walls ;  no  autospores  pleurococcace^e 

Cells  free  or  colonial,  without  copious  gelatinous  en- 
velope, forming  autospores   protococcace^: 

Cells  spherical  and  indefinite  in  number,  embedded  in 
a  copious  gelatinous  envelope  palmellace^e 

FAMILY  I.  PALMELLACE^E. 

Unicellular  Algae,  free-floating  or  attached,  single  or  in 
families,  with  a  conspicuous  mucous  envelope,  which  is  with- 
out definite  form,  and  is  either  structureless  or  differentiated 
into  concentric  envelopes.  Cell  contents  at  first  homogeneous, 
later  granular,  green  or  reddish.  Multiplication  by  cell  division 
in  two  or  three  directions,  and  cells  often  grouped  in  twos  or 
fours.  Asexual  reproduction  by  biciliated  zoogonidia,  several 
of  which  arise  from  an  ordinary  cell.  Sexual  reproduction  has 
been  observed  in  some  species. 

This  family  is  divided  into  three  sub-families,  as  follows :  — 

,  Key  to  Sub-families. 

Cells  grouped  in  twos  or  fours  within  a  lamellose 

mucous  investment  glceocystide^e 

Cells  grouped  in  fours,  irregularly  disposed  in  a 

mucus :  cells  with  a  non-motile  hair  tetraspore^ 


No.  io.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG^. 


29 


Cells    irregularly   grouped    within    a  structureless 

mUCUS   PALMELLELE 

SUB-FAMILY  I.  GLCEOCYSTTDEtE. 

Plants  formed  of  colonies  of  cells  in  a  common  mucila- 
ginous envelope.  Ordinarily  concentric  coats  of  mucus  can 
be  seen  around  single  cells  or  groups  of  cells.  Multiplication 
by  division  of  the  mother-cell  into  four  parts. 

Key  to  Genera. 

Colonies  irregular  

Colonies  cylindrical  and  branching 
Colonies  subspherical   

Description  of  Genera. 

Glceocystis  Nag.  (Chlorococcus  Fries.,  in  part). — 
Spherical  or  oblong  cells  associated  in  globose  families  of  an 
indefinite  number  of  cells.  Teguments  gelatinous,  formed  in 
layers.    Cells  spherical  or  ellipsoidal. 

G.  vesiculosa   Nag.,  Fig.  28. 

[G.  rupestris  (Lyng.)  Rab.] 

Palmodictyon  Kutz. —  The  cells  and  surrounding  tegu- 
ment are  in  the  shape  of  cylindrical  masses  which  branch  and 
anastomose.  The  outer  covering  is  often  hard  and  of  a 
reddish  brown  color.  Reproduction  by  means  of  resting  spores 
with  brown  cell  walls. 

Botrydina  Breb. —  A  genus  little  investigated.  The 
colonies  are  subspherical,  made  of  cells  enveloped  in  a  thick, 
gelatinous  integument,  which  may  be  as  large  in  diameter  as 
five  hundred  microns. 

SUB-FAMILY  II.  TETRASPORE^. 

Cells  grouped  in  fours  or  very  irregularly  scattered  towards 
the  outside  of  a  structureless  mass  of  jelly.  The  cells  of  this 
family  are  frequently  provided  with  delicate  non-vibratile  hairs 
called  p sen  do  cilia. 

Description  of  Genera. 
Tetraspora  Ag. —  Thallus  gelatinous,  thick,  at  first  baggy, 
then  lengthening;  scattered  through  the  felly  are  numberless 


. .  Gloeocystis* 
\Palmodictyon 
.  . .  .Botrydina 


30  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 

green  cells,  dividing  in  one  or  more  directions,  grouped  in 
twos  or  fours  without  order  near  the  periphery.  Isogamous 
planogametes  —  i.  e.,  provided  with  cilia, —  biciliated  zoogoni- 
dia,  and  resting  spores  with  thick  brown  cell  walls,  are  de- 
veloped. 

T.  lubrica  (Roth)  Ag.  var.  lacunosa  Chand.,  Fig.  212. 
T.  gelatinosa  (Vauch.)  Desv.,  Fig.  77. 
[T.  bullosa  (Roth)  Ag.] 

Apiocystis  Nag. —  Thallus  small,  of  various  or  changing 
color,  fastened  by  a  stem-like  base.  Cells  spherical,  sometimes 
scattered,  sometimes  eight  in  a  circle;  contents  homogeneous 
or  slightly  granular,  with  a  distinct  colorless  vacuole.  Propa- 
gation by  globose  zoogonidia,  each  bearing  two  cilia,  and 
isogamous  gametes. 

SUB-FAMILY  III.  PALMELLE^. 

A  large  number  of  globose  cells  are  aggregated  in  a  struc- 
tureless mass  of  jelly,  which  is  of  indefinite  extent  except  in 
Palmodactylon,  in  which  it  is  more  or  less  cylindrical  and 
variously  branched.  The  outer  layers  of  the  firm,  thin  cell 
walls  are  thrown  off  from  time  to  time  in  one  or  many  pieces. 

Description  of  Genera. 

Palmella  Lyng.  —  A  shapeless  mass  of  jelly,  holding  cells 
which  are  spherical,  oval,  or  oblong,  green,  red,  or  brown. 
Multiplication  by  repeated  division  of  the  cell  contents,  accom- 
panied by  decided  gelatinization  of  the  wall  of  the  mother-cell. 
Reproduction  by  micro- and  macro-zoogonidia  and  also  by 
small  isogamous  planogametes. 

P.  mucosa  Kutz.  (  ?) ,  Fig.  72.  Fig.  72a  is  the  gelatinous 
colony,  natural  size. 

Schizochlamys  A.  Br. —  Found  with  Tetraspora,  and  like 
it,  except  that  in  this  genus  the  cell  wall  often  splits  into  four 
parts.  The  cell  contents  afterward  divide  into  two  or  four 
daughter-cells. 

Palmodactylon  Nag. —  Small  round  cells,  dull  green,  en- 
closed in  a  cylindrical  bladder-like  membrane.  Several  of 
these  membranes  are  often  joined  together  at  one  end,  spread- 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALGvE. 


31 


ing  radially.  One,  two,  or  four  series  of  cells  in  each  mem- 
brane. 

FAMILY  II.  PROTOCOCCACELE. 

The  vegetative  cells  are  green,  strictly  unicellular,  and  are 
not  provided  with  cilia.  Propagation  either  sexual  or  asexual. 
In  the  latter  case  the  cells  divide  into  many  parts,  the  whole 
assuming  the  form  of  a  new  colony.  These  are  called  auto- 
spores  and  autocolonies.  Division  of  vegetative  cells  lacking. 
In  some  genera  the  cells  are  united  into  definite  regular  forms 
called  ccenobia,  in  others  into  a  pseado coenobium,  which  differs 
from  the  true  coenobium  in  that  the  cells  are  not  all  of  the  same 
generation;  other  genera  have  the  cells  scattered  or  congre- 
gated into  irregular  forms. 

Key  to  Sub -families. 

1.  Cells  elongated,  frequently  curved;    solitary  or  in 

definite,  loosely  coherent  colonies  selenastre^e 

Cells  angular,  with  a  definite  number  of  angles,  two, 

four,  six,  eight,  or  more;  cells  solitary.  .  .tetraedreje 
Cells  variable,  united  in  a  regular  flat  plate.  . crucigenie^: 
Cells  globose  or  sub-globose   2 

2.  Cells  strictly  globose,  united  in  a  spherical  colony 

( coenobium  )   ccelastre^e 

Cells  globose  or  sub-globose,  not  united  in  a  spherical 
coenobium   3 

3.  Cells  with  two  or  more  attenuated  bristles . . .  phytheliele 
Cells  without  bristles   4 

4.  Cells  generally  retained  within  enlarged  wall  of 

mother-cell   oocystide^: 

Cells  joined  in  colonies  by  persistent  walls  of  mother- 
cells,  which  sometimes  become  transformed  into 
connecting  threads  dictyosph^erie^e 

sub-family  i.  dictyosph^erie^e. 

Cells  globose,  ovoid,  or  ellipsoid,  and  associated  to  form 
indefinite  colonies.  The  cells  are  held  in  position,  usually,  by 
the  wall  of  the  mother-cell,  which  in  some  genera  breaks  up 
into  connecting  threads.    Multiplication  by  simple  vegetative 


32  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


division,  or  by  the  formation  of  four  daughter-cells  in  a  mother- 
cell,  which  at  length  ruptures  to  let  them  out. 

Key  to  Genera. 

1.  Cells  indefinitely  disposed   2 

Cells  in  grape-like  clusters,  freely  exposed  in  a 

thin  gelatinous  envelope  Botryococcus 

2.  With     well-marked,     subdichotomous  connecting 

threads;  chloroplast  parietal  Dictyosphcerium* 

Cells  in  radiating  series ;  connecting  threads  scarcely 
visible;  chloroplast  axile  Dictyocystis 

Description  of  Genera. 

Botryococcus  Kiitz. —  Sixteen  or  thirty-two  cells  clustered 
like  a  bunch  of  grapes  in  an  irregularly  lobed  mucous  thallus. 
Cells  oval,  spherical,  or  elliptical,  densely  packed '  in  families 
within  a  thin  tegument.  Clusters  free-swimming,  green,  at 
length  pallid  or  brown. 

Dictyosphaerium  Nag. —  Cells  green,  kidney-shaped  or 
egg-shaped,  gathered  into  a  hollow,  somewhat  spherical  family, 
and  usually  surrounded  by  a  gelatinous  envelope;  free-swim- 
ming. Cells  covered  by  thick  coats  which  are  confluent; 
joined  by  a  fine  tegument.  Division  of  cells  at  first  in  all 
directions,  later  only  radially.  Biciliated  zoogonidia  rarely 
occur. 

D.  Ehrenbergiannm   Nag.,  Fig.  22. 

Dictyocystis  Lagerh.  —  Oblong  or  cylindrical  cells,  held  in 
radiating  series  by  delicate  threads,  to  form  a  small,  free- 
floating  colony,  the  series  often  branching. 

SUB-FAMILY  II.  TETRAEDRE^. 

Solitary  unicellular  plants,  flattened  and  angular  with  a 
definite  number  of  angles.  The  angles  may  be  rounded, 
notched,  or  furnished  with  spines.  Only  one  genus,  sometimes 
divided  into  two,  according  to  the  depth  of  the  lobulation. 

Tetraedron  Kiitz.  (Polyedrium  Nag.). —  Cells  green, 
single,  free-swimming,  three-,  four-,  or  eight-angled ;  angles 
rounded,   sometimes   notched,  mostly  armed  with  a  spine. 


No.  io.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG^E. 


33 


Propagation  by  means  of  autospores,  which  are  formed,  usu- 
ally to  the  number  of  four  or  eight,  in  the  mother-cell. 

T.  minimum  (A.  Br.)  Hansg.,  Fig.  23. 

T.  trigonum  var.  punctatum  (Kirch.),  Fig.  24. 

T.  trigonum  var.  pentagonum  (Rab.),  Fig.  25. 

SUB-FAMILY  III.  OOCYSTIDE^. 

Cells  spherical  or  elliptical,  often  retained  within  the  swollen 
wall  of  the  mother-cell.  There  may  be  one  or  several  parietal 
chloroplasts.  The  cell  wall  of  all  but  Palmellococcus  is  firm. 
Multiplication  by  means  of  autospores,  which  often  develop 
and  grow  to  full  size  in  the  mother-cell. 

Key  to  Genera. 

1.  Cells  curved,  subcylindrical  or  sublunate.  .Nephrocytium* 

Cells  ellipsoidal  Odcystis 

Cells  spherical   2 

2.  Cells  large,  solitary  and  free-floating.  .  .  .  Eremosphcera 
Cells  minute,  forming  a  thin  stratum.  . .  .Palmellococcus* 

Description  of  Genera. 

Nephrocytium  Nag. —  Two,  four,  eight,  or  sixteen  oblong 
or  kidney-shaped  cells,  associated  in  a  free-swimming  family, 
surrounded  by  an  oval  or  kidney-shaped  covering.  Of  variable 
size ;  cells  bright  green.  Frequent  in  ponds.  Multiplication  by 
autospores,  which  are  often  spirally  disposed  around  the  inside 
of  the  wall  of  the  mother-cell. 

N.  Ncegelii  A.  Br.,  Figs.  26,  29. 

N.  Agardhianum   Nag.,  Fig.  27. 

Obcystis.  This  genus  differs  from  Nephrocytium  in 
having  cells  ellipsoidal  and  showing  polar  nodules.  There  are 
usually  several  parietal  chloroplasts  in  each  cell. 

Eremosphaera  D.  By.  ( Chlorosphaera  Henfrey). —  Large, 
spherical,  free-swimming  cells,  with  firm  walls,  showing  a 
colorless  border.  Cell  contents  green,  granulose;  each  cell 
containing  large  numbers  of  small  parietal  chloroplasts.  Mul- 
tiplication into  two  or  four  parts,  which  escape  through  the 
cell  wall.  Found  in  small  pools. 
3 


34  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 

Palmellococcus  Chodat   (Protococcus  Ag.,  in  part). — 

Strictly  unicellular  Algae,  globose,  green,  sometimes  changing 
to  red  upon  exposure.  Cells  formed  singly  or  in  clusters, 
growing  in  water,  or  on  damp  soil,  flower-pots,  trunks  of  trees, 
etc. ;  8,  1 6,  32,  or  64  spores  formed  within  a  mother-cell,  the 
wall  of  which  ruptures  and  sets  them  free.  Very  rapid  multi- 
plication by  cell  division. 

P.  sp.  (?),  Fig.  30. 

P.  Gigas  (Kiitz.),  Fig.  31. 

SUB-FAMILY  IV.  SELENASTRE^. 

Cells  elongated  and  attenuated,  sometimes  lunate ;  solitary, 
or  joined  into  fragile  families.  A  single  chloroplast,  which 
may  contain  one  or  many  pyrenoids,  is  found  in  each  cell. 
The  cell  wall  is  delicate  but  firm.    Multiplication  by  autospores 


or  autocolonies. 

Key  to  Genera. 

1.  Colonies  enveloped  in  mucus  Kirchneriella* 

Colonies  almost  destitute  of  mucus   2 

2.  Cells  attenuated  to  acute  apices   3 


Cells  sublimate  or  ellipsoidal,  arranged  in  groups  of 
four  in  a  plane ;  groups  forming  irregular  colonies 

Dimorphococcus 
3.    Cells  forming  definite  colonies  of  a  row  of  cells  in  one 


plane  Scenodesmus* 

Cells  solitary  or  loosely  grouped  in  irregular  bundles 

Ankistro  desmus* 

Cells  lunate,  arranged  back  to  back  Selenastrum* 

Cells  dividing,  oblique;  daughter-cells  remaining  at- 
tached loosely  by  their  apices  Dactylococcus 


Description  of  Genera. 

Kirchneriella. —  The  cells  are  bent  like  a  bow,  often  until 
their  apices  almost  touch  each  other ;  loosely  aggregated  within 
an  enveloping  mass  of  jelly.  The  cell  wall  is  thin,  the  chloro- 
plast parietal;  multiplication  by  autospores,  four  or  eight  of 
which  are  produced  in  a  mother-cell.  The  genus  differs  from 
Selenastrum  in  the  presence  of  jelly. 

K.  obesa  (West)  Schmidle,  Fig.  54. 


No.  io.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG.E. 


35 


Selenastrum  Reinsch. —  Cells  lunate,  attenuated  on  both 
ends  to  a  fine  point,  with  firm,  thin  walls;  arranged  back  to 
back  to  form  four-  to  eight-celled  colonies.  Multiplication  by 
autospores. 

S.  acuminatum  Lagerh.,  Fig.  46. 

6\  sp.  (?)  (perhaps  acuminatum),  Fig.  43. 

Scenodesmus  Meyen. —  Cells  elliptical,  cylindrical,  oblong- 
spherical,  often  drawn  out  into  longer  or  shorter  spines.  One, 
sometimes  two,  rows  of  cells  are  commonly  joined  laterally 
into  a  coenobium.  Propagation  by  repeated  division  of  the 
cell  contents  into  brood-families,  which  are  set  free  by  rupture 
of  the  mother-cell  wall. 

5".  obtusus   Meyen,  Fig.  38. 

5*.  caudatus    Corda,  Fig.  36. 

S.  caudatus  var.  abundans    Kirch.,  Fig.  32. 

5\  caudatus  var.  typicus    Kirch.,  Fig.  33. 

5.  caudatus  var.  setosus    Kirch.,  Fig.  34. 

5".  acutus   Meyen,  Fig.  37. 

S.  dimorphus   Kutz.,  Figs.  42,  44. 

S.  antennatus  Breb.  var.  rectus  Wolle,  Fig.  39. 

S.sfi,  (?),Ffe.35. 

Dimorphococcus  A.  Br. —  Cells  united  more  or  less  in 
fours  on  short  branches ;  the  two  intermediate,  contiguous  cells 
oblique,  obtuse-ovate;  the  two  lateral,  opposite  and  separate 
from  each  other,  lunate;  families  free-swimming,  in  irregular 
clusters. 

Ankistrodesmus  Corda  (Rhaphidium  Kiitz. ;  Schroderia 

Lemmermann). —  Finely  granulate,  cylindrical  cells,  usually 
tapering  at  both  ends  and  variously  curved.  The  cells  occur 
singly,  or  gathered  into  groups,  several  radially  joined,  two 
crossing  each  other,  rarely  two  united  at  the  end;  covering 
thin  and  smooth;  division  in  only  one  direction. 

A.  falcatus  (Corda)  Ralfs,  Fig.  45. 

A  falcatus  var.  acicularis  West,  Fig.  47. 

A.  falcatus  var.  mirabilis  West,  Fig.  41. 

A.  Braunii  (Nag.)  (?),  Fig.  40. 

SUB-FAMILY  V.  CRUCIGEXIE^. 

Cells  gathered  into  flat  ccenobia.  The  cells  are  generally 
rounded  and  sometimes  furnished  with  spines.    The  groups  of 


36  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


four  are  held  together  by  a  tough  mucilage.  Multiplication  by 
autocolonies.    The  only  American  genus  is  the  following : — 

Crucigenia  Morren  (Staurogenia  Kiitz. ;  Lemmer- 
mannia  Chodat;  Willea  Schmidle). —  4,  8,  16,  or  32  sub- 
quadratic  cells,  gathered  into  a  flat  ccenobium  held  in  a  mucila- 
ginous envelope.  As  many  as  128  cells  in  groups  of  four  have 
been  discovered.  The  cell  walls  are  smooth,  and  each  cell  is 
furnished  with  a  single  chloroplast.  Multiplication  by  auto- 
colonies. 

SUB-FAMILY  VI.  PHYTHELIEyE. 

Unicellular  or  grouped  in  a  more  or  less  definite  ccenobium, 
freely  floating.  Almost  devoid  of  a  mucous  envelope  and  fur- 
nished with  bristles. 

SUB-FAMILY  VII.  CCELASTRE^E. 

The  cells  are  either  globose  or  polygonal,  provided  with 
processes  by  which  they  are  united  into  a  hollow  sphere;  or 
broadly  lunate,  and  united  at  the  centre  by  short  stalks. 
Propagation  by  autocolonies  which  are  formed  in  each  cell  of 
the  ccenobium. 

Key  to  Genera. 

Ccenobium  hollow   Ccelastrum* 

Ccenobium  solid  Sorastrum* 

Description  of  Genera. 

Ccelastrum  Nag.  (Hariotina  Dang.).  —  Ccenobium  a 
hollow  globe  formed  of  a  single  layer  of  green,  spherical  or 
angular  cells;  later  the  ccenobium  appears  to  be  reticulately 
pierced ;  in  older  growths  the  cells  have  become  polygonal 
through  continued  pressure.  Daughter-ccenobia  are  developed 
within  the  mother-cell,  and  escape  by  breaking  the  walls  of  the 
latter.    Found  in  ponds. 

C.  micro porum   Nag.,  Fig.  51. 

Sorastrum  Kiitz.  (Selenosphaerium  Cohn). —  Differs 
from. Ccelastrum  in  that  the  ccenobium  is  solid.  It  is  composed 
of  4,  8,  16,  or  32  wedge-shaped  stalked  cells,  radially  disposed, 
with  spines  (usually  two)  on  each  end.  Propagation  by  auto- 
colonies. 


No.   IO.]  FRESH-WATER  ALGJE.  37 

5.  spinulosum  Nag.  (?). —  The  common  form  of  Soras- 
trum  in  this  region  is  shown  in  Fig.  213.  It  shows  only  one 
spine  at  each  corner.  A  less  common  form  which  may  be  a 
different  species  is  shown  in  Fig.  55. 

FAMILY  III.  HYDRODICTYACE^E. 

These  plants  are  free-floating,  non-motile  ccenobia,  com- 
posed of  cells  arranged  like  a  net  or  in  a  flat  plate.  Pediastrum 
may  have  fifty  cells  and  Hydrodictyon  many  hundreds.  Multi- 
plication by  autocolonies.  Reproduction  by  spores,  which  be- 
come quiescent  within  the  mother  colony  and  then  unite  by 
their  extremities  to  form  a  new  ccenobium.  A  fusion  of 
isogamous  gametes  to  form  a  zygospore  also  sometimes  occurs. 
The  two  sub-families  are  probably  not  closely  related. 

Key  to  Sub-families. 

Cells  in  a  flat  plate  pediastre^e 

Cells  form  a  network  hydrodictye^e 

SUB-FAMILY  I.  PEDIASTRE/E. 

Microscopic  plants  composed  of  a  number  of  small  cells 
united  into  a  flat  disk.  Zoogonidia  formed  in  the  mother-cell 
are  liberated  into  an  external  vesicle,  and  there  form  new 
ccenobia. 

Description  of  Geniis. 
Pediastrum  Meyen. —  The  plane,  discoid  or  stellate,  free- 
swimming  ccenobium  is  formed  of  a  single,  rarely  a  double, 
layer  of  green  cells,  perforated  or  continuous.  The  cells  are 
polygonal,  with  four  or  more  sides ;  the  central  cells  are  entire, 
while  the  marginal  cells  are  often  bilobed ;  the  lobes  are 
wedge-shaped,  simple  or  bidentate,  sometimes  drawn  out  into 
hair-like  ends.  The  genus  is  very  abundant  and  variable.  The 
reproduction  is  as  follows : —  The  cell  contents  are  at  first 
homogeneous,  later  becoming  granular.  The  granular  contents 
divide  into  small  zoogonidia,  spherical  or  nearly  so,  which 
break  away  from  the  mother-cell  into  an  external  vesicle. 
After  they  have  been  motile  awhile,  they  come  to  rest,  and 
then  divide  and  redivide ;  a  gelatinous  covering  forms  around 
them,  the  cells  arrange  themselves  into  a  single  layer,  and 
gradually  take  on  the  shape  of  the  mother  plant.  Autocolonies 


38  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


are  sometimes  found  in  a  single  cell.    Biciliated  gametes  are 
also  found  which  conjugate. 
P.  sp.  (?),  Fig.  65. 

P.  pertusum  Kiitz.,  Figs.  66,  68,  70,  71. 

P.  pertusum  var.  clathratum  A.  Br.,  Figs.  50,  52,  57. 

P.  tetras  Ehrb.,  Fig.  69. 

P.  Boryanum    (Turp.)  Menegh.  var.  granulatum  Kiitz., 

Figs-  58,  59.  67. 

P.  Ehrenbergii  A.  Br.,  Figs.  61,  62,  63,  64. 

SUB-FAMILY  II.  HYDRODICTYEiE. 

Plants  large,  composed  of  a  number  of  large  cells,  which 
are  so  arranged  as  to  form  a  net.  Zoogonidia  swarm  and  be- 
come quiescent  within  the  mother-cell,  and  there  unite  to  form 
new  ccenobia. 

Hydrodictyon  Roth. —  Ccenobium  large,  composed  of 
oblong  cells  joined  at  the  ends,  forming  a  reticulated  stratum, 
at  first  baggy,  then  net-like.  All  the  cells  are  fertile,  breaking 
up  to  form  large  numbers  of  microgonidia  within  the  mother- 
ccenobium.  After  a  period  of  activity  they  come  to  rest  and 
form  a  new  ccenobium  by  joining  together  at  their  extremities. 
Sometimes  they  become  perfectly  dry;  but,  when  moistened, 
they  form  biciliated  macrogonidia  which  join  themselves  into 
daughter-ccenobia  within  the  mother-cell.  Motile  gametes  are 
also  found  which  become  free  and  conjugate  into  a  globose 
zygote.    The  only  known  species  is  the  following : — 

H.  reticulatum  (L.)  Lag.,  Figs.  215,  a,  b,  c. 

FAMILY  IV.  PLEUROCOCCACE^E. 

Plants  mostly  unicellular,  sometimes  composed  of  short, 
creeping,  slightly  branched  filaments,  which  are  never  atten- 
uated to  hairs.  The  cell  walls  are  generally  very  firm,  and  the 
cells  aggregate  to  form  indefinite  colonies.  Multiplication  by 
division  in  two  or  three  directions.  Asexual  reproduction 
sometimes  "by  means  of  biciliated  zoogonidia.  Of  the  six 
genera  of  this  family  we  have  found  only  one. 

Pleurococcus  Menegh.  (Protococcus  Ag.,  in  part; 
Cystococcus  Nag. ;  Chlorococcus  Fries,  in  part ;  Pseudo- 
pleurococcus  Snow). —  The  cells  are  usually  globular,  some- 
times angular  from  pressure.    Division  occurs  in  three  direc- 


Xo.  io.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALGiE. 


39 


tions,  so  at  times  a  cubical  colony  is  seen,  which  easily  divides 
into  its  respective  cells.  The  plants  are  occasionally  creeping, 
branched  filaments.  A  single  parietal  chloroplast  is  present, 
with  or  without  a  pyrenoid.  Reproduction  by  aplanospores  — 
i.  e.,  without  cilia, —  by  rejuvenescence  of  the  mother-cell  con- 
tents, by  isogamous  gametes,  or  by  biciliated  zoogonidia. 

P.  vulgaris  Menegh.,  Fig.  73,  is  a  very  common  form  in 
the  state,  growing  in  damp  places,  upon  stones,  etc.  We  have 
not  found  it  in  water. 

FAMILY  V.  CHARACIACE^E. 

Plants  unicellular,  usually  elongated  and  attenuated  at  both 
ends,  the  lower  end  terminating  in  a  stalk,  generally  furnished 
with  a  disk  by  which  it  is  attached  to  larger  Algae.  A  single 
parietal  chloroplast  with  one  pyrenoid  is  present.  Reproduc- 
tion by  numerous  zoogonidia  formed  by  division  of  the  cell 
contents  at  first  transversely,  then  longitudinally.  These  por- 
tions become  rounded  off,  become  biciliated,  and  escape  by 
a  lateral,  or,  more  rarely,  a  terminal  pore.  Each  zoogonidium 
becomes  a  new  plant  on  coming  to  rest. 

Characium   A.  Br. —  Coextensive  with  the  family. 

C.  Ncegelii   A.  Br.,  Fig.  53. 

C.  ambiguum   Herm.,  Fig.  56. 

FAMILY  VI.  VOLVOCACEiE. 

Plants  unicellular,  or  consisting  of  coenobia  with  a  definite 
number  of  cells,  always  ciliated  and  motile.  Multiplication  by 
division  of  the  mother-cell  into  2,  4,  or  8  daughter-cells.  Re- 
production both  by  the  union  of  isogamous  planogametes  and, 
in  the  higher  genera,  by  heterogamous  gametes. 

The  Volvocaceae  are  sometimes  found  in  immense  quantities, 
and  frequently  give  an  oily  taste  and  odor  to  drinking  water. 
They  are  closely  related  to  the  Flagellata,  and  some  of  them 
are  frequently  classed  with  the  Protozoa. 

Key  to  Sub-families. 
Composed  of  colonies  of  many  cells;  cells  with  two 

cilia   volvoce^e 

Composed  of  single  cells  with  two,  or  rarely  four, 

Cilia   CHLAMYDOMONADE^E 


40 


CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.   HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


SUB-FAMILY  I.  VOLVOCE^. 

Motile  coenobia ;  cells  varying  in  number  from  4  to  20,000, 
globose  or  ovoidal,  with  a  distinct  but  thin  cell  wall ;  cilia  two ; 
chloroplast  one  of  very  variable  form,  usually  including  a  single 
pyrenoid.  Cells  usually  imbedded  in  a  common  mucilaginous 
investment ;  more  rarely  united  by  protoplasmic  processes. 
All  the  cells  may  be  capable  of  reproducing  the  plant,  or  there 
may  be  a  differentiation  into  vegetative  and  reproductive  cells. 
Vegetative  reproduction  by  division  of  some  or  all  of  the  cells 
to  form  daughter-ccenobia.  Isogamous  or  heterogamous  sexual 
reproduction. 

Key  to  Genera. 

1.  Colonies  spherical  or  circular   2 

Colonies  flat,  cells  4-16,  angles  rounded,  in  a  color- 
less sheath  Gonium 

2.  No  gelatinous  covering,  cells  many,  in  a  hollow  globe 

Volvox* 

No  gelatinous  covering,  cells  16,  arranged  in  four 

rows   Spondylomorum* 

With  a  gelatinous  covering   3 

3.  Colony  ovate  or  spherical   4 

Colony  of  eight  cells,  in  an  equatorial  zone  in  a 

spherical  or  ellipsoidal  investment  Stephanosphcera 

4.  Cells  16-32,  globose,  not  crowded,  but  scattered  at 

regular  intervals  on  a  colorless  sphere  Eudorina* 

Cells  8,  16,  32,  or  64,  globose,  crowded,  often  angular 
from  pressure  Pandorina* 


Description  of  Genera. 
Gonium  Muller  (inclus.  Tetragonium  West). —  Four  to 
sixteen  cells  so  placed  in  a  flat  stratum  as  to  form  a  quadrangle 
with  rounded  angles.  A  colorless  tegument  covers  all.  Cells 
globular  except  when  angular  from  pressure.  The  cilia  all 
arise  from  one  surface  of  the  colony.  When  old,  the  cells 
become  granular  and  are  connected  by  produced  angles.  Re- 
production by  repeated  division  of  the  cytoplasm  into  zoogo- 
nidia.  Multiplication  by  daughter-ccenobia  formed  in  each  cell 
of  the  mother-ccenobium. 


No.   10.]  FRESH- WATER  ALGJE. 


41 


Volvox  Ehrb. —  Coenobium  spherical,  hollow,  the  surface 
composed  of  green  cells  estimated  as  high  as  22,000,  arranged 
regularly  on  the  wall,  and  each  provided  with  two  cilia,  which 
reach  through  the  gelatinous  covering  and  keep  the  coenobium 
in  constant  motion.  Each  green  cell  is  attached  to  the  six  sur- 
rounding ones  by  fine  threads  which  are  difficult  to  see  even 
under  high  power  and  with  favorable  light.  Odgonia  and 
antheridia  are  developed  from  vegetative  cells,  and  a  brown, 
smooth  or  star-shaped  cell  is  often  found  which  is  supposed  to 
be  a  fertilized  oospore  in  a  resting  stage.  Asexual  reproduc- 
tion takes  place  by  the  division  of  the  larger  vegetative  cells, 
which  form  new  families.  These  after  sufficient  growth 
separate  from  the  mother-cell  and  begin  life  independently. 

V.  aureus    Ehrb.,  Fig.  75. 

V.  globator  (L.)  Ehrb.,  Fig.  76.  Fig.  74  is  a  fertilized 
oospore.  These  are  frequently  found  within  the  ccenobia,  and 
also  occur  free  in  the  water.  Ehrenberg  named  it  V.  stellata, 
but  of  course  this  was  an  error. 

Spondylomorum  Ehrb.  (Uvella  Ehrb.;  Phacolomonas 
Stein.). —  Coenobium  of  sixteen  cells  in  four  alternating  rows, 
each  cell  with  four  cilia. 

6".  quatcrnarium   Ehrb.,  Fig.  288. 

Stephanosphaera  Cohn. —  Eight  green  cells,  each  having 
two  vibrating  cilia,  are  arranged  at  regular  intervals  in  an 
equatorial  circle,  enclosed  in  a  colorless  sphere.  Propagation 
by  macrogonidia,  formed  by  eight-fold  division  of  the  green 
cells,  each  bearing  two  cilia  and  a  lateral  red  spot,  and  gathered 
into  families  of  eight ;  or  by  microgonidia,  each  provided  with 
four  cilia,  formed  by  repeated  division,  and  at  first  revolving 
within  the  common  sphere,  afterwards  escaping  singly.  In 
hollow  rocks  and  pools  after  rain. 

Eudorina  Ehrb.  (Eudorinella  Lemmermann). —  Coeno- 
bium somewhat  oval  or  spherical,  composed  of  16  or  32  globular 
green  cells,  each  with  two  cilia,  arranged  around  the  color- 
less sphere  at  nearly  regular  intervals.  Usually  four  of  the 
32  cells  develop  antheridia  and  the  rest  oogonia  for  the  sexual 
reproduction.  Asexual  reproduction  by  the  division  of  the 
cells  into  16  or  32  parts  to  form  daughter-ccenobia. 

E.  elegans   Ehrb.,  Fig.  285. 


42  CONNECTICUT   GEOL.   AND   NAT.    HIST.   SURVEY.  [Bull. 

Pandorina  Bory. —  Coenobium  spherical,  covered  by  a 
colorless  jelly.  Cells  8,  16,  or  32,  green,  spherical,  each  covered 
with  a  thin  membrane  and  furnished  with  two  widely  divergent 
cilia,  often  so  crowded  as  to  be  angular.  Propagation  sexual, 
by  the  conjugation  of  isogamous  gametes.  Cells  of  a  coenobium 
divide  into  eight  daughter-cells ;  these  become  two-ciliated 
gametes,  and  are  scattered  and  conjugate  with  similar  cells 
from  other  coenobia;  they  flow  together  and  produce  a 
zygospore,  which,  after  a  season  of  rest,  develops  one  to  three 
biciliate  macrospores,  and  these  in  their  turn  develop  new 
coenobia.  Asexual  multiplication  by  formation  of  a  daughter- 
coenobium  from  each  of  the  cells  of  the  mother-ccenobium. 
P.  morum  (Mull.)  Bory,  Figs.  286,  287. 

SUB-FAMILY  II.  CHLAMYDOMONADEiE. 

The  plants  are  unicellular,  spherical  or  ovoid,  with  thin 
walls,  and  two  or  rarely  four  cilia.  The  chloroplast  is  in  the 
posterior  end  of  the  cell  and  usually  contains  one  pyrenoid. 
Reproduction  by  division  of  the  resting  cell  into  2,  4,  or  8 
daughter-cells.  Non-motile  spores  sometimes  occur.  Sexual 
reproduction  by  conjugation  of  ciliated  gametes,  either  isoga- 
mous or  heterogamous,  which  are  similar  to  the  vegetative 
cells,  though  smaller.  They  arise  by  division  of  the  contents 
of  the  mother-cell,  sometimes  as  manv  as  64  resulting  from  one 
cell. 

Key  to  Genera. 

Contents  of  cell  close  to  cell  wall  Chlamydomonas* 

Contents  of  cell  connected  with  cell  wall  by  threads 

Sphcerella 

Description  of  Genera. 

Chlamydomonas  Ehrb. —  Vegetative  cells  ovate,  green, 
enclosed  in  a  narrow,  colorless  tegument,  frontal  extreme  some- 
times produced  to  a  beak  with  two  cilia,  other  end  with  large 
chloroplast,  and  with  or  without  a  red  lateral  spot.  Gametes 
formed  by  continued  division  of  cell  contents  of  vegetative 
cells,  numerous,  oblong,  or  ovate,  pale  green  or  yellow,  after- 
wards brownish.    Zygospores  globular,  red  or  brownish. 

Chlamydomonas  is  abundant  in  the  reservoirs  of  the  state. 

C.  pulvisculus    Ehrb.,  Fig.  289. 


No.   IO.]  FRESH-WATER  ALG^E.  43 

According-  to  West  the  forms  with  four  cilia  should  be 
named  Carteria,  Fig.  290.  Both  the  two-  and  the  four-ciliate 
forms  are  common  in  our  waters. 

Sphaerella  Sommerf eldt  ( Chlamydococcus  A.  Br. ; 
Haematococcus  Ag.). —  Like  Chlamydomonas,  except  that 
the  cell  walls  are  outstanding  and  joined  to  the  cell  contents  by 
fine  threads.  There  is  always  more  or  less  red  coloring  matter 
present. 

[S.  lacustris  (Girod.)  Witter.] 

ORDER  II.  ULVALES. 

Thallus  expanded  and  parenchymatous;  attached  when 
young  by  rhizoids.  Each  cell  is  furnished  with  a  single  nucleus 
and  a  parietal  chloroplast,  often  quite  large,  containing  one 
pyrenoid. 

FAMILY  I.  ULVACE^E. 

Most  of  the  genera  of  this  family  are  inhabitants  of  salt 
or  brackish  water.  The  thallus  consists  of  an  expanse  of  cells 
arranged  compactly  with  their  longer  axes  at  right  angles  to 
the  plane  of  the  thallus;  either  flat  or,  more  rarely,  tubular. 
The  cells  are  uninucleate,  with  a  single  parietal,  often  ragged, 
chloroplast,  containing  one  pyrenoid. 

Asexual  reproduction  by  zoogonidia  with  4  cilia,  and  by 
gemmae.  Sexual  reproduction  by  isogamous  gametes.  The 
contents  of  a  vegetative  cell  divide  into  8  (sometimes  4  or  16) 
gametes,  smaller  than  the  zoogonidia,  which  are  pear-shaped, 
with  a  pigment  spot  and  two  long  cilia.  As  a  result  of  conjuga- 
tion a  rounded  cell  with  two  pigment  spots  and  4  cilia  is 
formed,  which  becomes  a  zygospore  on  losing  its  cilia. 

Enteromorpha  Lk. —  Thallus  tubular,  membranaceous; 
at  first  fixed,  then  floating;  sometimes  branched.  It  is  either 
green  or  pale  olive-colored.  Reproduction  as  in  the  family. 
Found  in  salt  or  fresh  water. 

ORDER  III.  SCHIZOGONIALES. 

The  thallus,  often  attached  by  rhizoids,  is  filamentous, 
sometimes  several  filaments  being  joined  laterally  to  form  a  flat 


44  CONNECTICUT   GEOL.   AND   NAT.    HIST.    SURVEY.  [Bull. 


plate.  Each  cell  contains  one  nucleus  and  a  central  stellate 
chloroplast  with  one  pyrenoid.  The  cells,  especially  of  young 
plants,  often  divide  in  two  or  three  directions. 

FAMILY  I.  PRASIOLACE.E. 

Coextensive  with  the  order. 

Prasiola  Ag.  (inclus.  Schizogonium  Kiitz.,  and  Hor- 
midium  Kiitz.,  in  part). —  Found  on  moist  earth,  trunks  of 
trees,  rocks,  stones,  etc. ;  some  species  require  very  little 
moisture.  The  cells  of  the  filamentous  thallus  are  broader  than 
long,  and  those  of  the  'flat  plates  quadrate  or  polygonal.  The 
cell  walls  are  strong  and  colorless.  Reproduction  by  gemmae, 
by  resting  spores  liberated  at  the  margin  of  the  thallus,  and  by 
tetraspores. 

ORDER  IV.  CILETOPHORALES. 

Thallus  filamentous,  simple  or  usually  branched.  Branches 
generally  attenuated  and  bearing  long  hairs.  The  uninucleate 
cells  possess  each,  except  in  Trentepohliacece,  a  single  parietal 
chloroplast  with  one  or  more  pyrenoids.  Asexual  reproduction 
by  resting  spores  or  zoogonidia  with  two  cilia.  Sexual  repro- 
duction by  isogamous  planogametes  with  two  cilia,  or  by 
heterogamous  gametes. 


Key  to  Families. 

1.  Plant  entirely  filamentous,  simple   2 

Plant  of  branched  filaments  forming  a  flat  cushion- 
like expansion  enveloped  in  mucilage  

COLEOCHiETACE/E 

2.  Filaments  branched   3 

Filaments  not  branched   5 

3.  Gametes  arise  from  special  cells  only  


TRENTEPOHLIACECE 

Gametes  arise  from  any  cell  of  the  filament   4 

4.    Small  creeping  filaments  upon  water  plants;  cells 

globose  or  cylindrical  herposteirace^e 

Like  the  above,  but  with  flask-shaped  cells  

CH^TOSPH^RIDIACE^ 

Plant  not  creeping  ch^tophorace^e 


No.  io.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG.E. 


45 


5.    Cells  with  thick  lamellose  coats,  in  a  series  inside  a 

lamellose  sheath  cylindrocapsacfje 

Cells  without  lamellose  coat  ulotrichace^e 

FAMILY  I.  TRENTEPOHLIACE^E. 

Thallus  filamentous  and  branched,  filaments  erect  or  creep- 
ing, growing  on  the  ground  or  on  tree  trunks.  The  cell  walls 
are  firm  and  lamellose.  The  cells  are  uninucleate,  and  possess 
one  or  many  parietal  chloroplasts  with  or  without  pyrenoids. 
The  color  of  the  plants  is  usually  brown  or  reddish.  Zoogo- 
nidia  are  developed  only  in  cells  especially  set  apart,  either  on 
the  ends  of  the  branches  or  intercalated.  These  motile  spores 
sometimes  conjugate.  Spores  are  sometimes  produced  which 
rest  for  a  period  before  germinating,  called  resting  spores  or 
hypnospores. 

Key  to  Genera. 

Terrestrial  or  arboreal;   chloroplasts  several  

Trentepohlia^ 
Aquatic;  cells  that  produce  zoogonidia  are  terminal 

Gongrosira 

Aquatic;  cells  that  produce  zoogonidia  not  terminal 

Leptosira 

Description  of  Genera. 
Trentepohlia  Mart.  (Chroolepus  Ag.). —  Filaments 
irregularly  branched,  often  so  dense  that  the  branches  and 
stem  cannot  be  easily  distinguished;  primary  branches  and 
stem  of  same  thickness.  Cell  contents  reddish  brown,  golden- 
yellow,  or  olive-colored.  About  32  red-brown  or  golden-yellow 
zoospores  in  a  cell  which  is  set  apart  especially  for  the  purpose, 
usually  on  the  end,  sometimes  on  the  side  of  the  filament. 
[T.  aurea  (L.)  Mart.;  T.  Iolithus  (L.)  Wittr.] 
Gongrosira  Kiitz.  (inclus.  Pilinia  Kiitz.,  in  part). —  The 
plant  is  attached  by  a  mass  of  cells,  formed  by  a  confluence 
of  creeping  branches.  From  this  mass,  which  may  be  of  one 
or  many  layers  of  cells,  numerous  erect  branched  filaments 
arise.  The  whole  is  frequently  encrusted  with  lime.  The  cell 
walls  are  thick  and  lamellose,  and  the  chloroplast  is  parietal 
with  one  or  many  pyrenoids.    Zoogonidia  are  found  in  flask- 


46  CONNECTICUT   GEOL.   AND   NAT.    HIST.   SURVEY.  [Bull. 

shaped,  terminal  zoogonidiangia.  The  spores  are  ordinary 
cells  from  the  recumbent  branches  which  become  detached. 

Leptosira  Borzi. —  Very  much  like  Gongrosira.  The 
thallus  is  in  the  form  of  a  minute  bright  green  cushion.  The 
cells  are  light  yellow-green,  the  terminal  cells  being  elliptical 
or  irregular.  The  zoogonidiangia  are  intercalated  and  not 
terminal.  The  zoogonidia  either  germinate  directly,  or  con- 
jugate in  pairs  and  form  resting  spores.  The  ends  without 
cilia  fuse  first  in  conjugation. 

FAMILY  II.  CH^ETOPHORACE^. 

The  thallus  is  branched,  and  the  branches  are  attenuated 
sometimes  into  long  hyaline  hairs;  it  is  usually  differentiated 
into  creeping  and  erect  portions.  The  creeping  portion  is  at- 
tached by  rhizoids,  is  branched,  and  is  more  or  less  torulose. 
The  cells  of  the  creeping  portion  are  more  or  less  swollen,  and 
the  branching  is  irregular.  Each  cell,  except  those  of  the 
terminal  hairs,  is  provided  with  a  parietal  irregular  chloroplast, 
containing  a  single  pyrenoid. 

Zoogonidia,  from  I  to  16,  may  be  produced  in  each  cell  of 
the  thallus  except  those  of  the  rhizoids  and  the  terminal  hairs. 
They  possess  a  red  pigment  spot  and  2  or  4  cilia,  and  vary 
much  in  size.  Spores  of  a  red-brown  color  are  produced  in  all 
the  genera  of  the  Chaetophoraceae.  The  gametes  possess  only 
two  cilia,  conjugate  in  pairs,  and  produce  zygospores  which 
rest  for  a  short  period  before  germinating. 

Key  to  Genera. 

1.  Plants  less  than  1  mm.  high,  without  setae  

Micro  tharnnion* 

Plants  larger,  branches  attenuated,  and  with  setae. . .  2 

2.  Filaments  fine,  showing  little  difference  in  character 

of  stem  and  branch,  not  in  tufts  in  gelatinous 

masses   Myxonema* 

Filaments  fine,  in  tufts  in  a  dense  gelatinous  substance 

Chcetophora* 

Filaments  and  main  branches  large,  bearing  tufts  of 
small  branchlets  Draparnaldia* 


No.  io.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALGM. 


47 


Description  of  Genera. 

Microthamnion  Nag. —  Filaments  articulate,  variously 
branched,  straight;  end  cell  at  first  linear,  then  obtuse,  and 
finally  swollen  into  a  sporangium.  The  plants  are  at  first  fixed, 
but  later  free-floating.  The  branches  arise  just  below  a  trans- 
verse cell  wall.  The  chloroplast  is  parietal,  long  and  entire,  and 
lacks  a  pyrenoid. 

This  genus  is  frequently  placed  with  the  Trentepohliacece ; 
but  Hazen  states  that  the  zoogonidia  may  be  produced  in  any 
cell  of  the  filament,  and  hence  it  has  its  relationship  near 
Myxonema.  Two  species  are  found  in  Connecticut,  according 
to  Hazen. 

[M.  Kuetzingianum    Nag. ;  M.  strictissimum  Rab.] 

Myxonema  Fries  (Stigeoclonium  Kiitz.). —  Filamentous, 
simple,  branched,  articulate ;  the  branches  not  in  tufts,  in  ap- 
pearance much  like  the  main  stem,  with  the  end  cells  often 
drawn  out  into  long,  colorless  bristles.  The  chloroplasts  are 
scattered  or  arranged  as  in  Draparnaldia.  One  to  many  zoogo- 
nidia, each  with  two  or  four  vibrating  cilia,  formed  from  the 
contents  of  one  cell.  Gametes  with  4  cilia.  Zygospores  smooth 
or  stellate. 

M.  attenuatum    Haz.,  Fig.  220. 

M.  tenue  (Ag.)  Rab.,  Figs.  79,  82. 

M.  nanutn  (Dillw.)  Haz.,  Fig.  284. 

M.  lubricum  var.  varians    Haz.,  Fig.  81. 

M.  sp.  (?),  Fig.  78. 

[M.  Hagelliferum  (Kiitz.)  Rab.] 

Chaetophora  Schrank. —  Plants  enveloped  in  a  hard,  gela- 
tinous covering  of  a  globose,  plane  or  lobed  form.  Thallus 
filamentous,  articulated  and  branched.  Stems  radiately  dis- 
posed, dividing  into  short  branchlets,  sometimes  ending  in  a 
bristle.  The  zoogonidia  have  two  or  four  cilia,  and  resting 
spores  are  generally  developed  from  terminal  cells  and  are 
brown. 

C.  incrassata   (Huds.)   Haz.,  Fig.  221. 
C.  pisiformis  (Roth)  Ag.,  Fig.  222. 
[C.  attenuate  Haz.] 

Draparnaldia  Ag. —  Filaments  articulate,  much  branched. 
The  stem  is  thick  and  composed  of  sterile  cells,  colorless 


48  CONNECTICUT   GEOL.   AND   NAT.    HIST.   SURVEY.  [Bull. 

except  for  the  chloroplast,  which  is  in  the  shape  of  a  trans- 
verse band.  The  filaments  are  furnished  more  or  less  densely 
with  alternate  or  opposite,  tufted  branches.  These  are  com- 
posed of  smaller,  green,  fertile  cells,  the  end  cell  often  a  color- 
less spine.  From  one  to  four  zoogonidia,  with  four  cilia  apiece, 
arise  from  each  cell  of  the  lateral  branches.  Usually  all  the 
cells  of  one  tuft  form  zoogonidia  at  the  same  time,  and  the 
whole  process  occupies  but  a  few  minutes.  A  gelatinous 
sheath,  soft  and  slippery,  covers  the  whole.  Found  in  clear 
streams,  attached  to  stones  or  water-plants. 

D.  phimosa   (Vauch.)   Ag.,  Figs.  83,  84. 

D.  glomerata  (Vauch.)  Ag.,  Fig.  217. 

[D.  acuta  (Ag.)  Kiitz.] 

FAMILY  III.  CYLINDROCAPSACE^E. 

Filamentous  green  Algae,  without  branches  or  roots,  living 
either  in  water  or  air.  The  filaments  are  covered  with  a  thick, 
lamellose  sheath,  and  the  cells  are  lamellose  and  are  in  a 
single  series. 

In  an  ordinary  vegetative  cell  the  contents  mass  together  to 
form  one  oosphere.  The  antherozoids,  which  change  from 
green  to  red  or  orange,  are  each  provided  with  two  short 
cilia.  After  the  oosphere  is  fertilized,  it  also  changes  to  red  or 
orange,  and  lies  resting  for  some  time  before  it  germinates. 

Cylindrocapsa  Reinsch. —  With  the  characters  of  the 
family.   They  are  at  first  attached,  then  floating. 

FAMILY  IV.  ULOTRICHACE^E. 

Filaments  simple,  composed  of  cylindrical  or  of  rounded 
cells.  The  cell  wall  is  always  colorless,  though  of  varying 
thickness.  Each  cell  contains  a  single  parietal  chloroplast 
with  irregular  margins  and  one  pyrenoid.  Asexual  reproduc- 
tion takes  place  in  various  ways.  Both  motile  and  non-motile 
spores  are  produced;  of  the  former  some  are  large  (macro- 
zoogonidia)  and  some  small  (microzoogonidia) .  The  plants 
also  multiply  by  dismemberment  of  the  filament  into  single 
cells  or  series  of  cells.  Sexual  reproduction  by  isogamous 
gametes. 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALCE. 


49 


Key  to  Genera. 
Filaments  attached;  chromatophore  a  homogeneous 

zonate  band,  with  one  to  several  pyrenoids.  .  .  Ulothrix* 
Filaments  not  attached;   chromatophore  a  parietal 

disk  or  plate,  with  one  pyrenoid  Stichococcus* 

Filaments  generally  not  attached;  chromatophore 
granular,  covering  more  or  less  completely  the 
whole  cell  wall,  containing  starch  but  no  pyrenoids 

Microspore 

Description  of  Genera. 

Ulothrix  Kiitz.  (Hormiscia,  as  used  by  Rabenhorst, 
Hansgirg,  and  De  Toni). —  Filaments  simple;  each  cell  except 
the  basal  cell  capable  of  reproduction.  The  chloroplast  is 
parietal  with  one  or  many  pyrenoids.  Asexual  reproduction  by 
zoospores.  Sexual  reproduction  by  conjugation  of  gametes, 
of  which  eight  or  more  may  be  formed  in  a  cell. 

U.  sonata  (Web.  and  Mohr)  Kiitz.,  Fig.  94. 

U.  tenerrima  Kiitz.,  Fig.  93. 

Figures  86  to  91  are  specimens  of  Ulothrix  of  which  we 
have  not  determined  the  species. 

[U.  implexa  Kiitz.;  U.  Hacca  (Dillw.)  Thur.] 

Stichococcus  Nag.  (Hormococcus  Chodat). —  Very  like 
Ulothrix,  but  unlike  it  in  being  almost  wholly  aerial,  and  in 
the  fact  that  the  filaments  easily  and  commonly  dissociate  into 
cylindrical  cells  or  small  groups.  The  dissociation  frequently 
occurs  first  on  the  one  side  and  then  on  the  other,  giving  a 
zig-zag  appearance.  Each  cell  has  a  parietal  chloroplast, 
usually  occupying  a  part  of  the  cell  wall  and  containing  a 
small  pyrenoid.  Propagation  by  cell  division,  breaking  up  of 
the  filaments,  by  non-motile  spores,  and  by  biciliated  zoogonidia. 

S.  Haccidus  (Kiitz.)  Gay,  found  but  not  figured. 

[S.  rivularis  (Kiitz.)  Haz.] 

Microspora  Thur. —  Filaments  composed  of  cylindrical 
or  slightly  swollen  cells.  The  firm,  sometimes  lamellose  cell 
walls  occasionally  break  up  into  H-shaped  pieces,  each  piece 
composed  of  a  transverse  wall  and  portions  of  the  lateral  walls 
of  the  two  adjoining  cells.  The  cells  are  uninucleate,  and  a 
more  or  less  reticulated  chloroplast  occupies  the  cell  wall. 
4 


50  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


Resting  spores  with  thick  walls  are  produced,  usually  one 
in  each  cell,  and  also  two-  to  four-ciliate  zoogonidia. 

M.  Wittrockii  (Wille)  Lag.,  Fig.  216. 

M.  Stagnorum  (Kutz.)  Lag.,  Fig.  92. 

[M.  abbrevia\a  (Rab.)  Lag.;  M.  amoena  (Kutz.)  Rab.; 
M.  crassior    (Hansg.)  Haz.] 

FAMILY  V.  HERPOSTEIRACE^E. 

The  thallus  is  a  creeping  filament,  sometimes  branched, 
and  growing  on  larger  Algae  or  other  water  plants ;  most  of  the 
cells  have  a  bristle  on  the  back,  which  is  bulbous  at  the  base  and 
separated  from  the  cell  by  a  septum. 

In  the  sexual  reproduction,  cells  in  the  centre  of  the  thallus, 
devoid  of  bristles,  form  the  oogonia.  One  oosphere  is  formed 
in  each  oogonium,  and  is  ejected  through  an  opening  in  the 
wall.  The  oosphere  is  large  and  slowly  motile,  provided  with 
four  cilia.  Smaller  cells  on  the  end  of  the  thallus,  frequently 
colorless,  form  the  antheridia.  One  or  two  swiftly  moving 
antherozoids,  pear-shaped,  each  with  four  cilia  and  two  pul- 
Bating  vacuoles,  are  produced  in  each  antheridium,  and  they 
unite,  outside  the  oogonium,  with  the  oosphere. 

Herposteiron  Nag.  (Aphanochaete  A.  Br.,  Berth., 
fiuber).  -Coextensive  with  the  family. 

H.  Confcrvicola    Nag.,  Fig.  806. 

|//.  vermiculoidcs  Wolle.] 

FAMILY  VI.  CH,ETOSPH.£RIDIACE.«. 

Thallus  creeping,  composed  of  flask-shaped  cells  more  or 
less  loosely  joined,  and  each  bearing  a  very  long  and  slender 
seta,  sheathed  at  the  base.  Cell  division  horizontal,  the  lower 
daughter  cell  migrating  to  the  side. 

Asexual  reproduction  by  zoospores,  formed  to  the  number 
of  four  or  more  (?)  in  a  cell. 

Cha?tosphatridium  Klebahn. —  Coextensive  with  the 
family. 

FAMILY  VII.  COLBOCHJETACE.5L 

Small,  bright  green  water-plants.  The  thallus  forms  small 
green  cushions  or  discs.   The  cells  in  the  common  species  often 


No.  10.] 


FRESH -WATER  ALGJE. 


51 


form  a  flat,  more  or  less  circular  plane,  or  are  arranged  as  fila- 
ments radiating  from  one  point.  The  cells  are  oblong,  more 
or  less  dilated  at  the  anterior  end,  and  some  of  them  bear  a 
colorless  bristle  fixed  in  a  long  and  narrow  sheath. 

The  oogonium  is  round,  on  a  slender  neck  —  the  continua- 
tion of  the  end  cell  of  the  plant*  Antheridia  found  either  on  a 
neighboring  cell  or  on  a  separate  thallus.  The  oospore  rests 
for  the  winter,  and  develops  in  the  following  spring.  Asexual 
reproduction  by  zoogonidia,  which  are  larger  than  the  anthero- 
zoids  and  may  be  developed  in  any  cell. 

Coleochaete   Breb. —  Coextensive  with  the  family. 

C.  irregularis   Pringsh.  (?),  Fig.  80a. 

C.  scutata   Breb.,  Fig.  243. 

ORDER  V.  CEDOGONIALES. 

Thallus  of  simple  or  branched  filaments,  fixed.  The  cells 
are  uninucleate,  and  with  a  parietal,  more  or  less  anastomosing 
chloroplast  containing  one  or  more  pyrenoids.  In  the  vegeta- 
tive division  new  pieces  of  the  cell  wall  are  intercalated. 
The  zoogonidia  are  possessed  of  a  circle  of  numerous  cilia 
around  the  anterior  end.   Antheridia  and  oogonia  are  present. 

FAMILY  I.  CEDOGONIACELA2. 

Filaments  branched  or  unbranched,  attached  in  early  stages. 
Cell  multiplication  by  transverse  division,  shown  by  transverse 
stria\  usually  at  the  end  of  the  mother-cell. 

The  oogonia  are  developed  in  a  series  of  vegetative  cells, 
and  are  at  first  green,  then  orange,  and  finally  dark  red  or 
almost  black.  There  are  two  kinds  of  male  plants,  dwarf  and 
elongated ;  the  dwarf  males  are  attached  to  female  plants,  and 
the  elongated  males  are  composed  of  a  short  series  of  cells 
forming  an  independent  thread. 

Asexual  reproduction  by  zoogonidia.  The  entire  contents 
of  a  cell  gather  in  one  mass,  the  cell  wall  splits  near  one  end, 
and  the  mass,  with  a  small  colorless  protuberance  on  one  end 
surrounded  by  numerous  cilia,  escapes  and  swims  awav  to 
form  a  new  plant. 

Key  to  Genera. 
Cells  long,  without  a  laterally  placed  bristle. (Edogonium% 
Cells  short,  with  a  laterally  placed  bristle.  .  .  .Bulbochtrte* 


52  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


Description  of  Genera. 

CEdogonium  Lk. —  Filaments  simple,  articulate ;  the  end 
cell  sometimes  setiform,  sometimes  with  an  acute  conical  cap; 
cells  enlarged  at  the  upper  extremities.  The  oogonia  and 
antheridia  are  either  on  the  same  or  on  different  filaments. 
Dwarf  males,  shaped  like  inverted  flasks,  are  parasitically  sit- 
uated near  the  oogonium.  The  elongated  males  are  inde- 
pendent and  shorter  than  the  female  plant.  When  a  cell  has 
reached  maturity,  it  splits  below  the  top  by  a  circular  line,  the 
top  is  raised  by  growth,  and  a  new  cell  formed.  This  may 
split  again,  and  a  new  growth  push  the  top  up  and  leave  an- 
other ring ;  this  may  be  repeated  five  or  six  more  times,  leaving 
a  new  ring  each  time. 

O.  sp.  (?),  Fig.  96. 

O.  cardiacum  (Hass.)  Wittr.  (?),  Fig.  228.  Male  and 
female  specimens. 

[0.  crenulato-costatum  Wittr.] 

Bulbochaete  Ag. —  Filaments  much  branched ;  almost  all 
the  cells  thickened  upwards,  and  bearing  on  that  end  long, 
thin,  transparent  bristles,  bulbose  at  the  base.  Reproduction 
as  in  CEdogonium.  The  plants  are  more  often  mixed  than  in 
CEdogonium,  and  are  enveloped  in  a  quantity  of  mucus. 
'  B.  sp.  (?),  Figs.  97,  98. 

[B.  intermedia  DeBary.] 

ORDER  VI.  CLADOPHORALES. 

Three  families,  very  like  the  Siphonales,  comprise  this 
order.  The  thallus  is  simple  or  branched,  incompletely  divided 
into  cells.  Each  portion  contains  many  nuclei  and  parietal 
chloroplasts,  with  single  pyrenoids.  Asexual  reproduction  by 
resting  spores,  cysts,  or  zoogonidia  with  two  or  four  cilia. 
Sexual  reproduction  by  heterogamous  or  isogamous  gametes. 

The  order  is  divided  into  families,  as  follows :  — 

Key  to  Families. 
1.    Filaments  unbranched,  compound  or  elongated  cceno- 

cytes   sph^eropleace^: 

Filaments  branched   2 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG.E. 


53 


2.    Producing  barrel-shaped  and  fusiform  resting  spores 

PITHOPHORACEvE 

Without  the  barrel-shaped  resting  spores  

CLADOPHORACE^E 

FAMILY  I.  SPH^ROPLEACE^E. 

The  thallus  is  unbranched,  composed  of  cells  from  one  to 
ninety  times  as  long  as  wide,  each  with  several  nuclei,  and 
parietal  chloroplasts  in  the  form  of  rings.  Any  segment  of  the 
filament  may  form  an  oogonium  or  a  bright  red  antheridium. 
These  sometimes  alternate  in  a  filament.  Many  antherozoids 
are  formed  on  the  breaking  up  of  the  antheridium,  and  they 
penetrate  the  oogonium  through  the  transverse  walls.  Bright 
red  oospores  with  thick  walls  are  produced,  which  hibernate  in 
the  oogonium,  and  on  germination  from  two  to  eight  zoospores 
are  set  free,  which  produce  young  plants,  simple,  fusiform,  at- 
tenuated to  a  fine  point  on  each  end. 

Sphaeroplea  Ag. —  Coextensive  with  the  family.  Its  fila- 
ments are  36-62  microns  in  diameter. 

FAMILY  II.  PITHOPHORACEjE. 

Thallus  much  branched,  segments  six  to  twelve  or  more 
times  longer  than  broad.  Usually  many  nuclei  in  a  segment, 
chloroplast  parietal ;  growth  apical ;  attached  below  by  a 
rhizoid.  Asexual,  green  resting  spores  with  thick  walls  are 
produced  here  and  there;  when  intercalated,  cask-shaped; 
when  terminal,  ovoid  or  fusiform.  They  develop  on  germina- 
tion at  both  ends. 

Pithophora  Wittr. —  Coextensive  with  the  family.  It  is 
almost  exclusively  tropical. 

FAMILY  III.  CLADOPHORACE.E. 

Thallus  large,  filamentous,  incompletely  septate,  branched 
in  Cladophora.  Each  segment  contains  several  nuclei  and  one 
reticulated  parietal  chloroplast  or  several  smaller  ones,  each 
with  a  pyrenoid.  In  Cladophora  and  Chcetomorpha  asexual  re- 
production is  by  zoogonidia,  formed  in  great  numbers  in  the 
mother-cell.  Rhizoclonium  produces  thick-walled  cysts.  Clado- 
phora has  also  an  isogamous  sexual  reproduction. 


54  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


The  Cladophoracece  secrete  very  little  or  no  mucus,  and 
are,  therefore,  a  resting  place  for  epiphytes. 

Key  to  Genera. 

1.  Filaments  unb ranched;   cells  often  slightly  swollen 

Chcetomorpha 

Filaments  commonly  branched;  cells  not  swollen. . .  2 

2.  With  branched  rhizoids  Rhizoclonium* 

Without  rhizoids   Cladophora* 

Description  of  Genera. 

Chaetomorpha  Kutz. —  Wide,  simple  filaments  of  thick- 
walled,  swollen  segments ;  fixed  at  the  base,  the  basal  segments 
being  shorter  than  the  rest.  The  cell  wall  is  firm  and  lamellose. 
Mostly  marine  or  in  brackish  water. 

Rhizoclonium  Kutz. —  Filaments  slightly  branched,  with 
branched  rhizoids  at  the  base;  articulate,  somewhat  contorted, 
having  here  and  there  short  branches  composed  of  from  one 
to  three  cells. 

[R.  lacustre  forma  Americanum  Wille ;  R.  hieroglyphicum 
var.  macromeres  Nordst] 

Cladophora  Kutz. —  Filaments  much  branched,  the  last 
branches  much  thinner  than  the  main  stem ;  cell  walls  thick, 
cells  longer  than  broad.  Propagation  by  zoogonidia,  which 
develop  in  large  numbers  within  the  cells. 

C.  glomerata  (L.)    Kutz.,  Fig.  274. 

[C.  callicoma  Kutz.] 

ORDER  VII.  SIPHONALES. 

Plant  composed  of  an  elongated  ccenocytic  filament  {cceno- 
cyte),  which  is  much  branched.  The  order  inhabits  salt  water 
almost  exclusively.  The  only  family  living  in  fresh  water  is 
the  Vaucheriacece. 

FAMILY  I.  VAUCHERIACECE. 

Thallus  elongated,  somewhat  branched,  ccenocytic,  usually 
attached.  The  protoplasm  contains  many  minute  nuclei.  The 
oval  chloroplasts  are  small  and  numerous.  The  cell  wall  is 
thin  and  easily  broken ;  after  which  the  injured  part  is  cut  off 
by  a  septum,  and  the  uninjured  parts  develop  into  new  plants. 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG.E. 


55 


Vaucheria  D.  C. —  Many  filaments  growing  from  one 
root,  green,  rather  stout.  A  single  filament  usually  more  or 
less  branched,  with  chlorophyll  quite  evenly  distributed  on  the 
inside  of  the  cell  wall,  forms  one  plant.  Sexual  reproduction 
by  oospheres  and  spermatozoids ;  asexual  reproduction  by 
zoospores.  One  zoospore,  provided  with  many  cilia,  is  formed 
in  a  swelling  at  the  tip  of  the  thallus,  cut  off  from  the  rest  of 
the  cell  by  a  wall.  The  oogonia  and  antheridia,  either  sessile 
or  on  short  pedicles,  grow  in  various  numbers  on  the  same 
tube  and  usually  close  together. 

V .  sessilis  (Vauch.)  D.  C,  Figs.  200,  201.  Sexual  organs 
of  this  species  are  shown  in  Fig.  206. 

[V.  aversa    Hass. ;    V.  geminata    (Vauch.)  D.  C] 

ORDER  VIII.  CONJUGATE* 

The  Conjugates  are  green  or  brownish  Algae,  sometimes 
single-celled,  but  usually  composed  of  many  cells  closely  joined. 
They  are  named  from  the  peculiar  mode  of  propagation.  Two 
cells  unite  their  entire  contents  to  form  a  zygospore;  rarely 
two  zygospores  result  from  such  a  union.  Resting  spores  or 
cysts  are  produced  in  the  Zygnemacea  without  copulation. 
Non-motile  spores  are  sometimes  formed.  All  the  Conjugates 
are  very  slimy  to  the  touch. 

Key  to  Families. 

Unicellular;  cells  commonly  constructed  of  two 
symmetrical  halves ;  of  very  many  forms,  though 
rarely  cylindrical ;  single,  or,  very  rarely,  bound 
together  in  a  loose  thread ;  two  to  eight  germs  de- 
velop from  a  single  zygospore  desmidiace^e 

Thallus  a  thread  of  many  similar  cells ;  each  zygo- 
spore produces  only  one  germ  plant  zygnemace^ 

*  Our  work  upon  the  remaining  orders  of  Chlorophyceae  is  as  yet  quite  in- 
complete. These  Algae  are  abundant  in  our  waters.  In  the  filamentous  forms  it 
is  difficult  or  impossible  to  identify  the  species  from  the  vegetative  stages;  and, 
since  in  ordinary  waters  it  is  usual  to  find  these  stages  only,  specific  determination 
is  frequently  impossible.  The  family  of  Desmidiaceee  is  very  abundant;  and, 
while  our  list  contains  a  large  number  of  them,  doubtless  a  longer  study  will  show 
many  more  species.    The  common  species  are,  however,  fairly  well  represented. 


56  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


FAMILY  I.  DESMIDIACE^E. 

Cells  of  various  forms,  but  symmetrical,  single,  or,  in  a  few 
genera,  loosely  united  into  threads.  Often  a  constriction  in 
the  middle  of  the  cell  divides  it  into  halves,  called  semi-cells; 
the  cell  contents  nearly  always  divided.  The  cell  wall  is  often 
provided  with  granules,  spines,  or  other  protuberances,  which 
are  usually  arranged  in  a  definite  pattern.  These  projections 
serve  as  a  protection  from  aquatic  animals,  and  as  an 
anchor  in  times  of  flood.  Conjugation  of  two  cells  results  in 
zygospores.  Asexual  multiplication  by  transverse  division  or 
separation  of  semi-cells.  The  Destnidiacece  are  surrounded  by 
a  mucus  exuded  through  pores  in  the  cell  wall,  and  often  may 
be  found  embedded  in  a  mass  of  jelly. 

They  are  not  free-swimming,  but  are  able  under  certain 
conditions  of  light  and  gravitation  to  glide  along  a  hard  sur- 
face. 

Desmids  are  extremely  abundant  the  world  over;  there  are 
several  thousand  known  species,  living  in  all  degrees  of  tem- 
perature, and  found  most  abundantly  in  soft  water. 

The  following  key,  modified  from  West,  includes  all  the 
known  genera  of  Desmids,  four  of  which  (Ichthyocercus, 
Triploceras,  Phymatodocis,  and  Streptonema)  are  exclusively 
tropical,  and  one  (Ancylonema)  is  exclusively  arctic.  We 
have  identified  certainly  as  yet  only  a  part  of  the  Connecticut 
species,  but  have  indicated  by  an  asterisk  the  genera,  and  have 
figured  the  species  thus  far  observed. 

Key  to  Sub-families. 

Cell  wall  not  evidently  divided  into  two  parts,  and 
without  pores  saccoderm^e 

Cell  wall  showing  two  segments,  and  with  a  differ- 
entiated outer  porous  layer  placoderm^e 

SUB-FAMILY  I.  SACCODERM.E. 

Cell  wall  unsegmented  and  without  pores.  Point  of  division 
of  cells  indefinite,  and  unknown  previous  to  the  actual  division. 
The  young  half  of  the  cell  is  developed  obliquely,  and  its  walls 
are  absolutely  continuous  with  the  walls  of  the  older  half. 


No.  10.] 


FRESH- WATER  ALGvE. 


57 


Key  to  Tribes  and  Genera. 

Tribe  I.  gonatozyge^e.  Cells  elongate,  cylindrical,  and 
unconstricted,  forming  loose  filaments.  Cell  wall  with  a  differ- 
entiated outer  layer,  of  which  the  small  roughnesses  and  spines 
form  a  part. 

Chloroplasts  axile  Gonatozygon 

Chloroplasts  parietal  and  spirally  twisted ....  Genicularia 
Tribe  II.    spirot\eniEuE:.    Cells  solitary,  relatively  short, 
and  mostly  unconstricted.   Cell  wall  a  simple  sac,  without  a  dif- 
ferentiated outer  layer.    The  cell  becomes  adult  by  periodical 


growth. 

1.  One  chloroplast  in  each  cell   2 

Two  chloroplasts  in  each  cell   4 

2.  Chloroplast  spirally  twisted,  axile  or  parietal.  .Spirotcenia 
Chloroplast  plane,  axile   3 

3.  Cells  solitary  Mesot&niam* 

Cells  forming  short  filaments.  Ancylonema 

4.  Chloroplasts  star-shaped,  radiating  from  a  central 

pyrenoid   Cylindrocystis 


Chloroplasts  ridged  with  longitudinal  serrated  ridges 

,  Netrium* 

Description  of  Genera. 

Gonatozygon  D.  By. —  Cells  long  and  straight,  not  con- 
stricted, forming  filaments  which  break  up  at  maturity.  The 
cell  wall  is  smooth  or  covered  with  minute  granules.  The 
two  chloroplasts  are  axile,  thin  and  waving  or  twisted;  they 
contain  four  to  sixteen  equidistant  pyrenoids.  The  zygospores, 
which  quickly  separate  from  the  empty  cells,  are  smooth. 

Spirotaenia  B'reb. —  Cells  straight,  fusiform,  ends  rounded, 
not  constricted  in  the  middle;  cells  single  or  several,  covered 
by  a  gelatinous  envelope.  Chloroplasts  spiral  bands  on  the 
inside  of  the  cell  wall. 

Mesotaenium  Nag. —  Cylindrical  cells,  straight  or  slightly 
curved,  without  median  constriction.  The  ends  are  broadly 
rounded.  The  chloroplast  is  a  flat  plate,  extending  from  one 
end  of  the  cell  to  the  other ;  occasionally  there  are  twot  chloro- 
plasts. 

M.  micrococcum    (Kutz.)  Roy  and  Biss.,  Fig.  219. 


58  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 

Netrium  Nag. —  Cylindrical,  straight,  or  fusiform  cells, 
without  constriction.  Chloroplasts  two  (or  four)  in  each  cell, 
each  with  longitudinal  serrate  ridges. 

N.  interruptum    (Breb.)  Lutkem,  Fig.  281. 

N.  Digitus    (Ehrb.)  Itz.  and  Roth.,  Fig.  282. 

SUB-FAMILY  II.  PLACODERMvE. 

Cell  wall  mostly  constricted,  with  a  differentiated  outer 
layer.  Cell  division  follows  a  fixed  type,  with  interpolation  of 
the  younger  halves  between  the  old  ones.  The  younger  por- 
tions of  the  cell  wall  are  joined  to  the  older  portions  by  an 
oblique  surface. 

Key  to  Genera. 

1.  After  division  the  cells  remain  free  and  solitary. ...  2 
After  division  the  cells  remain  attached  to  form 

colonies    14 

2.  Cells  more  or  less  constricted  at  the  middle   5 

Cells  not  constricted   3 

3.  Cells  of  moderate  length,  straight,  cylindrical. .  .Penium* 
Cells  elongate,  generally  curved  and  attenuated   4 

4.  Cells  almost  cylindrical,  scarcely  attenuated;  chloro- 

plast  single,  without  apical  moving  granules ....  Roya* 
Cells  strongly  attenuated  towards  each  extremity; 
two  chloroplasts  in  each  cell,  with  apical  moving 
granules   Closterium* 

5.  Cells  elongated  and  cylindrical,  constriction  slight.  .  6 
Cells  relatively  short;  deeply  constricted   10 

6.  Apices  of  cells  truncate  or  rounded,  entire   7 

Apices  of  cells  cleft,  incision  open  or  narrow   8 

7.  Base  of  semi-cells  plicate  Docidium* 

Base  of  semi-cells  plane  Plewotcenium* 

8.  Cell  wall  adorned  with  rings  of  furcate  processes. . 

Triploceras 

Cell  wall  plane   9 

9.  Apical   incision   widely   open,   each   apical  angle 

furnished  with  a  spine  Ichthyocercus 

Apical  incision  narrow  Xetmemorus 

10.    Cells  compressed  (at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the 


No.   IO.]  FRESH- WATER  ALGjE.  59 

front  view),  in  the  vertical  view  fusiform  or  el- 
liptical   ii 

Cells  in  vertical  view  radiating,  triangular,  quadran- 
gular, or  radiate;  rarely  fusiform  Staurastrum* 

It.    Cells  mostly  oblong  or  elliptical;  moderately  lobed; 

margins  wavy,  the  depressions  rounded ....  Euastrum* 

Cells  very  much  compressed,  mostly  orbicular  or 
broadly  elliptical,  deeply  lobed  or  incised .  Mkrasterias* 

Cells  with  a  more  or  less  entire  margin,  often 
furnished  with  warts  or  spines   12 

12.  Cell  wall  with  regularly  arranged  spines  of  consider- 

able length   13 

Cells  without  spines  Cosmarium* 

13.  Spines  several,  commonly  in  pairs;  a  central  pro- 

tuberance always  present  Xanthidiutn* 

Spines  4  or  8,  occasionally  16,  no  central  protuberance 

Arthrodesrnus* 

14.  Colonies  spheroidal;  cells  not  in  contact,  but  joined 

by  gelatinous  bands   15 

Colonies  thread-like ;  cells  attached  by  their  apices  to 
form  long  filaments   16 

15.  Gelatinous  bands  narrow ;  few  cells  forming  a  micro- 

scopic colony  Cosmocladium 

Gelatinous  bands  very  broad,  many  cells  forming  a 
macroscopic  colony  0  ocardiwm 

16.  The  line  of  division  of  the  cell,  where  the  new  and 

old  parts  of  the  cell  wall  are  obliquely  fitted  to- 
gether, develops  a  girdle  during  division   21 

The  line  of  division  does  not  develop  a  girdle  during 
division   17 

17.  Cells  attached  by  special  apical  processes   18 

Apices  of  cells  plane  and  flat   19 

18.  Apical  processes  very  short  Spharozosnta* 

Apical  processes  long  and  overlapping  the  apices  of 

the  adjoining  cells   Onychonema* 

19.  Cells  deeply  constricted   20 

Cells  slightly  constricted  Hyalotheca* 

20.  Cells  in  vertical  view  elliptical  Spondylosium* 

Cells  in  vertical  view  quadrangular  with  produced 

angles   Phymatodocis 


6b  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


21.  Cells  joined  by  special  apical  processes  Streptonema 

Cells  joined  by  their  flat  apices  or  by  flattened  apical 

projections    22 

22.  Cells  short,  in  vertical  view  fusiform,  triangular,  or 

quadrangular    (rarely    circular    with  produced 

angles)   Desmidium* 

Cells  elongate,  cylindrical  .  .Gymnozyga 

Description  of  Genera. 

Penium  Breb. —  Cells  straight,  cylindrical  or  fusiform, 
without  median  constriction,  ends  rounded ;  free  or  collected 
in  a  gelatinous  membrane.  Cell  wall  smooth,  or  minutely 
granular,  colorless  or  sometimes  red,  often  finely  striate. 
Chloroplast  axile ;  when  seen  in  cross  section  star-shaped,  with 
arms  often  forking.  Multiplication  by  division,  and  by  zygo- 
spores formed  by  conjugation. 

P.  closterioides    Ralfs,  Fig.  172. 

P.  polymorphum    Perty,  Fig.  173. 

P.  margaritaceum    (Ehrb.)  Breb.,  Fig.  175. 

P.  Navicula    Breb.,  Fig.  218. 

Roya   West. —  Cells  curved  but  not  attenuated.    Cell  wall 
without  pores,  chloroplast  single,  without  dancing  granules. 
R.  obtusa   (Breb.)  West,  Fig.  145. 

Closterium  Nitzsch. —  Cells  simple,  elongated,  crescent- 
shaped  or  lunately  curved,  entire.  The  centres  are  not  con- 
stricted, but  often  bear  a  few  transverse  striae.  The  cell  walls 
are  smooth  or  finely  striate,  colorless  or  brown ;  at  each  end  of 
the  cell  is  a  vesicle,  colorless  or  straw-colored,  containing 
numerous  granules.  The  chloroplasts  are  arranged  in  longi- 
tudinal rows  broken  in  the  middle  by  a  transverse,  colorless 
band. 

C.  acuminatum   Kiitz.,  Fig.  147. 

C.  lanceolaium  Kiitz.,  Fig.  148. 

C.  Cucumis  Ehrb.  (  ?) ,  Fig.  149. 

C.  acerosum    (Schrank)  Ehrb.  (?),  Figs.  150,  151. 

C.  Lunula  Ehrb.,  Fig.  152. 

C.  turgidum    Ehrb.,  Fig.  153. 

C.  strigosum   Ehrb.,  Fig.  154. 

C.  costatum   Corda,  Fig.  155. 

C.  Delpontei  Klebs,  Fig.  156. 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG^E. 


6l 


C.  prelongum    (Breb.)  Delp.,  Fig.  157. 

C.  lineatum    Ehrb.,  Figs.  157a,  158. 

C.  decorum   Breb.,  Fig.  159. 

C.  areolatum   Wood,  Fig.  161. 

C.  Diance   Ehrb.,  Fig.  162. 

C.  Jenneri    Ralfs,  Fig.  160. 

C.  parvulum    Nag.,  Figs.  163,  164. 

C.  moniliferum    (Bory)  Ehrb.,  Fig.  165. 

C.  Leibleinii   Kutz.,  Fig.  166. 

C.  Leibleinii  var.  cnrtiim   West,  Fig.  167. 

C.  ro stratum   Ehrb.,  Fig.  168. 

C.  rostratum  var.  breviro stratum    West,  Fig.  169. 
C.  subcostatum    Nord.,  Fig.  170. 

C.  Brebissonii    Delp.,  Fig.  171. 

Docidium  Breb. —  Cells  straight,  cylindrical  or  fusiform; 
ends  rounded,  truncate  or  smooth,  constricted  in  the  middle ; 
each  semi-cell  furnished  with  a  basal  inflation.  The  base  is 
plicate  with  a  granule  under  each  plication.  Chlorophyll  axile 
and  an  axile  row  of  pyrenoids.  The  ends  have  a  vacuole  con- 
taining dancing  granules. 

D.  Baculum    (Breb.),  Figs.  103,  223. 

D.  verticillatum    (Bailey)  Ralfs,  found  but  not  figured. 

Pleurotaenium  Nag. —  In  shape  much  like  Docidium, 
without  plications  at  the  base  of  the  semi-cells.  The  ends  are 
truncate  and  usually  furnished  with  a  ring  of  tooth-like  pro- 
jections. The  parietal  chloroplasts  are  longitudinal  and  are 
provided  with  several  pyrenoids.  The  centre  of  the  cells  usually 
contains  large  vacuoles,  and  in  the  apical  ones  moving  granules 
are  often  seen. 

P.  crenulatum    (Ehrb.)  Rab.,  Fig.  224. 

P.  Archerii  Delp.,  Fig.  225. 

P.  Trabecula   (Ehrb.)  Nag.,  Fig.  226. 

P.  nodosum    (Bail.)  Lund.,  Fig.  283. 

P.  sp.  (?),  Fig.  101. 

Tetmemorus  Ralfs. —  Cells  like  Penium,  except  that  the 
ends  are  slightly  cut  and  the  middle  is  constricted.  One 
central  chloroplast  with  a  single  row  of  pyrenoids  is  present. 
Cell  wall  mostly  punctate  or  granulose. 


62  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 

Staurastrum  Meyen. —  The  second  largest  genus  of 
Desmids.  Cells  in  front  view  oblong,  cylindrical,  elliptical,  or 
orbicular,  with  margins  notched  or  smooth,  always  constricted 
in  the  middle,  ends  rounded,  entire.  End  view  with  three  to 
six  obtuse,  acute,  or  horn-like  angles.  Chlorophyll  more  or  less 
central,  zygospores  commonly  furnished  with  spines  (see 
Fig.  261). 

orbicular e    (Ehrb.)  Ralfs,  Figs.  123,  124. 

dejectum    (Breb.)  var.  convergens   Wolle,  Fig.  122. 

S.  dejectum  var.  mucronatum    Ralfs,  Fig.  125. 

S.  megacanthum   Lund.,  Figs.  126,  127. 

>S\  hirsutum    (Ehrb.)  Breb.,  Figs.  133,  263,  263a. 

S.  brevispinum   Breb.,  Fig.  128. 

S,  leptocladum    Nord.,  Figs.  264,  264a. 

5.  erasum   Breb.,  Figs.  130,  131. 

S.  arctiscon   Ehrb.,  Figs.  268,  268a. 

5*.  odonatum  Wolle,  Fig.  132. 

S.  coronulatum  Wolle,  Figs.  267,  267a. 

5\  Ravenelii  Wood,  Figs.  134,  135. 

S.  dejectum  Breb.,  Figs.  233,  236. 

S.  furcigerum   Breb.,  Fig.  136. 

5.  crenulatum    (Delp.)  Nag.,  Fig.  231. 

5.  margaritaceum   Ehrb.,  Fig.  235. 

5\  iotanum    Wolle,  Fig.  143. 

S.  eustephanum    Ralfs,  Fig.  144. 

S.  pygmcEum   Breb.,  Fig.  261.  Conjugating. 

S.-muricatum   Breb.,  Fig.  129. 

Four  species,  names  unknown,  Figs.  137-142. 

S.  gracile    Ralfs,  found  but  not  figured. 

Euastrum  Ehrb. —  Cells  elliptical  or  oblong,  deeply  con- 
stricted ;  semi-cells  usually  cut  at  the  ends  and  wavy  or  lobed 
at  the  sides,  the  number  of  lobes  being  uneven;  usually 
furnished  with  circular  inflated  protuberances. 

E.  integrum  Wolle,  Fig.  105. 

E.  verrucosum    (Ehrb.)  Ralfs,  Fig.  104. 

E.  oblongatum    (Grev.)  Ralfs,  Fig.  229. 

E.  ampullaceum   Ralfs,  Fig.  230. 

E.  elegans   Kiitz.,  Fig.  232. 

E.  Nordstedtianum   Wolle,  Fig.  234. 


No.  10.] 


FRESH- WATER  ALGJE. 


63 


E.  sp.  (?),  Fig.  227. 

E.  ansatum    (Ehrb.)  Ralfs,  found  but  not  figured. 

Micrasterias  Ag.  (Holocystis  Hass. ;  Tetrachastrum 
Dixon) . —  Cells  simple,  flattened,  in  the  form  of  a  double-con- 
vex lens,  deeply  constricted  in  the  middle.  Front  view- 
orbicular  or  broadly  elliptical;  end  view  spindle-shaped,  with 
acute  ends.  Each  semi-cell  three-  to  five-lobed ;  lateral  lobes 
entire,  or  irregularly  cut  into  large,  deep  lobes;  the  end  lobes 
entire,  or  more  slightly  cut,  sometimes  with  angles  pro- 
nounced, and  two-cleft.  Zygospores  seldom  found,  large, 
globular,  with  stout  spines  which  are  at  first  simple  and  later 
branched. 

M.  radiosa    (Ag.)  Ralfs  var.  punctata    West,  Fig.  106. 

M.  apiculata  Menegh.,  Fig.  108. 

M.  rotata    (Grev.)  Ralfs,  Fig.  238. 

M.  furcata    (Ag.)  Ralfs,  Fig.  239. 

M.  Americana   (Ehrb.)  Kutz.,  Fig.  240. 

M.  muricata   Bailey,  Fig.  241. 

M.  truncata    (Corda)  Ralfs,  Fig.  242. 

M.  Crux-Melitensis    (Ehrb.)  Hass.,  Fig.  107. 

Arthrodesmus  Ehrb. —  Cells  simple,  deeply  constricted  in 
the  middle;  each  half-cell  is  wider  than  long,  and  furnished 
with  several  spines.  This  genus  is  distinct  from  Xanthidium 
by  the  absence  of  the  protruding  area  in  the  centre  of  the  semi- 
cells.  There  are  usually  fewer  spines,  and  the  zygospores  are 
either  smooth  or  spinous. 

A.  octocornis  Ehrb.,  Fig.  260. 

A.  convergens    (Ehrb.)  Ralfs,  Fig.  259. 

Cosmarium  Corda  ( Dysphinctium  Nag.;  Calocylin- 
drus  (Nag.)  Kirch.;  Cosmaridium  Gay;  Pleurotaeniopsis 
(Lund.)  Lagerh.). —  The  largest  genus  of  Desmids.  The 
single  cells  circular,  elliptical,  or  oblong,  usually  one  and  one- 
half  diameters  in  length,  always  more  or  less  constricted  in 
the  middle.  Ends  usually  entire,  rounded  or  truncate.  The 
margins  are  smooth,  dentate,  or  crenate,  the  cell  wall  smooth, 
punctate,  warty,  or  even  covered  with  spines.  End  view 
oblong  or  oval,  with  sometimes  a  swelling  in  the  middle  of 
the  longer  sides.  Zygospores  usually  spherical,  sometimes 
cubical  or  angular,  smooth  or  furnished  with  spines. 


64  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 


C.  Botrytis  Menegh.,  Figs.  115,  116. 

C.  Broomei  Thwaites,  Figs.  99,  258. 

C.  suborbiculare    Wood,  Fig.  113. 

C.  granatum   Breb.,  Fig.  109. 

C.  crenatum    Ralfs,  Fig.  no. 

C.  contractum    Kirch. ,  Fig.  117. 

C.  tumidum   Lund.,  Figs.  100,  100a. 

C.  ornatum    Ralfs,  Fig.  102. 

C.  ovale    Ralfs,  Fig.  245. 

C.  undulatum   Corda,  Fig.  244. 

C.  pyramidatum   Breb.,  Fig.  246. 

C.  Meneghinii   Breb.,  Fig.  247. 

C.  octhodes   Nord.,  Fig.  248. 

C.  perforatum   Lund.,  Fig.  249. 

C.  Ndgelianum    Breb.,  Fig.  250. 

C.  intermedium   Delp.,  Fig.  251. 

C.  Portianum  Arch.,  Fig.  252. 

C.  orbiculatum    Ralfs,  Fig.  253. 

C.  tetrophthalmum    (Kiitz.)  Breb.,  Fig.  254. 

C.  galeritum   Nord.,  Fig.  255. 

C.  Cucurbita   Breb.,  Fig.  256. 

C.  pseudobroomei   Wolle,  Fig.  257. 

Xanthidium  Ehrb. — ■  Cells  single,  or  two  joined  end  to 
end;  deeply  constricted;  semi-cells  wider  than  long,  entire, 
furnished  with  spines,  and  with  a  round,  truncate,  or  toothed 
arm  projecting  from  the  centre.  The  spines  are  either  simple 
or  with  two  or  three  forks  at  the  end.  In  the  centre  of  each 
semi-cell  is  a  roughened  protruding  area  of  variable  size. 
Zygospores  spherical  and  spinous. 

X.  fasciculatum  (Ehrb.)  Ralfs  var.  subalpinum  Wolle, 
Figs.  121,  266. 

X.  antilopoeum    (Breb.)  Kiitz.,  Fig.  262. 

X.  cristatum    (Breb.)  Ralfs,  Fig.  265. 

X.  aseptum    Nord.,  found  but  not  figured. 

Sphaerozosma  Corda. —  Filaments  of  cells  closely  united 
by  a  narrow  isthmus  or  by  a  granular  process.  Cells  deeply 
constricted,  thus  forming  bilobed  cells. 

5\  Miforme    Rab.,  Figs.  118,  119. 


No.   IO.]  FRESH- WATER  ALG^.  65 

S.  spinosum    Delp.,  Figs.  120,  277. 
5.  pulcrum   Bailey,  Fig.  271. 

Onchonema  Wall. —  Like  Sphcerozosma  except  that  the 
granular  processes  are  long. 

0.  serratum    (Bailey)  Wall.,  Fig.  272. 

Hyalotheca  Ehrb. —  Cells  short,  cylindrical,  usually 
blunted,  constricted  in  the  centre ;  joined  in  long  filaments  en- 
closed in  an  ample  mucilaginous  sheath.  The  end  view  of  the 
cell  is  round  and  shows  the  chloroplast  to  be  eight-  to  ten-rayed. 

H.  disSiliens    (Sm.)  Breb.,  Fig.  273. 

Spondylosium  Breb.  (Leuronema  Wallich). —  Like 
Sphcerozosma  except  that  instead  of  being  united  by  lateral 
processes,  the  cells  are  joined  in  filaments  merely  by  the  close 
apposition  of  the  cells. 

5\  papillatum   West,  found  but  not  figured. 

Desmidium  Ag.  (Didymoprium  '  Kiitz. ;  Aptogonum 
Ralfs). —  Cells  incised  or  entire,  with  two  chloroplasts  barely 
touching  in  the  middle ;  triangular  or  quadrangular  in  end 
view;  united  into  fragile,  elongated  filaments,  regularly 
twisted,  and  enclosed  in  a  mucous  envelope. 

D.  cylindricum    Grev.,  Fig.  276. 

D.  Swart  zii   Ag.,  Fig.  275. 

Gymnozyga  Ehrb.  (Bambusina  Kiitz.). — >  Cells  barrel- 
shaped  with  one  or  more  narrow  bands  around  the  middle ; 
closely  united  into  articulate  filaments.  Chlorophyll  bodies  as 
in  Hyalotheca.    Zygospores  smooth,  ellipsoidal. 

FAMILY  II.  ZYGNEMACE.E. 

Unbranched  filaments  composed  of  single  cells  or  of  a 
simple  series  of  cells.  Chloroplasts  in  the  shape  of  spiral 
bands,  axile  plates,  or  twin  stellate  bodies. 

Key  to  Sub-families. 

Conjugation  producing  a  zygospore  which,  after  a 
period  of  rest,  develops  directly  into  a  new  gameto- 
phyte   zygneme^e 


5 


66  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 

Conjugation  producing  a  zygospore  which  immedi- 
ately develops  a  sporocarp  of  several  cells,  one  of 
which  is  the  spore.  The  gametophyte  is  developed 
from  this  spore  after  a  period  of  rest.  . .  .mesocarpe^e 

SUB-FAMILY  I.  ZYGNEME^. 

Filaments  unbranched.  A  lining  of  protoplasm  is  in  each 
cell,  and  the  nucleus  is  held  in  the  centre  by  quite  prominent 
bands  of  protoplasm.  The  chloroplasts  containing  numerous 
prominent  pyrenoids  are  twin  stellate  bodies  in  Zygnema  and 
spiral  bands  in  Spirogyra. 

Vegetative  multiplication  by  breaking  of  filaments  into 
separate  cells  or  groups  of  cells.  Asexual  reproduction 
by  spores.  Sexual  reproduction  by  conjugation  between 
cells  of  different  filaments  which  lie  close  together.  Each 
cell  puts  out  a  tube  on  the  side  nearest  the  other  fila- 
ment, and  these  meet  with  similar  tubes  from  the  cells 
of  the  other  filament.  The  ends  of  the  tubes  join,  and  an 
open  "  conjugating  tube "  is  formed.  The  contents  of  the 
cells  separate  from  the  cell  walls,  and  the  mass  from  one  cell 
flows  into  the  other,  there  to  unite  with  the  mass  in  that  cell 
and  form  a  zygospore.  The  zygospores  are  usually  all  found 
in  one  of  the  two  filaments.  Occasionally  lateral  conjugation 
between  two  cells  of  the  same  filament  is  observed. 

Key  to  Genera. 

Cells  containing  two  star-shaped  chlorophyll  bodies 

near  the  nucleus  Zygnema* 

Cells  with  spirally  twisted  bands  of  chlorophyll .  . . 

Spirogyra* 

Cells  with  nearly  straight  bands  of  chlorophyll .  Choaspis* 

Description  of  Genera. 

Zygnema  Ag.  (Zygogonium  Kiitz.). —  Cells  with  two 
star-shaped  chlorophyll  bodies  near  the  nucleus,  each  chloro- 
plast  bearing  a  starch  grain. 

Z.  leiospermum    D.  By.,  Fig.  176. 

Z.  stellium  Ag.,  Figs.  177,  178. 

Z.  stellium    var.  genuinum    Kirch.,  Fig.  179. 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG^E. 


67 


Z.  pectinatum    (Vauch.)  Ag.,  Fig.  279.    In  conjugation. 

Z.  cruciatum    (Vauch.)  Ag.,  Fig.  180. 

Spirogyra  Link. —  Cells  with  from  one  to  many  bands  of 
chlorophyll  in  the  cell  wall,  winding  to  the  right.  The  zygo- 
spores are  always  inside  the  walls  of  one  of  the  conjugating 
cells. 

The  length  and  width  of  the  cells,  the  form  of  the 
dividing  wall  (which  may  be  plane  or  replicate,  i.  e.,  with  an 
annular  ingrowth  of  cellulose),  the  number  of  spirals,  and  the 
number  of  turns  each  spiral  makes  in  a  cell,  are  all  points  for 
consideration;  but  the  zygospores  form  the  only  decisive 
factor  in  the  determination  of  species.  In  the  determination 
of  the  species  given  below,  we  have  chiefly  relied  on  the 
vegetative  thread. 

Found  in  low-lying  ponds  and  ditches. 

5*.  varians   (Hass.)  Kiitz.,  Figs.  181,  182. 

5.  Weberi   Kiitz.,  Figs.  183,  184. 

vS.  maxima    (Hass.)  Witt.,  Fig.  185. 

S.  jugalis    (Dillw.)  Kiitz.,  Figs.  186,  187. 

.S.  inilata    (Vauch.)  Rab.,  Fig.  269. 

5".  calospora    Cleve,  Fig.  195. 

S.  dubia   Kiitz.,  Fig.  188. 

S.  quinina    (Ag.)  Kiitz.,  Figs.  189,  190. 

5\  Grevilleana    (Hass.)  Kiitz.,  Fig.  191. 

5\  majuscula   Kiitz.,  Fig.  192. 

S\  adnata   Kiitz.,  Fig.  193. 

5\  Spreeiana   Rab.,  Fig.  194. 

5.  decimina    (Mull.)  Kiitz.,  Fig.  196. 

5.  communis    (Hass.)  Kiitz.,  Fig.  197. 

S\  Huviatilis   Hilse,  Figs.  198,  199. 

S".  mirabilis   Hass.,  Fig.  202. 

S.  bellis    (Hass.)  Cleve,  Figs.  203,  204,  270. 
.  5".  Havescens    (Hass.)  Cleve,  Fig.  205. 

vS.  crassa   Kiitz.,  Fig.  60. 
[S.  nitida    (Dillw.)  Link.] 

Choaspis  S.  F.  Gray  (Sirogonium  Kiitz.). —  Fila- 
mentous. The  only  genus  of  Conjugate  without  a  mucous 
coat.  Sterile  cells  much  like  Spirogyra;  conjugating  cells 
arise  by  unequal  division  of  the  cells  of  the  filaments,  and, 


68  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.   HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 

bending  knee-like  towards  each  other,  grow  together;  zygo- 
spores elliptical. 

SUB-FAMILY  II.  MESOCARPE^E. 

The  plants  of  this  sub-family  are  often  narrower  than  those 
of  Zygnemese,  with  thin  cell  walls.  The  chloroplast  is  a  thin 
axile  plate,  and  all  those  of  a  filament  usually  lie  in  one 
plane.  The  chloroplasts  change  their  position  according  to 
the  degree  of  light,  turning  the  edge  to  bright  light  and  the 
face  to  dim  light.   Reproduction  as  in  Zygnemeae. 

Key  to  Genera. 

Plants  reproducing  by  Conjugation  Mougeotia* 

Reproduction  by  non-sexual  methods  only .  .  Gonatonema 

Description  of  Genera. 

Mougeotia  A.  Br.  (Staurospermum  Kutz. ;  Mesocarpus 
Hass. ;  Craterospermum  Braun  ;  Plagiospermum  Cleve) . — 
Cells  long,  cylindrical,  with  axile  chloroplasts.  Conjugation 
scalariform ;  zygospores  spherical  or  quadrate  and  more  or 
less  flattened  with  rounded  angles. 

M.  sp.  (?),  Fig.  85.  The  method  of  conjugating  is  shown 
in  Fig.  280. 

[M.  robusta  (De  Bary)  Wittr. ;  M.  genuiiex.a  (Dillw.) 
Ag.] 

Gonatonema  Wittr. —  Cells  similar  to  Mougeotia,  but  re- 
production only  by  means  of  non-sexual  spores.  Spores  pro- 
duced without  conjugation,  formed  by  division  of  the  mother- 
cells,  which  are  afterwards  often  burst  and  bent  angularly 
and  alternately  at  the  point  of  fructification. 

CLASS  V.  CHARACE^. 

Algae  with  a  peculiar  odor;  often  encrusted  with  lime. 
Thallus  a  stem  with  nodes  and  internodes.  The  plants  grow 
from  a  few  inches  to  over  a  foot  in  height  by  means  of  an 
apical  cell.  Whorls  of  leaves,  on  which  may  be  Jx>rne  antheridia 
and  oogonia,  grow  at  the  nodes. 

Zoospores  are  wanting.  The  organs  of  reproduction  are 
conspicuous  in  color  and  form.    The  antheridia  are  spherical, 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG^. 


69 


red  when  mature,  the  wall  consisting  of  eight  shields  or  plates. 
The  spermatozoids  are  spirally  coiled.  The  oogonium  is  situ- 
ated on  a  nodal  cell  from  which  five  other  cells  grow  and  coil 
around  the  oogonium,  covering  it  closely.  They  divide  once 
or  twice  at  the  top,  so  that  a  crown  of  five  or  ten  small  cells 
is  formed. 

Description  of  Genera. 

Chara  Vaill. —  The  crown  consists  of  five  cells.  The 
stems  are  covered  with  a  cortex. 
C.  sp.    (?),  Figs.  207-209. 

Nitella  Ag. —  The  crown  consists  of  ten  cells ;  cortex 
lacking. 

CLASS  VI.    PH^OPHYCE^  (FUCOIDEyE). 

The  Algse  of  this  class  are  almost  exclusively  salt-water 
forms,  known  as  the  Brown  Seaweeds,  and  include  the  most 
highly  developed  of  the  Seaweeds.  The  vegetative  cells  are 
uninucleate,  and  the  chromatophores  are  distinctly  brown. 

Asexual  reproduction  by  means  of  motile  cells  or  zoogonidia. 
Sexual  reproduction  by  isogamous  or  heterogamous  gametes. 
Copulation  always  takes  place  outside  the  plant,  and  the  re- 
sulting spore  germinates  directly.  The  motile  cells  always 
possess  two  laterally  placed  cilia,  one  directly  forward  and  the 
other  backward. 

While  the  class  is  made  up  mostly  of  marine  plants,  there  is 
one  order  that  is  found  in  fresh  water. 

ORDER  I.  SYNGENETIOE. 

Exclusively  fresh-water  forms.  Plants  unicellular,  solitary 
or  colonial,  or  multicellular ;  free-swiming  or  motionless.  The 
cells  are  either  naked  or  surrounded  by  a  mucilaginous  en- 
velope. The  cells  are  uninucleate,  possess  one  or  more  pul- 
sating vacuoles,  one  or  two  yellow  or  pale  brown  chromato- 
phores, and  occasionally  pyrenoids. 

The  order  as  thus  defined  includes  about  seven  families. 
But  at  least  four  of  the  seven  are  frequently  classed  with  the 
Flagellate  Protozoa,  and  are  described  in  the  report  upon  the 
Protozoa  of  our  waters.    These  include  the  following  genera : 


70  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 

Cryptomonas,  Synura,  Uroglena,  Dinobryon.  (See  Bull.  No.  2 
of  this  Survey.) 

The  only  other  family  known  to  us  to  occur  in  our  fresh 
water  is  the  following :  — 

FAMILY  I.  HYDRURACE^E. 

The  plant  consists  of  an  attached  colony,  from  two  to  twelve 
inches  long.  The  cells  have  each  one  chromatophore,  lack  a 
cell  wall,  and  are  embedded  in  a  large  mass  of  jelly.  Cells 
brown  at  one  end,  colorless  at  the  other ;  arranged  in  irregular, 
longitudinal  families ;  at  first  globose,  then  elliptical.  Division 
at  first  in  one,  later  in  two  directions. 

Asexual  reproduction  by  uniciliated  tetrahedral  zoogonidia. 
Two  or  four  of  them  are  produced  from  each  cell  of  the 
branches,  and  germinate  at  once.  Resting  spores  have  been 
observed. 

Hydrurus    Ag. —  Coextensive  with  the  family. 

CLASS  VII.    RHODOPHYCE^  (FLORIDEiE). 

Plants  generally  rosy  red  or  purple,  dark  reddish-brown,  or 
blackish.  Most  closely  related  to  salt-water  Algae.  Crust- 
aceous,  filamentous,  variously  branched. 

Asexual  propagation  by  means  of  motionless  spores.  In  the 
sexual  reproduction,  which  is  wanting  in  some  of  the  genera, 
the  female  cell,  called  the  carpogonkim,  is  fertilized  by  a  mass 
of  protoplasm,  called  spermatium,  derived  from  a  male  cell. 
The  result  of  fertilization  is  called  a  cystocarp,  and  the  method 
of  its  formation  determines  the  different  groups  of  Rhodo- 
phycese. 

Sometimes  the  cystocarp  is  developed  directly,  and  some- 
times the  fertilized  carpogonium  puts  out  growths,  known  as 
ooblast  ema-Hlaments ,  which  conjugate  with  auxiliary  cells,  the 
result  being  the  cystocarp.  The  carpospores  are  always  de- 
veloped on  a  tuft  of  filaments  which  spring  from  the  fertilized 
cells  and  are  called  gonimoblasts. 

Of  the  four  orders  of  this  class,  two  are  found  in  fresh 
water.   They  are  distinguished  as  follows : 


No.  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG^. 


71 


Key  to  Orders. 

Carpogonium  developing  directly  NEMALIONALES 

Carpogonium  developing  a  filament  of  which  two 
cells  conjugate  with  each  other  CRYPTON  EMI  ALES 

ORDER  I.  CRYPTONEMIALES. 

A  long  branched  filament  is  sent  out  from  the  fertilized 
carpogonium.  Each  terminal  cell  of  the  filament  unites  with 
an  auxiliary  cell,  and  from  the  latter  the  gonimoblasts  arise. 

FAMILY  L  SQUAMARIACE^E. 

A  small  group,  mostly  marine,  but  with  a  few  fresh-water 
species.  The  thallus  consists  of  dense,  upright  cell-filaments, 
which  form  minute,  flat,  gelatinous  or  membranous  expanses. 
Cavities  in  the  upper  surface  of  the  thallus  hold  the  sexual 
organs,  and,  after  the  fertilization  of  the  carpogonia,  are 
filled  with  cystocarps. 

Hildenbrandtia  Nardo. —  Thallus  crustaceous,  firmly  ad- 
hering, formed  of  subcubical,  blood-red,  dark  red,  rose,  or 
brown  cells,  placed  in  close  vertical  series.  Sexual  organs  in 
Cavities  in  the  upper  surface. 

ORDER  II.  NEMALIONALES. 

The  gonimoblasts  are  developed  in  tufts,  directly  from  the 
fertilized  carpogonium. 

Key  to  Families. 
Thallus  with  a  basal  attached  portion,  from  which 
arise  tufts  of  simple  or  branched  filaments  

LEMANEACEjE 

Thallus  filamentous,  simple  or  branched,  with  sec- 
ondary axes  often  in  whorls. . . helminthocladiace^: 

FAMILY  I.  LEMANEACE.E. 

Exclusively  fresh-water  Algae,  growing  in  very  rapid 
water.  The  thallus  consists  of  a  basal  attached  portion  from 
which  arise  dense  tufts  of  erect  branched  filaments.  From 
these  grow  the  fructiferous  branches  which  are  the  most  con- 
spicuous part  of  the  plant.   After  the  growth  of  this  part,  the 


72  CONNECTICUT  GEOL.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 

vegetative  portion  of  the  thallus  generally  dies  away,  and 
these  branches  become  fixed  by  rhizoids  of  their  own.  The 
fructiferous  branches  are  long,  filamentous,  cartilaginous,  and 
swing  freely  in  the  water;  they  are  olive-green  or  greenish 
black.  Each  thread  is  built  up  of  an  axile  row  of  tubular 
cells  surrounded  by  rows  of  smaller  cells;  at  short,  more  or 
less  regular,  distances  along  the  entire  length  are  distinct 
swellings  or  nodes. 

Only  sexual  multiplication  is  known.  The  antheridia  are 
short  and  cylindrical,  growing  on  whorled  eminences  or  on  the 
widest  part  of  the  nodes.  The  carpogonium  possesses  a  long, 
simple  or  branched  process  for  the  reception  of  the  male 
gamete,  called  a  trichogyne.  After  fertilization  the  car- 
pogonium puts  out  an  ooblastema-filament,  at  the  extremity 
of  which  a- bunch  of  jointed  moniliform  filaments  arises,  each 
of  the  swollen  cells  of  which  becomes  at  maturity  a  carpo- 
spore.  The  carpospores  are  produced  on  the  inside  of  the 
thallus,  filling  up  the  space  between  the  axile  cells  and  the 
cortical  cells.  The  carpospores  in  turn  produce  the  vegetative 
thallus. 

Lemanea    Bory. —  Large,  simple  or  somewhat  branched, 
bristle-like  threads  of  dark  or  brownish  color;  hollow  except 
for  the  axile  series  of  cells  which  is  held  in  place  by  transverse 
threads  at  regular  intervals. 
1     [L.  fucina  var.  rigida    (Sirdt.)  Atk.] 

Tuomeya  Harvey. —  Thallus  much  branched,  upright, 
five  cm.  high,  rosette-like. 

[T.  Uuviatilis  Harvey.] 

FAMILY  II.  HELMINTHOCLADIACE^E. 

The  plants  consist  of  a  filamentous  thallus,  simple  or 
branched,  with  the  secondary  axes  often  arranged  in  whorls. 
The  main  filament  may  consist  of  a  single  row  of  cells  or  of  an 
axile  row  surrounded  by  cortical  rows  of  smaller  cells. 

The  terminal  cells  of  the  gonimoblasts,  which  are  short 
tufts  of  filaments,  generally  form  the  carpospores.  When  the 
carpospore  has  become  detached,  the  supporting  cell  grows 
through  the  old  cell  wall  and  produces  a  new  spore-forming 
cell.   The  cystocarp  has  no  definite  wall. 


No.  10.] 


FRESH -WATER.  ALG^E. 


73 


Key  to  Genera. 
i.    With  clustered  tufts  of  branches.  ..  .Batrachospermum* 


Batrachospermum  Roth. —  A  wholly  fresh-water  genus. 
The  plants  are  dioecious,  of  a  violet  or  bluish  green  color.  Thal- 
lus  is  from  sixteen  to  twenty  cm.  in  length,  moniliform,  gela- 
tinous, slippery,  consisting  of  an  axile  series  of  cells  growing  by 
means  of  a  hemispherical  apical  cell,  and  an  accessory  parallel 
series,  covered  with  clustered  tufts  of  branches  which  are  more 
or  less  scattered.  The  carpogonium  grows  in  a  cell  at  the 
extremity  of  a  short  branch  which  stands  out  directly  from  the 
main  branch;  it  possesses  a  short,  straight  trichogyne,  and 
after  fertilization  develops 'a  dense  mass  of  exposed  carpo- 
spores. 

B.  vagum    (Roth)  Ag.,  Fig.  278. 

[B.  anatinum  Sirdt. ;  B.  Boryanum  Sirdt. ;  B.  Corbula 
Sirdt. ;  B.  ectocarpum  Sirdt. ;  B.  monili forme  var.  typicum, 
and  var.  chlorosum  Sirdt. ;  B.  pyramidale  Sirdt. ;  B.  virga- 
tum  Sirdt.] 

Chantransia  Fries. —  Dioecious,  red,  steel-blue,  or  purp- 
lish violet,  growing  in  fresh  and  salt  water.  Filaments  articu- 
late, branched ;  branches  simple  or  compound ;  mucilage 
lacking. 

The  carpogonium  develops,  after  fertilization,  numerous 
gonimoblasts  in  small  clusters,  upwards  and  on  one  side. 
Asexual  multiplication  by  tetras pores  developed  on  ends  of 


Thorea  Bory. —  This  genus  possesses  but  one  species,  T. 
ramosissima  Bory.  The  thallus  is  round,  filamentous,  much 
branched,  the  thickness  of  a  horse  hair,  of  a  purple-brown  or 
dark  brown  color,  very  mucous,  and  reaching  the  length  of 
thirty  to  sixty  cm.  The  branches  are  short  and  compact, 
slightly  attenuated,  and  the  cells  are  from  two  to  five  times 
longer  than  their  diameter.  The  cells  possess  starch-like 
granules,  and  the  spores  are  naked  and  non-motile. 


Without  clustered  tufts 


  2 

Chantransia 
....  Thorea 


2.    Thallus  three  to  seven  mm.  in  length . 
Thallus  thirty  to  sixty  cm.  in  length. 

Description  of  Genera. 


cells. 


FRESH-WATER  ALG.E. 


INDEX. 


Amphithrix,  15. 
Ancylonema,  57. 
Ankistrodesmus,  34,  35. 
Aphanocapsa,  12,  13. 
Aphanochaete,  50. 
Aphanothece,  13. 
Apiocystis,  30. 
Aplanospores,  39. 
Aptogonum,  65. 
Arthrodesmus,  59,  63. 
Arthrosiphon,  22. 
Arthrospira,  18,  20. 
Autocolonies,  31. 
Autospores,  31. 

Bacillariae,  9,  24. 
Bambusina,  65. 
Batrachospermum,  73. 
Botrydiaceae,  24. 
Botrydina,  29. 
Botrydium,  25. 
Botryococcus,  32. 
Bulbochaete,  51,  52. 

Calocylindrus,  63. 
Calothrix,  15,  16. 
Camptotrichacese,  16. 
Chaetomorpha,  54. 
Chaetophora,  46. 
Chaetophoraceae,  44,  45. 
Chaetophorales,  27,  44. 
Chaetosphaeridiaceae,  44,  45. 
Chaetosphaeridium,  50. 
Chamaesiphoniaceae,  14. 
Chantransia,  73. 
Chara,  9,  69. 
Characeae,  9,  68. 
Characiaceae,  28,  39. 
Characium,  39. 
Chlamydococcus,  43. 
Chlamydomonadeae,  42. 


Chlamydomonas,  42. 
Chlorobotrys,  25,  26. 
Chlorococcus,  29,  38. 
Chlorophyceae,  9,  26. 
Chlorosphaera,  33. 
Choaspis,  66,  67. 
Chroococcaceae,  11. 
Chroococcus,  12,  14. 
Chroolepus,  45. 
Cladophora,  54. 
Cladophoraceae,  53. 
Clathrocystis,  13. 
Closterium,  58,  60. 
Coccogoneae,  11. 
Coelastreae,  31,  36. 
Ccelastrum,  36. 
Coelosphaerium,  12,  13. 
Coenobia,  27,  31. 
Coleochacta,  51. 
Coleochaetaceae,  44,  50. 
Conferva,  25. 
Conjugatae,  9,  27,  55. 
Cosmaridium,  63. 
Cosmarium,  59,  63. 
Cosmocladium,  59. 
Craterospermum,  68. 
Crucigenia,  36. 
Crucigenieae,  31,  35. 
Cryptonemiales,  71. 
Cthonoblastus,  20. 
Cyanophyceae,  9,  10. 
Cylindrocapsa,  45,  48. 
Cylindrocapsaceae,  45, 
Cylindrocystis,  57. 
Cylindrospermum,  21. 
Cystococcus,  38. 

Dactylococcus,  34. 
Desmidiaceae,  55,  56. 
DesmidiGm,  60,  65. 
Diatomaceae,  9,  24. 


j6  CONNECTICUT  GEOL. 

Diatomin,  9. 
Dicothrix,  15,  16. 
Dictyocystis,  32. 
Dictyosphaerieae,  31. 
Dictyosphaerium,  31,  32. 
Didymopriurn,  65. 
Dimorphococcus,  34. 
Docidium,  58,  61. 
Dolichospermum,  21. 
Draparnaldia,  46,  47. 
Dysphinctium,  63. 

Enteromorpha,  43. 
Eremosphaera,  33. 
Euastrum,  59,  62. 
Eudorina,  40,  41. 
Eudorinella,  41. 
Gametes,  9. 
Genicularia,  57. 
Glceocapsa,  12,  13,  14. 
Gloeocystideae,^28,  29. 
Gloeocystis,  29. 
Glceothece,  12,  13. 
Glceotrichia,  14,  15,  16. 
Gomphosphaeria,  12,  13. 
Gonatonema,  68. 
Gonatozygon,  57. 
Gongrosira,  45. 
Gonium,  40. 
Gymnozyga,  60,  65. 

Haematococcus,  43. 
Hapalosiphon,  23. 
Hariotina,  36. 
Hassallia,  23. 

Helminthocladiaceae,  71,  72. 
Herposteiracese,  44,  50. 
Herposteiron,  50. 
Heterocysts,  10. 
Heterokontae,  9,  24. 
Hildenbrandtia,  71. 
Hormidium,  44. 
Hormiscia,  49. 
Hormococcus,  49. 
Hormogoneae,  10,  11,  14. 
Hormogones,  10. 
Hyalotheca,  59,  65. 


AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY.  [Bull. 

Hydrodictyaceae,  28,  37. 
Hydrodictyon,  37,  38. 
Hydrurus,  70. 
Hyphceothrix,  19,  20. 

Ichthyocercus,  58. 
Inactis,  20. 
Isactis,  15,  16. 

Kirchneriella,  34. 

Leibleinia,  19. 
Lemanea,  72. 
Lemaneaceae,  71. 
Lemmerraannia,  36. 
Leptosira,  45,  46. 
Leptothrix,  19. 
Leuronema,  65. 
Limnactis,  16. 
Lyngbya,  18,  19,  20. 
Lyngbyeae,  17,  18. 

Mastigonema,  16. 
Mastigothrix,  16. 
Merismopedia,  11,  12. 
Mesocarpeae,  68. 
Mesocarpus,  68. 
Mesotasnium,  57. 
Micrasterias,  59,  63. 
Microcoleus,  20. 
Microcystis,  12,  13,  22. 
Microspora,  49. 
Microsporales,  27. 
Microthamnion,  46,  47. 
Mougeotia,  68. 
Myxonema,  46,  47. 
Myxophyceae,  9,  10. 

Nemalionales,  71. 
Nephrocytium,  33. 
Netrium,  57,  58. 
Nostoc,  21. 
Nostocaceae,  17,  20. 

CEdogoniales,  27,  51. 
(Edogonium,  51,  52. 
Onchonema,  59,  65. 
Oocardium,  59. 
Oocystideae,  31,  33- 


No..  10.] 


FRESH-WATER  ALG^. 


Oocystis,  33. 
Ophiocytium,  25,  26. 
Oscillaria,  19. 
Oscillatoria,  18,  19,  20. 
Oscillatoriaceae,  10,  17. 

Palmella,  30. 
Palmellaceae,  28. 
Palmelleae,  29,  30. 
Palmellococcus,  33,  34. 
Palmodactylon,  30. 
Palmodictyon,  29. 
Pandorina,  40,  42. 
Pediastreae,  37. 
Pediastrum,  37. 
Penium,  58,  60. 
Petalonema,  22. 
Phaeophyceae,  9. 
Phormidium,  18,  19. 
Phycocyanin,  9. 
Phycoerythrin,  10. 
Phycophaein,  9. 
Phymatodocis,  59. 
Phythelieae,  31,  36. 
Pilinia,  45. 
Pithophora,  53. 
Placodermae,  56,  58. 
Plagiospermum,  68. 
Planogametes,  30. 
Plectonema,  18,  19. 
Pleurococcaceae,  28,  38. 
Pleurococcus,  38. 
Pleurotaeniopsis,  63. 
Pleurotsenium,  58,  61. 
Polycystis,  13. 
Polyedrium,  32. 
Prasiola,  44. 
Protococcaceae,  28,  31. 
Protococcales,  27. 
Protococcus,  34,  38. 
Pseudocilia,  29. 
Pseudocoenobia,  31. 
Pseudopleurococcus,  38. 
Psilonemateae,  14,  17. 

Raphidium,  35. 
Rhizoclonium,  54. 


Rhodophyceae,  10. 
Rivularia,  15,  16. 
Rivulariaceae,'  15. 
Roya,  58,  60. 

Saccodermae,  56. 
Scenodesmus,  34,  35. 
Schizochlamys,  30. 
Schizogoniales,  27,  43. 
Schizogonium,  44. 
Schizophyceae,  9. 
Schizosiphon,  22. 
Schizothrix,  20. 
Schoderia,  35. 
Sciadium,  26. 
Scytonema,  22,  23. 
Scytonemaceae,  17,  22. 
Selenastreae,  31,  34. 
Selenastrum,  34,  35. 
Selenosphaerium,  36. 
Sex  union,  9. 
Siphonales,  27,  54. 
Sirogonium,  67. 
Sirosiphon,  23. 
Sorastrum,  36. 
Sphaerella,  42. 
Sphaeroplea,  53. 
Sphaerozosma,  59,  64. 
Sphaerozyga,  21. 
Spirocoleus,  19. 
Spirogyra,  66,  67. 
Spirotaenia,  57. 
Spirulina,  18. 
Spondylomorum,  40,  41 
Spondylosium,  59,  65. 
Spores,  8. 
Squamariaceae,  71. 
Staurastrum,  59,  62. 
Staurogenia,  36. 
Staurospermum,  68. 
Stephanosphaera,  40,  41 
Stichococcus,  49. 
Stigeoclonium,  47. 
Stigonema,  23. 
Stigonemaceae,  17,  23. 
Streptonema,  60. 
Swarm  spores,  9. 


yS  CONNECTICUT 

Symphysiphon,  22. 
Symploca,  18,  19. 
Synechococcus,  11,  12. 

jTetmemorus,  58,  61. 
Tetrachastrum,  63. 
Tetraedreae,  31,  32. 
Tetraedron,  32. 
Tetragonium,  40. 
Tetraspora,  29. 
Tetrasporese,  28,  29. 
Thorea,  73. 
Tolvpothrix,  22,  23. 
Trentepohlia,  45. 
Trentepohliacese,  44,  45. 
Tribonema,  25. 
Tribonemaceae,  24,  25. 
Trichormus,  21. 
Trichophoreae,  14. 
Triploceras,  58. 
Tuomeya,  72. 

Ulothrix,  49. 


r.  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SURVEY - 

Ulotrichaceae,  48,  49. 
Ulvaceae,  43. 
Ulvales,  27. 

Vaucheria,  55. 
Vaucheriaceae,  54. 
Vaginarieae,  17,  20. 
Volvocaceae,  28,  '39. 
Volvoceae,  39,  40. 
Volvox,  40,  41. 

Willea,  36. 

Xanthidium,  59,  64. 
Xanthophyll,  9. 

Zonotrichia,  16. 
Zygnema,  66. 
Zygnemaceae,  65. 
Zygnemeae,  66. 
Zygogonium,  66. 
Zygote,  9. 


Plate  I;  Figures  i  to  6;  All  Magnified  1,000  Diameters. 

Fig.  i.  Oscillatoria  siibtilissima    Kutz.    .  .  page  19 

Fig.  2.  cerugineo-ccerulea    Kutz.  . 

Fig.  3.  Mcrismopedia  glauca    Nag.        .  .  12 

Fig.  4.                        convolnta    Breb.    .  "  " 

Fig.  5.  Oscillatoria  limosa    Ag.      .       .  .  19 

Fig.  6.                     percursa    Kiitz.        .  ■■  « 


PLATE 


G6  0Q 

mm 
aouu 

3D  GO 
<&QG 

Q9  «© 


00GO 


**** 


QQQQ  gojjj 


Plate  II;  Figures  7  to  io;  All  (except  Fig.  8a)  Magni- 
fied 1000  Diameters. 

Fig.    7.    Ccelosphcerium  Kuetzingicmurn     Nag.       page  13 

Fig.    8.    Glococapsa  arenaria  (  ?) 

Fig.    8a.  A  mass  of  the  plant, 

natural  size  

Fig.    9.    Microcystis  ccruginosa    Kiitz.  (?).     In  a 

mucilaginous  mass  .... 
Fig.    9a.  Microcystis  aeruginosa    Kiitz.  Without 

the  mucilaginous  mass 
Fig.  10.    Aphanocapsa  Grevillei   (Hass.)    Rab.  14 


Plate  III;  Figures  ii  to  15;  All  Magnified  iooo 
Diameters. 

Fig-.  11.  Anabccna  gigantea  Wood  .  .  page 
Fig.  12.  Flos-aqucu    Kiitz.    or  circinalis 

(Rab.)  Kirch  

Fig.  13.    Lyngbya  sp.   ( ?) 

Fig.  14.    Oscillatoria  chalybea  Mertens 

Fig.  15.  "         amphibia  Ag. 


PLATE  III. 


Plate  IV;  Figures  16  to  19;  Fig.  18  Magnified  500  Diam- 
eters ;  THE  OTHERS  IOOO  DIAMETERS. 

Fig.  16.    Nostoc  rupestre    Kutz.      .       .       .       page  21 

Fig.  17.     "  "...     «  i 

Fig.  18.        "     sp.  (  ?)  

Fig.  19.         "      comminutum  Kutz. 


Plate  V;  Figures  20  to  29;  Figs.  26  and  29  Magnified  500 
Diameters  ;  all  others  iooo  Diameters. 

Fig.  20.  Ophiocytium  parvulum  (Perty)  A.Br,  page  26 
Fig.  21.  Tribonema  minus  (Wille)  Haz.  .  26 
Fig.  22.  Dictyosphcerium  Ehrenbergianum  Nag.  32 
Fig.  23.  Tetraedron  minimum  (A.  Br.)  Hansg.  "  33 
Fig.  24.  trigonum    var.  punctatum 

(Kirch.)   " 

Fig.  25.    Tetraedron  trigonum    var.  pentagonum 

(Rab.)  

Fig.  26.    Nephrocytium  Naegelii    A.  Br.  . 
Fig.  27.  Agardhianum  Nag. 

Fig.  28.  Glocoeystis  vesiculosa  Nag.  .  .  29 
Fig.  29.    Nephrocytium  Ndgelii    A.  Br.   .       .  33 


PLATE  V. 


Plate  VI ;  Figures  30  to  49 ;  All  Magnified  iooo 
Diameters. 


Fig.  30 

Fig-  3i 
Fig.  32 

Fig-  33 

Fig.  34 

Fig.  35 
Fig.  36 
Fig.  37 
Fig-  38 
Fig.  39 

Fig.  40 
Fig.  41 

Fig.  42 
Fig.  43 
Fig.  44 

Fig.  45 
Fig.  46 
Fig.  47 

Fig.  48 

Fig.  49 


Pahncllococcus  sp.    ( ?)  .       .       page  34 

Gigas  (Kiitz.). 
Sccnodcsmus  caudatus    var.  abundans 

Kirch  

Sccnodcsmus   caudatus     var.  ty picas 

Kirch.  _ 
Sccuodcsmus   caudatus    var.  sctosus 
Kirch.  ...... 

Scenodesmus  sp.    (  ?) 

caudatus  Corda 
acutus  Meyen 
obtusus    Meyen  . 
"  antcnnatus    Breb.  var. 

rectus    Wolle  .... 

Ankistrodesmus  Braunii  (  Xag.)  (?) 
"  falcatus     var.  mira- 

bilis  West  

Sccnodcsmus  dimorphus    Kiitz.  . 
Selenastrum  sp.    (  ?)  . 
Sccnodcsmus  dimorphus  Kiitz. 
Ankistrodesmus  falcatus    (Corda)  Ralfs. 
Selenastrum  acuminatum  Lagerh. 
Ankistrodesmus  falcatus     var.  acicu- 
laris    West      .       .       .       .  . 
Tribonema  bombycinum   (Ag.)  Derbes 

and  Sol.   .       .  . 
Scenodesmus  sp.   ( ?) 


PLATE  VI. 


Plate  VII ;  Figures  50  to  56 ;  All  except  Fig.  54a  Magni- 
fied 1000  Diameters. 


Fig.  50. 

Pediastrum  pertusum    var.  clathratum 

A.  Br  

page  38 

Fig.  51. 

Coclastrum  micro  porn  111    Nag.  . 

"  36 

Fig.  52. 

Pediastrum  pertusum   var.  clathratum 

A.  Br  

"  38 

Fig.  53- 

Characium  Naegelii    A.  Br. 

u  39 

Fig.  54- 

Kirchneriella  obesa    (West)  Schmidle. 

Fig.  54a  represents  a  single  cell 

u  34 

Fig.  55- 

Sorastrum  spinulosum  Nag. 

"  37 

Fig.  56. 

Characium  ambiguum    Herm.  . 

39 

Plate  VIII;  Figures  57  to  60;  All  Magnified  500  Diam- 
eters. 

Fig.  57.    Pediastrum   pertusum     var.  clathra- 

tum     A.  Br  page  38 

Figs.  58,  59.    Pediastrum  Boryanum  (Turp.) 

Meneg.    var.  granulatum    Kiitz.  . 

Fig.  60.    Spirogyra  crassa    Kiitz.     .       .       .  67 


PLATE  VIII. 


Plate  IX ;  Figures  6i  to  71  ;  Fig.  68  Magnified  500  Diam- 
eters; ALL  OTHERS  IOOO  DIAMETERS. 

Figs.  61-63.  Pediastrum  Ehrenbergii  A.  Br.  .  page  38 
Fig.  64.  var. 

truncatum    Braun    .  ... 
Fig.  65.    Pediastrum  sp.   ( ?)  . 
Fig.  66.  pertusum  Kiitz. 

Fig.  67.  Boryanum  (Turp.)  Meneg. 

var.  granulatum  Kiitz. 
Fig.  68.    Pediastrum  pertusum    Kiitz.      .  . 
Fig.  69.  tetras    Ehrb.  . 

Figs.  70,  71.    "         pertusum  Kiitz. 


PLATE  IX. 


Plate  X;  Figures  72  to  77. 


Fig.  72.    Palmclla  mucosa    Kiitz.     (?)  (250 
diameters)  ..... 

Fig.  72a.    A  colony  of  the  same,  natural  size  . 

Fig.  73.    Pleurd coccus  vulgaris  Menegh.  (500 
diameters)       .  . 

Fig.  74.    Volvo. v.     A    young   colony.  (500 
diameters)       .  . 

Fig.  75.    Volvox  aureus    Ehrb.     (200  diameters) 

Fig.  76.         "     globator    Ehrb.     (125  diam- 
eters)   

Fig.  77.    Tctraspora  gelatiuosa   (Vauch.)  Desv. 

(250  diameters)  .... 

Fig.  77a.  A  colony  of  the  same,  natural  size 


page  30 

a 

39 
4i 


30 


Plate  XI ;  Figures  78,  79 ;  Magnified  250  Diameters. 

Fig.  78.    Myxonema  sp.    ( ?)  .       .       .       page  47 

Fig.  79.  "         tenue    (Ag.)    Rab.  . 


PLATE  XI. 


Plate  XII;  Figures  80  to  82. 

Fig.  Soa.Coleochcete  irregularis    Pringsh.  (?) 

(250  diameters)      .  .       .       page  51 

b.  Herposteiron    Confervicola    Nag.     .  50 

c.  Diatom        .       .       .       .  . 

Fig.  81.    Myxonema  lubricum  var.  varians  Haz. 

(500  diameters)  .  .  .  .  47 
Fig.  82.    Myxonema  tome    (Ag.)    Rab.  (250 

diameters)  "  " 


PLATE  XII. 


Plate  XIII;  Figures  83,  84;  Magnified  100  Diameters. 

Figs.  83,  84.    Drapamaldia  plumosa  (Vauch.) 

Ag  page  48 


Plate  XIV;  Figures  85  to  89. 

Fig.  85.    Mougeotia  sp.  (?)    (500  diameters)    .       page  68 
Figs.  86  to  89.    Ulothrix  sp.   (?)     (1000  diam- 
eters,   except   86a,    which    is  500 
diameters)  "49 


PLATE  XIV. 


Plate  XV;  Figures  90  to  95;  Magnified  iooo  Diameters, 
except  Fig.  91. 

Fig.  90.  Ulothrix.    Young  stage     .       .       .       page  49 

Fig.  91.  "      (low  power) 

Fig.  92.  Microspora  Stagnorum    (Kutz.)    Lag.  50 

Fig.  93.  Ulothrix  tenerrima    Kutz.         .       .  49 

Fig.  94.  sonata     (Web.  and  Mohr) 

Kiitz   " 

Fig-  95-  Ulothrix  sp.    ( ?) 


PLATE  XV. 


Plate  XVI;  Figures  96  to  98;  Magnified  iooo  Diameters. 

Fig.  96.    (Edogonium  sp.   ( ?)   .       .       .       .       page  52 

Fig.  97.    Bnlbochccte  sp.    ( ?)  . 

Fig.  98.  "     Young  stage 


Plate  XYII ;  Figures  99  to  105;  Magnified  iooo 
Diameters. 


Fig.  99.  Cosmarium  Broomei    Thwaites       .       page  64 

Fig.  100.  tumidum    Lund.  . 

Fig.  1 00a.  "              "            "     (?)  . 

Fig.  101.  Pleuroi&nium  sp.   ( ?) 

Fig.  102.  Cosmarium  ornatum    Ralfs      .       .  61 

Fig.  103.  Pleurotccnium  Baculum  Breb. 

Fig.  104.  Euastrum  verrucosum    (Ehrb.)    Ralfs  62 

Fig.  105.  integrum  Wolle 


PLATE  XVII. 


Plate  XVIII;   Figures  106  to  108;   Fig.  107  Magni 
1000  Diameters  ;  others  500  Diameters. 

Fig-.  106.    Micrasterias  radio sa    (Ag.)  Ralfs 

var.  punctata    West     .       .       .  page 

Fig.  107.    Micrasterias  Crux-Mclitensis  (Ehrb.) 

Hass.  ...... 

Fig.  108.    Micrasterias  apiculata  Menegh. 


PLATE  XVIII. 


Plate  XIX;  Figures  109  to  121;  Magnified  iooo 
Diameters. 


Fig.  109.  Cosmarium  granatum    Breb.  . 
Fig.  no.  crenatum  Ralfs 

Figs,  in,  112.    Cosmarium  sp.   ( ?)  . 

Fig.  113.  Cosmarium  suborbiculare  Wood 
Fig.  114.  sp.    (?)  .. 

Figs.  115,  116.    Cosmarium  Botrytis  Menegh. 

Fig.  117.  Cosmarium  contraction  Kirch. 

Figs.  118,  119.    Sphccrozosma  aiiformc    Rab.  . 

Fig.  120.  Sphccrososma  spinulosum    Delp.  ( ?) 

Fig.  121.  Xanthidiuni  fasciculatum    var.  sub- 
al  pi  nu  m    Wolle  . 


page  64 


65 
64 


PLATE  XIX. 


Plate  XX;  Figures  122  to  133;  Magnified  iooo  Diameters. 

Fig.  122.    Staurastrum  defectum    var.  conver- 
gent   Wolle    .......       page  62 

Figs.  123,  124.    Staurastrum  orbiculare  (Ehrb.) 

Ralfs  " 

Fig.  125.    Staurastrum  defectum    var.  mucro- 
natum  Ralfs 

Figs.  126,  127.    Staurastrum  mcgacanthum  Lund. 

Fig.  128.    Staurastrum  brevispinum  Breb. 

Fig.  129.  muricatum  Breb. 

Fig.  130.  erasum  Breb. 

Fig.  131.  "  "  "  Show- 

ing multiplication  by  division 

Fig.  132.    Staurastrum  odouatum    Wolle  . 

Fig-  133.  hirsutum    (Ehrb.)    Breb.  " 


Plate  XXI;  Figures  134  to  144;  Magnified  iooo 
Diameters. 


Figs.  134,  135.    Staurastrum  Ravenelii   Wood  (?)  page  62 

Fig.  136.    Staurastrum  furcigerum  Breb. 

Figs.  137-142.    Staurastrum    species  undetermined  " 

Fig.  143.    Staurastrum  iotanum  Wolle 

Fig.  144.  eustephanum  Ralfs 


PLATE  XXI. 


Plate  XXII  ;  Figures  145  to  151;  Figures  147,  149,  151 
Magnified  500  Diameters  ;  Others  iooo  Diameters. 

Figs.  145,  146.    Roya  obtusa    (Breb.)    West   .       page  60 
Fig.  147.    Closterium  acuminatum    Kiitz.  . 
Fig.  148.  lanccolatum  Kiitz. 

Fig.  149.  Cucumis    Ehrb.  (?) 

Fig.  150.  acerosum  (Schrank) 

Ehrb.    (?).    With  fungous  growth 
Fig.  151.    Closterium    acerosum  (Schrank) 

Ehrb.   (?).     About  to  divide  . 


Plate  XXIII;  Figures  152  to  159;  Figs.  152,  157,  158 
Magnified  500  Diameters  ;   others  iooo  Diameters. 

Fig.  152.    Closterium  Lunula    Ehrb.        .       .       page  60 


Fig-  153-  turgidum  Ehrb. 

Fig.  154.  strigosum    Ehrb.  . 

Fig-  155-  costatum  Corda 

Fig.  156.  "         Dclpontei    Klebs    .  "  Y' 

Fig.  157.  prelongum    (Breb.)    Delp.  61 

Fig.  157a.  lineatum  Ehrb. 

Fig.  158.  "  "  "      A  mul- 


tiplication by  division 
Fig.  159.    Closterium  decor  inn  Breb. 


Plate  XXIV;  Figures  160  to  165;  Magnified  iooo  Diam- 
eters, Except  Fig.  161. 

Fig.  160.  Closterium  Jenneri  Ralfs.  .  .  page  61 
Fig.  161.  areolatum    Wood  (500 

diameters)  

Fig.  162.    Closterium  Diancc    Ehrb.  . 

Figs.  163,  164.    Closterium  parvulum  Xag. 

Fig.    165.    Closterium  mouiliferum    (Bory)    Ehrb.  " 


PLATE  XXIV. 


Plate  XXV;  Figures  166  to  171  ;  Figs.  168,  169  Magnified 
500  Diameters;  all  others  iooo  Diameters. 

Fig.  166.  Clostcrium  Leibleinii  Kutz.  .  .  page  61 
Fig.  167.  var.  curium   West  " 

Fig.  168.  ro  stratum  Ehrb. 

Fig.  169.  var. 

brcviro stratum    West  . 
Fig.  170.    Clostcrium  subcostatam    Nord.  With 

only  6  costae  

Fig.  171.    Clostcrium  Brcbissonii   Delp.  . 


Plate  XXVI;  Figures  172  to  175;  Magnified  iooo 
Diameters. 

Fig.  172.  Penium  closterioides  Ralfs  .  .  page  60 
Fig.  173.  polymorphum    Perty  . 

Fig.  174.  "  sp."  (?)  .  ...  -  ■ 
Fig.  175.  mar  gar  it  ace  um  Breb. 


PLATE  XXVI. 


Plate  XXVII;  Figures  176  to  180;  Magnified  500 
Diameters. 

Fig.  176.    Zygnema  leiospermum    D.  By.        .       page  66 
Figs.  177,  178.    Zygnema  stellium    Ag.    .  . 
Fig-  179-    Zygnema   stellium     var.  genuinum 

Kirch  

Fig.  180.    Zygnema  cruciatum    (Vauch.)  Ag. 


PLATE  XXVII. 


Plate  XXVIII;  Figures  181  to  187;  Figs.  182,  186  Mag- 
nified 250  Diameters;  all  others  500  Diameters. 

Fig.  181.  Spirogyra  varians  (Hass.)  Kiitz.  .  page  67 
Fig.  182. 

Conjugating  ..... 
Figs.  183,  184.    Spirogyra  Weberi    Kiitz.  . 
Fig.  185.    Spirogyra  maxima    (Hass.)  Witt. 
Fig.  186.  "  "      jugalis    (Dillw.)    Kiitz.  . 

Fig.  187. 

Conjugating  .... 


PLATE  XXVIII. 


Plate  XXIX;  Figures  188  to  196;  Magnified  250 
Diameters. 


Fig.  188 
Figs.  1 8c 
Fig.  191 
Fig.  192 
Fig.  193 
Fig.  194 

Fig-  195 
Fig.  196 


Spirogyra  diibia  Kiitz. 
190.    Spirogyra  quinina  (Ag.)  Kiitz. 
Spirogyra  Grevilleana   (Hass.)  Kiitz. 
majuscula  Kiitz. 
adnata    Kiitz.  . 
Spreeiana  Rab. 
calospora  Cleve 
decimina    (Mull.)  Kiitz. 


page  67 


Plate  XXX;  Figures  197  to  206;  Figures  197,  205  Mag- 
nified 500  Diameters  ;  all  others  250  Diameters. 

Fig.  197.    Spirogyra  communis  (Hass.)   Kiitz.       page  67 

Fig.  198.  "        nuviatilis    Hilse  . 

Fig.  199.  "  "  "      Kept  in 

dishes,  the  cells  elongating  without 
dividing,  and  dancing  dots  of  oil 
appearing  in  the  ends 

Fig.  200.    Vaucheria  sessilis  (?)    (Vauch.)  D.  C.  55 

Fig.  201.  "  "  " 

Fig.  202.  Spirogyra  mirabilis  Hass.  .  .  67 
Fig.  203.  bell  is    (Hass.)    Cleve.  In 

state  of  decomposition  .       .       .  67 
Fig.  204.    Spirogyra  bellis    (Hass.)  Cleve 
Fig.  205.  flavescens    (Hass.)  Cleve 

Fig.  206.    Vaucheria.    Showing  sexual  organs  .  55 


PLATE  XXX. 


Plate  XXXI;  Figures  207  to  209. 


Fig.  207.    Char  a  sp.    (?)     Shield  of  antheri- 

dium  (125  diameters)    .       .       .       page  69 

Fig.  208.  Char  a  sp.  (?)  A  portion  of  the 
plant,  natural  size  . 

Fig.  209.    Chara    sp.     (?).    a,    antheridium ; 

b,  oogonium  (50  diameters)  . 


\ 


PLATE  XXXI. 


Plate  XXXII;  Figures  210  to  216. 

Fig.  210.    Chrodcoccus  cohccrens  (Breb.)    Nag.      page  14 
Fig.  210a.                                   (1000  diam- 
eters)   

Fig.  211.  Nostoc  minutissimus  Kiitz.  .  .  21 
Fig.  21 1  a.  Single 

thread  (1000  diameters) 
Fig.  212.    Tetraspora    lubrica     (Roth.)  var. 

lacunosa    Chand.  .       .       .       .  30 
Fig.  212a.  Tetraspora    lubrica     var.  lacunosa 

Chand.    (1000  diameters) 
Fig.  213.    Sorastrum  spinulositni    Nag.  (1000 

diameters)   37 

Fig.  214.  Glocotrichia  pisuni  (Ag.)  Thur.  .  16 
Fig.  215.    Hydrodictyon  reticulatum   (L.)   Lag.  38 

a.  Natural  size 

b.  Young  colony,  slightly  magnified 

c.  Full  grown  colony,  highly  magnified 
Fig.  216.    Micro spora  WittrockU  (Wille)  Lag. 


PLATE  XXXII. 


Plate  XXXIII;  Figures  217  to  220. 

Fig.  217.    Dra  partial  diet  glomerata    Ag.  (250 

diameters)      .....       page  48 

Fig.  218.    Penium    Nairicula      Breb.  (1000 

diameters)      .       .       .       .       .         "  .  60 

Fig.  219.    Mesotcenium   micrococcus  (Kiitz.) 

Roy  and  Biss.     (1000  diameters)  "  ,  57 

Fig.  220.    Myxonema  attenuatum    Haz.   .       .  47 


PLATE  XXXIII. 


Plate  XXXIV7;  Figures  221,  222. 


Fig.  221.    Chcetophora  incrassata  (Huds.)  Haz. 

Upper  figure,  natural  size ;  lower 

figure,  highly  magnified  .       .       .       page  47 

Fig.  222.    Chcetophora  pisiformis    (Roth.)  Ag. 

a,  colony,  natural  size,    b,  a  single 

filament  .....         "  * 


Plate  XXXV ;  Figures  223  to  228 ;  Magnified  500  Diam- 
eters, except  Fig.  228. 

Fig.  223.  Docidium  Baculum  Breb.  .  .  page  61 
Fig.  224.    Pleurotcenium   crenulatum  (Ehrb.) 

Rab.       ......  " 

Fig.  225.    Pleurotcenium  Archerii  (Delp.) 

Fig.  226.  Tvabccula    (Ehrb.)    Nag.  " 

Fig.  227.    Enastvum  sp.   ( ?)  .       .       .  63 

Fig.  228.    (Edogonium   cardiacum  (Hass.) 

Wittr.  (?)  "  52 


PLATE  XXXV. 


Plate  XXXYI ;  Figures  229  to  237;  "Magnified  iooo 
Diameters. 

Fig.  229.  Euastrum  oblongatum  (Grev.)  Ralfs  page  62 
Fig.  230.  ampullaceum    Ralfs  . 

Fig.  231.    Staurastrum    crenulatum  (Delp.) 

Nag.    End  view 
Fig.  231a.  Staurastrum    crenulatum  (Delp.) 

Side  view 

Fig.  232.    Euastrum  elegans.   Kutz.  ... 
Fig.  233.    Staurastrum  dejectum    Breb.  . 
Fig.  2^a,  "     End  view  " 

Fig.  234.  Euastrum  N ordstedtianum  Wolle  . 
Fig.  235.  Staurastrum  margaritaccum  Ehrb.  . 
Fig.  235a.  "  " 

Side  view  ..... 
Fig.  236.    Staurastrum  dejectum    Breb.  . 
Fig.  236a.  "  "  "      Side  view  u 

Fig.  237.  gracile  Ralfs 

Fig.  237a.  Side  view  " 


Plate  XXXVII;  Figures  238  to  244;  Magnified  500 
Diameters,  except  Figs.  243,  244. 

Fig.  238.  Micrastcrias  rotata    (Grev.)    Ralfs       page  63 

Fig.  239.  furcata    (Ag.)    Ralfs  . 

Fig.  240.  Americana    (Ehrb.)  Kiitz. 

Fig.  241.  muricata  Bail. 

Fig.  242.  truncata    (Corda)  Ralfs 

Fig.  243.  Coleochccta  scut  at  a  Breb. 

Fig.  244.  Cosmarium  undulatum    Corda  (500 

diameters)      .       .       .       .       .  64 


PLATE  XXXVII. 


Plate  XXXVIII ;  Figures  245  to  253 ;  Magnified  iooo 
Diameters. 


Fig.  245.    Cosmarium  ovale    Ralfs  .       .       .       page  64 

Fig.  246.  pyramidatum  Breb. 

Fig.  247.  Meneghinii  Breb. 

Fig.  248.  octhodes  Nord. 

Fig.  249.  perforatum  Lund. 

Fig.  250.  Nagelianum  Breb. 

Fig.  251.  intermedium  Delp. 

Fig.  252.  Portianum  Arch. 

Fig.  253.  orbiculatum  Ralfs 


PLATE  XXXVIII. 


Plate  XXXIX;  Figures  254  to  260;  Magnified  iooo 
Diameters. 

Fig.  254.    Cosmarium  tetrophthalmum  (  Kiitz.) 

Breb.      .       .       .       .       .       .       page  64 

Fig.  255.    Cosmarium  galeritunt    Nord.  . 

Fig.  256.  "         Cucurbita    Breb.    .  "  " 

Fig.  257.  pscudobroomci    Wolle  . 

Fig.  257a. 

End  view  . 
Fig.  258.    Cosmarium  Broomci  Thwaites.  End 

<<  << 

view  ...... 

Fig.  259.    Arthrodcsmus  convergens  (Ehrb.) 

Ralfs  "63 

Fig.  260.    Arthrodcsmus  octocornis  Ehrb. 


PLATE  XXXIX. 


Plate  XL;  Figures  261  to  266;  Magnified  iooo  Diameters. 

Fig.  261.    Staurastrum  pygmceum    Breb.  Con- 
jugating        .       .       .       .  page  62 
Fig.  262.    Xanthidium  antilopceum    (Breb.)  Kiitz. 
Fig.  263.    Staurastrum  hirsutum    (Ehrb.)  Breb. 
Fig.  263a. 

Side  view  ..... 
Fig.  264.    Staurastrum  leptocardium  Nord. 
Fig.  264a. 

End  view       .  . 
Fig.  265.    Xanthidium  cristatum    (Breb.)   Ralfs  64 
Fig.  266.  fasciculatum    (Ehrb.)  Ralfs 

var.  subalpmum    Wolle        .       .  " 


PLATE  XL. 


Plate  XLI ;  Figures  267  to  270;  Magnified  500  Diameters. 

Fig.  267.  Staurastrum  coronulatum  Wolle  .  page  62 
Fig.  267a, 

End  view  " 

Fig.  268.    Staurastrum  arctiscon    Ehrb.  . 
Fig.  268a.  "  "  u  End 

view  ...... 

Fig.  269.  Spirogyra  inflate  (Yanch.)  Rab.  .  67 
Fig.  270.  bell  is    (Hass.)  Clev. 


PLATE  XLI. 


270 


Plate  XLII ;  Figures  271  to  277;  Magnified  500 
Dta  m  eters. 

Fig.  271.  Sphccrozosma  pulcrum  Bailey  .  .  page 
Fig-.  272.  serratum    (Bailey)  Wall. 

a,  Side  view  ;  b,  end  view  ;  c,  view 
from  above 

Fig.  273.  Hyalothcca  dissiliens  (Sm.)  Breb. 
Fig.  274.  Cladophora  glomerata  (L.)  Kiitz. 
Fig.  275.    Desmidium  Swartzii    Ag.     a,  Side 

view ;    b,  end  view ;   c,  side  view 

less  magnified 
Fig.  276.    Desmidium  cylindricum    Grev.  Side 

view  ...... 

Fig.  276a.  Desmidium  cylindricum    Grev.  End 

view  ...... 

Fig.  277.    S phcerozosma  spinosum    (Delp.)    Wolle  " 


PLATE  XLII. 


\ 


Plate  XLIII ;  Figures  278  to  280. 

Fig.  278.    Bairachospermum  vagum  Ag.          .  page  73 

Fig.  279.    Zygnema  pcctinatum  (Vauch.)  Ag.  "  67 

Fig.  280.    Mougeotia  sp.  (?).  Conjugating        .  "  68 


PLATE  XLIII. 


Plate  XLW ;  Figures  281  to  291;  Magnified  iooo 
Diameters. 


Fig. 

281. 

Netrium  interruptum    (Breb.)  Liit- 

kem  ...... 

page 

58 

Fig. 

282. 

Netrium  Digitus    (Ehrb.)    Itz.  and 

Roth  

(( 

Fig. 

283. 

Pleurotcenium  nodosum    (Bail.)  Lund. 

(( 

6l 

Fig. 

284. 

Myxonema  nanum    (Dillw.)  Haz. 

a 

47 

Fig. 

285. 

Eudoriiia  clcgans    Ehrb.  . 

a 

4i 

Fig. 

286. 

Pandorina  morum    (Mull.)    Bory  . 

42 

Fig. 

287. 

Full-grown  colony 

a 

Fig.  288. 

Spondylomorum  quaternariiim  Ehrb. 

a 

4i 

Fig. 

289. 

Chlamydomonas  pulvisculus  (Mull.) 

Ehrb  

a 

42 

Fig. 

290. 

Carteria  (Chlamydomonas)  multffilis 

(Fresen.)  (?) 

43 

Fig. 

291. 

Spiridina  temtissima  Kiitz. 

18 

PLATE  XLIV. 


Date  Due 


Library  Bureau  Cat.  no.  1137 

AUG.  1 939 


WELLESLEY  COLLEGE  LIBRARY 


3  5002  03281  7111 


Science  OH  105  .  Cd  A2  lO 
Conn,    H.    W.    b.  1859. 


The  algae  of   "the  fresh 
waters  of  Connecticut. 


